古文：十三日，早促饭，即出靖藩城北门，过独秀西庵，叩绀谷，已入内官礼忏矣。
现代文：十三日早晨催着吃了饭，立即到靖江王王城的北门，探访独秀峰西面的寺庵，拜见给谷，已进内宫礼佛去了。
English: On the morning of the 13th, he hurriedly ate dinner and immediately went to the north gate of the Jingjiang Wangcheng, visited the temple and hermitage on the west side of the Duxiu Peak, visited the valley, and went to the inner palace to worship Buddha.

古文：登峰之约，复欲移之他日。
现代文：约定好的登峰，又想把它推到别的日子。
English: You have agreed to climb the peak, but you want to postpone it to another day.

古文：余召与其徒灵室期，姑先阳朔，而后来此。
现代文：我召唤他徒弟灵室过来与他讲定：暂且先去阳朔，然后再来此地。
English: I summoned his apprentice, the mortician, and told him to go to Yangshuo for the time being and then come back here.

古文：乃出就日门，过木龙南洞，由其下渡江。
现代文：于是出了就日门，经过木龙洞的南洞，由洞下渡江。
English: As a result, I went out of the Sun Gate, passed through the South Cave of the Dragon Cave, and crossed the river from the bottom of the cave.

古文：还望木龙洞下层，复有洞滨江穿麓，潆流可爱。
现代文：回头望木龙洞的下层，又有洞濒临江流穿过山麓，流水潇绕十分可爱。
English: Looking back at the lower level of the Mokulong Cave, there is also a cave on the edge of the river flowing through the foothills, and the flowing water is very lovely.

古文：上江东涯，即溯江流北行，不半里，入千佛阁，乃平殿也。
现代文：登上漓江东岸，立即溯江流往北行，不到半里，走入千佛阁，是单屋的佛殿。
English: On the east bank of the Li River, the river immediately flows northward, less than half a mile, and enters the Thousand Buddha Pavilion, which is a single-storey Buddhist temple.

古文：问所谓辰山者，自庵至渡头东街，僧俗少及长俱无一知。
现代文：寺前有一棵大榕树。打听所谓的辰山这地方，从寺庵到渡口东街，和尚俗人老的少的全无一人知道。
English: There is a large banyan tree in front of the temple. If you ask around the so-called Tatsuyama area, from the temple hermitage to Toguchi Higashi-dori Street, not a single monk or layman of any age knows.

古文：乃东向苍莽行，冀近山处或得一识者，如屏风岩故事。
现代文：只好向着东方在空旷无际的原野中行走，希望在靠近山的地方或许能遇到一个知道的人，如在屏风岩发生的事一样。
English: One has only to walk eastwards through the endless open fields, hoping that somewhere close to the mountains one might meet someone who knows, as happened at the Byblos.

古文：随大路东北五里，眺尧山在东，屏风岩在南，独辰山茫然无辨。
现代文：顺大路向东北走五里，远眺尧山在东，屏风岩在南，唯独辰山茫然无法辨认出来。
English: I walked five miles northeast along the main road, with distant views of Mount Lushan to the east and Byobu Rock to the south. Only Mount Tatsunoyama remained unrecognizable.

古文：一负刍者，执而问之，其人曰： 余生长于此，未闻所谓辰山。
现代文：见一个背草的人，拉住他问路，那人说： 我生长在此地，没听说过所谓的辰山。
English: He saw a man carrying weeds and pulled him to ask for directions. The man said: "I grew up here and have never heard of the so-called Tatsuyama.

古文：无已，则东南数里有寨山角，其岩前后相通，或即此也。 
现代文：如有的话，那么东南几里外有个寨山角，山上的岩洞前后相通，或许就是此处了。 
English: If there is, then a few miles to the southeast there is a mountain cape, and the caves on the mountain are connected back and forth, perhaps this is the place.

古文：余欲从之，将东南行，忽北望一山，去路不一里，而其山穹然有洞，洞口有石当门，赭色斑烂，彪炳文采焕发有异。
现代文：我打算听从他的话，将要向东南方走去，忽然望见北方有一座山，相距的路不足一里，而且那座山有洞弯然隆起，洞口有岩石挡住入口，赫色斑烂，光彩焕发，有奇异之处。
English: I intended to follow his advice, and was about to walk south-east, when I caught sight of a mountain to the north, less than a mile away, and in that mountain there was a cave with a curved rise, a rock at the mouth of the cave blocking the entrance, mottled, radiant, and strange.

古文：亟问何名，负刍者曰： 老虎山也。 
现代文：连忙打听叫什么名字，背草的人说： 是老虎山 。
English: Quickly inquiring what the name was, the weaver said, "It's Tiger Mountain."

古文：余谓静闻： 何不先了此，而后觅辰山。 
现代文：我对静闻说： 为何不先了结了此山，然后再去找辰山。 
English: I said to Jingwen, "Why don't you finish this mountain first, and then go to Tatsuyama?"

古文：遂北由岐行一里，抵山下。
现代文：便向北经由岔道行一里，抵达山下。
English: He then walked one mile north on a rutted path and arrived at the foot of the mountain.

古文：有耕者，再问之，语如初。
现代文：有个耕地的人，再次询问他，说的话如先前那人说的一样。
English: He was questioned again by a farmer, who said the same thing as the first man.

古文：乃望高贾勇，遂先登洞口斑烂石畔，穿入跨下，其内天光自顶四射。
现代文：于是望着高处鼓足勇气，就首先登到洞口色彩斑烂的岩石旁，穿过横跨的岩石下去，见天上的亮光从洞顶上四处射下来。
English: So, looking at the heights and gaining courage, he first climbed up to the colorful rocks at the mouth of the cave, went down through the straddling rocks, and saw the bright light of the sky shooting down from the top of the cave.

古文：由下北透其腹，再入重门，支峡后裂，层庋上悬，俱莫可度。
现代文：由下边往北穿到山腹中，两度进入两道石门，后面裂开支峡，上方悬着层层石板，都不能过去。
English: From the bottom to the north through the mountainside, twice into the two stone gates, behind the crack in the canyon, hanging above the layers of stone slabs, can not pass.

古文：返南向重门内，攀崖上跻，遂履层楼，徘徊未下。
现代文：返回到向南的重门之内，攀着石崖上登，便踏在了如层楼的岩洞上，正徘徊没有下去。
English: Back inside the south-facing main gate, climbing up the cliff, I stepped on the cave like a floor, just wandering without going down.

古文：忽一人来候洞前，乃下问之，曰： 是山名老虎山，是洞名狮子口，以形也。
现代文：忽然有一个人来等在洞前，就下去问他，回答说： 此山名叫老虎山，此洞名叫狮子口，是因为形状相似。
English: Suddenly, a man came to wait in front of the cave, and went down to ask him. He replied, "This mountain is called Tiger Mountain, and this cave is called Lion's Mouth, because they are similar in shape.

古文：又名黄鹏岩，以色也。
现代文：又叫黄鹏岩，是据颜色起名。
English: It is also called Huangpeng Rock, named after its color.

古文：山前有三洞：下曰平地，中曰道士，上曰黄鹏。 
现代文：山前有三个洞：下边的叫平地岩，中间的叫道士岩，上边的叫黄鹏岩。 
English: There are three caves in front of the mountain: the lower one is called the flat rock, the middle one is called the Taoist rock, and the upper one is called the Huangpeng rock.

古文：似欲为余前驱者。
现代文：似乎想要为我在前引路的样子。
English: He seemed to want to lead the way for me.

古文：余出洞，见山顶石丛参错，不暇与其人语，遂循路上跻。
现代文：我出洞来，见山顶岩石成丛，参差交错，顾不上与那人说话，就顺着路登山。
English: When I came out of the cave, I saw clumps of rocks at the top of the mountain, jagged and staggered. I couldn't talk to the man, so I followed the path up the mountain.

古文：其石片片，皆冰棱铁色。
现代文：山顶的岩石一片片，都是冰凌样的石条，铁样的颜色。
English: The rocks at the top of the mountain are all ice-like slivers of stone, the color of iron.

古文：久之下岭，石棱就夷，棘道转没。
现代文：很久才下岭来，石棱没有了，变为平地，荆棘丛生的小道转而隐没了。
English: It has been a long time since I came down from the ridge, the stone edges are gone, it has become flat land, and the thorny path has disappeared.

古文：方踯躅间，前候者自山下释耒ě农具趋上，引余左入道士岩。
现代文：正在徘徊之间，先前等候的那人从山下放下农具赶了上来，领我向左进入道士岩。
English: While I was wandering around, the man I had been waiting for came up from the bottom of the mountain, put down his farm tools, and led me to the left into the Taoist rock.

古文：岩亦南向，在黄鹏之东而稍下，所谓中洞也。
现代文：岩洞也是向南，在黄鹏岩的东边而稍微偏低一些，就是所谓的中洞了。
English: The cave is also to the south, on the east side of Huangpeng Rock and slightly lower, it is the so-called middle cave.

古文：洞之前壁，右镌李彦弼，左镌胡槻诗，皆赠刘升之者。
现代文：洞的前壁上，右边刻着李彦弼的诗，右边刻着胡椒的诗，都是赠给刘升之的。
English: On the front wall of the cave, on the right side is engraved a poem by Li Yanqi, and on the right side is engraved a poem by Pepper, both of which were given to Liu Shengzhi.

古文：升之家山下，读书洞间，故当道皆重之。
现代文：刘升之的家在山下，在洞中读书，故而当官的人都敬重他。
English: Liu Shengzhi's home is at the foot of the mountain, and he studies in a cave. Therefore, people in power respect him.

古文：拂读诗叙，始知是山之即为辰山。
现代文：拂拭洞壁读了诗前的序文，这才知道此山就是辰山。
English: After wiping the cave wall and reading the preamble before the poem, I knew that this mountain was Tatsuyama.

古文：又得辰山之不待外索，更奇甚。
现代文：又一回找到辰山不必另去寻索，更是十分奇异。
English: To find Tatsuyama once again, without having to search for it, is even more extraordinary.

古文：前得屏风岩于近山之指示，又得中隐山于时登之摹拟，若此山近人皆以为非，既登莫知其是，而数百年之遗迹，独耿然真实明白示我也，又孰提醒而孰嘿导之耶？
现代文：先前找到屏风岩是由于在近山之处有人指点，又一次找到中隐山在子登山时的揣摩思考，至于说到此山，附近的人都认为不是，登山后也不知它就是，然而几百年前的遗迹，独独明明白白地显示给我，那是谁提醒谁在默默地引导着呢？
English: Previously, the folding screen rock was found due to someone's pointing in the vicinity of the mountain, and once again, Zhongyin Mountain was found during the children's mountaineering. As for this mountain, the people nearby thought it was not, and after climbing they did not know it was. However, the remains of hundreds of years ago, uniquely and clearly showed me, who is reminding who to silently guide?

古文：余就岩录诗，因令顾仆随导者往其家就炊，其人欣然同去。
现代文：我凑近岩壁抄诗，因而命令顾仆跟随引路的人前往他家就火烧饭，那人欣然一同前去。
English: I approached the rock wall to write a poem, so I ordered my servant to follow the guide to his house to cook on the fire, and the man gladly went along.

古文：东向下山，以为其家不远，瞻眺无近村，始知尚在东北一里外也。
现代文：没有抄完，那人又来了，等候前去就餐，我就跟着他穿过东侧的石门出来。
English: Before I had finished, the man came again, waiting to go to dinner, and I followed him out through the stone door on the east side.

古文：其人姓王名世荣，号庆字，山四旁惟兹姓最近，为山之主。
现代文：此石门内剖开重重石完，外面耸立着峡壁。向东下山，以为他家不远，抬头眺望附近没有村庄，这才知道还在东北一里之外。
English: After opening the heavy stone inside this stone gate, the canyon wall stood outside. He went down the mountain to the east, thinking that his home was not far away, and looked up to see that there was no village nearby, only to find out that it was still a mile to the northeast.

古文：抵王氏，主人备餐加豆，且留宿焉。
现代文：来到王家，主人准备了饭食添加了豆，并且挽留我们住宿。
English: When we arrived at Wang's house, the owner had prepared a meal, added beans, and reserved us a place to stay.

古文：余见尧山渐近，拟为明日游，因俞ú表示应允其请，而以余晷时间索近胜。
现代文：我见尧山渐渐接近了，准备到明天去游，因此应允了他的邀请，而因为有剩余的时间就去搜寻近处的胜境。
English: As I saw that Shaoshan was getting closer, I was ready to go for a swim tomorrow, so I accepted his invitation, and since I had some time left, I went to search for nearby scenic spots.

古文：庆字乃肩梯束炬前导，为青珠洞游。
现代文：庆宇于是肩扛梯子绑了火把在前领路，去游青珠洞。
English: So Qingyu shouldered a ladder, tied a torch and led the way to visit the Blue Pearl Cave.

古文：不约而随者数十人，皆王姓。
现代文：没有邀约便有几十个人跟随而来，都姓王。
English: Without an invitation, dozens of people followed, all surnamed Wang.

古文：遂复趋辰山北麓。
现代文：于是又赶到辰山北麓。
English: As a result, they arrived at the northern foot of Tatsuyama.

古文：其洞北向，裂峡上并山顶，内界两层。
现代文：青珠洞向北，裂开的峡谷向上迸裂到山顶，洞内分隔为两层。
English: Qingzhu Cave faces north, the cleft canyon splits upward to the top of the mountain, and the cave is separated into two layers.

古文：始向南，入十余丈，乃攀崖而上，其中穹窿而暗。
现代文：开始时向南进去十多丈，就攀崖而上，洞中弯窿且很暗。
English: At the beginning, I went more than ten meters to the south and climbed up the cliff. The cave was crooked and very dark.

古文：稍转而西，乃竖梯向北崖上跻。
现代文：慢慢转向西，于是竖起梯子向北面的石崖上登。
English: Slowly he turned to the west, erecting a ladder to climb the rocky cliff to the north.

古文：既登，遂北入峡中五丈余，透出横峡。
现代文：登上去后，就向北走入峡中五丈多，钻出到横着的峡谷中。
English: After climbing up, I walked north into the canyon about five stories high and drilled out into the canyon next to me.

古文：其峡东西横亘，上高俱不见顶。
现代文：此峡呈东西向横亘着，上边高得都见不到顶。
English: The gorge stretches from east to west and is so high that you can't see the top.

古文：由东行四五丈，渐辟生光，有大石柱中悬。
现代文：往东走四五丈，慢慢开阔生出光亮来，有大石柱悬在中央。
English: Walk east for four or five meters, slowly open up to create light, with a large stone pillar hanging in the center.

古文：绕出柱西，其峡又南北竖裂：南入而临洞底，即穹窿暗顶之上也；北出而临洞门，即裂峡分层之巅也。
现代文：绕到石柱西侧，这里的峡谷又呈南北向纵向裂开：往南进去就面临洞底，就是弯窿黑暗的洞顶的上方了；向北出去就下临洞口，就是裂开峡谷分层的顶上了。
English: Going around to the west side of the stone pillar, the canyon here is also split vertically in a north-south direction: if you go south, you will face the bottom of the cave, which is above the top of the dark cave; if you go north, you will go down to the mouth of the cave, which is at the top of the split canyon.

古文：洞门中列二柱，剖为一门二窗，延影内射，正当圆柱。
现代文：洞口中央排列着两根石柱，把洞口剖为一道门两个窗，引进光影射入洞内，正照着圆形的石柱。
English: Two stone pillars are arranged in the center of the cave mouth, and the cave mouth is cut into a door and two windows, introducing light and shadow into the cave, shining on the round stone pillar.

古文：余诧以为奇，而导者曰： 未也。 
现代文：我十分诧异认为很奇特，可向导说： 不算。 
English: I was very surprised and thought it was very strange, but the guide said: No.

古文：转从横峡口，又由西行四五丈，有窍南入，甚隘。
现代文：转而从横向的峡谷口，又往西行四五丈，有洞穴往南进去，十分狭窄。
English: Turning from the transverse mouth of the canyon, and heading westward for four or five meters, there is a cave to the south, very narrow.

古文：悉去衣赤体，伏地蛇伸以进。
现代文：脱去全部衣服赤着身体，伏在地上像蛇一样一伸一屈地前进。
English: Stripped of all his clothes and stripped naked, he prostrated himself on the ground and advanced like a snake, stretching and bending.

古文：其穴长三丈，大仅如筒，又曲折而有中悬之柱，若范模子人之身而为之窍者。
现代文：这个洞穴长三丈，大处仅如竹筒一样，又曲曲折折而且中间有悬垂的石柱，洞窄得如同是用人的身子作模子而成的。
English: The cave is three stories high, with large areas resembling bamboo tubes, twists and turns, and an overhanging stone pillar in the middle. The cave is so narrow that it looks as if it was molded from a human body.

古文：时从游两人以火炬先入，余继之。
现代文：此时跟随游览的两个人拿着火把先进去，我紧跟着他们。
English: At this point, the two people accompanying the tour took the torches and went ahead, and I followed them closely.

古文：半晌而度，即西坠度板，然后后入者得顶踵而入，几几乎度一人须磨捱一时矣。
现代文：半晌才过去，马上往西下坠越过平板状的坡道，这样之后后面进来的人才得以顶着脚跟进来，几儿乎过一个人须要磨蹭一个时辰了。
English: Half an hour passed, and I immediately fell westward over the flat-shaped ramp, so that those who came in after me could come in on their heels, and it took almost an hour for one person to pass.

古文：过隘，洞复穹然，上崇下陷，乃俯南降，垂乳纷列，迥与外异。
现代文：过了隘口，洞重又弯然隆起，上高下陷，于是俯身向南下降，下垂的钟乳石纷纷罗列，迥然与外边不同。
English: After passing through the pass, the cave rises steeply and sinks, then bends down to the south, and the pendulous stalactites are lined up one after another, seemingly different from the outside.

古文：导者曰： 未也！ 
现代文：向导说： 不算奇异！ 
English: The guide said: "It's not that strange!"

古文：又西逾一梁，梁横若阈，下可由穴以坠，上可截梁而度。
现代文：又往西越过一座桥，桥横架在南北好像门槛，下边可由洞穴中坠下去，桥可横截过桥。
English: I also crossed a bridge to the west. The bridge is like a threshold from north to south. The lower side can fall down from the cave, and the bridge can cut across the bridge.

古文：越梁西下，石乳愈奇。
现代文：过了桥向西下去，钟乳石愈加奇异。
English: After crossing the bridge and heading west, the stalactites become even more bizarre.

古文：四洼既穷，复转北上，靡丽盈眸，弥更加转弥胜。
现代文：西边的洼地走到头后，又转向北上走，绮丽的景色充满眼中，越转进去越更优美。
English: After walking to the west of the depression, I turned north again. The beautiful scenery filled my eyes, and the more I turned, the more beautiful it became.

古文：盖此洞与山南之黄鹏正南北相当，而南则层叠轩朗，涤虑怡神，可以久托；北则重嫱险巇，骇心恫目，所宜暂游。
现代文：原来此洞与山南面的黄鹏岩正好南北相对，可南边的层层叠叠，轩敞明朗，消愁恰神，可以长时间托身；北边的却一重重隐秘幽深，艰险难行，惊心触目，只适宜作短暂的游览。
English: Originally, this cave was just north-south opposite the Huangpeng Rock on the south side of the mountain, but the layers of the south side are superimposed. It is open and clear, dispelling worries, and can be sheltered for a long time; the north side is full of hidden depths, arduous and dangerous, and shocking. It is only suitable for a short tour.

古文：洵一山皆空，其环峙分门者虽多，无逾此二妙矣。
现代文：确实是整座山都是空的，其中环山耸峙分出的洞口虽然很多，没有超得过这两个洞奇妙的了。
English: It is true that the whole mountain is empty, and although there are a lot of caves around the mountain, none of them are more wonderful than these two.

古文：出，复东循北麓，过洞门一，不甚深。
现代文：向北开的洞口有三个，此洞在中间，东西两个洞都浅。出洞后，再往东沿着北麓走，路过一个洞口，不十分深。
English: There are three openings to the north. This one is in the middle, and both openings are shallow. After exiting the cave, walk east along the northern foot of the mountain and pass through a hole that is not very deep.

古文：转南向而循东麓，先过高穹之洞一，又过内削三曲一，又过狗头岩一，皆以高悬不入。
现代文：转向南后沿着东麓走，首先路过高大弯窿的山洞一个，又经过洞内陡削的三个、曲曲折折的一个，又路过狗头岩一个，都因为悬在高处没进去。
English: After turning to the south and walking along the eastern foot, I first passed a tall, curved cave, and then three steeply cut caves, one with twists and turns, and one dog's head rock, all of which I did not enter because they were overhanging.

古文：又南过道十后峡门，又南得和合岩。
现代文：又往南路过道士岩后面的峡口，又向南找到和合岩。
English: Further south, we passed through the gorge behind the Taoist rock, and further south we found the Wohei rock.

古文：其岩亦东向，内辄南裂成峡，而峡东壁上镌和、合二仙像，衣褶妙若天然，必非尘笔可就。
现代文：这个岩洞也是向东，洞内则往南裂成峡谷，而峡谷东壁上刻有和、合二仙的像，衣服的皱褶巧妙得如同天然的一样，必定不是凡俗的画笔可以画就的。
English: This cave is also eastward, and the cave is split into a canyon to the south, and the east wall of the canyon is engraved with images of the two immortals, and the folds of the clothes are as clever as they are natural. It is definitely not something that can be painted with an ordinary paintbrush.

古文：转西向而循南麓，遂入平地岩。其门南向，初入欹侧，不堪平行，侧身挨北缘东隙而上，内境既穹，外光渐嫱。
现代文：洞口向南，刚进去就倾斜下去，不能平走，侧着身子挨近北面沿东边的裂隙中上去，里面的地方既弯窿而起，外边的光亮又渐渐幽暗下来。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south. As soon as you enter, you lean down and cannot walk flat. You have to walk sideways, close to the north and along the east rift. The inside is curved and rising, while the outside is bright and gradually darkening.

古文：时火炬俱弃北隅，庆宇复欲出取，而暮色亦上，不堪栖迟，乃谢之出。
现代文：此时火把全部丢弃在北边的角落里，庆宇想出去取，可暮色降临，不能停留得太晚，便谢过他出来。
English: At this time, all the torches were discarded in the corner on the north side. Qing Yu wanted to go out and get them, but when dusk fell, he couldn't stay out too late, so he came out.

古文：亦以此洞既通中洞，已穷两端，无复中撷é采摘矣。
现代文：也因为此洞既然通到中洞，已经穷究了两头，不必再摘取中间了。
English: Also, since this hole leads to the middle hole, the two ends have been exhausted, and there is no need to remove the middle.

古文：乃从山东北一里，复抵王氏。
现代文：于是从辰山往东北行一里，再次来到王家。
English: So he traveled one mile from Tatsuyama to the northeast and came to the royal family again.

古文：庆宇之母，已具餐相待。
现代文：庆宇的母亲，已备好饭相待。
English: Qing Yu's mother has prepared a meal.

古文：是夜月色甚皎，而蚊聚成雷，庆宇撤己帐供客，主仆俱得安寝。
现代文：这天夜里月色十分皎洁，而蚊子聚集声音成雷，庆宇撤了自己的蚊帐给客人用，主仆都得以安睡。
English: On this night, the moon was very bright and the sound of mosquitoes swarming was deafening. Qing Yu took out his mosquito net to use it on his guests, and his servants were able to sleep peacefully.

古文：十四日，早餐于庆宇处，遂东行。
现代文：十四日在庆宇处吃了早餐，便往东行。
English: On the 14th, they had breakfast at Qingyu and then headed east.

古文：过一聚落，又东北共三里，过矮山。
现代文：路过一个村落，又向东北共走三里，路过矮山。
English: Passed a village, and then walked a total of three miles to the northeast, passing low mountains.

古文：其山在尧山之西，漓水之东，其北复耸一枝，如拇指之附，乃石山最北之首峰也。
现代文：这座山在尧山的西边，漓江的东岸，山北又耸起一座支峰，如像大拇指附着在手掌上，是石山最北边的第一座山峰。
English: This mountain is on the west side of Lushan, on the east bank of the Lijiang River, and on the north side of the mountain there is another peak, like a thumb attached to the palm of the hand. It is the northernmost first peak of Shishan.

古文：山南崖削立，下有白岩洞。
现代文：山南崖壁削立，下面有个白岩洞。
English: Shannan cliff wall stands, below there is a white rock cave.

古文：洞门南向，三窦旁通；其内垂石，如莲叶卷覆，下多透漏，列为支门；其后少削，而下辄复平旷；转而西入数丈，仍南透天光。
现代文：洞口向南，旁边通着三个旁洞；洞内垂着岩石，如荷叶样卷覆下来，下方有许多孔隙，排列为支洞；洞后略有些陡峻，可下去后就又平敞空旷起来；转向西走进去几丈，仍然从南边透进天光。
English: The mouth of the cave faces south, and there are three side caves next to it. There are rocks hanging inside the cave, which are rolled down like lotus leaves, and there are many pores below, which are lined up as supporting caves. The back of the cave is slightly steep, but after going down, it becomes flat and open again. If you turn to the west and walk a few meters, you can still see the sky from the south.

古文：出洞而东，有庵两重，庵后又有洞甚爽，僧置牛栏猪笠于中，此中之点缀名胜者如此！
现代文：出洞后往东走，有两重寺庵，庵后又有洞十分明朗，和尚在洞中设置了牛圈和养猪的篱笆，这地方点缀名胜的东西竟然如此！
English: After going out of the cave and walking east, there are two temple hermitages, and after the hermitage there is a cave that is very clear. The monk set up a cattle pen and a fence for raising pigs in the cave. This place is dotted with places of interest that are like this!

古文：北小山之顶，一小石尖立，特起如人。
现代文：北边小山的山顶，一块小石尖尖立起，好像一个人。
English: At the top of the hill to the north, a small stone stands on tiptoe, like a man.

古文：山之名 矮 ，以矮于众山；余见其嶙峋，欲以雅名易之，未能也。
现代文：此山名叫 矮 ，是因为比群山矮；我见它山势嶙峋，想要用优雅点的名字来给它改名，没能想出来。
English: This mountain is called Dwarf, because it is shorter than the other mountains; I saw that it was very tall, and I wanted to rename it with a more elegant name, but I couldn't come up with one.

古文：于是东向溯小溪行，共二里，抵尧山西麓。
现代文：从这里向东溯小溪行，共二里，抵达尧山西麓。
English: From here, we followed the stream eastward for a total of two miles, arriving at the western foot of Lushan Mountain.

古文：由王坟之左渡一小石桥，乃上山，入古石山坊，共二里，抵玉虚殿。
现代文：由靖江王王室墓地的左侧过一座小石桥，就上山，进入古老的石山坊，共二里，来到玉虚殿。
English: After crossing a small stone bridge on the left side of the Jingjiang King's royal cemetery, I went up the mountain, entered the ancient Stone Mountain, a total of two miles, and came to the Jade Palace.

古文：其处山回成坞，西向开洋，水自山后转峡而来，可润可耕，名天赐田，而土人讹为天子田。
现代文：此处环绕成小山坞，向西一面开阔，水自山后转过山峡流来，可以灌溉可以耕种，名叫天赐田，但本地人错读成天子田。
English: This place is surrounded by a small mountain dock, open to the west, the water flows from the back of the mountain through the canyon, can be irrigated and cultivated, called Tian Zi Tian, but the locals misread it as Tian Zi Tian.

古文：由殿右转入山后，则两山夹而成涧。
现代文：由殿后转入山后，就见两座山相夹形成的山涧。
English: When you turn from the back of the hall to the back of the mountain, you will see two mountains sandwiched together.

古文：乃南向溯涧半里，又逾涧东上半里，始登岭角，于是从岭上望东北最高峰而登。
现代文：于是向南溯山涧走半里，又越过山涧往东上行半里，这才登上岭角，于是从岭上望着东北方的最高峰登去。
English: So he walked half a mile south to the foot of the ridge, and then walked half a mile east across the ridge to the top of the ridge, and then climbed the highest peak in the northeast from the top of the ridge.

古文：适得樵者，询帝尧庙所在。
现代文：恰好遇到打柴的人，打听帝尧庙在的地方。
English: He happened to meet a woodcutter and inquired about the location of the Imperial Palace Temple.

古文：其人指最高峰曰： 庙在此顶，今已移麓，惟存二石为识，无他可睹也。 
现代文：那人指着最高峰说： 庙宇在这个山顶，现在已移到山麓，仅存留下两块石头作为标记，没有其他可看的了。 
English: Pointing to the highest peak, the man said: "The temple was at the top of this mountain, and now it has moved to the foot of the mountain, leaving only two stones as markers, and there is nothing else to see.

古文：乃益东北上，三过狭脊，三登三降。
现代文：于是愈加向着东北上登，三次走过狭窄的山脊，三次上登三次下降。
English: As a result, I climbed more and more to the northeast, walked through the narrow ridge three times, climbed up three times and descended three times.

古文：又二里，始登第一高峰，然庙址无影响，并二石亦莫辨焉。
现代文：又行二里，才登上第一高峰，然而庙址没有痕迹，连两块石头也无法辨认出来。
English: It took another two miles to reach the first peak, but there was no trace of the temple site, and even the two stones could not be identified.

古文：盖此中皆石峰森立，得土山反以为异，故群而称之，犹吾地皆土山而偶得一石峰也。
现代文：大概这一带都是森然耸立的石峰，见到土山反而认为很奇特，因此大家都称颂它，就好像我家乡都是土山而偶尔见到一座石峰一样的了。
English: Presumably, this area is full of towering stone peaks, but seeing a dirt mountain is considered very strange, so everyone praises it, just as if my hometown were all dirt mountains and I occasionally saw a stone peak.

古文：大舜虞山已属附影，犹有《史记》苍梧之文，而放勋何与于此哉！
现代文：大舜的虞山已属望影附会，尚且还有《史记》记载的大舜游苍梧的文章，但是唐尧何时涉足到此地的呢！
English: The Yushan of Dafu is already a member of the Association of Watching the Shadows, and there is also an article on the journey of Dafu recorded in the "Histories," but when did Tang Jun set foot here?

古文：若谓声教南暨到，则又不独此山也。
现代文：如果说是声威与教化传到南方，那么又不仅仅是此山了。
English: If it is to be said that prestige and enlightenment have spread to the south, then it is not just this mountain.

古文：或者曰： 山势岩峣。 
现代文：有人说： 是山势险要高峻。 
English: Some people say: If the mountain is dangerous, it must be high.

古文：又或曰： 昔为瑶人所穴，以声音之同，遂讹为过化所及。
现代文：又有人说： 过去是瑶人的巢穴。 
English: Another said: "It used to be a den of vipers.

古文：如卧龙之诸葛，此岂三国版图哉！ 其山之东，石峰攒丛，有溪盘绕其间，当即大坝之上流，出于廖家西者也。
现代文：由于声音相同，便误为唐尧经过教化所到的地方，如卧龙山的诸葛武侯祠，此地难道是主国的版图吗了此山的东面，石峰成丛攒聚，有溪流环绕在其间，应当就是大坝的上游，源出于廖家村西边的水流了。
English: Because the sound is the same, it is mistaken for the place where Tang Xuan was educated, such as the Zhuge Wuhou Temple in Wolong Mountain. Is this place the territory of the host country? The eastern side of this mountain, with stone peaks clustered together and streams surrounding it, should be the upstream of the dam, with the water flowing from the west side of Liaojia Village.

古文：凭眺久之，仍五里下，饭于玉虚殿。
现代文：凭眺了很久，仍然走了五里下山来，在玉虚殿吃了饭。
English: After gazing at it for a long time, I still walked five miles down the mountain and had dinner at the Jade Palace.

古文：又二里，抵山麓小桥。
现代文：又是二里，到达山麓的小桥。
English: Another two miles and we reach a small bridge at the foot of the mountain.

古文：闻其北有尧庙，乃县中移以便伏伏天腊严冬故事者，其东南有寨山角铁峰山，其名颇著。
现代文：听说桥北有尧庙，是县里移来以便在伏腊日举行祭祀的场所，庙东南有寨山角、铁峰山，它们十分著名。
English: It is said that to the north of the bridge, there is the Gong Temple, which was moved by the county to be a place of worship on the Fula Day. To the southeast of the temple, there are the Zhai Mountain and the Tiefeng Mountain, which are very famous.

古文：乃又南渡一桥，于是东南循尧山南麓而趋，将先探铁峰，遂可西南转及寨山、黄金而返也。
现代文：就又向南走过一座桥，于是往东南沿尧山南麓快步赶去，将要先去探寻铁峰山，顺道可向西南转到寨山角、黄金岩再返回城。
English: Then he walked south across a bridge, and hurried to the southeast along the southern foot of Lushan Mountain. He wanted to explore Tiefeng Mountain first, and he could turn southwest along the way to Zhaishan Cape, Huangyan Rock, and then return to the city.

古文：五里，已出尧山东南坞。
现代文：五里，已到了尧山东南的山坞中。
English: Wuli, has reached the southeast of Lushan Mountain dock.

古文：其南石峰森森，而东南一峰，尤铮铮屼突。
现代文：山坞南面石峰森森，而东南方的一座山峰，尤其峥嵘突兀。
English: To the south of the dockyard, the peaks are jagged, and one peak in the southeast is particularly jagged.

古文：余疑其为铁峰山，得两人自东来，问之，曰： 铁峰在西，已逾而东矣！ 余不信，曰： 宁失铁峰，此铮铮者不可失也！ 
现代文：我怀疑它就是铁峰山，遇到两个人自东边过来，问他们，回答说： 铁峰山在西面，已经走过头来到东边了！  我不信，说： 宁愿失去铁峰山，这座峥嵘的高山是不能错过的！ 
English: I suspected that it was Tiefeng Mountain. I met two people coming from the east and asked them about it. They replied, "Tiefeng Mountain is in the west, and you have already gone too far to the east!" I didn't believe them and said, "I'd rather lose Tiefeng Mountain. You can't miss this magnificent mountain!"

古文：益东南驰松篁，复得一小沙弥，询铁峰，曰： 前即是矣！ 
现代文：越发向着东南在松林竹丛间疾行，又遇上一个小和尚，打听铁峰山，回答说： 前边就是了！ 
English: As he sped southeast through the pine and bamboo groves, he met a small monk who asked him about the Iron Peak Mountain and replied, "It's just up ahead!"

古文：出林，夹右转石山而南，将抵铮铮突峰之西，忽一老者曳杖至。
现代文：出了树林，靠右转过石山往南走，将要来到峥嵘突起的山峰的西麓，忽然一位老人拄着拐杖走来。
English: Out of the woods, turn right and walk south past the stone mountain, you will come to the western foot of the jutting peak, suddenly an old man walks on crutches.

古文：再询之，则夹右而转者即铁峰，其东南铮铮者乃天童观后峰，铮铮者可望而不可登，铁峰山则可登而不可入。
现代文：再次询问他，原来靠右转过来的石山就是铁峰山，那在东南方的峥嵘之山是天童观后的山峰，峥嵘之峰可望却不可登，铁峰山却可以登上去但不能进去。
English: Ask him again, the original stone mountain turned by the right is Tiefeng Mountain, and the southeastern Shizhishan is the peak after Tiantong observation. Shizhishan can be expected but cannot be climbed, but Tiefeng Mountain can be climbed but cannot be entered.

古文：盖铁峰颇似独秀，其下有岩洞，昔有仙留记，曰： 有人开得铁峰山，真珠金宝满担担。 
现代文：原来铁峰山颇有些像独秀峰，山下有个岩洞，从前有仙人留下了题记，说： 有人开得铁峰山，珍珠金宝满当当。 
English: Originally, Tiefeng Mountain is quite similar to Duxiu Peak. There is a cave at the bottom of the mountain. Once upon a time, a hermit left an inscription, saying: "Someone opened Tiefeng Mountain, full of pearls and gold."

古文：故先后多凿崖通窍者，及将得其门，辄坠石闭塞焉。
现代文：所以先后有很多在崖壁上凿洞穴想进去的人，到将要找到石门时，总是有岩石坠下把石门堵塞住了。
English: So there have been many people who have tried to get in by digging holes in the cliff wall, but when they are about to find the stone gate, a rock falls down and blocks the stone gate.

古文：老者指余循南麓遍探，仍返勘东麓，俱无深入容身之窍。
现代文：老人指引我沿着南麓四处探寻，仍旧返回来踏勘东麓，全无可以容身深入的洞穴。
English: The old man guided me to explore around the southern foot, but I still returned to explore the eastern foot. There were no caves that could accommodate me.

古文：乃西驰一里，转入南岐。
现代文：于是向西疾行一里，转上往南的岔路。
English: So he sped a mile to the west and turned onto a side road heading south.

古文：又一里抵冷水塘。
现代文：又走一里抵达冷水塘。
English: Walk another mile to reach the cold pond.

古文：小桥跨流，急涌西南而去，一村依山逐涧，亦幽栖之胜，而其人不之觉也。
现代文：小桥跨过流水，急流涌向西南而去，一个村庄依山逐涧，也是幽静栖息的胜地，可村里人没有觉察到它的优美之处了。
English: A small bridge crosses the flowing water, the torrent rushes to the southwest, and a village follows the mountain ridge. It is also a quiet resort, but the villagers have not noticed its beauty.

古文：村南石峰如屏，东西横亘，从西嘴望之，只薄若立指。
现代文：村南的石峰如像屏风，东西向横亘着，从西边的山嘴望它，只薄得如立着的手指头。
English: The stone peak in the south of the village is like a screen, stretching from east to west. Looking at it from the west side of the mountain, it is only as thin as a finger.

古文：从其腋东转南山之坳，则遂出山南大道。
现代文：从峰侧向东转到南山的山坳，便竟然出到了山南的大道上。
English: Turning east from the peak side to the foothills of Nanshan Mountain, I found myself on the main road in the south of the mountain.

古文：始驰而西，共三里过万洞寺，则寨山在其西矣。
现代文：开始向西疾行，共三里路过万洞寺，就见寨山角在它的西边了。
English: I began to speed westward, passing through Mando-ji Temple for a total of three miles, and I saw Zhaishan Cape on the west side of it.

古文：其地石山始开，平畴如砥，而寨山兀立其中。
现代文：此地石山开始开阔起来，平坦的田野如像平滑的磨刀石，可寨山角兀立在田野中。
English: Here, the stone mountains begin to open up, the flat fields are like smooth whetstones, but the mountain range stands in the middle of the fields.

古文：望其东崖，穹然壁立，悬崖之上，有室飞嵌，而不见其径。
现代文：远望它的东崖，弯然壁立，悬崖之上，有石室飞嵌在上，可不见有通往那里的路径。
English: Looking far and wide at its east cliff, it stands crookedly against the wall, on top of the cliff, with a stone room embedded on it, but there is no path leading there.

古文：转循山南，抵山西麓，乃历级北上。
现代文：转弯沿着山的南麓走，到达山的西麓，于是沿石阶向北上登。
English: Turn along the southern foot of the mountain, reach the western foot of the mountain, and then climb north along the stone steps.

古文：当西北隅，崖开一罅，上架横梁，乃逾梁入洞，贯腹而东，透出东崖，已在嵌室之内矣。
现代文：位于寨山角西北隅，山崖裂开一道裂缝，上边横架着桥，就走过桥进洞，横贯山腹往东走，钻出到东面的悬崖上，已在飞嵌的石室之内了。
English: Located in the northwest corner of Zhaishan Cape, the cliff cracked a crack, and a bridge was erected on the upper side. I walked across the bridge into the hole, walked across the mountainside to the east, and drilled out onto the cliff on the east side. I was already inside the flying stone chamber.

古文：余时急于东出，西洞真形俱不及细按。
现代文：我此时急于往东出去，西面山洞的真实情形都来不及细细考察。
English: At this time, I was in a hurry to go to the east, and I didn't have time to investigate the real situation of the cave on the west side.

古文：及透东洞，始解衣憩息，竟图托宿其间，不暇更问他胜矣。
现代文：等钻出了东面的山洞，这才脱去衣服休息，竟然考虑寄宿在洞中，顾不上再去问津别的胜景了。
English: After drilling out of the cave to the east, I took off my clothes and rested. I even thought about staying in the cave. I couldn't bear to go and see the beautiful scenery of Tsubame again.

古文：十五日，寨山洞中多蚊，无帐睡不能熟。
现代文：十五日寨山角的山洞中蚊子很多，没有蚊帐不能熟睡。
English: On the 15th, there were a lot of mosquitoes in the cave at Zhaishan Cape. I couldn't sleep well without a mosquito net.

古文：晨起，晓日即射洞而入，余不候盥栉，辄遍观洞中。
现代文：清晨起床，旭日就射入洞中，我等不得洗脸梳头，就遍观洞中。
English: When we get up in the morning, the rising sun shines into the cave. If we can't wash our face or comb our hair, we look around the cave.

古文：盖其洞西北东南，前后两辟，而中则通隘，仅容一人。
现代文：大体上此洞呈西北东南向，前后两头开阔，中间只通着一个狭窄的隘口，仅能容下一个人。
English: Generally speaking, this hole faces northwest-southeast. It is wide at the front and back, with only a narrow opening in the middle, which can only accommodate one person.

古文：由西麓上山腰，透入飞石下，旋转蹑其上，卷石为桥，以达洞门。
现代文：由西麓上到山腰，钻入飞石下边，随即转而登到飞石之上，翻卷的岩石成为桥，得以通到洞口。
English: From the west foot up to the mountainside, drill into the underside of the flying stone, then turn to climb on the flying stone, the overturned rock becomes a bridge, allowing access to the mouth of the cave.

古文：门西北向，门内洞界为两，南北并列，俱平整可居。
现代文：洞口朝西北方，洞口以内山洞被分隔成两半，南北两洞并列，全都平整可以居住。
English: The mouth of the cave faces northwest, and the cave within the mouth of the cave is divided into two halves, and the north and south caves are side by side, all of which are flat and habitable.

古文：北洞之后，即通隘透腹处也，隘长三丈。
现代文：北洞的后边，就是通往隘口穿透山腹之处了，隘口长三丈。
English: The back of the north cave is the place leading to the pass through the mountainside. The pass is three stories long.

古文：既入，即宽辟为岩，悬乳垂莲，氤氲左右，而僧结屋掩其门。
现代文：进去以后，立即拓宽成为岩洞，悬挂着的钟乳石似下垂的莲花，左右云烟氰氯，但和尚建了屋子关着屋门。
English: After entering, it immediately widened into a rock cave, the hanging stalactites looked like drooping lotus flowers, and there were clouds of cyanogen chloride, but the monk built a house and closed the door.

古文：东岩上下，俱极崇削，惟屋左角余飞台一掌，不为屋掩。
现代文：东面岩洞的上下，都极其高峻陡削，唯有屋子左角余下一块手掌大的飞台，未被屋子遮挡住。
English: Both the upper and lower parts of the cave on the east face are extremely steep and precipitous, with the exception of a hand-sized flying platform in the left corner of the house, which is not blocked by the house.

古文：余先是中夜为蚊所驱，时出坐其上。
现代文：我在此之前半夜被蚊子驱赶，时常出来坐在石台上。
English: Before this, I was chased away by mosquitoes in the middle of the night, and I often came out to sit on the stone platform.

古文：月色当空，见平畴绕麓，稻畔溢水，致甚幽旷。
现代文：月色当空，望见平坦的田野绕着山麓，稻田溢满水，景致极为幽静空阔。
English: The moon is high in the sky, and you can see the flat fields around the foot of the mountain, the rice paddies are full of water, and the scenery is extremely quiet and open.

古文：东岩之下，亦有深洞，第不透明。
现代文：东面岩洞的下边，也有个深洞，只是不透亮。
English: There is also a deep cave below the cave on the east side, but it is opaque.

古文：路当山麓，南转始得东上。
现代文：路就在山麓，往南转才能向东上去。
English: The road is at the foot of the mountain, and you have to turn south to go east.

古文：余既晨餐，西北望黄金岩颇近，亟趋焉，不复东寻下洞也。
现代文：我早餐之后，望见西北方的黄金岩很近，急忙赶去那里，不再往东去寻找下洞了。
English: After my breakfast, I saw that the golden rock in the northwest was very close, and I hurried there instead of going east to look for the next cave.

古文：自九疑瑶峒，俱以取拐为务。
现代文：下到山的西麓，过了竹桥，由村北往西北行，三里，抵达黄金岩的南面。
English: Descend to the western foot of the mountain, pass the bamboo bridge, travel northwest from the north of the village for three miles, and arrive at the south face of the Golden Rock.

古文：其下即裂为洞，洞不深而高，南北交透，前低后峻。
现代文：此山似骨头样竖立在路北，上面有块竖石很像观音，有块趴伏着的岩石好似蛤蟆，当地人称为 蟆拐拜观音 。那下边马上裂成洞，洞不深却很高，南北相通，前低后高。
English: This mountain stands like a bone in the north of the road. There is a vertical stone on top that looks like Guanyin. There is a rock lying on its side that looks like a skull. The locals call it the skull of Guanyin. The lower side immediately cracks into a hole. The hole is not deep, but it is very high. It connects the north and the south. It is low at the front and high at the back.

古文：后门之半，复有石横飞，若驾虹空中，门界为二。
现代文：后洞上的半中间，又有岩石横向飞起，如彩虹架在空中，洞口被分隔成两半。
English: In the middle of the back half of the cave, there are rocks flying horizontally, like a rainbow in the air, and the mouth of the cave is divided into two halves.

古文：既内外分启，亦上下层分，映彻之景，莫此为甚，土人俱指此为黄金岩。
现代文：内外既分别开启，上下也分层，映照通透的景致，没有比这里更优美的了，当地人都指认这里是黄金岩。
English: Both the inside and outside are separately opened, and the top and bottom are also layered, reflecting the transparent scenery. There is nothing more beautiful than here. Locals all identify this place as the Golden Rock.

古文：余既得之黄公之外，又觉此洞之奇，虽中无镌刻，而心有余幸幸运。
现代文：我既在黄公岩之外找到它，又觉得此洞很奇特，虽然洞中没有碑刻，可心里有种出乎意料的幸运感。
English: Even though I found it outside Huanggang Rock, I found this cave very strange. Although there is no inscription in the cave, I felt an unexpected sense of luck.

古文：由洞内上跻，北出驾虹之下，俯瞰北麓，拖剑江直啮其下而西去焉。
现代文：由洞内上登，往北出洞到了架空的彩虹之下，俯瞰北麓，拖剑江直接啃咬着山下而后向西流去。
English: Climbing up from the cave, going north out of the cave to an overhead rainbow, overlooking the northern foothills, the Dragjian River gnaws directly under the mountain and then flows westward.

古文：踞坐久之，仍南下出洞。
现代文：盘腿坐了很久，仍然往南下走出了洞。
English: After sitting cross-legged for a long time, he walked out of the hole, still heading south.

古文：其右复有一洞，门亦南向高裂，其内则深入而不透，若重峡而已。
现代文：洞右又有一洞，洞口也是向南高高裂开，洞内深入进去却不通，好像深峡而已。
English: There is another hole to the right of the cave. The mouth of the cave is also split high and high to the south, but it is not possible to go deep into the cave, it is just like a deep gorge.

古文：已从西麓北转，山之西北，亦有一洞西向，则中穹而不深，亦不透。
现代文：不久从西麓向北转，山的西北面，也有一个洞向西，则洞中弯窿却不深，也不通。
English: Soon I turned north from the western foot of the mountain. On the northwest face of the mountain, there was also a cave to the west, but the bend in the cave was not deep and did not open.

古文：其对山有东向之洞，与此相向，若门庑对列。
现代文：它对面的山上有个向东的洞，与此洞相对，好像大门两侧的厢房样相对排列。
English: Opposite it, on the opposite hill, there is a cave facing east. Opposite this cave, it looks like the two sides of the gate are lined up opposite each other.

古文：其洞则内分四支如 十 字。
现代文：那个山洞里面则分出四个岔洞如像 十 字。
English: Inside that cave, there are four grottoes.

古文：东北二门则外透而明，然东其所入，北乃悬崖也；西南二峡则内入而黑，然西其上奥，南乃深潭也。
现代文：东北两个洞口则通到外面而且明亮，然而东边的是入洞之处，北面的是悬崖；西南两边是两个峡谷，一进去便黑暗下来，然而西边的是此洞在上层的隐秘之处，南面的是深潭。
English: The two openings of the northeastern cave open to the outside and are bright, but the east side is the entrance to the cave, and the north side is the cliff; the southwest sides are two canyons, and it gets dark as soon as you enter, but the west side is the hidden place of the cave on the upper level, and the south side is the deep pool.

古文：拖剑之水在东峰之北，抵此洞前，转北循山。
现代文：拖剑江的江水在东峰的北边，流到此洞前，转向北沿着山流去。
English: The waters of the Tojian River flow north of the east peak, before reaching this cave, and turn north along the mountain stream.

古文：当洞有桥跨之，桥内汇而为池，亦山丛水曲之奥矣。
现代文：正对洞口有桥跨过江流，桥内侧积水成为水池，也是山重水曲的幽深之处了。
English: Directly opposite the mouth of the cave, there is a bridge across the river, and the water accumulated on the inside of the bridge has become a pool, which is also a deep place of the mountain heavy water curve.

古文：出洞，不知其名，心诧其异，见汲水池中者，姑问之。
现代文：出了山洞，不知道它的名字，心里对它的奇异之处很诧异，见到有在水池中取水的人，姑且问间他。
English: When I came out of the cave, I didn't know the name of it, and I was very surprised at the strangeness of it. When I saw someone taking water from the pool, I asked him about it.

古文：其人曰： 此洞无名。
现代文：那人说： 此洞没有名字。
English: The man said, "This cave doesn't have a name.

古文：其上更有一洞，可跻而寻也。 
现代文：它上面还有一个洞，可登上去找。 
English: There's a hole in the top of it, so you can climb up and look for it.

古文：亟从之。适雨至不为阻，披箐透崖而上。
现代文：急忙听从他的话，恰好雨来了也不能阻止，披开深著穿过山崖向上登。
English: I hurriedly obeyed his words, just as the rain came, I couldn't stop the horse, and I rode deep through the cliff and climbed up.

古文：南北两石屏并立而起，微路当其中，甚峻。
现代文：南北两面的石屏风并立而起，中间有条小路，非常陡峻。
English: The stone screens on the north and south sides rise side by side, with a very steep path in the middle.

古文：洞峙南屏后，门亦东向，而不甚宏。
现代文：洞位于南面的石屏风后，洞口也是向东，但不怎么宽敞。
English: The cave is located in the south behind a stone screen, the entrance is also to the east, but it is not very spacious.

古文：门左刻石一方，则宋人遗迹也，言此洞山回水绕，洞名黄金，为东坡居士香火院。
现代文：洞口左侧刻有一块方形石碑，是宋朝人的遗迹，说此洞山回水绕，洞名叫黄金岩，是东坡居士供奉香火的寺院。
English: On the left side of the mouth of the cave, there is a square stone monument engraved with a dragon, which is a relic of the Song Dynasty. It is said that this cave is surrounded by backwaters, and the cave is called the Golden Rock. It is a temple where Dongpo residents offer incense.

古文：岩中东坡题额可拓，予急觅之。
现代文：岩洞中苏东坡题写的匾额值得摹拓，我急忙去寻找它。
English: The inscription of Su Dongpo in the cave is worth exploring. I hurried to find it.

古文：洞右有旧镌，上有 黄金岩 三字可辨。
现代文：洞右有旧时的刻石，上面有 黄金岩 三个字可以辨认出来。
English: On the right side of the cave, there is an old carved stone with the words "Golden Rock" inscribed on it.

古文：其下方所书，则泐剥无余矣。
现代文：它下方所写的字，却剥蚀无存了。
English: The words written below it, however, have been eroded away.

古文：始知是洞为黄金，而前乃其东峰之洞。
现代文：这才知道此洞是黄金岩，而先前的那一个是它东面山峰上的洞。
English: That's how I knew that this cave was the Golden Rock, and the previous one was the cave on the mountain peak to the east of it.

古文：一黄金洞而既能得土人之所不知，又能知土人之所误指，且又知其为名贤所遗；第东坡不闻至桂为可疑耳。
现代文：找到一个黄金洞就既能得知当地人所不知道的东西，又能知道当地人误指之处，而且又知道它是古代名贤遗留下来的；只是没有听说过苏东坡到过桂林，这一点值得怀疑。
English: If you find a golden cave, you can not only learn what the local people don't know, but also know where the local people mistakenly pointed, and also know that it is left over from the ancient sages; but it is doubtful that Su Dongpo has ever heard of Guilin.

古文：洞内无他奇，而北转上透天光，断崖崩溜，无级可攀。
现代文：洞内没有别的奇异之处，可转到北面上边透进天光，断崖崩塌溜滑，没有石阶可攀。
English: There are no other strange places in the cave, you can turn to the north side to see the sky, the cliff collapses and slips, and there are no stone steps to climb.

古文：乃出门左，见北屏内峡，有路上跻，第为积莽所翳，雨深蔓湿，不堪置足，余贾勇直前，静闻不能从焉。
现代文：于是出到洞口左侧，看见北面石屏风内的峡谷，有路上登，只是被堆积的草丛遮住了，雨大草湿，不能落脚，我鼓足勇气一往直前，静闻不能跟随。
English: So I went out to the left side of the mouth of the cave and saw the canyon inside the stone screen on the north side. There was a path to climb up, but it was covered by the accumulated grass. It was raining and the grass was wet, so I couldn't put my foot down. I mustered up the courage to go straight ahead, but Jinghan couldn't follow.

古文：既登，转而南，则上洞也。
现代文：登上去后，转向南走，就是上洞了。
English: After climbing up, turn to the south and walk, that is, go up the hole.

古文：洞门北向。
现代文：洞口向北。
English: The cave opens to the north.

古文：门外棘蔓交络，余缕分而节断之，乃得入门。
现代文：洞口外荆棘蔓草交织在一起，我一缕缕分开一节节折断它们，这才得以进洞。
English: Outside the mouth of the cave, thorns and weeds were intertwined. I pulled them apart piece by piece and broke them. Only then was I able to enter the cave.

古文：门内旁窦外通，重楼三叠，下俯甚深，上眺亦异，然其上俱无级罅可攀。
现代文：洞口以内旁洞外通，三层重楼，向下俯视非常深，往上眺望也很奇异，然而那上边全无石阶缝隙可以攀援。
English: Inside the mouth of the cave, there is a passage outside the cave, a three-story building, looking down is very deep, looking up is also very strange, but there is no stone step gap on the upper side.

古文：谛视久之，见中洞之内，有旁窦可穿而上，第隘而层折，四体难舒。
现代文：审视了很久，看见中洞之内，有个旁洞小巧玲珑，悬空的裂隙宛宛转转，可以穿上去，只是狭窄又一层层曲曲折折的，四肢难以舒展。
English: After examining for a long time, I saw that inside the middle hole, there was a small and exquisite side hole, a gap in the ceiling that could be walked through, but it was narrow and tortuous, and it was difficult to stretch the limbs.

古文：于是脱衣赤体，蛇伸蠖曲，遂出上层，踞洞口飞石驾梁之上，高呼静闻，久而后至，亦以前法教猱而升，乃共下焉。
现代文：于是脱去衣服赤裸着身体，如蛇和尺镬一样一伸一曲地上爬，终于出到上层平架着的楼阁上，坐在洞口飞石架成的桥上，高声呼唤静闻，很久以后才到来，也用先前的方法教给他像猿猴一样登上来，这才一同下去。
English: So he took off his clothes, stripped naked, and crawled on the ground like a snake and a snake, and finally went out to the upper flat-roofed attic, sat on the bridge made of flying stones at the mouth of the cave, shouted quietly, and only came much later. He also used the previous method to teach him to climb up like a monkey, and only then did they go down together.

古文：时顾仆待下洞桥端甚久，既下，越桥将西趋屏风山，欲更录《程公岩记》并《壶天铭序》。
现代文：此时顾仆在下洞的桥头等了很久，下来之后，走过桥将向西赶去屏风山，打算再去抄录《程公岩记》及《壶天观铭序》。
English: At this time, Gu waited for a long time at the bridgehead of the lower cave. After coming down, he walked across the bridge and drove west to Pingfeng Mountain, intending to copy "Cheng Yan Ji" and "Jug Tian Gu Mingshu."

古文：回望黄金岩下，其西北麓诸洞尤多，乃复越桥而西，随拖剑绕山北麓，其处又北向洞二，西向洞三，或旁透多门，或内夹深峡，一山之麓，靡不嵌空，若垂云覆冀焉。
现代文：回头望黄金岩下，山西北麓的各种洞穴尤其多，就又过桥往东走，顺着拖剑江绕到山的北麓，此处又找到向北的洞两个，向西的洞三个，有的旁侧穿通有许多洞口，有的洞内夹成深峡，一座山的山麓，无处不镶嵌着空洞，好似下垂的云朵下覆的鸟翼一样。
English: Looking back at the bottom of the Golden Rock, there are especially many caves at the northwest foot of the mountain. Then, walk east across the bridge and follow the Toji River around to the northern foot of the mountain. Here you will also find two caves to the north and three caves to the west. Some have many holes on the side, and some caves are sandwiched into deep gorges. The foot of a mountain is everywhere inlaid with holes, like the wings of a bird covered by drooping clouds.

古文：极西一洞门，亦自西北穿透东南，亦北低南峻，与东峰午，令顾仆先炊王庆宇处，余与静闻西望屏风山而趋。
现代文：极西处的一个洞口，也是从西北穿透到东南，也是北低南高，与东峰中午，命令顾仆先到王庆宇处去烧饭，我与静闻向西望着屏风山赶去。
English: A cave entrance in the extreme west, also penetrating from northwest to southeast, also north low south high, and east peak at noon, ordered Gu's servant to go to Wang Qingyu's place to cook rice first, and I and Jingwen looked westward at Byobu Mountain to catch up.

古文：将度拖剑水，望两山之中，又南界一山，其下有洞北向，复迂道从之。
现代文：将要渡过拖剑水时，望见屏风山、黄金岩两山之中，又在南面隔着一座山，山下有洞朝向北方，又再绕道望着它赶去。
English: When he was about to cross the Togenshui River, he saw the Bifeng Mountain and the Golden Rock in the middle of the two mountains, and in the south there was a mountain, and under the mountain there was a cave facing the north, and he took a detour to look at it.

古文：则其洞亦旁分两门，一北一东，此山之东北隅洞也。
现代文：就见此洞也是在两旁分为两个洞口，一北一东，这是山东北隅的洞了。
English: As you can see, this cave is also divided into two openings on both sides, one north and one east. This is the cave in the northeast corner of the mountain.

古文：其西有级上跻，再上而级崩路削，又有洞北向。
现代文：洞西有石阶上登，再上去却见石阶崩塌道路陡削，又有个山洞向北。
English: To the west of the cave, there are stone steps to climb up, but when you go up again, you will see that the stone steps have collapsed, the road has been steepened, and there is a cave to the north.

古文：其前有垣，其后有座，乃昔时梵宇所托，虽后左深窍可入，然暗不能穷。
现代文：洞前有墙，洞后方有佛座，是往时佛寺建宅之处，虽然后面左侧有个深窍可以进去，但很暗不能走到头。
English: There is a wall in front of the cave and a Buddha's seat behind the cave, which is the place where the Buddhist temple was built in the past. Although there is a deep opening on the left side of the back, you can go in, but it is very dark and you can't get to the top.

古文：乃下抵西北隅，则旁透之洞，中空之峡，又连辟焉，颇与黄金岩之西北同。
现代文：于是下山走到西北隅，就见旁通之洞，中空之峡，又接连展现出来，与黄金岩的西北麓颇有些相同。
English: So I went down the mountain to the northwest corner, where I saw the hole of the bypass, the hollow gorge, and it appeared one after another, quite similar to the northwest foot of the Golden Rock.

古文：从此遂西度石堰，共一里入程公岩，录东崖记、铭二纸。
现代文：然而正西有一个洞，高高隆起，一层层排列，纷纭杂乱，高大舒展，这又是以雄壮飞扬见奇，不是平常窈窕玲珑状的洞穴了。
English: However, there is a cave directly to the west, with a high rise, arranged in layers, a variety of clutter, and a high stretch. This is another magnificent cave, not the usual ring-shaped cave.

古文：铭乃范成大，记乃侯彭老。
现代文：当地人见我进洞的时间太久，觉得诧异便来探视，我返回来打听洞名，知道是飞石洞。
English: When the locals saw that I had been in the cave for too long, they were surprised and came to visit. When I returned, I asked them the name of the cave and learned that it was the Flying Rock Cave.

古文：崖高石侧，无从缘拭，抄录甚久，有数字终不能辨。
现代文：从此便往西越过石坝，共一里进入程公岩，抄录东面石崖上的记文、铭文。石崖又高又斜，无从攀援拂拭，抄录了很长时间，有几个字始终不能辨认。
English: From then on, he crossed the stone dam to the west and entered the Chenggong Rock for a total of one mile, transcribing the notes and inscriptions on the eastern cliff. The cliff is high and sloping, and there is no way to climb and wipe it. It took a long time to transcribe, and several words could not be identified.

古文：时已过午，腹中枵然，乃出岩北趋王氏。
现代文：此时已过中午，肚中空空然，于是出了岩洞向北赶到王家。
English: By this time it was past midday and my stomach was empty, so I left the cave and drove north to Wang Jia.

古文：不半里，过一村，以衣质梯抵押，复肩至岩中，缘拭数字，尽录无遗。
现代文：不到半里，经过一个村庄，用衣服抵押借了一架梯子，重又扛来岩洞中，攀上去擦拭那几个字，全部抄完没有遗漏。
English: Less than half a mile later, he passed through a village, borrowed a ladder using his clothes as collateral, carried the heavy load to a cave, climbed up and erased the few words. He copied everything without missing anything.

古文：复缘拭西崖《张安国碑》，以其草书多剥，有数字不辨焉。
现代文：又攀上西面的崖壁擦拭《张安国碑》，因为它是草书多有剥落，有几个字不能辨认出来。
English: He also climbed the cliff wall on the west side to wipe the "Zhang'an National Monument," because it was mostly cursive with flaking, and several words could not be identified.

古文：时已下午，于是出洞还梯，北二里，饭于王氏。
现代文：此时己是下午，于是出洞还了梯子，向北走二里，到王家吃饭。
English: At this time it was already afternoon, so I returned the ladder from the cave and walked two miles north to the Wang family for dinner.

古文：王氏杀鸡为黍，待客愈隆。
现代文：王家人杀了鸡作饭，款待客人愈加丰盛。
English: The royal family killed a chicken to make a meal, and treated their guests to an even more sumptuous meal.

古文：其母再留止宿，余急于入城，第以胡槻诗下刘居显跋未录，居显，升之乃郎。攀凳拂拭，而庆宇复负而前趋。
现代文：他母亲再次挽留住下，我急于进城，只是因为胡椒的诗下边刘居显的跋没有抄录，攀着凳子拂拭，而庆宇又背着凳子在前头奔走。
English: His mother held him back again, and I was eager to go into the city, just because Liu Ju Xian's poem at the bottom of the pepper poem was not copied, climbing the stool to wipe it, and Qing Yu ran ahead with the stool on his back.

古文：西一里，入道士岩东峡门，穿入洞中，拭左崖，再读跋，终以剥多置。
现代文：往西行一里，进入道士岩东峡的峡口，穿进洞中，擦拭左侧的崖壁，再读了跋文，最终由于剥落太多放弃了。
English: I walked one mile to the west, entered the mouth of the Taoist Rock East Gorge, penetrated the cave, wiped the cliff wall on the left side, then read the essay, and finally gave up because of too much flaking.

古文：又校得胡诗三四字，乃入洞右隅之后腋，即与下洞平地岩通者。
现代文：又校对胡椒的诗校出三四个字，于是进入洞右隅的后侧，就是与下洞平地岩相通之处。
English: He also corrected the spelling of "pepper" to three or four letters, so he entered the back side of the right corner of the cave, which is the place connected to the flat rock of the lower cave.

古文：其隙始入甚隘，少进而西，则高下穹然，暗不可辨。
现代文：此道裂隙开始进去时十分狭窄，稍微进去后往西走，便上下都似苍弯一样，黑暗得不能辨认东西。
English: This fissure is very narrow when you first enter it. If you go west after entering it for a bit, the top and bottom look like a bend in the sky. It's so dark that you can't see anything.

古文：庆宇欲取火为导，余曰： 不若以余晷探外未悉之洞也。 
现代文：庆宇想要取火来领路，我说： 不如用剩余的时间去探外边没有探完的洞。 
English: When Qing Yu wanted to light a fire to lead the way, I said: It would be better to use the remaining time to explore the holes that have not yet been explored.

古文：遂仍出东峡，循东麓而北，过狗头洞。
现代文：于是仍旧出了东峡，沿东麓往北走，经过狗头洞。
English: So I still went out of the East Gorge, walked along the eastern foot to the north, and passed through the Dog's Head Cave.

古文：洞虽奇而名不雅，竟舍之。
现代文：洞虽奇特可名字不雅，竟然放弃了它。
English: Although the cave is peculiar, it has an inelegant name, so much so that it was abandoned.

古文：其北麓又有一洞，北门亦东向，外若裂罅。
现代文：山的北麓又有一个洞，北面的洞口也是向东，外边好似裂隙。
English: There is another cave at the northern foot of the mountain. The northern mouth of the cave also faces east, and looks like a crack on the outside.

古文：攀隙而上，历转三曲，遂透三窗，真窈窕之鹫宫，玲珑之鷟宇也。
现代文：攀着裂隙上去，转过三个弯，但通着三个石窗，真是窈窕的灵鸳宫府，玲珑的凤凰殿宇呀！
English: Climbing up the crevasse, turning three corners, but passing through three stone windows, it is really a splendid coffin palace, a splendid phoenix palace!

古文：出洞再北，即为高穹之洞。
现代文：出洞再往北，马上就是高高隆起的山洞。
English: Heading further north, you'll soon reach the high-rising Tsumo Cave.

古文：其门南向，上盘山顶，与北之青珠并。
现代文：洞口向南，高高地盘踞在山顶，与北面的青珠洞并列。
English: The mouth of the cave is to the south, high up on the top of the mountain, side by side with the Seizhu Cave to the north.

古文：入其内，即东转而上跻，已而北转，渐上渐黑，虽崇峻自异，而透朗独悭，非金之所心艳也。
现代文：走入洞内，马上向东转后上登，随即往北转，渐渐上去渐渐黑下来，虽然高峻自有特点，可独缺通透明朗之处，不是我心里所喜爱的地方。
English: Entering the cave, I immediately turned to the east and climbed up, then turned to the north, gradually going up and gradually getting darker. Although the height has its own characteristics, it is not my favorite place because of its lack of transparency.

古文：出洞，日已薄暮，遂别庆宇南趋二里，过屏风山西麓，至是已周其四面矣。
现代文：出了洞，天色已近傍晚，便告别庆宇向南赶了二里路，走过屏风山西麓，来到这里已遍历了山的四面了。
English: When they came out of the cave, it was already late afternoon, so they said goodbye to Qingyu and drove two miles to the south, passing the western foot of Pingfeng Mountain. By the time they got here, they had already traversed all four sides of the mountain.

古文：又三里，过七星岩，又一里，入浮桥门，则离寓已三日矣。
现代文：又行三里，过了七星岩，又一里，进入浮桥门，浮桥共由三十六条船组成。
English: Another three miles, past the Seven Star Rocks, and another mile, into the Floating Bridge Gate. The floating bridge consists of a total of thirty-six boats.

