古文：起阏逢困敦五月，尽旃蒙赤奋若七月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢困敦五月，尽旃蒙赤奋若七月，凡一年有奇。
English: It is a strange thing to happen in the month of May, or in the month of July.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝六
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝六
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Shenwen VI

古文：兴元元年甲子，公元七八四年
现代文：唐德宗兴元元年
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Xingyuan, the general amnesty came into effect, and the year name was changed.

古文：五月，盐铁判官万年王绍以江、淮缯帛来至，上命先给将士，然后御衫。
现代文：五月，盐铁判官万年人氏王绍带着江淮地区的丝帛来到行在，德宗命令先供给将士，然后自己才穿上单衣。
English: In May, Wang Shao, the salt and iron adjudicator and man of a thousand years, came to Xingye with silk cocoons from the Jianghuai region. Dezong ordered to supply soldiers first, and then put on a single coat.

古文：韩滉欲遣使献绫罗四十担诣行在，幕僚何士幹请行，滉喜曰： 君能相为行，请今日过江。 
现代文：韩打算派遣使者进献绫罗四十担，送到行在去，幕僚何士干请求前往。韩高兴地说： 你若能够替我去，请在今天就渡过长江。 
English: Han planned to send an emissary to present forty carts of rice to Luo, who was on his way, and his staff asked him to go. Han said happily: If you can go for me, please cross the Yangtze River today.

古文：士幹许诺，归别家，则家之薪米储偫已罗门庭矣；登舟，则资装器用已充舟中矣。
现代文：何士干答应了。当何士干回去告别家人时，韩已经让人将家中需用的柴米储备罗列在门口和庭院了。何士干登船时，韩已经让人把所需物资装备与用具在船中装满了。
English: He Shigang agreed. When He Shigang went back to say goodbye to his family, Han had people list the firewood and rice reserves needed at home at the door and in the courtyard. When He Shigang boarded the ship, Han had people fill the ship with the necessary supplies, equipment and tools.

古文：下至厕筹，滉皆手笔记列，无不周备。
现代文：下至清除大便的拭秽之具，韩都亲手逐项记录，无不周全详备。
English: Even down to the wiping utensils used to remove faeces, Han Du recorded each item by hand, meticulously and in detail.

古文：每担夫，与白金一版置腰间。
现代文：每个担夫发给银牌一块，系在腰间。
English: Each bearer was given a silver medallion to wear around his waist.

古文：又运米百艘以饷李晟，自负囊米至舟中，将佐争举之，须臾而毕。
现代文：又有一次，韩运送一百艘船的粮米，给李晟充作粮饷，他亲自将米口袋背放到船中，他的将佐都争先去背米袋，不一会儿，就把船装完了。
English: On another occasion, Han transported a hundred ships' worth of grain and rice to be used as food for Li Yao. He personally carried the bags of rice into the ship, and his general Zadu raced to carry the bags of rice. In a short time, the ship was completely loaded.

古文：艘置五弩手以为防援，有寇则叩舷相警，五百弩已彀矣。
现代文：韩还让每艘船设置弩手五人，用来作为防备打劫和互相声援之用。有寇盗时，便敲击船舷，互通警报，只用弩手五百人便足够了。
English: Han also ordered that each ship be equipped with a five-person watchman to prevent robberies and provide mutual support. In the event of a robbery, the watchman would knock on the side of the ship to sound the alarm. Five hundred watchmen would be enough.

古文：比至渭桥，资不敢近。
现代文：直至运到渭桥，都不曾有寇盗敢来靠近。
English: Until they were transported to Qianqiao, no robbers dared to come near them.

古文：时关中兵荒，米斗直钱五百，及滉米至，减五之四。
现代文：当时关中战乱不息，每斗米价值五百钱，等到韩将米运到后，米价减少了五分之四。
English: At that time, Guanzhong was in a state of continuous war, and each bucket of rice was worth five hundred yuan. By the time South Korea shipped the rice, the price of rice had fallen by four-fifths.

古文：滉为人强力严毅，自奉俭素，夫人常衣绢裙，破，然后易。
现代文：韩为人强干有力，严明果决，自己的日常所需节俭而朴素，他的夫人常常穿着没有纹彩的绢裙，穿破后才换。
English: Han is strong and decisive, and his daily needs are frugal and simple. His wife often wears a plain pleated skirt and changes it only after it is worn out.

古文：吐蕃既破韩旻等，大掠而去。
现代文：吐蕃打败韩等人以后，大规模地掳掠了一番便离去了。
English: After defeating Han and the others, they plundered everything on a large scale and then left.

古文：硃泚使田希鉴厚以金帛赂之，吐蕃受之。韩游瑰以闻。
现代文：朱让田希鉴把大量金帛赠给吐蕃，吐蕃接受了，韩游便将此事上奏朝廷闻知。
English: Zhu asked Tian Xijian to give a large amount of gold ingots to Tubo, Tubo accepted, and Han You reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：浑瑊又奏： 尚结赞屡遣人约刻日共取长安，既而不至。
现代文：浑又上奏说： 尚结赞屡次派人与我约定，立下时限，共同攻取长安，后来却不曾前来。
English: "Shang Jizan repeatedly sent people to make an appointment with me, set a time limit, and jointly capture Chang'an, but later he never came.

古文：闻其众今春大疫，近已引兵去。 
现代文：听说吐蕃人在今年春天遭受了大规模的瘟疫，最近已经领兵离去了。 
English: I heard that the people of Tubo had suffered a large-scale plague in the spring of this year, and had recently led the troops to leave.

古文：上以李晟、浑瑊兵少，欲倚吐蕃以复京城，闻其去，甚忧之，以问陆贽。
现代文：由于李晟、浑兵力薄弱，德宗准备依赖吐蕃兵收复京城，现在听说吐蕃人离去，甚为担忧，便询问陆贽的意见。
English: Due to the weak military strength of Li Qian and Hun, Dezong was prepared to rely on the Tubo soldiers to recover the capital. Now that he heard that the Tubo people were leaving, he was very worried and asked Lu Qian's opinion.

古文：贽以为吐蕃贪狡，有害无益，得其引去，实可欣贺。
现代文：陆贽认为，吐蕃既贪婪，又狡猾，只有害处，没有裨益，赶上吐蕃领兵离去，实在值得庆幸。
English: Lu Yao believed that the cormorant was greedy and cunning, with only harm and no benefit. It was truly fortunate to catch up with the departure of the cormorant leader.

古文：乃上奏，其略曰： 吐蕃迁延观望，翻覆多端，深入郊畿，阴受贼使，致令群帅进退忧虞：欲舍之独前，则虑其怀怨乘蹑；欲待之合势，则若其失信稽延。
现代文：于是他进上奏疏，大略是说： 吐蕃拖延观望，反覆无常。他们深入京畿，暗中接受贼寇的指使，以致使得各军主帅进退两难。如果准备抛开吐蕃独自前往，那便顾虑吐蕃心怀怨恨，乘机紧随在后面骚扰；如果打算等待吐蕃会合兵势，那便苦于吐蕃不守信用，拖延时日。
English: He then went on a rant, saying, roughly, "Tu Xuan delayed and waited, and was capricious. They went deep into Gyeonggi and secretly accepted the instructions of the bandits, which put the commanders of the armies in a dilemma. If they were prepared to leave Tu Xuan to go alone, then Tu Xuan would be suspicious, hold a grudge, and take the opportunity to follow closely behind and harass them; if they intended to wait for Tu Xuan to assemble their forces, then they would suffer from Tu Xuan's breach of trust and delay.

古文：戎若未归，寇终不灭。 
现代文：若是吐蕃没有回去，敌寇终难消灭。 
English: If the cormorants do not return, the enemy cormorants will not be able to be eliminated.

古文：又曰： 将帅意陛下不见信任，且患蕃戎之夺其功；士卒恐陛下不恤旧劳，而畏蕃戎之专其利；贼党惧蕃戎之胜，不死则悉遗人禽；百姓畏蕃戎之来，有财必尽为所掠。
现代文：他又说： 将帅猜想陛下不信任自己，而且担心吐蕃会与他们争功；士兵惟恐陛下不顾念旧日的劳绩，而且害怕吐蕃独占了赏赐；贼人一伙畏惧吐蕃取得胜利，即使自己不死，也会全部被擒；百姓害怕吐蕃到来，有点钱财，也必然会被他们完全掠去。
English: He also said, "The commander-in-chief suspects that His Majesty does not trust him, and is afraid that the Tibetan mastiff will compete with them; the soldiers fear that His Majesty does not care about their past achievements, and are afraid that the Tibetan mastiff has monopolized the reward; the gang of thieves are afraid of the Tibetan mastiff to win, and even if they do not die, they will all be arrested; the people are afraid of the arrival of the Tibetan mastiff, and some money will inevitably be completely robbed by them.

古文：是以顺于王化者其心不得不怠，陷于寇境者其势不得不坚。 
现代文：所以，顺承皇上教化的人们的心意不得不日见懈怠，失陷到敌寇疆境内的人们不肯归附的情势也不得不渐趋坚定。 
English: Therefore, the will of the people who followed the emperor's edification had to weaken day by day, and the unwillingness of the people who had fallen into the enemy's territory to adhere had to become increasingly firm.

古文：又曰： 今怀光别保蒲、绛，吐蕃远避封疆，形势既分，腹背无患，瑊、晟诸帅，才力得伸。 
现代文：他又说： 现在李怀光另外去防守蒲州和绛州，吐蕃又远远地避开大唐的疆土，形势既已将李怀光与吐蕃分开了，我军腹心与后背都没有顾忌，浑、李晟各节帅的才能与力量也就可以得到施展了。 
English: He also said: Now Li Huai Guang is also defending Puzhou and Zhangzhou, and Tubo is far away from the territory of Datang. Since the situation has separated Li Huai Guang from Tubo, our army's subordinates and backbones have no scruples, and the talents and strength of the commanders of Hun and Li Tong can also be exerted.

古文：又曰： 但愿陛下慎于抚接，勤于砥砺，中兴大业，旬月可期，不宜尚眷眷于犬羊之群，以失将士之情也。 
现代文：他又说： 只希望陛下谨慎地安抚将士，经常地砥砺自己，那么，中兴大业，可望在一个月的时间里完成，不应该还眷恋吐蕃这种犬羊之群，因而失去将士之心。 
English: He also said: I only hope that His Majesty will carefully appease the soldiers and constantly improve himself. Then, the great cause of ZTE can be expected to be completed in a month's time. He should not still be attached to the dogs and sheep like Tu Wei, and thus lose the soldiers' hearts.

古文：上复使谓贽曰： 卿言吐蕃形势甚善，然瑊、晟诸军当议规画，今其进取。
现代文：德宗再次让人对陆贽说： 你所讲的有关吐蕃形势很好。但是，对浑、李晟各军应当计议出一个规划来，以便让他们进取敌军。
English: Dezong once again had someone say to Lu Yao: The situation you mentioned regarding Tubo is good. However, the armies of Gong and Li Yao should come up with a plan so that they can attack the enemy.

古文：朕欲遣使宣慰，卿宜审细条疏以闻。 
现代文：朕打算派遣使者去安抚他们，你应当审慎详细地列出纲目，上报给朕知道。 
English: I am going to send a messenger to pacify them. You should carefully detail the agenda and report back to me.

古文：贽以为： 贤君选将，委任责成，故能有功。
现代文：陆贽认为， 贤明的君主选择将领，委以重任，责以成效，所以能够有所建树。
English: Lu Wei believes that a wise monarch chooses generals, entrusts them with important tasks, and entrusts them with results, so they can do something.

古文：况今秦、梁千里，兵势无常，遥为规画，未必合宜。
现代文：况且，现在秦中与梁州相距千里，用兵的形势变化多端，远远地为将帅规划，不一定合乎时宜。
English: Moreover, now Qinzhong and Liangzhou are thousands of miles apart, and the situation of the use of troops has changed a lot. It is far from being a general plan, and it is not necessarily timely.

古文：彼违命则失君威，从命则害军事，进退羁碍，难以成功。
现代文：如果将帅们违反命令，便有失君主的威严；如果将帅们听从命令，却对军中事务有害。或进或退，都有羁绊与阻碍，便难以取得成功。
English: If generals disobey orders, they will lose the majesty of the monarchy; if generals obey orders, it will be harmful to the affairs of the army; if they advance or retreat, there will be obstacles and obstacles, and it will be difficult to succeed.

古文：不若假以便宜之权，待以殊常之赏，则将帅感悦，智勇得伸。 
现代文：不如给他们见机行事的权力，以超常的奖赏对待他们，将帅们既感激，又喜欢，他们的智慧与勇敢便会得以施展。 
English: It is better to give them the power to act opportunistically, to treat them with extraordinary rewards, the generals are grateful and like, their wisdom and bravery will be able to exert.

古文：乃上奏，其略曰： 锋镝交于原野而决策于九重之中，机会变于斯须而定计于千里之外，用舍相碍，否臧皆凶。
现代文：于是陆贽进上奏疏，大略是说： 战事在原野上进行而决定方策却在幽深的宫禁之中，交战的时机瞬息万变而制定计谋却在千里以外，用命与不用命互相妨碍，仗打得好坏，结果都是不祥的。
English: Therefore, Lu Xunjin made a brief report, saying roughly: The battle was fought in the field, but the decision-making strategy was in the depths of the palace, the timing of the battle was ever-changing, but the formulation of the strategy was thousands of miles away, the use of life and non-life hindered each other, the battle was good or bad, and the results were ominous.

古文：上有掣肘之讥，下无死馁之志。 
现代文：在上会招致对将帅处处掣肘的讥讽，在下会丧失军队、将帅当死的士气。 
English: On the one hand, it will invite ridicule on the general who is hampered everywhere, and on the other hand, it will lose the morale of the army and the general.

古文：又曰： 传闻与指实不同，悬算与临事有异。 
现代文：他又说： 道听途说与亲临实际是不同的，凭空计议与据事决断也是有区别的。 
English: He also said: There is a difference between hearsay and actual attendance, and there is also a difference between basing decisions on speculation and making decisions based on facts.

古文：又曰： 设使其中或有肆情干命者，陛下能于此时戮其违诏之罪乎？
现代文：他又说： 假使将帅中有肆意违犯命令的人物，陛下能在这时候以违背诏旨的罪名将他诛杀吗？
English: He also said: If there is a person among the generals who wantonly violates the order, can His Majesty kill him at this time on the charge of violating the edict?

古文：是则违命者既不果行罚，从命者又未必合宜，徒费空言，只劳睿虑，匪惟无益，其损实多。 
现代文：由此可见，既然不能实现对违背命令行为的惩罚，遵从命令的行为又不一定合乎时宜，白白浪费空洞的言辞，只能忧劳陛下的思虑，不仅没有好处，损失实在太多。 
English: From this, it can be seen that since the punishment for disobeying orders cannot be realized, and the act of obeying orders is not necessarily timely, the waste of empty words is in vain, and can only worry His Majesty's thoughts. Not only is there no benefit, but there are too many losses.

古文：又曰： 君上之权，特异臣下，惟不自用，乃能用人。 
现代文：他又说： 君主的权力，与臣下的权力大有区别。君主只有不自以为是，才能善于用人。 
English: He also said: The power of the monarch is very different from the power of his subjects. The monarch can only be good at employing people if he is not self-righteous.

古文：癸酉，泾王侹薨。
现代文：癸酉，泾王李去世。
English: On the third day, the King of Gongs, Li Yueting, passed away.

古文：徐、海、沂、密观察使高承宗卒，甲戌，使其子明应知军事。
现代文：徐、海、沂、密观察使高承宗去世。甲戌，德宗让高承宗的儿子高明应代理军中事务。
English: Gao Chengzong's death was observed by Xu, Hai, Yan, and Mi. Gao Chengzong's son Gao Ming should act as his deputy in military affairs.

古文：乙亥，李抱真、王武俊距贝州三十里而军。
现代文：乙亥，李抱真与王武俊在距离贝州三十里的地方驻扎。
English: Yi Hai, Li Baozhen and Wang Wujun were stationed in a place 30 miles away from Bozhou.

古文：硃滔闻两军将至，急召马寔，寔昼夜兼行赴之。
现代文：朱滔听说李、王两军即将到来，急忙传召马，马日夜兼程，前来赴召。
English: Zhu Tao heard that the two armies of Li and Wang were about to arrive, and hastily summoned horses. The horses traveled day and night to come and be summoned.

古文：或谓滔曰： 武俊善野战，不可当其锋，宜徙营稍前逼之，使回纥绝其粮道。
现代文：有人对朱滔说： 王武俊善于在旷野作战，我军不应该与他正面交战，而应该移动营垒，稍稍向前逼近他一些，让回纥兵断绝他的运粮通道。
English: Someone said to Zhu Tao: Wang Wujun is good at fighting in the wilderness, our army should not fight him head-on, but should move the camp, slightly advance closer to him, and let the Hui soldiers cut off his grain transportation channel.

古文：我坐食德、棣之餫，依营而陈，利则进攻，否则入保，待其饥疲，然后可制也。 
现代文：我军不劳而得食德州、棣州运送来的粮食，靠近营垒列阵，有利时便进攻，不利时，便入营防守，等王武俊军饥饿疲惫了，然后才能制服他。 
English: Our army had no trouble eating the grain shipped from Texas and Zhangzhou. They lined up near the camp, attacked when it was advantageous, and entered the camp to defend it when it was disadvantageous. They waited until Wang Wujun's army was hungry and exhausted before they could subdue him.

古文：滔疑未决。
现代文：朱滔迟疑没有作出决定。
English: Zhu Tao hesitated and did not make a decision.

古文：会马寔军至，滔命明日出战。
现代文：适逢马的军队到，朱滔便命令他第二天出战。
English: When Ma's army arrived, Zhu Tao ordered him to fight the next day.

古文：寔言： 军士冒暑困惫，请休息数日乃战。 
现代文：马说： 将士冒着炎天暑气，都很疲乏，请让他们休息几天再战。 
English: Ma said, "The soldiers are very tired after braving the hot weather. Please let them rest for a few days before the battle."

古文：常侍杨布、将军蔡雄引回纥达干见滔，达干曰： 回纥在国与邻国战，常以五百骑破邻国数千骑，如扫叶耳。
现代文：常侍杨布、将军蔡雄领着回纥达干来见朱滔，达干说： 回纥军在本国内与邻国交战，常常用骑兵五百人打败邻国骑兵数千人，如同打扫落叶一般。
English: Yang Bu's regular attendant, General Cai Xiong, led the Uighur Dagan to come to see Zhu Tao. Dagan said: The Uighur army fought with neighboring countries in their own country, often using five hundred cavalry to defeat thousands of neighboring cavalry, just like sweeping the fallen leaves.

古文：今受大王金帛、牛酒前后无算，思为大王立效，此其时矣。
现代文：如今我们先后所接受的大王的钱帛和牛酒犒劳多得难以计算，想替大王立点儿功劳，现在是时候了。
English: It is difficult to calculate the amount of money and wine that we have received from the great king. It is time to do something for the great king.

古文：明日，愿大王驻马高丘，观回纥为大王翦武俊之骑，使匹马不返。 
现代文：明天，希望大王骑马立在高丘上，观看回纥军替大王消灭王武俊的骑兵，让他连一匹马也跑不回去。 
English: Tomorrow, I hope that the great king will ride a horse and stand on a high hill to watch the Uighur army destroy Wang Wujun's cavalry for the great king, so that he can not run back even one horse.

古文：布、雄曰： 大王英略盖世，举燕、蓟全军，将扫河南，清关中，今见小敌豫不击，失远近之望，将何以成霸业乎！
现代文：杨布、蔡雄说： 大王英才大略，盖世无双，带领燕、蓟全军，将要扫荡河南，肃清关中，现在才与小股敌人遭遇，便迟疑不定，不肯进击，使远近各地的人们大失所望，那将怎么能够完成霸业呢！
English: Yang Bu and Cai Xiong said: "The great king is a brilliant general, unparalleled in the world, leading the entire army of Yan and Zou. He will sweep Henan and cleanse Guanzhong. Now that he has encountered a small group of enemies, he hesitates and refuses to attack, causing great disappointment to people far and near. How will he be able to complete his hegemony?

古文：达干请战是也。 
现代文：达干请求出战是对的啊。 
English: Dagan was right to ask for a fight.

古文：滔喜，遂决意出战。
现代文：朱滔大喜，于是拿定主意，准备出战。
English: Zhu Tao was overjoyed, so he made up his mind and prepared to go to war.

古文：丙子旦，武俊遣其兵马使赵琳将五百骑伏于桑林，抱真列方陈于后，武俊引骑兵居前，自当回纥。
现代文：丙子早晨，王武俊派遣他的兵马使赵琳带领骑兵五百人在桑林埋伏下，李抱真列成方阵，居于后面，王武俊带领骑兵，居于前面，亲自抵挡回纥军。
English: In the morning of the third day, Wang Wujun sent his soldiers and horses to make Zhao Lin lead 500 cavalry to ambush in the mulberry forest, Li Baozhen formed a square formation and stayed behind, Wang Wujun led the cavalry and stayed in front, and personally resisted the Uighur army.

古文：回纥纵兵冲之，武俊命其骑控马避之。
现代文：回纥军放出兵马向王武俊冲击，王武俊让他的骑兵驾驭好战马，避开回纥军。
English: The Hui army sent out soldiers and horses to attack Wang Wujun. Wang Wujun let his cavalry ride the war horses and avoid the Hui army.

古文：回纥突出其后，将还，武俊乃纵兵击之，赵琳自林中出横击之，回纥败走。
现代文：回纥军冲到王武俊军的后面，将要返回，王武俊这才放出兵马进击回纥军，赵琳也从树林中冲出，拦腰截击，回纥军战败逃走。
English: The Hui army rushed to the back of Wang Wujun's army and was about to return. Wang Wujun then sent soldiers and horses to attack the Hui army. Zhao Lin also rushed out of the woods to intercept the Hui army. The Hui army was defeated and fled.

古文：武俊急追之，滔骑兵亦走，自践其步陈，步骑皆东奔，滔不能制，遂走趣其营，抱真、武俊合兵追击之。
现代文：王武俊急忙追击，朱滔的骑兵也在奔逃，在本军的步兵阵列中自行践踏，步兵、骑兵都向东逃奔，朱滔无法制止，于是向他的营地逃去，李抱真、王武俊合兵一处，追击朱滔。
English: Wang Wujun hurriedly pursued, Zhu Tao's cavalry also fled, trampling on their own in the infantry array of this army. Both infantry and cavalry fled to the east. Zhu Tao could not stop them, so he fled to his camp. Li Baozhen and Wang Wujun joined forces and pursued Zhu Tao.

古文：时滔引三万人出战，死者万馀人，逃溃者亦万馀人，滔才与数千人入营坚守。
现代文：当时，朱滔是率领三万人出战的，结果死亡一万余人，逃散的也有一万余人，朱滔仅仅与数千人进入营垒坚守。
English: At that time, Zhu Tao led 30,000 people to go to war. As a result, more than 10,000 people died, and more than 10,000 people fled. Zhu Tao only entered the camp with thousands of people.

古文：会日暮，昏雾，两军不能进，抱真军其营之西北，武俊军其东北。
现代文：正赶上天刚黑，雾气浓重昏暗，前来追击的两支军队无法前进，于是李抱真在朱滔营地的西北面驻扎下来，王武俊在朱滔营地的东北面驻扎下来。
English: It was just getting dark, the fog was thick and dark, and the two armies that had come to chase them could not advance, so Li Baozhen stationed himself in the northwest of Zhu Tao camp, and Wang Wujun stationed himself in the northeast of Zhu Tao camp.

古文：滔夜焚营，引兵出南门，趣德州遁去，委弃所掠资货山积。
现代文：当天夜里，朱滔烧掉营垒，领兵从南门出来，向德州逃去，丢下他们所劫掠的财物堆积如山。
English: That night, Zhu Tao burned down the camp, led the soldiers out of the south gate, and fled to Texas, leaving behind a mountain of looted property.

古文：两军以雾，不能追也。
现代文：李、王二军因雾气浓重的原故，不能前去追击。
English: Due to the heavy fog, Li and Wang's two armies could not go forward to pursue.

古文：滔杀杨布、蔡雄而归幽州，心既内惭，又恐范阳留守刘怦因败图己。
现代文：朱滔杀了杨布和蔡雄，于是回到幽州。他既感到内心惭愧，又惟恐范阳留守刘怦乘着兵败之机谋害自己。
English: Zhu Tao killed Yang Bu and Cai Xiong, and then returned to Yuzhou. He felt both ashamed and afraid that Fan Yang left Liu Wei to take advantage of the military defeat to kill himself.

古文：怦悉发留守兵夹道二十里，具仪仗，迎之入府，相对悲喜，时人多之。
现代文：刘怦悉数派出留守的兵员，夹道列队长达二十里，备办了仪仗，把朱滔迎入军府，两人相对既悲又喜，当时的人们都称许刘怦的做法。
English: Liu Bei sent all the soldiers who were left behind, lined up the captains for twenty miles, prepared a ceremonial battle, and welcomed Zhu Tao into the military government. The two were both sad and happy at the same time. People at the time praised Liu Bei's approach.

古文：初，张孝忠以易州归国，诏以孝忠为义武节度使，以易、定、沧三州隶之。
现代文：当初，张孝忠率领易州归顺了朝廷，德宗颁诏任命张孝忠为义武节度使，将易、定、沧三州隶属于他。
English: At first, Zhang Xiaozhong led Yizhou to surrender to the imperial court. Emperor Dezong issued an edict appointing Zhang Xiaozhong as the envoy of the military festival, subordinating Yizhou, Ding and Cang to him.

古文：沧州刺史李固烈，李惟岳之妻兄也，请归恒州，孝忠遣押牙安喜程华交其州事。
现代文：沧州刺史李固烈是李惟岳的妻兄，他请求回恒州去，张孝忠派遣押牙安喜人氏程华与他交接沧州事宜。
English: Cangzhou historian Li Gurei is the brother-in-law of Li Weiyue. He requested to go back to Hengzhou, and Zhang Xiaozhong dispatched Aba An Xijin's Cheng Hua to hand over Cangzhou affairs to him.

古文：固烈悉取军府绫、缣、珍货数十车，将行，军士大噪曰： 刺史扫府库之实以行，将士于后饥寒，奈何！ 
现代文：李固烈将军府内的绫绢和珍宝财物数十车全部取走，准备启程时，将士们大声喧闹着说： 刺史将库存的财物尽其所有带着走了，将士们以后挨饿受冻时，如何是好？ 
English: Li Gurei took away all the dozens of carts of treasures and treasures in the general's residence. When they were preparing to leave, the generals said loudly and noisily: "Sushi took all the inventory of property with him. How will it be when the generals are starving and freezing later?"

古文：遂杀固烈，屠其家。
现代文：于是，将士们杀了李固烈及其全家。
English: As a result, the soldiers killed Li Gurei and his entire family.

古文：程华闻乱，自窦逃出，乱兵求得之，请知州事。
现代文：程华听说发生变乱，从孔道中逃了出来，变乱的将士找到了他，请他执掌州中事务。
English: Cheng Hua heard that there was a mutiny and escaped from the tunnel. The mutinous soldiers found him and asked him to take charge of state affairs.

古文：华不得已，从之。
现代文：程华没有办法，听从了他们的要求。
English: Cheng Hua had no choice but to comply with their request.

古文：孝忠闻之，即版华摄沧州刺史。
现代文：张孝忠听说此事后，立即便给程华授官为代理沧州刺史。
English: After Zhang Xiaozhong heard about this, he immediately appointed Cheng Hua as the agent of Cangzhou History.

古文：华素宽厚，推心以待将士，将士安之。
现代文：程华平素待人宽和厚道，推心置腹地对待将士，将士们安定了。
English: Cheng Huaping has always treated people with generosity and kindness, and treated the soldiers with sincerity, and the soldiers have become stable.

古文：会硃滔、王武俊叛，更遣人招华，华皆不从。
现代文：正赶上朱滔、王武俊反叛，两人轮番派人传召程华，程华一概不肯从命。
English: Just in time for Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun to rebel, the two took turns to send people to summon Cheng Hua. Cheng Hua refused to comply with the order.

古文：时孝忠在定州，自沧如定，必过瀛州，瀛隶硃滔，道路阻涩。
现代文：当时，张孝忠驻军定州，从沧州到定州去，必须经过瀛州，瀛州隶属朱滔，两处往来的道路阻隔不通。
English: At that time, Zhang Xiaozhong was stationed in Dingzhou. To go from Cangzhou to Dingzhou, he had to go through Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou belonged to Zhu Dao, and the two roads were blocked.

古文：沧州录事参军李宇说华，表陈利害，请别为一军，华从之，遣宇奉表诣行在。上即以华为沧州刺史、横海军副大使、知节度事，赐名日华，令日华岁供义武租钱十二万缗。
现代文：沧州录事参军李宇劝说程华，向朝廷上表陈说利害，请朝廷在沧州另设一个军，程华听从了这一建议，派遣李宇带着表章前往行在，德宗当即任命程华为沧州刺史、横海军副大使，代理节度使事务，赐名叫做日华，命令程日华每年供给义武租税钱十二万缗。
English: Record of Cangzhou's entry into the army Li Yu persuaded Cheng Hua to petition the imperial court to set up another army in Cangzhou. Cheng Hua listened to this suggestion and sent Li Yu to march with a watch badge. Dezong immediately appointed Cheng Hua to be the deputy ambassador of Cangzhou and the deputy ambassador of Heng navy, acting as the commander of the festival, giving the name of Nichihua, and ordered Cheng Nichihua to supply 120,000 yuans of tax money to the military every year.

古文：王武俊又使人说诱之，时军中乏马，日华绐使者曰： 王大夫必欲相属，当以二百骑相助。 
现代文：王武俊又让人劝说引诱程日华，当时军队中缺少马匹，程日华欺骗王武俊的使者说： 王大夫果真打算有事相嘱托的话，就应该派来二百人马援助我。 
English: Wang Wujun also had someone persuade and entice Cheng Rihwa. At that time, there was a shortage of horses in the army. Cheng Rihwa deceived Wang Wujun's messenger and said, "If Dr. Wang really intends to entrust me with something, he should send two hundred men and horses to help me."

古文：武俊给之，日华悉留其马，遣其士归。
现代文：王武俊将人马派给了程日华，程日华却将他的马匹悉数留下，而将他的士兵都打发回去。
English: Wang Wujun sent men and horses to Cheng Rihwa, but Cheng Rihwa left all his horses behind and sent his soldiers back.

古文：武俊怒，而方与马燧等相拒，不能攻取，日华由是获全。
现代文：王武俊大怒，但当时他正与马燧等人相对抗，不能够攻打程日华，程日华因此得以保全。
English: Wang Wujun was furious, but at that time he was fighting against Ma Jun and others, and could not attack Cheng Rihua, so Cheng Rihua was saved.

古文：及武俊归国，日华乃遣人谢过，偿其马价，且赂之。武俊喜，复与交好。
现代文：到王武俊归顺朝廷时，程日华便派人向王武俊承认了过错，偿还了他的马价，并且对他有所赠送，王武俊高兴了，再次与程日华交好。
English: When Wang Wujun returned to the imperial court, Cheng Rihwa sent someone to Wang Wujun to admit his mistake, reimburse his horse price, and give him a gift. Wang Wujun was happy and made friends with Cheng Rihwa again.

古文：庚寅，李晟大陈兵，谕以收复京城。
现代文：庚寅，李晟将兵马布成巨大的阵列，向将士宣布前去收复京城。
English: Gyeong-in and Rihyo formed a huge array of soldiers and horses and announced to the soldiers that they were going to recapture the capital.

古文：先是，姚令言等屡遣谍人觇晟进军之期，皆为逻骑所获。
现代文：在此之前，姚令言等人屡次派遣探子前来刺探李晟进军的日期，但都被巡逻的骑兵俘虏了。
English: Prior to this, Yao Lingyan and others repeatedly sent scouts to spy on the date of Li Lan's march, but they were all captured by the patrolling cavalry.

古文：晟引示以所陈兵，谓曰： 归语诸贼，努力固守，勿不忠于贼也！ 
现代文：现在，李晟领着这些俘虏，让他们观看自己布成阵列的兵马，对他们说： 你们回去告诉每一个贼兵贼将，让他们卖力气地坚决防守吧，可不要不忠于朱老贼！ 
English: Now, Li Lan led these captives, let them watch their arrayed soldiers and horses, and said to them: You go back and tell every thief and soldier to be a thief, let them defend themselves vigorously and resolutely, but don't be disloyal to Zhu Laotie!

古文：皆饮之酒，给钱而纵之。
现代文：李晟让他们都喝了酒，给了一些钱，便将他们放了回去。
English: Li Yao let them all drink wine, gave them some money and let them go.

古文：遂引兵至通化门外，曜武而还，贼不敢出。
现代文：李晟于是领兵来到通化门外，将武力显示了一番，才又回去，敌军不敢出城。
English: Li Gan then led the troops to the outside of Tonghua Gate, and made a show of force before returning. The enemy troops did not dare to leave the city.

古文：晟召诸将，问兵所从入，皆请 先取外城，据坊市，然后北攻宫阙。 
现代文：李晟召集各位将领，询问军队攻打入城的路线，将领们都主张先夺取外廓城，占领坊市，然后向北攻打宫苑。
English: Li Yu called together the generals and asked them about the army's attack route into the city. The generals all advocated seizing the outer city first, occupying Fang and then attacking Gongyuan to the north.

古文：晟曰： 坊市狭隘，贼若伏兵格斗，居人惊乱，非官军之利也。
现代文：李晟说： 坊市狭窄，倘若贼军在那里埋伏下兵马，与我军搏斗，居民惊惶散乱，对官军并没有好处。
English: Li Wei said: Fangcheng is narrow. If the thief army ambushes soldiers and horses there and fights with our army, the residents will be panicked and scattered, which is not good for the government army.

古文：今贼重兵皆聚苑中，不若自苑北攻之，溃其腹心，贼必奔亡。
现代文：现在贼军的重兵都聚集在宫苑中，不如从宫苑北面进攻他们，使他们的核心先行崩溃，敌军肯定就会逃亡。
English: Now the heavy troops of the invaders are gathered in the courtyard. It is better to attack them from the north side of the courtyard, so that their core will collapse first, and the enemy troops will certainly flee.

古文：如此，则宫阙不残，坊市无扰，策之上者也！ 
现代文：这样做，宫苑不会残破，坊市不受骚扰，这才是上策呢！ 
English: In this way, the palace will not be destroyed, and the town will not be harassed. This is the best strategy!

古文：诸将皆曰： 善！ 
现代文：各将领都说： 好。 
English: All the generals said, "All right."

古文：乃牒浑瑊及镇国节度使骆元光、商州节度使尚可孤，刻期集于城下，壬辰，尚可孤败泚将仇敬忠于蓝田西，斩之。
现代文：于是，李晟给浑以及镇国节度使骆元光、商州节度使尚可孤送去文书，限定日期，在城下会集。壬辰，尚可孤在蓝田西面打败朱的将领仇敬忠，并诛杀了他。
English: As a result, Li Qian gave Hun and the township festival to Luo Yuanguang, and the Shangzhou festival to Shangke Lone to send documents, set a date, and gather under the castle. In Imjin, Shangke Lone defeated Zhu's general Qiu Jingzhong on the west side of Lantian and killed him.

古文：乙未，李晟移军于光泰门外米仓村。
现代文：乙未，李晟将军队调到光泰门外的米仓村。
English: Two days later, Li Yong transferred the army to the village of Yecang outside the Guangtai Gate.

古文：丙申，晟方自临筑垒，泚骁将张庭芝、李希傅引兵大至，晟谓诸将曰： 始吾忧贼潜匿不出，今来送死，此天赞我，不可失也！ 
现代文：丙申，李晟正在亲自指挥修筑营垒时，朱的骁将张庭芝、李希倩领兵卷地而来，李晟对各将领说： 最初我还担心贼军躲藏着不肯出战，现在赶来送死，这是上天助我，良机决不可失！ 
English: In other words, when Li Qiye was personally commanding the construction of the camp, Zhu Diwei brought Zhang Tianzhi and Li Xizhe to lead the troops. Li Qiye said to the generals: At first, I was worried that the thief army was hiding and refused to go to war, but now they have come to kill me. This is God's help to me, a good opportunity must not be lost!

古文：命副元帅兵马使吴诜等纵兵击之。
现代文：李晟命令副元帅、兵马使吴诜等人放出兵马，进击敌军。
English: Li Yu ordered the vice-marshal and the soldiers and horses to make Wu Yu and others release the soldiers and horses and attack the enemy.

古文：时华州营在北，兵少，贼并力攻之，晟命牙前将李演等帅精兵救之。
现代文：当时，骆元光华州军的营垒在北面，兵马较少，敌军便合力攻打骆元光部，李晟命令牙前将领李演等人率领精锐兵马前去援救。
English: At that time, Luo Yuanguang's battalion of the Huazhou Army was in the north, and there were fewer soldiers and horses. The enemy forces joined forces to attack Luo Yuanguang, and Li Gan ordered the former general Li Yuan and others to lead the elite soldiers and horses to the rescue.

古文：演等力战，贼败走。
现代文：李演等人奋力接战，贼军败走。
English: Li Yuan and others fought hard, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：演等追之，乘胜入光泰门，再战，又破之。
现代文：李演等人追击敌军，乘胜进入光泰门，再次接战，又打败敌军。
English: Li Yuan and others chased the enemy, took advantage of the victory to enter the Guangtai Gate, fought again, and defeated the enemy.

古文：会夜，晟敛兵还。
现代文：适逢夜幕降临，李晟收兵回营。
English: As night fell, Li Yao gathered his troops and returned to the camp.

古文：贼馀众走入白华门，夜，闻恸哭。
现代文：敌军的残余人马逃入白华门，夜里可以听到极其悲痛的哭声。
English: The remnants of the enemy army fled into the Baihua Gate, and the cries of extreme grief could be heard in the night.

古文：希傅，希烈之弟也。
现代文：李希倩是李希烈的弟弟。
English: Li Xizhe is the younger brother of Li Xile.

古文：丁酉，晟复出兵，诸将请待西师至，夹攻之。晟曰： 贼数败，已破胆，不乘胜取之，使其成备，非计也。 
现代文：丁酉，李晟再次出兵，各将领请求等待西面的浑军赶到后夹攻敌军，李晟说： 贼军屡次失败，已经吓破了胆，不乘胜攻取敌军，而使他们作好防备，这不是良策。 
English: Ding Xuan and Li Xuan sent out troops again, and the generals requested to wait for the Hun army in the west to arrive and attack the enemy army. Li Xuan said: The thief army has failed repeatedly and has been scared. It is not a good idea to attack the enemy army without taking advantage of the victory, but to make them prepare for defense.

古文：贼又出战，官军屡捷。骆元光败泚众于浐西。
现代文：敌军又来出战，官军屡屡获胜，骆元光又在水西面打败了朱军。
English: The enemy army came to fight again, the government army repeatedly won, and Luo Yuanguang defeated the Zhu army in the west side of the water.

古文：戊戌，晟陈兵于光泰门外，使李演及牙前兵马使王佖将骑兵，牙前将史万顷将步兵，直抵苑墙神村。
现代文：戊戌，李晟在光泰门外面摆开军阵，让李演以及牙前兵马使王带领骑兵，让牙前将领史万顷带领步兵，直接抵达宫苑墙边的神村。
English: Wu Zhen, Li Zhen set up an army outside the Guang Tai Gate, let Li En and Fang Qian's soldiers and horses lead the cavalry, let Fang Qian's general Shi Wan He lead the infantry, and directly arrived at the sacred village on the wall of the palace.

古文：晟先使人夜开苑墙二百馀步，比演等至，贼已树栅塞之，自栅中刺射官军，官军不得进。
现代文：李晟事先让人在夜间凿开宫苑的垣墙宽二百余步，待到李演等人到来时，敌军已经竖起栅栏堵塞了宫苑垣墙的缺口，从栅栏里面刺杀、射击官军，官军不能前进。
English: In advance, Li Gan had someone cut the wall of the palace garden by more than two hundred paces at night. By the time Li Yuan and others arrived, the enemy had already erected a fence to block the gap in the palace wall, stabbing and shooting the official army from inside the fence, and the official army could not advance.

古文：晟怒，叱诸将曰： 纵贼如此，吾先斩公辈矣！ 
现代文：李晟愤怒地大声呵斥各将领说： 你们放纵贼军到这般地步，我要先斩诸位了！ 
English: Li Lan angrily shouted at the generals and said, "You have allowed the bandits to get to this stage. I'll behead you all first!"

古文：万顷惧，帅众先进，拔栅而入，佖、演引骑兵继之，贼众大溃，诸军分道并入。
现代文：史万顷害怕，率领部众首先前进，拔除栅栏，冲了进去，王、李演带领骑兵相继而入，敌军纷纷逃散，各军分路一齐进入宫苑。
English: Shi Wanhao was afraid, and led the troops to advance first, pull out the fence, and rushed in. Wang and Li Yuan led the cavalry to enter one after another. The enemy troops fled in succession, and all the troops entered the palace courtyard together.

古文：姚令言等犹力战，晟命决胜军使唐良臣等步骑蹙之，且战且前，凡十馀合，贼不能支。
现代文：姚令言等人仍然在奋力接战，李晟命令决胜军使唐良臣等人的步兵、骑兵迫近他们，一边接战，一边前进，约有十余回合，敌军不能支持。
English: Yao Lingyan and others are still struggling to engage in battle, Li Wei ordered the decisive army to make the infantry and cavalry of Tang Liangchen and others close to them, while engaging in battle, while advancing, about more than ten rounds, the enemy army can not support.

古文：至白华门，有贼数千骑出官军之背，晟帅百馀骑回御之，左右呼曰： 相公来！ 
现代文：来到白华门前时，敌军有骑兵数千人从官军背后出战，李晟率领骑兵一百余人回头抵御他们，李晟身边的人大声喊道： 李相公来了！ 
English: When they arrived in front of the Baihua Gate, the enemy army had thousands of cavalrymen fighting from behind the official army. Li Lan led more than a hundred cavalrymen to defend them. The people around Li Lan shouted loudly: Li Xianggong is coming!

古文：贼皆惊溃。
现代文：敌军都惊惶地溃散了。
English: The enemy scattered in panic.

古文：先是，泚遣张光晟将兵五千屯九曲，去东渭桥十馀里，光晟密输款于晟。
现代文：在此之前，朱派遣张光晟领兵五千人在九曲屯驻，该处距离东渭桥有十余里，张光晟暗中向李晟表示诚意。
English: Prior to this, Zhu dispatched Zhang Guangyao to lead five thousand soldiers stationed in Jiuqu, which is more than ten miles away from Dongyao Bridge. Zhang Guangyao secretly expressed his sincerity to Li Xi.

古文：及泚败，光晟劝泚出亡。泚乃与姚令言帅馀众西走，犹近万人。
现代文：到朱战败时，张光晟劝说朱出城逃走，朱便与姚令言率领残余部众向西面逃跑，这时朱仍然有将近一万人。
English: When Zhu was defeated, Zhang Guangya persuaded Zhu to leave the city and flee, and Zhu and Yao Lingyan led the remaining members to flee to the west. At that time, Zhu still had nearly ten thousand people.

古文：光晟送泚出城，还，降于晟。
现代文：张光晟将朱送出城，又回到城中，归降了李晟。
English: Zhang Guangyao sent Zhu out of the city, and then returned to the city, surrendering Li Jun.

古文：晟遣兵马使田子奇以骑兵追泚。
现代文：李晟派遣兵马使田子奇率领骑兵追击朱。
English: Li Lan dispatched soldiers and horses to make Tian Ziqi lead the cavalry to chase Zhu.

古文：晟顿含元殿前，舍于右金吾仗，令诸军曰： 晟赖将士之力，克清宫禁。
现代文：李晟在含元殿前驻扎军队，在右金吾仗的房舍住下，他命令各军说： 我依靠将士们的努力，得以肃清宫禁。
English: Li Qiye stationed troops in front of the Hall of Han Yuan and lived in the building on the right of the Golden Gate. He ordered the troops to say: I rely on the efforts of the soldiers to be able to clear the palace ban.

古文：长安士庶，久陷贼庭，若小有震惊，非吊民伐罪之意。
现代文：长安的士子庶民，长期失陷在贼寇的统治之下，如果使他们稍微受到些震惊，就不是安抚人民、讨伐罪人的本意了。
English: The common people of Chang'an, who have long fallen under the rule of the bandits, if they are a little shocked, it is not the intention to appease the people and fight the criminals.

古文：晟与公等室家相见非晚，五日内无得通家信。 
现代文：我与诸位同家里人相见的时候不会太晚了，但五天以内不能与家里人互通消息。 
English: It won't be too late for me to see my family, but I won't be able to communicate with them for five days.

古文：命京兆尹李齐运等安慰居人。
现代文：他命令京兆尹李齐运等安慰居民。
English: He ordered Jing Zhao, Yin Li, Qi Yun and others to comfort the residents.

古文：晟大将高明曜取贼妓，尚可孤军士擅取贼马，晟皆斩之，军中股栗。
现代文：李晟的大将高明曜占有了敌人的歌妓，尚可孤的将士擅自牵走了敌人的马匹，李晟将他们一概斩杀，军中将士害怕得连大腿都发抖了。
English: General Gao Mingyao of Li Qiye took possession of the enemy's geisha, and some soldiers took away the enemy's horses without permission. Li Qiye killed them all, and the lieutenant generals were so scared that their thighs were shaking.

古文：公私安堵，秋毫无犯，远坊有经宿乃知官军入城者。
现代文：公私相安无事，官军对百姓没有丝毫侵犯，偏远的坊，有过了一夜以后才知道官军已经进了都城。
English: Public and private were safe and sound, the government army did not infringe on the people in the slightest, and the remote village only learned after one night that the government army had entered the capital.

古文：是日，浑瑊、戴休颜、韩游瑰亦克咸阳，败贼三千馀众，闻泚西走，分兵邀之。
现代文：这一天，浑、戴休颜、韩游也攻克了咸阳，打败敌军三千余人。浑等人听说朱向西逃走，便分兵拦击朱。
English: On this day, Hun, Dai Xiuyan and Han Yu also conquered Xianyang, defeating more than 3,000 enemy troops. When Hun and others heard that Zhu had fled to the west, a detachment of soldiers stopped Zhu.

古文：己亥，晟使京西兵马使孟涉顿白华门，尚可孤屯望仙门，骆元光屯章敬寺，晟以牙前三千人屯安国寺，以镇京城。
现代文：己亥，李晟让京西兵马使孟涉在白华门驻扎，让尚可孤在望仙门驻扎，让骆元光在章敬寺驻扎，李晟自率牙前兵三千人在安国寺驻扎，以便镇守京城。
English: At the same time, Li Gan ordered the Beijing and Xi'an soldiers and horses to be stationed at Baihua Gate, Shang Ke to be stationed at Wangxian Gate, Luo Yuanguang to be stationed at Zhangjing Temple, and Li Gan himself to lead 3,000 soldiers stationed at Anguo Temple in order to guard the capital.

古文：斩泚党李希倩、敬釭、彭偃等八人于市。
现代文：李晟又命令将朱的党羽李希倩、敬、彭偃等八人在闹市中斩杀。
English: Li Xi also ordered eight of Zhu's followers, including Li Xiyu, Jing and Peng Xi, to be beheaded in the middle of the city.

古文：王武俊既破硃滔，还恒州，表让幽州、卢龙节度使，上许之。
现代文：王武俊在打败朱滔后，回到恒州，上表让出幽州、卢龙节度使的职务，德宗允许了他的表奏。
English: After defeating Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun returned to Hengzhou, and the upper table conceded the post of Yuzhou, Lulong Festival envoy, and Dezong allowed him to play.

古文：六月，癸卯，李晟遣掌书记吴人于公异作露布上行在曰： 臣已肃清宫禁，祗谒寝园，钟虡不移，庙貌如故。 
现代文：六月，癸卯，李晟派遣掌书记吴地人氏于公异草拟告捷文书进上行在说： 我已经肃清宫禁，恭敬地参谒了陵寝墓园，连钟罄的支架都没有移动，宗庙的面貌仍然与过去一个模样。 
English: In June, Emperor Wu dispatched his secretary, Wu Diren, to publicly draft a proclamation of victory, saying: "I have cleared the palace ban, respectfully visited the mausoleum cemetery, and even the broken supports have not moved. The appearance of the ancestral temple is still the same as in the past.

古文：上泣下曰： 天生李晟，以为社稷，非为朕也。 
现代文：德宗流着眼泪说： 让天让李晟降生，是为了国家，而不是为了朕啊。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Dezong said, "Let the heavens give birth to Li Yao, it is for the country, not for me."

古文：晟在渭桥，荧惑守岁，久之乃退，宾佐皆贺，曰： 荧惑退舍，皇家之福也！宜速进兵。 
现代文：李晟驻兵渭桥时，火星停留在木星附近，经过很长时间才离去。他的幕僚将佐都向他庆贺说： 火星退离木星，这是皇室的福象啊，应当赶快进兵。 
English: When Li Qiye was stationed at the Peasants' Bridge, Mars stayed near Jupiter and took a long time to leave. His staff congratulated him, saying: "Mars is retreating from Jupiter. This is a blessing for the royal family. They should quickly enter the army."

古文：晟曰： 天子野次，臣下知死敌而已。
现代文：李晟说： 皇上置身旷野，人臣只知道为战胜敌人而死罢了。
English: Li Zhe said: When the emperor is in the wilderness, the vassals only know how to die to defeat the enemy.

古文：天象高远，谁得知之！ 
现代文：天象高远难测，谁能够弄得清楚！ 
English: Who can fathom the height and breadth of the heavens?

古文：既克长安，乃谓之曰： 曏非相拒也，吾闻五星赢、缩无常，万一复来守岁，吾军不战自溃矣！ 
现代文：在攻克长安后，李晟才对他们说： 以往可不是我要拒绝你们的意见。我听说过，金木水火土五星早出与晚出都没有准儿，万一火星再次来靠近木星，我军就会不战自溃了。 
English: It was only after conquering Chang'an that Li Lan said to them, "In the past, I didn't want to reject your opinions. I've heard that gold, wood, water, fire, earth, and the five stars can't be predicted to rise early or late. If Mars comes close to Jupiter again, our army will collapse without a fight.

古文：皆谢曰： 非所及也！ 
现代文：大家都向他认错说： 这些道理不是我们所能看得透的！ 
English: Everyone admitted to him that he was wrong and said: These principles are not clear to us!

古文：硃泚将奔吐蕃，其众随道散亡，比至泾州，才百馀骑。
现代文：朱准备逃奔吐蕃，他的部众沿途散失流亡，及至来到泾州时，剩下骑兵才一百余人。
English: Zhu prepared to flee to Tubo, but his troops were scattered and exiled along the way. By the time he arrived in Zhangzhou, there were only a hundred or so cavalry left.

古文：田希鉴闭门拒之，泚谓之曰： 汝之节，吾所授也。奈何临危相负！ 
现代文：田希鉴关闭城门，不让他进城，朱对他说： 你的节度使的旌节，乃是我授给你的，你怎么能够在我面临危难时，便辜负了我呢！ 
English: Tian Xijian closed the gate and did not allow him to enter the city. Zhu said to him, "Your self-restraint is what I have given you. How could you fail me in the face of danger?"

古文：使焚其门。希鉴取节投火中曰： 还汝节！ 
现代文：他让人去烧掉泾州城门，田希鉴取出旌节，丢在火中说： 还你旌节！ 
English: He sent someone to burn down the gates of Zhangzhou City. Tian Xijian took out the dried bonito and threw it into the fire, saying, "I'll give you back the dried bonito!"

古文：泚众皆哭。
现代文：朱的部众都哭了起来。
English: Zhu's followers all burst into tears.

古文：泾卒遂杀姚令言，诣希鉴降。
现代文：于是泾州士兵杀了姚令言，到田希鉴那里投降。
English: So the soldiers from Zhangzhou killed Yao Lingyan and surrendered to Tian Xijian.

古文：泚独与范阳亲兵及宗族、宾客北趣驿马关，宁州刺史夏侯英拒之。
现代文：朱独自与范阳亲兵及其本宗族人和幕府宾客向北奔向驿马关，宁州刺史夏侯英拒绝让他通过。
English: Zhu alone, accompanied by Fan Yang's soldiers, his own clan members, and guests of the shogunate, rushed north to the pass. Xia Houying, the governor of Ningzhou, refused to let him pass.

古文：至彭原西城屯，其将梁庭芬射泚坠坑中，韩旻等斩之，诣泾州降。
现代文：到彭原县西城屯时，朱将领梁庭芬将他射落到土坑之中，韩等人斩杀了朱，前往泾州归降。
English: When they arrived at Xicheng Tun in Pengyuan County, Zhu's general Liang Tingfen shot him down into a pit. Han and the others killed Zhu and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：源休、李子平奔凤翔，李楚琳斩之，皆传首行在。
现代文：源休、李子平逃奔凤翔，李楚琳将他们斩杀了。
English: Yuan Hui and Li Ziping fled to Fengxiang, and Li Chulin killed them.

古文：上命陆贽草诏赐浑瑊，使访求奉天所失裹头内人。
现代文：他们的头颅，全都被传送到行在。德宗命令陆贽起草诏书赐给浑，使访求奉天所失散了裹头内人。
English: Their heads were all conveyed to the line. Dezong ordered Lu Yao to draft an edict and give it to him, so that the head-wrapped people would be dispersed by the visitation.

古文：贽上奏，以为： 今巨盗始平，疲瘵之民，疮痍之卒，尚未循拊，而首访妇人，非所以副惟新之望也。
现代文：陆贽进上奏章认为： 大盗刚刚平定，对疲困病苦的人民和遭受创伤的士兵还没有抚慰，反而首先查找宫中妇女，这是不符合人们刷新政治的愿望的。
English: Lu Yujin wrote in his report: The bandits have just been subdued, and there is still no consolation for the tired and sick people and the soldiers who have suffered trauma. Instead, they first look for the women in the palace, which is not in line with people's desire to refresh politics.

古文：谋始尽善，克终已稀；始而不谋，终则何有！
现代文：能够将事业的开端谋划得尽善尽美，同时能够取得完美的结局的例子是为数不多的，如果连事业的开端都不曾为之谋划，还有什么结局可言！
English: There are very few examples of people who can plan the beginning of their career to perfection and at the same time achieve a perfect ending. If you haven't even planned the beginning of your career, what can you say about the ending!

古文：所赐瑊诏，未敢承旨。 
现代文：陛下赐给浑的诏书，我不敢接旨草拟。 
English: I dare not draft the imperial edict that His Majesty has given me.

古文：上遂不降诏，竟遣中使求之。
现代文：于是，德宗不再下诏，但还是派遣中使去寻找传令宫女。
English: As a result, Emperor Dezong no longer issued an edict, but still sent an envoy to look for the courtesan.

古文：乙巳，诏吏部侍郎班宏充宣慰使，劳问将士，抚慰蒸黎。
现代文：乙巳，德宗颁诏命令吏部侍郎班宏充任宣慰使，前去慰劳将士，安抚百姓。
English: At this time, Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict ordering Ban Hongzong, the attendant of the cadre department, to be appointed as a consolation envoy, to go to comfort the laborers and pacify the people.

古文：两午，李晟斩文武官受硃泚宠任者崔宣、洪经纶等十馀人，又表守节不屈者刘乃、蒋沇等。
现代文：丙午，李晟斩掉文武官员中受到朱宠信与任用的崔宣、洪经纶等十余人，又表奏恪守臣节、不肯屈敌的刘、蒋等人。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Li Gan killed more than ten civil and military officials, including Cui Xuan and Hong Jingyao, who had been appointed by Zhu Chaoxin, and also Liu and Jiang, who had played the role of adhering to the Vassal Day and refusing to yield to the enemy.

古文：己酉，以李晟为司徒、中书令，骆元光、尚可孤各迁官有差，以检校御史中丞田希鉴为泾原节度使。
现代文：己酉，德宗任命李晟为司徒、中书令，骆元光、尚可孤各自升官不等，还任命检校御史中丞田希鉴为泾原节度使。
English: In addition, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Jian as the tutor and the chief scribe, and Luo Yuanguang and Shang Keqiu were promoted to different ranks. He also appointed the chief inspector of schools, Zhongzheng Tian Xijian, as the chief inspector of the Songyuan Festival.

古文：诏改梁州为兴元府。
现代文：德宗颁诏将梁州改称为兴元府。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict to rename Liangzhou as Xingyuanfu.

古文：甲寅，以浑瑊为侍中，韩游瑰、戴休颜各迁官有差。
现代文：甲寅，德宗任命浑为侍中，韩游、戴休颜各自升官不等。
English: Jia Yin and Dezong were both promoted to the rank of chamberlain, while Han Yu and Dai Xiuyan were promoted to different ranks.

古文：硃泚之败也，李忠臣奔樊川，擒获，丙辰，斩之。
现代文：朱战败时，李忠臣逃奔樊川，官军擒获了他，丙辰，将他斩杀。
English: When Zhu was defeated, Li Zhongchen fled to the Li River, and the government army captured him, Hsin Chen, and killed him.

古文：上问陆贽： 今至凤翔有迎驾诸军。形势甚盛，欲因此遣人代李楚琳，何如？ 
现代文：德宗询问陆贽说： 如今开到凤翔的，有迎驾各军，声势甚为盛在，大，我打算借此机会派人将李楚琳替代下来，你看怎么样？ 
English: De Zong asked Lu Yao, "Nowadays, when I drive to Fengxiang, there are welcoming armies, and the momentum is very strong. I plan to take this opportunity to send someone to replace Li Chuling. What do you think?

古文：贽上奏，以为： 如此则事同胁执，以言乎除乱则不武，以言乎务理则不诚，用是时巡，后将安入！
现代文：陆贽进上奏章认为： 如果这样做，事情就如同胁迫拘捕，将这种做法说成清除变乱那是并不能显示威武的，说成是务求政治修明那是并不能表明诚意的，若将此作为陛下的巡视之举，以后将怎么进入京城！
English: Lu Yujin said in his report: If this is done, the matter will be like coercion and arrest. To describe this practice as clearing up the turmoil is not to show power. To describe it as seeking political rectification is not to show sincerity. If this is regarded as His Majesty's inspection, how will he enter the capital in the future!

古文：议者或谓之权，臣窃未谕其理。
现代文：议论此事的人将这种办法称为权变，我私下里不能明白其中的道理。
English: People who talk about it call it a power shift, but I can't really put my finger on it.

古文：未权之为义，取类权衡，今辇路所经，首行胁夺，易一帅而亏万乘之义，得一方而结四海之疑，乃是重其所轻而轻其所重，谓之权也，不亦反乎！
现代文：一般地说，权变的含义是就衡量事物轻重而言的。如今在陛下车驾经过处，首先施行胁迫削官，更换了一个节帅而使陛下的大义受到损害，获得了一个地方而使举国上下疑虑，这乃是看重了本该看轻的东西，而看轻了本该看重的东西，将此称作权变，不是正好说反了吗！
English: Generally speaking, the meaning of power shift is to measure the importance of things. Nowadays, at the place where His Majesty's car passes, the first thing to be done is to impose a coercive reduction officer, replace a section commander and cause His Majesty's great justice to be damaged, and obtain a place and cause the whole country to have doubts. This is to value what should have been valued less, and to value what should have been valued less. To call this a power shift, isn't it just the opposite?

古文：以反道为权，以任数为智，君上行之必失众，臣下用之必陷身，历代之所以多丧乱而长奸邪，由此误也。
现代文：以违背法则为权变，以任用权术为机智，君主实行起来必然会失去人心，臣下实行起来必然会使自身受害，历代死丧祸乱频繁而奸邪滋长的原因，就是因为这个错误啊。
English: Taking the violation of law as a power shift, taking the appointment of power as a tactic, the implementation of the monarch will inevitably lose people's hearts, and the implementation of the vassal will inevitably make themselves suffer. The reason for the frequent death and disaster in the past and the growth of evil is because of this mistake.

古文：不如俟奠枕京邑，征授一官，彼喜于恩宥，将奔走不暇，安敢辄有旅拒，复劳诛锄哉！ 
现代文：不如待陛下安枕于京城以后，再召回李楚琳，授给他一个官职，他因陛下降恩宽恕而高兴，将会为朝廷奔走效力都来不及呢，怎么敢动不动就聚众抗命，需要再次烦劳朝廷去铲除他呢！ 
English: It would be better to wait for His Majesty to rest in the capital, then recall Li Chuling and grant him an official post. He is happy because of His Majesty's grace and forgiveness, and will be too late to run for the court. How dare he gather the crowd to disobey orders, and need to trouble the court again to eradicate him!

古文：戊午，车驾发汉中。
现代文：戊午，德宗的车驾从汉中启程。
English: In the afternoon, Dezong's car set off from Hanzhong.

古文：李晟综理长安以备百司，自请至凤翔迎扈，上不许。
现代文：李晟总揽治理长安事务，以便使各部门完备起来。他主动请求到凤翔去迎接德宗，扈从车驾，德宗不允。
English: In order to make the various departments complete, Li Xuan took it upon himself to manage the affairs of Chang'an. He took the initiative to request to go to Fengxiang to meet Dezong, but Dezong did not agree.

古文：内常侍尹元贞奉使同华，辄诣河中招谕李怀光。晟奏： 元贞矫制擅赦元恶，请理其罪！ 
现代文：内常侍尹元贞奉命出使同华，却随即到河中劝说李怀光归顺朝廷，李晟上奏说： 尹元贞假托朝命，擅自赦免首恶，请将他治罪！ 
English: After being ordered to send an envoy to Tonghua, Inner Chamberlain Yin Yuanzhen immediately went to the middle of the river to persuade Li Huaiguang to submit to the imperial court. Li Yao reported: "Yin Yuanzhen falsely entrusted the imperial order and arbitrarily pardoned the chief villain. Please punish him!"

古文：秋，七月，丙子，车驾至凤翔，斩乔琳、蒋镇、张光晟等。
现代文：秋季七月，丙子，德宗的车驾来到凤翔，斩杀了乔琳、蒋镇、张光晟等人。
English: In the autumn of July, Bing Zi and Dezong drove to Fengxiang and killed Qiaolin, Jiang Zhen, Zhang Guangyao and others.

古文：李晟以光晟虽臣贼，而灭贼亦颇有力，欲全之，上不许。
现代文：张光晟虽然曾向朱称臣，但消灭朱也很出力，因此李晟打算保全他，德宗不肯答应。
English: Although Zhang Guangyao had been Zhu's subordinate, he was also instrumental in eliminating Zhu. Therefore, Li Xi planned to preserve him, but Dezong refused to agree.

古文：副元帅判官高郢数劝李怀光归款，怀光遣其子璀诣行在谢罪，请束身归朝。
现代文：副元帅判官高郢屡次劝说李怀光投诚，李怀光让他的儿子李璀前往行在承认罪责，请求到朝廷投案。
English: Vice-Marshal Judge Gao Jun repeatedly persuaded Li Huaiguang to surrender, and Li Huaiguang asked his son Li Jun to go to the court to admit his guilt and request to surrender to the court.

古文：庚辰，诏遣给事中孔巢父赍先除怀光太子太保敕诣河中宣慰，朔方将士悉复官爵如故。
现代文：庚辰，德宗颁诏派遣给事中孔巢父带着原先封拜李怀光为太子太保的敕书，前往河中安抚李怀光，悉数恢复朔方将士的官爵，一如既往。
English: Geng Chen and Dezong issued an imperial edict to send Father Kong Chao, who was in the middle of the matter, to the middle of the river to appease Li Huai Guang and fully restore the official titles of the soldiers of the Shuo side, as always.

古文：壬午，车驾至长安，浑瑊、韩游瑰、戴休颜以其众扈从，李晟、骆元光、尚可孤以其众奉迎，步骑十馀万，旌旗数十里，晟谒见上于三桥，先贺平贼，后谢收复之晚，伏路左请罪。
现代文：壬午，德宗的车驾来到长安。浑、韩游、戴休颜率领自己的部众扈从德宗前来，李晟、骆元光、尚可孤率领自己的部众前去迎候，步兵、骑兵十余万人，旗帜连绵了几十里。李晟在三桥谒见德宗，首先为平定了朱而道贺，然后为收复京城太迟而道歉，跪在道路左侧请求恕罪。
English: At noon, Dezong's chariot arrived in Chang'an. Hun, Han Yu, and Dai Xiuyan led their followers to come from Dezong. Li Yu, Luo Yuanguang, and Shang Keqiu led their followers to meet him. There were more than 100,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen, and the banners stretched for dozens of miles. Li Yu met Dezong at Sanqiao Pass. He first congratulated Zhu on the victory, then apologized for being too late to recapture Beijing, and knelt on the left side of the road to ask for forgiveness.

古文：上驻马慰抚，为之掩涕，命左右扶上马。
现代文：德宗停下马来安慰他，被他感动得掩而流泪，命令侍从人员扶他上马。
English: Desong stopped his horse to comfort him. He was moved to tears and ordered his attendants to help him onto the horse.

古文：至宫，每闲日，辄宴勋臣，赏赐丰渥。
现代文：回到宫中后，每逢不上朝的日子。
English: After returning to the Imperial Palace, whenever there is a day when it is not morning,

古文：李晟为之首，浑瑊次之，诸将相又次之。
现代文：德宗总是宴请立下功勋的大臣，赏赐的物品甚为丰厚，每次都是李晟居于首位，浑居于第二，各将相又居于他们之下。
English: Emperor Dezong always invited the ministers who had made meritorious contributions to the banquet, and the rewards were very rich. Each time, Li Xun was in the first place, Hun was in the second place, and the generals were below them.

古文：曹王皋遣其将伊慎、王锷围安州，李希烈遣其甥刘戒虚将步骑八千救之。
现代文：曹王李皋派遣他的将领伊慎、王锷围困安州，李希烈派遣他的外甥刘戒虚带领步兵、骑兵八千人援救安州。
English: Cao Wang Lijun sent his generals Yishen and Wang Yao to besiege Anzhou, and Li Xilei sent his nephew Liu Jiahu to lead eight thousand infantry and cavalry to rescue Anzhou.

古文：皋遣别将李伯潜逆击之于应山，斩首千馀级。生擒戒虚，徇于城下，安州遂降。
现代文：李皋派遣他的别将李伯潜在应山迎击刘戒虚军，斩首一千余级，活捉了刘戒虚，拿他在城下示众，于是安州归降，朝廷任命伊慎为安州刺史。
English: Li Yu sent his general Li Bo to meet Liu Jiehu's army on the mountain, beheaded more than a thousand soldiers, captured Liu Jiehu alive, and paraded him in front of the city. Anzhou then surrendered, and the imperial court appointed Yishen as the historian of Anzhou.

古文：以伊慎为安州刺史，又击希烈将康叔夜于厉乡，走之。
现代文：李皋军又在厉乡进击李希烈的将领康叔夜，将他赶走了。
English: Li Qiye's army also attacked Li Xilai's general Kang Shuwei in Lixiang and drove him away.

古文：丁亥，孔巢父至河中，李怀光素服待罪，巢父不之止。
现代文：丁亥，孔巢父来到河中，李怀光穿着民服，等待治罪，孔巢父没有制止他。
English: Dinghai, Kong Chao's father came to the river, Li Huaiguang was wearing civilian clothes, waiting to be punished, Kong Chao's father did not stop him.

古文：怀光左右多胡人，皆叹曰： 太尉无官矣！ 
现代文：李怀光的亲信多是胡人，他们都叹着气说： 太尉保不住官爵了！ 
English: Li Huaiqing's close friends are mostly Hu people, they all sighed and said: The captain can't keep the official title!

古文：巢父又宣言于众曰： 军中谁可代太尉领军者？ 
现代文：孔巢父又向大家扬言说： 军中有谁可以代替太尉统领军队呢？ 
English: Kong Chao's father also threatened everyone, saying, "Who in the army can replace the captain to lead the army?

古文：于是怀光左右发怒喧噪。宣诏未毕，众杀巢父及中使啖守盈，怀光亦不之止，复治兵为拒守之备。
现代文：于是，李怀光的亲信生气地喧闹起来，诏书还没有宣读完毕，众人便杀死了孔巢父以及中使啖守盈。李怀光对此也不加制止，再次整治兵马，作抵御防守的准备。
English: As a result, Li Huaiguang's close associates got angry and noisy. Before the edict was read out, everyone killed Kong Xuefu and the middle envoy Zou Shouying. Li Huaiguang did not stop this, and again repaired the soldiers and horses to prepare for defense.

古文：辛卯，赦天下。
现代文：辛卯，大赦天下。
English: Sin woo, amnesty world wide.

古文：初，肃宗在灵武，上为奉节王，学文于李泌。
现代文：当初，肃宗在灵武时，德宗是奉节王，跟着李泌学习作文。
English: At the beginning, when Su Zong was in Lingwu, Dezong was the king of Fengjie and followed Li Xiu to study composition.

古文：代宗之世，泌居蓬莱书院，上为太子，亦与之游。
现代文：代宗在位期间，李泌在蓬莱书院居住，德宗已经当了太子，还是与李泌交往。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Reizei lived in Penglai Academy. Emperor Dezong had already become the crown prince, but he still kept in touch with Emperor Reizei.

古文：及上在兴元，泌为杭州刺史，上急诏征之，与睦州刺史杜亚俱诣行在。
现代文：及至德宗出行兴元府时，李泌正担任杭州刺史，德宗紧急颁诏，征召他，与睦州刺史杜亚一起前往行在。
English: At the time of Dezong's trip to Xingyuanfu, Li Xiu was serving as the Hangzhou magistrate, and Dezong issued an urgent edict to recruit him to travel with the Muczhou magistrate Dua.

古文：乙未，以泌为左散骑常侍，亚为刑部侍郎，命泌日直西省以候对，朝野皆属目附之。
现代文：乙未，德宗任命李泌为左散骑常侍，杜亚为邢部侍郎，命令李泌每天在中书省值班，以便等候德宗召对，朝野人士都注视着他，想依附他。
English: Soon after, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Xiu as the left rider's attendant and Duya as the attendant's attendant, and ordered Li Xiu to be on duty every day in Zhongshu, in order to wait for Emperor Dezong's summons. People from both the imperial court and the countryside were watching him and wanted to follow him.

古文：上问泌： 河中密迩京城，朔方兵素称精锐，如达奚小俊等皆万人敌，朕昼夕忧之，奈何？ 
现代文：德宗询问李泌： 河中距离京城很近，朔方兵马素来号称精锐，比如达奚小俊等人，都有万夫之勇，朕日夜为河中担忧，你看如何是好呢？ 
English: Dezong asked Li Xiu: The middle of the river is very close to the capital city. The soldiers and horses of Shuo Fang have always been known as elite soldiers. For example, Daju Xiaojun and others are all very brave. I worry about the middle of the river day and night. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 天下事甚有可忧者，若惟河中，不足忧也。
现代文：李泌回答说： 天下还有甚为可忧的事情，如果只有一个河中，那就不值得忧虑了。
English: Li Xiu replied: There are still very worrying things in the world. If there is only one river, then it is not worth worrying about.

古文：夫料敌者，料将不料兵。
现代文：一般说来，估量敌情，只须估量将领，不须估量士兵。
English: Generally speaking, in assessing the enemy situation, it is only necessary to assess the generals, not the soldiers.

古文：今怀光，将也；小俊之徒乃兵耳，何足为意！
现代文：现在，李怀光是大将，达奚小俊一类人只是小卒罢了，哪里值得挂虑呢！
English: Now, Li Huaguang is a general, and people like Daju Xiaojun are just pawns. What is there to worry about?

古文：怀光既解奉天之围，视硃泚垂亡之虏不能取，乃与之连和，使李晟得取以为功。
现代文：李怀光解除了奉天的围困后，眼看着朱这一帮人行将灭亡，不但不去攻取他们，反而与他们联合，使李晟得到了建立功勋的机会。
English: After Li Huaguang relieved the siege of Fengtian, he saw that Zhu and his gang were about to perish, but instead of attacking them, he allied with them, so that Li Yao got the opportunity to establish a meritorious service.

古文：今陛下已还宫阙，怀光不束身归罪，乃虐杀使臣，鼠伏河中，如梦魇之人耳！
现代文：如今，陛下已经回到宫中，李怀光不仅不肯投案认罪，还残暴地杀害使臣，老鼠般地躲伏在河中，就象恶梦中的人物一般！
English: Now that His Majesty has returned to the palace, Li Huaiguang not only refuses to confess to the crime, but also brutally kills the envoy and hides in the river like a rat, just like a character in a nightmare!

古文：但恐不日为帐下所枭，使诸将无以藉手也。 
现代文：只怕过不多久，他就会被自己的部下砍下头来悬在木杆上，使各将领即使想要立功，也没有什么可借助的了。 
English: It may not be long before his head is chopped off by his own men and hung on a pole, leaving the generals with nothing to fall back on if they want to claim credit.

古文：初，上发吐蕃以讨硃泚。许成功以伊西、北庭之地与之。及泚诛，吐蕃来求地，上欲召两镇节度使郭昕、李元忠还朝，以其地与之。
现代文：当初，德宗征发吐蕃兵来讨伐朱，答应在成功以后将安西、北庭的地盘给与吐蕃，及至朱被杀，吐蕃前来要求土地，德宗打算传召安西、北庭两镇节度使郭昕、李元忠回朝，将该地给与吐蕃。
English: At the beginning, Dezong conscripted and dispatched Tujia soldiers to fight Zhu, and promised to give Anxi and Beiting to Tujia after success. When Zhu was killed, Tujia came to request land. Dezong planned to summon the Anxi and Beiting two towns to make Guo Gan and Li Yuanzhong return to the North and give the land to Tujia.

古文：李泌曰： 安西、北庭，人性骁悍，控制西域五十七国及十姓突厥，又分吐蕃之势，使不得并兵东侵，奈何拱手与之！
现代文：李泌说： 安西、北庭地区，人们生性骁勇剽悍。该地控制着西域五十七个国家以及十个姓氏的突厥人，又能分散吐蕃的声势，使吐蕃不能合兵一处而向东侵犯，怎么能轻易地让给他们！
English: Li Xiu said: In the Anxi and Beiting regions, people are naturally brave and courageous. This place controls the fifty-seven countries in the western region and the Turks with ten surnames. It can also disperse the sound of the Tuyn, so that the Tuyn cannot join forces and invade the east. How can it be easily given to them!

古文：且两镇之人，势孤地远，尽忠竭力，为国家固守近二十年，诚可哀怜。
现代文：而且，这两节镇的人们，势力孤单，地方遥远，竭尽忠心与气力，为国家坚守边疆接近二十年，实在令人哀伤怜悯。
English: Moreover, the people of these two towns are lonely and far away, and they have devoted their loyalty and strength to the country for nearly 20 years, which is really sad and pitiful.

古文：一旦弃之以与戎狄，彼其心必深怨中国，它日从吐蕃入寇，如报私仇矣。
现代文：现在，忽然遗弃了他们，将他们交给戎狄之人，他们内心必定深深地怨恨大唐，以后他们随从吐蕃前来侵扰，就会象报私仇一样了。
English: Now, the people who suddenly abandoned them and handed them over to the soldiers must have deeply resented Datang in their hearts. Later, when they came from Tubo to invade, it would be like taking revenge.

古文：况日者吐蕃观望不进，阴持两端，大掠武功，受赂而去，何功之有！ 
现代文：况且，往日吐蕃有意观望，不肯进军，暗中与双方都有往来，还大规模地劫掠了武功地区，接受了赠送的财物以后才肯离去，他们到底有什么功劳！ 
English: Moreover, in the past, the Tubo deliberately watched, refused to march, secretly had dealings with both sides, and also looted the Wugong area on a large scale, and only agreed to leave after accepting gifts of property. What merit did they have?

古文：众议亦以为然，上遂不与。
现代文：大家计议此事，也认为李泌讲得对。
English: Everyone considered the matter and agreed that Li Xiu was right.

古文：李希烈闻李希倩伏诛，忿怒，八月，壬寅，遣中使至蔡州杀颜真卿。
现代文：于是，德宗没有将二镇给与吐蕃。李希烈听说李希倩被处死刑，又怨恨，又恼怒。八月，壬寅，他派遣中使往蔡州去杀害颜真卿。
English: As a result, Dezong did not give the two towns to Tubo. When Li Xili heard that Li Xili had been sentenced to death, he was both resentful and angry. In August, Ren Yin sent an envoy to Caizhou to kill Yan Zhenqing.

古文：中使曰： 有敕。 
现代文：中使说： 有敕书。 
English: The Chinese envoy said, "It is a forged document."

古文：真卿再拜。
现代文：颜真卿拜了两拜。
English: The emperor bowed twice.

古文：中使曰： 今赐卿死。 
现代文：中使说： 现在赐你死。 
English: The envoy said, "Now I sentence you to death."

古文：真卿曰： 老臣无状，罪当死，不知使者几日发长安？ 
现代文：颜真卿说： 老臣办事一无成绩，应当是死罪。不知使者是几时从长安出发的？ 
English: Yan Zhenqing said: It should be a capital crime for an old minister to do nothing. I don't know when the messenger set out from Chang'an.

古文：使者曰： 自大梁来，非长安也。 
现代文：中使说： 我是从大梁来的，不是从长安来的。 
English: The Chinese envoy said, "I am from Daliang, not from Chang'an.

古文：真卿曰： 然则贼耳，何谓敕邪！ 
现代文：颜真卿说： 这么说来，你们是一帮贼寇罢了，怎么能称敕旨呢！ 
English: Yan Zhenqing said: So, you are nothing but a gang of thieves and robbers, how can you call it an order!

古文：遂缢杀之。
现代文：于是缢杀了颜真卿。
English: So he killed Yan Zhenqing.

古文：李晟以泾州倚边，屡害军帅，常为乱根，奏请往理不用命者，力田积粟以攘吐蕃。
现代文：由于泾州临近边疆，镇兵屡次杀害军中主帅，经常成为祸乱的根子，于是李晟上奏请求前往处治不肯听从命令的人们，让他们努力种田，积聚粮食，以便打击吐蕃。
English: As Bozhou is close to the border, the town soldiers repeatedly killed the commander of the army, often becoming the root of the calamity, so Li Xuan made a request to go to deal with people who refused to obey orders, let them work hard to plant fields and accumulate grain in order to combat spitting.

古文：癸卯，以晟兼凤翔、陇右节度等使及四镇、北庭、泾原行营副元帅，进爵西平王。
现代文：癸卯，德宗帝命令李晟兼任凤翔、陇右节度使等使以及安西四镇、北庭、泾原行营副元帅，进升爵位为西平王。
English: At the same time, Emperor Dezong ordered Li Jian to serve concurrently as Fengxiang, Jiuyue, and other envoys, as well as the deputy marshal of the four towns of Anxi, Beiting, and Shihara, and to be promoted to the peerage of Xiping Wang.

古文：时李楚琳入朝，晟请与俱至凤翔斩之，以惩逆乱。
现代文：当时，李楚琳已经入朝，李晟请求与李楚琳一起前往凤翔，并在那里斩杀他，以便惩戒反叛朝廷的变乱。
English: At that time, Li Chuling had already entered the imperial court, and Li Yao requested to go to Fengxiang with Li Chuling and kill him there in order to punish the rebellion against the imperial court.

古文：上以新复京师，务安反仄，不许。
现代文：德宗认为新近才将京城收复，一定要使动荡不安的局面安定下来，因而没有答应。
English: Dezong believed that the capital had only recently been recaptured and that the unstable situation must be stabilized, so he did not agree.

古文：先是，上命浑瑊、骆元光讨李怀光军于同州，怀光遣其将徐庭光以精卒六千军于长春宫以拒之，瑊等数为所败，不能进。
现代文：在此之前，德宗命令浑、骆元光讨伐李怀光，二将在同州驻扎。李怀光派遣他的将领徐庭光率领精锐士兵六千人驻扎在长春宫，以便抵抗二将。浑等人屡次被徐庭光打败，不能前进。
English: Prior to this, Dezong ordered Hun and Luo Yuanguang to fight against Li Huaiguang, and the two would be stationed in the same state. Li Huaiguang sent his general Xu Tingguang with 6,000 elite soldiers stationed in Changchun Palace to resist the two generals. Hun and others were repeatedly defeated by Xu Tingguang and could not advance.

古文：时度支用度不给，议者多请赦怀光，上不许。
现代文：当时，度支的开支供给不足，计议此事的人们多数请求赦免李怀光，德宗不允。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of money for living expenses, and most of the people who considered the matter requested to pardon Li Huaguang, but Dezong did not agree.

古文：李怀光遣其妹婿要廷珍守晋州，牙将毛朝易攵守隰州，郑抗守慈州，马燧皆遣人说下之。
现代文：李怀光派遣他的妹夫要廷珍防守晋州，派遣牙将毛朝扬防守隰州，派遣郑抗防守慈州。马燧一一派人说服他们归顺了。
English: Li Huaiguang sent his brother-in-law Tingzhen to defend Jinzhou, sent Mao Chaoyang to defend Zhangzhou, and sent Zheng Antagonism to defend Cizhou. Ma Jun persuaded them to surrender one by one.

古文：上乃加浑瑊河中、绛州节度使，充河中、同华、陕虢行营副元帅，加马燧奉诚军、晋、慈、隰节度使，充管内诸军行营副元帅，与镇国节度使骆元光、鄜坊节度使唐朝臣合兵讨怀光。
现代文：于是德宗加封浑为河中、绛州节度使，充任河中、同华、陕虢行营副元帅，加封马燧为奉诚军、晋、慈、隰节度使，充任管辖范围以内诸军行营副元帅，与镇国节度使骆元光、坊节度使唐朝臣合兵一处，讨伐李怀光。
English: As a result, Dezong Gaofeng was appointed as an envoy to the festival in Hechu and Zhangzhou and served as a deputy field marshal in Hechu, Tonghua and Shaanxi; Gaofeng Ma Jun was appointed as an envoy to the festival in Fengcheng, Jin, Cixi and Handan, and served as a deputy field marshal in the military camps within the jurisdiction; and Luo Yuanguang was appointed as an envoy to the festival in Zhenguo, and Fang Jiedu was appointed as an envoy to the festival in Fang, and was appointed as an envoy to the festival in Tonghua and Shaanxi, and was appointed

古文：初，王武俊急攻康日知于赵州，马燧奏请诏武俊与李抱真同击硃滔，以深、赵隶武俊，改日知为晋、慈、隰节度使，上从之。
现代文：当初，王武俊曾经在赵州急攻康日知。现在，马燧上奏请求颁诏命令王武俊与李抱真共同进击朱滔，将深州、赵州隶属王武俊，改任康日知为晋、慈、隰节度使，德宗听从了他的建议。
English: At first, Wang Wujun attacked Kang Rongji in Zhaozhou. Now, Ma Yingxiao requested and issued a decree ordering Wang Wujun and Li Bozhen to jointly attack Zhu Dao, subordinate Shenzhou and Zhaozhou to Wang Wujun, and appoint Kang Rongji as the envoy of Jin, Ci and Jie, and Dezong followed his suggestion.

古文：日知未至而三州降燧，故上使燧兼领之。
现代文：康日知尚未前往三州，三州已经投降了马燧，所以德宗让马燧兼职统领三州。
English: Kang Ritchie had not yet traveled to Sanzhou, and Sanzhou had already surrendered to Ma Xuan, so Dezong asked Ma Xuan to take over Sanzhou on a part-time basis.

古文：燧表让三州于日知，且言因降而授，恐后有功者，踵以为常，上嘉而许之。
现代文：马燧上表将三州让给康日知，而且说由于三州是向他归降的，如将三州的职任授给他，恐怕以后立下功劳的人们因袭此例，成为经常性的做法。德宗嘉许他的意见。
English: Ma Zhen gave up the three prefectures to Kang Rong Zhi in the table above, and said that since the three prefectures were surrendered to him, if the post of the three prefectures were given to him, I am afraid that people who made merit in the future would follow this example and become a regular practice. Dezong appreciated his opinion.

古文：燧遣使迎日知。既至，籍府库而归之。
现代文：观燧派遣使者迎接康日知，康日知来后，马燧登记好库存簿册，交给了他。
English: Guanyu sent an envoy to meet Kang Rongzhi. After Kang Rongzhi came, Ma Rong registered the inventory book and handed it to him.

古文：甲辰，以凤翔节度使李楚琳为左金吾大将军。
现代文：甲辰，德宗任任命凤翔节度使李楚琳为左金吾大将军。
English: Jia Chen and Dezong Ren appointed Feng Xiang to make Li Chulin the general of the Left Kingu.

古文：丙午，加浑瑊朔方行营元帅。
现代文：丙午，加封浑为朔方行营元帅。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Jiafeng became the field marshal of Shuo Fangxing.

古文：李晟至凤翔，治杀张镒之罪，斩裨将王斌等十馀人。
现代文：李晟到凤翔，惩治杀害张镒的罪行，斩杀副将王斌等十余人。
English: Li Gan went to Fengxiang to punish the crime of killing Zhang Ye, and beheaded Vice Admiral Wang Bin and more than ten others.

古文：硃滔为王武俊所攻，殆不能军，上表待罪。
现代文：朱滔被王武俊攻打，几乎溃不成军，进上表章，等待治罪。
English: Zhu Tao was attacked by Wang Wujun, and was almost defeated and unable to form an army. He went into exile, waiting to be punished.

古文：癸未，马燧将步骑三万攻绛州。
现代文：癸未，马燧带领步兵、骑兵三万人攻打绛州。
English: Shortly after, Ma Jun led 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：度支以李怀光所部将士数万与怀光同反，不给冬衣，上曰： 朔方军累代忠义，今为怀光所制耳，将士何罪！ 
现代文：由于李怀光所统领的将士数万人曾与李怀光共同造反，度支不给他们冬天的衣装。德宗说： 朔方军多少世代以来都是忠义的，如今只是被李怀光控制了而已，将士有什么罪过！ 
English: Since tens of thousands of soldiers led by Li Huai Guang had once rebelled together with Li Huai Guang, they were not given winter clothing. Dezong said: The Shuo Fang Army has been loyal for many generations, but now it is just controlled by Li Huai Guang. What is the soldiers' fault?

古文：冬，十月，已亥，诏： 朔方及诸军在怀光所者，冬衣及赏钱皆当别贮，俟道路稍通，即时给之。 
现代文：冬季，十月，德宗颁诏说： 朔方军以及在李怀光统领下的各军，其冬季衣装以及赏钱都应当另外储存着，等倏道路逐渐畅通以后，立刻及时发给他们。 
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Dezong issued an edict saying: The winter clothing and reward money of the Shuo Fang Army and all the armies under the command of Li Huai Guang should be stored separately, and they should be distributed to them in a timely manner as soon as the roads are gradually cleared.

古文：李勉累表乞自贬，辛丑，罢勉都统、节度使，其检校司徒、同平章事如故。
现代文：李勉多次上表请求贬黜自己的官职。辛丑，德宗罢免了李勉都统、节度使的职务，他的检校司徒、同平章事职务一如既往。
English: Li Mian repeatedly petitioned for the downgrading of his official position. Outraged, Emperor Dezong dismissed Li Mian from the posts of tutor and festival delegate, and his posts as school inspector and Tongping official remained unchanged.

古文：丙辰，李怀光将阎晏寇同州，官军败于沙苑。
现代文：丙辰，李怀光的将领阎晏侵犯同州，官军在沙苑打了败仗。
English: Hsin Chen and Li Huaiqing's general Yan Qi invaded Tongzhou, and the government army was defeated in Sha Yuan.

古文：诏征邠州之军，韩游瑰将甲士六千赴之。
现代文：德宗颁诏命令征调州的军队，韩游带领甲兵六千人奔赴该地。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering the transfer of troops from the state, and Han Yu led six thousand armored soldiers to the place.

古文：乙丑，马燧拔绛州，分兵取闻喜、万泉、虞乡、永乐、猗氏。
现代文：乙丑，马燧攻克绛州，分兵攻取闻喜、万泉、虞乡、永乐、猗氏等地。
English: Second Ugly, Horse and Foal invaded and conquered Luzhou, and the detachment of troops captured Wensi, Wanquan, Yuxiang, Yongle, Jiu and other places.

古文：初，鱼朝恩既诛，代宗不复使宦官典兵。
现代文：当初，鱼朝恩被杀后，代宗不再让宦官掌管军事。
English: At first, after Yu Chaon was killed, Daizong no longer allowed eunuchs to control the military.

古文：上即位，悉以禁兵委白志贞，志贞得罪，上复以宦官窦文场代之，从幸山南，两军稍集。
现代文：德宗即位后，将禁卫亲军全部交给白志贞掌管。白志贞获罪后，德宗再次让宦官窦文场代替他，窦文场跟随德宗出行山南，神策两军渐渐有了一些规模。
English: After Emperor Dezong ascended the throne, he put all of the imperial guard troops under the command of Bai Zhizhen. After Bai Zhizhen was convicted, Emperor Dezong once again asked the eunuch Dou Wenchang to replace him. Dou Wenchang accompanied Emperor Dezong on his trip to Shannan. The two armies of Shen Zhe gradually gained some scale.

古文：上还长安，颇忌宿将握兵多者，稍稍罢之。
现代文：德宗回到长安后，对掌握兵马较多的宿将颇有顾忌，逐渐地削除他们的兵权。
English: After Dezong returned to Chang'an, he was wary of having too many soldiers and horses, and gradually removed their military power.

古文：戊辰，以文场监神策军左厢兵马使，王希迁监石厢兵马使，始令宦官分典禁旅。
现代文：戊辰，德宗任命窦文场为监神策军左厢兵马使，任命王希迁为监神策军右厢兵马使，开始让宦官分别掌管禁卫亲军。
English: Boshen and Dezong appointed Dou Wenchang as the left compartment envoy of the overseer and strategist army, and appointed Wang Xijian as the right compartment envoy of the overseer and strategist army, and began to let the eunuchs take charge of the imperial guard separately.

古文：闰月，丙子，以泾原节度使田希鉴为卫尉卿。
现代文：闰十月，丙子，德宗任命泾原节度使田希鉴为卫尉卿。
English: In leap October, Emperor Dezong, the son of Emperor Xizong, appointed Tian Xijian, the son of Empress Dowager Cixi, as the Lord of the Imperial Guards.

古文：李晟初至凤翔，希鉴遣使参候，晟谓使者曰： 泾州逼近吐蕃，万一入寇，州兵能独御之乎？
现代文：李晟刚刚来到凤翔时，田希鉴派遣使者前来参见问倏。李晟对使者说： 泾州距离吐蕃很近，万一吐蕃入境侵犯，泾州兵能够独自抵御他们吗？
English: When Li Qiye had just arrived in Fengxiang, Tian Xijian sent an envoy to inquire about him. Li Qiye said to the envoy: Zhangzhou is very close to Tubo. If Tubo were to invade, would the Zhangzhou soldiers be able to resist them on their own?

古文：欲遣兵防援，又未知田尚书意。 
现代文：我打算派兵增防打援，又不知道田尚书的意见。 
English: I plan to send troops to reinforce the defense and strike support, but I do not know the opinion of Tian Shangshu.

古文：使者归，以告希鉴，希鉴果请援兵，晟遣腹心将彭令英等戍泾州。
现代文：使者回去后，将李晟的意思告诉了田希鉴，田希鉴果然请求援兵，李晟便派遣亲信将领彭令英等人戍守泾州。
English: After the envoy returned, he told Tian Xijian of Li Xi's intention. Tian Xijian indeed requested reinforcements, and Li Xi sent his close confidant, General Peng Lingying and others, to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：晟寻托巡边诣泾州，希鉴出迎，晟与之并辔而入，道旧结欢。
现代文：不久，李晟托称巡视边防而来到泾州，田希鉴出来迎接。李晟与他并马入城，谈论着往事，同他交好。
English: Soon after, Li Yantuo came to Zhangzhou to inspect the border defense, and Tian Xijian came out to meet him. Li Yantuo entered the city with him, talked about the past, and made friends with him.

古文：希鉴妻李氏，以叔父事晟，晟谓之田郎。
现代文：田希鉴的妻子李氏，以对待叔父的礼数事奉李晟，李晟把田希鉴称作田郎。
English: Tian Xijian's wife, Li, treated her uncle with the same courtesy as she did Li Yao. Li Yao called Tian Xijian "Taro."

古文：晟命具三日食，曰： 巡抚毕，即还凤翔。 
现代文：李晟命令田希鉴只须备办三天的食物，还说： 我巡视安抚完毕，便立即回凤翔去。 
English: Li Yao ordered Tian Xijian to prepare only three days of food, and said, "After I finish my inspection and pacification, I will immediately go back to Fengxiang."

古文：希鉴不复疑。
现代文：田希鉴不再怀有疑虑。
English: Tian Xijian no longer had any doubts.

古文：晟置宴，希鉴与将佐俱诣晟营。
现代文：李晟摆下宴席，田希鉴与将佐都来到李晟的营垒。
English: After the banquet, Tian Xijian and General Sadu came to Li Xuan's camp.

古文：晟伏甲于外庑，既食而饮，彭令英引泾州诸将下堂。
现代文：李晟在外面的廊庑里埋伏下甲兵，在人们吃喝起来后，彭令英将泾州各将领拉到堂下。
English: After the people had finished eating and drinking, Peng Lingying dragged the generals of Zhangzhou to the hall.

古文：晟曰： 我与汝曹久别，各宜自言姓名。 
现代文：李晟说： 我与你们分别了很长时间，你们最好各自说出自己的姓氏名字。 
English: Li Wei said: I have been separated from you for a long time, you had better say your surname and first name separately.

古文：于是得为乱者石奇等三十馀人，让之曰： 汝曹屡为逆乱，残害忠良，固天地所不容！ 
现代文：于是，得悉石奇等作乱者共三十余人。李晟斥责他们说： 你们屡次兴起叛逆朝廷的变乱，残酷地杀害忠良大臣，乃是天地所不能容忍的！ 
English: As a result, it was learned that there were more than thirty rioters such as Shi Qi. Li Xi rebuked them, saying: You have repeatedly rebelled against the imperial court and brutally killed loyal ministers, which is intolerable to heaven and earth!

古文：悉引出，斩之。
现代文：将他们全部拉到外面斩杀了。
English: He dragged them all outside and killed them.

古文：希鉴尚在座，晟顾曰： 田郎亦不得无过，以亲知之故，当使身首得完。 希鉴曰： 唯。 
现代文：田希鉴还在座位上面，李晟看着他说： 田郎也不能没有过错，看在我与你亲近相知的份上，自当让你得以身首完整。 田希鉴说： 是。 
English: Tian Xijian was still on the seat, Li Yao looked at him and said, "Taro can't be without fault, for the sake of my close acquaintance with you, I should let you have a complete head." Tian Xijian said, "Yes."

古文：遂引出，缢杀之，并其子萼。
现代文：于是李晟命人将田希鉴拉出去，缢杀了他和他的儿子田萼。
English: So Li Xi ordered his men to drag Tian Xijian out and kill him and his son Tian Calyx.

古文：晟入其营，谕以诛希鉴之意，众股栗，无敢动者。
现代文：李晟进入田希鉴的营垒，向大家说明了诛杀田希鉴的用意，大家吓得两腿发抖，没有敢动一动的。
English: Li Gan entered Tian Xijian's camp and explained to everyone his intention to kill Tian Xijian. Everyone was so scared that their legs were shaking and they didn't dare to move.

古文：李希烈遣其将翟崇晖悉众围陈州，久之，不克。
现代文：李希烈派遣他的将领翟崇晖带领全部人马围困陈州，很长时间未能攻克。
English: Li Xilai sent his general Zou Chongyao to besiege Chenzhou with all his men and horses, but he was unable to conquer Zhuang for a long time.

古文：李澄知大梁兵少，不能制滑州，遂焚希烈所授旌节，誓众归国。
现代文：李澄知道大梁兵马不多，不能控制滑州，于是烧掉了李希烈授给他的节度使旌节，与大家宣誓归顺朝廷。
English: Li Cheng knew that there were not many soldiers and horses and he could not control the city of Slanting, so he burned the ceremonial sword given to him by Li Xilai and swore allegiance to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，以澄为汴滑节度使。
现代文：甲午，德宗任命李澄为汴滑节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Cheng to be the envoy of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：宋亳节度使刘洽遣马步都虞候刘昌与陇右、幽州行营节度使曲环等将兵三万救陈州，十一月，癸卯，败翟崇晖于州西，斩首三万五千级，擒崇晖以献。
现代文：宋毫节度使刘洽派遣马步都虞候刘昌与陇右、幽州行营节度使曲环等人，领兵三万人前去援救陈州。十一月，癸卯，曲环等人在陈州西面打败了翟崇晖，斩首三万五千，擒获了翟崇晖，进献上来。
English: Song Zhao sent Liu Cai to lead 30,000 soldiers to rescue Chenzhou. In November, Zou Wu, Qu Huan and others defeated Zou Chongyi on the west side of Chenzhou, beheaded 35,000 people, captured Zou Chongyi, and presented it to the emperor.

古文：乘胜进攻汴州，李希烈惧，奔归蔡州。
现代文：刘洽等人乘胜进攻汴州，李希烈恐惧，逃回蔡州。
English: Liu Ciao and others took advantage of the victory to attack Zhangzhou. Li Xile was afraid and fled back to Caizhou.

古文：李澄引兵趣汴州，至城北，恇怯不敢进。
现代文：李澄率兵前往汴州，到汴州城的北面，恐慌害怕，不敢进军。
English: Li Cheng led the troops to Luzhou, to the north of Luzhou City, panicked and afraid, did not dare to march.

古文：刘洽兵至成东。戊午，李希烈守将田怀珍开门纳之。
现代文：刘洽的兵马来到汴州城的东面，戊午，李希烈的守将田怀珍打开城门，放入刘洽军。
English: Liu Cai's soldiers and horses came to the east of Zhangzhou City. At noon, Li Xilai's guard Tian Huaizhen opened the city gate and let Liu Cai's army in.

古文：明日，澄入，舍于浚仪。两军之士，日有忿阋。
现代文：第二天，李澄进入汴州，在浚仪县住下，两军将士每天都要愤怒争斗。
English: The next day, Li Cheng entered Zhangzhou and lived in Jianyi County. The soldiers of the two armies had to fight angrily every day.

古文：会希烈郑州守将孙液降于澄，澄引兵屯郑州。诏以都统司马宝鼎薛珏为汴州刺史。
现代文：适逢李希烈的郑州守城将领孙液向李澄投降，李澄引兵在郑州驻扎，德宗颁诏任命都统司马宝鼎人薛珏为汴州刺史。
English: At the right time, Li Xilai's Zhengzhou garrison commander, Sun Ju, surrendered to Li Cheng, Li Cheng stationed his troops in Zhengzhou, and Dezong issued an edict appointing the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, Ma Baoding's successor, Xue Qi, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：李勉至长安，素服待罪。
现代文：李勉来到长安，不穿朝服，等候问罪。
English: Li Mian came to Chang'an, did not wear the imperial robe, and waited to be questioned.

古文：议者多以 勉失守大梁，不应尚为相。 
现代文：议论的人多数认为： 李勉没有守住大梁，不应该再作宰相。 
English: Most of the commentators believe that: Li Mian did not hold on to the beam, and should no longer be the prime minister.

古文：李泌言于上曰： 李勉公忠雅正，而用兵非其所长。
现代文：李泌对德宗说： 李勉公平忠厚，温雅正直，但是指挥兵马不是他的长处。
English: Li Xiu said to Dezong: Li Mian is fair, loyal, gentle and honest, but commanding soldiers and horses is not his strength.

古文：乃大梁不守，将士弃妻子而从之者殆二万人，足以见其得众心矣。
现代文：到大梁失陷时，丢下妻子儿女跟随他的将士们大约有两万人，充分说明李勉是深得人心的。
English: By the time of the fall of Dalian, there were about twenty thousand soldiers who had left their wives and children to follow him, fully demonstrating that Li Mian was deeply popular.

古文：且刘洽出勉麾下，勉至睢阳，悉举其众以授之，卒平大梁，亦勉之功也。 
现代文：而且，刘洽原是李勉的部下，李勉到睢阳时，把他的部众全部交给了刘洽，刘洽终于平定了大梁，这也是李勉的功劳啊。 
English: Moreover, Liu Cai was originally a subordinate of Li Cunxu. When Li Cunxu arrived in Fenyang, he handed over all his subordinates to Liu Cai. Liu Cunxu finally leveled the girders, which is also the merit of Li Cunxu.

古文：上乃命勉复其位。
现代文：于是德宗让李勉官复原位。
English: As a result, Emperor Dezong reinstated Li Benguan to his original position.

古文：议者又言： 韩滉闻銮舆在外，聚兵修石头城，阴蓄异志。 
现代文：议论的人又说： 韩听说圣上的车驾出行在外，聚集士兵修筑石头城，暗中包藏着反叛朝廷的意图。 
English: The commentators also said: Han was rumored to travel around in a sacred chariot, gathering soldiers to build a stone city, secretly harboring the intention of rebelling against the imperial court.

古文：上疑之，以问李泌，对曰： 滉公忠清俭，自车驾在外，滉贡献不绝。
现代文：德宗怀疑韩，便以此事询问李泌，李泌回答说： 韩公正忠实，清廉俭朴，自从陛下车驾出行在外，韩进贡物品从未间断。
English: Dezong was suspicious of Han, so he asked Li Xiu about this. Li Xiu replied: Han is fair and faithful, clean and frugal. Since His Majesty's car travels outside, Han's tribute items have never been interrupted.

古文：且镇抚江东十五州，盗贼不起，皆滉之力也。
现代文：而且，他镇守江东十五个州，没有盗贼兴起，这都是韩作出的努力。
English: Moreover, he guarded the fifteen states east of the Yangtze River, and there was no rise of thieves. This was all due to the efforts made by Han.

古文：所以修石头城者，滉见中原板荡，谓陛下将有永嘉之行，为迎扈之备耳。
现代文：修筑石头城的原因在于，韩眼见中原动荡不安，认为陛下将会有晋元帝永嘉年间南渡长江的事情发生，他是为迎接和扈从陛下作准备而已。
English: The reason for building the stone city is that Han saw the Central Plains in turmoil and thought that His Majesty would cross the Yangtze River during the reign of Emperor Yongjia, and he was just preparing to welcome His Majesty.

古文：此乃人臣忠笃之虑，奈何更以为罪乎！
现代文：这乃是人臣真心忠于陛下的一种考虑，怎么能够反而认为有罪呢！
English: This is a consideration for a courtier who is truly loyal to His Majesty, how can he be considered guilty!

古文：滉性刚严，不附权贵，故多谤毁，愿陛下察之，臣敢保其无它。 
现代文：韩生性刚直严正，不肯依附地位高、有权势的人，所以往往遭到诽谤，希望陛下察究此事，我敢担保他没有别的用意。 
English: Han Sang-soo is very upright and does not want to be dependent on high-ranking and powerful people, so he is often slandered. I hope that His Majesty will investigate this matter. I guarantee that he has no other intention.

古文：上曰： 外议汹汹，章奏如麻，卿弗闻乎？ 
现代文：德宗说： 外面议论噪杂，有关韩的章奏多如丝麻，你难道没有听说吗？ 
English: Dezong said, "Outside, there is a lot of noise, and there are so many chapters about Korea. Haven't you heard?

古文：对曰： 臣固闻之。
现代文：李泌回答说： 我当然听说了。
English: Mr. Li replied: "Of course I heard about it.

古文：其子皋为考功员外郎，今不敢归省其亲，正以谤语沸腾故也。 
现代文：韩的儿子韩皋担任考功员外郎，如今他不敢回家探亲，正是由于诽谤性的议论象开了锅的原故啊。 
English: Han's son, Han Min, who works as an examiner, is now afraid to go home to visit his relatives, precisely because the slanderous talk has been stirred up.

古文：上曰： 其子犹惧如此，卿奈何保之？ 
现代文：德宗说： 连他的儿子尚且这样恐惧，怎么你却要担保他呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "Even if his son is so afraid, how can you vouch for him?"

古文：对曰： 滉之用心，臣知之至熟。
现代文：李泌回答说： 韩的居心，我了解得很清楚。
English: Ri Seul replied, "I understand Han's intentions very well.

古文：愿上章明其无它，乞宣示中书，使朝众皆知之。 
现代文：我愿意进上章疏，说明他没有别的意图，请陛下将章疏向中书省发布，使朝中群臣都能了解此事。 
English: I am willing to go into the above chapter and explain that he has no other intention. I would like to ask His Majesty to release the chapter to the Ministry of Literature, so that all the ministers in the DPRK and China can understand the matter.

古文：上曰： 朕方欲用卿，人亦何易可保！慎勿违众，恐并为卿累也。 
现代文：德宗说： 担保一个人谈何容易！朕正打算重用你，希望你当心不要违背大家，朕恐怕这会成为你的麻烦的。 
English: Dezong said, "How easy it is to guarantee one person! I am planning to reuse you, I hope you will be careful not to violate everyone, I am afraid this will become your trouble."

古文：泌退，遂上章，请以百口保滉。
现代文：李泌退下后，便奏上章疏，请求以一家百口担保韩。
English: After Ri Seul stepped down, he played the last chapter and asked for a one-hundred-unit guarantee for South Korea.

古文：它日，上谓泌曰： 卿竟上章，已为卿留中。
现代文：另一天，德宗对李泌说： 你到底还是把章疏奏上，朕已经为你留在禁中了。
English: On another day, Dezong said to Li Xiu, "In the end, you still have to play the stanzas, I have already stayed in the ban for you."

古文：虽知卿与滉亲旧，岂得不自爱其身乎！ 
现代文：虽然朕知道你与韩是亲朋故友，但你怎么能够不自爱自重呢！ 
English: Although I know that you and Han are relatives and old friends, how can you not love and respect yourself!

古文：对曰： 臣岂肯私于亲旧以负陛下！
现代文：李泌回答说： 我怎么会偏私亲朋故友来辜负陛下呢！
English: Lirong replied, "How could I betray your majesty by favoring my relatives, friends, and old friends?"

古文：顾滉实无异心，臣之上章，以为朝廷，非为身也。 
现代文：顾及韩实在没有背叛朝廷的用心，我进上章疏，是为了朝廷，不是为了自身。 
English: Considering that Han really did not have the intention of betraying the imperial court, I entered Shangzhangzuo for the sake of the imperial court, not for myself.

古文：上曰： 如何其为朝廷？ 
现代文：德宗说： 为什么说你是为了朝廷呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "Why do you say you are doing it for the imperial court?"

古文：对曰： 今天下旱、蝗，关中米斗千钱，仓廪耗竭，而江东丰稔。
现代文：李泌回答说： 如今全国发生了旱灾蝗祸，关中的粮食每斗值一千钱，粮食储备消耗已尽，但江东却是丰收。
English: Li Xiu replied, "Nowadays, a drought and locust plague have occurred across the country. The grain in Guanzhong is worth one thousand yuan per barrel. Grain reserves have been exhausted, but the east of the Yangtze River is a bumper harvest.

古文：愿陛下早下臣章以解朝众之惑，面谕韩皋使之归觐，令滉感谢无自疑之心，速运粮储，岂非为朝廷邪？ 
现代文：希望陛下及早将我的章疏批示下来，以便解除朝中群臣的疑惑。请陛上当面晓示韩皋，让他回家省亲，使韩心怀感激，消除自己的疑虑之心，迅速运送粮食储备，这难道不是为朝廷着想吗！ 德宗说： 好！
English: I hope that His Majesty will issue my imperial edict as early as possible, so as to remove the doubts of the ministers of the two Koreas. I would like to ask His Majesty to personally show it to Han Zong, let him go home to visit his relatives, make Han grateful, eliminate his doubts, and quickly transport grain reserves. Isn't this for the sake of the imperial court? Dezong said: Good!

古文：上曰： 善！
现代文：朕完全明白了。 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：朕深谕之矣。 即下泌章，令韩皋谒告归觐，面赐绯衣，谕以 卿父比有谤言，朕今知其所以，释然不复信矣。 
现代文：德宗立即将李泌的章疏批示下来，让韩皋禀告韩就要回家探亲，并当面赐给他绯色的朝服，告诉他说： 你父亲近来遭受流言蜚语，现在朕知道了其中的原故，已经消除了疑虑，不再相信那些话了。 
English: Dezong immediately ordered Li Xiu's secretary to inform Han Zheng that Han was about to go home to visit his relatives, and gave him a dark-colored imperial robe in person, telling him: Your father has recently been subjected to rumors, now I know the reason, I have eliminated my doubts, and I no longer believe those words.

古文：因言： 关中乏粮，归语卿父，宜速致之。 
现代文：德宗又就势说： 关中粮食缺乏，回去告诉你父亲，最好快速把粮食运来。 
English: Desong also said: "There is a shortage of grain in Guanzhong. Go back and tell your father that it would be best to get the grain quickly.

古文：皋至润州，滉感悦流涕，即日，自临水滨发米百万斛，听皋留五日即还朝。
现代文：韩皋来到润州，韩感激、高兴得流下了眼泪。就在当天，韩亲自来到水边，发出粮食一百万斛，准许韩皋停留五天，随即回朝。
English: On the very same day, Han himself came to the water's edge, gave out one million baht worth of grain, allowed Han Mi to stay for five days, and then immediately returned to the DPRK.

古文：皋别其母，啼声闻于外。滉怒，召出，挞之，自送至江上，冒风涛而遣之。
现代文：韩皋与母亲告别时，哭声让外面听到了，韩大怒，叫出韩皋，用棍子打了他一顿，亲自把他送到长江上，打发他冒着风浪走了。
English: When Han Xuan was saying goodbye to his mother, his cries were heard outside. Han Dafu was furious, called out Han Xuan, beat him with a stick, personally sent him to the Yangtze River, and sent him away braving the storm.

古文：既而陈少游闻滉贡米，亦贡二十万斛。
现代文：不久，陈少游听说韩进贡粮食，他也进贡了二十万斛。
English: Soon, Chen Shaoyou heard that Han had paid a tribute of grain, and he also paid a tribute of 200,000 baht.

古文：上谓李泌曰： 韩滉乃能化陈少游亦贡米矣！ 
现代文：德宗对李泌说： 韩竟然能够感化陈少游来进贡粮食了！ 
English: Dezong said to Li Xiu: Han was able to influence Chen Shaoyou to bring in tribute grain!

古文：对曰： 岂惟少游，诸道将争入贡矣！ 
现代文：李泌回答说： 何止陈少游，各道也将要争着入朝进贡了！ 
English: Li Xiu replied, "No matter how much Chen Shaoyou travels, each province will also have to compete for the tribute!

古文：吏部尚书、同平章事萧复奉使自江、淮还，与李勉、卢翰、刘从一俱见上。
现代文：吏部尚书、同平章事萧复奉命出使，从江淮地区回朝，与李勉、卢翰、刘从一一起晋见德宗。
English: Officers Shang Shu and Tong Ping Zhang and Xiao Fu were dispatched by order to return to the North from the Jianghuai region, and together with Li Qian, Lu Han and Liu Cong, they went to see Emperor Dezong.

古文：勉等退，复独留，言于上曰： 陈少游任兼将相，首败臣节，韦皋幕府下僚，独建忠义，请以皋代少游镇淮南，使善恶著明。
现代文：李勉等人退下后，萧复一人留了下来，他对德宗说： 陈少游兼有大将与宰相的职任，却首先败坏人臣的操守；韦皋是幕府中的下级官吏，却能独建忠义之举。请让韦皋代替陈少游镇守淮南。 德宗认为萧复讲得有理。
English: After Li Tsun and others retreated, Xiao Fu was the only one to remain. He said to Dezong: Chen Shao Yu, who held the position of grand marshal and prime minister, was the first to corrupt the morals of his subordinates; Wei Wei, a lower-ranking official in the shogunate, was able to build loyalty on his own. Please let Wei Wei replace Chen Shao Yu as the town guard of Huainan. Dezong thought that Xiao Fu was right.

古文：上然之。寻遣中使马钦绪揖刘从一附耳语而去。诸相还閤。
现代文：不久，德宗派遣中使马钦绪拜见刘从一，贴着他的耳朵讲话就走了，各位宰相回到各自的阁室。
English: Not long after, Emperor Dezong sent Ma Qingsu to meet Liu Zong, and he spoke into Liu's ear and then left. The prime ministers returned to their respective offices.

古文：从一诣复曰： 钦绪宣旨，令从一与公议朝来所言事，即奏行之，勿令李、卢知。敢问何事也？ 
现代文：刘从一到萧复处说 马钦绪传达圣旨，让我与你计议早晨所讲的事情，立即奏上实行，不要让李勉、卢翰知道，请问那是什么事情？ 
English: Liu went to Xiao Fu and said, "Ma Qingshu conveyed the holy will. Let me discuss with you the things we talked about in the morning, and immediately put them into practice. Don't let Li Mian and Lu Han know. What is that?

古文：复曰： 唐、虞黜陟，岳牧佥谐。爵人于朝，与士共之。
现代文：萧复说： 唐尧、虞舜掌握升降百官的尺度，朝中的执政大臣与各地的封疆大吏全都协调一致。
English: Xiao Fu said: Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan have mastered the scale of promotion and demotion of hundreds of officials, and the ruling ministers of the dynasty and the officials of the fiefdoms around the country are all coordinated.

古文：使李、卢不堪为相，则罢之。
现代文：在朝中给人爵位，就要与这些人共掌朝政。假使李勉、卢翰不适于担当宰相职务，就勉除他们的职务。
English: If you give someone a title in the imperial court, you have to share the imperial government with these people. If Li Mian and Lu Han are not suitable to hold the post of prime minister, you should remove them from their posts.

古文：既在相位，朝廷政事，安得不与之同议而独隐此一事乎！
现代文：既然他们尚在宰相职位上，朝廷的政事，怎么能够不和他们共同计议，而偏偏隐瞒这件事情呢！
English: Since they are still in the position of prime minister, how can the political affairs of the imperial court not be discussed with them, but rather concealed?

古文：此最当今之大弊，朝来主上已有斯言，复已面陈其不可，不谓圣意尚尔。
现代文：这乃是当前最大的弊病，早晨皇上就说过这番话，我已经向皇上当面陈述如此做法是不对的，没想到皇上的意愿还是这个样子。
English: This is the biggest problem at the moment. The Emperor said this in the morning. I have already told the Emperor in person that it is wrong to do this. I did not expect the Emperor's will to be like this.

古文：复不惜与公奏行之，但恐浸以成俗，未敢以告。 
现代文：我不在乎和你上奏实行这件事情，但是惟恐这种做法逐渐成为习俗，不敢告诉你。 
English: I don't mind sharing this with you, but I'm afraid it's becoming a habit and I can't tell you.

古文：竟不以事语从一。
现代文：萧复始终没有把这件事说给刘从一听。
English: Xiao Fu never told Liu about this.

古文：从一奏之，上愈不悦，复乃上表辞位，乙丑，罢为左庶子。
现代文：刘从一将这件事奏上，德宗愈发不高兴。于是，萧复进上表章，请求辞去宰相职务。乙丑，德宗罢免萧复为左庶子。
English: As soon as Liu reported the matter, Dezong became more and more unhappy. Therefore, Xiao Fuzhong was promoted to the highest rank and asked to resign from the post of prime minister. Secondly, Dezong dismissed Xiao Fuzhong as his illegitimate son.

古文：刘洽克汴州，得《李希烈起居注》，云 某月日，陈少游上表归顺。 
现代文：刘洽攻克汴州，得到《李希烈起居注》。该注说： 某月某日，陈少游进上表章，表示归顺。 
English: Liu Cai conquered Zhangzhou and obtained the "Note on Li Xili's Settlement." The note said: On a certain day of a certain month, Chen Shaoyou entered the upper chapter, indicating surrender.

古文：少游闻之惭惧，发疾，十二月，乙亥，薨。
现代文：陈少游听说此事，又惭愧，又恐惧，犯了病。十二月，乙亥，陈少游去世。
English: When Chen Shaoyou heard about this, he was ashamed and afraid, and fell ill. In December, the Year of the Ox, Chen Shaoyou passed away.

古文：赠太尉，赙祭如常仪。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太尉，送去助丧的钱财和对他的祭祀都按照通常的仪礼进行。
English: The imperial court posthumously promoted him to the rank of captain, sent money and goods to help with his funeral, and held a memorial service for him in accordance with the usual rituals.

古文：淮南大将王韶欲自为留后，令将士推己知军事，且欲大掠。
现代文：淮南大将王韶打算自己担任留后，命令将士推举自己代理军中事务，而且准备大规模劫掠。
English: Huainan General Wang Qian planned to stay on in his post, ordered his generals to nominate themselves as agents of the military affairs, and prepared for large-scale looting.

古文：韩滉遣使谓之曰： 汝敢为乱，吾即日全军渡江诛汝矣！ 
现代文：韩派遣使者告诉他说： 倘若你敢作乱，当天我就带着全军渡过长江杀你！ 
English: Han dispatched an envoy to tell him: "If you dare to make trouble, I will cross the Yangtze River with my entire army to kill you that very day!"

古文：韶等惧而让。
现代文：王韶等人因恐惧而放弃了原来的打算。
English: Wang Qi and others abandoned their original plan out of fear.

古文：上闻之喜，谓李泌曰： 滉不惟安江东，又能安淮南，真大臣之器，卿可谓知人！ 
现代文：德宗听说此事很高兴，对李泌说： 韩不只使江东安定，又使淮南安定，他真是有大臣的才具，你可以说是善于知人！ 
English: De Zong was very pleased to hear this and said to Li Xiu: Han not only stabilized the East River, but also stabilized Huainan. He really has the talent of a minister, you can say that he is good at getting to know people!

古文：庚辰，加滉平章事，江淮转运使。
现代文：庚辰，德宗加封韩为平章事、江淮转运使。
English: Geng Chen, Dezong and Han Wei Ping signed the document, and Jianghuai transferred the envoy.

古文：滉运江、淮粟帛入贡府，无虚月，韩廷赖之，使者劳问相继，恩遇始深矣。
现代文：这一年，蝗虫的灾害遍及各地，草木都被吃光，只是不吃稻子。大规模的饥荒发生了，遍地躺着饿死的人。
English: This year, the locust plagues were all over the place, the plants and trees were eaten up, but they did not eat rice. A large-scale famine occurred, and people were dying of starvation everywhere.

古文：是岁蝗遍远近，草木无遗，惟不食稻，大饥，道殣相望。贞元元年乙丑，公元七八五年春，正月，丁酉朔，赦天下，改元。
现代文：贞元元年春季正月，丁酉朔，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Zhengyuan, Ding Junshuo, the general amnesty of the world, and the change of year.

古文：癸丑，赠颜真卿司徒，谥曰文忠。
现代文：癸丑，朝廷追封颜真卿为司徒，给予 文忠 的谥号。
English: As a result, the imperial court posthumously appointed Yan Zhenqing as a disciple and gave him the nickname Wen Zhong Rong.

古文：新州司马卢杞遇赦，移吉州长史，谓人曰： 吾必再入。 
现代文：新州司马卢杞遇到大赦，移任吉州长史。他对人说： 我一定能够再次回到朝廷。 
English: When Sima Lucheng of Xinzhou was amnestied and transferred to the post of governor of Ji Province, he said to the people: I will definitely be able to return to the imperial court again.

古文：未几，上果用为饶州刺史。
现代文：不久，德宗果然将他起用为饶州刺史。
English: Not long after, Emperor Dezong appointed him as the official historian of Raozhou.

古文：给事中袁高应草制，执以白卢翰、刘从一曰： 卢杞作相，致銮舆播迁，海内疮痍，奈何遽迁大郡！
现代文：给事中袁高应命草拟制书，他拉着卢翰、刘从一说： 卢杞担任宰相，致使圣上流亡在外，国内创伤满目，怎么能够骤然把他升迁大郡呢！
English: In the middle of the matter, Yuan Gao was ordered to draft a book, he led Lu Han and Liu Congyi to say: Lu Wei served as prime minister, resulting in the saint's exile abroad, the domestic trauma is full of eyes, how can he suddenly be promoted to a large county!

古文：愿相公执奏。 
现代文：希望相公坚持上奏。 
English: Let's hope Sokong sticks to the first verse.

古文：翰等不从，更命它舍人草制。
现代文：卢翰等人不肯听从，改令其他舍人起草制书。
English: Lu Han and others did not want to listen, so they ordered others to draft the book.

古文：乙卯，制出，高执之不下，且奏： 杞极恶穷凶，百辟疾之若仇，六军思食其肉，何可复用！ 
现代文：乙卯，制书发到中书省，袁高拿着制书不肯下发，而且上奏说： 卢杞凶恶到了极点，百官憎恨他有如仇敌，六军将士想吃他的肉，怎么能够再次任用他呢！ 
English: One by one, the books were sent to the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Yuan Gao refused to send the books, and said in his report: Lu Xun was extremely vicious. The officials hated him like an enemy. The soldiers of the Sixth Army wanted to eat his flesh. How could he be reappointed?

古文：上不听。
现代文：德宗不肯听从。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：补阙陈京、赵需等上疏曰： 杞三年擅权，百揆失叙，天地神祇所知，华夏、蛮夷同弃。
现代文：补阙陈京、赵需等进上疏章说； 卢杞独揽大权三年，使百官废失事业，已为天地神灵所知晓，为华夏和蛮貊各族所共同抛弃。
English: Complementing Chen Jing and Zhao Bei, he said, "The cause of Lu Xun's monopolization of power for three years and the loss of hundreds of officials has been known to the gods and spirits of heaven and earth, and has been abandoned by all ethnic groups in China and barbarians.

古文：倘加巨奸之宠，必失万姓之心。 
现代文：倘若给这个大奸人再加以恩宠，一定会丧失百姓的心。 
English: If this great traitor is given any more favors, he will surely lose the hearts of the people.

古文：丁巳，袁高复于正牙论奏。上曰： 杞已再更赦。 
现代文：丁巳，袁高再次在正殿向德宗论奏此事，德宗说： 已经再次更改了对卢杞的赦书。 
English: Soon after, Yuan Gao again discussed the matter with Dezong in the main hall. Dezong said, "The pardon letter for Lu Yao has been changed again."

古文：高曰： 赦者止原其罪，不可为刺史。 
现代文：袁高说： 所谓赦书，只限于宽宥他的罪行，不应该任命他当刺史。 
English: Yuan Gao said: The so-called pardon is only limited to forgiving his crime, and he should not be appointed as a historian.

古文：陈京等亦争之不已，曰： 杞之执政，百官常如兵在其颈，今复用之，则奸党皆唾掌而起。 
现代文：陈京等人也就此事争论不休，他们说： 卢杞执掌朝政，百官就象有兵器经常放在脖子上，如今再次起用他，那就会让邪恶之辈都象把唾水吐到手中那般容易地再度兴起了。 
English: Chen Jing and others also argued endlessly about this matter, saying: "When Lu Wei was in charge of the imperial government, the officials were like weapons often placed around his neck. Now, if he is used again, it will make the evil people rise again as easily as spitting into their hands.

古文：上大怒，左右辟易，谏者稍引却，京顾曰： 赵需等勿退，此国大事，当以死争之。 
现代文：德宗十分恼怒，随侍诸人惊惶而退，进谏的人们也稍有退缩。陈京回头看着大家说： 赵需等人不要退去，这是国家大事，应当冒死相争。 
English: Dezong was very angry, and he retreated as the attendants panicked, and the people entering the hall also retreated a little. Chen Jing looked back at everyone and said: Zhao Bei and others should not retreat, this is a national event, and they should fight to the death.

古文：上怒稍解。
现代文：德宗的怒气稍微消散了一些。
English: Desong's anger dissipated a little.

古文：戊午，上谓宰相： 与杞小州刺史，可乎？ 
现代文：戊午，德宗对宰相说： 给卢杞一个小州刺史来当，可以吗？ 
English: In the afternoon, Dezong said to the prime minister, "Can you give Lu Yao a small piece of state history?

古文：李勉曰： 陛下欲与之，虽大州亦可，其如天下失望何！ 
现代文：李勉说： 陛下打算给他官作，即使让他当大州刺史也是可以的。只是让天下的百姓失望了，那怎么办呢？ 
English: Li Mian said: His Majesty is planning to give him an official post, even if it is possible to make him the governor of Dazhou. However, he has disappointed the people of the world, so what should he do?

古文：壬戌，以杞为澧州别驾。使谓袁高曰： 朕徐思卿言，诚为至当。 
现代文：壬戌，皇帝任命卢杞为澧州别驾，叫人对袁高说： 朕慢慢考虑你讲的话，实在是极为恰当的。 
English: Therefore, the emperor appointed Lu Wei as the special envoy to Zhangzhou, and told people to say to Yuan Gao: "I am slowly considering what you said. It is really very appropriate.

古文：又谓李泌曰： 朕已可袁高所奏。 
现代文：德宗又对李泌说： 朕已经准许了袁高的奏议。 
English: Dezong also said to Li Xiu: I have allowed Yuan Gao's appeal.

古文：泌曰： 累日外人窃议，比陛下于桓、灵；今承德音，乃尧、舜之不逮也！ 
现代文：李泌说： 连日以来，外面的人们私下议论，将陛下比作东汉的桓帝和灵帝，如今承闻陛下的德音，这乃是尧、舜所赶不上的啊！ 
English: Li Xiu said, "For several days, people outside have been discussing in private, comparing Your Majesty to the Eastern Han Dynasty's Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling. Now they are listening to Your Majesty's words. This is something that the world cannot catch up with!"

古文：上悦。
现代文：德宗高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：杞竟卒于澧州。
现代文：卢杞终于在澧州死去。
English: Lu Yong finally died in Ganzhou.

古文：高，恕己之孙也。
现代文：袁高是袁恕己的孙子。
English: Yuan Gao is the grandson of Yuan Shuxi.

古文：三月，李希烈陷邓州。
现代文：三月，李希烈攻陷邓州。
English: In March, Li Xilai invaded and occupied Dangzhou.

古文：戊午，以汴滑节度使李澄为郑滑节度使。
现代文：戊午，德宗任命汴猾节度使李澄为郑滑节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Cheng as Zhenglu's envoy.

古文：以代宗女嘉诚公主妻田绪。
现代文：德宗将代宗的女儿嘉诚公主嫁给田绪为妻。
English: Emperor Dezong married Emperor Dezong's daughter, Princess Kaecheng, to Emperor Taejo.

古文：李怀光都虞候吕鸣岳密通款于马燧，事泄，怀光杀之，屠其家。
现代文：李怀光的都虞候吕鸣岳向马燧暗表诚意，事情泄露后，李怀光杀死他及他全家人。
English: After the matter was leaked, Li Huaguang killed him and his entire family.

古文：事连幕僚高郢、李鄘，怀光集将士而责之，郢、鄘抗言逆顺，无所惭隐，怀光囚之。鄘，邕之侄孙也。马燧军于宝鼎，败怀光兵于陶城，斩首万馀级，分兵会浑瑊，逼河中。
现代文：斩首一万余级。马燧分兵与浑军会合，进逼河中。
English: More than ten thousand were beheaded. The horse and mule detachment met with the Hun army and entered the river.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑，以曹王皋为荆南节度，李希烈将李思登以随州降之。
现代文：夏季四月，丁丑，德宗任命曹王李皋为荆南节度使。李希烈的将领李思登率随州归降了李皋。
English: In the summer of April, Dingwuxi, Dezong appointed Cao Wang Lijun as the Jingnan Festival envoy. Li Siden, the general of Li Xilai, led Li Lijun to return to Suzhou.

古文：壬午，马燧、浑瑊破李怀光兵于长春宫南，遂掘堑围宫城。怀光诸将相继来降。
现代文：壬午，马燧、浑在长春宫南面打败李怀光的兵马，于是挖掘壕沟，包围宫城，李怀光的将领们接连不断地前来投降。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Ma Xun and Hun defeated Li Huaiqing's soldiers and horses on the south side of the Changchun Palace, so they dug a trench and surrounded the palace. Li Huaiqing's generals came one after another to surrender.

古文：诏以燧、瑊为招扶使。
现代文：德宗颁诏任命马燧、浑为招抚使。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict appointing Ma Jun and Hun We as courting envoys.

古文：五月，丙申，刘洽更名玄佐。
现代文：五月，丙申，刘洽改名为刘玄佐。
English: In May, he changed his name from Liu Cai to Liu Xuan Cao.

古文：韩游瑰请兵于浑瑊，共取朝邑。
现代文：韩游要求浑出兵，共同攻取朝邑。
English: Han Yu requested that troops be dispatched to jointly capture Aso.

古文：李怀光将阎晏欲争之，士卒指邠军曰： 彼非吾父兄，则吾子弟，奈何以白刃相向乎！ 
现代文：李怀光的将领阎晏准备前去争斗，他的士兵们指着州军说： 他们不是我们的父兄，就是我们的子弟，如何拿明晃晃的兵器对着他们呢！ 
English: Li Huaiqing's general Yan Qi was preparing to go to battle, and his soldiers pointed at the state army and said: "They are not our brothers and fathers, they are our sons and daughters. How can we use shiny weapons against them?"

古文：语甚嚣。晏遽引兵去。
现代文：士兵们十分喧闹，阎晏只好赶快领兵离开。
English: The soldiers were very noisy, and Yan Yan had to quickly lead the soldiers away.

古文：怀光知众心不从，乃诈称欲归国，聚货财，饰车马，运俟路通入贡，由是得复逾旬月。
现代文：李怀光知道大家心中不肯服从自已，于是他诈称准备归顺朝廷。他聚集财物，整饰车马，说是等道路畅通以后进贡朝廷，因此他又得以苟延残喘了十个多月。
English: Li Huai Guang knew that everyone would not obey him, so he pretended to be ready to surrender to the imperial court. He gathered his belongings, decorated his chariots and horses, and said that he would pay tribute to the imperial court after the road was smooth. Therefore, he was able to survive for more than ten months.

古文：六月，辛巳，以刘玄佐兼汴州刺史。
现代文：六月，辛巳，德宗命令刘玄佐兼任汴州刺史。
English: In June, Emperor Dezong ordered Liu Xuanzuo to take on the additional post of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，以金吾大将军韦皋为西川节度使。
现代文：辛卯，德宗任命金吾大将军韦皋为西川节度使。
English: Unexpectedly, Emperor Dezong appointed Kingu's general Wei Jun as the chief envoy to the Nishikawa festival.

古文：硃滔病死，将士奉前涿州刺史刘怦知军事。
现代文：朱滔生病而死，将士拥戴前涿州刺史刘怦主持军中军务。
English: Zhu Tao fell ill and died, and Liu Wei, the former prefect of Zhangzhou, presided over the military affairs of the army.

古文：时连年旱、蝗，度支资粮匮竭，言事者多请赦李怀光。
现代文：当时，旱灾蝗灾连年发生，度支的物资粮食已经用尽，议事的人们多数请求赦免李怀光。
English: At that time, droughts and locust plagues had occurred year after year, and the supplies of food had been exhausted. Most of the people in the deliberation requested to pardon Li Huaiguang.

古文：李晟上言： 赦怀光有五不可：河中距长安才三百里，同州当其冲，多兵则未为示信，少兵则不足提防，忽惊东偏，何以制之！
现代文：李晟进言说： 赦免李怀光有五个不可：河中距离长安才有三百里路，同州正当两地的要冲。大量派兵便不能够显示信义，派兵少了又不足以防范，李怀光一旦夺取同州，将如何控制他！
English: "There are five reasons why Li Huai Guang cannot be pardoned: Hezhong is only 300 miles away from Chang'an, and there is a legitimate clash between the two places in Tongzhou. Sending a large number of troops will not be able to show loyalty, and sending fewer troops will not be enough to prevent it. Once Li Huai Guang seizes Tongzhou, how will he control it?

古文：一也；今赦怀光，必以晋、绛、慈、隰还之，浑瑊既无所诣，康日知又应迁移，土宇不安，何以奖励，二也；陛下连兵一年，讨除小丑，兵力未穷，遽赦其反逆之罪；今西有吐蕃，北有回纥，南有淮西，皆观我强弱，不谓陛下施德泽，爱黎元，乃谓兵屈于人而自罢耳，必竞起窥觎之心。三也；怀光既赦，则朔方将士皆应叙勋行赏，今府库方虚，赏不满望，是愈激之使叛，四也；既解河中，罢诸道兵，赏典不举，怨言必起，五也。今河中斗米五百，刍藁且尽，墙壁之间，饿殍甚众。
现代文：如今河中一斗粮食值五百钱，喂养牲口的草料将要用尽，房屋之中，饿死的人甚多。
English: Today, a bucket of grain in the river is worth 500 yuan, the grass to feed the livestock is about to be exhausted, and many people are starving to death in their houses.

古文：且其军中大将杀戮略尽，陛下敕诸道围守旬时，彼必有内溃之变，何必养腹心之疾，为他日之悔哉！ 
现代文：而且，李怀光军中的大将几乎被杀光了，只要陛下敕令各道围困他们，守上十天时间，他们必然会发生内部崩溃的变故，何必姑息这一致命的隐患而留下将来的悔恨呢！ 
English: Moreover, the generals in Li Huaiguang's army were almost all killed, and as long as His Majesty ordered everyone to besiege them and keep them for ten days, they would inevitably collapse internally. Why should they tolerate this fatal hidden danger and leave future regrets?

古文：又请发兵二万，自备资粮，独讨怀光。
现代文：李晟又请求派出兵马两万人，自备物资粮食，独自讨伐李怀光。
English: Li Lan also requested that 20,000 soldiers and horses be sent to fight Li Huai Guang alone, and that they should bring their own supplies and grain.

古文：秋，七月，甲午朔，马燧自行营入朝，奏称： 怀光凶逆尤甚，赦之无以令天下，愿更得一月粮，必为陛下平之。 
现代文：秋季，七月，甲午朔，马燧从行营回京朝见，他上奏说： 李怀光凶恶悖逆太甚，赦免了他，无法号令天下。希望再得到一个月的粮食，一定能为陛下将他平定。 
English: In the autumn, in July, on the morning of the first day of the second month, Ma Jun returned to Beijing from the camp to see the imperial court. He made a report saying: Li Huaiguang was too vicious and rebellious, he pardoned him, he could not order the world. I hope to get another month's grain, I will surely be able to pacify him for his majesty.

古文：上许之。
现代文：德宗允许了这一要求。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：陕虢都知兵马使达奚抱晖鸩杀节度使张劝，代总军务，邀求旌节，且阴召李怀光将达奚小俊为援。
现代文：陕虢都兵马使达奚抱晖用毒酒将节度使张劝杀害，自己代理总揽军中事务，希望得到节度使的旌节。而且，他暗中召引李怀光的将领达奚小俊作为应援。
English: The Shaanxi and Fujian troops and horses sent Daju Baojun to persuade and kill the military commander Zhang Zuo with poisoned wine, and he himself acted as the general in charge of the military affairs, hoping to get the military commander's blessing. Moreover, he secretly summoned Li Huaiqing's general Daju Xiaojun as a backup.

古文：上谓李泌曰： 若蒲、陕连衡，则猝不可制。
现代文：德宗对李泌说： 如果蒲、陕联合抗拒朝廷，猝然之间，难以制伏。
English: Dezong said to Li Xiu: If Pu and Shaanxi jointly resist the imperial court, it will suddenly become difficult to subdue.

古文：且抱晖据陕，则水陆之运皆绝矣。
现代文：而且，一旦达奚抱晖占据了陕地，水路和陆路的运输便会阻隔不通了。
English: Moreover, once the container ships occupy Shaanxi, the transportation of waterways and land routes will be blocked.

古文：不得不烦卿一往。 
现代文：朕不能不麻烦你走一趟了。 
English: I can't help but ask you to come.

古文：辛丑，以泌为陕虢都防御水陆运使。
现代文：辛丑，德宗任命李泌为陕虢都防御水陆运使。
English: Unsurprisingly, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Xiu as the envoy for the defense of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：上欲以神策军送泌之官，问 须几何人？ 
现代文：德宗打算让神策军护送李泌就任，问李泌： 需要多少人？ 
English: Dezong planned to have the Shengzhao Army escort Li Xiu into office, and asked Li Xiu: How many people are needed?

古文：对曰： 陕城三面悬绝，攻之未可以岁月下也，臣请以单骑入之。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 陕州城三面绝壁高悬，如果攻打该城，是不知哪年哪月才能攻克的。请让我单人匹马到那里去。 
English: Li Xiu replied: The three walls of Shaanxi City are high. If I attack the city, I don't know what year or month I will be able to conquer it. Please let me go there alone.

古文：上曰： 单骑如何可入？ 
现代文：德宗说： 你单人匹马怎么可以进去？ 
English: Dezong said: How can you go in alone?

古文：对曰： 陕城之人，不贯逆命，此特抱晖为恶耳。
现代文：李泌回答说： 陕州城的百姓，并不习惯违背朝命，这只是达奚抱晖作恶罢了。
English: Li Xiu replied: The people of Shaanxi City are not accustomed to disobeying the orders of the imperial court. This is just a way of doing evil.

古文：若以大兵临之，彼闭壁定矣。
现代文：如果带着许多兵马到那里去，达奚抱晖肯定会闭守营垒。
English: If you go there with a lot of soldiers and horses, you will definitely have to close the camp.

古文：臣今单骑抵其近郊，彼举在兵则非敌，若遣小校来杀臣，未必不更为臣用也。
现代文：现在我单人匹马到陕州近郊，达奚抱晖大规模发兵前来，那是不相匹敌，如果他派遣一个低级军官前来杀我，未必不会反而为我所利用。
English: Now I'm riding alone to the outskirts of Shaanxi Province. It's incomparable. If he sends a low-ranking officer to kill me, he won't necessarily use me instead.

古文：且今河东全军屯安邑，马燧入朝，愿敕燧与臣同辞皆行，使陕人欲加害于臣，则畏河东移军讨之，此亦一势也。 
现代文：而且，现在河东的全部兵马都在安邑屯驻，马燧来到朝廷。希望陛下敕令马燧与我同时向陛下辞别，一起离开长安，使陕虢人打算侵害我时，便害怕河东调动军队讨伐他们，这也算是一种声势吧。 
English: Moreover, now all the soldiers and horses of Hedong are stationed in Anyi, and Ma Jun came to the imperial court. I hope that Your Majesty will order Ma Jun and I to bid farewell to Your Majesty at the same time and leave Chang'an together, so that when the Shaanxi people plan to infringe on me, they will be afraid of Hedong mobilizing troops to fight them, which is also a kind of momentum.

古文：上曰： 虽然，朕方大用卿，宁失陕州，不可失卿，当更使他人往耳。 
现代文：德宗说： 话虽这么讲，但朕正要重用你，宁可失去陕州，不能失去你。朕自当再让其他人前往算了。 
English: Dezong said, "Having said that, I'm going to use you again. I'd rather lose Shaanxi than lose you. I'll let other people go."

古文：对曰： 他人必不能入。
现代文：李泌回答说： 其他人必定难以进入陕州。
English: Li Jie replied: It must be difficult for others to enter Shaanxi.

古文：今事变之初，众心未定，故可出其不意，夺其奸谋。
现代文：现在是事变的初期，众人心意尚未安定，所以我能够出其不意，威慑他们的邪恶阴谋。
English: It's early days, and people's minds are still unsettled, so I can surprise them and deter their evil plots.

古文：他人犹豫迁延，彼既成谋，则不得前矣。 
现代文：其他人犹豫不决，拖延不前，达奚抱晖有了成算后，那就不能前去了。 
English: Others are hesitant and procrastinate, and once they've made up their minds, they can't move forward.

古文：上许之。
现代文：德宗同意让李泌前往。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：泌见陕州进奏官及将吏在长安者，语之曰： 主上以陕、虢饥，故不授泌节而领运使，欲令督江、淮米以赈之耳。
现代文：李泌见到陕州派来上奏的官员以及正在长安的陕州将领与官吏，对他们说： 皇上因陕州、虢州在闹饥荒，所以不授给我节度使的职务而让我出任水陆运使，打算让我监督江、淮地区的粮运，以便赈济陕虢而已。
English: Li Xiu saw the officials from Shaanxi sent to Shangso, as well as the generals and officials from Shaanxi who were in Chang'an, and said to them: "Because of the famine in Shaanxi and Ganzhou, the emperor did not give me the post of the festival envoy, but let me serve as the land and water transport envoy, intending to let me supervise the grain transportation in the Jiang and Huai regions in order to help Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：陕州行营在夏县，若抱晖可用，当使将之。有功，则赐旌节矣。 
现代文：陕州行营驻扎在夏县，如果达奚抱晖可以任用，自当让他来率领行营，如果立下功劳，便会赐给他节度使的旌节了。 
English: The Shaanxi Expeditionary Force is stationed in Xia County. If Daju Baozhuang can be appointed, he should be allowed to lead the expeditionary force. If he does a good job, he will be awarded the medal of the commander of the expeditionary force.

古文：抱晖觇者驰告之，抱晖稍自安。
现代文：达奚抱晖的探子驰马告诉了达奚抱晖，达奚抱晖稍微有些安心了。
English: The scouts on horseback told him, and he felt a little more at ease.

古文：泌具以语白上曰： 欲使其士卒思米，抱晖思节，必不害臣矣。 
现代文：李泌将此事全告诉了德宗，还说： 要让陕虢士兵想得到粮食，让达奚抱晖想得到节度使的旌节，他就一定不会加害我了。 德宗说： 好！ 
English: Li Xiu told Dezong everything about the matter, and said, "If you want the soldiers in Shaanxi and Fujian to get food, and if you want the soldiers in Dadu and Shandong to get the festival, he will definitely not harm me." Dezong said, "Good!

古文：戊申，泌与马燧俱辞行。
现代文：戊申，李泌与马燧一起向德宗告别。
English: Wushin, Li Xiu and Ma Jun said goodbye to Dezong together.

古文：庚戌，加泌陕虢观察使。
现代文：庚戌，德宗加封李泌为陕虢观察使。
English: Geng Zong, Dezong Jiafeng and Li Xiu were the observation envoys of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：泌出潼关，鄜坊节度使唐朝臣以步骑三千布于关外，曰： 奉密诏送公至陕。 
现代文：李泌出潼关后，坊节度使唐朝臣率领步兵、骑兵三千人分布在关外，他说： 我接到秘密诏令，送你前去陕州。 
English: After Li seceded from Shaoguan, Fang Jiedu ordered Tang's courtier Zang to lead 3,000 infantry and cavalry to disperse outside of Shaoguan. He said, "I have received a secret imperial edict to send you to Shaozhou.

古文：泌曰： 辞日奉进止，以便宜从事。
现代文：李泌说： 刮别皇上时，我已得到圣旨，准许我见机行事。
English: Li Zuo said, "When I was bidding farewell to the emperor, I had already received the imperial edict, allowing me to act at my own discretion.

古文：此一人不可相蹑而来，来则吾不得入陕矣。 
现代文：此次即使是一个人，也不能让他前来跟随着我。如果派人前来，我就不能进入陕州了。 
English: This time, even if it's just one person, I can't let him come and follow me. If I send someone to come, I won't be able to enter Shaanxi.

古文：唐臣以受诏不敢去，泌写宣以却之，因疾驱而前。
现代文：唐朝臣因受有诏命，不敢离开，李泌写了一纸文书，将他打发回去，于是急速策马前行。
English: The Tang courtier did not dare to leave because of the imperial edict, and Li Xiu wrote a document to send him back, so he quickly rode ahead.

古文：抱晖不使将佐出迎，惟侦者相继。
现代文：达奚抱晖不让将佐出来迎接李泌，只是探子不断。
English: Daju did not allow Zengza to come out to meet Li Xiu, but the spies kept coming.

古文：沁宿曲沃，将佐不俟抱晖之命来迎，泌笑曰： 吾事济矣！ 
现代文：李泌在曲沃过夜，不待达奚抱晖下达命令，将佐们便前来迎接。李泌笑着说： 我要办的事情成功了。 
English: Li Xiu spent the night in Quwo. He did not wait for the commander to give the order, and the commander came to meet him. Li Xiu said with a smile: I have succeeded in what I wanted to do.

古文：去城十五里，抱晖亦出谒。
现代文：在李泌距离州城十五里时，达奚抱晖也出来谒见李泌。
English: When Li Xiu was fifteen miles away from the state capital, Daju Baozhu also came out to see Li Xiu.

古文：泌称其摄事保完城隍之功，曰： 军中烦言，不足介意。
现代文：李泌称赞他代理诸事保全城池的功劳说： 军中的闲言碎语，不值得挂在心上。
English: Li Xiu praised him for his role in protecting the city and said: It's not worth worrying about the gossip in the army.

古文：公等职事皆按堵如故。 
现代文：你们的职务都一如既往，不会改变。 
English: Your duties remain the same and will not change.

古文：抱晖出而喜。
现代文：达奚抱晖退出门来，感到很高兴。
English: I'm very happy to be out of the door.

古文：泌既入城视事，宾佐有请屏人白事者。泌曰： 易帅之际，军中烦言，乃其常理，泌到，自妥贴矣，不愿闻也。 
现代文：李泌进城任职后，宾客佐吏中有人请李泌屏退其他人禀告事情，李泌说： 在更换节帅的时刻，军中言多语杂，这乃是通常的情理。我来了，这类事情自然会安定下来，我不希望听你讲这类事情。 
English: After Li Jie took office in the city, some of the guests and officials asked Li Jieping to withdraw from the others to report the matter. Li Jie said: At the time of changing the commander, the military's language is mixed, this is the usual situation. I came, this kind of thing will naturally settle down, I don't want to listen to you talk about such things.

古文：由是反仄者皆自安。泌但索簿书，治粮储。
现代文：第二天，李泌把达奚抱晖叫到住宅中，告诉他说： 我不是因怜惜你才不杀你。
English: The next day, Li Xiu called Daju to the residence and told him: "I didn't not kill you out of pity.

古文：明日，召抱晖至宅，语之曰： 吾非爱汝而不诛，恐自今有危疑之地，朝廷所命将帅皆不能入，故丐汝馀生，汝为我赍版、币祭前使，慎无入关，自择安处，潜来取家，保无它也。 
现代文：我是怕今后有了凶险可虑的地方，朝迁所任命的将帅都进不去，所以才给你留条活路。你为我带着灵牌和奠仪及器物去祭奠前任节度使，小心别再进入潼关，自己去找一个安身处所，暗中前来接走家小，我保你不会发生意外。 
English: I am afraid that there will be dangerous places in the future, and the generals appointed by the imperial resettlement will not be able to enter, so I will leave you a way out. If you go to pay tribute to the former governor for me with a spiritual plaque and a memorial service and utensils, be careful not to enter Shaoguan again, find a safe place for yourself, and secretly come to pick up Jia Xiao, I guarantee you will not have an accident.

古文：泌之辞行也，上籍陕将预于乱者七十五人授泌，使诛之。
现代文：李泌向德宗告别时，德宗将陕州参予作乱的将领七十五人登录成册，交给李泌，让李泌杀了他们。
English: When Li Xiu bade farewell to Dezong, Dezong registered the seventy-five generals from Shaanxi who had participated in the disturbance and handed them over to Li Xiu, who had them killed.

古文：泌既遣抱晖，日中，宣慰使至。
现代文：李泌将达奚抱晖打发走了后，到中午时，宣慰使到了。
English: At noon, after Li Jie had sent Daju away, Xuan You arrived.

古文：泌奏 已遣抱晖，馀不足问。 
现代文：李泌奏报说： 我已经将达奚抱晖打发走了，剩下的人们不值得追查。 
English: "I've already sent away the bad apples, and the rest of the people aren't worth tracking down," the newspaper said.

古文：上复遣中使诣陕，必使诛之。
现代文：德宗再次派遣中使来到陕州，让李泌一定将那些人杀掉。
English: Dezong once again sent an envoy to Shaanxi to make sure that Li Xiu would kill those people.

古文：泌不得已，械兵马使林滔等五人送京帅，恳请赦之。
现代文：李泌没有办法，将兵马使林滔等五人加上铐镣，送往京城，还恳切请求德宗赦免他们。
English: Li Xiu had no choice but to send five soldiers and horses, including Lin Tao, to the capital, together with their shackles. He also earnestly asked Emperor Dezong to pardon them.

古文：诏谪戍天德；岁馀，竟杀之。
现代文：德宗颁诏遣送他们戍守天德军。一年多后，到底还是将他们杀掉了。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict to send them to the German army guarding Tianjin. More than a year later, he still killed them.

古文：而抱晖遂亡命，不知所这。
现代文：然而，达奚抱晖却逃亡在外，不知去向。
English: However, Daju and Bao fled, and their whereabouts are unknown.

古文：达奚小俊引兵至境，闻泌已入陕而还。
现代文：达奚小俊领兵来到陕虢边境，听到李泌已经进入陕州，便回去了。
English: Daju Xiaojun led the troops to the border of Shaanxi and Fujian. When he heard that Li Xiu had entered Shaanxi, he went back home.

古文：壬子，以刘怦为幽州、卢龙节度使。
现代文：壬辰，德宗任命刘怦为幽州、卢龙节度使。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Dezong appointed Liu Ye as the special envoy to Yuzhou and Lulong.

古文：大旱，灞、浐将竭，长安井皆无水。
现代文：旱情严重，灞水、水将要干涸，长安的井中滴水全无。
English: The drought situation is serious, the water will dry up, and there is no dripping water in the wells of Chang'an.

古文：度支奏中外经费才支七旬。
现代文：度支上奏说，朝廷内外的经费只能支撑七十天了。
English: The imperial edict said that the funds inside and outside the imperial court could only support it for seventy days.

