古文：子孝骞嗣，终宁国军节度使、晋康郡王；孝锡终嘉州团练使，赠永国公。益端献王頵，初名仲恪，封大宁郡公，进鄮国公、乐安郡王、嘉王。
现代文：益端献王頵，初名仲恪，封为大宁郡公，进封为国公、乐安郡王、嘉王。
English: He was given the first name of Zhong Ke, and was given the title of Daning County official, and later the title of Guogong, Le'an County official, and Jia Wang.

古文：所历官赐，略与兄颢同。
现代文：他所经历的官赐，大略与其兄颢相同。
English: His rise through the ranks has been much the same as his brother's.

古文：更武胜、山南西、保信、保静、武昌、武安、武宁、镇海、成德、荆南十节度，徙王曹、荆，位至太尉。
现代文：历任武胜、山南西、保信、保静、武昌、武安、武宁、镇海、成德、荆南十节度使，徙任曹王、荆王，官至太尉。
English: Successively served as the 10th grade envoy of Busheng, Shananxi, Baoxin, Baojing, Wuchang, Wu'an, Wu'ning, Zhenhai, Chengde, and Jingnan, and was appointed Cao Wang, Jing Wang, and promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：元祐三年七月薨，年三十三，赠太师、尚书令、荆徐二州牧、魏王，谥端献。
现代文：元三年七月去世，终年三十三岁，追赠太师、尚书令、荆徐二州牧、魏王，谥号端献。
English: He died in July of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of thirty-three, and was posthumously awarded the titles of Taishi, Shang Shuling, Jing Xu, Erzhou Mu and Wei Wang.

古文：徽宗改封益王。
现代文：徽宗时改封为益王。
English: When he became the head of the Huizong sect, he changed his name to Yixing Wang.

古文：頵端重明粹，少好学，长博通群书，工飞白、篆籀。
现代文：頵为人端重明粹，年幼时好学，成年后博通群书，擅长飞白书体、篆砯书体。
English: Zou is a person who attaches great importance to clarity. When he was young, he was eager to learn. When he became an adult, he was well-versed in books. He was good at flying white typefaces and enamel typefaces.

古文：始，璩之入宫也，储位未定者垂三十年，中外颇以为疑。
现代文：对待宫僚像宾客一样，岁满应当离任的，他都奏请留用，时间长的达十余年。非常喜爱医书，亲手写成《普惠集效方》一书，并且储积药材救治病人。
English: He treated his courtiers like guests. When they reached the age of retirement, he asked them to stay on for more than ten years. He was very fond of medical books. He wrote the book "Primary Benefit Collection Method" with his own hands, and stored medicinal materials to treat patients.

古文：孝宗既立，天性友爱，璩入朝，屡召宴内殿，呼以官，不名也，赐予无算。子四人：师淳历忠州团练使、永州防御使，师瀹、师沦、师路并补武翼大夫。
现代文：有九个儿子：孝哲，任右骁卫将军，早亡；孝奕，任彰化军节度观察留后，追赠司空、平原郡王；孝参，任奉国军节度使，改任宁武节度使、武胜节度使，封为豫章郡王；孝永，任邢州观察使，赠司空、广陵郡王；孝诒、孝骘、孝悦、孝愿，都官至节度使。
English: They had nine sons: Xiao Zhe, who was appointed as the General of the Right Division of the National Guard and died at an early age; Xiao Yi, who was appointed as the Changhua Army to observe the festival and later presented the gifts of Siku and the King of Pingyuan County; Xiao Zhan, who was appointed as the Festival Envoy of the National Army and later became the Ningwu Festival Envoy and the Wusheng Festival Envoy and was given the title of the King of Yuzhang County; Xiao Yong, who was appointed as the Bozhou Observation Envoy and presented the gifts of Siku and the King of Guangling County; Xiaoju,

古文：孙希楙，特补保义郎。庄文太子讳愭，孝宗嫡长子也，母郭皇后。
现代文：庄文太子名愭，是孝宗的嫡亲长子，母亲是郭皇后。
English: Prince Mengqi of Zhuangwen was the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Xiaozong, and his mother was Empress Guo.

古文：初名愉，补右内率府副率，寻赐名愭，除右监门卫大将军、荣州刺史。
现代文：开始名愉，补官任右内率府副率，不久赐名愭，任命为右监门卫大将军、荣州刺史。
English: At the beginning of his rise to fame, he was appointed to the post of vice-head of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and was soon promoted to the post of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, appointed to the post of the General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and the post of the Vice-head of the Inner Palace Guards in Rongzhou.

古文：孝宗为皇子时，愭拜蕲州防御使。
现代文：孝宗做皇子时，愭任蕲州防御使。
English: When he was a prince, Takamune served as the defense minister of Banzhou.

古文：及受禅，除少保、永兴军节度使，封邓王。
现代文：到孝宗受禅即位后，任愭为少保、永兴军节度使，封为邓王。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was appointed as the Minor Protector of the Yongxing Army, and was given the title of King Deng.

古文：故事皇子出阁，封王，兼两镇，然后加司空。
现代文：惯例：皇子出宫，封为王，兼任两镇节度使，然后加任司空。
English: The usual practice: the prince leaves the palace, is crowned king, concurrently serves as the two towns' festival envoy, and then takes on the additional post of tsuru.

古文：愭自防御使躐拜少保，章异数也。
现代文：愭从防御使跳级升任少保，典章变化如此。
English: From defense to promotion to junior guard, the regulations have changed.

古文：乾道元年，立为皇太子，册广国夫人钱氏为妃。
现代文：乾道元年，立为皇太子，册封广国夫人钱氏为太子妃。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he became crown prince, and his wife Qian, the wife of Guangguo, became the princess.

古文：诏增东宫从卫，太子谦让。
现代文：诏令增加东宫侍卫人员，太子谦让。
English: The Imperial edict increased the number of attendants and guards at the East Palace, and the prince relented.

古文：及奏捐月给杂物，从之。
现代文：太子上奏捐献每月应领杂物，皇帝表示同意。
English: The prince proposed to donate his monthly allowance of sundries, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三年秋，太子病暍，医误投药，病剧。
现代文：乾道三年秋，太子生病，医生误用药，病情加剧。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the dry road, the prince fell ill, the doctor misused the medicine, and the condition worsened.

古文：上皇与帝亲视疾，为赦天下。
现代文：太上皇与皇帝亲自探望他的病情，为此大赦天下。
English: The emperor and empress dowager personally visited him to check on his condition, and he was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：越三日薨，年二十四，谥庄文。
现代文：过三天后去世，终年二十四岁，谥号庄文。
English: He died three days later, at the age of twenty-four, with the nickname Zhuangwen.

古文：太子贤厚，上皇与帝皆爱之。
现代文：太子贤惠厚道，太上皇与皇帝都喜欢他。
English: Prince Xianhui is kind, and both the Retired Emperor and the Emperor like him.

古文：帝从礼官议服期，以日易月；文武百官服衰，服一日而除；东宫臣僚齐衰三月，临七日而除。
现代文：皇帝听从礼官关于太子丧服的建议，以日计月；文武百官服衰服，服一天就除服；东宫臣僚服齐衰三个月，到七天后除服。
English: The emperor listened to the advice of the etiquette officer on the funeral attire of the prince and measured the month by day; the civil and military attire of hundreds of officials wore out and was removed on the same day; the East Palace minister's attire wore out for three months and was removed seven days later.

古文：比葬，帝再至东宫，命宰臣奉谥册，大小祥皆以执政官行礼。
现代文：到下葬时，皇帝又到东宫，命令大臣呈奉谥册，大小礼仪都以执政官丧礼对待。
English: When it came time for the funeral, the emperor went to the East Palace and ordered the minister to present a copy of the imperial edict. All ceremonies, large and small, were treated as the funeral rites of a consul.

古文：子挺，钱氏所生也，甫晬，除福州观察使，封荣国公，乾道九年卒，赠武当军节度使，追封豫国公。
现代文：太子的儿子名挺，钱氏所生，成年后，授任福州观察使，封为荣国公。乾道九年去世，追赠武当军节度使，追封为豫国公。
English: The prince's son, named Ting, was born to the Qian family. When he came of age, he was awarded the post of Fuzhou Observation Envoy and named Rongguo. When he died nine years after his birth, he was posthumously awarded the post of Wudang Army Festival Envoy and posthumously named Yu Guo.

古文：宁宗时，命宗子希璂为太子后。
现代文：宁宗时，命令宗子希王基过继为太子后代。
English: At the time of Ning Zong, he ordered his son Wang Ji to succeed him as the prince's descendant.

古文：希璂，艺祖九世孙也，赐名搢，补右千牛卫将军，置教授于府。
现代文：希王基是艺祖九世孙，赐名扌晋，补任右千牛卫将军，在主府里设置教授。
English: Xi Wangji is the ninth-generation grandson of the founder of the arts. He was given the name Yu Jin, and was appointed to the post of general of the Right Qian Niu Wei. He was also appointed as a professor in the main office.

古文：开禧二年，除忠州防御使。
现代文：开禧三年，任忠州防御使。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the Defense Minister of Chungju.

古文：寻用天禧故事，宰辅大臣并兼师傅、宾客，太子出居东宫，更名询。嘉定十三年薨，年二十九，谥景献。
现代文：嘉定八年，更名为思正。
English: In the eighth year of Jiading, it was renamed Sizheng.

古文：镇王竑，希瞿之子也。
现代文：镇王竑，是希瞿的儿子。
English: Zhenwang Yao, is the son of Xi Yao.

古文：初，沂靖惠王薨，无嗣，以竑为之后，赐名均，寻改赐名贵和。
现代文：当初，沂靖惠王去世，没有后代，以竑作为后代，赐名均，不久改赐名为贵和。
English: At first, when King Su Jing Hui died, he had no descendants, so he gave his name to his descendants, and soon changed his name to Gui He.

古文：太子询薨，乃立贵和为皇子，赐名竑，授宁武军节度使，封祁国公。
现代文：太子绚去世，于是立贵和为皇子，赐名竑，授任宁武军节度使，封为祁国公。
English: After the death of Prince Hua, Emperor Gaozong elevated Guihe to the status of prince, bestowed him with the title of prince, appointed him as the Ningwu army's envoy to the festival, and made him the prince of the State of Qi.

古文：嘉定十五年五月，加检校少保，封济国公。
现代文：嘉定十五年五月，加官检校少保，封为济国公。
English: In May of the fifteenth year of Jiading, he was promoted to the rank of inspector of schools and junior guard, and was given the title of prince of Jiguo.

古文：十七年六月辛未，竑生子，诏告天地、宗庙、社稷、宫观。
现代文：嘉定十七年六月辛未日，竑生下儿子，诏告天地、宗庙、社稷、宫观。
English: On the last day of June in the seventeenth year of Jiading, his second son was born, heralding heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, the community, and the imperial court.

古文：八月祭未，赐竑子名铨，授左千牛卫大将军。
现代文：八月辛未日，赐竑的儿子名为铨，授任左千牛卫大将军。
English: On the last day of August, his son, named Zou, was promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：丁亥，铨薨，赠复州防御使，追封永宁侯。
现代文：丁亥日，铨去世，赠复州防御使，追封为永宁侯。
English: On the day of Dinghai, Zou died, and was given the title of Fuzhou Defense Envoy, and was posthumously awarded the title of Yongning Hou.

古文：竑上表称谢。
现代文：竑上表称谢。
English: A thank you card is on the table.

古文：竑好鼓琴，丞相史弥远买美人善琴者，纳诸御，而厚廪其家，使美人目闲竑，动息必以告。
现代文：竑喜欢弹琴，丞相史弥远买了一个擅长弹琴的美女，送给他，而厚待美女家里，让美女监视竑，一举一动都告诉弥远。
English: Yao liked to play the piano, and the prime minister, Shi Yanyuan, bought a beautiful woman who was good at playing the piano and gave it to him, and treated the beautiful woman well at home, letting the beautiful woman monitor Yao and tell Yao every move.

古文：美人知书慧黠，竑嬖之。
现代文：美女知书又狡猾，竑喜欢她。
English: Beauty is cunning, and the grasshopper loves her.

古文：宫壁有舆地图，竑指琼厓曰： 吾他日得志，置史弥远于此。 又尝呼弥远为 新恩 。以他日非新州则恩州也。
现代文：宫里墙壁上有一张地图，竑指着琼崖州说： 我日后如得志，就把史弥远安置到这里。 又曾经称呼弥远为 新恩 ，因为日后不把他流放到新州就流放到恩州。
English: There was a map on the wall of the palace, and the toad pointed to Qiong Yaozhou and said, "In the future, if I get my wish, I will place Shi Yanyuan here," and he once called Shi Yanyuan Xin En, because in the future, if he was not exiled to Xin Zhou, he would be exiled to En Zhou.

古文：弥远闻之，尝因七月七日进乞巧奇玩以觇之，竑乘酒碎于地。
现代文：弥远听说这些，曾经趁七月七日进奉奇巧珍玩来试探竑，竑乘着酒兴把这些东西都摔碎在地上。
English: I heard about this from afar, and I took advantage of the 7th of July to go to Fongjing to test the urns, and I took advantage of the wine to smash these things to the ground.

古文：弥远大惧，日夕思以处竑，而竑不知也。
现代文：史弥远非常恐惧，日夜考虑怎么处置竑，而竑却不知道这些事。
English: Shi Mianyuan was very afraid, thinking day and night about what to do with Yao, but Yao did not know these things.

古文：时沂王犹未有后，方选宗室希瓐子昀继之。
现代文：当时沂王还没有后代，正选择宗室希王卢的儿子昀为继子。
English: At that time, King Yao did not have any descendants yet, and he was choosing the son of his ancestress, King He Lu, as his stepson.

古文：一日，弥远为其父饭僧净慈寺，独与国子学录郑清之登惠日阁，屏人语曰： 皇子不堪负荷，闻后沂邸者甚贤，今欲择讲官，君其善训迪之。
现代文：一天，史弥远替他的父亲到净慈寺送斋饭，跟国子学录郑清之登上惠日阁，屏去众人说： 皇子不堪重任，听说沂王之子非常贤明，现在想选择讲官，请你善为训导他。
English: One day, Shi Miyan went to the Jingsi Temple to deliver a meal for his father, and boarded the Hui Sun Pavilion with the son of the country, the scholar Zheng Qing. He said to the crowd: "The prince cannot bear the heavy responsibility. I heard that the son of the king of Qi is very wise. Now he wants to choose a lecturer. Please be a good teacher to him."

古文：事成，弥远之坐即君坐也。然言出于弥远之口，入于君之耳，若一语泄者，吾与君皆族矣。 清之拱手曰： 不敢。 乃以清之兼魏忠宪王府教授。
现代文：事成后，我的官位就是你的官位了，但是此话出自我的口，入于你的耳，如果有一点泄露的话，我与你都将被族诛啊。 郑清之拱手作揖说 ：不敢。 于是任命郑清之兼任魏忠宪王府教授。
English: After the event, my official position is your official position, but these words came out of my mouth and into your ears, if there is any leakage, I and you will both be ostracized by the tribe. Zheng Qingzhi made a gesture and said, "Don't you dare." He then appointed Zheng Qingzhi as a professor at the Wei Zhongxian Wangfu.

古文：清之日教昀为文，又购高宗书俾习焉。
现代文：郑清之每天教昀写文章，又买来高宗的书让他学习。
English: Zheng Qingzhi teaches him to write articles every day, and buys Gaozong's books for him to study.

古文：清之上谒弥远，即以昀诗文翰墨以示，弥远誉之不容口。
现代文：郑清之谒见史弥远，就把昀所作的诗文翰墨给他看，史弥远赞不绝口。
English: When Zheng Qing's concubine saw Shi Yidang, she showed him the poems and calligraphy she had done. Shi Yidang was full of praise.

古文：弥远尝问清之： 吾闻其贤已熟，大要竟何如？ 清之曰： 其人之贤，更仆不能数，然一言以断之曰：不凡。 弥远颔之再三，策立之意益坚。
现代文：史弥远曾经问郑清之说： 我听说他已很贤明，大概究竟怎么样？ 郑清之说： 他的贤明，我不能一一列举，然而一言以蔽之说：不凡。 史弥远再三点头，策立他的志向更加坚定。
English: Shi Miyan once asked Zheng Qingzhi, "I heard that he is already very wise, what about him?" Zheng Qingzhi said, "I can't list all of his wisdom, but in a nutshell, it's extraordinary." Shi Miyan nodded again and again, and his ambition became more determined.

古文：清之始以小官兼教授，其后累迁，兼如故。
现代文：郑清之当初以小官兼任教授，后来不断升迁，依旧兼任教授。
English: At the beginning, Zheng Qingzhi was a minor official who also served as a professor. Later, he was constantly promoted and still served as a professor.

古文：宁宗崩，弥远始遣清之往，告昀以将立之之意。
现代文：宁宗去世，史弥远开始派遣郑清之前往，告诉昀打算立他的意思。
English: After Ningzong's death, Shi Miyuan began to send Zheng Qing ahead of him, telling Zou that he intended to establish his will.

古文：再三言之，昀默然不应。
现代文：弥远再三诉说，昀默然不答。
English: Ya Yuan repeatedly appealed, but Yao remained silent.

古文：最后清之乃言曰： 丞相以清之从游之久，故使布腹心于足下。
现代文：最后郑清之说： 丞相因为我跟他交游较久，所以把我当作心腹布置在你身边。
English: In the end, Zheng Qingzhi said: "Mr. Prime Minister, because I have been friends with him for a long time, I put myself at your side as a confidant.

古文：今足下不答一语，则清之将何以复命于丞相？ 昀始拱手徐答曰： 绍兴老母在。 清之以告弥远，益相与叹其不凡。
现代文：现在你一句也不回答，则清之怎么向丞相复命呢？ 昀才拱手慢慢回答说 ：绍兴老母亲还在。 清之把此话告诉给史弥远，两人越发叹其不凡。
English: Now you don't answer a word, so how can Qingzhi give his life back to the prime minister? Zhai Cai slowly replied: "Shaoxing's old mother is still alive." Qingzhi told this to Shi Miyuan, and the two of them sighed more and more.

古文：竑跂足以需宣召，久而不至。
现代文：竑翘首等待宣召，很久使者未到。
English: He waited expectantly for the summons, but the messenger did not arrive for a long time.

古文：弥远在禁中，遣快行宣皇子，令之曰： 今所宣是沂靖惠王府皇子，非万岁巷皇子，苟误，则汝曹皆处斩。 竑不能自己，属目墙壁间，见快行过其府而不入，疑焉。
现代文：弥远在后宫中，派遣人骑快马宣召皇子，命令他们说 ：现在所宣召的是沂靖惠王府皇子，不是万岁巷的皇子，如果误宣，则你们都将被处斩。 竑不能自已，在墙壁间窥视，看见使者经过自己的王府而不进来，产生怀疑。
English: Far away in the harem, they sent men on fast horses to summon the prince and ordered them to say, "What is being summoned now is the prince of the palace, not the prince of the alley, and if you misdeclare, you will all be beheaded.  Unable to control himself, he peered between the walls, and when he saw the messenger pass his palace without entering, he became suspicious.

古文：己而拥一人径过，天已暝，不知其为谁，甚惑。
现代文：不久看见使者簇拥着一个人径自走过，天已黑，不知那个人是谁，甚感疑惑。
English: Soon he saw the emissaries surrounding a man who was walking past on his own. It was already dark, and he did not know who the man was. He was very suspicious.

古文：昀既至，弥远引入柩前，举哀毕，然后召竑。
现代文：昀到后，史弥远引他到灵柩前，行哀礼已毕，然后召竑。
English: After the coffin arrived, Shi Miyan led him to the coffin, after the mourning ceremony, and then summoned the coffin.

古文：竑闻命亟赴，至则每过宫门，禁卫拒其从者。
现代文：竑闻命急忙入宫，每到一座宫门，禁卫兵就拦拒他的侍从。
English: He hurried into the palace, and every time he reached a palace gate, the guards stopped his attendants.

古文：弥远亦引入柩前，举哀毕，引出帷，殿帅夏震守之。
现代文：史弥远也把他引到灵柩前，行哀礼已毕，引出灵帷，殿上元帅夏震守住他。
English: Shi Miyan also led him to the coffin. The funeral service was over, the funeral curtain was drawn, and His Imperial Highness Marshal Xia Zhen guarded him.

古文：既而召百官立班听遗制，则引竑仍就旧班，竑愕然曰： 今日之事，我岂当仍在此班？ 震绐之曰： 未宣制以前当在此，宣制后乃即位耳。 竑以为然。
现代文：不久召百官立班听遗诏，把竑仍然引到旧日的班次，竑愕然说： 今天的事，我怎能仍在这个班次？ 夏震骗他说 ：没有宣读遗诏前应当在此位，宣读诏令后再即位。 竑认为正确。
English: Soon after, he summoned a squadron of a hundred officials to listen to the imperial edict, but they still led him back to the old squadron, and he said in dismay, "How can I still be in this squadron after today's events?" Xia Zhen lied to him and said, "You should be here before the imperial edict is read, and ascend the throne after the imperial edict is read." He thought this was correct.

古文：未几，遥见烛影中一人已在御坐，宣制毕，阁门赞呼，百官拜舞，贺新皇帝即位。
现代文：不久，遥见烛影中一个人已坐在御座，宣读诏令后，全宫赞呼，百官拜舞，祝贺新皇帝即位。
English: Soon, a person in the distant candlelight was sitting on the throne. After the imperial edict was read, the whole palace applauded, officials danced, and congratulated the new emperor on his enthronement.

古文：竑不肯拜，震捽其首下拜。
现代文：竑不肯下拜，夏震按着他的头下拜。
English: Zou refused to bow down, and Xia Zhen bowed down with his head.

古文：皇后矫遗诏：竑开府仪同三司，进封济阳郡王，判宁国府。
现代文：皇后矫制遗诏：竑开府仪同三司，进封为济阳郡王，判宁国府。
English: In her will, Empress Dowager Cixi decreed that the imperial residences of Jiaokaifu and Sanji should be merged, and that Jinfeng should become the county seat of Jiyang, and that Janning should become the national capital.

古文：帝因加竑少保，进封济王。
现代文：皇帝于是加竑少保，进封为济王。
English: As a result, the emperor promoted Gao Shao Bao to the position of Jiefang.

古文：九月丁丑，以竑充醴泉观使，令就赐第。
现代文：九月丁丑日，任命竑为醴泉观使，令他到赐给的宅第。
English: On the day of Dingwu in September, he appointed Zou as Zouquan observation envoy and ordered him to go to the house he had been given.

古文：宝庆元年正月庚午，湖州人潘壬与其弟丙谋立竑，竑闻变匿水窦中，壬等得之，拥至州治，以黄袍加身。
现代文：宝庆元年正月庚午日，湖州人潘壬与他的弟弟潘丙图谋立竑，竑听说事变后藏在水坊中，潘壬等找到他，拥到州治，把黄袍加在他身上。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of Baoqing in the first year of the year, the Huzhou people Pan Ren and his brother Pan Ping tried to establish a raft. After hearing about the incident, the raft was hidden in the watering place. Pan Ren and others found him, hugged him to the state, and put the yellow robe on him.

古文：竑号泣不从，不获已，与之约曰： 汝能勿伤太后、官家乎？ 众许诺。
现代文：竑号哭不从，不得已，与他们相约说 ：你们能不伤害太后、皇帝吗？ 众人答应。
English: Yao Xiang could not help crying, and as a last resort, he made a deal with them, saying, "Can you not harm the Empress Dowager and the Emperor?" All of them agreed.

古文：遂发军资库金帛、会子犒军，命守臣谢周卿率官属入贺，伪为李全榜揭于门，数弥远废立罪，云： 今领精兵二十万，水陆进讨。 比明视之，皆太湖渔人及巡尉兵卒，不满百人耳。
现代文：于是取出军资库的金帛和纸币犒劳军队，命守臣谢周卿率领官员入贺，假托李全在城门张榜，历数史弥远废立皇帝之罪，说 ：现在领精兵二十万，水陆进讨。 到天明时一看，是些太湖渔民以及巡尉兵卒，一共不满百人。
English: Therefore, he took out the gold ingots and paper money from the military treasury to reward the hard-working troops, and the life-guarding minister Xie Zhouqing led the officials into the celebration, and the fake gifts were all posted at the city gate, and the sin of abolishing the emperor was recorded in history, saying: Now there are two hundred thousand elite soldiers, and they are advancing by land and water.

古文：竑知其谋不成，率州兵讨之。
现代文：竑知道此谋不会成功，率领州兵讨伐他们。
English: Knowing that this plan would not succeed, he led the National Guard to fight them.

古文：遣王元春告于朝，弥远命殿司将彭任讨之，至则事平。
现代文：派遣王元春告诉给朝廷，史弥远命令殿司将彭任前来讨伐，彭任的部队到时事态已平息。
English: Wang Yuanchun was dispatched to tell the imperial court that Shi Yiyuan had ordered the palace secretary to send Peng Ren to fight, and that Peng Ren's troops had arrived and the situation had calmed down.

古文：弥远令客秦天锡托召医治竑疾，竑本无疾。
现代文：史弥远令门客秦天锡召来医生给竑治病，竑本来没有病。
English: Shi Miyuan ordered his protégé Qin Tianxi to summon a doctor to treat him, but he was not ill.

古文：丙戌，天锡诣竑，谕旨逼竑缢于州治。
现代文：丙戌日，天锡见竑，宣谕圣旨逼竑在州治自缢。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, Tianxi met the emperor and proclaimed the holy will to force the emperor to rule himself in the state.

古文：帝辍朝，赙银绢各一千、会子万贯，赠少师、保静镇潼军节度使。
现代文：皇帝停朝，赠送白银千两，绢布千匹，钱币万贯作为丧资，赠少师、保静镇潼军节度使。
English: The emperor stopped the dynasty, presented a thousand taels of silver, a thousand pieces of cloth, and a million yuan of coins as the lost capital, and presented a small division, a calming force, and a military festival.

古文：给事中盛章、权直舍人院王既一再缴奏，诏从之。
现代文：给事中盛章、权直舍人院王暨一再上奏要求，诏令依从此议。
English: The Imperial Rescript was issued in accordance with the Emperor's repeated request for a grand medal, the Emperor's surrender of power and authority, and the Imperial Rescript.

古文：右正言李知孝累奏，追夺王爵，降封巴陵县公。
现代文：右正言李知孝多次上奏，追夺竑的王爵，降封为巴陵县公。
English: The Right Upright Upright Li Chih-hiao was promoted many times, and he was reduced to the title of the Prince of Baling County.

古文：于是在廷之臣真德秀、魏了翁、洪咨夔、胡梦昱等每以竑为言，弥远辄恶而斥远之。
现代文：于是朝廷大臣真德秀、魏了翁、洪咨夔、胡梦昱等人常常为竑事奏言，弥远都恶恨而斥逐他们。
English: As a result, imperial ministers such as Zhen Dexiu, Wei Liowong, Hong Zhiping, and Hu Mengtao often made speeches on trivial matters, and they were hated and expelled from far and wide.

古文：端平元年，诏复官爵。
现代文：端平元年，诏令追复竑的官爵。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, the imperial edict was issued to restore the official title.

古文：妻吴氏为比丘尼，赐惠净法空大师，月给钵钱百贯。
现代文：其妻吴氏做了比丘尼，赐号为惠净法空太师，每月供给钵钱百贯。
English: His wife, Ms. Wu, became a bhikkhuni and was given the title of Hui Ching Law and Space Grand Master, and was provided with a monthly stipend of 100 yuan.

古文：景定五年，度宗降诏，追复元赠节度使。
现代文：景定五年，度宗下诏，追复原来赠的节度使。
English: In the fifth year of Jingding, Duzong issued an edict to recover the original gift of the festival envoy.

古文：德祐元年，提领户部财用兼修国史常楙请立竑后，试礼部侍郎兼中书舍人王应麟请更封大国，表墓锡谥，命大宗正司议选择立后，迎善气，销恶运，莫先于此。
现代文：德元年，提领户部财用兼修国史常杼木请求立竑的后代，试礼部侍郎兼中书舍人王应麟请改封大国，立墓表赐谥号，命大宗正司商议选择立后，为国家迎接善气，消除恶运，以此为先。
English: In the first year of the 20th century, Wang Yinglin, the head of the Household Department of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of National History, requested the descendants of the deceased to erect a coffin. Wang Yinglin, the attendant of the Ceremonies Department and the person in charge of the middle school, requested that the deceased's name be changed to a great country, a tombstone be erected, and a posthumous name be bestowed. He also ordered Daizong Zhengji to discuss the choice of a successor, so as to welcome the good fortune and eliminate the bad luck for the country.

古文：下礼部议，赠太师、尚书令，依旧节度使，升封镇王，谥昭肃。
现代文：下礼部计议，赠太师、尚书令，依旧赠节度使，升封为镇王，谥号为昭肃。
English: According to the recommendation of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Taishi and Shang Shuling were bestowed, and Setsudo-so was still bestowed, and he was elevated to the position of Zhenwang, and his posthumous name was Shoshu.

古文：以田万亩赐其家，遣应麟致祭。
现代文：赐给他家良田万亩，派遣应麟前去祭祀。
English: He gave his family 10,000 mu of good farmland, and sent Yinglin to go to the sacrifice.

