古文：李舟弟檐生嵩山客邓甲苏闰利州李录事昝老冯但陆绍郑翬张垩子选仙场狗仙山李黄
现代文：李舟弟檐生嵩山客邓甲苏闰利州李录事昝老冯但陆绍郑翬张垩子选仙场狗仙山李黄
English: Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother Li Zhouzhong's younger brother

古文：李舟弟
现代文：李舟弟
English: Li Zhubiao

古文：李舟之弟患风，或说蛇酒可疗，乃求黑蛇。
现代文：李舟的弟弟得了头风病，有人说用蛇泡酒喝能治疗。
English: Li Zhou's younger brother fell ill with a head cold. Some people said that drinking snake wine could cure him.

古文：生覆瓮中，加之曲蘖。
现代文：因此去捉来黑蛇，活着封在坛子里，坛中加进酒母，好几天，蛇的叫声也没停。
English: So he went to catch a black snake, sealed it alive in a jar, and added mother liquor to the jar. For several days, the snake's cries did not stop.

古文：数日，蛇声不绝，及熟，香气酷烈，引满而饮。须臾，悉化为水，唯毛发存之。
现代文：等到酒酿熟了，香气极浓烈，舀出一碗酒喝，不一会，人就全化成水，只有毛发还在。
English: Wait until the wine is ripe, the aroma is very strong, pour out a bowl of wine to drink, and soon, the person is completely transformed into water, only the hair is still there.

古文：檐生
现代文：檐生
English: 生

古文：昔有书生，路逢小蛇，因而收养，数月渐大。
现代文：从前有个书生，路上遇到一条小蛇，因而收养起来，几个月后渐渐长大。
English: Once upon a time, there was a student who encountered a small snake on the road, so he adopted it, and after a few months it gradually grew up.

古文：书生每自檐之，号曰檐生。其后不可檐负，放之范县东大泽中。
现代文：书生常常亲自遮盖着它，就称呼蛇叫： 檐生 ，那以后遮盖不住了，就把蛇放到范县东面的大泽之中去。
English: The scholar often covered it himself and called the snake "twin," but when he could no longer cover it, he placed the snake in the middle of the Osawa River in the eastern part of Fan County.

古文：四十余年，其蛇如覆舟，号为神蟒，人往于泽中者，必被吞食。
现代文：四十多年以后，那条蛇长得象倒过来的船一样，被人称为神蟒，凡是经过大泽的人，定会被蛇吞吃。
English: More than forty years later, that snake looks like an upturned boat, and people call it a god. Anyone who passes through Osawa is sure to be swallowed by the snake.

古文：书生时以老迈，途经此泽畔，人谓曰： 中有大蛇食人，君宜无往。 
现代文：书生这时已年迈，走路经过这个大泽的附近，有人对他说： 泽中有条大蟒蛇吃人，你不应该去。 
English: The student, now elderly, was walking through the vicinity of the large pond when someone said to him, "There's a large python in the pond that eats people. You shouldn't go there."

古文：时盛冬寒甚，书生谓冬月蛇藏，无此理，遂过大泽。
现代文：当时正是隆冬季节，天很冷，书生认为冬月蛇都冬眠，没有这个道理。
English: At that time, it was the midwinter season, and it was very cold. The students thought that all snakes hibernate in winter, but this was not true.

古文：行二十里余，忽有蛇逐，书生尚识其形色，遥谓之曰： 尔非我檐生乎？ 
现代文：就穿过大泽，走了二十多里，忽然有蛇来追赶，书生还认识那条蛇的样子和颜色，远远地对蛇说： 你不是我的檐生吗？ 
English: He passed through Osawa, walked more than twenty miles, and suddenly a snake came chasing him. The student recognized the snake's appearance and color, and said to the snake from a distance, "Aren't you my twin?"

古文：蛇便低头，良久方去。
现代文：蛇就低下头，很久才离开。
English: The snake lowered its head and left after a long time.

古文：回至范县，县令问其见蛇不死，以为异，系之狱中，断刑当死。
现代文：回到范县。县令听说书生见到了蛇却没有死，认为很怪异，就把书生押到监狱里，定的刑罚是死罪。
English: Back in Fan County, when the county magistrate heard that the student had seen a snake but did not die, he thought it was very strange and sent the student to prison. The punishment was death.

古文：书生私忿曰： 檐生，养汝翻令我死，不亦剧哉！ 
现代文：书生私下忿恨地说： 檐生，养活了你却反而让我死，不也太过份了吗？ 
English: Privately, the student said angrily: "Son, you have fed me and let me die. Isn't that too much?

古文：其夜，蛇遂攻陷一县为湖，独狱不陷，书生获免。
现代文：那天夜里，蛇就把整个县城陷为湖泊，只有监狱没有陷落，书生就免了一死。
English: That night, the snake turned the entire county seat into a lake. Only the prison did not fall, and Shousheng was spared death.

古文：天宝末，独孤暹者，其舅为范令。三月三日，与家人于湖中泛舟，无故覆没，家人几死者数四也。
现代文：天宝末年，有个叫独孤暹的人，他的舅舅就是范县令，三月三日这一天，和家里人在湖上划船玩，无缘无故地船就翻了，家中有好几个人好险没被淹死。
English: At the end of the Tianbao era, there was a man named Duolongsi, whose uncle was Fan Xianling. On March 3, he was boating with his family on the lake, but the boat overturned for no reason. Several people in the family were drowned.

古文：嵩山客
现代文：嵩山客
English: Songshan guest

古文：元和初，嵩山有五六客，皆寄山习业者也。
现代文：元和初年，嵩山上有五六个外地人，都是寄住在山上学艺的人。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, there were five or six foreigners in Songshan, all of whom stayed in the mountain to study art.

古文：初秋，避热于二帝塔下。日晚，于塔下见一大蛇长数丈，蟠绕塔心，去地十数丈。
现代文：初秋的一天，他们在二帝塔下避暑，天晚了，从塔下看见了一条长几丈的大蛇，蟠踞缠绕在塔心，离地有十几丈，大家都惊骇地观看着。
English: One day in early autumn, they were taking a summer break under the Second Emperor's Tower. Late in the day, they saw from under the tower a large snake several meters long. The cocoon was wrapped around the center of the tower, more than ten meters above the ground, and everyone watched in horror.

古文：众骇而观之，一客曰： 可充脯食之厨。 
现代文：有一个客人说： 这条蛇可以做成干肉吃。 
English: One guest said: 'This snake can be made into dried meat and eaten.

古文：咸和之，中一客善射。
现代文：其余的人全都赞同，其中一个客人善于射箭。
English: The others all agree, one of the guests is good at archery.

古文：或曰： 大者或龙神，杀之恐为祸也。
现代文：有一个人说： 蛇长得大有的就是龙蛇，杀了它恐怕是件祸事。
English: One person said, "The largest snake is the dragon snake. It would be a disaster to kill it."

古文：昼脯之膳，岂在此乎？不如勿为。 
现代文：要吃干肉，怎么偏用这条大蛇呢？不如不杀蛇。 
English: If you want to eat dried meat, why use this big snake? It's better not to kill the snake.

古文：诸客决议，不可复止，善射发一箭，便中，再箭，蛇蟠解坠地，众共杀之。
现代文：大家已经决定了，不能再制止了。善于射箭的人射了一箭，就射中了，再射一箭，蛇就伸直坠落在地上，大家一起上去杀了蛇。
English: The decision had been made, and there was no stopping it. The skilled archer shot one arrow and hit it, and then shot another, and the snake fell straight to the ground. Everyone went up and killed the snake together.

古文：诸客各务庖事，操刀剸割者，或有入寺求柴炭盐酤者。
现代文：各位客人，各干各的厨房活，拿刀砍的割的，有的人到寺里去要点木炭、盐和酒。
English: Dear guests, each of you does his own kitchen work, cutting with a knife, and some go to the temple to ask for charcoal, salt and wine.

古文：其劝不取者，色不乐，遂辞而归。
现代文：那个劝大家不要伤害大蛇的人，脸色很不高兴，就辞别大家回住处去。
English: The person who was advising everyone not to hurt the snake looked very unhappy and left everyone to go back to their homes.

古文：数人皆震死于塔下，有先归者，路亦死。
现代文：他离开寺几里路，这时已阴天了，天上忽然响起雷声，其中也有几个回住处的，还有几个客人仍在塔下。
English: By the time he left Terakiri-ro, it was already cloudy, and thunder suddenly sounded in the sky. Among them, there were also several times of residence, and several guests were still under the tower.

古文：其一客不欲杀者，未到山居，投一空兰若。阖门，雷电随客入，大惧。
现代文：不一会，云雾合在一起，远近的地方都晦暗看不清楚，雨和冰雹从天上往下直掉，狂风在四周刮着，吹断了树，飞砂走石，雷和冰雹愈加狂暴，山川都震动了，那几个人都被震死在塔下。
English: In a little while the clouds and mists were gathered together, and it was dark and gloomy near and far, and rain and hail fell straight down from the sky, and there was a great wind all around, which broke the trees and scattered the stones, and the thunder and hail became more violent, and the mountains and rivers were shaken, and those few people were all shaken to death under the tower.

古文：自省且非同谋，令其见害，乃大言曰： 某不与诸人共杀此蛇，神理聪明，不可滥罚无辜！幸宜详审。 
现代文：有那提前回住处的人，也死在路上。其中那个说是不要杀蛇的人，还没走到住处，就走进一座空庙，关上了门，雷电也随着他追进屋，那人心里很害怕，觉得自己不是同谋让蛇受害的人，就大声说： 我没有与其他人共同杀害这条蛇，神仙从道理上讲应当是聪明懂事理的，不能乱罚无罪的人，请你详细审察一下。 
English: One of them, the one who had said not to kill the snake, had not yet reached his home when he walked into an empty temple, closed the door, and the thunder and lightning followed him into the house. The man was very scared and felt that he was not the one who had conspired to harm the snake, so he said out loud: "I did not kill this snake together with the others. Immortals are supposed to be intelligent and reasonable, and cannot arbitrarily punish innocent people. Please examine it in detail."

古文：言讫，雷霆并收，风雨消歇。
现代文：说完，雷霆停止了，风雨也停下了。
English: After that, the thunder stopped, and the wind and rain also stopped.

古文：此客独存。
现代文：这个客人独自一人活了下来。
English: The guest survived on his own.

古文：邓甲
现代文：邓甲
English: Dengjia

古文：宝历中，邓甲者，事茅山道士峭岩。
现代文：唐宝历年间，邓甲事奉茅山道士峭岩。
English: During the Tang and Bao Dynasties, Deng Jia served the Taoist Crags of Maoshan.

古文：峭岩者，真有道之士，药变瓦砾，符召鬼神。
现代文：峭岩，是个真正的有道之士，能够用药使瓦砾变化，写符召来鬼神。
English: Kogaiwa is a true Taoist. He can use medicine to change rubble and write symbols to summon ghosts and gods.

古文：甲精恳虔诚，不觉劳苦，夕少安睫，昼不安床。
现代文：邓甲虔诚专一非常用功，不觉得劳累辛苦，晚上很少睡觉，白天也躺不下来。
English: Deng Jia devoutly devoted himself to study very hard, did not feel tired and hard, rarely slept at night, and could not lie down during the day.

古文：峭岩亦念之，教其药，终不成；受其符，竟无应。
现代文：峭岩也很受感动。教他学习药法，始终学不成，教他学习符法，竟然不应验。
English: Kogaiwa was also very moved. He was taught to study medicine, but he still couldn't learn it, and he was taught to study Chinese characters, but he couldn't pass the exam.

古文：道士曰： 汝于此二般无分，不可强学。 
现代文：道士说： 你与这两样法术没有缘分，不能勉强学习。 
English: The moralist said, "You have no predestined relationship with these two spells, so you can't learn them by force.

古文：授之禁天地蛇术，环宇之内，唯一人而已。
现代文：就传授他禁制天地之间蛇类的法术，环宇之内，只有他一个人懂得这种法术。
English: and taught him the magic to banish the snakes between heaven and earth. He was the only one in the whole world who knew this magic.

古文：甲得而归焉，至乌江，忽遇会稽宰遭毒蛇螫其足，号楚之声，惊动闾里。
现代文：邓甲学会后往家走，走到乌江，忽然遇上会稽县宰遭到毒蛇咬伤了他的脚，痛苦号叫的声音，惊动了街坊邻居。
English: After Deng Jia learned, he went home and walked to Wujiang. Suddenly, he met a county official who was bitten by a venomous snake and injured his foot. The sound of his cries of pain alarmed his neighbors.

古文：凡有术者，皆不能禁，甲因为治之。
现代文：用了一切办法，都不能止住，邓甲于是替他治疗。
English: Using all means, unable to stop, Deng Jia then treated him.

古文：先以符保其心，痛立止，甲曰： 须召得本色蛇，使收其毒，不然者，足将刖矣。 
现代文：先用符保住他的心脏，疼痛立刻止住。邓甲说： 必须召来咬人的那条蛇，让它收回脚上的毒。不这样做，脚就得砍去。 
English: First, protect his heart with a charm, and the pain will stop immediately. Deng Jia said: The snake that bit the man must be called in, and it must recover the poison from his foot. If it doesn't, the foot must be cut off.

古文：是蛇疑人禁之，应走数里。
现代文：这条蛇怀疑有人禁制它，随后跑到数里之外。
English: The snake suspected it was being restrained and ran several miles away.

古文：遂立坛于桑林中，广四丈，以丹素周之，乃飞篆字，召十里内蛇。
现代文：于是在桑林里修一座坛，坛宽四丈。把丹药洒在坛的四周，又草书了篆字，召集十里内的蛇，没过多久蛇就到了。
English: So he built an altar in the mulberry grove, and the altar was four feet wide. He sprinkled the elixir around the altar, and wrote in cursive script, "Convene the snakes within ten miles," and before long the snakes arrived.

古文：不移时而至，堆之坛上，高丈余，不知几万条耳。
现代文：堆积在坛上，高有一丈多高，不知道有几万条蛇。
English: They are piled up on the altar, towering higher and higher. I don't know how many tens of thousands of snakes there are.

古文：后四大蛇，各长三丈，伟如汲桶，蟠其堆上。
现代文：后来的四条大蛇，各三丈长，粗壮象水桶一样，盘踞在蛇堆的上面。
English: Later, four large snakes, each three feet long and as thick as a bucket, perched on top of the snake pile.

古文：时百余步草木，盛夏尽皆黄落。
现代文：这时百多步方园的杂草和树木，在这盛夏季节，都枯黄落叶。
English: At this time, the weeds and trees of more than a hundred paces square garden, in this midsummer season, are withered and yellow leaves.

古文：甲乃跣足攀缘，上其蛇堆之上，以青条敲四大蛇脑曰： 遣汝作五主，掌界内之蛇，焉得使毒害人？是者即住，非者即去！ 
现代文：邓甲就光脚攀援着上到蛇堆的最上层。用一根青色的小竹棍敲着四条大蛇的头说： 派你们作了五种毒虫的主管，掌管界内的蛇，怎么能用毒去害人，是用毒害人的蛇就留下，不是的就走开。 
English: Deng Jia climbed barefoot to the top of the snake pile. He used a small blue bamboo stick to hit the heads of the four large snakes and said, "I have sent you to be in charge of the five types of poisonous insects, to control the snakes within the realm. How can you use poison to harm people? If you use poison to harm people, stay with the snakes. If not, go away."

古文：甲却下，蛇堆崩倒。大蛇先去，小者继往，以至于尽。
现代文：邓甲倒退着下来，蛇堆也倒塌了，大蛇先离开，小蛇跟着离开，以至于全走光了。
English: Deng Jia backed down, and the snake pile collapsed. The big snake left first, and the small snake followed, until they were all gone.

古文：只有一小蛇，土色肖箸，其长尺余，懵然不去。
现代文：只有一条小蛇，土黄色象根筷子，长一尺多，迷迷糊糊地没有离开。
English: Only a small snake, earthy yellow like a chopstick, more than a foot long, did not leave in a daze.

古文：甲令舁宰来，垂足，叱蛇收其毒。蛇初展缩难之，甲又叱之，如有物促之，只可长数寸耳，有膏流出其背，不得已而张口，向疮吸之。宰觉其脑内，有物如针走下。蛇遂裂皮成水，只有脊骨在地。
现代文：邓甲命令把县宰抬来，垂下脚，命令小蛇收他的毒，小蛇开始时一伸一缩地象是很为难，邓甲又叱责蛇，象有什么东西催促着小蛇，小蛇的身子变得只有几寸长，有油脂从小蛇的背上流出来，不得已才张开口，向疮口吸毒，县宰觉得他的脑子里，有个东西象针一样往下走，小蛇就皮肤裂开成了一滩水，只有脊骨留在地下。
English: Deng Jia ordered the county magistrate to carry the snake, dangling his foot, and ordered the snake to collect his poison. The snake began to stretch and shrink as if it was very difficult. Deng Jia also scolded the snake, as if something was urging the snake. The body of the snake became only a few inches long, with grease flowing from the snake's back. He had no choice but to open his mouth and take drugs to the wound. The county magistrate felt that in his mind, there was something going down like a needle. The snake's skin cracked into a puddle of water, and only the backbone remained underground.

古文：宰遂无苦，厚遗之金帛。
现代文：县宰于是就没有了痛苦，他赠送给邓甲很丰厚的钱和物。
English: As a result, the county magistrate was no longer in pain. He presented Deng Jia with a generous amount of money and goods.

古文：时维扬有毕生，有常弄蛇千条，日戏于阛阓，遂大有资产，而建大第。
现代文：这时扬州有个毕生，经常玩弄上千条蛇，天天在市区游戏玩耍，于是成了大富翁，并且建了很大的府第。
English: At this time, Yangzhou had a lifetime, often playing with thousands of snakes, playing games in the city every day, so he became a millionaire, and built a large mansion.

古文：及卒，其子鬻其第，无奈其蛇，因以金帛召甲。
现代文：等他死后，他的儿子出卖那座府第，却没办法处理那些蛇。因而用钱帛找来邓甲，邓甲到了，给了一张符。
English: After his death, his son sold the mansion, but he couldn't deal with the snakes, so he used the money to find Deng Jia. Deng Jia arrived and gave him a certificate.

古文：甲至，与一符，飞其蛇过城垣之外，始货得宅。
现代文：让那些蛇飞过城墙到外面去了，才卖掉了那座住宅。
English: They let the snakes fly over the city wall and out into the open before selling the house.

古文：甲后至浮梁县，时逼春。凡是茶园之内，素有蛇毒，人不敢掇其茗，毙者已数十人。
现代文：邓甲后来到了浮梁县，当时正是冬末春初的季节，所有的茶园之内，平时就有蛇毒，人们不敢摘茶园的茶叶，因摘茶叶而死的已有几十人了。
English: Deng Jia later came to Fu Liang County. At that time, it was the late winter and early spring season. All the tea gardens usually had snake venom. People dared not pick tea leaves from the tea gardens. Dozens of people had already died from picking tea leaves.

古文：邑人知甲之神术，敛金帛，令去其害。
现代文：县城里的人知道邓甲的神术，收集了一些钱财，请邓甲除去这一祸害。
English: The people in the county town knew Deng Jia's magic and collected some money and asked Deng Jia to remove this evil.

古文：甲立坛，召蛇王。有一大蛇如股，长丈余，焕然锦色，其从者万条。
现代文：邓甲站在坛上，召来蛇王，有一条大蛇象大腿那么粗，一丈多长，身上象彩绸一样的灿烂，跟着的小蛇有一万多条。
English: Deng Jia stood on the altar and summoned the snake king. There was a big snake as thick as a thigh, as long as a great height, with a body as bright as colored silk, followed by more than ten thousand small snakes.

古文：而大者独登坛，与甲较其术。蛇渐立，首隆数尺，欲过甲之首。
现代文：那条大蛇独自上到坛上，与邓甲较量法术，大蛇渐渐地挺立起来，头高出地面好几尺，想超过邓甲的头，邓甲用手杖顶着帽子高高地竖起。
English: The big snake went up to the altar on its own and competed with Deng Jia in spells. The big snake gradually stood up, its head several feet above the ground, trying to surpass Deng Jia's head. Deng Jia held his hat high with his cane.

古文：甲以杖上拄其帽而高焉，蛇首竟困，不能逾甲之帽。蛇乃踣为水，余蛇皆毙。
现代文：蛇头受到困窘，不能超过邓甲的帽子。大蛇就仆倒下来，成了一滩水，其余的蛇也全死了。
English: The head of the snake was embarrassed and could not surpass Deng Jia's hat. The big snake fell down and became a puddle of water, and the rest of the snakes all died.

古文：倘若蛇首逾甲，即甲为水焉。从此茗园遂绝其毒虺。
现代文：如果蛇头超过邓甲，就是邓甲化成水了，从此茶园就再也没有毒蛇了。
English: If the head of the snake exceeds Deng Jia, then Deng Jia will turn into water, and from then on, there will be no more poisonous snakes in the tea garden.

古文：甲后居茅山学道，至今犹在焉。
现代文：邓甲后来住在茅山学道，至今还活着。
English: Deng Jia later lived in Mao Shan to study Taoism and is still alive.

古文：苏闰
现代文：苏闰
English: Su Liang

古文：俗传有媪妪者，嬴秦时，尝得异鱼，放于康州悦城江中。
现代文：民间传说，有个老妇人，在秦始皇时，曾经得到一条奇异的鱼，放到康州悦城江中。
English: According to folklore, there was an old woman who, at the time of the First Emperor of Qin, was given a strange fish and placed it in the Yuecheng River in Kangzhou.

古文：后稍大如龙，妪汲浣于江，龙辄来妪边，率为常。
现代文：后来稍长大就象龙一样，老妇人在江边提水洗衣服时，那条龙就来到老妇人的身边，这成了经常的事。
English: Later, when she grew up a little, she was like a dragon. When the old woman was carrying water to wash clothes by the river, the dragon came to the old woman's side. This became a regular occurrence.

古文：他日，妪治鱼，龙又来，以刀戏之，误断其尾，妪死。
现代文：后来有一天，老妇人收拾鱼，龙又来了，老妇人用刀逗龙玩，失手砍断了龙的尾巴。
English: Then one day, the old woman was cleaning up the fish, and the dragon came again. The old woman was playing with the dragon with a knife, and accidentally cut off the dragon's tail.

古文：龙拥沙石，坟其墓上，人呼为掘尾，为立祠宇千余年。
现代文：老妇人死了，龙就拥起沙石，堆在老妇人的坟上，人们就称呼龙为 掘尾 ，为它建庙宇已有一千多年。
English: When the old woman died, the dragon gathered sand and stones and piled them on the old woman's grave. People called the dragon "Digging Tail" and have been building temples for it for more than a thousand years.

古文：太和末，有职祠者，欲神其事，以惑人。取群小蛇，术禁之，藏祠下，目为龙子，遵令饮酒。置巾箱中，持诣城市。
现代文：太和年的末年，有个管理这个庙的人，想使这件事神秘起来，用来迷惑百姓，就捉来一群小蛇，用法术禁制住它们，藏在祠庙的下面，看成是龙子，训练它们遵照命令喝酒，放在毛巾盖着的箱子里，带着到城里的市场去。
English: Towards the end of the 15th century, a man in charge of the temple, who wanted to keep the incident a mystery and confuse the people, caught a group of small snakes, restrained them with magic, hid them under the temple, treated them as dragon eggs, trained them to drink alcohol on command, put them in a box covered with a towel, and took them to the city market.

古文：越人好鬼怪，争遗之，职祠者辄收其半。
现代文：越人喜好鬼神，争着送他东西，管理祠庙的人只收半价。
English: Yue people like ghosts and gods and compete to give them things. The people who manage the ancestral temple only charge half price.

古文：开成初，沧州故将苏闰为刺史，心知其非，且利其财，益神之。
现代文：开成年间，沧州旧将苏闰任刺史，心里知道那人的作法是错误的，但是认为这是个财路，更使这件事神秘起来。
English: At the beginning of the year, Cangzhou allowed Su Yue to make history. He knew in his heart that the man's actions were wrong, but he thought it was a way to make money, which made the matter even more mysterious.

古文：得金帛，用修佛寺官舍。
现代文：得到的钱财，用来修庙和官家的房舍。
English: The money received was used to repair temples and government buildings.

古文：他日军吏为蛇啮，闰不使治，乃整簪笏，命走语妪，所啮者俄顷死，乃云，慢神罚也。
现代文：有一天有个军官被蛇咬了，苏闰不让治疗，却准备好簪子和手板，命令军官跑去向老妇的灵位祷告，被蛇咬的人不一会就死了，却说： 这是怠慢了神灵的惩罚呀。 
English: One day, an officer was bitten by a snake. Su Liang did not allow treatment, but prepared pliers and a hand board. He ordered the officer to run and pray to the spirit of the old woman. The person bitten by the snake died soon after, but said, "This is the punishment for neglecting the gods."

古文：尝有杀其一蛇，乾于火，藏之，已而祠中蛇逾多。迄今犹然。
现代文：愚昧的百姓一时间都谈论这件事，更加坚定了对神龙的信仰。曾有人杀了其中的一条蛇，就在火上烤干了，把它藏起来。不久，祠庙里的蛇更多了，到今天还是这样子。
English: The foolish people talked about it for a long time, strengthening their belief in the divine dragon. Someone killed one of the snakes, dried it on the fire and hid it. Soon, there were more snakes in the temple, and it is still like this today.

古文：利州李录事
现代文：利州李录事
English: Li Zhou Li Rongji

古文：开成中，有陇西李生，为利州录事参军。
现代文：唐文宗开成年代，有个陇西人李生，做利州的录事参军，居住在官舍里。
English: In the early years of Tang Wenzong, there was a Shaanxi native, Li Sheng, who made a record of Li Prefecture, joined the army, and lived in an official residence.

古文：居于官舍中，尝晓起，见蛇数百在庭，生大惧，尽命弃于郊野外。
现代文：曾经早起，看见几百条蛇在庭院里，李生很害怕，就命令人全都扔到城郊的野外去。
English: Once upon a time, Li Sheng got up early and saw hundreds of snakes in the courtyard. Terrified, he ordered everyone to throw them into the open air on the outskirts of the city.

古文：其明旦，群蛇又集于庭，生益惧之，且异也，亦命弃去。
现代文：第二天早晨，群蛇又聚集在庭院里，李生更加害怕这件事，并且认为这事很奇异，又命令人扔掉了。
English: The next morning, the snakes gathered in the courtyard again, and Li Sheng was even more afraid of it, and thought it was very strange, and ordered it to be thrown away.

古文：后一日，群蛇又至，李生惊曰： 岂天将祸我乎？ 
现代文：之后一天，群蛇又来了。李生吃惊地说： 难道是天要降给我灾祸吗？ 
English: The next day, the snakes came again. Li Sheng said in surprise, "Is it the heavens that are going to bring me disaster?"

古文：戚其容者且久。
现代文：悲戚的样子，呆呆地过了很久。
English: The look of a grieving relative, stunned for a long time.

古文：后旬余，生以赃罪闻于刺史。遣吏至门，将按其罪，且闻于天子。
现代文：以后的十多天，李生以贪赃罪被刺史知道了，派官吏到李生家去，准备审查了解他的罪状，并且上报给皇上。
English: More than ten days later, it became known to history that Li Sheng had been stabbed with the crime of embezzlement, and officials were sent to Li Sheng's home to prepare to examine and understand his crime, and report it to the emperor.

古文：生惶骇，无以自安，缢于庭树，绝脰而死。
现代文：李生惊慌害怕，没有办法安慰自己，就吊在庭院里的树上，勒断脖子死去。
English: Li Sheng panicked and scared, unable to console himself, he hanged himself from a tree in the courtyard, and strangled himself to death.

古文：生有妻，感生不得其死，亦自缢焉。
现代文：李生妻子，觉得李生不该这样死，也自己上吊死了。
English: Li Sheng's wife, feeling that Li Sheng did not deserve to die like this, also hanged herself.

古文：于是其家僮震慑，委身于井者且数辈，果符蛇见之祸。刺史即李行枢也。昝老
现代文：因此李生家的僮仆也震惊害怕，投井、自杀的也有好几个人，果然符合了蛇出现就带来灾祸的说法，刺史就是李行枢。昝老
English: Therefore, the servants of the Li Sheng family were also shocked and afraid, and there were also several people who threw themselves into wells and committed suicide. It is indeed consistent with the saying that the appearance of a snake brings disaster. The stabbing history is Li Xingzhu.

古文：长寿老僧聓言，他时在衡山，村人为毒蛇所噬，须臾而死，发解，肿起尺余。
现代文：一个长寿的老和尚名叫聓言，从前在衡山，村里有个人被毒蛇咬了，不一会就死了，头发掉光了，身子肿起一尺多。
English: Once upon a time in Hengshan, there was a man in the village who was bitten by a poisonous snake and died soon after. His hair fell out and his body swelled up by more than a foot.

古文：其子曰： 昝老若在，当勿虑。 
现代文：他的儿子说： 昝老如果在，就不用担心了。 
English: His son said: "If Zhao Lao is here, there is no need to worry.

古文：遂迎昝至。
现代文：于是迎接昝老来到家里。
English: So he came to the house to greet the old man.

古文：乃以灰围其尸，开四门。
现代文：就用灰围着尸体，打开四门。
English: He surrounded the body with ashes and opened the four doors.

古文：先曰： 若从足入，则不救矣。 
现代文：事先说： 如果从脚下走进灰圈，就没救了。 
English: Be forewarned: If you step into the grey circle, you're doomed.

古文：遂踏步据固，久而蛇不至，昝大怒，乃取饭数升，擣蛇形诅之。
现代文：就踩着步子手握得紧紧地，很久蛇也不到。昝老大怒，就取出几升饭，捣粘弄成蛇形并念咒语。
English: He stepped on the steps and held his hands tightly so that the snake would not reach him for a long time. Furious, he took out several liters of rice, pounded it into a snake shape and recited a spell.

古文：忽蠕动出门，有顷，饭蛇引一蛇从死者头入，径及其疮，尸渐低，蛇缩而死，村人遂活。
现代文：那条用饭做的蛇忽然就蠕动着爬出门去，不一会，那条饭蛇引来一条蛇从死者的头部进入灰圈，直接爬到尸体肿起的地方吮吸，尸体渐渐消了肿，蛇却缩小死了。那个村民就活了。
English: The snake made of rice suddenly wriggled out of the door, and after a while, the rice snake brought a snake from the head of the deceased into the gray circle, climbed directly to the place where the body was swollen and sucked. The body gradually lost its swelling, but the snake shrank and died. The villager lived.

古文：冯但
现代文：冯但
English: Fengdan

古文：冯但者，常有疾，医令浸蛇酒服之。
现代文：冯但，经常有病，医生让他用蛇泡酒喝。
English: Feng Dan, often sick, the doctor told him to drink snake wine.

古文：初服一瓮，于疾减半。
现代文：开始喝了一瓮蛇酒，病好了一半。
English: He started drinking a bottle of python wine and was half way to recovery.

古文：又令家人园中执一蛇，投瓮中，封闭七日。
现代文：又让家人从园子里抓一条蛇，投入瓮中，封闭了七天。
English: He also had his family members catch a snake from the garden, put it in a cocoon and sealed it for seven days.

古文：及开，蛇跃出，举首尺余，出门，因失所在。
现代文：等到打开瓮口的时候，蛇跳了出来，抬起头有一尺多高，出门去，因而失去踪迹。
English: By the time the gate was opened, the snake had jumped out, raised its head more than a foot high, and left the house, disappearing without a trace.

古文：其过迹，地坟起数寸。
现代文：蛇经过的地方，土鼓出地面有几寸高。
English: Where the snake passed, the soil drum rose a few inches above the ground.

古文：陆绍
现代文：陆绍
English: Lu Shao

古文：郎中陆绍言，尝记一人浸蛇酒，前后杀蛇数十头。
现代文：郎中陆绍说，曾记得有一个人泡蛇酒。前后杀了几十条蛇。
English: His son-in-law, Lu Shao, said that he once remembered a man making snake wine. He killed dozens of snakes back and forth.

古文：一日，自临瓮窥酒，有物跳出，啮其鼻将落。视之，乃蛇头骨也。因疮毁，其鼻如削焉。
现代文：一天，亲自到瓮前看酒，有个东西跳了出来，咬中了他的鼻子，快要掉了下来，看那东西，竟是蛇的头骨，因为是被咬掉的，他的鼻子象刀削的一样。
English: One day, when he personally went to the mill to look at the wine, something jumped out and bit his nose, and it was about to fall off. When he looked at the thing, it turned out to be the skull of a snake, because it had been bitten off, and his nose looked like it had been cut with a knife.

古文：郑翬
现代文：郑翬
English: Zheng Wei

古文：进士郑翬说，家在高邮，有亲表卢氏庄近水。
现代文：进士郑翬说，他家住在高邮，有个表亲卢氏住在庄园靠近水边，他的邻居好几家共同杀了一条白蛇。
English: He said that his family lived in Gaoyou, a cousin of Lu's lived in a manor near the water's edge, and several of his neighbors killed a white snake together.

古文：其邻人数家共杀一白蛇，未久，忽大震电雨，发洪，数家陷溺无遗，唯卢宅当中一家无恙。
现代文：不久，忽然打雷闪电下大雨，爆发了洪水，那几家全都陷落沉没，只有卢氏的住宅在当中，一家人没有出事。
English: Not long after, thunder, lightning and heavy rain suddenly struck, and a flood broke out. All the houses collapsed and sank. Only Lu's house was among them, and the family did not have any accidents.

古文：张垩子
现代文：张垩子
English: Zhang Yanzi

古文：梓潼县张垩子神，乃五丁拔蛇之所也。
现代文：梓潼县张垩子神，神庙就在五丁拽蛇的地方。
English: The temple of the god Zhang Yizi in Zizhi County is located in the place where Wuding pulled the snake.

古文：或云，隽州张生所养之蛇，因而祠。时人谓为张垩子，其神甚灵。
现代文：有的人说，那就是隽州张生养的蛇，因此为他建了祠庙，当时人称呼他叫张垩子，他的神灵很灵验。
English: Some people said that it was a snake born and raised by Zhang in Zhangzhou, so an ancestral temple was built for him. At that time, people called him Zhang Yanzi, and his spirit was very powerful.

古文：伪蜀王建世子名元膺，聪明博达，骑射绝伦。
现代文：非法的蜀王名叫建，他的儿子名叫元膺，又聪明又渊博通达，骑马射箭没有比得上的。
English: The illegitimate King of Shu was named Jian, and his son was named Yuan Zang, who was clever and well-versed, and excelled in horse riding and archery.

古文：牙齿常露，多以袖掩口，左右不敢仰视。
现代文：牙齿常露在外，总是用袖子遮着嘴，身边的人不敢仰脸看他。
English: His teeth are often exposed, he always covers his mouth with his sleeve, and people around him do not dare to look up at him.

古文：蛇眼而黑色，凶恶鄙亵，通夜不寐，竟以作逆伏诛。
现代文：眼睛象蛇眼而且是黑色的，样子很凶恶卑鄙下流，整夜地不睡觉，竟因作了反叛的事而被依法处死了。
English: His eyes were like a snake's and black, and he was wicked and vile, and he did not sleep all night, and he was put to death according to the law for his rebellion.

古文：就诛之夕，梓潼庙祝，亟为垩子所责，言： 我久在川，今始方归，何以致庙宇荒秽如是耶？ 
现代文：被处死的那天，梓潼的庙祝，多次被垩子责备，说是我长久在川地，现在刚回来，为什么使庙宇荒芜肮脏到这个样呢？
English: On the day he was put to death, Zizhao's temple attendant was repeatedly scolded by the executioner, saying that I had been in Sichuan for a long time and had just returned. Why had the temple become so desolate and dirty?

古文：由是蜀人乃知元膺为庙蛇之精矣。
现代文：因此，蜀地人才知道元膺是庙蛇的精灵。
English: Therefore, the people of Shu knew that Yuan Zang was the spirit of the temple snake.

古文：选仙场
现代文：选仙场
English: Choir of Fairies

古文：南中有选仙场，场在峭崖之下。其绝顶有洞穴，相传为神仙之窟宅也。
现代文：南中有个选仙场，场子在一个峭壁之下，峭壁的高处有个洞穴，相传是神仙的洞府。
English: In the south, there is a fairground. The fairground is under a cliff, and there is a cave high up on the cliff, which is said to be the cave of the gods.

古文：每年中元日，拔一人上升。
现代文：每年的阴历七月十五日这一天，就提起一个人上升到洞里去，学道的人就在峭壁下筑起一座坛。
English: Every year, on the 15th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, a person would go up to the cave, and the scholars would build an altar under the cliff.

古文：学道者筑坛于下，至时，则远近冠帔，咸萃于斯。
现代文：到了时候，远近的道士们，全都集中在这里，准备好各种仪式，安排好斋戒和祭祀，多次烧香祷告。
English: When the time came, all the Taoists from near and far gathered here to prepare various ceremonies, arrange fasting and sacrifices, and burn incense and pray many times.

古文：备科仪，设斋醮，焚香祝数，七日而后，众推一人道德最高者，严洁至诚，端简立于坛上。余人皆掺袂别而退，遥顶礼顾望之。
现代文：七天以后，大家推选出一个道行品德最高尚的人，严肃洁净报其虔诚，端庄简从站在坛上，其余的人全都扯着他的衣袖告别之后退下去，远远地顶礼望着他。
English: Seven days later, they elected a man of the highest moral character, serious and pure in his piety, dignified and simple from standing on the altar, and the rest of them all tugged at his sleeves and said goodbye before retreating to look at him from a distance.

古文：于时有五色祥云，徐自洞门而下，至于坛场。其道高者，冠衣不动，合双掌，蹑五云而上升。观者靡不涕泗健羡，望洞门而作礼。如是者年一两人。
现代文：这时有五色祥云慢慢地从洞门飘下来，飘到坛场，那个道行高的人，衣冠不动，合着双掌，踩着五色祥云向上，观看的人没有不流着眼泪鼻涕非常地羡慕他，朝着洞口行礼，象这样的人每年有一两个。
English: At this time, a five-colored auspicious cloud slowly floated down from the cave door and floated to the altar. The person who walked up the path, with his robe still on and his palms together, stepped on the five-colored auspicious cloud and ascended. The people who watched did not envy him very much without shedding tears and blowing their noses, and bowed toward the cave mouth. There are one or two people like this every year.

古文：次年有道高者合选，忽有中表间一比丘，自武都山往与诀别。比丘怀雄黄一斤许，赠之曰： 道中唯重此药，请密置于腰腹之间，慎勿遗失之。 
现代文：下一年有个道行高的人该入选飞升，忽然有个和尚是他的中表亲属，从武都山前来和他诀别，和尚怀里带着一斤多雄黄，赠送给他说： 修道的人最重视这个药，请你秘密地放腰腹之间，千万不要丢失了它。 
English: The next year, there was a man of high moral character who was to be selected for the soaring. Suddenly, a monk who was a relative of his came from Mt. Wudusan to bid him farewell. The monk was carrying more than a kilo of marjoram in his arms and gave it to him, saying, "Monastics attach the greatest importance to this medicine. Please put it secretly between your waist and stomach, and never lose it."

古文：道高者甚喜，遂怀而升坛。至时，果蹑云而上。
现代文：道行高的人很喜欢，就带好雄黄走上坛去，到了时间，果然踩着云彩升上去。
English: People who are high on the Tao liked it very much, so they took a good male yellow to the altar, and when the time came, they really stepped on the clouds and rose up.

古文：后旬余，大觉山岩臭秽。
现代文：十多天以后，大家嗅到山岩一带有恶臭的气味。
English: After more than ten days, everyone smelled the mountain rock with a foul smell.

古文：数日后，有猎人，自岩旁攀缘造其洞，见有大蟒蛇，腐烂其间，前后上升者骸骨，山积于巨穴之间。
现代文：几天后，有个猎人，从山岩的边上援引而上进入洞中，就见有一条大蟒蛇，在洞里已经腐烂，前前后后上升到洞里的人的骸骨，象小山一样堆积在大洞穴之间。
English: A few days later, a hunter entered the cave from the edge of the mountain rock, and saw a large python that had rotted in the cave. The skeletons of the people who had ascended to the cave piled up like a hill between the large caves.

古文：盖五色云者，蟒之毒气，常呼吸此无知道士充其腹。
现代文：原来，五色彩云，是大蟒的毒气，常用来吸取这些无知的道士填充蛇的肚子。
English: Originally, the five-colored cloud was the poisonous gas of the big toad, which was often used to draw these ignorant Taoists to fill the belly of the snake.

古文：哀哉！
现代文：可悲呀。
English: It's pathetic.

古文：狗仙山
现代文：狗仙山
English: Dog Immortal Mountain

古文：巴賨之境，地多岩崖，水怪木怪，无所不有。
现代文：巴山夷水一带地方石崖很多，水怪树怪等，什么都有。
English: There are a lot of rocky cliffs, water monsters, tree monsters, etc. in the area around Bashan Yishui. Everything is there.

古文：民居溪壑。以弋猎为生涯。
现代文：百姓居住在溪水山谷之间，靠打猎为生。
English: The people live in the valleys between the streams and depend on hunting for their livelihood.

古文：嵌空之所，有一洞穴，居人不能测其所往。
现代文：有一处山岸凹进去的地方，有一个洞穴，居民无法得知那个洞通向哪里，猎人放猎狗到这个地方，就是多次地招呼，狗也不回来。
English: There is a place where the hillside dips into the sea, there is a cave, the inhabitants cannot find out where the cave leads to, the hunters let the hunting dogs go to this place, they call repeatedly, and the dogs do not come back.

古文：猎师纵犬于此，则多呼之不回，瞪目摇尾，瞻其崖穴。
现代文：只是瞪着眼睛，摇着尾巴，盯着看那石崖上的洞穴。
English: It just stared, tail wagging, at the hole in the cliff.

古文：于时有彩云垂下，迎猎犬而升洞。
现代文：这时就有彩云从洞口飘下来，迎接着猎狗升上洞去。
English: At this time, there was a colorful cloud floating down from the mouth of the cave, welcoming the hounds to go up to the cave.

古文：如是者年年有之，好道者呼为狗仙山。
现代文：象这样的事年年都有，爱好修道的人称呼这个地方叫狗仙山。
English: This kind of thing happens every year, and the place is called "Dog Immortal Mountain" by religious people.

古文：偶有智者，独不信之，遂絏一犬，挟弦弧往之。
现代文：偶然有个聪明的人，一个人坚持不相信这样的事，他就带着一只猎狗，背着弓和箭到那里去。
English: By chance a wise man, one who did not believe in such things, went there with a hunting dog and a bow and arrow.

古文：至则以粗縆系其犬腰，系于拱木，然后退身而观之。
现代文：到了就用粗绳系着猎狗的腰，拴在大树上，然后就退回身子观看。
English: When he arrived, he tied a thick rope around the hound's waist and tethered it to a large tree. Then he stepped back and watched.

古文：及彩云下，犬萦身而不能随去，嗥叫者数四。旋见有物，头大如瓮，双目如电，鳞甲光明，冷照溪谷，渐垂身出洞中观其犬，猎师毒其矢而射之。既中，不复再见。
现代文：等到彩云飘下来，狗被捆住不能随彩云上升，狗嗥叫了好几次，接着就看见有个东西，头象个大坛子，两眼象闪电，身上的甲光亮耀眼，冷冷地反射照耀着溪流和峡谷，渐渐地垂下身子出洞看那只狗。猎师在箭上涂了毒药射那怪物，射中以后，不再出现。
English: When the cloud floated down, the dog was tied up and could not rise with the cloud, the dog howled several times, then he saw something, the head was like a big jar, the two eyes were like lightning, the body was bright and dazzling, the cold reflection shone on the streams and canyons, and he gradually hung down from the hole to see the dog. The hunter painted poison on the arrow and shot the monster. After being shot, it no longer appeared.

古文：顷经旬日，臭秽满山。猎师乃自山顶，缒索下观，见一大蟒，腐烂于岩间。狗仙山之事，永无有之。
现代文：过了十多天，满山都是恶臭的气味，猎人就从顶上垂下绳子顺绳下到洞口，看见了一条大蟒蛇，在山岩之间腐烂了，狗仙山的事，再也没有了。
English: After more than ten days, the whole mountain was filled with a foul smell, so the hunter hung a rope from the top and went down the rope to the mouth of the cave. He saw a large python, which had rotted between the rocks of the mountain, and the matter of the dog fairy mountain was no more.

古文：李黄
现代文：李黄
English: Li Huang

古文：元和二年，陇西李黄，盐铁使逊之犹子也。因调选次，乘暇于长安东市，瞥见一犊车，侍婢数人于车中货易。
现代文：唐宪宗元和二年，陇西人李黄，是盐铁使李逊的侄儿，因在官员的调动选拔的过程中，趁着闲遐时间来到长安的东市，瞥见一驾小牛拉的车，几个女仆在车中买东西。
English: In the second year of Tang Xian Zongyuan and Tang Xian Zongyuan, Li Huang, a native of Shaanxi Province, was the nephew of Li Xun, the salt iron envoy. Because he was in the process of mobilizing and selecting officials, he took advantage of his leisure time to come to the East City of Chang'an. He caught a glimpse of a car pulled by a calf, and several maids were shopping in the car.

古文：李潜目车中，因见白衣之姝，绰约有绝代之色。
现代文：李黄偷看车里，看见了一个穿白衣服的美女，姿态优美，有绝代的美色。
English: Peeking into the car, Li Huang saw a beautiful woman dressed in white, with a graceful posture and unparalleled beauty.

古文：李子求问，侍者曰： 娘子孀居，袁氏之女，前事李家，今身依李之服。方除服，所以市此耳。 
现代文：李黄上前询问，女郎的侍女说： 娘子是个寡妇，是袁氏的女儿，从前嫁到李家，现在身上穿的就是李家的丧服，正要脱下丧服，所以来买这些东西。 
English: When Li Huang came forward to inquire, the girl's maid said, "My daughter is a widow, a daughter of the Yuan family. She used to be married into the Li family, but now she is wearing the mourning clothes of the Li family. She is about to take off her mourning clothes, so she came to buy these things."

古文：又询可能再从人乎，乃笑曰： 不知。 
现代文：李黄又询问能不能再嫁人，才笑着说： 不知道。 
English: Li Huang also asked if he could remarry, only to smile and say: I don't know.

古文：李子乃出与钱帛，货诸锦绣，婢辈遂传言云： 且贷钱买之，请随到庄严寺左侧宅中，相还不负。 
现代文：李黄于是拿出钱来给她买布，买了各种各样锦绣。女仆就传话来说： 暂且借钱买这些东西，请跟我们到庄严寺左侧的住宅中，把钱还给你，绝不欺骗你。 
English: Li Huang then took out money to buy her cloth and bought all kinds of brocade. The maid sent a message saying: "For the time being, borrow money to buy these things, please come with us to the residence on the left side of the solemn temple, return the money to you, and never deceive you."

古文：李子悦。时已晚，遂逐犊车而行。
现代文：李黄很高兴，这时天已经晚了，就跟着牛车走，到夜间才走到住处。
English: Li Huang was very happy. It was already late at that time, so he followed the ox cart and walked to his residence at night.

古文：碍夜方至所止，犊车入中门，白衣姝一人下车，侍者以帷拥之而入。
现代文：牛车进入中门，白衣美女一个人下了车，仆人用帷布遮着她一起进到屋里去。
English: The oxcart entered the middle gate, the white-clad beauty got out of the car alone, and the servants covered her with a curtain and went into the house together.

古文：李下马，俄见一使者将榻而出，云： 且坐。 
现代文：李黄下了马，一会儿就看见一个仆人拿一个椅子走出来，说： 请先坐一会。 
English: Li Huang dismounted, and soon saw a servant come out with a chair and said, "Please sit down for a moment.

古文：坐毕，侍者云： 今夜郎君岂暇领钱乎？
现代文：坐下以后，仆人说： 今天夜里你难道有时间带钱回去吗？
English: After he had sat down, the servant said, "Do you really have time to take the money home tonight?

古文：不然，此有主人否？
现代文：不然，你在这里有主人吗？
English: Otherwise, do you have a master here?

古文：且归主人，明晨不晚也。 
现代文：请暂时回到主人那里，明天早上来取也不算晚。 
English: Please go back to your master for the time being. It's not too late to pick up your horse tomorrow morning.

古文：李子曰： 乃今无交钱之志，然此亦无主人，何见隔之甚也？ 
现代文：李黄说： 你们现在没有还钱的意思，可我在这个地方也没有主人，为什么这样地拒绝我呢？ 
English: Li Huang said: You have no intention of returning the money now, but I have no master in this place, why do you reject me like this?

古文：侍者入，复出曰： 若无主人，此岂不可，但勿以疏漏为诮也。 
现代文：仆人进去，又出来说： 如果此地没有主人，在这里又怎么不行呢？但是请不要因为我们侍候得不周到而笑话我们。 
English: The servant went in and came out again, saying, "If there is no master here, why are we doing this? But please don't laugh at us because we didn't serve you properly."

古文：俄而侍者云： 屈郎君。 
现代文：不一会仆人又说： 让你委屈了。 
English: After a while, the servant said, "I have done you an injustice.

古文：李子整衣而入，见青服老女郎立于庭，相见曰： 白衣之姨也。 
现代文：李黄整了整衣服走进去，看见一个穿黑衣服的老女人站在院子里。与李黄相见并说： 我是白衣女郎的姨娘。 
English: After straightening his clothes, Li Huang walked in and saw an old woman dressed in black standing in the courtyard. She met Li Huang and said, "I am the aunt of the girl in white."

古文：中庭坐，少顷，白衣方出，素裙粲然，凝质皎若，辞气闲雅，神仙不殊。
现代文：请到中庭坐下，不一会，白衣女郎才出来，白色的裙子显得很光洁，皮肤象皎洁的月亮，说话和风度娴静雅致，与神仙比没什么两样。
English: Please go to the atrium and sit down. After a while, the girl in white will come out. The white dress looks very shiny, the skin is like a bright moon, the speech and demeanor are quiet and elegant, and it is no different from the fairy tale.

古文：略序款曲，翻然却入。姨坐谢曰： 垂情与货诸彩色，比日来市者，皆不如之。
现代文：简略地说了表示殷勤的话，潇洒轻飘飘地又进去了，她的姨娘也坐下并感谢说： 蒙你的好意，借给我们钱买了这些布料，和前几天买到的布料比，强得多了，可是，你借给我们的钱怎么办，我深深地忧虑惭愧。 
English: After a few brief words of courtesy, she glided gracefully back inside, where her niece also sat down and thanked her, saying: Thanks to your kindness, you lent us money to buy these fabrics, which are much stronger than the ones we bought a few days ago, but I am deeply worried and ashamed about what to do with the money you lent us.

古文：然所假如何？深忧愧。 李子曰： 彩帛粗缪，不足以奉佳人服饰，何敢指价乎？ 
现代文：李黄说： 那些彩绸粗糙质量差，不足以用来给美女做衣服穿。怎么敢定价呢？ 
English: Li Huang said: Those coarse colored silks are of poor quality and are not good enough to be used to make clothes for beautiful women. How dare they put a price on them?

古文：答曰： 渠浅陋，不足侍君子巾栉。
现代文：回答说： 她很浅薄见识少，配不上你，可是我家贫穷有三十千钱的债务。
English: He replied, "She is too shallow and unintelligent to be worthy of you, but my poor family is thirty thousand dollars in debt.

古文：然贫居有三十千债负，郎君倘不弃，则愿侍左右矣。 
现代文：你如果不抛弃我们不管，她就愿意在你的身边侍奉你。 
English: If you do not abandon us regardless, she is willing to serve you by your side.

古文：李子悦。拜于侍侧，俯而图之。
现代文：李黄很高兴，到她的身边表示谢意，答应了她的要求并且想得到她。
English: Li Huang was very happy, came to her side to express his gratitude, agreed to her request and wanted to get her.

古文：李子有货易所，先在近，遂命所使取钱三十千。
现代文：李黄有个交易场所，先前就在附近，于是派仆人去取来三十千钱，一会儿就送来了。
English: Li Huang had a trading place, which was previously nearby, so he sent a servant to fetch thirty thousand yuan, and it was delivered in a moment.

古文：须臾而至，堂西间门，剨然而开。饭食毕备，皆在西间。
现代文：堂屋西面房间的门 哗 地一声打开了，吃的全都准备好了，都在西间屋里，姨娘就请李黄入坐。
English: The door to the room on the west side of the hall opened with a bang. All the food was ready and in the west room. My aunt invited Li Huang to sit down.

古文：姨遂延李子入坐，转盼炫焕。
现代文：用眼睛四下打量，屋子色彩鲜明夺目。
English: Look around with your eyes, the bright colors of the house are eye-catching.

古文：女郎旋至，命坐，拜姨而坐，六七人具饭。
现代文：白衣女郎接着来到，让她坐下，她给姨娘行了礼就坐下了。
English: The girl in white came next and told her to sit down. She bowed to her aunt and sat down.

古文：食毕，命酒欢饮。一住三日，饮乐无所不至。
现代文：六七个仆人安排好吃的，吃完后，又拿来酒欢畅地喝起来，一住就是三天，喝酒玩乐快乐到极点。
English: Six or seven servants arrange delicious food, and after eating, they bring wine and drink it happily. One stay is three days, and drinking and having fun is the best.

古文：第四日，姨云： 李郎君且归，恐尚书怪迟，后往来亦何难也？ 
现代文：第四天，姨娘说： 李郎君暂且回家去，恐怕尚书大人会怪你迟归，以后再往来又有什么难处呢？ 
English: On the fourth day, the aunt said: Li Lang, let's go home for the time being. I'm afraid Shang Shu will blame you for being late. What's the problem with coming back later?

古文：李亦有归志，承命拜辞而出。
现代文：李黄也有了回家的意思，应承了姨娘的话告别后出了门。
English: Li Huang also had the intention to go home, and he complied with his aunt's words to say goodbye and went out.

古文：上马，仆人觉李子有腥臊气异常。
现代文：上了马，仆人只觉得李黄的身上有一股特殊的腥臊气味。
English: Once on the horse, the servant only felt that Li Huang's body had a special musty smell.

古文：遂归宅，问何处许日不见，以他语对。
现代文：就回到家里。家里人问他到什么地方去了。这么多天不见影子？李黄用别的话对付过去了。
English: He returned home. His family asked him where he had gone. He had not seen his shadow for so many days? Li Huang used other words to deal with it.

古文：遂觉身重头旋，命被而寝。
现代文：这时，就觉得身子重，脑子眩晕，让人拿来被子就睡了。
English: At this time, I felt heavy and dizzy, so I asked someone to bring me a quilt and went to sleep.

古文：先是婚郑氏女，在侧云： 足下调官已成，昨日过官，觅公不得，某二兄替过官，已了。 
现代文：李黄的妻子郑氏。这时在他的身旁说： 你调官的事已经办成，昨天拜官，寻找你没找到，我的二哥代替你拜官，已经结束了。 
English: At this time, Li Huang's wife, Zheng Shi, said beside him: "Your transfer has been completed, you were promoted yesterday, you didn't find it when you were looking for it, my second brother was promoted instead of you, it's over."

古文：李答以愧佩之辞。
现代文：李黄说惭愧佩服的话。
English: Li Huang said that he was ashamed of his words of admiration.

古文：俄而郑兄至，责以所往行。
现代文：不一会郑氏的哥哥来了，责问他前几天到哪里去了？
English: Mr. Zheng's brother soon arrived and asked him where he had been for the past few days.

古文：李已渐觉恍惚，祗对失次，谓妻曰： 吾不起矣。 
现代文：李黄这时已经渐渐觉得精神恍惚，答话无伦次，对他的妻子说： 我起不来身子了。 
English: At this time, Li Huang had gradually felt dizzy and incoherent, and said to his wife: I can't get up.

古文：口虽语，但觉被底身渐消尽，揭被而视，空注水而已，唯有头存。
现代文：口里说着话，只觉得被里的身子渐渐地变得没有了，揭开被子看，一汪水而已，只有头还在。
English: As he spoke, he only felt that the body inside the quilt was gradually disappearing. When he opened the quilt, he saw nothing but a puddle of water, and only his head was still there.

古文：家大惊慑，呼从出之仆考之，具言其事。
现代文：家里的人非常地惊慌害怕，叫来跟李黄出去的仆人详细询问。仆人把事情经过全说了。
English: The people in the house were very panicked and scared, and they called the servant who had gone out with Li Huang to ask him in detail. The servant told them the whole story.

古文：及去寻旧宅所，乃空园。有一皂荚树，树上有十五千，树下有十五十，余了无所见。
现代文：等到去寻找那所旧住宅，是个空园子，有一棵皂荚树，树上挂着十五千钱，树下堆着十五千钱，其它的什么也没看见。
English: When I went to look for the old house, it was an empty garden, there was a soap oak tree with fifteen thousand dollars hanging from it, fifteen thousand dollars were piled under the tree, and I didn't see anything else.

古文：问彼处人云： 往往有巨白蛇在树下，便无别物，姓袁者，盖以空园为姓耳。
现代文：询问那个地方住的人，说： 常常有条巨大的白蛇在树下，再没有别的东西了。说是姓袁，可能是用空园当作自己的姓罢了。
English: He asked the people who lived in the area and said, "There is often a huge white snake under the tree, there is nothing else." He said his surname was Yuan, but he may have used Kuyuan as his surname.

古文：复一说，元和中，凤翔节度李听，从子琯，任金吾参军。自永宁里出游，及安化门外，乃遇一车子，通以银装，颇极鲜丽。
现代文：又一种说法是，元和年间，凤翔节度是李听，他的侄儿李琯，担任金吾参军，从永宁里出去游玩，等到了安化门外，就遇见一辆车子。
English: Another theory is that during the Yuan and He years, the Fengxiang Festival was held by Li He, and his nephew Li Yao, who served as Kingu to join the army, went out to play from Yongningli, and when he arrived outside Anhua Gate, he met a car.

古文：驾以白牛，从二女奴，皆乘白马，衣服皆素，而姿容婉媚。
现代文：车子全都用银子装饰，特别地鲜艳华丽，用一条白牛驾车，跟着两个女仆，全都骑着白马，穿的衣服也全是白的，而且姿态面貌温柔迷人。
English: The chariot was all decked out in silver, and was particularly bright and gaudy; it was driven by a white ox, and was followed by two maids, all mounted on white horses, all dressed in white, and all of them with gentle and charming countenances.

古文：琯贵家子，不知检束，即随之。
现代文：李琯是富贵人家的子弟，不知检点约束自己，就跟着那个车子走。
English: Li Yao is the son of a wealthy family. Without knowing how to restrain himself, he followed the car.

古文：将暮焉，二女奴曰： 郎君贵人，所见莫非丽质，某皆贱质，又粗陋，不敢当公子厚意。然车中幸有姝丽，诚可留意也。 
现代文：天快黑了的时候，两个女仆说： 你是个贵人，看见的女子没有不是天生丽质的，我们都是些低贱的人，又粗俗丑陋，不敢接受公子你的深厚情意，可是，幸亏车子里有美女，你实在应当留心呀。 
English: When it was getting dark, the two maids said, "You are a noble man, and there is no woman I have seen who is not naturally beautiful. We are all low-born people, vulgar and ugly, and dare not accept your deep feelings, but, fortunately, there is a beautiful woman in the car. You really should pay attention."

古文：琯遂求女奴，乃驰马傍车，笑而回曰： 郎君但随行，勿舍去。某适已言矣。 
现代文：李琯就去恳求女仆，于是骑着马走在车旁。女仆笑着回头说： 你只要跟随着走不要舍弃离开就行了，我刚才已经说过了。 
English: Li Yao went to plead with the maid, so he rode his horse and walked beside the car. The maid smiled and turned around and said, "You just have to follow along and don't give up on leaving, as I just said."

古文：琯既随之，闻其异香盈路。
现代文：李琯随着车子走以后，就闻到那车子中的奇异的香味飘满路上。
English: After Li Yao followed the car, he smelled the strange scent of the car's exhaust wafting all over the road.

古文：日暮，及奉诚园，二女奴曰： 娘子住此之东，今先去矣。郎君且此回翔，某即出奉迎耳。 
现代文：天黑时，到了奉诚园，两个女仆说： 娘子在这个园的东侧住，现在就先走了，你暂且在这里来回走走，我就出来迎接你。 
English: When it was dark, they arrived at Fengcheng Garden. The two maids said, "My daughter lives on the east side of this garden. I'll go first. If you walk around here for a while, I'll come out to meet you."

古文：车子既入，琯乃驻马于路侧。良久，见一婢出门招手。
现代文：车子进门以后，李琯就把马停在路边，好长时间，看见一个女仆出门招手。
English: After the car entered the gate, Li Yao parked the horse on the roadside for a long time, and saw a maid go out and wave.

古文：琯乃下马。入座於厅中，但闻名香入鼻，似非人世所有。
现代文：李琯下马，进去坐在厅里，只闻香气扑鼻，好象不是人世间所能有的。
English: Li Qian dismounted, went in and sat in the hall, only smelling the fragrance, as if it were not possible in the world.

古文：琯遂令人马入安邑里寄宿。
现代文：李琯就让跟随的人和马到安邑里去寄宿。
English: Li Yao asked his followers and horses to go to An'yur village for lodging.

古文：黄昏后，方见一女子，素衣，年十六七，姿艳若神仙。
现代文：黄昏以后，才看见一个女子，穿着白净衣服，年龄有十六七岁，姿容艳丽象神仙一样。
English: It was only after dusk that I saw a woman, dressed in immaculate white clothes, aged sixteen or seventeen, with a beautiful appearance like a fairy godmother.

古文：琯自喜之心，所不能谕。
现代文：李琯内心里喜悦的心情，是不能用言语说出来的。
English: It is impossible to put into words the feeling of joy in Li Yan's heart.

古文：及出，已见人马在门外。遂别而归。
现代文：等到他出门时，已经看见人和马在门外等着他，就告别回家去了。
English: When he went out, he saw a man and a horse waiting for him outside the door, and he said goodbye and went home.

古文：才及家，便觉脑疼，斯须益甚，至辰巳间，脑裂而卒。
现代文：才到家，就觉得脑袋疼，不一会就越来越激烈。到了辰时巳时之间的时候，脑袋裂开就死了。
English: When I got home, I felt a headache, which soon became more and more intense. When it was between the hours, my head split open and I died.

古文：其家询问奴仆，昨夜所历之处，从者具述其事，云： 郎君颇闻异香，某辈所闻，但蛇臊不可近。 
现代文：李琯的家里人询问奴仆，昨天夜里经过的地方，仆人们全都说了那件事，并且说： 公子说闻到了奇特的香味，我们闻到的只是蛇的臊味使人不敢接近的。 
English: Li Qian's family members asked the servants where they had passed the night before, and they all said the same thing, adding: "The prince said he smelled a strange scent, but what we smelled was just the smell of a snake, which made people afraid to approach.

古文：举家冤骇，遽命仆人，于昨夜所止之处复验之，但见枯槐树中，有大蛇蟠屈之迹。
现代文：全家人都觉得冤枉而且害怕，急忙命令仆人，到昨天夜里去过的地方再察看一下。只看见枯死的槐树里，有大蛇盘屈的迹象。
English: The whole family felt wronged and afraid, and hurriedly ordered the servants to look again at the place where they had been the night before, only to see signs of a snake coiled in the dead elm tree.

古文：乃伐其树，发掘，已失大蛇，但有小蛇数条，尽白，皆杀之而归。
现代文：就伐倒了那棵树，挖掘，已经失去了大蛇的踪迹，只有几条小蛇，全是白色的。
English: They cut down the tree, and after digging, they had lost track of the big snake, only a few small snakes, all white.

