古文：起强阏赤奋若六月，不满一年。
现代文：起强阏赤奋若六月，不满一年。
English: If it is June, it is less than a year.

古文：义宁元年丁丑、公元六一七年六月，己卯，李建成等至晋阳。
现代文：隋纪八隋恭帝义宁元年六月，己卯，李建成等人到达晋阳。
English: In June of the eighth year of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Sui Gong of the Sui Dynasty and Emperor Yining of the Sui Dynasty, Ji Wu, Li Jiancheng and others arrived in Jinyang.

古文：刘文静劝李渊与突厥相结，资其士马以益兵势。
现代文：刘文静劝李渊与突厥人相结交，请突厥人资助兵马以壮大兵势，李渊听从了这个意见。
English: Liu Wenzhing advised Li Yuan to make friends with the Turks, and asked the Turks to fund soldiers and horses to strengthen the army. Li Yuan obeyed this advice.

古文：渊从之，自为手启，卑辞厚礼，遗始毕可汗云： 欲大举义兵，远迎主上，复与突厥和亲，如开皇之时。
现代文：他亲笔写信，言辞卑屈，送给始毕可汗的礼物十分丰厚，信中说： 我想大举义兵，远迎隋主，重新与突厥和亲，就象开皇年间那样。
English: He wrote a letter in his own handwriting, his words were humble, and the gifts he sent to Shibi Khan were very rich. The letter said: I want to raise a large number of volunteers, welcome the Sui Lord from afar, and make peace with the Turks again, just like in the time of the emperor.

古文：若能与我俱南，愿勿侵暴百姓；若但和亲，坐受宝货，亦唯可汗所择。 
现代文：您要是能和我一起南下，希望不要侵扰强暴百姓。假若您只想和亲，您就坐受财物吧。这些方案请您自己选择。 
English: If you can come with me to the south, I hope you will not disturb the violent people. If you just want to be friends, you can take your belongings. Please choose these plans yourself.

古文：始毕得启，谓其大臣曰： 隋主为人，我所知也。若迎以来，必害唐公而击我无疑矣。
现代文：始毕可汗得到李渊的信，对他的大臣说： 隋朝皇帝的为人我是了解的，若是把他迎接回来，必定会加害唐公而且向我进攻，这是毫无疑问的。
English: When Shi Bi Khan received Li Yuan's letter, he said to his minister: I understand the emperor of the Sui Dynasty. If I welcome him back, there is no doubt that he will harm Tang Gong and attack me.

古文：苟唐公自为天子，我当不避盛暑，以兵马助之。 
现代文：如果唐公自称天子，我应当不避盛署，以兵马去帮助他。 
English: If Tang Gong claimed to be the son of heaven, I should not avoid Sheng De and help him with soldiers and horses.

古文：即命以此意为复书。
现代文：始毕立即命令将这个意思写成回信。
English: He was immediately ordered to write a reply to that effect.

古文：使者七日而返，将佐皆喜，请从突厥之言，渊不可。
现代文：使者七天后返回，见信，李渊的将领僚佐们都很高兴，请李渊听从突厥人的话，李渊认为不可。
English: When the envoy returned seven days later and saw the letter, Li Yuan's generals and colleagues were very happy. They asked Li Yuan to listen to the Turks, but Li Yuan thought it was impossible.

古文：裴寂、刘文静等皆曰： 今义兵虽集而戎马殊乏，胡兵非所须，而马不可失；若复稽回，恐其有悔。 
现代文：裴寂、刘文静都说： 如今义兵虽然召集来了，但是军马还极为缺乏，胡兵并不是所需的，但胡人的马匹不可失去，如果再拖延而不回信，恐怕对方反悔。 
English: Pei Zhang and Liu Wenzhing both said: Although the volunteer soldiers have been called up, there is still a great shortage of horses. Hu soldiers are not needed, but the horses of the Hu people must not be lost. If you delay and do not reply, I am afraid that the other side will regret it.

古文：渊曰： 诸君宜更思其次。 
现代文：李渊说： 大家最好再想想别的办法。 
English: Li Yuan said: Everyone had better think of another way.

古文：寂等乃请尊天子为太上皇，立代王为帝，以安隋室；移檄郡县；改易旗帜，杂用绛白，以示突厥。
现代文：裴寂等人就请李渊尊炀帝为太上皇，立代王杨侑为皇帝，以安定隋王室；传布檄文到各郡县；改换旗帜，用红、白掺杂的颜色，以此向突厥示意不完全与隋室相同。
English: Peizhang and others asked Li Yuan to elevate Emperor Yongzheng to the rank of grand empress dowager and install King Yang Di as emperor in order to stabilize the Sui royal family; to disseminate the imperial edict to all counties; to change the flag, using red and white mixed colors, in order to indicate to the Turks that it was not completely the same as the Sui dynasty.

古文：渊曰： 此可谓 掩耳盗钟 ，然逼于时事，不得不尔。 
现代文：李渊说： 这可以说是 掩耳盗钟 ，但这是形势所迫，不得不如此啊。 
English: Li Yuan said: This can be said to be a cover-up, but this is forced by the situation, it has to be so.

古文：乃许之，遣使以此议告突厥。
现代文：于是就同意这样做，派使者将这个决定通知突厥。
English: He agreed to do so, and sent an envoy to inform the Turks of his decision.

古文：西河郡不从渊命，甲申，渊使建成、世民将兵击西河；命太原令太原温大有与之偕行，曰： 吾儿年少，以卿参谋军事；事之成败，当以此行卜之。 
现代文：西河郡不服从李渊的命令，甲申，李渊派李建成、李世民率兵进攻西河郡。命太原令太原人温大有与李建成等人同行。李渊对温大有说： 我儿子年轻，请您参与谋划军事，事情的成败，在此行就可预测出来了。 
English: Xihe County disobeyed Li Yuan's order. Jiashen, Li Yuan sent Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin to attack Xihe County. Taiyuan ordered Wen Dayu, a native of Taiyuan, to accompany Li Jiancheng and others. Li Yuan said to Wen Dayu: My son is young, please participate in military planning. The success or failure of the matter can be predicted on this trip.

古文：时军士新集，咸未阅习，建成、世民与之同甘苦，遇敌则以身先之。近道菜果，非买不食，军士有窃之者，辄求其主偿之，亦不诘窃者，军士及民皆感悦。
现代文：当时军队的士兵都是新近招募的，没有经过训练检阅。李建成、李世民与士卒同甘苦，遇到敌人身先士卒，附近道旁的蔬菜瓜果，不是买的不准吃，兵士有偷吃的，立刻找物主进行赔偿，也不责备偷窃者，士兵及百姓们都心悦诚服。
English: At that time, the soldiers of the army were all newly recruited and had not undergone training and inspection. Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin shared the hardships with the soldiers. When they encountered the enemy, they were at the forefront. The vegetables, fruits and melons near the roadside were not allowed to eat unless they were bought. If the soldiers stole food, they would immediately find the owner to make compensation. They did not blame the thief. The soldiers and the people were sincerely convinced.

古文：至西河城下，民有欲入城者，皆听其入。
现代文：李建成等率军到达西河城下，百姓有想进城的人，都听任其进入。
English: Li Jiancheng and others led the army to the west of the city, and the people who wanted to enter the city were allowed to enter.

古文：郡丞高德儒闭城拒守，己丑，攻拔之。执德儒至军门，世民数之曰： 汝指野鸟为鸾，以欺人主，取高官，吾兴义兵，正为诛佞人耳！ 
现代文：西河郡丞高德儒闭城拒守，己丑，李建成攻克西河城，将高德儒押到军营门口，李世民历数他的罪过说： 你指野鸟为鸾鸟来欺骗君主，骗取高官，我们兴义兵，正是要诛灭奸佞之人！ 
English: Gao De Rong, the county magistrate of Xihe County, closed the city and refused to defend it. He was ugly. Li Jiancheng conquered Xihe City and pushed Gao De Rong to the gate of the military camp. Li Shimin recounted his sins and said: You said that the wild bird was an ostrich to deceive the monarch and deceive high-ranking officials. We, the ruffian soldiers, are the ones who want to exterminate the ruffian!

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：于是将高德儒处死。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：自余不戮一人，秋毫无犯，各尉抚使复业，远近闻之大悦。
现代文：其余官员一个不杀，秋毫无犯，分别抚慰吏民百姓，让他们各复其业，远近的百姓听到后非常高兴。
English: The remaining officials did not kill anyone and did not commit any crimes. They consoled the officials and the people separately and let them each resume their duties. The people near and far were very happy to hear this.

古文：建成等引兵还晋阳，往返凡九日。
现代文：李建成等人率兵返回晋阳，往返共九日。
English: Li Jiancheng and others led the troops back to Jinyang, a round trip of nine days.

古文：渊喜曰： 以此行兵，虽横行天下可也。 
现代文：李渊高兴地说： 象这样用兵，就是横行天下也可以了！ 
English: Li Yuan said happily: If you use soldiers like this, you can run rampant all over the world!

古文：遂定入关之计。
现代文：于是就定下了入关计划。
English: So the entry plan was set.

古文：渊开仓以赈贫民，应募者日益多。
现代文：李渊开仓赈济贫民，应募当兵的人日益增多。
English: Li Yuan opened a warehouse to help the poor, and the number of people who wanted to be recruited as soldiers was increasing.

古文：渊命为三军，分左右，通谓之义士。
现代文：李渊命令将招募来的人分为三军，分左、右军，通称为义士。
English: Li Yuan ordered the recruited people to be divided into three armies, divided into the left and right armies, commonly known as the righteous.

古文：裴寂等上渊号为大将军，癸巳，建大将军府；以寂为长史，刘文静为司马，唐俭及前长安尉温大雅为记室，大雅仍与弟大有共掌机密，武士彟为铠曹，刘政会及武城崔善为、太原张道源为户曹，晋阳长上邽姜謩为司功参军，太谷长殷开山为府掾，长孙顺德、刘弘基、窦琮及鹰扬郎将高平王长谐、天水姜宝谊、阳屯为左、右统军；自馀文武，随才授任。
现代文：裴寂等人给李渊上尊号为大将军。癸巳，设置大将军府，任命裴寂为长史，刘文静为司马，唐俭和前长安尉温大雅为记室，温大雅仍和他弟弟温大有共同掌管机密，任命武士为铠曹，刘政会和武城人崔善为、太原人张道源为户曹，晋阳长上人姜为司功参军，太谷长殷开山为府掾，长孙顺德、刘弘基、窦琮和鹰扬郎将高平人王长谐、天水人姜宝谊、阳屯为左、右统军，其余的文武僚佐都按照才能授予官职。
English: Peizhang and others gave Li Yuan the honorific title of grand general. Later, he set up the general's office, appointed Peizhang as the chief historian, Liu Wenzhing as the secretary, Tang Jian and former Chang'an lieutenant Wen Daya as the secretary, Wen Daya still shared the secret with his brother Wen Daya, appointed the samurai as the secret agent, Liu Zhengkai and Wucheng man Cui Shan as the secret agent, Taiyuan man Zhang Douyuan as the household agent, Jinyang elder Jiang as the secret agent, Taiyuan elder Yin Kaishan as the prefectural governor, eldest grandson Shunde, Liu Hongji, Dou

古文：又以世子建成为陇西公，左领军大都督，左三统军隶焉；世民为敦煌公，右三统军隶焉各置官属。
现代文：李渊又封世子李建成为陇西公、左领军大都督，左三统军由他统辖；封李世民为敦煌公，右领军大都督，右三统军归他统辖，二人各设置官府僚属。
English: Li Yuan also appointed his heir, Li Jian, as the Duke of Shaanxi and the left leader of the Third Route Army, and the left Third Route Army was under his control; he appointed Li Shimin as the Duke of Dunhuang, the right leader of the Third Route Army, and the right Third Route Army was under his control, and both men were assigned to the government.

古文：以柴绍为右领军府长史；咨议谯人刘赡领西河通守。
现代文：任命柴绍为右领军府长史，谘议谯县人刘赡任西河通守。
English: He appointed Chai Shao as the right-hand leader of the army, the prefect of the prefecture, and Liu Yan, a person from Shixian County, was appointed as the governor of the West River.

古文：道源名河，开山名峤，皆以字行。
现代文：张道源名河，殷开山名峤，都是用字来称呼他们。
English: Zhang Daoyuan famous river, Yin Kaishan famous reed, are to use words to call them.

古文：开山，不害之孙也。
现代文：殷开山是殷不害的孙子。
English: Yin Kaishan is the grandson of Yin Nihong.

古文：李密复帅众向东都，丙申，大战于平乐园。
现代文：李密又统帅部众向东都进军，丙申，与隋军在平乐园大战。
English: Li Mi also led the general staff to march to Dongdu, and fought with the Sui army at Pingyuan.

古文：密左骑、右步、中列强弩，鸣千鼓以冲之，东都兵大败，密复取回洛仓。
现代文：李密左边部署骑兵，右边部署步兵，中间摆列强弩，敲响千面战鼓壮大声势以冲击隋军，东都兵大败，李密再次夺取了回洛仓。
English: Li Mi deployed cavalry on the left side, infantry on the right side, and in the middle he set up a line of strong horses, sounded a thousand war drums and shouted loudly to impact the Sui army, the Dongdu soldiers were defeated, and Li Mi once again captured Luocang.

古文：突厥遣其柱国康鞘利等送马千匹诣李渊为互市，许发兵送渊入关，多少随所欲。
现代文：突厥派他们的柱国康鞘利等人押送一千匹马到李渊处进行交易，并答应发兵送李渊入关，人数的多少随李渊定。
English: The Turks sent their vassal state, Kang Sheili, and others to escort a thousand horses to Li Yuan's place for trading, and promised to send soldiers to escort Li Yuan into the customs, the number of which would be determined by Li Yuan.

古文：丁酉，渊引见康鞘利等，受可汗书，礼容尽恭，赠遣康鞘利等甚厚。
现代文：丁酉，李渊会见了康鞘利等人，接受了可汗的书信，礼仪容止都极为恭敬，赠送给康鞘利等人的礼物也很丰厚。
English: Ding Xi, Li Yuan met with Kang Sheili and others, accepted the Khan's letter, the etiquette was extremely respectful, and the gifts given to Kang Sheili and others were also plentiful.

古文：择其马之善者，止市其半；义士请以私钱市其馀，渊曰： 虏饶马而贪利，其来将不已，恐汝不能市也。
现代文：李渊挑选马匹中的良马，只买了其中的一半。
English: Li Yuan selected the best horses and only bought half of them.

古文：吾所以少取者，示贫，且不以为急故也，当为汝贳之，不足为汝费。 
现代文：义士们请求用自己的私钱买下其余的马匹。李渊说： 胡人马匹多，但是贪利，他们会不断地来，恐怕你们就买不起了。我所以少买的原因就是向他们表示贫穷，而且也不是那么急用。我应当替你们付钱，不至于让你们破费。 
English: The righteous requested to use their own money to buy the rest of the horses. Li Yuan said: There are a lot of Hu people's horses, but they are greedy, they will keep coming, I'm afraid you can't afford it. The reason why I bought less is to show them that I'm poor, and it's not that urgent. I should pay for you, so that I don't cost you anything.

古文：乙巳，灵寿贼帅郗士陵帅众数千降于渊，渊以为镇东将军、燕郡公，仍置镇东府，补僚属，以招抚山东郡县。
现代文：乙巳，灵寿县的贼帅郗士陵统帅部众几千人归降李渊。李渊封郗士陵为镇东将军、燕郡公，仍设置镇东府，补充镇东府的僚属，以此招抚潼关以东各郡县。
English: At the same time, thousands of soldiers from the general staff of the Tomb of the Thieves and Soldiers in Lingshou County surrendered to Li Yuan. Li Yuan made the Tomb of the Thieves and Soldiers as the Zhendong General and the Yan County, and still set up the Zhendong Prefecture to supplement the subordinates of the Zhendong Prefecture, in order to entice the counties and counties east of Shaoguan.

古文：己巳，康鞘利北还。
现代文：己巳，康鞘利返回北方。
English: Soon after, Kang She Wali returned to the north.

古文：渊命刘文静使于突厥以请兵，私谓文静曰： 胡骑入中国，生民之大蠹也。
现代文：李渊命令刘文静出使突厥请求发兵，他私下对刘文静说： 胡骑进入中国，是黎民百姓的大害。
English: Li Yuan ordered Liu Wenzhing to send an envoy to the Turks to request the dispatch of troops. He said to Liu Wenzhing in private: "Hoo riding into China is a great harm to the people of Li."

古文：吾所以欲得之者，恐刘武周引之共为边患；又，胡马行牧，不费刍粟，聊欲藉之以为声势耳。数百人之外，无所用之。 
现代文：我所以要突厥人发兵，是怕刘武周勾结突厥一起成为边境上的祸患。另外，胡马是放牧饲养的，不用耗费草料，我只是要借突厥人的兵马以壮声势，几百人也就够了，没有别的用途。 
English: The reason why I want the Turks to send troops is that I am afraid that Liu Wuzhou will collude with the Turks and become a scourge on the border. In addition, Huma is pasture-raised and does not need to consume grass. I just want to borrow the Turks' soldiers and horses to make a loud noise. A few hundred people are enough, there is no other use.

古文：秋，七月，炀帝遣江都通守王世充将江、淮劲卒，将军王隆帅邛黄蛮，河北大使太常少卿韦霁、河南大使虎牙郎将王辩等各帅所领同赴东都，相知讨李密。
现代文：秋季，七月，炀帝派江都通守王世充率领江、淮的精兵，将军王隆率领邛都夷部的黄蛮，河北讨捕大使太常少卿韦霁，河南讨捕大使虎牙郎将王辩等崐人各自率领辖下的军队一同赶赴东都，协同讨伐李密。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Zhou sent Wang Shichong, the keeper of the Yangtze River, to lead the elite soldiers of the Yangtze River and Huai River provinces, General Wang Long led the Huangban of the Yangtze River, Hebei Ambassador Wei Wei, Henan Ambassador Koga Lang led the troops under the command of Wang Dian and others to the Eastern Capital to jointly fight against Li Mi.

古文：霁，世康之子也。
现代文：韦霁是韦世康的儿子。
English: Wei Wei is the son of Wei Shikang.

古文：壬子，李渊以子元吉为太原太守，留守晋阳宫，后事悉委之。
现代文：壬子，李渊任命儿子李元吉为太原太守，留守晋阳宫，一切后方事务都委托他处理。
English: In response, Li Yuanrong appointed his son Li Yuanji as the governor of Taiyuan and left him in charge of the Jinyang Palace, entrusting him with all the rear affairs.

古文：丙辰，渊至西河，慰劳吏民，赈赡穷乏；民年七十已上，皆除散官，其馀豪俊，随才授任，口询功能，手注官秩，一日除千馀人；受官皆不取告身，各分渊所书官名而去。
现代文：凡年纪在七十岁以上的人，都授予散官的职务，其余的豪强俊杰，都根据才能授予职务。李渊一边询问来人的功劳、才能，一边注册授予的官职等级。一天就任命官员一千余人。接受官职的人都不拿任命状，他们各自拿着李渊所写的官名状离去。
English: Li Yuan, while inquiring about the merits and talents of those who came to him, also registered the official ranks they had been awarded. He appointed more than a thousand officials in one day. Those who accepted the official posts did not take the appointment certificates, but each of them left with the official title certificate written by Li Yuan.

古文：渊入雀鼠谷；壬戌，军贾胡堡，去霍邑五十馀里。
现代文：李渊率军进入雀鼠谷。壬戍，在贾胡堡驻军，贾胡堡距霍邑五十余里。
English: Li Yuan led his army into the Valley of the Sparrow Mice. In Nyingchi, the army was stationed at Jahu Fort, which was more than fifty miles away from Huo'e.

古文：代王侑遣虎牙郎将宋老生帅精兵二万屯霍邑，左武候大将军屈突通将骁果数万屯河东以拒渊。
现代文：代王杨侑派遣虎牙郎将宋老生率领精兵两万人在霍邑驻防。左武侯大将军屈突通驻军河东以抵御李渊。
English: The acting king, Yang Pi, sent Koga Lang to garrison Song Laosheng with 20,000 elite soldiers in Hoi'e, and Zuo Hou's general, Qu Jutong, to garrison Hedong to defend against Li Yuan.

古文：会积雨，渊不得进，遣府佐沈叔安等将羸兵还太原，更运一月粮。
现代文：正逢连续大雨，李渊无法进军，他派遣府佐沈叔安等人率领老弱病兵返回太原，每运一个月的粮食来。
English: At the time of continuous heavy rain, Li Yuan was unable to march. He sent Fu Sasa, Shen Shu'an and others to lead the old and sick soldiers back to Taiyuan, each carrying a month's worth of grain.

古文：乙丑，张纶克离石，杀太守杨子崇。
现代文：乙丑，张纶攻克了离石郡，杀太守杨子崇。
English: Second Ugly, Zhang Ye conquered Liishi County and killed Yang Zizong, the governor of Taizhou.

古文：刘文静至突厥，见始毕可汗，请兵，且与之约曰： 若入长安，民众土地入唐公，金玉缯帛归突厥。 
现代文：刘文静到突厥，拜见了始毕可汗，请求派兵，并且与始毕约定， 要是进入长安，百姓、土地归唐公，金玉绫罗归突厥。 
English: Liu Wenjing went to Turkestan, met Shi Bi Khan, requested the dispatch of troops, and agreed with Shi Bi that if he entered Chang'an, the people and land would be returned to Tang, and the jade and gems would be returned to Turkestan.

古文：始毕大喜，丙寅，遣其大臣级失特勒先至渊军，告以兵已上道。
现代文：始毕可汗大喜。丙寅，始毕派大臣级失特勒先往李渊的军营，通知他突厥军已经上路。
English: At first, Khan Bi was overjoyed. Bình Yình sent a minister-level official to Li Yuan's military camp to inform him that the Turkish army was on its way.

古文：渊以书招李密。
现代文：李渊写书信招附李密。
English: Li Yuan wrote a letter to Li Mi.

古文：密自恃兵强，欲为盟主，己巳，使祖君彦复书曰： 与兄派流虽异，根系本同。
现代文：李密自恃兵强势盛想自作盟主。他让祖君彦回信说： 我和兄长虽然家支派系不同，但同是李姓，根系是相同的。
English: He asked Zu Junyan to write back and say: Although my brother and I are from different branches of the family, we share the same surname, Li, and the same roots.

古文：自唯虚薄，为四海英雄共推盟主。
现代文：我自认为势单力薄，但却为天下的英雄共推为盟主。
English: I consider myself to be a weak individual, but I am the leader of the world's heroes.

古文：所望左提右挈，戮力同心，执子婴于咸阳，殪商辛于牧野，岂不盛哉！ 
现代文：希望互相扶持，同心协力，完成在咸阳抓住秦子婴、在牧野灭掉商辛这样的大业，岂不很宏伟吗？ 
English: Isn't it grand to hope to support each other and work together to complete the great cause of catching Qin Ziying in Xianyang and eliminating Shang Xin in Makino?

古文：且欲使渊以步骑数千自至河内，面结盟约。
现代文：他还想让李渊亲自率领步骑兵几千人到河内郡，二人当面缔结盟约。
English: He also wanted Li Yuan to personally lead several thousand infantry and cavalry to Hanoi County, and the two would sign an alliance agreement face to face.

古文：渊得书，笑曰： 密妄自矜大，非折简可致。吾方有事关中，若遽绝之，乃是更生一敌；不如卑辞推奖以骄其志，使为我塞成皋之道，缀东都之兵，我得专意西征。
现代文：李渊接到信后，笑着说： 李密妄自尊大，不是书信就能招来的，我在关中正有战事，若马上断绝了与他的来往，就是又树了一个敌人，不如用阿谀逢承之语吹捧他，使他心志骄横，让他替我挡住成皋之道，牵制东都之兵，我就可以专心一意地进行西征。
English: After receiving the letter, Li Yuan said with a smile: Li Miao is arrogant, and he can be summoned not by letter, I am at war in Guanzhong. If I immediately cut off contact with him, I will create another enemy. It would be better to praise him with the words of Ah Fu Xiong, make him arrogant, let him block the road to Chengkun for me, and distract the soldiers of Dongdu, so that I can concentrate on the Western Expedition.

古文：俟关中平定，据险养威，徐观鹬蚌之势以收渔人之功，未为晚也。 
现代文：待到关中平定以后，我们依据险要之地，养精蓄锐，慢慢地观看鹬蚌之争以坐收渔人之利，也并不晚啊。 
English: After waiting for the middle of the pass to be leveled, we will slowly watch the battle of the cormorants to collect the fishermen's benefits according to the critical place, keep our energy up, and it's not too late.

古文：乃使温大雅复书曰： 吾虽庸劣，幸承馀绪，出为八使，入典六屯，颠而不扶，通贤所责。
现代文：于是他让温大雅回信说： 我虽然平庸愚味，幸而承继了祖宗的功业，使我出任为八使之要职，回朝任将军。
English: So he sent a letter back to Wenda Ya saying: Although I am mediocre and stupid, I have fortunately succeeded the work of my ancestors, and I have been appointed to the important post of the eighth emperor and returned to the imperial court as a general.

古文：所以大会义兵，和亲北狄，共匡天下，志在尊隋。
现代文：国家有难而不出来扶助，是所有的贤人君子都要责备的，所以我才大规模地招集义兵，与北狄和亲，共同救助天下，志向在于尊崇隋王室。
English: It is reprehensible for all wise men and gentlemen not to come to the aid of the country when it is in difficulty, so that is why I have called up volunteers on a large scale to help the world together with Bei Di and relatives. My ambition is to honor the Sui royal family.

古文：天生烝民，必有司牧。当今为牧，非子而谁！
现代文：天生众生，必要有管理他们的人，而今为治民之官的人，不是您又能是谁呢？
English: All creatures by nature must have someone to govern them, and if you are not the one who is now the ruler of the people, who can you be?

古文：老夫年逾知命，愿不及此。
现代文：老夫我已过了知命之年，没有这个崐心愿了。
English: Old man, I'm past the age of dying, and I don't have this wish anymore.

古文：欣戴大弟，攀鳞附翼，唯弟早膺图箓，以宁兆民！
现代文：我很高兴拥戴您，这已经是攀鳞附翼了，希望您早些应验图谶，以安定万民！
English: I am very happy to support you, this is already a scale-climbing attached wing, I hope you will fulfill the dream sooner to stabilize the people!

古文：宗盟之长，属籍见容，复封于唐，斯荣足矣。
现代文：您是宗盟之长，我的宗属之籍都还须得到您的容纳。您将我还封在唐地，这样的殊荣已经够了。
English: You are the head of the clan, and all my clan members still need to be accommodated by you. You have also sealed me in Tang, such a great honor is enough.

古文：殪商辛于牧野，所不忍言；执子婴于咸阳，未敢闻命。
现代文：将商辛诛灭于牧野这样的大业，我是不敢说的，至于在咸阳抓住秦子婴之事，我也是不敢听命于您的。
English: I dare not speak of the great undertaking of exterminating Shang Xin in Makino, and I dare not obey your order to seize Qin Zi's baby in Xianyang.

古文：汾晋左右，尚须安辑；盟津之会，未暇卜期。 
现代文：汾晋一带，还需要我安抚管理，盟津之会盟，我还顾不上卜定日期。 
English: In the vicinity of Binjin, I still need to pacify the management, and I can't take into account the date of the meeting of the alliance and the alliance of the alliance.

古文：密得书甚喜。以示将佐曰： 唐公见推，天下不足定矣！ 
现代文：李密收到李渊的信后很是高兴，他将信给僚佐们看，说： 唐公推举我，天下很容易就平定了！ 
English: After Li Mi received Li Yuan's letter, he was very happy. He showed the letter to his colleagues and said: Tang Gong elected me, and the world was easily pacified!

古文：自是信使往来不绝。
现代文：从此，双方的信使往来不绝。
English: From then on, messengers from both sides were in constant contact.

古文：雨久不止，渊军中粮乏；刘文静未返，或传突厥与刘武周乘虚晋阳；渊召将佐谋北还。
现代文：雨下了很长时间还不止，李渊的军队缺粮，刘文静也还没有回来，有人传言突厥人与刘武周乘虚袭击晋阳。李渊召集将领僚佐们商议向北返回。
English: It had been raining for a long time, Li Yuan's army was short of food, and Liu Wenzhing had not yet returned. There were rumors that the Turks and Liu Wuzhou were taking advantage of the situation to attack Jinyang. Li Yuan called together his generals and advisors to discuss returning north.

古文：裴寂等皆曰： 宋老生、屈突通连兵据险，未易猝下。李密虽云连和，奸谋难测。突厥贪而无信，唯利是视。武周，事胡者也。
现代文：裴寂等人都说： 宋老生、屈突通联合居守险要，不容易很快攻下；李密虽说要联合，但是他的奸诈图谋难以揣测；突厥人贪利而无信义，唯利是图；刘武周又是向胡人称臣的人。
English: Peizhang and others all said: Song Laosheng and Qu Jutong jointly occupy a precarious position, and it is not easy to quickly capture it; Li Mi, although he wants to unite, but his treacherous plot is difficult to guess; Turks are greedy and have no faith, but are only interested in profit; Liu Wuzhou is also a person who praises his subordinates to Hu.

古文：太原一方都会，且义兵家属在焉，不如还救根本，更图后举。 
现代文：太原为一方的都会，而且义兵的家属都在太原，不如返回救援根本之地，再筹划今后的义举。 
English: Taiyuan is the capital of one side, and the families of the volunteers are all in Taiyuan. It is better to return to the rescue base and then plan the future charity.

古文：李世民曰： 今禾菽被野，何优乏粮！
现代文：李世民说： 现在稻谷遍野都是，还愁无粮吗？
English: Li Shimin said: Now that rice is everywhere, are you still worried about having no grain?

古文：老生轻躁，一战可擒。
现代文：宋老生为人轻狂浮躁，一战就可以擒住他。
English: Song Laosheng is frivolous and impetuous, he can be captured in one battle.

古文：李密顾恋仓粟，未遑远略。
现代文：李密舍不得粮仓粟米，顾不上向远处图谋。
English: Li Mi does not want to have grain silos full of corn, and does not care about plotting in the distance.

古文：武周与突厥外虽相附，内实相猜。
现代文：刘武周和突厥人表面上虽然相互依赖，但实际上却互相猜忌。
English: Although Liu Wuzhou and the Turks are mutually dependent on the surface, they are actually suspicious of each other.

古文：武周虽远利太原，岂可近忘马邑！
现代文：刘武周虽然追逐远利而攻取太原，但岂肯忘记就近的马邑呢？
English: Although Liu Wuzhou pursued distant interests and conquered Taiyuan, would he forget the nearby Ma'yun?

古文：本兴大义，奋不顾身以救苍生，当先入咸阳，号令天下。
现代文：我们本来是兴大义，奋不顾身地拯救百姓，应当先行进入咸阳，号令天下。
English: Originally, we were upholding the great cause of justice and saving the people at all costs. We should have entered Xianyang first and shouted to the world.

古文：今遇小敌，遽已班师，恐从义之徒一朝解体，还守太原一城之地为贼耳，何以自全！ 
现代文：现在只遇到了小敌，立刻就要班师，恐怕跟随起义的人一旦解体，返回去守卫太原一城之地，我们就成贼了，怎么能保全自己呢？ 
English: Now that we have only encountered a small enemy, we must immediately form a team. I am afraid that once the people who follow the uprising are disbanded and return to guard the land of Taiyuan, we will become thieves. How can we protect ourselves?

古文：李建成亦以为然。渊不听，促令引发。
现代文：李建成也认为李世民的话对，但李渊不听，催促军队出发。
English: Li Jiancheng also thought that Li Shimin's words were right, but Li Yuan did not listen and urged the army to leave.

古文：世民将复入谏，会日暮，渊已寝；世民不得入，号哭于外，声闻帐中。
现代文：李世民再要进入李渊的营帐劝阻，可是天黑了，李渊已经躺下休息。
English: Li Shimin tried to dissuade him from entering Li Yuan's camp again, but it was dark and Li Yuan had already laid down to rest.

古文：渊召问之，世民曰： 今兵以义动，进战则克，退还则散；众散于前，敌乘于后，死亡无日，何得不悲！ 
现代文：李世民进不去，就在帐外号哭，哭声传到了帐中，李渊召见世民问话，世民说： 如今我们举兵是为大义，进军攻战就能取胜，后退就会溃散，到那时，部众溃散在前，敌军追击在后，我们被灭亡的日子就到了。怎么能不悲伤呢？ 
English: When Li Shimin couldn't get in, he cried loudly outside the account, and his cries reached the account. Li Yuan summoned the world's people for questioning. The world's people said, "Nowadays, we raise an army for the greater good. If we march into battle, we can win. If we retreat, we will be scattered. At that time, our subordinates will be scattered in front, and the enemy army will pursue behind, and the day of our destruction will come. How can we not be sad?

古文：渊乃悟，曰： 军已发，奈何？ 
现代文：李渊醒悟过来，说： 军队已经出发，怎么办呢？ 
English: Li Yuan came to his senses and said: The army has set off, what should we do?

古文：世民曰： 右军严而未发；左军虽去，计亦未远，请自追之。 
现代文：李世民说： 右军整装而未发，左军虽然出发，估计还没走远，请让我去追赶他们。 
English: Li Shimin said, "The right-wing army is fully equipped but hasn't set out, while the left-wing army has set out but hasn't gone far, so please let me go after them."

古文：渊笑曰： 吾之成败皆在尔，知复何言，唯尔所为。 
现代文：李渊笑道： 我的成败都在于你，知道了还说什么呢？
English: Li Yuan said with a smile: My success or failure is all up to you. Knowing this, what else can I say?

古文：世民乃与建成分道夜追左军复还。
现代文：随你去做吧。 李世民和李建成连夜把左军追了回来。
English: Do as you please. Li Shimin and Li Jiancheng drove back the Left Army overnight.

古文：丙子，太原运粮亦至。
现代文：丙子，太原的粮食也运到了。
English: Well, the grain from Taiyuan has also arrived.

古文：武威鹰扬府司马李轨，家富，好任侠。
现代文：武威鹰扬府司马李轨，家中富有，喜好侠义之举。
English: Wuwei Yingyangfu Sima Li Liao, rich at home, likes chivalry.

古文：薛举作乱于金城，轨与同郡曹珍、关谨、梁硕、李赟、安修仁等谋曰： 薛举必来侵暴，郡官庸怯，势不能御，吾辈岂可束手并妻孥为人所虏邪！
现代文：薛举在金城作乱，李轨和同郡的曹珍、关谨、梁硕、李、安仁等人商议说： 薛举必定前来侵犯暴虐，郡官昏庸、怯懦，看情势不能抵御，但我们怎么能毫不抵抗就让自己和妻子儿女作人家的俘虏呢？
English: When Xue Jiu started a riot in Jincheng, Li Lu and his fellow county officials Cao Zhen, Guan Zhen, Liang Shuo, Li, Anren and others discussed and said: Xue Jiu will certainly come to violate the tyranny, the county officials are dull and cowardly, seeing the situation cannot be resisted, but how can we let ourselves and our wives and children become captives of others without resistance?

古文：不若相与并力拒之，保据河右以待天下之变。 
现代文：不如大家同心协力共同抵抗薛举，据保河右以等待形势发生变化。 
English: It would be better for everyone to make a concerted effort to jointly resist Xue's move and wait for the situation to change.

古文：众皆以为然，欲推一人为主，各相让，莫肯当。
现代文：大家都认为这个意见很对。想推举一个人为首领，大家崐各自推让，不肯出来为首。
English: Everyone agreed that this opinion was right. If they wanted to nominate someone as leader, everyone would have to make concessions and refuse to come out as leader.

古文：曹珍曰： 久闻图谶李氏当王；今轨在谋中，乃天命也。 
现代文：曹珍说： 我久闻图谶上说李氏应当为王，今天李轨也参加了这一谋划，这是天命。 
English: Cao Zhen said: I have heard for a long time that the Li clan should be king, and today Li Rail also participated in this plan. This is the destiny of heaven.

古文：遂相与拜轨，奉以为主。
现代文：于是大家一同向李轨跪拜，奉他为主。
English: So we all knelt down together to Li Rail and worshipped him as Lord.

古文：丙辰，轨令修仁集诸胡，轨结民间豪杰，共起兵，执虎贲郎将谢统师、郡丞韦士政。
现代文：丙辰，李轨命令安修仁召集各部落的胡人，李轨结交民间的豪杰之士，共同起兵，抓住虎贲郎将谢统师，郡丞韦士政。
English: Bing Chen, Li Rail ordered An Xiu Ren to gather the Hu people of all tribes, Li Rail made friends with the folk heroes, and jointly raised an army to seize the tiger's son, General Xie Junshi, and the county magistrate Wei Shizheng.

古文：轨自称河西大凉王，置官属并拟开皇故事。
现代文：李轨自称河西大凉王，设置官府僚属全都模仿隋文帝开皇年间的成例。
English: Li Liao claimed to be the king of cool in Hexi, and set up all the subordinates of the government to imitate the example of the Sui and Wen Dynasties.

古文：关谨等欲尽杀隋官，分其家赀，轨曰： 诸人既逼以为主，当禀其号令。
现代文：关谨等人要将隋官杀尽，分掉他们的家产，李轨说： 各位既然推举我为主，就应当听我的号令。
English: Guan Zheng and others wanted to kill all the Sui officials and divide up their family property. Li Luo said: Since you have elected me as lord, you should listen to my command.

古文：今兴义兵以救生民，乃杀人取货，此群盗耳，将何以济！ 
现代文：如今兴义兵是为了拯救百姓，杀人越货，这就成了群盗了！我们将靠什么取得成功呢？ 
English: Today, the volunteer soldiers are raised to save the people, kill people and smuggle goods, which has become a group of thieves! What will we rely on to succeed?

古文：于是以统师为太仆卿，士政为太府卿。
现代文：于是他任命谢统师为太仆卿，韦士政为太府卿。
English: Therefore, he appointed Xie Junshi as Dajuqing and Wei Shizheng as Dafuqing.

古文：西突厥阙达度设据会宁川，自称阙可汗，请降于轨。
现代文：西突厥的阙度设占据会宁川，自称阙可汗，他向李轨请求投降。
English: The Western Turkic khan of Ningchuan, who called himself the Khan of Ningchuan, asked Li Liao to surrender.

古文：薛举自称秦帝，立其妻鞠氏为皇后，子仁果为皇太子。
现代文：薛举自称秦帝，立妻子鞠氏为皇后，儿子薛仁果为皇太子。
English: Xue Jiu claimed to be the Emperor of Qin, his wife Mu as the Empress, and his son Xue Rengo as the Crown Prince.

古文：遣仁果将兵围天水，克之，举自金城徙都之。
现代文：派遣薛仁果率兵包围并攻克了天水，薛举从金城迁都于天水。
English: He sent Xue Rengguo and his soldiers to encircle and conquer Tianshui. Xue Jiu moved the capital from Jincheng to Tianshui.

古文：仁果多力，善骑射，军中号万人敌；然性贪而好杀。
现代文：薛仁果很有力气，善于骑射，军中号称万人敌。
English: Xue Rengguo is very strong, good at riding and shooting, and is known as a mortal enemy in the army.

古文：尝获庾信子立，怒其不降，磔于火上，稍割以啖军士。
现代文：但是他生性贪婪、残忍、嗜杀成性，曾经抓住庾信的儿子庾立，他为庾立不肯投降而发怒，将庾立在火上分尸，然后一点点地割下肉来让军士们吃。
English: But he was greedy, cruel, and murderous by nature. He once grabbed Xuan Xin's son, Xuan Li. He was angry that Xuan Li refused to surrender. He would cut up Xuan Li's body on the fire, and then cut off the flesh little by little for the soldiers to eat.

古文：及克天水，悉召富人，倒悬之，以醋灌鼻，责其金宝。
现代文：待他攻下了天水，把天水的富人都召来，倒吊起来，用醋灌鼻子，向他们索取金宝。
English: After he captured Tianshui, he summoned the rich people of Tianshui, hung them upside down, doused their noses with vinegar, and demanded gold from them.

古文：举每戒之曰： 汝之才略足以办事，然苛虐无恩，终当覆我国家。 
现代文：薛举常常训诫他说： 你的才能谋略足以办事，但是生性严苛酷虐，对人不能施恩，终归要倾覆我的家和国呵！ 
English: Xueqiu often admonished him: "Your talent and strategy are enough to do things, but your nature is harsh and cruel, you can't be kind to others, and you will eventually overthrow my home and country!"

古文：举遣晋王仁越将兵趋剑口，至河池郡；太守萧瑀拒却之。
现代文：薛举派晋王薛仁越率兵奔赴剑口，走到河池郡时，河池太守萧抵御薛仁越。
English: Xue Qiu sent the Jin king Xue Ren Yue and his soldiers to run to Jiankou, and when they reached Hechi County, Hechi Taishu Xiao defended against Xue Ren Yue.

古文：又遣其将常仲兴济河击李轨，与轨将李赟战于昌松，仲兴举军败没。
现代文：薛举又派部将常仲兴渡黄河去进击李轨，与李轨的部将李在昌松交战，常仲兴全军覆没。
English: Xue Qiu also sent his subordinate, Changzhong Xing, across the Yellow River to attack Li Rail. He fought with Li Rail's subordinate, Li in Changsong, and Changzhong Xing's entire army was wiped out.

古文：轨欲纵遣之，斌曰： 力战获俘，复纵以资敌，将焉用之！
现代文：李轨要将俘虏全都放走，李说： 奋力作战才俘获的，却将他们放走去帮助敌军，为什么这样做呢？
English: Li Rail wanted to release all the prisoners. Li said, "Why did you release those who were captured after a hard-fought battle to help the enemy?

古文：不如尽坑之。 
现代文：不如全部坑杀了。 
English: Might as well kill them all.

古文：轨曰： 天若祚我，当擒其主，此属终为我有；若其无成，留此何益！ 
现代文：李轨说： 上天要是赐福于我，就应当抓住他们的首领，这些人终归还是为我所有。要是我事业无成，留下他们又有什么好处呢？ 
English: Li Liao said, "If Heaven blesses me, I should seize their leaders. These people will eventually belong to me. If my cause is not successful, what is the benefit of leaving them?

古文：乃纵之。
现代文：于是将俘虏放走。
English: The captives were then released.

古文：未几，攻张掖、敦煌、西平、包罕，皆克之，尽有河西五郡之地。
现代文：不久，李轨进攻张掖、敦煌、西平、罕，全部攻克，河西五郡全部为李轨据有。
English: Soon, Li Rail attacked Zhangye, Dunhuang, Xiping, and Han, and conquered them all. All five counties in Hexi were under Li Rail's control.

古文：炀帝诏左御卫大将军涿郡留守薛世雄将燕地精兵三万讨李密，命王世充等诸将皆受世雄节度，军所过盗贼随便诛剪。
现代文：炀帝下诏命左御卫大将军涿郡留守薛世雄率领燕地的精兵三万讨伐李密。他命令王世充等将领都受薛世雄指挥，所遇见的盗贼，可以随便诛杀。
English: Emperor Yao decreed that Zuo Wei's general, Xue Shixiong, who was left behind in Yao County, should lead the 30,000 elite soldiers of Yan Di to fight against Li Mi. He ordered Wang Shichong and other generals to be under the command of Xue Shixiong, and any thieves they encountered could be killed at will.

古文：世雄行至河间，军于七里井，窦建德士众惶惧，悉拔诸城南遁，声言还入豆子卤亢。
现代文：薛世雄走到河间，在七里井驻军。窦建德的部众惊惶恐惧，从占领的各城池中撤出向南逃走，声称返回豆子。
English: Xue Shixiong marched to the middle of the river and garrisoned his troops in Qilijing. Dou Jiande's subordinates panicked and fled south, withdrawing from the occupied cities and claiming to be returning to the beans.

古文：世雄以为畏己，不复设备，建德谋还袭之。
现代文：薛世雄认为他们是惧怕自己，不再提防。窦建德策划回击隋军。
English: Xue Shixiong thought that they were afraid of themselves and no longer guarded against it. Dou Jiande planned to strike back at the Sui army.

古文：其处去世雄营百四十里，建德帅敢死士二百八十人先行，令馀众续发，建德与其士众约曰： 夜至，则击其营；已明，则降之。 
现代文：窦建德驻地距薛世雄的军营有一百四十里，建德率领敢死队二百八十人先行，命令其余的人随即陆续出发，并与士兵约好， 夜里到达薛营就进攻他们，若到达时天已经放明，就投降。 
English: Dou Jiande's camp was 140 miles away from Xue Shixiong's camp. Jiande led a death squad of 280 people ahead of him and ordered the rest of the people to leave one after another. He made an appointment with the soldiers. When they arrived at Xue's camp at night, they would attack them. If the sky was clear when they arrived, they would surrender.

古文：未至一里所，天欲明，建德惶惑议降；会天大雾，人咫尺不相辨，建德喜曰： 天赞我也！ 
现代文：他率军走到距薛营不到一里的地方，天就要亮了，窦建德惶惑，和大家商议投降之事。恰好天降大雾，人相隔咫都无法辨认，窦建德高兴地说： 天助我也！ 
English: He led his army to a place less than a mile from Xue's camp. The sky was about to light up, and Dou Jiande was confused and discussed the matter of surrender with everyone. It just so happened that a heavy fog descended from the sky, and it was impossible to distinguish people from each other. Dou Jiande happily said, "Heaven help me, too!"

古文：遂突入其营击之，世雄士卒大乱，皆腾栅走。世雄不能禁，与左右数十骑遁归涿郡，惭恚发病卒。
现代文：于是率军突入薛营袭击他们。薛世雄兵营大乱，兵卒们都翻越栅栏逃走，薛世雄无法制止，他只和左右几十名骑兵逃回涿郡。薛世雄惭愧忧愤，发病去世。
English: As a result, he led his army into Xue's camp to attack them. Xue Shixiong's camp was in chaos, the soldiers all climbed over the fence to escape, Xue Shixiong could not stop them, he only fled back to the county with dozens of cavalrymen. Xue Shixiong was ashamed and angry, and died of the disease.

古文：建德遂围河间。
现代文：窦建德就包围了河间。
English: Dou Jiande then encircled Hema.

古文：八月，己卯，雨霁。
现代文：八月，己卯，雨停了。
English: It's August and the rain has stopped.

古文：庚辰，李渊命军中曝铠仗行装。
现代文：庚辰，李渊命令部队晾晒铠甲、器械、行装。
English: Geng Chen and Li Yuan ordered the troops to dry their armor, equipment and baggage.

古文：辛巳旦，东南由山足细道趣霍邑。
现代文：辛巳，早晨，李渊率军从山脚下的小路向东南直抵霍邑。
English: Suddenly, in the morning, Li Yuan led the army from the path at the foot of the mountain to the southeast to Ho'eup.

古文：渊恐宋老生不出，李建成、李世民曰： 老生勇而无谋，以轻骑挑之，理无不出；脱其固守，则诬以贰于我。彼恐为左右所奏，安敢不出！ 
现代文：李渊怕宋老生不出战，李建成、李世民说： 宋老生有勇无谋，我们用轻骑向他挑战，按理他不会不出战，假使他坚守不出，我们就诬陷他对我们有贰心，他害怕被左右的人奏报，怎敢不出战呢？ 
English: Li Yuan was afraid that Song Laosheng would not go to war. Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin said: Song Laosheng has no courage and no strategy. We challenged him with a light horse. It is reasonable that he would not go to war. If he could not hold out, we would frame him as having a grudge against us. He was afraid of being reported by those around him. How dare he not go to war?

古文：渊曰： 汝测之善，老生不能逆战贾胡，吾知其无能为也！ 
现代文：李渊说： 你们估计得对，在贾胡堡时宋老生未能迎战我军，我知道他是没有作为的。 
English: Li Yuan said: You are right in your estimation. When Song Laosheng failed to fight against our army at the Jiahu Fort, I know that he did nothing.

古文：渊与数百骑先至霍邑城东数里以待步兵，使建成、世民将数十骑至城下，举鞭指麾，若将围城之状，且诟之。
现代文：李渊和几百名骑兵先到霍邑城东面几里的地方等待步兵，派李建成、李世民率领几十骑到城下，举鞭挥旗就象要包围城池的样子，并且辱骂宋老生。
English: Li Yuan and several hundred cavalry first went to a place a few miles east of Huo'i City to wait for the infantry, sent Li Jiancheng and Li Shimin led dozens of cavalry to the city, raised the whip and waved the flag as if to encircle the city, and abused Song Laosheng.

古文：老生怒，引兵三万自东门、南门分道而出，渊使殷开山趣召后军。后军至，渊欲使军士先食而战，世民曰： 时不可失。 
现代文：宋老生大怒，率三万人从东门、南门分道出战。李渊派殷开山立刻去召集后军，后军来到后，李渊想让军士门先吃饭再战斗，李世民说： 时机不可失！ 
English: Song Laosheng was furious and led 30,000 people to go to war from the East Gate and South Gate. Li Yuan sent Yin Kaishan to immediately summon the rearguard. After the rearguard arrived, Li Yuan wanted to let the sergeants eat first and then fight. Li Shimin said: Don't lose the opportunity!

古文：渊乃与建成陈于城东，世民陈于城南。
现代文：李渊就和李建成在城东列阵，李世民在城南列阵。
English: Li Yuan and Li Jiancheng lined up in the east of the city, and Li Shimin lined up in the south of the city.

古文：渊、建成战小却，世民与军头临淄段志玄自南原引兵驰下，冲老生陈，出其背，世民手杀数十人，两刀皆缺，流血满袖，洒之复战。
现代文：李渊、李建成与宋老生交战，稍有退却，李世民与军头临淄人段志玄从南原率兵驰马而下，冲击宋老生的军阵，出击宋老生军的背后。李世民亲手杀死几十人，两把刀子都砍缺了口，飞溅的鲜血沾满衣袖，世民将血甩掉再战。
English: Li Yuan, Li Jiancheng and Song Laosheng engaged in battle and retreated slightly. Li Shimin and the commander of Linyi, Duan Zhixuan, galloped down from Nanyuan with their soldiers, stormed Song Laosheng's army line and attacked the back of Song Laosheng's army. Li Shimin killed dozens of people with his own hands. Both knives were notched, splattered blood stained his sleeves, and the people threw off the blood and fought again.

古文：渊兵复振，因传呼曰： 已获老生矣！ 
现代文：李渊的兵势又振奋起来，就传话呼喊： 已经抓住宋老生了！ 
English: Li Yuan's troops became excited again and sent out a message shouting: "We have caught Song Laosheng!"

古文：老生兵大败，渊兵先趣其门，门闭，老生下马投堑，刘弘基就斩之，僵尸数里。
现代文：宋老生军因此大败。李渊兵迅速直抵城门，城门关闭了，宋老生下马跳入壕沟，刘弘基就将他杀死，隋军的死尸遍布几里。
English: As a result, Song Laosheng's army was defeated. Li Yuan's soldiers quickly reached the city gate, the city gate was closed, Song Laosheng dismounted and jumped into the trench, Liu Hongji killed him, and the dead bodies of the Sui army were spread over several miles.

古文：日已暮，渊即命登城，时无攻具，将士肉薄而登，遂克之。
现代文：天已黑了，李渊立即命令登城，当时没有攻城的器械，将士们赤膊登城，攻下霍邑。
English: It was already dark, Li Yuan immediately ordered to go to the city. At that time, there was no equipment to attack the city. The soldiers went to the city shirtless and captured Huoyu.

古文：渊赏霍邑之功，军吏疑奴应募者不得与良人同，渊曰： 矢石之间，不辨贵贱；论勋之际，何有等差，宜并从本勋授。 
现代文：李渊奖赏攻取霍邑的有功将士，军吏们怀疑以奴隶身份应募的人不能和良人同样论功。李渊说： 在箭与石之间战斗，不分贵贱，论功行赏时，有什么等级差别？应该同样按功颁赏授官。 
English: Li Yuan rewarded the meritorious soldiers who captured Huoyu. Military officials suspected that those who enlisted as slaves could not be awarded the same merit as their loved ones. Li Yuan said: In the battle between arrows and stones, there is no distinction between high and low. When it comes to awarding merit, what is the difference in rank? Awarding officers should also be based on merit.

古文：壬午，渊引见霍邑吏民，劳赏如西河，选其丁壮使从军；关中军士欲归者，并授五品散宫，遣归。
现代文：壬午，李渊接见了霍邑的吏民，慰劳赏赐，如同西河郡一样，并挑选霍邑强壮的男丁从军。关中的军士要回乡的，都授予五品散官，让他们回去。
English: In the morning of the third day, Li Yuan met with the officials and people of Huo County, and gave them the same reward for their hard work as that of Xihe County, and selected the strong men of Huo County to join the army. The soldiers in Guanzhong who wanted to return to their hometowns were all awarded the rank of five-star non-commissioned officer, allowing them to return.

古文：或谏以官太滥，渊曰： 隋氏吝惜勋赏，此所以失人心也，奈何效之！
现代文：有人劝李渊说授官太多，李渊说： 隋氏吝惜勋位赏赐，因而失去人心。我怎么能效仿他们呢？
English: Some people advised Li Yuan that there were too many officials awarded. Li Yuan said: The Sui clan was stingy with the award of orders, and thus lost the hearts of the people. How can I follow their example?

古文：且收众以官，不胜于用兵乎！ 
现代文：况且用官职来收拢众人，不比用兵要好吗？ 
English: Besides, isn't it better to use official positions to win people over than to use soldiers?

古文：丙戌，渊入临汾郡，慰抚如霍邑。
现代文：丙戌，李渊进入临汾郡，对临汾吏民的慰劳安抚如同霍邑。
English: When Li Yuan entered Linyi County, he comforted and pacified the officials and people of Linyi as if he were in Houyi.

古文：庚寅，宿鼓山。
现代文：庚寅，李渊军队在鼓山过夜。
English: The troops of Geng Yin and Li Yuan spent the night in Gushan.

古文：绛郡通守陈叔达拒守；辛卯，进攻，克之。
现代文：绛郡通守陈叔达率兵拒守。辛卯，李渊军进攻并攻克了绛郡。
English: Chen Shuda, the general-in-chief of Handan County, led his troops to refuse to defend the city. However, Li Yuan's army attacked and conquered Handan County.

古文：叔达，陈高宗之子，有才学，渊礼而用之。
现代文：陈叔达是陈高宗陈顼的儿子，有才学。李渊待之以礼并任用他。
English: Chen Shuda is the talented son of Chen Gaozong Chen Yao. Li Yuan treated him with courtesy and appointed him.

古文：癸巳，渊至龙门，刘文静、康鞘利以突厥兵五百人、马二千匹来至。
现代文：癸巳，李渊到达龙门。刘文静、康鞘利率突厥兵五百，马两千匹来到。
English: Soon after, Li Yuan arrived at the Dragon Gate. Liu Wenjing and Kang Sheya led 500 Turkish soldiers and 2,000 horses to the gate.

古文：渊喜其来缓，谓文静曰： 吾西行及河，突厥始至，兵少马多，皆君将命之功也。 
现代文：李渊很高兴他们来得晚，他对刘文静说： 我向西走到黄河，突厥人才到达，并且是兵少马多，都是您的功劳啊！ 
English: Li Yuan was glad that they came late. He said to Liu Wenzhing: I went west to the Yellow River, the Turks arrived, and there were fewer soldiers than horses, all thanks to you!

古文：汾阳薛大鼎说渊： 请勿攻河东，自龙门直济河，据永丰仓，传檄远近，关中可坐取也。 
现代文：汾阳人薛大鼎劝说李渊： 请不要进攻河东，从龙门直接渡黄河，占据永丰仓，向各地传布檄文，关中地区便坐等可取了。 
English: Xue Dading, a native of Shenyang, persuaded Li Yuan: Please don't attack the eastern part of the river, cross the Yellow River directly from Longmen, occupy Yongfeng Cang, spread the sermons to all parts of the country, and then wait for the Guanzhong area.

古文：渊将从之。
现代文：李渊打算听从他的意见。
English: Li Yuan plans to follow his advice.

古文：诸将请先攻河东，乃以大鼎为大将军府察非掾。
现代文：诸将请求先攻取河东，于是李渊任命薛大鼎为大将军府察非掾。
English: The generals requested to capture the eastern part of the river first, so Li Yuan appointed Xue Dading as the commander-in-chief.

古文：河东县户曹任瑰说渊曰： 关中豪杰皆企踵以待义兵。瑰在冯翊积年，知其豪杰，请往谕之，必从风而靡。
现代文：河东县户曹任对李渊说： 关中的豪杰都踮着脚盼望义军，我在冯翊郡多年，了解冯翊豪杰的情况，请让我去宣召他们，他们必定会望风而动。
English: Cao Ren, a resident of Hedong County, said to Li Yuan: "The heroes in Guanzhong are all hoping for the rebel army. I have been in Fenglu County for many years and know the situation of Fenglu heroes. Please let me call them. They will surely follow the wind.

古文：义师自梁山济河，指韩城，逼郃阳。
现代文：义师从粱山渡黄河，直指韩城，逼近阳。
English: Yishi crossed the Yellow River from Shaoshan and headed straight for Hancheng, approaching the sun.

古文：萧造文吏，必望尘请服。
现代文：萧造这样的文官，必定望尘而请求归降；孙华之流也会远迎义师。
English: A civil servant like Xiao Zou would certainly beg for surrender; Sun Hua's lineage would also welcome a teacher of righteousness from afar.

古文：孙华之徒，皆当远迎，然后鼓行而进，直据永丰。虽未得长安，关中固已定矣。 
现代文：然后您大张旗鼓地进军，直接占据永丰仓，虽然您还没有得到长安，但关中却根本上稳定了。 
English: Then, with great fanfare, you marched in and directly occupied Yongfeng Cang. Although you have not yet gained Chang'an, Guanzhong has been fundamentally stabilized.

古文：渊说，以瑰为银青光禄大夫。
现代文：李渊听后很高兴，任命任为银青光禄大夫。
English: Li Yuan was very pleased to hear this, and he was appointed as a silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：时关中群盗，孙华最强。丙申，渊至汾阴，以书招之。
现代文：当时，关中的群盗以孙华的势力最强，丙申，李渊到达汾阴，用书信前去招抚孙华。
English: At that time, the bandits in Guanzhong had the strongest influence on Sun Hua. Bishen and Li Yuan arrived in Jinyin and wrote to Sun Hua.

古文：己亥，渊进军壶口，河滨之民献舟者日以百数，乃置水军。
现代文：己亥，李渊进军到壶口，河边的百姓向李渊献船的每天有一百多人。李渊又建立水军。
English: In Ji Hai, Li Yuan marched to Hukou, and the people along the river offered more than a hundred boats to Li Yuan every day. Li Yuan also established a navy.

古文：壬寅，孙华自郃阳轻骑渡河见渊。
现代文：壬寅，孙华从阳轻骑渡黄河来谒见李渊。
English: Ren Yin and Sun Hua rode across the Yellow River from the west to see Li Yuan.

古文：渊握手与坐，慰奖之，以华为左光禄大夫、武乡县公，领冯翊太守，其徒有功者，委华以次授官，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：李渊拉着他的手和他坐在一起，慰劳奖赏他，封他为左光禄大夫、武乡县公，任冯翊太守之职。孙华部众有功的人，让孙华依次授予官职，赏赐的物品非常丰厚。
English: Li Yuan took his hand and sat with him, consoled and rewarded him, and appointed him as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, the governor of Wuxiang County, and the governor of Fengyuan. Sun Huab's many meritorious people were successively awarded official positions by Sun Hua, and the rewards were very rich.

古文：使之先济；继遣左右统军王长谐、刘弘基及左领军长史陈演寿、金紫光禄大夫史大柰将步骑六千自梁山济，营于河西以待大军。
现代文：李渊让孙华先行渡河，随即派遣左、右统军王长谐、刘弘基以及左领军长史陈演寿、金紫光禄大夫史大柰率领步骑兵六千人从粱山渡河，在河西扎营以等待大军的到来。
English: Li Yuan let Sun Hua cross the river first, and then dispatched the left and right unified army Wang Changhong, Liu Hongji, and the left leader Long Shi Chen Yanshou, and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor Shi Datong led six thousand infantry cavalry from Lushan to cross the river and camp in Hexi to wait for the arrival of the army.

古文：以任瑰为招慰大使，瑰说韩城，下之。
现代文：任命任为招慰大使，任去劝降韩城，韩城归降。
English: He was appointed as a consolation ambassador, sent to persuade Hanseong to surrender, and Hanseong surrendered.

古文：渊谓长谐等曰： 屈突通精兵不少，相去五十馀里，不敢来战，足明其众不为之用。
现代文：李渊对王长谐说： 屈突通精兵不少，与我军相隔仅五十余里，但不敢来战，足以证明他的部下已经不为屈突通效命了。
English: Li Yuan said to Wang Changhong, "There are many excellent soldiers of Qu Tu Tong, and they are only separated from our army by more than fifty miles, but they dare not come to fight, which is enough to prove that his subordinates are no longer willing to die for Qu Tu Tong.

古文：然通畏罪，不敢不出。
现代文：但是屈突通害怕上边怪罪，又不敢不出战。
English: However, Qu Jutong was afraid of being blamed by superiors and did not dare not to fight.

古文：若自济河击卿等，则我进攻河东，必不能守；若全军守城，则卿等绝其河梁：前扼其喉，后拊其背，彼不走必为擒矣。 
现代文：若他亲自率军过河进攻你们，那我就进攻河东，河东肯定守不住。若是屈突通全军守城，那你们就拆毁河上的桥梁。这样前面扼住他的咽喉，后面攻击他的后背，他不逃走必定被我们擒获。 
English: If he personally leads the army across the river to attack you, then I will attack the east of the river, and the east of the river will certainly not be able to be defended. If the whole army defends the city, then you will demolish the bridges on the river. In this way, strangle his throat in front and attack his back. If he does not escape, he will certainly be captured by us.

古文：骁果从炀帝在江都者多逃去，帝患之，以问裴矩，对曰： 人情非有匹偶，难以久处，请听军士于此纳室。 
现代文：跟从炀帝在江都的骁果有很多逃跑了，炀帝很忧虑这件事，问裴矩如何办，裴矩回答说： 从人情上讲，没有配偶，就难以久待，请听任军士们在此成家吧。 
English: Emperor Gong was very worried about this matter and asked Pei Mom how to handle it. Pei Mom replied, "From a human point of view, without a spouse, it is difficult to stay for a long time. Please let the soldiers start a family here."

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝听从了裴矩的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：九月，悉召江都境内寡妇、处女集宫下，恣将士所取；或先与奸者听自首，即以配之。
现代文：九月，将江都境内的寡妇、处女都召集到宫下，任凭将士们娶走，有些原来就有奸情的人，任凭他们自首，然后即将此女配给他为妻。
English: In September, he summoned all the widows and virgins in Jiangdu to the palace, and allowed the soldiers to marry them off. Some of them who had had adulterous affairs were allowed to give themselves up, and then this woman was given to him as his wife.

古文：武阳郡丞元宝藏以郡降李密，甲寅，密以宝藏为上柱国、武阳公。
现代文：武阳郡丞元宝藏举郡投降李密，甲寅，李密封元宝藏为上柱国、武阳公。
English: Wuyang County, the county of Li Min, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of Li Jianyuan, the county of

古文：宝藏使其客巨鹿魏征为启谢密，且请改武阳为魏州；又请帅所部西取魏郡，南会诸将取黎阳仓。
现代文：元宝藏派他的门客钜鹿人魏徵写信向李密致谢，并且请求将武阳郡改为魏州，又请求率领所部向西攻取魏郡，向南与诸将会合攻取黎阳仓。
English: Yuan Baozhu sent a letter of thanks to Li Mi from his client Wei Zheng, a man from Menglu, and requested that Wuyang County be changed to Wei Prefecture. He also requested that he lead the headquarters to the west to capture Wei County, and to the south to attack Li Yangcang with the generals.

古文：密喜，即以宝藏为魏州总管，召魏征为元帅府文学参军，掌记室。
现代文：李密听后很高兴，就任命元宝藏为魏州总管，召魏徵为元帅府文学参军，掌管记室。
English: Li Mi was very pleased after listening, and appointed Yuan Baozhu as the chief administrator of Weizhou, called Wei Zheng to join the army as the marshal of literature, and took charge of the record room.

古文：征少孤贫，好读书，有大志，落拓不事生业。
现代文：魏徵年轻时孤苦贫穷。他喜好读书，抱有大志，为人性情放浪不经营谋生之业。
English: Wei Zheng was lonely and poor when he was young. He liked to read, had great aspirations, and was a wanderer rather than a business man.

古文：始为道士，宝藏召典书记。
现代文：开始作过道士，元宝藏召他掌管书籍。
English: He started out as a Taoist priest, and was called by the former treasurer to take charge of the books.

古文：密爱其文辞，故召之。
现代文：李密喜欢魏徵的文辞，因此就将他召来。
English: Li Mi liked Wei Zheng's writing, so she called him in.

古文：初，贵乡长弘农魏德深，为政清静，不严而治。
现代文：当初，贵乡长弘农人魏德深，为政清廉，用法并不严苛，但治理得很好。
English: At the beginning, Wei Dezhen, a farmer from Changhong, Guizhong Township, was politically clean and honest. The usage was not strict, but it was well managed.

古文：辽东之役，征税百端，使者旁午，责成郡县，民不堪命，唯贵乡闾里不扰，有无相通，不竭其力，所求皆给。
现代文：炀帝征伐辽东的时候，苛捐杂税有上百种，征税的使者纷繁交错地来责成郡县官吏办理，百姓不堪忍受这样的催逼。唯独贵乡县的乡里没有受到骚扰，邻里之间互通有无，并没耗竭百姓的财力，所要求的都能供给。
English: When Emperor Qian conquered Liaodong, there were more than a hundred kinds of heavy taxes and miscellaneous taxes. The emissaries of taxation came in a variety of ways to instruct county officials to deal with them, and the people could not bear such urging. However, the villages in Guixiang County were not harassed, there was no interchange between neighbors, and the financial resources of the people were not exhausted, and everything that was required could be supplied.

古文：元宝藏受诏捕贼，数调器械，动以军法从事。
现代文：元宝藏受诏命讨捕盗贼，他几次征调器械，动不动就以军法论处。
English: The former treasurer was ordered by imperial edict to hunt down thieves, and several times he requisitioned equipment and was punished at every turn by military law.

古文：其邻城营造，皆聚于听事，官吏递相督责，昼夜喧嚣，犹不能济。
现代文：贵乡县的邻城营造器械，官吏们都聚集在厅堂，互相监督责备，昼夜喧嚣，还完不成任务。
English: In the neighboring city of Guixiang County, officials are gathered in the hall to supervise and blame each other, and they are noisy day and night, but they can't complete the task.

古文：德深听随便修营，官府寂然，恒若无事，唯戒吏以不须过胜馀县，使百姓劳苦；然民各自竭心，常为诸县之最，县民爱之如父母。
现代文：魏德深却任凭属下随意修造，官府里安安静静，总象是没干什么事的样子。他仅是告诫官吏们，完成征调任务即可，不必超过其它的县，而使百姓劳苦。然而百姓却都尽心竭力，供赋常常为各县之冠。百姓们爱戴魏德深如同父母。
English: Wei Dezhen, on the other hand, allowed his subordinates to build at will, and the government offices were always quiet, as if nothing had happened. He only warned the officials that they could complete the recruitment and transfer task, and did not have to surpass other counties, but made the people work hard. However, the people did their best, and the donation was often the crown of each county. The people loved Wei Dezhen like their parents.

古文：宝藏深害其能，遣将千兵赴东都。
现代文：元宝藏很妒忌他的才能，派他率领一千名士兵赶赴东都。
English: The former treasure envied his talent and sent him to Dongdu with a thousand soldiers.

古文：所领兵闻宝藏降密，思其亲戚，辄出都门，东向恸哭而返；或劝之降密，皆泣曰： 我与魏明府同来，何忍弃去！ 
现代文：当魏德深所统之兵听到元宝藏投降李密时，士兵们思念自己的亲戚，就出了都城门，向东痛哭后返回。有人劝他们投降李密，他们都流着泪说： 我们与魏明府一同来的，怎么忍心弃他离去呢？ 
English: When the soldiers under the command of Wei De heard that the former treasure had surrendered to Li Mi, the soldiers missed their relatives and went out of the capital gate, crying bitterly to the east before returning. When they were advised to surrender to Li Mi, they all said with tears: We came with the Wei Ming government, how can we bear to abandon him and leave?

古文：河南、山东大水，饿殍满野，炀帝诏开黎阳仓赈之，吏不时给，死者日数万人。
现代文：河南、山东发大水，饿殍遍野。炀帝下诏开黎阳仓赈济饥民，但官吏们不按时赈济，每天有几万人死去。
English: Henan Province and Shandong Province were flooded, and there was famine everywhere. Emperor Gao decreed to open Liyang Warehouse to feed the hungry, but the officials did not provide food on time, and tens of thousands of people died every day.

古文：徐世勣言于李密曰： 天下大乱，本为饥馑。今更得黎阳仓，大事济矣。 
现代文：徐世对李密说： 天下大乱，本来就是因为饥馑的缘故，现在若是再得黎阳仓，大事就告成功。 
English: Xu Shih said to Li Mi: The world is in turmoil, originally because of famine. Now, if we get Liyangcang again, the event will be a success.

古文：密遣世绩帅麾下五千人自原武济河，会元宝藏、郝孝德、李文相及洹水贼帅张升、清河贼帅赵君德共袭破黎阳仓，据之，开仓恣民就食，浃旬间，得胜兵二十馀万。
现代文：李密派徐世率部下五千人从原武渡黄河，会同元宝藏、郝孝德、李文相及洹水贼帅张升、清河贼帅赵君德共同袭取了黎阳仓并在那里据守，开仓听任百姓来吃粮，十天之内得到精兵二十余万人。
English: Li Mi sent Xu Shih and five thousand of his subordinates to cross the Yellow River from the original Wu, and together with the former treasure, Zou Xiaode, Li Wenxiang, and the water thief Zhang Sheng, the Qing River thief Zhao Junde, they jointly seized the Liyang warehouse and guarded there, opened the warehouse to let the people eat grain, and obtained more than 200,000 elite soldiers within ten days.

古文：武安、永安、义阳、弋阳、齐郡相继降密。
现代文：武安、永安、义阳、弋阳、齐群相继投降李密。
English: Wu'an, Yong'an, Yiyang, Shenyang and Qiqun successively surrendered to Li Mi.

古文：窦建德、硃粲之徒亦遣使附密，密以粲为扬州总管、邓公。
现代文：窦建德、朱粲之类的人也派遣使者依附李密。李密封朱粲为扬州总管、邓公。
English: People such as Dou Jiande and Zhu Xi also sent envoys to adhere to Li Mi. Li Jie Zhu Xi is the Yangzhou governor, Deng Gong.

古文：泰山道士徐洪客献书于密，以为： 大众久聚，恐米尽人散，师老厌战，难可成功。 
现代文：泰山道士徐洪客向李密献书，他认为： 大批的人马长久地聚在一起，恐怕粮尽人散，出师时间长了，就会厌战，那样就难以取胜获得成功。 
English: The Taoist monk Xu Hongke of Mount Tai dedicated a book to Li Mi, he thought: A large number of people have been gathered together for a long time, I am afraid that the food will run out, and if it takes a long time to leave the division, it will be war-weary, so it will be difficult to win and succeed.

古文：劝密 乘进取之机，因士马之锐，沿流东指，直向江都，执取独夫，号令天下。 
现代文：他劝李密 乘着有进取的时机，凭借着军队的锐气，沿远河向东，直取江都擒拿独夫民贼，号令天下。 
English: He advised Li Mi to take advantage of the enterprising opportunity, rely on the spirit of the army, go eastward along the Yangtze River, directly take the Yangtze River to seize the one-man bandits, and command the world.

古文：密壮其言，以书招之，洪客竟不出，莫知所之。
现代文：李密认为他的建议很有运见，写信召他来，但徐洪客竟没有来，不知道到什么地方了。
English: Li Mi thought his suggestion was very insightful and wrote to him to come, but Xu Hongke did not come and did not know where he was.

古文：乙卯，张纶徇龙泉、文成等郡，皆下之，获文成太守郑元璹。
现代文：乙卯，张纶攻打龙泉、文成等郡，攻克，俘获文成太守郑元。
English: Yi Wu and Zhang Ye attacked Longquan, Wensheng and other counties, conquered and captured Wensheng's governor Zheng Yuan.

古文：元璹，译之子也。
现代文：郑元是郑译的儿子。
English: Zheng Yuan is the son of Zheng Yu.

古文：屈突通遣虎牙郎将桑显和将骁果数千人夜袭王长谐等营，长谐等战不利，孙华、史大柰以游骑自后击显和，大破之。
现代文：屈突通派遣虎牙郎将桑显和率领几千名骁果乘夜袭击王长谐等人的营地。王长谐等交战不利。孙华、史大柰用游骑从后面袭击桑显和，大败桑显和。
English: Qu Jutong sent Hu Ya Lang to attack the camp of Wang Changhong and others at night with several thousand troops led by Guo Guo. Wang Changhong and others did not fare well in the battle. Sun Hua and Shi Datong attacked Sang Hsien Ho from behind on horseback, and defeated Sang Hsien Ho.

古文：显和脱走入城，仍自绝河梁。
现代文：桑显和脱身逃回城里，并毁掉黄河桥梁。
English: Sang Xianhe escaped and fled back to the city, and destroyed the Yellow River bridge.

古文：丙辰，冯翊大守萧造降于李渊。
现代文：丙辰，冯翊太守萧造向李渊投降。
English: Cixin, Feng Yu's eunuch Xiao Zuo surrendered to Li Yuan.

古文：造，修之子也。
现代文：萧造是萧的儿子。
English: Xiao Zou is the son of Xiao Wu.

古文：戊午，渊帅诸军围河东，屈突通婴城自守。
现代文：戊午，李渊统帅各军包围河东郡，屈突通闭城拒守。
English: In the afternoon, Li Yuan, the commander of the army, surrounded Hedong County and closed the city of Qudutu, refusing to defend it.

古文：将佐复推渊领太尉，增置官属，渊从之。
现代文：将佐们又推戴李渊为太尉，增设官属，李渊接受了这个建议。
English: The generals also recommended Li Yuan to be promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and to have additional subordinates, and Li Yuan accepted this suggestion.

古文：时河东未下，三辅豪杰至者日以千数。
现代文：当时河东郡还未攻下，三辅之地的豪杰来投奔李渊的每天数以千计。
English: At that time, Hedong County had not yet been conquered, and thousands of heroes from Sanshu came to Liyuan every day.

古文：渊欲引兵西趣长安，犹豫未决。
现代文：李渊想率兵向西直达西安，但仍犹豫不决。
English: Li Yuan wanted to lead the troops westward straight to Xi'an, but still hesitated.

古文：裴寂曰： 屈突通拥大众，凭坚城，吾舍之而去，若进攻长安不克，退为河东所踵，腹背受敌，此危道也。
现代文：裴寂说： 屈突通拥有大批军队，凭借着坚固的城池，我们若舍弃他而去，要是进攻长安而不能攻克，后退就会遇到河东方面的追击，腹背受敌，这是危险的策略。
English: Peizhang said: Qu Jutong has a large number of troops, with a solid city, if we abandon him, if we attack Chang'an and can't conquer it, the retreat will encounter the pursuit of the east side of the river, and suffer the enemy's back, this is a dangerous strategy.

古文：不若先克河东，然后西上。
现代文：不如先攻下河东，然后挥师西上。
English: It would be better to capture the eastern part of the river first, and then march westward.

古文：长安恃通为援，通败，长安必破矣。 
现代文：长安是依恃屈突通为后援的，屈突通被打败，长安也必定被攻破。 
English: Chang'an was supported by Qu Jutong. If Qu Jutong was defeated, Chang'an would also be defeated.

古文：李世民曰： 不然。
现代文：李世民说： 不对！
English: Li Shimin said: That's not right!

古文：兵贵神速，吾席累胜之威，抚归附之众，鼓行而西，长安之人望风震骇，智不及谋，勇不及断，取之若振槁叶耳。
现代文：兵贵神速，我们乘着屡战屡胜的军威，安抚归顺的众军，大张旗鼓地西进，长安的人就会望风而震惊骇惧，智慧还来不及谋划，勇敢还来不及决断，取长安就如同震动树上的枯叶一样容易。
English: The soldiers are precious and swift, we take advantage of the military prestige of repeated battles and victories, pacify the submissive troops, and march westward with great fanfare, the people of Chang'an will look to the wind and be shocked and horrified, wisdom is too late to plan, courage is too late to decide, taking Chang'an is as easy as shaking the dead leaves on the tree.

古文：若淹留自弊于坚城之下，彼得成谋修备以待我，坐费日月，众心离沮，则大事去矣。
现代文：我们要是滞留，自己将自己耽误在坚城之下，他们则有时间加强防备以对待我们。而我们白白浪费了时间，大家的心就会沮丧溃散，那么大事就全完了。
English: If we stay, if we hold ourselves under siege, and they have time to build up their defences against us, and we have wasted our time, and everybody's hearts are broken, then it's all over.

古文：且关中蜂起之将，未有所属，不可不早招怀也。
现代文：况且关中蜂拥而起的将领还没有归属，不能不早些将他们招抚来。
English: Moreover, the generals who have flocked to Guanzhong have not yet been assigned, and they must be brought in earlier.

古文：屈突通自守虏耳，不足为虑。 
现代文：屈突通是仅能自守之敌，不足为虑。 
English: As the enemy can only defend itself, it is not enough to worry about.

古文：渊两从之，留诸将围河东，自引军而西。
现代文：两方面的意见李渊都采纳了，他留下诸将包围河东，自己率军西进。
English: Li Yuan accepted both opinions. He left the generals to encircle the eastern part of the river and led his army westward.

古文：朝邑法曹武功靳孝谟，以蒲津、中潬二城降，华阴令李孝常以永丰仓降，仍应接河西诸军。
现代文：朝邑县法曹武功人靳孝谟献蒲津、中两座城池归降李渊。华阴县令李孝常献永丰仓归降，并去接应河西的李渊诸军。
English: Zou Xiaomu, a legal scholar and military hero from Chaoyu County, offered Puting and two castles to Li Yuan. Huayin County ordered Li Xiaozhang to offer Yongfeng Cang to Li Yuan, and to meet Li Yuan's army in the west of the river.

古文：孝常，圆通之子也。
现代文：李孝常是李圆通的儿子。
English: Li Xiaozhong is the son of Li Yuntong.

古文：京兆诸县亦多遣使请降。
现代文：京兆各县也大多派遣使者请求归降。
English: Most of the counties in Jingzhao also sent envoys to request surrender.

古文：王世充、韦霁、王辩及河内通守孟善谊、河阳郡尉独孤武都各帅所领会东都，唯王隆后期不至。
现代文：王世充、韦霁、王辩以及河内通守孟善谊、河阳都尉独孤武都各自率领所部军队汇集东都，只有王隆过了期限还没到。
English: Wang Shichong, Wei Xuan, Wang Dian, as well as Meng Zhengyi, the general in charge of Hanoi, and Duolouwu, the captain in charge of Hebei, each led their respective armies to assemble the eastern capital. Only Wang Long had passed the deadline and had not yet arrived.

古文：己未，越王侗使虎贲郎将刘长恭等帅留守兵，宠玉等帅偃师兵，与世充等合十馀万众，击李密于洛口，与密夹洛水相守。
现代文：己未，越王杨侗派虎贲郎将刘长恭等将领统领留守的军队，庞玉等统领偃师的军队，与王世充等人合在一起有十余万人，在洛口攻击李密。隋军与李密军队隔着洛水相互防卫。
English: Not long after, the king of Yue, Yang Pi, sent Tigress to attack Li Mi at Lokou, bringing Liu Changgong and other generals to command the remaining troops, Pang Yu and other generals to command the troops of the imperial division, and Wang Shichong and others to attack more than 100,000 people. The Sui army and Li Mi's army defended each other across the Luoshui River.

古文：炀帝诏诸军皆受世充节度。
现代文：炀帝下诏命令各军都受王世充的指挥。
English: Emperor Qian decreed that all armies should be under the command of Wang Shizhong.

古文：帝遣摄江都郡丞冯慈明向东都，为密所获，密素闻其名，延坐劳问，礼意甚厚，因谓曰： 隋祚已尽，公能与孤共立大功乎？ 
现代文：炀帝派遣代理江都郡丞冯慈明到东都，被李密抓获。李密素来就听说冯慈明的名声，让冯慈明坐下并安慰他，向他深表敬意。李密对冯慈明说： 隋朝的气数已尽，您能和我共建大功吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuan dispatched Feng Ciming, the acting governor of Jiangdu County, to Dongdu, and he was captured by Li Mi. Li Mi had heard of Feng Ciming's reputation, so he let Feng Ciming sit down and comforted him, and expressed his deep respect to him. Li Mi said to Feng Ciming: The energy of the Sui Dynasty has been exhausted, can you work with me to build a great achievement?

古文：慈明曰： 公家历事先朝，荣禄兼备。不能善守门阀，乃与玄感举兵，偶脱罔罗，得有今日，唯图反噬，未谕高旨。
现代文：冯慈明说： 您的家族历来侍奉先朝，荣华富贵兼备，却不能好好地恪守自己的世家门第，和杨玄感起兵造反，侥幸逃脱法网，才有今天，仍想着造反，我不理解您的高见。
English: Feng Ciming said, "Your family has always served the previous dynasty. You are both glorious and rich, but you can't properly adhere to your own family lineage. You and Yang Xuanquan started a rebellion and narrowly escaped the net of the law. Only today, you still want to rebel. I don't understand your high-mindedness."

古文：莽、卓、敦、玄非不强盛，一朝夷灭，罪及祖宗。
现代文：王莽、董卓、王敦、桓玄的势力不是不强盛，一旦诛灭，罪及祖宗。
English: The power of Wang Mang, Dong Zhuo, Wang Dun and Huan Xuan is not weak. Once they are destroyed, the sins of their ancestors will follow.

古文：仆死而后已，不敢闻命！ 
现代文：我己对隋皇室唯有死而后已，不敢从命！ 
English: I've only been loyal to the Sui royal family since I died, and I don't dare to die!

古文：密怒，囚之。
现代文：李密发怒，将冯慈明关起来。
English: Li Mi flew into a rage and locked up Feng Ciming.

古文：慈明说防人席务本，使亡走。
现代文：冯慈明说通看守他的席务本，放他逃走。
English: Feng Ciming said that the guards had read his attendance book and let him escape.

古文：奉表江都，及致书东都论贼形势，至雍丘，为密将李公逸所获，密又义而释之；出至营门，翟让杀之。
现代文：冯慈明向江都奉上奏表，给东都写信谈论盗贼的形势。他走到了雍丘，被李密的将领李公逸抓获。李密又出于义气将他释放。冯慈明走到营门，被翟让杀死。
English: Feng Ciming sent a report to Jiangdu and a letter to Dongdu to discuss the situation of the thieves. He went to Yongqiu and was captured by Li Gongyi, Li Mi's general. Li Mi released him out of a sense of loyalty. Feng Ciming walked to the gate of the camp and was killed by Zhang.

古文：慈明，子琮之子也。
现代文：冯慈明是冯子琮的儿子。
English: Feng Ciming is the son of Feng Zixuan.

古文：密之克洛口也，箕山府郎将张季珣固守不下，密以其寡弱，遣人呼之。季珣骂密极口，密怒，遣兵攻之，不能克。
现代文：李密攻取洛口，箕山府郎将张季固守不降，李密认为张季兵少且弱，崐派人叫他，张季对李密破口大骂，李密发怒，派兵攻城，未能攻克。
English: Li Mi captured Lokou, Lushan Furo defended Zhang Ji, Li Mi thought that Zhang Ji's soldiers were few and weak, and sent people to call him, Zhang Ji cursed Li Mi, Li Mi was angry and sent troops to attack the city, but failed to conquer it.

古文：时密众数十万在其城下，季珣四面阻绝，所领不过数百人，而执志弥固，誓以必死。
现代文：当时李密在城下聚众几十万。张季四面被围，一切都被隔绝，他率领的人马不过几百人，但他守城的决心很坚，发誓以必死的决心战斗。
English: At that time, Li Mi gathered hundreds of thousands of people under the city. Zhang Ji was surrounded on all sides, everything was cut off. He led only a few hundred people, but his determination to defend the city was very strong, and he vowed to fight with the determination to die.

古文：久之，粮尽水竭，士卒羸病，季珣抚循之，一无离叛，自三月至于是月，城遂陷。
现代文：时间长了，水断粮绝，士兵体衰病倒，张季亲自抚慰，没有一个人叛离他。从三月到九月，城池才被攻陷。
English: It took a long time, the water supply was cut off, the soldiers fell ill, Zhang Qi personally comforted them, and no one betrayed him. From March to September, the city was only conquered.

古文：季珣见密不肯拜，曰： 天子爪牙，何容拜贼！ 
现代文：张季见到李密不肯跪下，说： 天子的武臣怎么可以给贼人跪拜呢！ 
English: When Zhang Ji saw that Li Mi refused to kneel, he said: "How can a warrior of the Son of Heaven kneel before a thief!"

古文：密犹欲降之，诱谕终不属，乃杀之。
现代文：李密还想让他投降，劝说引诱，张季始终不屈服，李密只好杀了张季。
English: Li Mi also wanted him to surrender, persuaded and enticed him, but Zhang Qi always refused to give in. Li Mi had no choice but to kill Zhang Qi.

古文：季珣，祥子之子也。
现代文：张季是张祥的儿子。
English: Zhang Ji is the son of Zhang Xiang.

古文：庚申，李渊帅诸军济河；甲子，至朝邑，舍于长春宫，关中士民归之者如市。
现代文：庚申，李渊统帅各军渡河。甲子，到达朝邑，住在长春宫。关中的士人、百姓前来归附的人很多。
English: Goshun, the commander of Li Yuan's army, crossed the river and reached the imperial capital, Jiazi, where he lived in Changchun Palace. Many officials and commoners from Guanzhong came to join him.

古文：丙寅，渊遣世子建成、司马刘文静帅王长谐等诸军数万人屯永丰仓，守潼关以备东方兵，慰抚使窦轨等受其节度；敦煌公世民帅刘弘基等诸军数万人徇渭北，慰抚使殷开山等受其节度。
现代文：丙寅，李渊派遣世子李建成、司马刘文静率领王长谐等诸军几万人屯驻在永丰仓，据守潼关以防备东都之兵，慰抚使窦轨等人受李建成的指挥。敦煌公李世民率领刘弘基等诸军几万人进攻渭北，慰抚使殷开山等人受李世民的指挥。
English: Hsin Yin, Li Yuan sent his son Li Jiancheng, Sima Liu Wenzhing led by Wang Changhong and other armies of tens of thousands of people stationed in Yongfeng Cang, guarded Shouguan to prevent the soldiers of Dongdu, and comforted Douluo and others under the command of Li Jiancheng. Dunhuang Gong Li Shimin led Liu Hongji and other armies of tens of thousands of people to attack north Anhui, and comforted Yin Kaishan and others under the command of Li Shimin.

古文：轨，琮之兄也。
现代文：窦轨是窦琮的哥哥。
English: Dou Trai is Dou Xuan's older brother.

古文：冠氏长于志宁、安养尉颜师古及世民妇兄弟长孙无忌谒见渊于长春宫。
现代文：冠氏县长于志宁、安养县尉颜师古和李世民的妻兄长孙无忌在长春宫谒见李渊。
English: Yu Zhining, the head of Guanxi County, Yan Shigu, the lieutenant of Anyang County, and Li Shimin's wife, brother, and eldest grandson all met Li Yuan at Changchun Palace.

古文：师古名籀，以字行。
现代文：颜师古名籀，通常人们称呼他的字。
English: Yan Shi is an ancient name, and people usually call him Mao.

古文：志宁，宣敏之兄子；师古，之推之孙也；皆以文学知名，无忌仍有才略。
现代文：于志宁是于宣敏的侄子，颜师古是颜之推的孙子，他们都因文才知名。长孙无忌还很有才干谋略。
English: Yu Shining is the nephew of Yu Xuanmin, Yan Shigu is the grandson of Yan Zhitui, both of whom are famous for their literary talent. The eldest grandson is also very talented in strategy.

古文：渊皆礼而用之，以志宁为记室，师古为朝散大夫，无忌为渭北行军典签。
现代文：李渊对他们都以礼相待并任用他们。他任命于志宁为记室，颜师古为朝散大夫，长孙无忌为渭北行军典签。
English: Li Yuan treated them all with courtesy and appointed them. He appointed Yu Shining as a recorder, Yan Shigu as a doctor of the morning sun, and his eldest grandson Mubi as a signer of the northern march.

古文：屈突通闻渊西入，署鹰扬郎将汤阳尧君素领河东通守，使守蒲坂，自引兵数万趣长安，为刘文静所遏。
现代文：屈突通闻知李渊西行入关，就任命鹰扬郎将汤阴人尧君素代理河东通守，派他守卫蒲坂。屈突通亲自率兵几万人赶赴长安，被刘文静所阻挡。
English: When Qu Jutong heard that Li Yuan had entered the pass on his westward journey, he appointed Ying Yang Lang to be the acting governor of Hedong Province and sent him to guard Pusan. Qu Jutong personally led tens of thousands of soldiers to Chang'an and was blocked by Liu Wenzhing.

古文：将军刘纲戍潼关，屯都尉南城，通欲往依之，王长谐先引兵袭斩纲，据城以拒通，通退保北城。渊遣其将吕绍宗等攻河东，不能克。
现代文：将军刘纲守卫潼跟，在都尉南城屯军。屈突通想去潼关向刘纲靠拢，王长谐先率兵袭击并斩杀了刘纲，占据都尉南城以阻击屈突通，屈突通退守都尉北城，李渊派部将吕绍宗等人进攻河东，未能攻克。
English: General Liu Gang was guarding the capital Nancheng with the garrison. Qu Jutong wanted to go to Shaoguan to get closer to Liu Gang, Wang Changhong led the first troops to attack and killed Liu Gang, occupied the capital Nancheng to block Qu Jutong, Qu Jutong retreated to defend the capital Beicheng, Li Yuan sent General Lü Shao Zong and others to attack Hedong, but failed to conquer.

古文：柴绍之自长安赴太原也，谓其妻李氏曰： 尊公举兵，今偕行则不可，留此则及祸，奈何？ 
现代文：柴绍从长安赶赴太原时，对他的妻子李氏说： 你父亲起兵，现在我们不能一起走，你留在此地就会遭到灾祸，怎么办？ 
English: When Chai Shao rushed from Chang'an to Taiyuan, he said to his wife Li: Your father raised an army, now we can't go together. If you stay here, you will be plagued. What should you do?

古文：李氏曰： 君弟速行，我一妇人，易以潜匿，当自为计。 
现代文：李氏说： 你只管赶快动身，我一个女人容易躲藏，可以自己想办法。 
English: Mr. Li said, "You just have to leave quickly. I'm a woman, it's easy for me to hide, I can find my own way.

古文：绍遂行。
现代文：柴绍就走了。
English: Chai Shao just walked away.

古文：李氏归鄠县别墅，散家赀，聚徒众。
现代文：李氏回到县的别墅，她散掉家财，聚集部众。
English: When Ms. Li returned to her villa in the county, she dispersed her family's wealth and gathered her followers.

古文：渊从弟神通在长安，亡入鄠县山中，与长安大侠史万宝等起兵以应渊。
现代文：李渊的堂弟李神通住在长安，逃入县的山里。他与长安大侠史万宝等人起兵响应李渊。
English: Li Yuan's cousin, Li Shentong, who lived in Chang'an, fled into the mountains of the county. He and Chang'an Grand Knight Shi Wanbao and others raised an army to respond to Li Yuan.

古文：西域商胡何潘仁入司竹园为盗，有众数万，劫前尚书右卫李纲为长史，李氏使其奴马三宝说潘会与之就神通，合势攻鄠县，下之。
现代文：西域的胡族商人何潘仁进入司竹园为盗贼，有部众几万人。他劫持前尚书右丞李纲任用为长史，李氏派家奴马三宝去劝说何潘仁，和她一起去依附李神通，合兵一处进攻县，攻下了县。
English: He Panren, a merchant of the Hu ethnic group in the western region, entered Shizhuyuan as a thief, with tens of thousands of followers. Before he kidnapped Shang Shuyuan, Li Gang was appointed as a long history, and the Li clan sent his family member Ma Sanbao to persuade He Panren, and went with her to attach to Li Shentong. Together they attacked the county and captured the county.

古文：神通众逾一万，自称关中道行军总管，以前东城长令狐德棻为记室。德棻，熙之子也。
现代文：李神崐通部众超过一万人。他自称关中道行军总管，任命前东城长令狐德为记室，令狐德是令狐熙的儿子。
English: He claimed to be the general manager of the Guanzhong Road march, and appointed the former mayor of Dongcheng, Ling Foo De, the son of Ling Foo Hee, as his secretary.

古文：李氏又使马三宝说群盗李仲文、向善志、丘师利等，皆帅众从之。
现代文：李氏又派马三宝去劝说群盗李仲文、向善志、丘师利等人，他们都率众归附了李氏。
English: The Li clan also sent Ma Sanbao to persuade the bandits Li Zhongwen, Xiang Zenshi, Qiu Shili and others, all of whom led the crowd to join the Li clan.

古文：仲文，密之从父；师利，和之子也。
现代文：李仲文是李密的堂伯父，丘师利是丘和的儿子。
English: Li Zhongwen is Li Mi's cousin and uncle, and Qiu Shili is the son of Qiu He.

古文：西京留守屡遣兵讨潘仁等，皆为所败。
现代文：西京留守屡次派兵讨伐何潘仁等，都被打败。
English: The Western Capital repeatedly sent troops to fight He Panren and others, but they were all defeated.

古文：李氏徇盩厔、武功、始平，皆下之，众至七万。
现代文：李氏率军进攻、武功、始平，都攻克了。其部众达七万人。
English: Li's army led the attack, the martial arts, and the beginning of the peace, all of which were conquered. The number of his followers reached seventy thousand.

古文：左亲卫段纶，文振之子也，娶渊女，亦聚徒于蓝田，得万馀人。
现代文：左亲卫段纶是段文振的儿子，他娶了李渊的女儿，也在蓝田聚众，得到一万余人。
English: Zuo Shenwei Duan Qi, the son of Duan Wen Zhen, married Li Yuan's daughter, and also gathered more than 10,000 people in Lantian.

古文：及渊济河，神通、李氏、纶各遣使迎渊。
现代文：待李渊渡河，李神通、李氏、段纶各自派遣使者迎接李渊。
English: While waiting for Li Yuan to cross the river, Li Shentong, the Li clan, and Duan Yu each sent an envoy to meet Li Yuan.

古文：渊以神通为光禄大夫，子道彦为朝请大夫，纶为金紫光禄大夫；使柴绍将数百骑并南山迎李氏。
现代文：李渊任命李神通为光禄大夫，李神通的儿子李道彦为朝请大夫，段纶为金紫光禄大夫，派柴绍率领几百名骑兵到南山迎接李氏。
English: Li Yuan appointed Li Shentong as the doctor of Guanglu, Li Shentong's son Li Daohan as the doctor of the morning, and Duan Yu as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and sent Chai Shao to lead hundreds of cavalry to Nanshan to meet the Li clan.

古文：何潘仁、李仲文、向善志及关中群盗，皆请降于渊，渊一一以书慰劳授官，使各居其所，受敦煌公世民节度。
现代文：何潘仁、李仲文、向善志和关中的群盗都向李渊请求归降。李渊一一写信慰劳授官，让他们各自在自己的辖地受敦煌公李世民的指挥。
English: He Panren, Li Zhongwen, Xiang Zenshi and Guanzhong's bandits all requested Li Yuan to surrender. Li Yuan wrote a letter of condolence, and let them each be commanded by the Dunhuang official Li Shimin in their own jurisdiction.

古文：刑部尚书领京兆内史卫文开年老，闻渊兵向长安，忧惧成疾，不复预事，独左翊卫将军阴世师、京兆郡丞骨仪奉代王侑乘城拒守。
现代文：刑部尚书兼京兆内史卫文升已年老，他闻知李渊军队向长安进军，忧惧成疾，不再参预政事。只有左翊卫将军阴世师、京兆郡丞骨仪尊奉代王杨侑据城坚守。
English: He heard that Li Yuan's army was marching towards Chang'an, and was afraid of getting sick, so he no longer took part in pre-election politics. Only General Zuo Wei, the master of the Yin Dynasty, and King Yang Jie, the governor of Jingzhao County, who served as the representative of King Yang Jie, held on to the city.

古文：己巳，渊如蒲津；庚午，自临晋济渭，至永丰仓劳军，开仓赈饥民。
现代文：己巳，李渊到蒲津，庚午，李渊从临晋渡过渭水，到永丰慰劳军队，并开仓赈济饥民。
English: At that time, Li Yuan went to Puting, and in the afternoon, Li Yuan went from Linjin to Surabaya, to Yongfeng to comfort the labor army, and opened a warehouse to feed the hungry.

古文：辛未，还长春宫；壬申，进屯冯翊。
现代文：辛未，李渊返回长春宫；壬申，李渊进驻冯翊。
English: In Xinwei, Li Yuan returned to Changchun Palace; in Jinshin, Li Yuan was stationed in Fengye.

古文：世民所至，吏民及群盗归之如流。世民收其豪俊以备僚属，营于泾阳，胜兵九万。
现代文：李世民所到之处，官吏、百姓及群盗归附如流，李世民收集其中的豪杰之士作为自己的僚属。他在泾阳驻军，有能作战的兵力几万。
English: Wherever Li Shimin went, officials, common people and bandits flocked to him. Li Shimin collected the heroes among them as his colleagues. He stationed his army in Shenyang, with tens of thousands of soldiers capable of fighting.

古文：李氏将精兵万馀会世民于渭北，与柴绍各置幕府，号 娘子军 。
现代文：李氏率一万余名精兵在渭北与李世民会合。李氏和柴绍各自设置幕府，李氏的军队号称 娘子军 。
English: The Li clan led more than 10,000 elite soldiers to join Li Shimin in northern Shandong. The Li clan and Chai Shao each set up a shogunate, and the Li clan's army was known as the Daughter Army.

古文：先是，平凉奴贼数万围扶风太守窦璡，数月不下，贼军食尽。
现代文：原先，平凉的奴贼几万人包围扶风太守窦，几个月攻城不下，贼军粮食吃完。
English: Originally, tens of thousands of flat-cold slaves surrounded Fufu Taishou Dou, and they could not attack the city for several months, and the thief army ran out of food.

古文：丘师利遣其弟行恭帅五百人负米麦持牛酒诣奴贼营，奴帅长揖，行恭手斩之，谓其众曰： 汝辈皆良人，何故事奴为主，使天下谓之奴贼！ 
现代文：丘师利派他弟弟丘行恭率领五百人背着粮食、牵着牛、拿着酒到奴贼的军营，奴贼的首领深深施礼，丘行恭挥刀把奴帅杀死，对贼众说： 你们都是良人，为什么奉奴为主，让天子都说你们是奴贼？ 
English: Qiu Shili sent his brother Qiu Xing Qiao to lead five hundred people carrying grain, cattle, and wine to the slave-thief's camp. The slave-thief's leader bowed deeply, Qiu Xing Qiao waved his sword and killed the slave-thief. He said to the thieves: "You are all good people. Why do you serve the slave as your master and let the heavenly son say that you are slave-thieves?"

古文：众皆俯伏曰： 愿改事公。 
现代文：大家都跪拜在地说 愿意侍奉您！ 
English: Everyone fell to their knees and said, "We are willing to serve you!"

古文：行恭即帅其众与师得共谒世民于渭北，世民以为光禄大夫。
现代文：丘行恭就率领这些人和丘师利在渭北一同谒见李世民。李世民任命丘行恭为光禄大夫。
English: Yau Gyong Kwan led these people and Yau Shili to meet Li Shimin in the north of Handan. Li Shimin appointed Yau Gyong Kwan as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：璡，琮之从子也。
现代文：窦是窦琼的侄子。
English: Dou is Dou Qiong's nephew.

古文：隰城尉房玄龄谒世民于军门，世民一见如旧识，署记室参军，引为谋主。
现代文：隰城尉房玄龄在军门谒见李世民。李世民与房玄龄一见如故，他任命房玄龄为记室参军，让他作为自己的高参。
English: Fong Xuanling, an officer of Shicheng, met Li Shimin at the gate of the army. Li Shimin and Fong Xuanling saw each other at once, and he appointed Fong Xuanling as a recorder to join the army and let him be his high-ranking officer.

古文：玄龄亦自以遇知己，罄竭心力，知无不为。
现代文：房玄龄也自认为遇到了知已，他对李世民是尽心竭力，知无不为。
English: Fang Xuanling also thought that he had met a wise man. He did his best for Li Shimin and did his best.

古文：渊命刘弘基、殷开山分兵西略扶风，有众六万，南渡渭水，屯长安故城。
现代文：李渊命令刘弘基、殷开山分兵向西攻取扶风，他们拥有部众六万人，向南渡过渭水，屯驻在长安故城。
English: Li Yuan ordered Liu Hongji and Yin Kaishan's detachment to go west to capture Fufeng. They had a detachment of sixty thousand people, crossed the Surabaya River to the south, and stationed in Chang'an Old Town.

古文：城中出战，弘基逆击，破之。
现代文：长安城中的隋军出战，刘弘基迎战，击败隋军。
English: The Sui army in Chang'an City went to war, and Liu Hongji went to war and defeated the Sui army.

古文：世民引兵趣司竹，李仲文、何潘仁、向善志皆帅众从之，顿于阿城，胜兵十三万，军令严整，秋毫不犯。
现代文：李世民率兵赴司竹，李仲文、何潘仁、向善志都率众跟随李世民，在阿城屯驻下，李世民有能作战的兵力十三万，军令严整，秋毫无犯。
English: Li Shimin led the troops to Sizhu. Li Zhongwen, He Panren and Xiang Zenshi all led the troops to follow Li Shimin and stationed in Achengtun. Li Shimin had 130,000 troops capable of fighting, strict military orders, and committed no crimes.

古文：乙亥，世民自盩厔遣使白渊，请期日赴长安。
现代文：乙亥，李世民从派使者禀报李渊，请求约定进攻长安的日期。
English: Yi Hai and Li Shimin sent an envoy to report to Li Yuan, requesting an agreed date for the attack on Chang'an.

古文：渊曰： 屈突东行不能复西，不足虞矣！ 
现代文：李渊说： 屈突通向东进军，不能再向西行了，他已不足为虑了！ 
English: Li Yuan said: Qu Jutong marched to the east and could no longer march to the west. He was no longer worried!

古文：乃命建成选仓上精兵自新丰趣长乐宫，世民帅新附诸军北屯长安故城，至并听教。
现代文：于是他命李建成挑选在永丰仓的精兵，从新丰直抵长乐宫；李世民率领新归附的各军向北进军，屯驻在长安故城；准时到达规定的地点，听从调遣。
English: Therefore, he ordered Li Jiancheng to select the best soldiers in Yongfeng Cang and go straight from Xinfeng to Changle Palace; Li Shimin led the newly annexed armies to march north and stationed in Chang'an Old City; arrived at the specified location on time and obeyed the dispatch.

古文：延安、上郡、雕阴皆请降于渊。
现代文：延安、上郡、雕阴等地都请求归降李渊。
English: Yan'an, Jangun, Jieyin and other places all requested the surrender of Li Yuan.

古文：丙子，渊引军西行，所过离宫园苑皆罢之，出宫女还其亲属。
现代文：丙子，李渊率军西行，所经过的炀帝的离宫园苑全部关闭崐，放出宫女归还其亲属。
English: When Emperor Xizong and Li Yuan led their armies westward, they closed all the imperial gardens of Emperor Xizong that they passed through, and released the imperial concubines to return to their relatives.

古文：冬，十月，辛巳，渊至长安，营于春明门之西北，诸军皆集，合二十馀万。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛巳，李渊到达长安，在春明门西北扎营，各路军队全部汇集，共二十余万人。
English: In the winter, in October, Li Yuan arrived in Chang'an, and set up camp in the northwest of Chunming Gate. All the armies were gathered there, totaling more than 200,000 people.

古文：渊命各依垒壁，毋得入村落侵暴。
现代文：李渊命令各部队驻扎在营垒内不得侵扰村落中的百姓。
English: Li Yuan ordered the troops stationed in the camp not to disturb the people in the village.

古文：屡遣使至城下谕卫文升等以欲尊隋之意，不报。
现代文：他屡次派使者到城下对卫文升等人宣称自己尊奉隋皇室的意思，卫文升等人不作答复。
English: He repeatedly sent emissaries to the outskirts of the city to respond to Wei Wensheng and others who declared their intention to honor the Sui royal family. Wei Wensheng and others did not respond.

古文：辛卯，命诸军进围城。
现代文：辛卯，李渊命令诸军进发围城。
English: Soon after, Li Yuan ordered the troops to march to the besieged city.

古文：甲午，渊迁馆于安兴坊。
现代文：甲午，李渊将营署迁到安兴坊。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Li Yuan moved the camp office to Anxingfang.

古文：巴陵校尉鄱阳董景珍、雷世猛、旅帅郑文秀、许玄彻、万瓚、徐德基、郭华、沔阳张绣等谋据郡叛隋，推景珍为主。
现代文：巴陵校尉鄱阳人董景珍、雷世猛，旅帅郑文秀、许玄、万瓒、徐德基、郭华，沔阳人张等人策划占据巴陵郡，背叛隋朝廷。大家推举董景珍为主。
English: Dong Jingzhen and Lei Shigemeng, the captains of Baling, and Zheng Wenxiu, Xu Xuan, Wan Xuan, Xu Deji, Guo Hua, and Zhang, the commander of Shenyang, planned to occupy Baling County and betray the Sui Dynasty. Everyone preferred Dong Jingzhen.

古文：景珍曰： 吾素寒贱，不为众所服。
现代文：董景珍说： 我向来贫寒微贱，不被众人所信服。
English: Dong Jingzhen said: I have always been poor and humble, and I am not convinced by many people.

古文：罗川令萧铣，梁室之后，宽仁大度，请奉之以从众望。 
现代文：罗川令萧铣是粱王室之后，他宽仁大度，请推举他为主以顺从众望。 
English: Luo Chuan ordered Xiao Yao to be the king of the royal family, he was generous and magnanimous, please nominate him as the main to obey the wishes of the public.

古文：乃遣使报铣。
现代文：于是就派使者告知萧铣。
English: So he sent an envoy to tell Xiao Yao.

古文：铣喜从之，声言讨贼，召募得数千人。
现代文：萧铣高兴地同意了。他声称讨贼，召募得几千人。
English: Xiao Yao happily agreed. He claimed to solicit thieves and recruited several thousand people.

古文：铣，岩之孙也。
现代文：萧铣是萧岩的孙子。
English: Xiao Yao is the grandson of Xiao Yan.

古文：会颍川贼帅沈柳生寇罗川，铣与战不利，因谓其众曰： 今天下皆叛，隋政不行，巴陵豪杰起兵，欲奉吾为主。
现代文：正好颍川的贼帅沈柳生侵犯罗川，萧铣率军与之交战不利，他就对柳生的部众说： 现在天下都造反了，隋朝的政令已经无法施行，巴陵的豪杰起兵，想推举我为主。
English: It just so happened that the thief-commander of Luochuan, Shen Liusheng, invaded Luochuan, and Xiao Gan led the army to fight against him. He said to Liusheng's subordinates: Now the whole world has rebelled, the Sui Dynasty's decrees can no longer be enforced, and the heroes of Baling have raised an army and want to elect me as their leader.

古文：若从其请以号令江南，可以中兴梁祚，以此召柳生，亦当从我矣。 
现代文：只要听从他们的请求，以此号令江南，就可以中兴梁氏的国统，以此召纳沈柳生，他也会跟从我的。 
English: As long as you listen to their request and use this as a signal to the south of the Yangtze River, you can promote the national unification of the Liang clan and use this as a way to recruit Shen Liu Sheng. He will also follow me.

古文：众皆悦，听命，乃自称梁公，改隋服色旗帜皆如梁旧。
现代文：大家听了都高兴，听命于萧铣。于是萧铣自称梁公，将隋朝的服色旗帜都恢复为梁朝的旧制。
English: Everyone was happy to hear this and obeyed Xiao Yao's order. So Xiao Yao called himself Liang Gong and restored the Sui Dynasty's uniform colors and flags to the Liang Dynasty's old system.

古文：柳生即帅众归之，以柳生为车骑大将军。
现代文：沈柳生就率众归附了萧铣。萧铣任命沈柳生为车骑大将军。
English: Shen Liusheng led the crowd to join Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao appointed Shen Liusheng as the general of the cavalry.

古文：起兵五日，远近归附者至数万人，遂帅众向巴陵。
现代文：他起兵五天，远近前来归附的有几万人。于是萧铣就率众进军巴陵。
English: It took him five days to raise an army, and tens of thousands of people came from near and far to join him. So Xiao Yao led the army into Baling.

古文：景珍遣徐德基帅郡中豪杰数百人出迎，未及见铣，柳生与其党谋曰： 我先奉梁公，勋居第一。
现代文：董景珍派徐德基率领巴陵郡的豪杰几百人出来迎接。还没见到萧铣，沈柳生就与他的党羽商议道： 我先推举梁公的，功勋当居第一位。
English: Dong Jingzhen sent Xu Deji to lead hundreds of heroes from Baling County to come out to greet him. Before seeing Xiao Yao, Shen Liusheng discussed with his party members: I will first nominate Liang Gong, and merit should come first.

古文：今巴陵诸将，皆位高兵多，我若入城，返出其下。不如杀德基，质其首领，独挟梁公进取郡城，则无出我右者矣。 
现代文：如今巴陵的诸将，都是位高兵多，如果我进城，反而要位于他们之下，不如杀掉徐德基，扣押他们的首领，我单独扶制梁公，进取巴陵郡城，那样就没有地位高于我的人了。 
English: Nowadays, the generals of Baling are all high-ranking soldiers. If I enter the city, but want to be below them, it is better to kill Xu Deji and detain their leaders. I will single-handedly support Liang Gong and enter the city of Baling County. Then there will be no one with a higher status than me.

古文：遂杀德基。
现代文：于是他杀死了徐德基，进军营告诉了萧铣。
English: So he killed Xu Deji, went into the camp and told Xiao Yao.

古文：入白铣，铣大惊曰： 今欲拨乱反正，忽自相杀，吾不能为若主矣。 
现代文：萧铣大吃一惊说： 现在要拨乱反正，我们忽然自相残杀，我不能作这样的首领。 
English: Xiao Yao was taken aback and said, "Now we have to set things right. We're suddenly killing each other. I can't be a leader like this."

古文：因步出军门。
现代文：于是走出了军门。
English: So he left the army.

古文：柳生大惧，伏地请罪，铣责而赦之，陈兵入城。
现代文：沈柳生大为惊慌，跪在地上请罪。萧铣责备沈柳生，但赦免了他，于是列队入城。
English: Shen Liusheng panicked and kneeled on the ground to plead guilty. Xiao Yao scolded Shen Liusheng, but pardoned him, so they marched into the city.

古文：景珍言于铣曰： 徐德基建义功臣，而柳生无故擅杀之，此而不诛，何以为政！
现代文：董景珍对萧铣说： 徐德基是倡义大业的功臣，沈柳生却无故擅自杀害徐德基，不杀此人，怎么能治理国家？
English: Dong Jingzhen said to Xiao Wei: Xu Deji is a hero of the great cause of advocating righteousness, but Shen Liusheng killed Xu Deji without any reason. Without killing this person, how can the country be governed?

古文：且柳生为盗日久，今虽从义，凶悖不移，共处一城，势必为变。失今不取，后悔无及！ 
现代文：况且沈柳生作了很长时间的强盗，现在虽然参预大义，但其凶恶悖逆的本性末改，我们与他共处一城，势必会生变乱，失掉现在的机会不杀掉他，后悔就晚了！ 
English: Moreover, Shen Liu Sheng has been a robber for a long time. Although he is now a participant in the Great Righteousness, his evil and rebellious nature will not change. If we live with him, it is bound to cause turmoil. If we lose the opportunity now and do not kill him, it will be too late to regret it!

古文：铣又从之。
现代文：萧铣又听从了董景珍的意见。
English: Xiao Yao also followed the advice of Dong Jingzhen.

古文：景珍收柳生，斩之，其徒皆溃去。
现代文：董景珍就收押了沈柳生并将他处死，沈柳生的党羽都溃散离去。
English: Dong Jingzhen arrested Shen Liusheng and put him to death. Shen Liusheng's followers scattered and left.

古文：丙申，铣筑坛燔燎，自称梁王，改元鸣凤。
现代文：丙申，萧铣筑坛燃烧祭火，自称梁王，改年号为鸣凤。
English: Bishen, Xiao Wei built the altar to burn the sacrificial fire, called himself Liang Wang, and changed his name to Ming Feng.

古文：壬寅，王世充夜渡洛水，营于黑石，明日，分兵守营，自将精兵陈于洛北。
现代文：壬寅，王世充率军夜渡洛水，在黑石扎营，第二天，他分兵守营，自己率领精兵在洛北列阵。
English: In Ren Yin, Wang Shichong led the army to Luoshui at night and camped in Black Rock. The next day, he divided the troops to guard the camp and led the elite soldiers to line up in the north of Luo.

古文：李密闻之，引兵渡洛逆战，密兵大败，柴孝和溺死。密帅麾下精骑渡洛南，馀众东走月城，世充追围之。
现代文：李密听到这个消息，就率兵渡过洛水迎战。李密大败，柴孝和淹死，李密率部下的精锐骑兵渡过洛水向南，其余的部众向东逃到月城。王世充率众追击包围月城的军队。
English: When Li Mi heard the news, he led his troops across the Luoshui River to meet the battle. Li Mi was defeated, Chai Xiaohe was drowned, Li Mi led his elite cavalry across the Luoshui River to the south, and the rest of the troops fled east to Yuecheng. Wang Shichong led the troops to pursue the army that surrounded Yuecheng.

古文：密自洛南策马直趣黑石，营中惧，连举六烽，世充释月城之围，狼狈自救；密还与战，大破之，斩首二千馀级。
现代文：李密从洛水南岸策马直奔黑石，王世充军营中的守军惊恐，接连举了六次烽火以报警，王世充撤了月城崐之围，狼狈地回救自己的军垒，李密又与之交战，大破隋军，斩获首级三千余。
English: Li Mi rode a horse from the south coast of Luoshui straight to Black Rock. The defenders in Wang Shichong's camp were terrified and held six bonfires in succession to alert the police. Wang Shichong withdrew the siege of Yuecheng Fort and returned to save his own military base in dismay. Li Mi fought with it again, defeated the Sui army, and won more than three thousand first-class soldiers.

古文：甲辰，李渊命诸攻城，约 毋得犯七庙及代王、宗室，违者夷三族！ 
现代文：甲辰，李渊命令各军攻城。规定 不得侵犯七庙和代王、隋朝宗室，违令的人诛灭三族！ 
English: Jia Chen and Li Yuan ordered their armies to attack the city, stipulating that they should not invade the seven temples and the ancestral house of the king and the Sui Dynasty, and that those who violated the order should exterminate the three ethnic groups!

古文：孙华中流矢卒。
现代文：孙华中流箭而死。
English: Sun Hua was killed by a flying arrow.

古文：十一月，丙辰，军头雷永吉先登，遂克长安。
现代文：十一月，丙辰，军头雷永吉先行登城，于是攻克了长安。
English: In November, Hsin-Chen and the military leader Lei Yongji went to the city first, and then conquered Chang'an.

古文：代王在东宫，左右奔散，唯侍读姚思廉侍侧。
现代文：代王杨侑在东宫，他身边的人奔逃溃散，只有侍读姚思廉侍立在杨侑身旁。
English: The acting king, Yang Hui, was in the East Palace. The people around him ran away and scattered. Only the attendant, Yao Siliang, stood next to Yang Hui.

古文：军士将登殿，思廉厉声诃之曰： 唐公举义兵，匡帝室，卿等毋得无礼！ 
现代文：李渊的军士将登入殿堂，姚思廉厉声斥责军士道： 唐王兴举义兵，扶助帝室，你们不得无礼！ 
English: Li Yuan's sergeant-at-arms will enter the hall of fame, Yao Siliang harshly rebuked the sergeant-at-arms: Tang Wang Xing raised volunteers, supported the imperial family, you must not be rude!

古文：众皆愕然，布立庭下。
现代文：军士们都愕然，在庭院中排列站立。
English: The sergeants, aghast, line up in the courtyard.

古文：渊迎王于东宫，迁居大兴殿后，听思廉扶王至顺阳阁下，泣拜而去。
现代文：李渊到东宫迎奉代王杨侑，把他迁居到大兴殿后面，让姚思廉扶着代王杨侑到顺阳下，李渊流泪跪拜而去。
English: Li Yuan went to the East Palace to welcome Wang Yang Hui, moved him to the back of the Daxing Hall, and let Yao Siliang support Wang Yang Hui to go to Shunyang. Li Yuan bowed down in tears and left.

古文：思廉，察之子也。
现代文：姚思廉是姚察的儿子。
English: Yao Silian is the son of Yao Cha.

古文：渊还，舍于长乐宫，与民约法十二条，悉除隋苛禁。
现代文：李渊返回，住在长乐宫，与百姓约法十二条，将隋朝的苛政酷令全部废除。
English: Li Yuan returned, lived in the Changle Palace, and negotiated with the people about the twelve articles of the law, abolishing all the harsh policies and orders of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：渊之起兵也，留守官发其坟墓，毁其五庙。
现代文：李渊起兵后，留守官挖掘他家的坟墓，毁掉他家的五庙。
English: After Li Yuan raised an army, the remaining officers dug up his family's grave and destroyed his family's five temples.

古文：至是，卫文升已卒，戊午，执阴世师、骨仪等，数以贪婪苛酷，且拒义师，俱斩之，死者十馀人，馀无所问。
现代文：到这时，卫文升已去世。戊午，李渊将阴世师、骨仪等人抓起来，历数他们的贪婪苛酷，以及抗拒义师的罪行，将他们全部处死。
English: By this time, Wei Wensheng had passed away. In the afternoon, Li Yuan arrested Yin Shishi, Ossuary and others, counted their greedy and harsh, as well as the crime of resisting the righteous, and put them all to death.

古文：马邑郡丞三原李靖，素与渊有隙，渊入城，将斩之。靖大呼曰： 公兴义兵，欲平暴乱，乃以私怨杀壮士乎！ 
现代文：除了处死的十余人，其余的人不追究。马邑郡丞三原人李靖，平素就与李渊有矛盾，李渊入城，要杀掉李靖，李靖大喊道： 您兴义兵，想要平息暴乱，怎么能因为私怨而杀壮士呢？ 
English: In addition to the more than ten people who were executed, the rest of the people were not investigated. Li Jing, a Ma'i County official and a native of Sanyuan, was always in conflict with Li Yuan. Li Yuan entered the city and wanted to kill Li Jing. Li Jing shouted: You riot soldiers, if you want to quell the riot, how can you kill a strong man because of a personal grudge?

古文：世民为之固请，乃舍之。
现代文：李世民替他再三请求，李渊才放了李靖。
English: Li Shimin made repeated requests on his behalf, and Li Yuan finally released Li Jing.

古文：世民因召置幕府。
现代文：李世民就将他安排在自己的幕府里。
English: Li Shimin placed him in his own shogunate.

古文：靖少负志气，有文武才略，其舅韩擒虎每抚之曰： 可与言将帅之略者，独此子耳！ 
现代文：李靖从小就有抱负有志气，又有文才武略，他舅舅韩擒虎常常抚摸着他说： 能够和我谈论将帅谋略的人只有这个孩子！ 
English: Li Jing has been ambitious and ambitious since childhood, and has literary talent. His uncle, Han Binghu, often caresses him and says: The only one who can talk to me about strategy is this child!

古文：王世充自洛北之败，坚壁不出；越王侗遣使劳之，世充惭惧，请战于密。
现代文：王世充自从在洛水之北被李密打败后，就坚守营垒不再出战，越王杨侗派遣使者去慰劳王世充，王世充既惭愧又恐惧，就向李密要求交战。
English: Ever since Wang Shichong was defeated by Li Mi in the north of Luoshui, he had held fast to his camp and no longer went to war. King Yang Pi of Yue sent an envoy to console Wang Shichong. Wang Shichong was both ashamed and afraid, so he asked Li Mi to fight.

古文：丙辰，世充与密夹石子河而陈，密布陈南北十馀里，翟让先与世充战，不利而退；世充逐之，王伯当、裴仁基从旁横断其后，密勒中军击之，世充大败，西走。
现代文：丙辰，王世充与李密在石子河两岸列阵，李密阵列南北长十余里，翟让先和王世充交战，不胜而退。王世充追击翟让，王伯当、裴仁基从旁横断隋军的后路，李密统率中军进击王世充，王世充大败，向西逃走。
English: Hsin Chen, Wang Shichong and Li Mi lined up on both sides of the Shizi River. Li Mi's array was more than ten miles long from north to south. Xuan Zhan first fought with Wang Shichong and retreated without victory. Wang Shichong pursued Xuan Zhan, Wang Bodang and Pei Rongji crossed the back road of the Sui army from the side, Li Mi led the central army to attack Wang Shichong, Wang Shichong was defeated and fled to the west.

古文：翟让司马王儒信劝让自为大冢宰，总统众务，以夺密权，让不从。
现代文：翟让的司马王儒信劝说翟让自任大冢宰，总管政务，以此来夺取李密的权力，翟让不听。
English: Sima Wang Ruxin, who persuaded Zhang to relinquish his post, persuaded Zhang to appoint himself as the grand vizier and head of government affairs in order to seize Li Mi's power, but Zhang did not listen.

古文：让兄柱国荥阳公弘，粗愚人也，谓让曰： 天子汝当自为，奈何与人！
现代文：翟让的哥哥柱国荥阳公翟弘，为人粗鲁愚昧，他对翟让说： 天子应该自己当，干吗要让给别人！
English: Zhangzang's elder brother, Zhu Guo Ziyang Gong Zhi Hong, was rude and ignorant, and he said to Zhangzang: "The Son of Heaven should be himself, why should he give it to others!

古文：汝不为者，我当为之！ 
现代文：你不作天子，让我来作！ 
English: If you don't do it, let me do it!

古文：让但大笑，不以为意，密闻而恶之。
现代文：翟让只是哈哈大笑，不放在心上。李密知道这件事后就厌恶他。
English: Hao Jang just laughed out loud, not taking it to heart. After Li Mi Rong found out about this, he loathed him.

古文：总管崔世枢自鄢陵初附于密，让囚之私府，责其货，世枢营求未办，遽欲加刑。
现代文：总管崔世枢从鄢陵初起事就归附李密，翟让把他囚禁在自己的府第里，向他索取钱财，崔世枢请求翟让不要处罚他，翟让就要给崔世枢加刑。
English: General Manager Cui Shizhu was attached to Li Mi from the beginning of the incident in Fuling. Yanzang imprisoned him in his own mansion and demanded money from him. Cui Shizhu asked Yanzang not to punish him. Yanzang was going to increase Cui Shizhu's sentence.

古文：让召元帅府记室邢义期博，逡巡未就，杖之八十。
现代文：他召元帅府记室邢义期和他赌博，邢义期有顾虑未来，翟让就把邢义期打了八十杖。
English: He called the marshal's office and gambled with him. He was worried about the future, so he gave him eighty sticks.

古文：让谓左长史房彦藻曰： 君前破汝南，大得宝货，独与魏公，全不与我！
现代文：翟让对左长史房彦藻说： 你从前攻破汝南时得了很多宝货，只给了魏公，却不给我！
English: Zhen Zang said to Zuo Changshi Fusa Hikomaso: You got a lot of treasures when you broke through the south of the country. You only gave them to Wei Gong, but not to me!

古文：魏公我之所立，事未可知。 
现代文：魏公是我拥立的，天下事的变化，尚难知道。 
English: I supported Wei Gong, but it is difficult to know how things will change in the world.

古文：彦藻惧，以状告密，因与左司马郑颋共说密曰： 让贪愎不仁，有无君之心，宜早图之。 
现代文：房彦藻听后感到害怕，他把这个情况告诉了李密，因而与左司马郑一起劝说李密： 翟让贪婪而刚愎自用，不行仁义，有目无君长之心，应该早些想办法。 
English: He told Li Mi about this situation, and together with Zuo Sima Zheng, he persuaded Li Mi: "Don't let greed and arrogance take over, don't be benevolent, don't have a king's heart, you should have thought of a solution earlier."

古文：密曰： 今安危未定，遽相诛杀，何以示远！ 
现代文：李密说： 现在我们的安危还未确定，就相互诛杀，让别的地方的人怎么看呢？ 
English: Li Mi said: Now that our safety has not been determined, we fight with each other. What do people in other places think of this?

古文：颋曰： 毒蛇螫手，壮士解腕，所全者大故也。彼先得志，悔无所及。 
现代文：郑说： 毒蛇螫手，壮士断腕，但是根本还保全着，若他们先得了手，您后悔就晚了。 
English: Zheng said, "The viper cuts off the hand, the strong man cuts off the arm, but they are still preserved. If they get the hand first, you will regret it later."

古文：密乃从之，置酒召让。
现代文：于是李密听了他们的劝告。他摆酒宴召翟让来。
English: So Li Mi listened to their advice. He set up a banquet and invited them to come.

古文：戊午，让与兄弘及兄子司徒府长史摩侯同诣密，密与让、弘、裴仁基、郝孝德共坐，单雄信等皆立侍，房彦藻、郑颋往来检校。
现代文：戊午，翟让和他哥哥翟弘及侄子司徒府长史翟摩侯一同去见李密。李密和翟让、翟弘、裴仁基、郝孝德坐在一起，单雄信等人都侍立着。房彦藻、郑来来往往地察看照顾。
English: In the afternoon, Yuanzhang went to see Li Mi with his brother Yu Hong and his nephew Shi Yanma, the governor of Szeto. Li Mi sat next to Yuanzhang, Yu Hong, Pei Renji, and Yu Xiaode, while Shan Xiongxin and others stood by. Fang Yanso and Zheng often came and went to look after Li Mi.

古文：密曰： 今日与达官饮，不须多人，左右止留数人给使而已。 
现代文：李密说： 今天和各位达官们饮洒，不需要很多人，左右人等只留服侍的而已。 
English: Li Mi said, "Today, I will have a drink with the dignitaries. I don't need a lot of people.

古文：密左右皆引去，让左右犹在。
现代文：李密身边的人都退去，翟让身边的人还在。
English: The people around Li Mi all retreated, leaving the people around her still there.

古文：彦藻白密曰： 今方为乐，天时甚寒，司徒左右，请给酒食。 
现代文：房彦藻对李密说： 今天正好饮宴作乐，天气很冷，请给司徒身边的人以洒食。 
English: Fang Yanmao said to Li Mi: Today is just the right time to have a banquet, the weather is very cold, please sprinkle the food to the people around Szeto.

古文：密曰： 听司徒进止。 
现代文：李密说： 听司徒的意思。 
English: Li Mi said, "Listen to the disciple's meaning.

古文：让应曰： 甚佳。 
现代文：翟让说： 很好。 
English: Zhang Zhen said: Very good.

古文：乃引让左右尽出，独密下壮士蔡建德持刀立侍。
现代文：于是房彦藻就把翟让身边的人全都带走了。唯独留李密辖下的壮士蔡建德持刀侍立。
English: As a result, Fang Yanmo took all the people around him away, except for Cai Jiande, a strong man under Li Mi's command, who stood by with a sword.

古文：食未进，密出良弓，与让习射，让方引满，建德自后斫之，踣于床前，声若牛吼，并弘、摩侯、儒信皆杀之。
现代文：还没吃饭，李密拿出良弓，和翟让练习射箭。翟让刚拉满弓，蔡建德就从背后用刀砍翟让，翟让扑倒在床前，声如牛吼，蔡建德将翟弘、翟摩侯、王儒信一并杀死。
English: Before the meal, Li Mi took out a good bow, and He Zhaojang practiced archery. As soon as He Zhaojang filled the bow, Cai Jiande slashed He Zhaojang with a knife from behind, He Zhaojang fell down in front of the bed, his voice was like a cow's roar, Cai Jiande killed Zhaohong, Zhaomao, and Wang Ruxin together.

古文：徐世勣走出，门者斫之伤颈，王伯当遥诃止之。
现代文：徐世走出门，看门的卫兵把他的脖子砍伤，王伯当在远处呵斥制止住了。
English: When Xu Shi walked out of the door, the guard at the gate slashed his neck. Wang Bodang shouted in the distance to stop him.

古文：单雄信叩头请命，密释之。
现代文：单雄信叩头请求饶命，李密将他释放。
English: Shan Xiongxin kowtowed and pleaded for his life to be spared, and Li Mi released him.

古文：左右惊扰，莫知所为，密大言曰： 与君等同起义兵，本除暴乱。司徒专行贪虐，陵辱群僚，无复上下；今所诛止其一家，诸君无预也。 
现代文：左右两旁的人都十分惊恐疑惧，不知怎么办好。李密大声说： 我和大家一同起义兵，本来是要铲除暴虐，但司徒翟让专行暴虐，凌辱众僚属，也不分上下尊卑，今天诛杀的只是翟让一家，与各位无关。 
English: People on both sides were very frightened and doubtful, and did not know what to do. Li Mi said loudly: I and all the insurgents originally wanted to eradicate tyranny, but Szeto Lhanzang committed tyranny, abused all his colleagues and subordinates, and did not distinguish between superior and inferior. Today, it was only the Lhanzang family that was killed, and it had nothing to do with you.

古文：命扶徐世勣置幕下，亲为傅创。
现代文：他命人扶走徐世，安置在帐幕下，亲自为他敷药。
English: He ordered someone to take Xu Shih away, placed him under a tent, and personally applied medicine to him.

古文：让麾下欲散，密使单雄信前往宣慰，密寻独骑入其营，历加抚谕，令世勣、雄信、伯当分领其众，中外遂定。
现代文：翟让的部众要溃散，李密派单雄信前往传达他的慰问之意。随即，李密又独自一人骑马来到翟让的营中，对其部下倍加安抚慰问。他命令徐世、单雄信、王伯当分别统领翟让的部众。于是，李密军内外形势稳定下来。
English: The general's troops were about to disperse, and Li Mi sent Shan Xiongxin to convey his condolences. Immediately, Li Mi rode alone to the general's camp to offer his condolences. He ordered Xu Shih, Shan Xiongxin, and Wang Bodang to lead the general's troops separately. As a result, the internal and external situation of Li Mi's army stabilized.

古文：让残忍，摩侯猜忌，儒信贪纵，故死之日，所部无哀之者；然密之将佐始有自疑之心矣。
现代文：翟让性情残忍，摩侯性好猜忌，王儒信为人贪婪放纵，所以他们被杀的那天，他们的部下没有人为此而悲痛。但是李密的将佐从此开始有了猜疑和不安定的情绪。
English: On the day they were killed, none of Li Mi's subordinates were saddened by their deaths, as they were cruel by nature, suspicious by nature, and greedy and self-indulgent by nature. However, Li Mi's generals began to feel suspicious and uneasy.

古文：始，王世充知让与密必不久睦，冀其相图，得从而乘之。
现代文：当初，王世充知道翟让与李密必定不能长久和睦相处，他希望二人互相图谋相斗，他就可以得到机会乘虚而入。
English: At first, Wang Shichong knew that Zou Zhan and Li Mi must not get along well for a long time. He hoped that the two would try to fight each other, so that he could get the opportunity to take advantage of the situation.

古文：及闻让死，大失望，叹曰： 李密天资明决，为龙为蛇，固不可测也！ 
现代文：等他闻知翟让被杀死，大失所望，叹息道： 李密天资聪颖决断，他是龙是蛇，根本无法预测！ 
English: When he heard that Yuanzhang had been killed, he was greatly disappointed and sighed, "Li Mi is talented, intelligent and decisive. Whether he is a dragon or a snake, it is impossible to predict!

古文：壬戌，李渊备法驾迎代王即皇帝位于天兴殿，时年十三，大赦，改元，遥尊炀帝为太上皇。甲子，渊自长乐宫入长安。以渊为假黄钺、使持节、大都督内外诸军事、尚书令、大丞相，进封唐王。
现代文：壬戊，李渊排列仪仗迎接代王杨侑在天兴殿即皇帝位。杨娰У苯蹦杲鍪辍纶笊馓煜拢哪旰牛痨镜畚匣省＜鬃樱ㄊ七日，李渊从长乐宫进入长安，杨侑特赐李渊持黄钺、持节，委以大都督内外诸军事、尚书令、大丞相，晋封为唐王。
English: On the seventh day, Li Yuan entered Chang'an from the Changle Palace. Yang Di specifically gave Li Yuan the power to hold the yellow scepter and the festival, and appointed him as the grand governor of internal and external military affairs, Shang Shuling, and the prime minister, and promoted him to the king of Tang.

古文：以武德殿为丞相府，改教称令，日于虔化门视事。
现代文：李渊以武德殿为丞相府，把所颁公文由教改称为令，每天在虔化门处理政事。
English: Li Yuan used Wude Hall as the chancellor's office, changed the official documents issued from teaching to orders, and dealt with political affairs at Qianhua Gate every day.

古文：乙丑，榆林、灵武、平凉、安定诸郡皆遣使请命。
现代文：乙丑，榆林、灵武、平凉、安定诸郡都派遣使者前来请求任命。
English: The counties of Yixiu, Yulin, Lingwu, Pingliang, and Ding'an all sent envoys to request the appointment.

古文：丙寅，诏军国机务，事无大小，文武设官，位无贵贱，宪章赏罚，咸归相府；唯郊祀天地，四时禘袷奏闻。
现代文：丙寅，杨侑下诏：凡军政事务无论大小，以及文武官员的任职无论贵贱，典章制度的执行惩处，全部归丞相府处理。只有在郊外祭祀天地以及四季祭祀祖先要上奏杨侑。
English: Hsin-Yin and Yang Hui issued the following edict: All military and political affairs, no matter how big or small, as well as the posts of civil and military officials, no matter how high or low, and the enforcement and punishment of the award system, should all be handled by the Prime Minister's Office. Only in the suburbs should the heavens and earth be sacrificed, and the four seasons should be sacrificed to ancestors.

古文：置丞相府官属，以裴寂为长史，刘文静为司马。
现代文：李渊设置丞相府官属。他任命裴寂为长史，刘文静为司马。
English: Li Yuan set up officials subordinate to the chancellor's office. He appointed Pei Jia as Changshi and Liu Wenzhing as Sima.

古文：何潘仁使李纲入见，渊留之，以专掌选事。
现代文：何潘仁派李纲进入长安觐见，李渊将李纲留下，任命他为丞相府司录，专管选用官员之事。
English: He Panren sent Li Gang to Chang'an to meet him, Li Yuan left Li Gang behind and appointed him as the secretary of the Prime Minister's Office, in charge of the selection of officials.

古文：又以前考功郎中窦威为司录参军，使定礼仪。
现代文：又任命前考功郎中窦威为司录参军，让他制订礼仪。
English: He also appointed the pre-examination hero, Zhong Dou Wei, as the registrar to join the army, and let him formulate the etiquette.

古文：威，炽之子也。
现代文：窦威是窦炽的儿子。
English: Dou Wei is the son of Dou Blaze.

古文：渊倾府库以赐勋人，国用不足，右光禄大夫刘世龙献策，以为 今义师数万，并在京师，樵苏贵而布帛贱；请伐六街及苑中树为樵，以易布帛，可得数十万匹。 
现代文：李渊将府库中所有的东西都拿出来赏赐给有功的人。国家的财政困难，右光禄大夫刘世龙献策，认为 现在义师有几万人都在京师，柴草贵而布帛贱，请允许砍伐长安城中六坊和苑中的树木为柴，用来换取布帛，可以得到几十万匹布帛。 
English: Li Yuan took out all the things in the treasury to reward the meritorious. Due to the country's financial difficulties, Liu Shilong, the doctor of the Right Guanglu, offered his advice, saying that tens of thousands of righteous teachers are now teaching in Beijing. Firewood is expensive, but cloth is cheap. Please allow the trees in Zhongliubang and Yuan in Chang'an City to be cut down for firewood. In exchange for cloth, hundreds of thousands of cloth can be obtained.

古文：渊从之。
现代文：李渊采纳了这个建议。
English: Li Yuan accepted this suggestion.

古文：己巳，以李建成为唐世子，李世民为京兆尹、秦公，李元吉为齐公。
现代文：己巳，他封李建成为唐世子，封李世民为京兆尹、秦公，封李元吉为齐公。
English: For example, he named Li Jian as Tang's heir, Li Shimin as Jing Zhaoyun and Qin Gong, and Li Yuanji as Qi Gong.

古文：河南诸郡尽附李密，唯荥阳太守郇王庆、梁郡太守杨汪尚为隋守。
现代文：河南各郡都归附了李密，唯独荥阳太守郇王杨庆、梁郡太守杨汪还效忠隋朝。
English: All counties in Henan were annexed by Li Mi, except that Yang Qing, the governor of Shiyang, and Yang Wang, the governor of Liang County, remained loyal to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：密以书招庆，为陈厉害，且曰： 王之先世，本住山东，本姓郭氏，乃非杨族。
现代文：李密写信去招抚郇王杨庆，陈说利害，并说： 您家世系，本住在山东，本姓郭而不属于杨家一族。
English: Li Mi wrote a letter to woo Wang Yangqing, Chen said the stakes, and said: Your family lineage, originally lived in Shandong, originally surnamed Guo, but did not belong to the Yang family.

古文：芝焚蕙叹，事不同此。 
现代文：虽物伤其类，但您与他们并非一类。 
English: Although they are different, you are not the same.

古文：初，庆祖父元孙早孤，随母郭氏养于舅族。及武元帝从周文帝起兵关中，元孙在鄴，恐为高氏所诛，冒姓郭氏，故密云然。
现代文：当初，杨庆的祖父元孙早年丧父，他跟随母亲郭氏在舅舅家族里生活，到隋武元帝杨忠跟从周文帝在关中起兵，元孙在邺城，他怕被北齐高氏杀害，就顶冒姓郭，所以李密说他不姓杨。
English: At the beginning, Yang Qing's grandfather, Yuan Sun, lost his father at an early age. He followed his mother, Guo, to live with his uncle's family. Yang Zhong, the Emperor of the Sui and Yuan Dynasties, followed Emperor Zhou Wenzhong to raise an army in Guanzhong. Yuan Sun was in Shicheng. He was afraid of being killed by Bei Qigao, so he changed his surname to Guo. Therefore, Li Mi said that his surname was not Yang.

古文：庆得书惶恐，即以郡降密，复姓郭氏。
现代文：杨庆收到信很惶恐，立即举郡投降李密，又恢复郭姓。
English: Yang Qing received the letter with great trepidation, immediately surrendered to Li Mi and resumed the surname of Guo.

古文：十二月，癸未，追谥唐王渊大父襄公为景王；考仁公为元王，夫人窦氏为穆妃。
现代文：十二月，癸未，追谥唐王李渊的祖父襄公李虎为景王，父亲仁公李为元王，李的夫人窦氏为穆妃。
English: In late December, the grandfather of the late Tang King Li Yuan, Prince Xiang, Li Hu, became King Jing, his father, Prince Ren, became King Yuan, and Li's wife, Lady Dou, became Empress Mu.

古文：薛举遣其子仁果寇扶风，唐弼据汧源拒之。
现代文：薛举派他儿子薛仁果劫掠扶风郡，唐弼据守源抗击薛仁果。
English: Xue Qiu sent his son Xue Rengguo to plunder Fufeng County, while Tang Xuan defended Yuan against Xue Rengguo.

古文：举遣使招弼，弼乃杀李弘芝，请降于举，仁果乘其无备，袭破之，悉并其众。
现代文：薛举派遣使者招降唐弼，唐弼就杀死李弘芝向薛举请求归降。薛仁果乘唐弼没有防备，袭击并攻取了源，收编了唐弼的全部部众。
English: Xue Qiu sent an envoy to invite Tang Xuan to surrender, and Tang Xuan killed Li Hongzhi to ask Xue Qiu to surrender. Xue Rengo took advantage of Tang Xuan's unpreparedness, attacked and captured the source, and gathered all of Tang Xuan's followers.

古文：弼以数百骑走诣扶风请降，扶风太守窦璡杀之。
现代文：唐弼率领几百名骑兵逃到扶风郡请求投降，扶风太守窦杀掉唐弼。
English: Tang Xuan led several hundred cavalrymen to flee to Fufeng County to request surrender, and Fufeng Taishou Dou killed Tang Xuan.

古文：举势益张，众号三十万，谋取长安；闻丞相渊已定长安，遂围扶风。
现代文：薛举的势力越加壮大，其部众号称三十万人。他筹划攻取长安，听到丞相李渊已平定长安，就包围扶风。
English: Xuezhu's power grew stronger and stronger, and his troops were said to number 300,000 men. He planned to attack Chang'an, and when he heard that the prime minister, Li Yuan, had pacified Chang'an, he encircled Fufeng.

古文：渊使李世民将兵击之。
现代文：李渊派李世民率兵进击薛举。
English: Li Yuan sent Li Shimin and his soldiers to attack Xueju.

古文：又使姜謩、窦轨俱出散关，安抚陇右；左光禄大夫李孝恭招慰山南；府户曹张道源招慰山东。
现代文：又派姜、窦轨出使散关，安抚陇右地方的百姓，派左光禄大夫李孝恭招抚慰问山南，派府户曹张道源招抚慰问潼关以东各地。
English: He also sent Jiang and Dou Loke as emissaries to Sankuan to pacify the people in Shigu, sent Zuo Guanglu doctor Li Xiaogong to solicit sympathy for Shannan, and sent Fuhu Cao Zhang Doyuan to solicit sympathy for the people in the east of Shigu.

古文：孝恭，渊之从父兄子也。
现代文：李孝恭是李渊的堂侄。
English: Li Xiaogong is a cousin of Li Yuan.

古文：癸巳，世民击薛仁果于扶风，大破之，追奔至垅坻而还。
现代文：癸巳，李世民率兵在扶风进攻薛仁果，大破薛仁果军，并追击到垅坻才返回。
English: At that time, Li Shimin and his soldiers attacked Xue Rengguo at Fufeng, defeated Xue Rengguo's army, and chased them until they retreated.

古文：薛举大惧，问其群臣曰： 自古天子有降事乎？ 
现代文：薛举大为惊慌，问他的臣属： 自古有天子投降的事情吗？ 
English: Xue Jiu was greatly alarmed and asked his subordinates: Has there ever been a case of a heavenly son surrendering?

古文：黄门侍郎钱唐褚亮曰： 赵佗归汉，刘禅仕晋，近世萧琮，至今犹贵。转祸为福，自古有之。 
现代文：黄门侍郎钱唐人褚亮说： 赵佗归附汉朝，刘禅侍奉晋室，近代的萧琮，到现在还地位显赫高贵，这种转祸为福的事自古就有。 
English: Huangmen's steward Qian Tangren Ziliang said: Zhao Zou became attached to the Han Dynasty, Liu Zen served the Jin court, and modern Xiao Zou still has a prominent and noble status. This kind of turning misfortune into blessing has existed since ancient times.

古文：卫尉卿郝瑗趋进曰： 陛下失问！
现代文：卫尉卿郝瑗快步上前说： 陛下不应该问这种事！
English: Guard Captain Yan quickly stepped forward and said, "Your Majesty should not ask such a thing!

古文：褚亮之言又何悖也！
现代文：褚亮的话又是多么荒谬！
English: How absurd are these glittering words!

古文：昔汉高祖屡经奔败，蜀先主亟亡妻子，卒成大业；陛下奈何以一战不利，遽为亡国之计乎！ 
现代文：从前汉高祖经过多次逃亡与失败，蜀汉的先主刘备屡次失去妻室儿子，但他们最后都完成了帝业，陛下怎崐么能因为一战失利，就要做亡国的打算呢？ 
English: In the past, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty fled and failed many times. The ancestor of Shu Han Dynasty, Liu Bei, lost his wife and son many times, but they finally completed the imperial career. How can His Majesty plan to ruin the country because of the defeat in World War I?

古文：举亦悔之，曰： 聊以此试君等耳。 
现代文：薛举也后悔了，说： 我不过拿这话试试你们罢了。 
English: Xue Qiu also regretted it and said, "I'm just testing you with this."

古文：乃厚赏瑗，引为谋主。
现代文：于是重赏郝瑗，让他作自己的高参。
English: As a result, he highly appreciated Zou and let him be his own high-ranking official.

古文：乙未，平凉留守张隆，丁酉，河池太守萧瑀及扶风汉阳郡相继来降。
现代文：乙未，平凉留守张隆，丁酉，河池太守萧以及扶风、汉阳郡相继来归降李渊。
English: Biyi, Pingliang, Zhanglong, Dingyao, Hechi, Xiao, Fufeng and Hanyang counties successively surrendered to Li Yuan.

古文：以窦璡为工部尚书、燕国公，萧瑀为礼部尚书、宋国公。
现代文：李渊封窦为工部尚书，燕国公；封萧为礼部尚书，宋国公。
English: Li Yuan Feng Dou was the official of the Ministry of Industry, and the ruler of Yan Province; Feng Xiao was the official of the Ministry of Rites, and the ruler of Song Province.

古文：姜謩、窦轨进至长道，为薛举所败，引还。
现代文：姜、窦轨率军走到长道县，被薛举击败，就率军返回。
English: Jiang and Dou Liao led the army to Changdao County. They were defeated by Xue Jiu and returned with their army.

古文：渊使通议大夫醴泉刘世让安集唐弼馀党，与举相遇，战败，为举所虏。
现代文：李渊派遣通议大夫醴泉人刘世让安抚召集唐弼的余党，刘世让与薛举相遇，战败，被薛举俘虏。
English: Li Yuan dispatched Liu Shijang, the mediator of the conciliation, to pacify and convene the rest of the Tang Dynasty. Liu Shijang met Xue Jiu, was defeated, and was captured by Xue Jiu.

古文：李孝恭击破硃粲，诸将请尽杀其俘，孝恭曰： 不可，自是以往，谁复肯降矣！ 
现代文：李孝恭击败朱粲，诸将请将俘虏全部杀死。李孝恭说： 不能这样做，否则，往后谁还肯投降？ 
English: Li Xiaogong defeated Zhu Xi, and the generals asked him to kill all the prisoners. Li Xiaogong said, "You can't do that, otherwise, who will be willing to surrender in the future?"

古文：皆释之。于是自金川出巴、蜀，檄书所至，降附者三十馀州。
现代文：于是从金川到巴中蜀地，檄文所到之处，投降归附李渊的有三十余州。
English: As a result, more than 30 prefectures surrendered to Li Yuan, from Jinchuan to Baizhong and Shu to Shunde.

古文：屈突通与刘文静相持月馀，通复使桑显和夜袭其营，文静与左光禄大夫段志玄悉力苦战，显和败走，尽俘其众，通势益蹙。
现代文：屈突通和刘文静相持了一个多月，屈突通又派桑显和率兵夜袭刘文静的军营。刘文静和左光禄大夫段志玄全力苦战，桑显和兵败逃走，刘文静将桑显和的部下全部俘获。
English: Qu Jutong and Liu Wenzhing held each other for more than a month. Qu Jutong also sent Sang Xianhe and his soldiers to attack Liu Wenzhing's camp at night. Liu Wenzhing and Zuo Guanglu's doctor Duan Zhixuan fought hard with all their strength. Sang Xianhe was defeated and fled. Liu Wenzhing captured all of Sang Xianhe's men.

古文：或说通降，通泣曰： 吾历事两主，恩顾甚厚。食人之禄而违其难，吾不为也！ 
现代文：屈突通的处境愈加窘迫。有人劝屈突通投降，屈突通哭道： 我侍奉过两个主上，皇帝对我的恩宠照顾非常优厚，拿着人家的俸禄而在困难时背叛，我不能做这样的事！ 
English: Some people urged him to surrender, and he cried out: "I have served two masters. The emperor has taken very good care of my grace. I took someone else's salary and betrayed them when they were in trouble. I can't do such a thing!"

古文：每自摩其颈曰： 要当为国家受一刀！ 
现代文：他常常摸着自己的脖子说： 应当为国家挨一刀！ 
English: He often felt his neck and said: "I should be stabbed for the country!"

古文：劳勉将士，未尝不流涕，人亦以此怀之。
现代文：屈突通慰劳勉励将士时，没有不痛哭流涕的，大家对此也很感动。
English: When Qu Jutong consoled and encouraged the soldiers, there was no one who did not weep bitterly, and everyone was very moved by this.

古文：丞相渊遣其家僮召之，通立斩之。
现代文：丞相李渊派其家僮去招降屈突通，他当即将僮仆杀死。
English: The chancellor, Li Yuan, sent his eunuch to recruit a subordinate, Qu Xutong, who promptly killed the eunuch.

古文：及闻长安不守，家属悉为渊所虏，乃留显和镇潼关，引兵东出，将趣洛阳。
现代文：当他听说长安已经失守，家属都被李渊俘获，就留下桑显和镇守潼关，率军东去，准备奔往洛阳。
English: When he heard that Chang'an had been lost and that Li Yuan's family members had all been captured, he left Sang Xian and the town guards at Shaoguan and led the army east, preparing to rush to Luoyang.

古文：通适去，显和即以城降文静。
现代文：屈突通刚走，桑显和就献出潼关投降了刘文静。
English: As soon as Qu Jutong left, Sang Xianhe surrendered the pass to Liu Wenzhing.

古文：文静遣窦琮等将轻骑与显和追之，及于稠桑。
现代文：刘文静派窦琮等人率领轻骑与桑显和去追阻屈突通，在稠桑追上了他。
English: Liu Wenjing sent Dou Jun and others to lead the light cavalry and mulberry Xianhe to chase down Qu Xuntong, and caught up with him in the thick mulberry.

古文：通结陈自固，窦琮遣通子寿往谕之。通骂曰： 此贼何来！
现代文：屈突通摆好陈势以自卫，窦琮派屈突通的儿子屈突寿去劝说他，屈突通骂道： 这个贼人来干什么？
English: Qu Jutong put up a good show to defend himself. Dou Ye sent Qu Jutong's son, Qu Jiu, to persuade him. Qu Jutong scolded: "What did this thief come for?

古文：昔与汝为父子，今与汝为仇雠！ 
现代文：过去我和你是父子，现在我和你是仇敌！ 
English: In the past, you and I were father and son, but now we are enemies!

古文：命左右射之。
现代文：他命令身边的人用弓箭射屈突寿。
English: He ordered the people around him to shoot him with a bow and arrow.

古文：显和谓其众曰： 今京城已陷，汝辈皆关中人，去欲何之！ 
现代文：桑显和对屈突通的部众说： 如今京城已经失陷，你们都是关中人，打算去什么地方？ 
English: Sang Hsien said to the members of the Qu Xu Tong: Now that the capital has fallen, you are all Guanzhong people. Where do you plan to go?

古文：众皆释仗而降。通知不免，下马，东南再拜号哭曰： 臣力屈至此，非敢负国，天地神祇实知之！ 
现代文：屈突通的士兵就扔掉兵器投降，屈突通知道自己已无法逃脱，就下马向东南方向再三跪拜号哭道： 我的力量至此已经使尽，不敢辜负国家，天地神祗是知道的！ 
English: Qu Zhutong's soldiers threw down their weapons and surrendered. Knowing that he could no longer escape, Qu Zhutong dismounted and repeatedly knelt in the southeast direction, crying: "I have exhausted my strength at this point. I dare not fail the country. The gods of heaven and earth know this!"

古文：军人执通送长安，渊以为兵部尚书，赐爵蒋公，兼秦公元帅府长史。
现代文：士兵抓住了屈突通押送到长安，李渊任命他为兵部尚书，赐他蒋公的爵位，兼任秦公元帅府长史。
English: The soldiers caught Qu Jutong and sent him to Chang'an. Li Yuan appointed him as the secretary of the military department, gave him the title of Chiang Gong, and also served as the governor of Qin Dynasty.

古文：渊遣通至河东城下招谕尧君素，君素见通，歔欷不自胜，通亦泣下沾衿，因谓君素曰： 吾军已败，义旗所指，莫不响应，事势如此，卿当早降。 
现代文：李渊派屈突通到河东城下招降劝说尧君素，尧君素看到屈突通，欷不止，悲不自胜。
English: Li Yuan sent Qu Juntong to the city of Hedong to persuade Su Junsu to surrender. When Su Junsu saw Qu Juntong, he was heartbroken.

古文：君素曰： 公为国大臣，主上委公以关中，代王付公以社稷，奈何负国生降，乃更为人作说客邪！
现代文：屈突通也流泪沾湿了衣襟。他对尧君素说： 我军已经失败，唐王义旗所指之处，无不响应，事情已到了如此地步，您还是早些归降为好。 尧君素说： 您身为国家大臣，主上委任您以防卫关中的重任，代王将社稷都托付给您了，您为什么背弃国家而投降呢？还替人家作说客呀！
English: Qu Juntong also shed tears and his shirt collar was wet. He said to Su Junsu, "Our army has already failed. Wherever Tang Wang Yiqi pointed, there was no response. Things have reached such a stage, you had better surrender earlier." Su Junsu said, "You are the minister of state, the Lord has appointed you to the important task of defense customs, and the king has entrusted you with social affairs. Why did you abandon the country and surrender? You are also a lobbyist for others!"

古文：公所乘马，即代王所赐也，公何面目乘之哉！ 通曰： 吁！
现代文：您所乘之马，崐就是代王赏赐的，您还有什么脸骑着这匹马呢！ 屈突通说： 唉！
English: The horse on which you are riding was given to you by the king. How dare you ride this horse! Qu Zhutong said, "Alas!

古文：君素，我力屈而来。 君素曰： 方今力犹未屈，何用多言！ 
现代文：君素，我是力尽图穷才来的。 尧君素说： 我现在力量还未用尽，哪里用得着你多嘴！ 
English: Junsu, I came here with all my strength and energy. Shun Junsu said, "I haven't exhausted my strength yet, why do you need to talk so much!

古文：通惭而退。
现代文：屈突通惭愧退走。
English: Qu Jutong retreated in shame.

古文：东都米斗三千，人饿死者什二三。
现代文：东都缺粮，一斗米价值三千钱，因而饿死之人有十之二三。
English: There is a shortage of grain in the eastern capital, with a barrel of rice costing 3,000 yuan. As a result, 23 out of every 10 people die of starvation.

古文：庚子，王世充军士有亡降李密者，密问： 世充军中何所为？ 
现代文：庚子，王世充的军士中有逃亡投降李密的人，李密问： 王世充目前在军中做什么？ 
English: Geng Zi, one of Wang Shichong's sergeants who fled and surrendered to Li Mi, Li Mi asked: What is Wang Shichong currently doing in the army?

古文：军士曰： 比见益募兵，再飨将士，不知其故。 
现代文：军士说： 近来只见他大量招兵，又犒劳将士，不知是什么缘故。 
English: The sergeant said, "Recently, I have seen him recruit a large number of soldiers and reward them for their hard work. I don't know why.

古文：密谓裴仁基曰： 吾几落奴度中，光禄知之乎？
现代文：李密对裴仁基说： 我几乎中了王世充这个奴才的谋算，你知道吗？
English: Li Mi said to Pei Renji: I almost fell for Wang Shichong's trick, you know?

古文：吾久不出兵，世充刍粮将竭，求战不得，故募兵飨士，欲乘月晦以袭仓城耳，宜速备之。 
现代文：我很长时间不出兵，王世充的粮草将要断绝，求战不得，因此招募士兵，犒赏将士，想要乘着月夜昏黑来袭击仓城。我们应该立即作防卫准备。 
English: I have not been a soldier for a long time. The grain and grass of Wang Shichong will be cut off, and we will not be able to fight. Therefore, we should recruit soldiers, reward soldiers, and take advantage of the dark of the moon to attack Cangcheng. We should immediately prepare for defense.

古文：乃命平原公郝孝德、琅邪公王伯当、齐郡公孟让勒兵分屯仓城之侧以待之。
现代文：于是他命令平原公赦孝德、琅邪公王伯当、齐郡公孟让率兵分别屯驻在仓城的两边以等待敌军。
English: Therefore, he ordered Pingyuan Gong Pardon and Filial Piety, Zhaozhuang Gong Baotang, and Qi County Gong Mengzhang to camp on both sides of Cangcheng to wait for the enemy.

古文：其夕三鼓，世充兵果至，伯当先遇之，与战，不利。
现代文：那天夜里三鼓时分，王世充的军队果然来了。王伯当先遭遇敌军，与之交战不利。
English: That night, at three o'clock in the morning, Wang Shichong's army really came. Wang Bodang encountered the enemy army first, and it was disadvantageous to fight with it.

古文：世充兵即陵城，总管鲁儒拒却之，伯当更收兵击之，世充大败，斩其骁将费青奴，士卒战溺死者千馀人。
现代文：王世充的士兵立即登城，总管鲁儒率军抵抗，王伯当收集兵卒再次进攻王世充，王世充大败。王伯当斩杀王世充的骁将费青奴，其部下士卒战死淹死的有一千余人。
English: Wang Shichong's soldiers immediately went to the city, the general manager Lu Ru led the army to resist, Wang Botang gathered soldiers to attack Wang Shichong again, Wang Shichong was defeated. Wang Botang killed Wang Shichong's commander Feixiong, and more than a thousand of his subordinates were killed and drowned.

古文：世充屡与密战，不胜，越王侗遣使劳之，世充诉以兵少，数战疲弊；侗以兵七万益之。
现代文：王世充屡次与李密交战都无法取胜。越王杨侗派遣使者来慰劳他，王世充诉说自己兵少，几次战斗后已疲惫不堪，越王杨侗派去七万援军补充王世充的力量。
English: Wang Shicheng repeatedly clashed with Li Ming and was unable to win. King of Yue Yang Di sent an envoy to console him. Wang Shicheng said that he had few soldiers and was exhausted after several battles. King of Yue Yang Di sent seventy thousand reinforcements to supplement Wang Shicheng's strength.

古文：刘文静等引兵东略地，取弘农郡，遂定新安以西。
现代文：刘文静等人率兵向东攻城夺地，攻占了弘农郡，于是新安以西的地方得到了安定。
English: Liu Wenjing and others led the troops to the east to attack the city and seize the land, and captured Hongnong County. As a result, the area west of Xin'an was stabilized.

古文：甲辰，李渊遣云阳令詹俊、武功县正李仲衮徇巴、蜀，下之。
现代文：甲辰，李渊派云阳令詹俊、武功县正李仲衮进攻并攻下了巴蜀。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Li Yuan sent Yunyang to order Zhan Jun and Wugong County's Zheng Li Zhongyi to attack and capture Bashu.

古文：乙巳，方与帅张善安袭陷庐江郡，因渡江，归林士弘于豫章；士弘疑之，营于南塘上。
现代文：乙巳，方与县的贼帅张善安袭击并攻陷了卢江郡，于是渡江，在豫章归附了林士弘。林士弘怀疑他，让他在南塘上扎营。
English: At this time, Fang and the county's thief commander Zhang Shan'an attacked and conquered Lujiang County, so they crossed the river and attached Lin Shihong in Yuzhang. Lin Shihong suspected him and let him camp on Nantang.

古文：善安恨之，袭破士弘，焚其郛郭而去，士弘徙居南康。
现代文：张善安因此怀恨林士弘，就袭击并败了林士弘，烧毁豫章郡的外城而去。林士弘迁居南康。
English: As a result, Zhang Shan'an harbored a grudge against Lin Shihong, attacked and defeated Lin Shihong, burned the outer city of Yuzhang County and left. Lin Shihong moved to Nankang.

古文：萧铣遣其将苏胡儿袭豫章，克之，士弘退保馀干。
现代文：萧铣派他的部将苏胡儿袭击并击攻取了豫章，林士弘退保余干县。
English: Xiao Yu sent his subordinate Su Huer to attack and capture Yuzhang, while Lin Shihong retreated to Bao Yugang County.

