古文：林栗字黄中，福州福清人。
现代文：林栗字黄中，福州福清人。
English: In the middle of the chestnut-tree character Huang, Fuzhou Fuqing people.

古文：登绍兴十二年进士第，调崇仁尉，教授南安军。
现代文：绍兴十二年考中进士，调任崇仁县尉、南安军教授。
English: Shaoxing 12th year of junior high school entrance examination, transferred to Chongren County lieutenant, Nan'an Army professor.

古文：宰相陈康伯荐为太学正，守太常博士。
现代文：由于宰相陈康伯的举荐，林栗被任命为太学学正、太常博士。
English: As a result of the recommendation of Prime Minister Chen Kangbo, Lin Kuri was appointed as Taigaku Senior Lecturer and Taichang Doctor.

古文：孝宗即位，迁屯田员外郎、皇子恭王府直讲。
现代文：孝宗即位，林栗升任屯田员外郎、皇子恭王府直讲。
English: Takamune ascended to the throne, and Lin Kuri was promoted to Tondenkanzan Gairo, and the prince, King Gyoofu, became the direct heir.

古文：时金人请和，约为叔侄之国，且以归疆为请。
现代文：当时金人请求讲和，约定金宋为叔侄之国，并且请求归还疆土。
English: At that time, the Kim people asked for peace, agreed that the Kim Song was the country of the uncle and nephew, and requested the return of the territory.

古文：栗上封事言： 前日之和，诚为非计。
现代文：林栗上封事说： 上次和议，实在是迫不得已。
English: Lin Kuri said in a letter: The last peace talks were really a last resort.

古文：然徽宗梓宫、慈宁行殿在彼，为是而屈，犹有名焉。
现代文：徽宗梓宫、慈宁行殿在金国，因此只好屈辱订立和议，犹有名目。
English: Hu Zong Zi Gong and Jining Xing Dian were in Jin, so they had no choice but to humiliate themselves and conclude a peace treaty.

古文：今日之和，臣不知其说也。
现代文：今天的和议，我不知道有什么说法。
English: I don't know what to say about today's peace talks.

古文：宗庙之仇，而事之以弟侄，其忍使祖宗闻之乎！
现代文：宋金之间有宗庙之仇，反而以弟侄身份侍奉金人，怎能忍使祖宗闻说呢！
English: There is a feud between the Song and Jin dynasties, but instead, they serve the Jin people as brothers and nephews. How can they make the ancestors hear it?

古文：无唐、邓，则荆、襄有齿寒之忧；无泗、海，则淮东之备达于真、杨，海道之防遍于明、越矣。
现代文：失去唐州、邓州，则荆州、襄阳就会唇亡齿寒；割让泗州、海州，则淮东的防备退至真州、扬州，海上防备偏至明州、越州。
English: If Tangzhou and Dengzhou are lost, then Jingzhou and Xiangyang will be chilled to the bone; if Ganzhou and Haizhou are ceded, then the defense of Huaidong will retreat to Zhenzhou and Yangzhou, and the maritime defense will shift to Mingzhou and Yuezhou.

古文：议者皆言和戎之币少，养兵之费多，不知讲和之后，朝廷能不养兵乎？
现代文：有人认为与金人结盟所献岁币少，而养兵备敌的费用更多，不知道讲和之后，朝廷难道可以不养兵吗？
English: Some people think that it costs less to ally with the Chinese, but it costs more to maintain troops and prepare for the enemy. I don't know, after peace is declared, can the imperial court not maintain troops?

古文：今东南民力，陛下之所知也，朝廷安得而不较乎？
现代文：现在东南地区百姓的承受能力，皇上是清楚的，朝廷怎么能不计较呢？
English: It is now clear to the emperor that the people in the southeastern region are no longer able to bear it, so how can the imperial court not care?

古文：且非徒无益而已。
现代文：况且不光是无益罢了。
English: And it's not just useless.

古文：与之岁币，是畏之矣。
现代文：给予金人岁币，是畏怕金人。
English: To give a gold coin to a goldsmith is to fear the goldsmith.

古文：三军之情，安得不懈弛；归正之心，安得不携贰。
现代文：三军的情绪，怎么能不松懈；归正之人，怎会不怀有二心。
English: How can the sentiments of the three armies not be relaxed; how can those who have been converted not harbor double-mindedness?

古文：为今日计，宜停使勿遣，迁延其期。
现代文：为今日计，应当停止派遣使节，拖延时日。
English: As of today, we should stop sending envoys and wasting time.

古文：比至来春，别无动息，徐于境上移书，谕以两国誓言。
现代文：等到明年春天，没有动息，慢慢致书金朝，告诉两国间互相约束的言辞。
English: Wait until next spring, without rest, slowly send a letter to the Kim dynasty, and tell them about the words of mutual restraint between the two countries.

古文：败之自彼，信不由衷，虽盟无益。
现代文：金人自毁盟约，言不由衷，即使结盟也无益处。
English: The Kim people will self-destruct the treaty, the words are not sincere, and even an alliance is of no benefit.

古文：自今宜守分界，休息生灵，不烦聘使之往来，各保疆场之无事，焉用疲弊州县，以奉犬羊之使乎？ 
现代文：从现在开始应当坚守边界，让天下百姓休养生息，不烦使节往来，各自保证疆场无事，怎么用得着使州县疲于应付，侍奉使节呢！ 
English: From now on, we should stick to the borders, let the people of the world rest and recuperate, do not bother the envoys, and ensure that there is nothing in the battlefield. How can we make the prefectures and counties tired and serve the envoys!

古文：孝宗惩创绍兴权臣之弊，躬揽权纲，不以责任臣下，栗言： 人主莅权，大臣审权，争臣议权，王侯、贵戚善挠权者也，左右近习善窃权者也。
现代文：孝宗鉴于绍兴年间权臣擅权之弊，亲自独揽大权，不以职责任务给臣下，林栗说 ：皇帝亲临权力，大臣审视权力，谏臣议论权力，王侯贵戚是扰乱权力的人，左右亲信是善于窃取权力的人。
English: In view of the fact that during the Shaoxing period, Emperor Xiaozong's vassals had the bad habit of monopolizing power and monopolizing power themselves, instead of giving duties and tasks to their vassals, Lin Li said: The emperor personally visits power, the minister examines power, the vassals discuss power, the prince's noble relatives are those who disrupt power, and the right and left relatives are those who are good at stealing power.

古文：权在大臣，则大臣重；权在迩臣，则迩臣重；权在争臣，则争臣重。
现代文：权在大臣，则大臣显赫；权在近臣，则近臣重要；权在谏官，则谏官权重。
English: If the power is in the minister, then the minister is prominent; if the power is in the vassal, then the vassal is important; if the power is in the eunuch, then the eunuch is important.

古文：是故人主常患权在臣下，必欲收揽而独持之，然未有能独持之者也。
现代文：所以皇帝经常担心权力在大臣，必定想收回而独自掌握它，没有能独掌权力的人。
English: Therefore, the emperor often worries that the power is in the minister, and he must want to take it back and hold it alone. There is no one who can hold the power alone.

古文：不使大臣持之，则王侯、贵戚得而持之矣；不使迩臣审之，争臣议之，则左右近习得而议之矣。
现代文：不让大臣掌权，则王侯贵戚得到而控制权力；不让近臣审视权力，谏官议论政治，则皇帝左右亲信得到而议论它。
English: If a minister is not allowed to hold power, then the prince's noble relatives will get it and control power; if a courtier is not allowed to examine power, and eunuchs discuss politics, then the emperor's right and left cronies will get it and discuss it.

古文：人主顾谓得其权而自执之，岂不误哉。
现代文：皇帝原来认为得到权力而亲自执掌，难道不是错了吗？
English: Wasn't the emperor mistaken in thinking that he had gained power and was personally in charge?

古文：是故明主使人持权而不以权与之，收揽其权而不肯独持之。 至有 以鹿为马、以鸡为鸾 之语。
现代文：因此贤明的君主任大臣以事而不使他专权，使权力归于自己而不肯独持权柄、事必躬亲。 林栗上书中至有 以鹿为马，以鸡为鸾 的语句。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs, chiefs, and ministers use things without giving him exclusive power, make power belong to themselves without being willing to hold exclusive power, and must bow to relatives in everything.

古文：方奉对时，读至 人主常患权在臣下，必欲收揽而独持之 ，孝宗称善，栗徐曰： 臣意尚在下文。 执政有诉于孝宗曰： 林栗谓臣等指鹿为马，臣实不愿与之同朝。 乃出知江州。
现代文：林栗奉对时，当他读到 君主常担心权在臣下，一定想收揽而独自掌握它 ，孝宗大声赞叹，林栗慢慢地说 ：我的意思尚在下文。 执政官有人向孝宗哭诉： 林栗说我等指鹿为马，我实在不愿意与他同在朝廷任职。 
English: When Lin Li was told the truth, when he read that the monarch was often worried about the power of the vassal, he must want to collect it and master it alone, Xiaozong loudly praised, Lin Li slowly said: My meaning is still below. Someone from the consul cried to Xiaozong: Lin Li said that I am like a deer, I really don't want to serve with him in the court.

古文：有旨省并江州屯驻一军，栗奏： 辛巳、甲申，金再犯两淮，赖江州一军分布防托，故舒、蕲、黄三州独不被寇。
现代文：于是孝宗让林栗离开京城，去江州任知州。有旨省并江州屯驻大军，林栗上奏指出 ：绍兴三十一年、隆兴二年，金人二次进犯两淮地区，幸亏依赖江州一军分开驻守防备，因此舒州、蕲州、黄州三州唯独没被金人入寇。
English: As a result, Xiaozong asked Lin Li to leave Beijing and go to Jizhou to serve in Jizhou. There were provinces that had the power to garrison a large army in Jizhou, and Lin Li's report pointed out: In 31st year of Shaoxing and 2nd year of Longxing, the Jin people invaded the two Huai regions for the second time. Fortunately, they relied on the Jiangzhou army to stand guard separately. Therefore, only three provinces, Shuzhou, Zhangzhou and Huangzhou, were not invaded by the Jin people.

古文：本州上至鄂渚七百里，下至池阳五百里；平时屯戍，诚哲无益，万一有警，鄂渚之戍，上越荆、襄，池阳之师，下流增备，中间千里藩篱，诚为虚阙。
现代文：本州上至鄂渚七百里，下距池阳五百里；平时屯驻戍守，好像没有益处，万一金人入侵，鄂渚戍守部队，上面越过荆州、襄阳，池阳之师，下游增加防备，中间千里藩篱，实在虚缺。
English: It is seven hundred miles upstream from Honshu to E-zhu, and five hundred miles downstream from Chiyang. In peacetime, it does not seem to be beneficial to stay and defend. In the event of an invasion by the Jin people, the E-zhu defending troops will cross the Jingzhou, Xiangyang, and Chiyang divisions above, increase their defense downstream, and the thousand-mile fence in the middle is really empty.

古文：无以一夫之议，而废长江千里之防。 由是军得无动。
现代文：请不要因为一人的建议，而废弃长江千里防线。 由于林栗的反对，江州屯驻大军没有被撤并。
English: Please do not abandon the Yangtze River thousand-mile defense line because of one person's suggestion.Due to Lin Li's opposition, the Jiangzhou garrison army was not withdrawn.

古文：以吏部员外郎召。
现代文：林栗被朝廷以吏部员外郎召回。
English: Lin Kuri was recalled by the imperial court as a member of the administrative department, Wairo.

古文：冬至，有事南郊，前期十日，百执事听誓戒；会废节，有旨上寿不用乐，迨宴金使，乃有权用乐之命。
现代文：冬至，朝廷将在南郊祭天，此前十日，执事官听誓戒；会庆节，皇帝下旨祝寿不用乐，等到设宴招待金使，才有暂且用乐之命。
English: On the winter solstice, the imperial court will hold a festival in the southern suburbs. On the 10th day before the festival, the deacons will hear the oath; on the festival day, the emperor will give the order to celebrate the birthday without music. Only when the banquet is set up to invite the envoys, will the order to temporarily use music be given.

古文：栗以为不可，致书宰相，不听，乃乞免充举册官，以状申朝廷曰： 若听乐则废斋，废斋则不敢以祭。祖宗二百年事天之礼，今因一介行人而废之。
现代文：林栗认为不可用乐，他致书宰相，意见没有被采纳，于是他请求辞去充任举册官之职，并上奏朝廷： 若听乐则应废斋，废斋则不敢行祭礼，祖宗二百年事天之礼，今日因一介行人而废弃。
English: Lin Li thought that music should not be used. He wrote to the Prime Minister, but his opinion was not accepted. So he asked to resign from the post of registrar, and reported to the court: If you listen to music, you should waste your time, and if you waste your time, you will not dare to perform the ritual. The ancestor's two-hundred-year-old ritual was abandoned today because of a pedestrian.

古文：天之可畏，过于外夷远矣。 不听。
现代文：老天可怕，这远过于外夷。 朝廷没有采纳他的意见。
English: God awful, this is far more than a foreigner, the court did not adopt his opinion.

古文：兼皇子庆王府直讲，有旨令二王非时招延讲读官，相与议论时政，期尽规益。
现代文：林栗兼任皇子庆王府直讲，有旨让二王不时延请讲读官，议论时政，希望能得到谋划的益处。
English: Lin Li also served as the direct speech of Prince Qingwangfu, with the intention of allowing the two kings to invite lecturers from time to time to discuss current affairs, hoping to gain the benefits of planning.

古文：栗以为不可，疏言： 汉武帝为戾太子开博望苑，卒败太子；唐太宗为魏王泰立文学馆，卒败魏王。
现代文：林栗认为不妥，他上书说 ：汉武帝为戾太子开设博望苑，最后使太子失败了；唐太宗为魏王李泰设立文学馆，最终使魏王失败。
English: Lin Li did not think it was appropriate. He wrote: Emperor Hanwu opened the Bohangyuan for Prince Gong, which ultimately led to the prince's failure; Emperor Taizong of Tang established a literature museum for the Wei king Li Tai, which ultimately led to the Wei king's failure.

古文：古者教世子与吾祖宗之所以辅导太子、诸王，惟以讲经读史为事，他无预焉。
现代文：古人教导世子与我朝祖宗用来辅导太子、诸王办法相同，只以讲经读史为事，其他不介入。
English: The ancients taught the world's sons in the same way that my ancestors used to instruct princes and kings. They only taught the scriptures and history, and did not interfere with anything else.

古文：若使议论时政，则是对子议父，古人谓之无礼，不可不留圣意。 
现代文：如若让他们议论时政，则是对着儿子议论父亲，古人认为是无礼，皇上不可不留意啊。 
English: If they were allowed to discuss current affairs, they would be discussing their father in front of their son, which the ancients considered to be impolite, and the emperor must not fail to notice this.

古文：除右司员外郎，迁太常少卿。
现代文：林栗官拜右司员外郎，晋升为太常少卿。
English: Lin Li was promoted to Vice-Minister of the Right and promoted to Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：太庙祫享之制，始祖东向，昭南向，穆北向，别庙神主祔于祖姑之下，随本室南北向而无西向之位。
现代文：太庙祭享之制，始祖东向，昭南向，穆北向；别庙神主附于祖姑之下，随本室南北向而无东西向神位。
English: According to the system of the temple's deities, the ancestral deities face east, Zhaonan faces south, and Mu faces north; the other temple's deities are attached to the ancestral deities, with this room facing north and south, but there are no deities facing east and west.

古文：绍兴、乾道间，懿节、安穆二后升祔，有司设幄西向。
现代文：绍兴、乾道年间，懿节、安穆二位皇后附祭，有关部门设幄西向。
English: During the years of Shaoxing and Qiandao, the two empresses of the Dragon Boat Festival and the Anmu Festival were held, and the relevant departments were set up in the west of Shaoxing.

古文：逮安恭皇后新祔，有司承前失，其西向之位，几与僖祖相对。
现代文：及至安恭皇后新附，有关部门继承前次失误，将神位朝西安放，几乎与舍祖神位相对。
English: And when Queen Angyong was newly enthroned, the relevant departments inherited the previous mistake and placed the god's throne to the west, almost opposite the throne of the founder.

古文：栗辨正之。
现代文：林栗予以辨别并加以纠正。
English: identify and correct them.

古文：除直宝文阁、知湖州。
现代文：朝廷以林栗为直宝文阁，出任湖州知州。
English: The imperial court used Linqin as the Naobao Library, and he served as the head of Huzhou Chizhou.

古文：栗朝辞，曰： 臣闻汉人贾谊号通达国体，其所上书至于痛哭流涕者，考其指归，大抵以一身谕天下之势。
现代文：林栗进宫与皇帝告辞，他说： 我听说汉代人贾谊号为通晓国体，他上书皇帝至于痛哭流涕，考察他的意向，大致以人的一身比喻天下大势。
English: Lin Li entered the palace to say goodbye to the emperor, he said: I heard that the Han Dynasty people called Jia Jiao as a knowledgeable national body. He sent a letter to the emperor as far as weeping and examining his intention, roughly using a human body as a metaphor for the world.

古文：其言曰： 天下之势方病大瘇。
现代文：他在上书中称 ：天下之势，正苦于脚肿。
English: In his last letter, he wrote: "The world's best player is suffering from swollen feet.

古文：非徒瘇也，又苦灸盭。
现代文：不仅足肿，又苦于足掌扭折。
English: He not only has a swollen foot, but also suffers from a sprained foot.

古文：又类辟，且病痱。
现代文：又类似腿瘤，并且患有风病。 
English: He also has a similar leg tumor and suffers from rheumatism.

古文：臣每见士大夫好论时事，臣辄举以问之：今日国体，于四百四病之中名为何病？
现代文：臣每每听见士大夫喜好议论时事，我就拿贾谊的论述问他：今日国体，于四百零四种病中属什么病？
English: Whenever a minister hears that a scholar-bureaucrat likes to discuss current affairs, I ask him about Jia Yi's discussion: Today's National Day, which disease belongs to the 404 kinds of diseases?

古文：能言其病者犹未必能处其方，不能言其病而辄处其方，其误人之死，必矣。
现代文：能指出病名的还未必能开出处方，不能指出病因就开出治病处方，误人致死是必定的。
English: If you can point out the name of the disease, you may not be able to prescribe it. If you can't point out the cause of the disease, you can prescribe a cure. Misleading people to death is inevitable.

古文：闻臣之言者不忿则默，间有反以诘臣，即对之曰：今日之病，名为风虚，其状半身不随是也。
现代文：听了我的话的人不是表示忿怒就是沉默寡言，也有人反过来问我，我立即对他说：今日之病，名叫风虚，它的症状为半身不遂。
English: Those who heard my words were either angry or silent. Some people asked me in return, and I immediately said to him: Today's disease is called wind deficiency, and its symptoms are paralysis.

古文：风者在外，虚者在内，真气内耗，故风邪自外而乘之，忽中于人，应时僵仆，则靖康之变是也。
现代文：风在外，虚在内，真气在内亏耗，所以风邪自外乘机而入，侵入人体，人会马上倒地，这就是靖康之变。
English: The wind is outside, the illusion is inside, and the true qi is depleted inside. Therefore, the wind malady takes the opportunity to enter from the outside, invades the human body, and people will immediately fall to the ground. This is the change of Jingkang.

古文：幸而元气犹存，故仆而复起，则建炎之兴是也。
现代文：幸好元气仍然存在，所以倒下后就能再站起来，是为建炎中兴。
English: Fortunately, the vitality still exists, so you can stand up again after falling down, which is a boon for construction.

古文：然元气虽存，邪气尚盛，自淮以北皆吾故壤，而号令不能及，正朔不能加，有异于半身不随者乎？
现代文：然而元气虽然存在，邪气仍还旺盛，自淮河以北都是我大宋故土，而朝廷号令不能到达，帝王新颁布的历法不能施行。
English: However, although the vitality still exists, the evil spirit is still strong. From the north of the Huaihe River, it is my Great Song Dynasty homeland, but the imperial decree cannot be reached, and the calendar newly promulgated by the emperor cannot be implemented.

古文：非但半身不随而已，半身存者，凛凛乎畏风邪之乘而不能以自安也。
现代文：与半身不遂有什么不同呢？不光半身不遂，残剩的半身，也恐惧、畏怕风邪进入而不能自安。
English: What's the difference between that and a half-dead body? It's not just a half-dead body, the remaining half-dead body is also afraid of catching a cold and can't relax.

古文：今日论者，譬如痿人之不忘起，奚必贤智之士，然后与国同其愿哉？
现代文：今日议论政事者，比如身体筋肉痿缩的人，不忘起行，哪里一定要是贤明智慧之士，然后与国家是同一愿望呢？
English: Today, those who discuss politics, such as those who have contracted body muscles, do not forget to start, where must they be wise and wise people, and then share the same desire with the country?

古文：而市道庸流，口传耳受，苟欲尝试以售其方，则荡熨针石，杂然并进，非体虚之人所宜轻受也。
现代文：而平凡庸人，口传耳授，如若想试一试所售方子，则洗涤针石，一起混入，这不是体虚的人轻易能接受的。
English: Ordinary people, however, are taught by word of mouth, and if they want to try the sold cubes, they have to wash the needles and mix them together, which is not easy for people with weak bodies to accept.

古文：闻之医曰： 中风偏废，年五十以下而气盛者易治。
现代文：听医生说： 中风偏瘫，五十岁以下而气盛的人容易治愈。
English: Listen to the doctor: Stroke is hemiplegia, people under the age of fifty who are energetic are easy to cure.

古文：盖真气与邪气相敌，真气盛则邪气衰，真气行则邪气去。
现代文：盖真气与邪气相匹敌，真气旺盛则邪气衰退，真气运行则邪气离去。
English: The true qi and the evil qi compete with each other. When the true qi is strong, the evil qi declines, and when the true qi is running, the evil qi leaves.

古文：然真气不充满于半存之身，则无以及偏废之体。
现代文：真气不能充满半存之身，则不可能到达偏废躯体。
English: If the true qi cannot fill the half-existing body, it is impossible to reach the half-wasted body.

古文：故欲起此疾者，必禁其嗜欲，节其思虑，爱其气血，养其精神，使半存之身，日以充实，则阳气周流，脉络宜畅，将不觉舍杖而行。
现代文：所以要治愈这种病，必须禁止其有嗜好欲望，节制其思虑，珍惜其气血，保养其精神，使得半存之身，一天天充实，则阳气流遍全身，脉络流畅，将在不知不觉中丢掉拐杖而能步行。
English: Therefore, in order to cure this disease, it is necessary to prohibit its desire to indulge, restrain its thoughts, cherish its qi and blood, and maintain its spirit, so that the half-existing body is enriched day by day, the yang qi flows throughout the body, the veins are smooth, and the crutch will be lost unknowingly and can walk.

古文：若急于愈疾而不顾其本，百毒入口，五脏受风，风邪之盛未可卒去，而真气之存者日以耗亡，故中风再至者多不能救。
现代文：如若急于治好病而不考虑本身的情况，百毒入口，五脏受风，风邪旺盛而不能驱除，而所存真气一天天在消耗，所以一再中风者大多不能抢救。 
English: For example, if one is in a hurry to cure the disease without considering one's own situation, the entrance of all poisons will be blocked, the five internal organs will be affected by the wind, the wind will be strong and cannot be driven out, and the remaining energy will be consumed day by day, so most people who have repeated strokes cannot be rescued.

古文：臣愚有感于斯言，窃谓贾谊复生，为陛下言，无以易此。 
现代文：愚臣有感于此言，私下以为贾谊再生，对皇帝进言，也离不开这些。 
English: The foolish minister was impressed by these words and privately thought that Jia Yi's rebirth and advice to the emperor could not be separated from these.

古文：知兴化军，又移南剑，除夔路提点刑狱，改知夔州，加直敷文阁。
现代文：林栗被任命为兴化军知军，又调至南剑，再拜官夔州路提点刑狱，改任夔州知州，加官直敷文阁。
English: Lin Li was appointed as the military governor of Xinghua, and was transferred to Nanjian, and then he was transferred to the provincial governor of Zhangzhou, and was transferred to the provincial governor of Zhangzhou, and then to the provincial governor of Zhishu, and then to the governor of Zhishu.

古文：夔属郡曰施州，其羁縻郡曰思州。
现代文：夔州有一属郡叫施州，羁糜郡叫思州。
English: There is a county in Luzhou called Shizhou, and a county in Guizhou called Shizhou.

古文：施民谭汝翼者，与知思州田汝弼交恶，会汝弼卒，汝翼帅兵二千人伐其丧。
现代文：施州豪民谭汝翼，与思州知州田汝弼相互不和，等到田汝弼逝世，谭汝翼带领二千士兵趁丧攻伐。
English: Tan Ruyi, a hero of Shizhou, was at odds with Tian Ruyi, a hero of Shizhou. When Tian Ruyi died, Tan Ruyi led two thousand soldiers to take advantage of his death.

古文：汝弼之子祖周深入报复，兵交于三州之境，施、黜大震。
现代文：田汝弼之子田祖周领兵深入内地予以报复，战争在三州境内进行，施州、黔州大为震动。
English: Tian Ruzhen's son, Tian Zu Zhou, led the troops deep into the inland to retaliate. The war was carried out in the territory of the three states, and Shizhou and Zhangzhou were greatly shaken.

古文：汝翼复缮甲兵，料丁壮，以重币借兵诸洞，而乞师于帅府。
现代文：谭汝翼再次修缮铠甲和兵器，计算丁壮，用重金向各少数部族借兵，又向帅府请求援兵。
English: Tan Ruyi repaired armor and weapons again, calculated Ding Zhuang, borrowed soldiers from various minority tribes with heavy money, and requested reinforcements from Shuaifu.

古文：栗曰： 汝翼实召乱者。 移檄罢兵，乃选属吏往摄兵职，以渐收汝翼之权。
现代文：林栗说 ：谭汝翼其实是导致战乱的人。 他传达命令停止用兵，选派属员前往，暂时掌管兵权，以此慢慢收回谭汝翼的兵权。
English: Lin Li said: "Tan Ruyi is actually the one who caused the war, he conveyed the order to stop using soldiers, selected subordinates to go, temporarily controlled the military power, and slowly recovered the military power of Tan Ruyi.

古文：命兵马钤辖按阅诸州，密檄至施，就摄州事。
现代文：下令兵马钤辖出巡检阅各州，密令到达施州，暂止代理知州。
English: Ordered the Terracotta Warriors and Horses to patrol and inspect all prefectures, secretly ordered to arrive in Shizhou, and temporarily suspended the agency in Zhizhou.

古文：汝翼不之觉，已乃皇遽遁入成都。
现代文：谭汝翼没有觉察，不久才仓皇逃往成都。
English: Unaware of this, Tan Ruyi soon fled to Chengdu in a panic.

古文：事闻，孝宗亲札赐栗及成都制置使陈岘曰： 田氏犹是羁縻州郡，谭氏乃夔路豪族，又且首为衅端，帅阃不能弹压，纵其至此。
现代文：事情传至朝廷，孝宗亲自写信给林栗及成都制置使陈岘说 ：田氏是羁糜州郡，谭氏乃是夔州路豪族，又首先挑起事端，安抚使司不能镇压，纵容他们发展到这样的地步。
English: When the matter was reported to the imperial court, Xiaozong personally wrote to Lin Li and Chengdu Construction Envoy Chen Qi, saying, "The Tian clan is from Guizhou County, and the Tan clan is from Luzhou, and they were the first to stir up trouble. The pacifying envoy cannot suppress them, and they have been allowed to develop to this point.

古文：如尚不悛，未免加兵，除其元恶。 时汝翼在成都，闻之逃归，调集家丁及役八砦义军，列陈于沱河桥与官军战，溃，汝翼遁去，俘其徒四十有三人，获甲铠器仗三万一千。
现代文：如果他们仍不悔改，不妨用兵，铲除首恶。 当时谭汝翼在成都，听到消息后逃回家乡，调家丁并征发八砦义军，列阵于沱河桥与官军作战，谭汝翼被打败后逃走，俘虏四十三人，缴获铠甲器仗三万一千件。
English: If they still do not repent, they may as well use soldiers to eradicate the first evil. At that time, Tan Ryu Ying was in Chengdu, and after hearing the news, he fled back to his hometown. He transferred his family members and conscripted eight fortresses of rebels to fight against the government army at the Weihe Bridge. After being defeated, Tan Ryu Ying fled, captured forty-three people, and seized thirty-one thousand pieces of armor.

古文：栗取其巨恶者九人诛之。
现代文：林栗挑出九名罪大恶极者处斩。
English: Lin Chuli singled out nine people who committed the most heinous crimes and executed them.

古文：田祖周由是惧，与其母冉氏谋献黔江田业，计钱九十万缗以赎罪，蛮徼遂安。
现代文：田祖周因此害怕，与他的母亲冉氏合谋献出黔江田业，以钱九十万缗赎罪，少数部族边界地区于是安定。
English: Tianzu Zhou was afraid of this and conspired with his mother, Ran, to sacrifice his Lijiang River farmland and atone for his sins with 900,000 baht. As a result, the minority tribal border areas were stabilized.

古文：既而汝翼入都诉栗受田氏金，诏以汝翼属吏，省札下夔州。
现代文：不久谭汝翼入京状告林栗接受田氏贿赂，皇帝下诏以谭汝翼为属吏，省札下达夔州。
English: Soon after, Tan Ruyi went to Beijing to sue Lin Li for accepting bribes from the Tian clan, and the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Tan Ruyi as a subordinate official.

古文：栗亲书奏状缴还，并辨其事。
现代文：林栗亲自起草奏状缴还省札，并为自己辩护。
English: Lin Li personally drafted a petition to return the bill and defended himself.

古文：上大怒。会近臣有救解者，寻坐栗身为帅臣，擅格上命，镌职罢归。
现代文：皇帝大怒，幸好近臣中有人从中解救，不久林栗以身为帅臣，擅自抵制皇帝命令获罪，降级罢官归家。
English: The emperor was furious. Fortunately, some of his close vassals came to his rescue. Soon, Lin Chuli took himself as a handsome vassal, resisted the emperor's order without authorization, was found guilty, demoted and dismissed, and returned home.

古文：既而理寺追究，事白，贷汝翼死，幽置绍兴府。
现代文：事后大理寺追查究问，事情被弄清楚了，宽免谭汝翼死罪，拘禁于绍兴府。
English: After the incident, Dali Temple investigated and investigated, the matter was clarified, and Tan Ruyi was pardoned and detained in Shaoxing.

古文：居顷之，诏栗累更事任，清介有闻，复直宝文阁、广南西路转运判官，就改提点刑狱，又改知潭州。
现代文：没过多久，皇帝下诏称林栗多次变更职务，清高耿直有声望，复官直宝文阁、广南西路转运判官，就地改任提点刑狱，后来又改任潭州知州。
English: Not long after, the emperor issued an edict saying that Lin Li had changed his position many times, Qing Gao and Geng Zhi had a good reputation, and he was reinstated as Zhi Bao Wenge and Guangnan West Road Transportation Judge, and he was transferred to Tiantou Detention Center, and later he was transferred to Tanzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：除秘阁修撰，进集英殿修撰、知隆兴府。
现代文：林栗官拜秘阁修撰，晋升为集英殿修撰、隆兴府知府。
English: Lin Li was promoted to Shuxin of the Shuei Palace and Longxing prefectural governor.

古文：召对便殿，奏乞仿唐制置补阙、拾遗左右各一员，不以纠弹为责。
现代文：皇帝在便殿召见林栗，林栗上奏乞请仿唐制设置左右补阙、左右拾遗各一名，不以纠察弹劾为职责。
English: The emperor summoned Lin Kuri to the hall, and Lin Kuri begged for the imitation of the Tang Dynasty system to set up a left and right supplement and a left and right relic, and did not take picketing and impeachment as duties.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：除兵部侍郎。
现代文：林栗被任命为兵部侍郎。
English: Lin Kuri was appointed to be an attendant of the military department.

古文：朱熹以江西提刑召为兵部郎官，熹既入国门，未就职。
现代文：朱熹以江西提点刑狱之职召回朝廷任兵部郎官，他进入京城后，却没有去上任。
English: Zhu Xi recalled him to the imperial court to serve as a military attaché, but he did not take up the post after he entered the capital.

古文：栗与熹相见，论《易》与《西铭》不合。
现代文：林栗曾与朱熹相见，议论《易》与《西铭》意见不一。
English: Lin Li once met with Zhu Xi, and they had a disagreement about "Yi" and "Ximing."

古文：至是，栗遣吏部趣之，熹以脚疾请告。
现代文：至此，林栗派遣属吏催促朱熹上任，朱熹以脚病请假。
English: At this point, Lin Li dispatched subordinate officials to urge Zhu Xi to take office, and Zhu Xi took a leave of absence due to a foot disease.

古文：栗遂论： 熹本无学术，徒窃张载、程颐之绪余，为浮诞宗主，谓之道学，妄自推尊。
现代文：林栗于是上奏： 朱熹本无学术，只是窃取张载、程颐学说之残余，为轻浮放荡宗主，叫作道学，妄自推尊。
English: Lin Li then began to play: Zhu Xi did not have any academic background, but only stole the remnants of Zhang Zai and Cheng Xi's teachings, and was a frivolous and dissolute patriarch, called Taoism, and arrogantly self-promoting.

古文：所至辄携门生十数人，习为春秋、战国之态，妄希孔、孟历聘之风，绳以治世之法，则乱人之首也。
现代文：每到一处则率门生数十人，依照春秋战国时士人之态势，妄自希求孔子、孟子历次受聘之风采，若绳之以治世之法，则他可被视为乱人之首。
English: He led dozens of disciples to each place, and in accordance with the situation of the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, he vainly hoped for the style of Confucius and Mencius, and if he was brought to the law of governing the world, he could be regarded as the head of chaos.

古文：今采其虚名，俾之入奏，将置朝列，以次收用。
现代文：今日朝廷慕其虚名，让他入朝奏事，将他安排在朝廷任职，逐渐加以使用。
English: Today, the imperial court coveted his false name, let him enter the imperial court, arranged for him to serve in the imperial court, and gradually used him.

古文：而熹闻命之初，迁延道途，邀索高价，门生迭为游说，政府许以风闻，然后入门。
现代文：而朱熹得到诏令之初，在道途中拖延时日，邀君索讨高价，门生更替为他游说，政府准许谏官风闻弹劾，他这才进入京城。
English: However, when Zhu Xi first received the edict, he delayed on the way, invited the prince to bargain for a higher price, his protégé lobbied for him, and the government allowed the eunuch to hear about impeachment. Only then did he enter Beijing.

古文：既经陛对，得旨除郎，而辄怀不满，傲睨累日，不肯供职，是岂张载、程颐之学教之然也？
现代文：经过皇帝召见，得到旨令，拜为郎官，立即心怀不满，倨傲旁视，目空一切已多日，不肯就职，这难道是张载、程颐之学教他这样？
English: After being summoned by the emperor, receiving the edict, and being appointed as his vassal, he was immediately dissatisfied, looked on with pride, and refused to take office for many days. Was it Zhang Zai and Cheng Yao's learning that taught him this?

古文：缘熹既除兵部郎官，在臣合有统摄，若不举劾，厥罪惟均。
现代文：因为朱熹已被任命为兵部郎官，微臣应当统管，若不加以弹劾，其罪过是相同的。
English: Because Zhu Xi has been appointed as an officer of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Weixin should be in charge. If he is not impeached, his crime is the same.

古文：望将熹停罢，姑令循省，以为事君无礼者之戒。 
现代文：望将朱熹停职罢官，暂且令他反省，以为事君无礼者之戒。 
English: It is hoped that Zhu Xi will be suspended from his post and dismissed from his post, and he will be asked to reflect on his actions for the time being.

古文：上谓其言过当，而大臣畏栗之强，莫敢深论。
现代文：皇帝认为林栗言过其实，而大臣畏怕林栗强暴，不敢深入争论。
English: The emperor thought Lin Li's words were exaggerated, while the minister was afraid of Lin Li's violence and did not dare to go deeper into the debate.

古文：太常博士叶适独上封事辩之曰： 考栗之辞，始末参验，无一实者。
现代文：太常博士叶适独自上封事与林栗辩论说 ：考察林栗之言，始末对照，没有一处属实。
English: Too often, Dr. Ye Shi would go off on his own to argue with Lin Qi, saying, "I have examined Lin Qi's words and compared them from beginning to end, and none of them are true."

古文：其中 谓之道学 一语，无实最甚。盖自昔小人残害良善，率有指名，或以为好名，或以为立异，或以为植党。
现代文：其中 叫作道学 一语，严重失实，过去小人残害忠良，大多有所指名，或者以为爱好虚名，或者以为标新立异，或者以为培植党羽。
English: Among them, "doctrine" is a term that is seriously untrue. In the past, villains killed and harmed the faithful. Most of them have been nominated, or they think that they are fond of false fame, or that they are innovative, or that they are cultivating party feathers.

古文：近忽创为 道学 之目，郑丙唱之，陈贾和之。居要路者密相付授，见士大夫有稍务洁修，粗能操守，辄以道学之名归之，殆如吃菜事魔、影迹犯败之类。
现代文：近来忽然创立道学之目，郑丙首唱，陈贾附和，官居要职者暗中相互传授，见到士大夫稍稍致力于洁身自好，粗略能坚持操守，就以道学之名强加于他，几乎如吃菜事魔，影迹犯败之类。
English: Recently, the eyes of Taoism were suddenly created, with Zheng Zhi as the first singer and Chen Jia as the second singer. Officials and dignitaries secretly taught each other, and when they saw that the scholar-official was a little committed to cleanliness and self-respect, and could roughly adhere to ethics, they were imposed on him in the name of Taoism, almost like the devil eating vegetables, and the like.

古文：往日王淮表里台谏，阴废正人，盖用此术。
现代文：往日王淮使台谏官员互为呼应，阴谋废除正直君子，用的就是这种手段。
English: This was the means used by Wang Huai in the past to make Taiwanese and Chinese officials echo each other and conspire to abolish honest gentlemen.

古文：栗为侍从，无以达陛下之德意志虑，而更袭郑丙、陈贾密相传授之说，以道学为大罪。
现代文：林栗为侍从官，不能传达陛下之德意、志向与忧虑，反而继承郑丙、陈贾暗地相传授之学说，以道学为大罪。
English: As an attendant, Lin Li was unable to convey His Majesty's thoughts, aspirations, and concerns. Instead, he inherited the teachings that Zheng He and Chen Jia had secretly passed down to each other, and regarded morality as a great sin.

古文：文致言语，逐去一熹，固未甚害，第恐自此游辞无实，谗言横生，善良受害，无所不有！
现代文：搜罗他人言语，构织罪状，赶走一个朱熹固然没有什么害处，只是恐怕从此游辞无实，谗言横生，善良受害，无所不有！
English: There is no harm in collecting other people's words, fabricating crimes, and driving away a Zhu Xi, but I'm afraid that from now on, idle talk is groundless, slander is rampant, and kindness is victimized, everywhere!

古文：愿陛下正纪纲之所在，绝欺罔于既形，摧抑暴横以扶善类，奋发刚断以慰公言。 于是侍御史胡晋臣劾栗，罢之，出知泉州，又改明州。
现代文：愿陛下严正纪纲，杜绝欺罔，摧毁抑制横暴，以扶持善类，奋发刚断以安抚公论。 于是侍御史胡晋臣弹劾林栗，林栗被罢免，离朝任泉州知州，又改任明州知州。
English: May His Majesty establish a strict discipline, eliminate bullying, destroy and restrain tyranny, support the virtuous, and make strenuous efforts to pacify public opinion. Therefore, the attendant historian Hu Jintao impeached Lin Kuri, Lin Kuri was dismissed, and left the government to be appointed as Quanzhou Chizhou, and was reappointed as Mingshou Chizhou.

古文：奉祠以卒，谥简肃。
现代文：嗣后任宫观之职直至去世，谥号 简肃 。
English: Subsequently, he held the post of Gongguan until his death, and his posthumous name was Jiansu.

古文：尝知泉州，为政暴急，或劝之尚宽，丙曰： 吾疾恶有素，岂以晚节易所守哉。 闻者哂之。
现代文：林栗为人倔强耿直有才华，而性急不能受委屈，想发泄私忿，以致攻击诋毁名儒，废绝师教，几乎与郑丙、陈贾、何澹、刘德秀、刘三杰、胡等结党残害正直君子者同列。
English: Lin Li was a stubborn and talented person, but he was impatient and could not be wronged. He wanted to vent his private anger, so he attacked and slandered famous Confucius, and abolished teaching and learning. He was almost on the same level as Zheng Hien, Chen Jia, He Xuan, Liu Dexiu, Liu Sanjie, Hu and others who formed a party to destroy an honest gentleman.

古文：丙官终端明殿学士，卒，谥简肃。京镗字仲远，豫章人也。
现代文：即使早年论事，雄辩可观，也不足以掩盖晚年的错误。京镗字仲远，豫章人。
English: Even if the early years of the argument, eloquent and impressive, it is not enough to cover up the mistakes of later years.

古文：登绍兴二十七年进士第。
现代文：绍兴二十七年考中进士。
English: Shaoxing 27th year of the middle school entrance examination.

古文：龚茂良帅江西，见之曰： 子庙廓器也。 及茂良参大政，遂荐镗入朝。
现代文：龚茂良出任地方长官，见到京镗，感到他不凡，赞叹说： 你真是朝廷的人才。 等到龚茂良出任执政，马上举荐京镗至朝廷任职。
English: When Gong Moliang took office as a local governor, he was amazed to see Jing Xuan and said, "You are truly a talent of the imperial court." When Gong Moliang took office, he immediately recommended Jing Xuan to serve in the imperial court.

古文：孝宗诏侍从举良县令为台官，给事中王希吕曰： 京镗蚤登儒级，两试令，有声。陛下求执法官，镗其人也。 上引见镗，问政事得失。
现代文：孝宗诏令亲信侍从举荐优秀县令任台官，给事中王希吕说： 京镗很早就考中进士，二次在地方任县令，所至皆有政绩，陛下选拔执法官，京镗是个合适的人选。 孝宗接见京镗，询问政事得失。
English: Xiaozong ordered his trusted attendants to recommend outstanding county magistrates to be appointed as Taiwanese officials, to which Wang Xilu said: Jingyao was admitted to the junior high school examination very early, and he was appointed as a local county magistrate for the second time. All of them have political achievements. His Majesty selected the magistrate, and Jingyao is a suitable candidate. Xiaozong met with Jingyao to inquire about the political gains and losses.

古文：时上初统万机，锐志恢复，群臣进说，多迎合天子意，以为大功可旦暮致。
现代文：当时孝宗受禅继承帝位，锐志恢复，大臣所进奏疏，大多迎合天子的意志，认为恢复大业很快就会成功。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaozong was enthroned by Emperor Zhen, and he was determined to restore the imperial throne. Most of the ministers were reluctant to follow the emperor's will, believing that the restoration of the great cause would soon be successful.

古文：镗独言 天下事未有骤如意者，宜舒徐以图之。 上善其言。
现代文：唯独京镗说 ：天下之事没有很快就能如意的，应当从长计，慢慢做打算。 
English: However, Kyoho said, "Things in this world don't always turn out the way you want them to, so you should take the long view and make plans slowly."

古文：镗于是极论今日民贫兵骄，士气颓靡，言甚切至。
现代文：孝宗认为说得很对。京镗于是极力论述今日百姓贫困，军队骄惰，士气颓废萎靡，言词急切。
English: According to Xiaozong, this is very true. Therefore, the Beijing government tried its best to discuss the poverty of the people, the arrogance of the army, the decadence of morale, and the urgency of words.

古文：上说，擢为监察御史，累迁右司郎官。
现代文：孝宗很高兴，京镗于是被提升为监察御史，历迁右司郎官。
English: Takamune was very pleased, and Kyobuchi was promoted to the post of inspector-general of history, later moving to the post of right secretary.

古文：金遣贺生辰使来，上居高宗丧，不欲引见，镗为傧佐，以旨拒之。
现代文：金国贺生辰使来南宋，孝宗正为高宗服丧，不想接见使节，京镗为侍从，根据皇帝的旨意拒绝金使求见。
English: Emperor He Shengchen sent an envoy to the Southern Song Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozong, who was in mourning for Emperor Gao, did not want to receive the envoy, and Emperor Jingjing, who was an attendant, refused the envoy's request according to the emperor's will.

古文：使者请少留阙下，镗曰： 信使之来，以诞节也。
现代文：金使请求在宋都杭州多呆些日子，京镗回答说： 信使南来是由于我大宋皇帝生日。
English: When the envoy asked to stay longer in the Song capital of Hangzhou, Emperor Jing of Song replied: The messenger came south because it was the birthday of the Great Song Emperor.

古文：诞节礼毕，欲留何名乎？ 使行，上嘉其称职。
现代文：生日寿礼已举行，你打算以什么名义停留呢？ 金使离开朝廷，孝宗称赞京镗很称职。
English: The birthday celebration has been held, in what name do you plan to stay? The envoy left the imperial court, and Xiaozong praised the Beijing envoy as very competent.

古文：转中书门下省检正诸房公事。
现代文：京镗改任中书门下省检正诸房公事。
English: Kyonghye was reassigned to the office of the provincial inspector of public affairs under Zhongshumen.

古文：金人遣使来吊，镗为报谢使。
现代文：金人派遣使节南来吊念高宗，京镗被任命为报谢使使金。
English: The Jin people sent envoys to the south to pay tribute to Gaozong, and Jingyao was appointed as the envoy to pay tribute to the Jin.

古文：金人故事，南使至汴京则赐宴。
现代文：金人惯例，宋使行至汴京则赐宴接风。
English: According to the custom of the Jin people, the Song envoys to Beijing were given a banquet.

古文：镗请免宴，郊劳使康元弼等不从，镗谓必不免宴，则请彻乐，遗之书曰： 镗闻邻丧者舂不相，里殡者不巷歌。
现代文：京镗请求撤消宴饮，金郊劳使康元弼等不同意，京镗告诉金人，若一定要设宴，则请撤去音乐，并写信给康元弼说 ：京镗听说邻居有丧则不舂谷，同里有殡则整个里巷不唱歌。
English: Jingyao requested to cancel the banquet, but the laborers in Jinjiao, including Kang Yuanlu, disagreed. Jingyao told the Jin people that if they must have a banquet, please remove the music, and wrote to Kang Yuanlu saying: Jingyao heard that if a neighbor had a funeral, they would not sing in the valley, and if there was a funeral, the whole lane would not sing.

古文：今镗衔命而来，繄北朝之惠吊，是荷是谢。
现代文：今日京镗受命前来北朝，与北朝惠吊相关联，肩负着酬谢的任务。
English: Today, the Peking Duck was ordered to come to the Northern Dynasty, and was associated with the Northern Dynasty Huizhang, shouldering the task of rewarding and thanking.

古文：北朝勤其远而悯其劳，遣郊劳之使，蒇式宴之仪，德莫厚焉，外臣受赐，敢不重拜。若曰而必听乐，是于圣经为悖理，于臣节为悖义，岂惟贻本朝之羞，亦岂昭北朝之懿哉？ 相持甚久。
现代文：北朝厚待我远道而来，怜悯其劳苦，派出郊劳使，解决用宴的仪式，德泽非常深厚，外臣得到恩赐，怎能不重拜，如若说一定要听乐，是与儒家经典相背离的，也与臣节义理相违背，不仅是对本朝的羞辱，又怎么能显示北朝的懿德呢？ 有关宴饮礼仪争论很久，相持不下。
English: The Northern Dynasty treated me kindly when I came from afar, pitied my toil, sent laborers from the countryside, and resolved the banquet ceremony. The virtue is very profound. Foreign ministers have been given a gift, how can they not pay homage, if they say that they must listen to music, it is contrary to the Confucian classics, it is also contrary to the principles of vassals, it is not only a humiliation to this dynasty, but also how can it show the virtue of the Northern Dynasty? The banquet etiquette has been debated for a long time, and it cannot be tolerated.

古文：镗即馆，相礼者趣就席，镗曰： 若不彻乐，不敢即席。 金人迫之，镗弗为动，徐曰： 吾头可取，乐不可闻也。 乃帅其属出馆门，甲士露刃向镗，镗叱退之。
现代文：京镗来到驿馆，赞礼者催京镗入席就座，京镗抗争说： 若不撤去奏乐，我不敢入席。 金人强迫他，京镗不为所动，他慢慢地说： 我的头可断，音乐不可以听见。 于是他带领随从离开驿馆，金廷全副武装的卫士将利刃指向京镗，京镗大声呵斥，使他们退下。
English: When the emperor came to the hall, the admirers urged him to enter and take his seat. The emperor protested and said, "If you don't remove the music, I won't dare to sit down." The goldsmiths forced him, but the emperor was unmoved. He said slowly, "My head can be cut off, but the music can't be heard." So he led his entourage out of the hall. The guards of the imperial court, fully armed, pointed their swords at the emperor. The emperor shouted at them, and they retreated.

古文：金人知镗不可夺，驰白其主，主叹曰： 南朝直臣也。 特命免乐。
现代文：金人知道不可能使京镗改变主意，只好派人去禀报金主，金主赞叹说： 真是南朝的正直之臣也。 特地下令撤消用乐。
English: The goldsmith knew that it was impossible to make the emperor change his mind, so he had no choice but to send someone to inform the owner of the gold, who said with admiration: "What an honest vassal of the Southern Dynasty.

古文：自是恒去乐而后宴镗。
现代文：此后京镗一行人一路北上，金人设宴招待，都先撤去奏乐而后宴请。
English: After that, the Peking Opera troupe went all the way to the north, and the goldsmiths held a banquet to invite guests. They first removed the music and then the banquet.

古文：孝宗闻之喜，谓辅臣曰： 士大夫平居孰不以节义自许，有能临危不变如镗者乎？ 
现代文：孝宗听到这事后很高兴，他对辅佐大臣说道： 士大夫平时哪个不以节义自许，可谁能像京镗一样，能临危不改变志操呢？ 
English: After hearing this, Takamune was very happy. He said to the Vice-Minister of State: Which scholar-official does not pride himself on his righteousness in ordinary times, but who can, like the Emperor of China, not change his mind in the face of danger?

古文：使还，入见，上劳之曰： 卿能执礼为国家增气，朕将何以赏卿？ 镗顿首曰： 北人畏陛下威德，非畏臣也。
现代文：京镗出使回朝，拜见孝宗，孝宗慰劳他说 ：爱卿能够坚持礼义为国增光，我将用什么来赏赐你呢？ 京镗磕头回答说 ：北人是畏怕陛下的威德，不是畏怕微臣京镗。
English: An envoy from the capital, Gyeongbuk, returned to the North to pay homage to Takamune, and Takamune consoled him, saying, "If you, my lord, can uphold propriety and add glory to the country, what will I reward you with?" The head of the capital, Gyeongbuk, replied, "Northerners are afraid of your majesty's virtue, not of the petty vassal, Gyeongbuk."

古文：正使臣死于北庭，亦臣子之常分耳，敢言赏乎！ 故事，使还当增秩。
现代文：即使我死在金国，也是做臣子应尽的职责，怎敢谈赏赐！ 按照惯例，使节回朝后应当晋级。
English: Even if I die in the Kim kingdom, it is my duty as a courtier, how dare I talk about rewards! According to the usual practice, envoys should be promoted after returning to the DPRK.

古文：右相周必大言于上曰： 增秩常典尔，京镗奇节，今之毛遂也，惟陛下念之。 乃命镗权工部侍郎。
现代文：右丞相周必大对孝宗说 ：晋级是常典，京镗具有世人少有的节操，是今日之毛遂，请陛下考虑。 于是孝宗任命京镗为权工部侍郎。
English: The Minister of the Right, Zhou Bida, said to Emperor Xiaozong, "Promotion is a regular occurrence, and Emperor Gaozong has rare self-restraint in the world, which is a great achievement today. Please consider it, Your Majesty." Therefore, Emperor Gaozong appointed Emperor Gaozong as the attendant of the Ministry of the Right.

古文：四川阙帅，以镗为安抚制置使兼知成都府。
现代文：四川帅位缺人，朝廷以京镗为安抚制置使兼成都府知府。
English: There was a shortage of Sichuan field marshals, so the imperial court used the Peking Rooster as a pacification system to appoint an envoy and the prefectural governor of Chengdu.

古文：镗到官，首罢征敛，弛利以予民。
现代文：京镗上任后，首先罢免各种杂税，让利与民。
English: After taking office, he first removed all kinds of miscellaneous taxes and let the people benefit.

古文：泸州卒杀太守，镗擒而斩之，蜀以大治。
现代文：泸州兵卒反叛杀死太守，京镗派人抓获凶手并予以处斩，蜀地因此安定。
English: An insurgent soldier from Bozhou rebelled and killed the daimyō, and the capital sent someone to capture the murderer and execute him. As a result, Shu was stabilized.

古文：召为刑部尚书。
现代文：朝廷召回京镗任刑部尚书。
English: The Imperial Court recalled Kyoho to the Imperial Penal Department.

古文：宁宗即位，甚见尊礼，由政府累迁为左丞相。
现代文：宁宗即位后，京镗越加被尊重，由知府历迁为左丞相。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ningzong, Emperor Jingzong was respected more and more, and he was transferred from the position of prefectural governor to the position of minister of the left.

古文：当是时，韩侂胄权势震天下，其亲幸者由禁从不一二岁至宰辅；而不附侂胄者，往往沉滞不偶。
现代文：就在这个时候，韩胄权势倾动天下，他所亲信宠爱者由任侍从官，不一二年就位至宰辅，而不依附于韩胄的人，则往往不得晋升。
English: It was at this time that Han Xuan's power was sweeping the world. Those who were trusted and favored by Han Xuan would be promoted from the position of attendant to the position of vice-premier within a year or two, while those who did not depend on Han Xuan would often not be promoted.

古文：镗既得位，一变其素守，于国事谩无所可否，但奉行侂胄风旨而已。
现代文：京镗自从官拜宰相后，一改其平素操守，对于国事不置可否，只是奉行韩胄的旨意行事。
English: After he was appointed prime minister, Kyonghyun changed his usual behavior and did not make any decisions on state affairs, but only acted in accordance with Han's will.

古文：又荐引刘德秀排击善类，于是有伪学之禁。
现代文：又引荐刘德秀排斥打击好人，于是始有伪学之禁。
English: He also recommended Liu Dexiu to ostracize and crack down on good people, and thus the ban on pseudoscience came into being.

古文：后宦者王德谦除节度使，镗乃请裂其麻，上曰： 除德谦一人而止可乎？ 镗曰： 此门不可启。
现代文：后来宦官王德谦被任命为节度使，京镗表示反对，宁宗说： 拜王德谦一人而停止可以吗？ 京镗回答说 ：此门不可开启。
English: Later, the eunuch Wang Deqian was appointed as the festival envoy, and the Beijing government objected. Ning Zong said, "Can we stop worshiping Wang Deqian alone?" The Beijing government replied, "This gate must not be opened."

古文：节钺不已，必及三孤；三孤不已，必及三公。
现代文：官拜节度使后，必定至三孤；三孤而后，必至三公。
English: After the official worship of the festival, it must go to the three gorges; after the three gorges, it must go to the three kings.

古文：愿陛下以真宗不予刘承规为法，以大观、宣、政间童贯等冒节钺为戒。 上于是谪德谦而黜词臣吴宗旦，或曰，亦侂胄意也。
现代文：愿陛下以真宗不授刘承规节度使为法，以大观、宣和、政和年间童贯等人充为节度使为戒。 宁宗于是流放王德谦而贬斥词臣吴宗旦，有人说这也是韩胄的意思。
English: May His Majesty make it a precept of the True Sect not to grant Liu Chenggui the position of festival messenger, and not to allow Da Guan, Xuan He, Zheng He, Lin Tongzhang and others to serve as festival messengers. Ning Zong then exiled Wang Deqian and denounced the poet Wu Zontan, some say this is also the meaning of Han Zheng.

古文：居无何，以年老请免相，薨，赠太保，谥文忠。
现代文：没过多久，京镗以年纪大为由请求罢相，逝世，赠官为太保，谥号 文忠 。
English: Not long after, he requested to retire on the grounds that he was too old, and passed away. He was given the title of Taibo and his posthumous name was Bunchu.

古文：后以监察御史倪千里言，改谥庄定。
现代文：后来由于监察御史倪千里建议，改谥号为 庄定 。
English: Later, due to the suggestion of the Inspector-General Ni Qianli, the nickname was changed to "Shuangding."

