古文：长沙景王道怜，高祖中弟也。
现代文：长沙景王刘道怜，是高祖的二弟。
English: Liu Daorei, the King of Changsha, is Gaozu's second brother.

古文：初为国子学生。
现代文：刚开始当国子监太学生。
English: He was just starting out as a student of Kuniko Jitsugyo.

古文：谢琰为徐州，命为从事史。
现代文：谢琰当徐州刺史，叫他当从事史。
English: Xie Yu was a historian in Xuzhou, and he was told to study history.

古文：高祖克京城，进平京邑，道怜常留家侍慰太后。
现代文：高祖攻下京城，道怜常常留在家中侍候太后。
English: Gaozu conquered the capital, and Dorei often stayed at home to wait on the empress dowager.

古文：桓玄走，大将军武陵王遵承制，除员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：桓玄西逃，大将军武陵王刘遵奉朝廷命令，任道怜为员外散骑侍郎。
English: When Emperor Kuan Xuan fled to the west, the great general, King Liu of Wuling, obeyed the order of the imperial court and was appointed as a non-commissioned officer's equerry.

古文：寻迁建威将军、南彭城内史。
现代文：不久迁任建威将军、南彭城内史。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General Jianwei and became the chief historian of Nanpeng.

古文：时北青州刺史刘该反，引索虏为援，清河、阳平二郡太守孙全聚众应之。
现代文：当时北青州刺史刘该叛乱，勾结魏为援助，清河、阳平二郡太守孙全集中兵士附和刘该。
English: At that time, North Qingzhou rebelled against Liu Gai, and colluded with Wei for assistance. Qinghe and Yangping two counties' grand marshal Sun Quan concentrated soldiers to support Liu Gai.

古文：义熙元年，索虏托跋开遣伪豫州刺史索度真、大将军斛斯兰寇徐州，攻相县，执钜鹿太守贺申，进围宁朔将军羊穆之于彭城；穆之告急，道怜率众救之。
现代文：义熙元年，魏国国王拓跋开派伪豫州刺史索度真、大将军斛斯兰侵略徐州，攻击相县，活捉巨鹿太守贺申。又进围在彭城的宁朔将军羊穆之。羊穆之派人告急，道怜派人救他。
English: In the first year of Yixi, the king of Wei, Tuoba Kai, sent the pseudo-Yuzhou assassin, Suo Duzhen, and the great general, Gu Xilan, to invade Xuzhou, attack Xiang County, and capture the giant deer alive. They also encircled the Ningshuo general, Yang Muzhi, who was in Pengcheng. Yang Muzhi sent people to be in a hurry, and Daorian sent people to save him.

古文：军次陵栅，斩全。
现代文：宋军驻陵栅时，杀了孙全。
English: When the Song army was stationed in Lingza, they killed Sun Quan.

古文：进至彭城，真、兰退走。
现代文：再进到彭城，索度真、斛斯兰退逃。
English: Entering Pengcheng again, Soduzhen and Xulan fled.

古文：道怜率宁远将军孟龙符、龙骧将军孔隆及穆之等追，真、兰走奔相城；又追蹑至光水沟，斩刘该，虏众见杀及赴水死略尽。
现代文：刘道怜率领宁远将军孟龙符、龙骧将军孔隆和羊穆之等追击。索度真、斛斯兰逃奔相城，又追击到光水沟，杀了刘该。敌人被杀和淹死的占百分之九十以上。
English: Liu Daorei led the pursuit of Ningyuan General Meng Longfu, Longquan General Kong Long and Yang Mu. Soduzhen and Xulan fled to the city of Xiangcheng, and chased to the light water ditch and killed Liu Gai. More than 90% of the enemy were killed and drowned.

古文：高祖镇京口，进道怜号龙骧将军，又领堂邑太守，戍石头。
现代文：高祖镇守京口，升道怜为龙骧将军，又兼任堂邑太守，戍守石头城。
English: Gao Zu Zhen guarded Jingkou, and Sheng Daoli was the general of Longjing. He also served as the grand marshal of Dongyue, and guarded Stone Town.

古文：明年，加使持节、监征蜀诸军事，率冠军将军刘敬宣等伐谯纵，而文处茂、温祚据险不得进，故不果行。
现代文：第二年，加任使持节，监征蜀州诸军事，率领冠军将军刘敬宣等征讨谯纵，而文处茂、温祚等占据险要不能前进，所以没有成行。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, supervise the recruitment of military personnel from Shuzhou, and lead the champion general Liu Jingxuan to solicit and discuss. However, it was not carried out because Wen, Shigeru, and Wenjun were in danger of not advancing.

古文：以义勋封新兴县五等侯。
现代文：道怜因起义被封为新兴县五等侯。
English: Due to the uprising, Dorei was given the title of emerging county fifth class mayor.

古文：四年，代诸葛长民为并州刺史、义昌太守，将军、内史如故。犹戍石头。
现代文：四年代替诸葛长民为并州刺史、义昌太守，将军、内史照旧，还是戍守石头城。
English: In the 4th century, Zhuge Changmin was appointed as the governor of the state, the governor of Yichang, the general, and the historian, and he still held Stone Town.

古文：时鲜卑侵逼，自彭城以南，民皆保聚，山阳、淮阴诸戍，并不复立。
现代文：当时鲜卑侵略，自彭城以南，百姓都躲在堡垒之中，山阳、淮阴等戍垒都不再能成立。
English: At the time of the Xianbei invasion, from the south of Pengcheng, the people were hiding in the fortresses, and the fortresses such as Sanyang and Huaiyin could no longer be established.

古文：道怜请据彭城，以渐修创，朝议以彭城县远，使镇山阳。
现代文：道怜请求据守彭城，慢慢地修治。朝廷意见认为彭城间隔太远，叫他镇守山阳。
English: The imperial court thought that the distance between Pengcheng and Shanyang was too far and ordered him to guard Shanyang.

古文：进号征虏将军、督淮北军郡事、北东海太守，并州刺史、义昌太守如故。
现代文：道怜进号征虏将军、督淮北军郡事、北东海太守，并州刺史、义昌太守还照旧。
English: Dorei Jin, the general of conscription, the governor of Huaibei Military County, the governor of the North East China Sea, and the governor of Zhoushi and the governor of Yichang are still the same.

古文：以破索度真功，封新渝县男，食邑五百户。
现代文：因为击败索度真的功劳，被封为新渝县男，食邑五百户。
English: He was awarded the title of Xinwu County's Man of the Year, and 500 households in the county's food townships were named after him.

古文：从高祖征广固，常为军锋。
现代文：随同高祖进攻广固，常常是部队的先锋。
English: Accompanied Gaozu to attack Guanggu, often being the vanguard of the troops.

古文：及城陷，慕容超将亲兵突围走，道怜所部获之。
现代文：广固被攻破时，慕容超带亲兵突围逃跑，道怜的部下俘虏了慕容超。
English: When Guanggu was breached, Murong Chao broke out of the encirclement with his own soldiers and ran away. Tao's subordinates captured Murong Chao.

古文：加使持节，进号左将军。
现代文：道怜加任使持节，晋号左将军。
English: Dorei was given the additional post of envoy to Jisai, and was given the title of General of the Left.

古文：七年，解并州，加北徐州刺史，移镇彭城。
现代文：七年他解除并州刺史职务，加任北徐州刺史，移到彭城镇守。
English: In the seventh year, he was relieved of the post of county magistrate, and was appointed as the county magistrate of North Xuzhou, and moved to Pengcheng.

古文：八年，高祖伐刘毅，征为都督衮青二州晋陵京口淮南诸郡军事、兗青州刺史，持节、将军、太守如故，还镇京口。
现代文：八年，高祖征讨刘毅，征调道怜为都督兖青二州和晋陵、淮南诸郡军事、兖青二州刺史，持节、将军、太守依旧，回镇京口。
English: In eight years, Gao Zu's conquest of Liu Yi, the conquest and adjustment of roads, the military for the governor of the two states of Jiaqing and Jinling, the counties of Huainan, the engraving of the history of the two states of Jiaqing, the festival, the general and the governor, and the return to the town of Jingkou.

古文：九年，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：九年，允许他带兵甲器仗上殿。
English: In the ninth year, he was allowed to bring a suit of armor to the temple.

古文：以广固功，改封竟陵县公，食邑千户。
现代文：又因广固的功勋改封为竟陵县公，食邑一千户。
English: In addition, due to Guanggu's meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Gong of Qiongling County, and a thousand households of food villages were created.

古文：减先封户邑之半，以赐次子义宗。
现代文：减去先封食邑的一半，赐给他的次子刘义宗。
English: He gave his second son, Liu Yizong, half of his former fief and half of his former fief.

古文：十年，进号中军将军，加散骑常侍，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：十年，道怜晋号为中军将军，加官散骑常侍，赐给鼓吹一部。
English: Ten years later, he was given the title of General of the Chinese Army and the additional title of Cavalryman and Cavalryman, as well as the title of Drummer.

古文：明年，讨司马休之，道怜监留府事，甲仗百人入殿。
现代文：第二年讨伐司马休之，道怜当监留府事，可以带兵甲器仗一百人上殿。
English: In the second year of the campaign against Sima Xiu, Dao Eri was put under house arrest. He was allowed to bring 100 soldiers and armor to the palace.

古文：江陵平，以为都督荆湘益秦宁梁雍七州诸军事、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、镇护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，持节，常侍如故。
现代文：江陵平定，用他为都督荆、益、湘、秦、宁、梁、雍七州诸军事、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、兼护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，持节、常侍照旧。
English: Gangneung was pacified, and he was appointed as the military governor of Jing, Yixing, Hunan, Qin, Ning, Liang, and Yong seven provinces, the general of the cavalry, the chief of the imperial guard, the third secretary of the imperial guard, the lieutenant of the south barbarian guard, the chief historian of Jing Province, the master of festivals, and the regular attendant as before.

古文：北府文武悉配之。
现代文：北府的文武将吏都配给他。
English: The north prefecture's generals and marshals were all assigned to him.

古文：道怜素无才能，言音甚楚，举止施为，多诸鄙拙。
现代文：道怜一向没什么才能，言语鄙陋，举止行动有很多可笑之处。
English: Doorei has never had any talent, his speech is despicable, and there are many ridiculous things about his behavior and actions.

古文：高祖虽遣将军佐辅之，而贪纵过甚，畜聚财货，常若不足，去镇之日，府库为之空虚。
现代文：高祖虽然派将军辅佐他，但他仍贪婪放纵，非常厉害，蓄积财物常常觉得不够，每次离开州镇，州中的仓库因此空空如也。
English: Although Gaozhu sent generals to assist him, he was still greedy and indulgent. He was very powerful, and he often felt that his accumulated wealth was not enough. Every time he left Zhouzhuang, the warehouses in Zhouzhuang were empty.

古文：高祖平定三秦，方思外略，征道怜还为侍中、都督徐兗青三州扬州之晋陵诸军事、守尚书令、徐衮二州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：高祖平定三秦，正想向外面扩张，便征调道怜回来当侍中，都督徐、兖、青三州和扬州的晋陵诸军事，暂时任尚书令、徐、兖二州刺史，持节、将军还照旧。
English: Gaozhu, who had pacified the Three Qin Dynasties, wanted to expand outward, so he was drafted and sent back to serve as an aide-de-camp to the governors of the three prefectures of Xu, Min, Qing, and Yang, as well as the military commanders of the Jin Dynasty. He was temporarily appointed as Shang Shuling (尚書令), Xu, Min, and Erzhou Shishi (二州刺史), and he continued to hold the title of Jie and General as before.

古文：元熙元年，解尚书令，进位司空，出镇京口。
现代文：元熙元年，解除他的尚书令，升官为司空，出外镇守京口。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Hei Dynasty, he was relieved of his post of Shang Shuling, promoted to Siku, and went abroad as the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：高祖受命，进位太尉，封长沙王，食邑五千户，持节、侍中、都督、刺史如故。
现代文：高祖称帝，道怜又升为太尉，被封为长沙王，食邑五千户，持节、侍中、都督、刺史照旧。
English: Gao Zu was proclaimed emperor, Dao Rong was promoted to the rank of captain, and he was named the king of Changsha. He fed 5,000 households, and continued to hold festivals, be a chamberlain, the governor of the capital, and write history.

古文：永初二年朝正，入住殿省。
现代文：永初二年朝见高祖，住在宫殿之中。
English: He met Gaozu in the morning of the second year of Yongchu and lived in the palace.

古文：先是，卢陵王义真为扬州刺史，太后谓上曰： 道怜汝布衣兄弟，故宜为扬州。 
现代文：先前，刘义真当扬州刺史，太后对高祖说： 道怜是你做百姓时的兄弟，应该当扬州刺史。 
English: Previously, Liu Yizhen was Yangzhou's chief historian, and the empress dowager said to Gao Zu, "Dao Rong was your brother when you were a commoner, and you should be Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：上曰： 寄奴于道怜岂有所惜。
现代文：高祖回答说： 寄奴对道怜难道会吝惜什么吗？
English: Gaozu replied, "Would a slave begrudge anything to a Taoist?"

古文：扬州根本所寄，事务至多，非道怜所了。 
现代文：只因扬州是国家的根本所在，事务太多，不是道怜所能办到的。 
English: Just because Yangzhou is the fundamental place of the country, there are too many affairs, which cannot be handled by Tao Er.

古文：太后曰： 道怜年出五十，岂当不如汝十岁兒邪？ 
现代文：太后说： 道怜年过五十，难道不如你的儿子吗？ 
English: The empress dowager said, "Isn't it better to be fifty years old than to be your son?"

古文：上曰： 车士虽为刺史，事无大小，悉由寄奴。
现代文：高祖说： 车士虽然当刺史，事情无论大小实际全由我处理。
English: Gao Zu said: Although the chauffeur is history, I actually handle all matters, no matter how big or small.

古文：道怜年长，不亲其事，于听望不足。 
现代文：道怜年龄五十多了，如果不管那些事，对他的声望是不利的。 
English: He is more than fifty years old, and if he does not care about those things, his reputation will be unfavorable.

古文：太后乃无言。
现代文：太后才没话说。
English: The Queen Mother was speechless.

古文：车士，义真小字也。
现代文：车士，即义真的小名。
English: Chashi, that is to say, is a real nickname.

古文：三年春，高祖不豫，加班剑三十人。
现代文：三年春，高祖病重，增加道怜班剑三十人。
English: In the spring of the third year, Gao Zu was seriously ill, and 30 people were added to the Taoist Relief Squad.

古文：时道怜入朝，留司马陆仲元居守，刁逵子弥为亡命，率数十人入京城，仲元击斩之。
现代文：当时道怜入朝，留下司马陆仲元守卫。刁逵的儿子刁弥当亡命之徒，率几十人进入京城，陆仲元击杀刁弥等人。
English: At that time, Dorei entered the imperial court, leaving Sima Lu Zhongyuan to guard him. Lu's son, Gongyi, became a fugitive and led dozens of people into the capital, where Lu Zhongyuan killed Gongyi and others.

古文：先是，府中陈告弥有异谋，至是赐钱二十万，除县令。
现代文：先前，府史陈犭屯告说刁弥有不轨企图，到这时赐陈犭屯二十万钱，任他县令官职。
English: Previously, the prefectural historian Chen Yutun reported that Gongyi had a nefarious intention. At this time, Chen Yutun was given 200,000 yuan to serve as his county magistrate.

古文：五月，宫车晏驾，道怜疾患不堪临丧。
现代文：五月，高祖去世。道怜也害病，不能参加丧事。
English: In May, Gao Zu passed away. Dou Rong also fell ill and was unable to attend the funeral.

古文：六月，薨，年五十五。
现代文：六月，也逝世了，享年五十五岁。
English: He also passed away in June, at the age of 55.

古文：追赠太傅，持节、侍中、都督、刺史如故。
现代文：死后，被追赠为太傅，持节、侍中、都督、刺史还照旧。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu, and his position as Jisetsu, Samurai, Governor, and Sashishi remained the same.

古文：便宜敬是前式，宪兹嘉礼，勒功天府，配祭庙庭，俾示徽章，垂美长世，茂绩远猷，永传不朽。 
现代文：祭祀的礼节根据晋朝的太宰安平王的老规矩，鸾鸟的辂车九套，有黄屋和左纛，车京车，挽歌二部，前后部九鼓吹一套，羽葆一套。虎贲和班剑一百人。
English: According to the old rules of the Dazai Anping King of the Jin Dynasty, the eagle's chariot has nine sets, including the yellow house and the left beak, the car of the capital, two parts of the elegy, one set of nine drums in the front and back, and one set of feathers. There are one hundred tigers and swords.

古文：道怜六子：义欣嗣、义庆、义融、义宗、义宾、义綦。
现代文：道怜一共有六个儿子，他们是：义欣、义庆、义融、义宗、义宾、义綦。
English: Dorei has a total of six sons, they are: Yixin, Yixing, Yirong, Yizong, Yibin, and Yixuan.

