古文：种世衡种世衡，字仲平，放之兄子也。
现代文：种世衡字仲平，种放兄长的儿子。
English: He was the son of his older brother, and was named after his father, Heng Zi Zhongping.

古文：少尚气节，昆弟有欲析其赀者，悉推与之，惟取图书而已。
现代文：年少时崇尚气节，兄弟有想分其资产的，全数辞让给与，只取图书而已。
English: When he was young, he was a fan of the festival. If any of his brothers wanted to divide his assets, he would give them all up and take only the books.

古文：以放荫补将作监主簿，累迁太子中舍。
现代文：因种放荫补为将作监主簿，累迁太子中允。
English: Due to the shade of the species, he will be the supervisor of the main book, and he will be the crown prince.

古文：尝知泾阳县，里胥王知谦以奸利事败，法当徙，遁去。
现代文：世衡曾任泾阳知县，里胥王知谦以非法手段求取利益事情败露，按照法令应判徒刑，王知谦逃走。
English: Shiheng once served as the governor of Fenyang County. It was revealed that Wang Zhicheng used illegal means to seek profits. According to the law, Wang Zhicheng should be sentenced to imprisonment. Wang Zhicheng fled.

古文：比郊赦辄出，世衡曰 送府则会赦 ，杖其脊而请罪于府，知府李谘奏释之。
现代文：等到郊赦将至，王知谦便主动向官府自首，世衡说： 把王知谦送州府则会被赦免。 用杖击打王的脊背后向州府请罪，知府李谘上奏释其罪。
English: When the pardoning of Wang Zhiqian was about to come, Wang Zhiqian voluntarily surrendered to the government. Shi Heng said: If Wang Zhiqian is sent to the prefectural government, he will be pardoned. After beating Wang Zhiqian's back with a cane, he pleaded guilty to the prefectural government, and the prefectural government accepted his plea and pardoned him.

古文：后通判凤州。
现代文：后世衡通判凤州。
English: In later years, Heng Tong was given the title of Fengzhou.

古文：州将王蒙正，章献后姻家也，所为不法。
现代文：州将王蒙正，是章献皇后的姻家，所作所为不守法纪。
English: Wang Mengzheng, the provincial commander, was Zhang Xian's in-law, and what he did was not in accordance with the law.

古文：尝干世衡以私，不听，蒙正怒，乃诱知谦讼冤而阴助之，世衡坐流窦州，徙汝州。
现代文：他曾向世衡求取私利，世衡没有听从，王蒙正着恼生气，于是诱使王知谦诉冤而暗中帮助他，世衡因此被流放窦州，移居汝州。
English: He had asked Shiheng for personal gain, Shiheng did not listen, Wang Meng was annoyed and angry, so he induced Wang Zhichian to sue for grievances and secretly help him. Shiheng was therefore exiled to Douzhou and moved to Ruzhou.

古文：弟世材上一官以赎，为孟州司马。
现代文：其弟世材送上一官职来替兄赎罪，任为孟州司马。
English: His younger brother sent him to a government post to atone for his brother's sin, and was appointed as Mengzhou Sima.

古文：久之，龙图阁直学士李纮为辨其诬，宋绶、狄棐继言之，除卫尉寺丞，历监随州酒，签书同州、鄜州判官事。
现代文：过了很久，龙图阁直学士李为他辩护，宋绶、狄蓒相继为他说话，世衡被任命为卫尉寺丞，历官随州监酒、同州签书、州判官事。
English: After a long time, Li, the direct master of Longtu Pavilion, defended him, Song Tao and Di Yu successively spoke for him, Shiheng was appointed as the guard of the temple, and the officials followed the state to supervise the wine, sign the letter with the state, and judge the state.

古文：西边用兵，守备不足。世衡建言，延安东北二百里有故宽州，请因其废垒而兴之，以当寇冲，右可固延安之势，左可致河东之粟，北可图银、夏之旧。
现代文：西部边地用兵，守备不足，世衡建议，延州东北二百里有故宽州，请求因其被废弃的城垒而兴建，用来抵挡敌人的锋锐，右可稳固延安的形势，左可致河东的粟米，向北可图取银、夏州的旧地。
English: In the west, troops were used to defend the outlying areas, which were underprepared. Shihang suggested that there were two hundred towns in the northeast of Yanzhou, including the former Kwangzhou, and requested that they be built as abandoned fortresses to resist the enemy's sharpness. On the right, the situation in Yan'an could be stabilized, on the left, the millet could be sent to the east of the river, and to the north, silver could be obtained, and the old land of Xiazhou.

古文：朝廷从之，命董其役。
现代文：朝廷同意了他的建议，命他负责这项工程。
English: The court agreed to his suggestion and ordered him to take charge of the project.

古文：夏人屡出争，世衡且战且城之。
现代文：西夏人多次出击争斗，世衡一边战斗一边筑城。
English: The Xixia people attacked and fought many times, and Shihang built the city while fighting.

古文：然处险无泉，议不可守。
现代文：但地险没有泉水，众人认为不可防守。
English: However, there is no spring water in the ground risk, and people think that it cannot be defended.

古文：凿地百五十尺，始至于石，石工辞不可穿，世衡命屑石一畚酬百钱，卒得泉。
现代文：凿地一百五十尺，才碰到石头，石工认为石头不可凿穿，世衡下令一畚碎石付酬一百钱，终于得到泉水。
English: He chiseled a hundred and fifty feet into the ground, only to hit a stone. The mason thought that the stone could not be chiseled through. Shihang ordered to pay one hundred yuan for a pile of gravel, and finally got spring water.

古文：城成，赐名青涧城。
现代文：城筑成，赐名青涧城。
English: The city was built and given the name Seongbuk-seong.

古文：迁内殿崇班、知城事。
现代文：升任内殿崇班、知青涧城事。
English: He was promoted to Uchidono Suban and Chisei Shosei.

古文：开营田二千顷，募商贾，贷以本钱，使通货赢其利，城遂富实。
现代文：开垦营田二千顷，招募商人，借贷给本钱，使流通货物赢得利益，青涧城于是富实。
English: Qingyuan City became rich by reclaiming 2,000 hectares of farmland, recruiting merchants, and borrowing capital to make the goods sold profitable.

古文：间出行部族，慰劳酋长，或解与所服带。
现代文：间或出行部族，慰劳酋长，或者解下所佩的带子送给他们。
English: From time to time, they travel to the tribes to console the chiefs, or to give them the bands they are wearing.

古文：尝会客饮，有得敌情来告者，即以饮器予之，繇是属羌皆乐为用。
现代文：曾适逢与客人饮酒，有人得知敌情来报告，就把饮器送给他，由于这样所属羌人部族都乐于为其所用。
English: There was a time when he was drinking with a guest. When someone learned of the hostile situation and reported it, he gave him the drinking vessel. Because of this, all the tribes of the Xiongnu were happy to use it for him.

古文：再迁洛苑副使、知环州。
现代文：又升任洛苑副使、环州知州。
English: He was also promoted to vice-envoy of Luoyuan, Huanzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：蕃部有牛家族奴讹者，素屈强，未尝出谒郡守，闻世衡至，遽郊迎。
现代文：蕃部有牛家族叫奴讹的人，向来倔强，从没有出来拜见郡守，听说世衡来到，急忙到郊外迎接。
English: The members of the Hebei cattle family, known as Nuxuan, have always been stubborn. They have never come out to meet the county governor. When they heard that Shiheng was coming, they hurried to the outskirts to meet him.

古文：世衡与约，明日当至其帐，往劳部落。
现代文：世衡与奴讹约定，第二天当到其帐舍，前去慰劳部落。
English: Shiheng agreed with Nongye that he would go to his tent the next day to console the tribe.

古文：是夕大雪，深三尺。
现代文：当晚下大雪，有三尺深。
English: It snowed heavily that night, three feet deep.

古文：左右曰： 地险不可往。 世衡曰： 吾方结诸羌以信，不可失期。 遂缘险而进。
现代文：左右侍臣说： 地势险恶不可前去。 世衡说 ：我正要结信于诸羌，不可失约。 于是沿险而进。
English: The courtiers on both sides said, "The situation is so dangerous that we can't go any further," and Sehyo said, "I'm just about to write to Zhu Xi, and I can't break the contract," and so they proceeded along the dangerous path.

古文：奴讹方卧帐中，谓世衡必不能至，世衡蹴而起，奴讹大惊曰： 前此未尝有官至吾部者，公乃不疑我耶！ 率其族罗拜听命。
现代文：奴讹正睡在帐中，认为世衡必定不能到达，世衡一蹴而至，奴讹起而大惊说： 在此以前从没有官员到我部落，您是不怀疑我们的！ 率领他的部众四面围绕着下拜表示听命。
English: Niu Ye was sleeping in his account, thinking that Shi Heng would not be able to reach him. Shi Heng suddenly arrived. Niu Ye stood up and said in shock: "No official has ever come to my tribe before. You don't doubt us!" He led his subordinates to bow down and obey his orders.

古文：羌酋慕恩部落最强，世衡尝夜与饮，出侍姬以佐酒。
现代文：羌人酋长慕恩部落最为强大，世衡曾在晚上与他饮酒，侍女出来劝酒。
English: Shihang chief Mun tribe is the most powerful, Shihang used to drink with him in the evening, the maid came out to persuade him to drink.

古文：既而世衡起入内，潜于壁隙中窥之。
现代文：不久世衡起身入内，偷偷在墙壁的空隙中窥视。
English: Soon Shihong got up and went inside, secretly peeking through the gaps in the walls.

古文：慕恩窃与侍姬戏，世衡遽出掩之，慕恩惭惧请罪。
现代文：慕恩私下与侍女调情，世衡乘其不备突然出来，慕恩惭愧恐惧请罪。
English: Mun flirted with the maid in private. Shi Heng took advantage of her unpreparedness and suddenly came out. Mun was ashamed and pleaded guilty out of fear.

古文：世衡笑曰： 君欲之耶？ 即以遗之，由是得其死力。
现代文：世衡笑着说 ：你想要她吗？ 马上把侍女赠送给了他，由于这样得到慕恩的拼死效力。
English: Shiheng smiled and said, "Do you want her? I immediately gave him the maid, and because of this, I got Mun's desperate effectiveness."

古文：诸部有贰者，使讨之无不克。
现代文：诸部有背叛的，使慕恩讨伐战无不胜。
English: The betrayal of various ministries has made the Mun crusade invincible.

古文：有兀二族，世衡招之不至，即命慕恩出兵诛之。
现代文：有兀二族，世衡招之不来，就命令慕恩出兵诛杀了兀二族。
English: When Shihheng could not bring the two tribes together, he ordered Mun to send troops to kill the two tribes.

古文：其后百余帐皆自归，莫敢贰。
现代文：其后一百多帐都自动归附，没有敢背叛的。
English: After that, more than a hundred accounts were automatically attached, and no one dared to betray.

古文：因令诸族置烽火，有急则举燧，介马以待。
现代文：因而令诸部族设置烽火，有紧急情况就举起告警的烽烟，披甲备马以待。
English: Therefore, the tribes were ordered to set up bonfires, raise warning smoke in case of emergency, and put on armor to be ready.

古文：葛怀敏败，率羌兵数千人以振泾原，无敢后者。
现代文：葛怀敏失败，世衡率领羌兵几千人以援救泾原，没有敢落后。
English: Ge Huimin failed, and Shi Heng led several thousand soldiers to rescue Yuyuan, and did not dare to fall behind.

古文：尝课吏民射，有过失，射中则释其罪；有辞某事、请某事，辄因中否而与夺之。
现代文：曾劝课官吏百姓射箭，如有过失，射中就释其罪；有人辞谢某事、请求某事，往往因射中否而作定夺。
English: Officials and common people were once advised to practice archery. If they made a mistake, they would be absolved if they hit the target. If someone thanked someone for something or asked for something, the decision was often made based on whether or not they hit the target.

古文：人人自厉，皆精于射，繇是数年敌不敢近环境。
现代文：因此人人自励，都精于射箭，由是数年敌人不敢靠近环州境地。
English: Therefore, everyone is self-motivated and proficient in archery, which is why the enemy has not dared to approach Huanzhou for several years.

古文：迁东染院使、环庆路兵马钤辖。
现代文：升任东染院使、环庆路兵马钤辖。
English: He was promoted to the post of the envoy of the East Dyeing Institute, under the jurisdiction of the Huanqing Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：范仲淹檄令与蒋偕筑细腰城，世衡时卧病，即起，将所部甲士昼夜兴筑，城成而卒。
现代文：范仲淹檄令他与蒋偕修筑细腰城，世衡当时卧病在床，立即起来，率领所部甲士日夜兴筑，城修成功而去世。
English: Fan Zhongdun ordered him and Chiang Kai-shek to build the thin waist city. Shiheng was ill in bed at the time, immediately got up and led the soldiers of the headquarters to build day and night. The city was successfully built and died.

古文：初，世衡在青涧城，元昊未臣，其贵人野利刚浪〈口夌〉、遇乞兄弟有材谋，皆号大王。
现代文：开始，世衡在青涧城，元昊没有臣服，其显贵野利刚浪、遇乞兄弟有才能谋略，都号称大王。
English: At the beginning, Shihang was in Qingyao City, and Yuan Hao did not surrender. He was known as a great king because he was a great warrior, and his beggar brothers had the ability to strategize.

古文：亲信用事，边臣欲以谋间之。
现代文：元昊以亲信用事当权，边臣打算用计谋离间他们。
English: Yuan Hao trusted his relatives to hold power, and the minister planned to use trickery to separate them.

古文：庆历二年，鄜延经略使庞籍，两为保安军守刘拯书，赂蕃部破丑以达野利兄弟，而泾原路王沿、葛怀敏亦遣人持书及金宝以遣遇乞。
现代文：庆历二年，延经略使庞籍，两次给保安军太守刘拯写信，贿赂蕃部破丑以便把信送给野利兄弟，但泾原路王沿、葛怀敏也派人持书及金子财宝来赠给遇乞。
English: In the second year of the celebration calendar, Yan Jing slightly made a huge number of people, twice wrote to Liu Zheng, the eunuch of the security forces, and bribed the eunuch to send the letter to the wild brothers, but Wang Yan and Ge Huimin also sent people with books and gold treasures to give to the beggar.

古文：会刚浪〈口夌〉令浪埋、赏乞、媚娘等三人诣世衡请降，世衡知其诈，曰： 与其杀之，不若因以为间。 留使监商税，出入骑从甚宠。
现代文：恰逢刚浪命令浪埋、赏乞、媚娘等三人拜见世衡请求降服，世衡知道这是欺骗，说 ：与其杀掉他们，不如因之作为离间。 留下他们使监商税，出入骑从很宠厚。
English: Just at the right time, Gang Nami ordered three people, including Nami Burial, Rewarding Beggars, and Charming Maidens, to pay a visit to Shigeno to request his surrender. Shigeno knew that this was a deception and said, "Instead of killing them, it would be better to use this as a reason to separate them.

古文：有僧王光信者，趫勇善骑射，习知蕃部山川道路。
现代文：有和尚叫王光信，骁勇善于骑马射箭，熟悉蕃部的山川道路。
English: There is a monk named Wang Guangxin, who is good at riding and archery, and is familiar with the mountain and river roads in the lower part.

古文：世衡出兵，常使为乡导，数荡族帐，奏以为三班借职，改名嵩。
现代文：世衡出兵，常常使他作为向导，多次荡平羌人族帐，上奏以他为三班借职，改名嵩。
English: When Shihong sent out troops, he often used him as a guide to settle the accounts of the Xiongnu people many times. At the beginning of the war, he was assigned to the third class and changed his name to Song.

古文：世衡为蜡书，遣嵩遗刚浪〈口夌〉，言浪埋等已至，朝廷知王有向汉心，命为夏州节度使，奉钱月万缗，旌节已至，趣其归附，以枣缀画龟，喻其早归之意。
现代文：世衡写信用蜡封好，派王嵩送给刚浪，说浪埋等人已到，朝廷知大王有向汉之心，任命他为夏州节度使，俸禄每月一万缗，皇帝赐给的旌旗节钺已到，催促他归附，用枣缀画成龟形，喻其早归之意。
English: Shiheng wrote a letter of credit, sealed with wax, and sent Wang Song to Gang Nami, saying that Nami Buried and others had arrived. The court knew that the king had a heart for Han, and appointed him as the ambassador to the Xiazhou Festival, with a salary of ten thousand baht per month. The banner given by the emperor had arrived, urging him to return. He painted it into a turtle shape with a date ornament, to symbolize his early return.

古文：刚浪〈口夌〉得书大惧，自所治执嵩归元昊。元昊疑刚浪〈口夌〉贰己，不得还所治，且锢嵩穽中。
现代文：刚浪得信后大为恐惧，从自己的治所内执王嵩归元昊，元昊怀疑刚浪背叛自己，不让他返回治所，而且把王嵩禁锢在井中。
English: After receiving the letter, Gangnam was very frightened and sent Wang Song from his office to Yuan Hao. Yuan Hao suspected that Gangnam had betrayed him and did not allow him to return to the office. He also imprisoned Wang Song in a well.

古文：使其臣李文贵以刚浪〈口夌〉旨报世衡，且言不达所遗书意，或许通和，愿赐一言。
现代文：派大臣李文贵以刚浪旨意报世衡，而且说明不明白所送书信的意思，如果答应通和，则希望赐给一言。
English: He sent his minister, Li Wengui, to inform Shiheng of Ganglang's will, and explained that he did not understand the meaning of the letter sent, and if he agreed to make peace, he hoped to give him a word.

古文：世衡以白籍。
现代文：世衡把此事报告庞籍。
English: Shihang reported the matter to his superiors.

古文：时朝廷已欲招拊，籍召文贵至，谕以国家宽大开纳意，纵使还报。
现代文：当时朝廷已打算招附元昊，庞籍把李文贵召来，谕示国家宽大开纳的意思，派使臣还报。
English: At that time, the imperial court had already planned to recruit Yuan Hao, and Pang Qi summoned Li Wengui to announce the country's intention to be lenient, and sent an envoy to report back.

古文：元昊得报，出嵩，礼之甚厚，使与文贵偕来。
现代文：元昊得到报告，放出王嵩，厚礼相待，让他与李文贵一同回来。
English: After receiving the report, Yuan Hao released Wang Song and treated him with courtesy, allowing him to return with Li Wengui.

古文：自是继遣使者请降，遂称臣如旧。
现代文：从此相继派使者请求降服，于是称臣如旧。
English: From then on, emissaries were sent one after another to ask for surrender, and the emperor declared that he would remain a vassal.

古文：世衡闻野利兄弟已诛，为文越境祭之。
现代文：世衡听说野利兄弟已被杀，写祭文越境祭吊。
English: When Sheho heard that the Yoli brothers had been killed, he wrote a cross-border eulogy.

古文：籍疏嵩劳，具言元昊未通时，世衡画策遣嵩冒艰险间其君臣，遂成猜贰，因此与中国通，请优进嵩官。
现代文：庞籍开列王嵩的劳绩，陈述元昊未通和时，世衡图划计策派王嵩冒着艰险离间元昊君臣，于是形成猜贰，元昊因此与中国通和，请求优先升王嵩的官。
English: Pang Zi listed Wang Song's achievements, stating that when Yuan Hao did not reach a peace agreement, the schemers of the world balance chart sent Wang Song to take the risk of alienating Yuan Hao's monarchs and ministers, thus forming a guessing game. As a result, Yuan Hao made peace with China and requested that Wang Song's promotion be given priority.

古文：迁三班奉职。
现代文：王嵩因此升任三班奉职。
English: As a result, Wang Song was promoted to the third shift.

古文：后嵩因对自陈，又进侍禁、阁门祗候。
现代文：后来王嵩因召对自陈，又进官侍禁、门祗候。
English: Later, Wang Song was summoned to appear before the court, and he was also placed under house arrest and had to wait at the gate.

古文：世衡死，籍为枢密使。
现代文：世衡死后，庞籍任枢密使。
English: After the death of Shihang, Pang was appointed as a privy councilor.

古文：世衡子古上书讼父功，为籍所抑。
现代文：世衡儿子种古上书诉说父亲的功劳，被庞籍所压抑。
English: Shiheng's son Zeng Gu wrote a letter to his father to tell him of his father's merits, but was suppressed by the huge number of his father's followers.

古文：古复上书，遂赠世衡成州团练使，诏流内铨授古大县簿尉，押还本贯。
现代文：种古再次上书，于是赠世衡为成州团练使，诏令吏部流内铨授种古大县簿尉，押还本籍。
English: Zenggu wrote again, so he gave Shiheng the title of Chengzhou regimental drill sergeant, ordered the cadre department to give him the title of Zenggu county bookkeeper, and returned his birthright.

古文：籍既罢，古复辩理，下御史考验，以籍前奏王嵩疏为定。
现代文：庞籍既已罢官，种古又辩理，下请御史考实验定，以庞籍以前奏王嵩疏为定。
English: Now that Pang Chih has been removed from office, he has become old-fashioned and discursive. I would like to ask you to conduct a history test to determine whether or not Pang Chih was formerly known as Wang Song So.

古文：诏以其事付史官，听古从官便郡。
现代文：诏以此事交付史官，听任种古就便近郡县做官。
English: The imperial edict handed the matter over to the historian, and after listening to Ren Zenggu, he became an official in a nearby county.

古文：世衡在边数年，积谷通货，所至不烦县官益兵增馈。
现代文：世衡在边地数年，积聚谷物流通货物，所到之处不烦县官增兵增粮。
English: Shihang has been in the outlying areas for several years, accumulating grain logistics goods, and it does not bother the county officials to increase the number of soldiers and grain.

古文：善抚养士卒，病者遣一子专视其食饮汤剂，以故得人死力。
现代文：善于安抚士兵，有人生病就派一个儿子专门视其食饮汤剂，因为这个缘故得人拼死效力。
English: He was good at soothing soldiers, and when someone fell ill, he would send one of his sons to look after their food and drink, because this was the reason why he was so effective.

古文：及卒，羌酋朝夕临者数日，青涧及环人皆画象祠之。
现代文：等到去世，羌人酋长数日早晚来看他，青涧城及环州人都画其像祠之。
English: After his death, the chief of the Xiongnu people came to see him in the morning and evening for several days, and people in Qingcheng and Huanzhou all painted his image in the shrine.

古文：子古、谔、诊，皆有将材。关中号曰 三种 。
现代文：儿子古、谔、诊，都有将才，关中地区号称 三种 。
English: Guanzhong District is famous for its three kinds of cranes, including the old crane, the new crane and the crane.

古文：谊，其幼子也。
现代文：谊，是他的幼子。
English: friendship, is his young son.

古文：谔字子正，以父任累官左藏库副使，延帅陆诜荐知青涧城。
现代文：孙种朴、种师道、种师中。种谔字子正，因父亲的职位累官左藏库副使，延州守帅陆诜推荐他知青涧城。
English: Sun Zengpu, Zengshi Dao, Zengshi Junior High School. Zengpu Zizi Zheng, because of his father's position, the vice-minister of the Left Bank of Tibet, and the governor of Yanzhou, Lu Wei, recommended him to know Qingyuan City.

古文：夏酋令〈口夌〉内附，诜恐生事，欲弗纳，谔请纳之。
现代文：西夏酋长令内附，陆诜恐怕惹起事端，打算不接纳，种谔请求接受令归附。
English: The Western Xia chieftain's order was attached, Lu Yao was afraid of causing trouble and planned not to accept it, and Zong Yao's request for acceptance was attached.

古文：夏人来索，诜问所以报，谔曰： 必欲令〈口夌〉，当以景询来易。 乃止。
现代文：西夏人来索取令，陆诜询问怎么回答，种谔说： 一定要令，应以景询来交换。 
English: The Western Xia people came to ask for an order, Lu Yao inquired how to answer, and Zeng Yao said: You must order, you should exchange it for an inquiry.

古文：询者，中国亡命至彼者也。
现代文：西夏人才停止要人。景询，是中国亡命到西夏境地的人。
English: Xixia talents ceased to be important people. Inquiries are people from China who have fled to Xixia.

古文：夏将嵬名山部落在故绥州，其弟夷山先降，谔使人因夷山以诱之，赂以金盂，名山小吏李文喜受而许降，而名山未之知也。
现代文：西夏大将嵬名山部落在以前的绥州境内，其弟夷山先降服，种谔派人因夷山以引诱名山，用金盂进行贿赂，名山的手下小吏李文喜接受了贿赂而答应降服，但名山不知道此事。
English: In the territory of the former Zhangzhou, the general of the Western Xia and the famous mountain tribe, his younger brother, Yishan, surrendered first, and the seedling sent people to seduce the famous mountain with the help of Yishan, and bribed him with gold ingots. Li Wenxi, a minor official of the famous mountain, accepted the bribe and agreed to surrender, but the famous mountain did not know about it.

古文：谔即以闻，诏转运使薛向及陆诜委谔招纳。
现代文：种谔立即把此事报告朝廷，诏令转运使薛向及陆诜委托种谔招纳。
English: The seedlings immediately reported the matter to the imperial court, and the transfer order ordered Xue Xiang and Lu Xun to recruit the seedlings.

古文：谔不待报，悉起所部兵长驱而前，围其帐。
现代文：种谔不等朝廷答复，全起所部军队长驱向前，包围名山的族帐。
English: The imperial court did not wait for a reply, and the army commanders of the whole army drove forward to surround the famous mountain.

古文：名山惊，援枪欲斗，夷山呼曰： 兄已约降，何为如是？ 文喜因出所受金盂示之，名山投枪哭，遂举众从谔而南。
现代文：名山惊慌，拿枪想要战斗，夷山叫他说 ：兄长已经相约降服，为什么这样做？ 李文喜趁机出示所接受的金盂，名山丢掉枪哭泣，于是举众跟从种谔南行。
English: Meishan panicked, took a gun and wanted to fight, Yishan told him, "My brother has already agreed to surrender, why did you do this?" Li Wenxi took the opportunity to show the gold ingot he had accepted, Meishan threw away the gun and cried, so he gathered a crowd to follow the seed ingot south.

古文：得酋领三百、户万五千、兵万人。
现代文：获得酋长首领三百人、户一万五千、军队一万人。
English: He received three hundred chiefs, fifteen thousand households and ten thousand soldiers.

古文：将筑城，诜以无诏出师，召谔还。
现代文：将要筑城，陆诜以无诏出师的名义，召回种谔。
English: When it was time to build the city, Lu Yao, in the name of Wu Zhaozhong, recalled the seed pods.

古文：军次怀远，晨起方栉，敌四万众坌集，傅城而陈。
现代文：军队驻扎怀远，早晨起来正在梳头，敌人四万聚集，附着城墙而结阵。
English: The army is stationed far away, and in the morning they are combing their hair. The enemy has gathered 40,000 men, and they are massed against the city wall.

古文：谔开门以待，使名山帅新附百余人挑战，谔兵继之，鼓行而出。
现代文：种谔开门以待，使名山率领新归附的一百多人挑战，种谔的军队随其后，击鼓前进而出。
English: Zonglu opened the door and waited for Meishan to lead the newly annexed more than one hundred people to challenge. Zonglu's army then marched out, beating drums.

古文：至晋祠据险，使偏将燕达、刘甫为两翼，身为中军，乃闭垒，悉老弱乘城鼓噪以疑贼。
现代文：到达晋祠占据险要地势，使副将燕达、刘甫为两翼，自己为中军，于是关闭城垒，集中全部老弱之人登城擂鼓呐喊以迷惑敌人。
English: Arriving at Jin Temple, they occupied a precarious position, so that Vice Generals Yanda and Liu Fu were the two wings, and they were the Chinese army, so they closed the fortress and concentrated all the old and weak people to climb the city to play drums and shout to confuse the enemy.

古文：已而合战，追击二十里，俘馘甚众，遂城绥州。
现代文：不久三军协同作战，追击敌人二十里，俘斩众多，于是筑绥州城。
English: Soon, the three armies fought together, chased the enemy for twenty miles, captured and killed many, and then built Luzhou City.

古文：诜劾谔擅兴，且不禀节制，欲捕治，未果而诜徙秦。
现代文：陆诜弹劾种谔擅自兴兵，而且不接受指挥约束，打算逮捕他治罪，还没有成而陆诜移任秦州。
English: Lu Yao impeached Zeng Yao for raising troops without authorization, and did not accept command constraints, intending to arrest him and punish him. Lu Yao has not yet been transferred to Qin State.

古文：言者交攻之，遂下吏，贬秩四等，安置随州。
现代文：言官交相攻击种谔，于是传送吏部，贬官秩四等，在随州居住。
English: The government officials attacked the seed-ploughs, so they transferred the officials, demoted the officials of the fourth rank, and lived in Suizhou.

古文：会侯可以言水利入见，神宗问其事，对曰： 种谔奉密旨取绥而获罪，后何以使人？ 帝亦悔，复其官。
现代文：恰逢侯可因报告水利之事入朝见皇帝，神宗问他这件事，回答说 ：种谔奉密旨攻取绥州而获罪，以后怎么用人？ 皇帝也后悔，恢复了种谔的官职。
English: Just as Hou Ke was reporting to the emperor about the water conservancy, Shenzong asked him about the matter and replied, "How can you employ a person after he was convicted of carrying out a secret order to conquer Zhangzhou? The emperor also regretted it and restored his official position as a seed planter."

古文：韩绛宣抚陕西，用为鄜延钤辖。
现代文：韩绛为陕西宣抚使，任用种谔为延钤辖。
English: Han Xuan was the envoy to Shaanxi Province, and Zeng Xuan was appointed as the governor of Yancheng.

古文：绛城啰兀，规横山，令谔将兵二万出无定川，命诸将皆受节度，起河东兵会银州。
现代文：韩绛在罗兀筑城，规取横山。命令种谔率兵二万出无定川，命令众将都受种谔的指挥约束，调发河东军队会于银州。
English: Han Xuan built a city in Luoqiao and captured Hengshan. He ordered the general to lead twenty thousand soldiers out of Mudechuan, ordered all generals to be bound by the general's command, and dispatched the Hedong army to gather in Yinzhou.

古文：城成而庆卒叛，诏罢师，弃啰兀，责授汝州团练副使。
现代文：城筑成但庆州士兵叛乱，诏令罢师，放弃罗兀，种谔被责罚降授汝州团练副使。
English: The city was built, but the soldiers of Gyeongju rebelled, and the emperor ordered the division to be disbanded, abandoning Luoyang. He was punished and demoted to the vice-envoy of the Ruzhou regimental drill.

古文：再贬贺州别驾，移单州，又移华州。
现代文：再贬为贺州别驾，移单州，又移华州。
English: Then it was downgraded to Hezhou Beidou, moved to Shanzhou, and then moved to Huazhou.

古文：绛再相，讼其前功，复礼宾副使、知岷州。
现代文：韩绛第二次任宰相，诉种谔以前的功劳，恢复为礼宾副使、岷州知州。
English: Han Zheng served as prime minister for the second time, sued Zeng Zheng for his previous achievements, and was reinstated as Vice-Minister of Protocol and Minister of Zhangzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：董毡将鬼章聚兵于洮、岷，新羌多叛，谔讨袭诛之。
现代文：董毡部将鬼章聚兵于洮、岷州，新归附的羌人大多反叛，种谔征讨袭击杀掉了鬼章。
English: Dong Xibe gathered ghost soldiers in Handan and Handan. Most of the newly annexed Handan people rebelled and killed the ghost soldiers.

古文：从李宪出塞，收洮州，下逋宗、讲珠、东宜诸城，掩击至大河，斩首七千级。
现代文：跟从李宪出兵边塞，收复洮州，攻占逋宗、讲珠、东宜诸城，乘敌不备进袭到大河，斩首七千级。
English: Following Li Xian, he dispatched troops to fortify the border, recovered Zhangzhou, captured the cities of Shizong, Lezhu, and Dongyi, and took advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to attack Dahe, beheading seven thousand levels.

古文：迁东上阁门使、文州刺史、知泾州，徒鄜延副总管。
现代文：升任上门使、文州刺史、泾州知州，移任延副总管。
English: He was promoted to the post of senior envoy, Wenzhou magistrate, Zhangzhou magistrate, and transferred to Yan vice-governor.

古文：上言： 夏主秉常为其母所囚，可急因本路官捣其巢穴。 遂入对，大言曰： 夏国无人，秉常孺子，臣往持其臂以来耳。 帝壮之，决意西讨，以为经略安抚副使，诸将悉听节制。
现代文：皇帝说： 西夏国王秉常被其母亲所囚禁，可赶快顺随本路官捣其巢穴。 种谔于是入对，夸大其辞说 ：西夏国无人，秉常小子，我前去即可持其臂以来。 皇帝受他的话鼓动壮胆，决意西征，以种谔为经略安抚副使，众将全听他的指挥约束。
English: The emperor said: Xixia King Bingzang was imprisoned by his mother, so he could quickly follow this road official to smash his nest. Zeng Yao then entered the match and exaggerated his words, saying: "There is no one in Xixia, Bingzang boy, I can hold his arm when I go." The emperor was encouraged by his words and decided to go to the West, with Zeng Yao as the deputy to pacify and pacify, and the people would all listen to his command and discipline.

古文：谔即次境上，帝以谔先期轻出，使听令于王中正。
现代文：种谔立即驻扎在边境上，皇帝以种谔提前轻率出动，使他听令于王中正。
English: The seed beak was immediately stationed on the border, and the emperor rashly dispatched the seed beak ahead of time to make him obey the order of Wang Zhongzheng.

古文：敌屯兵夏州，谔率本路并畿内七将兵攻米脂，三日未下。
现代文：敌人屯兵夏州，种谔率领本路并京城地区的七将军队攻打米脂，三天没有攻克。
English: The enemy stationed troops in Xiazhou, and seven generals from the capital region led the main road and attacked Mizhi, but did not conquer it for three days.

古文：夏兵八万来援，谔御之无定川，伏兵发，断其首尾，大破之，降守将令介讹遇。
现代文：西夏八万军队来援救，种谔在无定川抵御，发伏兵，断其首尾，大破西夏援军，降服米脂守将令介讹遇。
English: Western Xia's 80,000 troops came to the rescue, the seed raft resisted in the Muding River, sent an ambush, cut off its head and tail, defeated the Western Xia reinforcements, and surrendered to the commander of Mizhi.

古文：捷书闻，帝大喜，群臣称贺，遣中使谕奖，而罢中正。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，皇帝大喜，群臣称贺，派宦官谕示奖赏，而且解除王中正的职务。
English: The news of the victory spread to the imperial court, the emperor was overjoyed, the courtiers congratulated him, sent eunuchs to reward him, and dismissed Wang Zhongzheng.

古文：谔留千人守米脂，进次银、石、夏州，不见敌。
现代文：种谔留下一千人守米脂，进而驻扎银、石、夏州，不见敌人。
English: He left a thousand people to guard the rice and barley, and then stationed them in Yin, Shi, and Xiazhou, and did not see any enemies.

古文：始，被诏当会灵武，谔迂枉不进，士卒饥惫，欲以粮运不继归罪转运使李稷。
现代文：开始，受诏命应当在灵武会合，种谔绕远路不向前进，士兵饥饿疲乏，打算以粮运不继归罪转运使李稷。
English: At the beginning, he was ordered by the emperor to meet at Lingwu, but the long journey did not move forward, the soldiers were hungry and tired, and he intended to transfer Li Qian with the crime of grain transportation.

古文：驻军麻家平，大校刘归仁以众溃，诏令班师。
现代文：驻军麻军坪，大校刘归仁带着众兵溃逃，朝廷诏令撤回军队。
English: The garrison of Ma Junping, Colonel Liu Guiren fled with the soldiers, and the imperial court ordered the withdrawal of the army.

古文：犹迁凤州团练使、龙神卫四厢都指挥使。
现代文：种谔还是被升任凤州团练使、龙神卫四厢都指挥使。
English: Zeng Yao was still promoted to Fengzhou regimental drill sergeant, Long Shenwei four compartment command sergeant.

古文：谔谋据横山之志未已，遣子朴上其策。
现代文：种谔谋划占据横山之志没有完成，派儿子种朴去朝廷上奏他的策书。
English: When his plan to occupy Yokoyama was not completed, he sent his son, Sompo, to present his strategy to the imperial court.

古文：帝召朴问状，擢为阁门祗候。
现代文：皇帝召见种朴询问情况，种朴被提升为门祗候。
English: The emperor summoned Zeng Pu to inquire about the situation, and Zeng Pu was promoted to the position of concubine.

古文：将进城横山，命徐禧、李舜举使鄜延计议。
现代文：将要向前筑横山城，命徐禧、李舜举到延计议。
English: It will be necessary to move forward to build Hengshan City, and the lives of Xu Xiyi and Li Xuan will be postponed for discussion.

古文：谔言： 横山延袤千里，多马宜稼，人物劲悍善战，且有盐铁之利，夏人恃以为生；其城垒皆控险，足以守御。
现代文：种谔说： 横山延袤千里，多马适宜耕稼，人物强悍善战，而且有盐铁之利，西夏人依仗它为生；其城垒都控扼险要，足以守御。
English: The seedling said: The mountains stretch for thousands of miles, the horse is suitable for farming, the person is strong and good at war, and it has the advantage of salt and iron. The Xixia people rely on it for their livelihood; its fortifications are important to control risks and are sufficient to guard.

古文：今之兴功，当自银州始。
现代文：现在兴功，当从银州开始。
English: Now it's time to work hard, starting with Yinzhou.

古文：其次迁宥州，又其次修夏州，三郡鼎峙，则横山之地已囊括其中。
现代文：其次迁宥州，又其次修夏州，三郡鼎立对峙，那么横山之地已囊括其中。
English: Next is Qianyuzhou, and then Shuxiazhou, the three counties stand face to face, then the land of Hengshan has been included.

古文：又其次修盐州，则横山强兵战马、山泽之利，尽归中国。
现代文：又其次修盐州，那么横山的强兵战马、山泽之利，尽归中国。
English: And next is the construction of Yanzhou, then the strong horse of Hengshan, the advantage of Yamazawa, will all go to China.

古文：其势居高，俯视兴、灵，可以直覆巢穴。 而禧与沈括定议移银州，城永乐，与谔始谋异，乃奏留谔守延。
现代文：其形势居高临下，俯视兴州、灵州，可以径直倾其巢穴。 但徐禧与沈括定议移驻银州，筑永乐城，与种谔开始的谋划不同，于是奏请种谔留守延州。
English: Its situation is high and low, overlooking Xingzhou and Lingzhou, and it can go straight to its nest. However, Xu Xiyi and Shen Guo decided to move to Yinzhou and build Yongle City, which is different from the plan started by Zeng Yao, so he asked Zeng Yao to stay in Yanzhou.

古文：既而永乐受围，谔观望不救，帝冀其后效，置不问，且虞贼至，就命知延州。
现代文：不久永乐被围，种谔观望不救，皇帝希望他以后效力，置之不问，而且担心敌人来到，就使种谔知延州。
English: Soon Yongle was besieged, and Zonglu could do nothing but watch and wait. The emperor hoped that he would serve in the future, and did not question him. Fearing that the enemy would come, he sent Zonglu to Yanzhou.

古文：疽发背卒，年五十七。
现代文：种谔背上痈疽发作去世，终年五十七岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-seven after an attack of gangrene on his back.

古文：谔善驭士卒，临敌出奇，战必胜，然诈诞残忍，左右有犯立斩，或先刳肺肝，坐者掩面，谔饮食自若。
现代文：种谔善驾驭士兵，临敌出奇不意，每战必胜，但狡诈狂诞残忍，属下有冒犯的立即斩首，有时先割肺肝，在座的人掩面不忍看，种谔饮食自如。
English: They are good at controlling soldiers, surprise the enemy, and win every battle, but they are cunning and cruel. If their subordinates offend them, they immediately behead them, and sometimes they cut their lungs and livers first. People here hide their faces because they can't bear to look at them. They eat and drink freely.

古文：敌亦畏其敢战，故数有功。
现代文：敌人也畏惧他敢于战斗，所以屡有战功。
English: The enemy is also afraid of him daring to fight, so he often has war exploits.

古文：李稷之馈军也，旦入谔营，军吏鸣鼓声喏。
现代文：李稷供应军饷，早晨进入种谔的军营，军吏鸣鼓吹呼。
English: In the morning, he went to the army camp to plant strawberries, and the military officials marched out with drums and trumpets.

古文：谔呼问吏曰： 军有几帅？
现代文：种谔呼问军吏说： 军队有几个主帅？
English: "How many commanders-in-chief does the army have?

古文：要当借汝头以代运使。 即叱斩之。
现代文：要当借你的头来代替转运使。 立即叱责斩首。
English: You should lend your head to replace the transfer agent. Immediately reprimand and behead.

古文：稷惶怖遽出。
现代文：李稷惶恐马上退出。
English: Panicked, Li Yan immediately withdrew.

古文：当是时，微舜臣则师歼矣。事闻，赠朴雄州防御使，官其后十人。
现代文：曾渡黄河，仓卒遇上敌人，种谔欺骗门下客说： 事情紧急，你可以穿上我的衣服，乘坐我的马，追随旗鼓千骑，赶快往赴大军。 客人相信了他，敌人以为是种谔，随后追击，客人差点丢了性命。
English: Once, when crossing the Yellow River in a hurry and encountering the enemy, the innkeeper deceived his guests by saying, "It's urgent, you can put on my clothes, ride my horse, follow the crowd, and quickly go to the army." The guests believed him, the enemy thought it was the innkeeper, and then they chased him, and the guests almost lost their lives.

古文：师道字彝叔。少从张载学，以荫补三班奉职，试法，易文阶，为熙州推官、权同谷县。
现代文：从熙宁首开绥州，到后来再举西征，都是种谔计谋，终于导致永乐之祸。议论的人认为种谔不死，边事不会停止。种师道字彝叔，年青时跟随张载学习，以恩荫补为三班奉职，通过试换法，改为文官，任熙州推官、代理同谷县。
English: From Xining's first conquest of Yanzhou to the subsequent Western Expedition, it was all the fault of Zonglu, which eventually led to the calamity of Yongle. Commentators believed that Zonglu would never die, and that border disputes would never end. Zonglu's tutor, Uncle Dao Zi, studied under Zhang Zai when he was young, and was assigned to the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Second Class of the Second Class of the Second Class of the Second Class of the Third Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First Class of the First

古文：县吏有田讼，弥二年不决。
现代文：县吏有田地诉讼案，满二年没有决断。
English: County officials have filed a lawsuit, but no decision has been made for two years.

古文：师道繙阅案牍，穷日力不竟，然所讼止母及兄而已。
现代文：师道翻阅案卷文书，一整天用力不能穷究，但此案所讼只是母亲及兄长而已。
English: Shi Dao rummaged through the case documents and could not exhaust his efforts for a whole day, but the case was only against his mother and brother.

古文：引吏诘之曰： 母、兄，法可讼乎。
现代文：于是引吏诘问此事说 ：母亲、兄长，依照法令可以诉讼吗？
English: So the usher inquired about the matter and said, "Mother, brother, according to the law, can there be a lawsuit?"

古文：汝再期扰乡里足未？ 吏叩头服罪。
现代文：你还会期望以此扰乱乡里吗？ 县吏叩头服罪。
English: Do you still expect to disturb the countryside with this? The county officials kowtow to the crime.

古文：通判原州，提举秦凤常平。
现代文：师道通判原州，提举秦凤常平。
English: Shidotong was awarded to Wonju and Qin Feng Changping was promoted.

古文：议役法忤蔡京旨，换庄宅使、知德顺军。
现代文：议论役法触犯蔡京的旨意，改任庄宅使、知德顺军。
English: He violated the will of Cai Jing by discussing the law on military service, and was reassigned to the post of village official, and to the Zhide Shunjun.

古文：又谓其诋毁先烈，罢入党籍，屏废十年。
现代文：又认为他诋毁先烈，解除其职务列入党籍，斥退废弃十年。
English: It is also believed that he slandered the martyrs, relieved him of his duties, listed him as a party member, and expelled him from the party for ten years.

古文：以武功大夫、忠州刺史、泾原都钤辖知怀德军。
现代文：以武功大夫、忠州刺史、泾原都钤辖的身份知怀德军。
English: He knew the German army as a doctor of martial arts, a historian of Chungju, and a governor of Suwon.

古文：夏国画境，其人焦彦坚必欲得故地，师道曰： 如言故地，当以汉、唐为正，则君家疆土益蹙矣。 彦贤无以对。
现代文：西夏国划定边境，西夏人焦彦坚必想得到旧地，师道说： 如果说旧地，应当以汉、唐为正，那么你家疆土就更小了。 焦彦坚无话可说。
English: When the Xixia State demarcated the border, the Xixia man Jiao Yan was adamant that he wanted to get the old land. Shidao said: If we say that the old land should be Han and Tang, then the territory of your home is even smaller. Jiao Yan had nothing to say.

古文：童贯握兵柄而西，翕张威福，见者皆旅拜，师道长揖而已。
现代文：童贯握兵权而西行，聚张威福，见者都按次序拜见，师道双手长揖而已。
English: Tong Rong took the military power and went west, gathering Zhang Weifu. Those who saw him bowed to him in order, but his hands were long.

古文：召诣阙，徽宗访以边事，对曰： 先为不可胜，来则应之。
现代文：朝廷召他赴朝官，徽宗向他咨询边事，回答说 ：先为不可胜之形，来则应之。
English: The imperial court called him to go to the imperial office, Huizong consulted him about side issues, and replied: First, it is an invincible form, then it is appropriate.

古文：妄动生事，非计也。 贯议徙内郡弓箭手实边，而指为新边所募。
现代文：妄动惹起事端，不是长久之计。 童贯建议移内郡弓箭手充实边地，却指定为新建边地所招募。
English: It's not a long-term strategy to stir up trouble. Tongran suggested moving the county archers to enrich the border areas, but they were designated to be recruited by the newly built border areas.

古文：帝复访之，对曰： 臣恐勤远之功未立，而近扰先及矣。 帝善其言，赐袭衣、金带，以为提举秦凤弓箭手。
现代文：皇帝又向师道咨询，回答说： 我担心勤远之功没有树立，但近扰先到了。 皇帝称道他的话，赐给袭衣、金带，以他为提举秦凤弓箭手。
English: The emperor also consulted with his mentor and replied, "I am worried that the virtue of diligence has not been established, but the nearness has come first." The emperor praised his words, gave him a cloak and a gold belt, and appointed him as the archer of Qin and Feng.

古文：时五路并置官，帝谓曰： 卿，吾所亲擢也。 贯滋不悦，师道不敢拜，以请，得提举崇福宫。
现代文：当时五路同时设置官员，皇帝对他说： 你是我所亲自提拔的。 童贯更加不高兴，师道不敢上任，因而请求改职，得提举崇福宫。
English: At that time, officials from five provinces were appointed at the same time, and the emperor said to him, "You are the one I have personally promoted." Tong Quan was even more unhappy, because Shi Dao did not dare to take up the post, so he asked for a change of post and was promoted to Chongfu Palace.

古文：久之，知西安州。
现代文：过了很长时间，任西安州知州。
English: After a long time, Xi'an became known as Chizhou.

古文：夏人侵定边，筑佛口城，率师往夷之。
现代文：西夏人侵犯定边，修筑佛口城，师道率领军队前去平定。
English: The Xixia people invaded Dingbian, built the Buddha's Mouth City, and Shidao led the army to go and pacify it.

古文：始至渴甚，师道指山之西麓曰： 是当有水。 命工求之，果得水满谷。
现代文：开始到达时军队非常口渴，师道指着山的西麓说： 这里应当有水。 命令工人寻求，果然得水满谷。
English: When they first arrived, the troops were very thirsty. Shidou pointed to the western foot of the mountain and said, "There should be water here." He ordered the workers to search for it, and they found a valley full of water.

古文：累迁龙神卫四厢都指挥使、洺州防御使、知渭州。
现代文：累迁龙神卫四厢都指挥使、氵名州防御使、知渭州。
English: He successively served as commander of the four carriages of the Long Shenwei, the defense envoy of Yunnan Province, and the defense envoy of Shandong Province.

古文：督诸道兵城席苇，土赋工，敌至，坚壁葫芦河。
现代文：督促各道军队修筑席苇平城，敌人到，在葫芦河坚固壁垒。
English: Urge the armies of all provinces to build the city of Pingcheng, the enemy will come, and build a strong barrier in the Huludao River.

古文：师道陈于河浒，若将决战者。
现代文：师道陈兵在河边，好像将要决战的样子。
English: Teacher Dao Chen Bing is by the river, looking as if he is about to fight a decisive battle.

古文：阴遣偏将曲克径出横岭，扬言援兵至，敌方骇顾，杨可世潜军军其后，姚平仲以精甲衷击之，敌大溃，斩首五十级，获橐驼、马牛万计，其酋仅以身免。
现代文：暗中派副将曲充径直出横岭，扬言援兵来到，敌人正惊骇回头看，杨可世偷偷地把军队驻扎在西夏军队的后面，姚平仲以精兵从中间进击，敌人大溃，斩首五十级，获得骆驼、马牛万计，其酋长仅以身免。
English: He secretly sent his vice-commander Qu Quanzhong straight out of Hengling, threatening that reinforcements would arrive. The enemy was looking back in horror. Yang Keshi secretly stationed his army behind the Western Xia army. Yao Pingzhong attacked from the middle with elite soldiers. The enemy was routed, decapitated to the fiftieth level, camels and horses were obtained, and their chiefs were only spared.

古文：卒城而还。
现代文：师道修完城而返归。
English: Shido returns from repairing the city.

古文：又诏帅陕西、河东七路兵征臧底城，期以旬日必克。
现代文：又诏令师道统帅陕西、河东七路军队征讨臧底城，预期十天必定攻克。
English: He also ordered the commanders of the Shaanxi and Hedong Seventh Route Armies to attack the city of Loudi, which was expected to be conquered in ten days.

古文：既薄城下，敌守备甚固。
现代文：不久逼近城下，敌人守备很牢固。
English: Soon they approached the city, and the enemy's defences were very strong.

古文：官军小怠，列校有据胡床自休者，立斩之，尸于军门。
现代文：官军稍有怠意，列校中有据胡床自己休息的，立即斩首，陈尸于军门。
English: If the government army is a bit lazy, and there is a person in the regiment who is resting on his bed, he will be beheaded immediately, and his corpse will be left at the gate.

古文：令曰： 今日城不下，视此。 众股栗，噪而登城，城即溃，时兵至才八日。
现代文：命令说： 今天城不攻占，这就是榜样。 众人两腿发抖，呐喊登城，城马上溃决，此时军队到达才八天。
English: The order said: "Today, the city will not be conquered, this is an example." The people trembled on their legs, shouted to the city, and the city was defeated. At this time, the army arrived only eight days later.

古文：帝得捷书喜，进侍卫亲军马军副都指挥使、应道军承宣使。
现代文：皇帝得到捷报很高兴，升师道为侍卫亲军马军副都指挥使、应道军承宣使。
English: The emperor was very happy to get the good news. Sheng Shidao was the bodyguard of the pro-army, the deputy commander of the horse army, and the vice-commander of the army.

古文：从童贯为都统制，拜保静军节度使。
现代文：跟随童贯为都统制，被任命为保静军节度使。
English: He followed Tong Quan as the governor of the capital, and was appointed as the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：贯谋伐燕，使师道尽护诸将。
现代文：童贯图谋讨伐燕地，派师道全权监领众将。
English: Tong Guan planned to fight Yan Di, and sent Shidao to supervise and lead the general with full authority.

古文：师道谏曰： 今日之举，譬如盗入邻家不能救，又乘之而分其室焉，无乃不可乎？ 贯不听。
现代文：师道劝谏说 ：今天的举动，譬如盗窃入邻家不能救，又乘机而瓜分其房屋，这可以吗？ 
English: Teacher Tao advised Zou saying, "Today's action, such as stealing into a neighbor's house, cannot be saved, and taking advantage of the opportunity to divide his house, is this okay?

古文：既次白沟，辽人噪而前，士卒多伤。
现代文：童贯没有听从他的意见。不久驻军白沟，辽国人呐喊向前，士兵多受伤。
English: Tong Quan did not listen to his advice. Soon the garrison was in Baigou, the Liao people shouted forward, and many soldiers were injured.

古文：师道先令人持一巨梃自防，赖以不大败。
现代文：师道预先令人拿着一巨梃自防，赖之以致没有大败。
English: In advance, the teacher gave the students a giant hammer to defend themselves, which helped them avoid a big defeat.

古文：辽使来请曰： 女真之叛本朝，亦南朝之所甚恶也。
现代文：辽国使臣来请求说： 女真背叛本朝，也是南朝很厌恶的。
English: An envoy from Liao came to make a request, saying, "Ning Zhen betrayed this dynasty, and the Southern Dynasty is very disgusted with her.

古文：今射一时之利，弃百年之好，结豺狼之邻，基他日之祸，谓为得计可乎？
现代文：现在追求一时的财利，抛弃百年的友好，结交豺狼邻居，种下以后的祸患，认为是得计谋可以吗？
English: Is it all right to pursue momentary financial gain, abandon centuries of friendship, befriend a wolfish neighbor, and sow the seeds of future disaster?

古文：救灾恤邻，古今通义，惟大国图之。 贯不能对，师道复谏宜许之，又不听，密劾其助贼。
现代文：救灾恤邻，古今通义，尚望贵国深思此理，善自图谋。 童贯不能回答，师道又劝谏童贯答应辽国的请求，又不听从，秘密弹劾师道帮助贼国。
English: Disaster relief and sympathy for neighbors, ancient and modern common sense, still hope that your country will ponder this reason and be good at self-planning. Tongquan could not answer, and the teacher advised Tongquan to agree to the request of Liaoning, but did not listen, secretly impeached the teacher to help the traitor country.

古文：王黼怒，责为右卫将军致仕，而用刘延庆代之。
现代文：王黻生气，责师道为右卫将军致仕，而任用刘延庆代替他的职务。
English: Wang Yu was angry and ordered Dao to serve as the right guard general, and appointed Liu Yanqing to take his place.

古文：延庆败绩于卢沟，帝思其言，起为宪州刺史、知环州，俄还保静军节度使，复致仕。
现代文：刘延庆失败于卢沟，皇帝想起师道的话，起用师道为宪州刺史、环州知州，不久复官保静军节度使，再致仕。
English: Liu Yanqing failed in Lugou, the emperor recalled the words of Shidao, appointed Shidao as the secretary of Genshu and the governor of Huanzhou, and soon returned to the post of the military commander of the Peace Preservation Army, and then resigned.

古文：金人南下，趣召之，加检校少保、静难军节度使、京畿河北制置使，听便宜檄兵食。
现代文：金人南下，朝廷急忙召用师道，加官检校少保、静难军节度使、京畿河北制置使，听任他就便缴纳军粮。
English: When the goldsmith went to the south, the imperial court hastily summoned Shidao, and promoted him to the post of inspector of schools and junior guards, and appointed him as the military governor of Jingnan Army, and the military governor of Gyeonggi and Hebei Provinces, and paid him military rations.

古文：师道方居南山豹林谷，闻命即东。
现代文：师道正居住在南山豹林谷，接到命令立即东行。
English: Shi Dao was living in Nanshan Leopard Forest Valley, and received an order to immediately go east.

古文：过姚平仲，有步骑七千，与之俱北。
现代文：访姚平仲，有步兵、骑兵七千，与之一起北行。
English: Yao Pingzhong was visited by seven thousand infantrymen and cavalrymen, and they marched north together.

古文：至洛阳，闻斡离不已屯京城下，或止勿行曰： 贼势方锐，愿少驻汜水，以谋万全。 师道曰： 吾兵少，若迟回不进，形见情露，祗取辱焉。
现代文：到洛阳，听说斡离不已屯兵京城下，有人劝止他不要北行说： 贼势正盛，希望稍驻汜水，以谋划万全之策。 师道说： 我兵力少，如果迟缓不进，形见情露，只会自取其辱。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he heard that the imperial court had sent troops to the capital, and someone advised him not to go north, saying, "Thieves are in the ascendant. I hope you will stay in Surabaya for a while to plan a comprehensive strategy." Shidao said, "I have a small army. If I don't enter the capital in a timely manner, and my feelings are revealed, I will only humiliate myself."

古文：今鼓行而前，彼安能测我虚实？
现代文：现在张大声势而前进，彼怎能猜测我的虚实？
English: Now that Zhang is shouting and advancing, how can he guess my truth?

古文：都人知吾来，士气自振，何忧贼哉！ 揭榜沿道，言种少保领西兵百万来。
现代文：都城的人知道我到来，士气自振，还担忧什么贼人！ 沿路张榜，说种少保率领百万兵西来。
English: People in the capital knew I was coming, their morale was boosted, and they were also worried about thieves! Banners were put up along the route, saying that the kind of minor guards led a million soldiers to the west.

古文：遂抵城西，趋汴水南，径逼敌营。
现代文：于是抵达城西，趋汴水南面，径直威逼敌营。
English: So he arrived in the west of the city, approached the south of Surabaya, and forced the enemy camp.

古文：金人惧，徙砦稍北，敛游骑，但守牟驼冈，增垒自卫。
现代文：金人惧怕，稍稍向北移砦，约束游骑，只是镇守牟驼冈，增修城垒自卫。
English: The goldsmiths were afraid, so they moved the fort a little to the north, restricted the cavalry, but only guarded Mucao Hill, and built additional ramparts for self-defense.

古文：时师道春秋高，天下称为 老种 。
现代文：当时师道年岁已高，天下人称为 老种 。
English: At that time, Shi Dao was already very old, and people all over the world called him an old seed.

古文：钦宗闻其至，喜甚，开安上门，命尚书右丞李纲迎劳。
现代文：钦宗听说他到来，十分高兴，打开安上门，命尚书右丞李纲迎接慰劳。
English: When Qinzong heard of his arrival, he was very happy and opened the door to An. He ordered Shang Shuyuan and Li Gang to welcome him.

古文：时已议和，入见，帝问曰： 今日之事，卿意如何？ 对曰： 女真不知兵，岂有孤军深入人境而能善其归乎？ 帝曰： 业已讲好矣。 对曰 臣以军旅之事事陛下，余非所敢知也。 拜检校少傅、同知枢密院、京畿两河宣抚使，诸道兵悉隶焉。
现代文：当时已议和，师道入见，钦宗询问说 ：今天的事情，你认为如何？ 师道回答说： 女真不懂兵法，难道有孤军深入他人境内而能善归吗？ 钦宗说 ：已经和女真议和了。 回答说： 我以军旅之事事奉陛下，其他不是我所敢知道的。 被授予检校少傅，同知枢密院、京畿两河宣抚使，各道军队全归其指挥。
English: At that time, peace had already been negotiated, and his mentor, Qinzong, asked, "What do you think of today's events?" The mentor replied, "Women really don't understand the art of war, is it possible for a lone army to go deep into someone else's territory and return safely?" Qinzong said, "I have already negotiated peace with Qinzong." He replied, "I served Your Majesty with the service of military travel, and I don't dare to know anything else. I was awarded the rank of inspector of schools, Tongzhi Privy Council, and Gyeonggi two rivers envoy, and all the armies were under my

古文：以平仲为都统制。
现代文：以姚平仲为都统制。
English: With Yao Pingzhong as the governor of the capital.

古文：师道时被病，命毋拜，许肩舆入朝。
现代文：师道当时患病，诏命不要跪拜，允许坐轿入朝。
English: Shido was ill at the time, and was ordered not to kneel, and was allowed to travel to the Imperial Palace in a sedan chair.

古文：金使王汭在廷颉颃，望见师道，拜跪稍如礼。
现代文：金国使臣王氵内在朝廷傲慢无礼，望见师道，拜跪稍稍符合礼节。
English: The envoy of the State of Jin, Wang Qian, was arrogant and impolite in the imperial court. Seeing his teacher's way, he bowed slightly in line with the etiquette.

古文：帝顾笑曰： 彼为卿故也。 京城自受围，诸门尽闭，市无薪菜。
现代文：钦宗看着师道笑说 ：他是因为你的缘故。 京城自从被围，众城门全部关闭，市场上没有柴火菜蔬。
English: Qinzong looked at his teacher and said with a smile, "He quit because of you. Since the capital was besieged, all the city gates have been closed, and there is no firewood, vegetables or fruits in the market.

古文：师道请启西、南壁，听民出入如常。
现代文：师道请求开西、南城门，听从百姓出入如常。
English: Shi Dao requested that the west and south gates of the city be opened, and that the people be allowed to enter and leave as usual.

古文：金人有擅过偏将马忠军者，忠斩其六人。
现代文：金人有擅自经过副将马忠军营的，马忠斩杀六人。
English: Jinren passed the camp of Vice-General Ma Zhong without permission, and Ma Zhong killed six people.

古文：金人来诉，师道付以界旗，使自为制，后无有敢越佚者。
现代文：金人来诉讼，师道把界旗交付给金人，使其自为约束，后来没有人敢放肆。
English: Jinren came to sue, and Shidao handed over the boundary banner to Jinren to make it self-restraint. Later, no one dared to be presumptuous.

古文：又请缓给金币，使彼惰归，扼而歼诸河，执政不可。
现代文：又请求暂缓给予金币，使金人懈怠返归，扼其归路而把金人歼灭在黄河，执政大臣不同意。
English: He also asked for a delay in giving the gold coins, so that the goldsmiths would return from their idleness, and narrow their way back and destroy the goldsmiths in the Yellow River. The ruling minister did not agree.

古文：种氏、姚氏皆为山西巨室，平仲父古方以熙河兵入援。
现代文：种氏、姚氏都是山西巨室，姚平仲父亲姚古正以熙河兵入援。
English: The Zong clan and the Yao clan are both from Shanxi Province, and Yao Pingzhong's father, Yao Guzheng, came to the aid of the Heihe soldiers.

古文：平仲虑功名独归种氏。
现代文：姚平仲担心功名独归种氏，就向皇上奏言兵士不得速战。
English: Yao Pingzhong was worried that the credit would go only to the imperial family, so he reported to the emperor that soldiers should not fight quickly.

古文：乃以士不得速战为言达于上。李纲主其议，令城下兵缓急听平仲节度。
现代文：李纲主张姚平仲的意见，命令城下军队缓急听从姚平仲的指挥约束。
English: Li Gang advocated Yao Pingzhong's opinion and ordered the army under the city to listen to Yao Pingzhong's command and control.

古文：帝日遣使趣师道战，师道欲俟其弟秦凤经略使师中至，奏言过春分乃可击。
现代文：钦宗每天派使臣催促师道决战，师道想等待其弟秦凤经略使师中到来，上奏说过了春分才可以进击。
English: Qin Zong sent envoys every day to urge Shidao to fight a decisive battle. Shidao wanted to wait for his brother Qin Fengjing to send an envoy to the middle of the division, and said that the spring equinox would be played before they could attack.

古文：时相距才八日，帝以为缓，竟用平仲斫营，以及于败。
现代文：当时相距春分才八天，钦宗认为迟缓，竟然任用姚平仲破营，以至于失败。
English: At that time, the spring equinox was only eight days away, and Qin Zong thought that it was too late to appoint Yao Ping to break the camp, so that it failed.

古文：既败，李邦彦议割三镇，师道争之不得。
现代文：既已失败，李邦彦建议割让三镇，师道争辩不得。
English: Having already failed, Li Bangyan proposed to cede the three towns, which could not be disputed.

古文：李纲罢，太学诸生、都人伏阙愿见种、李，诏趣使弹压。
现代文：李纲被解除职务，太学诸生、都城百姓伏在朝宫希望见种师道、李纲，诏令急速派人弹压。
English: When Li Gang was relieved of his duties, all the scholars and people in the capital city gathered at the Imperial Palace, hoping to see the teacher, Li Gang. The imperial edict quickly dispatched people to suppress him.

古文：师道乘车而来，众褰廉视之，曰： 果我公也。 相率声喏而散。
现代文：师道乘车而来，众人揭起车帘视之，说： 果真是我种公。 相互欢呼而散。
English: Shi Dao came by car, and everyone opened their curtains to look at him and said, "He really is my father." They cheered and dispersed.

古文：金师退，乃罢为中太一宫使。
现代文：金国军队退走，就罢师道之职为中太一宫使。
English: When the Chinese army retreated, he became the envoy of the Central Taiyi Palace.

古文：御史中丞许翰见帝，以为不宜解师道兵柄。
现代文：御史中丞许翰见钦宗，认为不应解除师道的兵权。
English: Goshi Chujo Xu Han met with Emperor Qinzong and believed that Shidu's military power should not be revoked.

古文：上曰： 师道老矣，难用，当使卿见之。 令相见于殿门外。
现代文：钦宗说 ：师道年老了，难以任用，应该让你见见他。 令他们俩人在殿门外相见。
English: Khinzong said, "Shido is old and it is difficult to appoint him, so you should meet him, let them meet each other outside the palace gate."

古文：师道不语，翰曰： 国家有急，诏许访所疑，公勿以书生之故不肯谈。 师道始言： 我众彼寡，但分兵结营，控守要地，使彼粮道不通，坐以持久，可破也。 翰叹味其言，复上奏谓师道智虑未衰，尚可用。
现代文：师道不说话，许翰说 ：国家有急难，诏令允许寻访所疑，您不要因书生之故不肯谈。 师道才说： 我众敌寡，只要分兵结营，控守要地，使其粮道不通，因以持久，可以破敌。 许翰赞叹体味他的话，又上奏说师道智虑没有衰退，还可任用。
English: Shi Dao did not speak, Xu Han said, "The country is in dire straits, the imperial edict allowing the search is doubtful, you should not refuse to talk because you are a scholar." Shi Dao then said, "I have few enemies, as long as I set up a camp, hold the important place, and make it impassable, I can defeat the enemy." Xu Han admired his words, and reported that Shi Dao's wisdom had not faded, and he could still be appointed.

古文：于是加检校少师，进太尉，换节镇洮军，为河北、河东宣抚使，屯滑州，实无兵自随。
现代文：于是加官检校少师，进官太尉，改任镇洮军节度使，为河北、河东宣抚使，屯驻滑州，实际上无兵自随。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of inspector junior division and promoted to the rank of captain. He was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhenhai Army, the envoy of Hebei and Hedong, and stationed in Leshou. In fact, there were no soldiers accompanying him.

古文：师道请合关、河卒屯沧、卫、孟、滑，备金兵再至。
现代文：师道请求协同关、河军队屯驻沧、卫、孟、滑州，防备金兵再来。
English: The Shidao requested that the Guan and He armies be stationed in Cang, Wei, Meng, and Leshou to prevent the Jin soldiers from returning.

古文：朝论以大敌甫退，不宜劳师以示弱，格不用。
现代文：朝廷意见认为大敌刚退走，不宜劳师以示弱，师道的建议被阻碍没有采用。
English: The opinion of the imperial court was that the great enemy had just retreated, and it was not appropriate to show weakness by working hard as a teacher. The suggestion of the teacher's way was obstructed and not adopted.

古文：既而师中战死，姚古败，朝廷震悚，召师道还。
现代文：不久种师中战死，姚古失败，朝廷震惊恐惧，召回师道。
English: Soon after, Yao Gu was killed in battle, Yao Gu was defeated, the imperial court was shocked and frightened, and recalled Shi Dao.

古文：太原陷，又使巡边。
现代文：太原陷落，又派师道去巡视边地。
English: After the fall of Taiyuan, Shidao was sent to inspect the border areas.

古文：次河阳，遇王汭，揣敌必大举，亟上疏请幸长安以避其锋。
现代文：驻扎河阳，遇上王，估计敌人必定大举进攻，急忙上疏请求钦宗临幸长安以避金军锋锐。
English: When he was stationed in Kheyang and met the king, he estimated that the enemy would certainly attack in a big way, and hurriedly went up to the ditch to ask the Qinzong to take the lead in Chang'an to avoid the Jin army.

古文：大臣以为怯，复召还。
现代文：当权大臣认为师道胆怯，又把他召回。
English: The minister in charge thought Shido was cowardly and recalled him.

古文：既至，病不能见。
现代文：既已到朝廷，患病不能朝见。
English: He has already been to the Imperial Court, but is too ill to attend.

古文：十月，卒，年七十六。
现代文：十月，师道去世，终年七十六岁。
English: In October, Shido passed away at the age of 76.

古文：帝临奠，哭之恸，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：钦宗亲临祭奠，悲痛哭泣，赠开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Qinzong personally attended the memorial service, wept with grief, and presented the opening ceremony and the three offices.

古文：京师失守，帝搏膺曰： 不用种师道言，以至于此！ 金兵之始退也，师道申前议，劝帝乘半济击之，不从，曰： 异日必为国患。 故追痛其语。
现代文：京城失守，钦宗拍胸痛悔说： 不采用种师道的话，以至于此！ 金兵开始退走，师道重申前议，劝钦宗乘金兵渡河时出击，钦宗没有同意，师道说 ：以后金兵必为国家祸患。 所以追痛其语。
English: When the capital was lost, Qinzong patted his chest in regret and said, "I didn't use the words of a great teacher, and now this!" The gold soldiers began to retreat, and the teacher reiterated his previous advice, urging Qinzong to attack when crossing the river with the gold soldiers. Qinzong did not agree, and the teacher said, "In the future, the gold soldiers will be a national disaster." So he pursued his words.

古文：建炎中，加赠少保，谥曰忠宪。
现代文：建炎年中，加赠师道少保，谥号叫 忠宪 。
English: In the middle of the construction period, he was awarded the title of teacher and junior guard, and his nickname was Zhongxian.

