古文：有为神农之言者许行，自楚之滕，踵门而告文公曰： 远方之人闻君行仁政，愿受一廛而为氓。 
现代文：有位主张神农学说的人叫许行，他从楚国到滕国进见滕文公说： 我这个从远方来的人听说您施行仁政，希望能得到一个住所成为您的百姓。 
English: Xu Xing, a proponent of the Shennong theory, visited Tengwen Gong from Chu to Teng and said: I, a person from afar, heard that you practice benevolent government and hope to get a residence to become your people.

古文：文公与之处，其徒数十人，皆衣褐，捆屦、织席以为食。
现代文：滕文公给了他住处。许行的门徒有几十个人，都穿着粗麻衣服，靠打草鞋织席子谋生。
English: Prince Tengwen gave him a place to live. There were dozens of disciples of Xu Xing, all wearing coarse linen clothes and making a living by weaving mats with straw sandals.

古文：陈良之徒陈相与其弟辛，负耒耜而自宋之滕，曰： 闻君行圣人之政，是亦圣人也，愿为圣人氓。 
现代文：陈良的门徒陈相，和他弟弟陈辛，背着农具从宋国来到滕国，也进见对滕文公说： 听说您实行圣人的政治主张，这也算是圣人了，我们愿意做圣人的百姓。 
English: Chen Liang's disciple, Chen Xiang, and his brother, Chen Xin, came to Tengguo from Song with farm tools on their backs. They also said to Tengwen, "I heard that you are carrying out the political ideas of a saint. That makes you a saint. We are willing to be the people of a saint."

古文：陈相见许行而大悦，尽弃其学而学焉。
现代文：陈相见到许行后非常高兴，完全抛弃了自己以前所学的而改学许行的学说。
English: Chen Xiang was very happy to see Xu Xing, and completely abandoned the doctrine he had previously learned and changed it to Xu Xing.

古文：陈相见孟子，道许行之言曰： 滕君，则诚贤君也；虽然，未闻道也。
现代文：陈相有一天去拜访孟子，转述许行的话说： 滕君的确是个贤明的君主；虽然如此，他还不知道治国的道理。
English: One day, Chen Xiang went to visit Mencius and, paraphrasing Xu Xingyun, said: "Teng Jun is indeed a wise monarch; nevertheless, he still does not know the principle of governing the country.

古文：贤者与民并耕而食，饔飧而治。
现代文：贤人治国应该和老百姓一起耕种而食，一面做饭，一面治理天下。
English: Wise men and women who govern the country should cultivate and eat together with the common people. While cooking, they should govern the world.

古文：今也滕有仓廪府库，则是厉民而以自养也，恶得贤？ 
现代文：现在滕国却有储藏粮食的仓库，存放财物的仓库，这是损害老百姓来奉养自己，怎么能算得上贤明呢？ 
English: Now Teng Guo has warehouses for storing grain, warehouses for storing property, which is to the detriment of the people to support themselves, how can it be considered wise?

古文：孟子曰： 许子必种粟而后食乎？ 
现代文：孟子说： 许子一定要自己种庄稼才吃吗？ 
English: Mencius said, "Does Xu Zi have to grow his own crops before he can eat?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：陈相回答说： 对。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 许子必织布而后衣乎？ 
现代文： 许先生一定要自己织布然后才穿衣吗？ 
English: Does Mr. Xu have to weave his own cloth before he can get dressed?

古文：曰： 否。许子衣褐。 
现代文：回答说： 不，许先生只穿粗麻衣服。 
English: He replied, "No, Mr. Xu only wears coarse linen clothes.

古文： 许子冠乎？ 
现代文： 许先生戴帽子吗？ 回答说： 戴。 
English: Does Mr. Xu wear a hat? He replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 冠。 
现代文：孟子问： 戴什么帽子呢？ 
English: Mencius asked: What kind of hat should he wear?

古文：曰： 奚冠？ 
现代文：回答说： 戴白帽子。 
English: "Wear a white hat," he replied.

古文：曰： 冠素。 
现代文：孟子问： 是他自己织的吗？ 
English: Mencius asked: Did he weave it himself?

古文：曰： 自织之与？ 
现代文：回答说： 不是，是用粮食换来的。 
English: And he said, Nay; but I have bought it for money.

古文：曰： 许子奚为不自织？ 
现代文：孟子问： 许先生为什么不自己织呢？ 
English: Mencius asked: Why didn't Mr. Xu weave the rope himself?

古文：曰： 害于耕。 
现代文：回答说： 因为怕耽误耕种。 
English: "For fear of delaying the planting," he replied.

古文：曰： 许子以釜甑爨，以铁耕乎？ 
现代文：孟子问： 许先生用锅和甄子做饭，用铁器耕种吗？ 回答说： 是的。 
English: Mencius asked, "Does Mr. Xu cook with a pot and a ladle, and cultivate with iron tools?" He answered, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文： 他自己做的吗？ 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 自为之与？ 
现代文：回答说： 不是，是用粮食换的。 
English: And he said, No; but for money.

古文：曰： 否。以粟易之。 
现代文：孟子于是说： 农夫用粮食换取锅、瓶和农具，不能说是损害了瓦匠铁匠。
English: Mencius then said: A farmer who exchanges grain for pots, bottles, and farm implements cannot be said to have harmed a bricklayer or a blacksmith.

古文： 以粟易械器者，不为厉陶冶；陶冶亦以其械器易粟者，岂为厉农夫哉？
现代文：那么，瓦匠和铁匠用锅、瓶和农具换取粮食，难道能说是损害农夫吗？
English: So, can it be said that bricklayers and blacksmiths use pots, bottles and farm tools in exchange for grain, to the detriment of the farmer?

古文：且许子何不为陶冶。舍皆取诸其宫中而用之？
现代文：而且，许先生为什么不自己烧窑冶铁做成锅、甑和各种农具，什么东西都放在家里随时取用呢？
English: Moreover, why doesn't Mr. Xu make his own pots, pans and various agricultural tools in a smelting furnace? Everything is kept at home for use at any time.

古文：何为纷纷然与百工交易？
现代文：为什么要一件一件地去和各种工匠交换呢？
English: Why do you have to exchange one thing for another with various craftsmen?

古文：何许子之不惮烦？ 
现代文：为什么许先生这样不怕麻烦？ 
English: Why is Mr. Xu so unafraid of trouble?

古文：曰： 百工之事，固不可耕且为也。 
现代文：陈相回答说： 各种工匠的活本来就不可能一边种地一边兼做的。 
English: Chen Xiang replied, "The work of various craftsmen cannot be done while cultivating land.

古文： 然则治天下独可耕且为与？
现代文： 那么治理国家就偏偏可以一边耕种一边治理了吗？
English: So is it possible to govern the country while cultivating the land?

古文：有大人之事，有小人之事。
现代文：官吏有官吏的事，百姓有百姓的事。
English: Officials have official business, the people have people's business.

古文：且一人之身，而百工之所为备。如必自为而后用之，是率天下而路也。
现代文：况且，每一个人所需要的生活资料都要靠各种工匠的产品才能齐备，如果都一定要自己亲手做成才能使用，那就是率领天下的人疲于奔命。
English: Moreover, the necessities of life that everyone needs can only be provided by the products of various craftsmen. If everyone has to make their own products before they can use them, it means that the leaders of the world are running for their lives.

古文：故曰：或劳心，或劳力；劳心者治人，劳力者治于人；治于人者食人，治人者食于人：天下之通义也。
现代文：所以说：有的人脑力劳动，有的人体力劳动；脑力劳动者统治人，体力劳动者被人统治；被统治者养活别人，统治者靠别人养活：这是通行天下的原则。
English: Therefore, it is said: Some people do mental work, and some people do manual work; mental workers rule people, and manual workers are ruled by people; the ruled feed others, and the rulers are fed by others: this is a universal principle.

古文：当尧之时，天下犹未平，洪水横流，泛滥于天下。草木畅茂，禽兽繁殖，五谷不登，禽兽偪人。
现代文：尧在位的时候，天下还不太平，洪水成灾，四处泛滥；草木生长茂盛，禽兽大量繁殖，谷物没有收成，飞禽走兽危害人类，到处都是它们的踪迹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou, the world was not yet peaceful. Floods were disastrous and flooded everywhere. Grasses and trees grew luxuriantly, animals bred in large numbers, there was no harvest of grain, and birds and beasts harmed human beings, and their traces were everywhere.

古文：兽蹄鸟迹之道，交于中国。
现代文：尧对此非常的担忧，选拔舜出来全面治理。
English: We are very concerned about this, and we have chosen to come out for comprehensive governance.

古文：尧独忧之，举舜而敷治焉。舜使益掌火，益烈山泽而焚之，禽兽逃匿。
现代文：舜派益掌管用火烧，益便用烈火焚烧山野沼泽的草木，飞禽走兽于是四散躲避。
English: Gong sent Yi to supervise the use of fire, and Yi then used the blaze to burn the grasses and trees of the mountains and marshes. The birds and beasts then scattered to avoid it.

古文：禹疏九河，瀹济漯，而注诸海；决汝汉，排淮泗，而注之江，然后中国可得而食也。
现代文：大禹疏通九条河道，治理济水、源水，引流入海；挖掘汝水、汉水，疏通淮水、泅水，引流进入长江。这样中原地区才可以进行农业耕种。
English: Dayu dredged nine river channels, treated water and source water, and diverted it to the sea; excavated water and Chinese water, dredged water and brackish water, and diverted it into the Yangtze River. Only in this way could agricultural farming be carried out in the Central Plains.

古文：当是时也，禹八年于外，三过其门而不入，虽欲耕，得乎？
现代文：那个时候禹在外八年，三次经过自己的家门前都没有进去，即便他想亲自种地，能做到吗？
English: At that time, Yu had been away for eight years. He had passed in front of his house three times, but never went inside. Even if he wanted to farm the land himself, could he do it?

古文：后稷教民稼穑。树艺五谷，五谷熟而民人育。
现代文：后稷教老百姓耕种收获，栽培谷物，谷物成熟了才能够养育百姓。
English: Later, he taught the common people to cultivate and harvest, to grow grain, and only when the grain was ripe could they raise the common people.

古文：人之有道也，饱食、暖衣、逸居而无教，则近于禽兽。
现代文：人之所以为人，吃饱了，穿暖了，居住得舒服了，如果没有教化，那就和禽兽差不多。
English: The reason why people are human beings is that they are well fed, warm, and live comfortably. If they are not educated, they are similar to animals.

古文：圣人有忧之，使契为司徒，教以人伦：父子有亲，君臣有义，夫妇有别，长幼有序，朋友有信。
现代文：圣人又为此忧虑，便派契做掌管教育的司徒，教育人们懂得人与人之间相处的道德关系：父子之间有骨肉之亲，君臣之间要有道义，夫妻之间有内外之别，长幼之间要有尊卑次序，朋友之间要有诚信。
English: The saint was also worried about this, so he sent Ji to be a scholar in charge of education, to educate people to understand the moral relationship between people: there should be a flesh-and-blood relationship between father and son, there should be morality between monarchs and ministers, there should be internal and external differences between husband and wife, there should be a hierarchy between elders and children, and there should be integrity between friends.

古文：放勋曰： 劳之来之，匡之直之，辅之翼之，使自得之，又从而振德之。 
现代文：尧说道： 慰劳他们，安抚他们，开导他们，纠正他们，辅助他们，又随着救济他们，对他们施加恩惠。 
English: "Comfort them, soothe them, enlighten them, correct them, succor them, and bestow on them bounty in addition to their relief."

古文：圣人之忧民如此，而暇耕乎？
现代文：圣人这样为百姓思虑担忧，还有空余时间耕种吗？
English: Does the sage, who is so worried about the people, have any spare time for farming?

古文：尧以不得舜为己忧，舜以不得禹、皋陶为己忧。
现代文：尧把得不到舜这样的人作为自己的忧虑，舜把得不到禹和陶这样的人作为自己的忧虑。
English: He regarded not being able to get such a person as his own worries, and he regarded not being able to get such a person as Yu Hetao as his own worries.

古文：夫以百亩之不易为己忧者，农夫也。
现代文：那些把耕种不好田地作为自己忧虑的，是农夫。
English: Farmers are the ones who worry about their fields not being well cultivated.

古文：分人以财谓之惠，教人以善谓之忠，为天下得人者谓之仁。
现代文：把钱财分给别人叫做惠，把好的道理教给别人叫做忠，为天下发现人才叫做仁。
English: Giving money to others is called benefit, teaching good principles to others is called loyalty, and discovering talents for the world is called benevolence.

古文：是故以天下与人易，为天下得人难。
现代文：所以把天下让给人容易，为天下发现人才却很难。
English: Therefore, it is easy to give the world to people, but it is difficult to find talent for the world.

古文：孔子曰： 大哉尧之为君！
现代文：孔子说： 尧做天子真是伟大！
English: Confucius said: "It is truly great to be the son of Heaven!

古文：惟天为大，惟尧则之，荡荡乎民无能名焉！
现代文：只有天最伟大，只有尧能够效法天，他的圣德无边无际，老百姓找不到恰当的词语来赞美他！
English: Only He is the greatest, only He can imitate Him, His holiness is boundless, and the common people cannot find the right words to praise Him!

古文：君哉舜也！
现代文：舜也是了不得的天子！
English: is also an extraordinary child of God!

古文：巍巍乎有天下而不与焉！ 
现代文：虽然有了这样广阔的天下，自己却并不占有它！ 
English: Although there is such a vast world, he does not occupy it!

古文：尧舜之治天下，岂无所用其心哉？
现代文：尧和舜治理天下，难道不用心思吗？
English: Shouldn't we be concerned about peace and harmony in the governance of the world?

古文：亦不用于耕耳。
现代文：也不是用在农耕上。
English: Nor is it used in agriculture.

古文：吾闻用夏变夷者，未闻变于夷者也。
现代文：我只听说过用中原的一切来改变边远落后地区的，没有听说过用边远落后地区的一切来改变中原的。
English: I have only heard of using everything in the Central Plains to change the remote and backward areas, but I have not heard of using everything in the remote and backward areas to change the Central Plains.

古文：陈良，楚产也。悦周公、仲尼之道，北学于中国。
现代文：陈良本来是楚国的人，喜爱周公、孔子的学说，由南而北来到中原学习。
English: Chen Liang was originally from the State of Chu. He loved the teachings of Zhou Gong and Confucius, and came from the south to the north to study in the Central Plains.

古文：北方之学者，未能或之先也。
现代文：北方的学者还没有人能够超过他。
English: No scholar in the north has been able to surpass him.

古文：彼所谓豪杰之士也。
现代文：他可以称得上是豪杰之士了。
English: He deserves to be called a hero.

古文：子之兄弟事之数十年，师死而遂倍之。
现代文：你们兄弟跟随他学习几十年，他一死，你们就背叛了他！
English: You brothers studied with him for decades, and as soon as he died, you betrayed him!

古文：昔者孔子没，三年之外，门人治任将归，入揖于子贡，相向而哭，皆失声，然后归。
现代文：以前孔子死的时候，门徒们都为他守孝三年，三年以后，大家才收拾行李准备回家。临走的时候，都去向子贡行礼告别，相对而哭，泣不成声，然后才离开。
English: In the past, when Confucius died, his disciples were all filial to him for three years. After three years, they all packed their bags and prepared to go home. When they were about to leave, they all went to pay their respects to Zigong and said goodbye, and wept, weeping inconsolably, before leaving.

古文：子贡反，筑室于场，独居三年，然后归。
现代文：子贡又回到孔子的墓地重新筑屋，独自守墓三年，然后才离开。
English: Zigong returned to the Confucius cemetery to rebuild the house, and guarded the tomb alone for three years before leaving.

古文：他日，子夏、子张、子游以有若似圣人，欲以所事孔子事之，强曾子。
现代文：后来，子夏、子张、子游认为有若有点像孔子，便想用尊敬孔子的礼来尊敬他，他们希望曾子也同意。
English: Later, Zixia, Zizhang and Ziyou thought that if there was something like Confucius, they would like to respect him with the courtesy of respecting Confucius, and they hoped Zengzi would agree.

古文：曾子曰： 不可。江汉以濯之，秋阳以暴之，皜皜乎不可尚已。 
现代文：曾子说： 不可以就像曾经用江汉的水清洗过，又在秋天的太阳下曝晒过，洁白无暇。
English: Zeng Zi said, "It can't be as if it had been washed with water from all over the world and then exposed to the autumn sun, leaving it immaculate.

古文：今也南蛮鴃舌之人，非先王之道，子倍子之师而学之，亦异于曾子矣。
现代文：我们的老师是没有谁还能够相比的。 如今这个怪腔怪调的南方蛮干，说话诽谤先王的圣贤之道，你们却背叛自己的老师而向他学习，这和曾子的态度恰恰相反。
English: Our teacher was like no one else, and now, in contrast to your great-grandson's attitude, you are betraying your own teacher by learning from him, while this eccentric Southern ruffian is speaking and slandering the wise and saintly words of the former king.

古文：吾闻出于幽谷迁于乔木者，未闻下乔木而入于幽谷者。鲁颂曰： 戎狄是膺，荆舒是惩。 
现代文：我只听说过从幽暗的山沟飞出来迁往高大的树木的，从没听说过从高大的树木飞下来迁往幽暗的山沟的。《鲁颂》说： 攻击北方的戎狄，惩罚南方的荆舒。 
English: I have only heard of those who flew out of the dark ravines and migrated to the tall trees, but I have never heard of those who flew down from the tall trees and migrated to the dark ravines.

古文：周公方且膺之，子是之学，亦为不善变矣。 
现代文：周公尚且要攻击楚国这样的南方蛮干，你们却去向他学习，这简直是越变越坏了啊。 
English: Zhou Gong still wanted to attack the southern barbarians such as Chu, but you went to learn from him. This is simply getting worse and worse.

古文： 从许子之道，则市贾不贰，国中无伪。虽使五尺之童适市，莫之或欺。
现代文：陈相说： 如果听从许先生的学说，就可以使市场物价统一，人人没有欺诈，哪怕是让一个小孩子去市场，也不会被欺骗。
English: Chen Xiang said: If you follow Mr. Xu's theory, you can make the market price uniform, and everyone will not be cheated. Even if you let a small child go to the market, you will not be cheated.

古文：布帛长短同，则贾相若；麻缕丝絮轻重同，则贾相若；五谷多寡同，则贾相若；屦大小同，则贾相若。 
现代文：布匹丝绸的长短一样，价格也就一样；麻线丝绵的轻重一样，价格也就一样；各种谷物的多少一样，价格也就一样；鞋子的大小一样，价格也就一样。 
English: Cloth and silk of the same length have the same price; linen of the same weight has the same price; cereals of the same quantity have the same price; shoes of the same size have the same price.

古文：曰： 夫物之不齐，物之情也；或相倍蓰，或相什百，或相千万。
现代文：孟子说： 各种东西的质量和价格不一样，这是很自然的，有的相差一倍五倍，有的相差十倍百倍，有的甚至相差千倍万倍。
English: Mencius said: It is quite natural that the quality and price of all kinds of things are different. Some are twice five times different, some are ten times a hundred times different, and some are even a thousand times a million times different.

古文：子比而同之，是乱天下也。
现代文：您强行让它们一样，只是搞乱天下罢了。
English: If you force them to be the same, you will only mess up the world.

古文：巨屦小屦同贾，人岂为之哉？
现代文：一双好的鞋子和一双差的鞋子价钱一样，人们会同意吗？
English: Would people agree that a good pair of shoes costs the same as a bad pair of shoes?

古文：从许子之道，相率而为伪者也，恶能治国家？ 
现代文：听从许先生的学说，就是率领大家走向虚伪，这怎么能治理好国家呢？
English: To follow Mr. Hui's doctrine is to lead everyone to hypocrisy. How can a country be governed well?

