古文：起阏逢困敦闰月，尽屠维大荒落，凡五年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢困敦闰月，尽屠维大荒落，一共五年有奇。
English: It has been a strange five years, from the time of the earthquake to the time of the leap month, from the time of the massacre to the time of the great desolation.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下会昌四年闰月，壬戌，以中书侍郎、同平章事李绅同平章事，充淮南节度使。
现代文：唐武宗会昌四年闰七月，壬戌，唐武宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事李绅挂同平章事衔，出任淮南节度使。
English: In July of the fourth year of Tang Wuzong's reign, Tang Wuzong appointed Zhongshu Jirong, Tongping Zhangji Lishen to the title of Tongping Zhang, and served as Huainan Festival Envoy.

古文：李德裕奏： 镇州奏事官高迪密陈意见二事：其一，以为 贼中好为偷兵术，潜抽诸处兵聚于一处，官军多就迫逐，以致失利；经一两月，又偷兵诣他处。
现代文：宰相李德裕上奏唐武宗： 镇州派遣来朝廷的奏事官高迪，秘密地向朝廷陈述两条意见：第一， 泽潞叛贼喜好用偷兵术对付官军，他们暗中抽调诸处兵马，聚集于一处，官军往往就其聚兵之处攻击追逐，以致大都失利；经过一两个月之后，叛贼又偷偷地移兵聚于他处。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu reported to Tang Wuzong: Zhenzhou sent Gaudi, the reporting officer to the imperial court, to secretly present two opinions to the imperial court: First, the Zeyu rebels liked to use the tactic of stealing soldiers to deal with the official army. They secretly transferred soldiers and horses from various places and gathered in one place. The official army often attacked and chased the place where the soldiers were gathered, so that most of them lost. After a month or two, the rebels secretly moved the soldiers and gathered in another place.

古文：官军须知此情，自非来攻城栅，慎勿与战。
现代文：官军必须知道这些情况，如果不是贼众主动来攻掠城堡栅寨，就应谨慎，按兵不动，不与贼军接战。
English: The government army must be aware of these circumstances. If the bandits do not take the initiative to attack and plunder the castle, they should be cautious and not engage the bandits.

古文：彼淹留不过三日，须散归旧屯，如此数四空归，自然丧气。
现代文：贼军在聚屯处停留不会超过三天，就会分散回归其旧屯居地，这样往返到多次，不战而空归，自然要影响军心，士兵垂头丧气。
English: The bandit army will not stay in the concentration camp for more than three days, and will return to their former settlements in a dispersed manner. There will be many such trips back and forth, and they will return empty-handed without a fight. Naturally, this will affect the morale of the army, and the soldiers will lose heart.

古文：官军密遣谍者诇其抽兵之处，乘虚袭之，无不捷矣。 
现代文：官军则可秘密地派遣间谍，探知贼军调出兵马的地方，乘虚袭击，则没有不取胜告捷的。 
English: The government army can secretly send spies to detect the places where the bandits have sent soldiers and horses, and take advantage of the false attack, and there is no victory without victory.

古文：其二， 镇、魏屯兵虽多，终不能分贼势。
现代文：第二， 朝廷派遣的藩镇军队如镇州、魏州兵虽然屯驻很多，但最终不能分叛贼的军势。
English: Second, although there were many garrisons of the imperial court's dispatched troops from the provinces and towns, such as Zhenzhou and Weizhou, they were ultimately unable to divide the army of the traitors.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：下营不离故处，每三两月一深入，烧掠而去。
现代文：因为镇、魏诸藩军队扎营没有远离他们原先的驻扎地。每三两个月才派军深入敌境一次，而仅仅是大肆烧杀掠夺一番就匆匆离去。
English: Because the armies of Zhen and Wei did not camp far away from their original encampment, they only sent troops deep into the enemy territory once every three months or two, but only burned and plundered a lot and left in a hurry.

古文：贼但固守城栅，城外百姓，贼亦不惜。
现代文：叛贼只要固守其城栅寨，军队就不会受到什么损失，而对于城外百姓，叛贼当然不加顾惜。
English: As long as the traitors hold fast to their strongholds, the army will not suffer any losses. As for the people outside the city, the traitors, of course, will not spare them.

古文：宜令进营据其要害，以渐逼之。
现代文：朝廷应该命令镇、魏诸藩镇军队深入进兵占据要害之处扎营，逐渐进逼叛贼老巢。
English: The imperial court should order the troops of the town and the Wei Zhu Han town to go deep into the army, occupy the key places, camp, and gradually enter the traitors' old nest.

古文：若止如今日，贼中殊不以为惧。 
现代文：如果仅仅只是像今天的作法，叛贼当然不会感到畏惧。 
English: If it's just business as usual, of course the traitors won't be afraid.

古文：望诏诸将各使知之！ 
现代文：希望皇上将高迪的两条意见用诏书颁布各路讨贼将领，务使周知！ 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will use the edict to promulgate Gaudi's two opinions to all generals, so that they will be well known!

古文：刘稹腹心将高文端降，言贼中乏食，令妇人挼穗舂之以给军。
现代文：刘稹的心腹将领高文端向官军投降，说叛贼军营中缺乏粮食，以致于命令妇女们用手搓麦穗，再将麦粒舂碎，供军队食用。
English: Liu Ye's confidant, General Gao Wentuan, surrendered to the government army, saying that there was a lack of food in the rebel camp, so he ordered the women to pick the ears of wheat with their hands, and then chop up the wheat grains for the army to eat.

古文：德裕访文端破贼之策，文端以为： 官军今真攻泽州，恐多杀士卒，城未易得。
现代文：李德裕又访问高文端，求破贼的计策，高文端认为： 官军如果现在就直接进攻泽州，恐怕造成士卒大量伤亡，而未可轻易攻破城池。
English: Li Deyu also visited Gao Wentuan to solicit strategies for defeating the thieves. Gao Wentuan believed that if the government army directly attacked Zezhou now, it would probably cause a large number of casualties among the soldiers, and would not be able to easily break through the city.

古文：泽州兵约万五千人，贼常分兵太半，潜伏山谷，伺官军攻城疲弊，则四集救之，官军必失利。
现代文：泽州叛军约有兵一万五千人，叛贼经常分出一大半兵力，暗中埋伏于山谷之间，刺探得官军攻城未克，疲惫不堪之时，伏兵便从四周集合，回救城下，官军为此必遭失利。
English: The rebels of Zezhou had about fifteen thousand soldiers. The traitors often separated a large part of their forces and secretly lay in ambush between the valleys. When they were exhausted, they gathered the ambushed soldiers from all sides to rescue the city. The government army was doomed to defeat.

古文：今请令陈许军过乾河立寨，自寨城连延筑为夹城，环绕泽州，日遣大军布陈于外以扞救兵。贼见围城将合，必出大战；待其败北，然后乘势可取。 
现代文：如果朝廷今天能命令陈许的军队渡过乾河扎下营寨，自寨城连延到泽州，环绕泽州筑起两边立栅、中间留有通道的夹城，每天派遣大军于夹城外布阵，以抵御救兵，叛贼看到环绕泽州的夹城行将合围，必定要出城拼死决战；官军可待击败出城的贼军后，乘势将泽州城攻破。 
English: If the imperial court could today order Chen Xu's army to cross the Qianhe River and set up a camp, extend from Zhai City to Zhezhou, build a walled city around Zhezhou with gates on both sides and a passage left in the middle, and send a large army outside the walled city every day to resist the rescuers, the rebels would see that the walled city around Zhezhou would be encircled and would have to go out of the city to fight a decisive battle; the government army could wait to defeat the invading army and take advantage of the situation to break through Zhezhou City.

古文：德裕奏请诏示王宰。
现代文：李德裕上奏唐武宗，请求将高文端的建议诏告前线将领王宰。
English: Li Deyu appealed to Tang Wuzong, requesting that Gao Wenduan's suggestion be made known to the front-line general Wang Zai.

古文：文端又言： 固镇寨四崖悬绝，势不可攻。
现代文：高文端又说： 叛贼所据的固镇寨四面崖悬绝壁，其形势险要，不可攻取。
English: Gao Wenduan also said: Guzhenzhai, where the traitors are based, is surrounded by cliffs on all four sides. Its situation is precarious and cannot be captured.

古文：然寨中无水，皆饮涧水，在寨东南约一里许。
现代文：然而寨中没有水，军士都饮用涧水，这股涧水在固镇寨以东约一里路外。
English: However, there was no water in the village, and the sergeants were drinking salty water, which was about a mile east of the village.

古文：宜令王逢进兵逼之，绝其水道，不过三日，贼必弃寨遁去，官军即可追蹑。
现代文：应该命令王逢率官军进逼，断绝固镇寨贼军的水道，这样不过三天，贼军必定放弃固镇寨而逃走，官军即可跟踪追击。
English: Wang Feng should be ordered to lead the official army to push forward and cut off the waterway of the Guzhenzhai thief army, so that after three days, the thief army must abandon the Guzhenzhai and flee, and the official army can follow and pursue.

古文：前十五里至青龙寨，亦四崖悬绝，水在寨外，可以前法取也。
现代文：固镇寨前面十五里外可到青龙寨，也处于四崖悬绝的山上，水也在寨外，可以依照同样的方法攻取。
English: In front of Guzhenzhai, Qinglongzhai can be found fifteen miles away. It is also located on a mountain with four cliffs, and the water is also outside the village. It can be captured in the same way.

古文：其东十五里则沁州城。 
现代文：青龙寨以东十五里就是沁州城。 
English: Fifteen miles east of Qinglongzhai is Zhangzhou City.

古文：德裕奏请诏示王逢。
现代文：李德裕又奏请唐武宗将此策用诏书告示王逢。
English: Li Deyu also asked Tang Wuzong to use the imperial rescript to announce this plan to Wang Feng.

古文：文端又言： 都头王钊将万兵戍洺州，刘稹既族薛茂卿，又诛刑洺救援兵马使谈朝义兄弟三人，钊自是疑惧。
现代文：高文端又建议说： 叛军都头王钊率领士兵万人戍守州，贼首刘稹既已将薛茂卿灭族，又诛杀邢救援兵马使谈朝义兄弟三人，王钊于是深感疑惧。
English: Gao Wenduan also suggested, "The rebel army was led by the capital's leader, Wang Xi, who garrisoned the state with tens of thousands of soldiers. The leader of the bandits, Liu Xi, had already exterminated Xue Maoxing and killed the three brothers who came to the aid of the soldiers and horses, so Wang Xi was deeply suspicious.

古文：稹遣使召之，钊不肯入，士卒皆哗噪，钊必不为稹用。
现代文：刘稹派遣使者召王钊，王钊不肯入潞州城，士卒们也都喧哗噪骂，可知王钊必定不会为刘稹所用。
English: Liu Bei sent an envoy to summon Wang Hui, but Wang Hui refused to enter the city of Zhangzhou. The soldiers also shouted and cursed, knowing that Wang Hui would certainly not be used by Liu Bei.

古文：但钊及士卒家属皆在潞州，又士卒恐己降为官军所杀，招之必不肯来。
现代文：但王钊及所部士卒家属都在潞州，另外，士卒们恐怕自己投降后会被官军所杀，所以招谕他们，他们肯定不敢前来。
English: However, Wang Qi and the family members of the officers and men of the headquarters were in Zhangzhou. In addition, the officers were afraid that they would be killed by the government army after surrendering, so they invited them, and they certainly did not dare to come.

古文：惟有谕意于钊，使引兵入潞州取稹。事成之日，许除别道节度使，仍厚有赐与，庶几肯从。 
现代文：只有向王钊宣示上谕，使他引所部兵马入潞州攻取刘稹，事成之日，许诺任命他为别道节度使，并给予丰厚的赏赐，或许王钊肯听从。 
English: He only had to issue an edict to Wang Qi, ordering him to lead the troops and horses of the headquarters into Bozhou to capture Liu Qi. On the day of the achievement, he promised to appoint him as the emissary of the farewell festival and give him a rich reward. Perhaps Wang Qi would be willing to obey.

古文：德裕奏请诏何弘潜遣人谕以此意。
现代文：李德裕再奏告唐武宗，并请武宗诏告何弘敬，让何弘敬暗中派人向王钊告喻皇上的旨意。
English: Li Deyu again reported to Tang Wuzong, and asked Wuzong to report to He Hongjing, so that He Hongjing could secretly send someone to inform Wang Xi of the emperor's will.

古文：刘稹年少懦弱，押牙王协、宅内兵马使李士贵用事，专聚货财，府库充溢，而将士有功无赏，由是人心离怨。
现代文：刘稹年轻性情懦弱，其部将押牙王协、宅内兵马使李士贵居中用事掌权，二人专事聚敛财货，使府库财货充斥溢满，而部下将士却有功而得不到赏赐，于是人心离散怨恨。
English: Liu Bei was young and weak-willed, and his subordinates, including the commander of the Prince's Teeth Association and the soldiers and horses in the palace, made Li Shigui stay in the middle and take power. The two of them devoted themselves to collecting wealth and goods, so that the government treasury was overflowing with wealth and goods, while their subordinates, the soldiers, were not rewarded for their services, so the hearts of the people were divided and resentful.

古文：刘从谏妻裴氏，冕之支孙也，忧稹将败，其弟问典兵在山东，欲召之使掌军政。
现代文：刘从谏的妻子裴氏，是前宰相裴冕的旁支孙女，忧虑刘稹将遭败亡，她的弟弟裴问，率领军队在太行山以东戍守，裴氏想召裴问回来掌握昭义镇的军政。
English: Liu Conglu's wife, Pei, is the granddaughter of the former prime minister, Pei Guan. She is worried that Liu Conglu will be defeated. Her brother, Pei Quan, led the army to defend the east of Taihang Mountain. Pei wants to call Pei Quan back to take control of the military and political affairs of Shoyi Town.

古文：士贵恐问至夺己权，且泄其奸状，乃曰： 山东之事仰成于五舅，若召之，是无三州也。 
现代文：李士贵担心裴问到来后收夺自己的权柄，且使自己的奸状暴露，于是向刘稹进言说： 太行山以东的军政大事全仰仗于五舅裴问，如果将裴问召回，邢？磁三州之地将无法控制。 
English: Li Shigui was worried that Pei Qian would usurp his power after his arrival and expose his treachery, so he suggested to Liu Ye that: The military and political events east of Mount Taihang all depend on the Fifth Uncle Pei Qian. If Pei Qian is recalled, the Three Magnetic States will be beyond control.

古文：乃上。王协荐王钊为洺州都知兵马使。
现代文：由于李士贵从中作梗，所以召裴问回镇之事不再提了。
English: Since Li Shigui interfered, the matter of summoning Pei to return to the town was no longer mentioned.

古文：钊得众心，而多不遵使府约束，同列高元武、安玉言其有贰心。
现代文：昭义军府押牙王协推荐王钊为州都知兵马使；王钊很得部众的心，而其部众大都不尊从节度使府的约束，王钊的同僚将领高元武、安玉声言王钊有二心。
English: Wang Qi was recommended by the Shouyi Military Government's Wang Qi Association to be the provincial military governor; Wang Qi won the hearts of his subordinates, but most of his subordinates did not respect the restrictions of the military governor. Wang Qi's colleagues, generals Gao Yuanwu and An Yu, said that Wang Qi had two hearts.

古文：稹召之，钊辞以 到洺州未立少功，实所惭恨，乞留数月，然后诣府。 
现代文：刘稹召王钊，王钊推辞说： 到州来没有立下多少功劳，实在是惭愧自恨，乞求再留任州几个月，然后再回节度使府效劳。 
English: Liu Ye summoned Wang Ye, but Wang Ye declined, saying, "I didn't do much work when I came to the prefecture. I'm really ashamed and feel sorry for myself. I beg to stay in the prefecture for a few more months, and then return to the festival to serve the prefecture."

古文：许之，王协请税商人，每州遣军将一人主之，名为税商，实籍编户家赀，至于什器无所遗，皆估为绢匹，十分取其二，率高其估。
现代文：刘稹也只好准许。王协又请刘稹向商人收税，每州派遣军将一人主持收税事宜，名义上说是收税，实际上却是把所有百姓的财产都登记造册，以致于连家庭日用器具也一扫无遗，这些器具全用来估价折算成绢匹，按其价值十分收取其二，并动不动就将其价估高，多收税钱。
English: Wang Xie also asked Liu Xuan to collect taxes from merchants. Each state dispatched an army to preside over the collection of taxes, nominally collecting taxes, but in fact registering all the people's property, so that even household utensils were swept away. These utensils were all used to estimate the value and convert it into money. According to their value, they were fully charged twice, and they were constantly overvalued and overcharged tax money.

古文：民竭浮财及糗粮输之，不能充，皆璟璟不安。
现代文：百姓虽然竭尽浮财以及存粮交纳给军府，也无法充实军府的税收，以致群情激愤，上下不安。
English: Although the common people did their best to collect floating money and stored grain and pay it to the military government, they were unable to supplement the military government's tax revenue, resulting in the crowd's anger and unease.

古文：军将刘溪尤贪残，刘从谏弃不用。
现代文：昭义军将刘溪尤其贪暴残忍，以前刘从谏对他弃而不用。
English: The Shao Yi Army treated Liu Xi in a particularly corrupt and cruel manner. Previously, Liu Conglu had abandoned him.

古文：溪厚赂王协，协以刑州富商最多，命溪主之。
现代文：刘溪用丰厚的财物贿赂王协，王协见邢者富商最多，任命刘溪为邢州主税官。
English: Liu Xi bribed Wang Xie with rich property. Wang Xie saw the most wealthy businessmen and appointed Liu Xi as the chief tax officer of Zhangzhou.

古文：裴问所将兵号 夜飞 ，多富商子弟，溪至，悉拘其父兄。军士诉于问，问为之请，溪不许，以不逊语答之。
现代文：当时裴问所率领的兵将号称 夜飞 ，大多是富商子弟，刘溪到邢州主税，将他们的父兄全部拘捕；夜飞军士向裴问申诉，裴问为他们向刘溪求情，并请求释放士兵家属，刘溪不许，竟用极不礼貌的语言回答裴问。
English: At that time, the soldiers led by Pei Qian were known as Yufei. Most of them were the sons and daughters of wealthy merchants. Liu Xi went to Zhangzhou to collect taxes and arrested all of their fathers and brothers. Sergeant Yufei appealed to Pei Qian. Pei Qian pleaded with Liu Xi for them and requested the release of the soldiers' families. Liu Xi did not allow it, and answered Pei Qian with extremely impolite language.

古文：问怒，密与麾下谋杀溪归国，并告刺史崔嘏，嘏从之。
现代文：裴问勃然大怒，秘密与麾下谋划杀刘溪，归降朝廷，并告知邢州刺史崔嘏，崔嘏表示赞同。
English: Pei Qian flew into a rage. He secretly plotted with his subordinates to kill Liu Xi and surrender to the imperial court. He also informed Zhangzhou's governor, Cui Wei, and Cui Wei agreed.

古文：丙子，嘏、问闭城，斩城中大将四人，请降于王元逵。时高元武在党山，闻之，亦降。
现代文：丙子，崔嘏、裴问将邢州城关闭，斩城中四员大将，向成德节度使王元逵请降，当时高元武在党山，闻知此讯，也向官军投降。
English: Cun Zi, Cui Yao, and Pei Yan closed Zhangzhou City, cut off the four generals in the city, and asked Wang Yuanjun to surrender to Chengde Festival. At that time, Gao Yuanwu was in Dangshan, and when he heard this news, he also surrendered to the government army.

古文：先是使府赐洺州军士布，人一端，寻有帖以折冬赐。
现代文：先前昭义节度使府曾赐给州军士布匹，每人得一端，不久使府又下帖文，要以这一端布折充为冬赐。
English: Prior to the Shouyi Festival, the government had given cloth to the state sergeants, each of whom received one end. Soon after, the government also sent a postcard, asking for this end of cloth to be given as a gift for the winter.

古文：会税商军将至洺州，王钊因人不安，谓军士曰： 留后年少，政非己出。
现代文：恰值使府派遣的税商军将来到州，致使人心不安，王钊趁机向军士鼓动说： 留后刘稹年少，军政命令并非由刘稹所出。
English: Just at the time when the tax merchant army dispatched by the government came to the state, causing people's hearts to be uneasy, Wang Yao took the opportunity to encourage the sergeant and said: After Liu Yao was young, military and political orders were not issued by Liu Yao.

古文：今仓库充实，足支十年，岂可不少散之以慰劳苦之士！
现代文：今军府仓库充实，足可支付十年的用度，岂可以不稍微散出一些财物，用以慰劳辛苦备至的士兵！
English: Now that the War Office warehouses are full, enough to pay for ten years of use, how can we not slightly scatter some property to comfort the soldiers who have worked hard to prepare!

古文：使贴不可用也。 
现代文：节度使府的使帖我们不能从命。 
English: We can't do what we're told.

古文：乃擅开仓库，给士卒人绢一匹，谷十二石，士卒大喜。
现代文：于是擅自打开仓库，分给士卒每人绢一匹，谷十二石，士卒皆大为欢喜。
English: As a result, he opened the warehouse without authorization and distributed one mule and twelve stones to each of the soldiers. The soldiers were overjoyed.

古文：钊遂闭城请降于何弘敬。
现代文：王钊趁势关闭州城门，请降于魏博节度使何弘敬。
English: Wang Hui took advantage of the situation to close the state gate, please descend to the Wei Bo Festival to make He Hongjing.

古文：安玉在磁州，闻二州降，亦降于弘敬。
现代文：安玉在滋州，闻知邢州、州都已投降，也以磁州请降于何弘敬。
English: In Shizhou, AnYu, Wenshi and Shanzhou have surrendered, and they have also asked Ho HongKei to surrender to the magnetic state.

古文：尧山都知失马使魏元谈等降于王元逵，元逵以其久不下，皆杀之。
现代文：尧山都知兵马使魏元谈等也降于成德节度使王元逵，王元逵对魏元谈等人据守尧山久攻不克，于是，将他们全都杀掉。
English: The soldiers and horses of Lushan all knew that the Wei Yuan Dan and others were also reduced to the Chengde Festival, so Wang Yuanzhang, Wang Yuanzhang attacked the Wei Yuan Dan and others who had been guarding Lushan for a long time, and then killed them all.

古文：八月，辛卯，镇、魏奏邢、洺、磁三州降，宰相入贺。
现代文：八月，辛卯，镇州、魏州藩镇使府向朝廷上奏，称邢？磁三州皆已投降，宰相们入朝向唐武宗庆贺。
English: In August, Xinwu, Zhenzhou and Weizhou envoys reported to the imperial court that all three states had surrendered, and the prime ministers went to the imperial court to congratulate the Tang Wusong.

古文：李德裕曰： 昭义根本尽在山东，三州降，则上党不日有变矣。 
现代文：李德裕对唐武宗说： 昭义镇的根本尽在太行山以东，邢？磁三州归降朝廷后，上党肯定在不久之内会有变故。 
English: Li Deyu said to Tang Wuzong: The foundation of Zhaoyi Town is east of Taihang Mountain. After the three magnetic prefectures were returned to the imperial court, there will definitely be a change in the upper party in the near future.

古文：上曰： 郭谊必枭刘稹以自赎。 
现代文：唐武宗说： 郭谊必定会斩下刘稹的首级，挂在竹杆上，归降朝廷以赎自己的罪。 
English: Tang Wuzong said: Guo Yi will surely cut off Liu Ye's head, hang it on a bamboo pole, and surrender to the imperial court to atone for his sins.

古文：德裕曰： 诚如圣料。 
现代文：李德裕回答说： 实际情况必定会如皇上所预料的那样。 
English: Li Deyu replied: The actual situation will certainly be as the emperor expected.

古文：上曰： 于今所宜先处者何事？ 
现代文：唐武宗说： 那么，现在首先应该处理什么事呢？ 
English: Tang Wuzong said: So, what should we deal with first?

古文：德裕请以给事中卢弘止为三州留后，曰： 万一镇、魏请占三州，朝廷难于可否。 
现代文：李德裕请求以卢弘止为邢？磁三州留后，说： 万一镇、魏藩镇请求占有三州，朝廷将难于表态。 
English: After Li Deyu requested that Lu Hongzhi be appointed as the magistrate of the three states, he said: In the unlikely event that the town and Wei Han town request to occupy the three states, the imperial court will find it difficult to make a statement.

古文：上从之。
现代文：唐武宗同意了李德裕的请求。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：诏山南东道兼昭义节度使卢钧乘驿赴镇。
现代文：颁下诏书任命山南东道兼昭义节度使卢钧乘驿马赶赴镇治。
English: An imperial edict was issued, appointing Shannan as the host and Shao Yi as the regent, so that Lu Yao rushed to the town to administer justice on horseback.

古文：潞人闻三州降，大惧。
现代文：潞州人听说邢？磁三州降唐，大为恐惧。
English: When the people of Zhangzhou heard that the three magnetic states had fallen to Tang, they were very afraid.

古文：郭谊、王协谋杀刘稹以自赎，稹再从兄中军使匡周兼押牙，谊患之，言于稹曰： 十三郎在牙院，诸将皆莫敢言事，恐为十三郎所疑而获罪，以此失山东。
现代文：郭谊、王协密谋杀刘稹以向朝廷赎罪；刘稹的远房堂兄中军使刘匡周兼任押牙，郭谊对他有顾虑，于是对刘稹说： 由于十三郎刘匡周在牙院，诸位将领都不敢说话言事，恐怕为十三郎猜疑而获罪，正因如此，我们才失去了太行山以东三个州。
English: Guo Jiyi and Wang Xiyi conspired to murder Liu Ye in order to atone to the imperial court; Liu Ye's distant cousin, the Chinese military envoy Liu Kuang Zhou, also served as a dental officer. Guo Jiyi had misgivings about him, so he said to Liu Ye: Since the Thirteenth Brother Liu Kuang Zhou is in the dental institute, all generals are afraid to say anything. I am afraid that they will be guilty of suspicion of the Thirteenth Brother. That is why we lost the three states east of Taihang Mountain.

古文：今诚得十三郎不入，则诸将始敢尽言，采于众人，必获长策。 
现代文：今天如果使十三郎不入牙院，诸位将领才敢于尽其所言，您如果听计于众人，必定能获得万全长策。 
English: Today, if you keep Juzaburo out of the dental clinic, your generals will dare to do what they say. If you listen to everyone, you will surely be able to get the best long-term solution.

古文：稹召匡周谕之，使称疾不入。
现代文：刘稹听后召刘匡周晓以道理，让刘匡周宣称有疾病而不入牙院。
English: After listening to Liu Wei, Liu Kuang called Zhou Xiao to reason, and let Liu Kuang Zhou declare that he had a disease and not enter the dental clinic.

古文：匡周怒曰： 我在院中，故诸将不敢有异图；我出院，家必灭矣！ 
现代文：刘匡周勃然大怒说： 正由于我在牙院中，诸将领才不敢有异图；我若出牙院，刘家必遭破天！ 
English: Liu Kuang Zhou flew into a rage and said, "It is precisely because I am in the dental hospital that the generals dare not have a different plan; if I leave the dental hospital, Liu's family will be destroyed!

古文：稹固请之，匡周不得已，弹指而出。
现代文：刘稹还是坚持要刘匡周出牙院，刘匡周不得已，又气又恨，只得即刻走出了牙院。
English: Liu Wei still insisted that Liu Kuang Zhou leave the dental clinic. Liu Kuang Zhou had no choice but to walk out of the dental clinic in anger and hatred.

古文：谊令稹所亲董可武说稹曰： 山东之叛，事由五舅，城中人人谁敢相保！
现代文：郭谊又指使刘稹所信任的董可武游说刘稹说： 太行山以东三州的叛变，事由您的五舅裴问发起，现在上党城中人谁敢保护您！
English: Guo Yiyi also instructed Liu Bei's trusted Dong Kewu to lobby Liu Bei, saying: "The mutiny in the three states east of Mount Taihang was initiated by your fifth uncle Pei Qian. Who in the upper party city would dare to protect you now?"

古文：留后今欲何如？ 
现代文：您今天想怎么办？ 
English: What do you want to do today?

古文：稹曰： 今城中尚有五万人，且当闭门坚守耳。 
现代文：刘稹回答说： 目前上党城中尚有五万人，应当紧闭城门坚守吧！ 
English: Liu Wei replied: At present, there are still fifty thousand people in the upper party city, so we should keep the city gate tightly closed.

古文：可武曰： 非良策也。留后不若束身归朝，如张元益，不失作刺史。
现代文：董可武说： 这不是良策，留后您不如将自己捆绑起来归降朝廷，如文宗时张元益那样，还不失作一个刺史。
English: Dong Kewu said, "This is not a good strategy. If you stay, you might as well tie yourself up and surrender to the imperial court, just like Zhang Yuan-yi did during the reign of Emperor Wenzong. It would not be a bad idea to make history."

古文：且以郭谊为留后，俟得节之日，徐奉太夫人及室家金帛归之东都，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：应暂让郭谊充任留后，待得到旌节的时候，从容不迫地奉太夫人以及家室财产归居东都洛阳，不是也很好吗？ 
English: Isn't it a good idea to let Guo Yicheng stay in office for the time being, and when the Spring Festival comes, he should calmly return his wife and family property to Luoyang, the eastern capital?

古文：稹曰： 谊安肯如是？ 
现代文：刘稹说： 郭谊怎么肯这么做呢？ 
English: Liu Wei said: How could Guo Yi do this?

古文：可武曰： 可武已与之重誓，必不负也。 
现代文：董可武说： 我已与郭谊立下重誓，必定不会背负誓约的。 
English: Dong Kewu said, "I have made a solemn oath with Guo Yi, and I will not go back on my oath."

古文：及引谊入。
现代文：于是引郭谊入见刘稹。
English: As a result, Liu Yao was summoned to the gulag.

古文：稹与之密约既定，乃白其母。母曰： 归朝诚为佳事，但恨已晚。
现代文：刘稹与郭谊密谋降唐事宜，密约既定，然后告诉母亲裴氏，裴氏说： 归降朝廷当然是一件好事，只恨已经太晚。
English: Liu Bei and Guo Yi conspired to bring down the Tang Dynasty. A secret agreement was made, and then they told their mother Pei. Pei said, "Of course, it's a good thing to surrender to the imperial court, but it's too late now.

古文：吾有弟不能保，安能保郭谊！
现代文：我弟裴问尚不忠于你，又如何能保证郭谊不背负于你呢！
English: My brother Pei asked, "If I am not loyal to you, how can I ensure that Guo Jiyi is not burdened by you?"

古文：汝自图之！ 
现代文：请您自己再三考虑吧！ 
English: Please think about it for yourself!

古文：稹乃素服出门，以母命署谊都知兵马使。
现代文：刘稹不加思索，穿着素服出使府牙门，以母亲裴氏之命任郭谊为都知兵马使。
English: Without a second thought, Liu Bei sent an envoy to the imperial palace in plain clothes, appointing Guo Jiali as the envoy to the capital on the orders of his mother, Pei.

古文：王协已戒诸将列于外厅，谊拜谢稹已，出见诸将，稹治装于内厅。
现代文：这时王协已经告诫诸将领，于使府外庭站立排列，郭谊拜谢刘稹礼毕后，出使府门接见诸位将领，刘稹则于内厅整理行装。
English: At this time, Wang Xie had already admonished the generals to stand in a row in the outer courtyard of the palace. After Guo Jiyi bowed to Liu Bei, he sent an envoy to the palace gate to meet the generals, while Liu Bei was in the inner hall sorting and packing.

古文：李士贵闻之，帅后院兵数千攻谊。
现代文：李士贵听说事变，率领后院兵数千人攻击郭谊。
English: When Li Shigui heard of the incident, he led thousands of soldiers to attack Guo Xiyi.

古文：谊叱之曰： 何不自取赏物，乃欲与李士贵同死乎！ 
现代文：郭谊向后院兵大喊说： 你们为何不各自求取赏物，而想与李士贵同死吗！ 
English: Guo Yiyi shouted to the soldiers at the back of the courtyard: "Why don't you each seek your own reward, but do you want to die with Li Shigui?"

古文：军士乃退，共杀士贵。
现代文：军士听后纷纷后退，共同将李士贵杀死。
English: After hearing this, the sergeants retreated one after another and killed Li Shigui together.

古文：谊易置将吏，部署军士，一夕俱定。
现代文：郭谊改换使府将吏，安插自己的亲信，重新部署军士，一个晚上就全部准备就绪。
English: Guo Yiyi changed the envoy officers, installed his own cronies, redeployed the sergeants, and everything was ready in one night.

古文：明日，使董可武入谒稹曰： 请议公事。 
现代文：次日，郭谊又指使董可武入室谒见刘稹，说： 郭公请您商讨公事。 
English: The next day, Guo Yiyi also instructed Dong Kewu to enter the room and see Liu Ye, saying: Guo Gong asked you to discuss business.

古文：稹曰： 何不言之！ 
现代文：刘稹说： 为何不到此对我讲？ 
English: Liu Wei said: Why didn't you tell me about this?

古文：可武曰： 恐惊太夫人。 
现代文：董可武说： 恐怕惊动了太夫人。 
English: Dong Kewu said: I'm afraid I've alarmed my wife.

古文：乃引稹步出牙门，至北宅，置酒作乐。
现代文：于是引刘稹步行出使府牙门，来到使府之北的别宅，摆设酒宴作乐痛饮。
English: Therefore, Liu Ye was led out of the embassy gate on foot and came to a villa north of the embassy, where he held a wine banquet and drank heavily.

古文：酒酣，乃言： 今日之事欲全太尉一家，须留后自图去就，则朝廷必垂矜闵。 
现代文：当喝得痛快之时，董可武对刘稹说： 今天的事是想保全您祖父太尉刘悟传下的一家人，但您必须自己决定去留，这样朝廷才会同情和照顾您的家属。 
English: When he was drunk, Dong Kewu said to Liu Jun: Today's matter is to preserve the family that was passed down from your grandfather, Lieutenant Liu Wu, but you must decide to stay, so that the court will sympathize and take care of your family members.

古文：稹曰： 如所言，稹之心也。 
现代文：刘稹回答说： 如您所说，我心里也这么想！ 
English: Liu Wei replied: As you said, I also think so in my heart!

古文：可武遂前执其手，崔率度自后斩之，因收稹宗族，匡周以下至襁褓中子皆杀之。
现代文：于是董可武上前抓住刘稹的手，崔玄度自后面将刘稹斩首。接着，收捕刘稹宗族家人，刘匡周以下以至襁褓之中的婴儿全部杀死。
English: As a result, Dong Kewu stepped forward and grabbed Liu Yao's hand, and Cui Xandu beheaded Liu Yao from behind. Next, Liu Yao's family members were arrested, and all the babies from Liu Kuang Zhou down to the middle of the crotch were killed.

古文：又杀刘从谏父子所厚善者张谷、陈扬庭、李仲京、郭台、王羽、韩茂章、茂实、王渥、贾庠等凡十二家，并其子侄甥婿无遗。
现代文：又杀死原刘从谏父子所信任善待的张谷、陈扬庭、李仲京、郭台、王羽、韩茂章、韩茂实、王渥、贾庠等总共十二家，并株连他们的子侄、外甥、女婿等，无一人能幸存。
English: They also killed Zhang Gu, Chen Yangting, Li Zhongjing, Guotai, Wang Yu, Han Maozhang, Han Shaoshi, Wang Wou, Jia Yao, and a total of twelve families, including their nephews, nieces, and sons-in-law, who had been trusted and treated kindly by the original Liu Congjun and his son. None of them survived.

古文：仲京，训之兄；台，行馀之子。羽，涯之从孙；茂章、茂实，约之子；渥，璠之子。庠，餗之子也。
现代文：李仲京是李训的兄长；郭台为郭行余的儿子；王羽是王涯的族孙；韩茂章、韩茂实兄弟皆为韩约的儿子；王渥是王的儿子；贾庠为贾的儿子。
English: Li Zhongjing was the elder brother of Li Xun; Guo Tai was the son of Guo Xingyu; Wang Yu was the grandchild of Wang Ya; Han Maozhang and Han Maosi were the sons of Han Yu; Wang Wo was the son of Wang; Jia Xi was the son of Jia.

古文：甘露之乱，仲京等亡归从谏，从谏抚养之。
现代文：唐文宗时甘露之变，李仲京等人逃亡投奔刘从谏，得到刘从谏的保护和抚养。
English: When Tang Wenzong's luck changed, Li Zhongjing and others fled to Liu Conglu and received protection and support from Liu Conglu.

古文：凡军中有小嫌者，谊日有所诛，流血成泥。
现代文：这时郭谊总揽昭义军政大权，凡军中对他稍有嫌隙的人，郭谊也将其诛杀，以致每天都要杀人，血流在地上碾成了血泥。
English: At this time, General Guo Jiyi seized military and political power from Zhaoyi, and anyone in the army who had a slight grudge against him, Guo Jiyi also killed them, so that they had to kill people every day, and the blood flow was crushed into blood on the ground.

古文：乃函稹首，遣使奉表及书，降于王宰。
现代文：大局稳定后，郭谊将刘稹的首级封装在一个盒子里，派遣使者带着表文和书札，向王宰投降。
English: After the overall situation stabilized, Guo Yi sealed Liu Ye's head in a box and sent an envoy with a form letter and a bookplate to surrender to Wang Zai.

古文：首过泽州，刘公直举营恸哭，亦降于宰。
现代文：刘稹的首级经过泽州，刘公直及其营垒的将士痛哭失声，也就一同投降王宰。
English: When Liu Xuan's head passed through Zezhou, Liu Gongzhi and his soldiers wept bitterly and lost their voices, and together they surrendered to Wang Zai.

古文：乙未，宰以状闻。
现代文：乙未，王宰将情况写成状奏告朝廷。
English: Soon after, Wang Zai reported the situation to the imperial court in writing.

古文：丙申，宰相入贺。
现代文：丙申，宰相们入朝向唐武宗祝贺。
English: According to him, the prime ministers came to congratulate Tang Wuzong.

古文：李德裕奏： 今不须复置邢、洺、磁留后，但遣卢弘止宣慰三州及成德、魏博两道。 
现代文：李德裕奏言： 如今不需要再设置邢？磁留后，只须派遣卢弘止去宣慰这三者以及成德、魏博两道。 
English: Li Deyu's speech: Now, there is no need to set up the magnetic confinement, and it is only necessary to send Lu Hongzhi to comfort the three parties as well as Chengde and Weibo.

古文：上曰： 郭谊宜如何处之？ 
现代文：唐武宗问： 郭谊应当如何处置呢？ 
English: Tang Wuzong asked: How should Guo Jie be dealt with?

古文：德裕对曰： 刘稹騃孺子耳，阻兵拒命，皆谊为之谋主。及势孤力屈，又卖稹以求赏。
现代文：李德裕说： 刘稹是个傻小子罢了，其调兵遣将抗拒朝廷命令，都是郭谊为他出主意，作谋主；到刘稹势孤力单不能支持时，郭谊又出卖刘稹以求朝廷的赏赐。
English: Li Deyu said: Liu Bei is just a silly boy. He resisted the imperial court's order to dispatch troops. It was Guo Jie who gave him the idea and acted as the mastermind. When Liu Bei's strength could not be supported by himself, Guo Jie betrayed Liu Bei to seek the reward of the imperial court.

古文：此而不诛，何以惩恶！
现代文：对这种人不加以诛除，又如何能说是惩治罪魁祸首。
English: If this kind of person is not eliminated, how can it be said that the culprit is punished?

古文：宜及诸军在境，并谊等诛之！ 
现代文：应该趁诸征讨大军压境之时，将郭谊等人一并诛除！ 
English: We should take advantage of the time when the armies of conquest are pressing on the frontier to eradicate Guo Yi and others together!

古文：上曰： 朕意亦以为然。 
现代文：唐武宗说： 我也认为这样处置为好。 
English: Tang Wuzong said: I also think that this is a good way to deal with it.

古文：乃诏石雄将七千人入潞州，以应谣言。
现代文：于是下诏命石雄率领七千人进入潞州，以和先前的谣言相应。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered Shi Xiong to lead seven thousand people into Zhangzhou, which was consistent with the previous rumors.

古文：杜悰以馈运不给，谓谊等可赦，上熟视不应。
现代文：杜则以军饷运输困难，不能供给为由，声言郭谊等人可以赦免，唐武宗对其奏议不予理睬。
English: Du Ze, on the grounds that it was difficult to transport and unable to supply military pay, claimed that Guo You and others could be pardoned, but Tang Wuzong ignored his appeal.

古文：德裕曰： 今春泽潞未平，太原复扰，自非圣断坚定，二寇何由可平！
现代文：李德裕说： 今年春天泽潞未能平定，太原又出现骚扰，如果不是皇上圣明坚决果断，两处贼寇怎么可能平定！
English: Li Deyu said, "This spring, we failed to subdue the Zeyu, and there was harassment in Taiyuan. If it were not for the Emperor Shengming's resolute determination, how could the two bandits have been subdued?"

古文：外议以为若在先朝，赦之久矣。 
现代文：朝外议论认为如果是先朝皇上，像郭谊这样情况早就赦免了。 
English: It was said that if it had been the previous emperor, a case like Guo's would have been pardoned long ago.

古文：上曰： 卿不知文宗心地不与卿合，安能议乎！ 
现代文：唐武宗说： 你不知文宗心里和你意见不合，怎么能议到一处去呢！ 
English: Tang Wuzong said, "You don't know that Wenzong doesn't agree with you in his heart, how can you come to an agreement?"

古文：罢卢钧山南东道，专为昭义节度使。
现代文：于是，罢除卢钧山南东道节度使的职务，让他专任昭义节度使。
English: As a result, Lu Wei was removed from the post of the Southern Host Festival Envoy, and he was assigned to the post of the Shouyi Festival Envoy.

古文：戊戌，刘稹传首至京师。
现代文：戊戌，刘稹的首级被传送至京师长安。
English: The severed heads of Wu Zhen and Liu Zhen were sent to the capital Chang'an.

古文：诏： 昭义五州给复一年，军行所过州县免今年秋税。
现代文：唐武宗颁布诏书： 昭义镇所属泽、潞、邢？磁五州免除赋役一年，为攻打刘稹，官军行军所过的州县也免除今年秋季的税收。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict: the five prefectures of Zhe, Zheng, and Zheng belonging to Shoyi Town were exempted from military service for one year. In order to attack Liu Ye, the prefectures and counties through which the government army marched were also exempted from taxes this autumn.

古文：昭义自刘从谏以来，横增赋敛，悉从蠲免。
现代文：昭义镇所辖之境自刘从谏以来，所增加的无理赋税，全部予以免除。
English: The territory under the jurisdiction of Zhaoyi Town has been exempted from all unreasonable tax increases since Liu Conglu.

古文：所藉土团并纵遣归农。
现代文：抽调平民所组建的土团也全部解散回家务农。
English: All the earthenware groups formed by civilians were also disbanded and sent home to do farming.

古文：诸道将士有功者，等级加赏。 
现代文：诸道征讨刘稹的军队中有功的将士，按等级给予赏赐。 
English: The meritorious soldiers in Liu Bei's army, who were recruited from all walks of life, were rewarded according to their ranks.

古文：郭谊既杀刘稹，日望旌节，既久不闻问，乃曰： 必移它镇。 
现代文：郭谊既已杀死刘稹，日夜盼望着朝廷赐予留后的旗子和符节；却久没有消息，朝廷对此不闻也不问，为此郭谊自言自语： 必定要移往其它藩镇。 
English: Since Guo Yi had already killed Liu Bei, he had been looking forward day and night to receiving the remaining flags and symbols from the imperial court. However, there was no news for a long time, and the imperial court did not hear or ask about it. Therefore, Guo Yi said to himself: I must move to other towns.

古文：于是阅鞍马，治行装。及闻石雄将至，惧失色。
现代文：于是开始检阅自己的鞍马，整治自己的行装；待听说石雄将到来，大惊失色。
English: So he began to inspect his pommel horse and adjust his outfit; when he heard that Ishio was coming, he was shocked.

古文：雄至，谊等参贺毕，敕使张仲清曰： 郭都知告身来日当至，诸高班告身在此，晚牙来受之！ 
现代文：石雄赶到，郭谊等人参贺既毕，显示皇帝诏书的敕者张仲清说： 都知兵马使郭谊的委任状过几天就会到来，其他诸将领的委任状在我这里，晚上牙院参拜时来受命！ 
English: Shi Xiong arrived, Guo Yi and others had finished their congratulations, and Zhang Zhongqing, the person who showed the emperor's edict, said: "We all know that the soldiers and horses will send Guo Yi's letter of appointment in a few days, and the other generals' letters of appointment are here with me. In the evening, when you visit the dental clinic, come and receive your orders!

古文：乃以河中兵环球场，晚牙，谊等至，唱名引入，凡诸将桀黠拒官军者，悉执送京师。
现代文：于是调河中镇兵马包围场。至晚牙院参拜时，郭谊等人纷纷赶到，张仲清点名将他们一个一个地引入场，凡是诸将领狡猾凶狠曾死命抗拒官军者，全都逮捕，囚送京师长安。
English: As a result, the encirclement of the soldiers and horses in the town of Hezhong was set up. At the end of the day, when visiting the Temple of the Tooth Relic, Guo Yi and others arrived one after another. Zhang Zhongqing called their names and led them one by one to the site. All the cunning and ferocious generals who had resisted the government army with their lives were arrested and sent to the capital Chang'an.

古文：加何弘敬同平章事。
现代文：唐武宗又加何弘敬为同平章事衔。
English: Tang Wusong also added He Hongjing to the title of Tongping chapter.

古文：丁未，诏发刘从谏尸，暴于潞州市三日，石雄取其尸置球场斩坐刂之。
现代文：丁未，武宗下诏命令掘刘从谏墓，将刘从谏尸首暴露于潞州街市三天；石雄又取刘从谏尸放置于场斩杀并剁成碎块。
English: Ding Wei, Wu Zong issued an order to dig Liu Congluo's grave and expose Liu Congluo's corpse to Luzhou Street Market for three days; Shi Xiong also took Liu Congluo's corpse and cut it into pieces.

古文：戊申，加李德裕太尉、赵国公，德裕固辞。
现代文：戊申，唐武宗加封李德裕为太尉、赵国公，李德裕坚决推辞。
English: Wushin, Tang Wuzong added Li Deyu as the first lieutenant, Zhao Guogong, Li Deyu resolutely refused.

古文：上曰： 恨无官赏卿耳！
现代文：唐武宗说： 我只恨没有什么好官赏给你呀！
English: Tang Wuzong said, "I just hate that there are no good officials to reward you!"

古文：卿若不应得，朕必不与卿。 
现代文：你如果不该得，朕必定不会轻易赏给你的。 
English: If you don't deserve it, I won't give it to you easily.

古文：初，李德裕以 韩全义以来，将帅出征屡败，其弊有三：一者，诏令下军前者，日有三四，宰相多不预闻。
现代文：起初，李德裕认为： 自德宗派遣韩全义讨吴少诚失败以来，官军将帅出征屡遭失败，分析其弊约有三条：第一，皇帝的诏令下达于军队之前，有三四天时间，宰相大多不能预先知道。
English: At first, Li Deyu thought: Since Emperor Dezong sent Han Quan Yi to deal with the failure of Wu Shaocheng, the general of the imperial army has repeatedly failed to go to war. There are about three disadvantages to analyze: First, it takes three or four days for the emperor's edict to be issued to the army, and most prime ministers cannot know in advance.

古文：二者，监军各以意见指挥军事，将帅不得专进退。
现代文：第二，宦官监军每人都总是以自己的意见来指挥军事，领军将帅反而不能指挥军队的进退。
English: Second, each eunuch and overseer of the army always commands the military with his own opinion. On the other hand, the leading general cannot command the advance and retreat of the army.

古文：三者每军各有宦者为监使，悉选军中骁勇数百为牙队，其在陈战斗者，皆怯弱之士。每战，监使自有信旗，乘高立马，以牙队自卫，视军势小却，辄引旗先走，陈从而溃。 
现代文：第三，官军都各有宦官为监军使，他们都选择军队中骁勇精壮的士兵数百人组成牙队，而在阵上战斗的士兵，却都是一些怯懦体弱的人；每次战斗，监军使自己掌有指挥进退的信号旗，乘马登高处观察，而以牙队自卫，见军队稍有退却，便立即带着旗帜先逃走，其他军队跟着跑，阵势于是溃散。 
English: Thirdly, each of the royal armies had eunuchs as overseers. They all chose hundreds of brave and strong soldiers from the army to form the eagle team, but the soldiers who fought in the battle were all cowardly and weak people. In each battle, the overseers made themselves hold the signal flag for commanding advance and retreat, took the Madden Heights to observe, and defended themselves with the eagle team. When they saw the army retreating slightly, they immediately fled with the flag first, other armies followed, and the formation broke up.

古文：德裕乃与枢密使杨钦义、刘行深议，约敕监军不得预军政，每兵千人听监使取十人自卫，有功随例沾赏。
现代文：李德裕与枢密使杨钦义、刘行深商议，相约监军不得干预军政，军队每一千人听任监军选取十人自卫，有战功时监军照例可沾光得到奖赏。
English: Li Deyu and the envoys Yang Qin Yi and Liu Xing Sheng discussed and agreed that the supervising troops should not interfere in military affairs. For every thousand soldiers, the supervising troops should select ten soldiers for self-defense. If the supervising troops had distinguished themselves in the war, they could be rewarded as usual.

古文：二枢密皆以为然，白上行之。
现代文：两位枢密使都认为有道理，表示同意，于是奏告唐武宗下诏执行。
English: Both envoys thought it was reasonable and agreed, so they reported to Emperor Wu of Tang for execution.

古文：自御回鹘至泽潞罢兵，皆守此制。
现代文：自后抵御回鹘的骚扰以至泽潞镇的罢兵，都是遵守以上制度。
English: Since then, to resist the harassment of the Uighurs and even the strike of the Zeyu Town, they have all complied with the above system.

古文：自非中书进诏意，更无它诏自中出者。
现代文：在朝廷，如果不是中书门下宰相们向皇帝进言颁布诏书旨意，就不再有其他诏旨自宫禁中通过宦官颁发出来。
English: In the imperial court, if the prime ministers did not speak to the emperor to issue the imperial edict, there would be no other imperial edict issued from the palace through eunuchs.

古文：号令既简，将帅得以施其谋略，故所向有功。
现代文：号令既简明统一，将帅们也就得以施展他们的谋略，所以每战所向无敌，立有战功。
English: Since the orders were concise and unified, the generals were also able to carry out their strategies, so they were invincible in every battle and achieved great achievements.

古文：自用兵以来，河北三镇每遣使者至京师，李德裕常面谕之曰： 河朔兵力虽强，不能自立，须借朝廷官爵威命以安军情。
现代文：自对泽潞用兵以来，河北三大藩镇经常派遣使者到京师长安，李德裕常当面告谕他们说： 河朔藩镇的兵力虽然强大，但不能依恃兵力自立，必须凭藉朝廷委任官爵，凭借威命，才能安定军情。
English: Since the use of troops against Zehui, the three major towns of Hebei have often sent envoys to the capital Chang'an. Li Deyu often told them in person: Although the military strength of the town of Heshuo is strong, it cannot rely on the military strength to stand on its own. It must rely on the court to appoint officials and nobles, and rely on the prestige to stabilize the military situation.

古文：归语汝使：与其使大将邀宣慰敕使以求官爵，何如自奋忠义，立功立事，结知明主，使恩出朝廷，不亦荣乎！
现代文：回去告诉你们的节度使：与其派大将请求宣慰敕使代为邀求官爵，还不如自己奋发忠义，为朝廷立功做事，结好圣明的天子，让皇上知道你们的忠义，而使恩命由朝廷主动直接地赐予，不是更为光荣吗！
English: Go back to tell you the reason for the festival: Instead of sending a general to ask for condolences and an envoy to invite a peer, it would be more honorable to work hard to be loyal, to do good for the court, to marry the holy son of heaven, to let the emperor know your loyalty, and to have the grace order given directly by the court.

古文：且以耳目所及者言之，李载义在幽州，为国家尽忠平沧景，及为军中所逐，不失作节度使，后镇太原，位至宰相。
现代文：就以我自己耳闻目睹的来说吧，李载义当年在幽州，为国家尽忠平定沧景的叛乱，后来被幽州镇军队驱逐，朝廷未忘他的功劳，使他仍不失为节度使，后移镇太原，位至于宰相。
English: From what I have heard and witnessed, Li Zaiyi was in Yuzhou that year, doing his best for the country to quell the rebellion of the vicissitudes. Later, he was expelled by the Yuzhou town army. The court did not forget his service, making him still a ceremonial envoy, later moved to Taiyuan, and became prime minister.

古文：杨志诚遣大将遮敕使马求官，及为军中所逐，朝廷竟不赦其罪。
现代文：杨志诚派遣大将，挡住朝廷所派敕使的坐马，邀求官爵，后来被所部军队驱逐，朝廷最后竟不赦免他的罪。
English: Yang Zhicheng dispatched a general to block the horse-drawn carriage of the imperial envoy sent by the court, and invited the nobles. Later, he was expelled by the imperial army, and the court finally did not pardon his crime.

古文：此二人祸福足以观矣。 
现代文：这两个人的荣辱福祸足以看得很清楚。 
English: The honour, disgrace and misfortune of these two men is clear enough to see.

古文：德裕复以其言白上，上曰： 要当如此明告之。 
现代文：李德裕将这些话告诉唐武宗，唐武宗说： 就是要这样明白地告诫他们 。
English: Li Deyu told these words to Tang Wuzong. Tang Wuzong said, "This is how you should clearly admonish them."

古文：由是三镇不敢有异志。
现代文：因此，河北三镇不敢趁朝廷对泽潞用兵而有异志。
English: Therefore, the three towns in Hebei did not dare to take advantage of the imperial court's use of troops against Zehuan and have different ideas.

古文：九月，诏以泽州隶河阳节度。
现代文：九月，唐武宗颁下诏书将泽州改由河阳镇节度。
English: In September, Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to change the name of the festival from Heyang Town to Zezhou.

古文：丁巳，卢钧入潞州。
现代文：丁巳，卢钧进入潞州。
English: Just then, Lu Wei entered Zhangzhou.

古文：钧素宽厚爱人，刘稹未平，钧已领昭义节度，襄州士卒在行营者，与潞人战，常对陈扬钧之美。
现代文：卢钧平素待人宽厚爱护，刘稹还未平定时，卢钧已经领昭义节度使衔，襄州士卒在征讨行营与潞州人作战时，常对阵喊话，宣扬卢钧的美德。
English: Lu Qianping treated people with generosity and love. When Liu Qian was not yet defeated, Lu Qian had already received the title of Zhao Yi Festival. When the soldiers from Xiangzhou went to fight against the Zhangzhou people, they often shouted and preached Lu Qian's virtues.

古文：及赴镇，入天井关，昭义散卒归之道，钧皆厚抚之，人情大洽，昭议遂安。
现代文：到卢钧赴镇上任，入天井关，昭义溃散的士卒归镇者，卢钧都善意抚慰，待他们十分厚道，以致上下人情大为融洽，昭义镇于是安定。
English: When Lu Ye went to the town to take up his post, and when he entered the gate of the town, and when the soldiers who had been scattered from Shoyi returned to the town, Lu Ye consoled them with goodwill and treated them very kindly, so that there was great harmony between the upper and lower ranks of the people, and Shoyi Town was stable.

古文：刘稹将郭谊、王协、刘公直、安全庆、李道德、刘佐尧、刘开德、董可武等至京师，皆斩之。
现代文：刘稹的部将郭谊、王协、刘公直、安全庆、李道德、李佐尧、刘武德、董可武等被押送至京师长安，全被斩首。
English: Liu Bei's generals Guo Rui, Wang Xie, Liu Gongzhi, Shengbo Qing, Li Daode, Li Zuoqi, Liu Wude, Dong Kewu, and others were taken to the capital Chang'an, where they were all beheaded.

古文：臣光曰：董重质之在淮西，郭谊之在昭义，吴元济、刘稹，如木偶人在伎儿之手耳。
现代文：臣司马光曰：唐宪宗时董重质在淮西叛乱，今郭谊又在昭义叛乱，其淮西镇主吴元济和昭义镇主刘稹，实际上如木偶在耍把戏人的手掌上。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: When Tang Xianzong, Dong Chongqing rebelled in Huaxi, and now Guo Yi is rebelling in Zhao Yi, the Huaxi town's lord Wu Yuanji and Zhao Yi town's lord Liu Wei are actually like puppets in the palm of a trickster's hand.

古文：彼二人者，始则劝人为乱，终则卖主规利，其死固有馀罪。然宪宗用之于前，武宗诛之于后，臣愚以为皆失之。
现代文：我虽然愚钝，但认为以上两种处置都有不当。为什么这样说呢？唐宪宗赏赐奸贼董重质，是不义；唐武宗杀死已降的郭谊，是不守信用。
English: Although I am obtuse, I think that both of the above-mentioned dispositions are improper. Why do I say this? It was unjust for the Tang Emperor Xianzong to reward the traitor Dong Chongqing; it was dishonest for the Tang Emperor Wuzong to kill Guo You, who had been demoted.

古文：何则？赏奸，非义也；杀降，非信也。失义与信，何以为国！昔汉光武待王郎、刘盆子止于不死，知其非力竭则不降故也。
现代文：先去义和信，如何能治好国家！过去汉光武帝刘秀对待向他投降的王郎、刘盆子，仅止于不死，除留他们一条命外，没有任何赏赐，这是因为汉光武帝知道王郎、刘盆子不到穷途末路，力竭不能抵抗时，是不会投降的。
English: In the past, the Han Kuangwu Emperor Liu Xiu treated Wang Lang and Liu Bonzi, who surrendered to him, only by not dying. Except for leaving them one life, there was no reward. This is because the Han Kuangwu Emperor knew that Wang Lang and Liu Bonzi would not surrender if they could not resist.

古文：樊崇、徐宣、王元、牛邯之徒，岂非助乱之人乎？
现代文：另外樊崇、徐宣、王元、牛邯这帮人，岂能说他们不是助纣为乱之人？
English: In addition, these people, Yu Chong, Xu Xuan, Wang Yuan, and Niu Yao, can it be said that they are not the people who helped Yu Yu to cause chaos?

古文：而光武弗杀。盖以既受其降，则不可复诛故也。
现代文：而光武帝刘秀也不杀他们，大概是因为既已接受他们的投降，就不可再诛杀他们的缘故。
English: However, Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu did not kill them, probably because he had already accepted their surrender and could not kill them again.

古文：若既赦而复逃亡叛乱，则其死固无辞矣！
现代文：如果他们不知恩义，既已受到赦免不死，却又逃亡叛乱，那么，再行诛杀他们也没什么好说的！
English: If they are ungrateful, if they have been pardoned and do not die, but flee to rebel, then there is nothing to say about killing them again!

古文：如谊等，免死流之远方，没齿不还，可矣；杀之，非也！
现代文：而如果唐武宗对待郭谊等人，免他们死罪，流放到远方，到老也不让他们归还，不是也可以吗！
English: And if Tang Wuzong treated Guo Yi and others like this, exempted them from capital punishment, exiled them to a faraway place, and did not let them return until old age, wouldn't that be okay?

古文：王羽、贾庠等已为谊所杀，李德裕复下诏称 逆贼王涯、贾餗等已就昭义诛其子孙 ，宣告中外，识者非之。
现代文：将他们一古脑儿全杀死，实在是不对的！王羽、贾庠等已经被郭谊所杀，李德裕又以唐武宗的名义下诏宣称： 逆贼王涯、贾等人在昭义的子孙已被诛灭 ，宣告朝野内外，有见识的人对此颇有非议。
English: It is really wrong to kill them all! Wang Yu Rong, Jia Xi, etc. have been killed by Guo Yi, and Li Deyu declared in the name of Tang Wuzong: The sons of the traitor Wang Ya, Jia, etc. have been exterminated in the name of Zhao Yi. This was announced both inside and outside the court, and people with insight criticized this.

古文：刘从谏妻裴氏亦赐死。又令昭义降将李丕、高文端、王钊等疏昭义将士与刘稹同恶者，悉诛之，死者甚众。
现代文：刘从谏的妻子裴氏也被赐死；又命令昭义镇的降将李丕、高文端、王钊等人揭发昭义镇将士中与刘稹共同作恶者，将他们全部诛灭，被杀死的人很多。
English: Liu Conglu's wife, Pei, was also put to death; he also ordered the surrender of Zhaoyi Town, and Li Qian, Gao Wentuan, Wang Qian and others to expose the Zhaoyi Town soldiers who had committed crimes together with Liu Qian, and to annihilate them all. Many people were killed.

古文：卢钧疑其枉滥，奏请宽之，不从。
现代文：卢钧疑虑杀人太多恐有冤枉，怕滥杀了无辜，奏请朝廷宽待他们，朝廷没有听从。
English: Lu Xun, fearing that killing too many people would be unjustified and that innocent people would be killed indiscriminately, asked the court to treat them leniently, but the court did not listen.

古文：昭义属城有尝无礼于王元逵者，元逵推求得二十馀人，斩之。馀众惧，复闭城自守。戊辰，李德裕等奏： 寇孽既平，尽为国家城镇，岂可令元逵穷兵攻讨！
现代文：昭义镇所属城堡有人曾对成德节度使王元逵无礼，王元逵穷加追究，抓到二十余人，处以斩首；其余人感到恐惧，将城门再行关闭自守抵抗，戊辰，李德裕等人上奏唐武宗说： 叛寇余孽既全部平定，昭义所属城垒现已尽为国家的城镇，岂可以任王元逵随意穷兵攻讨！
English: Some people in the castle belonging to Zhaoyi Town had been rude to Wang Yuanzhang at the Chengde Festival. Wang Yuanzhang made a desperate investigation, caught more than 20 people and beheaded them. The rest were afraid and closed the city gate again to defend themselves. Wuchen, Li Deyu and others played Tang Wuzong and said: Since all the remaining traitors have been subdued, and the fortress belonging to Zhaoyi has now become a national town, can Wang Yuanzhang be allowed to attack at will!

古文：望遣中使赐城内将士敕，招安之，仍诏元逵引兵归镇，并诏卢钧自遣使安抚。 
现代文：希望皇上派遣宦官，赐昭义所属城堡内的将士敕书，招安他们，并且下诏书命令王元逵率领成德镇的军队归还本镇，再下诏书给卢钧，让他自己派遣使者去进行安抚。 
English: It was hoped that the emperor would send an eunuch to give a message to the soldiers in the castle belonging to Zhao Yi, to invite them to peace, and issue a decree ordering Wang Yuanzhang to lead the army of Chengde Town to return to the town, and then issue a decree to Lu Wei, so that he could send an envoy to pacify.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐武宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙亥，李德裕等请上尊号，且言： 自古帝王，成大功必告天地。父，宣懿太后祔庙，陛下未尝亲谒。 
现代文：乙亥，李德裕等人奏请给唐武宗上尊号，并且声言： 自古以来帝王成就大功者，必定要告天地；再者，宣懿太后追谥名号时，陛下也没有亲自到陵墓去拜谒。 
English: Yi Hai, Li Deyu and others gave Tang Wuzong the title of honor, and said: Since ancient times, emperors who have achieved great feats must tell the world; moreover, when the Empress Dowager Xuanzang pursued the title, Her Majesty did not personally go to the mausoleum to pay homage.

古文：上瞿然曰： 郊庙之礼，诚宜亟行，至于徽称，非所敢当！ 
现代文：唐武宗听后有失常态地回答说： 郊庙谒陵的礼仪，当然应该赶快举行，至于给我加什么美称，真是不敢当啊！ 
English: After listening, Tang Wuzong replied in an abnormal manner: Of course, the etiquette of the suburb temple and mausoleum should be held as soon as possible. As for what to call me, I really don't dare!

古文：凡五上表，乃许之。
现代文：李德裕等人共上了五次表，唐武宗才准许。
English: Li Deyu and others made a total of five times table, Tang Wuzong only allowed to climb.

古文：李德裕奏： 据幽州奏事官言：诇知回鹘上下离心，可汗欲之安西，其部落言亲戚皆在唐，不如归唐。又与室韦已相失，计其不日来降，或自相残灭。
现代文：李德裕上奏唐武宗，称： 根据幽州奏事官所说，已探知回鹘上下离心，可汗想迁往安西，而其部落声称亲戚都在唐朝，不如归降大唐；加上回鹘与室韦已经失和，估计不几天回鹘将会来投降，或者回鹘内部将自相残杀，自我毁灭。
English: Li Deyu played the role of Tang Wuzong, saying: According to the Yuzhou official, centrifugal centrifugation has been detected in the Uygur, the Khan wants to move to Anxi, and his tribe claims that his relatives are all in the Tang Dynasty, it is better to return to the Great Tang Dynasty; plus the Uygur and Shouwei have lost peace, it is estimated that the Uygur will surrender in a few days, or the Uygur will kill each other and self-destruct.

古文：望遣识事中使赐仲武诏，谕以镇、魏已平昭义，惟回鹘未灭，仲武犹带北面招讨使，宜早思立功。 
现代文：希望陛下派遣识事知情的宦官使者往幽州赐给张仲武诏书，告谕说镇州、魏州藩镇军队已协助朝廷讨平昭义的叛乱，现在只有回鹘还未消灭，而张仲武仍然带有北面招讨使的职衔，应该尽早想着立功报国。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will send a knowledgeable eunuch envoy to Yuzhou to give Zhang Zhongwu an imperial edict, announcing that the Zhenzhou and Weizhou clan and town armies have assisted the imperial court to quell the rebellion of Zhao Yi, and now only Hui Yi has not yet been eliminated, and Zhang Zhongwu still has the title of the north-facing recruiting envoy, and should think about making a contribution to the country as soon as possible.

古文：李德裕怨太子太傅、东都留守牛僧孺、湖州刺史李宗闵，言于上曰： 刘从谏据上党十年，太和中入朝，僧孺、宗闵执政，不留之，加宰相纵去，以成今日之患，竭天下力乃能取之，皆二人之罪也。 
现代文：李德裕怨恨太子太傅、东都留守牛僧孺和湖州刺史李宗闵，他对唐武宗上言说： 刘从谏占据上党有十年，文宗太和年间曾入朝，当时牛僧孺、李宗闵执政，不扣留刘从谏，反而给他加上宰相头衔，放纵他归还上党，以致形成今天的祸患，竭尽天下人力物力才将上党攻取，这都是牛僧孺、李宗闵二人的罪过。 
English: Li Deyu held a grudge against the Crown Prince Taifu, the Dongdu left-behind Niu Zonglu and the Huzhou scribe Li Zonglu. He said to the Tang Wuzong, "Liu Zonglu occupied the upper party for ten years. During the reign of Emperor Wenzong, when Niu Zonglu and Li Zonglu were in power, they did not detain Liu Zonglu, but instead gave him the title of prime minister and allowed him to return to the upper party, resulting in today's disaster. It took all the manpower and material resources in the world to capture the upper party. These are the sins of Niu Zong

古文：德裕又使人于潞州求僧孺、宗闵与从谏交通书疏，无所得，乃令孔目官郑庆言从谏每得僧孺、宗闵书疏，皆自焚毁。
现代文：李德裕又派人到潞州搜求牛僧孺、李宗闵与刘从谏相互交往的书信，却一无所得，于是命令孔目官郑庆上言，称刘从谏每次得到牛僧孺、李宗闵的书信，都要自己将信烧毁。
English: Li Deyu also sent people to Bozhou to search for the letters exchanged between Niu Sang Hui, Li Zonglu and Liu Conglu, but nothing was found, so he ordered the Confucius official Zheng Qing to make a speech, saying that every time Liu Conglu got a letter from Niu Sang Hui and Li Zonglu, he would burn the letter himself.

古文：诏追庆下御史台近问，中丞李回、知杂郑亚以为信然。
现代文：唐武宗下诏催促郑庆往御史台进行查问，御史中丞李回、御史台侍御史知杂事郑亚查问后认为情况属实。
English: Emperor Tang Wuzong issued an edict urging Zheng Qing to go to the Historian's Office to investigate, and the Historian's Secretary Li Hui and the Historian's Attendant Zheng Ya believed that the situation was true after the investigation.

古文：河南少尹吕述与德裕书，言稹破报至，僧孺出声叹恨。
现代文：河南少尹吕述也给李德裕写信，声称刘稹被剿灭的捷报传到东都洛阳时，牛僧孺发出叹惜声，有怨恨之言。
English: Henan minor Yin Liushu also wrote a letter to Li Deyu, claiming that when the news of Liu Ye's death reached the eastern capital of Luoyang, Niu Sangye sent out a sighing voice, with words of resentment.

古文：德裕奏述书，上大怒，以僧孺为太子少保、分司，宗闵为漳州刺史。戊子，再贬僧孺汀州刺史，宗闵漳州长史。
现代文：唐武宗得知后勃然大怒，将牛僧孺降为太子少保、分司东都，李宗闵降为漳州刺史；十月，戊子，再将牛僧孺贬为汀州刺史，将李宗闵贬为漳州长史。
English: When Tang Wuzong learned of this, he flew into a rage. He demoted Niu Zengqi to the rank of prince junior protector and deputy governor of Dongdu, and Li Zengqi to the rank of prefect of Zhangzhou; in October, Wuzi further demoted Niu Zengqi to the rank of prefect of Tingzhou, and Li Zengqi to the rank of prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：上幸鄠校猎。
现代文：唐武宗到县进行游猎。
English: Tang Wuzong went on a hunting trip to the county.

古文：十一月，复贬牛僧儒循州长史，李宗闵长流封州。
现代文：十一月，唐朝廷再贬牛僧孺为循州长史，李宗闵长期流放于封州。
English: In November, the Tang court once again demoted Niu Sangyu to the rank of prefectural governor, and Li Zongyu was exiled to Fengzhou for a long time.

古文：十二月，以忠武节度使王宰为河东节度使，河中节度使石雄为河阳节度使。
现代文：十二月，唐武宗任命忠武节度使王宰为河东节度使，任命河中节度使石雄为河阳节度使。
English: In December, Tang Wuzong appointed Zhongwu Jie to make Wang Zai the Jie of Hedong, and appointed Hezhong Jie to make Shixiong the Jie of Heyang.

古文：上幸云阳校猎。
现代文：唐武宗到云阳进行游猎。
English: Tang Wuzong went on a hunting trip to Yunyang.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下会昌五年
现代文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下会昌五年
English: From Emperor Wuzong to Emperor Daozhao and Emperor Su Xiao, five years of Huichang

古文：春，正月，己酉朔，群臣上尊号曰仁圣文武章天成功神德明道大孝皇帝，尊号始无 道 字，中旨令加之。
现代文：春季，正月，己酉朔，满朝大臣给唐武宗上尊号，称仁圣文武章天成功神德明道大孝皇帝，尊号起初并没有 道 字，唐武宗崇信道教，中间下旨命令群臣加上道字。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the minister of the Manchu Dynasty gave Tang Wuzong the honorific title of "Ren Sheng Wenwuzhang Tian Chenggong Shen Deming Da Xiao Emperor." The honorific title did not have the word "Dao" at first. Tang Wuzong believed in Taoism, and ordered the ministers to add the word "Dao" in the middle.

古文：庚戌，上谒太庙。辛亥，祀昊天上帝，赦天下。
现代文：庚戌，唐武宗行谒太庙之礼；辛亥，唐武宗又祭祀昊天上帝，宣诏大赦天下。
English: In the Heian period, the Tang Wushu sect performed the ceremony of the dedication of the Great Temple; in the Xinhai period, the Tang Wushu sect also offered sacrifices to Haotian God and proclaimed a general amnesty to the world.

古文：筑望仙台于南郊。庚申，义安太后王氏崩。
现代文：在南郊筑望仙台。庚申，义安太后王氏驾崩。
English: In the southern suburb of Chikubo Sendai, Koshin, the Empress Dowager of Yian passed away.

古文：以秘书监卢弘宣为义武节度使。
现代文：朝廷任秘书监卢弘宣为义武节度使。
English: Lu Hongxuan, the imperial court's secretary-supervisor, was appointed as an envoy of the Boxer Rebellion.

古文：弘宣性宽厚而难犯，为政简易，其下便之。
现代文：卢弘宣性情宽厚，而态度严肃，人们不敢冒犯，为政比较简易，其部下称便。
English: Lu Hongxuan's disposition is generous, but his attitude is serious, people dare not offend, politics is relatively simple, and his subordinates are convenient.

古文：河北之法，军中偶语者斩。弘宣至，除其法。
现代文：按河北的法规，军队中相对私语者就要斩首；卢弘宣来到义武镇，废除这种残酷的法规。
English: According to the regulations of Hebei Province, a relative whisperer in the army would be beheaded; Lu Hongxuan came to Yiwu Town to abolish this cruel regulation.

古文：诏赐粟三十万斛，在飞狐西，计运致之费逾于粟价，弘宣遣吏守之。
现代文：唐武宗下诏赐给义武粟米三十万斛，存放在飞狐之西，从飞狐将这些粟米运至义武镇，所需费用超过粟米本身的价值，卢弘宣于是派遣官吏至飞狐仓加以看守。
English: Emperor Wu of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to give 300,000 baht to Yiwu poppy rice, which was stored in the west of the flying fox. The cost of transporting the poppy rice from the flying fox to Yiwu Town exceeded the value of the poppy itself. Lu Hongxuan then sent officials to the flying fox warehouse to guard it.

古文：会春旱，弘宣命军民随意自往取之，粟皆入境，约秋稔偿之。
现代文：恰值春季大旱，卢弘宣命令义武军民自己随意往飞狐仓领取粟米，使粟米全部运入义武辖境，卢弘宣又向得到粟米的军民相约，待到秋天粮食丰收时再向官府偿还。
English: Just at the time of the spring drought, Lu Hongxuan ordered the Yiwu soldiers and civilians to go to the flying fox warehouse to receive the corn at their own discretion, so that all the corn would be transported into the Yiwu jurisdiction. Lu Hongxuan also agreed with the soldiers and civilians who received the corn to wait until the autumn grain harvest to repay the government.

古文：时成德、魏博皆饥，独易定之境无害。
现代文：当时成德和魏博两镇也都因旱灾发生饥馑，唯独义武节度使卢弘宣所辖的易定境内没有出现饥馑灾害。
English: At that time, Chengde and Weibo Towns also suffered from famine due to drought. However, the Yiwu Festival prevented famine from occurring in the territory of Yiding, which was under the jurisdiction of Lu Hongxuan.

古文：淮南节度使李绅按江都令吴湘盗用程粮钱，强聚所部百姓颜悦女，估其资装为赃，罪当死。
现代文：淮南节度使李绅按查所部江都县令吴湘，说他擅自盗用官家因公出差用的程粮钱，并强横逼娶管下百姓颜悦的女儿，将他家的资产衣装估价作为赃款，论其罪当处死刑。
English: The Huainan Festival ordered Li Sheng to report to the Jiangdu County of the Investigation Department of Wu Xiang, saying that he had illegally used the official's Cheng grain money for business trips, and forcibly married the daughter of Yan Yue, a commoner under his control, and estimated the value of his family's assets and clothing as stolen money. He should be sentenced to death for his crime.

古文：湘，武陵之兄子也，李德裕素恶武陵，议者多言其冤，谏官请覆按，诏遣监察御史崔元藻、李稠覆之。
现代文：吴湘是吴武陵哥哥的儿子，李德裕平素就厌恶吴武陵。议论此案的人都声言吴湘冤枉，谏官于是向唐武宗请求重新审理，唐武宗颁下诏书，派遣监察御史崔元藻、李稠复审此案。
English: Wu Hsiang was the son of Wu Wuling's brother, and Li Deyu hated Wu Wuling. People who discussed the case said that Wu Hsiang was wronged, so the eunuch requested Tang Wuzong to re-examine the case. Tang Wuzong issued an edict, and dispatched inspectors Cui Yuanmao and Li Cong to review the case.

古文：还言： 湘盗程粮钱有实。颜悦本衢州人，尝为青州牙推，妻亦士族，与前狱异。 
现代文：崔元藻、李稠经过复查，回奏朝廷说： 吴湘偷盗税粮钱实有其事；而颜悦这个人本是衢州人，曾经任青州牙推官，他的妻子也是士族，情况与初审论罪事实有异。 
English: After the re-examination, Cui Yuanmao and Li Zhuo echoed the court and said: Wu Xiang's theft of tax grain money is real; and Yan Yue, who is originally from Zhangzhou, was once a Qingzhou dentist, and his wife is also a warrior. The situation is different from the facts of the first trial.

古文：德裕以为无与夺，二月，贬元藻端州司户，稠汀州司户。
现代文：李德裕认为崔元藻和李稠论事模棱两可，没有给吴湘定重罪论死刑，二月，朝廷将崔元藻贬为端州司户，李稠贬为汀州司户。
English: Li Deyu thought that the arguments of Cui Yuanmao and Li Chouzhou were ambiguous, and did not give Wu Xiang the death penalty for a serious crime. In February, the imperial court relegated Cui Yuanmao to the household of the governor of Danzhou, and Li Chouzhou to the household of the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：不复更推，亦不付法司详断，即如绅奏，处湘死。
现代文：对吴湘案不再复审，也不交付司法官署依法详细判罪论刑，即按照李绅所奏，将吴湘处死。
English: Wu Xiang's case will no longer be re-examined, nor will it be submitted to the Judicial Office for detailed sentencing and punishment according to law, that is, Wu Xiang will be executed in accordance with Li Sheng's report.

古文：谏议大夫柳仲郢、敬晦皆上疏争之，不纳。
现代文：谏议大夫柳仲郢、敬晦都上疏论争，均不被采纳。
English: Dr. Liu Zhongyao's proposal and Jingyao's argument are not accepted.

古文：稠，晋江人；晦，昕之弟也。
现代文：李稠是晋江人；敬晦是敬昕的弟弟。
English: Li Cong is from Jinjiang; Jing Ya is the younger brother of Jing Yao.

古文：李德裕以柳仲郢为京兆尹。素与牛僧孺善，谢德裕曰： 不意太慰恩奖及此，仰报厚德，敢不如奇章公门馆！ 
现代文：李德裕提拔柳仲郢任京兆尹；柳仲郢平素与牛僧孺相友善，于是向李德裕道谢说： 想不到李太尉对我如此恩奖，为报答您的厚德，我怎敢不再去奇章公牛僧孺的门馆呢！ 
English: Li Deyu promoted Liu Zhongyao to the post of Beijing Zhaoyun; Liu Zhongyao was usually friendly with the bull monk, so he thanked Li Deyu and said, "I can't believe that Lieutenant Li has been so kind to me. To repay your kindness, how dare I no longer go to the gate hall of Qizhang bull monk!"

古文：德裕不以为嫌。
现代文：李德裕对这些话并不以为嫌。
English: Li Deyu did not take offense at these words.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，以陕虢观察使李试为册黠戛斯可汗使。
现代文：夏季四月，壬寅，朝廷任命陕虢观察使李拭为册封黠戛斯可汗使。
English: In the summer of April, in Ren'in, the imperial court appointed Li Wu, the Shaanxi observation envoy, as the envoy of the Khan of Gansu.

古文：五月，壬戌，葬恭僖皇后于光陵柏城之外。
现代文：五月，壬戌，唐武宗命将唐穆宗恭僖皇后安葬于光陵的柏城之外。
English: In May, Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty ordered the burial of Empress Muzong of Tang Dynasty outside the city of Pakcheng in Guangling.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事二悰罢为右仆射，中书侍郎、同平章事崔铉罢为户部尚书。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事杜被唐武宗罢相，改任右仆射，中书侍郎、同平章事崔铉也被罢相，改领户部尚书衔。
English: His subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang Jidu, was dismissed by Emperor Wuzong of Tang and replaced by his right-hand man, Jie. His subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang Jidu, was dismissed by Emperor Wuzong of Tang and replaced by his right-hand man, Jie. His subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang Jidu, was dismissed by Emperor Wuzong of Tang and replaced by his right-hand man, Jie.

古文：乙丑，以户部侍郎李回为中书侍郎、同平章事，判户部如故。
现代文：乙丑，唐武宗任命户部侍郎李回为中书侍郎、同平章事，依旧叛户部。
English: Second, Tang Wusong appointed the Household Attendant Li Hui to be the Chusho Attendant and Tongbei, and he still rebelled against the Household.

古文：祠部奏括天下寺四千六百，兰若四万，僧尼二十六万五百。
现代文：祠部上奏朝廷，全国有佛教寺院四千六百座，小佛祠四万，僧尼有二十六万五百人。
English: There are 4,600 Buddhist temples across the country, 40,000 small Buddhist shrines, and 265,000 monks and nuns.

古文：诏册黠戛斯可汗为宗英雄武诚明可汗。
现代文：唐武宗册封黠戛斯可汗为宗英雄武诚明可汗。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wu Chengming Khan, a hero of the Tang Dynasty, was enthroned as Gansu Khan in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙午朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, at the crack of dawn, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：上恶僧尼耗蠹天下，欲去之，道士赵归真等复劝之。
现代文：唐武宗厌恶象蠹虫一样耗费天下财物的和尚和尼姑，企图将他们罢废还俗。道士赵归真等人又竭力劝武宗废佛。
English: The Tang Wuzong detested the monks and nuns who were devouring the world's wealth like maggots, and tried to expel them and return them to the secular world. Taoist Zhao Guizhen and others also tried their best to persuade the Wuzong to abolish Buddhism.

古文：乃先毁山野招提、兰若，至是，敕上都、东都两街各留二寺，每寺留僧三十人；天下节度、观察使治所及同、华、商、汝州各留一寺，分为三等：上等留僧二十人，中等留十人，下等五人。
现代文：于是唐武宗下令先拆毁山野之间的寺庙，上都长安和东都洛阳的左、右两街各留佛寺两所，每个寺院留僧侣三十人；天下各镇凡节度使、观察使的治所以及同州、华州、商州、汝州各留一所佛寺，将佛寺分为三等：上等可留僧侣二十人，中等可留僧侣十人，下等可留僧侣五人。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wuzong of the Tang Dynasty ordered to first demolish the temples between the mountains and fields. There were two Buddhist temples in each of the left and right streets of Chang'an, the upper capital, and Luoyang, the eastern capital, and 30 monks were allowed to stay in each temple. There was also a Buddhist temple in every town in the world, as well as a Buddhist temple in Tongzhou, Huazhou, Shangzhou, and Ruzhou. The Buddhist temples were divided into three classes: 20 monks could stay in the upper class, 10 monks could stay in the middle class, and 5 monks could stay in the lower class.

古文：馀僧及尼并大秦穆护、袄僧皆勒归俗。
现代文：其余僧侣及尼姑以及大秦穆护、袄教僧人也一并勒令还俗。
English: The remaining monks and nuns, as well as the Daqin Muju and Zoroastrian monks, were also ordered to return to secular life.

古文：寺非应留者，立期今所在毁撤，仍遣御史分道督之。
现代文：寺庙除应该留下的以外，立即命令所在官府拆毁，并且由朝廷派遣御史到各道去进行监督。
English: In addition to the temples that should be left, the government immediately ordered their demolition, and the imperial court sent imperial historians to each province to supervise.

古文：财货田产并没官，寺材以葺公廨驿舍，铜像、钟磐以铸钱。
现代文：佛寺的财产、田产全部没收入官府，寺庙的建筑材料用以修缮公家的官舍和驿站的房屋，佛教铜像、钟磐等器物熔化后用以铸造钱币。
English: The government did not receive any income from the property and farm produce of the Buddhist temple. The temple's building materials were used to repair the official residences of government officials and the buildings of the post office, and Buddhist bronze statues, bells and other utensils were melted down and used to mint coins.

古文：以山南东道节度使郑肃检校右仆射、同平章事。
现代文：唐武宗任命山南东道节度使郑肃为检校右仆射、同平章事。
English: Tang Wuzong appointed Shannan as the host of the festival and made Zheng Su the right-hand man of the inspection of the school.

古文：诏发昭义骑兵五百、步兵千五百戍振武，节度使卢钧出至裴村饯之，潞卒素骄，惮于远戍，乘醉，回旗入城，闭门大噪，均奔潞城以避之。
现代文：唐武宗下诏调发昭义骑兵五百、步兵一千五百人戍守振武，昭义节度使卢钧出城行至裴村为戍卒饯行；潞州士卒素来骄横，害怕出门远戍，乘着酒醉，举旗回到上党城，关闭城门大声喧噪，卢钧逃奔于潞城以躲避军乱。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty sent 500 Shouyi cavalrymen and 1500 infantrymen to defend Zhenwu, and the Shouyi Festival made Lu Ye go out of the city to Pei Village to act as an envoy; the Zhangzhou envoy, who had always been arrogant and was afraid to go far, returned to Shangdang City in a drunken state, raised the flag, closed the city gate and shouted loudly. Lu Ye fled to Zhencheng to avoid the military turmoil.

古文：监军王惟直自出晓谕，乱兵击之，伤，旬日而卒。
现代文：昭义监军王惟直亲自出来晓以大义，对乱军进行劝谕，乱兵竟大打出手，将王惟直击伤，十天后死去。
English: Wang Weizhi, the military overseer of Zhao Yi, personally came out to appeal for justice and advise the rebels. However, the rebels fought fiercely and wounded Wang Weizhi, who died ten days later.

古文：李德裕奏： 请诏河东节度使王宰以步骑一千守石会关，三千自仪州路据武安，以断邢、洺之路；又令河阳节度使石雄引兵守泽州，河中节度使韦恭甫发步骑千人戍晋州。
现代文：李德裕为此上奏唐武宗说： 请皇上下诏命令河东节度使王宰率步、骑兵一千人守石会关，派三千人自仪州的道路去据守武安，以便截断潞州去邢州、州的道路；再命令河阳节度使石雄率领军队驻守泽州，河中节度使韦恭甫调发步、骑兵一千人戍守晋州。
English: Li Deyu appealed to Tang Wuzong in this regard, saying, "I would like to ask the emperor to issue an imperial edict to order the Hedong Festival to send Wang Zai to lead the troops and 1,000 cavalrymen to guard Shishie Pass, and to send 3,000 soldiers from the road of Yizhou to guard Wu'an, so as to cut off the road from Shizhou to Shizhou and Shizhou; and to order the Kheyang Festival to have Shixiong lead the troops to guard Zezhou, and the Mid-Hebei Festival to have Wei Gongfu lead the troops and 1,000 cavalrymen to guard Jinzhou.

古文：如此，贼必无能为。 
现代文：这样的话，叛贼必定无所作为。 
English: In that case, the traitors must do nothing.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：唐武宗接受了这些建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：八月，李德裕等奏： 东都九庙神主二十六，今贮于太微宫小屋，请以废寺材复修太庙。 
现代文：八月，李德裕等人向唐武宗奏言： 东都洛阳九庙有高祖以来神主二十六尊，现在贮藏在太微宫小屋子里，请求用拆毁佛寺所得的木材来修复太庙。 
English: In August, Li Deyu and others made a report to the Tang Wusong: The Nine Temples of Luoyang, the eastern capital, have had 26 deities since the time of Gao Zu. They are now stored in a small hut in the Taiwei Palace. They requested that the timber obtained from the demolition of the Buddhist temple be used to restore the temple.

古文：壬午，诏陈释教之弊，宣告中外。
现代文：壬午，唐武宗下诏陈述佛教的危害弊端，并宣告朝廷内外。
English: In Renpo, Tang Wuzong issued an edict stating the harm and drawbacks of Buddhism, and announced it inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：凡天下所毁寺四千六百馀区，归俗僧尼二十六万五百人，大秦穆护、祅僧二千馀人，毁招提、兰若四万馀区。
现代文：在全国范围内拆毁佛寺四千六百余区，勒令还俗的僧侣、尼姑有二十六万零五百人，大秦穆护、袄教僧人也有二千余人，又拆毁大小佛祠四万余区。
English: Nationwide, more than 4,600 districts of Buddhist temples were demolished, 260,500 monks and nuns were ordered to return to secular life, more than 2,000 Daqin Muhu and Zoroastrian monks were also ordered to return to secular life, and more than 40,000 districts of Buddhist temples and shrines were demolished.

古文：收良田数千万顷，奴婢十五万人。
现代文：从寺院收得良田数千万顷，收得寺院奴婢十五万人。
English: Tens of millions of hectares of good farmland and 150,000 slaves and maidservants were collected from the temples.

古文：所留僧皆隶主客，不隶祠部。
现代文：其余所留下的僧侣都隶属于尚书省礼部主客郎中管辖，而不再隶属于尚书省礼部祠部郎中。
English: The rest of the remaining monks are under the jurisdiction of the chief priest of the Ceremonial Department of the Province of Shangshu, and are no longer under the jurisdiction of the priest of the Shrine Department of the Ceremonial Department of the Province of Shangshu.

古文：百官奉表称贺。
现代文：对于上述处置，朝廷百官都奉表称赞庆贺。
English: For the above-mentioned disposition, all the officials of the Imperial Court applauded and congratulated.

古文：寻又诏东都止留僧二十人，诸道留二十人者减其半，留十人者减三人，留五人者更不留。
现代文：不久，唐武宗又命令东都只留僧侣二十人。诸道原留僧侣二十人者减去一半，留十人者减去三人，留五人者全部减去，一个不留。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wuzong of Tang ordered that only twenty monks should remain in Dongdu, and those who had originally left twenty monks were to lose half, those who had left ten were to lose three, those who had left five were to lose all, and one was not to remain.

古文：五台僧多亡奔幽州。
现代文：五台山的僧侣有很多逃亡投奔幽州。
English: Many monks from Mount Wutai fled to Yuzhou.

古文：李德裕召进奏官谓曰： 汝趣白本使，五台僧为将必不如幽州将，为卒必不如幽州卒，何为虚取容纳之名，染于人口！
现代文：李德裕召来幽州的进奏官，对他说： 你回去告诉你的节度使，五台山的僧人充当将领必定不如幽州的将领，为士卒也必定不如幽州的士卒，为何要凭白无故地得一个容纳僧侣的恶名，而成为人家的口实！
English: Li Deyu summoned Yuzhou's precentor and said to him: "Go back and tell your governor that the monks of Mount Wutai are definitely not as good as Yuzhou's generals as generals, and they are definitely not as good as Yuzhou's soldiers as soldiers. Why should they get a bad name of accommodating monks for no reason, and become a mouthpiece for others!

古文：独不见近日刘从谏招聚无算闲人，竟有保益！ 
现代文：你没有看见不久前刘从谏招纳收聚无数的闲人，最终有什么好处！ 
English: You didn't see the benefits of Liu Zeng recruiting countless idlers not long ago, after all!

古文：张仲武乃封二刀付居庸关曰： 有游僧入境则斩之！ 
现代文：幽州节度使张仲武于是将两把刀封好送给居庸关的守将，宣称： 若有游僧进入幽州之境，一概斩首。 
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongwu seal two swords and give them to the guard of Juyongguan, declaring: If any wandering monk enters the territory of Yuzhou, he will be beheaded.

古文：主客郎中韦博以为事不宜太过，李德裕恶之，出为灵武节度副使。
现代文：主客郎中韦博认为毁佛之事不应做得太过份，李德裕深感厌恶，将韦博贬谪为灵武节度副使。
English: The main guest, Wei Bo, thought that the destruction of the Buddha should not be done too excessively. Li Deyu was deeply disgusted and belittled Wei Bo as the vice-envoy of Lingwu sect.

古文：昭义乱兵奉都将李文矩为帅，文矩不从，乱兵亦不敢害。
现代文：昭义乱兵推举都将李文矩为帅；李文矩不从命，乱兵也不敢加害。
English: Li Wen-ch'u was praised as a handsome man by the soldiers of the Zhaoyi Rebellion; Li Wen-ch'u did not follow orders, and the soldiers of the Rebellion did not dare to harm him.

古文：文矩稍以祸福谕之，乱兵渐听命，乃遣人谢卢钧于潞城。
现代文：李文矩趁机对乱军进行一些劝谕，晓以祸福，乱兵渐渐听命，于是派人到潞城向卢钧谢罪。
English: Li Wen Rui took the opportunity to make some exhortations to the rebel army, saying that it was a blessing and a curse. The rebel army gradually obeyed his orders, so he sent someone to Lucheng to apologize.

古文：均还入上党，复遣之戍振武。行一驿，乃潜选兵追之。明日，及于太平驿，尽杀之。
现代文：卢钧回到上党城，再派遣这些士卒往振武镇去戍守；走过一个驿程，卢钧暗中挑选兵追赶这些士卒，第二天，至太平驿追及，将曾参与叛乱的士兵全部杀死。
English: Lu Yao returned to Shangdangcheng, and then sent these soldiers to Zhenwu Town to guard; after a long journey, Lu Yao secretly selected soldiers to chase these soldiers, and the next day, when he caught up with them, he killed all the soldiers who had participated in the rebellion.

古文：具以状闻，且请罢河东、河阳兵在境上者，从之。
现代文：卢钧又将情况写成状文向朝廷汇报，并且请求罢除河东、河阳在昭义边境防驻守的军队，朝廷一概听从。
English: Lu Xun also reported the situation to the imperial court in a written document, and requested the removal of the troops stationed in Hedong and Heyang on the border of Shuai, and the imperial court obeyed.

古文：九月，诏修东都太庙。
现代文：九月，唐武宗下诏修复东都太庙。
English: In September, Tang Wusong issued an edict to restore Dongdu Taimiao.

古文：李德裕请置备边库，令户部岁入钱帛十二万缗匹，度支盐铁岁入钱帛十三万缗匹，明年减其三之一，凡诸道所进助军财货者皆入焉，以度支郎中判之。
现代文：李德裕向唐武宗请求设置备边仓库，命令户部每年输入钱、帛十二万缗、匹，度支使和盐铁使每年输入钱、帛十二万缗、匹，第二年减少其三分之一的输入，全国诸道所进的助军财产财物也都输入备边仓库，任命度支郎中来掌管这项事务。
English: Li Deyu requested the Tang Wuzong to set up a reserve warehouse, ordered the household department to import money of 120,000 baht and horses every year, and the imperial envoy and the salt and iron envoy to import money of 120,000 baht and horses every year, and reduce their import by one-third in the second year. The military aid, property and belongings from all over the country were also imported into the reserve warehouse, and appointed the imperial secretary to take charge of this matter.

古文：王才人宠冠后庭，上欲立以为后。李德裕以才人寒族，且无子，恐不厌天下之望，乃止。上饵方士金丹，性加躁急，喜怒不常。
现代文：唐武宗的王才人在后宫最得武宗喜爱，唐武宗想立王才人为皇后；李德裕认为王才人出身寒族，而且没有生儿子，恐怕不合天下人的愿望，因而上言劝阻，唐武宗于是放弃了这一想法。唐武宗吃下道教方士炼的金丹，性情更加暴躁，喜怒无常。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Wuzong was most loved by Emperor Wuzong in his harem. Emperor Wuzong wanted to make Emperor Wuzong the empress. Li Deyu thought that Emperor Wuzong was from the Ham people and had no son, which might not meet the wishes of the world. Therefore, he advised Emperor Wuzong to dissuade Emperor Wuzong from this idea. Emperor Wuzong then abandoned this idea. Emperor Wuzong ate jade made by Taoist priests, and his temperament became more irritable and temperamental.

古文：冬，十月，上问李德裕以外事，对曰： 陛下威断不测，外人颇惊惧。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐武宗问李德裕朝外之事，李德裕回答说： 您的严厉决断人们难以猜测，朝外人士感到很惊诧和恐惧。
English: In the winter, in October, Tang Wuzong asked Li Deyu about what was going on in and out of the country. Li Deyu replied, "It is difficult for people to guess your stern decision. People outside the country are very surprised and frightened.

古文：向者寇逆暴横，固宜以威制之；今天下既平，愿陛下宽理之，但使得罪者无怨，为善者不惊，则为宽矣。 
现代文：以前贼寇叛逆专横暴虐，当然应该用严厉的威邢来制服他们；但如今天下既已平定，希望您能以宽容治理政事，如果能使犯罪的人服罪无怨言，为善的人不感到惊慌恐怖，那就能称得上为政宽容了。 
English: In the past, there were bandits, rebels, tyrants and oppressors. Of course, they should be subdued with stern deterrence. However, now that the situation has been stabilized, I hope you can govern the country with tolerance. If you can make criminals confess their crimes without complaint, and good people do not feel panic and fear, then it can be called political tolerance.

古文：以衡山道士刘玄静为银青光禄大夫、崇玄馆学士，赐号广成先生，为之治崇玄馆，置吏铸印。
现代文：唐武宗任命衡山道士刘玄静为银青光禄大夫、崇玄馆学士，赐号广成先生，为他建崇玄馆，并署置吏员，铸有印章。
English: Tang Wuzong appointed the Hengshan Taoist Liu Xuanjing as the silver Qingguanglu doctor and the Chong Xuan Pavilion bachelor, and gave him the name Guangcheng, built the Chong Xuan Pavilion for him, and signed the clerk, and cast the seal.

古文：玄静固辞，乞还山，许之。
现代文：刘玄静坚决推辞，乞求让他回衡山继续修道，唐武宗同意了他的请求。
English: Liu Xuanjing firmly refused, begging him to return to Hengshan Mountain to continue the practice. Tang Wuzong agreed to his request.

古文：李德裕秉政日久，好徇爱憎，人多怨之。
现代文：李德裕掌权的时间久了，喜欢根据自己的好恶处置官吏，使很多人心怀怨言。
English: Li Deyu has been in power for a long time, and he likes to deal with officials according to his own likes and dislikes, causing many people to harbor complaints.

古文：自杜悰、崔铉罢相，宦官左右言其太专，上亦不悦。
现代文：自从杜、崔铉罢免相位后，宦官在唐武宗左右说李德裕太专权，唐武宗也感到不高兴。
English: Since Du and Cui Gan were dismissed, eunuchs around Tang Wuzong said that Li Deyu was too authoritarian, and Tang Wuzong was also unhappy.

古文：给事中韦弘质上疏，言宰相权重，不应更领三司钱谷。
现代文：给事中韦弘质上疏于唐武宗，声言宰相的权力太重，不应该再掌管户部、度支、盐铁三司的钱谷。
English: In this matter, Wei Hong was qualitatively inferior to Tang Wuzong, claiming that the power of the prime minister was too heavy, and that he should no longer be in charge of the household department, the education department, and Qianya of the three departments of salt and iron.

古文：德裕奏称： 制置职业，人主之柄。
现代文：李德裕为此也上奏唐武宗，声称： 任用官员，本是皇帝的权柄。
English: Li Deyu also appealed to Tang Wuzong for this, claiming: The appointment of officials is the authority of the emperor.

古文：弘质受人教导，所谓贱人图柄臣，非所宜言。 十二月，弘质坐贬官，由是众怒愈甚。
现代文：韦弘质受人教唆，竟然对皇帝赋予宰相的权力妄持异议，真是卑贱人企图谮害掌有权柄的大臣，这些话哪里是韦弘质这种人可以妄说的呢！ 十二月，韦弘质为此贬官，于是众朝臣大抱不平，怨怒更甚。
English: Wei Hongjie was instigated by someone, and he even disagreed with the power given to the prime minister by the emperor. It was really a despicable person who tried to harm a powerful minister. How could such a person as Wei Hongjie say such things? In December, Wei Hongjie was demoted for this, so all the courtiers were upset and even more angry.

古文：上自秋冬以来，觉有疾，而道士以为换骨。
现代文：唐武宗自从秋冬之际以来，感觉患有疾病，而道士却认为是换骨。
English: Tang Wuzong had been feeling ill since the beginning of autumn and winter, but the Taoist thought it was a bone replacement.

古文：上秘其事，外人但怪上希复游猎，宰相奏事者亦不敢久留。
现代文：唐武宗将疾病隐瞒起来，宫禁之外的朝臣只是奇怪唐武宗很少出来游猎，宰相入朝奏事也不敢停留太久。
English: Emperor Tang Wuzong concealed his illness, and the courtiers outside the palace were only surprised. Emperor Tang Wuzong rarely went out hunting, and the prime minister did not dare to stay too long in the morning.

古文：诏罢来年正旦朝会。
现代文：武宗又下诏书停罢明年元旦的大朝会。
English: Emperor Buzong also issued an edict to suspend the Grand Imperial Assembly on New Year's Day.

古文：吐蕃论恐热复纠合诸部击尚婢婢，婢婢遣厖结藏将兵五千拒之，恐热大败，与数十骑遁去。
现代文：吐蕃的论恐热又纠合诸部落攻击吐蕃宰相尚婢婢，尚婢婢派遣结藏率领五千兵进行抵抗，论恐热被打得大败，只与数十个骑兵逃走。
English: On the other hand, the tribes of Tubo were entangled in the attack of Tubo's prime minister, Shang Hibi, who sent Jie Zang to lead five thousand soldiers to resist. On the other hand, Tubo was defeated and fled with only dozens of cavalry.

古文：婢婢传檄河、湟，数恐热残虐之罪，曰： 汝辈本唐人，吐蕃无主，则相与归唐，毋为恐热所猎如狐兔也！ 
现代文：尚婢婢传布檄文于河、湟地区，历数论恐热的残忍暴虐罪行，说： 你们本来都是大唐的臣民，吐蕃没有了国王，你们应该相互联结归奉唐朝，不应该被论恐热所控制，象狐狸抓免子一样！ 
English: Shang diligently spread the "Analects of Confucius" in Hehe and Handan regions, recounting the cruel and tyrannical crimes of fear and fever, saying: "You are all subjects of the Great Tang Dynasty. If there is no king in Tibet, you should unite with each other to serve the Tang Dynasty. You should not be controlled by fear and fever, like a fox catching its prey!"

古文：于是诸部从恐热者稍稍引去。
现代文：于是河、湟地区汉人诸部民跟从论恐热者，逐渐离他而去。
English: As a result, the Han people in the areas of He and Handan followed the fanatic and gradually left him.

古文：是岁，天下户四百九十五万五千一百五十一。
现代文：这一年，全国共有四百九十五万五千一百五十一户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 4,950,151 households across the country.

古文：朝廷虽为党项置使，党项侵盗不已，攻陷邠、宁、盐州界城堡，屯叱利寨。
现代文：唐朝廷虽然为对付党项设置了三处使职，但党项部族仍然侵盗唐边境不已，攻陷唐州、宁州、盐州边境的城堡，屯兵于叱利寨。
English: Although the Tang court set up three posts to deal with the party, the party tribes still continued to invade the Tang border, captured the castles on the border of Tangzhou, Ningzhou, and Yanzhou, and stationed soldiers in Zhaoli Zhai.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下会昌六年
现代文：宰相请求唐武宗派遣使者宣慰招抚，但唐武宗决意要派军队讨伐。会昌六年
English: The prime minister requested Tang Wuzong to send an envoy to offer consolation and encouragement, but Tang Wuzong was determined to send an army to fight.

古文：春，二月，庚辰，以夏州节度使米暨为东北道招讨党项使。
现代文：春季，二月，庚辰，唐武宗任命夏州节度使米暨为东北道招讨党项使。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Gaochen of Tang Wuzong appointed Xia Zhou to be the festival envoy and the envoy to solicit party items for Northeast China.

古文：上疾久未平，以为汉火德，改 洛 为 雒 。唐土德，不可以王气胜君名。三月，下诏改名炎。
现代文：唐武宗患疾病很久未能痊愈，认为汉朝属火德，光武帝刘秀因而改洛阳的 洛 为 雒 ；唐朝属土德，不可以王气胜过君主的名字，三月，唐武宗李颁下诏书，宣告改名为炎。
English: Tang Wuzong suffered from an illness for a long time and was unable to recover. He believed that the Han Dynasty belonged to fire virtue, and Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu changed Luoyang's Luo to ; the Tang Dynasty belonged to local virtue, and the king's spirit should not prevail over the monarch's name. In March, Tang Wuzong Li issued an edict, announcing the change of name to flame.

古文：上自正月乙卯不视朝，宰相请见，不许。中外忧惧。
现代文：炎从火，火能生土。唐武宗自从正月乙卯以来就不再上朝视事，宰相请求见皇上，也不获允许；朝廷内外都深感忧惧。
English: Since the first day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wuzong of the Tang Dynasty no longer came to the Imperial Court to supervise affairs. When the prime minister requested to see the Emperor, he was not allowed to do so; both inside and outside the Imperial Court were deeply worried.

古文：初，宪宗纳李锜妾郑氏，生光王怡。
现代文：起初，唐宪宗收纳李的妾郑氏，生光王李怡。
English: At first, Tang Xianzong took in Li's concubine Zheng, whose real name was Guangwang Li Yi.

古文：怡幼时，宫中皆以为不慧，太和以后，益自韬匿，群居游处，未尝发言。
现代文：李怡年幼时，后宫中人们都认为他不聪明，唐文宗太和年以后，李怡更是自己韬光养晦，在大庭广众游乐相处时，从不发言。
English: When Li Yi was young, people in the harem thought that he was not smart. After Tang Wenzong's death, Li Yi was even more self-deprecating, and never spoke when playing with the public in the courtyard.

古文：文宗幸十六宅宴集，好诱其言以为戏笑，号曰光叔。上性豪迈，尤所不礼。
现代文：唐文宗到十六宅为诸王设宴集会，喜欢引逗李怡发言以作笑料，唐武宗性格强韧豪迈，对光王李怡更加无礼。
English: Tang Wenzong went to the Sixteen Mansions to set up a banquet for the kings, and liked to tease Li Yi to speak as a joke. Tang Wuzong's character was tough and heroic, and he was even more rude to Guangwang Li Yi.

古文：及上疾笃，日不能言。诸宦官密于禁中定策，辛酉，下诏称： 皇子冲幼，须选贤德，光王怡可立为皇太叔，更名忱，应军国政事令权句当。 
现代文：唐武宗危病，十来天不能说话，诸宦官于是暗中在宫禁内策划立新皇帝，辛酉，禁中传出以唐武宗名义颁发的诏书称： 皇子们都太年幼，必须选择贤德的皇族成员继承皇位，光王李怡可以立为皇太叔，改其名称李忱，所有军国政事可让他暂时处置。 
English: Tang Wuzong was critically ill and unable to speak for about ten days, so the eunuchs secretly plotted to establish a new emperor within the palace. Soon, an imperial decree issued in the name of Tang Wuzong was issued, saying: The princes are too young and must choose virtuous members of the royal family to inherit the throne. Guangwang Li Yi can be appointed as the emperor's uncle and change his name to Li Zhen. He can temporarily handle all military and political affairs.

古文：太叔见百官，哀戚满容；裁决庶务，咸当于理，人始知有隐德焉。
现代文：皇太叔李忱出宫见百官时，满脸悲哀戚惨的样子；而裁决细小军政事务时，都能合情合理，人们这才知道他很内秀。
English: When the Emperor's uncle Li Zhen went out of the palace to meet with hundreds of officials, his face was full of sadness and a miserable look; but when ruling on small military and political affairs, he could be reasonable, and people knew that he was very secretive.

古文：甲子，上崩。
现代文：甲子，唐武宗驾崩。
English: Gaozi, Tang Wuzong passed away.

古文：以李德裕摄冢宰。
现代文：李德裕受命兼任冢宰办理后事。
English: Li Deyu was also ordered to take on the post of deputy governor to deal with the aftermath.

古文：丁卯，宣宗即位。
现代文：丁卯，唐宣宗李忱即皇帝位。
English: Dingwu, Tang Xuan Zong Li Zhen, that is, the emperor.

古文：宣宗素恶李德裕之专，即位之日，德裕奉册。既罢，谓左右曰： 适近我者非太尉邪？
现代文：唐宣宗李忱平素厌恶李德裕专权，即皇帝位的那一天，由李德裕手捧册封的诏书；册立仪式既罢，宣宗对左右近侍说： 刚才靠近我的是不是李太尉呢？
English: On the day of the enthronement of Emperor Li Deyu, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Li Zhen, who detested the absolute power of Emperor Li Deyu, held up the imperial edict. After the enthronement ceremony, Emperor Xuanzong said to his attendants: "Wasn't it Lieutenant Li who approached me just now?

古文：每顾我，使我毛发洒淅。 
现代文：每看我一眼，都使人毛骨耸然。 
English: Every glance at me makes one's hair stand on end.

古文：夏，四月，辛未朔，上始听政。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛未朔，唐宣宗开始上朝听政。
English: In the summer, in April, Tang Xuan Zong began to listen to the government.

古文：尊母郑氏为皇太后。
现代文：唐宣宗尊自己的生母郑氏为皇太后。
English: Tang Xuan Zongjun's own birth mother, Zheng, was the empress dowager.

古文：壬申，以门下侍郎、同平章事李德裕同平章事，充荆南节度使。
现代文：壬申，唐宣宗下令调门下侍郎、同平章政事李德裕仍带平章事衔，出任荆南节度使。
English: In Jinshin, Tang Xuan Zong ordered the transfer of his subordinate attendant, the political officer Li Deyu, still with the title of Pingzhang, to serve as Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：德裕秉权日久，位重有功，众不谓其遽罢，闻之莫不惊骇。
现代文：李德裕在朝掌握权柄很久，位望崇重，立有大功，众朝官想不到他突然被罢免，消息传来，百官无不感到惊骇。
English: Li Deyu had held power in the DPRK for a long time, was highly respected, and had made great contributions. Many DPRK officials did not expect him to be suddenly dismissed. When the news came, all the officials were shocked.

古文：甲戌，贬工部尚书、判盐铁转运使薛元赏为忠州刺史，弟京兆少尹、权知府事元龟为崖州司户，皆德裕之党也。
现代文：甲戌，唐宣宗又下令贬工部尚书、判盐铁转运使薛元赏为忠州刺史，他的弟弟京兆少尹、权知府事薛元龟贬为崖州司户，因为他们都是李德裕的党羽。
English: In addition, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty decreed that the Ministry of Industry should be downgraded to Shangshu, and that the Salt and Iron Transportation should be downgraded to Xueyuan, and that his brother, Jingzhao Shaoyin, and the prefectural governor, Xueyuan Jie, should be downgraded to Yazhou Shihu, because they were all party members of Li Deyu.

古文：杖杀道士赵归真等数人，流罗浮山人轩辕集于岭南。
现代文：唐宣宗下令用棍棒打杀道士赵归真等数人，将罗浮山人轩辕集流放到岭南。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ordered several people, including the Taoist priest Zhao Guizhen, to be clubbed to death, and the Luofu Mountain people, including Xuan Zong, were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：五月，乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：五月，乙巳，宣告大赦天下。
English: In May, the emperor declared a general amnesty.

古文：上京两街先听留两寺外，更各增置八寺；僧、尼依前隶功德使，不隶主客，所度僧、尼仍令祠部给牒。
现代文：又宣告上京长安两街除以前留下的两座佛教寺庙外，再各增置八座寺庙；佛教僧侣、尼姑依照以前的规定隶属于左、右街功德使，不隶属于尚书省礼部主客郎中，这些寺庙所度的僧侣、尼姑都可由祠部发给度牒，准许他们出家。
English: It was also announced that in addition to the two Buddhist temples previously left behind, eight additional temples would be built in each of the two streets of Chang'an in Beijing. According to the previous regulations, Buddhist monks and nuns would be affiliated with the left and right streets, and would not be affiliated with the Ministry of Rites and Decrees in Shangshu Province. The monks and nuns of these temples could be issued a certificate by the ancestral hall to allow them to enter the priesthood.

古文：以翰林学士、兵部侍郎白敏中同平章事。
现代文：唐宣宗任命翰林学士、兵部侍郎白敏中为同平章事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate and Bai Minzhong, the attendant of the military department, to be the same rank.

古文：辛酉，立皇子温为郓王，氵美为雍王，泾为雅王，滋为夔王，沂为庆王。
现代文：辛酉，唐宣宗立皇子李温为郓王，李为雍王，李泾为雅王，李滋为夔王，李沂为庆王。
English: Xin Zheng, Tang Xuan Zongli's son, Li Wen, was the king of Zhou, Li was the king of Yong, Li Zheng was the king of Ya, Li Zhi was the king of Zhou, and Li Zheng was the king of Qing.

古文：六月，礼仪使奏 请复代宗神主于太庙，以敬宗、文宗、武宗同为一代，于庙东增置两室，为九代十一室。 
现代文：六月，礼仪使向唐宣宗上奏称： 请陛下恢复唐代宗的神主像于太庙，由于唐敬宗、唐文宗、唐武宗为同一代，都是唐穆宗的儿子，所以可于太庙之东增置两个室，共为九代十一室神主像。 
English: In June, the etiquette envoy made a report to Emperor Xuan of Tang Dynasty, saying, "Your Majesty is requested to restore the statue of the god of the Tang Dynasty to the Imperial Temple. Since Emperor Keizong of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wen of Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Wu of Tang Dynasty are of the same generation and are all sons of Emperor Mu, two rooms can be added to the east of the Imperial Temple, making a total of eleven statues of the god of nine generations.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐宣宗表示同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，淮南节度使李绅薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬寅，淮南节度使李绅去世。
English: Autumn, July, Ren Yin, Huainan Festival, Li Sheng passed away.

古文：回鹘乌介可汗之众稍稍降散及冻馁死，所馀不及三千人。
现代文：回鹘国乌介可汗的部众渐渐减少，有的降唐，有的离散，有的冻饿而死，所余下的已不及三千人。
English: The followers of Ujie Khan of Yunnan gradually dwindled, some were deported to Tang, some dispersed, some died of cold and hunger, and the remaining were less than three thousand.

古文：国相逸隐啜杀乌介于金山，立其弟特勒捻为可汗。
现代文：回鹘宰国相逸隐啜在金山将乌介可汗杀死，立乌介可汗的弟弟特勒遏捻为可汗。
English: He killed Ujikhan in Jinshan at the behest of Ujikhan's brother, Tertullian, and made him khan.

古文：八月，壬申，葬至道昭肃孝皇帝于端陵，庙号武宗。
现代文：八月，壬申，唐宣宗及朝臣将至道昭肃孝皇帝李炎葬于端陵，庙号为武宗。
English: In August, in Jinshin, Tang Xuan Zong and his courtiers buried Emperor Daozhao Su Xiao Li Yan in the Duan Mausoleum, with the temple name of Wuzong.

古文：初，武宗疾困，顾王才人曰： 我死，汝当如何？ 
现代文：起初，唐武宗被疾病困扰，望着宠妃王才人说： 我死了，你该怎么办呢？ 
English: At first, Tang Wuzong was plagued by illness. He looked at his favorite princess and said, "I'm dead. What should you do?

古文：对曰： 愿从陛下于九泉！ 
现代文：王才人回答说： 我愿意随从您一起到九泉之下！ 
English: Wang Cai Ren replied, "I am willing to follow you to the bottom of the nine springs!"

古文：武宗以巾授之。
现代文：唐武宗即送给她一条绫巾。
English: Tang Wuzong immediately gave her a silk scarf.

古文：武宗崩，才人即缢。
现代文：待唐武宗驾崩，王才人即用绫巾上吊自缢而死。
English: After the death of Tang Wuzong, Wang Cairen hanged himself with a silk scarf and died.

古文：上闻而矜之，赠贵妃，葬于端陵柏城之内。
现代文：唐宣宗听说后对王才人深感怜悯，赠给她贵妃的名号，安葬于端陵柏城之内。
English: After hearing this, Tang Xuan Zong felt deep pity for Wang Cai Ren, gave her the title of noble consort, and buried her in Duanling Bai Rong.

古文：以循州司马牛僧孺为衡州长史，封州流人李宗闵为郴州司马，恩州司马崔珙为安州长史，潮州刺史杨嗣复为江州刺史，昭州刺史李珏为郴州刺史。
现代文：唐宣宗任命循州司马牛僧孺为衡州长史，任命流放封州的李宗闵为郴州司马，任命恩州司马崔珙为安州长史，任命潮州刺史杨嗣复为江州刺史，任命昭州刺史李珏为郴州刺史。
English: Tang Xuanzong appointed Xuzhou Sima Niu Monk Zou as Heng governor history, appointed exiled Fuzhou Li Zongyi as Zhangzhou Sima governor history, appointed Enzhou Sima Cui Zou as An governor history, appointed Chaozhou Sima Yang Sifu as Jiangzhou Sima history, appointed Zhaozhou Sima Li Zou as Zhangzhou Sima history.

古文：僧孺等五相皆武宗所贬逐，至是，同日北迁。
现代文：牛僧孺等五位前宰相都是唐武宗所贬逐的，到这时，五人同日北还。
English: The five former chancellors, including Niu Xiangyao, were all exiled by Emperor Wu of Tang. At this time, the five of them returned to the north on the same day.

古文：宗闵未离封州而卒。
现代文：李宗闵还未离开封州就死了。
English: Li Zongyao died before he left Fenzhou.

古文：九月，以刑南节度使郴德裕为东都留守，解平章事；以中书侍郎、同平章事郑肃同平章事，充荆南节度使。
现代文：九月，唐宣宗任荆南节度使李德裕为东都留守，解除他平章事的官衔；加中书侍郎、同平章事郑肃同平章事衔，充任荆南节度使。
English: In September, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Deyu to stay in Jingnan for the Dongdu Festival, relieving him of his official title of Pingzhangji; he was appointed as Jingnan Festival envoy with the title of Jiazhong Shushi Lang and Tongping Zhangji Zhengsu.

古文：以兵部侍郎、判度支卢商为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐宣宗任命兵部侍郎、判度支卢商为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Hyobu Jirong, and Jandu Jirong as Chusho Jirong and Tongping Jirong.

古文：商，翰之族孙也。
现代文：卢商是卢翰的族孙。
English: Lu Shang is the grandson of Lu Han.

古文：册黠戛斯可汗使者以国丧未行，或以为僻远小国，不足与之抗衡。回鹘未平，不应遽有建置。
现代文：唐武宗派出册封黠戛斯可汗的使者李拭等，因为国丧而未前行，有人认为黠戛斯是僻远小国，不足以与大国抗衡；回鹘王国的侵扰并未平定，不应该马上有所建置。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty sent Li Wu and other envoys to confer the title of Qajs Khan, but they did not go ahead because of the national mourning. Some people thought that Qajs was a small country far away, not enough to compete with the big countries; the invasion of the Uighur kingdom was not settled, and it should not be built immediately.

古文：诏百官集议，事遂寝。
现代文：唐宣宗于是下诏请百官来集体议论，册封黠戛斯可汗的事也就放下来了。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to invite hundreds of officials to discuss the matter collectively, and the matter of the canonization of Qas Khan was also dropped.

古文：蛮寇安南，经略使裴元裕帅邻道兵讨之。
现代文：蛮族南诏入侵安南，唐安南经略使裴元裕率领相邻几道的军队攻讨蛮族。
English: The barbarian Nanzhao invaded Annan, and Tang Annan sent Pei Yuanyu to lead the army of several neighboring provinces to attack the barbarians.

古文：以右常侍李景让为浙西观察使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命右散骑常侍李景让为浙西观察使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Jingzhan, the right rider's attendant, as the western Zhejiang observation envoy.

古文：初，景让母郑氏，性严明，早寡，家贫，居于东都。
现代文：起初，李景让的母亲郑氏，性格严明，很早就守寡，家境贫困，居住在东都洛阳。
English: At first, Li Jingzhang's mother Zheng, a strict character, was widowed very early, and her family was poor, living in the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：诸子皆幼，母自教之。
现代文：几个儿子的年纪都很小，由郑氏亲自教育。
English: Several of the sons are very young and were educated by Mr Zheng himself.

古文：宅后古墙因雨隤陷，得钱盈船，奴婢喜，走告母。母往，焚香祝之曰： 吾闻无劳而获，身之灾也。
现代文：李景让家住宅后面的古旧墙壁因为下雨而陷塌，得到的钱能装满一船，奴婢们欢喜，跑来告诉李景让的母亲；李母赶来，烧香祷告，说： 我听说没有劳动而获利，是自身的灾祸。
English: The old wall behind Li Jingzhang's house collapsed because of the rain, and the money received could fill a boat. The slaves and maidservants rejoiced and ran to tell Li Jingzhang's mother; Li's mother came, burned incense and prayed, saying: I heard that profit without labor is one's own disaster.

古文：天必以先君馀庆，矜其贫而赐之，则愿诸孤它日学问有成，乃其志也，此不敢取！ 
现代文：老天必定是因为我死去的丈夫积下了功德，怜悯我家贫困而赐给我们钱财，但愿几个孤儿将来学问有成，这才是我丈夫的志向，这些份外之钱我不敢取！ 
English: God must have given us money because of my dead husband's accumulated merits and pity for my family's poverty. I hope that a few orphans will succeed in their studies in the future. This is my husband's ambition. I don't dare to take this extra money!

古文：遽命掩而筑之。
现代文：于是即命人将钱掩埋于原处，并重新修筑好墙壁。
English: As a result, the man buried the money in the same place and rebuilt the walls.

古文：三子景让、景温、景庄，皆举进士及第。景让官达，发已斑白，小有过，不免捶楚。
现代文：郑氏的三个儿子李景让、李景温、李景庄，都中进士及第，李景让已当上大官，头发都已斑白，在家小有过错，仍不免遭母亲的捶打。
English: Zheng's three sons, Li Jingzhang, Li Jingwen and Li Jingzhuang, are all junior high school graduates. Li Jingzhang has become a high-ranking official, his hair has turned white, he makes mistakes at home, and he is still beaten by his mother.

古文：景让在浙西，有左都押牙迕景让意，景让杖之而毙。
现代文：李景让在浙西做官，部下左都押牙违背他的意旨，李景让竟举杖将左都押牙打死。
English: When Li Jingzhang was an official in western Zhejiang, his subordinates all broke their oaths against his wishes. Li Jingzhang even raised his cane to beat his subordinates to death.

古文：军中愤怒，将为变。
现代文：引起军中愤怒，眼看就将发生变乱。
English: Anger in the army will cause turmoil in the near future.

古文：母闻之，景让方视事，母出坐听事，立景让于庭而责之曰： 天子付汝以方面，国家刑法，岂得以为汝喜怒之资，妄杀无罪之人乎！
现代文：景让母郑氏得知消息，时李景让正在官厅办理公事，郑氏出来坐于厅堂，然后让李景让站在庭院中，愤怒地责备说： 天子付给你镇守一方的重任，国家的刑法，岂能成为你个人喜怒的凭借，由你随意杀无罪的人！
English: When Li Jingzhang was doing business in the government office, Zheng came out and sat in the hall, and then asked Li Jingzhang to stand in the courtyard and angrily reproached him, saying: "The important task of protecting the town, the country's criminal law, given to you by the Son of Heaven, can it become your personal source of joy and anger? You can kill innocent people at will!

古文：万一致一方不宁，岂惟上负朝廷，使垂年之母衔羞入地，何以见汝之先人乎！
现代文：万一造成一方不安宁，岂只是上负于朝廷，就是垂老之年的我也要含羞而死，有什么脸面见你的先人前辈！ 
English: In the unlikely event that one side causes unrest, is it only the imperial court that will be held responsible? Even in my old age, I will die with shame. What a face to see your ancestors!

古文：命左右褫其衣坐之，将挞其背。
现代文：说完命令左右家人剥下李景让的衣服，坐于庭中，将鞭挞李景让的背。
English: After giving the order, the family members stripped off Li Jingzhang's clothes, sat in the yard, and whipped Li Jingzhang's back.

古文：将佐皆为之请，拜且泣，久乃释之，军中由是遂安。
现代文：将佐们都为李景让求情，拜谢以致于哭泣，郑氏很久才将李景让释放，军中于是安定下来了。
English: The generals all pleaded for the release of Li Jingjun, and they were so grateful that they cried. It took a long time for Zheng to release Li Jingjun, and the army then settled down.

古文：景庄老于场屋，每被黜，母辄挞景让。
现代文：李景庄多年入贡院参加科举考试，每次考不上被黜退时，母郑氏就要鞭挞李景让。
English: For many years, Li Jingzhuang was admitted to the Tribute Academy to participate in the imperial examinations. Every time he failed to pass the examination and was forced to withdraw, his mother Zheng would whip Li Jingzhuang.

古文：然景让终不肯属主司，曰： 朝廷取士自有公道，岂敢效人求关节乎！ 
现代文：然而李景让始终不肯依附于主考官，说： 朝廷科举取士自会有公道的，岂敢象别人那样去打通关节呢！ 
English: However, Li Jingzang always refused to be attached to the chief examiner, saying: The imperial court examiner will be fair, how dare he open the joint like others!

古文：久之，宰相谓主司曰： 李景庄今岁不可不收，可怜彼翁每岁受挞！ 
现代文：过了很久，宰相对知贡举的主司说： 李景庄今年科举不能不予录取，可怜他的哥哥每年都要受鞭挞！ 
English: After a long time, the president said to the director of the intellectual tribute: Li Jingzhuang cannot fail to be admitted to the examination this year, pity his brother who has to be whipped every year!

古文：由是始及第。
现代文：于是李景庄始得以进士及第。
English: As a result, Li Jingzhuang was able to enter the first and second.

古文：冬，十月，礼院奏禘祭祝文于穆、敬、文、武四室，但称 嗣皇帝臣某昭告 ，从之。
现代文：冬季，十月，礼院向唐宣宗奏称，在祭的祝文上，对于唐穆宗及其儿子唐敬宗、唐文宗、唐武宗四室，因唐宣宗辈份并不比他们低，所以祝文上只是自称 嗣皇帝臣某昭告 ，唐宣宗表示同意。
English: In winter, in October, the ceremonial hall reported to Tang Xuan Zong that in the congratulatory message of the festival, for Tang Mu Zong and his sons, Tang Jing Zong, Tang Wen Zong, and Tang Wu Zong, because Tang Xuan's ancestors were not lower than them, Tang Xuan Zong agreed to the congratulatory message that he was only a self-proclaimed emperor's vassal.

古文：甲申，上受三洞法于箓衡山道士刘玄静。
现代文：甲申，唐宣宗接受道教三洞法于衡山道士刘玄静。
English: A Jia Shen, Tang Xuan Zong accepted the Taoist three-cave method from the Hengshan Taoist Liu Xuan Jing.

古文：十二月，戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，戊辰朔出现日食。
English: In December, a solar eclipse occurred in the morning.

古文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝上
现代文：宣宗元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝上
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Yuan and Ming dynasties was a great warrior, a great scholar, a great man of wisdom, a great man of benevolence, a great man of virtue, and a great man of filial piety.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下大中元年春，正月，甲寅，上祀圆丘，赦天下，改元。
现代文：唐宣宗大中元年春季，正月，甲寅，唐宣宗举行祀圜丘大礼，大赦天下，改年号为大中。
English: In the spring of the first year of the 21st century, in the first month of the year, Tang Xuan Zong held the grand ceremony of worshiping the sacred mountain, and was amnestied by the world, and the year name was changed to the university.

古文：二月，庚午，加卢龙节度使张仲琥同平章事，赏其屡破回鹘也。
现代文：二月，唐宣宗加给卢龙节度使张仲武同平章事的名号，以奖赏他击破回鹘的功劳。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty gave Zhang Zhongwu the title of Tongping Shanzhi to the Lulong Festival to reward him for defeating the Hui.

古文：癸未，上以旱故，减膳彻乐，出宫女，纵鹰隼，止营缮，命中书侍郎、同平章事卢商与御史中丞封敖疏理京城系囚。
现代文：癸未，由于旱灾，唐宣宗减少自己的膳食，撤除伎乐，将后宫宫女放回家，将宫廷中养的鹰和鹘放飞天空，并停止经营修缮宫庭，命令中书侍郎、同平章事卢商与御史中丞封敖审查疏理关押在京城监狱中的囚徒。
English: Recently, due to drought, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty reduced his diet, abolished the magic show, sent the harem maidens home, released the eagles and egrets raised in the court into the sky, and stopped repairing the palace garden. He ordered the chief secretary, Tongping Zhangji Lu Shang, and the chief historian, Zhongzheng Feng, to review the prisoners detained in the Beijing City Prison.

古文：大理卿马植奏称： 卢商等务行宽宥，凡抵极法者，一切免死。
现代文：大理卿马植奏告唐宣宗说： 卢商等人尊从您的旨意疏理囚徒时，务行宽大原宥，罪囚凡须抵命处极刑的，也一概免死。
English: Dai Liqing Ma Zhesong told Tang Xuan Zong, "When Lu Shang and other dignitaries release prisoners according to your will, they must practice great clemency. All prisoners who are sentenced to capital punishment are also exempted from death.

古文：彼官典犯赃及故杀人，平日大赦所不免，今因疏理而原之，使贪吏无所惩畏，死者衔冤无告，恐非所以消旱灾、致和气也。
现代文：有些得罪的官是因为贪赃犯罪以及故意杀人，平日就是遇到大赦也不能免罪，今天因为卢商等人的疏理而获得赦免，这样做必定使贪官污吏得不到应有的惩罚，因而更加不怕触犯法律；被无辜杀死的人含冤无告，因为没有人为他们主持公道，这恐怕不是消除旱灾，导致和气的好办法。
English: Some officials who are guilty of corruption and intentional homicide cannot be pardoned even if they are granted amnesty. Today, they were pardoned because of the negligence of Lu merchants and others. Doing so will certainly make corrupt officials not get the punishment they deserve, and thus they will not be afraid of breaking the law. People who were killed innocently will not complain, because there is no one to do justice for them. This is probably not a good way to eliminate drought and lead to harmony.

古文：昔周饥，克殷而年丰；卫旱，讨邢而雨降。
现代文：过去周朝遇到大饥荒，灭亡暴虐的殷朝而致丰收年；卫国发生旱灾，因攻讨邢国而降下大雨。
English: In the past, the Zhou dynasty experienced a great famine, and the death of the tyrannical Yin dynasty led to a bumper harvest year; drought occurred in the defense of the country, and heavy rain fell due to the attack on the country.

古文：是则诛罪戮奸，式合天意，雪冤决滞，乃副圣心也。
现代文：说明诛讨罪犯，杀戮奸邪盗贼，正合天意，使冤杜昭雪，滞留的案情得到判决，我认为这才是符合皇上的圣心呀。
English: I think it is in line with the emperor's sacred heart to explain that the cases of arresting criminals, killing traitors and thieves are in line with the will of heaven, and that the wrongdoers are brought to justice.

古文：乞再加裁定。 
现代文：乞求陛下对疏理囚徒之事再加以裁定。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to re-examine the matter of the prisoner release.

古文：诏两省五品以上议之。
现代文：唐宣宗于是颁下诏书，请中书、门下两省五品以上的官员集体加以议论。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang then issued an imperial edict, inviting officials from the Central Government and the two provinces with more than five princes to discuss the matter collectively.

古文：初，李德裕执政，引白敏中为翰林学士。乃武宗崩，德裕失势，敏中乘上下之怒，竭力排之，使其党李咸讼德裕罪，德裕由是自东都留守以太子少保、分司。
现代文：起初，李德裕任宰相执掌朝政时，提拔白敏中为翰林学士；到唐武宗死后，李德裕失势，白敏中于是趁朝廷上下对李德裕一片愤怒，竭力排挤李德裕，指使李德裕的党羽李咸揭发李德裕执政时的罪过，李德裕因此而由东都留守贬为太子少保、分司东都，为闲官。
English: At first, when Li Deyu was the prime minister in charge of the imperial government, Bai Minzhong was promoted to Hanlin Scholar; when Tang Wuzong died, Li Deyu lost power. Bai Minzhong then took advantage of the anger of the imperial court against Li Deyu, and tried his best to oust Li Deyu. He ordered Li Haman, a party member of Li Deyu, to expose Li Deyu's sins when he was in power. As a result, Li Deyu was left behind in Dongdu and was demoted to the position of a minor prince, a deputy governor of Dongdu, and an idle official.

古文：左谏议大夫张鹭等上言： 陛下以旱理系囚，虑有冤滞。
现代文：左谏议大夫张鹭等人向唐宣宗上言： 您因为旱灾而疏理被关押的囚犯，并为冤情和滞留案件而深感忧虑。
English: Zuo Wei's doctor Zhang Wei and others appealed to Tang Xuanzong: You have evacuated prisoners detained due to drought, and are deeply concerned about grievances and detention cases.

古文：今所原死罪，无冤可雪，恐凶险侥幸之徒常思水旱为灾，宜如马植所奏。 
现代文：目前所原宥的犯有死罪的囚徒，本没有冤情可昭雪，恐怕因此凶恶阴险而心存侥幸的罪犯常希望发生水旱灾害，所以应该听从马植的奏请。 
English: At present, the death-row prisoners who were originally pardoned have no grievances to show, and I am afraid that criminals who are vicious and insidious and lucky often hope for floods and droughts, so they should listen to Ma Zhi's appeal.

古文：诏从之，皆论如法。
现代文：唐宣宗颁下诏书，批准了马植的奏议，对关押于狱中的罪徒，全都依法论处。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang issued an edict, approved the petition of Ma Zhi, and all criminals detained in prison were dealt with according to law.

古文：以植为刑部侍郎，充盐铁转运使。
现代文：并提升马植为刑部侍郎，充任盐铁转运使。
English: He also promoted Ma Zhe to the position of the attendant of the criminal department and appointed him as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：植素以文学政事有名于时，李德裕不之重。
现代文：马植平素以有文学才能和善理政事而闻名于当时，李德裕对他不加以重用。
English: At that time, Ma Yueping was famous for his literary talent and good governance, but Li Deyu did not give him much attention.

古文：及白敏中秉政，凡德裕所薄者，皆不次用之。
现代文：到白敏中任宰相执政之时，凡以前受李德裕鄙薄的人，都一个接一个地加以重用。
English: By the time Bai Minzhong was appointed prime minister, all those who had previously been despised by Li Deyu were reused one after another.

古文：以卢商为武昌节度使，以刑部尚书、判度支崔元式为门下侍郎，翰林学士、户部侍郎韦琮为中书侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：唐宣宗听白敏中的荐举，任命卢商为武昌节度使。任命刑部尚书、判度支崔元式为门下侍郎，翰林学士、户部侍郎韦琮为中书侍郎，三人并为同平章事。
English: Tang Xuan Zong listened to Bai Minzhong's recommendation and appointed Lu Shang as Wuchang's delegate to the festival, appointed Shang Shu of the Department of Criminal Law and Cui Yuan Shi of the Department of Judgement as his subordinate attendants, Han Lin Baozhong and Wei Wei, the attendant of the Department of Household Affairs, as the attendants of the Department of Central Affairs, and the three of them as the same level of officials.

古文：闰三月，敕： 应会昌五年所废寺，有僧能营葺者，听自居之，有司毋得禁止。 
现代文：三月，唐宣宗颁下诏敕： 在会昌五年毁佛时所拆毁的寺庙，如果僧人有能力修缮或营造的，听任他自己居处，官府不得禁止。 
English: In March, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict: If a monk has the ability to repair or build a temple that was destroyed during the five-year destruction of Buddhism in Huichang, he is allowed to live in it, and the government may not prohibit it.

古文：是时君、相务反会昌之政，故僧、尼之弊皆复其旧。
现代文：这时，唐宣宗和白敏中等君主、宰相，都竭力反对会昌年间唐武宗和李德裕的政策，所以僧侣、尼姑的弊端全部恢复了原样。
English: At this time, Tang Xuan Zong and Bai Min, a middle-ranking monarch and prime minister, both strenuously opposed the policies of Tang Wuzong and Li Deyu during the Heichang period, so all the drawbacks of monks and nuns were restored.

古文：己酉，积庆太后萧氏崩。
现代文：己酉，唐文宗的母亲积庆太后萧氏驾崩。
English: The Dowager Empress Jieqing, the mother of Tang Wenzong, passed away.

古文：五月，幽州节度使张仲武大破诸奚。
现代文：五月，幽州节度使张仲武率军大破诸奚族部落。
English: In May, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongwu and his army defeat the Yi tribes.

古文：吐蕃论恐热乘武宗之丧，诱党项及回鹘馀众寇河西，诏河东节度使王宰将代北诸军击之。
现代文：吐蕃统帅论恐热趁唐武宗丧事的机会，引诱党项族以及回鹘国的残余部众入侵唐朝河西诸郡，唐宣宗颁下诏书，令河东节度使王宰率领代北诸支军队讨伐论恐热。
English: On the occasion of Tang Wuzong's funeral, the commander-in-chief of Tubo took the opportunity to lure Dangxiang and the remnants of Hui into invading the western counties of the Tang Dynasty. Tang Xuanzong issued an edict, ordering the Hedong Festival to send Wang Zai to lead the northern troops to fight on behalf of Tang Wuzong.

古文：宰以沙陀硃邪赤心为前锋，自麟州济河，与恐热战于盐州，破走之。
现代文：王宰任命沙陀族酋领朱邪赤心为前锋，从麟州渡过黄河，与论恐热接战于盐州，将论恐热击败并赶走。
English: Wang Zai appointed Zhu Yanzhong, the chief of the Shatou tribe, as the front man. He crossed the Yellow River from Linzhou and fought with Ongfei in Yanzhou, defeating and driving off Ongfei.

古文：六月，以鸿胪卿李业为册黠戛斯英武诚明可汗使。
现代文：六月，唐宣宗任命鸿胪卿李业为册封黠戛斯英武诚明可汗使。
English: In June, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Hongyuqing Liye as the official envoy of the Kangxi Yingwu Chengming Khan.

古文：上请白敏中曰： 朕昔从宪宗之丧，道遇风雨，百官、六宫四散避去，惟山陵使长而多髯，攀灵驾不去，谁也？ 
现代文：唐宣宗将白敏中请到便殿问道： 朕以前为宪宗发丧，去陵墓的路途中遇到大风雨，朝臣百官和六宫妃主都四散逃走避雨，只有长得高大而多胡须的山陵使扶着宪宗的灵柩车驾不走，这个人是谁呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong invited Bai Minzhong to the latrine and asked: I used to mourn for Xianzong. On the way to the mausoleum, I encountered heavy wind and rain. Hundreds of courtiers and six palace empresses scattered to escape the rain. Only the tall and bearded mountains prevented the hearse carrying Xianzong from driving away. Who is this person?

古文：对曰： 令狐楚。 
现代文：白敏中回答说： 是令狐楚。 
English: Bai Minzhong replied, "It's Lingfuchu."

古文：上曰： 有子乎？ 
现代文：唐宣宗说： 他有儿子吗？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said: Does he have a son?

古文：对曰： 长子绪今为随州刺史。 
现代文：敏中回答说： 他的长子令狐绪现在是随州刺史。 
English: Min Chung replied: His eldest son, Ling Foo Su, is now Suizhou's history.

古文：上曰： 堪为相乎？ 
现代文：唐宣宗又问： 是不是可以当宰相？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong also asked: Is it possible to become prime minister?

古文：对曰： 绪少病风痹。次子綯，前湖州刺史，有才器。 
现代文：白敏中回答说： 令狐绪年少时得过风湿病，令狐楚的次子令狐是前湖州刺史，很有才器。 
English: Bai Min replied: Ling Fuxu suffered from rheumatism when he was young. Ling Fuxu, the second son of Ling Fuxu, is a former Huzhou barber and is very talented.

古文：上即擢为考功郎中、知制诰。
现代文：唐宣宗立即将令狐提拔为考功郎中、知制诰。
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately promoted Ling Fox to be a meritorious student in the examination and a scholar.

古文：綯入谢，上问以元和故事，綯条对甚悉，上悦，遂有大用之意。
现代文：令狐入朝向唐宣宗谢恩，唐宣宗问起元和年间的事，令狐逐条对答，十分熟悉，唐宣宗甚为欢喜，于是有重用令狐的意思。
English: When the fox came to Tang Xuan Zong to thank him, Tang Xuan Zong asked him about the events of the Yuan and the years, and the fox answered step by step, which was very familiar. Tang Xuan Zong was very pleased, so there was a sense of reusing the fox.

古文：秋，八月，丙申，以门下侍郎、同平章事李回同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：秋季，八月，丙申，唐宣宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事李回挂同平章事衔、出任西川节度使。
English: In the autumn, in August, Tang Xuan Zong appointed his servant, Tongping Zhang Jiji Li, to the title of Tongping Zhang Jiji Li and served as the Nishikawa Festival Envoy.

古文：葬贞献皇后于光陵之侧。
现代文：安葬贞献皇后萧氏于穆宗光陵旁侧。
English: Empress Zhengjian Xiao was laid to rest next to the tomb of Mu Zongguang.

古文：上敦睦兄弟，作雍和殿于十六宅，数临幸，置酒，作乐，击球尽欢。
现代文：唐宣宗为了与兄弟们和睦友爱，于十六宅建造雍和殿，并多次亲临此殿，设置酒宴，与兄弟诸王饮酒作乐，击游戏，尽情欢乐。
English: In order to promote harmony and friendship with his brothers, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty built the Yonghe Hall in the Sixteen Mansions. He visited the hall many times to hold banquets, drink wine with his brothers and kings, make music, play games, and have fun.

古文：诸王有疾，常亲至卧内存问，忧形于色。
现代文：诸王患有疾病，唐宣宗经常亲自来到患病亲王的卧室内加以慰问，忧虑焦急之形现于脸上。
English: When the princes were ill, Emperor Tang Xuanzong often personally came to the sick prince's bedroom to offer his condolences. An anxious look of worry appeared on his face.

古文：突厥掠漕米及行商，振武节度使史宪忠击破之。
现代文：突阙部族掠夺唐朝的漕米和行商，振武节度使史宪忠率军讨击，大破突阙。
English: Turbulent tribes plundered the rice paddies and peddlers of the Tang Dynasty, and the Zhenwu Festival made Shi Xianzhong lead the army to counterattack, and broke the Turbulence.

古文：九月，丁卯，以金吾大将军郑光为平卢节度使。
现代文：九月，丁卯，唐宣宗任命金吾大将军郑光为平卢节度使。
English: In September, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty appointed General Zheng Guang as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Pinglu.

古文：光，润州人，太后之弟也。
现代文：郑光是润州人，郑太后的弟弟。
English: Zheng Guang is from Runzhou and is the younger brother of Empress Dowager Zheng.

古文：乙酉，前永宁尉吴汝纳，讼其弟湘罪不至死， 李绅与李德裕相表里，期罔武宗，枉杀臣弟，乞召江州司户崔元藻等对辨。 
现代文：乙酉，前永宁县尉吴汝纳，上表申诉其弟弟吴湘犯罪不至于处死，而 李绅与李德裕内外相通，互为表里，欺瞒迷惑唐武宗，冤枉杀死我弟吴湘，乞求皇帝陛下召江州司户崔元藻等人来对质辨诬。 
English: Acetylene, the former Yongning County lieutenant Wu Runa, complained to the above table that his brother Wu Xiang's crime would not be executed, while Li Sheng and Li Deyu communicated with each other inside and outside, deceiving and confusing Tang Wuzong, unjustly killing my brother Wu Xiang, and begging His Majesty the Emperor to call Jiangzhou Sido Cui Yuanmao and others to confront the hecklers.

古文：丁亥，敕御史台鞫实以闻。
现代文：丁亥，唐宣宗颁下敕书给御史台，令调查出真实情况向上汇报。
English: Dinghai, Tang Xuan Zong issued an imperial edict to the Imperial History Channel, ordering the investigation to report the true situation to the top.

古文：冬，十二月，庚戌，御史台奏，据崔元藻所列吴湘冤状，如吴汝纳之言。
现代文：冬季，十二月，庚戌，御史台上奏唐宣宗，据崔元藻所列举的吴湘冤枉情况，和吴汝纳申诉的差不多。
English: In winter, December, Geng Zheng, Tang Xuan Zong appeared on the historical stage. According to Cui Yuanmao, the situation of Wu Xiang's wrongdoing was similar to Wu Runa's complaint.

古文：戊午，贬太子少保、分司李德裕为潮州司马。
现代文：戊午，唐宣宗下令贬太子太保、分司东都李德裕为潮州司马。
English: In the afternoon, Tang Xuan Zong ordered to demote the crown prince Taibo and the sub-governor of Dongdu, Li Deyu, to Chaozhou Sima.

古文：吏部奏，会昌四年所减州县官内复增三百八十三员。
现代文：吏部奏报唐宣宗：在会昌四年所减少的州、县官中，恢复三百八十三员官吏。
English: Tang Xuanzong reported to the cadre department: among the prefectural and county officials reduced in the four years of Huichang, 383 officials were restored.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下大中二年正月，甲子，群臣上尊号曰圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝；赦天下。
现代文：大中二年正月，甲子，群臣给唐宣宗上尊号，称为圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝；唐宣宗为此大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the second year of junior high school, a group of courtiers gave Tang Xuan Zong the title of honor, known as the Holy Venerable Wensi and the Emperor Wu Guangxiao; Tang Xuan Zong forgave the world for this.

古文：初，李德裕执政，有荐丁柔立清直可任谏官者，德裕不能用。
现代文：起初，李德裕任宰相执朝政，有人推荐丁柔立为人清廉正直，可以担任谏官，李德裕不予任用。
English: At first, Li Deyu was appointed as the prime minister to run the government. Some people recommended Ding Ruling as a clean and honest person who could serve as a eunuch, but Li Deyu was not appointed.

古文：上即位，柔立为右补阙。德裕贬潮州，柔立上疏讼其冤。
现代文：唐宣宗即皇帝位后，任丁柔立为右补阙；李德裕被贬至潮州，丁柔立向唐宣宗上疏为李德裕申冤。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong became emperor, Ren Ding Rong was appointed as the right-hand man; Li Deyu was demoted to Chaozhou, and Ding Rong appealed to Tang Xuan Zong for Li Deyu.

古文：丙寅，坐阿附贬南阳尉。
现代文：丙寅，朝廷以丁柔立阿附李德裕而将他贬为南阳县尉。
English: Hsin-Yin, the imperial court made Ding Rong-Ling subordinate to Li Deyu and demoted him to Nanyang County Lieutenant.

古文：西川节度使李回、桂管观察使郑亚坐前不能直吴湘冤，乙酉，回左迁湖南观察使，亚贬循州刺史，李绅追夺三任告身。
现代文：西川节度使李回、桂管观察使郑亚因为以前不能辨白吴湘的冤情，乙酉，李回被降职调任湖南观察使，郑亚被贬为循州刺史，李绅虽死，也被追夺三任委任状。
English: Li Hui was demoted to the position of Hunan Observer, Zheng Ya was relegated to the position of State Historian, and Li Sheng, although dead, was also deprived of the three-term commission.

古文：中书舍人崔嘏坐草李德裕制不尽言其罪，己丑，贬端州刺史。
现代文：中书舍人崔嘏因为起草贬李德裕官的制书没有全部写上李德裕的罪状，已丑，也被贬为端州刺史。
English: The author of the Chinese history textbook, Cui Wei, was disgraced because he did not write down all of Li Deyu's crimes when he drafted the textbook to disparage Li Deyu. He was also relegated to a footnote in the history of Danzhou.

古文：回鹘遏捻可汗仰给于奚王石舍朗。
现代文：回鹘国的遏捻可汗因穷困，生活仰仗于奚族王石舍朗。
English: Due to poverty, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong Khan of the State of Yunnan depended on the Yao King Shishelang for his livelihood.

古文：及张仲琥大破奚众，回鹘无所得食，日益耗散。至是，所存贵臣以下不满五百人，依于室韦。
现代文：至唐卢龙节度使张仲武大破奚族部众，回鹘没有地方可求得食物，于是部众日益消耗离散，到这时，所留下的贵族以下人员还不满五百人，转而依附于室韦部族。
English: By the time of the Lulong Festival of Tang, Zhang Zhongwu had completely destroyed the Yi tribe, and there was no place to get food. As a result, the tribe was increasingly dispersed. By this time, there were less than five hundred people from the aristocracy and below left behind, and they turned to cling to the Murowe tribe.

古文：使者入贺正，过幽州，张仲武使归取遏捻等。遏捻闻之，夜与妻葛禄、子特勒毒斯等九骑西走，馀众追之不及，相与大哭。
现代文：回鹘派遣使者入唐朝祝贺正旦佳日，路过幽州，张仲武让其使者回去擒取遏捻可汗等人；遏捻可汗得知消息，趁夜与妻子葛禄、儿子特勒毒斯等九人骑马西走，回鹘余众追遏捻可汗不及，相对痛哭流泪。
English: Hui Xuan sent an envoy to Tang Dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan on the auspicious day. Passing Yuzhou, Zhang Zhongwu asked his envoy to go back and capture Dang Dui Khan and others. When Dang Dui Khan learned the news, he took advantage of the night to ride west with nine people, including his wife, Gu Lu, and his son, Tre Yux, and the rest of Hui Xuan couldn't catch up with Dang Dui Khan, so he cried bitterly.

古文：室韦分回鹘馀众为七，七姓共分之。居二日，黠戛斯遣其相阿播帅诸胡兵号七万来取回鹘，大破室韦，悉收回鹘馀众归碛北。
现代文：于是室韦将回鹘余众分为七个部分，由室韦族的七姓部落平分，每姓分得一部；留居了三天，黠戛斯派遣宰相阿播率领诸胡族之兵号称七万来夺取回鹘人，大破室韦部族，将回鹘余众全部收归沙漠之北。
English: As a result, Murowe divided the remaining Uighurs into seven parts, equally divided by the seven tribes of the Murowe tribe, with each tribe getting a part; after staying for three days, Zangas sent Prime Minister Abang, led by the Hu tribe, to capture the Uighurs, defeating the Murowe tribe and returning all the remaining Uighurs to the north of the desert.

古文：犹有数帐，潜窜山林，钞盗诸胡。其别部厖勒，先在安西，亦自称可汗，居甘州，总碛西诸城，种落微弱，时入献见。
现代文：还有几帐回鹘人，秘密地逃窜到山林之中，经常出来攻掠劫取诸胡部落；回鹘族的别部勒，起先在安西，也自称可汗，居住于甘州，总领沙漠以西诸城镇，这时回鹘部落已很微弱，时常入唐朝贡献，朝见大唐皇帝。
English: There were also several groups of Uighurs who secretly fled to the mountains and forests, and often came out to attack and rob the Zhuhu tribes. Another branch of the Uighurs, first in Anxi, also called themselves khans, lived in Ganzhou and led the towns west of the desert. At this time, the Uighur tribe was already very weak, and often contributed to the Tang Dynasty and met the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：二月，庚子，以知制诰令狐綯为翰林学士。
现代文：二月，庚子，唐宣宗任知制诰令狐为翰林学士。
English: In February, Geng Zi, Tang Xuan Zong's pupil, was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：上尝以太宗所撰《金镜》授綯，使读之， 至乱未尝不任不肖，至治未尝不任忠贤， 上止之曰： 凡求致太平，当以此言为首。 
现代文：唐宣宗曾经以唐太宗所撰写的《金镜》授与令狐，让他读给自己听，书中有 在大乱之世也不应该委任不肖之徒为官，在大治之世也不应该不委忠贤之士掌政， 唐宣宗听到这句时止住令狐，说： 凡是要求致太平的，应当以这句话为首要信条。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong once gave Ling Foo a copy of the "Golden Mirror" written by Tang Taizong and asked him to read it to himself. In the book, it is said that in a world of great turmoil, one should not appoint unscrupulous people as officials, and in a world of great governance, one should not appoint loyal and wise people to govern. When Tang Xuan Zong heard this sentence, he stopped Ling Foo and said, "Anyone who asks for peace should take this sentence as the primary tenet."

古文：又书《贞观政要》于屏风，每正色拱手而读之。
现代文：又将《贞观政要》书写于屏风之上，经常严肃地拱手细读其中的警句。
English: He also wrote "Zhenguan Zhengyao" on the screen, and often seriously read the epigrams in it.

古文：上欲知百官名数，令狐綯曰： 六品已下，官卑数多，皆吏部注拟；五品以上，则政府制授，各有籍，命曰具员。 
现代文：唐宣宗想知道朝廷百官的名字和数额，令狐说： 六品以下的官，官位卑下而数目很多，都由尚书省吏部注拟授职；五品以上的官，则由中书门下政事党节制授理，他们各有名籍，叫做具员。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong wanted to know the names and amounts of the hundred officials of the imperial court. Ling Xiu said: "Officials below the rank of six, who are inferior in rank but numerous in number, are all appointed by the Ministry of Civil Service of Shangshu Province; officials above the rank of five, are appointed by the political party system under the gate of Zhongshu. Each of them has his own name, called Gu member.

古文：上命宰相作《具员御览》五卷，上之，常置于案上。
现代文：唐宣宗于是命令宰相撰写《具员御览》五卷，宰相撰修完后奏上，唐宣宗将其经常放置于桌上，以备查考。
English: Tang Xuan Zong then ordered the prime minister to write five volumes of "Composition Overview." After the prime minister finished writing, Tang Xuan Zong often placed it on the table for inspection.

古文：立皇子泽为濮王。
现代文：唐宣宗立皇子李泽为濮王。
English: Emperor Xuan Zongli's son, Emperor Li Ze, was crowned the King of Gong.

古文：上欲作五王院于大明宫，以处皇子之幼者，召术士柴岳明使相其地。
现代文：唐宣宗想在大明宫内建造五王院，以让年龄幼小的皇子居处，召来术士柴岳明，让他来相风水。
English: Emperor Tang Xuanzong wanted to build the Five Kings' Courtyard in the Daming Palace to accommodate the young prince, and summoned the sorcerer Chai Yueming to come for feng shui.

古文：岳明对曰： 臣庶之家，廷徙不常，故有自阳宅入阴宅，阴宅入阳宅。
现代文：柴岳明回答说： 一般臣民之家，常迁徒不定，所以有的从向阳的屋子迁入朝阴的屋子，有的从朝阴的屋子迁进向阳的屋子。
English: Chai Yueming replied: Generally, the homes of subjects are subject to constant movement, so some move from the sun-facing room into the morning-shade room, and some from the morning-shade room into the sun-facing room.

古文：刑克祸福，师有其说，今陛下深拱法宫，万神拥卫，阴阳书本不言帝王家。 
现代文：阴阳家所谓三刑祸福，五行相克，是有这种说法，但陛下您高筑起宏伟的路寝正殿，受到万神的拥戴守卫，而阴阳家的书是无法预测帝王之家的。 
English: There is a saying that the yin and yang family has the so-called three punishments, misfortune and good fortune, and that the five elements compete with each other. However, Your Majesty, you have built a magnificent throne hall, which is supported and guarded by all the gods, while the book of the yin and yang family cannot predict the emperor's family.

古文：上善其言，赐束帛遣之。 夏，五月，己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：唐宣宗对柴岳明的话表示赞同，赐给他束帛将他送走。夏季，五月，己未朔，出现日食。
English: Tang Xuan Zong agreed with Chai Yueming's words and gave him a bunch of bamboo shoots to send him away. In the summer, in May, before the new year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事崔元式罢为户部尚书。以兵部侍郎、判度支、户部周墀、刑部侍郎、盐铁转运使马植并同平章事。
现代文：唐宣宗将门下侍郎、同平章事崔元式罢相，任为户部尚书；任命兵部侍郎、判度支、户部周墀和刑部侍郎，盐铁转运使马植一并为同平章事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty made his subordinate attendants and Tongping chapter officials Cui Yuan style and appointed them as household officials; he appointed the attendants of the military department, the judgment department, the household department and the criminal department, and the transfer of salt and iron made Ma Zhi become the same as Tongping chapter officials.

古文：初，墀为义成节度使，辟韦澳为判官，及为相，谓澳曰： 力小任重，何以相助？ 
现代文：起初，周墀为义成节度使，召聘韦澳为判官，及为宰相，周墀对韦澳说： 我的能力很小，而任务很重，你将如何帮助我呢？ 
English: At first, Zhou Yu, as the envoy of the Yicheng Festival, appointed Wei Ao as the judge and the prime minister. Zhou Yu said to Wei Ao: My ability is small, but the task is very heavy. How will you help me?

古文：澳曰： 愿相公无权。 
现代文：韦澳回答说： 希望相公没有权力。 
English: Wei Ao replied, "Hopefully, the Prince Consort has no power.

古文：墀愕然，不知所措。
现代文：周墀听后感到愕然，不知道韦澳指的是什么意思。
English: After listening, Zhou Yao was stunned and did not know what Wei Ao meant.

古文：澳曰： 官赏刑罚，与天下共其可否，勿以己之爱憎喜怒移之，天下自理，何权之有！ 
现代文：韦澳解释说： 对于官的赏赐和用刑处罚，您应该与天下人持相同的意见，不要以自己的爱憎喜怒来转移公论，这样天下就自然得到治理，又有什么必要去谋求权力！ 
English: Wei Ao explained: For the reward and punishment of officials, you should hold the same opinion as the people of the world. Don't use your love, hate, joy and anger to divert public opinion. In this way, the world will naturally be governed, and there is no need to seek power!

古文：墀深然之。
现代文：周墀听后深表赞同。
English: After listening, Zhou Ye expressed his deep approval.

古文：澳，贯之之子也。
现代文：韦澳是韦贯之的儿子。
English: Wei Ao is the son of Wei Gangzhi.

古文：己卯，太皇太后郭氏崩于兴庆宫。
现代文：已卯，太皇太后郭氏于兴庆宫驾崩。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Guo passed away at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：六月，礼院检讨官王皞贬句容令。
现代文：六月，礼院的检讨官王被贬为句容县令。
English: In June, the king of the ceremonial court was demoted to a county magistrate.

古文：初，宪宗之崩，上疑郭太后预其谋。又，郑太后本郭太后侍儿，有宿怨，故上即位，待郭太后礼殊薄，郭太后意怏怏。
现代文：起初，唐宪宗崩驾，唐宣宗怀疑郭太后参预了谋害唐宪宗的密谋；另外，郑太后本是侍侯郭太后的小婢，她们之间有宿怨，因此，唐宣宗即皇帝位后，对待郭太后的礼遇特别薄。郭太后为此怏怏不得意。
English: At first, when Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty died, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty suspected Empress Dowager Guo of having participated in the conspiracy to assassinate Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty. In addition, Empress Dowager Zheng was a servant of Empress Dowager Guo, and there was a long-standing grudge between them. Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty treated Empress Dowager Guo with very little courtesy. Empress Dowager Guo was not happy about this.

古文：一日，登勤政楼，欲自陨。上闻之，大怒，是夕，崩，外人颇有异论。
现代文：有一天，郭太后登上兴庆宫的勤政楼，企图跳楼自杀；唐宣宗得知情状，勃然大怒，这天夜里，郭太后身死，宫禁外人们对此有不少异议。
English: One day, Empress Dowager Guo boarded the Gongzheng Building of the Xingqing Palace and attempted to jump off the building to commit suicide; Tang Xuanzong learned of the situation and flew into a rage. That night, Empress Dowager Guo died. People outside the palace had many objections to this.

古文：上以郑太后故，不欲以郭后祔宪宗。有司请葬景陵外园，皞奏宜合葬景陵，神主配宪宗室。奏入，上大怒。
现代文：唐宣宗因为郑太后的缘故，不希望让郭太后于唐宪宗的墓中安葬，主管丧礼的官府请求将郭太后埋葬于景陵的外园；王向唐宣宗上奏论说应该与唐宪宗同葬于景陵，郭太后的神主像也应该和唐宪宗的神主像配置于同一室，王的奏状入于朝廷，唐宣宗勃然大怒。
English: Because of Empress Zheng, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty did not want Empress Dowager Guo to be buried in the tomb of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty. The government office in charge of the funeral requested that Empress Guo be buried in the outer garden of Jingling Mausoleum. The king sent a report to Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty saying that Empress Guo should be buried together with Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty in Jingling Mausoleum, and the statue of the deity of Empress Guo should also be placed in the same room as the statue of the deity of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty. The king's report was submitted to the imperial court

古文：白敏中召皞诘之。皞曰： 太皇太后，汾阳王之孙，宪宗在东宫为正妃，逮事顺宗为妇。
现代文：白敏中召来王质问并指责他，王说： 太皇太后，是汾阳王郭子仪的孙女，宪宗在东宫时就是正妃娘娘，成为顺宗的媳妇。
English: Bai Minzhong summoned Wang to question and accuse him. Wang said: The great empress dowager is the granddaughter of Guo Ziyi, the king of Shenyang. Xianzong was a princess when she was in the East Palace, and became Shunzong's daughter-in-law.

古文：宪宗厌代之夕，事出暖昧。太皇太后母天下，历五朝，岂得以暖昧之事遽废正嫡之礼乎！ 
现代文：宪宗驾崩的那天夜里，似乎死得有些不明不白；但太皇太后郭氏为天下之母，已经历了穆、敬、文、武及今朝共五朝，岂可以因为不明不白的事就突然废止按正宫嫡妻安葬的礼仪呢？ 
English: On the night of Emperor Xianzong's death, it seems that his death was a bit unclear; however, the Empress Dowager Guo, the mother of the world, has already experienced five dynasties, including the Mu, Kei, Wen, and Wu dynasties, so how can she suddenly cancel the funeral rites for the wife of the emperor due to an unclear matter?

古文：敏中怒甚，皞辞气愈厉。
现代文：白敏中听完后怒气冲天，而王却越说越有劲，语气更加严厉。
English: After listening to Bai Minzhong, his anger rose to the sky, while Wang became more and more energetic and stricter.

古文：诸相会食，周墀立于敏中之门以俟之。敏中使谢曰： 方为一书生所苦，公弟先行。 
现代文：待到宰相于政事堂会餐，周墀站在白敏中的公堂门口等待，白敏中派人向周墀道谢说： 刚才正为一个书生所困扰，您请先走一步。 
English: While waiting for the Prime Minister to arrive for the dinner at the Government House, Zhou Ye stood at the entrance of the public hall waiting for Bai Minzhong. Bai Minzhong sent someone to thank Zhou Ye and said: "I was just troubled by a student, please take the first step."

古文：墀入，至敏中厅问其事，见皞争辨方急，墀举手加颡，叹皞孤直。
现代文：周墀于是进入白敏中的公堂，问事出何由，只见王正争辩得厉害，周墀不由得举手按住脑门，赞叹王为人正直。
English: Zhou Yi then entered the court of Bai Minzhong, asked why the matter had come up, only to see Wang Zheng arguing fiercely. Zhou Yi couldn't help but raise his hand and hold his head, praising Wang for his honesty.

古文：明日，皞坐贬官。
现代文：第二天，王即因此而被贬官。
English: The next day, Wang was demoted as a result.

古文：秋，九月，甲子，再贬潮州司马李德裕为崖州司户，湖南观察使李回为贺州刺史。
现代文：秋季，九月，甲子，唐宣宗再次将潮州司马李德裕贬为崖州司户，将湖南观察使李回贬为贺州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in September, in Kozi, Tang Xuan Zong once again relegated Chaozhou Sima Li Deyu to Yalang Prefecture, and relegated Hunan Observation to Hezhou.

古文：前观翔节度使石雄诣政府自陈黑山、乌岭之功，求一镇以终老。
现代文：前凤翔节度使石雄来到中书门下政事堂，向宰相们陈述自己在黑山、乌岭建立的功劳，请求领一藩镇任节度使，直至终老。
English: Before the Fengxiang Festival, Shi Xiong came to the government hall under the Zhongshumen Gate to present his achievements in Montenegro and Wuling to the prime ministers, and requested to be appointed as the festival's envoy to a domain town until his death.

古文：执政以雄李德裕所荐，曰： 向日之功，朝廷以薄、孟、岐三镇酬之，足矣。 
现代文：当朝执政的宰相认为石雄是李德裕所推荐，对石雄说： 以前的战功，朝廷已经让你统辖蒲州、孟州岐州三镇，算是给你的酬劳，够可以的了。 
English: The prime minister of the ruling dynasty thought that Shi Xiong was recommended by Li Deyu, and said to Shi Xiong: "For your previous war exploits, the imperial court has already given you the control of the three towns of Puzhou and Mengzhou-Qizhou, which is considered to be your reward, and it is enough.

古文：除左神武统军。雄怏怏而薨。
现代文：于是任石雄为左龙武统军，石雄怏怏不乐而死。
English: As a result, Ren Shixiong became the leader of the Left Dragon United Front Army, and Shixiong died of grief.

古文：十一月，庚午，万寿公主适起居郎郑颢。
现代文：十一月，庚午，万寿公主嫁起居郎郑颢。
English: In the late afternoon of November, Princess Manshou married Juro Zheng Yao.

古文：颢，絪之孙，登进士第，为校书郎、右拾遗内供奉，以文雅著称。
现代文：郑颢是郑的孙子，举进士第，任校书郎、右拾遗内供奉，以文才风度儒雅而著称于士林。
English: Zheng Yao was the grandson of Zheng. He was promoted to the rank of scholar, appointed as a school scribe, and enshrined in the Right Revival Hall. He was famous in Shilin for his literary talent and elegant demeanor.

古文：公主，上之爱女，故选颢尚之。
现代文：而万寿公主是唐宣宗的爱女，所以宣宗选郑颢娶公主。
English: However, Princess Manshou was the beloved daughter of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, so Emperor Xuanzong chose Zheng Qi to marry the princess.

古文：有司循旧制请用银装车，上曰： 吾欲以俭约化天下，当自亲者始。 
现代文：有关礼官请遵循旧制度用银子装饰马车，唐宣宗说： 我正想以俭朴节约来教化天下人，应当从我的亲人开始。 
English: Relevant etiquette officials should follow the old system to decorate the carriage with silver, Tang Xuan Zong said: I just want to educate the world with frugality and economy, and should start with my relatives.

古文：令依外命妇以铜装车。
现代文：于是命令礼官依照一品外命妇的标准用铜装饰车辆。
English: So he ordered the etiquette officer to decorate the vehicle with copper according to the standard of a foreign wife.

古文：诏公主执妇礼，皆如臣庶之法，戒以毋得轻夫族，毋得预时事。
现代文：唐宣宗又颁下诏书令万寿公主要执守妇人的礼节，不能因为自己是皇帝的女儿而失礼不守规矩，一切规矩都依照臣下庶民的习惯法律，并告诫万寿公主不得轻视丈夫家族的人，不得干预时事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang also issued an edict ordering Princess Wanzhou to mainly adhere to the etiquette of women, and not to be disrespectful or disobey the rules because she was the daughter of the emperor. All rules were in accordance with the customary laws of the common people, and warned Princess Wanzhou not to despise the people of her husband's family and not to interfere in current affairs.

古文：又申以手诏曰： 苟违吾戒，必有太平、安乐之祸。 
现代文：唐宣宗自写诏书告诫万寿公主说： 如果违背我给你的告诫，必然会有当年太平公主、安乐公主那样的祸患。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang wrote an imperial edict to warn Princess Wan Shou, saying: "If you violate my warning, you will inevitably have the same disaster as Princess Taiping and Princess Anle.

古文：颢弟顗，尝得危疾，上遣使视之。还，问 公主何在？ 曰： 在慈恩寺观戏场。 
现代文：郑颢之弟郑，曾患有重病，十分危急，唐宣宗派遣使者去探视，回宫后，唐宣宗问道： 万寿公主在什么地方 使者回答说： 在慈恩寺观戏场。 
English: Zheng Xuan's younger brother, Zheng, had been seriously ill and was in a critical condition. Tang Xuan Zong sent an envoy to visit him. After returning to the palace, Tang Xuan Zong asked, "Where is Princess Manshou?" The envoy replied, "At the Zi En Temple theater."

古文：上怒，叹曰： 我怪士大夫家不欲与我家为昏，良有以也！ 
现代文：唐宣宗听后勃然大怒，叹惜说： 我一直奇怪士大夫家族不想与我家结婚，现在看来是有原因的！ 
English: After hearing this, Tang Xuan Zong flew into a rage and lamented: "I always wondered why the Shidafu family didn't want to marry into my family. Now it seems there is a reason!

古文：亟命召公主入宫，立之阶下，不之视。
现代文：立即命令召万寿公主入禁宫，让她站立在庭殿台阶之下，看也不看她一眼。
English: He immediately ordered that Princess Manju be summoned to the Forbidden Palace and made to stand at the foot of the steps in the courtyard, without even glancing at her.

古文：公主惧，涕泣谢罪。
现代文：万寿公主感到恐慌，流泪满面，向父皇谢罪。
English: Princess Manshou panicked, burst into tears and apologized to her father, the emperor.

古文：上责之曰： 岂有小郎病，不往省视，乃观戏乎！ 
现代文：唐宣宗责备女儿说： 哪有小叔子病危，嫂子不去探望，反而有兴致去看戏的道理！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong scolded his daughter, saying, "What is the reason why a younger brother-in-law is critically ill and his sister-in-law does not visit, but is interested in going to the theatre!

古文：遣妇郑氏。
现代文：派人将万寿公主送回郑颢家。
English: They sent someone to take Princess Manju back to Zheng Ye's home.

古文：由是终上之世，贵戚皆兢兢守礼法，如山东衣冠之族。
现代文：于是直到唐宣宗死，终其朝，皇亲遗戚都兢兢尊守礼法，不敢有违逆，象崤山以东以礼法门风相尚的世族一样。
English: Therefore, until the death of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, all the relatives of the emperor followed the etiquette and did not dare to disobey, just like the people in the east of Mount Lushan who followed the etiquette and etiquette.

古文：壬午，葬懿安皇后于景陵之侧。
现代文：壬午，将懿安皇后安葬于景陵旁侧。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Empress Jianan was buried next to the Jing Mausoleum.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事韦琮为太子宾客、分司。
现代文：唐宣宗将中书侍郎、同平章事韦琮罢相，改任太子宾客、分司东都。
English: Tang Xuan Zong dismissed Chushushushijiro and Tongping Zhangjiwei from their posts and appointed them as guests of the crown prince and sub-governors of Dongdu.

古文：十二月，凤翔节度使崔珙奏破吐蕃，克清水。清水先隶秦州，诏以本州未复，权隶凤翔。
现代文：十二月，凤翔节度使崔珙上奏朝廷，称击破吐蕃，攻克清水县，清水县起先隶属于秦州，唐宣宗颁下诏书称，由于秦州尚未收复，清水县暂时隶属于凤翔。
English: In December, the Fengxiang Festival made Cui Yao appeal to the imperial court, saying that he had defeated Tu Yao and conquered Qingshui County. Qingshui County was initially subordinated to Qin State. Tang Xuan Zong issued an edict saying that since Qin State had not yet been recovered, Qingshui County was temporarily subordinated to Fengxiang.

古文：上见宪宗朝公卿子孙，多擢用之。
现代文：唐宣宗凡是看到宪宗朝公卿大臣的子孙，多半要提拔选用。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty usually saw the sons and daughters of the noblemen and ministers of the Qianzong Dynasty as the best, and most of them had to be promoted and selected.

古文：刑部员外郎杜胜次对，上问其家世，对曰： 臣父黄裳，首请宪宗监国。 
现代文：刑部员外郎杜胜上朝参加次对，唐宣宗问到他的家世，杜胜回答说： 我父亲杜黄裳，首先提议请宪宗监国。 
English: Du Sheng, the second son of Du Huang Zang, a member of the Department of Justice, attended the second match. Tang Xuan Zong asked him about his family history, and Du Sheng replied: My father, Du Huang Zang, first proposed to invite Xian Zang to supervise the country.

古文：即除给事中。
现代文：唐宣宗立即任命杜胜为给事中。
English: Tang Xuan Zong immediately appointed Du Sheng as a member of the commission.

古文：翰林学士裴谂，度之子也，上幸翰林，面除承旨。
现代文：翰林学士裴谂，是裴度的儿子，唐宣宗来到翰林院，当面提升裴谂为翰林学士承旨。
English: Tang Xuan Zong, the son of Pei Du, came to the Hanlin Academy to personally promote Pei Du to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：吐蕃论恐热遣其将恭罗急藏将兵二万略地西鄙，尚婢婢遣其将拓跋怀光击之于南谷，大破之，急藏降。
现代文：吐蕃首领论恐热派遣部将莽罗急藏率兵二万人攻略西部边境之地，尚婢婢派遣部将拓跋怀光抗击论恐热于南谷，结果大破论恐热军。
English: The leader of Tubo dispatched 20,000 troops to conquer the western border, and the dispatched troops to fight against the "fear of heat" in the South Valley. As a result, the "fear of heat" army was defeated.

古文：武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝下大中三年
现代文：莽罗急藏投降尚婢婢。大中三年
English: Meng Luo-Qingzang surrendered reluctantly. Three years of junior high school followed.

古文：春，正月，上与宰相论元和循吏孰为第一，周墀曰： 臣尝守土江西，闻观察使韦丹功德被于八州，没四十年，老稚歌思，如丹尚存。 
现代文：春季，正月，唐宣宗与宰相讨论唐宪宗元和年间地方上循职守法的官吏谁为第一，周墀说： 我曾经在江西做官，听说江西观察使韦丹的功德被江西道所辖洪、江、鄂、岳、虔、吉、袁、抚八州人民传诵，在他死后四十年，江西无论是老人还是小孩，仍然歌唱思念他，就象韦丹还活着一样。 
English: In the spring, in the first month, Tang Xuan Zong and the prime minister discussed Tang Xian Zong Yuan and who was the first law-abiding local official during the years. Zhou Qi said: I used to be an official in Jiangxi Province. I heard that Jiangxi Province observed that the merits of Wei Dan were recited by the people of Hong, Jiang, E, Yue, Qian, Ji, Yuan and Fuzhou, which were under the jurisdiction of Jiangxi Province. Forty years after his death, Jiangxi people, whether old or young, still sing and miss him, just as if Wei Dan was still alive.

古文：乙亥，诏史馆修撰杜牧撰《丹遗爱碑》以纪之，仍擢其子河阳观察判官宙为御史。
现代文：乙亥，唐宣宗下诏命令史馆修撰杜牧撰写《丹遣爱碑》以资纪念，并且拔擢韦丹的儿子河阳观察判官韦宙为御史。
English: At the time of Emperor Yihai, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the History Museum to compile and write the "Danzan Love Monument" in memory of Du Mu, and promoted Wei Xiu, the son of Wei Dan, the judge of Kheyang Observation, as the official historian.

古文：二月，吐蕃论恐热军于河州，尚婢婢军于河源军。
现代文：二月，吐蕃酋领论恐热屯军于河州，尚婢婢屯军于唐鄯州以东的河源军。
English: In February, Tubo chieftain led the Dreadnought garrison in Hezhou, while Shang and his garrison led the Heyuan army in the east of Tangshan.

古文：婢婢诸将欲击恐热，婢婢曰： 不可。
现代文：尚婢婢部下诸将企图攻击论恐热，尚婢婢说： 不可轻易出战。
English: Shang Hibi's subordinates tried to attack the theory of fear and heat, and Shang Hibi said: "You should not go to war easily."

古文：我军骤胜而轻敌，彼穷困而致死，战必不利。 
现代文：我军骤然间获得胜利而产生了轻敌情绪，敌军因战败穷困无路，只有拼死战斗才能求生，所以现在接战对我军必然不利。 
English: Our army's sudden victory has created a feeling of contempt for the enemy. The enemy army is in a desperate situation due to the defeat, and can only survive by fighting to the death. Therefore, engaging in a battle now is inevitably unfavorable to our army.

古文：诸将不从。
现代文：诸将领不信，不肯听从。
English: The generals didn't believe him and wouldn't listen.

古文：婢婢知其必败，据河桥以待之，诸将果败。
现代文：尚婢婢知道部将出战必然失败，于是占据河桥以等待败军的归来，果然诸将进击遭受败绩。
English: Shang knew that the general would inevitably fail, so he occupied the bridge to wait for the return of the defeated army. As it turned out, the generals were defeated.

古文：婢婢收馀众，焚桥，归鄯州。
现代文：尚婢婢于是收集余众，焚烧河桥，率军退归鄯州。
English: Shang then gathered the rest of the people, burned the river bridge, and led the army back to Zhangzhou.

古文：吐蕃秦、原、安乐三州及石门等七关来降。
现代文：吐蕃占领的秦、原、安乐三州以及石门等七座关隘遣使向唐朝投降。
English: The Qin, Yuan, Anle Three Provinces and Shimen, seven passes occupied by Tubo, were forced to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：以太仆卿陆耽为宜谕使，诏泾原、宁武、凤翔、邠宁、振武皆出兵应接。
现代文：唐宣宗任命太仆卿陆耽为宣谕使，颁发诏令让泾原、灵武、凤翔、宁、振武等镇调发军队去接应。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Lu Tan, the Great Servant of the Emperor, as the envoy to deliver the edict, and issued an imperial decree to dispatch troops from the towns of Yuyuan, Lingwu, Fengxiang, Ning and Zhenwu to respond.

古文：河东节度使王宰入朝，以货结贵幸，求以使相领宣武。刑部尚书、同平章事周墀上疏论之，宰遂还镇。
现代文：河东节度使王宰入朝，用财货交结当权的幸臣，求他们游说唐宣宗让自己能以使相的身份领宣武节度使；刑部尚书、同平章事周墀向唐宣宗上疏评论此事，王宰于是回到河东镇。
English: Wang Zai, who was sent to the imperial court by the Hedong Emperor, used his wealth and goods to win over the privileged vassals in power, and asked them to lobby Tang Xuan Zong to allow him to take the position of the consul and lead the Xuanwu Emperor to the imperial court; Shang Shu of the Department of Justice and Tongping Zhang of the Zhou Dynasty made a comment to Tang Xuan Zong on the matter, and Wang Zai then returned to Hedong Town.

古文：附马都尉韦让求为京兆尹，墀言京兆尹非才望不可为，让议意寝。
现代文：附马都尉韦让请求任京兆尹；周墀声言京兆尹没有才能和声望的人不可以担当，韦让的请求最后没有实现。
English: Wei Zhan, the second-in-command of the horse, asked for the appointment of Jing Zhaoyun; Zhou Qian said that someone without the talent and reputation of Jing Zhaoyun should not be in charge, and Wei Zhan's request was not realized in the end.

古文：墀又谏上开边，由是忤旨。
现代文：周墀又谏阻唐宣宗开拓边境，经略河西，因而触犯了唐宣宗的旨意。
English: Zhou Yu also obstructed Tang Xuan Zong from opening up the border and bypassed Hexi, thus violating the will of Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：夏，四月，以墀为东川节度使，以御史大夫崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事，兵部侍郎、判户部魏扶同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐宣宗任周墀为东川节度使。提拔御史大夫崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事；又任命兵部侍郎、判户部魏扶为同平章事。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Zhou Qi as the Dongchuan Festival envoy, promoted the Grand Historian Cui Qi to the position of the secretary of the Central Office and the secretary of the same level, and appointed the secretary of the Military Department and the judge of the Household Department Wei Fu to the same level.

古文：癸巳，卢龙奏节度使张仲武薨，军中立其子节度押牙直方。
现代文：癸已，卢龙镇上奏节度使张仲武去世，军中立张仲武的儿子节度押牙张直方继掌卢龙军政。
English: At that time, Zhang Zhongwu died in Lulong Town, and Zhang Zhongwu's son, Zhang Naofang, succeeded to the military government of Lulong.

古文：翰林学士郑颢言于上曰： 周墀以直言入相，亦以直言罢相。 
现代文：翰林学士郑颢向唐宣宗上言： 周墀因为敢于直言而升任宰相，也因为敢于直言而罢除相职。 
English: Zheng Qi, a scholar of Hanlin, appealed to Tang Xuanzong: Zhou Qi was promoted to prime minister because he dared to speak out, and he was dismissed from his post because he dared to speak out.

古文：上深感悟，甲午，墀入谢，加检校右仆射。
现代文：唐宣宗听后深为感动而觉悟，甲午，周墀入朝谢恩，唐宣宗给他加检校右仆射的衔名。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was deeply moved and enlightened after listening. In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Zhou Xuan entered the morning to express his gratitude. Tang Xuan Zong gave him the title of the right-hand man of the inspection school.

古文：戊戌，以张直方为卢龙留后。
现代文：戊戌，唐宣宗任命张直方为卢龙留后。
English: After Wu Xi, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Zhang Naofang to stay in Lulong.

古文：五月，徐州军乱，逐节度使李廓。
现代文：五月，徐州发生军乱，驱逐节度使李廓。
English: In May, there was a military conflict in Xuzhou, and Li Kuo was expelled from the festival.

古文：廓，程之子也，在镇不治。右补阙郑鲁上言其状，且曰： 臣恐新麦未登，徐师必乱。速命良帅，救此一方。 
现代文：李廓是李程的儿子，在镇不修政治，右补阙郑鲁曾向唐宣宗告发其情状，并且说： 我恐怕还等不到新麦丰收，徐州的军队就已发生变乱；请陛下赶快派一位优秀的统帅，去解救这一方大难。 
English: Li Kuo was the son of Li Cheng, who did not practice politics in the town. Zheng Lu, a right-hand man, had reported his situation to Tang Xuan Zong and said: I'm afraid I can't wait for the new wheat harvest, and the army of Xuzhou has already been in turmoil; please Your Majesty quickly send an excellent commander to relieve this great difficulty.

古文：上未之省。
现代文：唐宣宗并未省悟。
English: Tang Xuan Zong did not reflect.

古文：徐州果乱，上思鲁言，擢为起居舍人。
现代文：而徐州果然发生军乱，唐宣宗回想起郑鲁的上言，于是提擢郑鲁为起居舍人。
English: However, a military conflict did occur in Xuzhou, and Tang Xuan Zong recalled Zheng Lu's exhortation, and then promoted Zheng Lu to the position of chief resident.

古文：以义成节度使卢弘止为武宁节度使。
现代文：唐宣宗任命义成节度使卢弘止为武宁节度使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Lu Hongzhi as the envoy to the Yicheng Festival and the envoy to the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：武宁士卒素骄，有银刀都尤甚，屡逐主帅。
现代文：武宁的士卒一惯骄横，其中银刀都尤其凶暴，屡次驱逐主帅。
English: The officers and men of Wu Ning were always arrogant, and the silver swordsmen were particularly violent, repeatedly expelling the head coach.

古文：弘止至镇，都虞候胡庆方复谋作乱，弘止诛之，抚循其馀，训以忠义，军府由是获安。
现代文：卢弘止来到武宁，都虞候胡庆方企图作乱，被卢弘止诛杀，卢弘止好言安抚其他人，向士卒们训以忠义，武宁军府于是获得了平安。
English: Lu Hongzhi came to Wu Ning, the prefectural governor waited for Hu Qing's side to attempt to make a disturbance, and was killed by Lu Hongzhi. Lu Hongzhi said good words to appease others, and taught the soldiers to be loyal, and the Wu Ning military government thus gained peace.

古文：六月，戊申，以张直方为卢龙节度使。
现代文：六月，戊申，唐宣宗任命张直方为卢龙节度使。
English: In June, Wu Shen, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Zhang Naofang as the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：泾原节度使康季荣取原州及石门、驿藏、木峡、制胜、六磐、石峡六关。
现代文：唐泾原节度使康季荣从吐蕃手中夺得原州，以及石门、驿藏、木峡、制胜、六磐、石峡六座关隘。
English: Tang Xuan Yuan's decree enabled Kang Jirong to seize Wonju from the hands of Tubo, as well as Shimen, Jizang, Muxia, Zhesheng, Liupan and Shixia Gorge.

古文：秋，七月，丁巳，灵武节度使硃叔明聚长乐州。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁巳，唐灵武节度使朱叔明从吐蕃手中攻取得长乐州。
English: In autumn, in July, Ding Si and Tang Lingwu gave Zhu Shuming the opportunity to conquer Changle Prefecture from the hands of Tubo.

古文：甲子，邠宁节度使张君绪取萧关。
现代文：甲子，唐宁节度使张君绪又从吐蕃手中夺回萧关县。
English: In addition, the Tangning Festival made Zhang Junxu win back Xiaoguan County from the hands of Tubo.

古文：甲戌，凤翔节度使李玭取秦州。
现代文：甲戌，唐凤翔节度使李从吐蕃手中攻取秦州。
English: Armor, Tang Fengxiang's determination made Li conquer Qinzhou from the hands of Tubo.

古文：诏邠宁节度权移军于宁州以应接河西。
现代文：唐宣宗颂下诏书令宁节度使暂将军队移驻于宁州，以便应接河西地区。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to temporarily relocate the army to Ningzhou during the Ning Festival, so as to be able to take over the Hexi region.

古文：八月，乙酉，改长乐州为威州。
现代文：八月，乙酉，唐朝改长乐州为威州。
English: In August, the Tang Dynasty changed Changle Prefecture to Weizhou.

古文：河、陇老幼千馀人诣阙，己丑，上御延喜门楼见之，欢呼舞跃，解胡服，袭冠带，观者皆呼万岁。
现代文：河西、陇右地区的百姓老幼一千余人来到长安，已丑，唐宣宗登上延喜门楼接见他们，河西、陇右人欢呼雀跃，脱下胡人服装，戴上唐人的冠带，围观的人都高呼万岁。
English: More than a thousand people, old and young, from the west of the river and the right bank of the Yangtze River came to Chang'an. They were already ugly. Tang Xuan Zong ascended the Yanxi Gate Tower to meet them. The people from the west of the river and the right bank of the Yangtze River cheered, took off their Hu costumes, put on the crown and sash of the Tang people, and the onlookers shouted "Long live!"

古文：诏 募百姓垦辟三州、七关土田，五年不租税，自今京城罪人应配流者皆配十处。四道将吏能于镇戍之地为营田者，官给牛及种粮，温池盐利可赡边陲，委度支制置。
现代文：唐宣宗为此颁发诏书，宣告： 招募百姓开辟耕垦河西、陇右三州、七关土地农田，五年免收租税；自今以后凡京城长安的罪人应发配流放的，全都发配这三州、七关地方；泾原、宁、灵武、凤翔四道的将领官吏能在镇戍的地方经营田者，由官府发给耕牛和种粮。温池的盐利可以用来赡养边陲，委任度支办理。
English: To this end, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict, declaring: Recruit people to open up farmland in the west of the Yangtze River, the three states to the right of the Yangtze River, and the seven passes, and exempt them from paying taxes for five years; from now on, all criminals in Chang'an, Beijing, who should be exiled, should be exiled to these three states and seven passes; generals and officials from the four provinces of Yingyuan, Ning, Lingwu, and Fengxiang, who can manage fields in the townships, will be sent by the government to farm cattle and grow grain. The salt of the warm

古文：其三州、七关镇戍之卒，皆倍给衣粮，仍二年一代。
现代文：凡三州、七关的镇守戍卫士卒，都加倍发给衣服和粮食，两年即进行轮换。
English: All town guards and guardsmen in the three prefectures and Shichiguan will be given double the amount of clothing and grain, and the rotation will be carried out every two years.

古文：道路建置堡栅，有商旅往来贩易及戍卒子弟通传家信，关镇毋得留难。
现代文：在通往边陲的道路上建置城堡栅寨，凡有商旅往来贩卖贸易以及戍军士兵的子弟寄家信的，据守关、镇的官员都不得滞留刁难。
English: According to the customs officer and town officials, anyone who builds a castle fence on the road leading to the border, has business travel, sells and trades, and the sons and daughters of the soldiers of the Han Army send letters, are not allowed to stay in difficulties.

古文：其山南、剑南边境有没蕃州县，亦令量力收复。 
现代文：山南、剑南边境地区有陷没于吐蕃的州县，也命令量力而收复。 
English: In the border areas of Shannan and Jiannan, there are prefectures and counties that have fallen into the Tuyun, and they are also ordered to recover as much as possible.

古文：冬，十月，改备边库为延资库。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐朝廷将备边库改为延资库。
English: In the winter, in October, the Tang court changed the reserve border warehouse to the extension warehouse.

古文：西川节充使杜悰奏取维州。
现代文：西川节度使杜上奏朝廷，宣告已从吐蕃手中夺取维州。
English: The Nishikawa festival made Du report to the imperial court, announcing that he had captured Wizhou from the hands of Tubo.

古文：闰十一月，丁酉，宰相以克复河、湟，请上尊号。
现代文：闰十一月，丁酉，唐朝宰相们以收复河、湟地区为由，请给唐宣宗上尊号。
English: In the intercalary month of November, Dingwu, the prime ministers of the Tang Dynasty, on the grounds of recovering the Fuxihe and Handan regions, please give Tang Xuan Zong the honorary title.

古文：上曰： 宪宗常有志复河、湟，以中原方用兵，未遂而崩，今乃克成先志耳。
现代文：唐宣宗说： 宪宗常有志要收复河、湟地区，由于当时正用兵中原，未能如愿而身死，今天才完成了先辈的遗志。
English: Tang Xuanzong said, "Kenzong often had the ambition to recover the Hebei and Handan regions. Since he was in the middle of the Central Plains at the time, he could not die as he wished, and only today has he fulfilled the last wish of his ancestors.

古文：其议加顺、宪二庙尊谥以昭功烈。 
现代文：应该议论加给顺宗、宪宗二庙的尊谥，以昭示先辈的功烈。 
English: There should be a discussion on the honorific titles to be given to the two temples of Shunzong and Jianzong, to show the merits of the forefathers.

古文：卢龙节度使张直方，暴忍，喜游猎。
现代文：卢龙节度使张直方残暴凶狠，喜欢游猎。
English: The Lulong Festival made Zhang Naokang cruel and ferocious, and he liked hunting.

古文：军中将作乱，直方知之，托言出猎，遂举族逃归京师。
现代文：军中将要发生变乱，张直方知道情况不妙，假说外出行猎，带着全族逃归京师长安；卢龙军中推牙将周为留后。
English: There will be a mutiny in the army. Zhang Naofang knows that the situation is not good. Supposing he goes out hunting, he will take the whole family and flee to Beijing Division Chang'an. Lu Long's army will leave Zhou behind.

古文：军中推牙将周纟林为留后，直方至京师，拜金吾大将军。
现代文：张直方来到京师，被任为金吾大将军。
English: Zhang Naofang came to the Beijing Division and was appointed as the General of Kingo.

古文：甲戌，追上顺宗谥曰至德弘道大圣大安孝皇帝，宪宗谥曰昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝。
现代文：甲戌，唐宣宗君臣给唐顺宗追上谥号为至德弘道大圣大安孝皇帝；给唐宪宗追上谥号为昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝。
English: In Jiajing, Tang Xuan Zong's vassals and subjects gave Tang Shun Zong the posthumous title of Shih De Hong Da Sheng Da An Xiao Emperor; they gave Tang Xian Zong the posthumous title of Shou Wen Wu Da Sheng Da Sheng Da Xian Xiao Emperor.

古文：仍改题神主。
现代文：并据新谥号改题唐顺宗和唐宪宗的神主。
English: And according to the new nickname, the subject was changed to the god of the Tang Shunzong and Tang Xianzong.

古文：己未，崖州司户李德裕卒。
现代文：已未，崖州司户李德裕去世。
English: Li Deyu, the secretary of Yalang Prefecture, has passed away.

古文：山南西道节度使郑涯奏取扶州。
现代文：山南西道节度使郑涯奏告朝廷已从吐蕃手中攻取扶州。
English: The Shannan West Road Festival made Zheng Ya report to the imperial court that he had conquered Fuzhou from the hands of Tubo.

