古文：杂器用阳城县吏桓玄徐氏婢江淮妇人刘玄游先朝居延部落主
现代文：杂器用阳城县吏桓玄徐氏婢江淮妇人刘玄游先朝居延部落主
English: Yangcheng County official Huan Xuan Xu's maidservant Jiang Huai's wife Liu Xuan Yu, the former head of the Juyan tribe

古文：僧太琼清江郡叟韦训卢赞善柳崇南中行者曲秀才虢国夫人
现代文：僧太琼清江郡叟韦训卢赞善柳崇南中行者曲秀才虢国夫人
English: Monk Tai Qiong, Qingjiang County, Zou Wei Xun, Lu Zan, Zenshan Liu, Chongnan Zhonggang, Qu Xucai, the wife of Zou Guo

古文：阳城县吏
现代文：阳城县吏
English: Yangcheng County official

古文：魏景初中，阳城县吏家有怪。
现代文：三国魏景初年间，阳城县县吏家里发生怪事。
English: During the first year of the Three Kingdoms of Wei and Jing, a strange thing happened in the home of a county official in Yangcheng County.

古文：无故闻拍手相呼，伺无所见。
现代文：没有原因就听到有人拍手互相呼叫，等着看又什么也看不见。
English: You hear people clapping and calling out to each other for no reason, you wait and see and see nothing.

古文：其母夜作倦，就枕寝息。有顷，复闻灶下有呼曰：文约，何以不见？
现代文：他的母亲夜间干活很疲倦，睡下不一会儿，又听到灶下有人喊道：文约，怎么看不见你？
English: His mother was very tired from working at night. She fell asleep for a short while, and then heard someone shouting from under the stove: "Wendy, why can't I see you?"

古文：头下应曰：我见枕，不能往，汝可就我。
现代文：她头下有人答应说：我被枕住了，不能过去！你可以到我这来！
English: Someone under her promised: "I'm stuck under a pillow, I can't get over! You can come here to me!"

古文：至明，乃饭锸也。
现代文：到了天亮一看，原来是盛饭用的铲子。
English: When I looked at it in the morning, it turned out to be a shovel used for serving meals.

古文：即聚烧之，怪遂绝。
现代文：立即就把它们集中起来烧了，妖怪也就灭绝了。
English: They were immediately gathered up and burned, and the specter became extinct.

古文：桓玄
现代文：桓玄
English: Kangen

古文：东晋桓玄时，朱雀门下，忽有两小儿，通身如墨，相和作《芒笼歌》，路边小儿从而和之数十人。
现代文：东晋桓玄那时候，在朱雀门下，忽然有两个通身黑如墨的小男孩，互相一唱一和地唱《芒笼歌》。路边的小孩跟着唱和的有几十人。
English: At that time, under the gate of Suzak, there were suddenly two little boys, dark as ink, singing "Mangetsu Song" in unison with each other. There were dozens of children on the roadside singing along.

古文：歌云：芒笼茵，绳缚腹。
现代文：歌说：芒笼茵，绳缚腹。
English: The song says: "Mang Keun-in, rope-tied belly."

古文：车无轴，倚孤木声甚哀楚，听者忘归。
现代文：车无轴，倚孤木。歌声非常哀伤凄楚，听的人都忘记了回家。
English: The car had no axle and was leaning against a tree. The song was so sad and wretched that everyone who heard it forgot to go home.

古文：日既夕，二小儿还入建康县，至阁下，遂成一双漆鼓槌。
现代文：天已经要黑了，两个小男孩回到建康县衙，来到阁楼下，就变成一对漆鼓槌。
English: It was already getting dark, the two little boys returned to Jiankang County, and when they came to the attic, they turned into a pair of lacquer drumsticks.

古文：鼓吏列云：槌积久，比恒失之而复得，不意作人也。
现代文：打鼓的官吏们说：这鼓槌堆积放置好长时间了，最近常常丢失了而又回来，没想到它们变成了人！
English: The drumming officials said: These drumsticks have been piled up for a long time, and recently they have often been lost and returned. I didn't expect them to turn into people!

古文：明年春而桓玄败。
现代文：第二年春天桓玄失败了。
English: In the spring of the following year, Kangen failed.

古文：言车无轴，倚孤木，桓字也。
现代文：说：车无轴，倚孤木，是个桓字。
English: He said, "A wagon without an axle, leaning against a lone tree, is a Kanji."

古文：荆州送玄首，用败笼茵包裹之，又以芒绳束缚其尸，沉诸江中。悉如童谣所言尔。
现代文：荆州把桓玄的头颅送回来，用破败的竹垫子包裹着，又用草绳捆绑他的尸体，沉到了大江之中，完全像童谣说的那样。
English: Jingzhou sent back Huan Xuan's head, wrapped it in a tattered bamboo mat, tied his body with a grass rope, and sank it into the river, just as the nursery rhyme says.

古文：徐氏婢
现代文：徐氏婢
English: Xu Shihibi

古文：东海徐氏婢兰，晋义熙中，忽患病，而拂拭异常。
现代文：东海一个姓徐的人，有一个名字叫兰的婢女。晋朝义熙年间，她忽然得了病，打扫灰尘的动作与平常不同。
English: In the East China Sea, a man surnamed Xu had a servant girl named Lan. During the reign of the Jin Dynasty, she suddenly fell ill, and the action of sweeping the dust was different from usual.

古文：共伺察之，见扫帚从壁角来，趋婢床。
现代文：大家共同偷偷地观察她，见扫帚从壁角出来，快步走到婢女的床下。
English: They all watched her surreptitiously, and saw the broom come out of the corner of the wall and walk quickly under the maid's bed.

古文：乃取而焚之。
现代文：于是，就把扫帚拿出来烧了。
English: So he took out his broom and burned it.

古文：江淮妇人
现代文：江淮妇人
English: Jianghuai Woman

古文：江淮有妇人，为性多欲，存想不舍，日夜常醉。
现代文：江淮有一个妇人，为人性情贪婪，有很多欲望。她不放弃自己的想象，日夜总是沉醉在想象之中。
English: There was a woman in Jianghuai who was greedy by nature and had many desires. She did not give up her imagination and was always absorbed in her imagination day and night.

古文：旦起，见屋后二少童，甚鲜洁，如宫小吏者。
现代文：一天早晨起来，看见屋后有两个小孩，非常鲜丽干净，象宫中的小官吏。
English: One morning I got up and saw two children at the back of the house. They were very neat and clean, like minor officials in a palace.

古文：妇因欲抱持，忽成扫帚，取而焚之。
现代文：妇人于是想要抱起来，小孩忽然变成扫帚，就拿出来烧了。
English: The woman then tried to pick it up, but the child suddenly turned into a broom and she took it out and burned it.

古文：刘玄
现代文：刘玄
English: Liu Xuan

古文：宋中山刘玄居越城。
现代文：南北朝，宋，中山人刘玄住在越城。
English: Liu Xuan lived in Yuecheng during the Southern and Northern Dynasties, the Song Dynasty, and the Middle and Northern Dynasties.

古文：日暮，忽见一著乌裤褶来取火，面首无七孔，面莽党然。
现代文：天黑了，忽然看见一个穿着黑裤子的人来取火，头脸上没有七窍，脸像一堆荒草的样子。
English: It was getting dark, and all of a sudden I saw a man in black trousers coming to light a fire. His head and face did not have seven points, and his face looked like a pile of weeds.

古文：乃请师筮之。
现代文：于是就请巫师占卜。
English: So he asked a sorcerer to tell his fortune.

古文：师曰：此是家先代时物，久则为魅，杀人。
现代文：巫师说：这是你家前辈时候的东西，时间久了就变成了鬼魅杀人。
English: The sorcerer said, "This is something from the time of your family's predecessors. After a long time, it has turned into a ghost killing.

古文：及其未有眼目，可早除之。
现代文：趁它还没有长出眼睛，可以及早除掉它。
English: You can get rid of it before it develops eyes.

古文：刘因执缚，刀断数下，乃变为一枕。
现代文：刘玄于是把那个怪物捉拿捆绑起来，用刀砍了几下，竟变成一个枕头。
English: Liu Xuan then tied up the monster and cut it several times with a knife, turning it into a pillow.

古文：此乃是祖父时枕也。
现代文：这是他祖父那时候的枕头。
English: It was his grandfather's pillow from back in the day.

古文：游先朝
现代文：游先朝
English: The morning after the trip

古文：广平游先朝。丧其妻。
现代文：广平人游先朝，死了妻子。
English: Guangping Renyou's wife died yesterday morning.

古文：见一人著赤裤褶。知是魅。乃以刀斫之。
现代文：看见一个穿红裤子的人，知道是鬼怪，就用刀砍他。
English: When he saw a man in red trousers, he knew it was a ghost and slashed him with a knife.

古文：良久。乃是己常著履也。
现代文：过了好一会一看，原来是自己经常穿的鞋。
English: After looking for a while, it turned out to be the shoes he often wore.

古文：居延部落主
现代文：居延部落主
English: The chief of the Kujen tribe

古文：周静帝初，居延部落主勃都骨低，凌暴，奢逸好乐，居处甚盛。
现代文：周静帝初年，居延部落主勃都骨低，高傲残暴，奢侈安逸，喜欢玩乐，居住的地方非常华丽。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhou Jing, the chief of the Juyan tribe, Bu Du, was short-tempered, arrogant and cruel, enjoyed luxury and ease, liked to have fun, and lived in a very gorgeous place.

古文：忽有人数十至门，一人先投刺曰：省名部落主成多受。
现代文：忽然有几十人来到门前，一个人首先上前递上名片说：我是省名部落主成多受。
English: Suddenly, dozens of people came to the door. One person came forward first to hand over his business card and said, "I am the famous provincial tribal chief Cheng Duan.

古文：因趋入。
现代文：于是就走进门去。
English: So he walked through the door.

古文：骨低问曰：何故省名部落？
现代文：勃都骨低问道：你这个部落为什么是个省名部落？
English: "Why is your tribe a provincial famous tribe?

古文：多受曰：某等数人各殊，名字皆不别造。有姓马者，姓皮者，姓鹿者，姓熊者，姓獐者，姓卫者，姓班者，然皆名受。唯某帅名多受耳。
现代文：成多受说：我们几十人各不一样，名字都不另起，有姓马的、姓皮的、姓鹿的、姓熊的、姓獐的、姓卫的、姓班的，但是名字都叫 受 ，只有我这个当帅的叫 多受 。
English: Chengdadu said, "There are dozens of us who are all different, and we all have different names. We have surnames such as Ma, Pi, Deer, Xiong, Yao, Wei, and Ban, but our names are all called Chengdadu. Only I, the handsome one, am called Chengdadu."

古文：骨低曰：君等悉似伶官，有何所解。
现代文：勃都骨低说：你们都象唱戏的，有什么解释的呢？
English: "You're all like opera singers, what's the explanation?

古文：多受曰：晓弄碗珠，性不爱俗，言皆经义。
现代文：成多受说：通晓摆弄碗、珠等器物的道理，生性不喜欢世俗，说的都是合乎经典要义的事情。
English: Chengdadu said: "I am familiar with the principle of playing with bowls, beads and other utensils. I don't like the mundane by nature. Everything I say is in line with the essence of the classics."

古文：骨低大喜曰：目所未睹，有一优即前曰：某等肚饥，臈臈怡怡皮漫绕身三匝。
现代文：勃都骨低很高兴，说：我从没见过。有一个唱戏的立即上前说道：我们肚子饥饿，咕咕噜噜地响，肚皮随便地绕了身体三圈儿。
English: "I've never seen anything like it," said the happy-go-lucky actor. One of the singers immediately stepped forward and said: "Our stomachs are hungry, rumbling, and our bellies casually circle our bodies three times."

古文：主人食若不充，开口终当不舍。
现代文：主人的饭食如果不充足，我们开口要，终究也会不给的。
English: If the host's meal is not sufficient, we will ask for it, but in the end we will not give it.

古文：骨低悦，更命加食。
现代文：勃都骨低高兴，又命人增加饭菜。
English: He was so happy that he ordered more food.

古文：一人曰：某请弄大小相成，终始相生。于是长人吞短人，肥人吞瘦人，相吞残两人。
现代文：一个人说：请让我表演一个 大小相成，终始相生 于是，一个高个子吞了一个矮个子，一个胖子吞了一个瘦子，高个子和胖子互相吞了两个人。
English: One man said, "Please let me act out a scene of small and large becoming one, and finally coming into being." Then, a tall man swallowed a short man, a fat man swallowed a thin man, and a tall man and a fat man swallowed two people.

古文：长者又曰：请作终始相生耳。
现代文：高个子又说：请让我表演 终始相生 吧！
English: The tall man also said, "Please let me perform "from beginning to end."

古文：于是吐下一人，吐者又吐一人，递相吐出，人数复足。
现代文：于是他吐出一个人，吐出来的人又吐出一个人，相递吐出来，人数又够了。
English: And he vomited out a man, and the man who had vomited out vomited out another man, and so on, until there were enough.

古文：骨低甚惊，因重赐赍遣之。
现代文：勃都骨低非常吃惊，就重重地赏赐了他们。
English: He was very surprised and rewarded them generously.

古文：明日又至，戏弄如初。
现代文：第二天他们又来了，表演的把戏和原来一样。
English: They came back the next day and performed the same trick.

古文：连翩半月，骨低颇烦，不能设食。
现代文：如此一连表演了半个月。勃都骨低很烦，不能为他们准备饭食了。
English: This went on for half a month. It was exhausting to have a low bone mass and not be able to prepare meals for them.

古文：诸伶皆怒曰：主人当以某等为幻术，请借郎君娘子试之。
现代文：戏子们都生气说：主人会把我们的表演当成幻术，请把你的娘子借给我们试一试。
English: The actors were angry and said, "Master will take our performance for illusion. Please lend us your daughter to try."

古文：于是持骨低儿女弟妹甥侄妻妾等，吞之于腹中。
现代文：于是把勃都骨低的儿女、弟妹、甥侄、妻妾等，吞到肚子里去。
English: Therefore, they swallow their children, brothers and sisters, nephews and nieces, wives and concubines, who have low bone density, into their stomachs.

古文：腹中皆啼呼请命，骨低惶怖。降阶顿首，哀乞亲属。
现代文：肚子里的人都哭哭啼啼请求出来。勃都骨低恐慌害怕，下到阶下来磕头，哀求把亲属放回来。
English: People in their stomachs were crying and begging to be let out. They were so scared and scared, they went downstairs and bowed their heads, begging for their relatives to be let back in.

古文：伶者皆笑曰：此无伤，不足忧。
现代文：唱戏的都笑着说：这没关系，不要愁。
English: The singers all smiled and said, "It doesn't matter, don't worry.

古文：即吐出之，亲属完全如初。
现代文：于是就把人吐出来。亲属们和原来完全一样。
English: So they spit them out. The relatives are exactly the same as before.

古文：骨低深怒，欲用衅杀之。
现代文：勃都骨低深深地生气了，想要用杀牲的血杀死他们。
English: He became very angry and wanted to kill them with the blood of the animals.

古文：因令密访之，见至一古宅基而灭。
现代文：于是派人秘密地查访，见他们走到一座古宅院的墙基就消失了。
English: So they secretly sent someone to investigate, and when they got to the foundation of an old mansion, they disappeared.

古文：骨低令掘之，深数尺，于瓦砾下得一大木槛，中有皮袋数千。
现代文：勃都骨低让人挖那墙基，挖了几尺，在瓦砾下挖到一个大木笼，笼中有几千只皮袋。
English: People dug through the rubble to reach a large wooden cage containing thousands of leather bags.

古文：槛旁有谷麦，触即为灰。
现代文：笼旁谷粒麦粒，用手一碰就变成灰。
English: The grains of wheat next to the cage turn to ashes at the touch of a hand.

古文：槛中得竹简书，文字磨灭，不可识。唯隐隐似有三数字，若是陵字。
现代文：从笼中得到一份简书，文字已经磨灭了，不能辨识，只隐隐约约好像有三几个字象是陵字。
English: I got a simple book from the cage. The writing had been worn away and I couldn't recognize it. It only vaguely looked like there were three or so characters that resembled Chinese characters.

古文：骨低知是诸袋为怪，欲举出焚之。诸袋因号呼槛中曰：某等无命，寻合化灭。
现代文：勃都骨低知道是这些皮袋作怪，想要弄出来烧了它，皮袋们就在笼子里哭喊道：我们没有生命，不久就该消灭。
English: Little did he know that it was the cats who were trying to get it out and burn it. The cats cried in their cage: "We have no life, we will soon be extinct."

古文：缘李都尉留水银在此，故得且存。
现代文：因为李都尉留有水银在这里，所以能够暂时存活。
English: Because Li Duifeng left the mercury here, he was able to survive temporarily.

古文：某等即都尉李少卿般粮袋，屋崩平压。
现代文：我们是都尉李少卿的搬粮袋，屋倒了，平压下来。
English: We are Captain Li Shaoqing's grain bags. The roof has fallen down, crushed flat.

古文：见为居延山神收作伶人，伏乞存情于神，不相残毁。
现代文：经过很长的岁月，现在已经有了生命，被居延山神收为唱戏的。请求你看在神的情份上，不杀我们。
English: After a long time, we now have life, and have been collected as a chorus by the god of Mt. Juyan. I ask you to please not kill us, for the sake of the gods.

古文：自此不敢复扰高居矣。
现代文：从此我们不敢再骚扰您的府第了。
English: From now on, we won't bother your office anymore.

古文：骨低利其水银，尽焚诸袋。无不为冤楚声，血流漂洒。
现代文：勃都骨低认为水银有用，把那些皮袋全烧了，没有不发出冤枉痛楚之声的。血流漂洒满地。
English: There was not a man in the whole city who did not think that mercury was useful, and he burned all those leather bags, crying out in pain. Blood flowed all over the ground.

古文：焚讫，骨低房廊户牖，悉为冤痛之音，如焚袋时，月余日不止。
现代文：烧完了，勃都骨低的房廊门户全发出冤枉痛苦的声音，和烧皮袋时一样，一个多月之后，这种声音也没有停止。
English: When it was all over, the low-slung porch doorway emitted a sound of unjustified pain, just as it did when the leather bag was burned. More than a month later, this sound has not stopped.

古文：其年，骨低举家病死。
现代文：那一年，勃都骨低全家都病死。
English: That year, the whole family fell ill and died.

古文：周岁，无复孑遗。水银后亦失所在。
现代文：一年以后，什么东西都散失净尽，丝毫不剩。水银后来也不存在了。
English: A year later, everything was gone, there was nothing left, and mercury didn't exist anymore.

古文：僧太琼
现代文：僧太琼
English: Sang Taejoong

古文：唐上都僧太琼者，能讲《仁王经》。
现代文：唐朝时上都有一个僧人叫太琼，能讲《仁王经》。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Tai Qiong who could recite the "Book of Benevolence."

古文：开元初，讲于奉先县京遥村，遂止村寺。
现代文：开元初年，他到奉先县京遥村去讲经，就住在村寺里。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he went to the village of Jingyao in Fengxian County to give a sermon, and lived in the village temple.

古文：经两夏，于一日，持钵将上堂。
现代文：经过两个夏天，有一日，他拿着钵子将要到堂上去。
English: After two summers, one day, he was about to go up to the hall with a rake.

古文：阖门之次，有物坠檐前。
现代文：关门之后，有一个什么东西掉到屋檐下。
English: After closing the door, something fell under the eaves.

古文：时天才辨色，僧就视之，乃一初生儿，其襁裼甚新。
现代文：当时天色刚刚能辨别颜色，僧人靠近一看，竟是一个初生的孩子。那包孩子的襁褓很新。
English: At that time, Tianshi was just able to distinguish colors, and when the monk took a closer look, it turned out to be a newborn baby. The baby's diaper was very new.

古文：僧惊异，遂袖之。
现代文：僧人非常惊异，于是就放到衣袖里。
English: The monk was very surprised, so he put it in his sleeve.

古文：将乞村人，行五六里，觉袖中轻。
现代文：要去求村人养活这孩子，走了五六里地，忽然觉得衣袖变得很轻。
English: I had to walk five or six miles to ask the villagers to feed the child, and I suddenly felt that my sleeves had become very light.

古文：探之，乃一敝帚也。
现代文：打开一看，原来是一把破笤帚。
English: On opening it, it turned out to be a broken pickaxe.

古文：清江郡叟
现代文：清江郡叟
English: Qingjiang County

古文：唐开元中，清江郡叟常牧牛于郡南田间。忽闻有异声自地中发，叟与牧童数辈，俱惊走辟易。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，清江郡有一个老头曾经在郡南田间牧牛，忽然听到有一种怪异的声音从地下发出来，老头和几个牧童都吓得跑开了。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was an old man in Qingjiang County who used to herd cattle in a field in the south of the county. Suddenly, he heard a strange sound coming from underground. The old man and several herd boys were scared and ran away.

古文：自是叟病热且甚。
现代文：从此老头有病发烧一天重似一天。
English: Since then, the old man has been ill with fever day after day.

古文：仅旬余，病少愈。梦一丈夫，衣青襦，顾谓叟曰：迁我于开元观。
现代文：只十几天，病稍微好些了，他梦见一位男子，穿着青色短衣，看着他对他说：把我搬迁到开元观去！
English: Just a dozen days later, after his illness had somewhat improved, he dreamed of a man wearing a blue short-sleeved shirt, looking at him and saying to him: "Move me to the Kaiyuan Observatory!"

古文：叟惊而寤，然不知其旨。
现代文：老头惊醒了，但是不知这是什么意思。
English: The old man was startled awake, but he didn't know what it meant.

古文：后数日，又适野，复闻之。
现代文：后来过了几天，又到野外去，又听到那怪异的声音。
English: A few days later, I went back to the field and heard the strange sound again.

古文：即以其事白于郡守。
现代文：他就把这事报告给郡守。
English: He reported the matter to the county governor.

古文：封君怒曰：岂非昏而妄乎？
现代文：郡守生气地说：这难道不是胡说八道吗？
English: The county governor angrily said, "Isn't this nonsense?"

古文：叱遣之。
现代文：让人把他哄出去。
English: Let him be coaxed out.

古文：是夕，叟又梦衣青襦者告曰：吾委迹于地下久矣，汝速出我，不然得疾。
现代文：这天晚上，老头又梦见穿青色短衣的男子告诉他说：我寄身地下已经好长时间了，你赶快把我弄出来，不然你就得病！
English: That night, the old man again dreamed of a man in a blue short-sleeved shirt, who told him: "I've been underground for a long time. Get me out quickly, or you'll get sick!"

古文：叟大惧。
现代文：老头特别害怕。
English: The old man was particularly frightened.

古文：及晓，与其子偕往郡南，即凿其地。
现代文：到了天明，和他的儿子一块来到郡南，挖那地。
English: At dawn, together with his son, he went to the south of the county to dig up the land.

古文：约丈余，得一钟，色青，乃向所梦丈夫色衣也。
现代文：大约挖了一丈多深，挖到一口钟，青色，就象梦见的那个男子的衣服颜色。
English: I dug about a foot deep, and I found a bell, blue, just like the color of the man's clothes in my dream.

古文：遂再白于郡守，郡守置于开元观。
现代文：于是又去报告郡守，郡守把钟放在开元观。
English: So he went to report to the county governor, who put the clock in the open.

古文：是日辰时，不击忽自鸣，声极震响。
现代文：这一天辰时，没人敲它它自己响了，声音特别响亮。
English: At this time of the day, no one knocked on it, it rang by itself, and the sound was particularly loud.

古文：清江之人。俱异而惊叹。
现代文：清江的人们，都认为怪异而惊叹。
English: People in Qingjiang all thought it was strange and marveled at it.

古文：郡守因其事上闻，玄宗诏宰臣林甫写其钟样，告示天下。
现代文：郡守就把这事上奏给皇帝知道，唐玄宗让宰相李林甫去画下钟的样子，告示全天下。
English: The county governor reported the matter to the emperor, and Tang Xuan Zong asked the prime minister, Li Linfu, to draw the clock and announce it to the whole world.

古文：韦训
现代文：韦训
English: Wei Xun

古文：唐京兆韦训，暇日于其家学中读《金刚经》。
现代文：唐朝京兆人韦训，闲暇之日在自己家的家学里读《金刚经》。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Jingzhao people read the Diamond Sutra in their leisure time at home.

古文：忽见门外绯裙妇人，长三丈，逾墙而入。遥捉其家先生，为捽发曳下地。
现代文：忽然看见门外有一个穿粉红色衣裙的妇人，三丈多高，跳墙进来，远远地伸手去捉他家的教书先生，先生被她揪住头发拽下地来。
English: He suddenly saw a tall woman in a pink dress outside the door, jump over the wall to get in, and reach out to catch his teacher from a distance. She grabbed him by the hair and pulled him to the ground.

古文：又以手捉训，训以手抱《金刚经》遮身，仓卒得免。
现代文：又伸手来捉韦训，韦训用手抱起《金刚经》遮挡身体，仓促地躲开了。
English: He also reached out to catch Wei Xun. Wei Xun covered his body with the Diamond Sutra and hurriedly ran away.

古文：先生被曳至一家，人随而呼之，乃免。
现代文：教书先生被拽到一家，这家人跟在后面喊叫，才得免。
English: The teacher was dragged into a family and the family had to scream to be saved.

古文：其鬼走入大粪堆中。
现代文：那鬼跑进大粪堆里。
English: The ghost ran into a large dung heap.

古文：先生遍身已蓝靛色，舌出长尺余。
现代文：教书先生已经全身蓝靛色，舌头吐出来一尺多长。
English: The teacher's whole body had turned blue and his tongue was more than a foot long.

古文：家人扶至学中，久之方苏。
现代文：家人把他扶到家学中，好长时间才醒过来。
English: His family put him in home-schooling, and it took him a long time to wake up.

古文：率村人掘粪堆中，深数尺，乃得一绯裙白衫破帛新妇子。
现代文：韦训领人挖那个粪堆，挖到几尺深时，竟挖到一个粉红裙白衣衫破布娃娃。
English: Wei Xun's leader dug into the dung heap, and when he reached a few feet deep, he actually dug up a rag doll in a pink dress and white shirt.

古文：焚于五达衢，其怪遂绝焉。
现代文：把它在四通八达的路口烧掉，那怪就灭绝了。
English: Burn it at every crossroads, and the monster is extinct.

古文：卢赞善
现代文：卢赞善
English: Lu Zanzan

古文：卢赞善家，有一瓷新妇子。
现代文：卢赞善家有一个瓷做的娃娃。
English: Luzan's family has a porcelain doll.

古文：经数载，其妻戏谓曰：与君为妾。
现代文：放了几年，他的妻子开玩笑对他说：让这瓷娃娃给你当小老婆吧！
English: After a few years, his wife jokingly said to him: Let this porcelain doll be your little wife!

古文：卢因尔惘惘。恒见一妇人，卧于帐中。
现代文：卢赞善因此就惘惘然，总能看到一个妇人躺在他的帐中。
English: Lu Zanzan was so shocked that he always saw a woman lying in his account.

古文：积久，意是瓷人为祟，送往寺中供养。
现代文：时间长了，他料到这是瓷娃娃作怪，就把它送到寺院里供养起来了。
English: After a long time, he guessed that it was a porcelain doll, and sent it to the temple to be cared for.

古文：有童人，晓于殿中扫地，见一妇人。
现代文：有一个童子，早晨在殿前扫地，看见一位妇人。
English: In the morning, a boy was sweeping the ground in front of the temple when he saw a woman.

古文：问其由来，云是卢赞善妾，为大妇所妬，送来在此。
现代文：问她从哪儿来，她说她是卢赞善的小老婆，被大老婆嫉妒，送到这儿来了。
English: When asked where she came from, she said that she was the younger wife of Lu Zanzan, who had been sent here by the older wife out of jealousy.

古文：其后见卢家人至，因言见妾事。
现代文：后来童子见卢家人来，就说起见到卢赞善小老婆的事。
English: Later, when the boy came to see Lu's family, he talked about seeing Lu Zanzan's little wife.

古文：赞善穷核本末，所见服色，是瓷人。
现代文：卢赞善详细弄清事情的始末，根据童子见到那人的服饰，断定是瓷娃娃。
English: Lu Zanzan tried to find out the details of the incident. According to the boy's clothing, he concluded that the person was a porcelain doll.

古文：遂命击碎。心头有血，大如鸡子。
现代文：就让人把它打碎，它心头有血，象鸡蛋那么大。
English: You just have to smash it, it has blood in its heart, it's the size of an egg.

古文：柳崇
现代文：柳崇
English: Ryu Takashi

古文：越州兵曹柳崇，忽疡生于头，呻吟不可忍。
现代文：越州兵曹柳崇，忽然头上生了个疮，痛得一个劲地呻吟。
English: Yuezhou soldier Cao Liu Chong suddenly developed a sore on his head and moaned in pain.

古文：于是召术士夜观之，云：有一妇女绿裙，问之不应，在君窗下。
现代文：于是找来术士夜里观察，术士说：有一个穿绿裙子的妇女，问她她也不答应，在你窗下。
English: So they called a sorcerer to watch them at night. The sorcerer said, "There's a woman in a green dress, ask her, she won't say yes, under your window."

古文：急除之。
现代文：应该赶紧除掉她。
English: She should be got rid of asap.

古文：崇访窗下，止见一瓷妓女，极端正，绿瓷为饰。
现代文：柳崇察看窗下，只看见一个瓷做的妓女，很端庄，用绿瓷为装饰。
English: Liu Chong looked under the window, only to see a porcelain prostitute, very dignified, decorated with green porcelain.

古文：遂于铁臼捣碎而焚之，疮遂愈。
现代文：于是把它放到铁臼中捣碎之后烧了。疮于是就好了。
English: So he put it in a mortar and pestle and burned it, and the sore was healed.

古文：南中行者
现代文：南中行者
English: South Middle Wayfarer

古文：南中有僧院，院内有九子母象，装塑甚奇。
现代文：南中有一个僧院，院内有一座九子母塑像，装饰雕塑得非常奇特。
English: There is a monastery in South Middle School, and inside the monastery there is a statue of the mother of nine children, the decorative sculpture is very peculiar.

古文：尝有一行者，年少，给事诸僧。
现代文：曾经有一个行者，很年轻，为和尚们做事。
English: There was once a practitioner, very young, who worked for the monks.

古文：不数年，其人渐甚羸瘠，神思恍惚。
现代文：不几年，这人渐渐地变得很瘦弱，神志恍惚不清。
English: Within a few years, the man gradually became very weak and delirious.

古文：诸僧颇怪之。
现代文：和尚们感到很怪。
English: The monks felt very strange.

古文：有一僧，见此行者至夜入九子母堂寝宿，徐见一美妇人至，晚引同寝，已近一年矣。
现代文：有一个和尚，看见这位行者到了夜间就进入九子母堂睡觉，慢慢地又看见一个美丽的妇人来到，拉他一块睡，已近一年了。
English: There was a monk who had seen this wanderer enter the Nine Sons Hall at night to sleep, and slowly saw a beautiful woman come and pull him to sleep with her. It had been nearly a year.

古文：僧知塑象为怪，即坏之。
现代文：和尚们知道是塑像作怪，就把塑像毁坏了。
English: The monks knew that the statue was a hoax and destroyed it.

古文：自是不复更见，行者亦愈，即落发为沙门。
现代文：从此不再能看见那妇人出现，行者的病也好了，即落发当了和尚。
English: From then on, he was no longer able to see the woman appear, and his illness was cured, that is, he became a monk.

古文：曲秀才
现代文：曲秀才
English: A Musical Genius

古文：道士叶法善，精于符箓之术，上累拜为鸿胪卿，优礼特厚。
现代文：道士叶法善，对使用符箓的法术很有研究，皇上多次拜他为鸿胪卿，给他的优待和礼遇特别丰厚。
English: The Taoist priest, Ye Fa-zen, was well versed in the use of charms and spells. The emperor worshipped him many times as Lord Hongtao, and gave him special treatment and courtesy.

古文：法善居玄真观，常有朝客十余人诣之，解带淹留。
现代文：叶法善住在玄真观，曾经有十几个朝中的人到观中来，解带住下。
English: Ye Fa was good at living in Xuan Zhen Guan. Once, there were more than a dozen people from the imperial court who came to Guan Guan and stayed there.

古文：满坐思酒，忽有人扣门，云，曲秀才。
现代文：满坐都想渴酒。忽然有人敲门，说他是曲秀才。
English: He's sitting there longing for a drink. Suddenly, someone knocks on his door and tells him that he's a talented musician.

古文：法善令人谓之曰：方有朝寮，无暇晤语，幸吾子异日见临也。语未毕，有一措大，傲睨直入。
现代文：叶法善派人对他说：正有朝中的同僚们在此，没有时间和你会晤交谈，希望你改日再来。
English: Ye Faxian sent someone to say to him, "Our colleagues from the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China are here right now, and we don't have time to meet and talk with you. I hope you'll come back another day."

古文：年二十许。肥白可观。
现代文：话还没说完，就见一个贫寒失意的读书人傲视着直闯进来。
English: Before the words were out of my mouth, I saw a poor, dejected reader come striding in with a haughty look.

古文：笑揖诸公，居于末席，抗声谭论，援引今古。
现代文：此人二十岁左右，又白又胖很好看。他笑着向各位作揖，然后坐到了末席。书生大声谈论，援引古今。
English: The man was about twenty years old, white, fat and good-looking. He smiled and made fun of everyone, and then sat in the last seat. The students talked loudly, invoking the past and the present.

古文：一坐不测，众耸观之。
现代文：满座都没料到，大家都高看他。
English: He didn't expect a full house, everyone looks up to him.

古文：良久暂起，如风旋转。
现代文：讲很长时间，他暂时站了起来，像风一样旋转。
English: After talking for a long time, he stood up momentarily and whirled like the wind.

古文：法善谓诸公曰：此子突入，词辨如此。岂非妖魅为眩惑乎？
现代文：叶法善对大家说：这个人突然进来，词辨能力如此，难道不是妖怪炫耀迷惑吗？
English: Ye Fa-zen said to everyone, "This person suddenly came in, his word recognition ability is so good, isn't it a monster showing off and confusing everyone?"

古文：试与诸公取剑备之。
现代文：和大家拿出剑来防备他试试。
English: and everyone pulls out their swords to fend off his attempt.

古文：曲生复至，扼腕抵掌，论难锋起，势不可当。
现代文：有一天曲生又来了，他时而握住手腕，时而击掌，尖锐地提出问题，时时发难，势不可当。
English: One day, Qu Sheng came again. He alternately held his wrists and clapped his hands, asked sharp questions, and was always in trouble.

古文：法善密以小剑击之，随手丧元，坠于阶下，化为瓶盖。
现代文：叶法善偷偷地用小剑击他。他随着叶法善的手掉了脑袋，落到阶上，变成一个瓶盖。
English: Ye Fa-zen secretly hit him with a small sword. He lost his head with Ye Fa-zen's hand, fell to the steps, and turned into a bottle cap.

古文：一坐惊慑惶遽，视其处所，乃盈瓶醲酝也，咸大笑。
现代文：满座人又惊又怕，看那处所，原来是满满一瓶好酒，大家全都大笑。
English: The entire audience was shocked and frightened. Looking at the place, which turned out to be full of a bottle of good wine, everyone burst out laughing.

古文：饮之，其味甚佳。
现代文：喝那酒，味道特别好。
English: Drink that wine, it's delicious.

古文：坐客醉而抚其瓶曰：曲生曲生，风味不可忘也，
现代文：座客们醉了抚摸着那瓶子说：曲生，曲生，你的风味不能忘啊！
English: The guests drunkenly stroked the bottle and said: Qu Sheng, Qu Sheng, your flavor cannot be forgotten!

古文：虢国夫人
现代文：虢国夫人
English: Mrs. Minokuni is crying.

古文：长安有一贫僧，衣甚褴褛。
现代文：长安有一个穷和尚，衣服非常破旧。
English: There was a poor monk in Chang'an whose clothes were very worn out.

古文：卖一小猿，会人言，可以驰使。
现代文：他到处卖一只小猴。这只小猴理解人语，可以驱使它做事。
English: He sells a little monkey everywhere. This little monkey understands human language and can be driven to do things.

古文：虢国夫人闻之，遽命僧至宅。
现代文：虢国夫人听说了，急忙让和尚到宅院里来。
English: Hearing of this, Lady Min Guo hurriedly asked the monk to come to the courtyard.

古文：僧既至，夫人见之，问其由。
现代文：和尚到了之后，夫人见了猴子，就问这猴子的来由。
English: After the monk arrived, the lady saw a monkey and asked the origin of this monkey.

古文：僧曰：本住西蜀，居山二十余年。
现代文：和尚说：贫僧本来住在西蜀，在山中住了二十多年。
English: The monk said, "The poor monk used to live in West Shu, and he has lived in the mountains for more than twenty years.

古文：偶群猿过，遗下此小猿，怜悯收养，才半载以来，此小猿识人意，又会人言语，随指顾，无不应人使用。
现代文：我怜悯它，就把它收养了，才半年。这小猿明白人的意思，又会人的语言，随着你的指示，没有不随人意使用的。
English: I took pity on it and adopted it, only six months old. This little ape understands human meaning and can speak human language, following your instructions and not using it arbitrarily.

古文：实不异一弟子耳。
现代文：实在和一名弟子没什么两样。
English: It's really no different than being a disciple.

古文：僧今昨至城郭。资用颇乏。无计保借得此小猿，故鬻之于市。
现代文：贫僧现在是昨天才到城里来，很缺乏资用，没有办法保住这小猿了，所以就在市上卖它。
English: The poor monk had only arrived in the city the day before and was very short of money. There was no way he could keep the little monkey, so he sold it in the market.

古文：夫人曰：今与僧束帛，可留此猿，我当养之。
现代文：夫人说：现在我给你成捆的丝帛，可以把小猿留下，我会喂养它的。
English: The lady said, "Now that I have given you bundles of silk cocoons, you can keep the little monkey and I will feed him."

古文：僧乃感谢，留猿而去。
现代文：和尚就感谢，留下小猿离开了。
English: The monk thanked him and left the little monkey alone.

古文：其小猿旦夕在夫人左右，夫人甚爱怜之。
现代文：那小猿从早到晚在夫人左右，夫人非常喜欢它。
English: The little monkey was with her from morning till night, and she was very fond of him.

古文：后半载，杨贵妃遗夫人芝草，夫人唤小猿令看玩。
现代文：半年后，杨贵妃赠送给虢国夫人一株灵芝草，夫人喊小猿让它观看玩耍。
English: Half a year later, Yang Guifei presented a lingzhi grass plant to Mrs. Zeng Guo, and Mrs. Zeng called Little Monkey to watch him play.

古文：小猿对夫人面前倒地，化为一小儿，容貌端妍，年可十四五。
现代文：小猿在夫人面前倒在地上，变成了一个小男孩。小男孩的容貌端庄秀美，年龄有十西五岁。
English: The little monkey fell to the ground in front of his wife and turned into a little boy. The little boy's appearance was dignified and beautiful, and he was five years old.

古文：夫人甚怪，呵而问之。
现代文：夫人很奇怪，呵叱他，问他。
English: His wife was very strange, scolded him and questioned him.

古文：小儿曰：我本姓袁。
现代文：小男孩说：我本姓袁。
English: The little boy said, "My real last name is Yuan.

古文：卖我僧昔在蜀山中。
现代文：卖我的那个和尚以前在蜀山中。
English: The monk who sold me used to live in the mountains of Shu.

古文：我偶随父入山采药，居林下三年，我父常以药苗啗我。
现代文：我偶然跟着父亲进山采药，在林中住了三年，我父亲常把一些药草给我吃。
English: By chance, I followed my father into the mountains to collect medicinal herbs and lived in the forest for three years. My father often gave me some herbs to eat.

古文：忽一日，自不觉变身为猿。
现代文：忽然有一天，自己不觉变身成了猿猴。
English: Suddenly, one day, he was transformed into a monkey.

古文：我父惧而弃我，所以被此僧收养，而至于夫人宅。
现代文：我父亲害怕，把我扔了，所以被那和尚收养，而到了夫人的宅院里来。
English: My father was afraid and abandoned me, so I was taken in by the monk and brought to the lady's house.

古文：我虽前日口不能言，我心中之事，略不遗忘也。
现代文：我虽然以前口不能说话，我心中的事一点不忘。
English: Although I couldn't speak before, I didn't forget anything in my heart.

古文：自受恩育，甚欲述怀抱于夫人，恨不能言。
现代文：自从受到夫人的恩育，很想和夫人说说心里话，只恨自己不能说话。
English: Ever since I was raised by my wife, I've wanted to talk to her. I just hate not being able to talk.

古文：每至深夜，唯自泣下。
现代文：每到了深夜，只自己哭泣。
English: Every night when it gets late, I just cry by myself.

古文：今不期却变人身，即不测尊意如何。
现代文：今天没想到竟然变成人身，就不知夫人尊意如何了。
English: I didn't expect to turn into a human being today, so I don't know how my wife feels.

古文：夫人奇之，遂命衣以锦衣，侍从随后。
现代文：夫人认为奇怪，就命人拿来衣服给他穿，侍从随后。
English: His wife thought it was strange and ordered someone to bring clothes for him to wear, followed by a servant.

古文：常秘密其事。
现代文：一直保密，不说出去。
English: Kept it confidential, never spoke about it.

古文：又三年，小儿容貌甚美，贵妃曾屡顾之。
现代文：又过了三年，小男孩容貌特别好看，杨贵妃曾经屡次注视他。
English: After another three years, the little boy's appearance is particularly good-looking, Yang Guifei has repeatedly watched him.

古文：复恐人见夺，因不令出，别安于小室。
现代文：夫人怕被人夺走他，就不让他出来，另安排住在一个小屋里。
English: His wife, fearing that someone would take him away, would not let him out and arranged for him to live in a small house.

古文：小儿唯嗜药物，夫人以侍婢常供饲药食，忽一日，小儿与此侍婢，俱化为猿。
现代文：小男孩只嗜好药物，夫人让侍婢经常供给他药食。忽然有一天，小男孩和这个侍婢都变成猿猴。
English: The little boy was addicted to drugs, and his wife had a maid regularly supply him with pills and food. Suddenly, one day, the little boy and the maid were both turned into monkeys.

古文：夫人怪异，令人射杀之，其小儿乃木人耳。
现代文：夫人感到怪异，让人射杀它们，那小男孩原来是个木头人。
English: The lady felt strange and asked someone to shoot them. The little boy turned out to be a wooden man.

