古文：遵义府即播州。
现代文：遵义府，就是播州。
English: Zunyi Prefecture is Banshu.

古文：秦为夜郎且兰地。汉属牂牁。
现代文：秦朝时该地为夜郎的且兰，汉朝时隶属于郡。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, the place was called Yelang of Yelang, and during the Han Dynasty, it belonged to the county.

古文：唐贞观中，改播州。
现代文：唐朝贞观中年，改为播州。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, Zhenguan changed to Banzhou.

古文：乾符初，南诏陷播，太原杨端应募复其城，为播人所怀服，历五代，子孙世有其地。
现代文：唐朝乾符初年，南诏攻陷了播州。太原的杨端响应招募收复了播州城，为播州人所信服，经历了五代十国时期，杨端的子孙都世代占有该地。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the Nanzhao attacked and conquered Banzhou. Yang Duan of Taiyuan responded to the recruitment and recovered Banzhou City. The Banzhou people were convinced and experienced the period of five generations and ten countries. Yang Duan's descendants have occupied the place for generations.

古文：宋大观中，杨文贵纳土，置遵义军。
现代文：宋朝大观中年，杨文贵向朝廷缴纳其领地，朝廷便在该地设置遵义军。
English: In the middle of the Song Dynasty, Yang Wengui donated his territory to the imperial court, which set up the Zunyi Army in the area.

古文：元世祖授杨邦宪宣慰使，赐其子汉英名赛因不花，封播国公。
现代文：元世祖授予杨邦宪宣慰使的官职，给杨邦宪的儿子杨汉英赐名赛因不花，将其封为播国公。
English: Yuan Shizhu awarded Yang Bangxian the official post of the consoler, and gave Yang Hanying, the son of Yang Bangxian, the title of the propagator of the country.

古文：洪武四年平蜀，遣使谕之。
现代文：洪武四年朝廷平四川，派使者带皇帝的诏谕去见他们。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the imperial court leveled Sichuan and sent an envoy to them with the emperor's edict.

古文：五年，播州宣慰使杨铿、同知罗琛、总管何婴、蛮夷总管郑瑚等，相率来归，贡方物，纳元所授金牌、银印、铜章。
现代文：五年，播州宣慰使杨铿、同知罗琛、总管何婴、蛮夷总管郑瑚等，相互率领土军归顺朝廷，向皇帝进献土产，缴纳元朝政府所授予他们的金牌、银印和铜章。
English: In the fifth year, Banzhou Xuanzheng made Yang Jie, Tongzhi Luo Jie, General Manager He Jiao, General Manager of the Barbarians Zheng Hui, and others jointly lead the territorial army to submit to the imperial court, donate local products to the emperor, and pay the gold medal, silver seal and bronze medal awarded to them by the Yuan Dynasty government.

古文：诏赐铿衣币，仍置播州宣慰使司，铿、琛皆仍旧职。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐予杨铿衣服、钱币等物，在播州仍设置宣慰使司，让杨铿、罗琛仍任旧职。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to bestow clothes, coins and other items on Yang Hui, and still set up a consolation envoy in Banzhou, allowing Yang Hui and Luo Hui to still hold their old posts.

古文：领安抚司二，曰草塘，曰黄平；长官司六，曰真州，曰播州，曰余庆，曰白泥，曰容山，曰重安。
现代文：播州宣慰使司下属有二个安抚司：草塘、黄平；统领有六个长官司：真州、播州、余庆、白泥、容山、重安。
English: There are two pacification divisions under the Banzhou Consolation Division: Caotang and Huangping; there are six chief divisions under the commander: Zhenzhou, Banzhou, Yuqing, Baidi, Yongshan, and Chong'an.

古文：以婴等为长官。
现代文：何婴等人任长官司长官。
English: Ho Jang and others were appointed Chief Secretary.

古文：七年，中书省奏： 播州土地既入版图，当收其贡赋，岁纳粮二千五百石为军储。 
现代文：七年，中书省向皇帝上奏说： 播州的土地既然已经归入我中央王朝的版图，就应当征收他们的赋税，每年应让他们缴纳粮食二千五百石作为军用储备粮。 
English: In the seventh year, the People's Commissariat of Literature reported to the emperor: "Since the land of Banzhou has been included in the territory of our Central Dynasty, their taxes should be levied, and they should be required to pay 2,500 koku of grain every year as military reserve grain.

古文：帝以其率先来归，田税随所入，不必以额。
现代文：皇帝认为他们率先来归附朝廷有功，他们的田地赋税随他们自己贡献算了，不必规定所交数额。
English: The emperor thought that they had made a great contribution by being the first to join the imperial court. The tax on their fields was calculated according to their own contribution, and there was no need to stipulate the amount to be paid.

古文：已，复置播州黄平宣抚。
现代文：之后，又设置播州黄平宣抚司。
English: After that, the Banzhou Huangping Publicity Department was set up.

古文：播州江渡蛮黄安作乱，贵州卫指挥张岱讨平之。
现代文：播州江渡的蛮族人黄安作乱，贵州卫的指挥张贷将其讨伐平定。
English: Huang An, a barbarian from Banzhou Jiangdu, started a riot, but Zhang Lian, the commander of Guizhou Wei, fought him down.

古文：八年，铿遣其弟锜来贡，赐衣币。
现代文：八年杨铿派遣其弟弟杨钅奇来献贡物，皇帝给他赏赐衣服钱币。
English: In the eighth year, Yang Hui sent his brother Yang Huiqi to pay tribute, and the emperor rewarded him with clothes and coins.

古文：自是，每三岁一入贡。
现代文：从此，他们每三年向朝廷献贡物一次。
English: From then on, they offered tribute to the imperial court once every three years.

古文：十四年遣使赍谕铿： 比闻尔听浮言，生疑贰。
现代文：十四年皇帝派使者带诏谕给杨铿说 ：近来我听说你听信浮言，对朝廷产生疑心。
English: Fourteen years later, the emperor sent an envoy with an edict to Yang Xuan, saying, "Recently, I have heard that you have been listening to rumours and have become suspicious of the imperial court.

古文：今大军南征，多用战骑，宜率兵二万、马三千为先锋，庶表尔诚。 
现代文：现今大军向南征伐，用的多是战骑，你应率兵二万、战马三千做先锋，以表示你对朝廷的忠诚不二。 
English: Today, a large army is marching south, using mostly war horses. You should lead 20,000 soldiers and 3,000 horses as the vanguard to show your loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：十五年城播州沙溪，以官兵一千人、土兵二千人戍之。
现代文：十五年明军在播州的沙溪筑城，派官军一千人，当地土兵二千人守卫该城。
English: In 15 years, the Ming army built a city in Shaxi, Banzhou, and sent 1,000 officers and men and 2,000 local soldiers to guard the city.

古文：改播州宣慰司隶贵州，改黄平卫为千户所。
现代文：不久，朝廷将播州宣慰司改为由贵州统领，将黄平卫改成千户所。
English: Soon after, the imperial court changed the name of the Banzhou Consolation Division to the Guizhou Consolation Division, and changed Huang Pingwei to the Thousand Household Division.

古文：十七年，铿子震卒于京，命有司归其丧。
现代文：十七年，杨铿的儿子杨震在京城逝世，朝廷命有关官府将其送回老家安葬。
English: In the seventeenth year, Yang Zhen, the son of Yang Hui, died in Beijing. The imperial court ordered the relevant government offices to send him back to his hometown for burial.

古文：二十年征铿入朝，贡马十匹。
现代文：二十年，朝廷征杨铿进京朝觐，向皇帝献贡马十匹。
English: Twenty years ago, the imperial court invited Yang Hui to the imperial court in Beijing, and he offered ten horses as tribute to the emperor.

古文：帝谕以守土保身之道，赐钞五百锭。
现代文：皇帝将守土保身的方法告诉杨铿，并赏赐给他钱钞五百锭。
English: The emperor told Yang Xuan the way to protect the land and protect himself, and rewarded him with 500 baht in banknotes.

古文：二十一年，播州宣慰使司并所属宣抚司官，各遣其子来朝，请入太学，帝敕国子监官善训导之。
现代文：二十一年，播州宣慰使司和其下属的宣抚司的长官，各派遣他们的儿子来朝见皇帝，请求朝廷让他们进入太学学习。皇帝命令国子监的官员应好好地训导他们。
English: In the 21st year, the chiefs of the Banzhou Xuanjie Envoy Division and its subordinate Xuanfu Division each sent their sons to see the emperor and asked the court to let them enter Taixue to study. The emperor ordered the officials of the State Children's Supervision to properly train them.

古文：永乐四年免播州荒田租，设重安长官司，隶播州宣慰司，以张佛保为长官，以佛保尝招辑重安蛮民响化故也。
现代文：永乐四年，朝廷免除了播州荒田的田租，设置了重安长官司，隶属于播州宣慰司。因张佛保在招抚和睦蛮族百姓，让他们向往朝廷，接受汉化上有功劳，就任命张佛保为重安长官司长官。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, the imperial court exempted the peasants of Banzhou's barren fields from paying farm rents, and set up the heavy security chief magistrate's office, which was subordinate to the Banzhou Xuanliao Division. Because Zhang Fubo played a role in bringing harmony to the barbarian people, making them yearn for the imperial court and accept Sinification, Zhang Fubo was appointed the heavy security chief magistrate's office chief.

古文：七年，宣慰使杨升招谕草塘、黄平、重安所辖当科、葛雍等十二寨蛮人来归。
现代文：七年，宣慰使杨升招抚了草塘、黄平、重安所辖的当科、葛雍等十二个寨子的蛮族人，并让他们归附朝廷。
English: In the seventh year, Yang Sheng was persuaded by Xuan Tong to appease the barbarians of twelve stockades such as Caotang, Huangping, Dangke and Geyong, which were under the jurisdiction of Chong'an, and make them join the imperial court.

古文：宣德三年，升贺万寿节后期，礼部议予半赏。
现代文：宣德三年，杨升没有按规定日期前来祝贺万寿节，礼部讨论说给杨升一半赏赐就行。
English: In the third year of Xuande, Yang Sheng did not come to congratulate the longevity festival according to the prescribed date. The ceremonial department discussed giving Yang Sheng half of the reward.

古文：帝以道远，勿夺其赐。
现代文：皇帝则认为他们路途遥远，不要减少对他们原有的赏赐数额。
English: The emperor, on the other hand, thought that they had come a long way and did not want to reduce the amount of their original reward.

古文：七年，草塘所属谷亻散等四十一寨蛮作乱，总兵陈怀剿抚之，旋定。
现代文：七年，草塘所属的谷亻散等四十一个寨子的蛮族人作乱，总兵陈怀前去进剿和招抚，不久即平定了。
English: In the seventh year, the barbarians of the forty-one stockade, including Gu Yuxan, who belonged to Caotang, made a disturbance. The general Chen Huai went to the stockade to pacify and pacify, and soon it was pacified.

古文：正统十四年，宣慰使杨纲老疾，以其子辉代。
现代文：正统十四年，宣慰使杨纲年老有病，以其儿子杨辉代理他的职务。
English: In the 14th year of orthodoxy, Xuan comforted Yang Gang, who was old and sick, and delegated his duties to his son Yang Hui.

古文：景泰三年，辉奏： 湖、贵所辖臻、剖、五坌等苗贼，纠合草塘、江渡诸苗黄龙、韦保等，杀掠人民，屡抚复叛，乞调兵征剿，以靖民患。 
现代文：景泰三年，杨辉上奏说： 湖广、贵州所辖的臻、剖、五坌等地的苗人，纠集草塘、江渡等地的苗人黄龙、韦保等，杀害掠夺人民，屡次招抚他们又屡次反叛，请求朝廷派军队征讨剿灭他们，清除百姓的祸患。 
English: In the third year of Jingtai, Yang Hui said in his report: The Miao people in Zhen, Jia and Wuzhong under the jurisdiction of Hukang and Guizhou, and the Miao people in Caotang, Jiangdu, Huanglong, Weibo, etc., killed and plundered the people, repeatedly lured them and repeatedly rebelled, and requested the court to send troops to fight and annihilate them and clear the people of the scourge.

古文：帝命总督王来、总兵梁珤等，会同四川巡抚剿之。
现代文：皇帝命令总督王来、总兵梁瑶等人，会同四川巡抚前去进剿。
English: The emperor ordered the governor Wang Lai, the commander-in-chief Liang Ye and others, together with the Sichuan governor, to march into the city.

古文：七年，调辉兵征铜鼓、五开叛苗，赐敕颁赏。
现代文：七年，朝廷征调杨辉的军队去征伐铜鼓、五开等地叛乱的苗人，皇帝下诏给他们颁布奖赏。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court conscripted Yang Hui's army to conquer the rebellious Miao people in Bronze Drum, Wukai and other places, and the emperor issued a decree to award them.

古文：成化十年以播州贼赍果等屡岁为患，敕责川、贵镇巡官。
现代文：成化十年，因播州的贼人赍果等每年为患，皇帝下诏责究四川、贵州的镇巡官。
English: In the tenth year of the Jin Dynasty, the emperor issued an edict to punish the town inspectors of Sichuan and Guizhou for the annual plague caused by the bandits of Banzhou.

古文：正统末，苗蛮聚众寇边，土官同知罗宏奏，辉有疾，乞以其子爱代。
现代文：正统末年，苗族人聚众侵犯边关，土官同知罗宏上奏朝廷，说杨辉有病在身，请求让杨辉的儿子杨爱代理其父的职务。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, the Miao people gathered in large numbers to encroach on the border. Luo Hong, a fellow local official, appealed to the imperial court, saying that Yang Hui was ill and requesting that Yang Hui's son, Yang Ai, act as his father's representative.

古文：帝命爱袭职，仍敕爱即率兵从总兵官剿贼。
现代文：皇帝命令杨爱继承其父的官职，让他带兵跟随总兵官去剿灭贼人。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Ai to take over his father's official position, and let him lead the soldiers to follow the commander-in-chief to exterminate the thieves.

古文：先是，辉奏所属夭坝干地五十三寨及重安所辖湾溪等寨，屡被苗蛮占据，乞令湖、贵会兵征之。
现代文：此前，杨辉曾上奏，说他下属的夭坝干地区的五十三个寨子和重安所管辖的湾溪等寨子，屡次被苗人占据，请求朝廷让湖广、贵州两地会兵征剿。
English: Previously, Yang Hui had appealed, saying that the fifty-three stockades in the Yodagan region under his jurisdiction and the Wanxi stockade under the jurisdiction of Chong'an had been repeatedly occupied by the Miao people, and requested the court to let the two places of Guangxi and Guizhou join forces to recruit soldiers.

古文：命如辉言。
现代文：皇帝下令就按杨辉所说的去做。
English: The emperor gave the order to do as Yang Hui said.

古文：部议以爱年幼，请仍起辉暂理军事。又以辉难独任，宜敕都御史张瓒亲至播州督理，励辉等振扬威武，以备征调，其机宜悉听瓒裁处。
现代文：兵部讨论认为杨爱年幼，无法承担重任，请求皇帝仍然起用杨辉，让其暂时处理军务；又认为杨辉也难以独自承担如此大的重任，应当让都御史张瓒亲自赶赴播州监督处理军务，激励杨辉等人振奋军威，准备出征，而具体的征讨时机全听从张瓒的裁决。
English: The military department thought that Yang Ai was too young to take on the heavy task, and asked the emperor to still appoint Yang Hui to temporarily handle military affairs. They also thought that Yang Hui would find it difficult to shoulder such a heavy task on his own, and should let the Metropolitan Historian Zhang Qian personally rush to Banzhou to supervise and handle military affairs, and encourage Yang Hui and others to raise their military prestige and prepare to go to war, while the specific time of requisition was entirely subject to Zhang Qian's ruling.

古文：十二年，瓒督诸军及辉攻败湾溪、夭坝干地诸苗，凡破山寨十六，斩首四百九十六级，抚男妇九千八百余口。
现代文：十二年，张瓒监督各路军队和杨辉一起进攻并打败了湾溪、夭坝干等地的苗人，攻破山寨共十六座，斩获首级四百九十六个，招抚男女九千八百多人。
English: In 2012, Zhang Rong oversaw all the armies and Yang Hui together attacked and defeated the Miao people in Wanxi, Xiaobagang and other places, defeated a total of 16 villages, captured 496 first-class villages, and attracted more than 9,800 men and women.

古文：事下兵部，以苗就抚者多，宜量为处分。
现代文：皇帝将此事交兵部讨论，兵部认为这次招抚的苗人数量多，应将他们分开安置为宜。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the military department for discussion. The military department believed that the number of seedlings attracted this time was large, and it was appropriate to place them separately.

古文：瓒议设安宁宣抚司，并怀远、宣化二长官司，建靖南、龙场二堡，命辉董其役。
现代文：张瓒建议设置一个安宁宣抚司和怀远、宣化二个长官司，建立靖南、龙场二个城堡，命令杨辉监督管理这些机构事务。
English: Zhang Ye proposed to set up an Anning and Xuanfu Division and two chief departments of Huaiyuan and Xuanhua, establish two castles in Jingnan and Longchang, and order Yang Hui to supervise and manage these institutional affairs.

古文：辉调兵民五千余，立治所，委所属黄平诸长官，分甓城垣。
现代文：杨辉征调土兵和百姓五千多人，建立治所，委托所属的黄平各长官，分别用砖砌筑城墙。
English: Yang Hui conscripted and transferred more than five thousand soldiers and civilians, established a government office, and commissioned the various officials of Huangping to build the city wall with bricks.

古文：将竣，辉因奏： 各寨苗蛮，近颇知惧，但大军还后，难保无虞。
现代文：这些工程将要完工时，杨辉上奏说： 各寨子的苗族人，近来已颇知畏惧，但是一旦大军撤走后，难保不会出事。
English: When these projects are about to be completed, Yang Hui said in his report: The Miao people in each village have recently been quite afraid, but once the army withdraws, it is difficult to guarantee that there will be no accidents.

古文：播州向设操守土兵一千五百人，今拨守怀远、靖南、夭漂、龙场各二百人，宣化百人，安宁六百人，其家属宜徙之同居，为固守计。
现代文：播州向来操练守卫的土兵一千五百人，现今已调拨去守卫怀远、靖南、夭漂、龙场各二百人，调拨去守卫宣化一百人，守卫安宁六百人，他们的家属应与他们一起迁徙，共同居住，以巩固土兵的守卫之心。
English: Banzhou has always trained 1,500 local soldiers to guard, and now 200 have been assigned to guard Huayuan, Jingnan, Yaofu and Longchang, 100 to guard Xuanhua, and 600 to guard Anning. Their families should migrate with them and live together to consolidate the guarding heart of the local soldiers.

古文：其工之未毕者，宜命臣子爱董之，而听臣致仕如故。 
现代文：工程中还没有完成的，可任命我的儿子杨爱去监督完工，让我像以前一样辞官在家。 
English: If the project is not yet completed, I can appoint my son Yang Ai to supervise the completion, and let me resign from my post at home as before.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: He complied.

古文：时湾溪既立安宁宣抚，烂土诸蛮恶其逼，遂引赍果等攻陷夭漂、靖南城堡，围安宁。
现代文：此时湾溪已经设立安宁宣抚，烂土等地蛮族人厌恶他的压迫，就带领赍果等人攻陷夭漂、靖南等城堡，包围安宁。
English: At this time, Anning Xuanfu was already established in Wanxi, and the barbarians in Putuo and other places were disgusted with his oppression, so they led Gan Guo and others to attack castles such as Yaofu and Jingnan, and surrounded Anning.

古文：爱新袭，力弗能支，求援于川、贵二镇。
现代文：杨爱刚继承其父的职位，还无力支撑这种局面，便向四川、贵州的镇巡官求援。
English: Yang Aigang inherited his father's position, but he was not able to support this situation, so he turned to the town inspectors in Sichuan and Guizhou for help.

古文：兵部奏起辉再统兵剿之，又敕川、贵兵为助。
现代文：兵部上奏皇帝，起用杨辉再统兵进剿，又命令四川、贵州的军队协助杨辉。
English: The military department reported to the emperor, appointed Yang Hui to lead the troops into battle, and ordered the armies of Sichuan and Guizhou to assist Yang Hui.

古文：十五年，贵州巡抚陈俨奏： 苗贼赍果转横，乞调川、湖等官军五万五千，剋期会贵州，听俨节制。 
现代文：十五年，贵州巡抚陈俨上奏说 ：苗族贼人赍果更加骄横恣肆，请求调拨四川、湖广等地的官军五万五千人限期到贵州会合，听从我陈俨的节制。 
English: Fifteen years later, Chen Xi, the governor of Guizhou, made a report: "The Miao thieves have become more arrogant and reckless. I request that 55,000 government troops from Sichuan, Hougang and other places be dispatched to Guizhou to meet the deadline and obey my Chen Xi's restraint."

古文：兵部言： 贼作于四川，而贵州守臣自欲节制诸军，恐有邀功之人主之。
现代文：兵部说： 贼人是在四川作乱，而贵州的守卫大臣却想节制各军，恐怕有邀功之人在替他做主张。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs said, "Thieves are making trouble in Sichuan, while the Minister of Defense in Guizhou is trying to control the armies. I'm afraid someone is trying to claim credit for him."

古文：且兴师五万，以半年计，须军储十三万五千石，山路险峻，谕运之夫须二十七万众，况天将暑，瘴疠可虞。 
现代文：而且调动五万军队，以半年时间计算，须储备军粮十三万五千石，该地区山路险峻，运送军粮的劳力需要二十七万人，何况天气将转向暑天，瘴气瘟疫不可不做考虑。 
English: Moreover, the mobilization of fifty thousand troops, calculated over a six-month period, requires the reserve of military grain of up to one hundred and thirty-five thousand stones. The mountainous roads in the region are steep, and the labor of transporting military grain requires two hundred and seventy thousand people. Moreover, the weather will turn to hot weather, and radon plague must be considered.

古文：帝然其奏。
现代文：皇帝认为兵部的奏章是对的，故不予调动军队。
English: The emperor believed that the report of the military department was correct, so the army would not be mobilized.

古文：二十二年，爱兄宣抚杨友讦奏爱，帝命刑部侍郎何乔新往勘。
现代文：二十二年，杨爱的兄长、宣抚杨友在上奏时攻讦杨爱，皇帝命令刑部侍郎何乔新前去审核。
English: In 1922, when Yang Ai's elder brother, Yang You, who was a courtier, attacked Yang Ai while she was playing, the emperor ordered He Qiaoxin, a waiter from the Department of Justice, to go and investigate.

古文：二十三年，乔新奏： 辉在日，溺其庶子友，欲令承袭，长官张渊阿顺之。
现代文：二十三年，何乔新上奏说： 杨辉在位时，溺爱其妾生的儿子杨友，想让杨友继承他的官位，长官张渊阿谀奉承顺从杨辉的意图。
English: In 233, He Qiao Xin Shangso said: When Yang Hui was on the throne, Yang You, the son of Yang Hui's concubine, wanted to let Yang You inherit his official position. The governor Zhang Yuan Aqi flattered and obeyed Yang Hui's intention.

古文：安抚宋韬谓杨氏家法，立嗣以嫡，爱宜立。
现代文：安抚宋韬认为杨氏的家法是嫡子继承父位，所以应该立杨爱。
English: To placate Song Tao, he thought that the Yang family law is that the legitimate son inherits the father's position, so Yang Ai should be appointed.

古文：辉不得已立爱，又欲割地以授友，谋于渊，因以夭坝干乃本州怀远故地，为生苗所据，请兵取之。
现代文：杨辉不得已立了杨爱，又想割地授予杨友，便去与张渊谋划此事。他们想以夭坝干是本州怀远的故地，现被没有汉化的苗族人所占据，请求出兵去攻取该地。
English: Yang Hui had no choice but to appoint Yang Ai, and also wanted to divide the land and grant it to Yang You, so he went to plan the matter with Zhang Yuan. They wanted to use Xiaobagang as a distant ancestral place in Honshu, which is now occupied by Miao people who have not been Sinicized, and asked for troops to be sent to conquer the place.

古文：容山长官韩瑄以土民安辑日久，不宜征。
现代文：容山的长官韩蠧认为当地的土族百姓和睦安处的时间已经很久，不应该出兵征讨。
English: Han Zheng, the governor of Yongshan, believes that the local Turkish people have been at peace for a long time and should not be conscripted.

古文：渊与辉计执瑄，杖杀之。
现代文：张渊便与杨辉用计谋将韩蠧捆起来，用杖打死。
English: Zhang Yuan and Yang Hui then used trickery to tie up Han Qi and beat him to death with a cane.

古文：前巡抚张瓒受辉赂，以其地设安宁宣抚司，冒以友任宣抚。
现代文：前任巡抚张瓒接受了杨辉的贿赂，设置了安宁宣抚司，让杨友冒充出任宣抚。
English: The previous procurator Zhang Hao accepted Yang Hui's bribe, set up the Anning Procuratorate, and let Yang You pretend to be the procurator.

古文：辉立券，以所有金玉、服用、庄田召诸子均分之。
现代文：杨辉生前曾立下券证，他所有的金玉、衣服用具、庄稼田产都要招集各儿子前来均分。
English: Before his death, Yang Hui had issued a voucher, and all of his gold, clothing and equipment, as well as his crops and farm produce, were to be divided equally among his sons.

古文：辉没，渊乃与友潜谋刺爱，渊弟深亦与谋，不果，友遂奏爱居处器用僣拟朝廷，又通唐府，密书往来，私习兵法、天文，谋不轨，事皆诬。 
现代文：杨辉死后，张渊与杨友密谋刺杀杨爱，张渊的弟弟张深也参与了此一阴谋，没有成功。杨友于是上奏朝廷，说杨爱的居处、器物用具都是僭越礼规、模拟朝廷的，杨爱勾通唐府，彼此之间有秘密书信来往，而且杨爱私自学习兵法和天文，图谋不轨，等等。这些事都是诬告。 
English: After Yang Hui's death, Zhang Yuan and Yang You plotted to assassinate Yang Ai. Zhang Yuan's younger brother Zhang Sheng also participated in this plot, but it was unsuccessful. Yang You then reported to the imperial court, saying that Yang Ai's residence and utensils were beyond the etiquette and simulated the imperial court, that Yang Ai had colluded with the Tang government, and that there were secret letters exchanged between them, and that Yang Ai Shi had studied military law and astronomy, and plotted irregularities, and so on. These are all false accusations.

古文：帝命斩渊、深。以爱信谗薄兄，友因公擅杀，且谋嫡，盗官钱，皆有罪。
现代文：皇帝下令斩杀张渊和张深，认为杨爱听信谗言薄待其兄，杨友假公擅杀，且谋害嫡亲，偷盗官钱，都有罪。
English: The emperor ordered the beheading of Zhang Yuan and Zhang Sheng, and believed that Yang Ai had listened to the insults and treated his brother, Yang You Xinggong, cruelly, and that he was guilty of plotting to kill his legitimate relatives and stealing official money.

古文：爱赎复任，友迁保宁羁管，仍敕乔新从宜处治。
现代文：杨爱赎罪后可再任原职，杨友须迁到保宁接受管制，并让何乔新从宜处治。
English: Yang Ai can be reappointed to his original post after atonement, Yang You must move to Boryeong to accept control, and let He Qiaoxin deal with it as appropriate.

古文：弘治元年增设重安守御千户所，命播州岁调土兵一千助戍守。
现代文：弘治元年，朝廷在该地区增设重安守御千户所，命令播州每年调拨土兵一千人前去该所协助守卫。
English: In the first year of the Kōji era, the imperial court added the heavy security guard of the thousand households in the area, and ordered Banshu to allocate one thousand soldiers a year to assist the guard.

古文：七年，以平苗功，赐敕劳爱。
现代文：七年，因平定苗族人有功，皇帝下诏犒劳杨爱。
English: In the seventh year, because of the success in pacifying the Miao people, the emperor issued an edict to Loyang Ai.

古文：十四年，调播州兵五千征贵州贼妇米鲁等。
现代文：十四年，朝廷从播州调拨了五千人前去征讨贵州的贼人女首领米鲁等。
English: In 1914, the imperial court sent five thousand people from Banzhou to recruit Miru, the female leader of thieves in Guizhou.

古文：正德二年升播州宣慰使杨斌为四川按察使，仍理宣慰事。
现代文：正德二年，播州宣慰使杨斌晋升为四川按察使，仍掌理宣慰事务。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, Yang Bin was promoted from Banzhou Xuanliao Envoy to Sichuan Ao Xuanliao Envoy, and was still in charge of Xuanliao affairs.

古文：旧制，土官有功，赐衣带，或旌赏部众，无列衔方面者。
现代文：按照原先的制度，土官有功劳，朝廷给他赏赐衣带，或用旗帜奖赏他的部众，没有升官衔的。
English: According to the original system, if a local official was meritorious, the imperial court would reward him with a sash, or reward his subordinates with a flag, if they were not promoted.

古文：斌狡横，不受两司节制，讽安抚罗忠等上其平普安等战功，重赂刘瑾，得之。
现代文：杨斌狡猾专横，不受两司的节制，唆使安抚罗忠等人上报他平定普安的战功，用重礼贿赂刘瑾，终于得以升职。
English: Yang Bin was cunning and imperious, not subject to the restraint of the two departments, instigated the leaders to appease Luo Zhong and others to report his war service of pacifying Pu'an, and bribed Liu Wei with a heavy gift, and finally he was promoted.

古文：逾年，巡按御史俞缁言不宜授，乃裁之，仍原职。
现代文：过了一年，巡按御史俞缁说不应该授予杨斌四川按察使的官衔，便将他裁了，让他仍任原职。
English: A year later, the inspector-general of police said that Yang Bin should not be awarded the title of inspector-general of Sichuan Province, and dismissed him, leaving him in his original position.

古文：初，友既编置保宁，爱益恣，厚敛以贿中贵，征取友向所居凯里地者独苛。
现代文：早先，杨友既已被迁到保宁受管制，杨爱就更加恣意妄行，用从百姓中收刮来的财物贿赂中央的贵族，然后出兵夺取杨友以往的居住地凯里。
English: Earlier, since Yang You had been moved to Boryeong and was under control, Yang Ai acted even more arbitrarily, bribing the aristocrats of the central government with the wealth stolen from the people, and then sent troops to seize Yang You's former residence, Kaili.

古文：同知杨才居安宁，乘之，朘剥尤甚，诸苗愤怨。
现代文：同知杨才居住在安宁，乘此机会压迫剥削百姓比以往更甚，苗人很怨愤。
English: Miao people are very angry that Yang Cai, who lives in a peaceful area, took this opportunity to oppress and exploit the people even more than before.

古文：凯里民为友奏复官，弗得，乃潜入保宁，以友还，纠众作乱，攻播州，焚爱居第及公私廨宇略尽，遂杀才，多所残戮。
现代文：凯里的百姓替杨友上奏要求恢复杨友的官职，不得，便潜入保宁，将杨友抢了回来，然后纠集众人作乱，攻打播州，焚烧了杨爱的居所和公私官邸，杀了杨才，还残戮了许多其他人。
English: The people of Kaili petitioned for the reinstatement of Yang You, and when they couldn't, they sneaked into Boryeong, snatched Yang You back, and then rallied everyone to make a riot, attacked Bozhou, burned Yang Ai's residence and public and private residences, killed Yang Cai, and slaughtered many others.

古文：爱屡奏于朝，帝命镇巡官调兵征之。
现代文：杨爱为此屡次上奏朝廷，皇帝命令镇巡官调拨军队前去征讨。
English: For this reason, Yang Ai repeatedly appealed to the imperial court, and the emperor ordered the town inspector to send troops to investigate.

古文：会友死，遂缓师。
现代文：此时杨友死了，于是军队便缓出。
English: At this time, Yang You died, so the army was released.

古文：已而镇巡官言： 友子弘能悔过自新，且善抚驭，蛮众愿听其约束。
现代文：不久镇巡官说： 杨友的儿子杨弘能够悔过自新，而且善于招抚驾驭百姓，蛮族群众愿意听从他的号令约束。
English: Soon, the town inspector said: Yang Hong, the son of Yang You, is able to repent and reform, and is good at enticing and controlling the people. The barbarian masses are willing to obey his orders and restrictions.

古文：其前为友所焚杀者，俱已随土俗折偿，且还所侵夺于官。
现代文：以前被杨友所焚烧杀害的，都已随当地习俗折价赔偿，同时还归还以前侵夺的东西给官府。
English: Those who were burned and killed by Yang You in the past have been compensated according to local customs. At the same time, they have returned what they had stolen to the government.

古文：乞授弘冠带为土舍，协同播州经历司抚辑诸蛮。
现代文：我们请求朝廷授予杨弘冠带，封他为土舍，让他协同播州经历司招抚各族。
English: We request the Imperial Court to award Yang Hong Guan with a sash, to grant him a mansion, and to allow him to work with the Banzhou Experience Division to attract people from all ethnic groups.

古文：其家众置保宁者仍归之，隶播州管辖。
现代文：他的家属已迁移安置到保宁的，允许他们回凯里，仍隶属于播州，受播州管辖。
English: If his family members have been relocated to Boryeong, they are allowed to return to Kaili, which is still subordinate to Banzhou and under the jurisdiction of Banzhou.

古文：并谕斌与弘协和，不得再造衅端。 
现代文：并谕告杨斌和杨弘通和，不得再制造争端。 
English: It also ordered Yang Bin and Yang Hongtong to make peace and not to create any more disputes.

古文：报可。
现代文：该提议上报朝廷后，朝廷同意了。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：未几，播州安抚宋淮奏： 贵州凯口烂土苗婚于凯里草塘诸寨，阴相构结，诱出苗为乱。
现代文：不久，播州安抚宋淮上奏说 ：贵州凯口烂土的苗族人与凯里草塘诸寨子里的番族人结婚，暗地里相互勾结，诱使山里的苗人作乱。
English: Soon after, Song Huai, the pacifier of Banzhou, said: The Miao people in Kaikouro, Guizhou, married the Guan people in the villages of Kaili Caotang, and secretly colluded with each other to induce the Miao people in the mountains to make trouble.

古文：乞赐斌敕，令每年巡视边境，会湖广镇巡官抚处。 
现代文：请求朝廷给杨斌颁敕谕，令他每年巡视边境，会同湖广镇巡官一起安抚处置。 
English: Request the imperial court to issue an imperial edict to Yang Bin, ordering him to inspect the border every year, and to work with the inspector of Huguang Town to pacify the situation.

古文：部议，土官向无领敕出巡者。谕斌宜抚绥土众，辑睦亲族，以副朝廷优待之意。
现代文：兵部讨论认为土官中向来没有带着皇帝的敕谕出巡的，便谕告杨斌应安抚妥当当地的百姓，与亲族和睦相处，不辜负朝廷对他的优待。
English: The military department discussed that the local officials had never gone on a tour with the emperor's edict, and the edict told Yang Bin that he should appease the local people, live in harmony with his relatives, and live up to the court's preferential treatment of him.

古文：因授致仕宣慰爱为昭毅将军，给诰命，赐麒麟服。
现代文：接着给已辞官在家的宣慰杨爱授昭毅将军的称号，皇帝给他颁布授官的诏令，赏赐绣有麒麟的衣服。
English: Next, Yang Ai conferred the title of General Zhaoyi to the consolation of the retired officer at home. The emperor issued a decree awarding him the post and rewarded him with clothes embroidered with unicorns.

古文：时斌又为其父请进阶及服色，礼科驳之，以服色等威所系，不可假。
现代文：这时杨斌又出面替他父亲请求晋升官阶和服装的颜色，礼科驳回他的请求，认为服装的颜色是等级威仪的象征，不能掺假。
English: At this time, Yang Bin also came forward to ask for his father's promotion and the color of clothing. The etiquette department rejected his request, believing that the color of clothing is a symbol of rank and dignity and cannot be adulterated.

古文：兵部以爱旧有剿贼功，皆许之。
现代文：兵部则认为杨爱以前剿贼有功，答应了杨斌为其父亲所提的请求。
English: On the other hand, the military department thought that Yang Ai had done a good job of thieving before, and agreed to the request made by Yang Bin for his father.

古文：斌复为其子相请入学，并得赐冠带。
现代文：杨斌又请求让其儿子杨相进国子监学习，得到朝廷的同意并得到皇帝所赐的冠带。
English: Yang Bin also requested that his son, Yang Xiangjin, be allowed to study in the imperial nursery, which received the consent of the imperial court and the crown given by the emperor.

古文：十二年，播州安抚罗忠、宋淮等奏： 斌有父丧，欲援文臣例守制，但边防为重，乞仍令掌印理事。 
现代文：十二年，播州安抚罗忠、宋淮等人给朝廷上奏： 杨斌有父丧在身，想援引朝廷文官的例制替父亲守孝，但边关防务很重，请求朝廷让他在父丧期间仍掌管官印处理事务。 
English: In the 12th year, Banzhou appeased Luo Zhong, Song Huai and others and made a report to the imperial court: Yang Bin's father had passed away, and he wanted to invoke the rule of the imperial civil servants to take care of his father, but the border defense was very heavy, and he asked the imperial court to let him still be in charge of the official seal handling affairs during his father's funeral.

古文：初，杨弘既归凯里，与重安土舍冯纶等有怨。
现代文：原初，杨弘回归凯里，与重安的土舍冯纶等人有怨。
English: Originally, Yang Hong returned to Kaili, and he had a grudge against Chong'an's Tsushe Feng Yao and others.

古文：弘卒，纶等诱苗蛮攻之，更相仇杀，侵轶贵州境。
现代文：杨弘死后，冯纶诱使苗族人进攻凯里，这样双方便构怨仇杀，其祸害超出了贵州边境。
English: After the death of Yang Hong, Feng Yu induced the Miao people to attack Kaili, so that the two sides set up a grudge and vendetta, the scourge of which went beyond the Guizhou border.

古文：巡抚邹文盛言状，且请移文四川，会官抚处，逾岁不报。
现代文：巡抚邹文盛向朝廷描述了相互仇杀的状况，请求朝廷移文到四川，让贵州、四川的官员会同一起去招抚处理此事。
English: The governor Gong Wensheng described the situation of mutual vendetta to the imperial court, and requested the imperial court to transfer the case to Sichuan, so that officials from Guizhou and Sichuan could work together to deal with the matter.

古文：文盛乃遣参议蔡潮入播州，督致仕杨斌抚平之。
现代文：该请求过了一年没有消息。邹文盛便派遣参议蔡潮进入播州，督促已辞官在家的杨斌出面安抚平定这场仇杀。
English: After a year, there was no news of the request. Yu Wensheng then sent Councillor Cai Chao into Banzhou to urge Yang Bin, who had resigned from his post and was at home, to appease and quell the vendetta.

古文：因言： 宜复安宁宣抚，俾弘子弟袭之。
现代文：因此邹文盛又上奏说： 应该恢复安宁宣抚，让杨弘的子弟承袭这个官位。
English: Therefore, Gong Wensheng also made a report saying: It is necessary to restore peace and tranquility, and let Yang Hong's son inherit this official position.

古文：斌未衰，宜仍起任事，以制诸蛮寨。
现代文：杨斌还未衰老，应该再起用他，让他节制各蛮族人居住的寨子。
English: Yang Bin is not yet senile, he should be used again, let him control the stockade where the barbarians live.

古文：潮有抚蛮劳，宜量擢。 
现代文：蔡潮有招抚蛮族的功劳，应根据其功劳提升他的官职。 
English: Cai Chao has the merit of appeasing the barbarians, and he should be promoted according to his merits.

古文：兵部议： 安宁已革不可复，斌子既代，亦不可起。
现代文：兵部讨论说 ：安宁宣抚已经革除了就不能再恢复了，杨斌的儿子既然已经代理了其父的职务，杨斌自然也不能再起用了。
English: The military department discussed: Anning Xuanfu had been dismissed and could no longer be reinstated. Since Yang Bin's son had already taken over his father's duties, Yang Bin naturally could no longer be used.

古文：土官应袭与否，属四川，非黔所得专。
现代文：土官是否应该继承原有官职，属于四川的事，不能由贵州说了算。
English: It is not up to Guizhou to say whether or not local officials should succeed to their former posts, which is a matter for Sichuan.

古文：盛所请难行，而功不可诬。 
现代文：邹文盛的请求难以施行，但其功劳不能抹杀。 
English: Gong Wensheng's request is difficult to implement, but his merits cannot be erased.

古文：十六年赐斌蟒衣玉带。
现代文：十六年，朝廷赏赐给杨斌绣有蟒纹的衣服和玉腰带。
English: In the 16th year of his reign, the imperial court presented Yang Bin with embroidered clothes and a jade belt.

古文：嘉靖元年赐播州儒学《四书集注》，从宣慰杨相奏也。
现代文：嘉靖元年，皇帝听从宣慰杨相的奏章，给播州儒学赏赐了《四书集注》。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor listened to Yang Xiang's sermon and rewarded Banzhou Confucianism with the Commentary on the Four Books.

古文：弘既死，其弟张求袭职不得，时盗边，劫白泥司印信，复与相构兵。
现代文：杨弘已经死了，他的弟弟杨张请求继承杨弘的职务，不得，便时常在边疆地区抢劫，抢走了白泥司的印信，又与杨相构兵为仇。
English: Yang Hong had already died. His younger brother Yang Zhang requested to inherit Yang Hong's position, but was not allowed to, so he often robbed in the border areas, robbed the seal of the white mud company, and made enemies with Yang Xiang.

古文：守臣乞改凯里属贵州，以张为土知州解释之。
现代文：当地守卫大臣请求朝廷将凯里改为隶属于贵州，以杨张为土知州。
English: The local Minister of Defense requested the Imperial Court to change Kaili to be affiliated with Guizhou, with Yang Zhang as Tochizhou.

古文：兵部议： 张习父兄之恶，幸免于辜；敢肆然执印信以要挟，当命川、贵守臣按其前后争产杀人诸罪，置于理。
现代文：兵部讨论说： 杨张学得了其父兄的恶习，幸免于被杀；现在竟敢公开抢夺印信来要挟朝廷，应当命令四川、贵州的守卫大臣按其以前和最近所犯的争夺财产、杀人等罪状，按理处置。
English: The military department discussed: Yang Zhang learned the bad habits of his father and brother, and was spared being killed; now he dares to openly snatch the seal letter to blackmail the imperial court, the Minister of Defense of Sichuan and Guizhou should be ordered to deal with him reasonably according to his previous and recent crimes of fighting for property, homicide and other crimes.

古文：若张悔过输情，还所获印，尚可量授一官，听调杀贼以自效。
现代文：要是杨张能够向朝廷表示悔过，归还其所获的印信，尚可按情况授予他一个官职，让他听从朝廷的调遣去杀贼立功，赎自己的罪。
English: If Yang Zhang could express his remorse to the imperial court and return the seal letter he received, he could be granted an official post according to the circumstances, and let him obey the dispatch of the imperial court to kill the thief and redeem himself.

古文：倘或怙终，必诛以为玩法戒。 
现代文：要是他坚持作恶到底，必杀他以为那些玩弄法律者戒。 
English: If he persists in doing evil, he will be killed, and those who play with the law will be punished.

古文：既，遂许张袭宣抚，而改安宁为凯里，隶贵川。
现代文：后来，答应让杨张继承宣抚官职，将安宁改为凯里，隶属于贵州。
English: Later, he promised to let Yang Zhang succeed to the post of procurator, and changed Anning to Kaili, which belongs to Guizhou.

古文：初，杨相之祖父皆以嫡庶相争，梯祸数世。
现代文：当初，杨相的祖辈都是因为庶子与嫡子之间的争端，遗祸几世。
English: At first, Yang Xiang's ancestors were all because of the dispute between the illegitimate son and the legitimate son, leaving a legacy of several generations.

古文：至是，相复宠庶子煦。
现代文：到杨相时，他又宠爱庶子杨煦。
English: When it came to Yang Xiang, he also doted on his illegitimate son Yang Xuan.

古文：嫡子烈母张，悍甚，与烈盗兵逐相，相走，客死水西。
现代文：杨相嫡子杨烈的母亲张氏，为人剽悍，与杨烈一起带兵赶走了杨相。杨相逃跑后，死在水西。
English: Mr. Zhang, the mother of Yang Xiang's legitimate son, Yang Lie, was a fierce person. Together with Yang Lie, she led soldiers to drive Yang Xiang away. After Yang Xiang ran away, he died in the west of Shuixi.

古文：烈求父尸，宣慰安万铨因要挟水烟、天旺故地，而后予尸，烈阳许之。
现代文：杨烈到水西去索回父亲的尸体时，宣慰安万铨就要挟杨烈，要他将水烟、天旺两个地方归还给安万铨，然后再还尸体给杨烈。
English: When Yang Li went to the west of Shuixi to retrieve his father's body, the consoler An Wanxuan wanted to blackmail Yang Li, asking him to return the two places of hookah and Tianwang to An Wanxuan, and then return the body to Yang Li.

古文：及相丧还，烈靳地不予，遂与水西构难，又杀其长官王黻。
现代文：杨烈表面上答应了。等杨相的尸体归丧以后，杨烈吝惜土地坚决不给安万铨，于是便与水西方面结仇，还杀死水西的长官王黻。
English: After Yang Xiang's body was buried, Yang Li, who was parsimonious about land, resolutely refused to give An Wanzhong, so he made a feud with the west side of the water, and also killed the governor of the west side of the water, Wang Yao.

古文：时嘉靖二十三年也。
现代文：这是嘉靖二十三年的事。
English: This happened in the 23rd year of Jiajing.

古文：烈既代袭，遂与黻党李保治兵相攻，垂十年，总督冯岳调总兵石邦宪讨平之。
现代文：杨烈继承父亲的官职之后，便与王黻的党徒李保带兵互相攻击，时间延续近十年。总督冯岳调拨总兵石邦宪将他们讨伐平定。
English: After Yang Li inherited his father's official post, he and Wang Yao's party member Li Bao led soldiers to attack each other, which lasted for nearly ten years. Governor Feng Yue dispatched the general soldier Shi Bangxian to fight and subdue them.

古文：真州苗卢阿项者亦久称乱，邦宪以兵七千击败之。
现代文：真州的苗族人卢阿项也长期作乱，石邦宪用七千军队将其击败。
English: Lua Xiang, a Miao from Zhenzhou, also waged war for a long time, and Shibang Xian defeated him with seven thousand troops.

古文：有言贼求援于播者，邦宪曰： 吾方调水西兵，声扬烈助逆罪，烈暇救人乎。 
现代文：有传言说贼人已向播州求援，石邦宪说： 我刚调遣水西的军队，说杨烈有帮助叛逆的罪行，杨烈还有功夫去救别人吗？ 
English: There is a rumor that the thief has asked for help from Banzhou. Shi Bangxian said: I have just dispatched the army of west water, saying that Yang Lie has helped the crime of rebellion. Does Yang Lie still have the power to save others?

古文：已，擒阿项父子，斩获四百余人。
现代文：不久，石邦宪生擒了卢阿项父子，斩杀和俘获敌人四百多。
English: Soon, Shi Bang Xian Sheng killed Lu A Xiang and his son, and killed and captured more than four hundred enemies.

古文：初，嘉靖初，议分凯里属贵州，既，又以播地多在贵州境，并改属思石兵备。
现代文：原先，在嘉靖初年时，朝廷商议将凯里分出来，让其隶属于贵州。后来，又因为播州的土地大多都在贵州境内，就将凯里改成隶属于思石兵备。
English: Originally, in the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial court discussed the separation of Kaili and made it subordinate to Guizhou. Later, because most of the land in Banzhou was in Guizhou, Kaili was made subordinate to Shishibei.

古文：及真州盗平，地方安靖，播人以为非便。
现代文：真州的盗贼被扫平以后，地方安宁了，播州人认为将凯里划归思石兵备很不方便。
English: After the thieves of Zhenzhou were wiped out, the place was peaceful. The Bozhou people thought that it was very inconvenient to move the capital to Shishihe.

古文：川、贵守臣异议不决，命总督会勘。
现代文：四川、贵州的守卫大臣也因意见不同无法决定，朝廷便命令总督合同两地的大臣前去审核。
English: The ministers of defense of Sichuan and Guizhou were also unable to decide due to different opinions, and the imperial court ordered the governor to contract the ministers of the two places to review.

古文：总督奏，仍以播归四川，而贵州思石兵备仍兼制播、酉、平、邑诸土司事，报可。
现代文：总督便向朝廷上奏，说仍将播州归四川管辖，而让贵州的思石兵备仍兼管播州、酉阳、黄平、邑州等地的土司事务。
English: The governor then appealed to the imperial court, saying that Banzhou would still be under the jurisdiction of Sichuan, and that Guizhou's Shishibei Bei would still be in charge of local affairs in Banzhou, Shenyang, Huangping, and Ezhou.

古文：隆庆五年，烈死，子应龙请袭，命予职。
现代文：皇帝同意这种安排。隆庆五年，杨烈死，其儿子杨应龙请求继承父亲的官职，朝廷同意了。
English: The emperor agreed to this arrangement. In the fifth year of Longqing, Yang Liang died, and his son Yang Yinglong requested to inherit his father's official post, and the court agreed.

古文：万历元年给应龙宣慰使敕书。
现代文：万历元年，皇帝下诏书任命杨应龙为宣慰使。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the emperor appointed Yang Yinglong as a consolation envoy.

古文：八年赐故宣慰杨烈祭葬，从应龙请也。
现代文：八年，皇帝同意杨应龙的请求，赐已故宣慰杨烈祭葬仪式。
English: Eight years later, the emperor agreed to Yang Yulong's request and granted the deceased the consolation of Yang Ye's funeral ceremony.

古文：十四年，应龙献大木七十，材美，赐飞鱼服，又复引其祖斌赐蟒例。
现代文：十四年，杨应龙向朝廷进献大木七十根，木材非常好，皇帝给他赏赐绣有飞鱼的衣服。杨应龙又援引其祖先杨斌的例子，希望朝廷赏赐他绣有蟒纹的衣服。
English: In the 14th year, Yang Yinglong presented 70 large trees to the court. The wood was very good, and the emperor rewarded him with clothes embroidered with flying fish. Yang Yinglong also cited the example of his ancestor Yang Bin, hoping that the court would reward him with embroidered clothes.

古文：部议，以斌有军功，且出特恩，未可为比。
现代文：礼部讨论，认为杨斌以前立有军功，又是出于边远地区，皇帝才特别恩赐，才赏蟒纹衣服，杨应龙不能比照杨斌的例子受赏。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies discussed and believed that Yang Bin had military merit in the past, and it was because of the remote area. The emperor only gave a special gift to award the crimson clothes, and Yang Yinglong could not follow Yang Bin's example to receive the award.

古文：帝命以都指挥使衔授应龙。
现代文：皇帝便命令给杨应龙授予都指挥使的官衔。
English: The emperor then ordered Yang Yinglong to be given the official title of "commander of the capital."

古文：十八年，贵州巡抚叶梦熊疏论应龙凶恶诸事，巡按陈效历数应龙二十四大罪。
现代文：万历十八年，贵州巡抚叶梦熊上疏朝廷，谈了杨应龙为凶作恶的事情；巡按陈效也上疏一一诉说了杨应龙二十四条大罪状。
English: In the 18th year of Wanli, Ye Mengxiong, the procurator of Guizhou, went to the imperial court and talked about Yang Yinglong's evil deeds; the procurator also sued Yang Yinglong for 24 major crimes.

古文：时方防御松潘，调播州土兵协守，四川巡按李化龙疏请暂免勘问，俾应龙戴罪图功。
现代文：此时正好是加强松潘的防卫，播州的土兵已调遣到松潘，协助当地的守卫，因此四川的巡按李化龙便上疏朝廷，请求暂时免于审核杨应龙，让杨应龙戴罪立功。
English: At this time, it was time to strengthen the defense of Songpan. The soldiers from Banzhou had been dispatched to Songpan to assist the local guards. Therefore, the Sichuan patrol leader Li Hualong went to the imperial court to request that Yang Yinglong be temporarily exempted from review, and let Yang Yinglong bear the crime and make a contribution.

古文：由是，川、贵抚按疏辨，在蜀者谓应龙无可勘之罪，在黔者谓蜀有私暱应龙之心。
现代文：从此事起，四川、贵州的抚按官上疏朝廷时就判然有别，四川的抚按官认为杨应龙没有什么可以审核的罪状，而贵州的抚按官则认为四川官员有徇私隐瞒杨应龙罪行的意图。
English: From this incident, it was clear that there was a difference between the officials of Sichuan and Guizhou when they came to the imperial court. The officials of Sichuan believed that Yang Yinglong had no crime that could be examined, while the officials of Guizhou believed that the officials of Sichuan had the intention of concealing Yang Yinglong's crime.

古文：于是给事中张希皋等，以事属重大，两省利害，岂漫不相关者，乞从公会勘，无执成心。
现代文：于是给事中张希皋等人认为此事非同小可，事关四川、贵州两省的利害，请求朝廷会合两省官员从公心出发，一同审核此事，不要造成成见。
English: As a result, Zhang Xizhe and others in the matter believed that the matter was not a small matter, but related to the interests of the two provinces of Sichuan and Guizhou, and requested the officials of the two provinces to review the matter together from the perspective of public interest, so as not to create prejudice.

古文：十九年，梦熊主议，播州所辖五司改土为流，悉属重庆，与化龙意复相左。
现代文：十九年，叶梦熊主张播州所管辖的五个司全改由流官治理，隶属重庆，与李化龙的意见又绝然不同。
English: In 1919, Ye Mengxiong advocated that the five departments under the jurisdiction of Banzhou should all be governed by officials from Chongqing, which was completely different from Li Hualong's opinion.

古文：化龙遂引嫌求斥。
现代文：李化龙于是因有嫌疑而遭排斥。
English: Li Hualong was then ostracized for suspicion.

古文：盖应龙本雄猜，阻兵嗜杀，所辖五司七姓悉叛离。
现代文：杨应龙原本就是一个猜忌狠毒之人，倚仗自己有兵好杀人，他所管辖之下五个司的七大姓都叛离了他。
English: Yang Yinglong was originally a suspicious and vicious person, relying on his soldiers to kill people. The seven major families of the five divisions under his jurisdiction all rebelled against him.

古文：嬖妾田屠妻张氏，并及其母。
现代文：他的宠妾田氏不仅屠杀了他的妻子张氏，还累及到张氏的母亲。
English: His favorite concubine Tian not only killed his wife Zhang, but also implicated Zhang's mother.

古文：妻叔张时照与所部何恩、宋世臣等上变，告应龙反。
现代文：他妻子的叔叔张时照与部下的何恩、宋世臣等人一起向朝廷报告紧急事变，密告杨应龙谋反。
English: His wife's uncle Zhang Shizhao, together with his subordinates Ho En, Song Shichen and others, reported the emergency to the imperial court and tipped off Yang Yinglong to plot a rebellion.

古文：梦熊请发兵剿之，蜀中士大夫悉谓蜀三面邻播，属裔以什伯数，皆其弹压，且兵骁勇，数征调有功，剪除未为长策。
现代文：叶梦熊请求朝廷发兵征剿，而四川的士大夫都认为四川三面与播州相邻，杨氏家族的后代和属下的人数在四川是以十以百计，全靠杨应龙来管束弹压的，况且杨应龙的土兵骁勇善战，朝廷数次征调他们都立有功劳，将他们剪除掉不是长久之策。
English: Ye Mengxiong requested the imperial court to send troops to recruit soldiers, and all the Sichuan scholars and magistrates believed that Sichuan was adjacent to Banzhou on three sides. The number of descendants and subordinates of the Yang family in Sichuan was more than ten hundred, and it was entirely up to Yang Yinglong to control and suppress them. Moreover, Yang Yinglong's soldiers were brave and good at war. The imperial court had several times drafted them, and they all had merits. It was not a long-term strategy to cut them out.

古文：以故，蜀抚按并主抚。
现代文：因此，四川的抚按官员一致主张招抚。
English: Therefore, Sichuan's Fuzhou officials unanimously advocated Fuzhou.

古文：朝议命勘，应龙愿赴蜀，不赴黔。
现代文：朝廷讨论后命令对杨应龙进行勘查，杨应龙表示愿意到四川去接受审查，而不愿到贵州。
English: After discussion, the imperial court ordered an investigation of Yang Yinglong. Yang Yinglong said he was willing to go to Sichuan to be examined, but not to Guizhou.

古文：二十年，应龙诣重庆对簿，坐法当斩，请以二万金赎。
现代文：二十年，杨应龙到重庆接受审讯，按法律他应当被斩首，他请求愿出二万金赎罪。
English: Twenty years later, Yang Yinglong went to Chongqing to stand trial. According to the law, he should be beheaded. He asked for 20,000 yuan to atone for his crime.

古文：御史张鹤鸣方驳问，会倭大入朝鲜，征天下兵，应龙因奏辨，且愿将五千兵征倭自赎，诏释之。
现代文：御史张鹤鸣正辨别审问他的罪状，碰到倭寇大举入侵朝鲜，朝廷广征天下的军队，杨应龙便上奏朝廷，愿带五千军队前去征讨倭寇以替自己赎罪。皇帝下诏释放了他。
English: The imperial historian Zhang Zhenming was trying to determine the charges against him, and when he encountered a large-scale invasion of Korea by Japanese pirates, and the imperial court called up troops from all over the world, Yang Yinglong reported to the imperial court that he was willing to take five thousand troops to call up Japanese pirates to atone for his sins. The emperor issued a decree to release him.

古文：兵已启行，寻报罢。巡抚王继光至，严提勘结，应龙抗不出。
现代文：他率军队已经启动出发了，不久下面的官府上报说杨应龙已罢兵不出了。巡抚王继光，严厉提审调查此事，杨应龙抗命不出。
English: The army led by him had already set off, and soon the government office below reported that Yang Yinglong had been unable to leave the army. The governor Wang Jiguang severely arraigned and investigated the matter, and Yang Yinglong did not disobey the order.

古文：张时照等复诣奏阙下，继光用兵之议遂决。
现代文：张时照等人又到朝廷上奏此事，王继光对杨应龙用兵的提议便被通过。
English: Zhang Shizhao and others went to the imperial court to report the matter, and Wang Jiguang's proposal to Yang Yinglong to use soldiers was approved.

古文：二十一年，继光至重庆，与总兵刘承嗣等分兵三道进娄山关，屯白石口。
现代文：二十一年，王继光到重庆，与总兵刘承嗣等人分兵三路向娄山关进发，屯驻在白石口。
English: In 1921, Wang Jiguang went to Chongqing. He and the general Liu Chengzhi and other soldiers marched three routes to Shaoshan Pass and stationed in Baishikou.

古文：应龙佯约降，而统苗兵据关冲击。
现代文：杨应龙假装约定日期投降，而带领苗族土兵占据关隘冲击官军。
English: Yang Yinglong pretended to surrender on the agreed date, and led the Miao soldiers to occupy the pass and attack the government army.

古文：承嗣兵败，杀伤大半。
现代文：刘承嗣兵败，其部下被杀死杀伤一大半。
English: Liu Chengzhi was defeated, and most of his subordinates were killed or wounded.

古文：会继光论罢，即撤兵，委弃辎重略尽。
现代文：碰到王继光被定罪罢官，官军即撤兵，丢弃的辎重几乎都被抢光。
English: When Wang Jiguang was convicted and dismissed, the government troops withdrew, and almost all of the abandoned baggage was robbed.

古文：黔师协剿，亦无功。
现代文：贵州的军队前去协助进剿，也无功而返。
English: Guizhou troops went to assist in the siege, but to no avail.

古文：时四川新抚谭希忠与贵州镇、抚再议剿，御史薛继茂主抚。
现代文：这时，四川新上任的巡抚谭希忠与贵州的镇巡官和巡抚再商量进剿事务，御史薛继茂主张招抚他。
English: At this time, Tan Xizhong, the newly appointed inspector general of Sichuan, and the town inspector and inspector general of Guizhou discussed the progress of the matter, and Goshi Xue Jimao advocated for him.

古文：应龙上书自白，遣其党携金入京行间，执原奏何恩诣綦江县。
现代文：杨应龙向朝廷上书自白，派遣其同党携带金子进入京城行贿，将原奏者何恩绑到綦江县。
English: Yang Yinglong confessed to the imperial court in a letter, sent his accomplices to carry gold into the capital to pay bribes, and tied the original performer He En to Minjiang County.

古文：二十二年，以兵部侍郎刑玠总督贵州。
现代文：二十二年，兵部侍郎邢总督贵州事务。
English: In 1922, he was appointed to the post of Governor of Guizhou Province.

古文：二十三年，玠至蜀，察永宁、酉阳皆应龙姻媾，而黄平、白泥久为仇仇，宜剪其枝党。
现代文：二十三年，邢到达四川，察觉永宁、酉阳都有杨应龙的姻亲，黄平、白泥等地则长期以来对杨应龙有深仇大恨，觉得应该剪除杨应龙的余党。
English: In 233, Zou arrived in Sichuan and noticed that Yongning and Fenyang both had Yang Yinglong's in-laws, while Huangping, Baidi and other places had a deep hatred for Yang Yinglong for a long time, and felt that Yang Yinglong's remaining party should be eliminated.

古文：乃檄应龙，谓当待以不死。
现代文：于是他便发檄文给杨应龙，只要他前来认罪，可以不处死他。
English: So he sent a letter to Yang Yinglong, saying that as long as he came to confess, he would not be put to death.

古文：会水西宣慰安疆臣请父国亨恤典，兵部尚书石星手札示疆臣，趣应龙就吏得贳，疆臣奉札至播招应龙。
现代文：此时正好又碰上水西宣慰安疆臣替其父亲安国亨请求举行抚恤典礼，兵部尚书石星写下手札出示给安疆臣，要他到杨应龙那里催促杨应龙到官府认罪，便可赦免杨应龙的罪行。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Shuixi Xuan comforted Anjiang minister to hold a pension ceremony for his father An Guoheng's request. Shang Shuxi of the military department wrote a handwritten card and showed it to Anjiang minister, asking him to go to Yang Yinglong to urge Yang Yinglong to confess to the government, and Yang Yinglong's crime could be pardoned.

古文：时七姓恐应龙出得除罪，而四方亡命窜匿其间，又幸龙反，因以为利，驿传文移，辄从中阻。
现代文：安疆臣便带着手札前往播州招抚杨应龙。此时，七姓大族害怕杨应龙出去后得以赦免罪行，因为四方的亡命之徒都逃窜、藏匿在该地区，倚仗杨应龙的反叛从中取利，因此，对朝廷官府过往的驿卒和文书，总是设置障碍阻拦。
English: At this time, the seven great clans were afraid that Yang Yinglong would be pardoned after he went out, because the fugitives from the four directions all fled and hid in the area, relying on Yang Yinglong's rebellion to profit from it. Therefore, obstacles were always set up to block the courtiers and documents of the imperial government.

古文：玠檄重庆知府王士琦诣綦江，趣应龙安稳听勘。
现代文：邢便传文给重庆知府王士琦，让他到綦江催促杨应龙到安稳听候审讯。
English: He sent a message to Wang Shizhen, the governor of Chongqing, asking him to go to the Li River to urge Yang Yinglong to come to the trial.

古文：应龙使弟兆龙至安稳，治邮舍，储糒叩头郊迎，致饩牵如礼，言： 应龙缚渠魁，待罪松坎。
现代文：杨应龙派其弟弟杨兆龙到安稳，建好馆舍，储备好干粮，到郊外叩头迎接王士琦，按礼仪隆重地向他敬献猪牛羊等礼物，并说： 杨应龙已将下面的罪魁祸首绑缚起来，在松坎等待判罪。
English: Yang Yinglong sent his younger brother, Yang Zhaolong, to stabilize the situation, build a good house, stock up on dry grain, go to the suburbs to kowtow to meet Wang Shijuan, and ceremoniously present him with gifts such as pigs, cattle and sheep, and said: Yang Yinglong has tied up the following culprits and is waiting for sentencing in Songkan.

古文：所不敢至安稳者，恐堕安稳仇民不测祸也，幸请至松坎受事。 
现代文：杨应龙之所以不敢到安稳来，就是害怕坠入安稳的仇人所设下的无法预测的灾祸之中。请求阁下到松坎去接受杨应龙的认罪。 
English: The reason why Yang Yinglong did not dare to come to Anzheng is that he was afraid of falling into the unpredictable disaster set by the enemies of Anzheng. I request you to go to Songkan to accept Yang Yinglong's confession.

古文：士琦曰， 松坎亦曩奏勘地。 
现代文：王士琦说 ：松坎以往也是上奏勘查之地。 
English: Wang Shizhen said: Songkan used to be a place for surveying.

古文：即单骑往。
现代文：便一个人骑马前往。
English: So he rode off alone.

古文：应龙果面缚道旁，泣请死罪，愿执罪人，献罚金，得自比安国亨。
现代文：杨应龙果然双手反绑着立于道旁，见到王士琦后哭着请求免己死罪，情愿帮朝廷收执其他罪人，献上罚金，让自己享受安国亨的境遇。
English: Yang Yinglong stood by the roadside with his hands tied behind his back. When he saw Wang Shihong, he cried and begged to be spared the death penalty. He was willing to help the court arrest other criminals, pay a fine, and let himself enjoy the situation of An Guoheng.

古文：国亨者，曩亦被讦惧罪不出界，故应龙引之。
现代文：安国亨，也是以往遭到攻讦，因对自己的罪行感到害怕而不出自己的地界的人，所以杨应龙引用他的例子来比照自己。
English: An Guoheng is also a person who has been attacked in the past and does not go out of his own territory because he is afraid of his crimes, so Yang Yinglong cited his example to compare himself.

古文：士琦为请于玠，许之，应龙乃缚献黄元等十二人。
现代文：王士琦为此向邢请示，邢答应了杨应龙，杨应龙便将黄元等十二人绑缚起来献给官府。
English: To this end, Wang Shizhen asked Zou for instructions. Zou agreed to Yang Yinglong's request. Yang Yinglong then tied up Huang Yuan and twelve others and presented them to the government.

古文：案验，抵应龙斩，论赎，输四万金助采木，仍革职，以子朝栋代，次子可栋羁府追赎，黄元等斩重庆市，总督以闻。
现代文：官府验明以后，将黄元等人抵杨应龙的死罪，判杨应龙输送四万金子帮助采伐树木以赎自己的罪，革去杨应龙的官职，让他的儿子杨朝栋代理他的职务，他的次子杨可栋留在官府追赎其父的罪行，黄元等人在重庆闹市被斩首，总督将此事处理结果上报朝廷。
English: After verification by the government, Huang Yuan and others were sentenced to Yang Yinglong's capital crime, Yang Yinglong was sentenced to transport forty thousand gold to help cut down trees to atone for his crime, Yang Yinglong was dismissed from his official position, his son Yang Chaodong was allowed to act as his representative, his second son Yang Kedong remained in the government to atone for his father's crime, Huang Yuan and others were beheaded in downtown Chongqing, and the governor reported the results of the matter to the imperial court.

古文：时倭气未靖，兵部欲缓应龙，事东方，朝廷亦以应龙向有积劳，可其奏，于松坎设同知治焉，以士琦为川东兵备副使弹治之。
现代文：此时倭寇还没有消灭干净，兵部想对杨应龙缓一手以专事东方的倭寇；朝廷也因为杨应龙以往积有功劳，就同意了总督的处理结果，在松坎设置同知来治理该地，任命王士琦为川东兵备副使，负责弹压、治理该地区的事务。
English: At this time, the wokou had not been completely eradicated, and the military department wanted to give Yang Yinglong a hand to deal with the wokou in the East; the imperial court also agreed with the governor's handling result because Yang Yinglong had accumulated merits in the past, and set up a confidant in Songkan to govern the place, and appointed Wang Shijun as the deputy envoy of the East Sichuan Military Preparedness, responsible for the suppression and governance of the affairs in the region.

古文：应龙获宽，益怙终不悛。
现代文：杨应龙获宽大处理后，对所犯的罪行更不思悔改。
English: After Yang Yinglong received lenient treatment, he was even more unrepentant about the crimes he committed.

古文：寻可栋死于重庆，益痛恨。
现代文：不久，杨可栋在重庆去世，杨应龙就更加痛恨官府。
English: Soon after, Yang Kedong died in Chongqing, and Yang Yinglong hated the government even more.

古文：促丧归不得，复檄完赎，大言曰： 吾子活，银即至矣。 
现代文：他敦促官府将其儿子的尸体送回来归葬，没有结果。官府传文书给他，要他交完赎罪的金钱，他大言不惭地说： 我的儿子能活过来，银子就送到。 
English: He urged the authorities to return his son's body for burial, to no avail. The authorities sent him a letter asking him to complete the payment of the atonement money. He boldly said: If my son can come back to life, the money will be sent.

古文：拥兵驱千余僧招魂去。分遣土目，署关据险。
现代文：他带兵驱赶一千多僧人替他儿子招魂；分别派遣土目据守关隘。
English: He led an army to drive away more than a thousand monks who were calling for the soul of his son, and separately dispatched earthmovers to guard the pass.

古文：厚抚诸苗，名其健者为硬手；州人稍殷厚者，没入其赀以养苗。
现代文：他还以优厚待遇招抚各地苗人，将苗人中的健壮者称为硬手；播州百姓中家底稍殷厚些的，财产都被他没收以供养苗族人。
English: He also enticed Miao people from all over the country with generous treatment, calling the robust ones among Miao people as hard workers; he confiscated the property of the slightly richer people in Banzhou to support the Miao people.

古文：苗人咸愿为出死力。
现代文：苗族人全都愿意出死力为他效劳。
English: All the Miao people are willing to do their best to serve him.

古文：二十四年，应龙残余庆，掠大阡、都坝，焚劫草塘、余庆二司及兴隆、都匀各卫。又遣其党围黄平，戮重安长官家，势复大炽。
现代文：二十四年，杨应龙带兵残害了余庆，抢劫了大阡、都坝地区，对草塘、余庆二个司和兴隆、都匀各卫所实行焚烧抢劫，还派其同党包围黄平，杀戮了重安长官全家，其势又大为旺盛。
English: In 1924, Yang Yinglong and his soldiers destroyed Yuqing, robbed Datong and Duba areas, burned and robbed Caotang, Yuqing two divisions, and Xinglong and Duyun garrisons, and sent his party to encircle Huangping and kill the entire family of the head of Chongan, and his momentum was also very strong.

古文：二十五年流劫江津及南川，临合江，索其仇袁子升，缒城下，磔之。
现代文：二十五年，流动抢劫了江津和南川，兵临合江索讨他的仇人袁子升，将袁子升用绳缒到城墙下车裂而死。
English: In the twenty-fifth year, the flow robbed Jiangjin and Nanchuan. The soldier Linhe Jiangsu fought his enemy Yuan Zisheng, roped Yuan Zisheng to the city wall and died.

古文：时兵备王士琦调征倭，应龙益统苗兵，大掠贵州洪头、高坪、新村诸屯。
现代文：此时，兵备王士琦被调派去征讨倭寇，杨应龙便统领苗兵大肆劫掠贵州洪头、高坪、新村等屯。
English: At this time, the soldier Wang Shizhen was sent to fight the wokou, and Yang Yinglong led the Miao soldiers to plunder Hongtou, Gaoping, Xincun and other towns in Guizhou.

古文：已，又侵湖广四十八屯，阻塞驿站。
现代文：之后，又侵犯湖广的四十八个屯，阻塞驿站交通。
English: After that, they encroached on forty-eight townships in Hukang and blocked traffic at the railway station.

古文：诇原奏仇民宋世臣、罗承恩等挈家匿偏桥卫，袭破之。大索城中，戮其父母，淫其妻女，备极惨酷。
现代文：他还刺探原先上奏要求惩罚他的仇人宋世臣和罗承恩的下落，知道他们带着家属隐藏在偏桥卫，便攻破该地，在城中大肆搜索，杀戮他们的父母，奸淫他们的妻子女儿，其行为非常悲惨残酷。
English: He also spied on the whereabouts of his enemies Song Shichen and Luo Cheng'en, who had originally demanded punishment. Knowing that they were hiding with their families in the bridge guard, he broke through the area, searched extensively in the city, killed their parents, and raped their wives and daughters. His behavior was very tragic and cruel.

古文：二十七年，贵州巡抚江东之令都司杨国柱部卒三千剿应龙，夺三百落。
现代文：二十七年，贵州巡抚江东之命令都司杨国柱带领三千士兵进剿杨应龙，争夺三百落。
English: In the 27th year, Yang Guozhu, the governor of Guizhou in the east of the Yangtze River, ordered Yang Guozhu, the governor of Guizhou, to lead three thousand soldiers into Yang Yinglong and compete for three hundred villages.

古文：贼佯北，诱师歼焉，国柱等尽死。
现代文：贼人假装败北，将官军诱入三百落全部歼灭，杨国柱等人全部战死。
English: The thieves pretended to be defeated and lured the government army into three hundred villages, all of which were annihilated. Yang Guozhu and others all died in the battle.

古文：东之罢，以郭子章代，而起李化龙节制川、湖、贵州诸军事，调东征诸将刘綎、麻贵、陈璘、董一元南征。
现代文：江东之为此被罢官，以郭子章代理江东之的职务，起用李化龙节制四川、湖广、贵州等地的军事，调拨东征的刘纟廷、麻贵、陈瞞、董一元等将领南征。
English: Jiang Dongzhi was dismissed for this, with Guo Zizhang acting as Jiang Dongzhi's deputy, Li Hualong was appointed to control the military in Sichuan, Hukang, Guizhou and other places, and Liu Bingding, Magui, Chen Xizhe, Dong Yiyuan and other generals who were sent to the east were sent to the south.

古文：时应龙乘大兵未集，勒兵犯綦江。
现代文：此时杨应龙乘大军还未集结，带兵进犯綦江。
English: At this time, Yang Yinglong's large army had not yet assembled, and he led his troops into the Li River.

古文：城中新募兵不满三千，贼兵八万奄至，游击张良贤巷战死，綦江陷。
现代文：綦江城内新招募的士兵还不满三千人，贼兵八万人掩杀过来时，游击张良贤带兵与杨应龙展开巷战，结果战死，綦江陷落。
English: The newly recruited soldiers in the city of Li River were still less than three thousand, and when the robber soldiers covered up eighty thousand people, the guerrilla Zhang Liangxian led the soldiers and Yang Yinglong to fight in the streets. As a result, he died in battle, and Li River fell.

古文：应龙尽杀城中人，投尸蔽江，水为赤。
现代文：杨应龙尽杀城中百姓，把尸体投入江中后把江面都盖满了，江水也全被血水染红。
English: Yang Yinglong did his best to kill the people in the city, and after throwing the bodies into the river, he covered the river surface completely, and the river water was all stained red with blood.

古文：益结九股生苗及黑脚苗等为助，屯官坝，声窥蜀。
现代文：杨应龙还勾结九股地区没有汉化的苗人和黑脚苗人协助自己，屯兵官坝，声称要伺机进攻四川。
English: Yang Yinglong also colluded with Miao people and Blackfoot Miao people in Jiugu District, who had not been Sinicized, to help himself and set up a garrison in Guanba, claiming that he wanted to wait for an opportunity to attack Sichuan.

古文：已，遂焚东坡、烂桥，楚、黔路梗。
现代文：不久，他又带人焚烧了东坡、烂桥、湖南、贵州等地的路标。
English: Soon after, he and his followers burned road signs in Dongpo, Rotten Bridge, Hunan, Guizhou and other places.

古文：二十八年，应龙五道并出，破龙泉司。
现代文：二十八年，杨应龙率兵五路齐发，攻破龙泉司。
English: In the 28th year, Yang Yinglong led his soldiers in a five-pronged attack to defeat Longquan.

古文：时总督李化龙已移驻重庆，征兵大集，遂以二月十二月誓师，分八路进。
现代文：此时总督李化龙已移驻到重庆，所征调的军队也已集结，便在二月十二日誓师，分八路进军。
English: At this time, Governor Li Hualong had already moved to Chongqing, and the troops he had recruited and transferred had also been assembled. On February 12, he swore an oath and marched in eight directions.

古文：每路约三万人，官兵三之，土司七之，旗鼓甲仗森列，苗大惊。
现代文：这八路军队中，每一路约有三万人，其中朝廷所调拨的官兵占三成，土司地区征调的土兵占七成，旗鼓甲仗森严壁垒而列，苗人大为惊慌。
English: Among these eight armies, there were about 30,000 people in each army, of which 30% were officers and soldiers sent by the imperial court, and 70% were local soldiers sent by the Tusi region. They were lined up with banners, armor, and fortified walls, and the Miao people were greatly alarmed.

古文：总兵刘綎破其前锋，杨朝栋仅以身免，贼胆落。
现代文：总兵刘纟廷攻破其前锋，杨朝栋只身逃脱，贼人为此丧胆落魄。
English: The general soldier Liu Bingding broke through his forward, Yang Chaodong escaped alone, and the thieves were discouraged.

古文：遂连克桑木、乌江、河渡三关，夺天都、三百落诸囤。
现代文：于是官军便连续攻克桑木、乌江、河渡三个关隘，夺取了天都、三百落等地的粮囤。
English: As a result, the government army successively conquered the three passes of the Mulberry, Wujiang and Hadu, and captured the grain fields of the capital and 300 villages.

古文：贼连败，乃乘隙突犯乌江，诈称水西陇澄会哨，诱永顺兵，断桥，淹死将卒无算。
现代文：贼人遭受连续失败后，乘间隙突然进犯乌江，诈称官军在水西的陇澄会师，诱骗永顺的土兵进入该地后，突然斩断桥梁，淹死将士无数。
English: After the bandits suffered consecutive defeats, they took advantage of the gap to suddenly attack the Wujiang River, falsely claiming that the government army was in the west of the water, and tricked Yongshun's soldiers into entering the area, suddenly cutting off the bridge and drowning countless soldiers.

古文：寻綎破九盘，入娄山关。
现代文：不久刘纟廷攻破九盘，进入娄山关。
English: Soon, Liu Bingding broke through nine sets and entered Shaoshan Pass.

古文：关为贼前门，万峰插天，中通一线。
现代文：娄山关是贼人的前门，关上万峰耸天，中间只有一条小路可通。
English: Lushan Pass is the thief's front door, closed by towering peaks, with only a small path in the middle.

古文：綎从间道攀藤毁栅入，陷焉。
现代文：刘纟廷从山间小道上攀藤而上，破除栅栏，攻陷了娄山关。
English: Liu Qingting climbed up from the mountain trail, broke through the fence, and captured the Lushan Pass.

古文：四月朔，师屯白石，应龙率诸苗决死战。
现代文：四月初一，官军屯驻在白石，杨应龙率领各地苗兵与官军决一死战。
English: On the first day of April, the official army was stationed in Baishi, and Yang Yinglong led the Miao soldiers from all over the country to fight the official army to the death.

古文：綎亲勒骑冲中坚，分两翼夹击，败之。追奔至养马城，连破龙爪、海云险囤，压海龙囤，贼所倚天险，谓飞鸟腾猿不能逾者。
现代文：刘纟廷亲自勒马冲击杨应龙的中坚苗兵，又派兵从两翼夹击，将杨应龙打败，追击到养马城，又连续攻破龙爪、海云等险要的村屯，直逼海龙囤。这些都是贼人所倚仗的天险，所谓飞鸟和猿猴都过不去的地方。
English: Liu Qingting personally stopped his horse to attack Yang Yinglong's mid-level seedling soldiers, and sent soldiers to attack from both wings to defeat Yang Yinglong and pursue him to the horse-breeding city, and continuously broke through the dragon's claws, sea clouds and other dangerous villages, until he reached the sea dragon's beak. These are natural dangers that thieves rely on, places where so-called flying birds and monkeys cannot pass.

古文：时偏沅师已破青蛇囤，安疆臣亦夺落濛关，至大水田，焚桃溪庄。
现代文：此时，偏、沅两地的官军已攻破青蛇囤，安疆臣也夺取了落氵蒙关，到达大水田，焚烧了桃溪庄。
English: At this time, the government troops of the two provinces of Yan and Qian had broken through Qinghai-Tibet, and the Anjiang officers had also seized the Mengguan, reached the large paddy fields, and burned the Taoxi village.

古文：贼见势急，父子相抱哭，上囤死守，每路投降文缓师。
现代文：贼人见形势危急，父子相互抱头痛哭，上囤死守并给每路官军递投降书，以缓官军进兵的速度。
English: Seeing the critical situation, the thieves, father and son, hugged each other and cried bitterly. They held on to each other and handed a letter of surrender to each official army to slow down the speed of the official army's advance.

古文：总兵吴广入崖门关，营水牛塘，与贼力战三日，却之。
现代文：总兵吴广进入崖门关，扎营在水牛塘，与贼人力战三天，打退了敌人。
English: General Wu Guang entered the cliff gate, camped in the buffalo pond, and fought against the thieves for three days, and repulsed the enemy.

古文：贼诡令妇人于囤上拜表痛哭云： 田氏且降。 
现代文：贼人施诡计，让一个女人在囤上拜表痛哭，边哭边说 ：田氏向官军投降。 
English: Using a trick, the thieves made a woman cry on the bed, saying, "Tae surrendered to the government army."

古文：复许为应龙仰药死报广，广轻信按兵。
现代文：又诈称杨应龙已仰头喝药而死，将此报告给吴广。吴广轻信此言，按兵不动。
English: He also falsely claimed that Yang Yinglong had died from drinking medicine with his head up, and reported this to Wu Guang. Wu Guang believed this and did not move.

古文：已，觇贼诈，益厉兵攻，烧二关，夺贼樵汲路。
现代文：不久，吴广发现了贼人的诈计，用兵猛攻，焚烧了二个关隘，夺取了贼人砍柴汲水的道路。
English: Soon, Wu Guang discovered the thief's trickery, stormed with soldiers, burned two narrow passes, and seized the thief's way to cut wood and draw water.

古文：八路师大集海龙囤，遂筑长围，更番迭攻。贼知必死。
现代文：八路大军集结到海龙囤，筑起了长长的包围圈，轮番向贼人发动攻击，贼人知道此次必死无疑。
English: The Eighth Route Army assembled at Hailongyi, built a long encirclement, and launched attacks on the bandits in turn. The bandits knew that this time they would certainly die.

古文：会化龙闻父丧，诏以縗墨视师。
现代文：碰上李化龙的父亲新近逝世，皇帝下诏让他在军中带孝作战。
English: When Li Hualong's father recently passed away, the emperor ordered him to fight in the army as a filial son.

古文：化龙念贼前囤险不能越，令马孔英率勍兵并力攻其后。
现代文：李化龙认为贼人所居的前囤地势太险无法逾越，命令马孔英率领劲兵猛攻后囤。
English: Li Hualong thought that the situation at Qianlong, where the thieves lived, was too dangerous to be overcome, and ordered Ma Kongying to lead the strong soldiers to storm Qianlong.

古文：天苦雨，将士驰泥淖中苦战。
现代文：天气老是下雨，将士们在泥淖中苦战。
English: The weather was always raining, and the soldiers fought hard in the mud.

古文：六月四日，天忽霁，綎先士卒，克土城。
现代文：六月四日，天气忽然晴朗，刘纟廷身先士卒，攻克土城。
English: On June 4th, the weather suddenly became clear, and Liu Bingding took the lead in conquering Tucheng.

古文：应龙益迫，散金募死土拒战，无应者。
现代文：杨应龙感觉更加紧迫，散发金子招募死士为他抗拒官军，没人响应。
English: Yang Yinglong felt more urgent. He distributed gold to recruit dead soldiers to resist the government army for him, but no one responded.

古文：起，提刀巡垒，见四面火光烛天，大兵已登囤，破土城入。
现代文：杨应龙起身，提着刀到堡垒上巡视，看见四面火光冲天，大批官军已登上囤，攻破土城杀了进来。
English: Yang Yinglong stood up and inspected the fortress with a knife. He saw flames shooting into the sky on all sides. A large number of government troops had boarded the raft, breached Tucheng and entered.

古文：应龙仓皇同爱妾二阖室缢，且自焚。
现代文：杨应龙便仓皇地同二个爱妾一起在室内自缢，并引火自焚。
English: Yang Yinglong, together with his two mistresses, hanged himself in the room and set himself on fire.

古文：吴广获其子朝栋，急觅应龙尸，出焰中。
现代文：吴广抓获了杨应龙的儿子杨朝栋，急忙寻找到杨应龙的尸体，冲出火焰。
English: Wu Guang caught Yang Yinglong's son Yang Chaodong, hurried to find Yang Yinglong's body, and rushed out of the flames.

古文：贼平。
现代文：贼人的叛乱终于平息。
English: The banditry calmed down.

古文：计出师至灭贼，百十有四日，八路共斩级二万余，生获朝栋等百余人。
现代文：从出师到消灭贼人历时一百一十四天，八路大军共斩敌人首级二万多个，活捉杨朝栋等一百多人。
English: It took one hundred and fourteen days for the Eighth Route Army to eliminate the bandits after the division was dispatched. In total, the Eighth Route Army beheaded more than twenty thousand of the enemy and captured more than one hundred people alive, including Yang Chaodong.

古文：化龙露布以闻，献俘阙下彩应龙尸，磔朝栋、兆龙等于市。
现代文：李化龙将此大捷公开上报，将俘虏献到朝廷，用锉磋磨杨应龙的尸体，将杨朝栋、杨兆龙等人在闹市车裂。
English: Li Hualong publicly reported this great victory, presented the captives to the imperial court, used a plough to grind Yang Yinglong's corpse, and broke Yang Chaodong, Yang Zhaolong and others into pieces in downtown.

古文：播州自唐入杨氏，传二十九世，八百余年，至应龙而亡。
现代文：播州从唐朝归入杨氏，传了二十九代，达八百多年之久，到杨应龙手上终于灭亡。
English: Banzhou was incorporated into the Yang family from the Tang Dynasty and passed down for 29 generations, for more than 800 years. It finally perished at the hands of Yang Yinglong.

古文：三十一年，播州余逆吴洪、卢文秀等叛，总兵李应祥等讨平之。
现代文：三十一年，播州残余的逆贼吴洪、卢文秀等人又发生叛乱，总兵李应祥等人带兵讨伐平定了他们。
English: In the 31st year, the remaining traitors Wu Hong, Lu Wenxiu and others in Banzhou rebelled again, and the general Li Yingxiang and others led an army to fight and subdue them.

古文：分播地为二，属蜀者曰遵义府，属黔者为平越府。
现代文：朝廷于是便将播州一分为二：属四川的部分称为遵义府；属贵州的这一部分称为平越府。
English: As a result, the imperial court divided Banshu in two: the part belonging to Sichuan was called Zunyi Prefecture; this part belonging to Guizhou was called Pingyue Prefecture.

古文：永宁，唐兰州地。
现代文：永宁，唐朝时称为蔺州。
English: Yongning, known as Bozhou during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：宋为沪州江安、合江二县境。
现代文：宋朝时，该地在泸州的江安、合江二个县的境内。
English: During the Song Dynasty, this area was in the territory of Jiang'an and Hejiang counties of Ganzhou.

古文：元置永宁路，领筠连州及腾川县，后改为永宁宣抚司。
现代文：元朝时，此地设置了永宁路，统领了筠连州和腾川县，后来此地又改为永宁宣抚司。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, Yongning Road was set up here, leading Qilian Prefecture and Tengchuan County. Later, this place was changed to Yongning Xuanfusi.

古文：洪武四年平蜀，永宁内附，置永宁卫。
现代文：明朝洪武四年平定了四川，永宁归附朝廷，朝廷在此设置永宁卫。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, Hongwu conquered Sichuan, and Yongning was annexed by the imperial court, which set up Yongningwei here.

古文：六年，筠连州滕大寨蛮编张等叛，诈称云南兵，据湖南长宁诸州县，命成都卫指挥袁洪讨之。
现代文：六年，筠连州滕大寨的蛮人编张等发动叛乱，伪称自己是云南的官军，占领了湖南长宁各州县，朝廷命成都卫指挥袁洪前去讨伐。
English: In the sixth year, the barbarians of Tengdazhai in Qilian Prefecture, including the band of Zhang, launched a rebellion, falsely claiming to be the official army of Yunnan, and occupied all the prefectures and counties of Hunan and Changning. The imperial court ordered Chengdu Wei commander Yuan Hong to go to fight.

古文：洪引兵至叙州庆符县，攻破清平关，擒伪千户李文质等。
现代文：袁洪带兵到叙州的庆符县，攻破了清平关，活捉了他们自封的千户李文质等人。
English: Yuan Hong led soldiers to Qingfu County in Suzhou, broke through the Qingping Pass, and captured their self-styled Qianhu Li Wenjie and others alive.

古文：编张遁走，复以兵犯江安诸县。
现代文：编张逃走后，又带兵进犯江安各县。
English: After he fled, he led his troops to invade other counties in Jiang'an.

古文：洪追及之，又败其众，焚其九寨，获编张子伪镇抚张寿。
现代文：袁洪带兵追击，又打败了他们，焚烧了他们九个寨子，俘获编张的儿子、自封的镇抚张寿。
English: Yuan Hong led his soldiers to chase and defeat them, burned nine of their camps, and captured Zhang Shou, the son of Zhang Hui, the self-proclaimed governor.

古文：编张遁匿溪洞，余党散入云南。
现代文：编张逃跑后藏匿在溪洞里，他的余党散入云南。
English: He fled and hid in a cave. The rest of his party scattered to Yunnan.

古文：帝闻之，敕谕洪曰： 南蛮叛服不常，不足罪。
现代文：皇帝听到报告以后，赐谕给袁洪说： 南方的蛮族人时而叛乱时而又归顺没有一定的准则，对他们不足以加罪。
English: After hearing the report, the emperor issued an edict to Yuan Hongxing, saying, "The barbarians in the south do not have a certain standard for when to rebel and when to submit, and it is not enough to punish them.

古文：既获其俘，宜编为军。
现代文：既然已经抓获了俘虏，就将这些俘虏编入军队之中，驻扎在边境之上。
English: Now that the prisoners have been captured, these prisoners will be integrated into the army and stationed on the border.

古文：且驻境上，必以兵震之，使詟天威，无遗后患。 
现代文：对待他们就是要以军队震慑，使他们对我天朝的威风有所畏惧，这样就不会留下后患。 
English: The way to deal with them is to shock them with the army, so that they are afraid of the might of my heavenly dynasty, so that they will not be left behind.

古文：未几，张复聚众据滕大寨，洪移兵讨败之。追至小芒部，张遁去，遂取得花寨，擒阿普等。
现代文：不久，编张又聚众占领了滕大寨，袁洪带兵讨伐并打败了他们，追到小芒部时，编张逃跑了，于是攻取了得花寨，活捉了阿普等人。
English: Not long after, he gathered a large number of people to occupy Teng Dazhai. Yuan Hong led the soldiers to fight and defeated them. When they chased Xiao Mang Bu, he ran away, so he captured De Huazhai and captured Apu and others alive.

古文：自是，张不敢复出，其寨悉平。
现代文：从此以后，编张再也不敢出来了，他们的寨子也都被扫平。
English: From then on, the compilers never dared to come out, and their stockade was razed to the ground.

古文：遂降筠连州为县，属叙州，以九姓长官司隶永宁安抚司。
现代文：于是朝廷便把筠连州降为县，让其隶属于叙州，将九姓长官司隶属于永宁安抚司。
English: As a result, the imperial court downgraded Qilian Prefecture to a county, making it subordinate to Shuzhou, and subordinated the nine-surname chief magistrate to the Yongning Pacification Division.

古文：七年升永宁等处军民安抚司为宣抚使司，秩正三品。
现代文：七年朝廷将永宁等处军民安抚司升为宣抚使司，官秩为正三品。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial court promoted Yongning and other military and civilian pacification departments to the position of propaganda envoy, with the official rank of Senior Third Rank.

古文：八年以禄照为宣抚使。
现代文：八年，朝廷任命禄照为宣抚使。
English: In the eighth year, the Imperial Court appointed Rokucho as the special envoy.

古文：十七年，永宁宣抚使禄照贡马，诏赐钞币冠服，定三年一贡如例。
现代文：十七年，永宁宣抚使禄照向朝廷献贡马，皇帝下诏赏赐给他钱钞、冠和衣服，规定他们每三年向朝廷入贡一次。
English: In the seventeenth year, Yongning Xuanfu sent Luo Zhe to present tribute horses to the imperial court. The emperor gave him money, crowns and clothes, and stipulated that they should pay tribute to the imperial court once every three years.

古文：十八年，禄照遣弟阿居来朝，言比年赋马皆已输，惟粮不能如数。
现代文：十八年，禄照派他的弟弟阿居来朝觐皇帝，说近年来应该交纳的赋马都已交纳了，只有粮食无法如数完成。
English: In the 18th year, Luo Zhao sent his younger brother, A Ju, to make a pilgrimage to the emperor, saying that all the fuma that should have been paid in recent years had been paid, only the grain could not be completed.

古文：缘大军南征，蛮民惊窜，耕种失时，加以兵后疾疫死亡者多，故输纳不及。
现代文：原因是大军向南征讨，蛮族百姓惊慌逃窜，无法按时耕种，加上打仗以后疾病瘟疫流行，死亡的人很多，所以来不及收缴和运送粮食。
English: The reason was that the large army went to the south to fight, the barbarian people panicked and fled, unable to cultivate on time, coupled with the epidemic of diseases after the war, many people died, so it was too late to collect and transport grain.

古文：命蠲之。
现代文：皇帝下令蠲免。
English: The emperor ordered his release.

古文：二十三年，永宁宣抚言，所辖地水道有一百九十滩，其江门大滩有八十二处，皆石塞其流。
现代文：二十三年，永宁宣抚上奏说，他所管辖的地盘内有水道一百九十滩，其中的江门大滩有八十一处，石头都将水流堵塞了。
English: In the 23rd year of his reign, Yongning Xuanfu said in his report that there were 190 beaches with water channels in the territory under his jurisdiction, of which the Jiangmen Grand Beach had 81 beaches, and the stones had blocked the water flow.

古文：诏景川侯曹震往疏凿之。
现代文：皇帝下诏书，命令景川侯曹震前去开凿疏通。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering the lord of Jingchuan, Cao Zhen, to go ahead and dig a dike.

古文：二十四年，震至泸州按视，有枝河通永宁，乃凿石削崖，以通漕运。
现代文：二十四年，曹震到泸州巡察，看到有支流通往永宁，便凿去石头、削平崖壁、疏通河道以通漕运。
English: In 1924, Cao Zhen went on an inspection tour to Bozhou and saw that there was a branch going to Yongning, so he chiseled away the stone, leveled the cliff wall, and cleared the river channel by rowing.

古文：二十六年，以禄照子阿聂袭职。
现代文：二十六年，禄照的儿子阿聂继承其父的职务。
English: In the 26th year, Luo Zhao's son, Ayao, took over his father's duties.

古文：先是，禄照坐事逮至京，得直，还卒于途。
现代文：此前，禄照因犯法被逮到京城，在他向朝廷申述清楚后回去时，死在途中。
English: Previously, Luo Zhao was arrested in Beijing for breaking the law. When he returned after making a clear appeal to the imperial court, he died on the way.

古文：其子阿聂与弟智皆在太学，遂以庶母奢尾署司事。
现代文：这时禄照的儿子阿聂和弟弟阿智都在太学里学习，于是朝廷便让阿聂的庶母奢尾掌管宣抚使司的事务。
English: At this time, Luo Zhao's son A Yan and his brother A Zhi were both studying in Taigaku, so the court put A Yan's stepmother Shuangwei in charge of the affairs of the envoy.

古文：至是，奢尾入朝，请以阿聂袭，从之。
现代文：到二十六年时奢尾进京朝觐，请求朝廷让阿聂继承其父的职务，皇帝同意了。
English: At the age of twenty-six, Shakuo went to Beijing for the imperial court and requested that the imperial court allow his father to succeed his father's duties. The emperor agreed.

古文：永乐四年，免永宁荒田租。
现代文：永乐四年，朝廷免除了永宁荒田的租赋。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, the imperial court exempted Yongning wasteland from rent.

古文：宣德八年，故宣抚阿聂妻奢苏朝贡。
现代文：宣德八年，已故宣抚阿聂的妻子奢苏进京朝觐献贡物。
English: In the eighth year of the Xuande Emperor, the wife of the late Xuanfu Grandmother, Su Su, went to Beijing to offer tributes at the imperial court.

古文：九年，宣抚奢苏奏： 生儒皆土僚，朝廷所授官言语不通，难以训诲。
现代文：九年，宣抚奢苏上奏说 ：我们这里学习儒学的学生都是当地的僚族人，朝廷所教授的官话他们听不通，因此难以训诲他们。
English: In the ninth year, Xuanfu Xuxu Shangso said, "The students studying Confucianism here are all local people. They do not understand the official language taught by the imperial court, so it is difficult to teach them.

古文：永宁监生李源资厚学通，乞如云南鹤庆府例，授为儒学训导。 
现代文：永宁的监生李源资质厚道学识贯通，请求朝廷比照云南鹤庆府的例子，授予他儒学训导。 
English: Li Yuan, the prisoner of Yongning, had the qualification of being able to pass on knowledge, and requested the imperial court to grant him the Confucian education according to the example of Yunnan Heqingfu.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意这个建议。
English: He complied.

古文：景泰二年，减永宁宣抚司税课局钞，以苗贼窃发，客商路阻，从布政司请也。
现代文：景泰二年，朝廷同意了布政司的请求，减免了永宁宣抚司的税课和部分钱钞，因该地苗族人悄悄作乱，客商不通，路途阻绝的缘故。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, the imperial court agreed to the request of Bu Zheng Si, and reduced and exempted Yongning Xuan Fu Si's tax and some banknotes, because the local Miao people quietly made trouble, the merchants could not get through, and the road was blocked.

古文：成化元年，山都掌大坝等寨蛮贼分劫江安等县，兵部以闻。
现代文：成化元年，山都掌、大坝等寨子的蛮族贼人分别抢劫了江安等县，兵部将此事上报朝廷。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the barbarian thieves of the mountain capital, dam and other stockades separately robbed Jiang'an and other counties, and the military department reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：二年，国子学录黄明善奏： 四川山都掌蛮屡岁出没，杀掠良民。
现代文：二年，国子监学录黄明善上奏 ：四川山都掌的蛮族贼人每年都出没无常，杀害掠夺良民。
English: In the second year, Guo Zi's supervisor Huang Mingzen recorded the following: The barbarian bandits who control the mountains of Sichuan come and go every year, killing and plundering the good people.

古文：景泰元年招之复叛，天顺六年抚之又反。
现代文：景泰元年招抚了他们，不久又叛乱。天顺六年招抚他们后又造反。
English: Jing Tai appeased them in the first year, and they soon rebelled. Tian Shun appeased them for six years, and then rebelled again.

古文：近总兵李安令永宁宣抚奢贵赴大坝招抚，亦未效。
现代文：近来总兵李安命令永宁宣抚奢贵赴大坝招抚他们，也没有效果。
English: Recently, Generalissimo Li An ordered Yongning Xuanfu to lavishly go to the dam to woo them, to no avail.

古文：恐开衅无已，宜及大兵之集，早为定计，毋酿边患。 
现代文：恐怕开战已不可避免，所以应该及早集结大军，早点决定计划，不使边关酿成祸患。 
English: I'm afraid that war is inevitable, so we should assemble a large army as early as possible, decide on a plan as early as possible, and not let the border become a disaster.

古文：三年，明善复言： 宋时多刚县蛮为寇，用白芀子兵破之。
现代文：三年，黄明善又上奏 ：宋朝时多刚县的蛮族入侵，朝廷派白刀艹子兵就将他们平息了。
English: Three years later, Huang Mingshan played again: During the Song Dynasty, the barbarians of Dogang County invaded, and the imperial court sent soldiers with white swords and sickles to quell them.

古文：白芀子者，即今之民壮；多刚县者，即今之都掌多刚寨也。
现代文：白刀艹子，就是今天的民壮人；多刚县，就是今天的都掌多刚寨。
English: Bai Jia Zizi is today's Min Zhuang people; Dogang County is today's Dapu Dogang Village.

古文：前代用乡兵有明效，宜急募民壮，以助官军。
现代文：前朝使用乡兵有明显效果，所以我们也应紧急招募民壮人，让他们协助官军。
English: The previous government's use of rural soldiers had a significant effect, so we should also urgently recruit able-bodied people and let them assist the government army.

古文：都掌水稻十月熟，宜督兵先时取其田禾，则三月之内蛮必馁矣。
现代文：都掌的水稻十月份就成熟，应带兵在此之前将其水田里的稻禾抢收过来，这样蛮族人三个月之内必然没有粮吃。
English: Du Fu's rice will be ripe in October, so he should lead soldiers to seize the rice in his paddy fields before then, so that the barbarians will not have any grain to eat within three months.

古文：军宜分三路：南从金鹅池攻大坝，中从戎县攻箐前，北从高县攻都掌。
现代文：这时官军可以分成三路进剿：南路从金鹅池向大坝攻击；中路从戎县向箐前进攻；北路从高县向都掌进攻。
English: At this time, the government army can be divided into three ways to advance into Handan: the south road from Jingechi to attack the dam; the middle road from Ebisu County to attack Handan; the north road from Gaoxian to attack the capital.

古文：小寨破，大寨自拔。
现代文：一旦小寨被攻破了，其大寨自然就被攻拔了。
English: Once a small village is breached, its larger village will naturally be attacked.

古文：又大坝南百余里为芒部，西南二百里为乌蒙，令二府土官截其险要。
现代文：大坝往南一百多里远的地方是芒部，往西南二百里远的地方是乌蒙，命令这二个府的土官截住险要之地。
English: The dam is more than a hundred miles to the south is Mangbu, and two hundred miles to the southwest is Umong, and the local officials of these two prefectures are ordered to intercept the dangerous place.

古文：更用火器自下而上，顺凤延热，寨必可攻。
现代文：再用火器自下而上顺风放火焚烧，这样蛮族人的寨子一定可以攻克。
English: Then they set fire to it with firearms from the bottom up, following the wind, so that the barbarians' stockade can definitely be conquered.

古文：且征调土兵，须处置得宜，招募民壮，须赏罚必信。 
现代文：当然征调土兵必须处置妥当，招募民壮人也必须赏罚分明讲究信义。 
English: Of course, the recruitment of local soldiers must be handled properly, and the recruitment of strong people must also be rewarded and punished.

古文：诏总兵官参用之。
现代文：皇帝下诏让总兵官参用这条建议。
English: The emperor decreed that the commander-in-chief should use this suggestion.

古文：时总督尚书程信亦奏： 都掌地势险要，必得士兵响道。
现代文：此时总督尚书程信也上奏 ：都掌的地势险要，一定要有土兵当向导才行。
English: At this time, Governor Shang Shucheng's letter was also issued: the terrain of the capital is precarious, and it is essential to have local soldiers as guides.

古文：请敕东川、芒部、乌蒙、乌撒诸府兵，并速调湖广永顺、保靖兵，以备征遣。 
现代文：请求皇上谕告东川、芒部、乌蒙、乌撒各府的土兵，并急速调拨湖广的永顺、保靖的军队，让他们准备随时出征。 
English: Request the emperor to issue an order to the local soldiers in the provinces of Dongchuan, Mangbu, Umong, and Wusa, and quickly dispatch the Yongshun and Pacification Army in Hukang, so that they are ready to go to war at any time.

古文：又请南京战马一千应用。
现代文：之后，又请求从南京调战马一千匹应用。
English: Later, another request was made to transfer a thousand horses from Nanjing.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：皇帝都同意了这些请求。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：四年，信奏： 永宁宣抚奢贵开通运道，擒获贼首，宜降玺书奖赍。 
现代文：四年，程信上奏说 ：永宁宣抚奢贵开通了运道，擒住了贼人的首领，皇上应降印有皇帝玺印的诏书奖励他。 
English: In the fourth year, Cheng Xin wrote: Yongning Xuanfu Luxurious opened the way of fortune, captured the leader of the thieves, and the emperor should reward him with an imperial edict with the emperor's seal.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十六年，白罗罗羿子与都掌大坝蛮相攻，礼部侍郎周洪谟言： 臣叙人也，知叙蛮情。
现代文：十六年，白罗罗的羿子与都掌大坝的蛮族互相攻击，礼部侍郎周洪谟说 ：我是叙州人，了解叙州蛮族的情况。
English: Sixteen years ago, the Bai Luo Luo's mule and the barbarians of the Du Fu Dam attacked each other. Zhou Hong Mu, the attendant of the etiquette department, said: I am from Shuzhou and understand the situation of the barbarians in Shuzhou.

古文：戎、珙、筠、高诸县，在前代皆土官，国朝始代以流，言语性情不相习，用激变。
现代文：戎、珙、筠连、高各县在前朝都是土官统治，只有在我明朝才开始以流官代替土官前来治理。流官与蛮族人之间言语不通、性情不一，造成激变。
English: The counties of Ebisu, Saitama, Koryo, and Taka were all ruled by local officials in the previous dynasty, and it was only in the Ming Dynasty that I began to replace local officials with ex-officials to govern. Language and temperament were not the same between ex-officials and barbarians, resulting in a drastic change.

古文：洪、永、宣、正四朝，四命将徂征，随服随叛。景泰初，益滋蔓，至今为梗。
现代文：洪武、永乐、宣德、正统四代皇帝命令将士四出征讨，蛮族人的叛乱更加滋蔓，至今还顽固不化。
English: Four generations of emperors, including Hongwu, Yongle, Xuande, and Zhengde, ordered their generals to go out to fight. The rebellion of the barbarians became even more rampant, and has remained stubborn to this day.

古文：臣向尝言仍立土官治之，为久远计。
现代文：我以前曾经说过从长远考虑，在这些地区应仍设立土官来治理。
English: I have previously said that, in the long term, local officials should still be established in these areas to govern them.

古文：而都御史汪浩儌幸边功，诬杀所保土官及寨主二百余人，诸蛮怨入骨髓，转肆劫掠。
现代文：都御史汪浩侥幸获得边功，欺骗杀害了官府保护的土官和寨主二百多人，各地蛮族人对他怨入骨髓，转而大肆劫掠。
English: The governor of the capital, Wang Hao, was lucky enough to win a border victory. He deceived and killed more than two hundred local officials and camp owners protected by the government. Barbarians from all over the country resented him to the core, and turned to plundering.

古文：及尚书程信统大兵，仅能克之。
现代文：等尚书程信统领大军才能克服他们。
English: It would take a great army under the command of Shujen Xin to overcome them.

古文：臣以谓及今顺蛮人之情，择其众所推服者，许为大寨主，俾世袭，庶可相安。 
现代文：我认为现今不如顺从蛮族人的情况，挑选出他们公推信服的人做大寨主，让他世袭官职管理当地蛮族群众，这样才能相互平安。 
English: I think that now it is better to obey the barbarians and select a person who is publicly supported and convinced by them to be the great fortress master, and let him inherit the official post to manage the local barbarian masses. In this way, mutual peace can be achieved.

古文：又言： 白罗罗者，相传为广西流蛮，有众数千，无统属。
现代文：他又说： 白罗罗，相传是广西的流动的蛮族人，有数千人之多，没有人统属他们。
English: He also said, "Bai Luo Luo, it is said that there are thousands of wandering barbarians in Guangxi, and no one is subordinate to them.

古文：景泰中，纠戎、珙苗，攻破长宁九县，今又侵扰都掌。
现代文：景泰中年，他们纠集了戎县、珙县的苗族人，攻破了长宁等九个县，现今又侵扰都掌。
English: In the middle of Jing Tai's life, they gathered the Miao people from Ebisu County and Min County, broke through nine counties such as Changning, and now they are invading the capital.

古文：其所居，崖险箐深，既难剪灭，亦宜立长官司治之。
现代文：他们居住的地方，崖险箐深，很难将他们剪除消灭。对他们也应该设立长官司来治理。
English: Where they live, the cliff is steep and deep, and it is difficult to cut them out and eliminate them. They should also be governed by the establishment of a magistrate.

古文：地近芒部，宜即隶之。
现代文：他们的居住地，靠近芒部，应隶属于芒部。
English: Their place of residence, which is close to the prefecture, should be subordinate to the prefecture.

古文：羿子者，永宁宣抚所辖。
现代文：羿子，归永宁宣抚所管辖。
English: Hanzi, under the jurisdiction of Yongning Xuanfu Office.

古文：而永宁乃云、贵要冲，南跨赤水、毕节六七百里，以一柔妇人制数万强梁之众，故每肆劫掠。
现代文：永宁是云南、贵州的要冲之地，南跨赤水、毕节六七百里，让一个柔弱的女人来节制数万强梁之徒，所以每每有大肆抢劫行为。
English: Yongning is the most important place in Yunnan and Guizhou. It is six or seven hundred miles south of Chishui and Bijie. It takes a weak woman to restrain tens of thousands of strong men, so there are always large-scale robberies.

古文：臣以为宣抚土僚，仍令宣抚奢贵治之。其南境寨蛮近赤水、毕节要路者，宜立二长官司，仍隶永宁宣抚。
现代文：我认为宣抚司中的土著僚人，仍然归宣抚奢贵治理，而其南部各寨靠近赤水、毕节等要道的蛮族人，应设立二个长官司来管理，这二个长官司仍隶属于永宁宣抚。
English: In my opinion, the aboriginal villagers in Xuanfujing still belong to Xuanfujing's luxurious governance, while the barbarians in its southern villages near Chishui, Bijie and other important roads should set up two chief officials to manage. These two chief officials are still subordinate to Yongning Xuanfujing.

古文：夫土官有职无俸，无损国储，有益边备。 
现代文：土官有职务而无官俸，对国库没有损害，对边防反而有益。 
English: The land officer has a post but no salary, which does not harm the state treasury, but is beneficial to the border defense.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意他的这些建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十五年，永宁宣抚司女土官奢禄献大木，给诰如例。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年，永宁宣抚司女土官奢禄向朝廷进献大木，皇帝按惯例给予封赠。
English: In the 25th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Yongning Xuanfuzi's daughter, the land officer Lanlu, presented a large tree to the imperial court, and the emperor gave it as a gift according to the custom.

古文：万历元年，四川巡抚曾省吾奏： 都蛮叛逆，发兵征讨，土官奢效忠首在调，但与贵州土官安国亨有仇。
现代文：万历元年，四川的巡抚曾省吾上奏朝廷： 都掌的蛮族叛逆，调拨军队前往征讨时，土官奢效忠首先在调拨之列。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the governor of Sichuan once wrote to the imperial court: The barbarians in the capital are rebellious, and when the army is dispatched to fight, the loyalty of the local officials is the first thing to be dispatched.

古文：请并令总兵官刘显节制，使不得藉口复仇，妄有骚动。 
现代文：但奢效忠与贵州的土官安国亨有仇，请求朝廷一并下令给总兵官刘显节制他们，使他们不能找借口复仇。 皇帝同意。
English: However, Shuxi Loyalty had a grudge against Guizhou's local official, An Guoheng, and asked the imperial court to order the general officer Liu Xian to restrain them so that they could not find an excuse to take revenge.

古文：从之。初，乌撒与永宁、乌蒙、水西、沾益诸土官境相连，复以世戚亲厚。
现代文：当初之时，乌撒与永宁、乌蒙、水西、沾益各土官的辖地边境相连，他们之间又世代有亲戚，亲情很厚。
English: At the beginning, Usa was connected to the borders of the local governors of Yongning, Umun, Shuixi and Zhanyi, and they had relatives for generations and were very close.

古文：既而安国亨杀安信，信兄智结永宁宣抚奢效忠报仇，彼此相攻。
现代文：不久安国亨杀死安信，安信的兄长安智勾结永宁宣抚奢效忠报仇，彼此相互攻杀。
English: Soon after, An Guoheng killed Anxin. Anxin's brother An Zhi colluded with Yongning Xuanfu to take revenge for his loyalty, and they attacked and killed each other.

古文：而安国亨部下吏目与智有亲，恐为国亨所杀，因投安路墨。
现代文：安国亨手下的吏目与安智有亲戚关系，怕被安国亨斩杀，就投奔安路墨。
English: The officials under An Guoheng were related to An Zhi. Fearing that they would be killed by An Guoheng, they fled to An Lu Mo.

古文：墨诈称为土知府安承祖，赴京代奏。
现代文：安路墨冒充土知府安承祖，赶赴京城代奢效忠向朝廷上奏。
English: An Luo Mo, pretending to be An Cheng Zu, the governor of Tochifu, rushed to the capital to report to the imperial court on behalf of the imperial family.

古文：已而国亨亦令其子安民陈诉，与奢效忠俱奉命听勘于川贵巡抚。
现代文：不久安国亨也派他儿子安民向朝廷陈述事情的经过，安国亨与奢效忠都奉命听从四川、贵州巡抚的审核。
English: Soon, An Guoheng also sent his son, An Min, to report to the imperial court on the course of events. Both An Guoheng and Shuxi Loyalty were ordered to listen to the review of the Sichuan and Guizhou governors.

古文：议照蛮俗罚牛赎罪，报可。
现代文：四川、贵州巡抚审核后建议依照蛮族人的习俗罚牛赎罪，皇帝认为可行。
English: After examination, the governors of Sichuan and Guizhou recommended that the cow be punished in accordance with the customs of barbarians to atone for sins. The emperor thought it was feasible.

古文：效忠死，妻世统无子，妾世续有幼子崇周。
现代文：奢效忠死后，他的妻子世统没有儿子，他的妾世续有一个幼小的儿子名叫崇周。
English: After Shu's death, his wife never had a son, but his concubine had a young son named Chong Zhou.

古文：世统以嫡欲夺印，相仇杀。
现代文：世统认为自己是嫡妻，想夺取官印，便与世续互相仇杀。
English: Shidong believed herself to be the legitimate wife, and wanted to seize the official seal, so she and Shidong killed each other.

古文：方奏报间，总兵郭成、参将马呈文利其所有，遽发兵千余，深入落红。
现代文：此事正向朝廷奏报期间，总兵郭成、参将马呈文利用他们的权力，突然发兵千余人，深入到落红。
English: While the matter was being reported to the imperial court, the commander-in-chief, Guo Cheng, and the commander-in-chief, Ma Shenwen, used their power to suddenly dispatch more than a thousand soldiers, plunging the country into chaos.

古文：奢氏九世所积，搜掠一空。
现代文：奢氏家族传了九代的积蓄，被搜刮抢劫一空。
English: The family's savings, which had been passed down for nine generations, were raided and robbed.

古文：世续亦发兵尾其后。
现代文：世续也派兵尾随郭成等人之后进入落红。
English: They also successively sent soldiers to follow Guo Cheng and others into the red.

古文：效忠弟沙卜出拒战，且邀水西兵报仇。
现代文：奢效忠的弟弟奢沙卜出来抗拒，并邀集水西的土兵前来报仇。
English: Shu's loyal younger brother Shu Shabu came out to resist, and invited the local soldiers from west of Shu to come and take revenge.

古文：成兵败绩，乃檄取沙卜于世统，统不应，复杀把总三人，聚苗兵万余，欲攻永宁泄怨。
现代文：郭成的军队打了败仗，便向世统下檄文，要她去抓奢沙卜。世统不答应，郭成便又杀了三个把总，聚集苗兵一万多人，想进攻永宁以泄怨气。
English: Guo Cheng's army lost the battle, so he sent a message to the world, asking her to catch Shaoshab. The world did not agree, Guo Cheng then killed three generals, gathered more than 10,000 soldiers, and wanted to attack Yongning to vent his anger.

古文：巡按劾成等邀利起衅，宜逮；而议予二土妇冠带，仍分地各管所属，其宣抚司印俟奢崇周成立，赴袭理事。
现代文：巡按官弹劾郭成为谋利挑起事端，应遭逮捕；并建议朝廷给奢效忠的妻妾二人授予冠带，将奢效忠原有的领地分开，由她们各管自己所属的部分，宣抚司的官印暂时封存，等奢崇周长大成人，赴京继承官职处理事务时才交付给他。
English: The supervising magistrate impeached Guo for being a troublemaker and should be arrested; and suggested that the imperial court should award the crown belt to the two wives and concubines of Luxu Loyalty, separate the original territory of Luxu Loyalty, let them each manage their own part, and temporarily seal the official seal of the Propaganda Department, and wait for Luxu Zhou to become an adult, and then hand it to him when he went to Beijing to succeed the official post and handle affairs.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝认为此议可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十四年，奢崇周代职，未几死。
现代文：十四年，奢崇周代理其父的官职，不久死亡。
English: Fourteen years later, Shuxong Zhou took over his father's official post and died soon after.

古文：奢崇明者，效忠亲弟尽忠子也。
现代文：奢崇明，是奢效忠的亲弟弟奢尽忠的儿子。
English: Shuxa Chongming is the loyal son of Shuxa's loyal younger brother Shuxa.

古文：幼孤，依世统抚养一十三年。
现代文：他从小是个孤儿，世统抚养了他一十三年。
English: He was an orphan from childhood, and the world raised him for thirteen years.

古文：至是，送之永宁，世续遗之毡马，许出印给之。
现代文：至此，将他送到永宁，世续送给他毡和马，并答应将宣抚司的官印交给他。
English: At this point, he was sent to Yongning, who gave him a donkey and a horse, and promised to give him the official seal of the procuratorate.

古文：事已定，而诸奸阎宗传等自以昔从世续逐世统，杀沙卜，惧崇明立，必复前恨，遂附水西，立阿利以自固。
现代文：本来事情已这样安排定了，不料阎宗传等诸位奸人认为以前自己跟随世续驱逐世统，杀死了奢沙卜，害怕奢崇明即位后，报以前的仇恨，于是依附于水西，拥立阿利以保护自己。
English: Originally, the matter had been arranged in this way. However, Yan Zongchuan and other traitors thought that they had previously expelled Shitong successively and killed Shao Shabo. They were afraid that Shao Chongming would come to the throne and report the previous hatred, so they clung to Shuixi and supported Ali to protect themselves.

古文：安疆臣阴阳其间，蛮兵四出，焚劫屯堡，官兵不能禁。
现代文：安疆臣对他们两派阳奉阴违，纵容蛮族土兵四出焚烧抢劫屯堡，官兵都无法禁止他们。
English: An Jiangcheng treated them both with disdain and connived at the barbarian local soldiers to go out and burn and loot the fort. The officers and soldiers were unable to forbid them.

古文：总督以闻，朝议命奢崇明暂管宣抚事，冀崇明蠲夙恨，以收人心。
现代文：总督将此事上报朝廷，朝廷讨论后任命奢崇明暂时管理宣抚司事务，希望奢崇明能减少夙恨，广收人心。
English: The governor reported the matter to the imperial court, and after discussion by the imperial court, he appointed Shao Chongming to temporarily manage the affairs of the Publicity Department, hoping that Shao Chongming could reduce hatred and win the hearts of the people.

古文：而阎宗传等攻掠永宁、普市、麾尼如故。
现代文：此时阎宗传等人依然如故地攻掠永宁、普市、摩尼等地。
English: At this time, Yan Zongchuan and others still attacked and plundered Yongning, Pu City, Mani and other places.

古文：崇明承袭几一载，世续印竟不与，且以印私安疆臣妻弟阿利。
现代文：奢崇明承袭宣抚使职务近一年了，世续竟然还不把官印交给他，却私下交给安疆臣的妻弟阿利。
English: It has been nearly a year since Shu Chongming succeeded to the post of procurator-general, but he still did not hand over the official seal to him, but privately handed it to his brother-in-law, Ali.

古文：巡抚遣都司张神武执世续索印，世续言印在镇雄陇澄处。
现代文：巡抚派都司张神武将世续抓起来索讨官印，世续说官印在镇雄的陇澄那里。
English: Zhang Shenwu, the procurator of the provincial capital, arrested the generals one after another to ask for the official seal, and the generals continued to say that the official seal was in Zhenxiong's Lucheng.

古文：陇澄者，水西安尧臣也。
现代文：陇澄，就是水西的安尧臣。
English: Gocho is the Anzenomi of western Mizushima.

古文：陇氏垂绝，尧臣入赘，遂冒陇姓，称陇澄。
现代文：陇氏家族快要绝种时，安尧臣入赘到陇家，于是冒称自己姓陇，叫陇澄。
English: When the Yi family was on the verge of extinction, An Rongcheng entered the Yi family, so he pretended to be a Yi and called himself Rong Cheng.

古文：叙平播州、叙州功，澄与焉，中朝不知其为尧臣也。
现代文：前文所叙述的讨平播州、叙州的功劳中，陇澄也参与在内，而中央官员根本就不知道他是安尧臣。
English: Among the merits of pacifying Bozhou and Shuzhou described in the previous paragraph, Gaocheng was also involved, and the central officials did not know that he was An Rongcheng at all.

古文：尧臣外怙播功，内仗水西，有据镇雄制永宁心。
现代文：安尧臣在外依仗自己在播州所立的功劳，在内依靠水西的势力，有占据镇雄节制永宁的野心。
English: Relying on his achievements in Banzhou on the outside, and relying on the power of west water on the inside, An Xiancheng had the ambition to occupy Zhenxiong and control Yongning.

古文：蜀抚按以尧臣非陇氏种，无授镇雄意。
现代文：四川的抚按官以安尧臣不是陇氏的血脉，不授予他镇雄陇氏家族世袭的官职。
English: Sichuan's Fuxian official said that An Yuxin was not a blood relative of the Zou family, and did not grant him the official position inherited by the Zhenxiong Zou family.

古文：尧臣以是怀两端，阴助世续。
现代文：安尧臣因此心怀两端，暗地里帮助世续。
English: Therefore, An Rongchen had both ends in mind and secretly helped the next generation.

古文：意世续得授阿利，则己据镇雄益坚。又朝廷厌兵，宗传、阿利等方驿骚，己可卧取陇氏也。
现代文：他的意图是世续将永宁的官职授予阿利，则自己所占据的镇雄会更加牢固；况且朝廷现在厌兵不愿动武，阎宗传、阿利等人又刚开始骚乱，自己完全可以躺着取代陇氏。
English: His intention was to bestow the official post of Yongning to Ali, then the town he occupied would be more solid; moreover, the court is now reluctant to use force, Yan Zongxuan, Ali and others have just begun to riot, and he can completely lie down and replace the Shun clan.

古文：而阎宗传等每焚掠，必称镇雄兵，以怖诸部。
现代文：而阎宗传等人每次焚烧掠夺，都称自己是镇雄的军队，以此吓唬各部落。
English: But every time Yan Zongchuan and others burned and plundered, they called themselves Zhenxiong's army to scare the tribes.

古文：川南道梅国楼所俘蛮丑者言，镇雄遣将鲁大功督兵五营屯大坝，水西兵已渡马铃堡，约攻永宁，普市遂溃，宗传等以空城弃去。
现代文：川南道梅园楼所俘获的蛮族人丑者说，镇雄府派遣将领鲁大功率五个营的军队屯驻在大坝，水西的兵也渡过马铃堡，相互约定进攻永宁，普市的人于是全都溃散，阎宗传等人因这是一座空城便弃之而去。
English: Ugly barbarians captured in Meiyuanlou, South Sichuan Province, said that Zhenxiong Prefecture dispatched five battalions of high-power troops from General Lu to be stationed at the dam, and soldiers from the west of the water also crossed the Mazu Ling Fort and mutually agreed to attack Yongning. The people of Pu City then all dispersed, and Yan Zongchuan and others abandoned it because it was an empty city.

古文：奢崇明又言，尧臣所遣目把彭月政、鲁仲贤六大营助逆不退，声言将抵叙南，攻永宁、沪州。
现代文：奢崇明又说，安尧臣所派的目把彭月政、鲁仲贤等人率六大营军队帮助叛逆之贼，声称将抵达叙南，进攻永宁和泸州。
English: Suo Chongming also said that the purpose of the troops sent by An Xun's vassal was to help the traitors of the rebellion led by Peng Yue Zheng, Lu Zhongxian and others with six battalions, claiming that they would arrive in southern Syria and attack Yongning and Zhangzhou.

古文：于是总兵侯国弼等，皆归恶于尧臣。
现代文：于是，总兵侯国弼等人，都把罪恶归咎于安尧臣。
English: As a result, the commander-in-chief, the vassal lord, and others all blamed the crime on the vassal lord.

古文：都司张神武等所俘唤者、朗者，皆镇雄土目，尧臣亦不能解。
现代文：都司张神武等人所抓的俘虏唤者、朗者，都是镇雄府的土目，安尧臣也无法辩解。
English: The captors, who were captured by the governor Zhang Shenwu and others, were all from the town of Zhenxiongfu, and An Rongcheng could not justify it.

古文：黔中抚按以西南多事，兵食俱诎，无意取镇雄。
现代文：贵州的抚按官以西南地区多兵事，军粮都已用完为由，无意进取镇雄府。
English: Guizhou's Fuxian officials had no intention of attacking Zhenxiongfu, citing the fact that there were many soldiers in the southwestern region and the army's rations had all been used up.

古文：尧臣因以普市、摩尼诸焚掠，皆归之蜀将。
现代文：安尧臣因此就把普市、摩尼等地的焚烧掠夺，都归到四川将领的头上。
English: Therefore, An Rongchen attributed the burning and looting of Pu City, Mani and other places to the Sichuan generals.

古文：议者遂以贪功起衅，为蜀将罪。
现代文：朝廷中也有议论，认为四川的将领有贪功而挑起事端的罪行。
English: There were also discussions in the imperial court that the generals of Sichuan were greedy for power and were guilty of provoking trouble.

古文：四川巡抚乔璧星言： 尧臣狡谋，欲篡镇雄，垂涎兰地有年矣。
现代文：四川巡抚乔璧星上奏说 ：安尧臣很狡猾，老谋深算，想篡夺镇雄府的大权，垂涎蔺州已有年头了。
English: Sichuan governor Qiao Bi said in his report to the emperor: An Xiancheng is very cunning and calculating, he wants to usurp the power of Zhenxiongfu, and has been coveting Zhou for years.

古文：宗传之背逆恃镇雄，犹镇雄之恃水西也。
现代文：阎宗传之所以敢背叛朝廷就是倚仗镇雄府的势力，就好像镇雄倚仗水西一样。
English: According to the legend, the reason why Yan Zongzhu dared to betray the imperial court was that he relied on the power of Zhen Xiongfu, just as Zhen Xiong relied on Western Shu.

古文：水西疆臣不助兵，臣已得其状，宜乘逆孽未成，令贵州抚按调兵与臣会剿。
现代文：水西的安疆臣没有出兵助逆，我已探明了他们的情况，所以应乘叛贼恶势力还未形成，命令贵州抚按官与我一起会合，前去进剿。
English: I have already ascertained their situation, so I should take advantage of the fact that the evil forces of the traitors have not yet formed, and order the Guizhou officials to meet with me and go into exile.

古文：倘尧臣稔恶如故，臣即移师击之，毋使弗摧之虺复为蛇，弗窒之罅复为河也。 
现代文：倘若安尧臣仍像以前一样酝酿作恶，我即带兵前去击碎他，不让小虫变成蛇，不使堵塞了的裂缝变成河。 
English: If, as before, An Xuancheng still has evil intentions, I will lead soldiers to crush him, so that the worm does not turn into a snake, and the blocked crack does not turn into a river.

古文：疏上，廷议无敢决用师者。
现代文：这疏章上奏皇帝后，朝廷大臣讨论中竟然没有人敢决定对安尧臣用兵。
English: After the Emperor's abdication, no one dared to decide to use troops against Andronikos during the discussion among the ministers of the imperial court.

古文：久之，阿利死，印亦出，蜀中欲逐尧臣之论，卒不可解。
现代文：时间长了以后，阿利死了，官印也交出来了，四川官员中想驱逐安尧臣的想法，最终还是没结果。
English: After a long time, Ali died, the official seal was also handed over, and the idea of Sichuan officials wanting to expel An Xiancheng was ultimately fruitless.

古文：时播州清疆之议方沸腾，黔、蜀各纷纷。
现代文：此时播州清疆的议论正热烈，贵州、四川各地也搞得纷纷扬扬。
English: At this time, the discussion of Banzhou and Qingjiang was heated, and Guizhou and Sichuan regions were also involved.

古文：至是，永宁议兵又如聚讼矣。
现代文：到此，永宁该不该用兵的讨论就像聚在一起诉讼一样。
English: At this point, the discussion of whether or not Yongning should use soldiers is like gathering together for a lawsuit.

古文：时朝廷已一意休兵。
现代文：此时，朝廷已经一心一意想休兵。
English: At this time, the imperial court was already bent on calling a truce.

古文：三十五年，命释奢世续，赦阎宗传等罪，访求陇氏子孙为镇雄后。
现代文：三十五年，皇帝下令释放奢世续，赦免阎宗传等人的罪行，寻访陇氏的子孙来继承镇雄府的官职。
English: Thirty-five years later, the emperor ordered the release of 奢世續, pardoned the crimes of Yan Zongchuan and others, and searched for the descendants of the Zou clan to inherit the official post of Zhenxiongfu.

古文：并令安疆臣约束尧臣归本土司，听遥授职衔，不许冒袭陇职。
现代文：并命令安疆臣约束安尧臣，把安尧臣带回本土司，听令遥授职务官衔，不许他假冒姓氏继承陇氏的职务。
English: He also ordered the Anjiang minister to restrain the Anhui minister, to bring the Anhui minister back to the local government, to accept the order of remote assignment of official titles, and not to allow him to fake his surname to inherit the duties of the Yi clan.

古文：于是宗传降，尧臣请避去，黔督遂请撤师。
现代文：这样，阎宗传便投降朝廷，安尧臣也请求避到本土司去，贵州的总督于是便请求撤回军队。
English: As a result, Yan Zongren surrendered to the imperial court, An Xianchen also requested to go to the mainland, and the governor of Guizhou then requested to withdraw the army.

古文：旧制，永宁卫隶黔，土司隶蜀。
现代文：按旧制度，永宁卫隶属于贵州，而其中的土司又隶属于四川。
English: According to the old system, Yongningwei was subordinate to Guizhou, while Tusi was subordinate to Sichuan.

古文：自水、兰交攻，军民激变，奢崇明虽立，而行勘未报。
现代文：自从水西与蔺州相互攻击后，军民激变。奢崇明虽然继承了永宁的官职，但官员的审核并未上报朝廷。
English: Since the mutual attacks between Shuixi and Zhangzhou, the military and the people have undergone drastic changes. Although Shuxi Chongming inherited the official post of Yongning, the official's review was not reported to the imperial court.

古文：摩尼、普市千户张大策等复请将永宁宣抚改土为流。
现代文：摩尼、普市的千户张大策等人又请求朝廷将永宁宣抚改为流官。
English: Mani, Chifu Zhang Dashe and others in Fuxi also requested the imperial court to change Yongning Xuanfu to a retired official.

古文：兵部言，无故改流，置崇明何地，命速完前勘诸案。
现代文：兵部认为，无缘无故地改由流官统治，将把奢崇明置于何地？便命令有关官员迅速完结以前审核的诸案。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs believed that changing from the rule of a high-ranking official to that of a low-ranking official without any reason would put Shuo Chongming in a difficult position, so it ordered the relevant officials to quickly complete the cases that had been previously reviewed.

古文：于是蜀抚拟张大策以失守城池罪，应斩，黔抚拟张神武以擅兵劫掠，罪亦应斩。
现代文：于是四川巡抚拟定张大策犯有失守城池罪，应当斩首；贵州巡抚则拟定张神武犯有擅自动兵抢劫掠夺罪，也应当斩首。
English: As a result, the Sichuan procurator proposed that Zhang Dashe should be beheaded for the crime of failing to defend the city; the Guizhou procurator proposed that Zhang Shenwu should also be beheaded for the crime of robbery and plunder by unauthorized soldiers.

古文：策斩策，黔人，武，蜀人也。
现代文：张大策，是贵州人，张神武，是四川人。
English: Zhang Dashe is from Guizhou, and Zhang Shenwu is from Sichuan.

古文：由是两情皆不平，诸臣自相构讼，复纷结不解。
现代文：因此两省都替本省的人打抱不平，各位大臣自己互相诉讼，纷纷扬扬解决不下来。
English: As a result, both provinces are fighting for the people of their province, and the ministers themselves are suing each other, and they can't come to a solution.

古文：会奢崇明子寅与水西已故土官妻奢社辉争地，安兵马十倍奢，而奢之兵精，两相持。
现代文：此时又碰上奢崇明的儿子奢寅与水西已故土官的妻子奢社辉争夺领地，奢社辉所带领的安家的兵马数量十倍于奢寅的兵马，但奢寅的兵马很精锐，所以双方互相争持着。
English: At this time, the son of Suk Chongming, Suk In, and Suk She Hui, the wife of the late local official of Mizushima, fought for territory. The number of soldiers and horses led by Suk She Hui was ten times that of Suk In's soldiers and horses, but Suk In's soldiers and horses were very elite, so the two sides fought each other.

古文：蜀、黔抚按不能制，以状闻。
现代文：四川、贵州的抚按官无法节制他们，就将此状况上报朝廷。
English: When officials in Sichuan and Guizhou were unable to control them, they reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：四十八年，黔抚张鹤鸣以赤水卫白撒所屯地为永宁占据，宜清还，皆待勘未决。
现代文：四十八年，贵州巡抚张鹤鸣认为赤水卫白撒所的屯地被永宁军队占据，应清理出来归还赤水卫。
English: In 1948, Guizhou's governor, Zhang Hurming, believed that the settlement of Chishuiwei Bai Saso was occupied by Yongning's army and should be cleared out and returned to Chishuiwei.

古文：天启元年，崇明请调马步兵二万援辽，从之。
现代文：这些都有待于朝廷派官员审核后才能决定。天启元年，奢崇明请求调拨骑兵和步兵二万人前去支援辽阳，皇帝同意了。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Su Chongming requested that 20,000 cavalry and infantry be sent to support Liaoyang, and the emperor agreed.

古文：崇明与子寅久蓄异志，借调兵援辽，遣其婿樊龙、部党张彤等，领兵至重庆，久驻不发。
现代文：奢崇明与其儿子奢寅长久以来蓄有异志，借调拨军队支援辽阳的机会，派遣女婿樊龙和部下同党张彤等人，带兵到达重庆后长期驻扎着不出发。
English: Shuang Chongming and his son Shuang Yin have long harbored ambitions. They seized the opportunity to send troops to support Liaoyang, dispatched his son-in-law Yao Long and his subordinates and party members Zhang Ye and others, and stationed them for a long time after they arrived in Chongqing.

古文：巡抚徐可求移镇重庆，趣永宁兵。樊龙等以增行粮为名乘机反，杀巡抚、道、府、总兵等官二十余员，遂据重庆。
现代文：巡抚徐可求亲自赶到重庆催促永宁军队赶快出发，樊龙等人以增加行粮为名乘机造反，杀死了巡抚、道官、府官、总兵等官员二十多人，占领了重庆。
English: The governor Xu Kegui personally rushed to Chongqing to urge the Yongning troops to set off as soon as possible, and Jialong and others took advantage of the opportunity to rebel in the name of increasing grain supply, killed more than 20 officials such as the governor, magistrate, prefectural official, and general soldier, and occupied Chongqing.

古文：分兵攻合江、纳溪，破沪州，陷遵义，兴文知县张振德死之。
现代文：他们还分兵攻打合江、纳溪，攻破泸州，攻陷遵义，兴文的知县张振德战死。
English: They also divided their troops to attack Hejiang and Naxi, broke through Zhangzhou, invaded and occupied Zunyi, and Zhang Zhende of Xingwen County died in battle.

古文：兴文，故九丝蛮地也。
现代文：兴文，是以前九丝蛮的地方。
English: Xingwen used to be a wild place.

古文：进围成都，伪号大梁，布政使朱燮元、周著，按察使林宰分门固守。
现代文：他们又进军包围成都，号称自己的政权为大梁。布政使朱燮元、周著，按察使林宰等在成都城内分门固守。
English: They also marched into and encircled Chengdu, claiming that their political power was the mainstay. The cloth political envoys Zhu Xuanyuan and Zhou Zhe, and the inspector and envoy Lin Zai, etc. held fast to their positions in Chengdu.

古文：石砫土司女官秦良玉遣弟民屏、侄翼明等，发兵四千，倍道兼行，潜渡重庆，营南坪关。
现代文：石石主土司的女土官秦良玉派其弟秦民屏、侄子秦翼明等发兵四千，日夜兼程，悄悄地渡过重庆，在南坪关扎营。
English: Qin Liangyu, the land officer's wife of Shi Shi, sent her brother Qin Minping, nephew Qin Yiming, and others to send 4,000 soldiers to quietly cross Chongqing day and night and camp at Nanping Pass.

古文：良玉自统精兵六千，沿江上趋成都。
现代文：秦良玉自己统率精兵六千沿江而上直奔成都。
English: Qin Liangyu himself led 6,000 elite soldiers up the river to Chengdu.

古文：诸援兵亦渐集。
现代文：其他的援兵也渐渐集结起来。
English: Other reinforcements were gradually arriving.

古文：时寅攻城急，阴纳刘勋等为内应，事觉伏诛。
现代文：此时奢寅攻城很急，暗地里接纳刘勋等人做内应。事情被发觉后，刘勋等人被诛杀。
English: At this time, Shao Yin was in a hurry to attack the city, secretly accepting Liu Xun and others to do internal affairs. After the matter was discovered, Liu Xun and others were killed.

古文：复造云梯及旱船，昼夜薄城，城中亦以炮石击毁之。
现代文：奢寅等又造云梯和旱船，昼夜攻城。城中也以炮石还击他们。
English: They also built ladders and barges, and attacked the city day and night. The city also fought back with cannons and stones.

古文：相持百日，会贼将罗乾象遣人输款，愿杀贼自效。
现代文：双方相持一百天，碰到贼军将领罗乾象派人向官军投诚，表示愿意杀死贼人为自己赎罪。
English: The two sides held each other for a hundred days, and when they met the general of the thief army, Luo Qianxiang, he sent people to the government army and expressed his willingness to kill the thief to atone for his sins.

古文：是夜，乾象纵火焚营，贼兵乱，崇明父子仓皇奔，钱帛谷米委弃山积，穷民赖以得活。
现代文：这天晚上，罗乾象纵火焚烧军营，贼兵大乱，奢崇明父子仓惶出逃，丢弃的钱帛谷米堆得像山一样，穷苦的百姓靠此得以活命。
English: On this night, Luo Qianxiang set fire to the military camp, the robber soldiers were in chaos, Luxong Ming father and son fled in panic, the discarded money and rice were piled up like a mountain, and the poor people were able to survive on this.

古文：乾象因率其党胡汝高等来降。
现代文：罗乾象便率其同党胡汝高等人前来投降。
English: Luo Qianxiang then led his party colleague Hu Ru to surrender.

古文：时燮元已授巡抚，率川卒追崇明，江安、新都、遵义诸郡邑皆复。
现代文：此时朝廷已授予朱燮元巡抚职务，他率四川的士兵追击奢崇明，江安、新都、遵义等郡邑都收复过来了。
English: At this time, the imperial court had granted Zhu Rongyuan the post of governor, and he led the soldiers of Sichuan to pursue Suo Chongming. Jiang'an, Xindu, Zunyi and other counties and towns were recovered.

古文：时二年三月也。
现代文：这时是天启二年三月。
English: It was now March of the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：樊龙收余众数万，据重庆险塞。
现代文：樊龙将余部数万人收集起来，占据了重庆的天险和要塞。
English: Xiaolong gathered the remaining tens of thousands of people and occupied the natural hazards and fortresses in Chongqing.

古文：燮元督良玉等夺二郎关，总兵杜文焕破佛图关，诸将迫重庆而军。
现代文：朱燮元督促秦良玉等人夺取二郎关，总兵杜文焕攻破了佛图关，诸将领将军队围着重庆驻扎下来。
English: Zhu Yuyuan urged Qin Liangyu and others to seize Jiro Pass, General Du Wenhuan broke through the Buddha Pass, and the generals stationed the army around Chongqing.

古文：奢寅遣贼党周鼎等分道来救，鼎败走，为合江民所缚。
现代文：奢寅派贼人同党周鼎等分道来救援，周鼎被官军打败后逃走，结果被合江的百姓绑缚起来。
English: Sakuin sent thieves and party members such as Zhou Ding to come to the rescue. Zhou Ding was defeated by the government army and fled. As a result, he was tied up by the people of Hejiang.

古文：官军与平茶、酉阳、石砫三土司合围重庆，城中乏食。
现代文：官军与平茶、酉阳、石石主三个土司的土兵合围重庆，重庆城中缺粮。
English: The government army encircled Chongqing with the soldiers of the three local governors of Pingcha, Fenyang and Shishishu, and there was a shortage of grain in Chongqing.

古文：燮元遂以计擒樊龙，杀之，张彤亦为乱兵所杀，生擒龙子友邦及其党张国用、石永高等三十余人，遂复重庆。
现代文：朱燮元便设计活捉了樊龙，将他杀了；张彤也被乱军所杀；生擒了樊龙的儿子樊友邦及其同党张国用、石永高等三十多人，收复了重庆。
English: Zhu Yuyuan then planned to capture Yao Long alive and killed him; Zhang Ye was also killed by the rebels; Yao Long's son, Yao Youbang, and more than 30 of his fellow party members, Zhang Guoying and Shi Yong Gao, were captured alive, and Chongqing was recovered.

古文：时安邦彦反于贵州，崇明遥倚为声援。
现代文：此时安邦彦在贵州造反，奢崇明与他遥相声援。
English: At this time, An Bangyan rebelled in Guizhou, and Suo Chongming supported him from afar.

古文：三年，川师复遵义，进攻永宁，遇奢寅于土地坎，率兵搏战。
现代文：三年，四川的官军收复遵义，进攻永宁，在土地坎与奢寅相遇，双方率兵进行搏战。
English: In the third year, the Sichuan government army recovered Zunyi and attacked Yongning. They met with Shuxa Yin at the land canyon, and the two sides led their soldiers into battle.

古文：大兵奋击，败之。寅被创遁，樊虎亦战死。
现代文：官军奋勇出击，叛军被打败，奢寅受伤后逃走，樊虎也战死了。
English: The government army bravely attacked, the rebels were defeated, Luxu escaped after being injured, and the tiger also died in the battle.

古文：进克其城，降贼二万。
现代文：官军进军攻克永宁城，降服了二万贼人。
English: The government army marched to conquer Yongning City and subdued twenty thousand thieves.

古文：得进拔红崖、天台诸囤寨，降者日至。
现代文：官军又进军攻拔了红崖、天台各囤寨，投降的人每天都有。
English: The government army also marched into and conquered the Red Cliff and Tiantai villages. There are people who surrender every day.

古文：崇明势益蹙，求救于水西，邦彦遣十六营过河援之。
现代文：奢崇明的势力越来越小，便向水西求救，安邦彦派十六个营的军队过河前来支援他。
English: As Suk Chongming's power dwindled, he appealed to the west for help, and An Bangyan sent sixteen battalions of troops across the river to support him.

古文：罗乾象急破兰州，焚九凤楼，覆其巢。
现代文：罗乾象攻破了蔺州，焚烧了九凤楼，他的老巢覆灭了。
English: Luo Qianxiang broke through Zhangzhou, burned Jiufeng Tower, and his old nest was destroyed.

古文：崇明踉跄走，投水西。
现代文：奢崇明踉踉跄跄地逃走了，投奔到水西。
English: Shuxong ran away and went to the west of Shuixi.

古文：邦彦与合兵，分犯遵义、永宁。
现代文：安邦彦与奢崇明合兵一处后，分别侵犯遵义和永宁。
English: After An Bangyan and Suk Chongming joined forces, they invaded Zunyi and Yongning separately.

古文：川师败之于芝麻塘，贼遁入青山。
现代文：四川的官军在芝麻塘将他们打败，他们便逃进了青山。
English: Sichuan's government troops defeated them at Zhimatang, and they fled into the Qingshan Mountains.

古文：诸将逼渭河，鏖入龙场阵，获崇明妻安氏及奢崇辉等，斩获万计。
现代文：各位将领逼近渭河，在龙场与奢崇明激战，俘获了奢崇明的妻子安氏和奢崇辉等人，斩杀的人数以万计。
English: The generals approached the Minhe River, fought fiercely with Shuxiong Ming in the dragon field, captured Shuxiong Ming's wife An and Shuxiong Hui, and killed tens of thousands of people.

古文：兰州平。总督朱燮元请以赤水河为界，河东龙场属黔，河西赤水、永宁属蜀。
现代文：蔺州平定了，总督朱燮元向朝廷请求以赤水河为界，河东的龙场隶属于贵州，河西的赤水、永宁隶属于四川。
English: Bozhou was pacified, and Governor Zhu Rongyuan petitioned the imperial court to use the Chishui River as the boundary. Longfang in the east of the river belonged to Guizhou, and Chishui and Yongning in the west of the river belonged to Sichuan.

古文：永宁设道、府，与遵义、建武声势联络。
现代文：在永宁设置了道和府，与遵义、建武声势相联。
English: A prefectural government was established in Yongning, which was linked to the rise of Zunyi and Jianwu.

古文：未几，贵州巡抚王三善为邦彦所袭死，崇明势复张，将以逾春大举寇永宁。
现代文：不久，贵州巡抚王三善遭安邦彦的袭击而死，奢崇明的势力又有扩张，过了春天将大举进攻永宁。
English: Not long after, Wang Sanshan, the governor of Guizhou, was attacked and killed by An Bangyan. Shu Chongming's forces were expanding, and after the spring they would attack Yongning in a big way.

古文：会奢寅为其下所杀，而燮元亦以父丧去，崇明、邦彦得稽诛。
现代文：此时正好奢寅被其部下所杀，朱燮元亦因父亲亡故离开军队去奔丧了，奢崇明、安邦彦得以苟延残喘。
English: It was at this time that Shaku was killed by his subordinates, and Zhu Rongyuan also left the army due to the death of his father and died. Shaku Chongming and An Bangyan were able to survive.

古文：崇明称大梁王，邦彦号四裔大长老，诸称元帅者不可胜计，合兵十余万，规先犯赤水。
现代文：奢崇明自称为大梁王，安邦彦号称自己为四裔大长老，其下称元帅者不可胜数。他们合兵十多万人，规划先进犯赤水。
English: Suk Chongming called himself the King of the Great Beam, An Bangyan called himself the Great Elder of the Four Descendants, and countless others called themselves marshals. Together, they had more than a hundred thousand soldiers and planned to invade Chishui first.

古文：崇祯初，起燮元总督贵、湖、云、川、广诸军务，大会师。
现代文：崇祯初年，朝廷起用朱燮元来总督贵州、湖广、云南、四川、广西等地的事务，会师讨伐。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court appointed Zhu Rongyuan as the governor of Guizhou, Hougang, Yunnan, Sichuan, Guangxi and other places to deal with the affairs.

古文：燮元定计诱贼深入向永宁，邀之于五峰山桃红坝，令总兵侯良柱大败之，崇明、邦彦皆授首。
现代文：朱燮元定下计谋诱使贼人向永宁深入，然后在五峰山的桃经坝邀击他们，再命令总兵侯良柱率军大败他们，奢崇明、安邦彦都被俘斩首。
English: Zhu Rongyuan devised a plan to lure the thieves deeper into Yongning, and then invited them to attack at the Taojingba Dam on Wufeng Mountain. He then ordered the commander-in-chief, General Liangzhu, to lead the army to defeat them. Shu Chongming and An Bangyan were both captured and beheaded.

古文：是役也，扫荡蜀、黔数十年巨憝，前后皆燮元功云。
现代文：这一仗，扫荡了四川、贵州几十年来都没有去除的大恶贼，这是朱燮元的功劳。
English: This battle has swept away the big villains that have not been removed from Sichuan and Guizhou for decades, which is the merit of Zhu Rongyuan.

古文：酉阳，汉武陵郡酉阳县地，宋为酉阳州。
现代文：酉阳，汉朝时是武陵郡的酉阳县。宋朝时，此地为酉阳州。
English: Poyang, during the Han Dynasty, was Poyang County of Wuling County. During the Song Dynasty, this place was Poyang Prefecture.

古文：元属怀德府。
现代文：元朝时隶属于怀德府。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, it was subordinated to Waide Prefecture.

古文：洪武五年，酉阳军民宣慰司冉如彪遣弟如喜来朝贡。置酉阳州，以如彪为知州。
现代文：明朝洪武五年，酉阳军宣慰司的冉如彪派其弟弟冉如喜前来进觐献贡，朝廷便设置了酉阳州，任冉如彪为知州。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu in the Ming Dynasty, Ran Rubei, the commander of the Shenyang Army, sent his younger brother Ran Ruxi to pay tribute. The imperial court then set up Poyang Province, and Ran Rubei was appointed to Zhizhou.

古文：八年改为宣抚司，仍以冉如彪为使。
现代文：八年，酉阳州改为宣抚司，仍让冉如彪担任宣抚使。
English: In eight years, Poyang Prefecture was changed to the Division of the Propaganda Department, but Ran Rubei was still allowed to serve as the propaganda secretary.

古文：置平茶、邑梅、麻免、石耶四洞长官司，以杨底纲、杨金奉、冉德原、杨隆为之，每三年一入贡。
现代文：其下设置平茶、邑梅、麻兔、石耶四个洞的长官司，任命杨底纲、杨金奉、冉德原、杨隆为长官司长官，让他们每三年入京城献贡物一次。
English: Under it, the chief magistrate of the four provinces of Pingcha, Oumei, Matsu and Shiya was set up, and Yang Jigang, Yang Jinbong, Ran Dehuan and Yang Long were appointed as chief magistrate, and they were allowed to enter Beijing once every three years to offer tribute.

古文：石耶不能亲至京，命附于酉阳。
现代文：石耶洞长官不能亲自到京城来，朝廷便命令他将贡物附在酉阳宣慰司一起带来。
English: The governor of Shiyadong could not come to Beijing in person, so the imperial court ordered him to bring the tribute together with the Shenyang Xuanliao Division.

古文：二十七年，平茶洞署长官杨再胜，谋杀兄子正贤及洞长杨通保等。
现代文：二十七年，平茶洞长官司长官杨再胜，阴谋杀害兄长的儿子杨正贤和洞长杨通保等人。
English: In the 27th year, Yang Zhaisheng, the chief of the chief of the Pingcha Cave, conspired to murder Yang Zhengxian, the son of his elder brother, and Yang Tongbo, the chief of the cave.

古文：正贤等觉之，逃至京师，诉其事，且言再胜与景川侯谋反。
现代文：杨正贤等人觉察后逃到京城，向朝廷诉说此事，并称杨再胜与景川侯一起阴谋造反。
English: Yang Zhengxian and others fled to the capital after they became aware of this and reported the matter to the imperial court, saying that Yang Zaisheng and Jingchuan Hou had conspired together to rebel.

古文：帝命逮再胜鞫之，再胜辞服，当族诛，正贤亦应缘坐。
现代文：皇帝命令将杨再胜逮捕审讯，杨再胜服罪，按法律此罪应诛杀九族，因此杨正贤也应治罪。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Jiasheng to be arrested and interrogated, and Yang Jiasheng accepted the crime. According to the law, this crime should be the killing of nine ethnic groups, so Yang Zhengxian should also be punished.

古文：帝诛再胜，释正贤，使袭长官。
现代文：皇帝诛杀了杨再胜，释放了杨正贤，让他继承了长官司长官职务。
English: The emperor killed Yang Zhaisheng, released Yang Zhengxian, and allowed him to succeed to the post of Chief of the General Office.

古文：酉阳宣抚冉兴邦以袭职来朝，命改隶渝州。
现代文：酉阳宣抚冉兴邦也因承袭了官职前来京城朝觐，皇帝便命令将酉阳宣抚司改为隶属于谕州。
English: Shenyang's procurator Ran Xingbang also came to the imperial court for the imperial pilgrimage because he had inherited the official post. The emperor then ordered that Shenyang's procuratorate be subordinated to Guozhou.

古文：永乐三年，指挥丁能、杜福抚谕亚坚等十一寨生苗一百三十六户，各遣子入朝，命隶酉阳宣抚司。
现代文：永乐三年，指挥丁能、杜福招抚了亚坚等十一个寨子里的没有汉化的苗族人共一百三十六户，告诉他们各派遣儿子入京城朝觐皇帝，皇帝命令他们隶属于酉阳宣抚司管辖。
English: In the third year of Yongle, the commanders Ding Neng and Dufu appeased a total of 136 households of Miao people who had not been Chineseized in 11 castles such as Yajian, telling them to send their sons to Beijing to make a pilgrimage to the emperor. The emperor ordered them to be under the jurisdiction of the Shenyang Propaganda Department.

古文：四年免酉阳荒田租。
现代文：四年朝廷免除了酉阳荒田的租税。
English: Four years later, the imperial court exempted the wasteland of Shenyang from taxes.

古文：五年，兴邦遣部长龚俊等贡方物，并谢立儒学恩。
现代文：五年，冉兴邦派遣部落酋长龚俊等人向朝廷贡献土产，并感谢皇上允许在当地设立儒学的恩典。
English: In the fifth year, Ran Xingbang sent the tribal chieftain Zou Jun and others to contribute local products to the court, and thanked the emperor for the grace of allowing the establishment of Confucianism in the local area.

古文：景泰七年调宣抚佥事冉廷璋兵，征五开、铜鼓叛苗，赐敕谕赏赍。
现代文：景泰七年，朝廷调拔宣抚佥事冉廷璋的军队，去征讨五开、铜鼓等地叛乱的苗族人，皇帝赐谕给他们奖赏。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Taejo, the imperial court dispatched the army of Ran Tingtao, who was in charge of propaganda, to subdue the rebellious Miao people in Wukai, Tonggu and other places. The emperor gave them a reward.

古文：天顺十三年命进宣抚冉云散官一阶，以助讨叛苗及擒石全州之功也。
现代文：天顺十三年，皇帝命令给宣抚冉云进散官一阶，因为他帮助讨伐叛乱的苗族人和擒捉石全州有功劳。
English: In the 13th year of Tianshun, the emperor ordered to give the first rank to the procurator Ran Yunjin San official, because he helped to fight the rebellious Miao people and the whole state.

古文：弘治七年，宣抚冉舜臣以征贵州叛苗功，乞升职。
现代文：弘治七年，宣抚冉舜臣因在征讨贵州叛乱的苗人中立有功劳，请求朝廷提升他的职务。
English: In the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, Xuanfu Ran Shunchen requested the imperial court to promote him to a higher position because of his service in neutralizing the Miao rebels in Guizhou.

古文：兵部以非例，请进舜臣阶明威将军，赐敕褒之。
现代文：兵部认为没有提升土司职务的惯例，请求朝廷给冉舜臣的官阶进到明威将军，赐谕褒奖他。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs believed that there was no practice of promoting the duties of the steward, and requested the court to give the official rank of the valet to the general Mingwei, and give him a commendation.

古文：十二年，舜臣秦宋农寨蛮贼纠胁诸寨洞蛮，杀掠焚劫，乞剿捕。
现代文：十二年，冉舜臣上奏说宋农寨的蛮族贼人纠集起来，胁迫各寨洞的蛮人去烧杀抢劫，请求朝廷派兵进剿搜捕。
English: In the twelfth year, Emperor Ran Shizhen reported that the barbarian thieves of Song Nongzhai had gathered together, coerced the barbarians of each village to burn, kill and rob, and requested the court to send soldiers to search and arrest.

古文：保靖、永顺二宣慰亦奏，邑梅副长官杨胜刚父子谋据酉阳，结俊倍洞长杨广震等，号召宋农、后溪诸蛮，聚兵杀掠，请并讨。
现代文：保靖、永顺二个宣慰也上奏说邑梅的副长官杨胜刚父子阴谋占领酉阳，勾结俊信洞的洞长杨广震等人，号召宋农、后溪等地的蛮族人聚兵烧杀抢劫，请求朝廷派兵一并讨伐。
English: The two consolations of Baojing and Yongshun also reported that Yang Shengang, the vice-governor of the town of Mei, and his son conspired to occupy Fenyang, colluded with Yang Guangzhen, the cave chief of Junxin Cave, and others, called on the barbarians in Songnong, Houxi and other places to gather troops to burn and rob, and requested the court to send troops to fight together.

古文：兵部议，酉阳溪洞连络，易煽动，宜即扑灭，请行镇巡官酌机宜。
现代文：兵部商议后认为酉阳各溪洞之间相互联络，容易煽动作乱，应立即将其扑灭，请各地的镇巡官相机行事。
English: After deliberation, the Ministry of Military Affairs considered that it was easy to instigate chaos due to the interconnection between the creeks and caves in Fenyang. It should be extinguished immediately, and requested the town inspectors' cameras from all over the country to act.

古文：十四年调酉阳兵五千协剿贵州贼妇米鲁。
现代文：十四年朝廷调拨酉阳的军队五千人协助官军进剿贵州的女贼人米鲁。
English: In the 14th year, the imperial court dispatched 5,000 troops from Shenyang to assist the government army to invade Miru, the female thief in Guizhou.

古文：正德三年，酉阳宣抚司护印舍人冉廷玺及邑梅长官司奏，湖广镇溪所洞苗聚众攻劫，请兵剿捕。
现代文：正德三年，酉阳宣抚司的护印舍人冉廷玺和邑梅长官司上奏，说湖广的镇溪所洞的苗人聚众攻掠抢劫，请求朝廷派兵进剿搜捕。
English: In the third year of Zhengde, Ran Tingyu, the protector of the Shenyang Proclamation Division, and Ou Mei, the chief of the Division, said that the Miao people in the town of Xi So Dong in Hukang gathered to attack, plunder and rob, and requested the court to send soldiers to search and arrest.

古文：八年，宣抚冉元献大木二十，乞免男维翰袭职赴京，从之。
现代文：八年，宣抚冉元向朝廷进大木二十根，请求朝廷免去其儿子冉维翰继承官职时须赴京城朝觐的任务，皇帝同意了。
English: In the eighth year, the imperial envoy Ran Yuan presented a petition to the imperial court, requesting that the court exempt his son Ran Weihan from the duty of going to the capital for a pilgrimage when he succeeded to the official post. The emperor agreed.

古文：二十年，元再献大木二十，诏量加服色酬赏。
现代文：二十年，冉元又向朝廷进献大木二十根，皇帝下诏按情况赏赐给他一定颜色的衣服。
English: Twenty years later, Ran Yuan also presented twenty large trees to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict awarding him clothes of a certain color according to the situation.

古文：万历十七年，宣抚冉维屏献大木二十，价逾三千。
现代文：万历十七年，宣抚冉维屏向朝廷献大木二十根，价值超过三千。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Wanli era, Ran Wiping, the procurator, presented twenty large trees to the imperial court, with a value of more than three thousand.

古文：工部议，应加从三品服，以为土官输诚之劝，从之。
现代文：工部讨论，认为应给冉维屏加赏从三品的衣服，以劝勉土官向朝廷献忠诚，皇帝同意了。
English: The Ministry of Works discussed and thought that Ran Weiping should be rewarded with three articles of clothing to encourage the local officials to be loyal to the imperial court, and the emperor agreed.

古文：四十六年调酉阳兵四千，命宣抚冉跃龙将之援辽。
现代文：四十六年，朝廷调拨酉阳兵四千人，命令宣抚冉跃龙带领着去支援辽阳。
English: In 1946, the imperial court dispatched four thousand soldiers from Shenyang and ordered the procurator Ran Yuelong to lead them to support Liaoyang.

古文：四十七年，跃龙遣子天胤及文光等领兵赴辽阳，驻虎皮、黄山等处三载，解奉集之围。
现代文：四十七年，冉跃龙派遣儿子冉天胤及冉文光等带兵赶赴辽阳，驻扎在虎皮、黄山等地达三年，解除了敌人对奉集的包围。
English: In 47 years, Ran Yulong sent his sons Ran Tianyin and Ran Wenguang to Liaoyang with soldiers, stationed in Hupi, Huangshan and other places for three years, and relieved the enemy's encirclement of Fengji.

古文：再援沈阳，以浑河失利，冉见龙战没，死者千余人。
现代文：他们又援救沈阳，因在浑河失利，冉见龙战死，同时阵亡的还有一千多人。
English: They also came to the rescue of Shenyang. As a result of their defeat at the Hunhe River, Ran Shilong died in battle, along with more than a thousand others.

古文：撤守辽阳，又以降敌纵火，冉文焕等战没，死者七百余人。
现代文：他们撤回军队守卫辽阳时，又被已投降的敌人放火焚烧，冉文焕等人战死，同时死亡的还有七百多人。
English: When they withdrew their troops to guard Liaoyang, they were set on fire by the enemy who had already surrendered. Ran Wenhuan and others died in the battle, as well as more than seven hundred people.

古文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣言： 跃龙遣子弟万里勤王，见龙既杀身殉国，跃龙又自捐金二千两，运军器至山海关，振困招魂，忠义可嘉。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣说： 冉跃龙派遣子弟不远万里前来保卫朝廷，冉见龙已以身殉国，冉跃龙又自己捐献二千金黄金，运送军用器械到山海关，帮助军队摆脱困境，招回和振奋了军魂军威，其对朝廷确实忠义可嘉。
English: Zhang Hurming, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, said: Ran Yuelong sent his son not far away to defend the imperial court. Ran Jilong has already died for the country. Ran Yuelong also donated two thousand gold and gold, transported military equipment to Shanhaiguan, helped the army get out of the predicament, called back and invigorated the military spirit and military prestige, and his loyalty to the imperial court is truly commendable.

古文：臣在贵州时，跃龙亦自捐饷征红苗，屡建奇功。
现代文：我在贵州时，冉跃龙也自己捐献粮饷主动征讨叛乱的红苗人，屡次建立奇功。
English: When I was in Guizhou, Ran Yuelong also donated grain and took the initiative to recruit insurgent Red Seedlings, and repeatedly achieved miraculous feats.

古文：今又著节于边，宜加优恤，以风诸边。 
现代文：现今他在边关地区又以忠节于朝廷而著称，朝廷应对他优加抚恤，以感化各边关的土著人。 
English: Nowadays, he is also famous for his loyalty to the imperial court in the border areas. The imperial court should give him a generous allowance to influence the aborigines in the border areas.

古文：天启元年授跃龙宣慰使，并妻舒氏，皆给诰命，仍恤阵亡千七百余家。
现代文：天启元年，朝廷授予冉跃龙宣慰使的职务，其妻舒氏也被授予诰命。还抚恤了阵亡将士家庭一千七百多家。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, the imperial court awarded Ran Yuelong the post of consoler, and his wife, Shu, was also awarded the posthumous death. He also gave pensions to more than 1,700 families of fallen soldiers.

古文：二年，奢崇明叛，跃龙率援师合围重庆。
现代文：二年，奢崇明叛乱，冉跃龙率军前去支援官军，与官军一起包围了重庆。
English: Two years later, during the Shu-Chung-Ming Rebellion, Ran Yuelong led the army to support the government army and surrounded Chongqing together with the government army.

古文：及崇明诛，其土舍冉绍文与有功。
现代文：在诛杀奢崇明的战斗中，他手下的土舍冉绍文也参加了并立有功劳。
English: In the battle to kill Shuxa Chongming, his subordinate Doushe Ran Shouwen also took part and rendered meritorious service.

古文：四年，跃龙以东西赴调效命，为弟见龙及诸阵亡者请赍恤。
现代文：四年，冉跃龙因奉朝廷调遣前往别处效命，便向朝廷请求优抚他的弟弟冉见龙和各阵亡将士的家庭，皇帝命令将该请求交有关机构办理。
English: In the fourth year, because Ran Yuelong was transferred by the imperial court to serve elsewhere, he requested the imperial court to give preferential treatment to his brother Ran Xilong and the families of the fallen soldiers. The emperor ordered that the request be submitted to the relevant agency.

古文：命下所司。崇祯九年，宣慰使冉天麟疏言： 庶孽天胤假旨谋夺臣爵土，不遂，擅兵戕杀。 
现代文：崇祯九年，宣慰使冉天麟上疏朝廷 ：作恶的冉天胤，假传圣旨阴谋夺取我的官爵和土地，没有成功，便擅自带兵残杀。 
English: In the ninth year of his reign, Ran Tianlin was proclaimed to be the one to shake up the imperial court: Ran Tianlin, the evil-doer, plotted to seize my peerage and land by falsely passing on the sacred edict. When he did not succeed, he took soldiers and killed them without authorization.

古文：下抚按察勘。
现代文：朝廷将该奏章交给抚按官去调查审核。
English: The imperial court handed over the record to the magistrate to investigate and review.

古文：时蜀方忧盗，大吏自顾不暇，土官事多寝阁云。
现代文：此时四川正为盗贼所困扰，各位大官自顾尚不暇，对土官的事便多束之高阁了。
English: At this time, Sichuan was being plagued by thieves, and the high-ranking officials did not have enough time to take care of themselves.

