古文：绛侯周勃者，沛人也。
现代文：绛侯周勃，沛县人。
English: Gonghou Zhou Bo, from Peixian County.

古文：其先卷人，徙沛。
现代文：他的祖先是卷县人，后来迁到的沛县。
English: His ancestors were from Zhuan County and later moved to Peixian County.

古文：勃以织薄曲为生，常为人吹箫给丧事，材官引彊。
现代文：周勃靠编蚕箔维持生活，还常在人家办丧时事吹箫奏挽歌，后来又成为能拉硬弓的勇士。
English: Zhou Bo made a living by weaving silkworm coils, and often played dirges at funerals. Later, he became a warrior who could draw a bow.

古文：高祖之为沛公初起，勃以中涓从攻胡陵，下方与。
现代文：高祖当初称为沛公刚刚起兵的时候，周勃以侍从官的身份随从高祖进攻胡陵，攻下方与。
English: When Gaozu, originally known as Pei Gong, had just raised an army, Zhou Bo, as an attendant, followed Gaozu to attack Huling and capture the lower part of the city.

古文：方与反，与战，卻適。
现代文：方与反叛，周勃跟他们交战，击退了敌军。
English: Fang fought with the rebels, Zhou Bo fought with them, and repulsed the enemy forces.

古文：攻丰。击秦军砀东。还军留及萧。
现代文：之后进攻丰邑，在砀郡东边攻打秦军，军队回到留县和萧县。
English: After that, they attacked Fengyi and fought against the Qin army on the east side of Jixian County. The army returned to Liu County and Xiao County.

古文：复攻砀，破之。下下邑，先登。
现代文：再次进攻砀郡，终于攻破，打下了下邑，周勃最先登上城墙。
English: Once again, they attacked Jixian County, and finally broke through and defeated the lower town. Zhou Bo was the first to climb the city wall.

古文：赐爵五大夫。
现代文：高祖赐给他五大夫的爵位。
English: Gaozhu gave him the title of the five great husbands.

古文：攻蒙、虞，取之。
现代文：后来进攻蒙、虞二城，全都攻下来了。
English: Later, Meng and Yu attacked the two cities, and they were all taken down.

古文：击章邯车骑，殿。
现代文：袭击章邯车骑部队的时候，周勃立下等功。
English: When attacking Zhangye's chariot and cavalry troops, Zhou Bo made great efforts.

古文：定魏地。攻爰戚、东缗，以往至栗，取之。
现代文：平定魏地后，进攻爰戚、东缗，一直打到栗县，将这些地方全部攻占了。
English: After Wei was subdued, they attacked Yanqi and Donglu, and fought all the way to Li County, capturing all of these places.

古文：攻齧桑，先登。
现代文：攻打啮桑的时候，周勃又最先登城。
English: When attacking Lushan, Zhou Bo was the first to enter the city.

古文：击秦军阿下，破之。
现代文：在东阿城下攻击秦军，把他们打败了。
English: He attacked the Qin army at the foot of Dong'a Castle and defeated them.

古文：追至濮阳，下甄城。
现代文：追击到濮阳，攻下甄城。
English: Pursued to Fenyang, captured Zhencheng.

古文：攻都关、定陶，袭取宛朐，得单父令。
现代文：进攻都关、定陶，袭击并攻占了宛朐，俘获了单父的县令。
English: Attacked Duguan and Dingtao, attacked and captured Wanlu, and captured the single father's county magistrate.

古文：夜袭取临济，攻张，以前至卷，破之。
现代文：夜袭攻占了临济，进攻寿张，又往前打到卷县，把它攻破了。
English: The night attack captured Linji, the attack Shou Zhang, and then moved forward to Meng County, breaking it.

古文：击李由军雍丘下。
现代文：在雍丘城下攻击秦军将李由的军队。
English: The Qin attacked Li Yu's army at the foot of Yongqiu Castle.

古文：攻开封，先至城下为多。
现代文：在攻打开封的时候，周勃先到城下，立了战功。
English: When the siege was opened, Zhou Bo was the first to reach the outskirts of the city, and achieved great success in the war.

古文：後章邯破杀项梁，沛公与项羽引兵东如砀。
现代文：后来章邯打败了项梁的军队并杀死了项梁。沛公刘邦和项羽领兵向东回到砀郡。
English: Later, Zhang Ye defeated Xiang Liang's army and killed Xiang Liang. Pei Gong Liu Bang and Xiang Yu led the troops eastward back to Xiang County.

古文：自初起沛还至砀，一岁二月。
现代文：从在沛县开始起兵到回至砀郡，共一年零两个月。
English: It took a total of one year and two months from the start of the army in Pae County to the return to Ye County.

古文：楚怀王封沛公号安武侯，为砀郡长。
现代文：楚怀王给沛公的封号是安武侯，并任他做砀郡郡长。
English: King Chu Huai gave Pei Gong the title of Anwu Hou, and appointed him as the county magistrate of Ya County.

古文：沛公拜勃为虎贲令，以令从沛公定魏地。
现代文：沛公任命周勃以虎贲令的职位跟随沛公平定魏地。
English: Pei Gong appointed Zhou Bo to the post of Tigress to follow Pei Gong.

古文：攻东郡尉於城武，破之。
现代文：在城武进攻东郡郡尉的军队，打败了他们。
English: In the city of Wu, he attacked the army of the county captain of Dong County and defeated them.

古文：击王离军，破之。
现代文：攻打秦将王离的军队，把他们打败了。
English: He attacked the army of Qin general Wang Li and defeated them.

古文：攻长社，先登。
现代文：进攻长社，周勃又是最先登城。
English: After attacking Chosha, Zhou Bo was the first to enter the city.

古文：攻颍阳、缑氏，绝河津。
现代文：进攻颍阳、缑氏，切断了黄河的渡口。
English: They attacked Fenyang and the Min clan and cut off the ferry of the Yellow River.

古文：击赵贲军尸北。
现代文：在尸乡北面攻打赵贲的军队。
English: They attacked Zhao Jun's army in the north of the necropolis.

古文：南攻南阳守齮，破武关、峣关。
现代文：又南下攻打南阳郡吕攻破武关、峣关。
English: They also went south to attack Lvyu, Nanyang County, and broke through Wuguan and Shaoguan.

古文：破秦军於蓝田，至咸阳，灭秦。
现代文：在蓝田大败秦军，打到咸阳，灭了秦朝。
English: Defeated the Qin army in Lantian, fought to Xianyang, and destroyed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：项羽至，以沛公为汉王。
现代文：项羽到达咸阳后，把沛公封为汉王。
English: After Cao Yu arrived in Xianyang, he made Pei Gong the king of Han.

古文：汉王赐勃爵为威武侯。
现代文：汉王赐给周勃的爵位是威武侯。
English: The title given to Zhou Bo by the Han king was Weiwu Hou.

古文：从入汉中，拜为将军。
现代文：周勃跟随汉王进入汉中，被任命为将军。
English: Zhou Bo followed the Han king into the Han dynasty and was appointed as a general.

古文：还定三秦，至秦，赐食邑怀德。
现代文：汉军回师平定三秦，到达秦地后，汉王把怀德赐给周勃作食邑。
English: The Han army returned to subdue Sanqin, and after arriving in Qin, the Han king gave Huai De to Zhou Bo for food.

古文：攻槐里、好畤，最。
现代文：进攻槐里、好畤，立了上等功。
English: The attack was successful and well-executed. It was a great achievement.

古文：击赵贲、内史保於咸阳，最。
现代文：在咸阳攻击赵贲和内史保，又立了上等功。
English: In Xianyang, he attacked Zhao Xuan and Neishi Bao, and again achieved superior performance.

古文：北攻漆。
现代文：向北进攻漆县。
English: Go north and attack Urushi County.

古文：击章平、姚卬军。
现代文：攻打章平、姚卬的军队。
English: Attack Zhang Ping and Yao Xi's army.

古文：西定汧。
现代文：向西平定汧县。
English: To the west, Dingye County.

古文：还下郿、频阳。
现代文：又回军打下了湄县、频阳。
English: In addition, the returning troops won the battle of Meixian and Fanyang.

古文：围章邯废丘。
现代文：在废丘包围了章邯军队。
English: They surrounded Zhang Ye's army in the wasteland.

古文：破西丞。
现代文：打败了西县县丞的军队。
English: Defeated the army of Xixian Xian Rong.

古文：击盗巴军，破之。
现代文：攻打盗巴的军队，打败了他。
English: Attacked Thobas's army and defeated him.

古文：攻上邽。
现代文：进攻上邽。
English: The attack is on.

古文：东守峣关。
现代文：在东。在东边镇守峣关。
English: In the east. In the east, the town guards Shouguan.

古文：转击项籍。
现代文：转而攻打项羽。
English: He turned to attack Xiang Yu.

古文：攻曲逆，最。
现代文：进攻曲逆，立上等功。
English: Attack in the opposite direction, stand up and do the same.

古文：还守敖仓，追项籍。
现代文：回师镇守敖仓，追击项羽。
English: He returned to his division to defend Kamakura and pursue Xiang Yu.

古文：籍已死，因东定楚地泗、东海郡，凡得二十二县。
现代文：项羽死后，趁机向东平定楚泗水和东海两郡，共占领二十二县。
English: After Xiang Yu's death, he took the opportunity to eastwardly pacify the two counties of Chu's Water and the East Sea, occupying a total of twenty-two counties.

古文：还守雒阳、栎阳，赐与颍侯共食锺离。
现代文：又回师守卫洛阳、栎阳，汉王把钟离赐给周勃与灌婴做为二人共有的食邑。
English: Once again, the master guards Luoyang and Fenyang, and the Han king gives Zhongli to Zhou Bo and Guan Yu as a common food village for the two.

古文：以将军从高帝反者燕王臧荼，破之易下。
现代文：周勃以将军的身份随从高祖征讨反叛汉朝的燕王臧荼，在易县城下把他们打败。
English: Zhou Bo, as a general, followed Gao Zu to subjugate the rebellious Han Dynasty Yan Wangtao, and defeated them in the city of Yi County.

古文：所将卒当驰道为多。
现代文：周勃率领的士兵在车马大道上抵御敌军，战功多。
English: The soldiers led by Zhou Bo resisted the enemy army on the Chema Avenue and achieved much.

古文：赐爵列侯，剖符世世勿绝。
现代文：周勃被封赐列侯的爵位，高祖分剖符信保证周勃的爵位代代相传，永不断绝。
English: Zhou Bo was awarded the title of prince, and Gao Zu's letter ensured that Zhou Bo's title would be passed down from generation to generation, and would never expire.

古文：食绛八千一百八十户，号绛侯。
现代文：赐绛县八千一百八十户做为食邑，号称绛侯。
English: There are 8180 households in Jianye County, which are known as Jianye food villages.

古文：以将军从高帝击反韩王信於代，降下霍人。
现代文：周勃以将军身份随从高祖在代地征讨反叛汉朝的韩王信，降服了霍人县。
English: Zhou Bo, as a general, followed Gaozu to recruit Han Wangxin, a rebel against the Han Dynasty, and subjugated Huoren County.

古文：以前至武泉，击胡骑，破之武泉北。
现代文：再向前到达武泉，攻击胡人的骑兵，在武泉北边把他们打败。
English: They then advanced to Wuquan, attacked the horsemen of the Hu people, and defeated them on the north side of Wuquan.

古文：转攻韩信军铜鞮，破之。
现代文：又转移到铜鞮进攻韩王信的军队，打败了他们。
English: He then moved to Tonglu to attack Han Wangxin's army and defeated them.

古文：还，降太原六城。
现代文：回师降服了太原郡的六座城。
English: He surrendered six cities in Taiyuan County.

古文：击韩信胡骑晋阳下，破之，下晋阳。
现代文：在晋阳城下，攻击韩王信的胡人骑兵，击败了他们，攻下了晋阳。
English: At the foot of Jinyang Castle, the Hu cavalry attacked Han Wangxin, defeated them, and captured Jinyang.

古文：後击韩信军於硰石，破之，追北八十里。
现代文：随后又在硰石攻击韩王信的军队，把他们击败，追击败兵八十里。
English: Subsequently, he attacked Han Wangxin's army in Zhishi, defeated them, and chased the defeated soldiers for eighty miles.

古文：还攻楼烦三城，因击胡骑平城下，所将卒当驰道为多。
现代文：回师进攻楼烦的三座城，趁势在平城之下攻击胡人骑兵，周勃所率领的士兵在车马大道上抵御敌兵，战功最多。
English: The returning division attacked the three troubled cities, and took advantage of the situation to attack the Hun cavalry under the flat city. The soldiers led by Zhou Bo resisted the enemy soldiers on the Chima Avenue, and had the most war exploits.

古文：勃迁为太尉。
现代文：周勃晋升为太尉。
English: Zhou Bo was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：击陈豨，屠马邑。
现代文：周勃攻打叛将陈豨，在马邑县屠城。
English: Zhou Bo attacks rebel general Chen Qi in Tu Cheng, Mayi County.

古文：所将卒斩豨将军乘马絺。
现代文：他率领的士卒斩杀了陈豨的将军乘马。
English: The soldiers he led killed Chen Xuan's general in the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：击韩信、陈豨、赵利军於楼烦，破之。得豨将宋最、雁门守。
现代文：在楼烦攻打韩王信、陈豨、赵利的军队，把他们打败了，俘获了陈豨的部将宋最和雁门郡守圂。
English: He attacked the troops of Han Wangxin, Chen Qi, and Zhao Li in the building, defeated them, and captured Chen Qi's general Song Zhaowang and Shou Qi of Yanmen County.

古文：因转攻得云中守、丞相箕肆、将勋。
现代文：趁势转攻云中郡，俘获了郡守圂、丞相箕肆和将军勋。
English: He took advantage of the situation to attack Yunzhong County and captured the county governor, the prime minister and the general.

古文：定雁门郡十七县，云中郡十二县。
现代文：平定雁门郡十七个县，云中郡十二个县。
English: There are 17 counties in Yanmen County and 12 counties in Yunnan County.

古文：因复击豨灵丘，破之，斩豨，得豨丞相程纵、将军陈武、都尉高肆。
现代文：趁势又在灵丘攻打陈豨，把他的军队打垮，斩杀了陈豨，俘获了陈豨的丞相程纵、将军陈武、都尉高肆。
English: He took advantage of the situation and attacked Chen Xi in Lingqiu, defeated his army, killed Chen Xi, and captured Chen Xi's chancellor Cheng Zheng, general Chen Wu, and lieutenant Gaozhu.

古文：定代郡九县。
现代文：平定代郡九个县。
English: There are nine counties in Pingdingdao County.

古文：燕王卢绾反，勃以相国代樊哙将，击下蓟，得绾大将抵、丞相偃、守陉、太尉弱、御史大夫施，屠浑都。
现代文：燕王卢绾反叛，周勃以相国的职位代樊哙领兵，攻下蓟县，俘获了卢绾的大将抵、丞相偃、郡守陉、太尉弱以及御史大夫施等人，屠灭浑都城。
English: Yan Wang of Lushan rebelled, Zhou Bo led the troops on behalf of Lushan with the position of a foreign country, conquered Lushan County, captured Lushan's general Lai, chengxiang Lai, county governor Lai, taifu weak and goshi daifu Shi and others, and slaughtered the city of Hundu.

古文：破绾军上兰，复击破绾军沮阳。
现代文：在上兰打败了卢绾的叛军，又在沮阳击败卢绾的叛军。
English: In Shanglan, he defeated the rebels of Lu Wei, and in Deyang, he defeated the rebels of Lu Wei.

古文：追至长城，定上谷十二县，右北平十六县，辽西、辽东二十九县，渔阳二十二县。
现代文：追击到长城，平定上谷郡十二县，右北平郡十六县，辽西、辽东二十九县，渔阳郡二十二县。
English: The pursuit reached the Great Wall, and 12 counties in Shanggu County, 16 counties in Ping County, 29 counties in West Liao and East Liao, and 22 counties in Yuyang County were pacified.

古文：最从高帝得相国一人，丞相二人，将军、二千石各三人；别破军二，下城三，定郡五，县七十九，得丞相、大将各一人。
现代文：随从高祖出征，共俘获相国一人，丞相二人，将这和年俸二千石的官各三人，另外还打败了两支军队，攻下了三座城，平定五个郡、七十九个县，俘虏丞相、大将各一人。
English: He went to war with Gao Zu, and captured one of his brothers, two of his brothers-in-law, and three of the officials with an annual salary of two thousand koku each. In addition, he defeated two armies, captured three cities, pacified five counties and seventy-nine counties, and captured one of his brothers-in-law and one general.

古文：勃为人木彊敦厚，高帝以为可属大事。
现代文：周勃为人质朴刚强，老实忠厚，高祖认为可以嘱托大事。
English: Zhou Bo was a simple, strong, honest and loyal person. Gao Zu believed that he could be entrusted with important matters.

古文：勃不好文学，每召诸生说士，东乡坐而责之： 趣为我语。 
现代文：周勃不喜爱文辞学问，每次召见儒生和游说之士，他面向东坐着，要求他们： 赶快对我说吧！ 
English: Zhou Bo did not like literature and learning. Every time he summoned Confucian scholars and lobbyists, he sat facing east and asked them: "Tell me quickly!"

古文：其椎少文如此。
现代文：他的质朴少文才就像这个样子。
English: His unpretentiousness is just like this.

古文：勃既定燕而归，高祖已崩矣，以列侯事孝惠帝。
现代文：周勃平定燕地之后回朝，高祖已经去世，他以列侯的身份侍奉惠帝。
English: After Zhou Bo subdued Yan Di and returned to the imperial court, Gaozu had passed away, and he served Emperor Hui as a vassal lord.

古文：孝惠帝六年，置太尉官，以勃为太尉。
现代文：惠帝六年设太尉官职，任命周勃为太尉。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Hui's reign, Zhou Bo was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：十岁，高后崩。
现代文：十年以后，吕后去世。
English: Ten years later, Queen Lyu passed away.

古文：吕禄以赵王为汉上将军，吕产以吕王为汉相国，秉汉权，欲危刘氏。
现代文：吕禄以赵王身份任汉朝上将军，吕产以吕王身份任汉朝相国，他们把持汉朝政权，想要推翻刘氏。
English: Lulu, as King Zhao, was a general of the Han Dynasty, and Liusan, as King Lyu, was a vassal of the Han Dynasty. They controlled the Han Dynasty and wanted to overthrow the Liu clan.

古文：勃为太尉，不得入军门。陈平为丞相，不得任事。
现代文：周勃身为太尉，却不能进入军营之门；陈平身为丞相，却不能处理政务。
English: Zhou Bo was a captain, but he could not enter the gate of the military camp; Chen Ping was the prime minister, but he could not handle government affairs.

古文：於是勃与平谋，卒诛诸吕而立孝文皇帝。
现代文：于是周勃与陈平谋划，终于诛灭了吕氏家族，拥立孝文皇帝。
English: As a result, Zhou Bo and Chen Ping plotted and finally annihilated the Lv family and supported Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：其语在吕后、孝文事中。
现代文：此事的说情都记载在《吕太后本纪》和《孝文本纪》中。
English: The details of this matter are recorded in the "Lyutai Houbeng" and the "Chiao Wen Wen Ji."

古文：文帝既立，以勃为右丞相，赐金五千斤，食邑万户。
现代文：文帝即位之后，任周勃为右丞相，赐给黄金五千斤，食邑一万户，过了一个多月，有人劝说周勃： 您已诛灭了吕氏家庭，拥立代王为天子，威震天下。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Wen, Zhou Bo was appointed as the Minister of the Right, and was given five thousand catties of gold and ten thousand households of food villages. After more than a month, someone persuaded Zhou Bo: You have annihilated the Lu family, upheld the king as the son of heaven, and shaken the world.

古文：居月馀，人或说勃曰： 君既诛诸吕，立代王，威震天下，而君受厚赏，处尊位，以宠，久之即祸及身矣。 勃惧，亦自危，乃谢请归相印。
现代文：您受到丰厚的赏赐，处在尊贵的地位，这样受宠，时间长了将会有灾祸降到您的身上。 周勃害怕了，自己也感到危险，于是就辞职，请求归还相印。
English: You have been richly rewarded, you are in an honorable position, you are so favored, if you stay too long, disaster will befall you. Zhou Bo was afraid, he also felt in danger, so he resigned and requested the return of the seal.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇帝答应他的请求。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：岁馀，丞相平卒，上复以勃为丞相。
现代文：过了一年多，丞相陈平去世。皇帝又让周勃任丞相。
English: More than a year later, Premier Chen Ping passed away, and the emperor appointed Zhou Bo as Premier.

古文：十馀月，上曰： 前日吾诏列侯就国，或未能行，丞相吾所重，其率先之。 
现代文：过了十几个月，皇帝说： 前些天我下令让列侯都到自己的封地去，有些人还没有走，丞相您是我很器重的人，希望您带头先去吧！ 
English: After ten months, the emperor said: "A few days ago, I ordered all vassals to go to their fiefdoms. Some have not yet left. You, the prime minister, are a very important person to me. I hope you will take the lead and go first!"

古文：乃免相就国。
现代文：于是免去丞相职位回到封地。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his position as chancellor and returned to his fiefdom.

古文：岁馀，每河东守尉行县至绛，绛侯勃自畏恐诛，常被甲，令家人持兵以见之。
现代文：回到封地一年多，每当河东郡守和郡尉巡视各县的达绛县的时候，绛侯周勃自己害怕被杀害，经常披挂铠甲，命令家人手持武器来会见郡守和郡尉。
English: Returning to the fiefdom for more than a year, whenever the county governor of Hedong and the county lieutenant toured the counties of Dadu County, Zhou Bo himself was afraid of being killed. He often wore armor and ordered his family members to come armed to meet the county governor and the county lieutenant.

古文：其後人有上书告勃欲反，下廷尉。廷尉下其事长安，逮捕勃治之。
现代文：后来有人上书告发周勃要反叛，皇帝把此事交给负责刑狱的长官廷尉处理，廷尉又把此事交付长安负责，长安的刑狱官逮捕周勃进行审问。
English: Later, someone wrote a letter accusing Zhou Bo of wanting to rebel, and the emperor handed the matter over to the imperial lieutenant in charge of the prison. The imperial lieutenant then handed the matter over to Chang'an, who arrested Zhou Bo for interrogation.

古文：勃恐，不知置辞。
现代文：周勃恐惧，不知道怎么回答。
English: I was terrified and didn't know how to answer.

古文：吏稍侵辱之。
现代文：狱吏渐渐欺凌侮辱他。
English: The guards gradually bullied and insulted him.

古文：勃以千金与狱吏，狱吏乃书牍背示之，曰 以公主为证 。
现代文：周勃拿千金送给狱吏，狱吏才写在木简背后提示他： 让公主为你作证。 
English: Zhou Bo took the money and gave it to the warden, who then wrote on the back of the block of wood: "Let the princess testify for you."

古文：公主者，孝文帝女也，勃太子胜之尚之，故狱吏教引为证。
现代文：公主就是文帝的女儿，周勃的长子胜之娶她为妻，所以狱吏教周勃让她出来作证。
English: The princess was the daughter of Emperor Wen. Zhou Bo's eldest son, Kanshi, had married her, so the warden told Zhou Bo to let her testify.

古文：勃之益封受赐，尽以予薄昭。
现代文：周勃把加封所受的赏赐都送给了薄太后的之弟薄昭。
English: Zhou Bo gave all the rewards he received from the sealing to Bo Zhao, the younger brother of the Empress Dowager Bo.

古文：及系急，薄昭为言薄太后，太后亦以为无反事。
现代文：等案子到了紧要关头，薄昭为周勃向薄太后说情，太后也认为不会有谋反的事。
English: When the case came to a critical juncture, Bo Zhao pleaded with the Empress Dowager Bo for Zhou Bo. The Empress Dowager also believed that there would be no rebellion.

古文：文帝朝，太后以冒絮提文帝，曰： 绛侯绾皇帝玺，将兵於北军，不以此时反，今居一小县，顾欲反邪！ 
现代文：文帝朝见太后，太后顺手抓起头巾向文帝扔去，说： 原来降侯身上带着皇帝的印玺，在北军领兵，他不在那时反叛，如今他住在一个小小的县里，反倒要叛乱吗？ 
English: When Emperor Wen met the Empress Dowager in the morning, the Empress Dowager grabbed the headscarf and threw it at Emperor Wen, saying, "Originally, the crown prince carried the emperor's seal on his body and led soldiers in the Northern Army. He did not rebel at that time, but now he lives in a small county. Does he want to rebel?

古文：文帝既见绛侯狱辞，乃谢曰： 吏方验而出之。 
现代文：文帝已经看到绛侯的供词，便向太后谢罪说： 狱吏刚好查证清楚，要放他出去了。 
English: Emperor Wen had already seen Yan Hou's confession, so he said to Empress Dowager Xie, "The prison officials just checked the evidence clearly, and they are going to let him out."

古文：於是使使持节赦绛侯，复爵邑。
现代文：于是派使者带着符节赦免绛侯，恢复他的爵位和食邑。
English: So he sent an envoy with tokens to pardon the vassal lord and restore his title and fiefdom.

古文：绛侯既出，曰： 吾尝将百万军，然安知狱吏之贵乎！ 
现代文：绛侯出狱以后说： 我普经率领百万大军，可是怎么知道狱吏的尊贵呀！ 
English: After being released from prison, Yan Hou said, "I have led a million-man army according to the Bible, but how do I know the dignity of a prison warden!

古文：绛侯复就国。
现代文：绛侯重新回到封地。
English: The feudal lord returned to his fief.

古文：孝文帝十一年卒，谥为武侯。
现代文：在文帝十一年去世，谥号是武侯。
English: He died in the eleventh year of Emperor Wen, and his posthumous name was Wu Hou.

古文：子胜之代侯。
现代文：他的儿子胜之继承爵位。
English: His son Katsuyuki succeeded to the title.

古文：六岁，尚公主，不相中，坐杀人，国除。
现代文：过了六年，他所娶的公主与他感情不和，又因他犯了杀人罪，封地被废除。
English: Six years later, the princess he married did not get along with him, and the fiefdom was abolished because he had committed murder.

古文：绝一岁，文帝乃择绛侯勃子贤者河内守亚夫，封为条侯，续绛侯後。
现代文：爵位中断了一年，文帝才从绛侯周勃的儿子中挑选出贤能的河内郡守周亚夫，封他为条侯，接续绛侯的爵位。
English: The title of nobility was suspended for a year, and it was only then that Emperor Wen selected the capable governor of Hanoi County, Zhou Yafu, from among the sons of Zhou Bo, the second-in-command, and made him the second-in-command, succeeding Zhou Bo.

古文：条侯亚夫自未侯为河内守时，许负相之，曰： 君後三岁而侯。侯八岁为将相，持国秉，贵重矣，於人臣无两。
现代文：条侯周亚夫在没有封侯还做河内郡守的时候，许负为他看相，说： 您三年以后被封侯，封侯八年以后任将军和丞相，掌握国家大权，位尊而权重，在大臣中没有第二个能和你比。
English: When the feudal lord Zhou Yaf was still the county governor of Hanoi without being a feudal lord, Xu Guanzhong was his prime minister and said: You were a feudal lord three years later, and after eight years as a feudal lord, you were a general and a prime minister, wielded great power in the country, and held a position of dignity and importance. Among the ministers, there is no second who can compare to you.

古文：其後九岁而君饿死。 
现代文：此后再过九年，您将会饿死。 
English: Nine years after that, you will starve to death.

古文：亚夫笑曰： 臣之兄已代父侯矣，有如卒，子当代，亚夫何说侯乎？
现代文：周亚夫笑着说： 我的哥哥已经继承父亲的侯爵了，如果他死了，他的儿子应当接替，我周亚夫怎么谈得上封侯呢？
English: Zhou Yafu said with a smile: My brother has already inherited his father's marquisate. If he dies, his son should succeed him. How can I, Zhou Yafu, talk about becoming a marquis?

古文：然既已贵如负言，又何说饿死？
现代文：既然我已像你说的那样富贵，又怎么说会饿死呢？
English: Since I am as rich as you say, how can I starve to death?

古文：指示我。 
现代文：还请您指教。 
English: I would also like to ask for your advice.

古文：许负指其口曰： 有从理入口，此饿死法也。 
现代文：许负指着周亚夫的嘴说： 您脸上有纵纹入口，这是饿死的面相。 
English: Xu Zeng pointed to Zhou Yafu's mouth and said, "Your face has vertical lines at the entrance. This is the face of a starving person.

古文：居三岁，其兄绛侯胜之有罪，孝文帝择绛侯子贤者，皆推亚夫，乃封亚夫为条侯，续绛侯後。
现代文：过了三年，他的哥哥绛侯周胜之有罪，文帝从周勃的儿子中挑选贤能的人，大家都推举亚夫，于是封亚夫为条侯，接续绛侯的爵位。
English: Three years later, his elder brother, the marquis Zhou Sheng, was found guilty, and Emperor Wen selected a capable person from the sons of Zhou Bo. They all chose Yafu, and Yafu was made the marquis to succeed the marquis.

古文：文帝之後六年，匈奴大入边。
现代文：文帝后元六年，匈奴大举入侵边境。
English: Six years after Emperor Wen's reign, the Huns invaded the border en masse.

古文：乃以宗正刘礼为将军，军霸上；祝兹侯徐厉为将军，军棘门；以河内守亚夫为将军，军细柳：以备胡。
现代文：文帝便任命宗正刘礼为将军，驻军霸上；任命祝兹侯厉为将军，驻军棘门；任命河内郡守周亚夫为将军，驻军细柳：以便防备匈奴。
English: Emperor Wen then appointed Zong Zheng Liu Li as general and garrisoned He Shang; appointed Zhu Zi Hou Li as general and garrisoned Zhanshanmen; appointed Hanoi County Governor Zhou Yafu as general and garrisoned Xiliu: in order to guard against the Huns.

古文：上自劳军。
现代文：皇帝亲自去尉劳军队。
English: The emperor himself led the troops in forced labor.

古文：至霸上及棘门军，直驰入，将以下骑送迎。
现代文：到了霸上和棘门的军营，一直奔驰进入，从将军到下属官兵都骑马迎送。
English: When they arrived at the military camp at the top of the hill and the thorny gate, they were driven in by Mercedes, and were greeted on horseback by everyone from the general to the subordinate officers and soldiers.

古文：已而之细柳军，军士吏被甲，锐兵刃，彀弓弩，持满。
现代文：之后到达细柳军营，军中官兵都披持铠甲，兵刃锐利，弓弩张开，弓弦拉满。
English: After arriving at the Xiliu Military Camp, the officers and soldiers in the army are wearing armor, the blades are sharp, the crossbows are open, and the bowstrings are full.

古文：天子先驱至，不得入。
现代文：天子的前导来到军营，不能进入。
English: The forerunner of the Son of God came to the military camp, but could not enter.

古文：先驱曰： 天子且至！ 
现代文：前导说： 天子就要到了！ 
English: The usher said, "The Son of God is coming!"

古文：军门都尉曰： 将军令曰 军中闻将军令，不闻天子之诏 。 
现代文：军门都尉说： 我们将军命令说 在军中只能听将军的命令，不听天子的诏令 。 
English: The captain of the military gate said, "Our military orders say that in the army, we can only listen to the general's orders, not the emperor's edict.

古文：居无何，上至，又不得入。
现代文：过了不久，皇帝到了，又不能进入。
English: Soon after, the emperor arrived, but he was not allowed to enter.

古文：於是上乃使使持节诏将军： 吾欲入劳军。 
现代文：于是皇帝便派使者手持符节给将军下诏令： 我要进去慰劳军队。 
English: So the emperor sent an emissary to the general with a rune in his hand and issued a decree: I will go in to comfort the troops.

古文：亚夫乃传言开壁门。
现代文：亚夫这才传话打开军营大门。
English: It was only then that Yaf sent word to open the camp gate.

古文：壁门士吏谓从属车骑曰： 将军约，军中不得驱驰。 
现代文：营门的守卫士官对皇帝的车马随从说： 将军有规定，军营里不准驱马奔驰。 
English: The officer guarding the camp gate said to the emperor's entourage of chariots and horses: The general has a rule that no horse-drawn carriages are allowed in the camp.

古文：於是天子乃按辔徐行。
现代文：于是天子就拉紧缰绳慢慢行进。
English: As a result, the heavenly son tightened the reins and slowly marched.

古文：至营，将军亚夫持兵揖曰： 介胄之士不拜，请以军礼见。 
现代文：到了营中，将军周亚夫手拿武器拱手行礼说： 穿戴盔甲的将士不能跪拜，请允许我以军礼参见皇上。 
English: When he arrived at the camp, General Zhou Yafu saluted with his weapons in his hands and said: Armored soldiers cannot kneel, please allow me to see the emperor with military salute.

古文：天子为动，改容式车。
现代文：天子被他感动了，马上变得面容庄重，靠在车着横木上向官兵致意。
English: Touched by him, Tianzi immediately became solemn, leaning on the crossbar to greet the officers and soldiers.

古文：使人称谢： 皇帝敬劳将军。 
现代文：派人向周亚夫致谢说： 皇帝特来慰劳将军。 
English: He sent someone to thank Zhou Yafu, saying, "The emperor has come especially to comfort the general.

古文：成礼而去。
现代文：完成劳军的礼仪后离去。
English: He left after completing the labor army's etiquette.

古文：既出军门，群臣皆惊。
现代文：一出营门，群臣都露出惊怪之色。
English: As soon as they left the camp gate, the courtiers were shocked.

古文：文帝曰： 嗟乎，此真将军矣！
现代文：文帝说： 啊，这才是真正的将军呀！
English: Wendi said: Ah, this is a real general!

古文：曩者霸上、棘门军，若兒戏耳，其将固可袭而虏也。
现代文：从前在霸上和棘门军营看到的，简直像是儿戏，他们的将军本来就可能受袭击被俘虏。
English: It was child's play to see in the past at the military camps in Hakujo and Kurachimo that their generals could have been attacked and captured.

古文：至於亚夫，可得而犯邪！ 
现代文：至于亚夫，怎么可能去侵犯他呢！ 
English: As for Yafu, how could he be violated!

古文：称善者久之。
现代文：称赞他很久。
English: Praise him for a long time.

古文：月馀，三军皆罢。
现代文：过了一个多月，三支军队都撤除了。
English: After more than a month, all three armies were withdrawn.

古文：乃拜亚夫为中尉。
现代文：文帝便授予周亚夫中尉的官职。
English: Emperor Wen then gave Zhou Yafu the official position of lieutenant.

古文：孝文且崩时，诫太子曰： 即有缓急，周亚夫真可任将兵。 
现代文：文帝将要去世的时候，告诫太子说： 如果发生危急情况，周亚夫是真正担当领兵重任的。 
English: When Emperor Wen was about to die, he admonished the prince, saying: If a critical situation occurs, Zhou Yafu is truly responsible for leading the troops.

古文：文帝崩，拜亚夫为车骑将军。
现代文：文帝去世以后，景帝便任命周亚夫为车骑将军。
English: After the death of Emperor Wen, Emperor Jing appointed Zhou Yafu as the general of chariots and cavalry.

古文：孝景三年，吴楚反。
现代文：景帝三年，吴、楚等地叛乱。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing, there was a rebellion in Wu, Chu and other places.

古文：亚夫以中尉为太尉，东击吴楚。
现代文：周亚夫由中尉升任太尉，领兵进攻打吴、楚叛军。
English: Zhou Yafu was promoted from lieutenant to captain and led the attack against the Wu and Chu rebels.

古文：因自请上曰： 楚兵剽轻，难与争锋。
现代文：于是周亚夫亲自请示皇帝说： 楚兵勇猛轻捷，我们与他们交战很难取胜。
English: So Zhou Yafu personally asked the emperor to say: "The Chu soldiers are brave, fierce and nimble, and it is difficult for us to win a battle with them.

古文：原以梁委之，绝其粮道，乃可制。 
现代文：我希望先把梁国放弃，让他们进攻，我们去断绝他们的粮道，这样才能把他们制服。 
English: I hope to give up Liangguo first, let them attack, we will cut off their food supply, so that we can subdue them.

古文：上许之。
现代文：景帝同意这个意见。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：太尉既会兵荥阳，吴方攻梁，梁急，请救。
现代文：太尉周亚夫把各路军队会合到荥阳之后，吴国叛军正在进攻梁国，梁国形势危急，请求援救。
English: After Captain Zhou Yaf gathered the various armies to Fenyang, the rebel army of Wu was attacking Liang Province. Liang Province was in a critical situation and requested rescue.

古文：太尉引兵东北走昌邑，深壁而守。
现代文：而太尉却领兵向东北跑到昌邑，深沟高垒守不出。
English: However, the captain led the soldiers to the northeast and ran to Chang'e. He could not defend the high base in the deep ditch.

古文：梁日使使请太尉，太尉守便宜，不肯往。
现代文：梁国天天派使者向太尉求救，太尉认为坚守有利，不肯去救。
English: Liang Guo sent envoys to the captain every day to ask for help, but the captain thought it would be better to stand firm and refused to help.

古文：梁上书言景帝，景帝使使诏救梁。
现代文：梁国上书报告景帝，景帝随即派使者诏令太尉救梁。
English: Liang Guo submitted a report to Emperor Jing, and Emperor Jing immediately sent an envoy to order the captain to rescue Liang.

古文：太尉不奉诏，坚壁不出，而使轻骑兵弓高侯等绝吴楚兵後食道。
现代文：太尉不遵从皇帝的诏令，坚守营垒仍不出兵，而是派遣轻骑兵由弓高侯等人率领去断绝吴、楚叛军后方的粮道。
English: The captain did not comply with the emperor's edict and did not go to war, but sent light cavalry led by Kyoko and others to cut off the food supply to the rear of the Wu and Chu rebels.

古文：吴兵乏粮，饥，数欲挑战，终不出。
现代文：吴国军队缺乏粮食，士兵饥饿，屡次挑战，可是汉军始终也不出来。
English: The Wu army was short of food, the soldiers were starving, and they repeatedly challenged the Han army, but the Han army never came out.

古文：夜，军中惊，内相攻击扰乱，至於太尉帐下。
现代文：夜里，汉军营中受惊，军内互相攻击扰乱，甚至闹到了太尉的营帐之下。
English: In the middle of the night, the Chinese camp was in a state of panic, and the soldiers attacked and disturbed each other, even making a scene under the captain's tent.

古文：太尉终卧不起。
现代文：太尉却始终静卧不起。
English: The captain, however, remained motionless.

古文：顷之，复定。
现代文：时间不久，就恢复了安定。
English: Stability was soon restored.

古文：後吴奔壁东南陬，太尉使备西北。
现代文：后来吴军朝汉军军营东南角奔来，太尉让人们注意防备西北。
English: Later, the Wu army rushed to the southeast corner of the Han army camp, and the captain drew people's attention to the northwest.

古文：已而其精兵果奔西北，不得入。
现代文：接着吴国精兵果然奔到了西北，但不能攻入。
English: Next, the elite soldiers of Wu really ran to the northwest, but could not break in.

古文：吴兵既饿，乃引而去。
现代文：吴兵已经饿了，于是就撤退离去。
English: Wu Bing was already hungry, so he retreated.

古文：太尉出精兵追击，大破之。
现代文：太尉派精兵去追击，大败吴军。
English: The captain sent elite soldiers to pursue and defeated the Wu army.

古文：吴王濞弃其军，而与壮士数千人亡走，保於江南丹徒。
现代文：吴王濞抛弃了他的大军，与几千名精壮士卒逃跑，逃到江南丹徒自保。
English: Wu Wangtao abandoned his large army, fled with several thousand elite soldiers, and fled to the south of the Yangtze River, Dantou, to protect himself.

古文：汉兵因乘胜，遂尽虏之，降其兵，购吴王千金。
现代文：汉兵于是乘胜追击，完全俘虏了叛军，并使他们投降，又悬赏千金买吴王之头。
English: The Han soldiers then took advantage of the victory to pursue, completely captured the rebels, forced them to surrender, and offered a reward of thousands of dollars for the head of King Wu.

古文：月馀，越人斩吴王头以告。
现代文：过了一个多月，就有越人斩了吴王的头来报告。
English: After more than a month, the Yue people cut off the head of Wu Wang to report.

古文：凡相攻守三月，而吴楚破平。
现代文：双方攻守一共只有三个月，吴、楚叛乱就被打败平定了。
English: It only took three months for both sides to attack and defend, and the Wu and Chu rebellions were defeated and quelled.

古文：於是诸将乃以太尉计谋为是。
现代文：于是将领们才认识到太尉的计谋是正确的。
English: Only then did the generals realize that the captain's plan was correct.

古文：由此梁孝王与太尉有卻。
现代文：可是由于这次平叛。梁孝王却和太尉有了仇怨。
English: However, as a result of this counter-rebellion, Liang Xiaowang developed a grudge against the lieutenant.

古文：归，复置太尉官。五岁，迁为丞相，景帝甚重之。
现代文：周亚夫回朝后，朝廷重新设置了太尉官，周亚夫升任丞相，景帝非常器重他。
English: After Zhou Yafu returned to the imperial court, the court re-established the rank of lieutenant, and Zhou Yafu was promoted to the position of chancellor. Emperor Jing attached great importance to him.

古文：景帝废栗太子，丞相固争之，不得。
现代文：后来，景帝废了栗太子，丞相周亚夫极力争辩，也未能劝阻。
English: Later, Emperor Jing abolished Prince Li, and Premier Zhou Yafu tried his best to argue, but failed to dissuade.

古文：景帝由此疏之。
现代文：景帝从此疏远了他。
English: Emperor Jing thereafter distanced himself from him.

古文：而梁孝王每朝，常与太后言条侯之短。
现代文：而梁孝王每次进京朝见，常常跟太后讲条侯周亚夫的短处。
English: And every time Liang Xiaowang went to Beijing for a morning meeting, he often talked to the empress dowager about the shortcomings of Zhou Yafu.

古文：窦太后曰： 皇后兄王信可侯也。 
现代文：有一天，窦太后说： 皇后的哥哥王信可以封侯了。 
English: One day, Empress Dowager Dou said, "The queen's brother, Wang Xin, can be made a prince."

古文：景帝让曰： 始南皮、章武侯先帝不侯，及臣即位乃侯之。
现代文：景帝推辞说： 起初南皮侯、章武侯先帝都没封他们为侯，等到我即位之后才封他们。
English: Emperor Jing said: At first, Emperor Nanpi and Emperor Zhangwu did not appoint them as princes, but they were appointed after I ascended the throne.

古文：信未得封也。 
现代文：封王信为侯还不是时候。 
English: It is not yet time for Wang Xin to be enthroned.

古文：窦太后曰： 人主各以时行耳。
现代文：窦太后说： 君主们都是各自按照当时的情况行事。
English: Empress Dowager Dou said: Monarchs all act according to the situation at the time.

古文：自窦长君在时，竟不得侯，死後乃其子彭祖顾得侯。吾甚恨之。帝趣侯信也！ 
现代文：我哥哥窦长君在世的时候，竟不能被封侯，死后他的儿子彭祖反倒封侯了，这件事我非常悔恨，皇上赶快封王信为侯吧！ 
English: When my brother Dou Changjun was alive, he actually couldn't be made a prince, but after his death, his son Peng Zu was made a prince. I regret this very much. Emperor, hurry up and make Wang Xin a prince!

古文：景帝曰： 请得与丞相议之。 
现代文：景帝说： 这件事需要和丞相商议一下。 
English: Jingdi said: This matter needs to be discussed with the prime minister.

古文：丞相议之，亚夫曰： 高皇帝约 非刘氏不得王，非有功不得侯。不如约，天下共击之 。
现代文：景帝就与丞相商议，周亚夫说： 当初高皇帝规定 不是刘氏家族的人不能封王，不是立功的人不能封侯，谁不遵守这个规定，天下人可以共同攻击他 。
English: Emperor Jing consulted with the prime minister, and Zhou Yafu said: At the beginning, Emperor Gao stipulated that people who were not from the Liu family could not be crowned king, and people who were not meritorious could not be crowned prince. If anyone did not comply with this regulation, the whole world could jointly attack him.

古文：今信虽皇后兄，无功，侯之，非约也。 
现代文：如今王信虽然是皇后的哥哥，但他没有功勋，封他为侯是违背高祖皇帝规约的。 
English: Today, although Wang Xin is the older brother of the empress, he has no merit, and it is against the regulations of Emperor Gaozhu to make him a marquis.

古文：景帝默然而止。
现代文：景帝听了默默无言，只好作罢。
English: Emperor Jing listened in silence and had no choice but to give up.

古文：其後匈奴王徐卢等五人降，景帝欲侯之以劝後。
现代文：后来匈奴王唯徐卢等五人投降汉朝。景帝想要封他们为侯以鼓励后来的人。
English: Later, Hun King Wei Xu Lu and five others surrendered to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Jing wanted to crown them as princes to encourage those who came later.

古文：丞相亚夫曰： 彼背其主降陛下，陛下侯之，则何以责人臣不守节者乎？ 
现代文：丞相周亚夫说： 他们几个人背叛他们的君主投降陛下，陛下如果封他们为侯，那还怎么去责备不守节操的臣子呢？ 
English: The chancellor Zhou Yafu said, "Several of them betrayed their sovereign and surrendered to His Majesty. If His Majesty appoints them as governors, then how can He reproach the unprincipled courtiers?

古文：景帝曰： 丞相议不可用。 
现代文：景帝说： 丞相的意见的不能采用。 
English: Emperor Jing said: The prime minister's opinion cannot be adopted.

古文：乃悉封徐卢等为列侯。
现代文：于是把唯徐卢等人全都封为列侯。
English: As a result, Wei Xu Lu and others were all made vassals.

古文：亚夫因谢病。
现代文：周亚夫因而称病退居在家中。
English: As a result, Zhou Yafu said he was ill and retired to his home.

古文：景帝中三年，以病免相。
现代文：景帝中元三年，周亚夫因病被免去丞相职务。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Zhou Yafu was removed from the post of chancellor due to illness.

古文：顷之，景帝居禁中，召条侯，赐食。
现代文：不久，景帝在皇宫中召见条侯，赏赐酒食。
English: Not long after, Emperor Jing summoned the groom to the imperial palace and rewarded him with food and drink.

古文：独置大胾，无切肉，又不置櫡。
现代文：席上只放了一大块肉，没有切碎的肉，不也放筷子。
English: There was only a large piece of meat on the table, no chopped meat, and no chopsticks.

古文：条侯心不平，顾谓尚席取櫡。
现代文：条侯心中不满，扭头就叫管宴席的官拿筷子来。
English: Unhappy in his heart, the lord of the feast asked the official in charge of the banquet to bring the chopsticks.

古文：景帝视而笑曰： 此不足君所乎？ 
现代文：景帝看到后笑着说： 这些不能满足您的需要吗？ 
English: After seeing this, Jingdi smiled and said: Can't these meet your needs?

古文：条侯免冠谢。
现代文：条侯脱下帽子谢罪。
English: The magistrate took off his hat and apologized.

古文：上起，条侯因趋出。
现代文：皇帝起身，条侯趁机快步退了出去。
English: The emperor stood up, and the eunuch took the opportunity to walk quickly away.

古文：景帝以目送之，曰： 此怏怏者非少主臣也！ 
现代文：景帝目送他出去后。说： 像这种遇到事情就表现出不满的人不能做少主的臣下啊！ 
English: After sending him out, Emperor Jing said, "A person who shows dissatisfaction when encountering a situation like this cannot be a subject of a minor lord!"

古文：居无何，条侯子为父买工官尚方甲楯五百被可以葬者。
现代文：过了不久，条侯的儿子从专做后家用品的工官那里给父亲买了五百件殉葬用的盔甲盾牌。
English: Not long after, the lord's son bought his father five hundred armor shields for funerals from a craftsman specializing in household goods.

古文：取庸苦之，不予钱。
现代文：搬运的雇工很受累，可是不给钱。
English: The porters are exhausted, but they are not being paid.

古文：庸知其盗买县官器，怒而上变告子，事连汙条侯。
现代文：雇工们知道他偷买天子用的器物，一怒就上告周亚夫的儿子要反叛，事情自然牵连到条侯。
English: The employees knew that he was stealing the goods used by the son of heaven, and angrily appealed to Zhou Yafu's son to rebel. The matter naturally involved the mayor.

古文：书既闻上，上下吏。
现代文：雇工的上书呈报给景帝，景帝交给官吏查办。
English: The employee's written complaint was reported to Emperor Jing, and Emperor Jing handed it over to officials for investigation.

古文：吏簿责条侯，条侯不对。
现代文：官吏按文书上内容一一责问条侯，条侯拒不回答。
English: According to the contents of the document, the official asked the postmaster one by one, but the postmaster refused to answer.

古文：景帝骂之曰： 吾不用也。 
现代文：景帝责骂他说： 我不任用你了。 
English: Jingdi scolded him and said, "I won't appoint you."

古文：召诣廷尉。
现代文：并下令把周亚夫交到廷尉那里去。
English: He also ordered that Zhou Yafu be handed over to the court lieutenant.

古文：廷尉责曰： 君侯欲反邪？ 
现代文：廷尉责问说： 您是想造反吗？ 
English: The courtier demanded: "Do you want to rebel?

古文：亚夫曰： 臣所买器，乃葬器也，何谓反邪？ 
现代文：周亚夫说： 我所买的器物都是殉葬用的，怎么说是要造反呢？ 
English: Zhou Yafu said, "All the objects I bought are for funerals. How can I say that I want to rebel?"

古文：吏曰： 君侯纵不反地上，即欲反地下耳。 
现代文：狱吏说： 您纵使不在地上造反，也要到地下去造反吧！ 
English: The warden said, "Even if you don't rebel on the ground, go underground and rebel!"

古文：吏侵之益急。
现代文：狱吏逼迫越来越加紧。
English: The guards' pressure became more and more intense.

古文：初，吏捕条侯，条侯欲自杀，夫人止之，以故不得死，遂入廷尉。
现代文：起初，狱吏逮捕条侯的时候，条侯想自杀，夫人制止了他。因此没能死，接着就进了廷尉的监狱。
English: At first, when the warden arrested him, he tried to commit suicide, but his wife stopped him, so he did not die, and then he went to the lieutenant's prison.

古文：因不食五日，呕血而死。
现代文：周亚夫于是五天不吃饭，吐血而死。
English: Zhou Yafu then did not eat for five days, vomited blood and died.

古文：国除。
现代文：他的封地被撤除。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：绝一岁，景帝乃更封绛侯勃他子坚为平曲侯，续绛侯後。
现代文：周亚夫的爵位中断了一年，景帝便改封绛侯周勃的另一个儿子周坚为平曲侯，接续绛侯的爵位。
English: Zhou Yafu's title of nobility was interrupted for one year, and Emperor Jing then changed the title of Zhou Bo's other son Zhou Jian to Heijie Hou, succeeding Zhou Bo's title of nobility.

古文：十九年卒，谥为共侯。
现代文：周坚在位十九年后去世，谥号是共侯。
English: Zhou Jian died after 19 years on the throne, and his posthumous name was Gonghou.

古文：子建德代侯，十三年，为太子太傅。
现代文：他的儿子建德继承侯爵。十三年后，周建德任太子太傅。
English: His son Jian De succeeded him as marquis. Thirteen years later, Zhou Jian De was appointed crown prince.

古文：坐酎金不善，元鼎五年，有罪，国除。
现代文：由于所献的助祭黄金品质不佳，元鼎五年，被判有罪，封地被废除。
English: Due to the poor quality of the gold offered by the deacon, he was sentenced to five years in prison, and his fief was abolished.

古文：条侯果饿死。
现代文：条侯周亚夫果然是饿死的。
English: The feudal lord Zhou Yafu died of starvation.

古文：死後，景帝乃封王信为盖侯。
现代文：他死后，景帝便封王信为盖侯。
English: After his death, Emperor Jing made Wang Xin a vassal lord.

古文：太史公曰：绛侯周勃始为布衣时，鄙朴人也，才能不过凡庸。
现代文：太史公说：绛侯周勃原来做平民的时候，是个粗陋朴实的人，才能不过平庸之辈。
English: Taishigong said, "When Gonghou Zhou Bo was a commoner, he was a coarse and simple person, and his talent was mediocre.

古文：及从高祖定天下，在将相位，诸吕欲作乱，勃匡国家难，复之乎正。
现代文：等到随从高祖平定天下，就身居将相之位，吕氏家族想谋反作乱，周勃挽救国家危难，使朝廷恢复正常。
English: After Gaozhu conquered the world, he became the commander-in-chief. The Lu family wanted to rebel and create turmoil. Zhou Bo saved the country from danger and restored the imperial court to normal.

古文：虽伊尹、周公，何以加哉！
现代文：即使伊尹、周公这样的贤人，又怎能超过他呢！
English: Even if they are wise men like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, how can they surpass him?

古文：亚夫之用兵，持威重，执坚刃，穰苴曷有加焉！
现代文：周亚夫用兵，一直保持威严庄重，坚韧不拔，即使司马穰苴这样的名将，又哪里能超过他呢？
English: Zhou Yafu has always been dignified, dignified and tenacious in his use of soldiers. Even if Sima Qian is such a famous general, where can he be surpassed?

古文：足己而不学，守节不逊，终以穷困。悲夫！
现代文：可惜他自满自足而不虚心学习，能谨守节操但不知恭顺，最后以穷途因窘而告终，真令人悲伤啊！
English: It is a pity that he was complacent and self-sufficient, but he did not study with a humble heart. He was able to keep the discipline, but he did not know how to be obedient. In the end, he ended up in a dead end because of embarrassment. What a sad thing!

