古文：高祖皇后李氏，晋阳人也。
现代文：高祖皇后李氏，晋阳人。
English: Gaozu Empress Li, a native of Jinyang.

古文：高祖微时，尝牧马于晋阳别墅，因夜入其家，劫而取之。
现代文：高祖卑微时，曾在晋阳的别墅放马，乘机在夜间闯入她家，将她抢来与她成亲。
English: When Gao Zu was humble, he used to ride a horse in a villa in Jinyang, and took the opportunity to break into her house at night to snatch her and marry her.

古文：及高祖领籓镇，累封魏国夫人。
现代文：到高祖掌管藩镇时，封她为魏国夫人。
English: When Gao Zu was in charge of the town, he made her the Empress of Wei.

古文：高祖建义于太原，欲行颁赉于军士，以公帑不足，议率井邑，助成其事。
现代文：高祖在太原立国，想对军士颁行赏赐，因国家资财不足，准备向民间征敛，以促成此事。
English: Gao Zu, who founded the country in Taiyuan, wanted to award the reward to the sergeant. Due to the lack of national resources, he was ready to collect from the people to facilitate this matter.

古文：后闻而谏曰： 自晋高祖建义，及国家兴运，虽出于天意，亦土地人民福力同致耳，未能惠其众而欲夺其财，非新天子恤隐之理也。
现代文：皇后听到后劝谏说： 自高祖立国之初，到国运兴盛，虽是天意所定，也是托土地人民的福庇协同的结果，不能对人民施恩还想剥夺他们的财产，不合新的天子应抚恤同情的道理。
English: After hearing this, the empress advised him, "Since the founding of the country by Gao Zu, the prosperity of the country has been determined by the will of heaven, and it is also the result of the cooperation of the land and the people. It is not possible to be kind to the people and still want to deprive them of their property, which is not in line with the new principle that the Son of Heaven should have mercy and compassion.

古文：今后宫所积，宜悉以散之，设使不厚，人无怨言。 
现代文：现在后宫的积蓄，当全部用来花费，即使不丰厚，也可使人无怨言。 
English: Now the savings of the harem, when all used to spend, even if not rich, can make people have no complaints.

古文：高祖改容曰： 敬闻命矣。 
现代文：高祖正色说 ：谨听吩咐。 
English: Gaozhu Zhengyi said, "I will do as I am told."

古文：遂停敛贷之议。后倾内府以助之，中外闻者，无不感悦。
现代文：于是停止征敛的计划，皇后竭尽内府资财帮助高祖，朝廷内外听说后没有不感动高兴的。
English: As a result, the collection plan was stopped, and the empress made every effort to help Gaozu with the resources of the government. After hearing this, there was nothing but emotion and joy inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：天福十二年，册为皇后。
现代文：天福十二年册封为皇后。
English: She was enthroned as empress in the twelfth year of Tianfu.

古文：隐帝即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：隐帝即位，尊为皇太后。
English: Emperor Hakuin ascends the throne, revered as empress dowager.

古文：及周太祖为六军推戴，上章具述其事，且言愿事后为慈母。
现代文：郭威入据京城，凡军国大事，都请太后颁发诰令以便执行。这年，议立徐州节度使刘斌贝为帝，因迎奉还未到，郭威乃率领群臣拜见太后呈上奏章，请太后暂时临朝听政，太后于是发布诰令。
English: When Guo Wei entered Beijing, he asked the empress dowager to issue a royal decree for the implementation of all military and national events. In this year, the Xuzhou Festival was held to make Liu Binbei the emperor. Since the welcoming ceremony had not yet arrived, Guo Wei led a group of ministers to visit the empress dowager to present a report, and asked the empress dowager to temporarily attend the court to listen to politics. The empress dowager then issued a royal decree.

古文：后下诰答曰： 侍中功烈崇高，德声昭著，翦除祸乱，安定乾坤，讴歌有归，历数攸属，所以军民推戴，亿兆同欢。
现代文：到郭威被六军推戴为君王，呈上奏章细述这件事，并说愿像待慈母一样侍奉太后。太后下诰令说： 郭侍中功烈崇高，德声昭著，翦除祸乱，安定乾坤，天命所归，所以军民拥戴，普天同庆。
English: Guo Wei was promoted to king by the Six Armies, and presented a report detailing the matter, and said that he was willing to serve the empress dowager like a mother. The empress dowager issued an order saying: Guo Zhizhong is a noble hero, renowned for his virtue, eliminates disasters, stabilizes things, and is destined by fate, so the military and the people support him and celebrate together.

古文：老身未终残年，属兹多难，惟以衰朽，托于始终。
现代文：老身未终残年，逢此多难之世，只想善终天年。
English: In this difficult world, I just want to be good for the rest of my life.

古文：载省来笺，如母见待，感念深意，涕泗横流 云。
现代文：阅侍中来奏，把我当作母亲对待，对于他的好意，不胜感激。 
English: He treated me like a mother, and I couldn't be more grateful for his kindness.

古文：仍出戎衣、玉带以赐周太祖。
现代文：又将戎衣、玉带赐给郭威。
English: He also gave Guo Wei a military uniform and a jade belt.

古文：周太祖即位，上尊号曰德圣皇太后，居于太平宫。
现代文：郭威即帝位后，上尊号为德圣皇太后，住在太平宫。
English: After Guo Wei ascended the throne, she was given the title of German Holy Empress Dowager and lived in the Taiping Palace.

古文：周显德元年春薨。
现代文：后周显德元年春去世。
English: Later, Zhou Xiande died in the spring of the first year.

