古文：李维桢，字本宁，京山人。
现代文：李维桢，字本宁，京山人。
English: Li Weizhen, surnamed Benning, from Jingshan.

古文：父裕，福建布政使。
现代文：父李裕曾任福建布政使。
English: His father, Li Yu, was once a political envoy to Fujian Province.

古文：维桢举隆庆二年进士，由庶吉士授编修。
现代文：维桢于隆庆二年进士及第，由庶吉士授编修。
English: Wei Xuan was promoted to the second and third rank in the second year of Longqing, and was taught editing by the second Kishi.

古文：万历时，《穆宗实录》成，进修撰。
现代文：万历时，参与修纂《穆宗实录》，书成后进为修撰。
English: For a long time, he participated in the compilation of the "Muzong Record," and after the book was written, it was revised.

古文：出为陕西右参议，迁提学副使。
现代文：出任陕西右参议，升提学副使。
English: He served as the Right Counselor of Shaanxi Province and the Vice Minister of Education.

古文：浮沉外僚，几三十年。
现代文：维桢在京外做官三十年。
English: Wei Wei has been an official outside of Beijing for 30 years.

古文：天启初，以布政使家居，年七十余矣。
现代文：天启初年，以布政使之职居家赋闲，这时已年过七十。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, he was already over seventy years old when he was appointed by the government to stay at home and be idle.

古文：会朝议登用耆旧，召为南京太仆卿，旋改太常，未赴。闻谏官有言，辞不就。
现代文：朝廷决议起用年老旧臣，因召维桢为南京太仆寺卿，随即改为太常寺卿，维桢闻知谏官对他有些议论，故辞谢不去就职。
English: The imperial court decided to use an old and veteran minister, calling Wei Wei as the Nanjing Taipu Jiaqing, and then changed him to the Taizhong Jiaqing. Wei Wei heard that the eunuch had some arguments with him, so he declined to take up the post.

古文：时方修《神宗实录》，给事中薛大中特疏荐之，未及用。
现代文：此时正要修《神宗实录》，给事中薛大中特上疏举荐他，但未任用。
English: At this time, he was about to edit "The True Record of the Shenzong," and he was recommended by Xue Daizhong in the middle of the matter, but was not appointed.

古文：四年四月，太常卿董其昌复荐之，乃召为礼部右侍郎，甫三月进尚书，并在南京。
现代文：天启四年四月，太常寺卿董其昌又举荐他，这才召为南京礼部右侍郎，刚三个月又晋升为南京礼部尚书。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Apocalypse, Dong Qichang, the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, recommended him again. Only then was he called to be the right attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and just three months later he was promoted to the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：维桢缘史事起用，乃馆中诸臣惮其以前辈压己，不令入馆，但超迁其官。
现代文：维桢原是起用参与修《实录》的，史馆中的人怕他摆老资格压制他们，故再升官职。
English: Wei Wei was originally appointed to participate in the revision of the "Real Record," and the people in the history museum were afraid that he would suppress them with his old qualifications, so he was promoted again.

古文：维桢亦以年衰，明年正月力乞骸骨去。
现代文：维桢考虑自己年衰，于五年正月极力奏请辞官归家。
English: Considering his own decrepitude, Wei Xuan tried his best to resign from his post and return home in the first month of the fifth year.

古文：又明年卒于家，年八十。
现代文：六年，在家中去世，终年八十岁。
English: He died at home six years later, at the age of 80.

古文：崇祯时，赠太子太保。
现代文：崇祯时，赠太子太保。
English: At the time of his enthronement, the crown prince was given the title of Taibo.

古文：维桢弱冠登朝，博闻强记，与同馆许国齐名。
现代文：维桢二十岁起就做官，博闻强记，与同馆的许国齐名。
English: Wei Wei has been an official since he was 20 years old. He is well-versed in history, and is on a par with Xu Guo of the same museum.

古文：馆中为之语曰： 记不得，问老许；做不得，问小李。 
现代文：馆中人流传说 ：记不得，问老许；做不得，问小李。 
English: A popular legend in the museum: If you can't remember, ask Lao Xu; if you can't do it, ask Xiao Li.

古文：维桢为人，乐易阔达，宾客杂进。
现代文：维桢为人，乐观豁达，交结各样人物。
English: Wei Wei is a human being, optimistic and open-minded, and mixes with all kinds of people.

古文：其文章，弘肆有才气，海内请求者无虚日，能屈曲以副其所望。
现代文：其文章弘大有才气，海内外来求他文章的人无日不有。他尽量满足别人的要求。
English: His articles are very talented, and people from home and abroad come to ask for his articles all the time. He tries his best to meet other people's requirements.

古文：碑版之文，照耀四裔。
现代文：其文章铭刻于碑石上，或雕板付印，传至各地。
English: His articles were inscribed on monuments, or engraved on engraved plates, and spread to various regions.

古文：门下士招富人大贾，受取金钱，代为请乞，亦应之无倦，负重名垂四十年。
现代文：其门人招富商大贾，受取其金钱，代为请求，维桢也孜孜不倦地为他们撰写，名声日高，传四十年不衰。
English: His parents recruited wealthy merchant Dajia, received his money, and wrote for them on his behalf. Wei Wei also tirelessly wrote for them, and his reputation grew day by day. It has been passed down for forty years.

古文：然文多率意应酬，品格不能高也。邑人郝敬，字仲舆。
现代文：然而多是应酬文章，格调不高。郝敬，字仲舆，与李维桢同乡，也是京山人。
English: However, most of them are entertainment articles, and the style is not high. 敬, also known as 仲舆, is a fellow villager of Li Weiqi, and also a resident of Beijing and Shandong.

古文：父承健，举于乡，官肃宁知县。
现代文：父郝承健，曾做过肃宁知县。
English: His father, Zou Chengjian, once worked in Suning County.

古文：敬幼称神童，性跅弛，尝杀人系狱。
现代文：敬年幼就有神童之称，为人放纵不羁，曾因杀人而坐过牢狱。
English: Known as a child prodigy at a young age, he was an uninhibited person and had been in prison for murder.

古文：维桢，其父执也，援出之，馆于家。
现代文：李维桢与他父亲是挚友，救他出狱，聘于家中教馆。
English: Li Weiwei is a close friend of his father. He rescued him from prison and employed him in his family's school.

古文：始折节读书，举万历十七年进士。历知缙云、永嘉二县，并有能声。
现代文：从这时起，他才专心专意地读书。万历十七年中进士，历任缙云、永嘉两县知县，均有政绩，为人们称赞。
English: From then on, he devoted himself to studying. In the 17th year of Wanli, he entered the priesthood, and successively served as the magistrate of the two counties of Suiyun and Yongjia. He was praised for his political achievements.

古文：征授礼科给事中，乞假归养。久之，补户科，数有所论奏。
现代文：朝廷征他为礼科给事中，他却请假回家去侍奉双亲，许久以后才起任为户科给事中。
English: The court appointed him as a ceremonial official, but he asked for leave to go home and serve his parents. It was not until much later that he was appointed as a household official.

古文：山东税监陈增贪横，为益都知县吴宗尧所奏，帝不罪。
现代文：山东税监陈增，贪横无忌，为益都知县吴宗尧弹劾。
English: Shandong tax inspector Chen Zeng, greedy and unscrupulous, was impeached by Wu Zongyao of Yidu County.

古文：敬上言： 开采不罢，则陛下明旨不过为愚弄臣民之虚文。
现代文：但皇帝并未惩戒陈增。郝敬上书说： 开矿不停止，则陛下明令的圣旨不过是愚弄臣民的一纸空文。
English: However, the emperor did not discipline Chen Zeng. Zou Jing wrote a letter saying: If mining does not stop, then His Majesty's explicit will is nothing more than a piece of paper fooling his subjects.

古文：乞先停止，然后以宗尧所奏下抚按勘核，正增不法之罪。 
现代文：请先停止开矿，然后以宗尧所奏，令抚按勘察核实，惩处陈增不法之罪。 
English: Please stop mining first, and then punish Chen Zeng for the crime of illegality according to the investigation and verification ordered by Zong Xi.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝未采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：顷之，山东巡抚尹应元亦极论增罪，帝怒，切责应元，斥完尧为民。
现代文：不久，山东巡抚尹应元也上书严厉弹劾陈增的罪行。皇帝大怒，斥责应元，将宗尧削官为民。
English: Soon, the governor of Shandong Province, Yin Yingyuan, also wrote a letter to severely impeach Chen Zeng's crime. The emperor was furious, rebuked Yingyuan, and dismissed Zong as an official.

古文：敬再上言： 陛下处陈增一事，甚失众心。 
现代文：郝敬再次上书说 ：陛下对陈增一事的处理，甚失人心。 
English: Zou Jing wrote again, saying, "Your Majesty's handling of the Chen Zengyu case is extremely unpopular.

古文：帝怒，夺俸一年。
现代文：皇帝又怒，取消郝敬一年的俸禄。
English: The emperor was angry again, and cancelled Shoujing's one-year salary.

古文：帝遣中官高寀榷税京口，暨禄榷税仪真，敬复力谏。
现代文：朝廷遣宦官高肕到京口征税，遣暨禄到仪真征税，郝敬又极力谏止。
English: The imperial court sent eunuch Gao Jun to Beijing to collect taxes, and sent Ji Lu to Yizhen to collect taxes, but the eunuch tried his best to stop them.

古文：宗尧之劾增也，增怒甚，诬讦其赃私，词连青州一府官僚，旁引商民吴时奉等，请皆籍没，帝辄可之。
现代文：过去宗尧弹劾陈增，陈增怀恨于心，诬告宗尧有贪污行为，株连到青州一府官吏，还涉及商民吴时奉等，请求没收他们的财产，神宗立即批准。
English: In the past, Zonglu impeached Chen Zeng, Chen Zeng harbored a grudge and falsely accused Zonglu of corruption. He even went to a government official in Qingzhou, and also involved the businessman Wu Shifong, to request the confiscation of their property, which was immediately approved by Shenzong.

古文：敬复力诋增，乞速寝其奏，亦不纳。
现代文：郝敬又竭力斥责陈增，要求尽快取消陈增的请求。
English: Zou Jing also vigorously rebuked Chen Zengmao and demanded that Chen Zengmao's request be cancelled as soon as possible.

古文：坐事，谪知江阴县。
现代文：这意见还是未被采纳。后郝敬因事而贬为江阴知县。
English: This opinion was still not adopted. Later, Jiejing was downgraded to Jiangyin County because of the incident.

古文：贪污不检，物论皆不予，遂投劾归，杜门著书。
现代文：郝敬认为，贪污之风不制止，群众的舆论是不会放过的。他见朝廷不能听取意见，便上书弹劾自己，辞官归家，闭门著书立说。
English: He saw that the imperial court could not listen to his opinions, so he wrote a letter to impeach himself, the official resigned and returned home, and wrote a letter to the emperor behind closed doors.

古文：崇祯十二年卒。
现代文：崇祯十二年逝世。
English: He died in the twelfth year of Chongzhen.

古文：徐渭，字文长，山阴人。
现代文：徐渭，字文长，山阴人。
English: Xu Yao, a famous writer, is from Shanyin.

古文：十余岁仿扬雄《解嘲》作《释毁》，长师同里季本。
现代文：十余岁就仿扬雄《解嘲》做《释毁》，长大后拜同乡季本为师。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he imitated "De-mockery" to make "Liberation and Destruction." After he grew up, he followed his hometown Qimoto as his teacher.

古文：为诸生，有盛名。
现代文：诸在学为生员时就已负盛名。
English: He was quite famous when he was a freshman.

古文：总督胡宗宪招致幕府，与歙余寅、鄞沈明臣同宪书记。
现代文：总督胡宗宪招聘为幕府，与歙县余寅、鄞县沈明臣同管书记。
English: Governor Hu Zongxian was recruited as a member of the shogunate, and became a co-secretary with Yu Yin of Min County and Shen Mingchen of Min County.

古文：宗宪得白鹿，将献诸朝，令渭草表，并他客草寄所善学士，择其尤上之。
现代文：宗宪得到一只白鹿，准备献给朝廷，令徐渭起草奏表，与其他幕僚起草的奏表一并寄给与他相好的学士，请他从中择其优者上报朝廷。
English: Zongxian got a white deer to dedicate to the imperial court, and ordered Xu Jun to draft a report form and send it together with the report form drafted by other staff members to a scholar who was friendly with him, asking him to choose the best one to report to the imperial court.

古文：学士以渭表进，世宗大悦，益宠异宗宪，宗宪以是益重渭。
现代文：学士以渭所拟的表文进呈，世宗大喜，特别宠爱宗宪，宗宪也更加器重徐渭。
English: Shizong was overjoyed when the baccalaureate student submitted the form written by Zou, and he was especially fond of Zong Xian. Zong Xian also attached great importance to Xu Xian.

古文：渭或醉不至，宗宪顾善之。寅、明臣亦颇负崖岸，以侃直见礼。
现代文：总督府戒备森严，将吏们低头出入，而渭却头顶角巾，身穿布衣，一付平民打扮，与总督府中的人长揖交谈。
English: The Governor-General's residence was heavily guarded, with officials entering and leaving with their heads bowed, while Zou, wearing a kerchief on his head, dressed in civilian clothes, conversed with the people in the Governor-General's residence.

古文：渭知兵，好奇计，宗宪擒徐海，诱王直，皆预其谋。
现代文：幕府有急事，夜深敞开督府大门等他来商议。如果渭喝醉了未来，宗宪派人去好好照顾。徐渭熟悉兵法，好用奇计。宗宪擒获海寇徐海和王直，都是渭参与谋划的。
English: The shogunate was in a hurry, so they opened the gate of the governor's office in the dead of night to wait for him to come and discuss. If Zou got drunk in the future, Zong Xian would send someone to take good care of him. Xu Zou was familiar with the art of war and was good at using stratagems. Zong Xian Zou was defeated by the sea pirates Xu Hai and Wang Zhi, both of which were planned by Zou.

古文：藉宗宪势，颇横。
现代文：渭借宗宪之势，颇为骄横。
English: It is quite arrogant to borrow the momentum of the Constitution.

古文：及宗宪下狱，渭惧祸，遂发狂，引巨锥剚耳，深数寸，又以椎碎肾囊，皆不死。
现代文：后宗宪下狱，渭惧祸，得疯狂病，用大锥刺耳，深至数寸。又用椎击碎肾囊，都没死。
English: Later, Zongxian was sent to prison. He was afraid of the evil and got a crazy disease. He pierced his ear with a large cone until it was several inches deep. He also crushed his kidney sac with a vertebra, but he didn't die.

古文：已，又击杀继妻，论死系狱，里人张元忭力救得免。
现代文：随后杀其后妻，官府依法将其打入死牢，同乡张元忭极力救他出狱。
English: He then killed his future wife, and the authorities put him in death row according to the law. His countryman Zhang Yuanyao tried his best to get him out of prison.

古文：乃游金陵，抵宣、辽，纵观诸边厄塞，善李成梁诸子。
现代文：他游历金陵，到达宣、辽，考察了诸边寨要地。与李成梁诸子十分友好。
English: He traveled to Jinling, arrived in Xuan and Liao, and inspected many important places. He was very friendly with the sons of Li Chengliang.

古文：入京师，主元忭。元忭导以礼法，渭不能从，久之怒而去。
现代文：入京师，在元忭家做客，元忭要他讲述礼法，渭不遵从，含怒而去。
English: When he came to Beijing, he was a guest at the house of Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao asked him to recite the etiquette, but he disobeyed and left angrily.

古文：后元忭卒，白衣往吊，抚棺恸哭，不告姓名去。
现代文：后来元忭去世，渭身着白衣去祭吊，抚棺恸哭，却不说他是谁。
English: Later, when Yuan Shao died, he went to the funeral in a white robe, stroked the coffin and wept, but did not say who he was.

古文：渭天才超轶，诗文绝出伦辈。
现代文：渭天资超人，诗文高出同辈。
English: His talent is superhuman, and his poetry surpasses that of his peers.

古文：善草书，工写花草竹石。尝自言： 吾书第一，诗次之，文次之，画又次之。 
现代文：善写草书，工于绘画花草竹石，曾自称 ：我是书法第一，其次是诗，再次是文章，最后才是画。 
English: He was good at writing cursive, and excelled at painting flowers and plants. He once said: I am a calligrapher first, then a poet, then an article, and finally a painter.

古文：当嘉靖时，王、李倡七子社，谢榛以布衣被摈。
现代文：嘉靖时期，王世贞、李攀龙创立 七子社 ，谢榛因是一介平民而被排斥。
English: During the Jiajing period, Wang Shizhen and Li Panglong founded the Shichizi Society, but Xie Jun was excluded because he was a commoner.

古文：明臣，字嘉则。
现代文：渭对于达官贵人压迫平民非常义愤，誓不与王、李等为伍。
English: He was very indignant at the oppression of civilians by high-ranking officials and nobles, and vowed not to be in the same company as Wang and Li.

古文：皆有诗名。屠隆者，字长卿，明臣同邑人也。
现代文：后二十年，公安袁宏道漫游越中，得到渭诗文残稿，给祭酒陶望龄看，都大加赞赏，刻印成集，流传于世。屠隆，字长卿，鄞县人。
English: In the last 20 years, Yuan Hongdao, a public security officer, wandered through Yuezhong, obtained the remaining manuscript of the poem of Zou, and gave great praise to the sacrificial wine of Tao Wangling, engraved into a collection and passed down to the world.

古文：生有异才，尝学诗于明臣，落笔数千言立就。
现代文：才智异于常人，曾向同乡沈明臣学诗，下笔数千言。
English: His talent is different from that of ordinary people. He once learned poetry from his countryman Shen Mingchen and wrote thousands of words.

古文：族人大山、里人张时彻方为贵官，共相延誉，名大噪。
现代文：族人屠大山、同乡张时彻正是贵官，隆受到他们的夸赞，名扬远近。
English: Tu Da Shan and his countryman Zhang Shicheng were dignitaries, and Rong was praised by them and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：举万历五年进士，除颍上知县，调繁青浦。
现代文：万历五年中进士，授颍上知县，后调青浦知县。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli era, he was promoted to Shangchi County, and later to Qingpu County.

古文：时招名士饮酒赋诗，游九峰、三泖，以仙令自许，然于吏事不废，士民皆爱戴之。
现代文：他时常招名士饮酒赋诗。曾游览九峰、三泖等地，以 仙令 自称，然从不耽误官府公事，士民都爱戴他。
English: He often invited famous people to drink and write poetry. He visited Jiufeng, Samye and other places, claiming to be a "saint," but he never delayed official business. The people loved him.

古文：迁礼部主事。
现代文：后升礼部主事。
English: Later he became the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：西宁侯宋世恩兄事隆，宴游甚欢。
现代文：西宁侯宋世恩把屠隆视为自己的兄长，二人交往甚好。
English: Song Shien, the lord of Xining, regarded Tu Long as his elder brother, and the two got along very well.

古文：刑部主事俞显卿者，险人也，尝为隆所诋，心恨之。讦隆与世恩淫纵，词连礼部尚书陈经邦。
现代文：刑部主事俞显卿，为人险恶，曾受到隆的斥责，怀恨在心，诬蔑隆与世恩放纵淫荡，而且牵连到礼部尚书陈经邦。
English: The head of the criminal justice department, Zou Xianqing, was a sinister person. He had been reprimanded by Long, held a grudge, slandered Long and the world's grace, indulged in lasciviousness, and was implicated in the ceremonial department.

古文：隆等上疏自理，并列显卿挟仇诬陷状。
现代文：隆等上疏申辩，并列举俞显卿挟仇诬陷的罪状。
English: Takashi and others pleaded for leniency, and listed the charges of framing Zou Xianqing for revenge.

古文：所司乃两黜之，而停世恩俸半岁。
现代文：有关衙门把隆及显卿都罢官，世恩停止俸禄半年。
English: Both the chief of the imperial court and the emperor were dismissed, and the emperor's salary was suspended for half a year.

古文：隆归，道青浦，父老为敛田千亩，请徙居。
现代文：隆归家乡时，路过青浦县，父老为他买田千亩，请他徙家青浦。
English: When Long returned to his hometown, he passed through Qingpu County. His father bought a thousand mu of land for him and invited him to move to Qingpu.

古文：隆不许，欢饮三日谢去。
现代文：隆不肯，在此地留饮三日而去。
English: Long refused, and stayed here drinking for three days before leaving.

古文：归益纵情诗酒，好宾客，卖文为活。
现代文：隆归家后，更加纵情于诗酒之中，好宾客，以卖文为生。
English: After returning home, Long indulged more in poetry and wine, was a good guest, and made a living by selling literature.

古文：诗文率不经意，一挥数纸。
现代文：他做诗文漫不经心，一写就是数篇。
English: He wrote poetry carelessly, just a few poems at a time.

古文：尝戏命两人对案拈二题，各赋百韵，咄嗟之间二章并就。
现代文：曾命两人随意出二题，每题百韵，隆在顷刻之间，两题诗就写出来了。
English: Zeng ordered two people to randomly come up with two questions, each with a hundred rhymes, and the two poems were written in an instant.

古文：又与人对弈，口诵诗文，命人书之，书不逮诵也。
现代文：与人下棋，边下棋边口诵诗文，命人记录下来，记录的人还抄写不及。
English: Playing chess with someone, reciting poetry while playing chess, ordering someone to record it, and the person who recorded it couldn't even copy it.

古文：子妇沈氏，修撰懋学女，与隆女瑶瑟并能诗。
现代文： 练川三老 即唐时升、娄坚、程嘉燧。唐时升，字叔达，嘉定人。
English: The Three Elders of Lianchuan are Tang Shisheng, Zou Jian and Cheng Jiayu. Tang Shisheng, Zi Shuda and Jiading Man.

古文：隆有所作，两人辄和之。
现代文：父亲唐钦训，与归有光友善，故时升得以早拜友光为师。
English: His father, Tang Qinxun, was friendly with Gui Youguang, so Shi Sheng was able to learn from Youguang at an early age.

古文：两家兄弟合刻其诗，曰《留香草》。
现代文：时升不到三十岁就抛弃科举，一心一意致力于古学。
English: When he was less than thirty years old, he abandoned science education and devoted himself to ancient studies.

古文：王穉登，字伯谷，长洲人。
现代文：王世贞在南京做官时，把时升请到他的邸舍，与他讨论学术。
English: When Wang Shizhen was an official in Nanjing, he invited Shi Sheng to his residence to discuss academic matters with him.

古文：王世贞官南都，延之邸舍，与辨晰疑义。时升自以出归氏门，不肯复称王氏弟子。及王锡爵枋国，其子衡邀时升入都，值塞上用兵，逆断其情形虚实，将帅胜负，无一爽者。家贫，好施予，灌园艺蔬，萧然自得。
现代文：时升因为是归有光的门徒，所以自己也不再称是王世贞的弟子。王锡爵执政，其子王衡邀时升入京都。这时正是塞上用兵之际，时升推断敌情的虚实，明朝将帅之胜负，无一差错。时升家贫，但好施舍，自己挑水种菜，十分自在。
English: Because he was a disciple of Gui Rong, Shi Sheng no longer called himself a disciple of Wang Shizhen. Wang Xizhe was in power, and his son Wang Heng invited Shi Sheng to enter Kyoto. At this time, it was the time for him to join the army. Shi Sheng deduced the truth and falsity of the enmity, and there was no mistake about the victory or defeat of the commander of the Ming Dynasty. Shi Sheng's family was poor, but he was good at giving alms, and he was very comfortable with his own water and vegetables.

古文：诗援笔成，不加点窜，文得有光之传。
现代文：做诗下笔即成，不加修改。他继承了归有光文章的风格。
English: A poem is finished as soon as it is written, without any modifications. He has inherited the style of Gui Youguang's essays.

古文：与里人娄坚、程嘉燧并称曰 练川三老 。
现代文：与同乡娄坚、程嘉燧并称 练川三老 。
English: He is also known as one of the "Three Elders of Lianchuan" together with his fellow townsmen Yu Jian and Cheng Jiayu.

古文：卒于崇祯九年，年八十有六。
现代文：卒于崇祯九年，享年八十六岁。
English: He died at the age of 86, nine years after his enthronement.

古文：娄坚，字子柔。
现代文：娄坚，字子柔，嘉定人。
English: Yan Jian, Zhizi Rong, Jiading Ren.

古文：幼好学，其师友皆出有光门。坚学有师承，经明行修，乡里推为大师。
现代文：年幼好学，他的师友都是归有光的门生，他承继其老师的学问，既对儒家经典有精深研究，又注意自己德行修养，家乡人推为大师。
English: Young and eager to learn, his teachers and friends are all disciples of Gui Youqing. He inherited the knowledge of his teacher, not only has a deep study of Confucian classics, but also pays attention to his own moral cultivation. People in his hometown are pushing him to be a master.

古文：贡于国学，不仕而归。
现代文：曾在京师国子监读书，是贡生，学成归家，不肯做官。
English: He studied under the tutelage of a tutor in Beijing and was a scholarship student. He returned home after completing his studies and refused to become an official.

古文：工书法，诗亦清新。
现代文：工于书法，其诗清新。
English: Crafted in calligraphy, its poetry is fresh.

古文：四明谢三宾知县事，合时升、坚、嘉燧及李流芳诗刻之，曰《嘉定四先生集》。
现代文：四明谢三宾为嘉定知县，将唐时升、娄坚、程嘉燧以及李流芳四人的诗合刻成书，题为《嘉定四先生集》。
English: The four clearly thanked the three guests for Jiading Zhixian, and engraved the poems of Tang Shisheng, Yu Jian, Cheng Jiayu and Li Liufang into a book, entitled "The Collection of the Four Masters of Jiading."

古文：流芳，字长蘅，万历三十四年举于乡。
现代文：李流芳，字长蘅，万历三十四年乡试中举。
English: Li Liufang, Zi Changqian, won the junior high school examination in the 34th year of Wanli.

古文：工诗善书，尤精绘事。
现代文：工于诗，善书法。
English: Works in poetry, good at calligraphy.

古文：天启初，会试北上，抵近郊闻警，赋诗而返，遂绝意进取。
现代文：天启初入京参加会试，抵北京近郊，闻农民军起义，赋诗而返，从此再不愿进取功名。
English: At the dawn of the new millennium, he entered Beijing to take part in the audition, arrived in the suburbs of Beijing, heard about the uprising of the peasant army, and returned with a poem. From then on, he did not want to gain fame.

古文：程嘉燧，字孟阳，休宁人，侨居嘉定。
现代文：程嘉燧，字孟阳，本休宁人，侨居嘉定。
English: Cheng Jiayuan, surnamed Mengyang, originally from Xiuning, now lives in Jiading.

古文：工诗善画。
现代文：工于诗，善于画。
English: Crafted in poetry, good at painting.

古文：与通州顾养谦善。
现代文：与通州顾养濂相好。
English: He is good friends with Tongzhou Gu Yangjun.

古文：友人劝诣之，乃渡江寓古寺，与酒人欢饮三日夜，赋《咏古》五章，不见养谦而返。
现代文：友人劝他去拜访养濂，于是他渡江，寓后于古寺内，与好酒之人欢饮三天三夜，赋《咏古》诗五章，未见到养濂而归。
English: A friend advised him to visit the reindeer, so he crossed the river, lived in an ancient temple, drank with good wine for three days and three nights, and wrote five chapters of "Ancient," but did not see the reindeer and returned.

古文：崇祯中，常熟钱谦益以侍郎罢归，筑耦耕堂，邀嘉燧读书其中。
现代文：崇祯年间，常熟钱谦益为侍郎，罢官归家，自建 耦耕堂 ，邀嘉燧去那里读书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Changshu Qian Qianyi served as a chamberlain, was dismissed from his post and returned home. He built his own "Couple Cultivation Hall" and invited Jiayuan to study there.

古文：阅十年返休宁，遂卒，年七十有九。
现代文：万历年间诏修国史，大学士赵志皋等举荐穉登及同乡魏学礼、江都陆弼、黄冈王一鸣参与其事。
English: During the Wanli years, Zhao Zhixuan, a university scholar, recommended Zou Deng, and his fellow townsmen Wei Xueli, Jiangdu Lujuan, and Huanggang Wang Yiming participated in the event.

古文：谦益最重其诗，称曰松圆诗老。
现代文：朝廷下诏征用，但未来得及上任，国史局就撤销了。
English: It was requisitioned by Imperial edict, but the State Historical Bureau was abolished before he could take office.

古文：焦竑，字弱侯，江宁人。
现代文：穉登年七十而逝。焦竑，字弱侯，江宁人。
English: He died at the age of 70. He was from Jiaozhou, Jiangning.

古文：为诸生，有盛名。
现代文：为生员时就颇有名气。
English: He was quite famous when he was a freshman.

古文：从督学御史耿定向学，复质疑于罗汝芳。
现代文：先是从督学御史耿定向为师，后又向罗汝芳求教。
English: First, he learned from the inspector of the school, Mishi Geng, and later he asked Luo Rufang for advice.

古文：举嘉靖四十三年乡试，下第还。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年乡试中举，但后来会试落第。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, the township exam was held, but later the exam would fail.

古文：定向遴十四郡名士读书崇正书院，以竑为之长。
现代文：定向遴选十四郡名士入崇正书院读书，竑为第一人。
English: Fourteen famous people from counties were selected to study at the Chongzheng Academy, and Zou was the first.

古文：及定向里居，复往从之。
现代文：定向告老还乡，竑追随于他。
English: Ding Xiang returned to his hometown, and Zou followed him.

古文：万历十七年，始以殿试第一人官翰林修撰，益讨习国朝典章。
现代文：万历十七年始以殿试第一名授翰林修撰，他进一步研究本朝的典章制度。
English: In the 17th year of the Wanli era, Hanlin Shuxuan was awarded the first place in the hall examination, and he further studied the award system of this dynasty.

古文：二十二年，大学士陈于陛建议修国史，欲竑专领其事，竑逊谢，乃先撰《经籍志》，其他率无所撰，馆亦竟罢。
现代文：二十二年，大学士陈于陛建议纂修国史，欲令竑专领其事，竑谢绝了，他先已撰有《经籍志》，其他书尚未纂修，国史馆就撤销了。
English: In 1922, the university scholar Chen Yuxing suggested compiling and revising the history of the country. He wanted to have Zou take charge of the matter, but Zou declined. He had already written the "History of the Book of the Bible," and other books had not yet been compiled and revised, so the National History Museum was cancelled.

古文：翰林教小内侍书者，众视为具文，竑独曰： 此曹他日在帝左右，安得忽之。 
现代文：翰林们教宫内小太监读书，大家都认为只是徒具形式，竑一人认为： 这班人将来在皇帝左右，怎能忽视。 
English: Hanlin and the others teach the young eunuchs of the imperial court to read. Everyone thinks it's just a formality, but one person thinks: How can we ignore this group of people who will be around the emperor in the future.

古文：取古奄人善恶，时与论说。
现代文：便将古代宦官之善恶事常讲给太监们听。
English: He often told the eunuchs about the good and evil deeds of the ancient eunuchs.

古文：皇长子出阁，竑为讲官。
现代文：皇长子出宫至其分封地，竑随去为讲官。
English: The eldest son of the emperor went out of the palace to his assigned fief, and Shun went with him as a lecturer.

古文：故事，讲官进讲罕有问者。竑讲毕，徐曰： 博学审问，功用维均，敷陈或未尽，惟殿下赐明问。 
现代文：按惯例，讲官讲课皇长子不提问，而竑在讲完后对皇长子说： 博学多问，都要做到，我讲课或有不清楚不周到的地方，请殿下赐问。 
English: According to the usual practice, the lecturer did not ask any questions to the eldest son of the emperor, but after the lecture, Zou said to the eldest son of the emperor: You should be more knowledgeable and ask more questions. If there is anything unclear or incomplete in my lecture, please ask your highness.

古文：皇长子称善，然无所质难也。
现代文：皇长子说好，但提不出疑问。
English: The eldest son of the emperor said yes, but could not raise any doubts.

古文：一日，竑复进曰： 殿下言不易发，得毋讳其误耶？解则有误，问复何误？
现代文：有天竑又进言： 殿下不提问，是怕说错了吗？解答的人也会有错误，提问的人又怎能无错误呢？
English: One day, Heaven spoke again: Your highness, if you don't ask questions, are you afraid of saying the wrong thing? The person who answers will also make mistakes, and how can the person who asks questions be free from mistakes?

古文：古人不耻下问，愿以为法。 
现代文：古人不耻下问，愿殿下效法。 
English: The ancients were not ashamed to ask, may His Royal Highness follow suit.

古文：皇长子复称善，亦竟无所问。
现代文：皇长子又说好，可还是提不出疑问。
English: The emperor's eldest son also said yes, but still could not raise any doubts.

古文：竑乃与同列谋先启其端，适讲《舜典》，竑举 稽于众，舍己从人 为问。
现代文：竑与同僚商议，先进行启发以开其端。在讲《舜典》时，竑问道：  稽于众，舍己从人 此句怎样理解？ 
English: When talking about the "Analects of Confucius," Zou asked: "Preaching to the public, sacrificing oneself to others" What is the meaning of this sentence?

古文：皇长子曰： 稽者，考也。考集众思，然后舍己之短，从人之长。 
现代文：皇长子回答： 稽是考的意思，考察和集中众人的意见，然后舍己之短，取人之长。 
English: The eldest son of the emperor replied: "Ji" is the meaning of examination, the examination and concentration of the opinions of many people, and then sacrificing the short and taking the long.

古文：又一日，举 上帝降衷，若有恒性 。
现代文：又有一次，竑举出 上帝降衷，若有恒性 一句，请皇长子解答。
English: On another occasion, he brought up the subject of God's change of heart, and asked the eldest son of the emperor to answer if there was any constancy.

古文：皇长子曰： 此无他，即天命之谓性也。 
现代文：皇长子说： 这话没别的意思，是说天命叫作性。 
English: The eldest son of the emperor said, "There is no other meaning to this, but it means that the destiny of heaven is called nature.

古文：皇长子敛容听，乃复讲如初。
现代文：皇长子这时才十三岁，答问流利，竑也竭诚启发他。
English: At this time, the eldest son of the emperor was only thirteen years old. He was fluent in answering questions, and Zou also inspired him wholeheartedly.

古文：竑尝采古储君事可为法戒者为《养正图说》，拟进之。
现代文：有次在讲课时，群鸟飞鸣，皇长子抬头去看，竑立即停讲，恭恭敬敬站着等待，皇太子也肃然听讲。竑曾把古代皇太子可以效法或借鉴的事例编成《养正图说》准备进呈。
English: Once, during a lecture, the birds were chirping and the eldest son of the emperor looked up to see them. Zou immediately stopped the lecture and stood respectfully waiting. The crown prince also listened to the lecture in awe. Zou had compiled examples of ancient crown princes that could be emulated or used as a reference into "The Story of Cultivating Self-Righteousness" for presentation.

古文：同官郭正域辈恶其不相闻，目为贾誉，竑遂止。
现代文：同僚郭正域辈忌恨竑没与他商议，说他是沽名钓誉，竑也就不进呈此书了。
English: Guo's colleague Guo Zhengwei did not consult with him, saying that he was not a famous fisherman, so he would not submit this book.

古文：竑既负重名，性复疏直，时事有不可，辄形之言论，政府亦恶之，张位尤甚。
现代文：竑名声日重，禀性又直爽，当时政事有不妥的，他马上加以评论，所以政府也讨厌他，张位尤其如此。
English: The government also hated him, especially Zhang Yi, because of his growing reputation, toughness and straightforwardness. When there was something wrong with the government, he immediately commented on it.

古文：二十五年主顺天乡试，举子曹蕃等九人文多险诞语，竑被劾，谪福宁州同知。
现代文：万历二十五年主考顺天乡试，举人曹蕃等九人的文章中多有耸人听闻的怪论，竑因此被弹劾，贬为福宁州同知。
English: In the 25th year of the Manchurian calendar, nine people, including the chief examiner Shun Tianxiang, and the examiner Cao Qi, wrote sensational and bizarre theories. As a result, Qi was impeached and relegated to being a common acquaintance of Funing.

古文：岁余大计，复镌秩，竑遂不出。
现代文：一年后，在考核地方官员时，竑又被削夺官阶，从此不再出仕。
English: A year later, during the assessment of local officials, Zou was stripped of his official rank and has not served since.

古文：竑博极群书，自经史至稗官、杂说，无不淹贯。
现代文：竑博览群书，自经史直到小说、杂说，无不贯通。
English: Extensive collection of books, ranging from history to novels and essays.

古文：善为古文，典正驯雅，卓然名家。
现代文：古文写得好、典雅，是位卓越的名家。
English: The ancient text is well written and elegant, and it is an outstanding famous family.

古文：集名《澹园》，竑所自号也。
现代文：其文集名为《澹园》，是他自己题写的。
English: His collection of essays is called "Garden of Earthworms," which he inscribed himself.

古文：讲学以汝芳为宗，而善定向兄弟及李贽，时颇以禅学讥之。
现代文：讲学以罗汝芳的学术思想为主旨，与耿定向兄弟及李贽都友善，当时人说他是禅学。
English: His lectures were based on Luo Rufang's academic thought, and he was friendly with the Geng brothers and Li Xi, who said at the time that he was a Zen scholar.

古文：万历四十八年卒，年八十。
现代文：万历四十八年去世，终年八十岁。
English: He died at the age of eighty in the forty-eighth year of Wanli.

古文：熹宗时，以先朝讲读恩，复官，赠谕德，赐祭荫子。
现代文：熹宗时，因他是先朝讲官，恢复其官职，又赠谕德，赐祭，荫其子。
English: At the time of Emperor Xizong, because he was a preacher of the previous dynasty, he restored his official position, and also bestowed virtue, gave offerings, and overshadowed his son.

古文：福王时，追谥文端。
现代文：福王时，追谥文端。
English: At the time of King Fukuda, he chased after Fumihata.

古文：子润生，见《忠义传》。黄辉，字平倩，一字昭素，南充人。
现代文：黄辉，字平倩，一字昭素，南充人。
English: Huanghui, the character Pingyao, one character Zhaoxu, Nanchong people.

古文：御史闻而异之，命负以至，授钱谷集，一览辄记。稍长，博极群书。
现代文：焦同年进士。年幼即聪敏异常，对刑律非常熟悉，受到湖广御史的重视。长大后，博览群书。
English: Jiao entered the priesthood in the same year. At a young age, he was unusually intelligent, very familiar with criminal law, and was valued by Hukang Imperial History. After growing up, he read a lot of books.

古文：年十五举乡试第一。久之，成进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：十五岁乡试中举，名列第一，后中进士，选为庶吉士。
English: At the age of 15, he won the first place in the junior high school examination. Later, he was promoted to junior high school student, and was selected as the best junior high school student.

古文：馆课文字多沿袭熟烂，目为翰林体，及李攀龙、王世贞之学行，则又改而从之。
现代文：当时，私塾课本的文章都用旧有的 翰林体 ，李攀龙、王世贞的学风盛行后才有所改进。
English: At that time, the articles of private school textbooks all used the old "Hanlin style," Li Panglong, and Wang Shizhen's learning style prevailed before being improved.

古文：辉刻意学古，一以韩、欧为师，馆阁文稍变。
现代文：而黄辉刻意学习古文，以韩愈、欧阳修的文体为范本，使翰林院的文风又有所改变。
English: However, Huang Hui deliberately studied ancient literature, using the style of Han Yu and Ouyang Xiu as a model, so that the literary style of Hanlin Academy changed again.

古文：时同馆中，诗文推陶望龄，书画推董其昌，辉诗及书与齐名。
现代文：在翰林院与他同事的人中，诗文要推陶望龄，书画则推董其昌，而辉的诗及书法均有名。
English: Among the people of Hanlin Academy and his colleagues, poems should be recommended to Tao Wangling, calligraphy and painting should be recommended to Dong Qichang, and Hui's poetry and calligraphy are famous.

古文：至征事，辉十得八九，竑以闳雅名，亦自逊不如也。由编修迁右中允，充皇长子讲官。
现代文：焦在诗词界也颇有声名，但他自认为不如黄辉。黄辉由编修升为右中允，任皇长子的讲官。
English: Jiao is also quite famous in the poetry world, but he thinks he is not as good as Huang Hui. Huang Hui was promoted from the editor to the right middle assistant, and was appointed as the lecturer of the eldest son of the emperor.

古文：时帝宠郑贵妃，疏皇后、长子，长子生母王恭妃几殆。
现代文：当时，皇帝宠爱郑贵妃，疏远皇后和皇长子。皇长子的生母王恭妃几乎死去。
English: At that time, the emperor favored Zheng Guifei, alienating the queen and the eldest son. The eldest son's birth mother, Wang Gongfu, almost died.

古文：辉从内竖征知其状，谓同里给事中王德完曰： 此国家大事，旦夕不测，书之史册，谓朝廷无人，吾辈为万世僇矣。 
现代文：辉从宫中传达皇帝命令的小宦官那里得知这些情况，对同乡给事中王德完说 ：这是国家大事，早晚会发生变故，若将此事写入史册，说朝中无贤能，你我将被后代耻笑。 
English: Hui learned about these circumstances from a minor eunuch who conveyed the emperor's orders from the palace. He said to Wang Deguan, a fellow villager who was involved in the matter, "This is a national event. Sooner or later, there will be a change. If you write this matter into the history books and say that there is no virtue in the imperial court, you and I will be laughed at by future generations."

古文：德完奋然，属辉具草上之，下狱，廷杖濒死。
现代文：德完为之激奋，委托辉为他起草奏章呈进。
English: He was so excited that he commissioned Hui to draft a musical score for him.

古文：辉周旋橐饘，不避险阻，人或危之。
现代文：德完因此受到皇帝的惩罚，廷杖几乎使他丧命，打入狱中。辉不顾危险和困难，为德完送饭，进行援救。
English: As a result, Dehan was punished by the emperor. The imperial scepter almost killed him and he was sent to prison. Hui sent food to Dehan and rescued him, regardless of the danger and difficulties.

古文：辉曰： 吾陷人于祸，可坐视乎？ 
现代文：有人为他担心，劝他不要管，辉说： 是我使德完遭祸，岂可坐视不管？ 
English: Some people were worried about him and advised him to leave it alone. Hui said, "It is I who have caused the misfortune of morality. Should I just sit back and watch?

古文：辉雅好禅学，多方外交，为言者所论。
现代文：辉爱好佛学，交游广，人们对他有所评论。
English: Hui is fond of Buddhism and has a wide network of friends. People have commented on him.

古文：时已为庶子掌司经局，遂请告归。
现代文：这时已为皇庶子掌管经局，请假归家。
English: At this time, the emperor's son-in-law was already in charge of the economic bureau, and he took a leave of absence to return home.

古文：已，起故官，擢少詹事兼侍读学士，卒官。
现代文：其后，起任原官，又提升为少詹士兼侍读学士，在任上去世。
English: After that, he was appointed as an original official, and was promoted to Junior Junior Officer and Attendant Bachelor, and died in office.

古文：陈仁锡，字明卿，长洲人。
现代文：陈仁锡，字明卿，长洲人。
English: Chen Rensi, Zi Mingqing, a native of Cheung Chau.

古文：父允坚，进士。历知诸暨、崇德二县。
现代文：父陈允坚，为进士，历任诸暨、崇德两县知县。
English: His father, Chen Yunjian, was a scholar, and successively served in Zhuji and Chongde counties.

古文：仁锡年十九，举万历二十五年乡试。
现代文：万历二十五年，仁锡十九岁，乡试中举。
English: Wanli 25 years old, Rensi 19 years old, village test middle school.

古文：闻武进钱一本善《易》，往师之，得其指要。
现代文：闻知武进县钱一本对《易》有研究，便去拜他为师，领会到《易》的中心思想。
English: When he heard that Wujin County Qianbai had studied "Yi," he went to worship him as a teacher and understood the central idea of "Yi."

古文：魏忠贤冒边功，矫旨锡上公爵，给世券。
现代文：因多次考进士落第，更加潜心于研究经史，著述颇多。天启二年，以殿试第三名授翰林偏修。第二年因母亲去世，回家守丧。
English: Because he failed the entrance examination several times, he concentrated more on studying the history of scripture and wrote a lot. In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was awarded the third place in the temple examination. The next year, due to the death of his mother, he went home to mourn.

古文：仁锡当视草，持不可，其党以威劫之，毅然曰： 世自有视草者，何必我！ 
现代文：期满，被起任原职，不久任经筵讲官，并起草皇帝的文书。魏忠贤假报边功，要仁锡起草圣旨，封他公爵，仁锡不肯。魏忠贤的党羽强迫他，他坚决不从，并称： 有的是起草人，何必一定要我！ 
English: At the end of his term of office, he was appointed to his original post, and soon became a lecturer in economics, and drafted the emperor's official documents. Wei Zhongxian falsely claimed that he had made great contributions to the country. He asked Rensi to draft the imperial edict and make him a duke, but Rensi refused. Wei Zhongxian's followers forced him to do so, but he resolutely refused, saying, "There are many draftsmen, why do I have to be the one?"

古文：忠贤闻之怒。
现代文：魏忠贤对他十分恼怒。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very angry with him.

古文：不数日，里人孙文豸以诵《步天歌》见捕，坐妖言锻炼成狱，词连仁锡及震孟，罪将不测。
现代文：过了几天，仁锡的同乡孙文豸，因唱《步天歌》被捕入狱，牵连到仁锡和同科进士文震孟，将有不测之祸。
English: A few days later, Renxi's fellow villager Sun Wenyu was arrested and jailed for singing "Walking to Heaven," implicating Renxi and his classmate Wen Zhenmeng, and there would be an unforeseen disaster.

古文：有密救者，得削籍归。
现代文：幸有人暗中营救，以削官为民了事。
English: Fortunately, someone came to the rescue in secret, and the matter was resolved by cutting the number of officials.

古文：崇祯改元，召复故官。
现代文：崇祯元年，召仁锡回朝，官复原职。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Renxi was recalled to the imperial court, and his post was reinstated.

古文：旋进右中允，署国子司业事，再直经筵。
现代文：不久进升为右中允，负责国子司业事，再任经筵讲官。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Uchu-Junior Vice-Minister of the Right, responsible for the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency, and was reappointed as a lecturer of economics.

古文：以预修神、光二朝实录，进右谕德，乞假归。
现代文：参预修纂神宗、光宗两朝实录，书成后进升为右谕德。他请假归家。
English: He participated in the preparatory work of compiling the records of the two dynasties of the Shinshu sect and the Guangzong sect, and after the book was completed, he was promoted to the right. He took a leave of absence and returned home.

古文：越三年，即家起南京国子祭酒，甫拜命，得疾卒。
现代文：过了三年起任南京国子监祭酒，刚受命就病逝。
English: After three years of serving as Nanjing's son-in-law, he died of illness as soon as he received the order.

古文：福王时，赠詹事，谥文庄。
现代文：福王时赠詹士，谥文庄。
English: The king of fortune bestowed upon him the name of Janz, and the name of Wenzhuang came into being.

古文：仁锡讲求经济，有志天下事，性好学，喜著书，一时馆阁中博洽者鲜其俦云。
现代文：仁锡讲求经邦济世，立志为国效力。其性好学，善著书立说，当时翰林院中，他的学问最渊博，几乎无人与他相比。
English: He was eager to learn and good at writing, and said that at that time, he was the most learned person in the Hanlin Academy, and almost no one could compare to him.

古文：董其昌，字玄宰，松江华亭人。
现代文：董其昌，字玄宰，松江府华亭人。
English: Dong Qichang, surnamed Xuanzai, from Huating, Songjiang.

古文：举万历十七年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：万历十七年进士，改庶吉士。
English: He entered the priesthood in 17 B.C. and was posthumously awarded the title of Kishi.

古文：礼部侍郎田一俊以教习卒官，其昌请假，走数千里，护其丧归葬。
现代文：曾任编修及皇长子讲习官，任湖广副使时，为势豪所忌，辞职归家。
English: He was once an editor and a tutor for the emperor's eldest son, and when he was a deputy envoy to Hukang, he resigned and returned home because he was afraid of the powerful.

古文：又采留中之疏切于国本、藩封、人才、风俗、河渠、食货、吏治、边防者，别为四十卷。
现代文：后来又起任为山东副使、登莱兵备、河南参政等，均辞不就任。光宗即位后召为太常少卿，熹宗天启二年升为太常寺卿兼侍读学士。为修纂《神宗实录》，其昌奉命往南方采辑先朝的章疏及遗事，录成三百本。
English: Later, he was appointed as deputy envoy to Shandong, military commander of Denglai, and politician of Henan, but all of them refused to take office. After the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, he was called to the post of Junior Secretary of Taizhong, and in the second year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the post of Secretary of Taizhong Temple as well as an attendant bachelor. In order to compile the "Real Record of the Shenzong," Qichang was ordered to go to the south to collect the chapters and relics of the previous dynasty and record them into three hundred books.

古文：时政在奄竖，党祸酷烈。
现代文：又将宫中未曾处理的奏疏中有关国本、藩封、人才、风俗、河渠、食货、吏治、边防的材料，另编辑成四十卷。书成进呈皇帝，受到嘉奖。三年晋升为礼部右侍郎，协助管理詹事府政务，不久又转任左侍郎。
English: He also edited forty volumes of materials from the Sonosho, which had not been dealt with by the palace, relating to the country, the territory, the people, the customs, the canals, the food, the officials, and the border defense. The book was presented to the emperor and received an award. He was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies in three years to assist in managing the government affairs of the Zhanshi Prefecture, and soon he was transferred to the Left Attendant.

古文：其昌深自引远，逾年请告归。
现代文：五年正月拜南京礼部尚书。当时宦官横行，其昌只在任一年便呈请辞官。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, he attended the Nanjing Ceremonial Department. At that time, eunuchs were rampant, and he only submitted his resignation in any given year.

古文：崇祯四年起故官，掌詹事府事。居三年，屡疏乞休，诏加太子太保致仕。
现代文：崇祯四年起任原官职，三年后又多次上疏，请求辞官返乡，为皇帝允准，并加太子太保衔。
English: In the four years since he assumed his original official position, three years later, he was promoted several times. He asked to return home after his resignation, which was approved by the emperor, and he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：又二年卒，年八十有三。赠太子太傅。
现代文：两年后去世，享年八十三岁，赠太子太傅。
English: He died two years later, aged 83, and was given the title of crown prince.

古文：福王时，谥文敏。
现代文：福王谥文敏。
English: With Fu Wang and Wen Min.

古文：其昌天才俊逸，少负重名。
现代文：其昌才智超人，年少就颇负盛名。
English: He was a prodigious talent and became quite famous at a young age.

古文：初，华亭自沈度、沈粲以后，南安知府张弼、詹事陆深、布政莫如忠及子是龙皆以善书称。
现代文：华亭自沈度、沈粲之后，又有南安知府张弼、詹事陆深、布政莫如忠及其子是龙，均以书法闻名。
English: After Huating from Shengdu and Shenyuan, there were Nan'an Zhifu Zhangyuan, Zhan Zhi Lu Sheng, Bu Zheng Mo Ruzhong and his son Zhe Long, all of whom were famous for their calligraphy.

古文：其昌后出，超越诸家，始以宋米芾为宗。后自成一家，名闻外国。
现代文：后来其昌的书法超过以前各家。其昌开始习宋米芾体，后自成一家，名闻遐迩。
English: Later, Qichang's calligraphy surpassed all previous schools. Qichang began to learn the Song Dynasty style, and later became a famous calligrapher.

古文：性和易，通禅理，萧闲吐纳，终日无俗语。
现代文：其昌的画集宋元画家之长，自成一派，潇洒生动。来请他写字做画的人，每日不断，争相求购，视如至宝。
English: Qichang's collection of paintings is the longest of the Song and Yuan painters, self-contained, chic and vivid. People who come to ask him to write and paint, every day, scramble to buy, seeing it as a treasure.

古文：人儗之米芾、赵孟頫云。
现代文：有人把他比作米芾和赵孟兆页。
English: Some people likened him to rice bran and Zhao Mengzhao.

古文：袁宏道，字中郎，公安人。与兄宗道、弟中道并有才名，时称 三袁 。宗道，字伯修。
现代文：同时代的书法大师还有监邑邢侗、顺天米万钟、晋江张瑞国，称为邢、张、米、董四大家。又称南董北米。然其他三人远不及董其昌。袁宗道、袁宏道、袁中道三兄弟，湖广公安人。都以才华闻名，世人称为 三袁 。宗道，字伯修。
English: At the same time, there were also calligraphy masters such as Guan Yu, Shuntian Mei Wan Zhong, and Jinjiang Zhang Ruiguo, known as the four masters of Guan, Zhang, Mei, and Dong. Also known as Nan Dong North America. However, the other three are far from Dong Qichang. Yuan Zong Dao, Yuan Hong Dao, Yuan Zhong Dao are three brothers, and are public security officers in Hunan and Guangxi. They are all famous for their talent, and the world is known as San Yuan. Zong Dao, the word is Bo Xiu.

古文：万历十四年会试第一。授庶吉士，进编修，卒官右庶子。
现代文：万历十四年会试第一，授庶吉士，进为编修，后官至右庶子而逝。
English: In the 14th year of the Wanli era, he was the first to pass the entrance examination, was awarded the title of Junshi, advanced to the position of editor, and passed away after being promoted to the position of Uwajishi.

古文：泰昌时，追录光宗讲官，赠礼部右侍郎。
现代文：泰昌时，追录光宗讲官，赠礼部右侍郎。
English: At the time of Taichang, he was a lecturer of Guangzong and the right hand man of the gift department.

古文：宏道年十六为诸生，即结社城南，为之长。
现代文：宏道，字中郎，十六岁还是生员时就创立 城南诗社 ，他是诗社之长。
English: Hongdao, also known as Zhongro, founded the Seongnam Poetry Society when he was just 16 years old. He was the head of the poetry society.

古文：闲为诗歌古文，有声里中。举万历二十年进士。
现代文：万历二十年进士。
English: After 20 years of hard work, he became a priest.

古文：归家，下帷读书，诗文主妙悟。
现代文：归家闭门读书，其诗文强调抒写自己的灵感。
English: Returning home to study behind closed doors, his poetry emphasizes the importance of expressing one's own inspiration.

古文：选吴县知县，听断敏决，公庭鲜事。
现代文：被选授吴县知县，断案敏捷果敢，故公堂少事。
English: He was selected to teach in Wuxian Zhixian, and he was quick and bold in dismissing cases, so there were few cases in the court.

古文：与士大夫谈说诗文，以风雅自命。
现代文：与士大夫谈论诗文，以风雅自命。
English: Discussing poetry and literature with the scholar-bureaucrats, he prides himself on his style.

古文：已而解官去。
现代文：随后辞官而去。
English: He subsequently resigned from his post.

古文：起授顺天教授，历国子助教、礼部主事，谢病归。
现代文：后起任顺天教授，历任国子监助教、礼部主事，因病辞归。
English: After that, he was appointed as Professor Shuntian, assistant professor of the National Children's Center, and head of the Ceremonial Department, but he resigned due to illness.

古文：久之，起故官。
现代文：许久以后，又起任原官。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to the same post again.

古文：寻以清望擢吏部验封主事，改文选。
现代文：不久，升为吏部验封主事，又改为文选。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to be in charge of the seal inspection of the personnel department, and then changed to the selection of literature.

古文：寻移考功员外郎，立岁终考察群吏法，言： 外官三岁一察，京官六岁，武官五岁，此曹安得独免？ 
现代文：在调任考功员外郎期间，立 岁终考察群吏法 。他说 ：外官三年一察，京官六年一察，武官五年一察，无一例外。 
English: He said: Foreign officials are inspected once every three years, Beijing officials once every six years, and military officers once every five years, without exception.

古文：疏上，报可，遂为定制。迁稽勋郎中，后谢病归，数月卒。
现代文：朝廷采纳这项建议。升稽勋郎中，后因病辞归，数月后去世。
English: The Imperial Court accepted this suggestion. Shoki Shiro junior, later resigned due to illness, and died a few months later.

古文：中道，字小修。
现代文：中道，字小修。
English: In the middle, a small correction.

古文：十余岁，作《黄山》、《雪》二赋，五千余言。
现代文：十余岁做《黄山赋》、《雪赋》，共五千余言。
English: He wrote "Huangshan Fu" and "Snow Fu" at the age of ten, a total of more than five thousand words.

古文：长益豪迈，从两兄宦游京师，多交四方名士，足迹半天下。
现代文：长大后更加豪放，随两兄至京师求官。交结四方名士，足迹遍半个天下。
English: After growing up, he became more adventurous and followed his two brothers to Beijing to seek a post. He met famous people from four places and traveled all over the world.

古文：万历三十一年始举于乡。又十四年乃成进士。
现代文：万历三十一年始中乡举，又过十四年才成进士。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted to middle-level township official, and it took another 14 years for him to be promoted to higher-level official.

古文：由徽州教授，历国子博士、南京礼部主事。
现代文：由徽州教授，历任国子博士、南京礼部主事。
English: He was a professor in Huizhou, successively held the position of Kuniko Doctor, and was the head of the Nanjing etiquette department.

古文：天启四年进南京吏部郎中，卒于官。
现代文：天启四年进南京吏部郎中。逝于任上。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he became a junior member of the Nanjing cadre. He died in office.

古文：然两人学不甚富，其识解多僻，大为通人所讥。
现代文：以前，王世贞、李攀龙之学盛行，袁氏兄弟则不以为然。
English: In the past, the teachings of Wang Shizhen and Li Panglong were popular, but the Yuan brothers did not think so.

古文：元春，字友夏，名辈后于惺，以《诗归》故，与齐名。
现代文：宗道在翰林院与同僚黄辉极力排斥王、李的文学思潮。他喜好唐朝白居易、宋朝苏轼，故命其书斋名为 白苏 。
English: In Hanlin Academy, Zong Dao and his colleague Huang Hui tried their best to reject the literary trend of Wang and Li. He liked Tang Dynasty Bai Juyi and Song Dynasty Su Xi, so he named his study room Bai Su.

古文：至天启七年始举乡试第一，惺已前卒矣。王惟俭，字损仲，祥符人。
现代文：宏道诗文更加清新，学者多舍弃王、李风格而学袁氏兄弟，称为 公安体 。王惟俭，字损仲，祥符人。
English: The poems of Hongdao are fresher, and scholars have mostly abandoned the Wang and Li styles and learned from the Yuan brothers, known as the public security style. Wang Wei Jian, Zhaozhong, Xiang Fu Ren.

古文：万历二十三年进士。
现代文：万历二十三年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 23 and was given the posthumous name of Kochi.

古文：授濰县知县，迁兵部职方主事。
现代文：授潍县知县，后升为兵部职方主事。
English: He was awarded the title of county magistrate, and was later promoted to be in charge of the military department.

古文：三十年春，辽东总兵官马林以忤税使高淮被逮，兵部尚书田乐等救之。帝怒，责职方不推代者，空司而逐，惟俭亦削籍归。
现代文：三十年春，辽东总兵官马林因得罪了朝廷派去的税使高淮而被逮捕，兵部尚书田乐营救，皇帝大怒，田乐被流放，惟俭也被牵连削职归家。
English: In the spring of the 30th year, the Liaodong general military officer Marin was arrested for offending Gao Huai, the tax envoy sent by the imperial court. The military department rescued Shang Shu Tian Le, the emperor was furious, Tian Le was exiled, and Wei Jian was also dragged back home.

古文：家居二十年，光宗立，起光禄丞。三迁大理少卿。
现代文：他在家中住了二十年，直到光宗即位后才起任光禄寺丞，后迁升大理寺少卿。
English: He lived at home for twenty years, and only after the enthronement of Emperor Kōzō did he take up the post of Kōroku-ji Temple chancellor, later moving to the post of Dairi-ji Temple junior secretary.

古文：天启三年八月擢右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
现代文：天启三年八月，升为右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
English: In August of the third year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the post of the Right Hand of the Emperor, the Governor of Shandong.

古文：值徐鸿儒之乱，民多逃亡，辽人避难来者，亦多失所，惟俭加意绥辑。
现代文：正逢徐鸿儒起义，民多逃亡，辽东百姓来山东避难的人也无处安身。
English: At the time of Xu Hongru's uprising, many people fled, and the people from Liaodong who came to Shandong for refuge had nowhere to stay.

古文：五年三月擢南京兵部右侍郎，未赴。
现代文：惟俭尽力将他们安置。五年三月，升南京兵部右侍郎，但未去上任。
English: In March of the fifth year, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department, but he did not take up the post.

古文：入为工部右侍郎，魏忠贤党御史田景新劾之，落职闲住。
现代文：入朝任工部右侍郎，为宦官魏忠贤的同党御史田景新弹劾，又落职归家闲住。
English: He entered the imperial court as the right hand man of the Ministry of Works, was impeached by the eunuch Wei Zhongxian's fellow party member Tian Jingshin, and returned home to live idly.

古文：惟俭资敏嗜学。
现代文：惟俭天资聪敏，又好学。
English: However, he is thrifty, intelligent, and eager to learn.

古文：尝与时辈宴集，征《汉书》一事，具悉本末，指其腹笑曰： 名下宁有虚士乎！ 
现代文：第一次被罢官后，努力研究经史百家。他认为《宋史》繁杂，便亲自删定，另成一书。
English: After being dismissed for the first time, he diligently studied hundreds of histories. He thought that "Song History" was complicated, so he personally deleted it and compiled it into another book.

古文：其自喜如此。曹学牷，字能始，侯官人。
现代文：他爱好书画古玩，万历、天启年间，世人认为他是 博学君子 ，与董其昌齐名。曹学牷，字能始，侯官人。
English: He was fond of calligraphy, painting and antiques. During the Wanli and Apocalypse eras, the world considered him to be a learned gentleman, on a par with Dong Qichang. Cao Xuecheng, Zhi Neng Shi, was a magistrate.

古文：弱冠举万历二十三年进士，授户部主事。
现代文：万历二十三年，他二十岁就中进士，授户部主事。
English: In the 23rd year of Wanli, he entered the junior high school at the age of 20, and became the head of the admission department.

古文：中察典，调南京添注大理左寺正。
现代文：调南京添注大理寺左寺正。
English: To the tune of "Nanjing" with the addition of "Dali Temple Zuo-ji Zheng."

古文：居冗散七年，肆力于学。
现代文：闲居七年，致力于学习。
English: After seven years of idleness, he devoted himself to study.

古文：累迁南京户部郎中，四川右参政、按察使。
现代文：后历任南京户部郎中、四川右参政、四川按察使。
English: Later, he successively served as a tutor of the Nanjing Household Department, a member of the Sichuan Right Political Party, and an inspector of Sichuan.

古文：蜀府毁于火，估修资七十万金，学牷以《宗藩条例》却之。
现代文：蜀王府失火，估算修建费七十万金，要求拨款，学牷根据《宗藩条例》拒绝。
English: Shu Wangfu was destroyed by fire, the estimated construction cost was seven hundred thousand gold, and the request for funding was rejected by the students in accordance with the "Zonghan Regulations."

古文：又中察典，议调。天启二年起广西右参议。
现代文：天启二年任广西右参议。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was appointed Guangxi Right Counselor.

古文：初，梃击狱兴，刘廷元辈主疯颠。
现代文：当初，万历四十三年发生 梃击案 ，刘廷元等主张将凶手作为疯癫奸徒之罪处置。
English: At first, Liu Tingyuan and others advocated that the murderer should be dealt with as the crime of a mad traitor.

古文：学牷著《野史纪略》，直书事本末。
现代文：学牷著《野史纪略》一书，记述事件的本末。
English: Xuanzang wrote the book "Record of Field History," which describes the events from beginning to end.

古文：至六年秋，学牷迁陕西副使，未行，而廷元附魏忠贤大幸，乃劾学牷私撰野史，淆乱国章，遂削籍，毁所镂板。
现代文：天启六年秋，学牷调任陕西副使，尚未起程，刘廷元依附于宦官魏忠贤而受到宠幸，弹劾学俭私撰野史，淆乱国法。将学牷削职为民，烧毁《野史纪略》的雕板。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of the Apocalypse, Xuechuan was transferred to the post of deputy envoy to Shaanxi Province, but had not yet set off. Liu Tingyuan was favored by the eunuch Wei Zhongxian, and impeached Xuechuan for privately compiling field history and disputing the law of chaos. He removed Xuechuan from his post and burned the engraved plate of "Record of Field History."

古文：巡按御史王政新，以尝荐学牷，亦勒闲住。
现代文：巡按御史王政新，因曾荐举过学牷，也被勒令闲住。
English: Wang Zhenxin, the inspector-general of history, was also ordered to stay idle because he had recommended raising the student grade.

古文：广西大吏揣学牷必得重祸，羁留以待。已，知忠贤无意杀之，乃得释还。
现代文：广西大吏估计学牷将来必有大祸，把他留在广西，后来知魏忠贤无意杀学牷，才放他回家。
English: The officials of Guangxi estimated that there would be a big disaster in the future for Xu Rong, so they kept him in Guangxi. Later, when they knew that Wei Zhongxian had no intention of killing Xu Rong, they let him go home.

古文：采撷四库书，因类分辑，十有余年，功未及竣，两京继覆。
现代文：崇祯初年，起任广西副使，学牷力辞不肯受任。学牷居家二十年，著书于所居之石仓园，其《石仓十二代诗选》盛行于世。他收集经、史、子、集，按类分辑，进行了十余年，尚未完成，北京、南京相继陷落。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he was appointed deputy envoy to Guangxi, but Xu Rong refused to accept the appointment. Xu Rong lived at home for twenty years, wrote books in the stone warehouse garden where he lived, and his "Selected Poems of the 12th Generation of Stone Warehouse" was popular in the world. He collected scriptures, histories, children's books, and collections, sorted by category, and carried out more than ten years. It was not yet completed, and Beijing and Nanjing fell one after another.

古文：唐王立于闽中，起授太常卿。
现代文：唐王在福建即位，起任学牷为太常寺卿。
English: Tang Wang ascended to the throne in Fujian, and was appointed as Gakugei (学) for the Lord of Taizhoji Temple.

古文：崇祯十二年举乡试，年四十有九矣，再赴会试还，遂卒。
现代文：不久，转为礼部右侍郎兼侍讲学士，进升尚书，加太子太保。南明亡，学牷避入山中，自缢而死，年七十四岁。学牷诗文甚多，总名为《石仓集》。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department and Lecturer of the Ceremonial Department, and was promoted to Senior Scholar and Crown Prince. Nanming died, and Xuanzang fled into the mountains and committed suicide at the age of seventy-four. Xuanzang wrote a lot of poems, the overall title of which is "Ishikura Collection."

古文：王志坚，字弱生，昆山人。
现代文：万历年间，福建文风颇盛，实为学牷提倡的结果。王志坚，字弱生，昆山人。
English: During the Wanli period, the Fujian literary style was quite prosperous, which was actually the result of the advocacy of scholars. Wang Zhijian, a weak student, was from Kunshan.

古文：父临亨，进士。杭州知府。
现代文：父亲王临亨是进士，曾任杭州知府。
English: His father, Wang Linheng, was a scholar and once served as the governor of Hangzhou.

古文：志坚举万历三十八年进士，授南京兵部主事，迁员外郎、郎中。
现代文：万历三十八年中进士，授南京兵部主事，后历任员外郎、郎中。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wanli, he was promoted to the position of the chief of the Nanjing Military Department. Later, he served as a member of the outer circle and a member of the inner circle.

古文：暇日要同舍郎为读史社，撰《读史商语》。
现代文：闲暇时邀同舍郎官结成读史社，自己撰有《读史商语》。
English: In his spare time, he was invited to form a history-reading society with his brother-in-law, and wrote "History-Reading Business Language" himself.

古文：迁贵州提学佥事，不赴，乞侍养归。
现代文：调任贵州提学佥事，不愿去，请求归家侍奉双亲。
English: Transferred to Guizhou to attend school, he did not want to go and asked to return home to serve his parents.

古文：天启二年起督浙江驿传，奔母丧归。
现代文：天启二年起任督察浙江驿传。
English: Since the second year of the Apocalypse, he has served as the inspector of Zhejiang Zhichuan.

古文：崇祯四年复以佥事督湖广学政，礼部推为学政第一。
现代文：崇祯四年以佥事职督察湖广学政，礼部推举志坚的学政为第一等。
English: In the past four years, with the title of inspector of affairs, he supervised the academic and political affairs of Huquan University. The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies recommended the academic and political affairs of Zhijian as the first grade.

古文：六年卒于官。
现代文：六年逝世。
English: He died six years later.

古文：志坚少与李流芳同学，为诗文，法唐、宋名家。
现代文：志坚年少时与李流芳同学，其诗文效法唐、宋名家。
English: When Shijian was young, he was a classmate of Li Liufang, and his poetry imitated the Tang and Song dynasties.

古文：通籍后，卜居吴门古南园，杜门却扫，肆志读书，先经后史，先史后子、集。
现代文：初为官时，住在吴门的古南园闭门谢客，专心读书，先经后史，然后子、集。
English: When he first became an official, he lived in the ancient South Park of Wumen to thank guests behind closed doors, concentrate on reading, first through post-history, and then through children and collections.

古文：其读经，先笺疏而后辨论。
现代文：读经则先笺疏后议论。
English: The sutras are read first and then discussed.

古文：读史，先证据而后发明。
现代文：读史，先考证其依据，而后再加论述。
English: When reading history, first verify its basis, and then add a discussion.

古文：读子，则谓唐、宋而后无子，当取说家之有裨经史者补之。
现代文：读子则认为唐、宋以后无子书可读，应当取论说家中有益于理解经史者补入。
English: On the other hand, the reader thinks that since the Tang and Song Dynasties, no children's books can be read, and it should be supplemented by those who take the argument that it is beneficial to understand the history of the family.

古文：读集，则定秦、汉以后古文为五编，考核唐、宋碑志，援史传，捃杂说，以参核其事之同异、文之纯驳。
现代文：读集则选定秦汉以后的古文为五编，考核唐、宋碑文、墓志铭，再援引历史传注，摘取各家学说，考察其事实之异同及文章之纯杂。
English: For the reading collection, five volumes of ancient texts from the Qin and Han dynasties were selected, inscriptions and epitaphs from the Tang and Song dynasties were examined, historical notes were quoted, various doctrines were extracted, and the similarities and differences of facts and miscellaneous articles were examined.

古文：溥幼嗜学。所读书必手钞，钞已朗诵一过，即焚之，又钞，如是者六七始已。右手握管处，指掌成茧。
现代文：对于佛教经典也深有研究。其诗作甚多，而自选者只七十余首。张溥，字天如，太仓人。自幼好学，所读之书必亲手抄写，抄完朗诵一遍，立即烧掉，然后又抄，直到六七遍才止，右手握笔的指掌起了茧。
English: There is also a deep study of Buddhist classics. There are many poems, but the self-selected ones are only more than seventy. Zhang Ye, whose characters are like the sky, is a person of great learning. He has been eager to learn since childhood, and he must copy the books he reads with his own hands. Once he has finished reading, he immediately burns them, and then he copies them again until he has read them sixty-seven times. The fingers of his right hand holding the pen are raised.

古文：冬日手皲，日沃汤数次。
现代文：冬季手冻裂，每天要用温水烫数次。
English: In winter, the hand is frozen and cracked, and it is necessary to warm it with warm water several times a day.

古文：后名读书之斋曰 七录 ，以此也。与同里张采共学齐名，号 娄东二张 。
现代文：所以后来把他的书斋题名为 七录 。与同乡张采同学，二人齐名，号称 娄东二张 。
English: Therefore, he later named his study room "Seven Records." Together with his fellow countryman Zhang Zhe, the two of them have the same name and are known as "Zhang Dong Er Zhang."

古文：崇祯元年以选贡生入都，采方成进士，两人名彻都下。
现代文：崇祯元年作为选贡生入京，同时人张采，字受先，也考中进士，两人闻名于京都。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he entered Kyoto as a tribute-paying student. At the same time, he was awarded the title of "Zhang Zhe," "Zha Zhe Xian" and "Zhong Jian Shi" in the junior high school entrance examination. Both of them are famous in Kyoto.

古文：已而采官临川。溥归，集郡中名士相与复古学，名其文社日复社。
现代文：其后，采至临川为官，溥归家乡，聚集郡中名士共同复兴古学，组织文社，名为 复社 。
English: After that, he went to Linchuan to become an official, returned to his hometown, gathered famous people in the county to jointly revive ancient studies, and organized a literary society, called the Restoration Society.

古文：四年成进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：四年，溥中进士，选为庶吉士，因父母去世，请假归葬服孝。
English: In the fourth year, he was promoted to Shizhong Junior High School, and was elected to Shizhong Ji Shi. Due to the death of his parents, he took a leave of absence to attend the funeral.

古文：以葬亲乞假归，读者若经生，无间寒暑。四方啖名者争走其门，尽名为复社。
现代文：在此期间，他努力读书，寒暑从不间断，四方慕名者争至其门，都称 复社 。
English: During this period, he worked hard to study, the cold and hot weather never stopped, and admirers from all over the country flocked to his door, all known as the "Resurrection Society."

古文：溥亦倾身结纳，交游日广，声气通朝右。
现代文：溥也尽全力接纳，交游日广，声名闻于朝廷。
English: Zhai also did his best to accept, travel widely, and became famous in the imperial court.

古文：所品题甲乙，颇能为荣辱。
现代文：他评论了谁，谁就感到荣耀。
English: He took pride in who he reviewed.

古文：诸奔走附丽者，辄自矜曰： 吾以嗣东林也。 
现代文：于是来依附于他的人，都自夸说： 我是继承了东林。 
English: Those who have come to depend on him have boasted, "I have inherited the Eastern Forest."

古文：执政大僚由此恶之。
现代文：从而为执政大官憎恶。
English: This has made him detested by the ruling elite.

古文：里人陆文声者，输赀为监生，求入社不许，采又尝以事抶之。
现代文：同乡陆文声，捐钱买得了监生，请求入 复社 ，未被接受。张采又曾为某事打了他。
English: A fellow villager, Lu Wensheng, was able to donate money to buy a probationer, and his request to be reinstated was not accepted. Zhang Cai once beat him for something.

古文：文声诣阙言： 风俗之弊，皆原于士子。溥、采为主盟，倡复社，乱天下。 
现代文：于是文声到朝廷去报告说 ：风俗之坏，皆由于那般读书人，以溥、采为首，创立复社，扰乱天下。 
English: So Wen Sheng went to the imperial court to report: The bad customs are all due to those readers, led by Zou and Zhao, who founded the Reunification Society and disturbed the world.

古文：温体仁方枋国事，下所司。
现代文：温体仁正掌握国家大权，令官府对他们治罪。
English: Wen Tite Ren is holding the power of the state, ordering the government to punish them.

古文：迁延久之，提学御史倪元珙、兵备参议冯元扬、太仓知州周仲连言复社无可罪。三人皆贬斥，严旨穷究不已。
现代文：这桩公案拖延了很久，提学御史倪元珙、兵备参议冯元、太仓知州周仲连，都说 复社 无罪，这三人因此遭到贬斥，皇帝严令追究。
English: This public case has been delayed for a long time. Ni Yuanjun, the Minister of Education, Feng Yuan, the Military Adviser, and Zhou Zhonglian, the Governor of Taicang and Zhizhou, all said that the Reunification Society was not guilty. As a result, these three people were disparaged, and the emperor ordered a strict investigation.

古文：闽人周之夔者，尝为苏州推官，坐事罢去，疑溥为之，恨甚。
现代文：福建人周之夔曾为苏州推官，因犯过失而被罢官。他怀疑是张溥害了他，深恨于心。
English: Zhou Zhiqi, a native of Fujian Province, was once a Suzhou magistrate and was dismissed for misconduct. He suspected that Zhang Zhiqi had harmed him and hated him deeply.

古文：闻文声讦溥，遂伏阙言溥等把持计典，己罢职实其所为，因及复社恣横状。
现代文：听说陆文声攻击张溥，也去向朝廷指控溥等把持官吏的审核，他之被罢职就是溥等所为，还指控 复社 恣意横行等不法之事。
English: Heard that Lu Wenxiang attacked Zhang Ye, he also went to the imperial court to accuse Ye and others of controlling the examination of officials. His dismissal was the work of Ye and others. He also accused the Communist Party of the People's Republic of China (CPC) of arbitrarily rampant and other illegal things.

古文：章下，巡抚张国维等言之夔去官，无预溥事，亦被旨谯让。
现代文：巡抚张国维等因指出周之夔被罢官与溥毫不相干，也受到皇帝的谴责。
English: The governor Zhang Guowei and others were also condemned by the emperor for pointing out that Zhou Zhisheng's dismissal had nothing to do with Zhou.

古文：至十四年，溥已卒，而事犹未竟。
现代文：直到崇祯十四年，这时溥已去世，而 复社 一案尚未了结。
English: It wasn't until the 14th year of Chongzhen's reign, by which time Chongzhen had passed away, that the case for the company's reinstatement was finally resolved.

古文：刑部侍郎蔡奕琛坐党薛国观系狱，未知溥卒也，讦溥遥握朝柄，己罪由溥，因言采结党乱政。
现代文：刑部侍郎蔡奕琛与薛国观结为朋党，被捕下狱。他不知道张溥已经故世，还攻击溥，说他遥控朝政，自己被捕下狱就是溥干的。又说张采结党乱政。
English: He did not know that Zhang Ye had passed away, and he also attacked Zhang Ye, saying that he controlled the government by remote control, and that he was the one who did it when he was arrested and sent to prison. He also said that Zhang Ye had made a mess of the party and government.

古文：诏责溥、采回奏，采上言： 复社非臣事，然臣与溥生平相淬砺，死避网罗，负义图全，谊不出此。
现代文：朝廷下诏，责令溥、采报告事情原尾。采上书说 ：复社与臣无关，然臣平生与溥相互鼓励上进，同生死，共荣辱，我们的友谊就是如此。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, ordering Zou and Zai to report the matter to the original end. Zai said in the letter: the Reorganized Society has nothing to do with the minister, but the minister and Zai have encouraged each other to make progress throughout their lives, living and dying together, sharing honor and disgrace, and our friendship is just like that.

古文：念溥日夜解经论文，矢心报称，曾未一日服官，怀忠入地。
现代文：溥每天日夜注解经书，评论文章，决心报答朝廷的恩德。他不曾一日为官，怀着一颗忠心而死。
English: Every day and night, he annotated scriptures and commented on articles, determined to repay the kindness of the imperial court. He had never been an official for a single day, and died with a sense of loyalty.

古文：即今严纶之下，并不得泣血自明，良足哀悼。 
现代文：至今未有诏令为他洗雪冤屈，实是令人哀悼。 
English: So far, there has been no official decree to clear up his grievances, which is really regrettable.

古文：当是时，体仁已前罢，继者张至发、薛国观皆不喜东林，故所司不敢复奏。
现代文：当时，温体仁已经罢官，继任者张至发、薛国观皆不喜欢东林党人，故有关衙门也不敢陈奏张溥与 复社 的事。
English: At that time, Wen Tizhen had already resigned, and his successors Zhang Zhifang and Xue Guokun did not like the Donglin Party members. Therefore, the relevant government officials did not dare to play up the issue of Zhang Ye and the "reunification."

古文：及是，至发、国观亦相继罢，而周延儒当国，溥座主也，其获再相，溥有力焉，故采疏上，事即得解。
现代文：至发、国观也相继罢官，周延儒执政。延儒是溥的进士主考官，形势对溥有利，故张采的奏疏呈上后，溥与复社的事才得以解决。
English: Zhi Fa and Gu Guanqian also resigned one after another, and Zhou Yanru came to power. Yan Ru was the chief examiner of Jinshi, and the situation was favorable to Jinshi. Therefore, it was only after Zhang Zhe's report was submitted that the matter of Jinshi and the reunion was resolved.

古文：明年，御史刘熙祚、给事中姜埰交章言溥砥行博闻，所纂述经史，有功圣学，宜取备乙夜观。
现代文：第二年，御史刘熙祚、给事中姜都上书说溥的道德修养好，学识渊博，其纂述的经史对孔孟之学颇有贡献，值得一看。
English: In the second year, the imperial historian Liu Xizhi and the court official Jiang Du wrote to the emperor, saying that Zou's moral cultivation was good and his knowledge was profound, and that his compilation of the history of Confucius and Mencius was quite a contribution to the study of Confucius and Mencius, and was worth a look.

古文：帝御经筵，问及二人，延儒对曰： 读书好秀才。 
现代文：崇祯皇帝在听讲经史时，问及张溥、张采二人，延儒回答说： 读书的好秀才。 
English: When Emperor Chongzhen was listening to a lecture on the history of scripture, he asked about Zhang Ye and Zhang Cai. Yan Ru replied, "They are good at reading.

古文：帝曰： 溥已卒，采小臣，言官何为荐之？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：溥已死了，采不过一小臣，谏官为何举荐？ 
English: The emperor said, "The eunuch is dead, I can't choose a vassal, why should I recommend a eunuch?"

古文：延儒曰： 二人好读书，能文章，言官为举子时读其文，又以其用未竟，故惜之耳。 
现代文：延儒说： 二人好读书，能写文章，那些谏官为举人时就读了他俩的文章，因见朝廷始终未任用他们，为之惋惜。 
English: Yan Ru said: The two of them are good at reading and can write articles. Those eunuchs read the articles of the two of them when nominating people, and they were sorry to see that the court had never appointed them.

古文：帝曰： 亦未免偏。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：这话也未免偏颇。 
English: The emperor said, "This is also a biased statement.

古文：延儒言： 诚如圣谕，溥与黄道周皆偏，因善读书，以故惜之者众。 
现代文：延儒说 ：诚如圣上所谕，对溥与黄道周评价是有些偏颇，但因他们会读书，所以很多人为之惋惜。 
English: Yan Rong said, "It is true that the evaluation of the Year of the Rooster and the Zodiac is a bit biased, but because they can read, many people regret it.

古文：帝颔之，遂有诏征溥遗书，而道周亦复官。
现代文：帝点头称是，下诏征求溥的遗著，道周也复了官。
English: The emperor nodded his head and said that he would issue an edict to solicit the posthumous works of Tao Zhou, and Tao Zhou was reinstated.

古文：有司先后录上三千余卷，帝悉留览。
现代文：地方官府先后进呈溥的遗著三千余卷，皇帝全都阅读了。
English: Local government offices successively submitted more than three thousand volumes of his posthumous works, and the emperor read them all.

古文：溥诗文敏捷。四方征索者，不起草，对客挥毫，俄顷立就，以故名高一时。
现代文：溥写诗撰文都很敏捷，四方之人来求他的诗文，从不起草，当即挥毫成篇，故当时名气很高。
English: He was very quick at composing poems. People from all over the country came to ask for his poems. He never stopped composing, but immediately whipped them into a poem, so he was very famous at that time.

古文：卒时，年止四十。
现代文：终年仅四十岁。
English: He was only forty years old.

