古文：臧盾弟厥傅岐臧盾，字宣卿，东莞莒人。
现代文：臧盾字宣卿，东莞莒人。
English: Dongguan Xuancheng, Dongguan Xuanren.

古文：高祖焘，宋左光禄大夫。
现代文：他的高祖父臧焘，宋时任左光禄大夫。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zou, was a doctor of the Left Guanglu School in the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖潭之，左民尚书。
现代文：祖父臧潭之，任左民尚书。
English: His grandfather, Shuitan Zhi, was a Ren Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：父未甄，博涉文史，有才干，少为外兄汝南周颙所知。
现代文：父亲臧未甄，广泛地涉猎文史，很有才能，年少时就深得表兄汝南周颐的赏识。
English: His father, Zou Weizhen, was a talented man who dabbled extensively in literary history. When he was young, he was deeply appreciated by his cousin, Runan Zhou Rong.

古文：宋末，起家为领军主簿，所奉即齐武帝。
现代文：宋代末年，臧未甄被从家中征召出来任领军主簿，侍奉齐武帝。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Gong Wei Zhen was called up from his home to be the leader of the army and serve Emperor Qiwu.

古文：入齐，历太尉祭酒、尚书主客郎、建安、庐陵二王府记室、前军功曹史、通直郎、南徐州中正、丹阳尹丞。
现代文：入齐后，历任太尉祭酒，尚书主客郎，建安庐陵二王府记室，前军功曹史，通直郎，南徐州中正，丹阳尹丞。
English: After entering the Qi, the successive captains of the sacrificial wine, Shang Shuzhu Hakka Lang, Jian Anqin Mausoleum of the Second King's Office, former military hero Cao Shi, Tong Naorang, South Xuzhou Zhong Zheng, Danyang Yin Jie.

古文：高祖平京邑，霸府建，引为骠骑刑狱参军。
现代文：高祖平定京城，建立王府，选用臧未甄为骠骑刑狱参军。
English: Gaozhu conquered the capital, established the royal palace, and selected Yao Wei as a prisoner of war to join the army.

古文：天监初，除后军谘议中郎、南徐州别驾，入拜黄门郎，迁右军安成王长史、少府卿。
现代文：天监初年，臧未甄被任命为后军谘议中郎、南徐州别驾，又入京任黄门郎，后来迁任右军安成王长史、少府卿。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervision, Gong Wei Zhen was appointed as the advisory middle-ranking officer of the rear army, and the deputy commander of the southern Xuzhou, and he also entered Beijing as the Huangmenro, and later he was transferred to the right army of Ancheng Wang Changshi and Shao Fuqing.

古文：出为新安太守，有能名。
现代文：他出京任新安太守，以办事干练著称。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the new governor of An, and was known for his efficiency.

古文：还为太子中庶子、司农卿、太尉长史。
现代文：返回京城后，他任太子中庶子，司农卿，太尉长史。
English: After returning to the capital, he was appointed the Prince's middle son, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the First Lieutenant.

古文：丁所生母忧，三年庐于墓侧。
现代文：臧未甄为生母服丧，在墓地旁筑草庐住了三年。
English: Zou Weizhen mourned for her birth mother and lived for three years in a grass-thatched hut near the cemetery.

古文：服阕，除廷尉卿。
现代文：服丧期满，他被任命为廷尉卿。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was appointed Lord Lieutenant.

古文：出为安成王长史、江夏太守，卒官。
现代文：臧未甄出京任安成王长史、江夏太守，在任上去世。
English: He did not screen the Beijing appointment of Ancheng Wang Changshi and the governor of Jiangxia, and died in office.

古文：盾幼从征士琅邪诸葛璩受《五经》，通章句。
现代文：臧盾自幼跟从征士琅邪诸葛璩学习《五经》，精通剖章析句解释经义。
English: From a young age, Zhaodun studied the Five Classics of Confucianism with Zhaozhu Zhuge, and was proficient in the analysis of passages to explain the meaning of the classics.

古文：璩学徒常有数十百人，盾处其间，无所狎比。
现代文：诸葛璩的学生常常有几十至上百人，臧盾天天和他们相处，但从不和人亲狎。
English: Zhuge Liang's students often number from a few dozen to over a hundred, and he gets along with them every day, but they are never close.

古文：璩异之，叹曰： 此生重器，王佐才也。 
现代文：诸葛璩赞赏他，感叹道： 此人是承担重任的大器，是辅佐帝王的大才啊! 
English: Zhuge Liang appreciated him and exclaimed, "This man is a great tool to shoulder heavy responsibilities, he is a great talent to assist the emperor!"

古文：初为抚军行参军，迁尚书中兵郎。
现代文：臧盾初出仕任抚军行参军，后来迁任尚书中兵郎。
English: Xing Dun first went to serve as a military attaché and joined the army, and later was transferred to the position of a soldier in Shangshu.

古文：盾美风姿，善举止，每趋奏，高祖甚悦焉。
现代文：他风度潇洒，仪容修美，举止优雅，每当他趋拜奏事，高祖见了他都很高兴。
English: He has a dashing demeanor, a beautiful appearance, and an elegant demeanor. Whenever he attends an event, Gao Zu is very happy to see him.

古文：入兼中书通事舍人，除安右录事参军，舍人如故。
现代文：臧盾入京兼中书通事舍人，后被任命为安右绿事参军，舍人之职不变。
English: Zou Dun entered Beijing and was appointed as the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. Later, he was appointed as the secretary of the General Office of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs.

古文：盾有孝性，随父宿直于廷尉，母刘氏在宅，夜暴亡，左手中指忽痛，不得寝。
现代文：臧盾有孝顺的德性，一天，他跟随父亲在廷尉值班，母亲刘氏在家中，半夜突然暴病身亡。
English: Zou Dun had the virtue of filial piety. One day, he was on duty with his father as a courtier, and his mother, Liu, was at home when she suddenly fell violently ill and died in the middle of the night.

古文：及晓，宅信果报凶问，其感通如此。服制未终，父又卒，盾居丧五年，不出庐户，形骸枯悴，家人不复识。
现代文：当晚臧盾左手中指突然剧痛，不能入睡，等到天亮，家中来人果然报告了母亲去世的消息，他和亲人之间的心灵相通竟到了这种程度。臧盾为母亲服丧未满，父亲又去世了，臧盾守丧五年，不出草庐，形容憔悴，骨瘦如柴，家裹人都认不出他了。
English: That night, Gongdun's left middle finger suddenly had a sharp pain, and he couldn't fall asleep. When it was dawn, someone from home reported the news of his mother's death. The spiritual connection between him and his relatives had reached such a level. Gongdun's mother was still in mourning, his father died again, Gongdun was in mourning for five years, he didn't have a single hair on his head, he was described as gaunt, skinny as wood, and his family couldn't recognize him.

古文：乡人王端以状闻，高祖嘉之，敕累遣抑譬。
现代文：同乡人王端把情况呈报朝廷，高祖对他十分赞赏，多次派人宽慰晓谕他。
English: Wang Duan, a fellow villager, reported the situation to the imperial court. Gaozhu highly appreciated him and repeatedly sent people to comfort and advise him.

古文：服阕，除丹阳尹丞，转中书郎，复兼中书舍人，迁尚书左丞，为东中郎武陵王长史，行府州国事，领会稽郡丞。
现代文：服丧期满后，臧盾被任命为丹阳尹丞，转任中书郎，又兼中书舍人，后迁任尚书左丞，任束中郎武陵王长史，行府州国事，领会稽郡丞。
English: After the expiration of the period of mourning, Zou Dun was appointed as Danyang Yinzheng, transferred to the position of Zhongshuro, and also concurrently the position of Zhongshuro, later moved to the position of Shangshuzojo, appointed to the position of Zaku Zhonglang, Murying Wangchangshi, engaged in prefectural and state affairs, and became the county magistrate.

古文：还除少府卿，领步兵校尉，迁御史中丞。
现代文：回京后他被任命为少府卿，领步兵校尉，迁任御史中丞。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was appointed as Shofu-kyo, the leader of the infantry, and transferred to the position of Goshi Chujo.

古文：盾性公强，居宪台甚称职。
现代文：臧盾性格刚强公正，在御史府很称职。
English: Zou Dun is a strong and fair character, and is very competent in the Imperial History Office.

古文：中大通五年二月，高祖幸同泰寺开讲，设四部大会，众数万人。
现代文：中大通五年二月，高祖幸临同泰寺讲论佛教经义，开设比丘、比丘尼、优婆塞、优婆夷四部众大会，到会的有数万人。
English: In February of the 5th year of Chuo University, Gao Zu Xinglin gave a lecture on Buddhist scriptures at Tongtai Temple, and opened a four-part general assembly of monks, nuns, nuns, and nuns, with tens of thousands of people attending.

古文：南越所献驯象，忽于众中狂逸，乘轝羽卫及会皆骇散，惟盾与散骑郎裴之礼嶷然自若，高祖甚嘉焉。
现代文：开会时，南越进献的驯象，突然在人群中狂奔，皇帝的车马仪仗以及舆会的人们都惊骇逃散，衹有臧盾和散骑郎裴之礼巍然不动，神情自若，高祖十分赞赏他们。
English: At the opening of the meeting, the tamed elephant presented by South Vietnam suddenly ran wildly in the crowd, the emperor's chariot and horse ceremonial battle and the people of the public meeting were shocked and fled, and the eunuch with the shield and the rider Pei remained motionless and self-confident. Gaozu highly appreciated them.

古文：俄有诏，加散骑常侍，未拜，又诏曰： 总一六军，非才勿授。
现代文：不久皇上下达诏令，加授咸盾为散骑常侍，咸盾还没有受任，高祖又下韶令说： 统领六军的职务不能授给没有才干的人。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an imperial edict, awarding Xiantun the additional title of straggler. Xiantun had not yet been appointed, and Gaozu issued another imperial edict, saying, "The post of commanding the Six Armies cannot be given to someone without talent."

古文：御史中丞、新除散骑常侍盾，志怀忠密，识用详慎，当官平允，处务勤恪，必能缉斯戎政。
现代文：御史中丞、刚任命的散骑常侍臧盾，胸怀大志，忠诚谨慎，知人善任，谨慎周密，担任官职公平允当，处理政务勤勉恭谨，他一定能很好地处理军机大事。
English: Goshi Chujo, the newly-appointed cavalry officer, is ambitious, loyal and prudent, knows people well, is prudent and meticulous, holds office fairly, and handles government affairs diligently and respectfully. He will surely be able to handle military affairs well.

古文：可兼领军，常侍如故。 
现代文：可兼领军，常侍的职位不变。 
English: He may also lead the troops, but his position as a regular attendant will remain unchanged.

古文：大同二年，迁中领军。
现代文：大同二年，臧盾迁任中领军。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was appointed as the leader of the middle army.

古文：领军管天下兵要，监局事多。
现代文：领军掌管国家的兵权，主管的事务繁多。
English: The leader of the army is in charge of the country's military power and is in charge of a wide range of affairs.

古文：盾为人敏赡，有风力，长于拨繁，职事甚理。
现代文：臧盾为人聪明敏捷，见多识广，有魄力，善于处理繁杂的政务，因此其职责范围内的事务都处理得很有条理。
English: Zou Dun is a smart and agile person, well-informed, courageous, and good at handling complex government affairs, so the affairs within his scope of responsibility are handled in a very orderly manner.

古文：天监中，吴平侯萧景居此职，著声称。至是，盾复继之。
现代文：天监年间，吴平侯萧景担任这一职务，声名卓著，到这时臧盾又继萧景获得了这样的声誉。
English: During the time of the Heaven's Supervisor, Wu Ping Hou Xiao Jing held this position and was famous. By this time, Zou Dun also gained such a reputation following Xiao Jing.

古文：五年，出为仁威将军、吴郡太守，视事未期，以疾陈解。
现代文：大同五年，臧盾出京任仁威将军、吴郡太守，任职不到一年，因生病上书请求免职。
English: In the fifth year of Datong, Zou Dun went to Beijing to serve as General Ren Wei and Governor of Wu County. He served for less than a year, and then requested to be relieved of duty due to illness.

古文：拜光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：他被任命为光禄大夫，加赐金印紫绶。
English: He was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, and was awarded the Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon.

古文：七年，疾愈，复为领军将军。
现代文：大同七年，臧盾病愈之后，又任领军将军。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, after Xing Dun recovered from his illness, he was appointed as the leading general.

古文：九年，卒，时年六十六。
现代文：大同九年，臧盾去世，死时六十六岁。
English: In the ninth year of Datong, Gong Dun passed away at the age of 66.

古文：即日有诏举哀。
现代文：他去世的当天皇上就下诏为他举哀。
English: When he died, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to mourn him.

古文：赠侍中，领军如故。
现代文：臧盾被追赠侍中，领军之职不变。
English: Xing Dun was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain, but his position as leader of the army remained unchanged.

古文：给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱布各有差。
现代文：朝廷赠给束园秘器，朝服一套，殡殓的衣服一套？钱币及布帛都赠有一定数量。
English: The imperial court presented a set of secret tools, a set of court dress, a set of funeral clothes, a certain amount of money and cloth.

古文：谥曰忠。
现代文：谧号盅。
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：子长博，字孟弘，桂阳内史。
现代文：臧盾的长子臧长博，字孟弘，任桂阳内史。
English: Zhaodun's eldest son, Zhaochangbo, surnamed Menghong, was appointed to the Guiyang Inner Court.

古文：次子仲博，曲阿令。
现代文：次子臧仲博，任曲阿令。
English: His second son, Zou Zhongbo, became Ren Qu'a Ling.

古文：盾弟厥。
现代文：臧盾的弟弟叫臧厥。
English: Zou Dun's younger brother is Zou Jue.

古文：厥，字献卿，亦以干局称。
现代文：臧厥字献卿，也以有才能有气度著称。
English: He was also known for his talent and grace.

古文：初为西中郎行参军、尚书主客郎。入兼中书通事舍人，累迁正员郎、鸿胪卿，舍人如故。
现代文：他初出仕任西中郎行参军，尚书主客郎，后来入京兼中书通事舍人，累经升迁为正员郎，鸿胪卿，中书通事舍人一职不变。
English: He first went to join the army as Nishi no chujo, serving as the chief secretary's guest, and later, when he entered the capital, he also served as the secretary's assistant. After promotion, he became the chief secretary's assistant, and the position of secretary's assistant remained unchanged.

古文：迁尚书右丞，未拜，出为晋安太守。
现代文：迁任尚书右丞，还未到任，又出京担任晋安太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoshu Ujo, but before he arrived, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jinan.

古文：郡居山海，常结聚逋逃，前二千石虽募讨捕，而寇盗不止。
现代文：晋安郡靠山临海，有逃亡的罪犯常聚集出没，前任郡守虽然招募军士征讨搜捕，但盗贼侵扰仍然无法禁止。
English: Jin'an County is a coastal county, and fugitive criminals often gather there. Although the former county governor recruited sergeants to search for and arrest them, the intrusion of thieves still cannot be prohibited.

古文：厥下车，宣风化，凡诸凶党，皆涘负而出，居民复业，商旅流通。
现代文：臧厥一到任，便宣扬教化，那些罪犯都拖儿带女全家从藏身之地出来归附，当地百姓恢复了常业，道路通畅，商人旅客来往不断。
English: As soon as Gong Jue took office, he began to preach enlightenment. All those criminals came out of their hiding places with their children and their whole families to join him. Local people resumed their regular jobs, roads were smooth, and merchants and tourists kept coming and going.

古文：然为政严酷少恩，吏民小事必加杖罚，百姓谓之 臧虎 。
现代文：然而臧厥处理政事崇尚严刑峻法，不肯稍有宽容，官吏百姓稍有过失也必加杖刑，百姓称他为 臧虎 。
English: However, the Qiangjue advocated strict punishment and harsh laws in dealing with political affairs, and refused to be a little tolerant. Officials and commoners who made a slight mistake would also be punished with a cane, and the people called him a "tiger."

古文：还除骠骑庐陵王谘议参军，复兼舍人。
现代文：臧厥回京被授任骠骑庐陵王谘议参军，又兼舍人。
English: Yan Jue returned to Beijing and was given the position of riding on the horse of the King of the Ling Dynasty to advise him to join the army. He also became a layman.

古文：迁员外散骑常侍，兼司农卿，舍人如故。
现代文：后迁任员外散骑常侍，兼司农卿，舍人之职不变。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and also served as the Secretary of Agriculture, but his duties remained unchanged.

古文：大同八年，卒官，时年四十八。
现代文：大同八年，他在任上去世，死时四十八岁。
English: He died in office eight years later, at the age of 48.

古文：厥前后居职，所掌之局大事及兰台廷尉所不能决者，敕并付厥。厥辨断精详，咸得其理。
现代文：臧厥先后任职之时，官署中的重大事情以及御史廷尉不能决断的事情，皇上都下令交给他处理。
English: When Gong Jue was successively appointed, the emperor ordered that the important matters in the government office and the matters that could not be decided by Lieutenant Gong Shijing should be handed over to him.

古文：厥卒后，有挝登闻鼓诉者，求付清直舍人。
现代文：堕压分析判断精当周密合情合理。鲮匦去世后，有人击打登闻鼓告状，请求将案件交给清直的舍人越厥处理。
English: After the death of Zhu Rong, someone beat a petition to report the case, requesting that the case be handed over to the clean and upright Shenren Yue Jue.

古文：高祖曰： 臧厥既亡，此事便无可付。 
现代文：高祖说： 臧厥已经去世，这事便无人可以托付了。 
English: Gaozu said, "He has passed away, so no one can be entrusted with this matter.

古文：其见知如此。
现代文：臧厥被高祖了解和赏识到了这种程度。
English: This is the level of understanding and appreciation of Jie Jue by Gao Zu.

古文：子操，尚书三公郎。
现代文：咸厥的儿子臧操，任尚书三公郎。
English: The son of Xian Jue, Zi Cao, was appointed the third prince of Shangshu.

古文：傅岐，字景平，北地灵州人也。
现代文：傅岐字景平，北地灵州人。
English: Fuqi Zi Jingping, a native of Lingshou, North China.

古文：高祖弘仁，宋太常。
现代文：他的高祖父傅弘仁，宋时任太常。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Fu Hongren, was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：祖琰，齐世为山阴令，有治能，自县擢为益州刺史。
现代文：祖父傅琰，齐代任山阴令，有管理政事的才能，从县令擢拔为益州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Fu Jun, was appointed to the position of Shanyin Ruling on behalf of Qi, and had the ability to manage government affairs. He was promoted from County Ruling to the position of Yizhou Historian.

古文：父翙，天监中，历山阴、建康令，亦有能名，官至骠骑谘议。
现代文：傅些的父亲傅翙，天监年间，历山阴、建康令，也以有才干而闻名，官至骠骑谘议。
English: Fu Zi's father, Fu Zi, was also famous for his talents during his time in the Heaven's Prison. He was known for his ability to consult with officials.

古文：岐初为国子明经生，起家南康王宏常侍，迁行参军，兼尚书金部郎。母忧去职，居丧尽礼。
现代文：傅岐开始是国子监明经生，初出仕任南康王左常侍，后来迁任行参军，兼尚书金部郎，因居母丧离职，服丧的所有礼制，他都做得尽心尽意。
English: Fu Qi began as a student of Guozi Jianming, and first served as the left attendant of King Nankang. Later, he was transferred to join the army, and also served as the secretary of the Ministry of Finance. He left the post because of his mother's death, and he did his best to follow all the etiquette of mourning.

古文：服阕后，疾废久之。
现代文：服丧期满后，因病很长时间未任职。
English: After the end of the mourning period, he did not hold office for a long time due to illness.

古文：是时改创北郊坛，初起岐监知缮筑，事毕，除如新令。
现代文：逭时朝廷改建北郊祭坛，开始起用傅岐监知修建之事，工程完成后，朝廷任命他为始新令。
English: At that time, the imperial court began to rebuild the northern suburb altar, and began to use Fu Qi to supervise the construction. After the project was completed, the imperial court appointed him as the first new order.

古文：县民有因斗相殴而死者，死家诉郡，郡录其仇人，考掠备至，终不引咎，郡乃移狱于县。岐即命脱械，以和言问之，便即首服。
现代文：始新县百姓中有人互相斗殴致死，死者的家属到郡裹告状，郡守逮捕了他们的仇人，百般拷问，那人始终不肯认罪，郡守把案件转到始新县审理，傅岐当即命令解去镰铐，言语温和地询问罪犯，那人马上服罪。
English: Some of the people in Shixin County fought each other to death. The family members of the deceased went to the county to file a complaint. The county magistrate arrested their enemy and tortured him in various ways. The man still refused to plead guilty. The county magistrate transferred the case to Shixin County for trial. Fu Qi immediately ordered to release the shackles, gently questioned the criminal, and the man immediately pleaded guilty.

古文：法当偿死，会冬节至，岐乃放其还家，使过节一日复狱。
现代文：按法令应判决罪犯以命抵罪，恰好遇上冬至，傅岐便放罪犯回家团圆，让他遇完冬至后一返回监狱。
English: According to the law, the convict should be sentenced to death. It happened to be the winter solstice, so Fu Qi let the convict go home for reunion, and let him return to prison after the winter solstice.

古文：曹掾固争曰： 古者乃有此，于今不可行。 
现代文：县吏坚持不肯放人，与傅岐争辩说： 古时候是有这种做法，但现在不能实行。 
English: The county official was adamant that he would not release the man, arguing with Fu Qi: In ancient times, there was such a practice, but now it cannot be carried out.

古文：岐曰： 其若负信，县令当坐，主者勿忧。 
现代文：傅岐说： 他如果不讲信用，我这个县令应当获罪，你逭主管人不要担忧。 
English: Fu Qi said: If he does not trust, I, the county magistrate, should be punished. You, the supervisor, should not worry.

古文：竟如期而反。
现代文：罪犯到底如期返回。
English: In the end, the criminal returned as planned.

古文：太守深相叹异，遽以状闻。
现代文：太守对这事惊叹不已，立即具状向上呈报。
English: The daimyō was astonished by this and immediately reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：岐后去县，民无老小，皆出境拜送，啼号之声，闻于数十里。
现代文：后来傅岐离开始新县时，百姓无论老少全都出境送别，哭号的声音，在几十里外都听得见。
English: Later, when Fu Qi left to start a new county, the people, both young and old, all went abroad to see him off. The sound of wailing could be heard dozens of miles away.

古文：至都，除廷尉正，入兼中书通事舍人，迁宁远岳阳王记室参军，舍人如故。
现代文：傅岐到了京城，被任命为廷尉正，入朝兼中书通事舍人，又迁任宁远岳阳王记室参军，舍人之职不变。
English: Fu Qi arrived in Beijing, was appointed as a court lieutenant, entered the imperial court and became a secretary of the imperial court, and was transferred to the King Yueyang's office in Ningyuan to join the army. The position of the secretary remained unchanged.

古文：出为建康令，以公事免。
现代文：傅岐出京任建康令，因为公事被免职。
English: Fu Qi left Beijing for Jiankang because he was relieved of his duties.

古文：俄复为舍人，累迁安西中记室、镇南谘议参军，兼舍人如故。
现代文：不久他又任舍人，累经升迁为安西中记室，镇南谘议参军，兼舍人之职不变。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the Anxi Central Records Office, and Zhenan Advisory Council to join the army, and his position as a concierge remained unchanged.

古文：岐美容止，博涉能占对。
现代文：傅岐相貌英俊，举止潇洒，涉猎广泛，对答如流。
English: Fu Qi is handsome in appearance, has a dashing demeanor, is widely involved in hunting, and answers questions fluently.

古文：大同中，与魏和亲，其使岁中再至，常遣岐接对焉。
现代文：大同年间，朝廷与魏国和亲，魏国的使节一年中来两次，皇上常派傅岐去接待应对。
English: In the same year, the imperial court and Wei Guoqin, the envoy of Wei, came twice a year, and the emperor often sent Fu Qi to receive and respond.

古文：太清元年，累迁太仆、司农卿，舍人如故。
现代文：太清元年，他累经升迁任太仆，司农卿，舍人之职不变。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of the eunuch, the Secretary of Agriculture, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：在禁省十余年，机事密勿亚于硃异。
现代文：他在皇宫内任职十多年，参与筹划国家机密要事勤勉努力，和朱异相当。
English: He has served in the imperial palace for more than ten years, participated in the planning of state secrets and other important matters, and worked diligently, comparable to Zhu Rong.

古文：此年冬，豫州刺史贞阳侯萧渊明率众伐彭城，兵败陷魏。
现代文：这年冬天，豫州刺史贞阳侯萧渊明率兵攻打彭城，失败后身陷魏国。
English: In the winter of that year, Xiao Yuanming, the prince of Zhengyang, the prince of Yuzhou, led an army to attack Pengcheng. After the defeat, he was trapped in Wei.

古文：二年，渊明遣使还，述魏人欲更通和好，敕有司及近臣定议。
现代文：太清二年，萧渊明派使者返回梁国，转述魏国人想重新和梁友好往来的意思，皇上命令有司以及亲近大臣商定决策。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Xiao Yuanming sent an envoy back to Liang Province to relay the intention of the Wei people to renew friendly exchanges with Liang. The emperor ordered the imperial secretary and the close minister to agree on decision-making.

古文：左卫硃异曰： 高澄此意，当复欲继好，不爽前和；边境且得静寇息民，于事为便。 
现代文：左卫将军朱异说： 高澄这一次的意思，是想要继续维持两国间以前的友好关系；这样做，我国边境将无外敌进犯，百姓可以安定地生活，答应讲和对事情有利。 
English: Zuo Wei General Zhu Ying said: What Gao Cheng meant this time was that he wanted to continue to maintain the previous friendly relations between the two countries; by doing so, there would be no foreign enemy to invade our border, and the people could live in a stable manner, promising to speak and be beneficial to things.

古文：议者并然之。
现代文：参加议论的人都认为朱异的意见正确。
English: Everyone who took part in the discussion thought that Zhu Xun's opinion was correct.

古文：岐独曰： 高澄既新得志，其势非弱，何事须和？
现代文：衹有傅岐说： 高澄刚刚打了胜仗，他的势力并不弱，为什么一定要求和呢?
English: Some Fuqi said: Gao Cheng has just won the battle, his power is not weak, why must he ask for peace?

古文：此必是设间，故令贞阳遣使，令侯景自疑当以贞阳易景。
现代文：逭必定是设置离间计，故意让贞阳侯派使者来，让侯景心中怀疑皇上将会用自己换回贞阳侯。
English: He must have set up a divider, deliberately letting the Prince of Zhengyang send an envoy, so that the Prince of Jing suspected in his heart that the Emperor would exchange himself for the Prince of Zhengyang.

古文：景意不安，必图祸乱。
现代文：侯景内心不安，必定要圆谋叛乱。
English: Hou Jing was uneasy in his heart and was sure to plot a rebellion.

古文：今若许澄通好，正是堕其计中。且彭城去岁丧师，涡阳新复败退，令便就和，益示国家之弱。
现代文：现在如果答应高澄求和交好的要求，正好落入他的奸计之中，再说去年我军在彭城失败，涡盐新近又败退，高澄一表示意思我们便与他和好，这更显出了国家实力的衰弱。
English: Now, if we agree to Gao Cheng's request for peace and friendship, we will fall right into his treacherous schemes. Moreover, our army failed in Pengcheng last year, and Vortex Salt recently lost and retreated. As soon as Gao Cheng expressed his will, we reconciled with him, which further showed the weakness of the country's strength.

古文：若如愚意，此和宜不可许。 
现代文：如果依照我的意见，就不能答应高澄这次求和的要求。 
English: If you follow my opinion, you will not be able to agree to Takasumi's request for this sum.

古文：硃异等固执，高祖遂从异议。
现代文：朱异等人坚持自己的意见，高祖便听从了朱异他们的主张。
English: Zhu Yiyi and others insisted on their own opinions, and Gao Zu obeyed Zhu Yiyi's suggestion.

古文：及遣和使，侯景果有此疑，累启请追使，敕但依违报之。至八月，遂举兵反。
现代文：派出讲和的使者之后，侯景果然有了这种疑心，多次上表向皇上请求追回使者，皇上衹是模棱两可地搪塞他，到了八月，侯景就举兵谋反。
English: After sending an envoy to talk about peace, Hou Jing did indeed have this suspicion. He repeatedly petitioned the emperor to recover the envoy. The emperor was ambiguous and blocked him. In August, Hou Jing raised an army to rebel.

古文：十月，入寇京师，请诛硃异。
现代文：十月，进犯京城，请求诛杀硃异。
English: In October, they attacked the capital, demanding a very different outcome.

古文：三年，迁中领军，舍人如故。
现代文：三年，优些迁任中领军，舍入之职不变。
English: In three years, some superior officers were transferred to lead the army, and the position of rounding up remained unchanged.

古文：二月，景于阙前通表，乞割江右四州，安其部下，当解围还镇，敕许之。
现代文：遣年二月，尽量在宫阙前向朝廷呈交奏表，请求分割长丝下游以西的四个州，以安置自己的部下，然后便解除京城之围返回寿春，皇帝下令答应他的要求。
English: In February of the following year, he tried his best to present a report to the imperial court before the imperial banquet, requesting that the four provinces west of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River be divided to accommodate his subordinates. He then lifted the siege of the capital and returned to Shuchun. The emperor ordered that his request be granted.

古文：乃于城西立盟，求遣宣城王出送。
现代文：于是双方在城西订立盟约，侯景要求派宣城王出城为自己送行。
English: As a result, the two sides concluded a covenant in the west of the city, and Hou Jing requested that the king of Xuancheng be sent out of the city to see him off.

古文：岐固执宣城嫡嗣之重，不宜许，遣石城公大款送之。
现代文：坚持自己的意见，认为宣坛王是嫡子，地位重要，不应当同意侯景的要求，于是皇上派石城公萧大款去送侯景。
English: He insisted on his own opinion that Xuan Tan Wang was the legitimate son and his status was important, and he should not agree to Hou Jing's request. Therefore, the emperor sent Shicheng Gong Xiao Daqi to send Hou Jing.

古文：及与景盟讫，城中文武喜跃，望得解围。
现代文：等到舆订立盟约之后，城中的文武大臣都欢喜雀跃，指望京城能够解围。
English: After the conclusion of the alliance, the ministers of culture and armed forces in the city were overjoyed, hoping that the capital could be relieved.

古文：岐独言于众曰： 贼举兵为逆，未遂求和，夷情兽心，必不可信，此和终为贼所诈也。 
现代文：祇有傅岐一人对大家说： 逆贼发兵叛乱，没有达到目的就请求讲和，这个外族人心如禽兽，一定不能相信他，这次签订盟约最终要被骗上当。 
English: Fu Qi was the only one who said to everyone, "A traitor sent troops to rebel, and when he didn't achieve his goal, he asked for peace. This foreigner's heart is like an animal's. You must not trust him. This time, you will be tricked into signing the treaty."

古文：众并怨怪之。
现代文：大家都埋怨责怪他。
English: Everyone is blaming him.

古文：及景背盟，莫不叹服。
现代文：到侯景背弃盟约的时候，没有人不对傅岐表示叹服。
English: By the time Hou Jing reneged on the covenant, no one did not express their admiration for Fu Qi.

古文：寻有诏，以岐勤劳，封南豊县侯，邑五百户，固辞不受。
现代文：不久皇帝下诏，因为傅岐辛勤劳苦，封他为南豊县侯，食邑五百户，垡岐坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict, because Fuqi worked hard and diligently, naming him as the lord of Nanfeng County, with 500 households. Iki resolutely refused to accept.

古文：宫城失守，岐带疾出围，卒于宅。
现代文：宫城失守后，傅岐带病逃出包围，后来在家中去世。
English: After the loss of Miyagi, Fu Qi escaped the siege with illness, and later died at home.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：夫举事者定于谋，故万举无遗策，信哉是言也。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：主持事务的人先要精心谋划，所以做任何事都不会失算，逭话说得真对啊。
English: Senior official Shangshu Yao-cha said: "The person who presides over affairs must first plan carefully, so nothing can be miscalculated, the saying is really right.

古文：傅岐识齐氏之伪和，可谓善于谋事。是时若纳岐之议，太清祸乱，固其不作。
现代文：傅岐识破了齐氏假装求和的阴谋，可以说是善于谋划，那时如果采纳了傅岐的主张，太清年间的祸乱，本来就不会产生。
English: Fu Qi saw through the conspiracy of the Qi clan pretending to seek peace, and can be said to be good at planning. At that time, if Fu Qi's proposition had been adopted, the calamity during the Taiqing era would not have occurred.

古文：申子曰： 一言倚，天下靡。 
现代文：申子说： 一句话的偏差，会导致国家的衰败。 
English: Shen Zi said, "The deviation of one sentence will lead to the decline of the country."

古文：此之谓乎？
现代文：说的就是这种情况啊!
English: This is exactly the situation!

