古文：田叔者，赵陉城人也。其先，齐田氏苗裔也。
现代文：田叔是赵国陉城人，他的祖先是齐国田氏的后代。
English: Uncle Tian is from Zhao Guocheng, and his ancestors are descendants of the Tian clan in Qi Province.

古文：叔喜剑，学黄老术於乐巨公所。叔为人刻廉自喜，喜游诸公。
现代文：田叔喜欢剑术，曾在乐巨公的住处向他学习黄、老的学说。
English: Uncle Tian likes swordsmanship, and once studied the ancient teachings of Huang and Lao from Grand Duke Le at his residence.

古文：赵人举之赵相赵午，午言之赵王张敖所，赵王以为郎中。
现代文：田叔为人严正清廉，并以此自得。喜欢和那些德高望重的人交游。赵国人把他推荐给赵相赵午，赵午又在赵王张敖那里称赞他，赵王任命他为郎中。
English: Uncle Tian prided himself on being a strict and honest person. He liked to travel with those who were highly respected. The people of Zhao recommended him to Zhao Xiang Zhao Wu. Zhao Wu also praised him to Zhao Wang Zhang Ye, and Zhao Wang appointed him as his assistant.

古文：数岁，切直廉平，赵王贤之，未及迁。
现代文：任职几年，他一直刚直清廉公平，赵王虽赏识他，却没有来得及提升他。
English: After several years in office, he has always been upright, honest and fair. Although Zhao Wang appreciated him, he did not have time to promote him.

古文：会陈豨反代，汉七年，高祖往诛之，过赵，赵王张敖自持案进食，礼恭甚，高祖箕踞骂之。
现代文：恰逢陈豨在代地谋反，汉七年，高祖前去诛讨，途径赵国，赵王张敖亲端食盘献食，礼节十分恭敬，汉高祖却傲慢地平伸开两条腿坐着大骂他。
English: In the seventh year of the Han Dynasty, when Chen Kuo was plotting a local rebellion, Gao Zu went to Zhao to discuss the matter. On the way to Zhao, Zhao Wang Zhang Kuo's relatives offered food on a plate. The etiquette was very respectful, but Han Gao Zu arrogantly sat with his two legs stretched out and shouted at him.

古文：是时赵相赵午等数十人皆怒，谓赵王曰： 王事上礼备矣，今遇王如是，臣等请为乱。 
现代文：当时赵相赵午等几十人都很生气，对赵王张敖说： 您侍奉皇上礼节完备周全，现在对待您竟是如此，我们请求造反。 
English: At that time, Zhao Xiang, Zhao Wu and dozens of others were very angry and said to Zhao Wang, Zhang Ye: You served the emperor with perfect etiquette, and now you are treated like this. We request a revolt.

古文：赵王齧指出血，曰： 先人失国，微陛下，臣等当蟲出。
现代文：赵王咬破自己的指头出了血，说： 我的父亲失去了国家，没有陛下，我们会死后尸体生蛆无人收尸，你们怎么能说这样的话呢？
English: Zhao Wang bit his finger and it bled, saying, "My father lost the country, without your majesty, when we die, our bodies will not be collected. How can you say such a thing?"

古文：公等柰何言若是！毋复出口矣！ 於是贯高等曰： 王长者，不倍德。 
现代文：不要再说了！ 于是贯高等议论说： 赵王是忠厚长者，不肯背弃皇上的恩德。 
English: Don't say anything more! Then, a high-ranking official spoke up and said: King Zhao is a loyal elder and would not betray the emperor's kindness.

古文：卒私相与谋弑上。
现代文：就私下里互相谋划弑杀皇上。
English: They plotted together in secret to kill the Emperor.

古文：会事发觉，汉下诏捕赵王及群臣反者。
现代文：恰好事情被发觉了，汉朝下命令逮捕赵王和谋反的群臣。
English: As soon as the affair was discovered, the Han Dynasty ordered the arrest of King Zhao and his rebellious ministers.

古文：於是赵午等皆自杀，唯贯高就系。
现代文：于是赵午等人都自杀了，只有贯高愿被囚系。
English: As a result, Zhao Wu and the others all committed suicide, and only Guan Gao was willing to be imprisoned.

古文：是时汉下诏书： 赵有敢随王者罪三族。 
现代文：这时汉朝又下诏书说： 赵国有胆敢跟随赵王进京的罪及三族。 
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty issued another imperial edict, saying: Zhao Guo had dared to follow King Zhao into the capital and had committed the crime of inciting the three ethnic groups.

古文：唯孟舒、田叔等十馀人赭衣自髡钳，称王家奴，随赵王敖至长安。
现代文：只有孟舒、田叔等十多人穿着赤褐色的囚衣，自己剃掉头发，颈上带着刑具，假称赵王的家奴跟随赵王张敖到了长安。
English: Only Meng Shu, Uncle Tian and more than a dozen others wore red-brown prison uniforms, shaved their hair, and wore torture devices around their necks, pretending to be Zhao Wang's slaves who had followed Zhao Wang Zhangye to Chang'an.

古文：贯高事明白，赵王敖得出，废为宣平侯，乃进言田叔等十馀人。
现代文：贯高等人谋反的事搞清楚了，赵王张敖得以释放出狱，被废黜为宣平侯，就推荐称赞田叔等十多人。
English: When it became clear that high-ranking officials were plotting a rebellion, Zhao Wang Zhangye was released from prison and deposed as the Prince of Xuanping. More than ten people, including Uncle Tian, recommended and praised him.

古文：上尽召见，与语，汉廷臣毋能出其右者，上说，尽拜为郡守、诸侯相。
现代文：皇上全部召见他们，跟他们谈话，认为朝中的大臣没有能超过他们的，皇上十分高兴，任命他们都做了郡守或诸侯的国相。
English: The emperor summoned them all, talked with them, and thought that no minister in the imperial court could surpass them. The emperor was very pleased and appointed them all to be county governors or ministers of the lords.

古文：叔为汉中守十馀年，会高后崩，诸吕作乱，大臣诛之，立孝文帝。
现代文：田叔做汉中郡守十多年，正逢高后去世，诸侯作乱，大臣杀死他们，拥立了汉文帝。
English: Uncle Tian served as the governor of Hanzhong County for more than ten years. He died just after the High Festival. The princes made a riot, the minister killed them, and Emperor Hanwen was enthroned.

古文：孝文帝既立，召田叔问之曰： 公知天下长者乎？ 
现代文：汉文帝即位后，召见田叔问他说： 先生知道谁是天下忠厚有德行的人吗？ 
English: After Emperor Hanwen ascended the throne, he summoned Uncle Tian and asked him, "Do you know who is the most loyal and virtuous person in the world?

古文：对曰： 臣何足以知之！ 
现代文：田叔回答说： 臣哪里能够知道！ 
English: Uncle Tian replied, "How could I possibly know!

古文：上曰： 公，长者也，宜知之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 您是忠厚的长者，应该能够知道。 
English: The emperor said: You are a loyal elder, you should know.

古文：叔顿首曰： 故云中守孟舒，长者也。 
现代文：田叔叩头说： 从前的云中郡太守孟舒是忠厚长者。 
English: Uncle Tian kowtowed and said, "Meng Shu, the former governor of Yunnan County, was a loyal elder.

古文：是时孟舒坐虏大入塞盗劫，云中尤甚，免。
现代文：当时孟舒因为抵御匈奴犯边抢劫不力而触犯刑律，云中郡遭侵犯抢劫尤为严重，被免职。
English: At that time, Meng Shu violated the criminal law because he was unable to resist the Huns from committing robbery. Yunnan County was particularly seriously violated and robbed, and he was removed from office.

古文：上曰： 先帝置孟舒云中十馀年矣，虏曾一人，孟舒不能坚守，毋故士卒战死者数百人。
现代文：文帝说： 先帝安置孟舒任云中郡太守十多年了，匈奴才入侵，孟舒就不能坚守，无缘无故让士兵战士几百人。
English: Emperor Wen said: The previous emperor had installed Meng Shu as the governor of Yunnan County for more than ten years, but the Huns invaded. Meng Shu could not hold out, and had hundreds of soldiers for no reason.

古文：长者固杀人乎？
现代文：忠厚有德行的长者本该杀人吗？
English: Should a loyal and virtuous elder commit murder?

古文：公何以言孟舒为长者也？ 
现代文：先生怎么能说孟舒是长者呢？ 
English: How can the teacher say that Meng Shu is an elder?

古文：叔叩头对曰： 是乃孟舒所以为长者也。
现代文：田叔叩头回答说： 这就是孟舒为长者的原因。
English: Tianshu's flunky replied, "This is why Mengshu is an elder."

古文：夫贯高等谋反，上下明诏，赵有敢随张王，罪三族。
现代文：贯高等人谋反，皇上下达了确切明白的诏书，赵国有敢跟随赵王张敖的人罪及三族。
English: Consistently high-ranking people plotted to rebel, and the emperor issued a clear and precise edict that Zhao Guo would not dare to follow Zhao Wang Zhang Ye's crime and the three tribes.

古文：然孟舒自髡钳，随张王敖之所在，欲以身死之，岂自知为云中守哉！
现代文：然而孟舒自己剃掉头发颈带刑具，跟随赵王张敖到他要去的地方，想要为他效死，自己哪里料到要做云中郡太守呢！
English: However, Meng Shu himself shaved off his hair, put on a torture device around his neck, followed Zhao Wang Zhangye to where he was going, and wanted to serve and die for him. How could he expect to become the governor of Yunzhong County!

古文：汉与楚相距，士卒罢敝。
现代文：汉和楚长期对峙，士兵疲劳困苦。
English: Han and Chu were in a long-term confrontation, and the soldiers were exhausted.

古文：匈奴冒顿新服北夷，来为边害，孟舒知士卒罢敝，不忍出言，士争临城死敌，如子为父，弟为兄，以故死者数百人。
现代文：匈奴王冒顿刚刚征服北夷，又来为害边境，孟舒知道士兵疲劳困苦，不忍心命令他们再作战，士兵们登城拼死作战，像儿子为父亲、弟弟为兄长打仗一样，因此战士的有几百人。
English: The king of the Xiongnu had just conquered Beiyi and came to harm the border again. Mengshu knew that the soldiers were tired and distressed and could not bear to order them to fight again. The soldiers went to the city to fight to the death, just as sons fight for their fathers and brothers fight for their brothers, so there were hundreds of soldiers.

古文：孟舒岂故驱战之哉！
现代文：孟舒哪里是故意驱使他们作战呢！
English: Where did Meng Shu deliberately drive them to fight?

古文：是乃孟舒所以为长者也。 
现代文：这就是孟舒是忠厚长者的原因。 
English: This is why Meng Shu is a loyal elder.

古文：於是上曰： 贤哉孟舒！ 
现代文：于是皇帝说： 孟舒真是贤德啊！ 
English: Then the emperor said: Meng Shu is really a virtuous man!

古文：复召孟舒以为云中守。
现代文：又召回了孟舒，让他重新做了云中郡太守。
English: He also recalled Meng Shu and made him the governor of Yunnan again.

古文：後数岁，叔坐法失官。
现代文：几年后，田叔因犯法失去汉中郡太守的职务。
English: A few years later, Uncle Tian lost his position as governor of Hanzhong County for breaking the law.

古文：梁孝王使人杀故吴相袁盎，景帝召田叔案梁，具得其事，还报。
现代文：梁孝王派人暗杀了从前吴国的丞相袁盎，汉景帝召回田叔让他到梁国审查这个案件，田叔查清了这个案件的全部事实，回朝报告。
English: Liang Xiaowang sent someone to assassinate Yuan Ang, the former prime minister of the State of Wu. Emperor Han Jing recalled Uncle Tian and asked him to go to Liang to investigate the case. Uncle Tian found out all the facts of the case and reported back to the North.

古文：景帝曰： 梁有之乎？ 
现代文：汉景帝说： 梁王有派人暗杀袁盎的事吗？ 
English: Han Jingdi said: Did King Liang send someone to assassinate Yuan Ang?

古文：叔对曰： 死罪！
现代文：回答说： 臣死罪！
English: He replied: "The death penalty!

古文：有之。 
现代文：有这事！ 
English: That's what happened!

古文：上曰： 其事安在？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 有罪证吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Do you have incriminating evidence?"

古文：田叔曰： 上毋以梁事为也。 
现代文：田叔说： 皇上不要过问梁王的事。 皇帝说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Uncle Tian said, "Don't ask the emperor about King Liang," and the emperor said, "Why?

古文：上曰： 何也？ 曰： 今梁王不伏诛，是汉法不行也；如其伏法，而太后食不甘味，卧不安席，此忧在陛下也。 
现代文：田叔说： 现在梁王如不伏法被处死，这是汉朝的刑法不能实行啊；如果他伏法而死，太后就会寝食难安，这又是您的忧虑啊！ 
English: Uncle Tian said, "If King Liang is now put to death for not obeying the law, then the criminal law of the Han Dynasty cannot be implemented; if he dies for not obeying the law, then the empress dowager will have a hard time sleeping and eating, which is also your concern!"

古文：景帝大贤之，以为鲁相。
现代文：汉景帝非常赏识他，让他做了鲁国的丞相。
English: Emperor Han Jing appreciated him very much and made him the prime minister of the State of Lu.

古文：鲁相初到，民自言相，讼王取其财物百馀人。
现代文：田叔刚刚到任，一百多位百姓主动找他，控告鲁王夺取他们的财物。
English: Uncle Tian had just taken office, and more than a hundred people took the initiative to find him and accuse Lu Wang of seizing their property.

古文：田叔取其渠率二十人，各笞五十，馀各搏二十，怒之曰： 王非若主邪？
现代文：田叔抓住为首的二十个人，每人笞打五十大板，其余的人各打手心二十，对他们发怒说： 鲁王不是你们的君主吗？
English: Uncle Tian caught the first twenty people and beat each of them with fifty large boards, while the rest of the people beat each of them with twenty palms. He became angry and said to them, "Isn't King Lu your ruler?

古文：何自敢言若主！ 
现代文：怎么敢毁谤君主呢！ 
English: How dare you defame the sovereign!

古文：鲁王闻之大惭，发中府钱，使相偿之。
现代文：鲁王听说后，非常惭愧，从内库中拿出钱来让国相偿还他们。
English: When King Lu heard about this, he was very ashamed and took money from the treasury to have the minister of state repay them.

古文：相曰： 王自夺之，使相偿之，是王为恶而相为善也。
现代文：田叔说： 君王自己夺来的，让国相偿还，这是君王做坏事而国相做好事。
English: Uncle Tian said, "What the king has stolen, let the minister of state repay. This is the king doing bad things and the minister of state doing good things."

古文：相毋与偿之。 
现代文：国相不能参与偿还的事。 
English: Ministers cannot be involved in repayments.

古文：於是王乃尽偿之。
现代文：于是鲁王就全部将财物偿还给他们。
English: So King Lu repaid them in full.

古文：鲁王好猎，相常从入苑中，王辄休相就馆舍，相出，常暴坐待王苑外。
现代文：鲁王喜欢打猎，田叔经常跟随进入狩猎的苑囿，鲁王总是要他到馆舍中休息，田叔就走出苑囿，常常坐在露天地里等待鲁王。
English: Lu Wang liked to hunt. Uncle Tian often followed him into the hunting pavilion. Lu Wang always asked him to rest in the pavilion. Uncle Tian went out of the pavilion and often sat in the open waiting for Lu Wang.

古文：王数使人请相休，终不休，曰： 我王暴露苑中，我独何为就舍！ 
现代文：鲁王多次派人请他去休息，他始终不去，说： 我们鲁王暴露在苑囿中，我怎能独自到馆舍中呢！ 
English: Lu Wang repeatedly sent people to invite him to rest, but he never went, saying: We Lu Wang are exposed in the courtyard, how can I go to the pavilion alone!

古文：鲁王以故不大出游。
现代文：鲁王因为这个缘故不再过分出外游猎。
English: Because of this, King Lu no longer went out to hunt excessively.

古文：数年，叔以官卒，鲁以百金祠，少子仁不受也，曰： 不以百金伤先人名。 
现代文：几年后，田叔在鲁国国相的任上去世，鲁王用一百斤黄金给他作祭礼。他的小儿子田仁不肯接受，说： 不能因为一百斤黄金损害先父的名声。 
English: A few years later, when Uncle Tian passed away while serving as Lu's minister of state, the king of Lu gave him a hundred pounds of gold as an offering. His youngest son, Tian Ren, refused to accept it, saying, "You can't damage your father's reputation because of a hundred pounds of gold."

古文：仁以壮健为卫将军舍人，数从击匈奴。
现代文：田仁因为身体壮健做了卫青将军的家臣。多次跟随他攻打匈奴。
English: Tian Ren became a vassal of General Wei Qing because of his physical strength. He followed him to attack the Xiongnu many times.

古文：卫将军进言仁，仁为郎中。
现代文：卫将军推荐称赞田仁，田仁做了郎中。
English: General Wei recommended and praised Tian Ren, and Tian Ren became his henchman.

古文：数岁，为二千石丞相长史，失官。
现代文：几年后，担任了享有两千石俸禄的丞相长史，后来又失去职位。
English: A few years later, he served as chancellor Nagashi, who enjoyed a stipend of two thousand koku, and later lost his position.

古文：其後使刺举三河。
现代文：那以后派他侦视纠察河南、河东、河内三郡。
English: After that, he was sent to investigate and picket the three counties of Henan, Hedong and Hanoi.

古文：上东巡，仁奏事有辞，上说，拜为京辅都尉。
现代文：皇帝到东方巡守，田仁奏事言辞精妙，皇帝很高兴，任命他做了京辅都尉。
English: The emperor went to the East to patrol, Tian Ren played a fine rhetoric, the emperor was very pleased and appointed him as the Beijing sub-captain.

古文：月馀，上迁拜为司直。
现代文：过了一个多月，皇帝又提升他做了司直。
English: After more than a month, the emperor promoted him to the position of Sihong.

古文：数岁，坐太子事。
现代文：几年后因太子谋反受到牵连。
English: A few years later, he was implicated for plotting against the crown prince.

古文：时左相自将兵，令司直田仁主闭守城门，坐纵太子，下吏诛死。
现代文：当时左丞相刘屈牦亲自率领军队和太子作战，命令司直田仁负责关闭守卫城门，因田仁使太子从城门逃逸而犯罪，交给法官审理后处以死刑。
English: At that time, the left chancellor Liu Quan personally led the army to fight against the prince, and ordered the director Naota Jin to be responsible for closing the guarded city gate. Because Naota Jin made the prince escape from the city gate and committed a crime, he was handed over to the judge for trial and sentenced to death.

古文：仁发兵，长陵令车千秋上变仁，仁族死。
现代文：一说田仁带兵到长陵，长陵令车千秋告发田仁叛变，田仁被灭族处死。
English: It is said that Tian Ren led soldiers to Changling. Changling ordered a chariot to announce Tian Ren's mutiny, and Tian Ren was executed by the exterminators.

古文：陉城今在中山国。
现代文：陉城现在属于中山国。
English: Lucheng now belongs to Zhongshan Province.

古文：太史公曰：孔子称曰 居是国必闻其政 ，田叔之谓乎！
现代文：太史公说：孔子用称赞口气说 住到这个国家一定参与它的政务 ，这样的话说的也是田叔吧！
English: Taishikong said: Confucius said in a praising tone that when you live in this country, you must participate in its government affairs. This is also what Uncle Tian said!

古文：义不忘贤，明主之美以救过。仁与余善，余故并论之。
现代文：他有节义而不忘贤德，使君王之美发扬光大，还能纠正君王的过失，田仁和我关系很好，我所以把田叔田仁放在一起进行叙述。
English: He had principles and did not forget his virtue, he made the beauty of the king flourish, and he could also correct the mistakes of the king. Tian Ren and I have a good relationship, so I put Tian's uncle Tian Ren together to describe.

古文：褚先生曰：臣为郎时，闻之曰田仁故与任安相善。
现代文：褚先生说：我做侍郎时，听到说田仁早先就和任安关系很好。
English: Mr. Zou said: When I was a waiter, I heard that Tian Ren had a good relationship with Ren An.

古文：任安，荥阳人也。
现代文：任安是荥阳人。
English: Ren An is from Shenyang.

古文：少孤贫困，为人将车之长安，留，求事为小吏，未有因缘也，因占著名数。
现代文：幼小时就成了孤儿，生活贫困，给别人驾驭车子到了长安，留了下来，想做一个小吏，没有机会，就了解估算一些地方著录户籍的情况及人口的多少等。
English: He became an orphan at an early age, lived in poverty, drove a car to Chang'an for others, stayed behind, wanted to be a minor official, and had no opportunity to estimate the situation of household registration in some places and the size of the population.

古文：武功，扶风西界小邑也，谷口蜀刬道近山。
现代文：武功是在扶风西边的小县，山谷口山处有通往蜀地的栈道。
English: Wukong is a small county on the west side of Fu Feng. There is a boardwalk leading to Shudi at the foot of the mountain.

古文：安以为武功小邑，无豪，易高也，安留，代人为求盗亭父。
现代文：任安认为武功是一个小县，没有豪门大族，容易提高自己的地位，就留居下来，代替别人做求盗，亭父。
English: Ren An thinks that Wugong is a small county, there is no big family, it is easy to improve one's status, so he stayed down and replaced others as a thief, my father.

古文：後为亭长。
现代文：后来做了亭长。
English: Later he became a pavilion manager.

古文：邑中人民俱出猎，任安常为人分麋鹿雉兔，部署老小当壮剧易处，众人皆喜，曰： 无怂也，任少卿分别平，有智略。 
现代文：县里的百姓都出城打猎、任安常常给人们分配麋鹿、野鸡、野兔等猎获物，合理安排老人、孩子和壮丁到或难或易的地方，大家都很高兴，说： 没有关系，任少卿分析辩别事情公平，有智谋。 
English: The people in the county all go out of the city to hunt, and Ren An often allocates elk, pheasants, hares and other game to the people, and rationally arranges for the elderly, children and young men to go to places that are difficult or easy. Everyone is very happy, saying: It doesn't matter, Ren Shaoqing analyzes and discusses different things fairly, and has wisdom.

古文：明日复合会，会者数百人。
现代文：明天又集合开会，聚会的有几百人。
English: Tomorrow they will gather again for a meeting. There are several hundred people at the meeting.

古文：任少卿曰： 某子甲何为不来乎？ 
现代文：任少卿说： 某某的儿子名叫甲的，为什么不来呢？ 
English: Ren Shaoqing said: So-and-so's son's name is A, why not come?

古文：诸人皆怪其见之疾也。
现代文：大家都惊讶他认识人的迅速。
English: Everyone was surprised at how quickly he got to know people.

古文：其後除为三老，举为亲民，出为三百石长，治民。
现代文：后来他被任命为乡中的三老，举荐为亲民之吏，主持乡邑之事，后
English: Later, he was appointed as one of the three elders in the village, recommended as a pro-people official, presided over the affairs of the village.

古文：坐上行出游共帐不办，斥免。
现代文：又被任命为享受三百石俸禄的官长，管理百姓。
English: He was also appointed as a government official enjoying a stipend of 300 koku to manage the people.

古文：乃为卫将军舍人，与田仁会，俱为舍人，居门下，同心相爱。
现代文：由于皇帝出巡时陈设帷帐供给使用的事情没有做，被罢免官职。这以后就做了卫青将军的家臣，和田仁在一起，都做家臣，住在将军府里，二人知心友爱。
English: He was removed from his official position because he did not set up a curtain for the emperor's use when he was on a tour. After that, he became a vassal of General Weiqing. Together with Wada Jin, they both worked as vassals and lived in the general's residence. The two knew each other's hearts.

古文：此二人家贫，无钱用以事将军家监，家监使养恶齧马。
现代文：这二人家中都很贫困，没有钱财事奉将军的管家，管家让他们喂养主人的烈马。
English: Both of their families were poor, and they had no money to pay the general's steward, who let them feed their master's horse.

古文：两人同床卧，仁窃言曰： 不知人哉家监也！ 
现代文：两人同床而眠，田仁悄悄地说： 太不了解人了，这个管家！ 
English: The two of them slept in the same bed, and Tian Ren said quietly, "He doesn't understand people very well, this housekeeper!"

古文：任安曰： 将军尚不知人，何乃家监也！ 
现代文：任安说： 将军尚且不了解人，何况是管家呢？ 
English: Ren An said, "The general does not understand people, let alone the steward."

古文：卫将军从此两人过平阳主，主家令两人与骑奴同席而食，此二子拔刀列断席别坐。
现代文：一次卫将军让他俩跟随自己拜访平阳公主，公主家的人让他们俩和骑奴同在一张席子上吃饭，这两人拔刀割裂席子和骑奴分席而坐。
English: Once, the general of the imperial guard asked the two of them to follow him to visit Princess Pingyang. The princess's family asked the two of them to eat together with the cavalier on a mat, and the two of them pulled out a knife to cut the mat and the cavalier to sit separately.

古文：主家皆怪而恶之，莫敢呵。
现代文：公主家的人都惊异而厌恶他俩，也没有谁敢大声喝斥。
English: Everyone in the princess's family was surprised and disgusted by the two of them, and no one dared to shout out.

古文：其後有诏募择卫将军舍人以为郎，将军取舍人中富给者，令具鞍马绛衣玉具剑，欲入奏之。
现代文：后来皇帝下诏书征募选拔卫将军的家臣做自己的侍从官，将军挑选了门客中富裕的人，让他们准备好鞍马、绛衣和用玉装饰的剑，准备入宫上奏。
English: Later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to recruit and select General Wei's vassals to be his attendants. The general selected the wealthy among the guests and had them prepare a pommel horse, robes and a sword decorated with jade to enter the palace.

古文：会贤大夫少府赵禹来过卫将军，将军呼所举舍人以示赵禹。
现代文：正好贤能的大夫、少府赵禹前来拜访卫将军，将军召集所举荐的家臣给赵禹看。
English: Just at that time, Zhao Yu, a virtuous doctor and minor prefect, came to visit General Wei, and the general summoned the recommended vassals to see Zhao Yu.

古文：赵禹以次问之，十馀人无一人习事有智略者。
现代文：赵禹依次考问他们，十多个人中没有一个通晓事理有智谋的。
English: Zhao Yu questioned them one by one, and out of more than ten people, there was not a single one who was well-versed in matters of reason and wisdom.

古文：赵禹曰： 吾闻之，将门之下必有将类。
现代文：赵禹说： 我听说，将军家中一定有可以当将官的人。
English: Zhao Yu said: I heard that there must be someone in a general's family who can be a general.

古文：传曰 不知其君视其所使，不知其子视其所友 。
现代文：古书说： 不了解那个国君，就看一看他任用的人，不了解那个人，就看一看他结交的朋友。 
English: An ancient book says: If you don't know the ruler, look at the person he appointed; if you don't know the person, look at the friends he made.

古文：今有诏举将军舍人者，欲以观将军而能得贤者文武之士也。
现代文：现在皇帝下诏书命令举荐将军家臣的原因，想要以此看一看将军能够得到怎样贤德的人和文武人才。
English: Now that the emperor has issued an edict ordering the reasons for recommending the general's vassals, I want to use this to see what kind of virtuous people and literary and military talents the general can get.

古文：今徒取富人子上之，又无智略，如木偶人衣之绮绣耳，将柰之何？ 
现代文：现在只是挑选有钱人的子弟上报，这些人没有智谋，就像木偶人穿上锦绣衣服罢了，你准备怎么办呢？ 
English: Now it's just a matter of selecting the children of rich people to appear in the newspaper. These people don't have a clue. It's just like a puppeteer putting on an embroidered dress. What are you going to do?

古文：於是赵禹悉召卫将军舍人百馀人，以次问之，得田仁、任安，曰： 独此两人可耳，馀无可用者。 
现代文：于是赵禹召集卫将军的全部门客一百多人，又依次考问他们，发现了田仁，任安，说： 只有这两个人行啊，其余的都没有能够任用的。 
English: So Zhao Yu gathered more than a hundred guests from all departments of General Wei, and questioned them one by one. He found Tian Ren and Ren An and said, "Only these two can go, the rest cannot be appointed."

古文：卫将军见此两人贫，意不平。
现代文：卫将军看到这两个人贫困，心里不高兴。
English: General Wei was not happy to see these two people in poverty.

古文：赵禹去，谓两人曰： 各自具鞍马新绛衣。 
现代文：赵禹走后，对他们俩人说： 各人自己去准备鞍子和新绛衣等。 
English: After Zhao Yu left, he said to the two of them, "Each of you go and prepare your own saddles, new coats, etc."

古文：两人对曰： 家贫无用具也。 
现代文：两人回答说： 家中贫穷，无法准备这些东西。 
English: They replied: "Our family is too poor to prepare these things.

古文：将军怒曰： 今两君家自为贫，何为出此言？
现代文：卫将军发怒说： 现在您两位自己是贫穷的，为什么说出这样的话呢？
English: General Wei said angrily: Now you two are poor yourselves, why would you say such a thing?

古文：鞅鞅如有移德於我者，何也？ 
现代文：愤愤不平的样子好像对我有过恩德，这是为什么？ 
English: He looked aggrieved, as if he had done me a favour. Why was that?

古文：将军不得已，上籍以闻。
现代文：卫将军出于无可奈何，只得写了报告让皇帝闻知。
English: Out of desperation, General Wei had to write a report to let the emperor know.

古文：有诏召见卫将军舍人，此二人前见，诏问能略相推第也。
现代文：皇帝下达诏书召集卫将军的门客，这两个人前去拜见，皇帝召见时询问他们的才智情况让他们互相推举评价。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning Wei's protégés, and the two men went to see each other. When the emperor summoned them, he asked about their talents and let them evaluate each other.

古文：田仁对曰； 提桴鼓立军门，使士大夫乐死战斗，仁不及任安。 
现代文：田仁回答说： 手执鼓槌，站立军门，使部下甘心情愿为战斗而死，我不如任安。 
English: Tian Ren replied, "Holding the drumstick in my hand, standing at the gate of the army, and making my subordinates willing to die in battle, I am not as good as Ren An."

古文：任安对曰： 夫决嫌疑。定是非，辩治官，使百姓无怨心，安不及仁也。 
现代文：任安回答说： 决断嫌疑，评判是非，辨别属下的官员，使百姓没有怨恨之心，我不如田仁。 
English: Ren'an replied, "I am not as good as Tian Ren in determining suspicions, judging right and wrong, distinguishing subordinate officials, and making the people have no resentment.

古文：武帝大笑曰： 善。 
现代文：汉武帝大笑着说： 好！ 
English: Han Wudi laughed loudly and said: Good!

古文：使任安护北军，使田仁护边田穀於河上。
现代文：让任安监护北军，让田仁到黄河边上监护边塞的屯田和生产谷物的事情。
English: Let Ren'an supervise the Northern Army, and let Tian Ren go to the edge of the Yellow River to supervise the military camps and the production of grain.

古文：此两人立名天下。
现代文：这两人马上名扬天下。
English: The two men immediately became world famous.

古文：其後用任安为益州刺史，以田仁为丞相长史。
现代文：后来，让任安做了益州刺史，让田仁做了丞相长史。
English: Later, let Ren'an do the history of Yizhou, and let Tian Ren do the long history of the prime minister.

古文：田仁上书言： 天下郡太守多为奸利，三河尤甚，臣请先刺举三河。
现代文：田仁曾上书给皇帝说： 天下各郡太守中有很多人已不法手段谋取私利，三河地区尤为严重，臣请求首先侦视督察山河地区。
English: Tian Ren once wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: Among all the county governors in the world, there are many people who have used illegal means to seek personal gain. The Sanhe area is particularly serious. The minister requested that the inspector first investigate the mountain and river areas.

古文：三河太守皆内倚中贵人，与三公有亲属，无所畏惮，宜先正三河以警天下奸吏。 
现代文：三河的太守全都在京城内倚靠朝廷中的显贵，和三公有亲属关系，没有什么畏惧的，应该先肃正三河来警告天下行为不轨的官吏。 
English: The emperors of the three rivers all rely on the dignitaries of the imperial court in the capital, and have a family relationship with the three princes. There is nothing to be afraid of, and it is necessary to first clean up the three rivers to warn the world of officials who behave improperly.

古文：是时河南、河内太守皆御史大夫杜父兄子弟也，河东太守石丞相子孙也。
现代文：当时，河西郡、河内郡太守都是御史大夫杜周的亲属，河东郡太守是丞相石庆的后代。
English: At that time, the governors-general of Hexi County and Hanoi County were relatives of Grand Historian Du Zhou, and the governor-general of Hedong County was a descendant of Emperor Shi Qing.

古文：是时石氏九人为二千石，方盛贵。
现代文：这时石家有九人担任享受二千石俸禄的官吏，正处在兴盛显赫的势头上。
English: At this time, Shike had nine people working as officials who enjoyed a stipend of two thousand koku, and was on the verge of prosperity.

古文：田仁数上书言之。
现代文：田仁多次上书谈及此事。
English: Tian Jin has repeatedly written about this matter.

古文：杜大夫及石氏使人谢，谓田少卿曰： 吾非敢有语言也，原少卿无相诬汙也。 
现代文：御使大夫杜周和石氏派人来道歉，对田少卿说： 我不敢有什么话要讲，希望少卿不要诬告玷污我们。 
English: Dr. Du Zhou and Shi Shi sent someone to apologize and said to Tian Shaoqing, "I don't dare to say anything. I hope the Shaoqing doesn't slander us with false accusations."

古文：仁已刺三河，三河太守皆下吏诛死。
现代文：田仁侦视督察三河后，三河太守都被送交法官审理后处以死刑。
English: After Tian Ren's investigation of Inspector Mikawa, the governors of Mikawa were all sent to a judge for trial and sentenced to death.

古文：仁还奏事，武帝说，以仁为能不畏彊御，拜仁为丞相司直，威振天下。
现代文：田仁回朝报告，汉武帝很高兴，认为田仁有才干，不畏惧横暴有权势的人，任命田仁做了丞相司直，声威震动天下。
English: Tian Ren reported back to the imperial court that Emperor Han Wu was very pleased. He thought that Tian Ren was talented and not afraid of violent and powerful people. He appointed Tian Ren as the prime minister, and his reputation shook the world.

古文：其後逢太子有兵事，丞相自将兵，使司直主城门。
现代文：后来田仁遇上太子谋反事发，丞相亲自率领军队，命令司直田仁守卫城门。
English: Later, when Tian Ren encountered the prince plotting a rebellion, the chancellor personally led the army and ordered Naotian Ren to guard the city gate.

古文：司直以为太子骨肉之亲，父子之间不甚欲近，去之诸陵过。
现代文：田仁认为太子和皇帝是骨肉之亲，不想卷进他们父子之间的冲突，就离开城门到各个陵寝去，使太子得以逃出城门。
English: Tian Ren believed that the prince and the emperor were blood relatives, and did not want to get involved in the conflict between their father and son, so he left the city gate to go to various mausoleums, so that the prince could escape from the city gate.

古文：是时武帝在甘泉，使御史大夫暴君下责丞相 何为纵太子 ，丞相对言 使司直部守城门而开太子 。
现代文：这时汉武帝正在甘泉宫，派御史大夫暴胜之前来责问丞相： 为什么放走太子？ 丞相回答说： 我命令司直守卫城门他却开门放了太子。 
English: At this time, Emperor Hanwu was in Ganquan Palace, and he sent the Grand Historian to question the Prime Minister before the stormy victory: Why did you let the prince go? The Prime Minister replied: I ordered Si Zhi to guard the city gate, but he opened the door and let the prince go.

古文：上书以闻，请捕系司直。
现代文：御史大夫上报给皇帝，请求批准逮捕司直。
English: The Imperial Historian reported to the emperor, requesting permission to arrest Sinao.

古文：司直下吏，诛死。
现代文：司直被送交法官审问后处死。
English: Sinao was sent to a judge for interrogation and then executed.

古文：是时任安为北军使者护军，太子立车北军南门外，召任安，与节令发兵。
现代文：这时任安担任北军使者护军，太子在北军的南门外停下车，召见任安，把符节给他，命他调动北军。
English: At this time, Ren'an served as the envoy of the Northern Army to escort the army. The prince stopped the car outside the southern gate of the Northern Army, summoned Ren'an, gave him the code, and ordered him to mobilize the Northern Army.

古文：安拜受节，入，闭门不出。
现代文：任安下拜接受符节，进去后，把军门关上不再出来。
English: Ren An bowed down to receive the festival, and after entering, closed the military gate and did not come out again.

古文：武帝闻之，以为任安为详邪，不傅事，何也？
现代文：汉武帝听说后，既认为任安是假装受节，不肯附和太子，又心怀疑惑？
English: After hearing this, Emperor Hanwu not only thought that Ren'an was pretending to be enthroned, but also hesitated and puzzled.

古文：任安笞辱北军钱官小吏，小吏上书言之，以为受太子节，言 幸与我其鲜好者 。
现代文：任安曾笞打羞辱北军掌管钱财的小吏，小吏趁机上书报告，揭发他接受太子符节，及太子还说： 希望把好的军队交给我的事 。
English: Ren An had beaten and humiliated the minor official in charge of the money of the Northern Army. The minor official took the opportunity to write a report, revealing that he accepted the prince's tribute, and the prince also said: I hope to hand over a good army to me.

古文：书上闻，武帝曰： 是老吏也，见兵事起，欲坐观成败，见胜者欲合从之，有两心。
现代文：上书被皇上看到，武帝说： 这是个圆滑的官吏，看到太子谋反的事发生，想要坐观胜败，看到谁胜利就附和顺从谁，有二心。
English: When Emperor Wu saw the letter, he said, "This is a tactful official. When he saw that the crown prince was plotting a rebellion, he wanted to sit back and watch the victory or defeat. When he saw who was victorious, he followed and obeyed. He was of two minds.

古文：安有当死之罪甚众，吾常活之，今怀诈，有不忠之心。 
现代文：任安犯有判死刑的罪很多，我常常让他活下来，现在竟心怀欺诈，有不忠之心。 
English: Ren'an has committed many crimes that are punishable by death. I often let him live, but now he is deceitful and disloyal.

古文：下安吏，诛死。
现代文：把任安交法官审判判处了死刑。
English: The trial judge sentenced him to death.

古文：夫月满则亏，物盛则衰，天地之常也。
现代文：月亮圆了就会亏缺，事物极盛就会衰弱，这是天地间万物的规律。
English: When the moon is full, there will be a shortage, and when things are at their peak, they will weaken. This is the law of all things in heaven and earth.

古文：知进而不知退，久乘富贵，祸积为祟。
现代文：只知进取却不知后退，长时间居于富贵之位，也会因灾殃积累而给人带来祸难。
English: They only know how to advance, but do not know how to retreat. If they stay in the position of wealth for a long time, they will also bring misfortune to people due to the accumulation of disasters.

古文：故范蠡之去越，辞不受官位，名传後世，万岁不忘，岂可及哉！
现代文：所以范蠡离开越国，不肯接受官职爵位，才名声传于后世，万年不被人遗忘，一般人哪能比得上他呢！
English: That is why Fan Xuan left Yue and refused to accept the official title of nobility, so that his reputation would be passed down to future generations and would not be forgotten for thousands of years. How can an ordinary person compare to him!

古文：後进者慎戒之。
现代文：后来者千万要以田仁、任安为借鉴。
English: Those who come later must learn from Tian Ren and Ren An.

