古文：孤阴则不生，独阳则不长，故天地配以阴阳；男以女为室，女以男为家，故人生偶以夫妇。
现代文：只有阴不能创造生命，只有阳也不能养育万物，所以天地万物是由阴阳相配合的；男子娶了女子才能组合成家庭，女子嫁给了男子才有了家，所以由男女相配结成夫妇。
English: Only yin cannot create life, and only yang cannot nurture all things. Therefore, all things in heaven and earth are coordinated by yin and yang. Only when a man marries a woman can they form a family, and only when a woman marries a man can they have a home. Therefore, only when a man and a woman are compatible can they form a couple.

古文：阴阳和而后雨泽降，夫妇和而后家道成。
现代文：阴阳二气调和而后才会降下雨露，夫妇和睦协调家道方能兴盛。
English: The rain and dew will fall only after the yin and yang are harmonized, and the couple can prosper only if they harmonize their family way.

古文：夫谓妻曰拙荆，又曰内子；妻称夫曰藁砧，又曰良人。
现代文：丈夫对人称自己的妻子为 内子 又称 拙荆 ，妻子称丈夫为 藁砧 ，又称 良人 。
English: The husband calls his wife his inner child, also known as a "bastard," and the wife calls her husband her "beloved," also known as a "good man."

古文：贺人娶妻，曰荣偕伉俪；留物与妻，曰归遗细君。
现代文：祝贺别人娶妻就说 荣偕伉俪 ；留下东西给妻子就叫做 归遗细君 。
English: If you congratulate someone on getting married, it's called "honor"; if you leave something to your wife, it's called "bequeathing."

古文：受室即是娶妻，纳宠谓人娶妾。
现代文：受室是说自己娶妻，纳宠是说人家买妾。
English: To accept a wife is to marry one, and to accept a concubine is to buy one.

古文：正妻谓之嫡，众妾谓之庶。
现代文：正妻称为 嫡 ，其他的妾称为 庶 。
English: The legal wife is called 嫡, and the other concubines are called 庶.

古文：称人妻曰尊夫人，称人妾曰如夫人。
现代文：称别人的妻子为 尊夫人 ，称别人的妾叫 如夫人 。
English: To call another man's wife your wife, and another man's concubine your mistress.

古文：结发系是初婚，续弦乃是再娶。
现代文： 结发 是指初次结婚， 续弦 是指妻子去世后再娶称。
English: To tie the knot is to marry for the first time, and to remarry is to remarry after the death of one's wife.

古文：妇人重婚曰再醮，男子无偶曰鳏居。
现代文：妇人再嫁称作 再醮 ，男子没有老婆称为 鳏居 。
English: A woman who remarries is called a remarried woman, and a man without a wife is called a widower.

古文：如鼓瑟琴，夫妻好合之谓；琴瑟不调，夫妇反目之词。
现代文： 如鼓瑟琴 是比喻夫妇感情和谐； 琴瑟不调 是说夫妇反目不和。
English: For example, the drum and the harp are metaphors for the harmony of the couple's feelings; the harp and the harp are out of tune, which means that the couple is at odds.

古文：牝鸡司晨，比妇人之主事；河东狮吼，讥男子之畏妻。
现代文： 牝鸡司晨 是说妇人掌权干预外事； 河东狮吼 是嘲讽丈夫畏惧妻子。
English: Yan Jixi Chen means that a woman is in power and intervenes in foreign affairs; Hedong Lion's Roar is a mockery of a husband's fear of his wife.

古文：杀妻求将，吴起何其忍心；蒸藜出妻，曾子善全孝道。
现代文：杀了妻子以求将位，吴起如何狠得下心肠；蒸梨不熟便离弃妻子，曾子善于顾全孝道。
English: He killed his wife in order to obtain the position of general, how ruthless Wu Qi was; he abandoned his wife when he was not familiar with steamed pears, and Zengzi was good at taking care of filial piety.

古文：张敞为妻画眉，媚态可哂；董氏为夫封发，贞节堪夸。
现代文：张敞为妻子画眉，儿女的情态真是可笑；董氏当着丈夫的面，把头发封住，其贞节实在值得夸耀。
English: Zhang Zhang's wife's eyebrows are drawn, and the children's mood is really ridiculous; Mr. Dong's hair is sealed in front of her husband, and her chastity is really worth boasting about.

古文：冀郤缺夫妻，相敬如宾；陈仲子夫妇，灌园食力。
现代文：冀邑郤缺夫妇在田间耕作，仍能相敬如宾；陈仲子夫妇替别人灌园谋生，自食其力不仰赖其兄。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Chen Zhongzi make a living by watering other people's gardens, and do not depend on their brother for their livelihood.

古文：不弃槽糠，宋弘回光武之语；举案齐眉，梁鸿配孟光之贤。
现代文：同吃糟糠的妻子不能抛弃，这是宋弘回答光武帝的话；每次送食举起的案总和眉齐高，这是说梁鸿配得上孟光的贤惠。
English: Song Hong replied to Emperor Guangwu that he could not abandon his wife who ate the same bad food; the total sum of the cases raised each time the food was sent was high, which meant that Liang Hong was worthy of Meng Guang's benevolence.

古文：苏蕙织回文，乐昌分破镜，是夫妇之生离；张瞻炊臼梦，庄子鼓盆歌，是夫妇之死别。
现代文：乐昌公主分破镜，苏蕙织锦回文，这些都是说夫妇生离的惨状；张瞻梦见在臼中做饭，庄子鼓盆而歌，这说的是夫妇的死别。
English: Princess Lechang's broken mirror, Su Shi's brocade palimpsest, these are all about the misery of the couple's separation; Zhang Zhan dreamed of cooking in a mortar, and Zhuo Zi's drum and basin sang, which is about the death of the couple.

古文：鲍宣之妻，提瓮出汲，雅得顺从之道；齐御之妻，窥御激夫，可称内助之贤。
现代文：鲍宣的妻子出身富家，仍亲自提瓮汲水，很懂得顺从丈夫的道理；齐国丞相晏子的车夫的妻子激励他虚心向学，可称得上是贤内助。
English: Bao Xuan's wife came from a wealthy family, but she still personally fetched water and knew how to obey her husband; the wife of the coachman of the Prime Minister of Qi Province, Zizi, encouraged him to be open-minded and eager to learn, and could be said to be a wise domestic helper.

古文：可怪者买臣之妻，因贫求去，不思覆水难收；可丑者相如之妻，夤夜私奔，但识丝桐有意。
现代文：令人奇怪的是，朱买臣的妻子在丈夫贫困时离去，富贵后又要回来，却不想想泼出去的水是很难再收回来的；司马相如的妻子真丢人，听见琴声挑逗，竟在半夜里私奔而去，因为听到的琴音很是有意。
English: Strangely enough, Zhu Meissen's wife left her husband when he was poor, but when he became rich, she wanted to come back, but she didn't want to throw out the water because it was hard to get it back; Sima Xiangru's wife was really a disgrace, and when she heard the music, she ran away in the middle of the night, because the music she heard was very meaningful.

古文：要知身修而后家齐，夫义自然妇顺。
现代文：要知道提高自身品德的修养，才能治理好家庭；丈夫对待妻子有礼仪情谊，妻子自然会顺从谦恭。
English: It is necessary to know how to improve the cultivation of one's own moral character in order to govern a good family; the husband treats his wife with etiquette and friendship, and the wife will naturally be obedient and humble.

