古文：禁藏于胸胁之内，而祸避于万里之外。
现代文：把 禁 字深记在心，可以避祸于万里之外。
English: If you keep the forbidden words in your heart, you can avoid misfortune a million miles away.

古文：能以此制彼者，唯能以己知人者也。
现代文：能做到以 禁 防 祸 ，只有能以自身苦乐理解别人的苦乐才行。
English: The only way to prevent misfortune is to understand other people's bitterness with your own bitterness.

古文：夫冬日之不滥，非爱冰也；夏日之不炀，非爱火也，为不适于身便于体也。
现代文：冬天不洗冰水，并不是吝惜冰；夏天不烤火，也不是舍不得火。而是因为这样做对身体不适宜。
English: If you don't wash with ice water in winter, it's not because you don't like ice; if you don't light a fire in summer, it's not because you don't like fire. It's because it's not good for your body.

古文：夫明王不美宫室，非喜小也；不听钟鼓，非恶乐也，为其伤于本事，而妨于教也。
现代文：明主不建造华丽的宫殿，不是因为他喜欢简陋的房屋；不听钟鼓之音，也不是因为他讨厌音乐。而是因为这样做会伤害农业生产，妨碍教化推行。
English: The Emperor does not build magnificent palaces, not because he likes humble houses; does not listen to the sound of bells and drums, not because he hates music, but because doing so would harm agricultural production and impede the spread of enlightenment.

古文：故先慎于己而后彼，官亦慎内而后外，民亦务本而去末。
现代文：所以，君主首先严格要求自己，然后再要求别人；官吏也才能首先管好内部，然后管好外部；百姓也才能专心于农业生产而放弃不正当的工商业。
English: Therefore, the monarch first strictly demands himself, and then demands others; officials can first manage the internal, and then manage the external; the people can also concentrate on agricultural production and abandon improper industry and commerce.

古文：居民于其所乐，事之于其所利，赏之于其所善，罚之于其所恶，信之于其所余财，功之于其所无诛。
现代文：要使百姓住在他们乐于居住的地方，使他们从事有利于自身的工作，奖励他们所赞成的事情，惩罚他们所厌恶的行为，保证百姓的余财不被剥夺，并致力于百姓不受刑罚。
English: Let the people live where they want to live, let them do what is good for them, reward them for what they like, punish them for what they don't like, make sure that the people's surplus wealth is not taken away from them, and make sure that the people are not punished.

古文：于下无诛者，必诛者也；有诛者，不必诛者也。
现代文：使百姓不受刑罚，是坚持有罪必罚的结果；百姓有受刑现象，才是没有坚持有罪必罚造成的。
English: The fact that the people are not punished is the result of insisting on the necessity of punishment; the fact that the people are punished is the result of not insisting on the necessity of punishment.

古文：以有刑至无刑者，其法易而民全；以无刑至有刑者，其刑烦而奸多。
现代文：从有刑到无刑，能做到法律简易而人民得到保全；从无刑到有刑，法律就将烦琐而恶人反会增多。
English: From punishment to no punishment, laws can be simplified and people can be protected; from no punishment to punishment, laws will be cumbersome and evil people will increase.

古文：夫先易者后难，先难而后易，万物尽然。
现代文：先易者后难，先难而后易，万事都是如此。
English: First comes change, then comes difficulty. First comes difficulty, then comes ease. This is true of all things.

古文：明王知其然，故必诛而不赦，必赏而不迁者，非喜予而乐其杀也，所以为人致利除害也。
现代文：明君懂得这个道理，所以，该罚的绝不赦免，该赏的绝不拖延，这不是因为君主喜欢赏赐和乐于杀人，而是要为百姓兴利除害的缘故。
English: Emperor Ming understood this principle, so he never pardoned the punishment or delayed the reward. This was not because the emperor liked to reward and kill, but because he wanted to benefit the people and eliminate harm.

古文：于以养老长弱，完活万民，莫明焉。
现代文：对于养老扶幼，保全万民来说，没有比这更可贵的了。
English: For old-age and child support, and for the protection of all people, there is nothing more precious.

古文：夫不法法则治。
现代文：不废法才能管好国家。
English: In order to manage the country well, it is necessary to abolish the law.

古文：法者天下之仪也，所以决疑而明是非也，百姓所县命也。
现代文：法，是天下的仪表，是用来解除疑难而判明是非的，是与百姓生命攸关的。
English: The law is the instrument of the world. It is used to resolve difficulties and determine right and wrong. It is vital to the lives of the people.

古文：故明王慎之，不为亲戚故贵易其法，吏不敢以长官威严危其命，民不以珠玉重宝犯其禁。
现代文：所以明君对于法非常慎重，绝不为亲故权贵而改变法律，他的官吏也就不敢利用长官权威破坏法令，百姓也就不敢利用珠宝贿赂触犯禁律。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun was very cautious about the law, and would never change the law for the sake of his relatives. His officials would not dare to use the authority of their superiors to break the law, and the people would not dare to use jewelry and bribery to violate the prohibition.

古文：故主上视法严于亲戚，吏之举令敬于师长，民之承教重于神宝。
现代文：这样。君主把法律看得比亲贵还尊严，官吏就把行令看得比敬师还严肃，百姓也就把接受政教看得比祭祀祖先还要神圣。
English: In this way, the monarch regards the law as more dignified than dear, the officials regard the execution of orders as more serious than respect for teachers, and the people regard the acceptance of politics and religion as more sacred than the worship of ancestors.

古文：故法立而不用，刑设而不行也。
现代文：这样，法虽然建立起来，实际上并不需要动用；刑罚虽然确立，实际上并不需要执行。
English: In this way, although the law is established, it does not actually need to be used; although the punishment is established, it does not actually need to be enforced.

古文：夫施功而不钧，位虽高为用者少；赦罪而不一，德虽厚不誉者多；举事而不时，力虽尽其功不成；刑赏不当，断斩虽多，其暴不禁。
现代文：如果赏功制度不公平，赏给的官位再高，肯效力的人也会很少；赦罪尺度不一致，施予的恩德再大，不赞成的人也会很多；举事不合时令，即使把力量用尽，效果也不会好；判刑不合法度，即使人再多，暴乱也制止不住。
English: If the reward system is unfair, no matter how high the official position awarded, there will be few people who are willing to be effective; the scale of pardon is inconsistent, no matter how great the grace given, there will be many people who disapprove; the action is not timely, even if the power is exhausted, the effect will not be good; the sentence is illegal, even if there are more people, the riot can not be stopped.

古文：夫公之所加，罪虽重下无怨气；私之所加，赏虽多士不为欢。
现代文：按公法行事，刑罚重，下边的人也没有怨气；按私意行事，赏赐多，战士也不会受到鼓励。
English: Acting according to public law, the punishment is heavy, and the people below are not resentful; acting according to selfishness, the reward is more, and the soldiers will not be encouraged.

古文：行法不道，众民不能顺；举错不当，众民不能成；不攻不备，当今为愚人。
现代文：执行法令不合理，民众就不会顺从；措施不得当，民众就不能成事。不研习法度，不完善法度，就应当叫作愚人。
English: If the implementation of laws and regulations is unreasonable, the people will not obey; if the measures are not proper, the people will not be able to accomplish things. If you do not study the laws and regulations and do not perfect the laws and regulations, you should be called a fool.

古文：故圣人之制事也，能节宫室、通车舆以实藏，则国必富、位必尊；能適衣服、去玩好以奉本，而用必赡、身必安矣；能移无益之事、无补之费，通币行礼，而党必多、交必亲矣。
现代文：因此，圣明君主的行事，能够俭治宫室，撙节车驾来充实国家贮备，则国必富而位必尊；能够撙节衣服、抛弃玩好之物来加强农业生产，则财用必足而地位必然巩固；能够摆脱无益的活动、无益的开支，来进行通币行礼的外交活动，则盟国必多而关系必然亲睦。
English: Therefore, if the actions of the enlightened monarch can frugally manage the palace, save money and drive to enrich the country's reserves, the country must be rich and respected; if he can save clothes and abandon toys to strengthen agricultural production, the financial use must be sufficient and the position must be consolidated; if he can get rid of useless activities and useless expenses to carry out diplomatic activities of currency exchange and courtesies, the allies must be many and the relationship must be amicable.

古文：夫众人者，多营于物，而苦其力、劳其心，故困而不赡，大者以失其国，小者以危其身。
现代文：至于一般的君主，多半迷恋于物质享受，并为此费力操心，所以弄得困顿不堪而国用不足，大者可致亡国，小者也危害自身。
English: As for the average monarch, most of them are infatuated with material enjoyment and take pains to worry about it, so they are exhausted and the country is not enough, the big ones can cause the country to perish, and the small ones also harm themselves.

古文：凡人之情：得所欲则乐，逢所恶则忧，此贵贱之所同有也。
现代文：人的常情是：满足了要求就高兴，碰上厌恶之事就忧愁，这是不论地位高低的人都如此的。
English: It is human nature to be happy when one's needs are met, and to be sad when one's dislikes are met. This is true for people of all ranks.

古文：近之不能勿欲，远之不能勿忘，人情皆然，而好恶不同，各行所欲，而安危异焉，然后贤不肖之形见也。
现代文：对接近的东西不能不追求，对远离的东西不能不遗忘，人情也莫不如此。然而每个人的好恶不同，各行所好，结局的安危则不一样，这里就区别出贤、不肖来了。
English: We can't help but pursue what is near, and forget what is far away, and that's just human nature. However, everyone's likes and dislikes are different, everyone is good at different things, and the safety of the outcome is different. This is where the difference between the wise and the foolish comes in.

古文：夫物有多寡，而情不能等；事有成败，而意不能同；行有进退，而力不能两也。
现代文：物产有多有少，而人的要求却不能和它吻合；事情有成有败，而人的意愿却不能和它一致；行动有进有退，而人的力量却不能和它适应。
English: There are more and fewer goods, but people's demands can't match them; things have successes and failures, but people's wills can't match them; actions have advances and retreats, but people's strength can't match them.

古文：故立身于中，养有节；宫室足以避燥湿，食饮足以和血气，衣服足以适寒温，礼仪足以别贵贱，游虞足以发欢欣，棺椁足以朽骨，衣衾足以朽肉，坟墓足以道记。
现代文：所以为人行事要保持适中，生活享受要有节制：宫室足以避燥湿，饮食足以和血气，衣服足以御寒热，礼仪足以别贵贱，游乐足以发欢情，棺椁足以硷朽骨，葬服足以裹尸体，坟墓足以作标记就行了。
English: Therefore, one should act moderately and enjoy life with moderation: a palace is enough to avoid dryness and dampness, food is enough to be healthy, clothing is enough to keep out the cold and heat, etiquette is enough to be noble, amusement is enough to have fun, coffin is enough to bury the dead, funeral clothes are enough to wrap the corpse, and the grave is enough to mark.

古文：不作无补之功，不为无益之事，故意定而不营气情。
现代文：不要搞没有意义的工作，不要做无益的事情，这样就意气安定，思想感情不受迷惑。
English: Don't engage in meaningless work, don't do useless things, so that your spirit is stable and your thoughts and feelings are not confused.

古文：气情不营则耳目穀、衣食足；耳目穀、衣食足，则侵争不生，怨怒无有，上下相亲，兵刃不用矣。
现代文：思想感情不受迷惑则耳目聪明、衣食丰足；耳聪目明、衣食丰足，就不会彼此争夺，不会互相怨怒，上下可以相亲，用不着动用武力了。
English: If one's thoughts and feelings are not confused, then one's ears and eyes will be smart, and one's food and clothing will be plentiful; if one's ears and eyes are sharp, and one's food and clothing are plentiful, then there will be no competition with each other, no grudges against each other, and the upper and lower classes can be intimate with each other, and there is no need to use force.

古文：故適身行义，俭约恭敬，其唯无福，祸亦不来矣；骄傲侈泰，离度绝理，其唯无祸，福亦不至矣。
现代文：所以，克制自身，遵行仪法，再加上节约谨慎，即使不会得福，也不至于灾祸临头。骄傲奢侈，背离法度，违反常理，即使没有祸害，幸福也不会来临。
English: Therefore, self-restraint, observance of rituals and laws, as well as thrift and prudence, even if there is no blessing, will not lead to disaster. Pride is extravagant, deviates from the law, violates common sense, and even if there is no disaster, happiness will not come.

古文：是故君于上观绝理者以自恐也，下观不及者以自隐也。
现代文：因此。君子一方面要从违背常理的人身上记取教训，警惕自己；另一方面又要从努力不足的人身上取得借鉴，而自行反省。
English: Therefore, on the one hand, a gentleman should learn from those who violate common sense and be wary of himself; on the other hand, he should learn from those who do not work hard enough and self-reflect.

古文：故曰：誉不虚出，而患不独生，福不择家，祸不索人，此之谓也。
现代文：所以说，荣誉不凭空出现，忧患不无故发生，幸福不挑选人家，灾祸不自动找到人的头上，就是这个意思。
English: Therefore, it is said that honor does not appear out of thin air, sorrow does not occur without reason, happiness does not choose others, and disaster does not automatically find people's heads. This is the meaning.

古文：能以所闻瞻察，则事必明矣。
现代文：能用自己的亲身见闻探察反省，事情就清楚了。
English: If you can use your own personal experience to investigate and reflect, things will become clear.

古文：故凡治乱之情，皆道上始。
现代文：一切治乱的根源，都从上面开始。
English: The root of all chaos management starts from the top.

古文：故善者圉之以害，牵之以利。能利害者，财多而过寡矣。
现代文：所以，善治国者要用 害 来约束人们，用 利 来引导人们，能掌握人们利害者，则财富增加而过错减少。
English: Therefore, those who govern the country well should use harm to restrain people, use benefit to guide people, and if they can grasp people's interests, then wealth will increase and mistakes will decrease.

古文：夫凡人之情，见利莫能勿就，见害莫能勿避。
现代文：凡人之常情，见利没有不追求的，见害没有不想躲避的。
English: It is a common human feeling that there is nothing that we should not pursue when we see benefit, and nothing that we should not avoid when we see harm.

古文：其商人通贾，倍道兼行，夜以续日，千里而不远者，利在前也。
现代文：商人做买卖，一天赶两天的路，夜以继日，千里迢迢而不以为远，是因为利在前面。
English: Merchants do business, one day to catch two days of the road, day after day, thousands of miles away, but not far away, because the profit is ahead.

古文：渔人之入海，海深万仞，就波逆流乘危百里，宿夜不出者，利在水也。
现代文：渔人下海，海深万仍，在那里逆流冒险，航行百里，昼夜都不出来，是因为利在水中。
English: Fishermen go to sea, the sea is still very deep, where they risk going against the current, sail a hundred miles, and do not come out day and night, because the profit is in the water.

古文：故利之所在，虽千仞之山无所不上，深源之下，无所不入焉。
现代文：所以，利之所在，即使干仍的高山，人们也要上；即使深渊之下，人们也愿意进去。
English: Therefore, the advantage is that even if it is a dry mountain, people want to go up; even if it is under the abyss, people are willing to go in.

古文：故善者势利之在，而民自美安，不推而往，不引而来，不烦不扰，而民自富。
现代文：所以，善治国考，掌握住利源之所在，人民就自然羡慕而甘心接受；无需推动，他们也会前进；无需引导，他们也会跟来；不烦民又不扰民，而人民自富。
English: Therefore, if the country is well governed and the source of profit is well controlled, the people will naturally be envious and willing to accept; without pushing, they will also advance; without guidance, they will also follow; without annoying or disturbing the people, and the people will enrich themselves.

古文：如鸟之覆卵，无形无声，而唯见其成。
现代文：这就象鸟孵卵一样，不见其形，不闻其声，小鸟就破巢而出了。
English: This is like a bird hatching an egg, without seeing its shape, without hearing its sound, the bird will break out of the nest.

古文：夫为国之本，得天之时而为经，得人之心而为纪，法令为维纲，吏为网罟，什伍以为行列，赏诛为文武。
现代文：治国的根本，掌握天时叫作 经 ，收得民心叫作 纪 ，法令好比网罟的大纲，官吏好比网和罟，居民的什伍编制好比军队的行列，赏罚好比进退的金鼓。
English: The fundamentals of governing the country, mastering the weather is called the economy, winning the hearts and minds of the people is called discipline, laws and regulations are like the outline of the net, officials are like the net and the net, the formation of residents is like the ranks of the army, and rewards and punishments are like the advancing and retreating golden drums.

古文：缮农具当器械，耕农当攻战，推引铫耨以当剑戟，被蓑以当铠鑐，菹笠以当盾橹。
现代文：应当整治农具以当武器，利用耕作以当攻战，锄好比剑戟，披蓑好比铠甲，斗笠好比盾牌。
English: Agricultural tools should be used as weapons, and farming should be used as offensive warfare. The plough should be compared to the sword, the cloak to the armor, and the battle hat to the shield.

古文：故耕器具则战器备，衣事习则功战巧矣。
现代文：所以农具完备则如武器完备，农事熟习攻战也精巧了。
English: Therefore, if the agricultural tools are complete, the weapons will be complete, and if the farmers are familiar with farming, they will be more skillful in fighting.

古文：当春三月，萩室熯造，钻隧易火，杼井易水，所以去兹毒也。
现代文：在春季三月时节，要点燃灶火熏烤房间，更换钻隧取火的木料，淘井换水，为的是消除其中毒气。
English: In the spring of March, it is necessary to ignite the stove to smoke the roasting room, replace the wood for the fire, and change the water in order to eliminate the poisonous gas.

古文：举春祭，塞久祷，以鱼为牲，以糵为酒，相召，所以属亲戚也。
现代文：举行春祭，祈祷不生疾病，用鱼做成供品，用曲做成米酒，互相宴请，为的是密切亲戚关系。
English: They hold a spring festival, pray not to get sick, make offerings of fish and rice wine with songs, and feast on each other in order to maintain a close relationship.

古文：毋杀畜生，毋拊卵，毋伐木，毋夭英，毋拊竿，所以息百长也。
现代文：不屠杀禽兽，不打剥禽卵，不砍伐树木，不采摘花朵，不损伤竹笋之芽，为的是保养万物生长。
English: In order to maintain the growth of all things, they do not slaughter animals and birds, do not peel eggs, do not cut down trees, do not pick flowers, and do not damage the buds of bamboo shoots.

古文：赐鳏寡，振孤独，贷无种，与无赋，所以劝弱民。
现代文：帮助鳏寡，赈济孤独，贷放种籽给无种籽的农户，救助无力纳税的人家，为的是劝勉贫弱人民。
English: Helping widows and widowers, relieving loneliness, lending seeds to farmers who do not have seeds, and helping families who are unable to pay taxes, in order to encourage poor and weak people.

古文：发五正，赦薄罪，出拘民，解仇雠，所以建时功施生谷也。
现代文：颁发各种政令，赦免罪轻的人，放出拘押的人，调解纠纷，为的是及时完成农事致力于粮食生产。
English: Issued various decrees, pardoned people with minor crimes, released people in custody, mediated disputes, in order to complete agricultural work in a timely manner, and committed to grain production.

古文：夏赏五德，满爵禄，迁官位，礼孝弟，复贤力，所以劝功也。
现代文：在夏季时节，奖赏各种有德的行为，加爵禄，提官职，礼敬孝悌卓著的人，为艰苦劳动者免除谣役，为的是鼓励人们努力工作。
English: In the summer season, various virtuous behaviors, bonuses, promotion, courtesy and filial piety are rewarded, and the hard workers are exempted from the ballad, in order to encourage people to work hard.

古文：秋行五刑，诛大罪，所以禁淫邪，止盗贼。
现代文：在秋天，行使各种刑罚，处杀罪大恶极的人，为的是禁淫邪而止盗贼。
English: In the autumn, all kinds of punishments are carried out, people who have committed the most heinous crimes are executed, and thieves are stopped in order to prohibit the evil of prostitution.

古文：冬收五藏，最万物，所以内作民也。
现代文：在冬天，做好五谷收藏，收聚各类产品，为的是收纳农民贡税。
English: In winter, do a good job of collecting grain, collect all kinds of products, in order to collect farmers' tribute.

古文：四时事备，而民功百倍矣。
现代文：一年四季的事情安排齐备，人民的劳动就能有百倍的功效。
English: The arrangements for the four seasons of the year are complete, and the people's labor can be a hundred times more effective.

古文：故春仁、夏忠、秋急、冬闭，顺天之时，约地之宜，忠人之和，故风雨时，五谷实，草木美多，六畜蕃息，国富兵强，民材而令行，内无烦扰之政，外无强敌之患也。
现代文：这样，春天仁慈，夏天忠厚，秋天严峻，冬天收闭，顺天时，管地宜，再合乎人和，就可以风调雨顺，五谷丰登，草木繁茂，六畜兴旺，国富兵强，人民富裕而法令通行，国内没有烦民扰民的政治，外部也没有强敌的祸患了。
English: In this way, the spring is benevolent, the summer is loyal, the autumn is severe, the winter is closed, the weather is good, the management of the land is appropriate, and if it is suitable for people, the weather can be good, the grain is abundant, the plants are flourishing, the six animals are thriving, the country is rich and the soldiers are strong, the people are rich and the laws are passed, there is no domestic politics that annoys the people and disturbs the people, and there is no external enemy disaster.

古文：夫动静顺然后和也，不夫其时然后富，不失其法然后治。
现代文：举措得宜国事才能协调，不误农时国家才能富裕，不失法度国家才能治好。
English: National affairs can only be coordinated when the measures are appropriate, the country can only be rich when it is agricultural, and the country can only be well governed when it does not violate the law.

古文：故国不虚富，民不虚治。
现代文：所以国家没有无缘无故富起来的，人民没有无缘无故治理好的。
English: Therefore, the country did not become rich for no reason, and the people did not govern well for no reason.

古文：不治而昌，不乱而亡者，自古至今未尝有也。
现代文：没有治理而国家昌盛，没有动乱而国家灭亡的事情，自古及今是不存在的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there is no such thing as a country flourishing without governance, or a country dying without turmoil.

古文：故国多私勇者其兵弱，吏多私智者其法乱，民多私利者其国贫。
现代文：所以，国家勇于私斗的人多，其兵力削弱；官吏表现个人智慧的人多，其法度混乱；人民图谋私利的人多，国家陷于贫穷。
English: Therefore, the country has more people who are brave enough to fight for their own interests, and their military strength is weakened; the officials have more people who show personal wisdom, and their laws are chaotic; the people have more people who seek their own interests, and the country is impoverished.

古文：故德莫若博厚，使民死之；赏罚莫若必成，使民信之。
现代文：因此。施德必须博厚，使人民能够以死报效；赏罚必须情实坚决，使人民能够坚信不疑。
English: Therefore, benevolence must be abundant, so that the people can repay it with death; reward and punishment must be real and resolute, so that the people can firmly believe.

古文：夫善牧民者，非以城郭也，辅之以什，司之以伍。
现代文：善于统治人民的君主，不是依靠内城外郭。而是依靠什、伍的居民组织来管理。
English: Monarchs, who are good at ruling the people, do not rely on the inner and outer walls of the city. Instead, they rely on the residents' organizations in Shizuoka and Wuxi to manage the city.

古文：伍无非其人，人无非其里，里无非其家。
现代文：使伍中没有非本伍的人，人们没有不住在本里的。里内没有非本里的人家。
English: There is no one in the envoy corps who is not from the envoy corps, there are no people who do not live in the envoy corps, and there are no people who do not live in the envoy corps.

古文：故奔亡者无所匿，迁徙者无所容，不求而约，不召而来。
现代文：这样，逃亡者无处隐藏，迁徒者无处容身，不用强求人们就受到约束，不用召唤人们也会前来。
English: In this way, fugitives have nowhere to hide, migrants have nowhere to hide, people can be restrained without being forced, and people can come without being summoned.

古文：故民无流亡之意，吏无备追之忧。
现代文：这样，人民无逃亡之意，官吏无戒备追捕之忧。
English: In this way, the people have no intention of fleeing, and the officials have no fear of being pursued.

古文：故主政可往于民，民心可系于主。
现代文：这样，君主政令可以贯彻于民间，民心也可以和君主联系起来了。
English: In this way, the monarch's decrees can be implemented among the people, and the people's hearts can be connected with the monarch.

古文：夫法之制民也，犹陶之于埴，冶之于金也。
现代文：用法制管理人民，应当象制陶了解粘土的特性，冶金了解金属的特点一样。
English: The administration of the people by the legal system should be like the potter's knowledge of the properties of clay, or the metallurgist's knowledge of the properties of metals.

古文：故审利害之所在，民之去就，如火之于燥湿，水之于高下。
现代文：只要判明利害的所在，人民去就的方向，就象火的避湿就干，水的避高就低一样明白了。
English: As long as you know what is at stake and the direction in which the people should go, you will understand, just as the fire is dry when it avoids moisture, and low when it avoids high water.

古文：夫民之所生，衣与食也；食之所生，水与土也。
现代文：人民赖以生活的，不外衣食；食物赖以生产的，不外水土。
English: What the people depend on for their livelihood is nothing more than food and clothing; what they depend on for food production is nothing more than water and soil.

古文：所以富民有要，食民有率，率三十亩而足于卒岁。
现代文：所以使人民富裕是有要领的，满足民食是有标准的。这个标准是一个人有三十亩地就可以生活一年。
English: Therefore, there are essentials to make the people rich, and there is a standard to meet the people's food. This standard is that a person can live for one year with thirty mu of land.

古文：岁兼美恶，亩取一石，则人有三十石，果蓏素食当十石，糠秕六畜当十石，则人有五十石，布帛麻丝，旁入奇利，未在其中也。
现代文：按好坏年景平均计算，亩产一石，则每人有三十石。瓜果蔬菜相当十石粮食，糠瘪谷与畜产相当十石粮食，则每人共五十石，而布帛麻丝和其他副业杂项收入还没有计算在内。
English: According to the average calculation of good and bad years, if one mu produces one stone, then each person has thirty stones. If ten stones of grain are equivalent to fruits and vegetables, and ten stones of grain are equivalent to animal husbandry, then each person has a total of fifty stones, and cloth castor silk and other sideline miscellaneous income have not been counted.

古文：故国有余藏，民有余食。
现代文：这样，国家有积蓄，人民也有余粮。
English: In this way, the country has savings and the people have surplus grain.

古文：夫叙钧者，所以多寡也；权衡者，所以视重轻也；户籍田结者，所以知贫富之不訾也；故善者必先知其田，乃知其人，田备然后民可足也。
现代文：就像和钩用来算定多少、权和衡用来计量轻重一样，户籍和田册正是用来了解贫富差别的。所以，善治国者，一定要先知道地的情况，然后再知道人的情况。土地够用，人民生活就可以富起来。
English: Just as a hook is used to calculate the number of people, and weights and measures are used to measure their weight, the family register and the field book are used to understand the difference between the rich and the poor. Therefore, those who govern the country well must first know the situation of the land, and then know the situation of the people. If there is enough land, people's lives can be enriched.

古文：凡有天下者，以情伐者帝，以事伐者王，以政伐者霸。
现代文：凡是据有天下的，靠人心取天下者成帝业，靠事业取天下者成王业。靠征战取天下者成霸业。
English: As long as there are people in the world, those who win the world by their hearts will become emperors, those who win the world by their deeds will become kings, and those who win the world by conquest will become overlords.

古文：而谋有功者五，一曰视其所爱，以分其威，一人两心，其内必衰也。
现代文：设法削减他的权力。他若怀有二心，对君主的亲近程度必然衰退。
English: If he is ambivalent, his closeness to the monarch is bound to wane.

古文：臣不用，其国可危。
现代文：大臣不为君主效力，其国家就宝宝可危。
English: If a minister does not work for the monarch, his country is in danger.

古文：二曰视其阴所憎，厚其货赂，得情可深，身内情外，其国可知。
现代文：第二，查明敌国君主暗个憎恶的大臣，设法加强贿赂。这可以深刻了解敌情。有人身居国内。情通国外，其国家实况就能掌握。
English: Second, to find out the secretly hated minister of the enemy country's monarch and try to strengthen the bribe. This can deeply understand the enemy situation. If someone lives in the country and knows the situation abroad, his country's real situation can be grasped.

古文：三曰听其淫乐，以广其心，遗以竽瑟美人，以塞其内；遗以谄臣文马，以蔽其外。外内蔽塞，可以成败。
现代文：第三，了解放国君主淫乐，就设法消磨他的意志。送给他乐队美人，在内蒙蔽他；送给的诌媚的侍臣和美丽的乘马，在外蒙蔽他。内外蒙蔽，可以促成其国败。
English: Thirdly, to satisfy the lust of the liberating monarch is to try to kill his will. To give him a band of beautiful women is to blind him on the inside; to give him charming courtiers and beautiful horses is to blind him on the outside. To blind him on the inside and outside is to bring about the defeat of his country.

古文：四曰必深亲之，如典之同生。
现代文：第四，尽量同敌国表示亲密。形同兄弟。
English: Fourth, try to be as close as possible to the enemy country. Act like brothers.

古文：阴内辩士，使图其计；内勇士，使高其气。
现代文：暗中派智辩之士帮助他图谋别国，派勇力之士投奔他使之骄傲。
English: He secretly sent wise men to help him plot against other countries, and brave men to make him proud.

古文：内人他国，使倍其约，绝其使，拂其意，是必士斗。
现代文：又派人到别国去，唆使别国同他背约、断交、反目，由此战争必起。
English: He also sent emissaries to other countries to incite them to break their treaties with him, to break off diplomatic relations with him, and to quarrel with him, so that war would break out.

古文：两国相敌，必承其弊。
现代文：两国相敌，就必能利用其失败的局面。
English: As the two countries are enemies, they will certainly be able to take advantage of the situation of their failure.

古文：五曰深察其谋，谨其忠臣，揆其所使，令内不信，使有离意。
现代文：第五，深入了解敌国君主的谋划。敬事其忠臣，挑拨其属下，使他们内部互不信任。离心离德。
English: Fifth, thoroughly understand the enemy monarch's plan. Respect his loyal subjects, instigate his subordinates, and make them distrust each other internally.

古文：离气不能令，必内自贼。
现代文：离不能合，一定自相残杀。
English: If they can't get along, they'll kill each other.

古文：忠臣已死，故政可夺。
现代文：忠臣死掉。就可以夺取他的政权。
English: When a loyal subject dies, you can seize his power.

古文：此五者，谋功之道也。
现代文：这五者便是谋攻敌国的办法。
English: These five are the methods of plotting against the enemy.

