古文：昆仑奴侯彝僧侠崔慎思聂隐娘
现代文：昆仑奴侯彝僧侠崔慎思聂隐娘
English: Kunlun Niu Houyi Monk Chivalry Choe Shin Si's Hidden Daughter

古文：昆仑奴
现代文：昆仑奴
English: Kunlun Horse

古文：唐大历中，有崔生者，其父为显僚，与盖代之勋臣一品者熟。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，有一位崔生，他父亲是一个地位显赫的官员，与当时的勋臣一品很要好，崔生当时任宫中警卫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Cui Sheng. His father was a high-ranking official who was on very good terms with the court nobles of the time. Cui Sheng was a palace guard at the time.

古文：生是时为千牛，其父使往省一品疾。
现代文：一品患病。崔生的父亲命他去探视。
English: Ippon falls ill. Cui Sheng's father orders him to visit him.

古文：生少年，容貌如玉，性禀孤介，举止安详，发言清雅。
现代文：崔生很年轻，容貌如玉，性情耿直，举止安祥，语言清雅。
English: Cui Sheng is very young, his appearance is perfect, his temperament is upright, his demeanor is peaceful, and his language is elegant.

古文：一品命姬轴帘，召生入室。生拜传父命，一品欣然爱慕，命坐与语。
现代文：一品命一姬女卷起门帘，召崔生入室，崔生拜过一品后，传达了他父亲的关怀之情。
English: After the meal, the daughter rolled up the door curtain and called Cui Sheng into the room. Cui Sheng bowed and conveyed his father's concern.

古文：时三妓人艳皆绝代，居前，以金瓯贮含桃而劈之，沃以甘酪而进。
现代文：一品很喜欢崔生，让崔生坐在面前，二人闲谈。这时有三个艳丽无比的姬女站在前面，手捧着金饰的食器，食器中盛着用糖水浸过的鲜桃。
English: A loved Cui Sheng very much, so Cui Sheng sat in front of him and the two of them chatted. At this time, there were three incredibly beautiful granddaughters standing in front, holding gold-decorated tableware, which contained fresh peaches soaked in sugar water.

古文：一品遂命衣红绡妓者，擎一瓯与生食。生少年赧妓辈，终不食。
现代文：一品让一位身穿红绡衣的姬女端了一碗给崔生吃，崔生年轻，在姬女面前显得很羞涩，没有吃。
English: At one point, a maid in a red satin dress brought a bowl to Cui Sheng to eat. Cui Sheng was young and looked very shy in front of the maid, and did not eat.

古文：一品命红绡妓以匙而进之，生不得已而食。妓哂之，遂告辞而去。
现代文：一品又让红绡姬用匙喂崔生。他不得已才吃了，姬女笑了，崔生要告辞回去。
English: He had to use a spoon to feed Cui Sheng to another dish. He had no choice but to eat it, Cui Sheng wanted to say goodbye and go back.

古文：一品曰：郎君闲暇，必须一相访，无间老夫也。
现代文：一品说：你要闲暇时，必须经常来看我，可不要疏远了老夫。
English: One said, "When you have leisure, you must come to see me often, but don't alienate your husband."

古文：命红绡送出院。
现代文：命红绡姬送崔生出院。
English: It's my mission to see Cui Sheng out of the hospital.

古文：时生回顾，妓立三指，又反三掌者，然后指胸前小镜子云：记取。
现代文：这时，崔生一回头，看见那姬女伸出三个手指，又连续翻了三掌，然后又指了指胸前的小镜子，说：记住。
English: At this time, Cui Sheng turned his head and saw that the little girl stretched out three fingers, turned three palms in a row, and then pointed to the small mirror in front of his chest and said: "Remember.

古文：余更无言。
现代文：没有再说其它话语。
English: No other words were spoken.

古文：生归，达一品意。
现代文：崔生回来，先向父亲转达了一品的意思。
English: When Cui Sheng came back, he first conveyed to his father the meaning of one dish.

古文：返学院，神迷意夺，语减容沮，怳然凝思，日不暇食，但吟诗曰：误到蓬山顶上游，明珰玉女动星眸。
现代文：返回学院后便神迷意乱，脸也瘦了，话也少了，只是痴呆呆地想心事，整天不吃饭，他却吟了一首诗。误到蓬山顶上游，明珰玉女动星眸。
English: After returning to the college, he was bewitched and distraught, his face was thin, and he had little to say, but he was thinking about things in a dazed manner. He didn't eat all day, but he recited a poem. Mistakenly, he reached the upper reaches of the top of Pengshan Mountain, and the bright-eyed young lady was looking at the stars.

古文：朱扉半掩深宫月，应照璚芝雪艳愁。
现代文：朱扉半掩深宫月，应照璚芝雪艳愁。
English: The vermilion door is half-hidden by the deep palace moon, it should be in accordance with the Qi Zhi Xue Yan Zhou.

古文：左右莫能究其意。
现代文：他身边的人都不知道是什么意思。
English: No one around him knows what it means.

古文：时家中有昆仑奴磨勒，顾瞻郎君曰：心中有何事，如此抱恨不已？
现代文：这时，他家有一个叫磨勒的昆仑奴，去看了看崔生，说：你心中有什么事，竟这样抱恨不已？
English: At this time, a Kunlun slave named Muller from his family went to see Cui Sheng and said, "What's in your heart that makes you hold grudges like this?

古文：何不报老奴。
现代文：你为什么不和我说。
English: Why didn't you tell me?

古文：生曰：汝辈何知，而问我襟怀间事。磨勒曰：但言，当为郎君释解，远近必能成之。
现代文：崔生说：这是我心里的事，你们怎么能知道。磨勒说：你说吧，我一定能为你解除忧愁，不论什么难事，我都能办成。
English: Cui Sheng said, "This is a matter of my heart, how can you know?" and the miller said, "Tell me, I am sure to be able to relieve your sorrow, no matter how difficult it is, I can do it."

古文：生骇其言异，遂具告知。
现代文：崔生觉得这话不一般，便把他这段经历告诉了磨勒。
English: Cui Sheng thought this was unusual, so he told the miller about his experience.

古文：磨勒曰：此小事耳，何不早言之，而自苦耶？
现代文：磨勒说：这是小事一件，何不早说，你自找苦吃。
English: The miller said, "This is a small matter. Why didn't you say so earlier? You're asking for trouble."

古文：生又白其隐语，勒曰：有何难会，立三指者，一品宅中有十院歌姬，此乃第三院耳；返掌三者，数十五指，以应十五日之数；胸前小镜子，十五夜月圆如镜，令郎来耶。
现代文：崔生又把红绡姬的隐语说了。磨勒说：这有什么难的，伸三个手指，是说一品家有十院歌姬，她是第三院的。翻掌三次，正是十五，是说十五日后。胸前小镜子，是说十五的月亮圆如镜，叫你去相会。
English: Cui Sheng also recited the secret language of the Red Kite. The miller said, "What's so difficult about this? Hold out three fingers, which means that there are ten imperial court poets in one family, and she is from the third court. Flip your palm three times, which is exactly fifteen, which means fifteen days later. A small mirror on your chest, which means that the moon is round like a mirror at fifteen, tells you to meet.

古文：生大喜不自胜，谓磨勒曰：何计而能导达我郁结？
现代文：崔生一听非常激动，高兴。他对磨勒说：用什么办法才能解开我心中的郁结，达到我的愿望呢？
English: Upon hearing this, Cui Sheng was very excited and happy. He said to the miller, "What can I do to solve the knot in my heart and achieve my wish?"

古文：磨勒笑曰：后夜乃十五夜，请深青绢两匹，为郎君制束身之衣。
现代文：磨勒笑了，说：后天晚上，就是十五夜，请你用两匹青绢，做一套紧身衣服。
English: The miller smiled and said, "On the evening of the day after tomorrow, which is the fifteenth night, please use two young horses to make a set of tight clothes.

古文：一品宅有猛犬，守歌姬院门，非常人不得辄入，入必噬杀之。
现代文：一品家有猛犬，看守歌姬院门，一般人是进不去的，进去也将被咬死。
English: There is a fierce dog guarding the gate of the Imperial Palace. Ordinary people cannot enter, and if they do, they will be bitten to death.

古文：其警如神，其猛如虎，即曹州孟海之犬也。世间非老奴不能毙此犬耳。
现代文：那犬，其警如神，其猛如虎，是曹州孟海之犬，这个世界上，除了我，别人不能杀死它。
English: That dog, whose guard is like a god and whose ferocity is like a tiger, is the dog of Caozhou Menghai. In this world, except for me, no one else can kill it.

古文：今夕当为郎君挝杀之。
现代文：为了你，我就要杀死它。
English: I'll kill it for you.

古文：遂宴犒以酒肉。
现代文：崔生便弄来了酒肉，犒赏磨勒。
English: Cui Sheng then brought wine and meat to reward the miller.

古文：至三更，携鍊椎而往。食顷而回曰：犬已毙讫，固无障塞耳。
现代文：到了那晚的三更，磨勒拿了炼椎走了，只过了吃顿饭的时间他回来了，说：犬，已经叫我打死，这回没有障碍了。
English: When it came to the third watch of the night, the miller took the whetstone and went away. It was just past dinner time when he came back and said, "Dog, I already told you to beat me to death. This time there are no obstacles."

古文：是夜三更，与生衣青衣，遂负而逾十重垣，乃入歌妓院内，止第三门。绣户不扃，金釭微明，惟闻妓长叹而坐，若有所俟。
现代文：这晚三更后，崔生换上了紧身青衣，磨勒背着他飞过了十多重院墙，到了歌姬院，在第三院停下了，门也没锁，灯还亮着，只看着红绡姬长叹而坐，好像在等待。
English: On this night, after the third night, Cui Sheng changed into a tight-fitting blue suit, and the miller flew with him over more than ten courtyard walls, to the Geisha House, and stopped at the third courtyard. The door was not locked, and the lights were still on. He just looked at the Red Skull and sat there with a long sigh, as if waiting.

古文：翠环初坠，红脸才舒，玉恨无妍，珠愁转莹。但吟诗曰：深洞莺啼恨阮郎，偷来花下解珠珰。碧云飘断音书绝，空倚玉箫愁凤凰。
现代文：她不戴头饰，不施脂粉，满腹怨恨，满面悲戚，她在吟诗：深洞莺啼恨阮郎，偷来花下解珠珰，碧云飘断音书绝，空依玉箫愁凤凰。
English: She doesn't wear a tiara, doesn't put on lipstick, is full of resentment, full of sorrow, she's chanting: deep cave hate Ruan Lang, steal flowers to solve the bead riddle, blue clouds drift away, break the sound book, empty ying jade, sad phoenix.

古文：侍卫皆寝，邻近阒然。
现代文：宫中的侍卫都睡了，周围很寂静。
English: The palace guards were all asleep, and there was silence all around.

古文：生遂缓搴帘而入。良久，验是生。姬跃下榻，执生手曰：知郎君颖悟，必能默识，所以手语耳。
现代文：崔生便慢慢地掀起门帘进去了，过了一会儿，红绡姬认出来人是崔生，便急忙跳下床，拉着崔生的手，说：我知道你很聪明，一定会悟出我隐语的意思，所以那天才用手语。
English: Cui Sheng then slowly lifted the curtain of the door and went in. After a while, Red Dragonfly recognized Cui Sheng and jumped out of the bed. She took Cui Sheng's hand and said, "I know you are very smart and will surely understand the meaning of my cryptic, so I used sign language that day."

古文：又不知郎君有何神术，而能至此？
现代文：可我不知道郎君你有什么神术，才能到这深宅大院？
English: But I don't know, my lord, what kind of magic do you have to perform to get to this mansion?

古文：生具告磨勒之谋，负荷而至。姬曰：磨勒何在？
现代文：崔生便把磨勒为他出的主意，并背他飞到这里的经过告诉了红绡女。姬女说：磨勒在哪？崔生说，在帘外。
English: Cui Sheng then took the idea of the miller for him and told the Scarlet Pimpernel how he had flown here with him. Hsieh Sheng said, "Where is the miller?" Cui Sheng said, "Outside the curtain."

古文：曰：帘外耳。遂召入，以金瓯酌酒而饮之。
现代文：便把磨勒叫进屋，用金饰杯盛酒叫磨勒喝。
English: Then he called the miller into the house, and gave him wine in a golden cup to drink.

古文：姬白生曰：某家本富，居在朔方。主人拥旄，逼为姬仆。不能自死，尚且偷生。脸虽铅华，心颇郁结。
现代文：红绡姬告诉崔生说：我家原来很富有，住在北方，是一品用武力逼迫我做了姬女，没能自杀，苟且偷生，脸上虽然涂脂抹粉，心里却很苦闷。
English: "My family used to be very rich and lived in the north. They forced me to become a concubine by force. I couldn't commit suicide, so I had to live a clandestine life. Although my face was plastered with grease and powder, my heart was very sad.

古文：纵玉箸举馔，金炉泛香，云屏而每进绮罗，绣被而常眠珠翠；皆非所愿，如在桎梏。贤爪牙既有神术，何妨为脱狴牢。所愿既申，虽死不悔。
现代文：就是吃山珍海味，穿绫罗绸缎。铺金盖玉，这都不是我希望的，我好像在监狱里似的，贤仆磨勒既有这么高明的神术，何不帮我逃出监牢，只要我的愿望实现了，虽死不悔。
English: To eat mountain and sea delicacies, to wear silk and satin, and to wear gold and jewels - none of this was what I had hoped for. I felt as if I were in prison. Since the wise servant, the miller, was so skilled in magic, why didn't he help me escape from prison? As long as my wish was fulfilled, I would never regret it.

古文：请为仆隶，愿待光容，又不知郎高意如何？
现代文：我情愿为奴仆，侍候在你身旁，可是，我不知道郎君有什么高见？
English: I'd rather be a servant and wait by your side, but I don't know what your high opinion is?

古文：生愀然不语。
现代文：崔生只是闷闷不语。
English: Cui Sheng just muffled his words.

古文：磨勒曰：娘子既坚确如是，此亦小事耳。
现代文：磨勒说：娘子既然这么坚决，逃出虎口，只是小事一件。
English: The miller said, "Since the maiden is so resolute, it is only a small matter for her to escape from the tiger's mouth.

古文：姬甚喜。磨勒请先为姬负其橐妆奁，如此三复焉。
现代文：姬女非常高兴，磨勒先为红绡姑娘把随身用的衣服，妆奁背出去三次，然后说，恐怕晚了就要天亮了。
English: Hiya was very happy. The miller first took out the clothes and make-up case for Little Red Coat three times, and then said, "I'm afraid it's getting late and it's getting light."

古文：然后曰：恐迟明，遂负生与姬，而飞出峻垣十余重。
现代文：磨勒便背崔生和姬女，飞出高墙大院十几处，一品家的守卫，都没发现。
English: There are more than a dozen places in the high-walled compound where the miller carried Cui Sheng and his wife's daughter, but the guards of the family did not find them.

古文：一品家之守御，无有警省，遂归学院而匿之。及旦，一品家方觉。又见犬已毙，一品大骇曰：我家门垣，从来邃密，扃锁甚严，势似飞腾，寂无形迹，此必使士而挈之。无更声闻，徒为患祸耳。
现代文：回来后到学院隐藏起来。天亮了，一品家才发觉，又看到了犬已死，一品大吃一惊，说：我家墙高院大，警卫森严，门户紧锁，来人是飞腾而来，没留一点痕迹，必定是侠士所为，这事不要声张，以免惹祸招灾。
English: After returning, he went to the academy to hide. At dawn, one family member found out, and saw that the dog was dead. The other family member was very surprised and said, "My house is surrounded by high walls, strict guards, and locked gates. People come flying in, leaving no trace. It must be the work of a knight. Don't make a fuss about it, so as not to cause trouble and invite disaster."

古文：姬隐崔生家二岁，因花时，驾小车而游曲江，为一品家人潜志认，遂白一品。
现代文：红绡姬在崔生家隐居二年，到了春暖花开季节，她坐着小车去游曲江，被一品家人暗中认出来了，告诉了一品。
English: Hong Ying Ji lived in seclusion at Cui Sheng's home for two years. In the spring flowering season, she went to the Qujiang River in a small car. She was secretly recognized by a family member and told a story.

古文：一品异之，召崔生而诘之事。惧而不敢隐，遂细言端由，皆因奴磨勒负荷而去。
现代文：一品有点疑惑，便召来崔生追问此事，崔生胆怯不敢隐瞒，便详细地把前后经过都说了，最后说都是因为磨勒背着才去的。
English: One of the products was a little doubtful, so they called Cui Sheng to inquire about the matter. Cui Sheng was too timid to hide it, so he told them in detail what had happened before and after. In the end, he said that he only went because the miller was carrying it on his back.

古文：一品曰：是姬大罪过，但郎君驱使逾年，即不能问是非，某须为天下人除害。
现代文：一品说：是姬女的罪过，但她已服侍你几年了，也不能向她问罪了。但我要为天下人除害。
English: Ippon said, "It's Himeya's fault, but she's been serving you for several years, and I can't ask her to take the blame. But I want to eliminate harm for the world."

古文：命甲士五十人，严持兵仗围崔生院，使擒磨勒。
现代文：命令五十名士兵，持兵器包围崔生的院子，叫他们抓捕磨勒。
English: He ordered fifty soldiers to surround Cui Sheng's yard with weapons and ordered them to arrest the miller.

古文：磨勒遂持匕首，飞出高垣，瞥若翅翕，疾同鹰隼。
现代文：磨勒呢，手持匕首，飞出高墙，轻如羽毛，快如鹰隼。
English: The grinder, holding a dagger, flies out of the high wall, light as a feather, fast as a falcon.

古文：攒矢如雨，莫能中之。顷刻之间，不知所向。
现代文：尽管箭矢如雨，却没能射中他，顷刻之间，不知去向。
English: Although the arrows rained down, they failed to hit him, and in an instant, I don't know where to go.

古文：然崔家大惊愕。后一品悔惧，每夕，多以家童持剑戟自卫，如此周岁方止。
现代文：崔家却是一片惊慌，一品也有些后悔和后怕，每到晚上，配备了很多持剑执戟的家童自卫巡逻，这样做了一年多。
English: The Cui family, however, was in a panic, and there was also some regret and regret. Every evening, they were equipped with a lot of sword-wielding children to patrol in self-defense, and they did this for more than a year.

古文：后十余年，崔家有人，见磨勒卖药于洛阳市，容颜如旧耳。侯彝
现代文：十多年后，崔家有人看见磨勒在洛阳市卖药，面貌还和从前一样。侯彝
English: More than ten years later, someone from the Cui family saw Muller selling medicine in Luoyang City, his face still the same as before.

古文：唐大历中，有万年尉侯彝者好尚心义，尝匿国贼。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，万年尉侯彝非常讲义气。他曾经藏匿过国家要犯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, the ten-thousand-year-old lieutenant Hou Yi was very loyal. He once hid a national criminal.

古文：御史推鞫理穹，终不言贼所在。
现代文：御史审问他时已经理屈词穷，可他就是不说要犯在什么地方。
English: He was at a loss for words when he was interrogated by Goshi, but he just wouldn't say where he wanted to commit the crime.

古文：御史曰：贼在汝左右膝盖下。
现代文：御史说：贼在你左右膝盖下。
English: History says: the thief is under your left and right knee.

古文：彝遂揭阶砖，自击其膝盖，翻示御史曰：贼安在？
现代文：侯彝便揭台阶上的砖，击打自己的膝盖，指给御史看，并说，贼在那？
English: Hou Yi then removed the bricks on the steps, hit his knee, pointed to the historian, and said, "Where is the thief?"

古文：御史又曰：在左膝盖下。
现代文：御史又说，在左膝盖下。
English: History also says, under the left knee.

古文：又击之翻示。
现代文：他又击打左膝给御史看。
English: He also hit his left knee and showed it to the referee.

古文：御史乃以鏊贮烈火，置其腹上。烟烽焪，左右皆不忍视。
现代文：御史又用钱鏊装炭火。放在他的肚子上，烟气腾腾，左右在场的人都不忍看。
English: Goshi also used money to light a charcoal fire. It was placed on his stomach, and the smoke billowed out, and everyone present couldn't bear to look at it.

古文：彝怒呼曰：何不加炭！
现代文：侯彝却大怒喊叫说，为什么不再加些炭？
English: But Hou Yi shouted angrily, "Why don't you add more charcoal?

古文：御史奇之，奏闻。
现代文：御史也感到惊奇，便上奏皇上。
English: Goshi was also surprised, so he appealed to the Emperor.

古文：代宗即召见曰：何为隐贼，自贻其苦若此？
现代文：唐代宗召见了候彝，说：你为什么要藏贼，你这样自找苦吃？
English: The Tang Dynasty Emperor summoned Hou Xuan and said, "Why do you want to hide a thief? Are you looking for trouble?

古文：彝对曰：贼臣实藏之。
现代文：侯彝回答说，这个贼确实是我藏的。
English: Hou Yi replied that the thief was indeed hidden by me.

古文：已然诺于人，终死不可得。
现代文：我已经事先向他做了承诺，就是死了我也不能食言。
English: I had made a promise to him in advance, and I couldn't go back on it even if I died.

古文：遂贬之为端州高要厨。
现代文：后来他被贬为端州高要县尉。
English: Later, he was demoted to the rank of Hanzhou Gaoyo County Lieutenant.

古文：僧侠
现代文：僧侠
English: The monk chivalry

古文：唐建中初，士人韦生移家汝州，中路逢一僧，因与连镳，言论颇洽。
现代文：唐德宗建中初年，读书人韦生举家迁往汝州，中途遇一僧人，便和他并辔而行，彼此言论很融洽。
English: In the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School, Wei Sheng, a reader, moved his family to Ruzhou. When he met a monk on the way, he walked with him, and their speech was very harmonious.

古文：日将夕，僧指路歧曰：此数里是贫道兰若，郎君能垂顾乎？
现代文：天快黑时，僧人指着一个岔路说：离这里不远是我的寺庙，您能不能到那去住一宿？
English: When it was getting dark, the monk pointed to a side road and said, "My temple is not far from here. Could you go and spend the night there?"

古文：士人许之，因令家口先行。
现代文：韦生答应了，叫家人先走。
English: Wesson agreed and told his family to go first.

古文：僧即处分从者，供帐具食。
现代文：僧人让他的随从先走，回去准备食宿用品。
English: The monk let his entourage go first and went back to prepare the food and accommodation supplies.

古文：行十余里，不至。
现代文：走了十余里还没到，韦生问僧人。
English: After walking more than ten miles and still not arriving, Wei Sheng asked the monk.

古文：韦生问之，即指一处林烟曰：此是矣。及至，又前进。
现代文：僧人指一处林烟说，这就是。可是，走到那后又往前走了。
English: The monk pointed to a patch of forest and said, "That's it. However, after going there, he went on.

古文：日已昏夜，韦生疑之，素善弹，乃密于靴中取张卸弹，怀铜丸十余，方责僧曰：弟子有程期，适偶贪上人清论，勉副相邀，今已行二十里，不至何也？
现代文：这时，天已经黑了，韦生有点疑心，他平常就擅长射弹弓，他便悄悄地从靴中取出弹弓，怀中有铜丸十多粒。这才以责备的口气问僧人：我的行程是有日期的，方才见到你，由于言谈投机，便应邀而来，现在已经走了二十里啦，怎么还没到？
English: At this time, it was already dark, and Wei Sheng was a little suspicious. He was usually good at shooting slingshots, so he quietly took the slingshot out of his shoes. There were more than ten copper pellets in his arms. This is when he asked the monk in a reproachful tone: My trip has a date, I just saw you, because of speculation, I came at the invitation, now I have walked twenty miles, why haven't I arrived yet?

古文：僧但言用行。是僧前行百余步，韦生知其盗也，乃弹之。僧正中其脑。僧初若不觉。凡五发中之，僧始扪中处，徐曰：郎君莫恶作剧。
现代文：僧人只说走吧，他自己往前走了百多步，韦生看出了他是一个大盗，便拿出弹弓射他，正打中他的脑袋，僧人起初像不知道似的，打中五发后，他才用手去摸打中的地方，僧人慢慢说：郎君你不要恶作剧。
English: The monk only said, "Let's go." He himself walked more than a hundred steps forward. Wei Sheng saw that he was a big thief, so he took out a slingshot and shot him, hitting him in the head. At first, the monk didn't seem to know. After hitting five shots, he only touched the place where he hit. The monk slowly said, "Brother, don't play pranks."

古文：韦生知无可奈何，亦不复弹。
现代文：韦生也无可奈何，不再打了。
English: There was nothing he could do, and he stopped playing.

古文：良久，至一庄墅，数十人列火炬出迎。
现代文：又走了一段时间，到了一处庄园。好几十人打着火把出来迎接。
English: After walking for some time, we arrived at a manor house. Dozens of people came out with torches to welcome us.

古文：僧延韦生坐一厅中，笑云：郎君勿忧。
现代文：僧人请韦生到一厅中坐下，笑着说：郎君不用担心。
English: The monk invited Wei Sheng to sit down in a hall and said with a smile, "Brother-in-law, don't worry.

古文：因问左右：夫人下处如法无？
现代文：又问左右的下人，夫人的住处已经安排好了吗？
English: He also asked the servants to his right and left, "Has your wife's accommodation been arranged yet?"

古文：复曰：郎君且自慰安之，即就此也。韦生见妻女别在一处，供帐甚盛，相顾涕泣。
现代文：又说，郎君就在这里好好休息吧。韦生看到了妻子子女住在了另一处，住处安排得很好。
English: He also said that his son-in-law should take a good rest here. Wei Sheng saw that his wife and children lived in another place, and the accommodation was well arranged.

古文：即就僧，僧前执韦生手曰：贫道盗也，本无好意。不知郎君艺若此，非贫道亦不支也。
现代文：夫妇互相看着都哭了，僧人来了，拉着韦生的手说：我是个大盗，本来未怀好意，不知郎君你有这么高的武艺，除非我，别人是受不了的。
English: The couple both cried as they looked at each other. A monk came and took Wei Sheng by the hand and said, "I am a big thief. I didn't mean any harm. I didn't know you had such a high level of martial arts. I can't stand anyone else but me."

古文：今日固无他，幸不疑耳。适来贫道所中郎君弹悉在。
现代文：现在没别的事，感谢你没有怀疑我，方才我中郎君的弹丸都在这。
English: There's nothing else to do right now, thank you for not doubting me, that's why my middle brother's bullets are all here.

古文：乃举手搦脑后，五丸坠焉。
现代文：说着举手摸脑后，五个弹丸便落下来。
English: As he spoke, he raised his hand to feel his head, and five pellets fell down.

古文：有顷布筵，具蒸犊，犊上劄刀子十余，以韭饼环之。
现代文：过了一会儿，开始布筵，端上来的是蒸犊，蒸犊上插着十几把刀子，周围摆着切碎的饼。
English: After a while, the serving of steamed buns began. The steamed buns were served with more than a dozen knives stuck into the steamed buns, surrounded by slices of bread.

古文：揖韦生就座，复曰： 贫道有义弟数人，欲令谒见。
现代文：请韦生就座。又说，我有几个结义弟兄，我叫他们拜见你。
English: And he said, I have some brethren that are Jews; and I beseech them that they would come unto thee.

古文：言已，朱衣巨带者五六辈，列于阶下。
现代文：说完，有五六个穿红衣扎巨带的人站在阶下。
English: After he finished, there were five or six people wearing red clothes and huge sashes standing at the bottom of the steps.

古文：僧呼曰：拜郎君！汝等向遇郎君，即成齑粉矣。
现代文：僧人喊道：拜郎君，你们若是遇到郎君，早粉身碎骨了。
English: The monk shouted: Bai Rongjun, if you had met Rongjun, you would have been crushed.

古文：食毕，僧曰：贫道久为此业，今向迟暮，欲改前非。
现代文：吃完饭，僧人说，我干这一行很久了，现在已经老了，很想痛改前非。
English: After the meal, the monk said, "I've been in this line of work for a long time, I'm old now, and I really want to make amends.

古文：不幸有一子技过老僧，欲请郎君为老僧断之。
现代文：不幸的是我有一个儿子，他的技艺超过我，我想请郎君为我除掉他。
English: Unfortunately, I have a son who is more skilled than I am, and I would like to ask my lord to get rid of him for me.

古文：乃呼飞飞出参郎君。
现代文：他便叫来了儿子飞飞出来拜见韦生。
English: He then called his son Feifei to come out to meet Wei Sheng.

古文：飞年才十六七，碧衣长袖，皮肉如腊。
现代文：飞飞才十六七岁，穿着长袖的绿衣服，皮肤蜡黄。
English: Feifei was only 16 or 17 years old, wearing a long-sleeved green dress, with sallow skin.

古文：僧曰：向后堂侍郎君。
现代文：僧人说，你上后堂去等郎君。
English: The monk said, "Go to the back hall and wait for your master."

古文：僧乃授韦一剑及五丸，且曰：乞郎君尽艺杀之，无为老僧累也。
现代文：僧人给韦生一把剑和五粒弹丸，并向韦生说，我乞求郎君使出所有的武艺来杀他，老僧我今后就没有累赘了。
English: The monk gave Wei Sheng a sword and five bullets, and said to Wei Sheng, I beg you to use all your martial arts to kill him, the old monk will no longer be a burden to me.

古文：引韦入一堂中，乃反锁之。
现代文：他领韦生进入一个堂中后，他出来反锁了门。
English: After he led Wei Sheng into a hallway, he came out and locked the door.

古文：堂中四隅，明灯而已。
现代文：堂中四个角落，都点了灯。
English: In the four corners of the hall, all the lights were on.

古文：飞飞当堂执一短鞭，韦引弹，意必中。
现代文：飞飞拿一短鞭站在当堂。韦生拉紧了弹弓。心想必然打中。
English: Fei Fei stood in the hall with a short whip. Wei Sheng tightened the slingshot. He was sure to hit it.

古文：丸已敲落，不觉跃在梁上，循壁虚蹑，捷若猱玃。
现代文：弹丸射出时，飞飞竟跳到梁上去了，沿着墙壁慢慢行走，象猿猴一样敏捷。
English: When the projectile was fired, Feifei actually jumped onto the beam and walked slowly along the wall, as agile as a monkey.

古文：弹丸尽，不复中。
现代文：弹丸打光了，也没打中他。
English: He ran out of bullets and didn't make it.

古文：韦乃运剑逐之，飞飞倏忽逗闪，去韦身不尺。
现代文：韦生又持剑追逐他，飞飞腾跳躲闪，只离韦生有一尺远。
English: Wei Sheng chased him with his sword and dodged him, only a foot away from Wei Sheng.

古文：韦断其鞭数节，竟不能伤。
现代文：韦生把飞飞的鞭子断成数节，却没有伤着飞飞。
English: Wei Sheng broke Fei Fei's whip into several pieces, but it did not hurt Fei Fei.

古文：僧久乃开门，问韦：与老僧除得害乎？
现代文：时间过去很久了，僧人开了门，问韦生，你为老夫除了害了吗？
English: After a long time had passed, the monk opened the door and asked Wei Sheng, "Have you done any harm to your husband?"

古文：韦具言之。
现代文：韦生把方才的经过告诉了他。
English: Wei Sheng told him the story of Fang Cai.

古文：僧怅然，顾飞飞曰：郎君证成汝为贼也，知复如何。
现代文：老僧人怅然若失，对飞飞说：你和郎君比武，弄得你非得做贼了，只好这么办了么？
English: The old monk was at a loss, and said to Fei Fei, "You and your brother-in-law were fighting, so you had to become a thief. Is that what you had to do?"

古文：僧终夕与韦论剑及弧矢之事。天将晓，僧送韦路口，赠绢百匹，垂泣而别。
现代文：僧人和韦生谈论剑术和弓箭之事谈了一夜，天要亮时，僧人把韦生送到路口，并赠给他绢布一百匹。二人垂泪而别。
English: The monk and Wei Sheng talked about swordsmanship and archery for a whole night. At dawn, the monk took Wei Sheng to a road junction and gave him a hundred cocoons. The two parted in tears.

古文：崔慎思
现代文：崔慎思
English: Choi Shin Si

古文：博陵崔慎思，唐贞元中应进士举。京中无第宅，常赁人隙院居止。
现代文：崔慎思，博陵人。唐德宗贞元中期，他应进士举，在京中没有住宅，曾经租人一小院居住。
English: Cui Shansi, a resident of Boling. In the middle of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, he was promoted to the rank of scholar. He did not have a residence in Beijing, but once rented a small house to live in.

古文：而主人别在一院，都无丈夫，有少妇年三十余，窥之亦有容色，唯有二女奴焉。
现代文：房主人另住一院，没有丈夫，只有一少妇，三十多岁，容貌看起来还有些姿色。
English: The owner of the house lives in a different hospital. There is no husband, only a young woman, in her thirties, who still looks somewhat attractive.

古文：慎思遂遣通意，求纳为妻。
现代文：她有两个婢女，崔慎思便让她们通通话，想纳少妇为妻。
English: She had two maidservants, and Cui Shansi had them talk on the phone to find a young woman to marry.

古文：妇人曰：我非仕人，与君不敌，不可为他时恨也。
现代文：妇人说：我不是读书人，和你不般配，你以后会后悔的。
English: The woman said, "I'm not a reader. I'm not a good match for you. You'll regret it later."

古文：求以为妾，许之，而不肯言其姓。慎思遂纳之。
现代文：崔生又想把她纳为妾，她同意了。可是，她从不肯说出自家姓名，慎思便把她纳为妾。
English: Cui Sheng also wanted to take her as a concubine, and she agreed. However, she would never say her own name, so Shen Si took her as a concubine.

古文：二年余，崔所取给，妇人无倦色。
现代文：二年多，崔慎思所取所用，妇人从未表现出不满意的神色。
English: In the more than two years that Cui Shansi has been using it, the woman has never shown any signs of dissatisfaction.

古文：后产一子，数月矣，时夜，崔寝，及闭户垂帷，而已半夜，忽失其妇。
现代文：后来又生了一个儿子。几个月后的一天夜里，崔生关门闭户正在睡觉，到了半夜，那妇人却不在了。
English: Later, another son was born. A few months later, one night, Cui Sheng closed the door and was sleeping. At midnight, the woman was gone.

古文：崔惊之，意其有奸，颇发忿怒。
现代文：崔很惊慌，认为妇人可能和别人通奸，他很生气，很愤怒。
English: Cui panicked, thinking that the woman might have committed adultery with someone else. He was angry, very angry.

古文：遂起，堂前彷徨而行。
现代文：他便穿衣起床，在堂前走来走去。
English: He got up, dressed, and walked around the front of the church.

古文：时月胧明，忽见其妇自屋而下，以白练缠身，其右手持匕首，左手携一人头。
现代文：当时月色朦胧，他忽然看见妇人从屋脊上下来，身上扎着白腰带，右手拿匕首，左手提一个人头。
English: It was a hazy moon, and suddenly he saw a woman coming down from the roof, wearing a white sash, holding a knife in her right hand and a human head in her left.

古文：言其父昔枉为郡守所杀，入城求报，已数年矣，未得；今既克矣，不可久留，请从此辞。
现代文：她对崔慎思说，他父亲早年被郡守无辜杀害，她进城来报仇，可是好几年没得手，今天终于报了仇，她不能在此久留，请求从此辞别。
English: She said to Cui Shensi that his father was killed by the county magistrate in his early years. She came to the city to take revenge, but for several years she did not succeed. Today she finally took revenge. She could not stay here for long and asked to leave.

古文：遂更结束其身，以灰囊盛人首携之。谓崔曰：某幸得为君妾二年，而已有一子。
现代文：她整理了一下衣服，拿着用灰囊装着的人头，对崔慎思说：我有幸为你做了二年妾，而且有了一个孩子。
English: She tidied up her clothes for a moment, took the head of a man in an ash bag, and said to Cui Shansi: "I am fortunate to have been your concubine for two years, and I have a child.

古文：少顷却至，曰：适去，忘哺孩子少乳。
现代文：房子和两个婢女都是我自己置买的，现在赠送给你，希望你好好养育孩子。说完就走，她跳墙越舍像飞似的走了，慎思大为惊叹。
English: I bought the house and the two maids myself, and now I'm giving them to you as a gift, hoping that you will raise the children well. After saying that, I left, and she jumped over the wall and flew away, leaving Shensi in amazement.

古文：遂入室。
现代文：不一会儿，她又回来了。
English: A moment later, she was back.

古文：良久而出曰：喂儿已毕，便永去矣。
现代文：说：方才走，忘了给孩子喂奶。她进入室内，过了一段时间出来说，孩子我已经喂完了，就永远地走了。
English: "I just left and forgot to feed the baby," she said. She went inside, came out after a while and said, "I've finished feeding the baby, and I'm gone forever."

古文：慎思久之，怪不闻婴儿啼。视之，已为其所杀矣。
现代文：崔慎思过了很久没听到孩子的哭声，进屋一看，孩子已被少妇杀死了。
English: After thinking for a long time, Cui Shan did not hear the child's cries. When she entered the house, she saw that the child had been killed by the young woman.

古文：杀其子者，以绝其念也。
现代文：她杀死孩子，是为了断绝自己的思念之情。
English: She killed the child in order to cut off her feelings of longing.

古文：古之侠莫能过焉。
现代文：古时的侠客没有几个能超过她。
English: Few knights of old could surpass her.

古文：聂隐娘
现代文：聂隐娘
English: 隐娘

古文：聂隐娘者，唐贞元中，魏博大将聂锋之女也。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，魏博大将聂锋的女儿聂隐娘，才十岁。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty, the daughter of Wei Bo General Yao Feng, Yao Yin, was only ten years old.

古文：年方十岁，有尼乞食于锋舍，见隐娘悦之。
现代文：有一尼姑到聂锋家讨饭，见到了隐娘，特别喜爱。
English: There was a nun who went to Yan Feng's house to beg for food. When she met the hermit, she was particularly fond of her.

古文：云：问押衙乞取此女教？
现代文：她说：押衙能不能将女儿交给我，让我教育她。
English: She said, "Can you give my daughter to me and let me educate her?"

古文：锋大怒，叱尼。
现代文：聂锋很生气，斥责了尼姑。
English: Yao Feng was very angry and scolded the nun.

古文：尼曰：任押衙铁柜中盛，亦须偷去矣。
现代文：尼姑说：押衙就是把女儿锁在铁柜中，我也能偷去呀。
English: The nun said, "The shackles are like locking my daughter in an iron box. I can steal her too."

古文：及夜，果失隐娘所向。锋大惊骇，令人搜寻，曾无影响。
现代文：这天晚上，隐娘果然丢失了，聂锋大吃一惊，令人搜寻，没有结果。
English: That evening, the concubine was indeed lost, and Yao Feng was taken aback. A search ensued, with no results.

古文：父母每思之，相对涕泣而已。
现代文：父母每思念女儿，便相对哭泣。
English: Every time the parents miss their daughter, they cry.

古文：后五年，尼送隐娘归。告锋曰：教已成矣，子却领取。
现代文：五年后，尼姑把隐娘送回，并告诉聂锋说：我已经把她教成了，把她送还给你。
English: Five years later, the nun sent her back and told Yao Feng, "I've finished teaching her, I'm giving her back to you."

古文：尼歘亦不见。一家悲喜。
现代文：尼姑须臾不见，一家人悲喜交加，问女儿学些什么。
English: When the nun Shuxuan disappeared, the family was overcome with grief and asked their daughter what she was studying.

古文：问其所学，曰：初但读经念咒，余无他也。
现代文：女儿说：开始时也就是读经念咒，也没学别样。
English: Her daughter said: "In the beginning, it was just reading the Bible and chanting mantras, and I didn't learn anything else.

古文：锋不信，恳诘。
现代文：聂锋不相信，又恳切地问女儿。
English: Hao Feng didn't believe her and earnestly asked her daughter again.

古文：隐娘曰：真说又恐不信，如何？
现代文：隐娘说：我说真话恐怕你们也不信，那怎么办？
English: I'm afraid you won't believe me when I tell you the truth, so what should I do?

古文：锋曰：但真说之。
现代文：聂锋说，你就说真话吧。
English: Yao Feng said, "Just tell the truth."

古文：曰：隐娘初被尼挈，不知行几里。
现代文：隐娘便把真实情况说了一遍。
English: The concubine then repeated the truth.

古文：及时，至大石穴之嵌空数十步，寂无居人，猿狖极多，松萝益邃。
现代文：我初被尼姑带走时，也不知走了多少里路，天亮时，到一大石穴中，穴中没人居住，猿猴很多，树林茂密。
English: When I was first taken away by a nun, I didn't know how many miles I had walked. At dawn, I found myself in a large stone cave, uninhabited, with many monkeys and thick woods.

古文：已有二女，亦各十岁，皆聪明婉丽不食。
现代文：这里已有两个女孩，也都是十岁，都很聪明美丽，就是不吃东西。
English: There are already two girls here, both ten years old, both smart and beautiful, who just don't eat.

古文：能于峭壁上飞走，若捷猱登木，无有蹶失。
现代文：能在峭壁上飞走，像猴爬树一样轻捷，没有闪失。
English: Can fly away on the cliff, as light as a monkey climbing a tree, without missing a beat.

古文：尼与我药一粒，兼令长执宝剑一口，长二尺许，锋利，吹毛令剸，逐二女攀缘，渐觉身轻如风。
现代文：尼姑给我一粒药，又给了我一把二尺长的宝剑，剑刃特别锋利，毛发放在刃上，一吹就断。我跟那两个女孩学攀缘，渐渐感觉自己身轻如风。
English: The nun gave me a pill and a two-foot-long sword with a very sharp blade, and the hairs on the blade would blow off. I learned to get along with the two girls, and gradually I felt as light as the wind.

古文：一年后，刺猿狖。百无一失。
现代文：一年后，学刺猿猴，百发百中。
English: A year later, he learned how to make a monkey with a thorn.

古文：后刺虎豹，皆决其首而归。
现代文：后又刺虎豹，都是割掉脑袋拿回来。
English: After that, he stabbed a tiger and a leopard. He cut off their heads and brought them back.

古文：三年后能飞，使刺鹰隼，无不中。
现代文：三年后能飞了，学刺老鹰，没有刺不中的。
English: Three years later, he could fly. He learned how to stab an eagle, and could not miss a single sting.

古文：剑之刃渐减五寸。飞禽遇之，不知其来也。
现代文：剑刃渐渐磨减到只剩五寸长，飞禽遇到，有来无回。
English: The blade of the sword was gradually worn down to only five inches long, and there was no turning back when flying birds encountered it.

古文：至四年，留二女守穴，挈我于都市，不知何处也。
现代文：到了第四年，留下二女守洞穴，领我去城市，我也不知是什么地方。
English: In the fourth year, he left the two women guarding the cave and took me to a city, I don't know where.

古文：指其人者，一一数其过曰：为我刺其首来，无使知觉。
现代文：她指着一个人，一一的把这人的罪过说一遍，叫我在那人不知不觉中，把他的头割回来。
English: She pointed to a man and told me his sins one by one, and told me to cut his head off without him noticing.

古文：定其胆，若飞鸟之容易也。受以羊角匕首，刀广三寸。遂白日刺其人于都市，人莫能见。以首入囊，返主人舍，以药化之为水。
现代文：像鸟飞那么容易，给我一把羊角匕首，三寸长，我就在大白天把那人刺死，别人还看不见，把他的头装在囊中，带回石穴，用药将那头化为水。
English: As easily as a bird can fly, give me a three-inch-long goat-horned dagger, and I will stab that man to death in broad daylight, while no one else can see, put his head in a bag, take it back to the stone cave, and use medicine to turn that head into water.

古文：五年，又曰：某大僚有罪，无故害人若干。夜可入其室，决其首来。
现代文：五年后，尼姑又说，某个大官有罪，无辜害死很多人，你晚间可到他的房中，把他的头割来。
English: Five years later, the nun said that if a high-ranking official was guilty of killing many innocent people, you could go to his room at night and cut off his head.

古文：至瞑，持得其首而归。尼大怒曰：何太晚如是！
现代文：于是，我就带着匕首到那房中，从门缝中进去，一点障碍没有，我爬到房梁上，直到天亮，这才把那人的头拿回来。尼姑大怒说，怎么这么晚才回来？
English: So I went into the room with a knife, I went in through the crack of the door, there was no obstacle, I climbed onto the beam, and it took me until dawn to get the man's head back. The nun said angrily, why did you come back so late?

古文：某云：见前人戏弄一儿可爱，未忍便下手。
现代文：我说，我看那个人逗弄一个小孩玩，怪可爱的，我没忍心下手。
English: I said, I saw the man teasing a child playing, so cute, I couldn't help myself.

古文：尼叱曰：已后遇此辈，先断其所爱，然后决之。
现代文：尼姑斥责说，以后遇到这样的事，先杀了孩子，断其所爱，然后再杀他。
English: The nun reprimanded him, saying that in the future, if something like this happens, kill the child first, cut off his loved one, and then kill him.

古文：某拜谢。尼曰：吾为汝开脑后藏匕首，而无所伤。
现代文：我拜谢了尼姑，尼姑说，我把你的后脑开开，把匕首藏在里面，伤不着你，用时很方便。
English: I thanked the nun, and she said, "I opened the back of your head and hid the dagger inside. It can't hurt you, and it's convenient to use."

古文：用即抽之，曰：汝术已成，可归家。
现代文：又说，你的武艺已经学成，可以回家了。
English: He also said that your martial arts have been learned and you can go home.

古文：遂送还。
现代文：于是把我送回来了。
English: So they sent me back.

古文：云后二十年，方可一见。
现代文：她还说，二十年后，才能一见。
English: She also said that it would be twenty years before they would see each other again.

古文：锋闻语甚惧，后遇夜即失踪，及明而返。锋已不敢诘之，因兹亦不甚怜爱。
现代文：聂锋听隐娘说完后，心中很惧怕。以后，每到夜晚隐娘就不见了，天亮才回来，聂锋也不敢追问，因此，也不太怜爱隐娘。
English: After listening to Yingfeng's words, he was very afraid. Later, every night Yingfeng would disappear, only to return in the morning. Yingfeng did not dare to ask questions, so he did not have much pity for Yingfeng.

古文：忽值磨镜少年及门，女曰：此人可与我为夫。
现代文：有一天，一个磨镜少年来到聂家门前，隐娘说：这个人可以做我的丈夫。
English: One day, a young man with a grinding mirror came to the door of the Yan family. The maiden said, "This man can be my husband."

古文：白父，父不敢不从，遂嫁之。
现代文：她告诉了父亲，父亲也不敢不应承。
English: She told her father, who didn't dare contradict her.

古文：其夫但能淬镜，余无他能。父乃给衣食甚丰，外室而居。
现代文：隐娘便嫁给了那少年，她丈夫只能制镜，不会干别样，父亲供给他们吃穿费用很丰厚，只是在外居住。
English: The hidden daughter then married the boy, her husband could only make mirrors and could not do anything else, the father provided them with food and clothing at a very high cost, but only lived outside.

古文：数年后，父卒。魏帅稍知其异，遂以金帛署为左右吏。
现代文：多年后，父亲去世，魏帅知道隐娘的一些情况，便用钱财雇佣他们为左右吏。
English: Many years later, after her father passed away, Wei Shuai knew something about his stepdaughter, so he used his money to hire them as officials.

古文：如此又数年。至元和间，魏帅与陈许节度使刘昌裔不协，使隐娘贼其首。
现代文：就这样又过了数年，到了宪宗元和年间，魏帅和陈许节度使刘昌裔关系不睦。魏帅派隐娘割刘昌裔的头。
English: In this way, several years passed, and by the time of Emperor Xianzong's reign, Wei Shuai and Chen Xu Jiedu had strained the relationship between Liu Chang's descendants. Wei Shuai sent his daughter to cut off the head of Liu Chang's descendants.

古文：引娘辞帅之许。刘能神算，已知其来。召衙将，令来日早至城北，候一丈夫一女子，各跨白黑卫。至门，遇有鹊前噪夫，夫以弓弹之，不中，妻夺夫弹，一丸而毙鹊者。
现代文：刘昌裔能神算，隐娘刚辞别魏帅时，他就知道她能来，便召集衙将，命令他们在隐娘来时的那天早晨到城北，等来了一男一女，各骑白驴黑驴，到城门，遇有鹊雀在隐娘丈夫前面鸣噪，他用弹弓射，没有射中。隐娘夺来弹弓，只一丸便射杀了鹊雀。
English: Liu Chang's descendant could do arithmetic. When Ying Niang had just said goodbye to Wei Shuai, he knew that she could come, so he summoned the generals and ordered them to go to the north of the city on the morning of Ying Niang's arrival. A man and a woman, each riding a white donkey and a black donkey, came to the city gate. When a starling chirped in front of Ying Niang's husband, he shot it with a slingshot, but missed. Ying Niang took the slingshot and shot the starling with only one bullet.

古文：揖之云：吾欲相见，故远相祗迎也。
现代文：她向衙将一揖，说：我们想见一见刘仆射，所以才从远道赶来。
English: "We wanted to see Liu Puxia, that's why we came all the way from far away," she said.

古文：衙将受约束，遇之。
现代文：衙将按正常礼节接待。
English: You will be received according to normal etiquette.

古文：隐娘夫妻曰：刘仆射果神人，不然者，何以洞吾也，愿见刘公。
现代文：隐娘夫妻说，刘仆射果然是神人，不然的话，怎么我们要来呢。我们愿见刘公。
English: The couple said, "Liu Fuxia is indeed a man of God, otherwise, why would we come? We would like to see Liu Gong."

古文：刘劳之。隐娘夫妻拜曰：合负仆射万死。
现代文：刘昌裔来了，隐娘夫妻拜过后说，我们很对不起你，真是罪该万死。
English: Liu Changxiong came, and after the husband and wife said their goodbyes, they said, "We are very sorry for you. You really deserve to die."

古文：刘曰：不然，各亲其主，人之常事。魏今与许何异，顾请留此，勿相疑也。
现代文：刘昌裔说：不能这样说，各亲其主，人之常情，我和魏帅没什么不一样的，我请你们留在这里，不要有疑虑。
English: Liu Changzhi said, "I can't say this, each to his own, it's human nature, I'm no different from Wei Shuai, I invite you to stay here, don't have any doubts."

古文：隐娘谢曰：仆射左右无人，愿舍彼而就此，服公神明也。知魏帅之不及刘。
现代文：隐娘感谢说：仆射左右无人，我们愿意到你这里来，我很佩服你的神机妙算，魏帅不如你。
English: The concubine thanked him and said, "There is no one around me. We are willing to come to you. I admire your ingenuity. Wei Shuai is not as good as you."

古文：刘问其所须，曰：每日只要钱二百文足矣。
现代文：刘昌裔又问他们需要什么。他们说，每天只要二百文钱就足够了。
English: Liu Changxiong also asked them what they needed. They said that as little as 200 yuan per day would be enough.

古文：乃依所请。
现代文：便答复了他们的要求。
English: He responded to their request.

古文：忽不见二卫所之，刘使人寻之，不知所问。
现代文：一天忽然不见了他们骑来的两匹驴，刘昌裔派人寻找，不知去向。
English: One day, the two donkeys they rode in on suddenly disappeared. Liu Changxiong sent someone to look for them, but they did not know where they had gone.

古文：后潜收布囊中，见二纸卫，一黑一白。
现代文：后来在一个布袋中，看见了两个纸驴，一黑一白。
English: Later, in a cloth bag, he saw two paper donkeys, one black and one white.

古文：后月余，白刘曰：彼未知住，必使人继至。今宵请剪发，系之以红绡，送于魏帅枕前，以表不回。
现代文：一个多月后，对刘昌裔说：魏帅不知我们在这住下了，必定派人来，今天请你剪些头发，用红绸布包上，送到魏帅枕前，表示我们不回去了。
English: More than a month later, he said to Liu Changxiong: Wei Shuai does not know that we live here, he must send someone. Today, please cut some hair, wrap it in red silk cloth, and send it to Wei Shuai's pillow to show that we will not go back.

古文：刘听之。
现代文：刘昌裔照办。
English: Liu Changxiong complied.

古文：至四更却返曰：送其信了，后夜必使精精儿来杀某，及贼仆射之首。此时亦万计杀之，乞不忧耳。
现代文：到了四更，隐娘返回来了，对刘昌裔说：送去信了，后天晚间魏帅必派精精儿来杀死我，还要割你的头，我们也要多想办法杀了他，你不用忧愁。
English: At four o'clock, the concubine returned and said to Liu Changxiong: "I have sent the letter, and the evening of the day after tomorrow, Wei Shuai will send elves to kill me, and they will also cut off your head. We must also find more ways to kill him. You don't have to be sad."

古文：刘豁达大度，亦无畏色。
现代文：刘昌裔豁达大度，毫无畏色。
English: Liu Changxiong is open-minded, generous and fearless.

古文：是夜明烛，半宵之后，果有二幡子一红一白，飘飘然如相击于床四隅。
现代文：这天晚上，烛光通明，半夜之后，果然看见一红一白两个幡子，互相击打，飘飘然在床的四周转悠。
English: On this night, the candlelight was bright, and after midnight, I actually saw two flags, one red and one white, beating each other and floating around the bed.

古文：良久，见一人自空而踣，身首异处。
现代文：过了很久，见一个人从空中跌下地来，身子和头分开了。
English: After a long time, I saw a man fall from the sky to the ground, his body and head separated.

古文：隐娘亦出曰：精精儿已毙。
现代文：隐娘也出现了，说，精精儿现在已被我打死。
English: The maiden also appeared, and said, The genie is now slain by me.

古文：拽出于堂之下，以药化为水，毛发不存矣。
现代文：将精精儿的尸体拽到堂下。用药化成了水。连毛发都不剩。
English: Dragged the elf's corpse to the hall. Used medicine to turn it into water. Not even a hair left.

古文：隐娘曰：后夜当使妙手空空儿继至。空空儿之神术，人莫能窥其用，鬼莫得蹑其踪。
现代文：隐娘又说：后天晚间，他会派空空儿来，空空儿的神术是神不知，鬼不觉，来无影，去无踪。
English: The hidden daughter also said, "In the evening of the day after tomorrow, he will send an empty vessel. The magic of the empty vessel is unknown to the gods and the ghosts, it comes without a shadow and goes without a trace.

古文：隐娘之艺，故不能造其境，此即系仆射之福耳。但以于阗玉周其颈，拥以衾，隐娘当化为蠛蠓，潜入仆射肠中听伺，其余无逃避处。
现代文：我的武艺是赶不上他，这就看仆射的福份了，你用于阗玉围着脖子，盖着被，我变成一只小蚊虫，潜入你肠中等待时机，其余人不用逃避。
English: My martial arts can't keep up with him, so it's up to the luck of the archer. If you use it to wrap the Orb around your neck and cover it with a quilt, I'll turn into a small mosquito, sneak into your intestines and wait for the right moment. The rest of you don't have to escape.

古文：刘如言。
现代文：刘昌裔按她所说的办法做了。
English: Liu Changxiong did as she said.

古文：至三更，瞑目未熟，果闻颈上铿然，声甚厉。
现代文：到了三更，刘昌裔虽然闭着眼睛却没睡着，果然听到脖子上砰的一声，声音特别大。
English: When it came to the third watch of the night, although Liu Changsu's eyes were closed, he did not fall asleep. Sure enough, he heard a thump on his neck, which was particularly loud.

古文：隐娘自刘口中跃出。贺曰：仆射无患矣。
现代文：隐娘从刘昌裔口中跳出，祝贺说：仆射没事了。
English: The hidden daughter jumped out of Liu Changxiong's mouth and congratulated him, saying, "It's all right to shoot.

古文：此人如俊鹘，一搏不中，即翩然远逝，耻其不中。才未逾一更，已千里矣。
现代文：这个人像雄鹰似的，只是一搏，一搏不中他便远走高飞，他没击中感觉很耻辱，还不到一更，他已经飞出一千多里了。
English: This man is like an eagle, just one shot, if he misses he will fly away, he feels very ashamed if he doesn't hit, less than one more, he has flown more than a thousand miles.

古文：后视其玉，果有匕首划处，痕逾数分。
现代文：他们察看了刘昌裔脖颈上的玉石，果然有匕首砍过的痕迹，很深。
English: They inspected the jade on Liu Changxiong's neck, and sure enough, there were deep knife marks.

古文：自此刘转厚礼之。
现代文：刘昌裔给隐娘夫妇送了厚礼。
English: Liu Changxiong gave a gift to the couple.

古文：自元和八年，刘自许入觐，隐娘不愿从焉。
现代文：唐宪宗元和八年，刘昌裔从陈许调到京师。隐娘不愿跟随去京，她说：从此我要游山逛水，遍访圣贤。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Tang Xian Zongyuan, Liu Changxiong was transferred from Chen Xu to Beijing. The hidden daughter did not want to follow him to Beijing, she said: From now on, I want to travel the mountains and visit the sages.

古文：云：自此寻山水，访至人，但乞一虚给与其夫。刘如约。后渐不知所之。及刘薨于统军，隐娘亦鞭驴而一至京师，柩前恸哭而去。
现代文：只求你给我丈夫一个差使便可以了。刘昌裔照办。后来，渐渐不知隐娘的去处，刘昌裔死时，隐娘骑驴到了京师，在刘的灵前大哭而去。
English: Liu Changxiong did as he was told. Later, he gradually lost track of his daughter. When Liu Changxiong died, his daughter rode a donkey to Beijing and cried in front of Liu's body before leaving.

古文：开成年，昌裔子纵除陵州刺史，至蜀栈道，遇隐娘，貌若当时，甚喜相见，依前跨白卫如故。
现代文：唐文宗开成年间，刘昌裔的儿子刘纵任陵州刺史，在四川栈道上遇见了隐娘，面貌仍和当年一样，彼此很高兴能够重逢，她还像从前那样骑一头白驴。
English: During the adulthood of Tang Wenzongkai, Liu Zongren, the son of Liu Chang, the son of Lingzhou, met the hidden daughter on the Sichuan trestle road. Her face was still the same as that year, and they were very happy to meet again. She also rode a white donkey as before.

古文：语纵曰：郎君大灾，不合适此。
现代文：她对刘纵说：你有大灾，你不应该到这里来。
English: She even said to Liu: You have a big disaster, you shouldn't come here.

古文：出药一粒，令纵吞之。
现代文：她拿出一粒药，让刘纵吃下去。
English: She took out a pill and let Liu Zong eat it.

古文：云来年火急抛官归洛，方脱此祸。
现代文：她说：来年你不要做官了，赶紧回洛阳去，才能摆脱此祸。
English: She said, "You should not be an official next year. You should go back to Luoyang as soon as possible to get rid of this disaster."

古文：吾药力只保一年患耳。
现代文：我的药力只能保你一年免灾。
English: My potency can only keep you safe for one year.

古文：纵亦不甚信，遗其缯彩，隐娘一无所受，但沉醉而去。
现代文：刘纵不太相信，送给隐娘一些绸缎，隐娘没有要，飘飘然而去，如神似仙。
English: Liu Zheng didn't quite believe it, so he gave some silk brocade to Ying Niang. Ying Niang didn't want it, but she floated away like a fairy godmother.

古文：后一年，纵不休官，果卒于陵州。
现代文：一年后，刘纵没休官，果然死于陵州。
English: A year later, Liu Zong did not retire and died in Lingzhou.

古文：自此无复有人见隐娘矣。
现代文：从那以后再没有人见过隐娘。
English: No one has seen her since.

