古文：陈袁生冉遂魏耽卢佩陈
现代文：陈袁生冉遂魏耽卢佩陈
English: Chen Yuan Sheng Ran Sui Wei Tan Lupe Chen

古文：袁生
现代文：袁生
English: Yuan Sheng

古文：贞元初，陈郡袁生者，尝任参军于唐安。罢秩游巴川，舍于逆旅氏。
现代文：贞元年初，陈郡有个姓袁的人，虽曾在唐安任参军，卸任后到四川旅游，住在一个旅店里。
English: At the beginning of the year of Zhen Yuan, there was a person surnamed Yuan in Chen County. Although he had joined the army in Tang An, he traveled to Sichuan after leaving office and lived in a hotel.

古文：忽有一夫，白衣来谒。
现代文：忽然有个穿白衣的人来求见。
English: Suddenly, a man in white came to see him.

古文：既坐，谓生曰：某高氏子也，家于此郡新明县。往者常职军伍间，今则免矣。故旅游至此。
现代文：落座后白衣人对袁生说，我姓高，家在本郡的新明县，曾在军队中任职，现在已经卸职，也是到这儿旅游的。
English: After taking their seats, the person in white said to Yuan Sheng, "My surname is Gao, my home is in this county's Xinming County, I once served in the military, and now I have retired, and I also came here to travel.

古文：生与语，其聪辩敏博，迥出于人，袁生奇之。
现代文：谈话中袁生觉得他聪慧精明博学广闻不同于常人，感到很奇怪。
English: During the conversation, Yuan Sheng found it strange that he was intelligent, shrewd, well-read and different from ordinary people.

古文：又曰：某善算者，能析君平生事。
现代文：白衣人又说，我善于算卦，能说出你的过去和将来。
English: The man in white also said, "I am good at telling fortunes. I can tell your past and future."

古文：生即讯之，遂述既往事，一一如笔写，生大惊。
现代文：袁生就问他。白衣人果然历数袁生过去的事，一件一件好像专门用笔记过，袁生更惊奇了。
English: Yuan Sheng asked him. The man in white had indeed recounted Yuan Sheng's past events, one by one, as if he had taken special notes. Yuan Sheng was even more surprised.

古文：是夕，夜既深，密谓袁生曰：我非人也，幸一陈于君子，可乎？
现代文：他们一直谈到深夜，高生神秘地说，我不是凡人，但有一件事要对你说，可以不？
English: They kept talking late into the night, and the high school student said mysteriously, "I'm not an ordinary person, but I have one thing to say to you, is that okay?"

古文：袁生闻之惧，即起曰：君非人，果鬼乎？是将祸我耶？
现代文：袁生一听就害怕了站起来问，你不是凡人，是鬼吧，是不是要加害于我？
English: Yuan Sheng was scared as soon as he heard this, he stood up and asked, "You are not an ordinary person, you are a ghost, are you trying to harm me?"

古文：高生曰：吾非鬼，亦非祸君，所以来者。
现代文：高生人说，我不是鬼，也不会害你，我是来拖你办一件事。
English: The high-born man said, "I'm not a ghost, and I won't harm you. I've come to drag you to do something."

古文：将有托于君耳。我赤水神，有祠在新明之南。
现代文：我是赤水神，我的庙在新明县南边。
English: I am the god of red water. My temple is in the south of Xinming County.

古文：去岁淫雨数月，居舍尽圮，郡人无有治者，使我为风日所侵铄。且日如樵牧者欺侮，里中人视我若一坏土耳。
现代文：去年连下了几个月的雨，我的庙坍塌了，郡里没有人管这事，使我遭受风吹日晒，平日砍柴人放牛娃也欺侮我，人们都把我看作一堆废土了。
English: Last year it rained for months on end, my temple collapsed, no one in the county cared about it, I was exposed to the wind and sun, I was bullied by woodcutters and cowherds on weekdays, and people saw me as a pile of waste.

古文：今我诉于子，子以为可则言，不则去。
现代文：今天我向你诉说求告，你觉得能到就办，办不到我就走，不会怪你的。
English: Today I'm appealing to you. If you think you can do it, you can do it. If you can't, I'll leave. I won't blame you.

古文：无恨也。袁生曰：神既有愿，又何不可哉！
现代文：袁生说，神既然有愿望，有什么不可以的，你就说吧。
English: Yuan Sheng said that since God has a desire, if there is anything that is not allowed, just say it.

古文：神曰：子来岁当调补新明令，倘为我重建祠宇，以时奠祀，则真幸之甚也。
现代文：高生说，你明年将调补到亲明去当县令。你上任后如能为我重修祠庙按时奠祀，那可真是我的大幸。
English: The high school student said, "Next year, you will be transferred to Chinming to become the county magistrate. If you can rebuild the ancestral temple for me on time after taking office, it will be my great fortune."

古文：愿无忘。
现代文：希望你不要忘了这件事。
English: I hope you don't forget this.

古文：袁生诺之。
现代文：袁生就答应了。
English: Yuan Sheng agreed.

古文：既而又曰：君初至邑时，当一见诣。
现代文：高生又说：你到新明县上任后，我俩该见上一面。
English: The high school student also said: After you take office in Xinming County, we should meet face to face.

古文：然而人神理隔，虑君仆吏有黩于我，君当屏去其吏，独入庙中。
现代文：然而人世与神兵相隔，我担心你的仆从下属会侮慢我，希望到时你能让他们退下，单独到庙里，我们才能谈得尽兴。
English: However, the human world is separated from the divine soldiers, and I am afraid that your servants and subordinates will despise me. I hope that when the time comes, you can let them withdraw and go to the temple alone, so that we can have a pleasant conversation.

古文：袁生曰：谨奉教。
现代文：袁生说记住了。
English: Yuan Sheng said he remembered.

古文：是岁冬，袁生果补新明令。
现代文：这年冬天袁生果然补任新明县令。
English: In the winter of that year, Yuan Sheng was appointed as the new county magistrate of Xinming County.

古文：及至任，讯之，果有赤水神庙，在县南数里。
现代文：上任后一打听，县南数里果然有座赤水神庙。过了十多天，袁生就到庙上去。
English: After taking office, Yuan Sheng inquired and found out that there was indeed a red water temple in the southern part of the county. After more than ten days, Yuan Sheng went to the temple.

古文：旬余，遂诣之。未至百余步，下马屏车吏，独入庙中。
现代文：离庙还有百余步时，他就屏退了车马仆从，单独近了庙。
English: When he was still more than a hundred paces away from the temple, he screened his attendants and approached the temple alone.

古文：见其檐宇摧毁，蓬荒如积。
现代文：一看，庙堂果然破烂不堪，到处都是荒草堆积。
English: At first glance, the temple is indeed in tatters, with weeds piled up everywhere.

古文：伫望久之，有一白衣丈夫自庙后来，高生也。
现代文：袁生看了半天，一个白衣人从庙后走出来，一看果然是高生。
English: Yuan Sheng watched for half a day. A man in white walked out from behind the temple. At first glance, he was indeed a high school student.

古文：色甚喜，既拜。谓袁生曰：君不忘前约，今日乃诣我，幸何甚哉！
现代文：高生高兴地拜过了袁生说，你不忘对我的许诺，今天来看我，我太高兴了。
English: The high school student happily bowed to Yuan Sheng and said, "Don't forget your promise to me, come and see me today, I'm so happy."

古文：于是偕行庙中。见阶垣下有一老僧，具桎梏，数人立其旁。袁生问曰：此何为者？
现代文：于是两人一起在庙里巡看，只见墙边有一个老和尚披枷戴锁被几个人押着，袁生就问是怎么回事。
English: So the two of them toured the temple together. They saw an old monk by the wall, shackled and chained, being held down by several people. Yuan Sheng asked what was going on.

古文：神曰：此僧乃县东兰若道成师也。有殃，故吾系之一岁矣。每旦夕则鞭捶之。
现代文：高生说，他是县东寺庙里的道成和尚，因为有罪，我已经把他押在这里一年了，每天早晚都要拷问他。
English: The high school student said that he is a Taoist monk in the temple in the east of the county. Because of his guilt, I have kept him here for a year, and I have to torture him every morning and evening.

古文：从此旬余，当解之。
现代文：过十几天，我会放掉他的。
English: In a dozen days, I'll let him go.

古文：袁生又曰：此僧既存，安得系于此乎？
现代文：袁生问，这和尚不是活人吗，怎么能把他押在这里呢？
English: Yuan Sheng asked, "Isn't this monk a living person? How can they keep him here?"

古文：神曰：以生魄系之，则其人自沈疾，亦安能知吾之为哉！神告袁生曰：君幸诺我建庙，可疾图之。
现代文：高生说，我拘押的是他的魂，他本人就会得上大病。他本人并不知道是我干的。又说，你既然答应为我修庙，望你快点办吧。
English: Gao Sheng said that I was holding his soul in custody and that he himself would get seriously ill. He himself did not know that I did it. He also said that since you promised to repair the temple for me, I hope you will do it quickly.

古文：袁生曰：不敢忘。
现代文：袁生说不会忘的。
English: Yuan Sheng said he would never forget.

古文：既归，将计其工。然贫甚，无以为资。
现代文：回到县里袁生就张罗修庙的事，然而由于太穷，没有经费。
English: Back in the county, Yuan Sheng asked Zhang Luo to repair the temple, but because he was too poor, he had no money.

古文：因自念曰：神人所言，系道成师之魄，当沉疾。
现代文：心里想，赤水神既然说他拘押了道成僧的魂使他生病，并说再过十几天就放他的魂，我不如就借神的话让道成和尚修庙，和尚一定会相信的。
English: I thought to myself, since the god of red water said that he detained the soul of Tao Cheng Monk and made him sick, and said that he would release his soul in ten days, I might as well borrow the word of God to let Tao Cheng Monk repair the temple. The monk will surely believe it.

古文：又云，从此去旬余，当解之。
现代文：于是他就到县东寺庙里去，一问，果然有位道成和尚，已经重病一年了。
English: So he went to a temple in the eastern part of the county and found a monk who had been seriously ill for a year.

古文：吾今假于他语，俾建其庙宇，又安有疑乎？
现代文：袁生见到道成就对他说，你病成这样，怕快要死了。
English: Yuan Sheng saw the accomplishment and said to him, "You are so ill, I am afraid you are about to die."

古文：于是经往县东兰若问之，果有成师者，卧疾一岁矣。道成曰：某病且死，旦夕则一身尽痛。
现代文：但我能使你痊愈。如果你能够出资修建赤水神庙就行。道成说，我的确快死了，尤其一早一晚身上痛得受不了。
English: But I can heal you. If you can fund the construction of the Red Water Temple, that's fine. I'm really dying, especially in the morning and at night, I can't stand the pain, said Daocheng.

古文：袁生曰：师疾如是，且近于死矣，然我能愈之。
现代文：如果病真能好，我怎么能在乎修庙的几个钱呢。袁生就撒谎说，我能见到鬼神。
English: If my illness is really nothing, how can I care about a few dollars to repair the temple? Yuan Sheng lied and said that I could see ghosts and gods.

古文：师能以缗货建赤水神庙乎？道成曰：疾果愈，又安能以缗货为事哉！
现代文：最近去赤水神庙，看到你的魂正披着枷锁捆绑在墙下，我就召来赤水神问怎么回事，他说你过去犯了罪，所以才被拘押。
English: Recently, when I went to the Red Water Temple and saw your soul being chained and tied under the wall, I called the Red Water God to ask what was going on. He said that you had committed a crime in the past, which is why you were detained.

古文：袁生既绐曰：吾善视鬼，近谒赤水神庙，见师魂，具桎梏势于垣下。
现代文：我同情你的痛苦，就对赤水神说不许拘押世上的活人，快快放了，我会让这和尚为你修庙，和尚决不会不修的。
English: I sympathize with your pain, so I said to the god of the Red Water, "Do not detain the living in the world, quickly release them. I will let this monk repair the temple for you. A monk will never fail to repair it."

古文：因召赤水神问其事，曰： 此僧有宿殃，故絷于此。
现代文：神高兴地答应了，并说过十多天就会免罪放了你。
English: God happily agreed, and said that he would absolve you in a little over ten days.

古文：吾怜师之苦，因告其神： 何为絷生人，可疾解之。
现代文：我来是为了告诉你病快好了，希望你快修赤水神庙，千万别因为病好了就不修了，那样你还会招来祸的。道成听后，假装答应了。
English: I've come to tell you that your illness will soon be over, and I hope you will quickly repair the Red Water Temple. Don't stop repairing it just because your illness is over, or you'll invite disaster. After hearing this, Dao Cheng pretended to agree.

古文：吾当命此僧以修建庙宇，慎无违也。神喜而诺我曰： 从此去旬余，当舍其罪。
现代文：过了十多天，病真好了，就召来了庙里的弟子们，对他们说，我小时就离家入庙，学习佛事，已经五十年了，日前不幸大病一场。
English: After more than ten days, the illness was really getting better, so he summoned the disciples in the temple and said to them, "I left home at an early age to enter the temple to study Buddhism, and it's been fifty years since then. Unfortunately, I became seriously ill a few days ago.

古文：吾故告师疾将愈，宜修赤水神庙也。
现代文：县令袁君曾对我说，我的病是赤水神作的怪，让我病好后修缮赤水庙。
English: Yuan Jun, the county magistrate, once told me that my illness was a miracle caused by the god of red water. After I recovered from my illness, I repaired the Red Water Temple.

古文：无以疾愈，遂怠其心。为此则祸且及矣。
现代文：我想修建寺庙本是为能祐护亿万人，为黎民祈福。
English: I want to build a temple so that I can help and protect hundreds of millions of people and pray for the well-being of the Lebanese people.

古文：道成伪语曰：敬受教后旬余，果愈。
现代文：然而赤水庙里的神却加害于我，不除掉它怎么得了？
English: However, the god in the Red Water Temple has harmed me. How can I get rid of it?

古文：又明日，道成谒袁生。袁生喜曰：师病果愈乎。吾之语岂妄耶？道成曰：然，幸君救我，何敢忘君之恩乎？
现代文：于是道成和尚率领徒众带着镐锹来到赤水神庙，把庙拆毁，把神像也扔掉了，什么也没有留。过了两天，道成去见袁生。袁生高兴地说，你的病果然好了，我没说错吧。道成说，对，你救了我，我不会忘你的大恩大德。
English: Therefore, Daocheng Monk led the disciples to the Red Water Temple with shovels, tore down the temple, and threw away the statues, leaving nothing behind. Two days later, Daocheng went to see Yuan Sheng. Yuan Sheng said happily, "Your illness is finally over. I wasn't wrong." Daocheng said, "Yes, you saved me. I won't forget your great kindness."

古文：袁生曰：可疾计修赤水神庙也，不然，具惧为祸。
现代文：袁生说，那就赶快修赤水神庙吧，不然怕会招来祸的。
English: Yuan Sheng said, then let's quickly repair the Red Water Temple, otherwise I'm afraid it will bring disaster.

古文：道成曰：夫神所以赖于人者，以其福可延，戾可弭，旱亢则雩之以泽，潦淫则萗之以霁。
现代文：道成说，我们凡人敬神，是为神能为我们施福免罪，天旱时给人间降雨，地涝了能够放晴晒干。
English: Daocheng said that we mortals worship God because God can bestow blessings on us and absolve us of our sins. When there is a drought, He can give us rain, and when the earth is parched, He can make it sunny and dry.

古文：故天子诏天下郡国，虽一邑一里，必建其祠。盖用为民之福也。若赤水神者，无以福人，而为害于人焉，可不去之。
现代文：所以皇帝才会让天下所有的地方都修寺建庙，以便为民造福，然而像赤水神这样不仅不造福于人反而害人的神，怎么能不除掉呢？
English: This is why the emperor ordered temples to be built in all parts of the world, in order to benefit the people. However, how can a god like the Red Water God, who not only does not benefit people, but actually harms them, not be removed?

古文：已尽毁其庙矣。
现代文：我已经把赤水神庙彻底拆毁了。
English: I have completely demolished the Red Water Temple.

古文：袁生且惊且惧，遂谢之。
现代文：袁生一听吓坏了，说，这可是罪过啊！
English: Yuan Sheng was horrified and said, "This is a sin!"

古文：道成气益丰，而袁生惧甚。
现代文：道成却毫不在乎。袁生更加恐惧了。
English: But Daocheng didn't care at all. Yuan Sheng was even more afraid.

古文：后月余。吏有罪，袁生朴之。无何吏死，其家诉于郡，坐徙端溪。
现代文：一个多月后，有位官员犯罪，袁生杖打了他，不久那官员却死了，官员的家人告到郡里说是袁生害的，结果袁生获罪被贬到端溪。
English: More than a month later, an official committed a crime, Yuan Shengcing beat him, but the official died soon after. The official's family reported to the county that Yuan Shengcing was responsible for the crime. As a result, Yuan Shengcing was convicted and sent to Duanxi.

古文：行至三峡，忽遇一白衣，立于路左。视之，乃赤水神也。
现代文：袁生走到三峡，忽然看见个白衣人站在道边，一看是赤水神。
English: Yuan Sheng walked to the Three Gorges and suddenly saw a man in white standing by the roadside. At first glance, he was the Red Water God.

古文：曰：向托君修我祠宇，奈何致道成毁我之舍，弃我之像？使一旦无所归，君之罪也。
现代文：赤水神说，我曾托你为我修庙，你却让道成毁了我的住所，扔了我的像，使我无家可归，这都是你的罪过！
English: Red Water God said, "I once asked you to build a temple for me, but you let Daocheng destroy my home, throw away my statue, and make me homeless. It's all your fault!

古文：今君弃逐穷荒，亦我报仇耳！
现代文：现在你被贬到这穷乡僻壤，这是我在向你报仇！
English: Now that you've been relegated to this backwater, I'm taking my revenge on you!

古文：袁生既谢曰：毁君者道成也。何为罪我？
现代文：袁生忙说，是道成毁了你的庙，为什么怪罪我？
English: Yuan Sheng said hurriedly, it was Daocheng who destroyed your temple, why blame me?

古文：神曰：道成师福盛甚，吾不能动。
现代文：赤水神说，道成和尚运气正好，我动不了他。
English: The Red Water God said, "Doucheng Monk's luck is just right, I can't move him.

古文：今君禄与命衰，故我得以报。
现代文：而你官运和气数都不行了，所以我可以报复你。
English: And you're out of office and out of luck, so I can get back at you.

古文：言已不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：生恶之，后数日，意以疾卒。
现代文：袁生非常痛恨赤水神，没几天，竟病死了。
English: Yuan Sheng hated the Red Water God so much that he died of illness a few days later.

古文：冉遂
现代文：冉遂
English: Ran Sui

古文：冉遂者，齐人也，父邑宰。
现代文：山东有个叫冉遂的人，父亲是地方官。
English: In Shandong Province, there was a man named Ran Sui, whose father was a local official.

古文：遂婚长山赵玉女。
现代文：冉遂娶了长山赵玉的女儿。
English: Ran then married the daughter of Changshan Zhao Yu.

古文：遂既丧父，又幼性不惠，略不知书，无以进达，因耕于长山。
现代文：后来冉遂的父亲死了，自己生来愚笨，又没念什么书，没法术功应，只好就在岳父赵玉家种地。
English: Later, Ran Sui's father died, he was born stupid, did not study any books, and had no magic merit, so he had to farm at his father-in-law Zhao Yu's house.

古文：其妻赵氏，美姿质，性复轻荡。
现代文：妻子赵氏却非常漂亮但作风轻浮。
English: His wife, Zhao, is very beautiful but has a frivolous style.

古文：一日独游于林薮间，见一人衣锦衣，乘白马，侍从百余人，皆携剑戟过之。赵氏曰：我若得此夫，死亦无恨。
现代文：一天她独自在林中散步，看见一个衣着华贵的人，骑着白马，带着一百多名持兵器的侍卫走过，就说，我要是有这样一个丈夫，死也心甘了！
English: One day, when she was walking alone in the forest, she saw a richly dressed man on a white horse with more than a hundred armed guards passing by, and she said, "If I had a husband like that, I would be happy to die!"

古文：锦衣人回顾笑之。
现代文：骑白马的人回头看她笑了笑。
English: The man on the white horse looked back at her and smiled.

古文：左右问赵氏曰：暂为夫可否？
现代文：侍卫们问赵氏，让他给你做个临时丈夫你愿不愿意？
English: The guards asked Mr. Zhao, would you like him to be your temporary husband?

古文：赵氏应声曰：君若暂为我夫，我亦怀君恩也。
现代文：赵氏立刻应声道，哪怕做他一天妻子，我也不忘他的恩。
English: Mr. Zhao immediately replied, "Even if I were to be his wife for a day, I would not forget his kindness."

古文：锦衣遽下马，入林内。
现代文：于是那骑白马的人立刻下马，和赵氏一齐钻进树林里。
English: So the man on the white horse immediately dismounted and went into the woods with Mr. Zhao.

古文：既别，谓赵氏曰：当生一子，为明神，善保爱之。
现代文：分别时他对赵氏说，你会生下一个儿子，这儿子是神。生下后你要好好爱护他。
English: At parting, he said to Mr. Zhao, "You will give birth to a son. This son is a god. You must take good care of him after he is born."

古文：赵氏果有孕，及期生一儿，发赤面青，遍身赤毛，仅长五寸，眼有光耀。
现代文：后来赵氏果然怀孕，生下一个儿子，但只有五寸长，而且黑脸红发，双目熠熠闪光。
English: Later, Ms. Zhao became pregnant and gave birth to a son, but he was only five inches long, with a dark face, red hair, and flashing eyelids.

古文：遂甚怪之，曰：此必妖也，可杀之。
现代文：丈夫冉遂十分惊怪，认为是个妖精，想杀掉婴儿。
English: Ran's husband was so surprised that he thought it was a fairy and wanted to kill the baby.

古文：赵氏曰：此儿托体于君，又何妖？
现代文：赵氏说，这孩子是你的，怎能是妖精呢？
English: Mr. Zhao said, "This child is yours, how can it be a fairy?"

古文：或是异人，何杀之耶？
现代文：也许长大后不同凡人，为什么要杀他？
English: Maybe he'll grow up to be different. Why kill him?

古文：必杀反为害。
现代文：如果杀了，也许会招来祸事呢。
English: If you kill it, it might bring bad luck.

古文：若何？
现代文：你看怎么办好？
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：遂惧而止，赵氏藏之密室。
现代文：冉遂怕招祸就没有杀。
English: Ran consequently did not kill for fear of inviting disaster.

古文：及七岁，其儿忽长一丈。俄又自空有一大鸟飞下，儿走出，跃上鸟背飞去，其母朝夕哭之。
现代文：赵氏把婴儿藏在密室，养到七岁，这孩子忽然长得有一丈高，有一个大鸟从天上飞下来，那孩子走出去，骑上鸟背就飞走了。
English: Mr. Zhao hid the baby in a secret room and raised it until it was seven years old. The child suddenly grew taller. A big bird flew down from the sky. The child went out, rode on the bird's back and flew away.

古文：经数月，儿自外来，擐金甲，佩剑弯弓，引兵士可千余人。至门直入，拜母曰：我是游察使者子，幸托身于母。
现代文：赵氏天天痛哭，过了几个月，那孩子又回来了，身披金钺甲，腰带宝剑弓箭，带着一千多士兵来到家里，向母亲跪拜后说，我是天神游察使者的儿子，有幸托生于母亲，受你养育之恩还没有报答你。
English: Mr. Zhao cried bitterly every day. A few months later, the child returned, wearing golden armor, a belt with a sword and bow and arrow, and came home with more than a thousand soldiers. After bowing to his mother, he said, "I am the son of the messenger of the gods, I was lucky to be born to my mother, and I have not yet repaid the kindness of being raised by you."

古文：受生育之恩，未能一报，我今日后，时一来拜觐，待我微答母恩，即不来矣。赵氏曰：儿自为何神也？儿曰：母慎勿言，我已补东方擒恶将军。
现代文：从今以后，我会常来看完你，等我多少能报答一点母恩，就不再来了。赵氏问儿子是那路神仙，儿子说，我告诉你，你可千万别对别人说。我现在是东方擒恶将军。
English: From now on, I will often come to see you, and when I can repay a little of my mother's kindness, I will no longer come. Mr. Zhao asked his son where the immortals were, and his son said, I tell you, you must not tell others. I am now the evil general of the East.

古文：东方之地，不遵明祗，擅为恶者，我皆得以诛之。
现代文：东方那面凡是不敬神明和作恶的人，我都杀掉。
English: I will kill all the godless and evildoers on the other side of the East.

古文：赵氏取酒炙以饲之，乃谓儿：我无多酒炙，不可以及将士。
现代文：赵氏就备了酒肉让儿子吃，并说，我酒肉太少，不能供你的将士们吃了。
English: Mr. Zhao prepared meat and wine for his son to eat and said, "I don't have enough meat and wine to feed your soldiers."

古文：儿笑曰：母但以一杯酒洒空中，即乒士皆饮酒也。
现代文：儿子笑着说，母亲只要拿一杯酒洒在空中，我的将士就都有酒喝了。
English: My son laughed and said that if my mother just took a glass of wine and threw it in the air, my soldiers would all be drunk.

古文：母从之。见空中酒下起雨，兵士尽仰面而饮之。
现代文：赵氏按他的话作了，果然空中像下雨似地落下了酒，将士们都仰着脸喝起来。
English: Mr. Zhao did as he said, and the wine fell from the sky like rain, and the soldiers all drank it with their faces upturned.

古文：儿乃遽止曰：少饮，临别，谓母曰：若有急，但焚香遥告，我当立至。
现代文：儿子就让雨停了，说，别喝多了。临别时，儿子对母亲说，以后如果有急事，只要烧香向远天祷告，我立刻就会来。
English: The son stopped the rain and said, "Don't drink too much." At the time of parting, the son said to his mother, "In the future, if there is an emergency, just burn incense and pray to the sky, and I will come immediately."

古文：言讫，上马如风雨而去。
现代文：说罢，上马像乘着风雨般的走了。
English: Having said that, getting on the horse was like riding into the wind and rain.

古文：后一年，赵氏父亡，赵氏往葬之。
现代文：过了一年，赵氏的父亲赵玉死了。
English: A year later, Mr. Zhao's father, Zhao Yu, died.

古文：其父家，每月有鬼兵可千余，围其宅。
现代文：赵氏赶回去为父亲料理丧事。
English: Mr. Zhao rushed back to cook for his father's funeral.

古文：有神扣门言曰：我要为祠宇，尔家翁见来投我，尔当速去，不然，皆杀之。
现代文：他父亲家里常常夜里被一千多鬼兵包围，还有个神敲门说，你父亲现在到我那儿去了，你要为我造一庙宇，不然把你们都杀掉！
English: His father's house was often surrounded at night by more than a thousand ghost soldiers, and a god would knock on the door and say, "Your father has now come to me, you must build a temple for me, or I will kill you all!"

古文：赵氏忽思儿留言，乃焚香以告。
现代文：赵氏忽然想起儿子留下的话，就烧香祷告。
English: Mr. Zhao suddenly remembered that if his son stayed, he would burn incense and pray.

古文：其夕，儿引兵士千余至，令一使诘之，神人茫然收兵为队，自缚于儿前。
现代文：这天晚上，儿子带着一千多兵士到了，让手下人上前质问那个包围住宅的神，那神人立刻把兵撤了，自己把自己绑上跪在赵氏儿子面前。
English: That evening, his son arrived with more than a thousand soldiers and asked his men to come forward to question the god who had surrounded the house. The godman immediately withdrew the soldiers and tied himself up and knelt in front of Mr. Zhao's son.

古文：儿呵责。尽杀其众。谓母曰：此非神也，是强鬼耳。
现代文：儿子把那神训斥了一顿，把他的士兵全杀了，然后对赵氏说，那不是神，是个很厉害倔强的鬼。
English: His son scolded the god, killed all his soldiers, and then told Mr. Zhao that it was not a god, but a very stubborn ghost.

古文：生为史朝义将，战亡之后无所归，自收战亡兵，引之来此，欲擅立祠宇耳。
现代文：他活着时是叛贼史朝义的部将，战死之后无处可归，才收集他那些战死的将士带到这儿来，想擅自立个祠庙而已。
English: When he was alive, he was the general of the traitor Shichong Righteousness. After his death, he had nowhere to return, so he collected his dead soldiers and brought them here. He just wanted to build a temple for himself.

古文：任何以无故追赵玉耶？
现代文：赵氏说，听他刚才说，我的父亲他也带来了，你问问他。
English: Mr. Zhao said, listen to what he just said, my father also brought it, ask him.

古文：今在何处？其人泣告曰：望将军哀念。生为一将，不能自立功，而死于阵前。死后欲求一神，又不能良图。
现代文：儿子又把那个神带来问道：你的打算我已经知道了，你就不用说了，但你为什么要害我的外公赵玉呢？那神人哭着说，求你能体念我的苦衷吧。我生前是个大将，没立什么大功而战死在阵中，死后想成为神，又当不上神。
English: My son brought the god with him and asked, "I already know your plan, so you don't have to tell me, but why do you want to harm my grandfather Zhao Yu?" The godman cried and said, "I beg you to consider my plight. I was a general in my lifetime, died in battle without accomplishing anything great, and after I die I want to become a god, but I can't be a god."

古文：今日有犯斧钺，若或将军不以此罪告上天。容在麾下，必效死节。
现代文：今天我冒犯了将军，如果将军不把我的罪错向上天报告，而留我在你帐下，我一定拚死为你效力！
English: Today I offended the general. If the general does not report my crime to heaven, but leaves me under your charge, I will work for you to the death!

古文：又问曰：赵玉何在？
现代文：儿子又问他，赵玉在哪里？
English: His son asked him again, "Where is Zhao Yu?"

古文：神曰：寄在郑大夫塚内。
现代文：那神说，寄押在郑大夫的坟墓里。
English: The god said, deposited in Dr. Zheng's tomb.

古文：儿乃立命于塚内取赵玉至，赵玉寻苏。
现代文：儿子派人立刻到郑大夫的坟中把赵玉带来，赵玉果然很快复活了。
English: His son immediately sent someone to Dr. Zheng's grave to bring Zhao Yu, and Zhao Yu was soon revived.

古文：赵氏切劝儿恕神之罪，儿乃释缚，命于部内为小将。
现代文：赵氏不断在儿子面前为那神人求情，让他饶恕神人的罪。
English: Mr. Zhao constantly pleaded for the godman in front of his son, asking him to forgive the godman's sins.

古文：乃辞其母，泣而言曰：我在神道，不当频出迹于人间，不复来矣，母善自爱。
现代文：儿子就让给他松绑，并派在自己帐下当一名小将，然后就向赵氏告别，哭着说，我是个神，不能经常到人世来，今后我们不能再见面了，希望母亲多多保重！
English: His son let him loose, and sent him to be a young general under his own account, and then he said goodbye to Mr. Zhao, crying, I am a god, I can't come to the world often, we can't meet again in the future, I hope my mother will take good care!

古文：又为风雨而去，迩后绝然不至矣。
现代文：说罢又如风雨般很快离去，此后再没有来过。
English: After saying this, he left like a storm and never came back.

古文：魏耽
现代文：魏耽
English: Wei Tan

古文：贞元中，吉州刺史魏耽，罢任居洛。
现代文：贞元年间，吉州刺史魏耽卸任后住在洛阳。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, the governor of Jizhou, Shi Wei Tan, lived in Luoyang after leaving office.

古文：有女子，年甫十六，颜色甚美丽。
现代文：他有个十六岁的女儿，长得很漂亮，盛夏，在庭院里乘凉。
English: He has a sixteen-year-old daughter, very pretty, in the middle of summer, enjoying the cool in the courtyard.

古文：夏中，俱纳凉于庭。急仰视天裂，有长人于裂处下，直至耽前。衣紫佩金，黑而髯，曰：我姓朱，天遣与君为女婿。
现代文：忽然仰头看见天空裂了个大口子，一个很高的人从裂口处落在地上。此人穿着紫衣佩着金饰物，生得很黑，胡子很长。他来到魏耽面前说，我姓朱，天帝派我来是让我做你的女婿。
English: Suddenly, he looked up and saw a large crack in the sky. A tall man fell to the ground from the crack. The man was wearing a purple robe with gold ornaments. He was very dark-skinned and had a long beard. He came to Wei Tan and said, "My name is Zhu. Heavenly Father sent me to be your son-in-law."

古文：耽不敢阻，请俟排比，再三乃许。
现代文：魏耽不敢不答应，请求给些安排准备的时间。
English: Wei Tan did not dare to refuse, and asked for some time to arrange and prepare.

古文：约期后月，乃腾空而去。
现代文：再三请求，姓朱的才同意，并说定一个月后来娶亲，说罢腾空而去。
English: After repeated requests, Ms. Zhu finally agreed and said that they would get married a month later.

古文：耽与其妻，虽甚忧迫，亦具酒食而俟之。
现代文：魏耽和妻子虽然忧心忡忡，也准备了酒食待着。
English: Although worried, Wei Tan and his wife prepared food and drink and waited.

古文：有圉人突入拜耽，耽曰：何不秣马而突入，太无礼也。
现代文：这天，魏耽的马夫突然进屋跪拜。魏耽说，你不喂马，来这里做什么，太无礼了。
English: On this day, Wei Tan's groom suddenly entered the house and knelt down. Wei Tan said, you don't feed horses, what are you doing here, it's too rude.

古文：圉人曰：窃见使君有忧色，故请言其事。
现代文：马夫说，我见大人面带愁容，想来问问是为什么事为难。
English: Muff said, I saw the adults with sad faces and wanted to ask why things were so difficult.

古文：耽曰：尔何要知之？
现代文：魏耽说，你问这做什么？
English: Wei Tan said, "What are you asking about?

古文：圉人固请，耽因告之。
现代文：马夫再三请求，魏耽就把实情告诉了他。
English: Maf repeatedly asked Wei Tan to tell him the truth.

古文：圉人曰：使君不足，小事耳。
现代文：马夫说，小事一桩，大人根本不用愁。说完就走了。
English: Maf said, "It's a small matter, adults don't have to worry about it at all." After saying that, he left.

古文：言讫而出。佩金者及期而至，圉人复突入，佩金者见之，趋下再拜。
现代文：后来那个姓朱的神人果然如期而至，马夫也突然闯进来。姓朱的见了马夫，跪下就拜。
English: Later, the man of God, surnamed Zhu, arrived as scheduled, and the groom also suddenly burst in. When the man of God, surnamed Zhu, saw the groom, he knelt down and worshipped him.

古文：圉人作色而叱之曰：天恕尔，罚汝在人间，奈何又复扰人如是？
现代文：马夫大怒，责骂道，上天宽恕了你，罚你到人间，就该老老实实，为什么还做害人的事情？
English: The groom was furious and scolded her, saying, "Heaven has forgiven you and punished you on earth, so you should be honest. Why do you still do things that harm others?"

古文：对曰：死罪。
现代文：姓朱的又叩头说，我有罪，我该死！
English: The surnamed Zhu also kowtowed and said, "I am guilty, I deserve to die!"

古文：唯言死罪。
现代文：马夫就进屋坐下，用一个大锣做酒杯喝起了酒，喝了好几斗酒，喝完又把一个铁棍子折断吃了起来。然后又让姓朱的用大锣喝酒，姓朱的很害怕就喝了，还不断地赔罪，说不出别的话来。
English: The groom went into the house and sat down. He used a large gourd to make a wine glass and drank the wine. He drank several buckets of wine. After drinking, he broke off an iron bar and ate it. Then he asked the man surnamed Zhu to drink from the large gourd. The man surnamed Zhu was very scared and drank it. He also constantly atoned for his sins. He couldn't say anything else.

古文：更无他词。圉人曰：送天狱禁百日。
现代文：喝完后马夫说，现在送你到天牢里关押一百天！
English: After drinking it, the stableman said, "Now I'm sending you to the dungeon for a hundred days!"

古文：乃腾空而去。
现代文：只见姓朱的腾空而去。
English: I only saw the surname Zhu take flight and leave.

古文：圉人曰：吾乃使君此斗本命星也，魏使君昼夜焚修，今乃报之。
现代文：马夫对魏耽说，我就是你的本命星北斗。你平时日夜烧香敬神，所以我来报答你。
English: Maf said to Wei Tan, "I am your fated star, the Big Dipper. You usually burn incense day and night to worship God, so I have come to repay you."

古文：适无礼者，既贼星也，今已禁之，请去他虑。
现代文：刚才那个无礼的家伙是一颗贼星，我已经把他关起来了，你就不用再犯愁了。
English: That rude fellow just now is a thief. I've locked him up, so you don't have to worry about him anymore.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完也离去了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：卢佩
现代文：卢佩
English: Lupe

古文：贞元末，渭南县丞卢佩，性笃孝。
现代文：贞元末年时，渭南县丞卢佩非常孝顺。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Zhenyuan, Lu Pei, the Prince of Yinan County, was very filial.

古文：其母先病腰脚，至是病甚，不能下床榻者累年，晓夜不堪痛楚。佩即弃官，奉母归长安，寓于长乐里之别第，将欲竭产而求国医王彦伯治之。
现代文：他母亲腰和腿生了病，越来越重，后来，好几年连炕也下不来了，日日夜夜痛得难以忍受，卢佩就毅然辞去官职，护送母亲回了长安，住在长乐里的别墅中，打算变卖家产以求全国知名的医生王彦伯给母亲治病。
English: His mother's hips and legs got sick and became heavier and heavier. Later, for several years, she could not even get off the bed, and the pain was unbearable day and night. Lupe resolutely resigned from his official position, escorted his mother back to Chang'an, lived in a villa in Changle, and planned to sell his family property in order to get the nationally renowned doctor Wang Yanbo to treat his mother's illness.

古文：彦伯声势重，造次不可一见，佩日往祈请焉。
现代文：王彦伯是名医，架子更大，平常人一律不见。卢佩天天去求告，半年后才答应去给看一次。
English: Dr. Wang Yanbo is a famous doctor, with a higher profile than the average person. Lupe went to see him every day, and only after half a year did he agree to see him once.

古文：半年余，乃许一到，佩期某日平旦。
现代文：卢佩按和王彦伯约好的日子一清早就在门上等待，直到中午还没来。
English: Lupe waited at the door early in the morning on the day of the appointment with Wang Yanbo, and did not come until noon.

古文：是日亭午不来，佩候望于门，心摇目断。
现代文：卢佩守着家门始终等着，焦急得望穿双眼，直到黄昏也不见王彦伯的人影。心里又怨又急。
English: Lupe guarded the door of the house and always waited, anxiously looking through his eyes, until dusk did not see the shadow of Wang Yanbo. In his heart, he was angry and anxious.

古文：日既渐晚，佩益怅然。忽见一白衣妇人，姿容绝丽，乘一骏马，从一女僮，自曲之西，疾驰东过。
现代文：忽然看见一个穿白衣的女子，容貌端庄秀丽，骑着一匹骏马，带着一个使女，从巷曲西边跑来，向东驰去。
English: Suddenly he saw a woman dressed in white, with a dignified and beautiful appearance, riding a fine horse and accompanied by a servant girl, coming from the western side of the alley and speeding eastward.

古文：有顷，复自东来，至佩处驻马，谓佩曰：观君颜色忧沮，似有所候待来，请问之。
现代文：不一会儿又从东奔回来，来到卢佩家门前停下来说，看您愁容满面，好像在等什么人吗？
English: After a while, he came back from his run to the east, stopped in front of Lupe's house and said, "Look at your sad face, do you seem to be waiting for someone?"

古文：佩志于王彦伯，初不觉妇人之来，既被顾问再三，乃具以情告焉。
现代文：卢佩一直在守望王彦伯，全神贯注，那女子问了好几次他才回答，把实情都说了。
English: Lupe had been watching Wang Yanbo with rapt attention. The woman asked him several times before he answered and told her the whole truth.

古文：妇人曰：彦伯国医，无容至此。妾有薄技，不减王彦伯所能。
现代文：女子说，王彦伯是国医，不一定能请来，我也略通医术，不一定就比国医差。
English: The woman said, "Wang Yanbo is a state doctor, so I may not be able to invite him. I also have some knowledge of medicine, so I may not be worse than the state doctor."

古文：请一见太夫人，必取平差。
现代文：请带我去见你们太夫人，你就能知道到底谁行。
English: Please take me to your mistress, and you'll find out who's who.

古文：佩惊喜，拜于马首曰：诚得如此，请以身为仆隶相酬。
现代文：卢佩大喜，在马前拜礼说，如果真能治好病，我愿给你当奴仆来报答。
English: Lupe was overjoyed and bowed before the horse and said, "If I can really cure your illness, I will reward you by becoming your slave."

古文：佩即先入白母，母方呻吟酸楚之次，闻佩言，忽觉小廖。
现代文：说罢就进家告诉母亲。母亲正在床上痛苦地呻吟，一听这事，先就松快了不少。
English: As soon as I said it, I went home and told my mother, who was moaning in pain in bed. Hearing this, I relaxed a lot at first.

古文：遂引妇人至母前，妇人才举手候之，其母已能自动矣。
现代文：卢佩带那女子到母亲床前，女子刚一抬手停在老太太身上，老太太身子就能动了。
English: Lupe took the woman to her mother's bedside. As soon as the woman raised her hand to stop the old lady, the old lady was able to move.

古文：于是一家欢跃，竟持所有金帛，以遗妇人。
现代文：于是全家都高兴得跳了起来，争着拿来金钱礼物给那女子，女子说，这还没完呢。
English: So the whole family jumped for joy and scrambled to get a cash gift for the woman, who said it wasn't over yet.

古文：妇人曰：此犹未也，当要进一服药，非止尽除痼疾，抑亦永享眉寿。母曰：老妇将死之骨，为天师再生，未知何阶上答全德。
现代文：还要吃一副药，就不但能除去病根，还能延年益寿。母亲说，我一个垂死的老人，被天师你起死回生，我怎么作才能报答你的恩望呢？
English: If you also take a dose of medicine, you will not only be able to remove the root of the disease, but also prolong your life. My mother said, I am a dying old man who was brought back to life by your heavenly teacher. What can I do to repay your favor?

古文：妇人曰：但不弃细微，许奉九郎巾栉。
现代文：女子说，如果您不嫌我卑微，让我与您儿子卢九郎成亲，使我也能永远侍奉您，我就满足了，说什么报答不报答呢。
English: The woman said, "If you don't mind me being humble and let me marry your son, Lu Juro, so that I can serve you forever, I'll be satisfied. What do you mean, reward or no reward?"

古文：母曰：佩犹愿以身为天师奴，今反得为丈夫，有何不可？
现代文：母亲说，我儿九郎本来只求能给你做奴仆，现在反而要做丈夫，有什么不可以的呢。
English: My mother said, "My son Juro originally only wanted to be your servant, but now he wants to be your husband. What's wrong with that?"

古文：妇人再拜称谢，遂于女僮手。取所持小庄奁中，取药一刀圭，以和进母。
现代文：女子一再行礼感谢，从女仆手里拿的梳妆匣里，取了一小包药用匙调好给母亲喝。
English: The woman repeatedly bowed in thanks and took a small packet of medicine from the dresser in the maid's hand and mixed it with a spoon for her mother to drink.

古文：母入口，积年诸苦，释然顿平。
现代文：刚一喝，就觉得多年来的病痛一扫而光。
English: As soon as I drank it, I felt like all the pain I'd had for years had been wiped away.

古文：即具六礼，纳为妻。
现代文：于是家里备好了聘礼，娶了女子为妻。
English: So the family prepared the bride price and the man married the young woman.

古文：妇入朝夕供养，妻道严谨。
现代文：婚后女子严守妇道，侍奉婆母无微不至。
English: After marriage, a woman strictly observes the women's way and serves her mother-in-law.

古文：然每十日，即请一归本家。
现代文：只是每过十天女子就要回一次娘家。
English: However, every ten days the woman has to return to her mother's house.

古文：佩欲以车舆送迎，即终因辞拒，唯乘旧马。从女僮，倏忽往来，略无踪迹。
现代文：卢佩每次要用车马送接，女子都坚持不用，只骑着原来那匹马，带着使女，很快去很快回来，不露一点蛛丝马迹。
English: Every time Lupe needed to be picked up by a horse and cart, the woman insisted that she didn't need to. She just rode the original horse, took the maid with her, and quickly went and quickly returned, without revealing a single trace of the horse.

古文：初且欲顺适其意，不能究寻，后既多时，颇以为异。
现代文：起初家里人顺着女子的意愿，不去追究了解。后来长了，觉得这里有事。
English: At first, the family members followed the woman's wishes and did not pursue an understanding. Later, they grew older and felt that there was something wrong here.

古文：一旦，伺其将出，佩即潜往窥之。
现代文：有天早上，女子又要回娘家，刚一出门，卢佩就偷偷跟在后面看。
English: One morning, the woman wanted to go back to her daughter's house. As soon as she left, Lupe secretly followed her.

古文：见乘马出延兴门，马行空中。
现代文：见女子骑马一出了延兴门，马突然腾空而起。
English: As soon as the woman rode out of the Yanxing Gate, the horse suddenly took off.

古文：佩惊问行者，皆不见。
现代文：卢佩惊讶地问路上的人，谁也没看见。
English: Surprised, Lupe asked people on the road if they had seen anything.

古文：佩又随至城东墓田中，巫者陈设酒肴，沥酒祭地，即见妇人下马，就接而饮之。
现代文：卢佩后来跟到城东的墓地里，见一个巫师在地上摆了酒菜，洒酒祭祀。接着看见女子下了马，拿起酒来喝。
English: Lupe later followed him to a graveyard in the east of the city, where he saw a sorcerer laying out wine and food on the ground and sprinkling it on a sacrificial offering. He then saw a woman dismount her horse, pick up the wine and drink it.

古文：其女僮随后收拾纸钱，载于马上，即变为铜钱。
现代文：那个使女跟着收拾起地上的纸钱，装在马上，纸钱立刻变成了铜钱。
English: The maid then picked up the paper money on the floor and put it in the horse, and the paper money immediately turned into copper money.

古文：又见妇人以策画地，巫者随指其处曰：此可以为穴。
现代文：又见那女子用马鞭在地上画圈，巫师就说，这里可以做坟地。
English: And when he saw the woman drawing a circle on the ground with her whip, the sorcerer said, "This could be a graveyard."

古文：事毕，即乘马而回。
现代文：然后，就上马而去。
English: Then he mounted his horse and rode away.

古文：佩心甚恶之，归具告母，母曰：吾固知是妖异，为之奈何？
现代文：看到这些事后，卢佩心里对女子十分厌恶，回来告诉了母亲。母亲说：我早就知道她是妖怪，可是能有什么办法呢。
English: After seeing these things, Lupe was disgusted with the woman in his heart and came back to tell his mother. His mother said: I already knew she was a monster, but what can I do?

古文：自是妇人绝不复归佩家，佩亦幸焉。
现代文：从此，那女子再也没有回卢佩家来，卢佩也暗自高兴。
English: From then on, the woman never came back to Lupe's house, and Lupe was secretly happy.

古文：后数十日，佩因出南街中，忽逢妇人行李，佩呼曰：夫人何久不归？
现代文：过了几十天，卢佩到南街去，忽然看见了那个女子。卢佩招呼她说，你怎么这么久不回家？
English: Dozens of days later, Lupe went to South Street and suddenly saw the woman. Lupe called out to her, "How come you haven't been home for so long?"

古文：妇人不顾，促辔而去。
现代文：女子不理睬，打马而去。
English: The woman ignored him and rode away.

古文：得平和。君自请相约为夫妇。今既见疑，信当决矣。
现代文：第二天，她让使女转告卢佩说，我实在不配做你的妻室，只是由于为你的孝心所感动，才给你母亲治病。太夫人病好以后是你自己请求我们结为夫妻。现在你既然怀疑我了，咱俩只能分手。
English: The next day, she had her maid tell Lupe, "I am not worthy to be your wife. I only treated your mother because I was moved by your filial piety. After your mother-in-law recovered from her illness, you yourself asked us to marry. Now that you suspect me, we can only separate."

古文：佩问女僮：娘子今安在？
现代文：卢佩问使女，娘子现在什么地方？
English: Lupe asked the maid where her daughter was now.

古文：女僮曰：娘子前日已改嫁靖恭李谘议矣。
现代文：使女说，她前几天已经改嫁靖恭李谘议了。
English: The maid said that she had already changed her name to Jing Gong Li a few days ago.

古文：佩曰：虽欲相弃，何其速欤？
现代文：卢佩说，虽然打算和我分手，但这也太快了吧。
English: Lupe said that although he was going to break up with me, it was too soon.

古文：女僮曰：娘子是地祗，管京兆府三百里内人家丧葬所在。长须在京城中作生人妻，无自居也。
现代文：使女说，娘子是冥府地神，主管京城三百里以内的丧葬事宜，必须长在京城给阳世人做妻子，因为她没有自己的居处。
English: The maid said that the maiden was the god of the underworld, in charge of funeral affairs within three hundred miles of the capital, and had to stay in the capital to be the wife of the sun-god, because she had no place to live.

古文：女僮又曰：娘子终不失所，但嗟九郎福祐太薄，向使娘子长为妻，九郎一家，皆为地仙矣。
现代文：和你分手，娘子并没有失去家，只是可惜九郎福气太薄。如果你们能长做夫妻，九郎你们一家就都成了人间神仙了。
English: When I broke up with you, my daughter didn't lose her home, but it's a pity that Kuro's luck was too thin. If you could grow up to be a husband and wife, Kuro, your family would all become immortals.

古文：卢佩第九也。
现代文：卢佩排行第九。
English: Lupe came in ninth.

