古文：燕人畔。
现代文：燕国人背叛齐国。
English: The Yan people betrayed Qi.

古文：王曰： 吾甚惭于孟子。 
现代文：齐王说： 我很是愧对孟子。 
English: King Qi said, "I am very ashamed of Mencius."

古文：陈贾曰： 王无患焉。
现代文：陈贾说： 大王不要忧虑。
English: Chen Jia said, "Don't worry, Your Majesty.

古文：王自以为与周公，孰仁且智？ 
现代文：您觉得您和周公相比，谁更爱民，谁更有智慧？ 
English: Compared to you and Zhou Gong, who do you think loves the people more and has more wisdom?

古文：王曰： 恶！是何言也？ 
现代文：齐王说： 唉呀，你这是什么话？ 
English: King Qi said: Alas, what are you saying?

古文：曰： 周公使管叔监殷，管叔以殷畔。知而使之，是不仁也；不知而使之，是不智也。
现代文：陈贾说： 周公使派他的哥哥管叔去监管殷商的遗国，管叔却带领殷族人起来反叛；如果周公管叔会这样做还要派他去，就是不爱民；如果不知道而这样做，就是没有智慧。
English: Chen Jia said: Minister Zhou sent his brother Guan Shuo to supervise the Yin merchants' inheritance of the country, but Guan Shuo led the Yin people to rebel; if Zhou Guan Shuo would do this and still send him, he does not love the people; if he does not know and does this, he is not wise.

古文：仁智，周公未之尽也，而况于王乎？
现代文：爱民和智慧，周公都没有完全做到，何况大王您呢？
English: Love the people and wisdom, Zhou Gong did not fully achieve, let alone the great king you?

古文：贾请见而解之。 
现代文：请让我去见孟子并向他解释。 
English: Please let me go to Mencius and explain it to him.

古文：见孟子问曰： 周公何人也？ 曰： 古圣人也。 
现代文：于是陈贾去见了孟子，见面后陈贾问： 周公是个什么样的人？ 孟子说： 是古代的圣贤。 
English: So Chen Jia went to see Mencius. After the meeting, Chen Jia asked: What kind of person was Zhou Gong? Mencius said: He was an ancient sage.

古文：曰： 使管叔监殷，管叔以殷畔也，有诸？ 
现代文：陈贾说： 他派管叔监管殷族人，但管叔却带领殷族人叛乱，有这件事情吗？ 孟子说： 有的。 
English: Chen Jia said: He sent Uncle Guan to supervise the Yin people, but Uncle Guan led the Yin people to rebel. Is there such a thing? Mencius said: Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 曰： 周公知其将畔而使之与？ 
现代文：陈贾说： 周公是知道管叔将要叛乱而还要派他去吗？ 
English: Chen Jia said: Did Zhou Gong know that Uncle Guan was going to rebel and still sent him there?

古文：曰： 不知也。 
现代文：孟子说： 他不知道。 
English: Qi Wang said: I don't know.

古文： 然则圣人且有过与？ 
现代文：陈贾说： 那么圣贤之人也会犯错误？ 
English: Chen Jia said, "Then even sages can make mistakes?"

古文：曰： 周公，弟也；管叔，兄也。
现代文：孟子说： 周公，是弟弟；管叔，是哥哥。
English: Mencius said: Zhou Gong is a younger brother; Guanzhong is an older brother.

古文：周公之过，不亦宜乎？
现代文：周公的过错，不是合乎情理吗？
English: Zhou Gong's fault, isn't that reasonable?

古文：且古之君子，过则改之；今之君子，过则顺之。
现代文：况且古时候的君子，有错就会改正；如今的君子，明知有错还将错就错。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, a gentleman would correct his mistakes; today's gentleman, knowing that he was wrong, would continue to be wrong.

古文：古之君子，其过也，如日月之食，民皆见之；及其更也，民皆仰之。
现代文：古时候的君子，他的过错，就像日食月食一样，百姓都看得见，等到他改正过错时，百姓就会很敬仰。
English: An ancient gentleman, his faults, like the eclipse of the sun and moon, are visible to the people, and when he corrects his mistakes, the people will be very admired.

古文：今之君子，岂徒顺之，又从为之辞。 
现代文：如今的君子，何止是让过错顺其自然发展，而且还会编一套言辞来为自己辩解。 
English: Today's gentleman not only allows faults to take their natural course, but also makes up a set of words to justify himself.

