古文：力黑问于太山之稽曰：蚩尤囗骄溢阴谋，阴谋囗高阳，为之若何？
现代文：力黑问太山稽说：蚩尤骄居淫溢，阴谋略地，我们拿他怎么办呢？
English: Lihai asked Taishanqi, "Qiu You is arrogant, full of lasciviousness and full of intrigue. What should we do with him?

古文：太山之稽曰：子勿患也。
现代文：太山稽回答说：你不必为此担心。
English: Taishan replied, "You don't have to worry about that.

古文：夫天行正信，日月不处。
现代文：天道中正而确当，日月也是沿着恒定的轨道不停地运行。
English: In the course of the heavens, the sun and the moon keep moving along a constant orbit.

古文：启然不怠，以临天下。
现代文：天道、日月的运动是从不懈怠的，它们显示于人类的便是这种恒定的法则。
English: The heavenly way and the movement of the sun and the moon never slacken, and it is this constant law that they show to mankind.

古文：民生有极，以欲涅洫即失。丰而为杀，加而为既，予之为害，致而为费，缓而为哀。
现代文：如同天道、日月的运行一样，人类对物欲的追求是有一个极限的，也是遵循着盛极而衰的规律，所以，可以通过怂恿其欲望而尽其淫溢，当他淫溢到了极点时就会走向失败。今其盛盈至极而使之走向衰落，增益之而使之转向衰竭。
English: Just like the heavenly path and the movement of the sun and the moon, human beings have a limit to their pursuit of material desires. They also follow the law of waxing and waning. Therefore, they can make the most of their lust by suppressing their desires. When their lust has reached its peak, it will lead to failure. Now that it has reached its peak, it will lead to decline, and its gain will lead to exhaustion.

古文：忧桐而君之，收而为之咎；累而高之，踣而弗救也。
现代文：多多给予他而使之贪婪遇害，尽量施赠他而使之挥霍得殃，弛缓之而使其懈怠。
English: Give him much and let his greed kill him, give him as much as possible and let him squander it, relax him and let him slack off.

古文：将令之死而不得悔。子勿患也。战盈哉，太山之稽曰：可矣。
现代文：使之优裕荣耀而尊显，然后收捕之而治其罪；不断地使其尊显高贵，然后一旦动手倾覆他就无可救药了。
English: He exalts it with his wealth and glory, and then punishes it by arresting it; he exalts it again and again, and then, once he begins to overthrow it, there is no remedy.

古文：于是出其锵钺，奋其戎兵。
现代文：这样，就会使他死到临头了都来不及反思后悔。你不必多虑。
English: In this way, you will make him die before he has time to reflect and regret. You don't have to worry.

古文：黄帝身遇蚩尤，因而擒之。
现代文：太山稽说：现在已经是战胜蚩尤的时候了。
English: Taiyamaki said, "Now is the time to defeat Chuyu."

古文：剥其皮革以为干侯，使人射之，多中者赏。
现代文：于是陈列兵器，激励士卒，与蚩尤大战，并且擒获了蚩尤。剥下蚩尤的皮制成箭靶，令人射之，射中多的给予奖赏。
English: So he displayed his weapons, encouraged his soldiers, and fought a great battle with the gourd, and captured the gourd. He peeled off the skin of the gourd and made it into an arrow target, which was easy to shoot, and gave a reward to those who shot the most.

古文：其发而建之天，名约蚩尤之旌。
现代文：剪下他的头发来装饰旗杆并将这种旗子高高的悬挂，标之为 蚩尤旗 。
English: Cut off his hair to decorate the flagpole and hang the flag high, labeling it the "Banyu flag."

古文：充其胃以为鞠，使人执之，多中者赏。腐其骨肉，投之若醢，使天下囗之。
现代文：在他的胃中用毛塞满制成皮球，令人踢之，踢入坑多的给予奖励，把他的骨头剁碎，掺在加苦菜的肉酱中，令天下的人来吮吸。
English: They stuffed his stomach full of fur and made a leather ball, kicked him, kicked him into many pits, gave him awards, chopped up his bones, mixed them in a meat sauce with bitter herbs, and made the whole world suck them.

古文：上帝以禁。
现代文：黄帝以上天的名义向臣民设立禁条。
English: In the name of heaven, the Yellow Emperor imposed a ban on his subjects.

古文：帝曰：毋乏吾禁，毋留吾醢，毋乱吾民，毋绝吾道。
现代文：黄帝说：不要废坏我所立的禁规，不许倾倒我所赐给你们的肉酱，不要扰乱民心，不要背弃我所秉执的天道。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: "Do not break the prohibitions I have set up, do not spill the meat sauce I have given you, do not disturb the hearts of the people, and do not abandon the heavenly way I uphold.

古文：乏禁，留醢，乱民，绝道，反义逆时，非而行之，过极失当，擅制更爽，心欲是行，其上帝未先而擅兴兵，视蚩尤共工。
现代文：废坏禁规、扰乱民心、弃绝天道、违背信义悖逆天时，明知不对却一意孤行，违犯法度和天道，专断无常，肆意行事，未受天命而擅自兴兵，这些都将受到像蚩尤一样的惩罚。
English: Abolishing prohibitions, disturbing the people's hearts, abandoning the heavenly way, violating the faith and disobeying the heavenly time, knowing that it is not right but doing it anyway, violating the law and the heavenly way, being arbitrary and capricious, acting arbitrarily, and raising an army without being commanded by heaven will all be punished like Pu You.

古文：屈其脊，使甘其俞，悫为地楹。
现代文：于是制成蚩尤的模型，使起弯曲背脊，披枷穿锁，容色居丧呆滞，伏帖地充当地下支柱。
English: Therefore, it was made into a model of Puyu, with a curved spine, wearing a yoke and a chain, with a dull appearance, and acting as a lower pillar.

古文：帝曰：谨守吾正名，毋失吾恒刑，以示后人。
现代文：黄帝又说：希望大家恭谨地遵守我所建立的制度，不要离弃国家的法令，用自己的行动示范后人。
English: Huang Di also said: I hope that everyone will respectfully abide by the system I have established, not abandon the country's laws and regulations, and use their own actions to set an example for future generations.

