古文：胡长孺，字汲仲，婺州永康人。
现代文：胡长孺，字汲仲，婺州永康人。
English: Hu Changyao, Zhiqizhong, Zhangzhou Yongkang people.

古文：当唐之季，其先自天台来徙。
现代文：其先祖在唐代末期从天台迁居婺州。
English: His ancestors moved from Tiantai to Zhangzhou at the end of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：父居仁，淳祐丁未进士，知台州军州事，文辞政事，亦绝出于四方。
现代文：宋朝南渡后，其家族中以进士出身的达十人之多。祖父胡岩就是宋宁宗嘉定七年进士，授福州闽县知县。其父胡居仁为宋理宗淳七年进士，授台州军知事。祖父和父亲都以文学闻名。
English: After the Song Dynasty moved to the south, there were as many as ten people in his family who were born as Jin Shi. His grandfather Hu Yan was the seventh Jin Shi of Song Ning Zong Jiading and was awarded the county of Fuzhou. His father Hu Jueren was the seventh Jin Shi of Song Rizong Jun and was awarded the military governor of Taizhou. Both his grandfather and father were famous for literature.

古文：至长孺，其学益大振，《九经》、诸史，下逮百氏，名、墨、纵横，旁行敷落，律令章程，无不包罗而揆序之。
现代文：至长孺学术更有造诣，《九经》、诸史以及诸子百家学说，无不深知，还熟悉律令章程。宋度宗咸淳年间，其外舅徐道隆任荆湖四川宣抚参议官，长孺随舅入蜀。
English: He was more academically accomplished than Changsheng. He was well-versed in the Nine Classics, the Histories, and the teachings of hundreds of schools, and was also familiar with the regulations of the ritsuryo code. During the reign of Song Duzong Xianjun, his maternal uncle, Xu Daolong, served as a senator of Jinghu, Sichuan Province, and Changsheng followed his uncle to Shu.

古文：咸淳中，外舅徐道隆为荆湖四川宣抚参议官，长孺从之入蜀，铨试第一名，授迪功郎、监重庆府酒务。
现代文：选拔官吏的考试，长孺中第一名，授迪功郎、监重庆府酒务。
English: He won the first place in the examination for the selection of government officials, and was awarded the title of meritorious student and the supervisor of the Chongqing government's liquor affairs.

古文：俄用制置使朱壒孙之辟，兼总领湖广军马钱粮所佥厅，与高彭、李湜、梅应春等，号南中八士。
现代文：不久，因宋制置使朱祀孙的征聘，总领湖广军马钱粮所佥厅，与高彭、李、梅应春等，号称 南中八士 。
English: Soon after, the Song Dynasty system led to the recruitment of Zhu Rishisun, the general leader of the Hubei and Guangxi Armies, Ma Qianren, and Gao Peng, Li, Mei Yingchun, etc., known as the eight members of the South Middle School.

古文：已而复拜福宁州倅之命，会宋亡，退栖永康山中。
现代文：其后任福宁州的副职。宋亡后，隐居永康山中。
English: He later served as vice-governor of Funing Prefecture. After Song's death, he lived in seclusion in Yongkang Mountain.

古文：至元二十五年，诏下求贤，有司强起之，至京师，待诏集贤院。
现代文：至元二十五年，元朝廷下诏求贤，地方官府强令他出来做官，到京师，于集贤院待诏。
English: In the twenty-fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the former imperial court issued an edict calling for sages, and local government offices forced him to come out to work as an official, go to Beijing to study, and wait for the edict in Jixianyuan.

古文：既而召见内殿，拜集贤修撰，与宰相议不合，改教授扬州。
现代文：世祖在内殿召见他，拜集贤修撰。因与宰相意见不合，改任扬州教授。
English: The patriarch summoned him to the inner hall to pray for the collection of virtuous men and women. Due to disagreement with the prime minister, he was reassigned as a professor in Yangzhou.

古文：元贞元年，移建昌，适录事阙官，檄长孺摄之。
现代文：元贞元年，调建昌教授。这时录事缺官，命长孺代行其职。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, Professor Jianchang was transferred. At this time, there was a vacancy in the record, and the president of the school, Zou, took over his duties.

古文：程文海方贵显，其家气焰薰灼，即违法，人不敢呵问，其树外门，侵官道，长孺亟命撤之。
现代文：程文海正飞黄腾达，气焰嚣张，即使违法也无人敢问。他在外门植树，侵占官道，长孺命他拔去。
English: Cheng Wenhai is flying high, arrogant, even if it is illegal, no one dares to ask. He planted trees at the outer gate, occupied the official road, and ordered him to pull them out.

古文：至大元年，转台州路宁海县主簿，阶将仕佐郎。
现代文：至大元年，转任台州路宁海县主簿。
English: In the first year of the Taizhou Dynasty, he was transferred to the main book of Ninghai County, Taizhou Road.

古文：大德丁未，浙东大昆，戊申，复无麦，民相枕死。
现代文：大德十一年浙江灾荒，至大元年又夏麦无收，百姓饿死者无数。
English: In the eleventh year of the Great German Reign, Zhejiang suffered a famine. By the first year of the Great German Reign, there was no summer wheat harvest, and countless people died of starvation.

古文：阅月再至，索其钱，长孺抱成案进曰： 钱在是矣。 脱欢察怒曰： 汝胆如山耶！
现代文：宣慰同知脱欢察进行赈灾，向富民征收一百五十万缗，以二十五万交给长孺去旁州赈济。长孺看出脱欢察有侵吞这笔钱的意图，便把这笔钱散给贫民。过了一月，脱欢察向他索取这笔钱，长孺拿出赈济名册说： 钱都在这里。 
English: Xuan Tiao and his colleague Zhituo Huancha carried out disaster relief, collecting 1.5 million baht from rich people and giving 250,000 to Changyu to go to Bozhou for relief. Changyu saw that Huancha had the intention of embezzling this money, so he distributed this money to the poor. After one month, Huancha asked him for this money, and Changyu took out the relief register and said: The money is all here.

古文：何所受命，而敢无忌若此！ 长孺曰： 民一日不食，当有死者，诚不及以闻，然官书具在，可征也。 
现代文：脱欢察大怒。长孺说 ：民一日无食便死，当时我的确来不及向你请示，然文书具在，可以为证。 
English: Nagase said, "People die after a day without food. At that time, I really didn't have time to ask you for advice, but I have the documents to prove it."

古文：脱欢察虽怒，不敢问。
现代文：脱欢察虽怒不止，但也不敢再说什么了。
English: Although he was furious, he did not dare to say anything.

古文：县有铜岩，恶少年狙伺其间，恒出钞道，为过客患，官不能禁。长孺伪衣商人服，令苍头负货以从，阴戒驺卒十人蹑其后。
现代文：县有铜岩，一些无赖之徒在此拦路行劫，官不能禁止。长孺伪装成商人，令其奴仆挑着货物，又令士卒十人暗中随从。
English: There is a copper rock in the county, and some ruffians have been stopping and robbing here, and officials cannot forbid it. Nagase disguised himself as a merchant, had his servants pick up the goods, and had ten soldiers secretly follow him.

古文：长孺至，岩中人突出要之，长孺方逊辞以谢，驺卒俄集，皆成擒，俾尽逮其党置于法，夜行无虞。
现代文：长孺至铜岩，这些无赖出来抢劫，长孺正向他说好话，忽然士卒上来把他们生擒，尽依法惩处，从此以后这里夜行无虞。
English: These ruffians came from Nagatoro to Bronze Rock to rob. Nagatoro was saying good words to him, when soldiers suddenly came up and handcuffed them, punishing them to the full extent of the law. From then on, it was safe to walk around here at night.

古文：民荷溺器粪田，偶触军卒衣，卒抶伤民，且碎器而去，竟不知主名。
现代文：百姓在田间施肥，不小心弄脏了一军卒的衣服，这个士卒打伤了施肥的农民，还打碎了农具，扬长而去，也不知他姓什名谁。
English: The people were spreading manure in the fields and accidentally soiled the clothes of a soldier. The soldier injured the farmer who was spreading the manure, and also broke the farm tools. He ran away, and we don't know his last name.

古文：民来诉，长孺阳怒其诬，械于市，俾左右潜侦之，向抶者过焉，戟手称快，执诣所隶，杖而偿其器。
现代文：农民来控诉，长孺假装说他是诬告，把来控诉的农民枷锁示众，暗中派左右调查。那个打了农民的士卒见此情形拍手叫好，长孺立刻把他逮捕审问，查明实情将他施以杖刑，并责令赔赏农民的损失。
English: The farmer came to complain, and the magistrate pretended to say that he was making a false accusation. He displayed the farmer's shackles to the public and secretly sent people to investigate. The policeman who had beaten the farmer clapped his hands when he saw this. The magistrate immediately arrested and interrogated him, and after ascertaining the truth, he punished him with a cane, and ordered him to compensate the farmer's losses.

古文：群妪聚浮屠庵，诵佛书为禳祈，一妪失其衣，适长孺出乡，妪讼之。
现代文：有一群老妇人在尼姑庵诵经禳灾，其中一老妪衣服被盗。正逢长孺到乡下巡察，丢失衣服的妇人向他告状。
English: There was a group of old women chanting sutras in a nunnery. One of the old women's clothes was stolen. It was the time when the abbot went to inspect the countryside. The woman who lost her clothes complained to him.

古文：长孺以牟麦置群妪合掌中，命绕佛诵书如初，长孺闭目叩齿，作集神状，且曰： 吾使神监之矣，盗衣者行数周，麦当芽。 
现代文：长孺将麦子放在这群妇人手中，叫他们合掌诵经。长孺则闭目叩齿，说他是神降临，偷盗衣服的人绕佛数周，掌中的麦子会发芽。
English: Nagase placed the wheat in the hands of the group of women and asked them to chant the sutras with their palms together. Nagase closed his eyes and clenched his teeth, saying that he was a god come down. The person who stole the clothes walked around the Buddha for several weeks, and the wheat in his hands would sprout.

古文：一妪屡开掌视，长孺指缚之，还所窃衣。
现代文：有一妇人不停地开掌观看，长孺就把她逮捕，果是她偷了衣服，令她归还。
English: One woman kept watching with open palms, and the chief magistrate arrested her for stealing clothes and ordered her to return them.

古文：长孺白事帅府归，吏言有奸事屡问弗伏者，长孺曰： 此易易尔。 
现代文：长孺向帅府汇报公事回衙，县吏对他说，有桩奸案屡审无结果，长孺说 ：这容易。 
English: Nagase reported to the governor's office for a business reply. The prefectural official told him that there were multiple trials of the gang rape case with no results. Nagase said, "That's easy.

古文：夜伏吏案下，黎明，出奸者讯之，辞愈坚，长孺佯谓令长曰： 颇闻国家有诏，盍迎之。 
现代文：夜间令一吏伏于公堂案下。
English: At night, one official was ordered to lie down under the public hall.

古文：趣持至验之，呼其弟示曰： 得非尔家物乎？ 弟曰： 然。 
现代文：黎明再进行审理，受审者更加坚决不肯招供。长孺假装说 ：闻国家有诏书到，都去迎接。 衙役把奸徒绑在东西楹，堂上官员衙役都出去了，奸徒相互说： 事至此，我们死不承认，将把我们无可奈何。 
English: The trial resumed at dawn, and those on trial became even more adamant in their refusal to confess. The chief eunuch pretended to say, "When we hear that the imperial edict has arrived from the state, we will all go to meet it." The eunuchs tied the traitors to the rafters, and the officials and eunuchs in the hall went out. The traitors said to each other, "Things have come to this, we will not admit it, we will be helpless."

古文：遂归焉。其行事多类此，不能尽载。
现代文：话音刚落，原藏在公案下的县吏突然出来，奸徒大惊，都叩头服罪。像这类事很多，不能一一记述。
English: As soon as the sentence was pronounced, the county official who was originally hiding under the public case suddenly came out, the traitors were shocked, and they all bowed down and confessed. There are many things like this, and it is impossible to describe them all.

古文：延祐元年，转两浙都转运盐使司长山场盐司丞，阶将仕郎，未上，以病辞，不复仕，隐杭之虎林山以终。
现代文：延祐元年，转任两浙都转运盐使司长山场盐司丞，官阶将仕郎，未上任，以病辞职，以后不再出仕，终生隐居于杭州虎林山。
English: In the first year of Yan Yu, he was transferred to the post of the director of the salt transportation department of the two Zhejiang provinces, Shanba Salt Secretary, the official rank will be the servant, did not take office, resigned due to illness, no longer served in the future, and lived in seclusion in Hangzhou Hulingshan for life.

古文：长孺初师青田余学古，学古师王梦松，梦松亦青田人，传龙泉叶味道之学，味道则朱熹弟子也。
现代文：长孺起初拜青田余学古为师，学古是青田王梦松的门生，承传龙泉叶味道的学说，而味道又是朱熹的弟子。
English: At first, Nagase studied under Qingtian Yu Xuegu, a disciple of Qingtian Wang Mengsong, who passed down the theory of Longquan Ye's taste, and Zhu Xi's taste disciple.

古文：渊源既正，长孺益行四方，访求其旨趣，始信涵养用敬为最切，默存静观，超然自得，故其为人，光明宏伟，专务明本心之学，慨然以孟子自许。
现代文：长孺的学术思想渊源纯正。长孺为人光明宏伟，慨然以孟子自许，唯恐孔孟之道失传，诲人不倦。一时学者都慕名而来，如饥似渴地向他学习。他讲解经义时，围听者达数百人。他说： 人虽最灵，但与万物最初并没有不同。 
English: Nagase's academic thought is pure in origin. Nagase is a bright and magnificent person, and he admires himself as a man of wisdom. He is afraid that the way of Confucius and Mencius will be lost, so he never tires. For a while, scholars came to learn from him. When he explained the sutras, there were hundreds of people listening. He said: Although people are the most spiritual, they are not different from all things at the beginning.

古文：晚寓武林，病喘上气者颇久。
现代文：听的人都感到新鲜。晚年住在武林，患哮喘病颇久。
English: People who listen to it feel refreshed. In his later years, he lived in Wulin and suffered from asthma for a long time.

古文：一旦具酒食，与比邻别，云将返故乡，门人有识其微意者，问曰： 先生精神不衰，何为遽欲观化乎？ 
现代文：一天早上备办酒食，与邻居告别，说他将回故乡。门人中有人明白他的意思，问道： 先生精神未衰，为何忽然要离人世？ 
English: One morning he prepared food and drink and said goodbye to his neighbors, saying that he was going back to his hometown. Some of his disciples understood what he meant and asked: "Teacher, you haven't lost your spirit, why do you suddenly want to die?"

古文：长孺曰： 精神与死生，初无相涉也。 
现代文：长孺说 ：精神与生死原不相涉。 
English: Nagase said, "Spirituality has nothing to do with life and death."

古文：熊朋来，字与可，豫章人。
现代文：就寝后至半夜，喘息声忽然停止，其子胡驹去看他，见他衣冠整齐，盘坐逝世了，终年七十五岁。
English: After going to bed until midnight, the wheezing suddenly stopped. His son Hu Yao went to see him. He saw that his clothes and crown were neat and he died in a sitting position. He was 75 years old.

古文：宋咸淳甲戌，登进士第第四人，授从仕郎、宝庆府佥书判官厅公事，未上而宋亡。
现代文：所著书有《瓦缶编》、《南昌集》、《宁海漫抄》、《颜乐斋稿》，行于世。熊朋来字与可，豫章人。宋咸淳十年，登进士第第四，授予从仕郎，宝庆府佥书判官厅公事，未上任而宋亡。
English: His books include "Ceramic Can Compilation," "Nanchang Collection," "Ninghai Manuscript" and "Yanle Zhai Manuscript," which have been popular in the world. Xiong Penglui Zi and Ke, Yu Zhangren. Song Xianjun was ten years old, the fourth to be awarded the title of academician, and was awarded the title of Zong Shiro, the official of the Baoqing Government's Book Adjudication Office. Song died before taking office.

古文：世祖初得江南，尽求宋之遗士而用之，尤重进士，以故相留梦炎为尚书，召甲戌状元王龙泽为江南行台监察御史。
现代文：世祖初得江南，尽力征求宋朝的遗老遗少，尤其重视进士，以亡宋宰相留梦炎为尚书，召咸淳十年状元王龙泽为江南行台监察御史。
English: When the founder of the dynasty first reached the south of the Yangtze River, he made every effort to solicit the old and young of the Song Dynasty, and paid particular attention to the promotion of young scholars. He took the late Song Prime Minister Remyongyan as his disciple, and summoned the former King Longze, who ruled the southern part of the Yangtze River for ten years, as his inspector.

古文：朋来，龙泽榜下进士，而声名不在龙泽下，然不肯表襮苟进，隐处州里间，生徒受学者，常百数十人。
现代文：进士榜上朋来名次在龙泽之下，而他的声名并不在龙泽之下，然而不肯炫耀自己，苟且求进，而隐居在州里之间，跟他学习受教的生徒常达数百人。
English: On the list of new recruits, his rank was lower than that of Longze, but his reputation was not lower than that of Longze. However, he did not want to show off himself, he insisted on making progress, and he lived in seclusion between states. There were often hundreds of students studying and being taught by him.

古文：取朱子《小学》书，提其要领以示之，学者家传其书，几遍天下。
现代文：朋来从朱子《小学》中提要领授予生徒，这些学者又在家中传授，这样朱子《小学》几乎传遍天下。
English: Zhu Zi's "Elementary School" was given to students by their friends, and these scholars also taught it at home, so Zhu Zi's "Elementary School" was spread almost all over the world.

古文：豫章为江西会府，行中书省、提刑按察司皆在焉，凡居是官者，多朝廷名公卿，皆以宾礼延见。
现代文：豫章是江西会府，行中书省、提刑按察司都设在此，凡任这种官的人多是朝廷著名公卿，都以宾礼的要求来引见他。
English: Yuzhang is the capital of Jiangxi Province. It is also the seat of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Department of Criminal Investigation. Most of the people who hold such posts are famous courtiers of the imperial court, and they all come to see him at the request of their guests.

古文：廉希宪之子惇为参知政事，以师礼事朋来，终身称门人。
现代文：廉希宪之子为参知政事，以师生之礼待朋来，终身自称是他的学生。
English: The son of Lian Xixian was a member of the prefectural government, treated his friends with the courtesy of a teacher and student, and claimed to be his student for life.

古文：刘宣为提刑按察使，尤加礼敬。
现代文：刘宣为提刑按察使，对朋来更加敬重。
English: Liu Xuan was the inspector who recommended the sentence, and he treated his friend with more respect.

古文：朋来和而不肆，介而不狷，与群贤讲论经义无虚日，儒者咸倚以为重焉。
现代文：朋来与这些人往来，从不显露自己，不同流合污，与群贤讲论经义一天都不间断，儒家学者都依重于他。
English: Friends and associates with these people, never reveal themselves, different flow into the mud, with a group of sages lecture on the theory and practice of a day without interruption, Confucian scholars are dependent on him.

古文：会朝廷遣治书侍御史王构铨外选于江西，于是参政徐琰、李世安列荐朋来为闽海提举儒学官，使者报闻，而朝廷以东南儒学之士唯福建、庐陵最盛，特起朋来连为两郡教授。
现代文：适逢朝廷遣治书侍御史王构在江西选拔官吏，于是参政徐琰、李世安都推荐朋来为闽海提举学官，使者报与朝廷，而朝廷以为东南儒学之士只有福建、庐陵最多，特别起用朋来连续为两郡教授。
English: At the same time, the imperial court sent Shih Wang Jie to select officials in Jiangxi, so the politicians Xu Xi and Li Shian both recommended Bora to be appointed as an academic official in Bohai, and the envoy reported to the imperial court. The imperial court thought that only Fujian and Fuling had the most Southeastern Confucian scholars, and specially appointed Bora to be a professor in two counties.

古文：所至，考古篆籀文字，调律吕，协歌诗，以兴雅乐，制器定辞，必则古式，学者化焉。既满考，以常格调建安县主簿，不赴。
现代文：所到之处，考古篆籀文字、调律吕、协调歌诗以振兴雅乐，制乐器定歌词，一定遵循古代格式，读书人都受到感化，考期已过，以常规格调任建安县主簿，不赴任。
English: Wherever he went, he found that the archaeology of the script, the tuning of the lute, and the harmonization of songs and poems to invigorate the elegant music, the production of musical instruments set lyrics, must follow the ancient format, the readers are influenced, the examination period has passed, and the main book of Jian'an County is appointed in a conventional style, and does not go to the appointment.

古文：晚以福清州判官致仕，朋来视之，漠如也。
现代文：晚年以福清州判官辞官，朋来视它，很是淡漠。
English: In his later years, he was a judge of the Fuqing Prefecture, and his friends regarded him as indifferent.

古文：四方学者，因其所自号，称为天慵先生。
现代文：四方的读书人因他自己所取的号，称他为天慵先生。
English: Readers in Shifang call him Mr. Tianyao because of his nickname.

古文：每燕居，鼓瑟而歌以自乐。
现代文：每当闲暇时，鼓瑟而歌，自得其乐。
English: Whenever he is at leisure, he plays the drums and sings, enjoying himself.

古文：尝著《瑟赋》二篇，学者争传诵之。
现代文：曾著《瑟赋》二篇，学者争相传诵。
English: He has written two "Sufu," which scholars are eager to recite.

古文：门人归之者日盛，旁近舍皆满，至不能容。朋来恳恳为说经旨文义，老益不倦。得其所指授者，多为闻人。
现代文：门人到他那里去，日益增多，附近的邻舍都住满了人，以至于容纳不下，朋来勤勤恳恳为他们讲述经书要旨和文章要义，越老越不知疲倦，得到他指教的人，大多是后来有名的学者。
English: The number of disciples who came to him increased day by day, and the nearby neighborhoods were so full of people that they could hardly contain them. Friends diligently and earnestly told them the gist of the scriptures and the gist of the articles. The older they got, the more tireless they became. Most of the people who received his instruction were later famous scholars.

古文：延祐初，诏以进士科取士，时科举废已久，有司咸不知其典故，以不称明诏为惧，行省官主其事者，谘问于朋来，动中轨度，因以申请，四方得遵用之。及请为考试官，则曰： 应试者十九及吾门，不可。 
现代文：延祐初年，下诏以进士科举取士，当时废科举已有多年，官府不知道科举的来历，因不明诏而担心，行省官中主持该事的向朋来请教，后来请他任考试官，朋来说： 十分之九的应试者都受业于我的门下，不可。 
English: In the first year of the Enyu era, the imperial edict was issued to recruit cadets through the entrance examination. At that time, the abolition of the imperial examination had been going on for many years. The government did not know the origin of the imperial examination, and was worried because it did not know the imperial edict. The provincial official who presided over the matter came to his friend for advice, and later asked him to serve as an examiner. The friend said, "Nine out of ten candidates are under my tutelage, it is impossible."

古文：其后江浙、湖广，皆卑词致礼，请为主文，朋来屡往应之。
现代文：后来，江浙、湖广都谦恭地请他任主考，朋来每次都应聘前往。
English: Later, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Guangxi all humbly invited him to be the chief examiner, and he applied for the position every time.

古文：及对大廷，其所选士居天下三之一焉。
现代文：就对朝廷而言，他所选拔的士人居全国的三分之一。
English: As far as the imperial court was concerned, he selected more than one-third of the country's judges.

古文：初，朋来以《周礼》首荐乡郡，而元制，《周官》不与设科，治《戴记》者又鲜，朋来屡以为言。
现代文：当初，朋来根据《周礼》首先推荐乡试，而据元朝的制度，《周官》不设科，而研究《戴记》的人又很少，朋来多次说到这一点。
English: At first, according to "Zhou Li," Peng Lai first recommended the township examination, but according to the system of the Yuan Dynasty, "Zhou Guan" does not have a subject, and there are few people who study "Dai Ji," Peng Lai said this many times.

古文：盖朋来之学，诸经中《三礼》尤深，是以当世言礼学者，咸推宗之。
现代文：大概朋来的学问，在诸经中对《三礼》的研究最深，所以当时谈礼学的人，都推崇他。
English: Probably, the study of the "Three Rites" was the most profound in the sutras, so people who talked about etiquette at that time all admired him.

古文：至治中，英宗始采用古礼，亲御衮冕祠太庙，锐意于制礼作乐之事，翰林学士元明善，扬言于朝，以朋来为荐，未及召而卒，年七十八。
现代文：至治中叶，英宗才开始采用古礼，穿礼服，戴礼帽，亲自去太庙祭祀，锐意于制礼作乐之事。翰林学士元明善在朝廷推荐朋来，没有等到召聘，他已逝世，终年七十八岁。
English: It was not until the middle of the reign that Emperor Yingzong began to adopt the ancient rites, wear ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat, and personally go to the imperial temple to perform the rituals. He was keen on performing the rites and making music. Hanlin Scholar Yuan Mingshan recommended his friend to the imperial court, but he did not wait to be recruited, and he passed away at the age of 78.

古文：朋来动止有常，喜怒不形于色，接宾客，人人各自以得其意。
现代文：朋来行止有常规，喜、怒都不表现出来，接待宾客，人人都感他的诚意。
English: My friend behaves in a routine manner, showing neither joy nor anger. When he receives guests, everyone senses his sincerity.

古文：韩性，字明善，绍兴人。其先家安阳，宋司徒兼侍中魏忠献王琦，其八世祖也。高祖左司郎中膺胄，扈从南渡，家于越。
现代文：著有家集三十卷，其中重要的则是关于礼乐、世教之类，其余的如天文、地理、方技、名物、度数，没有哪方面不精于研究。韩性字明善，绍兴人。祖籍安阳。高祖左司郎中膺胄，随从宋朝南渡，安家于越。
English: He is the author of thirty volumes of family anthologies, the most important of which are about ceremonial music, world religions, etc. The rest, such as astronomy, geography, square techniques, famous objects, degrees, are not proficient in any aspect of research. Korean character is good, Shaoxing people. Ancestral home Anyang. Gao Zuo Lang Zhongyi, followed the Song Dynasty to Nandu, settled in Yue.

古文：性天资警敏，七岁读书，数行俱下，日记万言。
现代文：韩性天资聪敏，七岁读书，一目数行，一天能记万言。
English: He has a Korean nature and is very smart. He can read at the age of seven, can count lines at a glance, and can memorize ten thousand words in a day.

古文：九岁通《小戴礼》，作大义，操笔立就，文意苍古，老生宿学，皆称异焉。
现代文：九岁通《小戴礼》，提笔成文，文意老练，年长者都说与众不同。年稍长，博览群书，从经史到诸子百家，无不深究根底，对儒家的性理学说的研究，其造诣尤深。
English: At the age of nine, he mastered "Xiaodai Li," writing with a pen and a sophisticated style, which the elders all said was unique. He was a little older, and was well-versed in books, studying everything from history to literature. He was particularly accomplished in the study of Confucian sexology.

古文：及长，博综群籍，自经史至诸子百氏，靡不极其津涯，究其根柢，而于儒先性理之说，尤深造其阃域。其为文辞，博达俊伟，变化不测，自成一家言。
现代文：他的文辞广博，气魄宏伟多变，自成一家。
English: His literature is extensive, his spirit is grand and changeable, and he is a family in his own right.

古文：四方学者，受业其门，户外之履，至无所容。
现代文：各地到他门下求学的人，多得无法容纳。
English: The number of people from all over the country who came to study under him was too large to accommodate.

古文：延祐初，诏以科举取士，学者多以文法为请，性语之曰： 今之贡举，悉本朱熹私议，为贡举之文，不知朱氏之学，可乎？
现代文：延祐初，帝下诏以科举取士，学生多向他求教，韩性说，现在考贡举都要根据朱熹的思想，写选拔贡举的文章，不了解朱氏的学说，行吗？
English: At the beginning of the Yan Yu era, the emperor decreed that the imperial examination would be used to select scholars, and the students mostly asked him for advice. According to the Korean character, now the examination and tribute should be based on Zhu Xi's thought, writing an article on the selection of tribute, do not understand Zhu's doctrine, okay?

古文：《四书》、《六经》，千载不传之学，自程氏至朱氏，发明无余蕴矣，顾行何如耳。
现代文：《四书》、《六经》二程朱熹阐发无余，只看行为如何。
English: "The Four Books" and "The Six Classics" can be fully expounded by Zhu Xi, just look at how they behave.

古文：有德者必有言，施之场屋，直其末事，岂有他法哉！ 
现代文：韩性出门没有车马仆人，他经过之处，背东西的人停了下来，行人让路，街上的老幼和仆役，都称呼他 韩先生 。
English: Han went out without a chariot and horse servant. Wherever he passed, people carrying things stopped, pedestrians gave way, and the old and young in the street, as well as servants, all called him Mr. Han.

古文：暮年愈自韬晦，然未尝忘情于斯世，郡之良二千石政事有所未达，辄往咨访，性从容载导，洞中肯綮，裨益者多。
现代文：官府推荐他任教官，他辞谢说： 幸有祖辈的房子可避风雨，微薄的田地，可以喝粥，读书是为了指导行为，只要无愧于古人，就够了。
English: The government recommended him as an instructor, but he declined, saying, "Fortunately, I have the house of my ancestors to shelter me from the wind and rain, a meager field where I can drink porridge, and I study to guide my behavior. As long as I am worthy of the ancients, that is enough."

古文：天历中，赵世延以性名上闻。
现代文：至于做官享受俸禄，不是我所希望的。 
English: As for enjoying a salary as an official, it is not what I had hoped for.

古文：后十年，门人李齐为南台监察御史，力举其行义，而性已卒矣。年七十有六。
现代文：晚年时他更不问世事，但他并未完全忘记世道之兴衰。天历中，赵世延向皇帝启奏韩性的为人。十年后他的学生李齐任南台监察御史，极力推崇性之人品德行。此时性已卒，终年七十六岁。
English: In his later years, he was even more detached from the affairs of the world, but he did not completely forget the ups and downs of the world. In the heavenly calendar, Zhao Shiyan told the emperor that he was a Korean person. Ten years later, his student Li Qi served as the Nantai Supervisor of History, and vigorously promoted the virtues of the Korean people. At this time, he passed away, at the age of 76.

古文：卒后，南台御史右丞月鲁不花，尝学于性，言性法当得谥，朝廷赐谥庄节先生。
现代文：他的学生南台御史中丞月鲁不花认为按照制度，韩性理应得到朝廷的封号。后来朝廷赐谥号为庄节先生。
English: His student, Nantai goshi chujo, Yue Lu Fu Hua, thought that according to the system, the Korean character deserved to receive the imperial seal. Later, the imperial court granted the imperial seal to Mr. Zhuo Jie.

古文：其所著有《礼记说》四卷，《诗音释》一卷，《书辨疑》一卷，《郡志》八卷，文集十二卷。
现代文：性著有《礼记说》四卷，《诗音释》一卷，《书辨疑》一卷，《郡志》八卷，文集十二卷。
English: His literary works include "The Book of Etiquette" in four volumes, "The Interpretation of Poems" in one volume, "The Discernment of Books" in one volume, "County History" in eight volumes, and twelve volumes of anthologies.

古文：登至治元年进士第，授高邮县丞，明达文法，吏不敢欺。
现代文：吴师道字正传，婺州兰溪人。幼年就懂得要学习，善于记忆和阅读。善写词章，才思横溢，谱成歌诗，清新美丽。
English: Wu Shidao was born in Lanxi, Zhangzhou. He knew how to study at an early age, and was good at memorizing and reading. He was good at writing verses, and was full of ideas. He composed poems, which were fresh and beautiful.

古文：再调宁国路录事。会岁大旱，饥民仰食于官者三十三万口，师道劝大家得粟三万七千六百石，以赈饥民；又言于部使者，转闻于朝，得粟四万石、钞三万八千四百锭赈之，三十余万人赖以存活。
现代文：二十岁读宋儒真德秀遗书，认识到要研习修身养性之学，须刻苦磨练，日长月进，他曾向同郡的许谦请教静心养性的问题。至治元年考中进士，授予高邮县丞，因他通晓文理和法律，所以县吏不敢欺骗他，后调任宁国路录事，该年适逢大旱，灾民靠官府救济者有三十三万人。师道募集粟子三万七千六百石，以赈饥民，又从朝廷获得四万石、银钞三万八千四百锭，使灾民得以活命。
English: At the age of twenty, he read the suicide note of Song Ruzhen Dexiu, and realized that he had to study the study of self-cultivation and self-cultivation, and he had to work hard every day. He had asked the same county's Xu Qian for advice on meditation and self-cultivation. He was promoted to junior high school in the first year of the year, and was awarded the title of Gaoyou County Secretary. Because he was familiar with humanities and laws, the county officials did not dare to deceive him. Later, he was transferred to Ningguo Road Record. That year coincided with a drought, and the victims of the disaster relied on

古文：迁池州建德县尹。郡学有田七百亩，为豪民所占，郡下其事建德，俾师道究治之，即为按其图籍，悉以归于学。
现代文：迁升池州建德县尹后，属郡学的七百亩田地被地方豪绅抢占，郡下的人希望师道能追究办理。他按照地图，将地全部划归于郡学。
English: After moving to Yin, Jiande County, Chizhou, the seven hundred mu of fields belonging to the county school were seized by the local wealthy gentry. The people in the county hoped that the teacher could investigate and deal with it. According to the map, he assigned all the land to the county school.

古文：建德素少茶，而榷税尤重，民以为病，即为极言于所司，榷税为减。
现代文：建德产的茶并不多，但捐税很重，百姓认为这是弊端，师道将此事告知所司，减轻了赋税。
English: There is not much tea produced in Jiande, but the tax is very heavy. The people think this is a drawback. Shidao informed the company about this and reduced the tax.

古文：中书左丞吕思诚、侍御史孔思立列荐之，召为国子助教，寻升博士。
现代文：中书左丞相吕思诚、侍御史孔思立联名推荐，师道被召为国子助教，不久又升为博士。
English: With the joint recommendation of Lu Sichen, the chancellor of the Middle School, and Kong Sitoru, the attendant master, Shi Dao was called to be Kuniko's assistant teacher, and was soon promoted to doctor.

古文：其为教，一本朱熹之旨，而遵许衡之成法，六馆诸生，人人自以为得师。
现代文：吴师道以朱熹思想为宗旨，遵循许衡的教学方法，六馆的学生都感到他们得到一位好老师。
English: Wu Shidao takes Zhu Xi Thought as its tenet and follows the teaching methods of Xu Heng. The students of the Sixth Academy all feel that they have a good teacher.

古文：时以为确论。伯颜平生，修辑《六经》，多所著述，皆毁于兵。赡思，字得之，其先大食国人。国既内附，大父鲁坤，乃东迁丰州。
现代文：后因亲丧而归故里，他最后的官职是奉议大夫和礼部郎中，逝世于家乡。著作有《易诗书杂说》、《春秋胡传附辨》、《战国策校注》、《敬乡录》及文集二十卷。赡思字得之，祖先本大食人，祖父鲁坤自大食迁居丰州。
English: Later, he returned to his hometown due to a family bereavement. His last official position was that of a doctor and a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and he died in his hometown. His works include "Easy Poetry Miscellany," "Spring and Autumn Hu Biography Supplement," "Warring States Strategy Commentary," "Homage to the Homeland" and 20 volumes of anthologies. His ancestors were great eaters, and his grandfather Lu Kun moved to Toyosu from Daishoku.

古文：太宗时，以材授真定、济南等路监榷课税使，因家真定。
现代文：太宗时，以其材授真定、济南等路税监推课税使，因而家住真定。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, he used his talents to establish Jinding, Jinan and other road tax supervisors to promote tax collection, and thus he lived in Jinding.

古文：父斡直，始从儒先生问学，轻财重义，不干仕进。
现代文：其父斡直拜儒生为师，轻财重义，不愿为官。
English: His father was a disciple of Confucius. He valued money more than righteousness, and was reluctant to become an official.

古文：赡思生九岁，日记古经传至千言。
现代文：赡思九岁时，一日能记千字，古典经传至千言。
English: When Yan Si was nine years old, he could memorize a thousand words in a day, and the classics were passed down to a thousand words.

古文：比弱冠，以所业就正于翰林学士承旨王思廉之门，由是博极群籍，汪洋茂衍，见诸践履，皆笃实之学，故其年虽少，已为乡邦所推重。
现代文：二十岁时，就学于翰林学士承旨王思廉，自此他博览群书，那气势恢宏，文辞优美的古著，对他的言行影响至深，所以尽管他很年轻，已为乡亲所尊重。
English: At the age of twenty, he studied under the scholar of Hanlin, Wang Siliang. Since then, he has read a lot of books. The magnificent and elegant ancient books have had a profound influence on his words and deeds, so although he is very young, he has been respected by the villagers.

古文：延祐初，诏以科第取士，有劝其就试者，赡思笑而不应。既而侍御史郭思贞、翰林学士承旨刘赓、参知政事王士熙交章论荐之。
现代文：延祐初，侍御史郭思真、翰林学士刘赓、参知政事王士熙都向朝廷推荐他。
English: At the beginning of the Yan Yu era, the chamberlain Shi Guo Sizhen, the scholar of Hanlin Liu Yu, and the senator Wang Shixi all recommended him to the imperial court.

古文：泰定三年，诏以遗逸征至上都，见帝于龙虎台，眷遇优渥。
现代文：泰定三年皇帝请他去上都，在龙虎台召见，给他优厚的待遇。
English: Three years later, the emperor invited him to Shangdu, summoned him to Longhu and gave him generous treatment.

古文：时倒剌沙柄国，西域人多附焉，赡思独不往见。倒剌沙屡使人招致之，即以养亲辞归。
现代文：当时倒刺沙当权，西域的人都顺从于他，唯独赡思不与之见面，倒刺沙数次派人招他去，都以奉养母亲为由而辞归故里。
English: At that time, he was in power, and the people of the western region obeyed him, but they did not meet with him. He sent people to invite him several times, but they all resigned and returned home on the grounds of supporting their mothers.

古文：天历三年，召入为应奉翰林文字，赐对奎章阁，文宗问曰： 卿有所著述否？ 
现代文：天历三年赡思应召入奎章阁，文宗问： 你有何著述？ 
English: Wen Zong asked, "How many books have you written?"

古文：明日，进所著《帝王心法》，文宗称善。
现代文：次日，呈上《帝王心法》，文宗称赞，诏令预修《经世大典》，提出将不合要求的议论删去。
English: The next day, he presented the "Emperor's Heart Law," which was praised by Wen Zong, and ordered the pre-amendment of the "Great Code of Confucianism," proposing to delete the unsuitable arguments.

古文：诏预修《经世大典》，以论议不合求去，命奎章阁侍书学士虞集谕留之，赡思坚以母老辞，遂赐币遣之。
现代文：并命奎章阁学士虞集转告赡思挽留他。
English: He also ordered Kui Zhangge, a scholar of the State Anthology, to tell Yan Si to retain him.

古文：复命集传旨曰： 卿且暂还，行召卿矣。 
现代文：赡思坚决以母亲年老辞谢，朝廷赐与他银两遣送返乡。帝再次命虞集转告赡思： 卿暂且回去，帝很快将召卿回来。 
English: Yan Si resolutely thanked his mother for her old age, and the court gave him two pieces of silver to send him back to his hometown. The emperor once again told Yan Si: Sir, go back for the time being, the emperor will soon call Sir back.

古文：至顺四年，除国子博士，丁内艰，不赴。
现代文：至顺四年，升为国子博士，因母丧，未赴任。
English: In the following four years, he was promoted to Dr. Kuniko, but due to his mother's death, he did not take up the post.

古文：后至元三年，拜陕西行台监察御史，即上封事十条，曰：法祖宗，揽权纲，敦宗室，礼勋旧，惜名器，开言路，复科举，罢数军，一刑章，宽禁网。
现代文：后至元二年任陕西行台监察御史，赡思呈上十条建议：效法祖宗，统揽大权，整顿皇室，尊重功臣，珍重封制，广开言路，恢复科举，裁减军旅，统一刑制，放宽禁令。
English: Later, in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went to Shaanxi and Taiwan to supervise the imperial history, and presented ten suggestions: follow the example of the ancestors, control the power, rectify the royal family, respect the heroes, cherish the sealing system, broaden the way of speech, restore the imperial examination, reduce the military brigade, unify the criminal system, and relax the ban.

古文：时奸臣变乱成宪，帝方虚己以听，赡思所言，皆一时群臣所不敢言者。
现代文：当时奸臣破坏了法制，顺帝正虚心听取大臣建议。赡思陈述建议都是各大臣不敢讲的。
English: At that time, the treacherous vassal had destroyed the legal system, and Emperor Shun was humbly listening to the minister's suggestion. The ministers dared not speak out against the proposal.

古文：侍御史赵承庆见之，叹曰： 御史言及此，天下福也。 
现代文：侍御史赵承庆见到赡思感慨地说： 御史能够说这些话，是天下人之福啊。 
English: Zhao Chengqing, the attendant of the imperial historian, said with emotion when he saw Yanzi: It is a blessing for the whole world that the imperial historian can say these words.

古文：戚里有执政陕西行省者，恣为非道，赡思发其罪而按之，辄弃职夜遁。
现代文：帝的外戚中有位在陕西行省做官的，为非作歹，赡思要办他的罪，他弃官连夜逃走了。
English: One of the emperor's relatives, who was an official in the province of Shaanxi, resigned his post and fled overnight.

古文：会有诏勿逮问，然犹杖其私人。
现代文：恰巧有诏令不要逮捕法办他，但赡思仍然打了他的家臣的板子。
English: Coincidentally, there was a decree not to arrest and prosecute him, but Yan Si still beat the board of his vassal.

古文：及分巡云南，按省臣之不法者，其人即解印以去，远藩为之震悚。
现代文：赡思去云南巡视，审察省臣中不法的官员时，该官员弃印而去，远方其他的藩臣都为之震惊。
English: When Yan Si went to Yunnan to inspect and investigate the illegal officials among the provincial ministers, the official abandoned the seal and left, and the other far-away ministers were shocked.

古文：襄、汉流民，聚居宋之绍熙府故地，至数千户，私开盐井，自相部署，往往劫囚徒，杀巡卒，赡思乃擒其魁，而释其党。
现代文：襄汉一带流民数千户，聚居宋之绍熙府故地，私开盐井，常常劫走囚犯，杀害巡逻兵卒，赡思捕获他们的头目，释放其他追随者。
English: Thousands of families of exiles in the area of Xianghan gathered in the former place of Song's Shaoxi Prefecture, opened private salt wells, often kidnapped prisoners, killed patrolling soldiers, supported the capture of their leaders, and released other followers.

古文：复上言： 绍熙土饶利厚，流户日增，若以其人散还本籍，恐为边患，宜设官府以抚定之。 
现代文：同时向上禀报 ：绍熙土饶利厚，流民日益增多，如将这些人遣散回原籍，会危害边境治安，应设官府抚爱安定他们。 
English: At the same time, it was reported to the upper echelons that the land of Shaoxi was rich and bountiful, and the number of displaced people was increasing. If these people were to be sent back to their place of origin, it would endanger border security, and a government office should be set up to care for and stabilize them.

古文：诏即其地置绍熙宣抚司。
现代文：诏令在该地设置绍熙宣抚司。
English: The imperial edict set up the Shaoxi Propaganda and Guidance Bureau in the area.

古文：枢密判官曰： 平反活人，阴德也。
现代文：至元三年任浙西肃政廉访司佥事，刚到任就查问赃官罪行。浙右郡县的官吏无一人敢贪财。接着又查问浙右的僧人寺院，私藏刁民，有道人、道民、行童，这些都是亵渎人伦，逃避徭役，耗费百姓资财的。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhe Xi Su Zheng Lian was appointed to investigate the eunuchs. As soon as he took office, he investigated the eunuchs' crimes. None of the officials in the counties and counties on the right side of Zhejiang dared to be greedy for money. Next, he also investigated the monks and temples on the right side of Zhejiang, the private Tibetans, the Taoists, the Taoists, and the peddlers, all of which were desecrating human ethics, evading eunuchs, and consuming the people's resources.

古文：御史勿执常法。 
现代文：仅嘉兴一路违法者达二千七百人。
English: In Jiaxing alone, the number of violators reached 2,700.

古文：赡思曰： 是谓故出人罪，非平反也。
现代文：于是朝廷采纳了赡思的建议，勒令这些人回本族，有利于交税，这样可减轻人民负担。
English: As a result, the imperial court adopted the suggestion of Yan Si, ordering these people to return to their own people, which is conducive to paying taxes, thus reducing the burden on the people.

古文：且公欲种阴德于生者，奈死者何！ 
现代文：至元四年又改任浙东肃政廉访司佥事，因病未赴任。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the East Zhejiang Su Zheng Lian Visitation Division, but he did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：乃独上议刑部，卒正娥罪。其审刑当罪多类此。
现代文：赡思历任台臣，都以理清冤案施仁政为己任，先后数次平反大刑之狱，但从未故意给人定罪或徇私枉法。
English: All successive ministers of the Tai Dynasty have taken it as their duty to clarify unjust cases and implement benevolent policies, and have successively rehabilitated several large-scale prison sentences, but they have never intentionally convicted people or abused the law for personal gain.

古文：至正四年，除江东肃政廉访副使。
现代文：至正四年升为江东肃政廉访副使。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of Jiangdong Sui Dynasty in the fourth year of Zheng He.

古文：十年，召为秘书少监，议治河事，皆辞疾不赴。
现代文：至正十年召为秘书少监，参与治河之事，他都以病辞职，未赴任。
English: Until the tenth year of the year, he was called to be the secretary of the junior superintendent and participated in river control. He resigned due to illness and did not take up the post.

古文：十一年，卒于家，年七十有四。
现代文：十一年卒于家中，终年七十四岁。
English: He died at home eleven years later, aged seventy-four.

古文：二十五年，皇太子抚军冀宁，承制封拜，赠嘉议大夫、礼部尚书、上轻车都尉，追封恒山郡侯，谥曰文孝。
现代文：至正二十五年皇太子抚军冀宁，按祖制封拜，赠赡思嘉议大夫、礼部尚书、上轻车都尉，追封恒山郡侯，谥号文孝。
English: In the 25th year of the Ming Dynasty, the crown prince Fuzhongjun Jining, according to the ancestral system of worship, awarded the title of Sijia consultation doctor, the etiquette department of Shangshu, the light truck captain, the title of Hengshan County Marquis, and the nickname of Wenxiao.

古文：赡思邃于经，而《易》学尤深，至于天文、地理、钟律、算数、水利，旁及外国之书，皆究极之。
现代文：赡思精于经学，对易学造诣尤深。至于天文、地理、音律、算数、水利，以至外国的书，都有深刻的研究。
English: As for astronomy, geography, music, arithmetic, water conservancy, and even foreign books, there are profound studies.

古文：家贫，饘粥或不继，其考订经传，常自乐也。
现代文：家贫穷，以粥充饥有时还要断炊。他在考证修订经传时，常常是自得其乐。
English: His family was poor, and he ate porridge to stave off hunger and sometimes had to stop cooking. When he was researching and revising scriptures, he often enjoyed himself.

古文：所著述有《四书阙疑》、《五经思问》、《奇偶阴阳消息图》、《老庄精诣》、《镇阳风土记》、《续东阳志》、《重订河防通议》、《西国图经》、《西域异人传》、《金哀宗记》、《正大诸臣列传》、《审听要诀》，及文集三十卷，藏于家。
现代文：著述有《四书阙疑》、《五经思问》、《奇偶阴阳消息图》、《老庄精诣》、《镇阳风土记》、《续东阳志》、《重订河防通议》、《西国图经》、《西域异人传》、《金哀宗记》、《正大诸臣列传》、《审听要诀》及文集三十卷，藏于家。
English: He is the author of "Four Books of Doubts," "Five Classics of Thought," "Peculiarities of Yin and Yang," "Laoshuang Jingyao," "Zhenyang Style and Geography," "Continuation of Dongyang History," "Renewal of the Hefen General Debate," "Sai Guo Zhu Jing," "Western Inhumans," "Golden Sorrow," "List of Zhengda's Ministers," "Key to Listening" and thirty volumes of anthologies, which are kept at home.

