古文：御史大夫韩安国者，梁成安人也，後徙睢阳。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国，是梁国成安县人，后适居睢阳。
English: Master of History Han An Guo, a native of Liang Guo Cheng'an County, later settled in Fenyang.

古文：尝受韩子、杂家说於驺田生所。事梁孝王为中大夫。
现代文：曾经在邹县田先生之处学习《韩非子》和杂家的学说。事奉梁孝王，担任中大夫。
English: He once studied "Hanfizi" and the teachings of the miscellaneous family from Mr. Zou Xian Tian. He served Liang Xiao Wang as a junior doctor.

古文：吴楚反时，孝王使安国及张羽为将，扞吴兵於东界。
现代文：吴楚七国叛乱的时候，梁孝王派韩安国和张羽担任将军，在东线抵御吴国的军队。
English: When the seven kingdoms of Wu-Chu rebelled, Liang Xiaowang sent Han'an and Zhang Yu as generals to resist Wu's army on the eastern front.

古文：张羽力战，安国持重，以故吴不能过梁。
现代文：因为张羽奋力作战，韩安国稳固防守，因此吴军不能越国梁国的防线。
English: Because Zhang Yu fought hard and Han'an defended firmly, the Wu army could not cross the defense line of Liang Guo.

古文：吴楚已破，安国、张羽名由此显。
现代文：吴楚叛乱平息，韩安国和张羽的名声从此显扬。
English: The Wu-Chu Rebellion subsided, and the fame of Han'an and Zhangyu became prominent.

古文：梁孝王，景帝母弟，窦太后爱之，令得自请置相、二千石，出入游戏，僭於天子。
现代文：梁孝王，是汉景帝的同母弟弟，窦太后很喜欢他，允许他有自己推举梁国国相和二千石级官员人选的权力。
English: Liang Xiao Wang was the younger half-brother of Emperor Han Jing. Empress Dowager Dou liked him very much and allowed him to have the power to nominate Liang Guo Guo Guo and two thousand stone-level officials.

古文：天子闻之，心弗善也。
现代文：他进出、游戏的排场，比拟天子，超越了人臣的本分。
English: He went in and out of the game, compared to the son of heaven, and exceeded the duties of a vassal.

古文：太后知帝不善，乃怒梁使者，弗见，案责王所为。
现代文：景帝听说后，心中很不高兴。窦太后知道景帝不满，就迁怒于梁国派来的使者，拒绝接见他们，而向他们查问责备梁王的所作所为。
English: When Emperor Jing heard of this, he was very displeased. Empress Dowager Dou, knowing that Emperor Jing was displeased, took umbrage at the envoys sent by Liang, refused to meet with them, and asked them to investigate the actions of King Liang.

古文：韩安国为梁使，见大长公主而泣曰： 何梁王为人子之孝，为人臣之忠，太后曾弗省也？
现代文：当时韩安国是梁国的使者，便去进见大长公主，哭着说： 为什么太后对于梁王作为儿子的孝心、作为臣下的忠心，竟然不能明察呢？
English: At that time, Han An Guo was the envoy of Liang Guo, so he went to see the eldest princess, crying and saying: Why can't the empress dowager see Liang Wang's filial piety as a son and his loyalty as a vassal?

古文：夫前日吴、楚、齐、赵七国反时，自关以东皆合从西乡，惟梁最亲为艰难。
现代文：从前吴、楚、齐、赵等七国叛乱时，从函谷关以东的诸侯都联合起来向西进军，只有梁国最忠于朝廷，成为叛军进攻的阻难。
English: In the past, when Wu, Chu, Qi, Zhao and other seven states rebelled, all the states east of the Hangeul Pass united to march westward. Only Liang Province was most loyal to the imperial court and became an obstacle to the rebel army's attack.

古文：梁王念太后、帝在中，而诸侯扰乱，一言泣数行下，跪送臣等六人，将兵击卻吴楚，吴楚以故兵不敢西，而卒破亡，梁王之力也。
现代文：梁王想到太后和皇上在关中，而诸侯作乱，一谈起这件事，眼泪就一行行流下，跪着送我等六人，领兵击退吴楚叛军，吴楚叛军也因为这个缘故不敢向西进军，而终于失败灭亡，这都是梁王的力量啊。
English: King Liang thought of the empress dowager and the emperor in the middle of the pass, while the lords were making trouble. As soon as he talked about this matter, tears streamed down his face. He kneeled down and sent me and six others to lead the troops to repel the Wuchu rebels. Because of this, the Wuchu rebels did not dare to march westward, and finally failed and perished. This was all the power of King Liang.

古文：今太后以小节苛礼责望梁王。
现代文：现在太后却为了一些苛细的礼节责怪抱怨梁王。
English: Now the empress dowager is blaming and complaining to Liang Wang for some harsh etiquette.

古文：梁王父兄皆帝王，所见者大，故出称跸，入言警，车旗皆帝所赐也，即欲以侘鄙县，驱驰国中，以夸诸侯，令天下尽知太后、帝爱之也。
现代文：梁王的父兄都是皇帝，所见的场面很大，因此出行开路清道，禁止人们通行，回宫强调戒备，梁王的车子、旗帜都是皇帝所赏赐的，他就是想用这些在边远的小县炫耀，在国中让车马来回奔驰，让天下的人都知道太后和皇帝喜爱他。
English: Liang Wang's father and brother were emperors, and the scene he saw was very big. Therefore, he traveled on a clear road, forbidding people to pass, and returning to the palace to emphasize vigilance. Liang Wang's car and flag were given by the emperor. He just wanted to use these to show off in the remote counties, and let the car and horse race back and forth in the country, so that everyone in the world would know that the empress dowager and the emperor loved him.

古文：今梁使来，辄案责之。
现代文：现在梁使到来，就查问责备。
English: Now that the envoy has arrived, we are ready to hold him accountable.

古文：梁王恐，日夜涕泣思慕，不知所为。
现代文：梁王恐惧，日夜流泪思念，不知如何是好。
English: Liang Wang was terrified, day and night he shed tears thinking about her, he didn't know what to do.

古文：何梁王之为子孝，为臣忠，而太后弗恤也？ 
现代文：为什么梁王作为儿子孝顺，作为臣下忠心，而太后竟不怜惜呢？ 
English: Why was King Liang dutiful as a son and loyal as a vassal, but the empress dowager did not pity him?

古文：大长公主具以告太后，太后喜曰： 为言之帝。 
现代文：大长公主把这些话详细地告诉了窦太后，窦太后高兴地说： 我要替他把这些话告诉皇帝。 
English: The eldest princess told the Empress Dowager Dou these words in detail, and the Empress Dowager Dou said happily, "I will tell the emperor these words for him."

古文：言之，帝心乃解，而免冠谢太后曰： 兄弟不能相教，乃为太后遗忧。 
现代文：转告之后，景帝内心的疙瘩才解开，而且摘下帽子向太后认错说： 我们兄弟间不能互相劝教，竟给太后您增添了忧愁。 
English: It was only after he had relayed the message that the knot in Emperor Jing's heart was loosened, and he took off his hat to confess his mistake to the Empress Dowager, saying, "We brothers cannot persuade each other, and you have added sorrow to the Empress Dowager.

古文：悉见梁使，厚赐之。
现代文：于是接见了梁王派来的所有使者，重重地赏赐了他们。
English: So he received all the emissaries sent by King Liang and rewarded them generously.

古文：其後梁王益亲驩。
现代文：从这以后梁王更加受宠爱了。
English: From then on, Liang Wang became even more beloved.

古文：太后、长公主更赐安国可直千馀金。
现代文：窦太后、大长公主再赏赐韩安国价值约千余金的财物。
English: Empress Dowager Dou and the eldest princess then rewarded Hanan with property worth more than 1,000 gold.

古文：名由此显，结於汉。
现代文：他的名声因此显著，和朝廷有了联系。
English: As a result, his reputation became prominent and he was linked to the imperial court.

古文：其後安国坐法抵罪，蒙狱吏田甲辱安国。
现代文：后来韩安国因犯法被判罪，蒙县的狱吏田甲侮辱韩安国。
English: Later, Han'an Guo was found guilty of breaking the law, and the warden of Meng County, Tian Jia, insulted Han'an Guo.

古文：安国曰： 死灰独不复然乎？ 
现代文：韩安国说： 死灰难道就不会复燃吗？ 
English: Han An Guo said: Won't the ashes of the dead be rekindled?

古文：田甲曰： 然即溺之。 
现代文：田甲说： 要是再燃烧就撒一泡尿浇灭它。 
English: Tian Jia said: If it burns again, sprinkle a little urine on it to put it out.

古文：居无何，梁内史缺，汉使使者拜安国为梁内史，起徒中为二千石。
现代文：过了不久，梁国内史的职位空缺，汉朝廷派使者任命韩安国为梁国内史，从囚徒中起家担任二千石级的官员。
English: Soon after, the position of Liang Guozhongshi became vacant, and the Han court sent an envoy to appoint Han An Guo as Liang Guozhongshi, and he started as a prisoner and served as an official of 2,000 koku.

古文：田甲亡走。
现代文：田甲弃官逃跑了。
English: Tago deserted and ran away.

古文：安国曰： 甲不就官，我灭而宗。 
现代文：韩安国说： 田甲不回来就任，我就要灭掉你的宗族。 
English: Han An Guo said: If Tian Jia does not return to take office, I will exterminate your clan.

古文：甲因肉袒谢。
现代文：田甲便脱衣露胸前去谢罪。
English: Tian Jia Ben stripped off and bared his chest to atone for his sins.

古文：安国笑曰： 可溺矣！
现代文：韩安国笑着说： 你可以撒尿了！
English: Han An Guo said with a smile: You can pee now!

古文：公等足与治乎？ 
现代文：像你们这些人值得我惩办吗？ 
English: Do people like you deserve to be punished?

古文：卒善遇之。
现代文：最后友好地对待他。
English: Finally, treat him kindly.

古文：梁内史之缺也，孝王新得齐人公孙诡，说之，欲请以为内史。
现代文：梁国内史空缺之际，梁孝王刚刚延揽来齐人公孙诡，很喜欢他，打算请求任命他为内史。
English: At the time of the vacancy in Liang's internal history, Liang Xiaowang had just recruited the Qizhen Gongsun Qi, liked him very much, and planned to request that he be appointed as internal history.

古文：窦太后闻，乃诏王以安国为内史。
现代文：窦太后听到了，于是就命令梁孝王任命韩安国做内史。
English: Empress Dowager Dou heard this and ordered Liang Xiaowang to appoint Han'an as the internal historian.

古文：公孙诡、羊胜说孝王求为帝太子及益地事，恐汉大臣不听，乃阴使人刺汉用事谋臣。
现代文：公孙诡、羊胜游说梁孝王，要求他向汉景帝请求做皇位继承人和增加封地的事情，恐怕朝廷大臣不肯答应就暗地里派人行刺当权的谋臣。
English: Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng lobbied Liang Xiao Wang, asking him to ask Emperor Han Jing to be the heir to the throne and to increase the fief. I am afraid that the minister of the court would not agree to secretly send people to assassinate the strategist in power.

古文：及杀故吴相袁盎，景帝遂闻诡、胜等计画，乃遣使捕诡、胜，必得。
现代文：以至杀害了原吴国国相袁盎，景帝便听到了公孙诡、羊胜等人的谋划，于是派使者务必捉拿到公孙诡、羊胜。
English: He even killed Yuan Ang, the former governor of Wu, and Emperor Jing heard about the plans of Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng, so he sent an envoy to capture Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng.

古文：汉使十辈至梁，相以下举国大索，月馀不得。
现代文：汉派使者十几批来到梁国，自梁国国相以下全国大搜查，一个多月还是没有抓到。
English: More than a dozen groups of Chinese envoys came to Liangguo. After a nationwide search, including Liangguo's minister of state, they were not caught for more than a month.

古文：内史安国闻诡、胜匿孝王所，安国入见王而泣曰： 主辱臣死。
现代文：内史韩安国听到公孙诡、羊胜隐藏在梁孝王宫中，韩安国入宫进见梁孝王，哭着说： 主上受到耻辱臣下罪当该死。
English: Internal history Han'an heard that Gongsun Zhe and Yang Sheng were hidden in the palace of Liang Xiao Wang. Han'an went to the palace to see Liang Xiao Wang and cried and said, "The lord is humiliated and the vassal deserves to die."

古文：大王无良臣，故事纷纷至此。
现代文：大王没有好的臣下所以事情才紊乱到这种地步。
English: The king doesn't have good vassals, that's why things are so messed up.

古文：今诡、胜不得，请辞赐死。 
现代文：现在既然抓不到公孙诡、羊胜，请让我向您辞别，并赐我自杀。 
English: Now that I can't catch Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng, please let me say goodbye to you and let me commit suicide.

古文：王曰： 何至此？ 
现代文：梁孝王说： 你何必这样呢？ 
English: Liang Xiaowang said, "Why do you have to do this?

古文：安国泣数行下，曰： 大王自度於皇帝，孰与太上皇之与高皇帝及皇帝之与临江王亲？ 
现代文：韩安国眼泪滚滚而下，说道： 大王自己考虑一下，您与皇上的关系比起太上皇与高皇帝以及皇上与临江王，哪个更亲密呢？ 
English: Tears rolling down his face, Han An Guo said, "Great King, consider for yourself, which relationship between you and the Emperor is closer than that between the Emperor and Emperor Gao, or between the Emperor and the King of Linjiang?

古文：孝王曰： 弗如也。 
现代文：梁孝王说： 比不上他们亲密。 
English: Liang Xiaowang said: They are not as close as others.

古文：安国曰： 夫太上、临江亲父子之间，然而高帝曰 提三尺剑取天下者朕也 ，故太上皇终不得制事，居于栎阳。
现代文：梁孝王说： 太上皇、临江王与高皇帝、皇上都是父子之间的关系，但是高皇帝说： 拿着三尺宝剑夺取天下的人是我啊 ，所以太上皇最终也不能过问政事，住在栎阳宫。
English: Liang Xiaowang said, "Emperor Taizong and King Linjiang and Emperor Gao and Emperor Gao are all father-son relationships, but Emperor Gao said, "I am the one who took the Three-Foot Sword to conquer the world," so Emperor Taizong could not interfere in politics and lived in Shenyang Palace.

古文：临江王，適长太子也，以一言过，废王临江；用宫垣事，卒自杀中尉府。
现代文：临江王是嫡长太子，只因为他母亲一句话的过错就被废黜降为临江王；又因建宫室时侵占了祖庙墙内空地的事，终于自杀于中尉府中。
English: King Linjiang was the eldest son of the crown prince. He was dethroned and demoted to King Linjiang because of his mother's one-sentence mistake. He also occupied a vacant space within the walls of the ancestral temple during the construction of the palace, and finally committed suicide in the lieutenant's residence.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：治天下终不以私乱公。
现代文：因为治理天下终究不能因私情而损害公事。
English: After all, the governance of the world cannot be compromised by private interests.

古文：语曰： 虽有亲父，安知其不为虎？
现代文：欲话说： 即使是亲生父亲，怎么知道他不会变成老虎？
English: He wanted to say, "Even if he is your biological father, how do you know he won't turn into a tiger?"

古文：虽有亲兄，安知其不为狼？ 
现代文：即使是亲兄弟怎么知道他不会变成恶狼？ 
English: How does even a brother know he won't turn into a wolf?

古文：今大王列在诸侯，悦一邪臣浮说，犯上禁，桡明法。
现代文：现在大王您位列诸侯，却听信一个邪恶臣子的虚妄言论，违反了皇上的禁令，阻挠了圣明的法律。
English: Now that you, the great king, have ascended to the throne, you have listened to the false words of an evil vassal, violated the emperor's ban, and thwarted the sacred law.

古文：天子以太后故，不忍致法於王。
现代文：皇上因为太后的缘故，不忍心用法令来对付您。
English: The Emperor, for the sake of the Empress Dowager, cannot bear to use the law against you.

古文：太后日夜涕泣，幸大王自改，而大王终不觉寤。
现代文：太后日夜哭泣，希望大王能自己改过，可是大王始终不觉悟。
English: The empress dowager cried day and night, hoping that the great king would change his ways, but the great king never came to his senses.

古文：有如太后宫车即晏驾，大王尚谁攀乎？ 
现代文：假如太后突然逝世，大王您还能依靠谁呢？ 
English: If the empress dowager were to die suddenly, whom would you be able to rely on?

古文：语未卒，孝王泣数行下，谢安国曰： 吾今出诡、胜。 
现代文：话还没有说完，梁孝王痛哭流涕，感谢韩安国说： 我现在就交出公孙诡、羊胜。 
English: Before the speech was over, Liang Xiaowang burst into tears and thanked Han Anguo, saying, "I will now hand over Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng."

古文：诡、胜自杀。
现代文：公孙诡、羊胜两人自杀。
English: Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng both committed suicide.

古文：汉使还报，梁事皆得释，安国之力也。
现代文：汉朝廷的使者回去报告了情况，梁国的事情都得到了解决，这是韩安国的力量啊。
English: The emissary of the Han Dynasty returned to report the situation. Liang's affairs were resolved. This is the strength of Han'an.

古文：於是景帝、太后益重安国。
现代文：于是汉景帝、窦太后更加看重韩安国。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Jing and Empress Dowager Dou placed more importance on Han'an.

古文：孝王卒，共王即位，安国坐法失官，居家。
现代文：梁孝王逝世，恭王即位，韩安国因为犯法丢了官，闲居在家。
English: King Liang Xiao Wang died, King Gong ascended to the throne. Han An Guo lost his official position for breaking the law, and idled at home.

古文：建元中，武安侯田蚡为汉太尉，亲贵用事，安国以五百金物遗蚡。
现代文：建元年间，武安侯田蚡担任汉朝太尉，受宠幸而掌大权，韩安国拿了价值五百金的东西送给田蚡。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, Wu'an Hou Tianyi served as the first lieutenant of the Han Dynasty. He was favored and held great power. Han'an Province gave Tianyi something worth 500 gold.

古文：蚡言安国太后，天子亦素闻其贤，即召以为北地都尉，迁为大司农。
现代文：田蚡向王太后说到韩安国，皇上也常说韩安国的贤能，就把他召来担任北地都尉，后来升为大司农。
English: When Tian Xuan told the empress dowager about Han'an, and the emperor often spoke of Han'an's virtue, he summoned him to serve as the captain of the north, and later he was promoted to the chief farmer.

古文：闽越、东越相攻，安国及大行王恢将。
现代文：闽越、东越互相攻伐，韩安国和大行王恢领兵前往。
English: Yunnan-Vietnam and East-Vietnam fought against each other, and Han'an and Da Xingwang returned to lead the troops.

古文：未至越，越杀其王降，汉兵亦罢。
现代文：还没有到达越地，越人就杀死了他们的国王向汉朝投降，汉军也就收兵了。
English: Before reaching Yueji, the Yue people killed their king and surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Army withdrew.

古文：建元六年，武安侯为丞相，安国为御史大夫。
现代文：建元六年武安侯田蚡担任丞相，韩安国担任御史大夫。
English: In the sixth year of the first year of the Jian Yuan Dynasty, Wu'an Hou Tian Xuan served as chancellor, and Han'an Guo served as minister of history.

古文：匈奴来请和亲，天子下议。
现代文：匈奴派人前来请求和亲，皇上交由朝臣讨论。
English: The Xiongnu sent someone to ask for peace, and the emperor left it to his courtiers to discuss.

古文：大行王恢，燕人也，数为边吏，习知胡事。
现代文：大行令王恢是燕地人，多次出任边郡官吏，熟悉了解匈奴的情况。
English: Wang Huai, the grand marshal, was a native of Yan, had served as a border county official many times, and was familiar with the situation of the Xiongnu.

古文：议曰： 汉与匈奴和亲，率不过数岁即复倍约。
现代文：他议论说： 汉朝和匈奴和亲大抵都过不了几年匈奴就又背弃盟约。
English: He commented: The Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu usually made peace within a few years, but the Xiongnu reneged on the treaty.

古文：不如勿许，兴兵击之。 
现代文：不如不答应，出动军队攻打它。 
English: Better not to agree, but to send troops to attack it.

古文：安国曰： 千里而战，兵不获利。
现代文：韩安国说： 派军队去千里之外作战，不会取得胜利。
English: Han An Guo said: Sending troops to fight thousands of miles away will not achieve victory.

古文：今匈奴负戎马之足，怀禽兽之心，迁徙鸟举，难得而制也。
现代文：现在匈奴依仗军马的充足，怀着禽兽般的心肠，迁移如同群鸟飞翔，很难控制他们。
English: Now the Huns rely on the abundance of war horses, with a heart like a beast, migrate like birds fly, it is difficult to control them.

古文：得其地不足以为广，有其众不足以为彊，自上古不属为人。
现代文：我们得到它的土地也不能算开疆拓土，拥有了他的百姓也不能算强大，从上古起他们就不属于我们的百姓。
English: If we get his land, we cannot be considered as expanding our territory, and if we have his people, we cannot be considered as powerful. They have not belonged to our people since ancient times.

古文：汉数千里争利，则人马罢，虏以全制其敝。
现代文：汉军到几千里以外去争夺利益，那就会人马疲惫，敌人就会凭借全面的优势攻击我们的弱点。
English: If the Chinese army goes thousands of miles away to fight for interests, it will be exhausted, and the enemy will attack our weaknesses with comprehensive advantages.

古文：且强弩之极，矢不能穿鲁缟；冲风之末，力不能漂鸿毛。非初不劲，末力衰也。
现代文：况且强弩之末连鲁地所产的最薄的白绢也射不穿；从下往上刮的强风，到了最后，连飘起雁毛的力量都没有了，并不是开始时力量不强，而是最后力量衰竭了。
English: Moreover, at the end of a strong gale, even the thinnest egrets produced in the Lu region could not be shot; a strong wind blowing from the bottom to the top, at the end, did not even have the power to fly the goose feathers. It was not that the strength was not strong at the beginning, but that the strength finally failed.

古文：击之不便，不如和亲。 
现代文：所以发兵攻打匈奴实在是很不利的，不如跟他们和亲。 
English: Therefore, it is very disadvantageous to send troops to attack the Huns. It is better to make peace with them.

古文：群臣议者多附安国，於是上许和亲。
现代文：群臣的议论多数附合韩安国，于是皇上便同意与匈奴和亲。
English: Most of the discussions among the ministers were in favor of annexing Hanan, so the emperor agreed to make peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：其明年，则元光元年，雁门马邑豪聂翁壹因大行王恢言上曰： 匈奴初和亲，亲信边，可诱以利。 
现代文：和亲的第二年，就是元光元年，雁门郡马邑城的豪绅聂翁壹通过大行王恢告诉皇上说： 匈奴刚与汉和亲，亲近信任边地之民，可以用财利去引诱他们。 
English: In the second year of the peace treaty, that is, in the first year of the Yuan Guang era, the grand gentleman Zou Weng of Mayi City, Yanmen County, told the emperor through Da Xing Wang Wei: The Xiongnu had just made peace with the Han, and they trusted the people in the border areas. They could use their wealth to lure them.

古文：阴使聂翁壹为间，亡入匈奴，谓单于曰： 吾能斩马邑令丞吏，以城降，财物可尽得。 
现代文：于是暗中派遣聂翁壹做间谍，逃到匈奴，对单于说： 我能杀死马邑城的县令县丞等官吏，将马邑城献给您投降，财物可以全部得到。 
English: Therefore, he secretly sent Gao Weng to be a spy, fled to the Huns, and said to Shan Yu, "I can kill Ma'i's county magistrate and other officials, and surrender Ma'i's city to you, and I can get all the property."

古文：单于爱信之，以为然，许聂翁壹。
现代文：单于很信任他，认为他说的有道理，便答应了聂翁壹。
English: Just because I trusted him very much and thought that what he said made sense, I agreed to do it.

古文：聂翁壹乃还，诈斩死罪囚，县其头马邑城，示单于使者为信。
现代文：聂翁壹就回来了，斩了死囚的头，把他的脑袋悬挂在马邑城上，假充是马邑城官吏的头，以取信于单于派来的使者。
English: He returned at once, beheaded the condemned man, and hung his head over the city of May, pretending to be the head of the officials of the city of May, in order to gain the trust of the envoys sent by Shanyu.

古文：曰： 马邑长吏已死，可急来。 
现代文：说道： 马邑城的长官已经死了，你们可以赶快来。 
English: He said, "The magistrate of the city of Mayi is dead. You can come quickly."

古文：於是单于穿塞将十馀万骑，入武州塞。
现代文：于是单于率领十余万骑兵穿过边塞，进入武州塞。
English: So he led more than one hundred thousand cavalry through the border fortress and entered the Wuzhou fortress.

古文：当是时，汉伏兵车骑材官二十馀万，匿马邑旁谷中。
现代文：正在这个时候，汉王朝埋伏了战车、骑兵、步兵三十多万，隐藏在马邑城旁边的山谷中。
English: It was at this time that the Han Dynasty ambushed more than 300,000 chariots, cavalry and infantry, hiding in the valley near the city of Mayi.

古文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军。
现代文：卫尉李广担任骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺担任轻车将军，大行王恢担任将屯将军，太中大夫李息担任材官将军。
English: Guardsman Li Guang served as the cavalry general, the eunuch Gong Sun He served as the light vehicle general, Da Xing Wang Wei served as the general of the garrison, and the eunuch doctor Li Xi served as the general of the material officer.

古文：御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，诸将皆属护军。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国担任护军将军，诸位将军都隶属护军将军。
English: Chief Historian Han An Guo served as the escort general, and all of you generals are subordinate to the escort general.

古文：约单于入马邑而汉兵纵发。
现代文：互相约定，单于进入马邑城时汉军的伏兵就奔驰出击。
English: It was mutually agreed that as soon as the Chinese army entered the city of Mayi, the ambush troops would attack.

古文：王恢、李息、李广别从代主击其辎重。
现代文：王恢、李息、李广另外从代郡主攻匈奴的军用物资。
English: Wang Huan, Li Xiu and Li Guang were also in charge of the military supplies to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：於是单于入汉长城武州塞。
现代文：当时单于进入汉长城武州塞。
English: At that time, it only entered the Han Great Wall at Wuzhou.

古文：未至马邑百馀里，行掠卤，徒见畜牧於野，不见一人。
现代文：距离马邑城还有一百多里，将要抢夺劫掠，可是只看见牲畜放养在荒野之中，却见不到一个人。
English: It was still more than a hundred miles away from the city of Mayi, and they were going to rob and plunder, but they only saw livestock grazing in the wilderness, but not a single person.

古文：单于怪之，攻烽燧，得武州尉史。
现代文：单于觉得很奇怪，就攻打烽火台，俘虏了武州的尉史。
English: Just because he thought it was strange, he attacked Bonfire Tower and captured the lieutenant of Wuzhou.

古文：欲刺问尉史。
现代文：想向尉史探问情况。
English: I'd like to ask First Lieutenant Shi about the situation.

古文：尉史曰： 汉兵数十万伏马邑下。 
现代文：尉史说： 汉军有几十万人埋伏在马邑城下。 
English: "Hundreds of thousands of Chinese troops are lying in ambush under the city of Ma'i," he said.

古文：单于顾谓左右曰： 几为汉所卖！ 
现代文：单于回过头来对左右人员说： 差点儿被汉所欺骗！ 
English: He only turned around and said to the people around him, "I was almost deceived by Han!"

古文：乃引兵还。
现代文：就带领部队回去了。
English: So he returned alone with his army.

古文：出塞，曰： 吾得尉史，乃天也。 
现代文：出了边塞，说： 我们捉到武州尉史，真是天意啊！ 
English: They came out of the border fortress and said: "We have captured Lieutenant Wuchuan Shi, it's really God's will!"

古文：命尉史为 天王 。
现代文：称尉史为 天王 。
English: He was called "Tenno" by his subordinates.

古文：塞下传言单于已引去。
现代文：塞下传说单于已经退兵回去。
English: The rumor is that he has already left the army and returned.

古文：汉兵追至塞，度弗及，即罢。
现代文：汉军追到边塞，估计追不上了，就撤退回来了。
English: The Han troops chased them to the border fortress, and when they could not catch up with them, they retreated back.

古文：王恢等兵三万，闻单于不与汉合，度往击辎重，必与单于精兵战，汉兵势必败，则以便宜罢兵，皆无功。
现代文：王恢等人的部队三万人，听说单于没有跟汉军交战，估计攻打匈奴的军用物资，一定会与单于的精兵交战，汉兵的形势一定失败，于是权衡利害而决定撤兵，所以汉军都无功而返。
English: Wang Hui and others had 30,000 troops. It was said that they did not fight against the Chinese army alone. It was estimated that if they attacked the military supplies of the Xiongnu, they would certainly fight against the elite soldiers alone. The situation of the Chinese soldiers would certainly fail. Therefore, they weighed the interests and decided to withdraw, so the Chinese army returned without success.

古文：天子怒王恢不出击单于辎重，擅引兵罢也。
现代文：天子恼怒王恢不攻击匈奴的后勤部队，擅自领兵撤回。
English: Enraged by the gods, Wang Wei did not attack the Hun's logistics force and withdrew his troops without permission.

古文：恢曰： 始约虏入马邑城，兵与单于接，而臣击其辎重，可得利。
现代文：王恢说： 当初约定匈奴一进入马邑城，汉军就与单于交战，而后我的部队攻取匈奴的军用物资，这样才有利可图。
English: Wang Kailai said: It was originally agreed that as soon as the Huns entered the city of Mayi, the Chinese army would engage with the Chinese army, and then my troops would capture the military supplies of the Huns, so that it would be profitable.

古文：今单于闻，不至而还，臣以三万人众不敌，礻是取辱耳。
现代文：现在单于听到了消息，没有到达马邑城就回去了，我那三万人的部队抵不过他，只会招致耻辱。
English: Now, merely on hearing the news, he has returned without having reached the city of May, and my thirty thousand troops cannot reach him, which will only bring disgrace.

古文：臣固知还而斩，然得完陛下士三万人。 
现代文：我本来就知道回来就会被杀头，但是这样可以保全陛下的军士三万人。 
English: I knew that if I came back I would be killed, but this way I can save your Majesty's thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：於是下恢廷尉。
现代文：皇上于是把王恢交给廷尉治罪。
English: The emperor then handed Wang Wei over to a courtier to be punished.

古文：廷尉当恢逗桡，当斩。
现代文：廷尉判他曲行避敌观望不前，应当杀头。
English: The courtier sentenced him to dodge, avoid the enemy and wait, and he should be beheaded.

古文：恢私行千金丞相蚡。
现代文：王恢暗中送给了田蚡一千金。
English: Wang Hui secretly gave Tian Yao 1000 gold.

古文：蚡不敢言上，而言於太后曰： 王恢首造马邑事，今不成而诛恢，是为匈奴报仇也。 
现代文：田蚡不敢向皇帝求情，而对王太后说道： 王恢首先倡议马邑诱敌之计，如今没有成功而杀了王恢，这是替匈奴报仇。 
English: Tian Xuan did not dare to plead with the emperor, but said to the Queen Mother: Wang Huai first proposed a plan to lure the enemy, and now he killed Wang Huai without success. This was revenge for the Xiongnu.

古文：上朝太后，太后以丞相言告上。
现代文：皇上朝见王太后时，王太后就把丞相的话告诉了皇上。
English: When the emperor met the empress dowager, the empress dowager told the emperor what the prime minister had said.

古文：上曰： 首为马邑事者，恢也，故发天下兵数十万，从其言，为此。
现代文：皇上说： 最先倡议马邑之计的人是王恢，所以调动天下士兵几十万人，听从他的话出击匈奴。
English: The emperor said, "The person who first proposed the Ma'yur scheme was Wang Wei, so he mobilized hundreds of thousands of soldiers from all over the world to follow his advice and attack the Xiongnu.

古文：且纵单于不可得，恢所部击其辎重，犹颇可得，以慰士大夫心。
现代文：再说这次即使抓不到单于，如果王恢的部队攻击匈奴的军用物资，也还很可能有些收获，以此来安慰将士们的心。
English: Besides, this time, even if they couldn't catch Zhan Yu, if Wang Hui's troops attacked the military supplies of the Xiongnu, there would probably be some gains to comfort the hearts of the soldiers.

古文：今不诛恢，无以谢天下。 
现代文：现在不杀王恢就无法向天下人谢罪。 
English: If you don't kill Wang Wei now, you won't be able to apologize to the world.

古文：於是恢闻之，乃自杀。
现代文：当时王恢听到了这话就自杀了。
English: When Wang Hui heard this, he committed suicide.

古文：安国为人多大略，智足以当世取合，而出於忠厚焉。
现代文：韩安国为人有大韬略，他的才智足够迎合世俗，可是他这样做都处于忠厚之心。
English: Han An Guo is a man of great tact, his talent is enough to cater to the world, but he does so in a loyal heart.

古文：贪嗜於财。
现代文：他贪嗜钱财。
English: He is greedy for money.

古文：所推举皆廉士，贤於己者也。
现代文：他所推荐的都是廉洁的士人，比他自己贤能。
English: Those he recommended were all incorruptible scholars, more virtuous than himself.

古文：於梁举壶遂、臧固、郅他，皆天下名士，士亦以此称慕之，唯天子以为国器。
现代文：在梁国推荐了壶遂、臧固、郅他，都是天下的名士，士人因此也对他很称道和仰慕，就是天子也认为他是治国之才。
English: In Liang Province, Jinsui, Zenggu, Zang and others were all famous people in the world. Therefore, the scholars also praised and admired him very much. Even the Son of Heaven also thought that he was a talent for governing the country.

古文：安国为御史大夫四岁馀，丞相田蚡死，安国行丞相事，奉引堕车蹇。
现代文：韩安国担任御史大夫四年多，丞相田蚡去世，韩安国代理丞相的职务，给皇帝导引车驾时跌下了车，跛了脚。
English: Han An Guo served as the imperial historian for more than four years. When the prime minister, Tian Ye, died, Han An Guo, acting as the prime minister, fell off the car while driving the guide car for the emperor and broke his foot.

古文：天子议置相，欲用安国，使使视之，蹇甚，乃更以平棘侯薛泽为丞相。
现代文：天子商量任命丞相，打算任用韩安国，派人去看望他，发现他脚跛得很厉害，于是改用平棘侯薛泽担任丞相。
English: Tianzi discussed the appointment of the prime minister, and planned to appoint Han Anguo. He sent someone to visit him, and found that his lameness was very severe, so he switched to Pingxian Hou Xueze as the prime minister.

古文：安国病免数月，蹇愈，上复以安国为中尉。
现代文：韩安国因病免职几个月，脚伤好了，皇上又任命韩安国担任中尉。
English: Han An Guo was relieved of duty for a few months due to illness, his foot injury was healed, and the emperor appointed Han An Guo as a lieutenant.

古文：岁馀，徙为卫尉。
现代文：一年多后，调任卫尉。
English: More than a year later, he was transferred to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：车骑将军卫青击匈奴，出上谷，破胡茏城。
现代文：车骑将军卫青攻打匈奴，从上谷郡出塞，在龙城打败了匈奴。
English: The cavalry general Wei Qing attacked the Xiongnu, came out of Shanggu County, and defeated the Xiongnu in Longcheng.

古文：将军李广为匈奴所得，复失之；公孙敖大亡卒：皆当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：将军李广被匈奴俘虏，又逃脱了；公孙敖的士兵伤亡很大；他们都该杀头，后来出钱赎罪成为庶人。
English: General Li Guang was captured by the Xiongnu and escaped again; Gongsun Yao's soldiers suffered heavy casualties; they all had to be beheaded, and later they paid money to atone for their sins and became commoners.

古文：明年，匈奴大入边，杀辽西太守，及入雁门，所杀略数千人。车骑将军卫青击之，出雁门。
现代文：第二年，匈奴大举入侵边境，杀了辽西太守，等到侵入雁门，杀死和掳去几千人，车骑将军卫青出兵追击，从雁门郡出塞。
English: In the second year, the Huns invaded the border on a large scale, killed Liao Xi Taizhong, and invaded Yanmen, killing and kidnapping thousands of people. The cavalry general Wei Qing sent troops to chase them and leave the fortress from Yanmen County.

古文：卫尉安国为材官将军，屯於渔阳。
现代文：卫尉韩安国担任材官将军，驻守在渔阳。
English: Guardsman Han An Guo served as quartermaster general and was stationed in Yuyang.

古文：安国捕生虏，言匈奴远去。
现代文：韩安国抓到俘虏，俘虏供说匈奴已经远远离去。
English: Hanan captured a prisoner, and the prisoner confessed that the Xiongnu had already left far away.

古文：即上书言方田作时，请且罢军屯。
现代文：韩安国立即上书皇帝说现在正是农耕时节，请求暂时停止屯军。
English: Han'an immediately sent a letter to the emperor, saying that it was the farming season, requesting a temporary halt to the troops.

古文：罢军屯月馀，匈奴大入上谷、渔阳。
现代文：停止屯军一个多月，匈奴又大举入侵上谷、渔阳。
English: After more than a month of halting the troops, the Xiongnu once again invaded Shanggu and Yuyang.

古文：安国壁乃有七百馀人，出与战，不胜，复入壁。
现代文：韩安国的军营中仅有七百多人，出迎与匈奴交战，没有取胜，又退回军营中。
English: There were only more than seven hundred people in the military camp of Hanan, who fought against the Xiongnu, did not win, and returned to the military camp.

古文：匈奴虏略千馀人及畜产而去。
现代文：匈奴俘虏掠夺了一千多人和牲畜财物而离去。
English: The Hun prisoners plundered more than a thousand people, livestock and property and left.

古文：天子闻之，怒，使使责让安国。
现代文：天子听到这个消息后，很恼火，派使者责备韩安国。
English: When the emperor heard this news, he was very angry and sent an envoy to reprimand Hanan.

古文：徒安国益东，屯右北平。
现代文：调韩安国更加往东移动，驻守在右北平。
English: He moved Han'an Province further eastward and stationed it in Right Beiping.

古文：是时匈奴虏言当入东方。
现代文：因为当时匈奴的俘虏供说要侵入东方。
English: Because at that time the prisoners of the Huns confessed to wanting to invade the East.

古文：安国始为御史大夫及护军，後稍斥疏，下迁；而新幸壮将军卫青等有功，益贵。
现代文：韩安国当初担任御史大夫和护军将军，后来渐渐被排斥疏远，贬官降职；而新得宠的年青将军卫青等又有军功，更加受到皇上的重用。
English: At first, Han An Guo served as the imperial historian and the general of the military escort. Later, he was gradually ostracized and alienated, demoted and demoted; while the newly favored young general Wei Qing and others had military merits, and were even more heavily used by the emperor.

古文：安国既疏远，默默也；将屯又为匈奴所欺，失亡多，甚自愧。
现代文：韩安国被疏远后，很不得志；领兵驻防又被匈奴所欺侮，损失伤亡很多，内心十分愧疚。
English: After Han'an was alienated, he was very discouraged; the leader of the garrison was bullied by the Xiongnu, there were many losses and casualties, and he felt very guilty.

古文：幸得罢归，乃益东徙屯，意忽忽不乐。
现代文：希望能够回到朝廷，却更被调往东边驻守，心中闷闷不乐。
English: He hoped to be able to return to the imperial court, but instead he was transferred to the east, where he was stationed.

古文：数月，病欧血死。
现代文：过了几个月，生病吐血而死。
English: A few months later, he became ill, vomited blood and died.

古文：安国以元朔二年中卒。
现代文：韩安国在元朔二年中去世。
English: Han An Guo passed away in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太史公曰：余与壶遂定律历，观韩长孺之义，壶遂之深中隐厚。世之言梁多长者，不虚哉！
现代文：太史公说：我和壶遂审定律历，观察韩长孺的行事得体，从壶遂的深沉含藏厚道来看，世人都说梁国多忠厚长者，这话确实不错啊！
English: Taishikong said, "I and Jug Sui examined the legal documents and observed Han Changtao's behavior properly. Judging from Jug Sui's deep and profound wisdom, the world said that Liang Guo was a very loyal elder. This is indeed a good saying!"

古文：壶遂官至詹事，天子方倚以为汉相，会遂卒。
现代文：壶遂做官做到詹事，天子正要倚仗他来做汉朝丞相，偏偏又碰上壶遂去世。
English: After all, the pot did a good job as an official, and the emperor was about to rely on him to become the prime minister of the Han Dynasty, but he ran into the pot again and died.

古文：不然，壶遂之内廉行脩，斯鞠躬君子也。
现代文：不然的话，以壶遂廉洁的品行和端正的行为，这真是一个谦恭谨慎的君子啊。
English: Otherwise, with his impeccable character and proper behavior, he is truly a modest and prudent gentleman.

