古文：夫性灵之表，不知所以发于咏歌；感动之端，不知所以关于手足。
现代文：性灵的表达，不知为什么就会转为吟咏歌诵；感动的表现，不知为什么就会涉及到手足。
English: The expression of temperament, for some reason, will turn into the chanting of songs; the expression of emotion, for some reason, will involve the limbs.

古文：生于心者谓之道，成于形者谓之用。
现代文：从心裹生发出来的叫做道，在形象上体现出来的叫做用。
English: What emanates from the heart is called the way, and what is embodied in the image is called the use.

古文：譬诸天地，其犹影响，百兽率舞，而况于人乎！美其和平而哀其丧乱，以兹援律，乃播其声焉。
现代文：用这个道理去看天地，那也是有影响的，百兽都一起起舞，何况于人呢赞美和平而为丧乱悲哀，在这样的情况下用到音律，就传播开声音了。
English: Using this principle to look at the heavens and the earth, it is also influential. All the animals dance together, not to mention people. They praise peace and mourn the loss of chaos. In such a situation, when using music, it spreads the sound.

古文：农瑟羲琴，倕钟和磬，达灵成性，象物昭功，由此言之，其来自远。
现代文：神农制瑟伏羲造琴，便作钟，和作磬，表达心灵体现性情，模仿万物昭彰功业，由此说来，它的由来本就很久远。
English: Shennong made the Sefu gong to make the gong, then made the bell, and made the gong to express the soul, embody the disposition, and imitate all things to highlight the work, so its origin is very far away.

古文：殷氏不纲，遗风馀孽，淫奏既兴，雅章奔散，《英》《茎》之制，盖已微矣。
现代文：殷商没有纲纪，遗留下很不好的风气，淫佚的乐曲兴盛之后，典雅的乐章流失散亡，《五英》、《六茎》之类的作品，已经衰微了。
English: Yin merchants had no discipline, leaving behind a very bad culture. After the flourishing of lewd music, the elegant movements were lost and dispersed. Works such as "Five Yings" and "Six Stems" have declined.

古文：孔子曰： 人能弘道，非道弘人。 
现代文：孔子说： 人能弘扬道，不是道弘扬人。 
English: Confucius said: It is not the man who promotes the Way, but the Way that promotes the man.

古文：周始二《南》，《风》兼六代。
现代文：周代开始有二《南》，《国风》兼容六代。
English: Since the beginning of the Zhou dynasty, there have been two "South" and "National Style" compatible with six generations.

古文：昔黄帝作《云门》，尧作《咸池》，舜作《大韶》，禹作《大夏》，殷作《大濩》，周作《大武》，所谓因前王之礼，设俯仰之容，和顺积中，英华发外。
现代文：过去黄帝作《云门》，尧作《咸池》，舜作《大韶》，禹作《大夏》，殷作《大濩》，周作《人武》，所谓承接前代贤王的礼制，制定俯仰举止的仪容，和顺累积在内，英华表现在外。
English: In the past, Huangdi composed "Cloud Gate," Zou composed "Hanchi," Zou composed "Big Dragonfly," Yu composed "Big Summer," Yin composed "Big Dragonfly," Zhou composed "Human Warrior," so-called inheriting the etiquette of the previous kings, formulating the posture of bowing, and accumulating harmony, Yinghua appeared outside.

古文：《书》称命夔典乐，教胄子，则《周官》所谓奏大吕，歌黄钟。
现代文：《尚书》说命令夔掌管音乐，教导贵族子弟，就是《周官》所说的演奏大吕，歌唱黄钟。
English: "Shangshu" said that the order was to take charge of music and teach the children of aristocrats, that is, "Zhou Guan" said to play the big lute and sing the yellow bell.

古文：天贶来下，人祗动色，抑扬周监，以弘雅音。
现代文：上天的恩赐降下来，人们恭敬面色肃穆，继承周代光辉，来弘扬典雅的音乐。
English: As a gift from heaven, people respectfully face solemnity, inherit the glory of generations, and promote elegant music.

古文：及褒艳兴灾，平王逢乱，礼废亲疏，乐沈河海。
现代文：到褒姒艳姬兴起灾祸，平王遭逢乱世，礼制破坏亲人疏远，典雅的音乐沉沦河海。
English: By the time of the rise of Fengxuan Yanji, disaster had struck, Pingwang had fallen into chaos, the etiquette system had been destroyed, relatives had become estranged, and elegant music had sunk into the river and sea.

古文：是以延陵季子闻歌《小雅》曰： 其周德之衰乎！犹有先王之遗风焉。 
现代文：因此延陵季子听到歌唱《小雅》说： 大概是周代德行的衰微吧仍然有先王的遗风在裹面。 
English: Therefore, when Yanling Qizi heard the singing of "Xiao Ya," he said: It is probably the decline of Zhou's virtue, but there is still the legacy of the former king in the face.

古文：而列壤称孤，各兴吟咏。
现代文：而列国称王，兴起各自的音乐。
English: But the nations have become kings, and their own music has arisen.

古文：魏文侯聆古乐而恐卧，晋平公听新声而忘食，先王之道，渐以陵夷。
现代文：魏文侯聆听到古代先王的正乐而生怕会睡下，晋平公听到新的乐曲而忘记了吃饭，先王之道，渐渐因此衰落。
English: Wei Wenhou was afraid of falling asleep when he heard the original music of the ancient king, Jin Ping Gong heard the new music and forgot to eat, and the way of the former king gradually declined.

古文：八方殊风，九州异则。
现代文：八方风俗有别，九州做法不同。
English: The customs of Happo are different, and the practices of Kyushu are different.

古文：秦氏并吞，遂专刑宪，至于弦歌《诗》《颂》，干戚旄羽，投诸烟火，扫地无遗。
现代文：秦氏并吞天下，于是统一法制，至于弦歌《诗。颂》等作品，干戚旄羽等道具，都扔到烟火裹，一点儿也没有遗留下来。
English: The Qin Dynasty swallowed up the whole world, thus unifying the legal system. As for the works such as the stringed song "Poem. Ode" and the tools such as the dried cicadas and feathers, they were all thrown into the firework, and nothing was left behind.

古文：汉祖提剑寰中，削平天下，文匪躬于德化，武有心于制作。
现代文：汉高祖提宝剑起义，平定天下，汉文帝尽心力施行德政教化，汉武帝有心于制礼作乐。
English: Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty took up the sword to put down the rebellion and pacify the world. Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty did his best to carry out the enlightenment of the German government, and Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty was interested in making music.

古文：太后摈儒家之道，大臣排贾氏之言，搢绅先生所以长叹，而子政、仲舒犹不能已也。
现代文：太后槟弃儒家的思想，大臣排斥贾氏之言论，捂绅先生因此长声叹息，而子政、董仲舒仍然不能罢休。
English: Empress Dowager Peng abandoned Confucianism, the minister rejected Mr. Jia's speech, Mr. Zongsheng sighed loudly, and Zi Zheng and Dong Zhongshu still could not stop.

古文：炎汉中兴，明皇帝即位，表圭景而陈《清庙》，树槐阴而疏璧流；祀光武于明堂，以配上帝；召桓荣于太学，袒而割牲；济济焉，皇皇焉，有足观者。
现代文：柬汉中兴，汉明皇即位，立土圭观日影而使用《周颂。清庙》，设立槐市而推行教化；在明堂祭祀光武帝，用来配享上帝；召桓荣到太学，亲自袒身行割牲礼；庄严肃穆，盛大庄重，很有值得看的。
English: The Khmer and Han dynasties flourished, Emperor Han Ming ascended to the throne, and "Zhousong. Qingmiao" was used as a guide to observe the sun and shadow, and a market was set up to promote enlightenment; Emperor Guangwu was worshiped in the Ming Hall to enjoy God; Emperor Huan Rong was summoned to Taigaku to personally perform the circumcision ceremony; solemn, grand and dignified, it is worth seeing.

古文：自斯厥后，礼乐弥殷。
现代文：从那以后，礼乐更加兴盛。
English: Since then, ceremonial music has flourished even more.

古文：永平三年，官之司乐，改名大予，式扬典礼，旁求图谶，道邻《雅》《颂》，事迩中和。
现代文：永乎三年，官府掌管音乐的官职，改名为 大予乐 ，光大典章礼仪，搜求图谶文献，道义上接近《雅》《颂》，事务上接近中和。
English: It took three years for the government office in charge of music to change its name to Dada Music, Guangda Ceremonial Etiquette, and search for maps and documents. Morally, it is close to "Grace" and "Ode," and it is close to neutral in terms of affairs.

古文：其有五方之乐者，则所谓 大乐九变，天神可得而礼 也。
现代文：如果有各地的音乐，就是所谓的 伟大的音乐有繁多的变体，天神才能得到它们并且合理使用它们 。
English: If there is music everywhere, that is, if the so-called great music has many variations, the gods can get them and use them rationally.

古文：其有宗庙之乐者，则所谓 肃雍和鸣，先祖是听 者也。
现代文：如果有宗庙的祭祀音乐，就是所谓的 肃敬正大和谐的声音，先祖就听这个 。
English: If there is a sacrificial music of the ancestral temple, that is, the so-called "sound of solemnity and harmony," the ancestors will listen to this.

古文：其有社稷之乐者，则所谓 琴瑟击鼓，以迓田祖 者也。
现代文：如果有祭祀社稷之类的音乐，就是所谓的 弹起琴瑟敲起鼓，迎接神农始祖 。
English: If there is music such as sacrificial music, it is the so-called "playing the lyre and beating the drum" to welcome the Shennong ancestors.

古文：其有辟雍之乐者，则所谓 移风易俗，莫善于乐 者也。
现代文：如果有辟雍之类的礼仪音乐，就是所谓的 要移风易俗，没有比音乐更好的 。
English: If there is a ceremonial music such as pidong, it is the so-called "changing customs," and there is nothing better than music.

古文：其有黄门之乐者，则所谓 宴乐群臣，蹲蹲舞我 者也。
现代文：如果有黄门之类的宫廷音乐，就是所谓的 让群臣欣赏雅乐，让我们庄严地起舞 。
English: If there is court music such as Huangmen, it is the so-called Let the courtiers enjoy classical music, let us solemnly dance.

古文：其有短箫之乐者，则所谓 王师大捷，令军中凯歌 者也。
现代文：如果有短箫之类的军乐，就是所谓的 王师大捷，下令军中奏起凯歌 。
English: If there is military music such as short harp, it is the so-called Wang Shida Jie, ordered the army to play the Kaige.

古文：魏武挟天子而令诸侯，思一戎而匡九服，时逢吞灭，宪章咸荡。
现代文：魏逮帝挟持天子而号令诸侯，想用战争来平定四方，当时遭逢吞并消灭，宪制典章都荡然无存。
English: The Emperor of the Wei Dynasty seized the heavenly son and ordered the princes to take the lead, and wanted to use war to pacify the four directions. At that time, it was annexed and destroyed, and the constitutional ordinances were all gone.

古文：及削平刘表，始获杜夔，扬鼙总干，式遵前记。
现代文：到了扫平刘表，才得到杜夔，擂响鼙鼓拿起盾牌，完全遵行前代的记载。
English: It was not until he had leveled Liu table that he got the cuckoo, banged the gong and picked up the shield, completely following the records of the previous generation.

古文：三祖纷纶，咸工篇什，声歌虽有损益，爱玩在乎雕章。
现代文：三位皇帝才华横溢，都精通诗歌，声律歌诗虽然有所差别，喜爱玩好的就是雕琢词章。
English: The three emperors were all talented and proficient in poetry. Although their vocal melodies differed, they all liked to carve out verses to play well.

古文：是以王粲等各造新诗，抽其藻思，吟咏神灵，赞扬来飨。
现代文：因此王粲等人各自创作新诗，发挥他们做文章的才思，吟诵歌咏神灵，赞颂宣扬功业。
English: Therefore, Wang Qian and others each created new poems, exerted their talent for writing articles, chanted songs and deities, and praised and promoted their merits.

古文：武皇帝采汉魏之遗范，览景文之垂则，鼎鼐唯新，前音不改。
现代文：晋武皇帝采用汉、魏留下的轨范，参考景帝、文帝传下的法则，鼎鼐更新，前代的音乐不加改变。
English: Emperor Jinwu adopted the model left by the Han and Wei dynasties, referring to the rules passed down by Emperor Jing and Emperor Wen, updating the rules, and the music of the previous generation remained unchanged.

古文：泰始九年，光禄大夫荀勖始作古尺，以调声韵，仍以张华等所制高文，陈诸下管。
现代文：壶垃九年，光禄大夫荀勖开始制作出古尺，用来调声韵，接着用张华等人所作的高妙诗文，在大祭仪式上演奏出来。
English: In the ninth year of the pot, Dr. Guanglu began to make an ancient ruler, used to tune the rhyme, and then used the wonderful poems made by Zhang Hua and others to play it at the grand festival ceremony.

古文：永嘉之乱，伶官既减，曲台宣榭，咸变污莱。
现代文：永嘉动乱之后，乐师减少，校书的曲台讲武的宣榭，都变成污秽的荒地。
English: After the Yongjia Disturbance, the number of musicians decreased, and the propaganda of martial arts on the music stand of the school book turned into a filthy wasteland.

古文：虽复《象舞》歌工，自胡归晋，至于孤竹之管，云和之瑟，空桑之琴，泗滨之磬，其能备者，百不一焉。
现代文：虽然又有《象舞》的歌手，从塞外回归晋朝，至于孤竹之类的管乐器，云和山出产的瑟，空桑山出产的琴，泅水滨出产的石磬，那时能够拥有的，百件裹不到一件。
English: Although there were singers of the "Elephant Dance" who returned to the Jin Dynasty from outside of Tibet, as for wind instruments such as lone bamboo, serpents produced by Yunhe Mountain, harps produced by Kuanshan Mountain, and stalagmites produced by Suibin, there were less than one hundred pieces that could be owned at that time.

古文：夫人受天地之灵，蕴菁华之气，刚柔递用，哀乐分情。
现代文：人类承受天地的灵性，蕴含精华的气韵，刚柔交互使用，哀乐区别情绪。
English: Human beings bear the spirituality of heaven and earth, contain the essence of qi rhyme, use strong and soft interactions, and distinguish between sadness and joy.

古文：经春阳而自喜，遇秋雕而不悦。
现代文：见到春天的阳光就自然欢喜，每逢秋天的凋零就不愉快。
English: It is natural to rejoice when seeing the spring sunshine, but it is unpleasant to see it wither away every autumn.

古文：游乎金石之端，出乎管弦之外，因物迁逝，乘流不反。
现代文：徜徉在金石的声音裹，超然于管弦的旋律外，随万物变迁生灭，顺潮流而不回返。
English: Wrapped in the sound of precious stones, detached from the melody of the orchestra, it comes and goes with the changes of all things, following the trend and not returning.

古文：是以楚王升轻轩于彭蠡，汉顺听鸣鸟于樊衢。
现代文：因此楚王在彭蠡登上轻便的轩车，汉顺帝在矾衢倾听乌的呜叫。
English: Therefore, King Chu boarded a light Xuan car in Penghu, and Emperor Han Shun listened to Wu's wailing in Shao.

古文：圣人功成作乐，化平裁曲，乃扬节奏，以暢中和，饰其欢欣，止于哀思者也。
现代文：圣人们功业成就而创作乐章，教化升平而创作歌曲，正是要利用节奏，来表达内心的和谐，美化他们的欢乐和欣喜，节制他们的哀思啊。
English: It is precisely to use the rhythm to express the inner harmony, to beautify their joy and rejoicing, and to restrain their sorrow that the saints create music with their achievements and songs with their enlightenment.

古文：凡乐之道，五声、八音、六律、十二管，为之纲纪云。
现代文：大凡乐的方面，有五声、八音、六律、十二管，作为它的纲要主干。
English: In terms of great music, there are five-part, eight-part, six-part, and twelve-part parts, which are the backbone of its outline.

古文：五声：宫为君，宫之为言中也。
现代文：五声：宫是君，宫说的是中。
English: Five voices: the palace is you, the palace is the middle.

古文：中和之道，无往而不理焉。
现代文：中和之道，没有哪裹它去了不能调理的。
English: There is no middle way, no place where it can't be adjusted.

古文：商为臣，商之为言强也，谓金性之坚强也。
现代文：商是臣，商说的是强，指的是金的坚强属性。
English: Shang is vassal, Shang says strong, referring to the strong attribute of gold.

古文：角为民，角之为言触也，谓象诸阳气触物而生也。
现代文：角是民，角说的是触，指的是类似阳气遇到万物都能生发。
English: The horns are the people, and the horns are the touch, referring to the fact that all things can be born when they encounter the yang.

古文：徵为事，徵之为言止也，言物盛则止也。
现代文：征是事，征说的是止，是说事物繁盛就将打住。
English: It is a matter of levying, it is a matter of stopping levying, it is a matter of saying that the prosperity of things will stop.

古文：羽为物，羽之为言舒也，言阳气将复，万物孳育而舒生也。
现代文：羽是物，羽说的是舒，是说阳气将要恢复，万物孳生发育而舒展生长。
English: Feather is a thing, feather says Shu, it means yang qi will be restored, all things grow and stretch.

古文：古人有言曰： 礼乐不可斯须去身。 
现代文：古人有话说： 礼和乐不可以片刻离开身边。 
English: The ancients had a saying: You can't leave your friends and family for a moment.

古文：化上迁善，有如不及。
现代文：熏陶在上位的使改恶迁善，总有像是不够似的。
English: It always seems like it's not enough to influence those at the top to change evil for good.

古文：是以闻其宫声，使人温良而宽大；闻其商声，使人方廉而好义；闻其角声，使人恻隐而仁爱；闻其徵声，使人乐养而好施；闻其羽声，使人恭俭而好礼。
现代文：因此听到那宫调的音乐，使人温和善良而且宽宏大度；听到那商调的音乐，使人方正廉洁而且讲究义；听到那角调的音乐，使人有恻隐之心而且仁爱；听到那征调的音乐，使人乐于赡养而且喜好施舍；听到那羽调的音乐，使人谦恭俭朴而且喜好礼。
English: Therefore, listening to the music of the palace makes one gentle, kind, and generous; listening to the music of the merchant makes one upright, honest, and righteous; listening to the music of the square makes one compassionate and kind; listening to the music of the requisition makes one willing to support and willing to give; listening to the music of the feather makes one humble, frugal, and willing to be polite.

古文：八音，八方之风也。
现代文：八音，是八方的风。
English: Eight tones, is the wind of the eight directions.

古文：乾之音石，其风不周。
现代文：干的音是石，它的风叫不周。
English: The dry sound is stone, and its wind is not round.

古文：坎之音革，其风广莫。
现代文：坎的音是革，它的风叫广莫。
English: The sound of the can is leather, its wind is called guangmo.

古文：艮之音匏，其风融。
现代文：艮的音是匏，它的风叫融。
English: The sound of the cicada is a cicada, and its wind is called fusion.

古文：震之音竹，其风明庶。
现代文：震的音是竹，它的风叫明庶。
English: The sound of the earthquake is bamboo, and its wind is called Mingzhu.

古文：巽之音木，其风清明。
现代文：巽的音是木，它的风叫清明。
English: The sound of the gong is wood, and its wind is called Qingming.

古文：离之音丝，其风景。
现代文：离的音是丝，它的风叫景。
English: The sound of departure is silk, and its wind is called scenery.

古文：坤之音土，其风凉。
现代文：坤的音是土，它的风叫凉。
English: Kun's sound is earth, its wind is cool.

古文：兑之音金，其风阊阖。
现代文：兑的音是金，它的风叫闾阖。
English: The sound of its beating is like gold, and its wind is like the sound of thunder.

古文：阳六为律，谓黄钟、太蔟、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射；阴六为吕，谓大吕、应钟、南吕、林钟、仲吕、夹钟：凡有十二，以配十二辰焉。
现代文：阳的六项是律，叫做黄钟、太蔟、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射；阴的六项是吕，叫做大吕、应钟、南吕、林钟、仲吕、夹钟。共有十二项，用来对应十二辰。
English: The six terms of yang are ritsu, which are called huangzhong, taizhong, guqi, qibing, yizhe and wu sha; the six terms of yin are lu, which are called da lu, ying zhong, nan lu, lin zhong, zhong lu and zhizhong. There are a total of twelve terms, which are used to correspond to the twelve hours.

古文：律之为言法也，言阳气施生各有法也；吕之为言助也，所以助成阳功也。
现代文：律说的是法，是说阳气在施生的时候各有自己的规律；吕说的是助，用来协助成就阳的功效。
English: Lu means help, which is used to help achieve the effect of yang.

古文：正月之辰谓之寅，寅者津也，谓生物之津涂也。
现代文：正月的辰叫做寅，寅说是津，指的是生物的门径。
English: The hour of the first month is called "Ting" and the month of "Ting" is called "Tsu," which refers to the doorway of living things.

古文：二月之辰名为卯，卯者茂也，言阳气生而孳茂也。
现代文：二月的辰名叫卯，卯就是茂，是说阳气发生而且孳长茂盛。
English: The hour of February is called "wu," and "wu" is "mao," which means that the yang occurs and the grass grows luxuriantly.

古文：三月之辰名为辰，辰者震也，谓时物尽震动而长也。
现代文：三月的辰名叫辰，辰就是震，说的是遣时万物都萌动成长。
English: The name of March's hour is "Chen," and "Chen" means "earthquake," referring to the time when everything begins to sprout and grow.

古文：四月之辰谓为巳，巳者起也，物至此时毕尽而起也。
现代文：四月的辰叫做巳，巳就是起，万物到这个时候全都成长起来了。
English: April's hour is called the crescent, and the crescent is the new moon. By this time, everything has begun to grow.

古文：五月之辰谓为午，午者长也，大也，言物皆长大也。
现代文：五月的辰叫做午，午就是长，是大，是说万物都长大。
English: The hour of May is called the afternoon, and the afternoon is long and big, which means that everything has grown.

古文：六月之辰谓之未，未者味也，言时万物向成，有滋味也。
现代文：六月的辰叫做未，未就是味，是说这时万物开始成熟，有了滋味。
English: The hour of June is called bai, bai is taste, which means that at this time, everything begins to mature and has a taste.

古文：七月之辰谓为申，申者身也，言时万物身体皆成就也。
现代文：七月的辰叫做申，申就是身，是说这时万物身体都长成了。
English: The hour of July is called shin, and shin is body, which means that at this time, all things have grown into bodies.

古文：八月之辰谓为酉，酉者緧也，谓时物皆綇缩也。
现代文：八月的辰叫做酉，酉就是缮缩，说的是这时万物都收敛了。
English: The hour of August is called the,  is the contraction, which means that everything converges at this time.

古文：九月之辰谓为戌，戌者灭也，谓时物皆衰灭也。
现代文：九月的辰叫做戌，戌就是灭，说的是造时万物都衰减。
English: The ninth hour of the month is called,  is extinction, which means that everything decays when it is created.

古文：十月之辰谓为亥，亥者劾也，言时阴气劾杀万物也。
现代文：十月的辰叫做亥，亥就是劾，是说这时阴气在处决万物。
English: The hour of October is called Hai, and Hai means impeachment, which means that at this time, Yin is executing all things.

古文：十一月之辰谓为子，子者孳也，谓阳气至此更孳生也。
现代文：十一月的辰叫做子，子就是孳，说的是阳气到这时又孳生。
English: The hour of November is called the son, the son is the cormorant, and the yang is said to be born at this time.

古文：十二月之辰谓为丑，丑者纽也，言终始之际，以纽结为名也。
现代文：十二月的辰叫做丑，丑就是纽，是说终始相交的地方，用纽结作为名称。
English: The hour of December is called Ugly, and Ugly is the Knot, which means the place where they intersect from beginning to end, with Knot as the name.

古文：十一月之管谓之黄钟，黄者，阴阳之中色也。
现代文：十一月的管叫做黄钟，黄，是阴阳的中间色。
English: November's tube is called the yellow bell, yellow, is the middle color of yin and yang.

古文：天有六气，地有五才，而天地数毕焉。
现代文：天有所谓六气，地有所谓五才，这样天地的数都齐了。
English: Heaven has the so-called six elements, and earth has the so-called five elements. Thus, the number of heaven and earth are equal.

古文：或曰，冬至德气为土，土色黄，故曰黄钟。
现代文：有人说，冬至的秉性是土，土的颜色是黄，所以叫黄钟。
English: Some people say that the nature of the winter solstice is the soil, and the color of the soil is yellow, so it is called the yellow bell.

古文：正月之管谓为太蔟，蔟者蔟也，谓万物随于阳气太蔟而生也。
现代文：正月的管名字是太蔟，所谓蔟就是蔟，说的是万物跟随着阳气太蔟而生长。
English: The name of the first month of the year is Taizhou, and the so-called "Zhou" is "Chuang," which means that everything grows with the "yang" of Taizhou.

古文：三月之管名为姑洗，姑洗者：姑，枯也；洗，濯也，谓物生新洁，洗除其枯，改柯易叶也。
现代文：三月的管名字是姑洗，所谓姑洗：姑，就是枯；洗，就是濯，说的是万物新生的时候新鲜干净，洗去它的干枯，改换它的枝叶。
English: The Chinese name for March is 姑洗. The so-called 姑洗:姑, is withered; 洗, is washed. It means that all things are fresh and clean at the time of rebirth, wash away its dryness, and change its branches and leaves.

古文：五月之管名为蕤宾，葳蕤，垂下貌也；宾，敬也，谓时阳气下降，阴气始起，相宾敬也。
现代文：五月的管名字是蕤宾，葳蕤，是垂下的样子；宾，就是敬，说的是这时阳气下降，阴气开始升起，互相作为宾客似的恭敬对待。
English: The names of the months of May are 宾,, which means "drooping appearance"; and 賓, which means "respect," which refers to the time when the yang energy drops and the yin energy begins to rise, and people treat each other with respect as if they were guests.

古文：七月之管名为夷则，夷，平也；则，法也，谓万物将成，平均皆有法则也。
现代文：七月的管名字是夷则，夷，就是平；则，就是法，说的是万物将要长成，平均而且都符合法则。
English: The name of the month of July is 夷则, 夷, which means flat;则, which means law, which means that everything will grow into an average and conform to the law.

古文：九月之管名为无射，射者出也，言时阳气上升，万物收藏无复出也。
现代文：九月的管名字是无射，所谓射就是出，是说逭时阳气上升，万物收藏没有再出生的。
English: The name of September is no ejection, the so-called ejection is out, which means that when the sun rises, the yang rises, and the collection of all things is not reborn.

古文：十二月之管名为大吕，吕者助也，谓阳气方之，阴气助也。
现代文：十二月的管名字是大吕，所谓吕就是助，说的是阳气刚刚到来，阴气来协助。
English: The name of the tube in December is the Great Lv, the so-called Lv is the help, saying that the yang has just arrived, and the yin has come to help.

古文：十月之管名为应钟，应者和也，谓岁功皆成，应和阳功，收而聚之也。
现代文：十月的管名字是应钟，所谓应就是和，说的是一年的劳作都完成了，呼应人间的活动，收敛而且聚集起来。
English: The official name of October is Ying Zhong, so-called Ying is and, said to be a year's work completed, echoing human activities, converging and gathering.

古文：八月之管名为南吕，南者任也，谓时物皆秀，有怀任之象也。
现代文：八月的管名字是南吕，所谓南就是任，说的是这时万物都抽穗，含有妊娠的象征。
English: The name of the month of August is Nan Lü, and the so-called South is Ren, which means that at this time everything is tapped, which contains a symbol of pregnancy.

古文：六月之管名为林钟，林者茂也，谓时物茂盛于野也。
现代文：六月的管名字是林钟，所谓林就是茂，说的是这时万物遍地茂盛。
English: The name of the month of June is Lin Zhong, and the so-called Lin is Mao, which means that all things are flourishing everywhere at this time.

古文：四月之管名为仲吕者，吕，助也，谓阳气盛长，阴助成功也。
现代文：四月的管名字叫仲吕是因为吕就是助，说的是阳气兴盛生长，阴气协助成功。
English: April's tube name is Zhong Lv, because Lv is assistance, which means yang qi flourishing and growing, and yin qi assisting success.

古文：二月之管名为夹钟者，夹，佐也，谓时物尚未尽出，阴德佐阳而出物也。
现代文：二月的管名字叫夹钟是因为夹就是佐，说的是遣时万物还没有完全长出来，阴德辅佐阳气而使万物出生。
English: The month of February is called "Jian Zhong" because "Jian" means "support" and refers to the time when all things have not yet fully grown, when yin and yang are supported by yin and yang, and all things are born.

古文：汉自东京大乱，绝无金石之乐，乐章亡缺，不可复知。
现代文：汉代从东京大乱以后，彻底没有了金石音乐，乐章散亡残缺，不能再得知。
English: In the Han Dynasty, after the Great Tokyo War, there was no gold and stone music at all, and the movements were scattered and incomplete, and can no longer be known.

古文：及魏武平荆州，获汉雅乐郎河南杜夔，能识旧法，以为军谋祭酒，使创定雅乐。
现代文：到魏武帝平定荆州，得到汉朝任雅乐郎的河南人杜夔，能够记得旧时的章法，任命他担任军谋祭酒，让他创制确定雅乐。
English: When Emperor Wu of Wei conquered Jingzhou, Du Xi, a Henan native who had been appointed as a court musician by the Han Dynasty, was able to remember the old rules and regulations. He was appointed as the military commander of the sacrificial wine, and he was asked to create and determine the court music.

古文：时又有散骑侍郎邓静、尹商善训雅乐，歌师尹胡能歌宗庙郊祀之曲，舞师冯肃、服养晓知先代诸舞，夔悉总领之。
现代文：当时又有散骑侍郎邓静、尹商善于咏唱雅乐，歌师尹胡能够唱宗庙郊祀的曲子，舞师冯肃、服养通晓先代的各种舞蹈，杜夔全都统领起来。
English: At that time, there were also the horseback riding attendants Deng Jing and Yin Shang, who were good at singing courtly music, the singer Yin Hu, who could sing the music of the suburb of the ancestral temple, and the dancers Feng Su and Zhuyang Tongxiao, who were familiar with the various dances of the previous generation.

古文：远详经籍，近采故事，考会古乐，始设轩悬钟磬。
现代文：远的详细查考经典古籍，近的采集旧事传说，考正会通古乐，开始设置架子悬挂钟和磬。
English: Far away in detail to examine the classic ancient books, recent collection of old stories and legends, the examination will be through the ancient music, began to set up shelves hanging bells and gongs.

古文：而黄初中柴玉、左延年之徒，复以新声被宠，改其声韵。
现代文：可是黄初年间柴玉、左延年之类的人，又因为新的音乐而受宠，改变了他们的音乐韵味。
English: However, in the early years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, people like Chaidam and Zuoyannian were favored because of their new music, which changed their musical charm.

古文：及武帝受命之初，百度草创。
现代文：到晋武帝承受天命的初期，各方面的事情都在草创阶段。
English: By the early days of Emperor Jinwu's receiving the Mandate of Heaven, all aspects of things were in the initial stage.

古文：泰始二年，诏郊祀明堂礼乐权用魏仪，遵周室肇称殷礼之义，但改乐章而已，使傅玄为之词云。
现代文：泰始二年，下诏说郊祀明堂的礼乐权且使用魏朝的仪式，遵奉周朝在开始的时候采用殷商礼制的道理，衹修改歌词就行了，让傅玄为音乐作词。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, the next edict said that the right to perform music of the Suburban Temple of Ming and the use of the Wei Dynasty ceremony, in accordance with the principle that the Zhou Dynasty adopted the Yin Shang ceremonial system at the beginning, it was enough to modify the lyrics, and let Fu Xuan write the lyrics for the music.

古文：祀天地五郊夕牲歌
现代文：祭祀天地以及五郊的夕牲歌：
English: The evening sacrifice song for heaven and earth and the five suburbs:

古文：天命有晋，穆穆明明。
现代文：上天赐命给晋朝，因为天道深远而帝王有明德。
English: Heaven gave the order to the Jin Dynasty, because the heavenly way is far-reaching and the emperor has wisdom and virtue.

古文：我其夙夜，祗事上灵。
现代文：我将夙兴夜寐，恭敬地事奉上帝神灵。
English: I will lie awake in the night and worship God.

古文：常于时假，迄用其成。
现代文：总是按时来到，直到准备完成。
English: Always show up on time until the preparations are complete.

古文：于荐玄牡，进夕其牲。
现代文：进献黑色公牛，于祭祀前夕前来查看准备用于祭献的牲口。
English: Black bulls are offered as an offering, and on the eve of the sacrifice, people come to see the animals being prepared for the sacrifice.

古文：崇德作乐，神祇是听。
现代文：崇上德政而演奏音乐，天神和地祇都听见了这些。
English: Worshipping virtue and playing music, the gods and goddesses heard it all.

古文：祀天地五郊迎送神歌
现代文：祭祀天地以及五郊的迎送神歌：
English: A song of welcome to heaven and earth and the five suburbs:

古文：宣文蒸哉，日靖四方。
现代文：宣帝、文帝多么美好啊，整日安抚四方。
English: Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen, how wonderful they are, appeasing all sides all day long.

古文：永言保之，夙夜匪康。光天之命，上帝是皇。
现代文：长久地保有这座江山，白天黑夜都不休息。光大上天的赐命，上帝感到荣光。
English: To preserve this country for a long time, day and night, without rest. Glorified by the mandate of heaven, God feels glorious.

古文：嘉乐殷荐，灵祚景祥。
现代文：美好的音乐一再献上，美好的国运会有大的美好先兆。
English: Beautiful music has been presented again and again, and the beautiful National Games will have a great good omen.

古文：神祗降假，享福无疆。
现代文：天神和地祇降下福来，享受造福佑没有尽头。
English: There is no end to the blessings bestowed by the gods and deities.

古文：飨天地五郊歌
现代文：祭飨天地五郊之歌：
English: Song of the Five Suburbs of Heaven and Earth:

古文：天祚有晋，其命惟新。
现代文：上天使晋朝统治天下，赐命建立新政。
English: God sent an angel to the Jin Dynasty to rule the world and ordered the establishment of the New Deal.

古文：受终于魏，奄有黎民。
现代文：从魏朝那裹接受天下，拥有所有的黎民百姓。
English: From the time of the Wei Dynasty, it embraced the world and owned all the Li people.

古文：燕及皇天，怀和百神。
现代文：让伟大的天神放心，让百神安宁。
English: Let the great gods be at ease, let the hundred gods be at peace.

古文：丕显遗烈，之德之纯。
现代文：光耀前王遗留下来的功业，光耀他们的德行和美善。
English: Shine on the legacy of the former king, shine on their virtues and virtues.

古文：享其玄牡，式用肇禋。
现代文：献上黑色的公牛，仿效采用西周开国的方式。
English: Presenting a black bull, imitating the way in which Western Zhou opened the country.

古文：神祗来格，福禄是臻。
现代文：天神和地衹一起来到，福禄因此而全部汇聚。
English: Tenjin and the mantle of the earth came together, and all the blessings came together as a result.

古文：时迈其犹，昊天子之。
现代文：按时巡行天下四方，吴天上帝保佑我们。
English: On time, marching across the country and the world, Wu Tian God bless us.

古文：祐享有晋，肇庶戴之。
现代文：庇佑我们享有晋朝，天下黎民拥戴我们。
English: God has blessed us with Jin Dynasty, and the people all over the world have embraced us.

古文：畏天之威，敬授人时。
现代文：敬畏上天的威严，谨慎地告知百姓时令。
English: Fear the majesty of heaven, and carefully inform the people of the time.

古文：丕显丕承，于犹绎思。
现代文：光耀承传上天的赐命，不断推究思考自己的使命。
English: Shining in the light of the mandate handed down from heaven, we must constantly investigate and reflect on our mission.

古文：皇极斯建，庶绩咸熙。庶几夙夜，惟晋之祺。
现代文：从此建立光辉的榜样，恭敬勤勉而不休止。
English: Since then, they have set a shining example of respect, hard work, and perseverance.

古文：宣文惟后，克配彼天。
现代文：但愿没曰没夜地努力，为了晋朝的吉祥昌盛。
English: I hope you will work hard day and night for the auspicious prosperity of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：抚宁四海，保有康年。
现代文：宣帝、文帝作为君主，能够符合上天的意旨。安抚平定四海，保持拥有繁荣。
English: Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen, as monarchs, can conform to the will of heaven, pacify and calm the four seas, and maintain prosperity.

古文：于乎缉熙，肆用靖民。
现代文：恭谨勤勉不断努力啊，因此能够安定天下人民。
English: Respect, diligence and continuous efforts can stabilize the people of the world.

古文：爰立典制，爰修礼纪。
现代文：建立典章制度，修定礼仪法纪。
English: The establishment of a ceremonial system and the revision of etiquette and discipline.

古文：作民之极，莫匪资始。
现代文：树立人民的行为规范，没有不是从这个时候开始的。
English: The establishment of people's behavioral norms did not begin at this time.

古文：克昌厥后，永言保之。
现代文：能够使后代昌盛，永远保有这个基业。
English: It can make future generations prosperous and keep this foundation forever.

古文：天地郊明堂夕牲歌
现代文：用于天、地郊祭和明堂祭祀的夕牲歌：
English: Evening sacrificial songs used for the heavenly, earthly suburb festival and Myeongdong ritual:

古文：皇矣有晋，时迈其德。
现代文：伟大的晋朝啊，按时巡行推行他的德政。
English: The great Jin Dynasty, marching on time to carry out his German policy.

古文：受终于天，光济万国。
现代文：从上天那裹承受天下，普济所有的侯国。
English: From the heavens above, to inherit the world, all the provinces of Puji.

古文：万国既光，神定厥祥。
现代文：侯国都已经得到安抚，天神确认了受命者的美好。
English: The vassal states have been pacified, and the gods have confirmed the goodness of those who have been appointed.

古文：虔于郊祀，祗事上皇。
现代文：虔诚地对待郊祀，恭敬地事奉上皇。
English: Piously treat suburban worship, respectfully serve the emperor.

古文：祗事上皇，百福是臻。
现代文：恭敬地事奉上皇，千百的福佑汇聚过来。
English: Respectfully serving the Emperor, thousands of blessings have come together.

古文：巍巍祖考，克配彼天。
现代文：伟大的祖先们，能够符合上天的意旨。
English: Great ancestors, able to conform to the will of heaven.

古文：嘉牲匪歆，德馨惟飨。受天之祐，神化四方。
现代文：美味的祭品并不是神所需要的，惟一接受的是德政的美好。
English: Delicious offerings are not what God needs. The only thing He accepts is the beauty of virtue.

古文：天地郊明堂降神歌
现代文：承受上天的庇佑。神妙地教化四方。
English: Undergo the blessing of heaven. Divinely enlighten the four directions.

古文：于赫大晋，应天景祥。
现代文：用于天、地郊祭和明堂祭祀的降神歌：伟大的晋朝啊，顺应了上天显示的意旨。
English: The Song of the Descending God, used in the Heaven, Earth Suburbs Festival and Myeongdong Festival: O great Jin Dynasty, you have obeyed the will of Heaven.

古文：二帝迈德，宣此重光。
现代文：二位先帝勉力建树德行，发扬出这样的万世盛德。
English: The two emperors tried their best to build a virtuous line and carry forward such an everlasting virtue.

古文：我皇受命，奄有万方。
现代文：我朝皇帝承受天命，拥有天下的土地人民。
English: I, as emperor, bear the mandate of heaven, and own the land and people of the world.

古文：郊祀配享，礼乐孔章。
现代文：在郊外进行大型祭祀而以先祖配享，礼仪音乐十分严整盛大。
English: Large-scale rituals are held in the suburbs, and the ancestors are honored, and the ceremonial music is very strict and grand.

古文：神祗嘉享，祖考是皇。
现代文：天神和地衹光临接受奉献的祭品，先祖们因此更加荣光。
English: The gods and deities came to receive the offerings, and the ancestors became even more glorious.

古文：克昌厥后，保祚无疆。
现代文：能够使后代昌盛，保有基业而永不到头。
English: Able to make future generations prosper, keep the foundation and never fail.

古文：天郊飨神歌
现代文：用于郊祭天的飨神歌：
English: A sacred song for the Suburban Festival:

古文：整泰坛，礼皇神。
现代文：修整好南郊的祭天的泰坛，礼待伟大的天神。
English: The altar of the Southern Suburbs, which is dedicated to the god of heaven, has been repaired, and the worship of the great god of heaven has begun.

古文：精气感，百灵宾。
现代文：精灵之气得到感应，各位天神一起前来。
English: The spirit of the elves has been sensed, and all the gods have come together.

古文：蕴硃火，缭芳薪。
现代文：燃起红红的火焰，添加进芳香的薪柴。
English: Light a red flame and add aromatic firewood.

古文：紫烟游，冠青云。
现代文：紫色的烟雾缭绕起来，飘到青云的上面。
English: Purple smoke curled up and drifted above the blue clouds.

古文：神之体，靡象形。
现代文：天神们的体态，没有可见的形迹。
English: There are no visible traces of the deities' bodies.

古文：旷无方，幽以清。
现代文：旷远而没有边际，深幽而又清高。
English: Vast and boundless, profound and lofty.

古文：神之来，光景昭。
现代文：天神们来临了，天光日影十分明亮。
English: The celestial gods have arrived, and the sky is bright with sun and shadow.

古文：听无闻，视无兆。
现代文：听不到声音，看不到形象。
English: Can't hear the sound, can't see the image.

古文：神之至，举歆歆。
现代文：天神们到达了，全都感动欣喜。
English: When the angels arrived, everyone was moved with joy.

古文：灵爽协，动余心。
现代文：精气相感应，触动我的心。
English: Touch my heart by sensing the spirit.

古文：神之坐，同欢娱。
现代文：天神们入座了，大家共同欢乐。
English: The heavenly deities have taken their seats, and everyone is happy.

古文：泽云翔，化风舒。
现代文：润泽万物的云彩缭绕，化育万物的和风轻拂。
English: The clouds that moisturize all things swirl around, and the gentle breeze that nurtures all things blows.

古文：嘉乐奏，文中声。
现代文：美妙的音乐奏响，构成中正和谐的声音。
English: The music is beautifully played, creating a positive and harmonious sound.

古文：八音谐，神是听。
现代文：各种乐器的声音和谐，天神们倾听了这些。
English: The voices of the various musical instruments were in harmony, and the gods listened to them.

古文：咸契齐，并芬芳。
现代文：谷物全都是清洁的，味道全都是芬芳的。
English: The grain is all clean, the taste is all fragrant.

古文：烹牷牲，享玉觞。
现代文：烹煮的是纯色的整头牲口，献上的是玉杯裹的美酒。
English: The whole head of a pure-coloured animal is cooked and presented with fine wine in a jade cup.

古文：神悦飨，歆禋祀。
现代文：天神们高兴地享用，闻到了里祀的芳香气味。
English: The celestial deities enjoyed it with pleasure, smelling the fragrant scent of the rice.

古文：祐大晋，降繁祉。
现代文：保佑伟大的晋朝，降下许多的福祉。
English: Bless the great Jin Dynasty and bring down a lot of welfare.

古文：作京邑，广四海。
现代文：建造京城，拥有四海。
English: He built the capital city and owned the four seas.

古文：保天年，穷地纪。
现代文：保有天年，统管大地。
English: Preserving heaven and earth, governing the earth.

古文：地郊飨神歌
现代文：用于郊祭地的飨神歌：
English: A sacred song for a suburban shrine:

古文：整泰折，竢皇祗。
现代文：修整好北郊的祭地的泰折，敬候伟大的地神。
English: The temple grounds in the northern suburbs have been renovated, and the worship of the great earth god has begun.

古文：众神感，群灵仪。
现代文：众神得到感应，各位地神一起来到。
English: The gods were inspired, and the gods of the earth came together.

古文：阴祀设，吉礼施。
现代文：设置了阴祀，施行了吉礼。
English: Yin worship was set up, and auspicious rites were performed.

古文：夜将极，时未移。
现代文：黑夜将要过去，时间似乎还没有改变。
English: The night is drawing to a close, and time seems to have stood still.

古文：祗之体，无形象。
现代文：地神们的体态，没有形象。
English: Bodies of the earth gods, no image.

古文：潜泰幽，洞忽荒。祗之出，薆若有。
现代文：潜藏在极其幽深的地方，混沌模糊没有定形。
English: Lurking in the deepest recesses of the cosmos, it is chaotic, fuzzy and formless.

古文：灵无远，天下母。
现代文：地神们的出现，似无似有。神灵并不遥远，天下以她为母。
English: The appearance of the earth gods seems to be out of the ordinary. The gods are not far away, and the world is her mother.

古文：祗之来，遗光景。
现代文：地神们来临了，留下了光影。
English: The gods of the earth have come, leaving a trail of light.

古文：昭若存，终冥冥。
现代文：明亮而好像存在，终究难以看出来。
English: Bright and seemingly present, it is, after all, difficult to see.

古文：祗之至，举欣欣。
现代文：地神们到达了，全都欣喜起来。
English: When the earth gods arrived, they were all overjoyed.

古文：舞象德，歌成文。
现代文：跳起象征德行的舞蹈，唱起构成文治的赞歌。
English: They danced a dance symbolizing virtue, and sang a song of praise that formed a chorus.

古文：祗既坐，同欢豫。
现代文：地神们已经坐下了，大家共同欢乐。
English: The gods of the earth have sat down, and everyone is rejoicing together.

古文：泽雨施，化云布。
现代文：润泽万物的雨水降下，化育万物的云彩布开。
English: The rain that waters all things falls, and the clouds that nurture all things are dispersed.

古文：乐八变，声教敷。
现代文：音乐有众多的乐章，声威教化普及开来。
English: Music has numerous movements, and vocal education has become widespread.

古文：物咸亨，祗是娱。
现代文：万物发展都很顺利，地神们为此而欢娱。
English: The development of all things went smoothly, and the gods of the earth were delighted.

古文：齐既洁，侍者肃。
现代文：奉献的谷物都已经弄干净，侍者恭敬地伺候着。
English: The offering of grain has been cleared away, and the waiter waits respectfully.

古文：玉觞进，咸穆穆。
现代文：献上玉杯美酒，一起恭恭敬敬。
English: Present the goblet of fine wine and bow respectfully together.

古文：飨嘉豢，歆德馨。
现代文：献上精心饲养的牲口，闻到了德行的芳香。
English: Presented with well-bred animals, they smelled the fragrance of virtue.

古文：祚有晋，暨群生。
现代文：赐福给晋朝，以及所有的生灵。
English: Blessings to the Jin Dynasty, and to all living beings.

古文：溢九壤，格天庭。
现代文：超出九州的土地，感动天庭。
English: Beyond the land of Kyushu, moved heaven.

古文：保万寿，延亿龄。
现代文：保有万年的寿命，延续到亿万的岁月。
English: It has a lifespan of tens of thousands of years, extending to hundreds of millions of years.

古文：明堂飨神歌
现代文：用于明堂祭祀的飨神歌：
English: Hymns of the gods used in the Myodo ritual:

古文：经始明堂，享祀匪懈。
现代文：建造明堂，享献祭祀不敢懈怠。
English: Dare not slack off in building Myeongdong and enjoying the sacrificial rites.

古文：于皇烈考，光配上帝。
现代文：伟大的先祖们啊，光荣地配享于上帝。
English: Glorious ancestors, gloriously worthy of God.

古文：赫赫上帝，既高既崇。
现代文：光辉赫赫的上帝，多么伟大多么崇高。
English: Glorious God, how great, how exalted.

古文：圣考是配，明德显融。
现代文：神圣的祖先配享在遣裹，圣明的德行得到显扬。
English: The holy ancestors were honored in the enclosure, and the virtuous deeds of the saints were made known.

古文：率土敬职，万方来祭。
现代文：各地的官员敬奉职守，万方的人们前来拜祭。
English: Officials from all over the country honored their duties, and people from all over the world came to pay homage.

古文：常于时假，保祚永世。
现代文：总是按时来到，保佑并赐福直到永远。
English: Always on time, bless and keep forever.

古文：祠庙夕牲歌
现代文：祠祭祖庙的夕牲歌：
English: The evening sacrifice song of the ancestral temple:

古文：我夕我牲，猗欤敬止。
现代文：我在黄昏的时候来查看用于祭祀的牲口，多么的恭敬。
English: I came at dusk to see the sacrificial animals, how respectful they are.

古文：嘉豢孔时，供兹享祀。
现代文：按照时令精心地饲养，供给这裹作为祭祀的奉献。
English: Carefully reared according to the season, this bundle is offered as a sacrificial offering.

古文：神鉴厥诚，博硕斯歆。
现代文：神灵明察其中的诚意，接受这些肥壮的祭品。
English: The gods, seeing the sincerity, accept these fat offerings.

古文：祖考降飨，以虞孝孙之心。
现代文：先祖们请光临享用，以使孝敬的子孙心安。
English: Ancestors, please come and enjoy it, so that your filial children will have peace of mind.

古文：祠庙迎送神歌
现代文：祠祭祖庙的迎送神歌：
English: The welcoming hymn of the ancestral shrine and temple:

古文：呜呼悠哉，日监在兹。
现代文：多么的高远啊，那太阳在这裹向下看着。
English: How far away, the sun, wrapped here, looks down.

古文：以时享祀，神明降之。
现代文：按照时令奉献和祭祀，神明就会降临。
English: According to the dedication and sacrifice of the season, the gods will descend.

古文：神明斯降，既祐飨之。祚我无疆，受天之祜。
现代文：神明降临这裹，保佑我们并享用我们的奉献。
English: The gods come down here to bless us and enjoy our offerings.

古文：赫赫太上，巍巍圣祖。
现代文：使我们的基业没有止境，承受上天无穷的赐福。
English: so that our inheritance will have no end and we will receive heaven's endless blessings.

古文：明明烈考，丕承继序。祠征西将军登歌
现代文：至高无上的上帝啊，伟大圣明的祖先啊，德行昭明的父辈们，光荣地继承了统治天下的责任。祠祭汉征西将军司马钧的登歌：
English: O supreme God, great holy ancestors, virtuous fathers, you have gloriously inherited the responsibility of ruling the world.

古文：经始宗庙，神明戾止。
现代文：奠定司马氏宗庙，神明因此来到。
English: The foundation of the Sima family temple was laid, and the gods came.

古文：申锡无疆，祗承享祀。
现代文：丰厚的恩赐无边，虔敬奉献祭祀。
English: The bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty

古文：假哉皇祖，绥予孙子。
现代文：美好的先祖啊，使我们子孙安宁。
English: O good ancestors, grant peace to our descendants.

古文：燕及后昆，锡兹繁祉。
现代文：惠泽影响到后嗣，赐给我们幸福。
English: Benefactors influence their heirs and give us happiness.

古文：祠豫章府君登歌
现代文：祠祭豫章府君司马量的登歌：
English: Ancestral hall festival, the enthronement of the prefectural prince, the ascension of the horse:

古文：嘉乐肆筵，荐祀在堂。
现代文：美好欢乐的宴席，奉献祭祀到堂上。
English: A beautiful and joyous banquet, followed by a dedication ceremony in the hall.

古文：皇皇宗庙，乃祖乃皇。
现代文：伟大的宗庙，因此而发扬光大。
English: The great ancestral temple, therefore, flourished.

古文：济济辟公，相予蒸尝。
现代文：济济一堂的贤人，辅佐我进行祭祀。
English: All the sages in the world assisted me in performing the ritual.

古文：享祀不忒，降福穰穰。
现代文：奉献祭祀不出变故，降下的福祉多而又多。
English: Dedication and sacrifice do not change the past, and the welfare of the fallen is more and more.

古文：祠颍川府君登歌
现代文：祠祭颖川府君司马俊的登歌：
English: The anthem of the ancestral shrine festival of Yingchuan prefecture prince Ma Jun:

古文：于邈先后，实司于天。
现代文：遥远的祖先帝王啊，其实是天上的官员。
English: Our distant ancestors, the emperors, were actually heavenly officials.

古文：显矣皇祖，帝祉肇臻。
现代文：伟大的先祖，开始奠定帝业。
English: great ancestors, began to lay the foundation of the empire.

古文：本枝克昌，资始开元。
现代文：根本强壮而枝叶昌盛，因此而创始开宗。
English: The foundation is strong and the branches are flourishing, which is why the founder started the sect.

古文：惠我无疆，享祚永年。
现代文：给我无边的恩惠，永远享受福祚。
English: Grant me the bounty of bounty, and let me be blessed forever.

古文：祠京兆府君登歌
现代文：祠祭京兆府君司马防的登歌：
English: The anthem of the ancestral hall festival of Junshi Horse Guards in Beijing's Zhaozhou District:

古文：于惟曾皇，显显令德。
现代文：皇曾祖父，美德无比。
English: The emperor's great-grandfather was a man of incomparable virtue.

古文：商明清亮，匪竞柔克，保乂命祐，基命惟则。
现代文：温和纯正。柔忍克制，安定地方，效仿成王。
English: Gentle and pure. Gentle and restrained, stable place, imitation is king.

古文：笃生圣祖，光济四国。
现代文：养育圣祖，光照四方。
English: Nurture the Holy Ancestors, and the light will shine in all directions.

古文：祠宣皇帝登歌
现代文：祠祭宣皇帝司马懿的登歌：
English: Ancestral hall festival proclaims Emperor Sima Qian's ascension to the throne:

古文：于铄皇祖，圣德钦明。
现代文：伟大的皇祖父啊，有圣德而敬肃明察。
English: Oh, great grandfather of the emperor, you are a man of holiness, reverence and discernment.

古文：勤施四方，夙夜敬止。
现代文：勤勉地管理四方，日夜慎于职守。
English: Diligently manage the four parties, day and night prudently in the line of duty.

古文：载敷文教，载扬武烈。
现代文：广布文教，弘扬武业。
English: widely spread literature and education, and promote martial arts.

古文：匡定社稷，龚行天罚。
现代文：辅佐安定社稷，奉行上天的惩罚。
English: Assisting the stabilization of society, pursuing the punishment of heaven.

古文：经始大业，造创帝基。
现代文：奠定大业，创造帝基。
English: Laying the foundation for a great career and creating a solid foundation.

古文：畏天之命，于时保之。
现代文：敬奉天命，时刻守护它。
English: Adhere to the Mandate of Heaven and guard it at all times.

古文：祠景皇帝登歌
现代文：祠祭量皇童司蜃鱼的登歌：
English: The anthem of the ancestral hall's festival is sung by Wang Tongsi's eel:

古文：执竞景皇，克明克哲。
现代文：自强不息的基皇童，能明事理而察是非。
English: Self-reliant, Ji Wang Tong is able to see right from wrong.

古文：旁作穆穆，惟祗惟畏。
现代文：做各项事情都深谋远虑。一心保持敬畏。
English: Do all things with forethought. Keep awe in your heart.

古文：纂宣之绪，耆定厥功。
现代文：继承宣皂帝的业绩，达成他自己的功勋。
English: Inheriting the achievements of Emperor Xuan Zi and achieving his own merits.

古文：登此隽乂，纠彼群凶。
现代文：提拔才德超群的，纠正那些凶人。
English: Promote those with superior talent and morality, and correct those who are violent.

古文：业业在位，帝既勤止。
现代文：在位兢兢业业，皇帝非常勤勉。
English: The emperor was very diligent during his reign.

古文：惟天之命，于穆之已。祠文皇帝登歌
现代文：天道啊，深远无穷。祠祭文皇帝司马昭的登歌：
English: Heaven's way, far-reaching and endless. The anthem of Emperor Sima Zhao of the small shrine festival:

古文：于皇时晋，允文文皇，聪明睿智，圣敬神武。
现代文：伟大的晋朝啊，有文德的文皇帝，聪明睿智，圣明神武。
English: The great Jin Dynasty, the Emperor Wen, who was kind, clever, and wise, and the Sage Shenwu.

古文：万机莫综，皇斯清之。
现代文：政务万机无人能处理，皇帝就来解决它们。
English: There are so many problems in the government that no one can handle them, so the emperor has to solve them.

古文：蛇豕放命，皇斯平之。
现代文：长蛇大猪违命害人，皇帝就来平定它们。
English: The long snake and the big pig violated their orders and harmed people, so the emperor came to subdue them.

古文：柔远能迩，简授英贤。
现代文：怀柔远方优抚近地，选拔任命英才贤人。
English: We should cherish the softness of the far and nurture the softness of the near, and select and appoint outstanding and wise people.

古文：创业垂统，勋格皇天。
现代文：创下基业留传下来，功勋齐天。
English: A record-setting legacy has been passed down, and the achievements are legion.

古文：祠庙飨神歌二篇
现代文：祠祭祖庙的飨神歌二篇：
English: There are two sacred poems of the ancestral temple:

古文：曰晋是常，享祀时序。
现代文：晋朝作为常规的，奉献祭祀遵循时令。
English: As is customary in the Jin Dynasty, the dedication and sacrifice followed the seasons.

古文：宗庙致敬，礼乐具举。
现代文：在宗庙向祖先致敬，袜仪音乐一起具备。
English: Pay homage to your ancestors at the ancestral temple, complete with stocking ceremony music.

古文：惟其来祭，普天率土。
现代文：说到来祭祀的，代表普天下各个地方。
English: The arrival of the sacrificial rites represents all parts of the world.

古文：牺樽既奠，清酤既载。
现代文：牺樽已经摆好，清酒已经斟满。
English: Sacrificial barrels have been set up, sake has been filled to the brim.

古文：亦有和羹，荐羞斯备。
现代文：还有调好的美味羹汤，美味的食品也备好了。
English: There is also a delicious yakitori soup prepared, and delicious food is also ready.

古文：蒸蒸永慕，感时兴思。
现代文：充满孝心的无尽思念，有感于当时情景而生发出来。
English: Endless thoughts full of filial piety, inspired by the situation at the time.

古文：登歌奏舞，神乐其和。
现代文：登堂献歌表演舞蹈，神灵为其中的和美而感到快乐。
English: They perform a song and dance in the temple, and the gods are happy because of the harmony and beauty.

古文：祖考来格，祐我邦家。
现代文：祖先们都来到了，保佑我们的邦国家园。
English: The ancestors have all come to bless our national home.

古文：溥天之下，罔不休嘉。
现代文：普天之下，无不美好嘉祥。
English: All over the world, everything is beautiful and auspicious.

古文：肃肃在位，济济臣工。
现代文：恭恭敬敬的在位者，济济一堂的群臣百官。
English: The incumbent, who is respected and revered, is surrounded by hundreds of courtiers.

古文：四海来格，神仪有容。
现代文：从四海来到这裹，神情仪表很有样子。
English: Having come all the way from the four seas, the appearance of the horse is very impressive.

古文：钟鼓振，管弦理，舞开元，歌永始，神胥乐兮！
现代文：钟鼓鸣响，管弦悠扬，为开始的新纪元起舞，为永久的基业歌唱，神灵都很快乐啊!
English: The bells and drums are ringing, the orchestra is melodious, dancing for the beginning of a new era, singing for the eternal inheritance, the gods are very happy!

古文：肃肃在位，臣工济济。
现代文：恭恭敬敬的在位者，群臣百官济济一堂。
English: Respectful of the incumbent, hundreds of courtiers gathered together.

古文：小大咸敬，上下有礼。
现代文：小官大官都很恭敬，上司下级都很有礼。
English: Junior officials and senior officials are very respectful, and superiors and subordinates are very courteous.

古文：理管弦，振鼓钟，舞象德，歌咏功，神胥乐兮！
现代文：调理管弦，奏响鼓钟，舞蹈象征德行，歌声咏唱功业，神灵都很快乐啊!
English: The orchestras are tuned, the drums and bells are played, the dances symbolize virtue, the songs chant the deeds, and the gods are happy!

古文：肃肃在位，有来雍雍。
现代文：恭恭敬敬的在位者，来宾们从容大方。
English: With all due respect to the incumbent, the guests left in a relaxed and generous manner.

古文：穆穆天子，相维辟公。
现代文：天子庄严，诸侯携手。
English: The Son of Heaven is solemn, and the princes join hands.

古文：礼有仪，乐有则，舞象功，歌咏德，神胥乐兮！
现代文：行礼有仪轨，奏乐有法度，舞蹈象征功业，歌声咏唱德行，神灵都很快乐啊!
English: Manners have rituals, music has rules, dance symbolizes work, singing and chanting are virtuous, and the gods are happy!

古文：杜夔传旧雅乐四曲，一曰《鹿鸣》，二曰《驺虞》，三曰《伐檀》，四曰《文王》，皆古声辞。
现代文：杜夔传下的旧《雅乐》有四部曲子，第一部叫《鹿鸣》，第二部叫《骝虞》，第三部叫《伐檀》，第四部叫《文王》，都是古代的旋律和歌词。
English: The old "Gara Music" passed down by Du Qiu has four pieces of music, the first part is called "Deer Song," the second part is called "Dragon Dance," the third part is called "Dragon Dance," and the fourth part is called "Wen Wang," all of which are ancient melodies and lyrics.

古文：及太和中，左延年改夔《驺虞》、《伐檀》、《文王》三曲，更自作声节，其名虽存，而声实异。
现代文：到了魏太和年间，左延年改编了杜夔的《骗虞》、《伐檀》、《文王》三部曲子，又自己创作旋律节拍，那个名称虽然保留，可是旋律其实不同。
English: During the Wei and Taiping dynasties, Zuo Yan'nian adapted three pieces of music by Cucao: "The Deception," "The Sandalwood Cutting" and "The King of Literature," and also created his own melody and beat. Although the name was retained, the melody was actually different.

古文：唯因夔《鹿鸣》，全不改易。
现代文：衹用了杜夔的《鹿呜》，完全没有改动。
English: He used Cuckoo's "The Deer" and did not change it at all.

古文：每正旦大会，太尉奉璧，群后行礼，东厢雅乐常作者是也。
现代文：每当正月初一的大会，太尉捧着玉璧，群臣行礼，在束厢经常演奏的雅乐就是那个。
English: Whenever there is a general assembly on the first day of the first month of the year, the captain holds the jade arrow, and the courtiers salute. This is the elegant music that is often played in the box.

古文：后又改三篇之行礼诗。
现代文：后来又改编造三篇作为行礼诗。
English: Later, three of the poems were adapted as prose poems.

古文：第一日《于赫篇》，咏武帝，声节与古《鹿鸣》同。
现代文：第一部叫做《于赫篇》，歌颂魏武帝，旋律节奏和古时候的《鹿鸣》相同。
English: The first part is called "Yu He," a song in praise of Emperor Wu of Wei, with the same melody and rhythm as the ancient "Deer Song."

古文：第二曰《巍巍篇》，咏文帝，用延年所改《驺虞》声。
现代文：第二部叫做《巍巍篇》，歌颂魏文帝，用左延年所改编的《骗虞》的旋律。
English: The second part is called "篇," a hymn to Wei Wendi, with the melody of "Lie" adapted by Zuo Yan Nian.

古文：第三日《洋洋篇》，咏明帝，用延年所改《文王》声。
现代文：第三部叫做《洋洋篇》，歌咏魏明帝，用左延年所改编的《文王》的旋律。
English: The third part is called "Yang Yang Zhen," sung by Wei Mingdi, with the melody of "Wen Wang" adapted by Zuo Yan Nian.

古文：第四曰复用《鹿鸣》。
现代文：第四部再用《鹿呜》。
English: In the fourth part, "Deer" is used again.

古文：《鹿鸣》之声重用，而除古《伐檀》。
现代文：《鹿呜》的旋律重新被用，而除去了古时候的《伐檀》。
English: The melody of "The Deer" has been reused, and the old-time "The Sandpiper" has been removed.

古文：及晋初，食举亦用《鹿鸣》。
现代文：到晋朝初年，进餐时也用《鹿鸣》。
English: By the first year of the Jin Dynasty, "Deer Song" was also used at meals.

古文：至泰始五年，尚书奏，使太仆傅玄、中书监荀勖、黄门侍郎张华各造正旦行礼及王公上寿酒、食举乐歌诗。
现代文：到晋泰始五年，尚书上奏，让太仆傅玄、中书监荀勖、黄门侍郎张华各自创作正月初一行礼的歌以及王公上寿酒的歌、食举乐的歌所用的歌诗。
English: In the first five years of the Jin and Tai dynasties, Shang Shuxu played the first song, and asked the eunuch Fu Xuan, the supervisor of the Chinese book, and the Yellow Gate waiter Zhang Hua to each create a song for the first month of the year, as well as a song for the prince's birthday, and a song for the meal.

古文：荀勖云： 魏氏行礼、食举，再取周诗《鹿鸣》以为乐章。
现代文：荀勖说： 魏朝行礼、食举的时候，一再取用周朝的诗《鹿岛》作为歌词。
English: Zou said: When the Wei Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty performed the ritual and food offering, they repeatedly used Zhou Dynasty's poem "Kashima" as the lyrics.

古文：又《鹿鸣》以宴嘉宾，无取于朝，考之旧闻，未知所应。 
现代文：另外《鹿鸣》是用来宴请嘉宾的，对于朝廷上的事没有可取的地方，根据旧有的记载和传说考证，不知道它有什么合适的。 
English: In addition, "Deersong" is used to invite guests to the banquet, there is no desirable place for things at the court, according to old records and legends, I do not know what is suitable for it.

古文：勖乃除《鹿鸣》旧歌更作行礼诗四篇，先陈三朝朝宗之义。
现代文：苟勖就除去旧有的《鹿鸣》歌而另外创作了四篇行礼诗，首先陈述在作为 三朝 的正月初一进行朝见天子礼仪的意义。
English: Goguryeo removed the old "Deer Song" from the anthem and created four additional poems of etiquette, first of all stating the significance of the ritual of seeing the Son of Heaven on the first day of the first month of the Three Dynasties.

古文：又为正旦大会、王公上寿歌诗并食举乐歌诗，合十三篇。
现代文：又作《正旦大会王公上寿歌》诗以及《食举乐歌》诗，合计十三篇。
English: He also wrote the poem "The Birthday Song of the Grand Duke of Zhengtang" and the poem "The Song of the Feast," a total of thirteen poems.

古文：又以魏氏歌诗或二言，或三言，或四言，或五言，与古诗不类，以问司律中郎将陈颀。
现代文：又因为魏朝的歌诗有的两个字一句，有的三个字一句，有的四个字一句，有的五个字一句，和古诗不同，因此询问司律中郎将陈颀。
English: In addition, because the poems of the Wei Dynasty have two words and one sentence, some have three words and one sentence, some have four words and one sentence, and some have five words and one sentence, which is different from the ancient poems, the interrogation of the chief magistrate will be Chen Yao.

古文：颀曰： 被之金石，未必皆当。 
现代文：陈颀说： 配上金石器乐，未必都很得当。 
English: Chen Yao said, "It is not necessarily a good idea to play the music with precious stone instruments.

古文：故勖造晋歌，皆为四言，唯王公上寿酒一篇为三言五言焉。
现代文：所以荀勖创作晋朝的歌，都用四个字一句，衹有《王公上寿酒》一篇是有三个字一句也有五个字一句的。
English: Therefore, the songs of the Jin Dynasty were all written with four words, and one of them, "Wanggu Shang Shouju," had three words and five words.

古文：张华以为 魏上寿、食举诗及汉氏所施用，其文句长短不齐，未皆合古。
现代文：张华认为 魏朝的《上寿》、《食举》诗以及汉朝所使用的，在文句上长短不齐，不完全符合古代的样子。
English: Zhang Hua believes that the poems of "Shang Shou" and "Shi Jiu" in the Wei Dynasty and those used in the Han Dynasty are uneven in length and do not fully conform to the ancient appearance.

古文：盖以依咏弦节，本有因循，而识乐知音，足以制声度曲，法用率非凡近之所能改。
现代文：大概因为依据旋律节拍歌唱，本来就有所依凭跟随，而瞄解了音乐，就足以配制乐曲，法度的应用通常不是凡人所能修改的。
English: Probably because they sing according to the rhythm of the melody, they already have something to follow, and understanding the music is enough to compose the music. The application of the law is usually not something that can be modified by ordinary people.

古文：二代三京，袭而不变，虽诗章辞异，兴废随时，至其韵逗留曲折，皆系于旧，有由然也。
现代文：两朝三都，沿袭使用而不改变，虽然诗歌的辞章措辞不同，兴用废除随时代不同，但说到它的句子的长短，完全和旧的相关联，都是有原由的。
English: The two dynasties and three capitals have been used in succession without change. Although the words and phrases of the poems are different, and the use of abolition varies with the times, but when it comes to the length of the sentence, it is completely related to the old, and there is a reason for it.

古文：是以一皆因就，不敢有所改易。 
现代文：因此一律都照旧，不敢有什么改变。 
English: Therefore, everything remains the same and nothing dares to change.

古文：此则华、勖所明异旨也。
现代文：造就是张华、荀勖所说明的不同的意思。
English: "Zo" is the different meaning explained by Zhang Hua and Zou.

古文：时诏又使中书侍郎成公绥亦作焉。
现代文：当时下韶又让中书侍郎成公绥也创作歌诗。
English: At that time, he also asked the chief secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Rong Chenggong, to write poems.

古文：今并采列之云。四厢乐歌
现代文：现在一齐采录列出。四厢乐歌：
English: Now all the recordings are listed.

古文：正旦大会行礼歌成公绥
现代文：正月初一大会行礼歌：成公绥
English: The first day of the first month of the year, the ceremonial song: Chenggongyi

古文：穆穆天子，光临万国。
现代文：庄严天子，统治万国。
English: Majestic Son of Heaven, rule all nations.

古文：多士盈朝，莫匪俊德。
现代文：人才站满朝廷，没有不是才能杰出德行高洁的。
English: The court was full of talented people, and there was no one who was not talented, virtuous and noble.

古文：流化罔极，王猷允塞。
现代文：影响和教化没有尽头，王道遍行天下。
English: There is no end to influence and indoctrination, and the royal road runs through the world.

古文：嘉会置酒，嘉宾充庭。
现代文：美好的宴会摆上酒席，美好的宾客充满院庭。
English: A splendid banquet is laid out on the banquet table, and beautiful guests fill the courtyard.

古文：羽旄曜宸极，钟鼓振泰清。
现代文：羽毛的旗帜辉耀着天空，钟鼓响在天地间。
English: Feathered banners light up the sky, and bells and drums ring out across the world.

古文：百辟朝三朝，彧彧明仪形。
现代文：百宫在正月初一这天来朝拜，文采美盛显示在仪容上。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the hundred palaces came to worship, and the beauty of the prose was reflected in the appearance.

古文：济济锵锵，金声玉振。
现代文：人才济济乐声锵锵，金声玉振。
English: Talents abound, music abounds, and the golden voice is resounding.

古文：礼乐具，宴嘉宾。
现代文：礼仪音乐齐备，宴请嘉宾。
English: The ceremonial music is ready, and the guests are dancing.

古文：眉寿祚圣皇，景福惟日新。
现代文：让圣明的皇帝长寿，让洪福天天更新。
English: Let Emperor Shengming live a long life, and let Hongfu be renewed every day.

古文：群后戾止，有来雍雍。
现代文：群臣一起来到，来者雍容大方。
English: A group of courtiers arrived together, and the visitors were gracious and generous.

古文：献酬纳贽，崇此礼容。
现代文：互相敬酒奉上见面礼，推崇这样的礼仪行为。
English: They toast each other and give each other a meeting gift, and they respect this kind of ceremonial behavior.

古文：丰羞万俎，旨酒千钟。
现代文：佳肴万盘，美酒千钟。
English: Thousands of dishes, thousands of bottles of wine.

古文：嘉乐尽宴乐，福禄咸攸同。
现代文：美妙的音乐共欢乐，无尽的福禄都同享。
English: Delightful music, shared joy, and endless good fortune.

古文：乐哉！天下安宁。
现代文：欢乐啊天下安宁。
English: Rejoice, the world is at peace.

古文：道化行，风俗清。
现代文：王道教化遍行，民风习俗清明。
English: The royal way of education is practiced everywhere, and the folk customs are clear.

古文：箫《韶》作，咏九成。年丰穰，世泰平。
现代文：箫《韶》那样的美妙音乐奏起来，歌颂了一遍又一遍。年成丰饶，世道太平。
English: The beautiful music of  "" is played, and the song is sung over and over again. The year is rich, and the world is peaceful.

古文：至治哉，乐无穷。
现代文：最好的统治啊，欢乐无边。
English: The best rule, the joy is boundless.

古文：元首聪明，股肱忠。
现代文：元首聪明，股肱忠诚。
English: The Fuhrer is clever and loyal.

古文：澍丰泽，扬清风。
现代文：像那滋润万物的好雨，像那轻轻吹拂的暖风。
English: Like the good rain that moistens everything, like the gently blowing warm wind.

古文：嘉瑞出，灵应彰。
现代文：美好的祥瑞出现，通灵的感应彰显。
English: Beautiful auspiciousness appears, and the channeling of inspiration is highlighted.

古文：麒麟见，凤皇翔。
现代文：麒麟出来，凤凰飞翔。
English: The unicorn comes out, the phoenix flies.

古文：醴泉涌，流中唐。
现代文：醴泉喷涌，流过庭院。
English: The spring gushed forth and flowed through the courtyard.

古文：嘉禾生，穗盈箱。
现代文：嘉禾长出，盛满仓房。
English: Jiahe grows up and fills the storeroom.

古文：降繁祉，祚圣皇。
现代文：降下多福，佑助圣皇。
English: Descend to Dafu and help the Holy Emperor.

古文：承天位，统万国。
现代文：承受天位，统治万国。
English: He will inherit the heavenly throne and rule over all nations.

古文：受命应期，授圣德，四世重光。
现代文：接受天命顺应期运，传授圣德，四世辉光相承。
English: Accepting the fate of heaven, conforming to the time, teaching holiness, the fourth generation inherits the glory.

古文：宣开洪业，景克昌，文钦明，德弥彰。
现代文：宣帝开辟宏伟基业，景帝发扬光大，文帝敬肃明察，德行更加彰显。
English: Emperor Xuan opened up a magnificent foundation, Emperor Jing carried forward the glory, Emperor Wen respected and observed, and the virtue was more prominent.

古文：肇启晋邦，流祚无疆。
现代文：从此开创晋朝，流传福柞无疆。
English: From then on, he created the Jin Dynasty and spread the legend of "Fu Yao Wujiang."

古文：泰始建元，凤皇龙兴。
现代文：建立第一个年号泰始，好比凤凰夭矫腾飞而起。
English: The establishment of the first year, Taizhi, is like a phoenix taking off.

古文：龙兴伊何，享祚万乘。
现代文：腾飞起来是什么样子，享有万乘之君的福祚。
English: What does it look like to take off and enjoy the blessings of the Prince of Ten Thousand Blessings?

古文：奄有八荒，化育黎蒸。
现代文：拥有八方荒远的地方，教化养育黎民。
English: It has far-flung and desolate places, and has educated and nurtured the Li people.

古文：图书既焕，金石有徵。
现代文：图书文章焕然有光彩，金石音乐有所表征。
English: The books and articles are resplendent, and the music of Jinshi is well represented.

古文：德光大，道熙隆。
现代文：德行光大，正道兴盛。
English: Virtue shines brightly, righteousness prospers.

古文：被四表，格皇穹。
现代文：影响四方，直达天穹。
English: Affecting the four directions, reaching up to the heavens.

古文：奕奕万嗣，明明显融，高朗令终。
现代文：光照万代，辉煌显著，美好善终。
English: Shining brightly for generations to come, with remarkable brilliance and a happy ending.

古文：保兹永祚，与天比崇。
现代文：保有遣无尽的福祚，和天比高。
English: Possessing inexhaustible blessings is higher than heaven.

古文：圣皇君四海，顺人应天期。
现代文：圣明的皇帝君临四海，顺人心而响应上天的期待。
English: The Emperor of the Holy Light reigns over the four seas, pleasing the people and responding to the expectations of heaven.

古文：三叶合重光，泰始开洪基。
现代文：三代相承光辉万世，从泰始开创宏伟基业。
English: Three generations have inherited the glory of eternity and created a magnificent foundation from the beginning.

古文：明曜参日月，功化侔四时。
现代文：光明显赫和日月同辉，功业教化和四季并存。
English: The light is obviously bright and the sun and the moon are the same, the work of enlightenment and the four seasons coexist.

古文：宇宙清且泰，黎庶咸雍熙，善哉雍熙！
现代文：宇宙清平而又安泰，黎民庶人都和乐升平，多么美好啊和乐升平!
English: The universe is peaceful and safe, and the common people of Li are peaceful and happy. How wonderful it is to be peaceful and happy!

古文：惟天降命，翼仁祐圣。
现代文：上天降下大命，辅助仁人保佑圣贤。
English: Heaven has decreed a great destiny to assist the benevolent and bless the sages.

古文：于穆三皇，载德弥盛。
现代文：庄严伟大的三位皇帝，德行更加盛大。
English: The three great emperors were dignified and great, and their virtue was even greater.

古文：总齐璇玑，光统七政。
现代文：总揽权柄，主掌七政。
English: The general seizes power and is in charge of the seven governments.

古文：百揆时序，化若神圣。
现代文：百官称职，教化可比神人圣人的统治。
English: A hundred officials are competent, and the rule of saints can be compared to the rule of gods.

古文：四海同风，兴至仁。
现代文：四海是同一种风化，有了至高的仁。
English: The four seas are the same kind of weathering, with the highest benevolence.

古文：济民育物，拟陶均。
现代文：帮助人民化育万物，比得上天地造化。
English: Helping the people to cultivate all things is comparable to the creation of heaven and earth.

古文：拟陶均，垂惠润。
现代文：比得上天地造化，布施下美好的恩德。
English: Comparable to the creation of heaven and earth, the benevolence of giving is wonderful.

古文：皇皇群贤，峨峨英隽。
现代文：出众的许多贤臣，卓越的英才俊士。
English: There are many outstanding sages, outstanding and talented young men.

古文：德化宣，芬芳播来胤。
现代文：德行教化流布，芬芳传给后代。
English: Virtue is taught and spread, and fragrance is passed on to future generations.

古文：播来胤，垂后昆。
现代文：传给后代，垂范子孙。
English: To be passed on to future generations, to be emulated by future generations.

古文：清庙何穆穆，皇极辟四门。
现代文：太庙多么庄严肃穆，皇帝设立明堂四门。
English: How solemn and solemn the imperial temple is. The emperor has set up four Ming-style halls.

古文：皇极辟四门，万机无不综。
现代文：皇帝设立明堂四门，所有国事没有不处理的。
English: The emperor set up four courthouses and dealt with all state affairs.

古文：亹亹翼翼，乐不及荒，饥不遑食。
现代文：勤勉不倦恭敬谨慎，快乐而不至于迷乱荒唐，饿了顾不上吃饭。
English: To be industrious and tireless, respectful and prudent, to be happy without being confused and absurd, and not to be able to eat when hungry.

古文：大礼既行，乐无极。
现代文：大礼既已施行，欢乐无边。
English: Now that the grand ceremony has taken place, the joy is boundless.

古文：登昆仑，上层城。
现代文：登上昆仑，走上层城。
English: boarded the Kunlun, embarked on the stratified city.

古文：乘飞龙，升泰清。
现代文：驾着飞龙，升到天空。
English: Ride the dragon and soar into the sky.

古文：冠日月，佩五星。
现代文：以日月为冠，以五星为佩。
English: With the sun and the moon as the crown, with the five stars as the peak.

古文：扬虹霓，建篲旌。
现代文：扬起虹霓，竖起等旌。
English: Hoist the rainbow lanterns, erect the lanterns.

古文：披庆云，廕繁荣。
现代文：披着庆云，装点繁花。
English: Dressed in festive clouds, decorated with flowers.

古文：览八极，游天庭。
现代文：眺望八极，游览天庭。
English: View the eight poles, tour the heavenly garden.

古文：顺天地，和阴阳。
现代文：顺应天地，调和阴阳。
English: Conform to heaven and earth, and harmonize yin and yang.

古文：序四时，曜三光。
现代文：按四季作息，以日月星为准。
English: According to the four seasons, based on the sun, moon and stars.

古文：张帝纲，正皇纲。
现代文：张开帝业的大纲，端正皇朝的纲纪。
English: Open up the outline of the emperor's career and rectify the discipline of the imperial dynasty.

古文：播仁风，流惠康。
现代文：广泛推行仁政，扩大恩惠和康宁。
English: We will widely implement benevolent policies and expand the scope of benevolence and conning.

古文：迈洪化，振灵威。
现代文：勤勉于宏大的教化，弘扬威灵权势。
English: diligently in the grand enlightenment, carry forward the authoritative power.

古文：怀万方，纳九夷。
现代文：使万方归心，使九夷纳贡。
English: To make all parties come to their senses, and to make Jiujiang pay tribute.

古文：朝阊阖，宴紫微。
现代文：来朝拜的好像到了天庭，宴席就像摆在紫微星那裹。
English: Those who come to pay homage seem to be in heaven, and the banquet is like being wrapped in a purple star.

古文：建五旗，罗钟虡。
现代文：树起五旗，罗列钟虞。
English: Five flags are raised, and the bell is rung.

古文：列四悬，奏《韶》《武》。
现代文：摆出四悬，奏起炽》、《武》。
English: The four pendants are displayed, and "Fire" and "Battle" begin to play.

古文：铿金石，扬旌羽。
现代文：金石铿锵，旌羽飞扬。
English: Gold pebbles ricochet, dragonfly wings flutter.

古文：纵八佾，《巴渝舞》。
现代文：排出八佾，跳起《巴渝》。
English: Remove the eight shackles, and "Bai Yu" will start.

古文：咏雅颂，和律吕。
现代文：歌咏雅颂，调和律吕。
English: Singing a beautiful song, harmonizing with the rhythm.

古文：于胥乐，乐圣主。
现代文：同欢乐啊，乐有圣主。
English: Rejoice and be glad in the Lord.

古文：化荡荡，清风泄。
现代文：教化荡荡，风气清明。
English: The culture is clear.

古文：总英雄，御俊杰。
现代文：统领英雄，驱使俊杰。
English: Leading the heroes, driving the heroes.

古文：开宇宙，扫四裔。
现代文：开辟纪元，扫清四裔。
English: Open up the era, sweep away the four descendants.

古文：光缉熙，美圣哲。
现代文：光辉显赫，美好圣哲。
English: Shining bright, beautiful saint.

古文：超百代，扬休烈。
现代文：超越百代，弘扬伟业。
English: To surpass a hundred generations and carry forward the great cause.

古文：流景祚，显万世。
现代文：传下帝业，功显万世。
English: To pass down the imperial tradition is a great achievement for all time.

古文：皇皇显祖，翼世佐时。
现代文：伟大显祖，救世济时。
English: The great ancestor, the savior of the world.

古文：宁济六合，受命应期。神武鹰扬，大化咸熙。
现代文：安定海内，承受天命。神奇威武，大化光明。
English: Stable at sea, able to withstand the fate of the heavens. Magical and powerful, ever brighter.

古文：廊开皇衢，用成帝基。
现代文：开辟大道，成就帝基。
English: Open up the avenue and achieve the goal.

古文：光光景皇，无竞惟烈。
现代文：辉煌呈壶，无比伟绩。
English: A brilliant performance in the jug, an incomparable achievement.

古文：匡时拯俗，休功盖世。
现代文：拯救人民，功业盖世。
English: To save the people is a great achievement.

古文：宇宙既康，九域有截。
现代文：海内安康，九域分明。
English: The inland sea is safe and sound, and the situation in nine regions is clear.

古文：天命降监，启祚明哲。
现代文：天命降临，明哲发祥。
English: As fate would have it, Mingzhe was born.

古文：穆穆烈考，克明克隽。
现代文：庄严先祖，英明卓越。
English: A dignified ancestor, wise and outstanding.

古文：实天生德，诞应灵运。
现代文：天生有德，顺应灵运。
English: Born with virtue, follow the spirit of fortune.

古文：肇建帝业，开国有晋。
现代文：创立帝业，晋朝开国。
English: He founded the Imperial Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty and founded the country.

古文：载德奕世，垂庆洪胤。
现代文：美德传世，功垂后代。
English: Virtue is handed down from generation to generation.

古文：明明圣帝，龙飞在天。
现代文：圣明先帝，龙腾飞天。
English: Emperor Shengming, dragons soar into the sky.

古文：与灵合契，通德幽玄。
现代文：符合神意，通达天理。
English: It is in accordance with God's will and is in accordance with divine principles.

古文：仰化青云，俯育重川。
现代文：仰化青云，俯育百川。
English: Yanghua Qingyun, supercilious education Baichuan.

古文：受灵之祐，于万斯年。
现代文：承受庇佑，亿万万年。
English: It has been protected for billions of years.

古文：正旦大会王公上寿酒歌荀勖
现代文：正月初一大会王公上寿酒之歌：荀勖跨入新年第一天，让光明布散开来。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the song of Wang Gong's birthday wine was sung: "Let the bright cloth spread out on the first day of the new year."

古文：践元辰，延显融。
现代文：献上美酒，祈祷美好的未来。
English: Offer good wine and pray for a better future.

古文：献羽觞，祈令终。我皇寿而隆，我皇茂而嵩。
现代文：我的皇帝长寿而兴隆，我的皇帝基业繁荣而伟大。
English: My emperor lives long and prosperously, and my emperor's foundation is prosperous and great.

古文：本枝奋百世，休祚钟圣躬。
现代文：子孙传百代，好运同归您。
English: Your descendants will pass it down for hundreds of generations. Good luck to you.

古文：食举乐东西厢歌荀勖
现代文：食举乐东西厢之歌：荀勖
English: Song of the East and West Compartments:

古文：煌煌七曜，重明交暢。
现代文：亮晶晶的七星，光明辉映。
English: The seven bright stars shine brightly.

古文：我有嘉宾，是应是贶。
现代文：我有美好的宾客，要照应宴享他们。
English: I have wonderful guests and I want to treat them well.

古文：邦政既图，接以大飨。
现代文：邦国政务已经谋划，接着就来大摆宴席。
English: The state and national affairs have been planned, followed by a grand banquet.

古文：人之好我，式遵德让。
现代文：人们对我友好，遵守德行和礼让。
English: People are friendly to me and observe good manners and courtesy.

古文：宾之初筵，蔼蔼济济。
现代文：宾客开始入席，济济一堂。
English: The guests began to take their seats.

古文：既朝乃宴，以洽百礼。
现代文：上朝过后就开宴会，使各种礼节融洽。
English: After the Last Supper, a banquet was held to harmonize all kinds of etiquette.

古文：颁以位叙，或庭或陛。
现代文：座位按照官职论，有的在上有的在下。
English: Seats are arranged according to official positions, some at the top and some at the bottom.

古文：登傧台叟，亦有兄弟。
现代文：让三公长者上座，也照顾到兄弟。
English: Let the three elders take their seats, and also take care of the brothers.

古文：胥子陪寮，宪兹度楷。
现代文：小官小吏，以此为法则和楷模。
English: The petty official and the petty official, this is the rule and model.

古文：观颐养正，降福孔偕。
现代文：观察养生涵养正道，天降福祉就会很多。
English: Observing the right way of health care and self-cultivation, there will be a lot of heavenly welfare.

古文：昔我三后，大业是维。
现代文：从前我们的三位帝王，奠定遣份宏大基业。
English: Once upon a time, our three emperors laid a great foundation.

古文：今我圣皇，焜炔前晖。
现代文：如今我们的圣明皇上，可以和前代的光辉相匹。
English: Today, our Holy Emperor can match the brilliance of his predecessors.

古文：奕世重规，明照九畿。
现代文：代代功德相继，光明照亮九畿。
English: From generation to generation, merits and virtues succeed one another, and the light illuminates the nine provinces.

古文：思辑用光，时罔有违。
现代文：想的是团结人民光大国家，时刻没有相违的地方。
English: The idea is to unite the people and the country, and there is no contradiction at any time.

古文：陟禹之迹，莫不来威。
现代文：紧随大禹的足迹，没有不被招来的。
English: Following in Dayu's footsteps, there is no such thing as not being invited.

古文：天被显禄，福履是绥。
现代文：天赐显贵地位，安享这份福禄。
English: God-given dignified status, enjoy this blessing.

古文：赫矣太祖，克广明德。
现代文：多么伟大啊我们的太祖，能弘扬圣明的德行。
English: How great was our great-grandfather, who was able to propagate the virtues of Shing Ming.

古文：廊开宇宙，正世立则。
现代文：开辟新的纪元，纠正世道树立法则。
English: To open up a new era and correct the laws of the world.

古文：变化不经，民无瑕慝。
现代文：改变荒唐不经的，使人民不犯过失。
English: To change the absurd and careless, so that the people do not make mistakes.

古文：创业垂统，兆我晋国。
现代文：创立基业留下统绪，使我晋国有了开始。
English: The founding of the foundation left a unifying theme, so that my promotion to the country had a beginning.

古文：烈文伯考，时维帝景。
现代文：辉煌的伯考，就是景帝。
English: The brilliant Berkow is the king.

古文：夷险平乱，威而不猛。
现代文：度过艰险平定世乱，威武而不凶猛。
English: Overcoming hardships and calms world turmoil, he is powerful but not fierce.

古文：御衡不迷，皇涂焕景。
现代文：驾御大车而没有迷路，宽阔大道光明灿烂。
English: Driving a car without getting lost, the broad avenue is bright and shiny.

古文：七德咸宣，其宁惟永。
现代文：七种德行全都弘扬，和平安宁将永远保持。
English: All seven virtues will be promoted, and peace and tranquility will be maintained forever.

古文：猗欤盛欤！
现代文：多么昌盛啊!
English: What prosperity!

古文：先皇圣文。
现代文：先皇圣明的文帝。
English: Emperor Wen of Emperor Shengming.

古文：则天作孚，大哉为君。
现代文：效仿上天树立诚信，真是伟大啊作为君主。
English: It is truly great to be a monarch who emulates heaven in establishing integrity.

古文：慎徽五典，帝载是勤。
现代文：恭谨宣扬五典，勤勉于帝业。
English: Respectfully proclaim the Five Classics, and diligently pursue the imperial cause.

古文：文武发挥，茂建嘉勋。
现代文：文才武功一起发挥，建立了许多美好的功勋。
English: Literary talent and martial arts have been brought into play together, and many wonderful feats have been established.

古文：修己济治，民用宁殷。
现代文：修身而有利治理，人民因此安宁殷阜。
English: It is conducive to self-cultivation and beneficial to governance, so the people are peaceful and prosperous.

古文：怀远烛幽，玄教氤氲。
现代文：安抚远方关照幽隐，美好的教化笼罩四方。
English: To pacify the far away, to care for the obscure, and to spread a beautiful enlightenment everywhere.

古文：善世不伐，服事三分。
现代文：太平世道不搞征伐，维护天下三分的形势。
English: The Taiping World Way does not engage in conquest, but maintains a three-point situation in the world.

古文：德博化隆，道昌无垠。
现代文：德政广博教化隆盛，道行昌盛无限。
English: Virtuous governance, wide-ranging education and enlightenment have flourished, and Taoism has enjoyed unlimited prosperity.

古文：隆化洋洋，帝命溥将。
现代文：风气敦厚无边，天帝的赐命多么广大。
English: The atmosphere is thick and boundless, and the emperor's command is so vast.

古文：登我晋道，越惟圣王。
现代文：使我晋朝大道确立，超越前代圣王。
English: Let me establish the road to ascend to the throne, surpassing the previous holy kings.

古文：龙飞革运，临焘八荒。
现代文：像龙腾飞而革新时运，庇护八方辽远的地方。
English: Like a dragon taking flight, it innovates time and fortune, and shelters places far and wide.

古文：睿哲钦明，配踪虞唐。
现代文：明智敬肃而明察秋毫，事迹配得上虞舜、唐尧。
English: Wise, reverent, and keenly observant, his deeds are worthy of the top echelons of the eunuchs of the Yue and Tang Dynasties.

古文：封建厥福，骏发其祥。
现代文：封土建国享有他的福分，大量开垦耕种结果非常吉祥。
English: The founding of the country as a fief enjoyed its share of blessings, and the results of extensive reclamation and cultivation were very auspicious.

古文：三朝习吉，终然允臧。
现代文：在 三朝 的日子裹占卜都得到吉兆，最终果然真的很好。
English: In the days of the Three Dynasties, all the divination got good omens, and in the end it was really good.

古文：其臧维何，总彼万方。
现代文：要问那好是什么样的，就是统治各方。
English: If you want to know what that's like, it's the ruling parties.

古文：元侯列辟，四岳籓王。
现代文：重臣大吏公卿百官，诸侯的首领藩国的王。
English: The chief vassals, dignitaries, court nobles, officials, princes, lords and kings of the feudal state.

古文：时见世享，率兹有常。
现代文：时时朝见世代享受，奉行这些保持不变。
English: From generation to generation, the enjoyment and pursuit of these remain unchanged.

古文：旅揖在庭，嘉客在堂。
现代文：众人在庭中作揖，嘉宾在堂上做客。
English: Many people were making bonfires in the courtyard, and the guests were dancing in the hall.

古文：宋卫既臻，陈留山阳。
现代文：宋、卫会聚到一起丁，还有陈留王和山阳公。
English: Song, Wei will gather together Ding, as well as Chen Liu Wang and Sanyang.

古文：有宾有使，观国之光。
现代文：有宾客有使节，都来观览国家的光彩。
English: Guests and envoys came to see the glory of the country.

古文：贡贤纳计，献璧奉璋。
现代文：推荐贤人提出计谋，献上玉璧奉上圭璋。
English: Recommend sages to put forward strategies, and present the gems to the emperor.

古文：保祐命之，申锡无疆。
现代文：保佑并且赐命给他们，丰厚的恩赐没有止境。
English: Bless them and give them life, for there is no end to your unfathomable riches.

古文：振鹭于飞，鸿渐其翼。
现代文：像成群的白鹭聚集飞翔，像鸿鹄递次比翼飞起。
English: Like flocks of egrets gathering to fly, like great crested newts taking wing.

古文：京邑穆穆，四方是式。
现代文：庞大的都市庄严雄伟，四面八方以此为楷模。
English: The huge city is majestic and majestic, and it is a model in all directions.

古文：无竞维人，王纲允敕。
现代文：聚集了无比的人才，王道纲纪完全得到整顿。
English: It has gathered incomparable talents, and the Wang Dao Gangji has been completely rectified.

古文：君子来朝，言观其极。
现代文：君子们都来朝拜，观览如此的盛况。
English: All the nobles came to pay homage and watch such a grand occasion.

古文：暠郧大君，民之攸暨。
现代文：恭恭敬敬的伟大君主，是人民希望的曙光。
English: The revered great monarch is the dawn of hope for the people.

古文：信理天工，惠康不匮。
现代文：认真地代上天处理事务，恩惠安康从不匮缺。
English: Deal with affairs conscientiously on behalf of heaven, and you will never lack the blessings of health.

古文：将远不仁，训以醇粹。
现代文：对待远方不讲仁义的，用精纯不杂的道理来教导他们。
English: If you want to be kind to those who are far away, you must teach them the pure and simple truth.

古文：幽明有伦，俊乂在位。
现代文：善恶贤愚有了层次，出众的人才获得职位。
English: The good, the evil, the wise and the foolish have a hierarchy, and outstanding talents get positions.

古文：九族既睦，庶邦顺比。
现代文：九族已经和睦，庶民邦国没有抵触。
English: The nine ethnic groups have been reconciled, and there is no conflict between the common people and the state.

古文：开元布宪，四海鳞萃。
现代文：开辟纪元发布宪令，四海的人们成群地来到。
English: At the dawn of the new era, a constitutional decree was issued, and people from all over the world came in droves.

古文：协时正统，殊涂同致。
现代文：按照时势匡正一统的天下，从不同的途径实现同样的目的。
English: According to the current situation of the world of rectitude and unity, the same goal can be achieved through different means.

古文：厚德载物，灵心隆贵。
现代文：德行深厚承载万物，心有灵感使贵人高升。
English: Virtue is a deep carrier of all things, and the heart is inspired to elevate the noble.

古文：敷奏谠言，纳以无讳。
现代文：向皇帝陈述正直的意见，采纳起来没有避讳。
English: He presented his honest opinion to the emperor and did not hesitate to accept it.

古文：树之典象，诲之义类。
现代文：树立起典范的样子，用好人教诲他们。
English: Set an example and teach them by being a good person.

古文：上教如风，下应如卉。
现代文：上面的教导像和风一样，下面的响应像花卉一样。
English: The teachings above are like the wind, and the responses below are like flowers.

古文：一人有废，群萌以遂。
现代文：一个人有了好的苗头，大家都起来帮助他成功。
English: A person has a good seedling, and everyone gets up to help him succeed.

古文：我后宴喜，令问不坠。
现代文：我们的君主设宴而欢喜，善意的问候从不阙失。
English: Our sovereign feasts and rejoices, and never fails to give a friendly greeting.

古文：既宴既喜，翕是万邦。
现代文：宴会进行了心情欢喜了，使所有的邦国和谐相处。
English: The banquet was held in a joyful mood, so that all the nations could live in harmony.

古文：礼仪卒度，物有其容。
现代文：礼仪最终都施行了，事物有了各自的面貌。
English: The etiquette has finally been implemented, and things have their own appearance.

古文：晰晰庭燎，喤々鼓钟。
现代文：院子裹明亮的火把，铜钟皮鼓咚咚的声音。
English: Bright torches lit up the courtyard, and the sound of a brass gong was heard.

古文：笙磬咏德，万舞象功。
现代文：笙和石磬咏颂德政，万舞象征的是功业。
English: The skull and crossbones are in praise of virtue, and the dance is a symbol of hard work.

古文：八音克谐，俗易化从。
现代文：各种乐器的声音非常和谐，风俗因此改变而教化随之跟从。
English: The sound of various musical instruments is very harmonious, and customs change accordingly, and enlightenment follows.

古文：其和如乐，庶品时邕。
现代文：那种和谐像音乐一样，万事万物相安太平。
English: That harmony is like music, everything is peaceful.

古文：时邕斌斌，六合同尘。
现代文：时世太平文质兼备，天地宇宙混合统一。
English: The times and the culture are both peaceful, and heaven and earth and the universe are mixed and unified.

古文：往我祖宣，威静殊邻。
现代文：从前我们的先祖宣皇帝，威镇四方邻国。
English: Once upon a time, our ancestors Emperor Xuan, Wizhen's neighbors in all directions.

古文：首定荆楚，遂平燕秦。
现代文：首先安定南方的荆楚一带，接着平定北方的燕秦之地。
English: First, the Jingchu region in the south was stabilized, and then the Yanqin region in the north was pacified.

古文：亹亹文皇，迈德流仁。
现代文：勤勉不倦的文皇帝，勉力树德流布仁义。
English: The diligent and tireless Emperor Wen strove to cultivate virtue and spread benevolence.

古文：爰造草昧，应乾顺民。
现代文：草创之初，顺应天意顺从民心。
English: At the beginning of the creation, we obeyed the will of heaven and the people.

古文：灵瑞告符，休徵响震。
现代文：上天显示的祥瑞次次相符，吉祥的征兆一一应验。
English: The auspicious signs shown by the heavens coincide one after another, and the auspicious signs come true one after another.

古文：天地弗违，以和神人。
现代文：天地不相违，而神灵与人关系和睦。
English: Heaven and earth do not contradict each other, and gods and humans have a harmonious relationship.

古文：既禽庸蜀，吴会是宾。
现代文：既征服庸和蜀一带，又成为吴会的主人。
English: He not only conquered the areas around Yonghe and Shu, but also became the master of Wuhui.

古文：肃慎率职，楛矢来陈。
现代文：肃慎前来朝贡，陈献楛矢弓弩。
English: Suspicion came to pay tribute, Chen Xianqian, bow and arrow.

古文：韩濊进乐，宫徵清钧。
现代文：韩减进献音乐，宫征清扬和谐。
English: Han Yanjin presented music, and Gongzheng promoted harmony.

古文：西旅献獒，扶南效珍。
现代文：西戎进献獒犬，南方的部落送上奇珍。
English: The tribes in the south of the country sent strange and rare dogs, while the tribes in the west of the country presented dogs.

古文：蛮裔重译，玄齿文身。
现代文：蛮荒四裔需要多重翻译的地方，那些有玄色牙齿或有文身的人。
English: There are places where the barbaric four races need multiple translations, those with black teeth or tattoos.

古文：我皇抚之，景命惟新。
现代文：我们的皇帝安抚他们，伟大的天命偏向了新的朝代。
English: Our emperor appeased them, and the great destiny of heaven favored the new dynasty.

古文：愔愔嘉会，有闻无声。
现代文：和睦欢悦的美好宴会，有好的名声而不喧哗。
English: A beautiful banquet of harmony and joy, with a good reputation and no noise.

古文：清酤既奠，笾豆既升。
现代文：清酒已经斟上，篷豆已经陈列。
English: The sake has been poured and the taro beans have been displayed.

古文：礼充乐备，箫《韶》九成。
现代文：礼仪不缺音乐齐备，箫《韶》演奏完毕。
English: The etiquette is complete, the music is ready, and the performance of 《》 is complete.

古文：恺乐饮酒，酣而不盈。
现代文：欢快高兴地喝酒，酒酣而不过分。
English: Drink cheerfully and enjoyably, sipping but not to excess.

古文：率土欢豫，邦国以宁。
现代文：所有的地方都欢乐，邦国因此而安宁。
English: And there was joy in all the land; and the country was quiet.

古文：王猷允塞，万载无倾。
现代文：王道充分施行，千秋万代不改变。
English: The royal road is fully implemented and will not change for thousands of generations.

古文：冬至初岁小会歌张华
现代文：冬至初岁小会歌：张华
English: Winter solstice first-year children's song: Zhang Hua

古文：日月不留，四气回周。
现代文：日月经天不停，四季周而复始。
English: The sun, moon and stars never stop moving, and the four seasons repeat themselves.

古文：节庆代序，万国同休。
现代文：时令节气更替，万国同享福禄。
English: Seasons and solar terms change, and all nations share the same happiness.

古文：庶尹群后，奉寿升朝。
现代文：百官群僚，为祝寿登上朝堂。
English: Hundreds of officials and colleagues came to the Imperial Palace to celebrate his birthday.

古文：我有寿礼，式宴百僚。
现代文：我备有寿礼，招待百官臣僚。
English: I have prepared a birthday party, inviting hundreds of officials and ministers.

古文：繁肴绮错，旨酒泉渟。
现代文：丰盛的佳肴像锦绣一样错杂陈列，香甜的美酒像泉水一样聚集而不流。
English: Sumptuous delicacies are displayed in a jumble like brocade, and sweet wine is gathered like spring water but does not flow.

古文：笙镛和奏，磬管流声。
现代文：笙和锈和谐地奏响，磬和管流淌出美声。
English: The gong and the reed played in harmony, and the gong and the pipe flowed out beautiful voices.

古文：上隆其爱，下尽其心。
现代文：皇上厚爱，下臣尽心。
English: Emperors love generously, and their vassals do their best.

古文：宣其壅滞，训之德音。
现代文：宣泄出胸中的郁积，用德音来训导。
English: Let out the stagnation in the chest, and use the German consonants to instruct.

古文：乃宣乃训，配享交泰。
现代文：已经宣泄并导了，君臣上下同心同德。
English: It has been vented and led, and the monarchs and ministers are united in the same spirit.

古文：永载仁风，长抚无外。
现代文：永远保持仁义的风气，长久地安抚而没有外心。
English: Always maintain the ethos of benevolence and righteousness, long-term appeasement and no extroversion.

古文：宴会歌张华
现代文：宴会歌：张华
English: Banquet song: Zhang Hua

古文：亹亹我皇，配天垂光。
现代文：我们勤勉不倦的皇上，和上天一样垂下光明。
English: Our diligent and tireless emperor sheds light like the heavens.

古文：留精日昃，经览无方。
现代文：集中精力直到太阳偏西，治理明察无与伦比。
English: Concentrate until the sun is westward, governance is clearly unparalleled.

古文：听朝有暇，延命众臣。
现代文：处理朝政而有闲暇，请来各位臣子。
English: If you have leisure time while dealing with court politics, please come, all you courtiers.

古文：冠盖云集，樽俎星陈。
现代文：冠带和车盖像云一样聚集，酒樽和食器像繁星一样陈列。
English: Crowns and bonnets gather like clouds, wine bottles and crockery are displayed like stars.

古文：肴蒸多品，八珍代变。
现代文：菜肴有众多的品种，烹调有无数的变化。
English: There are many varieties of dishes and countless variations in cooking.

古文：羽爵无算，究乐极宴。
现代文：碰杯无数次，极尽欢乐饮宴。
English: They clinked glasses for the umpteenth time and enjoyed the banquet to the full.

古文：歌者流声，舞者投袂。
现代文：唱的人放歌，跳的人舞袖。
English: Singers sing, dancers dance.

古文：动容有节，丝竹并设。
现代文：举止姿态各有节律，丝竹乐器一起奏响。
English: Each posture has its own rhythm, and the silk and bamboo musical instruments play together.

古文：宜扬四体，繁手趣挚。
现代文：舞动的肢体非常得宜，演奏的手法复杂而有分寸。
English: The dancing limbs are very appropriate, and the playing technique is complex and measured.

古文：欢足发和，酣不忘礼。
现代文：高兴地跺脚高声地和唱，尽情而不忘礼数。
English: Happy to stamp their feet loudly in unison and sing as much as they can without forgetting the number of bows.

古文：好乐无荒，翼翼济济。
现代文：美妙快乐没有止境，恭敬谨慎而整齐美好。
English: There is no end to beauty and happiness, respectful and careful, neat and beautiful.

古文：命将出征歌张华
现代文：命令将士出征歌：张华
English: Ordering soldiers to go to war: Zhang Hua sings

古文：重华隆帝道，戎蛮或不宾。
现代文：虞舜帝道兴隆，戎狄蛮夷有的却不服从。
English: Emperor Yunyang is flourishing, but some of his subordinates are disobedient.

古文：徐夷兴有周，鬼方亦违殷。
现代文：周朝有逮袁作乱，员适有皇方造反。
English: The Zhou Dynasty arrested Yuan for creating a disturbance, and members of the imperial side rebelled.

古文：今在盛明世，寇虐动四垠。
现代文：如今处在盛明的世道，寇贼暴虐的人在四方活动。
English: Now we are in a flourishing world, and the bandits and tyrants are active in all directions.

古文：豺狼染牙爪，群生号穹旻。
现代文：凶恶的豺狼染红了利牙尖爪，民众的哀号响彻苍穹。
English: The vicious jackals reddened their sharp teeth and claws, and the wailing of the people rang through the sky.

古文：元帅统方夏，出车抚凉秦。
现代文：元帅统领华夏，出兵平定凉州秦地。
English: The marshal-commander Huaxia dispatched troops to subdue Qin in Liangzhou.

古文：众贞必以律，臧否实在人。
现代文：众人的美好善良必定要出自法度，赞扬还是批评其实在于自己。
English: The beauty and goodness of all people must come from the law, and praise or criticism actually lies in oneself.

古文：威信加殊类，疏逖思自亲。
现代文：威严和诚信施加给异族，在荒远的地方想的是自己的亲人。
English: Majesty and good faith are imposed on a foreign people, while in a faraway place one thinks of one's own relatives.

古文：单醪岂有味，挟纩感至仁。
现代文：单是醪糟哪裹会有味，关心抚慰使人感受到真正的仁。
English: Even a bowl of rice noodles will taste good, and caring about comforting people will make them feel truly benevolent.

古文：武功尚止戈，七德美安民。
现代文：武力的功业崇尚的是制止干戈，武的七种德行裹最美的是使人民安宁。
English: The accomplishment of force is to stop the fighting, and the most beautiful of the seven virtues of martial arts is to make the people peaceful.

古文：远迹由斯举，永世无风尘。
现代文：远大的业绩从这裹开始，永远没有出征的风尘。
English: Great achievements start from here, and there is never any wind and dust of going to war.

古文：劳还师歌张华
现代文：慰劳军队还师歌：张华
English: The comfort troops also wrote a song: Zhang Hua

古文：玁犭允背天德，构乱扰邦畿。
现代文：豭狁违背上天的德，制造动乱扰乱邦畿。
English: violate the virtue of heaven, create turmoil and disturb the country.

古文：戎车震朔野，群帅赞皇威。
现代文：戎车威震朔方的原野，群帅盛赞皇帝的威严。
English: The army chariots swept across the vast plain, and the commanders praised the majesty of the emperor.

古文：将士齐心旅，感义忘其私。
现代文：将军士兵齐心合力出征，感念恩义而忘了他们自己。
English: Generals and soldiers go to war together, feeling grateful and forgetting themselves.

古文：积势如郭弩，赴节如发机。
现代文：积蓄的攻势像张开的大弩，奔赴战场像击发了扳机。
English: The accumulated offensive is like an open cocoon, and rushing to the battlefield is like pulling the trigger.

古文：嚣声动山谷，金光曜素晖。
现代文：呼喊的声音震动山谷，金甲的寒光辉耀月。
English: The sound of shouting shakes the valley, the cold of the golden armor shines the moon.

古文：挥戈陵劲敌，武步蹈横尸。
现代文：挥舞长戈冲向劲敌，跨着大步踏上横尸。
English: He swung his long club and rushed towards his rival, striding over the corpse.

古文：鲸鲵皆授首，北土永清夷。
现代文：像鲸鲵那样的凶恶敌人全都投降或被杀，北方的领土永远清静太平。
English: Vicious enemies like the whale shark have all surrendered or been killed, and the northern territory is forever calm and peaceful.

古文：昔往冒隆暑，今来白雪霏。
现代文：当年出去的时候冒着酷暑，如今回来的时候白雪飘飘。
English: When I went out that year, I braved the heat. Now, when I come back, it's snowing.

古文：征夫信勤瘁，自古咏《采薇》。
现代文：出征的汉子确实辛苦劳累，自古以来唱的都是《采薇》。
English: The men who go to war are indeed hard-working and tired. Since ancient times, they have sung "The Gathering of the Vines."

古文：收荣于舍爵，燕喜在凯归。
现代文：获得荣誉是在脱掉甲胄的时候，安乐欢喜就在凯旋的时候。
English: Honour is won when the armour is stripped away, and joy and contentment come with a triumphant return.

古文：中宫所歌张华
现代文：中宫所歌：张华
English: Zhongguo's song: Zhang Hua

古文：先王统大业，玄化渐八维。
现代文：先王统领弘大的基业，美好的教化影响到八方。
English: The previous king presided over the foundation of Hongda, and the beautiful enlightenment affected Happo.

古文：仪刑孚万邦，内训隆壸闱。
现代文：风范使万邦信服，对内的训诫教育使宫阐敦厚。
English: Manners make all nations convinced, and internal discipline and education make the palace eloquent and thick.

古文：皇英垂帝典，《大雅》咏三妃。
现代文：娥皇、女英留下帝舜家的典范，《大雅》歌咏周文王家的三位女子。
English: Empress E and Empress Ye left behind a model for the imperial family, and three women from the Zhouwen royal family are the stars of "Great Elegance."

古文：执德宣隆教，正位理厥机。
现代文：保持德行宣扬敦厚的教化，摆正位置打理她的织机。
English: Maintain virtue, propagate dignified enlightenment, take care of her loom in the right position.

古文：含章体柔顺，帅礼蹈谦祗。
现代文：包含美质而体现出柔顺，作为礼的表率行为谦敬。
English: It contains beauty and embodies softness, and acts as an example of courtesy and modesty.

古文：《螽斯》弘慈惠，《樛木》逮幽微。
现代文：《螽斯》弘扬慈爱贤惠，《穋木》涉及幽微。
English: "The Goat" promotes benevolence and benevolence, while "The Tree of Life" deals with subtleties.

古文：徽音穆清风，高义邈不追。
现代文：令闻美誉像温和的清风，高尚的道义远速不能赶上。
English: Let fame and reputation be like a gentle breeze, and lofty morals can't catch up.

古文：遗荣参日月，百世仰余晖。
现代文：身后的荣誉和日月一样高，百代之后仍然仰望她们的余晖。
English: The honor behind them is as high as the sun and moon, and after hundreds of generations, they still look up to them.

古文：宗亲会歌张华
现代文：宗亲会歌：张华
English: Family reunion song: Zhang Hua

古文：族燕明礼顺，啜食序亲亲。
现代文：家族聚会明确礼仪上的顺序，一起就餐论的是亲近自己的亲戚。
English: Family gatherings have a clear order of etiquette, and eating together is about being close to one's relatives.

古文：骨肉散不殊，昆弟岂他人。
现代文：骨肉离散开也不会不同，兄弟之间难道是外人。
English: Flesh and blood would be no different if they were separated. Brothers are strangers to each other.

古文：本枝笃同庆，《棠棣》著先民。
现代文：就像树根和树枝一样讲究在一起共同欢庆，正如《棠棣》所歌颂的先民那样搞好兄弟关系。
English: Just like the roots and branches of the tree, they pay attention to celebrating together, just as the ancestors praised in "Tanggu" do well in brotherly relations.

古文：于皇圣明后，天覆弘且仁。
现代文：伟大圣明的君主啊，像天空覆盖大地一样庇护我们广大而又仁义。
English: O great and holy monarch, as the sky covers the earth, protect us with vastness and benevolence.

古文：降礼崇亲戚，旁施协族姻。
现代文：放下君臣之礼来推崇亲戚关系，普遍施恩而使家族姻亲和谐。
English: Let go of the courtesy of monarchs and ministers to promote the relationship between relatives, and generally grant grace to make the family and in-laws harmonious.

古文：式宴尽酣娱，饮御备羞珍。
现代文：宴会上全都酒酣欢娱，饮酒时备好了珍奇佳肴。
English: At the banquet, all the guests were entertained with wine, and when drinking, they prepared rare delicacies.

古文：和乐既宣洽，上下同欢欣。
现代文：和睦快乐已经普遍开来，上上下下共同欢乐欣喜。
English: Harmony and happiness have become widespread, and people from all walks of life are rejoicing together.

古文：德教加四海，敦睦被无垠。
现代文：德教施加给四海，敦厚和睦影响无边。
English: The moral teaching has been imposed on the four seas, and the influence of the harmony and harmony is boundless.

古文：泰始九年，光禄大夫荀勖以杜夔所制律吕，校太乐、总章、鼓吹八音，与律吕乖错，乃制古尺，作新律吕，以调声韵。
现代文：九年，光禄大夫苞逖用丝塑所制定的律吕，校验太乐、总章、鼓吹乐队的各种乐器，和律吕不一致，于是研制古尺，制作出新的律吕，用来调声韵。
English: In the ninth year, Dr. Guanglu used the rune made by silk molding to calibrate various musical instruments such as taiko, general chapter, and trumpet band, which were inconsistent with the rune. Therefore, he developed the ancient ruler and made a new rune, which was used to tune the rhyme.

古文：事具《律历志》。
现代文：事情详见《律历志》。
English: The details can be found in the Legal History.

古文：律成，遂班下太常，使太乐、总章、鼓吹、清商施用。
现代文：律被确定以后，就颁布给太常，让太乐、总章、鼓吹、清商使用。
English: After the law was determined, it was promulgated to the Tai Chang, so that the Tai Le, the general chapter, the propaganda, and the Qing merchants could use it.

古文：勖遂典知乐事，启朝士解音律者共掌之。
现代文：荀勖于是掌管音乐事宜，上奏请求让朝宫中懂得音律的人共同负责逭件事。
English: So he took charge of the music, and requested that someone in the Imperial Court who knew the music be put in charge of it.

古文：使郭夏、宋识等造《正德》、《大豫》二舞，其乐章亦张华之所作云。正德舞歌张华
现代文：让郭夏、宋识等人创作《正德》、《大豫》两个舞蹈，遣两个舞蹈的歌词也是张华写的。《正德舞》歌：张华
English: Let Guo Xia, Song Zhi and others create "Zhengde" and "DaYu" two dances, the lyrics of the two dances are also written by Zhang Hua. "Zhengde Dance" Song: Zhang Hua

古文：日皇上天，玄鉴惟光。
现代文：伟大的上天，明察一切。
English: Great Heavens, watch over all.

古文：神器周回，五德代章。
现代文：皇帝的神器轮流拥有。王朝的五德更替彰显。
English: The emperor's sacred objects were held in turn, and the five virtues of the dynasty were displayed alternately.

古文：祚命于晋，世有哲王。
现代文：上天赐福给晋，世代都有圣哲的帝王。
English: Heaven has blessed Jin, and generations of emperors have been blessed with sages.

古文：弘济区夏，陶甄万方。
现代文：广为救助华夏，教化万方。
English: Huaxia has been widely helped and educated.

古文：大明垂曜，旁烛无疆。
现代文：伟大的光辉普照下来，照亮了一切没有止境。
English: The great radiance shines down, illuminating everything without end.

古文：蚩蚩庶类，风德永康。
现代文：敦厚无知的万物万类，风范德行永远康宁。
English: Humble and ignorant of all kinds of things, the demeanor of virtue is always Kangning.

古文：皇道惟清，礼乐斯经。
现代文：治国的法则惟有清明，礼乐靠的是这样的推行。
English: The rules of governing a country can only be clear, and ceremonial music relies on this kind of implementation.

古文：金石在悬，万舞在庭。
现代文：金钟石磬等悬挂在架子上，万舞在庭中表演。
English: The Admiralty stalactites, etc. are hanging on the shelves, and a dance performance is taking place in the courtyard.

古文：象容表庆，协律被声。
现代文：象征国家的面貌表现美好的征兆，符合音乐的律度体现在悦耳的声音上。
English: The face of the symbol of the country shows a good omen, and the rhythm of the music is reflected in the pleasant sound.

古文：轶《武》超《濩》，取节《六英》。
现代文：突破了周代的《武》超过了商汤的《濩》，从帝誉颛顼的《六英》中吸取节奏的精华。
English: It breaks through Zhou Dynasty's "Wu" and surpasses Shang Tang's "Crane," and absorbs the essence of rhythm from Emperor Yu's "Six Kingdoms."

古文：同进退让，化渐无形。
现代文：共同前进后退礼让，在无形中整顿教化秩序。
English: Let's advance and retreat together, and rectify the indoctrination order invisibly.

古文：大和宣洽，通于幽冥。大豫舞歌张华
现代文：普遍和睦处处融洽，一直通到幽僻荒远的地方。《大豫舞》歌：张华
English: Universal harmony is harmonious everywhere, all the way to remote and desolate places. "Dai Yu Dance" Song: Zhang Hua

古文：惟天之命，符运有归。
现代文：上天赐命，大运有归宿。
English: Heaven-sent life, great fortune has a destination.

古文：赫赫大晋，三后重晖。
现代文：伟大晋朝，三位先帝相互辉映。
English: In the great Jin Dynasty, the three emperors mirrored each other.

古文：继明绍世，光抚九围。
现代文：继承圣明传续后代，广泛安抚九域之内的地方。
English: Inherit the Holy Light and pass it on to future generations, and extensively pacify the places within the nine realms.

古文：我皇绍期，遂在璇玑。
现代文：我们的皇帝继承大业，于是登上帝位。
English: Our emperor inherited a great cause, so he ascended to the throne.

古文：群生属命，奄有庶邦。
现代文：民众听命，统领天下。
English: The people obey orders and rule the world.

古文：慎徽五典，玄教遐通。
现代文：恭谨宣扬五典，教化遍及各方。
English: Respectfully promote the Five Classics, and the enlightenment will spread to all parties.

古文：万方同轨，率土咸雍。
现代文：万方同一制度，到处全都和谐。
English: The same system in all directions, and harmony everywhere.

古文：爰制《大豫》，宣德舞功。
现代文：于是创制《大豫》，宣扬德政表现功业。
English: As a result, he created the "Great Henan" and promoted the virtues of German politics.

古文：醇化既穆，王道协隆。
现代文：使得教化纯正，王道协调兴隆。
English: makes the enlightenment pure, and the coordination of the royal road flourishes.

古文：仁及草木，惠加昆虫。
现代文：仁爱遍及草木，恩惠涉及昆虫。
English: Benevolence pervades plants and trees, benevolence involves insects.

古文：亿兆夷人，悦仰皇风。
现代文：亿万四夷的人民，喜悦地景仰皇风。
English: Hundreds of millions of people in Shiyi joyfully admire the emperor's style.

古文：丕显大业，永世弥崇。
现代文：伟大光明的基业，一代代更加发达。
English: The great and bright foundation industry has been more and more developed from generation to generation.

古文：荀勖又作新律笛十二枚，以调律吕，正雅乐，正会殿庭作之，自谓宫商克谐，然论者犹谓勖暗解。
现代文：荀勖又创制十二支新律用的笛子，用来调试律吕，规范雅乐，在正式集会的殿上和庭院使用，自称能够使宫商谐调，但是议论的人还是称荀勖为 暗解 。
English: Gong also created twelve flutes with new rhythms, used to tune the rhythms, standardize elegant music, and use them in formal gatherings and courtyards. He claimed to be able to harmonize the palace merchants, but the discussants still called Gong a "secret solution."

古文：时阮咸妙达八音，论者谓之神解。
现代文：当时阮咸精通八音，议论的人称他为 神解 。
English: At that time, Nguyen Hanh was proficient in the eight tones, and commentators called him the divine solution.

古文：咸常心讥勖新律声高，以为高近哀思，不合中和。
现代文：阮咸常常在心裹批评荀勖的新律调子高，认为调子高接近悲哀愁思，不符合中正和睦的精神。
English: Nguyn Ánh often criticized the high pitch of the new melody of  in his heart, believing that the high pitch was close to sadness and melancholy, which was not in line with the spirit of Sino-Mongolian harmony.

古文：每公会乐作，勖意咸谓之不调，以为异己，乃出咸为始平相。
现代文：每次公会奏乐，荀勖感到阮咸认为他不合调，视之为异己，就把阮咸调出京城去担任始平相。
English: Every time the guild played music, he felt that Nguyn Ánh thought he was out of tune and regarded him as a stranger, so he transferred Nguyn Ánh out of the capital to serve as the first peace minister.

古文：后有田父耕于野，得周时玉尺，勖以校己所治钟鼓金石丝竹，皆短校一米，于此伏咸之妙，复徵咸归。
现代文：后来有农夫在野地裹耕作，发现周代的玉尺，荀勖用来核对自己所制作的钟鼓金石丝竹等乐器，都短了一点点，由此服了阮咸的精妙，重新征召阮咸回来。
English: Later, a farmer ploughing in the fields found that the jade ruler of the Zhou Dynasty, which was used to measure musical instruments such as bells, drums, and bamboos made by himself, was a little bit short, and thus obeyed the subtlety of Nguyn Ánh and recalled Nguyn Ánh.

古文：勖既以新律造二舞，次更修正钟声。
现代文：荀勖根据新律创作了两个舞蹈，后来又修正乐器。
English: Gong created two dances based on the new melody, and later modified the musical instruments.

古文：会勖薨，未竟其业。
现代文：赶上荀勖去世，没有完成他的事业。
English: He died before he could complete his work.

古文：元康三年，诏其子籓修定金石，以施郊庙。
现代文：元康三年，下韶让他的儿子苟藩修定乐器，用到郊祭和宗庙祭祀中。
English: In the third year of Yuan Kang, he asked his son, Gohan, to modify the musical instrument and use it in the suburb festival and the ancestral temple ritual.

古文：寻值丧乱，莫有记之者。
现代文：不久遭逢丧乱，没有记录下来。
English: There was a riot soon after, but it wasn't recorded.

古文：汉高祖自蜀汉将定三秦，阆中范因率賨人以从帝，为前锋。
现代文：漠高祖从蜀漠出兵将要平定三秦，板中人范因率领宾地的人来跟从他，担任前锋。
English: Mo Gaozu sent troops from Shu to subdue Sanqin. Fan Ying, a member of the board, led the guests to follow him and served as a striker.

古文：及定秦中，封因为阆中侯，复賨人七姓。
现代文：到平定秦地一带，封范因为阎中侯，恢复宾人的七个姓。
English: To pacify the area around Qin, Fan restored the seven surnames of the guests because of Yan Zhonghou.

古文：其俗喜舞，高祖乐其猛锐，数观其舞，后使乐人习之。
现代文：他们的习俗是爱跳舞，高祖喜欢他们的勇猛精锐，多次观看他们的舞蹈，后来派乐入学习他们。
English: Their custom is to love to dance, Gaozhu liked their brave elite, watched their dance many times, and later sent Le to study them.

古文：阆中有渝水，因其所居，故名曰《巴渝舞》。
现代文：阗中有条渝水河，根据他们所居住的地方，所以叫做《巴渝舞》。
English: According to the place where they live, there is a river called the "Baiyu River."

古文：舞曲有《矛渝本歌曲》、《安弩渝本歌曲》、《安台本歌曲》、《行辞本歌曲》，总四篇。
现代文：舞曲有《矛渝本歌曲》、《安弩渝本歌曲》、《安台本歌曲》、《行辞本歌曲》，共四篇。
English: There are four pieces of dance music: "Chou Yu Song," "An Yu Yu Song," "Andai Song" and "Dictionary Song."

古文：其辞既古，莫能晓其句度。
现代文：歌辞很古奥，没有人能通晓它的句读。
English: The words of the song are so ancient that no one knows how to read it.

古文：魏初，乃使军谋祭酒王粲改创其词。
现代文：魏朝初年，就让担任军谋祭酒的王粲改编它的歌词。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Wang Zhen, who served as the military strategist of the sacrificial wine, adapted its lyrics.

古文：粲问巴渝帅李管、种玉歌曲意，试使歌，听之，以考校歌曲，而为之改为《矛渝新福歌曲》、《弩渝新福歌曲》、《安台新福歌曲》、《行辞新福歌曲》，《行辞》以述魏德。
现代文：王粲向巴渝的将领李管、种玉询问歌曲的意思，尝试让他们唱，自己听，根据这个考证研究歌曲，从而改编为《矛渝新福歌典》、咱渝新福歌曲》、《安台新福歌曲》、《行辞新福歌曲》，《行辞》用来叙述魏朝的德行。
English: Wang Qian asked the generals Li Guan and Zangyu of Bayu about the meaning of the song, tried to get them to sing it, listened to it himself, and studied the song according to this research, and then adapted it into "Spear Yu Xinfu Songbook," "Bear Yu Xinfu Songbook," "Andai Xinfu Songbook," "Dictionary Xinfu Songbook," and "Dictionary" to describe the virtues of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：黄初三年，又改《巴渝舞》曰《昭武舞》。
现代文：魏黄初三年，又把《巴渝舞》改称为《昭武舞》。
English: In the first three years of Wei Huang, "Bai Yu Dance" was renamed "Zhaowu Dance."

古文：至景初元年，尚书奏，考览三代礼乐遗曲，据功象德，奏作《武始》、《咸熙》、《章斌》三舞，皆执羽龠。
现代文：到魏量翅元年，尚书上奏，考察研究了三代在礼乐方面遗留下来的乐曲，根据功业象征德行，建议创作《武始》、《咸熙》、《章斌》三个舞蹈，都要拿着羽毛和籥。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei, Shang Shuxu played the music, examined and studied the music left behind by the three generations of ceremonial music, and suggested the creation of three dances, "Wuzhi," "Hanxi" and "Zhangbin," according to the virtue symbolized by the work, all of which should hold feathers and gongs.

古文：及晋又改《昭武舞》曰《宣武舞》，《羽龠舞》曰《宣文舞》。
现代文：到晋朝又把《昭武舞》改作《宣武舞》，《羽籥舞》改作《宣文舞》。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, the "Shobu Dance" was changed to the "Proclamation Dance," and the "Feather Dance" was changed to the "Proclamation Dance."

古文：咸宁元年，诏定祖宗之号，而庙乐乃停《宣武》、《宣文》二舞，而同用荀勖所使郭夏、宋识等所造《正德》、《大豫》二舞云。
现代文：晋咸宁元年，下韶确定祖宗的庙号，于是宗庙音乐中就停掉了《宣武》、《宣文》两个舞蹈，而在同等情况时就使用苞劻让郭夏、宋识等人所创作的《正德》、《大豫》两个舞蹈。
English: In the first year of Jin-Han Ning, the lower court determined the temple name of the ancestor, so the two dances of "Xuanwu" and "Xuanwen" were stopped in the music of the ancestral temple, and in the same situation, the two dances of "Zhengde" and "Daiyu" created by Guo Xia and Song Zhi were used.

