古文：汝南陈仲举，颍川李元礼二人，共论其功德，不能定先后。
现代文：汝南郡陈仲举、颍川郡李元礼两人，人们谈论他们的成就和德行，又是难以分出谁才是最优秀的。
English: Chen Zhongju from Runan County and Li Yuanli from Beichuan County, people talk about their achievements and virtues, but it is difficult to distinguish who is the best.

古文：蔡伯喈评之曰： 陈仲举强于犯上，李元礼严于摄下。
现代文：蔡伯喈评论他们说： 陈仲举敢于冒犯上司，李元礼严于整饬下属。
English: Cai Boqi commented on them: Chen Zhongju dared to offend his boss, Li Yuanli was strict in disciplining his subordinates.

古文：犯上难，摄下易。 
现代文：冒犯上司难，整饬下属容易。 
English: It is difficult to offend superiors, but it is easy to discipline subordinates.

古文：仲举遂在三君之下，元礼居八俊之上。
现代文：于是陈仲举的名次就排在三君之后，李元礼排在八俊的前面。
English: As a result, Chen Zhongzhu's ranking was behind Sanjun, and Li Yuanli was ahead of Hachijun.

古文：庞士元至吴，吴人并友之。
现代文：庞士元到了吴地，吴人都和他交朋友。
English: Pang Shiyuan arrived in Wuxi, and people from Wuxi came to visit him.

古文：见陆绩、顾劭、全琮而为之目曰： 陆子所谓驽马有逸足之用，顾子所谓驽牛可以负重致远。 
现代文：他见到陆绩、顾劭、全琮三人，就评价他们说： 陆君可以说是能够用来代步的驽马，顾君可以说是能够驾车载重物走远路的驽牛。 
English: When he saw Lu Jie, Gu Yao and Quanzhang, he said of them: "Lu Jun can be said to be a horse that can be used as a means of transportation, and Gu Jun can be said to be a snail that can drive and carry heavy objects over long distances."

古文：或问： 如所目，陆为胜邪？ 
现代文：有人问道： 你为什么要这样评价，是陆君胜过顾君吗？ 
English: Someone asked: Why do you make such a comment, is Lu Jun better than Gu Jun?

古文：曰： 驽马虽精速，能致一人耳。驽牛一日行百里，所致岂一人哉？ 
现代文：庞士元说： 驾马就算跑得很快，也只能载一个人罢了；驾牛一天走一百里，可是运载的难道只有一个人吗？ 
English: Pang Shiyuan said, "Driving a horse, even if it runs fast, can only carry one person; driving a cow, walking a hundred miles a day, can only carry one person?

古文：吴人无以难。 全子好声名，似汝南樊子昭。 
现代文：吴人没话反驳他。 全君有很好的名声，像汝南郡樊子昭。 
English: The people of Wu had no words to refute him. Quanjun had a good reputation, like Yunnan County's Zangzi Zhao.

古文：顾劭尝与庞士元宿语，问曰： 闻子名知人，吾与足下孰愈？ 
现代文：顾劭曾经和庞士元作过一次夜谈，他问庞士元说： 听说您因为善于辨识人才而闻名，我和您两人谁更好些？ 
English: Gu Yao once had a night talk with Pang Shiyuan. He asked Pang Shiyuan: I heard that you are famous for being good at identifying talents. Who is better between you and me?

古文：曰： 陶冶世俗，与时浮沉，吾不如子；论王霸之余策，览倚仗之要害，吾似有一日之长。 
现代文：庞士元说： 移风易俗，顺应潮流，这点我比不上您；至于谈论历代帝王统治的策略，掌握事物因果变化的要害，这方面我比你强一些。 
English: Pang Shiyuan said: I am not as good as you at changing customs and conforming to the trend; as for talking about the strategy of the rule of emperors in the past and grasping the essence of the cause and effect of things, I am better than you in this respect.

古文：劭亦安其言。
现代文：顾劭也认为他的话妥当。
English: Gu Yao also thought his words were reasonable.

古文：诸葛瑾弟亮及从弟诞，并有盛名，各在一国。
现代文：诸葛谨和弟弟诸葛亮以及堂弟诸葛诞都有很大的名望，各在一个国家任职。
English: Zhuge Zhen, his brother Zhuge Liang, and his cousin Zhuge Xing all have great reputations and have served in one country each.

古文：于时以为 蜀得其龙，吴得其虎，魏得其狗 。
现代文：当时，人们认为蜀国得到了其中的龙，吴国得到了其中的虎，魏国得到了其中的狗。
English: At that time, it was believed that Shu got one of the dragons, Wu got one of the tigers, and Wei got one of the dogs.

古文：诞在魏与夏侯玄齐名；瑾在吴，吴朝服其弘量。
现代文：诸葛诞在魏国，和夏侯玄齐名；诸葛谨在吴国，吴国朝廷官员佩服他的宽宏大量。
English: Zhuge was born in Wei and was as famous as Xia Hou Xuan; Zhuge was born in Wu, and the officials of the imperial court of Wu admired his magnanimity.

古文：司马文王问武陔： 陈玄伯何如其父司空？ 
现代文：晋文王司马昭问武陔： 陈玄伯和他父亲相比，该怎样评价？ 
English: Jinwen Wang Sima Zhao asked Wu Gan: Compared to Chen Xuanbo and his father, how should we evaluate him?

古文：陔曰： 通雅博畅，能以天下声教为己任者，不如也。明练简至，立功立事，过之。 
现代文：武陔说： 说到通雅博畅，能负责在全国树立君主的声威和推行教化这方面，比不上他父亲；至于明练简至，建功立业这方面，就超过他父亲。 
English: Wu Yao said: In terms of being well-educated and well-spoken, he is not as good as his father in terms of being able to be responsible for establishing the monarch's prestige and carrying out education in the country; as for being well-trained and simple, in terms of making contributions and establishing careers, he is better than his father.

古文：正始中，人士比论，以五荀方五陈：荀淑方陈寔，荀靖方陈谌，荀爽方陈纪，荀彧方陈群，荀顗方陈泰。
现代文：正始年间，知名人士对比评论人物时，拿荀氏家族中的五位和陈氏家族中的五位对比：荀淑比陈寔，荀靖比陈湛é，荀爽比陈纪，荀彧比陈群，荀比陈泰。
English: At the beginning of the year, when famous people compared and commented on the characters, they compared the five members of the Yu family with the five members of the Chen family: Shuxu compared with Chen Yao, Jie Jing compared with Chen Zhan, Shao Shuang compared with Chen Ji, Zou compared with Chen Qun, and Zou compared with Chen Tai.

古文：又以八裴方八王：裴徽方王祥，裴楷方王夷甫，裴康方王绥，裴绰方王澄，裴瓒方王敦，裴遐方王导，裴頠方王戎，裴邈方王玄。
现代文：又拿裴氏家族中的八位和王氏家族中的八位对比：裴徽比王样，裴楷比王夷甫，裴康比王绥，裴绰比王澄，裴斑比王敦，裴遐比王导，裴比王戎，裴邈比王玄。
English: He also compared eight members of Pei's family with eight members of Wang's family: Pei Hui Bi Wang Sam, Pei Kai Bi Wang Yifu, Pei Kang Bi Wang Yao, Pei Cao Bi Wang Cheng, Pei Bian Bi Wang Dun, Pei Yao Bi Wang Du, Pei Wang Rong, Pei Yao Bi Wang Xuan.

古文：冀州刺史杨淮二子乔与髦，俱总角为成器。
现代文：冀州刺史杨淮的两个儿子杨乔和杨髦，都是幼年时就成名的。
English: Yang Huai's two sons, Yang Qiao and Yang Xiang, both from Jizhou, became famous at a young age.

古文：淮与裴頠、乐广友善，遣见之。
现代文：杨淮和裴、乐广两人很友好，就打发两个儿子去见他们。
English: Yang Huai has a good relationship with Pei Jun and Le Guang. He invited his two sons to visit them.

古文：頠性弘方，爱乔之有高韵，谓淮曰： 乔当及卿，髦小减也。 
现代文：裴禀性宽宏正直，所以喜欢杨乔那种高雅的风度，他对杨淮说： 杨乔将会赶上你，杨髦稍差一点。 
English: Pei Xuan was magnanimous and honest, so he liked Yang Qiao's elegant demeanor. He said to Yang Huai: "Yang Qiao will catch up with you, Yang Xiang is slightly worse.

古文：广性清淳，爱髦之有神检，谓淮曰： 乔自及卿，然髦尤精出。 
现代文：乐广禀性清廉淳厚，所以喜欢杨髦那种高贵的品德，他对杨淮说： 杨乔自然能赶上你，可是杨髦更会高出一头。 
English: Le Guang is honest and honest, so he likes the noble character of Yang Xiang. He said to Yang Huai: Yang Qiao can naturally catch up with you, but Yang Xiang will be even higher.

古文：淮笑曰： 我二儿之优劣，乃裴、乐之优劣。 
现代文：杨淮笑道： 我两个儿子的长处和短处，就是裴、乐广的长处和短处。 
English: Yang Huai said with a smile: The strengths and weaknesses of my two sons are the strengths and weaknesses of Pei and Le Guang.

古文：论者评之：以为乔虽高韵，而检不匝；乐言为得。
现代文：评论家评论这两人的看法，认为杨乔虽然风度高雅，可是品德修养还不够完美，还是乐广的话说对了。
English: Critics commented on the two men's views, saying that although Yang Qiao's demeanor was elegant, his moral cultivation was not perfect enough, and that Le Guang was right.

古文：然并为后出之俊。
现代文：不过两个孩子都是后起之秀。
English: But both kids are up-and-comers.

古文：刘令言始入洛，见诸名士而叹曰： 王夷甫太解明，乐彦辅我所敬，张茂先我所不解，周弘武巧于用短，杜方叔拙于用长。 
现代文：刘令言刚刚到洛阳的时候，见到诸多名士，就感慨地说： 王夷甫过于精明，乐彦辅才是我崇敬的人，张茂先是我所不理解的人，周弘武能巧妙地使用自己的短处，杜方叔则不善于发挥自己的长处。 
English: When Liu Lingyan just arrived in Luoyang, he saw many people and said with emotion: Wang Yifu is too shrewd, Lok Yan Fu is a person I respect, Zhang Maoxian is a person I do not understand, Zhou Hongwu can skillfully use his weaknesses, and Uncle Du Fang is not good at playing his strengths.

古文：王夷甫云： 闾丘冲，优于满奋、郝隆。此三人并是高才，冲最先达。 
现代文：王夷甫说： 闾丘冲胜过满奋和郝隆；这三个人同是优秀的人才，闾丘冲是其中最优秀显贵的。 
English: Wang Yifu said, "Mangqiu Chong is better than Manfen and Gonglong; these three men are all outstanding talents, and Mangqiu Chong is the most outstanding and distinguished among them.

古文：王夷甫以王东海比乐令，故王中郎作碑云： 当时标榜，为乐广之俪。 
现代文：王夷甫拿东海太守王承来和尚书令乐广并列，所以北中郎将王但之给王承写的碑文上说： 当时称扬他和乐广齐名。 
English: Wang Yifu ranked Wang Chenglai, the governor-general of the East China Sea, and the monk who wrote the book, Le Guang, on the same level. Therefore, the Northern Middle Ages put the inscription written by Wang Danzhi to Wang Chenglai, saying: At that time, he and Le Guang were praised equally.

古文：庾中郎与王平子鴈行。
现代文：从事中郎庾子嵩和王平子并列。
English: In terms of the number of middle school students who are engaged in sports, the number of high school students is the same as that of middle school students.

古文：王大将军在西朝时，见周侯辄扇障面不得住。
现代文：大将军王敦在西晋时期，每次见到武城侯周伯仁，总是要用扇子遮住脸。
English: During the Western Jin Dynasty, the great general Wang Dun always had to cover his face with a fan every time he saw Wucheng marquis Zhou Boren.

古文：后度江左，不能复尔。
现代文：后来渡江，到了东晋，就不再这样了。
English: Later, after crossing the Yangtze River and arriving in the East Jin, this was no longer the case.

古文：王叹曰： 不知我进，伯仁退？ 
现代文：王敦叹道： 不知是我进步了，还是伯仁退步了？ 
English: Wang Dun sighed, "I don't know if I have progressed or Bo Ren has regressed.

古文：会稽虞，元皇时与桓宣武同侠，其人有才理胜望。
现代文：会稽郡虞，晋元帝时和桓温是同僚，这个人既有才思，声望又很高。
English: He was the county auditor and a colleague of Emperor Jin and Emperor Huan. He was a man of great talent and reputation.

古文：王丞相尝谓曰： 孔愉有公才而无公望，丁潭有公望而无公才，兼之者其在卿乎？ 
现代文：丞相王导曾经对他说过： 孔愉有三公的才能，却没有三公的名望；丁潭有三公的名望，却没有三公的才能；这两方面兼而有之的，大概就是你吧！ 
English: The chancellor Wang Du once said to him: Kong Yu has the talent of the Three Princes, but does not have the fame of the Three Princes; Ding Tan has the fame of the Three Princes, but does not have the talent of the Three Princes; if you have both aspects, it is probably you!

古文：未达而丧。
现代文：虞还没有登上高位就死了。
English: He died before attaining a high position.

古文：明帝问周伯仁： 卿自谓何如郗鉴？ 
现代文：晋明帝问周： 你自己认为你和郗鉴相比，谁更强些？ 
English: Jin Mingdi asked Zhou: In your own opinion, who is stronger between you and Gongjian?

古文：周曰： 鉴方臣，如有功夫。 
现代文：周说： 郗鉴和臣相比，似乎更有功力。 
English: Zhou said, "Compared to Zeng Jian and Zeng Sheng, Zeng Jian seems to have more ability.

古文：复问郗。郗曰： 周顗比臣，有国士门风。 
现代文：明帝又问郗鉴，郗鉴说： 周和臣相比，他有国士家风。 
English: Emperor Ming also asked Gongjian. Gongjian said, "Compared to Zhou and Zhou Enlai, he has the style of a statesman.

古文：王大将军下，庾公问： 卿有四友，何者是？ 
现代文：大将军王敦从武昌东下建康后，庚亮问他： 听说你有四位好友，是哪几位？ 
English: After the general Wang Dun went to Jiankang from the east of Wuchang, Geng Liang asked him: I heard that you have four friends, who are they?

古文：答曰： 君家中郎，我家太尉、阿平、胡毋彦国。
现代文：王敦答道： 您家的中郎、我家的太尉、阿平和胡毋彦国。
English: Wang Dun replied: Your family's middle brother, my family's captain, Ah Ping and Hu Bezoeku.

古文：阿平故当最劣。 
现代文：阿平当然是最差的。 
English: Of course, Aping is the worst.

古文：庾曰： 似未肯劣。 
现代文：庾亮说： 好像他还不同意最差。 
English: Hao Liang said: It seems that he still disagrees with the worst.

古文：庾又问： 何者居其右？ 
现代文：庾亮又问： 哪一位更出众？ 
English: Hao Liang also asked: Which one is more outstanding?

古文：王曰： 自有人。 
现代文：王敦说： 自然有人。 
English: Wang Dun said: Of course there are people.

古文：又问： 何者是？ 
现代文：又追问： 是哪一位？ 
English: Follow-up question: Which one is it?

古文：王曰： 噫！
现代文：王敦说： 唉！
English: Wang Dun said: Alas!

古文：其自有公论。 
现代文：自然会有公论吧。 
English: Naturally, there will be a public debate.

古文：左右蹑公，公乃止。
现代文：手下的人踩了一下庾亮的脚，庾亮才没有再问下去。
English: One of his subordinates stepped on his foot, and he did not ask any more questions.

古文：人问丞相： 周侯何如和峤？ 
现代文：有人问丞相王导： 周侯比和峤怎么样？ 
English: Someone asked Premier Wang Du: What about Zhou Houbi and Zou Ye?

古文：答曰： 长舆嵯櫱。 
现代文：王导回答说： 长舆像高山屹立。 
English: Wang Du replied, "The statue of Changwu stands tall in the mountains.

古文：明帝问谢鲲： 君自谓何如庾亮？ 
现代文：晋明帝问谢鲲： 您自己认为和庾亮相比，谁强些？ 
English: Jin Mingdi asked Xie Jun: In your own opinion, who is better than Xie Liang?

古文：答曰： 端委庙堂，使百僚准则，臣不如亮。一丘一壑，自谓过之。 
现代文：谢鲲回答说：说： 用礼制整饬朝廷，使百官有个榜样，这方面，臣不如庾亮；至于寄情于山水的志趣，自以为超过他。 
English: Xie Yao replied, saying, "Using the etiquette system to tidy up the imperial court and set an example for the hundreds of officials, in this respect, the vassal is not as bright as the eunuch; as for the sentimental interest in the landscape, he thinks he is better than him.

古文：王丞相二弟不过江，曰颍，曰敞。
现代文：丞相王导有两个弟弟没有到江南，一个叫王颖，一个叫王敞。
English: The chancellor Wang Du had two younger brothers who did not make it to the south of the Yangtze River. One was called Wang Ying and the other was called Wang Chang.

古文：时论以颍比邓伯道，敞比温忠武。议郎、祭酒者也。
现代文：当时的舆论把王颖和邓伯道并列，把王敞和温峤并列，两人分别任议郎和祭酒。
English: At that time, the public opinion put Wang Ying and Deng Boduo on the same level, and Wang Qiang and Wen Qi on the same level, and the two were appointed as the speaker and the sacrificial wine respectively.

古文：明帝问周侯： 论者以卿比郗鉴，云何？ 
现代文：晋明帝问武城侯周： 评论界拿你和郗鉴并列，你认为怎么样？ 
English: Jin Mingdi asked Wucheng Hou Zhou: The critics put you and Gong Jian on the same level, what do you think?

古文：周曰： 陛下不须牵顗比。 
现代文：周说： 陛下不必拉着去比较。 
English: Zhou said, "Your Majesty doesn't need to compare.

古文：王丞相云： 顷下论以我比安期、千里。亦推此二人。
现代文：丞相王导说： 洛阳的舆论把我和安期、千里相提并论，我也推重这两个人。
English: Wang Du, the chancellor, said: Luoyang's public opinion compared me to Anji and Qianli, and I also put more weight on these two people.

古文：唯共推太尉，此君特秀。 
现代文：希望大家共同推重太尉，因为这个人才能出众。 
English: I hope that everyone will jointly promote the captain, because this person can be outstanding.

古文：宋袆曾为王大将军妾，后属谢镇西。
现代文：宋祎曾经是王敦的侍妾，后来又归属镇西将军谢尚。
English: Song Yao was once a concubine of Wang Dun, and later belonged to Zhenxi General Xie Shang.

古文：镇西问袆： 我何如王？ 
现代文：谢尚问她： 我和王敦相比怎么样？ 
English: Xie Shang asked her: How do I compare with Wang Dun?

古文：答曰： 王比使君，田舍、贵人耳！ 
现代文：宋祎回答说： 王敦和使君相比，就像乡下人和富贵人相比一样。 
English: Song Tao replied, "Comparing Wang Dun with the envoy is like comparing a villager with a rich person.

古文：镇西妖冶故也。
现代文：这是谢尚容貌艳丽的缘故。
English: This is due to Xie Shang's glamorous appearance.

古文：明帝问周伯仁： 卿自谓何如庾元规？ 
现代文：晋明帝问周伯仁： 你认为自己和庾元规相比，谁更优秀一些？ 
English: Jin Mingdi asked Zhou Peiren: Do you think you are better than Yu Yuanbai?

古文：对曰： 萧条方外，亮不如臣；从容廊庙，臣不如亮。 
现代文：周伯仁回答说： 说到退隐山林，逍遥世外，庾亮比不上臣；至于周旋于朝廷之上，臣比不上庾亮。 
English: Zhou Boren replied, "When it comes to retreating to the mountains and forests, and being away from the world, no one is more brilliant than a vassal; but when it comes to meddling with the imperial court, no one is more brilliant than a vassal.

古文：王丞相辟王蓝田为掾，庾公问丞相： 蓝田何似？ 
现代文：丞相王导聘请蓝田侯王述做属官的时候，庾亮问丞相王导： 你觉得蓝田这个人怎么样？ 
English: When Prime Minister Wang Du hired Lantian Hou Wang Su as a subordinate official, Yan Liang asked Prime Minister Wang Du: What do you think of Lantian?

古文：王曰： 真独简贵，不减父祖；然旷澹处，故当不如尔。 
现代文：王导说： 这个人真率、孤高、简约、高贵，这点不比他父亲、祖父逊色，可是旷达、淡泊这方面还是比不上的呀。 
English: Wang Du said, "This man is honest, solitary, simple and noble, which is not inferior to his father and grandfather. However, he cannot match them in terms of generosity and lightness."

古文：卞望之云： 郗公体中有三反：方于事上，好下佞己，一反。治身清贞，大脩计校，二反。自好读书，憎人学问，三反。 
现代文：卞望之说： 郗公身上有三种矛盾现象：侍奉君主很正直，却喜欢下级奉承自己，这是第一个矛盾；很注意加强清廉节操方面的修养，却非常喜欢计较财物得失，这是第二个矛盾；自己喜欢读书，却讨厌别人做学问，这是第三个矛盾。 
English: Gong Wangzhi said: There are three contradictions in Gong Gong: He is very honest in serving the monarch, but he likes to flatter himself, which is the first contradiction; he is very careful to strengthen the cultivation of integrity and discipline, but he is very fond of considering the gain and loss of property, which is the second contradiction; he likes to read, but he hates others to do learning, which is the third contradiction.

古文：世论温太真，是过江第二流之高者。
现代文：世人评论温太真是江南的第二等人物中名列前茅的人。
English: The world commented that Wen Taizhen was one of the best of the second-class figures in Jiangnan.

古文：时名辈共说人物，第一将尽之闲，温常失色。
现代文：当时，名士们在一起品评人物，第一等人快要举完的时候，温太真经常紧张得脸色都变了。
English: At that time, the celebrities evaluated the characters together. When the first person was about to finish, Wen Taizhen was often so nervous that his face changed.

古文：王丞相云： 见谢仁祖之令人得上。
现代文：丞相王导说： 见到谢仁祖，就会让人感到积极向上的力量。 
English: Wang Du, the chancellor, said: Seeing Xie Ranzhu, people will feel the positive power.

古文：与何次道语，唯举手指地曰： 正自尔馨！  
现代文：和何次道谈话时，他只是用手指着地，说： 是的，就是这样。 
English: How many times in a conversation did he just put his finger on the ground and say: Yes, that's it.

古文：何次道为宰相，人有讥其信任不得其人。
现代文：何次道就任宰相以后，有人指责他用人不当。
English: Several times since he took office as prime minister, some people have accused him of employing people improperly.

古文：阮思旷慨然曰： 次道自不至此。
现代文：阮思旷感慨地说： 次道自然不会做到这一步。
English: Nguyen Thi Quang said with emotion: "Naturally, the next generation will not be able to take this step.

古文：但布衣超居宰相之位，可恨！唯此一条而已。 
现代文：只不过他以普通百姓的身份坐上了宰相之位，令人遗憾的只有这一条罢了。 
English: However, he assumed the position of prime minister as an ordinary citizen, and this is the only regrettable thing about him.

古文：王右军少时，丞相云： 逸少何缘复减万安邪？ 
现代文：右军将军王逸少年轻时，丞相王导说： 逸少为什么说他不如刘万安呢！ 
English: When the right-wing general Wang Yishao was young, the prime minister Wang Du said: "Yishao, why do you say that he is not as good as Liu Wan'an?

古文：郗司空家有伧奴，知及文章，事事有意。
现代文：司空郗鉴家有个仆人，有些才学懂得文章，对什么事都有一些见识。
English: There is a servant in Sikuo's household, who has some ability to read and write, and has some insight into everything.

古文：王右军向刘尹称之。刘问 何如方回？ 
现代文：右军将军王羲之向丹阳尹刘淡称赞他，刘惔问道： 和方回相比，怎么样？ 
English: Wang Shanzhi, general of the Right Army, praised him to Danyang Yin Liu Tan. Liu Tan asked: Compared with Fang Hui, how is Mao Zedong?

古文：王曰： 此正小人有意向耳！何得便比方回？ 
现代文：王羲之说： 这只是小人有那么点志向罢了，哪里就能和方回相比！ 
English: Wang Xizhi said, "It's just that the villain has so little ambition. He can be compared to Fang Hui anywhere!"

古文：刘曰： 若不如方回，故是常奴耳！ 
现代文：刘惔说： 如果比不上方回，那也不过是一个平常的仆人罢了。 
English: Liu Ye said, "If you can't match Fang Hui, then you're just an ordinary servant."

古文：时人道阮思旷： 骨气不及右军，简秀不如真长，韶润不如仲祖，思致不如渊源，而兼有诸人之美。 
现代文：当时人士评论阮思旷说： 他的骨气比不上王右军，简约内秀比不上刘真长，华美柔润比不上王仲祖，才思韵味比不上殷渊源，可是却兼有这几个人的长处。 
English: At that time, people commented on Ruan Siyuan, saying: His backbone is not as good as Wang Rongjun, his simplicity and elegance are not as good as Liu Zhenlong, his beauty and gentleness are not as good as Wang Zhongzu, and his talent and charm are not as good as Yin Yuanyuan, but he has the advantages of these people.

古文：简文云： 何平叔巧累于理，稽叔夜俊伤其道。 
现代文：简文帝说： 何平叔的精巧言辞连累到他所说的道理，没有很大说服力；嵇叔夜的奇才妨害了他的主张，得不到实现。 
English: Jianwen Di said: Uncle He Ping's clever words are not very persuasive, and the truth he said is not very persuasive; the wizards of the night obstruct his claim and cannot be realized.

古文：时人共论晋武帝出齐王之与立惠帝，其失孰多？
现代文：当时人士都评论晋武帝令齐王归国和确立惠帝的太子地位两件事，哪一件事失误最大。
English: At that time, people commented on the two things that Emperor Jinwu ordered King Qi to return to the country and established Hui Di's status as prince, which one was the biggest mistake.

古文：多谓立惠帝为重。
现代文：多数认为确立惠帝一事失误最大。
English: Most believed that establishing Hui Di was the biggest mistake.

古文：桓温曰： 不然，使子继父业，弟承家祀，有何不可？ 
现代文：桓温说： 不是这样，让儿子继承父亲的事业，让弟弟治理王国，有什么不行！ 
English: Kanwen said, "That's not true. It's not okay to let a son inherit his father's business and let his younger brother govern the kingdom!

古文：人问殷渊源： 当世王公以卿比裴叔道，云何？ 
现代文：有人问殷渊源： 现在的王公大臣把你和裴叔道并列，你觉得怎么样？ 
English: Someone asked Yin Yuanyuan: The current Minister Wang Gong ranked you alongside Pei Shudo, what do you think?

古文：殷曰： 故当以识通暗处。 
现代文：殷渊源说： 这自然是因为都能用识见疏通疑义。 
English: Yin Yuanyuan said: This is naturally because all can use insight to clear up doubts.

古文：抚军问殷浩： 卿定何如裴逸民？ 
现代文：抚军问殷浩： 你和裴逸民相比，谁更优秀些呢？ 
English: Fu Jun asked Yin Hao: Compared to you and Pei Yimin, who is better?

古文：良久答曰： 故当胜耳。 
现代文：过了很久，殷浩才回答说： 自然是我超过他。 
English: It took a long time for Yin Hao to reply: "Naturally, I'm better than him."

古文：桓公少与殷侯齐名，常有竞心。
现代文：桓温年轻时和殷浩同样有名望，所以常常有一种竞争心。
English: When he was young, Kuan Wen was as famous as Yin Hao, so he often had a competitive spirit.

古文：桓问殷： 卿何如我？ 
现代文：桓温问殷浩： 你和我相比，谁强些？ 
English: Kuan Wen asked Yin Hao: Compared to you and me, who is stronger?

古文：殷云： 我与我周旋久，宁作我。 
现代文：殷浩回答说： 我和自己长期打交道，宁愿作我。 
English: Yinhao replied, "I've been dealing with myself for a long time, I'd rather be me.

古文：抚军问孙兴公： 刘真长何如？ 
现代文：抚军司马里问孙兴公： 刘真长这个人怎么样？ 
English: Military Secretary Mali asked Sun Xinggong: How is Liu Zhenlong?

古文：曰： 清蔚简令。 
现代文：孙兴公回答说： 他的清谈清新华美，禀性简约美好。 
English: Sun Xinggong replied: His clear talk is fresh and beautiful, and his simplicity is beautiful.

古文： 王仲祖何如？ 
现代文：又问： 王仲祖怎么样？ 
English: He also asked: What about Wang Zhongzu?

古文：曰： 温润恬和。 
现代文：孙回答： 温和柔润，恬静平和。 
English: Sun replied: Gentle and soft, calm and peaceful.

古文： 桓温何如？ 
现代文： 桓温怎么样？ 
English: How is Kan'en?

古文：曰： 高爽迈出。 
现代文：孙说： 高尚爽朗，神态超逸。 
English: Sun said, "He is noble and cool, and his demeanor is superb.

古文： 谢仁祖何如？ 
现代文： 谢仁祖怎么样？ 
English: What about Xie Renzhu?

古文：曰： 清易令达。 
现代文：孙说： 清廉平易，美好通达。 
English: Sun said: Clean, simple, and beautiful.

古文： 阮思旷何如？ 
现代文： 阮思旷怎么样？ 
English: What about Nguyen Thi Quang?

古文：曰： 弘润通长。 
现代文：孙说： 宽大柔润，精深广阔。 
English: Sun said, "He is broad, gentle, and profound.

古文： 袁羊何如？ 
现代文： 袁羊怎么样？ 
English: What about Yuan Yang?

古文：曰： 洮洮清便。 
现代文：答： 谈吐清雅，滔滔不绝。 
English: A: He spoke eloquently and eloquently.

古文： 殷洪远何如？ 
现代文： 殷洪远怎么样？ 
English: What about Yin Hongyuan?

古文：曰： 远有致思。 
现代文：答： 大有新颖的思想情趣。 
English: A: It has a lot of novel ideas.

古文： 卿自谓何如？ 
现代文： 你认为你自己怎么样？ 
English: What do you think of yourself?

古文：曰： 下官才能所经，悉不如诸贤；至于斟酌时宜，笼罩当世，亦多所不及。
现代文：孙兴公说： 下官才能所擅长的事，全部比不上诸位贤达；至于考虑时势的需要，全面把握时局，这也大多赶不上他们。
English: Sun Xinggong said: All the things that lower-ranking officials are good at are not comparable to you sages; as for considering the needs of the current situation and comprehensively grasping the current situation, most of them can't keep up with them.

古文：然以不才，时复托怀玄胜，远咏老、庄，萧条高寄，不与时务经怀，自谓此心无所与让也。 
现代文：可是以我这个没有才能的人而论，还时常寄怀于超脱的境界，赞美古代的《老子》《庄子》，逍遥自在，寄情高远，不让世事打扰自己的心志，我自认为这种胸怀是没有什么可推让的。 
English: However, for me, a person with no talent, I often cherish the state of detachment, praise the ancient "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi," feel free, have lofty sentiments, and do not let the world disturb my mind. I think there is nothing to push this kind of mind.

古文：桓大司马下都，问真长曰： 闻会稽王语奇进，尔邪？ 
现代文：大司马桓温到京都后，问刘真长道： 听说会稽王的言谈有了出人意料的长进，真的是这样吗？ 
English: After Daishi Ma Kan-Wen arrived in Kyoto, he asked Liu Zhen-Chang: I heard that the speech of the King of Censors has grown unexpectedly, is this really the case?

古文：刘曰： 极进，然故是第二流中人耳！ 
现代文：刘真长说： 是有非常大的长进，不过仍旧是第二流中的人罢了！ 
English: Liu Zhenlong said: He has made great progress, but he is still a second-rate person!

古文：桓曰： 第一流复是谁？ 
现代文：桓温说： 第一流的人又是谁呢？ 
English: Kuan Wen said: Who are the first-class people?

古文：刘曰： 正是我辈耳！ 
现代文：刘真长说： 就是我们这些人呀！ 
English: Liu Zhenlong said, "It's just us people!"

古文：殷侯既废，桓公语诸人曰： 少时与渊源共骑竹马，我弃去，己辄取之，故当出我下。 
现代文：殷浩被罢官以后，桓温对众人说： 年少时我和渊源一道骑竹马玩，我扔掉的竹马，他总是拾来骑，所以他本就不如我。 
English: After Yin Hao was removed from office, Huan Wen said to the crowd: When I was young, I used to ride a bamboo horse with Yuan Yuan. He always picked up the bamboo horse I threw away and rode it, so he was not as good as me.

古文：人问抚军： 殷浩谈竟何如？ 
现代文：有人问抚军司马里： 殷浩的清谈究竟怎么样？ 
English: Someone asked Mali, the army chief of staff: What about Yinhao's frank talk?

古文：答曰： 不能胜人，差可献酬群心。 
现代文：抚军回答说： 不能超过别人，大体上能满足大家的心愿。 
English: Fozun replied, "I can't surpass others, but I can generally satisfy everyone's wishes."

古文：简文云： 谢安南清令不如其弟，学义不及孔岩，居然自胜。 
现代文：简文帝说： 谢安甫在清雅善美上不如他的弟弟，学识上不如孔岩，但是显然有自己的优越之处。 
English: Jian Wen Di said: Xie Anfu is not as good as his brother in elegance and beauty, and is not as good as Kong Yan in knowledge, but he obviously has his own advantages.

古文：未废海西公时，王元琳问桓元子： 箕子、比干，迹异心同，不审明公孰是孰非？ 
现代文：还没有罢黜海西公的时候，王元琳问桓元子说： 箕子和比于两人，行事不同，用心一样，不知道您肯定谁、否走谁？ 
English: When Wang Yuanlin had not yet ousted Haisi Gong, she asked Huan Yuanzi, "Compared to the two of you, Haizi acts differently and has the same intentions. I don't know who you are sure of and who you are not sure of.

古文：曰： 仁称不异，宁为管仲。 
现代文：桓元子说： 如果都一样称为仁人，那么我宁愿做管仲。 
English: Kanemoto said: If everyone is called a benevolent person, then I would rather be a mediator.

古文：刘丹阳、王长史在瓦官寺集，桓护军亦在坐，共商略西朝及江左人物。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔和司徒左长史王濛在瓦官寺聚会，护军将军桓伊也在座，一道评价西晋和江南有声望的人士。
English: Danyang's Yin Liu Ye and Sidu's Zuo Chang Shi Wang Ye gathered at the Wakan Temple, and the escort general Huan Yi was also present, together evaluating the prestigious people of West Jin and Jiangnan.

古文：或问： 杜弘治何如卫虎？ 
现代文：有人问： 杜弘治和卫虎相比，哪个好？ 
English: Some people asked: Compared with Du Hongzhi and Weihu, which one is better?

古文：桓答曰： 弘治肤清，卫虎奕奕神令。 
现代文：桓伊回答说： 弘治外表清丽，卫虎神采奕奕。 
English: Huan Yi replied, "Kongzhi has a beautiful appearance, and Weihu is beautiful.

古文：王、刘善其言。
现代文：王濛和刘惔认为他的评论很好。
English: Wang Hui and Liu Hui thought his comments were very good.

古文：刘尹抚王长史背曰： 阿奴比丞相，但有都长。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘谈拍着长史王濛的背说： 你和王丞相相比，只不过比他漂亮、淳厚。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu patted the back of the long-serving Wang Xi and said, "Compared to Minister Wang, you are just more beautiful and honest.

古文：刘尹、王长史同坐，长史酒酣起舞。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔和长史王濛坐在一起，王濛喝酒喝到痛快的时候就跳起舞来。
English: Danyang's Yin Liuqi and Changshi's Wang Qi sat together. Wang Qi drank until he was drunk and then danced.

古文：刘尹曰： 阿奴今日不复减向子期。 桓公问孔西阳： 安石何如仲文？ 
现代文：刘惔说： 你今天赶上向子期了。 桓温问西阳侯孔严： 安石和仲文相比，谁强些？ 
English: Liu Yao said, "Today, you have caught up with Xiangzi's age." Huan Wen asked Xiyang Hou Kong Yan, "Compared to Anshi and Zhongwen, who is stronger?"

古文：孔思未对，反问公曰： 何如？ 
现代文：孔严考虑着没有回答，反问桓温： 您以为怎么样？ 
English: Kong Yan didn't answer, thinking about it. He asked Kuan Wen: What do you think?

古文：答曰： 安石居然不可陵践其处，故乃胜也。 
现代文：桓温回答说： 安石显然使人不能压制他的决断，自然就是胜一筹了。 
English: Kan-Wen replied, "Apparently, An-Shi's determination is irresistible, so naturally he won the battle."

古文：谢公与时贤共赏说，遏、胡儿并在坐。
现代文：谢安和当时贤达一起赞赏、评论人物，谢玄和谢朗都在座。
English: Xie An and the sages of the time praised and commented on the characters together. Xie Xuan and Xie Lang were both present.

古文：公问李弘度曰： 卿家平阳，何如乐令？ 
现代文：谢安问李弘度： 你家平阳和乐令相比，怎么样？ 
English: Xie An asked Li Hongdu: How is your home Pingyang compared to Le Ling?

古文：于是李潸然流涕曰： 赵王篡逆，乐令亲授玺绶。亡伯雅正，耻处乱朝，遂至仰药。
现代文：这时李弘度泪流不止他说： 赵王叛逆篡位时，乐令亲自奉献玺绶；亡伯为人正直，耻于在叛逆的朝廷中做官，终至于服毒身死。
English: At this time, Li Hongdu not only shed tears, but also said: When Zhao Wang rebelled and usurped the throne, Le Ling personally dedicated the scepter; the deceased was an honest man, ashamed of serving as an official in the rebellious court, and eventually poisoned to death.

古文：恐难以相比！
现代文：两人恐怕难以相比！
English: I'm afraid it's hard to compare the two!

古文：此自显于事实，非私亲之言。 
现代文：这自有事实来表明，并不是偏袒亲人的话。 
English: This is not a case of favouritism, as the facts themselves show.

古文：谢公语胡儿曰： 有识者果不异人意。 
现代文：谢安于是对谢朗说： 有识之士果然和人们的心愿相同。 
English: Xie An then said to Xie Lang: People with insight are indeed the same as people's wishes.

古文：王脩龄问王长史： 我家临川，何如卿家宛陵？ 
现代文：王脩龄问长史王濛说： 我家的临川和你家的宛陵相比，谁更好些？ 
English: Wang Yuling asked the elder Shi Wang Yu and said: Compared with my family's Linchuan and your family's Wanling, who is better?

古文：长史未答，脩龄曰： 临川誉贵。 
现代文：王濛还没有回答；王脩龄又说： 临川名声好，而且尊贵。 
English: Wang Yao had not yet answered; Wang Yuling also said: Linchuan has a good reputation and is respected.

古文：长史曰： 宛陵未为不贵。 
现代文：王濛说： 宛陵也不算不尊贵。 
English: Wang Yao said, "Wanling Mausoleum is not without dignity.

古文：刘尹至王长史许清言，时苟子年十三，倚床边听。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔到长史王濛那里清谈，这时王脩十三岁，就站在一边听。
English: Danyang Yin Liuqi went to Changshi Wangqi to have a clear talk. At this time, Wangqi was thirteen years old and stood aside to listen.

古文：既去，问父曰： 刘尹语何如尊？ 
现代文：刘惔走后，王脩问他父亲： 刘尹的谈论和父亲相比谁更好一些呢？ 
English: After Liu Yao left, Wang Yao asked his father: Compared to his father, who is better at talking about Liu Yin?

古文：长史曰： 韶音令辞，不如我；往辄破的，胜我。 
现代文：王濛说： 要论音调的抑扬顿挫，言辞的优美，他不如我，至于一谈就能切中玄理，这点我比不上他。 
English: Wang Yao said: In terms of intonation and beauty of speech, he is not as good as me. In terms of being able to get to the heart of the matter in a single conversation, I am not as good as him.

古文：谢万寿春败后，简文问郗超： 万自可败，那得乃尔失士卒情？ 
现代文：谢万在寿春县失败后，简文帝问郗超： 谢万自然可能打败，可是怎么竟会如此失掉士兵们的爱戴之情？ 
English: After Xie Wan's defeat in Shuchun County, Emperor Jianwen asked Gong Chao: Xie Wan could have been defeated, but how could he have lost the soldiers' love?

古文：超曰： 伊以率任之性，欲区别智勇。 
现代文：郗超说： 他凭着任性放纵的性格，想把智谋和勇敢区分开。 
English: Zou Chao said: With his capricious and indulgent personality, he wanted to distinguish between cleverness and bravery.

古文：刘尹谓谢仁祖曰： 自吾有四友，门人加亲。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘谈对谢仁祖说： 自从我有了 颜回 ，学生间的关系就更加亲密。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu said to Xie Renzu: Since I had Yan Hui, the relationship between students has become more intimate.

古文：谓许玄度曰： 自吾有由，恶言不及于耳。 
现代文：又对许玄度说： 自从我有了 仲由 ，让人不满的话就再也听不到了。 
English: He also said to Xu Xundu: "Since I have Zhongyu, I can no longer hear the words that make people dissatisfied.

古文：二人皆受而不恨。
现代文：两个人都容忍了他的说法而没有怨言。
English: Both men tolerated his comments without complaint.

古文：世目殷中军： 思纬淹通，比羊叔子。 
现代文：世人评论中军将军殷浩： 思路宽广通畅，可以和羊叔子并列。 
English: People around the world commented on the Chinese military general Yin Hao: He has a broad and smooth way of thinking, and can be ranked alongside Yang Shuzi.

古文：有人问谢安石、王坦之优劣于桓公。
现代文：有人向桓温问起谢安石和王但之两人的优劣。
English: Someone asked Kan On about the pros and cons of Xie Anshi and Wang Dan.

古文：桓公停欲言，中悔曰： 卿喜传人语，不能复语卿。 
现代文：桓温正要说，中途后悔了，便说： 你喜欢传别人的话，不能再告诉你。 
English: Kuan Wen was about to say something, but regretted it halfway through, and said, "You like to pass on other people's words, I can't tell you any more.

古文：王中郎尝问刘长沙曰： 我何如苟子？ 
现代文：北中郎将王坦之曾经问长沙相刘奭： 我和苟子相比，怎么样？ 
English: Wang Tanzhi, the Northern Middle Lord, once asked Liu Ye, the Minister of Changsha, "Compared to my son-in-law, how am I?

古文：刘答曰： 卿才乃当不胜苟子，然会名处多。 
现代文：刘奭回答说： 你的才学本来是不会超过苟子，可是领会名理的地方却比他强。 
English: Liu Ye replied, "Your talent is not superior to that of Gou Zi, but your understanding of names and reason is better than his.

古文：王笑曰： 痴！ 
现代文：王坦之笑说： 傻话！ 
English: Wang Tanzhi said with a smile: What nonsense!

古文：支道林问孙兴公： 君何如许掾？ 
现代文：支道林问孙兴公： 您和许椽相比，怎么样？ 
English: Branch Road Lin asked Sun Xinggong: How are you compared to Xu Yao?

古文：孙曰： 高情远致，弟子蚤已服膺；一吟一咏，许将北面。 
现代文：孙兴公说： 要论情趣高远，弟子对他早已心悦诚服；说到吟诗咏志，许掾却要拜我为师。 
English: Sun Xinggong said: When it comes to lofty and far-reaching sentiments, his disciple has already been pleased and convinced by him; when it comes to chanting poems, Xu Yao wants to worship me as his teacher.

古文：王右军问许玄度： 卿自言何如安石？ 
现代文：右军将军王羲之问许玄度： 你自己说说你和安石、万石相比，谁强些？ 
English: The right-wing general Wang Xizhi asked Xu Xundu: Tell me about yourself, compared to Anshi and Wanshi, who is stronger?

古文：许未答，王因曰： 安石故相为雄，阿万当裂眼争邪？ 
现代文：许玄度还没有回答，王羲之便说： 安石自然对你称雄，阿万可要和你怒目相争吧！ 
English: Xu Xundu hadn't answered yet, so Wang Xizhi said: Anshi is naturally proud of you, Ah Van can fight with you!

古文：刘尹云： 人言江虨田舍，江乃自田宅屯。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔说： 人们谈论江虨像农家子，土气，江虨其实是在村庄里自营田地，房舍，自种自收。 
English: Danyang Yin Liuyao said: People talk about Jiangyao like a farmer's son, earthy, Jiangyao is actually in the village self-operated fields, houses, self-sown self-harvesting.

古文：谢公云： 金谷中苏绍最胜。 
现代文：谢安说： 在金谷园的聚会中苏绍的诗最优秀。 
English: Xie An said, "Su Shao's poem was the best at the gathering in Jinguyuan."

古文：绍是石崇姊夫，苏则孙，愉子也。
现代文：苏绍是石崇的姊夫。苏则的孙子。
English: Su Shao is the brother-in-law of Shi Chong and the grandson of Su Ze.

古文：刘尹目庾中郎： 虽言不愔愔似道，突兀差可以拟道。 
现代文：苏愉的儿子。丹阳尹刘惔评论从事中郎庾敳说： 虽然他的言谈不像道那样寂静无为，但是其中突出之处大体能和道相比拟。 
English: Su Yu's son, Danyang Yin Liu Yao, commented on the performance of Zhong Lang Yao: Although his speech is not as silent and inactive as the Tao, the salient point is that his physical strength is comparable to that of the Tao.

古文：孙承公云： 谢公清于无奕，润于林道。 
现代文：孙承公说： 谢公比无奕高洁、比林道温和宽厚。 
English: Sun Chenggong said: Xie Gong is more noble and pure than any other, and gentler and more generous than Lin Dao.

古文：或问林公： 司州何如二谢？ 
现代文：有人问支道林： 司州和谢家两兄弟相比，怎么样？ 
English: Someone asked Shidolin: Compared to the two brothers, Sizhou and Xie, how are they?

古文：林公曰： 故当攀安提万。 
现代文：支道林说： 当然是仰攀谢安，提携谢万。 
English: Shidolin said: Of course, it is to climb up and thank An, and to cooperate with Xie Wan.

古文：孙兴公、许玄度皆一时名流。
现代文：孙兴公、许玄度都是当时的名流。
English: Sun Xingguo and Xu Xundu were both celebrities at the time.

古文：或重许高情，则鄙孙秽行；或爱孙才藻，而无取于许。
现代文：有人看重许玄度的高远情趣，就鄙视孙兴公的丑恶行为；有人喜欢孙兴公的才华，就认为许玄度无可取之处。
English: Some people value the lofty sentiments of Xu Xundu and despise the ugly behavior of Sun Xinggong; some people like the talent of Sun Xinggong and think that Xu Xundu has no redeeming features.

古文：郗嘉宾道谢公： 造膝虽不深彻，而缠绵纶至。 
现代文：郗嘉宾评论谢安说： 议论虽然不很深透，可是情意特别深厚。 
English: Zou Jiabin commented on Xie An: Although the discussion is not very profound, the sentiment is particularly profound.

古文：又曰： 右军诣嘉宾。 
现代文：有人说： 右军造诣根深。 
English: Some people say: The right-wing conspiracy is deep-rooted.

古文：嘉宾闻之云： 不得称诣，政得谓之朋耳！ 
现代文：嘉宾听到后说： 不能说造诣很深，只能说两人不相上下罢了。 
English: After listening, the guest of honor said, "I can't say that the accomplishment is very deep, I can only say that the two are on a par."

古文：谢公以嘉宾言为得。
现代文：谢安认为嘉宾的话说对了。
English: Xie An thought that what the guest of honor said was right.

古文：庾道季云： 思理伦和，吾愧康伯；志力强正，吾愧文度。
现代文：庾道季说： 要论思路条理清楚，我自愧不如康伯；要论志气坚强不屈，我自愧不如文度。
English: Zou Daoji said, "In terms of having a well-organized and clear way of thinking, I am ashamed to be inferior to Khambo; in terms of having a strong and indomitable spirit, I am ashamed to be inferior to Wenda.

古文：自此以还，吾皆百之。 
现代文：除此以外的人，我都超过他们一百倍。 
English: I am a hundred times better than all the rest.

古文：王僧恩轻林公，蓝田曰： 勿学汝兄，汝兄自不如伊。 
现代文：王僧恩轻视支道林，蓝田侯王述告诉他： 不要学你哥哥，你哥哥本来比不上他。 
English: Wang Xiong'en despised the tributary forest, Lantian Hou Wang told him: Don't learn from your brother, your brother is not as good as him.

古文：简文问孙兴公： 袁羊何似？ 
现代文：简文帝问孙兴公： 袁羊这个人怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Jianwen asked Sun Xinggong: How is Yuan Yang?

古文：答曰： 不知者不负其才；知之者无取其体。 
现代文：孙兴公回答说： 不了解他的人不会看不到他的才能，了解他的人瞧不起他的品德。 
English: Sun Xinggong replied, "Those who don't know him won't be able to see his talent, and those who know him will look down on his character.

古文：蔡叔子云： 韩康伯虽无骨干，然亦肤立。 
现代文：蔡叔子说： 韩康伯虽然像没有骨架似的，但是体型壮美，形象也还能立得住。 
English: Cai Shuzi said: Although Han Kangbo looks like he doesn't have a skeleton, his body shape is magnificent and his image can still stand up.

古文：郗嘉宾问谢太傅曰： 林公谈何如嵇公？ 
现代文：郗嘉宾问太傅谢安： 林公的清谈比秘公怎么样？ 
English: A distinguished guest asked Taifu Xie An: How is Lin Gong's clear talk with Bi Heiguo?

古文：谢云： 嵇公勤著脚，裁可得去耳。 
现代文：谢安说： 嵇公要马不停蹄地走，才能前进呀。 
English: Xie'an said, "Zhang Gong needs to walk non-stop in order to advance.

古文：又问： 殷何如支？ 
现代文：嘉宾又问： 殷浩比支道林怎么样？ 
English: The guest also asked: What about the Yin Hao Bi Branch Forest?

古文：谢曰： 正尔有超拔，支乃过殷。然亹亹论辩，恐殷欲制支。 
现代文：谢安说： 只是能超脱尘俗，支道林才超过殷浩，可是在娓娓不倦的辩论方面，恐怕殷浩的口才会制服支道林的。 
English: Xie An said: It is only by being able to transcend the vulgarity that the tributary forest surpasses Yin Hao, but in terms of tireless debate, I am afraid that Yin Hao's mouth will overpower the tributary forest.

古文：庾道季云： 廉颇、蔺相如虽千载上死人，懔懔恒如有生气。
现代文：庾道季说： 廉颇和蔺相如虽然是千年以上的古人，依旧正气凛然，经常使人感到虎虎有生气。
English: Zou Daoji said: Although the ancient people are more than a thousand years old, they are still upright and often make people feel energetic.

古文：曹蜍、李志虽见在，厌厌如九泉下人。
现代文：曹蜍、李志虽然现在还活着，却精神委靡像坟墓里的死人一样。
English: Although Cao Wei and Li Zhi are still alive, they are as depressed as the dead in the grave.

古文：人皆如此，便可结绳而治，但恐狐狸貒貉啖尽。 
现代文：如果人人都像曹、李那样，就可以回到结绳而治的原始时代去，只是恐怕野兽会把人都吃光。 
English: If everyone were like Cao and Li, we could go back to the primitive era of tying ropes and ruling, but I'm afraid the beasts would eat everyone up.

古文：卫君长是萧祖周妇兄，谢公问孙僧奴： 君家道卫君长云何？ 
现代文：卫君长是萧祖周的大舅子，一次谢安问孙僧奴： 您说卫君长这个人怎么样？ 
English: Wei Junchang is the elder brother-in-law of Xiao Zu Zhou. Once, Xie An asked Sun Monk: What do you think of Wei Junchang?

古文：孙曰： 云是世业人。 
现代文：孙僧奴说： 听说是个俗事缠身的人。 
English: Sun Zongnu said, "I heard that he is a person who is obsessed with the mundane.

古文：谢曰： 殊不尔，卫自是理义人。 
现代文：谢安说： 根本不是这样，卫君长本是个研究名理的人。 
English: Xie An said, "It's not like that at all. Wei Jun Chang was originally a person who studied philosophy.

古文：于时以比殷洪远。
现代文：当时人们把卫君长和殷洪远并列。
English: At that time, people put Wei Junchang and Yin Hongyuan on the same level.

古文：王子敬问谢公： 林公何如庾公？ 
现代文：王子敬问谢安： 林公比庾公，怎么样？ 
English: The prince respectfully asked Xie An: How is Lin Gong better than Yan Gong?

古文：谢殊不受，答曰： 先辈初无论，庾公自足没林公。 
现代文：谢安很不同意这样相比，回答说： 前辈从来没有谈论过，庚公自然能够超过林公。 
English: Xie An strongly disagreed with the comparison, replying, "Our predecessors never talked about the fact that Geng Gong could naturally surpass Lin Gong.

古文：谢遏诸人共道竹林优劣，谢公云： 先辈初不臧贬七贤。 
现代文：谢遏等人一起谈论竹林七贤的优劣，谢安说： 前辈从来不褒贬七贤。 
English: Xie Yan and others discussed the merits and demerits of the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest. Xie An said, "Our predecessors never praised or disparaged the Seven Sages.

古文：有人以王中郎比车骑，车骑闻之曰： 伊窟窟成就。 
现代文：有人把北中郎将王坦之和车骑将军谢玄并列，谢玄听说这事就说： 他努力做出了成绩。 
English: Some people put Kitanakura in the same league as Wang Tan Zhi and the cavalry general Xie Xuan. When Xie Xuan heard about this, he said: He worked hard to achieve results.

古文：谢太傅谓王孝伯： 刘尹亦奇自知，然不言胜长史。 
现代文：太傅谢安对王孝伯说： 刘尹也是非常了解自己的，可是他不说超过长史。 
English: Daifu Xie'an said to Wang Xiaobo: Liu Yin also knows himself very well, but he does not say more than a long history.

古文：王黄门兄弟三人俱诣谢公，子猷、子重多说俗事，子敬寒温而已。
现代文：黄门侍郎王子猷兄弟三人一同去拜访谢安，子猷和子重大多说些日常事情，子敬不过寒暄几句罢了。
English: Huangmen waiter, prince and three brothers went to visit Xie An together. Zixuan and Zigeige said more about daily affairs, but Zigeige could only say a few words of greeting.

古文：既出，坐客问谢公： 向三贤孰愈？ 
现代文：三人走了以后，在座的客人问谢安： 刚才那三位贤士谁较好？ 
English: After the three of them left, a guest asked Xie An: Who were the three wise men just now?

古文：谢公曰： 小者最胜。 
现代文：谢安说： 小的最好。 
English: Xie An said: Small is best.

古文：客曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：客人问道： 怎么知道呢？ 
English: The guest asked: How do you know?

古文：谢公曰： 吉人之辞寡，躁人之辞多，推此知之。 
现代文：谢安说： 善良的人话少，急躁的人话多。是从这两句话推断出来的。 
English: Xie'an said, "Kind people talk less, and impatient people talk more." This is inferred from these two sentences.

古文：谢公问王子敬： 君书何如君家尊？ 
现代文：谢安问王子敬： 您的书法比起令尊怎么样？ 
English: Xie An asked Prince Jing: How is your calligraphy compared to your father's?

古文：答曰： 固当不同。 
现代文：子敬回答说： 本来是不同的。 
English: Zi Jing replied, "It was originally different."

古文：公曰： 外人论殊不尔。 
现代文：谢安说： 外面的议论绝不是这样。 
English: Xie'an said, "This is absolutely not what is being said outside.

古文：王曰： 外人那得知？ 
现代文：王子敬说： 外人哪里会懂得！ 
English: The prince said respectfully: How would a foreigner understand it!

古文：王孝伯问谢太傅： 林公何如长史？ 
现代文：王孝伯问太傅谢安： 林公和长史相比，怎么样？ 
English: Wang Xiao Bo asked Taifu Xie An: Compared with Lin Gong and Chang Shi, how are they?

古文：太傅曰： 长史韶兴。 
现代文：谢安说： 长史的清谈意趣清新。 
English: Xie An said: The long history of clear talk has a fresh meaning.

古文：问： 何如刘尹？ 
现代文：王孝伯又问： 和刘尹相比怎么洋？ 谢安说： 哎，刘尹才能出众。 
English: Wang Xiao Bo also asked: How foreign is he compared to Liu Yin? Xie An said: Oh, Liu Yin is outstanding.

古文：谢曰： 噫！刘尹秀。 王曰： 若如公言，并不如此二人邪？ 
现代文：王孝伯说： 如果像您说的那样，他全都比不上这两个人吗？ 
English: Wang Xiao Bo said: If, as you said, he is not as good as these two people?

古文：谢云： 身意正尔也。 
现代文：谢安说： 我的意思正是这样啊。 
English: Xie An said, "That's exactly what I mean."

古文：人有问太傅： 子敬可是先辈谁比？ 
现代文：有人问太傅谢安： 子敬到底是和哪一位前辈相当？ 
English: Someone asked Taifu Xie'an: Which of your predecessors is Zijing comparable to?

古文：谢曰： 阿敬近撮王、刘之标。 
现代文：谢安说： 从近处说，阿敬集中了王、刘二人的风度。 
English: Xie An said: From a close distance, Ah Jing concentrated the demeanor of Wang and Liu.

古文：谢公语孝伯： 君祖比刘尹，故为得逮。 
现代文：谢安对王孝伯说： 您的祖父和刘尹齐名，自然是能够做到他那样。 
English: Xie An said to Wang Xiaobo: Your grandfather is as famous as Liu Yin, so naturally he can do what he did.

古文：孝伯云： 刘尹非不能逮，直不逮。 
现代文：王孝伯说： 刘尹那样的人并不是难以做到的，只是祖父不那样做。 
English: Wang Xiaobo said, "It's not difficult to be like Liu Yin, but my grandfather wouldn't do that.

古文：袁彦伯为吏部郎，子敬与郗嘉宾书曰： 彦伯已入，殊足顿兴往之气。
现代文：袁彦伯担任了吏部郎，王子敬写信给郗嘉宾说： 彦伯已经入朝就职了，这个官职特别能挫伤人的仕进志气。
English: Yuan Yanbo served as the secretary, and the prince respectfully wrote to Zou Jiabin saying: "Yanbo has entered the imperial court and taken office. This official position can especially frustrate one's ambition to enter the imperial court.

古文：故知捶挞自难为人，冀小却，当复差耳。 
现代文：原先就知道受了杖刑自然很难做人，所以希望他能稍为辞让一下，这样就会好一些呀。 
English: I knew it would be difficult for him to be punished with the cane, so I hoped he would give in a little, and it would be better.

古文：王子猷、子敬兄弟共赏高士传人及赞。子敬赏井丹高洁，子猷云： 未若长卿慢世。 
现代文：王子猷、子敬兄弟一起欣赏《高士传》一书所记的人和所写的《赞》，子敬欣赏井丹的高洁，子猷说： 不如长卿玩世不恭。 
English: Prince Zixuan and Zi Jing brothers together appreciated the people recorded in the book "The Biography of Gao Shi Huang" and the "Praise" written. Zixuan appreciated the nobility of Yidan. Zixuan said: Not as cynical as Changqing.

古文：有人问袁侍中曰： 殷仲堪何如韩康伯？ 
现代文：有人问侍中袁烙之： 殷仲堪和韩康伯相比，谁强些？ 
English: Someone asked the chamberlain Yuan Brandzhi: Compared to Yin Zhongkan and Han Kangbo, who is stronger?

古文：答曰： 理义所得，优劣乃复未辨；然门庭萧寂，居然有名士风流，殷不及韩。 
现代文：袁恪之回答说： 两人义理上的成就，其优劣实在是还没有辨明，可是门庭闲静，显然保存着名士的风雅，这一点，殷仲堪是赶不上韩康伯的。 
English: Yuan Kezhi replied: The merits and demerits of the two men's achievements in righteousness have not yet been identified, but the courtyard is quiet and obviously preserves the style of celebrities. In this respect, Yan Zhongkan is not as good as Han Kangbo.

古文：故殷作诔云： 荆门昼掩，闲庭晏然。 
现代文：所以殷仲堪在哀悼韩康伯的诔文上说： 柴门白天也关闭着，清幽的庭院安安静静。 
English: Therefore, Yin Zhongkang said in the obituary of mourning Han Kangbo: Zhaimen is also closed during the day, and the quiet courtyard is quiet.

古文：王子敬问谢公： 嘉宾何如道季？ 
现代文：王子敬问谢安： 嘉宾和道季相比，谁强些？ 
English: The prince respectfully asked Xie An: Compared to Jiabin and Doji, who is stronger?

古文：答曰： 道季诚复钞撮清悟，嘉宾故自上。 
现代文：谢安回答说： 道季的清谈的确集中了他人的清虚善悟，嘉宾却本来就出众。 
English: Xie'an replied, "Doxi's clear talk really concentrated the purity and insight of others, but the guest of honor was already outstanding.

古文：王珣疾，临困，问王武冈曰： 世论以我家领军比谁？ 
现代文：王珣病重，临死的时候，问武冈侯王谧说： 舆论界把我家领军和谁并列？ 
English: Wang Yao was seriously ill, and when he was dying, he asked the lord of WuGang, Wang Yao, "Who does the public opinion compare the leaders of my family to?

古文：武冈曰： 世以比王北中郎。 
现代文：武冈侯说： 世人把他和王北中郎并列。 
English: Takeoka marquis said: People put him on a par with Wang Beizhong.

古文：东亭转卧向壁，叹曰： 人固不可以无年！ 
现代文：东亭侯王珣翻身面向墙壁，叹气说： 人确是不能没有寿数呀！ 
English: Dongting Hou Wangyao turned around and faced the wall, sighed and said, "It's true that people can't live forever!

古文：王孝伯道谢公： 浓至。 
现代文：王孝伯评价谢安 品格厚重深沉之至 。
English: Wang Xiao'er's evaluation of Xie An is profound.

古文：又曰： 长史虚，刘尹秀，谢公融。 
现代文：又说： 长史谦虚宽和，刘尹才智出众，谢公和乐通达。 
English: He also said: Changshi is modest and broad-minded, Liu Yin is outstanding in intelligence, Xie Gong and Le Tongda.

古文：王孝伯问谢公： 林公何如右军？ 
现代文：王孝伯问谢安： 林公和王羲之相比，谁更厉害一些？ 
English: Wang Xiaobo asked Xie An: Compared to Lin Gong and Wang Xizhong, who is more powerful?

古文：谢曰： 右军胜林公，林公在司州前亦贵彻。 
现代文：谢安说： 王羲之胜过林公。可是林公比起司州来还是尊贵而通达的。 
English: Xie'an said, "Wang Xizhi is better than Lin Gong. However, Lin Gong is more honorable and knowledgeable than Xizhou."

古文：桓玄为太傅，大会，朝臣毕集。
现代文：桓玄任太傅的时候，大宴宾客，朝中很多大臣都来了。
English: When Kuan Xuan was appointed taifu, the guests of the grand banquet, many ministers in the imperial court, came.

古文：坐裁竟，问王桢之曰： 我何如卿第七叔？ 
现代文：大家入座后，桓玄就问王桢之： 我和你七叔相比，谁更强一些？ 
English: After everyone was seated, Kuan Xuan asked Wang Xizhi: Compared to you and your seven uncles, who is stronger?

古文：于时宾客为之咽气。
现代文：当时在座的宾客都为王桢之紧张得不敢喘气。
English: The guests present at the time were so nervous that they dared not breathe for Wang Xizhi.

古文：王徐徐答曰： 亡叔是一时之标，公是千载之英。 
现代文：王桢之从容回答说： 亡叔只是一代的楷模，您却是千古的英才。 
English: Wang Xizhi calmly replied: "My late uncle was just a role model for a generation, but you are an all-time great talent.

古文：一坐欢然。
现代文：满座的人听了都喜气洋洋。
English: The full house was beaming with joy.

古文：桓玄问刘太常曰： 我何如谢太傅？ 
现代文：桓玄问太常刘瑾说： 我和谢太傅相比，谁更厉害一些？ 
English: Kuan Xuan often asked Liu Ye: Compared to Xie Taifu, who is more powerful?

古文：刘答曰： 公高，太傅深。 
现代文：刘瑾回答说： 公高明，太傅深厚。 
English: Liu Ye replied: "He is very open-minded and very profound.

古文：又曰： 何如贤舅子敬？ 
现代文：桓玄又问： 比起贤舅子敬来怎么样？ 
English: Kuan Xuan also asked: How is Jing Lai compared to his brother-in-law?

古文：答曰： 樝、梨、橘、柚，各有其美。 
现代文：刘瑾回答说： 楂、梨、橘，柚，各有各的美味。 
English: Liu Ye replied, "Strawberries, pears, tangerines, yuzu, each has its own deliciousness.

古文：旧以桓谦比殷仲文。
现代文：以前人们总是把桓谦和殷仲文并列。
English: In the past, people always put Kan Qian and Yin Zhongwen on the same level.

古文：桓玄时，仲文入，桓于庭中望见之，谓同坐曰： 我家中军，那得及此也！ 
现代文：桓玄称帝时，仲文入朝，桓玄在庭里望见他，对同座的人说： 我家的桓谦怎么比得上此人呢！ 
English: When Emperor Kuan Xuan was enthroned, Zhongwen entered the imperial court. Kuan Xuan saw him in the courtyard and said to those present: "How can my Kuan Qian be compared to this man!"

