古文：秦兴师临周而求九鼎，周君患之，以告颜率。
现代文：秦国发动军队逼近洛阳城下，向东周朝廷索要九鼎，周君为这件事感到忧虑，就告诉大臣颜率，和他一起商量对策。
English: Qin launched an army to approach the city of Luoyang and demanded nine dynasties from the East Zhou court. Zhou Jun was worried about this matter, so he told the minister Yan Quan and discussed countermeasures with him.

古文：颜率曰： 大王勿忧，臣请东借救于齐。 
现代文：颜率说： 大王不必忧虑，请让臣往东去齐国借兵救援。 
English: Yan Kai said, "Great King, don't worry, please let your vassal go east to Qi Province to borrow soldiers for rescue.

古文：颜率至齐，谓齐王曰： 夫秦之为无道也，欲兴兵临周而求九鼎，周之君臣内自画计，与秦，不若归之大国。
现代文：颜率来到齐国，对齐王说： 秦国的这种行为残暴无道，想兴兵来周索要九鼎，周的君臣在朝廷里商量对策，认为与其将九鼎给秦国，不如将它送给贵国。
English: Yan Rong came to Qi, and said to the king of Qi: "This kind of behavior of Qin is cruel and unreasonable. If you want to raise an army, come to Zhou to ask for Jiuding. Zhou's princes and ministers discussed countermeasures in the imperial court, and thought that rather than giving Jiuding to Qin, it would be better to give it to your country."

古文：夫存危国，美名也；得九鼎，厚宝也。
现代文：能够挽救面临危亡的国家，将会给您留下美名；能够得到九鼎，将是厚重的宝物。
English: To be able to save a country in danger will leave you a good name; to be able to get nine ding, will be a heavy treasure.

古文：愿大王图之。 
现代文：请求大王考虑一下这件事。 
English: Ask the king to consider the matter.

古文：齐王大悦，发师五万人，使陈臣思将，以救周，而秦兵罢。
现代文：齐王听了大为高兴，就发动了五万人的军队，派遣陈臣思做大将，前去救援东周，于是秦国的军队撤退了。
English: King Qi was very pleased to hear this, so he launched an army of fifty thousand men and sent Chen Zhensi as a general to rescue Dong Zhou. As a result, Qin's army retreated.

古文：齐将求九鼎，周君又患之。
现代文：齐国向东周索要九鼎，以兑现颜率的诺言时，东周国君为此事感到忧虑。
English: When the State of Qi asked the Eastern Zhou Dynasty for the Nine Treasures in order to fulfill the promise of Yan Quan, the Eastern Zhou Dynasty was worried about this.

古文：颜率曰： 大王勿忧，臣请东解之。 
现代文：颜率说： 大王不必忧虑，请允许臣去齐国为您解除烦忧。 
English: Yan Kai said, "Your Majesty, there is no need to worry. Please allow me to go to Qi Province to relieve your worries."

古文：颜率至齐，谓齐王曰： 周赖大国之义，得君臣父子相保也，愿献九鼎，不识大国何途之从而致之齐? 
现代文：于是颜率来到齐国，对齐王说： 这回我东周仰赖贵国的义举，才使我君臣父子得以平安无事，所以东周愿意献出九鼎，但是却不知贵国准备走哪一条路将九鼎运送到齐国？ 
English: Yan then came to Qi, and said to the king of Qi: This time, I am relying on your country's act of charity to keep my father and son safe and sound. Therefore, Eastern Zhou is willing to offer Jiuding, but I do not know which way your country is going to take to transport Jiuding to Qi.

古文：齐王曰： 寡人将寄径于梁。 
现代文：齐王说： 寡人打算借道梁国。 
English: King Qi said, "Many people want to take the path of Liang Guo.

古文：颜率曰： 不可。
现代文：颜率说： 大王不可向梁国借道啊！
English: Yan Kai said: The great king must not take the path of Liang Guo!

古文：夫梁之君臣欲得九鼎，谋之晖台之下，少海之上，其日久矣。
现代文：梁国君臣很早就想得到九鼎，他们在晖台和少海一带已经谋划很久了。
English: Liang Guo Junchen wanted to get Jiuding for a long time. They have been planning for a long time in Xingtai and Shaohai.

古文：鼎入梁，必不出。 
现代文：一旦九鼎进入梁国，就很难能出来了。 
English: Once Jiuding enters Liangguo, it will be difficult to get out.

古文：齐王曰： 寡人将寄径于楚。 
现代文：于是齐王又说： 那寡人向楚国借道。 
English: Then King Qi said, "Those few people have taken the road to Chu."

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：颜率回答说： 大王这也不可以啊！
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：楚之君臣欲得九鼎，谋之于叶庭之中，其日久矣。
现代文：楚国君臣为了得到九鼎，很早就在叶庭进行谋划了。
English: In order to obtain Jiuding, the princes and ministers of the State of Chu started planning in Ye Tian very early.

古文：若入楚，鼎必不出。 
现代文：一旦九鼎进入楚国，就很难能够出来了 。
English: Once the Jiuding enters Chu, it is difficult to get out.

古文：王曰： 寡人终何途之从而致之齐? 
现代文：齐王说： 那么寡人应该从哪条路将九鼎运送回来呢？ 
English: King Qi said, "Then which way should I take Jiuding back?"

古文：颜率曰： 弊邑固窃为大王患之。
现代文：颜率说： 我东周君臣也在私下为大王这件事忧虑。
English: Yan Kai said: My Eastern Zhou monarchs and ministers are also privately worried about the great king.

古文：夫鼎者，非效醯壶酱甀耳，可怀挟提挈以至齐者；非效鸟集乌飞，兔兴马逝，漓然止于齐者。
现代文：因为九鼎，并不是像醋瓶子或酱罐子一类的东西，可以提在手上或揣在怀中就能拿到齐国，也不像群鸟聚集、乌鸦飞散、兔子奔跳、骏马疾驰那样飞快地进入齐国。
English: Because Jiuding is not like a bottle of vinegar or a jar of sauce, which can be picked up in the hand or carried in the arms to get to Qi, nor is it like a flock of birds gathering, crows flying, rabbits running and horses galloping to enter Qi.

古文：昔周之伐殷，得九鼎，凡一鼎而九万人輓之，九九八十一万人，士卒师徒，器械被具，所以备者称此。
现代文：过去西周讨伐殷商的时候，得到九鼎，就一只鼎都要九万人一起才能够抬动，总共用了九九八十一万人，用到的兵士和工匠，以及所需要准备的搬运工具和被服用具更是难以计数。
English: In the past, when the Western Zhou Dynasty cracked down on the Shang merchants, it took a total of 99.81 million people to get the nine tripods, and each tripod required 90,000 people to be able to lift it. The soldiers and craftsmen used, as well as the handling tools and tools needed to be prepared are even more difficult to count.

古文：今大王纵有其人，何途之从而出?
现代文：如今大王即使有这种人力和物力，也不知道从哪条路把九鼎运来齐国。
English: Nowadays, even if the great king has such human and material resources, he does not know from which road to transport Jiuding to Qi.

古文：臣窃为大王私忧之。 
现代文：所以臣一直在私下为大王担忧。 
English: Therefore, the vassal has been privately worried about the great king.

古文：齐王曰： 子之数来者，犹无与耳。 
现代文：齐王说： 贤卿屡次来我齐国，说来说去还是不想把九鼎给寡人了！ 
English: The king of Qi said, "Xianqing has repeatedly come to my country of Qi, and he still does not want to give Jiuding to just a few people!

古文：颜率曰： 不敢欺大国，疾定所从出，弊邑迁鼎以待命。 
现代文：颜率赶紧解释说： 臣怎敢欺骗贵国呢，只要大王能赶快决定从哪条路搬运，我东周君臣可迁移九鼎听候命令。 
English: Yan Kai hurriedly explained: How dare the minister deceive your country. As long as the king can quickly decide which way to carry it, I, Dong Zhou, the monarch and the minister, can move Jiuding to await orders.

古文：齐王乃止。
现代文：齐王终于打消了获得九鼎的念头。
English: King Qi finally gave up the idea of obtaining Jiuding.

