古文：贞观五年，李百药为太子右庶子，时太子承乾颇留意典坟，然闲宴之后，嬉戏过度。
现代文：贞观五年，李百药为太子右庶子。当时太子承乾对三坟五典这些古代典籍颇为留心，可是闲饮宴乐之后，游乐嬉戏稍微过分。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Li Baiyao was the prince's right child. At that time, Prince Chengyan was quite attentive to the three tombs and five classics, but after the leisurely drinking and feasting, the play was a little excessive.

古文：百药作《赞道赋》以讽焉，其词曰：
现代文：于是李百药作《赞道赋》来进行讽谏规劝，里面写道：
English: Therefore, Li Baiyao wrote "Zan Daofu" to make ironic exhortation, in which he wrote:

古文：下臣侧闻先圣之格言，尝览载籍之遗则，伊天地之玄造，洎皇王之建国，曰人纪与人纲，资立言与立德。
现代文：我听说过古代圣贤遗留下来的格言，也曾经看过记载在典籍上的遗训。自从开天辟地以来，直到帝王建国立邦，都是依靠君主的德性言行，建立和巩固社会的纲纪。
English: I have heard the sayings of the sages of ancient times, and I have also read the teachings of the sages recorded in the classics. From the beginning of the world until the emperor founded the state, it was the monarch's virtuous words and deeds that were relied on to establish and consolidate social discipline.

古文：履之则率性成道，违之则罔念作忒。
现代文：按照法则办事就能依附本性成就大道，违背了它就会思想混乱，作恶酿祸。
English: If you act according to the law, you will be able to rely on nature to achieve the road, and if you violate it, you will be confused and do evil.

古文：望兴废如从钧，视吉凶如纠餧。
现代文：看待历史的兴亡如同自然的天工造化，观察人事的吉凶如同绳索的缠绕纠结。
English: Look at the rise and fall of history as a natural phenomenon, observe the fortunes of personnel affairs as a tangle of ropes.

古文：至乃受图膺箓，握镜君临。
现代文：现在我们大唐帝国承受天命，应运而生，秉承清明之道，君临天下。
English: Now we, the Great Tang Empire, bear the fate of heaven and are born in response to the call of the times. Adhering to the path of clarity, we will rise to rule the world.

古文：因万物之思化，以百姓而为心。
现代文：应根据事物变化的规律，把老百姓放在自己心中。
English: According to the law of the change of things, the people should be placed in their own hearts.

古文：体大仪之潜运，阅往古于来今。
现代文：体会天下暗藏的变化规律，细细地研读古往今来的历史。
English: Experience the hidden laws of change in the world, and carefully study the history from ancient times to the present.

古文：尽为善于乙夜，惜勤劳于寸阴。
现代文：尽量为天下多做好事，珍惜分分秒秒的光阴。
English: Try to do more good things for the world and cherish every minute of your time.

古文：故能释层冰于瀚海，变寒谷于蹛林。
现代文：这样才能融化浩瀚海洋中的坚冰，将阴冷的山谷变成祭祀的秋林。
English: Only in this way can the hard ice in the vast ocean be melted and the gloomy valley be turned into an autumn forest for rhinoceroses.

古文：总人灵以胥悦，极穹壤而怀音。
现代文：让生灵万民欢悦，让天地都沐浴您的恩宠。
English: Let all beings rejoice, and let heaven and earth be bathed in your grace.

古文：赫矣圣唐，大哉灵命；时维大始，运钟上圣。
现代文：我盛唐赫赫天威，上承天命；开创帝业，遇到圣明的贤人。
English: I wield the power of heaven, inherit the destiny of heaven, create an empire, and meet the wise men of wisdom.

古文：天纵皇储，固本居正；机悟宏远，神姿凝映。
现代文：天派遣你作为皇位的继承人，巩固国家的根本，居于正位；心地聪颖，光彩照人。
English: Heaven has sent you as the heir to the throne, to consolidate the foundation of the country, to occupy the rightful position; you are intelligent and brilliant.

古文：顾三善而必弘。祗四德而为行。每趋庭而闻礼，常问寝而资敬。
现代文：凡三善之事必予光大，用四德来规范自己的行为，常拜谒父王听取教训，奉孝君父问安致敬。
English: All three good things must be glorified, use the four virtues to regulate one's behavior, always pay homage to the father to listen to the lessons, and pay tribute to the filial piety to ask the father for greetings.

古文：奉圣训以周旋，诞天文之明命。迈观乔而望梓，即元龟与明镜。
现代文：按照圣训待人接物，发扬光大上天之命，勤勉励行父子之道，以此作为元龟、明镜。
English: In accordance with the hadiths, treat people with respect, carry forward the heavenly mandate, and diligently pursue the path of father and son, thus serving as the original turtle and a bright mirror.

古文：自大道云革，礼教斯起，以正君臣，以笃父子。
现代文：自从大道消失以后，礼就兴起来了，这使君臣各得其所，使父与子之间的感情更加笃厚。
English: Since the disappearance of the high road, etiquette has been on the rise, which has enabled princes and ministers to find their own place, and has made the feelings between father and son more profound.

古文：君臣之礼，父子之亲，尽情义以兼极，谅弘道之在人。
现代文：君臣之间的礼义，父子之间的亲情，达到情义兼至，都在于人为。
English: The etiquette between princes and ministers, the kinship between father and son, and the achievement of mutual affection are all man-made.

古文：岂夏启与周诵，亦丹朱与商均。
现代文：怎能说夏启、周诵与丹朱、商均是一样的呢？
English: How can it be said that Xiaqi and Zhouqiao are the same as Danzhu and Shang?

古文：既雕且琢，温故知新。
现代文：你要通过反复不停地琢磨来温习旧的知识，让心灵受到启发而获得的新的知识。
English: You have to review the old knowledge through repeated and incessant pondering, and let the mind be inspired to acquire new knowledge.

古文：惟忠与敬，曰孝与仁。则可以下光四海，上烛三辰。
现代文：忠、敬、孝、仁，用它来治理国家，就可以使国家安定与兴盛。
English: Loyalty, respect, filial piety and benevolence, if used to govern the country, can make the country stable and prosperous.

古文：昔三王之教子，兼四时以齿学；将交发于中外，乃先之以礼乐。
现代文：过去三王教育子女，用四时之法按年来学习；将要让太子出宫就位，都是先用礼乐来教育他们。
English: In the past, the three kings educated their children, using the four-hour method to learn according to the year; when they were going to let the prince leave the palace, they would first use the ritual music to educate them.

古文：乐以移风易俗，礼以安上化人。
现代文：乐用来改变风俗，礼用来安定统治、教化大众。
English: Entertainment is used to change customs, and etiquette is used to stabilize rule and educate the public.

古文：非有悦于钟鼓，将宣志以和神。
现代文：学习音乐并非是喜欢乐音，而是用它来表明志向，使心神安宁。
English: Learning music is not about liking the sound of music, but using it to show ambition and make the mind calm.

古文：宁有怀于玉帛，将克己而庇身。
现代文：学习礼法难道是想要得到玉帛吗？只是为了用其来克制自己的贪欲而让自己得以保全。
English: Is the purpose of learning etiquette to obtain the Jade Scepter? It is only to use it to restrain one's greed and keep oneself safe.

古文：生于深宫之中，处于群后之上，未深思于王业，不自珍于匕鬯。谓富贵之自然，恃崇高以矜尚，必恣骄狠，动愆礼让，轻师傅而慢礼仪，狎奸谄而纵淫放。
现代文：太子生长在宫廷之中，地位处于诸侯之上，如果不认真思考帝王的基业得之不易，就不会去珍惜，认为富贵天定，自高自大，必然产生骄横，从而使行为违背礼节，产生像轻视师傅、怠慢礼仪、亲近奸佞谄媚之人而放纵乱等可耻行为。
English: Princes grow up in the court, their status is above that of princes. If they do not seriously think about the emperor's hard-won heritage, they will not cherish it, think that wealth is predetermined by heaven, be arrogant, and inevitably become arrogant, thus causing behavior to violate etiquette, and produce shameful behaviors such as despising teachers, neglecting etiquette, and indulging people who are close and flattering.

古文：前星之耀遽隐，少阳之道斯谅。虽天下之为家，蹈夷俭之非一。
现代文：如果这样，那么先王的光芒就会隐没，充满阳光的大道就会阴暗，即使天下表面仍是一家，但所处的安全、危险情况却不一样。
English: If so, then the light of the first king will fade, the sun-filled avenue will be gloomy, even if the surface of the world is still a family, but the safety and danger situation is different.

古文：或以才而见升，或见谗而受黜。
现代文：有的人可能凭借才华得到任用，有的却可能因为诬陷而遭到贬谪。
English: Some people may be appointed on the basis of talent, while others may be demeaned because of false accusations.

古文：足可以省厥休咎，观其得失。
现代文：这就完全可以从中看出吉凶祸福，悟出得失成败。
English: This can fully be seen from the auspicious and inauspicious, and the realization of success and failure.

古文：请粗略而陈之，觊披文而相质。
现代文：让我粗略地陈述一下过去的历史，让你从中得到公正的评断。
English: Let me recapitulate the history of the past so that you can judge it fairly.

古文：在宗周之积德，乃执契而膺期；赖昌、发而作贰，启七百之鸿基。
现代文：周代以德服人，于是能把握时机承受天命。依靠文王、武王开创了七百年的宏伟基业。
English: Zhou dynasties served the people with virtue, so they were able to seize the opportunity to bear the fate of heaven. Relying on King Wen and King Wu, they created a magnificent foundation for seven hundred years.

古文：逮扶苏之副秦，非有亏于闻望，以长嫡之隆重，监偏师于亭障。
现代文：扶苏作为秦国的太子，并不是声名有什么贬损之处，而是自己作为嫡长子，却被派去监视守边之军。
English: As the prince of Qin, there was nothing derogatory about Fusu's reputation, but as the eldest son, he was sent to monitor the border troops.

古文：始祸则金以寒离，厥妖则火不炎上；既树置之违道，见宗祀之遄丧。
现代文：祸患由此产生，太子被疏远，灾难降临，太子被杀害。由于册立君主违背了正道，秦朝基业很快就遭到灭亡。
English: The calamity resulted from this, the prince was alienated, a disaster befell, and the prince was killed. Since the enthroned monarch violated the right path, the Qin Dynasty and the Imperial Family were soon destroyed.

古文：伊汉氏之长世，固明两之递作。
现代文：汉代统治久远，实则是因为太子继起的缘故。
English: The Han dynasty ruled for a long time, but in fact it was because of the succession of the prince.

古文：高惑戚而宠赵，以天下而为谑。
现代文：汉高祖被戚夫人迷惑而宠爱其子赵王，竟把国家大事视同玩笑。
English: Han Gao Zu was puzzled by his relative's wife and doted on his son Zhao Wang. He actually regarded the national event as a joke.

古文：惠结皓而因良，致羽翼于寥廓。
现代文：惠帝用张良的计策结交商山四皓，使得自己羽翼丰满得以翱翔九天之上。
English: Hui Di used Zhang Liang's strategy to make a deal with Shangshan Siyu, making his wings full and able to soar above the nine heavens.

古文：景有惭于邓子，成从理之淫虐；终生患于强吴，由发怒于争博。
现代文：汉景帝正因为侍奉父皇比不上宠臣，造成了邓通的乱暴虐，从而终生以强大的吴国为患，由于博弈的争执错杀了吴太子。
English: Emperor Han Jing was a favorite because he was not as good as his father, which led to Dantong's tyranny. As a result, he was plagued by the powerful State of Wu for the rest of his life. Due to a dispute over a game, he mistakenly killed Prince Wu.

古文：彻居储两，时犹幼冲，防衰年之绝议，识亚夫之矜功，故能恢弘祖业，绍三代之遗风。
现代文：汉武帝刘彻为太子时，年纪尚幼，就能提防老年不听劝谏而被人非议，疏远了周亚夫。因此他能够巩固拓展国家疆土，使三代遗风更加明显。
English: When Liu Che, the Emperor of Han, was a young prince, he was able to avoid being criticized for not listening to advice in his old age, which alienated Zhou Yafu. As a result, he was able to consolidate and expand the country's territory, making the three-generation legacy more obvious.

古文：据开博望，其名未融。
现代文：武帝为太子刘据设立博望苑广交宾客，名望尚未张显。
English: Emperor Wu set up Bohangyuan as a place for Prince Liu to meet guests, but his fame has yet to become apparent.

古文：哀时命之奇舛，遇谗贼于江充，虽备兵以诛乱，竟背义而凶终。
现代文：可叹的是他的命运不济，遇到谗臣江充的诽谤，虽然诛杀了引起内乱的江充，但也因违背礼仪而遭到杀身之祸。
English: Sadly, his fate was not good. He was slandered by his vassal Jiangchong. Although he killed Jiangchong, who caused the civil unrest, he was also killed for violating etiquette.

古文：宣嗣好儒，大猷行阐，嗟被尤于德教，美发言于忠謇。
现代文：汉元帝喜爱儒术，大道得以昌明。感叹他因为施行道德教化而被指责，赞赏他所发表的意见忠诚正直。
English: Emperor Hanyuan loved Confucianism, and the road to prosperity was clear. He lamented that he was criticized for carrying out moral education, and appreciated the opinions he expressed for their loyalty and honesty.

古文：始闻道于匡、韦，终获戾于恭、显。
现代文：起初任用匡衡、韦玄成为丞相，使他能够闻取治国正道，但他又因为任用弘恭、石显从而导致滥杀忠臣的错误行为。
English: At first, he appointed Kuang Heng and Wei Xuan as chancellors, so that he could learn the right way of governing the country, but because he appointed Hong Gong and Shi Xian, he led to the wrong behavior of indiscriminately killing loyalists.

古文：太孙杂艺，虽异定陶，驰道不绝，抑惟小善。
现代文：汉元帝太子成帝的才艺虽然不及元帝庶子定陶，但仁义为重，身为太子时不敢在御道上奔跑，不失为一些小的优点。
English: Although the talent of the crown prince of the Han Emperor Yuan Dynasty was not as good as that of the emperor's illegitimate son Ding Tao, benevolence and righteousness were important. When he was crown prince, he did not dare to run on the imperial road. These were some small advantages.

古文：犹见重于通人，当传芳于前典。
现代文：仍得到当时贤者的辅助，从而流芳史册。
English: He was still assisted by the sages of the time, and thus went down in history.

古文：中兴上嗣，明、章济济，俱达时政，咸通经礼，极至情于敬爱，惇友于于兄弟，是以固东海之遗堂，因西周之继体。
现代文：东汉的诸太子中，汉明帝、汉章帝端庄诚敬，都通晓政务和儒术，个个情感笃厚，兄弟和睦。因此能使东海王的遗业稳固，继承了西周的传位制度。
English: Among the princes of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Han Mingdi and Han Zhangdi Dangzhuangzhenggong were well versed in government affairs and Confucianism, each with strong feelings and brotherly harmony. Therefore, they were able to make the legacy of the East Sea King stable and inherited the Western Zhou succession system.

古文：五官在魏，无闻德音。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕为魏世子时，没有听到他好的德行。
English: When Wei Emperor Cao Pi was the son of Wei, he did not listen to his good virtue.

古文：或受讥于妲己，且自悦于从禽。
现代文：不是因为喜爱美女而遭到别人指责，就是放纵于打猎游玩。
English: It is not because they like beautiful women that they are criticized by others, but because they indulge in hunting.

古文：虽才高而学富，竟取累于荒淫。
现代文：虽然才能高、学问好，但却被自己的荒淫所牵连。
English: Although talented and well-educated, he was entangled in his own debauchery.

古文：暨贻厥于明皇，构崇基于三世。
现代文：到魏明帝时，在御花园中建筑土山长达三年。
English: By the time of Emperor Wei Ming, it took three years to build the earthen mound in the imperial garden.

古文：得秦帝之奢侈，亚汉武之才艺。
现代文：他有秦始皇那样的奢侈，却无汉武帝那样的才艺。
English: He had the luxury of Qin Shihuang, but not the talent of Emperor Wu of Han.

古文：遂驱役于群臣，亦无救于凋弊。
现代文：于是驱使群臣负土筑山，导致国家衰落，百姓凋疲。
English: As a result, he drove his ministers to build mountains of negative soil, leading to the decline of the country and the exhaustion of the people.

古文：中抚宽爱，相表多奇。
现代文：晋武帝司马炎宽厚仁德，相貌奇伟。
English: Emperor Jinwu Sima Yan was generous and benevolent, with a magnificent appearance.

古文：重桃符而致惑，纳巨鹿之明规。竟能扫江表之氛秽，举要荒而见羁。
现代文：其父虽然当初因为重视其弟司马悠，因为立世子之事而产生疑惑，但又最终接受了大臣裴秀的规劝，立司马炎为世子。
English: Although his father initially had doubts because of the importance he placed on his younger brother, Sima Yu, and because of the issue of establishing a successor, he eventually accepted the advice of Minister Pei Xiu and established Sima Yan as the successor.

古文：惠处东朝，察其遗迹。
现代文：最后司马炎终于取代魏国平定东吴，一统天下。
English: In the end, Sima Yan finally replaced Wei Guo in pacifying Eastern Wu and ruling the world.

古文：在圣德其如初，实御床之可惜。
现代文：晋惠帝为太子时，观察他的言行，其品行还和原来一样的昏愚，继承帝位实在让人感到痛惜。
English: When Emperor Jinhui was crown prince, observing his words and deeds, his character was still as stupid as before, and it was really regrettable for him to succeed to the throne.

古文：悼愍怀之云废，遇烈风之吹沙。
现代文：我伤悼晋惠王的长子愍怀被废掉太子之位，如同狂风吹沙般溃散无迹。
English: I mourn the fact that the eldest son of King Jin Hui, Gong Huai, was dethroned from the position of crown prince, and he was scattered without a trace like the wind blowing sand.

古文：尽性灵之狎艺，亦自败于凶邪。
现代文：但是他却因此自暴自弃，将聪明才智全都用于嬉戏，面对奸谄谗狞而自毁前程。
English: But as a result, he abandons himself, uses all his ingenuity to play, and destroys his own future in the face of the traitor.

古文：安能奉其粢盛，承此邦家！
现代文：这样的人又怎么能够保其祖业，担当国家重任！
English: How can such a person be able to preserve his ancestral heritage and take on important national responsibilities!

古文：惟圣上之慈爱，训义方于至道。
现代文：当今圣上慈祥仁爱，用最好的道德准则来对殿下进行教诫。
English: Today, the Holy Compassionate and Merciful One uses the best moral principles to admonish His Imperial Highness.

古文：同论政于汉幄，修致戒于京鄗。鄙《韩子》之所赐，重经术以为宝。
现代文：以前代的教训作为鉴戒。对晋元帝好用刑法，赐太子以《韩非子》表示鄙视，看重儒家的经世致用之术将它作为治国的法宝。
English: The lessons of previous generations serve as a warning. Emperor Jin Yuan was fond of using criminal law, and gave the prince "Hanfeizi" to express his disdain, valuing the Confucian way of using the world and using it as a magic weapon for governing the country.

古文：咨政理之美恶，亦文身之黼藻。庶有择于愚夫，惭乞言于遗老。
现代文：学习儒学，可以了解政事的得失，也可以提高自身的修养；因为知书达理而欣喜，可以用来识辨愚蠢的人；因为不知道典故而惭愧，需要去请教有学问的长者。
English: Studying Confucianism, you can understand the gains and losses of political affairs, and you can also improve your self-cultivation; you can rejoice because you know the book and reason, and you can use it to identify stupid people; you are ashamed because you do not know the allusions, and you need to consult a learned elder.

古文：致庶绩于咸宁，先得人而为盛。
现代文：要让国家政通人和，最关键的是得人心、得人才。
English: In order to be a national statesman, the most important thing is to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：帝尧以则哲垂谟，文王以多士兴咏。
现代文：尧帝懂得知人善任而成为世代的楷模，文王广揽贤才而为世人赞颂。
English: Emperor Xuan knew how to know people and become a role model for generations, and King Wen was praised by the world for his wide range of talents.

古文：取之于正人，鉴之于灵镜。量其器能，审其检行。
现代文：从正人君子中选取人才，然后用慧眼来加以鉴别对照。正确地判断一个人的才能，检验其德行。
English: Select talent from the righteous, and then use discernment to identify and compare. Correctly judge a person's talent, and test their virtue.

古文：必宜度机而分职，不可违方以从政。
现代文：必须根据其人之实际情况来确定职位，不可以违背原则。
English: The position must be determined according to the actual situation of the person, and the principle must not be violated.

古文：若其惑于听受，暗于知人，则有道者咸屈，无用者必伸。
现代文：如果被偏听迷惑，不能正确地了解人，那么有道行的人必然会受到压抑，没有才德的人必然能得到显贵。
English: If you are confused by partial listening and cannot understand people correctly, then those who have Taoism will inevitably be suppressed, and those who have no talent will inevitably be exalted.

古文：谗谀竞进以求媚，玩好不召而自臻。
现代文：奸谗之人竞相去献媚讨好来寻求宠幸，玩乐之物不招自来。
English: The cheaters compete to flatter and seek favors, and the playthings come uninvited.

古文：直言正谏，以忠信而获罪；卖官鬻狱，以货贿而见亲。
现代文：正直忠谏的人，可能因为他的忠心而招致罪过；卖官徇私之人，可能因为贿赂而得以亲近。
English: An honest and faithful man may incur guilt by his fidelity; a traitor may be brought near by bribery.

古文：于是亏我王度，斁我彝伦。
现代文：这就会使王道亏损，人伦败坏。
English: This will cause the royal road to lose money and human relations to deteriorate.

古文：九鼎遇奸回而远逝，万姓望抚我而归仁。
现代文：国家遇到奸臣就要遭到灭亡，黎民百姓都希望得到安抚而愿意归顺仁义之人。
English: When the country encounters a traitor, it will be destroyed. The people of Lebanon want to be appeased and are willing to submit to righteousness.

古文：盖造化之至育，惟人灵之为贵。
现代文：天地生育的万种生灵，只有人最为宝贵。
English: Of all the creatures of heaven and earth, only human beings are the most precious.

古文：狱讼不理，有生死之异涂，冤结不伸，乖阴阳之和气。
现代文：诉讼判断不合理，使人的生死适得其反；冤情得不到伸张，就会违背阴阳之气的调和。
English: Unreasonable litigation judgments make people's life and death counterproductive; if grievances are not upheld, it will violate the harmony of yin and yang.

古文：士之通塞，属之以深文；命之修短，悬之于酷吏。
现代文：贤才是否被任用，交付于苛责的刑法；百姓生命的长短，全维系在酷吏的身上。
English: Whether or not a wise person is appointed is left to the harsh criminal law; the length of people's lives is entirely dependent on the cruel officials.

古文：是故帝尧画像，陈恤隐之言；夏禹泣辜，尽哀矜之志。
现代文：所以尧帝画五刑图像的目的，正是为了表达对违法者的一种安抚；夏禹为哀怜犯人之心，在道路上哭泣是为了反省自身。
English: Therefore, the purpose of Hao Di's painting of the five punishments is precisely to express a kind of appeasement to the violator; Xia Yu is the heart of pity for the criminal, and crying on the road is to reflect on oneself.

古文：因取象于《大壮》，乃峻宇而雕墙。
现代文：根据《大壮》卦象的启发，于是建造楼宇亭台、雕梁画栋。
English: According to the inspiration of the "Big" Gua elephant, the pavilion and the carved and painted building were built.

古文：将瑶台以琼室，岂画栋以虹梁。
现代文：像桀那样做瑶台，像纣王那样做琼室，怎会是单单的雕梁画栋呢！
English: To make a throne like a dragonfly, to make a throne room like a dragonfly king, how can it be just a carved beam and a painting!

古文：或凌云以遐观，或通天而纳凉。
现代文：魏文帝修建凌云台远望，汉武帝修建通天台纳凉。
English: Emperor Wei Wendi built Lingyuntai Yuanwang, while Emperor Hanwu built Tongtiantai Nanlang.

古文：极醉饱而刑人力，命痿蹶而受身殃。
现代文：穷奢极欲而使黎民遭受苦难，而最后必遭天怒人怨，性命遭殃。
English: Those who indulge in extravagant desires cause the people of Li to suffer, and in the end, they will be subject to the wrath of heaven and the malice of men, and their lives will suffer.

古文：是以言惜十家之产，汉帝以昭俭而垂裕；虽成百里之囿，周文以子来而克昌。
现代文：所以汉文帝听说造露台要耗费十家人的家产而罢手，他以俭约的美名促使了国家的富强；周文王虽然修建成了方圆百里的园苑，却因为老百姓的自愿帮助而更加强大。
English: Therefore, Emperor Han Wen heard that the construction of a terrace would consume the family property of ten families and stopped. He promoted the country's prosperity and strength with the reputation of frugality. Although King Zhou Wen built a hundred-mile-square garden, he was more powerful because of the voluntary help of the common people.

古文：彼嘉会而礼通，重旨酒之为德。
现代文：至于美好的宴会应用礼来加强往来，喜欢美酒也应注重酒德。
English: As for the beautiful banquet, the use of etiquette to strengthen exchanges, like fine wine should also pay attention to wine ethics.

古文：至忘归而受祉，在齐圣而温克。
现代文：酒酣忘返却能得福的境界，在于自身的聪明和自制。
English: The realm where the drunkard forgets to return but can be blessed lies in his own cleverness and self-control.

古文：若其酗以致昏，酖湎而成忒，痛殷受与灌夫，亦亡身而丧国。
现代文：如果沉溺于酒色，因酗酒而酿成错误，就会像殷纣与灌夫那样因酒妄为、国亡身死，令人感到痛惜。
English: If you indulge in alcohol and make mistakes due to alcoholism, it will be regrettable that you will die as a result of drunkenness, just like Yin Xi and Guan Fu.

古文：是以伊尹以酣歌而作戒，周公以乱邦而贻则。
现代文：所以伊尹以酣歌为名作出训诫，周公因为酒能使国家混乱，而确立了行为的准则。
English: Therefore, Yi Yin made an admonition in the name of Yingge, and Zhou Gong established a code of conduct because alcohol can make the country chaotic.

古文：咨幽闲之令淑，实好逑于君子。
现代文：温婉贤淑的女子，实在是君子的美好伴侣。
English: A gentle and virtuous woman is indeed a fine companion for a gentleman.

古文：辞玉辇而割爱，固班姬之所耻；脱簪饵而思愆，亦宣姜之为美。
现代文：坚决不愿与汉帝同车游览，这是班婕妤知道仅仅作为宠妾的耻辱；拔掉簪子思考皇上沉溺后宫的罪过，这也是宣姜的美德。
English: Resolutely unwilling to tour with the Han emperor in the same car, this is the shame that Ban Zheng knows only as a favorite concubine; it is also the virtue of Xuan Jiang to pull out the braids and think about the emperor's sin of indulging in the harem.

古文：乃有祸晋之骊姬，丧周之褒姒。
现代文：但也有让晋国发生内乱的骊姬，让周幽王丧命的褒姒。
English: However, there is also the story of Shun Ji, who caused civil unrest in Jin Province, and the story of Bo Zhou, who caused the death of Zhou Yu Wang.

古文：尽妖妍于图画，极凶悖于人理。
现代文：这些人极其妖艳，赛过美丽的图画，但行为却极其违背人的纲常伦理。
English: These people are extremely glamorous and have beautiful pictures, but their behavior is extremely contrary to human ethics.

古文：倾城倾国，思昭示于后王；丽质冶容，宜永鉴于前史。
现代文：面对倾城倾国的美貌，应想想这些给后王留下的启示，应该永远以前代的历史为鉴。
English: In the face of the beauty of the city and the country, we should think about the inspiration left to the queen, and we should always follow the history of previous generations.

古文：复有蒐狩之礼，弛射之场，不节之以正义，必自致于禽荒。
现代文：至于狩猎驰射，如果不用道义加以节制，必然导致沉迷于此。
English: As for hunting, if it is not restrained by morality, it will inevitably lead to addiction.

古文：匪外形之疲极，亦中心而发狂。
现代文：这样不但形体疲惫，而且内心也会放纵失常。
English: In this way, not only is the body tired, but the mind will also indulge in disorder.

古文：夫高深不惧，胥靡之徒；韝緤为娱，小竖之事。
现代文：高山深谷都不害怕，这是无知囚徒；以打猎作为人生的欢乐，这是庸俗之辈所为。
English: To fear neither the heights nor the depths is the prisoner of ignorance; to hunt for the joy of life is the act of vulgarity.

古文：以宗社之崇重，持先王之名器，与鹰犬而并驱，凌艰险而逸辔。
现代文：自己身系宗庙社稷等崇高的事情，担负着先王传下来的治国重任，却与打猎的鹰犬并排奔跑，翻越危险之地策马飞奔。
English: He is a member of a noble family, a member of a temple, a member of a society, and so on, and bears the heavy responsibility of governing the country, which was passed down from the previous king. However, he runs side by side with the hunting eagle and dog, and gallops through dangerous places.

古文：马有衔橛之理，兽骇不存之地，犹有靦于获多，独无情而内愧？
现代文：而马也有失前蹄的时候，连野兽也会为没有生存之地而变得恐慌好斗，自己却不念及于此，反而贪得无厌，内心难道真的不感到惭愧吗？
English: And when a horse loses its front hooves, even wild beasts become panicky and combative because they have no place to live, but they do not think about this, but are insatiably greedy. Are they really not ashamed?

古文：以小臣之愚鄙，忝不赀之恩荣。
现代文：我见识短小浅陋，有愧于圣君如此隆恩。
English: I see how short-sighted and shallow I am, and I am ashamed of the saint for being so generous.

古文：擢无庸于草泽，齿陋质于簪缨。
现代文：皇上从草野之中把我这没才能的人提拔上来，鄙陋之躯竟然冠饰簪缨。
English: The emperor promoted me, a man with no talent, from the grasslands, and my humble body was crowned with a scepter.

古文：遇大道行而两仪泰，喜元良会而万国贞。
现代文：有幸遇到大道即行而国泰民安，欣喜与太子相会而使四海归正。
English: I was fortunate enough to come across the road and the Cathay people were safe, and I was delighted to meet the prince and make the four seas righteous.

古文：以监抚之多暇，每讲论而肃成。
现代文：我在做监抚的空闲时间，每每在书房讨论学问。
English: In my free time as a supervisor, I often discuss learning in the study room.

古文：仰惟神之敏速，叹将圣之聪明。
现代文：为您如神的敏捷而仰慕，为您如圣的聪慧而赞叹。
English: Admire you for your godlike agility and marvel at your saintly wisdom.

古文：自礼贤于秋实，足归道于春卿。
现代文：如果想要在道德方面礼贤下士，就要在礼仪方面归于道德。
English: If you want to be a good corporal in morals, you have to be moral in etiquette.

古文：芳年淑景，时和气清。
现代文：您正值美好年华，一切光阴都值得珍惜。
English: You are in the prime of your life, and every moment is precious.

古文：华殿邃兮帘帏静，灌木森兮风云轻，花飘香兮动笑日，娇莺啭兮相哀鸣。
现代文：宫殿深邃，帘帷清净；灌木苍盛，飞云轻绕；花香四溢，笑语盈盈；莺歌燕舞，互相和鸣。
English: The palace is deep, the curtains are clean; the shrubs are in full bloom, the clouds are lightly circling; the flowers are fragrant, the laughter is rich; the song and dance of the swallows harmonize with each other.

古文：以物华之繁靡，尚绝思于将迎。
现代文：面对生活的富贵奢华，您尚且无心留恋。
English: Faced with the richness and luxury of life, you still have no desire to linger.

古文：犹允蹈而不倦，极耽玩以研精。
现代文：仍然能做到恪守德行孜孜不倦，沉迷于学问而精于钻研。
English: They can still be tireless in adhering to virtue, indulge in learning and be proficient in research.

古文：命庸才以载笔，谢摛藻于天庭。
现代文：命不才的我执笔作文，在朝廷之上铺陈辞藻。
English: Desperate, I penned a composition and spread old rhetoric over the imperial court.

古文：异洞箫之娱侍，殊飞盖之缘情。
现代文：这不同于文帝时王褒上的《洞箫赋》那样讨人欢心，也不同于曹植 飞盖相追随 的诗赋。
English: This is different from the "Cave Gift" praised by Emperor Wen, which was so popular, and also different from the poem gift followed by Cao Zhi Feigai.

古文：阙雅言以赞德，思报恩以轻生。
现代文：我不擅长用优美的言辞来赞美您高尚的德行，只是想着报答知遇之恩而不惜牺牲自己的生命。
English: I am not good at using fine words to praise your noble virtues, but I just want to repay the grace of my experience and sacrifice my own life.

古文：敢下拜而稽首，愿永树于风声。
现代文：请允许我下拜稽首，愿您英名永树。
English: Please allow me to bow my head. May your name live forever.

古文：奉皇灵之遐寿，冠振古之鸿名。
现代文：努力侍奉皇上，美名千古流传。
English: He diligently served the emperor, and his good name has been passed down through the ages.

古文：太宗见而遣使谓百药曰： 朕于皇太子处见卿所作赋，述古来储贰事以诫太子，甚是典要。
现代文：太宗看了这篇辞赋后，派遣使者对李百药说： 我在皇太子居住的地方看到了你所作的辞赋，叙述古往今来太子的事情来告诫太子，十分简明得当。
English: After Emperor Taizong read this speech, he sent an envoy to Li Baiyao to say: I saw the speech you made in the place where the crown prince lived. It was very concise and appropriate to describe the things of the prince from ancient times to the present to admonish the prince.

古文：朕选卿以辅弼太子，正为此事，大称所委，但须善始令终耳。 
现代文：我选用你来辅佐太子，正是为了这件事。你很称职，但你必须让自己有始有终。 
English: That's why I chose you to assist the crown prince. You're very competent, but you have to be consistent.

古文：因赐厩马一匹，彩物三百段。
现代文：于是赏赐百药骏马一匹，彩帛三百段。
English: As a result, he rewarded a horse with a hundred medicinal herbs and a donkey with three hundred denarii.

古文：贞观中，太子承乾数亏礼度，侈纵日甚，太子左庶子于志宁撰《谏苑》二十卷讽之。
现代文：贞观年间，太子承乾屡次违反礼仪法度，一天比一天奢侈放纵。太子左庶子于志宁撰写了《谏苑》共二十卷对他进行劝谏。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Prince Cheng Qian repeatedly violated the etiquette laws and indulged in more and more extravagance. Prince Zuo's son-in-law, Yu Zhining, wrote a 20-volume "Guan Yuan" to dissuade him.

古文：是时太子右庶子孔颖达每犯颜进谏。
现代文：当时太子右庶子孔颖达经常冒犯威严进行谏诤。
English: At that time, the prince's son-in-law, Kong Yingda, often insulted the majesty of the throne.

古文：承乾乳母遂安夫人谓颖达曰： 太子长成，何宜屡得面折？ 
现代文：承乾的乳母遂安夫人对孔颖达说： 太子已长大成人，怎好屡次当面指责他？ 
English: Lady Sui An, the wet nurse of Cheng Chien, said to Kong Ying Da: The prince has grown up, how can you repeatedly accuse him to his face?

古文：对曰： 蒙国厚恩，死无所恨。 
现代文：孔颖达回答： 我蒙受国家的厚恩，即使死也无怨恨。 
English: Kong Yingda replied: I have been blessed by the country, and even if I die, I will not hold a grudge.

古文：谏诤愈切。
现代文：于是谏诤得更加激切。
English: So the crying became more intense.

古文：承乾令撰《孝经义疏》，颖达又因文见意，愈广规谏之道。
现代文：承乾命孔颖达撰写《孝经义疏》，孔颖达又通过经文表达自己的意见，获得了更多的劝谏机会。
English: He ordered Kong Yingda to write "Filial Piety and Righteousness," and Kong Yingda expressed his opinions through the scriptures, gaining more opportunities for persuasion.

古文：太宗并嘉纳之，二人各赐帛五百匹，黄金一斤，以励承乾之意。贞观十三年，太子右庶子张玄素以承乾颇以游畋废学，上书谏曰：
现代文：太宗对两人的做法都很称赏，赏赐这两位大臣帛各五百匹，黄金各一斤。贞观十三年，太子右庶子张玄素因为太子李承乾喜欢打猎，荒废了学业，于是上书进谏，他说：
English: Emperor Taizong was very appreciative of the two men's actions, and rewarded the two ministers with five hundred yakitori each, and one kilo of gold each. In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Zhang Xuansu, the prince's right illegitimate son, abandoned his studies because the prince Li Chengqian liked to hunt, so he wrote to the emperor, saying:

古文：臣闻皇天无亲，惟德是辅，苟违天道，人神同弃。
现代文：我听说老天不会偏私，只会辅佐有德之人。如果违背了天道，不管是人还是神都会遗弃他。
English: I have heard that God does not favor the selfish, but only supports the virtuous. If he violates the heavenly way, both man and God will abandon him.

古文：然古三驱之礼，非欲教杀，将为百姓除害，故汤罗一面，天下归仁。
现代文：古代打猎三驱的礼治，并不是要人杀生，只是为老百姓除害而已。所以商汤撤除捕捉野兽的四面网，只用一面网，如此仁义之举终于使百姓归心。
English: The ancient three-drive hunting etiquette did not require people to kill animals, but only to eliminate harm to the people. Therefore, Shang Tang removed the four-sided net for catching wild animals and used only one net. Such a benevolent act finally made the people come to their senses.

古文：今苑内娱猎，虽名异游畋，若行之无恒，终亏雅度。
现代文：如今您在御苑之内打猎，虽然名义上不同于在野外游猎，但是如果放纵无度，终究有失体统。
English: Now you are hunting in the imperial garden. Although it is nominally different from hunting in the wild, if you indulge excessively, it is ultimately unseemly.

古文：且傅说曰： 学不师古，匪说攸闻。 
现代文：所以商代贤相傅说说： 学习不遵循古训，这是闻所未闻的。 
English: Therefore, Xianxiangfu of the Shang Dynasty said: It is unheard of that learning does not follow the ancient teachings.

古文：然则弘道在于学古，学古必资师训。
现代文：因此要弘扬道性必须学习古礼，学习古礼必须依靠老师教诲。
English: Therefore, in order to promote morality, it is necessary to learn ancient rites, and to learn ancient rites, it is necessary to rely on teachers' teachings.

古文：既奉恩诏，令孔颖达侍讲，望数存顾问，以补万一。
现代文：现在我既然奉旨教太子读书，让孔颖达讲授学问，是希望您能询问古代的事迹和学问，以弥补学问的不足。
English: Now that I have been instructed to teach the prince to read and let Kong Yingda lecture on learning, I hope you can inquire about ancient deeds and learning to make up for the lack of learning.

古文：仍博选有名行学士，兼朝夕侍奉。
现代文：另外再选一些博学多才之士，朝夕侍奉太子。
English: In addition, some well-read and multi-talented people will be selected to serve the crown prince in the morning and evening.

古文：览圣人之遗教，察既往之行事，日知其所不足，月无忘其所能。
现代文：阅读圣人的遗训，知道历史变迁，发现国亡的原因，每天都能发现自己不足的地方，每月都能不忘记自己所学的东西。
English: Reading the teachings of the saints, knowing the historical changes, discovering the reasons for the country's demise, being able to find out what you lack every day, and not forgetting what you have learned every month.

古文：此则尽善尽美，夏启、周诵焉足言哉！
现代文：这样就尽善尽美了，那么夏启、周诵这样的贤太子又何足称道呢！
English: In this way, everything is perfect, so how can we praise such a wise prince as Xiaqi and Zhou Qian!

古文：夫为人上者，未有不求其善，但以性不胜情，耽惑成乱。
现代文：为人君主，没有谁不追求善美的，只是因为理智难以胜过感情，沉溺惶惑才造成了昏乱。
English: As a human ruler, there is no one who does not pursue the good and the beautiful. It is only because reason is difficult to prevail over emotion that the confusion has caused confusion.

古文：耽惑既甚，忠言尽塞，所以臣下苟顺，君道渐亏。
现代文：沉溺惶惑过于厉害，就会使忠言全部堵塞，从而使臣下苟且偷生、投其所好，损害为君之道。
English: Dedication and bewilderment are too powerful, and they will block all loyal advice, thus causing the vassal to live secretly, vote for his favorite, and damage the way of the king.

古文：古人有言： 勿以小恶而不去，小善而不为。 
现代文：古人说： 不要因为是小的过失就不加以改正，也不要因为小优点就不愿去做。 
English: The ancients said: Don't be unwilling to correct a small fault, and don't be unwilling to do something because of a small advantage.

古文：故知祸福之来，皆起于渐。
现代文：应该知道，祸福都是渐渐产生的。
English: It should be known that misfortune and good fortune all come about gradually.

古文：殿下地居储贰，当须广树嘉猷。
现代文：您身为皇储，应该树立自己美好的形象。
English: As the crown prince, you should establish a good image of yourself.

古文：既有好畋之淫，何以主斯匕鬯？
现代文：既然有喜爱打猎的癖好，如何能专心主持国事呢？
English: Since he has a penchant for hunting, how can he concentrate on running the country?

古文：慎终如始，犹恐渐衰，始尚不慎，终将安保！
现代文：谨慎从事，善始善终，尚且担心会逐渐衰退；何况一开始就不谨慎，最终又如何去保持呢！
English: It is prudent to start well and end well, yet we are worried that it will gradually decline; moreover, if we are not prudent at the beginning, how can we maintain it in the end!

古文：承乾不纳。玄素又上书谏曰：
现代文：李承乾不接受张玄素的意见，于是他又呈上一篇奏疏：
English: Li Chengkian did not accept Zhang Xuansu's opinion, so he submitted another report:

古文：臣闻称皇子入学而齿胄者，欲令太子知君臣、父子、尊卑、长幼之道。
现代文：我听说皇子入学按年龄长幼排序，这样是为了使太子知晓君臣、父子、尊卑、长幼之间的道理。
English: I heard that the prince's enrollment is arranged according to the age of the eldest and youngest, so that the prince knows the principle of ruler and subject, father and son, superiority and inferiority, and the relationship between the eldest and youngest.

古文：然君臣之义，父子之亲，尊卑之序，长幼之节，用之方寸之内，弘之四海之外者，皆因行以远闻，假言以光被。
现代文：然而君臣之间的礼义，父子之间的亲情，尊卑的等级，长幼的秩序，要从内心去奉行，使之广大于天下，都要依靠自身的行为使自身闻名久远，凭借言辞而使其广泛传播。
English: However, the etiquette between sovereigns and subjects, the affection between father and son, the hierarchy of the high and low, the order of the eldest and youngest, should be pursued from the heart, so that it is wider than the world. They should rely on their own behavior to make themselves known for a long time, and rely on words to spread it widely.

古文：伏惟殿下，睿质已隆，尚须学文以饰其表。
现代文：殿下已经长大成人，且天资聪慧，但仍需要学习知识以提高自身修养。
English: His Royal Highness has grown up and is naturally intelligent, but still needs to learn knowledge to improve his self-cultivation.

古文：窃见孔颖达、赵弘智等，非惟宿德鸿儒，亦兼达政要。
现代文：我认为孔颖达、赵弘智等人，不仅是当今鸿儒，具有很高的德行修养，而且他们通晓政治之道。
English: I think that Kong Yingda, Zhao Hongzhi and others are not only today's great scholars, with high moral cultivation, but they also know the way of politics.

古文：望令数得侍讲，开释物理，览古论今，增辉睿德。
现代文：希望您时常听他们授课，让他们讲授人情物理，谈古论今，以增加您的智能。
English: I hope you will listen to their lectures often, let them teach you the physics of human emotions, talk about the past and the present, and increase your intelligence.

古文：至如骑射畋游，酣歌妓玩，苟悦耳目，终秽心神。
现代文：至于骑马射击、音乐美女之类的逸乐，只会满足一时的耳目之娱，终将会扰乱心神。
English: As for horse riding, shooting, music, beautiful women and other kinds of entertainment, they will only satisfy the entertainment of the eyes and ears for a while, and will eventually disturb the mind.

古文：渐染既久，必移情性。
现代文：如果过多沉溺其中，必将改变您的性情。
English: If you indulge in it too much, it will definitely change your disposition.

古文：古人有言： 心为万事主，动而无节即乱。 
现代文：古人说： 心是万事的主宰，如果心无节制地骚动，必然会产生祸乱。 
English: The ancients said: "The heart is the master of all things. If the heart is unrestrainedly agitated, it will inevitably produce disasters."

古文：恐殿下败德之源，在于此矣。
现代文：我是害怕这些逸乐会成为败坏殿下德性的根源啊！
English: I am afraid that these pleasures will be the source of the corruption of Your Highness's virtue!

古文：承乾览书愈怒，谓玄素曰： 庶子患风狂耶？ 
现代文：李承乾看了奏书，更加愤怒，对张玄素说： 你是害了疯病吗？ 
English: After reading the transcript, Li Chengkian became even angrier and said to Zhang Xuansu, "Are you suffering from a mental illness?

古文：十四年，太宗知玄素在东宫频有进谏，擢授银青光禄大夫，行太子左庶子。
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗得知张玄素在太子东宫频频进谏，于是授予他银青光禄大夫，兼任太子左庶子。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang learned that Zhang Xuansu frequently entered the palace in the eastern palace of the prince, so he awarded him the silver Qingguanglu doctor, and also served as the prince's left illegitimate son.

古文：时承乾尝于宫中击鼓，声闻于外，玄素叩閤请见，极言切谏。
现代文：一次李承乾在宫中击鼓作乐，声音传至宫外，张玄素敲宫门求见太子，极力劝谏。
English: At one time, Li Chengqian was playing the drums in the palace, and the sound was heard outside the palace. Zhang Xuansu knocked on the palace door to see the crown prince, and tried his best to persuade him.

古文：乃出宫内鼓对玄素毁之，遣户奴伺玄素早朝，阴以马檛击之，殆至于死。
现代文：太子气急败坏，把宫中的鼓拿出来，当着张玄素的面毁掉。他又派奴仆等张玄素上早朝的时候，暗中用马袭击他，差点将他置于死地。
English: The prince lost his temper in a hurry, took out the drum from the palace and destroyed it in front of Zhang Xuansu. He also sent his servants to wait for Zhang Xuansu in the early morning, secretly attacked him with a horse, and almost killed him.

古文：是时承乾好营造亭观，穷极奢侈，费用日广。
现代文：那时李承乾喜好营造楼阁，穷奢极欲，耗资一天比一天增加。
English: At that time, Li Chengqian was fond of building mansions, and he was extremely greedy for luxury. The cost was increasing day by day.

古文：玄素上书谏曰：
现代文：张玄素又上书进谏：
English: Zhang Xuansu wrote again:

古文：臣以愚蔽，窃位两宫，在臣有江海之润，于国无秋毫之益，是用必竭愚诚，思尽臣节者也。
现代文：我身性愚钝，却担当朝廷和东宫的要职，皇恩浩荡，而我却对国家没有一丝一毫的好处。所以一定要尽职尽忠，想要尽到人臣的责任。
English: I am physically stupid, but I hold an important position in the Imperial Court and the East Palace, the royal favor is abundant, but I do not have the slightest benefit to the country. Therefore, I must be dutiful and loyal, and I want to fulfill my duties as a vassal.

古文：伏惟储君之寄，荷戴殊重，如其积德不弘，何以嗣守成业？
现代文：太子的使命，责任十分重大，如果积德不深厚，又怎么能担当守护祖宗基业的大任呢？
English: The prince's mission and responsibility are very important. If his virtue is not profound, how can he take on the responsibility of guarding the ancestral heritage?

古文：圣上以殿下亲则父子，事兼家国，所应用物不为节限。
现代文：圣上与您是父子之亲，您的言行于家于国关系重大，所以对您的日常用度没有限制。
English: His Holiness and you are father and son, and your words and deeds are of great importance to the family and the country, so there is no limit to your daily usage.

古文：恩旨未逾六旬，用物已过七万，骄奢之极，孰云过此？
现代文：圣上圣旨颁布不到六十天，而殿下的东宫之内的财物用度已超过七万，骄奢至极，到了无以复加的地步。
English: It has been less than sixty days since the promulgation of the holy edict, and the use of property and goods within the Eastern Palace of His Imperial Highness has exceeded seventy thousand, and it is extremely extravagant, to the point of being immeasurably excessive.

古文：龙楼之下，惟聚工匠；望苑之内，不睹贤良。
现代文：太子宫殿下聚集无数工匠，内苑之中却不见贤才良臣半点踪影。
English: Countless artisans gathered under the Prince's palace, but there was not a trace of any talented ministers in the inner court.

古文：今言孝敬，则阙侍膳问竖之礼；语恭顺，则违君父慈训之方；求风声，则无学古好道之实；观举措，则有因缘诛戮之罪。
现代文：论孝敬，殿下有违晚辈向长辈问寒问暖的礼节；论恭顺，殿下则与慈父的训导背离；论名声，殿下没有学习古道的事实；论行为，殿下又凭借权势滥施刑罪。
English: On the subject of filial piety, His Imperial Highness violated the etiquette of the younger generation asking the elders for help; on the subject of obedience, His Imperial Highness deviated from his father's teachings; on the subject of reputation, His Imperial Highness did not learn the ancient way; on the subject of behavior, His Imperial Highness used his power to commit crimes.

古文：宫臣正士，未尝在侧，群邪淫巧，昵近深宫。
现代文：正直的人没在身边，而哗众取宠的弄臣却不离左右。
English: Honest people are not around, but grandstanding jokers are.

古文：爱好者皆游伎杂色，施与者并图画雕镂。
现代文：您喜欢的不外乎是声色犬马，所赏赐的都是图画雕刻。
English: What you like is nothing more than the sound and color of dogs and horses, and what you are given are pictures and carvings.

古文：在外瞻仰，已有此失；居中隐密，宁可胜计哉！
现代文：从表面看，殿下已有如此多的过失；何况朝中隐秘的大事，可能已经不可胜数了。
English: On the surface, His Imperial Highness has made so many mistakes; moreover, there may be countless secret affairs between the North and the South.

古文：宣猷禁门，不异闤闠，朝入暮出，恶声渐远。
现代文：宣布法令的宫门无异于街市，形形色色的人时刻出入其中，坏名声已经传播得很广了。
English: The palace gate where the edict was announced is no different from a street market, with all kinds of people coming and going all the time. The bad reputation has spread far and wide.

古文：右庶子赵弘智经明行修，当今善士，臣每请望数召进，与之谈论，庶广徽猷。
现代文：右庶子赵弘智精通经术，德行高尚，是当今贤才。我常常劝告殿下，希望经常召见他，与他谈论，以增进您的美德。
English: I often advise Your Imperial Highness that I hope to see him often and talk with him in order to improve your virtue.

古文：令旨反有猜嫌，谓臣妄相推引。
现代文：如今殿下却对他猜疑嫌弃，认为错用了人才。
English: Now, however, His Royal Highness is suspicious of him and thinks he misused his talent.

古文：从善如流，尚恐不逮；饰非拒谏，必是招损。
现代文：一个人从善如流，恐怕还来不及，如果掩饰过错，拒绝进谏，必然会招来损失。
English: It is too late for a person to follow the virtuous path. If he covers up his mistakes and refuses to enter the market, he will inevitably incur losses.

古文：古人云： 苦药利病，苦口利行。 
现代文：古人说： 良药苦口利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。 
English: The ancients said: The bitter taste of good medicine is good for the disease, the contrary ear of good advice is good for the practice.

古文：伏愿居安思危，日慎一日。
现代文：希望殿下居安思危，千万谨慎啊。
English: I hope His Royal Highness is safe and sound, and that he will be very careful.

古文：书入，承乾大怒，遣刺客将加屠害，俄属宫废。
现代文：奏书送入东宫，李承乾看后大怒，想派刺客加害张玄素。
English: The report was sent to the East Palace. After reading it, Li Chengqian was furious and wanted to send an assassin to harm Zhang Xuansu.

古文：贞观十四年，太子詹事于志宁，以太子承乾广造宫室，奢侈过度，耽好声乐，上书谏曰：
现代文：不久李承乾被废黜。贞观十四年，太子詹事于志宁因太子李承乾大造宫室，奢侈无度，又沉溺于声色犬马，于是上书进谏：
English: Soon after, Li Chengkian was deposed. In the 14th year of the reign of Zhenguan, Prince Zhan Zhi Yu Shining, because of Prince Li Chengkian's large palace-building room, extravagant extravagance, and indulgence in the sound of dogs and horses, then wrote a letter to the emperor:

古文：臣闻克俭节用，实弘道之源；崇侈恣情，乃败德之本。
现代文：我听说克制节俭，是弘扬德性的根本；穷奢极致，是败坏品德的根源。
English: I heard that restraint and frugality are the foundation of promoting morality; extravagance is the root of corrupting morality.

古文：是以凌云概日，戎人于是致讥；峻宇雕墙，《夏书》以之作诫。
现代文：所以秦穆公夸耀自己豪华的宫殿，遭到西戎人的耻笑；高楼雕墙，《夏书》将其作为国家危亡的警戒。
English: Therefore, Qin Mu Gong boasted of his luxurious palace, which was ridiculed by the people of Xi Rong; high-rise carved walls, "Summer Book" regarded it as a warning of national peril.

古文：昔赵盾匡晋，吕望师周，或劝之以节财，或谏之以厚敛。
现代文：过去赵盾匡扶晋灵公，姜太公辅佐周文王，或者劝告他们节约财物，或者建议他们免征重税。
English: In the past, Zhao Dun Kuan supported Jin Ling Gong and Jiang Taigong's assistant, Zhou Wen Wang, and either advised them to save money or suggested that they be exempted from heavy taxes.

古文：莫不尽忠以佐国，竭诚以奉君，欲使茂实播于无穷，英声被乎物听。咸著简策，用为美谈。
现代文：无不尽忠竭力为国效劳、为君分忧，希望使功业流传无穷，英名广播；载入史册，成为千古美谈。
English: He devoted all his efforts to serve the country and share his worries for you, hoping to make his achievements spread to infinity. He became famous for his broadcasting; it was recorded in the history books and became a beautiful story for thousands of years.

古文：且今所居东宫，隋日营建，睹之者尚讥其侈，见之者犹叹甚华。
现代文：今天殿下居住的东宫，乃隋代所建，看到的人已经觉得奢侈非常，感叹其过于富丽堂皇了。
English: The East Palace, where His Imperial Highness lives today, was built in the Sui Dynasty. People who have seen it have already felt that it is very luxurious and have lamented that it is too magnificent.

古文：何容于此中更有修造，财帛日费，土木不停，穷斤斧之工，极磨砻之妙？
现代文：为什么还要再修宫室，天天浪费资财，大兴土木，极尽雕琢精妙之能事？而且如此多的工匠出入东宫，又没人监视。
English: Why do they still need to repair the palace room, waste resources and money every day, build large buildings, and do the most exquisite things? Moreover, so many craftsmen enter and leave the East Palace, and no one monitors them.

古文：且丁匠官奴入内，比者曾无复监。
现代文：这些人是犯法之人的兄弟，却可以自由出入于东宫禁地，他们身上携带有斧凿等器具。
English: These people are the brothers of those who broke the law, but they can freely enter and leave the Donggong Forbidden City. They carry axes, chisels and other tools on their bodies.

古文：监门本防非虑，宿卫以备不虞，直长既自不知，千牛又复不见。
现代文：守门值班的人是为了防止意外发生，然而这种情况负责守卫的直长和千牛这些官员都不知道也看不见。
English: The people on duty at the gate are there to prevent accidents from happening, but the situation is neither known nor seen by the officials in charge of guarding, including the captain and the thousand cows.

古文：爪牙在外，厮役在内，所司何以自安，臣下岂容无惧？
现代文：武官们在宫外，奴隶们在宫内，负责禁卫的部门怎么能够安心，又怎么不让我感到恐惧忧虑呢？
English: The military officers are outside the palace, the slaves are inside the palace, how can the department responsible for the guard be at ease, and how can I not feel fear and anxiety?

古文：又郑、卫之乐，古谓淫声。
现代文：另外，郑国、卫国的音乐，自古以来就被称做是亡国的靡靡之音。
English: In addition, the music of Zheng Guo and the defense of the country has been known since ancient times as the sweeping sound of the defeated country.

古文：昔朝歌之乡，回车者墨翟；夹谷之会，挥剑者孔丘。
现代文：过去墨子经过商代的朝歌之地，由于地名不符合他的 非乐 思想，便回车转向；鲁定公与齐侯会于夹谷，孔子挥剑斩杀戏子，因为他们用乐舞侮惑诸侯。
English: In the past, Mozi passed through the place of morning song in the Shang Dynasty, but because the place name did not conform to his non-music thought, he turned back to the car; Lu Ding Gong and Qi Hou would meet in the valley, and Confucius wielded a sword to kill the actors, because they used music and dance to insult the princes.

古文：先圣既以为非，通贤将以为失。
现代文：歌舞失去礼法，古代圣人认为是大逆不道的，通达的贤者也认为是过失。
English: Singing and dancing have lost their etiquette, which the ancient sages considered to be a great transgression, and the sages also considered to be a mistake.

古文：顷闻宫内，屡有鼓声，大乐伎儿，入便不出。
现代文：而如今的东宫，时常传出寻欢作乐的鼓乐声，歌伎舞伎只见进不见出。
English: But in today's East Palace, the sound of drums playing for pleasure is often heard, and Kabuki is all in and no out.

古文：闻之者股栗，言之者心战。
现代文：听说这件事的人都双腿发抖，心惊胆战。
English: People who heard about it were trembling in their legs and their hearts were shaking with fear.

古文：往年口敕，伏请重寻，圣旨殷勤，明诫恳切。
现代文：往年陛下对太子的教谕，请您重新温习。圣旨关注，殷勤有加。
English: Please re-read His Majesty's instruction to the Crown Prince from previous years. Pay attention to the Holy Will, and be diligent.

古文：在于殿下，不可不思；至于微臣，不得无惧。
现代文：这些对于殿下来说不可不深思，对于我来说也不能不感到害怕。
English: For His Royal Highness, these are things to ponder, and for me, they are things to fear.

古文：臣自驱驰宫阙，已积岁时，犬马尚解识恩，木石犹能知感，臣所有管见，敢不尽言。
现代文：我自从承蒙圣恩，为朝廷效劳已有多年。犬马尚且知道感恩，木石尚且能够感知情义；我所有的狭小见识，怎敢不去竭尽所能进言。
English: I have been serving the Imperial Court for many years since I received the grace. Dogs and horses still know gratitude, and wood and stone can still perceive meaning; with all my narrow insight, how dare I not do my best to speak my mind.

古文：如鉴以丹诚，则臣有生路；若责其忤旨，则臣是罪人。
现代文：如果我能承蒙您的明察，看到我的忠诚，那么我就有了生路；如果您指责我违抗旨意，那么我就罪名难逃。
English: If I can accept your scrutiny and see my loyalty, then I have a way out; if you accuse me of defying the will, then I can't escape the blame.

古文：但悦意取容，臧孙方以疾；犯颜逆耳，《春秋》比之药石。
现代文：只是阿谀逢迎，鲁国大夫臧仲武将它比作疾病；冒犯尊严，逆耳忠言，《春秋》里面将它比作良药。
English: However, it has been likened to a disease by Lu Guodongfei and Lu Guodongfei; it offends people's dignity and contradicts what they have been told. In "Spring and Autumn," it is likened to a good medicine.

古文：伏愿停工巧之作，罢久役之人，绝郑、卫之音，斥群小之辈。
现代文：希望殿下停止营造宫殿，释放那些久做劳役的人，不听郑卫之音，斥退卑鄙小人。
English: I hope that His Royal Highness will stop building palaces, release those who have been in forced labor for a long time, not listen to Zheng Wei's voice, and repel scumbags.

古文：则三善允备，万国作贞矣。
现代文：这样，就会使事君、事父、事长这三种善行完备了，家国天下也将归于中正。
English: In this way, the three virtuous deeds of the steward, the steward's father, and the steward's chief will be completed, and the whole country will be turned into Zhongzheng.

古文：承乾览书不悦。
现代文：李承乾看过奏书很不高兴。
English: After reading the playbook, Li Chengqian was very unhappy.

古文：十五年，承乾以务农之时，召驾士等役，不许分番，人怀怨苦。又私引突厥群竖入宫。志宁上书谏曰：
现代文：贞观十五年，李承乾在百姓农忙之时，摊派杂役，不许他们轮流换班，臣民无不心怀怨恨，苦不堪言，后来他私自将突厥童仆带入宫中，于是于志宁上书进谏：
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, when the people were busy with farming, Li Chengqian assigned miscellaneous servants and did not allow them to take turns to change shifts. The subjects all harbored resentment and were miserable. Later, he secretly brought the Turkish servants into the palace, so he wrote to Yu Shining:

古文：臣闻上天盖高，日月光其德；明君至圣，辅佐赞其功。
现代文：我听说苍天高远，日月显耀它的德行；君王圣明，臣下匡扶他的功业。
English: I heard that the sky is high and far away, the sun and the moon show its virtue; the king is holy, and the vassals support his work.

古文：是以周诵升储，见匡毛、毕；汉盈居震，取资黄、绮。
现代文：所以周朝姬诵升为太子，有毛叔、郑毕公的鼎力辅佐；西汉的刘盈位居太子，得到夏黄公、绮里季等四位贤士的帮助。
English: Therefore, Zhou Zhaohui was crowned as the crown prince with the strong support of Mao Zedong and Zheng Bi Gong; Liu Ying of Western Han was crowned as the crown prince with the help of four sages including Xia Huang Gong and Bao Lijie.

古文：姬旦抗法于伯禽，贾生陈事于文帝，咸殷勤于端士，皆恳切于正人。
现代文：周成王有过失，丞相周公旦就鞭打自己的儿子伯禽，以告诫成王；汉代贾谊多次上书文帝谈论国家大事，他们都是品德高尚的贤臣，真诚正直的人。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang was at fault, and the prime minister Zhou Gongdan whipped his own son Boqian to admonish Cheng Wang; Han Dynasty Jia Yi repeatedly wrote to Emperor Wen to talk about national affairs. They were all virtuous sages, sincere and honest people.

古文：历代贤君，莫不丁宁于太子者，良以地膺上嗣，位处储君。
现代文：历代的君王无不再三叮嘱太子，因为太子身为王储，将要担当继承帝业的大任。
English: All the monarchs of the past three dynasties no longer admonish the prince, because the prince, as the crown prince, will be responsible for the great task of inheriting the empire.

古文：善则率土沾其恩，恶则海内罹其祸。
现代文：太子良善，那么老百姓都会感谢他的恩德；太子作恶，那么就会殃及万民。
English: If the prince is good, then the people will thank him for his kindness; if the prince does evil, then it will affect all the people.

古文：近闻仆寺、司驭、驾士、兽医，始自春初，迄兹夏晚，常居内役，不放分番。
现代文：现在，我听说仆寺、司驭、驾士、兽医等人，从初春到夏末，长期居住在宫内服役，不让他们轮番值勤。
English: Now, I have heard that servants, drivers, chauffeurs, veterinarians, etc. live in the palace for a long time from early spring to late summer to serve, and they are not allowed to take turns on duty.

古文：或家有尊亲，阙于温凊；或室有幼弱，绝于抚养。
现代文：他们中有的人家中双亲尚在，但是却因此得不到应有的侍奉；有的人家中有幼小的儿女，也因此得不到父亲的照顾抚育。
English: Some of them still have parents at home, but they don't get the service they deserve; some have young children at home, and they don't get the care and upbringing of their fathers.

古文：春既废其耕垦，夏又妨其播殖。
现代文：这样做既荒废了他们的春耕，又妨碍了他们的夏种。
English: In so doing, they have wasted their spring ploughing and hindered their summer sowing.

古文：事乖存育，恐致怨嗟。
现代文：这样做与抚养百姓之道相违背，久而久之恐怕遭到怨言。
English: Doing so is contrary to the way of raising the people, and I am afraid that it will be complained about over time.

古文：倘闻天听，后悔何及？
现代文：如果民怨传到圣上耳中，只怕您悔之晚矣。
English: If the grievances of the people reach the ears of the saints, it will be too late for you to repent.

古文：又突厥达哥支等，咸是人面兽心，岂得以礼义期，不可以仁信待。
现代文：另外，突厥达哥支等人，都是人面兽心，怎么能够用仁义诚信来期望和对待他们？
English: In addition, the Turkic Dagok branch and others are all human-like and animal-like, how can we expect and treat them with benevolence, righteousness and integrity?

古文：心则未识于忠孝，言则莫辩其是非，近之有损于英声，昵之无益于盛德。
现代文：他们的本心不知忠孝，言行不辨是非，接近他们会败坏您的英名，宠信他们也对增加您的盛德毫无益处。
English: Their true hearts know nothing of loyalty and filial piety, their words and deeds do not distinguish between right and wrong, approaching them will ruin your reputation, and trusting them will do nothing to increase your virtue.

古文：引之入閤，人皆惊骇，岂臣庸识，独用不安？
现代文：现在把他们带入宫中，没有人不惊恐万分，岂止是我一个人的见识平庸，独自忧虑。
English: Now, when I bring them into the palace, no one is not terrified, and I am not the only one with mediocre knowledge and worries.

古文：殿下必须上副至尊圣情，下允黎元本望，不可轻微恶而不避，无容略小善而不为。
现代文：殿下做事应该符合至尊的身份，与黎民百姓的愿望相符，勿以小恶而为之，勿以小善而不为。
English: His Royal Highness should do things in line with his supreme status and in line with the wishes of the people of Lebanon. He should not do things out of petty evil, nor should he do things out of petty good.

古文：理敦杜渐之方，须有防萌之术。
现代文：您理应遵守防微杜渐之道。斥退小人，任用忠良。
English: You should abide by the principle of prevention of micro-management and gradual improvement. Reject the villain and appoint the loyal.

古文：屏退不肖，狎近贤良。如此则善道日隆，德音自远。
现代文：如果能做到这样，那么美德就能日见昌盛，美名也会自然远扬。
English: If this can be done, then virtue will flourish and fame will naturally spread.

古文：承乾大怒，遣刺客张师政、纥干承基就舍杀之。
现代文：李承乾看后大怒，派刺客张师政、纥干承基到于志宁家刺杀他。
English: After seeing this, Li Chengkian was furious and sent the assassins Zhang Shizheng and Yu Gan Chengji to assassinate Yu Shining.

古文：是时丁母忧，起复为詹事。
现代文：当时于志宁正在为母守丧，期限未到又被任命为太子詹事。
English: At that time, Yu Zhining was in mourning for his mother, and before the deadline was up, he was appointed Crown Prince Zhanji.

古文：二人潜入其第，见志宁寝处苫庐，竟不忍而止。
现代文：两个刺客偷偷潜入于府，看见他睡着草苫、枕着土块为亡亲服丧，最终不忍心下手。
English: Two assassins secretly sneaked into Yu's house, saw him sleeping with a straw mat and a lump of earth under his pillow as he mourned for his dead relatives, and finally could not bear to carry out the attack.

古文：及承乾败，太宗知其事，深勉劳之。
现代文：等到后来李承乾劣迹败露，唐太宗得知于志宁的事迹，勉励慰劳了他。
English: Later, when Li Chengqian's evil deeds were exposed, Tang Taizong learned of Yu Shining's deeds and consoled him.

