古文：王治，字本道，忻州人。
现代文：王治，字本道，忻州人。
English: Wang Zhi, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年，考取进士。
English: He became a priest in 32nd year of Jiajing.

古文：除行人，迁吏科给事中。
现代文：授职为行人，升任吏科给事中。
English: Awarded the post of pedestrian, and promoted to the post of clerk.

古文：寇屡盗边，边臣多匿不奏；小胜，文臣辄冒军功。
现代文：敌寇屡次骚扰边关，边防大臣大都隐瞒不奏报；稍获小胜，文官就冒领军功。
English: Enemy raiders repeatedly harassed the border, and most of the border defense ministers concealed it and did not report it; if there was a small victory, the civilian officials would take the lead in military exploits.

古文：治请临阵斩获，第录将士功；文臣及镇帅不亲搏战者止赐赉。
现代文：王治请求临阵斩寇俘敌，按等差记录将士们的功勋；文官和镇中主帅不亲身参战搏击的不做赏赐。
English: Wang Zhi requested that the enemy should be killed and captured on the spot, and the achievements of the soldiers should be recorded according to the parity record; the civilian officials and the town coach should not be rewarded if they did not personally participate in the battle.

古文：从之，再迁礼科左给事中。
现代文：皇帝听从了建议。他又升任礼科的左给事中。
English: The emperor heeded the advice, and he was promoted to the middle of the left echelon of etiquette.

古文：隆庆元年，偕御史王好问核内府诸监局岁费。
现代文：隆庆元年，与御史王好问一道核实内府各监局的年度开支。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he verified the annual expenditure of the supervisory bureaus in the inner prefecture together with Goshi Wang.

古文：中官崔敏请止之，为给事中张宪臣所劾。
现代文：宦官崔敏请求终止此事，被给事中张宪臣弹劾。
English: The eunuch Cui Min requested to terminate the matter and was impeached by Zhang Xiancheng.

古文：得旨： 诏书所载者，自嘉靖四十一年始，听治等详核。
现代文：获圣旨： 诏书所言，从嘉靖四十一年开始，听从王治等人详细核查。
English: Received the imperial edict: As stated in the imperial edict, since the 41st year of Jiajing, it has been subject to detailed verification by Wang Zhi and others.

古文：不载者，已之。 
现代文：诏书没有提及的，予以终止。 
English: If it is not mentioned in the imperial edict, it shall be terminated.

古文：治等力争，不许。
现代文：王治等人极力争辩，没有被同意。
English: Wang Zhi and others tried their best to argue, but were not agreed.

古文：事竣，劾中官赵廷玉、马尹干没罪，诏下司礼监按问。
现代文：事情办完了，弹劾宦官赵廷玉、马尹侵吞国家财物的罪行，诏令司礼监负责查问。
English: After the matter was completed, the eunuchs Zhao Tingyu and Ma Yin were impeached for the crime of embezzling state property, and the eunuchs were ordered to be investigated by the chief etiquette inspector.

古文：寻上疏陈四事： 一、定宗庙之礼以隆圣孝。
现代文：不久他上疏陈述四件事： 一，确定宗庙的礼仪以便隆肃圣上的孝道。
English: Soon after, he came up with four things: First, determine the etiquette of the ancestral temple in order to enhance the sacred filial piety.

古文：献皇虽贵为天子父，未尝南面临天下；虽亲为武宗叔，然尝北面事武宗。
现代文：献皇虽然贵为天子的父亲，却没有登基做皇帝；虽然亲为武宗的叔叔，但曾经尊奉武宗。
English: Although Emperor Xianwang was the father of Emperor Tianzi, he was not enthroned as emperor; although he was the uncle of Emperor Wuzong, he once revered Emperor Wuzong.

古文：今乃与祖宗诸帝并列，设位于武宗右，揆诸古典，终为未协。
现代文：现在却与各祖宗先帝并列，位置安排在武宗右方，考察诸多典制，终究没有与此和洽的。
English: Now, however, he is ranked alongside the ancestors of the previous emperors, and his position is on the right side of Emperor Wuzong. After examining many systems, there is no way to come to terms with this.

古文：臣以为献皇祔会太庙，不免递迁。
现代文：我认为献皇附祭于太庙，未免有僭越之嫌。
English: In my opinion, offering the emperor as an additional sacrifice in the imperial temple is a sign of arrogance.

古文：若专祀世庙，则亿世不改。乞敕廷臣博议，务求至当。
现代文：如果专门祭祀世庙，就永世不做更改，请求敕令朝廷大臣广做评议，务必要使此事办得妥当。
English: If it is a special offering to the world temple, it will not be changed forever, and it is requested that the Minister of the Imperial Court be ordered to make a broad review, and it is imperative that this matter be handled properly.

古文：一、谨燕居之礼以澄化源。
现代文：二，谨慎退朝而处的礼仪，以澄清教化之源。
English: Second, the etiquette of discreet retreat to clarify the source of enlightenment.

古文：人主深居禁掖，左右便佞窥伺百出，或以燕饮声乐，或以游戏骑射。
现代文：皇帝深居禁宫，左右奸佞之人就会窥伺时机百般讨好，或者宴饮声乐，或者游戏骑射。
English: The emperor lived deep in the Forbidden City, and those around him would spy opportunities to curry favor, or banquet vocal music, or play horse archery.

古文：近则损敝精神，疾病所由生。
现代文：近者损耗精神，由此滋生疾病。
English: The latter consume the spirit and thus breed disease.

古文：久则妨累政事，危乱所由起。
现代文：长久看就妨害政事，由此滋生危害与祸乱。
English: In the long run, it interferes with political affairs, thereby breeding harm and calamity.

古文：比者人言籍籍，谓陛下燕闲举动，有非谅闇所宜者。
现代文：近来众人议论纷纷，称陛下宴饮消闲的举动，并非居丧帝王所适宜的。
English: Recently, there has been a lot of discussion, saying that His Majesty's act of feasting and leisure is not appropriate for the death of the emperor.

古文：臣窃为陛下虑之。 
现代文：我暗暗替陛下忧虑。 
English: I am secretly worried for His Majesty.

古文：其二，请勤朝讲、亲辅弼。
现代文：其他二件事，请求皇帝勤于朝讲、亲近辅佐者。
English: As for the other two matters, he asked the emperor to be diligent in addressing the North Korean people and to be close to his aides.

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：奏疏呈入宫中，皇帝答复知道了。
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：进吏科都给事中。
现代文：升迁为吏科都给事中。
English: Promotion to the rank of officer is pending.

古文：劾蓟辽总督都御史刘焘、南京督储都御史曾于拱不职，于拱遂罢。
现代文：弹劾蓟、辽总督都御史刘焘、南京督储都御史曾于拱不称职，曾于拱被罢免官职。
English: Impeachment, the governor of Liao, the governor of the capital Liu Wei, and the governor of Nanjing, the governor of the capital, were incompetent in the arch, and were removed from office in the arch.

古文：山西及蓟镇并中寇，治以罪兵部尚书郭乾、侍郎迟凤翔，偕同官欧阳一敬等劾之。
现代文：山西与蓟镇同时受敌寇侵扰，王治归罪于兵部尚书郭乾、侍郎迟凤翔，与同官欧阳一敬等人弹劾他们。
English: Both Shanxi and Shanzhen were invaded by the enemy at the same time. Wang Zhi ascribed the crime to the military commander Shang Shuxu Guoqian and the chamberlain Chi Fengxiang, and impeached them with his colleague Ouyang Yikong and others.

古文：诏罢乾，贬凤翔三秩视事。
现代文：皇帝下诏书罢免了郭乾，将迟凤翔贬职为三秩视事。
English: The emperor dismissed Guo Qian and demoted Chi Fengxiang to the third-ranked official.

古文：部议恤光禄少卿马从谦。
现代文：部议抚恤光禄少卿马从谦。
English: The council of ministers commiserated with Ma Cong Qian, Shaoqing of Guanglu.

古文：帝不许，治疏争。
现代文：皇帝不同意，王治上疏争辩。
English: The emperor did not agree, and Wang Zhi did not want to argue.

古文：帝谓从谦所犯，比子骂父律，终不允。
现代文：皇帝称马从谦所犯罪行，如同儿子辱骂父亲，最终不同意做抚恤。
English: The emperor said that Ma Congxian had committed a crime, just as a son abuses his father, and finally did not agree to make a pension.

古文：治又请追谥何瑭，雪夏言罪，且言大理卿朱廷立、刑部侍郎詹瀚共锻成夏言、曾铣狱，宜追夺其官。
现代文：王治又奏请追封何王唐的谥号，为夏言昭雪平反，并且申诉说大理卿朱廷立、刑部侍郎詹瀚共同捏造了夏言、曾铣的冤案，应该追夺他们的官职。
English: Wang Zhi also petitioned for the restoration of He Wang Tang's posthumous name to rehabilitate Xia Yan Shaoxue, and complained that the grand secretary Zhu Tingli and the secretary of the Criminal Investigation Department, Zhanhan, had jointly fabricated the unjust case of Xia Yan and Zeng Yao, and should be deprived of their official positions.

古文：咸报可。
现代文：皇帝都答复同意。
English: The emperor replied in the affirmative.

古文：明年，左右有言南海子之胜者，帝将往幸。
现代文：第二年，左右大臣中有人称南海子为胜景地，皇帝即将前往。
English: In the second year, some ministers from the right and left called Nanhaizi a scenic spot, and the emperor was about to go there.

古文：治率同官谏，大学士徐阶、尚书杨博、御史郝杰等并阻止，皆不听。
现代文：王治率领同僚劝阻。大学士徐阶、尚书杨博、御史郝杰等人一道阻止。皇帝全然不听。
English: Wang Zhi led his colleagues to dissuade him, and the university scholars Xu Ji, Shangshu Yangbo, Mishi Xuanjie and others worked together to stop him. The emperor did not listen at all.

古文：至则荒莽沮湿，帝甚悔之。
现代文：到了目的地眼见一片低湿荒凉苍莽之地，皇帝非常懊悔。
English: When he arrived at his destination and saw a damp, desolate and desolate land, the emperor was very remorseful.

古文：治寻擢太仆少卿，改大理，进太仆卿。
现代文：王治立即被提升为太仆少卿，改任大理职，晋升太仆卿。
English: Wang Zhi was immediately promoted to Taigu Shaoqing (太僕少卿), reassigned to the position of Dari (大理职), and promoted to Taigu Sir (太僕卿).

古文：忧归，卒。
现代文：奔父母丧事归乡，直至去世。
English: After the death of his parents, he returned to his hometown until his death.

古文：欧阳一敬，字司直，彭泽人。
现代文：欧阳一敬，字司直，彭泽人。
English: Ouyang Yijie, Zi Zi Zhi, Peng Ze Ren.

古文：嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：除萧山知县。
现代文：任命为萧山知县。
English: Appointed as Xiaoshan Zhixian.

古文：征授刑科给事中。
现代文：征招授职为刑科给事中。
English: The criminal investigation department is in the process of recruiting and assigning positions.

古文：劾太常少卿晋应槐为文选郎时劣状，而南京侍郎傅颐、宁夏巡抚王崇古、湖广参政孙弘轼由应槐进，俱当罢。
现代文：弹劾太常少卿晋应槐任文选郎时的劣迹，而且南京侍郎傅颐、宁夏巡抚王崇古、湖广参政孙弘轼都是应槐选拔的，都应当被罢免。
English: Impeachment of Taizang Shaoqing Jin for his misdeeds when he was appointed as Wen Xuan Lang, and the fact that the Nanjing waiter Fu Xi, the Ningxia governor Wang Chonggu, and the Hukang political advisor Sun Hongyi were all appointed by him, should be dismissed.

古文：吏部为应槐等辨，独罢颐官。
现代文：吏部替晋应槐等人辩解，只罢免了傅颐的官职。
English: The cadre department defended Jin Yingtao and others, and only dismissed Fu Jun from his official post.

古文：未几，劾罢礼部尚书董份。
现代文：不久，弹劾并罢免了礼部尚书董份。
English: Soon after, the director of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shang Shu, was impeached and dismissed.

古文：三迁兵科给事中。
现代文：三次调职后任兵科给事中。
English: After being transferred three times, he is now in charge of military science.

古文：言广西总兵当用都督，不当用勋臣。
现代文：他说广西总兵不应当任用都督，应当任用勋臣。
English: He said that the Guangxi soldiers should not be appointed as governors, but should be appointed as courtiers.

古文：因劾恭顺侯吴继爵，罢之，以俞大猷代。
现代文：于是弹劾恭侯吴继爵并罢免了他，由俞大猷代替。
English: Therefore, the impeachment of Prince Gong and the dismissal of Prince Wu was carried out, and he was replaced by Emperor Gao.

古文：寇大入陕西，劾总督陈其学、巡抚戴才，俱夺官。
现代文：敌寇大举进攻陕西，他弹劾总督陈其学、巡抚戴才，一并剥夺他们的官职。
English: He impeached the governor Chen Qixue and the governor Dai Cai, and deprived them of their official posts.

古文：又以军政劾英国公张溶，山西、浙江总兵官董一奎、刘显，掌锦衣卫都督李隆等九人不职。
现代文：又因军政事务弹劾英国公张溶，山西、浙江总兵官董一奎、刘显，执掌锦衣卫的都督李隆等九人不称职。
English: In addition, due to military and political affairs, the British impeached Zhang Rong, the Shanxi and Zhejiang chief military officer, Dong Yikui, Liu Xian, and the governor of Jin Yiwei, Li Long, and nine others were incompetent.

古文：溶留，余俱贬黜。
现代文：张溶留任，其余的人都遭贬斥。
English: Zhang Rong remained in office, and the rest of the people were reprimanded.

古文：自严嵩败，言官争发愤论事，一敬尤敢言。
现代文：自从严嵩倒台，言官争相鼓勇评论时事，欧阳一敬尤为敢说。
English: Since the fall of Yan Song, officials have been competing to comment on current affairs. Ouyang Yijian is particularly bold.

古文：隆庆元年正月，吏部尚书杨博掌京察，黜给事中郑钦、御史胡维新，而山西人无下考者。
现代文：隆庆元年正月，吏部尚书杨博执掌京城的察举，罢黜给事中郑钦、御史胡维新，但是山西籍人士没有获下考的。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Longqing era, Yang Bo, the secretary of the personnel department, was in charge of the inspection and enumeration of Beijing. Zheng Qin and Gu Shi Hu Weixin were dismissed, but people from Shanxi did not pass the examination.

古文：吏科给事中胡应嘉劾博挟私愤，庇乡里。
现代文：吏科给事中胡应嘉弹劾杨博心怀私人恩怨，庇护乡里人士。
English: Hu Yingjia was involved in the impeachment of Yang Bo, who harbored personal grudges and patronized the villagers.

古文：应嘉先尝劾高拱，拱修郤，将重罪之。
现代文：胡应嘉以前曾经弹劾高拱，高拱记仇，将要从重治他的罪。
English: Hu Yingjia had previously impeached Gao Gong, and Gao Gong took revenge. He will be punished for his crime.

古文：徐阶等重违拱意，且以应嘉实佐察，初未言，今党同官妄奏，拟旨斥为民。
现代文：徐阶等人违拂高拱的心意，并且认为胡应嘉的确是辅佐察举，起初没有说什么，现在他伙同同僚妄加上奏，拟将他贬斥为民。
English: Xu Ju and others went against Gao Gong's wishes and thought that Hu Yingjia was indeed an assistant inspector. At first, he didn't say anything, but now he and his colleagues are playing up the incident, intending to disparage him as a commoner.

古文：言路大哗。
现代文：舆论哗然。
English: Public opinion was outraged.

古文：一敬为应嘉讼，斥博及拱。
现代文：欧阳一敬替胡应嘉诉讼，驳斥杨博和高拱。
English: Ouyang Yijing sued for Hu Yingjia and refuted Yang Bo and Gao Gong.

古文：诋拱奸险横恶，无异蔡京，且言： 应嘉前疏臣与闻，黜应嘉不若黜臣。 
现代文：毁谤高拱奸险横恶，与蔡京无异，并称： 应嘉先前的奏疏我也听说了，罢免应嘉不如罢免我。 
English: He said that the slander of Gao Gongzhu was as dangerous and vicious as that of Cai Jing, and said: I have also heard about Ying Jia's previous slander, it is better to dismiss Ying Jia than to dismiss me.

古文：会给事中辛自修、御史陈联芳疏争，阶乃调应嘉建宁推官。
现代文：遇上给事中辛自修、御史陈聊芳上疏争辩，徐阶便调应嘉为建宁推官。
English: In the event of a dispute between Sin Zi Xiu and Gu Shi Chen Liao Fang, Xu Jia transferred Ying Jia to be Jian Ning's superior officer.

古文：一敬寻劾拱威制朝绅，专柄擅国，亟宜罢。
现代文：不久欧阳一敬弹劾高拱威制朝绅，专柄擅国，应该马上罢免。
English: Not long after, Ouyang Yijian impeached Gao Qiang, the high-ranking and tyrannical courtier, who had arrogated to himself the right to rule the country. He should be removed from office immediately.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：逾月，御史齐康劾阶。
现代文：过了一个月，御史齐康弹劾徐阶。
English: A month later, Emperor Qikang impeached Xu Jia.

古文：诸给事御史以康受拱指，群集阙下，詈而唾之。
现代文：各位给事中、御史认为齐康是受高拱指使，群集于皇宫前，责骂并唾弃他。
English: In the middle of the matter, you historians believed that Qikang was ordered by Gao Gong and gathered in front of the imperial palace to scold and spit on him.

古文：一敬首劾康，康亦劾一敬。
现代文：欧阳一敬首先弹劾齐康，齐康也弹劾欧阳一敬。
English: Ouyang Yijie first impeached Qikang, and Qikang also impeached Ouyang Yijie.

古文：时康主拱，一敬主阶，互指为党。
现代文：当时齐康以高拱为主，欧阳一敬以徐阶为主，互相指责结党。
English: At that time, Qikang was dominated by Gao Gong, Ouyang Yijian was dominated by Xu Ji, and they accused each other of forming a party.

古文：言官多论康，康竟坐谪。
现代文：言官多抨击齐康，齐康最终遭贬职。
English: Many officials criticized Qikang, and he was eventually demoted.

古文：已，陈兵政八事，部皆议行。
现代文：此事完结，他陈述兵政的八件事情，部中都评议可行。
English: When the matter was over, he presented eight matters concerning military affairs, all of which could be discussed at the Central Military Commission.

古文：南京振武营兵由此罢。
现代文：南京振武营兵因此罢除。
English: As a result, the Nanjing Zhenwu Battalion was dismissed.

古文：湖广巡按陈省劾太和山守备中官吕祥，诏征祥还，罢守备官。
现代文：湖广巡按陈省弹劾太和山的守备宦官吕祥，诏令吕祥返京，罢除守备官。
English: The Hukang inspection of Chen Province impeached the Taihe Mountain garrison eunuch Lv Xiang, ordered Lv Xiang to return to Beijing, and dismissed the garrison officer.

古文：未几，复遣监丞刘进往代。
现代文：不久，又派遣盐丞刘进前往接替。
English: Soon, Liu Jin, a salt master, was sent to replace him.

古文：一敬言： 进故名俊，守显陵无状。
现代文：欧阳一敬进谏： 进原名为俊，驻守显陵无功。
English: Ouyang Yijian: Originally named Jun, he garrisoned Xianling without success.

古文：肃皇帝下之狱，充孝陵卫净军，今不宜用。 
现代文：肃皇帝将他投入牢狱，发配为孝陵卫靖军，现在任用他不合适。 
English: Emperor Su threw him into prison and assigned him to the Xiaoling Weijing Army. It is not appropriate to appoint him now.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的劝谏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：中官吕用等典京营，一敬力谏，事寝。
现代文：宦官吕用等人主管京营，欧阳一敬极力劝谏，此事才平息。
English: The eunuch Lyu Ying and others were in charge of the Beijing camp, Ouyang Yijing tried his best to dissuade him, and the matter was resolved.

古文：黔国公沐朝弼残恣，屡抗诏旨。
现代文：黔国公沐朝弼残暴放纵，屡次违抗皇帝诏令。
English: The Duke of Shandong indulged in brutality and repeatedly disobeyed the Emperor's edict.

古文：一敬请治其罪，报可。
现代文：欧阳一敬请求惩治他，获得同意。
English: Ouyang Yijie requested that he be punished, which was approved.

古文：然悻悻好搏击，议者颇以倾危目之。
现代文：不久他被提升为太常少卿。高拱再度崛起执掌国政，欧阳一敬感到惊惧，当天就告辞回乡，半道上忧郁而死。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Taizhang Shaoqing. Gao Gong once again rose to power and took charge of state affairs. Ouyang Yijian was alarmed and left for his hometown the same day, dying of melancholy on the way.

古文：周弘祖，麻城人。嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：当时胡应嘉已经多次调迁升任参议，奔父母丧事回乡，听说高拱再度任宰相，也惊恐而死。周弘祖，麻城人。嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: At that time, Hu Yingjia had been transferred and promoted to the position of councillor several times. He rushed back to his hometown to attend his parents' funeral. When he heard that Gao Gong had been reappointed as prime minister, he also died of fright. Zhou Hongzu, a resident of Macheng. A member of the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：除吉安推官。
现代文：授职为吉安推官。
English: Awarded the post of Ji'an magistrate.

古文：征授御史，出督屯田、马政。
现代文：征召为御史，离开京都督察屯田、马政。
English: Conscripted as a historian, he left Kyoto to inspect Tonden and Masamasa.

古文：隆庆改元，司礼中贵及藩邸近侍荫锦衣指挥以下至二十余人。
现代文：改换隆庆年号，司礼中贵和藩邸近侍荫庇锦衣指挥以下二十多人。
English: The name of the year was changed to Longqing Year, and more than twenty people, including the conductor, attended the ceremony in the shade of the eaves near Guihe's residence.

古文：弘祖驰疏请止赉金币，或停世袭，且言： 高皇帝定制，宦侍止给奔走扫除，不关政事。
现代文：周弘祖在外地急速上疏请求停止赏赐金币，或者停止世袭，并且劝谏 ：高祖皇帝的定制，宦官只能负责跑腿与卫生清扫之类，不能参与政治事务。
English: Zhou Hongzu quickly went abroad to ask for a stop to the awarding of gold coins, or to stop hereditary succession, and advised: According to Emperor Gao Zu's custom, eunuchs can only be responsible for running errands and cleaning, and cannot participate in political affairs.

古文：孝宗召对大臣，宦侍必退去百余武，非惟不使之预，亦且不使之闻。
现代文：孝宗召见大臣，宦官侍从必须退离百余步，不仅不让他们干预，也不让他们听见。
English: Xiaozong summoned the minister, and the eunuch's attendants had to retreat more than a hundred paces, not only not letting them intervene, but also not letting them hear.

古文：愿陛下勿与谋议，假以嚬笑，则彼无乱政之阶，而圣德媲太祖、孝宗矣。
现代文：希望陛下不要同他们商议政事，不示宠爱，则他们没有扰乱朝政的凭借，皇帝的贤德可与太祖、孝宗媲美。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will not discuss political affairs with them, and will not show favoritism to them, then they will not disrupt the government of the dynasty, and the emperor's virtue can be comparable to that of the great-grandfather and the emperor.

古文：臣又闻先帝初载，欲荫太监张钦义子锦衣，兵部尚书彭泽执奏再四。
现代文：我还听说先帝初年，想荫庇太监张钦的义子为锦衣，兵部尚书彭泽再三执意上奏。
English: I also heard that in the first year of the former emperor, the son-in-law of the eunuch Zhang Qin, who wanted to protect the shadow, was the brocade, and the military secretary Peng Ze repeatedly insisted on playing up.

古文：今赵炳然居泽位，不能效泽忠，无所逃罪。 
现代文：现在赵炳然处在彭泽的职位，不能效法彭泽的忠诚，有不可逃避的罪责。 
English: Now that Zhao Yulan is in Pengze's position, he cannot imitate Pengze's loyalty, and he has unavoidable guilt.

古文：报闻。
现代文：皇帝答复知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：已，请汰内府监局、锦衣卫、光禄寺、文思院冗员，复嘉靖初年之旧，又请仿行古社仓制。
现代文：不久，又奏请淘汰内府盐局、锦衣卫、光禄寺、文思院的冗员，恢复嘉靖初年的旧制，还请求仿效古时的社仓制。
English: Soon, he also requested that the redundant employees of the Neifu Salt Bureau, Jin Yiwei, Guanglu Temple, and Wensi Academy be eliminated, the old system of the first year of Jiajing be restored, and the old warehouse system be imitated.

古文：诏皆从之。
现代文：皇帝诏令全部依从了。
English: Gao Zu's subordinate orders were all carried out in accordance with what the eldest grandson Jian said.

古文：明年春，言： 近四方地震，土裂成渠，旗竿数火，天鼓再鸣，陨星旋风，天雨黑豆，此皆阴盛之徵也。
现代文：第二年春天，他进谏： 近来四方发地震，土地开裂成渠，旗竿屡次着火，天鼓一再鸣响，星陨风旋，天降黑豆雨，这都是阴气旺盛的征兆。
English: In the spring of the second year, he entered the cocoon: Recently, earthquakes have occurred in all directions, the land has cracked into canals, the flagpole has repeatedly caught fire, the celestial drum has repeatedly sounded, star meteorites have swirled, and black bean rain has fallen from the sky. These are all signs of gloomy vigor.

古文：陛下嗣位二年，未尝接见大臣，咨访治道。
现代文：陛下即位两年，没有接见大臣，咨询过问治国之道。
English: His Majesty has been on the throne for two years, but he has not received any ministers or consulted them on how to run the country.

古文：边患孔棘，备御无方。
现代文：边防忧患严重，守备无方。
English: Border control is in serious trouble, and there is no way to protect it.

古文：事涉内庭，辄见挠沮，如阅马、核库，诏出复停。
现代文：事情牵涉内廷，动辄被阻扰，例如阅马、核库，诏令刚发出又停止。
English: Matters involving the Inner Court were frequently obstructed, for example, the inspection of horses and nuclear repositories. Imperial edicts were issued and then suspended.

古文：皇庄则亲收子粒，太和则榷取香钱，织造之使累遣，纠劾之疏留中。
现代文：皇庄却亲自征收粮食，太和山则征收香火钱，不断派遣织造使，纠察弹劾的奏疏留在宫中不下发处理。
English: However, Emperor Zhuang personally levied grain, while Emperor Taishan levied incense money, constantly dispatched weaving envoys, and picketing and impeachment were left in the palace without being dealt with.

古文：内臣爵赏谢辞，温旨远出六卿上，尤祖宗朝所绝无者。 
现代文：内臣谢辞爵位封赏，圣上言词的美意远远超出了六卿之上，此更是先朝所绝对没有的事。 
English: The noble words of the Emperor far exceed the words of the six nobles, and this is something that absolutely did not happen in the previous dynasty.

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏呈入宫中，没有回音。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：其冬诏市珍宝，魏时亮等争，不听。
现代文：当年冬天皇帝诏令购买珍宝，魏时亮等人劝阻，皇帝不听。
English: In the winter of that year, Wei Shiliang and others tried to dissuade the emperor from ordering the purchase of precious treasures, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：洪震寻以疾归。
现代文：周弘祖又恳切劝谏。
English: Zhou Hongzu also earnestly advised him.

古文：万历改元，督抚交章论荐，竟不起。詹仰庇，字汝钦，安溪人。
现代文：不久，他被调任福建提学副使。大学士高拱执掌吏部，考察言官，厌恶周弘祖和岑用宾等人，将周弘祖贬斥为安顺判官，岑用宾为宜川县丞。詹仰庇，字汝钦，安溪人。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of vice-envoy of Fujian University of Arts and Sciences. Zhan Yangbi, also known as Ruqin, was a native of Anxi. He was in charge of the administrative department of the University of Arts and Sciences, and was also an inspector. He detested Zhou Hongzu and Zou Yibin. He denounced Zou Yibin as the judge of Anshun, and Zou Yibin as the governor of Yichuan County.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: The 44th year of Jiajing.

古文：由南海知县征授御史。
现代文：由南海知县征招授为御史。
English: He was recruited from Nanhaichi County and became a goshi.

古文：隆庆初，穆宗诏户部购宝珠，尚书马森执奏，给事中魏时亮、御史贺一桂等继争，皆不听。
现代文：隆庆初年，穆宗诏令户部购置珠宝，尚书马森劝谏，给事中魏时亮、御史贺一桂等人相继上疏反对，皇帝都不听。
English: In the first year of the Longqing, Mu Zongzhao ordered the household to purchase jewelry, Shang Shumason advised him, and Wei Shiliang, Mishi He Yigui and others successively raised objections, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：仰庇疏言： 顷言官谏购宝珠，反蒙诘让。
现代文：詹仰庇奏疏： 前不久言官劝谏购置珠宝，反而遭到责备。
English: Zhan Yangpi Song So: Not long ago, a government official advised her to buy jewelry, but she was rebuked.

古文：昔仲虺戒汤不迩声色，不殖货利；召公戒武王玩人丧德，玩物丧志。汤、武能受二臣之戒，绝去玩好，故圣德光千载。
现代文：以前仲虺告诫商汤不要近声色，不要发展商贾之利；召公告诫武王玩人丧德，玩物丧志；商汤、武王能接受两位大臣的告诫，杜绝玩物嗜好，所以圣德光照千秋。
English: Previously, Zhonglu warned Shangtang not to be close-mouthed, not to develop the profits of merchants; called for a public notice to admonish King Wu to play with people and things; Shangtang and King Wu could accept the admonition of the two ministers and eliminate the addiction to toys, so the holy virtue shines brightly.

古文：若侈心一生，不可复遏，恣情纵欲，财耗民穷。
现代文：如果一生心性放纵，不能再加以遏制，放纵情欲，财资耗费百姓穷困。
English: If a person indulges his or her heart all his or her life and can no longer be restrained, indulging his or her passions and spending money and resources, the people will be impoverished.

古文：陛下玩好之端渐启，弼违之谏恶闻，群小乘隙，百方诱惑，害有不胜言者。
现代文：陛下渐渐开启玩物嗜好之心，厌恶听到逆意的忠良劝谏，小人们乘隙而入，百方诱惑陛下，祸害不胜数说。
English: His Majesty gradually opened his heart to the hobby of playing with toys. He was disgusted to hear the disloyal advice of loyal and good people. Small people took advantage of the loophole to enter, tempting His Majesty in every possible way. There are countless scourges.

古文：况宝石珠玑，多藏中贵家，求之愈急，邀直愈多，奈何以有用财，耗之无用之物。
现代文：况且宝石珠玑，多收藏于中贵人家，追求越急切，索取的价值愈高，怎么用有用的资财，耗费在无用的东西上。
English: Moreover, precious stones and beads are mostly collected in the homes of middle-class people. The more urgent the pursuit, the higher the value of the request. How can we use useful resources and waste them on useless things?

古文：今两广需饷，疏请再三，犹靳不予，何轻重倒置乎！ 
现代文：现在两广需要粮饷，再三奏疏请求，仍吝啬不给，为什么轻重倒置呢？ 
English: Now that the two provinces need grain, they repeatedly ask for it, but they are still stingy and do not give it. Why is the weight inverted?

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：三年正月，中官制烟火，延烧禁中庐舍，仰庇请按治。
现代文：隆庆三年正月，宦官酿成烟火，延绵烧毁禁宫庐舍，詹仰庇请求调查惩治宦官。
English: In the first month of the third year of Longqing, the eunuchs made fireworks and burned down the Forbidden Palace, and Zhan Yangpi requested that the eunuchs be investigated and punished.

古文：左右近习多切齿者。
现代文：皇帝左右亲近的小人都对他咬牙切齿。
English: The little people around the emperor gritted their teeth at him.

古文：帝颇耽声色，陈皇后微谏，帝怒，出之别宫。
现代文：皇帝颇为耽迷声色，陈皇后稍做劝谏，皇帝发怒，将她逐至别宫。
English: The emperor was quite indignant, the Empress Chen did a little persuasion, the emperor was angry and banished her to another palace.

古文：外庭皆忧之，莫敢言。
现代文：外廷都对此忧虑，却不敢言语。
English: The court was worried about this, but did not dare to say a word.

古文：仰庇入朝，遇医禁中出。
现代文：詹仰庇进宫朝拜，遇上御医从宫中出来。
English: Zhan Yangpi went into the palace to worship, and met the royal physician coming out of the palace.

古文：询之，知后寝疾危笃，即上疏言： 先帝慎择贤淑，作配陛下，为宗庙社稷内主。
现代文：询问他，得知皇后病情危急，立刻上奏： 先帝慎重地选择贤淑女子，与陛下婚配，担当宗庙社稷的内廷之主。
English: After questioning him and learning that the empress was in critical condition, he immediately began to play: The former emperor carefully chose a virtuous woman to marry his majesty and serve as the head of the inner court of the family temple.

古文：陛下宜遵先帝命，笃宫闱之好。近闻皇后移居别宫，已近一载，抑郁成疾，陛下略不省视。
现代文：陛下应当遵循先帝的安排，与皇后情笃意好，近来听说皇后移居别宫，已经将近一年，愁闷成疾，陛下丝毫不去省视。
English: His Majesty should follow the arrangements of the former Emperor and be on good terms with the Empress. Recently, I heard that the Empress has moved to another palace. It has been nearly a year, and she has become depressed. His Majesty does not care at all.

古文：万一不讳，如圣德何？
现代文：万一皇后殒命，在圣德上就讲不过去。
English: In the unlikely event that the empress dies, there will be no end of talk about her sanctity.

古文：臣下莫不忧惶，徒以事涉宫禁，不敢颂言。
现代文：臣下无不忧虑惶恐，只因为事情牵涉禁宫，不敢评说。
English: His vassals were all worried and frightened, and only because the matter involved the Forbidden City, they dared not comment.

古文：臣谓人臣之义，知而不言，当死；言而触讳，亦当死。
现代文：我认为做臣子的道义，知道却不劝谏，该死；劝谏触犯禁讳，也该死。
English: I think that if you know the moral of being a courtier, but do not advise him, you should die; if you advise him to break the taboo, you should also die.

古文：臣今日固不惜死，愿陛下采听臣言，立复皇后中宫，时加慰问，臣虽死贤于生。 
现代文：我今天固然不因死而叹惜。希望陛下能采纳、听从我的劝谏，马上使皇后回复中宫，时时慰问，这样我虽然死了也比活着强。 
English: Of course, I do not regret my death today. I hope that Your Majesty will accept and follow my advice and immediately have the Empress reply to the Middle Court, offering condolences at all times, so that even though I am dead, I am better off than if I were alive.

古文：帝手批答曰： 后无子多病，移居别宫，聊自适，以冀却疾。
现代文：皇帝亲笔批阅作答 ：皇后无子嗣，身体多病，移居别宫，姑且自己贻养，希望因此除去疾患。
English: The emperor personally approved the reading and replied, "The empress has no children and is often ill. She has moved to another palace and is raising her children on her own. I hope this will cure her illness."

古文：尔何知内庭事，顾妄言。 
现代文：你怎么知道内宫的事，而妄自言语呢？ 
English: How do you know the things of the inner court, and how can you say such things?

古文：仰庇自分得重谴，同列亦危之。
现代文：詹仰庇自己料想会受到重责，同僚也觉得他处境危险。
English: Zhan Yangbi expected to be held responsible, and his colleagues also felt that he was in danger.

古文：及旨下，中外惊喜过望，仰庇益感奋。
现代文：等到圣旨下达，京城内外惊喜过望，詹仰庇更加感情激奋。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, the surprise inside and outside the capital was overwhelming, and Zhan Yangbi was even more emotional.

古文：亡何，巡视十库，疏言： 内官监岁入租税至多，而岁出不置籍。
现代文：不久，他巡视十库，奏疏称 ：每年内官监租税收入很多，但是每年的支出不造簿册。
English: Not long after, he inspected ten libraries, and said in his report, "Each year, the tax revenue of the Internal Revenue Service is a lot, but the annual expenditure is not recorded in books."

古文：按京城内外园廛场地，隶本监者数十计，岁课皆属官钱，而内臣假上供名，恣意渔猎。
现代文：查京城内外的园林、栈房、场地，隶属本监的以数十计算，每年的课税都属于官钱，但宦官假借供给皇帝的名目，恣意渔猎。
English: The gardens, storehouses, and grounds inside and outside the city of Zhaqing, which are under the jurisdiction of this supervisor, are counted in dozens. The annual taxation belongs to the official money, but the eunuchs pretend to provide the emperor's name, arbitrarily fishing and hunting.

古文：利填私家，过归朝宁。
现代文：填充私家的利窟，过失归咎于朝廷。
English: The culpability of the imperial court lies in the fact that it filled a private loophole.

古文：乞备核宜留宜革，并出入多寡数，以杜奸欺。
现代文：请详细核实该留该革之项，以及出入多少的数目，以便杜绝奸诈欺骗。
English: Please check the details of the item to be retained, as well as the number of entries and exits, in order to prevent fraud.

古文：再照人主奢俭，四方系安危。
现代文：再说，皇帝的奢侈或节俭，关联四方的安危。
English: Moreover, the emperor's extravagance or frugality is related to the safety of the four sides.

古文：陛下前取户部银，用备缓急。
现代文：陛下以前提取户部的银资，以备缓急之用。
English: His Majesty used to withdraw money from his household for emergencies.

古文：今如本监所称，则尽以创鳌山、修宫苑、制鞦韆、造龙凤舰、治金柜玉盆。
现代文：现在如内官监所称，则全部用作创制鳌山、修筑宫苑、制作秋迁、建造龙凤舰、加工金柜玉盆。
English: Now, as stated by the Internal Audit Office, they are all used for the creation of Shaoshan, the construction of palaces, the production of autumn migration, the construction of dragon and phoenix ships, and the processing of gold cabinets and jade pots.

古文：群小因干没，累圣德，亏国计。
现代文：众宦官因此多有侵吞，败损圣德，危害国家大计。
English: As a result, many eunuchs committed usurpation, undermined the sanctity of the state, and endangered the country's overall plan.

古文：望陛下深省，有以玩好逢迎者，悉屏出罪之。 
现代文：希望陛下深刻反思，有以玩物嗜好迎合奉承的人，全部逐出并治他们的罪。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will reflect deeply and expel and punish all those who indulge in flattery with toys.

古文：宦官益恨。
现代文：宦官更加憎恨他。
English: The eunuch hated him even more.

古文：故事，诸司文移往还及牧民官出教，用 照 字，言官上书无此体。
现代文：旧制，各司文书往来，以及行政官离京教化，使用 照 字，言官上奏没有这种文体。
English: Under the old system, there was no such style in the correspondence between departments, and the administrative officials were educated away from Beijing. They used the 照 characters and the 言官上奏.

古文：宦官因指 再照人主 语，为大不敬。
现代文：宦官因此指责 再照人主 一句，是犯大不敬之罪。
English: The eunuch therefore rebuked him, saying, "If you go back on your word, you will be guilty of great disrespect."

古文：帝怒，下诏曰： 仰庇小臣，敢照及天子，且狂肆屡不悛。 
现代文：皇帝发怒，颁布诏令： 仰庇这个小臣，竟然照及天子，而且狂妄放肆屡不悔改。 
English: The emperor was enraged and issued a decree: "Look up to this young minister, who has become like the Son of God, and who has repeatedly shown unrepentant arrogance.

古文：遂廷杖百，除名，并罢科道之巡视库藏者。
现代文：于是将他廷杖百下，除去其名，罢除科道中巡视库藏的人。
English: As a result, he was stripped of his title and his name, and the person in charge of inspecting the library was dismissed.

古文：南京给事中骆问礼、御史余嘉诏等疏救，且言巡视官不当罢。
现代文：南京给事中骆问礼、御史余嘉诏等人上疏救助，并劝谏不能罢除巡视官。
English: Nanjing gave assistance to Zhong Luo, Gu Shi Yu Jia Zhao and others, and advised them not to remove the inspector.

古文：不纳。
现代文：没被采纳。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：仰庇为御史仅八月，数进谠言，竟以获罪。
现代文：詹仰庇任御史仅仅八个月，多次陈述直言，竟然因此获得罪名。
English: Zhan Yangbi has only been in office for eight months, but he has repeatedly made forthright statements, and has even been charged for doing so.

古文：神宗嗣位，录先朝直臣。
现代文：神宗继位，录用先朝正直的大臣。
English: Shinshu succeeded to the throne, and appointed the most honest ministers of the previous dynasty.

古文：以仰庇在京时尝为商人居间，不得内召，除广东参议。
现代文：因詹仰庇在京城时曾经替商人做中间人，没能招回京师，任命为广东参议。
English: Because Zhan Yangpi once acted as an intermediary for a businessman when he was in Beijing, he was unable to invite the Beijing division back and was appointed as the Guangdong councillor.

古文：寻乞归。
现代文：不久，请求回乡。
English: Soon after, he asked to return to his hometown.

古文：家居十余年，起官江西。
现代文：在家闲住十多年，又起任江西官员。
English: After living at home for more than ten years, he became an official in Jiangxi Province.

古文：再迁南京太仆少卿。
现代文：再升任南京太仆少卿。
English: He was then promoted to the post of Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：入为左佥都御史，进左副都御史。
现代文：入朝任左佥都御史，晋升左副都御史。
English: Entered the Imperial Court as Zuo Jitsu Miyoshi, and was promoted to Zuo Jitsu Miyoshi.

古文：仰庇初以直节负盛名，至是为保位计，颇不免附丽。
现代文：詹仰庇起初因为正直的气节而负有盛名。到此时为保全职位考虑，不免很有些趋炎附势。
English: At the beginning, Zhan Yangpi was famous for his honesty. At this time, in order to maintain his position, he had to be a bit of a firebrand.

古文：饶伸以科场事劾大学士王锡爵、左都御史吴时来，仰庇即劾伸。
现代文：饶伸因科场的事弹劾大学士王锡爵、左都御史吴时来，詹仰庇即刻弹劾饶伸。
English: Rao Shin impeached the university judge Wang Xizhe and the governor of the Left Capital Wu Shilai, and Zhan Yangbi immediately impeached Rao Shin.

古文：进士薛敷教劾时来及南京右都御史耿定向，仰庇未及阅疏，即论敷教排陷大臣，敷教坐废。
现代文：进士薛敷教弹劾吴时业和南京右都御史耿定向，詹仰庇还没翻阅奏疏，就判薛敷教诬陷大臣的罪名，薛敷教被黜废。
English: Jinshi Xue Shikijo impeached Wu Shiye and Nanjing U.S. Consul Geng, Zhan Yangpi had not yet read the record, and sentenced Xue Shikijo for framing the minister, and Xue Shikijo was dethroned.

古文：及吏部侍郎赵焕、兵部侍郎沈子木相继去，仰庇谋代之，踪迹颇著。
现代文：等到吏部侍郎赵焕、兵部侍郎沈子木相继离职，詹仰庇图谋取代他们，迹象很明显。
English: By the time Zhao Huan, the secretary of the cadre department, and Shen Zi Mu, the secretary of the military department, left office one after another, Zhan Yang Pi was plotting to replace them, and the signs were obvious.

古文：给事中王继光、主事姜士昌、员外郎赵南星、南京御史王麟趾等交章论列。
现代文：给事中王继光、主事姜士昌、员外郎赵南星、南京御史王麟趾等人，纷纷上疏评论。
English: Wang Jiguang, the person in charge of the matter, Jiang Shichang, Zhao Nansing, the person in charge of the matter, Wang Linzi, the person in charge of the matter in Nanjing, and so on, commented on it one after another.

古文：仰庇不自安，屡求去。
现代文：詹仰庇自己感觉不安，屡次请求辞官。
English: Zhan Yangpi felt uneasy and repeatedly asked to resign.

古文：帝虽慰留，而众议籍籍不止。
现代文：皇帝虽然安慰挽留，但是众议纷纷不止。
English: Although the emperor consoled him, the discussion continued.

古文：稍迁刑部右侍郎。
现代文：渐升刑部右侍郎。
English: He gradually rose to the position of the right-hand man of the criminal investigation department.

古文：移疾归，久之卒。
现代文：因疾病而回乡里，很久才去世。
English: Due to illness, he returned to his hometown, where he died a long time ago.

古文：骆问礼，诸暨人。
现代文：骆问礼，诸暨人。
English: All hail, all hail.

古文：嘉靖末进士。
现代文：嘉靖末年的进士。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty.

古文：历南京刑科给事中。
现代文：历任南京刑科给事中。
English: Successive heads of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Bureau are under investigation.

古文：隆庆三年，陈皇后移别宫，问礼偕同官张应治等上言： 皇后正位中闱，即有疾，岂宜移宫。
现代文：隆庆三年，陈皇后移居别宫，骆问礼与同僚张应治等人上奏： 皇后处在宫闱的正位，即使有疾病，怎么能移迁宫室？
English: In the third year of the Longqing era, Empress Chen moved to another palace. Luo Mianli and his colleagues Zhang Yingzhi and others played up: The empress is in the positive position of the imperial concubine, even if she has a disease, how can she move the palace?

古文：望亟返坤宁，毋使后世谓变礼自陛下始。 
现代文：希望马上让她返回坤宁宫，不要让后世的人说礼制的变更是从陛下开始的。 
English: It is hoped that she will be allowed to return to the Kunming Palace immediately, so that future generations will not say that the change in etiquette began with His Majesty.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：给事张齐劾徐阶，为廷臣所排，下狱削籍。
现代文：给事中张齐弹劾徐阶，被朝廷大臣排挤，投入牢狱削夺官籍。
English: In the affair, Zhang Qi impeached Xu Ji, was ousted by the minister of the imperial court, and was thrown into prison for taking away his official status.

古文：问礼独言齐赃可疑，不当以纠弹大臣实其罪。
现代文：只有骆问礼称张齐的赃罪可疑，不应该因为弹劾大臣判他的罪。
English: Only Luo Mianli said that Zhang Qi's conviction was suspicious and that he should not be convicted because of the impeachment of the minister.

古文：张居正请大阅，问礼谓非要务，而请帝日亲万几，详览奏章。
现代文：张居正请求做大检阅，骆问礼称此不是紧要事务，却请求皇上每天亲临几案，详细浏览奏章。
English: Zhang Juzheng requested a major review. Luo Mianli said that this was not an urgent matter, but he asked the emperor to come in person several times a day to view the score in detail.

古文：未几，劾诚意伯刘世延、福建巡抚涂泽民不职，帝并留之。
现代文：不久，皇帝弹劾诚意伯刘世延、福建巡抚涂泽民不称职，穆宗却一并留用了他们。
English: Soon after, the emperor impeached Liu Shiyan, the Bishop of Sincerity, and Tu Zemin, the governor of Fujian, for incompetence, but Mu Zong retained them both.

古文：帝初纳言官请，将令诸政务悉面奏于便殿，问礼遂条上面奏事宜。
现代文：起初他采纳了言官的请求，即将下令各政务处全部在便殿面奏，骆问礼便条陈面奏的事宜。
English: At first, he accepted the request of the spokesman that he would order all the government affairs offices to present the matter in the toilet hall.

古文：一言： 陛下躬揽万几，宜酌用群言，不执己见，使可否予夺，皆合天道，则有独断之美，无自用之失。 
现代文：其一称 ：陛下躬身几案，应当对群臣的劝谏斟酌采用，不要固执己见，使对可否的决定，都合乎天道，这样就有独自决断的美名，而没有自己意气用事的过失。 
English: The first is: Your Majesty, when faced with several cases, should carefully consider the advice of your ministers, do not be stubborn, and make the decision on whether or not to do so in accordance with the heavenly way. In this way, you will have the reputation of making your own decisions, and will not have the fault of doing things on your own.

古文：二言： 陛下宜日居便殿，使侍从官常在左右，非向晦不入宫闱，则涵养薰陶，自多裨益。 
现代文：其二称 ：陛下应该每天居住便殿，让侍从官经常跟随左右，不到夜幕降临不进后宫，这样涵养熏陶，自然裨益甚多。 
English: The second meaning is: His Majesty should live in a common room every day, have attendants always follow him around, and not enter the harem until nightfall. This way of nurturing and cultivating is naturally very beneficial.

古文：三言： 内阁政事根本，宜参用诸司，无拘翰林，则讲明义理，通达政事，皆得其人。 
现代文：其三称： 内阁，是政事的根本所在，用人应当参杂各个部门的人选，不要拘泥于翰林，那么讲明义理，通达政事，都能找到合适的人。 
English: Thirdly, the cabinet is the foundation of government affairs, and the employer should be involved in the selection of candidates for various departments, and should not stick to the mainstream, so that the right person can be found who is well-versed in logic and politics.

古文：四言 诏旨必由六科，诸司始得奉行，脱有未当，许封还执奏。
现代文：其四称： 诏书旨令必须经过六科，各司才能奉行，如果它们有所不当，允许他们退回并执意上奏。
English: The fourth said: The edict of the imperial rescript must pass through six departments before it can be implemented by all departments, and if they are improper, they are allowed to return and insist on it.

古文：如六科不封驳，诸司失检察者，许御史纠弹。 
现代文：如果六科不做封还驳议，各司又失去检察，允许御史纠察弹劾。 
English: If the six departments do not seal and refute, the departments will lose the inspection and allow the history pickets to impeach.

古文：五言： 顷诏书两下，皆许诸人直言。
现代文：其五称 ：不久前两度发布诏书，都准许众人直言。
English: Its five meanings: The imperial edict was issued twice recently, both times allowing people to speak their minds.

古文：然所采纳者，除言官与一二大臣外，尽付所司而已。
现代文：然而被采纳的，除了言官和一两位大臣之外，全部交付给了他们的主管部门。
English: However, all those who were accepted, except for the speaker and one or two ministers, were handed over to their competent departments.

古文：宜益广言路，凡臣民章奏，不惟其人惟其言，令匹夫皆得自效。 
现代文：应当更加扩展言路，凡是臣民的奏章，不论其人而论其所谏，使匹夫都能有效力的机会。 
English: It is necessary to further expand the speech path, the opportunity for all subjects to play, regardless of who they are and what they do, so that the play can be effective.

古文：六言： 陛下临朝决事，凡给事左右，如传旨、接奏章之类，宜用文武侍从，毋使中官参与，则窥窃之渐，无自而生。 
现代文：其六称 ：陛下临朝决断，所有的左右给事，如传递圣旨、接收奏章之类，应当任用文武侍从，不要让宦官参与，这样窥窃之事自然会逐渐消除。 
English: The sixth was: His Majesty will make a decision in the presence of the emperor, and all matters to do with the left and right, such as the transmission of the will and the reception of musical scores, should be assigned to the civil and military attendants, and eunuchs should not be allowed to participate. In this way, the matter of spying will naturally be gradually eliminated.

古文：七言： 士习倾危，稍或异同，辄加排陷。
现代文：其七称： 士人习惯了倾轧，稍稍有所异议，就加以排挤陷害。
English: The seventh said: The judges are used to being pushed around, and if they have the slightest objection, they will be ousted and trapped.

古文：自今凡议国事，惟论是非，不徇好恶。
现代文：从现在开始，凡是议论国家大事，只论议论的是与非，不能依照个人的好恶。
English: From now on, when discussing national affairs, only discuss the rights and wrongs, not according to personal likes and dislikes.

古文：众人言未必得，一人言未必非，则公论日明，士气可振。 
现代文：众人之言未必得理，一个人的观点也未必就不对，那么公正的评论一天天明了，士人的风气也可以得到振兴。 
English: People's words may not be right, and one person's point of view may not be wrong, so fair comments are clear day by day, and the morale of scholars can also be revitalized.

古文：八言： 政令之出，宜在必行。
现代文：其八称： 政令发出，应当严格执行。
English: Eighth: When a government order is issued, it should be strictly enforced.

古文：今所司题覆，已报可者未见修举，因循玩悽，习为故常。
现代文：现在所司的批复，已经答复认可的不见施行，因循怠废，习以为常。
English: Now the director's reply, which has already been approved, has not been implemented, and it has become commonplace due to neglect.

古文：陛下当明作于上，敕诸臣奋励于下，以挽颓惰之风 。
现代文：陛下在上应该做出明断，敕令各位大臣在下磨砺奋进，以便扭转颓废怠惰的风气。 
English: His Majesty should make a clear decision at the top and order the ministers to work hard at the bottom in order to reverse the decadent and lazy culture.

古文：九言： 面奏之仪，宜略去繁文，务求实用，俾诸臣入而敷奏，退而治事，无或两妨，斯上下之交可久。 
现代文：其九称： 面奏的仪式，应当略去繁文缛节，务必讲求实用，使各位大臣入朝陈述奏章，退朝就专心办事，两无妨碍，这样君臣之间的知遇就可以长久维持。 
English: Ninth: The ceremony of playing the mask should omit the red tape and be practical, so that the ministers enter the court with a written report and leave the court with a concentrated work, and there is no obstacle between the two, so that the friendship between the monarch and the minister can be maintained for a long time.

古文：十言： 修撰、编检诸臣，宜令更番入直，密迩乘舆，一切言动，执简侍书。
现代文：其十称 ：负责修撰、编检的各位大臣，应当让他们紧随皇帝的圣驾，把皇帝的一切言行，都记录在册。
English: Tenth: The ministers in charge of editing and proofreading should have them follow the emperor's lead and record all the emperor's words and deeds.

古文：其耳目所不及者，诸司或以月报，或以季报，令得随事纂缉，以垂劝戒。 
现代文：他们所不能耳闻目睹的事情，诸司或者每月报告，或者每季度报告，使他们依事编纂，以昭示后人作为劝诫。 
English: What they could not hear or see, they reported on a monthly or quarterly basis, so that they could compile it and use it as an exhortation to future generations.

古文：疏奏，帝不悦。
现代文：奏疏交上，穆宗不高兴。
English: When the report was submitted, Emperor Guangwu was displeased.

古文：帝意未释，严旨谯让。涍惶恐请罪，斥为民。
现代文：有盗窃建晶王印章的人，逃到南京被捕获。张居正的门客指使江都御史王篆罪责陈吾德的部下失盗，将他贬为马邑典史。
English: A thief of King Jianjing's seal escaped to Nanjing and was captured. Zhang Jizheng's protégé instructed the governor of Jiangsu Province, Wang Qi, to blame Chen Ude's subordinates for the theft and to relegate him to the status of a local historian.

古文：逾年，巡按御史李学诗荐涍。诏自后有荐者，并逮治涍。
现代文：御史又弹劾他在饶州任职时违背规定进行讲学，用府库的钱购置办学的公田，于是将他从官籍中除名降为百姓。张居正死后，被推荐担任思州推官，调任宝庆同知，都以年老没有赴任。
English: The imperial court also impeached him for violating regulations by giving lectures when he was in office in Raozhou, and using the money of the prefectural treasury to purchase public land to run a school, so he was removed from the official register and reduced to a commoner. After Zhang Jizheng's death, he was recommended to serve as a Shizhou magistrate, and he was transferred to Baoqing Tongzhi, but he did not take up the post due to his old age.

古文：久之，卒。
现代文：后来死在湖广佥事的任上。
English: After a long time, Wang Yao died of illness.

古文：汪文辉，字德充，婺源人。
现代文：汪文辉，字德充，婺源人。
English: Wang Wenhui, the character of Dezhong, the role of Yu Yuanren.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: The 44th year of Jiajing.

古文：授工部主事。
现代文：授任工部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the engineering department.

古文：隆庆四年，改御史。
现代文：隆庆四年，改任御史。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing era, he was reassigned to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：高拱以内阁掌吏部，权势烜赫。
现代文：高拱以内阁大臣身份掌管吏部，权势显赫。
English: Gao Gong, as a cabinet minister, was in charge of the personnel department and wielded considerable power.

古文：其门生韩楫、宋之韩、程文、涂梦桂等并居言路，日夜走其门，专务搏击。
现代文：他的门生韩楫、宋之韩、程文、涂梦桂等人同任言官，日夜奔走于高拱的门庭，专门从事攻击政敌的活动。
English: His protégés, Han Min, Song Zhi Han, Cheng Wen, Tu Meng Gui and others, who were also appointed as spokesmen, ran around the high-arched courtyard day and night, specializing in attacking political opponents.

古文：文辉亦拱门生，心独非之。
现代文：汪文辉也是高拱的门生，心思唯独不如此。
English: Wang Wenhui is also a disciple of Gao Gong, but he is not the only one.

古文：明年二月，疏陈四事，专责言官。
现代文：第二年二月上疏陈述四件事，专门责难言官。
English: In February of the following year, Shangsu made a statement on four matters, specifically criticizing the spokesman.

古文：其略曰：
现代文：大意是：
English: The article said in summary:

古文：先帝末年所任大臣，本协恭济务，无少衅嫌。
现代文： 先帝末年所委任的大臣，本是协佐皇上共济事务，很少有嫌隙。
English: The minister appointed at the end of the previous emperor's life was originally a co-counselor to the emperor in Masonic affairs, and there was rarely a rift.

古文：始于一二言官见庙堂议论稍殊，遂潜察低昂、窥所向而攻其所忌。
现代文：从一两个言官看见庙堂的议论稍稍不同开始，于是暗中察看高低，权衡自己的投向而攻击自己所忌讳的人事。
English: Starting from one or two gossips who saw that the discussion in the temple was slightly different, they surreptitiously looked at the highs and lows, weighed their own direction and attacked their own taboo personnel affairs.

古文：致颠倒是非，荧惑圣听，伤国家大体。
现代文：致使是非颠倒，圣德迷惑，伤害国家大体。
English: As a result, the rights and wrongs are reversed, the sanctity is confused, and the country as a whole is harmed.

古文：苟踵承前弊，交煽并构，使正人不安其位，恐宋元祐之祸，复见于今，是为倾陷。
现代文：假使沿袭前面的弊端，交替煽动诬构，使正派的人不安于自己的职位，恐怕宋元礻右的党祸，又在现在重演，此为倾覆陷害。
English: If it follows the previous malpractice of alternately instigating and fabricating, making decent people feel insecure about their positions, I am afraid that the party disaster of Song Yuanxuan will be repeated again now. This is a subversion trap.

古文：祖宗立法，至精密矣，而卒有不行者，非法敝也，不得其人耳。
现代文： 祖宗的立法非常精密，却最终有无法推行的地方，不是法制不好，是任用非人。
English: The legislation of the ancestors was very precise, but in the end there were places that could not be implemented, not because the legal system was not good, but because the appointment was not human.

古文：今言官条奏，率锐意更张。
现代文：现在言官的奏章，都急切地要有所进取。
English: Now, the playbooks of officials are eager to make progress.

古文：部臣重违言官，轻变祖制，迁就一时，苟且允覆。
现代文：部臣又很担心违背言官，轻率地变更祖制，做一时的迁就，苟且答应。
English: The ministers were also very worried about disobeying the spokesman, rashly changing the ancestral system, and making a temporary accommodation, but they agreed.

古文：及法立弊起，又议复旧。
现代文：等到立法的弊端产生，又议论恢复旧制。
English: Wait until the drawbacks of legislation arise, and then discuss the restoration of the old system.

古文：政非通变之宜，民无画一之守，是为纷更。
现代文：政治没有变通的必要，百姓没有统一遵守的规则，这是盲目多变。
English: There is no need for politics to be flexible, and the people have no uniform rules to abide by, which is blindly changeable.

古文：古大臣坐事退者，必为微其词；所以养廉耻，存国体。
现代文： 古时大臣犯罪退职的，必定婉转述说其事，以培养廉耻心，保存国体。
English: In ancient times, if a minister resigned for committing a crime, he would have to recount the story in a gentle manner in order to cultivate a sense of modesty and preserve the national identity.

古文：今或掇其已往，揣彼未形，逐景循声，争相诟病，若市井哄瘩然。
现代文：现在或者拾掇他们以往的事，揣测他们未形之事，逐影循声，争相责骂，如同市井的喧哗。
English: Now, we can pick up on their past affairs, speculate on their unformed affairs, follow the sound of their voices, and scold each other, like the noise of the market.

古文：至方面重臣，苟非甚奸慝，亦宜弃短录长，为人才惜。
现代文：至于各方面重臣，如果不是非常奸诈邪恶，也应该弃短录长，珍惜人才。
English: As for the chief ministers in all aspects, if they are not very treacherous and evil, they should also abandon short records and cherish talents.

古文：今或搜抉小疵，指为大蠹，极言丑诋，使决引去。
现代文：现在或者搜小小的过失，指责为大祸，极尽丑化诋毁，使他们决然离去。
English: Now, they may search for minor faults, accuse them of being a big disaster, vilify them to the utmost, and force them to leave.

古文：以此求人，国家安得全才而用之？
现代文：用此办法求人才，国家怎么能保全人才、使用人才？
English: Using this method to solicit talent, how can the country preserve talent and use talent?

古文：是为苛刻。
现代文：这是苛刻。
English: That's harsh.

古文：言官能规切人主，纠弹大臣。
现代文： 言官能规劝皇上，纠察弹劾大臣。
English: The magistrate can advise the emperor, picket and impeach the minister.

古文：至言官之短，谁为指之者？
现代文：至于言官的缺点，谁替他指出？
English: As for the shortcomings of the spokesman, who pointed them out for him?

古文：今言事论人或不当，部臣不为奏覆，即愤然不平；虽同列明知其非，亦莫与辨，以为体貌当如是。
现代文：现在言事论人或有不当，部臣不为其上奏回复就愤然不平；虽然同僚明知这不对，也不与他们辩驳，认为体貌应当如此。
English: Now, if someone says something about someone, it may be inappropriate, and if a minister does not reply to it, he is indignant; although colleagues know that this is not right, they do not argue with them and think that the body should be like this.

古文：夫臣子且不肯一言受过，何以责难君父哉？
现代文：臣子不愿因一句话受责难，凭什么责难皇上呢？
English: If a courtier does not want to be reproached for a single word, on what basis can he reproach the emperor?

古文：是为求胜。
现代文：这是求胜。
English: It's about winning.

古文：此四弊者，今日所当深戒。
现代文： 这四种弊端，现在应该深做戒备。
English: We should be on high alert for these four evils.

古文：然其要在大臣取鉴前失，勿用希指生事之人。
现代文：然而它们要求大臣们借鉴以前的过错，不要任用会迎合上级却好生事的人。
English: However, they urged ministers to learn from previous mistakes and not to appoint trouble-makers who pander to their superiors.

古文：希指生事之人进，则忠直贞谅之士远，而颂成功、誉盛德者日至于前。
现代文：拍马生事的人晋职，则忠诚、正直、坚贞、冷静的人远避，使颂扬成功、赞誉圣德的人一天天接近皇帝。
English: Those who make a fuss are promoted, while those who are loyal, honest, steadfast and calm are shunned. Those who extol success and praise virtue are brought closer to the emperor day by day.

古文：大臣任己专断，即有阙失，孰从闻之？
现代文：大臣固执专断，即使有过失，谁能向上报告。
English: The minister is stubborn and arbitrary. Even if there is a mistake, who can report it to higher authorities?

古文：盖宰相之职，不当以救时自足，当以格心为本。
现代文：所以宰相的职责，不应当以救时弊而自满，应当以纠正心性为本。
English: Therefore, the duties of the prime minister should not be complacent with saving time and money, but should be based on correcting the disposition.

古文：愿陛下明饬中外，消朋比之私，还淳厚之俗，天下幸甚。
现代文：希望陛下明确告诫全国，消除朋党私怨，返还淳正厚道的风气，是天下的大幸事。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty's clear warning to the whole country, the elimination of cronyism and personal grudges, and the return of the honest and virtuous culture will be a great blessing for the world.

古文：疏奏，下所司。
现代文：奏疏呈上，穆宗下交所司。
English: The report was submitted to Musong, the director of the Shanghai Stock Exchange.

古文：拱恶其刺己，甫三日，出为宁夏佥事。
现代文：高拱憎恨他讽刺自己，才过三天，就将他调出京城，任命为宁夏佥事。
English: Gao Gong hated his self-mockery, and only three days later, he transferred him out of Beijing and appointed him to Ningxia Ancients.

古文：修屯政，蠲浮粮，建水闸，流亡渐归。
现代文：他在那里整治屯田，除去虚浮的粮饷，修建水闸，流亡的人渐渐归来。
English: There he repaired the ruined fields, removed the empty grain bins, built a sluice, and the exiles gradually returned.

古文：御史富平孙丕扬忤拱，为希指者所劾。
现代文：御史富平、孙丕扬与高拱抵触，被迎合上级旨意的人弹劾。
English: Gu Shi Fuping and Sun Yat-sen had conflicts with Gao Gong and were impeached by those who catered to the will of their superiors.

古文：方行勘，文辉抗言曰： 毛举细故，齮晷正人，以快当路之私，我固不肯为，诸君亦不可也。 
现代文：刚进行调查，汪文辉就抗旨进谏： 用非常微不足道的事例，毁伤正直的人，以悦当权者的私心，我决不会做，诸君也不能做。 
English: As soon as the investigation began, Wang Wenhui protested and said: I will never use very trivial cases to hurt honest people and please the selfishness of those in power, and you can't do it.

古文：于是缓其事。
现代文：因此延缓了这件事。
English: So the matter was delayed.

古文：未几，劾者先得罪去，丕扬竟获免。
现代文：不久，弹劾的人先被治罪离去，孙丕扬竟然获得赦免。
English: Soon after, the person who initiated the impeachment was convicted and went away, and Sun Yat-sen was actually pardoned.

古文：神宗嗣位，拱罢政，召为尚宝卿。
现代文：神宗继位，高拱罢官，召见并任令汪文辉为尚宝卿。
English: Shenzong succeeded to the throne, Gao Gong resigned, summoned and appointed Wang Wenhui as Shang Baoqing.

古文：寻告归。
现代文：不久告辞回乡。
English: He soon left for his hometown.

古文：久之，有诏召用。未赴卒。
现代文：很久之后，有诏令招他任职，还没赴任就去世了。
English: A long time later, he was appointed by imperial decree, but he died before taking office.

古文：刘奋庸，洛阳人。
现代文：刘奋庸，洛阳人。
English: Liu Fenyong, from Luoyang.

古文：嘉靖三十八年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Jiajing.

古文：授兵部主事。
现代文：授任兵部主事。
English: He was appointed as the head of the military department.

古文：寻改礼部兼翰林待诏。侍穆宗裕邸。
现代文：不久改任礼部兼翰林侍诏，侍从穆宗裕邸。
English: He was soon appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies as well as the Hanlin Attendant, and became an attendant at the residence of Mu Zongyu.

古文：进员外郎。
现代文：晋升员外郎。
English: Gairo, the promoted member.

古文：穆宗即位，以旧恩，擢尚宝卿。
现代文：穆宗即位，因旧恩，提升他为尚宝卿。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he was promoted to Shang Baoqing because of his old favor.

古文：已，藩邸旧臣相继柄用，独奋庸久不调。
现代文：此后，藩邸的旧臣相继被授予权柄获任用，唯独刘奋庸长期没升迁。
English: After that, the former vassals of the Han residence were successively granted authority and appointed, but Liu Fenyong was not promoted for a long time.

古文：大学士高拱亦故官也，再起任事，颇专恣，奋庸疾之。
现代文：大学士高拱也是过去的讲官，再度被启用负责事务，专横恣意，刘奋庸很厌恶他。
English: Gao Gong, a university scholar, was also a lecturer in the past. He was once again put in charge of affairs. He was arbitrary and arbitrary. Liu Fenyong detested him.

古文：隆庆六年三月，上疏曰：
现代文：隆庆六年三月上奏称：
English: In March of the sixth year of the Longqing era, the orchestra reported:

古文：陛下践阼六载，朝纲若振饬，而大柄渐移；仕路若肃清，而积习仍故。
现代文： 陛下做了六年皇帝，朝纲好像被振兴调治，而大柄逐渐转移；仕路好像被肃清，而积习依然如故。
English: Your majesty has been emperor for six years. The imperial system seems to have been revitalized and adjusted, while the great man has gradually shifted; the career path seems to have been cleared, but the accumulation of experience is still the same.

古文：百僚方引领以睹励精之治，而陛下精神志意渐不逮初。
现代文：百官刚刚翘望皇帝励精图治，而陛下的精神意志渐渐不如当初。
English: The officials had just been looking forward to the emperor's efforts to govern, but his majesty's spiritual will was gradually inferior to the beginning.

古文：臣念潜邸旧恩，谊不忍默。
现代文：我怀念在藩邸的旧恩，道义上不忍沉默。
English: I miss the old grace in the residence of the clan, I cannot bear to be silent morally.

古文：谨条五事，以俟英断。
现代文：谨慎地条陈五件事，等待皇帝的英明决断。
English: Cautiously list five things and wait for the emperor's wise decision.

古文：一、保圣躬。
现代文： 一、保重圣体。
English: I. Take care of the Blessed Sacrament.

古文：人主一身，天地人神之主，必志气清明，精神完固，而后可以御万几。
现代文：陛下之躯，是天地人神的主宰，必须志气清明，精神凝定，而后才可以临案几。
English: Your Majesty's body is the master of heaven and earth, people and gods. You must have a clear mind and a steady spirit before you can sit on the bench.

古文：望凝神定志，忍性抑情，毋逞旦夕之娱，毋徇无涯之欲，则无疆之福可长保也。二、总大权。
现代文：希望皇帝凝神定志，忍耐抑制性情，不要逞一时的欢娱，不要依从无涯的欲望，则能长保无疆的幸福。 二、总揽大权。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will concentrate his mind, be patient and restrain his disposition, not try to enjoy the moment, not follow the boundless desire, and then he will be able to maintain the boundless happiness.

古文：今政府所拟议，百司所承行，非不奉诏旨，而其间从违之故，陛下曾独断否乎？
现代文：现在官府议论的，百司奉行的，不是没有奉行皇帝旨意，而是这中间的依从与违背的缘故，陛下可曾独断过吗？
English: Is it possible that His Majesty has arbitrarily decided that what the government is discussing now, and what most of them are doing, is not a failure to carry out the emperor's will, but rather the result of this in-between compliance and violation?

古文：国事之更张，人才之用舍，未必尽出忠谋，协公论。
现代文：国家事务的更变，人才的任用与舍弃，不一定全出于忠诚的谋划，未必尽与公论相和协。
English: Changes in national affairs, the appointment and dismissal of talents, are not necessarily all out of loyal planning, and may not be in harmony with public opinion.

古文：臣愿陛下躬揽大权，凡庶府建白，阁臣拟旨，特留清览，时出独断，则臣下莫能测其机，而政柄不致旁落矣。
现代文：我希望陛下亲自掌握大权，所有庶府的建议，内阁大臣拟定的旨意，特意留下详加审阅，时常做出独断，则臣子们不能预测，使国家的权柄不致旁落。
English: I hope that His Majesty will personally take control of the power. All the suggestions of the lower house, the will drawn up by the cabinet minister, will be specially left for detailed review, and will often make arbitrary decisions, which the courtiers cannot predict, so that the power of the country will not fall by the wayside.

古文：三、慎俭德。
现代文： 三、谨行俭朴的美德。
English: The third is to practice the virtue of frugality.

古文：陛下嗣位以来，传旨取银不下数十万，求珍异之宝，作鳌山之灯，服御器用，悉镂金雕玉。
现代文：陛下继位以来，下令提取的银两不下几十万两，寻求珍奇异宝，制作鳌山的明灯，御用器皿，全部镂金雕玉。
English: Since His Majesty's succession to the throne, he has ordered the extraction of no less than several hundred thousand taels of silver, sought out rare and unusual treasures, and made the Lushan lanterns, royal utensils, and all the gold-plated carvings.

古文：生财甚难，靡敝无纪。
现代文：生财很艰难，靡费却没有法度。
English: It is difficult to make money, but there is no law against wasting money.

古文：愿察内帑之空虚，思小民之艰苦，不作无益，不贵异物，则国用充羡，而民乐其生矣。
现代文：希望陛下审察内宫的空耗财资，思虑小民的艰苦，不做无益的事，不看重奇异的东西，则国家的资财充盈，百姓生活安乐。
English: I hope that His Majesty will examine the depleted resources of the Inner Court, think about the hardships of the common people, not do useless things, and not attach importance to strange things, so that the country's resources will be abundant and the people's lives will be happy.

古文：四、览章奏。
现代文： 四、阅览奏章。
English: IV. Reading of the movement.

古文：人臣进言，岂能皆当。
现代文：大臣的谏言，怎么会都恰当？
English: How can the minister's criticisms all be appropriate?

古文：陛下一切置不览，非惟虚忠良献纳之诚，抑恐权奸蔽壅，势自此成。
现代文：陛下一概置之不阅，不是担心白耗忠良献纳的诚意，而是担心篡权的奸人充塞，自此形成势力。
English: His Majesty did not read them all, not because he was worried that the sincerity of the donation would be wasted, but because he was worried that the usurpers of power would fill them with lies, thus creating power.

古文：望陛下留神章奏，曲垂容纳。
现代文：希望陛下留神奏章，屈尊容纳谏言。
English: I hope that His Majesty will pay attention to the play and condescend to accept the criticism.

古文：言及君德，则反己自修；言及朝政，则更化善治。
现代文：谈论君德的，就反省自己的修养；谈论朝政的，就使它促成善治。
English: If you talk about chivalry, you should reflect on your upbringing; if you talk about politics, you should make it conducive to good governance.

古文：听言者既见之行事，而进言者益乐于效忠矣。
现代文：听从劝谏的人既然见此行事，那么进谏的人就更加乐于效忠。
English: Since those who listen to the exhortation see this and act accordingly, then those who enter into the exhortation are more willing to be loyal.

古文：五、用忠直。
现代文： 五、任用忠良正直的人。
English: V. Appoint good, loyal and honest people.

古文：迩岁进谏者，或以勤政，或以节用，或以进贤退不肖，此皆无所利而为之；非若承望风旨，肆攻击以雪他人之愤，迎合权要，交荐拔以树淫朋之党者比也。
现代文：近年进谏的人，或者因为辅佐政务，或者因为节约开支，或者因为推荐贤良摒弃不肖之人，这些都是无自身好处却勇于提议的事；不像望风承旨，大肆攻击以便替他人泄愤，迎合权贵，相互举荐提拔结成朋党之徒所能比拟。
English: Those who have been promoted in recent years, either because they assist in government affairs, or because they save expenses, or because they recommend the virtuous and discard the unscrupulous, these are things that have no self-benefit but have the courage to propose; unlike following the wind, aggressively attacking in order to vent anger on behalf of others, pandering to the powerful, and recommending and promoting each other to become friends of the party.

古文：愿恕狂愚之罪，嘉批鳞之诚，登之有位，以作士气，则谠规日闻，裨益非鲜。
现代文：希望陛下宽恕他们狂愚的罪过，嘉奖触怒陛下的人的忠诚，给予相应的职位，以便形成士气，则每天听到正直的规劝，裨益不少。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will forgive their foolish sins, reward the loyalty of those who have angered His Majesty, and give them appropriate positions in order to build morale. It is of great benefit to hear honest advice every day.

古文：疏入，帝但报闻，不怒也。
现代文：奏疏呈入宫中，皇帝只答复知道了，却没有发怒。
English: When the report was submitted to the palace, the emperor only replied that he knew, but did not get angry.

古文：而附拱者谓奋庸久不徙官，怏怏风刺，相与诋訾之。
现代文：攀附高拱的人说刘奋庸很久得不到提升，不满而讥讽，因此交相诋毁他。
English: Gao Gong's followers said that Liu Fenyong had not been promoted for a long time, and was dissatisfied and ridiculed, so they slandered him.

古文：给事中涂梦桂遂劾奋庸动摇国是。
现代文：给事中涂梦桂弹劾刘奋庸动摇国策。
English: Impeachment of Liu Fenyong in the middle of the matter has shaken the national policy.

古文：会给事中曹大埜亦劾拱十罪，帝斥之。
现代文：遇上给事中曹大聎也弹劾高拱的十条罪状，皇帝贬责了他。
English: Cao Daxu also impeached Gao Gong on ten charges, and the emperor reprimanded him.

古文：给事中程文因奏拱竭忠报国，万世永赖，奋庸与大埜渐构奸谋，倾陷元辅，罪不可胜诛。
现代文：于是给事中程文奏称高拱尽忠报国，是万世的依托，刘奋庸与曹大聎渐渐捏造奸谋，陷害元辅，诛杀他们都不够抵罪。
English: Therefore, in the middle of the matter, Wensong said that Gao Gong was loyal to the country and was the eternal support. Liu Fenyong and Cao Dazhao gradually fabricated a treacherous plot, framed Yuan Fu, and killed them, but they were not enough to atone for the crime.

古文：章并下吏部。
现代文：奏章一起下达吏部。
English: The report was sent to the cadre together with the report.

古文：拱方掌部事，阳为二臣祈宽。
现代文：高拱刚刚掌管吏部事务，表面上请求对两人从宽处置。
English: Gao Gong had just taken charge of the affairs of the cadre department, ostensibly requesting lenient treatment for the two.

古文：帝不许，竟谪大埜乾州判官，奋庸兴国知州。
现代文：皇帝不答应，最后将曹大聎贬为乾州判官，刘奋庸贬为兴国知州。
English: The emperor did not agree, and finally demoted Cao Dazhao to judge of Qianzhou and Liu Fenyong to Xingguozhou.

古文：梦桂、文皆拱门生。
现代文：涂梦桂、程文都是高拱的门生。
English: Tu Meng Gui and Cheng Wen are disciples of Gao Gong.

古文：梦桂极诋奋庸，文则盛称颂拱，又尽举大埜奏中语代拱剖析，士论非之。
现代文：涂梦桂极力诋毁刘奋庸，程文则极力称颂高拱，他们又详尽列举曹大聎奏章中的话代高拱剖析，士人在议论中都鄙视他们。
English: Tu Menggui tried his best to discredit Liu Fenyong, and Cheng Wenjun tried his best to praise Gao Gong. They also listed in detail Gao Gong's analysis of Cao Dazhao's music. The scholars despised them in their discussions.

古文：奋庸谪官两月，会神宗即位，遂擢山西提学佥事。
现代文：刘奋庸被贬官两个月后，神宗即位，于是被提升为山西提学佥事。
English: Two months after Liu Fenyong was demoted, Shenzong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the top of Shanxi Ti Xue Anji.

古文：再迁陕西提学副使。
现代文：再晋升为陕西提学副使。
English: He was then promoted to vice-envoy of Shaanxi to promote education.

古文：以病乞归，卒。
现代文：因病请求退休，而后去世。
English: Due to illness, he asked to retire and then passed away.

