古文：宣秉传
现代文：◆宣秉传
English: ◆Xuan Bingzhuan

古文：宣秉字巨公，冯翊云阳人。
现代文：宣秉字巨公，冯翊云阳人。
English: Xuan Bing is a great man of letters, Feng Xuan is a person from Yunyang.

古文：从小修养高节，显名于三辅。
现代文：从小修养高节，显名于三辅。
English: From an early age, he cultivated a high-class attitude, and became famous in Sanshu.

古文：哀帝平帝之际，看到王莽据权专政，侵暴削弱汉室宗室，有逆乱的迹象，就逃遁隐居深山，州郡连续相召，他称病不肯出仕。
现代文：哀帝平帝之际，看到王莽据权专政，侵暴削弱汉室宗室，有逆乱的迹象，就逃遁隐居深山，州郡连续相召，他称病不肯出仕。
English: On the occasion of the mourning of Emperor Ping, seeing Wang Mang establish a dictatorship, violently weaken the Han dynasty, and there were signs of rebellion, he fled and secluded himself in the mountains, and the prefectures and counties were continuously summoned. He said that he was ill and refused to serve.

古文：王莽为宰衡，召他他不应。
现代文：王莽为宰衡，召他他不应。
English: Wang Mang is a chivalrous person, he should not be called.

古文：王莽篡位后，遣使征他，他坚称有病。
现代文：王莽篡位后，遣使征他，他坚称有病。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he insisted that he was ill.

古文：更始即位，征为侍中。
现代文：更始即位，征为侍中。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of a new era, and was enlisted as a chamberlain.

古文：建武元年，拜为御史中丞。
现代文：建武元年，拜为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Kenmu era, he was appointed to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：光武特诏御史中丞与司隶校尉、尚书令会同并专席而坐，所以京师称为 三独坐 。
现代文：光武特诏御史中丞与司隶校尉、尚书令会同并专席而坐，所以京师称为 三独坐 。
English: Emperor Guangwu's special emissary, the middle-ranking official in charge of history, together with the school's lieutenant, Sili, and the school's superintendent, Shang Shuling, sat together in a special seat, so the Beijing division was called the "three independent seats."

古文：第二年，迁为司隶校尉。
现代文：第二年，迁为司隶校尉。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the rank of captain.

古文：务必举以大纲，简化省略烦杂苛刻的项目，百官敬重他。
现代文：务必举以大纲，简化省略烦杂苛刻的项目，百官敬重他。
English: He is respected by hundreds of officials for his ability to outline, simplify and omit complicated and demanding projects.

古文：宣秉性节约，常穿布衣盖布被，蔬食瓦器。
现代文：宣秉性节约，常穿布衣盖布被，蔬食瓦器。
English: They advocate frugality and often wear cloth clothing, cover cloth quilts, and use vegetable and food crockery.

古文：帝曾经到他的府舍，见而叹道： 楚国龚胜、龚舍虽清苦，还比不上云阳宣巨公哩。 
现代文：帝曾经到他的府舍，见而叹道： 楚国龚胜、龚舍虽清苦，还比不上云阳宣巨公哩。 
English: The emperor once went to his residence, saw it and sighed: Chu is a victorious country, and although the residence is clean and comfortable, it is not as good as Yunyang Xuanhuogong.

古文：即赐以布帛帐帷等生活用具。
现代文：即赐以布帛帐帷等生活用具。
English: They were given cloth curtains and other household utensils.

古文：四年，拜大司徒司直。
现代文：四年，拜大司徒司直。
English: In four years, Bai Daishi became a disciple of Sinao.

古文：所得禄奉，常以收养亲族。
现代文：所得禄奉，常以收养亲族。
English: They often use the adoption of relatives as a source of income.

古文：其孤弱者，分与田地，自己没有担石的储蓄。
现代文：其孤弱者，分与田地，自己没有担石的储蓄。
English: He who is poor and of a contrite spirit will inherit the land; he will not lift up a stone on his own.

古文：六年，卒于官，帝悯惜之，任其子宣彪为郎。
现代文：六年，卒于官，帝悯惜之，任其子宣彪为郎。
English: Six years later, he passed away in office, and the Emperor took pity on him and allowed his son, Nobuo, to become his heir.

古文：张湛传
现代文：◆张湛传
English: ◆Zhang Zhanchuan

古文：张湛字子孝，扶风平陵人。
现代文：张湛字子孝，扶风平陵人。
English: Zhang Zhan Zi Zi Xiao, Fu Feng Pingling people.

古文：庄重严肃好礼，动止都有准则，居处幽室之中，也必自修整，虽遇妻子，却像严君一样。
现代文：庄重严肃好礼，动止都有准则，居处幽室之中，也必自修整，即使遇到妻子儿子，也像遇到父母一样。
English: They are dignified, serious and polite. They have a code for every movement. They live in a secluded room and must groom themselves. Even if they meet a wife or a son, it is just like meeting their parents.

古文：其在乡党，必审言正色，三辅以他为榜样。
现代文：其在乡党，必审言正色，三辅以他为榜样。
English: His party in the township must be upright, and the three auxiliaries should follow his example.

古文：有的人说他虚伪狡诈，张湛听后笑道 ：我真诈，别人皆诈恶，我独诈善，不是也可以吗？ 
现代文：有的人说他虚伪狡诈，张湛听后笑道 ：我真诈，别人皆诈恶，我独诈善，不是也可以吗？ 
English: Some people said that he was deceitful and cunning. After listening to this, Zhang Zhan laughed and said, "I am truly deceitful, everyone else is evil, and I am the only one who is good at deceit. Isn't that okay?"

古文：成帝、哀帝时，为二千石。
现代文：成帝、哀帝时，为二千石。
English: When the emperor was crowned or mourned, it was 2,000 koku.

古文：王莽时，历任太守、都尉。
现代文：王莽时，历任太守、都尉。
English: Wang Mangshi, successive governors and captains.

古文：建武初，为左冯翊。
现代文：建武初，为左冯翊。
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu period, it was Zuo Fengjun.

古文：在郡里修典礼，设条教，政化大行。
现代文：在郡里修典礼，设条教，政化大行。
English: In the county, they held ceremonies, set up rules and regulations, and carried out a large-scale political reform.

古文：后告归平陵，望到平陵县门而步行向前。
现代文：后告归平陵，望到平陵县门而步行向前。
English: Afterward, he returned to Pingling and walked forward while looking at the gate of Pingling County.

古文：主簿进言说 ：明府位尊德重，不应自己轻视自己。 
现代文：主簿进言说 ：明府位尊德重，不应自己轻视自己。 
English: The main book said: Mingfu is a place of high moral values, and you should not despise yourself.

古文：张湛说： 《礼记》说，下公门，抚轼挽车。
现代文：张湛说： 《礼记》说，下公门，抚轼挽车。
English: Zhang Zhan said: "The Book of Rites" says, "Go down to the public gate, and pull the carriage with the handle.

古文：孔子于乡党，恭恭敬敬。
现代文：孔子于乡党，恭恭敬敬。
English: Confucius in the village party, respectfully.

古文：父母之国，尽礼是必须的，什么叫自轻呢？ 
现代文：父母之国，尽礼是必须的，什么叫自轻呢？ 
English: In the country of our parents, it is necessary to be polite, but what does it mean to be disrespectful?

古文：建武五年，拜光禄勋。
现代文：建武五年，拜光禄勋。
English: Jianwu five years, Baiguang honorable mention.

古文：光武临朝，有时显得无精打彩，张湛常说明劝谏其过失。
现代文：光武临朝，有时显得无精打彩，张湛常说明劝谏其过失。
English: Guangwu Lintao sometimes appeared listless, and Zhang Zhan often explained his mistakes.

古文：张湛常骑白马，帝每见到张湛，常说 ：白马生又要谏劝我了。 
现代文：张湛常骑白马，帝每见到张湛，常说 ：白马生又要谏劝我了。 
English: Zhang Zhan often rode a white horse. Whenever the emperor saw Zhang Zhan, he would often say, "The white horse student is trying to persuade me again."

古文：七年，以病请退职，拜为光禄大王，代王丹为太子太傅。
现代文：七年，以病请退职，拜为光禄大王，代王丹为太子太傅。
English: In the seventh year, he retired due to illness, and was worshipped as the great king of Guanglu, and Wang Dan as the prince's daifu.

古文：郭后被废后，因称病不参加朝会，拜太中大夫，居中东门候舍，所以当时的人称为中东门君。
现代文：郭后被废后，因称病不参加朝会，拜太中大夫，居中东门候舍，所以当时的人称为中东门君。
English: After Guo Hou was deposed, he said that he would not attend the imperial court meeting due to illness, and prayed to the Taizhong Doctor, and lived in the waiting room of the Middle East Gate, so the people at that time were called the Middle East Gate.

古文：帝数次慰问赏赐。
现代文：帝数次慰问赏赐。
English: The emperor offered condolences several times.

古文：后来大司徒戴涉被诛，帝强起张湛以代大司徒职务。
现代文：后来大司徒戴涉被诛，帝强起张湛以代大司徒职务。
English: Later, Daishi Tutu Dai Wanzhang was arrested, and Emperor Qiang appointed Zhang Zhan to replace him as Daishi Tutu.

古文：张湛到朝堂，小便失禁，因说明病重，不能再任朝事，于是罢了。
现代文：张湛到朝堂，小便失禁，因说明病重，不能再任朝事，于是罢了。
English: Zhang Zhan went to the court, urinated incontinence, due to the explanation of serious illness, can no longer be appointed to the court, so that's it.

古文：后数年，卒于家。
现代文：后数年，卒于家。
English: He died at home a few years later.

古文：王丹传
现代文：◆王丹传
English: ◆Wang Dan Chuan

古文：王丹字仲回，京兆下圭阝人。
现代文：王丹字仲回，京兆下圭阝人。
English: Wang Dan Zi Zhong Hui, Keizhao Shimo Gui Xuan Ren.

古文：哀帝、平帝时，仕于州郡。
现代文：哀帝、平帝时，仕于州郡。
English: During the reigns of Emperors Aidi and Ping, he served in Zhoushu County.

古文：王莽时，连征不至。
现代文：王莽时，连征不至。
English: When Wang Mang, he was not even conscripted.

古文：家累千金，隐居养志，喜周济贫困。
现代文：家累千金，隐居养志，喜周济贫困。
English: The family accumulated a lot of money, lived in seclusion to raise their spirits, and benefited from poverty.

古文：每岁农时，常载酒菜于田间，等待勤者而慰劳。
现代文：每岁农时，常载酒菜于田间，等待勤者而慰劳。
English: Every year, when they are farmers, they often carry wine and vegetables to the fields, waiting for the hard-working people to comfort them.

古文：其懒者，自感羞耻而不到王丹处来，都加功以自励。
现代文：其懒者，自感羞耻而不到王丹处来，都加功以自励。
English: The lazy ones, feeling ashamed for not being able to get to Wang Dan, all worked harder to motivate themselves.

古文：乡邑聚相勉励，以致富裕起来。
现代文：乡邑聚相勉励，以致富裕起来。
English: Villages and towns gathered together to encourage each other, so that they became rich.

古文：对其轻黠游荡废业为患者，王丹常晓谕其父兄，使给予责备和教育。
现代文：对其轻黠游荡废业为患者，王丹常晓谕其父兄，使给予责备和教育。
English: Wang Dan often admonished his father and brother for their careless wandering and wasteful activities as patients, so as to give them reproach and education.

古文：死了人则送与赙金，亲自护理。
现代文：死了人则送与赙金，亲自护理。
English: Those who died were given money and personal care.

古文：其有遭丧忧的，常等着王丹为他操办，乡邻习以为常。
现代文：其有遭丧忧的，常等着王丹为他操办，乡邻习以为常。
English: He often waits for Wang Dan to run errands for him when he is distressed, which his neighbors take for granted.

古文：实行十多年，其教化大为融洽，风俗笃实。
现代文：实行十多年，其教化大为融洽，风俗笃实。
English: It has been practiced for more than ten years, and its teachings and customs are very harmonious and solid.

古文：王丹资性方洁，疾恶豪强。
现代文：王丹资性方洁，疾恶豪强。
English: Wang Dan's nature is square and clean, and he is courageous and strong.

古文：当时河南太守同郡陈遵，是关西的大侠。
现代文：当时河南太守同郡陈遵，是关西的大侠。
English: At that time, Chen Zun, the governor of Henan Province, was a great hero in Kansai.

古文：其友人丧亲，陈遵为护丧，送赙金甚多。
现代文：其友人丧亲，陈遵为护丧，送赙金甚多。
English: When his friends lost their relatives, Chen Zun acted as a mourner and sent a lot of money.

古文：王丹就携缣一匹，陈列在主人之前，说 ：如王丹此缣，是自己制出来的。 
现代文：王丹就携缣一匹，陈列在主人之前，说 ：如王丹此缣，是自己制出来的。 
English: Wang Dan took a yakitori with him and displayed it in front of his master, saying, "Like Wang Dan, this yakitori is made by myself."

古文：陈遵听了而有惭色。
现代文：陈遵听了而有惭色。
English: Chen Zun listened and felt ashamed.

古文：自此知名，想与王丹结交，王丹拒不同意。
现代文：自此知名，想与王丹结交，王丹拒不同意。
English: Since then, she has been known to want to make friends with Wang Dan, but Wang Dan refused to agree.

古文：恰逢前将军邓禹西征关中，军粮缺乏，王丹率宗族献上麦二千斛。
现代文：恰逢前将军邓禹西征关中，军粮缺乏，王丹率宗族献上麦二千斛。
English: It coincided with the ex-general Deng Yuxi's expropriation, when there was a shortage of military food, Wang Dan and his family presented 2,000 baht of wheat.

古文：邓禹表荐王丹领左冯翊，王丹称疾不视事，免职回，后征召为太子少傅。
现代文：邓禹表荐王丹领左冯翊，王丹称疾不视事，免职回，后征召为太子少傅。
English: Deng Yu recommended Wang Dan as the leader of the Left Fenghui faction. Wang Dan said that he did not care about his illness and was relieved of his duties. Later, he was called up to be the prince's junior tutor.

古文：这时大司徒侯霸想与王丹交友，王丹被征召，派遣儿子侯昱在路上等候。
现代文：这时大司徒侯霸想与王丹交友，王丹被征召，派遣儿子侯昱在路上等候。
English: At this time, the headmaster, Houba, wanted to make friends with Wang Dan. Wang Dan was conscripted and sent his son, Hou Yao, to wait on the road.

古文：侯昱迎拜车下，王丹下车答谢。
现代文：侯昱迎拜车下，王丹下车答谢。
English: Hou Yi bowed to the car and Wang Dan got out to thank him.

古文：侯昱说： 家父想与君交，何为见拜？ 
现代文：侯昱说： 家父想与君交，何为见拜？ 
English: Hou Yao said: My father wants to make friends with you, what is a meeting?

古文：王丹说 ：令尊有此言，丹没有答应呢。 
现代文：王丹说 ：令尊有此言，丹没有答应呢。 
English: Wang Dan said, "It was because your father said so, but Dan didn't agree."

古文：王丹儿子有位同学丧亲，家在中山，王丹儿子告诉王丹想往奔丧慰问，结伴而行，王丹怒而鞭挞其子，令他寄帛二匹以祠。
现代文：王丹儿子有位同学丧亲，家在中山，王丹儿子告诉王丹想往奔丧慰问，结伴而行，王丹怒而鞭挞其子，令他寄帛二匹以祠。
English: Wang Dan's son had a classmate who lost a relative, and his home was in Zhongshan. Wang Dan's son told Wang Dan that he wanted to go to offer condolences and walk together. Wang Dan angrily whipped his son and made him send two donkeys to the shrine.

古文：有人问其故。
现代文：有人问其故。
English: Some have asked why.

古文：王丹说： 交道之难，不容易说。
现代文：王丹说： 交道之难，不容易说。
English: Wang Dan said, "It's not easy to say how difficult it is to communicate.

古文：世上称管仲与鲍叔，次则王吉与贡禹。
现代文：世上称管仲与鲍叔，次则王吉与贡禹。
English: In the world, they are known as Guanzhong and Baoshu, and Wangji and Gongyu.

古文：张耳、陈余以张杀陈而告终，萧育与朱博后来有隙不终，所以交友能善始又善终者是很少的。 
现代文：张耳、陈余以张杀陈而告终，萧育与朱博后来有隙不终，所以交友能善始又善终者是很少的。 
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu ended with Zhang killing Chen, and Xiao Yu and Zhu Bo later had a gap without end, so it is rare for friends to have a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：时人信服其言论。
现代文：时人信服其言论。
English: His words were believed at the time.

古文：客初有荐举士子于王丹的，因选举之，后来所举士子陷于罪，王丹被牵连免职。
现代文：客初有荐举士子于王丹的，因选举之，后来所举士子陷于罪，王丹被牵连免职。
English: At first, a guest recommended a candidate to Wang Dan. Due to the election, the candidate was later convicted of a crime, and Wang Dan was implicated and dismissed.

古文：客惭愧害怕而自绝于王丹，而王丹无所芥蒂。
现代文：客惭愧害怕而自绝于王丹，而王丹无所芥蒂。
English: The guests were ashamed and afraid, so they refused to serve Wang Dan, but Wang Dan had nothing to complain about.

古文：后来王丹被再征为太子太傅，于是呼叫客对他说： 你的自绝，是对我王丹的气量估计得太薄了吧？ 
现代文：后来王丹被再征为太子太傅，于是呼叫客对他说： 你的自绝，是对我王丹的气量估计得太薄了吧？ 
English: Later, Wang Dan was re-conscripted as the crown prince, so the caller said to him: Your self-denial is an underestimation of my Wang Dan's strength, isn't it?

古文：不为客设食以示惩罚，相待如初。
现代文：不为客设食以示惩罚，相待如初。
English: As punishment for not preparing food for the guests, they treated each other as before.

古文：后来让位，在家逝世。
现代文：后来让位，在家逝世。
English: He later abdicated and died at home.

古文：王良传
现代文：◆王良传
English: ◆Wang Liang Chuan

古文：王良字仲子，东海郡兰陵人。
现代文：王良字仲子，东海郡兰陵人。
English: Wang Liangzi, a native of Lanling, Donghai County.

古文：年轻时好学，学习《小夏侯尚书》。
现代文：年轻时好学，学习《小夏侯尚书》。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn, studying "Little Xia Hou Shang Shu."

古文：王莽时，称病不仕，教授学生千余人。
现代文：王莽时，称病不仕，教授学生千余人。
English: Wang Mangshi, who claimed to be ill, taught more than a thousand students.

古文：建武二年，大司马吴汉征召，不应。
现代文：建武二年，大司马吴汉征召，不应。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the chief secretary Ma Wuhan was conscripted.

古文：三年，征拜为谏议大夫，几次进忠言，进止都以礼，朝廷敬重。
现代文：三年，征拜为谏议大夫，几次进忠言，进止都以礼，朝廷敬重。
English: For three years, he was solicited to serve as a doctor of deliberation, and several times he was promoted to the post of loyal counselor. He advanced and stopped with courtesy, and was respected by the imperial court.

古文：迁沛郡太守。
现代文：迁沛郡太守。
English: He became the governor of Qianpei County.

古文：到了蕲县，称病不入府，官属都跟随着他，王良上书称病重，请退休，于是征拜为太中大夫。
现代文：到了蕲县，称病不入府，官属都跟随着他，王良上书称病重，请退休，于是征拜为太中大夫。
English: When he arrived in Jixian County, he said that he was too ill to enter the government, and all the officials followed him. Wang Liang wrote a letter saying that he was seriously ill and asked to retire, so he was recruited as a doctor.

古文：六年，代宣秉为大司徒司直。
现代文：六年，代宣秉为大司徒司直。
English: Six years later, Xuan Bing was appointed as the chief disciple of Sizhi.

古文：在位恭俭，妻子不入官舍，穿戴的是布被，用的是瓦器。
现代文：在位恭俭，妻子不入官舍，穿戴的是布被，用的是瓦器。
English: In the reign of Ge Jian, his wife did not enter the official residence, wearing a cloth quilt and using a pottery.

古文：这时司徒史鲍恢以事到东海，问候其家，看到一妇人穿着布裙曳着柴，从田中回来。
现代文：这时司徒史鲍恢以事到东海，问候其家，看到一妇人穿着布裙曳着柴，从田中回来。
English: At this time, Szeto Szabo returned to the East Sea with the matter, greeted his family, and saw a woman wearing a cloth skirt dragging firewood and returning from Tanaka.

古文：鲍恢对她说： 我是司徒史，特来取书，想见王良夫人。 
现代文：鲍恢对她说： 我是司徒史，特来取书，想见王良夫人。 
English: Bao Wei said to her, "I'm Szeto Shi, I'm here to pick up a book, I want to see Mrs. Wang Liang."

古文：王妻说： 我就是王良妻。
现代文：王妻说： 我就是王良妻。
English: The king's wife said, "I am Wang Liang's wife."

古文：掾史辛苦了，没有书信。 
现代文：掾史辛苦了，没有书信。 
English: After all that hard work, there was no letter.

古文：鲍恢于是下拜，叹息而回，听到这个话的人莫不嘉美王良。
现代文：鲍恢于是下拜，叹息而回，听到这个话的人莫不嘉美王良。
English: Bao Wei then bowed down, sighed and turned around. No one who heard this could fail to admire Mei Wangliang.

古文：后以病归。
现代文：后以病归。
English: He later returned home with an illness.

古文：一年后复征，到荥阳，病重不能前进，就造访其友人。
现代文：一年后复征，到荥阳，病重不能前进，就造访其友人。
English: A year later, he resumed his enlistment, and when he got to Shenyang, he was too sick to go forward, so he visited his friend.

古文：友人不肯见，说： 不是有忠言奇谋而取大位吗，为什么往来这么窝囊不怕麻烦呢？ 
现代文：友人不肯见，说： 不是有忠言奇谋而取大位吗，为什么往来这么窝囊不怕麻烦呢？ 
English: My friend refused to see me and said, "Isn't there a conspiracy to take over the throne? Why do we have to go through all this trouble?

古文：于是拒绝。
现代文：于是拒绝。
English: So he refused.

古文：王良惭愧，自后连征，他就称病。
现代文：王良惭愧，自后连征，他就称病。
English: Wang Liang was ashamed, and since he had been conscripted, he claimed to be ill.

古文：诏以黑纟熏聘请他，不应。
现代文：诏以黑纟熏聘请他，不应。
English: It is not right to hire him under the pretext of black magic.

古文：后光武到兰陵，派遣使者问王良到底有什么疾苦，不能用言语答复。
现代文：后光武到兰陵，派遣使者问王良到底有什么疾苦，不能用言语答复。
English: After Guangwu went to Lanling, he sent an envoy to ask Wang Liang what his ailment was. Wang Liang could not answer in words.

古文：诏免除他子孙邑中徭役，后在家病逝。
现代文：诏免除他子孙邑中徭役，后在家病逝。
English: He issued an edict exempting his children and grandchildren from serving as middlemen, and then died of illness at home.

古文：史官评论说：利仁的人有借仁以从利，体义的人不用体以合义。
现代文：史官评论说：利仁的人有借仁以从利，体义的人不用体以合义。
English: The historian commented: People of benevolence have to borrow benevolence in order to benefit, while people of righteousness do not have to borrow righteousness.

古文：这是说履行仁义，其事虽同，原其本心，真伪各异。
现代文：这是说履行仁义，其事虽同，原其本心，真伪各异。
English: This is to say that the performance of benevolence and righteousness is the same, but the original intention is different.

古文：季文子妾不穿帛，鲁人以为美谈。
现代文：季文子妾不穿帛，鲁人以为美谈。
English: Ji Wenzi's concubine did not wear a veil, Lu people thought it was a beautiful story.

古文：公孙弘身服布被，及黯讥笑他多诈。
现代文：公孙弘身服布被，及黯讥笑他多诈。
English: Gongsun Hong dressed in a cloth quilt, and the crowd jeered at his treachery.

古文：事实没有什么不同，而为誉为毁，议论不一样，这是为什么呢。
现代文：事实没有什么不同，而为誉为毁，议论不一样，这是为什么呢。
English: The facts are no different and the rhetoric is no different, why is that?

古文：大概是体与利的区别吧，宣秉、王良处位优重，而宣秉甘于淡泊，王良的妻子亲挑柴薪可以说太俭朴了。
现代文：大概是体与利的区别吧，宣秉、王良处位优重，而宣秉甘于淡泊，王良的妻子亲挑柴薪可以说太俭朴了。
English: It's probably the difference between propriety and expediency. Xuan Bing and Wang Liang are in a superior position, while Xuan Bing is willing to be frivolous, and Wang Liang's wife is too frugal to pick firewood herself.

古文：然而当时赞他的清廉，人君高他的节概，难道不是以诚处之吗？
现代文：然而当时赞他的清廉，人君高他的节概，难道不是以诚处之吗？
English: However, at the time he was praised for his integrity, and people held him in high esteem. Wasn't this done with sincerity?

古文：语说： 同言而信，信在言先；同令而行，诚在令外。 
现代文：语说： 同言而信，信在言先；同令而行，诚在令外。 
English: The saying goes: "Believe in what you say, believe in what you say; do what you say, but be sincere."

古文：正是这样啊。
现代文：正是这样啊。
English: That's exactly what happened.

古文：张湛不怕矜伪的讥刺，这就是不作伪。
现代文：张湛不怕矜伪的讥刺，这就是不作伪。
English: Zhang Zhan is not afraid of the mockery of hypocrisy. This is what it means not to be a hypocrite.

古文：王丹难于交执之道，这就是知交道呢。
现代文：王丹难于交执之道，这就是知交道呢。
English: Wang Dan is difficult to get along with. This is the way to get along.

古文：杜林传
现代文：◆杜林传
English: ◆Du Lin Chuan

古文：杜林字伯山，扶风郡茂陵人。
现代文：杜林字伯山，扶风郡茂陵人。
English: Du Lin is a native of Baoshan, Maoling, Fufeng County.

古文：父杜邺，成帝哀帝时为凉州刺史。
现代文：父杜邺，成帝哀帝时为凉州刺史。
English: His father, Dujuan, was the crown prince of Liangzhou at the time of the emperor's death.

古文：杜林从小就好学深思，家里既多书，又舅氏张竦父子喜文采，杜林从张竦受学，博学多闻，当时被称为通儒。
现代文：杜林从小就好学深思，家里既多书，又舅氏张竦父子喜文采，杜林从张竦受学，博学多闻，当时被称为通儒。
English: From an early age, Du Lin liked to study and think deeply. There were many books at home, and his uncle Zhang Ye and his son liked literature. Du Lin learned from Zhang Ye and was well-read. At that time, he was known as a Confucian scholar.

古文：起初为郡吏。
现代文：起初为郡吏。
English: At first he was a county official.

古文：王莽失败，盗贼群起。
现代文：王莽失败，盗贼群起。
English: Wang Mang failed, thieves swarmed.

古文：杜林与弟杜成及同郡范逡、孟冀等，率领老小都客往河西。
现代文：杜林与弟杜成及同郡范逡、孟冀等，率领老小都客往河西。
English: Du Lin, his younger brother Du Cheng, and others from the same county, such as Fan Yu and Meng Jie, led the Lao Xiaodu guests to Hexi.

古文：路上遇到贼人数千人，于是就掠取财物，剥夺衣服，拔刀向杜林等准备把他们都杀掉。
现代文：路上遇到贼人数千人，于是就掠取财物，剥夺衣服，拔刀向杜林等准备把他们都杀掉。
English: Encountering thousands of thieves on the road, he plundered their belongings, stripped them of their clothes, and drew a knife on Durin, preparing to kill them all.

古文：孟冀抬起头说 ：愿说完一句话再死。
现代文：孟冀抬起头说 ：愿说完一句话再死。
English: Meng Jie raised his head and said, "I would like to say one sentence before I die."

古文：将军知道天神吗？
现代文：将军知道天神吗？
English: Does the general know about Tenjin?

古文：赤眉拥兵百万，所向披靡，但残贼无道，终于破败。
现代文：赤眉拥兵百万，所向披靡，但残贼无道，终于破败。
English: The million-strong army of the Red Eyebrows was invincible, but the remnants had no way out and were finally defeated.

古文：现在将军以数千之众，而想成霸王之业，不行仁义恩德而反重蹈赤眉的覆辙，难道不害怕天命吗？ 
现代文：现在将军以数千之众，而想成霸王之业，不行仁义恩德而反重蹈赤眉的覆辙，难道不害怕天命吗？ 
English: Now the general, with thousands of people, wants to become the tyrant's cause, not to be benevolent, but to repeat the mistakes of the red eyebrows. Isn't he afraid of the fate of heaven?

古文：贼于是放了他们，使他们一行俱免于难。
现代文：贼于是放了他们，使他们一行俱免于难。
English: The thieves then let them go, and they all walked away unharmed.

古文：隗嚣素来听说杜林有志气节义，深相接待，以他为持书平。
现代文：隗嚣素来听说杜林有志气节义，深相接待，以他为持书平。
English: He had always heard that Du Lin had a strong will, and received him warmly, considering him to be a scholar.

古文：后因病辞去，辞还禄食。
现代文：后因病辞去，辞还禄食。
English: He later resigned due to illness and was given a severance package.

古文：隗嚣想再要他勉强相随，杜林称病重。
现代文：隗嚣想再要他勉强相随，杜林称病重。
English: When she tried to force him to go along with her, he said he was seriously ill.

古文：隗嚣虽怀恨，还想优待他，于是下令道 ：杜伯山天子所不能臣，诸侯所不能友，过去伯夷、叔齐耻食周粟，现在暂且从师友的位置上，打通友好的通道，按照他的志节行事好了。 
现代文：隗嚣虽怀恨，还想优待他，于是下令道 ：杜伯山天子所不能臣，诸侯所不能友，过去伯夷、叔齐耻食周粟，现在暂且从师友的位置上，打通友好的通道，按照他的志节行事好了。 
English: Although harboring a grudge, Yan Han still wanted to treat him favorably, so he ordered the following: "Tu Bo Shan, the son of heaven, cannot have a vassal, the princes cannot have a friend. In the past, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi were ashamed to eat millet. Now, from the position of a teacher and friend, it is time to open a friendly channel and act in accordance with his wishes.

古文：杜林虽被隗嚣网罗住，然终不降志屈节。
现代文：杜林虽被隗嚣网罗住，然终不降志屈节。
English: Although Durin was caught up in the hustle and bustle, he did not give up.

古文：建武六年，弟杜成去世，隗嚣只好听从杜林护丧东归。
现代文：建武六年，弟杜成去世，隗嚣只好听从杜林护丧东归。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, his younger brother Du Cheng died, and Gong Han had no choice but to follow Du Lin's funeral procession back to the East.

古文：放走后又后悔，令刺客杨贤追他到陇坻予以掩杀。
现代文：放走后又后悔，令刺客杨贤追他到陇坻予以掩杀。
English: After he was released, he regretted it again and ordered the assassin Yang Xian to chase him to Shifang to cover up the murder.

古文：杨贤见杜林身推着小车，载着弟弟的灵柩，叹道： 当今之世，谁能行义？
现代文：杨贤见杜林身推着小车，载着弟弟的灵柩，叹道： 当今之世，谁能行义？
English: When Yang Xian saw Du Lin pushing a cart and carrying his brother's coffin, he sighed: In today's world, who can do righteousness?

古文：我虽是小人，何忍杀害义士？ 
现代文：我虽是小人，何忍杀害义士？ 
English: Even though I am a villain, how can I bear to kill a righteous man?

古文：因此自己逃走。
现代文：因此自己逃走。
English: So he fled on his own.

古文：光武听说杜林已回到三辅，就征拜他为侍御史，接见他，问他经书故旧及西州的事，很高兴，赏赐车马衣被。
现代文：光武听说杜林已回到三辅，就征拜他为侍御史，接见他，问他经书故旧及西州的事，很高兴，赏赐车马衣被。
English: When Guangwu heard that Du Lin had returned to Sanfu, he enlisted him as an attendant historian, received him, asked him about the ancient scriptures and the affairs of Xizhou, was very pleased, and rewarded him with a chaise longue.

古文：群僚知杜林是以名气德义而得到重用，都很尊敬畏惧他。
现代文：群僚知杜林是以名气德义而得到重用，都很尊敬畏惧他。
English: Colleagues know that Du Lin is famous for his virtue and has been reused, and they all respect and fear him.

古文：京师士大夫都推重他博学多闻。
现代文：京师士大夫都推重他博学多闻。
English: All the masters and doctors in Beijing valued his erudition and knowledge.

古文：河南郑兴、东海卫宏等，都以古学见长。
现代文：河南郑兴、东海卫宏等，都以古学见长。
English: Henan Zheng Xing, East China Sea Weihong, etc. are all good at ancient studies.

古文：郑兴曾师事刘歆，杜林见郑兴，高兴地说道： 杜林得了郑兴等固然是好事，如卫宏得我杜林，将有所补益哩。 
现代文：郑兴曾师事刘歆，杜林见郑兴，高兴地说道： 杜林得了郑兴等固然是好事，如卫宏得我杜林，将有所补益哩。 
English: Zheng Xing had been a teacher of Liu Ye, and when Du Lin saw Zheng Xing, he said happily: Of course, it is a good thing that Du Lin got Zheng Xing, but if Wei Hong gets me Du Lin, it will be a benefit.

古文：后来卫宏见到杜林，果然被他博大精深的知识所折服。
现代文：后来卫宏见到杜林，果然被他博大精深的知识所折服。
English: Later, Wei Hong met Du Lin and was really impressed by his vast and profound knowledge.

古文：济南徐巡，开始以卫宏为师，后来更接受杜林的学识。
现代文：济南徐巡，开始以卫宏为师，后来更接受杜林的学识。
English: Jinan Xu Jun, began to use Wei Hong as a teacher, and later accepted Du Lin's knowledge.

古文：杜林以前在西州得漆书《古文尚书》一卷，常以此为珍宝，虽遭困顿，仍手不离卷。
现代文：杜林以前在西州得漆书《古文尚书》一卷，常以此为珍宝，虽遭困顿，仍手不离卷。
English: In the past, Du Lin obtained a volume of the lacquer book "Kowen Shang Shu" in Xizhou, and often used it as a precious treasure. Although he was in trouble, he still couldn't keep his hands off the volume.

古文：杜林拿出来以示卫宏等说： 我流离兵乱，常常害怕这部经典绝世。
现代文：杜林拿出来以示卫宏等说： 我流离兵乱，常常害怕这部经典绝世。
English: Du Lin took it out to show Wei Hong and said, "I was displaced by the war, and I was often afraid of this classic masterpiece.

古文：不料想东海卫宏、济南徐生还能得到而将其传下去，这是道不坠于地啊。
现代文：不料想东海卫宏、济南徐生还能得到而将其传下去，这是道不坠于地啊。
English: Unexpectedly, Donghae Weihong and Jinan Xusheng could still get it and pass it on. This is the Tao never falling to the ground.

古文：古文虽不合时务，然愿诸生无悔所学。 
现代文：古文虽不合时务，然愿诸生无悔所学。 
English: Although the ancient text is out of step with the times, I hope that everyone will learn it without regret.

古文：卫宏、徐巡更加敬重，于是古文就盛行起来。
现代文：卫宏、徐巡更加敬重，于是古文就盛行起来。
English: Wei Hong and Xu Jun were more respected, so ancient texts became popular.

古文：明年，大议郊祀制，多数人以为周祀后稷，汉当祀尧。
现代文：明年，大议郊祀制，多数人以为周祀后稷，汉当祀尧。
English: Next year, the suburban worship system will be widely discussed, and most people think that the weekly worship will be the last, and the Han people should worship.

古文：诏命由公卿复议，议者都同意，帝也以为然。
现代文：诏命由公卿复议，议者都同意，帝也以为然。
English: The edict was reviewed by the court nobles, and all the members of the council agreed, as did the emperor.

古文：杜林独认为周室的兴起，其福祚来于其始祖后稷，汉业的兴起，并不是缘着尧的功迹。
现代文：杜林独认为周室的兴起，其福祚来于其始祖后稷，汉业的兴起，并不是缘着尧的功迹。
English: Durindo believed that the rise of Zhou Dynasty was due to the good fortune of its founder Hou Yi, and the rise of Han Dynasty was not due to the merits of Zhu Xi.

古文：祖宗旧制，应因循相继。
现代文：祖宗旧制，应因循相继。
English: The old ancestral system should be abolished one after another.

古文：于是决定依杜林的倡议。
现代文：于是决定依杜林的倡议。
English: Thus, Yidulin's initiative was adopted.

古文：后来代王良为大司徒司直。
现代文：后来代王良为大司徒司直。
English: Later, Wang Liang became the grand steward Sinao.

古文：杜林推荐同郡范逡、赵秉、申屠刚及陇西牛邯等，都被擢用，学者多归向之。
现代文：杜林推荐同郡范逡、赵秉、申屠刚及陇西牛邯等，都被擢用，学者多归向之。
English: Du Lin recommended Fan Qi, Zhao Bing, Shen Tuo Gang and Shaanxi Niu Qi from the same county, all of whom were promoted, and many scholars were attracted to them.

古文：建武十一年，司直官罢，以杜林代郭宪为光禄勋。
现代文：建武十一年，司直官罢，以杜林代郭宪为光禄勋。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jianwu era, he was promoted to Shizhi official, and Du Lin, the deputy of Guo Xian, was awarded the honor.

古文：内供以警卫，外总管三署，周密谨慎，选举公平。
现代文：内供以警卫，外总管三署，周密谨慎，选举公平。
English: Internal security is provided, and the three foreign affairs bureaus are in charge. The election is thorough and fair.

古文：郎中有好学的，常常引进，朝夕满堂。
现代文：郎中有好学的，常常引进，朝夕满堂。
English: One of the children is eager to learn and is often brought in. The hall is full in the morning and evening.

古文：十四年，群臣上言： 古者肉刑严酷，人人害怕法令；今法律轻薄，所以奸轨太多。
现代文：十四年，群臣上言： 古者肉刑严酷，人人害怕法令；今法律轻薄，所以奸轨太多。
English: Fourteen years ago, a group of ministers made the following statement: In the past, corporal punishment was harsh, and everyone was afraid of the law; today, the law is light, so there are too many traps.

古文：应增加科禁，以塞源头。 
现代文：应增加科禁，以塞源头。 
English: Science prohibition should be increased to plug the source.

古文：诏下到公卿。
现代文：诏下到公卿。
English: The imperial edict was sent to the court nobles.

古文：杜林奏道 ：人情受到挫伤侮辱，那么义气忠节的风气就受到损害；法网繁多，那么希图侥幸苟免的行为就会兴起。
现代文：杜林奏道 ：人情受到挫伤侮辱，那么义气忠节的风气就受到损害；法网繁多，那么希图侥幸苟免的行为就会兴起。
English: Duling said: If human feelings are frustrated and insulted, then the culture of loyalty and loyalty will be damaged; if there are many legal networks, then the behavior of hoping to get away with it will arise.

古文：孔子说： 发布政令，凡违法者以刑罚之，人民只想避免刑罚而不能免于作恶。
现代文：孔子说： 发布政令，凡违法者以刑罚之，人民只想避免刑罚而不能免于作恶。
English: Confucius said: If a decree is issued to punish all those who break the law, the people will only want to avoid punishment, but will not be able to avoid doing evil.

古文：以德去诱导，使人民在礼里去行动，人民就知耻而且自动约束自己使归于正了。 
现代文：以德去诱导，使人民在礼里去行动，人民就知耻而且自动约束自己使归于正了。 
English: By using virtue to induce the people to act in a proper manner, the people will know shame and will automatically restrain themselves to rectify themselves.

古文：古代明君，深思远虑，行为动作以忠厚为念，不着眼于多杀，周代的五刑，不过三千。
现代文：古代明君，深思远虑，行为动作以忠厚为念，不着眼于多杀，周代的五刑，不过三千。
English: Ancient Ming Jun, thoughtful foresight, acts with loyalty in mind, does not focus on killing more, Zhou Dynasty's five punishments, but three thousand.

古文：大汉初兴，详鉴前代得失，破方为圆，削雕为朴，革除苛政，更立简法，海内欢欣，人怀宽德。
现代文：大汉初兴，详鉴前代得失，破方为圆，削雕为朴，革除苛政，更立简法，海内欢欣，人怀宽德。
English: The Great Han Dynasty was in its infancy, the gains and losses of the previous generation were studied in detail, the broken square was round, the carved carving was simple, the harsh government was eliminated, the simplified law was established, the country rejoiced, and people cherished broad-mindedness.

古文：到了后来，渐渐增加章法，吹毛求疵，诬妄诋毁层出不穷。
现代文：到了后来，渐渐增加章法，吹毛求疵，诬妄诋毁层出不穷。
English: Later, the rules and regulations were gradually added, and the fault-finding and slander were rampant.

古文：送了一点桃果菜茄，就记录在案以为罪证，犯了一点小过本来无妨大义，竟构成杀头，以致国内没有了廉节之士，家里没有了完满的行为。
现代文：送了一点桃果菜茄，就记录在案以为罪证，犯了一点小过本来无妨大义，竟构成杀头，以致国内没有了廉节之士，家里没有了完满的行为。
English: If you send a bit of peach and tomato, it will be recorded in the case as evidence of a crime. If you do a bit less than what is right and proper, it will constitute murder. As a result, there are no honest people in the country, and there is no perfect behavior in the family.

古文：至于法不能禁，令不能止，上下回避隐匿，为害更深。
现代文：至于法不能禁，令不能止，上下回避隐匿，为害更深。
English: As for the law cannot be banned, the order cannot be stopped, and the evasion and concealment are even more harmful.

古文：臣以为宜如旧制，不应另出新办法。 
现代文：臣以为宜如旧制，不应另出新办法。 
English: The vassal thought that it was better to keep the old system and not to come up with a new method.

古文：帝听从了。
现代文：帝听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：后来皇太子刘强请求自退，封为东海王，所以重选官属，以杜林为王傅。
现代文：后来皇太子刘强请求自退，封为东海王，所以重选官属，以杜林为王傅。
English: Later, the crown prince Liu Qiang requested to withdraw and be named the king of the East Sea, so the officials and subordinates were re-elected, with Durin as the king.

古文：从帝南巡狩。
现代文：从帝南巡狩。
English: On a hunting trip from the south of Germany.

古文：这时诸王傅几次被引进受命，或多交游，不得应诏；只有杜林小心慎独，有召必到。
现代文：这时诸王傅几次被引进受命，或多交游，不得应诏；只有杜林小心慎独，有召必到。
English: At this time, all the kings and princes were brought in several times to receive orders, or to travel together, and they were not allowed to respond to the edict; only Du Lin was careful and prudent, and if there was a call, he would come.

古文：其余的人虽没受责备，而只有杜林独受赏赐，杜林又辞不敢受，帝因而更尊重他。
现代文：其余的人虽没受责备，而只有杜林独受赏赐，杜林又辞不敢受，帝因而更尊重他。
English: Although the others were not reproached, only Durin was rewarded. Durin did not dare to refuse, and the emperor respected him even more.

古文：第二年，代丁恭为少府。
现代文：第二年，代丁恭为少府。
English: In the second year, Daiding was promoted to shofu (junior prefect).

古文：建武二十二年，再为光禄勋。
现代文：建武二十二年，再为光禄勋。
English: In the 22nd year of the Jianwu era, he was awarded the Guanglu Honor again.

古文：不久，代朱浮为大司空。
现代文：不久，代朱浮为大司空。
English: Before long, the deputy Zhu Fu was promoted to the post of chief secretary.

古文：博雅多通，被称为称职相。
现代文：博雅多通，被称为称职相。
English: Boyadotong, known as a competent minister.

古文：建武二十三年去世，帝亲自临丧送葬，任其子杜乔为郎。
现代文：建武二十三年去世，帝亲自临丧送葬，任其子杜乔为郎。
English: When Emperor Jianwu died in the 23rd year of the Jianwu era, Emperor Jianwu himself attended the funeral and allowed his son Du Qiao to act as his stepfather.

古文：下诏书说 ：公侯的子孙，必恢复其原来封赐，贤者的后代，应主宰城邑。
现代文：下诏书说 ：公侯的子孙，必恢复其原来封赐，贤者的后代，应主宰城邑。
English: The next edict said: "The sons of princes shall resume their former fiefs, and the descendants of the wise shall rule the cities."

古文：其以杜乔为丹水县长。 
现代文：其以杜乔为丹水县长。 
English: Du Qiao is the head of Danshui County.

古文：史官评论道：威强能以自御，威力损失了就身危；伪装欺诈以谋私利，欺诈之术用尽了，其手法就完了；而忠信笃敬，虽蛮貊之邦也能通行，是因为道德之感化万物是特别深厚的。
现代文：史官评论道：威强能以自御，威力损失了就身危；伪装欺诈以谋私利，欺诈之术用尽了，其手法就完了；而忠信笃敬，虽蛮貊之邦也能通行，是因为道德之感化万物是特别深厚的。
English: The historian commented: The powerful can use self-control, and if they lose their power, they are in danger; disguise and deception are used for personal gain, and when the art of deception is exhausted, their methods are over; and loyalty and respect can be used even in a barbaric country, because the moral influence of all things is particularly profound.

古文：所以晋赵盾怀有忠心、匹夫锄麂自杀以成其仁；杜林行义，烈士杨贤自逃以假其命。
现代文：所以晋赵盾怀有忠心、匹夫锄麂自杀以成其仁；杜林行义，烈士杨贤自逃以假其命。
English: Therefore, Jin Zhao Dun was loyal and committed suicide to achieve his benevolence; Du Lin acted righteously, and the martyr Yang Xian fled to fake his death.

古文：《易》上说 人之所助者信 ，真是不错呀。
现代文：《易》上说 人之所助者信 ，真是不错呀。
English: It's really good that Yi said that people trust those who help them.

古文：郭丹传
现代文：◆郭丹传
English: ◆Guo Dan Chuan

古文：郭丹字少卿，南阳郡穰人。
现代文：郭丹字少卿，南阳郡穰人。
English: Guo Dan Zi Shaoqing, Nanyang County, Shandong Province.

古文：父亲郭稚，成帝时为庐江太守，有清廉名。
现代文：父亲郭稚，成帝时为庐江太守，有清廉名。
English: Guo Zhi's father, Guo Zhi, was the governor of the Li River when he became emperor, and was known as a man of integrity.

古文：郭丹七岁成了孤儿，小心孝顺，后母哀怜他，为他卖衣装，买产业。
现代文：郭丹七岁成了孤儿，小心孝顺，后母哀怜他，为他卖衣装，买产业。
English: Guo Dan became an orphan at the age of seven. He was careful and dutiful. His stepmother pitied him, sold clothes for him, and bought property.

古文：后来从师于长安，买进函谷关，于是感慨而叹道： 郭丹不坐使者车，誓不出关。 
现代文：后来从师于长安，买进函谷关，于是感慨而叹道： 郭丹不坐使者车，誓不出关。 
English: Later, he learned from his teacher in Chang'an and bought into Hangu Pass, so he sighed with emotion: Guo Dan does not take the messenger car and does not swear off.

古文：既至京师，常为都讲，儒者们都敬重他。
现代文：既至京师，常为都讲，儒者们都敬重他。
English: Even as far away as Beijing, Confucius is often referred to as the founder of Confucianism, and Confucians revere him.

古文：大司马严尤请郭丹，郭丹推辞有病不去。
现代文：大司马严尤请郭丹，郭丹推辞有病不去。
English: Daishi Ma Yan Yu asked Guo Dan, Guo Dan refused to go because he was ill.

古文：王莽又征他，他与诸生逃往北地。
现代文：王莽又征他，他与诸生逃往北地。
English: Wang Mang conscripted him again, and he fled to the north with all the living.

古文：更始二年，三公举郭丹贤能，征为谏议大夫，持符节使回南阳，安集受降。
现代文：更始二年，三公举郭丹贤能，征为谏议大夫，持符节使回南阳，安集受降。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Guo Danxian Neng was raised to the rank of Third Prince, he was appointed as the doctor of consultation, he was sent back to Nanyang with the festival of symbols, and Andi was surrendered.

古文：郭丹自出家共十二年，果然乘高车出关，实现了他入关时的誓言。
现代文：郭丹自出家共十二年，果然乘高车出关，实现了他入关时的誓言。
English: Guo Dan has been a monk for a total of twelve years, and he actually took a high-speed train to leave the customs, fulfilling the vow he made when he entered the customs.

古文：更始失败，诸将都归附光武，并获封爵；郭丹独保平氏县城不下，为更始发丧，穿丧服以尽哀思。
现代文：更始失败，诸将都归附光武，并获封爵；郭丹独保平氏县城不下，为更始发丧，穿丧服以尽哀思。
English: After the coup failed, all generals were subordinated to Guangwu and were knighted; Guo Dan was the only one who was able to keep the county seat of the Ping clan. He was saddened by the coup and wore mourning clothes to mourn.

古文：建武二年，就潜逃而去，身穿破旧走小路，爬山涉险，求谒于更始妻子，奉还符节符信，因而回到乡里。
现代文：建武二年，就潜逃而去，身穿破旧走小路，爬山涉险，求谒于更始妻子，奉还符节符信，因而回到乡里。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he absconded and went to the countryside, wearing worn-out clothes, walking on small paths, climbing mountains and taking risks, begging for his wife's hand in marriage, and returning letters.

古文：太守杜诗请他为功曹，郭丹荐乡人长者代自而去。
现代文：太守杜诗请他为功曹，郭丹荐乡人长者代自而去。
English: Du Si, the provincial governor, asked him to be a meritorious person, and Guo Dan recommended that the village elder go on his own behalf.

古文：杜诗叹道 ：昔日明君兴隆教化，卿士让位，今功曹推贤自代，可说是至德。
现代文：杜诗叹道 ：昔日明君兴隆教化，卿士让位，今功曹推贤自代，可说是至德。
English: Du Shi sighed, "In the past, the Ming Emperor was enlightened by Xinglong, and nobles and dignitaries gave up their positions, but now the meritorious person is promoted from generation to generation, which can be said to be the epitome of virtue."

古文：命令以郭丹事迹编署在太守厅堂，以为后人楷模。 
现代文：命令以郭丹事迹编署在太守厅堂，以为后人楷模。 
English: He ordered that Guo Dan's deeds be compiled and posted in the hall of the Imperial Governor's office, as a model for future generations.

古文：建武十三年，大司马吴汉把他召来举为高才，再迁并州牧，有清平的美称。
现代文：建武十三年，大司马吴汉把他召来举为高才，再迁并州牧，有清平的美称。
English: In the 13th year of Jianwu's reign, he was summoned by the grand master Ma Wuhan to be promoted as a high-level talent. He was then transferred to be a state herdsman, and was known as a clear and level-headed person.

古文：转使匈奴中郎将，迁左冯翊。
现代文：转使匈奴中郎将，迁左冯翊。
English: He transferred the Xiongnu general Zhong Rong to Feng Xuan.

古文：永平三年，代李讠斤为司徒。
现代文：永平三年，代李讠斤为司徒。
English: In the third year of Yongping, he replaced Li Shujin as a disciple.

古文：在朝廉直公正，与侯霸、杜林、张湛、郭亻及齐名相善。
现代文：在朝廉直公正，与侯霸、杜林、张湛、郭亻及齐名相善。
English: He is honest and fair in the court, and is good friends with Houba, Durin, Zhang Zhan, Guo Wei and Qi Ming.

古文：第二年，因考究陇西太守邓融事无所依据，策书免职。
现代文：第二年，因考究陇西太守邓融事无所依据，策书免职。
English: In the second year, because there was no basis for the investigation of Deng Rong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, he was removed from his post.

古文：五年，在家去世。
现代文：五年，在家去世。
English: Five years later, he died at home.

古文：年八十七岁。
现代文：年八十七岁。
English: He was eighty-seven years old.

古文：以河南尹范迁有清行，代为司徒。
现代文：以河南尹范迁有清行，代为司徒。
English: With Henan Yin Fan Qian You Qing Xing, acting as a disciple.

古文：吴良传
现代文：◆吴良传
English: ◆ Wu Liang Chuan

古文：吴良字大仪，齐国临淄人。
现代文：吴良字大仪，齐国临淄人。
English: Wu Liangzhe Dai Yi, a native of Linyi, Qi.

古文：初为郡吏，岁旦与掾史入贺，门下掾王望举觞上寿，虚夸太守功德。
现代文：初为郡吏，岁旦与掾史入贺，门下掾王望举觞上寿，虚夸太守功德。
English: He was a county official at the beginning, and he entered the celebration of the New Year with the history of the year, and his disciples wanted to raise the king to the new life, and he boasted too much about his merits.

古文：吴良跪说： 王望奸佞邪恶之人，欺太守，望勿受其觞。 
现代文：吴良跪说： 王望奸佞邪恶之人，欺太守，望勿受其觞。 
English: Wu Liang kneeled down and said, "The king expects a traitor and an evil person, and the emperor expects a traitor and an evil person, and the emperor expects him not to be a traitor."

古文：太守敛容而止。
现代文：太守敛容而止。
English: Stop being so defensive.

古文：宴罢，转吴良为功曹，吴良以进言太守获职为耻，终不肯前去拜谒。
现代文：宴罢，转吴良为功曹，吴良以进言太守获职为耻，终不肯前去拜谒。
English: After the banquet, Wu Liang was honored as a meritorious person, and Wu Liang was ashamed of being appointed as the chancellor. He finally refused to go to pay homage.

古文：这时骠骑将军东平王刘苍听到后把他招去，暂代为西曹。
现代文：这时骠骑将军东平王刘苍听到后把他招去，暂代为西曹。
English: At this time, after listening to the cavalry general Dongping Wang Liu Cang, he invited him to go and temporarily became the West Cao.

古文：刘苍对吴良甚相敬爱，上疏举荐吴良说： 臣听说为国所重要的，必在于得人；报恩的义行，莫大于举荐贤士。
现代文：刘苍对吴良甚相敬爱，上疏举荐吴良说： 臣听说为国所重要的，必在于得人；报恩的义行，莫大于举荐贤士。
English: Liu Cang had great respect for Wu Liang and recommended him to the imperial court. Liu Cang said to Wu Liang, "As a minister, I have heard that what is important for the country is to win people over. There is no greater act of kindness than to recommend a wise man.

古文：我看到我府西曹齐国吴良，资质敦厚坚固，公正廉洁，躬俭安贫，虽老而志节不衰；又治《尚书》，学通师法，经任博士，行为中正表有仪礼。
现代文：我看到我府西曹齐国吴良，资质敦厚坚固，公正廉洁，躬俭安贫，虽老而志节不衰；又治《尚书》，学通师法，经任博士，行为中正表有仪礼。
English: I saw Wu Liang, Cao Qiguo from the west of our prefecture. He was well qualified, solid, fair and incorruptible, thrifty and poverty-free. Although he was old, he never wavered in his dedication. He also read "Shang Shu," learned a lot about teaching and law, and received a doctorate. He behaved in a dignified manner with proper etiquette.

古文：宜备位宿卫，以辅圣政。
现代文：宜备位宿卫，以辅圣政。
English: It is appropriate to prepare the position of the night watchman to supplement the holy government.

古文：臣刘苍荣宠到顶了，忧思责任深大，私心羡慕公叔举荐家臣同升于朝之义气，而惧臧文知贤不进之罪，敢呈愚见，犯冒圣威。 
现代文：臣刘苍荣宠到顶了，忧思责任深大，私心羡慕公叔举荐家臣同升于朝之义气，而惧臧文知贤不进之罪，敢呈愚见，犯冒圣威。 
English: His vassal Liu Cang Rong's favor was at its peak, his worries and responsibilities were profound, he was selfishly envious of his uncle's recommendation that his vassal be elevated to the dignity of the emperor, and he was afraid of the sin of not advancing in knowledge and wisdom, daring to show foolishness and offend the dignity of the emperor.

古文：显宗以疏示公卿说 ：前以事见吴良，见他须发皓然，衣冠甚伟。
现代文：显宗以疏示公卿说 ：前以事见吴良，见他须发皓然，衣冠甚伟。
English: With a hint to the nobles, Emperor Xuanzong said, "I have seen Wu Liang before, and he is very handsome, and his clothes are very grand.

古文：荐贤才助国政，是宰相的职责，萧何举韩信，设坛而拜，不复考试。
现代文：荐贤才助国政，是宰相的职责，萧何举韩信，设坛而拜，不复考试。
English: It is the prime minister's duty to recommend talented people to assist in national politics. It is not enough to raise the Han letter, set up a platform and worship, and pass the examination.

古文：今以吴良为议郎。 
现代文：今以吴良为议郎。 
English: Wu Liang is now the chairman.

古文：永平中，帝驾近出，信阳侯阴就干扰禁卫，车府令徐匡钩阴就车，将驾车人收狱。
现代文：永平中，帝驾近出，信阳侯阴就干扰禁卫，车府令徐匡钩阴就车，将驾车人收狱。
English: In Yongping, when the emperor was about to leave, Xinyang Houyin interfered with the guards, and the chauffeur's office ordered Xu Kuanghuyin to get in the car and put the driver in jail.

古文：诏书谴责徐匡，徐匡就自缚请罪。
现代文：诏书谴责徐匡，徐匡就自缚请罪。
English: The edict condemned Xu Kuang, and Xu Kuang pleaded guilty to self-bondage.

古文：吴良上言说： 信阳侯阴就倚仗外戚权势，干犯车驾，不守人臣礼节，是大不敬。
现代文：吴良上言说： 信阳侯阴就倚仗外戚权势，干犯车驾，不守人臣礼节，是大不敬。
English: Wu Liang said: It is very disrespectful for Xinyang Houyin to rely on the power of a foreign relative, drive a car, and not observe the etiquette of a vassal.

古文：徐匡执法守正，反进了监狱，臣恐圣化会荒废下去了。 
现代文：徐匡执法守正，反进了监狱，臣恐圣化会荒废下去了。 
English: Xu Kuang abided by the law and went to prison, and the Sanctification Society fell into disrepair.

古文：帝虽赦免了徐匡，还是把吴良左转为即丘县长。
现代文：帝虽赦免了徐匡，还是把吴良左转为即丘县长。
English: Although the emperor pardoned Xu Kuang, he still turned Wu Liangzu into the head of Zhougu County.

古文：后迁司徒长史。
现代文：后迁司徒长史。
English: Later, the history of the relocation of the Shitucho began.

古文：每处理重大议案，总是引经据典，不求取得皇帝的宠爱，也不附合于时俗，以求获取时誉。
现代文：每处理重大议案，总是引经据典，不求取得皇帝的宠爱，也不附合于时俗，以求获取时誉。
English: Whenever dealing with major motions, always refer to the scriptures, do not seek to obtain the emperor's favor, and do not adhere to the customs of the time in order to obtain the reputation of the time.

古文：后因事免职。
现代文：后因事免职。
English: He was later relieved of his duties.

古文：复拜议郎，卒于官。
现代文：复拜议郎，卒于官。
English: Fubai Heiro, died in office.

古文：承宫传
现代文：◆承宫传
English: ◆The Tale of Prince Shogun

古文：承宫字少子，琅笽姑幕人。
现代文：承宫字少子，琅笽姑幕人。
English: Shogun's younger son, Shogun's aunt.

古文：少孤，八岁时为人牧猪。
现代文：少孤，八岁时为人牧猪。
English: He was orphaned at a young age and became a swineherd at the age of eight.

古文：乡里徐子盛，以《春秋经》授学生数百人，承宫休息时过其庐下，乐听经，因弃猪请留门下。
现代文：乡里徐子盛，以《春秋经》授学生数百人，承宫休息时过其庐下，乐听经，因弃猪请留门下。
English: In the township of Xu Zisheng, hundreds of students were taught the "Spring and Autumn Classic," and when Shogu was resting, he would pass under his armpit to listen to the classic. Please stay away from him because he abandoned pigs.

古文：为学生们拾柴薪。
现代文：为学生们拾柴薪。
English: Collecting firewood for the students.

古文：苦了数年，勤学不倦。
现代文：苦了数年，勤学不倦。
English: After suffering for several years, he never tired of studying hard.

古文：经典既明，就回家教授。
现代文：经典既明，就回家教授。
English: When the classics are clear, it's time to go home and teach.

古文：遭天下丧乱，就带学生们避乱汉中，后来与妻子到了蒙阴山，努力耕种。
现代文：遭天下丧乱，就带学生们避乱汉中，后来与妻子到了蒙阴山，努力耕种。
English: When the world was in turmoil, he took his students to escape the chaos in Hanzhong. Later, he and his wife went to Mengyin Mountain and worked hard at farming.

古文：禾黍将熟，有人说禾黍是他的，承宫不与他计较，让他推之而去，由此他出了名。
现代文：禾黍将熟，有人说禾黍是他的，承宫不与他计较，让他推之而去，由此他出了名。
English: He was said to be famous because he was said to be the one who had won the battle of Heru. The palace did not care about him and let him go, which made him famous.

古文：三府都要招他去，他都不应。
现代文：三府都要招他去，他都不应。
English: All three prefectures should invite him, but he should not go.

古文：永平中，征召他到公车，车驾临太学，召见承宫，拜为博士，迁左中郎将。
现代文：永平中，征召他到公车，车驾临太学，召见承宫，拜为博士，迁左中郎将。
English: In Yongping Middle School, he was summoned to the bus, drove to Taigaku, was summoned to the palace, was made a doctor, and was transferred to the left middle school.

古文：多次吐纳忠言，陈述政见，议论确切谨慎，朝臣都惧其节气，声名远播匈奴。
现代文：多次吐纳忠言，陈述政见，议论确切谨慎，朝臣都惧其节气，声名远播匈奴。
English: He repeatedly offered his loyal advice, stated his political views, and spoke precisely and cautiously. The courtiers were afraid of his temper, and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：当时北单于派遣使者要求见承宫，显宗令他善自整饬，承宫说： 夷狄眩惑于臣的名声，并不是要看我本人。
现代文：当时北单于派遣使者要求见承宫，显宗令他善自整饬，承宫说： 夷狄眩惑于臣的名声，并不是要看我本人。
English: At that time, Hokkien sent an envoy to ask to see Choeungguk, and Emperor Gyeongsang ordered him to rectify himself. Choeungguk said, "It is not for me to judge the reputation of the emperor.

古文：臣容貌丑陋，不可以示诸远方，应当选有威容的去见。 
现代文：臣容貌丑陋，不可以示诸远方，应当选有威容的去见。 
English: If a vassal is ugly, he should not be shown far away, but should be met with a dignified manner.

古文：帝就以大鸿胪魏应代他。
现代文：帝就以大鸿胪魏应代他。
English: The emperor replaced him with the Great Dragon Wei.

古文：永平十七年，拜侍中祭酒。
现代文：永平十七年，拜侍中祭酒。
English: In the 17th year of the Yongping era, the mid-year ritual wine was brewed.

古文：建初元年去世，肃宗表彰感叹，赐给墓地。
现代文：建初元年去世，肃宗表彰感叹，赐给墓地。
English: Jianzhong died in the first year of the year, Su Zong commended and lamented, and gave it to the cemetery.

古文：妻上书请求归葬乡里，再赐钱三十万。
现代文：妻上书请求归葬乡里，再赐钱三十万。
English: His wife sent a letter requesting that he be buried in his hometown and that he be given another 300,000 yuan.

古文：郑均传
现代文：◆郑均传
English: ◆Zheng Junquan

古文：郑均字仲虞，东平任城人。
现代文：郑均字仲虞，东平任城人。
English: Zheng Junzhe Zhongyu, Dongping Rencheng.

古文：少时喜好黄老之书。
现代文：少时喜好黄老之书。
English: When I was young, I liked Huang Lao's books.

古文：兄为县吏，接受别人礼物甚多，郑均多次谏阻，兄不听。
现代文：兄为县吏，接受别人礼物甚多，郑均多次谏阻，兄不听。
English: My brother is a county official and receives a lot of gifts from others. Zheng Jun resisted many times, but my brother would not listen.

古文：郑均就脱身为人打工，一年多，得到钱帛，回来交给其兄。
现代文：郑均就脱身为人打工，一年多，得到钱帛，回来交给其兄。
English: Zheng Jun worked as a laborer for more than a year, got money and returned to his brother.

古文：说： 物用完了可以再得，为官吏贪赃犯罪，一生都完了。 
现代文：说： 物用完了可以再得，为官吏贪赃犯罪，一生都完了。 
English: He said: If you run out of something, you can get it again. If you are a corrupt official, your life is over.

古文：兄感激其言，以后就廉洁奉公了。
现代文：兄感激其言，以后就廉洁奉公了。
English: My brother was grateful for his words, and from then on he served the public with integrity.

古文：郑均好义务实，养寡嫂孤儿，恩义礼貌备至。
现代文：郑均好义务实，养寡嫂孤儿，恩义礼貌备至。
English: Zheng Jun is good at fulfilling obligations, raising widows and orphans, and is polite and courteous.

古文：常称病留家，不应州郡征召。
现代文：常称病留家，不应州郡征召。
English: It is often said that sick people should stay at home and should not be called up by the state or county.

古文：郡守非要他去不可，使县令诈称将到他家，郑均即到郡守府，郡府最后还是没能让他屈服。
现代文：郡守非要他去不可，使县令诈称将到他家，郑均即到郡守府，郡府最后还是没能让他屈服。
English: The county governor had to force him to go, so that the county magistrate fraudulently said that he would go to his home, and Zheng Jun went to the county governor's office. In the end, the county government could not make him give in.

古文：郑均于是躲到濮阳作客去了。
现代文：郑均于是躲到濮阳作客去了。
English: Zheng Jun then hid in Shenyang as a guest.

古文：建初三年，司徒鲍昱招他，后举他直言，他没有到。
现代文：建初三年，司徒鲍昱招他，后举他直言，他没有到。
English: In the first three years of construction, he was invited by Stubai Baojun, but he did not come.

古文：六年，皇帝公车特征，再迁尚书，多次献纳忠言，肃宗很敬重他。
现代文：六年，皇帝公车特征，再迁尚书，多次献纳忠言，肃宗很敬重他。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor's official car was moved to Shangshu again, and he offered his loyal advice many times. Su Zong respected him very much.

古文：后来以病请求退休，拜为议郎，告归，因称病重，帝赐以衣冠。
现代文：后来以病请求退休，拜为议郎，告归，因称病重，帝赐以衣冠。
English: Later, he asked to retire due to illness, prayed for a mediator, returned home, and because he was seriously ill, the emperor gave him a crown.

古文：元和元年，诏书告庐江太守、东平相说： 议郎郑均，束修安贫，恭俭节整，前在机密，以病退休，守善贞固，黄发不怠。
现代文：元和元年，诏书告庐江太守、东平相说： 议郎郑均，束修安贫，恭俭节整，前在机密，以病退休，守善贞固，黄发不怠。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the year, the imperial edict told the governor of the Minjiang River and the East Pingxiang that: Zheng Jun, the leader of the council, was a disciplinarian, a man of peace and poverty, a man of frugality and thrift, a man who kept secrets, a man who retired due to illness, a man of virtue and chastity, and a man who did not neglect his hair.

古文：又前安邑令毛义，躬行谦让，从征辞病，纯洁之风，东州称仁。
现代文：又前安邑令毛义，躬行谦让，从征辞病，纯洁之风，东州称仁。
English: In the past, An'yupi was known for its piety, humility, modesty, and purity, and Dongzhou was known for its benevolence.

古文：《尚书》不是说 表彰那些有常德的人，是善政 。
现代文：《尚书》不是说 表彰那些有常德的人，是善政 。
English: "Shangshu" does not mean that it is good politics to commend those who have common virtues.

古文：宜赐郑均、毛义谷各千斛，常以八月长吏慰问，赐羊酒，以显此异行。 
现代文：宜赐郑均、毛义谷各千斛，常以八月长吏慰问，赐羊酒，以显此异行。 
English: It is appropriate to give a thousand baht each to Zhengjun and Mao Yigu, and often to the august officials for their condolences, and to give them sheep's wine, in order to show this heresy.

古文：第二年，帝东巡过任城，就亲临郑均家，命赐尚书禄以终其身，所以当时人称为 白衣尚书 。
现代文：第二年，帝东巡过任城，就亲临郑均家，命赐尚书禄以终其身，所以当时人称为 白衣尚书 。
English: In the second year, Emperor Dong inspected Rencheng and personally visited Zheng Jun's family and gave his life to Shang Shulu, so at that time he was called Bai Rong Shang Shu.

古文：永元中，在家去世。
现代文：永元中，在家去世。
English: Yongyuan junior high school, died at home.

古文：赵典传
现代文：◆赵典传
English: ◆ Zhao Dianchuan

古文：赵典字仲经，蜀郡成都人。
现代文：赵典字仲经，蜀郡成都人。
English: Zhao Sheng is a calligrapher from Chengdu, Shugu County.

古文：父赵戒，为太尉，桓帝立，以定策封厨亭侯。
现代文：父赵戒，为太尉，桓帝立，以定策封厨亭侯。
English: His father, Zhao Jie, was a captain of the imperial guard, and he had the power to decide on the succession to the throne.

古文：赵典年少时就专心实行隐约静俭，博学经书，弟子自远方来求教于他。
现代文：赵典年少时就专心实行隐约静俭，博学经书，弟子自远方来求教于他。
English: When he was young, Zhao Dian concentrated on practising vague modesty, learning scriptures, and disciples came from afar to learn from him.

古文：建和初，四府表荐，征拜为议郎，侍讲宫中，再迁为侍中。
现代文：建和初，四府表荐，征拜为议郎，侍讲宫中，再迁为侍中。
English: At the beginning of the Jianhe era, he was recommended by four prefectures, solicited as a negotiator, served as a palace lecturer, and then moved to be a chamberlain.

古文：时帝想广开鸿池，赵典谏道： 鸿池水面，已达百顷，还要增广挖深，这不是崇敬唐虞的约束自己，遵守孝文的爱护百姓哩。 
现代文：时帝想广开鸿池，赵典谏道： 鸿池水面，已达百顷，还要增广挖深，这不是崇敬唐虞的约束自己，遵守孝文的爱护百姓哩。 
English: When the emperor wanted to expand Honchi, Zhao Dianjun said: The water surface of Honchi has reached one hundred hectares, and it is necessary to increase the width and dig deeper. This is not to respect Tang Yu's self-restraint, to abide by filial piety and love the people.

古文：帝纳其言而止。
现代文：帝纳其言而止。
English: Dinah was speechless.

古文：父亲去世后，赵典袭封。
现代文：父亲去世后，赵典袭封。
English: After his father's death, Zhao Dian became emperor.

古文：出为弘农太守，转右扶风。
现代文：出为弘农太守，转右扶风。
English: He was appointed as Konodai no kami (governor of Kono Province) and turned to the right to support Fukei.

古文：公事去官，征拜城门校尉，转将作大匠，迁少府，又转为大鸿胪。
现代文：公事去官，征拜城门校尉，转将作大匠，迁少府，又转为大鸿胪。
English: He went to work, was recruited as a captain of the castle gate, was transferred to be a master craftsman, was transferred to a minor prefecture, and was transferred to a great giant.

古文：当时恩泽诸侯以无功受封，群臣不悦，但不敢提出意见，赵典独谏道： 无功而赏，劳者得不到奖励，上愧下辱，天象紊乱。
现代文：当时恩泽诸侯以无功受封，群臣不悦，但不敢提出意见，赵典独谏道： 无功而赏，劳者得不到奖励，上愧下辱，天象紊乱。
English: At that time, the princes of Enze were appointed without merit, the ministers were not pleased, but they did not dare to put forward their opinions. Zhao Dian said: Reward without merit, laborers do not get rewards, shame and humiliation, the sky is disordered.

古文：且高祖之誓，非功臣不封。
现代文：且高祖之誓，非功臣不封。
English: And according to the oath of the ancestors, if you are not a meritorious subject, you will not be given a title.

古文：宜对那些无功受封的都削免爵土，以存旧制。 
现代文：宜对那些无功受封的都削免爵土，以存旧制。 
English: In order to preserve the old system, it is appropriate to abolish the peerage for those who have been awarded it without merit.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：帝不从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：不久，转为太仆，迁太常。
现代文：不久，转为太仆，迁太常。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of eunuch.

古文：朝廷每有灾异疑议，常咨询于他。
现代文：朝廷每有灾异疑议，常咨询于他。
English: The imperial court often consulted him whenever they had any doubts.

古文：赵典据经正对，并无曲折隐晦。
现代文：赵典据经正对，并无曲折隐晦。
English: Zhao's theory is correct, and there are no hidden twists and turns.

古文：每得赏赐，常分给诸生中的贫者。
现代文：每得赏赐，常分给诸生中的贫者。
English: For every gift is given to the poor of this life.

古文：后来以谏争违背旨意，被免官就国。
现代文：后来以谏争违背旨意，被免官就国。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post for disobeying the will of the emperor.

古文：恰逢帝崩，当时规定藩国诸侯不得奔丧，赵典愤然说： 我从衣褐之中，致位上列。
现代文：恰逢帝崩，当时规定藩国诸侯不得奔丧，赵典愤然说： 我从衣褐之中，致位上列。
English: Coinciding with the demise of the emperor, when it was stipulated that the lords of the domain should not be mourned, Zhao Qian said indignantly: I have risen to the top from the ranks of the brown-robed.

古文：而且鹊鸟还能反哺报恩，何况是士子呢？ 
现代文：而且鹊鸟还能反哺报恩，何况是士子呢？ 
English: What's more, the ostrich can also return the favor, and what's more, what about the scholar?

古文：于是解下印绶符策付县，而驰马到京师。
现代文：于是解下印绶符策付县，而驰马到京师。
English: As a result, he unraveled the seal of Sezuke County and rode to Kyoto.

古文：州郡及大鸿胪都要捉拿他处以罪，而公卿百僚却表扬赵典有义气，上表奏请以租自赎，诏书批准。
现代文：州郡及大鸿胪都要捉拿他处以罪，而公卿百僚却表扬赵典有义气，上表奏请以租自赎，诏书批准。
English: The prefectures and counties as well as the great magnates all wanted to arrest and punish him, but the nobles and courtiers praised Zhao Sheng for his loyalty, and asked him to redeem himself by paying rent, which was approved by imperial edict.

古文：再迁长乐少府、卫尉。
现代文：再迁长乐少府、卫尉。
English: Relocated again to Chouraku Junior High School, and became a guard lieutenant.

古文：公卿又表奏赵典专心治学广识博闻，宜备位国师。
现代文：公卿又表奏赵典专心治学广识博闻，宜备位国师。
English: The Kugyong also said that Zhao Dian's concentration on the study of politics, general knowledge and erudition was exemplary, and it was appropriate for him to be appointed as a state teacher.

古文：恰病逝，使者吊唁。
现代文：恰病逝，使者吊唁。
English: Just died of illness, the messenger sent his condolences.

古文：窦太后复遣使兼赠印绶，谥号献侯。
现代文：窦太后复遣使兼赠印绶，谥号献侯。
English: Empress Dowager Dou sent an envoy and presented an imperial seal, and the imperial seal was dedicated.

