古文：张融周颙
现代文：张融，字思光，是吴郡吴人。
English: Zhang Rong, also known as Siguang, is a native of Wu County, Wuxi.

古文：张融，字思光，吴郡吴人也。祖祎，晋琅邪王国郎中令。
现代文：其祖父张祎，是晋琅邪王国的郎中令。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Ye, was the second-in-command of the evil kingdom of Jinxi.

古文：父畅，宋会稽太守。
现代文：父亲张畅，是宋会稽太守。
English: His father, Zhang Chang, was the Grand Chancellor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：融年弱冠，道士同郡陆脩静以白鹭羽麈尾扇遣融，曰： 此既异物，以奉异人。 
现代文：张融二十岁的时候，同郡的道士陆脩静把一柄白鹭羽毛驼尘尾的扇子赠给张融，说： 这既然是不同寻常的东西，就拿来送给非同寻常的人物。 
English: When Zhang Rong was 20 years old, Lu Yujing, a Taoist priest from the same county, gave Zhang Rong a fan with a white felt feather and a camel's dust tail, saying, "Since this is an unusual thing, it should be given to an unusual person."

古文：宋孝武闻融有早誉，解褐为新安王北中郎参军。
现代文：宋孝武听说张融早有声誉，赐官为新安王北中郎参军。
English: Song Xiaowu heard that Zhang Rong already had a good reputation and gave an official post to Xin'an King Beizhong Lang to join the army.

古文：孝武起新安寺，傣佐多儭钱帛，融独儭百钱。
现代文：孝武帝兴建新安寺，官僚们都大量施舍钱帛，惟独张融衹施舍了一百钱。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu was building Xin'an Temple, the bureaucrats all donated a large amount of money, but only Zhang Rongji donated one hundred yuan.

古文：帝曰： 融殊贫，当序以佳禄。 
现代文：皇上说： 张融太穷，应当给他优厚的俸禄。 
English: The emperor said: Zhang Rong is too poor, he should be given a generous salary.

古文：出为封溪令。
现代文：出任为封溪令。
English: He was appointed as the order of closing the creek.

古文：从叔永出后渚送之，曰： 似闻朝旨，汝寻当还。 
现代文：他的族叔张永把他送出后渚，蜕： 好像听说朝廷有旨意，你不久就会回来。 
English: After his uncle Zhang Yong sent him away, Zou: It seems that I have heard that the imperial court has a will, and you will be back soon.

古文：融曰： 不患不还，政恐还而复去。 
现代文：张融说： 我不愁不回来，正恐怕回来又要离开。 
English: Zhang Rong said, "I'm not afraid that I won't be able to come back, but I'm afraid that if I come back, I'll leave again."

古文：广越嶂嶮，獠贼执融，将杀食之，融神色不动，方作洛生咏，贼异之而不害也。
现代文：广州越州一带地势险峻，僚族强盗抓住张融，要把他杀掉吃了，逊女神色不改，还在吟咏辽生，强盗们感到奇怪而没有加害于他。
English: The terrain in the Yuezhou area of Guangzhou is very steep. The fellow bandits grabbed Zhang Rong and wanted to kill him and eat him. The bandit's face did not change and he was still alive. The bandits felt strange and did not harm him.

古文：浮海至交州，于海中作《海赋》曰：
现代文：渡海去交州，在海上作了一篇《海赋》：
English: Crossed the sea to go to Jiaozhou, and made a "Sea Fu" at sea:

古文：盖言之用也，情矣形乎，使天形寅内敷，情敷外寅者，言之业也。
现代文：大凡言语的作用，在于表达情感。能将内在之情铺叙显现出来的，正是言辞的功用。
English: The role of ordinary speech is to express emotions. It is the function of speech to be able to express the inner feelings.

古文：吾远职荒官，将海得地，行关入浪，宿渚经波，傅怀树观，长满朝夕，东西无里，南北如天，反覆悬乌，表里菟色。
现代文：我担任遥远荒僻之地的官职，行于海中陆上，从波浪中穿过，在小岛边安宿，种种景观充满心胸，早晚都常常可以见到，东西不知有多少里数，南北好像长天没有边际，海浪不停卷涌像空中飞动的群鸦，上下都是菟草那样的颜色。
English: I hold an official position in a remote and desolate land. I travel on land and in the sea, walk through the waves, and stay on the edge of a small island. I am filled with various landscapes, and I can often see them in the morning and evening. I don't know how many miles there are between things. The north and south seem to have no limit to the sky. The waves keep rolling in like a flock of crows flying in the air, and the top and bottom are the color of egrets.

古文：壮哉水之奇也，奇哉水之壮也。
现代文：这海水真是奇丽壮美。
English: The water is so beautiful.

古文：故古人以之颂其所见，吾问翰而赋之焉。当其济兴绝感，岂觉人在我外。木生之作，君自君矣。
现代文：所以古人用言辞颂赞他所看见的景象，我施用笔墨来为之作赋当它得以助兴尽情的时候，又怎会感觉别人和我不同，木生当年的作品，也就是写他自己的感受罢了。
English: Therefore, the ancients praised the scene he saw with words, I applied pen and ink to make it a gift, when it can help to enjoy it to the fullest, how can others feel different from me, the work of Muxeng that year, that is, to write his own feelings.

古文：分浑始地，判气初天，作成万物，为山为川。
现代文：破开浑沌才有大地，分离大气开始有天空。形成万物，有山岳有河流。
English: Breaking through the chaos, there is the earth. Separating the atmosphere, there is the sky. Forming all things, there are mountains and rivers.

古文：总川振会，导海飞门。
现代文：各条河流汇聚到一起，奔向海的入口。
English: The rivers come together at the entrance to the sea.

古文：尔其海之状也，之相也，则穷区没渚，万里藏岸，控会河、济，朝总江、汉。
现代文：说到那海的形象，地域广袤淹没海岛，遮隐海岸，使黄河、济水汇集而来，使长江、汉水聚合朝见。
English: When it comes to the image of the sea, the vastness of the region submerges the islands, obscures the coast, brings together the Yellow River and the Jishui River, and brings the Yangtze River and the Han River together.

古文：回混浩溃，巅倒发涛，浮天振远，灌日飞高。
现代文：回旋浩荡，浪涛汹涌。托起天空振动远方，浇灌太阳高高飞溅。
English: The swirl is huge, the waves are turbulent. The sky vibrates in the distance, and the sun splashes high.

古文：摐粗江撞则八纮摧聩，鼓怒则九纽折裂。
现代文：冲撞的力量可以摧毁大地的八个极点，发怒时可以使九个枢纽断裂。
English: The force of the collision can destroy the eight poles of the earth, and when angry, it can break the nine pivots.

古文：扌会于活长风以举波，漷音郭天地而为势。
现代文：掀动大风以卷起波浪，开拓天地而造成气势。
English: Whipping up high winds to roll up waves, opening up the world and creating momentum.

古文：氵蛰音蛰，泽于及涾音沓洽音合，来往相躭粗合。
现代文：聚合沸腾，来回相互推引。澎湃流转，把礁石击打出洞窟。
English: The agglomeration boils, pushing each other back and forth. The surging current knocks the reef out of the cave.

古文：濩长泺音乐氵门音门浑，涫于官氵和于和碨于磊雍，渤非勃淬音卒沦音仑澊音尊，兰浅垄緌于拱。
现代文：向西撞击太阳所入的虞渊曲处，向东振动太阳所出的汤谷水边。于是若木因此倒伏，扶桑也被折断成为碎片。滚滚奔涌，喧腾激荡。
English: To the west, it struck the bend of the Yueyuan, where the sun entered, and to the east, it vibrated the edge of the Tanggu, where the sun came out. As a result, young trees fell down, and the Fusang was also broken into pieces. Rolling, rushing, tumultuous.

古文：湍转则日月似惊，浪动而星河如覆。
现代文：湍急流转日月都似受惊，浪头翻动而星河也像被遮蔽。
English: The swift current around the sun and the moon seemed to be frightened, the waves were tossing and the Xinghe River seemed to be obscured.

古文：既烈太山与昆仑相压而共溃，又盛雷车震汉破天以折毂。
现代文：既气势威武好像泰山和昆仑相互重叠随即一同崩溃，又声势雄壮好像雷车滚过震颤天河打破天空随后车毂断绝。
English: Both powerful and mighty, like Mount Tai and Mount Kunlun overlapping each other and then collapsing together, and powerful, like a thunderbolt rolling through the trembling Tianhe, breaking the sky and then breaking the chariot.

古文：淃于员涟涴于卵濑于嫩，辗转纵横。扬珠起玉，流镜飞明。
现代文：水面迥旋荡漾，纵横起伏。浪花飞溅像扬洒珠玉，水波流动好似明镜闪耀光辉。
English: The surface of the water swirls and undulates, vertically and horizontally. The spray splashes like pearls, and the water waves flow like bright mirrors.

古文：是其回堆曲浦，欹关弱渚之形势也。
现代文：这是它盘桓于海口水湾，经过小洲小岛的情状。
English: This is it circling in Haikou Water Bay, passing by Xiaozhou Kojima.

古文：沙屿相接，洲岛相连。东西南北，如满于天。
现代文：沙洲岛屿相连相接。东西南北各方，都像占满了天际。
English: The sandbar islands are connected to each other. The east, west, south and north all seem to occupy the sky.

古文：梁禽楚兽，胡木汉草之所生焉。长风动路，深云暗道之所经焉。
现代文：梁国的禽乌楚国的走兽、胡地的树木、汉地的花草都生长于此；长风劲吹，厚云浮动，每次经过这襄都像有固定的道路。
English: The birds of Liang, the beasts of Wuchu, the trees of Hu, and the flowers and plants of Hanzhong all grow here. The long wind blows strongly, the thick clouds float, and every time you pass through it, it looks like there is a fixed road.

古文：茫沆于刚汴河，汩于突磈于磊漫无官桓。
现代文：高远深邃。朝阳住在它的东方，垂下的银河接在它的西边。浩渺无涯，迅疾难测。
English: High and far and deep. The morning sun lives in its east, the hanging Milky Way is connected to its west. The vastness is boundless, and the swiftness is unpredictable.

古文：旁踞委岳，横竦危峦。
现代文：屹立好像山岳，耸起好像高峰。
English: They stand out like mountains; they tower like pinnacles.

古文：重彰岌岌，攒岭聚立。
现代文：重叠的山嶂高耸，攒集的山岭矗立。
English: Overlapping mountain ridges soar high, and mountains that have been piled up stand tall.

古文：嵂吕兀窟音窟暐吕今嵚钦，架石相阴。
现代文：高峻陡险，像高高架起的石块相互遮蔽。
English: Steep and precipitous, like high-rise blocks of stone shielding each other.

古文：昚曈徒罪陀陀，横出旁入。
现代文：倾斜绵延，从旁侧涌动出入。
English: The slope stretches, and the water rushes in and out from the side.

古文：嵬嵬支罪磊磊，若相追而下及。
现代文：高低不平，似乎相互追逐而渐渐平息。
English: The ups and downs seem to chase each other and gradually subside.

古文：峰势纵横，岫形参错。
现代文：波峰纵横交错，浪头纷至沓来。
English: The crest of the wave criss-crosses, and the waves come crashing down.

古文：或如前而未进，乍非迁而已却。
现代文：或是像要上前却没有推进，忽又并非迁移而已经退却。
English: Or as if to advance but not advance, and suddenly not to migrate but to have retreated.

古文：天抗晖于东曲，日倒丽于西阿。
现代文：在东边天空与它相互辉映，在西边太阳倒映水中十分华丽。
English: In the east, the sky shines with it, and in the west, the reflection of the sun in the water is very gorgeous.

古文：岭集雪以怀镜，严照春而自华。
现代文：好像山峰聚集着白雪亮如怀藏明镜，山岩春光照耀而自然光艳。
English: It is as if the snow-capped peaks are shining like a crystal mirror, and the mountain rocks are shining with the light of spring and natural radiance.

古文：顿浪低波，矰苦降交苦交硄苦江，折岭挫峰，旂浪硠音郎掊，崩山相祇苦合万里蔼蔼，极路天外。
现代文：江洪喧响，冲击拍打着海岸。撞上山岳毁损山石，水流寒凉。回旋涌起，漫延积聚在险峻山石下。波浪起伏，澎澎桄桄，峰头起落，浪涛冲撞，像山岩崩塌。水势盛大长达万里，铺展到九天云外。
English: The river booms and crashes against the shore. It crashes into the mountains, destroying the rocks, and the water is cold. The swirls rise and accumulate under the steep rocks. The waves rise and fall, thunder and lightning, the peaks rise and fall, the waves crash, and collapse like mountain rocks. The water is huge and stretches for thousands of miles, spreading out to nine days.

古文：电战雷奔，倒地相磕。
现代文：像电光闪动雷车奔行，倾泻于地湍急无比。
English: Like a lightning flashing mine cart, it rushes and pours into the earth with unparalleled haste.

古文：兽门象逸，鱼路鲸奔。
现代文：像野兽中的大象在奔逃，鱼类中的巨鲸在腾游。
English: As the elephant among beasts runs, and the great whale among fishes swims.

古文：水遽龙魄，陆振虎魂。
现代文：水中可使龙心惊胆战，陆上可使虎丧魂失魄。
English: In the water, the dragon's heart can be frightened, and on land, the tiger can be lost.

古文：却瞻无后，向望何前。
现代文：回头顾视后面没有尽头，向前遥望前方也看不到边际。
English: There is no end to looking back, and there is no limit to looking ahead.

古文：长寻高眺，唯水与天。
现代文：长途寻视高高眺望，衹见水天相接。
English: A long-distance search for a high-altitude view reveals that water and sky are connected.

古文：若乃山横蹴浪，风倒摧波。
现代文：至于那山脉横断激起大浪，狂风倒吹摧动雄波。
English: As for the crossing of the mountain range, it provoked a big wave, and the strong wind blew in the opposite direction to break the male wave.

古文：磊若惊山竭岭以竦石，郁若飞烟奔云以振霞。
现代文：磊落好像惊险高绝的山岭耸立的石块，郁盛好像飞奔的烟云飘动的彩霞。
English: Resplendent like the towering stones of the breathtakingly high mountains, lush like the flying clouds of smoke and the fluttering colored haze.

古文：连瑶光而交采，接玉绳以通华。
现代文：连着瑶光星而光彩相交，接着玉绳星而光华流通。
English: Together with the brilliant star, the brilliance intersects, followed by the jade rope star, and the brilliance circulates.

古文：尔乎夜满深雾，昼密长云，高河灭景，万里无文。
现代文：有时它晚间弥满浓雾，白昼长云密集，银河没有了踪影，万里都没有色彩。
English: Sometimes it is full of thick fog in the evening, long clouds are dense in the daytime, the Milky Way has no trace, and there is no color at all.

古文：山门幽暖，岫户葐惸。
现代文：山口深暗温暖，山谷烟气氤氲。
English: Yamaguchi is dark and warm, and the valley is smoky.

古文：九天相掩，王地交氛。
现代文：九天相互掩盖，五地云气交流。
English: Nine days of mutual concealment and five days of cloud-to-cloud exchange.

古文：汪汪横横音皇，沆沆于刚浩浩音害。淬粗贵溃大人之表，泱于朗荡君子之外。
现代文：深广充溢，浩渺盛大。水流奔腾荡漾的气势，实在出于大人君子的想象之外。
English: Deep, wide and overflowing, vast and magnificent. The force of the rushing and rippling water is beyond the imagination of an adult gentleman.

古文：风沫相排，日闭云开。
现代文：风浪相互推挤，太阳隐去云朵散开。
English: The wind and waves push against each other, the sun disappears and the clouds scatter.

古文：浪散波合，岳起山隤。
现代文：波浪随合随散，峰头时起时落。
English: Waves come and go, peaks rise and fall.

古文：若乃漉沙构白，熬波出素。
现代文：至于淘滤海沙熬制出洁白的盐粒。
English: As for Amoy filtered sea sand boiled to produce white salt grains.

古文：积雪中春，飞霜暑路。
现代文：春季也似有积雪，暑天路上也凝起白霜。
English: It's like snow piling up in the middle of spring, and like frost appearing in the middle of a hot day.

古文：尔其奇名出录，诡物无书。
现代文：还有奇异的物品超出了书籍的载绿。
English: There are also bizarre items beyond the book's green cover.

古文：则何忄罗音罗鳙音容鳍音诣，飞音非魜音人果音果骨音滑。哄日吐霞，吞河漱月。
现代文：高高海岸上滋生群乌，横流的水波中养育鱼群。鳙鲳鲺卧蝶鲭等鱼类又哪算稀少。烘托天日放现云霞，并吞河流洗濯明月。
English: Blackbirds breed high up on the coast, and schools of fish are raised in the waves of the cross-flowing water. Fish such as the reclining butterfly cormorant are rare. The setting sun releases clouds and mists, engulfing the river and washing the bright moon.

古文：气开地震，声动天发。
现代文：气势使大地震动，声音使上天震颤。
English: The earthquake shook the earth, and the sound of the earthquake shook the heavens.

古文：喷洒哕于月噫于戒，流雨而扬云。
现代文：喷洒着浪花，好像播下雨点扬起云朵。
English: Sprinkled with spray, as if sowing raindrops to lift the clouds.

古文：乔壮脊，架岳而飞坟。
现代文：高头健背，好像架起的山岳飞动的高丘。
English: Tall and sturdy, like a flying mountain range.

古文：牴音挺动崩五山之势，瞷矣简睔矣焕七曜之文。蟕隽瑁蛑，绮贝绣螺。
现代文：跃动的气势像五岳崩塌，波光闪烁有日月五星的光华。灵龟背负着玳瑁，又有绮丽的贝壳海螺。
English: The momentum of the leap is like the collapse of the five mountains, the waves flashing with the brilliance of the sun, moon and five stars. The turtle is carrying a dragonfly, and there is a beautiful shell conch.

古文：玄珠互彩，绿紫相华。
现代文：黑色珍珠光彩相映，绿紫两色争相夺目。
English: Black pearls sparkle against each other, green and purple compete for attention.

古文：游风秋濑，泳景登春。
现代文：游乐于秋日的湍流之上，浮游于春天的美景之中。
English: Rejoice in the turbulence of autumn, float in the beauty of spring.

古文：伏鳞渍彩，升魵洗文。
现代文：沉潜的鱼儿色彩浸润水中，升起的鱼儿花纹格外清晰。
English: The colors of the submerged fish permeate the water, and the raised fish patterns are exceptionally clear.

古文：若乃春代秋绪，岁去冬归。柔风丽景，晴云积晖。
现代文：至于冬天归去，春日到来，微风轻柔景色秀丽，云空晴朗日光照耀。
English: As for the return of winter, spring has arrived, the breeze is gentle and the scenery is beautiful, the sky is clear and the sun is shining.

古文：起龙涂于灵步，翔螭道之神飞。
现代文：神龙在迷濛玄妙的云路上漫步，螭龙在天空优游飞翔。
English: The divine dragon walks on the mysterious cloud road, and the dragon flies in the sky.

古文：浮微云之如梦，落轻雨之依依。
现代文：微云浮动好像梦境，轻雨洒落似恋恋有情。
English: Tiny clouds float like a dream, light rain sprinkles like love.

古文：触巧涂而感云绀远，抵栾木以激扬。
现代文：踏上征途驶向远方，摇动船桨激起浪花。
English: Set out on a journey and sail into the distance, shaking the oars to stir up the waves.

古文：浪相礴傍各而起千状，波独涌乎惊万容。
现代文：风浪相互拍扦晴状万千，波涛遽然涌动形象变化难测。
English: The wind and waves beat against each other like a thousand suns, the waves suddenly surge, and the changes in the image are difficult to predict.

古文：蘋藻留映，荷芰提阴。
现代文：浮苹水藻留下影，菱荷举出叶荫。
English: The floating algae cast shadows, and the honeysuckle lifted the leaf shade.

古文：扶容曼彩，秀远华深。
现代文：芙蓉花色彩曼妙，香气清远光华深湛。
English: The color of hibiscus flowers is delicate, and the aroma is clear, far-reaching, and profound.

古文：明藕移玉，清莲代金。
现代文：明洁的白藕可以当成美玉。清新的莲花可以替代黄金。
English: A clear chalk can be used as a precious stone. A fresh lotus can be used as a substitute for gold.

古文：眄芬芳于遥渚，泛灼烁于长浔。
现代文：在遥遥的水边最适于观赏艳丽芬芳的花朵。船只聚集，舟楫交错。
English: The distant water's edge is the best place to see the bright, fragrant flowers. Boats gather, their oars criss-cross.

古文：浮舻杂轴，游舶交艘。
现代文：为饯别而设的帷帐酒席，高广连绵。
English: The curtain-draped bar, set up for the farewell, stretches far and wide.

古文：帷轩帐席，方远连高。入惊波而箭绝，振排天之雄飙。
现代文：一入激流顿时飞驶如箭，振起推移长空的强劲之风。
English: As soon as it entered the torrent, it immediately flew like an arrow, stirring up a strong wind that traveled across the sky.

古文：越汤谷以逐景，渡虞渊以追月。
现代文：越过汤谷而追赶太阳，渡过虞渊去追逐月亮。
English: Chasing the sun across the soup valley, chasing the moon across the Yuyuan.

古文：偏万里而无时，浃天地于挥忽。
现代文：行遍万里无须多时，遍及天地衹在瞬间。
English: It does not take much time to travel thousands of miles, and it is instantaneous to travel all over the world.

古文：雕隼飞而未半，鲲龙趠贪教而不逮。
现代文：雕隼等猛禽还飞不到它一半高，巨馄大龙跳跃起来也难以企及。
English: Birds of prey such as egrets can't fly more than half as high, and giant dragonflies can't jump as high.

古文：舟人未及复其喘，已周流宇宙之外矣。
现代文：船家尚没有经过一次呼吸，船只早已顺流周转行至天地之外了。
English: The boatman has not yet taken a breath, and the boat has already traveled downstream to the other side of the world.

古文：阴鸟阳禽，春毛秋羽。远翅风游，高翮云举。
现代文：春秋各季的种种禽乌，乘着风云高高飞翔。
English: Various birds of all seasons in spring and autumn fly high on the clouds.

古文：翔归栖去，连阴日路。
现代文：群鸟飞着归巢，连起来一路遮蔽着太阳。
English: The flocks of birds fly back to their nests, linking up to block the sun all the way.

古文：澜涨波渚，陶玄浴素。
现代文：浪潮涨起，淘洗着黑白之奥妙。
English: The tide is rising, washing away the mysteries of black and white.

古文：长纮四断，平表九绝。
现代文：四面天地间的大绳索都被折断，广阔平坦的九州也被隔绝。
English: The large ropes between heaven and earth on all four sides were broken, and the vast, flat Kyushu was cut off.

古文：雉翥成霞，鸿飞起雪。
现代文：雉鸟飞举幻成片片彩霞，鸿雁翱翔好像雪色纷纷。
English: Ostriches fly up to create the illusion of a beautiful sky, and wild geese soar like snowflakes.

古文：合声鸣侣，并翰翻群。
现代文：相互呼应呜叫伴侣，并连着翅膀群起群飞。
English: They call out to their partners in unison and fly in flocks with their wings attached.

古文：飞关溢绣，流浦照文。
现代文：行过关防流溢着华彩，经过渡口照映出美丽的花纹。
English: Passing through the sluice gate is full of splendor, and beautiful patterns are reflected through the ferry port.

古文：尔夫人微亮气，小白如淋。
现代文：假如人缺少豪爽的气概，旌旗也像被云气浸渍。
English: If a person lacks a heroic spirit, the national flag is also like being impregnated by clouds.

古文：凉空澄远，层汉无阴。
现代文：清凉的天空澄静高远，直见银河没有阴云。
English: The cool sky is clear and calm far away, and there are no clouds in the Milky Way.

古文：照天容于鮷渚，镜河色于魦浔。括盖余以进广，浸夏洲以洞深。
现代文：在锑纱出没的水边映照着天空和银河的形色，包容笼盖无余而增进它的广阔，浸润大洲而贯穿深处。
English: At the edge of the gauze-infested water, the shapes of the sky and the Milky Way are reflected, embracing the canopy and enhancing its vastness, infiltrating the continent and penetrating the depths.

古文：形每惊而义维静，迹有事而道无心。
现代文：形状往往惊扰多变而义旨沉静，周行运动不停而持有无心之道。
English: The shape is often disturbing and changeable, but the meaning is calm, and the circular movement is incessant and holds a mindless way.

古文：于是乎山海藏阴，云尘入岫。
现代文：于是山海藏蔽着阴气，云烟轻尘都卷入山洞。
English: As a result, mountains and seas hide the gloomy atmosphere, and clouds, smoke and light dust are all drawn into the cave.

古文：天英偏华，日色盈秀。
现代文：长天神气清美，日色秀丽无比。
English: Chang Tian's demeanor is beautiful, and her complexion is incomparably beautiful.

古文：则若士神中，琴高道外。
现代文：若士神游其中，琴高出入无迹。
English: The young man's mind wanders, the harp soars into the void.

古文：袖轻羽以衣风，逸玄裾于云带。
现代文：袖中怀藏着轻盈的羽毛而使衣服乘风而起，拖曳着黑色的衣襟随云朵飘动。
English: The light feathers hidden in the sleeves make the clothes rise with the wind, dragging the black lapels with the clouds.

古文：筵秋月于源潮，帐春霞于秀濑。
现代文：在海潮的源头就着秋月为宴，在秀丽的急流间以春霞作为帐幔。
English: At the source of the sea tide, the autumn moon is the feast, and the spring haze is the curtain between the beautiful rapids.

古文：晒蓬莱之灵岫，望方壶之妙阙。
现代文：阳光照射蓬莱仙岛上的灵秀山洞，方壶仙山上的奇妙高阙。
English: The sun shines on the Lingxiu Cave on the Penglai Fairy Island, and the strange stilts on the Fangyuan Fairy Mountain.

古文：树遏日以飞柯，岭回峰以蹴月。
现代文：大树枝条横举仿佛遏止明日，山岭峰峦环绕似要踩踏月亮。
English: The branches of large trees are held sideways as if to stop tomorrow, and the mountains and peaks surround the moon as if to trample it.

古文：空居无俗，素馆何尘。
现代文：空明的居处没有俗物，素洁的馆阁哪有微尘。
English: There is no vulgarity in the dwelling place of the empty and bright, and there is no dust in the clean pavilion.

古文：谷门风道，林路云真。
现代文：峡谷山是清风行经的道路，林间小路上白云自守真性。
English: The canyon mountain is the path of the wind, and the white clouds on the path between the woods are the self-preservation of truth.

古文：若乃幽崖邑于夹曌仓夹，隈隩之穷，骏波虎浪之气，激势之所不攻。有卉有木，为灌为丛。
现代文：至于那幽峭的海崖，山水弯曲的尽头，波浪的气势犹如奔马跃虎，激荡不已。有花草有树木，灌木丛生。
English: As for the steep sea cliff, at the end of the curvature of the landscape, the wave momentum is like a running tiger, agitating endlessly. There are flowers, trees, and shrubs.

古文：路糅网杂，结叶相笼。
现代文：藤蔓交织成网，树叶交接相互覆盖。
English: The vines are interwoven into a web, the leaves overlap and cover each other.

古文：通云交拂，连韵共风。
现代文：行云流动相互轻拂，风声和谐好似乐音。
English: The movement of the clouds gently brushes each other, and the harmony of the wind sounds like music.

古文：荡洲礉去角岸，而千里若崩；冲崖沃岛，其万国如战。
现代文：激荡沙洲冲撞角岸，气势好像千里之内都在崩塌，拍打山崖激荡海岛，又好像万国都在交战。
English: Stirring sandbanks crash into the promontory, the momentum seems to collapse within a thousand miles, beating cliffs and islands, and it seems that all nations are at war.

古文：振骏气以摆雷，飞雄光以倒电。
现代文：振动骏伟之气强过轰雷，飞起耀眼雄光胜似闪电。
English: The mighty vibration is stronger than thunder, and the dazzling light is more powerful than lightning.

古文：若夫增云不气，流风敛声。
现代文：到那层云静止无变，风声开始收敛的日子。
English: To the day when the clouds stand still and the wind begins to die down.

古文：澜文复动，波色还惊。
现代文：海面波澜轻摇，水色仍是动荡不定。
English: The waves of the sea are lightly shaking, and the water color is still unstable.

古文：明月何远，沙里分星。
现代文：明亮的月儿不再觉得遥远，天上星星也映在水底沙间。
English: The bright moon no longer feels far away, and the stars in the sky are also reflected in the sand under the water.

古文：至其积珍全远，架宝谕深。
现代文：而海中繁多的珍宝却更加深远难及。
English: But the many treasures in the sea are even more profound and difficult to reach.

古文：琼池玉壑，珠岫岑。
现代文：琼玉般的池塘沟壑，珠玑般的山洞山岭。
English: The ponds and gullies are like jewels, and the caves and mountains are like pearls.

古文：合日开夜，舒月解阴。
现代文：日光隐去夜色降临，月光放明驱除了阴翳。
English: Daylight fades away as night falls, and moonlight shines brightly to drive away the gloom.

古文：珊瑚开缋，琉璃竦华。
现代文：珊瑚绽放出五彩，琉璃闪烁着光华。
English: The corals are in full bloom, and the glaze is sparkling.

古文：丹文镜色，杂照冰霞。
现代文：鲜红的花纹是水色如镜映照出美丽的海霞。
English: The bright red pattern is the light blue like a mirror reflecting the beautiful sea mist.

古文：洪洪溃溃，浴干日月。
现代文：洪大浩荡，洗浴太阳和月亮。
English: Hongda swells, bathing the sun and moon.

古文：淹汉星墟，渗河天界。
现代文：淹没天河与星座。海风没有由来而自然生成。
English: Inundate the Milky Way and the constellations. The sea breeze has no origin and is naturally generated.

古文：风何本而自生，云无从而空灭。
现代文：高云不必跟从着什么而在空中消灭。
English: Gao Yun doesn't have to follow anything and vanish in the air.

古文：笼丽色以拂烟，镜悬晖以照雪。
现代文：绚丽的色彩氤氲朦胧像轻烟拂动，反射的明亮曰光好似照映着白雪十分灿烂。
English: Brilliant colors dimly flickered like light smoke, and the reflected bright sunlight seemed to reflect the white snow very brilliantly.

古文：尔乃方员去我，混然落情。
现代文：它没有执着于我的方圆尺度，混沌忘情。
English: It did not cling to my square-circle scale, chaotic and forgetful.

古文：气暄而浊，化静自清。
现代文：气氛喧嚣因而浑浊，大化宁静自然清明。
English: The atmosphere is tumultuous and therefore turbid, and naturally clear and tranquil.

古文：心无终故不滞，志不败而无成。
现代文：心思没有终结所以毫不凝滞，志向坚定不移而不追求所成。
English: There is no end to the mind, so there is no stagnation, the ambition is unswerving and does not pursue what has been achieved.

古文：既覆舟而载舟，固以死而以生。
现代文：既能使船只倾覆也能使之运行，固然有死灭也有生机。
English: It can make a ship capsize or make it sail, but there is death and there is life.

古文：弘刍狗于人兽，导至本以充形。
现代文：弘法平等同样看待草狗和人兽，把万千表象导向最根本的大道。
English: The propagation of the Dharma treats the grass dog and man and beast equally, and directs the thousands of representations to the most fundamental avenue.

古文：虽万物之日用，谅何纬其何经。
现代文：虽然万物天天显现劳作，又怎么知道哪是经哪是纬。
English: Although all things appear and work every day, how can we know which is the sun and which is the moon?

古文：道湛天初，机茂形外。
现代文：大道深湛天理初朴，机微众多表现在外。
English: The thoroughfare is profound, the principles are simple, and many subtleties are manifested.

古文：亡有所以而有，非胶有于生末。
现代文：无所谓有所以成为有，并不是胶着于有的发生。
English: It doesn't matter how something came to be, it's not glued to the occurrence of something.

古文：亡无所以而无，信无心以入太。
现代文：无所谓无所以成为无，秉持无心而进入太一之道。
English: It doesn't matter what the reason is for becoming nothing, uphold no-mind and enter the way of Taichi.

古文：不动动是使山岳相崩，不声声故能天地交泰。
现代文：不动的运动才能使山岳崩毁，不出声的声音所以能使天地安泰。
English: Only motion without movement can cause mountains to collapse, and only silent sound can make heaven and earth safe.

古文：行藏虚于用舍，应感亮于圆会。
现代文：用之则行，舍之则藏，随世而化不必坐实，感应天地自然觉悟通达。
English: To use is to do, to give up is to hide, to adapt to the world is not to be rigid, to sense the world is to be naturally enlightened.

古文：仁者见之谓之仁，达者见之谓之达。
现代文：仁者看见它说是仁爱，达者看见它也说是通达。
English: The benevolent see it as benevolence, the gifted see it as attainment.

古文：咶者几于上善，吾信哉其为大矣。
现代文：感叹它到达了至上的完善，我坚信它在世间为大。
English: Lamenting that it has reached the supreme perfection, I firmly believe that it is great in the world.

古文：融文辞诡激，独与众异。
现代文：张融的文辞诡异偏激，和众人大不相同。
English: Zhang Rong's words are strange and extreme, and very different from everyone else's.

古文：后还京师，以示镇军将军顾觊之，觊之曰： 卿此赋实超玄虚，但恨不道盐耳。 
现代文：后来回到京都，拿去给镇军将军顾觊之看，顾觊之说： 你这篇赋实在超出扬雄和司马相如，衹可惜没有提到海盐一事。 
English: Later, when he returned to Kyoto, he showed it to the general of the town army, Gu Shizhong. Gu Shizhong said, "This article of yours really surpasses Yang Xiong and is similar to Sima. Unfortunately, you didn't mention the sea salt."

古文：融即求笔注之曰： 漉沙构白，熬波出素。
现代文：张融立即提笔加上： 粗糙的沙砾中形成白盐，煎熬海水便可出产。
English: Zhang Rong immediately picked up a pen and added: White salt is formed in coarse gravel, and sea water can be produced by boiling.

古文：积雪中春，飞霜暑路。 
现代文：犹如仲春的皑皑积雪，又似暑天道中寒霜飞现。 
English: It's like snow piling up in the middle of spring, and like frost appearing in the middle of a hot day.

古文：此四句，后所足也。
现代文：这四句是后来加的。
English: These four sentences were added later.

古文：觊之与融兄有恩好，觊之卒，融身负坟土。
现代文：顾觊之和张融的哥哥友好，他死的时候，张融亲自为他背土添坟。
English: Gu Xizhi and Zhang Rong's brother were very close. After Gu Xizhi's death, Zhang Rong dug his own grave.

古文：在南与交止太守卞展有旧，展于岭南为人所杀，融挺身奔赴。
现代文：在南方时舆交耻太守卞展有交情，卞展在岭南被人杀害，张融挺身前去赴丧。
English: When he was in the south, Zhang Rong, the Shidai Shou, had a friendship with Gong Zhan. When Gong Zhan was killed in Lingnan, Zhang Rong stepped forward to go to the funeral.

古文：举秀才，对策中第，为尚书殿中郎，不就，为仪曹郎。
现代文：举为秀才，在朝廷对策中选，任命为尚书殿中郎，没有就任，改做仪曹郎。
English: Raised as a brilliant scholar, he was selected in the imperial court's countermeasures and appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household, but he did not take office and was changed to the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：泰始五年，明帝取荆、郢、湘、雍四州射手，叛者斩亡身及家长者，家口没奚官。
现代文：泰始五年，明帝收取荆、郢、湘、雍四州的射手，凡是反叛的要杀掉逃跑者和他的长辈，家属都没入官府。
English: In the first five years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Ming collected archers from the four prefectures of Jing, Min, Hunan, and Yong. Anyone who rebelled was to kill the escapee and his elders, and his family members were not to enter government offices.

古文：元徽初，郢州射手有叛者，融议家人家长罪所不及，亡身刑五年。
现代文：元徽初年，郢州有叛逃的射手，张融议政提出家属家长与此罪无关，祇应叛处逃跑者五年的刑罚。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a defected archer in Zhangzhou. Zhang Rong Erzheng proposed that family members and parents had nothing to do with this crime, and only the five-year sentence should be imposed on the defector.

古文：寻请假奔叔父丧，道中罚干钱敬道鞭杖五十，寄系延陵狱。
现代文：不久请假为他的叔父奔丧，路上处罚他的随从钱敬道鞭杖五十，送往延陵狱处置。
English: Soon he asked for leave to grieve for his uncle. On the way, he was punished with 50 strokes of the cane and sent to Yanling Prison.

古文：大明五年制，二品清官行僮干杖，不得出十。
现代文：大明五年时的制度规定，二品清官的僮仆受杖刑不得超过十下。
English: According to the imperial edict in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, officials of the second grade with simple political affairs should not beat their servants more than ten times.

古文：为左丞孙缅所奏，免官。
现代文：被左丞琢缅奏知此事，被免去官职。
English: He was made aware of the matter by Zuojo Takumen and was removed from his post.

古文：寻复位，摄祠、仓部二曹。
现代文：不久官复原位，管理祠、仓部两个部门。
English: The post was soon restored to its original position, and the administration of the shrine and the storeroom were split into two departments.

古文：领军刘勔力战死，祠曹议 上应哭勔不 ，融议 宜哭 。
现代文：领军刘劻战死，祠曹计议 皇上是否应该哭悼刘劻 ，张融认为 宜哭 。
English: When Liu Bei, the leader of the army, died in battle, the ancestor Cao Zhe deliberated whether the emperor should weep and mourn Liu Bei. Zhang Rong thought it was appropriate to cry.

古文：于是始举哀。
现代文：于是才为其举哀。
English: That's when the outpouring of grief began.

古文：仓曹又以 正月俗人所忌，太仓为可开不 ，融议 不宜拘束小忌 。
现代文：仓曹又议论 正月开仓是一般人的忌讳，是否要开太仓 ，张融以为 不应该受这种小忌讳的拘束 。
English: Cang Cao also discussed whether to open a warehouse in the first month, which is a taboo for the average person, or whether to open a warehouse, Zhang Rong thought that he should not be bound by this small taboo.

古文：寻兼掌正厨。融见宰杀，回车径去，自表解职。
现代文：不久兼任掌管正厨，张融看见宰杀牲畜，径自乘车回去，自己上书请求解职。
English: Soon he was also in charge of the head chef. When Zhang Rong saw the slaughter of livestock, he went back by car and wrote a letter to request his dismissal.

古文：为安成王抚军仓曹参军，转南阳王友。
现代文：做了安成王的抚军仓曹参军，转任南阳王府友。
English: Cang Cao, who had served as a tutor to King Ancheng, joined the army and was transferred to the post of Nanyang Wangfujing.

古文：融父畅先为丞相长史，义宣事难，畅为王玄谟所录，将杀之。
现代文：张融的父亲张畅早先是丞相畏史，义宣之难的时候，张融曾被王玄谟逮捕，要处死刑。
English: Zhang Rong's father, Zhang Chang, was once a feared minister. During the time of Yixuan's difficulties, Zhang Rong was arrested by Wang Xuanmu and sentenced to death.

古文：玄谟子瞻为南阳王前军长史，融启求去官，不许。
现代文：现在塞谌之子王堕做了南阳王前军长史，垩邀就请求辞去官职，没有被允许。
English: Now, Sai Ye's son, Wang Po, has become the former military commander of Nanyang. He was invited to resign from his post, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：融家贫愿禄，初与从叔征北将军永书曰： 融昔称幼学，早训家风，虽则不敏，率以成性。
现代文：张融家裹很穷想要求取俸禄，起初写信给他的族叔征北将军张永说： 我自幼间学，很早得到家风的训导，虽然不算太聪明，大概也不失本性。
English: Zhang Rong Jia Wai was very poor and wanted to ask for a salary. At first, he wrote to his uncle, the Northern General Zhang Yong, saying: I have been studying since I was a child. I was taught the family style very early. Although I am not too smart, I probably do not lose my nature.

古文：布衣苇席，弱年所安；箪食瓢饮，不觉不乐。
现代文：从小就安于服用粗布衣衫草编篾席，对简单粗陋的饮食，也从未感到不满足。
English: From a young age, he was content to take the coarse cloth and straw-woven tablecloth, and he never felt dissatisfied with the simple and crude diet.

古文：但世业清贫，民生多待，榛栗枣脩，女贽既长，束帛禽鸟，男礼已大。
现代文：衹是世代都很清贫，生活所需难以安排，女儿长大，要预备榛栗一类礼品，儿子成年也要准备帛绢禽鸟等礼物。
English: In general, the generations are very poor, and it is difficult to arrange the necessities of life. As daughters grow up, they should prepare gifts such as chestnuts, and adult sons should also prepare gifts such as ostriches and birds.

古文：勉身就官，十年七仕，不欲代耕，何至此事。
现代文：勉强进身为官，十年中变动了七次职务，不是想要求取生计，又何至于此呢?
English: Since I diligently worked as an official, I was transferred seven times in ten years, not to replace farmland, how did it come to such a situation?

古文：昔求三吴一丞，虽属舛错；今闻南康缺守，愿得为之。
现代文：以前请求做三吴的一个佐丞，虽然是弄错了。这次听说南康郡守有缺，很想得到这机会。
English: In the past, I asked to be a Sasho in Samghou, although I made a mistake. This time, I heard that there was a shortage of guards in Nankang County, and I really wanted to get this opportunity.

古文：融不知阶级，阶级亦可不知，融政以求丞不得，所以求郡，求郡不得，亦可复求丞。 
现代文：我不明白等级阶次，也许对这个不懂也行吧，我正是没有请到佐丞一职，才来申请郡守，如果郡守没得做，也可以再求做佐丞。 
English: I don't understand the rank order, maybe it's okay if I don't understand this. I didn't apply for the position of county governor until I was invited to the position of Sajo. If I don't have to be county governor, I can also apply to be Sajo.

古文：又与吏部尚书王僧虔书曰： 融，天地之逸民也。
现代文：又给吏部尚书王僧虔写信说： 我是天地间放逸的一个老百姓。
English: He also wrote a letter to Shangshu Wangxiangqian, the head of the personnel department, saying, "I am an ordinary citizen who is at ease in heaven and earth.

古文：进不辨贵，退不知贱，兀然造化，忽如草木。
现代文：进不懂得辨别贵胄，退不知道分别贫贱，处在造化之中，平生如草木一样转眼即逝。
English: Those who go in do not know how to distinguish between the rich and the poor, and those who go out do not know the difference between the rich and the poor. They are in the midst of creation, and their lives are fleeting like grass and trees.

古文：实以家贫累积，孤寡伤心，八侄俱孤，二弟颇弱，抚之而感，古人以悲。
现代文：实在是因为家中贫困不堪，孤儿寡母都十分伤心，八个侄子没有父亲，两个弟弟年纪还小，对着他们深感惭愧，也非常令人悲悯。
English: It's really because of the poverty at home, the orphans and widows are very sad, eight nephews have no father, two younger brothers are still young, I feel deeply ashamed of them, and it's also very pitiful.

古文：岂能山海陋禄，申融情累。
现代文：能不能赐予我一点微薄俸禄，使我不负家累。
English: Can you give me a small salary so that I can support my family?

古文：阮籍爱东平土风，融亦欣晋平闲外。 
现代文：阮籍喜爱束平的风土人情，我也欣羡晋平一地的悠闲。 
English: Nguyn Quc likes the local style of Dongping, and Zhang Rong also appreciates the culture of Jinping.

古文：时议以融非治民才，竟不果。
现代文：当时议论以为张融没有治理百姓的才干，最终没有得到官位。
English: At that time, it was rumored that Zhang Rong did not have the ability to govern the people, and ultimately did not get an official position.

古文：辟太祖太傅掾，历骠骑豫章王司空谘议参军，迁中书郎，非所好，乞为中散大夫，不许。
现代文：征召为太祖太傅掾，历任骠骑豫章王司空谘议参军，迁中书郎，都不是他喜欢做的事，请求为中散大夫，没得到允许。
English: He did not like to be conscripted as the great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great

古文：融风止诡越，坐常危膝，行则曳步，翘身仰首，意制甚多。
现代文：张融言行举止诡异不同寻常，坐着常把膝部耸起来，走路则拖着步子，翘着身体昂着头，很是做作。
English: Zhang Rong said and behaved strangely and unusually, often sitting with his knees up, and walking with a shuffling gait, head cocked and head held high. It was very contrived.

古文：随例同行，常稽迟不进。
现代文：跟着大家一块走，经常延迟处在后面。
English: Everyone went along as usual, and he often hesitated.

古文：太祖素奇爱融，为太尉时，时与融款接，见融常笑曰： 此人不可无一，不可有二。 
现代文：太祖一向很珍视喜爱张融，当初做太尉的时候，常常跟他来往，看见张融就笑着说： 这样的人不能没有，也不能有两个。 
English: The great-grandfather had always treasured and loved Zhang Rong. When he was first lieutenant, he often visited him. When he saw Zhang Rong, he smiled and said, "You can't have one person like this, and you can't have two."

古文：即位后，手诏赐融衣曰： 见卿衣服粗故，诚乃素怀有本；交尔蓝缕，亦亏朝望。
现代文：即位以后，亲自下诏书赐给他衣服，说： 看见你穿的衣服破旧，实在是心怀清白，但你衣衫褴褛，有失朝廷观瞻。
English: After he ascended the throne, he personally issued an imperial edict to give him new clothes, saying, "Seeing your worn-out clothes, it is true that you have a pure heart, but your ragged clothes are a loss to the court.

古文：今送一通故衣，意谓虽故，乃胜新也。
现代文：这裹送一件旧衣服给你，觉得衣服虽是旧的，心意却胜过新的。
English: Today I'm giving you an old dress. I think old clothes are better than new ones.

古文：是吾所著，已令裁减称卿之体。并履一量。 
现代文：本来是我穿的，已经让人照你的身材改好了。再送鞋子一双。 
English: Originally I wore it, but someone had it altered to fit your figure. I'll send you another pair of shoes.

古文：融与吏部尚书何戢善，往诣戢，误通尚书刘澄。
现代文：张融和吏部尚书何戢很好，去看望何戢，错通报给了尚书刘澄。
English: Zhang Rong mistakenly went to visit He Zhen, but went to visit Liu Cheng instead.

古文：融下车入门，乃曰： 非是。 
现代文：张融下车进门，才说： 不对。 
English: Zhang Rong got off the bus and walked through the door, only to say: "That's not right.

古文：至户外，望澄，又曰： 非是。 
现代文：到了门口，看见刘澄，又说： 不对。 
English: When he got to the door, he saw Liu Cheng and said, "That's not right.

古文：既造席，视澄曰： 都自非是。 
现代文：等到了席上，看着刘澄说： 全都不对。 
English: When he got to the table, he looked at Liu Cheng and said, "This is all wrong.

古文：乃去。
现代文：就走掉了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：其为异如此。
现代文：他的行为不同常人竟到了这种地步。
English: His behaviour is out of the ordinary to such an extent.

古文：又为长沙王镇军、竟陵王征北谘议，并领记室，司徒从事中郎。
现代文：又做遇长沙王镇军、竟陵王征北谘议，并领记室参军，司徒从事中郎。
English: He also served as an adviser to the Changsha Wang Zhen Army and the Jingling Wang Zhengbei Army, and joined the army after receiving a letter of commendation, while Sitoru served as a middle-ranking officer.

古文：永明二年，总明观讲，敕朝臣集听。
现代文：永明二年，总明观讲经，皇帝敕令朝臣都集合听讲。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, a sermon was held at the General Ming Court, and courtiers were ordered to attend.

古文：融扶入就榻，私索酒饮之，难问既毕，乃长叹曰： 呜呼！
现代文：张融扶着侍从走去坐上坐榻，私自要酒来喝，等闲难完了，就长叹一声说： 唉!
English: Zhang Rong helped the attendant to go and sit on the couch. I asked for some wine to drink. When the trouble was over, he said with a long sigh: Alas!

古文：仲尼独何人哉！ 
现代文：孔仲尼是什么人呀! 
English: What kind of person is Kongzhongni!

古文：为御史中丞到捴所奏，免官，寻复。
现代文：被御史中丞至岖奏知皇上，免去了官职，不久又复职了。
English: He was dismissed from his official position by the Emperor, and was reinstated soon after.

古文：融形貌短丑，精神清澈。
现代文：强融长得短小丑陋，精神却很清明。
English: He is short and ugly, but his spirit is very clear.

古文：王敬则见融革带垂宽，殆将至骼，谓之曰： 革带太急。 
现代文：王敬则看见他的皮带垂了下来，都快要到髀骨了，对他说： 把带子紧一紧 。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, saw that his belt was hanging down, almost reaching his shin, and said to him, "Tighten the belt tightly."

古文：融曰： 既非步吏，急带何为？ 
现代文：张融说： 我又不是走路的小吏，紧它干什么? 
English: Zhang Rong said, "I'm not a petty official walking around. What's the point of tightening it?

古文：融假东出，世祖问融住在何处？
现代文：张融请假去东方，世祖问他住在什么地方?
English: Zhang Rong asked for leave to go to the East. The ancestor asked him where he lived.

古文：融答曰： 臣陆处无屋，舟居非水。 
现代文：张融回答说： 我住在陆地上却没有屋子，住在船裹但不在水中。 
English: Zhang Rong replied, "I live on land but don't have a house, and I live in a boat but not in the water.

古文：后日上以问融从兄绪，绪曰： 融近东出，未有居止，权牵小船于岸上住。 
现代文：后来皇上问他的族兄张绪，他说： 最近张融东出京城，没有住的地方，暂且拉了一只小船，住在岸上。 
English: Later, the emperor asked his elder brother Zhang Xu. He said, "Recently, Zhang Rongdong left Beijing. He had no place to live, so he temporarily pulled a small boat and lived on the shore.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上放声大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：虏中闻融名，上使融接北使李道固，就席，道固顾之而言曰： 张融是宋彭城长史张畅子不？ 
现代文：北方少数民族听说了张融的名字，皇上派张融接待他们的来使李道固，入席后，李道固看着他说： 张融是宋彭城长史张畅的儿子吗? 
English: The northern ethnic minorities heard the name of Zhang Rong. The emperor sent Zhang Rong to receive them to make Li Daogu. After taking his seat, Li Daogu looked at him and said: Is Zhang Rong the son of Zhang Chang, the mayor of Song Pengcheng?

古文：融嚬蹙久之，曰： 先君不幸，名达六夷。 
现代文：张融皱了很久的眉，说： 先父很不幸，名字传到六夷地方去丫。 
English: Zhang Rong frowned tightly and grieved for a long time before saying: "Unfortunately, my father's name has spread to Liushi.

古文：豫章王大会宾僚，融食炙始行毕，行炙人便去，融欲求盐蒜，口终不言，方摇食指，半日乃息。
现代文：豫章王为群臣大设宴筵，张融吃烤肉才吃完，烤肉的人就走了，张融想要盐和大蒜，嘴裹却始终不说，衹是摇着他的食指，老半天才停。
English: King Yuanzhang held a grand banquet for his courtiers. Zhang Rong only finished eating the grilled meat when the griller left. Zhang Rong wanted salt and garlic, but he never said anything. He just waggled his index finger and didn't stop for a long time.

古文：出入朝廷皆拭目惊观之。
现代文：他出入朝廷的时候总是擦着眼睛很惊讶地看着。
English: He was always wiping his eyes and looking surprised when he came in and out of court.

古文：八年，朝臣贺众瑞公事，融扶入拜起，复为有司所奏，见原。
现代文：丛蛆八年，朝廷大臣庆贺各种祥瑞之事，逊自让人扶着行礼，再次被有关官员上奏违礼，得到原谅。
English: Eight years later, the Minister of the Imperial Court celebrated various auspicious events, but did not allow himself to make a bow, and was once again reprimanded by the relevant officials, and was forgiven.

古文：迁司徒右长史。
现代文：迁为司徒右长史。
English: Xiao Jinsheng is the long history of Stou.

古文：竟陵张欣时为诸暨令，坐罪当死。
现代文：竟陵张欣是诸暨县令，犯了罪要被处死。
English: After all, Zhang Xin is a Zhuji County magistrate, and if he commits a crime, he will be executed.

古文：欣时父兴世宋世讨南谯王义宣，官军欲杀融父畅，兴世以袍覆畅而坐之，以此得免。
现代文：张欣的父亲兴世在宋时征讨南谯王义宣，官军要杀迩自的父亲畅，张兴世用袍子罩住他并坐在上面，因此得以免死。
English: Zhang Xin's father, Xing Shiyi, was in the Song Dynasty when he fought against the Southern Wei king, Yixuan. The government army wanted to kill Zhang Xing Shiyi's father, Chang. Zhang Xing Shiyi covered him with a robe and sat on top of him, so he was able to avoid death.

古文：兴世卒，融著高履负土成坟。
现代文：张兴世死时，张融穿着高底鞋为他背土成坟。
English: When Zhang Xing died, Zhang Rong wore high-heeled shoes to carry the soil to his grave.

古文：至是融启竟陵王子良，乞代欣时死。
现代文：这时张融便给竟陵王子良上疏，请求替亟欣时去死。
English: At this time, Zhang Rong gave the crown prince a good scolding and asked him to die in place of Erxin.

古文：子良答曰： 此乃是长史美事，恐朝有常典，不得如长史所怀。 
现代文：子良回答说： 这是长史的美德，衹怕朝廷有恒定的典章制度，不能遂你的心愿。 
English: Xiao Ziliang replied: This was originally a beautiful thing in the long history. I am afraid that the imperial court has fixed laws and cannot do as the long history thought.

古文：迁黄门郎，太子中庶子，司徒左长史。
现代文：迁黄门郎，太子中庶子。司徒左长史。
English: Transferred to Hwang Mun-ro, the Prince's younger illegitimate son, and Sido Sakanaga.

古文：融有孝义，忌月三旬不听乐，事嫂甚谨。
现代文：张融很讲孝义，在父母的忌月裹三旬都不听音乐，平时事奉寡嫂很恭谨。
English: Zhang Rong has the virtue of filial piety. In the month of his father's death, he did not listen to music for three months. He served his sister-in-law very respectfully.

古文：宋丞相义宣起事，父畅以不同将见杀，司马竺超民谏免之。
现代文：宋时丞相义宣起事，他父亲张蝎因为不同意将要被杀，是司马竺超民谏止才得免一死。
English: Song Shizheng, the minister of justice, proclaimed an uprising, and his father Zhang Qi was about to be killed because he did not agree. It was Sima Qian who overcame the people's resistance and was spared death.

古文：畅临终谓诸子曰： 昔丞相事难，吾缘竺司马得活，尔等必报其子弟。 
现代文：张畅临终时对几个儿子说： 从前丞相发难，我是因为竺司马才得活命的，你们一定要向他的子孙们报答。 
English: When Zhang Chang was on his deathbed, he said to his sons: Once upon a time, the prime minister was in trouble. I only survived because of Xie Sima. You must repay his children and grandchildren.

古文：后超民孙微冬月遭母丧，居贫，融往吊之，悉脱衣以为赙，披牛被而反。
现代文：后来孙子竺峦冬季母亲去世，很是困苦，张融前去吊丧，把自己的衣服都脱下来当作丧礼，自己披着牛盖的草席回来。
English: Later, Zhang Rong's grandchild's mother died in winter, and he was very distressed. Zhang Rong went to the funeral, took off all his clothes as a funeral, and came back with a straw mat covered with a cowl.

古文：常以兄事微。
现代文：一直像对兄长那样对待竺趱。
English: He always treated Gong Wei as his elder brother.

古文：豫章王嶷、竟陵王子良薨，自以身经佐吏，哭辄尽恸。
现代文：豫章王萧蹙、竟陵王王旦去世，自己做过他们的手下，哭起来总是十分悲恸。
English: Because he had been an aide-de-camp, he wept bitterly at the death of Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi and even the tomb king Xiao Ziliang.

古文：建武四年，病卒。
现代文：建武四年，病死。
English: Jianwu was four years old when he died of illness.

古文：年五十四。
现代文：时年五十四岁。
English: He was fifty-four years old.

古文：遗令建白旌无旒，不设祭，令人捉麈尾登屋复魂，曰： 吾生平所善，自当凌云一笑。 
现代文：遣言让衹树不写名字的白旗幡，不要祭奠，命人拿着拂尘到屋顶上招魂。说： 我这一辈子所喜欢的，自是驾着云彩一笑。 
English: He sent a message to the eucalyptus tree not to write the name of the white flag, not to pay tribute, and ordered the person to take the whisk to the roof to attract the soul. He said: What I have liked all my life is to ride the clouds and smile.

古文：三千买棺，无制新衾。
现代文：用三千钱置办棺木，不必制作新的被褥。
English: Buy a coffin for three thousand dollars, don't sew new bedding.

古文：左手执《孝经》、《老子》，右手执小品《法华经》。妾二人，哀事毕，各遣还家。
现代文：左手拿着《孝经》、《老子》，右手拿着小品《法华经》两位小妾，等丧事完毕，就各自把她们送回家。
English: The two concubines, holding the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Lao Zi" in their left hands and the short poem "The Lotus Sutra" in their right hands, sent them home separately after the funeral.

古文：又曰： 以吾平生之风调，何至使妇人行哭失声，不须暂停闺阁。 
现代文：又说： 以我一辈子的做事方法，何至于要让妇人失声痛哭，不要在闺合裹停留。 
English: He also said: "With the way I have been doing things all my life, how can I make a woman cry, don't stay in a bouquet.

古文：融玄义无师法，而神解过人，白黑谈论，鲜能抗拒。
现代文：张融的玄学没有师承，但是体会解悟超过常人，谈论黑白之道，很少有人能够和他相抗衡。
English: Zhang Rong's metaphysics has no teacher, but his experience of understanding exceeds that of ordinary people, and he talks about the black and white way. Few people can compete with him.

古文：永明中，遇疾，为《门律自序》曰： 吾文章之体，多为世人所惊，汝可师耳以心，不可使耳为心师也。
现代文：永明年间，生了一场病，就写了《门律自序》说： 我的文章体例，多数使世人感到惊讶，你们要把心智当作耳朵的老师，不要使耳朵成为心智老师。
English: In the middle of the following year, he fell ill and wrote the "Door Law Self-Order," saying: My style of writing, most of which surprises the world, you should treat the mind as a teacher of the ear, do not make the ear a teacher of the mind.

古文：夫文岂有常体，但以有体为常，政当使常有其体。
现代文：作文章岂有一定的法式，衹是因为把有法式的情形当作寻常来看，正应该使作文有一定的法则。
English: There is no such thing as a certain French style for writing an article, but because the situation of having a French style is considered normal, it is necessary for the composition to have a certain rule.

古文：丈夫当删《诗》《书》，制礼乐，何至因循寄人篱下！
现代文：大丈夫应该删简《诗经》、《尚书》，制定礼乐，怎么可以因循守旧寄人篱下呢?
English: It is all right to abridge the "Song of Songs" and the "Book of Songs" and establish a liturgy, but how can we follow the old rules?

古文：且中代之文，道体阙变，尺寸相资，弥缝旧物。
现代文：况且近世的文章，道义体制都有所缺漏改变，仅仅是以尺寸之见相互支持，弥缝破旧的古物罢了。
English: Moreover, the articles of the modern world and the moral system have all been changed, but they only support each other in terms of size, and are nothing more than antiques.

古文：吾之文章，体亦何异，何尝颠温凉而错寒暑，综哀乐而横歌哭哉？
现代文：我的文章，体裁也没有什么不同寻常的，又何尝是因为颠倒冷暖错乱寒暑，或综述哀乐横陈歌赞与悲哭呢?
English: There is nothing unusual about the genre of my article, and what is the reason for the reversal of warm and cold, the confusion of hot and cold, or the review of sorrow and music, and the praise and lamentation?

古文：政以属辞多出，比事不羁，不阡不陌，非途非路耳。
现代文：正是因为辞语繁多，比拟事物没有拘束，不伦不类，有点出格罢了。
English: Precisely because of the multiplicity of words, the comparison of things is unrestrained, incongruous, and a bit out of the ordinary.

古文：然其传音振逸，鸣节竦韵，或当未极，亦已极其所矣。
现代文：但是它能够传达振动响亮激越飘逸的音节，节奏铿锵音韵鲜明，虽然没有达到文章的极致，在我也已经是竭尽所能了。
English: But it can convey the vibration of loud, exciting, flowing syllables, the rhythm and rhyme are vivid, although it does not reach the extreme of the article, I have also done my best.

古文：汝若复别得体者，吾不拘也。
现代文：你们如果还有别的体制，我没有意见。
English: If you have another system, I have no problem with that.

古文：吾义亦如文，造次乘我，颠沛非物。
现代文：我的主旨也和文章一样，仓促之间也不能忘怀。
English: My main point is also the same as the article, and cannot be forgotten in a hurry.

古文：吾无师无友，不文不句，颇有孤神独逸耳。
现代文：我没有师长没有朋友，不追章逐句，很有孤身求道独怀逸兴的意思。
English: I don't have a teacher or a friend, I don't follow chapter and verse, I'm very lonely and I'm looking for a way to enjoy myself.

古文：义之为用，将使性入清波，尘洗犹沐。
现代文：义理的用处，在于使人性情清明，好像经过泉水洗去灰尘一样。
English: The use of righteousness is to purify one's disposition, as if one were to wash away the dust with spring water.

古文：无得钓声同利，举价如高，俾是道场，险成军路。
现代文：不应该沽名钓誉来谋利，相互称举抬高身价，这襄毕竟是谈玄论道的场所，却差点成了争战之地。
English: It is not right to exploit one's name and reputation to make a profit and to elevate one's status. After all, this is a place to discuss esoteric matters, but it almost became a battleground.

古文：吾昔嗜僧言，多肆法辩，此尽游乎言笑，而汝等无幸。 
现代文：我过去很喜欢佛家之语，常常大加辩论，这都是言语的游嬉，而你们没有这个幸运。 
English: In the past, I was very fond of the language of the Buddhists, and we often had heated debates. It was all a play on words, but you are not so lucky.

古文：又云： 人生之口，正可论道说义，惟饮与食。
现代文：又说： 人长了嘴巴，就是用来谈论道义和用来饮食的。
English: And he said, A man's mouth is his best part of speech; it is the part of him that speaketh wisdom, and the part of him that eateth food.

古文：此外如树网焉。
现代文：除此之外则要树立繁密如纲的禁令。
English: In addition to this, it is necessary to establish a comprehensive ban.

古文：吾每以不尔为恨，尔曹当振纲也。 
现代文：我是不会对此感到忿恨的，你们尽管去抖动你们的禁网好了。 
English: I'm not going to hold a grudge, so go ahead and shake your forbidden webs.

古文：临卒，又戒其子曰： 手泽存焉，父书不读！
现代文：临死，又告诫他的儿子说： 父亲的书不应不读，否则不会惭愧吗?
English: On his deathbed, he also admonished his son, saying: "A father's book should not be read, otherwise, won't he be ashamed?

古文：况父音情，婉在其韵。
现代文：体察父亲的情感，委婉地蕴藏在韵语之中。
English: The father's emotion is subtly hidden in the rhyme.

古文：吾意不然，别遗尔音。
现代文：我的意思还不仅于此，对你另有要求。
English: I mean more than that, I want something else from you.

古文：吾文体英绝，变而屡奇，既不能远至汉魏，故无取嗟晋宋。
现代文：我的文章体制宏伟超出一般，变化多端而屡出奇妙之处，即使不能远逮达到漠、魏的标准，也无愧于晋、宋之世了。
English: My writing system is more magnificent than usual, with many changes and frequent oddities. Even if it can't reach the standards of Mu and Wei, it is worthy of the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：岂吾天挺，盖不隤家声。
现代文：并非是我天资特别优秀，不过是没有辱没家世尚学的名声。
English: It's not that I'm particularly gifted, but I haven't disgraced my family's reputation for being studious.

古文：汝若不看，父祖之意欲汝见也。可号哭而看之。 
现代文：你如果不看我的文章，也要去体会父祖的心意。实在应该号哭着来看啊。 
English: If you don't read my article, you have to experience the heart of the ancestors. You really should cry when you read it.

古文：融自名集为《玉海》。
现代文：张融给自己的文集起名为《玉海》。
English: Zhang Rong named his collection "Jade Sea."

古文：司徒褚渊问《玉海》名，融答： 玉以比德，海崇上善。 
现代文：司徒褚渊问为什么叫《玉海》，张融说： 玉是比喻德行，海是崇尚至上的善行。 
English: When Shibu Shanyuan asked why it was called "Jade Sea," Zhang Rong said: "Jade is a metaphor for virtue, and the sea is a good deed that advocates the supremacy of the crane.

古文：文集数十卷行于世。
现代文：文集有数十卷在世上流行。
English: Dozens of volumes of the anthology are in circulation around the world.

古文：张氏知名，前有敷、演、镜、畅，后有充、融、卷、稷。
现代文：张氏家族裹的知名人物，前代有张敷、张演、张镜、张畅，后代有张充、张融、张卷、张稷。
English: The famous figures in Zhang's family include Zhang Shigu, Zhang Xuan, Zhang Jing and Zhang Chang in the previous generation, and Zhang Zheng, Zhang Rong, Zhang Zhou and Zhang Xuan in the next generation.

古文：周颙，字彦伦，汝南安城人。
现代文：周颙，字彦伦，是汝南安城人。
English: Zhou Qi, also known as Yan Lun, is from Nan'an City.

古文：晋左光禄大夫顗七世孙也。
现代文：是晋代左光禄大夫周频的七世孙。
English: He is the seventh-generation grandson of Zhou Fang, a doctor of the Zaganglu sect in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖虎头，员外常侍。
现代文：他的祖父周虎头，是员外常侍。
English: His grandfather, Zhou Houtou, was a non-commissioned officer.

古文：父恂，归乡相。
现代文：父亲周恂，做到归乡相。
English: His father, Zhou Qi, became the minister of returning to the hometown.

古文：颙少为族祖朗所知。
现代文：周颙少年时就被族祖周朗所赏识。
English: When Zhou Qi was a boy, he was appreciated by the ancestor Zhou Lang.

古文：解褐海陵国侍郎。
现代文：出仕做了海陵国侍郎。
English: He served as a retainer of the province of Hailing.

古文：益州刺史萧惠开赏异颙，携入蜀，为厉锋将军，带肥乡、成都二县令。
现代文：益州刺史萧惠开又特别看重他，带着他进入蜀地，做了厉锋将军，兼肥乡、成都二县县令。
English: Xiao Huikai, the governor of Yizhou, also attached great importance to him. He took him with him to enter Shu and became the general of Li Feng, as well as the county magistrate of Feixiang and Chengdu two counties.

古文：转惠开辅国府参军，将军、令如故。
现代文：转惠开辅国府参军，仍然是将军、县令。
English: Even after he joined the army, he was still a general and a county magistrate.

古文：仍为府主簿。
现代文：也仍是府主簿。
English: He is also still the chief accountant.

古文：常谓惠开性太险峻，每致谏，惠开不悦，答颙曰： 天险地险，王公设险，但问用险何如耳。 
现代文：他常常说萧惠闪性情太阴深难测，每次规谏，萧惠开都不高兴，回答周颐说： 天也险地也险，王公大臣们居心深险，衹要问是怎么样就行了。 
English: He often said that Xiao Huibing's disposition was too dark and difficult to fathom, and Xiao Huibing was not happy every time he made a rule, and replied to Zhou Qi: The sky is also dangerous, and the princes and ministers are deep in danger. If you want to ask what it is, just do it.

古文：随惠开还都。
现代文：跟随萧惠开回到京城。
English: Follow Xiao Huikai back to Beijing.

古文：宋明帝颇好言理，以颙有辞义，引入殿内，亲近宿直。
现代文：宋明帝喜欢谈玄论道，因为周颐侃侃能言，把他召入殿中，时常亲近派他宿值守夜。
English: Emperor Song Ming liked to talk about the occult, and because Zhou Enlai was so eloquent, he called him into the palace and often sent him to stay nearby to keep vigil.

古文：帝所为惨毒之事，颙不敢显谏，辄诵经中因缘罪福事，帝亦为之小止。
现代文：明帝所做的狠毒歹事，周颙都不敢直接劝辣，就背诵佛经裹的因果报应故事，明帝也为此稍稍有所收敛。
English: The vicious and evil deeds done by Emperor Ming, Zhou Yu did not dare to directly persuade him, so he recited the karmic retribution story wrapped in Buddhist scriptures. Emperor Ming also slightly restrained himself for this reason.

古文：转安成王抚军行参军。
现代文：转为安成王抚军行参军。
English: He was transferred to the Ancheng Wangfu army and joined the army.

古文：元徽初，出为剡令，有恩惠，百姓思之。
现代文：元徽初年，出朝为剡县令，施政有恩惠，得到百姓的爱戴。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the magistrate of Jixian County, and he was loved by the people for his benevolent administration.

古文：还历邵陵王南中郎三府参军。
现代文：回到朝廷任邵陵王南中郎三府参军。
English: He returned to the imperial court as Shao Ling Wang Nan Zhong Lang and joined the army in three provinces.

古文：太祖辅政，引接颙。
现代文：齐太祖辅政时，提拔了周颙。
English: When Qi Taizu was a vice-premier, he promoted Zhou Qi.

古文：颙善尺牍，沈攸之送绝交书，太祖口授令颙裁答。
现代文：周颙擅长写文书，沈攸之投送绝交书的时候，就由太祖口授让周颠裁度给以答覆。
English: Zhou Qi was good at writing documents, and when Shen Youzhi sent him a completed document, the great ancestor dictated that Zhou Bi Jiandu should give him a reply.

古文：转齐台殿中郎。
现代文：转为齐台殿中郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of Chidai-dono churo.

古文：建元初，为长沙王参军，后军参军，山阴令。
现代文：建元初，为长沙王参军，后军参军，山阴县令。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Changsha Wang joined the army, the latter joined the army, and became the governor of Shanyin County.

古文：县旧订滂民，以供杂使。颙言之于太守闻喜公子良曰： 窃见滂民之困，困实极矣。
现代文：该县过去专门规定滂民供宫府役使的制度，周颙对太守闻喜公子良说： 我看那些滂民的困苦，实在是到了极点。
English: In the past, the prefecture had a special system of providing palace servants for the people of the county. Zhou Ye said to Daju Wenqi Gongziliang: I think the hardships of the people of the county have really reached the extreme.

古文：役命有常，只应转竭，蹙迫驱催，莫安其所。
现代文：役使的命令常年不断，祇会弄得周转力竭，再加上催促驱迫，使他们不能自安。
English: The orders of the servants are constant all year round, which only exhausts the turnover, and, together with the urging and driving, makes them unable to be at ease.

古文：险者或窜避山湖，困者自经沟渎尔。
现代文：敢于冒险的或者逃窜到山湖之间。穷困无路的祇能自杀埋葬于沟河了。
English: Those who dare to take risks may flee to the mountains and lakes. The destitute can only commit suicide and be buried in a ditch.

古文：亦有摧臂斫手，苟自残落，贩佣贴子，权赴急难。
现代文：也有弄断手臂砍掉手掌的，不过是白白变成残废，仍要做工卖子，权且应付急迫的官差。
English: There are also people who have broken their arms and cut off their palms, but they have become crippled in vain, still have to work as a laborer, and have to deal with urgent official duties.

古文：每至滂使发动，遵赴常促，辄有柤杖被录，稽颡阶垂，泣涕告哀，不知所振。
现代文：每次到了征发役民的时候，遵从上头的命令照常催促，就免不了棍棒相加，看着百姓在台阶边叩首求告，哭泣哀号，不知该怎么解救。
English: Every time it was time to send out the conscripts, they followed the orders from above and urged them as usual. They could not help but add sticks to sticks and watched the people on the side of the steps knocking their heads, crying and wailing, not knowing how to save them.

古文：下官未尝不临食罢箸，当书偃笔，为之久之，怆不能已。
现代文：下宫我总是将要进食又放下筷子，想要上书呈告又停笔不写，这样烦恼了很久，悲怆难以自己。
English: In the lower house, I would always be about to eat and put down my chopsticks. I would want to submit a report and stop writing, so I was troubled for a long time, and it was difficult for me to feel sad.

古文：交事不济，不得不就加捶罚，见此辛酸，时不可过。
现代文：交待下去的事情不能完成，不得不鞭打他们以示惩罚，看见这种情形又觉辛酸，而时限不允许超过。
English: It's sad to see them whipped as punishment when they can't finish what they've been told to do, but the time limit can't be exceeded.

古文：山阴邦治，事倍余城；然略闻诸县，亦处处皆踬。
现代文：山阴县的政务，倍加于其他的城镇；但是我听说其他各县，也到处是这样的艰难。
English: The government affairs of Shanyin County are twice as difficult as those of other towns; but I have heard that other counties also have such difficulties everywhere.

古文：唯上虞以百户一滂，大为优足，过此列城，不无凋罄。
现代文：衹有上虞县因为每百户人家才派给一次服役，非常的富足优裕，超过遣个比例的各城，没有不凋败衰落的。
English: Because every hundred households in Shangyu County are only assigned to military service once, there are very affluent and affluent cities that exceed the ratio of the secondment. There is no city that will not decline and fall.

古文：宜应有以普救倒悬，设流开便，则转患为功，得之何远。 
现代文：应该采取措施解民于倒悬，使百姓得到便利，就可以把忧患变成功劳，要做到也不是很难啊。 
English: Measures should be taken to relieve the people from the overhang and make it convenient for the people, so that they can turn their worries into successful labor. It is not difficult to do.

古文：还为文惠太子中军录事参军，随府转征北。
现代文：回到朝廷做了文惠太子中军录事参军，跟随太子辗转北征。
English: After returning to the imperial court, she made a record of Prince Wen Hui's entry into the army and joined the army, and followed the prince to the Northern Expedition.

古文：文惠在东宫，颙还正员郎，始兴王前军谘议。
现代文：文惠太子在束宫，周颙回来做了正员郎，始兴王前军谘议。
English: Prince Wen Hui was at Sokong, Zhou Qi returned to be the official vassal, and Shixing Wang's former army was consulted.

古文：直侍殿省，复见赏遇。
现代文：在殿中台省等处当值侍卫，重新得到厚待。
English: He served as an attendant guard on duty at various places such as the front hall, the middle hall, and the front hall, and once again received kind treatment.

古文：颙音辞辩丽，出言不穷，宫商朱紫，发口成句。
现代文：周颙言辞华美绮丽，滔滔不绝，音调和谐色彩繁富，出口成章。
English: Zhou Ye's speech was beautiful and eloquent, the tone was harmonious and rich in color, and the speech was a success.

古文：泛涉百家，长于佛理。
现代文：广泛地涉猎百家之说，善于讲谈佛理。
English: Widely dabbles in the teachings of a hundred schools, and is good at talking about the Buddha's teachings.

古文：著《三宗论》。
现代文：着有《三宗论》。
English: He is the author of the "Three-Fold Doctrine."

古文：立空假名，立不空假名。
现代文：设立空假名，又立不空假名。
English: To set up an empty pseudonym, and not to set up an empty pseudonym.

古文：设不空假名难空假名，设空假名难不空假名。
现代文：用不空假名来诘驳空假名，又用空假名诘难不空假名。
English: Use non-empty pseudonyms to refute empty pseudonyms, and use empty pseudonyms to refute difficult-to-remove empty pseudonyms.

古文：假名空难二宗，又立假名空。
现代文：用假名空诘难性、相二宗。又立假名空。
English: Two schools of thought use the pseudo-name-emptiness to refute the difficulty, and another pseudo-name-emptiness is established.

古文：西凉州智林道人遗颙书曰： 此义旨趣似非始开，妙声中绝六七十载。
现代文：西凉州的智林道人给周颙寄信说： 这一法义的幽微旨趣好像并不是才被发掘的，神奇美妙的声音已经中断了六七十年。
English: Jilin Taoists in West Liangzhou sent a letter to Zhou Qi saying: This subtle meaning of the Dharma seems to have not just been discovered, the magical and beautiful sound has been interrupted for sixty or seventy years.

古文：贫道年二十时，便得此义，窃每欢喜，无与共之。
现代文：贫道二十岁的时候，就懂得了这个道理，私下海每十分欢喜，感到没有人与我共享。
English: When I was a poor twenty-year-old, I understood this truth. I was privately happy to go to sea every ten minutes, and felt that no one shared with me.

古文：年少见长安耆老，多云关中高胜乃旧有此义，当法集盛时，能深得斯趣者，本无多人。
现代文：少年时见到的长安老辈，都说关中的高士早就有这一义法，当它盛重一时的时候，能深入领会其旨趣的人并不多。
English: The elders of Chang'an, whom I saw when I was a boy, all said that the high-ranking officials of Guanzhong had this definition for a long time, and when it was popular, there were not many people who could deeply understand its meaning.

古文：过江东略是无一。
现代文：过辽塞以后几乎就没有了。
English: After passing through Liao Ce, there is almost no traffic.

古文：贫道捉麈尾来四十余年，东西讲说，谬重一时，余义颇见宗录，唯有此涂白黑无一人得者，为之发病。
现代文：我手执麈尾参论佛法四十多年，在东西各地讲学，勉强名重一时，其他各义在宗绿上都有所记载，惟独逭一法门的黑白真谬没有一个人懂得，因此很是忧虑。
English: I have been teaching Buddhism for more than forty years, and I have lectured all over the East and the West. For a while, I was barely famous. All the other meanings are recorded in Zongreen, but no one understands the black-and-white truth and falsehood of the Dharma, so I am very worried.

古文：非意此音猥来入耳，始是真实行道第一功德。 
现代文：没想到这一法音近来传到耳畔，才是真实行道第一大功德。 
English: Unexpectedly, this law has recently been passed down to the ear, which is the first great merit of the true path.

古文：其论见重如此。
现代文：可知他对周颙的立论是多么推崇
English: You can see how highly he respected Zhou's theory

古文：颙于锺山西立隐舍，休沐则归之。
现代文：周颙在钟山西面建了隐居的房子，放假时就回去。
English: Zhou Yu built a secluded house in the west side of Zhongshan Mountain, and he would go back when he was on vacation.

古文：转太子仆，兼著作，撰起居注。
现代文：转为太子仆，兼著作，撰写起居注。
English: He became the prince's valet and also a writer, writing a commentary on the prince's life.

古文：迁中书郎，兼著作如故。
现代文：迁为中书郎，仍兼著作。
English: He was transferred to the position of junior high school teacher, but continued to write.

古文：常游侍东宫。
现代文：常常在东宫游侍。
English: He often visited the Eastern Palace.

古文：少从外氏车骑将军臧质家得卫恒散隶书法，学之甚工。
现代文：他小时候从外祖车骑将军臧质家得到过卫恒的散隶书法，学得相当有功力。
English: When he was a child, he learned Wei Heng's Sanli calligraphy from his maternal grandfather, the chariot-riding general Xing Guo Jia. He was quite good at it.

古文：文惠太子使颙书玄圃茅斋壁，国子祭酒何胤以倒薤书求就颙换之，颙笑而答曰： 天下有道，丘不与易也。 
现代文：文惠太子让他写在玄圃的茅屋墙壁上，国于祭酒何胤要用倒薤书同周愿交换，周愿笑着答道： 天下有道，孔丘不会拿来交换的。 
English: Prince Wen Hui asked him to write on the wall of the thatched cottage in the garden that the country would exchange the sacrificial wine Ho Yan with the unlucky book with Zhou Zheng. Zhou Zheng replied with a smile: There is a way in the world, Confucius will not exchange it.

古文：每宾友会同，颙虚席晤语，辞韵如流，听者忘倦。
现代文：每当宾友聚会，周颙离席相对交谈，语辞如流，使听的人忘却疲倦。
English: Whenever the guests gather, Zhou Ye leaves the table to talk to them. The words flow like water, making the listener forget and tired.

古文：兼善《老》、《易》，与张融相遇，辄以玄言相滞，弥日不解。
现代文：兼善《老子》、《易经》，同张融相遇，就彼此以玄言对答，整日都不停歇。
English: He is also good at "Lao Zi" and "I Ching," and when he meets Zhang Rong, they answer each other with gossip, and they do not stop all day.

古文：清贫寡欲，终日长蔬食。虽有妻子，独处山舍。
现代文：清贫没有太多欲望，整天吃蔬食，虽然有妻子儿女，却一个人住在山间的屋舍裹。
English: The destitute don't have many desires. They eat vegetables all day long. Although they have a wife and children, they live alone in a house in the mountains.

古文：卫将军王俭谓颙曰： 卿山中何所食？ 
现代文：卫将军王俭对他说： 你在山裹吃什么? 
English: Guard General Wang Jian said to him, "What do you eat in the mountains?

古文：颙曰： 赤米白盐，绿葵紫蓼。 
现代文：他说： 红的米白的盐，绿的葵菜紫的蓼实。 
English: He said: Red rice and white salt, green sunflower purple compost.

古文：文惠太子问颙： 菜食何味最胜？ 
现代文：文惠太子问他： 菜食之中什么味道最好? 
English: Prince Wenhui asked him: What tastes the best among vegetarian food?

古文：颙曰： 春初早韭，秋末晚菘。 
现代文：周颙说： 初春是新鲜的韭菜，晚秋是成熟的菘菜。 
English: Zhou Wei said: Early spring is a fresh leek, late autumn is a mature leek.

古文：时何胤亦精信佛法，无妻妾。
现代文：当时何胤也诚信佛法，没有娶妻妾。
English: At that time, He Yin also believed in Buddhism and did not marry a concubine.

古文：太子又问颙： 卿精进何如何胤？ 
现代文：太子又问周颙： 你和何胤谁的修行更深? 
English: The prince also asked Zhou Qi: You and He Yin, whose practice is deeper?

古文：颙曰： 三涂八难，共所未免。
现代文：他说： 三种路径八种灾难都不能够避免。
English: He said: Three paths and eight disasters cannot be avoided.

古文：然各有其累。 
现代文：但是各有各的拖累。 
English: But each has its own drawbacks.

古文：太子曰： 所累伊何？ 
现代文：太子说： 是什么样的拖累呢? 
English: The prince said: What kind of drag is that?

古文：对曰： 周妻何肉。 
现代文：回答说： 周颐是妻子何胤是肉食。 
English: He replied, "Zhou Ying is a wife, but He Yan is a meat eater.

古文：其言辞应变，皆如此也。
现代文：他的言辞应变，总是这样敏捷。
English: He's always so quick with his words.

古文：转国子博士，兼著作如故。
现代文：调任国子博士，仍兼著作。
English: He was transferred to the position of Dr. Kuniko and continued to work as a writer.

古文：太学诸生慕其风，争事华辩。
现代文：太学的学生仰慕他的风范，争着都从事辩难。
English: The edict said: Zhou Lang has violated the rules of etiquette, can speak fluently, and should be eradicated. A villain is not enough to disturb the permanent punishment, just lock him up and hand him over to the border.

古文：后何胤言断食生，犹欲食白鱼、旦脯、糖蟹，以为非见生物。
现代文：后来何胤说停止吃活物，却还是食白鱼、旦脯、糖蟹。认为是没有看见活物。
English: Later, He Tan said that he had stopped eating living things, but he still ate white fish, clams, and sugar crabs. He thought that he did not see any living things.

古文：疑食蚶蛎，使学生议之。
现代文：对吃蚶蛎有疑虑，让学生讨论此事。
English: If you have any doubts about eating maggots, ask students to discuss the matter.

古文：学生锺岏曰： 旦之就脯，骤于屈伸；蟹之将糖，躁扰弥甚。
现代文：学生钟吭说： 鲤鱼被做成莱之前。猛烈地伸缩躯体，螃蟹将要被做成糖蟹时，也惊扰得特别厉害。
English: Student Zhong Qi said: Before the carp was made into crabs, it violently stretched and contracted its body, and when the crab was going to be made into sugar crabs, it was also particularly disturbed.

古文：仁人用意，深怀如怛。
现代文：有仁爱之心的人，心中会感到悲悯。
English: Compassionate and full of sorrow.

古文：至于车螯蚶蛎，眉目内阙，惭浑沌之奇，矿壳外缄，非金人之慎。
现代文：至于蚶蛎之类，裹面没有眉眼，羞惭衹有一片混沌，外面包着硬壳，无须抱持谨慎之心。
English: As for toads and the like, the shrouded face has no eyebrows, the shy toad has a chaos, the outside is covered with a hard shell, and there is no need to be cautious.

古文：不悴不荣，曾草木之不若；无馨无臭，与瓦砾其何算。
现代文：它不衰朽也不繁盛，连草木都不如；没有芬芳的气息，跟瓦砾差不多。
English: It withers not, neither does it flourish; it is no better than the grass; it has no fragrance, it is like the chaff.

古文：故宜长充庖厨，永为口实。 
现代文：所以很适合拿来做菜，使它永远成为美味佳肴。 
English: Therefore, it is suitable for long-term use as a material in the kitchen and will always be food in the population.

古文：竟陵王子良见絜议，大怒。
现代文：竟陵王子良看了奏议，非常生气。
English: After all, Prince Ling Liang saw the report and was very angry.

古文：胤兄点，亦遁节清信。
现代文：何胤的哥哥何点，也是讲求遁节清心仰佛的人。
English: Ho-yin's brother Ho-tou is also a person who preaches asking for a pure heart and praying to the Buddha on the Day of the Dead.

古文：颙与书，劝令菜食。
现代文：周颙给他写信，劝他吃素。
English: Zhou Qi wrote to him and advised him to become a vegetarian.

古文：曰： 丈人之所以未极遐蹈，或在不近全菜邪？
现代文：说: 您之所以修行没有进展，大概是因为没有吃素吧?
English: He said, "The reason why you haven't made any progress in your practice is probably because you haven't gone vegetarian, right?"

古文：脱洒离析之讨，鼎俎网罟之兴，载之简策，其来实远，谁敢干议？
现代文：宰割禽畜的行当，调和鼎镬的兴致，记载在书籍上，历史已经很久远了。谁敢提出非议?
English: The history of the business of slaughtering livestock and reconciling people's interests has been recorded in books for a long time. Who dares to raise objections?

古文：观圣人之设膳脩，仍复为之品节，盖以茹毛饮血，与生民共始，纵而勿裁，将无厓畔。
现代文：看圣人规设食事，也要限定品目步骤，大概是因为茹毛饮血，本是和人类的出现同时的，放任而不加裁夺，就没有边界了。
English: If you look at the saints who set the diet, you should also limit the item steps, probably because boiled wool drinking blood was originally simultaneous with the emergence of humans. If you let it go without pruning, there will be no boundaries.

古文：善为士者，岂不以恕己为怀？
现代文：善于秉持士行的人，怎能不用自己的心思去体恕外物呢?
English: How can a person who is good at upholding morality not use his own mind to experience external things?

古文：是以各静封疆，罔相陵轶。
现代文：所以各自静守自己的界限，不要相互欺凌。
English: So each of you should keep to your own boundaries and not bully each other.

古文：况乃变之大者，莫过死生；生之所重，无逾性命。
现代文：何况最大的变故，没有比死生还重要的；生的最紧要处，就是性命。
English: What's more, the biggest change is that nothing is more important than life and death; the most important part of life is life.

古文：性命之于彼极切，滋味之在我可赊，而终身朝晡，资之以永岁，彼就冤残，莫能自列，我业久长，吁哉可畏。
现代文：对它们来说，性命之忧非常急切，对我们来说，口腹之欲却是可以放过的，然而我们终身都在吃它，来滋长自己的年岁，它们冤枉地遭到残害，没有地方可以申诉，即使我们得以长寿，也是应该感到畏惧的呀。
English: For them it is a matter of life and death, for us it is a matter of appetite, but we eat it all our lives to grow old, they are unjustly killed, there is no place to complain, even if we live long, we should be afraid.

古文：且区区微卵，脆薄易矜，歂彼弱麑，顾步宜愍。
现代文：况且小小的一双禽卵，脆薄易冷，气喘微弱的小鹿，看着就让人怜愍。
English: Moreover, a small pair of chicken eggs, thin and fragile, easily cold, and a fawn with weak asthma, are pitiful to look at.

古文：观其饮喙飞行，人应怜悼，况可心心扑褫，加复恣忍吞嚼。
现代文：看那鸟儿饮水飞翔和降落，让人哀怜，怎么还能忍心把它抓住打死，又肆意咀嚼呢。
English: It was pitiful to see the bird flying and landing with drinking water. How could I bear to catch it, beat it to death, and chew it at will?

古文：至乃野牧盛群，闭豢重圈，量肉揣毛，以俟枝剥，如土委地，佥谓常理，可为怆息，事岂一涂。
现代文：像那野外的畜群，关闭在重重的畜圈裹饲养，不时称量肉骨揣度皮毛，衹等着宰割剥取。好像尘上归于地面一样，居然都把这事看作寻常之理，实在是应该为之叹息，事情还不止这一面。
English: Like the herds of animals in the wild, enclosed in heavy cattle pens, from time to time weighing the meat and bones, trimming the fur, waiting for the donkeys to be slaughtered and stripped. As if the dust had fallen to the ground, they all regarded this as common sense. It is really something to be lamented, and there is more to it than this.

古文：若云三世理诬，则幸矣良快。如使此道果然，而受形未息，则一往一来，一生一死，轮回是常事。
现代文：如果说三世之说没有道理，那么很幸运地可以把它视为一桩快事，如果真的有转生之道，而生的形态并非恒久，那么一往一来，一生一死之间，肯定会有轮遛的了。
English: If the third generation theory is not true, then fortunately it can be regarded as a happy event. If there really is a way of rebirth, and the form of birth is not permanent, then in the long run, between life and death, there will certainly be a rut.

古文：杂报如家，人天如客，遇客日鲜，在家日多，吾侪信业，未足长免，则伤心之惨，行亦自及。
现代文：因果报应好似家舍一样是人的归宿，人和天的交接却像出外为客，行客的日子很少，居家的很多，我们这些人信奉佛法，也不能最终避免，则那种令人伤心的惨祸，也将要危及自身。
English: Cause and effect retribution is a person's home, just like a house. However, the handover between people and the heavens is like going out as a guest. The days of traveling are few and the days of staying at home are many. Those of us who believe in Buddhism cannot ultimately avoid it. Then that sad tragedy will also endanger itself.

古文：丈人于血气之类，虽无身践，至于晨凫夜鲤，不能不取备屠门。
现代文：您对有血有肉的活物，虽然没有亲自动手，但是早晚吃着禽乌鱼类，不能不从肉市得来。
English: Although you have not personally handled the flesh-and-blood living creatures, you can't help but get them from the meat market when you eat grouper sooner or later.

古文：财贝之一经盗手，犹为廉士所弃；生性之一启鸾刀，宁复慈心所忍！
现代文：钱财一经过盗贼的手，就会被廉洁之士唾弃；生性一旦启用了屠刀，又怎能再为慈悲之心所克制呢?
English: The moment money passes through the hands of a thief, it is rejected by the unscrupulous; once nature has used the butcher's knife, how can it be restrained by compassion?

古文：驺虞虽饥，非自死之草不食，闻其风岂不使人多愧者！
现代文：骝虞即使很饿，也不吃不是自己枯死的草，听见他的操行难道不使人羞愧吗?
English: Is it not shameful to hear that even though he is very hungry, he will not eat grass that he has not withered?

古文：众生之禀此形质，以畜肌跂，皆由其积壅痴迷，沈流莫反，报受秽浊，历苦酸长，此甘与肥，皆无明之报聚也。
现代文：众生具备现世的形态，以积聚肌肉和脂膏，都是因为前生积累的痴迷蒙昧，沉沦不知自解，报应造成秽浊之身，经受辛苦艰难，这甘美的肉食，都是愚昧无识的报应所聚。
English: All sentient beings have their present-day forms, with the accumulation of muscles and fat, because of the obsession and ignorance accumulated in their previous lives. They have fallen into the abyss and do not know how to extricate themselves. Their retribution has caused them to become filthy and dirty. They have endured hardships and hardships. This sweet meat is the result of the retribution of ignorance.

古文：何至复引此滋腴，自污肠胃。
现代文：怎么还要再次吃下这丰腴之食，使自己的肠胃小洁呢?
English: How can I eat this rich food again and make my stomach clean?

古文：丈人得此有素，聊复寸言发起耳。 
现代文：您能够懂得这个道理从此吃素，就不枉费我一番口舌。 
English: If you can understand this principle and go vegetarian from now on, it will not be a waste of my time.

古文：颙卒官时，会王俭讲《孝经》未毕，举昙济自代，学者荣之。
现代文：颙在任上去世的时候，正巧王俭讲《孝经》还没有讲完，就推举谢昙渣代替自己讲，学者们很赞赏他。
English: When Hao died in office, it happened that Wang Jian, who had not yet finished reciting the "Filial Piety Sutra," chose Xie Bingjie to speak in his place. Scholars appreciated him very much.

古文：官为给事中。
现代文：官为给事中。
English: The officer is on leave.

古文：史臣曰：弘毅存容，至仁表貌，汲黯刚戆，崔琰声姿，然后能不惮雄桀，亟成讥犯。
现代文：史臣曰：弘毅果断持有法度，至仁至德礼义周到，有汲黯的刚强戆直，又有崔琰的清妙声姿，然后可以不惧雄强人物，屡次上言讥讽冒犯。
English: Shichen said: Hongyi resolutely upholds the rule of law, is considerate from benevolence to morality, has a strong and upright demeanor, and has a clear voice and appearance. Then he can not be afraid of powerful figures, and repeatedly mocks and offends.

古文：张融标心托旨，全等尘外，吐纳风云，不论人物，而事君会友，敦义纳忠，诞不越检，常在名教。
现代文：张融表白心地寄托深意，完全超出尘俗，吐纳天地风云之气，不议论世间人物，但他事奉君主会同朋友，敦守道义敬纳忠心，放诞却不超过适当的程度，常常涉于名教。
English: Zhang Rong honestly expressed his deep-rooted intention, completely beyond the mundane, accepting the atmosphere of heaven and earth, not talking about worldly figures, but he served the monarch together with friends, adhered to morality, respected and accepted loyalty, but did not celebrate birthdays more than appropriate, and often involved in famous religion.

古文：若夫奇伟之称，则虞翻、陆绩不得独擅于前也。
现代文：至于离奇美好的名声，则不逊于虞翻、陆绩。赞曰：张融矫矫不群，可以上达千仞远行万里。
English: As for the bizarre and beautiful reputation, it is not inferior to the fortune-turning and land-performance. Praise: Zhang Rong can travel thousands of miles.

古文：升同应谐，黜同解摈。
现代文：升起好像响应谐和，降下好像解脱弃绝。
English: Rising up seems to be a response to harmony, and falling down seems to be a liberation and abandonment.

古文：务在连衡，不谋销印。
现代文：惟求多得玄理，不求铸印销印这些权媒之事。
English: However, we should seek to gain more knowledge, not seek to print and print these power mediums.

古文：彦伦辞辩，苦节清韵。
现代文：周颙善于言辩，谨守节操韵致清雅。
English: Zhou Ying is good at speech, and is careful to adhere to the rules of rhyme and rhythm to achieve elegance.

古文：白马横擒，云梯独振。
现代文：能够捕捉过隙之白马，见解不凡如登云梯。
English: To be able to catch a white horse passing through a gap, extraordinary insights are like climbing a ladder.

