古文：○韦皋刘辟附
现代文：韦皋字城武，京兆人。
English: Wei Xuan Zi Chengwu, Keizhou people.

古文：张建封卢群韦皋，字城武，京兆人。大历初，以建陵挽郎调补华州参军，累授使府监察御史。
现代文：大历初年，从建陵挽郎任上调补为华州参军，累官被授为使府监察御史。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, he was transferred from the post of Kenryo-birao to join the army in Huazhou, and was awarded the post of envoy inspector.

古文：宰相张镒出为凤翔陇右节度使，奏皋为营田判官，得殿中侍御史，权知陇州行营留后事。
现代文：宰相张镒出任凤翔陇右节度使，上奏荐举韦皋为营田判官，得任殿中侍御史，临时署理陇州行营留后事务。
English: The prime minister, Zhang Ye, was appointed as Feng Xiangya's right-hand delegate to the festival, and Wei Ye was recommended as the judge of Yingtian. He was appointed as the palace attendant, and the temporary deputy of the post-camping affairs in Bozhou.

古文：建中四年，泾师犯阙，德宗幸奉天，凤翔兵马使李楚琳杀张镒，以府城叛归于硃泚，陇州刺史郝通奔于楚琳。
现代文：建中四年，泾原节镇的军队进犯京师，德宗临幸奉天，凤翔兵马使李楚琳杀死张镒，率凤翔府城叛变，归附于叛臣朱氵此，陇州刺史郝通投奔李楚琳。
English: In the fourth year of Jianzhong, the army of Yuyuan Jiezhen attacked the Beijing Division, De Zong Rinchen Bong Tian, Feng Xiang soldiers and horses sent Li Chulin to kill Zhang Xuan, led Feng Xiang to mutiny in Fucheng, attached to the traitor Zhu Xuan, and Zhang Zhou sent Shi Xuntong to Li Chulin.

古文：先是，硃泚自范阳入朝，以甲士自随；后泚为凤翔节度使，既罢，留范阳五百人戍陇州，而泚旧将牛云光督之。
现代文：在此之前，朱氵此从范阳入朝任职，命甲士随从自己入京；后来朱氵此任凤阳节度使，罢职以后，留下范阳的五百名士卒戍守陇州，而由原朱氵此部下旧将牛云光督率他们。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Xi entered the imperial court from Fanyang, and his subordinates followed him to Beijing; later, Zhu Xi was appointed as Fengyang's festival envoy, and after his resignation, he left Fanyang's five hundred nobles to stay in Zhangzhou, and the former Zhu Xi's subordinate, former general Niu Yunguang, led them.

古文：时泚既以逆徒围奉天，云光因称疾，请皋为帅，将谋乱，擒皋以赴泚。
现代文：这时朱氵此既已率叛军包围奉天，牛云光便假托有病，请求韦皋担任统帅，而暗中策划叛乱，准备擒获韦皋前去投靠朱氵此。
English: At this time, Zhu Xi had already led the rebels to encircle Fengtian, and Niu Yunguang pretended to be ill, asked Wei Wei to serve as commander, and secretly plotted a rebellion, preparing to capture Wei Wei to go to Zhu Xi's side.

古文：皋将翟晔伺知之，白皋为备；云光知事泄，遂率其兵以奔泚。
现代文：韦皋的部将翟晔探听到了这件事，报告韦皋预做准备，牛云光知道事情泄漏，便率领他的兵卒投奔朱氵此。
English: Wei Zheng's subordinate, Zou Xun, heard about the incident and reported to Wei Zheng to prepare in advance. When Niu Yunguang learned about the leak, he led his soldiers to Zhu Xi.

古文：行及汧阳，遇泚家僮苏玉将使于皋所，苏玉谓云光曰： 太尉已登宝位，使我持诏以韦皋为御史中丞，君可以兵归陇州。
现代文：行至阳，遇见朱氵此的家奴苏玉正要到韦皋那里去，苏玉对牛云光说： 太尉已登上了皇帝宝座，派我持诏书前去任命韦皋为御史中丞，你可率兵返回陇州。
English: On his way to the sun, he met Zhu Xi's servant Su Yu, who was about to go to Wei Xi's place. Su Yu said to Niu Yunguang, "The captain has ascended to the emperor's throne. Send me with an imperial edict to appoint Wei Xi as the Grand Historian. You can lead the troops back to Zhangzhou."

古文：皋若承命，即为吾人；如不受诏，彼书生，可以图之，事无不济矣。 
现代文：韦皋如果接受任命，就是我们的人；如果不接受，他不过是个书生，可以算计他，事情没有不成的。 
English: If Wei Wei accepts the appointment, he is our man; if he does not accept, he is just a student, you can count on him, things will work out.

古文：乃反昪疾趋陇州。
现代文：牛云光便掉转旗号迅速奔赴陇州。
English: Niu Yunguang then turned around and quickly rushed to Ganzhou.

古文：皋迎劳之，先纳苏玉，受其伪命，乃问云光曰： 始不告而去，今又来，何也？ 
现代文：韦皋迎上去慰劳他们，先接纳苏玉，受了伪诏，才问牛云光道： 当初不告而别，现在又回来，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Wei went to meet and comfort them. He first received Su Yu and received a false edict, before asking Niu Yunguang, "Why did you leave without telling me, and now you're coming back?

古文：云光曰： 前未知公心，故潜去；知公有新命，今乃复还。
现代文：牛云光说： 原先不了解公之心意，所以偷偷离去；知道您有新的任命，现在才又回来。
English: Niu Yunguang said: I did not understand the public's will, so I secretly left; knowing that you have a new appointment, I have just come back.

古文：愿与公戮力定功，同其生死。 
现代文：希望和您一道尽力奠定功勋，同生共死。 
English: I hope to work with you to lay a foundation of merit and live and die together.

古文：皋曰： 善。 
现代文：韦皋说： 好呀！ 
English: Wei Wei said: Good!

古文：又谓云光曰： 大使苟不怀诈，请纳器甲，使城中无所危疑，乃可入。 
现代文：又对牛云光道： 肩负重大使命的人若不怀欺诈，就请交出武器甲仗，使城中的人免去畏惧、怀疑，方可入城。 
English: He also said to Niu Yunguang, "If those who shoulder the important mission are not deceitful, please hand over their weapons and armor, so that the people in the city can enter the city without fear and doubt."

古文：云光以书生待皋，且以为信然，乃尽付弓矢戈甲。皋既受之，乃内其兵。
现代文：牛云光把韦皋当作书生，而且认为他这番话可信，便将弓箭、兵器、甲仗尽数交出，韦皋接收之后，便让他的军队进城。
English: Niu Yunguang took Wei Wei as a scholar, and thought that his words were credible, so he handed over all the bows and arrows, weapons, and armor. After Wei Wei accepted, he let his army enter the city.

古文：明日，皋犒宴苏玉、云光之卒于郡舍，伏甲于两廊。酒既行，伏发，尽诛之，斩云光、苏玉首以徇。
现代文：次日，韦皋在郡府屋舍中设宴犒劳苏玉、牛云光的士卒，在两边廊下埋伏了甲士，酒过一巡，伏兵齐起，将叛军全都杀死，砍下牛云光、苏玉的脑袋以示众。
English: The next day, Wei Wei held a banquet in the county government house to reward the soldiers of Su Yuguang and Niu Yunguang. They ambushed the soldiers in the corridors on both sides. After a round of drinks, the soldiers got up and killed all the rebels, and cut off the heads of Niu Yunguang and Su Yuguang to show the public.

古文：泚又使家僮刘海广以皋为凤翔节度使，皋斩海广及从者三人，生一人，使报泚。
现代文：朱氵此又派家奴刘海广前去任命韦皋为凤翔节度使，韦皋斩了刘海广和他的三个随从，留下一个让他回去向朱氵此报信。
English: Zhu Xi also sent his servant Liu Haigang to appoint Wei Jun as Fengxiang's festival envoy. Wei Jun beheaded Liu Haigang and his three attendants, leaving one for him to go back and report to Zhu Xi.

古文：于是诏以皋为御史大夫、陇州刺史，置奉义军节度以旌之。
现代文：于是皇上下诏任命韦皋为御史大夫、陇州刺史，设置奉义军节度使以表彰他。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Wei Wei as a goshi taifu (chief of the imperial history department) and a goshu sashi shi (chief of the imperial history department), and set up a military award ceremony to commend him.

古文：皋遣从兄平及弇继入奉天城，城中闻皋有备，士气增倍。
现代文：韦皋派遣他的堂兄韦平和韦相继进入奉天城，城中的人闻知韦皋有武备，士气倍增。
English: Wei Wei sent his cousin Wei Ping and Wei Wei into Fengtian City one after another. The people in the city heard that Wei Wei was armed, and their morale increased.

古文：皋乃筑坛于廷，血牲与将士等盟曰： 上天不吊，国家多难，逆臣乘间，盗据宫闱。而李楚琳亦扇凶徒，倾陷城邑，酷虐所加，爰及本使，既不事上，安能恤下。
现代文：韦皋在庭中筑起高台，涂抹牲血，与将士们盟誓道： 上天不怜恤百姓，国家多难，叛臣伺机盗占宫廷，而李楚琳也煽动凶徒，攻陷城邑，所施残酷暴虐，延及本使，既然不能侍奉皇上，又怎能体恤百姓。
English: Wei Zheng built a high platform in the courtyard, smeared it with animal blood, and swore with his generals: Heaven has no mercy on the people, the country is in great difficulty, traitors are waiting to seize the palace, and Li Chuling also incited murderers, attacked cities, and inflicted cruel violence, extending to the envoys. Since they cannot serve the emperor, how can they sympathize with the people?

古文：皋是用激心愤气，不遑底宁，誓与群公，竭诚王室。
现代文：我因此心情愤激，没有安宁的闲暇，誓和大家一起竭诚拥戴王室。
English: As a result, I feel angry, have no peaceful leisure, and vow to wholeheartedly support the royal family together with everyone.

古文：凡我同盟，一心协力，仗顺除凶，先祖之灵，必当幽赞。
现代文：凡是和我一起盟誓的人，同心协力，顺天行事，扫除顽凶，先祖在天之灵，必会在幽冥中赞赏。
English: All those who swear together with me, make concerted efforts, act in accordance with heaven, and sweep away evil-doers, whose ancestors are in the spirit of heaven, will surely be appreciated in the dark.

古文：言诚则志合，义感则心齐；粉骨糜躯，决无所顾。
现代文：言辞诚信则志同道合，正义相感则心齐力协，粉骨碎身，决不回头。
English: Words of sincerity are like-minded, justice is like-minded, and hearts are like-minded. We will never turn back.

古文：有渝此志，明神殛之，迨于子孙，亦罔遗类。
现代文：若有改变心志的，神灵将击杀他，祸及子孙，决无族类遗存。
English: If anyone changes his mind, the gods will strike him dead, and woe to his descendants, for there will be no remnant of the human race.

古文：皇天后土，当兆斯言。 
现代文：皇天后土，当验证此言。 
English: Empress Dowager Earth, you should verify this statement.

古文：又遣使入吐蕃求援。
现代文：又派人到吐蕃求援。
English: They also sent someone to Tuyn to ask for help.

古文：十一月，加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：十一月，加授检校礼部尚书。
English: In November, the additional teaching of the proctored etiquette section was added.

古文：兴元元年，德宗还京，征为左金吾卫将军，寻迁大将军。
现代文：兴元元年，德宗返回京师，征召韦皋为金吾卫将军。不久升为大将军。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Dezong returned to the Beijing division and conscripted Wei Wei as General Kinguwei. He was soon promoted to General.

古文：贞元元年，拜检校户部尚书，兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度使，代张延赏。
现代文：贞元元年，韦皋官拜检校户部尚书，兼成都尹、御史大夫、剑南西川节度使，以替代张延赏。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Xuan official paid a visit to Shang Shu, the head of the household department of the school, and Chengdu Yin, the chief historian, and Jianan Nishikawa, the secretary of the festival, to replace Zhang Yanbo.

古文：皋以云南蛮众数十万，与吐蕃和好，蕃人入寇，必以蛮为前锋。四年，皋遣判官崔佐时入南诏蛮，说令向化，以离吐蕃之助。
现代文：由于云南蛮族部众数十万与吐蕃和好，吐蕃人入侵，必以蛮族人作为先锋，贞元四年，韦皋派遣判官崔佐时进入南诏蛮，劝说令他们归顺王化，以脱离对吐蕃的依附。
English: As the hundreds of thousands of Yunnan barbarians had made peace with the Tubo, and the Tubo people invaded, the barbarians must be used as the vanguard. In the fourth year of Zhenyuan, Wei Wei sent the judge Cui Zuo to enter the Southern Zhao barbarians and persuade them to submit to the king, so as to break away from the dependence on the Tubo.

古文：佐时至蛮国羊咀咩城，其王异牟寻忻然接遇，请绝吐蕃，遣使朝贡。
现代文：崔佐时到达蛮国羊咀咩城，其国王异牟寻欣然接待，崔佐时代表朝廷请他们同吐蕃绝交，派遣使臣向朝廷进贡。
English: Cui Zuoxi arrived in the barbarian country of Yangtze and Shandong, and was gladly received by its king, Yimuxing. On behalf of the imperial court, Cui Zuoxi invited them to sever diplomatic relations with Tubo and send envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：其年，遣东蛮鬼主骠傍、苴梦冲、苴乌等相率入朝。
现代文：当年，韦皋让东蛮首领骠傍、苴梦冲、苴乌等相继入朝。
English: In that year, Wei Wei allowed the Eastern Barbarian chieftains Zou Bi, Zou Mengchong and Zou Wu to enter the imperial court one after another.

古文：南蛮自巂州陷没，臣属吐蕃，绝朝贡者二十余年，至是复通。
现代文：南蛮自州陷落后，成为吐蕃的臣属，继绝朝贡前后共二十余年，到这时又重新通好。
English: After the fall of Southern Manchuria, Southern Manchuria became a vassal of Tubo and refused to pay tribute to the imperial court for more than 20 years. At this time, they became friendly again.

古文：五年，皋遣大将王有道简习精卒以入蕃界，与东蛮于故巂州台登北谷大破吐蕃青海、腊城二节度，斩首二千级，生擒笼官四十五人，其投崖谷而死者不可胜计。
现代文：贞元五年，韦皋派遣大将王有道挑选精兵进入吐蕃境内，和东蛮一起，在从前州的台登北谷将吐蕃的青海、腊城两节度打得大败，斩杀二千人，生擒笼官四十五人，那投身崖下深谷而死的不计其数。
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Wei dispatched the general Wang Youdao to select the best soldiers to enter the territory of Tubo. Together with the Eastern Barbarians, they defeated the Qinghai and Lacheng of Tubo in the northern valley of the former state of Taideng, killing two thousand people, forty-five living officials, and countless people who died in the deep valley under the cliff.

古文：蕃将乞臧遮遮者，蕃之骁将也，久为边患。自擒遮遮，城栅无不降，数年之内，终复巂州，以功加吏部尚书。
现代文：吐蕃将领乞臧遮遮是吐蕃的一员勇将，长期成为边患，自从擒住乞臧遮遮之后，吐蕃的城邑栅寨没有不投降的，几年之内，终于收复了州，韦皋因战功而被加授吏部尚书。
English: Tuyn's general, Qianqian Zhajia, was one of Tuyn's most courageous generals. For a long time, he became a borderline problem. After he captured Qianqian Zhajia, there was not a single city or town in Tuyn that did not surrender. Within a few years, the state was finally regained. Because of his war service, Wei Qian was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：九年，朝廷筑盐州城，虑为吐蕃掩袭，诏皋出兵牵维之。
现代文：贞元九年，朝廷修筑盐州城，因为担心遭吐蕃偷袭，便下诏命韦皋出兵牵制吐蕃。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, the imperial court was building Yanzhou City. Fearing a sneak attack by the Tujia, it issued an edict ordering Wei Wei to send troops to contain the Tujia.

古文：乃命大将董勔、张芬出西山及南道，破峨和城、通鹤军。
现代文：韦皋便命令大将董面力、张芬从西山出兵到达南道，攻破峨和城、通鹤军。
English: Wei Wei then ordered the generals Dong Mian Li and Zhang Fen to send troops from Xishan to arrive in the South Road to break through the Ehe and Tonghe army.

古文：吐蕃南道元帅论莽热率众来援，又破之，杀伤数千人，焚定廉城。
现代文：吐蕃的南道元帅论莽热率兵前来援救，又被击败，被杀死杀伤了几千人，焚毁了定廉城。
English: On the other hand, the marshal of the southern province of Tubo led soldiers to come to the rescue, and was defeated, killed and injured several thousand people, and burned down Dinglian City.

古文：凡平堡栅五十余所，以功进位检校右仆射。
现代文：一共铲除堡栅五十余处，韦皋因功而晋封为检校右仆射。
English: A total of more than 50 bastions were eradicated, and Wei Wei was promoted to the position of the school inspector because of his achievements.

古文：皋又招抚西山羌女、诃陵、白狗、逋租、弱水、南王等八国酋长，入贡阙廷。
现代文：韦皋又招降、安抚西山羌蛮的女、诃陵、白狗、逋阻、弱水、南水等八国的酋长，入朝进贡。
English: Wei Wei also invited and pacified the chiefs of eight countries, such as Xishan's fierce women, Fuling, White Dog, Diao Jiao, Weak Water and Nanshui, and paid tribute to the North.

古文：十一年九月，加统押近界诸蛮、西山八国兼云南安抚等使。
现代文：贞元十一年九月，韦皋被加授统押近界诸蛮、西山八国兼云南安抚使。
English: In September of the eleventh year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Zheng was awarded the title of general and entrusted with the leadership of the barbarians of the Near East, the eight states of the West Mountain and the pacification of Yunnan.

古文：十二年二月，就加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：贞元十二年二月，就地加授中书门下平章事。
English: In February of the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan era, he was awarded the title of the second-ranked scholar of the Middle School.

古文：十三年，收复巂州城。
现代文：贞元十三年，收复州城。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenyuan, the state capital was recaptured.

古文：十六年，皋命将出军，累破吐蕃于黎、巂二州。
现代文：贞元十六年，韦皋派将领出兵，多次在黎州、州击败吐蕃的军队。
English: In the 16th year of the Zhengyuan, the general of the Wei Dynasty dispatched troops and repeatedly defeated the army of Tubo in Lizhou and Zhouzhou.

古文：吐蕃怒，遂大搜阅，筑垒造舟，欲谋入寇，皋悉挫之。
现代文：吐蕃大怒，便进行大规模搜索、检查，修筑堡垒，建造舟船，图谋入侵，韦皋将其全都挫败。
English: Enraged, Tubo carried out a large-scale search and inspection, built a fortress, built a boat, and plotted an invasion, all of which were foiled by Wei Xuan.

古文：于是吐蕃酋帅兼监统曩贡、腊城等九节度婴、笼官马定德与其大将八十七人举部落来降。
现代文：这时吐蕃酋帅兼监统曩贡、腊城等九地节度使婴，笼官马定德，以及他的八十七名大将率领整个部落前来投降。
English: At this time, the commander-in-chief of Tubo and the commander-in-chief of Shigong, Lacheng and other nine local festivals, the cage officer Ma Dingde, and his eighty-seven generals led the entire tribe to surrender.

古文：定德有计略，习知兵法及山川地形，吐蕃每用兵，定德常乘驿计事，蕃中诸将禀其成算。至是，自以扞边失律，惧得罪而归心焉。
现代文：马定德有谋略，熟知兵法和山川地形，吐蕃每次用兵，马定德常常乘坐驿车前往计议军事，吐蕃军中诸将都向他禀报既定方案；至此，他才因骚扰边境违犯律令，惧怕罪罚而归顺朝廷。
English: Ma Dingde had a strategy, he was familiar with the art of war and the topography of mountains and rivers, and every time he used troops, Ma Dingde often took a carriage to discuss the military, and all the generals in the Tubo army reported to him the established plan; at this point, he only obeyed the court because he was harassing the border and violating the law, and he was afraid of punishment.

古文：十七年，吐蕃昆明城管些蛮千余户又降。
现代文：贞元十七年，吐蕃在昆明城所管领的磨些蛮又有一千多户投降。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Zhengyuan, more than a thousand households under the control of Tu Wei in Kunming City surrendered.

古文：赞普以其众外溃，遂北寇灵、朔，陷麟州。
现代文：吐蕃的君长因其部众溃散，便侵犯北方的灵州、朔州，攻陷麟州。
English: The ruler of Tubo invaded Lingzhou and Shuozhou in the north and invaded Linzhou.

古文：德宗遣使至成都府，令皋出兵深入蕃界。
现代文：德宗派遣使臣到成都府，命令韦皋出兵深入吐蕃境内。
English: Emperor Dezong sent envoys to Chengdu Prefecture and ordered Emperor Wei to send troops deep into the territory of Tubo.

古文：皋乃令镇静军使陈洎等统兵万人出三奇路，威戎军使崔尧臣兵千人出龙溪石门路南，维保二州兵马使仇冕、保霸二州刺史董振等兵二千趋吐蕃维州城中，北路兵马使邢玼等四千趋吐蕃栖鸡、老翁城，都将高倜、王英俊兵二千趋故松州，陇东兵马使元膺兵八千人出南道雅、邛、黎、巂路。
现代文：韦皋便命令镇静军使陈洎等率领一万名士卒从三奇路出兵，令威戎军使崔尧臣率一千名士卒从龙溪石门的路南出兵，维州、保州二州兵马使仇冕及保州、霸州二州刺史董振等率二千士卒直趋吐蕃的维州城中，北路兵马使邢王此等率四千人直趋吐蕃的栖鸡、老翁城，都将高倜、王英俊率四千人进军原松州，陇东兵马使元膺的士卒八千人由南道的雅州、邛州、黎州、州一齐出击。
English: Wei Zheng then ordered the calming military envoy Chen Zheng and others to lead ten thousand soldiers from Sanqi Road, the Wei Rong military envoy Cui Zheng and his one thousand soldiers from the south of Longxi Shimen Road, the Victoria and Bozhou two states military and cavalry envoys of the vendetta and Bozhou and Bozhou two states military and cavalry envoys of Dong Zhen and others with a rate of two thousand soldiers from the middle of Victoria City, the North Road military and cavalry envoys of the King Zheng and others with a rate of four thousand soldiers from the Rooster and Lao Weng City, both Gao Zheng

古文：又令镇南军使韦良金兵一千三百续进，雅州经略使路惟明等兵三千趋吐蕃租、松等城，黎州经略使王有道兵二千人过大渡河，深入蕃界，巂州经略使陈孝阳、兵马使何大海、韦义等及磨些蛮、东蛮二部落主苴那时等兵四千进攻昆明城、诺济城。
现代文：韦皋又命令镇南军使韦良金率领一千三百人后续跟进，雅州经略使路惟明等率兵三千人直趋吐蕃的租、松等城，黎州经略使王有道率军二千人渡过大渡河，深入吐蕃境内，州经略使陈孝阳、兵马使何大海、韦义等，以及磨些蛮、东蛮二部落的酋长苴那时等的兵卒四千人进攻昆明城、诺济城。
English: Wei Wei also ordered the Zhennan Army to follow up with Wei Liangjin led by 1,300 men, the Yazhou Economic Delegate Lu Weiming led 3,000 soldiers straight to the cities of Tan and Song of Tubo, the Lizhou Economic Delegate Wang Youdao led 2,000 soldiers across the Dadu River and deep into Tubo, the State Economic Delegate Chen Xiaoyang, the Terracotta Warriors and Horses led by He Haiya and Wei Yi, and the chiefs of some barbarian and eastern barbarian tribes led 4,000 soldiers to attack Kunming City and Nooji City.

古文：自八月出军齐入，至十月破蕃兵十六万，拔城七、军镇五、户三千，擒生六千，斩首万余级，遂进攻维州。
现代文：从八月出兵入吐蕃，到十月击破吐蕃军队十六万，攻下城邑七座、军镇五处，有民户三千，生擒敌兵六千人，斩首万余，于是进攻维州。
English: From August, troops were sent to Tubo, and by October, they had defeated the Tubo army of 160,000, captured seven cities and towns, five military towns, three thousand households, six thousand enemy soldiers alive, and beheaded more than ten thousand, and then attacked Victoria.

古文：救军再至，转战千里，蕃军连败。
现代文：援军两度来到，转战千里，吐蕃军连连战败。
English: Reinforcements came twice, fought for thousands of miles, and the Tubo army was defeated repeatedly.

古文：于是寇灵、朔之众引而南下，赞普遣论莽热以内大相兼东境五道节度兵马都群牧大使，率杂虏十万而来解维州之围。
现代文：这时吐蕃进犯灵州、朔州的部众被调南下，吐蕃君主派遣论莽热以内大相之职兼任东境五道节度兵马都群牧大使，率领各部族混编的队伍十万人来解救维州之围。
English: At this time, the officials of Lingshou and Shuozhou of Tubo invaded Lingzhou and Shuozhou were transferred to the south, and the monarch of Tubo dispatched Tong Rong Rong Rong to serve as the ambassador of the Eastern Five-District Festival of Terracotta Warriors and Horses, leading a mixed team of 100,000 people from various tribes to relieve the siege of Wizhou.

古文：蜀师万人据险设伏以待之，先出千人挑战。
现代文：蜀州军一万名士卒占据险要设置伏兵以等待吐蕃军，先派出一千人前去挑战。
English: The ten thousand soldiers of the Shu State Army were on the verge of setting up an ambush to wait for the Tubo Army, and first sent a thousand men to challenge.

古文：莽热见我师之少，悉众追之。
现代文：论莽热见我军人少，便率领全军追击。
English: Seeing that our soldiers were few, he led the whole army in pursuit.

古文：发伏掩击，鼓噪雷骇，蕃兵自溃，生擒论莽热，虏众十万，歼夷者半。
现代文：我军伏兵齐出，攻其不备，呐喊声犹如惊雷，吐蕃军不战自溃，我军生擒论莽热，俘获其十万名士兵，杀死一半。
English: Our army ambushed and attacked it unprepared, shouting like thunder. The Tubo army self-destructed without a fight. Our army captured 100,000 of its soldiers and killed half of them.

古文：是岁十月，遣使献论莽热于朝；德宗数而释之，赐第于崇仁里。
现代文：这年十月，韦皋派人将论莽热献交朝廷，德宗数落他的罪状，然而释放了他，赐给他在崇仁里的府第一座。
English: In October of that year, Wei Zheng sent someone to present Ong Meng Rong to the imperial court. Emperor Dezong dropped the charges against him, but released him and gave him the first palace in Chongren.

古文：皋以功加检校司徒，兼中书令，封南康郡王。
现代文：韦皋因战功而加授检校司徒，兼中书令，封南康郡王。
English: Because of his war exploits, Wei Wei was awarded the title of inspector of the school, also the title of middle school, and the title of King of Nankang County.

古文：顺宗即位，加检校太尉。
现代文：顺宗即位之后，加授韦皋检校太尉。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shunzong, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of Weiqi School.

古文：顺宗久疾，不能临朝听政，宦者李忠言、侍棋待诏王叔文、侍书待诏王伾等三人颇干国政，高下在心。
现代文：顺宗长期患病，不能临朝听政，宦官李忠言、侍棋待诏王叔文、侍书待诏王亻丕等三人干预国家大政，大小事务均由他们随心所欲地处理。
English: Shunzong had been ill for a long time and could not attend the imperial court to listen to politics. Three people, eunuch Li Zhongyan, attendant Wang Shuwen, and attendant Wang Yao, intervened in the country's major politics, and they dealt with large and small affairs as they wished.

古文：皋乃遣支度副使刘辟使于京师，辟私谒王叔文曰： 太尉使致诚于足下，若能致某都领剑南三川，必有以相酬；如不留意，亦有以奉报。 
现代文：韦皋便派度支副使刘辟私下拜谒王叔文说： 太尉派我向足下表示诚意，如果能够使太尉总管剑南三川，必有重谢；如果不留意此事，也会有回报的。 
English: Wei Zheng then sent Liu Bi, the vice-chief of staff, to pay a private visit to Wang Shuwen, saying: "The captain sent me to express his sincerity to his subordinates. If I can make Jian Nan Sanchuan, the captain-in-chief, grateful, if I do not pay attention to this matter, there will be a reward.

古文：叔文大怒，将斩辟以徇；韦执谊固止之，辟乃私去。
现代文：王叔文大怒，打算杀了刘辟以警告效法者，韦执谊坚决劝止了他，刘辟便偷偷离去。
English: Wang Shouwen was furious and planned to kill Liu Bi with a warning to the imitator. Wei Xinyi resolutely dissuaded him, and Liu Bi secretly left.

古文：皋知王叔文人情不附，又知与韦执谊有隙，自以大臣可议社稷大计，乃上表请皇太子监国，曰： 臣闻上承宗庙，下镇黎元，永固无疆，莫先储两。
现代文：韦皋知道王叔文不随和人情，又知道他与韦执谊有嫌隙，自认为大臣可以议论国家大政方针，便上表请求皇太子监理国政，说道： 臣听说国君上则承继宗庙，下则镇抚百姓，要永远强固而无止境，没有比储君更重要的了。
English: Wei Zheng knew that Wang Shouwen did not follow the trend of conciliation, and also knew that he had a rift with Wei Xiyu. He thought that the minister could discuss the national policy, so he asked the crown prince to supervise the national policy, saying: The minister heard that the sovereign inherits the ancestral temple at the top and pacifies the people at the bottom, and must always be strong and endless. There is nothing more important than the crown prince.

古文：伏闻圣明以山陵未祔，哀毁逾制，心劳万几，伏计旬月之间，未甚痊复。
现代文：听说皇上因先帝灵柩尚未安葬，哀痛过分，心中操劳万种机务，估计十天半月之中，不能完全康复。
English: It is said that the Emperor has not yet been laid to rest in the coffin of his predecessor, he is grieving excessively, his mind is preoccupied with a million and one things, and it is estimated that he will not fully recover for ten days and a half months.

古文：皇太子睿质已长，淑问日彰，四海之心，实所倚赖。
现代文：皇太子智慧的资质已经成熟，美好的声誉日渐传扬，四海之内的人心，确实仰赖于他。
English: The crown prince's intellectual qualities have matured, his good reputation is gradually spreading, and the hearts of people around the world truly depend on him.

古文：伏望权令皇太子监抚庶政，以俟圣躬痊平，一日万几，免令壅滞。 
现代文：恳望暂令皇太子监督、执掌国政，以待皇上圣体痊愈安康，以免每日万般事务积压、滞留。 
English: I earnestly hope that the Crown Prince will be temporarily appointed to supervise and take charge of state affairs, so that the Emperor's health will be restored and he will not be bogged down in the daily backlog of affairs.

古文：又上皇太子笺曰：
现代文：又上书给皇太子说道：
English: He also wrote to the crown prince, saying:

古文：殿下体重离之德，当储贰之重，所以克昌九庙，式固万方，天下安危，系于殿下。
现代文： 殿下体现着重黎的盛德，身当储君的重任，所以能使国家昌盛，万方稳定，天下之安危，系于殿下一身。
English: His Royal Highness embodies the virtues of the Li dynasty and the important role of the crown prince, so he can make the country prosperous, stable in all respects, and the world safe and secure.

古文：皋位居将相，志切匡扶，先朝奖知，早承恩顾。
现代文：臣身居将相之位，立志匡扶社稷，先朝之奖掖知遇，我早已承受恩顾。
English: As a vassal living in the position of shogun, determined to support the community, and knowing the rewards of the previous dynasty, I have already received patronage.

古文：人臣之分，知无不为，愿上答眷私，罄输肝鬲。
现代文：人臣之本分，在于知则必行，希望报答皇上眷顾之恩情，完全献出忠诚之心志。
English: The duty of a vassal is to know the right thing to do, to hope to repay the emperor's favor, and to be completely loyal.

古文：伏以圣上嗣膺鸿业，睿哲英明，攀感先朝，志存孝理。
现代文：臣俯首以为，圣上承继伟业，英明睿智，仰慕先朝，心存先道。
English: The vassal bowed his head, thinking that the saint was inheriting the great cause, was wise and sagacious, admired the previous dynasty, and was mindful of the previous path.

古文：谅闇之际，方委大臣，但付托偶失于善人，而参决多亏于公政。
现代文：居丧之际，始将政务委托给大臣，但偶然未托付给有德之人，参与决策多有损于国政。
English: On the occasion of his death, he began to entrust government affairs to the minister, but by chance he did not entrust it to a virtuous person. Participating in decision-making is more detrimental to national politics.

古文：今群小得志，隳紊纪纲，官以势迁，政由情改，朋党交构，荧惑宸聪。
现代文：如今群小得志，败乱纲纪，官员仗着权势升迁，政令由着感情修改，结成私党，蒙蔽圣上。
English: Nowadays, a group of petty ambition, the defeat of discipline, officials rely on the power of promotion, government orders modified by emotion, formed a private party, blinded the sacred.

古文：树置腹心，遍于贵位；潜结左右，难在萧墙。
现代文：提拔的心腹之人，遍布于朝廷的高位；暗中结纳圣上近臣，灾难就在萧墙之内。
English: Promoted confidants, spread throughout the high ranks of the imperial court; secretly married sacred vassals, the disaster is within Xiaowan.

古文：国赋散于权门，王税不入天府，亵慢无忌，高下在心。
现代文：国家的财赋分散于权贵之门，君王的税收进不了朝廷府库，轻浮散漫无所顾忌，大小事务的处置皆随心所欲。
English: The country's wealth is dispersed at the doors of the powerful, the king's taxes cannot enter the imperial treasury, frivolity and dissipation have no scruples, and the disposition of large and small affairs are whatever you want.

古文：货贿流闻，迁转失叙，先圣屏黜赃犯之类，咸擢居省寺之间。
现代文：财富流失，官员的升迁调动也失了规矩，先皇所摒弃罢黜的贪赃枉法之徒，都提拔到政府的要冲之位。
English: Wealth has been lost, the promotion and transfer of officials has become irregular, and corrupt officials who were dismissed by the former emperor have been promoted to important positions in the government.

古文：至令忠臣陨涕，正人结舌，遐迩痛心，人知不可。
现代文：以至于忠臣痛哭流涕，正人君子缄口不言，远近之人都感到痛心，人人知道不可行。
English: So that loyal subjects weep bitterly, honest men and gentlemen hold their tongues, people near and far are heartbroken, and everyone knows it cannot be done.

古文：伏恐奸雄乘便，因此谋动干戈，危殿下之家邦，倾太宗之王业。
现代文：臣担心奸雄乘此有利之机，阴谋动用武力，危及殿下之家邦，颠覆太宗的王业。
English: The vassal feared that the villain would take advantage of this favorable opportunity to plot the use of force, endanger His Imperial Highness's home country, and subvert Emperor Taizong's reign.

古文：伏惟太宗栉沐风雨，经营庙朝，将垂二百年，欲及千万祀；而一朝使叔文奸佞之徒，侮弄朝政，恣其胸臆，坐致倾危。
现代文：臣追思太宗奔走操劳，辛苦创造的王朝，已将近二百年了，希望能延续千年万载，而一旦让王叔文这些奸佞之徒，侮弄朝政，为所欲为，眼睁睁地听任国家覆亡。
English: It has been nearly two hundred years since Emperor Taizong worked hard to create the dynasty, and it is hoped that it will continue for thousands of years. However, once Wang Shouwen is allowed to do as he pleases, he will allow the country to fall apart.

古文：臣每思之，痛心疾首！
现代文：臣每思及此，痛心疾首。
English: Every time I think about it, my heart sinks.

古文：伏望殿下斥逐群小，委任贤良，忄妻々血诚，输写于此！
现代文：切望陛下斥逐群小，委任贤良，怀着满腔赤诚，奉献书写于此。 
English: Desirous of His Majesty's banishment of the petty and appointment of the virtuous, with all sincerity, the dedication is written here.

古文：太子优令答之。
现代文：太子以优宠的敕令答谢了韦皋。
English: The prince thanked Wei Wei with a favor.

古文：而裴均、严绶笺表继至，由是政归太子，尽逐伾文之党。
现代文：而裴均、严绶的笺表也接着送达，从此政柄归于太子，王亻丕、王叔文一党全被驱逐。
English: However, the imperial edicts of Pei Jun and Yan Kun were also delivered. From then on, the political power belonged to the crown prince, and Wang Kun and Wang Shouwen and their entire party were expelled.

古文：是岁，暴疾卒，时年六十一，赠太师，废朝五日。
现代文：这年，韦皋暴病而死，时年六十一岁，追赠太师，停止上朝五日。
English: That year, Wei Zheng died of a violent illness, at the age of sixty-one. He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and ceased to ascend the throne for five days.

古文：皋在蜀二十一年，重赋敛以事月进，卒致蜀土虚竭，时论非之。
现代文：韦皋在蜀地二十一年，加重征收赋税以确保按月向朝廷进奉，终于使蜀地财源空虚枯竭，时论对此颇有非议。
English: In his twenty-first year in Shoudi, Wei Zheng increased the tax collection to ensure that the imperial court was paid on a monthly basis, finally draining Shoudi's financial resources, which was criticized by contemporary commentators.

古文：其从事累官稍崇者，则奏为属郡刺史，或又署在府幕，多不令还朝，盖不欲泄所为于阙下故也。
现代文：他属下的官员积年升迁品级较高的，就上奏保举他们为属下州郡的刺史，或者再安排做府中幕僚，大多不让他们返回朝廷任职，大概是不想让他们向朝廷泄露自己的作为的缘故。
English: Most of the officials under him were not allowed to return to the imperial court, probably because he did not want them to reveal their actions to the imperial court.

古文：故刘辟因皋故态，图不轨以求三川，历阶之作，盖有由然。
现代文：因而刘辟便沿袭韦皋的旧法，图谋不轨以求取得三川，祸乱的发生，总是有来由的。
English: As a result, Liu Bei followed Wei Xuan's old method and plotted to obtain the Three Rivers. There is always a reason for the occurrence of calamity.

古文：令献太庙、郊社，徇于市，即日戮于子城西南隅。初，辟尝病，见诸问疾者来，皆以手据地，倒行入辟口，辟因砾裂食之；惟卢文若至，则如平常。
现代文：韦皋之兄韦聿当时任国子监司业，刘辟与卢文若据有西川而叛变，韦皋的侄儿韦行式，早先娶了卢文若之妹为妻，所以此时韦皋不上奏朝廷。韦行式被收审下狱之后，其妻籍没入官，皇上下诏，令御史台追查韦聿，韦聿被捕下狱。
English: Wei Xuan's brother Wei Xuan was then in charge of supervising the sons of the state, and Liu Bi and Lu Wenru were said to have defected to the West. Wei Xuan's nephew Wei Xingshi had earlier married Lu Wenru's sister, so at this time Wei Xingshi did not report to the imperial court. After Wei Xingshi was put on trial and sent to prison, his wife did not become an official, and the emperor issued an edict ordering the imperial court to investigate Wei Xunru, and Wei Xingshi was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：故尤与文若厚，竟以同恶俱赤族，不其怪欤！张建封，字本立，兗州人。
现代文：官府认为韦行式之妻在远地，与其兄不通关节，不应当连坐，诏令韦行式之妻返回，并释放了韦聿。张建封字本立，兖州人。
English: The government considered that Wei Xingzhi's wife was in a distant land and did not get along with her brother, and should not sit together. They ordered Wei Xingzhi's wife to return and released Wei Wei. Zhang Jianfeng is a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：祖仁范，洪州南昌县令，贞元初赠郑州刺史。
现代文：祖父张仁范，洪州南昌县令，贞元初追赠郑州刺史。
English: Zhang Renfan's grandfather, the governor of Nanchang County in Hongzhou, presented Zhengzhou's first imperial crown to Zhenyuan.

古文：父玠，少豪侠，轻财重士。
现代文：父张，年轻时豪爽侠义，轻视钱财，看重士人。
English: Father Zhang, when he was young, was brave and chivalrous, despised money, and valued scholars.

古文：安禄山反，令伪将李庭伟率蕃兵胁下城邑，至鲁郡；太守韩择木具礼郊迎，置于邮馆。
现代文：安禄山谋反时，命伪将李庭伟率领藩镇军队威胁治下城邑，至鲁郡，太守韩择木备礼在郊外迎接，将李庭伟安置于客馆。
English: When Anlu Mountain was plotting a rebellion, Li Tingwei led the domain and town army to threaten the cities and towns under his control. When he arrived in Lu County, the governor Han Zegi prepared a ceremony in the suburbs to welcome Li Tingwei and placed him in a guest house.

古文：玠率乡豪张贵、孙邑、段绛等集兵将杀之。
现代文：张率领乡间豪士张贵、孙邑、段绛等聚集兵卒打算杀死李庭伟。
English: Zhang led the gathered soldiers, including local heroes Zhang Gui, Sun Yiu, and Duan Yu, to plan to kill Li Tingwei.

古文：择木怯懦，大惧；唯员外司兵张孚然其计，遂杀庭伟并其党数十人，择木方遣使奏闻。
现代文：韩择木怯懦，十分恐惧；惟有员外司兵张孚赞同这个办法，于是杀了李庭伟及其同党几十人，韩择木这才派遣使者向朝廷奏明。
English: Han Zegui was cowardly and full of fear; only the Foreign Corporal Zhang Fu agreed to this plan, so he killed Li Tingwei and dozens of his fellow party members. Han Zegui then sent an envoy to inform the imperial court.

古文：择木、张孚俱受官赏，玠因游荡江南，不言其功。
现代文：韩择木、张孚都受到升官的奖励，张因到江南游历去了，未提及他的功劳。
English: Both Han Zhengmu and Zhang Fu were rewarded with promotion. Zhang went on a trip to the south of the Yangtze River without mentioning his achievements.

古文：以建封贵，赠秘书监。
现代文：后因张建封官职显贵，追赐张为秘书监。
English: Later, because Zhang Jianfeng's official position was distinguished, Zhang was posthumously awarded the title of Secretary Supervisor.

古文：建封少颇属文，好谈论，慷慨负气，以功名为己任。
现代文：张建封年轻时颇善做文章，好发议论，慷慨激昂，不甘居于人下，以建树功名为自己的目标。
English: When Zhang Jianfeng was young, he was quite good at writing articles, good at making arguments, impassioned, unwilling to live under others, and his goal was to build a tree.

古文：宝应中，李光弼镇河南，时苏、常等州草贼，寇掠郡邑，代宗遣中使马日新与光弼将兵马同征讨之。
现代文：宝应年间，李光弼镇守河南，当时苏州、常州等地草寇劫掠郡县，代宗派遣宦官马日新与李光弼率领兵马一同去征讨。
English: During the Baoying Dynasty, Li Guangxuan was in charge of Henan Province. At that time, grasshoppers from Suzhou, Changzhou and other places plundered counties and counties. The daimong sent eunuch Ma Rixin and Li Guangxuan to lead the soldiers and horses to go to collect.

古文：建封乃见日新，自请说喻贼徒。日新从之，遂入虎窟、蒸里等贼营，以利害祸福喻之。
现代文：张建封便去拜见马日新，请求自己前去劝说贼徒归降，马日新同意了他，张建封便进入虎窟、蒸里等处贼营，向他们说明福祸利害。
English: Zhang Jianfeng then went to see Ma Rixin and asked him to go and persuade the bandits to surrender. Ma Rixin agreed with him. Zhang Jianfeng then entered the tiger cave, steam village and other places of the bandit camp to explain to them the benefits and harms.

古文：一夕，贼党数千人并诣日新请降，遂悉放归田里。
现代文：一天晚上，数千名贼人一起前往马日新处请求归降，于是将他们全部放归乡里。
English: One night, thousands of thieves went to Mazhixin together to ask for surrender, so they were all released to the countryside.

古文：大历初，道州刺史裴虬荐建封于观察使韦之晋，辟为参谋，奏授左清道兵曹，不乐吏役而去。
现代文：大历初，道州刺史裴虬向观察使韦之晋举荐张建封，韦之晋召聘他为参谋，奏请朝廷授他左清道兵曹，张建封不乐意担任这种小吏差使而离去。
English: At the beginning of the Chinese calendar, Zhang Jianfeng was recommended by the Daozhou magistrate Pei Jun to the observation of Wei Zhi Jin. Wei Zhi Jin recruited him as a staff officer and asked the court to award him with the title of Zuo Qing Taoist Sergeant. Zhang Jianfeng was not happy to serve as such a petty officer and left.

古文：滑亳节度使令狐彰闻其名，辟之；彰既未曾朝觐，建封心不悦之，遂投刺于转运使刘晏，自述其志，不愿仕于彰也。
现代文：滑亳节度使令狐彰闻知他的名声，征用了他；令狐彰未曾入朝晋见，张建封心中不悦，便到转运使刘晏处投名帖自荐，自己陈述志向，不愿在令狐彰那儿任职。
English: At the time of the Gliding Festival, Ling Foo-Chang learned of his reputation and requisitioned him. As Ling Foo-Chang had never been to the Court of the Jin Dynasty, Zhang Jianfeng was not pleased, so he went to Liu Ye's transfer office to apply for a post, stating his ambition and unwilling to work for Ling Foo-Chang.

古文：晏奏试大理评事，勾当军务。岁余，复罢归。
现代文：刘晏奏请试用他为大理评事，处理军务；一年多以后，张建封再次罢职归家。
English: Liu Yingxiao asked Zhang Jianfeng to try out as a military commentator to deal with military affairs; more than a year later, Zhang Jianfeng resigned again and returned home.

古文：建封素与马燧友善，大历十年，燧为河阳三城镇遏使，辟为判官，奏授监察御史，赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：张建封素来与马燧相友善。大历十年，马燧任河阳三城镇遏使，征聘张建封为判官，并奏请朝廷授予他监察御史，赐绯衣银鱼袋。
English: Zhang Jianfeng had always been on friendly terms with Ma Jun. In the tenth year of the lunar calendar, Ma Jun served as the governor of three towns in Heyang, recruited Zhang Jianfeng as a judge, and petitioned the imperial court to grant him the title of inspector of imperial history and a silver fish bag.

古文：李灵曜反于梁、宋间，与田悦掎角，同为叛逆，燧与李忠臣同讨平之，军务多咨于建封。
现代文：李灵曜在梁州、宋州间谋反，与田悦互相策应，同为叛逆之臣，马燧与李忠臣一同讨伐平定了他们，在军务方面多向张建封咨询。
English: Li Lingyang plotted a rebellion between Liangzhou and Songzhou, and he and Tian Yue responded to each other. They were both rebellious vassals. Ma Jun and Li Zhongchen fought together to pacify them, and consulted Zhang Jianfeng on military affairs.

古文：及燧为河东节度使，复奏建封为判官，特拜侍御史。
现代文：及至马燧任河东节度使，再次奏请张建封为判官，特拜为侍御史。
English: And when Ma Jun was appointed as the envoy of the Hedong Festival, he once again asked Zhang Jianfeng to be the judge, and Te Bai to be the attendant of history.

古文：建中初，燧荐之于朝，杨炎将用为度支郎中，卢杞恶之，出为岳州刺史。
现代文：建中初，马燧向朝廷举荐他，杨炎拟用他为度支郎中，可卢杞厌恶他，派他出任岳州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the middle school, Ma Xuan recommended him to the imperial court, Yang Yan intended to use him as a tutor, but Lu Xuan detested him and sent him to serve as the governor of Yuezhou.

古文：时淮西节度使李希烈乘破灭梁崇义之势，渐纵恣跋扈，寿州刺史崔昭数书疏往来。淮南节度使陈少游奏之，上遽召宰相令选寿州刺史。
现代文：当时淮西节度使李希烈乘破梁崇义的局势，逐渐骄横跋扈，同寿州刺史崔昭有好几次书信来往，淮南节度使陈少游将此事奏报朝廷，皇上立即召见宰相，令他另选寿州刺史。
English: At that time, the Huaixi Festival made Li Xilai take advantage of the situation in Chongyi, and gradually became arrogant. He had several letters with the Shoushou scribe Cui Zhao. The Huainan Festival made Chen Shaoyou report the matter to the imperial court. The emperor immediately summoned the prime minister and ordered him to choose another scribe from Shoushou.

古文：卢杞本恶建封，是日苍黄，遂荐建封以代崔昭牧寿阳。
现代文：卢杞本来厌恶张建封，这天仓皇失措，便荐举张建封替代崔昭任寿州刺史。
English: Lu Wei originally disliked Zhang Jianfeng, but in a moment of panic, he recommended Zhang Jianfeng as a replacement for Cui Zhaoren of Shoushou.

古文：李希烈称兵，寇陷汝州，擒李元平，击走胡德信、唐汉臣等，又摧破哥舒曜于襄城，连陷郑、汴等州，李勉弃城而遁。
现代文：李希烈起兵，攻陷汝州，擒获李元平，击走刘德信、唐汉臣等，又在襄城摧毁哥舒曜的军队，连续攻陷郑州、汴州等地，李勉弃城逃走。
English: Li Xili took up arms, invaded Ruzhou, captured Li Yuanping, drove away Liu Deshin, Tang Hanzhong, etc., destroyed the army of Xiangcheng in Xiangcheng, continuously invaded Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou and other places, Li Yan abandoned the city and fled.

古文：泾师内逆，驾幸奉天，贼锋益盛。淮南陈少游潜通希烈，寻称伪号，改元，遣将杨丰赍伪赦书二道，令送少游及建封。
现代文：泾原军内部反叛，圣驾临幸奉天，叛贼锋芒更盛，淮南陈少游暗中勾结李希烈，不久李希烈自建伪朝名号，更改年号，派遣叛将杨丰携带伪赦书两道，令他送交陈少游和张建封。
English: There was a rebellion within the Yuyuan army. The sacred driver was lucky enough to be sent to heaven. The traitors were more active. Chen Shaoyou of Huainan secretly colluded with Li Xilai. Soon, Li Xilai himself created a fake name for the dynasty, changed the year, and sent the traitor Yang Feng with two fake pardon letters for him to send to Chen Shaoyou and Zhang Jianfeng.

古文：至寿州，建封缚杨丰徇于军中。
现代文：杨丰抵达寿州，张建封将他绑缚起来在军中示众。
English: When Yang Feng arrived in Shoushu, Zhang Jianfeng tied him up and paraded him in the army.

古文：适会中使自行在及使江南回者同至，建封集众对中使斩丰于通衢，封伪赦书送行在，远近震骇。
现代文：适逢从皇上行宫来的宦官和出使江南返回的宦官同时来到，张建封召集部众，当着宦官的面，在通衢大路上斩了杨丰，并密封伪赦书送至皇上行宫，远近之人对此事均感震惊。
English: When the eunuch who came from the emperor's palace and the eunuch who was sent to the south of the Yangtze River arrived at the same time, Zhang Jianfeng called together his subordinates. In front of the eunuch, he beheaded Yang Feng on Tonglu Road and sealed the fake pardon letter and sent it to the emperor's palace. People near and far were shocked by this.

古文：陈少游闻之，既怒且惧。
现代文：陈少游闻知此事，既恼怒又害怕。
English: When Chen Shaoyou heard about this, he was both angry and afraid.

古文：建封乃具奏少游与希烈往来事状。
现代文：张建封便将陈少游和李希烈往来的情况全部奏报皇上。
English: Zhang Jianfeng then reported to the emperor the entire situation between Chen Shaoyou and Li Xili.

古文：希烈又伪署其党杜少诚为淮南节度使，令先平寿州，趣江都。
现代文：李希烈又非法任命他的党羽杜少诚为淮南节度使，命他先平定寿州，再进兵江都。
English: Li Xilai also illegally appointed his henchman Du Shosheng as the Huainan Festival envoy, ordering him to first pacify Shoushou and then march into Jiangdu.

古文：建封令其将贺兰元均、邵怡等守霍丘秋栅。
现代文：张建封令其部将贺兰元均、邵怡等防守霍丘的秋栅。
English: Zhang Jianfeng ordered his subordinates He Lan Yuanjun, Shao Yi and others to defend Huoqiu's autumn palisade.

古文：少诚竟不能侵轶，乃南掠蕲、黄等州，又为伊慎所挫衄。
现代文：杜少诚终究不能侵犯寿州，便向南劫掠蕲州、黄州等地，又被伊慎挫败。
English: After all, Du Shaocheng could not invade Shoushou, so he went south to plunder Luzhou, Huangzhou and other places, and was defeated by Yishen.

古文：寻加建封兼御史中丞、本州团练使。
现代文：不久加授张建封兼御史中丞和本州团练使。
English: Soon, Zhang Jianfeng, who was also the vice-president of the imperial history department, and the Honshu regimental training officer were also conferred.

古文：车驾还京，陈少游忧愤而卒。
现代文：皇上返回京师，陈少游忧愤而死。
English: When the emperor returned to Beijing, Chen Shaoyou died of grief.

古文：兴元元年十二月，乃加兼御史大夫，充濠寿庐三州都团练观察使。于是大修缉城池，悉心绥抚，远近悦附，自是威望益重。
现代文：兴元元年，又加授张建封兼御史大夫，充任濠寿庐三州都团练观察使，于是大规模修葺城池，悉心安抚百姓，远近人民都乐于依附，从此威望更高。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Zhang Jianfeng was also awarded the title of Imperial Historian, and he served as the observation envoy of the three states' capital group training. As a result, he repaired the castle on a large scale, conscientiously appeased the people, and the people near and far were willing to adhere to him. Since then, his prestige has been higher.

古文：李希烈选凶党精悍者率劲卒以攻建封，旷日持久，无所克获而去。
现代文：李希烈挑选党羽中精悍者率领强兵攻打张建封，旷日持久地对峙，终于无所获取而离去。
English: Li Xilei selected the most capable members of the party to lead a strong army to attack Zhang Jianfeng, and the confrontation lasted for a long time. Finally, he left without gaining anything.

古文：及希烈平，进阶封，赐一子正员官。
现代文：及至李希烈被平定，张建封升官晋级，并赐其一子以正员官职。
English: After Li Xilai was subdued, Zhang Jianfeng was promoted to a higher rank, and his son was given an official post.

古文：初，建中年，李涓以徐州归附。涓寻卒，其后高承宗父子、独孤华相继为刺史。为贼侵削，贫困不能自存；又咽喉要地，据江淮运路，朝廷思择重臣以镇者久之。
现代文：当初，建中年间李洧率徐州归附朝廷，不久李洧去世，此后高承宗父子、独孤华相继任徐州刺史，因被贼军侵扰掠夺，百姓贫困无以为生；又因徐州是咽喉要地，处于江淮航运的要冲，朝廷早就想挑选权位尊宠的大臣去镇守。
English: At first, during the middle of the Jian period, Xuzhou was annexed to the imperial court under the leadership of Li Qian. Soon after, Li Qian died, after which Gao Chengzong, Gao Chengzong's father and son, and Du Guohua successively served as the governor of Xuzhou. Because of the invasion and plunder by the thief army, the people were poor and could not make a living. Also, because Xuzhou was an important place and was in the middle of the Jianghuai shipping line, the imperial court had long wanted to select a powerful and beloved minister to guard the town.

古文：贞元四年，以建封为徐州刺史，兼御史大夫、徐泗濠节度、支度营田观察使。
现代文：贞元四年，任命张建封为徐州刺史，兼御史大夫、徐泗濠节度使、支度营田观察使。
English: In the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era, Zhang Jianfeng was appointed as the chief historian of Xuzhou, as well as the chief historian, the delegate to the Xuzhou Festival, and the delegate to the Xuzhou Yingtian Observation.

古文：既创置军伍，建封触事躬亲；性宽厚，容纳人过误，而按据纲纪，不妄曲法贷人。每言事，忠义感激，人皆畏悦。
现代文：创设军队以后，张建封遇事皆亲自处理，他性情宽厚，能够容忍别人的过失，而依据法律行事，不随意枉法宽免，每谈及事理，总是以忠义感动激发人，人们对他又敬畏又爱戴。
English: After the creation of the army, Zhang Jianfeng personally handled all matters. He was generous in nature, able to tolerate the faults of others, and acted according to the law, not arbitrarily forgiving and forgiving. Whenever he talked about matters, he always moved and inspired people with loyalty. People feared and loved him.

古文：七年，进位检校礼部尚书。
现代文：贞元七年，晋封检校礼部尚书。
English: In the seventh year of the Zhengyuan era, the ceremonial department of the Jinfu inspection school was rewritten.

古文：十二年，加检校右仆射。
现代文：贞元十二年，加授检校右仆射。
English: In the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan era, he was awarded the right to shoot.

古文：十三年冬，入觐京师，德宗礼遇加等，特以双日开延英召对，又令朝参入大夫班，以示殊宠。
现代文：贞元十三年冬，入京觐见皇上，德宗对他加等给予礼遇，特地在双日开启延英殿召见应对，又令他上朝参见时入大夫班行列，以示特别恩宠。
English: In the winter of the 13th year of the Jōgen era, when he entered the capital to see the emperor, Emperor Dezong gave him special treatment. He specially opened the Yan Ying Palace on the 2nd day of the month to receive him, and made him enter the doctor's class when he visited the emperor, to show his special grace.

古文：建封赋《朝天行》一章上献，赐名马珍玩颇厚。
现代文：张建封赋《朝天行》一章奉献，皇上赐给他名马珍玩等厚赏。
English: Zhang Jianfeng gave a chapter of "The Ascendant" as a dedication, and the emperor gave him a rich reward such as famous horses and rare toys.

古文：时宦者主宫中市买，谓之宫市，抑买人物，稍不如本估。
现代文：当时宦官掌管宫中采购事务，称为宫市，他们压价购入货物，比原来的售价稍低一些。
English: At that time, eunuchs were in charge of procurement in the palace, known as the palace market, and they purchased goods at a reduced price, slightly lower than the original price.

古文：末年不复行文书，置白望数十百人于两市及要闹坊曲，阅人所卖物；但称宫市，则敛手付与，真伪不复可辨，无敢问所从来及论价之高下者。率用直百钱物买人直数千物，仍索进奉门户及脚价银。
现代文：后来每年不再颁行公文敕书，而派遣 白望 数十百人，在东西两市及要冲热闹的坊曲，看见人家所卖的货物，只称 宫市 ，对方就要恭敬地奉上，真假也分不清楚，也不敢问他是从哪里来的和论价钱的高低，大多用只值一百钱的东西换取别人值几千钱的货物，还要索取进奉门户和脚价钱。
English: Later, the official document was no longer issued every year, but sent to Baiwang. Tens of hundreds of people, in the two cities of the East and West, and to the bustle of the square, saw the goods sold by others, only known as the palace city. The other party had to respectfully present it. It was not clear whether it was true or false. They did not dare to ask where he came from and discuss the price. Most of them exchanged something worth only one hundred dollars for goods worth thousands of dollars. They also had to ask for the portal and foot price.

古文：人将物诣市，至有空手而归者，名为宫市，其实夺之。
现代文：人们把货物拿到市场上，甚至有空手而归的，名为 宫市 ，其实是抢夺。
English: People take the goods to the market, and some even return empty-handed, called miyaichi, which is actually a robbery.

古文：尝有农夫以驴驮柴，宦者市之，与绢数尺，又就索门户，仍邀驴送柴至内。
现代文：曾有一农夫用驴驮柴去集市上卖，宦官买柴，付给他几尺绢，又马上索取门户钱，并要他用驴将柴送至宫中。
English: Once upon a time, a farmer used a donkey to fetch firewood to sell at the market. The eunuch bought the firewood, paid him a few shillings, and immediately demanded the portal money and asked him to use the donkey to carry the firewood to the palace.

古文：农夫啼泣，以所得绢与之，不肯受，曰： 须得尔驴。 
现代文：农夫啼哭流泪，把所得的绢付给宦官，宦官不肯受，说： 须得你的驴才行。 
English: The farmer, weeping and wailing, paid the eunuch the money he had earned. The eunuch refused to accept it, saying, "I need your donkey."

古文：农夫曰： 我有父母妻子，待此而后食；今与汝柴，而不取直而归，汝尚不肯，我有死而已。 
现代文：农夫说： 我有父母妻儿，等我卖柴换钱才有饭吃，现在把柴给了你却不拿钱回去，你还不肯罢休，我只有性命一条。 
English: The farmer said, "I have my parents, my wife, and my children. I have to wait until I can sell the wood for money before I can eat. Now I have given you the wood, but I can't take the money back. You still won't give up. I only have one life."

古文：遂殴宦者。
现代文：便揍这宦官。
English: Note the eunuch.

古文：街使擒之以闻，乃黜宦者，赐农夫绢十匹。
现代文：街使抓了农夫向皇上奏报，皇上罢黜宦官，赐给农夫绢十匹。
English: The town marshal caught the farmer to report to the emperor, the emperor dismissed the eunuch and gave the farmer ten yakitori.

古文：然宫市不为之改，谏宫御史表疏论列，皆不听。
现代文：然而宫市并未因此改变，谏官和御史上表章一一论说，都不听。
English: However, the Imperial Palace did not change as a result, and neither the eunuchs nor the Imperial Historian listened.

古文：吴凑以戚里为京兆尹，深言其弊。
现代文：吴凑作为外戚担任京兆尹，深刻分析了宫市的弊端。
English: Wu Qian, as the maternal relative of Beijing Zhaoyun, deeply analyzed the drawbacks of the palace city.

古文：建封入觐，具奏之，德宗颇深嘉纳；而户部侍郎、判度支苏弁希宦者之旨，因入奏事，上问之，弁对曰： 京师游手堕业者数千万家，无土著生业，仰宫市取给。 
现代文：张建封入朝觐见，详尽禀奏此事，德宗深表赞许而采纳；而户部侍郎、判度支苏弁逢迎宦官心意，因入宫奏事，皇上询问他的看法，苏弁回答道： 京师游手好闲的失业者有成千上万家，在本地均无谋生之业，仰赖宫市为生。 
English: Zhang Jianfeng went to the Imperial Court to present the matter in detail, which was accepted by Emperor Dezong, who expressed his deep appreciation. Meanwhile, the Household Attendant and the Judgement Support Sub-Commander met with the eunuch's heart, and the Emperor asked him for his opinion on the matter, to which the Sub-Commander replied, "There are thousands of idle unemployed people in Beijing, who have no livelihood in the local area, and depend on the palace for their livelihood.

古文：上信之，凡言宫市者皆不听用。
现代文：皇上相信他的话，凡奏谏宫市的都不听纳。
English: The emperor believed his words and would not listen to anyone who played the harp.

古文：诏书矜免百姓诸色逋赋，上问建封，对曰： 凡逋赋残欠，皆是累积年月，无可征收，虽蒙陛下忧恤，百姓亦无所裨益。 
现代文：下达诏书怜悯百姓减免其拖欠未交的赋税，皇上询问张建封的意见，张建封回答说： 所有拖欠的赋税残额，都是累积多年无法征收的，虽蒙陛下哀怜体恤，百姓还是得不到什么好处。 
English: Issuing an edict of mercy to the people to reduce and exempt their unpaid tax arrears, the emperor asked Zhang Jianfeng's opinion. Zhang Jianfeng replied: All the tax arrears are accumulated for many years and cannot be collected. Although His Majesty is pitiful and compassionate, the people still do not get any benefits.

古文：时河东节度使李说、华州刺史卢微，皆中风疾，口不能言，足不能行，但信任左右胥吏决遣之。
现代文：那时河东节度使李说、华州刺史卢征都患中风，口不能言，脚不能行，只听任左右亲近胥吏裁决处事。
English: At that time, the Hedong Festival made Li say that Huazhou, Zhishulou and Zheng all suffered from stroke, unable to speak, unable to walk, and only allowed to be close to the decision-making officials.

古文：建封皆悉闻奏，上深嘉纳。
现代文：张建封都一一禀奏，皇上表示赞同。
English: Zhang Jianfeng played all the parts, and the emperor agreed.

古文：又金吾大将军李翰好伺察城中细事，加诸闻奏，冀求恩宠，人畏而恶之。
现代文：又有金吾大将军李翰喜欢窥探城中琐事，加在奏章中禀告，希望求取皇上恩宠，人们对他既畏惧又厌恶。
English: There was also Kingu's general, Li Han, who liked to pry into the trivialities of the city, adding obituaries to the records, hoping to gain the emperor's favor. People both feared and loathed him.

古文：建封亦奏之，乃下诏曰： 比来朝官或诸处过从，金吾皆有上闻。
现代文：张建封将此事也禀奏皇上，皇上降诏说： 近来朝官有时与各处往来，金吾大将军皆向皇帝奏报。
English: Zhang Jianfeng also reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict saying, "Recently, the imperial officials sometimes have dealings with various places, and all the great generals of Kingu report to the emperor.

古文：其间如素是亲故，或曾同僚友，伏腊岁序，时有还往，亦是常礼，人情所通。
现代文：这当中，如果向来是亲戚老友，或曾为同僚，冬夏年节，时有往来，也是通常礼教，人情所通达的。
English: Among them, if they have always been relatives and old friends, or have been colleagues, winter and summer festivals, sometimes have contacts, it is also usually a matter of etiquette and human feelings.

古文：自今以后，金吾不须闻。 
现代文：从今以后，金吾不必上奏。 
English: From now on, Kingo doesn't have to play.

古文：十四年春上巳，赐宰臣百僚宴于曲江亭，特令建封与宰相同座而食。
现代文：贞元十四年春，三月初一，皇上在曲江亭向宰臣和百官赐宴，特别令张建封与宰相同座而食。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of the Jeongwon era, on the first day of March, the emperor gave a banquet to the vice-minister and hundreds of officials at Qujiang Pavilion, and specially ordered Zhang Jianfeng to eat with the vice-minister.

古文：贞元已后，籓帅入朝及还镇，如马燧、浑瑊、刘玄佐、李抱真、曲环之崇秩鸿勋，未有获御制诗以送者，建封将还镇，特赐诗曰： 牧守寄所重，才贤生为时。
现代文：贞元以后，藩镇将帅入朝和返镇，如马燧、浑王咸、刘玄佐、李抱真、曲环这样品级极高的勋臣，没有一个能得到皇上御制诗为其送行。张建封将要返回藩镇时，皇上特别赐诗道： 牧守寄所重，才贤生为时。
English: After the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, none of the high-ranking vassals, such as Ma Zhen, Hun Wang Xian, Liu Xuan Zuo, Li Baozhen, and Qu Huan, were able to receive a poem from the emperor to see them off. When Zhang Jianfeng was about to return to the town, the emperor gave him a special poem: "It is important to be a shepherd, so it is important to be a virtuous man."

古文：宣风自淮甸，授钺膺籓维。
现代文：宣风自淮甸，授钺膺藩维。
English: Xuanfeng came from HuaiDian, and he was awarded the title of Han Wei.

古文：入觐展遐恋，临轩慰来思。
现代文：入觐展遐恋，临轩慰来思。
English: Entering the exhibition of love, Lin Xuan comfort comes to mind.

古文：忠诚在方寸，感激陈清词。
现代文：忠诚在方寸，感激陈清词。
English: Loyalty is in the square inch, gratitude is in the word.

古文：报国尔所尚，恤人予是资。
现代文：报国尔所尚，恤人予是资。
English: Reported to the State Department, but not yet released.

古文：欢宴不尽怀，车马当还期。
现代文：欢宴不尽怀，车马当还朝。
English: The feast is not exhausted, the carriage and horse are still in the morning.

古文：谷雨将应候，行春犹未迟。
现代文：谷雨将应候，行春犹未迟。
English: The rain will come, and spring will be here soon.

古文：勿以千里遥，而云无已知。 
现代文：勿以千里遥，而云无己知。 
English: Don't think that you are thousands of miles away, and the clouds don't know where to go.

古文：又令高品中使赍常所执鞭以赐之，曰： 以卿忠贞节义，岁寒不移，此鞭朕久执用，故以赐卿，表卿忠节也。 
现代文：又令高品宦官带了自己所执的马鞭赐给张建封，道： 因卿忠贞节义，如松柏岁寒不移，这支马鞭为朕长久所执用，故尔用以赐卿，以表彰卿之忠节。 
English: He also ordered the high-ranking eunuch to give Zhang Jianfeng the horse whip he had wielded, saying, "Because my lord is so loyal, this horse whip has been used by me for a long time. Therefore, I will give it to my lord to commend his loyalty."

古文：建封又献诗一篇，以自警励。
现代文：张建封又向皇上献诗一篇，以督促勉励自己。
English: Zhang Jianfeng also dedicated a poem to the emperor, urging him to encourage himself.

古文：建封在彭城十年，军州称理。
现代文：张建封在彭城十年，军镇和州府均治理有方。
English: Zhang Jianfeng has been in Pengcheng for ten years, and both the military town and the state capital are well managed.

古文：复又礼贤下士，无贤不肖，游其门者，皆礼遇之，天下名士向风延颈，其往如归。
现代文：加之又礼贤下士，无论贤达还是平庸的，只要来到他的门下，均以礼相待，天下名士闻风向往，如归家一般迅速前来投奔。
English: In addition, corporals, whether they are outstanding or mediocre, are treated with courtesy as long as they come to his door. Celebrities around the world are yearning for the wind, and they usually come and go quickly when they return home.

古文：贞元时，文人如许孟容、韩愈诸公，皆为之从事。
现代文：贞元年间，文人如许孟容、韩愈等人，都做过他的僚属。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, literati such as Xu Meng Rong, Han Yu and others all worked as his subordinates.

古文：十六年，遇疾，连上表请速除代，方用韦夏卿为徐泗行军司马。未至而建封卒，时年六十六，册赠司徒。
现代文：贞元十六年，患病，接连上表奏请迅速派员替代自己，刚任命韦夏卿为徐泗行军司马，人未到职张建封便去世了，时年六十六，册命追赠司徒。
English: In the 16th year of the Zhengyuan, he fell ill, and successively asked the emperor to quickly send someone to replace him. He had just appointed Wei Xiaqing as the Sima of Xu Xingxing's army, but Zhang Jianfeng died before he could take up the post. He was 66 years old at the time, and he was ordered to pursue the gift of the Sito.

古文：子愔。
现代文：有子名张忄音。
English: There is a child named Zhang Xuanying.

