古文：邓琬、袁顗、孔觊
现代文：邓琬字元琬，豫章郡南昌县人。
English: Deng Qi, also known as Yuan Qi, was born in Nanchang County, Yuzhang County.

古文：邓琬，字元琬，豫章南昌人也。高祖混，曾祖玄，并为晋尚书吏部郎。祖潜之，镇南长史。
现代文：他的高祖邓混，曾祖邓玄，都当过晋朝尚书吏部郎。他的祖父邓潜之，官至镇南将军长史。
English: His great-great-grandfather Deng Jun and great-great-grandfather Deng Xuan were both officials in the Jin Dynasty. His grandfather, Deng Qianzhi, was a high-ranking official in the Zhenan General Long History.

古文：父胤之，世祖征虏长史，吏部郎，彭城王义康大将军长史、豫章太守，光禄勋。
现代文：父胤之，世祖征虏长史、吏部郎、彭城王刘义康大将军长史、豫章太守、光禄勋。
English: His father, Tainzhi, was the ancestor of the Conquistadores, the leader of the cadres, the king of Pengcheng, Liu Yikang, the General of the General Staff, the Governor of Yuzhang, and the Honorable Order of the Star.

古文：世祖起义，版琬为辅国将军、南海太守，率军伐萧简于广州，攻围逾年，乃克。
现代文：邓琬最开始当本州西曹主簿、南谯王义宣征北行参军，再转本府主簿、江州治中从事史。当世祖起义时，任命邓琬当辅国将军、南海太守。他又率领部队至广州讨伐萧简，攻打了一年多才攻克。
English: At first, Deng Xuan joined the army in the north when he was the chief of the Western Cao of Honshu and the King of Nanxi, and then he was the chief of the capital and the governor of Jiangzhou. When the ancestors revolted, he appointed Deng Xuan as the general of Fu Guo and the governor of the South China Sea. He also led the troops to Guangzhou to fight against Xiao Jian, and it took more than a year to defeat him.

古文：以臧质反，为江州刺史宗悫所执，值赦原。
现代文：又因为臧质造反、被广州刺史宗逮捕，遇到大赦又被释放。
English: In addition, because of the gluten rebellion, he was arrested by Guangzhou Zhishizong, and was released when he encountered an amnesty.

古文：琬弟璩，与臧质同逆，质败从诛；琬弟环亦坐诛。
现代文：邓琬的弟弟邓璩和臧质一同造反，臧质失败后因随从他而被杀，另一个弟弟邓环也因为这被杀。
English: Deng Yao's younger brother, Deng Yao, rebelled together with Gongye. After Gongye's defeat, he was killed for following him. Another brother, Deng Huan, was also killed because of this.

古文：琬在远，又有功，免死远徙，仍停广州。
现代文：邓琬因为远离他们，又加上有功劳，被免除死刑而流放远方，仍然是停在广州。
English: Because of his distance from them and his merits, Deng Wei was exempted from the death penalty and exiled far away. He is still in Guangzhou.

古文：久之，得还，除给事中，尚书库部郎，都水使者，丹阳丞，本州大中正。
现代文：好长时间了才得以回到内地，被任命为给事中、尚书库部郎、都水使者、丹阳郡丞、本州大中正。
English: It took a long time before he was able to return to the mainland, and he was appointed as a middle-ranking official, Shang Shuxuburou, Toushui envoy, Danyang Guzheng, and Honshu University junior high school vice-president.

古文：大明七年，车驾幸历阳，追思在籓之旧，下诏曰： 故光禄勋、前征虏长史邓胤之体局沈隐，累任著绩。
现代文：大明七年，皇上巡视历阳、追念做藩王时的故旧功臣，下诏书说： 前光禄勋，前征虏长史邓胤之器局深沉，长期任职，成绩卓著。
English: In the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor inspected Liyang and remembered the old heroes and heroines when he was the king of the domain, and the next imperial decree said: Former Guanglu Honors, Former Conscript Changshi Deng Yinshi's cabinet is deep, long-term service, outstanding achievements.

古文：朕昔当籓重，首先佐务，心力款尽，弗忘于怀。
现代文：我当年作藩镇长官时，他最先辅佐我，心性忠诚，竭力效诚，我一直不能忘记，往年他的儿子邓璩凶狂，自取灭亡。
English: When I was the chief of the domain and town, he was the first to support me. He was loyal and tried his best to serve me. I have never been able to forget that in previous years, his son Deng Yao went mad and killed himself.

古文：往岁息璩凶悖，自取诛翦，沿恩及琬，特免衅戮。
现代文：但邓胤之的功勋应该让他的儿子邓琬继承，现在特别免除邓琬的死罪。
English: However, Deng Yanzhi's merits should be passed on to his son, Deng Yao, and Deng Yao is now specifically exempted from the death penalty.

古文：今可擢为给事黄门侍郎，以旌胤之宿诚。 
现代文：可以升为给事黄门侍郎，以表彰邓胤之的忠诚。 
English: In recognition of Deng Yanzhi's loyalty, he can be promoted to the position of Zhihuangmen waiter.

古文：明年，出为晋安王子勋镇军长史、寻阳内史，行江州事。
现代文：明年，邓琬出外当晋安王刘子勋镇军长史、寻阳内史、代管江州事务。
English: The next year, Deng Xuan went abroad to serve as the military commander of the King of Jin and An, Liu Zixun, the military commander of Zhen, the military commander of Xuanyang, and the representative of Jiangzhou affairs.

古文：前废帝狂悖无道，以太祖、世祖并第数居三以登极位，子勋次第既同，深构嫌隙，因何迈之谋，乃遣使赍药赐子勋死。
现代文：前废帝疯狂没人性，他认为太祖文帝、世祖孝武帝都是因为在兄弟辈中排行第三而当上皇帝，子勋在兄弟中也是排行第三，便深深怀疑他而把他当成有威胁的人，用何迈的计策，于是派人带毒药赐刘子勋自杀。
English: The former emperor was mad and inhumane. He thought that the great ancestor Emperor Wen and the great ancestor Emperor Xiaowu both became emperors because they ranked third among their brothers. Zixun also ranked third among his brothers. He was deeply suspicious of him and regarded him as a threatening person. Using the most ingenious strategy, he sent someone to poison Liu Zixun to commit suicide.

古文：使至，子勋典签谢道遇、斋帅潘欣之、侍书褚灵嗣等驰以告琬，泣涕请计。
现代文：使者到了以后，刘子勋的典签谢道遇、斋帅潘欣之、侍书褚灵嗣等用驿马使者告诉邓琬这个消息，并哭着请他想法子。
English: After the messenger arrived, Liu Zixun's signature Xie Dao Yu, the commander Pan Xinzhi, the attendant Yan Lingzhi, etc. told Deng Yao this news with the messenger of the horse, and asked him to think about it with tears.

古文：琬曰： 身南土寒士，蒙先殊恩，以爱子见托，岂得惜门户百口，其当以死报效。
现代文：邓琬说： 我本来是南方寒族，承蒙先帝的特别厚恩，把他的爱子托附给我，我怎能顾惜家门一百多人的性命？应该用死来报答先帝的厚恩。
English: Deng Yao said: I was originally a member of the Southern Han people, and I received a special favor from the former emperor, who entrusted his beloved son to me. How could I spare the lives of more than a hundred members of my family? I should repay the former emperor's kindness with my death.

古文：幼主昏暴，社稷危殆，虽曰天子，事犹独夫。
现代文：幼主昏庸残暴，国家危险万分，他名义上为天子，实际上独夫一个。
English: The young lord is stupid and cruel, the country is in great danger, he is nominally the son of heaven, but in fact he is a single man.

古文：今便指率文武，直造京邑，与群公卿士，废昏立明。 
现代文：我们现在应该指挥文武将吏，直接进到京城、和众公卿大臣，一同除去昏君，拥立明君。 
English: We should now command the generals and generals, directly enter the capital, and all the nobles and ministers, together remove the dim prince and support the bright prince.

古文：景和元年十一月十九日，称子勋教，即日戒严。
现代文：景和元年十一月十九日，他宣布子勋的命令。当天便戒严。
English: On November 19, 1861, he announced his son-in-law's order, and martial law was imposed that day.

古文：子勋戎服出听事，集僚佐，使潘欣之口宣旨曰： 少主昏狂悖戾，并是诸君所见闻。顾命重臣，悉皆诛戮。
现代文：刘子勋穿着军装出外倾听意见、招集部众，叫潘欣之以口头宣布命令说： 少主昏乱暴虐、都是先生们亲眼得见的，被先帝顾托的大臣都被他杀死。
English: Liu Zixun, wearing a military uniform, went out to listen to opinions and convene his subordinates, and asked Pan Xin to verbally announce the order: "The young master is confused and tyrannical, the gentlemen can see it with their own eyes, and the ministers who were killed by the former emperor Gu Tuo were all killed by him.

古文：驱逼王公，幽辱太后。不逞之徒，共成其衅。京师诸王，并见囚逼，委厄虎口，思奋莫因。
现代文：他驱逐逼迫伯侯公卿，幽闭侮辱太后，和一些残酷的人，共同制造这些罪恶，呆在京城中的亲王们，都被关起来，等于落入虎口，想方设法但无法逃脱。
English: He expelled and persecuted the princes, imprisoned and insulted the empress dowager, and worked with some cruel people to create these evils. The princes who stayed in the capital were locked up and fell into the tiger's mouth. They tried their best but could not escape.

古文：身义兼家国，岂可坐视横流！
现代文：我本人一则是皇室亲戚，再则是先皇的儿子，怎么能坐观祸乱的发生！
English: I myself am a relative of the imperial family and the son of the former emperor, how can I sit by and watch the disaster!

古文：今便欲举九江之众，驰檄近远，以谋王室。于诸君何如？ 
现代文：现在便想集中九州的人马，写文告给远近各州，一同为国家出力，诸位先生认为应怎么样？ 
English: Now he wants to concentrate the manpower of Kyushu, write a message to the states near and far, and contribute to the country together. What do you gentlemen think should be done?

古文：四座未答，录事参军陶亮曰： 少主昏狂，丑毒已积。伊、霍行之于古，殿下当之于今。鄙州士子，世习忠节，况属千载之会，请效死前驱。 
现代文：面前的人还未回答，录事参军陶亮说： 少主昏乱发疯，罪恶滔天，伊尹、霍光在古代曾经废除过这种昏君，殿下今天也应该这样做，本州的士大夫，世世代代力行忠诚道义，况且正遇目前这千载难适的机会，我们请求为殿下效劳，作先锋前行。 
English: The person in front of him still did not answer, and the record-keeping soldier Tao Liang said: "The young lord has gone mad, and the crime is monstrous. In ancient times, Yi Yin and Huo Guang once abolished this kind of weak prince. Your highness should do the same today. The statesmen and magistrates of this state have been committed to loyalty and morality for generations. Moreover, we are facing the current opportunity of a thousand years of difficulties. We request to serve your highness and be the vanguard.

古文：众并奉旨。
现代文：其余官员都愿听从。
English: The rest of the officials obeyed.

古文：文武普进位一阶。
现代文：文武官员都被晋爵加级。
English: Civil and military officials have all been promoted to the rank of peer.

古文：转亮为谘议参军事，领中兵，加宁朔将军，总统军事。
现代文：刘子勋转陶亮为谘议参军事、并任中军参军，加号宁朔将军，总管军务。
English: Liu Zixun turned Tao Liang into a military adviser, and appointed the Chinese army to join the army, plus the Ningshuo general, the general manager of military affairs.

古文：功曹张沈为谘议参军，统作舟舰。参军事顾昭之、沈伯玉、荀道林等参管书记。
现代文：功曹张沈当谘议参军，统管水军，参军事顾昭之、沈伯玉、荀道林等参管书记。
English: Gong Cao Zhang Shendang advised Gu Zhaozhi, Shen Bo Yu, and Xing Daolin to join the army and take charge of the navy.

古文：南阳太守沈怀宝、岷山太守薛常宝之郡，始至寻阳，与新蔡太守韦希直并为谘议参军，领中兵，及彭泽令陈绍宗并为将帅。
现代文：南阳太守沈怀宝、岷山太守薛常宝赴郡上任，刚到寻阳，便与新蔡太守韦希直同时被任命为谘议参军，兼任中军参军，彭泽县令陈绍宗等人当将领。
English: Shen Huaibao, the governor of Nanyang, and Xue Changbao, the governor of Lushan, went to the county to take office. As soon as they arrived in Xuanyang, they were appointed to join the army at the same time as the new Cai governor Wei Xi, and also served as the Chinese army to join the army. Chen Shaozong and others were appointed as generals by Pengze County.

古文：初，废帝使荆州录送前军长史、荆州行事张悦下至盆口，琬称子勋命，释其桎梏，迎以所乘之车，以为司马，加征虏将军。加琬冠军将军，二人共掌内外众事。
现代文：当初，废帝叫荆州逮捕绑送前军长史，荆州行事张悦东行到盆口城时，邓琬用刘子勋的命令，打开他的枷锁，用自己坐的车欢迎他，让他当司马，加官征虏将军，加官邓琬冠军将军，他们二人共同掌管内外所有的事务。
English: At the beginning, the former emperor ordered Jingzhou to arrest and kidnap the former military commander Shi, and when Zhang Yue, acting on behalf of Jingzhou, traveled east to Baikou City, Deng Yu used Liu Zixun's order to open his shackles, welcome him with his own car, and let him be a Sima, a high-ranking recruiting general, and a high-ranking Deng Yu champion general. The two of them jointly controlled all internal and external affairs.

古文：遣将军俞伯奇率五百人出断大雷，禁绝商旅，及公私使命。
现代文：他们派将军俞伯奇率领五百人出外截断大雷、不许商人旅客过往和公家民间的书信事务的进行。
English: They sent General Zou Boqi to lead five hundred people to go out and cut off the thunder, not allowing merchants and travelers to pass and the public and private correspondence.

古文：遣使上诸郡民丁，收敛器械。十日之内，得甲士五千人，出顿大雷，于两岸筑垒。巴东、建平二郡太守孙冲之之郡，始至孤石，琬以冲之为子勋谘议参军，领中兵，加辅国将军，与陶亮并统前军。
现代文：又派人统计属下各郡的人民户口，收集武器，十天之内，便得到全副武装的士兵五千人，前进驻扎大雷，在附近两岸建筑堡垒，巴东建平二郡太守孙冲之到郡上任，刚到独石，邓琬让孙冲之当刘子勋的谘议参军，兼中军参军，加号辅国将军，和陶亮共同统率前锋军队。
English: He also sent people to count the people's household registration of the counties under his jurisdiction and collect weapons. Within ten days, he obtained five thousand fully armed soldiers, advanced and stationed Darei, built fortresses on both sides of the nearby coast, built two counties in the east of Badong, and appointed Sun Chongzhi as the county's governor. When he first arrived in Dokdo, Deng Xiao asked Sun Chongzhi to join the army as Liu Zixun's adviser, and to join the Chinese army as well. He was promoted to General of the Auxiliary State, and jointly led the forward army with Tao Liang.

古文：使记室参军荀道林造檄文，驰告远近。
现代文：叫记室参军苟道林写出檄文，迅速告知远近各州。
English: He ordered the records office to write a letter of apology to General Guo Daolin and promptly inform the states near and far.

古文：会太宗定乱，进子勋号车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：恰遇太宗平定乱子，增加刘子勋位号为车骑将军，开府仪同三司。
English: It so happened that Emperor Taizong calmed down the disturbance and increased Liu Zi's title to General of Cavalry and Cavalry, and the ceremony of opening the capital was the same as that of the Three Departments.

古文：令书至，诸佐吏并喜，造琬曰： 暴乱既除，殿下又开黄阁，实为公私大庆。 
现代文：朝廷的任命刚到，江州将吏都很高兴，他们对邓琬说： 暴乱既然被消除，殿下又可以设立黄阁当宰相，确实是公家私家的大喜事。 
English: The appointment of the imperial court had just arrived, and the Jiangzhou generals were very happy. They said to Deng Xuan: Since the riots have been eliminated, His Royal Highness can set up Huang Ge as prime minister, which is indeed a great joy for both the public and private sectors.

古文：琬以子勋次第居三，又以寻阳起事，有符世祖，理必万克。
现代文：邓琬认为刘子勋在兄弟中排行老三，在寻阳的起义活动，和世祖登上皇位情况相同，理所当然一定要成功的。
English: Deng Yu believed that Liu Zixun ranked third among the brothers, and the uprising activities in the search for the sun were in the same situation as the emperor's ascension to the throne, so it was natural that he must succeed.

古文：乃取令书投地曰： 殿下当开端门，黄阁是吾徒事耳！ 
现代文：于是把朝廷来的信甩在地上说： 殿下应当建立政权，设置黄阁机构那是我们这些助手的事。 
English: So he threw the letter from the court on the ground and said: "Your Highness should establish a regime, set up a yellow cabinet agency, that's up to us assistants."

古文：众并骇愕。
现代文：众人听了无不震惊。
English: Everyone was shocked.

古文：琬与陶亮等缮治器甲，征兵四方。
现代文：邓琬和陶亮等修理整顿武器，向其他各州征兵。
English: Deng Yu and Tao Liang repaired and rectified weapons, and recruited soldiers from other states.

古文：郢州刺史安陆王子绥、荆州刺史临海王子顼、会稽太守寻阳王子房、雍州刺史袁顗、梁州刺史柳元怙、益州刺史萧惠开、广州刺史袁昙远、徐州刺史薛安都、青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固、湘州行事何慧文、吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王昙生、晋陵太守袁标、义兴太守刘延熙并同叛逆。
现代文：郢州刺史安陆王子绥、荆州刺史临海王子顼、会稽太守临海王刘子房、雍州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固、湘州行事何慧文、吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王昙生、晋陵太守袁标、义兴太守刘延熙等人同时叛乱。
English: Prince Anlu of Zhangzhou, Prince Linhai of Jingzhou, Liu Zifang of Linhai, Shen Wenshu of Yongzhou, Cui Daogu of Jizhou, He Huiwen of Hunan, Gu Jun of Wu County, Wang Xinsheng of Wu Xing, Yuan Bian of Jinling, and Liu Yanxi of Yixing all rebelled at the same time.

古文：先是，废帝以邵陵王子元为冠军将军、湘州刺史，中兵参军沈仲玉为道路行事。至鹊头，闻寻阳兵起，停住，白太宗进止之宜。
现代文：此前，废帝用邵陵王刘子元当冠军将军、湘州刺史中军参军沈仲玉当道路行事，走到鹊头，听说寻阳正举行大事，便停在那里，启告太宗该怎么办。
English: Previously, the deposed emperor used Shao Ling Wang Liu Zi Yuan as the champion general and Xiangzhou stabbing history of the Chinese army to join the army Shen Zhongyu to act as a road, walked to Shantou, heard that Huan Yang was holding a major event, stopped there, and told Taizong what to do.

古文：太宗以子勋起兵，本在幼主，虽疑其不即解甲，不欲先彰同异，敕令进道。信未报，琬闻子元停鹊头不进，遣数百人劫迎之。乃建牙于桑尾，传檄京师曰：
现代文：太宗认为子勋他们起兵目的是为了消灭废帝，虽然猜疑他们没有放下武器，但并不想首先表示和他们立场不同，叫沈仲玉继续前进上路，太宗的书信还未到达，邓琬听说刘子元停在鹊头没有前进，便派几百人截住他并把他接到寻阳，于是在象尾建立军府，下了一道给朝廷的檄文，文章说：
English: Emperor Taizong believed that Liu Zi Yuan's purpose in raising an army was to destroy the deposed emperor. Although he suspected that they had not laid down their weapons, he did not want to first express a different position from them, and told Shen Zhongyu to continue on his way. Emperor Taizong's letter had not yet arrived. When Deng Wei heard that Liu Zi Yuan had stopped in Shantou and had not advanced, he sent several hundred people to intercept him and bring him to Xiangwei. He then established a military headquarters in Xiangwei and issued a posthumous message to the imperial court, the article said:

古文：阳六数艰，云雷相袭。高皇受历，时乘云辔，顿于促路。
现代文：群龙无首，天下大乱，风起云涌，太祖武皇帝拨乱反正，建立宋王朝，但在位时间不长。
English: The dragons had no leader, the world was in turmoil, the winds were rising, Emperor Taizu Wu put things right and established the Song Dynasty, but he did not reign for long.

古文：文祖定祥，系昭睿化，翦于中年。
现代文：太祖文帝继承武帝的大业，四海安定，人民幸福，政治清明，礼法齐备，不幸中年遇祸。
English: The great ancestor Emperor Wen inherited the great cause of Emperor Wu, the four seas were stable, the people were happy, the politics were clear, and the etiquette was complete. Unfortunately, he met with a disaster in middle age.

古文：二凶纵祸，三纲理灭，宗王俯首，姑息逆朝，枕戈无闻，偷荣有秩。孝武皇帝释位泣血，纠义入讨，投袂戎首，亲戮鲸鲵，九服还辉，两仪更造。
现代文：刘邵刘诞两个凶贼犯下了滔天大罪，杀君自立，丧尽天良，亲王们被迫屈从，没听说有立志复仇的，只是投降奸贼而得富贵，孝武皇帝不顾自己的安危，坚决复仇，率义兵进入京城讨伐叛贼，亲自杀掉了两个凶贼，九州重新安定，秩序重行恢复。
English: Liu Shao Liu Xing, two thugs committed a heinous crime, killed the prince, became independent, and lost everything. The princes were forced to submit. I have not heard of anyone determined to take revenge, but they surrendered to the traitors and became rich. Emperor Xiaowu, regardless of his own safety, resolutely took revenge, led the volunteer soldiers into the capital to fight the traitors, and killed the two thugs himself. Kyushu was stabilized again, and order was restored.

古文：而穹旻不惠，弃离万国，皇运重替，嗣王荒淫。
现代文：但老天爷连续降祸，孝武帝不幸逝世，皇室的命运又一次改换，新君继位，但荒淫残暴。
English: However, the gods continued to bring misfortune, Emperor Xiaowu passed away, the fate of the imperial family changed again, and a new emperor succeeded to the throne, but he was wild and cruel.

古文：孤以不才，任居籓长，大惧宗稷，歼覆待日。
现代文：我没有很高的才能，但身负藩王的重任，深深地担心国家的安危，可能会在一个暴君的统治下时刻被灭亡。
English: I do not have great talent, but I bear the heavy responsibility of the lord of the domain, deeply worried about the safety of the country, and may be destroyed at any time under the rule of a tyrant.

古文：故招徒楚郢，飞檄京甸，志遵前典，黜幽陟明，庶七庙复安，海昏有绍。
现代文：所以在荆楚招聚英雄豪杰，传檄文告给京城，坚决遵循古人的明确教训，废去昏君拥立明主，为的是使我们皇室七代祖庙重新安定，朝廷有贤明的继承人，怎么会想到本朝的运道还要继续乱下去？
English: Therefore, in Jingchu, heroes and heroines were recruited, the imperial edict was sent to the capital, the clear teachings of the ancients were resolutely followed, the weak monarchs were abolished and the emperor was established, in order to re-stabilize the seven-generation ancestral temple of our royal family, and the imperial court had wise successors. How could it be thought that the fate of this dynasty would continue to be chaotic?

古文：岂图宋未悔祸，弑乱奄臻，遂矫害明茂，篡窃天宝，反道效尤，蔑我皇德，干我昭穆，寡我兄弟，恣鸱鸮之心，蹈伦、颖之志，覆移鼎祚，诬罔天人。
现代文：杀皇帝的大乱接连出现，以至假借号令，残害贤臣，湘东王自立为皇帝，反而比先前的暴君更加凶恶，蔑视我们皇室的规矩，打乱我们皇室的继承秩序，杀我们的亲王兄弟，显出豺狼般的举动，做出赵王司马伦、河间王司马颖的叛逆举动。强夺我们的皇位，诬害上天和人民。
English: The chaos of killing emperors appeared one after another, even to the extent of issuing fake orders to injure wise ministers. The king of eastern Hunan proclaimed himself emperor. On the contrary, he was more vicious than previous tyrants. He flouted the rules of our royal family, disrupted the order of succession of our royal family, killed our prince brothers, behaved like a jackal, and made the traitorous actions of Zhao Wang Simaren and Hema Wang Simaying. He usurped our imperial throne and slandered heaven and the people.

古文：藐孤同气，犹有十三，圣灵何辜，而当乏飨。
现代文：不管怎么说，我的亲王兄弟们，还有十三个存在，老天有什么理，怎么让我们家不能祭祀先人？
English: In any case, my prince brothers, there are still thirteen of them, so what is God's reason for not allowing our family to offer sacrifices to our ancestors?

古文：昔隆周弛御，晋、郑是依；盛汉中陵，居、章抗节。支苗轻属，犹或忘驱，况孤忝惟臣子，情地兼切，号感一隅，心与事痛。是用饮血衽金，誓复宗祀。
现代文：当年强大的周朝政治开始削弱时，晋国郑国诸侯得以效忠；兴旺的汉朝中间曾受破坏，刘氏兄弟努力抗争，这些皇帝的枝叶远宗能够忘记自身的灾乱，况我是皇帝的儿子，少帝的兄弟，以情以义都该勤王，因此在本州号召众人为国家复仇，所以泣血发誓，一定要恢复朝廷和先人的祭祀。
English: When the politics of the powerful Zhou Dynasty began to weaken in that year, the princes of the State of Zheng of the State of Jin were able to be loyal; the prosperous Han Dynasty was destroyed in the middle, and the Liu brothers fought hard. These emperors' descendants can forget their own disasters. Moreover, I am the son of the emperor, the brother of the young emperor, and I should be loyal to the king with all my heart. Therefore, I called on everyone in Honshu to take revenge for the country, so I swore blood and tears that I must restore the sacrificial rites of the imperial court and the ancestors.

古文：宁朔将军谘议领中直兵陶亮、龙骧将军焦度，总中黄之旅，枭雄三万，风掩江介，云临石头。
现代文：现在派辅国将军谘议参军兼中直兵孙冲之、龙骧将军陈绍宗，率领老虎般的猛士，聚合二万兵士，沿江迅速出发，直抵白下城。
English: Now, he sent Sun Chongzhi, the general of Fu Guo, and Chen Shaozong, the general of Longtao, to advise and join the army and direct soldiers. They led the tiger-like warriors, gathered twenty thousand soldiers, and quickly set off along the river to reach Baixia.

古文：建威将军张冽，龙骧将军何休明，提育、获之徒，劲悍之卒，邪趋金陵，北指阊阖。龙骧将军张系伯、龙骧将军陈庆，勒轻锐五千，强弩一万，飞锋班渎，齐会西明。冠军将军、寻阳内史邓琬，撮湘、雍之兵，勇敢四万，授律总威，飙集京邑。
现代文：龙骧将军兼领中直兵薛常宝、建威将军中直兵沈怀宝，率领手持方天画戟的兵士、轻骑千人，直接从南州出兵，直抵朱雀桥。宁朔将军谘议兼领中直兵陶亮、龙骧将军焦度，率步兵三万，沿长江江岸迅速攻打石头城，建威将军张冽、龙骧将军何休明，率勇士越过金陵；向东指向苏州。龙骧将军张系伯、龙骧将军陈庆，率先锋五千，弓箭手一万，从班渎出发，在西明会合，冠军将军、寻阳内史邓琬，率湘州、雍州勇士四万人总统各路会集京师。
English: Longjing General Xu Changbao and Jianwei General Shen Huaibao, led by soldiers holding Fang Tian Painting, led a thousand light cavalry, directly dispatched troops from Nanzhou and arrived at Zhuzak Bridge. Ningshuo General Tao Liang and Longjing General Cao Du, led 30,000 infantry, along the banks of the Yangtze River, quickly attacked Stone City. Jianwei General Zhang Du and Longjing General He Xiuming, led the warriors over Jinling; pointed eastward to Suzhou. Longjing General Zhang Jiebo and Longjing General Chen Qing, the first five thousand and ten thousand archers, set off from Banfu and arrived in Ximing.

古文：征虏将军领府司马张悦，苍兕千艘，水军五万，大董群校，络绎继道。冠军将军豫章内史刘衍、宁朔将军武昌太守刘弼、宁朔将军西阳太守谢稚、建威将军领中直兵晋熙太守阎湛之，皆扫境胜兵，荐诚请效。
现代文：征虏将军兼领本府司马张悦，统率战舰一千艘，水军五万，在后面接应前面的部队，冠军将军豫章内史刘衍，宁朔将军武昌太守刘弼、宁朔将军西阳太守谢稚，建威将军兼中直兵晋熙太守阎湛之，都聚集本郡，为本府效劳。
English: The conscript general Zhang Yue Ma, who was also the leader of the prefectural government, led a thousand warships and 50,000 sailors, and received the troops in front from the rear. The champion general Yu Zhang Neishi Liu Yan, the Ningshuo general Wuchang Taishu Liu Wei, the Ningshuo general Xiyang Taishu Xie Zhi, the Jian Wei general and the Zhong Zhi soldier Jin Xi Taishu Yan Tan Zhi, all gathered in the county to serve the prefecture.

古文：后将军、郢州刺史安陆王子绥怀恩缠慕，鞠旅先辰。
现代文：后将军、郢州刺史安陆王子绥对我推戴备至，士兵早已训练齐整。
English: After the general, the prince of Anlu, the prince of Zhangzhou, pushed me to be prepared, and the soldiers were already well trained.

古文：冠军将军、湘州刺史邵陵王子元席颿陵波，整众遄至。
现代文：冠军将军、湘州刺史邵陵王刘子元沿江而下，率领部队迅速到来。
English: Liu Ziyuan, the champion general and Shaoling King of Xiangzhou, went down along the river and led the troops to arrive quickly.

古文：前将军、荆州刺史临海王子顼练甲陕西，献徒万数。辅国将军、冠军长史、长沙内史何惠文，见拔先皇，诚深投袂。
现代文：前将军、荆州刺史临海王刘子顼在陕西整练精兵，愿意出动数万增援我们，辅国将军、冠军长史，长沙内史何慧文，受先帝提拔，忠诚效力。
English: Former general Liu Ziqi, King of Jingzhou and Linhai, trained elite soldiers in Shaanxi and was willing to dispatch tens of thousands of reinforcements to support us. He Huiwen, the general of the auxiliary country, the champion of Changshi and Changsha history, was promoted by the former emperor and was loyal and effective.

古文：冠军将军、雍州刺史袁顗，不谋同契，雷发汉南。
现代文：冠军将军、雍州刺史袁靑，不谋而合从汉南出发。
English: The champion general, the champion of Yongzhou, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Yongzhou, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi, the champion of Shishi,

古文：建武将军、顺阳太守刘道宪，怀忠抱慨，不远三千。
现代文：建威将军、顺阳太守刘道宪，心怀忠义，出兵三千支援。
English: General Jian Wei and Shunyang Governor Liu Daoxian, with loyalty in their hearts, sent 3,000 troops to help.

古文：梁、益、青、徐、兗、豫、吴、会，皆密介归诚，誓为表里。
现代文：梁州、益州、青州、徐州、豫州、吴郡、会稽郡，都派使者报信，愿意效忠，发誓一起行动，内外相应。
English: Liangzhou, Yizhou, Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuanzhou, Wu County and Huiqi County have all sent envoys to report, are willing to be loyal, swear to act together, and are corresponding at home and abroad.

古文：孤亲总烝徒，十有余万，白羽咽川，霜锋照野，金声振谷，鸣鼙聒天。
现代文：我亲率十万大军沿途东进。我军的队伍充满山川，我军的武器照亮了原野，军鼓震撼了大地，吼声惊动了苍天。
English: I personally led a hundred thousand troops eastward along the way. The ranks of our army filled the mountains and rivers, the weapons of our army lit up the fields, the military drums shook the earth, and the roar alarmed the sky.

古文：凡诸将帅，皆忠无匿情，智无遗计，果干刚鸷，谲略多奇。
现代文：所有各个将领，都忠诚守分，智谋百出，果断英勇，谋略变化无方。
English: All the generals are loyal, resourceful, resolute and brave, and their strategies never change.

古文：水陆长驱，数道并进，发舟逾险，背水争先。
现代文：我军水陆并进，数路长驱，兵舰越过险阻，士兵日夜争先。
English: Our army and navy are marching side by side, driving several routes, warships are crossing dangerous obstacles, and soldiers are racing ahead day and night.

古文：以此众战，孰能斯御，推此义锐，沧海可垔。
现代文：用这个队伍进攻，谁能抵挡？用这个队伍起事，苍海可填。
English: With this team to attack, who can resist? With this team to rise up, the sea can be filled.

古文：诸君或荷宠前朝，感恩旧日；或弈世贞淳，见危授命。
现代文：朝中诸位先生或者在先朝蒙受先帝提拔，感激先帝厚恩；或者世代忠良，看见国家的危险便踊跃奋争。
English: Your Excellencies of the First and Second Dynasties, either you were promoted by the First Emperor in the last dynasty, and are grateful for the benevolence of the First Emperor; or you were loyal for generations, and saw the danger of the country, and actively fought against it.

古文：而逼迫寇手，效节莫由。今大军密迩，形援已接，见几而作，岂俟终日！
现代文：但是现在被人胁迫，无路效忠。我军四面密布，形势喜人，先生们因势而起，不需要观望了。
English: But now they are being coerced, and there is no way for them to remain loyal. Our army is spread out on all sides, the situation is gratifying, and gentlemen are rising to the occasion. There is no need to wait and see.

古文：便宜转祸趣福，因变立功。夫旦、奭与三监并时，金、霍与上官共主，邪正粈杂，何世无之！
现代文：应该转祸为福，相机而动，当年周公召公和三叛在同时代，金日石单与霍光和上官桀共同侍候一个皇帝，邪人正人混在一起，哪一代没有！
English: Should turn misfortune into blessing, the camera moves, that year Zhou Zhao Zong and the three traitors were contemporaries, Jin Rishi Shan and Huo Guang and Shang Guan Yu jointly served an emperor, the wicked and the righteous mixed together, which generation has not!

古文：但绩亮则名播，奸骋则道消耳。
现代文：但是做了正义的事业便名播四海，恶人当道则正义被压。
English: However, if you do a just cause, your name will spread far and wide. If you are a wicked person, justice will be suppressed.

古文：纪季入齐，陈平归汉，身尊誉远，明誓是裒，成范全规，殷监匪远。
现代文：你们应当学习纪季进入齐国、陈平投身汉朝的榜样，那样便能安全获得保障，名誉得以保护。
English: You should learn from the examples of Ji Ji, who entered Qi, and Chen Ping, who joined the Han Dynasty, so that your safety can be guaranteed and your honor can be protected.

古文：若玩咎惟休，告舍罔悟，则诛及五族，有殄无遗。
现代文：你们明智地选择好的榜样，不要学坏例子。如果心想投机，或左右两投，那么将会五族诛灭，格杀不论。
English: You should wisely choose a good example, and not learn from a bad one. If you want to speculate, or double down, then the Five Tribes will be annihilated, no matter what.

古文：军科爵赏，信如皦日，巫山既燎，芝艾共烟，幸遵良涂，无守毁辙。
现代文：我军的赏罚明如日月。巫山已燃烧，荆棘和艾草同时被毁。我希望你们选择光明的道路，不要走上毁灭的歧途。
English: The rewards and punishments of our army are as clear as the sun and the moon. Wushan Mountain has been burned, and thorns and wormwood have been destroyed at the same time. I hope you will choose the bright path and not go down the wrong path of destruction.

古文：檄到宣告，咸使闻知。
现代文：檄文传到你那里，各人迅速的明白这些意识。
English: The message gets to you, and everyone quickly understands these realizations.

古文：购太宗万户侯，布绢二万匹，金银五百斤，其余各有差。
现代文：刘子勋同时下令：能杀太宗的人封万户侯，布绢二万匹，金银五百斤，其余各个等级都有赏赐。
English: At the same time, Liu Zixun ordered that anyone who could kill Taizong should be rewarded with 10,000 households, 20,000 cloth animals, 500 catties of gold and silver, and all other ranks.

古文：太宗遣荆州典签邵宰乘驿还江陵，经过襄阳，袁顗驰书报琬，劝勿解甲，并奉表劝子勋即位。
现代文：太宗派荆州典签邵宰通过驿站回到江陵，经过襄阳时，袁靑派他给邓琬带信，劝说邓琬不要解除武装，且上表劝刘子勋做皇帝。
English: When Shao Zhai, a member of the Jingzhou Censorship of the Tai Sect, returned to Jiangling through Shao Station and passed through Yangyang, Yuan Shao sent him to bring a letter to Deng Xiao to persuade Deng Xiao not to disarm and to persuade Liu Zixun to become emperor.

古文：郢州承子勋初檄，及闻太宗定大事，即解甲下标。
现代文：郢州接受寻阳开始的檄文，后又听说太宗即位，便解除武装，放下武器。
English: Bozhou accepted the imperial edict that initiated the search for the sun, and when they heard that Emperor Taizong had ascended the throne, they disarmed and laid down their weapons.

古文：继闻寻阳不息，而鳷又响应，郢府行事录事参军荀卞之大惧，虑为琬所咎责，即遣谘议领中兵参军郑景玄率军驰下，并送军粮。
现代文：再又听说寻阳继续戒严，因而袁靑又响应。郢州州府行事录事参军荀卞之非常害怕，担心被邓琬所指责，马上派谘议兼领中兵参军郑景玄带领军队迅速东下，同时也运送军粮。
English: He also heard that the martial law continued in Xuanyang, so Yuan Shao also responded. According to the records of the Zhangzhou State Government, Zheng Jingxuan, who was very afraid of being accused by Deng Xiao, immediately sent Zheng Jingxuan, who was also in charge of advising and leading soldiers to join the army, to lead the army quickly to the east, while also transporting military grain.

古文：琬乃称说符瑞，造乘舆御服，云松滋县生豹自来，柴桑县送竹有 来奉天子 字，又云青龙见东淮，白鹿出西冈。
现代文：邓琬于是称说吉祥瑞气，赶造皇帝坐的车子和穿的衣服，说什么松滋县豹子自动归来，柴桑县送的竹子有 来奉天子 的字，又说青龙出现在东淮河中，百鹿被发现在西岗。
English: Deng Xuan then said that it was auspicious and auspicious, hastily made the car the emperor sat in and the clothes he wore, said that the leopard in Songzhi County returned automatically, and the bamboo sent from Chaisang County had the words "to worship the son of heaven," and said that the blue dragon appeared in the East Huai River, and the deer were found in Xigang.

古文：令顾昭之撰为《瑞命记》。
现代文：又叫顾昭之写成《瑞命记》。
English: He also asked Gu Zhaozhi to write "Sui Minbi."

古文：立宗庙，设坛场，矫作崇宪太后玺，令群僚上伪号于子勋。
现代文：建立宋庙，设立坛场，假传崇宪太后玉玺的命令，叫各个郎将吏士上表劝子勋做皇帝。
English: The Song Dynasty temple was built, the altar was set up, and the order of the Empress Dowager Yuxuan was falsely transmitted, calling on all the officials to persuade their sons to become emperors.

古文：泰始二年正月七日，即位于寻阳城，改景和二年为义嘉元年。
现代文：泰始二年正月七日，在寻阳城即位，改景和二年为义嘉九年。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the second year of Taishi, he ascended to the throne in Xuanyang City, and the two years were changed to the nine years of Yijia.

古文：以安陆王子绥为司徒、骠骑将军、扬州刺史，寻阳王子房车骑将军，临海王子顼卫将军，并开府仪同三司，邵陵王子元抚军将军。
现代文：让安陆王刘子绥当司徒、骠骑将军、扬州刺史、寻阳王子房当车骑将军，临海王刘子顼为卫将军，他们同时都是开府仪同三司。以邵陵王刘子元当抚军将军。
English: Let the king of Anlu, Liu Zixuan, be the steward, the general of the horse cavalry, the prince of Yangzhou, Zhang Shi Shi, and the prince of Huan Yang, be the general of the chariot cavalry, and the king of Linhai, Liu Zixuan, be the general of the guards, all of which are also the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony, and the king of Shao Ling, Liu Zi Yuan, be the general of the army.

古文：其日云雨晦合，行礼忘称万岁。
现代文：当日乌云满天，细雨氵蒙氵蒙，行登位礼时忘掉了称呼万岁。
English: On that day, dark clouds covered the sky, drizzle covered the sky, and I forgot to say "hurrah" during the enthronement ceremony.

古文：取子勋所乘车，除脚以为辇，置伪殿之西。其夕，有鸠栖其中，鸮鸟集其宪；又有秃鹙集城上。
现代文：又改造刘子勋以前坐的车子，把其中的车轮去掉，变成新的辇车，辇车被放在刘子勋新起的宫殿西边，当天傍晚，有些鸠鸟在里面栖息，在车帘上栖息的是号鸟鸟，此外还有一些秃鹰歇在城墙上面。
English: He also remodeled Liu Zixun's former car, removing the wheels and turning it into a new carriage. The carriage was placed on the west side of Liu Zixun's newly built palace. In the evening of the same day, some ostriches roosted inside, and the hornbills roosted on the curtains. In addition, some vultures rested on the city wall.

古文：子绥拜司徒日，雷电晦冥，震其黄阁柱，鸱尾堕地；又有鸱栖其帐上。
现代文：刘子绥拜官司徒的那一天，乌云蔽日，雷电交加，霹雷把他住的黄阁柱子也震动了，黄阁的房顶掉在地上。另外有鸱鸟栖息在他帐子上。
English: On the day that Liu Zi paid homage to the officials and scholars, the sun was covered by dark clouds, thunder and lightning were added, and the thunderbolt shook the pillar of the yellow pavilion where he lived, and the roof of the yellow pavilion fell to the ground. In addition, there were ostriches perched on his tent.

古文：以邓琬为左将军、尚书右仆身，张悦领军将军、吏部尚书，征虏将军如故；进袁顗号安北将军，加尚书左仆射。
现代文：刘子勋以邓琬当左将军、尚书右仆射，张悦为领军将军、吏部尚书，征虏将军的官职还是照旧。升袁靑官职为安北将军，另加尚书左仆射。
English: Liu Zixun with Deng Qian as the left general, Shang Shuxu as the right servant, Zhang Yue as the leading general, and Shang Shuxu as the officer, the official position of the conscript general is still the same. Yuan Shuxu was promoted to the official position of General Anbei, and Shang Shuxu as the left servant.

古文：临川内史张淹为侍中。
现代文：临川内史张淹当侍中。
English: Lin Chuanai's Zhang Rui became a junior samurai.

古文：鄱阳内史丘景先、庐陵内史殷损、西阳太守谢稚、后军府记室参军孙诜、长沙内史孔灵产、参军事沈伯玉、荀道林并为中书侍郎。荀卞之为尚书左丞，府主簿江乂为右丞，府主簿萧宝欣为通直郎。
现代文：江州府的主簿顾昭之，武昌郡太守刘弼同时当黄门侍郎。鄱阳内史丘景先、庐陵内史殷损、西阳太守谢稚、后军府记室参军孙诜、长沙内史孔灵产、参军事沈伯玉、荀道林都当中书侍郎、荀卞之当尚书右丞、府中主簿江义当尚书右丞、本府主簿萧宝欣当通直郎。
English: Gu Zhao, the chief record keeper of Jiangzhou Prefecture, and Liu Wei, the governor of Wuchang County, were also the attendants of the Yellow Gate. The following were the chief record keepers of Fenyang Prefecture: Qiu Jingsian, the chief record keeper of Fuling, the chief record keeper of Xiyang Prefecture: Xie Zhuang, the chief record keeper of Guizhou Prefecture: Sun Qian, the chief record keeper of Guizhou Prefecture; Kong Lingzang, the chief record keeper of Changsha Prefecture: Shen Bo Yu, the chief record keeper of Guizhou Prefecture; Lin Duzhong, the chief record keeper of

古文：琬大息粹、悦息洵并正员郎，粹领卫尉，洵弟洌司徒主簿。建武将军、领军主、晋熙太守阎湛之加宁朔将军。
现代文：邓琬大儿邓粹、张悦的儿子张洵都当员外郎。邓粹还兼任卫尉。张洵的弟弟张冽当司徒府主簿，建武将军，领军主、晋熙太守阎湛之加官宁朔将军。
English: Deng Qi, the eldest son of Deng Qi, and Zhang Qi, the son of Zhang Yue, both served as foreign ministers. Deng Qi also served as a guard lieutenant. Zhang Qi's younger brother Zhang Qi served as the chief accountant of the Jiuquan government, General Jianwu, the leader of the army, and General Ning Shuo, the vice-governor of Yan'an, the capital of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：庐陵内史王僧胤为秘书丞。
现代文：庐陵内史王僧胤当秘书丞。
English: Wang Soyin, the secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, remained in the position.

古文：桂阳太守刘卷为尚书殿中郎。
现代文：桂阳太守刘卷当尚书殿中郎。
English: Liu Zhuan, the governor of Guiyang, acted as the middle-ranking official in Shang's study.

古文：褚灵嗣、潘欣之、沈光祖，中书通事舍人。
现代文：褚灵嗣、潘欣之、沈光祖当中书通事舍人。
English: Yu Lingzhi, Pan Xinzhi and Shen Guangzu were among those who refused to write.

古文：余诸州郡，并加爵号。
现代文：其余各个州郡官吏，都加官晋爵。
English: The rest of the state and county officials were promoted to the peerage.

古文：琬性鄙暗，贪吝过甚，财货酒食，皆身自量校。
现代文：邓琬本性庸俗愚蠢，贪得无厌，对于金钱财物喝酒吃饭，都亲自管理。
English: Deng Wei's nature is vulgar and stupid, and he is insatiably greedy. He personally manages his money, property, drinking and eating.

古文：至是父子并卖官鬻爵，使婢仆出市道贩卖，酣歌博奕，日夜不休。
现代文：到此时，他的父子兄弟都竞相卖官鬻爵，叫奴仆们到集市上贩卖财物。另外他们又唱歌跳舞赌博下棋，日夜相继。
English: By this time, both his father and his brothers were competing in the sale of officials and lords, calling their servants to the market to sell their possessions, and they also sang, danced and gambled on chess, day and night.

古文：大自矜遇，宾客到门者，历旬不得前。内事悉委褚灵嗣等三人，群小横恣，竞为威福，士庶忿怨，内外离心矣。
现代文：另外他又妄自尊大，以为自己了不得，有来访问他的手下客人，有等上七天不能见到他的，大小事务他全部委托给褚灵嗣他们三个人，这些小人们横行霸道，作威作福。普通士人和百姓无不气愤，这样从内到外已呈现分裂的态势。
English: In addition, he was so arrogant that he thought he was untouchable. Sometimes he came to visit his guests, and other times he waited for seven days without being able to see him. He entrusted all matters, large and small, to his three spiritual heirs. These little people were domineering and pretentious. Ordinary people and the people were furious. As a result, there was a divisive situation from the inside out.

古文：太宗遣散骑常侍、领军将军王玄谟领水军南讨，吴兴太守张永为其后继；又遣宁朔将军寻阳内史沈攸之、宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军刘灵遗率众屯虎槛。时东贼甚急，张永、江方兴回军东讨。尚书下符曰：
现代文：太宗派散骑常侍、领军将军王玄谟带领水军南向讨伐，吴兴太守张永在后面增援，又派宁朔将军寻阳内史沈欣之，宁朔将军江方兴，龙骧将军刘灵遗带兵驻守在虎槛，当时，东方叛军势头正猛，张永江方兴只得回过头来到东方讨伐，尚书部下了一道诏书说：
English: Emperor Taizong dispatched Wang Xuanmu, the leading general and cavalryman, to lead the navy southward in the crusade. Wu Xing sent Zhang Yong, the governor of Taizong, to reinforce the rear. He also sent Ningshuo's General Xing Xing, Ningshuo's General Jiang Fangxing, and Longjing's General Liu Ling to garrison the troops in the Tiger's Threshold. At that time, the Eastern rebels were gaining momentum. Zhang Yongjiang Fangxing had to turn around and come to the East for the crusade. Shang Shuxu's subordinates issued an edict saying:

古文：夫晦明递运，崇替相沿，帝宋之基，懋业维永，圣祖重光，氤氲上业。
现代文：治乱循环，善恶交替，大宋王朝的基业，将永远长存。先帝们留下的事业，再次发扬光大。
English: The cycle of governing chaos, the alternation of good and evil, the foundation of the Great Song Dynasty, will last forever. The cause left by the former emperors, will once again flourish.

古文：狂昏承祀，国维以紊，毒流九县，衅秽三灵，搢绅戮辱，黔庶涂炭，人神同愤，朝野泣血。
现代文：但是昏乱的废帝曾继承皇位，国家的纲常混乱了。他给人民带来了巨大的祸害，犯下了滔天的罪恶。士大夫官员有的被屠杀，老百姓身陷于水深火热之中，人和神同时愤怒，朝廷和民间同时哭泣。
English: However, a deranged deposed emperor once succeeded to the throne, and the country was in chaos. He brought great disaster to the people and committed monstrous crimes. Some officials were massacred, the common people were caught in the crossfire, people and gods were angry at the same time, and the court and the people cried at the same time.

古文：圣上明睿在躬，膺符握曜，眷怀家国，夙夜劬劳，惧社稷湮芜，彝伦左衽。
现代文：当今皇上英明贤圣，应天顺人，心怀国家，日夜忧虑，担心朝廷被毁灭，人伦被破坏，汉族被压迫。
English: Today's emperors are wise, wise and holy, responsive to the needs of the people and the country, and are worried day and night, worried about the destruction of the imperial court, the destruction of human relations, and the oppression of the Han people.

古文：天威雷发，氛沴冰消，殄凶谯门，不俟鸣条之旅；歼虐牧野，无劳孟津之钺。
现代文：突发神威，把一切灾难消除，在谯门杀掉夏桀般的暴君而不需要鸣条那样的战争，消灭商纣那样的恶人而不需孟津那样的出动大军。
English: The sudden emergence of divine power will eliminate all disasters, kill the tyrant like Xia Yao at the gate without the need for a war like Mingzhu, and eliminate the villain like Shang Yao without the need for a large army like Meng Jin.

古文：华、夷即晏，晷纬还光，铿锵闻于管弦，趋翔被于冠冕，同轨仰化，异域怀风。
现代文：中华民族得以安宁，日月重现光明，嘹亮的歌声重新在管弦乐器中发出，龙凤雕饰再次在帽子上呈现，普天同庆，万国归诚，刘子勋在乱世起兵，是一种罪恶行动。
English: The Chinese nation was able to enjoy peace, the sun and the moon regained their brightness, bright songs were once again heard in orchestral instruments, dragon and phoenix carvings once again appeared on hats, the whole world celebrated, all nations returned to sincerity, and Liu Zixun raised an army in a turbulent world. This was a criminal act.

古文：刘子勋昏世称兵，义同翦恶，明朝不戟，罔识邪正。窥窬畿甸，逼遏两江，陵上无君，暴于遐迩。
现代文：在太平时代穷兵黩武，则是不识好歹，窥探皇室宝座，逼迫两江人民，欺骗皇上，压迫士人，远近已经看得清清楚楚了。
English: In the Taiping era, the poor soldiers and warriors did not know right from wrong, spying on the royal throne, persecuting the people of the two rivers, deceiving the emperor, and oppressing the scholars have been clearly seen from far and near.

古文：王赫斯怒，兴言讨违，命彼上将，治兵薄伐。
现代文：皇上赫然愤怒，准备讨伐叛逆，叫将帅们整训军队讨伐反贼。
English: The emperor was furious, prepared to fight against the rebels, and ordered the generals to train the army to fight against the rebels.

古文：今遣宁朔将军、寻阳内史沈攸之，轻锐七千，飞舟先迈。
现代文：现在派宁朔将军，寻阳内史沈攸之，带领七千精兵首先乘船前进。
English: Now send General Ningshuo, looking for Sun Yat-sen, to lead the seven thousand elite soldiers to advance by boat first.

古文：龙骧将军刘灵遗，羽林虎旅，连锋继造。假节、督南讨前锋诸军事、冠军将军、兗州刺史殷孝祖，驱济、河劲卒，电击雷动。
现代文：龙骧将军刘灵遗带领勇猛的羽林禁军，迅速前进，假节、统率南伐的前锋诸军事、冠军将军、兖州刺史殷孝祖，率领中原劲兵，迅猛前行。
English: Longjing General Liu Lingyi led the valiant Ulin Forbidden Army and advanced rapidly. On the holiday, the vanguard of the Southern Expedition, the military, the champion general, Zhangzhou Jishi Yin Xiaozu, led the Central Plains strong soldiers and advanced rapidly.

古文：使持节、车骑将军、江州刺史曲江县开国侯王玄谟，烝徒五万，董统前师。
现代文：使持节、车骑将军、江州刺史曲江县开国侯王玄谟率军五万，作前面各军统帅。
English: Wang Xuanmu, the founding lord of Qujiang County in Jiangsu Province, led an army of 50,000 and served as commander-in-chief of all the armies in front.

古文：使持节、侍中、司徒、扬州刺史建安王休仁，拥神州之众，总督群帅。
现代文：使持节、侍中、司徒、扬州刺史建安王刘休仁，统率朝廷各路大军作为讨伐元帅。
English: Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, Yangzhou, was appointed as the commander of the army of the imperial court as a crusading marshal.

古文：龙骧将军刘勔、宁朔将军刘怀珍，步骑五千，直指大雷。
现代文：龙骧将军刘面力，宁朔将军刘怀珍，带步兵和骑兵五千，直接攻向敌人大雷戍城。
English: Longjing General Liu Mianli and Ningshuo General Liu Huaizhen, with 5,000 infantry and cavalry, directly attacked the enemy Dailiancheng.

古文：宁朔将军柳伦、司州刺史庞孟虬，淮、颍突骑，邪趣西阳。使持节、骠骑大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休祐，总勒步师，连旗百万，河舟代马，遄鹜江氵贲，越棘吴钩，交曜畿服，笳鼓动坤维，金甲震云汉，掎角相望，水陆俱发。
现代文：宁朔将军柳伦、司州刺史庞孟纠率领淮河颍河流域一带的快速骑兵，从侧翼迂回攻击西阳，使持节、骠骑大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休统率步兵百万，坐着河上的大船，以及骠悍的代州骏马在江边巡逻，手持锐利的武器在京城一带守卫。
English: Ningshuo General Liu Lun and Shizhou Cavalryman Pang Meng Guo led the rapid cavalry around the Huai River and the Fen River basin, and attacked Xiyang from the flanks, and sent Zhijie Jie, cavalry general, and Shanzhou Cavalryman Shanyang Wang Xiu Tong led the infantry of one million, sitting on the big boat on the river, as well as the fierce horses of Dazhou to patrol the riverside, and guard the Beijing area with sharp weapons.

古文：冠军将军武念，率雍、司之锐，已据樊、沔。
现代文：真是军鼓撼动天地，金戈响达云霄。我军相互配合，水陆并进。冠军将军武念，则带领雍州司州的精兵先期占据樊汉地区。
English: It is the military drum that shakes heaven and earth, and the jingle resounds to the heavens. Our army cooperates with each other, and advances by land and sea. Champion General Wu Nian led the elite soldiers of Yongzhou Sizhou to occupy the Shuhan area in the early stage.

古文：徐州刺史申令孙，提彭、宋剽勇，陆涂焱奋。
现代文：徐州刺史申令孙，带着彭城宋国一带勇士也准备上路。
English: Xuzhou bard Shen Ling Sun, along with warriors from Pengcheng and Song Dynasty, are also preparing to set out.

古文：皇上当亲驭六师，降临江服，旌旆掩云，舳舻咽海。
现代文：皇上一定会亲自驾临六军，在江上指挥，我军旌旗蔽日，船舰填满苍海，必将百战百胜。
English: The emperor will certainly personally drive to the six armies and command them on the river. Our army will hoist the flag to cover the sun, the ships will fill the sea, and we will surely win every battle.

古文：昔吴、楚连衡，燕、淮劲悍，尘扰区内，声沸秦中，雾散埃灭，岂非先鉴。
现代文：当年西汉时，吴楚连横造反。燕王淮南王的劲兵骚扰朝廷时，真可谓声震关中，但结果却如同大雾见日即散，尘土见风自消自灭，这难道不是最好的例子吗？
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, Wu Chulian rebelled violently. When Yan Wang Huainan Wang's strong soldiers harassed the imperial court, it was really a sonic shock, but the result was like a fog dissipating as soon as it saw the sun, and dust dissipating as soon as it saw the wind. Isn't this the best example?

古文：而婴彼孤城，以待该天之网，迫此乌合，以抗络宇之师。
现代文：而今天你们竟然守着一个小小的寻阳城，等待朝廷的讨伐，驱逐一些乌合之众抗衡全国的军队。
English: And today, you are actually guarding a small sun-seeking city, waiting for the imperial court's crusade, expelling some of the rabble to compete with the national army.

古文：云罗四掩，霜锋交集，犹劲飙之拂细草，烈火之扫寒原，燋卷之形，昭然已著。
现代文：一旦我军包围你们，向你们发动进攻，好比是疾风吹蓑草，烈火烧草原，你们将被彻底消灭，这是显而易见的。
English: Once our army encircles you and launches an attack on you, it will be like a gale blowing weeds and burning the grasslands, and you will be completely destroyed. This is obvious.

古文：朝廷恻愍我僚吏，哀矜我士民，并亦何辜，拘误迷党。
现代文：皇上同情各位将吏，哀痛我们的人民，有什么罪过，却被凶党贻误。
English: The Emperor sympathizes with the generals and grieves for our people, who have committed no crime, but have been wronged by the evil Party.

古文：故加宣示，令得自新。
现代文：所以宣示远近，叫你们重开改过自新的道路。
English: Wherefore I declare unto you the gospel of the kingdom, and the gospel of your salvation, and the gospel of your reconciliation.

古文：如其沦惑不改，抵冒王威，同焚既至，虽悔奚补。
现代文：如果执迷不悟，抗拒朝廷权威，必然招致玉石俱焚的不幸结局，那时便悔之已晚。
English: If one persists and resists the authority of the imperial court, it will inevitably lead to the unfortunate outcome of burning the jade, and then it will be too late to repent.

古文：奉诏以四王幼弱，不幸陷难，兵交之日，不得妄加侵犯，若有逼损，诛翦无贷。
现代文：诏书说四个造反的亲王年龄尚小，不幸陷入灾祸中，两军交战的时候不准乱加伤害，他们如果有半点损伤，必然要严惩不贷。
English: The edict said that the four rebellious princes were still young and had unfortunately fallen into a disaster. When the two armies were at war, they were not allowed to inflict harm indiscriminately. If they had any damage, they must be severely punished.

古文：左右主帅，严相卫奉，诖误之罪，一无所问。
现代文：对方起事的一些主帅们，你们应该好好地保护亲王们，你们过去的失误都不再追究，如果你们迷途知返的话。
English: Some opposing managers, you should protect the princes well, and your past mistakes will not be investigated if you stray.

古文：琬遣孙冲之率陈绍宗、胡灵秀、薛常宝、张继伯、焦度等前锋一万，来据赭圻。
现代文：邓琬派孙冲之率领陈绍宗胡天秀薛常宝张继伯焦度等先锋兵一万，占据赭圻。
English: Deng Xiao sent ten thousand vanguard soldiers led by Sun Chongzhi, including Chen Shaozong, Hu Tianxiu, Xue Changbao, Zhang Jibo and Jiao Du, to occupy the city.

古文：冲之于道与子勋书曰： 舟楫已办，器械亦整，三军踊跃，人争效命，便欲沿流挂颿，直取白下。愿速遣陶亮众军，兼行相接，分据新亭、南州，则一麾定矣。 
现代文：孙冲之在路上给刘子勋写信说： 舟船已办好了，武器也准备好了，三军踊跃振奋，人人竞相效命，我们准备沿江东进，直捣白下戍城，希望早点派陶亮等参军迅速接应我们，分别占据新亭、南州，则能平定局势。 
English: On the way, Sun Chongzhi wrote to Liu Zixun: The boat has been arranged, the weapons are ready, the three armies are excited, and everyone is competing for their lives. We are preparing to advance along the east of the river and go straight to Baixiaocheng. I hope that Tao Liang and other soldiers will be sent to join the army as soon as possible to meet us. If they occupy Xinting and Nanzhou respectively, the situation can be calmed down.

古文：乃加冲之左卫将军，以陶亮为右卫将军，统诸州兵俱下。
现代文：于是刘子勋给孙冲之加官卫将军，陶亮等右卫将军率领军队同时东下。
English: As a result, Liu Zixun gave Sun Chongzhi the additional post of General of the Guard, and Tao Liang and other generals of the Right Guard led the army to the east at the same time.

古文：郢州军主郑景玄、荆州军主刘亮、湘州军主何昌、梁州军主柳登、雍州军主宗庶等合二万人，一时俱下。
现代文：郢州司马郑景玄、荆州司马刘亮、湘州司马何昌、梁州司马柳登、雍州司马宗庶等集合二万人也一同东下。
English: Zhangzhou Sima Zheng Jingxuan, Jingzhou Sima Liu Liang, Hunan Sima He Chang, Liangzhou Sima Liuden, Yongzhou Sima Zongzhuan and other 20,000 people also went east together.

古文：亮本无干略，闻建安王休仁自上，殷孝祖又至，不敢进，屯军鹊洲。
现代文：陶亮本来没什么本事，听说建安王休仁等亲自前来，殷孝祖又准备到来，不敢前进，只好驻军鹊洲。
English: Tao Liang didn't have any skills originally. He heard that King Jianan and King Huiren had come in person, and Yin Xiaozu was preparing to come. He didn't dare to advance, so he had to garrison Luzhou.

古文：时琬遣阎湛之来寇庐江，台军主、龙骧将军段佛荣受命讨之。更使佛荣领铁骑一千，回军南讨。
现代文：当时邓琬派阎湛之前来侵犯庐江，台城将领龙骧将军殷佛荣接受命令讨伐阎湛之，另外又派殷佛荣率领铁骑一千，回过来向南讨伐。
English: At that time, Deng Xiao sent Yan Tan to invade the Minjiang River, and the Taicheng general Long Yu's general Yin Fuerong was ordered to fight Yan Tan. In addition, Yin Fuerong was sent to lead the Iron Cavalry to fight south.

古文：三月三日，水陆攻赭圻，亮等率众来救，殷孝祖为流矢所中死，军主硃辅之、申谦之、张灵符并失利，辅之副正员将军皇甫仲远、谦之副虎贲中郎将徐稚宾并没。孝祖支军主范潜率五百人投亮。
现代文：三月三日，在水路旱路同时进攻赭圻，陶亮等人率领各军前来援救，战斗中殷孝祖被流矢射中而死，将军朱辅之、申谦之、张灵符都失败了。朱辅之的副将正员将军皇甫仲远、申谦之副将虎贲中郎将徐稚宾都战死了，殷孝祖的支军将领范潜带领手下五百人向陶亮投降。
English: On March 3rd, in the waterway and the dry road at the same time, the Yunnan was attacked, and Tao Liang and others led the armies to come to the rescue. During the battle, Yin Xiaozu was shot and killed by a stray arrow, and the generals Zhu Yuzhi, Shen Qian and Zhang Lingfu all failed. Zhu Yuzhi's vice-general, the vice-commander, the general Wang Fu Zhongyuan, and the vice-commander of Shen Qian, the vice-commander, the vice-commander, the vice-commander, the vice-commander, the vice-commander, the vice-commander, the

古文：时东军已捷，江方兴复还虎槛，建安王休仁遣方兴、刘灵遗各领三千人助赭圻，以方兴领孝祖军，沈攸之代孝祖为前锋都督。冲之谓陶亮曰： 孝祖枭将，一战便死。
现代文：当时讨伐东方叛军的朝廷军队已获得了胜利，江方兴重新回到虎槛，建安王刘休仁派江方兴、刘灵遗各带三千人帮助守卫赫圻，叫江方兴统领殷孝祖的军队。沈攸之代替殷孝祖作前锋都督，孙冲之对陶亮说： 殷孝祖是一员骁将，刚一交战便被我们打死。
English: At that time, the imperial army that fought against the Eastern rebels had won victory, and Jiang Fangxing had returned to the Tiger Threshold. Liu Xiuren, the King of Jian'an, sent Jiang Fangxing and Liu Lingyi, each with three thousand people, to help guard Hebei, and asked Jiang Fangxing to lead the army of Yin Xiaozhu. Shen Youzhi replaced Yin Xiaozhu as the vanguard governor. Sun Chongzhi said to Tao Liang: Yin Xiaozhu is a general, and he was killed by us just after the battle.

古文：天下事定矣，不须复战，便当直取京都。 
现代文：天下大事已经定了一大半，不必再打，只需直取新城。 
English: Most of the world's major events have already been decided, there is no need to fight again, just take Xincheng directly.

古文：亮不从。
现代文：陶亮不同意孙的意见。
English: Tao Liang did not agree with Sun's opinion.

古文：太宗遣员外散骑侍郎王道隆至赭圻督战。
现代文：太宗此时派员外散骑侍郎王道隆到赭圻督战。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong sent a group of horsemen led by Wang Daolong to join the battle.

古文：孝祖死之明日，建安王休仁又遣军主郭季之马步三千就攸之，攸之乃率季之及辅国将军步兵校尉杜幼文、宁朔将军屯骑校尉垣恭祖、龙骧将军硃辅之、员外散骑侍郎高遵世、马军主龙骧将军顿生、段佛荣等三万人，诘旦进战，奋击，大破之，斩获数千，追奔至姥山而反。冲之等于湖、白口筑二城，为军主张兴世所拔。
现代文：孝祖死的第二天，建安王刘休仁派将军郭秀之率骑兵三千接受沈攸之指挥。沈攸之于是带郭秀之和辅国将军步兵校尉杜幼文、宁朔将军屯骑校尉垣恭祖、龙骧将军朱辅之、元外散骑侍郎高遵世、马军队长龙骧将军顿生和殷佛荣等三万人，在凌晨前攻击敌军，朝廷军队猛烈攻击，大败西军，杀掉几千西方士兵，一直追到姥山才退回，孙冲之等人在湖、白口筑的两个小城，也被将军张兴世攻下。
English: On the second day after the death of Emperor Xiaozu, the Jianan King Liu Xuren sent General Guo Xiu Zong and 3,000 cavalry to accept the command of Shen You. Shen You Zong then led Guo Xiu Zong and General Fu Guo, General Fu Guo's infantry lieutenant Du Xiaowen, General Ningshuo's cavalry lieutenant Gaki Gongzu, General Longtao's cavalry lieutenant Zhu Yu Zong, General Yuan Gao's cavalry officer Lang Gao Zun Shi, General Longtao's cavalry commander Tong Sheng and Yin Fuerong, and other 30,000 people to attack the enemy army before dawn. The imperial army

古文：陶亮闻湖、白二城陷没，大惧，急呼冲之还鹊尾，留薛常宝代冲之守赭圻。
现代文：陶亮听说湖、白二城陷落，非常害怕，连忙呼叫，孙冲之回到鹊尾，留下薛常宝，代替孙冲之守赭圻。
English: When Tao Liang heard that the Lake and Bai Ercheng had fallen, he was very scared and quickly called for Sun Chongzhi to return to Shanwei, leaving Xue Changbao to guard the city in place of Sun Chongzhi.

古文：先于姥山及诸冈分立营寨，亦悉败还，共保浓湖。浓湖即在鹊尾。
现代文：西军首先在姥山和各山岗分立的营寨也各自败回，共同占据浓湖，浓湖城正是建在鹊尾这地方。
English: At first, the Western troops were also defeated in Ubayama and the encampments separated by various hills, and they jointly occupied Lake Yunso. Lake Yunso City was built in Shanwei.

古文：时军旅大起，国用不足，募民上米二百斛，钱五万，杂谷五百斛，同赐荒县除。上米三百斛，钱八万，杂谷千斛，同赐四品正令史；满报，若欲署四品在家，亦听。上米四百斛，钱十二万，杂谷一千三百斛，同赐四品正令史；满报，若欲署三品在家，亦听。上米五百斛，钱十五万，杂谷一千五百斛，同赐三品令史；满报，若欲署内监在家，亦听。上米七百斛，钱二十万，杂谷二千斛，同赐荒郡除；若欲署诸王国三令在家，亦听。
现代文：此时战争正剧烈进行，朝廷货用不足，劝老百姓每家上交二百斛米、五万钱、杂谷五百斛，同时赏赐荒远县令官；上等白米三百斛，八万钱杂谷一千斛的，同时赏赐五品的正令史官员，如果达到上述要求，想留在家里享受一个四品官的待遇也可以；上交四百斛米、十万钱、杂谷一千三百斛的赏赐四品令史官职，满了，可以在家享受三品官的待遇；上交大米五百斛、十五万钱、杂谷一千五百斛，赏赐三品令史官职，如果满数了，在家里享受监守待遇也可以；上交七百斛米、二十万钱、杂谷二千斛赏赐荒郡太守官职，如果想在家里享受亲王尚书令官待遇也可以。
English: At this time, the war was in full swing, and the imperial court was short of supplies, so they advised the common people to each submit 200 bunches of rice, 50,000 coins, and 500 bunches of miscellaneous grains, and at the same time reward the distant county magistrate. For the superior white rice, 300 bunches, and the miscellaneous grains, 80,000 coins and 1,000 bunches, they also rewarded the five-grade official of the history, and if they meet the above requirements, they can also enjoy the treatment of a four-grade official if they want to stay at home. For the superior white rice, 100,000 coins, and the miscellaneous grains, 1,300 bunches, they

古文：琬又遣辅国将军、豫州刺史刘胡率众三万，铁骑二千，来屯鹊尾。胡宿将，屡有战功，素多狡诈，为众推伏，攸之等甚惮之。时胡乡人蔡那、佼长生、张敬兒各领军隶攸之在赭圻，胡以书招之，那等并拒绝。
现代文：邓琬又派辅国将军豫州刺史刘胡率领二万人马，精锐骑兵二千，前来驻扎鹊尾，刘胡是一位老将，多次立战功，一贯奸猾有些计谋，被众人推戴，沈攸之等人有些怕他，当时刘胡的老同乡蔡那，佼长生，张敬儿，都带兵隶属沈攸之，正在赭圻。刘胡写信招降他们，蔡那等人都拒绝了，刘胡又请蔡那等人对话，说过去的旧事。
English: Deng Xiao also sent Liu Hu, an auxiliary general of the State Council of Henan Province, who led twenty thousand horses and two thousand elite cavalry, to come and station in Shanwei. Liu Hu was a veteran who had made many war exploits, had always been cunning and scheming, and was respected by everyone. Shen Youzhi and others were somewhat afraid of him. At that time, Liu Hu's old countryman Cai Na, Choi Chang Sheng, and Zhang Jing'er were leading soldiers under Shen Youzhi. Liu Hu wrote a letter to invite them to surrender, Cai Na and others refused. Liu Hu also invited Cai Na and others to dialogue and talk about

古文：胡因要那等共语，陈说平生，那等诘诮，说令归顺。胡回军入鹊尾，无他权略。
现代文：蔡那等人质问他，叫刘胡归顺朝廷。刘胡便回军进驻鹊尾，也没有献出什么谋略。
English: Cai Na and others questioned him and told Liu Hu to submit to the imperial court. Liu Hu then returned to the army and stationed in Shanwei, but did not offer any strategy.

古文：辅国将军吴喜平定三吴，率所领五千人，并运资实，至于赭圻，于战鸟山筑垒，分遣千人，乘轻舸二百，与佼长生为游军。
现代文：辅国将军吴喜平定三吴后，率领他手下五千人，同时运物资，抵达赭圻，在战乌山建堡垒，又分派一千人，乘小船两百，和佼长生在一起作为游击部队。
English: Wu Xi, the general of the Auxiliary State, conquered San Wu, and led 5,000 of his men, and transported materials at the same time. He arrived in Kunlun, built a fortress in the Wu Mountains, and dispatched another 1,000 people, 200 in small boats, to be a guerrilla force together with Jia Chang.

古文：薛常宝粮尽，告胡求援。
现代文：薛常宝粮食吃完了，请求刘胡增援。
English: Xue Changbao finished eating the grain and asked Liu Hu for reinforcements.

古文：三月二十九日，胡率步卒一万，夜斫山开道，以布囊运米，来饷赭圻。
现代文：三月二十九日，刘胡率领步兵一万，半夜凿山开路用布袋运米，前来增援赭圻的薛军。
English: On March 29th, Liu Hu led ten thousand infantrymen, and in the middle of the night, he cut a path through the mountains to transport rice in cloth bags, and came to reinforce Xue Jun's army.

古文：平旦至城下，犹隔小堑，未能得入。
现代文：早晨到赭圻城下，还隔着小城濠，不能运进去。
English: In the morning, when we arrived at the foot of the castle, we were still separated by a small moat, so we couldn't be transported inside.

古文：沈攸之率众军攻之，军主郭季之、荀僧韶、幢主韩欣宗等，率众三千，为攸之势援。
现代文：沈攸之这时连忙带领各路军队进攻敌军，队长郭宗之、荀僧韶、队长韩欣委等人率兵三千，作为沈攸之的援兵。
English: At this time, Shen Youzhi hurriedly led all the troops to attack the enemy. Captain Guo Zongzhi, Zang Soan, captain Han Xinwei and others led three thousand soldiers as Shen Youzhi's reinforcements.

古文：胡发所由桥道，僧韶等接盾行战，复桥得渡。
现代文：刘胡打开通城吊桥，荀僧韶等手持盾牌上前猛击，使吊桥重新断毁。
English: Liu Hu opened the suspension bridge to the city, and the monks and nuns, holding shields in their hands, lashed out, causing the suspension bridge to be broken again.

古文：军主刘沙弥轻骑深入，至胡麾下，遂见杀。
现代文：军帅刘沙弥率轻军深入敌阵，进到刘胡面前，被刘胡部下杀了。
English: Field Marshal Liu Shami led a light army deep into the enemy lines, came in front of Liu Hu, and was killed by Liu Hu's subordinates.

古文：攸之策马陷陈，回还，为追骑所刺；马军主段佛荣、武保救之得免。
现代文：沈攸之驱马攻入敌阵，回来时，被敌人追击骑兵刺中骑兵军帅殷佛荣，武保救助他回来。
English: Shen Yuanzhi drove his horse into the enemy lines, and when he returned, he was chased by the enemy cavalry and stabbed by the cavalry commander Yin Fuerong. Wu Bao rescued him and brought him back.

古文：并殊死战，多所伤杀。
现代文：朝廷军仍继续猛烈进攻。杀伤敌人很多。
English: The imperial army still continued its fierce attack, killing and wounding many of the enemy.

古文：胡众大败，舍粮弃甲，缘山遁走，乘胜追之，斩获甚众。
现代文：刘胡的人马大败，于是丢下粮食和甲兵，沿山逃跑，沈攸之等乘胜追击，又杀了很多敌人，刘胡也受了伤。
English: Liu Hu's men suffered a crushing defeat, so he abandoned his grain and armored soldiers and fled along the mountain. Shen Youzhi and others took advantage of the victory to pursue and killed many enemies. Liu Hu was also injured.

古文：胡被创，仅得还营。常宝惶惧无计，遣信告胡，欲突围奔出。
现代文：勉强回到军营。薛常宝恐惧得手足无措，又派人告诉刘胡，想突围逃回去。
English: Barely able to return to the military camp, Xue Changbao was overwhelmed with fear and sent someone to tell Liu Hu that he wanted to break through the encirclement and escape back.

古文：四月四日，胡自率数千人迎之，常宝等开城突围走。
现代文：四月四日，刘胡又亲自率几千人迎接薛常宝，薛常宝等人开城突围逃跑。
English: On April 4, Liu Hu personally led several thousand people to welcome Xue Changbao, and Xue Changbao and others broke out of the city and fled.

古文：攸之率辅国将军沈怀明、军主周普孙、江方兴、申谦之等诸军悉力击之。
现代文：沈攸之率辅国将军沈怀明、队长周普孙、江方兴、申谦之等又合力进攻刘胡等，吴喜也接着率兵支援。
English: Shen Youyou led the auxiliary general Shen Huiming, captain Zhou Fusun, Jiang Fangxing, Shen Qian and others to jointly attack Liu Hu, and Wu Xi also led the troops to support.

古文：吴喜率众来赴，为胡别军所围，甚急。有人来捉喜马，将蔡保以刀斫之，断手，然后得免。正员将军幢主卜伯宗、江夏国侍郎幢主张涣力战没陈。伯宗，益州刺史天与子也。
现代文：吴喜被刘胡军包围非常着急，有人前来牵捉吴喜的坐骑，他的手下蔡保用刀砍那人，断了那人的手，然后才逃出，正员将军队长卜伯宗，江夏国侍郎队长张涣，奋战殉国，卜伯宗即益州刺史卜天与的儿子。
English: Wu Xi was surrounded by Liu Hu's army and was very anxious. Someone came to capture Wu Xi's horse. His subordinate Cai Bao slashed the man with a knife, broke the man's hand, and then escaped. The commander-in-chief of the army, Bu Bozong, the captain of Jiangxia's waiter Zhang Qi, fought and died for the country. Bu Bozong was the son of Yizhou's assassin, Bu Tianya.

古文：攸之、喜等苦战移日，常宝、张继伯、胡灵秀、焦度等皆被重创，走还胡军。
现代文：沈攸之、吴喜等人大战一整天。薛常宝、张继伯、胡灵秀、焦度等都受了重伤，逃回大营，赭圻陷落。
English: Shen Youzhi, Wu Xi and others fought all day long. Xue Changbao, Zhang Jibo, Hu Lingxiu, Cao Du and others were seriously injured, fled back to the camp, and the castle fell.

古文：赭圻城陷，斩伪宁朔将军南阳太守沈怀宝、伪奉朝请领中舍人督战谢道遇，纳降数千。
现代文：伪宁朔将军南阳太守沈怀宝，伪奉朝请兼中书舍人督战谢道遇被斩首，另外俘虏敌军几千人。
English: The pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao general Nanyang Daju Shen Huaibao, the pseudo-Ningshao

古文：陈绍宗单舸奔西岸，与其部曲俱还鹊尾。
现代文：陈绍生坐一小船逃到西岸，他的部众都逃到鹊尾。
English: Chen Shaosheng fled to the west coast in a small boat, and his followers fled to Shanwei.

古文：建安王休仁自虎槛进据赭圻。
现代文：建安王刘休仁从虎槛前往进驻赭圻。
English: Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, went from Houzhu to settle in Handan.

古文：刘胡遣陈绍宗、陈庆率轻艓二百，大舰五十，出鹊外挑战；吴喜、张兴世、佼长生等击之。
现代文：刘胡派陈绍宗、陈庆率领轻舰小船二百，大船五十艘，到鹊尾州之外挑战，吴喜、张兴世、佼长生等人进攻刘胡。
English: Liu Hu sent Chen Shaozong and Chen Qing, leading 200 light ships and 50 large ships, to challenge outside Shanwei Province, while Wu Xi, Zhang Xingshi, and Jiao Changsheng attacked Liu Hu.

古文：喜支军主吴献之飞舸冲突，所向摧陷，斩获及投水死甚多，追至鹊里而还。
现代文：吴喜部下军帅吴献之飞舰冲击，所向披靡，无数敌人被斩首擒获，另外有些投水而死，一直追击到鹊尾州上才回来。
English: Wu Xizhi's subordinate general Wu Xianzhi's flying ship hit the enemy, which was overwhelming. Countless enemies were beheaded and captured, and some others were drowned and died. They were pursued all the way to Shanwei County before returning.

古文：太宗虑胡等或于步路向京邑，使宁朔将军、广德令王蕴千人防鲁显。
现代文：太宗担心刘胡等人也许会从陆路迂回京师，派宁朔将军、广德令王蕴带一千人防守鲁头。
English: Taizong was worried that Liu Hu and others might bypass the capital division by land, and sent General Ning Shuo, Guang De, Wang Yun and a thousand men to defend the capital.

古文：时胡等兵众强盛，远近疑惑。太宗欲绥慰人情，遣吏部尚书褚渊至虎槛选用将帅以下，申谦之、杜幼文因此求黄门郎，沈怀明、刘亮求中书郎。
现代文：当时刘胡兵众强盛，朝廷内外非常担心，太宗想安定人心，派吏部尚书褚渊到虎槛选用将帅以下人物作朝廷官吏。申谦之、杜幼文用这机会请求做黄门郎，沈怀明，刘亮请求做中书郎，建安王刘休仁叫褚渊接受将帅的要求，太宗不允许。
English: At that time, Liu Hu's army was very strong, and both inside and outside the imperial court were very worried. In order to stabilize the hearts of the people, Emperor Taizong sent Shangshu Qianyuan to the Tiger Threshold to select the following people to be imperial officials. Shen Qianzhi and Du Youwen used this opportunity to request to be Huangmen Lang, Shen Huaiming, Liu Liang requested to be Zhongshuro, and King Jianan Liu Xuren asked Qianyuan to accept the request of the general. Emperor Taizong did not allow it.

古文：建安王休仁即使褚渊拟选，上不许，曰： 忠臣殉国，不谋其报，临难以干朝典，岂臣下之节邪？ 始安内史王职之、建安内史赵道生、安成太守刘袭，并举郡奉顺。琬遣龙骧将军廖琰率数千人，并发庐陵白丁攻袭。
现代文：他说： 忠臣为国而死，不要求报答，在困难中要挟朝廷，难道是做臣子的道德吗？ 始安内史王职之，建安内史赵道生，安成太守刘袭都在本郡宣布归顺朝廷，邓琬于是派龙骧将军廖琰率领几千人，同时征集庐陵百姓进攻刘袭。
English: He said, "Is it moral to be a loyal vassal who dies for the country, does not ask for reward, and blackmails the imperial court in times of trouble? Shi An's vassal, Jian An's vassal, Zhao Daosheng, and An Cheng's eunuch, Liu Bei, all declared their allegiance to the imperial court in this county. Therefore, Deng Xiao sent Longyan General Liao Wei to lead several thousand people, and at the same time recruited Fuling people to attack Liu Bei.

古文：袭与郡丞檀玢拒战，大败，玢临陈见杀，袭弃郡走，据险自守。
现代文：刘袭和郡丞檀玢进行抵抗，但彻底失败。檀玢在战斗中被杀，刘袭丢下郡务逃跑，只好占据险要防守而已。
English: Liu Wei and the county magistrate, Danzhong, resisted, but failed completely. Danzhong was killed in the battle, Liu Wei left the county government and ran away, and had no choice but to take up defensive positions.

古文：琰虏掠而退，袭复出据郡。
现代文：廖琰抢掠一番便回来了，刘袭再次出来，占据本郡。
English: Liao Wei came back after a while, and Liu Wei came out again to occupy the county.

古文：时齐王率众东北征讨，而齐王世子为南康赣令，琬遣使收世子；世子腹心萧欣祖、桓康等数十人，奉世子长子奔窜草泽，召募得百余人，攻郡出世子。
现代文：当时齐王萧道成正率军在北方讨伐敌人。齐王世子萧赜正当南康郡赣县县令，邓琬派人逮捕萧赜，萧赜的心腹萧欣祖、桓康等数十人，带萧赜的长子逃窜在山林中，招募得一百多人，攻打郡城救出萧赜，萧赜自称宁朔将军。
English: At that time, the king of Qi, Xiao Daocheng, led the army to fight the enemy in the north. Xiao Yao, the son of the king of Qi, was the county magistrate of Nankang County, and Deng Yu sent people to arrest Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao's confidant, Xiao Xinzu, Huan Kang and dozens of others, fled with Xiao Yao's eldest son in the mountains and forests, recruited more than a hundred people, attacked the county town and rescued Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao called himself Ningshuo General.

古文：世子自号宁朔将军，与南康相沈用之、前南海太守何昙直、晋康太守刘绍祖、北地傅浩、东莞童禽等，据郡起义。琬征始兴相殷孚为御史中丞，并令率郡人俱下。孚众盛，世子避之于揭阳山。
现代文：南康相沈肃之、前南海太守何昙直、晋康太守刘绍祖、北地人傅浩、东莞人童禽等人，在本郡宣布起义，邓琬征调始兴相殷孚当御史中丞，同时叫他带领本郡人前来赴援，殷孚人马很多，萧赜在揭阳山避开殷孚。
English: Nankang Minister Shen Su Zhi, former Nankai Governor He Yanzhi, Jin Kang Governor Liu Shao Zu, Hokkien Fu Hao, Dongguan People's Children and Birds, and others declared an uprising in the county. Deng Yu transferred the first Xing Xiang to Yin Fu, and asked him to lead the people of the county to come to help. There were many people in Yin Fu, and Xiao Yu avoided Yin Fu in Jieyang Mountain.

古文：琬遣武昌戴凯之为南康相，世子率众攻之，凯之战败遁走。
现代文：邓琬派武昌人戴凯之当南康相，萧赜率兵进攻他，戴觊之战败逃跑。
English: Deng Yu sent the Wuchang man Dai Kai Zhi to be the South Kangsang, Xiao Yu led the troops to attack him, and Dai Yu was defeated and fled.

古文：世子遣幢主檀文起千人戍西昌，与袭相应。琬又遣廖琰与其中兵参军胡昭等筑垒于西昌，坚壁相守。
现代文：萧赜派队长檀文起带一千人到西边防守西昌、和刘袭相互响应，邓琬又派廖琰和他的中兵参军胡昭等人在西昌建立堡垒，守在堡中伺机攻击。
English: Xiao Yu sent captain Dangwen with a thousand men to the west to defend Xichang, and he and Liu Qi responded to each other. Deng Yu also sent Liao Wei and his middle-ranking soldiers to join the army Hu Zhao and others to build a fortress in Xichang and wait for an opportunity to attack.

古文：琬召豫章太守刘衍以为右将军、中护军，殷孚代为豫章太守，督上流五郡，以防袭等。
现代文：邓琬又调豫章太守刘衍当右将军、中护军，殷孚代他当豫章太守，统率上游五郡军事，以防卫刘袭等人。
English: Deng Xuan also transferred Liu Yan, the governor of Yuzhang, to be the right-hand general and the middle guard, and Yin Fu replaced him as the governor of Yuzhang and led the military of the five counties in the upper reaches to defend Liu Yi and others.

古文：衡阳内史王应之率郡文武五百许人，起义兵袭何慧文于长沙，径至城下。
现代文：衡阳内史王应之率领郡中文武官兵五百人起义袭击在长沙的何慧文，直抵城下。
English: Hengyang Inner History Wang Ying led the county's 500 Chinese military officers and soldiers in an uprising to attack He Huiwen in Changsha, reaching right under the city.

古文：慧文率左右出城与战，应之勇气奋发，击杀数人，遂与慧文交手战，斫慧文八创，慧文斫应之断足，遂杀之。
现代文：何慧文率领左右出城抵抗，王应之奋勇拼杀，杀死好几千人，于是和何慧文对面接战，他砍了何慧文八道伤口，何慧文把他的双脚砍断，于是杀了他。
English: He Huiwen led the left and right out of the city to resist. Wang Yingzhu fought bravely and killed several thousand people, so he fought with He Huiwen. He cut He Huiwen eight wounds, He Huiwen cut off his feet, so he killed him.

古文：时湘东国侍郎虞洽为太宗督国秩，在湘东，劝太守颜跃发兵应朝廷，跃不从。
现代文：当时湘东国的侍郎虞洽为太宗收租税，在湘东劝太守颜跃起兵响应朝廷，颜跃不同意，虞洽于是投奔桂阳招募好几百人。
English: At that time, Yu Gao, a retainer of Eastern Hunan Province, collected taxes for Taizong. In Eastern Hunan Province, he advised the Emperor Yan Yue to raise an army in response to the imperial court. Yan Yue did not agree, so Yu Gao went to Guiyang to recruit several hundred people.

古文：洽乃投桂阳，收募得数百人，还欲攻跃，跃惧求和，许之；有众二千。
现代文：回来攻打颜跃，颜跃害怕，只好求和，虞洽同意了他，于是虞洽有二千部众。
English: He came back to attack Yan Yue. Yan Yue was afraid, so he had to sue for peace. Gu Chao agreed with him, so Gu Chao had two thousand followers.

古文：时琬征慧文率众下寻阳，发长沙，已行数百里，闻洽起兵，乃回还攻洽，洽寻战败奔走。
现代文：当时邓琬调何慧文带兵东进寻阳。从长沙出发，已走了几百里，听说虞洽起兵，于是回师攻打虞洽，虞洽等不久便战败逃跑。
English: At that time, Deng Xiao transferred He Huiwen and his soldiers to the east to seek the sun. Starting from Changsha, he had already walked several hundred miles. He heard that Yu Cai had raised an army, so he returned to the division to attack Yu Cai. Yu Cai was soon defeated and fled.

古文：殷孚既去始兴，以郡五官掾谭伯初留知郡事。
现代文：殷孚离开始兴后，让郡中五官椽谭伯初留下来管理郡中事务。
English: After the beginning of the rise of Yingfu, let the five officials of the county stay to manage the affairs of the county.

古文：士人刘嗣祖等斩伯初，据郡起义。
现代文：当地人刘嗣祖等人杀掉谭伯初占据此郡宣布起义。
English: The local people Liu Shizu and others killed Tan Bo, occupied the county for the first time and declared an uprising.

古文：琬遣始兴太守韦希真、鹰扬将军杨弘之领众一千讨嗣祖。嗣祖亦遣众出南康，与齐王世子合。
现代文：邓琬派始兴太守韦希真、鹰扬将军杨弘之率兵一千讨伐刘嗣祖，刘嗣祖另派部分兵力出行南康和萧赜汇合。
English: Deng Xiao sent 1,000 soldiers led by Shuxing governor Wei Xizhen and Eagle Yang general Yang Hongzhi to fight Liu Shizu, and Liu Shizu also sent part of his troops to travel to the confluence of Nankang and Xiaoqi.

古文：希真等以义徒强盛，住庐陵不敢进。
现代文：韦希真等人认为起义人马很多，驻在庐陵不敢前进。
English: Wei Xizhen and others believed that there were too many insurgents in Fuling and they dared not advance.

古文：广州刺史袁昙远闻始兴起义，遣将李万周、陈伯绍率众讨嗣祖。嗣祖遣兵戍浈阳，万周亦筑垒相守。
现代文：广州刺史袁昙远听说始兴起义，派手下将领李万周陈伯绍率兵进攻刘嗣祖，刘嗣祖派兵戍守阳，李万周也立堡垒互相对峙。
English: Guangzhou historian Yuan Bingyuan heard that the uprising had begun, and sent his subordinate general Li Wanzhou Chen Bashao to attack Liu Shizuo, Liu Shizuo sent soldiers to defend Yang, and Li Wanzhou also set up a fortress to confront each other.

古文：嗣祖遣人诳万周曰： 寻阳已平，台遣刘勔为广州，垂至。 
现代文：刘嗣祖派人骗李万周说： 寻阳已被平定，朝廷派刘面力当广州刺史，将要到了。 
English: Liu Shizhu sent people to deceive Li Wanzhou, saying: "The search for the sun has been pacified, and the imperial court has sent Liu Mianli to make history in Guangzhou, and it will come.

古文：万周信之，便回还袭番禺，夜以长梯入城；昙远怯弱无防，闻万周反，便徒跣出奔，万周追斩之于城内。交州刺史檀翼被代还至广州，资货钜万，万周诬以为逆，袭而杀之。
现代文：李万周信以为真，于是回过头来袭击番禺城，半夜时用长梯进城，袁昙远胆怯无防卫，听说李万周反了自己，于是当日出逃，李万周在城中追上他并将他杀掉，交州刺史檀翼被人代替回到广州，家财仍以巨万计。李万周诬陷他造反，袭杀了他。
English: Li Wan Zhou believed it to be true, so he turned around and attacked Panyu City. At midnight, he used a long ladder to enter the city. Yuan Shiyuan was timid and defenseless. He heard that Li Wan Zhou had turned against himself, so he fled on the same day. Li Wan Zhou caught up with him in the city and killed him. He was replaced by someone from Jiaozhou and returned to Guangzhou. His family fortune was still huge. Li Wan Zhou framed him for rebellion and attacked and killed him.

古文：遂劫掠公私银帛，藉略袁、檀珍宝，悉以自入。
现代文：于是他抢掠公家私人很多金钱布帛，缴获袁檀的珍宝，都收入自己腰包。
English: As a result, he robbed many public and private people of money and seized Yuan Dan's treasures, all of which went into his own pocket.

古文：袁顗悉雍州之众，来赴寻阳。时孔道存为卫军长史，行荆州事。琬以黄门侍郎刘道宪代之，以道存为侍中，行雍州事。
现代文：袁靑调集雍州所有的兵士，东下赶赴寻阳城，当时孔道存当卫军长史，代管荆州事务，邓琬以黄门侍郎刘道宪代替他，让孔道存当侍中，代管雍州事务。
English: Yuan Shao mobilized all the soldiers of Yongzhou and rushed eastward to Xiangyang City. At that time, Kong Dao was the longest-serving member of the guard and was in charge of the affairs of Jingzhou. Deng Wei replaced him with Huangmen waiter Liu Daoxian and let Kong Dao serve as a waiter and was in charge of the affairs of Yongzhou.

古文：柳元景之诛也，元景弟子世隆为上庸太守，民吏共藏匿之。
现代文：当初柳元景被杀时，柳元景弟弟的儿子柳世隆当上庸太守，百姓和官员们共同把柳世隆藏起来。
English: At first, when Liu Yuanjing was killed, Liu Shilong, the son of Liu Yuanjing's younger brother, became Shangyong Daiju, and the people and officials hid Liu Shilong together.

古文：顗起兵，召世隆，不至。
现代文：袁靑起兵，召见柳世隆，柳世隆没有应命。
English: Yuan Shikun raised an army and summoned Liu Shilong, but Liu Shilong did not comply with the order.

古文：顗既下，世隆乃合率蛮、宋二千余人，起义于上庸，来袭襄阳。道存遣将王式民、康元隆等迎击于万山，世隆大败，还郡自守。
现代文：袁靑既然东下，柳世隆于是纠集当地守人二千多在上庸起义，前来袭击襄阳，孔道存派将王式民、康元隆等人在万山追击，柳世隆大败，回到本郡继续防守。
English: Since Yuan Shikun went to the east, Liu Shilong then gathered more than two thousand local defenders in the Shangyong Uprising and came to attack Yangyang. Kong Daozun sent Wang Shimin, Kang Yuanlong and others to pursue them in Wanshan. Liu Shilong was defeated and returned to this county to continue the defense.

古文：沈攸之等与刘胡相持久不决，上又遣强弩将军任农夫、振武将军武会仓、冗从仆射全景文、军主刘伯符等领兵继至。
现代文：沈攸之等人和刘胡长时间相互对峙，但还是没有决出胜负。太宗又派强弩将军任农夫、振武将军武会仓、冗从仆射全景文、军帅刘伯符等带兵来援。
English: Shen Youzhi and others and Liu Hu confronted each other for a long time, but still did not decide the outcome. Taizong also sent General Qiangyao as a farmer, General Zhenwu as a military leader, General Zhanwu as a military leader, General Zhou as a military leader, and General Liu Bofu as a military leader.

古文：攸之缮治船舸，材板不周，计无所出。
现代文：沈攸之修造船舰，材料不足，想不出办法。
English: Shen Youzhi repair shipbuilding ship, materials are insufficient, can not think of a way.

古文：会琬送五千片榜供胡军用，俄而风潮奔迅，榜捍突栅出江，胡等力不能制，自撞船舰，杀没数十人，赴流而下，来泊攸之等营，于是材板大足。
现代文：恰遇邓琬送五千片大木头供应刘胡。不料大风突起，江潮奔涌，大木头突破栅栏流出江外，刘胡等看着没有办法。木头把刘胡的那些船撞坏了很多，撞死十人。这些木头沿流而下，正好停在沈攸之等人的营地附近，于是材料充足。
English: It just so happened that Deng Wei sent five thousand large pieces of wood to Liu Hu for supply. Unexpectedly, a gale sprang up, the river tides surged, and the large pieces of wood broke through the fence and flowed out of the river. Liu Hu and others watched helplessly. The wood knocked down many of Liu Hu's boats, killing ten people. These pieces of wood floated down the river and just stopped near the camp of Shen Yuanzhi and others, so there was plenty of material.

古文：琬进袁顗都督征讨诸军事，给鼓吹一部。六月十八日，顗率楼船千艘，来入鹊尾，张兴世建议越鹊尾上据钱溪，断其粮道。
现代文：邓琬任袁岂页为都督征讨诸军事，并赏给袁靑鼓吹一套，六月十八日，袁岂页率领楼船一千艘，前来驻进鹊尾，张兴世建议越过鹊尾上据钱溪断绝敌人粮道。
English: Deng Xiaoping appointed Yuan Lushai as the military governor to recruit and persuade the military, and rewarded Yuan Lushai with a set of propaganda. On June 18, Yuan Lushai led a thousand ships to enter Shanwei, and Zhang Xingshi suggested crossing the Qianxi River in Shanwei to cut off the enemy's food supply.

古文：胡累攻之，不能克，事在《兴世传》。刘亮率所领至胡寨下，胡遣其副孙犀及张灵、焦度铁骑五匹，越磵取亮，不能得，犀回马去，亮使左右善射者夹身之，坠马，斩犀首。张继伯副马可率所领来降。
现代文：刘胡屡次进攻钱溪，都不能攻克，这事请看《张兴世传》，刘亮率他的部队到刘胡营下面，刘胡派他的副将孙犀和张灵、焦度带铁骑五十匹，越过涧中捉拿刘亮，没有成功，孙犀只好打马回去，刘亮叫左右会射箭的人夹着射击他们，孙犀掉下马来，朝廷兵士砍下孙犀的脑袋，张继伯副将率领部队前来投降。
English: Liu Hu repeatedly attacked Qianxi, but could not conquer it. Please see the "Zhang Xing Biography" for this matter. Liu Liang led his troops to the bottom of Liu Hu's camp. Liu Hu sent his vice-commanders, Sun Sai and Zhang Ling, to cross the middle of the stream and capture Liu Liang. It was not successful. Sun Sai had to beat his horse to go back. Liu Liang called people who could shoot arrows to shoot them. Sun Sai fell off his horse. The imperial soldiers cut off Sun Sai's head. Vice-General Zhang Jibo led the troops to surrender.

古文：刘亮营寨，深入贼地，袁顗畏惮之，曰： 贼入我肝脏里，何由得活！ 
现代文：刘亮的营寨，深入敌人腹部中间。袁岂页非常害怕，说： 敌人进入我们的肝脏中，怎么能活下去？ 
English: Liu Liang's encampment penetrated deep into the middle of the enemy's abdomen. Yuan Shifang was very scared and said, "If the enemy enters our liver, how can we survive?"

古文：刘胡率轻舸四百，由鹊头内路，欲攻钱溪。既而谓其长史王念叔曰： 吾少习步战，未闲水斗。若步战，恆在数万人中，水战在一舸之上，舸舸各进，不复相关，正在三十人中取，此非万全之计，吾不为也。 
现代文：刘胡率领轻快小舰四百艘，由鹊头内路，准备攻打钱溪，不久对他的长史王念叔说： 我自小便熟习步兵作战，不会水上打斗，如果是步战的话，常常轻易组织以几万人协同作战，水战则在一船之上，舰船各行其道，不再相互联系，最多三十人一同作战，这不是万全计策，我不干。 
English: Liu Hu led four hundred light and fast small ships from Shantou Inner Road, preparing to attack Qianxi. Soon he said to his eldest son Wang Nian: I have been familiar with infantry combat since I was a child. I can't fight on the water. If it's a foot battle, it's often easy to organize tens of thousands of people to fight together. Water battle is on a ship. Ships go their own way and are no longer in contact with each other. Up to thirty people fight together. This is not a perfect solution. I won't do it.

古文：乃托疟疾，住鹊头不进。遣龙骧将军陈庆领三百舸向钱溪，戒庆不须战： 张兴世、武会仓，吾之所悉，自当走耳。 
现代文：于是托名得了虐疾，住在鹊头不出击，只派龙骧将军陈庆率领三百艘船向钱溪行进，告诫陈庆不用进攻，张兴世、武会仓我很熟悉，自然是会逃跑的。
English: As a result, he got malaria under false pretenses, lived in Shantou and did not attack. He only sent the dragon dragon general Chen Qing to march to Qianxi with three hundred ships, and warned Chen Qing not to attack. I am very familiar with Zhang Xingshi and Wu Hui Cang, so I would naturally run away.

古文：陈庆至钱溪，不敢攻。越钱溪，于梅根立寨。胡别遣将王起领百舸攻兴世，兴世击，大破之。胡率其余舸驰还，谓顗曰： 兴世营寨已立，不可卒攻，昨日小战，未足为损。陈庆已与南陵、大雷诸军共遏其上，大军在此，鹊头诸将又断其下流，已堕围中，不足复虑。 
现代文：陈庆到钱溪，不敢进攻，只好越过钱溪，在梅根建立营寨，刘胡另派王起带百艘小船攻打张兴世，张兴世反击并大败他，刘胡率领剩余船舰回来，对袁靑说： 张兴世营寨已稳固了，不能一下攻克，昨天的战斗，谈不上损失，陈庆已和南陵、大雷各路军队共同截断他的上游，我们大军在此地，鹊头各将又截断他的下流，张兴世已落入我们的包围之中，不需再担心。 
English: When Chen Qing arrived at Qianxi, he did not dare to attack, so he had to cross Qianxi and set up a camp in Megan. Liu Hui sent Wang to attack Zhang Xingshi with a hundred small boats. Zhang Xingshi counterattacked and defeated him. Liu Hu led the remaining ships back and said to Yuan Shao: Zhang Xingshi's camp is already stable and cannot be conquered at once. Yesterday's battle is not a loss. Chen Qing has cut off his upstream together with Nanling and Dalai's various armies. Our army will cut off his downstream in this place. Shantou will cut off his downstream. Zhang Xingshi has fallen into our

古文：顗怒胡不战，谓曰： 粮运梗塞，当如此何？ 
现代文：袁岂页恨刘胡不进攻，对刘胡说： 粮道阻塞，那怎么办？ 
English: Yuan Shaoqi hated Liu Hu for not attacking, and said to Liu Hu: If the grain route is blocked, what should we do?

古文：胡曰： 彼尚得溯流越我而上，此运何以不得沿流越彼而下邪！ 
现代文：刘胡说： 他们能逆流越过我们在上游扎营，我们为什么不能沿流而下在他们下面扎营呢？ 
English: Liu Hu said, "They can cross the stream and camp upstream of us, why can't we camp downstream of them?"

古文：顗更使胡率步卒二万，铁马一千，往攻兴世。休仁因此命沈攸之、吴喜、佼长生、刘灵遗、刘伯符等进攻浓湖，造皮舰十乘，拔其营栅，苦战移日，大破之。顗被攻既急，驰信召胡令还。
现代文：袁岂页又派刘胡率领步兵二万，铁骑一千，前往进攻张兴世，刘休仁于是命令沈攸之、吴喜、佼长生、刘灵遣、刘伯符等人进攻浓湖，造皮舰十艘，毁掉敌人栅栏，苦战一天，大败袁岂页军队，袁岂页被攻得紧急，派人请刘胡回来。
English: Yuan Shikai also sent Liu Hu, leading 20,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry, to attack Zhang Xingshi. Liu Shuren then ordered Shen Youzhi, Wu Xi, Jia Changsheng, Liu Lingyuan, Liu Bofu and others to attack the thick lake, make ten leather ships, destroy the enemy fence, and fight hard for one day. Yuan Shikai's army was defeated. Yuan Shikai was attacked urgently and sent someone to ask Liu Hu to come back.

古文：张兴世既据钱溪，江路岨断，胡军乏食，琬大送资粮，畏兴世不敢下。胡遣将迎之，为钱溪所破，资实覆没都尽，烧米三十万斛，胡众骇惧。胡副张喜来降，说胡欲叛。
现代文：张兴世既然占据钱溪，江路断绝，刘胡的部下开始没有饭吃，邓琬大量地运送军粮，但害怕张兴世而不敢东下，刘胡派他的将领迎接，又被钱溪的张军打败，军粮覆没干净，三十万斛大米被烧，刘胡的部众非常惶恐，刘胡副将张喜前来投降，说刘胡想叛变。
English: Since Zhang Xingshi occupied Qianxi, the river routes were cut off, Liu Hu's subordinates began to have no food to eat, Deng Wei transported a large amount of military food, but was afraid of Zhang Xingshi and did not dare to go east, Liu Hu sent his generals to meet, and was defeated by Zhang's army in Qianxi, the military food was not clean, 300,000 stalks of rice were burned, Liu Hu's subordinates were very frightened, Liu Hu's vice-general Zhang Xi came to surrender, saying that Liu Hu wanted to mutiny.

古文：八月二十四日，胡诳顗云： 更率步骑二万，上取兴世，兼下大雷余餫。 
现代文：八月二十四日，刘胡骗袁岂页说： 我再率二万步骑兵，沿江而上进攻张兴世，同时运下大雷的余粮。 
English: On August 24th, Liu Huliang said to Yuan Shaoqi, "I will lead another twenty thousand foot cavalry to attack Zhang Xingshi along the river, and at the same time, I will transport the surplus grain from Darei.

古文：令顗悉度马配之，其夜，委顗奔走，径趣梅根。先令薛常宝办船舸，悉拨南陵诸军，烧大雷诸城而走。
现代文：叫袁岂页把全部的马匹给他，当天夜里便丢下袁岂页逃跑，奔向梅林，先叫薛常宝准备船舰，同时拨出南陵各路军队，烧掉大雷诸城而逃。
English: He told Yuan Shibei to give him all the horses. That night, he abandoned Yuan Shibei and fled to Meilin. First, he ordered Xue Changbao to prepare a ship. At the same time, he dispatched troops from all parts of Nanling, burned the cities of Dalai and fled.

古文：顗闻胡走，亦弃众西奔，至青林见杀。
现代文：袁岂页听说刘胡逃走，也丢下部队而逃，到青林时被杀。
English: Yuan Qizhe heard that Liu Hu had fled, and he also left his troops and fled. He was killed when he arrived in Qinglin.

古文：胡率数百舸二万人向寻阳，报子勋诈云： 袁顗已降，军皆散，唯己率所领独反。宜速处分，为一战之资，当停据盆城，誓死不贰。 
现代文：刘胡率几百艘军舰二万人逃向寻阳，骗刘子勋说： 袁岂页已投降，军队都逃散了，只有我率部下逃回，应该迅速准备，以备一战，誓死不降。 
English: Liu Hu led several hundred warships and twenty thousand people to flee to Xuanyang, deceiving Liu Zixun and saying: Yuan Shifang has surrendered, the army has fled, only I and my subordinates have fled back, we should quickly prepare to prepare for a battle, and swear not to surrender.

古文：乃于江外夜取沔口。
现代文：于是在当夜直接逃向汉口。
English: So he fled directly to Hankou that night.

古文：琬闻胡去，惶扰无复计，呼褚灵嗣等谋之，并不知所出，唯云更集兵力，加赏五阶，或云三阶者。
现代文：邓琬听说刘胡逃走，惶恐得无计可施，叫褚灵嗣等前来商讨，都无计可施，这些人只是说再召集兵力，每人加赏五级，也有说只加三级的。
English: When Deng Yao heard that Liu Hu had fled, he was so terrified that he could do nothing. When he called for the descendants of Yan Ling to come and discuss the matter, there was nothing he could do. These people only said that they would call up more troops and increase the reward for each person by five levels, while others said that they would only increase it by three levels.

古文：张悦始发兄子浩丧，乃称疾呼琬计事，令左右伏甲帐后，戒之： 若闻索酒，便出。 
现代文：张悦这时才办侄儿张治的丧事，又传称叫邓琬商量大事。叫左右的人在布帐后面埋伏，告诉他们： 你们如果听我要酒，便出来。 
English: It was at this time that Zhang Yue held the funeral of her nephew Zhang Zhimen. It was also rumored that she had asked Deng Yao to discuss important matters. She ordered the people on her right and left to lie in ambush behind a tablecloth and told them: "If you hear me asking for wine, then come out."

古文：琬既至，悦曰： 卿首唱此谋，今事已急，计将安出？ 
现代文：邓琬到后，张悦说： 你最先主张造反，但现在情况不妙，我们将想想什么办法？ 
English: After Deng Xuan arrived, Zhang Yue said: You first advocated rebellion, but now the situation is not good, what will we think about?

古文：琬曰： 正当斩晋安王，封府库，以谢罪耳。 
现代文：邓琬说： 只有将晋安王斩首，封存府中金银，向皇上谢罪而已。 
English: Deng Yao said: Only by beheading King Jian'an and sealing the gold and silver in the palace could he apologize to the emperor.

古文：悦曰： 今日宁可卖殿下求活邪？ 
现代文：张悦说： 今天怎么能出卖殿下求生呢？ 
English: Zhang Yue said, "How can I betray His Royal Highness to survive today?"

古文：因呼求酒，再呼，左右震慑不能应。第二子洵提刀走出，余人续至，即斩琬。
现代文：于是喊要酒，第二次呼叫时，张悦左右的人害怕而不敢响应，他的第二个儿子张洵提刀走出来，其余的人也跟着出来，便杀了邓琬。
English: So he called for wine. The second time he called, the people around Zhang Yue were afraid and did not dare to respond. His second son, Zhang Xizhe, came out with a knife, and the rest of the people followed, and killed Deng Yao.

古文：琬死时，年六十。时中护军刘顺在座，惊起抱悦，左右人欲杀之，悦顾曰： 无关护军。 
现代文：邓琬死的时候，六十岁，当时中护军刘衍在座上，惊起抱住张悦，张左右的人也想杀掉他，张悦回头说： 不关护军的事。 
English: When Deng Xuan died, he was sixty years old. At that time, Liu Yan, the middle guard, was on the throne. He was startled and hugged Zhang Yue. People around Zhang Yue also wanted to kill him. Zhang Yue looked back and said, "I don't care about the guard."

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是没有杀。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：潘欣之闻琬死，勒兵而至，悦使人语之曰： 邓琬谋反，即已枭戮。 
现代文：潘欣之听说邓琬死了，带兵来了。张悦叫人告诉他说： 邓琬谋反，已被杀了。 
English: When Pan Xinzhi heard that Deng Xuan was dead, he came with soldiers. Zhang Yue called someone to tell him: Deng Xuan plotted a rebellion and has been killed.

古文：欣之乃回还，取琬兒并杀之。
现代文：潘欣之于是返回，捉住邓琬的儿子们都杀掉。
English: Pan Xinzhi then returned, captured Deng Yao's sons and killed them.

古文：悦因单舸赍琬首驰下，诣建安王休仁降。
现代文：张悦于是装好邓琬的脑袋驾着一叶小船驰下，到建安王刘休仁那里投降。
English: Zhang Yue then loaded Deng Yao's head onto a small boat and sailed down to Jian'an King Liu Xuren to surrender.

古文：蔡那子道渊，以父为太宗效力，被系作部，因乱脱锁入城，执子勋囚之。
现代文：蔡那的儿子蔡道渊因为自己的父亲为太宗效力，被关在作部，趁乱中打开枷锁进入寻阳，逮住刘子勋关起来。
English: Cai Na's son, Cai Daoyuan, was locked up in the workshop because his father was working for Emperor Taizong. He took advantage of the turmoil to open the shackles and go out to look for the sun. He caught Liu Zixun and locked him up.

古文：沈攸之诸军至江州，斩子勋于桑尾牙下，传首京都。
现代文：沈攸之等部队到江州，在桑尾屋下将刘子勋斩首，在京师传观他的脑袋。
English: Shen Yuanzhi and other troops went to Jiangzhou, beheaded Liu Zixun under the Mulberry Tree House, and watched his head in Beijing.

古文：刘顺及余同逆，并伏诛。
现代文：刘衍和其余同时造反的都被杀掉。
English: Liu Yan and the others who rebelled at the same time were killed.

古文：吴喜、张兴世进向荆州，沈怀明向郢州，刘亮、张敬兒向雍州，孙超之向湘州，沈思仁、任农夫向豫章，所至皆平定。
现代文：吴喜张兴世前进到荆州，沈怀明到郢州，刘亮、张敬儿到雍州，孙超之到湘州，任农夫到豫章。他们到后都平定了叛乱。
English: Wu Xi and Zhang Xingshi advanced to Jingzhou, Shen Huiming advanced to Bozhou, Liu Liang and Zhang Jing'er advanced to Yongzhou, Sun Chaozhi advanced to Hunan, and Ren Nongfu advanced to Yuzhang. After their arrival, they all quelled the rebellion.

古文：刘胡走入沔，众稍散，比至石城，裁余数骑。
现代文：刘胡逃到汉江流域，等到了石城，只剩下几个骑兵。
English: Liu Hu fled to the Han River basin and waited for Shicheng. There were only a few cavalrymen left.

古文：竟陵郡丞陈怀真，宪子也，闻胡经过，率数十人断道邀之。胡人马既疲，自度不免，因随怀真入城，告渴，与之酒，胡饮酒毕，引佩刀自刺，不死，斩首送京邑。张兴世弟僧产追胡，未至石城数十里，逢送胡首信，将还竟陵，杀怀真，窃有其功。
现代文：竟陵郡丞陈怀真是陈宪的儿子，听说刘胡经过，率领几十人截断刘胡逃的去路而追击他，刘胡一路人马已很疲倦，自知活不成，于是随同陈怀真进城，说他很渴，陈给他酒，刘胡喝酒完了，抽出佩刀自杀，没有杀死，被斩首送往东城，张兴世的弟弟张僧产追击刘胡，还未到石城，恰逢送刘胡脑袋的人，他便带回竟陵城，杀了陈怀真，窃据这个功劳。
English: Chen Huai, the county magistrate of Qingting County, was the son of Chen Xian. Hearing that Liu Hu was passing by, he led dozens of people to cut off Liu Hu's escape route and chased him. Liu Hu was very tired all the way and knew that he could not survive. So he followed Chen Huai Zhen into the city, saying that he was thirsty. Chen gave him wine. Liu Hu finished drinking, drew a saber to commit suicide, did not kill, and was beheaded and sent to Dongcheng. Zhang Xingshi's brother Zhang Sangzhu chased Liu Hu before he reached Shicheng. It coincided with the person who sent Liu

古文：郢州行事张沈、伪竟陵太守丘景先闻败，变形为沙门逃走，追擒伏诛。
现代文：郢州行事张沈、伪竟陵太守丘景听先说他们失败了，扮成和尚逃走，被追上杀掉。
English: Zhang Shen and the pseudo-mausoleum guardian Yujing, who were acting in Zhangzhou, were first told that they had failed, disguised themselves as monks and fled. They were caught and killed.

古文：荆州闻浓湖平，议欲更遣军与郢州合势，又欲断据巴陵，经日不决。
现代文：荆州人听说浓湖平定，商议再派部队和郢州汇合，又想截断东路占据巴陵。
English: When the people of Jingzhou heard that the lake had been pacified, they discussed sending more troops to join forces with Zhangzhou, and also wanted to cut off the eastern road and occupy Baling.

古文：乃遣将赵道始于江津筑垒，任演戍沙桥，诸门津要，皆有屯兵。
现代文：几天不能决定下来，于是派将领赵道始在江津修筑堡垒，任演戍守沙桥。各关门津要都有守兵。
English: Unable to come to a decision for a few days, he sent the general Zhao Daozhi to build a fortress in Jiangjin and assigned him to guard the sand bridge. Each gate should have a guard.

古文：人情转离，将士渐逃散。更议奉子顼奔益州，就萧惠开，典签阮道预、邵宰不同，曰： 近奉别诏，诸籓若改迷归顺者，悉复本爵。且任叔兒已断白帝，杨僧嗣据梁州，虽复欲西，岂可得至。 
现代文：但叛军的人心已离散，将士纷纷逃跑，他们又商量拥着刘子顼跑到益州，乞求萧惠开门保护，典签道预、邵宰觉得不妥，说： 近来接到诏书的各藩镇如果能改正错误，归顺朝廷的，全部恢复本来爵位，况且任叔儿已截断白帝城，杨僧嗣据有梁州，即使想逃到西方，又怎么到得了。 
English: However, the hearts of the rebels had been scattered, and the soldiers fled one after another. They also discussed hugging Liu Ziqi and ran to Yizhou, begging Xiao Hui to open the door for protection. The emperor signed the preamble, and Shao Zai felt it was not appropriate, saying: If the provinces and towns that have recently received the edict can correct their mistakes, and those that have surrendered to the imperial court can all recover their original titles. Moreover, Ren Shizhe has cut off Baidicheng, and Yang Shizhe has Liangzhou. Even if you want to escape to the west, how can you get there?

古文：道预、邵宰即与刘道宪解遣白丁，遣使归罪。荆州治中宗景、土人姚俭等勒兵入城，杀道宪、预、记室参军鲍照，劫掠府库，无复孑遗，执子顼以降。
现代文：阮道预、邵宰便和刘道宪解散民丁，派人谢罪，荆州治中宗景、士人姚俭等率兵入城，杀掉刘道宪、阮道预和记室参军鲍照，抢掠府库，没一点剩下的，捉住刘子顼投降。
English: Ruan Daoyuan, Shao Zai Ben and Liu Daoxian disbanded the Min Ding and sent someone to apologize, Jingzhou Zhizhong Zongjing, scholar Yao Jian and other soldiers entered the city, killed Liu Daoyuan, Ruan Daoyuan and the army member Bao Zhao, looted the government treasury, there was nothing left, captured Liu Zixuan and surrendered.

古文：初，邓琬征兵巴东，巴东太守罗宝称辞以郡接凶蛮，兵力不足分。
现代文：当初，邓琬向巴东调兵，巴东太守罗宝称推辞说： 本郡和土蛮相邻，兵力不够。 
English: At first, Deng Xiaoping transferred troops to Badong, and the governor of Badong, Luo Bao, said: This county is adjacent to the barbarians, and there are not enough troops.

古文：巴东人任叔兒聚徒起义，遣信要宝称，宝称持疑未决，暴疾死。叔兒乃自号辅国将军，引兵据白帝，杀宝称二子，阻守三陕。萧惠开遣费欣寿等五千人攻叔兒，叔兒与战，大破之，斩欣寿。子顼又遣中兵参军何康之领宜都太守，讨叔兒。军至陕口，为夷帅向子通所破，挺身走还。叔兒遂固白帝。
现代文：巴东人任叔儿聚众起义，派人要请罗宝称一同起事，宝称犹豫不决，突然得病死了，任叔儿于是自称辅国将军，带兵占据白帝，杀掉罗宝称两个儿子，阻挡东方去路守住三峡，萧惠开派费欣寿等五千人进攻任叔儿，叔儿迎战，大败萧军，杀了费欣寿，刘子顼又派中兵参军何康之兼领宜都太守，讨击任叔儿，何康之的部队刚到峡口，便被少数民族头领向子通打败，只身而逃，任叔儿于是固守白帝。
English: The Padong people, Ren Shul, gathered a crowd to revolt and sent someone to ask Luo Bao to rise up together. Bao said he was indecisive and suddenly fell ill and died. Ren Shul then called himself the general of the auxiliary country, led the troops to occupy the White Emperor, killed Luo Bao and his two sons, blocked the road to the East, and guarded the Three Gorges. Xiao Hui sent Fei Xin Shou and five thousand others to attack Ren Shul. The uncle met the battle, defeated the Xiao army, and killed Fei Xin Shou. Liu Zixuan also sent soldiers to join the army. He Kangzhi and his

古文：孔道存知寻阳已平，遣使归顺。
现代文：孔道存得知寻阳已被平定，派人归顺朝廷。
English: When Kong Daoxuan learned that Xuanyang had been pacified, he sent people to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：寻闻柳世隆、刘亮当至，众悉奔逃，道存及三子同时自杀。何慧文始谋同逆，其母禁之不从，母乃携女归江陵，遽嫁之。
现代文：不久听说柳世隆刘亮将要到来，他的部下全部逃跑，孔道存和他的三个儿子同时自杀，何慧文开始打算与寻阳同道，他母亲不允许他这样，于是带他女儿回到江陵，马上便嫁出他的女儿。
English: Soon he heard that Liu Shilong and Liu Liang were about to arrive, all his subordinates fled, Kong Daocun and his three sons committed suicide at the same time, and He Huiwen began to plan to go with Xuanyang. His mother did not allow him to do so, so he took his daughter back to Jiangling and immediately married his daughter.

古文：慧文才兼将吏，干略有施，虽害王应之，上特加原宥，吴喜宣旨赦之。慧文曰： 既陷逆节，手害忠义，天网虽复恢恢，何面目以见天下之士。 
现代文：何慧文文武全才，颇有些手力。虽然杀害了王应之，太宗特别原谅他，吴喜宣告诏书赦免他，何慧文说： 我既然陷入逆党亲自杀害了忠义之士，虽然皇上网开一面，但有何面目重见天下士人。 
English: Although he killed Wang Yingzhi, Emperor Taizong specially pardoned him, and Wu Xi issued an edict to pardon him, He Hui said, "Since I have fallen into the opposite party, I have personally killed a loyal person. Although the emperor has opened a page on the Internet, what is the face of the world's scholars?

古文：和药将饮，门生覆之，乃不食而死。
现代文：准备毒药喝下，他的门生把药倒掉，于是他绝食而死。
English: Preparing to drink the poison, his protégé spilled it, and he died of starvation.

古文：颜跃虑虞洽还都，说其始时同逆，密使人杀之。
现代文：颜跃担心虞洽回到本郡，说他开始时也附和反党，暗中叫人杀了他。
English: Yan Yue was worried that Gongchao would come back to his county. He said that he had initially sided with the anti-party and secretly ordered someone to kill him.

古文：初，淮南定陵人贾袭宗本县已为刘胡所得，率二十人投沈攸之。攸之言之建安王休仁，休仁版为司徒参军督护，使还乡里招集，为胡所禽，以火炙之，问台军消息，一无所言，瞋目谓胡曰： 君称兵内侮，窥觎神器，未闻奇谋远略，而为砲烙之刑。
现代文：当初淮南定陵人贾袭宗的本县已被刘胡占据，他带二十人投奔沈攸之，沈攸之告诉建安王刘休仁，刘休仁任他当司徒参军都护，叫他回到乡里，招集人马，不幸被刘胡捉住，刘胡用火烧他，问他朝廷军队的消息，他一个字也不吐，睁着眼睛对刘胡说： 你在国内起兵侮弄人民，岂页觎皇位。
English: At that time, the county of Jia Xizong, the Dingling person of Huainan, was occupied by Liu Hu. He took twenty people to join Shen Youzhi. Shen Youzhi told Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an. Liu Xuren appointed him as the tutor to join the army to protect the capital. He told him to go back to the countryside and recruit people. Unfortunately, he was caught by Liu Hu. Liu Hu burned him with fire and asked him about the news of the imperial army. He did not say a word. He opened his eyes and said to Liu Hu, "If you raise an army in the country and mock the people, will you usur

古文：仆本以身奉义，死亦何有。 
现代文：没听说有什么奇谋远计，只知造一些炮烙般的刑罚，我本来准备杀身成仁，死有什么了不起！ 
English: I hadn't heard of any far-fetched schemes, I only knew about the creation of some brand-like punishments. I had originally planned to commit suicide. What's so great about death?

古文：胡乃斩之。前军典签范道兴志不同逆，为琬所诛，其余奉顺见害者，并为上所愍。
现代文：刘胡于是杀了他，前军典坚决不响应叛军，被邓琬杀掉，其余归顺朝廷被杀害的同时被皇上所怜悯。
English: Liu Hu then killed him. The former military censor resolutely did not respond to the rebels and was killed by Deng Xuan. The rest surrendered to the imperial court and were killed while being pitied by the emperor.

古文：诏曰： 前镇军参军督护范道兴，朕之旧隶，经从北籓，徒役南畿，遭离命会，抱恩固节，受害群凶，言念纯诚，良有悯怆。可赠员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：太宗下诏书说： 前镇军参军督护范道兴是我的老部下，曾经在北藩中服务，又在南方服役，遭遇不幸，他心怀皇室，因守臣节，被小人杀害，他的忠诚令人感叹，实在值得悲伤和同情，可以追赠员外散骑侍郎。
English: Emperor Taizong's second imperial edict said, "Former town guard Fan Daoxing, who joined the army, is my old subordinate. He once served in the northern domain, and also served in the south. He suffered misfortune. He had the royal family in his heart, and was killed by a villain because of the Day of Defending the Fatherland. His loyalty is amazing. It is truly worthy of sorrow and sympathy. He can be posthumously awarded the title of Foreign Riding Butler.

古文：南城令鲍法度、后军典签冯次民、永新令应生、新建令库延宝、上饶令黄难等，违逆识顺，同被诛灭，言念既往，宜在追荣。可赠生奉朝请，法度南台御史，次民、延宝、难并员外将军。 
现代文：南城令鲍法度、后军典冯次民、永新令应生新建令库延宝、上饶令黄难等，反对叛乱拥护朝廷，想起他们的可贵的行动，应该得到追认褒奖，可赠给应生奉朝请，法度南台御史，次民、延宝，都为员外将军。 
English: Nancheng commander Bao Fadu, post-military commander Feng Cimin, Yongxin commander Ying Sheng, newly created commander Ku Yan Bao, Shangrao commander Huang Nan, etc. opposed the rebellion and supported the imperial court, and their valuable actions should be recognized and rewarded, and may be presented to Ying Sheng. Nantai governor Fadu, Cimin, and Yan Bao are all non-commissioned officers.

古文：有司奏： 宁朔将军、督豫州之梁郡诸军事、豫州刺史、领南梁郡太守竟陵张兴世，都统水军，屡战克捷，仍进断贼上流钱溪，贵口苦战，平定凶逆，今封南平郡作唐县开国侯，食邑一千户。
现代文：有关官员上奏： 宁朔将军、督豫州的梁郡诸军事、豫州刺史、兼领南梁郡太守竟陵张兴世统率水军，屡战屡胜，前进截断在钱溪上流的敌人，又在贵口经过苦战，平定凶党，现在封为南平郡作唐县开国侯，食邑一千户。
English: Relevant officials reported: General Ningshuo, the military of Liang County in Yuzhou, the historian of Yuzhou, and Zhang Xing, the eunuch of Nanliang County, who also led the navy, led the navy, fought and won many times, advanced to cut off the enemy in the upper reaches of Qianxi, and after a hard battle in Guikou, pacified the evil party, and is now known as Nanping County, serving as the governor of Tang County, with a thousand households.

古文：宁朔将军、参司徒中直兵军事广平佼长生，同统水军屡战，及兴世上据钱溪，长生独距贼冲要，功次兴世，今封武陵郡迁陵县开国侯，食邑八百户。宁朔将军试守西阳太守吴兴全景文、尚书比部郎吴县孙超之、假辅国将军右卫将军南彭城刘亮等三人，并经晋陵苦战，景文、超之仍又北讨破釜，水军断贼粮运，及经葛冢、石梁二处破贼，亮南伐经大战，又最处险剧。景文今封西阳郡孝宁县，超之封长沙郡罗县，亮封顺阳县，并开国侯，食邑各六百户。
现代文：宁朔将军、参司徒中直兵军事、广平佼长生，和张兴世同时统率水军，也进行多次战斗，在张兴世占据钱溪时，佼长生独立在关健地方抵抗敌人，比张兴世略逊一等，现在封为武陵郡迁陵县开国侯，食邑八百户，宁朔将军代理西阳太守吴兴全景文、尚书比部朗吴兴孙超之，代理辅国将军、南彭城刘亮等人，都经过晋陵苦战，景文同时又北讨破釜敌军，用水军截断敌人粮运，也经历了葛冢、石宗二处激战打败敌人，刘亮南伐经过激烈战斗，又处在最危险的地方，全景文现在封爵西阳郡孝宁县，孙超之封长沙汨罗县，刘亮封顺阳县，都是开国侯，每人食邑六百户。
English: General Ningshuo, Sang Sidi Zhong Zhi soldier military, Guang Ping Qiao Chang Sheng, and Zhang Xing Shi simultaneously led the navy, and also fought many battles. When Zhang Xing Shi occupied Qianxi, Qiao Chang Sheng independently resisted the enemy in Guan Jian. He was slightly inferior to Zhang Xing Shi. He is now the prince of Wuling County, Qianling County, and 800 households in food villages. General Ningshuo, acting governor of Xiyang, Wu Xing Panjingwen, Shang Shubilang Lang, Wu Xing Sun Chaozhi, acting governor of Fu Guo, Nan Pengcheng Liu Liang

古文：假辅国将军骠骑司马刘灵遗、宁朔将军右军蔡那、宁朔将军屯骑校尉段佛荣等三人，统治攻道，并经苦战，灵遗今封新野郡新野县，那封始平郡平阳县，佛荣封湘东郡临蒸县，并开国伯，食邑各五百户。
现代文：代理辅国将军骠骑司马刘灵遗、宁朔将军右军蔡那、宁朔将军屯骑校尉殷佛荣等人，负责封锁道路，都经过激烈战斗，灵遗封为新野郡新野县，蔡那封始平郡平阳县，佛荣封湘东郡临蒸县，都是开国伯，每人食邑五百户。
English: Liu Lingyi, the acting assistant general of the State Council, Cai Na, the right army of Ningshuo General, Yin Fuerong, the cavalry captain of Ningshuo General, and others were responsible for blocking the road. All of them went through fierce battles. Lingyi was assigned to Nino County, Nino County, Cai Na was assigned to Pingyang County, Shihping County, and Fuerong was assigned to Linmu County, Shandong County. All of them were the founding prefects, with 500 households per person.

古文：假辅国将军左军吴兴沈怀明、龙骧将军积射将军东平周盘龙、司徒参军南彭城李安民等三人，怀明经晋陵破贼，又水军南伐，统治攻道，盘龙虽不统军，并经大战，先登陷陈，安民又随张兴世遏断钱溪，别统军贵口破贼，今封怀明建安郡吴兴县，盘龙封晋安郡晋安县，安民封建安郡邵武县，并开国子，食邑各四百户。
现代文：代理辅国将军、左军吴兴沈怀明，龙骧将军、积射将军东平周盘龙，司徒参军南彭城，李安民等人，怀明经过晋陵战役打败敌人，又随水军南伐，负责封锁道路，盘龙虽未统管军队，都经历过激烈战斗，先登陷阵。安民又随同张兴世截断钱溪敌人粮道，又统率军队在贵口打败敌人。现在封怀明建安郡吴兴县，盘龙封晋安郡晋安县，安民封建安郡邵武县，都是开国子，食邑每人四百户，代理辅国将军。
English: Wu Xing Shen Hui Ming, the acting general of Fu Guo, the left army, Wu Xing Shen Hui Ming, the general of Long Xuan, the general of Dongping Zhou Pan Long, the general of accumulative shooting, Stow joined the army of Nan Pengcheng, Li Anmin and others, Hui Ming defeated the enemy through the battle of Jinling, and was responsible for blocking the road with the southward march of the navy. Although Pan Long did not control the army, they all experienced fierce battles and were the first to enter the battlefield. An Min also cut off the enemy's food channel of Qianxi with Zhang Xingshi, and led the army to

古文：假辅国将军游击将军彭城杜幼文、龙骧将军羽林监太原王穆之、龙骧将军羽林监济北顿生、龙骧将军羽林监沛郡周普孙、员外散骑侍郎硃重恩等五人，幼文经晋陵破贼，在军统攻道，南伐浓湖，普孙副沈攸之都统众军，穆之、生、重恩并南伐有功。今封幼文邵陵郡邵阳县，穆之封衡阳郡衡山县，生封始平郡武功县，普孙封顺阳郡清水县，重恩封南海郡龙川县，并开国男，食邑各三百户。 
现代文：游击将军彭城杜幼文，龙骧将军羽林监太原王穆之，龙骧将军羽林监沛郡人周普生，员外散骑侍郎宋重恩等五人，幼文经历晋陵战役打败敌人，在军中负责进攻道路。南伐浓湖时，普孙作沈攸之的副官，统率各路军队，穆之、朱重恩都南伐有功，现在杜幼文封邵陵郡郡阳县，穆之封衡阳郡衡山县，生封始平邵武功县，普孙封顺阳郡清水县，重恩封南海郡龙州县，都是开国男，每人食邑三百户。
English: Guerrilla General Pengcheng Duyunwen, Longjing General Hualin Supervisor Wang Muzhi, Longjing General Hualin Supervisor Zhou Pusheng, and Foreign Cavalryman Song Chung-en are five people. Yuwen experienced the Battle of Jinling and defeated the enemy, and was responsible for the offensive road in the army. During the Southern Expedition to the Yangtze River, Fusun served as Shen Youzhi's adjutant and led the army along all routes. Mu Zhi and Zhu Chung-en have made great contributions to the Southern Expedition. Now Duyunfeng Wenyang County, Shaolin County, Mu Zhifeng

古文：江方兴以战功为太子左卫率，贼未平，病卒，追封武当县侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：江方兴因战功当太子左卫帅，敌人还未平定时，便病死了，被追封为武当县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Jiang Fangxing was awarded the title of "Prince of the Left Guards" for his military exploits. When the enemy was not yet subdued, he died of illness and was posthumously awarded the title of "Count of Wudang County" with 500 households.

古文：元徽元年，自辅师将军、淮南太守，为南豫州刺史、历阳太守，将军如故。明年，征为散骑常侍，领步兵校尉、南兰陵太守。
现代文：江方兴，济阴人，出身士族。龙骧将军虎贲中郎将董凯之随同张兴世击破湖白二城，先登陷阵，封河隆县子，食邑四百户；队长张灵符，向东南征讨有功，封上饶县男，食邑三百户；前征北长兼行参军杨覆，因贵口之战立功，封为绥城县男，食邑二百户，后来追认虞洽、檀玢给事中，以李万周作步兵校尉，陈怀真因为杀刘胡功劳，追封永丰县男，食邑三百户。
English: Jiang Fangxing, a Jiyin man, was born into a warrior family. Longjing General Tigun Zhongro defeated Dong Kai accompanied by Zhang Xingshi and broke through the two cities of Hubei, and first entered the battle, sealing the children of Helong County, 400 households; Captain Zhang Lingfu, who had meritorious service in the southeastern expedition, sealing the men of Rao County, 300 households; Former Northern Expeditionary Commander Yang Rui, who also joined the army, who had meritorious service in the war, sealed the men of Shicheng County, 200 households. Later, in the recognition of Yu Cai and Danzhang, Li Wanzhou was made an

古文：病卒，谥曰壮侯。袁顗，字景章，陈郡阳夏人，太尉淑兄子也。父洵，吴郡太守。
现代文：袁顗字景章，陈郡阳夏人，是太尉袁淑的哥哥的儿子，他父亲袁洵，官至吴郡太守。
English: Yuan Yu Zi Jing Zhang, a native of Yangxia, Chen County, was the son of the brother of Lieutenant Yuan Shu. His father, Yuan Yu, was the governor of Wu County.

古文：顗初为豫州主簿，举秀才，不行。
现代文：袁顗最开始当豫州主簿，被推荐为秀才，他没有应征。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Qi was the chief accountant of Yuzhou and was recommended as an outstanding talent. However, he did not apply for the position.

古文：后补始兴王浚后军行参军，著作佐郎，庐陵王绍南中郎主簿，世祖征虏、抚军主簿，庐江太守，尚书都官郎，江夏王义恭骠骑记室参军，汝阴王文学，太子洗马。
现代文：后又补任始兴王刘浚后军行参军，著作佐郎，庐陵王刘绍的南中郎主簿，世祖征虏、抚军主簿，庐江太守，尚书都官郎，江夏王刘义恭骠骑记室参军，汝阳王文学，太子洗马。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general secretary of the Shixing King, Liu Jun, who joined the army after the march, wrote the book of the Southern Middle-Rangers of the King of Goryeo Liu Shao, the general secretary of the Ancestor's Conquest and Support Army, the governor of the Minjiang River, the general secretary of the Shang Dynasty, the riding room of the King of Jiangxia Liu Yigong, the literature of the King of Ruyang, and the prince's horse-washing.

古文：时顗父为吴郡，鳷随父在官。
现代文：当时袁顗的父亲当吴郡太守，袁顗随同父亲在官任上，恰遇此时元凶刘邵杀文帝自称皇帝。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao's father was the governor of Wu County, and Yuan Shao accompanied his father on official duties. It was at this time that the culprit Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen and claimed to be the emperor.

古文：值元凶弑立，安东将军随王诞举兵入讨，板鳷为谘议参军。事宁，除正员郎，晋陵太守。
现代文：安东将军随王刘诞率兵进京讨伐，任袁顗当谘议参军。刘邵被消灭后，他又被任为正员郎，晋陵太守。
English: General Anton followed Wang Liu Xing and led his soldiers to fight in Beijing. He was appointed as Yuan Xing's adviser to join the army. After Liu Shao was eliminated, he was appointed as the chief official and the governor of Jinling.

古文：遭父忧，服阕，为中书侍郎，又除晋陵太守，袭南昌县五等子。
现代文：遇到父亲去世。他为父守丧孝三年期满后，当中书侍郎，又被调为晋陵太守，继承南昌县五等子的爵位。
English: When his father died, after three years of mourning for his father, he was transferred to the position of Jinling Dazhong, inheriting the title of the fifth son of Nanchang County.

古文：大明二年，除东海王祎平南司马、寻阳太守，行江州事。复为义阳王昶前军司马，太守如故。
现代文：大明二年，他被调为东海王刘礻韦平南司马，寻阳太守，代管江州事务，再当义阳王刘昶前军司马，太守照旧。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to serve as the Southern Sima of the East Sea King Liu Zhenwei Ping, the Chanyang Governor, in charge of the affairs of Jiangzhou, and then as the former Military Sima of the Yiyang King Liu Zhen, the Governor as before.

古文：昶寻罢府，司马职解，加宁朔将军，改太守为内史。复为寻阳王子房冠军司马，将军如故，行淮南、宣城二郡事。
现代文：刘昶不久又被免除府职，袁顗的司马职务便被解除，加号宁朔将军，改太守职为内史，再当寻阳王刘子房冠军司马，将军仍照旧，代管淮南、宣城二郡事务。
English: Liu Bei was soon relieved of his post, and Yuan Shun's post of Sima was removed, plus Ningshuo General, changed to Taishou duty for internal history, and then became the champion Sima of Liu Zifang, the king of Huanyang, the general is still in charge of Huainan and Xuancheng two counties affairs.

古文：五年，召为太子中庶子，御史中丞，领本州大中正。
现代文：大明五年，被召见，用为太子中庶子，御史中丞兼领本州大中正。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, he was summoned to the court as the prince's illegitimate son, and he was appointed to the post of goshi chujo (junior secretary) and leader of the Honshu University junior high school.

古文：七年，迁侍中。明年，除晋安王子勋镇军长史、襄阳太守，加辅国将军。
现代文：七年，迁官侍中，第二年，被调为晋安王刘子勋镇军长史、襄阳太守，加官辅国将军。
English: In the seventh year, he was transferred to the official attendant, and in the second year, he was transferred to the Jinan King Liu Zixun Town military commander, the Yangyang governor, and the auxiliary general.

古文：未行，复为永嘉王子仁左军长史、广陵太守，将军如故。未拜，复为侍中，领前军将军。大明末，新安王子鸾以母嬖有盛宠，太子在东宫多过失，上微有废太子立子鸾之意，从容颇言之。顗盛称太子好学，有日新之美。
现代文：还未赴任，再当侍中，兼领前军将军。大明末年，新安王刘子鸾，因为母亲被宠幸而为皇帝宠爱，太子在东宫时有很多过失，孝武帝稍稍有些废去太子，立刘子鸾为太子的意思，不时平静地表露出来，袁顗满口称颂太子喜欢读书，品德一天比一天进步。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Zixuan, the king of Xin'an, was favored by the emperor because his mother was favored. The prince had many faults when he was in the East Palace. Emperor Xiaowu slightly dethroned the prince and appointed Liu Zixuan as the prince, which was calmly revealed from time to time. Yuan Shun was full of praise for the prince who liked to read and whose character was improving day by day.

古文：世祖又以沈庆之才用不多，言论颇相蚩毁，顗又陈庆之忠勤有干略，堪当重任。
现代文：世祖又因为沈庆之才能不多，言语间常加以讥笑，袁顗又说沈庆之忠诚勤奋，有能力有谋略能肩负重任。
English: Because Shen Qing's talent was not much, the patriarch often mocked him in his speech. Yuan Xi also said that Shen Qing was loyal and diligent, and had the ability and strategy to shoulder heavy responsibilities.

古文：由是前废帝深感顗，庆之亦怀其德。景和元年，诛群公，欲引进顗，任以朝政，迁为吏部尚书。又下诏曰： 宗社多故，衅因冢司，景命未沦，神祚再乂，自非忠谋密契，岂伊克殄。
现代文：因此前废帝深深感激袁顗，沈庆之也感谢他，景和元年，废帝杀掉众大臣，想引进袁顗，让他参与朝政，迁他做吏部尚书，废帝又下诏说： 国家大事的好坏，取决于宰相们，皇室大业没有沉沦，皇室的福气再次恢复，如果不是忠诚的谋略被采纳，怎么能成就今日的光荣？
English: Therefore, the former deposed emperor was deeply grateful to Yuan Shao, and Shen Qingzhi also thanked him. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the deposed emperor killed all the ministers, wanted to introduce Yuan Shao, let him participate in the imperial government, and transferred him to be the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. The deposed emperor also issued an edict saying: The good or bad of national events depends on the prime ministers. The great cause of the royal family has not sunk, and the happiness of the royal family has been restored again. If a loyal strategy is not adopted, how can today's glory be achieved?

古文：侍中祭酒、领前军将军、新除吏部尚书顗，游击将军、领著作郎、兼尚书左丞徐爰，诚心内款，参闻嘉策，匡赞之效，实监朕怀。
现代文：侍中祭酒、前领军将军最近调任的吏部尚书袁顗，游击将军、领著作郎、兼任尚书左丞徐爰，诚心效劳，上献好计策，有辅助的功效，我心中有数。
English: Shangshu Yuan Qi, who was recently transferred to the cadre department, Shangshu Yuan Qi, the former leader of the army, and the guerrilla general, the leader of the army, and the concurrent leader of the army, Shangshu Zuoxiao Xu Qi, served sincerely, presented good strategies, and had auxiliary effects, I have a few in my heart.

古文：宜甄茅社，以奖义概。
现代文：应该酌量赏赐土地，以奖励忠诚。
English: Land should be awarded on a discretionary basis to reward loyalty.

古文：顗可封新隆县子，爰可封吴平县子，食邑各五百户。 
现代文：袁顗可封为新淦县子，徐爰可封为吴平县子，食邑各为五百户。 
English: Yuan Rong can be assigned to Xinyi County, Xu Rong can be assigned to Wuping County, and each food village can have up to 500 households.

古文：俄而意趣乖异，宠待顿衰。始令顗与沈庆之、徐爰参知选事，寻复反以为罪，使有司纠奏，坐白衣领职。
现代文：但不久，废帝兴趣又变了，他们的宠遇突然消失，开始时叫袁顗、沈庆之、徐爰参与管理选拔官吏的事，不久反而把这事当成他们的罪过，叫有关人员弹劾他们，因为袁顗以布衣身份兼职。
English: But soon, the interest of the former emperors changed again, and their favors suddenly disappeared. At the beginning, Yuan Qi, Shen Qingzhi, and Xu Qi were asked to participate in the management of the selection of officials. Soon, however, they took this as their fault and asked the relevant personnel to impeach them, because Yuan Qi worked part-time as a clothier.

古文：从幸湖熟，往反数日，不被唤召。
现代文：袁顗随同废帝巡视湖熟往返几天，也不被废帝召见。
English: Yuan Shao accompanied the deposed emperor on a tour of the lake for several days, but was not summoned by the deposed emperor.

古文：顗虑及祸，诡辞求出，沈庆之为顗固陈，乃见许。除建安王休仁安西长史、襄阳太守，加冠军将军。
现代文：袁顗担心祸患降临，说了些理由请求出外做官，沈庆之又为袁顗坚决请求，于是被同意，袁岂页被调为建安王刘休仁安西长史、襄阳太守，加号冠军将军。
English: Yuan Shun, worried about the disaster, said some reasons to request to go abroad to work as an official. Shen Qingzhi was also a firm request of Yuan Shun, so it was agreed. Yuan Lushai was transferred to Jianan Wang Liu Xiu Ren Anxi Changshi, Yangyang Dazhong, plus champion general.

古文：休仁不行，即以顗为使持节、督雍、梁、南北秦四州、郢州之竟陵、随二郡诸军事、领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，将军如故。顗舅蔡兴宗谓之曰： 襄阳星恶，岂可冒邪？ 
现代文：刘休仁没有出任，便让袁顗当使持节，督雍、梁南北秦四州郢州、竟陵随二郡诸军事，兼任宁蛮校尉，雍州刺史，将军号照旧，袁顗的舅父蔡兴宗对他说： 襄阳的岁星不吉利，怎么能冒死前往呢？ 
English: Liu Xuren did not take up the post, so Yuan Shun was sent to hold the festival, the governor of Yongyang, Liang Nanfang of Qin, the four states of Quzhou, and Jingling with the two counties of the military, concurrently serving as the captain of Ningban, the history of Yongzhou, and the title of general as before. Yuan Shun's uncle Cai Xingzong said to him: The lucky star of Xiangyang is unlucky, how can you risk death to go there?

古文：顗曰： 白刃交前，不救流矢，事有缓急故也。
现代文：袁顗说： 白刀子在面前交错，也不能挡住流失，是因为有快有慢的差别。
English: Yuan Qi said, "The white knives are staggered in front of me, and I can't stop the loss, because there is a difference between fast and slow.

古文：今者之行，本愿生出虎口。且天道辽远，何必皆验，如其有征，当修德以禳之耳。 
现代文：此次的出外，我的愿望只希望逃出虎口，况且天意辽远，没准都会应验，如果确有那征兆的话，我也会修养道德以消除它们。 
English: On this trip, my only wish is to escape from the clutches of the tiger. Moreover, God's will is far and wide, and it may all come true. If there are indeed signs, I will cultivate morality to eliminate them.

古文：于是狼狈上路，恆虑见追，行至寻阳，喜曰： 今始免矣！ 
现代文：于是狼狈上路，常担心被追回，他走到寻阳时，才高兴地说： 今日才免除灾祸。 
English: So he set out on the road, often fearing that he would be chased back. When he reached the sun, he was happy to say: Today I am free from the disaster.

古文：与邓琬款狎相过，常请间，必尽日穷夜。
现代文：他与邓琬一见如故，亲密异常，经常两个人在一起，日以继夜。
English: He and Deng Yao were as close as they had ever been. They were unusually close and often spent time together, day and night.

古文：顗与琬人地本殊，众知其有异志矣。
现代文：袁顗和邓琬出身悬殊，周围的人知道他们有些异常的打算。
English: Yuan Shao and Deng Yao are from very different backgrounds, and the people around them know that they have some unusual plans.

古文：既至襄阳，便与刘胡缮修兵械，纂集士卒。
现代文：袁顗到了襄阳后，便和刘胡修造兵器用物，纠集士卒。
English: After Yuan Xuan arrived in Xiangyang, he and Liu Hu built weapons and recruited soldiers.

古文：会太宗定大事，进顗号右将军。
现代文：恰遇太宗平定乱子，升袁顗爵号右军将军。
English: When Emperor Taizong happened to quell the turmoil, he promoted Yuan Xizhe to the rank of general of the right army.

古文：以荆州典签邵宰乘驿还江陵，道由襄阳。顗反意已定，而粮仗未足，且欲奉表于太宗。顗子秘书丞戩曰： 一奉表疏，便为彼臣，以臣伐君，于义不可。 
现代文：因为荆州典签邵宰乘驿马回到江陵，路过襄阳，袁顗反局已定，但粮食武器尚未充足，想上表推戴太宗，袁顗的儿子秘书丞袁戬说： 一旦献上表文奏疏，便是他的臣子，以臣子的身份讨伐皇上，在政治上不利。 
English: Because Shao Zai, the signer of the Jingzhou Edict, returned to Jiangling on a horse and passed through Yangyang, Yuan Shao's counter-plan had been decided, but grain and weapons were not yet sufficient. Yuan Shao's son, the secretary of Yuan Shao, wanted to promote Emperor Taizong to the throne. He said, "Once you present the throne to Emperor Taizong, you are his vassal. It is politically disadvantageous to fight the emperor as a vassal.

古文：顗从之。顗诈云被太皇太后令，使其起兵。
现代文：听从了这主意，袁顗假称说接受太皇太后的命令，叫他起兵。
English: Heeding this advice, Yuan Shao pretended to accept the order of the empress dowager to raise an army.

古文：便建牙驰檄，奉表劝晋安王子勋即大位，与琬书，使勿解甲。
现代文：于是便建立军政府，传播檄文，上表劝晋安王刘子勋即位做皇帝，给邓琬写信，叫他不要解除武装。
English: Therefore, they established a military government, disseminated slanderous articles, made a petition to persuade the King of Jin and An, Liu Zixun, to ascend to the throne as emperor, and sent a letter to Deng Xuan, asking him not to disarm.

古文：子勋即位，进顗号安北将军，加尚书左仆射。
现代文：刘子勋做了皇帝，升袁顗的位号为安北将军，加官尚书左仆射。
English: Liu Zixun became emperor, and Yuan Shao was promoted to the rank of Anbei general, and Shang Shuxu was promoted to the rank of Zuoying.

古文：太宗使朝士与顗书曰：
现代文：太宗叫朝臣给袁顗写信说：
English: Emperor Taizong ordered his courtier to write to Yuan Shao, saying:

古文：夫夷陂相因，兴革递数，或多难而固其国，或殷忧而启圣明，此既著于前史，亦彰于闻见。
现代文：坎坷和平夷相连，盛衰相互交替，或者因多难而兴邦，或者因多忧而导致圣明的局面，这是前人书籍中写得很清楚的，也是你平生多见的事。
English: The ups and downs are connected with the ups and downs, the ups and downs alternate with each other, or the state is revived due to many difficulties, or the situation is bright due to many worries. This is clearly written in the books of the ancients, and it is also something that you have seen many times in your life.

古文：王室不造，昏凶肆虐，神鼎将沦，宗稷几泯，幸天未亡宋，乾历有归。
现代文：王室遭到不幸，昏庸暴君肆意作恶，皇位将沉沦，宋国几乎覆灭，幸好苍天还不想消灭宋国，天命终于有了依托。
English: The royal family suffered misfortune, the tyrant Doyun wantonly committed evil, the imperial throne would sink, and the Song Dynasty was almost destroyed. Fortunately, Heaven did not want to destroy the Song Dynasty, and the Mandate of Heaven finally had support.

古文：主上体自圣文，继明作睿，而辱均牖里，屯逾夏台。既天地俱愤，义勇同奋，克殄鲸鲵，三灵更造，应天顺民，爰集宝命，四海属息肩之欢，华戎见来苏之泰。
现代文：皇上是文帝的骨肉，继承先帝的英明，但曾像周文王那样被关在牖里，像商汤那样曾在夏台中遇到灾难，既而天地同时发怒，忠义的勇士奋勇行动，消灭大恶人，重新恢复原来的秩序，皇帝接受上天的命令和人民的希望，继承皇位。因此四海内的人民得以休息，中华外国得以光复。
English: The emperor is the flesh and blood of Emperor Wen, inheriting the wisdom of the previous emperor, but he was once imprisoned in a cocoon like King Zhou Wen, and met with disaster in Xatai like Shang Tang. Even though heaven and earth were angry at the same time, the loyal warriors acted bravely to eliminate the great evildoers and restore the original order. The emperor accepted the order of heaven and the hope of the people and succeeded to the throne. Therefore, the people in the four seas were able to rest, and China and other countries were able to recover.

古文：吾等获免刀锯，仅全首领，复身奉惟新，命承亨运，缓带谈笑，击壤圣世。
现代文：我们这些人免除刀锯的灾难，保全自己的性命，而且再辅助维新的朝廷，从容地议论时事，在太平盛世中做一个幸福的臣民。
English: Those of us who are exempt from the scourge of the sword and the saw, save our own lives, and then assist the renovation of the imperial court, calmly discuss current affairs, and be a happy subject in a peaceful prosperous world.

古文：汝虽劬劳于外，迹阻京师，然心期所寄，江、汉何远。
现代文：你虽然在外面辛苦工作，远离京师，但我们对你的希望，汉江又怎么隔绝我们的相互思念？
English: Although you are working hard outside and are far away from Beijing, how can our hope for you and the Han River cut off our mutual thoughts?

古文：自九江告变，皆谓邓氏狂惑，比日国言藉藉，颇尘吾子。道路之议，岂其或然，闻此之日，能无骇惋。
现代文：自从九州发生事变以来，人们都认为邓琬发疯迷乱，近日国人有些流言，对你有些议论，道听途说，当然说明不了什么，但听到这样的谣言，我们不得不担心。
English: Ever since the incident in Kyushu, people have thought that Deng Xiaoping had gone mad. Recently, there have been some rumors about you, hearsay, which, of course, can't explain anything, but when we hear such rumors, we have to worry.

古文：凶人反道败德，日夜滋深，昵近狡慝，取谋豺虎，非惟毒流外物，恶积中朝，乃欲毁陵邑，虐崇宪，烧宗庙，卤御物，然后荡覆京都，必使兰莸俱尽。自非圣上庙算灵图，俯眉逊避，维持内外，拥卫臣下，则赤县为戎，百姓其鱼矣。此事此理，宁可孰念！
现代文：废帝倒行逆施，日夜相继，亲近小人，从狼虎般的人那里搜寻毒计，不仅毒害人民，作恶朝廷，甚至想毁掉先皇陵墓，虐害崇宪太后，烧掉祖宗庙宇，糟踏皇帝用物，这之后便洗劫京城，定然会使首都被毁灭，如果不是皇上的深谋妙计，妥协回避，维护内外秩序，保护臣民的安全，那么九州便会落入异族铁蹄之下，百姓变成鱼鳖，这个事态，这个道理，难道你不应多想想吗？
English: The deposed emperor did the opposite, day and night in succession, getting close to villains, searching for poisonous schemes from people like wolves and tigers, not only poisoning the people, doing evil to the court, but even wanting to destroy the former emperor's mausoleum, abusing the Empress Dowager, burning ancestral temples, and abusing the emperor's utensils. After that, he ransacked the capital city, which would certainly lead to the destruction of the capital. If it were not for the emperor's cunning plan, compromise and avoidance, maintaining internal and external order, and protecting the safety of his subjects, then Kyushu would fall under the iron heel

古文：既天道辅顺，讴歌有奉，高祖之孙，文皇之子，德洞九幽，功贯三曜，匡拯家国，提毓黔首，若不子民南面，将使神器何归。
现代文：幸好天老爷帮助正义的人们，称颂贤明的皇上，因为他是高祖的孙子，文帝的儿子，高尚的品德九州人民看清楚了，功盖日月，拯救国家，爱护人民，如果他不做皇帝管理人民，那么皇位将属于谁呢？
English: Fortunately, Heavenly Father helps the righteous people, praises the wise emperor, because he is the grandson of Gao Zu, the son of Emperor Wen, the noble character of the Kyushu people can see clearly, the achievement of the sun and moon, save the country, love the people, if he does not do the emperor to manage the people, then who will the throne belong to?

古文：而群小构慝，妄生窥觊，成轸惑燕，贯高乱赵，谗人罔极，自古有之。
现代文：但小人们制造纷乱，胡乱地靑觎朝廷，大位好比成轸蛊惑燕国人民，贯高捣乱赵国一般。谣言无限流传，自古以来便是如此。
English: But petty people create turmoil and wantonly harass the imperial court, and the great ones are like the people of Yan who are bewitched and the people of Zhao who are harassed. Rumors circulate endlessly, and this has been the case since ancient times.

古文：汝中京冠冕，儒雅世袭，多见前载，县鉴忠邪，何远遗郎中之清轨，近忘太尉之纯概。
现代文：你是京城士族大家出身，世世代代都是以儒家精神自命，应该见过前代的史实，明确了解忠诚与邪恶的不同结果。怎么能舍弃你家郎中先人的贤贞榜样，忘掉了你家太尉的忠诚家风。
English: You are from the Jingcheng warrior tribe, and you have been claiming the Confucian spirit for generations. You should have seen the historical facts of the previous generation and clearly understand the different results of loyalty and evil. How can you abandon the virtuous example of your ancestors and forget the loyal family style of your family captain?

古文：相与，或群从舅甥，或姻娅周款，一旦胡、越，能无怅恨。
现代文：你和朝中大臣或者是甥舅关系，或者是堂兄弟关系，或者是其他亲戚关系，一旦结下矛盾，便如胡越相斗，怎能没有遗憾。
English: You and the Minister of the DPRK and China are either nephews, or cousins, or other relatives. Once you have a conflict, you will fight like dogs. How can you have no regrets?

古文：若疑诳所至，邪诐无穷，汝当誓众奋戈，翦此朝食。
现代文：如果你是被人欺骗这样作，或者被邪恶之人逼迫，你应该奋力反击，消灭叛党而后饮食。
English: If you are tricked into doing so, or forced by evil people, you should fight back hard, eliminate the rebels and then eat.

古文：若自延过听，迷涂未远，圣上临物以仁，接下以爱，岂直雍齿先封，乃当射钩见相矣！当由力窘迹屈，丹诚未亮邪。
现代文：如果是自已招致的误会，迷途不返的话，本来我们皇上仁心宽大，原谅臣子的小过错，你归顺的话，不仅会享有雍齿首先被封赏那一些待遇，而且会发生管仲那样虽有射钩的过错，但终会被大大进用的奇迹，还是选择竭力抗拒，忠诚埋没无闻的道路呢！
English: If it is a self-induced misunderstanding, if you lose your way and don't come back, our emperor was originally benevolent and forgiving, forgiving the minor faults of his vassals. If you surrender, you will not only enjoy the treatment that Yong Zi was first awarded, but there will be a miracle like Guanzhong, although there is a mistake of the hook, but it will eventually be greatly used, or you can choose to resist with all your might, and your loyalty will be buried.

古文：跂予南服，寤寐延首，若反棹沿流，归诚凤阙，锡珪开宇，非尔而谁。
现代文：我们正企首盼望，日夜等待你的醒悟，如果回身到正道上，沿流而下，归顺朝廷，赏赐官职封赏爵土，不是你又是谁呢？
English: We are pinning our hopes on you, waiting day and night for you to wake up. If you turn back to the right path, go down the river, submit to the court, and be rewarded with an official title and a peerage, who are you?

古文：吾等并过荷曲慈，俱叨非服，纡金拖玉，改观蓬门，入奉舜、禹之渥，出见羲、唐之化，雍容揄扬，信白驹空谷之时也。奈何毁掷先基，自蹈凶戾，山门萧瑟，松庭谁扫，言念楚路，岂不思父母之邦。幸纳恶石，以蠲美疹。裁书表意，尔其图之。
现代文：我们这些在朝廷的人都受到皇上的宠爱，享受非常的待遇，穿着莽袍玉带，改换家门的气象，入则沐浴着皇帝的恩惠，出则看见伏羲舜帝般的太平，从容不迫的议论朝政，确实像白马在空谷之中驰骋，怎么能反而毁弃先人的基业，招致自己凶恶的后果，以致家门萧条，庭院无人打扫？想到这些后果，你怎么不想念父母故国，希望你接受我们这些意见，消除过去的罪恶，这些话是我的一点心意，你认真地选择吧。
English: Those of us who are in the imperial court are favored by the emperor, enjoy very good treatment, wear a shameless robe and jade belt, change the weather at home, bathe in the emperor's favor when entering, and see the peace and tranquility of Emperor Fuxi when leaving. The unhurried discussion of the imperial government is indeed like a white horse galloping in an empty valley. How can we instead destroy the ancestral inheritance and bring about our own evil consequences, so that the house is depressed and the courtyard is not cleaned? Thinking about these consequences, why do you not miss your parents' homeland? I hope you accept our opinions and eliminate the sins of the past. These words

古文：时尚书右仆射蔡兴宗是顗舅，领军将军袁粲是顗从父弟，故旧云群从舅甥也。
现代文：当时尚书右仆射蔡兴宗是袁顗的舅父，领军将军袁粲是袁顗的弟弟，所以信中有群从舅甥的说法。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Cai Xingzong, was Yuan Shao's uncle, and the leading general, Yuan Shao, was Yuan Shao's younger brother, so there was a lot of talk in the letter about them being uncles and nephews.

古文：子勋征顗下寻阳，遣侍中孔道存行雍州事。顗乃率众驰下，使子戩领家累俱还。时刘胡屯鹊尾，久不决。
现代文：刘子勋命令袁顗东下寻阳城，袁顗派他的侍中孔道存代管雍州事务，他于是率兵驰下，叫他的儿子袁戬领着家人财物回去，当时刘胡驻屯鹊尾，双方好久不能决出胜负。
English: Liu Zixun ordered Yuan Shao to go east to find Yangcheng, and Yuan Shao sent his aide-de-camp, Kong Daozhen, to take charge of the affairs of Yongzhou. He then led the troops and sent his son, Yuan Shao, to lead his family and property back. At that time, Liu Hu was stationed in Shanwei, and the two sides could not decide the outcome for a long time.

古文：泰始二年夏，加顗都督征讨诸军事，给鼓吹一部，率楼船千艘，战士二万，来入鹊尾。
现代文：泰始二年夏天，刘子勋加官袁顗都督征讨诸军事，赏赐鼓吹一套，叫他率领楼船一千艘，士兵两万驻进鹊尾。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Taizhi era, Liu Zixun, the second-ranking official of the Yuan Dynasty, conscripted the military into the military, rewarded him with a set of propaganda, and asked him to lead a thousand ships and twenty thousand soldiers into Shanwei.

古文：顗本无将略，性又怯挠，在军中未尝戎服，语不及战陈，唯赋诗谈义而已。不能抚接诸将，刘胡每论事，酬对甚简，由此大失人情，胡常切齿恚恨。胡以南运未至，军士匮乏，就顗换襄阳之资。顗答曰： 都下两宅未成，亦应经理，不可损彻。 
现代文：袁顗本来不懂带兵打仗，性格怯懦，在军队中从未穿军服，也不谈论打仗的话，只高谈阔论而已，又不能抚纳众将领，刘胡每次与他商量军事，袁顗意见都很简略，因此他很不得人心，刘胡常常咬牙切齿，非常愤恨，刘胡因为南方的军用物资没有运来，士兵缺衣少粮，和袁顗商量先借襄阳的物资，袁顗说： 我京城的两个房屋还未修成，也应该考虑考虑，我的这些物资是不能借人的。 
English: Yuan Shao did not know how to lead soldiers to war, he was a coward, he never wore a military uniform in the army, he did not talk about war, he only talked about it, but he could not accommodate the generals. Every time Liu Hu discussed military affairs with him, Yuan Shao's opinions were very concise, so he was very unpopular. Liu Hu often gritted his teeth and was very angry. Liu Hu, because the military supplies from the south had not been delivered, the soldiers were short of clothes and food, discussed with Yuan Shao to borrow the supplies from Xiangyang. Yuan Shao said: My two houses in Beijing are not yet completed, and I should also consider

古文：又信往来之言，京师米贵，斗至数百，以为不劳攻伐，行自离散，于是拥甲以待之。
现代文：又听信往来人员的传言，说京城大米很昂贵，每斗值几万钱，认为不须进攻，官军自动崩溃，于是待兵不动。
English: He also listened to the rumors of his contacts, saying that the rice in the capital was very expensive, worth tens of thousands of dollars per barrel. He thought that there was no need to attack, and that the government army would automatically collapse, so he waited and did not move.

古文：太宗使顗旧门生徐硕奉手诏譬顗曰： 卿历观古今，嶮之与强，何尝可恃。
现代文：太宗派袁顗的门生徐项带着诏书劝说袁顗： 你遍观古今，表面上重要和强大的势力，何曾值得依靠？
English: Xu Xiangru, a protégé of Yuan Shao of the Tai sect, persuaded Yuan Shao with an edict: If you look at the past and present, at the superficially important and powerful forces, what has ever been worth relying on?

古文：自朕践阼，涂路梗塞，卿无由奉表，未经为臣。
现代文：自我做皇帝以来，路途受阻，你无法上表归顺，没有成为我们的朋友。
English: Since I became emperor, the road has been blocked, you can't submit to the table, you haven't become our friend.

古文：今追踪窦融，犹未为晚也。 
现代文：现今向窦融学习，还不算晚。 
English: It is not too late to learn from Dou Rong.

古文：及刘胡叛走，不告顗，顗至夜方知，大怒骂曰： 今年为小子所误！ 
现代文：到刘胡叛逃，没有通知袁顗，半夜袁顗才得知这消息，大怒骂道： 今年我被这小子耽误！ 
English: When Liu Hu defected, he did not inform Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao only learned the news in the middle of the night, and angrily scolded: This year, I was delayed by this guy!

古文：呼取飞燕，谓其众曰： 我当自出追之。 
现代文：喊叫拿节杖来，对他的手下说： 我应亲自追赶刘胡。 
English: He called out for a staff and said to his men, "I should personally chase Liu Hu."

古文：因又遁走。
现代文：也乘机逃走。
English: He also took the opportunity to flee.

古文：至鹊头，与戍主薛伯珍及其所领数千人步取青林，欲向寻阳。
现代文：走到鹊头时，与戍主薛伯珍和他所带几千人相遇从陆路到青林，想到寻阳，晚上在山中歇息，杀死马匹慰劳左右的人。
English: When I went to Shantou, I met the donkey owner Xue Bozhen and the thousands of people he brought with him. From the overland route to Qinglin, I thought of seeking the sun, resting in the mountains at night, and killing horses to comfort those around me.

古文：夜止山间宿，杀马劳将士，顗顾谓伯珍曰： 我举八州以谋王室，未一战而散，岂非天邪！
现代文：袁顗回头对薛伯珍说： 我集中八州人马谋取王室，还未经过一场战斗便消散，这不是天意吗？
English: Yuan Xuan turned to Xue Bozhen and said, "I concentrated eight states of people and horses to seek the royal family, but they dispersed without a battle. Isn't this the will of heaven?

古文：非不能死，岂欲草间求活，望一至寻阳，谢罪主上，然后自刎耳。 
现代文：并不是我不能自杀，怎么能在山野中保命？只希望走到寻阳，向主上请罪，然后再自杀。 
English: It's not that I can't commit suicide, how can I stay alive in the mountains? I just want to go to seek the sun, ask the Lord for forgiveness, and then commit suicide.

古文：因慷慨叱左右索节，无复应者。
现代文：于是慷慨流泪喊叫左右人找到节杖，但没有人回答他。
English: So he cried aloud with tears, and called to those around him to find the staff, but no one answered him.

古文：及旦，伯珍请以间言，乃斩顗首诣钱溪马军主襄阳俞湛之。
现代文：天亮时，薛伯珍请在一个空隙地方谈事，他砍下袁顗的脑袋，到驻在钱溪的骑兵将领襄阳俞湛之那里投降。
English: At dawn, Xue Bozhen asked to talk in a vacant place. He cut off Yuan Xuan's head and surrendered to the cavalry general Xiangyang Xizhan who was stationed in Qianxi.

古文：顗死时年四十七。太宗忿顗违叛，流尸于江，弟子彖微服求访，四十一日乃得，密致丧瘗于石头后罔，与一旧奴，躬共负土。
现代文：俞湛之趁机杀了薛伯珍，把他们的脑袋一齐送到朝廷作为自己的功劳。袁顗死的时候四十七岁，太宗特别愤恨袁顗的反叛，把他的尸首扔到长江。袁顗弟弟的儿子袁彖装扮成其他人访求他的尸首，十一日才找到。暗中运到岸上把尸首埋在石头后岗，和一个老仆人，亲自挑土掩埋了他。
English: Yan Zhanzhi took the opportunity to kill Xue Bozhen and sent their heads to the imperial court as his own merit. When Yuan Shao died, he was forty-seven years old. The emperor was particularly angry with Yuan Shao's rebellion and threw his body into the Yangtze River. Yuan Shao, the son of Yuan Shao's brother, disguised himself as someone else to search for his body, which was only found on the eleventh day. He secretly transported the body to the shore and buried it in a stone mound. An old servant personally dug up the soil and buried him.

古文：后废帝即位，方得改葬。
现代文：后废帝当皇帝时，才得以改葬。
English: It was only when Emperor Gaozong became emperor that he was able to be reburied.

古文：顗子戩为伪黄门侍郎，加辅国将军，戍盆城。寻阳败，戩弃城走，讨禽伏诛。
现代文：袁顗的儿子袁戬做伪黄门侍郎，加号辅国将军，戍守宫城，寻阳造反失败，袁戬弃城而逃，后来被抓住杀了！
English: Yuan Shun's son, Yuan Shun, was a pseudo Yellow Gate attendant, plus a vice-governor general, and guarded the palace city. The rebellion failed, and Yuan Shun abandoned the city and fled. Later, he was caught and killed!

