古文：南海之外，赤水之西，流沙之东，有兽，左右有首，名曰䟣踢。
现代文：在南海以外，赤水的西岸，流沙的东面，生长着一种野兽，身体的左右两侧各长着一个脑袋，名称是䟣踢。
English: Beyond the South Sea, on the west coast of the Red Sea, east of the quicksand, there grows a beast with a head on each side of its body. It is called the Kickbeard.

古文：有三青兽相并，名曰双双。
现代文：还有三只青色的野兽交相合并着，名称是双双。
English: There are also three blue beasts that intersect and merge, and their names are Shuangshuang.

古文：有阿山者。
现代文：有一座山叫阿山。
English: There is a mountain called Asan.

古文：南海之中，有泛天之山，赤水穷焉。
现代文：南海的当中，有一座泛天山，位于赤水的尽头处。
English: In the middle of the South China Sea, there is a huge mountain, located at the end of the Red Sea.

古文：赤水之东，有苍梧之野，舜与叔均之所葬也。
现代文：在赤水的东岸，有个地方叫苍梧野，帝舜与叔都葬在那里。
English: On the east bank of the Red River, there is a place called Gouwangye, where the emperor and his uncle are both buried.

古文：爰有文贝、离俞、嶋久、鹰、贾、委维、熊、罴、象、虎、豹、狼、视肉。
现代文：这里有花斑贝、离朱鸟、鹞鹰、老鹰、乌鸦、两头蛇、熊、罴、大象、老虎、豹子、狼、视肉怪兽。
English: There are zebra mussels, scarlet ibises, bald eagles, eagles, crows, two-headed snakes, bears, baboons, elephants, tigers, leopards, wolves, and carnivorous monsters.

古文：有荣山、荣水出焉。
现代文：有一座荣山，荣水就从这座山发源的。
English: There is a Rongshan, and Rongshui originated from this mountain.

古文：黑水之南，有玄蛇，食麈。
现代文：在黑水的南岸，有一条大黑蛇，正在吞食麈鹿。
English: On the southern shore of the Blackwater, a large black snake is devouring a moose.

古文：有巫山者，西行黄鸟。
现代文：有一座山叫巫山，在巫山的西面有黄鸟。
English: There is a mountain called Wushan. On the west side of Wushan there is a yellow bird.

古文：帝药，八斋。
现代文：天帝的药就藏在巫山的八个斋舍中。
English: Heavenly Father's medicine is hidden in eight monasteries in Wushan.

古文：黄鸟于巫山，司此玄蛇。
现代文：黄鸟在巫山上专门监视那条大黑蛇。
English: The yellow bird was specifically monitoring the large black snake on Wushan Mountain.

古文：大荒之中，有不庭之山，荣水穷焉。
现代文：最荒远之地中有一座不庭山，这里是荣水的尽头处。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Futingan Mountain, which is the end of Rongshui.

古文：有人三身，帝俊妻娥皇，生此三身之国，姚姓，黍食，使四鸟。
现代文：有一种人，长着三个身子，帝俊的妻子娥皇，生了这个三身国的祖先，这个国家的人姓姚，以黍为食物，会驱使虎、豹、熊、罴四种野兽。
English: There is a kind of person with three bodies. Emperor Jun's wife, Empress E, gave birth to the ancestor of this three-body country. The people of this country, surnamed Yao, eat earthworms and drive four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears, and centipedes.

古文：有渊四方，四隅皆送，北属黑水，南属大荒。北旁名曰少和之渊，南旁名曰从渊，舜之所浴也。
现代文：那里有一个深潭，呈四方形，四边都与外面相通，北边与黑水相连，南边与最荒远的地方相连，北边是少和渊，南边是从渊，这里是舜沐浴的地方。
English: There is a deep pool there, square in shape, all four sides are connected to the outside, the north side is connected to the black water, the south side is connected to the most desolate place, the north side is the Shaowabun, the south side is the abyss, and this is the place where the dragonflies bathe.

古文：又有成山，甘水穷焉。
现代文：又有一座成山，甘水最终流到这座山。
English: There is also a mountain, and the sweet water eventually flows to this mountain.

古文：有季禺之国，颛顼之子，食黍。
现代文：有个国家叫季禺国，他们是帝颛顼的子孙后代，吃黄米饭。
English: There is a country called Ji's country, they are the descendants of the imperial family, they eat yellow rice.

古文：有羽民之国，其民皆生毛羽。
现代文：还有个国家叫羽民国，这里的人都长着羽毛。
English: There is also a country called the Republic of Hani, where everyone has feathers.

古文：有卵之国，其民皆生卵。
现代文：又有个国家叫卵民国，这里的人都产卵而又从卵中孵化生出。
English: There is also a country called the egg republic, where people lay eggs and hatch from them.

古文：大荒之中，有不姜之山，黑水穷焉。
现代文：最荒远之地有一座山，名叫不姜山，这里是黑水的尽头处。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Mount Bujang, which is at the end of the Black Water.

古文：又有贾山，汔水出焉。
现代文：这还有一座贾山，汔水从这座山发源。
English: There is also a Jia Mountain, the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：又有言山。又有登备之山。
现代文：又有座言山、登备山、恝恝山。
English: In addition, there are Mount Zemo, Mount Tengbo and Mount Lushan.

古文：有恝恝之山。
现代文：还有一座蒲山，澧水从这座山发源。
English: There is also a mountain called "Pusan," which is the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：又有蒲山，澧水出焉。又有隗山，其西有丹，其东有玉。
现代文：又有座隗山，它的西面蕴藏有丹雘，它的东面蕴藏有玉石。
English: There is also a Lushan Mountain. Its west side contains camphor, and its east side contains jade.

古文：又南有山，漂水出焉。有尾山。
现代文：又往南有座高山，漂水就是从这座山中发源的。又有座尾山。
English: There is also a high mountain to the south, from which the water drifts originate. There is also a tail mountain.

古文：有翠山。
现代文：还有座翠山。
English: There is also a verdant mountain.

古文：有盈民之国，於姓，黍食。
现代文：有个国家叫盈民国，这里的人姓於，以黍为食物。
English: There is a country called the Republic of Ying, and the people here are surnamed Yu, and they eat quail.

古文：又有人方食木叶。
现代文：又有人正在吃树叶。
English: Someone else is eating leaves.

古文：有不死之国，阿姓，甘木是食。
现代文：有个国家叫不死国，这里的人姓阿，以甘木为食物。
English: There is a country called the Land of the Undead, and the people here have the surname Ah, and eat sweetgum.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰去痓。
现代文：最荒远之地有一座山，叫做去室山。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Mt. Gomuro.

古文：南极果，北不成，去痓果。
现代文：去痓也是一种植物，它在山的南边能结果，在山的北边则不能结果。
English: It can bear fruit on the south side of the mountain, but not on the north side.

古文：南海渚中，有神，人面，珥两青蛇，践两赤蛇，曰不廷胡余。
现代文：在南海的岛屿上，有一个神，是人的面孔，耳朵上穿挂着两条青色蛇，脚底下踩踏着两条红色蛇，这个神叫不廷胡余。
English: On an island in the South China Sea, there is a god with a human face, wearing two blue snakes on his ears and two red snakes under his feet. This god is called Bu Ting Hu Yu.

古文：有神名曰因因乎－－南方曰因乎，夸风曰乎民－－处南极以出入风。
现代文：有个神人名叫因乎，南方人单称他为因，从南方吹来的风称作民，他处在大地的南极主管风起风停。
English: There was a god-man named Inhu. People in the south simply called him In, and the wind that blew from the south was called Min. He was located at the earth's South Pole and was in charge of the wind's starting and stopping points.

古文：有襄山。又有重阴之山。
现代文：有一座襄山，另外有一座重阴山。
English: There is a Xiangshan Mountain, and there is also a Chongyin Mountain.

古文：有人食兽，曰季厘。
现代文：有一个人在吞食野兽肉，他叫季厘。
English: There is a man who devours the flesh of wild beasts, and his name is Qili.

古文：帝俊生季厘，故曰季厘之国。
现代文：帝俊生了季厘，所以称作季厘国。
English: Emperor Qijun gave birth to Qili, so it is called Qili country.

古文：有缗渊。
现代文：有一个缗渊。
English: There is an abyss.

古文：少昊生倍伐降处缗渊。
现代文：少昊生了倍伐，倍伐被贬住在缗渊。
English: Xiao Hao gave birth to the double felling, and the double felling was relegated to the wasteland.

古文：有水四方，名曰俊坛。
现代文：有一个呈四方形且高出地面的水池，名叫俊坛。
English: There is a square-shaped pool high above the ground, called Jun Tan.

古文：有臷民之国。
现代文：有个国家叫臷民国。
English: There is a country called the Republic of Korea.

古文：帝舜生无淫，降臷处，是谓巫臷民。
现代文：帝舜生了无淫，无淫被贬在臷这个地方居住，他的子孙后代就是所谓的巫臷民。
English: Emperor Xuan was born without sexual desire, and without sexual desire, he was relegated to live in this place, and his descendants are the so-called Wuxi people.

古文：巫臷民盼姓，食谷，不绩不经，服也；不稼不穑，食也。
现代文：巫臷民都姓盼，以谷为食物，他们不用纺织，自然有衣服穿；不用耕种，自然有粮食吃。
English: The people of Wuxi all have surnames and eat grain. They don't need to weave, so they naturally have clothes to wear; they don't need to farm, so they naturally have grain to eat.

古文：爱歌舞之鸟，鸾鸟自歌，凤鸟自舞。
现代文：这里生长着擅长唱歌跳舞的鸟，鸾鸟在自在地歌唱，凤鸟在自由地跳舞。
English: Birds that are good at singing and dancing grow here, the ostrich is singing freely, the phoenix is dancing freely.

古文：爰有百兽，相群爰处。
现代文：这里有各种野兽，成群聚居在一起。
English: There are also herds of all kinds of wild animals.

古文：百谷所聚。
现代文：这里还是百谷聚集生长的地方。
English: This is also the place where the hundred valleys gather and grow.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰融天，海水南入焉。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山叫做融天山，海水从南面流进这座山。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Rongtian Mountain, and seawater flows into this mountain from the south.

古文：有人曰凿齿，有蜮山者，有蜮民之国，桑姓，食黍，射蜮是食。
现代文：有一个神人叫凿齿，羿射死了他。有一座山叫做蜮山，那里有个蜮民国，国中的人都姓桑，以黍为食物，也用箭射蜮当食物。
English: There was a godman who called for a chisel and a crossbow shot him to death. There is a mountain called Lushan Mountain, where there is a Lushan Republic. The people in the country are surnamed Sang, and they eat grasshoppers and shoot arrows at grasshoppers for food.

古文：有人方扞弓射黄蛇，名曰蜮人。
现代文：有人正在拉弓射黄蛇，名叫蜮人。
English: Someone is pulling a bow to shoot a yellow snake, called a dragonfly.

古文：有宋山者，有赤蛇，名曰育蛇。
现代文：有座山叫做宋山，山中有一种红颜色的蛇，名叫育蛇。
English: There is a mountain called Songshan, and there is a red-colored snake in the mountain, called the breeding snake.

古文：有木生山上，名曰枫木。
现代文：山上还有一种树，名叫枫木。
English: There is another kind of tree on the mountain, called maple.

古文：枫木，蚩尤所弃其桎梏，是为枫木。
现代文：枫木，原来是蚩尤死后所丢弃的手铐脚镣，这些刑具就化成了枫木。
English: The maple tree was originally the handcuffs and leg irons that were discarded after the death of Gong You, and these instruments of torture turned into maple trees.

古文：有人方齿虎尾，名曰祖状之尸。
现代文：有个神人正咬着老虎的尾巴，他的名字叫祖状尸。
English: There is a godman who is biting the tiger's tail. His name is Ancestor.

古文：有小人，名曰焦侥之国，几姓，嘉谷是食。
现代文：有一个由三尺高的小人组成的国家，名叫焦侥国，国中的人都姓几，吃的是优良谷米。
English: There is a country made up of three-foot-tall little people called Jiao Yu Guo. The people in the country all have the same surname and eat high-quality rice.

古文：大荒之中，有山名朽涂之山，青水穷焉。
现代文：在大荒当中，有座山名叫涂山，青水最终流到这座山。
English: In the midst of the desert, there is a mountain called Tu Mountain, and the blue water eventually flows to this mountain.

古文：有云雨之山，有木名曰栾。
现代文：还有座云雨山，山上有一棵树叫做栾。
English: There is also a cloud rain mountain, on the mountain there is a tree called cormorant.

古文：禹攻云雨。有赤石焉生栾，黄本，赤枝，青叶，群帝焉取药。
现代文：大禹在云雨山砍伐树木，发现红色岩石上忽然生出这棵栾树，黄色的茎干，红色的枝条，青色的叶子，诸帝就到这里来采药。
English: Dayu cut down trees in Yunyu Mountain and found that this eucalyptus tree suddenly sprung up on the red rock, with a yellow stem, red branches, and blue leaves. The emperors came here to collect medicine.

古文：有国曰颛顼，生伯服，食黍。
现代文：有个国家叫伯服国，颛顼的后代组成伯服国，这里的人吃黄米饭。
English: There is a country called Bofu Country. The descendants of the baboons make up Bofu Country. People here eat yellow rice.

古文：有鼬姓之国。
现代文：有个鼬姓国。
English: There is a country with the same name.

古文：有苕山。
现代文：有座苕山。
English: There is a mountain of straw.

古文：又有宗山。
现代文：又有座宗山。
English: There is also a Sozan.

古文：又有姓山，又有壑山。
现代文：又有座姓山。又有座壑山。
English: There is also a surname mountain. There is also a surname mountain.

古文：又有陈州山，又有东州山。
现代文：又有座陈州山。又有座东州山。
English: There is also a Chenzhou Mountain. There is also a Dongzhou Mountain.

古文：又有白水山，白水出焉，而生白渊，昆吾之师所浴也。
现代文：还有座白水山，白水从这座山发源，然后流下来汇聚成为白渊，是昆吾的师傅洗澡的地方。
English: There is also a white water mountain. The white water originates from this mountain, and then flows down and converges to become a white abyss. It is the place where the master of Kunwu takes a bath.

古文：有人名曰张宏，在海上捕鱼。
现代文：有一个叫张宏的人，正在海上捕鱼。
English: There is a man named Zhang Hong who is fishing in the sea.

古文：海中有张宏之国，食鱼，使四鸟。
现代文：海里的岛上有个张宏国，国中的人以鱼为食物，能驯化驱使四种野兽。
English: On an island in the sea, there is a country called Zhanghong. The people in the country eat fish and can domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts.

古文：有人焉，鸟喙，有翼，方捕鱼于海。
现代文：有一种人，长着鸟的嘴，生有翅膀，正在海上捕鱼。
English: A man with a bird's beak and wings was fishing in the sea.

古文：大荒之中，有人名曰驩头。
现代文：在大荒当中，有个人名叫驩头。
English: In the midst of the great famine, there was a man named Shantou.

古文：鲧妻士敬，士敬子曰琰融，生驩头。
现代文：鲧的妻子是士敬，士敬生个儿子叫炎融，炎融生了驩头。
English: Yao's wife was Shi Jing. Shi Jing gave birth to a son named Yan Rong. Yan Rong gave birth to Shantou.

古文：头人面鸟喙，有翼，食海中鱼，杖翼而行。
现代文：驩头长着人的面孔而鸟一样的嘴，生有翅膀，吃海中的鱼，凭借着翅膀行走。
English: Skulls with human faces and bird-like beaks, born with wings, eat fish from the sea, and walk on their wings.

古文：维宜芑苣，穋是食。
现代文：也把苣、穋、杨树叶做成食物吃。
English: They also eat alfalfa, goji berries and poplar leaves made into food.

古文：有驩头之国。
现代文：于是有了驩头国。
English: Thus, Shantou Province came into being.

古文：帝尧、帝喾、帝舜葬于岳山。
现代文：帝尧、帝喾、帝舜都葬埋在岳山。
English: Emperors, emperors, emperors are all buried in Mount Yue.

古文：爰有文贝、离俞、嶋久、鹰、廷维、视肉、熊、罴、虎、豹；朱木、青华，玄实。
现代文：这里有花斑贝、三足乌、鹞鹰、老鹰、乌鸦、两头蛇、视肉怪兽、熊、罴、老虎、豹子；还有朱木树，是红色的枝干、青色的花朵、黑色的果实。
English: There are zebra mussels, three-legged cormorants, bald eagles, eagles, crows, two-headed snakes, carnivorous monsters, bears, baboons, tigers, leopards; there are also cedar trees, which are red branches, blue flowers, and black fruits.

古文：有申山者。
现代文：有座申山。
English: There is a mountain called Shen.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰天台高山，海水入焉。
现代文：在大荒当中，有座山名叫天台山，海水从南边流进这座山中。
English: In the midst of the desert, there is a mountain called Tiantai Mountain, and seawater flows into this mountain from the south.

古文：东南海之外，甘水之间，有羲和之国，有女子名曰羲和，方日浴于甘渊。
现代文：在东海之外，甘水之间，有个羲和国。这里有个叫羲和的女子，正在甘渊中给太阳洗澡。
English: Beyond the East Sea, between the sweet water, there is a land of peace. Here, there is a woman called peace, who is bathing the sun in the sweet water.

古文：羲和者，帝俊之妻，生十日。
现代文：羲和这个女子，是帝俊的妻子，生了十个太阳。
English: Yao and this woman, the wife of Emperor Jun, gave birth to ten suns.

古文：有盖犹之山者，其上有甘柤，枝干皆赤，黄叶，白华，黑实。
现代文：有一座山叫盖犹山，山上生长有甘柤树，枝条和茎干都是红的，叶子是黄的，花朵是白的，果实是黑的。
English: There is a mountain called Mount Gayu. On the mountain there is a carob tree. The branches and stems are red, the leaves are yellow, the flowers are white, and the fruit is black.

古文：东又有甘华，枝干皆赤，黄叶。
现代文：在这座山的东端还生长有甘华树，枝条和茎干都是红色的，叶子是黄的。
English: At the eastern end of the mountain, there is also a camphor tree. The branches and stems are red, and the leaves are yellow.

古文：有青马，有赤马，名曰三骓。
现代文：有青色马。还有红色马，名叫三骓。
English: There was a blue horse, and there was a red horse called Three Storks.

古文：有视肉。
现代文：又有视肉怪兽。
English: There are also flesh-eating monsters.

古文：有小人，名曰菌人。
现代文：有一种身材特别矮小的人，名叫菌人。
English: There is a type of person with a particularly short stature, called a fungus person.

古文：有南类之山。爰有遗玉、青马、三骓、视肉、甘华。百谷所在。
现代文：有一座南类山，这里有遗玉、青马、三骓马、视肉、甘华，各种谷物都在这里生长。
English: There is a southern-type mountain, where there are jade, blue horse, three horses, meat, and ambergris. All kinds of cereals grow here.

