古文：周世宗时，拾遗王朴献《平边策》，略云： 攻取之道，从易者始。
现代文：原文后周世宗时，拾遗王朴曾提出《平边策》，内容大意是：攻占土地的基本原理，一定要从容易的地方着手。
English: After Zhou Shizong, the late Wang Pak once proposed the "flat-edge strategy," the content of which was: the basic principle of conquering land must start from an easy place.

古文：当今唯吴易图，东至海，南至江，可挠之地二千里。
现代文：放眼天下，当今只有吴国容易攻占。它的土地辽阔，东到海，南至江，将近两千里。
English: Looking around the world, only the State of Wu is easy to conquer today. Its land is vast, stretching from the sea in the east to the river in the south, nearly two thousand miles.

古文：从少备处先挠之，备东则挠其西，备西则挠其东。
现代文：我们从吴国防备最薄弱的地方开始进攻，他们防备东方，我们就进攻西方，他们守备西方，我们就搅乱东方。
English: We will start our attack from the weakest point of Wu's defense. If they defend the East, we will attack the West. If they defend the West, we will disrupt the East.

古文：彼奔走以救弊，则奔走之间，我可窥其虚实。避实击虚，所向无前，则江北诸州举矣。
现代文：他们一定会奔走救援，在奔走之间，我们就能看出他们的虚实、强弱，然后我们避开防卫坚固的地方，攻击武力薄弱的地方，这样一来一定战无不胜。那么长江北岸的各州，都将归我们所有。
English: They will certainly run to the rescue, and while running, we will be able to see their reality, strength and weakness, and then we will avoid places with strong defenses and attack places with weak forces, so that we will be invincible. Then all the states on the north bank of the Yangtze River will belong to us.

古文：既得江北，用彼之民，扬我之兵，江南亦不难下也。
现代文：取得江北之后，就利用江北的百姓，继续我们征讨江南的计划，那么江南也不难取得了。
English: After obtaining the north of the Yangtze River, we will use the people of the north of the Yangtze River to continue our plan to conquer the south of the Yangtze River. Then the south of the Yangtze River will not be difficult to obtain.

古文：江南下，而桂、广、岷、蜀，可飞书召之矣。
现代文：江南一旦到手，那么桂林、广东、四川、巴蜀等地，就只需传递一两封谕示文书便足以叫他们投降。
English: Once Jiangnan falls into their hands, then Guilin, Guangdong, Sichuan, Bashu and other places will only need to be delivered one or two letters of instruction, which will be enough to make them surrender.

古文：吴、蜀既平，幽必望风而至，唯并为必死之寇，必须强兵力攻，然不足为边患也。 
现代文：吴、蜀既已平定，那么燕地一定闻风归附，只有河东，是拼死也不会归附的匪寇，必须要出动强大的兵力来攻取，但也不足以构成我国的边患。 
English: Since Wu and Shu have been pacified, Yan's land will definitely be annexed. Only Hedong is a bandit that will not be annexed, and it is necessary to send a strong force to attack it, but it is not enough to constitute a border problem for our country.

古文：世宗奇之，未及试，其后宋兴，卒如其策。
现代文：周世宗对这个建议颇为赞赏，可惜还来不及照这个策论去做就病死了。日后宋朝代之而起，宋主就是按照这计策实行的。
English: Zhou Shizong was quite appreciative of this suggestion, but unfortunately he died of illness before he could follow this strategy. Later, the Song Dynasty was established, and the Song Lord implemented this strategy.

