古文：李涓，字浩然，驸马都尉遵勖曾孙也。
现代文：李涓字浩然，是驸马都尉李遵勖的曾孙。
English: Li Shanzi is a great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandfather.

古文：以荫为殿直，召试中书，易文阶，至通直郎，知鄂州崇阳县。
现代文：以荫补任殿直，被中书省召见考试，改成文官官阶，升到通直郎，任鄂州崇阳知县。
English: He was called for an examination by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and was promoted to the official rank of civil servant. He was promoted to Tong Nairo, and was appointed to the highest post in Chongyang County, Ezhou.

古文：靖康元年，京城被围，羽檄召天下兵。
现代文：靖康元年，京城开封被围困，朝廷用羽书召天下军队。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the capital city of Kaifeng was besieged, and the imperial court summoned the world's armies.

古文：鄂部县七，当发二千九百人，皆未集，涓独以所募六百锐然请行。
现代文：鄂州下属七县，应当征发二千九百人，都没有集中，李涓独身以所招募的六百人迅速请求出发。
English: In the seven counties under Ezhou, 2,900 people should be recruited and dispatched, but none of them were concentrated. Li Xiuxing quickly requested the departure of the 600 recruited people.

古文：或谓： 盍徐之，以须他邑。 涓曰： 事急矣，当持一信报天子，为东南倡。 而募士多市人，不能军，涓出家钱买牛酒激犒之。
现代文：李涓说： 事情很危急了，应当持一封信报告天子，作为东南地区的倡导。 但招募的士兵大多为街市之人，不能成军，李涓拿出家钱买牛和酒激励犒赏他们。
English: Li Yao said: "Things are very critical, we should hold up a letter to report to God, as an advocate for the southeast region.However, most of the recruited soldiers are people from the street market, and cannot form an army.Li Yao took out his family money to buy cattle and wine to encourage and reward them.

古文：令曰： 吾固知无益，然世受国恩，唯直死耳。
现代文：下令说 ：我本知道这样做没有益处，但世代受到国家的恩惠，只有为国而死。
English: The order said: "I knew there was no benefit in doing so, but generations have been blessed by the state and can only die for the state.

古文：若曹知法乎， 失将者死 ，钧之一死，死国留名，男儿不朽事也。 众皆泣。
现代文：你们知道这样的法令吗？ 失去将军的士兵死 ，同样是一死，为国而死留名百世，这是男子汉不朽的事业。 众人都哭了。
English: Do you know of such a decree? The death of a soldier who has lost his general is also a death, and dying for the country leaves a name for a hundred lifetimes, which is the immortal cause of a man. Everyone cried.

古文：即日，引而东，北过淮，蒲圻、嘉鱼二县之兵始至，合而前。
现代文：当天，李涓率领大家向东而去，北过淮河，蒲圻、嘉鱼二个县的军队才到，于是合兵前进。
English: On the same day, Li Qian led everyone to the east. After crossing the Huai River to the north, the armies of the two counties of Pu'er and Jiayu arrived, so they advanced together.

古文：至蔡，天大雪，蔡人忽噪而奔，曰： 敌至矣。 即结阵以待。
现代文：到达蔡州，天上下着大雪，蔡人忽然鼓噪奔逃，说： 敌人到了。 李涓马上结阵以待。
English: Arriving in Caizhou, the sky was covered with heavy snow, Cai people suddenly ran away, saying: The enemy has arrived.

古文：少焉，游骑果集。
现代文：不久，敌人游骑果然到了。
English: Soon, the enemy cavalry arrived.

古文：涓驰马先犯其锋，下皆步卒，蒙卤盾径进，颇杀其骑，且走。
现代文：李涓驰马率先抵御敌人先锋，所部都是步兵，蒙着大盾径直前进，杀敌骑甚多，敌人将要逃走。
English: Li Qizhi's horse took the lead in resisting the enemy's vanguard. All the troops were infantrymen, and they advanced straight ahead with large shields. They killed a lot of enemy riders, and the enemy was about to flee.

古文：涓乘胜追北十余里，大与敌遇，飞矢猬集，二县兵亟舍去。
现代文：李涓乘胜向北追击十多里，与敌人大军相遇，飞箭猬集，蒲圻、嘉鱼二县军队马上舍而离去。
English: Li Qiye chased northward for more than ten miles, met with the enemy army, gathered arrows, and the two county armies of Pu'er and Jiayu immediately left.

古文：再赠彰化军节度。孙昂，亦引刀欲自刺，金人拥至军前，不屈而死，至是赠成忠郎、围练使。
现代文：李涓受伤很重，仍坚持血战，大声叱责左右之人辜负了自己，于是牺牲在战场上，享年五十三岁。
English: Heavily wounded, he still insisted on bloody battle, loudly scolded those around him for failing him, and died on the battlefield at the age of fifty-three.

古文：徽言子冈既同死事，而从孙适亦以守安丰死。昂父翊，宣和末知朔宁府，救太原，死于阵。
现代文：有十之六七的士兵死去。上级官员有人忌妒李涓，胁迫逃跑的士兵诬蔑李涓已经逃遁。
English: Sixty-seven out of every ten soldiers died. Some higher-ranking officials were jealous of Li Qiye, and forced the soldiers who fled to slander Li Qiye as having fled.

古文：各世著忠义云。
现代文：第二年，金兵离去，蔡人把李涓的尸体运回朝廷。
English: The following year, after Jinbing left, Cai Ren took Li Xuan's body back to the imperial court.

古文：向子韶，字和卿，开封人，神宗后再从侄也。
现代文：朝廷省察记录李涓的忠义情状，赠为朝奉郎，让他的三个儿子做官。向子韶字和卿，开封人，是神宗向皇后的曾从侄。
English: The imperial court investigated and recorded Li Xun's loyalty, presented him as a court servant, and allowed his three sons to serve as officials. Xiang Zixi and Sir, the person who opened the seal, was a nephew of the Empress Shenzong Xiang.

古文：年十五入太学，登元符三年进士第。
现代文：他十五岁进入太学，登元符三年进士第。
English: He entered Taigaku at the age of fifteen and was promoted to the third grade three years later.

古文：特恩改承事郎，授荆南府节度判官，累官至京东转运副使。
现代文：因皇帝特恩改为承事郎，被任为荆南府节度判官，累官至京东转运副使。
English: Due to Emperor Ten's change to the position of secretary-general, he was appointed as the judge of Jingnan Festival and the vice-envoy of transportation to Jingdong.

古文：属郡郭奉世进万缗羡余，户部聂昌请赏之以劝天下。
现代文：所属郡郭奉世进献万缗羡余钱，户部聂昌请求朝廷奖赏他用以劝告天下。
English: Guo Fengshi, the county he belonged to, donated a lot of money, and Hube Yuchang asked the imperial court to reward him for advising the world.

古文：子韶劾奉世，且言近臣首开聚敛之端，浸不可长，士论韪之。
现代文：向子韶弹劾奉世，又说近臣首开聚敛之端，更加不可以助长，士人议论这是对的。
English: It is right for the scholars to discuss the impeachment of Emperor Zizong, and that it is even more wrong to encourage the close vassals to start gathering.

古文：以父忧免，起复，知淮宁府。
现代文：因父亲去世免官，起任为淮宁知府。
English: Due to his father's death, he was removed from office and became the governor of Huaining.

古文：建炎二年，金人犯淮宁，子韶率诸弟城守，谕士民曰： 汝等坟墓之国，去此何之，吾与汝当死守。 时有东兵四千人，第三将岳景绶欲弃城率军民走行在，子韶不从，景绶引兵迎敌而死。
现代文：建炎二年，金人进犯淮宁，子韶率领诸弟修筑城墙守御，谕告士人百姓说 ：这是你们祖坟所在之国，离开这里到哪里去？
English: In the second year of Jianyan, the Jin people invaded Huaining. Zi Yan led his brothers to build a city wall to protect it, and told the scholars and people: "This is the country where your ancestors' graves are located. Where do you go from here?"

古文：金人昼夜攻城，子韶亲擐甲胄，冒矢石，遣其弟子率赴宗泽乞援兵，未至，城陷。
现代文：我与你应当死守府城。 当时有东兵四千人，第三将岳景绶打算弃城率领军队百姓逃往皇帝所在之处，子韶不同意，景绶引兵迎敌而牺牲。金人白天夜晚进攻府城，子韶亲自身披甲胄，冒着箭矢石头，派遣他的弟弟子率赶往宗泽处请援兵，援兵没到，府城陷落。
English: At that time, there were four thousand Eastern soldiers. The third general, Yue Jingyao, planned to abandon the city and lead the army and people to flee to the place where the emperor was. Zi Yao did not agree, and Jingyao led the troops to meet the enemy and died. Jinren attacked the capital city day and night. Zi Yao himself put on armor and risked arrows and stones, and sent his younger brother and disciples to rush to Soze to ask for reinforcements. The reinforcements did not arrive, and the capital fell.

古文：子韶率军民巷战，力屈为所执。
现代文：子韶率领军民与金人展开巷战，因力竭而被金人俘获。
English: Zixuan led the soldiers and civilians in a street battle with the goldsmiths, and was captured by the goldsmiths due to his exhaustion.

古文：金人坐城上，欲降之，酌酒于前，左右抑令屈膝，子韶直立不动，戟手责骂，金人杀之。
现代文：金人坐在城楼上，想要招降他，斟酒放在他的面前，左右侍臣迫令他跪下，子韶笔直站立不动，指着敌人责骂，被金人杀害。
English: The goldsmith sat on the castle tower, wanted to recruit him, poured the wine and placed it in front of him, the attendants around him forced him to kneel, the son stood still, pointed at the enemy and scolded him, and was killed by the goldsmith.

古文：其弟新知唐州子褒、朝请郎子家等与阖门皆遇害，惟一子鸿六岁得存。
现代文：他的弟弟新知唐州子褒、朝请郎子家等与全家合门遇害，只有一个六岁的儿子向鸿得以幸存。
English: His younger brothers, Xinchi Tangzhou Zibo and Chaozhe Roozi Jia, were killed together with the whole family. Only one six-year-old son, Xiang Hong, survived.

古文：事闻，再赠通议大夫，官其家六人，后谥忠毅。
现代文：事情被朝廷知道后，再赠子韶通议大夫，使他家六人为官，后谥号 忠毅 。
English: After the matter was known to the imperial court, he gave his son, Zou Tong, the title of Doctor of Law, and six members of his family were appointed to government posts. His posthumous name was Zhongyi.

古文：初，金人至淮宁府，杨时闻之曰： 子韶必死矣。 盖知其素守者云。
现代文：起初，金人到达淮宁府，杨时听说后说： 子韶必定会死。 大概知道子韶平素奉行职守。
English: At first, when the gold man arrived at Huaining Prefecture, Yang Shiji heard about it and said: Zibo will surely die, probably knowing that Zibo was just doing his duty.

古文：杨邦乂，字晞稷，吉州吉水人。
现代文：杨邦乂字晞稷，吉州吉水人。
English: Yang Bang, a native of Jishui, Jizhou.

古文：博通古今，以舍选登进士第，遭时多艰，每以节义自许。
现代文：博通古今，以上舍资格登进士第，遭逢时事多艰难，每每以气节忠义自许。
English: Broadcom, from ancient times to the present, has been qualified to be promoted to the highest rank, and has been subjected to more and more difficult times, and has always praised itself for its loyalty.

古文：历婺源尉、蕲庐建康三郡教授，改秩知溧阳县。
现代文：历任婺源县尉、蕲州、庐州、建康三郡教授，改官秩知溧阳县。
English: Successively held the posts of Xinyuan County Lieutenant, Xizhou, Xizhou, Jiankang Three Counties Professor, and changed his post to Xinyang County, Chichichi.

古文：会叛卒周德据府城，杀官吏。
现代文：恰逢叛兵周德占据府城，杀害官吏。
English: This coincided with the rebel Zhou De occupying the capital and killing officials.

古文：邦乂立县狱囚赵明于庭，欲诛之，因谕之曰： 尔悉里中豪杰，诚能集尔徒为邑人诛贼，不惟宥尔罪，当上功畀爵。 明即请行，邦乂饮之卮酒，使自去。
现代文：邦乂让县监狱囚犯赵明站立在堂庭，打算杀掉他，因而劝谕他说 ：你熟悉里中豪杰，如确实能聚集你的同党替县里百姓诛杀盗贼，不但宽宥你的罪行，而且还可上功封爵。 赵明马上请求行动，邦乂给他用卮喝酒，然后让他自己离去。
English: The state magistrate let the county prison inmate Zhao Ming stand in the court and planned to kill him, so he advised him, "You are familiar with the local heroes. If you can really gather your fellow party members to fight thieves for the people of the county, not only will your crime be forgiven, but you can also be knighted." Zhao Ming immediately asked for action, the state magistrate gave him alcohol with a straw, and then let him leave on his own.

古文：越翼日，讨平之。
现代文：过了第二天，就讨平了叛兵。
English: After the second day, the rebels were subdued.

古文：建炎三年，金人至江上。高宗如浙西，留右仆射杜充为御营使，驻紥建康，命刘光世、韩世忠、王〈王燮〉诸将悉听充节制。
现代文：建炎三年，金人到达长江上，高宗去浙西，留下右仆射杜充为御营使，驻扎在建康，命令刘光世、韩世忠、王燮诸将都听杜充节制。
English: In the third year of Jianyan, the Jin people arrived on the Yangtze River, Gao Zong went to West Zhejiang, leaving his right-hand man, Sha Ducong, as the imperial envoy, stationed in Jiankang, and ordered Liu Guangshi, Han Shizhong, and Wang Xizhong to listen to Ducong's restraint.

古文：充性酷而无谋，士心不附。
现代文：杜充性情残酷而且无谋，军心不附。
English: Du Chong's nature is cruel and unscrupulous, with no military spirit.

古文：渡碙沙，充遣陈淬、岳飞等及金人战于马家渡。
现代文：渡硇沙河，杜充派遣陈淬、岳飞等人与金人战于马家渡。
English: After crossing the Lushan River, Du Chong sent Chen Yao, Yue Fei and others to fight against the Jin in Majiadu.

古文：自辰至未，战数合，胜负未决。
现代文：从上午七点到下午一点，双方多次交战，不分胜负。
English: From seven o'clock in the morning to one o'clock in the afternoon, the two sides fought many times, regardless of victory or defeat.

古文：〈王燮〉拥兵弗救，淬被擒，〈王燮〉兵遁，充率麾下数千人降。
现代文：王燮拥兵不去援救，陈淬被金人擒获，王燮所部逃跑，杜充率领部下几千人投降。
English: Wang Yao's soldiers did not go to rescue, Chen Yao was captured by Jin people, Wang Yao's headquarters fled, Du Chong led several thousand of his subordinates to surrender.

古文：金人济江，鼓行逼城。
现代文：金人渡过长江，击鼓前进直逼建康城。
English: The goldsmith crossed the Yangtze River, beat the drum and marched straight to Jiankang City.

古文：时李棁以户部尚书董军饷，陈邦光以显谟阁直学士守建康，皆具降状，逆之十里亭。
现代文：当时李以户部尚书的身份监督军饷，陈邦光以显谟阁直学士的身份驻守建康，都写好降书，在十里亭迎接金人。
English: At that time, Li supervised the military eulogy as the head of the household department, and Chen Bangguang was stationed in Jiankang as the direct scholar of Xian Mougou. They both wrote the surrender letter and met the gold medalist at Shilitei.

古文：金帅完颜宗弼既入城，棁、邦光率官属迎拜，惟邦乂不屈膝，以血大书衣裾曰： 宁作赵氏鬼，不为他邦臣。 宗弼不能屈。
现代文：金人主帅完颜宗弼已进入城内，李、陈邦光率领下属官员迎接跪拜，只有杨邦乂不下跪，用血在衣襟上大书说： 宁做赵氏鬼，不为他邦臣。 宗弼不能使他屈服。
English: Jinren coach Ganyan Zonglu has entered the city, Li and Chen Bangguang led subordinate officials to kneel to welcome him, only Yang Banglu did not kneel, and wrote in blood on his lapel: I'd rather be Zhao's ghost than his state minister. Zonglu can't make him give in.

古文：翼曰，遣人说邦乂，许以旧官。
现代文：第二天，宗弼派人劝说邦乂，许诺恢复他原有的官职。
English: The next day, Zonglu sent someone to persuade Banglu, promising to restore his former official position.

古文：邦乂以首触柱础流血，曰： 世岂有不畏死而可以利动者？
现代文：邦乂用头碰柱子底下的石礅，鲜血直流，说 ：世上难道有不怕死而可以用利惑动的吗？
English: Bangtao bumped his head against the stone coffin under the pillar, blood flowing, and said, "Is there anyone in the world who is not afraid of death and can be moved by persuasion?"

古文：速杀我。 翼日，宗弼等与棁、邦光宴堂上，立邦乂于庭，邦乂叱棁、邦光曰： 天子以若捍城，敌至不能抗，更与共宴乐，尚有面目见我乎？ 有刘团练者，以幅纸书 死活 二字示邦乂曰： 若无多云，欲死趣书 死 字。 邦乂奋笔书 死 字，金人相顾动色，然未敢害也。
现代文：快点杀掉我。 第二天，宗弼等人与李、陈邦光在堂庭上举行宴会，使邦乂站在庭中，邦乂叱骂李、陈邦光说： 天子用你们守卫城池，敌人来了你们不能抵抗，再与敌人一起宴饮玩乐，还有什么脸见我呢？ 有叫刘团练的人，用一幅纸写上 死活 二字示给邦乂说： 如果没有话多说，想死赶快写 死 字。 邦乂奋笔写上 死 字，金人相顾动色，但不敢加害于他。
English: The next day, Zonglu and others held a banquet in the courtyard with Wang Li and Chen Bangguang, and made Wang Li stand in the courtyard. Wang Li scolded Li and Chen Bangguang, saying, "The Son of Heaven uses you to guard the castle, and when the enemy comes, you can't resist, and then you feast and have fun with the enemy. How else can you see me?" Someone called Liu Duanren wrote the words "die" and "live" on a piece of paper and showed it to Wang Li, saying, "If you don't have anything more to say, write the word "die" as soon as you want to die." Wang Li

古文：已而宗弼再引邦乂，邦乂不胜愤，遥望大骂曰： 若女真图中原，天宁久假汝，行磔汝万段，安得污我！ 宗弼大怒，杀之，剖取其心，年四十四。
现代文：不久宗弼又引诱邦乂，邦乂不胜愤恨，遥望宗弼大声骂道 ：你们女真图谋中原，上天岂会长久帮助你，将把你裂为万段，怎么能玷污我！ 宗弼大怒，杀害邦乂，剖肚取出他的心脏，时年四十四岁。
English: Soon after, Zonglu seduced Banglu. Banglu was so angry that he could not contain his anger. Distantly, Zonglu cursed loudly, "You women are really plotting against Central Plains. Heaven will not help you for a long time. It will break you into a million pieces. How can you defile me!" Zonglu flew into a rage, killed Banglu, cut open his stomach and took out his heart. He was forty-four years old.

古文：事闻，赠直秘阁，赐田三顷，官为敛葬，即其地赐庙褒忠，谥忠襄，官其四子。
现代文：事情被朝廷听到，赠他直秘阁，赐田三百亩，官府为他殓尸下葬，就其葬地赐庙号褒忠，谥号 忠襄 ，以他的四个儿子为官。
English: The matter was heard by the imperial court, which presented him with a direct secret cabinet, gave him three hundred mu of land, the government buried his body, and gave him the temple name Bo Zhong and the nickname Zhong Xiang for his burial place, with his four sons as officials.

古文：邦乂少处郡学，目不视非礼，同舍欲隳其守，拉之出，托言故旧家，实娼馆也。
现代文：邦乂少时在郡学，眼睛不看有违于礼义的东西，同学想毁坏他的操守，拉他出去，托言是故友家，其实是妓女馆。
English: When he was young, he was studying at the county school. His eyes would not look at anything that violated etiquette. His classmates wanted to destroy his integrity and pull him out. The excuse was that it was a friend's house, but it was actually a prostitute's house.

古文：邦乂初不疑，酒数行，娼女出，邦乂愕然，疾趋还舍，解其衣冠焚之，流涕自责。
现代文：邦乂开始没有怀疑，酒行了几遍，妓女出来了，邦乂陡然一惊，快步回到舍宿，脱下衣服帽子烧掉，痛加流涕自我责斥。
English: At first, Bangtao didn't have any suspicions. He went out drinking several times, a prostitute came out, and Bangtao was taken aback. He hurried back to the dormitory, took off his clothes and burned his hat, and scolded himself bitterly.

古文：绍兴七年，枢密院言邦乂忠节显著，上曰： 颜真卿异代忠臣，朕昨已官其子孙，邦乂为朕死节，不可不厚褒录，以为忠义之劝。 加赠徽猷阁待制，增赐田三顷。
现代文：绍兴七年，枢密院说邦乂忠义节气显著，皇帝说： 颜真卿是异代忠臣，我昨天已经使其子孙为官，邦乂为我死节，不可以不予厚加褒扬记录，用以作为忠义之劝。 加赠徽猷阁待制，增加赐田三百亩。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, the Privy Council said that the loyalty of the State Council was remarkable, and the emperor said: Yan Zhenqing is a loyal subject of a different generation, I have made his children and grandchildren officials yesterday, the State Council is the anniversary of my death, it is impossible not to give a thick record of praise, to be used as a persuasion of loyalty.

