古文：祖干持《大学》以进，太祖问治道何先，对曰： 不出是书。 
现代文：范祖干，字景先，金华人，太祖攻下婺州后，与叶仪一同奉召，祖干以《大学》进呈太祖。太祖问治国之道以何者为先，祖干回答： 不出此书。 
English: Fan Zugang, a Chinese from Jinhua, was summoned together with Ye Yi after the conquest of Zhangzhou. Zugang presented the "University" to the great ancestor. When the great ancestor asked who should take the lead in governing the country, Zugang replied: This book will not be published.

古文：太祖令剖陈其义，祖干谓帝王之道，自修身齐家以至治国平天下，必上下四旁，均齐方正，使万物各得其所，而后可以言治。
现代文：又进一步解释说：帝王治国之道，从修身齐家到治国平天下，必须对上下四方都要公平正直，使万物各得其所，然后才谈得上治理。
English: He further explained: The emperor's way of governing the country, from self-cultivation to governing the country and the world, must be fair and honest to the upper and lower quarters, so that everything has its place, and then we can talk about governance.

古文：太祖曰： 圣人之道，所以为万世法。
现代文：太祖说： 圣人治国之道，为万世准绳。
English: The great-grandfather said, "The way a saint governs a country is the standard for all time."

古文：吾自起兵以来，号令赏罚，一有不平，何以服众。夫武定祸乱，文致太平，悉是道也。 
现代文：我自起兵以来，如果不是号令统一，赏罚分明，何能令人口服心服，以武功平定祸乱，以文治达到太平，均是治国之道。 
English: Since I took up arms, if there is no unified command and clear rewards and punishments, how can the population be convinced, the calamity be settled with martial arts, and the peace be achieved with literature, all of which are the way to govern the country.

古文：深加礼貌，命二人为谘议，祖干以亲老辞归。
现代文：于是命叶仪与范祖干同为咨议。
English: As a result, Mei Ye Yi and Fan Zu were both consulted.

古文：李文忠守处州，特加敬礼，恒称之为师。祖干事亲孝，父母皆八十余而终。家贫不能葬，乡里共为营办，悲哀三年如一日。有司以闻，命表其所居曰纯孝坊，学者称为纯孝先生。
现代文：祖干为了奉养父母，辞归故里，父母皆过八旬而寿终，家贫不能安葬，乡里为之办理丧事，当地官府将此情形上报，朝廷为祖干立 纯孝坊 以表彰，学者因此称祖干为 孝纯先生 。
English: In order to support his parents, Zu Gan resigned and returned to his hometown. His parents were both over eighty years old and passed away. The family was poor and could not afford a proper burial. The local government reported the situation to the local government, and the imperial court set up a pure filial piety booth to commend Zu Gan. Scholars therefore called Zu Gan Mr. Filial Piety.

古文：叶仪，字景翰，金华人。
现代文：叶仪，字景翰，金华人，是许谦的弟子。
English: Ye Yi, Zi Jinghan, Jin Hua Ren, is a disciple of Xu Qian.

古文：受业于许谦，谦诲之曰： 学者必以五性人伦为本，以开明心术、变化气质为先。 
现代文：许谦教导他说 ：学者必以五性人伦为本，以开发心术、变化气质为先。 
English: Xu Qian taught him, "Scholars must be based on the Five Gender Ethic, with the development of mental skills and changes in temperament as the first priority."

古文：仪朝夕惕厉，研究奥旨。
现代文：仪早晚均以此来告诫鞭策自己，探究其中深意。
English: Sooner or later, Yi used this as a way to admonish and encourage himself, to explore the deeper meaning.

古文：已而授徒讲学，士争趋之。
现代文：不久，他收徒讲学，士人争相拜他为师。
English: Soon, he became a lecturer, and scholars flocked to him as a teacher.

古文：其语学者曰： 圣贤言行，尽于《六经》、《四书》，其微词奥义，则近代先儒之说备矣。
现代文：他对弟子们说： 圣贤的言行，尽在于《六经》、《四书》之中，其言简义深。近代先儒的言论都是如此。
English: He said to his disciples: The words and deeds of the sages are all contained in the "Six Classics" and the "Four Books," and their words are concise and profound. This is true of the words of the early modern Confucians.

古文：由其言以求其心，涵泳从容，久自得之，不可先立己意，而妄有是非也。 
现代文：通过他们的言词来探求其思想，慢慢体会，久而久之必有所得，切不可先立自己的主张，妄自评论是非。 
English: Through their words to explore their thoughts, slowly experience, over time must have something to gain, must not first set up their own ideas, presumptuously comment on the rights and wrongs.

古文：太祖克婺州，召见，授为谘议，以老病辞。
现代文：太祖攻克婺州，召见叶仪，授为咨议。仪以年老多病为由，力辞其职。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Quzhou and summoned Ye Yi for consultation. Ye Yi resigned from his post on the grounds of old age and illness.

古文：已而知府王宗显聘仪及宋濂为《五经》师，非久亦辞归，隐居养亲。
现代文：不久，知府王宗显聘仪及宋濂为《五经》师，但时间不久，他便辞归故里，隐居养亲。
English: Soon, the prefectural governors Wang Zongxian (王宗顯) and Song Xi (宋) hired him as a "Five Classics" teacher, but he soon resigned and returned to his hometown to raise his family in seclusion.

古文：所著有《南阳杂藁》。
现代文：其著作有《南阳杂稿》。
English: His works include "Nanyang Miscellaneous Manuscripts."

古文：隐居教授，以高寿终。
现代文：吴沉认为此书见识精微，道理明白，一丝不苟。叶仪安贫乐道，至终不变。
English: Wu Shen believes that this book has a fine insight, a clear reason, and is meticulous. Ye Yi is poor and happy, and will not change until the end.

古文：谢应芳，字子兰，武进人也。
现代文：其门人著名者有金华的何寿朋。谢应芳，字子兰，武进人。
English: Famous students of his include Jinhua's He Shoupeng, Xie Yingfang, Ziran, and Wu Jinren.

古文：自幼笃志好学，潜心性理，以道义名节自励。
现代文：自幼好学，潜心研究性理，以道义、名节自励。
English: Since childhood, he was eager to learn, devoted himself to the study of nature, and encouraged himself with morality and fame.

古文：元至正初，隐白鹤溪上。
现代文：元至正初年，隐居于白鹤溪上。
English: In the first year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, he lived in seclusion on Baizhe Creek.

古文：构小室，颜曰 龟巢 ，因以为号。
现代文：建有一栋小屋，门楣上写着 龟巢 二字，世人因以为号。
English: A small house was built with the words "Turtle's Nest" written on the lintel, and the world thought it was a nickname.

古文：郡辟教乡校子弟，先质后文，诸生皆循循雅饬。
现代文：本郡请他教导子弟，其教学先注重实质然后再讲文采，学生皆遵循他的教导。
English: The county asked him to teach the children, and his teaching focused on substance first and then on literature, and the students followed his teaching.

古文：疾异端惑世，尝辑圣贤格言、古今明鉴为《辨惑编》。
现代文：应芳痛恨异端邪说扰乱人们视听，曾辑录圣贤格言及古今明鉴，合为《辨惑编》一书。
English: Ying Fang hated heretical heresies that disturbed people's sight and hearing, and once compiled a list of sages and wise men, as well as a clear reference to the past and present, which was compiled into a book called "Discernment Edition."

古文：有举为三衢书院山长者，不就。
现代文：有人荐举他为 三衢书院 山长，他不肯。
English: Someone recommended him to be the head of the mountain of the Sanlu Academy, but he refused.

古文：有司征修郡志，强起赴之。
现代文：元末，天下兵起，应芳至吴地避难，吴人争相聘请他去教导子弟。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when the war broke out, Yingfang took refuge in Wudi, and the people of Wudi scrambled to hire him to teach their children.

古文：年益高，学行益劭。
现代文：若干年后江南平定，他才返回家乡，这时已年过七十。
English: A few years later, after the south of the Yangtze River had been pacified, he returned to his hometown, by which time he was over seventy years old.

古文：达官缙绅过郡者，必访于其庐，应芳布衣韦带与之抗礼。
现代文：他迁居芳茂山，虽家徒四壁，却安逸自得。官府强行起用他修撰郡志，虽年事已高，但仍勉力治学。达官纟晋绅凡经过本郡者，都要去拜望他，应芳身着粗衣接待来客。
English: He moved to Fangmaoshan, and although his family was surrounded by four walls, he felt at ease. The government forced him to write the county chronicle, and although he was old, he still tried his best to study. Everyone who passed through the county would visit him, and he would receive guests in his coarse clothes.

古文：议论必关世教，切民隐，而导善之志不衰。
现代文：平时谈论的也是关于教育、民情等，教人行善之志始终不减。
English: In ordinary times, they also talk about education, people's feelings, and so on, and the desire to teach people to do good has never diminished.

古文：诗文雅丽蕴藉，而所自得者，理学为深。
现代文：其诗文高雅，含义深远。而他自认为心得最多的是在理学方面。
English: His poetry is elegant and far-reaching, and he believes that he has learned the most in the field of science.

古文：卒年九十七。
现代文：享年九十七岁。
English: He was ninety-seven years old.

古文：汪克宽，字德一，祁门人。
现代文：汪克宽，字德一，祁门人。
English: Wang Kekuan, the first of the word virtue, the gatekeeper.

古文：乃取《四书》，自定句读，昼夜诵习，专勤异凡儿。
现代文：十岁时，父亲教他学习双峰饶鲁的著作，能即刻有所领悟。读《四书》能自己断句，日夜学习，其刻苦专心的程度是别的儿童所难以比拟的。
English: When he was ten years old, his father taught him to study the works of Shuangfeng Rao Lu, and he was able to understand immediately. When reading the "Four Books," he was able to make his own sentences and study day and night. His degree of hard concentration is hard to match by other children.

古文：后从父之浮梁，问业于吴仲迂，志益笃。
现代文：后随父亲到浮梁，向吴仲迂求教，求学之心更切。
English: After that, he followed his father to Fu Liang and asked Wu Zhong Yu for advice. He was more eager to learn.

古文：元泰定中，举应乡试，中选。
现代文：元泰定中，乡试中举，而会试落第。
English: In the middle of the former Tai Ding, the township test was raised, and the test would fall to the first.

古文：会试以答策伉直见黜，慨然弃科举业，尽力于经学。《春秋》则以胡安国为主，而博考众说，会萃成书，名之曰《春秋经传附录纂疏》。
现代文：他愤愤不平地抛弃科举而致力于经学。研究《春秋》以南宋胡安国的《春秋传》为主，广泛参照其他各家之说，荟萃成书，名为《春秋经传附录纂疏》。
English: He indignantly abandoned the imperial examinations and devoted himself to the study of the classics. His research on "Spring and Autumn" was mainly based on the "Spring and Autumn Biography" of the Southern Song Juan country. He extensively referred to the sayings of other schools and compiled them into a book called "Spring and Autumn Biography Supplementary Compendium."

古文：《易》则有《程朱传义音考》。
现代文：关于《易》的研究，有《程朱传义音考》。
English: Regarding the study of "Yi," there is the "Cheng Zhu Chuan Yi Audio Test."

古文：《诗》有《集传音义会通》。
现代文：关于《诗》的著作有《集传音义会通》。
English: Among the books on "Poetry" is "Shu Chuan Ne Yi Hui Tong."

古文：《礼》有《礼经补逸》。
现代文：关于《礼》的著作有《礼经补逸》。
English: There is a book about "Rei" called "Reiki Fuyaku."

古文：至正间，蕲、黄兵至，室庐赀财尽遭焚掠。
现代文：关于《纲目》有《凡例考异》。捧着经书从各地前来求教的人甚多。
English: There are many people who come from all over the country to study the sutras.

古文：箪瓢屡空，怡然自得。洪武初，聘至京师，同修《元史》。
现代文：至正年间，蕲州、黄州兵至，克宽的房舍财产尽被焚掠，常常无米下锅，而他却满不在乎。洪武初年，克宽被招聘至京师，参加《元史》的编修。
English: During the Zheng He years, when the soldiers from Zhangzhou and Huangzhou arrived, Kekuan's house and property were all burned and plundered, and he often had no rice to cook, but he did not care. In the first year of Hongwu, Kekuan was recruited to the Beijing Division to participate in the compilation of "Yuan Shi."

古文：书成将授官，固辞老疾。赐银币，给驿还。
现代文：书成后，朝廷授他官职，他以年老多病辞谢，太祖赐他银币送归故里。
English: After the book was completed, the court awarded him an official post. He thanked the court for his resignation, saying that he was too old and sick. His great-grandfather gave him a silver coin to take back to his hometown.

古文：五年冬卒，年六十有九。
现代文：洪武五年冬去世，享年六十九岁。
English: Hongwu passed away in the winter of 2005, at the age of 69.

古文：梁寅，字孟敬，新喻人。
现代文：梁寅，字孟敬，新喻人。
English: Liang Yin, Zi Meng Jing, Xin Yu Ren.

古文：世业农，家贫，自力于学，淹贯《五经》、百氏。
现代文：祖先世代务农，家境贫寒。寅完全靠自学，精通《五经》和诸子百家。
English: His ancestors worked in agriculture for generations, and his family was poor. He relied entirely on self-education, and was well-versed in the Five Classics of Confucianism and Confucianism.

古文：累举不第，遂弃去。
现代文：多次应考不中，便放弃科举之道。
English: After failing the entrance examination several times, he gave up the path of science education.

古文：辟集庆路儒学训导，居二岁，以亲老辞归。
现代文：集庆路招聘他为儒学训导，任职二年，因父母年老，辞归供养。
English: Jiuqing Road recruited him as a Confucian scholar, and he served for two years. Due to his parents' old age, he resigned to provide for them.

古文：明年，天下兵起，遂隐居教授。
现代文：第二年，各地反元起义蜂起，梁寅隐居，以教授子弟为业。
English: In the second year, the anti-Yuan uprising broke out in various regions, and Liang Yin lived in seclusion, making his living as a professor.

古文：太祖定四方，征天下名儒修述礼乐。寅就征，年六十余矣。
现代文：太祖平定四方后，诏征天下名儒编修礼乐，寅应征，这时他已六十多岁。
English: After the Great Ancestor had subdued the four sides, he issued an edict to conscript the world's famous Confucianists to perform ceremonial music. At that time, he was already over sixty years old.

古文：时以礼、律、制度，分为三局，寅在礼局中，讨论精审，诸儒皆推服。
现代文：当时朝廷将礼、律、制度分立三局，寅在礼局。由于议论精当，受到其他儒士的推崇。
English: At that time, the imperial court separated the etiquette, law, and system into three departments, and Yin was in the etiquette department. He was respected by other Confucians because of his precise speech.

古文：书成，赐金币，将授官，以老病辞，还。
现代文：全书编成，朝廷赐予金银彩帛，授以官职。
English: The whole book was compiled, and the Imperial Court awarded the author with gold and silver decoration and an official post.

古文：结庐石门山，四方士多从学，称为梁五经，又称石门先生。
现代文：梁寅以自己年老有病辞谢，回到家乡，住在石门山，四方学士登门求学，称他 梁五经 ，又称 石门先生 。
English: Liang Yin used his old age and illness as an excuse to return to his hometown and live in Shimen Mountain. He was called Liang Wujing, also known as Mr. Shimen.

古文：邻邑子初入官，诣寅请教。
现代文：有邻县子弟初次任官，前来倾听梁寅的教诲。
English: Some children from neighboring counties, who were first-time officials, came to listen to Liang Yin's teachings.

古文：寅曰： 清、慎、勤，居官三字符也。 
现代文：寅告诉他 ：清、慎、勤是做官的三字符。 
English: Tama told him, "Clear, prudent, and diligent are the three characters of being an official."

古文：其人问天德王道之要，寅微笑曰： 言忠信，行笃敬，天德也。不伤财，不害民，王道也。 
现代文：问他关于天法王道的要义，寅微笑道： 言语讲忠信，行为重踏实，这就是天德；不贪财、不害民，这就是王道。 
English: Asking him about the essence of the way of the Heavenly Law King, Yin smiled and said, "Speaking faithfully and behaving in a down-to-earth manner, this is the way of heaven; not being greedy for money and not harming the people, this is the way of the king.

古文：其人退曰： 梁子所言，平平耳。 
现代文：这人回来说 ：梁子所言平常得很。 
English: This person came back and said, "What Liang Zi said is very ordinary.

古文：后以不检败，语人曰： 吾不敢再见石门先生。 
现代文：后来此人因言行不检点而身败名裂。这时才有所醒悟地对人说 ：我不敢再去见石门先生。 
English: Later, this person was disgraced because of his words and deeds. It was only then that he said to people with some awareness: I don't dare to see Mr. Shimen again.

古文：寅卒，年八十二。
现代文：梁寅享年八十二岁。
English: Liang Yin passed away at the age of 82.

古文：赵汸，字子常，休宁人。
现代文：赵汸，字子常，休宁人。
English: Zhao Yao, Zizi Chang, Huining people.

古文：生而姿禀卓绝。
现代文：天资过人。
English: He's a genius.

古文：初就外傅，读朱子《四书》，多所疑难，乃尽取朱子书读之。
现代文：拜师求学之初，读朱子注释的《四书》，有许多疑问不能解决，便通读朱子的全部著作。
English: At the beginning of his studies, when he read Zhu Zi's commentary on the "Four Books," there were many questions that could not be resolved, so he read through all of Zhu Zi's works.

古文：闻九江黄泽有学行，往从之游。
现代文：他听说九江黄泽的学问道德都好，即去与之交游。
English: He heard that the culture and morals of Jiujiang Huangze were good, so he went to mingle with them.

古文：泽之学，以精思自悟为主。
现代文：黄泽治学以自思自悟为主，采用启发式方法教育他人。
English: Huang Zeji's study is mainly based on self-reflection and self-enlightenment, and he uses a heuristic method to educate others.

古文：其教人，引而不发。汸一再登门，乃得《六经》疑义千余条以归。
现代文：赵汸一再登门拜访，从泽那里得到对《六经》疑难问题千余条的解释后才回归。
English: Zhao Wei repeatedly visited the house, and only returned after receiving from Ze an explanation of more than a thousand articles on the difficult questions of the "Six Classics."

古文：已，复往，留二岁，得口授六十四卦大义与学《春秋》之要。
现代文：不久，又在那里留住了两年，得到黄泽口授六十四卦的大义与学习《春秋》的要领。
English: Soon, he stayed there for another two years, receiving Huang Ze's dictation on the importance of the Sixty-four Trigrams and learning the essentials of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：后复从临川虞集游，获闻吴澄之学。乃筑东山精舍，读书著述其中。
现代文：以后又与临川虞集交游，从虞集那里得知吴澄之学，回家乡筑 东山精舍 ，专门读书著述。
English: Later, he crossed paths with Linchuan Yu Ji, learned about Wu Cheng's learning from Yu Ji, and returned to his hometown to build Dongshan Seishe, specializing in reading and writing.

古文：鸡初鸣辄起，澄心默坐。
现代文：他每天鸡鸣即起，静心默坐。
English: Every day, when the rooster crows, he sits and meditates.

古文：由是造诣精深，诸经无不通贯，而尤邃于《春秋》。
现代文：从此以后，其学问造诣日趋精深，诸经无不贯通，尤精于《春秋》。
English: From then on, his scholarly attainments became more and more profound, and he was well versed in all the scriptures, especially in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：初以闻于黄泽者，为《春秋师说》三卷，复广之为《春秋集传》十五卷。
现代文：他最初送给黄泽看的著作为《春秋师说》三卷，后来扩充为《春秋集传》十五卷。
English: The work he initially gave to Huang Ze to read was the three-volume "Spring and Autumn Teacher's Talk," which was later expanded into the 15-volume "Spring and Autumn Collection."

古文：因《礼记》经解有 属辞比事《春秋》教 之语，乃复著《春秋属辞》八篇。
现代文：《礼记》经解中 属辞比事《春秋》教 一语，汸据此又著《春秋属辞》八篇。
English: In the interpretation of "Li Ji," there is a saying that "Spring and Autumn" is a metaphor, and according to this, there are eight "Spring and Autumn" proverbs.

古文：又以为学《春秋》者，必考《左传》事实为先，杜预、陈傅良有得于此，而各有所蔽，乃复著《左氏补注》十卷。
现代文：凡学《春秋》者，必先查考《左传》所载事实。西晋杜预、北宋陈傅良都是这样，有所收获。汸认为他们各有不足，于是又著《左氏补注》十卷。
English: Anyone who studies "Spring and Autumn" must first check the facts contained in "Zo Zhuan." Western Jin Du Yu and Northern Song Chen Fu Liang are both like this, and they have gained something. Zou believed that they each had shortcomings, so he also wrote "Zo's Supplement" ten volumes.

古文：当是时，天下兵起，汸转侧干戈间，颠沛流离，而进修之功不懈。
现代文：当时正值元末，义军蜂起，汸在战乱中颠沛流离，但读书做学问的事却从未懈怠。
English: At that time, it was the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when the rebels rose up, and he was displaced in the chaos of the war, but he never slackened in his reading and learning.

古文：太祖既定天下，诏修《元史》，征汸预其事。书成，辞归。未几卒，年五十有一。学者称东山先生。
现代文：太祖平定天下，诏修《元史》，汸被召去参与其事，书成即辞归，不久去世，年仅五十一岁，学者称他为 东山先生 。
English: The great-grandfather pacified the world, issued the edict to revise the "Ancient History," and Zou was summoned to participate in the matter. He resigned immediately after writing the edict, and died soon after, at the age of only fifty-one. Scholars call him Mr. Dongshan.

古文：陈谟，字一德，泰和人。
现代文：薛瑄，字德温，河津人。
English: Xue Qi, also known as Dewen, is a native of Kawazu.

古文：幼能诗文，邃于经学，旁及子史百家，涉流探源，辨析纯驳，犁然要于至当。
现代文：天资聪敏，初上私塾学堂，就攻读《诗》、《书》，并能背诵。其父薛贞任荥阳教谕时，瑄亦随行，这时年仅十二岁。
English: Tian Zi Congmin, who studied "Poetry" and "Books" in the private school at the beginning, and could recite them by heart. When his father, Xue Zhen, was teaching in Shiyang, Zou also accompanied him. He was only 12 years old at the time.

古文：隐居不求仕，而究心经世之务。
现代文：所做诗赋受到荥阳监司的赞赏。
English: The poems were highly appreciated by the Shenyang Supervisor.

古文：瑄补鄢陵学生，遂举河南乡试第一，时永乐十有八年也。
现代文：当得知高密魏希文、海宁范汝颢精于理学时，薛贞把他二人聘为薛瑄师傅。从此，瑄将所做诗赋全部焚毁，潜心于探究程颢、朱熹学说的渊源，以至于废寝忘食。
English: When it was learned that Gaomi Wei Xiwen and Haining Fan Ruchen were good at science, Xue Zhen hired the two of them to be Xue Yao's teachers. From then on, Yao burned all the poems he had written and concentrated on exploring the origins of Cheng Yao and Zhu Yao's teachings, so much so that he lost sleep and forgot to eat.

古文：明年成进士。以省亲归。居父丧，悉遵古礼。
现代文：后来其父调鄢陵为官，瑄成为鄢陵生员，永乐十八年，参加河南乡试，中第一名，第二年又中进士，因省亲归家。父亲去世，瑄完全按照古礼守丧。
English: Later, his father was transferred to be an official, and Zou became a member of Zou Mausoleum. In 18th year of Yongle, he participated in the Henan Township Examination, and won the first place in the middle school. In the second year, he was promoted to the middle school. He returned home because of his provincial relatives. When his father passed away, Zou held a funeral in full accordance with the ancient rituals.

古文：宣德中服除，擢授御史。
现代文：宣德年间守丧期满，授任御史。
English: In the year of Emperor Xuande's death, his term of office expired, and he was appointed Imperial Historian.

古文：三杨当国，欲见之，谢不往。
现代文：这时，杨士奇、杨荣、杨溥执政，想招见他，他不肯去。
English: At this time, Yang Shiji, Yang Rong and Yang Hui were in power and wanted to invite him, but he refused to go.

古文：出监湖广银场，日探性理诸书，学益进。
现代文：出朝监湖广银场，每天研究理学著作，学问更有进步。
English: He went out to supervise the Hukang Silver Mine, and studied scientific works every day, and his studies made more progress.

古文：以继母忧归。
现代文：因母亲去世，归家守丧。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he returned home to mourn.

古文：正统初还朝，尚书郭琎举为山东提学佥事。
现代文：正统初回朝，尚书郭举荐为山东提学佥事。
English: In the morning of the first day of the orthodoxy, Shang Shu Guo recommended Shandong to mention the study anecdote.

古文：首揭白鹿洞学规，开示学者。
现代文：他首先向学士宣布白鹿洞学规，亲自为学生讲课。
English: He first announced the White Deer Cave curriculum to the bachelors and personally lectured to the students.

古文：延见诸生，亲为讲授。才者乐其宽，而不才者惮其严，皆呼为薛夫子。
现代文：有才学的人感到他很宽厚，不肖者则惧怕他的严厉，都称他为 薛夫子 。
English: Talented people feel that he is very generous, while the unscrupulous fear his severity. They all call him "Xuefuzi."

古文：王振语三杨： 吾乡谁可为京卿者？ 
现代文：王振问三杨 ：吾乡谁可为京卿？ 三杨提出薛瑄。
English: Wang Zhen asked Sanyang: Who in my hometown can be the lord of Beijing? Sanyang suggested Xue Yao.

古文：以瑄对，召为大理左少卿。
现代文：于是召瑄为大理寺左少卿。
English: As a result, he was summoned to the position of the Left Minor Prelate of the Dali Temple.

古文：三杨以用瑄出振意，欲瑄一往见，李贤语之。瑄正色曰： 拜爵公朝，谢恩私室，吾不为也。 
现代文：三杨明白用瑄是王振的意思，欲要瑄去见王振，由李贤把这意图告诉薛瑄，瑄严肃地说： 朝廷拜官授爵，却去向私家谢恩，这样的事我不干。 
English: Sanyang understood that Wang Zhen meant to use. He wanted to go to see Wang Zhen with. Li Xian told Xue Ying about this intention. Xue Ying said solemnly: I will not do such a thing. I will not go to the court to give a knighthood to an official, but I will thank a private person.

古文：其后议事东阁，公卿见振多趋拜，瑄独屹立。振趋揖之，瑄亦无加礼，自是衔瑄。
现代文：其后凡在东阁议事，公卿们见振多打躬作揖，唯独薛瑄屹然不动，振去向他施礼，瑄也不还礼，从此王振对瑄怀恨在心。
English: After that, whenever there were deliberations in the East Pavilion, the nobles saw Zhen Duo bowing and prostrating, but Xue Yao stood still and bowed to him, and Zhe did not return the bow. From then on, Wang Zhen held a grudge against Zhe.

古文：指挥某死，妾有色，振从子山欲纳之，指挥妻不肯。妾遂讦妻毒杀夫，下都察院讯，已诬服。
现代文：某指挥去世，其妾美貌，王振的侄子王山欲纳为妾，指挥之妻不允，妾便诬陷指挥之妻毒杀亲夫，下都察院审讯，屈打成招。
English: A certain conductor passed away, his concubine was beautiful, Wang Zhen's nephew Wang Shan wanted to take her as his concubine, but the conductor's wife did not agree, so the concubine framed the conductor's wife to poison her husband, went to the court of investigation, and was beaten into submission.

古文：瑄及同官辨其冤，三却之。
现代文：瑄及同僚为指挥之妻申冤，三次都被驳回。
English: Zou and his colleagues appealed for justice for the conductor's wife, but their appeals were rejected three times.

古文：都御史王文承振旨，诬瑄及左、右少卿贺祖嗣、顾惟敬等故出人罪，振复讽言官劾瑄等受贿，并下狱。论瑄死，祖嗣等末减有差。
现代文：都御史王文秉承王振的旨意，诬劾瑄及左、右少卿贺祖嗣、顾惟敬等故意制造王山的罪名。王振又暗示谏官弹劾薛瑄等受贿，均被下狱，论瑄死罪，祖嗣等减刑惩处。
English: Wang Wen, the Grand Historian of the Capital, adhered to Wang Zhen's will and falsely accused Zou and the Left and Right Minor Lords He Zuzi and Gu Wei Jie of intentionally fabricating Wangshan. Wang Zhen also implied that the eunuchs impeached Xue Yu and others for taking bribes, and they were all sent to prison. On the crime of instigating death, Zouzi and others were given a reduced sentence.

古文：系狱待决，瑄读《易》自如。
现代文：瑄在狱中等待处决时，仍读《易》如故。
English: While waiting for his execution in prison, Zou still read Yi as before.

古文：子三人，愿一子代死，二子充军，不允。
现代文：薛瑄有三子，一子愿代父死，另二子愿充军以减父罪，均未被允准。
English: Xue Yao had three sons. One son wanted to die in place of his father, while the other two sons wanted to join the army to reduce their father's crime, but they were not allowed to do so.

古文：及当行刑，振苍头忽泣于爨下。问故，泣益悲，曰： 闻今日薛夫子将刑也。 
现代文：瑄行刑前，王振家奴在厨房哭泣，问他何故，他哭得更厉害，边哭边说： 听说今日薛夫子将要处斩。 
English: Before the execution, Wang Zhen Jia Nong cried in the kitchen. When asked why, he cried even harder and said, "I heard that Xue Fuzi will be executed today."

古文：振大感动。
现代文：王振为言所动。
English: Wang Zhen was moved by the speech.

古文：会刑科三覆奏，兵部侍郎王伟亦申救，乃免。
现代文：经刑科三次陈奏及兵部侍郎王伟的援救，免去了薛瑄的刑罚。
English: After three times of investigation by the criminal investigation department and the rescue of Wang Wei, the attendant of the military department, Xue Yao was exempted from the punishment.

古文：景帝嗣位，用给事中程信荐，起大理寺丞。
现代文：景帝即位，由于给事中程信的举荐，起任薛瑄为大理寺丞。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he appointed Xue Ye as the chancellor of Dali Temple due to the recommendation of the letter sent by Zhong Cheng.

古文：也先入犯，分守北门有功。
现代文：也先入侵，瑄守北门有功。
English: They also invaded first, and successfully defended the North Gate.

古文：寻出督贵州军饷，事竣，即乞休，学士江渊奏留之。
现代文：不久督贵州军饷，事毕后请求退休，学士江渊奏请留任。
English: Soon the governor of Guizhou Military Academy, after the event, asked to retire, and the bachelor Jiang Yuan Rong asked to remain in office.

古文：景泰二年，推南京大理寺卿。
现代文：景泰二年，瑄被推举为南京大理寺卿。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingtai, Zou was elected as the Lord of Nanjing Dali Temple.

古文：富豪杀人，狱久不决，瑄执置之法。
现代文：有一富豪杀了人，但久不判决，瑄依法处置。
English: There was a rich man who killed someone, but there was no verdict for a long time, and he was dealt with according to the law.

古文：召改北寺。
现代文：朝廷招他回京任北京大理寺卿。
English: The imperial court invited him back to Beijing to be the head of the Beijing Dali Temple.

古文：苏州大饥，贫民掠富豪粟，火其居，蹈海避罪。
现代文：苏州发生饥荒，贫民抢夺了富豪粮食，焚烧了他们的房屋，逃往海上。
English: Famine occurred in Suzhou. The poor robbed the rich of grain, burned their houses, and fled to the sea.

古文：王文以阁臣出视，坐以叛，当死者二百余人，瑄力辨其诬。文恚曰： 此老倔强犹昔。 
现代文：王文以阁臣职务巡视江南，定苏州饥民以反叛罪，拟处死二百余人。薛瑄竭力为饥民辩护，王文愤怒地说 ：这个老头还是像往日一样倔强。 
English: Wang Wen toured the southern part of the Yangtze River as a cabinet minister, sentenced the Suzhou famine victims to the crime of rebellion, and planned to execute more than 200 people. Xue Yao tried his best to defend the famine victims, and Wang Wen angrily said, "This old man is still as stubborn as ever."

古文：然卒得减死。
现代文：然而还是减了苏民的死刑。
English: However, Su Min's death sentence was reduced.

古文：帝数见瑄，所陈皆关君德事。
现代文：薛瑄多次告老还乡，不准。英宗复辟，拜薛瑄为礼部右侍郎兼翰林院学士，入内阁参预机务。
English: After the restoration of the Ying Zong Dynasty, Xue Yao was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department and a scholar of the Hanlin Academy, and he joined the cabinet as a member of the preparatory committee.

古文：已，见石亨、曹吉祥乱政，疏乞骸骨。
现代文：王文、于谦下狱，英宗令群臣讨论文、谦二人的罪行，石亨等主张对他们施以极刑。瑄见石亨、曹吉祥等败坏朝政，上疏呈请辞官归家。
English: When Wang Wen and Yu Qian were sent to prison, Emperor Yingzong ordered his courtiers to discuss the crimes of Wen and Qian, and Shi Heng and others proposed to impose capital punishment on them. Seeing that Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang had corrupted the imperial government, Emperor Gaoshu asked them to resign and return home.

古文：帝心重瑄，微嫌其老，乃许之归。
现代文：英宗内心本器重薛瑄，但嫌他年老，也就准予退休。
English: Yingzong's innermost self was very much like Xue Yao, but because he was old, he was allowed to retire.

古文：瑄学一本程、朱，其修已教人，以复性为主，充养邃密，言动咸可法。
现代文：薛瑄之学本于程朱，修身教人，以恢复人之本性为主，修养很深，言行均成典范。
English: Xue Yao's textbook was written by Cheng Zhu. He taught people how to cultivate themselves, focusing on the restoration of human nature. His cultivation was very deep, and his words and deeds were exemplary.

古文：尝曰： 自考亭以还，斯道已大明，无烦著作，直须躬行耳。 
现代文：他曾说： 自考亭朱熹以后，天理已十分明白，无须再有什么著述，只要身体力行就是了。 
English: He once said: Since Zhu Xi of the examination hall, the heavenly principle has been very clear that there is no need to write anything, as long as you do your best.

古文：有《读书录》二十卷，平易简切，皆自言其所得，学者宗之。
现代文：著有《读书录》二十卷，其文简明扼要，均是讲自己的心得，学者甚加尊崇。
English: He is the author of the "Book of Readings" in 20 volumes. His writings are concise and to the point, all of which are about his own experiences, and are highly respected by scholars.

古文：天顺八年六月卒，年七十有二。
现代文：瑄于天顺八年去世，终年七十二岁。
English: Xing died in Tianshun eight years later, at the age of 72.

古文：赠礼部尚书，谥文清。
现代文：朝廷赠礼部尚书，谥文清。
English: The Imperial Court presented the gift department with the Shang book, and the Xuan textbook with the Qing.

古文：弘治中，给事中张九功请从祀文庙，诏祀于乡。
现代文：弘治年间，给事中张九功奏请供奉于文庙，朝廷则诏令瑄故乡建祠祭祀。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Zhang Jiu's feats were enshrined in the Wen Temple, while the imperial court ordered the construction of an ancestral shrine in his hometown.

古文：已，给事中杨廉请颁《读书录》于国学，俾六馆诵习。
现代文：不久，给事中杨廉清颁《读书录》于国学，让六馆学习。
English: Not long after, Yang Lianqing presented the "Reading Record" to the students of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, allowing them to study in six halls.

古文：且请祠名，诏名 正学 。
现代文：还请朝廷恩赐祠名，朝廷诏名 正学 。
English: He also asked the imperial court to grant the name of the ancestral hall, and the imperial court issued the name of the school.

古文：弘治初，由国学生授保安州判官，有平允声。其教门人也，务以诚敬为本。胡居仁，字叔心，余干人。
现代文：隆庆六年，批准廷臣的请求，将薛瑄供奉于孔庙之中。其弟子中间有阎禹锡，也是一代名儒。胡居仁，字叔心，余干人。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, he approved the request of the courtier to enshrine Xue Yuxi in the Confucius Temple. Among his disciples was Yan Yuxi, also a famous Confucian. Hu Juerin, also known as Shushin, and Yu Gangren.

古文：闻吴与弼讲学崇仁，往从之游，绝意仕进。
现代文：闻知吴与弼在崇仁讲学，便去与之交游，而完全放弃做官的念头。
English: Hearing that Wu and Zou were lecturing in Chongren, they went to mingle with them and completely abandoned the idea of becoming officials.

古文：其学以主忠信为先，以求放心为要，操而勿失，莫大乎敬，因以敬名其斋。
现代文：他治学以忠信为先，以把握善心为要，随时保持戒慎之心，因而命名他的居室为 敬斋 。
English: He studied to be faithful first, to be good at heart, and to be cautious at all times, so he named his room "Jiezhai."

古文：端庄凝重，对妻子如严宾。
现代文：他为人端庄持重，对妻子相敬如宾。
English: He is dignified and dignified, and treats his wife with the utmost respect.

古文：手置一册，详书得失，用自程考。
现代文：时常备一记事册，详细记录自己言行的得失，用以做自我考察。
English: Always keep a record book, record in detail the gains and losses of your words and deeds, and use it for self-examination.

古文：鹑衣箪食，晏如也。
现代文：他生活简朴，破旧衣服，粗茶淡饭，安逸自如。
English: He lives a simple life, shabby clothes, coarse tea and light meals, and is at ease.

古文：筑室山中，四方来学者甚众，皆告之曰： 学以为己，勿求人知。 
现代文：虽住在山谷中，而四方前来求学的人甚多。他告诫他们 ：学是为了自己，而不是要显名于世。 
English: Although he lives in the valley, many people come from far and wide to study, and he cautions them: "Study for yourself, not to become famous."

古文：语治世，则曰： 惟王道能使万物各得其所。 
现代文：谈到治国安邦，他说： 唯行王道，才能使万物各得其所。 
English: Referring to the governance of the country, he said: "Only by following the royal path can everything be put in its place.

古文：所著有《居业录》，盖取修辞立诚之义。
现代文：所著《居业录》，是取 修辞立诚 之义。
English: The author's "Record of Residence" is a rhetoric of sincerity.

古文：每言： 与吾道相似莫如禅学。
现代文：他常说 ：与我的学理相似的莫如禅学。
English: He used to say, "There is nothing like Zen in my philosophy."

古文：后之学者，误认存心多流于禅，或欲屏绝思虑以求静。
现代文：后生学者误认为自我反省就会流于禅学，有的欲杜绝一切思念而求静。
English: Later-generation scholars mistakenly believe that self-reflection will flow into Zen, and some want to eliminate all thoughts and seek tranquility.

古文：不知圣贤惟戒慎恐惧，自无邪思，不求静未尝不静也。
现代文：殊不知圣贤唯有自我警戒，遇事谨慎，常存思惧之心，自然就没有邪念。这样不求静又何尝不静。
English: It is not widely known that sages and saints only need to be self-vigilant, prudent in dealing with things, and always have fear in their hearts, and naturally have no evil thoughts. In this way, they do not seek tranquility and are not calm.

古文：故卑者溺于功利，高者骛于空虚，其患有二：一在所见不真，一在功夫间断。 
现代文：故卑下之人沉溺于功利，高傲者不务实际，其弊端有二，一在所见不真，一在功夫间断。 
English: Therefore, those who are lowly indulge in utilitarianism, and those who are arrogant are unrealistic. There are two drawbacks: one is that what is seen is not true, and the other is that the gongfu is interrupted.

古文：尝作《进学箴》曰： 诚敬既立，本心自存。力行既久，全体皆仁。举而措之，家齐国治，圣人能事毕矣。 
现代文：曾做《进学箴》曰： 人们有了诚实敬戒之意，他天赋的善心就自然存在，长期身体力行，大家都有了仁爱之心，都见于行动，治家治国，就能完成圣人的事业。 
English: He once said in his "Principles for Further Study": "If people have the will to be honest and respectful, if their innate goodness exists naturally and they practice it for a long time, if everyone has a heart of benevolence, which can be seen in their actions, and if they govern their families and the country, they will be able to accomplish the cause of a saint.

古文：居仁性行淳笃，居丧骨立，非杖不能起，三年不入寝门。与人语，终日不及利禄。
现代文：居仁禀性淳厚诚实，居丧期间，身体非常虚弱，非扶杖不能起身，三年不回自己卧室，与人谈话从不涉及利禄。
English: Ju Ren is honest and honest. During the mourning period, his body is very weak, he can't get up without a cane, he hasn't returned to his bedroom for three years, and he never talks to people about Li Luo.

古文：与罗伦、张元祯友善，数会于弋阳龟峰。
现代文：他与罗论、张元祯友好，多次聚会于弋阳龟峰。
English: He was friendly with Luo Xuan and Zhang Yuanxuan, and they met many times at the Poyang Turtle Peak.

古文：尝言，陈献章学近禅悟，庄昶诗止豪旷，此风既成，为害不细。
现代文：他曾说，陈献章之学近于参禅悟道，庄昶的诗只是豪放无羁而已，此风一成，为害不小。
English: He once said that Chen Xianzhang's study was close to the way of enlightenment through meditation, and that Zhuangzi's poetry was just unbridled arrogance, which was harmful.

古文：又病儒者撰述繁芜，谓朱子注《参同契》、《阴符经》，皆不作可也。
现代文：认为一般儒生的毛病在于著述既多又杂，认为朱熹大可不必去注释《参同契》、《阴附经》这样道家的书。
English: He thought that the problem with general Confucianism was that there were too many and complicated writings, and that Zhu Xi didn't need to annotate Taoist books such as "Shandong Chi" and "Yin Zi Jing."

古文：督学李龄、钟成相继聘主白鹿书院。
现代文：督学李龄、钟成相继聘请他去主持白鹿书院。
English: Superintendents Li Ling and Zhong Cheng successively hired him to preside over the White Deer Academy.

古文：过饶城，淮王请讲《易传》，待以宾师之礼。
现代文：路过饶城时，淮王请他去讲解《易传》，待他如同贵宾、师长。
English: When passing through Raocheng, Huai Wang invited him to give a lecture on "Easy Transmission" and treated him as an honored guest and teacher.

古文：是时吴与弼以学名于世，受知朝廷，然学者或有间言。
现代文：当时吴与弼以其学问而著名于世，受到朝廷重视，然学者中也有说三道四的。
English: At that time, Wu and Zou were famous in the world for their learning and were highly valued by the imperial court. However, there were also some scholars who were not so enthusiastic.

古文：卒年五十一。
现代文：年五十一岁而逝。
English: He died at the age of 51.

古文：万历十三年从祀孔庙，复追谥文敬。
现代文：万历十三年供于孔庙随同祭祀。追谥文敬。
English: It has been offered at the Confucius Temple for 13 years.

古文：其弟子余祐最著。祐字子积，鄱阳人。
现代文：余祐，字子积，鄱阳人。
English: Yu Yu, the character Zizeki, is a Yang person.

古文：年十九，师事居仁，居仁以女妻之。
现代文：十九岁拜胡居仁为师，居仁将女儿许配给他。
English: Nineteen-year-old Bai Hu Jiu Ren was his teacher, and Jiu Ren promised his daughter to him.

古文：弘治十二年举进士。为南京刑部员外郎，以事忤刘瑾，落职。
现代文：于弘治十二年中进士，授南京刑部员外郎，因得罪太监刘瑾而落职。
English: In the 12th year of the Hongzhi era, he was promoted to the post of Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department member, and he was dismissed from his post for offending the eunuch Liu Yao.

古文：瑾诛，起为福州知府。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后，又起任祐为福州知府。
English: After Liu Ye was arrested, he was appointed as the governor of Fuzhou.

古文：镇守太监市物不予直，民群诉于祐。涕泣慰遣之，云将列状上闻。镇守惧，稍戢，然恚甚，遣人入京告其党曰： 不去余祐，镇守不得自遂也。 
现代文：镇守太监购物不付钱，民众向余祐控告，祐安慰他们，答应将此情形上报朝廷，镇守太监害怕了，稍有收敛，但却怀恨在心，遣人入京告诉其党羽： 不除去余祐，镇守什么事也办不通。 
English: The town guard eunuchs did not pay for their shopping, the people complained to Yu Yu, Yu comforted them, and promised to report the situation to the Imperial Court. The town guard eunuchs were afraid, slightly restrained, but held a grudge. They sent someone to Beijing to tell their party members: If Yu Yu is not removed, the town guards will not be able to do anything.

古文：然祐素廉，摭拾竟无所得。
现代文：但祐素来清廉，抓不到把柄。
English: But Yusuke is incorruptible and can't be caught.

古文：未几，迁山东副使。
现代文：不久，调任山东副使，父亲去世，归家守丧。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of deputy envoy to Shandong Province. His father passed away, and he returned home to mourn.

古文：父忧，服阕，补徐州兵备副使。
现代文：三年期满，起任徐州兵备副使。
English: At the end of the three-year term, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Xuzhou Bei Bei.

古文：中官王敬运进御物入都，多挟商船，与知州樊准、指挥王良诟。良发其违禁物，敬惧，诣祐求解，祐不听。
现代文：宦官王敬运宫廷所用之物入京，多挟持商船，因与知州樊准、指挥王良不和，王良揭发他携带违禁物品，王敬畏罪，去求祐为他解脱，祐不允。
English: The eunuch Wang Jingyun brought the things used by the court to Beijing, and held many merchant ships hostage. Due to discord with the Chizhou commander Wang Liang, Wang Liang revealed that he was carrying prohibited items, and Wang was afraid of the crime. He went to seek help for his release, but was not allowed.

古文：敬诬奏准等殴己，遂并逮祐，谪为南宁府同知。
现代文：敬诬奏樊准等殴打他，一并将余祐逮捕，被贬为南宁府同知。
English: He was beaten up by the hooligans such as Jing Gongjun, and Yusuke was arrested as well. He was relegated to being a common acquaintance in Nanning.

古文：稍迁韶州知府，投劾去。
现代文：稍后，调任韶州知府。他投呈自劾，辞官而去。
English: Later, he was transferred to the governor of Zhangzhou. He submitted a self-impeachment and resigned.

古文：嘉靖初，历云南布政使，以太仆寺卿召，未行，改吏部右侍郎，祐已先卒。
现代文：嘉靖初年调任云南布政使，因太仆寺召他回京而未成行，改为吏部右侍郎，此时，祐已去世。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, he was transferred to the post of Yunnan cloth envoy, but he did not go because he was called back to Beijing by Taipu Temple, and he was changed to the right hand man of the cadre department. At this time, Yu passed away.

古文：祐之学，墨守师说，在狱中作《性书》三卷。其言程、朱教人，专以诚敬入。学者诚能去其不诚不敬者，不患不至古人。
现代文：祐墨守其师胡居仁的学说，在狱中著《性书》三卷，其中说道，程朱专以 诚敬 二字教人，学者若真能去掉不诚不敬便可，否则不能达到古人的修养境界。
English: Yu Mo adhered to the teachings of his teacher, Hu Jueren, and wrote three volumes of "The Book of Sex" while in prison. In it, he said, "Cheng Zhuxuan teaches people with sincerity and respect. If scholars can truly get rid of dishonesty and disrespect, they can, otherwise they cannot reach the cultivation level of the ancients."

古文：时王守仁作《朱子晚年定论》，谓其学终归于存养。
现代文：当时王守仁著《朱子晚年定论》，认为朱子之学最终归于存心养性。
English: At that time, Wang Shouren wrote "The Conclusive Theory of Zhu Zi's Later Years" and believed that Zhu Zi's learning was ultimately attributed to the cultivation of mind and character.

古文：祐谓： 朱子论心学凡三变，存斋记所言，乃少时所见，及见延平，而悟其失。后闻五峰之学于南轩，而其言又一变。
现代文：余祐则认为 ：朱子论心学有三个阶段的变化，存斋记述他的话，是他年少时的见闻，后见到延平，才感到过去所说的不对，聆听五峰之学于南轩，其言论又有变化。
English: Yu Yu believes that: there are three stages of change in Zhu Zi's theory of psychology. He recorded his words by memorizing and recording what he saw and heard when he was young. It was only when he saw Yanping that he felt that what he had said in the past was wrong. Listening to Wu Feng's study in Nanxuan, his speech changed again.

古文：最后改定已发未发之论，然后体用不偏，动静交致其力，此其终身定见也。
现代文：最后改定了已发表或未发表的言论，然后本质与现象不偏废，动静交相作用，这就是朱熹最后的定论。
English: Finally, the published or unpublished remarks were revised, and then the essence and phenomenon were not biased, and the dynamic and static interacted. This was Zhu Xi's final conclusion.

古文：安得执少年未定之见，而反谓之晚年哉？ 
现代文：怎能把朱熹少年时的见识说成是晚年的定论？ 
English: How can the insight of Zhu Xi as a boy be said to be the conclusion of his later years?

古文：其辨出，守仁之徒不能难也。蔡清，字介夫，晋江人。
现代文：这种见解公开后，守仁的门徒也不敢非难。蔡清，字介夫，晋江人。
English: After this opinion was made public, Shujin's disciples did not dare to criticize it. Cai Qing, Zi Jiefu, Jinjiang people.

古文：少走侯官，从林玭学《易》，尽得其肯綮。
现代文：年少时到侯官，跟从林王比学《易》，尽得其精髓。
English: When he was a young man, he went to Hou Guan and learned "Yi" from Lin Wangbi, and got its essence.

古文：举成化十三年乡试第一。二十年成进士，即乞假归讲学。已，谒选，得礼部祠祭主事。
现代文：成化十三年乡试第一，二十年中进士，但不愿做官，请求归家讲学，而后选为礼部祠祭主事。
English: In the 13th year of Chenghua, he was the first to pass the township examination. In the 20th year, he was promoted to the middle school, but he did not want to be an official. He asked to return home to lecture, and then he was chosen to be the head of the ceremony.

古文：王恕长吏部，重清，调为稽勋主事，恒访以时事。
现代文：王恕主持吏部工作时，器重蔡清，调任稽勋主事。
English: When Wang Shou presided over the work of the cadre department, Cai Qing was given more responsibility and transferred to the main work of the inspector.

古文：清乃上二札：一请振纪纲，一荐刘大夏等三十余人。恕皆纳用。
现代文：清向王恕提出两条建议，一是整顿纪纲，一是荐举刘大夏等三十余人，恕均采纳。
English: Qing proposed two suggestions to Wang Shuguo, one was to rectify the syllabus, the other was to recommend Liu Daxia and more than 30 others, all of which were accepted.

古文：寻以母忧归，服阕，复除祠祭员外郎。乞便养，改南京文选郎中。
现代文：不久，因母亲去世归家守丧，三年期满复官任祠祭员外郎，后改任南京文选郎中。
English: Soon, due to the death of his mother, he returned home to stay and mourn, and after three years he was reinstated as the priest of the ancestral hall, and later he was reassigned to Nanjing Wenxuan.

古文：一日心动，急乞假养父，归甫两月而父卒，自是家居授徒不出。
现代文：有一天忽然心动，请求归家奉养父亲，回家仅两个月父亲便去世。从此居家教授学生，再不出来做官。
English: One day, he suddenly had a change of heart and asked to return home to take care of his father. Just two months after returning home, his father passed away. From then on, he taught students at home and could no longer work as an official.

古文：正德改元，即家起江西提学副使。
现代文：正德改元，起任他为江西提学副使。
English: Zhengde changed the era, and he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Jiangxi to raise the level of education.

古文：宁王宸濠骄恣，遇朔望，诸司先朝王，次日谒文庙。清不可，先庙而后王。
现代文：宁王宸濠骄横无忌，每月初一、十五，地方官员都先去朝拜宁王，次日才去文庙，清认为这样不妥，应该先文庙后宁王。
English: On the first day and the fifteenth day of every month, local officials went to pay homage to King Ning first, and only went to the Wen Temple the next day. Qing thought that this was not appropriate, and King Ning should go to the Wen Temple first.

古文：王生辰，令诸司以朝服贺。清曰 非礼也 ，去蔽膝而入，王积不悦。
现代文：宁王生辰，令各地方官员穿朝服去庆贺，清认为此不合礼制，只把平时系在衣服前的围裙解掉而前往参拜，宁王颇不高兴。
English: On the birthday of King Ning, local officials were ordered to wear imperial robes to celebrate. The Qing thought this was not proper etiquette, so they only took off the apron that was usually tied to the front of the robe and went to visit. King Ning was quite unhappy.

古文：会王求复护卫，清有后言。
现代文：宁王要求恢复护卫，清背后非议。
English: Ning Wang demanded that the escort be restored, and the Qing backed down.

古文：王欲诬以诋毁诏旨，清遂乞休。
现代文：宁王欲诬陷他诋毁诏旨，清则请求辞职归家。
English: Ning Wang wanted to frame him for slandering the imperial edict, while Qing Wang asked him to resign and return home.

古文：王佯挽留，且许以女妻其子，竞力辞去。
现代文：宁王假意挽留，并欲将自己的女儿许配给清之子为妻，清则坚决辞官而去。
English: Ning Wang pretends to stay, and wants to marry his daughter to Qing's son, but Qing resolutely resigns and leaves.

古文：刘瑾知天下议己，用蔡京召杨时故事，起清南京国子祭酒。
现代文：刘瑾知道天下人在非议自己，于是援用蔡京召杨时的故事，起用蔡清为南京国子祭酒。
English: Liu Wei knew that people around the world were criticizing him, so he used the story of Cai Jing summoning Yang Shi, and appointed Cai Qing as the Nanjing Guozi Festival liquor.

古文：命甫下而清已卒，时正德三年也，年五十六。
现代文：朝命刚下，而清已去世，这时是正德三年，寿终五十六岁。
English: At that time, Zhengde was three years old and his life expectancy was fifty-six.

古文：清之学，初主静，后主虚，故以虚名斋。
现代文：蔡清的学术思想，最初主张静，以后主张虚，故以虚为其斋名。
English: Cai Qing's academic thought initially advocated tranquility, and later advocated falsehood. Therefore, he took falsehood as his religious name.

古文：平生饬躬砥行，贫而乐施，为族党依赖。
现代文：清平生凡事必亲自实践，虽贫而好施舍，同族乡党都依赖于他。
English: He must personally practice everything in his life. Although he is poor, he is good at giving alms. His fellow villagers and the party all depend on him.

古文：以善《易》名。
现代文：他以精通《易》而著称。
English: He is known for his mastery of "Yi Cang."

古文：嘉靖八年，其子推官存远以所著《易经》、《四书蒙引》进于朝，诏为刊布。
现代文：嘉靖八年，其子推官存远将他所著《易经》、《四书蒙引》呈送朝廷，诏令刊刻流传于世。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, his son Su Yuan Yuan presented his works "I Ching" and "The Four Books" to the imperial court, and the edict was published and passed down to the world.

古文：万历中追谥文庄，赠礼部右侍郎。
现代文：万历中追谥文庄，赠礼部右侍郎。
English: He was a member of the Manchurian middle school, and the right hand man of the gift department.

古文：学士丰熙戍镇海，见烈，叹曰： 先生不言躬行，熙已心醉矣。 罗钦顺，字允升，泰和人。
现代文：其门人有陈琛、王宣、易时中、林同、赵逯、蔡烈，均为当时名儒。其中以陈琛最称著。罗钦顺，字允升，泰和人。
English: His disciples were Chen Qi, Wang Xuan, Yi Shizhong, Lin Tong, Zhao Qi, Cai Lei, all of whom were famous Confucianists at the time. Among them, Chen Qi was the most famous. Luo Qinshun, Zi Yun Sheng, Tai He Ren.

古文：弘治六年进士及第，授编修。
现代文：弘治六年进士，授编修。
English: Koji was promoted to the rank of Shinshi in his sixth year, and was awarded an editor's degree.

古文：迁南京国子监司业，与祭酒章懋以实行教士。
现代文：后迁调南京国子监司业。与祭酒章懋一同教导士子。
English: Later, he was transferred to Nanjing as the provincial overseer of the sons of the state. Together with the sacrificial wine, he taught the scholars.

古文：未几，奉亲归，因乞终养。
现代文：不久，送父母返乡，并请求在家奉养。
English: Soon after, he sent his parents back to their hometown and asked to be raised at home.

古文：刘瑾怒，夺职为民。
现代文：刘瑾大怒，削去钦顺官职，降为平民。
English: Outraged, Liu Bei stripped Qinshun of his official position and reduced him to a commoner.

古文：瑾诛，复官，迁南京太常少卿，再迁南京吏部右侍郎，入为吏部左侍郎。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后复官，调任南京太常寺少卿，再调任南京吏部右侍郎，回北京任吏部左侍郎。
English: After Liu Bei was executed, he was reinstated and transferred to the post of Nanjing Taizhong Temple Junior Secretary, and then transferred to the post of Right Attendant of the Nanjing Cadre, and returned to Beijing as the Left Attendant of the Cadre.

古文：迁南京吏部尚书，省亲乞归。
现代文：世宗即位，命他代理尚书。不久调任南京吏部尚书，为省亲请求回归故里。
English: When Shizong ascended to the throne, he ordered his deputy, Shang Shu, who was soon transferred to Nanjing to serve as Shang Shu's official, to plead for the provincial family to return to their hometown.

古文：改礼部尚书，会居忧未及拜。
现代文：后改任礼部尚书，这时正值父母去世，须在家守丧，未能赴任。
English: Later, he was reassigned to the Ministry of Ceremonies. At that time, his parents passed away, and he had to stay at home for the funeral, so he was unable to take up the post.

古文：再起礼部尚书，辞。
现代文：服丧期满，朝廷再起任他为礼部尚书，他辞谢而不就任。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the imperial court reinstated him as the ceremonial secretary, but he resigned and did not take office.

古文：又改吏部尚书，下诏敦促，再辞。
现代文：再改为吏部尚书，并下诏催促他赴任，他仍推辞。
English: He then changed his title to that of secretary and was urged to take the post by imperial edict, but he still declined.

古文：许致仕，有司给禄米。
现代文：最后，准许他退休，仍由地方政府按时付给禄米。
English: Finally, he was allowed to retire, and the local government continued to pay Lumi on time.

古文：时张〈王总〉、桂萼以议礼骤贵，秉政树党，屏逐正人。钦顺耻与同列，故屡诏不起。里居二十余年，足不入城市，潜心格物致知之学。
现代文：钦顺所以多次不肯奉诏赴任，因为当时有张璁、桂萼这班人执掌朝政，他们树立权势，排斥正人，钦顺耻于与他们同列。钦顺在家闲居二十余年，足不入城，潜于格物致知之学。
English: That is why Qinshun repeatedly refused to accept the imperial edict to take office, because at that time, Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai were in charge of the imperial government. They established their power and excluded the righteous. Qinshun was ashamed to be among them. Qinshun idled at home for more than 20 years, never venturing into the city, and immersed himself in the study of geometry.

古文：王守仁以心学立教，才知之士翕然师之。
现代文：王守仁创立 心学 ，一时间有才学的人，不约而同皆拜他为师。
English: Wang Shouren founded the school of thought, and people who had the ability to learn for a while all worshipped him as a teacher.

古文：钦顺致书守仁，略曰： 圣门设教，文行兼资，博学于文，厥有明训。
现代文：钦顺致书守仁说 ：圣人教化世人：既要研究学问，又要身体力行，学习各方面的知识，其教训是很清楚明白的。
English: Qin Shun said to Shuzo Ren, "A sage teaches the world: it is necessary to study knowledge, but also to practice, to learn all aspects of knowledge. The lesson is very clear.

古文：事事物物各得其理者，格物也。 
现代文：如果不向外界学习，而只在内心反省体验，则 正心诚意 四字无所不包，又何必于入门之际而忙着去研究各类事物呢？ 
English: If you do not learn from the outside world, but only reflect on the experience in your heart, then the word sincerity is all-encompassing, and why do you have to be busy studying all kinds of things at the time of entry?

古文：审如所言，则《大学》当云 格物在致知 ，不当云 致知在格物 ，与 物格而后知至 矣。 书未及达，守仁已殁。
现代文：王守仁回信说 ：理无内外，性无内外，故学无内外。讲习学问未尝不是内心之事，而内心反省体验也曾抛弃身外之物。 二人就 格物致知 与 正心诚意 这个传统主题进行反复辩论，直至王守仁去世。
English: Wang Shouren wrote back, "There is no inside and outside of reason, there is no inside and outside of sex, so there is no inside and outside of learning. The study of knowledge is not necessarily a matter of the heart, and the inner reflection experience has also abandoned the things outside of the body. The two of them repeatedly debated the traditional theme of knowledge and sincerity until Wang Shouren passed away.

古文：钦顺为学，专力于穷理、存心、知性。
现代文：钦顺的学术研究，专心致力于穷理、存心、知性这三个命题。
English: Qin Shun's academic research concentrates on the three propositions of poor reason, intention and intelligence.

古文：初由释氏入，既悟其非，乃力排之，谓： 释氏之明心见性，与吾儒之尽心知性，相似而实不同。
现代文：开始从佛学入手，后渐渐认识到佛学中的错误，便排斥佛学。他指出： 佛学之明心见性，与我儒学之尽心知性外表相似，而实质不同。
English: He started with Buddhism, but gradually realized the mistakes in Buddhism and rejected it. He pointed out: The clear-mindedness of Buddhism is similar in appearance to the thoroughness of my Confucianism, but the essence is different.

古文：释氏之学，大抵有见于心，无见于性。
现代文：佛学大抵有见于心，无见于性。
English: Buddhism is mostly concerned with the mind, not with sex.

古文：今人明心之说，混于禅学，而不知有千里毫厘之谬。
现代文：今人的明心之说，与佛家的禅学混为一谈，殊不知是差之毫厘失之千里。
English: The clear-mindedness of today's people is a thousand miles away from being confused with Buddhist Zen.

古文：道之不明，将由于此，钦顺有忧焉。 
现代文：道理不明就是因此而造成的，钦顺不能为之耽忧。 因著《困知记》。
English: It is because of this that the reason is unclear, and Qinshun cannot be worried about it.

古文：为著《因知记》，自号整庵。
现代文：钦顺自号整庵，享年八十三岁。
English: At the age of eighty-three, Qinshun retired from his position as a monk.

古文：年八十三卒，赠太子太保，谥文庄。
现代文：赠太子太保，谥文庄。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and the name of the village was changed to Shibenzhuang.

古文：曹端，字正夫，渑池人。
现代文：曹端，字正夫，渑池人。
English: Cao Duan, Zha Zhengfu, Zou Chi Ren.

古文：永乐六年举人。
现代文：永乐六年中举。
English: Yongle won the junior high school championship for the sixth time.

古文：五岁见《河图》、《洛书》，即画地以质之父。
现代文：五岁时见到《河图》、《洛书》，便去问他的父亲。
English: When he was five years old, he saw "Hetao" and "Luoshu" and asked his father about them.

古文：及长，专心性理。
现代文：长大后专心研究性理。
English: After growing up, he devoted himself to the study of nature.

古文：其学务躬行实践，而以静存为要。
现代文：他做学问必亲自实践，以求静心为要领。
English: When he studies, he must practice in person, and the key is to seek meditation.

古文：读宋儒《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭》，叹曰： 道在是矣。 
现代文：在读宋儒所著《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭》这些著作时，不禁感叹说： 道就在这些书里面。 
English: When reading "Taijiquan," "Tsunshu" and "Ximing" by Song Ru, I couldn't help but sigh and say, "The way is in these books."

古文：笃志研究，坐下著足处，两砖皆穿。
现代文：意志坚定地进行研究，坐位下踏脚的砖都被磨穿了。
English: Determined to carry out the research, the bricks under his feet were worn through.

古文：事父母至孝，父初好释氏，端为《夜行烛》一书进之，谓： 佛氏以空为性，非天命之性。
现代文：他对父母十分孝敬，父亲好佛学，他著《夜行烛》进呈父亲，其中说： 佛学以空为性，不是自然界赋予之性。
English: He was very respectful to his parents, and his father was fond of Buddhism. He wrote "Night Walking Candle" to show his father, in which he said, "Buddhism takes emptiness as its nature, not the nature given by nature.

古文：老氏以虚为道，非率性之道。 
现代文：老子是以虚为道，而不是引导人之本性发展的道。 
English: Lao Tzu took the way of illusion as the way, rather than the way of guiding the development of human nature.

古文：父欣然从之。
现代文：父亲十分欣赏他的见解。
English: His father appreciated his opinion very much.

古文：继遭二亲丧，五味不入口。
现代文：父母相继去世后，他在庐墓旁守丧六年。
English: After his parents died one after the other, he spent six years watching over their graves.

古文：既葬，庐墓六年。端初读谢应芳《辨惑编》，笃好之，一切浮屠、巫觋、风水、时日之说屏不用。上书邑宰，毁淫祠百余，为设里社、里谷坛，使民祈报。
现代文：端初读谢应芳的《辨惑编》，十分喜爱，便抛弃佛经、巫术、风水、时运之说。他上书本县县令，毁掉淫祠百余座，设立里社、里谷坛，让百姓祈祷丰年。
English: At the beginning of the year, he read Xie Yingfang's "Discernment Series," which he liked very much, so he abandoned Buddhist scriptures, witchcraft, feng shui, and fortune-telling. He wrote a book on county regulations, destroyed more than a hundred temples, set up a village shrine and a valley altar, and let the people pray for a good year.

古文：年荒劝振，存活甚众。
现代文：逢灾荒之年，劝官府赈济，使百姓免于死亡。
English: In the year of calamity, he advised the government to provide relief to the people so that they would not die.

古文：为霍州学正，修明圣学。诸生服从其教，郡人皆化之，耻争讼。
现代文：任霍山学正时，提倡孔孟之学，诸生听从其教诲，郡内之人都受到教化，以诉讼为耻。
English: Ren Huoshan studied at the right time, advocated Confucius and Mencius, and all sentient beings obeyed his teachings. People in the county were enlightened and were ashamed of litigation.

古文：知府郭晟问为政，端曰： 其公廉乎。公则民不敢谩，廉则吏不敢欺。 
现代文：知府郭晟问他如何治理政事，他说： 要公道廉洁，公道则民不会谩骂，廉正则衙吏不敢欺骗。 
English: Guo Wei, the prefectural governor, asked him how to manage political affairs. He said, "Be fair and honest. If you are fair, people will not abuse you. If you are honest, officials will not dare to deceive you."

古文：晟拜受。
现代文：晟恭敬地接受这个意见。
English: respectfully accept this opinion.

古文：遭艰归，渑池、霍诸生多就墓次受学。
现代文：他父母去世，渑池、霍州的生员都到他护守的墓边就学。
English: After the death of his parents, students from Dianchi and Huzhou went to his grave to study.

古文：服阕，改蒲州学正。
现代文：守丧期满，改任蒲州学正。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was reappointed as Puzhou Senior Lecturer.

古文：霍、蒲两邑各上章争之，霍奏先得请。
现代文：霍、蒲两县各上书争着要他。霍州先奏故至霍州。
English: The two counties of Huo and Pu were competing for him. Huozhou was the first to come to Huozhou.

古文：先后在霍十六载，宣德九年卒官，年五十九。
现代文：端在霍州先后十六年。于宣德九年去世，时年五十九岁。
English: He lived in Huzhou for 16 years. He died in Xuande nine years later, at the age of 59.

古文：诸生服心丧三年，霍人罢市巷哭，童子皆流涕。
现代文：诸生哀悼三年，霍山人民都为之哀悼，连童子都流泪。
English: Three years of mourning for all living beings, the people of Huoshan are mourning for it, even the boys are in tears.

古文：贫不能归葬，遂留葬霍。
现代文：因家贫不能运回家乡安葬，留葬霍州。
English: Due to his family's poverty, he could not be transported back to his hometown for burial, so he was buried in Huozhou.

古文：二子瑜、琛，亦户端墓，相继死，葬暮侧，后改葬渑池。
现代文：二子曹瑜、曹琛，在霍山守墓，相继去世。葬父亲墓侧，后来才迁回渑池。
English: The second son, Cao Yu and Cao Yao, died one after another while guarding the tomb in Huoshan. They buried their father's grave side by side, and later moved back to Dianchi.

古文：端尝言： 学欲至乎圣人之道，须从太极上立根脚。 
现代文：端曾说： 要学到圣人之道，须在太极上立脚根。 
English: Duan Zeng said: To learn the way of a sage, you must have a foothold in Taiji.

古文：又曰： 为人须从志士勇士不忘上参取。 
现代文：又说： 做人须为志士、勇士，不忘向上。 
English: He also said: To be a man, you must be a hero and a warrior, and not forget to improve.

古文：又曰： 孔、颜之乐仁也，孔子安仁而乐在其中，颜渊不违仁而不改其乐，程子令人自得之。 
现代文：又说： 孔子、颜渊乐于仁，孔子安于仁义而乐在其中，颜渊不违仁而致其乐，程子令人自得其乐。 
English: He also said: Confucius and Yan Yuan were both fond of benevolence. Confucius was satisfied with benevolence and enjoyed it. Yan Yuan enjoyed it without violating benevolence. Cheng Zi let people enjoy it.

古文：又曰： 天下无性外之物，而性无不在焉。
现代文：又说： 天下无性外之物，性无所不在，性就是理。
English: He also said: There is nothing in the world outside of sex, sex is everywhere, and sex is reason.

古文：性即理也，理之别名曰太极，曰至诚，曰至善，曰大德，曰大中，名不同而道则一。 
现代文：性的别名曰太极、曰至诚、曰至善、曰大德、曰大中，名不同而道则一。 
English: The sexual aliases are Tai Chi, Supreme Sincerity, Supreme Goodness, Great Virtue, and Great Middle School. The names are different, but the way is the same.

古文：初，伊、洛诸儒，自明道、伊川后，刘绚、李〈籥页〉辈身及二程之门，至河南许衡、洛阳姚枢讲道苏门，北方之学者翕然宗之。
现代文：当初，伊、洛诸儒，自程明道、程伊川之后，刘洵、李吁等人投入二程门下，元代河南许衡、洛阳姚枢讲道于苏门，北方之学者都奉为宗师。
English: At the beginning, Yi and Luo Zhu Ru, from Chengming Road and Chengyi River, Liu Wei, Li Huan, and others were under the tutelage of Ercheng. In the Yuan Dynasty, Henan Xu Heng and Luo Yang Yao Zu preached in Sumen, and scholars from the north were worshiped as the master.

古文：洎明兴三十余载，而端起崤、渑间，倡明绝学，论者推为明初理学之冠。所著有《孝经述解》、《四书详说》、《周易乾坤二卦解义》、《太极图说通书》《西铭》释文、《性理文集》、《儒学宗统谱》、《存疑录》诸书。
现代文：至明朝兴起三十余年，曹端崛起于崤、渑间，倡明这宏伟独到的学术，被当时人推为明初理学之冠，所著书有《孝经述解》、《四书详说》、《周易乾坤二卦解义》、《太极图说》、《通书》、《西铭》释文以及《性理文集》、《儒学宗统谱》、《存疑录》等。
English: In the more than thirty years since the rise of the Ming Dynasty, Cao Duan rose to prominence in and around Shandong, advocating this magnificent and unique academic discipline, which was considered by the people of the time to be the crown of Ming primatology. His books include "Introduction to the Filial Piety Sutra," "Detailed Explanation of the Four Books," "Introduction to Zhou Yi Qian Kun and the Two Guas," "Introduction to the Taiji Diagram," "Comprehensive Book," "Interpretation of the Western Inscription," as well as "Collection of Sexuality," "Confucianism Genealogy," "Questionnaire

古文：霍州李德与端同时，亦讲学于其乡。及见端，退语诸生曰： 学不厌，教不倦，曹子之盛德也。
现代文：霍州李德与端是同时人，也讲学于本乡，会见曹端后对诸生说： 学不厌，教不倦，乃曹子之盛德。
English: Huozhou Li De and Duan were contemporaries, and they also lectured in their hometown. After meeting Cao Duan, they said to all living beings: Never get tired of learning, never get tired of teaching, this is the great virtue of Cao Zi.

古文：至其知古今，达事变，末学鲜或及之。
现代文：他了解古今，通晓事变，我的学识很少能赶得上他的。
English: He understands the past and the present, and is well-versed in current affairs. My knowledge can rarely match his.

古文：古云 得经师易，得人师难 ，诸生得人师矣。 
现代文：古人云 得经师易，得人师难 ，你们已得到了 人师 。 
English: The ancients said, "It is easy to get a guru, but it is difficult to get a human guru. You already have a human guru."

古文：遂避席去。
现代文：拜辞而去。
English: He bowed and left.

古文：端亦高其行谊，命诸生延致之，讲明正学。初，端作《川月交映图》拟太极，学者称月川先生。
现代文：端也风格高尚，命诸生将李德请来讲学。曹端曾著有《川月交映图》，模拟太极，故学者称他为 月川先生 。
English: Cao Duan also has a noble style, and asks all living beings to read and learn from him. Cao Duan once wrote "Chuan Yue Junction Map" and simulated Tai Chi, so scholars call him Mr. Yuechuan.

古文：及殁，私谥静修。
现代文：去世后，被世人谥为静修。
English: After his death, he was forced by the world to go into seclusion.

古文：正德中，尚书彭泽、河南巡抚李桢请从祀孔子庙庭，不果。
现代文：正德年间，尚书彭泽、河南巡抚李桢都请求将曹端供奉于孔庙一同祭祀，这个请求未能实现。
English: During the Zhengde era, Shangshu Pengze and the Henan governor Li Xi both requested that Cao Duan be enshrined in the Confucius Temple, but this request was not fulfilled.

古文：吴与弼，字子传，崇仁人。
现代文：吴与弼，字子传，号康斋，崇仁人。
English: Wu and Zhai, Zizi Chuan, Gong Kangzai, Chong Ren Ren.

古文：父溥，建文时为国子司业，永乐中为翰林修撰。
现代文：父吴溥，建文时为国子司业，永乐年间为翰林修撰。
English: His father, Wu Xuan, was the Secretary of State at the time of the founding of the school, and during the Yongle Dynasty, he was the editor of Hanlin.

古文：与弼年十九，见《伊洛渊源图》，慨然响慕，遂罢举子业，尽读《四子》、《五经》、洛闽诸录，不下楼者数年。
现代文：与弼十九岁那年见到《伊洛渊源图》一书，非常仰慕。他不去参加科举考试，闭门尽读《四子》、《五经》及程朱的著作，数年不下楼。
English: When he was nineteen years old, he saw the book "Ilo Yuan Yuanpu" and admired it very much. He did not go to take the entrance examination, read "Four Sons," "Five Classics" and Cheng Zhu's works behind closed doors, and did not go downstairs for several years.

古文：中岁家益贫，躬亲耕稼，非其义，一介不取。
现代文：中年时，家境更贫，他参加耕稼，凡是不正当的利益，丝毫不取。
English: When he was middle-aged, his family was even poorer. He took part in farming and did not take any improper benefits.

古文：四方来学者，约己分少，饮食、教诲不倦。
现代文：对于四方前来求学的人，他教诲不倦。
English: He never tired of teaching those who came from far and wide to study.

古文：正统十一年，山西佥事何自学荐于朝，请授以文学高职。后御史涂谦、抚州知府王宇复荐之，俱不出。
现代文：正统十一年，山西佥事何自学向朝廷举荐，请授他文学高职，后来御史涂谦、抚州知府王宁又向朝廷荐举，他都不肯接受。
English: In the 11th year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, the self-taught scholar He Xizhi of Shanxi recommended him to the imperial court and asked him to grant him the high post of literature. Later, the imperial historian Tu Qian and the governor of Fuzhou, Wang Ning, also recommended him to the imperial court, but he refused to accept.

古文：尝叹曰： 宦官、释氏不除，而欲天下治平，难矣。 
现代文：他曾叹息说： 宦官、佛教不除掉，要想天下治理好，是困难的。 
English: He once said with a sigh, "If eunuchs and Buddhism are not eliminated, it will be difficult to govern the world well."

古文：景泰七年，御史陈述又请礼聘与弼，俾侍经筵，或用之成均，教育胄子。
现代文：景泰七年，御史陈述奏请朝廷聘请他为皇帝讲经，或在国子监讲学，教育贵族子弟。
English: In the seventh year of King Taejo's reign, the imperial court was asked to hire him as a scribe to the emperor, or as a tutor to educate the children of the nobility.

古文：诏江西巡抚韩雍备礼敦遣，竟不至。
现代文：朝廷诏令江西巡抚韩雍备礼聘请，他仍是不肯就职。
English: Han Yong Bei, the governor of Jiangxi Province, was appointed by imperial decree, but he still refused to take office.

古文：天顺元年，石亨欲引贤者为己重，谋于大学士李贤，属草疏荐之。
现代文：天顺元年，石亨打算召来一些贤者，以表示自己对他们的尊重，便与大学士李贤商议，嘱咐他起草奏疏，向皇帝推荐。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Shi Heng planned to summon some sages to show his respect for them, so he discussed with the university scholar Li Xian and ordered him to draft a report and recommend it to the emperor.

古文：于是召见文华殿，顾语曰： 闻处士义高，特行征聘，奚辞职为？ 
现代文：英宗命李贤起草诏书，遣行人曹隆带着礼物庄重地征召吴与弼上京。与弼到了朝廷，被授左春坊谕德之职，他上疏辞谢。
English: Emperor Yingzong ordered Li Xian to draft the imperial edict, and sent Cao Long with a gift to solemnly summon Wu and Zou to Beijing. Zou and Zou arrived at the imperial court and were given the post of Zuo Chunbo, but he declined the post.

古文：对曰： 臣草茅贱士，本无高行，陛下垂听虚声，又不幸有狗马疾。
现代文：皇帝在文华殿召见，问他为何辞职，回答说： 我不过是个贫贱之人，本无高深学问和高尚德行，陛下听到的并非真实情形，又不幸有好狗马的毛病。
English: Summoned by the emperor at the Palace of Literature, he was asked why he was resigning, and replied: "I am but a lowly man, lacking profound learning and high moral conduct. What Your Majesty has heard is not true, and unfortunately, I have a problem with good horses and dogs."

古文：束帛造门，臣惭被异数，匍匐京师，今年且六十八矣，实不能官也。 
现代文：朝廷令使臣带重礼来召我，臣惭愧地受到特殊优待，不能不勉力来到京师。我今年已六十八岁，实在不能为官。 
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to summon me with a heavy salute. The envoy was treated shamefully with special privileges, and I had to make an effort to come to Beijing. I am sixty-eight years old this year, and I really can't be an official.

古文：帝曰： 宫僚优闲，不必辞。 
现代文：英宗说 ：在宫中做官，事情不多，不必推辞。 
English: Yingzong said, "There are not many things to do as an official in the palace, so there is no need to refuse."

古文：赐文绮酒牢，遣中使送馆次。
现代文：赐锦缎酒食，遣宦官送回住处安息。
English: The eunuchs were given food and wine, and the officials sent them back to their homes to rest.

古文：顾谓贤曰： 此老非迂阔者，务令就职。 
现代文：并对李贤说： 此老头并非迂阔之人，务必令他就职。 
English: He also said to Li Xian: This old man is not a man of loose morals, he must be appointed to the post.

古文：贤请曲从放还，始终恩礼，以光旷举。
现代文：皇上对他待遇越优厚，他辞谢得越坚决，上疏说： 臣学术浅陋荒疏，如果冒昧受禄，必耽误公事。 皇帝不许。
English: The better the emperor treated him, the more resolute he became in his resignation. Shangzhu said, "A vassal's scholarship is shallow and desolate. If he dares to accept a reward, he will certainly delay his official duties. The emperor will not allow it."

古文：帝然之，赐敕慰劳，赍银币，复遣行人送还，命有司月给米二石。
现代文：与弼不得已，只有请求不穿朝服，仍住在馆舍中，借读于秘书阁。在京师留住了两月，因病力请回乡，在李贤的劝说下，皇帝同意了，派行人送还，命当地官府每月给与弼米二石。
English: As a last resort, he only had to request not to wear the imperial robe, but he still lived in the mansion and studied at the secretary's pavilion. He stayed in Beijing for two months and was asked to return to his hometown due to illness. Under the persuasion of Li Xian, the emperor agreed, sent the traveler back, and ordered the local government to give him two kilos of glutinous rice per month.

古文：与弼归，上表谢，陈崇圣志、广圣学等十事。
现代文：与弼回家后，上表称谢，并陈奏尊崇圣人之学说主张、广建学校等十事。
English: After returning home with Zou, the above table expressed thanks, and listed ten things such as the doctrines and propositions of respecting and venerating saints, and the construction of schools.

古文：成化五年卒，年七十九。
现代文：成化五年逝世，享年七十九岁。
English: Chenghua died five years later, at the age of 79.

古文：与弼始至京，贤推之上座，以宾师礼事之。编修尹直至，令坐于侧。
现代文：吴与弼初到京师，李贤推他上座，以尊敬师长之礼相待，而令编修尹直坐于侧。
English: When Wu and Zou first arrived in Beijing, Li Xian pushed him to the front seat, treating him with respect and courtesy, and ordered editor-in-chief Yin Zhi to sit at his side.

古文：直大愠，出即谤与弼。
现代文：尹直非常气愤，出来就诽谤与弼。
English: Yin Zhi was very angry and came out with slander and ridicule.

古文：及与弼归，知府张璝谒见不得，大恚。募人代其弟投牒讼与弼，立遣吏摄之，大加侮慢，始遣还。
现代文：与弼回到家乡，知府张王贵求见不得，很不高兴，募人代与弼的弟弟投文控告与弼，张王贵立即派人把与弼逮捕至府衙大加侮辱，然后送回。
English: When Zhang Wanggui returned to his hometown with Yao, the prefectural governor Zhang Wanggui could not meet him and was very unhappy. He recruited Yao's younger brother to submit a complaint against Yao. Zhang Wanggui immediately sent someone to arrest Yao to the prefectural governor, insulted him, and then sent him back.

古文：与弼谅非弟意，友爱如初。
现代文：与弼知道这不是出自其弟本意，仍与他友爱。
English: Knowing that this was not his brother's intention, Yan still had a friendly relationship with him.

古文：编修张元桢不知其始末，遣书诮让，有 上告素王，正名讨罪，岂容先生久窃虚名 语。直后笔其事于《琐缀录》。
现代文：编修张元桢不知张王贵诬陷与弼一事的始末，致书讥笑他，其中有 上告素王，正名讨罪，岂容先生久窃虚名 之语，尹直也把这件事写在《琐缀录》中。
English: The editor Zhang Yuanzhang did not know the beginning and end of Zhang Wanggui's frame-up and slander, and wrote a book mocking him. Among them were the words of appealing to Su Wang, justifying his name and asking for punishment, and Mr. Ning Rong stealing his false name for a long time. Yin Zhi also wrote about this matter in "Trivia."

古文：又言与弼跋亨族谱，自称门下士，士大夫用此訾与弼。
现代文：有人说与弼在为石亨族谱所写的《跋》中，自称 门下士 ，士大夫因此对与弼有非议。
English: Some people said that in "Taba," which was written for the Shiheng family tree, he called himself a corporal, so the shidafu criticized him.

古文：后顾允成论之曰： 此好事者为之也。 
现代文：后来顾允成指出 ：这是那些爱管闲事的人干的。 
English: Later, Gu Yuncheng pointed out: It was done by those meddlesome people.

古文：与弼门人后皆从祀，而与弼竟不果。
现代文：后来，吴与弼的学生都能入祠享受祭祀，而与弼却不能。
English: Later, both Wu and Zou's students could enter the ancestral hall to enjoy the sacrificial rites, but Zou's students could not.

古文：所著《日录》，悉自言生平所得。
现代文：所著《目录》，都是记录自己平生学问所得。
English: The "Catalogue" is a record of his lifelong learning.

古文：所著《易义发明》、《读史管见》、《观物余论》、《蛙鸣集》，多烬于火。陈真晟，字晦德，漳州镇海卫人。
现代文：其门人最著名的有胡居仁、陈献章、娄谅，其次是胡九韶、谢复、郑伉。陈真晟，字晦德，漳州镇海卫人。
English: The most famous of his disciples were Hu Jueren, Chen Xianzhang, and Zhaopeng, followed by Hu Jiuyuan, Xie Fu, and Zheng Yao. Chen Zhenyao, Zhi Yu De, was the guardian of the Luzhou coast.

古文：初治举赴乡试，闻有司防察过严，无待士礼，耻之弃去，由是笃志圣贤之学。
现代文：最初参加乡试时，听说官府防察过严，不按礼节对待士人，深以为耻辱，激愤之下拒绝参加考试，从此潜心圣贤之学。
English: When he first took part in the township examination, he heard that the government was too strict in its prevention and inspection and did not treat scholars according to etiquette. He was deeply ashamed and refused to take part in the examination out of indignation. Since then, he has devoted himself to the study of sages.

古文：读《大学或问》，见朱子重言主敬，知 敬 为《大学》始基。
现代文：读《大学或问》，见朱子反复强调主敬，乃知 敬 为《大学》的起点和基础。
English: Reading "University or Question," see Zhu Zi repeatedly emphasized the main respect, but knowledge and respect are the starting point and foundation of "University."

古文：又得程子主一之说，专心克治，叹曰： 《大学》，诚意为铁门关，主一二字，乃其玉钥匙也。 
现代文：又得程子 主一 之说，便专心研究，他说 ：《大学》的诚意是铁门关， 主一 二字是开关的玉钥匙。 
English: He said: "The sincerity of "University" is the iron gate, and the word "Master" is the key to the switch.

古文：天顺二年诣阙上《程朱正学纂要》。
现代文：天顺二年至朝廷呈送其《程朱正学纂要》。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, he submitted his "Cheng Zhu Zheng Xue Guan Yu" to the imperial court.

古文：其书首取程氏学制，次采朱子论说，次作二图，一著圣人心与天地同运，一著学者之心法天之运，终言立明师、辅皇储、隆教本数事，以毕图说之意。
现代文：该书首先采用程氏学说的体制，其次采取朱子的论述，再次做二图，一图说明圣人的思维随天地一同运行，一图说明治学的思想要遵循天地运行规律，最终落脚于推举贤明导师，辅助太子，重视教育。
English: The book firstly adopts the system of Cheng's doctrine, secondly adopts Zhu Zi's exposition, and again draws two pictures. One picture shows that the sage's thinking runs together with heaven and earth, and the other picture shows that the thought of governing learning wants to follow the laws of heaven and earth. In the end, it is based on the election of a wise mentor, an auxiliary prince, and attaches importance to education.

古文：书奏，下礼部议，侍郎邹干寝其事。
现代文：朝廷命礼部讨论书中的建议，但为侍郎邹干搁置不办。
English: The Imperial Household Agency's Ceremonial Department discussed the proposal in the book, but did not put it on hold for the sake of the attendants.

古文：真晟归，闻临川吴与弼方讲学，欲就问之。过南昌，张元祯止之宿，与语，大推服曰： 斯道自程、朱以来，惟先生得其真。如康斋者，不可见，亦不必见也。 
现代文：真晟回到家中，闻知临川吴与弼在本乡讲学，便去请教，路过南昌在张元祯家留宿，俩人谈论后，元祯大加推崇，对他说： 圣人之道，自程朱以后，只有先生得其真义，至于康斋，不可求见，也不必求见。 
English: After returning home, when he heard that Linchuan Wu and Zou were lecturing in his hometown, he went to ask for advice. Passing Nanchang, he stayed at Zhang Yuanxuan's house. After the two had a discussion, Yuanxuan highly respected him and said to him: Since Cheng Zhu, only the master can obtain the true meaning of the sage's way. As for Kangzai, he cannot seek it, and he does not have to seek it.

古文：遂归闽，潜思静坐，自号漳南布衣。
现代文：于是他又折回福建，深思静坐，自号 漳南布衣 。
English: So he returned to Fujian, meditated deeply, and called himself "Shennan Buyi."

古文：卒于成化十年，年六十四。
现代文：成化十年逝世，终年六十四岁。
English: Chenghua died ten years ago, aged sixty-four.

古文：真晟学无师承，独得于遗经之中。
现代文：真晟没有拜过师，只是从流传下来的经书中得到学问。
English: Manchu did not have a teacher, but learned from the scriptures that had been passed down.

古文：自以僻处海滨，出而访求当世学者，虽未与与弼相证，要其学颇似近之。
现代文：他自己感到居于海滨偏僻之地，应出去访求当世学者，虽未同吴与弼讨论过学问，但二人学说颇相近似。
English: He himself felt that he lived in a remote place on the coast and should go out to visit contemporary scholars. Although he had not discussed learning with Wu and Zou, their doctrines were quite similar.

古文：吕柟，字仲木，高陵人，别号泾野，学者称泾野先生。
现代文：吕柟，字仲木，高陵人，别号泾野，学者称他 泾野先生 。
English: Lv Ying, surnamed Zhong Mu, a native of Gaoling, alias Sheng Ye, scholars call him Mr. Sheng Ye.

古文：正德三年登进士第一，授修撰。
现代文：正德三年中进士第一，授修撰。
English: Zhengde was the first to be promoted to a scholar in the third year of middle school.

古文：刘瑾以柟同乡欲致之，谢不往。
现代文：刘瑾与吕柟同乡，想召他去，柟推辞不去。
English: Liu Ye is a fellow villager of Lv Ye. If you want to call him to go, don't refuse to go.

古文：又因西夏事，疏请帝入宫亲政事，潜消祸本。瑾恶其直，欲杀之，引疾去。瑾诛，以荐复官。
现代文：瑾恼恨柟为人正直，欲杀他而后快，柟称病辞官而去，直到刘瑾被诛后，才由人荐举复其官职。
English: He resented the fact that Liu Xuan was an honest man, wanted to kill him, and then quickly resigned, claiming to be ill. It was only after Liu Xuan was arrested that he was recommended to resume his official position.

古文：乾清宫灾，应诏陈六事，其言除义子，遣番僧，取回镇守太监，尤人所不敢言。
现代文：乾清宫发生火灾，柟应诏陈奏六事，其中说要除去义子，遣散番僧，取回镇守太监，这些都是别人不敢说的话。
English: When a fire broke out in the Qianqing Palace, the emperor issued an edict and announced six things, including the removal of the godson, the dismissal of the monk, and the return of the town guard eunuch. These are words that others dare not say.

古文：是年秋，以父病归。
现代文：这年秋，因父病辞职归家。
English: In the autumn of that year, he resigned due to his father's illness and returned home.

古文：都御史盛应期，御史朱节、熊相、曹珪累疏荐。适世宗嗣位，首召柟。
现代文：由于都御史盛应期，御史朱节、熊相、曹皀等多次上书举荐，世宗即位后首先召柟回朝。
English: Due to the auspicious period of the capital's imperial history, imperial historians Zhu Jie, Xiong Xiang, Cao Pi, and others repeatedly submitted letters of recommendation, and Sejong was the first to recall Sejong back to the dynasty after he ascended the throne.

古文：上疏劝勤学以为新政之助，略曰： 克己慎独，上对天心；亲贤远谗，下通民志，庶太平之业可致。 
现代文：柟上疏劝皇上勤学，以促进新政，其中说 ：严格要求自己，即使独处而无人注意时，也要谨慎不苟；对上能符合天意，亲贤人远谗言，对下与百姓心心相通，这样才可以使天下太平。 
English: He advised the emperor to study hard in order to promote the New Deal. He said, "Strictly demand of yourself that even when you are alone and no one is paying attention, you should be cautious. Only in this way can you make the world peaceful.

古文：大礼议兴，与张、桂忤。
现代文：在讨论登基大礼问题上，与张桂意见不合。
English: On the issue of discussing the enthronement ceremony, he disagreed with Zhang Gui.

古文：以十三事自陈，中以大礼未定，谄言日进，引为己罪。
现代文：他自陈十三事，其中说大礼未定，而向皇上说奉承话日多，皇上应引为己罪。
English: He recited thirteen things, one of which was that the grand salute was undecided, but he said more flattering words to the emperor, and the emperor should be held responsible.

古文：上怒，下诏狱，谪解州判官，摄行州事。
现代文：世宗大怒，将他下狱，贬为解州判官，代行州事。
English: Sejong was so angry that he sent him to prison and demoted him to the position of judge of the court of appeals, acting on behalf of the state.

古文：恤茕独，减丁役，劝农桑，兴水利，筑堤护盐池，行《吕氏乡约》及《文公家礼》，求子夏后，建司马温公祠。
现代文：吕柟在解州抚恤那些孤独无靠的人，鼓励发展农桑，兴修水利，筑堤保护盐池。推行《吕氏乡约》及《文公家礼》，寻求子夏的后裔，建立司马温公的祠堂等等。
English: In Luzhou, Lv Ying gave alms to those who were lonely and helpless, encouraged the development of agricultural mulberry, built water conservancy, built dikes to protect salt ponds, promoted the "Lv's Hometown Covenant" and "Civil Rites," sought descendants of Zixia, established the ancestral hall of Sima Wengong, and so on.

古文：四方学者日至，御史为辟解梁书院以居之。
现代文：四方学者前来的日多，御史将解梁书院给他们居住。
English: When scholars from the four directions came to Japan, Goshi decided to open the Liang Academy for them to live in.

古文：三年，御史卢焕等累荐，升南京宗人府经历，历官尚宝司卿。
现代文：嘉靖三年，御史卢焕等又多次向朝廷举荐，因而升任南京宗人府经历，后调任尚宝司卿。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was repeatedly recommended to the imperial court by Goshilohan and others, and thus was promoted to the Nanjing Patriarchate, after which he was transferred to the post of Shangbao Secretary.

古文：吴、楚、闽、越士从者百余人。
现代文：吴、越、闽、楚的学士随从他的有百余人。
English: He was accompanied by more than a hundred scholars from Wu, Yue, Zhai and Chu.

古文：晋南京太仆寺少卿。
现代文：后晋升为南京太仆寺少卿。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Nanjing Dapu Temple Junior Secretary.

古文：太庙灾，乞罢黜，不允。
现代文：太庙火灾，自己请求罢官，未准。
English: After the fire at the Imperial Temple, he asked to be removed from his post, but was not allowed.

古文：选国子监祭酒，晋南京礼部右侍郎，署吏部事。
现代文：选为国子监祭酒，晋升为南京礼部右侍郎，兼理吏部事。
English: He was selected to be the provincial overseer of the festival wine, promoted to the right hand man of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and concurrently held the position of the head clerk.

古文：帝将躬祀显陵，累疏劝止，不报。
现代文：世宗要亲自祭祀显陵，柟多次上疏劝阻，但奏疏未呈于皇帝。
English: Sejong wanted to personally perform a ritual to reveal the mausoleum, but was repeatedly dissuaded by the emperor. However, Sejong did not present it to the emperor.

古文：解梁及四方学者闻之，皆设位，持心丧。
现代文：这时天象发生剧变，他乘时呈请辞官归家，六十四岁逝世。为哀悼他，高陵人关门闭户三天。解梁及四方学者闻耗，皆设灵位哀念。
English: At this time, a drastic change occurred in the celestial appearance. He took the opportunity to submit his resignation and return home, and died at the age of 64. In order to mourn him, the people of Goryeong closed their doors for three days. The scholars of Jie Liang and Sifang felt the loss, and all set up a spiritual place to mourn.

古文：讣闻，上辍朝一日，赐祭葬。
现代文：世宗闻知，辍朝一日，赐祭葬。
English: Sejong Wenshi, who died the day before, was given a ceremonial funeral.

古文：柟受业渭南薛敬之，接河东薛瑄之传，学以穷理实践为主。官南都，与湛若水、邹守益共主讲席。
现代文：柟受业于渭南薛敬之，承接河东薛蠧的学术思想。其学以探求道理付诸实践为主，在南京做官时，与湛若水、邹守益共同主持讲座。
English: He received his education from Southern Xue Jingshi, inheriting the academic thought of Eastern Xue Jingshi. His study was mainly to explore the truth and put it into practice. When he was an official in Nanjing, he co-chaired a lecture with Zhan Ruoshui and Zou Shouyi.

古文：仕三十余年，家无长物，终身未尝有惰容。
现代文：做官三十余年，家无一件像样的东西，但终身没有怠惰的神情。
English: As an official for more than 30 years, there is not a single decent thing in my family, but I have never been lazy.

古文：时天下言学者，不归王守仁，则归湛若水，独守程、朱不变者，惟柟与罗钦顺云。
现代文：当时天下讲学术的人，不是归于王守仁一派，就是归于湛若水一派，而坚持程朱思想不变的，只有吕柟与罗钦顺二人。
English: At that time, the world's academic people either belonged to the Wang Shouren school or the Zhan Ruo Shui school, but only Lv Ying and Luo Qin Shun adhered to the unchanging Cheng Zhu thought.

古文：所著有《四书因问》、《易说翼》、《书说要》、《诗说序》、《春秋说志》、《礼问内外篇》、《史约》、《小学释》、《寒暑经图解》、《史馆献纳》、《宋四子抄释》、《南省奏藁》、《泾野诗文集》。
现代文：其著作有：《四书因问》、《易说翼》、《书说要》、《诗说序》、《春秋说志》、《礼问内外篇》、《史约》、《小学释》、《寒暑经图解》、《史馆献纳》、《宋四子抄释》、《南省奏稿》、《经野诗文集》。
English: His works include: "Four Books on Questions," "Easy to Say Wings," "Books to Say," "Poetry to Say," "Spring and Autumn Stories," "Internal and External Questions," "History," "Elementary School Explanation," "Summer and Winter Classic Illustration," "History Museum Donation," "Song of the Four Sons Interpretation," "Southern Song" and "Collection of Field Poems."

古文：蓝田王之士，字欲立。由举人以赵用贤荐，授国子博士。
现代文：万历、崇桢年间，李祯、赵锦、周子义、王士性、蒋德瞡等人，先后奏请将柟供奉于孔庙内一同祭祀。
English: During the years of Wanli and Chongzhen, Li Qian, Zhao Jin, Zhou Ziyi, Wang Shixing, Jiang Deqi and others successively played the gong and offered it to the Confucius Temple for worship.

古文：两人不及柟门，亦秦士之笃学者也。邵宝，字国贤，无锡人。
现代文：朝廷下礼部讨论，但已来不及付诸实行。其弟子有泾阳吕潜、张节，咸宁李挺等，皆有学问、德行。邵宝，字国贤，无锡人。
English: The ceremonial department under the imperial court discussed it, but it was too late to put it into practice. His disciples included Shanyang Lyu Qian, Zhang Jie, Xianning Li Ting, and others, all of whom were learned and virtuous. Shao Bao, also known as Guoxian, was from Wuxi.

古文：年十九，学于江浦庄昶。成化二十年举进士，授许州知州。
现代文：十九岁师从江浦庄昶，成化二十年中进士，授许州知州。
English: Nineteen-year-old teacher from Jiangpu Zhuangzi, twenty-year-old junior high school student, awarded the title of Zhizhou.

古文：月朔，会诸生于学宫，讲明义利公私之辨。
现代文：每月初一，在学宫招集诸生，讲明义利、公私之辨。
English: On the first day of every month, all the students are summoned to the palace for a lecture on the distinction between righteousness and benefit, and between public and private life.

古文：正颍考叔祠墓。改魏文帝庙以祠汉愍帝，不称献而称愍，从昭烈所谥也。
现代文：他考正春秋时人颍考叔的祠墓地点，并将魏文帝庙改为汉愍帝祠，不称献帝而称愍帝，这是遵从汉昭烈帝刘备所尊的谥号。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, he examined the location of the ancestral tomb of Emperor Gaokao, and changed the Weiwen Temple to the Han Dynasty Ancestral Shrine. Instead of calling it Emperor Gao, it was called Emperor Gao, which was the nickname of Emperor Liu Bei.

古文：巫言龙骨出地中为祸福，宝取骨，毁于庭，杖巫而遣之。
现代文：有巫师说地下出现龙骨会有祸、福降临，故弄玄虚，邵宝将 龙骨 当众毁掉，杖打巫师，将其驱逐。
English: Some sorcerers said that if the keel appeared underground, it would bring misfortune and good fortune, so they invented the myth. Shao Bao destroyed the keel in public, beat the sorcerer with a stick, and expelled him.

古文：躬课农桑，仿朱子社仓，立积散法，行计口浇田法，以备凶荒。
现代文：他亲自考查农业生产状况，仿朱子社仓，建立粮食的积散制度，实行计口浇田法，以备灾荒。
English: He personally inspected the state of agricultural production, imitated Zhuzi's warehouse, established a system of grain accumulation and dispersal, and implemented the method of sowing fields in order to prepare for natural disasters.

古文：弘治七年入为户部员外郎，历郎中，迁江西提学副使。
现代文：弘治七年回朝任户部员外郎，后任郎中，又出任江西提学副使。
English: In the seventh year of the Hongzhi dynasty, he was appointed as a member of the household department, and later as a junior vassal, and also served as a deputy envoy to Jiangxi to study.

古文：释菜周元公祠。修白鹿书院学舍，处学者。
现代文：在江西，他祭祀周元公祠，修白鹿书院学舍，安置学士。
English: In Jiangxi Province, he dedicated the Zhouyuan Public Shrine, renovated the White Deer Academy dormitory, and resettled undergraduates.

古文：其教，以致知力行为本。
现代文：其教育思想以求知实践为本。
English: Its educational philosophy is based on the pursuit of knowledge and practice.

古文：江西俗好阴阳家言，有数十年不葬父母者。
现代文：江西地方风俗好听阴阳家的话，以致有父母死后数十年不葬者。
English: Local customs in Jiangxi Province are inclined to listen to yin and yang, so much so that there are people who do not bury their parents for decades after their death.

古文：宝下令，士不葬亲者不得与试，于是相率举葬，以千计。
现代文：邵宝下令：凡士子不葬父母者不能参加科举考试。于是相继安葬双亲者数以千计。
English: Shao Bao decreed that ordinary people who did not bury their parents could not take part in the imperial examinations. As a result, thousands of people buried their parents one after another.

古文：宁王宸濠索诗文，峻却之。
现代文：宁王宸濠欲求他的诗文，被严厉拒绝。
English: Ning Wangtao asked for his poem and was sternly refused.

古文：后宸濠败，有司校勘，独无宝迹。
现代文：后宸濠谋反失败，官府清查他的文书，唯独没有邵宝的片纸只字。
English: Hou Yi's countermeasures failed, and the government investigated his documents, but there was no word of Shao Bao's piece of paper.

古文：迁浙江按察使，再迁右布政使。
现代文：后调任浙江按察使，再升为右布政使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of inspector of Zhejiang Province, and then promoted to the post of political envoy of the right cloth.

古文：与镇守太监勘处州银矿，宝曰： 费多获少，劳民伤财，虑生他变。 
现代文：在与镇守太监勘察处州银矿时提出 ：开银矿耗费多收获少，劳命伤财，恐怕会引发其他事变。 
English: When exploring the state silver mine with the town guard eunuch survey office, he proposed that the opening of the silver mine would cost more and yield less, and that it would cost lives and money, and would probably lead to other incidents.

古文：卒奏寝其事。
现代文：奏请终止其事。
English: He requested that the matter be terminated.

古文：进湖广布政使。
现代文：晋升为湖广布政使。
English: He was promoted to the post of political envoy of Hubei Province.

古文：正德四年擢右副都御史，总督漕运。
现代文：正德四年升为右副都御史，总督漕运。
English: Zhengde was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital in the fourth year, and became the governor.

古文：刘瑾擅政，宝至京，绝不与通。
现代文：刘瑾独揽政权，邵宝在京师绝不与他往来。
English: Liu Bei was in sole control of the political power, and Shao Bao never had any dealings with him in Beijing.

古文：瑾怒漕帅平江伯陈熊，欲使宝劾之，遣校尉数辈要宝左顺门，危言恐之曰： 行逮汝。 张彩、曹元自内出，语宝曰： 郡第劾平江，无后患矣。 
现代文：瑾对漕帅平江伯陈熊十分不满，想要邵宝出面弹劾，遣校尉数人去把邵宝邀到左顺门，对他进行威胁，张彩、曹元自内出来对邵宝说： 你弹劾了平江伯，以后就没事了。 
English: Zhai was very dissatisfied with the commander of Pingjiang District, Chen Xiong. He wanted Shao Bao to come forward to impeach him. He sent several school lieutenants to invite Shao Bao to Zuoshun Gate and threaten him. Zhang Cai and Cao Yuan came out from inside and said to Shao Bao: You have impeached Pingjiang District, everything will be fine in the future.

古文：宝曰： 平江功臣后，督漕未久，无大过，不知所劾。 
现代文：宝回答说： 平江伯是功臣之后，他总督漕运不久，没有大的过失，不知弹劾他什么。 
English: Bao replied, "After Pingjiangbo was a meritorious vassal, he was governor for a short time. He didn't commit any major mistakes, so I don't know what to impeach him for.

古文：二人默然出。越三日，给事中劾熊并及宝，勒致仕去。
现代文：张、曹二人哑口无言，过了三天，给事中弹劾陈熊和邵宝，勒令他辞官返家。
English: Zhang and Cao were speechless. Three days later, Chen Xiong and Shao Bao were impeached and ordered to resign and return home.

古文：瑾诛，起巡抚贵州，寻迁户部右侍郎，进左侍郎。命兼左佥都御史，处置粮运。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后，朝廷又起用邵宝，巡抚贵州，不久调任户部右侍郎，进升左侍郎，又命他兼左佥都御史，处置粮运事宜。
English: After Liu Bei was executed, the imperial court appointed Shao Bao as the governor of Guizhou, and soon he was transferred to the position of the right attendant of the household, promoted to the left attendant, and ordered him to be the left attendant of the capital to deal with grain transportation matters.

古文：及会勘通州城濠归，奏称旨。寻疏请终养归，御史唐凤仪、叶忠请用之留都便养，乃拜南京礼部尚书，再疏辞免。
现代文：又参与联合勘察通川城濠。不久，奏请回家奉养父母，御史唐凤仪、叶忠等奏请留用，于是拜为南京礼部尚书。他再次上疏辞职。
English: He also participated in the joint survey of Tongchuan Castle. Soon, he was asked to go back home to support his parents, and the goshi Tang Fengyi, Ye Zhong and other musicians were asked to stay, so he became the Nanjing Ceremonial Department. He resigned again.

古文：世宗即位，起前官，复以母老恳辞。
现代文：世宗即位，起任前官，他再次恳请辞职，回家奉养老母，世宗允准。
English: When Sejong ascended to the throne and assumed the post of prefect, he once again earnestly asked to resign and return home to serve his elderly mother. Sejong agreed.

古文：许之，命有司以礼存问。久之卒，赠太子太保，谥文庄。
现代文：以后逝于家中，赠太子太保，谥文庄。
English: Afterward, he died at home, and was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and Shibunzhuang.

古文：宝三岁而孤，事母过氏至孝。
现代文：邵宝三岁丧父，对母亲过氏至孝。
English: Shao Bao lost his father at the age of three, and was very close to his mother.

古文：甫十岁，母疾，为文告天，愿减己算延母年。
现代文：刚十岁时，母亲有病，他撰文祝告天地，愿减短自己的生命而使母亲益寿延年。
English: When he was just ten years old, his mother was ill, and he wrote a wish to heaven and earth, wishing to shorten his own life so that his mother could live longer.

古文：及终养归，得疾，左手不仁，犹朝夕侍亲侧不懈。
现代文：后来辞官归家奉养母亲时，他左手已麻木，但仍从早到晚侍奉母亲，从不懈怠。
English: Later, when the diplomat returned home to support his mother, his left hand was numb, but he still served his mother from morning to night, never slacking.

古文：博综群籍，有得则书之简，取程子 今日格一物，明日格一物 之义，名之曰日格子。
现代文：其学问以程朱之学为本，曾说： 我愿做个名符其实的士大夫，不愿为假道学。 年轻时在南畿中举，受到李东阳的赏识。其诗文典雅，效法东阳。他博览群书，一有心得便记述下来，取程子 今日格一物，明日格一物 之义，因取名为 日格子 。
English: His learning was based on Cheng Zhu's study, and he once said: I would like to be a real scholar and not a fake one. When he was young, he was raised in Nanki Junior High School and was appreciated by Li Dongyang. His poetry is elegant and imitates Dongyang. He is well-versed in books, and when he feels like it, he will write it down. He chose Cheng Zi as the meaning of "one thing today, one thing tomorrow" because he chose the name "day lattice."

古文：鉴亦善画，有言胜其父者，遂终身不复作。
现代文：其著作有《学史录》、《简端录》。巡抚吴廷举将此二书进呈朝廷。此外还有《定性书说》、《漕政举要》诸集若干卷。学者称他为 二泉先生 。
English: His works include "Study of History" and "A Brief History." The governor Wu Tingji presented these two books to the imperial court. In addition, there are several volumes of "Qualitative Book" and "Important for Governance." Scholars call him Mr. Erquan.

古文：杨廉，字方震，丰城人。
现代文：杨廉，字方震，丰城人。
English: Yang Liang, also known as Fang Zhen, is from Fengcheng.

古文：父崇，永州知府，受业吴与弼门人胡九韶。
现代文：父杨崇，曾任永州知府，受业于吴与弼弟子胡九韶。
English: His father, Yang Chong, was once the governor of Yongzhou and studied under Wu Zhe's disciple, Hu Jiuyong.

古文：廉承家学，早以文行称。
现代文：廉继承家学，早年就以文章著称于世。
English: Heir to a family of scholars, he became famous for his essays in his early years.

古文：举成化末年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：成化末年中进士，改为庶吉士。
English: At the end of his junior high school career, he was promoted to junior high school teacher.

古文：弘治三年，授南京户科给事中。明年，京师地震，劾用事大臣。
现代文：弘治三年，授南京户科给事中，第二年京师地震，杨廉就此事弹劾执政大臣。
English: In the third year of Hongzhi, the award of Nanjing Household Science was in the middle of the matter, the second year of Beijing earthquake, Yang Liang impeached the ruling minister on this matter.

古文：五年以灾异上六事。一，经筵停罢时，宜日令讲官更直待问。
现代文：五年，借发生灾异的时机上陈六事：一、经筵停罢时，应令讲官每天轮流值班听候皇上询问。
English: In the fifth year, six things were decided on the occasion of the occurrence of disasters: First, when it was suspended, the lecturer should be ordered to take turns on duty every day to listen to the emperor's inquiry.

古文：二，召用言事迁谪官，不当限台谏及登极以后。
现代文：二、招回因直言规谏而遭贬谪的官员，不当限定台臣谏诤皇上登基后的事。
English: Second, the officials who were demoted because of their outspokenness were recalled, and the matter of improperly restricting the Emperor's ministers after he ascended to the throne.

古文：三，治两浙、三吴水患，停额外织造。
现代文：三、治两浙、三吴水患，停止额外织造。
English: Third, to deal with the floods in Zhejiang and Wuxi, and stop the extra weaving.

古文：四，召林下恬退诸臣。
现代文：四、招回隐退诸臣。
English: Fourth, invite back retired ministers.

古文：五，删法司条例。
现代文：五、修改法律条例。
English: Fifth, amend laws and regulations.

古文：六，灾异策免大臣。
现代文：六、发生灾异应鞭策甚至罢免某些大臣。
English: Sixth, in the event of a disaster, some ministers should be whipped or even dismissed.

古文：末言，遇大政，宜召大臣面议，给事、御史随入驳正。
现代文：最后还说，凡国家大政方针，应招集大臣面议，给事中、御史随后驳正。
English: In the end, he also said that in the case of a major national policy, the minister should be summoned for face-to-face discussion, and the minister should then be corrected.

古文：帝颇纳之。
现代文：这些意见孝宗都加以采纳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen accepted the above suggestion.

古文：吏部尚书王恕被谗，廉请斥谗邪，无为所惑。
现代文：吏部尚书王恕遭到诽谤，廉奏请斥责诽谤者及奸邪之人，劝皇上不要被他们所迷惑。
English: I sincerely apologize for the slander against the head of the Imperial Household Agency, Prince Shoshu. Please rebuke the slanderers and traitors, and advise the Emperor not to be deceived by them.

古文：母丧，服阕，起任刑科。
现代文：母亲去世，服丧期满，起任刑科官员。
English: After his mother's death, his mourning period was over, and he was reinstated as a criminal investigation officer.

古文：请祀薛瑄，取《读书录》贮国学。
现代文：他奏请祭祀薛蠧，将其《读书录》贮存于国学。
English: He performed a religious service for Xue Yao and stored his "Reading Record" in the study of Chinese classics.

古文：明年三月有诏以下旬御经筵。
现代文：第二年三月，诏令下旬开经筵，为皇帝讲解经文。
English: In March of the following year, in the latter half of the imperial edict, he opened the sutra room and began to explain the scriptures to the emperor.

古文：廉言： 故事，经筵一月三举，苟以月终起以月初罢，则进讲有几？
现代文：杨廉认为： 按成例，经筵一月举行三次，如果上月终开始，下月初即停止，那能进讲多少？
English: Yang Liang thought: According to the usual practice, the lectures are held three times in January. If the lectures start at the end of the previous month and stop at the beginning of the next month, how much can the lectures continue?

古文：且经筵启而后日讲继之，今迟一日之经筵，即辍一旬之日讲也。 
现代文：而经筵开始后，隔日继讲，今迟一日开经筵，就会停一日之讲。 
English: However, after the sutra chanting begins, the next day's sutra chanting will continue, and the day after the sutra chanting begins, the next day's sutra chanting will stop.

古文：报闻。
现代文：这个意见上呈给了皇帝。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：以父老欲便养，复改南京兵科。
现代文：因父亲年迈，为就近奉养，调至兵科。
English: Due to his father's old age, he was transferred to the military academy to be closer to him.

古文：中贵李广死，得廷臣通贿籍。
现代文：宦官李广死，从他那里获得廷臣贿赂他的账册。
English: The eunuch Li Guang died, from whom he obtained the account books of the courtiers who bribed him.

古文：言官劾贿者，帝欲究而中止。
现代文：谏官弹劾行贿的人，皇帝本想追究，但又中止。
English: The eunuch impeached the bribe-giver, the emperor wanted to prosecute, but stopped.

古文：廉率同官力争，竟不纳。
现代文：廉率领同僚力争，皇帝拒不接受惩办行贿者的请求。
English: The emperor refused to accept the request to punish the bribe-giver.

古文：已，请申明祀典，谓宋儒周、程、张、朱从祀之位，宜居汉、唐诸儒上。
现代文：随后，廉申明祀典，认为宋儒周敦颐、程颐、程颢、张载、朱熹从祀之位应排在汉、唐诸儒之上。
English: Subsequently, Liang Shenming Shuxian believed that Song Confucius, Zhou Dunxi, Cheng Qi, Cheng Qi, Zhang Zai and Zhu Qi should be ranked higher than Han and Tang Confucius in the position of worship.

古文：阙里庙，当更立木主。大成本乐名，不合谥法。
现代文：孔子故乡阙里的孔庙中，当改立木神位 ，大成 本是乐名，用于作为谥号，不合谥法。
English: In the Confucius Temple in Confucius' hometown of Xili, when the standing wooden god was changed, Dacheng was originally a musical name, used as a nickname, not a proper name.

古文：皆不果行。
现代文：这些意见均未采行。
English: None of these recommendations have been implemented.

古文：迁南京光禄少卿。
现代文：调南京光禄寺少卿。
English: To the tune of "Nanjing Guanglu Temple Shokei."

古文：正德初，就改太仆，历顺天府尹。
现代文：正德初改任太仆寺卿，又改任顺天府尹。
English: At first, Zheng De was changed to Taipu Jiaqing, and then to Shuntianfu Yin.

古文：时京军数出，车费动数千金，廉请大兴递运所余银供之。
现代文：这时京都军队多次调遣，其车费动辄数千金。廉奏请用大兴县递运余银供给。
English: At this time, the Kyoto army was dispatched several times, and the fare was several thousand gold. For a cheap trip, please use Daxing County's delivery surplus silver supply.

古文：奏免夏税万五千石，虑州县巧取民财，置岁办簿，吏无能为奸。
现代文：还奏请豁免夏税粮一万五千石。考虑到州县会对百姓巧取豪夺，而设置 岁办簿 ，登载税收，使地主官吏无法作弊。
English: He also requested that the summer tax on grain be exempted from 15,000 koku. Considering that the prefectural and county governments would take advantage of the people, and set up a yearbook to publish taxes, so that landlords and officials could not cheat.

古文：乾清宫灾，极陈时政缺失，疏留中。
现代文：乾清宫遭火灾，廉极力陈奏时政之失误，但奏疏被扣留未进呈皇帝。
English: The Qianqing Palace was on fire, and Ren tried his best to expose the mistakes of the current government, but he was detained for not reporting them to the emperor.

古文：明年擢南京礼部右侍郎。上疏谏南巡，不报。
现代文：第二年升南京礼部右侍郎，上疏劝阻皇帝南巡，这奏疏也未上报皇帝。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department. Shang So dissuaded the emperor from touring the south, and this dissuasion was not reported to the emperor.

古文：帝驻南京，命百官戎服朝见。廉不可，乞用常仪，更请谒见太庙，俱报许。
现代文：武帝驻南京，命百官着军服朝见，廉认为不可，请求依照通常朝拜礼仪，还请皇上去谒见太庙，这些意见均被采纳。
English: Emperor Wu was stationed in Nanjing and ordered hundreds of officials to wear military uniforms to meet the emperor, but Liang thought it was impossible, and requested that they follow the usual ritual of worship, and also asked the emperor to go to see the Imperial Temple. These opinions were all adopted.

古文：世宗即位，就迁尚书。
现代文：世宗即位，调任尚书。
English: Sejong ascends to the throne, and Shosho is reassigned.

古文：廉与罗钦顺善，为居敬穷理之学，文必根《六经》，自礼乐、钱谷至星历、算数，具识其本末。
现代文：杨廉与罗钦顺友好，讲求 居敬穷理 之学，认为文章必以《六经》为本。他自礼乐、钱粮至星历、算术，都知其本末。
English: Yang Liang was friendly with Luo Qinshun and stressed the importance of learning from the poor and respecting the rich, and believed that articles must be based on the "Six Classics." He knew everything from liturgy, money and grain to the astrological calendar and arithmetic.

古文：学者称月湖先生。
现代文：学者称他为 月湖先生 。
English: Scholars call him Mr. Moon Lake.

古文：尝以帝王之道莫切于《大学》，自为给事即上言，进讲宜先《大学衍义》，至是首进《大学衍义节略》。
现代文：他认为帝王治国之道，最要紧的是按照《大学》中的教导。自从任给事中起就上书说 ：向皇帝进讲，首先应该是《大学衍义》。 于是首先呈进《大学衍义节略》。
English: He believed that the most important thing for the emperor's way of governing the country was to follow the teachings of the "University." From the time he was appointed, he wrote a letter saying: "The first thing to be presented to the emperor should be the "Definition of the University." Therefore, the "Definition of the University" was presented first.

古文：帝优诏答之。疏论大礼，引程颐、朱熹言为证，且言： 今异议者率祖欧阳修。然修于考之一字，虽欲加之于濮王，未忍绝之于仁宗。
现代文：在上疏议论大礼时，援引程颐、朱熹的话为证，并说： 今持异义的人都是根据欧阳修的话，然修于 考 之一字，虽加于濮王，却未止于仁宗。
English: When discussing the Great Rite at the Shang Shou, he cited the words of Cheng Yu and Zhu Xi as evidence, and said: People who hold dissenting opinions now are all based on the words of Ouyang Xiu, but they practice according to one word, although it is added to the King of Gong, it is not limited to Ren Zong.

古文：今乃欲绝之于孝庙，此又修所不忍言者。 
现代文：而今不用于孝宗，这也是修所不同意的。 
English: But now it is not used for filial piety, which is also not approved by the monastery.

古文：又有李中，吉水人，官副都御史，号谷平先生，在观后。是为吉水三先生。马理，字伯循，三原人。
现代文：他八次上疏请求退休，至嘉靖二年允准。他在家住了两年便去世了，享年七十四岁。赠太子少保。谥文恪。马理，字伯循，三原人。
English: He requested retirement eight times from Joso, and was finally allowed to retire in the second year of Jiajing. He lived at home for two years and died at the age of seventy-four. He was given the title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：同里尚书王恕家居，讲学著书。理从之游，得其指授。
现代文：同乡尚书王恕居家讲学著书，马理从他交游，受到他的指教。
English: His fellow countryman, Wang Shuxiu, was a homemaker and a book writer. Ma Li became his friend and received his advice.

古文：杨一清督学政，见理与吕柟、康海文，大奇之，曰： 康生之文章，马生、吕生之经学，皆天下士也。 
现代文：杨一清督察学政，见马理、吕木冉、康海的文章，大加赞赏说： 康生善于文章，马生、吕生精通经学，都是天下才子。 
English: Yang Iqing, an inspector of school administration, saw the articles of Ma Li, Lyu Mulin, and Kanghai, and said with great appreciation: Kang Sheng is good at writing, Ma Sheng and Lyu Sheng are proficient in studying, and they are all world-class talents.

古文：登乡荐，入国学，与柟及林虑马乡，榆次寇天叙，安阳崔铣、张士隆，同县秦伟，日切劘于学，名震都下。
现代文：马理乡试中举，进入国学，与吕木冉及林虑马卿，榆次寇天叙，安阳崔铣、张士隆，同县秦伟等，每日切磋学问，名震京都。
English: He was selected for the junior high school entrance examination in Ma Li Township, and entered the national school. He had daily academic competition with Lv Mullan, Lin Qian Ma Qing, Xing Zi Kou Tian Xiu, Anyang Cui Yu, Zhang Shilong, and Qin Wei of the same county. He was famous in Kyoto.

古文：高丽使者慕之，录其文以去。
现代文：高丽使者仰慕他们，把他们的文章抄录带回本国。
English: The Goryeo envoys admired them and brought copies of their articles back to their home country.

古文：连遭艰，不预试。
现代文：马理因父母相继去世，未参加科举考试。
English: Due to the death of her parents, Mari did not take part in the entrance examination.

古文：安南使者至，问主事黄清曰： 关中马理先生安在，何不仕也？ 
现代文：安南使臣到京后，问主事黄清： 关中马理先生在哪里，为何没有做官？ 
English: After the Annan envoy arrived in Beijing, he asked the host Huang Qing: Where is Mr. Guanzhong Mari, why did he not become an official?

古文：其为外裔所重如此。
现代文：外国人对他如此敬重。
English: Foreigners do not hold him in such high esteem.

古文：正德九年举进士。
现代文：正德九年中进士。
English: Zhengde entered the army at the age of nine.

古文：一清为吏部尚书，即擢理稽勋主事。
现代文：当时杨一清为吏部尚书，立即提升马理为稽勋主事。
English: At that time, Yang Iqing was the secretary of the personnel department, and immediately promoted Ma Li to be the chief of the inspection.

古文：调文选，请告归。
现代文：告假归家。后起任考功主事。
English: He took a leave of absence and returned home. Later, he took up the post of chief examiner.

古文：起考功主事，偕郎中张衍瑞等谏南巡。
现代文：与郎中张衍瑞等劝阻皇帝南巡。
English: He and his vassal Zhang Yanrui dissuaded the emperor from going on a southern tour.

古文：诏跪阙门，予杖夺俸。
现代文：皇帝不仅不采纳他们的意见，而且令他们跪在宫殿门口，施以杖刑，夺去俸禄。
English: The emperor not only did not accept their opinion, but also made them kneel at the palace gate, punished them with a cane, and took away their salary.

古文：未几，复告归。教授生徒，从游者众。
现代文：不久，马理又告假返乡，在家乡教授生徒，向他求学的人很多。
English: Soon, Mari returned home from leave to teach students in his hometown, and many people came to learn from him.

古文：嘉靖初，起稽勋员外郎，与郎中余宽等伏阙争大礼。
现代文：嘉靖初年，起任马理为稽勋员外郎，与郎中余宽在朝廷大殿上争论大礼问题。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, Ma Li was appointed as an inspector, and he and his brother-in-law, Yu Guang, argued over the question of the grand salute in the Great Hall of the Imperial Court.

古文：下诏狱，再予杖夺俸。
现代文：皇帝下诏将其逮捕入狱，再施以杖刑，剥夺俸禄。
English: The emperor issued an edict to arrest him and put him in prison. He was then punished with the cane and deprived of his salary.

古文：屡迁考功郎中。
现代文：其后多次调任考功郎中。
English: He was transferred several times as a meritorious student.

古文：故户部郎中庄绎者，正德时首导刘瑾核天下库藏。
现代文：已故户部郎中庄绎，正德时首次引导刘瑾考核天下库藏。
English: According to the interpretation of the late head of the household, Zhuang Zhengde first guided Liu Ye to examine the world's storehouses.

古文：瑾败，落职。
现代文：刘瑾败，庄绎也被削职。
English: Liu Xuan was defeated, and Zhuang Yuanzhong was also dismissed.

古文：至是奏辨求复，当路者属理，理力持不可，寝其事。
现代文：现在又有人奏请核查，当权者提出让马理担任此事。马理坚持不可，查核之事也就此停止了。
English: Now, another request has been made for an inspection, and the authorities have proposed that Mari be put in charge of the matter. Mari's insistence was not possible, and the inspection was stopped.

古文：五年大计外吏，大学士贾咏、吏部尚书廖幻以私憾欲去广东副使魏校、河南副使萧鸣凤、陕西副使唐龙。
现代文：嘉靖五年，考察地方官吏，大学士贾咏、吏部尚书廖纪出于私怨，要除去广东副使魏校、河南副使肖鸣凤、陕西副使唐龙。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, the local officials, including the university judge Jia Yu and the head of the personnel department Shang Shu Liao Ji, were inspected. Out of personal grudge, the Guangdong deputy envoy Wei Xie, the Henan deputy envoy Xiao Ming Feng, and the Shaanxi deputy envoy Tang Long should be removed.

古文：理力争曰： 三人督学政，名著天下，必欲去三人，请先去理。 
现代文：马理力争，指出： 此三人督察学政，名著天下，一定要除去三人，就请把我马理除掉。 
English: Ma Li protested, pointing out: This three-person school politics inspector is famous all over the world, we must get rid of the three of them, so please get rid of Ma Li.

古文：乃止。
现代文：三人终免于罢职。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：明年大计京官，黜张〈王总〉、桂萼党吏部郎中彭泽，〈王总〉、萼竟取旨留之。
现代文：第二年考核京官，罢黜张璁、桂萼党羽吏部郎中彭泽，而璁、萼竟得到皇帝的同意，留用彭泽。
English: In the second year of the assessment of Beijing officials, Zhang Ye and Gui Cai, the party leaders, dismissed the middle-ranking official, Peng Ze. However, Zhang Ye and Cai Cai actually obtained the consent of the emperor and retained Peng Ze.

古文：理擢南京通政参议，请急去。
现代文：马理提升为南京通政参议，请求辞官而去。
English: Ma Li was promoted to Nanjing Tong Political Counselor and asked to resign.

古文：居三年，起光禄卿，未几告归。
现代文：在家闲住三年，起任光禄寺卿，不久又告假回家。
English: He lived at home idly for three years, was appointed as the head priest of Koroku-ji Temple, and soon returned home on leave.

古文：阅十年，复起南京光禄卿，寻引年致仕。
现代文：十年以后，再度起用为南京光禄寺卿。不久告老还乡。
English: Ten years later, he was once again appointed as the head priest of the Guanglu Temple in Nanjing. He soon returned to his hometown.

古文：三十四年，陕西地震，理与妻皆死。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年，陕西地震，马理与妻皆蒙难。
English: In the 34th year of Jiajing, the Shaanxi Earthquake, Ma Li and his wife were both injured.

古文：理学行纯笃，居丧取古礼及司马光《书仪》、朱熹《家礼》折衷用之，与吕柟并为关中学者所宗。
现代文：马理的学问道德纯正深厚，居丧以古礼及司马光《书仪》、朱熹《家礼》的规定折衷使用，与吕木冉并为关中学者的宗师。
English: Ma Li's culture and morals are pure and profound, and he uses the ancient rites and the provisions of Sima Guang's "Calligraphy" and Zhu Xi's "Family Rites" in an eclectic manner. He is the father of Guan Middle School students with Lv Mulin.

古文：穆宗立，赠右副都御史。
现代文：穆宗即位，赠右副都御史。
English: Emperor Mu Zong ascends the throne, bestowing the title of vice-governor of the capital.

古文：天启初，追谥忠宪。
现代文：天启初，追谥忠宪。
English: In the beginning of the world, there was a hunt for those loyal to the constitution.

古文：魏校，字子才，昆山人。
现代文：魏校，字子才，昆山人。
English: Wei school, Zhizi Cai, Kunshan people.

古文：其先本李姓，居苏州葑门之庄渠，因自号 庄渠 。
现代文：先祖本姓李，居住在苏州葑门之庄渠，自号 庄渠 。
English: The ancestor's family name was Li, and he lived in Zhuangqiu, Shimen, Suzhou, and called himself Zhuangqiu.

古文：弘治十八年成进士。历南京刑部郎中。
现代文：弘治十八年进士，担任过南京刑部郎中。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 18 and served as an assistant of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：守备太监刘瑯藉刘瑾势张甚，或自判状送法司，莫敢抗者。
现代文：守备太监刘琅凭藉刘瑾之势，甚为猖狂，竟自行审案送司法惩治，谁都不敢阻抗。
English: The eunuch guarding Liu Bei, taking advantage of Liu Bei's momentum, was so reckless that he actually tried the case on his own and sent it to judicial punishment, and no one dared to resist.

古文：校直行己意，无所徇。
现代文：魏校按法办事，不徇私情。
English: The Wei school operates according to the law and does not indulge in personal feelings.

古文：改兵部郎中，移疾归。
现代文：改任兵部郎中，因病告归。
English: He was reassigned to the Hyobusho junior high school, but had to resign due to illness.

古文：嘉靖初，起为广东提学副使。
现代文：嘉靖初年起任提学副使。
English: In the first year of his reign, Jiajing was appointed Vice Minister of Education.

古文：伊川一言以断之，曰 性，即理也 ，则诸说皆不攻自破矣。 所著有《大学指归》、《六书精蕴》。
现代文：亲丧守孝期满，补为江西兵备副使。后历任国子祭酒、太常寺卿，不久退休。魏校为胡居仁的私淑弟子，学术思想主 敬 ，而贯彻儒家各派学说，尤其选择了其中的精华。其著述有《大学指归》、《六书精蕴》。
English: At the end of his term of mourning and filial piety, he became the deputy envoy of Jiangxi Military Preparedness. Later, successive heads of the Guozi Festival Wine and the Taiji Temple retired soon. Wei School was the disciple of Hu Juerin, the academic thinker, and implemented the teachings of Confucianism, in particular, he chose the essence of it. His books include "The Return of the University" and "The Essence of Six Books."

古文：卒，谥恭简。
现代文：去世后谥号恭简。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was changed to Kyojan.

古文：唐顺之、王应电、王敬臣，皆其弟子也。顺之，自有传。
现代文：唐顺之、王应电、王敬臣都是其弟子。唐顺之自有传。
English: Tang Shunzhi, Wang Yingdian and Wang Jingchen were all his disciples. Tang Shunzhi's autobiography.

古文：王应电，字昭明，昆山人。
现代文：王应电，字昭明，昆山人。
English: Wang Yingdian, surnamed Zhao Ming, from Kunshan.

古文：受业于校，笃好《周礼》，谓《周礼》自宋以后，胡宏、季本各著书，指摘其瑕衅至数十万言。
现代文：受业于魏校。特别爱好《周礼》，认为《周礼》自宋以后，胡宏、季本各有著述，指责其中的缺点、破绽，长达数十万字。
English: He was educated in the Wei school. He is particularly fond of "Zhouli," and believes that since the Song Dynasty, Hu Hong and Ji Ben have each written about "Zhouli," criticizing the shortcomings and flaws in it, which is hundreds of thousands of words long.

古文：而余寿翁、吴澄则以为《冬官》未尝亡，杂见于五官中，而更次之。
现代文：余寿翁、吴澄则认为《周礼》中之《冬官》并未佚失，可散见于其他五官之中，他们重新进行编排。
English: Yu Shouweng and Wu Cheng, on the other hand, believed that the "winter official" in the "Weekly Ritual" was not lost, and could be found scattered among the other five officials, and they rearranged it.

古文：近世何乔新、陈凤梧、舒芬亦各以己意更定。
现代文：近世何乔新、陈凤梧、舒芬也都各以己见来对《周礼》进行更定。
English: In recent times, He Qiaoxin, Chen Fengwu and Shu Fen have also revised the "Weekly Ritual" according to their own views.

古文：然此皆诸儒之《周礼》也。
现代文：这些都是诸儒之《周礼》。
English: These are the "weekly rituals" of Confucianism.

古文：覃研十数载，先求圣人之心，溯斯礼之源；次考天象之文，原设官之意，推五官离合之故，见纲维统体之极。
现代文：应电深入研究十数年，先求圣人之心，追溯周礼之源，其次考察天文和原设官的用意，推论五官离合的原因，最后看出全书的体系。
English: After ten years of in-depth study, we first sought the heart of the saint, traced the source of the weekly ritual, then examined the astronomy and the original intention of the official, deduced the reasons for the clutch of the five senses, and finally saw the system of the whole book.

古文：因显以探微，因细而绎大，成《周礼传诂》数十卷。
现代文：从显而易见的方面探索那些隐而未见的方面，从细小而演绎全体，著成《周礼传诂》数十卷。
English: From the obvious aspects to explore those hidden aspects, from the small and deduce the whole, resulting in "Zhou Li Chuanxuan" dozens of volumes.

古文：以为百世继周而治，必出于此。
现代文：他认为后代百世继周代治理天下，其制度渊源于此。
English: He believed that the descendants of a hundred generations would govern the world, and that this was the origin of the system.

古文：嘉靖中，家毁于兵燹，流寓江西泰和。以其书就正罗洪先，洪先大服。
现代文：嘉靖中，应电家庭在兵乱中被毁，他独自流落到江西泰和，将其著作送请罗洪先指正，洪先非常佩服。
English: In Jiajing, his family was destroyed in the war, and he was left alone in Taihe, Jiangxi Province. He sent his book to Luo Hongxian to recommend, and Hongxian was very impressed.

古文：翰林陈昌积以师礼事之。
现代文：翰林陈昌积以尊师之礼对待他。
English: Hanlin Chen Changji treated him with respect.

古文：胡松抚江西，刊行于世。
现代文：胡松巡抚江西，将应电的著作刊行于世。
English: Hu Song, the governor of Jiangxi Province, published the work of answering the call.

古文：应电又研精字学，据《说文》所载为讹谬甚者，为之订正，名曰《经传正讹》。又著《同文备考》、《书法指要》、《六义音切贯珠图》、《六义相关图》。
现代文：应电还研究并精通文字学，订正了《说文》中一些错误，著《经传正伪》。关于文字学的著作，还有《同文备考》、《书法指要》、《六义音切贯珠图》、《六义相关图》。
English: Yingfei also studied and mastered philology, corrected some errors in "Shuwen," and wrote "Zhuan Zhengfu." Books on philology, as well as "Same Text Remarks," "Calligraphy Tips," "Six-Meaning Sound Cutting Bead Chart," "Six-Meaning Related Chart."

古文：王敬臣，字以道，长洲人，江西参议庭子也。
现代文：逝于泰和。陈昌积经办他的丧事，送回昆山安葬。王敬臣，字以道，长洲人。江西参议王庭之子。
English: He passed away in Taihe. Chen Changji was in charge of his funeral and sent him back to Kunshan for burial. Wang Jingchen, a native of Changzhou, was the son of Wang Ting, a Jiangxi senator.

古文：十九为诸生，受业于校。
现代文：十九岁受业于魏校。
English: At the age of nineteen, he was enrolled in the Wei school.

古文：性至孝，父疽发背，亲自吮舐。老得瞀眩疾，则卧于榻下，夜不解衣，微闻响咳声，即跃起问安。
现代文：禀性至孝，父亲背生痈疽，敬臣用口吸舐；父年迈，目眩眼花，他卧于父亲榻边，夜不解衣，闻有咳嗽声，立即起来询问，侍奉继母与侍奉父亲一样细心。
English: Tenacious and filial, his father was born with gangrene on his back, his father sucked it with his mouth; his father was old, his eyes were dazzled, he lay on his father's bedside, he did not undress at night, he heard a coughing sound, he immediately got up to inquire, he served his stepmother as carefully as he served his father.

古文：事继母如事父，妻失母欢，不入室者十三载。初，受校默成之旨，尝言议论不如著述，著述不如躬行，故居常杜口不谈。
现代文：婆媳不和，他十三年不入室与妻子同居。他最初受业于魏校时，曾认为议论不如著述，著述不如实践，故居家常闭口不言谈议论。
English: His mother-in-law and daughter-in-law did not get along, and he lived with his wife for thirteen years without entering the house. When he first studied at Wei School, he thought that discussion was not as good as writing, and writing was not as good as practice, so he often kept his mouth shut at home.

古文：自见耿定向，语以圣贤无独成之学，由是多所诱掖，弟子从游者至四百余人。
现代文：然自见耿定向以后，定向告诉他说，圣贤无独成之学，须相互讨论。从此以后，对前来求学之人引导扶持，其弟子有四百余。
English: However, after seeing Geng Ding, Ding told him that there is no unique learning for sages and that they must discuss with each other. From then on, he guided and supported those who came to study, and his disciples numbered more than four hundred.

古文：其学，以慎独为先，而指亲长之际、衽席之间为慎独之本，尤以标立门户为戒。
现代文：其学以 慎独 为本，不自立门户。
English: Its learning is based on prudence and independence, and it is not a self-supporting portal.

古文：乡人尊为少湖先生。
现代文：乡里尊称他 少湖先生 。
English: The villagers respectfully call him Mr. Shoko.

古文：万历中，以廷臣荐，征授国子博士，辞不行。
现代文：万历中，由于廷臣的推荐，朝廷召他入京授国子博士，他没有去。
English: During the Wanli era, on the recommendation of a courtier, the imperial court invited him to Beijing to confer the title of Kuniko hakase, but he did not go.

古文：诏以所授官致仕。
现代文：诏令以所授官职退休。
English: He retired with the rank he was awarded.

古文：二十一年，巡按御史甘士价复荐。
现代文：万历二十一年，巡按御史甘士价又举荐他。
English: Twenty-one years later, the inspector recommended him again.

古文：吏部以敬臣年高，请有司时加优礼，诏可。
现代文：吏部看他年事已高，奏请令当地官府经常以最高礼节对待他，得到皇帝的批准。
English: The officials thought he was too old, so they asked the local government to always treat him with the utmost courtesy, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：帝不许，命俟二十七日后行之。
现代文：享年八十五岁。潘府，字孔修，上虞人。
English: He died at the age of eighty-five. Panfu, also known as Kongxiu, was from Shangyuan.

古文：至百日，帝以大行未葬，麻衣衰绖如故。府因上疏请行三年丧，略言： 子为父，臣为君，皆斩衰三年，仁之至，义之尽也。
现代文：成化末年进士。宪宗去世，孝宗即位，潘府上疏奏请皇帝按制行三年丧礼。他说： 子为父、臣为君都要着孝服守孝三年，这是至仁至义的大事。
English: He entered the priesthood at the end of his life. When Emperor Gensong died and Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, the Pan government requested the emperor to hold a three-year funeral ceremony. He said, "A son should be a father and a vassal should be a vassal for three years. This is a matter of the utmost benevolence and justice."

古文：汉文帝遗诏短丧，止欲便天下臣民，景帝遂自行之，使千古纲常一坠不振。
现代文：汉文帝崩，遗诏减少服丧期间，是为天下臣民着想，但景帝即位自己却不按制守孝三年，从而使千古纲常遭到破坏。
English: When Emperor Hanwen passed away, he decreed to reduce the period of mourning for the sake of the subjects of the world. However, Emperor Jing himself did not follow the three-year rule of filial piety when he ascended the throne, which led to the destruction of the thousand-year-old syllabus.

古文：晋武帝欲行而不能，魏孝文行之而不尽，宋孝宗锐志复古，易月之外，犹执通丧，然不能推之于下，未足为圣王达孝也。
现代文：晋武帝欲按旧制而不能行，魏孝文帝也未完全实行，宋孝宗锐意复古，也未能推行于下，这些都不足以成为圣王之至孝。
English: Emperor Jinwu wanted to follow the old system but was unable to do so, Emperor Wei Xiaowen did not fully implement it, and Emperor Song Xiaozong was determined to return to the old system, but was unable to implement it. These are not enough to become the holy king's filial son.

古文：先帝奄弃四海，臣庶衔哀，陛下恻恒由衷，麻衣视朝，百日未改。
现代文：先帝忽然驾崩，臣子庶民都怀哀痛之心，陛下忧伤不已，穿孝衣临朝，百日未改。
English: The previous emperor suddenly passed away, and all the courtiers and common people were filled with sorrow. His Majesty was grief-stricken, wore a filial piety robe, and did not change for a hundred days.

古文：望排群议，断自圣心，执丧三年一如三代旧制。
现代文：望陛下力排众议，决心执丧三年，一如三代旧制。
English: His Majesty hoped to force the public discussion, determined to hold the funeral for three years, just like the three generations of the old system.

古文：诏礼官参考载籍，使丧不废礼，朝不废政，勒为彝典，传之子孙，岂不伟哉。 
现代文：诏令礼官参考经史所载规定，使丧事不违礼仪，朝廷不耽误政事。定为不可更改的制度，传于子孙后代，岂不是件伟大的事情。 
English: It is a great thing for the Emperor to order the etiquette officials to refer to the provisions contained in the history, so that the funeral does not violate the etiquette and the court does not delay the political affairs. It is an unchangeable system that will be passed on to future generations.

古文：疏入，衰绖待罪。诏辅臣会礼官详议，并持成制，寝不行。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，朝廷诏令内阁辅臣会同礼官详细讨论，都认为要实行原来制定的制度，但终究未能实行。
English: After the report was submitted, the Imperial Court issued a decree ordering the Council of Vice-Ministers of the Cabinet to discuss the matter in detail with the etiquette officials. Both agreed that the system originally established should be implemented, but in the end, it was not implemented.

古文：谒选，得长乐知县，教民行《朱子家礼》。
现代文：潘府被任命为长乐知县，在该县教民实行《朱子家礼》。
English: Panfu was appointed as Changle County, and the "Zhuzi Family Rite" was implemented in the county.

古文：躬行郊野，劳问疾苦，田夫野老咸谓府亲己，就求笔札，府辄欣然与之。
现代文：他亲自到郊野去访问民间疾苦。田夫野老都感到潘府待民亲切，纷纷请求著文题辞，潘府欣然同意。
English: He personally went to the countryside to visit the people's sufferings. The field lords all felt that Panfu was kind to the people, and they asked for the inscription, and Panfu readily agreed.

古文：迁南京兵部主事，陈军民利病七事。
现代文：后调升南京兵部主事，陈奏有关军民利害的七件事。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the head of the Nanjing Military Department, where he was in charge of seven matters concerning the interests of the military and the people.

古文：父丧除，补刑部。
现代文：父亲去世，守丧期满，调任北京刑部主事。
English: After his father's death, he was transferred to be the head of the Beijing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：值旱蝗、星变，北寇深入，孔庙灾，疏请内修外攘，以谨天戒。
现代文：这时发生了旱灾、蝗灾、星变、北寇入侵、孔庙失火等不幸事故，潘府上疏呈请整治内政，抵御外敌入侵。
English: At this time, unfortunate accidents such as droughts, locust plagues, star changes, the invasion of the Northern Cossacks, and the fire at the Confucius Temple occurred. The Pan government was asked to rectify domestic affairs and resist foreign invasion.

古文：又上救时十要。
现代文：又呈上匡正弊政的十项建议。
English: He also put forward ten suggestions to rectify the maladministration.

古文：以便养乞南，改南京兵部，迁武选员外郎。
现代文：为了就近奉养父母，请求南迁，因而改任南京兵部主事。后升武选员外郎。
English: In order to be closer to his adoptive parents, he requested to move south, and was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Military Department. Later, he was promoted to military selector.

古文：尚书马文升知其贤，超拜广东提学副使。
现代文：尚书马文升知潘府贤能，越级提拔为广东提学副使。
English: Shangshu Mawen learned of Panfu's ability and was promoted to vice-envoy of Guangdong to promote learning.

古文：已而吏部尚书杨一清及巡按御史吴华屡荐其学行，终不起。
现代文：因母亲年老，请求辞官归家奉养，不等朝廷诏令便自己回去了。随后，吏部尚书杨一清及巡按御史吴华，多次向朝廷举荐，始终未起用。
English: Due to his mother's old age, he asked the official to return home to take care of him, but he did not wait for the imperial decree and went back himself. Subsequently, the official Yang Iqing and the inspector Wu Hua repeatedly recommended to the imperial court, but they were never used.

古文：嘉靖改元，言官交荐，起太仆少卿，改太常，致仕。
现代文：嘉靖改元，谏官们都荐举他，朝廷起任他为太仆少卿，后改为太常寺少卿，他请求退休。
English: When the era was changed from the Jiajing to the Yuan Dynasty, the eunuchs all recommended him for promotion, and the imperial court appointed him as Taigu Shaoqing (太僕少卿), which was later changed to Taizhoji Shaoqing (太常寺少卿), and he asked to retire.

古文：既归，屏居南山，布衣蔬食，惟以发明经传为事。
现代文：归家后隐居于南山，穿的是布衣，吃的是素食。每日以阐发经传为己任。
English: After returning home, he lived in seclusion in Nanshan, wearing cloth and eating vegetarian food. His daily duty was to interpret the sutras.

古文：时王守仁讲学其乡，相去不百里，颇有异同。
现代文：这时王守仁在本乡讲学，离潘府家乡不过百里，而两人学术思想却颇不相同。
English: At this time, Wang Shouren was lecturing in his hometown, only a hundred miles away from Panfu's hometown, but the two men's academic thoughts were quite different.

古文：尝曰： 居官之本有三：薄奉养，廉之本也；远声色，勤之本也；去谗私，明之本也。 
现代文：他曾说： 做官有三本：俸禄薄为廉之本；不沉溺于声色为勤之本；不听谗言、不徇私情为明之本。 
English: He once said, "There are three rules for being an official: the first is to be honest, the second is not to indulge in vanity, the third is to be diligent, the fourth is not to listen to gossip, and the fifth is not to be selfish."

古文：又曰： 荐贤当惟恐后，论功当惟恐先。 
现代文：又说： 荐举贤人应唯恐落后于别人。论功应唯恐在前。 
English: He also said, "In the matter of recommendation, a wise man should be afraid of falling behind others. In the matter of merit, he should be afraid of getting ahead."

古文：年七十三卒。
现代文：年七十三岁而卒。
English: He was 73 years old.

古文：故事，四品止予祭。世宗重府孝行，特诏予葬。
现代文：按成例，四品官只赐祭，而世宗重视府的孝道行为，特诏令赐葬。
English: As usual, the four court officials only gave offerings, but the Sejong placed importance on filial piety of the government and gave the funeral by special edict.

古文：崔铣，字子钟，安阳人。
现代文：崔铣，字子钟，安阳人。
English: Cui Wei, Zizi Zhong, Anyang people.

古文：父升，官参政。铣举弘治十八年进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：弘治十八年进士，选为庶吉士，授编修。
English: Entered the priesthood in 18th year of Konji era, and was selected as an associate priest, and was awarded the title of editor.

古文：预修《孝宗实录》，与同官见太监刘瑾，独长揖不拜，由是忤瑾。
现代文：他在参与编修《孝宗实录》时，与同僚去见太监刘瑾，独他一人对刘瑾只揖不拜，因而得罪了刘瑾。
English: When he participated in the compilation of "The True Record of the Filial Piety," he and his colleagues went to see the eunuch Liu Xuan, but he was the only one who did not bow to Liu Xuan, thus offending Liu Xuan.

古文：书成，出为南京吏部主事。
现代文：《实录》成书后，调任南京吏部主事。
English: After "Real Record" was published, he was transferred to be the head of the Nanjing Personnel Department.

古文：瑾败，召复故官，充经筵讲官，进侍读。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后，召回北京官复原职，充任经筵讲官，又晋升为侍读。
English: After Liu Wei was arrested, he was recalled to Beijing to resume his duties as a government official, and was appointed as a lecturer of economics. He was also promoted to attendant.

古文：引疾归，作后渠书屋，读书讲学其中。
现代文：因病归家，建 后渠书屋 ，在其中读书讲学。
English: Due to illness, he returned home and built the Houqu Bookstore, where he read and lectured.

古文：世宗即位，擢南京国子监祭酒。
现代文：世宗即位，升崔铣为南京国子监祭酒。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and Seungcheol was promoted to the position of Nanjing's son-in-law.

古文：嘉靖三年集议大礼，久不决。
现代文：嘉靖三年，朝廷召集群臣讨论追尊世宗生父兴献王为皇考恭献皇帝的大礼问题，长期议而不决。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial court convened a group of courtiers to discuss the issue of presenting a grand gift to the emperor for the imperial examination after the death of Emperor Zongzong's father, King Xingxian, but the matter was not resolved for a long time.

古文：大学士蒋冕、尚书汪俊俱以执议去位，其他摈斥杖戍者相望，而张〈王总〉、桂萼等骤贵显用事。
现代文：大学士蒋冕、尚书汪俊都因坚持反对意见而被罢官，其他许多人或被排斥，或受杖刑，或流放边戍，只有张璁、桂萼等人一时受到重用。
English: Jiang Guan and Shang Shu Wang Jun, both university scholars, were removed from their posts for holding opposing views. Many others were either ostracized, caned, or exiled. Only Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly were temporarily re-employed.

古文：铣上疏求去，且劾〈王总〉、萼等曰： 臣究观议者，其文则欧阳修之唾余，其情则承望意响，求胜无已。
现代文：崔铣见此情形，上疏辞职，并弹劾璁、萼等说： 臣考察各种议论，那些赞成的人，其文是为欧阳修所唾弃的，其情则是仰承皇上的意图，力求得到高官厚禄。
English: Seeing this situation, Choe Son resigned, and impeached Soong, Cai, and others, saying, "I have examined all kinds of arguments. Those who are in favor, their writings are rejected by Ouyang Xiu, and their situation is to follow the emperor's intention, and strive to get high-ranking officials.

古文：悍者危法以激怒，柔者甘言以动听。
现代文：强悍者不怕违法而激怒了皇上，软弱的人则以甜言蜜语而动听。
English: The strong ones were not afraid to break the law and angered the emperor, while the weak ones charmed the emperor with sweet words.

古文：非有元功硕德，而遽以官赏之，得毋使侥幸之徒踵接至与？
现代文：没有大功大德的人而很快得到官爵，这样能不使那些侥幸之徒接踵而来吗？
English: Can those who have no great merits and virtues but quickly get a title of nobility prevent those who are just lucky from coming one after another?

古文：臣闻天子得四海欢心以事其亲，未闻仅得一二人之心者也。
现代文：臣听说天子总是力图获取天下臣民的欢心，以尽忠孝之职，而未听说只去获取一二人之欢心。
English: The vassal heard that the Son of Heaven was always trying to win the hearts of the world's subjects in order to fulfill his duties of loyalty and filial piety, but he did not hear that he was only trying to win the hearts of one or two people.

古文：赏之，适自章其私昵而已。
现代文：对这些本无大功大德的人行赏，恰恰表明是自己宣扬徇私而已。
English: Giving awards to these people, who have no great merits, just shows that they are promoting their own selfishness.

古文：夫守道为忠，忠则逆旨；希旨为邪，邪则畔道。
现代文：遵守圣人之道者为忠臣，忠则违背皇帝旨意；讨好皇上的为奸邪，邪则离经叛道。
English: Those who keep the sage's precepts are loyal, and loyalty is contrary to the emperor's will; those who curry favor with the emperor are treacherous, and treachery is deviant.

古文：今忠者日疏，而邪者日富。
现代文：如今忠者日渐疏远，邪者却日益富贵。
English: Today, the loyal are becoming more and more estranged, while the wicked are getting richer and richer.

古文：一邪乱邦，况可使富哉！ 
现代文：一邪就会扰乱国家，何况使他们富贵。 
English: One evil will disrupt the country, let alone make them rich.

古文：帝览之不悦，令铣致仕。
现代文：世宗看后不高兴，令铣退休。
English: Sejong was not happy after watching, so he retired.

古文：阅十五年，用荐起少詹事兼侍读学士，擢南京礼部右侍郎。
现代文：十五年后，又起用为少詹事兼侍读学士，升南京礼部右侍郎。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed to the post of Junior Chamberlain and Bachelor of Attendance, and was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：未几疾作，复致仕。卒，赠礼部尚书，谥文敏。
现代文：不久因病辞官。死后赠礼部尚书，谥文敏。
English: He was soon demoted due to illness. After his death, the Ministry of Ceremonies presented him with a posthumous award.

古文：铣少轻俊，好饮酒，尽数斗不乱。
现代文：铣年少时轻佻不稳重，好饮酒，虽饮数斗而不醉。
English: When he was young, he was light-hearted and unstable. He was a good drinker, although he drank several cups, he did not get drunk.

古文：中岁自厉于学，言动皆有则。
现代文：中年自厉于学问，言行皆有准则。
English: Middle-aged self-improvement in learning, words and deeds have a standard.

古文：尝曰： 学在治心，功在慎动。 
现代文：曾说： 学在治心，功在慎于言行。 
English: He once said: "Learning is to govern the mind, and merit is to be prudent in words and deeds."

古文：又曰： 孟子所谓良知良能者，心之用也。
现代文：又说 ：孟子所谓良知良能，是就心的作用而言。
English: He also said: Mencius' so-called conscience, wisdom, and virtue are in terms of the role of the heart.

古文：爱亲敬长，性之本也。
现代文：爱亲人，敬长者，是人的本性。
English: It is human nature to love relatives and respect elders.

古文：若去良能，而独挈良知，是霸儒也。 
现代文：若去良能而只有良知，那就是霸儒。 
English: If you do not have good energy, but only conscience, then you are a tyrant.

古文：又尝作《政议》十篇，其《序》曰： 三代而上，并田封建，其民固，故道易行，三代而下，阡陌郡县，其民散，故道难成。
现代文：做《政议》十篇，其《序》说： 三代以上，实行井田、封建制，百姓固守家园，故圣人之道易行；三代以下，开阡陌，实行郡县制，百姓流动，故圣人之道难成。
English: There are ten articles in "Political Opinions," and its "Preamble" says: For more than three generations, the well field and feudal system are implemented, and the people stick to their homes, so the path of the saint is easy to accomplish; for less than three generations, the county system is implemented, and the people flow, so the path of the saint is difficult to achieve.

古文：况沿而下趋至今日乎。
现代文：何况以后每况愈下，直至今日。
English: And it's been getting worse ever since, right up to the present day.

古文：然人心弗异，系乎主之者而已。 
现代文：然要人心不异，关键在于统治他们的人。 
English: But people are people, and the key is who governs them.

古文：凡篇中所论说，悉仿此意。
现代文：《政议》各篇之论说，都是说明这个意思。
English: The arguments in each article of "Political Opinions" illustrate this meaning.

古文：世多有其书，故不载。何瑭，字粹夫，武陟人。
现代文：何瑭，字粹夫，武陟人。
English: He is a poet, a writer, and a warrior.

古文：年七岁，见家有佛像，抗言请去之。
现代文：七岁时，见家供佛像，坚决请求去掉。
English: When he was seven years old, he saw a Buddha statue at home and insisted that it be removed.

古文：十九读许衡、薛瑄遗书，辄欣然忘寝食。
现代文：十九岁读许衡、薛蠧的遗著，废寝忘食。
English: At the age of nineteen, he read the posthumous works of Xu Heng and Xue Yao, losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：弘治十五年成进士，选庶吉士。
现代文：弘治十五年进士，选为庶吉士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 15th year of the Koji era, and was selected as a junior priest.

古文：阁试《克己复礼为仁论》，有曰： 仁者，人也。礼则人之元气而已，则见侵于风寒暑湿者也。
现代文：阁试考题为《克己复礼为仁论》，何瑭在其文章中写道 ：仁就是人，礼是人的元气，它现受到风寒暑湿的侵蚀。
English: In an essay entitled "The Theory that Self-restraint and Repetition of Rites is Benevolence," he wrote: "Benevolence is a person, and courtesy is a person's vitality, which is now being eroded by cold, heat and humidity.

古文：人能无为邪气所胜，则元所复，元年复而其人成矣。 
现代文：人若能不为邪气所侵，则元气复，元气复就成为人了。 
English: If a person can not be invaded by evil spirits, he will regain his vigor and become a man.

古文：宿学咸推服焉。
现代文：此言为学人们推崇。
English: This saying is revered by scholars.

古文：刘瑾窃政，一日赠翰林川扇，有入而拜见者。
现代文：刘瑾窃取朝政后，有天赠翰林每人一把川扇，有的去拜见刘瑾。
English: After Liu Bei stole the imperial government, one day he gave each person in Hanlin a pair of fans, and some of them went to meet Liu Bei.

古文：瑭时官修撰，独长揖。瑾怒，不以赠。
现代文：当时瑭为修撰，对刘瑾只行长揖礼，瑾怒，不赠扇给瑭。
English: At that time, he was a novice, and he only bowed to Liu Xuan, but he did not give him a fan.

古文：受赠者复拜谢，瑭正色曰： 何仆仆也！ 
现代文：受赠者又去拜谢，何瑭严肃地说 ：何必那样低三下四。 
English: The recipient of the gift went to thank him again, and he said seriously, "Why do you have to be so humble?"

古文：瑾大怒，诘其姓名。
现代文：刘瑾大怒，追问谁讲此话。
English: Liu Yao flew into a rage and demanded to know who had said this.

古文：瑭直应曰： 修撰何瑭。 
现代文：何瑭毫不畏缩地回答 ：修撰何瑭。 
English: Without flinching, he replied: "Write it down."

古文：知必不为瑾所容，乃累疏致仕。
现代文：他知道必为瑾所不容，多次上疏请求隐退。
English: He knew it would not be tolerated and repeatedly asked to be allowed to withdraw.

古文：后瑾诛，复官。
现代文：直到瑾被诛后，才复官。
English: He was not reinstated until after he was arrested.

古文：以经筵触忌讳，谪开州同知。
现代文：在给皇上讲经说史时，触犯忌讳，贬为开州同知。
English: When he spoke to the emperor about the history of the sutras, he broke the taboo and was relegated to the status of a common acquaintance.

古文：修黄陵冈堤成，擢东昌府同知，乞归。
现代文：在开州修黄陵冈堤有功，升为东昌府同知。
English: He was instrumental in the construction of the Huangling embankment in Kaizhou and was promoted to the same post in Dongchang Prefecture.

古文：嘉靖初，起山西提学副使，以父忧不赴。
现代文：但他请求辞官回乡。嘉靖初，起任山西提学副使，因守父丧而未赴任。
English: However, he asked his resignation officer to return to his hometown. At the beginning of the Jiajing era, he was appointed vice-envoy to Shanxi to study, but did not take up the post due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，起提学浙江。
现代文：服丧期满，起用他提学浙江。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed to study in Zhejiang.

古文：敦本尚实，士气丕变。未几，晋南京太常少卿。
现代文：他在浙江重本求实，士气大变，不久，晋升为南京太常寺少卿。
English: He focused on seeking truth in Zhejiang, and his morale changed dramatically. Soon, he was promoted to Shaoqing of Nanjing Taizhong Temple.

古文：与湛若水等修明古太学之法，学者翕然宗之。
现代文：与湛若水等提倡古太学之法，学者一致推崇他为宗师。
English: He advocated the way of ancient learning with the likes of Zhan Ruoshui, and scholars unanimously revered him as the founder.

古文：历工、户、礼三部侍郎，晋南京右都御史，未几致仕。
现代文：他历任工、户、礼三部侍郎，晋升为南京右都御史。不久退休。
English: He successively served as the attendant of the three departments of work, household, and etiquette, and was promoted to the governor of Nanjing. He retired soon after.

古文：是时，王守仁以道学名于时，瑭独默如。
现代文：当时，王守仁以道学著名于世。何瑭独默不语。
English: At that time, Wang Shouren was famous in the world for his Taoism. He was silent.

古文：尝言陆九渊、杨简之学，流入禅宗，充塞仁义。
现代文：他曾说： 陆九渊、杨简的学说流入禅宗，阻挡仁义的盛行。
English: He once said: The teachings of Lu Jiuyuan and Yang Jian have flowed into Zen Buddhism, blocking the prevalence of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：后学未得游、夏十一，而议论即过颜、曾，此吾道大害也。
现代文：后世学者未学得子游、子夏的十分之一，而其议论却超过颜渊、曾子。这是吾道之大害。 
English: Later generations of scholars have not learned one-tenth of Ziyu and Zixia, but their discussions exceed Yan Yuan and Zengzi. This is a great harm to our way.

古文：里居十余年，教子姓以孝弟忠信，一介必严。
现代文：在家乡居住了十余年，以孝悌忠信教育子孙。
English: He lived in his hometown for more than ten years, teaching his children and grandchildren with filial piety and loyalty.

古文：两执亲丧，皆哀毁。
现代文：父母相继去世，哀痛不已。
English: His parents passed away one after the other, and he grieved endlessly.

古文：后谥文定。
现代文：死后谥文定。
English: He was posthumously canonized.

古文：所著《阴阳律吕》、《儒学管见》、《柏斋集》十二卷，皆行于世。
现代文：所著有《阴阳律吕》、《儒学管见》、《柏斋集》十二卷。皆流行于世。
English: He is the author of "Yin Yang Rullu," "Confucianism Guanxi" and "Baizhai Collection" in twelve volumes, all of which are popular in the world.

古文：唐伯元，字仁卿，澄海人。
现代文：唐伯元，字仁卿，澄海人。
English: Tang Bo Yuan, Zhenqing, Chenghai people.

古文：万历二年进士。
现代文：万历二年进士。
English: He became a priest two years later.

古文：历知万年、泰和二县，并有惠政，民生祠之。
现代文：历任万年、泰和二县知县。为政有利于民，两县人民为他建立生祠。
English: He served as the governor of Taihe County for ten thousand years, and the people of the two counties built a shrine for him because his policies were beneficial to the people.

古文：迁南京户部主事，进郎中。
现代文：后调任南京户部主事，晋升郎中。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the head of the household department in Nanjing and was promoted to junior assistant.

古文：伯元受业永丰吕怀，践履笃实，而深疾王守仁新说。
现代文：伯元受业于永丰吕怀，言行踏实，深恶王守仁的新学说。
English: He studied under Yongfeng Lvhuai and was a man of firm words and deeds. He abhorred Wang Shuren's new doctrine.

古文：及守仁从祀文庙，上疏争之。
现代文：朝廷将守仁供于文庙祭祀，伯元上疏反对，并请求从文庙中去掉陆九渊的神位，而将有若及周敦颐、程颐、程颢、张载、朱熹五人列入十哲。
English: The imperial court offered Shujin to the Wen Temple for sacrifice, but Bu Yuan Shang So objected and requested that Lu Jiubuan's divinity be removed from the Wen Temple, and that five people, namely, Jia, Zhou, Cheng, Cheng, Zhang, and Zhu, be included in the Ten Philosophers.

古文：因请黜陆九渊，而跻有若及周、程、张、朱五子于十哲之列，祀罗钦顺、章懋、吕柟、魏校、吕怀、蔡清、罗洪先、王艮于乡。
现代文：在各乡祭祀罗钦顺、章懋、吕木冉、魏校、吕怀、蔡清、罗洪先、王艮。
English: In each township, sacrifices were held for Luo Qinshun, Zhang Ye, Lu Mu Ran, Wei Ke, Lu Huai, Cai Qing, Luo Hongxian, and Wang Ye.

古文：疏方下部，旋为南京给事中钟宇淳所驳，伯元谪海州判官。
现代文：其奏疏刚下部议，就遭南京给事中钟宇淳的反对，伯元也因此被贬为海州判官。
English: As soon as it was discussed in the lower house, it was opposed by Zhong Yuchun in Nanjing. As a result, Bo Yuan was demoted to judge of Haizhou.

古文：屡迁尚宝司丞。
现代文：后调任尚宝司丞。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Shang Bao Jie.

古文：吏部尚书杨巍雅不喜守仁学，心善伯元前疏，用为吏部员外郎。历考功、文选郎中，佐尚书孙丕扬澄清吏治，苞苴不及其门。
现代文：吏部尚书杨巍，很不喜欢王守仁的学说，同意伯元的奏疏，因而调伯元为吏部员外郎，后历任考功、文选郎中，辅佐尚书孙丕扬澄清吏治，杜绝贿赂。
English: The head of the personnel department, Shangshu Yang Qian, disliked Wang Shouren's theory very much and agreed with Bo Yuan's resignation. Therefore, he transferred Bo Yuan to be the head of the personnel department, and later, among the successors of the examination of merit and selection of literature, the assistant of the head of the personnel department, Sun Xiangyang, clarified the management of personnel and eliminated bribery.

古文：秩满，推太常少卿，未得命。
现代文：任期满后推荐为太常少卿，但未被朝廷任命。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was recommended to be promoted to Taizang Shaoqing, but he was not appointed by the imperial court.

古文：时吏部推补诸疏皆留中，伯元言： 贤愚同滞，朝野咨嗟，由臣拟议不当所致，乞赐罢斥。 
现代文：当时吏部推荐的陈奏皆被扣留，不进呈皇帝，伯元说： 贤愚同被滞留不提拔任用，朝野为之叹息，这是因为臣所提建议不当所致，呈请准于辞职。 
English: At that time, all the chenso recommended by the cadre department were detained and did not go to the emperor, Bo Yuan said: Xianutong was detained without promotion and appointment, and the court sighed for it. This was due to the improper proposal made by the minister, and he requested permission to resign.

古文：帝不怿，特允其去，而诸疏仍留不下。
现代文：皇帝很不高兴，特准他辞退，并把他的奏疏扣留下来，不交廷臣议论。
English: The emperor was very displeased. He gave him special permission to decline, and he kept his letter of resignation, not to be discussed by courtiers.

古文：居二年，甄别吏部诸郎，帝识伯元名，命改南京他部，而伯元已前卒。
现代文：过了两年，在甄别吏部诸郎中时，看到伯元的名字，命改南京吏部任职，此时伯元已过世了。
English: Two years later, during the screening of the leaders of the cadres, he saw the name of Bo Yuan and was appointed to the Nanjing cadres. At this time, Bo Yuan had passed away.

古文：伯元清苦淡薄，人所不堪，甘之自如，为岭海士大夫仪表。
现代文：伯元生活清苦淡薄，别人难以忍受，他却能怡然自乐，成为岭南士大夫的表率。
English: Bo Yuan's life is simple, others can't stand it, but he can enjoy himself and become a model for Lingnan doctors.

古文：黄淳耀，字蕴生，嘉定人。
现代文：黄淳耀，字蕴生，嘉定人。
English: Huang Chunyao, Zhiyun Sheng, Jiading people.

古文：为诸生时，深疾科举文浮靡淫丽，乃原本《六经》，一出以典雅。
现代文：当学生时，就深恶科举文章华而不实。他的文章，以六经为范本，讲求典雅。
English: When he was a student, he abhorred the pompousness of academic papers. His essays, using the Six Classics as a model, were elegant.

古文：京师陷，福王立南都，诸进士悉授官，淳耀独不赴选。
现代文：名士追求名利，他对名利表示淡漠。崇祯十六年进士及第后，回家潜心钻研经书。布衣粝食，家徒四壁。京师陷落，福王在南京即位，诸进士都授官职，唯独淳耀不去应选。
English: Famous people pursue fame and fortune, he expressed indifference to fame and fortune. He entered the priesthood in the 16th year and the second year, and then went home to study the scriptures. Clothed and fed, his disciples were everywhere. The capital fell, King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing, and all the new priests were appointed to official positions, but Junyao did not want to be elected.

古文：及南都亡，嘉定亦破。
现代文：南京沦陷，嘉定城破，淳耀愤慨不已。
English: After the fall of Nanjing and the capture of Jiading, Junyao was furious.

古文：忾然太息，偕弟渊耀入僧舍，将自尽。僧曰： 公未服官，可无死。 
现代文：与渊耀入庙宇，准备自尽。僧人对他说： 你没有做官，不必死。 
English: He entered the temple with Yuan Yao and prepared to commit suicide. The monk said to him, "You didn't become an official, so you don't have to die."

古文：淳耀曰： 城亡与亡，岂以出处贰心。 
现代文：淳耀说： 我与嘉定共存亡，岂可有贰心。 
English: Junyao said, "I can't bear to co-exist with Jiading.

古文：乃索笔书曰： 弘光元年七月二十四日，进士黄淳耀自裁于城西僧舍。
现代文：向僧人索求纸笔，写道 ：弘光六年七月二十四日，进士黄淳耀自杀于城西僧舍。
English: He asked the monk for a pen and paper and wrote: On July 24th, the sixth year of Hongguang, the priest Huang Junyao committed suicide in the monk's house west of the city.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：进不能宣力王朝，退不能洁身自隐，读书寡益，学道无成，耿耿不寐，此心而已。 
现代文：进不能为朝廷效力，退不能洁身自隐，读书受益不多，学道无成，内心不安，夜不能寐。 
English: You can't work for the imperial court if you go in, you can't keep yourself pure if you go back, you won't benefit much from reading, you won't succeed in your studies, you'll be anxious, and you can't sleep at night.

古文：遂与渊耀相对缢死，年四十有一。
现代文：与渊耀相对，悬梁自尽，时年四十一岁。
English: In contrast to Yuan Yao, he hanged himself at the age of forty-one.

古文：淳耀弱冠即著《自监录》、《知过录》，有志圣贤之学。
现代文：淳耀二十岁就著有《自监录》、《知过录》，立志于圣贤之学。
English: At the age of 20, Junyao authored "Self-Monitoring Record" and "Knowledge Record" and aspired to become a scholar of sages.

古文：所作诗古文，悉轨先正，卓然名家。
现代文：每天将白天所做之事，在夜间记录下来，凡语言之得失，思念之纯杂，无不记载，以备自己反省改过。
English: Every day, record what you do during the day and at night, and record all the gains and losses of language, the pure mixture of thoughts, so that you can reflect and change.

古文：有《陶庵集》十五卷。
现代文：著有《陶庵集》十五卷。
English: He is the author of the 15-volume "Taoan Collection."

古文：其门人私谥之曰贞文。
现代文：其弟子奉谥号曰贞文。
English: His disciple's posthumous name was Zhenwen.

