古文：初七日晨起，云尚氤氲。
现代文：初七日早晨起床，仍然是云雾迷漫。
English: Waking up on the morning of the seventh day of the first lunar month, it was still cloudy and foggy.

古文：饭而行。
现代文：吃过饭就出发。
English: After dinner, let's go.

古文：有索哨者，还宿处，解囊示批而去。
现代文：有哨兵索要路条公文，又返回住处，解开行李找出批条给哨兵看了才通过。
English: A sentry asked for the official document of the road, and then returned to the residence, unpacked the luggage and found the approval slip to show the sentry before passing.

古文：于是西北随坡平下，其路甚坦，而种麻满坡南，盖其下亦有坞西通者。
现代文：于是朝西北顺着山坡平缓地往下走，这段路很平坦，而且山坡南面种满了麻，大概山坡下面也有山坞通向西边。
English: So I walked slowly down the mountain slope to the northwest. This section of the road was very flat, and the south side of the mountain slope was full of hemp, and there was probably a dock below the mountain slope leading to the west.

古文：西驰四里，始与溪近。
现代文：往西急行四里，才走到溪水边。
English: It's a four-mile express ride to the west before you reach the edge of the stream.

古文：随流稍南半里，复循坡西转，又一里，下坡。
现代文：顺着溪流逐渐往南走半里，又沿着山坡往西转，又走一里，下坡。
English: Follow the stream gradually to the south for half a mile, then turn west along the hillside, walk another mile, downhill.

古文：西望西南坞中，有数家之聚，田禾四绕，此溪经坞环之。
现代文：向西边远看西南坞中，有个几家人聚居的村落，种满庄稼的田地分布在村落四周，这条溪水顺着山坞环绕着村落流过。
English: Looking far to the west, in the southwest dock, there is a village where several families live together. Fields full of crops are distributed around the village. This stream flows along the dock and around the village.

古文：其坞自北山随坡南下，中有一水，亦自北而南，与此水同会于村北，合而西南破峡去。乃西截北来坞，半里抵北来之溪，有新建石梁跨之，是为独木桥。
现代文：其坞从北山顺着山坡往南延伸下去，中间有一股水，也是从北往南流，和绕过村落的溪水在村子北边会合，合流之后向西南方穿透峡谷而瓮于是往西横穿从北边延伸过来的山坞，走半里抵达由北边流来的水边，有座新建的石桥横跨水面，这里名独木桥。
English: Its dock extends from the north mountain along the slope to the south, in the middle there is a stream of water, also flowing from north to south, and the stream that bypasses the village meets on the north side of the village. After the confluence, it penetrates the canyon to the southwest and then rushes westward across the dock extending from the north side, walking half a mile to reach the water's edge flowing from the north side. There is a newly built stone bridge across the water, here called the unique wooden bridge.

古文：想昔乃独木，今虽石而犹仍旧名也。
现代文：想来过去是用独木做桥，如今虽然建起石桥却还仍然沿用旧名称。
English: In the past, the bridge was made of a single piece of wood, but today, although the stone bridge has been built, the old name is still used.

古文：桥下溪流，三倍于西来之水，固知北坞之源远于东矣。
现代文：桥下的溪流，水量是西边流来之水的三倍，所以知道北坞中的水源比东边的水源长远。
English: The water volume of the stream under the bridge is three times that of the water flowing from the west, so it is known that the water source in the north dock is longer than the water source in the east.

古文：逾桥西，即上岭，西南直跻甚峻，一里半，逾其脊。
现代文：往西过桥后，立即上岭，朝西南方一直往上爬，山很陡峻，往上一里半，越过岭脊。
English: After crossing the bridge to the west, immediately go up the ridge, and keep climbing in the southwest direction. The mountain is very steep, go up a mile and a half, and cross the ridge.

古文：又西向平下者一里，有岐随冈南去者，陆凉道也。
现代文：又往西平缓地下一里，有条顺着山冈往南去的岔路，是去陆凉州的道路。
English: Another mile west of Xiping, there is a narrow road that goes south along the mountain, which is the road to Lulangzhou.

古文：冈西坞中，复有数家焉，亦陆凉属也。
现代文：山冈西边的山坞中，又有几家人聚居在那里，也属于陆凉州管辖。
English: In the dockyard on the west side of the mountain, there are several families living there, which also belongs to the jurisdiction of Lu Liangzhou.

古文：其坞亦自北而南，虽有村而无流。
现代文：其坞也是从北往南走向，坞中虽有村子却没有溪流。
English: Its dock is also from north to south, although there is a village in the dock, there is no stream.

古文：路西下截坞，半里，经村北，又半里，抵西界崇山下，遂蹑峻而上，而陆凉之界，又西尽于此矣。
现代文：道路往西伸下去而横穿山坞，半里，经过村子北边，又半里，抵达西边的高山下，于是攀登峻岭而上，陆凉州的边界，西边就到此为止了。
English: The road stretches westward and crosses the dock, half a mile, passing the north side of the village, another half a mile, reaching the west side of the mountain, and then climbing up the mountain, the border of the land of Liangzhou, the west side ends here.

古文：盖因其水南下陆凉，故西自此坞，东抵回窞西山，皆属之陆凉。
现代文：大概因大那条溪流往南流到陆凉州，所以西边从这道山坞开始，东边抵达回富坡西山，中间都属于陆凉州管辖。
English: Probably due to the large stream flowing south to Liangzhou, the west side starts from this dock, the east side reaches back to Fubao Xishan, and the middle is under the jurisdiction of Liangzhou.

古文：其处南抵陆凉卫，路经尖山、天生桥，相距尚八十里也。
现代文：从这里往南抵达陆凉卫，途中经过尖山、天生桥，相距还有八十里。
English: From here, they traveled south to Lulangwei, passing through Jianshan and Tiansheng Bridge on the way, a distance of eighty miles.

古文：由西岭而上，又为海崖属，乃亦佐县右县丞土司龙姓者所辖，亦佐县有左、右二丞，皆土司。
现代文：顺西岭而上，又属于海崖土司，是由亦佐县右县皿、姓龙的土司管辖，其属地东边起自此岭，西边抵达著口。
English: Going up along the west ridge, it also belongs to the Haiyan Toji, and is under the jurisdiction of the Toji of Sara, surnamed Long, in the right county of Isa County. Its territory starts from this ridge in the east and reaches the mouth in the west.

古文：左丞姓沙，在本县，即与步雄攻黄草坝者。右丞姓龙，或曰即姓海，在北，而居近越州。
现代文：海崖土司东边和亦佐县的西界被从中隔断，罗平州、陆凉州的属地间隔交错在其中，和亦佐县不接壤。
English: The eastern side of Haiyan Tusi and the western border of Isa County are cut off from each other, and the territorial boundaries of Luoping Prefecture and Lulang Prefecture are intertwined, and there is no border with Isa County.

古文：其地东自此岭而西抵箐口焉。东与亦佐西界中隔，罗平、陆凉二州之地间错其间，不接壤也。
现代文：从山岭东麓往西攀登，多次爬陡峰，多次走平地，陡峻之处为悬崖峭壁上环绕着的石阶，平坦之路则曲曲弯弯、连续不断。
English: Climbing from the eastern foot of the mountain to the west, repeatedly climbing steep peaks, repeatedly walking on flat ground, the steep places are stone steps surrounded by cliffs, and the flat road is curved and continuous.

古文：从东麓西上，屡峻屡平，峻者削崖盘磴，平者曲折逶迤。三峻而三逾岭头，共七里，望见南坪有数十家之聚，北峰则危耸独悬。
现代文：三次攀登陡峰而三次翻越岭头，一共走了七里，远远看见南面平地上有几十家聚居的村寨，北面的山峰则直直地耸立着、孤伶伶地悬在天地之中。
English: After climbing the steep peak three times and crossing the ridge three times, we walked a total of seven miles. In the distance, we could see dozens of villages clustered together on the flat land to the south, while the mountain peaks to the north stood upright, hanging alone in the sky.

古文：盖自马场而西，即望见遥峰尖削，特出众峰之上，而不意直逼其下也。
现代文：原来从马场往西走时，就远远地望到有座尖削的山峰，特别地突出于众峰之上，却没料到竟直接走到其下面了。
English: Originally, when walking west from the horse farm, I saw a sharp mountain far away, which particularly stood out from the others, but I did not expect to walk directly under it.

古文：又一里，梯石悬磴，西北抵危峰前，其时丽日转耀，碧天如洗，众峰尽出，而是山最高，不特独木西峰，下伏如砥，即远而回窞老脊，亦不能上与之抗，惟拐泽鸡场西岭，遥相颉颃。
现代文：又一里，沿着石梯在空中攀登，往西北抵达陡峰前。这时，明亮的太阳放射出耀眼的光芒，蓝色的天空明净如洗，四周群峰暴露无遗，而这座山最高，不仅是独木桥西边的山峰，低伏如平地，即使远到回宫坡主峰，在高大方面也不能和这座山相抗衡，只有拐泽河边的鸡场西岭，才和它遥相对抗、不相上下。
English: Another mile, climbing along the stone ladder in the air, heading northwest to reach the steep peak. At this time, the bright sun radiated dazzling light, the blue sky was as clear as water, and the surrounding peaks were exposed. And this mountain was the highest, not only the peak on the west side of the single-tree bridge, low-lying as flat land, even as far as the main peak of the backyard slope, it could not compete with this mountain in terms of height. Only the chicken farm Xiling on the edge of the river was far away and comparable to it.

古文：其中翡翠层层，皆南环西转，而接于西南巨峰。
现代文：两座高山之间碧玉般的山峰层层叠叠，都是从南绕着转西走向，从而和西南边的巨峰连接。
English: Between the two high mountains, the jade-like peaks are stacked on top of each other, moving from the south around to the west, thus connecting with the giant peak in the southwest.

古文：此东顾之极观也。
现代文：这是往东看到的极为壮观的景致。
English: This is a spectacular view looking east.

古文：其四则乱峰回罨ｙｎ覆盖，丛箐盘错，远虽莫抗，而近多自障焉。
现代文：往西则是乱峰迂回、互相掩映，众多的警沟盘旋交错，远处虽然没有什么高山，但近处已有很多自然生成的屏障了。
English: To the west, there is a tangle of peaks circling around and blocking each other, with numerous police lines interlaced. Although there are no high mountains in the distance, there are already many natural barriers nearby.

古文：其南则支条直走，近界既豁，远巚前环，此独木诸所遥带而下泄者。
现代文：往南看则分支山脉走向垂直，近处豁然开阔，远看重山环绕，这是和独木桥一带的众山遥相连带而往下聚集的山脉。
English: Looking to the south, the branching mountains go vertically, the nearby area is suddenly open, and the distant area is surrounded by mountains. These are the mountains that are connected to the mountains around Dokubyo Bridge and gathered down.

古文：西南有二峰遥凑，如眉中分，此盘江之所由南注者耶？
现代文：西南方远处有两座山峰凑合在一起，如同秀眉分在两端，这会不会是盘江往南流的通道呢？
English: In the far southwest, there are two peaks that come together, as if they were divided at both ends. Could this be a channel for the southward flow of the Pan River?

古文：其西即越州所倚。
现代文：朝西的是越州所背靠的山峰。
English: To the west is the mountain behind Yuezhou.

古文：而东峰之外，复有一峰高悬，其南浮青上耸，圆若团盖，此即大龟山之特峙于陆凉、路南、师宗、弥勒四州之交者耶？天南诸峰，悉其支庶，而此峰又其伯仲行矣。
现代文：而朝东的山峰之外，还有一峰高高耸立在空中，其南部又向上涌起青翠的山顶，团团地如同圆形车盖一样，这是奇特地屹立在陆凉州，路南州、师宗州、弥勒州四州的交界处的大龟山吗又远处南部众多的山峰，全部是大龟山的分支山脉，而此峰又和大龟山相差无几了。
English: In addition to the east-facing mountain peak, there is also a peak that stands tall in the air, and in the south of it, the verdant top of the mountain rises up, and the ground is like a round car cover. Is this the Big Turtle Mountain that stands strangely at the junction of the four states of Lulangzhou, Lunanzhou, Shizongzhou, and Mailezhou? In addition, the numerous peaks in the south are all branch mountains of the Big Turtle Mountain, and this peak is almost the same as the Big Turtle Mountain.

古文：由峰西逾脊稍下，即有石坡斜悬，平庋砥峙，古木婆娑其上，亦高崖所仅见者。
现代文：从陡峰西部翻过山梁稍稍往下走，立即有石坡斜斜地悬挂，平缓地延伸、平缓地峙立，茂盛的古树生长在石坡上面，这也是在高山上唯一见过的景象。
English: From the western part of the steep peak, turn over the mountain beam and walk down a little, and immediately there is a stone slope hanging obliquely, extending smoothly and standing up smoothly. Lush ancient trees grow on the stone slope, which is also the only sight seen on the mountain.

古文：由此历级西下一里，有壑回环，中洼四合，复有中悬之台，平瞰其中，夹坑之冈，横亘其外，石痕木荫，映彩流霞，令人神骨俱醒。
现代文：从石坡上顺着阶梯往西下一里，有道曲折环绕的沟壑，中间低洼，四周闭合，其中又悬立起高台，平行远看沟壑之中，夹在洼坑两旁的山冈，横贯于沟壑之外，石头上树荫苔痕，映衬着五彩的光芒、流动的云霞，令人精神气概全都为之一震。
English: From the stone slope, follow the staircase to the west for one mile, there is a winding path around the gully, low-lying in the middle, closed on all sides, among which there is also a high platform. Look at the gully in the distance, sandwiched between the hills on both sides of the sinkhole, across the gully, the shadow of the moss on the stone, the reflection of the colorful light, the flowing clouds, and the spirit is all one.

古文：由横冈西南转，二里，复逾一脊。
现代文：从横贯之冈往西南转，二里，又越过一座山梁。
English: From the transverse hill to the southwest, two miles, and over a mountain ridge.

古文：又西度一中悬之冈，有索哨者，不顾而去。度冈而西一里，复上坡，又一里，西逾其隘，复有索哨者，亦不顾而去。想皆所云海崖土司者。
现代文：再往西经过一座孤立耸起的山冈，有索要路条公文的哨兵，没有理会就过去了；越过山冈向西走一里，又上坡，再走一里，往西经过其险要地段时，又有索取路条批文的哨兵，也没有理会就离开了：想来都是所说的海崖土司的哨兵。
English: Further west, passing through an isolated hill, there was a sentry asking for a road document, and he passed by without paying attention; walking westward over the hill for a mile, then uphill, then another mile, and passing westward through its critical section, there was a sentry asking for a road approval document, and he left without paying attention: I think they are all the sentries of the so-called sea cliff.

古文：逾脊，又不能西见盘江。
现代文：越过山梁，朝西还是看不见盘江。
English: After crossing the mountains, the Pan River is still not visible in the west.

古文：又西半里，西障始尽，下界遥开，瞥然见盘江之流，自西北注东南而去，来犹不能尽瞩焉。
现代文：又往西边走半里，西部的障碍才过完了，往下视野遥远开阔，一眼看到盘江的江流，从西北往东南流去，但江流的来源从这里还不能尽情眺望。
English: After another half-mile walk to the west, the obstacles in the west were over, and the view down was far and wide. At a glance, I saw the flow of the Pan River, flowing from the northwest to the southeast, but the source of the river flow could not be fully seen from here.

古文：于是西向拾级直下，一里抵坞中。
现代文：于是向西边顺着石梯径直往下走，一里抵达坞中。
English: So he walked straight down the stone steps to the west and arrived in the middle of the dock a mile away.

古文：又西半里，循西山南转，半里，复稍上逾冈西，复平行岭上。
现代文：又往西走半里，沿着西山往南转，半里，又逐渐往上越到山冈西面，再顺着岭上平行。
English: Another half-mile to the west, along the West Mountain to the south, half a mile, and gradually up to the western side of the mountain, and then parallel along the ridge.

古文：半里，有岐，一直西下坑，一西南盘岭。
现代文：半里，有岔道，一条直直往西下坑，一条往西南环绕山岭。
English: Half a mile, there is a fork, one straight to the west of the pit, one to the southwest around the mountains.

古文：见西南路稍大，从之。
现代文：看起来往西南的路稍微大点，便从这条路走。
English: It looks like the road to the southwest is slightly larger, so take this road.

古文：一里，得数家当岭头，其茅舍低隘，牛畜杂处其中，皆所谓儸儸也。
现代文：一里，看到几家人住在岭头，他们的茅草屋低矮狭窄，耕牛等牲畜和人杂处屋中，都是所称的锣锣。
English: A mile away, I saw several families living in Lingtou. Their thatched houses were low and narrow, and livestock such as cattle and miscellaneous people lived in the houses. They were all so-called shacks.

古文：男子皆出，妇人莽不解语，索炊具无有应者。
现代文：男人都外出了，妇女粗鲁，不懂汉话，向她们借用炊具而没有人答应。
English: The men were all out, the women were rude, didn't know Chinese, and asked to borrow cooking utensils, but no one said yes.

古文：是即所谓箐口也，海崖之界，于是止焉。
现代文：这里就是所说的著口，海崖土司的边界，到这里为止。
English: This is where the so-called mouth, the border of the sea cliff Toji, ends.

古文：由冈头西南去，为越州道；从此西北下，即越州属，为曲靖道。
现代文：从冈头往西南方向走，是去越州的路；从这里往西北方向下去，是越州辖境和去曲靖府的路。
English: From Gangtou to the southwest is the road to Yuezhou; from here to the northwest is the road to Yuezhou jurisdiction and Qujingfu.

古文：遂西北下岭。
现代文：于是从西北下岭。
English: So I started from the northwest lower ridge.

古文：始甚峻，一里，转西渐夷。
现代文：开始很陡，走一里，路转向西后渐渐平缓。
English: The start is very steep, walk one mile, the road turns west and then gradually flattens out.

古文：于是皆车道平拓，无龃龉ｊǔｙǔ指地面不平之虑矣。又西一里，饭于树下。
现代文：从此都是平坦、宽阔的车道，走起来不再担忧高低不平了。又往西走一里，在树下吃饭。
English: From then on, it was all flat, wide lanes, no more worrying about ups and downs when walking. I walked another mile west and ate under a tree.

古文：又西驰七里，始有坞北来。
现代文：又往西急行七里，有山坞从北边伸来。
English: Another seven miles west of the expressway, there is a dock extending from the north.

古文：遂盘东山北转，一里，始横截北来之坞。
现代文：于是绕着东山往北转，一里，于是横穿北边来的山坞。
English: So I went around Higashiyama to the north, one mile, and then across the dock to the north.

古文：余始意坞中当有流南注，而不知其坞亦中洼也。
现代文：我当初估计坞中应有河水流向南边，却不知北坞也是中洼之地。
English: I initially estimated that there should be river water flowing to the south in the dock, but I did not know that the north dock was also a depression.

古文：坞中横亘一冈，南北俱成盘壑，而壑南复有冈焉。
现代文：坞中横贯一座山•冈，南北两面都形成盘壑，而盘壑的南面又有山冈。
English: In the dock, a mountain and a hill run across it, forming a mound on both the north and south sides, while on the south side of the mound, there is another hill.

古文：从中亘者驰而西，一里，复西上坡。
现代文：顺着坞中横贯的山冈往西急行，一里，又往西上坡。
English: Along the hill that runs through the middle of the dock to the west express, one mile, and then uphill to the west.

古文：又一里，陟坡之脊，亦有儸儸数家。
现代文：又一里，登上坡脊，也有几家锣锣居住。
English: Another mile up the ridge, there are also a few baboons living.

古文：问之道，不能对也。
现代文：向他们询问道路，不能回答。
English: Ask them for directions and they can't answer.

古文：从脊西下三里，连越两坡，又见坞自北来南向去，其中皆圆洼贮水，有冈中间，不通流焉。
现代文：顺坡脊往西下三里，又接连翻过两座山坡，又看见一道山坞从北边延伸过来后往南边下去，坞中尽是贮存有水的圆形洼地，有山冈隔在中间，水不互相流通。
English: I followed the ridge of the slope for three miles to the west, and successively turned over two hillsides, and saw a dock extending from the north and then going down to the south. The dock was full of circular depressions with water storage, with mountains and hills in the middle, and the water did not circulate with each other.

古文：从坡上西北望，则龙潭之山，自北分突，屏列而西，此近山也；西南望，则越州南岭，隔山遥障，所谓西峰也；而东峰之外。浮青直对，则大龟之峰，正与此南北相准焉。
现代文：从坡上向西北看去，则龙潭的山，从北面分出高耸的支脉，屏风般耸列着往西延伸，这是近处的山；向西南看去，则越州南面的山岭，隔着山形成远方屏障，是所说的西峰；而东峰之外青翠的山峰直直相对，则大龟山之峰，正好和这里南北相对。
English: Looking from the slope to the northwest, the Longtan Mountain, from the north, separates the towering branches, like a screen, extending to the west, which is the nearby mountain; looking to the southwest, the mountains in the south of Yuezhou, forming a distant barrier across the mountain, are the so-called west peak; and the verdant peaks beyond the east peak are directly opposite, the peak of the Big Turtle Mountain, just opposite the north and south here.

古文：西下坡，又有一坞自北而南，南环为大坞，与东界连洼之坞合。
现代文：往西下坡，又有一道从北往南走向的山坞，往南面环绕成大坞，和东部洼地相连的山坞会合。
English: Downslope to the west, there is another dock from the north to the south, which is surrounded by a large dock to the south, and meets the dock connected to the eastern depression.

古文：此坞始有细流中贯，夹坞成畦。
现代文：这座山坞才有细流纵贯其中，坞中沿细流两边形成田陇。
English: Only this dock has a thin stream running through it, forming rice fields on both sides of the dock.

古文：流上横小桥西度，有一老人持筐卖梨其侧，一钱得三枚，其大如瓯一种酒杯，味松脆而核甚小，乃种之绝胜者，闻此中有木瓜梨，岂即此耶？
现代文：从横跨细流的小桥往西走，有位老人提着筐子在桥边卖梨，一枚铜钱买到三个梨，大小如同小盆，味道甜脆、质地松软，而且核很小，是品种极佳的梨，听说这地方有木瓜梨，是否就是这种梨呢？
English: Walking west from a small bridge spanning a small stream, an old man carrying a basket was selling pears on the edge of the bridge. One copper coin bought three pears, the size of which was like a small pot, the taste was sweet and crisp, the texture was soft, and the core was small. It was an excellent variety of pear. I heard that there were papaya pears in this place. Was it this kind of pear?

古文：西上一冈，平行冈上四里，直抵西峰下，则有坞随其麓，而深涧潆之，所谓龙塘河也，然但见涧形，而不能见水。
现代文：往西登上一座山冈，沿冈平行四里，一直抵达西峰下面，有山坞伴随在峰脚，而且有很深的涧沟盘绕坞中，是所说的龙塘河，然而只能看见涧沟的形状，而不能看到水流。
English: Climbing up a mountain to the west, running parallel to the mountain for four miles, all the way to the bottom of the west peak, accompanied by a dock at the foot of the peak, and with a deep gully coiled in the dock, is the so-called Longtang River. However, only the shape of the gully can be seen, but not the water flow.

古文：乃西下坡约半里，随坞出西南，先与一小水遇，随之；既乃截坞而西，又半里，始与龙塘河遇，有大石梁跨其上。
现代文：于是往西下坡约半里，随着山坞从西南方出去，先遇到一条小河，顺着小河走；不久就横穿山坞往西，又走了半里，才和龙塘河相遇，有座大石桥横跨在龙塘河上。
English: So I walked about half a mile downhill to the west, following the dock from the southwest, and first encountered a small river, and walked along the small river; soon I crossed the dock to the west, walked another half mile, and met the Longtang River, and there was a large stone bridge across the Longtang River.

古文：桥右村庐累累，倚西山而居，始皆瓦房，非复茅舍矣。
现代文：桥右边村庄中的房屋重重叠叠，背靠西山居住，所见的民房到这里才全部都是瓦房，而不再是茅草房了。
English: The houses in the village on the right side of the bridge are stacked on top of each other, with people living behind the west hill. The houses you see here are all brick houses, and no longer thatched houses.

古文：龙塘河之水，发源于东北山峡中，其处环潭甚深，为蛟龙之窟，即所谓曲靖东山之东峡也。
现代文：龙塘河的水，发源于东北边的峡谷中，那里圆形的水潭十分深，是蛟龙的巢穴，就是所说的曲靖东山之东峡。
English: The water of the Longtang River originates in the canyon on the northeast side, where the round pool is very deep. It is the dragon's lair, the so-called East Gorge of Qujing Dongshan.

古文：其山北自白水铺西分水岭分支南下，亘曲靖之东，故曰东山；而由此视之，则为西岭焉，南至此，濒河而止。
现代文：东山从北边白水铺西面分水岭的支脉往南延伸下来，纵贯曲靖府东部，所以叫做东山；而从这里看过去，则成了西岭，往南延伸到这里，在龙塘河边止住。
English: Dongshan is called Dongshan because it extends southward from the northern branch of the west-facing watershed of Baishuipo to the east of Jingfu. From here, it becomes Xiling and extends southward to here, stopping at the Longtang River.

古文：其西腋之中，为阆木山；东腋之中，为龙潭，即此水之所出矣。
现代文：东山西侧的分支山脉中有间木山；东侧的分支山脉中，有龙潭，就是龙塘河所发源的地方。
English: Among the branch mountains on the west side of Dongshan, there is a wooden mountain; among the branch mountains on the east side, there is Longtan, which is the place where the Longtang River originated.

古文：自管口西下坞中，即为越州属，州境至此西止，而田畸悉环聚焉。
现代文：从警口往西下到坞中，则是越州所属的范围，越州西部边界到此而止，而田地全部环绕、聚集在这里。
English: From the police gate to the dock, it is the scope of Yuezhou, the western border of Yuezhou stops here, and the fields are all surrounded and gathered here.

古文：由村西上坡，即东山之南尽处也。
现代文：从村庄西边上坡，是东山南端尽头处。
English: From the west side of the village uphill, it is the end of the southern end of Dongshan.

古文：二里，逾冈头，方踞石少憩，忽一人自西岭驰来，谓余曰： 可亟还下山宿。
现代文：走了二里，越过冈头，正盘坐在石头上稍作休息，忽然有一个人从西边岭上奔跑过来，对我说道： 可以赶快返回山下住宿。
English: After walking two miles, crossing the top of the hill, and sitting on the stone for a short rest, suddenly a man ran over from the western ridge and said to me: You can quickly return to the mountain for accommodation.

古文：前岭方有盗劫人，毋往也。 
现代文：前边岭上正有强盗抢人，不要再过去了。 
English: There are bandits robbing people on the ridge ahead. Don't go any further.

古文：已而其妇后至，所语亦然。
现代文：不久他的女人在后赶到，所说的也是同样的话。
English: His wife arrived soon after and said the same thing.

古文：而仰视日方下午，前终日驰无人之境，皆豺狼魑魅之窟，即深夜幸免，岂此昼行，东西夹山而后者甚众，反有贼当道耶？
现代文：而我抬头看太阳，正是下午时分，之前整天奔走于毫无人烟的地区，全是如豺狼鬼怪的洞穴遍布其间，即使是深夜行走也能幸免于难，难道现在白天走路，山岭东西两面居住的人很多，反而会有盗贼当道吗？
English: And I looked up at the sun, it was in the afternoon, before that I had been running all day in a deserted area, full of caves like jackals and ghosts all over it, even walking late at night can be spared, is it now walking during the day, there are many people living on both sides of the mountains and hills, but will there be thieves?

古文：因诘之曰： 既有贼，汝何得至？ 
现代文：于是追问他们道： 既然有盗贼抢劫，你们怎么能过得来？ 
English: He then asked them: Since there are thieves and robberies, how can you get by?

古文：其人曰： 彼方剥行者衣，余夫妇得迂道来耳。 
现代文：那人说道： 盗贼正在剥行人的衣服，我夫妇因此得以绕道过来了。 
English: The man said: 'The thieves were stripping people of their clothes, so my wife and I were able to get around.

古文：余疑此人欲诳余还宿，故托为此言。
现代文：我怀疑这个人想骗我返回去住宿，所以假借这样的话作托词。
English: I suspected this person was trying to trick me into going back to my accommodation, so I used that as an excuse.

古文：又思果有之，今白日返宿，将明日又孰保其不至耶？
现代文：又想，如果真有强盗，今日白天返回去住下，那明天谁又能保证强盗不来呢？
English: I also thought, if there really is a robber who returns during the day today to live, then who can guarantee that the robber will not come tomorrow?

古文：况既劫人，彼必无复待之理，不若即驰而去也。
现代文：况且既然抢了人，盗贼一定没有再等在那里的道理，不如立即急行而离开此地。
English: Moreover, since the robber has robbed someone, the thief must have no reason to wait there any longer. It is better to leave this place immediately.

古文：遂叱顾仆行，即从冈上盘北山而西。
现代文：于是呼喊顾仆出发，立刻从山冈上绕着北山往西走。
English: So he shouted for his servant to set out and immediately walked westward around the north mountain from the top of the hill.

古文：盖北即东山南下之顶，南即其山下坠之峡，而盘江自桥头南下，为越州后横亘山所勒，转而东流，遂截此山南麓而断之，故下皆砠踽不平。
现代文：因为北面是东山往南延伸的顶部，南面是东山断陷下去的峡谷，而盘江从桥头往南流，被越州后面横贯的大山所阻止，转向东流，于是横穿东山南麓而切断东山，所以下去的道路坎坷不平。
English: Because the north side is the top of Dongshan stretching southward, and the south side is the canyon where Dongshan breaks off, and the Panjiang River flows south from the bridgehead, is blocked by the mountains across the back of Yuezhou, turns to the east, and then cuts through the southern foot of Dongshan and cuts off Dongshan, so the road down is bumpy and uneven.

古文：路横架岭上，四里抵其中，旁瞩北岭，石参差而岫屼岦，觉云影风枝，无非惴人之具，令人错顾不定，投趾莫择。
现代文：道路横跨岭上，走四里抵达东山中部，从侧面看北岭，石头参差不齐而山峰光秃，只觉得云动之影、风吹树枝，无二不是令人恐惧不安的道具，使人不停地东顾西看，投足慌不择路。
English: The road stretches across the ridge, walking four miles to reach the middle of the East Mountain. Looking at the North Ridge from the side, the stones are uneven and the peaks are bare. I only feel the shadow of the clouds and the wind-blown branches. They are nothing but frightening and disturbing tools, making people constantly look to the east and west, and rush to choose a path.

古文：又西四里，始西南下片石中。
现代文：又往西走四里，才往西南下到片片岩石的包围之中。
English: Another four miles to the west, before descending south-west into the encirclement of rock.

古文：其处土倾峡坠，崩嵌交错，而石骨露其中，如裂瓣缀行。
现代文：这里泥土塌落，峡谷深陷，崩石纵横交错，而岩石裸露其中，如裂开的花瓣连接不断地排列。
English: Here the earth falls away, the canyons sink deeper, the crags are criss-crossed, and the bare rocks, like the petals of a split flower, are connected in a continuous line.

古文：其坠处皆流土，不可着足，必从石瓣中宛转取道。
现代文：那些深陷下去的地方都是松动的泥土，不能落脚，必须从片片石瓣之中转来转去地找路走。
English: Those places that sink deeper are loose soil, you can't land, and you have to find your way from one piece of stone to another.

古文：其石质幻而色异，片片皆英山绝品，惟是风鹤惊心，不能狎憩而徐赏之。
现代文：这些岩石质地变幻而色彩各异，片片都是山上罕见的绝妙佳品，只是风声鹤映、休目惊心，不能随意休息而慢慢地观赏它们。
English: These rocks vary in texture and color, and each piece is a rare gem on the mountain. It's just that the wind is so loud that you can't relax and watch them slowly.

古文：亡何不久，已下见西坞南流之江，知去桥头不远，可免虎口，乃倚石隙少憩，竟作青莲瓣中人矣。
现代文：不久，往下已经看见西边坞中往南流去的盘江，知道距离桥头不远了，能够脱离危险的境地，才靠在石缝中稍作休息，竟然作了一回青色石莲花瓣之中的人。
English: Soon, he saw the Panjiang River flowing southward in the west dock and knew that the bridgehead was not far away, and he was able to get out of the dangerous situation, only to rest a little in the stone crevice, and even made a person among the petals of the blue stone lotus.

古文：从石中下者一里，既及西麓，复行支陇，遂多聚庐之居。
现代文：从石瓣中往下走一里，不久来到西边山麓，又在支陇上走，于是村落房舍多了。
English: From the stone flap, walk down one mile, soon come to the western foot of the mountain, and then walk on the branch, so the village has more houses.

古文：又一里，路北江回堰曲，中涵大塘一围，四面丰禾环之；东有精庐，高倚东山之麓；西则江流所泄，而石梁横跨之。
现代文：又走一里，路北江水回转、挡水的堤坝弯曲，其中形成一圈大塘，四面环绕着茂盛的庄稼；东边有精致的房舍，高高地傍靠在东山之麓；西边则是盘江江流的河道，而石桥横跨盘江之上。
English: After walking for another mile, the water of the Lu Bei River turned around and the dam that held back the water was bent, forming a circle of large ponds surrounded by lush crops on all sides; on the east side there were exquisite houses, high up near the foot of the Dongshan Mountain; on the west side was the river channel of the Panjiang River, and the stone bridge spanned the Panjiang River.

古文：又行畦间半里，始及石梁。
现代文：又在田畦间走半里，才抵达石桥。
English: I walked another half-mile between fields before arriving at the stone bridge.

古文：其梁不高而长，是为南盘之源，北自炎方、交水、曲靖之东，直南至此。
现代文：此桥不高而长，桥下水是南盘江的上源，从北面炎方骚、交水、曲靖府的东部，径直往南流到这里。
English: This bridge is not high but long. The water under the bridge is the upper source of the South Panyu River, flowing from the north of Yanfangxiao, Jiaoshui, and the east of Qujingfu, and flowing straight south to here.

古文：是桥为曲靖锁钥，江出此即东南流，绕越州之东而南人峡焉。
现代文：这座桥是曲靖府的交通要道，盘江流经这里后就往东南流走，绕过越州的东部而往南流人峡谷。
English: This bridge is a major transportation route in Qujing Prefecture. After the Pan River flows through here, it flows to the southeast, bypassing the eastern part of Yuezhou and flowing to the South Streamer Canyon.

古文：逾梁而西约半里，上坡北，而宿于逆旅，即昔之所过石堡村也。
现代文：过桥后往西走了大约半里，上坡往北走，然后到客舍住宿，是前些时候所走过的石堡村。
English: After crossing the bridge, I walked about half a mile to the west, uphill to the north, and then to the guest house for accommodation, which is the stone castle village I walked through earlier.

古文：适夜色已瞑，明月在地，过畏途，就安庐，乐甚。
现代文：正好此时天色黑了，明亮的月光洒在地上，顺利通过令人生畏的旅途，住进了安全适意的客舍，心里很高兴。
English: Just then it got dark, bright moonlight spilled on the ground, successfully passed the daunting journey, lived in a safe and comfortable guest house, and I was very happy.

古文：问主人： 岭上有御人者，果有之乎？ 
现代文：问客店主人道： 山上有抢人的强盗，真的吗？ 
English: Ask the innkeeper: Is it true that there are robbers on the mountain?

古文：主人曰： 即余邻人。
现代文：主人说： 就是我的邻居被抢。
English: The owner said, "It was my neighbor who was robbed."

古文：下午樵于山，数贼自山后跃出，剥三人衣，而碎一人首。
现代文：他们今天下午在山上砍柴，几个盗贼从山后跳出来，将三个人的衣服剥掉，并且砍掉一个人的头。
English: They were chopping wood on the mountain this afternoon when a couple of thieves jumped out from behind the mountain, stripped three people of their clothes and chopped off one man's head.

古文：与君来时相后先也。 
现代文：就发生在你过来时相前后一点。 
English: It happened just before and just after you came.

古文：予于是始感前止宿者之情，而自愧以私衷臆度之也。
现代文：我于是才感谢先前阻止我前进、让我回去住宿之人的情份，而且暗自惭愧自己用私心去揣测、猜疑他们。
English: I was therefore grateful for the kindness of the people who had previously prevented me from moving forward and let me go back to my accommodation, and I was secretly ashamed of my selfish speculation and suspicion of them.

古文：盖是岭东为越州，西为石堡，乃曲靖卫屯军之界，互相推诿，盗遂得而乘之耳。
现代文：大概因为这座岭东部属于越州管辖；西部属于石堡村，是曲靖卫守军的范围，两家互相推楼，盗贼于是得以乘机行事罢了。
English: Probably because the eastern part of this ridge belongs to the jurisdiction of Yuezhou; the western part belongs to Shibao Village and is within the scope of the Qujing garrison, the two houses pushed each other, and the thieves were able to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：初八日昧爽饭，索酒而酌，为浴泉计。
现代文：初八日天亮时吃饭，索要酒来喝，为去温泉沐浴作准备。
English: On the morning of the eighth day of the first month, I ate at dawn, asked for wine to drink, and prepared to go to the hot spring for a bath.

古文：遂由村后越坡西下，则温泉在望矣。
现代文：然后从村后越过坡往西一下，于是温泉就看得到了。
English: Then, from the back of the village, cross the slope to the west, and you can see the hot springs.

古文：坞中蒸气氤氲，随流东下，田畦间郁然四起也。
现代文：山坞中蒸气弥漫，随着温泉水流向东流下去，田畦间浓郁的蒸气四面腾起。
English: Steam permeates the dockyard. As the hot spring water flows eastward, thick steam rises from the fields on all sides.

古文：半里，人围垣之户，则一泓中贮，有亭覆其上，两旁复砖甃两池夹之。
现代文：走了半里，从矮围墙上的门进去，么池清澈的泉水就聚贮于墙内，有亭子覆盖在池上，两旁又用砖砌了两个池子把泉水夹在中间。
English: After walking half a mile, entering through a door in the low wall, the clear spring water from the spring pool was collected and stored in the wall. A pavilion covered the pool, and two pools were built with bricks on both sides to sandwich the spring water in the middle.

古文：北有谢三楹，水从其下来，中开一孔，方径尺，可掬而盥也。
现代文：北面高处有三间屋子，泉水从屋子下面流出来，其中开有一个孔，孔每边长一尺，可以用手捧水洗涤。
English: There are three rooms high up on the north side. The spring water flows from the bottom of the room, and there is a hole in it. The hole is one foot long on each side, and can be washed with a handful of water.

古文：遂解衣就池中浴。
现代文：于是脱衣在中池沐浴。
English: So she stripped off and bathed in the middle of the pool.

古文：初下，其热烁肤，较之前浴时觉甚烈。
现代文：刚下水时，感觉水热得烫皮肤，比从前温泉沐浴时的感觉更强烈。
English: When you first get into the water, you feel the water is so hot that it burns your skin, which is a stronger sensation than when you used to bathe in hot springs.

古文：既而温调适体，殊胜弥勒之太凉，而清冽亦过之。
现代文：不久温度便很适宜体温，大大胜过弥勒州温泉过凉的水温，而泉水清澈的程度也超过那里的。
English: Soon the temperature is very suitable for body temperature, much better than the water temperature of the Mailezhou hot spring, and the spring water is also clearer than there.

古文：浴罢，由垣后东向半里，出大道。
现代文：沐浴完毕，从矮墙背后往东走半里。出到大路上。
English: After bathing, walk half a mile east from behind the low wall. Go out to the main road.

古文：是日碧天如濯，明旭晶然，腾翠微而出，洁波映其下，对之觉尘襟荡涤，如在冰壶玉鉴中。
现代文：今日蓝天如洗，明亮的太阳光芒四射，从雅淡葱绿的峰上跃出，浩荡的水波映照在阳光下，面对这样的美景顿时觉得世俗的胸襟已被消除干净，如同置身于冰壶玉鉴中。
English: Today, the sky is so blue, the bright sun shines everywhere, leaping out from the elegant green peaks, and the vast waves of water are reflected in the sun. Faced with such beauty, I suddenly feel that the worldly heart has been eliminated cleanly, as if I were in a curling jade book.

古文：北行十里，过南城，又二十里，入曲靖南门。
现代文：往北走十里，经过南城，又走二十里，从曲靖府城南门进城。
English: Walk north for ten miles, pass through Nancheng, walk another twenty miles, and enter the city from the South Gate of Qujing City.

古文：时有戈参戎者持枪士兵，奉按君命，巡诸城堡，高幢大纛，拥骑如云，南驰而去。
现代文：这时有个姓戈的武官参将，奉按察使的命令，巡视各城堡。高大的军旗林立，簇拥参将的骑兵如云，往南飞奔而去。
English: At this time, there was a military attaché named Go, who, on the orders of the inspector, inspected the castles. Tall banners stood, and the cavalrymen, surrounded by the inspectors, flew south.

古文：余避道旁视之，如赫电，亦如浮云，不知两界青山见惯，袒当谁左也谁露出左臂表示拥护呢。
现代文：我让在路旁注视着他们，如触目惊心的闪电，又如飘逝的云雾，不知道两旁的青山见此，谁会拥护他们呢。在卖面的店中吃饭。
English: I let the roadside watch them, like a startling lightning, and like a passing cloud, I don't know if the mountains on both sides see this, who will support them.

古文：饭于面肆中。出东门半里，入东山寺。
现代文：从城东门走出半里，进入东山寺。
English: Walk half a mile from the east gate of the city and enter Dongshan Temple.

古文：是名青龙山，而实无山，郭东岣嵝，高仅丈余，大不及五丈。
现代文：这里名叫青龙山，而实际上并没有山。城墙东面的小土冈，只有一丈多高，周边长不到五丈。
English: It is called Qinglong Mountain, but in fact there is no mountain. The small earth mound on the east side of the city wall is only a few feet high, and the surrounding area is less than five feet long.

古文：上建大殿，前列层楼配之，置宏钟焉，钟之大，余所未见也。
现代文：其上建有大殿，前面列有一层楼配着，楼内置放宏钟，钟如此之大，是我从未见过的。
English: There is a large hall on top of it, with a row of one-story buildings in front of it, and a large bell in the building. The bell is so large that I have never seen it before.

古文：殿左有藏经阁，其右楼三层，皆翼于岣嵝之旁而齐其末者。
现代文：大殿左边有藏经阁，其右是三层楼房，分别立在土冈旁边而和大殿底部相齐。
English: On the left side of the main hall is the library, and on the right is a three-story building, which stands separately next to the earthen mound and is aligned with the bottom of the main hall.

古文：徙倚久之，出寺右，循城而北，五里，出演武场大道。
现代文：在寺中留连徘徊了很久，从寺右出来，顺着城墙往北走，五里，走出演武场大路。
English: He lingered in the temple for a long time, came out from the right side of the temple, walked along the city wall to the north, five miles, and walked out of the battlefield road.

古文：又三里过白石江，又二里过一坡。
现代文：又走三里经过白石江，又走二里过了一座坡。
English: I walked another three miles past the Shiroishi River, and another two miles past a hill.

古文：又十里抵新桥，殷雷轰然，大雨忽至，避茅檐下，冰霰交作，回风涌之，扑人衣面，莫可掩蔽。
现代文：又走十里抵达新桥。雷声轰鸣，暴雨来临，在茅檐下避雨，冰雹雨点交相兴起，旋风涌来，直扑人的衣服和脸面，没有什么可以遮蔽。
English: I walked another ten miles to Xinqiao. The thunder roared, the rainstorm came, I took shelter under the thatch, the hailstones and raindrops intermingled, and the whirlwind came, hitting people's clothes and faces, and there was nothing to cover.

古文：久之乃霁。
现代文：过了一阵天才晴开。
English: After a while, the sun came out.

古文：仍北行，泞滑不可着趾。
现代文：仍然往北走，道路泥泞滑溜难以下脚。
English: Still going north, the road is muddy and slippery and difficult to walk on.

古文：十里抵交水，入南门。
现代文：走了十里抵达交水，从城南门进城。
English: After walking ten miles, they arrived at Jiaozuo and entered the city through the south gate.

古文：沾益惟土司居州治，而知州之署则在交水。
现代文：经过沾益州署前而到达城东门，到原来住过的龚起潜家投宿。
English: After passing in front of the Tsim Sha Tsui Prefectural Police Station, they arrived at the east gate of the city and stayed at the former home of the Tsukiji divers.

古文：初九日余倦于行役在外长途跋涉，憩其楼不出，作数日游纪。
现代文：看到他家大门紧闭，感到奇怪，叩开门才知道他家正在内院演剧。我因为双脚泥泞衣服很脏，不愿意看，急忙进他家后楼去休息。初九日我由于在外长途跋涉而疲倦，在后楼休息不出门，写几天来的游记。
English: I was surprised to see the gate of his house closed, and only when I knocked on the door did I find out that his family was performing a play in the inner courtyard. Because my feet were muddy and my clothes were dirty, I didn't want to watch, so I hurried into the back of his house to rest. On the ninth day of the first month, I was tired because of the long journey outside, so I rested in the back room and didn't go out to write a travelogue of the past few days.

古文：是日为重九，高风鼓寒。
现代文：今天是九月九日，金风送爽。
English: Today is September 9th. The wind is blowing.

古文：以登高之候，而独作袁安僵卧之态，以日日跻攀崇峻不少也。
现代文：在这登高的节日，我独自一人作出袁安僵卧不出的态势，因为连日来攀登的崇山峻岭不少了。
English: On this climbing festival, I was the only one who made Yuan An lie still, because there were a lot of mountains to climb.

古文：下午，主人携菊具酌，不觉陶然而卧。
现代文：下午，主人送来菊花，备下酒宴，后在不知不觉中乐陶陶地入睡。
English: In the afternoon, the owner sent chrysanthemums, prepared a wine banquet, and then fell asleep unconsciously.

古文：初十日寒甚，终日阴翳。
现代文：初十日很冷，整日阴云遮天。
English: The first ten days were very cold, with overcast skies all day.

古文：止寓中。下午复雨，彻夜不休。
现代文：留在住所里 下午又下起雨来，一夜没停。
English: Stay at home It rained again in the afternoon and didn't stop overnight.

古文：十一日余欲行。主人以雨留，复为强驻，厌吃饱其酒脯焉。
现代文：十一日我打算出发，主人用下雨为理由挽留，又因此强行让我住下，在这里酒足饭饱。
English: On the eleventh day I planned to set out, but my host used the rain as a reason to keep me back, and therefore forced me to stay, and here I have had enough to eat and drink.

古文：初余欲从沾益并穷北盘源委，至交水，龚起潜为余谈之甚晰，皆凿凿可据，遂图返辕，由寻甸趋省城焉。
现代文：当初我准备从沾益州走，连同北盘江源流一齐穷究，到了交水，龚起潜对我谈论北盘江，十分清楚，都很确凿有据，于是考虑掉转方向返回，由寻甸府回省城。
English: At first, I was going to go from Zhangyizhou, and together with the divers, I was going to explore the source of the Beipan River. When I reached the water crossing, the diver started to talk to me about the Beipan River. It was very clear and well-founded, so I considered turning back and returning to the provincial capital from Xiangdianfu.

古文：十二日主人情笃，候饭而行，已上午矣。
现代文：十二日主人情意深厚，等吃过饭启程，已经是上午了。
English: On the twelfth day, the owner was very affectionate, and it was already morning when he left after eating.

古文：十里仍抵新桥，遂由歧溯流西南行。
现代文：走十里仍旧来到新桥，于是从岔路溯流往西南行。
English: After walking ten miles, they still came to Xinqiao, so they retraced the flow from Kuching Road to the southwest.

古文：二里抵西南小山下，石幢之水，乃从西北峡中来，路乃从西南峡中入。
现代文：二里抵达西南小山下，石幢河水从西北峡谷中流来，道路往西南峡谷中伸去。
English: After two miles, we arrived at the foot of the southwest hill. The stone river water flowed from the northwest canyon, and the road stretched into the southwest canyon.

古文：一里登岭，一里陟其巅。
现代文：走一里后上岭，攀登一里抵达其顶。
English: After walking one mile to Shangling, climb one mile to reach its top.

古文：西行岭上者又一里，乃下。
现代文：又往西在岭上走了一里，于是下岭。
English: Another mile west on the ridge, then down the ridge.

古文：初从岭头下瞰西坞，有庐有畴，有水潆之，以为必自西而东注石幢者。
现代文：当初从岭头上向下俯视西边的山坞，有村舍、田地，还有河水环绕，我认为水一定从西往东注入石幢河。
English: At first, I looked down from the ridge to the dock on the west side of the mountain, surrounded by village houses, fields, and river water. I thought that water must be injected into the Shidong River from west to east.

古文：迤逦西下者又一里，抵坞中，则其水返西南流，当由南谷中转东而出于白石江者。
现代文：绕来绕去地又往西下一里，来到坞中，则看到河水是返过来往西南流，可能是流经南边山谷中再往东转，然后流入白石江。
English: After going around and around, it went west for another mile, and when it came to the dock, it was seen that the river water was flowing back and forth to the southwest, possibly flowing through the southern valley and then turning east, and then flowing into the Shiraishi River.

古文：询是村为戈家冲。
现代文：询问这个村子名，叫戈家冲。
English: If you ask the name of the village, it is called Gojiaochong.

古文：由是而西，并翠峰诸涧之流，皆为白石江上流之源矣。
现代文：从这里往西，以及翠峰山各涧的溪流，都是白石江上游的源头。
English: From here to the west, as well as the streams of the various ridges of the Tsui Feng Mountains, are the sources of the upper reaches of the Shiraishi River.

古文：源短流微，潆带不过数里之内，而沐西平曲靖之捷，誇为冒雾涉江，自上流渡而夹攻之，著之青史，为不世勋，而不知与坳堂水塘无异也。
现代文：源流短、水流小，回旋流经的区域不过在儿里之内，而西平侯沐英的曲靖作战捷报，却夸大其词为冒着浓雾横渡白石江，从上游绕渡然后夹攻敌军，将这一切写入历史，成为不同寻常的功勋，却不知白石江和小水塘没有什么区别。
English: The source of the river is short, the water flow is small, and the area through which the gyre flows is only within a few kilometers. However, the victory report of Xiping Hou Muying's Qujing Campaign exaggeratedly said that he braved the thick fog to cross the Shiraishi River, circumnavigated from the upper reaches and then attacked the enemy army. He wrote all this into history and became an unusual merit, but he did not know that there was no difference between the Shiraishi River and a small pond.

古文：征事考实，书之不足尽信如此！
现代文：征引史事、考证实际，不能完全相信史书的记载就是这个道理！
English: This is the reason why it is impossible to completely trust the records of history books when historical events are quoted and evidence is examined.

古文：于是盘折坂谷四里，越刘家坡，则翠峰山在望矣。
现代文：于是在坡上谷中盘旋曲折地走了四里，越过刘家坡，就看得到翠峰山了。
English: So I walked for four miles, winding and twisting in the middle of the valley on the slope, and when I crossed the Lujia slope, I could see the Jade Mountain.

古文：盖此山即两旁中界之脊，南自宜良分支，北度木容箐，又北而度火烧箐岭，又北而度响水西岭，又北而结为此山；又西夹峙为回龙山，绕交水之西北，经炎方，又北抵沾益州南；转东，复折而南下，峙为黑山，分为两支。
现代文：原来翠峰山是两边群山的中分之脊，南端从宜良县分支，往北越过木容著，再往北越过火烧著岭，还往北越过响水西岭，又往北就聚结为此山；然后又往西延伸，对峙为回龙山，绕到交水西北，经过炎方骤，又往北延伸到沾益州南边；转向东边，又折回去往南走，耸起为黑山，分成两支山脉。
English: Originally, Cuifeng Mountain was the midpoint ridge of the mountains on both sides. The southern end branched off from Yiliang County, went north over Muzhong, then north over Fiery Ridge, then north over Xiangshui West Ridge, and then north to unite as a mountain. Then it extended west again, confronted by Huilong Mountain, circled to the northwest of the confluence, passed through Flame Square, and extended north to the south of Zhanyizhou; turned to the east, and turned back to the south, rising as Black Mountain, divided into two mountains.

古文：正支由火烧铺、明月所之间南走东折，下安笼所，入泗城州，而东峙为大明山，遂尽于浔州。
现代文：正支往南从火烧铺、明月所之间往南延伸后向东转，往下到安笼所，进入泅城州，然后向东耸立为大明山，最终延伸到得州结束。
English: The main branch extends southwards between the Fiery Furnace and the Bright Moon, then turns eastwards, descends to the Cage, enters Lucheng, and then rises to the east as the Great Bright Mountain, and finally extends to the end of Texas.

古文：旁支西南由白水西分水岭，又分两支：直南者由回窞坡西岭，西南峙为大龟山，而尽于盘江南曲；西南分支者，尽于曲靖东山。
现代文：旁边的分支往西南经过白水铺西的分水岭，又分成两支：一直往南走向的一支经过回宫坡西岭，在西南方耸立为大龟山，再延伸到盘江南岸结束；往西南走向的分支，延伸到曲靖府东山结束。
English: The adjacent branch to the southwest passes through the watershed west of Baishuipu, and is divided into two branches: the one that goes all the way to the south passes through the west ridge of Huigongpo, rises in the southwest as the Big Turtle Mountain, and then extends to the end of the south bank of the Panjiang River; the branch that goes to the southwest extends to the end of the Dongshan of Qujing.

古文：其东南之水，下为白石江；东北之水，下为石幢河；而西则泄于马龙之江，而出寻甸，为北盘江焉。
现代文：翠峰山东南边的水，流下去是白石江；东北边的水，流下去是石幢河；而西边的水则流入马龙州的口江，然后从寻甸府流出，称为北盘江。
English: The water on the southeast side of Mount Cuifeng flows into the Baishi River; the water on the northeast side flows into the Shidong River; and the water on the west side flows into the Kuching River in Malong Prefecture, and then flows out of Xiangdian Prefecture, known as the Beipan River.

古文：然则一山而东出为南盘，西出为北盘，惟此山及炎方足以当之；若曲靖东山，则旁支错出，而志之所称悉误也。
现代文：这样看来，则是一座山东边流出的水属于南盘江，西边流出的水属于北盘江，只有翠峰山和炎方骚才能够处于这种位置；如果认为是曲靖府东山，那么东山的分支山脉就是交叉延伸的，因而志书的记载完全错误。
English: From this perspective, the water flowing out of the east side of a mountain belongs to the Nanpan River, and the water flowing out of the west side belongs to the Beipan River. Only Mount Cuifeng and Mount Yanfangsao can be in this position. If it is considered to be the East Mountain of Qujing Prefecture, then the branch mountains of the East Mountain are cross-extended, so the record of the book is completely wrong.

古文：由刘家坡西南，从坡上行一里，追及一妪，乃翠峰山下横山屯人也。
现代文：从刘家坡往西南，顺坡往上行一里，追上一位老年妇女，是翠峰山脚横山屯的人。
English: From the Lujia slope to the southwest, one mile up the slope, I caught up with an elderly woman, who was from Hengshan Tun at the foot of the Tsui Feng Mountain.

古文：随之又西一里，乃下坡。
现代文：跟着她又往西走了一里，于是下坡。
English: He followed her west for another mile, then downhill.

古文：径坞一里，有小水自西北来，小石梁跨之。
现代文：在坞中走了一里，有条小河从西北流来，上面横跨小石桥。
English: After walking a mile in the dock, there was a small river flowing from the northwest, with a small stone bridge across it.

古文：从此西南上坡，为三车道；从此直西溯小水，自西南岸入，为翠峰间道。
现代文：从这里往西南上坡，是去三车市的道路；从这里一直往西，顺着小河往上游走，从西南岸进去，是到翠峰山的小路。
English: From here, going uphill to the southwest is the road to Sancha City; from here, going west all the way, going upstream along the creek, and entering from the southwest bank is the path to Cuifeng Mountain.

古文：其路若续若断，横截坞陇。
现代文：小路断断续续，横穿山坞陇冈。
English: The path is intermittent, crossing the mountain dock of Hataoka.

古文：三里，有大道自东南来，则自曲靖登山之径也，于是东南望见三车市矣。
现代文：走三里，有条大路从东南边伸过来，这是从曲靖府登翠峰山的路，在这里往东南就看得到三车市了。
English: After walking for three miles, there is a big road stretching from the southeast. This is the road from Qujing to Mount Cuifeng. From here, you can see Sansha Market to the southeast.

古文：遂从大道西行，二里，将抵翠峰下，复从小径西南度陇。
现代文：于是顺大路往西走，二里，快到翠峰山脚时，又从小路往西南越过陇冈。
English: So I walked west along the main road for two miles, and when I was almost at the foot of the Tsui Feng Mountains, I crossed the Lushan Mountains from the south-west.

古文：风雨忽至，顷刻而过。
现代文：风雨忽然来临，片刻就过去了。
English: The wind and rain came suddenly, and a moment passed.

古文：一里，下坡涉深涧，又西上坡半里，抵横山屯。
现代文：一里，下坡后涉过深涧，又往西上坡半里，抵达横山屯。
English: After descending one mile, it waded through the deep ravine, and then climbed half a mile to the west, arriving at Hengshan Tun.

古文：其屯皆徐姓。
现代文：这屯的人都姓徐。
English: Everyone in this town is surnamed Xu.

古文：老妪命其子从村后送余入山。
现代文：那位老年妇女叫她儿子送我从村后进山。
English: The old woman asked her son to take me to the mountain behind the village.

古文：半里抵其麓，即有两小涧合流。
现代文：走半里后抵达翠峰山麓，就有两股小涧水合在一块流。
English: After walking half a mile and arriving at the foot of the Tsui Feng Mountain, there are two small streams of water merging into one stream.

古文：涉其北来者，溯其西来者，遂蹑峻西上。
现代文：渡过北边延伸过来的小水涧，顺着西边来的水涧往上走，于是攀爬陡峻的山峰往西上。
English: After crossing the small streamlets extending from the north, they walked up the streamlets coming from the west, and climbed the steep mountain to the west.

古文：一里半，盘岭头而北，转入西峡中，则山之半矣。
现代文：一里半，绕着岭头往北走，转到西边峡谷中，是翠峰半山腰。
English: A mile and a half, walk around the ridge to the north, turn to the west side of the canyon, is the mid-mountain of the Jade Peak.

古文：其山自绝顶垂两支，如环臂东下：北支长，则缭绕而前，为新桥西冈之脉；南支短，则所蹑以上者。
现代文：翠峰山从最顶上分为两支垂下去，如同手臂一样往东环绕：北支长，就环绕在前，是新桥西冈的山脊：南支短，就是刚才攀爬的陡峰。
English: Cuifeng Mountain is divided into two branches hanging down from the top, surrounding it to the east like an arm: the north branch is long, it is surrounded in front, it is the ridge of the west ridge of Xinqiao: the south branch is short, it is the steep peak just climbed.

古文：两臂之内，又中悬一支，当坞若台之峙，则朝阳庵踞其上，庵东北向。
现代文：两条手臂般的山脊之间，其中部又耸起一座山峰，正对山坞，如同高台一样地屹立，而朝阳庵就位于这座山峰上，朝阳庵面向东北。
English: Between the two arm-like ridges, a mountain peak rises in the middle, standing like a plateau directly opposite the dock, and Chaoyang'an is located on this peak. Chaoyang'an faces northeast.

古文：其南腋又与南臂环阿成峡，自峰顶逼削而下，则护国旧寺倚其间。
现代文：这座山峰的南侧又和翠峰山的南支山脊绕成峡谷，从峰顶上又窄又陡地伸下去，护国旧寺紧靠在峡谷中。
English: The southern side of this peak and the southern branch ridge of Cuifeng Mountain are twisted into a canyon, which is narrow and steep from the peak, and the National Guard Old Temple is close to the canyon.

古文：自西峡入半里，先达旧寺，然后东转上朝阳，以旧寺前坠峡下堑也。
现代文：从西边峡谷中进去半里，先到护国旧寺，然后往东转，登上朝阳庵，因为护国旧寺前峡谷深陷。
English: Half a mile into the canyon from the west, first to the old temple of the protector of the country, then turn to the east and climb the Chaoyang Monastery, because the canyon in front of the old temple of the protector of the country is deep.

古文：旧寺两崖壁夹而阴森，其病这里指不足之处在旁无余地；朝阳孤台中缀而轩朗，所短在前少回环。
现代文：旧寺两旁的山崖狭窄而阴森，不足的是寺旁毫无余地；朝阳庵位于孤峰顶上而位置开敞，短处在于庵前缺少回旋余地。
English: The cliffs on both sides of the old temple are narrow and gloomy. The only drawback is that there is no room for a horse next to the temple. Choyo-an is located on the top of a lonely peak and is spacious. The disadvantage is that there is no room for maneuvering in front of the hermitage.

古文：余先入旧寺，见正殿亦整，其后遂危崖迥峭，藤木倒垂于其上，而殿前两柏甚巨，夹立参天。
现代文：我先进护国旧寺，看到寺里的大殿也还整齐，大殿背后就是笔直的山崖，十分陡峭，古藤、老树倒挂在山崖，而殿前的两棵柏树十分巨大，位于大殿两侧，高入云天。
English: I went to the old temple for the protection of the country, and saw that the main hall of the temple was also neat. Behind the main hall is a straight cliff, very steep. Old wisteria and old trees hang upside down on the cliff, and the two cypress trees in front of the hall are very huge, located on both sides of the main hall, high into the sky.

古文：寺中止一僧，乃寄锡殿中者，一见即为余爇火炊饭。
现代文：寺中只有一个僧人，是暂在殿中的行脚僧，一见面就为我烧火做饭。
English: There is only one monk in the temple. He is a lineage monk who is temporarily staying in the main hall. As soon as he sees me, he lights a fire to cook for me.

古文：余乃更衣叩佛，即乘间东登朝阳。
现代文：我于是换衣服、叩拜佛祖，并乘空闲往东攀登朝阳庵。
English: So I changed my clothes, bowed to the Buddha, and took a leisurely walk east to climb Choyo-an.

古文：一头陀方曳杖出庵门。
现代文：一个头陀正拖着锡杖走出庵门。
English: A toddler is dragging a tin cane out of the hermitage door.

古文：余入其庵，亦别无一僧，止有读书者数人在东楼。
现代文：我进入朝阳庵，也没有其它僧人，只有几个读书人住在东楼。
English: When I entered Choyo-an, there were no other monks, only a few readers lived in the east wing.

古文：余闲步前庭。
现代文：我在前庭漫步。
English: I walk around the front yard.

古文：庭中有西番菊两株，其花大如盘，簇瓣无心，赤光灿烂，黄菊为之夺艳，乃子种而非根分，此其异于诸菊者。
现代文：庭院中有两株西番菊，盛开的菊花如同盘子一样大，花瓣簇拥而无花蕊，红光灿烂，黄菊的艳丽也因此而失色。西番菊是撒子栽种而不是分根，这和其它各种菊花的培育方法不同。
English: In the courtyard there are two camellia trees. The blooming chrysanthemums are as big as saucers. The petals are clustered together, but there are no stamens. The red light is brilliant, and the beauty of the yellow chrysanthemum fades as a result. The camellia is grown from cuttings rather than from separate roots, which is different from other methods of cultivating chrysanthemums.

古文：前楼亦幽迥，庭前有桂花一树，幽香飘泛，远袭山谷。
现代文：前楼也幽静深远，庭院前有一棵桂花树，清香飘浮，香气侵袭到很远的山谷中。
English: The front building is also secluded and far away. In front of the courtyard, there is an osmanthus tree. The fragrance floats, and the aroma invades the distant valley.

古文：余前隔峡盘岭，即闻而异之，以为天香遥坠，而不意乃敷萼开花所成也。
现代文：我先前隔着峡谷盘绕山岭，因闻到花香而感到奇怪，以为香气从天而降，而没想到是桂树开花所散发的香味。
English: I had been circling the mountains across the canyon, and I was surprised to smell the scent of flowers, thinking that the fragrance was falling from the sky, but I did not expect it to be the fragrance emitted by the flowering of the cinnamon tree.

古文：桂芬菊艳，念此幽境，恨无一僧可托。
现代文：桂树芬芳，菊花艳丽，遗憾的是如此幽雅的环境，竟然找不到一位僧人可以托付。
English: The fragrance of the laurel trees, the dazzling chrysanthemums, and, unfortunately, such a tranquil environment, that not a single monk could be found to be entrusted with it.

古文：还饭旧寺，即欲登顶为行计，见炊饭僧殷勤整饷，虽瓶无余粟，豆无余蔬，殊有割指啖客之意，心异之。
现代文：返回护国旧寺吃饭，计划饭后立即出发登上山顶，看到做饭的僧人殷勤地准备食物，即使是瓶钵中没有多余的粮食，盘中没有多余的蔬菜，也很有割下指头待客的心意，我感到惊异。
English: After returning to the old temple for dinner, I planned to go to the top of the mountain immediately after dinner. I was surprised to see that the monks who cooked the food prepared the food diligently. Even if there was no extra grain in the jar and no extra vegetables on the plate, they were very willing to cut off their fingers to welcome the guests.

古文：及饭，则己箸不沾蔬，而止以蔬奉客，始知即为淡斋师也。
现代文：到吃饭时，僧人自己则筷不沾菜，而只把菜敬奉客人，才知道是淡斋法师。
English: When it comes to eating, the monks themselves do not dip their chopsticks in the vegetables, but only serve the dishes to the guests, and only then do they know that it is Master Hanzai.

古文：先是横山屯老妪为余言： 山中有一僧，损口苦体，以供大众。
现代文：在这之前横山屯的老妇对我说： 翠峰山中有一位僧人，省嘴苦自己，以此供养大众。
English: Before this, an old woman from Hengshan Tun said to me, "There is a monk in the mountains of the Jade Mountains, who works hard to provide for the public.

古文：有予衣者，辄复予人。
现代文：有人送给衣服，他总是又送给别人。
English: If someone gave him clothes, he would always give them to someone else.

古文：有饷食者，己不盐不油，惟恐众口弗适。 余初至此讯之，师不对，余肉眼不知即师也。
现代文：有人送给饭，他自己不放盐不放油，只是担心不适应众人的口味。 我刚到旧寺便向僧人询问，淡斋法师不作回答，我凡人的眼光不明白他就是淡斋法师。
English: Someone gave him some rice, but he didn't put any salt or oil in it, he was just worried that it wouldn't suit everyone's taste. As soon as I arrived at the old temple, I asked the monk about it, but he didn't answer, and my mortal eyes couldn't understand that he was the Master of Hanzai.

古文：师号大乘，年甫四十，幼为川人，长于姚安，寄锡于此，已期年已满一年矣。
现代文：法师的法号叫大乘，年纪才四十岁，幼时在四川省，在云南姚安府长大，到护国旧寺暂住已经一年了。
English: The Dharma name of the Master is "Mahayana." He is only forty years old. When he was a child, he grew up in Sichuan Province and Yao'an Prefecture, Yunnan Province. He has been living temporarily in the old temple of Guo Guo for one year.

古文：发愿淡斋供众，欲于此静修三年，百日始一下山。
现代文：发誓自己素食，供养大众，准备在这里安静地修行三年，一百天才下一次山。
English: He swears to be a vegetarian, to provide for the public, and to prepare for three years of quiet practice here, and one hundred days to climb the next mountain.

古文：其形短小，而目有疯痒之疾。
现代文：法师的身材矮小，而且眼睛有疯痒病。
English: The mage is short and has ringworm in his eyes.

古文：苦行勤修，世所未有。
现代文：忍受身体的折磨，勤苦修行的精神，是世上所不曾有过的。
English: The spirit of enduring physical torture and practicing diligently is unprecedented in the world.

古文：余见之，方不忍去，而饭未毕，大雨如注，其势不已，师留止宿，余遂停憩焉。
现代文：我看到这一切，正不忍心离去，而饭没吃完，大雨如注，雨势不会停止，法师留我住在这里，我于是停留在寺里休息。
English: I saw all of this, I just couldn't bear to leave, and the meal wasn't finished, it was raining like crazy, the rain wouldn't stop, the mage kept me here, so I stayed in the temple to rest.

古文：是夜寒甚，余宿前楹，师独留正殿，无具无龛，彻夜禅那即坐禅入定不休。
现代文：这天夜里很冷，我住在前屋，法师独自留在正殿，殿中没有床具，没有椅柜，法师整夜坐禅不止。
English: It was very cold that night. I was staying in the front room, and the mage was left alone in the main hall. There was no bedding in the hall, no chair, and the mage just sat and meditated all night.

古文：十三日达旦雨不止，大乘师复留憩。
现代文：十三日一直到天亮雨都没停，大乘师又挽留我在寺中歇息。
English: On the 13th, the rain didn't stop until dawn, and the Great Master kept me in the temple to rest.

古文：余见其瓶粟将尽，为炊粥为晨餐，师复即另爂为饭。
现代文：我看到他瓶钵里的粮食就要完了，于是煮粥作早餐，大乘师立刻重新烧火做饭。
English: I saw that the food in his jar was about to run out, so I boiled porridge for breakfast, and immediately reheated it for cooking.

古文：上午雨止，恐余行，复强余餐。
现代文：上午雨停了，怕我出发，又强留我吃饭。
English: It stopped raining in the morning, and they made me stay for dinner again, afraid that I would leave.

古文：忽有一头陀入视，即昨朝阳入庵时曳杖而出者，见余曰： 君尚在此，何不过我？
现代文：忽然有一个头陀进来看，就是昨天进朝阳庵时拖着锡杖出去的那个僧人，他见我就说： 您还在这里，为什么不去探访我？
English: Suddenly, a head monk came to see me, the same monk who had dragged his cane out of the Choyo-an when he entered it yesterday. When he saw me, he said, "You are still here, why don't you visit me?"

古文：我犹可为君一日供，不必啖此也。 
现代文：我还能为您提供一天的食宿，不必在这里吃了。 
English: I can also provide you with a day's board and lodging, so you don't have to eat here.

古文：遂挟余过朝阳，共煨火具餐。
现代文：于是强拉我去朝阳庵，一齐就着火准备食物。
English: So he forced me to go to Choyoan, and together we lit a fire to prepare food.

古文：师号总持，马龙人，为曲靖东山寺住持，避嚣于此，亦非此庵主僧也。
现代文：头陀法号总持，是云南马龙州人，在曲靖府东山寺担任住持，因躲避吵闹来到这里，也不是朝阳庵的主持僧人。
English: The chief abbot of Tundu Dharma, a native of Yunnan's Malongzhou, served as abbot of Dongshan Temple in Qujing Prefecture, and came here to avoid the noise. He is also not the presiding monk of Chaoyang Monastery.

古文：此庵主僧曰瑞空，昨与旧寺主僧俱入郡，瑞空归而旧寺僧并不知返，盖皆蠢蠢即无知，世法佛法，一无少解者。
现代文：此庵的主持僧人叫瑞空，昨天与护国旧寺的主持僧人一起去曲靖府，瑞空返回庵中而护国旧寺的僧人并不返回来，大概都是愚昧无知的那类人，世间的法规、佛都的教规，一律了解很少。
English: The presiding monk of this hermitage is called Rui Ku, and yesterday he went to Qu Jingfu with the presiding monk of the old temple of the protector of the country. Rui Ku returned to the hermitage, but the monks of the old temple of the protector of the country did not return. They are probably all stupid and ignorant people. They have little understanding of the laws of the world and the rules of the Buddhist capital.

古文：大乘精进而无余资，总持静修而能撙节节省，亦空山中两胜侣也。
现代文：大乘师精益求精地修行而无多余的资财，总持师静心修行而能节省，也是翠峰山中的两位优秀僧人。
English: The Great Master, who practices diligently and has no extra wealth, and the General Master, who practices meditatively and can save money, are also two outstanding monks in the Jade Mountain.

古文：已而自言其先世为姑苏吴县籍，与余同姓。
现代文：不久他说起他祖辈的籍贯是苏州府矣县，和我同姓。
English: Soon he mentioned that his ancestors came from Ying County, Suzhou, and had the same surname as me.

古文：昔年朝海过吴门，山塘徐氏欲留之放生池，师不果而归。
现代文：前些年朝海经过吴门，山塘的徐氏想留他在放生池，总持师没有答应而返回来。
English: A few years ago, when Chao Hai passed through Wu Men, Shantang's Mr. Xu wanted to keep him in the pond, but the head teacher did not agree and returned.

古文：今年已六十三矣。
现代文：今年已经六十三岁了。
English: This year it is sixty-three years old.

古文：是夜宿其西楼，寒更甚，而夜雨复潺潺。
现代文：这天晚上住在朝阳庵西楼，比昨夜更冷，而且夜里雨又哗哗地下起来。
English: It was colder than last night when we stayed at Chaoyangan West Building, and it rained during the night.

