古文：秦攻魏急。
现代文：秦国加紧进攻魏国。
English: Qin intensified its attack on Wei.

古文：或谓魏王曰： 弃之不如用之之易也，死之不如弃之之易也。
现代文：有人对魏王说： 因战败而放弃土地不如用土地贿赂容易，因被围困使土地成为死地不如放弃土地更容易。
English: Someone said to the Wei king: It is easier to give up land because of defeat than to bribe with land, and it is easier to give up land because of being besieged.

古文：能弃之弗能用之，能死之弗能弃之，此人之大过也。
现代文：能放弃土地，而不能使用土地进行贿赂，能使土地成为死地而不能放弃，这是人的大错。
English: To be able to give up land, but not to be able to use land for bribery, to be able to make land a killing ground, but not to be able to give it up, this is a big mistake of man.

古文：今王亡地数百里，亡城数十，而国患不解，是王弃之，非用之也。
现代文：大王失去土地数百里，丢掉城邑几十座，而国家的祸患仍然没有解除，这是大王放弃土地而没有利用土地的结果。
English: The great king lost hundreds of miles of land, lost dozens of cities and towns, and the country's woes are still not resolved. This is the result of the great king abandoning the land and not using the land.

古文：今秦之强也，天下无敌，而魏之弱也甚，而王以是质秦，王又能死而弗能弃之，此重过也。
现代文：秦国强大，天下无敌，魏国弱小得很，而大王却因此招来秦国的进攻，大王又只能把土地变成死地，而不肯放弃，这是极严重的错误。
English: Qin was powerful and invincible, while Wei was very weak and small. As a result, the Great King invited the attack of Qin. The Great King could only turn the land into a dead land, but refused to give it up. This was a very serious mistake.

古文：今王能用臣之计，亏地不足以伤国，卑体不足以苦身，解患而怨报。
现代文：观在大王如能采用臣下的计策，失去一些土地不至于损害国家，轻贱自己的身躯不至于使皮肉受苦，解除了祸患也报了仇。 
English: If the great king could adopt the strategies of his vassals, losing some land would not harm the country, belittling his own body would not make his flesh suffer, and he would get rid of the evil and take revenge.

古文： 秦自四境之内，执法以下至于长輓者，故毕曰： 与嫪氏乎？
现代文： 秦国国内上至执政的大臣下至长予驾车的平民，本来就都在说： 秦王亲近嫪毐吗？
English: The people of Qin, from the ruling minister down to the ordinary motorists, have always been saying: Is the Qin king close to Yao?

古文：与吕氏乎？ 
现代文：亲近吕不韦吗？ 
English: Are you close to Lü Buwei?

古文：虽至于门闾之下，廊庙之上，犹之如是也。
现代文：即使走在里巷的大门之下，或是到了朝廷之上，仍然有人如此询问。
English: Even if you walk under the gate of the alley, or above the court, there are still people who ask this.

古文：今王割地以赂秦，以为嫪毐功；卑体以尊秦，以因嫪毐。
现代文：现在大王割让土地来贿赂秦国，把它作为缪毒的功劳；轻贱自身来尊奉秦国，因此而依靠嫪毐。
English: Now the great king ceded land to bribe the Qin state, taking it as the merit of the poison; the lowly himself came to honor the Qin state, and therefore relied on the dragonfly.

古文：王以国赞嫪毐，以嫪毐胜矣。
现代文：大王用国家来资助嫪毐，臣下认为嫪毐会获胜。
English: The great king used the state to fund, and his vassals thought that  would win.

古文：王以国赞嫪氏，太后之德王也，深于骨髓，王之交最为天下上矣。
现代文：大王用国家赞助嫪毐，秦太后一定会感激大王的恩德，这种感激会深及骨髓，大王得到的交情是天上最上等的。
English: The great king used state sponsorship, and the Qin Empress Dowager will certainly be grateful for the great king's benevolence. This gratitude will go deep into the bone marrow. The friendship that the great king received is the best in the world.

古文：秦、魏百相交也，百相欺也。
现代文：秦国，魏国百次相交，百次互相欺骗。
English: The Qin and Wei dynasties met each other a hundred times and deceived each other a hundred times.

古文：今由嫪氏善秦而交为天下上，天下孰不弃吕氏而从嫪氏？
现代文：观在由于嫪毐而同秦国亲善，获得天下上等的邦交，天下人谁会不抛弃吕不韦而去跟从嫪毐呢？
English: Considering the fact that Lu Buwei was friendly with Qin and gained the world's best diplomatic relations, who in the world would not abandon Lu Buwei and follow Lu Buwei?

古文：天下必舍吕氏而从嫪氏，则王之怨报矣。 
现代文：天下诸侯一定会舍弃吕不韦而跟嫪毐，那么大王的怨仇也就报了。 
English: The princes of the world will surely abandon Lü Buwei and follow him, so the great king's grudge will also be reported.

