古文：少阳之为病，口苦、咽干、目眩也。
现代文：少阳病的主要症候特征，是口中发苦，咽喉干燥，头晕目眩。
English: The main symptoms of Yang Yang disease are bitter taste in the mouth, dry throat and dizziness.

古文：少阳中风，两耳无所闻，目赤，胸中满而烦者，不可吐下，吐下则悸而惊。
现代文：少阳感受风邪，耳聋听不到声音，眼睛发红，胸中满闷而烦躁不安。不可用吐法或下法治疗。
English: Xiaoyang feel cold, deafness can not hear the sound, eyes are red, chest is stuffy and restless. Can not be treated by vomiting or lying down.

古文：伤寒，脉弦细，头痛发热者，属少阳。
现代文：如果误用吐法或下法，就会出现心悸不宁及惊恐不安的变证。外感病，脉象弦细，头痛发热的，是证属少阳。
English: If the vomiting method or the lower method is misused, there will be evidence of palpitations and fear and anxiety. Exogenous diseases, thin veins, and fever headaches are signs of Shao Yang.

古文：少阳不可发汗，发汗则谵语，此属胃，胃和则愈，胃不和，则烦而悸。
现代文：少阳病不能用发汗法治疗，误发其汗，损伤津液，津伤胃燥，邪传阳明，就会出现谵语。
English: Yang deficiency disease can not be treated by sweating, if it is sweated by mistake, it will damage the blood and lymph, cause stomach pain and dryness, and cause the sun to shine, slang will appear.

古文：本太阳病不解，转入少阳者，胁下硬满，干呕不能食，往来寒热，尚未吐下，脉沉紧者，与小柴胡汤。
现代文：如果通过治疗，胃气得以调和，就会痊愈；如果胃气不和，就会出现烦躁、心悸的变证。原患太阳病，没有解除，病邪传入少阳，出现胁下痞硬胀满，干呕，不能进食，发热怕冷交替而作，如果没有使用涌吐或攻下法，而见脉沉紧的，可用小柴胡汤治疗。
English: If through treatment, the stomach gas can be reconciled, it will be cured; if the stomach gas is not reconciled, there will be irritability, palpitations. Originally suffering from sun disease, it has not been relieved, the disease has been transmitted to the sun, under duress, the gills are hard and swollen, retching, unable to eat, fever is afraid of cold alternately, if there is no use of vomiting or grasping, and the pulse is tight, it can be treated with small chaihu soup.

古文：若已吐、下、发汗、温针，谵语，柴胡汤证罢，此为坏病，知犯何逆，以法治之。
现代文：假如已经使用涌吐、泻下、发汗、温针等治法，柴胡证已解，而见谵语的，这是坏病。
English: If you have already used the treatment methods such as vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, and warm needles, the symptoms of chaihu have been solved, but if you see the slang, it is a bad disease.

古文：三阳合病，脉浮大，上关上，但欲眠睡，目合则汗。
现代文：应该详审其误治之因，详查演变为何种症候，然后随证选用适当的方法治疗。太阳、阳明、少阳三经同时俱病，其脉浮大而弦直，只想睡眠，眼睛闭合就会出汗。
English: It is necessary to examine in detail the cause of its mistreatment, investigate in detail what kind of symptoms have evolved, and then select the appropriate method of treatment according to the evidence. The sun, yangming and shaoyang are three simultaneous diseases, their pulse is large and straight, they just want to sleep, and they will sweat when their eyes are closed.

古文：伤寒六七日，无大热，其人躁烦者，此为阳去入阴故也。
现代文：外感病六七天，表热已不显，却见病人躁烦不安的，这是表邪传里的缘故。
English: After six or seven days of extrinsic disease, the fever is no longer apparent, but the patient is restless, which is the reason for the appearance of evil.

古文：伤寒三日，三阳为尽，三阴当受邪。
现代文：外感病第三天，邪气已传尽三阳经，应当传入三阴经。
English: On the third day of exogenous disease, the evil spirit has been transmitted to the three yang sutras, and it should be transmitted to the three yin sutras.

古文：其人反能食而不呕，此为三阴不受邪也。
现代文：此时，如果病人反而能够饮食而不呕吐的，这是邪气没有传入三阴经。
English: At this time, if the patient is able to eat and drink without vomiting, it is because the evil spirit has not been transmitted to the Three Yin Elements.

古文：伤寒三日，少阳脉小者，欲已也。
现代文：外感病第三天，病在少阳，如果脉象小的，是邪气已衰，疾病将要痊愈的征象。
English: On the third day of exogenous disease, the disease is in Shaoyang. If the pulse is small, it is a sign that the evil spirit has waned and the disease will be cured.

古文：少阳病，欲解时，从寅至辰上。
现代文：少阳病将要解除的时间，多在早晨时到时之间。
English: The time when the Yang Yang disease will be relieved is mostly between morning and evening.

