古文：黄帝问曰：余闻九针九篇，夫子乃因而九之，九九八十一篇，余尽通其意矣。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说九针有九篇文章，而先生又从九篇上加以发挥，演绎成为九九八十一篇，我已经完全领会它的精神了。
English: Huang Di asked: I heard that there are nine articles in the nine stitches, and my teacher played on the nine articles and deduced them into the nine hundred and ninety-eight first article. I have fully understood its spirit.

古文：经言气之盛衰，左右倾移，以上调下，以左调右，有余不足，补泻于荣、输，余知之矣。
现代文：《针经》上说的气之盛衰，左右偏胜，取上以调下，去左以调右，有余不足，在荥输之间进行补泻，我亦懂得了。
English: I also understood that the rise and fall of qi mentioned in the Sutra of the Needles is like a pendulum swinging from the right to the left, from up to down, from left to right, and that there are surpluses and shortages, and that the qi is replenished between ebbs and flows.

古文：此皆营卫之倾移，虚实之所生，非邪气从外入于经也。
现代文：这些变化，都是由于容卫的偏胜、气血虚实而形成的，并不是邪气从侵入经脉而发生的病变。
English: These changes are all due to the partial victory of Yong Wei and the formation of Qi and blood deficiency, and are not lesions caused by evil qi invading the meridians.

古文：余愿闻邪气之在经也，其病人何如？
现代文：我现在希望知道邪气侵入经脉之时，病人的症状怎样？
English: I would now like to know what were the patient's symptoms when the evil spirit entered the vein?

古文：取之奈何？
现代文：又怎样来治疗？
English: How is it treated?

古文：岐伯对曰：夫圣人之起度数，必应于天地。
现代文：岐伯回答说：一个有修养的医生，在制定治疗法则时，必定体察于自然的变化。
English: Qibo replied: A cultured doctor, when formulating treatment rules, must be aware of natural changes.

古文：故天有宿度，地有经水，人有经脉。
现代文：如天有宿度，地有江河，人有经脉，其间是互相影响，可以比类而论的。
English: If the sky has a destination, the earth has rivers, and human beings have meridians, and the meridians influence each other, they can be discussed by analogy.

古文：天地温和，则经水安静；天寒地冻，则经水凝泣；天暑地热，则经水沸溢；卒风暴起，则经水波涌而陇起。
现代文：如天地之气温和，则江河之水安静平稳；天气寒冷，则水冰地冻，江河之水凝涩不流；天气酷热，则江河之水沸腾扬溢；要是暴风骤起，则使江河之水，波涛汹涌。
English: If the weather is mild, the water of the river will be calm and steady; if the weather is cold, the water will be icy and frozen, and the water of the river will not flow; if the weather is extremely hot, the water of the river will boil and overflow; if the storm suddenly rises, the water of the river will be turbulent.

古文：夫邪之入于脉也，寒则血凝泣，暑则气淖泽，虚邪因而入客，亦如经水之得风也，经之动脉，其至也，亦时陇起，其行于脉中，循循然。
现代文：因此病邪侵入了经脉，寒则使血行滞涩，热则使血气滑润流利，要是虚邪贼风的侵入，也就象江河之水遇到暴风一样，经脉的搏动，则出现波涌隆起的现象。
English: Therefore, the disease invades the meridians, the cold makes the blood stagnant, and the heat makes the blood gas smooth and fluent. If the evil wind invades, it will be like the water of the river encountering a storm, and the pulsation of the meridians will appear as a swell.

古文：其至寸口中手也，时大时小，大则邪至，小则平。其行无常处，在阴与阳，不可为度，从而察之，三部九候。卒然逢之，早遏其路。
现代文：虽然血气同样依次在经脉中流动，但在寸口处按脉，指下就感到时大时小，大即表示病邪盛，小即表示病邪退，邪气运行，没有一定的位置，或在阴经或在阳经，就应该更进一步，用三部就侯的方法检查，一旦察之邪气所在，应急早治疗，以阻止它的发展。
English: Although blood gas also flows sequentially in the meridians, if you press the pulse at the cusp, you will feel when it is large and when it is small. Large indicates that the disease is high, and small indicates that the disease is retreating. The evil gas is running, and there is no certain position, either in the yin or yang meridians. You should go further and use the three-part waiting method to check. Once the evil gas is detected, emergency treatment should be carried out as soon as possible to prevent its development.

古文：吸则内针，无令气忤，静以久留，无令邪布。吸则转针，以得气为故。候呼引针，呼尽乃去，大气皆出，故命曰泻。
现代文：治疗时应在吸气时进针，进针时勿使气逆，进针后要留针静侯其气，不让病邪扩散；当吸气时转捻其针，以得气为目的；然后等病人呼气的时候，慢慢地起针，呼气尽时，将针取出。这样，大邪之气尽随针外泄，所以叫做泻。
English: During treatment, the needle should be inserted during inhalation, and the gas should not be reversed when the needle is inserted. After the needle is inserted, the needle should be left to calm the patient's breath and prevent the spread of the disease; when inhaling, the needle should be twisted to obtain the breath; then when the patient exhales, the needle should be slowly raised, and when the breath is exhausted, the needle should be removed. In this way, the evil breath is exhausted with the needle, so it is called diarrhea.

古文：帝曰：不足者补之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：不足之虚症怎样用补法？
English: Huang Di Dao: How to make up for the deficiency of deficiency?

古文：岐伯曰：必先扪而循之，切而散之，推而按之，弹而怒之，抓而下之，通而取之，外引其门，以闭其神。
现代文：岐伯说：首先用手抚摸穴位，然后以指按压穴位，再用手指揉按周围肌肤，进而用手指弹其穴位，令脉络怒张，左手按闭孔穴，不让正气外泄。
English: Qi Bo said: First, touch the acupoint with the hand, then press the acupoint with the finger, then rub the surrounding skin with the finger, and then play the acupoint with the finger to make the vein angry, and press the closed hole with the left hand to prevent the positive energy from leaking out.

古文：呼尽内针，静以久留，以气至为故，如待所贵，不知日暮。
现代文：进针方法，是在病人呼气将尽时进针，静侯其气，稍久留针，以得气为目的。
English: The injection method is to inject the needle when the patient's exhalation will be exhausted, wait for his breath, leave the needle for a while, and aim to get the breath.

古文：其气以至，适而自护，候吸引针，气不得出，各在其处，推阖其门，令神气存，大气留止，故命曰补。
现代文：进针侯气，要象等待贵客一样，忘掉时间的早晚，当得气时，要好好保护，等病人吸气时候，拔出其针，那末气就不至外出了；出针以后，应在其孔穴上揉按，使针孔关闭，真气存内，大经之气留于营卫而不泄，这便叫做补。
English: When the patient inhales, pull out the needle, so that the breath does not come out; after the needle is pulled out, it should be rubbed on its hole to close the needle hole, so that the true breath is stored, and the great breath is kept in the camp guard without leakage, which is called filling.

古文：帝曰：候气奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：对邪气怎样诊候呢？
English: Huangdi Dao: How to diagnose evil spirits?

古文：岐伯曰：夫邪去络入于经也，舍于血脉之中，其寒温未相得，如涌波之起也，时来时去，故不常在。
现代文：岐伯说：当邪气从络脉而进入经脉，留舍于血脉之中，这时邪正相争，或寒或温，真邪尚未相合，所以脉气波动，忽起忽伏，时来时去，无有定处。
English: Qi Bo said: "When evil qi enters the meridians from the vas deferens and remains in the blood vessels, then evil is in conflict, either cold or warm, true evil has not yet been matched, so the pulse qi fluctuates, suddenly rising and falling, coming and going, and there is no fixed place.

古文：故曰，方其来也，必按而止之，止而取之，无逢其冲而泻之。
现代文：所以说诊得泄气方来，必须按而止之，阻止它的发展，用针泻之，但不要正当邪气冲突，遂用泻法。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to stop it, prevent its development, and relieve it with needles, but do not use the laxative method because of the conflict of evil spirits.

古文：真气者，经气也，经气太虚，故曰： 其来不可逢。 
现代文：因为真气，就是经脉之气，邪气冲突，真气大虚，这时而用泻法，反使经气大虚，所以说气虚的时候不可用泻，就是指此而言。
English: Because the true qi is the qi of the meridians, the evil qi conflicts, and the true qi is greatly deficient. Therefore, when the qi is deficient, the laxative method should be used. On the other hand, when the qi is greatly deficient, the laxative method should not be used.

古文：此之谓也。故曰： 候邪不审，大气已过，泻之则真气脱，脱则不复，邪气复至，而病益蓄。 
现代文：因此，诊侯邪气而不能审慎，当大邪之气已经过去，而用泻法，则反使真气虚脱，真气虚脱，则不能恢复，而邪气益甚，那病更加重了。
English: Therefore, it is not prudent to treat evil qi, and when the great evil qi has passed, and the laxative method is used, the true qi is weakened, the true qi is weakened, it cannot be restored, and the evil qi is even worse, the disease is more severe.

古文：故曰： 其往不可追。 
现代文：所以说，邪气已经随经而去，不可再用泻法，就是指此而言。
English: Therefore, it is said that the evil spirit has gone away with the passage of time, and it is no longer possible to use the laxative method, that is to say.

古文：此之谓也。不可挂以发者，待邪之至时而发针泻矣。若先若后者，血气已尽，其病不可下。
现代文：阻止邪气，使用泻法，是间不容发的事，须待邪气初到的时候，随即下针去泻，在邪至之前，或在邪去之后用泻法，都是不适时的，非但不能去邪，反使血气受伤，病就不容易退了。
English: To stop the evil spirit, using the method of laxation, is something that cannot be done in a hurry. It is necessary to wait for the evil spirit to first arrive, and then use the needle to lax. Using the method of laxation before the evil spirit arrives, or after the evil spirit has left, is not timely. Not only can the evil spirit not be removed, but the blood and gas will be injured, and the disease will not easily recede.

古文：故曰： 知其可取如发机，不知其取如扣椎。 
现代文：所以说，懂得用针的，象拨动弩机一样，机智灵活，不善于用针的，就象敲击木椎，顽钝不灵了。
English: Therefore, those who know how to use a needle are like a pinball machine, witty and flexible. Those who are not good at using a needle are like striking a wooden vertebra, dull and ineffective.

古文：故曰： 知机道者不可挂以发，不知机者扣之不发。 
现代文：所以说，识得机宜的，一霎那时毫不迟疑，不知机宜的，纵然时机已到，亦不会下针，就是指此而言。
English: So, if you know the right time, you won't hesitate to do it. If you don't know the right time, you won't do it, even if the right time comes. That's what I mean.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：黄帝道：怎样进行补泻呢？
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：补泻奈何？
现代文：岐伯说：应以攻邪为主。
English: Huangdi said: How to make up for diarrhea?

古文：岐伯曰：此攻邪也。疾出以去盛血，而复其真气。此邪新客，溶溶未有定处也。推之则前，引之则止，逆而刺之，温血也。刺出其血，其病立已。
现代文：应该及时刺出盛血，以恢复正气，因为病邪刚刚侵入，流动未有定处，推之则前进，引之则留止，迎其气而泻之，以出其毒血，血出之后，病就立即会好。
English: It is necessary to prick out the blood in time to restore sanity, because the disease has just invaded, the flow is not fixed, push it forward, lead it to stay, meet it with its breath and lick it, to get out its poisoned blood, after the blood comes out, the disease will immediately get better.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：然真邪以合，波陇不起，候之奈何？
现代文：假如到了病邪和真气并合以后，脉气不现波动，那么怎样诊察呢？
English: If the pulse does not fluctuate after the disease and true qi have merged, then how should it be diagnosed?

古文：岐伯曰：审扪循三部九候之盛虚而调之。
现代文：岐伯说：仔细审察三部九候的盛衰虚实而调治。
English: Qi Bo said: carefully examine the rise and fall of the three parts of the nine seasons and adjust.

古文：察其左右上下，相失及相减者，审其病脏以期之。
现代文：检查的方法，在它左右上下各部分，观察有无不相称或特别减弱的地方，就可以知道病在那一脏腑，待其气至而刺之。
English: The method of inspection is to observe whether there is any disproportionate or particularly weakened place in the upper and lower parts of the right and left sides, so as to know where the disease is in the viscera, and wait for it to come and sting.

古文：不知三部者，阴阳不别，天地不分。地以候地，天以候天，人以候人，调之中府，以定三部。
现代文：假如不懂得三部九侯，则阴阳不能辨别，上下也不能分清，更不知道从上部脉以诊察下，从上部脉以诊察上，从中部脉以诊察中，结合胃气多少有无来决定疾病在那一部。
English: If you don't know the three parts of the nine horas, then you can't distinguish between yin and yang, and you can't distinguish between up and down. What's more, you don't know that from the upper pulse to the diagnosis, from the upper pulse to the diagnosis, and from the middle pulse to the diagnosis, combined with the amount of gastric gas to determine the disease in that part.

古文：故曰： 刺不知三部九候病脉之处，虽有大过且至，工不能禁也。 
现代文：所以说，针刺而不知三部九侯以了解病脉之处，则虽然有大邪为害，这个医生也没有办法来加以事先防止的。
English: Therefore, acupuncture without knowing the three parts and nine horas to understand the location of the disease, although there is a great evil, this doctor has no way to prevent it in advance.

古文：诛罚无过，命曰大惑，反乱大经，真不可复。用实为虚，以邪为真，用针无义，反为气贼。夺人正气，以从为逆，荣卫散乱，真气已失，邪独内着，绝人长命，予人夭殃。
现代文：如果诛罚无过，不当泻而泻之，这就叫做 大惑 ，反而扰乱脏腑经脉，使真气不能恢复，把实症当作虚症，邪气当作真气，用针毫无道理，反助邪气为害，剥夺病人正气，使顺症变成逆症，使病人荣卫散乱，真气散失，邪气独存于内，断送病人的性命，给人家带来莫大的祸殃。
English: If there is no fault in the gong punishment, and it is not appropriate to sneeze, it is called great bewilderment, but it disturbs the organs and meridians, so that the true qi cannot be restored, the real disease is regarded as a false disease, the evil qi is regarded as the true qi, the needle is unreasonable, the evil qi is harmed, the patient is deprived of the righteous qi, the concomitant disease becomes the inverse disease, the patient is scattered, the true qi is lost, the evil qi exists only in the body, the patient's life is cut off, and a great disaster is brought to the family.

古文：不知三部九候，故不能久长。因不知合之四时五行，因加相胜，释邪攻正，绝人长命。
现代文：这种不知三部九侯的医生，是不能够久长的，因为不知配合四时五行因加相胜的道理，会放过了邪气，伤害了正气，以致断绝病人性命。
English: This kind of doctor who does not know the three parts of the nine horas cannot last long, because if he does not know the principle of matching the four and five elements, he will let go of the evil spirit and hurt the righteous spirit, so as to cut off the patient's life.

古文：邪之新客来也，未有定处，推之则前，引之则止，逢而泻之，其病立已。
现代文：病邪新侵入人体，没有定着一处，推它就向前，引它就阻止，迎其气而泻之，其病是立刻可以好的。
English: When a new disease invades the human body, if it does not settle in one place, it can be pushed forward, it can be stopped if it is guided, and it can be relieved if it is breathed in. The disease can be cured immediately.

