古文：辖底，字涅烈衮，肃祖孙夷离堇帖剌之子。
现代文：辖底，字涅烈衮，肃祖孙夷离堇剌之子。
English: At the end of his reign, he was known as "Nirvana" and was the son of Sun Yi, the founder of the Su Dynasty.

古文：幼黠而辩，时险佞者多附之。
现代文：幼时机敏善辩，一时邪谄奸佞之辈大多依附于他。
English: When he was young, he was quick-witted and good at arguing, and most of those who were evil and treacherous at one time clung to him.

古文：遥辇痕德堇可汗时，异母兄罨古只为迭剌部夷离堇。
现代文：遥辇痕德堇可汗时，异母兄罨古只为迭剌部夷离堇。
English: When Dehong Khan was exiled, his half-brother Gonggu was only exiled because of him.

古文：故事，为夷离堇者，得行再生礼。
现代文：按旧例，为夷离堇者，可以行再生礼。
English: According to the old practice, the rebirth rite can be performed for those who have been exiled.

古文：罨古只方就帐易服，辖底遂取红袍、貂蝉冠，乘白马而出。
现代文：罨古只正在帐中换衣服，辖底便夺取红袍、貂蝉冠，乘白马出帐。
English: Gonggu only changed clothes in the middle of the account, then seized the red robe and the cicada crown, and rode out of the account on a white horse.

古文：乃令党人大呼曰： 夷离堇出矣！ 
现代文：于是令党人大呼曰： 夷离堇出来了！ 
English: As a result, the party members shouted: "The ruffians have come out!"

古文：众皆罗拜，因行柴册礼，自立为夷离堇。与于越耶律释鲁同知国政。
现代文：众人都围着他下拜，于是行柴册礼，自立为夷离堇，与于越耶律释鲁同掌国政。
English: All the people around him bowed down, and then they performed the firecracker ceremony, declared themselves to be 夷離, and took over the state government together with Yu Yeludong and Shilu.

古文：及释鲁遇害，辖底惧人图己，挈其二子迭里特、朔刮奔渤海，伪为失明。
现代文：待到释鲁遇害，辖底怕别人算计自己，带着二子迭里特、朔刮逃到渤海，装着双目失明。
English: After Shilu was killed, Gui Di, fearing that others would take advantage of him, fled to the Bohai Sea with his two sons, Derritt and Shuo Scratch, pretending to be blind.

古文：后因球马之会，与二子夺良马奔归国。
现代文：后来乘球马之会，与二子夺取良马逃回国。
English: Later, he and his two sons seized a good horse and fled back to the country.

古文：益为奸恶，常以巧辞获免。
现代文：更加奸佞险恶，每每因巧言得以免罪。
English: Even more treacherous and sinister, he was always exonerated because of his clever words.

古文：太祖将即位，让辖底，辖底曰： 皇帝圣人，由天所命，臣岂敢当！ 
现代文：太祖将要即位，让位于辖底，辖底说 ：皇帝是圣人，由天来任命，臣岂敢当！ 
English: The great-grandfather was about to ascend the throne and give way to the emperor, who said: the emperor is a saint, appointed by heaven, how dare he be a vassal!

古文：太祖命为于越。
现代文：太祖命他为于越。
English: My great-grandfather ordered him to go to Vietnam.

古文：及自将伐西南诸部，辖底诱剌葛等乱，不从者杀之。
现代文：待到自己率兵讨伐西南诸部，辖底引诱剌葛等人作乱，不从者杀之。
English: He waited until he led his troops to attack the southwestern provinces, and under his command, he lured people such as Xingge into a riot and killed those who did not follow him.

古文：车驾还至赤水城，辖底惧，与剌葛俱北走，至榆河，为追兵所获。
现代文：皇上回到赤水城，辖底害怕了，与剌葛一同北逃，至榆河为追兵抓获。
English: When the emperor returned to Chishui City, his subordinates were afraid and fled north with Gongge. They were caught by the pursuing soldiers in the Li River.

古文：太祖问曰： 朕初即位，尝以国让，叔父辞之；今反欲立吾弟，何也？ 
现代文：太祖问他说： 朕刚即位时，曾以国位相让，叔父你推辞了，现在反而想要立我的弟弟，这是为何？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked him, "When I first came to the throne, I offered to abdicate the throne. Uncle, you refused, but now you want to install my younger brother. Why is that?

古文：辖底对曰： 始臣不知天子之贵，及陛下即位，卫从甚严，与凡庶不同，臣尝奏事心动，始有窥觎之意。
现代文：辖底回答说： 开始我不知天子之尊贵，待到陛下即位，卫士侍从森严，与凡庶不同。我曾在奏事时心有所感，开始有了觊觎之心。
English: Jurisdiction replied: At first I did not know the dignity of the Son of Heaven, until His Majesty's enthronement, the guards were very strict, unlike ordinary people. I had a feeling in my heart when reporting the matter, and I began to have a bad heart.

古文：度陛下英武，必不可取；诸弟懦弱，得则易图也。
现代文：料想陛下英明神武，必定不能篡位；诸弟懦弱，他们若得帝位我就容易算计了。
English: Assuming that His Majesty is wise and powerful, he must not usurp the throne; his brothers are weak, and if they gain the throne, it will be easy for me to calculate.

古文：事若成，岂容诸弟乎！ 
现代文：事情如果成功，我哪里还容得你的诸弟呢？ 
English: If things go well, where will I put your brothers?

古文：太祖谓诸弟曰： 汝辈乃从斯人之言耶！ 
现代文：太祖对诸弟说 ：你们怎么竟然听从了这个人的话呢？ 
English: The patriarch said to his brothers, "How is it that you have obeyed this man?

古文：迭剌曰： 谋大事者，须用如此人；事成亦必去之。 
现代文：迭剌说： 谋大事时，必须用这等人；事成之后，也一定要除掉他。 
English: Diyu said, "When you are planning a big event, you must use these people; after the event, you must also get rid of him."

古文：呕出瘀血，痛止。
现代文：辖底不再做声。囚禁数月，被缢杀。
English: He was imprisoned for several months and beaten to death.

古文：帝以其亲，每加赐赉；然知其为人，未尝任以职。
现代文：将行刑时，太祖对他说： 叔父犯罪该处死，朕不敢赦免。
English: When he was about to be executed, his great-grandfather said to him, "Since my uncle's crime deserves death, I don't dare to pardon him.

古文：后从剌葛乱，与其父辖底俱缢杀之。
现代文：如果知道什么事情对国家有利，请您全都说出来。 辖底说： 迭剌部人多势强，所以多肇乱，应当分为二部，以削弱其势力。 
English: If you know something that is good for the country, please tell us all about it.Ji Du Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Dui Du

古文：察割，字欧辛，明王安端之子。
现代文：察割，字欧辛，明王安端之子。
English: Chawari, the character of Oshin, the son of the Ming King Anduan.

古文：善骑射。
现代文：擅长骑射。
English: He is proficient in horse riding and archery.

古文：貌恭而心狡，人以为懦。
现代文：貌似恭顺而内心狡猾，人们以为他懦弱。
English: Outwardly deferential and inwardly cunning, he was thought to be a coward.

古文：太祖曰： 此凶顽，非懦也。 
现代文：太祖说： 这是凶暴愚顽之人，并非懦夫。 
English: The great-grandfather said: "This is a violent and stupid person, not a coward.

古文：其父安端尝使奏事，太祖谓近侍曰： 此子目若风驼，面有反相。
现代文：其父安端曾经让他奏事，太祖对近侍说： 此子似日行千里的骆驼，面目露出反相。
English: His father, Ando, once asked him to perform a service, and the great-grandfather said to his attendant: "This son is like a camel that travels a thousand miles a day, his face shows the opposite.

古文：朕若独居，无令入门。 
现代文：朕如果一个人居处，不要让他进宫门。 
English: If you live alone, do not let him enter the palace gate.

古文：世宗即位于镇阳，安端闻之，欲持两端。
现代文：世宗在镇阳即位，安端得知，想保持中立而观望。
English: Sejong ascended the throne in Zhenyang, and Anduan was informed that he wanted to remain neutral and wait and see.

古文：察割曰： 太弟忌刻，若果立，岂容我辈！
现代文：察割说 ：皇太弟为人猜忌刻薄，如果真的即位，怎么容得我们！
English: Tsakure said, "The crown prince's younger brother must not be mean. If he really ascends to the throne, how can he tolerate us!"

古文：永康王宽厚，且与刘哥相善，宜往与计。 
现代文：永康王为人宽厚，又与刘哥友善，应该前往与他谋划。 
English: Yongkang Wang is a generous person, and he is friendly with Liu Ge. You should go and make plans with him.

古文：安端即与刘哥谋归世宗。
现代文：安端便与刘哥商议归附于世宗。
English: Anduan then negotiated with Liu Ge to be annexed to Shizong.

古文：及和议成，以功封泰宁王。
现代文：待到世宗与李胡达成和议，察割因功封为泰宁王。
English: It was not until Shizong and Li Hu reached a peace agreement that he was awarded the title of King of Taining.

古文：会安端为西南面大详稳，察割佯为父恶，阴遣人白于帝，即召之。
现代文：适逢安端担任西南面大详稳，察割假装为父亲所厌恶，暗中派人告知于皇上，皇上便召见他。
English: At the time when Ando was in charge of the southwestern part of the country, Tsakure, pretending to be disgusted by his father, secretly sent someone to inform the emperor, who then summoned him.

古文：既至上前，泣诉不胜哀，帝悯之，使领女石烈军。
现代文：到了皇上面前，察割哭诉着，显得十分伤情，皇上怜悯他，让他统领女石烈军。
English: When he arrived in front of the emperor, he cried and complained, appearing very sad. The emperor took pity on him and let him lead the female stone martyrs.

古文：出入禁中，数被恩遇。
现代文：出入于禁宫中，多次蒙受恩遇。
English: He entered and left the Forbidden City many times and received many favors.

古文：帝每出猎，察割托手疾，不操弓矢，但执炼锤驰走。
现代文：每逢皇上出猎，察割借口手疾，不带弓箭，只是手执练锤奔驰。
English: Whenever the emperor went hunting, he used the excuse that he had a hand ailment. He did not bring a bow and arrow, but only practiced hammering with his hands.

古文：屡以家之细事闻于上，上以为诚。
现代文：多次将家中小事都讲给皇上听，皇上觉得他诚实。
English: He repeatedly told the emperor all the little things about his family, and the emperor thought he was honest.

古文：察割以诸族属杂处，不克以逞，渐徙庐帐迫于行宫。
现代文：察割觉得与诸位皇亲混杂居住，难以成谋逆之事，渐渐地将自己的庐帐迁得迫近于行宫。
English: Tsakure felt that it would be difficult to do the opposite by living with the imperial family, so he gradually moved his residence closer to the Imperial Palace.

古文：右皮室详稳耶律屋质察其奸邪，表列其状。
现代文：右皮室详稳耶律屋质察觉到他的奸邪，上表列举其罪状。
English: His treachery was detected by the right-hand room's guardian, who listed his crimes in the table above.

古文：帝不信，以表示察割。
现代文：皇上不信，将屋质的奏表取出给察割看。
English: The emperor didn't believe him and took out the roof-quality report card for inspection.

古文：察割称屋质疾己，哽咽流涕。
现代文：察割便说是屋质嫉恨自己，泣不成声。
English: The inspector said that the roofer hated himself and couldn't stop crying.

古文：帝曰： 朕固知无此，何至泣耶！ 
现代文：皇上说 ：我本来就知道没有此事，又何至于哭泣呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "I knew all along that there was no such thing, so why should I cry?"

古文：察割时出怨言，屋质曰： 汝虽无是心，因我过疑汝，勿为非义可也。 
现代文：察割不时地口出怨言，屋质说 ：你尽管无此谋逆之心，因我错疑于你，你还是不要做不道义之事为好。 
English: From time to time, the inspector complained, and the housemaster said, "Even though you don't have the heart to plot against me, because I have misgivings about you, you'd better not do anything immoral."

古文：他日屋质又请于帝，帝曰： 察割舍父事我，可保无他。 
现代文：后来屋质又请皇上处理察割之事，皇上说： 察割抛弃了亲生父亲来奉事我，我可以确保他没有异心。 
English: Later, the roofer also asked the emperor to deal with the matter of Tsakari, and the emperor said: Tsakari abandoned his own father to serve me, and I can make sure that he has no ill will.

古文：屋质曰： 察割于父既不孝，于君安能忠！ 
现代文：屋质说 ：察割对父亲既已不孝，对君王怎么会忠心！ 
English: The roofer said, "Since Chavar is not loyal to his father, how can he be loyal to the king?"

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇上不纳其言。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：天禄五年七月，帝幸太液谷，留饮三日，察割谋乱不果。
现代文：天禄五年七月，皇上临幸太液谷，留居饮酒三日，察割的反叛计划未能实现。
English: In July of the 5th year of the Tenroku era, Emperor Linxing went to Taiyukoku, where he stayed and drank for three days. However, his rebellion plan failed to come to fruition.

古文：帝伐周，至详古山，太后与帝祭文献皇帝于行宫，群臣皆醉。
现代文：皇上攻伐周国，到达详古山，太后与皇上一同在行宫祭祀文献皇帝，群臣都喝醉了。
English: The emperor conquered Zhou and reached the ancient mountains. The empress dowager and the emperor went to the palace together to worship the emperor. The courtiers were all drunk.

古文：察割归见寿安王，邀与语，王弗从。
现代文：察割回来去见寿安王，邀他来说出自己反叛的谋划，寿安王不从。
English: When he returned, he went to see King Shouan and invited him to reveal his plan for rebellion, but King Shouan refused.

古文：察割以谋告耶律盆都，盆都从之。
现代文：察割又将谋划告知于耶律盆都，盆都听从了他。
English: The inspector also told the plan to the Yerut Basin Capital, and the Basin Capital listened to him.

古文：是夕，同率兵入弑太后及帝，因僣位号。
现代文：当天傍晚，二人一同率兵入行宫杀害了太后及皇上，于是僭居帝位帝号。
English: In the evening of the same day, the two of them led an army into the imperial palace and killed the empress dowager and the emperor, and then took the imperial throne.

古文：百官不从者，执其家避。
现代文：百官有不附从者，拘执其家属。
English: Hundreds of officials, some of whom are not followers, have detained his family members.

古文：至夜，阅内府物，见码瑙碗，曰： 此希世宝，今为我有！ 
现代文：到夜里，查看内府物品，见到玛瑙碗，说： 此乃希世之宝，如今为我所有！ 
English: In the middle of the night, he looked through his belongings, saw the onyx bowl, and said: "This is a treasure of a lifetime, now it's all mine!"

古文：诧于其妻。
现代文：拿去在妻子面前夸耀。
English: Take it and flaunt it in front of your wife.

古文：妻曰： 寿安王、屋质在，吾属无噍类，此物何益！ 
现代文：妻子说： 寿安王、屋质还在，我们一个人都没有活命，这东西有什么用！ 
English: His wife said: King Sooan, the roof is still standing, none of us are alive, what use is this thing!

古文：察割曰： 寿安年幼，屋质不过引数奴，诘旦来朝，固不足忧。 
现代文：察割说： 寿安王年幼，屋质不过统领几个奴仆而已，明天就会前来朝见，实在不值得忧虑。 
English: Caution said: King Shouan is young and only has a few servants. He will come to see the emperor tomorrow. It is really not worth worrying about.

古文：其党矧斯报寿安、屋质以兵围于外，察割寻遣人弑皇后于柩前，仓惶出阵。
现代文：其党人矧斯报告寿安王、屋质率兵在外围困，察割不一会儿便在世宗灵柩前杀害了皇后，仓惶出外对阵。
English: His party members reported that King Shouan and the soldiers led by Yakujo were trapped in the outer perimeter, and shortly after the inspection, they killed the empress in front of the Sejong's coffin and rushed out to fight.

古文：寿安遣人谕曰： 汝等既行弑逆，复将若何？ 
现代文：寿安王派人晓谕他说 ：你们既已杀害了皇上，还准备怎么样？ 
English: King Shouan sent someone to tell him, "Since you have killed the Emperor, what are you going to do?

古文：有夷离堇划者委兵归寿安王，余众望之，徐徐而往。
现代文：有夷离堇划者率兵归依于寿安王，余下众人望见，也渐渐前往。
English: Some of the soldiers who had left the rafts and led the soldiers to surrender to King Shouan, and the rest of the people saw this and gradually started to leave.

古文：察割知其不济，乃系群官家属，执弓矢胁曰： 无过杀此曹尔！ 
现代文：察割知道自己将会失败了，便拘禁众官员的家属，手执弓箭威胁说 ：最多不过将他们全杀了罢！ 
English: Knowing that he would fail, he detained the families of the officials, armed with bows and arrows, and threatened: "At most, just kill them all!"

古文：帝曰： 朕为寿安王时，卿数以此事说我，今日岂有虚乎？ 
现代文：喝令立即推出斩首。当时林牙耶律敌猎也在被囚众人之中，进言说： 如果没有世宗被害，寿安王如何能够兴起继立。借此语为说词，还可以被赦免。 察割说： 果真如你所说，应当派谁出使？ 
English: At that time, Lin Ya Ye Lu's enemy Fang Fang was also among the prisoners, and he said: "If there is no world-wide damage, how can King Shouan rise up and succeed? Using this as a speech, he can also be pardoned. Zha Kuan said: Is it really as you said, who should be sent?

古文：娄国不能对。及余党尽服，遂缢于可汗州西谷，诏有司择绝后之地以葬。重元，小字孛吉只，圣宗次子。
现代文：敌猎请求让自己与罨撒葛一同前往劝说寿安王，察割依从其计。寿安王回过头来让敌猎诱骗察割前来，碎割之。其诸子均被诛杀。重元，乳名孛吉只，圣宗次子。
English: At the request of the huntsmen, he went with Caesar Geth to persuade Shouan Wang, and Chacao followed his plan. Shouan Wang turned around and let the huntsmen lure Chacao to come and cut him into pieces. All of his sons were killed. Chongyuan, only his second son, was named Chakichi.

古文：材勇绝人，眉目秀朗，寡言笑，人望而畏。
现代文：有才能且勇武过人，眉目秀美俊朗，很少谈笑，人望之而生畏。
English: Talented and extremely brave, with a handsome face and a quick wit, he rarely talks or laughs and is feared by all.

古文：太平三年，封秦国王。
现代文：太平三年，封秦国王。
English: In the third year of the Taiping era, King Qin was enthroned.

古文：圣宗崩，钦哀皇后称制，密谋立重元。
现代文：圣宗崩逝，钦哀皇后称制摄政，密谋立重元为帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Shenzong, the queen was named regent in his honor, and a plot was hatched to make Chongyuan emperor.

古文：重元以所谋白于上，上益重之，封为皇太弟。
现代文：重元将皇后之谋划告知于兴宗，兴宗更加看重他，封为皇太弟。
English: Chongyuan told Yu Xingzong about the queen's plan, and Xingzong gave him more importance and made him the crown prince.

古文：历北院枢密使、南京留守、知元帅府事。
现代文：历任北院枢密使、南京留守、知元帅府事。
English: Successive Privy Envoy to the Northern Court, stayed in Nanjing, and was a friend of the marshal.

古文：重元处戎职，未尝离辇下。
现代文：重元身居军职，从不离开皇上身边。
English: Chongyuan served in the military and never left the emperor's side.

古文：先是契丹人犯法，例须汉人禁勘，受枉者多。
现代文：此前，契丹人犯法，按例必须由汉人按察审判，受冤枉的人很多。
English: Previously, when Khitan people broke the law, they had to be tried by Han Chinese according to the rules, and many people were wrongly convicted.

古文：重元奏请五京各置契丹警巡使，诏从之，赐以金券誓书。
现代文：重元奏请在五京分别设置契丹警巡使，皇上下诏从之，赐以金券誓书。
English: Please set up Khitan police inspectors in Beijing separately, and the emperor should issue an order to obey them, and give them a gold certificate oath.

古文：道宗即位，册为皇太叔，免拜不名，为天下兵马大元帅，复赐金券、四顶帽、二色袍，尊宠所未有。
现代文：道宗即位，册立为皇太叔，上朝免拜，赞拜时不直呼姓名，任天下兵马大元帅，又赐给金券、四顶帽、二色袍，所受尊重宠幸为前所未有。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he was registered as the Emperor's uncle, he was exempted from paying homage to the previous emperor, he was not called by his first name when paying homage, he was appointed as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and he was also given gold certificates, four hats, and two-colored robes. The respect he received was unprecedented.

古文：清宁九年，车驾猎滦水，以其子涅鲁古素谋，与同党陈国王陈六、知北院枢密事萧胡睹等凡四百余人，诱胁弩手军阵于帷宫外。
现代文：清宁九年，皇上出猎于滦水，由其子涅鲁古预先策划，与同党陈国王陈六、知北院枢密事萧胡睹等共计四百余人，引诱胁迫弩手军列阵于皇上行宫之外。
English: In the ninth year of the Qing Dynasty, the emperor went hunting in Surabaya. His son, Nehru Gu, planned in advance, and together with the same party, King Chen Chen VI, Privy Councillor of Zhibei Yuan Xiao Hujian, and others, a total of more than four hundred people, lured and coerced the army of hunters to line up outside the imperial palace.

古文：将战，其党多悔过效顺，各自奔溃。
现代文：准备交战时，其党人大多悔过而愿效顺于皇上，各自奔逃溃散。
English: When preparing to engage in war, most of his party members repented and were willing to obey the emperor, and they fled and dispersed.

古文：重元既知失计，北走大漠，叹曰： 涅鲁古使我至此！ 
现代文：重元既已知道计划落空，便北逃于大漠，叹道： 是涅鲁古让我落到今天这一步！ 
English: Knowing that his plan had failed, Chongyuan fled north into the desert, lamenting, "It was Nehru who brought me to where I am today!"

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：先是，重元将举兵，帐前雨赤如血，识者谓败亡之兆。
现代文：先前重元准备举兵叛乱时，帐前落雨红得如鲜血一般，有见识的人说这是败亡之征兆。
English: Earlier, when Chongyuan was preparing to raise an army to rebel, the front of the account was red with blood, and people with insight said that this was a sign of defeat.

古文：子涅鲁古。
现代文：子涅鲁古。
English: Son of Nehru.

