古文：隋高祖文皇帝姓杨氏，讳坚，小名那罗延。
现代文：隋高祖文皇帝姓杨，名坚，小名那罗延。
English: Emperor Sui Gao Zuwen's family name was Yang, his given name was Jian, and his nickname was Naroyan.

古文：本弘农华阴人，汉太尉震之十四世孙也。
现代文：他原是弘农华阴人，是汉朝太尉杨震的第十四代孙子。
English: He was originally a Hongnong Huayin person and the 14th-generation grandson of the Han Dynasty Lieutenant Yang Zhen.

古文：震八世孙，燕北平太守铉。
现代文：杨震的八世孙是燕的北平太守杨铉。
English: Yang Zhen's eighth-generation grandson is Yan's Beiping Empress Dowager Yang Hui.

古文：铉子元寿，魏初为武川镇司马，因家于神武树颓焉。
现代文：杨铉的儿子杨元寿，北魏初年任武川镇司马，因而在神武树颓安家。
English: Yang Yu's son, Yang Yuan Shou, was the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and served as the mayor of the town of Wuchuan. Therefore, he settled in Shenwushu.

古文：元寿生太原太守惠嘏，嘏生平原太守烈，烈生宁远将军祯，祯生皇考忠。
现代文：杨元寿生了太原太守杨惠嘏，杨惠嘏生了平原太守杨烈，杨烈生了宁远将军杨祯，杨祯生下杨坚的父亲杨忠。
English: Yang Yuan Shou gave birth to Yang Huijun, the governor of Taiyuan; Yang Huijun gave birth to Yang Lie, the governor of the Plain; Yang Lie gave birth to Yang Jie, the general of Ningyuan; Yang Jie gave birth to Yang Zhong, the father of Yang Jian.

古文：初，祯属魏末丧乱，避地中山，结义徒以讨鲜于修礼，遂死之。
现代文：初时，杨祯正遇到北魏末年混乱的局面，他便避居于中山，联结了一批讲义气的好汉一起讨伐鲜于修礼，后来战死了。
English: At the beginning, when Yang Xuan was confronted with the chaotic situation at the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he took refuge in Zhongshan and joined a group of good-natured people to fight against the cult, and later died in battle.

古文：周保定中，皇考著勋，追赠柱国大将军、少保、兴城郡公。
现代文：北周保定年间，因杨忠功勋卓著，追赠杨祯为柱国大将军、少保、兴城郡公。
English: During the Northern Zhou Baoding period, Yang Zhong was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Column, Minor Protector, and Xingcheng County Governor for his outstanding services.

古文：皇考美须髯，身长七尺八寸，状貌瑰伟，武艺绝伦；识量深重，有将率之略。
现代文：杨忠长着一副美须髯，身高七尺八寸，相貌魁梧，武艺绝伦，见识广、器量大，有大将的谋略。
English: Yang Zhong wore a beautiful mustache, was seven feet and eight inches tall, had a burly appearance, excelled in martial arts, was well-informed and resourceful, and had the strategy of a general.

古文：年十八，客游泰山，会梁兵陷郡国，没江南。
现代文：十八岁时，他游览泰山，正赶上梁兵攻下了这个郡，所以就流落到江南。
English: At the age of eighteen, he visited Mount Tai, just in time for Liang soldiers to conquer the county, so he was exiled to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：及北海王元颢入洛，乃与俱归。
现代文：当北海王元颢北归洛阳时，他跟随同回。
English: When King Yuan of the North Sea returned to Luoyang, he followed the same route.

古文：颢败，尔硃度律召为帐下统军。
现代文：元颢失败后，尔朱度律召他到帐下充当统军。
English: After the failure of the Yuan Dynasty, Er Zhudu Li called him to serve as a united army under his account.

古文：后从独孤信，屡有军功。
现代文：后来，他跟从独孤信，多次立有战功。
English: Later, he followed Du Guoxin and made war exploits many times.

古文：又与信从魏孝武西迁。
现代文：又跟独孤信随从孝武帝西迁。
English: He also moved west with Du Guoxin to follow Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：东魏荆州刺史辛纂据穰城，皇考从信讨之，与都督康洛兒、元长生乘城而入。弯弓大呼，斩纂以徇，城中慑服。
现代文：东魏荆州刺史辛纂，占据穰城，杨忠跟随独孤信前去讨伐，他跟都督康洛儿、元长生登城而入，拉着弓大声呼叫，斩了辛纂，占领了城池，城里人都很害怕并服从他们。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Jingzhou assassinated Xin Cao and occupied Lucheng. Yang Zhong followed Du Guoxin to fight. He entered the city with the governor Kang Lore and Yuan Chang Sheng, and shouted loudly with a bow. They killed Xin Cao and occupied the city. The people in the city were very afraid and obeyed them.

古文：居半岁，以东魏之逼，与信俱归。
现代文：过了半年时间，由于东魏军队进逼，这才和独孤信一起回长安。
English: After half a year, due to the advance of the East Wei army, he returned to Chang'an together with Du Guoxin.

古文：周文帝召居帐下。
现代文：周文帝把杨忠召到自己帐下。
English: Zhou Wendi called Yang Zhong under his account.

古文：尝从周文狩于龙门，皇考独当一猛兽，左挟其腰，右拔其舌，周文壮之。
现代文：杨忠曾经跟着周文帝到龙门狩猎，他一个人勇斗一头猛兽，左手挟着这只猛兽的腰，右手拔出它的舌头，周文帝很赞赏他的勇气。
English: Yang Zhong once followed Emperor Zhou to Longmen for hunting. He single-handedly fought a ferocious beast, holding the beast's waist with his left hand and pulling out its tongue with his right hand. Emperor Zhou appreciated his courage.

古文：北台谓猛兽为掩赡，因以字之。
现代文：北地人称猛兽为蒁于，因此就把蒁于作为杨忠的字。
English: The northerners called the ferocious beast the dragonfly, so they took the dragonfly as the character of Yang Zhong.

古文：从禽窦泰，破沙苑阵，封襄武县公。
现代文：他又跟从周文帝捉拿窦泰，大破沙苑的敌阵，被封为襄武县公。
English: He also followed Emperor Zhou Wen to capture Dou Tai, smashed the enemy line of Shayuan, and was named the governor of Xiangwu County.

古文：河桥之役，皇考与壮士五人力战守桥，敌人不敢进。
现代文：河桥战役时，杨忠和五位壮士奋力作战，守卫河桥，敌军不敢前进。
English: During the Battle of the River Bridge, Yang Zhong and five strong men fought hard to defend the river bridge, and the enemy army did not dare to advance.

古文：又与李远破黑水稽胡，并与怡峰解玉壁围，以功历云、洛二州刺史。
现代文：他又跟李远击败了黑水稽胡，并同怡峰解了玉壁之围，因战功而历任云、洛两州的刺史。
English: Together with Li Yuan, he defeated Heishui Jinghu, and together with Yifeng, he broke the siege of the Jade Wall. Because of his war exploits, he has been appointed to the history of the two states of Yun and Luo.

古文：芒山之战，先登陷阵，除大都督。
现代文：芒山之战，他率先冲锋陷阵，被任命为大都督。
English: In the Battle of Mangshan, he took the lead in the charge and was appointed the grand governor.

古文：及侯景度江，梁氏丧败。周文将经略，乃授皇考都督荆等十五州诸军事，镇穰城。
现代文：当侯景渡江、梁朝败亡时，周文帝准备扩大地盘，便任命杨忠都督荆州等十五州的军事，镇守穰城。
English: When Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River and the Liang Dynasty was defeated, Emperor Zhou Wen was preparing to expand the territory, so he appointed Yang Zhong as the military governor of 15 states, including Jingzhou.

古文：梁雍州刺史、岳阳王萧察，虽曰称籓，而尚怀贰心。
现代文：梁朝雍州刺史、岳阳王萧鮞，虽然向西魏称藩，但还怀有贰心。
English: Although the Liang Dynasty, the Yongzhou Emperor, and the Yueyang Emperor, Xiao Zhen, called themselves the West Wei Dynasty, they still harbored the spirit of feudalism.

古文：皇考自樊城观兵汉滨，易旗递进。实二千骑，察登楼望之，以为三万，惧而服焉。
现代文：杨忠从樊城出发到汉水边显扬军威，更换旗号接续而进，其实不过只有两千人马，但萧鮞登上城楼观望时，以为有三万人，这才感到震惊并真心信服。
English: Yang Zhong set out from Shicheng to the Han River to show his military power, changing the banner one after another. In fact, there were only two thousand horses, but when Xiao Wei climbed the tower to watch, he thought there were thirty thousand people, which shocked him and truly convinced him.

古文：又攻梁随郡，克之，获其守桓和。
现代文：他又进攻梁朝的随郡，攻克了它并俘获了郡守桓和。
English: He also attacked Su County of the Liang Dynasty, conquered it and captured the county of Shouhuanhe.

古文：所过城戍，望风请服。
现代文：所经过的城市和戍地，都望风请降。
English: All the cities and farmlands we passed through looked to the wind for help.

古文：进围安陆。
现代文：他进而围困安陆。
English: He proceeded to lay siege to Anlu.

古文：梁同州刺史柳仲礼恐安陆不守，驰归赴援。
现代文：梁朝司州刺史柳仲礼担心安陆守不住，便奔回救援。
English: Liang Chaozhou and Liu Zhongli were worried that Anlu could not be defended, so they ran back to the rescue.

古文：诸将恐仲礼至则安陆难下，请急攻之。
现代文：众将担心柳仲礼来后安陆难以攻下，请求加速进攻。
English: The generals were worried that it would be difficult to capture Anlu after the arrival of Liu Zhongli, and requested that the attack be accelerated.

古文：皇考曰： 仲礼已在近路，吾以奇兵袭之，一举必克，则安陆不攻自拔，诸城可传檄而定。 
现代文：杨忠说 ：柳仲礼已经来到近处，我们设下奇兵袭击他，一战必胜。这样，安陆就可以不战而降，各城也可传檄文平定了。 
English: Yang Zhong said: Liu Zhongli has already come to the vicinity, we will set up a special soldier to attack him, and we will win the battle. In this way, Anlu can surrender without a fight, and all cities can also spread the message.

古文：于是选骑二千，衔枚夜进。遇仲礼于漴头，禽之，悉俘其众。
现代文：于是，他挑选了两千骑兵，衔着枚在夜间急进，在氵崇头正遇上柳仲礼，活捉了他，并全部俘虏了他的部众。
English: Therefore, he selected two thousand cavalrymen and led them on a night-time raid. They caught Liu Zhongli alive and captured all of his subordinates.

古文：安陆、竟陵并降。
现代文：安陆、竟陵同时出降。
English: Anlu and Jingling surrendered at the same time.

古文：梁元帝大惧，送子方略为质，并送载书，请魏以石城为限，梁以安陆为界。
现代文：梁元帝大惊，送来儿子方略作为人质，并且送来盟书，请求魏国以石头城为界，梁国以安陆为界。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was so shocked that he sent his son Fang Liang as a hostage, and sent a letter of alliance, requesting Wei to use Stone Town as its boundary, and Liang to use Anlu as its boundary.

古文：皇考乃旋师。
现代文：杨忠于是回师。
English: Yang Zhong then returned to his teacher.

古文：进爵陈留郡公，位大将军。
现代文：晋爵为陈留郡公，任大将军。
English: He was promoted to the peerage of Chenlu County and appointed as a general.

古文：十七年，梁元帝逼其兄邵陵王纶。纶送质于齐，欲来寇。
现代文：十七年，梁元帝进逼他的哥哥邵陵王萧纶，萧纶送人质给北齐，准备出兵来侵犯西魏。
English: In the seventeenth year, Emperor Liang Yuan invaded and forced his brother Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei, Xiao Wei sent hostages to Northern Qi, and prepared to send troops to invade Western Wei.

古文：梁元帝密报周文。
现代文：梁元帝密报了周文帝。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan secretly reported to Emperor Zhou.

古文：遣皇考讨之。禽纶，数其罪，杀之。
现代文：周文帝派杨忠讨伐，抓住了萧纶，列举了他的罪状，把他杀掉了。
English: Emperor Zhou Wenzong sent Yang Zhong to make a crusade, captured Xiao Yu, listed his crimes, and killed him.

古文：初，皇考禽柳仲礼，遇之甚厚。
现代文：当初，杨忠活捉了柳仲礼以后，待他很好。
English: At first, after Yang Zhong captured Liu Zhongli alive, he treated him well.

古文：仲礼至京，反谮皇考，言在军大取金宝。
现代文：柳仲礼到京城以后，却反诬杨忠，说他在军中拿走了许多金银财宝。
English: After Liu Zhongli arrived in Beijing, he turned against Yang Zhong, saying that he had taken away a lot of gold, silver and treasure in the army.

古文：周文以皇考功重，不问。
现代文：周文帝因为杨忠功劳很大，所以没有过问。
English: Zhou Wendi did not question Yang Zhong because of his great merits.

古文：然皇考悔不杀仲礼，故至此杀纶。
现代文：可是，杨忠知道以后，后悔当时没有杀掉柳仲礼，所以这次他把萧纶杀了。
English: However, after Yang Zhong knew, he regretted not killing Liu Zhongli at that time, so this time he killed Xiao Yao.

古文：皇考间岁再举，尽定汉东地，甚得新附心。
现代文：杨忠过了一年又再次发兵，全部平定汉水以东地区，很得新归附地方的民心。
English: A year later, Yang Zhong again sent troops to pacify all the areas east of the Hanshui River, winning the hearts and minds of the newly annexed areas.

古文：魏恭帝赐姓普六茹氏，行同州事。
现代文：魏恭帝赐给他姓普六茹氏，兼管同州。
English: Emperor Wei Gonggong gave him the surname Pu Rongru, and he was also in charge of Tongzhou.

古文：及于谨伐江陵，皇考为前军，屯江津，遏其走路。
现代文：当于谨进攻江陵时，杨忠作为前军，屯守在江边，阻止敌人的退路。
English: When Yu Ji attacked Gangneung, Yang Zhong, as the vanguard, stayed by the river to block the enemy's retreat.

古文：梁人束刃于象鼻以战，皇考射之，二象反走。
现代文：梁人用刀绑在大象的鼻子上赶着在前面作战，杨忠用箭射象，两只大象回身而走。
English: Liang Man rushed to fight in front with a knife tied to the elephant's nose, Yang Zhong shot the elephant with an arrow, and the two elephants turned around and walked away.

古文：江陵平，周文立萧察为梁主，令皇考镇穰城。
现代文：江陵被讨平后，周文帝立萧鮞作为梁国国君，命令杨忠镇守穰城。
English: After the subjugation of Gangneung, Emperor Zhou established Xiao Yao as the sovereign of Liang Province and ordered Yang Zhongzhen to defend Lucheng.

古文：周孝闵践阼，入为小宗伯。
现代文：周孝闵帝称帝后，杨忠入朝任小宗伯。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaoxuan was named empress, and Yang Zhongrui was appointed to the position of minor prince.

古文：及司马消难请降，皇考与柱国达奚武援之。
现代文：当司马消难请求投降北周时，杨忠和柱国达奚武前去援助。
English: When Sima Qishan requested the surrender of Northern Zhou, Yang Zhong and Zhu Guo Da Yanwu came forward to help.

古文：入齐境五百里，前后遣三使报消难，皆不反命。
现代文：他们进入齐国地盘五百里远，前后派出三名使者向司马消难报信，但三位使者都没有回来复命。
English: They entered the territory of Qi, 500 miles away, and sent three emissaries back and forth to report to Sima Qianlu, but none of the three emissaries returned to answer the call.

古文：及去北豫州三十里，武疑有变，欲还。
现代文：当军队离北豫州还有三十里远时，达奚武怀疑事情有了变故，想要回兵。
English: When the army was still thirty miles away from Beiyuzhou, Dabengwu suspected that things had changed and wanted to return.

古文：皇考曰： 有进死，无退生。 
现代文：杨忠说 ：只有前进而死，没有后退求生的道理。 
English: Yang Zhong said: The only way to die is to advance, there is no reason to retreat to survive.

古文：独以千骑，夜趣城下。候门开而入，乃驰遣召武。时齐镇城伏敬远勒甲士三千据东陴，举烽严警。武惮之，不欲保城，乃多取财宝，以消难先归。
现代文：他独自率领一千骑兵，乘夜间来到城下，等城门打开以后进了城，这才派人飞驰通知达奚武前来，当时齐国镇守城防将领伏敬远带领三千名士兵据守东山坡，点着烽火严加警戒，达奚武感到害怕，不愿保守城池，便拿走许多财宝，让司马消难先回西魏。
English: He alone led a thousand cavalry, came to the city at night, waited for the gate to open, and entered the city. Only then did he send someone to tell Dabou to come. At that time, the city defense general of Qi Province, Fu Jingyuan, led three thousand soldiers to guard the eastern slope of the mountain, lit bonfires and kept a strict vigil. Dabou was afraid and did not want to protect the city, so he took away many treasures, so that Sima could not return to West Wei first.

古文：皇考以三千骑殿，到洛南，皆解鞍而卧。
现代文：杨忠带领三千骑兵断后。到达洛水南面时，骑兵们都解下马鞍躺在地上休息。
English: Yang Zhong led the three thousand cavalrymen to break off. When they reached the south of Luoshui, the cavalrymen all took off their saddles and lay on the ground to rest.

古文：齐众来追，至于洛北。
现代文：齐军前来追赶，到达洛水北岸。
English: The Qi army came to catch up and reached the north shore of Luoshui.

古文：皇考谓将士曰： 但饱食，今在死地，贼必不敢度水。 
现代文：杨忠对部下们说 ：大家只管饱吃一顿。如今居于死地，敌军肯定不敢渡河。 
English: Yang Zhong said to his subordinates, "Let's just eat a full meal. Now we are in the death zone, and the enemy troops will certainly not dare to cross the river."

古文：食毕，齐兵阳若度水，皇考驰将击之；齐兵不敢逼，遂徐引而还。
现代文：吃过以后，齐军装出准备渡河的样子，杨忠立即奔驰前往迎击，齐兵不敢逼近，便慢慢领着部队退回去了。
English: After eating, the Qi army pretended to be preparing to cross the river, and Yang Zhong immediately galloped to meet the attack. The Qi soldiers did not dare to approach, so he slowly led the troops back.

古文：武叹曰： 达奚武自言是天下健兒，今日服矣。 
现代文：达奚武感叹地说 ：我达奚武自称是天下的勇士，今天信服了！ 
English: Dabangwu sighed and said, "I, Dabangwu, claim to be the bravest man in the world. Today, I am convinced!"

古文：进位柱国大将军。
现代文：杨忠随即被晋封为柱国大将军。
English: Yang Zhong was immediately promoted to General of the Column.

古文：武成元年，进封隋国公，邑万户，别食竟陵县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：武成元年，晋封为隋国公，食邑一万户，又另有竟陵县食户一千户，收取他们的赋税。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wucheng's reign as the Prince of Sui, he collected taxes from 10,000 households in the food villages and another 1,000 households in Jingling County.

古文：保定二年，为大司空。
现代文：保定二年，被任命为大司空。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was appointed as the chief of the Air Force.

古文：时朝议与突厥伐齐。公卿咸以齐兵强国富，斛律明月不易可当，兵非十万众不可。
现代文：当时朝廷正商议和突厥联合讨伐齐国，公卿们都认为齐国国富兵强，斛律明月又不容易抵挡，出兵没有十万人不行。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing a joint crusade against Qi with the Turks. The court nobles all believed that Qi was a rich and powerful country, and that it was not easy to resist the Ming and Qing dynasties. It was not possible to send in less than 100,000 soldiers.

古文：皇考独曰： 万骑足矣，明月竖子，亦何能为！ 
现代文：只有杨忠说道： 有一万骑兵就足够了，斛律明月这个小子，有多大的本领？ 
English: Only Yang Zhong said, "Ten thousand cavalrymen are enough. How much ability does this boy, Bao Lu Ming Yue, have?"

古文：三年，乃以皇考为元帅，大将军杨纂、李穆、王杰、尔硃敏及开府元寿、田弘、慕容近等皆隶焉。
现代文：三年，便任命杨忠为元帅，大将军杨纂、李穆、王杰、尔朱敏以及开府元寿、田弘、慕容近等都归他管辖。
English: In three years, Yang Zhong was appointed as a marshal, and the generals Yang Cong, Li Mu, Wang Jie, Er Zhumin, as well as Kaifu Yuan Shou, Tian Hong, Murong and others were all under his jurisdiction.

古文：又令达奚武帅步骑三万自南道进，期会晋阳。
现代文：又命令达奚武带领步骑兵三万人从南路出发，约好时间在晋阳会合。
English: He also ordered Daguangwu to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to set out from South Road and meet at an agreed time in Jinyang.

古文：皇考乃留敏据什贲，游兵河上。
现代文：杨忠便留下尔朱敏据守什贲，派兵在河上巡逻。
English: Yang Zhong then left Er Zhumin to guard Shifang and sent soldiers to patrol the river.

古文：皇考出武川，过故宅，祭先人，飨将士，度卷二十余城。
现代文：杨忠从武川出兵，经过自家故宅，祭祀了祖先，大宴将士，很快席卷了二十多座城。
English: Yang Zhong dispatched troops from Takekawa, went through his family's ancestral home, held a sacrifice for his ancestors and a grand banquet for generals, and soon swept through more than twenty cities.

古文：齐人守陉岭之隘，皇考纵奇兵大破之，留杨纂屯灵丘为后拒。
现代文：齐军据守陉岭上的关隘，杨忠出奇兵大破敌人，留下杨纂屯守在灵丘，准备阻击从后面来的救兵。
English: The Qi army held the pass on the Jiaoling Mountains. Yang Zhong made a surprise attack and defeated the enemy, leaving Yang Zun to stay in Lingqiu, ready to block the rescuers coming from behind.

古文：突厥木杆可汗控地头可汗、步离可汗等，以十万骑来会。
现代文：突厥的木杆可汗率领地头可汗、步离可汗等，带十万骑兵前来会合。
English: The Turkic pole khan led the ground khan, step away from the khan, etc., and brought a hundred thousand cavalry to the meeting.

古文：四年正月朔，攻晋阳。
现代文：四年正月初一，攻打晋阳。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year, Jinyang was attacked.

古文：时大雪风寒，齐人乃悉其精锐，鼓噪而出。
现代文：当时大雪纷飞，北风奇寒，齐人便全部出动精锐部队大喊大叫地冲出城来。
English: At that time, there was a heavy snowfall, and the north wind was very cold, so the Qi people all sent out elite troops to rush out of the city shouting.

古文：突厥引上西山，不肯战，众失色。
现代文：突厥军队领着人马上了西山，不肯和齐兵交战，众人都惊恐不安神色大变。
English: The Turkic army led the people to the West Mountain immediately, and refused to fight with the Qi soldiers. Everyone was terrified and uneasy, and their faces changed dramatically.

古文：皇考乃率七百人步战，死者十四五。
现代文：杨忠带领七百多人和敌人展开步战，阵亡的十分之四五。
English: Yang Zhong led more than seven hundred people and the enemy to fight on foot, and forty-five out of ten died in battle.

古文：以武后期，乃班师。
现代文：由于达奚武迟到，周军只得回师。
English: As Dagongwu was late, Zhou's army had to retreat.

古文：齐人亦不敢逼。
现代文：齐军也不敢进逼。
English: The Qi army also did not dare to advance.

古文：突厥乃纵兵大掠。自晋阳至平城，七百余里，人畜无遗。
现代文：突厥这才纵兵大抢大掠，从晋阳直到平城，沿途七百多里，人畜都被掳掠一空。
English: It was only then that the Turks began to plunder and pillage. From Jinyang to Pingcheng, more than seven hundred miles along the way, people and animals were plundered.

古文：周武帝拜皇考为太傅，晋公护以其不附己，以为泾州总管。
现代文：周武帝任命杨忠为太傅，晋公宇文护因为杨忠不肯依附于他，就派杨忠去当泾州总管。
English: Emperor Zhou appointed Yang Zhong as Taifu, and because Yang Zhong refused to be attached to him, Jin Gong Yu Wengu sent Yang Zhong to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：是岁，大军又东伐，晋公护出洛阳，令皇考出沃野，以应接突厥。
现代文：当年，大军又东征，晋公护出兵洛阳，命令杨忠从沃野出兵，以接应突厥。
English: In the same year, the great army marched to the East again. Jin Gonggu sent troops to Luoyang and ordered Yang Zhong to send troops from Wuye to meet the Turks.

古文：时军粮少，诸将忧之。皇考曰： 当获以济事耳。 
现代文：当时缺少军粮，众将都很忧虑，杨忠说： 应当暂时想办法来解决。 
English: At that time, there was a shortage of military food, and the generals were very worried. Yang Zhong said: We should temporarily find a way to solve it.

古文：乃招诱稽胡首领，咸令在坐，使王杰盛军容鸣鼓而出。
现代文：于是，他派人去招诱稽胡的首领，让他们都坐在一起。这时，王杰带领军队雄纠纠地擂着战鼓出兵。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to entice the leaders of Jinghu to sit together. At this time, Wang Jie led the army to march out bravely beating the war drums.

古文：皇考阳怪问之。杰曰： 大冢宰已至洛阳，天子闻银、夏间胡扰动，故使杰就攻除之。 
现代文：杨忠装出吃惊的样子，问他干什么，王杰说： 大冢宰已经到了洛阳，天子听说银、夏之间的胡人骚乱，所以派我来除掉他们。 
English: Yang Zhong pretended to be surprised and asked him what he was doing. Wang Jie said, "The Grand Vizier has arrived in Luoyang. The Heavenly Son heard about the Hu people's riot between the Silver and the Summer, so he sent me to eliminate them."

古文：又令突厥使者驰告曰： 可汗更入并州，留兵马十万在长城下，故令问公，若有稽胡不服，欲来共破之。 
现代文：接着，又让突厥的使者前来报告说 ：可汗已经进入并州，留下兵马十万人在长城下待命，因此命令我来向您请求，如果有稽胡人不肯归顺，就来这里一齐打败他们。 
English: Next, he had a Turkic envoy come to report: The khan has entered the annexed state, leaving 100,000 soldiers and horses on standby under the Great Wall, so I am ordered to come to ask you, if there are any Qihus who do not want to submit, come here to defeat them together.

古文：坐者皆惧。
现代文：在座的稽胡首领听了都非常害怕。
English: All the chiefs of the qihu here were very scared when they heard this.

古文：皇考慰喻遣之，于是归命，馈输填积。
现代文：杨忠便安慰了他们一番并讲明道理，然后放了他们。于是，稽胡人都表示归顺，送来的各种粮草，塞满道路。
English: Yang Zhong consoled them first and explained the reason, and then released them. As a result, the Qihou people all surrendered, and all kinds of grain and grass were sent to fill the road.

古文：属晋公护先退，皇考亦罢兵而还镇。
现代文：由于晋公宇文护先自退军，杨忠也罢兵回到本镇。
English: Since Jin Gong Uwenguo withdrew from the army first, Yang Zhong also withdrew from the army and returned to this town.

古文：又以政绩称，诏赐钱三十万，布五百匹，谷二千斛。
现代文：他又因政绩突出，皇帝下诏赐钱三十万，布五百匹，谷子二千斛。
English: Due to his outstanding political achievements, the emperor granted him 300,000 yuan in money, 500 horses of cloth, and 2,000 yams of grain.

古文：以疾还京，周武及晋公护屡临视焉。
现代文：后来杨忠因病回京。周武帝和晋公宇文护多次亲临看望。
English: Later, Yang Zhong returned to Beijing due to illness. Emperor Zhou Wudi and Jin Gong Yu Wengu visited him in person many times.

古文：薨，赠太保、都督同朔等十三州军事、同州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：去世后，追赠为太保，都督同、朔等十三州军事，同州刺史，原来生前官职照旧。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo, the military governor of thirteen states including Tong and Shuo, and the history of the same state, and his former official position remained unchanged.

古文：谥曰桓公。
现代文：被谥为桓公。
English: He was enthroned as Kan-ko.

古文：开皇元年，追尊为武元皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：开皇元年，追封为武元皇帝，庙号为太祖。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was enthroned as Emperor Wuyuan, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：帝，武元皇帝之长子也。
现代文：杨坚是武元皇帝的长子。
English: Yang Jian was the eldest son of Emperor Wuyuan.

古文：皇妣曰吕氏。以周大统七年六月癸丑夜，生帝于冯翊波若寺。
现代文：母亲是吕氏，在西魏大统七年六月十三日夜，在冯翊的波若寺生下了他。
English: His mother was Lv, who gave birth to him on the evening of June 13th, in the 7th year of the Western Wei Dynasty, at the Bora Temple in Fenghuang.

古文：有紫气充庭。时有尼来自河东，谓皇妣曰： 此兒所从来甚异，不可于俗间处之。 
现代文：当时有紫气充满庭中，有位来自河东的尼姑对杨坚的母亲说： 这个孩子的来历很奇异，不能让他住在俗人居住的地方。 
English: At that time, a purple aura filled the courtyard. A nun from Hedong said to Yang Jian's mother, "This child's origin is very strange, he cannot live in a place where common people live.

古文：乃将帝舍于别馆，躬自抚养。
现代文：于是将杨坚抱到另外的馆舍中，亲自抚养。
English: So he took Yang Jian to another hall and raised him himself.

古文：皇妣抱帝，忽见头上出角，遍体起鳞，坠帝于地。
现代文：母亲吕氏抱他时，忽然看见他头上长出角，全身长满鳞，吃惊地松手把孩子掉下地。
English: When his mother, Lü, was holding him, she suddenly saw horns growing out of his head and his whole body covered in scales. She was so surprised that she let go of her hand and dropped the child to the ground.

古文：尼自外见，曰： 已惊我兒，致令晚得天下。 
现代文：尼姑从外面见到后说 ：已经惊了孩子了，推迟了他得到天下的时间。 
English: When the nun saw him from the outside, she said, "He has already frightened the child and delayed his coming into the world."

古文：帝龙颔，额上有五柱入顶，目光外射；有文在手曰 王 字，长上短下，沈深严重。
现代文：杨坚下巴像龙，额上有五个肉柱长上头顶，目光四射，手上有 王 字，上长下短，纹路很深看得十分清晰。
English: Yang Jian's chin is like a dragon, there are five meat columns on his forehead that are long on the top of his head, his eyes are bright, his hands have the word "Wang," they are short on the top and long on the bottom, and the lines are very deep and very clear.

古文：初入太学，虽至亲昵，不敢狎也。
现代文：初进太学时，即使是很亲近的人，也不敢轻易和他开玩笑。
English: When he first entered Taigaku, even those who were very close to him did not dare to joke with him easily.

古文：年十四，京兆尹薛善辟为功曹。
现代文：十四岁时，京兆尹薛善任用他当功曹。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was appointed as a gong cao by Emperor Jingzhao.

古文：十五，以皇考勋，授散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司，封成纪县公。
现代文：十五岁时，因他父亲的功劳，被任命为散骑常侍车骑大将军、仪同三司，封爵成纪县公。
English: At the age of fifteen, due to his father's merits, he was appointed as the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, the General of the Horse Cavalry, and the General of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：十六，迁骠骑大将军，加开府。
现代文：十六岁，晋升为骠骑大将军，加开府。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry, and sent to the capital.

古文：周文帝见而叹曰： 此兒风骨，非世间人。 
现代文：周文帝见到他以后感叹说 ：这个孩子的风骨，不像世间的人。 
English: After seeing him, Zhou Wendi sighed and said, "This child's temperament is unlike that of people in the world."

古文：明帝即位，授右小宗伯，进封大兴郡公。
现代文：明帝即位，任命他为小宫伯，晋封大兴郡公。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed him as Xiaogongbo (小宮伯) and promoted him to Daxing County.

古文：明帝尝遣善相者来和视帝。和诡对曰： 不过柱国。 
现代文：明帝曾经派善于给人看相的来和给杨坚看相，来和假报说： 不过能当个柱国罢了。 
English: Emperor Ming once sent someone who was good at reading people's faces to read Yang Jian's face and said, "But we can be a pillar country."

古文：既而私谓帝曰： 公当为天下君，必大诛杀而后定。 
现代文：但他接着便私下对杨坚说 ：您必定成为天下国君，必须经过一番大杀戮而后天下安定。 
English: But he went on to say to Yang Jian in private: "You will surely become the ruler of the world, you must go through a great slaughter and then the world will be stable."

古文：周武帝即位，迁左小宫伯，出为随州刺史，进位大将军。
现代文：周武帝即位，升任左小宫伯，出任随州刺史，晋位为大将军。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu ascended the throne, was promoted to Zuo Xiaogong Bo, served as Suizhou chief historian, and was promoted to general.

古文：后征还，遇皇妣寝疾三年，昼夜不离左右，以纯孝称。
现代文：后来被召回，正遇上他母亲生病三年，他日夜不离开母亲身边，因此以纯孝而受到称誉。
English: He was recalled later, just as his mother fell ill for three years. He did not leave his mother's side day and night, and was praised for his filial piety.

古文：宇文护执政，尤忌帝，屡将害焉。
现代文：宇文护执政时，特别嫉妒杨坚，屡次准备加害。
English: When Uwen Rong was in power, he was particularly jealous of Yang Jian and repeatedly prepared to harm him.

古文：赖大将军侯伏侯寿等救护以免。
现代文：幸亏大将军侯伏、侯寿等加以救护，才免于受害。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the great generals Hou Fu and Hou Shou, who came to their rescue, they were able to avoid injury.

古文：后袭爵隋国公。周武既为皇太子娉帝长女为妃，益加礼重。
现代文：周武帝聘杨坚的长女给皇太子当妃子，也就对杨坚更加礼遇、尊重。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu hired Yang Jian's eldest daughter as a concubine for the crown prince, and treated Yang Jian with more courtesy and respect.

古文：齐王宪言于周武曰： 普六茹坚相貌，臣每见之，不觉自失。
现代文：齐王宪曾经对周武帝说 ：普六茹坚的相貌，我每次见他时，常常有茫然自失的感觉。
English: Qi Wangxian once said to Zhou Wudi: Every time I see the appearance of Pu Rujian, I often have a feeling of being at a loss.

古文：恐非人下，请早除之。 
现代文：恐怕不是作为人臣的，请及早除掉他。 
English: I'm afraid not as a minister, please get rid of him as soon as possible.

古文：周武曰： 此止可为将耳。 
现代文：周武帝说 ：他只不过是可以当将军罢了！ 
English: Zhou Wudi said: He can only be a general!

古文：内史王轨骤谏曰： 皇太子非社稷主，普六茹坚有反相。 
现代文：内史王轨急切地进谏说 ：皇太子并不是国家之主，普六茹坚有反叛的相貌。 
English: Inner historian Wang Luo eagerly chimed in, saying: "The crown prince is not the head of the country, and Priyujujian has the appearance of a rebel.

古文：周武不悦曰： 必天命，将若之何？ 
现代文：周武帝不高兴地说 ：如果天命如此，又能拿他怎么样？ 
English: Zhou Wudi said with displeasure: If this is the fate of heaven, what can be done with him?

古文：帝甚惧，深自晦匿。
现代文：杨坚为此十分害怕，便深深地自我隐晦。
English: Yang Jian is very afraid of this, so he is deeply self-effacing.

古文：后从周武平齐，进柱国。
现代文：后来，他跟从周武帝平齐，晋封为柱国。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Zhou and was promoted to be a pillar state.

古文：又与齐王宪破齐任城王湝于冀州，除定州总管。
现代文：他又跟齐王宪一起在冀州击败齐任城王氵皆，被任命为定州总管。
English: Together with Qi Wangxian, he defeated Qi Rencheng in Jizhou and was appointed the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：先是州城门久闭不行，齐人白： 文宣时，或请开之，文宣不许，曰： 当有圣人启之。  
现代文：原来定州的城门关闭了很久不打开，齐人说，文宣帝时，有人请求他打开，文宣帝说 ：当有圣人来打开。 
English: Originally, the city gate of Dingzhou was closed for a long time and not opened. Qi said that when Emperor Wenzhong was asked to open it, Emperor Wenzhong said: "Open it when a saint comes."

古文：及帝至而开之，莫不惊异。
现代文：杨坚来到以后，打开了城门，人们无不感到惊异。
English: After Yang Jian arrived, he opened the gate, and everyone was surprised.

古文：迁亳州总管。
现代文：后他又改任亳州总管。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general manager of Ganzhou.

古文：周宣帝即位，以后父，征拜上柱国、大司马。
现代文：周宣帝即位时，因为杨坚是皇后的父亲，被征召入朝，任命为上柱国、大司马。
English: When Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended the throne, because Yang Jian was the father of the empress, he was conscripted into the imperial court and appointed as Shangzhu Guo (上柱国) and Da Sima (大司馬).

古文：大象初，迁太后丞、右司武，俄转大前疑。
现代文：大象初年，改任大后丞、右司武，不久又转为大前疑。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was reassigned to Daigo-jo and Utsubo, and soon he was reassigned to Daizen-suspicion.

古文：周宣每巡幸，恆委以居守。
现代文：周宣帝每次出巡时，都委任他留守京城。
English: Zhou Xuandi appointed him to stay in Beijing every time he went on a tour.

古文：时周宣为《刑经圣制》，其法深刻，帝以法令滋章，非兴化之道，切谏，不纳。
现代文：当时，周宣帝制定了《刑经圣制》，法令严苛，杨坚认为法令过多，不是兴国化民之道，恳切加以劝谏，皇帝不采纳。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhou Xuan formulated the "Sacred System of the Criminal Law" and the laws were harsh. Yang Jian thought that the laws were too many and were not the way to rejuvenate the country. He earnestly advised the emperor not to adopt them.

古文：帝位望益隆，周宣颇以为忌。
现代文：杨坚的地位和声望越来越高，周宣帝对他产生了猜忌之心。
English: As Yang Jian's status and reputation grew higher and higher, Emperor Zhou Xuan became suspicious of him.

古文：时周宣四幸女并为皇后，争宠相毁。
现代文：当时周宣帝宠幸的四个女子都是皇后，她们为争宠而互相攻击。
English: At that time, the four women who were Zhou Xuandi's favorites were all empresses, and they attacked each other in order to compete for favor.

古文：周宣每谓后曰： 必族灭尔家。 
现代文：周宣帝常常对杨皇后说 ：我一定要族灭你们一家。 
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan often said to Empress Yang, "I must exterminate your family."

古文：因召帝，命左右曰： 若色动，即杀之。 
现代文：于是，他命人召杨坚入宫，对身边的人说： 如果他神色变异就立即杀了他。 
English: As a result, he ordered someone to summon Yang Jian to the palace and said to the people around him: If his appearance changes, kill him immediately.

古文：帝容色自若，遂免。
现代文：可是杨坚神情自若，因而免祸。
English: But Yang Jian looked confident, so he was spared.

古文：大象二年五月，以帝为扬州总管，将发，暴足疾而止。
现代文：大象二年五月，任命杨坚为扬州总管，杨坚正准备出发赴任，因突然脚上有病而停止。
English: In May of the second year of the elephant, Yang Jian was appointed Yangzhou chief administrator. Yang Jian was preparing to leave for the post, but stopped due to a sudden illness on his foot.

古文：乙未，周宣不悆。
现代文：十一日，周宣帝身体不适。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Zhou Xuan fell ill.

古文：时静帝幼冲，前内史上大夫郑译、御正大夫刘昉以帝皇后之父，众望所集，遂矫诏引帝入侍疾。因受遗辅政，都督内外诸军事。
现代文：这时，静帝年幼，前内史上大夫郑译、御正大夫刘窻因杨坚是皇后的父亲，众望所归，便假传诏书让杨坚进入宫中侍候皇帝的疾病，因而接受遗命辅佐朝政，都督内外诸军事。
English: At this time, Emperor Jing was still young, and because Yang Jian was the father of the empress and was highly regarded, the former Imperial Historian Doctor Zheng Rong and Imperial Physician Liu Xuan falsely issued an imperial edict to let Yang Jian enter the palace to wait for the emperor's illness, and thus accepted his last will and testament to assist the imperial government, and to be the military governor inside and outside the capital.

古文：帝恐周氏诸王在籓生变，称赵王招将嫁女于突厥为词以征之。
现代文：杨坚担心周氏诸王在藩国发生变故，就以赵王招准备把女儿嫁给突厥为由，把他们召回京。
English: Yang Jian was worried that the kings of the Zhou clan would cause trouble in the domain, so he called them back to Beijing on the grounds that Zhao Wang Zhao was preparing to marry his daughter to a Turk.

古文：己酉，周宣崩。
现代文：二十五日，周宣帝去世。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Zhou Xuan died.

古文：庚戌，静帝诏假黄钺、左大丞相，百官总己而听焉。
现代文：二十六日，周静帝下诏任命杨坚为假黄钺、左大丞相，百官的总领听理朝政。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Zhou Jing issued an edict appointing Yang Jian as the False Huang Di, the Left Major General, and the leader of a hundred officials to listen to the government of the dynasty.

古文：以正阳宫为丞相府，以郑译为长史，刘悆昉为司马，具置僚佐。
现代文：以正阳宫作为丞相府，任命郑译为长史，刘窻为司马，各人都设置了幕僚和辅助官员。
English: Zhengyang Palace was designated as the chancellor's office, Zheng Zhan was appointed as the chief historian, and Liu Ye was appointed as the secretary. Each of them set up staff and auxiliary officials.

古文：周宣时刑政峻酷者，悉更以宽大之制，天下归心矣。
现代文：周宣帝时刑罚政令严酷的部分，杨坚全部更改使之宽宏，天下人归心于他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Xuan, Yang Jian changed all the harsh parts of the punishment decree to make it more lenient, and people around the world became attached to him.

古文：六月，赵王招、陈王纯、赵王盛、代王达、滕王悄并至长安。
现代文：六月，赵王招、陈王纯、越王盛、代王达、滕王荄都来到长安。
English: In June, Zhao Wangzhao, Chen Wangjun, Yue Wangsheng, Dai Wangda and Teng Wangyao all came to Chang'an.

古文：相州总管尉迟迥自以宿将，至是不能平，遂举兵。
现代文：相州总管尉迟迥自以为是有声望的老将军，心中愤愤不平，于是起兵反叛。
English: The lieutenant-general of Sangju, who thought of himself as a prestigious old general, was so angry that he rebelled.

古文：赵、魏之士响应，旬日间，众至十余万。
现代文：赵、魏的一些人士加以响应，十多天时间，反叛军队多达十几万。
English: Some people from Zhao and Wei responded, and in more than ten days, the rebel army reached more than one hundred thousand.

古文：宇文胄以荥州，石悆以建州，席毗以沛郡，毗弟叉罗以兗州，皆应。
现代文：宇文胄在荥州、石孙心在建州、席毗在沛郡、席毗的弟弟叉罗在兖州，都纷纷呼应。
English: Yu Wenjun in Ganzhou, Shi Sunxin in Jianzhou, Shibi in Pei County, Shibi's younger brother Xiluo in Ganzhou, all echoed.

古文：迥遣子质于陈，以求援。
现代文：尉迟迥又送儿子到陈国作为人质，请求援军。
English: He sent his son to Chen as a hostage to ask for reinforcements.

古文：帝命上柱国、郧公韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：杨坚命令上柱国、郧公韦孝宽进行讨伐。
English: Yang Jian ordered Shangzhu Guo and Wei Xiaokuan to carry out the crusade.

古文：雍州牧、毕王贤及赵、陈等五王谋作乱，帝执贤斩之，而掩赵王等罪。因诏五王剑履上殿。入朝不趋，以安之。
现代文：雍州牧、毕王贤以及赵、陈五位藩王也阴谋作乱。杨坚抓住毕王贤，将他斩首，但故意掩盖赵王等人的罪状，并下诏五王可以带剑穿履上殿，入朝不必趋行，以此稳住他们。
English: Yang Jian caught Bi Wangxian and beheaded him, but he deliberately covered up the crimes of Zhao Wang and the others, and ordered that the five kings could enter the palace with swords, so that they did not have to travel to the imperial court, in order to stabilize them.

古文：时五王阴谋滋甚，帝以酒肴造赵王，观其指。赵王伏甲于卧内，帝赖元胄以免，于是诛赵、越二王。
现代文：这时，五王的阴谋却越来越明显。杨坚送酒菜到赵王家，观察他的意向，赵王埋伏下甲士在卧房内，杨坚因有元胄才免于受害。于是，杀了赵王和越王。
English: At this time, the conspiracy of the five kings became more and more obvious. Yang Jian sent wine and vegetables to Zhao Wang's house to observe his intentions. Zhao Wang ambushed the knight in the bedroom. Yang Jian was only spared because he had Yuan Xuan. Therefore, he killed Zhao Wang and Yue Wang.

古文：八月庚午，韦孝宽破尉迟迥，斩之，传首阙下，余党悉平。
现代文：八月十七日，韦孝宽击败尉迟迥，斩了他，将首级传送朝廷，余党也全被讨平。
English: On August 17th, Wei Xiaokuan defeated and beheaded his lieutenant, and sent his head to the imperial court. The rest of the party was also defeated.

古文：初，迥之乱，郧州总管司马消难据州应迥，淮南州县多从之。
现代文：当初，尉迟迥作乱时，郧州总管司马消难以所占的州呼应他，淮南一带的州县也大都跟从。
English: At the beginning, when the lieutenant was late to make a disturbance, the states that were difficult to occupy echoed him, and most of the states and counties around Huainan also followed.

古文：襄州总管王谊讨之，消难奔陈。
现代文：襄州总管王谊进讨，司马消难投奔陈国。
English: Wang Rui, the governor of Yangzhou, advanced the discussion, and Sima was forced to go to Chen Guo.

古文：荆、郢群蛮乘衅而起，命亳州总管贺若谊讨平之。
现代文：这时，荆、郢一带的群蛮也乘机而起，杨坚命令亳州总管贺若谊讨平了他们。
English: At this time, the bandits in the areas of Jing and Handan also took the opportunity to rise up, and Yang Jian ordered He Ruoyi, the governor of Handan, to fight them.

古文：先是，上柱国王谦为益州总管，亦拥众邑、蜀，以匡复为辞。
现代文：起先，益州总管、上柱国王谦也率众在巴蜀起兵，宣称要匡复周室。
English: At first, the governor-general of Yizhou, the upper pillar king Qian also led the troops in Bashu, declaring that he wanted to restore the Zhou dynasty.

古文：帝以东夏、山南为事，未遑致讨，谦遂屯剑口，陷始州。
现代文：杨坚当时正忙于处置东夏和山南的事态，无暇征讨，王谦便屯兵于剑口，攻陷始州。
English: At that time, Yang Jian was busy dealing with the state of affairs in Eastern Xia and Shannan, and had no time to fight. Wang Qian then stationed troops in Jiankou and invaded Shizhou.

古文：至是，乃命上柱国梁睿讨平之，传首阙下。隳剑阁之险，以绝好乱之萌焉。
现代文：到这时，杨坚命令上柱国梁睿讨平了王谦，把他的首级也送到朝廷，毁了剑阁一带的险要地方的设施，以杜绝喜欢作乱的人再生念头。
English: At this time, Yang Jian ordered the head of the pillar, Guo Liang Rui, to level Wang Qian, send his head to the imperial court, and destroy the facilities in the critical areas around Jiange, so as to eliminate the idea of rebirth of people who like to make trouble.

古文：九月壬子，周帝进帝大丞相。
现代文：九月三十日，周静帝晋封杨坚为大丞相。
English: On September 30, Emperor Zhou Jing promoted Yang Jian to the post of grand chancellor.

古文：十月，周帝诏追赠皇曾祖烈为柱国、太保、都督十州诸军事、徐州刺史、隋国公，谥曰康。
现代文：十月，周静帝下诏追赠他的曾祖父杨烈为柱国、太保、都督十州诸军事、徐州刺史、隋国公，谥号为 康 。
English: In October, Emperor Zhou Jing posthumously awarded his great-grandfather Yang Rong with the titles of "pillar of the nation," "guardian of the nation," "governor-general of ten military states," "governor-general of Xuzhou" and "governor-general of the Sui Dynasty." His posthumous name was Kang.

古文：皇祖祯为柱国、都督十三州诸军事、同州刺史、隋国公，谥曰献。
现代文：杨坚的祖父杨桢为柱国、都督十三州诸军事、同州刺史、隋国公，谥为 献 。
English: Yang Jian's grandfather, Yang Jie, was a pillar state, the military governor of thirteen states, the governor of the same state, and the prince of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：皇考忠为上柱国、太师、大冢宰、都督十三州诸军事、雍州牧。
现代文：杨坚的父亲杨忠为上柱国、太师、大冢宰、都督十三州诸军事、雍州牧。
English: Yang Jian's father, Yang Zhong, was Shangzhu Guo, Taishi, Dazhao, Governor of the 13 Military Provinces, and Yongzhou Herdsman.

古文：壬戌，诛陈王纯。
现代文：初十，杀了陈王纯。
English: At the age of ten, he killed Chen Wangjun.

古文：周帝进帝大冢宰，五府总于天官。
现代文：周静帝又晋封杨坚为大冢宰、五府总于天官。
English: Emperor Zhou Jing also promoted Yang Jian to the position of grand vizier, and the five prefectural governors were elevated to heavenly officials.

古文：十一月辛未，诛代王达、滕王悄。
现代文：十一月辛未，杀了代王达、滕王荄。
English: In November, Xin Wei killed Wang Da and Teng Wang Yao.

古文：十二月甲子，周帝授帝相国，总百揆，去都督内外诸军事、大冢宰之号，进爵为王。
现代文：十二月十三日，周静帝晋封杨坚为相国，总理百事，免去都督中外诸军事、大冢宰的称号，晋爵位为王。
English: On December 13th, Emperor Zhou Jing promoted Yang Jian to the position of consort of the emperor, Premier of the People's Republic of China, exempted him from the titles of military governor and grand vizier, and promoted him to the rank of king.

古文：以隋州之崇业，郧州之安陆、城阳，温州之宜人，应州之平靖、上明，顺州之淮南，士州之永川，昌州之广昌、安昌，申州之义阳、淮安，息州之新蔡、建安，豫州之汝南、临颍、广宁、初安，蔡州之蔡阳，郢州之汉东二十郡为隋国。
现代文：以隋州的崇业，郧州的安陆、城阳，温州的宜人，应州的平靖、上明，顺州的淮南，土州的水川，昌州的广昌、安昌，申州的义阳、淮安，息州的新蔡、建安，豫州的汝南、临颍、广宁、初安，蔡州的蔡阳，郢州的汉东共二十郡作为隋国。
English: There are 20 counties in Sui Province, including Chongye in Suizhou, Anlu and Chengyang in Ganzhou, Yijin in Wenzhou, Pingjing and Shangming in Yingzhou, Huainan in Shunzhou, Suichuan in Tuzhou, Guangchang and Anchang in Changzhou, Yiyang and Huai'an in Shenzhou, Xin Cai and Jian'an in Sichuan, Runan, Linyi, Guangning and Chu'an in Yuzhou, Caiyang in Caizhou and Hantong in Ganzhou.

古文：剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，备九锡之礼。
现代文：可以剑履上殿，入朝不趋行，赞拜不称名，备九锡的礼仪。
English: You can go up to the palace with a sword, enter the court without marching, praise without praising, and prepare the etiquette of Jiuxi.

古文：加玺绂、远游冠，相国印绿綟绶，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：加赐玺绂、远游冠，绿色组绶的相国印，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: In addition to the imperial seal, the traveling crown, and the seal of the country of the green group, the status is above the princes.

古文：隋国置丞相以下，一依旧式。
现代文：隋国设置丞相以下官员，全部依照旧有样式。
English: Sui State set up officials below the prime minister, all in accordance with the old style.

古文：帝再让，乃受王爵，十郡而已。
现代文：杨坚再次谦让，最后接受了王爵和十郡而已。
English: Yang Jian once again conceded, finally accepting only the crown and ten counties.

古文：周帝诏进皇祖、皇考爵并为王，夫人为王妃。
现代文：周静帝又下诏晋封杨坚的祖父、父亲为王爵，夫人为王妃。
English: Emperor Zhou Jing also issued an edict to promote Yang Jian's grandfather and father to the rank of prince, and his wife to the rank of princess.

古文：大定元年二月壬子，下令曰： 以前赐姓，皆复其旧。 
现代文：大定元年二月初二，下令说： 以前所赐姓氏，全部恢复旧姓。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 1st year of Dading, it was ordered that: All surnames previously given shall be restored to the old surnames.

古文：甲寅，帝受九锡之礼。
现代文：初四，杨坚接受了九锡的礼仪。
English: On the fourth day of his freshman year, Yang Jian accepted Jiuxi's etiquette.

古文：丙辰，周帝又诏帝冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗；出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕；乐舞八佾，设钟谆宫县；王妃为王后，世子为太子。
现代文：初六，周帝又下诏说，杨坚的王冕上可以有十二旒，建天子的旌旗，出警入跸，乘坐金银车，驾六马，备有五时使用的副车，设置先驱骑士和云旗，用天子使用的八佾的乐舞，设有钟悬磬等，王妃称为王后，世子称为太子。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Zhou issued another edict, saying that Yang Jian's crown could have twelve cranes, the banner of building a heavenly son, the police entering the crane, riding a gold and silver car, driving six horses, having a secondary car used at five o'clock, setting up a pioneer knight and a cloud flag, using the music and dance of the eight cranes used by the heavenly son, and having a bell hanging, etc. The princess was called the queen, and the heir was called the prince.

古文：遣大宗伯、大将军、金城公赵蟹奉皇帝玺绂，百官劝进，帝乃受焉。
现代文：于是便派遣太傅、上柱国、杞国公椿送上册文，又派遣大宗伯、大将军、金城公赵奉上皇帝的玺绂，百官劝进，杨坚这才接受了。
English: As a result, he sent Taifu, Shangzhu Guo, and Zang Guo Gongzhu to send the record. He also sent Dai Zongbo, Da Geng, and Jincheng Gong Zhao to send the emperor's imperial edict. Hundreds of officials persuaded Yang Jian to accept.

古文：开皇元年春二月甲子，自相府常服入宫，备礼即皇帝位于临光殿。
现代文：开皇元年春二月十八日，杨坚从相国府穿着平时穿的制服入宫，在临光殿按照礼仪即皇帝位。
English: On the 18th day of February in the spring of the first year of the emperor's reign, Yang Jian entered the palace from the Shogunate wearing his usual uniform, and was enthroned in accordance with the etiquette at the Lin Guang Palace.

古文：设坛于南郊，遣兼太傅、上柱国、邓公窦炽柴燎告天。
现代文：在南郊设立祭坛，派遣兼太傅、上柱国、邓公窦炽以柴燎祭告天帝。
English: An altar was set up in the southern suburb, and concubines Taifu, Shangzhu Guo, and Deng Gongdou were dispatched to announce the heavenly emperor with a firecracker sacrifice.

古文：是日，告庙。大赦，改元。
现代文：当天，又祭告太庙，大赦，改年号。
English: On the same day, the temple was also announced, amnesty, and a new year.

古文：京师庆云见。
现代文：京都出现了显示祥瑞之气的庆云。
English: In Kyoto, clouds of joy appeared, displaying the atmosphere of auspiciousness.

古文：改周官，依汉、魏之旧。
现代文：改变周朝原有的官制，恢复汉、魏时期的旧制。
English: The original official system of the Zhou Dynasty was changed, and the old system of the Han and Wei Dynasties was restored.

古文：制：以相国司马高谵为尚书左仆射兼纳言，相国司录虞庆则为内史监兼史部尚书，相国内郎李德林为内史令，上开府韦世康为礼部尚书，上开府元晖为都官尚书，开府、户部尚书元岩为兵部尚书，上仪同、司宗长孙毗为工部尚书，上仪同、司会杨尚希为度支尚书，雍州牧杨惠为左卫大将军。
现代文：下令：任命相国司马高赹为尚书左仆射兼纳言，相国司录虞庆则为内史监兼吏部尚书，相国内郎李德林为内史令，上开府韦世康为礼部尚书，上开府元晖为都官尚书，开府、户部尚书元岩为兵部尚书，上仪同、司宗长孙毗为工部尚书，上仪同、司会杨尚希为度支尚书，雍州牧杨惠为左卫大将军。
English: Order: To appoint the Secretary of State Ma Gaoqi as the left-hand man of Shangshu and the right-hand man of Nagon, the Secretary of State Luo Yuqing as the supervisor of internal history and the official of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Minister's son-in-law Li Delin as the internal history of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Wei Shikang of Shangkaifu as the official of the Ministry of Rites, the former governor of Shangkaifu as the official of the Metropolitan Government, the former governor of Kaifu and the official of the Ministry of Household, Yuan Yan as the official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the former minister of Rites

古文：乙丑，追尊皇考为武元皇帝，庙号太祖；皇妣吕氏为元明皇后。
现代文：十五日，文帝追尊父亲为武元皇帝，庙号太祖；母亲吕氏为元明皇后。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Wen traced his father as Emperor Wuyuan, and his mother, Empress Lu, as Empress Yuanming.

古文：改周氏左社右庙制为右社左庙。
现代文：更改周氏原来的左社右庙制为右社左庙制。
English: Changed the Zhou's original Zuoshe ZuoMiao system to Zuoshe ZuoMiao system.

古文：遣八使巡省风俗。
现代文：派出八位使者到各地巡视民间风俗。
English: Eight emissaries were sent to various regions to inspect folk customs.

古文：丙寅，修庙社。
现代文：十六日，修建太庙和社坛。
English: On the 16th, the construction of the Great Temple and the community center began.

古文：立王后独孤氏为皇后，王太子勇为皇太子。
现代文：立王后独孤氏为皇后，王太子杨勇为皇太子。
English: He appointed Queen Doko as empress and Crown Prince Yang Yong as crown prince.

古文：丁卯，以大将军赵蟹为尚书右仆射，以上开府伊娄彦恭为右武候大将军。
现代文：十七日，任命大将军赵为尚书左仆射，上开府伊娄彦恭为右武候大将军。
English: On the 17th, General Zhao was appointed as Shangshu's second-in-command, and Shangkaifu Ili Yanqiong as the second-in-command.

古文：己巳，以五千户封周帝介国公为隋室宾；旌旗车服礼乐，一如其旧；上书不为表，答表不称诏。
现代文：十九日，以五千户封给周静帝为介国公，作为隋国国宾，旌旗、车服和礼乐，完全照旧，上书不称表，答表也不称为诏书。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Zhou Jing was presented with a 5,000-household fief as imperial prince, and as a state guest of the Sui Dynasty, the flag, car clothes and music were completely unchanged. The letter was not called a watch, and the answer sheet was not called an imperial decree.

古文：周氏诸王，尽降为公。
现代文：周室原来的各王，全部降为公爵。
English: All the former kings of the Zhou dynasty were reduced to dukes.

古文：辛未，以皇弟同安郡公爽为雍州牧。
现代文：二十一日，任命皇弟同安郡公杨爽为雍州牧。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yang Shuang, the prince of Tong'an County, was appointed as the Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：乙亥，封皇弟邵国公慧为滕王，同安公爽为卫王，皇子雁门公广为晋王，俊为秦王，秀为越王，谅为汉王。
现代文：二十五日，封皇弟邵国公杨慧为滕王，同安公杨爽为卫王，皇子雁门公广为晋王，俊为秦王，秀为越王，谅为汉王。
English: On the 25th, Yang Hui, the younger brother of Emperor Shao, was crowned as the King of Teng, Yang Shuang, the Prince of Tongan, was crowned as the King of Wei, the Prince of Guimen, Gongguang, was crowned as the King of Jin, Jun was crowned as the King of Qin, Xiu was crowned as the King of Yue, and Peng was crowned as the King of Han.

古文：并州总管李穆为太师，上柱国窦炽为太傅，幽州总管于翼为太尉，观国公田仁恭为太子太师，武德郡公柳敏为太子太保。
现代文：并州总管李穆为太师，上柱国窦炽为太傅，幽州总管于翼为太尉，观国公田仁恭为太子太师，武德郡公柳敏为太子太保。
English: And Li Mu, the head of the prefecture, was the Grand Master, Gu Dou, the head of the prefecture, was the Grand Master, Yu Ying, the head of the prefecture, was the Grand Officer, Gu Tian, the head of the prefecture, was the Grand Master, and Gong Liu Min, the head of Wude County, was the Grand Master.

古文：丁丑，以晋王广为并州总管，封陈留郡公智积为蔡王，兴城郡公静为道王。
现代文：二十七日，任命晋王广为并州总管，封陈留郡公智积为蔡王，兴城郡公静为道王。
English: On the 27th, Jin Wangguang was appointed as the chief administrator of the merged prefecture, Chenliu County's Gong Zhizhe was named Cai Wang, and Xingcheng County's Gongjing was named Dao Wang.

古文：戊寅，改东京府为尚书省，发官牛五千头，分赐贫人。
现代文：二十八日，改东京府为尚书省，发出官牛五千头，分赐给穷人。
English: On the 28th, Tokyo Prefecture was changed to Shosho-sho, and 5,000 head of government cattle were distributed to the poor.

古文：三月，宣仁门槐树连理，众枝内附。
现代文：三月，宣仁门的槐树长出连理枝，其他枝条也都俯向树干。
English: In March, the eucalyptus tree at Xuanren Gate sprouted new branches, and the other branches also bent down to the trunk.

古文：壬午，白狼国献方物。
现代文：初二，白狼国进贡地方特产。
English: On the second day of the school year, White Wolf pays tribute to local specialties.

古文：丁亥，诏犬马器玩口味，不得献上。
现代文：初七，下诏说，凡是犬马玩赏的器物以及各种食用物品，不得进献。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the next imperial edict said that all dog and horse play objects and all kinds of edible items may not be donated.

古文：戊子，弛山泽禁。
现代文：初八，放宽有关山泽的禁令。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the ban on Yamazawa was relaxed.

古文：己丑，移盩啡连理树植于宫庭。
现代文：初九，将銩稨的连理树移到宫廷。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, he moved the withered Lianli tree to the court.

古文：戊戌，以太子少保苏威兼纳言、吏部尚书。
现代文：十八日，任命太子少保苏威兼纳言、吏部尚书。
English: On the 18th, he appointed Prince Shobao Suwei and Nagon, and Shangshu, the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：庚子，诏前代品爵，悉依旧定。
现代文：二十日，下诏凡前代所定的品爵，仍按照旧规定不变。
English: On the 20th, all the titles of nobility established by the previous generation will remain unchanged in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：丁未，梁萧岿使其太宰萧岩来贺。
现代文：二十七日，梁国萧岿派太宰萧岩前来祝贺。
English: On the 27th, Liang Guo Xiaoqi sent Dazai Xiaoyan to congratulate him.

古文：夏四月辛巳，大赦。
现代文：夏四月初二，大赦。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：戊戌，太常散乐并免为编户。
现代文：十九日，太常寺散乐户都废除改为编户。
English: On the 19th, all of the Taijoji Temple's sanshaku households were abolished and replaced with knitting households.

古文：禁杂乐百戏。
现代文：禁止演出杂乐和百戏。
English: The performance of miscellaneous music and opera is prohibited.

古文：辛丑，陈人来聘于周，至而上已受禅，致之介国。
现代文：二十二日，陈人来周朝聘问，到达京城时，杨坚已受禅让为帝，于是将使者引导去见介国公。
English: On the 22nd, the Chen people came to the Zhou Dynasty to ask questions. When they arrived in Beijing, Yang Jian had already been made emperor by Zen, so he led the emissary to see the emperor.

古文：是月，发稽胡修恐长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：当月，派遣稽胡人修筑长城，二十天停止。
English: In the same month, officials were dispatched to build the Great Wall, which lasted for twenty days.

古文：五月戊午，封邗国公杨雄为广平王，永康郡公杨弘为河间王。
现代文：五月初十，封于阝国公杨雄为广平王，永康郡公杨弘为河间王。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, Yang Xiong, the Duke of Yunnan, was crowned as the King of Guangping, and Yang Hong, the Duke of Yongkang, was crowned as the King of Hebei.

古文：辛未，介公薨，上举哀于朝堂，谥曰周静帝。
现代文：二十三日，介国公去世，文帝在朝堂为他举行哀礼，谥为 周静帝 。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Zhou passed away. Emperor Wen held a memorial service for him in the imperial hall, and he was named Emperor Zhou Jing.

古文：六月癸未，诏以初受命，赤雀降祥，推五德相生，为火色。
现代文：六月初五，下诏说，初受命为帝时，有赤雀降临的祥瑞，以五德相生推算，应是火的颜色。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the next imperial edict said that when he was first appointed as emperor, the auspiciousness of the arrival of the sparrow, based on the five virtues, should be the color of fire.

古文：其郊及社、庙，依服冕之仪；而朝会之服、旗帜、牺牲尽尚赤，戎服尚黄。
现代文：因此郊祭、社、庙祭礼，依照正常服冕的仪式；而朝会穿戴的衣服、用的旗帜、祭神的牲畜等都用红色，戎服用黄色。
English: Therefore, the suburb festivals, shrines, and temple festivals follow the normal coronation ceremony; while the clothes worn by the imperial court, the flags used, and the livestock used to worship the gods are all red, and the eunuchs wear yellow.

古文：秋七月乙卯，上始服黄，百僚毕贺。
现代文：秋七月初八，文帝开始身穿黄色帝服，百官都进行朝贺。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, Emperor Wen began to wear a yellow imperial robe, and all the officials performed morning greetings.

古文：八月壬午，废东京官。
现代文：八月初五，废除在东京设立的官职。
English: On August 5th, the post established in Tokyo was abolished.

古文：甲午，遣乐安公元谐击吐谷浑于青海，破而降之。
现代文：十七日，派乐安公元谐在青海进攻吐谷浑，攻破了他并使他降服。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Pei Le'an led a coordinated attack against Tu Guhun in Qinghai, defeating him and forcing him to surrender.

古文：九月戊申，遣使振给战亡者家。
现代文：九月初二，派使者赈济作战阵亡者的家属。
English: On the second day of September, envoys were sent to bring relief to the families of those who had died in battle.

古文：庚午，陈将周罗攻陷胡墅，萧摩诃寇江北。
现代文：二十四日，陈将周罗目侯攻占了胡墅，萧摩诃入侵江北。
English: On the 24th, Chen Zhou captured Hu's villa, and Xiao Miao invaded the north of the river.

古文：辛未，以越王秀为益州总管，改封蜀王。
现代文：二十五日，任命越王秀为益州总管，改封为蜀王。
English: On the 25th, Yue Wangxiu was appointed as the general manager of Yizhou, and his title was changed to Shu Wang.

古文：壬申，以薛公长孙览、宋安公元景山并为行军元帅。伐陈，仍令尚书左仆射高谵节度诸军。
现代文：二十六日，任命薛公长孙览、宋安公元景山同为行军元帅，讨伐陈国，仍令尚书左仆射高赹管辖各军。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Xue Gongchang, Sun Zhan, Song An, and Jingshan as marshals to fight Chen Guo, and still ordered Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Ya Gaoqi, to supervise the armies.

古文：是月，行五铢钱。
现代文：当月，发行五铢钱。
English: In the same month, 50 baht coins were issued.

古文：冬十月乙酉，百济王扶余昌遣使来贺。授昌上开府仪同三司、带方郡公。
现代文：冬十月初九，百济王扶馀昌派使者来朝贺，任命扶馀昌为上开府仪同三司、带方郡公。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, King Buyeochang of Baekje sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to congratulate the Emperor, and appointed Buyeochang as Shangkaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Utaifang Guo.

古文：戊子，行新律。
现代文：十二日，实行新法律。
English: On the 12th, the new law came into effect.

古文：壬辰，行幸岐州。
现代文：十六日，出巡到岐州。
English: On the 16th, he went on a tour to Qizhou.

古文：十一月乙卯，以永富郡公窦荣定为右武候大将军。
现代文：十一月初十，任命永富郡公窦荣定为右武侯大将军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of November, Gong Dou Rong of Yongfu County was appointed as the grand marshal of the Right Wuhou.

古文：遣兼散骑侍郎郑捴使于陈。
现代文：派兼散骑侍郎郑扌为出使陈国。
English: He sent Zheng Jian, his equerry and horseback rider, as Chen Guo's envoy.

古文：己巳，有流星如坠墙，光照于地。
现代文：二十四日，有流星如同墙壁坠落下来，光芒照亮大地。
English: On the 24th, a meteor fell like a wall, lighting up the earth.

古文：十二月甲申，以礼部尚书韦世康为吏部尚书。
现代文：十二月初九，任命礼部尚书韦世康为吏部尚书。
English: On the 9th day of December, Wei Shikang was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Rites.

古文：庚子，至自岐州。
现代文：二十五日，从岐州归来。
English: On the 25th, he returned from Qizhou.

古文：壬寅，高丽王高阳遣使朝贡，授阳大将军、辽东郡公。
现代文：二十七日，高丽王高阳派使者朝贡，封高阳为大将军、辽东郡公。
English: On the 27th, Goryeo King Goyang sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Goyang was made a general and the governor of Liaodong County.

古文：太子太保柳敏卒。
现代文：太子太保柳敏去世。
English: Prince Taibo Liumin passed away.

古文：是岁，靺鞨、突厥阿波可汗、沙钵略可汗并遣使朝贡。二年春正月庚申，陈宣帝殂。
现代文：当年，突厥阿波可汗、沙钵略可汗都派使者朝贡。二年春正月十六日，陈宣帝死去。
English: In that year, the Turkic Abo Khan and Shahryar Khan both sent emissaries to pay tribute. On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring, Chen Xuan Di died.

古文：辛酉，置河北道行台尚书省于并州，以晋王广为尚书令。置河南道行台尚书省于洛州，以秦王俊为尚书令。置西南道行台尚书省于益州，以蜀王秀为尚书令。
现代文：十七日，在并州设置河北道行台尚书省，任命晋王杨广为尚书令；在洛州设置河南道行台尚书省，由秦王俊为尚书令；在益州设置西南道行台尚书省，由蜀王秀任尚书令。
English: On the 17th, Jin Wang Yang Guang was appointed as the Director of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the Department of the

古文：戊辰，陈人遣使请和，求归胡墅。
现代文：二十四日，陈人派使者求和，请求送还胡墅。
English: On the 24th, the Chen people sent an envoy to sue for peace and request the return of Hu's villa.

古文：甲戌，诏举贤良。
现代文：三十日，下诏举荐贤良之士。
English: On the thirtieth day, the following edict was issued to recommend virtuous people.

古文：二月己丑，诏以陈有丧，命高颎等班师。
现代文：二月十五日，下诏因陈国有丧事，命令高等回师。
English: On February 15th, due to the state funeral of Chen Guo, the following edict was issued, ordering the college to send back the students.

古文：庚寅，加晋王广左武卫大将军，秦王俊右武卫大将军。
现代文：十六日，加封晋王广为左武卫大将军，秦王俊为右武卫大将军。
English: On the 16th, Jin Wangguang was promoted to General of the Left Division, and Qin Wangjun was promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：庚子，京师雨土。
现代文：二十六日，京师落下许多土。
English: On the 26th, a large amount of earth fell in Kyoto.

古文：三月，初命入宫殿门通籍。
现代文：三月，初次下令进入宫殿门要通报和登记。
English: In March, for the first time, it was ordered to inform and register when entering the palace gate.

古文：戊申，开渠引柱阳水于三畤原。夏四月丁丑，以宁州刺史窦荣定为左武候大将军。
现代文：初四，在三原开渠引杜阳水。夏四月初四，任命宁州刺史窦荣定为左武侯大将军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, a canal was opened in Mihara to bring water to Duyang. On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, the appointment of Ningzhou Jishi Dou was honored as the general of Zuowu.

古文：庚寅，大将军韩僧寿破突厥于鸡头山，上柱国李充破突厥于河北山。
现代文：十七日，大将军韩僧寿在鸡头山打败突厥人，上柱国李充在河北山打败突厥。
English: On the 17th, the great general Han Sang-soo defeated the Turks in Jitou Mountain, and the pillar country Li Chong defeated the Turks in Hebei Mountain.

古文：五月戊申，以上开府长孙平为度支尚书。
现代文：五月初五，任命上开府长孙平为度支尚书。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, the appointment of Sun Ping, the governor of Shangkaifu, as the highest-ranking official.

古文：己酉，以旱故，上亲省囚徒，其日大雨。
现代文：初六，因大旱，皇帝亲自审理囚犯，当天下了大雨。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, because of the drought, the emperor personally tried the prisoners, and it rained heavily that day.

古文：己未，高宝宁寇平州，突厥入长城。
现代文：十六日，高宝宁入侵平州，突厥人进犯长城。
English: On the 16th, Gao Baoning invaded Pingzhou, and the Turks attacked the Great Wall.

古文：庚申，以豫州刺史皇甫绩为都官尚书。
现代文：十七日，任命豫州刺史皇甫绩为都官尚书。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Emperor Fuxi of the State of Yuzhou was appointed as the official of the capital.

古文：甲子，改传国玺曰受命玺。
现代文：二十一日，将传国玉玺称为受命玺。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Jade Scepter will be called the Ordered Scepter.

古文：丁卯，制人年六十以上免课。
现代文：二十四日，下令凡年纪六十岁以上的免除课税。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that anyone over the age of sixty would be exempt from taxation.

古文：六月壬午，以太府卿苏孝慈为兵部尚书。
现代文：六月十日，任命太府卿苏孝慈为兵部尚书。
English: On June 10, Su Xiaoji, the Grand Mufu, was appointed as the Minister of Military Affairs.

古文：甲申，使使吊于陈。
现代文：十二日，派使者到陈国吊唁。
English: On the 12th, an envoy was sent to Chen to offer condolences.

古文：乙酉，上柱国李充破突厥于马邑。丙申诏曰：
现代文：十三日，上柱国李亮在马邑击败突厥。二十四日，下诏说：
English: On the 13th, Li Liang of Shangzhu defeated the Turks in Mayi. On the 24th, the following edict was issued:

古文：朕祗奉上玄，群临万国。属生灵之弊，处前代之宫，以为作之者劳，居之者逸。改创之事，心未遑也。
现代文： 朕奉上天之命，成为万国之君，正当生灵凋敝之际，暂居前代宫殿，以为建造者辛劳，居住者安逸，改建之事，未及思考。
English: By the order of Heaven, I have become the ruler of all nations. Just as life is fading away, I temporarily live in the palace of the previous generation, thinking that the builders are hard-working, the residents are comfortable, and the matter of reconstruction is not worth thinking about.

古文：而王公大臣，陈谋献策，咸云：羲、农以降，至于姬、刘，有当世而屡迁，无革命而不徙。
现代文：而王公大臣，陈谋献策，都说：从伏羲、神农以来，直至周姬氏，汉刘氏，有的当代就迁徙，没有变革后不改迁的。
English: Minister Wang Gong and Chen Mu Xianxing both said: From Fuxi and Shennong to the Zhou Ji clan and the Han Liu clan, some contemporaries have migrated. If there is no change, there will be no change.

古文：曹、马之后，时见因循，乃末世之宴安，非往圣之宏义。
现代文：曹氏司马氏之后，时常因循旧制，这是末世的苟安，不是以往圣人的宏大之义。
English: After Cao Sima, he often followed the old system. This is the peace of the last days, not the grandeur of the saints in the past.

古文：此城从汉，雕残日久，屡为战场，旧经丧乱。
现代文：此城自汉以来，凋残时日已久，屡次成为战场，旧时历经丧乱。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, this city has been in decline for a long time. It has repeatedly become a battleground, and the old history has been devastated.

古文：今之宫室，近代权宜，又非谋筮从龟，瞻星揆日；不足建皇王之邑，合大众所聚。
现代文：今日所居宫室，为近代权宜之计而建，又没有经过占卜策问，观星择日，不足以成为皇都之所和大众聚居之地。
English: The palace where he lives today was built as a modern expedient, but it did not go through the process of divination, stargazing and choosing the day. It is not enough to become the place of the imperial capital and the place where the public gathers.

古文：论变通之数，具幽显之情。同心固请，词情深切。
现代文：论述变通的运数，陈明幽显的情由，同心坚请，言辞恳切。
English: Discuss the flexible number of operations, clarify the reasons for the appearance, insist on the same heart, and speak earnestly.

古文：然则京师百官之府，四海归向，非朕一人之所独有。苟利于物，其可违乎。
现代文： 然而京都为百官府第，四海所归，非朕一人所独有，假如确有利于物，怎么能违背呢！
English: However, Kyoto is the first of a hundred government offices, the home of the four seas, and it is not unique to me alone. If it is truly beneficial, how can it be violated?

古文：且殷之五迁，恐人尽怨。是则以吉凶之土，制长短之命，谋新去故，如农望秋：虽则劬劳，其究安宅。
现代文：况且殷代五次迁都，惟恐人心抱怨，所以以地方之吉凶，确定立为都邑时间之短长，谋求新都舍去旧邑，犹如农夫盼望秋收，虽然辛劳，终于得以安居。
English: Moreover, the capital was moved five times in the Yin Dynasty, but for fear of complaints from the people, it was determined that the time to establish the capital was short, based on the local fortunes, and the old capital was abandoned to seek a new capital. It was like a farmer looking forward to the autumn harvest, although he had to work hard, he was finally able to live in peace.

古文：今区宇宁一，阴阳顺序，安安以迁，勿怀胥怨。
现代文：如今天下安宁，阴阳谐和，应安然改迁，不要心怀怨愤。
English: If there is peace and harmony between yin and yang today, you should relocate peacefully and not harbor resentment.

古文：龙首山川原秀丽，卉物滋阜，卜食相土，宜建都邑。定鼎之基永固，无穷之业在斯。
现代文： 龙首山川原秀丽，花卉万物兴盛，经占卜和勘测，适宜建都，是可以永固定鼎的根基，传下无穷的大业。
English: Longshou has beautiful mountains and rivers, flourishing flowers and all things. According to divination and survey, it is suitable to build a capital city. It is a foundation that can be permanently fixed, and an endless great cause passed down.

古文：公私府宅，规模远近，营构资须，随事修茸。
现代文：公私官府宅院，规模大小远近，建造所需资财，随事奏请。 
English: Public and private government residences, large and small, the construction of the necessary resources, please report.

古文：仍诏左仆射高颎、将作大匠刘龙、钜鹿郡公贺娄子干、太府少卿高龙叉等创造新都。
现代文：于是，仍命左仆射高赹、将作大匠刘龙、巨鹿郡公贺娄子干、太府少卿高龙叉等人修建新都。
English: As a result, his left-hand man, Sho Takatsuki, was still alive, and the construction of the new capital was entrusted to master craftsmen Liu Long, Gonghe Shanzikan of Koga County, and Taifu Shaoqing Gao Longfor.

古文：秋七月癸巳，诏新置都处坟墓，令悉迁葬设祭，仍给人功；无主者，命官为殡葬。
现代文：秋七月癸巳日，下诏说，凡是准备新建都城里的坟墓，命令全部迁葬并祭奠，供给人力。无主坟墓，由官府代为殡葬。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the next edict said that if any tombs in the capital were to be newly built, the order would be given to relocate and pay tribute to all of them, and manpower would be provided. If there was no owner of the grave, the government would take over the funeral.

古文：甲午，行新令。
现代文：甲午日，实行新法令。
English: On the afternoon of the 1st, the new law came into effect.

古文：冬十月，以撤毁故，徙居东宫。
现代文：冬十月，因折毁旧殿，迁居在东宫。
English: In the winter of October, due to the demolition of the old hall, they moved to the East Palace.

古文：给内外官人禄。
现代文：发给内外官员俸禄。
English: Salaries will be paid to domestic and foreign officials.

古文：癸酉，皇太子勇屯兵咸阳，以备胡虏。
现代文：初三，皇太子杨勇屯兵在咸阳，以防备胡人。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Crown Prince Yang Yong stationed troops in Xianyang to guard against the Hu people.

古文：庚寅，上疾愈，享百僚于观德殿，赐钱帛，皆任自取，尽力以出。
现代文：二十日，皇帝病愈，在观德殿宴请百官，赏赐钱帛，都由他们随意自取，尽全力拿出宫。
English: On the 20th day, after the emperor had recovered from his illness, he invited hundreds of officials to a banquet at the Kuangde Hall and rewarded them with money bags. They were allowed to take as much as they wanted, and they did their best to take out the palace.

古文：辛卯，以营新都副监贺娄子干为工部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，任命营建新都的副监贺娄子干为工部尚书。
English: On the 21st, the deputy supervisor of the construction of the new capital, He Shanzigen, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十一月丙午，初命为方阵战法，及制军营图样，下诸军府，以拟征突厥。
现代文：十一月初六，初次下令演习方阵战法，并绘制了军营的图样，发给各军府，准备征讨突厥。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the 1st month, he ordered the practice of the square-battles method for the first time, and drew a picture of the military camp and sent it to each military department to prepare for the conquest of the Turks.

古文：十二月辛未，上讲武于后园。
现代文：十二月初二，皇帝在后园讲习武艺。
English: On the second day of the second month of December, the emperor began to study martial arts in the back garden.

古文：甲戌，上柱国窦毅卒。
现代文：初四，上柱国窦毅死去。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, the head priest, Guo Dou Yi, died.

古文：丙子，名新都曰大兴城。
现代文：初七，将新建都城命名为大兴城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the newly built capital city was named Daxing City.

古文：乙酉，遣彭城公虞庆则屯弘化以备胡。
现代文：十六日，派彭城公虞庆则屯兵在弘化防备胡人。
English: On the 16th, Pengcheng Gongyu Qingzhe sent troops to guard against the Hu people in Honghua.

古文：突厥寇周盘，行军总管达奚长儒为虏所败。
现代文：突厥入侵周，行军总管达奚长儒被胡人打败。
English: In the week of the Turkic invasion, the commander-in-chief of the march, Dagu Changru, was defeated by the Hu people.

古文：丙戌，赐国子生经明者束帛。
现代文：十七日，赏国子学生中明于经书的每人一束帛。
English: On the 17th, a bunch of bamboo shoots were given to each of the middle school students.

古文：丁亥，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十八日，皇帝亲自审阅囚徒。
English: On the 18th, the emperor personally inspected the prisoners.

古文：是岁，高丽、百济并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、百济都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo and Baekje sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月庚子，将迁新都，大赦。
现代文：三年春正月初一，准备迁往新都，大赦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, prepare to move to the new capital, after the amnesty.

古文：禁大刀长。
现代文：禁止使用大刀长槊。
English: The use of long swords is prohibited.

古文：始令人以二十一成丁，岁役功不过二十日，不役者收庸。
现代文：开始下令民众二十一岁成丁，每年服役不超过二十天，不服役的人收取赋税。
English: He began to order the people to be 21 years old and serve no more than 20 days a year, and those who did not serve were taxed.

古文：废远近酒坊，罢盐井禁。
现代文：废除远近的酒坊，停止盐井的禁令。
English: Liquor stores near and far will be abolished, and the ban on drinking from salt wells will be lifted.

古文：二月己巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。初五，陈国前来聘问。
English: On the first day of February, the solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, Chen Guo came to ask questions.

古文：癸酉，陈人来聘。突厥犯边。
现代文：突厥侵犯边境。
English: The Turks have violated the border.

古文：癸未，以左武卫大将军李礼成为右武卫大将军。
现代文：十五日，任命左武卫大将军李礼成为右武卫大将军。
English: On the 15th, Li Li, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, was appointed as General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：三月丁未，上柱国、鲜虞县公谢庆恩卒。
现代文：三月初九，上柱国、鲜虞县公谢庆恩死去。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Gong Xie Qing'en of Shangzhu Country and Xiangyu County died.

古文：丙辰，以雨故，常服入新都。
现代文：十八日，由于下雨，皇帝穿平常衣服进入新建都城。
English: On the 18th, due to rain, the emperor entered the newly built capital wearing ordinary clothes.

古文：京师承明里醴泉出。
现代文：京都承明里甘泉涌出。
English: A spring gushes forth in Kyoto's Seimei district.

古文：丁巳，诏购遗书于天下。癸亥，城榆关。
现代文：十九日，下诏收购天下遗书。二十五日，修筑榆关城。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an edict to acquire the imperial will, and on the 25th, the city of Shaoguan was built.

古文：夏四月己巳，卫王爽大破突厥于白道山，停筑原阳、云内、紫河等镇而还。
现代文：夏四月初二，卫王爽在白道山大败突厥，停止修筑原阳、云内、紫河等镇回兵。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Wei Wang Shuang defeated the Turks in Baidu Mountain and stopped building the towns of Yuanyang, Yunnai, and Zihe.

古文：上柱国、建平郡公于义卒。
现代文：上柱国、建平郡公于义死去。
English: Shangzhu Province, Jianping County, Gongyuxi died.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑寇临洮，洮州刺史皮子信死之。
现代文：初三，吐谷浑入侵临洮，洮州刺史皮子信因而死去。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Tu Gu Hun invaded Linyi, resulting in the death of Zhang Zhou Jishi Zixin.

古文：壬申，以尚书右仆射赵煚兼内史令。
现代文：初五，任命尚书右仆射赵兼内史令。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Sho Sho's right-hand man Sho Zhao was appointed Minister of the Interior.

古文：丁丑，以滕王瓚为雍州牧。
现代文：初十，任命滕王瓒为雍州牧。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he appointed Teng Wangtao as the Yongzhou Patriarch.

古文：庚辰，行军总管阴寿大破高宝宁于黄龙。
现代文：十三日，行军总管阴寿在黄龙大败高宝宁。
English: On the 13th, Yin Shou, the commander-in-chief of the march, defeated Gao Baoning in Huanglong.

古文：甲申，以旱故，上亲祀雨师。
现代文：十七日，因为旱灾，皇帝亲自祀雨师。
English: On the seventeenth day, because of the drought, the emperor himself came to worship the rainmaker.

古文：丙戌，诏天下劝学行礼。
现代文：十九日，下诏天下劝人读书行礼。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an edict to encourage people to read and do the salute.

古文：己丑，陈郢州城主张子讥遣使请降，上以和好不纳。
现代文：二十二日，陈国郢州城主管张子讥派使者请求归降，皇帝因为两国关系和好而不接纳。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Zi, the head of the city of Quzhou, Chen Guo, sent an envoy to request the surrender, but the emperor did not accept it because of the rapprochement between the two countries.

古文：辛卯，遣兼散骑常侍薛舒聘于陈。
现代文：二十四日，派兼散骑常侍薛舒到陈国聘问。
English: On the 24th, he sent his equestrian attendant Xue Shu to Chen Guo for an interview.

古文：癸巳，上亲雩。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝亲自雩祭求雨。
English: On the 26th, the emperor himself made a burnt offering for rain.

古文：五月癸卯，太尉、任城公于翼薨。
现代文：五月初六，太尉、任城公于翼去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, Tai Lai and Rencheng passed away.

古文：行军总管李晃破突厥于摩那渡口。
现代文：行军总管李晃在摩那渡口击败突厥。
English: The head of the march, Li Akira, defeated the Turks at the Mana Ferry.

古文：乙巳，梁太子萧琮来贺迁都。
现代文：初八，梁国太子萧琮前来祝贺迁都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Prince Xiao Jie of Liang Province came to congratulate the relocation of the capital.

古文：辛酉，亲祀方泽。
现代文：二十四日，皇帝亲祭方泽。
English: On the 24th, the emperor's own son, Emperor Fangze, died.

古文：壬戌，行军元帅窦荣定破突厥及吐谷浑于凉州。赦黄龙死罪以下。
现代文：二十五日，行军元帅窦荣定在凉州击败突厥和吐谷浑，赦免黄龙地方死罪以下犯人。
English: On the 25th, the marching marshal Dou Rongding defeated Turk and Tu Guhun in Liangzhou, and pardoned the prisoners below the death penalty in Huanglong.

古文：六月庚午，封卫王爽子集为遂安郡王。
现代文：六月初四，封卫王爽的儿子集为遂安郡王。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the son of Fengwei Wang Shuang became the king of Su'an County.

古文：戊寅，突厥遣使求和。
现代文：十二日，突厥派使者求和。
English: On the 12th, the Turks sent an envoy to sue for peace.

古文：庚辰，行军总管梁远破吐谷浑于尔汗山，斩其名王。
现代文：十四日，行军总管梁远在尔汗山击败了吐谷浑，将他的名王斩首。
English: On the 14th, the head of the march, Liang Yuan, defeated Tu Guhun on Erhan Mountain and beheaded him.

古文：秋七月壬戌，诏曰： 往者山东河表，经此妖乱，孤城远守，多不自全。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，下诏说： 以往山东和黄河以外地方，经历了这次祸乱，孤城远处的守令，大多难以保全。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued: In the past, places outside of Shandong and the Yellow River have experienced this calamity, and most of the orders kept in remote and isolated cities are difficult to preserve.

古文：济阴太守杜猷身陷贼徒，命悬冠手；郡省事范台玫倾产营护，免其戮辱。
现代文：济阴太守杜猷身陷于贼寇之中，命系于敌人之手，郡省事范台玫倾其家产，加以救护，使他免受到凌辱。
English: Du Xuan, the governor of Jilin Province, was trapped in the midst of bandits, and his life was in the hands of the enemy. The governor of Jilin Province, Fan Tai Mei, donated his family property to save him from humiliation.

古文：眷言诚节，实有可嘉。宜超恆赏，用明沮劝。
现代文：这种眷爱之情和忠诚的志节，实在值得嘉勉，应当破格奖赏，以表明反对和鼓励的方面。
English: This kind of affection and loyalty is truly commendable and should be rewarded in an unprecedented way to show opposition and encouragement.

古文：台玫可大都督，假湘州刺史。 
现代文：台玫可任命为大都督、假湘州刺史。 
English: Tai Mei can be appointed as the grand governor, and fake Hunan history will be made.

古文：丁卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：八月一日，日食。
English: August 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：八月壬午，遣尚书右仆射高颎出宁州道，吏部尚书虞庆则出原州道，并为行军元帅以击胡。
现代文：八月十六日，派尚书左仆射高赹从宁州道出兵，吏部尚书虞庆则从原州道出兵，同为行军元帅以攻打胡人。
English: On August 16th, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Gao Jie, was dispatched from Ningzhou Road, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yu Qing, was dispatched from Yuanzhou Road, both of them acting as marshals to attack Hu Ren.

古文：戊子，亲祀太社。
现代文：二十二日，亲自到太社祭祀。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Taisha Shrine in person to perform the ritual.

古文：九月壬子，幸城东观谷稼。
现代文：九月十七日，前往城东观看庄稼。
English: On September 17th, I went to the east of the city to watch the crops grow.

古文：癸丑，大赦。
现代文：十八日，大赦。
English: On the 18th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：冬十月甲戌，废河南道行台省。
现代文：冬十月十九日，废除河南道行台省。
English: In winter, on October 19, Henan Province and Xingtai Province were abolished.

古文：十一月，发使巡省风俗。
现代文：十一月，派使者巡察各地风俗。
English: In November, he sent an envoy to inspect local customs.

古文：庚辰，陈人来聘。陈主知帝貌异世人，使副使袁彦图像而去。
现代文：十二月十六日，陈人前来聘问，陈国国君知道隋文帝相貌异于世人，派副使袁彦画了像带回。
English: On December 16th, Chen people came to ask questions. Chen Guo Guojun knew that the Sui Emperor's appearance was different from the world, so he sent a deputy envoy, Yuan Yan, to draw a portrait and bring it back.

古文：甲午，罢天下诸郡。
现代文：三十日，废除天下各郡设置。
English: On the 30th, the establishment of counties throughout the country was abolished.

古文：十二月乙卯，遣兼散骑常侍唐令则使于陈。
现代文：闰十二月二十二日，派兼散骑常侍唐令则出使陈国。
English: On the 22nd day of the intercalary month of December, the Tang emperor sent Chen Guo, who was also a knight errant.

古文：四年正月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二十五日，任命刑部尚书苏威为户部尚书。当年，高丽？突厥都派使者朝贡。四年春正月初一，日食。
English: On the 25th, the Minister of Justice, Su Wei, was appointed as the Minister of the Household. That year, Korea and Turkey both sent envoys to pay tribute. On the first day of the first month of the fourth spring, a solar eclipse.

古文：祀太庙。
现代文：祭祀太庙。
English: The rituals of the Imperial Temple are over.

古文：辛未，祀南郊。
现代文：初八，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a ritual is held in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬申，梁主萧岿来朝。
现代文：初九，梁国国君萧岿前来朝见。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Liang Guo Guojun came to see Xiao Yao.

古文：甲戌，大射于北苑，十日而罢。壬午，齐州水。
现代文：十一日，在北苑大射猎，十天以后才停止。十九日，齐州发生水灾。
English: On the 11th, there was a big shooting in Beiyuan, which only stopped ten days later. On the 19th, there was a flood in Qizhou.

古文：辛卯，渝州获兽，似麋，一角同蹄。
现代文：二十八日，渝州捕获一只野兽，样子像麋鹿，长一只角和蹄相同。
English: On the 28th, a beast was captured in Yuzhou. It looked like a mule deer, with a single horn and hooves.

古文：壬辰，班新历。
现代文：二十九日，颁布新历法。
English: On the 29th, the new calendar was promulgated.

古文：二月乙已，上饯梁主于霸上。
现代文：二月十三，皇帝在霸上为梁主萧岿饯行。
English: On February 13th, the emperor sent Xiao Xingxing as Liang's representative to He Shang.

古文：庚戌，行幸陇州。
现代文：十八日，巡幸陇州。
English: On the 18th, they went on a tour of Bozhou.

古文：突厥可汗阿史那玷厥率其属来降。
现代文：突厥可汗阿史那玷厥带领部属归降。
English: The Turkic khan, Ashina Tserkva, led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：夏四月己亥，敕总管、刺史，父母及子年十五以上，不得将之官。
现代文：夏四月初八，下令总管、刺史，他们的父母和年纪十五岁以上的儿子，不得带到官府。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, the chief steward, the chief historian, their parents and sons over the age of 15 were ordered not to be taken to the government office.

古文：庚子，以吏部尚书虞庆则为尚书右仆射，瀛州刺史杨尚希为兵部尚书，毛州刺史刘仁恩为刑部尚书。
现代文：初九，任命吏部尚书虞庆则为尚书右仆射，瀛州刺史杨尚希为兵部尚书，毛州刺史刘仁恩为刑部尚书。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yu Qing, who was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Yang Shangxi, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Liu Ren'en, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, were appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：五月癸酉，契丹主莫贺弗遣使请降，拜大将军。
现代文：五月十二，契丹国君莫贺弗派使者请求归降，任命他为大将军。
English: On the 12th of May, the ruler of the Khitan state, Mokhaf, sent an envoy with a request to surrender and appointed him as a general.

古文：六月庚子，降囚徒。
现代文：六月初十，给囚犯减刑。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month, the prisoner's sentence was commuted.

古文：壬子，开通济渠，自渭达河，以通运漕。
现代文：二十二日，开通济渠，从渭河到黄河，以通漕运。
English: On the 22nd, the Jicheng Canal was opened, from the Min River to the Yellow River, for through-river transportation.

古文：甲寅，制官人非战功不授上柱国以下戎官。
现代文：二十四日，下令官员没有立战功的不得授予上柱国以上武官职务。
English: On the 24th, it was ordered that officials who did not have distinguished war service were not allowed to be awarded the post of military attaché at or above the pillar country.

古文：以雍、同、华、岐、宜五州旱，命无出今年租调。
现代文：因雍、同、华、岐、宜五州旱灾，让五州不用交当年的租调。
English: Due to the drought in the five states of Yong, Tong, Hua, Qi and Yi, the five states did not have to pay the rent of the year.

古文：戊午，秦王俊来朝。
现代文：二十八日，秦王俊来朝见。
English: On the 28th, Qin Wangjun came to see the emperor.

古文：秋七月丙寅，陈人来聘。
现代文：秋七月初六，陈人前来聘问。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Chen people came to ask questions.

古文：八月甲午，遣十使巡省天下。
现代文：八月初五，派十位使者巡察天下。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, he sent ten envoys to inspect the land.

古文：戊戌，卫王爽来朝。
现代文：初九，卫王爽前来朝见。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Wei Wang Shuang came to see the morning.

古文：壬寅，上柱国、太傅、邓公窦炽薨。
现代文：十三日，上柱国、太傅、邓公窦炽去世。
English: On the 13th, Shangzhu Guo, Taifu and Deng Gongdou passed away.

古文：乙卯，陈将夏侯苗请降，上以通和不纳。
现代文：十六日，陈国将领夏侯苗请求归降，皇帝因两国通和而不接纳。
English: On the 16th, Chen's general Xia Houmiao requested to surrender, but the emperor did not accept due to the peace between the two countries.

古文：九月己巳，上亲录囚徒。
现代文：九月初十，皇帝亲自审阅囚犯案情。
English: At the beginning of September, the emperor personally reviewed the prisoners' cases.

古文：庚午，契丹内附。
现代文：十一日，契丹前来归附。
English: On the 11th day, Khitan came to annex it.

古文：甲戌，以关中饥，行幸洛阳。
现代文：十五日，因关中饥荒，前往洛阳。
English: On the 15th, due to the famine in Guanzhong, he went to Luoyang.

古文：冬十一月壬戌，遣兼散骑常侍薛道衡使于陈。
现代文：冬十一月初四，派兼散骑常侍薛道衡出使陈国。
English: On the fourth day of the eleventh month of winter, Xue Daoheng, who was also an equestrian, sent an envoy to Chen Guo.

古文：甲戌，改周十二月为腊蜡。
现代文：十六日，改称周历十二月为腊蜡。
English: On the 16th, the name of the lunar month of December was changed to wax.

古文：是岁靺鞨及女国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，和女国都派使者朝贡。
English: That year, both Japan and China sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月戊辰，诏行新礼。
现代文：五年春正月十一日，下诏实行新礼仪。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, a new etiquette will be implemented.

古文：壬申，诏罢江陵总管。
现代文：十五日，下诏废除江陵总管。
English: On the 15th, the Gangneung General Administration was abolished.

古文：其后，梁主请依旧，许之。
现代文：后来，梁国国主请求恢复旧制，应许了。
English: Later, the ruler of Liang Province requested the restoration of the old system, which was granted.

古文：三月戊午，以尚书左仆射高颎为左领军大将军，以上柱国宇文忻为右领军大将军。
现代文：三月初二，任命尚书左仆射高赹为左领军大将军，任命上柱国宇文忻为右领军大将军。
English: On the second day of March, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Ya Gaozhu, as the general leading the left-hand army, and appointed Shangzhu's general, Guo Wenyi, as the general leading the right-hand army.

古文：夏四月甲午，契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月初八，契丹派使者朝贡。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Khitan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬寅，上柱国王谊谋反，诛。
现代文：十六日，上柱国王谊谋反，被杀。
English: On the 16th, Shangzhu King plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：乙巳，诏征山东大儒马荣伯等。
现代文：十九日，下诏征召山东大儒马荣伯等人。
English: On the 19th, Ma Rongbo and other members of the Shandong Great Confucianism were conscripted.

古文：戊申，车驾至自洛阳。
现代文：二十二日，车驾从洛阳归来。
English: On the 22nd, the driver returned from Luoyang.

古文：五月甲申，初置义仓。
现代文：五月二十九日，开始设立义仓。
English: On May 29th, the establishment of a charity warehouse began.

古文：梁主萧岿殂。
现代文：梁国君萧岿死去。
English: Liang Guojun Xiao Yao passed away.

古文：遣上大将军元契使于突厥阿波可汗。
现代文：派上大将军元契出使突厥阿波可汗。
English: General Yuan Qi sent an envoy to the Turk Abokhan.

古文：秋七月庚申，陈人来聘。
现代文：秋七月初六，陈人前来问聘。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Chen Ren came to ask for a job.

古文：壬午，突厥沙钵略可汗上表称臣。
现代文：二十八日，突厥沙钵略可汗上表称臣。
English: On the 28th, the Turk Shahrukh Khan appeared on the scene and claimed to be a vassal.

古文：八月甲辰，河南诸州水，遣户部尚书苏威振给之。
现代文：八月二十日，河南各州水灾，派户部尚书苏威去赈济。
English: On August 20th, the Ministry of Households sent Shangshu Suwei to help the flood victims in Henan Province.

古文：戊申，有流星数百，四散而下。
现代文：二十四日，有几百颗流星，四散而下。
English: On the 24th, hundreds of meteors streamed down.

古文：九月乙丑，改鲍陂曰杜陂，霸水曰滋水。
现代文：九月十二日，改称鲍陂为杜陂，霸水为滋水。
English: On September 12th, the name of Baodi was changed to Cuckoo, and the name of Bansui was changed to Shishui.

古文：丙子，遣兼散骑常侍李若使于陈。
现代文：二十三日，派兼散骑常侍李若出使陈国。
English: On the 23rd, Li Ruo, who was also a cavalry officer, sent Chen Guo.

古文：冬十一月丁卯，晋王广来朝。
现代文：冬十一月十五日，晋王杨广来朝。
English: On the 15th day of the 11th month of winter, the Jin king Yang Guang came to the DPRK.

古文：十二月丁未，降囚徒。
现代文：十二月二十五日，给囚犯减刑。
English: On December 25, the prisoner's sentence was reduced.

古文：六年春正月甲子，党项羌内附。
现代文：六年春正月十三日，党项、羌族前来归附。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, the party members and the Yi people came to annex it.

古文：庚午，班历于突厥。
现代文：十九日，在突厥颁布历法。
English: On the 19th, the new calendar was promulgated in Turkey.

古文：壬申，使户部尚书苏威巡省山东。
现代文：二十一日，派户部尚书苏威巡察山东。
English: On the 21st, the Household Department sent Shangshu Suwei to inspect Shandong.

古文：二月乙酉，山南荆浙七州水，遣前工部尚书长孙毗振恤之。
现代文：二月初四，山南的荆、淅七州水灾，派前工部尚书长孙毗前去赈济和抚恤。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, due to the floods in seven prefectures of Shannan, Shangshu, the former head of the Ministry of Industry, sent his eldest grandson, Bibi, to help with the relief efforts.

古文：丙戌，制刺史上佐，每岁暮，更入朝上考课。
现代文：初五，规定刺史上佐，每年年底前轮流入朝进行考课。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, the rules stipulate that the first round of exams will be held in the morning at the end of each year.

古文：丁亥，发丁男十一万修筑长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：初六，征发民工十一万修建长城，二十天后停止。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the recruitment and dispatch of 110,000 migrant workers to build the Great Wall was stopped after 20 days.

古文：庚子，大赦。
现代文：十九日，大赦。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三月己未，洛阳男子高德上书，请帝为太上皇，传位皇太子。
现代文：三月初八，洛阳男子高德上书，请求文帝当太上皇，传位给皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, Gao De, a man from Luoyang, submitted a letter requesting Emperor Wen to become the emperor and pass the throne to the crown prince.

古文：帝曰： 朕承天命，抚育苍生，日旰孜孜，犹恐不逮。岂学近代帝王，事不师古，传位于子，自求逸乐哉。 
现代文：文帝说： 我承受天命，抚育苍生，日夜不息。怎能学近代的帝王，凡事不学古代，早早传位给儿子，自己寻求安乐呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "I bear the destiny of heaven, nurturing all living beings, day and night without ceasing. How can I learn from modern emperors, not learn from the ancients, pass the throne to my son early, and seek happiness myself?

古文：癸亥，突厥沙钵略可汗遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二日，突厥沙钵略可汗派使者朝贡。
English: On the twelfth day, the Turkic Shah Salih Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月己亥，陈人来聘。
现代文：夏四月十九日，陈人前来聘问。
English: In the summer of April 19th, Chen people came to ask questions.

古文：秋七月辛亥，河南诸州水。
现代文：秋七月初二，河南各州大水。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, all the states of Henan were flooded.

古文：乙丑，京师雨毛如马尾，长者二尺余，短者有六七寸。
现代文：十八日，京城下雨时落下毛来，长如马尾，最长的二尺多，短的有六七寸。
English: On the 18th, when it rained in the capital, the hair fell down. It was as long as a horse's tail, the longest was more than two feet, and the shortest was six or seven inches.

古文：八月辛卯关内七州旱，蠲其赋税。
现代文：八月十三日，关内七州旱灾，免去赋税。
English: On August 13th, seven prefectures in the Kanto region were exempted from the tax due to drought.

古文：遣散骑常侍裴世豪使于陈。
现代文：派散骑常侍裴世豪出使陈国。
English: He dispatched his equerry, Pei Shih-hao, to dispatch Chen Guo.

古文：戊申，上柱国、太师、申公李穆薨。
现代文：三十日，上柱国、太师、申公李穆去世。
English: On the 30th, Li Mu, Shangzhu Guo, Taishi, and Shengong passed away.

古文：闰月丁卯，皇太子镇洛阳。
现代文：闰八月十九，皇太子镇守洛阳。
English: On the 19th day of the 8th month, the crown prince came to Luoyang.

古文：辛未，晋王广、秦王俊并来朝。
现代文：二十二日，晋王广、秦王俊一同来朝。
English: On the 22nd, Jin Wangguang and Qin Wangjun came to the DPRK together.

古文：丙子，上柱国郕公梁士彦、上柱国巳公宇文忻、柱国舒公刘昉谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十八日，上柱国、成阝公梁士彦，上柱国杞公宇文忻，柱国舒公刘日方谋反，被杀。
English: On the 28th, Shangzhuan Guo, Chengyu Gong Liang Shihang, Shangzhuan Guo Xingguo Uwenqi, Shangzhuan Guo Xingguo Shu Gong Liu plotted against the Japanese side and were killed.

古文：上柱国、许公宇文善有罪，除名。
现代文：上柱国、许公宇文善有罪，被除名。
English: Shangzhu Guo and Xu Gongyu Wenzhen were found guilty and removed from the list.

古文：九月辛巳，帝素服御射殿，诏百寮射梁士彦三家资物。
现代文：九月初四，皇帝穿着常服来到射殿，下诏让百官射取梁士彦等三家的财物。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the emperor came to the palace in his regular clothes and issued an edict to the officials to confiscate the property of the three families including Liang Shih-yan.

古文：丙戌，上柱国、宋安公元景山卒。
现代文：初九，上柱国、宋安王元景山死去。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, King Yuan Jingshan of Shangzhu Province and Song'an died.

古文：辛丑，诏振恤大象以来死事之家。
现代文：二十四日，下诏抚恤赈济大象年间以来因国事而死亡的人的家属。
English: On the 24th, a decree was issued to provide assistance to the families of those who died as a result of national affairs since the Year of the Elephant.

古文：冬十月己酉，以河北道行台尚书令、并州总管、晋王广为雍州牧，余官如故。
现代文：冬十月初二，任命河北道行台尚书令、并州总管、晋王杨广为雍州牧，其余官职如故。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Shang Shuling, the governor of Hebei Province, and Yang Guang, the governor of Jin Province, were appointed as Yongzhou pastors, and the rest of the official positions remained unchanged.

古文：以兵部尚书杨尚希为礼部尚书。
现代文：任命兵部尚书杨尚希为礼部尚书。
English: Yang Shangxi, the military secretary, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：癸丑，置山南道行台尚书省于襄州，以秦王俊为尚书令。
现代文：初六，在襄州设置山南道行台尚书省，由秦王俊任尚书令。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shannan Dao Xingtai Shang Shu Province was set up in Xiangzhou, and Qin Wang Jun was appointed as Shang Shu commander.

古文：七年春正月癸巳，祀太庙。
现代文：七年春正月十八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Spring, the ritual began at the Imperial Temple.

古文：乙未，制诸州岁贡三人。
现代文：二十日，下令各州每年向朝廷贡举三人。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the states to present three tributes to the imperial court each year.

古文：二月丁巳，祀朝日于东郊。
现代文：二月十二日，在东郊祭祀朝日。
English: On February 12th, the Asahi Festival was held in the eastern suburbs.

古文：己巳，陈人来聘。
现代文：二十四日，陈国人前来聘问。
English: On the 24th, Chen Guoren came to ask questions.

古文：壬申，幸醴泉宫。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝前往醴泉宫。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to the Quanquan Palace.

古文：是月，发丁男十万修筑长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：当月，征派男丁十万人修筑长城，二十天停止。
English: In the same month, 100,000 men were conscripted to build the Great Wall, which lasted for 20 days.

古文：夏四月庚戌，于扬州开山阳渎，以通运漕。
现代文：夏四月初六，在扬州挖山阳渎，以便漕运。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, Yangzhou dug a sunken mountain to facilitate rowing.

古文：突厥沙钵略可汗卒。
现代文：突厥沙钵略可汗去世。
English: The Turkic Shah Jahan passed away.

古文：癸亥，颁青龙符于东方总管、刺史；西方以白武；南方以硃雀；北方以玄武。
现代文：十九日，颁发青龙符节给东方的总管、刺史，西方的用白虎符，南方用朱雀符，北方用玄武符。
English: On the 19th, the Qinglong Festival was awarded to the general manager of the East, Zhishi, the West with the White Tiger, the South with the Suzaku, and the North with the Xuanwu.

古文：甲戌，遣兼散骑常侍杨周使于陈。
现代文：三十日，派兼散骑常侍杨周出使陈国。
English: On the 30th, he sent Yang Zhou, who was also an equestrian, to dispatch Chen Guo.

古文：以户部尚书苏威为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命户部尚书苏威为吏部尚书。
English: He appointed Su Wei, the head of the Household Department, as the head of the Cadre Department.

古文：五月乙亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月初一为朔日，日食。
English: The first day of May is New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：己卯，陨石于武安、滏阳间，十余里。
现代文：初五，陨石落在武安、滏阳之间，洒落了十多里。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a meteorite fell between Wu'an and Shenyang, scattering debris more than ten miles away.

古文：秋七月己丑，卫王爽薨。
现代文：秋七月十六日，卫王爽去世。
English: Autumn On July 16th, Wei Wang Shuang passed away.

古文：八月庚申，梁主萧琮来朝。
现代文：八月十八日，梁朝国君萧琮前来朝见。
English: On August 18th, Liang Chaoguo's son Xiao Yao came to see him.

古文：九月乙酉，梁安平王萧岩掠于其国以奔陈。
现代文：九月十三日，梁安平王萧岩在梁国掳掠之后投奔陈国。
English: On September 13th, Xiao Yan, King of Liang'anping, fled to Chen Province after being captured in Liang Province.

古文：辛卯，废梁国，曲赦江陵。
现代文：十九日，废掉梁国，在江陵特赦。
English: On the 19th, Liang Guo was abolished and Jiangling was granted amnesty.

古文：以梁主萧琮为柱国，封莒国公。
现代文：封梁国国君萧琮为柱国、莒国公。
English: Xiao Xi, the prince of the state of Liang, became the pillar state and the prince of the state of Yan.

古文：冬十月庚申，行幸同州。
现代文：冬十月十九日，前往同州。
English: In the winter, on October 19th, he went to Tongzhou.

古文：以先帝所居故，曲降囚徒。
现代文：因同州是先帝居住过的地方，特为这里的囚犯减刑。
English: Because the same state is the place where the former emperor lived, the sentence was reduced for the prisoners here.

古文：癸亥，幸蒲州。
现代文：二十二日，前往蒲州。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Puzhou.

古文：丙寅，宴父老，上极欢，曰： 此间人物，衣服鲜丽，容止闲雅。
现代文：二十五日，宴请父老们，皇帝极为高兴地说： 这里的人物，衣服鲜洁美丽，举止优雅文静。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor gave a banquet for the fathers and grandfathers, and said with great pleasure: "The people here, the clothes are fresh and beautiful, and the manners are elegant and calm.

古文：良由仕宦之乡，陶染成俗也。 
现代文：显然因为是众多官员的故乡，长期陶冶而形成风气的。 
English: Obviously, because it is the hometown of many officials, it has been cultivated for a long time and has formed a culture.

古文：十一月甲午，幸冯翊，祭故社。
现代文：十一月二十三日，前往冯翊，祭祀旧社。
English: On November 23rd, he went to Fengyuan to offer sacrifices to the old shrine.

古文：父老对诏失旨，上大怒，免其县官而去。
现代文：父老们回答皇帝的问话时文不对题，文帝大怒，罢免了当地的县官以后离开。
English: When the elders answered the emperor's question, the text was off-topic. Emperor Wen was furious and dismissed the local county official and left.

古文：戊戌，车驾至自冯翊。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝从冯翊归来。
English: On the 27th, the emperor returned from Fengye.

古文：八年春正月乙亥，陈人来聘。
现代文：八年春正月初五，陈人前来聘问。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, Chen people came to ask questions.

古文：二月辛酉，陈人寇硖州。
现代文：二月二十二日，陈人进犯陕州。
English: On February 22, the Chen people invaded Shaanxi.

古文：三月辛未，上柱国、陇西公李询卒。
现代文：三月初二，上柱国、陇西公李询死去。
English: On the second day of March, Shangzhuang and Shaanxi Gong Li Sheng passed away.

古文：甲戌，遣兼散骑常侍程尚贤使于陈。
现代文：初五，派兼散骑常侍程尚贤出使陈国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Cheng Shangxian, a party member and horseback riding attendant, sent Chen Guo.

古文：戊寅，诏大举伐陈。
现代文：初九，下诏大举讨伐陈国。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to make a large-scale attack on Chen.

古文：秋八月丁未，河北诸州饥，遣吏部尚书苏威振恤之。
现代文：秋八月十一日，河北各州饥荒，派吏部尚书苏威前去赈济。
English: On the 11th day of the 8th month of autumn, when all the prefectures in Hebei were suffering from famine, Shangshu Suwei was sent to help.

古文：九月癸巳，嘉州言龙见。
现代文：九月初七，嘉州上奏说有龙出现。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the lunar month, a dragon was reported to have appeared in Jiazhou.

古文：冬十月己未，置淮南行台省于寿春，以晋王广为尚书令。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，在寿春设立淮南行台省，任命晋王广为尚书令。
English: On the 23rd day of winter in October, Huainan Province was established in Shouchun, and Jin Wangguang was appointed as the new governor.

古文：辛酉，陈人来聘，拘留不遣。
现代文：二十五日，陈人前来聘问，拘留下来不让回去。
English: On the 25th, Chen came for questioning and was detained and not allowed to return.

古文：甲子，有星孛于牵牛。
现代文：二十八日，有一颗明亮的彗星出现在牵牛座。
English: On the 28th, a bright comet appeared in the constellation of Taurus.

古文：享太庙，授律，令晋王广、秦王俊、清河公杨素并为行军元帅以伐陈。
现代文：祭祀太庙，授予法律。任命晋王广、秦王俊、清河公杨素同为行军元帅以讨伐陈国。
English: He appointed Jin Wangguang, Qin Wangjun, and Qinghe Yang Sutong as marshals to march against Chen.

古文：于是晋王出六合，秦王出襄阳，清河公杨素出信州，荆州刺史刘仁恩出江陵，宜阳公王世积出蕲春，新义公韩擒出庐江，襄邑公贺若弼出吴州，落丛公燕荣出东海，合总管九十。兵五十一万八千，皆受晋王节度。
现代文：于是，晋王出兵六合，秦王出兵襄阳，清河公杨素出兵信州，荆州刺史刘仁恩出兵江陵，宜阳公王世积出兵蕲春，新义公韩擒虎出兵庐江，襄邑公贺若弼出兵吴州，落丛公燕荣出兵东海，共计总管九十人，士兵五十一万八千人，都接受晋王的统辖。
English: As a result, the King of Jin dispatched troops to Liuhe, the King of Qin dispatched troops to Xiangyang, the Duke of Qinghe, Yang Su, dispatched troops to Xinshou, the Duke of Jingzhou, Liu Ren'en, dispatched troops to Jiangling, the Duke of Yiyang, Shizhe, dispatched troops to Hunchun, the Duke of Xinyi, Han Zhihu, dispatched troops to Minjiang, the Duke of Xiangyi, He Ruo, dispatched troops to Wuzhou, and the Duke of Laxu, Yan Rong, dispatched troops to the East Sea. A total of 90 officers and 518

古文：东接沧海，西拒巴蜀，旌旃舟楫，横亘数千里。仍曲赦陈国。
现代文：东连沧海，西接巴蜀，旌旗舟楫，横亘几千里，仍特赦陈国。
English: East of the sea, west of Bashu, and east of the flag boat, spanning thousands of miles, Chen Guo was still pardoned.

古文：十一月丁卯，车驾饯师。
现代文：十一月初二，皇帝为军队饯行。
English: On the second day of the eleventh month, the emperor marched out for the army.

古文：诏购陈叔宝，位上柱国、万户公。
现代文：下诏悬赏陈叔宝，捉获的封为上柱国、万户公。
English: The following edict offered a reward for Chen Shubao, and those who were caught were given the title of Shangzhu Guo (上柱国) and Wanhu Guo (万户公).

古文：乙亥，行幸定城，陈师誓众。
现代文：初十，前往定城，集合部队誓师。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, they went to Dingcheng to gather troops and swear allegiance.

古文：丙子，幸河东。
现代文：十一日，前往河东。
English: On the 11th day, he left for Hedong.

古文：十二月，车驾至自河东。
现代文：十二月，车驾从河东归来。
English: In December, driving back from the east of the river.

古文：九年春正月癸酉，以尚书左仆射虞庆则为右卫大将军。
现代文：九年春正月初九，任命尚书右仆射虞庆则为右卫大将军。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Spring, Shangshu's right-hand man, Shayuqing, was appointed as the General of the Right Division.

古文：丙子，贺若弼败陈师于蒋山，获其将萧摩诃；韩擒进师入建鄴，获陈主叔宝，陈国平。
现代文：十二日，贺若弼在蒋山打败陈国军队，活捉陈将萧摩诃。韩擒虎领军队攻进建邺，俘虏了陈朝国君陈叔宝，陈国被讨平。
English: On the 12th, He Ruoqi defeated Chen's army in Jiangshan and captured Chen's general Xiao Maqian alive. Han Yu's tiger-led army invaded Jianye, captured Chen's sovereign Chen Shubao, and Chen's country was leveled.

古文：合州四十，郡一百，县四百，户五十万，口二百万。
现代文：合计有州四十个，一百个郡，四百县，五十万户，二百万人。
English: In total, there are forty states, one hundred counties, four hundred counties, half a million households, and two million people.

古文：癸巳，遣使持节巡抚之。
现代文：二十九日，派使者持节前往巡视并安抚。
English: On the 29th, an envoy was sent to inspect and pacify the site.

古文：二月乙未，废淮南尚书省。
现代文：二月初一，废除淮南尚书省。
English: On the first day of February, Huainan Shangshuo was abolished.

古文：丙申，制五百家为乡，正一人；百家为里，长一人。
现代文：初二，规定以五百家为一乡，设乡长一人；一百家为一里，设里正一人。
English: On the second day of the first month, it was stipulated that 500 families should form a township, with one head of township; 100 families should form a village, with one head of village.

古文：夏四月己亥，幸骊山，亲劳旋师。
现代文：夏四月初六，皇帝前往骊山，亲自慰问和犒劳凯旋而归的军队。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor went to Lushan to personally offer condolences and rewards to the troops who had made a triumphant return.

古文：乙巳，三军凯入，献俘于太庙。
现代文：十二日，三军高奏凯歌入京，到太庙进献俘虏。
English: On the twelfth day, the three armies marched into the capital to the accompaniment of a magnificent song, and went to the Imperial Temple to present the captives.

古文：以晋王广为太尉。
现代文：任命晋王广为太尉。
English: Jin Wangguang was appointed to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：庚戌，帝御广阳门，宴将士，颁赐各有差。
现代文：十七日，皇帝到广阳门宴请将士，颁发奖赏，有所差别。
English: On the 17th, the emperor held a banquet at the Guangyang Gate to invite generals and present awards.

古文：辛亥，大赦。
现代文：十八日，大赦。
English: On the 18th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：以陈都官尚书孔范、散骑常侍王差、王仪、御史中丞沈观等邪佞于其主，以致亡灭，皆投之边裔。
现代文：因陈朝都官尚书孔范、散骑常侍王誾、王仪、御史中丞沈观等人都是一批奸佞，造成陈国灭亡，把他们都流放到边地。
English: Because the Chen dynasty's governor of the capital, Shangshu Kongfan, the horseback riding attendant Wang Yao, Wang Yi, and the chief historian, Shen Guan, were all a group of traitors, causing the downfall of Chen, they were all exiled to outlying areas.

古文：陈人普给复十年。
现代文：陈国人全部免徭役十年。
English: All citizens of Chen were exempt from military service for ten years.

古文：军人毕世免徭役。
现代文：军人终身免除徭役。
English: Military personnel are exempted from military service for life.

古文：擢陈之文武众才而用之。
现代文：拔擢陈国文武官员中有才干的人加以任用。
English: Select and appoint the talented people among Chen Guowenwu's officials.

古文：宫奴数千，可归者归之，其余尽以分赐将士及王公贵臣。
现代文：几千名宫奴，有家可归的放回。其余的全部分赐给将士们和王公贵臣。
English: A few thousand palace servants were allowed to return home, and the rest were given to soldiers and royal dignitaries.

古文：其资物，皆于五垛赐王公以下大射。
现代文：缴获的物资，都堆成五垛赐给王公以下官员大射。
English: The seized materials were piled up in five piles and given to officials from the Prince downwards.

古文：毁所得秦汉三大钟，越二大鼓。
现代文：毁掉缴获的秦汉三只大钟、越国的两只大鼓。
English: Destroy the three large bells of Qin and Han and the two large drums of Yue.

古文：又设亡陈女乐，谓公卿等曰： 此声似啼，朕闻之甚不喜，故与公等一听亡国之音，俱为永鉴焉。 
现代文：又设置陈的女乐，文帝对公卿们说： 这声音听起来像是在啼哭，我听了以后很不喜欢，因而留下和大家听一听亡国之音是什么样子，作为永久的鉴戒啊！ 
English: Chen's female music was also set up, and Emperor Wen said to the nobles: This sound sounds like wailing, I don't like it after listening to it, so I'll stay and listen to what the sound of a dying country is like, as a permanent warning!

古文：辛酉，以吏部侍郎宇文弼为刑部尚书，宗正卿杨异为工部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，任命吏部侍郎宇文瞖为刑部尚书，宗正卿杨异为工部尚书。
English: On the 28th, he appointed the attendant of the Ministry of Justice, Uwen Hui, as the Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry, Yang Yi, as the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 今率土大同，含生遂性。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说： 如今国土大同，众生随性而长。
English: On the 29th, the next edict said: Today, the country is the same, and all beings grow with nature.

古文：兵可立威，不可不戢；刑可助化，不可专行。
现代文：兵可以建立威严，但不能不加以节制；刑可以有助教化，但不能只依靠它。
English: Soldiers can establish dignity, but not without restraint; punishment can help to educate, but can not rely on it alone.

古文：禁卫九重之余，镇守四方之外；戎旅军器，皆宜停罢。
现代文：除宫殿禁卫和镇守四方之外，各种戎旅军器，都应停止。
English: In addition to palace guards and town guards, all kinds of military equipment should be stopped.

古文：武力之子，俱可学文。
现代文：原来习武的人士，全可学文。
English: Those who originally studied martial arts can now study literature.

古文：人间甲仗，悉皆除毁。 
现代文：民间的军器，全部销毁。 
English: Civilian military equipment, all destroyed.

古文：闰月丁丑，颁木鱼符于总管、刺史，雌一雄三。
现代文：闰月十五日，给刺史、总管颁发木鱼符，一雌三雄。
English: On the fifteenth day of the leap month, a wooden fish charm was issued to the chief steward and the chief steward, one female and three males.

古文：己卯，以吏部尚书苏威为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十七日，任命吏部尚书苏威为尚书右仆射。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Su Wei was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：六月乙丑，以荆州总管杨素为纳言。
现代文：六月初四，任命荆州总管杨素为纳言。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, Yang Su, the general manager of Jingzhou, was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：丁卯，以吏部侍郎卢恺为礼部尚书。
现代文：初六，任命吏部侍郎卢恺为礼部尚书。
English: On his 6th day of junior high school, he was appointed as a member of the etiquette club.

古文：时群臣咸请封禅，诏不许，曰： 岂可命一将军除一小国，以薄德而封名山，用虚言而干上帝邪。 
现代文：当时，群臣都请皇帝封禅。下诏不同意，并说： 怎么能因为任命了一位将军灭掉一个小国，以这样的薄德大封名山，用虚假的话来惊动上天呢？ 
English: At that time, the courtiers all asked the emperor to seal Zen. The lower edict disagreed, and said: How can a small country be destroyed because of the appointment of a general, and how can the heaven be alarmed with such a big and famous mountain, with false words?

古文：八月壬戌，以广平王雄为司空。
现代文：八月初二，任命广平王雄为司空。
English: On the second day of August, Guangping Wangxiong was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：冬十一月壬辰，考使定州刺史豆卢通等上表请封禅，上不许。
现代文：冬十一月初三，考使定州刺史豆卢通等上表请求皇帝封禅，皇帝不答应。
English: On the third day of the first month of November in winter, the imperial envoy Dingzhou Zhi Zhu Lutong and others requested the emperor to seal the zen, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：庚子，以右卫大将军虞庆则为右武候大将军，右领军将军李安为右领军大将军。
现代文：十一日，任命右卫大将军虞庆则为右武侯大将军，右领军将军李安为右领军大将军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yu Qing, the right guard general, was appointed as the right military commander, and Li An, the right leading general, was appointed as the right leading general.

古文：甲寅，降囚徒。
现代文：二十五日，给囚犯减刑。
English: On the 25th, the prisoner's sentence was reduced.

古文：十二月甲子，诏太常卿牛弘、通直散骑常侍许善心、秘书丞姚察、通直郎虞世基等议定乐。
现代文：十二月初六，下诏令太常卿牛弘、通直散骑常侍许善心、秘书丞姚察、通直郎虞世基等议定乐曲。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Taizongqing Ushihiro, Tsunzhi Sanzhong's attendant Xu Zenshin, secretary Jo Yao Cha, and Tsunzhi Lang Yu Shiji agreed on a piece of music.

古文：十年春正月乙未，以皇孙昭为河南王，楷为华阳王。
现代文：十年春正月初七，任命皇孙昭为河南王，楷为华阳王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Emperor Sun Zhao was appointed King of Henan, and Emperor Kai was appointed King of Huayang.

古文：二月庚申，行幸并州。
现代文：二月初二，前往并州。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, I went to Nianzhou.

古文：夏五月乙未，诏曰： 魏未丧乱，宇县瓜分，役军岁动，未遑休息。
现代文：夏五月初九，下诏说： 魏末以来丧乱，天下四分五裂，徭役从军，年年动荡不安，无暇休息。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the summer, the next imperial edict said: Since the end of the Wei Dynasty, the country has been in turmoil, the country has been torn apart, the cadres have served in the army, the country has been in turmoil year after year, and there is no time to rest.

古文：兵士军人，权置坊府，南征北伐，居处无定；家无完堵，地罕苞桑；恆为流寓之人，竟无乡里之号，朕甚愍之。
现代文：兵士军人，临时设置各种坊、府，南征北伐，居无定所，家无完堵。地里罕见苞谷蚕桑，岁岁长为流寓他乡之人，竟然没有乡里的称号，我十分悯惜同情。
English: Soldiers and servicemen, temporarily set up all kinds of villages, prefectures, the Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition, there is no fixed place to live, and there is no complete blockage of the home. It is rare to find silkworms in Shibuya, and people who have lived in other towns for a long time do not have the title of the township. I am very sorry and sympathetic.

古文：凡是军人，可悉属州县，垦田籍帐，一同编户。
现代文：凡是军人，可以全部归属于州县，开垦土地，登载入籍，和编户一样。
English: All military personnel can be assigned to prefectures and counties, reclaim land, and register for naturalization, just like household registrars.

古文：军府统领，宜依旧式。 
现代文：军府的统领，仍依旧样。 
English: The leadership of the military government is still the same.

古文：罢山东、河南及北方缘边之地新置军府。
现代文：废除山东、河南以及北方边境地区新设立的军府。
English: Shandong, Henan and the newly established military headquarters in the northern border areas will be abolished.

古文：六月辛酉，制人年五十，免役折庸。
现代文：六月初五，规定年龄五十岁以后，免服徭役，折算成赋税交纳。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, after the stipulated age of fifty, they are exempt from military service, which is converted into tax payment.

古文：秋七月癸卯，以纳言杨素为内史令。
现代文：秋七月十八日，任命纳言杨素为内史令。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, Nagan Yang Su was appointed as the Minister of Internal Affairs.

古文：庚戌，上亲录囚徒。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝亲自审阅囚徒罪状。
English: On the 25th, the emperor personally reviewed the prisoners' charges.

古文：辛亥，高丽辽东郡公高阳卒。
现代文：二十六日，高丽辽东郡公高阳去世。
English: On the 26th, Gong Gaoyang of Liaodong County, Korea passed away.

古文：八月壬申，遣柱国韦洸、上开府王景并持节巡抚岭南，百越皆服。
现代文：八月十七日，派柱国韦氵光、上开府王景一同持节巡视及安抚岭南一带，百越人都顺服。
English: On August 17th, he sent Wei Bingguang and Wang Jing from Shangkaifu to patrol and pacify the Lingnan area. Hundreds of people obeyed.

古文：九月丁酉，至自并州。
现代文：九月十三日，从并州归来。
English: On September 13th, he returned from Anhui Province.

古文：冬十月甲子，颁木鱼符于京官五品以上。
现代文：冬十月初十，颁发木鱼符给五品以上的京官。
English: On the tenth day of winter and the first day of October, wooden fish charms are issued to officials of the Beijing Municipal People's Government who have been awarded at least five prizes.

古文：十一月辛卯，幸国学，颁赐各有差。
现代文：十一月初七，前往国学，分发赐给数量不等的物品。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, he went to the Chinese University to distribute various items that had been given to him.

古文：辛丑，祀南郊。
现代文：十七日，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 17th, a religious service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：是月，婺州人汪文进、会稽人高智慧、苏州人沈玄懀皆举兵反，自称天子。
现代文：当月，婺州人汪文进、会稽人高智慧、苏州人沈玄忄会都起兵反叛，自称为天子。
English: In the same month, Wang Wenzhin from Zhangzhou, Gao Zhizhi, the auditor of the association, and Shen Xuanqin from Suzhou all rebelled and called themselves Tianzi.

古文：乐安蔡道人、饶州吴世华、永嘉沈孝彻、泉州王国庆、余杭杨宝英、交耻李春等，皆自称大都督。
现代文：乐安的蔡道人、饶州吴世华、永嘉沈孝彻、泉州王国庆、余杭杨宝英、交阝止李春等人都自称为大都督。
English: Le An's Cai Daojin, Raozhou's Wu Shihua, Yongjia's Shen Xiaocher, Quanzhou's Wang Guoqing, Yuhang's Yang Baoying, Jiaxuan's Li Chun, and others all claimed to be great governors.

古文：诏内史令杨素讨平之。
现代文：皇帝命令内史令杨素讨平了他们。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Su to subdue them.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、契丹并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑、契丹都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, the emissaries of both Tugu Hun and Khitan sent tribute to the court.

古文：十一年春正月丁酉，以平陈所得古器，多为妖变，悉命毁之。
现代文：十一年春正月十四日，由于平陈时所得的古代器物，许多发生妖变，全部命令毁掉。
English: On the fourteenth day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, due to the normal aging of the ancient artifacts obtained, many of them were transformed into monsters, and all of them were ordered to be destroyed.

古文：丙午，皇太子妃元氏薨，上举哀于东宫文思殿。
现代文：二十三日，皇太子妃元氏去世，皇帝在东宫文思殿致哀。
English: On the 23rd, Crown Princess Motouji passed away, and the Emperor paid his respects at the East Palace.

古文：二月戊午，以大将军苏孝慈为工部尚书。
现代文：二月初六，任命大将军苏孝慈为工部尚书。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, General Su Xiaoji was appointed as the Minister of Industry.

古文：丙子，以临颍令刘旷政绩尤异，擢为莒州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，因临颍令刘旷政绩优异，提升为莒州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Liu Kuang was promoted to the post of governor of Zhangzhou due to his outstanding performance in politics.

古文：辛巳晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：二十九日为晦日，日食。
English: The 29th is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：夏五月乙巳，以右卫将军元旻为左卫大将军。
现代文：夏五月二十四日，任命右卫将军元为左卫大将军。
English: On the 24th day of the 5th month of the summer, General Yuan of the Right Division was appointed General of the Left Division.

古文：秋八月壬申，滕王瓚薨。
现代文：秋八月二十五日，滕王瓒去世。
English: On the 25th day of the 8th month of autumn, Teng Wangyao passed away.

古文：乙亥，上柱国沛国公郑译卒。
现代文：二十六日，上柱国、沛国公郑译去世。
English: On the 26th, Shangzhu Guo and Pe Guo Gong Zheng passed away.

古文：是岁，高丽、靺鞨并遣使朝贡。突厥献七宝碗。
现代文：当年，高丽、都派使者朝贡。突厥进献七宝瞗。
English: In that year, both Korea and Japan sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the Turks presented the Seven Treasures.

古文：十二年春二月己巳，以蜀王秀为内史令，兼右领军大将军；以汉王谅为雍州牧、右卫大将军。
现代文：十二年春二月二十三日，任命蜀王秀为内史令，兼右领军大将军；任命汉王谅为雍州牧、右卫大将军。
English: On the 23rd day of February in the spring of the 12th year, Shu Wangxiu was appointed as the internal history commander and the right-hand leading general; Han Wangxu was appointed as the Yongzhou herdsman and the right-hand guard general.

古文：秋七月乙巳，尚书右仆射邳公苏威、礼部尚书容城侯卢恺并坐事除名。
现代文：秋七月初一，尚书右仆射苏威、礼部尚书容城侯卢恺都因事被除名。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Suwei, and the head of the etiquette department, Shangshu Rongcheng, were both expelled for the incident.

古文：壬申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：二十八日这一天为晦日，日食。
English: The 28th is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：八月甲戌，制天下死罪，诸州不得便决，皆令大理覆之。
现代文：八月初一，下令全国凡定为死罪的人，各州不能立即处决，全部交大理寺复查。
English: On the first day of August, it was ordered that all people who were sentenced to death in the country could not be immediately executed in all states, and all of them should be submitted to Dali Temple for review.

古文：癸巳，制宿卫者不得輙离所守。
现代文：二十日，下令宿卫人员不得任意离开职守。
English: On the 20th, it was ordered that the lifeguards should not leave their duties arbitrarily.

古文：丁酉，上柱国、楚公豆卢绩卒。
现代文：二十四日，上柱国、楚公豆卢责力去世。
English: On the 24th, Shangzhu Guo and Chu Gongzu Lu Liuli passed away.

古文：戊戌，上亲录囚徒。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝亲自审阅囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the emperor personally reviewed the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：冬十月丁丑，以遂安王集为卫王。
现代文：冬十月初五，封遂安王集为卫王。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, An Wang Ji was officially named Wei Wang.

古文：壬午，祀太庙。
现代文：初十，祭祀太庙。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：至太祖神主前，帝流涕鸣咽，不自胜。
现代文：当来到太祖的神主前面时，皇帝流着泪哭了起来，不能自制。
English: When he came in front of the god of his grandfather, the emperor burst into tears and could not control himself.

古文：十一月辛亥，祀南郊。
现代文：十一月初九，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, a religious service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：己未，上柱国、新义公韩擒卒。
现代文：十七日，上柱国、新义公韩擒虎死去。
English: On the 17th, Shangzhu Guo and Shinyi Gong Han Xinghu passed away.

古文：甲子，百僚大射于武德殿。
现代文：二十二日，百官在武德殿举行大射。
English: On the 22nd, a hundred officials held a mass shooting at the Wude Hall.

古文：十二月乙酉，以内史令杨素为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十二月十四日，任命内史令杨素为尚书右仆射。
English: On December 14th, Yang Su was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：是岁，突厥、吐谷浑、靺鞨并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，突厥、吐谷浑、都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, the Turks and the Tuyghurs both sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：十三年春正月乙巳，上柱国、郇公韩建业卒。
现代文：十三年春正月初四，上柱国、郇公韩建业去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, Shangzhu Guo and Gong Han Jianye passed away.

古文：壬子，祀感帝。
现代文：十一日，祭祀时皇帝十分感伤。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor was very sentimental during the ritual.

古文：己未，以信州总管韦世康为吏部尚书。
现代文：十八日，任命信州总管韦世康为吏部尚书。
English: On the 18th, Wei Shikang, the general manager of Shinshu, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：壬戌，行幸岐州。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝前往岐州。
English: On the 21st, the emperor left for Qizhou.

古文：二月丙子，诏营仁寿宫。
现代文：二月初六，下诏修建仁寿宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the edict was issued for the construction of Renshou Palace.

古文：丁亥，至自岐州。
现代文：十七日，从岐州归来。
English: On the 17th, he returned from Qizhou.

古文：己卯，立皇孙暕为豫章王。
现代文：初九，封皇孙为豫章王。
English: In the early 9th century, the crown prince's grandson was named Prince Yuanzhang.

古文：戊子，晋州刺史南阳郡公贾悉达、隰州总管抚宁郡公韩延等以贿伏诛。
现代文：十八日，晋州刺史南阳郡公贾悉达和隰州总管、抚宁郡公韩延等都因受贿而被杀。
English: On the 18th, the governor of Nanyang County in Jinzhou Province, Jia Sida, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, and the governor of Fuxing County, Han Yan, were all killed for taking bribes.

古文：己丑，制坐事去官者，配防一年。
现代文：十九日，下令因事而免官的，流配边防一年。
English: On the 19th, it was ordered that those who were relieved of their duties due to the incident would be assigned to the border guard for one year.

古文：丁酉，制私家不得陷藏纬候图谶。
现代文：二十七日，规定私人家里不准藏有纬书图谶。
English: On the 27th, it was stipulated that a private home was not allowed to have a latitude, longitude and longitude map.

古文：夏五月癸亥，诏禁人间撰集国史，臧否人物。
现代文：夏五月二十四日，下诏禁止民间私自撰写国史，褒贬人物。
English: On the 24th day of the 5th month of the summer, the following edict prohibited people from privately writing national history, praising and criticizing figures.

古文：秋七月戊辰晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月三十日为晦日，日食。
English: The 30th of July in autumn is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：九月丙辰，降囚徒。
现代文：九月十九日，给囚徒减刑。
English: On September 19th, the prisoner's sentence was reduced.

古文：庚申，封邵公杨纶为滕王。
现代文：二十三日，封邵公杨纶为滕王。
English: On the 23rd, Shao Gong Yang Jun was crowned King of Teng.

古文：冬十一月乙卯，上柱国、华阳公梁彦光卒。
现代文：冬十一月十九日，上柱国、华阳公梁彦光死去。
English: On the 19th day of the 11th month of winter, Shangzhu Province, Huayang Gong Liang Yanguang died.

古文：是岁，契丹、燧、室韦、靺鞨并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，契丹、靅、室韦、都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Khitan, Min, and Shumway all sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：十四年夏四月乙丑，诏曰： 比命有司，总令研究，正乐雅声，详定已讫，宜即施用，见行者停。
现代文：十四年夏四月初一，下诏说： 近命有司，总体研究，正乐雅声，详定已毕，应即施用，现行者停。
English: On the first day of April in the summer of the 14th year of the Heian period, the following edict was issued: There is a division in the near future, a general study, a righteous and elegant voice, the details have been determined, it should be applied immediately, and the current one should be stopped.

古文：人间音乐，流僻日久；弃其旧体，竞造繁声；流宕不归，遂以成俗。
现代文：民间音乐，流弊日久，弃其旧体，竞用繁声，流荡不归，因成习俗。
English: Folk music has been around for a long time, but it has become a custom to abandon its old form, to compete with loud noises, and to wander.

古文：宜加禁约，务存其本。 
现代文：应加禁止，务存根本。 
English: It should be banned and banned for good.

古文：五月辛酉，京师地震。
现代文：五月二十八日，京城地震。
English: On May 28th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：关内诸州旱。
现代文：关内各州大旱。
English: Severe drought in the Kanto region.

古文：六月丁卯，诏省、府、州、县皆给廨田，不得兴生，与人争利。
现代文：六月初四，诏令各省、府、州都配给公田，不得生事，与民争利。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, all provinces, prefectures, and prefectures were ordered to allocate public land, not to cause trouble, and to compete with the people.

古文：秋七月乙未，以邳公苏威为纳言。
现代文：秋七月初三，任命邳公苏威为纳言。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Su Wei was appointed as Nagan.

古文：八月辛未，关中大旱，人饥。行幸洛阳，并命百姓山东就食。
现代文：八月初九，关中大旱，民众饥荒，皇帝前往洛阳，并让百姓们到山东求食。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Guanzhong was in a drought and the people were starving. The emperor went to Luoyang and asked the people to go to Shandong to look for food.

古文：冬闰十月甲寅，诏曰： 梁、齐、陈往皆创业一方，绵历年代。
现代文：冬闰十月二十三日，下诏说： 梁、齐、陈朝，以往都曾创业于一方，绵延许多年代。
English: The following edict was issued on October 23, the winter solstice: The Liang, Qi, and Chen dynasties had all started businesses in the past, spanning many years.

古文：既宗祀废绝，祭奠无主；兴言矜念，良以怆然。
现代文：现宗庙废绝，祭奠无主，兴思怜念，十分凄然。
English: Now that the ancestral temple has been abolished, there is no one to pay homage to, no one to think of, and it is very desolate.

古文：莒国公萧琮及高仁英、陈叔宝等，宜令以时世修祭祀，所须器物，有司给之。
现代文：莒国公萧琮和高仁英、陈叔宝等，应让他们按时世代进行祭祀。所需器物，由有关部门供给。 
English: Xiao Yao, Gao Renying, Chen Shubao and other officials of the State Council of the People's Republic of China should be allowed to perform the sacrificial rites according to the chronological order of the generations. The necessary utensils should be provided by the relevant departments.

古文：乙卯，制外官九品以上，父母及子年十五不得从之官。
现代文：二十四日，规定外官九品以上的，父母和年纪十五岁以上的儿子不能带到任所。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, it was stipulated that parents and sons over the age of fifteen could not be brought to the foreign minister's office if they were above the ninth grade.

古文：十一月壬戌，制州县佐史，三年一代，不得重任。
现代文：十一月初二，规定州县的佐史官员，三年一换，不得连任。
English: On the second day of November, it was stipulated that the prefectural and county officials in charge of history would be replaced every three years and would not be allowed to be reappointed.

古文：癸未，有星孛于角、亢。
现代文：二十三日，有彗星出现于角、亢之间。
English: On the 23rd, a comet appeared between the horn and the beak.

古文：十二月乙未，东巡狩。
现代文：十二月初五，东巡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the Eastern Tour began.

古文：十五年春正月壬戌，车驾次齐州，亲问疾苦。
现代文：十五年春正月初三，车驾到达齐州，皇帝亲访民间疾苦。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fifteenth year of spring, the car arrived in Qizhou, and the emperor personally visited the people's sufferings.

古文：丙寅，旅王符山。
现代文：初七，住在王符山。
English: He is in his seventh year of junior high school and lives in Wangfushan.

古文：庚午，以岁旱，祀太山以谢愆咎，大赦。
现代文：十一日，因天旱，祭祀泰山以示承担罪责，大赦。
English: On the 11th day, due to the drought, a sacrifice was made to Mount Taishan to show that the culprits had been held accountable, and an amnesty was declared.

古文：二月丙辰，禁私家畜兵器，关中、缘边不在其例。
现代文：二月二十七日，禁止私人家中存放兵器，关中、沿边地区不在此例。
English: On February 27, the storage of weapons in private homes was prohibited, with the exception of Guanzhong and border areas.

古文：禁河以东无得乘马。
现代文：禁止黄河以东民众骑马。
English: People east of the Yellow River are prohibited from riding horses.

古文：丁巳，上柱国、蒋公梁睿卒。
现代文：二十八日，上柱国、蒋公梁睿死去。
English: On the 28th, Shangzhu Guo and Chiang Gong Liang Rui passed away.

古文：三月己未，车驾至自东巡。
现代文：三月初一，车驾东巡归来。
English: On the first day of March, he returned from an eastbound tour.

古文：望祭五岳海渎。
现代文：望祭五岳和大海河渎。
English: The Five Mountains and the Great Sea and the Great River are the focus of the festival.

古文：丁亥，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：二十九日，前往仁寿宫。
English: On the 29th, he went to Renshou Palace.

古文：夏四月己丑朔，大赦。
现代文：夏四月初一为朔日，大赦。
English: The first day of summer in April is a new day, a day of amnesty.

古文：甲辰，以赵州刺史杨达为工部尚书。
现代文：十六日，任命赵州刺史杨达为工部尚书。
English: On the 16th, Yangda Zhaozhou was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：五月丁亥，制京官五品以上佩铜鱼符。
现代文：五月三十日，规定五品以上的京官佩戴铜鱼符。
English: On May 30th, it was stipulated that Beijing officials with five or more court ranks should wear bronze fish charms.

古文：六月戊子，诏凿砥柱。
现代文：六月初一，下诏凿砥柱。
English: On the first day of June, the chisel is chiseled.

古文：庚寅，相州刺史豆卢通贡绫文布，命焚之于朝堂。
现代文：初三，相州刺史豆卢通上贡绫文布，命令在朝堂上烧毁。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the order was given to burn it in the morning hall.

古文：辛丑，诏名山未在祀典者，悉命祀之。秋七月甲戌，遣邳公苏威巡省江南。
现代文：十四日，下诏凡是没有列入祭典的名山，全部让地方祭祀。秋七月十八，派邳公苏威视察江南。
English: On the 14th, all the famous mountains that were not included in the festival were ordered to be sacrificed locally. On the 18th of autumn, Su Wei, the Duke of Yan, was sent to inspect the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：戊寅，至自仁寿宫。
现代文：二十二日，从仁寿宫归来。
English: On the 22nd, he returned from Renshou Palace.

古文：辛巳，制九品以上官，以理去官者，并听执笏。
现代文：二十九日，规定九品以上的官员，因治狱而去官的，都让他们执朝笏。
English: On the 29th, it was stipulated that officials with nine or more pins, who had been removed from office due to imprisonment, were allowed to perform the Hajj.

古文：冬十二月戊子，敕盗边粮一升以上，皆斩，籍没其家。
现代文：冬十二月初四，下令偷盗边境用粮一升以上的，全部斩首，籍没家产。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month of winter, he ordered that anyone who stole more than one liter of grain from the border should be beheaded and deprived of their property.

古文：己丑，诏文武官以四考更代。
现代文：初五，下诏令文武官员以四考来决定更替。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict ordering the civil and military officials to take four examinations to decide the replacement.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、林邑等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑、林邑等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, countries such as Tugu, Hun and Linyi sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十六年春二月丁亥，封皇孙裕为平原王，筠为安成王，嶷为安平王，恪为襄城王，该为高阳王，韶为建安王，蟹为颍川王。
现代文：十六年春二月初四，封皇孙裕为平原王，筠为安成王，嶷为安平王，恪为襄城王，该为高阳王，韶为建安王，为颍川王。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 16th year of the Spring, Emperor Sun Yu was named the King of the Plain, King Ancheng, King Anping, King Xiangcheng, King Gaoyang, King Jianan, and King Xichuan.

古文：夏六月甲午，制工商不得进仕。
现代文：夏六月十三日，规定工商户不得当官。
English: In the summer of June 13th, it was stipulated that industrial and commercial households were not allowed to become officials.

古文：并州大蝗。
现代文：并州出现大蝗灾。
English: and a major locust infestation in the state.

古文：辛丑，诏九品以上妻、五品以上妾，夫亡不得改嫁。
现代文：二十日，下令九品以上官员的妻子、五品以上官员的小妾，丈夫死后不得改嫁。
English: On the 20th, the wife of an official with nine or more pins and the concubine of an official with five or more pins were ordered not to remarry after the husband's death.

古文：秋八月庚戌，诏决死罪者，三奏而后行刑。
现代文：秋八月三十，下诏凡判决死罪的，三次上奏以后才行刑。
English: On the 30th day of the 8th month of the autumn, it was decreed that anyone sentenced to death would not be executed until after the third appeal.

古文：冬十月己丑，幸长春宫。
现代文：冬十月初二，前往长春宫。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, go to the Changchun Palace.

古文：十一月壬子，至自长春宫。
现代文：十一月初三，从长春宫归来。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he returned from the Changchun Palace.

古文：十七年春二月癸未，太平公史万岁伐西宁，克之。
现代文：十七年春二月初六，太平公史万岁讨伐西宁，打败了它。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 17th year of the Spring, the Taiping Public History League launched a long-lasting crusade against Xining and defeated it.

古文：庚寅，行幸仁寿宫。
现代文：十三日，前往仁寿宫。
English: On the 13th, he went to the Renshou Palace.

古文：庚子，上柱国王世积讨桂州贼李光仕，平之。
现代文：二十三日，上柱国王世积讨伐桂州贼李光仕，讨平。
English: On the 23rd, the king of Shangzhu made a concerted effort to defeat the Guizhou thief, Li Guangshi.

古文：三月丙辰，诏诸司属官有犯，听于律令外斟酌决杖。
现代文：三月初九，下诏说，各有关部门属官如有犯法的，听由在法令之外斟酌情况进行杖责。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the year, the following edict stated that if any subordinate officials of the relevant departments violated the law, they would be subject to disciplinary action at their own discretion in addition to the law.

古文：辛酉，上亲录囚徒。
现代文：十四日，皇帝亲自审阅囚徒材料。
English: On the 14th, the emperor personally reviewed the prisoners' materials.

古文：癸亥，上柱国、彭城公刘昶以罪状诛。
现代文：十六日，上柱国、彭国公刘昶因罪被杀。
English: On the 16th, Shangzhu Guo and Peng Guo Guo were killed for their crimes.

古文：庚午，遣御史柳彧、皇甫诞巡省河南北。
现代文：二十三日，派御史柳、皇甫诞巡察河南河北。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor sent the Grand Historian Liu and the Imperial Father to inspect Henan and Hebei.

古文：夏四月戊寅，颁新历。
现代文：夏四月初二，颁布新历法。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the new calendar was promulgated.

古文：五月庚申，宴百僚于玉女泉，班赐各有差。
现代文：五月十四日，在玉女泉宴请百官，颁发赏品多少不等。
English: On the 14th of May, hundreds of officials were invited to a banquet at the Jade Fountain, and various prizes were awarded.

古文：己巳，蜀王秀来朝。
现代文：二十三日，蜀王杨秀来朝。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Xiu, the King of Shu, came to Korea.

古文：闰月己卯，群鹿入殿门。
现代文：闰月初四，群鹿跑进殿门，骚扰侍卫。
English: On the fourth day of the leap month, a herd of deer ran into the palace gate, harassing the guards.

古文：驯扰侍卫之内。秋七月丁丑，桂州人李世贤反，遣右武候大将军虞庆则讨平之。
现代文：秋七月初三，桂州人李世贤谋反，派右武侯大将军虞庆则讨平。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Li Shixian, a Guizhou native, plotted a rebellion and sent Yu Qing, a grand marshal of the Right Wu, to quell it.

古文：丁亥，并州总管、秦王俊坐事免，以王就第。
现代文：十三日，并州总管、秦王俊因事免职，仍以王爵回府。
English: On the 13th, Qin Wangjun, the provincial governor, was relieved of his duties due to the incident, but still returned to the capital with the title of prince.

古文：九月甲申，车驾至自仁寿宫。
现代文：九月十一日，车驾从仁寿宫返回。
English: On September 11, he was driving back from Renshou Palace.

古文：庚寅，上谓侍臣曰： 庙庭设乐，本以迎神。斋祭之日，触目多感，当此之际，何可为心？
现代文：十七日，皇帝对侍臣们说： 庙堂设乐，原是用来迎神的，斋戒的时候，触目多有感伤，当此之时，怎么还有其他心思？
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor said to his courtiers: The music of the temple hall was originally used to welcome the gods. When fasting, the eyes are more sentimental. At this time, how can there be any other thoughts?

古文：在路奏乐，礼为未允。
现代文：沿路奏乐，以礼而论也是不合适的。
English: It is also inappropriate to play music along the road.

古文：公卿宜更详之。 
现代文：公卿们应当再加以考虑。 
English: The Lords should think again.

古文：冬十月丁未，颁铜武符于骠骑、车骑府。
现代文：冬十月初四，颁发铜武符给骠骑、车骑府。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the bronze military badges were awarded to the cavalry and cavalry prefectures.

古文：戊申，道王静薨。
现代文：初五，道王静去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Tao Wangjing passed away.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 五帝异乐，三王殊礼，皆随事而有损益，因情而立节文。
现代文：二十七日，下诏说 ：五帝之乐有异，三王之礼各殊，都是随事而有所增减，因情而重立节文。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: "The music of the five emperors is different, and the rites of the three kings are all different. They all increase or decrease depending on the situation, and the verses are re-established depending on the situation."

古文：仰惟祭享宗庙，瞻敬如在，罔极之感，情深兹日。
现代文：祭祀于宗庙，瞻仰礼敬如有神在，无限感怀，情深此日。
English: Sacrifices are held at the ancestral temple, and if there is a deity present, it is revered and worshiped with boundless emotion and deep feelings on this day.

古文：而礼毕升路，鼓吹发音，还入宫门，金石振响；斯则哀乐同日，心事相违，情所不安，理实未允。
现代文：而礼毕之后上路，钟鼓歌吹，五音齐发，回到宫门，金石振响，此则哀乐同日，心事相违，心情不安，于理未妥。
English: But after the ceremony, he went on the road, the bells and drums sang, and the five tones sounded in unison. When he returned to the palace gate, the precious stones vibrated. This was sad music on the same day. He felt conflicted, uneasy, and unreasonable.

古文：宜改兹往式，用弘礼教。
现代文：应改变旧制，以弘扬礼教。
English: The old system should be changed in order to promote etiquette.

古文：自今享庙日，不须备鼓吹，殿庭勿设乐县。 
现代文：从今以后祭祀宗庙之日，不必再备鼓吹，殿堂不设乐部。 
English: From now on, on the day of the ancestral temple's worship, there is no need to prepare a sermon, and the hall of fame does not have a club.

古文：辛未，京下大索。
现代文：二十八日，在京城大搜索。
English: On the 28th, a large-scale search was conducted in Beijing.

古文：十二月壬子，上柱国、右武候大将军、鲁公虞庆则以罪伏诛。
现代文：十二月初十，上柱国、右武侯大将军、鲁公虞庆则因罪被杀。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month of the year, Shangzhu Guo, Uwuhou General, and Lu Gongyu Qing were killed for their crimes.

古文：是岁，高丽、突厥并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、突厥都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, both Korea and Turkey sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：十八年春正月辛丑，诏曰： 吴、越之人，往承弊俗；所在之处，私造大船，因相聚结，致有侵害。
现代文：十八年春正月二十九日，下诏说 ：吴、越之人，承袭过去的陋俗，所在之处，私造大船，因而彼此集结，以致相互侵害。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the 18th year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: "The people of Wu and Yue, inheriting the vulgar customs of the past, illegally built large ships wherever they were, and thus gathered together to infringe upon each other.

古文：江南诸州，人间有船长三丈以上，悉括入官。 
现代文：江南各州，民间船只长三丈以上的，全部没收入官。 
English: In all the provinces south of the Yangtze River, there is no revenue officer for private vessels over three meters in length.

古文：二月甲辰，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：二月初三，前往仁寿宫。
English: On the third day of the second lunar month, he went to the Jinshou Palace.

古文：乙巳，以汉王谅为行军元帅，水陆三十万，伐高丽。
现代文：初四，任命汉王谅为行军元帅，带领水陆军三十万人，攻打高丽。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Han Wangyu was appointed as a marching marshal, leading 300,000 people from the navy and army to attack Korea.

古文：夏五月辛亥，诏畜猫鬼蛊毒厌魅野道之家，投于四裔。
现代文：夏五月辛亥日，下诏将豢养猫鬼蛊毒厌魅旁门左道的人家，流放到四方边地。
English: In the summer of May, on the day of Xinhai, the next edict will banish the people who keep cats to the four corners of the country.

古文：六月丙寅，诏黜高丽王高元官爵。
现代文：六月二十七日，下诏罢免高丽王高元的官爵。
English: On June 27th, the king of Goryeo, Gao Yuan, was stripped of his title.

古文：秋八月丙子，诏京官五品以上、总管、刺史举志行修谨、清平干济之士。
现代文：秋七月初七，下诏让五品以上的京官、总管、刺史们举荐志行端正严谨，清廉公正和干练的人士。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the year, the following edict was issued to let the Beijing officials, chief administrators, and historians with five or more pins recommend people who are honest, rigorous, clean, fair, and capable.

古文：九月己丑，汉王谅师遇疾疫而旋，死者十二三。
现代文：九月二十一日，汉王谅的军队遇到疾病和大疫只得回师，死者有十分之二三。
English: On September 21st, the army of Han Wang Peng encountered disease and a great epidemic and had to return to the division, with two-thirds of the dead.

古文：庚寅，敕舍客无公验者，坐及刺史、县令。
现代文：二十二日，下令凡留居官舍的客人没有经过公家验证的，刺史和县令连坐处分。
English: On the 22nd, it was ordered that all guests staying in official residences who had not been verified by public officials would be punished in accordance with the history and county ordinance.

古文：辛卯，车驾至自仁寿宫。
现代文：二十三日，车驾从仁寿宫归来。
English: On the 23rd, he drove back from Renshou Palace.

古文：冬十一月甲戌，帝亲录囚徒。
现代文：冬十一月初七，皇帝亲自审阅囚犯案件。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month in winter, the emperor personally reviewed the prisoners' cases.

古文：癸未，祀南郊。
现代文：十六日，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 16th, a religious service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：十二月庚子，上柱国、夏州总管、东莱公王景以罪伏诛。
现代文：十二月初四，上柱国、夏州总管、东莱公王景因罪被杀。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Wang Jing, the governor-general of Shangzhu, Xia and Donglai, was killed for his crimes.

古文：是岁，自京师至仁寿宫，置行宫十所。
现代文：当年，从京城到仁寿宫，设十所行宫。
English: In that year, from the capital to Renshou Palace, there were ten palaces.

古文：巳、宋、陈、亳、曹、戴、颍等州水，诏并免庸调。
现代文：杞、宋、陈、亳、曹、戴、颍等州大水，下诏免去庸调。
English: Zhou Dashui, Song Dynasty, Chen Dynasty, Song Dynasty, Cao Dynasty, Dai Dynasty, Zhou Dynasty, etc. are exempted from the banal tune.

古文：十九年春正月癸酉，大赦。
现代文：十九年春正月初七，大赦。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the 19th year of the Spring, the amnesty began.

古文：戊寅，大射于武德殿。
现代文：十二日，在武德殿大射。
English: On the 12th, there was a mass shooting at the Wude Hall.

古文：二月己亥，晋王广来朝。
现代文：二月初四，晋王广来朝。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Jin Wang Guang came to the imperial court.

古文：甲寅，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：十九日，前往仁寿宫。
English: On the 19th, he went to Renshou Palace.

古文：夏四月丁酉，突厥利可汗内附。
现代文：夏四月初二，突厥颉利可汗归附。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the Turkic Qili Khanate was annexed.

古文：达头可汗犯塞，行军总管史万岁击破之。
现代文：达头可汗入侵边塞，行军总管史万岁打败它。
English: The Tatou Khan invaded the border fortress. Long live the march of the commander-in-chief to defeat it.

古文：六月丁酉，以豫章王暕为内史令。
现代文：六月初三，任命豫章王为内史令。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Yu Zhang Wang was appointed as the Minister of Internal Affairs.

古文：秋八月癸卯，上柱国、尚书左仆射、齐公高颎坐事免。
现代文：秋八月初十，上柱国、尚书左仆射、齐公高赹因事被免职。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month of the autumn, Shangzhu Guo, Shangshu Zuofei and Qi Gong Gaoqi were removed from their posts.

古文：辛亥，上柱国、皖城公张威卒。
现代文：十八日，上柱国、皖城公张威去世。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Wei, the leader of Shangzhu Province and Shicheng, passed away.

古文：甲寅，上柱国、城阳公李彻卒。
现代文：二十一日，上柱国、城阳公李彻去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Li Che, the ruler of Shangzhu and Chengyang, passed away.

古文：九月乙丑，以太常卿牛弘为吏部尚书。
现代文：九月初三，封太常卿牛弘为吏部尚书。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12

古文：冬十月甲午，以突厥利可汗为启人可汗，筑大利城，处其部落。
现代文：冬十月初二，封突厥颉利可汗为启人可汗，修建大利城，让他的部落居住。
English: On the second day of the second month of winter, Turku Qili Khan was given the title of Qijin Khan, built Dali City, and allowed his tribe to live there.

古文：十一月，有司言元年已来，日渐长。
现代文：十一月，有关部门上奏说，从开皇元年以来，白天逐渐增长。
English: In November, the relevant departments reported that since the beginning of the year, the daytime has gradually increased.

古文：十二月乙未，突厥都蓝可汗为部下所杀，国大乱。
现代文：十二月初四，突厥都蓝可汗被部下杀害，国中大乱。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month, the Turkic capital Blue Khan was killed by his subordinates, and the country was in turmoil.

古文：星陨于勃海。
现代文：有星在渤海陨落。
English: A star has fallen in the Bohai Sea.

古文：二十年春正月辛酉朔，突厥、高丽、契丹并遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十年春正月初一为朔日，突厥、高丽、契丹都派使者朝贡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 20th year of the Spring, the Turks, Goryeo and Khitan sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：二月丁丑，无云而雷。
现代文：二月十八日，天上无云而有雷声。
English: On the 18th of February, there was no cloud in the sky but thunder.

古文：三月辛卯，熙州人李英林反，遣行军总管张衡讨之。
现代文：三月初二，熙州人李英林谋反，派行军总管张衡前去讨伐。
English: On the second day of March, Li Yinglin, a resident of Xizhou, plotted a rebellion and sent Zhang Heng, the head of the marching army, to fight.

古文：夏四月壬戌，突厥犯塞，以晋王广为行军元帅，击破之。
现代文：夏四月初四，突厥侵犯边塞，任命晋王广为行军元帅，击败了突厥。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：乙亥，天有声如写水，自南而北。
现代文：十七日，天上有响声，仿佛像水泻一般，从南往北。
English: And on the seventeenth day there was a sound in heaven as of the rushing of waters, from the south to the north.

古文：六月丁丑，秦王俊薨。
现代文：六月二十日，秦王俊去世。
English: On June 20, Qin Wangjun passed away.

古文：秋九月丁未，车驾至自仁寿宫。
现代文：秋九月二十一日，车驾从仁寿宫归来。
English: Autumn On September 21st, I drove back from Renshou Palace.

古文：冬十月乙丑，废皇太子勇及其诸子。并为庶人。
现代文：冬十月初九，废黜皇太子杨勇和他的儿子，全都成为庶人。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the deposed crown prince Yang Yong and his son became commoners.

古文：杀柱国、太平公史万岁。
现代文：杀柱国、太平公史万岁。
English: Long live the pillar-killing country, long live the peaceful public history.

古文：己巳，杀左卫大将军、五原公元旻。
现代文：十三日，杀左卫大将军、五原公元。
English: On the 13th, he killed General Zawawei, in the 5th year of the Heian period.

古文：十一月戊子，以晋王广为皇太子。
现代文：十一月初三，立晋王广为皇太子。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Wang Guang was crowned crown prince.

古文：天下地震。京城大风雪。
现代文：天下地震，京城出现大风雪。
English: The world is shaken by an earthquake, and there is a blizzard in Kyoto.

古文：十二月戊午，诏东宫官属于皇太子不得称臣。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏东宫的官员对皇太子不得称臣。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, officials of the East Palace issued an edict that the crown prince should not be praised.

古文：辛巳，诏毁坏偷盗佛及天尊像、岳镇海渎神形者，以不道论。
现代文：二十六日，下诏凡毁坏、偷盗佛像和天尊像、山岳、海渎神像的，以大逆不道论处。
English: On the 26th, the following edict decreed that anyone who destroyed or stole statues of Buddha and heavenly deities, as well as statues of mountain and sea gods, would be dealt with as a traitor.

古文：沙门坏佛像，道士坏天尊像，以恶逆论。
现代文：僧人毁坏佛像、道士毁坏天尊像的，以恶逆论处。
English: If a monk destroys a Buddha statue, or a Taoist destroys a statue of a deity, he will be punished according to the theory of evil and vice.

古文：仁寿元年春正月乙酉朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：仁寿元年春正月初一，大赦，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jinshou, the amnesty and the change of the year began.

古文：以尚书右仆射杨素为左仆射，以纳言苏威为右仆射。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射杨素为左仆射，纳言苏威为右仆射。
English: He appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Yang Su as his left-hand man and Nagan Su Wei as his right-hand man.

古文：丁酉，徙河南王昭为晋王。
现代文：十三日，改封河南王昭为晋王。
English: On the 13th, Henan Wang Zhao was renamed Jin Wang.

古文：突厥寇恆安，遣柱国韩洪击之，败焉。
现代文：突厥入侵恒安，派柱国韩洪前去攻打，打败了敌人。
English: The Turks invaded Heng'an and sent Han Hong, a pillar state, to attack and defeat the enemy.

古文：以晋王昭为内史令。
现代文：任命晋王昭为内史令。
English: Jin Wang Zhao was appointed as the Minister of the Interior.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 投生殉节，自古称难，殒身王事，礼加二等。
现代文：十七日，下诏说： 舍身殉节，自古称难。捐身王事，礼加二等。
English: On the seventeenth day, the following edict was issued: "Sacrificing one's life on the day of martyrdom has been considered difficult since ancient times.

古文：而世俗之徒，不达大义，致命戎旅，不入兆域。兴言念此，每深愍叹。
现代文：而世俗之人，不明大义，致使阵亡兵士，不入坟陵之所，每言及此，深为伤感。
English: But the secular people, who do not know the truth, cause the dead soldiers not to enter the cemetery. Every mention of this is deeply saddening.

古文：且入庙祭祀，并不废阙，何止坟茔，独在其外？
现代文：且入庙祭祀，并不废缺，何独坟茔，独在其外？
English: And entering a temple for worship is not a waste. What is a graveyard, but something outside of it?

古文：自今战亡之徒，宜入墓域。 
现代文：自今战亡之士，宜入墓域。 
English: From now on, those who died in the war should be buried in cemeteries.

古文：二月乙卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：夏五月己丑，突厥男女九万余口来降。
现代文：夏五月初七，突厥男女九万多口前来归降。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the summer, more than ninety thousand Turkish men and women came to surrender.

古文：壬辰，骤雨震雷，大风拔木，宜君湫水，移于始平。
现代文：初十，暴雨震雷，大风拔起树木，宜君的湫水，移到始平。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, torrential rain, thunder and lightning, high winds uprooted trees, and Yijun's floodwaters moved to Shihping.

古文：六月乙卯，遣十六使巡省风俗。乙丑，废太学及州县学，唯留国子一学，取正三品以上子七十二人充生。
现代文：六月初三，废除太学和各州、县学校，只留国子一所学校，收正三品以上官员的儿子七十二人为国子学生。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the Taihe school and all the state and county schools were abolished, leaving only one school in Kuniko. Seventy-two sons of officials above the third grade were enrolled as Kuniko students.

古文：颁舍利于诸州秋七月戊戌，改国子为太学。
现代文：颁发舍利给各州。秋七月十七日，改国子学为太学。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Kuniko-gaku was changed to Tai-gaku.

古文：十一月己丑，祀南郊。
现代文：十一月初九，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, a religious service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：十二月，杨素击突厥，大破之。
现代文：十二月日，杨素进攻突厥，大败他们。
English: On December 12, Yang Su attacked the Turks and defeated them.

古文：二年春三月己亥，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：二年春三月二十一日，前往仁寿宫。
English: In the spring of the second year, on March 21st, he went to Renshou Palace.

古文：夏四月庚戌，岐、雍二州地震。
现代文：夏四月初三，岐、雍二州地震。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer, the earthquake occurred in the two prefectures of Qi and Yong.

古文：秋七月丙戌，诏内外官各举所知。
现代文：秋七月初十，下诏内外官员各举荐所知之士。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, officials from both inside and outside the country recommended people they knew.

古文：八月己巳，皇后独孤氏崩。
现代文：八月二十四日，皇后独孤氏去世。
English: On August 24th, Empress Doko passed away.

古文：九月丙戌，车驾至自仁寿宫。
现代文：九月十一日，车驾从仁寿宫归来。
English: On September 11, he was driving back from Renshou Palace.

古文：壬辰，河南北诸州大水，遣工部尚书杨达振恤之。
现代文：十七日，黄河南北各州大水灾，派工部尚书杨达前去赈济。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the provinces north and south of the Yellow River were flooded, and the Ministry of Industry and Trade sent Shang Shuda Yangda to help.

古文：乙未，上柱国、袁州总管、金水公周摇卒。
现代文：二十日，上柱国、袁州总管、金水公周摇去世。
English: On the 20th, Zhou Shao, the governor of Shangzhu Province, the governor of Yuan Province, and Jinshui Gong passed away.

古文：陇西地震。
现代文：陇西地震。
English: Shaanxi earthquake.

古文：冬十月壬子，典赦益州管内。
现代文：冬十月初八，特赦益州范围内罪人。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, an amnesty will be granted to criminals within Yizhou.

古文：癸丑，以工部尚书杨达为纳言。
现代文：初九，任命工部尚书杨达为纳言。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Yangda Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry was appointed as Nagan.

古文：闰月甲申，诏尚书左仆射杨素与诸术者刊定阴阳舛谬。
现代文：闰月初十，下诏令尚书左仆射杨素和各位术数方面官员勘定阴阳历法中的谬误之处。
English: On the 10th day of the leap month, the emperor ordered Shangshu's right-hand man Yang Su and the officials in charge of the number of operations to account for the fallacies in the yin and yang calendar.

古文：己丑，诏杨素、右仆射苏威、吏部尚书牛弘、内史侍郎薛道衡、秘书丞许善心、内史舍人虞世基、著作郎王劭等修定五礼。
现代文：十五日，下诏令杨素、右仆射苏威、吏部尚书牛弘、内史侍郎薛道衡、秘书丞许善心、内史舍人虞世基、著作郎王劭等修定五礼。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Yang Su, his right-hand man Sha Su Wei, his secretary Yang Shu Niu Hong, his attendant of internal history Xue Daoheng, his secretary Jo Xu Zenshin, his subordinate of internal history Yu Shiji, and his secretary Wang Yao were ordered to perform the five formalities.

古文：壬寅，葬献皇后于太陵。
现代文：二十八日，把献太后埋葬于太陵。
English: On the 28th, the Dowager Empress Dowager was buried in the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：十二月癸巳，益州总管、蜀王秀有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：十二月二十日，益州总管、蜀王秀有罪，被废为庶人。
English: On December 20th, the general manager of Yizhou, Shu Wangxiu, was found guilty and was abolished as a commoner.

古文：但依《礼》十三月而祥，中月而禫，庶以合圣人之意，达人子之心。秋七月丁卯，诏州县搜扬贤哲，皆取明知古今，通识安危，究政教之本，达礼乐之源。不限多少，不得不举。
现代文：交州人李佛子起兵反叛，派行军总管刘方讨伐并打败他。三年春二月十六日，任命大将军、蔡阳郡公姚辩为左武侯大将军。夏五月初二，下诏说： 六月十三日是朕的生日，当天命令全国为武元皇帝、元明皇后的缘故而停止屠杀动物。 六月二十四日，下诏说： 父在丧母，不宜有练祭。但依照《礼》中所说，十三月而小祥，中月而礻覃，才合圣人之意，达人子之心。 秋七月二十七日，下诏各州县寻求和表扬贤哲之士，都选取那些明于古今之事，通识安危之道，深究政教之本，达知礼乐之源的人士，不限数量多少，不能不举荐。
English: On the 16th of February in the spring of the third year, the general, Caiyang County Gongyao Yan, was appointed as the general of Zuowu. On the 2nd of May in the summer, the following edict was issued: "June 13 is my birthday, and on that day, I ordered the whole country to stop the slaughter of animals for the sake of Emperor Wuyuan and Empress Yuanming." On the 24th of June, the following edict was issued: "My father is in the process of losing his mother, and it is not appropriate to have a training festival. However, according to the "Rite," it is said that the thirteenth month is auspicious

古文：征召将送，必须以礼。
现代文：征召和准备遣送来京，务须以礼相待。
English: Recruits and those preparing to be sent to Kyoto must be treated with courtesy.

古文：八月壬申，上柱国、检校幽州总管、落丛公燕荣以罪伏诛。
现代文：八月初三，上柱国、检校幽州总管、落丛公燕荣因罪被杀。
English: On the third day of August, Shangzhu Guo, the head of Yuzhou's school inspection, and Lobsong Guo Yan Rong were killed for their crimes.

古文：九月壬戌，置常平官。
现代文：九月二十三日，设置常平宫。
English: On September 23rd, the Changping Palace was established.

古文：甲子，以营州总管韦冲为户部尚书。
现代文：二十五日，任命营州总管韦冲为户部尚书。
English: On the 25th, Wei Chong, the governor of Yingzhou, was appointed as the head of the household.

古文：十二月癸酉，河南诸州水，遣纳言杨达振恤之。
现代文：十二月初六，河南各州水灾，派纳言杨达前去赈济。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, floods in various provinces of Henan sent Naoyan Yangda to help.

古文：四年春正月丙辰，大赦。
现代文：四年春正月十九日，大赦。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the amnesty began.

古文：甲子，幸仁寿宫。
现代文：二十七日，前往仁寿宫。
English: On the 27th, he went to Renshou Palace.

古文：夏四月乙卯，上不豫。
现代文：夏四月乙卯日，皇帝身体不适。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the emperor became unwell.

古文：六月庚午，大赦。
现代文：六月初六，大赦。
English: June 6th, amnesty.

古文：有星入月中，数日而退，长人见于雁门。
现代文：有星进入月中，几天后才退出。在雁门关看见了长人。
English: Some stars enter the middle of the month, only to exit a few days later. I saw an old man at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：秋七月乙未，日青无光，八日乃复。
现代文：秋七月初一，日色青而无光，八天以后才恢复正常。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the sun was blue and without light, and it took eight days for it to return to normal.

古文：律令格式有不便于事者，宜依前修改，务当政要。
现代文：初十，皇帝病重，躺在仁寿宫，和百官们辞别，皇帝握着手轻声哭泣。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor was gravely ill, lying in the Renshou Palace, bidding farewell to the dignitaries. The emperor held his hand and wept softly.

古文：呜呼！敬之哉，无坠朕命。
现代文：十三日，在大宝殿去世，年纪六十四岁。
English: On the 13th, he passed away in the Great Treasure Hall at the age of 64.

古文：乙卯，发丧。
现代文：二十一日发丧。
English: The funeral took place on the 21st.

古文：河间杨柳四株，无故黄落，既而花叶复生。
现代文：河间有四株杨柳树，无缘无故叶黄落下，不久花叶重生。
English: There are four willow trees in the middle of the river. For no apparent reason, their leaves turn yellow and fall off. Soon, the flowers and leaves are reborn.

古文：八月丁卯，梓宫至自仁寿宫。
现代文：八月初三，灵柩从仁寿宫送来。
English: On the third day of the eighth lunar month, the coffin arrived from Renshou Palace.

古文：丙子，殡于大兴前殿。
现代文：十二日，在大兴前殿举行殡礼。
English: On the 12th, a funeral service was held at the Daxing Front Hall.

古文：十月乙卯，葬于太陵，同坟而异穴。
现代文：十月十六日，埋葬在太陵，和皇后同坟而异穴。
English: On October 16th, he was buried in Tai Ling, in the same grave as the empress.

古文：士庶赴葬者，皆听入视陵内。
现代文：凡官员百姓前来奔丧的，都让他们进入陵中观看。
English: All officials and people who came to pay their respects were allowed to enter the mausoleum and take a look.

古文：帝性严重有威容，外质木而内明敏，有大略。
现代文：文帝为人严肃有威仪，外表木讷而内心明白，机敏有大谋略。
English: Emperor Wen was a serious and dignified man, outwardly dull but inwardly clear, quick-witted with a grand strategy.

古文：初得政之始，群情不附。诸子幼弱，内有六王之谋，外致三方之乱，握强兵、居重镇者，皆周之旧臣。
现代文：刚掌握政权时，人心不肯归附，几个儿子又都年幼势弱，朝廷内部有六王图谋不轨，外部则有三方面的叛乱。当时手握重兵、掌管重镇的，都是北周的旧臣。
English: When he first came to power, people were reluctant to follow him, several of his sons were young and weak, six princes were plotting within the court, and there were three rebellions outside. At that time, it was the old retainers of Northern Zhou who had the most soldiers and controlled the most important towns.

古文：上推以赤心，各尽其用。不逾期月，克定三边；未及十年，平一四海。
现代文：文帝以诚心相待，让各人都能尽量发挥才能，不到一月时间，便平定了三边，不到十年，统一天下。
English: Emperor Wen treated each other with sincerity, allowing everyone to make the most of their talents. In less than a month, the three sides were leveled, and in less than ten years, they were unified.

古文：薄赋敛，轻刑罚；内修制度，外抚戎夷。
现代文：他薄征赋税，减轻刑罚，对内明修法度，对外安抚戎夷。
English: He levied taxes sparingly, mitigated punishments, amended laws and regulations for internal use, and appeased the troops abroad.

古文：每旦听朝，日仄忘倦。
现代文：每天早晨上朝听政，直到太阳西斜仍不知疲倦。
English: Every morning, I go to listen to politics, and I never get tired until the sun sets.

古文：居处服玩，务存节俭，令行禁止，上下化之。
现代文：居住的地方服饰玩物，务求节俭，令行禁止，上下同风。
English: Living in a place where clothing is a plaything, in order to be frugal, it is forbidden to order, and it is the same up and down.

古文：开皇、仁寿之间，丈夫不衣绫绮而无金玉之饰。
现代文：开皇、仁寿年间，男子不穿绫罗也不用金玉作为饰品。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong and the reign of Emperor Renzhou, men did not wear brocade or use gold ores as ornaments.

古文：常服率多布帛，装带不过以铜铁骨角而已。
现代文：日常衣服大多是布帛制作的，装饰衣带等也不过用铜铁骨角之类物品而已。
English: Most everyday clothes are made of cloth, and decorative belts and other items are made of brass, iron, bone and horn.

古文：虽啬于财，至于赏赐有功，亦无所爱惜。
现代文：他虽然吝惜用钱，但赏赐有功的人时，却并不小气。
English: Although he is stingy with money, he is not stingy when rewarding meritorious people.

古文：每乘舆四出，路逢上表者，驻马亲自临问。
现代文：每当他乘车外出，在路中遇到有人上表时，他便停下马来亲自询问。
English: Whenever he goes out in his car and meets someone on the street, he stops to inquire in person.

古文：或潜遣行人，采听风俗；吏政得失，人间疾苦，无不留意。
现代文：有时他暗中派遣使者，到各地采风，听知民间风气和官吏政绩得失。对民间疾苦，无不留心。
English: Sometimes he secretly sent emissaries to various regions to gather information about the customs of the people and the achievements and failures of government officials. He was always attentive to the sufferings of the people.

古文：尝遇关中饥，遣左右视百姓所食。有得豆屑杂糠而奏之者，上流涕以示群臣；深自咎责，为之损膳而不御酒肉者，殆将一期。
现代文：曾有一次关中饥荒，他派身边人去观察百姓的食物，有人拿来豆屑和糠混杂在一起的食物上奏，皇帝流着泪展示给群臣，对自己深加责备。并为此而减少膳食，将近一个月不吃酒肉。
English: There was once a famine in Guanzhong. He sent his entourage to observe the food of the people. Someone brought bean crumbs and grasshoppers mixed with food to play on. The emperor showed it to his courtiers with tears and reproached himself deeply. For this reason, he reduced his meals and did not eat meat or wine for almost a month.

古文：及东拜太山，关中户口就食洛阳者，道路相属。
现代文：当他东祭泰山时，关中民众到洛阳就食的，络绎不绝。
English: When he went to the eastern festival of Mount Tai, the people of Guanzhong went to Luoyang to eat.

古文：帝敕斥候，不得辄有驱逼，男女参厕于仗卫之间。
现代文：文帝下令将士们，不能随意驱赶。许多男女民众夹杂在文帝的仪仗和侍卫人员之中同行。
English: Emperor Wen ordered the soldiers not to be driven away at will. Many men and women mingled with Emperor Wen's honor guard and attendants.

古文：遇逢扶老携幼者，辄引马避之，慰勉而去。
现代文：遇到有扶老携幼的百姓，他便带着马避开他们，并加以安慰和勉励后才离开。
English: When he came across people helping the elderly with their children, he took his horse to avoid them and consoled and encouraged them before leaving.

古文：至艰险之处，见负担者，遽令左右扶助之。
现代文：走到难以行走和危险的地段，看见有挑担的人，立即命令身边侍从加以扶助。
English: If you walk into a difficult or dangerous area and see someone carrying a load, immediately order the attendants around you to help.

古文：其有将士战殁，必加优赏，仍令使者，就家劳问。
现代文：凡是将士们阵亡，他必定重加奖赏，派出使者，到他们家中慰问。
English: If any of his soldiers are killed in battle, he will give them a great reward and send a messenger to their home to console them.

古文：自强不息，朝夕孜孜。
现代文：他从早到晚勤勤恳恳，自强不息。
English: He worked diligently from morning to night, never stopping to improve himself.

古文：人庶殷繁，帑藏充实。虽未能臻于至道，亦足称近代之良主。
现代文：民众因而逐渐富裕，人口也越加兴盛，府库中内藏充实，虽然没有达到极盛，也足以称为近代以来的好皇帝了。
English: As a result, the people gradually became richer, the population became more prosperous, and the treasury was enriched. Although it did not reach its peak, it was enough to be called a good emperor since modern times.

古文：然雅性沈猜，素无学术，好为小数。
现代文：可是他本性多疑，向来又不学无术，喜欢雕虫小技和旁门左道的方术。
English: However, he is suspicious by nature, has always been uneducated and unskilled, and likes the small skills of carving insects and the left-hand side of the door.

古文：言神烛圣杖，堪能疗病。
现代文：例如说神烛和圣杖都能够治病。
English: For example, both the holy candle and the holy stick can cure diseases.

古文：又信王劭解石文以为己瑞焉。不达大体如是。故忠臣义士，莫得尽心竭辞。
现代文：又相信王劭随意编解的石头上的那些文字，认为确是自己的祥瑞之兆，像这样不明大道理，因此，忠臣义士，就难以尽心和尽言劝谏了。
English: He also believed that the characters on the stone, which Wang Yao had arbitrarily compiled and interpreted, were indeed a sign of his auspiciousness. As such, he did not know the truth, and therefore, as a loyal subject, it was difficult to persuade him with all his heart and all his words.

古文：其草创元勋，及有功诸将，诛夷获罪，罕有存者。
现代文：那些开国元勋以及有功劳的众将，或被杀被夷族以及因罪被免，很少有存留下来的。
English: Those founding fathers and meritorious generals, or those who were killed by the barbarians and pardoned for their crimes, are few and far between.

古文：又不悦诗书，杨素由之希旨，遂奏除学校。
现代文：他又不喜欢诗书，杨素便投其所好，上奏请求废除学校。
English: He also didn't like poetry books, so Yang Su took his side and petitioned to abolish the school.

古文：唯妇言是用，废黜诸子。
现代文：他只听妇人之言，废黜几个儿子。
English: He only listens to his wife and abandons his sons.

古文：逮于暮年，持法尤峻，喜怒失常，果于杀戮。
现代文：到他晚年时，执法尤其严峻，喜怒无常，动辄杀戮。
English: In his later years, law enforcement was especially grim, capricious and murderous.

古文：尝令左右送西域朝贡使出关，其人所经之处，受牧宰小物，馈鹦鹉、麖皮、马鞭之属，闻而大怒。
现代文：他曾经让身边随从送西域前来朝贡的使者出关，那些随从在所经过的地方，接受了牧宰们送给的鹦鹉、麋皮、马鞭之类杂物，文帝知道以后大为恼怒；他又到武库中，见管理人员屋里杂乱不堪，没有整理。
English: He once had his entourage escort the envoys who were bringing tribute to the Western Regions out of the customs. The attendants received parrots, mink pelts, horse whips and other miscellaneous items from the shepherds in the places they passed through. Emperor Wen was very angry when he learned of this; he also went to the arsenal and saw that the administrator's room was cluttered and had not been organized.

古文：又诣武库，见署中芜秽不理，于是执武库令及诸受遗者，出开远门外，亲自临决，死者数十人。
现代文：于是，他就抓了这个管理武库的小官和那些接受馈赠的人员，把他们押到开远门外，亲自主持处决，被杀死的有几十人。
English: As a result, he arrested the minor official who managed the arsenal and those who received the gifts, pushed them outside the open door, and personally presided over the executions, in which dozens of people were killed.

古文：又往往潜令赂遗令史，府史受者必死，无所宽贷，议者以此少之。
现代文：他又常常让人暗地贿赂令史们，府史凡是接受的一定被处死，毫不留情。议论者认为这些是他的不足之处。
English: He also often had people secretly bribe officials, and those who accepted bribes were executed without mercy. Commentators believe that these were his shortcomings.

