古文：○英宗英宗体乾应历隆功盛德宪文肃武睿圣宣孝皇帝，讳曙，濮安懿王允让第十三子，母曰仙游县君任氏。
现代文：英宗体乾应历隆功盛德宪文肃武睿圣宣孝皇帝，名曙，攫安爵王允让第十三个儿子，母亲为仙游县君任氏。
English: He was the thirteenth son of Emperor Xuanxiao, the renowned founder of the Han Dynasty, and his mother was a member of the Junren clan from Xianyu County.

古文：明道元年正月三日生于宣平坊第。
现代文：明道元年正月三日，在宣平坊第宅出生。
English: He was born on the third day of the first month of the first year of the Ming Dynasty in the second house of Xuanpingbo.

古文：初，王梦两龙与日并堕，以衣承之。
现代文：先是，攫安爵王梦见两条龙与太阳一起坠落，就用衣服接着。
English: First, King Anzai dreamed that two dragons fell with the sun, and then he used clothes.

古文：及帝生，赤光满室，或见黄龙游光中。
现代文：到英宗出生的时候，红光照遍居室，有人看见黄龙在红光中游动。
English: By the time of Yingzong's birth, red light was shining throughout the room, and someone saw a yellow dragon swimming in the red light.

古文：四岁，仁宗养于内。
现代文：四岁，仁宗养于宫内。
English: At the age of four, Ninsong was raised in the palace.

古文：宝元二年，豫王生，乃归濮邸。
现代文：宝元二年，豫王出生后，才回到父亲身边。
English: He did not return to his father's side until after Yu Wang was born in the second year of Baoyuan.

古文：帝天性笃孝，好读书，不为燕嬉亵慢，服御俭素如儒者。
现代文：英宗天性极为孝顺，喜好读书，不做嬉游玩乐的事情，穿的用的节俭朴素得像一个儒者。
English: The nature of Yingzong is extremely filial, likes to read, does not like to play, and dresses like a Confucian.

古文：每以朝服见教授，曰： 师也，敢弗为礼？ 
现代文：常穿着礼服朝拜他的老师，说： 你是我的老师，不敢不以礼相见。 
English: He often wore a ceremonial robe and bowed to his teacher, saying, "You are my teacher, I dare not meet you without proper etiquette."

古文：时吴王宫教授吴充进《宗室六箴》，仁宗付宗正，帝书之屏风以自戒。
现代文：当时吴王宫教授吴充进呈徐室六筋，仁宗把它交给当时任宗正的英宗，英宗把内容写在屏风上来约束自己。
English: At that time, Wu Chengjin, a professor of Wu Wang Gong, presented a six-syllable poem, and Ren Zong gave it to Ying Zong, who was then appointed as Zong Zheng. Ying Zong wrote the content on the screen to restrain himself.

古文：景祐三年，赐名宗实，授左监门卫率府副率，累迁右羽林军大将军、宜州刺史。
现代文：景三年，赐名为宗实，担任左监门卫率府副率，历官右羽林军大将军、宜州刺史。
English: In the third year of Jing, he was given the name of Zongshi, served as the left supervisor of the gate guard, the deputy head of the government, the general of the Ubin Army, and the history of Yizhou.

古文：皇祐二年，为右卫大将军、岳州团练使。
现代文：皇二年，为右卫大将军、岳州团练使。
English: In the 2nd year of the Emperor, he was appointed to the post of Udaidajo (Major General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards) and sent to Gyeongju as a regimental training officer.

古文：嘉祐中，宰相韩琦等请建储，仁宗曰： 宗子已有贤知可付者，卿等其勿忧。 
现代文：嘉中，宰相韩琦等人请求确立太子，仁宗说： 宗室后代中已经有贤能可以继承皇位的人，请你们不要担忧。 
English: Jia Zhong, Prime Minister Han Zheng and others requested the establishment of a crown prince, and Ren Zong said: There are already people of merit who can inherit the throne among the descendants of the imperial family, please do not worry.

古文：时帝方服濮王丧。
现代文：当时英宗刚好因父亲攫王逝世服丧。
English: At that time, Emperor Yeongjong was in mourning for the death of his father, King Yeongjo.

古文：六年十月辛卯，起为秦州防御使、知宗正寺，帝以终丧辞。
现代文：嘉六年十月十二日，朝廷打算起用担任秦州防御史、知宗正寺，英宗以守丧期未满而推辞。
English: On October 12, 1866, the imperial court planned to use the Chizong Zheng Temple, which served as the defense history of Qinzhou, but Yingzong refused to do so, saying that the mourning period had not expired.

古文：奏四上，乃听。
现代文：英宗四次上奏推辞，朝廷才允许。
English: The Imperial Court only allowed Emperor Yingzong to submit his resignation four times.

古文：丧终，复授前命，又辞。
现代文：守丧完毕，又被授给前职，英宗再次推辞。
English: After the funeral was over, he was given his former post again, but again refused it.

古文：七年八月，许罢宗正，复为岳州团练使。
现代文：嘉七年八月，允许罢去宗正一职，又担任岳州团练使。
English: In August of the seventh year of the Jia Dynasty, he was allowed to be dismissed from the post of Zongzheng, and he also served as the Yuezhou League training envoy.

古文：戊寅，立为皇子。
现代文：初四，被立为皇太子。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：癸未，改今名。
现代文：初九，改今名。
English: At the age of nine, he changed his name to his current one.

古文：帝闻诏称疾，益坚辞。
现代文：英宗听到诏命后称病，更是坚决推辞。
English: After hearing the imperial edict, Emperor Yingzong called in sick, and even more resolutely refused to go.

古文：诏同判大宗正事安国公从古等往喻旨，即卧内起帝以入。
现代文：仁宗下诏同判大宗正事安国公从古等人前往劝告服从命令，于是到英宗卧室扶起英宗到朝廷。
English: When Emperor Jinzong issued an edict that the matter was serious, Prince An Guo and others went to advise him to obey the order, and then they went to Emperor Yingzong's bedroom to help Emperor Yingzong go to the imperial court.

古文：甲辰，见清居殿。
现代文：三十日，出现在清居殿。
English: On the 30th, he appeared at Seiji-den.

古文：自是，日再朝，或入侍禁中。
现代文：从此以后，每天两次朝拜仁宗，有时还到皇宫内服侍仁宗。
English: From then on, he made the pilgrimage to Bayinzong twice a day, and sometimes went to the imperial palace to serve the Nizong.

古文：九月，迁齐州防御使、钜鹿郡公。
现代文：九月，迁齐州防御史、巨鹿郡公。
English: In September, he was transferred to Qizhou Defense History, and became the governor of Jugu County.

古文：八年，仁宗崩。
现代文：嘉八年，仁宗逝世。
English: In the eighth year of the Jia, Renzong passed away.

古文：夏四月壬申朔，皇后传遗诏，命帝嗣皇帝位。
现代文：夏四月初一，皇后发布遗诏，任命英宗继承皇帝位。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the empress issued a will, appointing Yingzong to succeed the emperor.

古文：百官入，哭尽哀。
现代文：文武百官进人宫廷，痛哭哀悼。
English: Civil and military officials entered the court, weeping and mourning.

古文：韩琦宣遗制。
现代文：韩琦读仁宗遗诏制命。
English: Han Yan read the last will and testament of the Rinzong Dynasty.

古文：帝御东楹见百官。
现代文：英宗到朝廷东殿接见文武百官。
English: Emperor Eisong went to the East Hall of the Imperial Court to receive hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：癸酉，大赦，赐百官爵一等，优赏诸军，如乾兴故事。
现代文：初二，在全国大规模赦免，赐给百官爵一等，奖赏各军，像仁宗乾兴元年即位一样。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, a large-scale amnesty was granted throughout the country, and the first class of one hundred officials was given, and the army was rewarded, just like the enthronement of Rinzong Qianxing in the first year of the year.

古文：遣王道恭告哀于契丹。
现代文：派遣王道恭向契丹报告仁宗逝世的消息。
English: Wang Daogong was dispatched to report the news of Rinzong's death to Khitan.

古文：帝欲亮阴三年，命韩琦摄冢宰，宰臣不可，乃止。
现代文：英宗想守丧三年，命令韩琦代理军政事务，宰臣不答应，才停止。
English: Yingzong wanted to hold the funeral for three years, and ordered Han Zheng to be in charge of military and political affairs, but Zhaisen did not agree, so he stopped.

古文：乙亥，帝不豫。
现代文：初四，英宗生病。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Ying Zong fell ill.

古文：遣韩贽等告即位于契丹。
现代文：派韩赞等人向契丹报告英宗即皇帝位的消息。
English: Han Zan and others were sent to report to Khitan the news of the enthronement of Emperor Yingzong.

古文：丙子，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：初五，尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the queen is revered as the empress dowager.

古文：己卯，诏请皇太后同听政。
现代文：初八，下诏请求皇太后共同处理军国要事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he issued an imperial edict requesting the empress dowager to jointly deal with military and state affairs.

古文：壬午，皇太后御小殿垂帘，宰臣覆奏事。
现代文：十四日，皇太后到小殿垂帘听政，宰臣又到小殿帘前上奏国事。
English: On the 14th, the Empress Dowager went to the small hall to listen to the government, and the Vice-Minister went to the small hall to report on national affairs.

古文：乙酉，作受命宝。
现代文：十四日，制作受命宝印。
English: On the 14th, the ordered seal was made.

古文：丁亥，以皇子右千牛卫将军仲钅咸为安州观察使、光国公。
现代文：十六日，任命皇子、右千牛卫将军仲喊为安州观察使、光国公。
English: On the 16th, he appointed his son, General U Chien Niu Wei Chung Hau, as the Anzhou Observer and the Prince of Guangxi.

古文：荧惑自七年八月庚辰不见，命宰臣祈禳，至是月己丑见于东方。
现代文：荧惑星从嘉七年八月初六起就没有出现，命令宰臣祈求福样，除去灾变，到嘉八年四月十八日出现在东方。
English: The fluorescent planet had not appeared since the 6th day of the 8th month of the 7th year of the Jia, so he ordered the prime minister to pray for good luck and remove the disaster, and it appeared in the east on April 18th of the 8th year of the Jia.

古文：庚子，立京兆郡君高氏为皇后。
现代文：二十九日，立京兆郡君高氏为皇后。
English: On the 29th, the Jinguo clan of Keicho County was established as the empress.

古文：五月戊午，以富弼为枢密使。
现代文：五月十七日，任命富弼为枢密使。
English: On May 17th, Fushun was appointed as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：戊辰，初御延和殿。
现代文：二十七日，开始到延和殿。
English: On the 27th, the procession began to Yanhe Hall.

古文：以疾未平，命宰臣祈福于天地、宗庙、社稷及寺观，又祈于岳渎名山。
现代文：因病没有痊愈，命令宰臣向天地、宗庙、社翟及寺观祈求赐福，又向岳读名山祈祷。
English: As he did not recover from his illness, he ordered Zaisen to pray to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, the community and the temple for blessings, and to pray to the famous mountain, Mt.

古文：六月辛卯，契丹遣萧福延等来祭吊。
现代文：六月二十一日，契丹派遣萧福延等人来祭哀吊丧。
English: On June 21, Khitan dispatched Xiao Fuyan and others to the funeral.

古文：秋七月壬子，初御紫宸殿。
现代文：秋七月十三日，开始到紫哀殿。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, the procession to the Purple Shrine began.

古文：帝自六月癸酉不御殿，至是始见百官。
现代文：英宗从六月初三不上殿，到这时才接见文武百官。
English: Emperor Yeongjong did not go to the palace from the third day of the first month of June. It was only then that he received hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：癸亥，岁星昼见。
现代文：二十四日，岁星白天出现。
English: On the 24th, the year star appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙丑，星大小数百西流。
现代文：二十六日，大小数百颗星向西流移。
English: On the 26th, hundreds of stars of all sizes streamed westward.

古文：戊辰，百官请大行皇帝谥于南郊。
现代文：二十九日，文武百官请求在南郊确立仁宗溢号。
English: On the 29th, hundreds of civil and military officials requested the establishment of the Nanzong Yue number in the southern suburbs.

古文：八月癸巳，以生日为寿圣节。
现代文：八月二十四日，以生日为寿圣节。
English: On August 24th, his birthday is celebrated as a holy day.

古文：九月辛亥，以光国公仲钅咸为忠武军节度使、同中书门下平章事、淮阳郡王，改名顼。
现代文：九月十三日，任命光国公仲喊为忠武军节度使、同中书门下平章事、淮阳郡王，改名为项。
English: On September 13th, Guang Guo Gongzhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the loyal armed forces, and his name was changed to Heping Zhangji and Huaiyang Guo.

古文：戊午，上仁宗谥册于福宁殿。冬十月甲午，葬仁宗于永昭陵。
现代文：二十日，在福宁殿敬上仁宗溢册。冬十月二十七日，仁宗埋葬在永昭陵。
English: On the 20th, a memorial copy of Ninsong was dedicated at Fukuning Hall. In the winter, on October 27th, Ninsong was buried at Yongshao Mausoleum.

古文：十一月丙午，祔于太庙。
现代文：十一月初九，在太庙附祭仁宗。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the Ninsong Festival was held in the Grand Temple.

古文：大风霾。
现代文：起大风，天空阴霆。
English: The wind was blowing hard and the sky was overcast.

古文：己酉，减东西二京罪囚一等，免山陵役户及灵驾所过民租。
现代文：十二日，东、西二京囚犯减刑一等，免除服役山陵人户及灵枢经过地区百姓的租税。
English: On the 12th, the East and West Beijing prisoners had their sentences reduced to the first class, and the households of those who served in the mountains and villages and the local people who passed through the spiritual center were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：辛亥，契丹遣萧素等来贺即位。
现代文：十四日，契丹派遣萧素等人来祝贺英宗即位。
English: On the 14th, Khitan sent Xiao Su and others to congratulate Yingzong on his enthronement.

古文：十二月己巳，初御迩英阁，召侍臣讲读经史。
现代文：十二月初二，开始到迩英阁，召集侍臣讲读经史。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, he began to go to Su Yingge to gather his courtiers to read the history of the sutra.

古文：乙亥，淮阳郡王顼出阁。
现代文：初八，淮阳郡王赵项出阎。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, King Zhao Xiang of Huaiyang County passed away.

古文：是岁，于阗、西南蕃来贡。
现代文：这一年，于闻、西南蕃来进贡。
English: This year, tribute came from Yunnan and Southwest Yunnan.

古文：治平元年春正月丁酉朔，改元。
现代文：治平元年春正月初一，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of the Heian period, the era name was changed.

古文：戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Taibai Xing appeared during the day.

古文：己亥，寿圣节，百官及契丹使初上寿于紫宸殿。
现代文：初三，寿圣节，文武百官及契丹使臣在紫哀殿为英宗祝寿。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, on the holy day of his birthday, hundreds of civil and military officials and Khitan envoys celebrated his birthday at the Purple Shrine.

古文：甲寅，赏知唐州赵尚宽修沟堰、增户口，进一官，赐钱二十万。
现代文：十八日，奖赏知唐州赵尚宽兴修水利、增加人口之功，升官一级，赐给络钱二十万。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Shangguan from Tangzhou was rewarded for his work in improving water conservancy and increasing the population. He was promoted to the first level and given 200,000 rupees.

古文：三月壬寅，命修秦悼王冢，置守护官。
现代文：三月初六，命令修治秦悼王坟墓，设置守护官。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, it was ordered to repair the tomb of the Qin mourning king and set up a guardian.

古文：戊午，录囚。
现代文：二十二日，讯察全国囚犯罪状。
English: On the 22nd, the status of prisoners across the country was surveyed.

古文：辛酉，雨土。
现代文：二十五日，降土。
English: On the seventeenth day, the descent began.

古文：夏四月癸未，放宫女百三十五人。
现代文：夏四月十七日，释放宫女一百三十五人。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, one hundred and thirty-five maids of honor were released.

古文：甲午，祈雨于相国天清寺、醴泉观。
现代文：二十八日，在相国天清寺、醛泉观祈祷降雨。
English: On the 28th, he prayed for rain at the Tensei-ji Temple and the Aldehyde Spring in Shokoku.

古文：赐诸军钱有差。
现代文：赐给各军不等的钱。
English: Give each army a different amount of money.

古文：五月己亥，浚二股河。
现代文：五月初四，修浚二股河。
English: On the fourth day of May, the Futamata River was dredged.

古文：戊申，皇太后还政。
现代文：十三日，皇太后还政英宗。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager returned to the throne.

古文：庚戌，初日御前后殿。
现代文：十五日，英宗开始每天到前后殿。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yingzong began to go to the front and back of the hall every day.

古文：壬子，诏： 皇太后称圣旨，出入仪卫如章献太后故事。
现代文：十七日，下诏： 皇太后的命令称圣旨，出人皇宫内外的礼仪像章献太后一样。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: The order of the empress dowager is called the sacred will, and the etiquette inside and outside the imperial palace is the same as that of the empress dowager.

古文：其有所须，内侍录圣旨付有司，覆奏即行。 
现代文：需要什么东西，内侍记录圣旨交给有关部门，上奏后即施行。 
English: If anything is needed, the chambermaid records the will and hands it over to the relevant department, and it is carried out immediately after it has been played.

古文：丙辰，上皇太后宫殿名曰慈寿。
现代文：二十一日，敬上皇太后宫殿名为慈寿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the palace of the revered empress dowager was named Cisou.

古文：己未，荧惑犯太微上将。
现代文：二十四日，荧惑星侵犯太微星和上将星。
English: On the 24th, the fluorescent planet invaded Taimixing and Admiral Star.

古文：壬戌，以病愈，命宰臣谢天地、宗庙、社稷及宫观。
现代文：二十七日，英宗病愈，命令宰臣向天地、宗庙、社翟及宫观表示感谢。
English: On the 27th, after Yingzong recovered from his illness, he ordered the vice-minister to express his gratitude to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, the community and the imperial court.

古文：闰月戊辰，辅臣进爵一等。
现代文：闰五月初三，辅臣提高爵位一等。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the vassal was promoted to the first class.

古文：六月己亥，以淮阳郡王顼为颍王，祁国公颢为保宁军节度使、同中书门下平章事、东阳郡王，鄠国公頵为左卫上将军。
现代文：六月初五，以淮阳郡王项为颖王，祁国公颖为保宁军节度使、同中书门下平章事、东阳郡王，鄂国幻页为左卫上将军。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Wang Xiang of Huaiyang County was named Ying Wang, Gong Ying of Hubei Province was appointed as the festival envoy of the Boryeong Army, Xia Ping Zhangji of Dongyang County was named King of Hubei Province, and Guanzhong of Hubei Province was named General of the Left Division.

古文：增宗室教授。
现代文：增加宗室教授。
English: Added the professor of the family room.

古文：丁未，增同知大宗正事一员。
现代文：十三日，增加同知大宗正事一名。
English: On the 13th, one more person was added to the same position as Daizong Zhengji.

古文：辛亥，作睦亲、广亲宅。
现代文：十七日，修建睦亲、广亲宅。
English: On the 17th, the house of Mutsu Kinship and Guang Kinship was built.

古文：辛酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：壬戌，岁星昼见。
现代文：二十八日，岁星白天出现。
English: After all, the New Year's Star only appears during the day.

古文：八月甲辰，录周世宗后。
现代文：八月十一日，录用周世宗后代。
English: On August 11, the descendants of Zhou Shizong were hired.

古文：甲寅，太白入太微垣。
现代文：二十一日，太白星进人太微垣。
English: On the twenty-first day, too white a star enters too small a field.

古文：乙卯，遣兵部员外郎吕诲等四人充贺契丹太后生辰、正旦使，刑部郎中章岷等四人充贺契丹主生辰、正旦使。
现代文：二十二日，派遣兵部员外郎吕诲等四人充任贺契丹太后生辰、正旦使，刑部郎中章崛等四人担任祝贺契丹主生辰、正旦使。
English: On the 22nd, four members of the military department, including Gaizhong Lu, were sent to serve as envoys to congratulate Empress Dowager He Qidan on the occasion of her birthday, and four members of the criminal department, including Gaizhong Zhongzhang, were sent to congratulate the Empress Dowager He Qidan on the occasion of her birthday, and to serve as envoys to congratulate the Empress Dowager He Qidan on the occasion of her birthday.

古文：丙辰，内侍都知任守忠坐不法，贬保信军节度副使、蕲州安置。
现代文：二十三日，内侍都知任守忠因不法行为，贬为保信军节度副使，薪州安置。
English: On the 23rd, the court lady, Du Chi Ren Shou Zhong, was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Hoxin Army for the festival due to illegal behavior, and was resettled in Zhouzhou.

古文：丁巳，以上供米三万石振宿、亳二州水灾户。
现代文：二十四日，用三万石上供米贩济宿、毫二州遭受水灾的人户。
English: On the 24th, 30,000 koku was used to provide lodging for rice traders and households affected by floods in two prefectures.

古文：九月丁卯，复武举。
现代文：九月初五，恢复武举。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, martial arts were resumed.

古文：庚午，诏夏国精择使人，戒励毋紊彝章。
现代文：初八，诏令夏国要精心选择使臣，告诫他们不要违反常典。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor ordered Xia Guo to carefully select the envoys and warned them not to violate the standing order.

古文：冬十月丙申，诏中外近臣、监司举治行素著可备升擢者二人。
现代文：冬十月初五，下诏中外近臣、监司推举有治国才干、德行卓著可以预备提升的人二名。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, it was decided that the foreign and domestic ministers and supervisors would nominate two people with the ability to govern the country and outstanding virtue who could be prepared for promotion.

古文：十一月乙亥，科陕西户三丁之一，刺以为义勇军，凡十三万八千四百六十五人，各赐钱二千。
现代文：十一月十四日，陕西民户科征丁兵，三丁抽一，刺字作为义勇军，共得十三万八千四百六十五人，分别赐给络钱二千。
English: On November 14, a total of 138,465 people from households in Shaanxi Province were enlisted as volunteers, and 2,000 rupees were given to them.

古文：谏官司马光累上疏谏之，不允。
现代文：谏官司马光多次上疏劝谏这件事，没有得到同意。
English: The eunuch, Sima Guang, repeatedly tried to dissuade her from doing so, but she did not agree.

古文：戊寅，复内侍养子令。
现代文：十七日，恢复内侍养子令。
English: On the 17th, the Imperial Household Agency's adoption order was reinstated.

古文：十二月乙巳，雨土。
现代文：十二月十四日，降土。
English: On the 14th of December, the earth fell.

古文：丙辰，契丹遣耶律烈等来贺寿圣节，萧禧等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十五日，契丹派遣耶律烈等人来祝贺寿圣节，萧禧等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 25th, the Khitan sent Ye Lu Lie and others to congratulate the anniversary, and Xiao Xi and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，畿内、宋、亳、陈、许、汝、蔡、唐、颍、曹、濮、济、单、濠、泗、庐、寿、楚、杭、宣、洪、鄂、施、渝州、光化、高邮军大水，遣使行视，疏治振恤，蠲其赋租。
现代文：这一年，京瓷、宋、毫、陈、许、汝、蔡、唐、颖、曹、攫、济、单、壕、泅、庐、寿、楚、杭、宣、洪、鄂、施、渝等州，光化军、高邮军发生大水灾，派遣使臣巡视，疏治河道，贩济抚恤灾民，免除灾民赋税。
English: In that year, great floods occurred in Kyocera, Song, Miao, Chen, Xu, Ru, Cai, Tang, Ying, Cao, Shun, Jie, Shan, Trench, Ying, Shun, Shou, Chu, Hang, Xuan, Hong, Hun, Shih, Ying and other prefectures, as well as in the Gwanghwamun and Goguryeo armies. Envoys were dispatched to inspect and control the river channels, and merchants were sent to help the victims and exempt them from taxes.

古文：西蕃瞎毡子瞎欺米征内附。
现代文：西蕃瞎毡的儿子瞎欺米征归附我朝。
English: The son of Xizang Xizang cheated the rice tax to join my dynasty.

古文：二年春正月甲戌，振蔡州。
现代文：治平二年春正月十四日，贩济蔡州。
English: On the 14th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Heian period, a vendor came to Caizhou.

古文：二月甲辰，大风，昼冥。
现代文：二月十四日，刮大风。白天像夜晚一样昏暗。
English: On the 14th of February, it was blowing a gale, and the day was as dark as night.

古文：丁未，录囚。
现代文：十七日，讯察全国囚犯罪状。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor inspected the prisoners and made a confession.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、明经诸科及第出身三百六十一人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、明经等各科及第出身三百六十一人。
English: This month, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies bestowed the names of 361 graduates in various disciplines, including calligraphy and divination, as well as their place of birth.

古文：三月己巳，班《明天历》。
现代文：三月初九，颁布《明天厉。
English: On March 9th, the "Tomorrow's Work" was promulgated.

古文：夏四月戊戌，诏议崇奉濮安懿王典礼。
现代文：夏四月初九，下诏讨论崇奉攫安爵王典礼。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued to discuss the ceremony of the enthronement of King Gong Anjie.

古文：辛丑，诏监司、知州岁荐吏毋徒充数。
现代文：十二日，下诏监司、知州每年推举的官吏不要只作为充数。
English: On the 12th day of the following month, the magistrate and officials elected annually in Zhizhou should not be used only as a supplementary number.

古文：丙午，奉安仁宗御容于景灵宫。
现代文：十七日，仁宗神主遗容迁到景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the remains of Ninso Shinshu were moved to Jingling Palace.

古文：丁未，白气起西方。
现代文：十八日，白色气雾从西方升起。
English: On the 18th, a white haze rose from the west.

古文：五月癸亥，诏以综核名实励臣下。
现代文：五月初四，下诏综合事情的名称和实际加以考核，以鼓励国家官员。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the next day, the name of the comprehensive matter and the actual situation will be assessed to encourage the national officials.

古文：丙子，诏自今皇子及宗室属卑者，勿授以检校师、傅官。
现代文：十七日，下诏：从今以后皇子及宗室官属低下的人，不要授给检校师傅官。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: From now on, the prince and those who are low-ranking officials should not be awarded the title of school inspector.

古文：乙酉，诏宗室封王者子孙袭爵。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：宗室封王的人，子孙可以承继封爵。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: the descendants of a person who was crowned king by his family could succeed to the title.

古文：六月壬辰，录囚。
现代文：六月初四，讯察全国囚犯罪状。
English: On the 4th of June, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：己酉，诏尚书集三省、御史台议奉濮安懿王典礼。
现代文：二十一日，下诏尚书省收集三省、御史台讨论崇奉攫安爵王典礼的意见。
English: On the 21st, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology announced that it would collect opinions from the three provinces and the State Administration of History to discuss the ceremony of worshipping the Prince of Anzhi.

古文：甲寅，罢尚书省集议，令有司博求典故，务在合经。
现代文：二十六日，罢除尚书省集中有关意见，命令有关部门广泛搜求典故，必须合乎经典规定。
English: On the 26th, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology revoked the relevant opinions and ordered the relevant departments to extensively search for allusions, which must comply with the classic regulations.

古文：诏遣官与契丹定疆界。
现代文：下诏派官员与契丹商定边界。
English: Officials from the lower house of parliament agreed on the border with the Khitan.

古文：秋七月癸亥，富弼罢。
现代文：秋七月初五，富弼罢职。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Fuxi resigned.

古文：丙寅，诏减乘舆服御。
现代文：初八，下诏减少皇帝用的车马和衣服。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor decreed to reduce the number of chariots, horses and clothes used by the emperor.

古文：丙子，放宫女百八十人。
现代文：十八日，放出宫女一百八十人。
English: On the eighteenth day, one hundred and eighty concubines were released.

古文：丁丑，太白昼见。
现代文：十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 30th, the too-white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：己卯，群臣五上尊号，不允。
现代文：二十一日，大臣们五次敬上尊号，英宗没有同意。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the ministers offered the honorific title five times, but Emperor Yingzong did not agree.

古文：庚辰，张昪罢，以文彦博为枢密使。
现代文：二十二日，张鼻罢职，任命文彦博为枢密使。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Na stepped down from his post and appointed Wen Yanbo as the envoy.

古文：八月庚寅，京师大雨，水。
现代文：八月初三，京城降大雨，发生水灾。
English: On the third day of August, heavy rain fell in Beijing, causing flooding.

古文：癸巳，赐被水诸军米，遣官视军民水死者千五百八十人，赐其家缗钱，葬祭其无主者。
现代文：初六，赐给遭受水灾各军粮米，派官员视察军士百姓被水淹死的一千五百八十人，赐给他们家庭络钱，埋葬祭奠那些没有人管的死者。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he gave grain and rice to the soldiers who suffered from the flood, sent officials to inspect the 1,580 soldiers and civilians who were drowned by the water, gave them family money, and buried and honored the dead who had no one in charge.

古文：乙未，以雨灾，诏责躬乞言。
现代文：初八，因为雨灾而下诏责备自己并要求臣下进言直谏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he issued an edict blaming himself for the rain disaster and asked his vassals to speak up.

古文：初，学士草诏曰： 执政大臣，其惕思天变。 
现代文：起初，学士草拟诏书说： 执政大臣一定要从天气的变异上引起警惕。 
English: At first, the bachelor drafted an edict saying: The ruling minister must be alerted to the weather variation.

古文：帝书其后曰： 雨灾专以戒朕不德，可更曰 协德交修 。 
现代文：英宗又在草诏后接着写道： 雨灾是专门告诫我的德行不高的，可以改作 协德交修 ，共同修养提高。 
English: After the edict, Yingzong went on to write: "The rainstorm was a special admonition that my moral conduct was not high. It can be changed to 協德交修, common cultivation and improvement."

古文：己亥，以水灾，罢开乐宴。
现代文：十二日，因为水灾而停止开乐宴。
English: On the 12th, because of the flood, the party was stopped.

古文：壬子，以工部郎中蔡抗等充贺契丹生辰使，侍御史赵鼎等充贺契丹正旦使。
现代文：二十五日，任命工部郎中蔡抗等担任祝贺契丹生辰使，侍御史赵鼎等担任祝贺契丹正旦使。
English: On the 25th, Cai Qian, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, was appointed as the envoy to congratulate Khitan on his birthday, and Zhao Ding, the minister of the Imperial Household, was appointed as the envoy to congratulate Khitan on his birthday.

古文：乙卯，减衮冕制度。
现代文：二十八日，减省皇帝礼服和礼帽的供给。
English: On the 28th, the supply of imperial robes and ceremonial hats was reduced.

古文：丙辰，陕西置壮城兵。
现代文：二十九日，陕西设置壮城兵。
English: On the 29th, Zhuangcheng soldiers were set up in Shaanxi.

古文：九月壬戌，雨，罢大宴。
现代文：九月初五，降雨，罢除大宴。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, it rained and the banquet was cancelled.

古文：己巳，以灾异风俗策制举人。
现代文：十二日，以灾异风俗策试举人。
English: On the 12th, they tried to select people by means of unusual customs.

古文：壬午，太白犯南斗。
现代文：二十五日，太白星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 25th, the Taibai Star invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：乙酉，以久雨，遣使祈于岳渎名山大川。
现代文：二十八日，因长期降雨，派遣使臣在岳读名山大川祈祷。
English: On the 28th, due to long-term rainfall, envoys were dispatched to recite prayers at the famous mountain stream at Mt.

古文：冬十月乙巳，雨木冰。
现代文：冬十月十九日，降木冰。
English: Winter, October 19th, falling ice.

古文：十一月庚午，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十一月十四日，朝祭景灵宫。
English: November 14th, morning festival at Jingling Palace.

古文：辛未，飨太庙。
现代文：十五日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the temple is dedicated.

古文：壬申，有事南郊，大赦。
现代文：十六日，祭祀南郊，赦免全国。
English: On the 16th, a memorial service was held in the southern suburbs, and a nationwide pardon was issued.

古文：上皇太后册。册皇后。
现代文：敬上皇太后宝册，又册皇后。
English: A tribute to the empress dowager, also known as the empress.

古文：以齐州为兴德军节度。
现代文：以齐州为兴德军节度。
English: The German army is celebrated in the city of Chizhou.

古文：辛巳，加恩百官。
现代文：二十五日，文武百官都得到朝廷恩惠。
English: On the 25th, all the civil and military officials received the favor of the imperial court.

古文：十二月辛亥，太白昼见。
现代文：十二月二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On December 26th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：是岁，蒋、波、绣、云、龙赐等州来贡。
现代文：这一年，蒋、波、绣、云、龙赐等州来进贡。
English: This year, Jiang, Bo, Xiu, Yun, Long Zi and other states came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月丙辰朔，契丹遣使耶律仲达等来贺正旦。
现代文：治平三年春正月初一，契丹派遣使臣耶律仲达等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Heian period, the Khitan sent envoy Yerut Zhongda and others to congratulate the new spring.

古文：戊午，契丹遣使萧惟辅等来贺寿圣节。
现代文：初三，契丹派遣使臣萧惟辅等人来祝贺寿圣节。
English: On the third day of the first month, Khitan dispatched envoy Xiao Weisuo and others to congratulate the anniversary.

古文：丙寅，幸降圣院，谒神御殿。
现代文：十一日，到降圣院，朝拜神御殿。
English: On the eleventh day, they went to the Holy House of the Fallen and worshipped at the God's palace.

古文：癸酉，契丹改国号为辽。
现代文：十八日，契丹改国号为辽。
English: On the 18th, Khitan changed its country name to Liao.

古文：己卯，温州火，烧民屋万四千间，死者五千人。
现代文：二十四日，温州发生火灾，烧毁百姓房屋一万四千间，死亡五千人。
English: On the 24th, a fire broke out in Wenzhou, destroying 14,000 houses and killing 5,000 people.

古文：丁丑，皇太后下书中书门下： 封濮安懿王宜如前代故事，王夫人王氏、韩氏、任氏，皇帝可称亲。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后下命中书门下省： 封攫安爵王应该像前代发生过的事一样看待，王的夫人王氏、韩氏、任氏，皇帝可以称亲。
English: On the 22nd, the empress dowager ordered the following to be written on the door of the lower province: King Fengyuan should be treated like what happened in the previous generation. The king's wife Wang, Han, and Ren, the emperor can call them relatives.

古文：尊濮安懿王为皇，夫人为后。 
现代文：尊攫安爵王为皇，夫人为后。 
English: The king is the emperor, and his wife is the empress.

古文：诏遵慈训。以茔为园，置守卫吏，即园立庙，俾王子孙主祠事，如皇太后旨。
现代文：英宗下诏遵循皇太后训示；以莹为园，设置守卫官吏，在园里立庙，让王的子孙主管祠事，像皇太后旨诏说的一样。
English: Emperor Yingzong's edict followed the instructions of the empress dowager; Ying was used as a garden, guards and officials were set up, a temple was built in the garden, and the king's descendants were put in charge of the affairs of the ancestral hall, just as the empress dowager's edict said.

古文：辛巳，诏臣民避濮安懿王讳，以王子宗懿为濮国公。
现代文：二十六日，下诏大臣和百姓回避骥安爵王的名字，任命王的儿子宗爵为骥国公。
English: On the 26th day of the following month, the minister and the people avoided the name of King Anzong, and appointed the king's son, Zongzong, as the Duke of An.

古文：壬午，黜御史吕诲、范纯仁、吕大防。
现代文：二十七日，罢默御史吕诲、范纯仁、吕大防。
English: On the twenty-seventh day of the month, there was a moment of silence in memory of Lyu Qian, Fan Chunren, and Lyu Dabao.

古文：二月乙酉朔，白虹贯日。
现代文：二月初一，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the first day of February, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：三月庚申，彗星晨见于室。
现代文：三月初六，彗星早晨出现在室宿。
English: On the 6th of March, the comet appeared in Murojuku in the morning.

古文：以灾异责躬，诏转运使察狱讼、调役利病大者以闻。
现代文：初七，罢除谏官傅尧俞、御史赵鼎和赵瞻。十四日，英宗亲自讯察全国囚犯的罪状。十六日，因彗星的缘故不上正殿，减少饮食。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the eunuchs Fu Xi, Mi Shi Zhao Ding and Zhao Zhan were dismissed. On the 14th day, Emperor Yingzong personally investigated the crimes of prisoners across the country. On the 16th day, due to the comet, he did not go to the main hall and reduced his diet.

古文：辛巳，彗晨见于昴，如太白，长丈有五尺。
现代文：十七日，彗星早晨出现在晶宿，像太白星，有一丈五尺长。
English: On the seventeenth day, the comet appeared in the morning at the crystal inn, like a very white star, one and a half feet long.

古文：壬午，孛于毕，如月。
现代文：二十八日，彗星出现在毕宿，像月亮。
English: On the 28th, the comet appeared in Bi-juku, like the moon.

古文：夏四月丙午，诏有司察所部左道、淫祀及贼杀善良不奉令者，罪毋赦。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，下诏有关部门查处所管辖范围内邪恶、淫祀及杀害善良、不执行朝廷法令的人，罪行不赦免。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the relevant departments were ordered to investigate and deal with the evil, immorality and killing of good people within their jurisdiction, and those who did not implement the imperial decree, and the crime would not be pardoned.

古文：五月甲子，罢知杂御史、观察使以上岁举人。
现代文：五月十一日，罢除知杂御史、观察使以上官员每年推举的人才。
English: On May 11th, it was decided to remove the post of the person with knowledge of miscellaneous history, and to observe the talents that the above-mentioned officials would nominate every year.

古文：乙丑，彗至张而没。
现代文：十二日，彗星到张宿消失。
English: On the 12th, the comet disappeared from Zhangshu.

古文：戊辰，谓宰相曰： 朕欲与公等日论治道，中书常务有定制者，付有司行之。 
现代文：十五日，英宗对宰相说： 我想同你们一道每天讨论治理国家的办法，中书省有要处理的日常事务，交给有关部门代理执行。 
English: On the 15th, Yingzong said to the Prime Minister: I would like to discuss the methods of governing the country with you every day. The Ministry of Education and Culture has daily affairs to deal with, and will delegate them to the relevant departments for execution.

古文：六月己酉，录囚。
现代文：六月二十六日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On June 26th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：秋七月乙丑，进濮王子孙及鲁王孙爵一等。
现代文：秋七月十三日，提升攫王子孙及鲁王孙爵位一等。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the peerage of Prince Sun of Zhai and King Sun of Lu was raised to the first class.

古文：八月庚子，遣傅卞等贺辽主生辰，张师颜等贺正旦。
现代文：八月十八日，派遣傅卞等人祝贺辽主生辰，张师颜等人祝贺正旦。
English: On August 18th, Fu Jun and others were sent to congratulate Liao Shuzhen on his birthday, and Zhang Shiyan and others congratulated Zhengdan.

古文：九月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，定待制、谏官、朝官少卿郎中迁选岁月补员格。
现代文：十二日，制定待制、谏官、朝官少卿郎中迁选岁月补员标准。
English: On the 12th, the recruitment standards for candidates, eunuchs, and junior courtiers were formulated.

古文：庚辰，禁妃嫔、公主以下荐服亲之夫。
现代文：二十九日，禁止妃殡、公主以下推荐服亲之夫。
English: On the 29th, the funeral of the princess and the following recommended clothing for the husband of the princess were prohibited.

古文：冬十月壬午朔，以仙游县君任氏坟域为园。
现代文：冬十月初一，以仙游县君任氏坟地为园陵。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the cemetery of the Junin family in Senyu County was used as a garden.

古文：乙酉，诏两日一御迩英阁。
现代文：初四，下诏两天到迩英阁一次。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the following day, I went to the Shunying Pavilion for two days.

古文：丁亥，诏礼部三岁一贡举。
现代文：初六，下诏礼部贡举三年举行一次。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the tribute of the Lower Zhao Ritual Department is held once every three years.

古文：甲午，诏宰臣、参知政事举才行士可试馆职者各五人。
现代文：十三日，下诏宰臣、参知政事推举德才兼备可以担任馆职的人才各五人。
English: On the thirteenth day, five vice-ministers and five councillors were elected, each of whom was a talented person who could serve as a librarian.

古文：十一月戊午，帝不豫，祷于大庆殿。
现代文：十一月初八，英宗染疾，在大庆殿祈祷神明保佑。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, Yingzong fell ill and went to Daqing Hall to pray for divine protection.

古文：己未，宰相始奏事。
现代文：初九，宰相开始奏事。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the prime minister began to make a report.

古文：辛酉，降天下囚死罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：十一月，全国死罪囚犯减刑一等，流刑以下全部释放。
English: In November, all death-row prisoners in the country had their sentences commuted to first-class, and all prisoners below the banishment level were released.

古文：十二月乙未，宰相祈于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十二月十五日，宰相向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On December 15th, the prime minister prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：壬寅，立颍王顼为皇太子。
现代文：二十二日，立颖王赵项为皇太子。
English: On the 22nd, Prince Zhao Xiang became crown prince.

古文：癸卯，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，举行大赦。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：赐文武官子为父后者勋一转。
现代文：赐给文武官员的儿子为父后裔者勋爵升转一级。
English: Gave the son of a military and civilian official a promotion of one level to Lord Descendant of the Father.

古文：辽遣萧靖等来贺正旦、寿圣节。
现代文：辽朝派遣萧靖等人来祝贺新春和寿圣节。
English: The Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Jing and others to congratulate the New Year and the New Year's Eve.

古文：是岁，遣使以违约数寇责夏国，谅诈献方物谢罪。
现代文：这一年，派遣使臣因违约数次攻打宋朝而责备夏国，夏主谅柞派人进贡当地土特产表示谢罪。
English: In that year, envoys were dispatched to reprimand Xia for violating the treaty by attacking the Song Dynasty several times, and Emperor Xia sent people to pay tribute to local special products to express his gratitude.

古文：四年春正月庚戌朔，群臣上尊号曰体乾膺历文武圣孝皇帝。
现代文：治平四年春正月初一，大臣们敬上尊号为体乾膺历文武圣孝皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Heian period, the ministers paid their respects to Emperor Wenwu Shengxiao.

古文：降天下囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：全国囚犯减刑一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: Prisoners across the country will have their sentences reduced by one grade, and all of them will be released after serving their sentences.

古文：大风霾。
现代文：刮大风，天空阴晦。
English: The wind was blowing hard and the sky was overcast.

古文：辛亥，蠲京师逋曲钱。
现代文：初二，免除京城拖欠的酒曲钱。
English: On the second day of the new year, liquor tax arrears in Kyoto will be waived.

古文：丁巳，帝崩于福宁殿，寿三十六。
现代文：初八，英宗在福宁殿逝世，终年三十六岁。
English: In the eighth year of his reign, Emperor Yeongjong died at the age of 36.

古文：谥曰宪文肃武宣孝皇帝，庙号英宗。
现代文：溢号为宪文肃武宣孝皇帝，庙号英宗。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Xuanwen Suwu Xuanxiao, and his temple name was Yingzong.

古文：帝自居睦亲宅，孝德著闻。
现代文：英宗从居住在睦亲宅时起，孝顺贤德就很出名。
English: Yeongjong was famous for his filial piety from the time he lived at Mutsukin's house.

古文：濮安懿王薨，以所服玩物分诸子，帝所得悉以与王府旧人既葬而辞去者。
现代文：父亲攫安爵王逝世后，把所佩带过的玩物分给各位儿子，英宗所得到的，全部分给了那些等安葬父亲后就要离开这里的王府旧人。
English: After the death of his father, King Anzong, he divided the toys he had brought with him among his sons. All the toys that Emperor Yingzong received were given to the old men of the royal court who were waiting to leave the palace after burying their father.

古文：宗室有假金带而以铜带归，主吏以告，帝曰： 真吾带也。 受之。
现代文：宗室子弟中有人借了金带却拿铜带还，主管的人把这事告诉他，英宗说： 这真是我的带啊广便接受下来。
English: One of his younger brothers borrowed a gold belt but returned it with a bronze one. The supervisor told him about this, and Yingzong said: "This is really my belt ah guang" and accepted it.

古文：命殿侍鬻犀带，直钱三十万，亡之，帝亦不问。
现代文：曾让殿前侍者给他卖掉犀带，那犀带值钱三十万，被弄丢了，英宗也不追问。
English: He once asked a waiter in front of the palace to sell him a rhinoceros strap. The rhinoceros strap was worth 300,000 yuan, but it was lost, and Emperor Yingzong did not inquire about it.

古文：初辞皇子，请潭王宫教授周孟阳作奏，孟阳有所劝戒，即谢而拜之。
现代文：开始推辞当皇太子，请潭王宫教授周孟阳撰写奏疏，周孟阳做了些劝诫，英宗连忙拜谢。
English: At the beginning of his resignation as crown prince, he asked Tanwanggong professor Zhou Mengyang to write a report. Zhou Mengyang made some exhortations, and Yingzong quickly thanked him.

古文：奏十余不允，始就召，戒舍人曰： 谨守吾舍，上有适嗣，吾归矣。 
现代文：奏疏上了十多遍，仁宗没有同意，才答应做皇太子，并告诫舍人说： 谨慎地守好我的屋舍，皇上有了后嗣，我就回来。 
English: Rinzong did not agree before he agreed to be crown prince, and warned his son saying, "Be careful to guard my house. When the emperor has an heir, I will return."

古文：既为皇子，慎静恭默，无所猷为，而天下阴知其有圣德。
现代文：当了皇太子后，谨慎谦恭，没有丝毫野心，全国臣民隐隐约约得知英宗具备了圣德。
English: After he became crown prince, he was cautious and humble, without the slightest ambition, and the subjects of the whole country vaguely knew that Yingzong possessed sanctity.

古文：即位，每命近臣，必以官而不以名，大臣从容以为言，帝曰： 朕虽宫中命小臣，亦未尝以名也。 
现代文：即皇帝位后，凡是命令臣子，一定是称呼其官职而不直呼其名，大臣们可以从容不迫地讲自己的意见，英宗说： 我即使是命令宫中小臣，也从来没有直呼其名。 
English: That is to say, after the emperor's enthronement, whenever he ordered a courtier, he must call him by his official position and not by his name. The ministers can speak their own opinions freely. Yingzong said, "I never called him by his name, even when I ordered the middle and junior ministers of the palace.

古文：一日，语神宗曰： 国家旧制，士大夫之子有尚帝女，皆升行以避舅姑之尊，义甚无谓。
现代文：有一天，英宗对神宗说： 按照国家的旧制度，士大夫的儿子有娶皇帝女儿的，公主们都因身价高升而避开公婆的尊长地位，这于情于理都说不过去。
English: One day, Yingzong said to Shenzong, "According to the old system of the country, the sons of scholars and magistrates married the emperor's daughters, and the princesses avoided the superior status of their in-laws because of their high status. This is beyond reason.

古文：朕尝思此，寤寐不平，岂可以富贵之故，屈人伦长幼之序也？
现代文：我总是在想这件事，醒时睡时都为此感到不安，怎么能因为富贵的缘故，而违背一般的人伦长幼之序呢？
English: I'm always thinking about it, and I'm uneasy about it when I'm awake and when I'm asleep. How can I go against the general order of human development for the sake of wealth?

古文：可诏有司革之。 
现代文：可以下诏有关部门改掉这个规矩。 
English: The relevant departments can be ordered to change this rule.

古文：会疾不果，神宗述其事焉。
现代文：遇上患病，英宗没有实现这一愿望，神宗叙述了这件事。
English: In the event of illness, Yingzong did not fulfill this wish, and Shenzong recounted the incident.

古文：赞曰：昔人有言，天之所命，人不能违。
现代文：评论说：先人有言，上天的安排，人是不能违背改变的，这确实是不妄之言啊！
English: Comment: The ancients had a saying, "God's arrangement, people cannot go against change." This is indeed a true saying!

古文：信哉！英宗以明哲之资，膺继统之命，执心固让，若将终身，而卒践帝位，岂非天命乎？
现代文：英宗凭聪慧英明的资质，本可接受继承帝位的任命，但他诚心、执意推让，好像要这样终其一生，然而最终还是登上了帝位，这难道不是天命吗？
English: Yingzong could have accepted the appointment of inheriting the imperial throne by virtue of his clever and wise qualifications, but he sincerely and persistently made concessions, as if he wanted to live his whole life like this, yet he eventually ascended to the throne. Isn't this the destiny of heaven?

古文：及其临政，臣下有奏，必问朝廷故事与古治所宜，每有裁决，皆出群臣意表。
现代文：到他执掌国政的时候，臣子每有奏章，一定先问朝中先例及按古代治国之策应该怎样，每当有下结论的事，都出自大臣们的意见。
English: When he was in charge of state affairs, every time a minister made a report, he would first ask about the precedents in Korea and China and what should be done according to the ancient strategy of governing the country. Whenever there was a conclusion, it came from the opinions of the ministers.

古文：虽以疾疹不克大有所为，然使百世之下，钦仰高风，咏叹至德，何其盛也！
现代文：虽然因为疾病早逝而不能大有作为，然而却使百代以下，都钦佩敬仰他的高风，歌颂叹服他的大德，这是多么壮观的政德啊！
English: Although he could not accomplish much due to his early death from illness, he nevertheless made the following hundred generations admire and respect his noble spirit, sing his praises and admire his great virtue. What a magnificent political virtue!

古文：彼隋晋王广、唐魏王泰窥觎神器，矫揉夺嫡，遂启祸原，诚何心哉！
现代文：那隋朝晋王杨广、唐朝魏王李泰，图谋帝位，变换曲直是非，以庶子嗣位而废嫡子，开启祸端，人的居心怎么会到这一步呀！
English: The Sui Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty, King Yang Guang, the Tang Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty, King Li Tai, scheming for the imperial throne, changing right and wrong, abolishing the legitimate son with the illegitimate son's heir, opening the calamity, how can people's intentions come to this step!

古文：诚何心哉！
现代文：怎么会到这一步呀
English: How did it come to this?

