古文：四年春，王二月，莒人伐杞，取牟娄。
现代文：隐公四年二月，莒国讨伐杞国，占领了 牟娄 。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Emperor's reign, the Xiongnu invaded the Xiongnu and occupied Muxiu.

古文：戊申，卫州吁弑其君完。
现代文：戊申日，卫国的州吁杀害了卫国国君一一卫完。
English: On the day of Wu Xun's death, the defender of the country, Zhu Xu, killed the defender of the country and the defender of the country.

古文：夏，公及宋公遇于清。
现代文：夏季的时候，隐公与宋公在 清 相遇，举行了会晤。
English: In the summer, Emperor Ying and Emperor Song met in Qingdi.

古文：宋公、陈侯、蔡人、卫人伐郑。
现代文：宋公、陈侯、蔡人、卫人讨伐郑国。
English: Song Gong, Chen Hou, Cai Ren and Wei Ren fought against Zheng Guo.

古文：秋，翚帅师会宋公、陈侯、蔡人、卫人伐郑。
现代文：秋天，公子翚率领鲁国军队，会合宋、陈、蔡、卫四国联军，共同讨伐郑国。
English: In autumn, Gongzixu led the Lu army to join the allied forces of Song, Chen, Cai and Wei to jointly fight against Zheng.

古文：九月，卫人杀州吁于濮。
现代文：九月，卫国人在 濮 杀掉了州吁。
English: In September, the defenders of the country killed the Shoushuo in Zou.

古文：冬十有二月，卫人立晋。
现代文：冬季十二月，卫国人拥立公子晋为卫国国君。
English: In the winter of December, the defenders of the country supported the promotion of the prince to the ruler of the country.

古文：四年春，卫州吁弑桓公而立。
现代文：四年春季，卫国的州吁杀了卫桓公而自立为国君。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Heian period, Shuzo, who was in charge of the defense of the country, killed the Duke of Wei and became the sovereign himself.

古文：公与宋公为会，将寻宿之盟。
现代文：鲁隐公和宋殇公会见，打算重温在宿地所建立的友好。
English: Lu Yin Gong and Song Xi Gong met, intending to revisit the friendship established in the host city.

古文：未及期，卫人来告乱。
现代文：还没有到预定的日子，卫国人来报告发生了叛乱。
English: Before the appointed day, the defenders came to report that a rebellion had taken place.

古文：夏，公及宋公遇于清。
现代文：夏季，隐公和宋殇公在清地会见。
English: In the summer, Emperor Ying and Emperor Song met in Qingdi.

古文：宋殇公之即位也，公子冯出奔郑，郑人欲纳之。
现代文：当宋殇公即位的时候，公子冯逃到了郑国。郑国人想送他回国。
English: When Emperor Songzong ascended the throne, Prince Feng fled to Zheng. The people of Zheng wanted to send him back to China.

古文：及卫州吁立，将修先君之怨于郑，而求宠于诸侯以和其民，使告于宋曰： 君若伐郑以除君害，君为主，敝邑以赋与陈、蔡从，则卫国之愿也。 
现代文：等到州吁立为国君，准备向郑国报复前代国君结下的怨恨，以此对诸侯讨好，安定国内人心。他派人告诉宋国说： 君王如果进攻郑国，除去君王的祸害，以君王为主，敝邑出兵出物，和陈、蔡两国一道作为属军，这就是卫国的愿望。 
English: He sent someone to tell Song Guo: "If the king attacks Zheng Guo, remove the king's scourge, with the king as the main focus, and send troops and supplies from Nanyue, and join forces with Chen and Cai as subordinate troops, this is the desire to defend the country.

古文：宋人许之。
现代文：宋国答应了。
English: Song Guo agreed.

古文：于是，陈、蔡方睦于卫，故宋公、陈侯、蔡人、卫人伐郑，围其东门，五日而还。
现代文：这时候陈国、蔡国正和卫国友好，所以宋殇公、陈桓公、蔡国人、卫国人联合进攻郑国，包围了国都的东门，五天以后才回去。
English: At this time, Chen Guo and Cai Guo were on friendly terms with Wei Guo, so Song Xi Gong, Chen Huan, Cai Guo and Wei Guo jointly attacked Zheng Guo, encircled the east gate of the capital, and only returned five days later.

古文：公问于众仲曰： 卫州吁其成乎？ 
现代文：鲁隐公向众仲询问说： 卫国的州吁能成功吗？ 
English: Lu Yingkong asked the audience, "Can the defense of the state succeed?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻以德和民，不闻以乱。
现代文：众仲回答说： 我只听说用德行安定百姓，没有听说用祸乱的。
English: And all the congregation answered and said, I have heard the saying, That he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.

古文：以乱，犹治丝而棼之也。
现代文：用祸乱，如同要理出乱丝的头绪，反而弄得更加纷乱。
English: The use of calamity, as if to straighten out the tangled threads, has made it even more tangled.

古文：夫州吁，阻兵而安忍，阻兵无众，安忍无亲，众叛亲离，难以济矣。
现代文：州吁这个人，仗恃武力而安于残忍。仗恃武力就没有群众，安于残忍就没有亲附的人。大家背叛，亲近离开，难以成功。
English: This man, Zhou Xiu, relies on force and is satisfied with cruelty. If you rely on force, there will be no masses, and if you rely on cruelty, there will be no relatives. Everyone will betray you, and it will be difficult to succeed.

古文：夫兵犹火也，弗戢，将自焚也。
现代文：军事，就像火一样，不去制止，将会焚烧自己。
English: The military, like fire, will burn itself out if left unchecked.

古文：夫州吁弑其君而虐用其民，于是乎不务令德，而欲以乱成，必不免矣。 
现代文：州吁杀了他的国君，又暴虐地使用百姓，不致力于建立美德，反而想通过祸乱来取得成功，就一定不能免于祸患了。 
English: The state that has murdered its prince, that has tyrannized its people, that has not striven to establish virtue, but has sought to succeed by mischief, cannot be exempt from calamity.

古文：秋，诸侯复伐郑。
现代文：秋季，各诸侯国再次攻打郑国。
English: In the autumn, the various vassal states once again attacked Zheng.

古文：宋公使来乞师，公辞之。
现代文：宋殇公派人前来请求出兵援救，隐公推辞了。
English: Emperor Songzheng sent someone to request that troops be sent to rescue him, but Emperor Yin refused.

古文：羽父请以师会之，公弗许，固请而行。
现代文：羽父请求出兵相会合，隐公不同意。羽父坚决请求以后便前去。
English: Hachiko asked for a meeting with the military attaché, but Hideko did not agree. After Hachiko's firm request, he went ahead.

古文：故书曰 翚帅师 ，疾之也。
现代文：所以《春秋》记载说： 翚帅师 ，这是表示讨厌他不听命令。
English: That's why "Spring and Autumn" records that: 帅师, this is to say that he dislikes not listening to orders.

古文：诸侯之师败郑徒兵，取其禾而还。
现代文：诸侯的军队打败了郑国的步兵，割取了那里的谷子便回来。
English: The armies of the lords defeated the infantry of Zheng, cut off the corn there and returned.

古文：州吁未能和其民，厚问定君于石子。
现代文：州吁不能安定他的百姓。石厚向石碏询问安定君位的办法。
English: Zhou Xu could not keep his people stable. Shi Hou asked Shi Yao for a way to keep his position stable.

古文：石子曰： 王觐为可。 曰： 何以得觐？ 
现代文：石碏说： 朝觐周天子就可以取得合法地位。 
English: Ishizaki said, "If you are born in the morning, you can obtain legal status."

古文：曰： 陈桓公方有宠于王，陈、卫方睦，若朝陈使请，必可得也。 
现代文：石厚说： 如何才能去朝觐呢？ 石碏说： 陈桓公正在受到天子的宠信。现在陈、卫两国正互相和睦，如果朝见陈桓公，让他代为请求，就一定可以成功。 
English: Shi Hou said, "How can I go to the imperial court?" Shi Yu said, "Chen Huan Gong is being favored by the Son of Heaven. Now that Chen and Wei are reconciling with each other, if the imperial court sees Chen Huan Gong and lets him make a request on their behalf, it will definitely be successful."

古文：厚从州吁如陈。
现代文：于是石厚就跟随州吁到了陈国。
English: As a result, Ishikatsu followed Shushu to Chen Province.

古文：石碏使告于陈曰： 卫国褊小，老夫耄矣，无能为也。此二人者，实弑寡君，敢即图之。 
现代文：石碏派人告诉陈国说： 卫国地方狭小，我老头子年纪已七十多了，不能做什么事了，这两个人，确实杀死了我国君主，请您趁此机会搞掉他们。 
English: Shi Yan sent a person to tell Chen Guo: The defense area is small, my old man is over seventy years old, I can't do anything, these two people really killed our monarch, please take this opportunity to get rid of them.

古文：陈人执之而请涖于卫。
现代文：陈国人把这两个人抓住，而请卫国派人来陈国处理。
English: Chen Guo Ren grabbed the two men and asked Wei Guo Ren to send someone to Chen Guo to deal with them.

古文：九月，卫人使右宰醜涖杀州吁于濮，石碏使其宰獳羊肩涖杀石厚于陈。
现代文：九月，卫国人派右宰丑在陈国的濮地杀了州吁，石碏派他的管家獳羊肩在陈国杀了石厚。
English: In September, the defenders of the country sent Ujaishi to kill Shuzo in the Shunde area of Chen Province, and Shih Chien sent his steward Yan Yochao to kill Shi Hou in Chen Province.

古文：君子曰： 石碏，纯臣也，恶州吁而厚与焉。大义灭亲，其是之谓乎。 
现代文：君子说： 石碏真是个忠臣。讨厌州吁，同时加上儿子石厚。 大义灭亲 就是这样的情况吧！ 
English: The gentleman said: Ishizuchi is really a loyal vassal. He hates Shizuo, and at the same time he has a son, Ishikatsu. So this is what it's like when relatives are killed in the name of justice!

古文：卫人逆公子晋于邢。
现代文：卫国人到邢国迎接公子晋。
English: The defenders of the country came to Shikoku to welcome Prince Jin.

古文：冬十二月，宣公即位。
现代文：冬季，十二月，卫宣公即位。
English: In winter, in December, Emperor Weizong ascended to the throne.

古文：书曰， 卫人立晋 ，众也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 卫人立晋 ，这是说出于大众的意思。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that the guards rose up, which means from the general public.

