古文：◎世祖十一二十三年春正月戊辰朔，以皇太子故罢朝贺。
现代文：至元二十三年春，正月初一，因皇太子去世而停止新年的朝贺。
English: In the spring of the 23rd year of the Yuan, on the first day of the first month of the year, the New Year's morning greetings were stopped due to the death of the crown prince.

古文：禁赍金银铜钱越海互市。
现代文：禁止携带金、银、铜钱过海进行贸易。
English: It is forbidden to carry gold, silver and copper money across the sea for trade.

古文：甲戌，帝以日本孤远岛夷，重困民力，罢征日本，召阿八赤赴阙，仍散所顾民船。
现代文：初七，皇帝认为日本是孤远岛国上的外夷，征伐日本严重地困扰民力，决定停止征伐日本，征召阿八赤前来朝廷，并遣散朝廷所雇佣的民船。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor thought that Japan was a foreign country on a remote island, and the conquest of Japan seriously troubled the people. He decided to stop the conquest of Japan, conscripted Ahaka to come to the imperial court, and dismissed the people's ships hired by the imperial court.

古文：以江南废寺田土为人占据者，悉付总统杨琏真加修寺。
现代文：把江南被人占据的废弃寺庙的土地，全部交付给总统杨琏真加修建寺庙。
English: The abandoned temple land occupied by people in the south of the Yangtze River will all be handed over to President Yang Jiechi to build a temple.

古文：己卯，立罗不、怯台、阇鄽斡端等驿。
现代文：十二日，设立罗不、怯台？斡端等地的驿站。
English: On the 12th, a post station was set up in Luofei, Zhudai, Tongduantang and other places.

古文：吕文焕以江淮行省右丞告老，许之，任其子为宣慰使。
现代文：吕文焕以江淮行省右丞的职务告老退休，皇上允准，任命他的儿子为宣慰使。
English: Lu Wenhuan retired from his position as the right-hand man of Jianghuai and Guanzhong provinces, and the emperor allowed him to appoint his son as a consolation envoy.

古文：庚辰，马八国遣使进铜盾。
现代文：十三日，马八国派遣使臣进贡铜盾。
English: On the 13th, envoys from eight Malay states were dispatched to bring in the bronze tribute.

古文：壬午，太阴犯轩辕太民。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座太民星。
English: On the fifteenth day, the too-dark star committed a crime against the too-bright constellation.

古文：遣使代祀岳渎东海。
现代文：派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎和东海。
English: On behalf of the emperor, he dispatched envoys to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Four Forbidden Mountains and the East Sea.

古文：癸未，罢巩昌二十四城拘榷所，以其事入有司。
现代文：十六日，撤销巩昌等二十四座城市的拘榷所，把它们管辖的事务归入地方政府。
English: On the 16th, the detention centers in 24 cities, including Gongchang, were abolished, and the affairs under their jurisdiction were transferred to local governments.

古文：发钞五千锭籴粮于沙、静、隆兴。
现代文：发放钱钞五千锭，在沙州、净州、隆兴购买粮食。
English: 5,000 baht in banknotes were distributed, and grain was purchased in Shazhou, Jingzhou and Longxing.

古文：从桑哥请，命杨琏真加遣宋宗戚谢仪孙、全允坚、赵沂、赵太一入质。
现代文：依从桑哥的请求，命令杨琏真加遣送宋朝皇室的亲族谢仪孙、全允坚、赵沂、赵太一入朝做人质。
English: In accordance with Sango's request, he ordered Yang Yizhenga to send the relatives of the Song Dynasty royal family, including Xie Yisun, Quan Yun Jian, Zhao Jun and Zhao Taichi, to the imperial court as hostages.

古文：甲申，忽都鲁言： 所部屯田新军二百人，凿河渠于亦集乃之地，役久功大，乞以傍近民、西僧余户助其力。 
现代文：十七日，忽都鲁上奏说： 属下的屯田新军二百人，在亦集乃地方开凿河渠，服役时间久，工程规模大，请派附近的百姓、西域僧人有余力的民户助他们一臂之力。 
English: On the seventeenth day, Khutulu reported to the emperor: "Two hundred men of the Tonden New Army, who are subordinate to me, have been digging canals in Yishino. They have served for a long time, and the project is large-scale. I would like to ask the people in the vicinity, the monks in the western region, and the people who have spare time to help them.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：憨答孙遣使言： 军士疲乏者八百余人，乞赈赡，宜于朵鲁朵海处验其虚实。 
现代文：憨答孙派遣使者上奏说： 疲乏的士兵有八百多人，请求赈济、赡养他们，应当在朵鲁朵海地方验证一下真假。 
English: Xun Ansun sent an envoy to report: There are more than eight hundred tired soldiers, requesting relief and support for them. It is necessary to verify the authenticity in the Dorudohai area.

古文：帝曰： 比遣人往，事已缓矣，其使赡之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：等到派人去，事情已经拖延了。
English: The emperor said, "By the time someone is sent, the matter has already been delayed."

古文：丁亥，焚阴阳伪书《显明历》。
现代文：就让这个使者去赈济他们吧。 二十日，焚毁伪造的阴阳书《显明历》。
English: Let this messenger go and help them. On the 20th, burn the forged yin and yang book, "The Revealed Calendar."

古文：辛卯，命阿里海牙等议征安南事宜。
现代文：二十四日，命令阿里海牙等人商议征伐安南的事宜。
English: On the 24th, he ordered Ali Haiga and others to discuss the matter of the conquest of Annam.

古文：癸巳，升福州长溪县为福宁州，以福安、宁德二县隶之。
现代文：二十六日，把福建的长溪县升格为福宁州，以福安、宁德两县隶属于它。
English: On the 26th, Fujian's Changxi County was upgraded to Funing County, with Fu'an and Ningde counties attached to it.

古文：丙申，以新附军千人屯田合思罕关东旷地，官给农具牛种。
现代文：二十九日，派一千名新附军在合思罕、关东的空地屯田，由官府供给农具、耕牛、种子。
English: On the 29th, a thousand newly attached troops were sent to occupy vacant land in Hexihan and Kanto, and were supplied with farm tools, cattle and seeds by the government.

古文：丁酉，畋于近郊。
现代文：三十日，皇帝在京师的近郊行猎。
English: On the 30th, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：降叙州为县，隶蛮夷宣抚司。
现代文：把叙州降格为县，隶属于蛮夷的宣抚司。
English: He downgraded Syuzhou to a county, subordinate to the Department of Publicity of the barbarians.

古文：诏禁沮扰盐课。
现代文：下诏禁止阻挠、干扰收取盐税。
English: The following edict prohibits obstructing or interfering with the collection of salt tax.

古文：设诸路推官以审刑狱，上路二员，下路一员。升龙兴武宁县为宁州，以分宁隶之。
现代文：在各路设推官以审判刑事案件，上等路府设两名，下等路府设一名，把龙兴、武宁升格为宁州，把分守县隶属于它。
English: In each road, there will be a magistrate to judge criminal cases, two in the higher road prefecture and one in the lower road prefecture, and Longxing and Wuming will be upgraded to Ningzhou, and the sub-prefectures will be subordinated to it.

古文：二月己亥，敕中外，凡汉民持铁尺、手挝及杖之藏刃者，悉输于官。
现代文：二月初二，敕令朝内外，汉族百姓凡是持有铁尺、手抓和暗藏锋刃的木棍，全部上交给官府。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：辛丑，遣使以钞五千锭赈诸王小薛所部饥民。
现代文：初四，派遣使臣用五千锭钱钞赈济诸侯王小薛部属的饥民。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, envoys were dispatched to use five-thousand-baht banknotes to feed the starving people belonging to the vassals of Prince Wang Xiao Xue.

古文：甲辰，以雪雪的斤为缅中行省左丞相，阿台董阿参知政事，兀的迷失签行中书省事。
现代文：初七，任命雪雪的斤为缅中行省左丞相，阿台董阿为参知政事，兀都迷失为行中书省佥事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xue Xue's Jin was appointed as the Minister of the Left of the Central Government of Myanmar, Atai Dong Ah was appointed as the Councillor of the Central Government, and Xiu Du was appointed as the Minister of the Right of the Central Government of Myanmar.

古文：以阿里海牙仍安南行中书省左丞相，奥鲁赤平章政事，都元帅乌马儿、亦里迷失、阿里、昝顺、樊楫并参知政事。
现代文：任命阿里海牙为安南行中书省左丞相，奥鲁赤为平章政事，都元帅乌马儿、亦里迷失、阿里、昝顺、樊楫均任参知政事。
English: He appointed Ali Haiga as the Minister of the Left and Right of the Ministry of Education and Culture during the Annan trip, and Oluhak as the Minister of Political Affairs of Pingzhang. Marshal Umar, Yili lost, Ali, Shishun, and Zou were all appointed as the Ministers of Political Affairs.

古文：遣使谕皇子也先铁木儿，调合剌章军千人或二三千，付阿里海牙从征交趾，仍具将士姓名以闻。
现代文：派遣使臣传谕皇孙也先铁木儿，调遣合剌章地方的士兵一千人，或二三千人交给阿里海牙，随从他征伐安南，并列具将士们的姓名上奏朝廷。
English: He dispatched envoys to tell Emperor Sun Yat-sen to dispatch 1,000 or 23,000 soldiers from Kappu-zhang Province to Ali Haig, to follow him in the conquest of Annam, and to report the names of the soldiers to the imperial court.

古文：乙巳，廷议以东北诸王所部杂居其间，宣慰司望轻，罢山北辽东道、开元等路宣慰司，立东京等处行中书省，以阔阔你敦为左丞相，辽东道宣慰使塔出右丞，同签枢密院事杨仁风、宣慰使亦而撒合并参知政事。
现代文：初八，大臣们在朝廷议论，因为东北诸侯王部属杂居其间的地方宣慰司的威望太轻，撤销山北辽东道、开元等路的宣慰司，建立东京等地行中书省，任命阔阔你敦为左丞相，辽东宣慰使塔出为右丞，枢密院同佥杨仁风、宣慰使亦而撒合均任参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the ministers discussed in the imperial court, because the prestige of the consolation secretary of the place where the northeastern princes and princes were living together was too light, the consolation secretary of Liaodong and Kaigen in Shanbei was revoked, the central book ministry was established in Tokyo and other places, Kuo Kuang You Dun was appointed as the left consolation minister, the Liaodong consolation envoy was appointed as the right consolation minister, and the Privy Council peer Yang Renfeng and the consolation envoy were both appointed as the chancellor.

古文：敕中书省： 大府监所储金银，循先朝例分赐诸王。 
现代文：敕令中书省： 太府监所储藏的金银，依照先朝的旧例分赐给诸侯王。 
English: In the imperial edict, the Ministry of Education: The gold and silver stored in the Taifu Detention Center shall be distributed to the princes in accordance with the old practice of the previous dynasty.

古文：复立大司农司，专掌农桑。
现代文：重新设立大司农司，专管农桑事务。
English: The Department of Agriculture was re-established, specializing in agricultural and mulberry affairs.

古文：升宣徽院正二品，降镇巢府为巢州。
现代文：把宣徽院的职俸升格为正二品。把镇巢府降格为巢州。
English: The salary of Xuanhuiyuan was upgraded to the second-highest grade, and the town of Chaofu was downgraded to Chaozhou.

古文：丁未，用御史台臣言，立按察司巡行郡县法，除使二员留司，副使以下每岁二月分莅按治，十月还司。
现代文：初十，采纳御史台大臣的意见，制定按察司巡行郡县的办法，除了二名按察司使留守司署外，自副使以下的官员每年二月分头莅临按察司辖治的地方，十月份返回司署。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the opinion of the Minister of History was adopted to formulate a method for inspectors to patrol counties and counties. In addition to the two inspectors who stay at the department, the officials below the deputy inspectors come to the places under the jurisdiction of the inspectors in February each year and return to the department in October.

古文：丙午，太阴犯井。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 27th, the star of the Great Yin moved to the area of Guanzhongjing.

古文：戊申，枢密院奏： 前遣蒙古军万人屯田，所获除岁费之外可粜钞三千锭，乞分廪诸翼军士之贫者。 
现代文：十一日，枢密院上奏说： 原来派遣一万名蒙古军士兵屯田，所收获的东西除了供全年的耗费之外，还可以通过出卖粮食得到三千锭钱钞，请求分赐给各营贫穷的士兵。 
English: On the 11th day, the report of the Privy Council said: Originally, ten thousand Mongolian soldiers were sent to the field. In addition to providing for the entire year's expenses, the harvest could also be obtained by selling grain for three thousand baht banknotes, and the request was given to the poor soldiers of each battalion.

古文：帝悦，令从便行之。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，命令采取简便的办法实行。
English: The emperor was pleased and ordered that a simple method be adopted.

古文：调京师新附军二千立营屯田。
现代文：调遣京师二千名新附军士兵建造营房进行屯田。
English: The Beijing Division dispatched two thousand soldiers of the New Annexed Army to build barracks for military garrisons.

古文：癸丑，复置隰州大宁县。
现代文：十六日，重新设置隰州大宁县。
English: On the 16th, Zhangzhou Danying County was re-established.

古文：丁巳，命湖广行省造征交趾海船三百，期以八月会钦、廉州。
现代文：二十日，命令湖广行省建造征伐安南的海船三百艘，约定八月在钦州、廉州会合。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the construction of three hundred seagoing ships for the conquest of Annan in Hubei Province, and agreed to meet in August in Qinzhou and Lianzhou.

古文：戊午，并江南行枢密院四处入行省。
现代文：二十一日，把江南四个地方的行枢密院合并到行中书省。
English: On the 21st, the line Privy Council of four places in the south of the Yangtze River was merged into the line Central Book Ministry.

古文：命荆湖占城行省将江浙、湖广、江西三行省兵六万人伐交趾。
现代文：命令荆湖占城行省统辖江浙、湖广、江西三个行省的士兵六万人讨伐安南。
English: He ordered 60,000 soldiers from the three provinces of Jinghu, Zhancheng, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Hukang and Jiangxi to fight against Annan.

古文：荆湖行省平章奥鲁赤以征交趾事宜请入觐，诏乘传赴阙。
现代文：荆湖行省平章政事奥鲁赤因为征伐安南的事情而请求入朝觐见皇上，皇上命他乘驿传前来朝廷。
English: Pingzhang, the governor of Jinghu Province, and Oruchi, the political officer of Pingzhang Province, requested to enter the imperial palace to see the emperor because of the conquest of Annam. The emperor ordered him to come to the imperial court.

古文：集贤直学士程文海言： 省院诸司皆以南人参用，惟御史台按察司无之。
现代文：集贤殿直学士程文海上奏说 ：中书省枢密院各司署都参用南方人，唯独御史台按察司没有南方人。
English: Cheng Wenhai, a direct scholar of the Jixian Palace, said: All departments of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China are staffed by southerners, except that there is no southerner in the Office of the Superintendent of History.

古文：江南风俗，南人所谙，宜参用之便。 
现代文：江南的风俗习性是南方人所熟悉的，应当参用他们，这样较为有利。 
English: The customs and habits of the south of the Yangtze River are familiar to the people of the south, and they should use them, which is more advantageous.

古文：帝以语玉速铁木儿，对曰： 当择贤者以闻。 
现代文：皇帝把这话告诉玉速铁木儿，玉速铁木儿回答说： 应当挑选贤者奏闻皇上。 
English: The emperor told this to Tamaso Temur. Tamaso Temur replied, "A wise man should be chosen and reported to the emperor."

古文：帝曰： 汝汉人用事者，岂皆贤邪？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：这些当权的北方汉人，难道都是贤者么？ 
English: The emperor said, "Are all these northern Han Chinese in power wise men?

古文：江南诸路学田昔皆隶官，诏复给本学，以便教养。
现代文：江南各路的学田以前都属于官府所有，诏令重新还给学校本身，以有利于教育、培养学子。
English: Previously, all the school grounds in the south of the Yangtze River belonged to the government, but the edict returned them to the schools themselves in order to facilitate the education and training of students.

古文：封陈益稷为安南王，陈秀嵈为辅义公，仍下诏谕安南吏民。
现代文：封陈益稷为安南国王，陈秀山爰为辅义公，并下诏晓谕安南的官吏和百姓。
English: He named Chen Yixuan as the king of Annan, Chen Xiushan as the vice-governor, and issued an edict to the officials and people of Annan.

古文：复立岳、鄂、常德、潭州、静江榷茶提举司。
现代文：重新设立岳州、鄂州、常德、潭州、静江的榷茶提举司。
English: Re-establish the Yuezhou, Ezhou, Changde, Tanzhou, and Jingjiang ginger tea promotion departments.

古文：癸亥，太史院上《授时历经》、《历议》，敕藏于翰林国史院。
现代文：二十六日，太史院奉上《授时历经》、《历议》，敕令收藏在翰林国史院。
English: On the 26th, the Taishi Academy submitted the "Giving Time, Studying the Classics" and the "Discussion," which were ordered to be collected at the Hanlin National History Academy.

古文：甲子，复以平原郡公赵与芮江南田隶东宫，立甘州行中书省。
现代文：二十七日，重新把平原郡公赵与芮在江南的田地隶属于东宫。设立甘州行中书省。
English: On the 27th, the fields in the south of the Yangtze River of Gong Zhao and Zou in Pingyuan County were re-subordinated to the East Palace, and the Gansu Province was established.

古文：丙寅，以编地里书，召曲阜教授陈俨、京兆萧、蜀人虞应龙，唯应龙赴京师。
现代文：二十九日，因为编撰地理书，征召曲阜教授陈俨、京兆的萧斗、蜀人虞应龙，只有虞应龙来了京师。
English: On the 29th, because of compiling a geography book, Qufu professor Chen Zhen, Jingzhao's Xiao Dou, and Shu man Yu Yinglong were conscripted. Only Yu Yinglong came to Beijing.

古文：三月己巳，御史台臣言： 近奉旨按察司参用南人，非臣等所知，宜令侍御史、行御史台事程文海与行台官博采公洁知名之士，具以名闻。 
现代文：三月初三，御史台大臣上奏说： 近日奉旨，在按察司参用南方人，这是臣等所不知道的，应当令侍御史、署理御史台事务的程文海与行御史台官员一起，广泛选取公正廉洁的知名之士，列具姓名上奏皇上。 
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the Minister of the Imperial Historiography Office reported as follows: Recently, I received an order to use a person from the south to participate in the inspection of the Imperial Historiography Office. This was not known to the ministers. It should be ordered that Cheng Wenhai, who serves as the Imperial Historiographer and is in charge of the Imperial Historiography Office, together with the officials of the Imperial Historiography Office, select a wide range of well-known people who are fair and honest, and report to the Emperor with their names.

古文：帝命赍诏以往。
现代文：皇帝命令带着诏书前去办理。
English: The emperor ordered that the imperial rescript be brought forward for processing.

古文：太阴犯娄。
现代文：太阴星干犯娄宿天区。
English: Too much yin and yang is the fault of the Pleiades.

古文：浚治中兴路河渠。
现代文：疏浚治理中兴路的河渠。
English: Dredging the canal of Zhongxing Road.

古文：省云和署入教坊司。
现代文：撤销云和署，并入教坊司。
English: The Yunhe Education Bureau was abolished and merged into the Education Bureau.

古文：辛未，降梅、循为下州。
现代文：初五，把梅州、循州降格为下州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Meizhou and Zhouzhou were downgraded to Zhouzhou.

古文：甲戌，雄、霸二州及保定诸县水泛溢，冒官民田，发军民筑河堤御之。
现代文：初八，雄州、霸州二州及保定各县洪水泛滥，淹没了官田和民田，遣发军民修筑河堤抵御洪水。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, floods swept through the counties of Xiongzhou, Baizhou, Erzhou and Baoding, inundating government-owned and private fields, and soldiers and civilians were dispatched to build dikes to withstand the floods.

古文：乙亥，以麦术丁仍中书右丞，与郭佑并领钱谷，杨居宽典铨选。
现代文：初九，派麦术丁仍旧担任中书右丞，与郭佑共同掌管钱粮，杨居宽执掌铨选。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Paimai Zhuting still served as the Second Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and together with Guo You, he was in charge of the distribution of money and grain, and Yang Ju Kuan was in charge of the election.

古文：立钦察卫亲军都指挥使司。
现代文：建立钦察卫亲军都指挥使司。
English: Establishment of the Department of Envoys for the Command and Control of the Kincha Imperial Guards.

古文：赐诸王脱忽帖木儿羊二万。
现代文：赐给诸侯王脱忽帖木儿羊二万头。
English: He gave twenty thousand head of sheep to the vassal king Tokhtemur.

古文：丙子，大驾幸上都。
现代文：初十，皇帝临幸上都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Emperor Linxing arrived in Shangdu.

古文：诏行御史台按察司以八月巡行郡县。
现代文：下诏给行御史台按察司，八月视察郡县。
English: The following edict was issued to the inspector of the Imperial Historical Records Office, and in August he inspected the counties.

古文：中书省臣言： 阿合马时诸王驸马往来饷给之费，悉取于万亿库，后征百官俸入以偿，最非便。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说： 阿合马专权时，诸侯王、驸马往来供给饮食的费用，都从万亿库中支取，然后从官员们的俸禄中征收，以补偿万亿库的开支极为不妥。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "During the time of the Ahama Monarchy, the cost of providing food and drink to and from the princes and queens was taken from the trillion-ruble treasury, and then levied from the officials' salaries to compensate for the expenditure of the trillion-ruble treasury, which was extremely improper.

古文：诏在籍者除之勿征。
现代文：皇帝诏令，在籍的官员免去，不得征收。
English: According to the Emperor's edict, officials who are on the register are exempted and may not be levied.

古文：以榷茶提举李起南为江西榷茶转运使。
现代文：任命榷茶提举李起南为江西榷茶转运使。
English: Li Qinan was appointed as the transfer envoy of Jiangxi ginger tea.

古文：起南尝言： 江南茶每引价三贯六百文，今宜增每引五贯。 
现代文：李起南曾经说过： 江南的茶，每张茶引的价格为三贯六百文，现在应该增加为每张茶引五贯。 
English: Li Qinan once said: The price of tea in Jiangnan is three times six hundred yuan per tea lead, and now it should be increased to five times five times per tea lead.

古文：事下中书议，因令起南为运使，置达鲁花赤处其上。
现代文：事情下达到中书省讨论，因而令李起南担任转运使，他的上面设一个镇守官。
English: The matter reached the discussion of the Ministry of Education and Culture, so Li Qinan was appointed as the transfer envoy, and a town guard officer was placed above him.

古文：丁丑，徙东京行中书省于咸平府。
现代文：十一日，把东京行中书省迁到咸平府。
English: On the 11th, the Tokyo-bound Shosho was moved to Hamidaira.

古文：癸巳，岁星犯垒壁阵。
现代文：二十七日，木星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 27th, Jupiter interfered with the star formation.

古文：以临江路为北安王分邑。
现代文：把临江路作为北安王的封邑。
English: Linjiang Road as the fief of the King of Bei'an.

古文：夏四月庚子，中书省臣请立汴梁行中书省及燕南、河东、山东宣慰司。
现代文：夏季，四月初四，中书省大臣请求设置汴梁行中书省及燕南、河东、山东宣慰司。
English: In the summer, on the fourth day of the fourth month of April, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China requested the establishment of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China and the Yannan, Hedong and Shandong Propaganda and Consolation Departments.

古文：有旨： 南京户寡盗息，不必置省，其宣慰司如所请。
现代文：皇帝有旨说： 南京人口少，盗贼已经平息，不必设置行省。那几处宣慰司按照请求的办。
English: The emperor purportedly said, "Nanjing is sparsely populated, the bandits have been subdued, there is no need to set up a provincial government. The several comfort stations will be set up as requested."

古文：济南乃胜纳合儿分地，太原乃阿只吉分地，其令各卫委官一人同治之。 
现代文：济南是胜纳合儿的封地，太原是阿只吉的封地，希望由各委派官员中的同一个人治理这两个地方。 
English: Jinan is the fiefdom of Shengnaheer, Taiyuan is the fiefdom of Ayutthaya, and it is hoped that the same person from each appointed official will govern both places.

古文：敕免云南从征交趾蒙古军屯田租。
现代文：敕令免除随同征伐安南的云南蒙古军屯田士卒的租税。
English: The imperial edict exempted the soldiers of the Yunnan Mongolian army who accompanied the conquest of Annan from paying taxes.

古文：立乌蒙站。
现代文：设立乌蒙驿站。
English: Umeng Railway Station was established.

古文：江南诸路财赋并隶中书省。
现代文：把江南各路的财赋全部隶属于中书省。
English: The financial resources of all roads in the south of the Yangtze River are all subordinated to the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：云南省平章纳速剌丁上便宜数事：一曰弛道路之禁，通民来往；二曰禁负贩之徒，毋令从征；三曰罢丹当站赋民金为饮食之费；四曰听民伐木贸易；五曰戒使臣勿扰民居，立急递铺以省驿骑。
现代文：云南行省平章政事纳速剌丁上奏几件有利的事：第一，放宽对于道路的禁令，开通民间的来往；第二，禁止运货贩买的人随同军队出征；第三，停止丹当驿站征收百姓的钱财作为饮食的费用；第四，听任百姓砍伐木材进行贸易；第五，告诫使臣，不得扰害居民的住宅，建立急递铺以节省驿车。
English: The political affairs of Pingzhang Province, Yunnan Province, were hastily drafted, and several favorable things were mentioned: First, relax the ban on roads and open up people's contacts; Second, prohibit people who transport goods to go to war with the army; Third, stop the Dandang station from collecting people's money and wealth as the cost of meals; Fourth, allow people to cut wood for trade; Fifth, warn the envoys not to disturb the residents' homes and build a courier shop to save on cars.

古文：诏议行之。
现代文：皇帝下诏商议施行这些建议。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to implement these suggestions.

古文：辛丑，陕西行省言： 延安置屯田鹰坊总管府，其火失不花军逃散者，皆入屯田，今复供秦王阿难答所部阿黑答思饲马及输他赋。 
现代文：初五，陕西行省上奏说： 延安设置屯田鹰坊总管府，那些逃散的，火失不花的士兵都进入了屯田，现在又给秦王阿答部下的属民饲马，并替他们交纳赋税。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Shaanxi provincial envoy said: Yan'an has set up the Tongtian Yingfang General Administration Office. Those soldiers who have fled and lost everything have entered Tongtian, and now they are feeding horses to the people under the Qin King Ata, and paying taxes for them.

古文：有旨皆罢之，其不悛者罪当死。
现代文：皇帝有旨，将他们全部遣散，那些不悔改的罪当处死。
English: The emperor decreed that they should all be dismissed, and those who did not repent were to be put to death.

古文：甲辰，行御史台自杭州徙建康。
现代文：初八，行御史台从杭州迁往建康。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the performance history stage moved from Hangzhou to Jiankang.

古文：以山南、淮东、淮西三道按察司隶内台。
现代文：把山南、淮东、淮西三个道的按察司隶属于御史台。
English: The inspectorates of Shannan, Huaidong and Huaixi provinces will be subordinated to the History Channel.

古文：增置行台色目御史员数。
现代文：增加行御史台色目人御史的人数。
English: To increase the number of people who perform historical dramas.

古文：丁未，江东宣慰司进芝一本。
现代文：十一日，江东宣慰司进献灵芝一株。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Jiangdong Xuanjie Company donated a strain of Ganoderma lucidum.

古文：庚戌，制谥法。
现代文：十四日，制定谥法。
English: On the 14th, the law was enacted.

古文：壬子，枢密院纳速剌丁言： 前所统渐丁军五千人往征打马国，其力已疲，今诸王复籍此军征缅，宜取进止。 
现代文：十六日，枢密院的纳速剌丁上奏说 ：原来所率领前去征伐打马国的五千名渐丁军士兵，他们的精力本来就已经疲惫，现在诸侯王又用这支军队去征伐缅国，应该在取得了一些进展之后就停止下来。 
English: On the 16th, the Privy Council's Nahao Ding wrote: Originally, the five thousand soldiers of the Qian Ding army, who had been led to conquer Taima, were already exhausted. Now the princes are using this army to conquer Burma. It should stop after some progress has been made.

古文：帝曰： 苟事力未损，即遣之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：如果作战能力没有受到损伤，就派他们前往。 
English: The emperor said, "If their fighting ability is not impaired, we will send them."

古文：仍谕纳速剌丁分阿剌章、蒙古军千人，以能臣将之，赴交趾助皇子脱欢。
现代文：并谕令纳速剌丁，分出阿剌章军和蒙古军的士兵一千人，派有才能的大臣统率他们前往安南协助皇子脱欢。
English: In addition, he ordered Nakhon Ratchasima to separate a thousand soldiers from the Mongol army and sent talented ministers to lead them to Annam to help the prince get rid of the party.

古文：己未，遣要束木勾考荆湖行省钱谷。
现代文：二十三日，派遣要束木核查荆湖行省的钱粮。
English: On the 23rd, a bundle of wood was sent to inspect the grain in Jinghu Province.

古文：中书拟要束木平章政事，脱脱忽参知政事。
现代文：中书省拟议任命要束木为平章政事，脱脱忽为参知政事。
English: The proposed appointment by the Ministry of Education and Culture is for Sokki to be a high-ranking government official, and for Dangdang to be a high-ranking government official.

古文：有旨： 要束木小人，事朕方五年，授一理算官足矣。
现代文：皇帝有旨说 ：要束木出身微贱，侍从我才五年，授给他一个理算官就够了。
English: The emperor had a saying: "If Sokoku comes from a lowly family, and I have only been an attendant for five years, it is enough to give him an accountant."

古文：脱脱忽人奴之奴，令史、宣使才也。读卿等所进拟，令人耻之。
现代文：脱脱忽是奴才的奴才，做令史、宣使的材料，读了你们呈上来的拟议令人感到羞耻。
English: Escape from danger is the slave of the slave. It is shameful to read your proposal, which is material for propaganda and propaganda.

古文：其以朕意谕安童。 
现代文：希望把我的意思告诉安童。 
English: I hope to tell Ando what I mean.

古文：以汉民就食江南者多，又从官南方者秩满多不还，遣使尽徙北还。
现代文：因为北方的汉人到江南去就食的很多；另外，随同到南方去任职的官员，任期届满后多数不返回原地，派遣使臣去把他们都迁回北方。
English: In addition, most of the officials who went to the south to hold office did not return to their original places after their term of office expired, and envoys were sent to move them all back to the north.

古文：仍设脱脱禾孙于黄河、江、淮诸津渡，凡汉民非赍公文适南者止之，为商者听。
现代文：在黄河、长江、淮河的各个渡口都设置巡查官，所有北方的汉人，只要不是携带着公文而到南方去的，全部予以拦截，但经商的听便。
English: Inspectors have been set up at every ferry crossing on the Yellow, Yangtze and Huai Rivers. All Han Chinese from the north, as long as they do not go to the south with official documents, will be intercepted, but it is convenient for business.

古文：中书省臣言： 比奉旨，凡为盗者毋释。
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：最近接奉圣旨，凡是做盗贼的均不得释放。
English: The Minister of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "Recently, I received a sacred edict that anyone who is a thief must not be released.

古文：今窃钞数贯及佩刀微物，与童幼窃物者，悉令配役。
现代文：现在偷几贯钱和佩刀之类的小东西与偷东西的小孩子一样，把他们全都流放服苦役。
English: Now stealing a few bushels of money and a small thing like a saber is the same as a small child stealing, and they are all exiled to hard labor.

古文：臣等议，一犯者杖释，再犯依法配役为宜。 
现代文：臣等商议，初犯的处以杖刑即释放，再犯的则依法流放服苦役比较适当。 
English: The vassals and others deliberated and decided that the punishment for a first-time offender would be a cane and immediate release, while for a repeat offender, exile and hard labor would be more appropriate.

古文：帝曰： 朕以汉人徇私，用《泰和律》处事，致盗贼滋众，故有是言。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我认为由于汉人曲从私情，用《泰和律》处理案件，以致盗贼越来越多，所以才下这道圣旨。
English: The emperor said, "I think this edict was issued because Han Renqiu, out of personal feelings, used the "Law of Taihe" to deal with cases, resulting in an increasing number of thieves.

古文：人命至重，今后非详谳者，勿辄杀人。 
现代文：人命至关重大，今后没有经过仔细审查的，不得随便杀人。 
English: Human life is of the utmost importance, and in the future, anyone who has not been carefully vetted must not be killed at random.

古文：五月丁卯朔，枢密院臣言： 臣等与玉速帖木儿议别十八里军事，凡军行并听伯颜节制，其留务委孛栾带及诸王阿只吉官属统之为宜。 
现代文：五月初一，枢密院大臣上奏说： 臣等和玉速帖木儿商议别十八里的军事，凡属军队的行动均听从伯颜节制，其留守的事务委派孛栾带及诸侯王阿只吉的属官掌管较为妥当。 
English: On the first day of May, the Minister of the Privy Council reported that: the ministers and others had discussed with Tamehaya Timur to leave the military for eighteen miles, all the actions of the army were subject to restraint, and it was more appropriate to assign the umbilical cord and the vassals of the vassal king Ahdudgyi to take charge of the affairs.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己巳，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：初三，荧惑星干犯太微西垣的上将星官。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the fluorescent planet interfered with the general star officer of the West Wall.

古文：荆湖行省阿里海牙上言： 要束木在鄂省勾考，岂无贪贿？
现代文：荆湖行省的阿里海牙上奏说 ：要束木在鄂州行省核查钱粮，难道没有贪污受贿的行为？
English: Ali Hague, governor of the Jinghu Province, said in his report: "Should Sokmu check the money and grain in the Ezhou Province? Isn't there corruption and bribery?

古文：臣亦请勾考之。 
现代文：臣请求对他也进行核查。 
English: The minister requested that he also be checked.

古文：诏遣参知政事秃鲁罕、枢密院判李道、治书侍御史陈天祥偕行。
现代文：下诏派遣参知政事秃鲁罕、枢密院判李道、治书侍御史陈天祥一同前往。
English: The following edict dispatched the political advisor to the governor, Baldur Khan, the Privy Councillor, Li Dao, and the secretary of state, Chen Tianxiang, to go together.

古文：甲戌，汴梁旱。
现代文：初八，汴梁发生旱灾。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a drought occurred in Huliang.

古文：徙江东按察司于宣州。
现代文：把江东按察司迁到宣州。
English: The Jiangdong Investigating Division was moved to Xuanzhou.

古文：庚辰，岁星犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十四日，木星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 14th, Jupiter interfered with the star formation.

古文：乙酉，荧惑犯太微右执法。
现代文：十九日，荧惑星干犯太微垣右执法星。
English: On the 19th, the fluorescent planet interfered with the offender's right enforcement star.

古文：敕遣耽罗戍兵四百人还家。
现代文：敕令遣送耽罗的四百名守军回家。
English: He ordered that the four hundred defenders of Tham Luo be sent home.

古文：庚寅，广平等路蚕灾。
现代文：二十四日，广平等路发生蚕灾。
English: On the 24th, a silkworm infestation occurred on Guangping Road.

古文：辛卯，霸州、漷州蝻生。
现代文：二十五日，霸州、氵郭州产生幼蝗。
English: On the 25th, young locusts were born in Bazhou and Zhangguozhou.

古文：安南国遣使来贡方物。
现代文：安南国派遣使臣前来进贡地方特产。
English: Annan dispatched envoys to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：癸巳，京畿旱。
现代文：二十七日，京畿地区发生旱灾。
English: On the 27th, a drought occurred in the Gyeonggi region.

古文：六月丙申朔，太白犯御女。
现代文：六月初一，太白金星干犯御女星。
English: On the first day of June, the all-too-white Venus becomes the heroine.

古文：辛丑，中书省臣言： 秃鲁罕来奏，前要束木、阿里海牙互请钩考，今阿里海牙虽已死，事之是非，当令暴白。 
现代文：初六，中书省大臣上奏说： 秃鲁罕前来上奏，先前要束木、阿里海牙互相要求核查对方，现在阿里海牙虽然已经死去，但事情的是非应当让它大白于天下。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said: Baldur Khan came to make a report. Previously, Sokoku and Ali Hague had asked each other to check each other. Now, although Ali Hague has died, the truth of the matter should be made known to the world.

古文：帝曰： 卿言良是，其连引诸人，近者即彼追逮，远者宜以上闻。
现代文：皇帝说 ：你的话很对，那些牵涉到的人，近处的就在当地追捕归案，远处的应当向上奏闻。
English: The emperor said, "Your words are right. Those who are involved should be hunted down and brought to justice in the local area, while those who are far away should be reported to higher authorities."

古文：此事自要束木所发，当依其言究行之。 
现代文：这件事是从要束木那儿揭露的，应当从他说的话那里开始追究。 
English: This matter was revealed by Mr. Sokoku, and the investigation should start from what he said.

古文：乙巳，以立大司农司诏谕中外。
现代文：初十，下诏把设立大司农司的事晓谕朝内外。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an imperial edict to announce the establishment of the Agricultural Division to the imperial court and beyond.

古文：皇孙铁木儿不花驻营亦奚不薛，其粮饷仰于西川，远且不便，徙驻重庆府。
现代文：皇孙铁木儿不花驻扎在亦奚不薛，其粮饷仰赖于西川供给，路途遥远而又不方便，把驻地迁移到重庆府。
English: Emperor's grandson Tiemu Er did not spend time stationed in Yixing, his food supply depended on the West River supply, the journey was long and inconvenient, and he moved his residence to Chongqing.

古文：诏以大司农司所定《农桑辑要》书颁诸路。
现代文：下诏把大司农司所编定的《农桑辑要》一书颁发给各路。
English: The following edict issued the book "Nongsang Collection" compiled by the director-general of the Department of Agriculture to all roads.

古文：命云南、陕西二行省籍定建都税赋。
现代文：命令云南、陕西二行省确定建都的赋税。
English: Ordered Yunnan and Shaanxi two provinces to determine the tax for the construction of the capital.

古文：戊申，括诸路马。
现代文：十三日，收聚各路的马匹。
English: On the 13th, horses from all over the country were rounded up.

古文：凡色目人有马者三取其二，汉民悉入官，敢匿与互市者罪之。
现代文：凡属色目人有马的，三匹收取二匹，汉人的马则全部收入官府，敢于隐瞒和互相买卖的，治罪。
English: For every horse belonging to a person of Chinese descent, two horses will be collected for every three horses, while all horses belonging to a person of Chinese descent will be collected by the government. Those who dare to conceal and trade horses with each other will be punished.

古文：辛亥，以亦马剌丹忒忽里使交趾。
现代文：十六日，派遣亦马剌丹忒忽里出使安南。
English: On the 16th, Ma Ying-jeou was dispatched to dispatch Annan.

古文：癸丑，湖广行省线哥言： 今用兵交趾，分本省戍兵二万八千七百人，期以七月悉会静江，今已发精锐启行，余万七千八百人，皆羸病、屯田等军，不可用。 
现代文：十八日，湖广行省的线哥上奏说 ：现在向安南用兵，调去本省的守军二万八千七百人，约定七月全部在静江会合，现在已经派遣精锐部队出发，剩下的一万七千八百人，都是衰弱有病屯田的士兵，不可用。 
English: On the 18th, the line brother of Hukanghang Province reported to the emperor, "We are now deploying troops to Annan. We have transferred 28,700 defenders of this province. It was agreed that they would all meet in Jingjiang in July. We have now dispatched elite troops. The remaining 17,800 soldiers are weak and sick and cannot be used."

古文：敕今岁姑罢之。
现代文：皇帝敕令今年暂时不用这些士卒。
English: The emperor's edict temporarily dispensed with these officials this year.

古文：丁巳，设陕西等路诸站总管府，从三品。
现代文：二十二日，设置陕西等路各驿站的总管府，职俸为从三品。
English: On the 22nd, the head office of each station in Shaanxi and other provinces was set up, and the salary was reduced to three products.

古文：庚申，甘肃新招贫民百一十八户，敕廪给之。
现代文：二十五日，甘肃新招收贫苦百姓一百一十八户，敕令从官仓中供给他们粮食。
English: On the 25th, Gansu newly recruited one hundred and eighteen households of poor people, and ordered to provide them with grain from the official warehouse.

古文：敕路、府、州、县捕盗者持弓矢，各路十副，府、州七副，县五副。
现代文：敕令各路、府、州、县的捕盗者持有弓箭，路为十副，府、州七副，县五副。
English: The imperial edict ordered the thieves in each road, prefecture, state, and county to hold bows and arrows, with the road having ten pairs, the prefecture and state seven pairs, and the county five pairs.

古文：以薛阇干为中书省平章政事。
现代文：任命薛干为中书省平章政事。
English: He appointed Xue Gan as the political secretary of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：辛酉，封杨邦宪妻田氏为永安郡夫人，领播州安抚司事。
现代文：二十六日，封杨邦宪的妻子田氏为永安郡夫人，管辖播州安抚司的事务。
English: On the 26th, the wife of Yang Bangxian, Ms. Tian, was appointed as the wife of Yongan County to supervise the affairs of the Banzhou Pacification Division.

古文：遣镇西平缅等路招讨使怯烈招谕缅国。
现代文：派遣镇西、平缅等处招讨使怯烈招降缅国。
English: They dispatched envoys to Zhenxi, Pingmai and other places to frantically call for the surrender of Burma.

古文：广元路阆中麦秀两歧。
现代文：广元路阆中县的麦穗分叉为两枝。
English: Guangyuan Road, Luzhong County, has two branches.

古文：高丽国遣使来贡。
现代文：高丽国派遣使臣前来朝贡。
English: Goryeo dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月丙寅朔，遣必剌蛮等使瓜哇。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，派遣必剌蛮等人出使爪哇。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, Bibi and others were dispatched to Java.

古文：己巳，用中书省臣言，以江南隶官之田多为强豪所据，立营田总管府，其所据田仍履亩计之。
现代文：初四，采纳中书省大臣的意见，因为江南属于官府的田地大多被豪强所占有，设立营田总管府，那些被豪强所占有的田地仍然按照面积的大小而计税。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the opinion of the Minister of the Ministry of Literature was adopted, because most of the fields belonging to the government offices in the south of the Yangtze River were occupied by the powerful, and the Yingtian General Administration Office was established. Those fields occupied by the powerful were still taxed according to the size of the area.

古文：复尚酝监为光禄寺，罢辽阳等处行中书省，复北京、咸平等三道宣慰司。
现代文：恢复尚醢监的光禄寺。撤销辽阳等处的行中书省。恢复北京、咸平等三道的宣慰司。
English: He restored the Guanglu Temple of Shang Xuan Guan, revoked the line of the book ministry in Liaoyang and other places, and restored the propaganda and consolation departments in Beijing and Xiamen.

古文：给铁古思合敦贫民币帛各二千、布千匹。
现代文：赐给铁古思合敦的贫民绢帛各二千匹、布一千匹。
English: To the poor of Tegucigalpa, he gave two thousand reeds and one thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：庚午，江淮行省忙兀带言： 今置省杭州，两淮、江东诸路财赋军实，皆南输又复北上，不便。
现代文：初五，江淮行省忙兀带上奏说 ：现在在杭州设置行省，两淮、江东各路的财赋和军用物资，都向南方交纳，然后又运到北方，不便利。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Jianghuai Shipping Province was busy with the first report, saying: It is not convenient to set up a shipping province in Hangzhou now. The financial resources and military materials of the two Huai and Jiangdong provinces are all paid to the south, and then transported to the north.

古文：扬州地控江海，宜置省，宿重兵镇之，且转输无往返之劳，行省徙扬州便。 
现代文：扬州地控江河海洋，应该设置行省，驻扎重兵镇守，而且转运物资没有往返的辛劳。把行省迁到扬州较为有利。 
English: Yangzhou's geographical control of rivers and seas is the best. It is necessary to set up a line province, station heavy troops to guard the town, and there is no hard work of transporting materials back and forth. It is more advantageous to move the line province to Yangzhou.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：立淮南洪泽、芍陂两处屯田。
现代文：建立淮南路的洪泽、芍陂两处屯田。
English: Hongze and Handan townships on Huainan Road will be established.

古文：壬申，平阳饥民就食邻郡者，所在发仓赈之。
现代文：七月初七，平阳到邻县去就食的饥民，由所在的地方开仓赈济他们。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：置中尚监。
现代文：设置中尚监。
English: The inspector is in the middle of setting up.

古文：右丞拜答儿将兵讨阿蒙，并其妻子禽之，皆伏诛。
现代文：右丞拜答儿率军讨伐阿蒙，将阿蒙连同他的妻儿一起擒获，全部处死。
English: Ujo Baidoa led an army to fight against Amon, captured Amon together with his wife and son, and executed them all.

古文：丁丑，斡脱吉思部民饥，遣就食北京，其不行者发米赈之。
现代文：十二日，蒙古功臣、元老部属的百姓发生饥馑，遣送他们去北京就食，那些不去的发给米粮赈济他们。
English: On the twelfth day, the people of the Mongolian heroes and elders were starving. They were sent to Beijing to eat, and those who did not go were given rice to feed them.

古文：以雄、易二州复隶保定。
现代文：把雄州、易州二州重新隶属于保定。
English: The two prefectures of Yungzhou and Yizhou were reassigned to Baoding.

古文：给和林军储，自京师输米万石，发钞即其地籴米万石。
现代文：赐给和林的军队储备粮，从京师运送一万石米前去，另外发放钱钞就在当地购买一万石。
English: He gave the reserve grain to the troops in Hailin, transported 10,000 koku of rice from Beijing Division, and issued banknotes to purchase 10,000 koku locally.

古文：辛巳，八都儿饥民六百户驻八剌忽思之地，给米千石赈之。
现代文：十六日，八都儿的六百户饥民驻留在八剌忽思地方，赐给一千石米赈济他们。
English: On the 16th, six hundred families of starving people from Badu'er stayed in Badu Kusi, and were given one thousand koku of rice to feed them.

古文：壬午，总制院使桑哥具省臣姓名以上，帝曰： 右丞相安童，右丞麦术丁，参知政事郭佑、杨居宽，并仍前职。
现代文：十七日，总制院使桑哥列具中书省大臣的姓名呈上，皇帝说 ：右丞相安童，右丞麦术丁，参知政事郭佑、杨居宽，均继续担任前职。
English: On the 17th, the General Institution of the People's Republic of China asked Sango to submit the names of the ministers of the Ministry of Education and Culture. The emperor said: Ando, the right-hand minister, Mai Shuting, the right-hand minister, Guo You, the political advisor to the governor, and Yang Ju Kuan, all continued to serve in their previous positions.

古文：以铁木儿为左丞，其左丞相瓮吉剌带、平章政事阿必失合、都忽鲁皆别议。 
现代文：任命铁木儿为左丞。右丞相瓮吉剌带、平章政事阿必失合、忽都鲁均另做商议。 
English: Temur was appointed to the position of the left vice-chairman. The right vice-chairman, 吉带, the vice-chairman, 平章政事阿必失合, and the vice-chairman,忽都鲁, were discussed separately.

古文：仍谕中书选可代者以闻。
现代文：仍旧谕令中书省铨选可以代替他们的人上奏。
English: It was still decreed that the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) would select the person who could replace them.

古文：给金齿国使臣圆符。
现代文：赐给金齿国使臣圆形符牌。
English: A round token was given to the envoys of the Golden Tooth Kingdom.

古文：癸巳，铨定省、院、台、部官，诏谕中外： 中书省，除中书令外，左、右丞相并一员，平章政事二员，左、右丞并一员，参知政事二员；行中书省，平章政事二员，左、右丞并一员，参知政事、签行省事并二员；枢密院，除枢密院使外，同知枢密院事一员，枢密院副使、签枢密院事并二员，枢密院判一员；御史台，御史大夫一员，中丞、侍御史、治书侍御史并二员；行台同；六部，尚书、侍郎、郎中、员外郎并二员。
现代文：二十八日，选定中书省、枢密院、御史台和六部的官员，下诏晓谕朝内外： 中书省，除中书令之外，左右丞相均为二人，平章政事二人，左、右丞均为一人，参知政事二人；行中书省，平章政事二人，左、右丞均为一人，参知政事、行省佥事均为二人；枢密院，除枢密院使之外，枢密院同知一人，枢密院副使、枢密院佥事均为二人，枢密院判一人；御史台，御史大夫一人，御史中丞、侍御史、治书侍御史均为二人；行御史台相同；六部、尚书、侍郎、郎中、员外郎均为二人。
English: On the 28th, the selected officials of the Central Ministry of Literature, the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, and the six ministries, issued the following edict to the imperial court and beyond: In the Central Ministry of Literature, in addition to the Imperial Edict, there are two left and right ministers, two high-ranking government officials, one left and right vice-minister, and two political advisors; in the Central Ministry of Literature, there are two high-ranking government officials, one left and one right vice-minister, and two political advisors; in the Central Ministry of Literature, there are two high-ranking government officials, one left and one right vice-minister, and two political advisors;

古文：其余诸衙门，并委中书省斟酌裁减。 
现代文：其余各衙署，均委托中书省斟酌情况进行裁减。 
English: The remaining departments have been entrusted by the Ministry of Education and Culture to make reductions at their discretion.

古文：八月丙申，发钞二万九千锭、盐五万引，市米赈诸王阿只吉所部饥民。
现代文：八月初二，发放钱钞二万九千锭，盐五万引，买米赈济诸侯王阿只吉部属的饥民。
English: On the second day of August, 29,000 baht in banknotes and 50,000 yuan in salt were distributed to buy rice to feed the starving people belonging to the vassal lord, King Ajukichi.

古文：己亥，敕枢密院遣侍卫军千人扈从北征。
现代文：初五，敕命枢密院派遣一千名侍卫军护驾随从北行。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Privy Council sent a thousand bodyguards to escort the northbound train.

古文：平阳路岁比不登，免贫民税赋。
现代文：平阳路屡屡不得丰收，免除贫困百姓的赋税。
English: Pingyang Road has repeatedly failed to have a good harvest, exempting poor people from paying taxes.

古文：罢淮东、蕲黄宣慰司，以黄、蕲、寿昌隶湖广行省，安庆、六安、光州隶淮西宣慰司。
现代文：撤销淮东、蕲黄宣慰司，把黄州、蕲州、寿昌隶属于湖广行省，安庆、六安、光州隶属于淮西宣慰司。
English: The Huaidong and Shiyanhuang Consolation Division was abolished, and Huangzhou, Shizhou and Shuchang were subordinated to Hubei Province, while Anqing, Lu'an and Gwangju were subordinated to the Huaxi Consolation Division.

古文：招集宋盐军。
现代文：召集宋朝的盐户组成军队。
English: He called together the salt farmers of the Song Dynasty to form an army.

古文：以市舶司隶泉府司。
现代文：把市舶司隶属于泉府司。
English: The city shipping office will be subordinated to the Izumi prefectural office.

古文：乙卯，太白犯轩辕右角。
现代文：二十一日，太白金星干犯轩辕座右角星。
English: On the twenty-first day, the too-white Venus offends the right-angled star of Virgo.

古文：辛酉，婺州永康县民陈巽四等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，婺州永康县百姓陈巽四等人谋反，被处死。
English: On the 27th, the people of Yongkang County, Zhangzhou, including Chen Yuxi and others, plotted a rebellion and were executed.

古文：甘州饥，禁酒。
现代文：甘州发生饥荒，禁止酿酒。
English: Famine occurs in Ganzhou, and the brewing of alcohol is banned.

古文：罢德平、定昌二路，置德昌军民总管府。
现代文：撤销德平路、定昌路二路，设置德昌军及总管府。
English: The Second Road of Deping Road and Dingchang Road were revoked, and the Dechang Army and the General Administration Office were set up.

古文：九月乙丑朔，马八儿、须门那、僧急里、南无力、马兰丹、那旺、丁呵儿、来来、急阑亦带、苏木都剌十国，各遣子弟上表来觐，仍贡方物。
现代文：九月初一，马八儿、须门那、僧急里、南无力、马兰丹、那旺、丁呵儿、来来、急阑亦带、苏木都剌十国各派遣子弟，奉上表章前来觐见皇上，并贡奉地方特产。
English: On the first day of September, children from ten provinces, including Ma Baher, Su Menna, So Kyu Ri, Nam Wulai, Marandan, Nawang, Ding Or, Lai Lai, Kyu Soi, and Sumi, were sent to the emperor to present the imperial seal and pay tribute to local special products.

古文：以太庙雨坏，遣瓮吉剌带致告，奉安神主别殿。
现代文：因为太庙被雨水淋坏，派遣瓮吉剌带报告皇上，将先皇神主奉安到偏殿。
English: Because the Great Temple had been damaged by the rain, the Emperor was sent a messenger with a message to report to the Emperor that the former Emperor's deity would be enshrined in a side hall.

古文：甲申，太阴犯天关。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯天官星。
English: On the 20th day, the great Yin star violated the heavenly official star.

古文：行辰，高丽遣使献日本俘。
现代文：二十八日，高丽派遣使臣献上日本俘虏。
English: On the 28th, Korea sent an envoy to present Japanese prisoners of war.

古文：是月，南部县生嘉禾，一茎九穗。
现代文：这个月，南部县长出嘉禾，一茎长了九支穗。
English: This month, Nanbu County saw the emergence of Jiahe, and one stem grew nine spikes.

古文：芝产于苍溪县。
现代文：苍溪县长出灵芝。
English: Ganoderma lucidum grows in Cangxi County.

古文：冬十月甲午朔，太白犯右执法。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，太白金星干犯右执法星。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the star of the criminal right law enforcement is too white.

古文：以南康路隶江西行省，徙浙西按察司治杭州。
现代文：把南康路隶属于江西行省。把浙西按察司的治所迁移到杭州。
English: To subordinate Nankang Road to Jiangxi Province, and to relocate the administrative center of the West Zhejiang Inspection Department to Hangzhou.

古文：罢诸道提刑按察司判官，行御史台监察御史及按察司官，虽汉人并毋禁弓矢。
现代文：撤销诸道提刑按察司判官、行御史台监察御史及按察司官。即使是汉人也并不禁止持有弓箭。
English: Revoke the right of all provinces to impose punishment on the judges of the procuratorate, the procuratorate of the procuratorate and the procuratorate of the procuratorate. Even the Chinese people are not prohibited from holding bows and arrows.

古文：襄邑县尹张玘为治有绩，邹平县达鲁花赤回回能捕盗理财，进秩有差。
现代文：襄邑县尹张王己治理地方有政绩，邹平县镇守官回回善于缉捕盗贼，管理财政，不同程度地提高他们的职俸。
English: Yin Zhang Wang of Xiangyi County has made political achievements in local governance, and the town guards of Fenping County are good at arresting thieves, managing finances, and raising their salaries to varying degrees.

古文：丁酉，享于太庙。
现代文：初四，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, offerings are made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯建星。
现代文：初五，太阴星干犯建星。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Taiyin Star committed the crime of building a star.

古文：己亥，车驾至自上都。
现代文：初六，皇上的车驾从上都抵达京师。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the emperor's chariot arrived at the capital from the capital.

古文：壬寅，太白犯左执法。
现代文：初九，太白金星干犯左执法星。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the star of law enforcement is too white and the star of crime is too white.

古文：遣兵千人戍畏吾境。
现代文：派一千名士卒戍守畏兀儿边境。
English: Send a thousand soldiers to guard the border.

古文：乙巳，赐合迷里贫民及合剌和州民牛种，给钞万六千二百锭当其价，合迷里民加赐币帛并千匹。
现代文：十二日，赐给合迷里的贫民以及合剌合州的百姓耕牛和种子，以一万六千二百锭钱钞抵充它们的价值，加赐一千匹绢帛给合迷里的百姓。
English: On the 12th, he gave the poor people of Hamuli and the people of Hebei Province arable cattle and seeds, and compensated their value with 16,200 baht banknotes. In addition, he gave 1,000 donkeys to the people of Hamuli.

古文：己酉，遣塔塔儿带、杨兀鲁带以兵万人、船千艘征骨嵬。
现代文：十六日，派遣塔塔儿带、杨兀鲁带率领一万名士兵、一千艘战船征伐骨嵬。
English: On the 16th, he dispatched the Tatars and Yang Bailu to lead ten thousand soldiers and a thousand warships to conquer and cut down the Ossuary.

古文：中书省具宣徽、大司农、大都、上都留守司存减员数以闻，帝曰： 在禁近者朕自沙汰，余从卿等议之。 
现代文：中书省开具宣徽院、大司农司、大都、上都留守司保留和裁减的官员数目奏闻皇帝，皇帝说： 在宫禁近旁的由我自己淘汰，其余的按照你们所商议的意见执行。 
English: The number of officials to be retained and reduced from the Xuanhuiyuan, the Agricultural Department, the Capital, and the Left-behind Department of the Capital was reported to the emperor by the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy. The emperor said: I will eliminate those who are close to the palace ban, and the rest will be implemented according to the opinions you have discussed.

古文：辛亥，太阴犯东井。
现代文：十八日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 18th day of the lunar month, the star of the lunar month, the star of the lunar month, the star of the lunar month, the star of the lunar month.

古文：河决开封、祥符、陈留、杞、太康、通许、鄢陵、扶沟、洧川、尉氏、阳武、延津、中牟、原武、眭州十五处，调南京民夫二十万四千三百二十三人，分筑堤防。
现代文：黄河在开封、祥符、陈留、杞县、太康、通许、鄢陵、扶沟、洧川、尉氏、阳武、延津、中牟、原武、睢州等十五个地方决口，调集南京的民夫二十万零四千三百二十三人分筑堤防。
English: The Yellow River broke its banks in 15 places, including Kaifeng, Xiangfu, Chenliu, Jixian, Taikang, Tongxu, Fuling, Fuguo, Luochuan, Youji, Yangwu, Yangtze, Zhongmou, Wonwu, and Zhangzhou, and the people of Nanjing were mobilized to build a dike for a total of 204 thousand 323 people.

古文：癸丑，谕江南各省所统军官教练水军。
现代文：二十日，谕令江南各省统辖下的军官训练水军。
English: On the 20th, the decree ordered the officers under the jurisdiction of various provinces in the south of the Yangtze River to train the navy.

古文：遣侍卫新附兵千人屯田别十八里，置元帅府即其地总之。
现代文：派遣新归附的侍卫军士兵一千人在别十八里屯田，就在当地设置屯田元帅府统领他们。
English: Send a thousand soldiers of the newly annexed Guards Corps to set up a garrison in 18 li, and set up a garrison marshal's office to command them.

古文：甲寅，太白犯进贤。
现代文：二十一日，太白金星干犯进贤星官。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taibai Jinxing criminal was promoted to Xianxing official.

古文：以征缅功，调招讨使张万为征缅副都元帅，也先铁木儿征缅招讨司达鲁花赤，千户张成征缅招讨使，并虎符，敕造战船，将兵六千人以征缅，俾秃满带为都元帅总之。
现代文：因为征伐缅国的功劳，升迁招讨使张万为征缅副都元帅，也先铁木儿为征缅招讨司监印官，千户张成任征缅招讨使，均佩戴虎符。敕令建造战船，率军六千人征伐缅国，令秃满带为都元帅统领他们。
English: Because of his contribution to the conquest of Burma, Zhang Wan was promoted to Vice-Marshal for the Conquest of Burma, Tiemu Er was promoted to Supervisor of the Imperial Seal for the Conquest of Burma, and Qianhu Zhang Chengren was promoted to Envoy for the Conquest of Burma, all of whom wore the tiger emblem. He ordered the construction of warships, led an army of six thousand to conquer Burma, and made Bald Man take command of them as the Grand Marshal.

古文：乙卯，给皇子脱欢马四千匹，部曲人三匹。
现代文：二十二日，赐给皇子脱欢四千匹马，家奴每人三匹。
English: On the twenty-second day, 4,000 horses were given to the prince for his debauchery, and three horses to each of his servants.

古文：庚申，济宁路进芝二茎。
现代文：二十七日，济宁路进奉灵芝二株。
English: On the 27th, two strains of Feng Lingzhi were found on Jining Road.

古文：壬戌，改河间盐运司为都转运使司。
现代文：二十九日，把河间盐运司改为都转运使司。
English: On the 29th, the salt transportation department in Kawama was changed to the capital transportation department.

古文：徙戍甘州新附军千人屯田中兴，千人屯田亦里黑。
现代文：迁移戍守甘州的一千名新附军士兵到中兴屯田，一千名到亦里黑屯田。
English: One thousand soldiers of the New Annexed Army stationed in Ganzhou were relocated to Zhongxing Tunden, and one thousand to Yilihe Tunden.

古文：高丽遣使来献日本俘十六人。
现代文：高丽派遣使臣来献上日本的俘虏十六人。
English: Korea sends envoys to present 16 prisoners to Japan.

古文：马法国进鞍勒、毡甲。
现代文：马法国进贡鞍勒、毡甲。
English: The French paid tribute to Anlle and Armour.

古文：兴化路仙游县虫伤禾。
现代文：兴化路仙游县发生虫灾，伤害禾苗。
English: An insect infestation occurred in Xianyou County, Xinghua Road, causing damage to grain seedlings.

古文：十一月乙丑，中书省臣言： 朱清等海道运粮，以四岁计之，总百一万石，斗斛耗折愿如数以偿，风浪覆舟请免其征。 
现代文：十一月初三，中书省大臣上奏说： 朱清等人从海路运输粮食，以四年计算，总共一百零一万石，搬运中的损耗希望能按实数补偿，因为风浪而翻船的请免于征收。 
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: Zhu Qing and others transported grain by sea, calculated over four years, a total of one million ten thousand stones. It is hoped that the loss during handling will be compensated in real terms. If the ship overturns due to wind and waves, please be exempted from collection.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：遂以昭勇大将军、沿海招讨使张瑄，明威将军、管军万户兼管海道运粮船朱清，并为海道运粮万户，仍佩虎符。
现代文：于是任命昭勇大将军、沿海招讨使张王宣，明威将军、管军万户兼管海道运粮船朱清共同担任海道运粮万户，并佩戴虎符。
English: As a result, he appointed General Zhaoyong, the coastal recruiting agent Zhang Wangxuan, General Mingwei, and Zhu Qing, who was in charge of the army and the grain transport ship, to jointly serve as the grain transport ship, and wear the tiger emblem.

古文：敕禽兽字孕时无畋猎。
现代文：敕令：飞禽走兽生育、怀孕时不得猎取。
English: Royal edict: Birds and animals should not be hunted when they are pregnant.

古文：戊辰，太白犯亢。
现代文：初六，太白金星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the too-white Venus committed a crime and went to heaven.

古文：遣蒙古千户曲出等总新附军四百人，屯田别十八里。
现代文：派遣蒙古千户曲出等统领四百名新附军在别十八里屯田。
English: He dispatched the Mongolian Qude, who commanded four hundred newly-added troops, to set up a garrison in Beixiaoli.

古文：己巳，改思明等四州并为路。
现代文：初七，把思明等四个州都改为路。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, four states, including Siming, were changed into roads.

古文：以阿八赤为征交趾行省右丞。
现代文：任命阿八赤为征讨安南的行省右丞。
English: Appointed Ahacheng as the provincial right-hand man for the campaign against Annan.

古文：丙子，以涿、易二州良乡、宝坻县饥，免今年租，给粮三月。
现代文：十四日，因为涿州、易州和良乡县、宝坻县发生饥荒，免征今年的田租，供给该地区三个月粮食。
English: On the 14th, because of the famine in Zhangzhou, Yizhou, Liangxiang County and Baodi County, this year's field rent was exempted and grain was supplied to the region for three months.

古文：平滦、太原、汴梁水旱为灾，免民租二万五千六百石有奇。
现代文：平滦、太原、汴梁水旱成灾，减免百姓的租税二万五千六百多石。
English: Pingyao, Taiyuan and Zhuliang suffered from floods and droughts, and the tax reduction and exemption of the people amounted to more than 25,600 koku.

古文：改广东转运市舶提举司为盐课市舶提举司。
现代文：把广东转运市舶提举司改为盐课市舶提举司。
English: The name of the Guangdong transshipment city ship lifting station was changed to the Yanchu city ship lifting station.

古文：丁丑，命塔义儿、忽难使阿儿浑。
现代文：十五日，命令塔叉儿、忽难出使阿儿浑。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he ordered Tafforer and Hukuda to send Alhun.

古文：戊寅，遣使阅实宣宁县饥民，周给之。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣视察、落实宣宁县饥民的情况，以便周济他们。
English: On the 16th, envoys were dispatched to inspect and implement the situation of the starving people in Xuanning County in order to provide them with food.

古文：己卯，太阴犯井。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 17th day of the lunar month, the star of the Great Yin appeared in the county of Jianjing.

古文：辛巳，岁星犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十九日，木星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 19th, Jupiter interfered with the star formation.

古文：十二月乙未，辽东开元饥，赈粮三月。
现代文：十二月初三，辽东、开元发生饥馑，赈济该地三个月粮食。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, famine occurred in Liaodong and Kaiyuan.

古文：戊戌，太白犯东咸。
现代文：初六，太白金星干犯东咸星。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, too white Venus offends East Ham Star.

古文：癸卯，要束木籍阿里海牙家赀，运致京师。
现代文：十一日，要束木抄没阿里海牙的家产，运抵京师。
English: On the 11th day, a bundle of wood was to be collected from the family property of Ali Hague and transported to Beijing.

古文：赐诸王术伯所部军五千人银万五千两、钞三千锭，探马赤二千人羊七万口。
现代文：赐给诸侯王术伯部下的五千多士卒一万五千两银子、三千锭钱钞。赐给二千名探马赤军七万头羊。
English: He gave more than five thousand soldiers under the command of Prince Zhubo fifteen thousand two silver coins and three thousand rupees in banknotes. He gave seventy thousand sheep to two thousand Red Army scouts.

古文：丙午，置燕南、河东、山东三道宣慰司。
现代文：十四日，设置燕南、河东、山东三道宣慰司。
English: On the 14th, the Yunnan, Hedong and Shandong Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Departments were set up.

古文：罢大有署。
现代文：撤销大有署。
English: Abolish the General Accounting Office.

古文：丁未，太阴犯井。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the fifteenth day, Taiyin star dry criminal wells Yutian District.

古文：乙卯，诸道宣慰司，在内地者设官四员，江南者六员。
现代文：二十三日，诸道宣慰司在内地设置四名官员，在江南设置六名官员。
English: On the 23rd, the Relief and Consolation Department set up four officials in the inland and six officials in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：以阿里海牙所芘逃民无主者千人屯田。
现代文：以阿里海牙庇护下的一千名无主流民屯田。
English: Under the protection of Ali Hague, a thousand displaced people settled in Tonden.

古文：遣中书省断事官秃不申复钩考湖广行省钱谷。
现代文：派遣中书省断事官秃不申再次核查湖广行省的钱粮。
English: Dispatching the adjudicator of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China's Hubei Province, Zhao Shuxin, to inspect the money grain of Hubei Province again.

古文：复置泉州市舶提举司。
现代文：重新设置泉州市舶提举司。
English: Re-establish the Quanzhou Shipping Promotion Division.

古文：大都饥，发官米低其价粜贫民。
现代文：大都发生饥馑，发放官仓的粮食，降低价格卖给贫苦百姓。
English: Famine occurred in most places, and grain from government warehouses was distributed and sold at reduced prices to poor people.

古文：丙辰，遣蒲昌赤贫民垦甘肃闲田，官给牛、种、农具。
现代文：二十四日，派遣蒲昌赤贫的百姓开垦甘肃的闲田，由官府供给耕牛、种子、农具。
English: On the 24th, the extremely poor people of Buchang were sent to reclaim idle fields in Gansu, and the government provided them with oxen, seeds, and farm tools.

古文：赐安南国王陈益稷羊马钞百锭。
现代文：赐给安南国王陈益稷羊马钱一百锭。
English: He gave the king of Annam, Chen Yixuan, one hundred baht in sheep and horse money.

古文：丁巳，太阴犯氐。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星干犯氐宿天区。
English: On the 25th day of the lunar month, the Yin and Yang planets collided in the constellation of Pisces.

古文：戊午，翰林承旨撒里蛮言： 国史院纂修太祖累朝实录，请以畏吾字繙绎，俟奏读然后纂定。 
现代文：二十六日，翰林学士承旨撒里蛮上奏说： 国史院编修的太祖朝实录，请用畏吾儿文字翻译，待奏明皇上，读完，然后定稿。 
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Hanlin Scholar, with the approval of the Emperor, said, "Please translate the real record of the Great Ancestor's reign compiled by the National Academy of History into Chinese characters, wait for Emperor Ming to read it, and then finalize it."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诸路分置六道劝农司。
现代文：各个路分别设置六道劝农司。
English: Each road is separately set up six ways to persuade the Department of Agriculture.

古文：庚申，置尚珍署于济宁等路，秩从五品。
现代文：二十八日，在济宁等路设置尚珍署，职俸为从五品。
English: On the 28th, the Shang Zhen Department was set up in Jining and other roads, and the salary was from five products.

古文：是岁，以亦摄思怜真为帝师。
现代文：当年，任命亦摄思怜真为帝师。
English: In the same year, he was also appointed as the emperor's disciple.

古文：赐皇子奥鲁赤、脱欢、诸王术伯、也不干等羊马钞一十五万一千九百二十三锭，马七千二百九十匹，羊三万六千二百六十九口，币帛、毳段、木绵三千二百八十八匹，貂裘十四。
现代文：赏赐皇子奥鲁赤、脱欢，诸侯王术伯、也不干等，总计羊马价钱钞十五万一千九百二十三锭，马七千二百九十匹，羊三万六千二百六十九头，绢帛、毳段、木棉三千二百八十八匹，貂裘十四件。
English: In total, 151,923 yakitori, 7,290 horses, 36,269 sheep, 32,888 yakitori, yakitori pieces, and yakitori wafers, and 14 yakitori wafers were awarded to Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka, Prince Oluka and Prince Oluka.

古文：又赐皇子脱欢所部怜牙思不花等及欠州诸局工匠钞五万六千一百三十九锭一十二两。
现代文：又赏赐皇子脱欢的部下怜牙思不花等人，以及欠州诸局的工匠，总共为钱钞五万六千一百三十九锭一十二两。
English: He also rewarded the prince's disgruntled subordinates, as well as the artisans who owed money to the state, with a total of 56,139.122.

古文：命西僧递作佛事于万寿山、玉塔殿、万安寺，凡三十会。
现代文：命西域僧人依次在万寿山、玉塔殿、万安寺做佛事，一共三十次。
English: He ordered the monks in the western region to do Buddhist activities in Mount Manshou, the Jade Pagoda, and Wanyan Temple in succession, a total of thirty times.

古文：大司农司上诸路学校凡二万一百六十六所，储义粮九万五百三十五石，植桑枣杂果诸树二千三百九万四千六百七十二株。
现代文：大司农司上报各路的学校总共为二万零一百六十六所，储备粮一共九万零五百三十五石，栽种桑、枣以及各种果树二千三百零九万四千六百七十二株。
English: The director-general of the Department of Agriculture reported a total of 20,166 schools, a grain reserve of 90,535 koku, and 23,094,672 plants of mulberry, jujube and various fruit trees.

古文：断死刑百一十四人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪囚共一百一十四人。
English: A total of 114 prisoners were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：二十四年春正月乙丑，复云南石梁县。
现代文：至元二十四年春季，正月初四，收复云南石梁县。
English: In the spring of the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the fourth day of the first month of the year, Shiliang County in Yunnan Province was recovered.

古文：戊辰，以修筑柳林河堤南军三千，浚河西务漕渠。
现代文：初七，派修筑柳林河堤的三千名南方士卒前去疏浚河西务用于漕运的河渠。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, three thousand Southern soldiers, who were building the Liulin River embankment, were sent to dredge the canal used for paddling in the west of the river.

古文：皇子奥鲁赤部曲饥，命大同路给六十日粮。
现代文：皇子奥鲁赤的部属发生饥荒，命大同路供给他们六十天的粮食。
English: There was a famine among the subjects of the prince Oruchak, and the emperor decreed that they should be provided with food for sixty days.

古文：免唐兀卫河西地元籍徭赋。
现代文：免除唐兀卫辖区之内河西地区百姓的徭役和赋税。
English: The people in the west of the Inner River in Tanggu District were exempted from labor service and taxes.

古文：壬申，御正殿受诸王百官朝贺。
现代文：十一日，皇上临幸正殿接受诸侯王和百官的新年朝贺。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Rinko received New Year's greetings from the princes and officials at the main hall.

古文：癸酉，俱蓝国遣使不六温乃等来朝。
现代文：十二日，俱蓝国派遣使臣不六温乃前来朝见。
English: On the 12th, the Blue Country dispatched envoys to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：甲戌，太阴犯东井。
现代文：十三日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 13th day of the lunar month, the star of the Great Yin appeared in the Jianjing and Suqian District.

古文：乙酉，太阴犯房。
现代文：二十四日，太阴星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the great Yin star committed the crime of lodging in the heavenly quarter.

古文：丙戌，以参政程鹏飞为中书右丞，阿里为中书左丞。
现代文：二十五日，任命参政程鹏飞为中书右丞，阿里为中书左丞。
English: On the 25th, Cheng Pengfei, a politician, was appointed as the Second Secretary of the Central Committee, and Ali was appointed as the Third Secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：丁亥，以不颜里海牙为参知政事。
现代文：二十六日，任命不颜里海牙为参知政事。
English: On the 26th, Hague was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：发新附军千人从阿八赤讨安南。
现代文：遣发一千名新附军士卒跟随阿八赤讨伐安南。
English: and dispatched one thousand newly-enlisted soldiers to follow the Aba Red Army to fight in Annan.

古文：弛女直、水达达地弓矢之禁。
现代文：放宽女真、水达达地区关于携带弓箭的禁令。
English: Relaxation of the ban on carrying bows and arrows in the Jianzhen and Shuidada areas.

古文：复改江浙省为江淮行省。
现代文：重新把江浙行省改为江淮行省。
English: The name of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province was changed to Jiangsu and Huaihai Province.

古文：戊子，以钞万锭赈斡端贫民。
现代文：二十七日，以一万锭钱钞赈济斡端的穷苦百姓。
English: On the 27th, he used 10,000 baht banknotes to help the poor people.

古文：西边岁饥民困，赐绢万匹。
现代文：西部边境年岁荒歉，百姓贫困，赐给绢一万匹。
English: The western border was desolate year after year, the people were poor, and ten thousand donkeys were given to them.

古文：庚寅，遣使代祀岳渎、后土、东海。
现代文：二十九日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五大山、四大水、后土大神、东海。
English: On the 29th, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the five great mountains, the four great waters, the great god of the hinterland, and the East Sea.

古文：辛卯，以淮东、淮西、山南三道按察司隶行御史台。
现代文：三十日，把淮东、淮西、山南三道按察司隶属于行御史台。
English: On the 30th, the inspectors of Huaidong, Huaixi and Shannan were subordinated to the Executive History Station.

古文：立上林署，秩从七品。
现代文：设立上林署，职俸为从七品。
English: The Forestry Agency was established, and the salary was raised to seven rupees.

古文：诏发江淮、江西、湖广三省蒙古、汉券军及云南兵，及海外四州黎兵，命海道运粮万户张文虎等运粮十七万石，分道以讨交趾。
现代文：敕令调遣江淮、江西、湖广三省的蒙古人、汉人券军以及云南军和海外四州的黎族兵，令海道运粮万户张文虎等运输粮食十七万石分路讨伐安南。
English: The imperial command dispatched Mongolian and Han soldiers from the three provinces of Jianghuai, Jiangxi, and Huguang, as well as the Yunnan army and the Li soldiers from the four overseas states, and ordered Zhang Wenguo and others to transport 170,000 kilos of grain by sea to fight against Annan.

古文：置征交趾行尚书省，奥鲁赤平章政事，乌马儿、樊楫参知政事，总之，并受镇南王节制。
现代文：设置讨伐安南的行尚书省，奥鲁赤任平章政事，乌马儿、樊楫任参知政事，总管行省事务，均受镇南王节制。
English: Annan was appointed to the post of Minister of Education and Culture, Oluhak to the post of Minister of State, Umar to the post of Councillor of State, and U Thant to the post of Councillor of State, all of which were controlled by the King of Zhenan.

古文：二月壬辰朔，遣使持香币诣龙虎、閤皂、三茅设醮，召天师张宗演赴阙。
现代文：二月初一，派遣使臣携带香烛钱到龙虎、阁皂、三茅设醮坛。征召天师张宗演前来朝廷。
English: On the first day of February, envoys were sent to Longhu, Gu So, and Sanmao with incense and money to set up altars, and the celestial teacher Zhang Zongyuan was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：癸巳，雍古部民饥，发米四千石赈之，不足，复给六千石米价。
现代文：初二，雍古部的百姓发生饥馑，发放四千石粮米赈济他们；不够，再给六千石米钱。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the people of Yongkubo suffered from famine, and 4,000 koku of grain and rice were distributed to help them; it was not enough, so another 6,000 koku of rice was given.

古文：甲午，畋于近郊。
现代文：初三，皇帝在京师近郊行猎。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：乙未，以麦术丁为平章政事。
现代文：初四，任命麦术丁为平章政事。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Mai Zhuting as Pingzhang political affairs.

古文：真定路饥，发沿河仓粟减价粜之。
现代文：真定路发生饥馑，发放沿海粮仓的粮食，减价卖给百姓。
English: Famine occurred in Zhending Road, and grain from the coastal granary was distributed and sold to the people at a reduced price.

古文：以真定所牧官马四万余匹分牧他郡。
现代文：把真定所放牧的四万多匹官马分散到别的州县放牧。
English: More than forty thousand official horses grazed by Zhending were dispersed to other states and counties for grazing.

古文：禁畏吾地禽兽孕孳时畋猎。庚子，太阴犯天关。
现代文：禽兽繁殖的时候禁止在畏兀儿地区行猎。初九，太阴星干犯天关星。
English: When animals are breeding, it is forbidden to hunt in fearful areas. On the 9th day of the 9th month, the sun is too dark to be a good omen.

古文：辛丑，太阴犯东井。
现代文：初十，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the yin and yang stars are in the yin and yang quarter.

古文：甲辰，升江淮行大司农司事秩二品，设劝农营田司六，秩四品，使副各二员，隶行大司农司。
现代文：十三日，把江淮行省大司农司的秩禄提升为二品，设置劝农营田司六处，秩禄为四品，设置营田使和副使各二人，隶属于行省大司农司管辖。
English: On the 13th, the rank of the Jianghuai Provincial Agricultural Division was raised to two products, six departments of the Agricultural Field Division were set up, four products were set up, and two Yingtan Envoys and two Deputy Envoys were set up, under the jurisdiction of the Provincial Agricultural Division.

古文：以范文虎为中书右丞，商议枢密院事。
现代文：任命范文虎为中书右丞，参议枢密院事务。
English: Fan Wenhu was appointed the Vice-President of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：壬子，封驸马昌吉为宁濮郡王。
现代文：二十一日，封驸马昌吉为宁濮郡王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ma Changji was crowned King of Ningbo County.

古文：设都总管府以总皇子北安王民匠、斡端大小财赋。
现代文：设立都总管府以统管皇子北安王的民匠，以及斡端地方的大小财赋。
English: The General Administration of the Capital was established to supervise the people's artisans of the prince Bei'an Wang, as well as to mediate the large and small financial endowments of localities.

古文：中书省臣言： 自正旦至二月中旬费钞五十万锭，臣等兼总财赋，自今侍臣奏请赐赉，乞令臣等预议。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：从正月初一到二月中旬已耗费钱钞五十万锭，臣等既兼管财赋，则从今以后，凡侍臣奏请皇上赏赐，请让臣等预先商议。 
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China said in his report: From the first day of the first month to the middle of February, half a million baht in banknotes have been spent. Since the vassals are also in charge of the financial endowment, from now on, if a vassal asks the emperor for a reward, please let the vassals discuss it in advance.

古文：帝曰： 此朕所当虑。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：这正是我常常考虑的事。 
English: The emperor said, "This is something I have often thought about.

古文：仍谕玉速铁木儿、月赤彻儿知之。
现代文：并晓谕玉速铁木儿、月赤彻儿知道这件事。
English: He also told Tamasui Tiemu'er and Yueka Ch'er to know about this.

古文：丙辰，马八儿国贡方物。
现代文：二十五日，马八儿国进贡地方特产。
English: On the 25th, local special products from Mabalang Province were brought in as tribute.

古文：戊午，敕诸王阇里铁木儿节制诸军。
现代文：二十七日，敕令诸侯王里铁木儿节制各军。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the princes and kings to restrain their armies with iron and wood.

古文：以赵与芮子孟桂袭平原郡公。
现代文：命赵与芮的儿子赵孟桂袭任平原郡公。
English: Zhao Menggui, the son of Zhao and Zou, was appointed the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：乃颜遣使征东道兵，阇谕里铁木儿毋辄发。
现代文：乃颜派使节征用东路军，皇帝谕令里铁木儿不要立即派出。
English: Naoyan sent envoys to requisition the Eastern Route Army, but the emperor ordered Li Tiemu'er not to send them immediately.

古文：闰月癸亥，太阴犯辰星。
现代文：闰二月初二，太阴星干犯水星。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd lunar month, the planet Mercury will be occulted by the planet Venus.

古文：以女直、水达达部连岁饥荒，移粟赈之，仍尽免今年公赋及减所输皮布之半。
现代文：因为女真、水达达部连年发生饥荒，运送粮食去赈济他们，并全部免除今年的官税，并减免原来交纳毛皮、布匹的一半。
English: Because famine has occurred in Jianzhen and Shuidadu every year, grain was transported to help them, and this year's official tax was completely exempted, and half of the furs and cloths that were originally paid were exempted.

古文：以宋畲军将校授管民官，散之郡邑。敕春秋二仲月上丙日祀尧帝祠。
现代文：授予宋朝畲军的将校管民官职务。把他们分散到各郡县中，敕令春秋两季第二个月的头一个丙日祭祀尧帝祠。
English: The officers of the Song and Qin Dynasties were given the duties of civil officers. They were dispersed to various counties, and on the first day of the second month of the spring and autumn seasons, they made sacrifices to the Andean Ancestral Shrine.

古文：西京等处管课官马合谋自言岁以西京、平阳、太原课程额外羡钱市马驼千输官，而实盗官钱市之，按问有迹，伏诛。
现代文：西京等处的管税官马合谋自己说出，每年用西京、平阳、太原的赋税以外的羡余钱购买一千匹马驼交纳给官府，而实际上是盗窃官钱购买的。经审问确有实据，将其处死。
English: The tax officials of Xijing and other places conspired to say that they used the surplus money from Xijing, Pingyang and Taiyuan to buy a thousand camels to pay the government every year, but in fact they stole the government money. After interrogation, there was solid evidence, and they were put to death.

古文：乙丑，畋于近郊。
现代文：初四，皇帝在京师近郊行猎。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：召麦术丁、铁木儿、杨居宽等与集贤大学士阿鲁浑撒里及叶李、程文海、赵孟頫论钞法。
现代文：征召麦术丁、铁木儿、杨居宽等与集贤殿大学士阿鲁浑撒里，以及叶李、程文海、赵孟兆页一起讨论钞法。
English: Maizhuting, Tiemu Er, Yang Ju Kuan and others were summoned to discuss the banknote method with Aru Hunsari, a scholar at Jixianden University, as well as Ye Li, Cheng Wenhai, and Zhao Meng Zhaojie.

古文：麦术丁言： 自制国用使司改尚书省，颇有成效，今仍分两省为便。 
现代文：麦术丁说： 自从制国用使司改为尚书省以后，颇有成效，现在仍旧分为中书省、尚书省为宜。 
English: Mai Shuting said: Since the State-building Envoy Division was changed to Shangshu Province, it has been quite effective. Now it is still appropriate to be divided into Zhongshu Province and Shangshu Province.

古文：诏从之，各设官六员。
现代文：下诏允从，两省各设官员六名。
English: In accordance with the following edict, each of the two provinces will set up six officials.

古文：其尚书，以桑哥、铁木儿平章政事，阿鲁浑撒里右丞，叶李左丞，马绍参知政事，余一员议选回回人充；中书，宜设丞相二员、平章政事二员、参知政事二员。
现代文：尚书省命桑哥、铁木儿任平章政事，阿鲁浑撒里任右丞，叶李任左丞，马绍任参知政事，余下的一员议定选回回人充任；中书省宜设丞相二人，平章政事二人、参知政事二人。
English: Shang Shuxuan ordered Sango and Tie Mu'er to serve as the vice-premiers, Aru Hunsari to serve as the right vice-premiers, Ye Li to serve as the left vice-premiers, Ma Shao to serve as the vice-premiers, and the remaining members agreed to be elected to fill the positions. It is advisable for China's Shuxuan Province to have two vice-premiers, two vice-premiers, and two vice-premiers.

古文：省陇右河西道提刑按察司，分置巩昌者入甘州，设官五员；以巩昌改隶京兆提刑按察司，设官六员；省太原提刑按察司，分置西京者入太原。
现代文：裁撤陇右河西提刑按察司，分设于巩昌的司署合并入太原。
English: The Department of Criminal Investigation in Gongchang was abolished, and the Department of Criminal Investigation in Gongchang was merged into Taiyuan.

古文：辛未，以复置尚书省诏天下。
现代文：初十，把恢复设置尚书省的决定诏令天下。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the decision to restore the establishment of the Ministry of Education was announced to the world.

古文：除行省与中书议行，余并听尚书省从便以闻。
现代文：除了行中书省与中书省商议实行之外，其余的事均由尚书省取便上奏皇帝。
English: In addition to the implementation of the agreement between the Central Book Ministry and the Central Book Ministry, the remaining matters were taken by the Central Book Ministry and reported to the emperor.

古文：设国子监，立国学监官：祭酒一员，司业二员，监丞一员，学官博士二员，助教四员，生员百二十人，蒙古、汉人各半，官给纸札、饮食，仍隶集贤院。
现代文：设立国子监并设置国子监官员：祭酒一人，司业二人，监丞一人，学官博士二人，助教四人。生员一百二十人，蒙古人、汉人各占一半。由官府供给纸札、饮食，仍旧隶属于集贤院。
English: Establishment of the State Children's Supervisor and the establishment of State Children's Supervisor officials: one sacrificial wine, two supervisors, one supervisor, two academic officers, four teaching assistants. One hundred and twenty students, half Mongolian and half Chinese. Paper tags and meals provided by the government, still affiliated to Shixian Academy.

古文：设江南各道儒学提举司。
现代文：设置江南各道儒学提举司。
English: Confucianism promotion offices will be set up in all provinces in the south of the Yangtze River

古文：甲申，太阴犯牵牛。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯牵牛星。
English: On the 23rd, Taiyin Star committed a crime against Morning Glory Star.

古文：车驾还宫。
现代文：皇帝的车驾返回皇宫。
English: The Emperor's car drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：乙酉，改淄莱路为般阳路，置录事司。
现代文：二十四日，把淄莱路改为般阳路，设置录事司。
English: On the 24th, Bulai Road was changed to Panyang Road, and a Records Division was set up.

古文：大都饥，免今岁银俸钞，诸路半征之。
现代文：大都发生饥荒，免征今年的银俸钞。其他各路征收一半。
English: Famine occurred in most places, and this year's silver salary bills were exempted. All other roads were levied at half.

古文：罢江南竹木柴薪及岸例鱼牙诸课，停不给之务。
现代文：停收江南的竹、木、柴薪，以及例行的岸税、渔税、商税等赋税。停办不紧迫的政务。
English: The collection of bamboo, wood, and firewood from the southern part of the Yangtze River, as well as the routine taxes such as shore tax, fishing tax, and commercial tax, will be suspended.

古文：敕行省宣慰司勿滥举官吏，受除官延引岁月不即之任者，追所受宣敕。
现代文：敕令各行省宣慰司不得随意胡乱地举荐官吏。接受了任命而又拖延时间不立即去上任的，追回所授予的宣命。
English: The king ordered the provincial propaganda and comfort departments not to randomly nominate officials. Those who accepted the appointment but delayed the time to take office immediately should recover the proclamation issued.

古文：镇南王脱欢徙镇南京。
现代文：镇南王脱欢把镇所迁到南京。
English: Zhennan Wang Du Huan moved the town office to Nanjing.

古文：改福建市舶都漕运司为都转运盐使司。
现代文：把福建市舶都漕运司改为都转运盐使司。
English: To change the Fujian Ship Capital Locomotive Transport Division to the Capital Transporter of Salt Division.

古文：范文虎改尚书右丞，商议枢密院事。
现代文：范文虎改任尚书右丞，参与商议枢密院事务。
English: Fan Wenhu was reappointed as Shang Shuxu Rongcheng and participated in the deliberation of the Privy Council affairs.

古文：改行中书省为行尚书省，六部为尚书六部，以吏部尚书忻都为尚书省参知政事。
现代文：把行中书省改为行尚书省，中书省六部改为尚书省六部，任命吏部尚书忻都为尚书省参知政事。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was renamed the Ministry of Education and Culture, the six departments of the Ministry of Education and Culture were renamed the six departments of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture were appointed as the councillors of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：庚寅，大驾幸上都。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the saint arrived in the capital.

古文：札鲁忽赤合剌合孙等言： 去岁审囚官所录囚数，南京、济南两路应死者已一百九十人，若总校诸路，为数必多，宜留札鲁忽赤数人分道行刑。 
现代文：断事官合剌合孙等人上奏说 ：去年审问囚犯的官员所记录的囚犯数目，南京、济南两路应当处死的已经有一百九十人，如果统计其他各路的死囚，为数必定更多，应当留几名断事官分路前去执行死刑。 
English: Adjudicator Huanhuisun and others made a report: According to the number of prisoners recorded by the officials who interrogated the prisoners last year, there are already one hundred and ninety people who should be put to death in Nanjing and Jinan. If the number of death row prisoners in other cities is counted, the number must be higher. Several adjudicators should be left to go ahead to carry out the death penalty.

古文：帝曰： 囚非群羊，岂可遽杀耶？
现代文：皇帝说： 囚犯并不是一群羊，怎么能一下子都杀掉呢？
English: The emperor said, "Prisoners are not a flock of sheep. How can they all be killed at once?

古文：宜悉配隶淘金。 
现代文：应当全部发配去淘金。 
English: They should all be distributed to gold panning villages.

古文：三月甲午，更造至元宝钞颁行天下，中统钞通行如故。
现代文：三月初四，再次印制至元宝钞颁行于天下，中统年间印制的交钞仍旧继续通行。
English: On the fourth day of March, the newly-printed yuan-denominated banknotes were issued to the world, and the delivery notes printed during the period of central government continued to circulate.

古文：以至元宝钞一贯文当中统交钞五贯文，子母相权，要在新者无冗，旧者无废。
现代文：以至元宝钞一贯钱相当于中统交钞五贯钱，前后的钱钞互相平衡，主要为求得新钞不冗滥，旧钞不作废。
English: So far, the yuan-denominated banknotes have always been equivalent to the central government-issued banknotes of five yuan, and the front and back banknotes balance each other, mainly to ensure that the new banknotes are not redundant and the old banknotes are not scrapped.

古文：凡岁赐、周乏、饷军，皆以中统钞为准。
现代文：凡属一年的例赏、周济贫困、供应军饷，都以中统交钞为标准。
English: All of the annual awards, Zhou Zhi poverty relief, and supply of military pay are based on Zhongtong's payment of banknotes.

古文：禁无籍自效军扰民，仍籍充军。
现代文：禁止不在籍而投军自效的士兵扰害百姓，并登记他们入籍充当正式的士兵。
English: Prohibit soldiers who join the army without being registered to disturb the people, and register their naturalization to serve as official soldiers.

古文：丙申，太阴犯东井。
现代文：初六，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the star of the sun is too dark to see.

古文：乙卯，幸凉陉。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝临幸凉陉。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Linxing passed away.

古文：辽东饥，弛太子河捕鱼禁。
现代文：辽东发生饥荒，放宽不得在太子河捕鱼的禁令。
English: Famine occurred in Liaodong, and the ban on fishing in the Prince Edward River was relaxed.

古文：丙辰，马八儿国遣使进奇兽一，类骡而巨，毛黑白间错，名阿塔必即。
现代文：二十六日，马八儿国派遣使臣进贡奇兽一头，类似骡子而形体巨大，毛色黑白交错，名为 阿塔必即 。
English: On the 26th, the state of Ma Bailiang sent an envoy to pay tribute to a strange beast, resembling a mule but huge in shape, with interlaced black and white fur, named Atabizhong.

古文：降重庆路定远州为县。
现代文：把重庆路的定远州降格为县。
English: to downgrade Dingyuanzhou of Chongqing Road to a county.

古文：命都水监开汶、泗水以达京师。
现代文：命都水监放汶水、泗水的河水流到京师。
English: It is the duty of the water conservator of the capital to release the river water of Wenshui and Xinshui to flow to the capital.

古文：汴梁河水泛溢，役夫七千修完故堤。
现代文：汴梁河水泛滥，役使七千名民夫修整好旧堤。
English: The Qiliang River was overflowing. Seven thousand people were sent to repair the old dike.

古文：夏四月癸酉，太阴犯氐。
现代文：夏季，四月十三日，太阴星干犯氐宿天区。
English: In summer, on the 13th of April, the yin and yang of the planets collide in the heavens.

古文：甲戌，太阴犯房。
现代文：十四日，太阴星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 14th day of the lunar month, the Yin and Yang stars committed the crime of lodging in the celestial quarter.

古文：甲申，忻都奏发新钞十一万六百锭、银千五百九十三锭、金百两，付江南各省与民互市。
现代文：二十四日，忻都上奏发放新钞十一万零六百锭、银子一千五百九十三锭、金子一百两，交付给江南各行省，和百姓们进行贸易。
English: On the 24th, the capital issued new banknotes of 110,600 baht, silver of 1,593 baht, and gold of 102 baht, which were delivered to the provinces in the southern part of the Yangtze River to conduct trade with the people.

古文：是月，诸王乃颜反。
现代文：当月，诸侯王乃颜谋反。
English: That month, the princes conspired to rebel.

古文：五月己亥，遣也先传旨谕北京等处宣慰司，凡隶乃颜所部者禁其往来，毋令乘马持弓矢。
现代文：五月初九，派遣也先传旨，晓谕北京等地宣慰司，凡是隶属于乃颜部下的人，禁止他们往来，不得让他们乘马，持有弓箭。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, the dispatch also sent a message to the Consolation Division in Beijing and other places, telling them that all people who were subordinate to Naoyan's subordinates were forbidden to come and go. They were not allowed to ride horses or hold bows and arrows.

古文：庚子，以不鲁合罕总探马赤军三千人出征。
现代文：初十，派遣不鲁合罕统领三千名探马赤军士卒出征。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Burroughs sent 3,000 probationary Red Army soldiers to the front.

古文：移济南宣慰司治益都，燕南按察司治大名，南京按察司治南阳，太原按察司治西京，复立丰州亦剌真站。
现代文：把济南宣慰司的治所迁到益都，燕南按察司的治所迁到大名，南京按察司的治所迁到南阳，太原按察司的治所迁到西京。重新设立丰州的亦剌真驿站。
English: Relocated the administrative office of the Jinan Xuanliao Division to Yidu, the administrative office of the Yan'nan Inspection Division to Daimyo, the administrative office of the Nanjing Inspection Division to Nanyang, and the administrative office of the Taiyuan Inspection Division to Xijing. Re-established the Fuzhou Yizheng Inspection Station.

古文：壬寅，以御史台吏王良弼等诽讪尚书省政事，诛良弼，籍其家，余皆断罪。
现代文：十二日，因御史台官员王良弼等人诽谤、讥笑尚书省的政务，将王良弼处死，抄没其家产，其余的人也都治罪。
English: On the 12th, because Wang Liangyao, an official of the Imperial History Department, and others slandered and ridiculed the government affairs of Shang Shuxuan, Wang Liangyao was put to death, his family property was confiscated, and the rest of the people were also punished.

古文：用桑哥言，置上海、福州两万户府，以维制沙不丁、乌马儿等海运船。
现代文：采纳桑哥的意见，设置上海、福州两个万户府，以维护、控制沙不丁、乌马儿等人的海运船。
English: Adopted Sango's opinion and set up two Wanhu Prefecture in Shanghai and Fuzhou to maintain and control the sea transport ships of Shabudin, Umar and others.

古文：户、工两部各增尚书二员。
现代文：户部、工部两部各增设尚书两名。
English: The Household Department and the two Departments of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce each added two officials.

古文：授高丽王睶行尚书省平章政事。
现代文：授予高丽国王王贝春行尚书省平章政事。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Bei Chunxing, was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, Grand Cordon of the Republic of Korea.

古文：罢诸路站脱脱禾孙。
现代文：撤销各路驿站的驿卒。
English: Revoke the suspension of all railway stations.

古文：括江南诸路匠户。
现代文：登记江南各路的匠户。
English: Craftsmen from all over the south of the Yangtze River have been registered.

古文：沙不丁言： 江南各省南官多，每省宜用一二人。 
现代文：沙不丁上奏说 ：江南各行省的南人官员太多，每省只宜用一两名南人。 
English: Sha Bouding said in his report: There are too many Nanren officials in the provinces south of the Yangtze River, and only one or two Nanren should be used in each province.

古文：帝曰： 除陈岩、吕师夔、管如德、范文虎四人，余从卿议。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：除了陈岩、吕师夔、管如德、范文虎四人，其余的按照你的意见办理。 
English: The emperor said, "In addition to Chen Yan, Lu Shijun, Guan Rude and Fan Wenhu, the remaining four will be dealt with according to your opinion."

古文：帝自将征乃颜，发上都。括江南僧道马匹。
现代文：皇帝亲自率军征伐乃颜，从上都出发，聚集江南僧侣道士的马匹。
English: The emperor personally led the army to conquer Naiyan, and set out from Shangdu to gather the horses of the monks and Taoists in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：诏范文虎将卫军五百镇平滦，以钦察为亲军都指挥使，也速带儿、右卫佥事王通副之。
现代文：诏令范文虎率领五百名侍卫亲军镇守平滦，任命钦察卫亲军都指挥使也速带儿、右卫佥事王通担任他的副手。
English: He ordered Fan Wenhu to lead five hundred guardsmen to guard Pingyao, and appointed Qincha as the commander of the guardsmen, and the right guard Anji Wang Tong as his deputy.

古文：甲辰，免北京今岁丝银，仍以军旅经行，给钞三千锭赈之。
现代文：十四日，免征北京今年的丝税银，并因为军队从这里通行，给他们三千锭钱钞以进行赈济。
English: On the 14th, they exempted Beijing from this year's silk tax and gave them 3,000 baht banknotes for relief because the army was passing through here.

古文：壬子，高丽王睶请益兵征乃颜，以五百人赴之。
现代文：二十二日，高丽国王王贝春请求增兵讨伐乃颜，派五百人前往。
English: On the 22nd, King Baechun of Goryeo requested additional troops to fight Naien and sent 500 men.

古文：六月庚申朔，百官以职守不得从征乃颜，愿献马以给卫士。
现代文：六月初一，百官们因为职守的原因不能随从皇帝征伐乃颜，愿意把马献给皇帝的卫士。
English: On the first day of June, for reasons of duty, the centurions could not accompany the emperor on the conquest of Naian, but were willing to give their horses to the emperor's guards.

古文：壬戌，至撒儿都鲁之地。
现代文：初三，圣驾抵达撒儿都鲁地方。
English: On the third day of the first month, the saint arrived in Sariduru.

古文：乃颜党塔不带率所部六万逼行在而阵，遣前军败之。
现代文：乃颜的党羽塔不带率领所部六万名士卒逼近皇帝驻跸的地方列阵，皇帝派前锋击败了他。
English: Naoyan's party of 60,000 soldiers, led by the leader of the headquarters, approached the place where the emperor was stationed, and the emperor sent a striker to defeat him.

古文：乙丑，敕辽阳省督运军储。
现代文：初六，敕令辽阳行省督运军需储备。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Liaoyang to supervise the transportation of military reserves.

古文：壬申，发诸卫军万人、蒙古军千人戍豪、懿州。
现代文：十三日，派遣各个卫军的一万人、蒙古军一千人戍守豪州、懿州。
English: On the 13th, 10,000 men from each of the guards and 1,000 men from the Mongolian army were sent to defend Gozhou and Ganzhou.

古文：诸王失都儿所部铁哥率其党取咸平府，渡辽，欲劫取豪、懿州，守臣以乏军求援，敕以北京戍军千人赴之。
现代文：诸侯王失都儿部下的铁哥率领他的党羽占领成平府，渡过辽河，想要抢占豪州、懿州，守城的官员因缺少兵卒而求援，敕命派一千名北京的守军前去救援。
English: Zhuhou Wang lost the capital, his subordinate Tie Brother led his party to occupy Chengpingfu, crossed the Liao River, and wanted to seize Huzhou and Zhangzhou. The officials defending the city asked for help due to a lack of soldiers, and desperately sent a thousand Beijing defenders to the rescue.

古文：括平滦路马。
现代文：聚集平滦路的马匹。
English: Horses gather on Pingyao Road.

古文：北京饥，免丝银、租税。
现代文：北京发生饥馑，免征丝税银和田租。
English: Famine occurs in Beijing, silk tax and field rent are exempted.

古文：乙亥，霸州益津县霖雨伤稼。
现代文：十六日，霸州的益津县连降大雨伤害庄稼。
English: On the 16th, continuous heavy rain in Yijin County, Bazhou, damaged crops.

古文：以陕西泾、邠、乾及安西属县闲田立屯田总管府，置官属，秩三品。
现代文：在陕西的泾州、州、乾州，以及安西路属县的闲田建立屯田总管府，设置官属，秩禄为三品。
English: In Shaanxi's Bozhou, Zhou and Qianzhou, as well as the idle fields of Anxi Road County, the General Administration of Tontian was established, with the establishment of official subordinates, and the rank of three prizes.

古文：车驾驻干大利斡鲁脱之地，获乃颜辎重千余，仍禁秋毫无犯。
现代文：皇帝的车驾屯驻在干大利斡鲁脱地方，缴获乃颜的辎重一千多车，并下禁令，对百姓秋毫不得有所犯。
English: The emperor's chariot drivers stationed themselves in Gandia and Lutu, seized more than a thousand chariots of Naoyan's army, and issued an injunction not to commit any crimes against the people.

古文：秋七月癸巳，乃颜党失都儿犯咸平，宣慰塔出从皇子爱牙赤，合兵出沈州进讨，宣慰亦儿撒合分兵趣懿州，其党悉平。
现代文：秋季，七月初四，乃颜的党羽失都儿进犯咸平，宣慰使塔出随从皇子爱牙赤，与其合兵从沈州出发进军征讨，宣慰使亦儿撒合分兵前往懿州，贼党全部被平定。
English: In autumn, on the 4th day of the 7th month, Naoyan's party lost the capital and attacked Hamping. To appease the emperor, he sent out a tower to follow the prince, Ai Ya Chia, and marched with his soldiers from Shenzhou to solicit, and to appease the emperor, he sent a detachment of soldiers to Zhangzhou. The thieves were all subdued.

古文：丁酉，弘州匠官以犬兔毛制如西锦者以献，授匠官知弘州。
现代文：初八，弘州掌管匠户的官员用犬毛和兔毛制成像西锦一样的织品呈献给朝廷，授予匠户官弘州知州之职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the officials in charge of the artisan households in Honshu presented dog and rabbit hair made into textiles like brocade to the imperial court, awarding the artisan household official the post of Honshu Chishu.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯南斗。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the yin and yang stars collide in the sky.

古文：枢密院奏： 签征缅行省事合撒儿海牙言，比至缅国，谕其王赴阙，彼言邻番数叛，未易即行，拟遣阿难答剌奉表赍土贡入觐。 
现代文：枢密院上奏说 ：征缅行省佥事合撒儿海牙说，最近抵达缅国，谕令该国国王前往朝廷，他说有好几个邻国叛乱，立即动身不容易做到，准备派阿难答剌奉上表章，携带地方特产入朝觐见皇上。 
English: The report to the Privy Council said: "A provincial anecdote of recruiting and traveling to Burma" The Hague said that he had recently arrived in Burma and ordered the king of the country to go to the imperial court. He said that there were several neighboring countries in rebellion, and it was not easy to leave immediately. He was preparing to send Ananda to present the above seal and bring local special products to the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，太阴犯牵牛。
现代文：十二日，太阴星干犯牵牛星。
English: On the twelfth day, the Yin star was the culprit of the Cowherd star.

古文：壬寅，荧惑犯舆鬼。
现代文：十三日，荧惑星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the 13th, the fluorescent planet caused havoc in the sky.

古文：庚戌，云南行省爱鲁言，金齿酋打奔等兄弟求内附，且乞入觐。
现代文：二十一日，云南行省爱鲁上奏说： 金齿国酋长打奔兄弟等要求归附朝廷，并请求入朝觐见皇上。 
English: On the twenty-first day of his visit to Yunnan Province, Ailu Shangso said: The chiefs and brothers of Jinzu Province requested to join the imperial court, and requested to enter the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：壬子，太阴犯司怪。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯司怪星官。
English: On the 23rd, Taiyin Star committed a crime against the strange star official.

古文：癸丑，日晕连环，白虹贯之。
现代文：二十四日，日晕形成连环，白虹从中贯通。
English: On the 24th, the sun's halo forms a continuous ring, and the white rainbow runs through it.

古文：罢乃颜所署益都、平滦，也不干河间分地达鲁花赤，及胜纳合儿济南分地所署官。
现代文：撤销乃颜在益都、平滦所署理的官职，撤销也不干在河间的封地所任镇守官之职，以及胜纳合儿在济南封地所署理的官职。
English: Naoyan's posts as deputy of Ikutsu and Pingyao were revoked, as well as his post as town watchman of the fief in Hema, and his post as deputy of the fief in Jinan were revoked.

古文：移北京道按察司置豪州，免东京等处军民徭赋。升福建盐运使司，依两淮等例，为都转运使司。
现代文：把北京道按察司迁移到豪州，免除东京等地军民的徭役和赋税，依照两淮等地的先例，把福建盐运使司升格为都转运使司，把中兴府隶属于甘州行省。
English: Relocate the Beijing Road Inspection Division to Australia, exempt the military and civilians in Tokyo and other places from taxes and duties, upgrade the Fujian Salt Transportation Division to the Capital Transportation Division in accordance with the precedent of the two Huai and other places, and subordinate Zhongxing Prefecture to Ganzhou Province.

古文：以中兴府隶甘州行省，以河西爱牙赤所部屯田军同沙州居民修城河西瓜、沙等处。
现代文：派遣河西的爱牙赤所部屯田军，同沙州居民一起在河西瓜州、沙州等处修筑城垣。
English: He dispatched troops from the Aiga Red Army Headquarters in Hexi to join the residents of Shazhou in building city walls in Hexiguazhou, Shazhou and other places.

古文：立阇鄽屯田。
现代文：建立屯田。
English: Settlements were established.

古文：八月癸亥，太白犯亢。
现代文：八月初五，太白金星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the great white planet Venus is in the sky.

古文：浚州进瑞麦，一茎九穗。
现代文：浚州进献瑞麦，一株长出九个麦穗。
English: Nine ears of wheat sprouted from one plant of Ruimai, which was donated by Danzhou.

古文：乙丑，车驾还上都。
现代文：初七，皇帝的车驾返回上都。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor's chariot returned to Shangdu.

古文：以李海剌孙为征缅行省参政，将新附军五千、探马赤军一千以行，仍调四川、湖广行省军五千赴之。
现代文：任命李海剌孙为征缅行省参政，率领五千名新附军、一千名探马赤军出征，并调遣四川、湖广行省的五千名士卒前往。
English: He appointed Li Haisheng's son to participate in politics in the province of the Conquest of Burma, led five thousand new attached troops and one thousand Red Army soldiers to go to war, and dispatched five thousand dignitaries from Sichuan and Hougang provinces.

古文：召能通白夷、金齿道路者张成及前占城军总管刘全，并为招讨使，佩虎符，从征。
现代文：征召能够通晓白夷、金齿道路的张成，以及前占城军队总管刘全，均担任招讨使，佩戴虎符，随从出征。
English: Zhang Cheng, who was able to understand the Baiyi and Jintao roads, and Liu Quan, the former general manager of the occupied city army, both served as recruiting envoys, wore tiger badges, and accompanied the expedition.

古文：以脱满答儿为都元帅，将四川省兵五千赴缅省，仍令其省驻缅近地，以俟进止。
现代文：任命满脱答儿为都元帅，率领四川行省的五千名士卒前往征缅行省，并令其行省的署衙屯驻在靠近缅国的地方，以等待采取行动。
English: Appointed the son of Man Tuo as the capital marshal, led five thousand soldiers from Sichuan Province to go to recruit Myanmar Province, and ordered his provincial office to stay in a place close to Myanmar to wait for action.

古文：置江南四省交钞提举司。
现代文：设置江南四省交钞提举司。
English: Set up the four provinces in the south of the Yangtze River to pay bills and raise funds.

古文：己巳，谪从叛诸王赴江南诸省从军自效。
现代文：十一日，贬谪随从叛乱的诸侯王前往江西各行省随营效力。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the vassals of the princes who followed the rebellion went to the provinces of Jiangxi to accompany the battalion.

古文：谕镇南王脱欢，禁戢从征诸王及省官奥鲁赤等，毋纵军士焚掠，毋以交趾小国而易之。
现代文：谕令镇南王脱欢约束从征的诸侯王以及中书省官员奥鲁赤等，不得放纵士兵纵火、抢劫，不得因为安南是小国就轻视它。
English: The edict ordered the king of Zhenan to withdraw from the feast, and restrained the princes and officials of the People's Republic of China, such as the officials of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China, from indulging soldiers in arson and robbery, and from despising Annan because it was a small country.

古文：癸酉，朵儿朵海获叛王阿赤思，赦之。
现代文：十五日，朵儿朵海俘获叛乱的诸侯王阿赤思，皇帝赦免了他。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor pardoned the rebellious vassal prince Achis, who had been captured by the sea.

古文：亦集乃路屯田总管忽都鲁请疏浚管内河渠，从之。
现代文：亦集乃路的屯田总管忽都鲁请求疏浚辖区内的河渠，皇帝允从。
English: Also, the general manager of the military cantonment at Jichinei Road, Kuduru, requested the dredging of the canals in the area under his jurisdiction, and the emperor complied.

古文：丙子，填星南犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十八日，土星南移，干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 18th, Saturn moved south and interfered with the star formation.

古文：己卯，太阴犯天关。
现代文：二十一日，太阴星干犯天关星。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a very cloudy star interfered with the celestial event.

古文：辛巳，太阴犯东井。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the twenty-third day, the star of the Great Yin appeared in the area of Guanzhongjing.

古文：甲申，太白犯房。
现代文：二十六日，太白金星干犯房宿天区。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus committed the crime of lodging in heaven.

古文：丁亥，沈州饥，又经乃颜叛兵蹂践，免其今岁丝银、租赋。
现代文：二十九日，因为沈州饥馑，又经乃颜的叛军蹂躏，免除该地今年的丝税银和田租。
English: On the 29th, because of the famine in Shenzhou and the ravages of the rebels in Noyan, this year's silk tax, silver and field rent were exempted.

古文：以北京伐木三千户屯田平滦。
现代文：派北京的三千名伐木户到平滦屯田。
English: Beijing sent three thousand lumberjacks to Pingyao Tunden.

古文：立丰赡、昌国、济民三署，秩五品，设达鲁花赤、令、丞、直长各一员。
现代文：设立丰赡署、昌国署、济民署三个署、职俸为五品，各署设置镇守官、署令、署丞、直长各一人。
English: Three departments were established, namely, the Affluent Maintenance Department, the Changguo Department, and the Economic and People's Affairs Department. The salary was five rupees, and each department was set up with a town guard, a deputy, a deputy secretary, and a director.

古文：女人国贡海人。
现代文：女人国进贡海人草。
English: Woman pays tribute to the sea grass.

古文：置河西务马站。
现代文：在河西务设置马站。
English: A horse station was set up in Hexi.

古文：九月辛卯，东京义静、麟、威远、婆娑等处大霖雨，江水溢，没民田；大定、金源、高州、武平、兴中等处霜雹伤稼。
现代文：九月初三，东京、义州、静州、麟州、威远、婆娑等处连降大雨，江水泛滥，淹没民田。大定、金源、高州、武平、兴中等处霜冻、冰雹伤害庄稼。
English: At the beginning of September 3, heavy rain fell in succession in Tokyo, Yishu, Jingzhou, Linzhou, Weiyuan, Bawang and other places, flooding rivers and submerging people's fields. Frost and hail damage crops in Dading, Jinyuan, Gaozhou, Wuping and Xingzhong.

古文：丁酉，荧惑犯长垣。
现代文：初九，荧惑星干犯长垣星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the fluorescent planet Nagakaki star is the culprit.

古文：己亥，湖广省臣言： 海南琼州路安抚使陈仲达、南宁军总管谢有奎、延栏总管符庇成，以其私船百二十艘、黎兵千七百余人，助征交趾。 
现代文：十一日，湖广行省大臣上奏说 ：海南琼州路安抚使陈仲达、南宁军总管谢有奎、延栏总管苻庇成，用他们的私船一百二十艘、黎兵一千七百多人协助征伐安南。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the minister of Hunan Province made a report: Chen Zhongda, the head of the Nanning Army, Xie Youkui, and the head of the Yan'an Army, Zou Peicheng, who were sent to pacify the Qiongzhou Road in Hainan, used their 120 private ships and more than 1,700 Li soldiers to assist in the conquest of Annan.

古文：诏以仲达仍为安抚使，佩虎符，有奎、庇成亦仍为沿海管军总管，佩金符。
现代文：下诏命陈仲达仍旧担任安抚使，佩戴虎符，谢有奎、苻庇成也仍旧担任沿海管军总管，佩戴金符。
English: The following edict ordered Chen Zhongda to continue to serve as the pacification envoy and wear the tiger emblem, and Xie Youkui and Nie Bicheng to continue to serve as the chiefs of the coastal administration troops and wear the gold emblem.

古文：庚子，太白犯天江。
现代文：十二日，太白金星干犯天江星。
English: On the twelfth day, too white Venus committed Tianjiang Star.

古文：给诸王八八所部穷乏者钞万一千锭。
现代文：赐给诸侯王八八部下的贫穷者钱钞一万一千锭。
English: He gave 11,000 baht in money and notes to the poor under the rule of Prince Hachihachibu.

古文：禁市毒药者。
现代文：禁止买卖毒药。
English: The sale and purchase of poison is prohibited.

古文：以西京、平滦路饥，禁酒。
现代文：因为西京、平滦路发生饥馑，禁止酿酒。
English: Because of the famine in Saikyo and Pingli Road, the brewing of alcohol was prohibited.

古文：乙巳，太阴犯毕。以米二万石、羊万口给阿沙所统唐兀军。
现代文：十七日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区，把二万石米、一万头羊赐给阿沙所统辖的唐兀军。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Great Yin Star invaded the quarter of Suqian and gave twenty thousand koku of rice and ten thousand sheep to the Tang Dynasty army under the command of Asha.

古文：丁未，安南国遣其中大夫阮文彦、通侍大夫黎仲谦贡方物。
现代文：十九日，安南国派遣该国中大夫阮文彦、通侍大夫黎仲谦进贡地方特产。
English: On the 19th, the State of Annan sent the country's middle doctor, Nguyn Văn Hng, and the doctor's aide, Lê Trng Hi, to bring in the tribute of local special products.

古文：戊申，咸平、懿州、北京以乃颜叛，民废耕作，又霜雹为灾，告饥，诏以海运粮五万石赈之。
现代文：二十日，咸平、懿州、北京因为乃颜叛乱，百姓废止耕作，再加上霜冻、冰雹造成灾害，上报饥馑。诏令从海上运粮五万石赈济该地区。
English: On the 20th, because of the Naien Rebellion, the people of Hamping, Zhangzhou, and Beijing stopped farming, which, combined with frost and hail, caused disasters and reported famine. The emperor ordered that 50,000 kilos of grain be transported from the sea to help the region.

古文：辛亥，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：二十三日，荧惑星干犯太微西垣上将星官。
English: On the 23rd, the fluorescent planet interfered with Admiral Nishigaki.

古文：壬子，太白犯南斗。
现代文：二十四日，太白金星干犯斗宿天区。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the too-white Venus entered the heaven zone.

古文：禁沮挠江南茶课。
现代文：禁止阻挠征收江南的茶税。
English: It is forbidden to obstruct the collection of tea tax in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：高丽王王睶来朝。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春前来朝见。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo came to see me in the morning.

古文：冬十月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，发生日食。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：壬戌，太阴犯牵牛大星。
现代文：初五，太阴星干犯牵牛星座大星。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Yin star is the culprit of the Cowherd constellation.

古文：甲子，享于太庙。
现代文：初七，向太庙奉献祭品。
English: On the 18th, offerings were made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：桑哥请赐叶李、马绍、不忽木、高翥等钞，诏赐李钞百五十锭，不忽木、绍、翥各百锭。
现代文：桑哥请求赐给叶李、马绍、不忽木、高翥等钱钞，皇上诏令赐给叶李一百五十锭钱钞，不忽木、马绍、高翥各一百锭。
English: Sango asked for money to be given to Ye Li, Ma Shao, Bu Khu Mu, Gao Yao, and so on. The Emperor's edict gave Ye Li 150 baht in money, and Bu Khu Mu, Ma Shao, and Gao Yao 100 baht each.

古文：又言： 中书省旧在大内前，阿合马移置于北，请仍旧为宜。 
现代文：桑哥又说 ：中书省府署原先在皇宫前面，阿合马把它迁到皇宫北面，请按照原样为妥。 
English: Sango also said, "The Chinese Calligraphy Provincial Government Office was originally located in front of the Imperial Palace, but Ahama moved it to the north of the Imperial Palace. Please keep it as it is.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸酉，江西行院月的迷失言： 广东穷边险远，江西、福建诸寇出没之窟，乞于江南诸省分军一万益臣。 
现代文：十六日，江西行枢密院月的迷失上奏说 ：广东处于极边远险要的地方，是江西、福建各类盗寇出没的巢穴，请在江南各行省分遣兵卒一万人增添给我。 
English: On the 16th day of the month of the loss of the Privy Council in Jiangxi, he said: Guangdong is located in a remote and dangerous place, and it is a lair for all kinds of thieves in Jiangxi and Fujian. Please send 10,000 additional soldiers to me from various provinces in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：诏江西忽都帖木儿以军五千付之。
现代文：皇帝下诏：令江西的忽都帖木儿把五千名士兵交给他。
English: The emperor decreed that Timur, the khutor of Jiangxi, should hand over five thousand soldiers to him.

古文：丙子，诛郭佑、杨居宽。
现代文：十九日，将郭佑、杨居宽处死。
English: On the 19th, Guo You and Yang Ju Kuan were executed.

古文：戊寅，桑哥言： 北安王相府无印，而安西王相独有印，实非事例，乞收之。
现代文：二十一日，桑哥上奏说： 北安王的宰相府没有印信，唯独安西王的相国有印信，确是一个不恰当的先例，请收回安西王相府的印信。
English: On the 21st, Sango reported: The prime minister's office of King Bei'an did not have a seal, but the prime minister's office of King Anxi did. This is an inappropriate precedent. Please withdraw the seal from the prime minister's office of King Anxi.

古文：诸王胜纳合儿印文曰 皇侄贵宗之宝 ，宝非人臣所宜用，因其分地改为 济南王印 为宜。 
现代文：诸侯王胜纳合儿的印信上的文字是 皇侄贵宗之宝 ，作为人臣， 宝 字是不宜于用的。按照他的封地，改为 济南王印 较为合适。 
English: According to his fiefdom, it is more appropriate to change it to Jinan King's Seal.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：均予允从。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：从总帅汪惟和言，分所部戍四川军五千人屯田六盘。
现代文：依从总帅汪惟和的建议，把他部下戍守四川的五千名士兵派到六盘去屯田。
English: In accordance with the suggestion of Generalissimo Wang Weihe, he sent five thousand soldiers of his subordinates to guard Sichuan to Liupan to occupy the field.

古文：乙酉，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：二十八日，荧惑星干犯左执法星。
English: On the 28th, the fluorescent planet became a law enforcement star.

古文：立陕西宝钞提举司。
现代文：设立陕西宝钞提举司。
English: The Shaanxi Treasure Banknote Withdrawal Office was established.

古文：罗北甸土官火者、阿禾及维摩合剌孙之子并内附。
现代文：罗北甸的土官火者、阿禾，以及维摩合剌孙的儿子均归附朝廷。
English: Luo Bei Dian's local officials Hui Zi, Ah Wo, and the son of Wei Mo He's grandson all joined the imperial court.

古文：丙戌，范文虎言： 豪、懿、东京等处，人心未安，宜立省以抚绥之。 
现代文：二十九日，范文虎上奏说 ：豪州、懿州、东京等地的人心还没有安定，应当设置行省安抚他们。 
English: On the 29th, Fan Wenhu delivered a report, saying that the hearts of the people in Australia, Chenzhou, Tokyo and other places were not yet stable, and that provinces should be set up to pacify them.

古文：诏立辽阳等处行尚书省，以薛阇干、阇里帖木儿并行尚书省平章政事，洪茶丘右丞，亦儿撒合左丞，杨仁风、阿老瓦丁并参知政事。
现代文：下诏设立辽阳等地行尚书省，任命薛干、里帖木儿并任行尚书省平章政事，洪茶丘任右丞，亦儿撒合任左丞，杨仁风、阿老瓦丁并任参知政事。
English: The following edict established Liaoyang and other places as Shangshu Province, and appointed Xue Gan and Lijie Mu'er as the governors of Shangshu Province, Hong Chaqiu as the right-hand man, Yi Ersa as the left-hand man, and Yang Renfeng and A Lao Wading as the co-governors.

古文：十一月壬辰，太白犯垒壁阵，月晕金、土二星。
现代文：十一月初六，太白金星干犯垒壁阵星，月晕的云气笼罩金星、土星二星。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the too-white Venus was the culprit of the bastion star, and the clouds of the moon's halo shrouded Venus and Saturn.

古文：云南省右丞爱鲁兵次交趾木兀门，其将昭文王以四万人守之，爱鲁击破之，获其将黎石、何英。
现代文：云南行省右丞爱鲁的军队驻扎在安南的木兀门地方，安南守将昭文王率领四万人镇守，爱鲁击败了敌军，俘获了他的将领黎石、何英。
English: The troops of the Yunnan Provincial U.S. General Airu were stationed in the Muxianmen area of Annan. The Annan governor, King Zhaowen, led 40,000 people to defend the town. Airu defeated the enemy army and captured his generals, Li Shi and He Ying.

古文：弛太原、保德河鱼禁。
现代文：放宽太原、保德的江河禁止捕鱼的禁令。
English: Relax the ban on fishing in the rivers of Taiyuan and Baode.

古文：以桑哥为金紫光禄大夫、尚书右丞相，兼统制院使，领功德使司事。
现代文：任命桑哥为金紫光禄大夫、尚书省右丞相，兼任总制院使，掌管功德使司的事务。
English: He appointed Sango as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the minister of the right of Shangshu Province, and also served as the chief envoy of the academy, in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Merit.

古文：从桑哥请，以平章帖木儿代其位，右丞阿剌浑撒里升平章政事，叶李升右丞，参知政事马绍升左丞。
现代文：依从桑哥的请求，以平章政事帖木儿代替他的职位，右丞阿剌浑撒里提升为平章政事，叶李升任右丞，参知政事马绍升任左丞。
English: In accordance with Sango's request, he was replaced by Taira no Shosho Seiji Timur, Ujo no Ahihunsari was promoted to Taira no Shosho Seiji, Ye Li was promoted to Ujo no Seiji, and Sancho no Seiji Masho was promoted to Zujo no Seiji.

古文：升集贤院秩正二品。
现代文：把集贤院的职俸升格为正二品。
English: The salary of Jixian Academy was upgraded to the second-highest grade.

古文：丙申，荧惑犯太微东垣上相。
现代文：初十，荧惑星干犯太微东垣上相星官。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the fluorescent planet is too faint to be detected by the eastern wall.

古文：丁酉，桑哥言： 先是皇子忙哥剌封安西王，统河西、土番、四川诸处，置王相府，后封秦王，绾二金印。
现代文：十一日，桑哥上奏说 ：当初，皇子忙哥剌被封为安西王，统领河西、土蕃、四川等地，设置安西王相府，后来又封为秦王，一身而系两颗金印。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Sango reported, "At the beginning, the prince Busy Brothers was named the King of Anxi, and he ruled over the provinces of Hexi, Tuyu, and Sichuan, and set up the Anxi King's Council of Ministers. Later, he was named the King of Qin, and he had two gold seals.

古文：今嗣王安难答仍袭安西王印，弟按摊不花别用秦王印，其下复以王傅印行，一藩而二王，恐于制非宜。 
现代文：如今嗣王安难答仍旧继承安西王的印信，他的弟弟按摊不花另拥秦王的印信，其下属又用王傅的印信行事。一处的藩属而有了两个亲王，对于体制来说恐怕不恰当。 
English: Today, Wang Anandatsu still inherits the seal of Anxi King, his younger brother holds the seal of Qin King, and his subordinates also use the seal of Wang Fu. Having two princes from the same clan is probably inappropriate for the system.

古文：诏以阿难答嗣为安西王，仍置王傅，而上秦王印，按摊不花所署王傅罢之。
现代文：诏令由阿难答继承安西王之位，仍旧设置王傅，而把秦王的印信上交，撤销按摊不花所任命的王傅。
English: The edict decreed that Ananda should succeed to the throne of Anxi, but still set up Wang Fu, and the king of Qin's seal letter should be handed over, and the Wang Fu appointed by Zhang Shanfu should be revoked.

古文：戊戌，以别十八里汉军及新附军五百人屯田合迷玉速曲之地。
现代文：十二日，派遣别十八里地方的汉军以及新附军五百人到合迷玉速曲地方屯田。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese troops stationed in the Beixiaoli area and the newly attached 500 troops were dispatched to the military garrison in the Hemei Yushiji area.

古文：己亥，镇南王次思明，程鹏飞与奥鲁赤等从镇南王分道并进，阿八赤以万人为前锋。
现代文：十三日，镇南王屯驻在思明，程鹏飞与奥鲁赤等跟随镇南王分路进军，阿八赤率领一万人为前锋。
English: On the 13th, Zhenan Wang Tun stationed in Siming, Cheng Pengfei and Olu Chia, etc. followed Zhenan Wang to march on a branch road, and Aba Chia led 10,000 people as the vanguard.

古文：庚子，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白金星白昼出现。
English: On the 9th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：大都路水，赐今年田租十二万九千一百八十石。
现代文：大都路发生水灾，赏赐今年的田租十二万九千一百八十石给他们。
English: A flood occurred on Dadu Road, and this year's field rent of 129,180 koku was awarded to them.

古文：辛丑，乌马儿、樊楫及程鹏飞等遂趣交趾，所向克捷。
现代文：十五日，乌马儿、攀楫以及程鹏飞等顺利抵达安南，所到之处都取得胜利。
English: On the 15th, Umar, Phan Thiet and Cheng Pengfei successfully arrived in Annan, and achieved victory everywhere they went.

古文：改卫尉院为太仆寺，秩三品，仍隶宣徽，以月赤彻儿、秃秃合领之。
现代文：把尉卫院改为太仆寺，职俸为三品，仍旧隶属于宣徽院，命月赤彻儿、秃秃合掌管。
English: The Yewei Temple was changed to the Taipo Temple, with a salary of three rupees, still under the jurisdiction of the Xuanhui Temple, and under the control of the Shigetsu Kechere and Bald Kechere.

古文：丙午，镇南王次界河，交趾发兵拒守，前锋皆击破之。
现代文：二十日，镇南王驻屯在界河，安南派兵抵抗，前锋把他们都击败了。
English: On the 20th, Zhenan Wang was stationed in Jiehe. Annan sent troops to resist, and the vanguard defeated them all.

古文：己酉，诏议弭盗。
现代文：二十三日，下诏商议平息盗贼的事。
English: On the 23rd, they held a meeting to discuss how to quell the thieves.

古文：桑哥、玉速帖木儿言： 江南归附十年，盗贼迄今未靖者，宜降旨立限招捕，而以安集责州县之吏，其不能者黜之。 
现代文：桑哥、玉速铁木儿上奏说 ：江南归附朝廷已经十年，直到现在盗贼还没有平定，应当降旨立定限期招降、追捕，而责成州县的官吏安定、聚集百姓。
English: Sangge and Yuhai Tiemu'er reported: It has been ten years since the south of the Yangtze River was annexed to the imperial court, and until now the thieves have not been subdued. It is necessary to issue an order to set a time limit for recruiting and pursuing, and to instruct the officials of the prefectures and counties to stabilize and gather the people.

古文：叶李言： 臣在漳州十年，详知其事，大抵军官嗜利与贼通者，尤难弭息。
现代文：那些不能做到这些的官员革职。 叶李上奏说： 臣在漳州十年，详细地了解这方面的事情。多数情况都是因为军官们贪利而与盗贼相勾结，这些地方就特别难以消除、平息盗寇。
English: Ye Li Shangso said: "I have been in Zhangzhou for ten years and know this area in detail. In most cases, it is because the officers are greedy and collude with the thieves. These places are particularly difficult to eliminate and quell the thieves.

古文：宜令各处镇守军官，例以三年转徙，庶革斯弊。 
现代文：应当依照惯例，把各地镇守的军官三年调一次，这样就差不多可以革除这项弊病了。 
English: Town guard officers should be rotated every three years in accordance with the usual practice, so that this problem can be almost eliminated.

古文：帝皆从其议，诏行之。
现代文：皇帝完全依从了他的意见，下诏实行。
English: The emperor fully followed his advice and issued the following edict.

古文：封驸马帖木儿济宁郡王。
现代文：封驸马帖木儿为济宁郡王。
English: He crowned Ma Timur as the king of Jining.

古文：壬子，以江西行省平章忽都帖木儿督捕广东等处盗贼。
现代文：二十六日，命令江西行省平章政事忽都帖木儿督察搜捕广东等地的盗贼。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the inspector of Pingzhang, Jiangxi Province, to search and arrest the thieves in Guangdong and other places.

古文：甲寅，命京畿、济宁两漕运司分掌漕事。
现代文：二十八日，命令京畿、济宁两个漕运司分别掌管漕运的事务。
English: On the 28th, it ordered the Gyeonggi and Jining Rowing Departments to take charge of the affairs of rowing separately.

古文：镇南王次万劫，诸军毕会。
现代文：镇南王屯驻在万劫，各军均会合于此。
English: Zhenan Wang Tun was stationed in Wanlu, and all the armies gathered here.

古文：获福建首贼张治囝，其党皆平。
现代文：俘获福建贼首张治囝，其党羽全部被平定。
English: Zhang Zhisheng, the first Fujian thief, was captured, and all of his followers were subdued.

古文：谕江南四省招捕盗贼。
现代文：谕令江南四省招降、捕捉盗贼。
English: The edict ordered the four provinces south of the Yangtze River to recruit and capture thieves.

古文：丙辰，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：三十日，荧惑星干犯进贤星。
English: On the 30th, the fluorescent planet trespassed into Hyosung.

古文：十二月癸亥，立尚乘寺。
现代文：十二月初七，设立尚乘寺。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Shoryo-ji Temple was established.

古文：顺元宣慰使秃鲁古言，金竹寨主搔驴等以所部百二十五寨内附。
现代文：顺元宣慰使秃鲁古上奏说 ：金竹寨主搔驴等率领所部的一百二十五寨归附朝廷。
English: Shun Yuan's exhortation caused Zhao Lugu to recite: The master of the Golden Bamboo Village and his donkeys led the 125 villages in the province to be annexed to the imperial court.

古文：甲子，皇子北安王置王傅，凡军需及本位诸事并以王傅领之。
现代文：初八，皇子北安王设置王傅，凡属军需以及王府内的各种事务，都由王傅掌管。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the prince Bei'an Wang set up Wang Fu. Wang Fu was in charge of all military supplies and various affairs within the royal palace.

古文：丙寅，太阴犯毕，太白昼见。
现代文：初十，太阴星干犯毕宿天区，太白金星白昼出现。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the too-dark star appeared in the sky, and the too-white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁卯，减扬州省岁额米十五万石，以盐引五十万易粮。
现代文：十一日，减免扬州行省每年定额交纳的粮米十五万石，用五十万张盐引交换粮食。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the annual quota of grain and rice paid by Yangzhou Province was reduced by 150,000 kilos, and half a million salt tablets were exchanged for grain.

古文：免浙西鱼课三千锭，听民自渔。
现代文：减免浙西的鱼税三千锭钱钞，听任百姓自己捕鱼。
English: The fish tax in western Zhejiang Province was reduced and exempted from 3,000 baht, and the people were allowed to fish on their own.

古文：发河西、甘肃等处富民千人往阇鄽地，与汉军、新附军杂居耕植。
现代文：遣发河西、甘肃等地一千名富裕的百姓前往地方，和汉军、新附军一起杂居、耕种。
English: A thousand wealthy people from Hexi, Gansu and other places were sent to the countryside to live and farm together with the Chinese army and the newly annexed army.

古文：从安西王阿难答请，设本位诸匠都总管府。
现代文：依照安西王阿难答的请求，设置其本位的诸匠都总管府。
English: In accordance with the request of Anxi King Ananda, he set up the headquarters of all craftsmen in Anxi.

古文：升万亿库官秩四品。
现代文：把万亿库的秩禄升格为四品。
English: Chichiroku, a trillion-dollar library, has been upgraded to four items.

古文：癸酉，镇南王次茅罗港，攻浮山寨，破之。
现代文：十七日，镇南王驻扎在茅罗港，进攻浮山寨，攻破该地。
English: On the 17th, Zhenan Wang was stationed in Maoro Port, attacked the floating village, and broke through the place.

古文：诸王薛彻都等所驻之地，雨土七昼夜，羊畜死不可胜计，以钞暨币帛绵布杂给之，其直计钞万四百六十七锭。
现代文：诸侯王薛彻都所屯驻的地方下了七昼夜尘土，羊畜死了不计其数，把钱钞，以及绢帛、棉布等杂物赐给他们，其价值总共为一万零四百六十七锭钱钞。
English: For seven days and nights, dust fell on the place where the vassal lord Xue Cherdu was stationed. Countless sheep and cattle died. He gave them money and bills, as well as bags, cotton and other miscellaneous items, with a total value of 10,467 yuan.

古文：丁丑，以朱清、张瑄海漕有劳，遥授宣慰使。
现代文：二十一日，因为朱清、张王宣海运粮食有功，遥授以宣慰使之职。
English: On the twenty-first day, because Zhu Qing and Zhang Wang Xuan had the merit of transporting grain by sea, they were awarded the title of Xuan comfort from afar.

古文：乙酉，镇南王以诸军渡富良江，次交趾城下，败其守兵，日烜与其子弃城走敢喃堡。
现代文：二十九日，镇南王率领诸军渡过富良江，驻扎在交趾城下，击败了它的守军。陈日火亘和他的儿子弃城逃往敢喃堡。
English: On the 29th, the king of Zhenan led his army across the Furiang River, stationed under the city of Jiaozi, and defeated its defenders. Chen Riguowat and his son abandoned the city and fled to Kanmura Castle.

古文：是岁，命西僧监臧宛卜卜思哥等作佛事坐静于大殿、寝殿、万寿山、五台山等寺，凡三十三会。
现代文：这一年，命西僧监臧宛卜卜思哥等在大殿、寝殿、万寿山、五台山入定做佛事，一共三十三次法会。
English: That year, West Monk Guan Yuan, Bo Bo Sigo, and others were ordained to do Buddhist rites in the Great Hall, the Sleeping Hall, Mount Manshou, and Mount Wutai, for a total of thirty-three pujas.

古文：断天下死刑百二十一人。
现代文：全国判处死刑的囚犯共一百二十一人。
English: A total of 121 prisoners have been sentenced to death across the country.

古文：浙西诸路水，免今年田租十之二；西京、北京、隆兴、平滦、南阳、怀孟等路风雹害稼；保定、太原、河间、般阳、顺德、南京、真定、河南等路霖雨害稼，太原尤甚，屋坏压死者众；平阳春旱，二麦枯死，秋种不入土；巩昌雨雹，虸蚄为灾。
现代文：浙西各路发生水灾，减免今年田租的十分之二。西京、北京、隆兴、平滦、南阳、怀孟等路，大风、冰雹伤害庄稼。保定、太原、河间、般阳、顺德、南京、真定、河南等路连降大雨，伤害庄稼，太原尤为严重，房屋倒塌压死了许多人。平阳发生春旱，两季麦都枯死，秋种不能入土。巩昌发生大雨、冰雹，粘虫成灾。
English: Floods occurred in all roads in western Zhejiang, and two-tenths of this year's field rents were reduced or exempted. In Xijing, Beijing, Longxing, Pingyao, Nanyang, and Huameng, high winds and hailstorms damaged crops. In Baoding, Taiyuan, Hema, Banyang, Shunde, Nanjing, Zhending, and Henan, heavy rain fell in succession, damaging crops. Taiyuan was particularly serious, and the collapse of houses crushed many people. In Pingyang, there was a spring drought, the two seasons of wheat died, and autumn seeds could not be buried. In Gongchang, heavy rain, hail

古文：分赐皇子、诸王、驸马、怯薛带等羊马钞，总二十五万三千五百馀锭，又赐诸王、怯薛带等军人，马一万二千二百、羊二万二千六百、驼百余。
现代文：分赐给皇子、诸侯王、驸马、护卫长等羊马钞钱，总数为二十五万三千五百余锭，又赐给诸侯王、护卫长等军人一万二千二百匹马、二万二千六百头羊、一百多头骆驼。
English: A total of more than 253,500 baht in cash was distributed to the prince, princes, horses, and guards, as well as 12,200 horses, 22,600 sheep, and more than 100 camels were given to the princes, princes, and guards.

古文：赈贫乏者合剌忽答等钞四万八千二百五十锭。
现代文：赈济贫穷的人合剌忽答等钱钞四万八千二百五十锭。
English: The amount of money given to the poor and the needy is 48,250 baht.

