古文：夫音律所始，本于人声者也。
现代文：音律的产生，原是从人的声音开始的。
English: The creation of musical rhythms originally began with the human voice.

古文：声合宫商，肇自血气，先王因之，以制乐歌。
现代文：人声具有五音，来自先天的气性，古代帝王就是根据人声的五音来创作乐曲。
English: The human voice has five tones, which comes from the innate temperament. Ancient emperors created music based on the five tones of the human voice.

古文：故知器写人声，声非学器者也。
现代文：由此可见，乐器的声音是模仿的人声，而不是人声音仿效乐器。
English: This shows that the sound of the instrument is an imitation of the human voice, rather than the human voice imitating the instrument.

古文：故言语者，文章关键，神明枢机，吐纳律吕，唇吻而已。
现代文：所以，语言是构成文章的关键，更是表达思想的枢纽；至于语言的音韵，则是求其和人的口吻协调而已。
English: Therefore, language is the key to composing an article, and it is also the hub for expressing thoughts; as for the phonology of language, it is just a matter of harmonizing it with the human tone.

古文：古之教歌，先揆以法，使疾呼中宫，徐呼中征。
现代文：古代教唱歌，首先要琢磨发音的方法，使疾呼合于宫音，徐呼合于徵音。
English: In ancient times, to teach singing, it was first necessary to work out the method of pronunciation, so that the hissing sound fits the palace sound, and the hissing sound fits the audition sound.

古文：夫宫商响高，徵羽声下；抗喉矫舌之差，攒唇激齿之异，廉肉相准，皎然可分。
现代文：属清声的徵、羽二音强，属浊声的宫、商二音弱；高亢的喉音和伸直的舌音各异，聚合的唇音和急激的齿音有别，强音和弱音相对：这些区别都是很明显的。
English: The sign of the clear voice, the feather two-tone is strong, the palace of the hooting voice, the merchant two-tone is weak; the high-pitched laryngeal sound and the straight tongue sound are different, the aggregated lip sound and the sharp tooth sound are different, and the strong sound and the weak sound are opposite: these differences are very obvious.

古文：今操琴不调，必知改张，攡文乖张，而不识所调。
现代文：如果弹琴时声音不协调，自然知道对弦柱加以调整；写文章时要是声律失调，就不易弄清从何调整了。
English: If the sound is not coordinated when playing the piano, it is natural to know how to adjust the string column; if the voice is out of tune when writing an article, it is not easy to figure out how to adjust it.

古文：响在彼弦，乃得克谐，声萌我心，更失和律，其故何哉？
现代文：琴弦发出的声音，尚能使之和谐，发自作者内心的声音，反而不能和谐，这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is it that the sound of the strings can still bring harmony, but the author's inner voice cannot?

古文：良由外听易为察，内听难为聪也。
现代文：主要就因为在外的声音容易辨识，内心的声音不易认清。
English: Mainly because the external voice is easy to recognize, but the inner voice is not easy to recognize.

古文：故外听之易，弦以手定，内听之难，声与心纷；可以数求，难以辞逐。
现代文：在外的声音容易掌握，是由于可以用手决定琴弦；内心的声音不好控制，则由于声音和心思纷乱不一。这只能从掌握音律技巧来求得解决，是难以用文辞说明白的。
English: The external sound is easy to master, because the strings can be determined by hand; the internal sound is difficult to control, because the sound and the mind are chaotic. This can only be solved by mastering the musical technique, and it is difficult to explain in words.

古文：凡声有飞沉，响有双叠。双声隔字而每舛，迭韵杂句而必睽；沉则响发而断，飞则声飏不还，并辘轳交往，逆鳞相比，迕其际会，则往蹇来连，其为疾病，亦文家之吃也。
现代文：所有声音都有飞扬下沉两种，音响有双声叠韵两种；双声字中间被其他字隔开，就往往不协调，叠韵词分离在两处，就必然违背声律；一个句子的字声全是低沉的，声音就像要断气一样，全是高昂的，就一直上升而不婉转：应使低昂之声像转动辘轳一样相互交错，像鱼龙的鳞甲那样整齐排列；声律的适当配合稍有错乱，就会前阻后碍，这种毛病，就是文人文章佶屈聱牙。
English: All sounds have two kinds of flying and sinking, and audio has two kinds of double-voiced overlapping rhymes; double-voiced words separated by other words are often incongruous, and overlapping rhymes separated in two places will inevitably violate the vocal rhythm; a sentence's words are all muffled, the sound is like trying to break the wind, all are high-pitched, and they keep rising without gentle turning: the low-pitched sounds should be interlaced like a rotating beak, and arranged neatly like the scales of an ichthyosaur; if there is a slight disorder in the proper coordination of the vocal rhythm, it will

古文：夫吃文为患，生于好诡，逐新趣异，故喉唇纠纷；将欲解结，务在刚断。
现代文：这个病根，在于作者爱好诡奇；一心去追逐新奇，就造成发音的杂乱。要想解除这种毛病，首先必须坚决割断对怪异的爱好。
English: The root of this malady lies in the author's love of strangeness; the single-minded pursuit of novelty causes a clutter of pronunciation, and in order to solve this problem, one must first resolutely cut off the love of strangeness.

古文：左碍而寻右，末滞而讨前，则声转于吻，玲玲如振玉；辞靡于耳，累累如贯珠矣。
现代文：左边受阻就从右边想办法，后边积滞就疏通前面，这就可使声音转动在口中，像振动玉器玲玲作响；悦耳的辞句，如成串的珍珠相联不绝。
English: If the left side is blocked, the right side will come up with a solution, and if the back is stagnant, the front will be unblocked. This will make the sound rotate in the mouth, like a vibrating jade; the sweet words are like strings of pearls connected endlessly.

古文：是以声画妍蚩，寄在吟咏，滋味流于下句，风力穷于和韵。异音相从谓之和，同声相应谓之韵。
现代文：所以，表达思想感情的作品，好坏寄托在吟咏上，诗歌的滋味从句子的安排中流露出来，工夫全在句子的 和 与句未的 韵 上：不同字调的适当配合就叫 和 ，同韵的字相呼应就叫 韵 。
English: Therefore, works that express thoughts and feelings, good or bad, are based on the intonation, the taste of poetry is revealed from the arrangement of the sentence, and the effort is all in the sentence's sum and the rhyme that is not in the sentence: the appropriate combination of different tones is called sum, and the word that echoes the same rhyme is called rhyme.

古文：韵气一定，则馀声易遣；和体抑扬，故遗响难契。
现代文：句末用韵是有定的，确定之后其余的韵都好处理；句子的和谐有高低抑扬的不同，要句子之间配合好就比较困难了。
English: The rhyme used at the end of a sentence is fixed, and the remaining rhymes are easy to deal with after they are determined; the harmony of a sentence has different levels of intonation, and it is more difficult to coordinate between sentences.

古文：属笔易巧，选和至难，缀文难精，而作韵甚易。
现代文：一般散文容易写得精巧，但要把一篇散文的声律调配和谐就很难；诗歌写作虽不易精巧，押韵却是比较容易的。
English: General prose is easy to write skillfully, but it is difficult to harmonize the vocal rhythm of a prose; poetry is not easy to write skillfully, but it is relatively easy to rhyme.

古文：虽纤意曲变，非可缕言，然振其大纲，不出兹论。
现代文：声律上很多细微不明显的变化，虽然不能一一讲到，但举其大要，基本上不出以上所论。
English: There are many subtle and not obvious changes in the vocal rhythm, although they cannot be mentioned one by one, but to summarize, they basically do not appear in the above discussion.

古文：若夫宫商大和，譬诸吹籥；翻回取均，颇似调瑟。
现代文：至于声律的全面调和，犹如吹奏可以和众声的籥；回旋地运用声韵，就像调和较复杂的瑟。
English: As for the overall harmony of the vocal melody, it is like blowing a gong that can harmonize with many voices; using the rhyme in a roundabout way is like harmonizing a more complex melody.

古文：瑟资移柱，故有时而乖贰；籥含定管，故无往而不壹。
现代文：调和瑟音须要移动弦柱，所以常常会出现不协调的情形；籥的管、孔有定，因而任意吹奏都可一致。
English: It is necessary to move the string column to harmonize the sibilant, so there is often a situation of incongruity; the tube and hole of the gong are fixed, so any blowing can be consistent.

古文：陈思、潘岳，吹籥之调也；陆机、左思，瑟柱之和也。
现代文：曹植和潘岳的作品，就如吹籥的无处不谐；陆机和左思的作品，就像调瑟的常有不和。
English: The works of Cao Zhi and Pan Yue are like the discordant sound of a trumpet; the works of Lu Jie and Zuo Si are like the discordant sound of a tuning fork.

古文：概举而推，可以类见。
现代文：这只是略举大概，其他作家作品可由此类推。
English: This is just a rough example, other writers' works can be inferred from this.

古文：又诗人综韵，率多清切，《楚辞》辞楚，故讹韵实繁。
现代文：此外，《诗经》的作者运用音韵，大都清楚明白；《楚辞》夹杂楚国的方言，所以其中音韵不清楚明白的很多。
English: In addition, the authors of the "Book of Songs" use phonology, most of which are clear and understandable; "Chu Ci" contains the dialect of Chu, so many of them are not clear and understandable.

古文：及张华论韵，谓士衡多楚，《文赋》亦称不易，可谓衔灵均之馀声，失黄钟之正响也。
现代文：到西晋张华论韵，曾说陆机作品中的楚音很多；他的楚音正如《文赋》中所说的 不能改变 。这就可说是屈原作品的余响，却失去了《诗经》正统音调。
English: When Zhang Hua of the Western Jin Dynasty discussed rhyme, he once said that there were many chu tones in the works of the land machine; his chu tone, as said in "Wenfu," cannot be changed. This can be said to be the afterglow of Qu Yuan's works, but it has lost the orthodox tone of "Shijing."

古文：凡切韵之动，势若转圜；讹音之作，甚于枘方。
现代文：韵，却失去了《诗经》正统音调。所以音韵用得正确，文势好像圆转和畅；不正确的韵，比把方木装进圆孔更不合适。
English: Therefore, the rhyme is used correctly, and the sentence seems to be rounded and smooth; the incorrect rhyme is more inappropriate than fitting the square wood into the round hole.

古文：免乎枘方，则无大过矣。
现代文：能避除这种不和，那么用韵就没什么大毛病了。
English: If this discord can be avoided, then there is nothing wrong with using rhyme.

古文：练才洞鉴，剖字钻响，识疏阔略，随音所遇，若长风之过籁，南郭之吹竽耳。
现代文：作家才识精深的，会剖析字句声韵，学识疏浅的，用韵好像偶然碰上，像风吹箫孔而发声，像南郭先生滥竽充数罢了。
English: A writer with profound knowledge will analyze the sound and rhyme of the words, while one with shallow knowledge will use rhyme as if he came across it by chance, sound like the wind blowing through a hole, and be like Mr. Nanko.

古文：古之佩玉，左宫右征，以节其步，声不失序。
现代文：古人身佩玉器饰品，而且走路时要使左边玉器碰击发出宫音，右边发出徵音，来调节步子，使声调不失掉该有的秩序。
English: The ancient person wore jade ornaments, and when walking, the left jade should be struck to emit a palace sound, and the right side should emit a call, to adjust the step, so that the tone does not lose the proper order.

古文：音以律文，其可忽哉！
现代文：何况关于写作音调构成文章的声律，怎能忽视呢？总结：
English: What's more, how can we ignore the fact that the tone of a writer's voice sets the tone of an article?

古文：赞曰∶标情务远，比音则近。
现代文：表明情志，应该高远；安排音韵，则须细密。
English: The expression of sentiments should be lofty; the arrangement of musical rhymes should be meticulous.

古文：吹律胸臆，调钟唇吻。
现代文：声音发自心胸，协调在于口吻。
English: The voice comes from the heart, the harmony is in the tone.

古文：声得盐梅，响滑榆槿。割弃支离，宫商难隐。
现代文：声韵要如咸盐酸梅配合得当，把榆实、堇菜调和得味美可口；只要摈除那些不正之音，和谐的宫商就自然明显。
English: It is necessary to match the sound properly, such as salty hydrochloric acid and plum, and to make the soup and stew taste delicious. As long as the improper sounds are eliminated, the harmonious palace merchant will naturally be obvious.

