古文：起阏逢困敦，尽屠维大荒落，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。
English: From start to finish, a total of six years.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明二年
现代文：齐武帝永明二年
English: Emperor Qiwu in the second year of Yongming

古文：春，正月，乙亥，以后将军柳世隆为尚书右仆射；竟陵王子良为护军将军兼司徒，领兵置佐，镇西州。
现代文：春季，正月，乙亥，南齐朝廷任命后将军柳世隆为尚书右仆射；竟陵王萧子良为护军将军兼司徒，统领军队，设置辅佐官员，镇守西州。
English: In the spring, the first month, the second month of the Heian period, General Liu Shilong was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man after being appointed by the Nanzhi imperial court; King Xiao Ziliang was appointed as the general of the guard and the tutor, commanded the army, set up assistant officials, and guarded Xizhou.

古文：子良少有清尚，倾意宾客，才俊之士，皆游集其门。
现代文：萧子良很小就有清高的品格，他喜欢结交朋友，有才能的士大夫都聚集在他的门下。
English: When Xiao Ziliang was very young, he had a clear and high character. He liked to make friends, and talented scholars and doctors gathered under his door.

古文：开西邸，多聚古人器服以充之。
现代文：萧子良建造他西郊的住宅，将聚集起来的许多古代器物、服饰放在里面。
English: Xiao Ziliang built his house in the western suburb and placed many of the collected ancient utensils and clothing inside.

古文：记室参军范云、萧琛、乐安任昉、法曹参军王融、卫军东阁祭酒萧衍、镇西功曹谢朓、步兵校尉沈约、扬州秀才吴郡陆倕，并以文学，尤见亲待，号曰八友。
现代文：记室参军范云、萧琛、乐安人任、法曹参军王融、卫军东阁祭酒萧衍、镇西功曹谢眺、步兵校尉沈约和扬州秀才吴郡人陆等，都在辞章修养上很有造诣，尤其受到萧子良的厚待，号称八友。
English: Fan Yun, Xiao Yao, Le An Ren, a member of the Military Records Office, Wang Rong, a member of the Legal Affairs Committee, Xiao Yan, a member of the Donggak Festival of the Guards Army, Zhen Xi Gong Cao Xie Qian, an infantry lieutenant Shen Yoyo, and Yangzhou's outstanding talent Wu Gu Renlu, are all very proficient in the cultivation of the words, and are especially well received by Xiao Ziliang, known as the eight friends.

古文：法曹参军柳恽、太学博士王僧孺、南徐州秀才济阳江革、尚书殿中郎范缜、会稽孔休源亦预焉。
现代文：另外，法曹参军柳恽、太学博士王僧孺、南徐州秀才济阳人江革、尚书殿中郎范缜和会稽人孔休源，也都是萧子良的朋友。
English: In addition, Liu Ziliang, a legal scholar and member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, Wang Ziliang, a doctor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jiang Ge, a prominent scholar from South Xuzhou, Fan Ziliang, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, and Kong Xuyuan, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, are also friends of Xiao Ziliang.

古文：琛，惠开之从子；恽，元景之从孙；融，僧达之孙；衍，顺之之子；朓，述之孙；约，璞之子；僧孺，雅之曾孙；缜，云之从兄也。
现代文：范缜是范云的堂兄。
English: Fan Qi is Fan Yun's cousin.

古文：子良笃好释氏，招致名僧，讲论佛法。道俗之盛，江左未有。
现代文：萧子良笃信佛教，他延请许多高僧讲论佛法，佛教之盛行，在江左一带还从来没有过。
English: Xiao Ziliang was a firm believer in Buddhism. He invited many high-ranking monks to lecture on Buddhism. Buddhism has never been popular in the Jiangzuo area.

古文：或亲为众僧赋食、行水，世颇以为失宰相体。
现代文：有时，萧子良还亲自给和尚们端饭送水，世间都认为他有失宰相体统。
English: Sometimes, Xiao Ziliang also personally brought water to the monks, and the world thought that he was not worthy of being the prime minister.

古文：范缜盛称无佛。
现代文：范缜大谈世上没有佛。
English: Fan Ye said that there is no Buddha in the world.

古文：子良曰： 君不信因果，何得有富贵、贫贱？ 
现代文：萧子良说： 如果你不相信困果报应，那么，为什么世上会有贫贱、富贵之分？ 
English: Xiao Ziliang said, "If you don't believe in suffering and retribution, then why are there poor and rich people in the world?

古文：缜曰： 人生如树花同发，随风而散：或拂帘幌坠茵席之上，或关篱墙落粪溷之中。
现代文：范缜说： 人生在世，就像树上的花朵一样，同时生长又都随风飘散，有的掠过竹帘帷幕落到了床褥上，有的越过篱笆围墙落在了粪坑里。
English: Fan Wei said: Life is alive, just like the flowers on the tree. At the same time, they grow and scatter with the wind. Some of them pass through the bamboo curtain and fall on the mattress, and some cross the fence and fall into the cesspit.

古文：坠茵席者，殿下是也；落粪溷者，下官是也。
现代文：落到床褥之上的好比是殿下您，落到粪坑里的就是我了。
English: This is the case for you, Your Highness, on the top of the throne; this is the case for me, the junior officer, who fell next to the cesspit of filth.

古文：贵贱虽复殊途，因果竟在何处！ 
现代文：虽然我们之间贵贱迥异，但因果报应究竟在何处呢？ 
English: Although we are very different from each other, where does karma come from?

古文：子良无以难。
现代文：萧子良听后，无言以对。
English: After listening, Xiao Ziliang was speechless.

古文：缜又著《神灭论》，以为： 形者神之质，神者形之用也。
现代文：范缜又写了《神灭论》，他认为： 形体，是精神的本质；精神则是形体的表现和产物。
English: Fan Qi also wrote "Theory of Annihilation," in which he believed: Form is the essence of spirit; spirit is the manifestation and product of form.

古文：神之于形，犹利之于刀；未闻刀没而利存，岂容形亡而神在哉！ 
现代文：精神对于形体来说，就好像锋刃与刀，从未听说过有刀失而刃在的道理，那么，怎么会有形体消亡了而精神却还存在的事情呢？ 
English: For the form, the spirit is like a sharp blade and a knife. I have never heard of a sword that is lost but the blade is still there. So, how can there be a thing where the form has died out but the spirit still exists?

古文：此论出，朝野喧哗，难之，终不能屈。
现代文：这一理论一提出，朝廷上下一片哗然，屡加诘难，最终也没能使范缜屈服。
English: As soon as this theory was put forward, the imperial court was in an uproar, and repeated difficulties were encountered. In the end, it was not possible to make Fan Yu give in.

古文：太原王琰著论讥缜曰： 呜呼范子！
现代文：太原人王琰，写文章讥讽范缜说： 呜呼范子！
English: Wang Yao, a native of Taiyuan, wrote an article mocking Fan Yao, saying, "Woo hoo, Fan Zi!

古文：曾不知其先祖神灵所在！ 
现代文：竟然不知道他祖先的神灵在什么地方！ 
English: He doesn't even know where the gods of his ancestors are!

古文：欲以杜缜后对。
现代文：王琰想以此堵住范缜的嘴。
English: Wang Yao wanted to shut Fan Yao's mouth with this.

古文：缜对曰： 呜呼王子！
现代文：范缜却回答他说： 呜呼王子！
English: Fan Ye, however, replied to him, "Alas, prince!

古文：知其先祖神灵所在，而不能杀身以从之！ 
现代文：知道他祖先的神灵在什么地方，却不肯杀身随之同去！ 
English: He knew where the spirits of his ancestors were, but he refused to go with them!

古文：子良使王融谓之曰： 以卿才美，何患不至中书郎；而故乖剌为此论，甚可惜也！
现代文：萧子良派王融劝范缜说： 凭着你这样的才华，还愁什么当不上中书郎，却故意发表这种荒谬偏激的言论，实在是令人太遗憾了。
English: Xiao Ziliang sent Wang Rong to advise Fan Yu, saying, "With such talent as yours, what are you worried about not being able to become a middle school teacher, but deliberately publish such absurd and extreme remarks, it is really regrettable.

古文：宜急毁弃之。 
现代文：你应该赶快毁掉并放弃这些文章。 
English: You should quickly destroy and discard these articles.

古文：缜大笑曰： 使范缜卖论取官，已至令、仆矣，何但中书郎邪！ 
现代文：范缜一听，大笑说： 假使让我范缜出卖我的理论，去换取官职，那么，我早已做到尚书令、仆射了，何止是一个中书郎！ 
English: After listening to Fan Ye, he laughed loudly and said: "If I were to let Fan Ye betray my theory in exchange for an official post, then I would have already achieved the title of Shang Shuling, Minxiao, and even more than that, I would be a Zhong Shulang!

古文：萧衍好筹略，有文武才干，王俭深器异之，曰： 萧郎出三十，贵不可言。 
现代文：萧衍做事喜欢运筹谋略。他文武全才，王俭非常器重他，对他的才能惊异不止。王俭曾说： 萧郎刚刚年过三十，实在是贵不可言啊！ 
English: Xiao Yan likes to plan and strategize. He is an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. Wang Jian highly values him and is amazed by his talent. Wang Jian once said: Xiao Lang is just over thirty years old, he is really precious!

古文：壬寅，以柳世隆为尚书左仆射，丹阳尹李安民为右仆射，王俭领丹阳尹。
现代文：壬寅，南齐朝廷任命柳世隆为尚书左仆射，任命丹杨尹李安民为右仆射，任命王俭兼领丹杨尹。
English: In Jinyin, the Southern Qi court appointed Liu Shilong as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, appointed Danyang Yin Li Anmin as his right-hand man, and appointed Wang Jian as Danyang Yin's second-in-command.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅，魏主如方山；戊午，还宫；庚申，如鸿池；丁卯，还宫。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲寅，北魏孝文帝前往方山；戊午，返回宫中。庚申，又前往鸿池，丁卯，返回宫中。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Gao of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Fangshan; in the afternoon, they returned to the palace. Emperor Gaoshen went to Honchi, and in the evening, they returned to the palace.

古文：五月，甲申，魏遣员外散骑常侍李彪等来聘。
现代文：五月，甲申，北魏派员外散骑常侍李彪等来访。
English: In May, Gao Sheng, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent a visiting cavalry officer Li Biao and others.

古文：六月，壬寅朔，中书舍人吴兴茹法亮封望蔡男。
现代文：六月，壬寅朔，南齐中书舍人吴兴人茹法亮，被封为望蔡男。
English: In June, Ren Yinshuo, Wu Xingren, a scholar in South Qi, was awarded the title of Wang Cai'an.

古文：时中书舍人四人，各住一省，谓之 四户 ，以法亮及临海吕文显等为之；既总重权，势倾朝廷，守宰数迁换去来，四方饷遗，岁数百万。
现代文：此时共有四位中书舍人，被分别派驻各省，称为四户，分别由茹法亮和临海人吕文显等人担任。他们总揽大权，声势超过了朝廷其他文武官员，地方官不断来去调换，四面八方给他们送的礼物，一年就达几百万之多。
English: At this time, there were a total of four Chinese calligraphers, who were stationed in each province separately, called the four households, and were respectively held by Rufa Liang and Lu Wenxian, who was from the coastal area. They always held great power, and their influence exceeded that of other literary and military officials of the imperial court. Local officials were constantly coming and going, and gifts sent to them from all directions amounted to several million a year.

古文：法亮尝于众中语人曰： 何须求外禄！
现代文：茹法亮曾经当众对人说： 何必一定要求得外任官的俸禄。
English: Ruffray had once said in public: Why do you have to ask for the salary of a non-commissioned officer?

古文：此一户中，年办百万。 
现代文：就在这一户里，一年就可弄到一百万。 
English: In just this one household, a million rupees can be earned in a year.

古文：盖约言之也。
现代文：他所说的一百万也不过是个大概的数目。
English: This is still only a rough estimate.

古文：后因天文有变，王俭极言 文显等专权徇私，上天见异，祸由四户 。
现代文：后来，天象星辰发生了变化，王俭坚决认为： 吕文显等人专断独行，徇私舞弊。所以，苍天出现异变，这一灾难出自四户。 
English: Later, the stars and planets changed, and Wang Jian firmly believed that: Lu Wenxian and others acted arbitrarily and selfishly. Therefore, there was a mutation in the sky, and this disaster came from four households.

古文：上手诏酬答，而不能改也。
现代文：南齐武帝亲自写诏酬答王俭，却不能改变这种现状。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu personally wrote an imperial edict in response to Wang Jian, but he could not change this situation.

古文：魏旧制：户调帛二匹，絮二斤，丝一斤，谷二十斛；又入帛一匹二丈，委之州库，以供调外之费；所调各随土之所出。
现代文：北魏旧制规定：每年户调为二匹布帛，二斤棉絮，一斤丝，二十斛谷米。另外，又增缴一匹二丈的布帛，存入本州州库，用来供应户调的需要。各州所征调的物品，可以按照本地所出产的缴纳。
English: According to the provisions of the old system of the Northern Wei Dynasty: each year, households were required to pay two horses of cloth, two pounds of cotton wool, one pound of silk, and twenty bushels of rice. In addition, an additional horse of cloth was paid, which was deposited into the local state treasury and used to supply the needs of households. The goods levied by each state could be paid according to the local production.

古文：丁卯，诏曰： 置官班禄，行之尚矣；自中原丧乱，兹制中绝。
现代文：丁卯，孝文帝下诏说： 设置官吏，发放俸禄，很早就已开始实行，自从中原战乱，这一制度才开始中断。
English: However, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict saying: The establishment of officials and the payment of salaries had already been implemented long ago, and this system had only been interrupted since the Central Plains War.

古文：朕宪章旧典，始班俸禄。
现代文：朕依照旧有的典章制度，开始颁赐官吏们的俸禄。
English: In accordance with the old award system, I began to award the salaries of officials.

古文：户增调帛三匹，谷二斛九斗，以为官司之禄；增调外帛二匹。
现代文：所以，每户户调应增缴三匹帛，二斛九斗谷米，作为官员们的棒禄。再增收二匹户调以外的帛。
English: Therefore, each household should pay an additional three horse mackerel, two horse mackerel and nine grain mackerel, as a bonus for officials, and an additional two horse mackerel other than household.

古文：禄行之后，赃满一匹者死。变法改度，宜为更始，其大赦天下。 
现代文：俸禄制度实行以后，贪赃达一匹布帛的处死，改变法令制度，应该作为新的开始，为此下令实行大赦。 
English: After the implementation of the salary system, it should be a new beginning to change the law and order system, and to this end, an amnesty was ordered.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，立皇子子伦为巴陵王。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲申，立皇子萧子伦为巴陵王。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Jiaxing, the prince Xiao Zilun was appointed as the king of Baling.

古文：乙未，魏主如武州山石窟寺。
现代文：乙未，北魏国主孝文帝前往武州山石窟寺。
English: Emperor Xiaowen, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to the Wuzhou Mountain Grotto Temple.

古文：九月，魏诏，班禄以十月为始，季别受之。
现代文：九月，北魏下诏，官员们的俸禄制度，从本年十月开始实行，每个季度发放一次。
English: In September, it was announced that the salary system for officials under the Northern Wei Dynasty will be implemented from October this year, and will be issued once a quarter.

古文：旧律，枉法十匹，义赃二十匹，罪死；至是，义赃一匹，枉法无多少，皆死。
现代文：以前的法律规定，贪污十匹布帛，受贿二十匹布帛的人，一律处以死刑。到现在，凡是受贿一匹布帛的，以及贪污无论多少，都处以死刑。
English: Previously, the law stipulated that anyone who embezzled ten cloth bags and took bribes of twenty cloth bags would be sentenced to death. Now, anyone who takes a bribe of one cloth bag and any amount of corruption will be sentenced to death.

古文：仍分命使者，纠按守宰之贪者。
现代文：朝廷仍然分别派出检查官，到各地巡视纠举有贪污行为的地方官。
English: The imperial court still sent procurators to various regions to investigate local officials who had committed acts of corruption.

古文：秦、益二州刺史恒农李洪之以外戚贵显，为治贪暴，班禄之后，洪之首以赃败。魏主命锁赴平城，集百官亲临数之；犹以其大臣，听在家自裁。
现代文：实行俸禄制度后，李洪之因贪污事露，第一个就被揭发出来。孝文帝下崐令给李洪之上戴上手铐脚镣，押赴平城；然后，召集文武百官，亲自历数他的罪状。由于他是朝廷大臣，允许他在家里自杀。
English: After the implementation of the salary system, Li Hongzhi was the first to be exposed for corruption. Emperor Xiaowen issued an order to put handcuffs and leg irons on Li Hongzhi and sent him to Pingcheng; then, he summoned hundreds of civil and military officials to personally count his crimes. Since he was a court minister, he was allowed to commit suicide at home.

古文：自馀守宰坐赃死者四十馀人。
现代文：其余有贪污受贿罪的地方官大约有四十多人，也全都处以死刑。
English: The remaining 40 or so local officials found guilty of corruption and bribery were also all sentenced to death.

古文：受禄者无不跼蹐，赇赂殆绝。
现代文：那些接受过贿赂的人，无不恐慌害怕，行贿受贿的事，几乎被杜绝了。
English: Those who have accepted bribes are all panicked and afraid, and the practice of giving and receiving bribes has almost been eliminated.

古文：然吏民犯它罪者，魏主率宽之，疑罪奏谳多减死徙边，岁以千计。
现代文：然而，官吏和老百姓犯了其他罪时，孝文帝大都宽大处理。对缺少确凿证据的罪犯上报审核，多半免除死刑而流放到边疆，这种情况，每年都数以千计。
English: However, when officials and ordinary people committed other crimes, Emperor Xiaowen mostly treated them leniently. Criminals who lacked conclusive evidence were reported for review, and most of them were exempted from the death penalty and exiled to the frontier. There are thousands of such cases every year.

古文：都下决大辟，岁不过五六人，州镇亦简。
现代文：由朝中法司判处死刑的，一年也超不过五六个人，州郡、边镇就更少了。
English: Only five or six people a year are sentenced to death by the courts of justice in China and the DPRK, and even fewer are sentenced to death in provinces, counties and border towns.

古文：久之，淮南王佗奏请依旧断禄，文明太后召群臣议之。
现代文：很久以后，淮南王拓跋佗奏请仍按旧制，停止向官员发放俸禄。
English: A long time later, Huainan Wang Tuobao still followed the old system and stopped paying salaries to officials.

古文：中书监高闾以为： 饥寒切身，慈母不能保其子。
现代文：太皇太后冯氏召集文武百官讨论这件事。中书监高闾认为： 自身深感饥寒交迫，慈母却不能保护她的孩子。
English: The Empress Dowager Feng called together a hundred officials to discuss the matter. Gao Yao, the supervisor of Chinese books, thought: Although he was deeply hungry and cold, his mother could not protect her child.

古文：今给禄，则廉者足以无滥，贪者足以劝慕；不给，则贪者得肆其奸，廉者不能自保。
现代文：如今，发放俸禄，廉洁的官吏更加清白而对于那些贪官污吏也足以改过为善。停止发放俸禄，贪官污吏会更加肆无忌惮地贪赃枉法，廉洁的人却不能维持生计。
English: Today, when salaries are paid, honest officials are more innocent, and it is enough to reform those who are corrupt. When salaries are stopped, corrupt officials will be more unscrupulous, but honest people will not be able to make a living.

古文：淮南之议，不亦谬乎！ 
现代文：淮南王的建议，岂不是荒唐吗？ 
English: Isn't King Huainan's suggestion absurd?

古文：诏从闾议。
现代文：朝廷颁诏采纳高闾的建议。
English: The Imperial Court issued an imperial edict to adopt Gao Jun's suggestion.

古文：闾又上表，以为： 北狄悍愚，同于禽兽。
现代文：接着，高闾再次上疏朝廷，认为： 北狄凶悍愚昧，如同禽兽。
English: Next, Gao Jun went to the imperial court again, and thought: Bei Di is fierce and stupid, just like a beast.

古文：所长者野战，所短者攻城。
现代文：他们所擅长的是在野外作战却不擅于攻城。
English: What they are good at is fighting in the field, but they are not good at attacking the city.

古文：若以狄之所短夺其所长，则虽众不能成患，虽来不能深入。
现代文：如果我们利用北狄的短处，遏止它的长处，那么，北狄人数再多也不会成为我们的祸患，即使攻来也无法深入我们的国境。
English: If we take advantage of North Korea's weaknesses and contain its strengths, then North Korea's large population will not be a disaster for us, and even if it is invaded, it will not be able to penetrate our borders.

古文：又，狄散居野泽，随逐水草，战则与家业并至，奔则与畜牧俱逃，不赍资粮而饮食自足，是以历代能为边患。
现代文：况且，北狄人都是散居在旷野沼泽地带，他们总是跟着河水和绿草不断迁移，打仗时，他们可以带着全部家人财产一起战斗，而撤退时又可以连同家畜一块儿逃走，用不着携带粮食，饮食可以自给自足，因此历代成为中原国家边患。
English: Moreover, the Bei Di people are dispersed in the wilderness swamp area. They always follow the river water and green grass to continuously migrate. When fighting, they can fight together with all their family property, and when retreating, they can flee together with their livestock. They do not need to carry grain, and they can be self-sufficient in food. Therefore, they have become a border disease of the Central Plains countries for generations.

古文：六镇势分，倍众不斗，互相围逼，难以制之。
现代文：朝廷在北方的六个重镇，使兵力分散。敌人的数目一旦超过我们一倍，镇将就不敢迎战。他们却可以互相援引围攻我方的重镇，这样，敌人就很难制服。
English: Six towns are guarded by detachments of soldiers, and it is difficult to fight against a large number of enemies. The enemies are encircled one by one, and it is difficult to subdue our army.

古文：请依秦、汉故事，于六镇之北筑长城，择要害之地，往往开门，造小城于其侧，置兵扞守。
现代文：因而，我请求依照秦、汉时期的边防策略，在六镇以北，修筑长城，选择关键地方开辟城门，在旁边再另修建一个小城，派兵守卫。
English: Therefore, I request that, in accordance with the frontier defense strategy of the Qin and Han dynasties, the Great Wall should be built north of the six towns, the gate should be opened at a key place, and another small town should be built next to it, and soldiers should be sent to guard it.

古文：狄既不攻城，野掠无获，草尽则走，终必惩艾。
现代文：狄人既不会攻城，在荒凉的郊野上也抢不到什么东西，他们的马把青草吃光就会撤走，定会受到惩罚。
English: The Di people will not attack the city, nor can they seize anything in the desolate countryside. If their horses eat up the grass, they will be removed and will be punished.

古文：计六镇东西不过千里，一夫一月之功，可城三步之地，强弱相兼，不过用十万人，一月可就；虽有暂劳，可以永逸。
现代文：估计六个重镇的防线，东西不超过一千里，一个男子一个月的功夫，就可以筑起三步长的城墙，即便把强壮老弱劳力加在一起，所用劳力也不会超过十万人，一个月就能完成。虽然暂时辛苦劳累，却可以得到永久的安宁。
English: It is estimated that the defensive lines of the six major towns do not exceed a thousand miles in length. If one man works for a month, he can build a three-step wall. Even if the strong, old and weak laborers are added together, the labor force will not exceed one hundred thousand people, and it can be completed in one month. Although it is temporarily hard work, it can get permanent peace.

古文：凡长城有五利：罢游防之苦，一也；北部放牧无抄掠之患，二也；登城观敌，以逸待劳，三也；息无时之备，四也；岁常游运，永得不匮，五也。 
现代文：兴筑长城有五种好处：第一，可以免除边防军巡逻的辛苦；第二，不用担心北方部落利用放牧的机会前来虏掠抢劫；第三，可以登上长城观察敌人的动静，以逸待劳；第四，免除平日无休止的戒备状态；第五，一年四季都可以将粮秣运往边塞，使要塞的物资永不匮乏。 
English: The construction of the Great Wall has five advantages: First, it can relieve the border guards from the hard work of patrolling; second, there is no need to worry about the northern tribes using the opportunity of grazing to come to plunder and rob; third, you can board the Great Wall to observe the movements of the enemy and wait for labor; fourth, you can get rid of the endless state of alert on weekdays; fifth, grain can be transported to the border fortress all year round, so that the fortress will never be short of supplies.

古文：魏主优诏答之。
现代文：孝文帝特地颁下诏令，表扬赞同这一建议。
English: Emperor Xiaowen specifically issued a decree praising and endorsing this suggestion.

古文：冬，十月，丁巳，以南徐州刺史长沙王晃为中书监。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁巳，南齐任命南徐州刺史、长沙王萧晃为中书监。
English: In the winter, in October, Ding Si and Nanqi appointed Nan Xuzhou Zhishi and Changsha Wang Xiao Ao as Chinese supervisors.

古文：初，太祖临终，以晃属帝，使处于辇下或近籓，勿令远出。
现代文：当初，高帝临终前，将萧晃托付给武帝，特别嘱咐，要让萧晃留在京城中或京城附近任官，不要派他去边远的地方。
English: At first, Emperor Gao, on his deathbed, entrusted Xiao Xiang to Emperor Wu, and specifically ordered that Xiao Xiang should be allowed to stay in or near the capital to serve as an official, and should not be sent to a remote place.

古文：且曰： 宋氏若非骨肉相残，它族岂得乘其弊！
现代文：又说： 宋氏如果不是亲骨肉之间互相残杀，外姓人怎么会有可乘之机？
English: He also said: If the Song clan did not kill each other between relatives, how could foreigners take advantage of the opportunity?

古文：汝深诫之！ 
现代文：你们应该深以为戒！ 
English: You should be on your guard!

古文：旧制：诸王在都，唯得置捉刀左右四十人。
现代文：旧制规定：亲王们在京都时，只可以带四十名武装侍卫。
English: Under the old system, the princes were only allowed to take 40 armed bodyguards with them when they were in Kyoto.

古文：晃好武饰，及罢南徐州，私载数百人仗还建康，为禁司所觉，投之江水。
现代文：萧晃喜欢武士的威仪，离开南徐崐州时，他私下带着几百件个人用的武器返回建康，被负责防禁的部门发觉，扔进了长江。
English: Xiao Yang liked the samurai's dignity. When he left Nanxuizhou, he secretly returned to Jiankang with hundreds of personal weapons. He was discovered by the department responsible for prevention and control, and thrown into the Yangtze River.

古文：帝闻之，大怒，将纠以法，豫章王嶷叩头流涕曰： 晃罪诚不足宥；陛下当忆先朝念晃。 
现代文：武帝闻知勃然大怒，打算将萧晃绳之以法。豫章王萧嶷叩头哭泣说： 萧晃的罪过，诚然不可以宽恕。陛下该想想父王对萧晃的恩爱。 
English: Emperor Wu was furious and planned to bring Xiao Xiang to justice. Emperor Yuanzhang bowed down to Xiao Xiang and wept, saying, "The sins of Xiao Xiang cannot be forgiven. Your majesty should think about your father's love for Xiao Xiang."

古文：帝亦垂泣，由是终无异意，然亦不被亲宠。
现代文：武帝也低下头哭了，从此，武帝对萧晃不再有杀机，也没有信任和宠爱。
English: Emperor Wu also bowed his head and wept. From then on, Emperor Wu no longer had a chance to kill Xiao Yang, nor did he trust or favor him.

古文：论者谓帝优于魏文，减于汉明。
现代文：议论朝事的人都说，武帝要比魏文帝曹丕好些，但不如东汉明帝刘庄。
English: Those who discuss the situation in Korea say that Emperor Wu is better than Wei Emperor Cao Pi, but not as good as Eastern Han Emperor Liu Zhuang.

古文：武陵王晔多才艺而疏悻，亦无宠于帝。
现代文：武陵王萧晔多才多艺，但性情直率，也得不到武帝的宠爱。
English: King of Wuling, King Xiao Yao, was a man of many talents, but he had a straightforward temperament and was not favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：尝侍宴，醉伏地，貂抄肉拌。
现代文：有一次，他参加皇宫御宴，大醉倒地，帽子边上的貂尾都沾上了肉汤。
English: Once, he attended a banquet at the Imperial Palace and got so drunk that the tip of his hat was covered in broth.

古文：帝笑曰： 肉污貂。 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 肉汤把你的貂尾都弄脏了。 
English: Emperor Wu smiled and said, "The broth has made your appendix dirty."

古文：对曰： 陛下爱羽毛而疏骨肉。 
现代文：萧晔回答说： 陛下您喜爱这些羽毛，却疏远亲生骨肉。 
English: Xiao Yao replied, "Your Majesty, you love these feathers, but you are estranged from your own flesh and blood.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：武帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：晔轻财好施，故无畜积；名后堂山曰 首阳 ，盖怨贫薄也。
现代文：萧晔把钱财看得很轻，喜欢施舍。所以，他自己没有积蓄。他把后堂山叫做 首阳山 ，就是抱怨自己生活贫困以及武帝薄情。
English: Xiao Yao didn't care much about money and liked to give alms. Therefore, he didn't have any savings of his own. He called Houdang Mountain Shouyang Mountain to complain about his poverty and Emperor Wu's unkindness.

古文：高丽王琏遣使入贡于魏，亦入贡于齐。
现代文：高句丽国王高琏，派使节向北魏进贡，同时也向南齐进贡。
English: The king of Goguryeo, Gao Pi, sent envoys to pay tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and also paid tribute to Nanqi.

古文：时高丽方强，魏置诸国使邸，齐使第一，高丽次之。
现代文：此时，高句丽王国正处于强盛时期，北魏安置各国使节住所，南齐使节排在第一位，接着就是高句丽了。
English: At this time, the Kingdom of Goguryeo was at the height of its power. The Northern Wei Dynasty resettled envoys from various countries, the Southern Qi envoys ranked first, followed by Goguryeo.

古文：益州大度獠恃险骄恣，前后刺史不能制。
现代文：益州大度獠人自恃占据险峻，骄横狂暴、为所欲为，朝廷先后派去了许多刺史，但都不能制服他们。
English: The imperial court sent a number of magistrates to Yizhou, but they were unable to subdue them.

古文：及陈显达为刺史，遣使责其租赕。獠帅曰： 两眼刺史尚不敢调我，况一眼乎！ 
现代文：等到陈显达接任益州刺史，他派遣官差去催缴田赋捐税，獠族首领说： 长着两只眼睛的刺史都不敢要我缴纳租调，何况这个独眼刺史。 
English: When Chen Xianda took over as Yizhou chief, he sent an official to demand the payment of land tax. The leader of the Yao people said: The chief with two eyes did not dare to ask me to pay the rent, let alone the one-eyed chief.

古文：遂杀其使。
现代文：于是，杀掉了陈显达派去的官差。
English: So he killed the official sent by Chen Xianda.

古文：显达分部将吏，声言出猎，夜往袭之，男女无少长皆斩之。
现代文：陈显达分别安排将领官吏，声称出去打猎，夜里，突然发动袭击，将大度獠地区的男女老幼全部斩杀了。
English: Chen Xianda arranged generals and officials separately, claiming to go out hunting, and suddenly launched an attack at night, killing all men, women and children in the Dadu District.

古文：晋氏以来，益州刺史皆以名将为之。
现代文：自从东晋以来，益州刺史都是由著名的将领来担任的。
English: Ever since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, famous generals have been in charge of the history of Yizhou.

古文：十一月，丁亥，帝始以始兴王鉴为督益、宁诸军事、益州刺史，征显达为中护军。
现代文：十一月，丁亥，武帝任命始兴王萧鉴为督益、宁诸军事，益州刺史。调陈显达返回建康，任中护军。
English: In November of Dinghai, Emperor Wu appointed Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jian as the inspector of Yixing, Ning as the military, and Yizhou as the historian. Chen Xanda was transferred back to Jiankang and served as the middle guard.

古文：先是，劫帅韩武方聚党千馀人断流为暴，郡县不能禁。
现代文：当初，劫盗头目韩武方聚集一千多名党羽，截断水源，横行霸道，地方官府无法阻止。
English: At first, the leader of the robbery, Han Wufang, gathered more than a thousand followers, cut off the water source, and went on a rampage. The local government was unable to stop him.

古文：鉴行至上明，武方出降，长史虞悰等咸请杀之。鉴曰： 杀之失信，且无以劝善。 
现代文：萧鉴赴任走到上明时，韩武方向萧鉴投降，长史虞等人都请求萧鉴杀掉他，萧鉴说： 杀了韩武方，就失去了信用，也无法规劝别人改过从善。 
English: When Xiao Jian was appointed to Shangming, Han Wu surrendered to Xiao Jian. Chang Shiyu and others all asked Xiao Jian to kill him. Xiao Jian said, "If you kill Han Wu, you will lose credibility, and you will not be able to persuade others to change and follow the good."

古文：乃启台而宥之，于是巴西蛮夷为寇暴者皆望风降附。
现代文：于是，向朝廷报告，饶恕韩武方。因此，巴西一带从事抢掠的残暴、愚昧的蛮夷也都闻风投降。
English: As a result, he reported to the imperial court and pardoned the Korean side. As a result, the brutal and ignorant barbarians engaged in looting around Brazil also surrendered.

古文：鉴时年十四，行至新城，道路籍籍，云 陈显达大选士马，不肯就征。 
现代文：萧鉴这年正好十四岁，当他继续进发，走到新城时，路上纷纷传言，说： 陈显达正大肆征兵买马，不肯接受朝廷征召。 
English: Xiao Jian was just 14 years old that year. As he continued his journey and reached Xincheng, there were rumors on the road, saying: Chen Xianda was aggressively recruiting soldiers to buy horses, and refused to accept the imperial court's call-up.

古文：乃停新城，遣典签张昙皙往观形势。
现代文：萧鉴在新城站下，并派典签张昙皙前去观察形势。
English: Xiao Jian went to Xincheng Station and sent Zhang Jun to observe the situation.

古文：俄而显达遣使诣鉴，咸劝鉴执之。
现代文：不久，陈显达派来的使者来到萧鉴停留处，手下人都劝萧鉴逮捕使者。
English: Soon, a messenger sent by Chen Xianda came to Xiao Jian's stop, and his subordinates all advised Xiao Jian to arrest the messenger.

古文：鉴曰： 显达立节本朝，必自无此。 
现代文：萧鉴却说： 陈显达高风亮节，尽心效忠朝廷，一定不会有这种事。 
English: But Xiao Jian said: Chen Hsien reached a high wind and bright festival, devoted himself to loyalty to the imperial court, there will be no such thing.

古文：居二日，昙皙还，具言 显达已迁家出城，日夕望殿下至。 
现代文：过了两天，张昙皙返回，陈说： 陈显达已带领全家人离城，早晚都希望殿下能到达。 
English: After two days, Zhang Ye returned, Chen said: Chen Xianda has led the whole family to leave the city, sooner or later I hope that His Royal Highness can arrive.

古文：于是乃前。
现代文：于是，萧鉴才继续赶路。
English: As a result, Xiao Jian only continued on his way.

古文：鉴喜文学，器服如素士，蜀人悦之。
现代文：萧鉴喜欢文学，他所使用的器具和服饰都和普通士大夫一样，因此，蜀地人民都非常高兴。
English: Xiao Jian likes literature, and the utensils and clothing he uses are the same as those of ordinary scholars and doctors. Therefore, the people of Shu are very happy.

古文：乙未，魏员外散骑常侍李彪等来聘。
现代文：乙未，北魏员外散骑常侍李彪等人，前来南齐访问。
English: Yi Wei, Northern Wei general Li Biao and others came to visit Nanqi.

古文：是岁，诏增豫章王嶷封邑为四千户。
现代文：这年，武帝颁下诏令，命令将豫章王萧嶷的封邑增加到四千户人家。
English: In the same year, Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict, ordering that the fief of Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi be increased to 4,000 households.

古文：宋元嘉之世，诸王入斋阁，得白服、裙帽见人主；唯出太极四庙，乃备朝服。
现代文：刘宋元嘉时代，亲王进入宫内的斋阁内，可以穿白色便服、裙子，戴高帽拜见皇帝，只有到太极殿四个厢房时，才穿正式官服。
English: During the time of Liu Songyuanjia, when the prince entered the palace's pavilion, he could wear white casual clothes, skirts, and a tall hat to meet the emperor. Only when he reached the four chambers of the Taiji Hall did he wear his official uniform.

古文：自后此制遂绝。
现代文：元嘉以后，这种制度也就取消了。
English: After Yuan Jia, this system was also abolished.

古文：上于嶷友爱，宫中曲宴，听依元嘉故事。
现代文：武帝对萧嶷极其友爱，凡在宫内歌舞饮宴，都允许萧嶷按照元嘉时代的制度穿戴。
English: Emperor Wu was extremely friendly to Xiao Yao. Whenever there was a song and dance banquet in the palace, Xiao Yao was allowed to wear a robe according to the system of the Yuan Jia era.

古文：嶷固辞不敢，唯车驾至其第，乃白服、乌纱帽以侍宴。
现代文：萧嶷坚决辞谢，不敢这样做。只有武帝来到他的家里时，他才敢穿上白色便服，戴上乌纱帽陪宴。
English: Only when Emperor Wu came to his home did he dare to put on white casual clothes and a black fedora to accompany the banquet.

古文：至于衣服、器服制度，动皆陈启，事无专制，务从减省。
现代文：他将自己平时的衣服、器具的标准，连同自己的一举一动，全都向武帝汇报，从不独断专行，开支都务求节俭。
English: He reported his usual standard of clothing and utensils, as well as his every move, to Emperor Wu. He never acted arbitrarily, and tried to be frugal in his spending.

古文：上并不许。
现代文：武帝对萧嶷的做法并不赞成。
English: Emperor Wu did not approve of Xiao Yao's actions.

古文：嶷常虑盛满，求解扬州，以授竟陵王子良。
现代文：萧嶷一直担心自己的地位太高，权势太大，多次请求解除他扬州刺史的职务，改授给竟陵王萧子良，武帝始终也没有签应。
English: Xiao Yao was always worried that his position was too high and his power was too great. He repeatedly requested to be relieved of his duties as Yangzhou chief historian and to be reassigned to Xiao Ziliang, the king of Jingling. Emperor Wu never signed the request.

古文：上终不许，曰： 毕汝一世，无所多言。 
现代文：武帝说： 扬州刺史这个官你要当一辈子，不要再多说什么。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Yangzhou Zhishi, you must serve as this official for the rest of your life. Don't say anything more."

古文：嶷长七尺八寸，善修容范，文物卫从，礼冠百僚，每出入殿省，瞻望者无不肃然。
现代文：萧嶷身高七尺八寸，他很善于修饰仪表，他的仪仗和侍从们的礼节规范，都远远超过了其他官属，每次出入殿堂，在旁边观看的人，无不肃然起敬。
English: Xiao Wei is seven feet eight inches tall. He is very good at decorating his appearance. His etiquette and the etiquette of his attendants are far superior to those of other officials. Every time he enters and leaves the hall, the people watching him are awestruck.

古文：交州刺史李叔献既受命，而断割外国贡献；上欲讨之。
现代文：交州刺史李叔献接受了朝廷的任命，却擅自截留外国对朝廷的进贡，因此，武帝打算去讨伐他。
English: Li Shuxian, the governor of Jiaozhou, accepted the appointment of the imperial court, but arbitrarily withheld foreign tribute to the imperial court. Therefore, Emperor Wu planned to go after him.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明三年
现代文：三年
English: Three years

古文：春，正月，丙辰，以大司农刘楷为交州刺史，发南康、庐陵、始兴兵以讨叔献。
现代文：春季，正月，丙辰，任命大司农刘楷为交州刺史，并发动南康、庐陵、始兴三地的军队，讨伐李叔献。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, in Hunchun, he appointed Liu Kai, the chief secretary of farmers, as the chief historian of Jiaozhou, and launched the armies of Nankang, Fuling and Shixing to fight against Li Shuchen.

古文：叔献耳之，遣使乞更申数年，献十二队纯银兜鍪及孔雀毦；上不许。
现代文：李叔献得到消息后，立刻派使者跑到建康，乞求允许他延长几年任期，并向朝廷进贡二千四百个纯银头盔和孔雀翎，武帝拒绝了他的请求。
English: After Li Shukan received the news, he immediately sent an envoy to Jiankang, begging to be allowed to extend his term of office for several years and to pay tribute to the court with twenty-four hundred sterling silver helmets and peacock feathers. Emperor Wu refused his request.

古文：叔献惧为楷所袭，间道自湘川还朝。
现代文：李叔献深怕自己会受到刘楷的袭击，就抄小路从湘州返回建康。
English: Li Shuxian was deeply afraid that he would be attacked by Liu Kai, so he took a back road from Hunan to return to Jiankang.

古文：戊寅，魏诏曰： 图谶之兴，出于三季，既非经国之典，徒为妖邪所凭。
现代文：戊寅，北魏下诏令说： 测定吉凶征兆的神秘预言图谶的出现，是从夏、商、周三代之末开始的。它不是治理国家的重要典章，只能被妖邪不正的人所利用。
English: Wu Yin, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued the following edict: The appearance of the enigmatic prediction chart, which measures auspicious and inauspicious signs, began at the end of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties. It is not an important ordinance for governing the country, and can only be used by evil people.

古文：自今图谶、秘纬，一皆焚之，留者以大辟论！ 
现代文：从现在开始，凡是图谶、纬书，一概烧掉，有私自保存的，一律处以极刑。 
English: From now on, all the pictures and calligraphy should be burned, and those who have kept them for themselves should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：又严禁诸巫觋及委巷卜筮非经典所载者。
现代文：又严格禁止男巫女巫以及街头巷尾占卦的人进行不是经典所记载的活动。
English: In addition, it is strictly forbidden for witches and wizards, as well as street hucksters, to carry out activities that are not recorded in the classics.

古文：魏冯太后作《皇诰》十八篇，癸未，大飨群臣于太华殿，班《皇诰》。
现代文：北魏太皇太后冯氏作《皇诰》十八篇。癸未，冯氏在太华殿大规模宴请文武百官，正式颁布《皇诰》。
English: Feng, the empress dowager of the Northern Wei Dynasty, wrote eighteen articles of "Imperial Rescript." Soon after, Feng held a large-scale banquet at the Taihua Palace for hundreds of officials from the civil and military fields, and officially promulgated the "Imperial Rescript."

古文：辛卯，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛卯，南齐武帝到南郊祭祀天神，实行大敕。
English: In Xinwu, Emperor Nanqiwu went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the gods and perform a grand banquet.

古文：诏复立国学；释奠先师用上公礼。
现代文：武帝下诏恢复国学。用祭祀上公的礼仪祭祀孔子。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict to restore the study of Chinese classics, and the ritual of offering sacrifices to the emperor was used to worship Confucius.

古文：二月，己亥，魏制皇子皇孙有封爵者，岁禄各有差。
现代文：二月，己亥，北魏规定：对有封爵的皇子皇孙们，按照不同标准等级，发放俸禄。
English: In February, Ji Hai, the Northern Wei Dynasty stipulated: for the princes and grandsons who have been knighted, according to different standards and levels, they will be paid a salary.

古文：辛丑，上祭北郊。
现代文：辛丑，武帝到北郊祭祀。
English: Sin ugly, Emperor Wu went to the northern suburbs to worship.

古文：三月，丙申，魏封皇弟禧为咸阳王，干为河南王，羽为广陵王，雍为颍川王，勰为始平王，详为北海王。
现代文：三月，丙申，北魏封皇弟拓跋禧为咸阳王，拓跋干为河南王，拓跋羽为广陵王，拓跋雍为颍川王，拓跋勰为始平王，拓跋详为北海王。
English: In March, Bishen, the younger brother of the Northern Wei Dynasty Fong Wang, named Tuoba Xi as the King of Xianyang, Tuoba Gan as the King of Henan, Tuoba Yu as the King of Guangling, Tuoba Yong as the King of Shichuan, Tuoba Jie as the King of Shihping, and Tuoba Zhe as the King of the North Sea.

古文：文明太后令置学馆，选师傅以教诸王。
现代文：太皇太后冯氏又下令设置皇家学校，遴选师傅教授各位亲王。
English: Empress Dowager Feng also ordered the establishment of a royal school to select teachers to teach the princes.

古文：勰于兄弟最贤，敏而好学，善属文，魏主尤奇爱之。
现代文：在所有兄弟中间，拓跋勰最贤能，他敏而好学，擅长写文章，因此，孝文帝特别赏识喜欢他。
English: Among all the brothers, Tuobao was the most capable. He was quick and eager to learn, and was good at writing articles. Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen especially appreciated and liked him.

古文：夏，四月，癸丑，魏主如方山；甲寅，还宫。
现代文：夏季四月，癸丑，孝文帝前往方山。甲寅，返回宫中。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan, and Emperor Jia returned to the palace.

古文：初，宋太宗置总明观以集学士，亦谓之东观。
现代文：当初，刘宋明帝设立总明观，聚集学士，也叫东观。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Liu Songming set up the General Ming Court, also known as the Eastern Court.

古文：上以国学既立，五月，乙未，省总明观。
现代文：武帝认为，国学已经成立，所以在五月，乙未，下令撤销总明观。
English: Emperor Wu believed that Confucianism had been established, so in May, Emperor Wei ordered the revocation of the General Mingguan.

古文：时王俭领国子祭酒，诏于俭宅开学士馆，以总明四部书充之。
现代文：当时，王俭正兼任国子祭酒，诏令在王俭住宅内，开设学士馆，把总明观的甲、乙、丙、丁四部的图书，移交给学士馆。
English: At that time, Wang Jian was concurrently serving as the national son's sacrificial wine, and the imperial edict ordered the opening of an academy in Wang Jian's residence, and the transfer of the total of four books of A, B, C, and D to the academy.

古文：又诏俭以家为府。
现代文：同时，又命令王俭把家作为办公的官署。
English: At the same time, he also ordered Wang Jian to use his home as a government office.

古文：自宋世祖好文章，士大夫悉以文章相尚，无以专经为业者。
现代文：从刘宋孝武帝喜欢文章辞采以来，士大夫也都以华丽的文辞章句互相推崇欣赏，却没有专门研究经典的人。
English: Since Emperor Liu Song Xiaowu liked to read and write, scholars have also admired each other with gorgeous words and sentences, but there is no one who specializes in classics.

古文：俭少好《礼》学及《春秋》，言论造次必于儒者，由是衣冠翕然，更尚儒术。
现代文：王俭小时候就喜欢《礼》和《春秋》，即使是随便言谈，也都一定遵循儒家法则，从王俭这里开始，士大夫又追随模仿，崇尚儒家学说。
English: Wang Jian liked "Rite" and "Spring and Autumn" when he was a child. Even if he spoke casually, he always followed the Confucian rules. Starting from Wang Jian, the scholar followed the imitation and advocated the Confucian doctrine.

古文：俭撰次朝仪、国典，自晋、宋以来故事，无不谙忆，故当朝理事，断决如流。
现代文：王俭在撰写朝廷礼仪、国家大典时，对晋、刘宋王朝以来的掌故，无不了如指掌，因此，在他处理朝廷各项事务时，能够迅速做出决断。
English: When Wang Jian was writing about imperial court etiquette and state ceremonies, he was very familiar with the history of the Jin and Liu Song dynasties. Therefore, he was able to make quick decisions when dealing with various affairs of the imperial court.

古文：每博议引证，八坐、丞、郎无能异者。
现代文：每次建言，都旁征博引，上自八坐，下到左右丞、各署曹郎，没有人能提出异议。
English: Each suggestion was solicited and cited from all sides, from the top to the eighth seat, down to the left and right chairs, and the staff of each department, and no one could raise an objection.

古文：令史咨事常数十人，宾客满席，俭应接辨析，傍无留滞，发言下笔，皆有音彩。
现代文：拿着公文向他请示的令史经常有几十人，宾客盈门，王俭都从容接待，条分缕析，从不积压延迟，无论是口头发表见解，还是下笔批示，都是有声有色，神彩飞扬。
English: There were often dozens of people with official documents asking him for instructions. Wang Jian received the guests with ease, dissected them one by one, and never delayed them. Whether it was a verbal expression of opinion or a written order, it was full of color and splendor.

古文：十日一还学监试诸生，巾卷在庭，剑卫、令史，仪容甚盛。
现代文：王俭每十天去学监一次，测试学生，学监内都是头戴葛巾、手拿试卷的学生，佩剑的卫士和令史站在一旁，仪式非常隆重。
English: Wang Jian went to the supervisor once every ten days to test the students. Inside the supervisor's office, there were students with scarves on their heads and test papers in their hands. The guard with the sword and Ling Shi stood by, and the ceremony was very grand.

古文：作解散髻，斜插簪，朝野慕之，相与仿效。
现代文：王俭解散发髻，把头簪斜插在上面，朝廷内外都很仰慕他的风采，争相模仿。
English: Wang Jian untied the hairpin and put the headband diagonally on top. Both inside and outside the court admired his style and tried to imitate him.

古文：俭常谓人曰： 江左风流宰相，唯有谢安。 
现代文：王俭经常对人说： 江左风流倜傥的宰相，只有谢安一人。 
English: Wang Jian often said to people: There is only one prime minister, Xie An, who is not popular with Jiang Zuo.

古文：意以自比也。
现代文：言下之意是把自己比作谢安。
English: The implication is that he is comparing himself to Xie An.

古文：上深委仗之，士流选用，奏无不可。
现代文：武帝也非常器重他并委以要职。选用士人，只要是王俭推荐的，没有不批准的。
English: Emperor Wu also attached great importance to him and appointed him to an important post. As long as a scholar was recommended by Wang Jian, there was nothing that was not approved.

古文：六月，庚戌，魏进河南王度易侯为车骑将军，遣给事中吴兴丘冠先使河南，并送柔然使。
现代文：六月，庚戌，北魏提升河南王慕容度易侯为车骑将军，并派遣经事中、吴兴人丘冠先出使河南同时护送柔然汗国使节。
English: In June, the Northern Wei Dynasty promoted the king of Henan Province, Murong Duyi, to the rank of cavalry general, and sent Wu Xingrenqiu as the first envoy to Henan Province and escorted the envoy of the Juran Khanate.

古文：辛亥，魏主如方山。
现代文：辛亥，孝文帝前往方山。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan.

古文：丁巳，还宫。
现代文：丁巳，返回宫中。
English: Ding Si, return to the palace.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，魏遣使拜宕昌王梁弥机兄子弥承为宕昌王。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸未，北魏派遣使节前往宕昌，任命宕昌已故国王梁弥机哥哥的儿子梁弥承为新任宕昌王。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to Tangchang and appointed the son of the late King of Tangchang, Liang Yicheng, the son of the brother of the late King Liang Yicheng, as the new King of Tangchang.

古文：初，弥机死，子弥博立，为吐谷浑所逼，奔仇池。
现代文：当初，梁弥机去世，他的儿子梁弥博继承王位，被吐谷浑汗国所逼迫，逃到了仇池。
English: At first, Liang Yicai died, and his son Liang Yibo succeeded to the throne. He was persecuted by the Tuyun Khanate and fled to Qiu Chi.

古文：仇池镇将穆亮以弥机事魏素厚，矜其灭亡；弥博凶悖，所部恶之；弥承为众所附，表请纳之。诏许之。
现代文：仇池镇将穆亮认为梁弥机侍奉北魏朝廷一向尽心谨慎，对宕昌国的灭亡非常同情。可是，梁弥博性情凶狠，残暴悖逆，将士对他都很痛恨，而梁弥承却受到大家的拥护，穆亮应奏请朝廷，允许护送梁弥承回国，朝廷下诏批准。
English: Mu Liang, the commander of Quchi Town, thought that Liang Yichie had always been careful in serving the Northern Wei Dynasty and was very sympathetic to the demise of the Tang Dynasty. However, Liang Yibo had a fierce temperament and was cruel and rebellious. The generals hated him, but Liang Yicheng was supported by everyone. Mu Liang requested the court to allow him to escort Liang Yicheng back to China, and the court approved it.

古文：亮帅骑三万军于龙鹄，击走吐谷浑，立弥承而还。
现代文：于是，穆亮就率领三万名骑兵驻扎在龙鹄，击退了吐谷浑，拥立梁弥承登上王位。
English: As a result, Mu Liang led thirty thousand cavalry stationed in Longjing, repelled Tu Gu Hun, and supported Liang Mi Heung to ascend the throne.

古文：亮，崇之曾孙也。
现代文：穆亮是穆崇的曾孙。
English: Mu Liang is the great-grandson of Mu Chong.

古文：戊子，魏主如鱼池，登青原冈；甲午，还宫；八月，己亥，如弥泽；甲寅，登牛头山；甲子，还宫。
现代文：戊子，孝文帝前往鱼池，登临青原冈。甲午，返回宫中。八月，己亥，前往弥泽。甲寅，登上牛头山。甲子，返回宫中。
English: In the spring, Emperor Xiaowen went to Yuchi and climbed Aobara-oka. In the summer, he went to Yaza. In the winter, he went to Niigata. In the winter, he went to Niigata. In the winter, he went to Niigata.

古文：魏初，民多廕附；廕附者皆无官役，而豪强征敛倍于公赋。
现代文：北魏建国初年，很多人自动依附于豪门强族。寻求庇护的人都不用为官府服役，可是，豪强贵族的横征暴敛，比官府征收的捐税高出一倍。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Northern Wei Dynasty, many people automatically attached themselves to the wealthy and powerful families. People seeking asylum did not have to serve the government, but the violent collection of the powerful aristocrats was twice as high as the tax levied by the government.

古文：给事中李安世上言： 岁饥民流，田业多为豪右所占夺；虽桑井难复，宜更均量，使力业相称。
现代文：于是，给事中李安世上书说： 每次遇到灾荒，老百姓就四处逃散，他们的田地大多都被豪强贵族们所霸占、掠夺。古代的井田制度难以恢复，朝廷应该使土地平均些，使农夫耕种土地的面积和人口数量相当。
English: As a result, Li An wrote in his will: Every time there is a natural disaster, the common people flee everywhere, and most of their fields are occupied and plundered by powerful aristocrats. It is difficult to restore the ancient paddy field system. The imperial court should make the land more equal, so that the area of land cultivated by farmers is equal to the number of people.

古文：又，所争之田，宜限年断，事久难明，悉归今主，以绝诈妄。 
现代文：另外，对发生争执的田产，应该限定日期裁断。官司拖得太久又难以明断的田产，一律归现在使用的人，以杜绝谗佞欺诈。 
English: In addition, land disputes should be adjudicated within a specified period of time. Land disputes that have dragged on for too long and are difficult to adjudicate should be returned to the current user to prevent fraud.

古文：魏主善之，由是始议均田。
现代文：孝文帝赞赏李安世的建议，由此开始讨论均田方案。
English: Emperor Xiaowen appreciated Li Anshi's suggestion, and thus began to discuss the equal-field plan.

古文：冬，十月，丁未，诏遣使者循行州郡，与牧守均给天下之田：诸男夫十五以上受露田四十亩，妇人二十亩，奴婢依良丁；牛一头，受田三十亩，限止四牛。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁未，孝文帝下诏派遣使者分别去各州郡，与各州郡牧守一同推行均田制，十五岁以上的男子，每人可以得到四十亩没有种树的农田，女子每人二十亩，奴仆婢女，按照一般成年人所配给田地的待遇分配土地。一头牛，可得三十亩农田，但以四头牛为限。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict to dispatch emissaries to all prefectures and counties separately, and together with the pastors of the prefectures and counties to implement the equal field system. Men over the age of fifteen can each get forty mu of farmland without planting trees, women can each get twenty mu, and slaves and maids can be allocated land according to the treatment of the field allocated by the average adult. One cow can get thirty mu of farmland, but it is limited to four cows.

古文：所授之田，率倍之；三易之田，再倍之，以供耕作及还受之盈缩。
现代文：所配给的农田，如果是隔一年才能耕种一次的贫瘠田地，增加一倍；如果是隔两年才能耕种一次的田地，增加两倍。以此供耕种和还田、受田增加减少的需要。
English: The allocated farmland will be doubled if it is a barren field that can only be cultivated once every other year; if it is a field that can only be cultivated once every two years, it will be tripled.

古文：人年及课则受田，老免及身没则还田。
现代文：老百姓到了应该纳赋的年龄，就配给土地，年纪已老以及去世之后，土地归还官府。
English: When ordinary people reach the age when they should be paid, they are allocated land, and when they are old or die, the land is returned to the government.

古文：奴婢、牛随有无以还受。
现代文：对于奴婢和耕牛，根据奴婢和耕牛数量多少，决定还田还是受田。
English: For slaves and farm cattle, according to the number of slaves and farm cattle, it is decided whether to return the field or accept the field.

古文：初受田者，男夫给二十亩，课种桑五十株；桑田皆为世业，身终不还。
现代文：初次受田的人，男子给田二十亩，规定种五十棵桑树，种了桑树的土地，都是世世代代经营管理，死了以后也不用缴回官府。
English: The man who receives the field for the first time gives the field twenty mu, stipulates the planting of fifty mulberry trees, and the land planted with mulberry trees is operated and managed for generations. After death, it does not have to be returned to the government.

古文：恒计见口，有盈者无受无还，不足者受种如法，盈者得卖其盈。
现代文：官府应经常统计人口情况，对土地有盈余的农家，不受田也不令他还田。对土地不够的农家，则依照法令增加配给。
English: The government should regularly count the population, and farmers with surplus land should not be forced to give up their land. For farmers with insufficient land, the ration should be increased in accordance with the law.

古文：诸宰民之官，各随近给公田有差，更代相付；卖者坐如律。
现代文：世代经营的田地，有盈余的人家，可以自由出售。各地地方官就在官府附近，按照等级，配给一份公田，地方官更换时，要把这份公田移交给接任的官员。如果私自卖掉公田，按照法律追究定罪。
English: Fields that have been managed for generations, and people's homes that have surpluses, can be sold freely. Local officials around the country are allocated a share of public land according to their rank near the government office. When local officials are replaced, they must hand over this public land to the succeeding officials. If they sell public land without permission, they will be prosecuted and convicted according to the law.

古文：辛酉，魏魏郡王陈建卒。
现代文：辛酉，北魏魏郡王陈建去世。
English: Xin Xi, the Northern Wei Wei County King Chen Jian passed away.

古文：魏员外散骑常侍李彪等来聘。
现代文：北魏员外散骑常侍李彪等人来访。
English: Li Biao, a member of the Northern Wei Dynasty who rode horseback outside the palace, and other attendants paid a visit.

古文：十二月，乙卯，魏以侍中淮南王佗为司徒。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，北魏任命侍中、淮南王拓跋佗为司徒。
English: In December, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the chamberlain, Huainan Wang Tuobao, as the tutor.

古文：柔然犯魏塞，魏任城王澄帅众拒之，柔然遁去。
现代文：柔然汗国进犯北魏边塞，北魏任城王拓跋澄率领将士抗击，柔然军远逃。
English: The Khanate of Juran attacked the Northern Wei frontier fortress. The Northern Wei city king, Tuoba Cheng, led the soldiers to fight back, and the Juran army fled far away.

古文：澄，云之子也。
现代文：拓跋澄是拓跋云的儿子。
English: Tuoba-Chen is the son of Tuoba-Yun.

古文：氐、羌反，诏以澄为都督梁、益、荆三州诸军事、梁州刺史。澄至州，讨叛柔服，氐、羌皆平。
现代文：后来，氐族、羌族人起来造反，诏命拓跋澄为都督梁、益、荆三州诸军事，梁州刺史，拓跋澄抵达仇池城就职后，讨伐叛贼，安抚降附的部众，氐族、羌族的叛乱全都平息。
English: Later, the Yi and Ya people rebelled, and the imperial edict ordered Tuoba Cheng to be the military governor of Liang, Yi, and Jing three states. Liangzhou made history, and after Tuoba Cheng arrived in Qiuchi City to take office, he fought against the traitors, pacified the subordinate subordinates, and the rebellions of the Yi and Ya people were all quelled.

古文：初，太祖命黄门郎虞玩之等检定黄籍。
现代文：当初，南齐高帝萧道成命令门下省黄门郎虞玩之等人重新校订户籍。
English: At first, Emperor Xiao Daocheng of the Southern Qi Dynasty ordered Huangmen Lang Yu Yanzhi and others under his command to re-register their household registration.

古文：上即位，别立校籍官，置令史，限人一日得数巧。
现代文：武帝即位后，又另行设立校籍官，设置令史，限定令史每天每人都要查出几件奸伪案件。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he also set up a separate school registration officer, set up history, and limited history. Every day, everyone should find out several cases of fraud.

古文：既连年不已，民愁怨不安。
现代文：这样连续几年都没有停止，老百姓为此愁苦不安，怨声载道。
English: This has not stopped for several years in a row, and the people are worried and anxious about this, and the complaints are rampant.

古文：外监会稽吕文度启上，籍被却者悉充远戍，民多逃亡避罪。
现代文：外监会稽人吕文度就此启奏皇上，武帝下令凡是撤销户籍的，都要发配远方戍守边疆，百姓大都畏罪逃亡。
English: The auditor of the Foreign Supervisory Commission, Lü Wendu, reported this to the emperor, and Emperor Wu ordered that anyone who revoked their household registration should be sent to a distant place to guard the frontier. Most people were afraid of crime and fled.

古文：富阳民唐之因以妖术惑众作乱，攻陷富阳，三吴却籍者奔之，众至三万。
现代文：富阳百姓唐之，趁机利用妖术，蛊惑人们起来叛乱，攻陷了富阳。三吴一带被撤销户籍的人纷纷投奔富阳，人数多达三万。
English: Tang Zhi, the people of Fuyang, took advantage of the opportunity to use magic to incite people to rebel and invaded Fuyang. People whose household registration was revoked in the Sanwu area flocked to Fuyang, numbering as many as thirty thousand.

古文：文度与茹法亮、吕文显皆以奸谄有宠于上。
现代文：吕文度和茹法亮、吕文显三人，都凭借奸邪谄媚，受到武帝的宠信。
English: The three of them, Lu Wen-du, Ru Far-liang, and Lu Wen-hsien, were all favored by Emperor Wu by virtue of their treachery and wickedness.

古文：文度为外监，专制兵权，领军守虚位而已。
现代文：吕文崐度身为外监，他独揽禁军大权，而使领军成为挂名的虚职。
English: Lü Wenzhong was appointed as the foreign overseer. He monopolized the power of the forbidden army, and made the leader of the army a nominal position.

古文：法亮为中书通事舍人，权势尤盛。
现代文：茹法亮担任中书通事舍人，权势更盛。
English: Rufa Liang served as the general secretary of the Communist Party of China, and his power increased.

古文：王俭常曰： 我虽有大位，权寄岂及茹公邪！ 
现代文：王俭经常说： 我虽然身居高位，现在掌握的权力又哪里比得上茹公呢！ 
English: Wang Jian often said: Although I am in a high position, the power I now hold is nothing compared to Ru Gong!

古文：是岁，柔然部真可汗卒，子豆仑立，号伏名敦可汗，改元太平。
现代文：这一年，柔然汗国可汗郁久闾予成去世，他的儿子郁久闾豆仑继位，号为伏名敦可汗，改年号为太平。
English: In the same year, Ikukyu Shigenari, the khan of the Juran Khanate, died, and his son, Ikukyu Shizuren, succeeded to the throne. He was given the name Fumendun Khan, and the new name was Taiping.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明四年春，正月，癸亥朔，魏高祖朝会，始服衮冕。
现代文：四年春季，正月，癸亥朔，北魏孝文帝召集百官朝见时开始穿戴汉族皇帝的礼服和冕旒。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen began to wear the Han Emperor's ceremonial dress and crown when he summoned hundreds of officials to meet the emperor.

古文：壬午，柔然寇魏边。
现代文：壬午，柔然汗国进犯北魏边塞。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the Mongolian Khanate invaded the Northern Wei border fortress.

古文：唐之攻陷钱唐，吴郡诸县令多弃城走。
现代文：南齐叛民头目唐之攻陷了钱唐，吴郡各县县令大多弃城逃走。
English: Tang Zhi, the leader of the Nanqi rebels, captured Qiantang, and most of the county magistrates in Wuxi County abandoned the city and fled.

古文：之称帝于钱唐，立太子，置百官；遣其将高道度等攻陷东阳，杀东阳太守萧崇之。
现代文：唐之在钱唐称帝，封立太子，设置文武百官。接着，又派他的大将高道度等人攻陷东阳，杀东阳太守萧崇之。
English: Tang Zhi proclaimed Qian Tang emperor, enthroned him as crown prince, and set up a hundred civil and military officials. Next, he sent his general Gao Daodu and others to invade Dongyang and kill Dongyang's governor Xiao Chongzhi.

古文：崇之，太祖族弟也。
现代文：萧崇之是高帝萧道成的族弟。
English: Xiao Chongzhi was the younger brother of Emperor Gao Xiao Dousheng.

古文：又遣其将孙泓寇山阴，至浦阳江，浃口戍主汤休武击破之。
现代文：唐之又派大将孙泓进犯山阴，孙泓率军走到浦阳江时，浃口戍主汤休武击败了孙泓。
English: Tang Zhi also sent General Sun Yat-sen to invade the mountains. When Sun Yat-sen led his army to the Poyang River, Tong Xiuwu defeated Sun Yat-sen.

古文：上发禁兵数千人，马数百匹，东击之。
现代文：武帝派几千名禁军，几百匹战马，往东进攻唐之。
English: Emperor Wu sent several thousand forbidden soldiers and hundreds of horses to attack Tang in the east.

古文：台军至钱唐，之众乌合，畏骑兵，一战而溃，擒斩之，进平诸郡县。
现代文：禁军抵达钱唐，唐之手下都是一群乌合之众，对骑兵都十分惧怕，双方刚一交战，唐之全军崩溃，禁军抓获了唐之，斩首，进而平定叛乱各郡县。
English: The forbidden army arrived at Qian Tang, Tang's men were a group of rabble, they were very afraid of the cavalry, the two sides just fought, Tang's entire army collapsed, the forbidden army captured Tang, beheaded, and then quelled the rebellion counties.

古文：台军乘胜，颇纵抄掠。
现代文：禁军乘胜对老百姓大肆奸淫虏掠。
English: The forbidden army took advantage of the victory to plunder the people.

古文：军还，上闻之，丁酉，收军主前军将军陈天福弃市；左军将军刘明彻免官、削爵，付东冶。
现代文：班师后，武帝听到了这一情况，就下令逮捕军主、前军将军陈天福，将他绑赴刑场斩首，免除左军将军刘明彻的官职，削除他的爵位，发配到东冶做苦工。
English: After the division was formed, Emperor Wu heard of this situation and ordered the arrest of the army commander, former army general Chen Tianfu, bound him to the execution site and beheaded him, relieved the left army general Liu Mingcher of his official position, removed his title and sent him to Dongye to do hard labor.

古文：天福，上宠将也，既伏诛，内外莫不震肃。
现代文：陈天福是武帝平时最宠爱的大将，他被处死，朝廷内外人士无不感到震惊。
English: Chen Tianfu was Emperor Wu's favorite general in peacetime. He was put to death, and people inside and outside the court were shocked.

古文：使通事舍人丹阳刘系宗随军慰劳，遍至遭贼郡县，百姓被驱逼者悉无所问。
现代文：武帝派通事舍人丹阳人刘系宗前往禁军去过的郡县安抚百姓。走遍了遭到叛民进攻的郡县。
English: Emperor Wu sent Liu Jiezong, a man from Danyang, to pacify the people in the counties where the imperial army had been. He went all over the counties that were attacked by the rebels.

古文：闰月，癸巳，立皇子子贞为邵陵王，皇孙昭文为临汝公。
现代文：对于被胁迫而参加叛乱的百姓，一概不予追究。闰正月，癸巳，武帝立皇子萧子贞为郡陵王，立皇孙萧昭文为临汝公。
English: For the people who were coerced to participate in the rebellion, they will not be investigated at all. In the leap month, Emperor Wu established Prince Xiao Zizhen as the King of Guanling and Emperor Sun Xiao Zhaowen as the Prince of Lin.

古文：氐王杨后起卒。
现代文：氐王杨后起去世。
English: Queen Yang of Sheba passed away.

古文：丁未，诏以白水太守杨集始为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：丁未，武帝诏命白水太守杨集始为北秦州刺史，封为武都王。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Wu decreed that Yang Jizhi, the governor of Baishui, should be the first governor of North Qin, and he was named King of Wudu.

古文：集始，文弘之子也。
现代文：杨集始是杨文弘的儿子。
English: Yang Jishi is the son of Yang Wenhong.

古文：后起弟后明为白水太守。
现代文：又任命杨后起的弟弟杨后明担任白水太守。
English: He also appointed Yang Houqi's younger brother Yang Houming as the governor of Baishui.

古文：魏亦以集始为武都王。
现代文：北魏也封杨集始为武都王。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty also appointed Yang Jizhi as the King of Wudang.

古文：集始入朝于魏，魏以为南秦州刺史。
现代文：杨集始到北魏京都朝见，北魏又任命他为南秦州刺史。
English: Yang Jizhi went to the Northern Wei Dynasty to meet with the emperor in Kyoto, and the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed him as the governor of Southern Qin.

古文：辛亥，上耕籍田。
现代文：辛亥，南齐武帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：二月，己未，立皇弟銶为晋熙王，铉为河东王。
现代文：二月，己未，武帝立皇弟萧为晋熙王，萧铉为河东王。
English: In February, Emperor Wu's younger brother, Emperor Xiao, was crowned King of Jinxi, and Emperor Xiao was crowned King of Hedong.

古文：魏无乡党之法，唯立宗主督护；民多隐冒，三五十家始为一户。
现代文：北魏没有地方基层行政组织法规，只有大家族的宗主来监督地方行政事务。老百姓大多隐瞒或假冒别人的户籍，有时三五十家才有一个户口。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, there were no laws and regulations for local grassroots administrative organizations, and only the patriarch of a large family was allowed to supervise local administrative affairs. Most of the common people concealed or forged other people's household registration, and sometimes there was only one household registration for thirty or fifty families.

古文：内秘书令李冲上言： 宜准古法：五家立邻长，五邻立里长，五里立党长，取乡人强谨者为之。
现代文：为此，内秘书令李冲上疏说： 应该依据古代的方法，五户设立一个邻长，五邻设立一个里长，五里设立一名党长，选派乡人中强干而又谨慎的人担任。
English: To this end, the Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior ordered Li Chong Shangzhu to say: According to the ancient method, the five households should set up a neighbor, the five neighbors should set up a village leader, and the five villages should set up a party leader, and strong and prudent people should be selected from the villagers.

古文：邻长复一夫，里长二夫，党长三夫；三载无过，则升一等。
现代文：邻长家免除一个人的差役，里长家免除二个人的差役，党长家则免除三个人的差役。三年之内，没有过失，加升一级。
English: The neighbor's family is exempted from one official, the village's family is exempted from two officials, and the party leader's family is exempted from three officials. Within three years, there is no fault, and it is raised one level.

古文：其民调，一夫一妇，帛一匹，粟二石。
现代文：对老百姓征收的户调，一对夫妇征收一匹布帛，二石粟米。
English: For the household tax levied on the common people, a couple levied one horse cloth, and two stones of poppy rice.

古文：大率十匹为公调，二匹为调外费，三匹为百官俸。
现代文：大体上十匹交给国库，二匹作为额外追加，三匹作为支付朝廷文武百官的俸禄。
English: In total, ten horses were handed over to the state treasury, two horses were added as extras, and three horses were used to pay the salaries of the Imperial Court's civil and military officials.

古文：此外复有杂调。
现代文：除此还有杂税。
English: In addition, there are miscellaneous taxes.

古文：民年八十已上，听一子不从役。
现代文：老百姓在八十岁以上的，可以免除一个儿子的差役。
English: Ordinary people over the age of eighty can be exempted from one son's service.

古文：孤独、癃老、笃疾、贫穷不能自存者，三长内迭养食之。 
现代文：孤儿、孤寡老人、残疾人及久病不愈者、贫穷无法养活自己的人，要由邻长、里长和党长轮流供养。 
English: Orphans, the elderly, the disabled, the chronically ill, and the poor who are unable to feed themselves should be supported by their neighbors, village chiefs, and party leaders in turn.

古文：书奏，诏百官通议。
现代文：李冲的奏章呈上之后，孝文帝诏令文武百官讨论。
English: After Li Chong's report was submitted, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict to have a hundred officials discuss it.

古文：中书令郑羲等皆以为不可。
现代文：中书令郑羲等人都认为行不通。
English: Zheng Qi and others all thought that the Chinese-written edict would not work.

古文：太尉丕曰： 臣谓此法若行，于公私有益。
现代文：太尉拓跋丕说： 我认为，这种办法如果实行，对朝廷和个人都有好处。
English: Captain Tuobao said, "I think that if this method is implemented, it will be beneficial to the imperial court and individuals.

古文：但方有事之月，校比户口，民必劳怨。
现代文：但是，现在正是征收赋税的月份，校正户籍，百姓一定会因苦生怨。
English: However, now is the month of tax collection, household registration correction, and the people will certainly be resentful because of the hardships.

古文：请过今秋，至冬乃遣使者，于事为宜。 
现代文：我请求过了今年秋季，等到冬季派官员到各地办理，这样做还是比较合适的。 
English: I requested that after this autumn, it would be more appropriate to wait until the winter to send officials to various regions to deal with this.

古文：冲曰：  民可使由之，不可使知之。 若不因调时，民徒知立长校户之勤，未见均徭省赋之益，心必生怨。
现代文：李冲则说：  民可使由之，不可使知之 ，如果不趁现在征收赋税的时节去办理，老百姓只看到校正户籍的麻烦辛苦，却没有看到减免徭役赋税所带来的好处，一定会心生怨恨。
English: Li Chong said: People can use reason, but they cannot use knowledge. If they do not take advantage of the current tax collection season to deal with it, the people will only see the troubles of correcting the household registration, but they will not see the benefits brought about by the reduction and exemption of the tax, and resentment will certainly arise.

古文：宜及课调之月，令知赋税之均，既识其事，又得其利，行之差易。 
现代文：我们应该利用征收赋税的月份，使老百姓知道赋税公平。他们了解了这一点，又从中得到了好处，推行起来就容易了。 
English: We should take advantage of the tax collection month to let people know that taxation is fair. They understand this and benefit from it, and it is easy to implement.

古文：群臣多言： 九品差调，为日已久，一旦改法，恐成扰乱。 
现代文：文武百官们却说： 按照九个等级进行征税，已经实行了很长时间，一旦要改变，恐怕会引起骚乱。 
English: Civil and military officials, however, said: Taxation according to nine levels has been implemented for a long time, and if it were to change, it would probably cause unrest.

古文：文明太后曰： 立三长则课调有常准，苞廕之户可出，侥幸之人可止，何为不可！ 
现代文：最终，冯太后说： 设立邻长、里长、党长，田赋捐税仍然有一定的标准，被包庇隐藏的户口就可以查出，侥幸逃脱的人也可以得到制止，为什么说它行不通呢？ 
English: In the end, Empress Dowager Feng said, "The establishment of neighborhood chiefs, village chiefs, and party chiefs, and the land tax still have a certain standard. The concealed and hidden accounts can be detected, and those who have escaped can also be stopped. Why is it not effective?

古文：甲戌，初立党、里、邻三长，定民户籍。
现代文：甲戌，开始建立党长、里长、邻长制度，重新核定百姓的户籍。
English: Jiuquan began to establish a system of party chiefs, village chiefs, and neighborhood chiefs, and re-approved the household registration of the people.

古文：民始皆愁苦，豪强者尤不愿。
现代文：老百姓开始为此都愁苦不安，豪强士族们尤其反对。
English: The common people began to worry about this, and the powerful warrior clans were particularly opposed.

古文：既而课调省费十馀倍，上下安之。
现代文：不久，赋税的征收额减少到过去的十几分之一，豪强、百姓才安下心来。
English: Soon, the amount of tax levied was reduced to one-tenth of what it had been in the past, and only then did the brave, the strong, and the people calm down.

古文：三月，丙申，柔然遣使者牟提如魏。
现代文：三月，丙申，柔然汗国派遣使节牟提前往北魏。
English: In March, Bishen, the Jurchen Khanate sent the envoy Muti to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：时敕勒叛柔然，柔然伏名敦可汗自将讨之，追奔至西漠。
现代文：这时，敕勒部落反叛，柔然可汗郁久闾豆仑亲自率领大军前去讨伐，一直追杀到西边大沙漠的尽头。
English: At this time, the Mule tribe rebelled, and the gentle Khan Yujiu Peacock personally led a large army to go and fight, and chased them all the way to the end of the great desert in the west.

古文：魏左仆射穆亮等请乘虚击之，中书监高闾曰： 秦、汉之世，海内一统，故可远征匈奴。
现代文：北魏左仆射穆亮等人，请求趁柔然汗国后方空虚，出兵袭击。中书监高闾说： 秦、汉时代，天下统一，才能够远征匈奴。
English: Northern Wei left-hand servant Sha Mu Liang and others requested to take advantage of the emptiness behind the Khanate to attack. Chinese librarian Gao Wei said: In the Qin and Han dynasties, only when the whole country was unified could the Huns be dispatched.

古文：今南有吴寇，何可舍之深入虏庭！ 
现代文：而如今，我们南面有吴地的敌人，怎么能能够不顾南边的危险而深入胡虏腹心呢。 
English: But now, we have the enemy of Wudi in the south, how can we go deep into the heart of Hukuru's confidant, regardless of the danger in the south?

古文：魏主曰：  兵者凶器，圣人不得已而用之。 
现代文：孝文帝说：  武器是一种凶器，圣人万不得已的时候才使用它。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: "A weapon is a deadly weapon. A sage only uses it when he has no other choice."

古文：先帝屡出征伐者，以有未宾之虏故也。
现代文：先帝多次出兵讨伐，是由于胡虏一直没有屈服。
English: The previous emperor repeatedly sent troops to fight, because the Huns never gave in.

古文：今朕承太平之业，奈何无故动兵革乎！ 
现代文：现在，朕所承继的是太平盛世的大业，怎么可以无缘无故发动战争呢。 
English: Now, what I have inherited is the great cause of peace and prosperity, how can I start a war for no reason?

古文：厚礼其使者而归之。
现代文：于是，以厚礼接待柔然汗国的使节，并送他回去。
English: Therefore, he received the envoy of the Khanate of Joran with great courtesy and sent him back.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉朔，魏始制五等公服；甲子，初以法服、御辇祀西郊。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛酉朔，北魏开始制做五等官服。甲子，孝文帝第一次穿上皇帝法服，乘坐皇帝专用的辇车，到南郊祭天。
English: In the summer, in April, the Northern Wei Dynasty began to make the fifth-class official uniforms. For the first time, Emperor Xiaowen put on the emperor's legal uniform, took the emperor's special carriage, and went to the southern suburbs to worship God.

古文：癸酉，魏主如灵泉池。
现代文：癸酉，孝文帝前往灵泉池。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pool.

古文：戊寅，还宫。
现代文：戊寅，返回宫中。
English: On the 11th day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：湘州蛮反，刺史吕安国有疾不能讨；丁亥，以尚书左仆射柳世隆为湘州刺史，讨平之。
现代文：湘州蛮族叛乱，南齐湘州刺史吕安国有病，不能讨伐。丁亥，武帝任命尚书左仆射柳世隆为湘州刺史，平息了叛乱。
English: The rebellion of the barbarians in Hunan Province, Southern Qi, Hunan Province, and the state of Lu'an are national diseases and cannot be fought. Ding Hai, Emperor Wu appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Jialu Shilong, as the governor of Hunan Province, and quelled the rebellion.

古文：六月，辛酉，魏主如方山。
现代文：六月，辛酉，孝文帝前往方山。
English: In June, Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan.

古文：己卯，魏文明太后赐皇子恂名，大赦。
现代文：己卯，北魏冯太后给皇子取名拓跋恂。实行大赦。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Empress Dowager Feng gave the prince the name Tuobao. An amnesty was implemented.

古文：秋，七月，戊戌，魏主如方山。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊戌，孝文帝再次前往方山。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan again.

古文：八月，乙亥，魏给尚书五等爵已上硃衣、玉佩、大小组绶。
现代文：八月，乙亥，北魏给尚书和五等爵以上的官员发放朱色官服、佩玉和佩带玉饰的丝带。
English: In August, Yihai, the Northern Wei issued vermilion-colored official uniforms, jade and jade-decorated ribbons to Shangshu and officials above the fifth grade.

古文：九月，辛卯，魏作明堂、辟雍。
现代文：九月，辛卯，北魏兴建明堂、辟雍。
English: In September, Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty began to build the Ming Hall and the Yong Dynasty.

古文：冬，十一月，魏议定民官依户给俸。
现代文：冬季，十一月，北魏议定地方官按照他所辖户口发放俸禄。
English: In the winter, in November, the Northern Wei Dynasty agreed that local officials would distribute salaries according to the hukou under their jurisdiction.

古文：十二月，柔然寇魏边。
现代文：十二月，柔然汗国进犯北魏边境。
English: In December, the Rouran Khanate invaded the Northern Wei border.

古文：是岁，魏改中书学曰国子学。
现代文：这一年，北魏将中书学改称为国子学。
English: In the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed the name of Chinese calligraphy to "Kokushigaku."

古文：分置州郡，凡三十八州，二十五在河南，十三在河北。
现代文：重新划分设置州郡，共有三十八个州，其中有二十五个州在黄河南，十三个州在黄河北。
English: A total of thirty-eight prefectures were set up, of which twenty-five were in the south of the Yellow River and thirteen were in the north of the Yellow River.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明五年春，正月，丁亥朔，魏主诏定乐章，非雅者除之。
现代文：五年春季，正月，丁亥朔，北魏孝文帝下诏，审定音乐，凡是不够典雅的音乐，一律除掉。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the first month, Ding Hai Shuo, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict to eliminate all music that was not elegant enough.

古文：戊子，以豫章王嶷为大司马，章陵王子良为司徒，临川王映、卫将军王俭、中军将军王敬则并加开府仪同三司。
现代文：戊子，南齐任命豫章王萧嶷为大司马，任命竟陵王萧子良为司徒。将临川王萧映、卫将军王俭和中军将军王敬则三人一并加授为开府仪同三司。
English: Wuzi, Nanqi appointed Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zhen as the chief steward, appointed Jingling Wang Xiao Ziliang as the steward, and awarded Linchuan King Xiao Ying, Wei General Wang Jian, and Chinese General Wang Jing as the three chief stewards.

古文：子良启记室范云为郡，上曰： 闻其常相卖弄，朕不复穷法，当宥之以远。 
现代文：萧子良起用记室范云担任郡守，武帝对萧子良说： 我听说，他在你面前经常卖弄才能，朕没有追究并惩罚他，应该宽宥并把他调到边远地区。 
English: Emperor Wu said to Xiao Ziliang, "I heard that he often flaunted his talent in front of you. I did not investigate and punish him. I should have pardoned him and transferred him to a remote area."

古文：子良曰： 不然。
现代文：萧子良说： 事实并不是这样。
English: "That's not true," Zorya replied.

古文：云动相规诲，谏书具存。 
现代文：范云经常对我进行规劝教诲，他写给我的谏书仍然保存着。 
English: Fan Yun often exhorts and teaches me, and the letter he wrote to me is still preserved.

古文：遂取以奏，凡百馀纸，辞皆切直。
现代文：说完，萧子良就拿出来呈上，大约有一百多张纸，言辞十分恳切直率。
English: After that, Xiao Ziliang took out and presented more than a hundred pieces of paper. His words were very sincere and straightforward.

古文：上叹息，谓子良曰： 不谓云能尔；方使弼汝，何宜出守！ 
现代文：武帝不禁叹息，对萧子良说： 没有想到范云能够这样，你正需要这样的人辅助，怎么应该让他去边远地区镇守呢！ 
English: Emperor Wu couldn't help but sigh and said to Xiao Ziliang: I didn't expect Fan Yun to be able to do this, you just need such a person's assistance, how should he go to the remote areas to guard the town!

古文：文惠太子尝出东田观获，顾谓众宾曰： 刈此亦殊可观。 
现代文：文惠太子萧长懋曾经到东田观看农夫在田间收割时的情况，他回过头对随从的宾客们说： 收割是一件很可以一看的事。 大家都纷纷点头说： 是，是。 
English: The Prince of Wenhui, Xiao Changyu, once went to Dongtian to watch the farmers harvesting in the fields. He turned around and said to the accompanying guests, "Harvesting is a very beautiful thing." Everyone nodded and said, "Yes, yes."

古文：众皆唯唯，云独曰： 三时之务，实为长勤。
现代文：只有范云回答说： 春天耕种，夏天锄草，秋天收获，这三个季节的农田劳作，实在是一件长时期劳苦之事。
English: Only Fan Yun replied: Spring plowing, summer weeding, autumn harvest, these three seasons of farmland work, is really a long period of hard work.

古文：伏愿殿下知稼穑之艰难，无徇一朝之宴逸。 
现代文：只愿殿下能够了解耕种和收获庄稼的艰难，不再贪图一时的享乐！ 
English: If only His Royal Highness could understand the hardships of farming and harvesting crops, and stop craving momentary pleasure!

古文：荒人桓天生自称桓玄宗族，与雍、司二州蛮相扇动，据南阳故城，请兵于魏，将入寇。
现代文：边疆人桓天生自称自己是桓玄的族人，他同雍州、司州两州的蛮族相互煽动，占据了南阳旧城，又向北魏请求出兵援助，要继续向南进犯。
English: The frontiersman Huan Tien claimed to be a native of Huan Xuan. He and the barbarians of Yongzhou and Shizhou instigated each other, occupied the old city of Nanyang, and asked the Northern Wei Dynasty for military assistance to continue to attack the south.

古文：丁酉，诏假丹阳尹萧景先节，总帅步骑，直指义阳，司州诸军皆受节度；又假护军将军陈显达节，帅征虏将军戴僧静等水军向宛、叶，雍、司众军皆受显达节度，以讨之。
现代文：丁酉，武帝下诏，加授丹杨尹萧景先符节，统领步、骑兵，直接向义阳挺进，司州境内各路大军都接受萧景先的指挥。又加授护军将军陈显达符节，统率征虏将军戴僧静等水军向宛、叶两地进攻，雍州和司州的各路大军也都全部接受陈显达的指挥，共同讨伐桓天生。
English: In Dingwu, Emperor Wu issued an edict, and promoted Danyang, Yangyin, Xiaojing to be the commander of troops and cavalry, and marched directly to Yiyang. All the armies in Shizhou were under the command of Xiao Jingsen. In addition, General Chen Xianda, the commander of the escort army, was awarded the order to be the commander of troops and cavalry, and led the navy to attack Wan and Ye, and all the armies in Yongzhou and Shizhou were also under the command of Chen Xianda and jointly fought against Huan Tian Sheng.

古文：魏光禄大夫咸阳文公高允，历事五帝，出入三省，五十馀年，未尝有谴；冯太后及魏主甚重之，常命中黄门苏兴寿扶侍。
现代文：北魏光禄大夫、咸阳文公高允，一生侍奉过五位皇帝，在尚书省、中书省、秘书省三省中担任过重要职位，五十多年，从未受到过责备。冯太后和孝文帝都非常尊重他，经常命令黄门苏兴扶侍他。
English: The Northern Wei Guanglu doctor, Xianyang Wenguang Gaoyong, served five emperors in his lifetime, and held important positions in the three provinces of Shangshu, Zhongshu and Secretary. For more than 50 years, he was never reproached. Empress Dowager Feng and Emperor Xiaowen respected him very much, and often ordered Huangmen Su Xing to serve him.

古文：允仁恕简静，虽处贵重，情同寒素；执书吟览，昼夜不去手，诲人以善，恂恂不倦；笃亲念故，无所遗弃。
现代文：高允仁义宽厚，简朴恬静，虽然处在极其尊贵重要的位置上，但是，他的情况却跟普通士人一样。他拿起书来不停地吟咏浏览，无论是白天还是夜里总是书不离手。他教诲别人向善学好，诚恳耐心地引导，从不感到厌倦。他顾念亲人、故旧，都从不忘记、抛充他们。
English: Gao Yun is kind, generous, simple and quiet. Although he is in an extremely important position, his situation is the same as that of an ordinary scholar. He picks up books and constantly browses them. Whether it is day or night, he never leaves his hands. He teaches others to be good at learning, sincerely and patiently guides them, and never gets tired. He thinks about his relatives and the past, and never forgets or forsakes them.

古文：显祖平青、徐，悉徙其望族于代，其人多允之婚媾，流离饥寒；允倾家赈施，咸得其所，又随其才行，荐之于朝。
现代文：当献文帝拓跋弘夺取刘宋青州、徐州时，把当地望族全都迁到了代郡，他们中有很多人都是高允的姻亲，流离失所、饥寒交迫地来到这里，高允拿出全部家产赈济，使他们得到安置。接着，高允又在他们当中根据才能品行的不同，把一些人推荐给朝廷。
English: When the emperor Tuoba Hong conquered Qingzhou and Xuzhou from Liu Song, he moved all the local dignitaries to Dai County. Many of them were Gao Yun's in-laws. They were displaced, hungry and cold, and came here. Gao Yun took out all the family produce to help them get settled. Then, Gao Yun recommended some of them to the imperial court according to their different talents and behaviors.

古文：议者多以初附间之，允曰： 任贤使能，何有新旧！
现代文：当时朝中许多人都因他们刚刚归附而不加信任。高允说： 任用贤才，使用能人，为什么要分他是新归附的还是早就归附的呢？
English: At that time, many people in the imperial court did not trust them because they had just joined the party. Gao Yun said, "Appoint a wise person, use a capable person. Why should we distinguish whether he is a new member or a member from long ago?"

古文：必若有用，岂可以此抑之！ 
现代文：如果他们肯定有用，怎么可以用这种理由去压制他们！ 
English: If they are definitely useful, how can they be suppressed for this reason!

古文：允体素无疾，至是微有不适，犹起居如常，数日而卒，年九十八。
现代文：高允身体一向无病，到这年，稍感不适，但他的起居仍如平日一样。几天之后去世，享年九十八岁。
English: Gao Yun had never been ill. By this year, he felt a little unwell, but his daily life continued as usual. He died a few days later at the age of ninety-eight.

古文：赠侍中、司空，赙襚甚厚；魏初以来，存亡蒙赉，皆莫及也。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为侍中、司空，陪葬的布帛衣被十分丰厚，北魏建国以来，对活着或者死去了的官员的赏赐，没有赶得上高允的。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him as a chamberlain and steward, and the burial cloth was very rich. Since the founding of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the rewards for officials who are alive or dead have not caught up with Gao Yun.

古文：桓天生引魏兵万馀人至沘阳，陈显达遣戴僧静等与战于深桥，大破之，杀获万计。
现代文：叛民首领桓天生引导北魏一万多名士卒到达阳，陈显达派征虏将军戴僧静等人，在深桥迎战北魏大军，大败北魏军，杀死、俘虏敌人数以万计。
English: The rebel leader Huan Tian Rong led more than ten thousand soldiers of the Northern Wei Dynasty to arrive in Yang, Chen Xianda sent the conscript general Dai Sojing and others to fight the Northern Wei Army in Shamqiao, defeated the Northern Wei Army, killed and captured tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：天生退保沘阳，僧静围之，不克而还。
现代文：桓天生退守阳，戴僧静又率领军队围攻，没有攻克，返回驻地。
English: Huan Tian Rong retreated to guard Yang, and Dai Sang Jing led the army to besiege, but failed to conquer, and returned to the garrison.

古文：荒人胡丘生起兵悬瓠以应齐，魏人击破之，丘生来奔。
现代文：边疆人胡丘生在北魏的悬瓠聚众起兵，响应北上讨伐桓天生的齐兵，北魏军击败了他们，胡丘生逃奔南来。
English: Hu Qiusheng, a frontiersman, raised an army in response to the Qi soldiers who were born and raised in the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Army defeated them, and Hu Qiusheng fled south.

古文：天生又引魏兵寇舞阴，舞阴戍主殷公愍拒击破之，杀其副张麒麟，天生被创退走。
现代文：桓天生又引导北魏军寇犯舞阴，舞阴守将殷公愍奋起抗击，击败北魏军，斩杀北魏军副将张麒麟，桓天生带伤逃走。
English: Huan Tian Rong also led the Northern Wei army to invade Wuyin, and the commander of Wuyin, Yin Gongyi, fought back, defeated the Northern Wei army, and killed the Vice-General of the Northern Wei army, Zhang Qilin. Huan Tian Rong escaped with injuries.

古文：三月，丁未，以陈显达为雍州刺史。显达进据舞阳城。
现代文：三月，丁未，南齐朝廷任命领军将军陈显达为雍州刺史，他又率领大军进驻舞阳城。
English: In March, Ding Wei, the Nanzhi imperial court appointed the leading general Chen Xianda as the chief historian of Yongzhou, and he led a large army into Wuyang City.

古文：夏，五月，壬辰，魏主如灵泉池。
现代文：夏季，五月，壬辰，孝文帝国主前往灵泉池。
English: In the summer, in May, Imjin, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pond.

古文：癸巳，魏南平王浑卒。
现代文：癸巳，北魏南平王拓跋浑去世。
English: Suddenly, the Northern Wei Nanping King Tuoba passed away.

古文：甲午，魏主还平城。
现代文：甲午，孝文帝返回平城。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the Northern Wei sovereign returned to Pingcheng.

古文：诏复七庙子孙及外戚缌麻服已上，赋役无所与。
现代文：下诏免除皇家七庙的子孙以及五服以内的外戚的赋役。
English: The following edict exempts the children and grandchildren of the seven royal temples, as well as relatives within five years of age, from military service.

古文：魏南部尚书公孙邃、上谷公张儵帅众与桓天生复寇舞阴，殷公愍击破之；天生还窜荒中。
现代文：北魏南部尚书公孙邃、上谷公张倏，率领部下和桓天生一起，再次寇犯舞阴，齐舞阴守将殷公愍再次击败北魏大军。桓天生逃到了荒远之地。
English: In the southern part of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shang Shukong Sun Quan and Shang Guong Zhang Quan, led by their subordinates and Huan Tian Sheng, once again invaded and defeated the Northern Wei Army. Huan Tian Sheng fled to a desolate land.

古文：邃，表之孙也。
现代文：公孙邃是公孙表的孙子。
English: Gongsun Zou is the grandson of Gongsun Watch.

古文：魏春夏大旱，代地尤甚；加以牛疫，民馁死者多。
现代文：北魏在春夏之交出现大旱，代郡地区尤其严重，又加上年瘟流行，老百姓有很多都因饥饿而死去。
English: At the turn of spring and summer in the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was a severe drought, which was particularly serious in the Daigun area. Coupled with the epidemic of the plague, many people died of starvation.

古文：六月，癸未，诏内外之臣极言无隐。
现代文：六月，癸未，诏令朝廷内外大臣畅所欲言，不要保留。
English: In June, just before the New Year, the Imperial edict ordered the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior to speak freely, and not to hold back.

古文：齐州刺史韩麒麟上表曰： 古先哲王，储积九稔；逮于中代，亦崇斯业，入粟者与斩敌同爵，力田者与孝悌均赏。
现代文：齐州刺史韩麒麟上表说： 古代贤哲君王，总是要储存足够维持九年的粮食，即使到了中古时期，也推崇这种方法，缴纳粮食的人和在前线杀敌的人一样得到封爵。
English: Han Qilin, a historian from Qizhou, said on the table: In ancient times, wise kings always had to store enough grain to last for nine years. Even in the Middle Ages, this method was also respected. Those who paid for grain were knighted just like those who killed the enemy on the front line.

古文：今京师民庶，不田者多，游食之口，叁分居二。
现代文：致力于耕种农田的人，与孝敬父母、友爱兄弟的人一样受到奖赏。而现今京师的民众百姓，不耕种农田的人多，不劳而食的人占三分之二。
English: People who devote themselves to cultivating farmland are rewarded in the same way as those who show filial piety to their parents and fraternal love to their brothers and sisters. However, there are many people in Beijing who do not cultivate farmland, and two-thirds of them do not work for a living.

古文：自承平日久，丰穰积年，竞相矜夸，遂成侈俗。
现代文：太平日子过久了，又加上连年丰收，大家都争相夸耀自己的财富，奢侈浪费形成了一种风气。
English: The days of peace are long gone. Coupled with successive years of bumper harvests, everyone is competing to boast of their wealth. Extravagant waste has formed a culture.

古文：贵富之家，童妾袨服，工商之族，仆隶玉食，而农夫阙糟糠，蚕妇乏短褐。
现代文：高贵富裕的人家，就连孩童婢女都穿上了华美的衣服；手工作坊及商人家庭，奴仆差役也是山珍海味。可是，种田的农夫却连酒渣糠皮都吃不饱，养蚕的妇女连蔽体的粗布衣裳都穿不全。
English: In the homes of the rich and noble, even the children and maids are dressed in splendid clothes; in the workshops of craftsmen and the homes of merchants, even the servants are dressed in exquisite clothing. However, the farmers in the fields can't even get enough of the wine dregs and bran, and the women who raise silkworms can't even wear the coarse cloth clothes that cover their bodies.

古文：故耕者日少，田有荒芜；谷帛罄于府库，宝货盈于市里；衣食匮于室，丽服溢于路。
现代文：因此，种地的人一天天减少，田地一天天荒芜。国库内粮食布帛告罄，街市上却堆满了各种珍宝货物；很多家庭无衣无食，道路上却挤满了衣着华丽的行人。
English: As a result, the number of people cultivating the land decreases day by day, the fields become barren day by day, the state treasury runs out of grain and cloth, but the street markets are full of all kinds of precious goods; many families have no clothes or food, but the roads are crowded with well-dressed pedestrians.

古文：饥寒之本，实在于斯。
现代文：老百姓饥寒交迫根本原因也就在此。
English: This is the root cause of the hunger and cold of the common people.

古文：愚谓凡珍异之物，皆宜禁断，吉凶之礼，备为格式；劝课农桑，严加赏罚。
现代文：我认为，凡是奇异珍贵的东西，朝廷都应该坚决禁止买卖。婚丧礼仪，应该规定严格的标准。鼓励人们努力耕田种桑，严格进行奖赏和惩罚。
English: In my opinion, the imperial court should resolutely ban the sale and purchase of all rare and precious things. Strict standards should be set for wedding and funeral etiquette. People should be encouraged to work hard to cultivate fields and plant mulberries, and strictly reward and punish.

古文：数年之中，必有盈赡。
现代文：几年之内，定会有盈余。
English: Within a few years, there will be a surplus.

古文：往年校比户贯，租赋轻少。
现代文：以前几年，校订户籍，就减轻了不少田赋捐税。
English: In the past, the payment status of farmers was audited, and it was found that the field rent tax was light and small.

古文：臣所统齐州，租粟才可给俸，略无入仓，虽于民为利，而不可长久。脱有戎役，或遭天灾，恐供给之方，无所取济。
现代文：我所管辖的齐州，所征收的粮食仅够发给官员俸禄，没有多余的入缴国库，这样虽然对老百姓有利，却不能长期维护下去，一旦有战事发生，或者遇到天灾，恐怕就无法拿出粮食布帛供给各地。
English: In my jurisdiction, the collected grain is only enough to pay salaries to officials, and there is no extra payment to the national treasury. Although this is beneficial to the people, it cannot be maintained for a long time. In the event of war or natural disaster, I am afraid that we will not be able to supply grain to all parts of the country.

古文：可减绢布，增益谷租；年丰多积，岁俭出赈。
现代文：可以减少布帛的征收，增加粮食的税收。这样，丰收年份，就可以大量储存；歉收年份，拿出来赈济。
English: It is possible to reduce the levy on cloth and increase the tax on grain. In this way, in years of good harvest, a large amount can be stored; in years of poor harvest, it can be taken out to save money.

古文：所谓私民之谷，寄积于官，官有宿积，则民无荒年矣。 
现代文：这就是所谓的把老百姓的粮食，寄存在官府。一旦官府有了储存，则老百姓就不会有荒年挨饿的事了。 
English: This is called depositing the grain of the common people in the government. Once the government has the storage, the common people will not have to starve in the lean years.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，诏有司开仓赈贷，听民出关就食。
现代文：秋季，七月，己丑，孝文帝下诏，命令有关部门打开官府府库，赈济或借贷给饥民，允许饥民出关逃生。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict, ordering the relevant departments to open the government treasury, give money or lend money to the hungry, and allow the hungry to escape.

古文：遣使者造籍，分遣去留，所过给粮廪，所至三长赡养之。
现代文：派专人重新制作户籍，由老百姓自己决定去留。饥民们路过的地方，要由当地官府提供饮食，所到之处，由当地的邻长、里长、党长负责安置。
English: Where hungry people pass by, the local government should provide food, and where they go, the local neighbors, village chiefs, and party chiefs should be responsible for resettling them.

古文：柔然伏名敦可汗残暴，其臣侯医垔石洛候数谏止之，且劝其与魏和亲。
现代文：柔然可汗郁久闾豆仑凶狠残暴，他的大臣侯医、石洛侯多次劝谏、阻止他的行为，并且建议他和北魏和好联姻。
English: The gentle khan, Ikukyu Shizuoren, was ferocious and cruel. His minister, the court physician, Shiloh Hou, repeatedly advised and prevented his actions, and suggested that he and the Northern Wei Dynasty reconcile and marry.

古文：伏名敦怒，族诛之，由是部众离心。
现代文：郁久闾豆仑勃然大怒，下令诛杀侯医、石洛候全族，为此，他的部众离心离德。
English: Ikukyu Shidulun flew into a rage and ordered to kill the village doctor, Shiloh, and the whole family. For this reason, his followers left Germany.

古文：八月，柔然寇魏边，魏以尚书陆睿为都督，击柔然，大破之。
现代文：八月，柔然汗国寇犯北魏边境，北魏任命尚书陆睿为都督，迎击柔然军，北魏军大获全胜。
English: In August, the invaders of the Rouran Khanate trespassed on the border of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Shang Shul Lu Rui as the governor to meet the Rouran army, and the Northern Wei Army won a complete victory.

古文：睿，丽之子也。
现代文：陆睿是陆丽的儿子。
English: Lu Rui is the son of Lu Li.

古文：初，高车阿伏至罗有部落十馀万，役属柔然。
现代文：最初，高车部落首领阿伏至罗有部落十多万，隶属柔然汗国。
English: In the beginning, the chief of the Gaochang tribe, Avu-Rao, had more than a hundred thousand tribes, belonging to the Juran Khanate.

古文：伏名敦之侵魏也，阿伏至罗谏，不听。
现代文：郁久闾豆仑南下侵犯北魏时，阿伏至罗竭力劝阻，郁久闾豆仑不听。
English: When Ikukyu Shizuoren went south to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty, Avu Ziloh tried his best to dissuade him, but Ikukyu Shizuoren would not listen.

古文：阿伏至罗怒，与从弟穷奇帅部落西走，至前部西北，自立为王。
现代文：阿伏至罗大为气愤，和他的堂弟阿伏穷奇率领部落向西出走，抵达前部西北地带，自立为高车国王。
English: Awu-Ziluo was very angry, and he and his cousin Awu-Hui-Qi led the tribe to the west, reached the northwest area of the front, and established themselves as the king of carts.

古文：国人号曰 候娄匐勒 ，夏言天子也；号穷奇曰 候倍 ，夏言太子也。
现代文：部众们尊称他为候娄匐勒，汉语的意思就是天子。尊称阿伏穷奇为候倍，汉语的意思就是太子。
English: The members of the club respectfully called him Hou Xule, which in Chinese means the son of heaven. They respectfully called Avhu Qianqi Hou Bi, which in Chinese means the son of the prince.

古文：二人甚亲睦，分部而立，阿伏至罗居北，穷奇居南。
现代文：阿伏至罗和阿伏穷奇之间感情非常好，分别统辖自己的部属。阿伏至罗住在北面，阿伏穷奇则在南面。
English: There was a very good relationship between Avi Ziro and Avi Khenchi, and they supervised their subordinates separately. Avi Ziro lived in the north, while Avi Khenchi lived in the south.

古文：伏名敦追击之，屡为阿伏至罗所败，乃引众东徙。
现代文：郁久闾豆仑追击阿伏至罗，却屡次都被击败。为此，郁久闾豆仑率众向东迁移。
English: Ikuhisaemon chased after Avro, but was repeatedly defeated. To this end, Ikuhisaemon led the crowd to move east.

古文：九月，辛未，魏诏罢起部无益之作，出宫人不执机杼者。
现代文：九月，辛未，北魏下诏，撤销对民生无益的工程，宫中不做纺织的宫女一概驱逐。
English: In September, Xinwei, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to cancel projects that were not beneficial to the people's livelihood, and the palace maids who did not do textiles were all expelled.

古文：冬，十月，丁未，又诏罢尚方锦绣、绫罗之工；四民欲造，任之无禁。
现代文：冬季，十日，丁未，又下诏撤去尚方署绫罗锦绣的制造工程，士、农、工、商们如果打算自己织造，听任不禁。
English: In the winter, on the 10th day of the month of Dingwei, the Shangfang Department of Luo brocade manufacturing project was removed. If the nobles, farmers, workers and merchants planned to weave their own brocade, they could not help but do so.

古文：是时，魏久无事，府藏盈积。
现代文：到这时为止，北魏已很久没有战事了，所以，国库库藏充盈。
English: By this time, the Northern Wei Dynasty had not been at war for a long time, so the treasury was full.

古文：诏尽出御府衣服珍宝、太官杂器、太仆乘具、内库弓矢刀钤十分之八，外府衣物、缯布、丝纩非供国用者，以其太半班赉百司，下至工、商、皁隶，逮于六镇边戍，畿内鳏、寡、孤、独、贫、癃，皆有差。
现代文：朝廷下诏，拿出皇家御库房内的衣物、珍奇宝物、太官使用的器具、太仆出外乘车用具及宫内库存崐的弓箭刀枪十分之八，以及宫外府库的衣服用具、丝绸、丝棉，不能供应朝廷使用的，把其中的一大半赏赐给文武百官，下至工匠，商贾以及衙役，直到在六镇戍守的边防士兵，以及京畿内的鳏夫、寡妇、孤儿、老人、贫民、残疾人，都按照等级分别赏赐。
English: The imperial court issued an edict that eight-tenths of the clothing, rare treasures, and utensils used by the imperial officials, the vehicles used by the imperial servants, and the bows and arrows and swords in the imperial treasury, as well as the clothing utensils, silk, and silk and cotton in the prefectural treasury outside the imperial palace, which could not be used by the imperial court, were taken out of the imperial treasury, and the majority of them were awarded to the civil and military officials, down to the craftsmen, merchants, and eunuchs, up to the border soldiers who guarded the six towns, as well as the widowers, widows, orphans

古文：魏秘书令高祐、丞李彪奏请改《国书》编年为纪、传、表、志，魏主从之。
现代文：北魏秘书令高、秘书丞李彪上奏请把《国书》的编年体例改为纪、传、表、志，孝文帝批准这一建议。
English: Northern Wei Secretary Ling Gao and Secretary Jo Li Biao appealed to Emperor Xiaowen to change the chronology of the "National Anthem" to "Chronicle," "Chronicle," "Table" and "Schedule," and Emperor Xiaowen approved the proposal.

古文：祐，允之从祖弟也。
现代文：高和高允是同一个曾祖父，高是高允的堂弟。
English: Gao and Gao Yun are the same great-grandfather, and Gao is Gao Yun's cousin.

古文：十二月，诏彪与著作朗崔光改修《国书》。
现代文：十二月，下诏，令丞李彪和著作郎崔光一起负责修订《国书》。
English: In December, the following edict was issued, and Li Biao and his brother-in-law, Cui Guang, were put in charge of revising the Constitution.

古文：光，道固之从孙也。
现代文：崔光是崔道固的堂孙。
English: Cui Guang is a cousin of Cui Daogu.

古文：魏主问高祐曰： 何以止盗？ 
现代文：孝文帝问高说： 怎样才能防止盗贼？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked Gao, "How can we prevent thieves?"

古文：对曰： 昔宋均立德，猛虎渡河；卓茂行化，蝗不入境。
现代文：高回答说： 汉明帝时宋均订立、推行德攻，就有猛虎渡河离去。汉平帝时卓茂推行教化，连蝗虫都不入境。
English: Gao replied: When Emperor Hanming and Emperor Songjun concluded and carried out the German attack, the tigers crossed the river and left. When Emperor Hanping and Emperor Zhuo Mao carried out the enlightenment, even the locusts did not enter the country.

古文：况盗贼，人也，苟守宰得人，治化有方，止之易矣。 
现代文：更何况，强盗也是普通人。只要郡守、县宰的选派适当，治理教化得当，那么，防止盗贼就十分容易了。 
English: What's more, robbers are also ordinary people. As long as the county governor and county magistrate are appropriately appointed and properly educated, it is quite easy to prevent thieves.

古文：祐又上疏言： 今之选举，不采识治之优劣，专简年劳之多少，斯非尽才之谓。
现代文：接着，高又上书建议说： 现在朝廷选用官吏，不是看他治理地方的政绩优劣，只是看他任期的长短，资历的深浅，这样不能说是人尽其才。
English: Next, Gao also wrote a letter of recommendation, saying, "Nowadays, the imperial court selects officials not according to the merits of their performance in local governance, but according to the length of their term of office and the depth of their qualifications. In this way, it cannot be said that people make the best of their abilities.

古文：宜停此薄艺，弃彼朽劳，唯才是举，则官方斯穆。
现代文：应该停止这种浅薄的区别，摒弃那些没用的年资阅历，唯才是举，官吏才会清廉严正。
English: This kind of shallow distinction should be stopped, and those useless years of experience should be abandoned. Only through hard work can officials become honest and upright.

古文：又勋旧之臣，虽年勤可录而才非抚民者，可加之以爵赏，不宜委之以方任，所谓王者可私人以财，不私人以官者也。 
现代文：另外，对于功勋老臣，虽然功劳资历可以承认，可没有治理安抚人民的才能，朝廷可以增加他们的爵位封赏，不应该再让他们担任地方要员，这也就是所说的，帝王可以因个人的喜好去赏赐钱财，却不可以因个人的好恶派人做官！ 
English: In addition, for meritorious old ministers, although their achievements and seniority can be recognized, they do not have the ability to govern and appease the people. The imperial court can increase their titles and rewards, and they should no longer be allowed to serve as local dignitaries. This is what is meant by saying that the emperor can reward money according to personal preferences, but cannot send people to be officials according to personal likes and dislikes!

古文：帝善之。
现代文：孝文帝认为言之有理。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：祐出为西兗州刺史，镇滑台。
现代文：高出任西兖州刺史，镇守滑台。
English: Gao served as the governor of Xishuanzhou and the town guard of Zhidong.

古文：以郡国虽有学，县、党亦宜有之，乃命县立讲学，党立小学。
现代文：他认为郡和封国既然有学校，下边的县和党也应该有，于是，高下令各县设立讲学，各党设立小学。
English: He believed that since counties and fiefdoms had schools, the lower counties and the party should also have them. Therefore, Gao ordered all counties to set up lectures, and all parties to set up primary schools.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明六年春，正月，乙未，魏诏： 犯死刑者，父母、祖父母年老，更无成人子孙，旁无期亲者，具状以闻。 
现代文：六年春季，正月，乙未，北魏下诏： 对犯有死罪的人，如果他的父母、祖父母年老，又无成年的子孙，身边也没有穿一年以上的丧服的亲属，可以奏报朝廷。 
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first month, the second month, and the third month of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the following edict was issued: For a person who has committed a capital crime, if his parents and grandparents are old, and there are no adult children or grandchildren, and there are no relatives wearing mourning clothes for more than one year around him, he can report to the imperial court.

古文：初，皇子右卫将军子响出继豫章王嶷；嶷后有子，表留为世子。
现代文：最初，南齐皇子、右卫将军萧子响过继给他的叔父、豫章王萧嶷。后来，萧嶷有了儿子，就上疏请求留下萧子响作为世子。
English: At first, Xiao Zi Xing, the prince of Nanqi and the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, was passed down to his uncle, Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Yao. Later, when Xiao Yao had a son, Shang Shu asked Xiao Zi Xing to be his heir.

古文：子响每入朝，以车服异于诸王，每拳击车壁。
现代文：萧子响每次入朝时，他的车马衣服都跟其他亲王不一样，他动辄用拳头猛击车壁。
English: Every time Xiao Zixing entered the imperial court, his carriage and clothes were different from those of other princes, and he often slammed his fist against the carriage wall.

古文：上闻之，诏车服与皇子同。
现代文：武帝知道后，下诏令萧子响的车马衣服和其他皇子一样。
English: After Emperor Wu found out, he ordered Xiao Zixing to wear the same clothes as the other princes.

古文：于是有司奏子响宜还本。
现代文：为此，有关部门又奏陈萧子响应该恢复原来的宗属。
English: For this reason, the relevant departments also urged Chen Xiaozihong to restore the original lineage.

古文：三月，己亥，立子响为巴东王。
现代文：三月，己亥，武帝立萧子响为巴东王。
English: In March, Ji Hai, Emperor Wu established Xiao Zi as the King of Padang.

古文：角城戍将张蒲，因大雾乘船入清中采樵，潜纳魏兵。戍主皇甫仲贤觉之，帅众拒战于门中，仅能却之。
现代文：南齐角城守将张蒲借着天下大雾的机会，乘船到清水一带砍伐木柴，秘密同北魏边防士兵勾结，将北魏军队带进国境，守城主将皇甫仲贤发觉了这件事，率领部众在城门奋力抗击，仅仅能击退张蒲。
English: Zhang Pu, the castle warden of Nanqi Cape, took advantage of the fog to take a boat to Clear Water to cut firewood. He secretly colluded with the Northern Wei border guards to bring the Northern Wei army into the border. The castle warden, Emperor Zhongxian, discovered this and led the troops to fight hard at the city gate. He could only beat Zhang Pu back.

古文：魏步骑三千馀人已至堑外，淮阴军主王僧庆等引兵救之，魏人乃退。
现代文：北魏三千多名步兵、骑兵已经到达护城河外，淮阴军主王僧庆等人率大军前来救援，才迫使北魏大军撤退。
English: More than 3,000 Northern Wei infantrymen and cavalrymen had already arrived outside the moat, and Wang Sangqing, the head of the Huaiyin army, and others led a large army to come to the rescue, forcing the Northern Wei army to retreat.

古文：夏，四月，桓天生复引魏兵出据隔城，诏游击将军下邳曹虎督诸军讨之。
现代文：夏季，四月，叛民首领桓天生再次引导北魏大军出兵占据了隔城。武帝下诏命令游击将军下邳人曹虎统率各陆大军前去讨伐。
English: In the summer, in April, the rebel leader Huan Tian Rong once again led the Northern Wei army to occupy the next city. Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering the guerrilla general Cao Huan to lead the army to fight.

古文：辅国将军硃公恩将兵蹹伏，遇天生游军，与战，破之，遂进围隔城。
现代文：此时，辅国将军朱公恩率军作敌前搜索，遇上了桓天生的游击部队，双方发生激战，朱公恩大败桓天生的部队，紧接着他就进军围攻隔城。
English: At this time, Zhu Gong'en, the general of the auxiliary state, led the army to search in front of the enemy and encountered the guerrilla forces born in Huancheng. The two sides had a fierce battle, Zhu Gong'en defeated the Huancheng forces, and then he marched to besiege the city.

古文：天生引魏兵步骑万馀人来战，虎奋击，大破之，俘斩二千馀人。
现代文：桓天生引导一万多名北魏步、骑兵前来迎战，曹虎率军奋力抗击，结果大败北魏军队，俘虏、斩杀了二千多北魏士卒。
English: Huan Tian Rong led more than ten thousand Northern Wei infantry and cavalry to meet the battle, Cao Hu led the army to fight hard, and as a result, the Northern Wei army was defeated, and more than two thousand Northern Wei soldiers were captured and killed.

古文：明日，攻拔隔城，斩其襄城太守帛乌祝，复俘斩二千馀人。天生弃平氏城走。
现代文：第二天，曹虎率军又继续围攻，最后终于攻克，斩了北魏朝廷任命的襄城太守帛乌祝，再次俘虏，斩杀了二千多名北魏士卒，桓天生放弃平氏城逃走。
English: The next day, Cao Hu led the army to continue the siege, and finally defeated, killed the Yangcheng Daju Wu Zhu, who was appointed by the Northern Wei court, captured again, killed more than two thousand Northern Wei soldiers, and abandoned the Ping City to escape.

古文：陈显达侵魏；甲寅，魏遣豫州刺史拓跋斤将兵拒之。
现代文：陈显达进犯北魏。甲寅，北魏朝廷派豫州刺史拓跋斤率领大军抗击陈显达。
English: Chen Xianda invaded the Northern Wei Dynasty. In Jia Yin, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Yu Zhou to lead a large army to resist Chen Xianda.

古文：甲子，魏大赦。
现代文：甲子，北魏实行大赦。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：乙丑，魏主如灵泉池；丁卯，如方山；己巳，还宫。
现代文：乙丑，孝文帝前往灵泉池。丁卯，前往方山。己巳，返回宫中。
English: Second Ugly, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pool. Third Ugly, went to Fangshan. Fourth Ugly, returned to the palace.

古文：魏筑城于醴阳，陈显达攻拔之，进攻沘阳。
现代文：北魏在醴阳兴筑城池，陈显达攻克该城，乘胜进军阳。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty built a castle in Fenyang. Chen Xianda conquered the city and took advantage of the victory to march into Fenyang.

古文：城中将士皆欲出战，镇将韦珍曰： 彼初至气锐，未可与争，且共坚守，待其力攻疲弊，然后击之。 
现代文：阳城里的将士们都要出来迎战，但镇将韦珍说： 他们刚刚到这里时士气旺盛，我们不可以和他们直接交锋，暂且一起在城里坚守城池，等到他们进攻得疲惫不堪时，再去攻击他们。 
English: The soldiers in Yangcheng all wanted to go out to fight, but the town marshal Wei Zhen said: They just arrived here with high morale, we can't fight them directly, let's hold the city together in the city for the time being, and wait until they are too exhausted to attack, and then attack them.

古文：乃凭城拒战，旬有二日，珍夜开门掩击，显达还。
现代文：于是，韦珍率领将士们据守阳城进行抵抗，十二天后，韦珍率军借着黑夜的掩护，打开城门，突袭陈显达，陈显达撤退。
English: As a result, Wei Zhen led the generals to resist Yangcheng, and twelve days later, Wei Zhen led the army to open the city gate under the cover of night, raid Chen Xianda, and Chen Xianda retreated.

古文：五月，甲午，以宕昌王梁弥承为河、凉二州刺史。
现代文：五月，甲午，南齐任命宕昌王梁弥承为河、凉二州刺史。
English: In May, in the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Nanqi appointed Tang Chang Wang Liang Yicheng as the governor of Hehe and Liang Erzhou as the governor of Shishi.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，魏主如灵泉池，遂如方山；己亥，还宫。
现代文：秋季，七月，己丑，孝文帝前往灵泉池，又前去方山。己亥，返回宫中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pond and Fangshan. He returned to the palace.

古文：九月，壬寅，上如琅邪城讲武。
现代文：九月，壬寅，武帝前往琅邪城讲习武事。
English: In September, Emperor Wu went to the city of Jinya to study martial arts.

古文：癸卯，魏淮南靖王佗卒。
现代文：癸卯，北魏淮南靖王拓跋佗去世。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Huainan Jing Wang Tuobao passed away.

古文：魏主方享宗庙，始荐，闻之，为废祭，临视哀恸。
现代文：当时，孝文帝正在皇家祖庙祭祀，刚刚献上第一道祭品，就得到拓跋佗去世的报告，他当即就停止了祭祀仪式，亲自去拓跋佗遗体旁哀悼恸哭。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen was performing a ritual at the Imperial Ancestral Temple. He had just offered the first sacrifice when he received the report of Tuobao's death. He immediately stopped the ritual and went to mourn and weep next to Tuobao's body.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，立冬，初临太极殿读时令。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚申，立冬，南齐武帝第一次亲临太极殿，开始阅读历书。
English: In winter, October, Goshun, and the beginning of winter, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi came to the Taiji Hall for the first time and began to read the almanac.

古文：闰月，辛酉，以尚书仆射王奂为领军将军。
现代文：闰十月，辛酉，南齐朝廷任命尚书仆射王奂为领军将军。
English: In October of the leap year, the Nanqi imperial court appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Wangyi as the leading general.

古文：辛未，魏主如灵泉池；癸酉，还宫。
现代文：辛未，孝文帝前往灵泉池。癸酉，返回宫中。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pool. He then returned to the palace.

古文：十二月，柔然伊吾戍主高羔子帅众三千以城附魏。
现代文：十二月，柔然汗国的伊吾守将高羔子率领三千名部属献出伊吾城池，归附北魏。
English: In December, the governor of Igu in the Juran Khanate, Gao Lam Zi, led 3,000 subordinates to surrender Igu Castle to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：上以中外谷帛至贱，用尚书右丞江夏李珪之议，出上库钱五千万及出诸州钱，皆令籴买。
现代文：南齐武帝由于全国各地粮食和帛的价格太贱，就采纳了尚书右丞、江夏人李的建议，拿出国库库存的五千万钱和各州州库的现款，全部用来购买粮食。
English: As the prices of grain and straw across the country were too low, Emperor Nanqiwu took the advice of Shang Shuyuan and Jiang Xiaren Li and took out 50 million yuan from the treasury inventory and cash from the state treasury of each state, all of which were used to purchase grain.

古文：西陵戍主杜元懿建言： 吴兴无秋，会稽丰登，商旅往来，倍多常岁。
现代文：西陵戍主杜元懿建议说： 吴兴今年没有收成，会稽则是五谷丰登，所以，商贾们在这两地来来往往，比平常年份多了一倍。
English: Du Yuanjun, the head of Xiling, suggested: Wu Xing had no harvest this year, but the harvest was abundant, so the merchants came and went in these two places twice as often as in an ordinary year.

古文：西陵牛埭税，官格日三千五百；如臣所见，日可增倍。
现代文：西陵牛埭的税收，朝廷规定是每天三千五百钱，但据我观察，该地每天的税收可以加倍。
English: According to the imperial court, the tax on Xiling beef is 3,500 yuan per day, but according to my observation, the daily tax in this place can be doubled.

古文：并浦阳南北津、柳浦四埭，乞为官领摄一年，格外可长四百许万。
现代文：我请求，连带浦阳南北两个渡口、柳浦四个堤坝，交给我管理一年，那么，除了原来的税收外，我还可以另外再多缴四百多万钱。
English: I request that, together with the two ferries from the north to the south of Poyang and the four dykes in Liupo, I be given one year's management. Then, in addition to the original tax, I can also pay another more than four million yuan.

古文：西陵戍前检税，无妨戍事；馀三埭自举腹心。 
现代文：在西陵戍守地前检查税收，并不妨碍正常的戍守。
English: Checking the tax before the Xiling garrison does not interfere with the normal garrison.

古文：上以其事下会稽，会稽行事吴郡顾宪之议以为： 始立牛埭之意，非苟逼蹴以取税也，乃以风涛迅险，济急利物耳。
现代文：剩下来的那三个牛马场，我自己选派可靠的人去负责。 武帝把这项建议交给会稽郡研究讨论，会稽行事吴郡人顾宪之认为： 最初设立牛埭的意思，并不是要强迫人民缴纳税务，而是因为江上风大浪急，危险很大，所以，为了救急和方便百姓才设立的。
English: The three remaining cattle and horse farms, I myself will select and send reliable people to be responsible for. Emperor Wu submitted this proposal to the county audit committee for study and discussion, and the Wu County people Gu Xizhi believed that: The original intention of setting up the cattle fence was not to force the people to pay taxes, but because the river was stormy and dangerous, so it was set up for emergency and convenience of the people.

古文：后之监领者不达其本，各务己功，或禁遏佗道，或空税江行，案吴兴频岁失稔，今兹尤甚，去之从丰，良田饥棘。
现代文：以后的负责官员并没有真正了解用意，仅仅是为了让自己做得有成效，所以，有的切断了其他道路，只留下一个关口；有的则对那些往来江上而未装货物的船只也征税。考查吴兴的情况，这几年农业一直没有获得丰收，今年特别惨重，人们都纷纷逃走，到富有的地方去谋生，这的确是由于饥饿所迫而不得已背井离乡。
English: Later responsible officials did not really understand the intention, just to make themselves effective, so some cut off other roads, leaving only one gate; others also taxed those ships that traveled to and from the river without loading goods. Examining the situation of Wuxing, in recent years, agriculture has not been able to obtain a good harvest, and this year is particularly disastrous. People are fleeing in droves to make a living in rich places. This is indeed forced by hunger and forced to leave their homes.

古文：埭司责税，依格弗降，旧格新减，尚未议登，格外加倍，将以何术！
现代文：堤坝的负责官员却仍向他们收税，并按照标准，不肯不收一点儿。
English: The officials in charge of the dam, however, still collect taxes from them and, according to the standard, refuse to collect anything.

古文：皇慈恤隐，振廪蠲调；而元懿幸灾榷利，重增困瘼，人而不仁，古今共疾！
现代文：旧有的税收标准近来已经有人认为应该减少，这一建议还没有决定是否采纳执行，但是，税收却又加倍增长起来，这将用什么办法呢？皇上恩慈，怜悯老百姓的痛苦，提出打开粮仓，赈济人民，免除人民的田赋和其他杂税。
English: Recently, some people have thought that the old tax standard should be reduced. This suggestion has not yet been decided whether to adopt and implement. However, the tax has doubled again. What will it be used for? His Majesty was kind and sympathized with the suffering of the people. He proposed to open the granary to help the people and exempt the people from the land tax and other miscellaneous taxes.

古文：若事不副言，惧贻谴诘，必百方侵苦，为公贾怨。
现代文：但是，杜元懿却利用人民的苦难，贪图眼前的小利，进一步加重人民的困苦。
English: However, Du Yuanzhang took advantage of the people's suffering, coveted the immediate small profits, and further aggravated the people's hardships.

古文：元懿禀性苛刻，已彰往效；任以物土，譬以狼将羊，其所欲举腹心，亦当虎而冠耳。
现代文：一个人没有仁爱之心，无论是在古代还是在今天，他都会受到人们的痛恨！如果一旦按照他的建议去做，而没有达到预期的目的，那么，他害怕朝廷的责罚、盘问，就一定要千方百计地向人民勒索，这样一来，就会为朝廷招来怨恨。
English: A person without a benevolent heart, whether in ancient times or today, he will be hated by the people! If once you follow his advice and do not achieve the intended purpose, then he is afraid of the court's punishment, cross-examination, he must do everything possible to blackmail the people, in this way, it will cause resentment for the court.

古文：书云： 与其有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣。 
现代文：杜元懿秉性苛薄尖刻，以前已经有明显的事实，如果再把一个地方交给他管理，那就好像是让狼去领导羔羊。
English: Du Yuanxuan is known to be harsh and sharp-tongued. It has been obvious before that if he were to be put in charge of another place, it would be like letting a wolf lead a lamb.

古文：此言盗公为损盖微，敛民所害乃大也。
现代文：而且，他打算推选可靠的人，也不过是一些戴着帽子的猛虎罢了。古书上说： 与其有搜刮财产的臣子，不如有偷盗财产的臣子。 
English: Moreover, the trustworthy people he intends to select are no more than tigers in hats. An ancient book says, "It is better to have a minister who steals property than a minister who plunders it."

古文：愚又以便宜者，盖谓便于公，宜于民也。
现代文：这是说，偷窃国家财产所造成的损害要稍微小些，而搜刮民财所造成的伤害更大。
English: That is to say, the damage caused by the theft of state property is slightly smaller, while the damage caused by the search for people's wealth is greater.

古文：窃见顷之言便宜者，非能于民力之外，用天分地；率皆即日不宜于民，方来不便于公。
现代文：我又认为，所谓方便适宜，是说对国家来说方便，对百姓来说适宜。我私下察看了一下近来所提出的所有有关方便适宜的建议，这些建议都不能提出在使老百姓尽力之外，还要利用天时，竭尽地利，大体上，这些建议都是眼前对百姓不合适，将来对朝廷也肯定是不利的。
English: I also believe that "convenient and appropriate" means "convenient for the country" and "convenient for the people." I have taken a look at all the suggestions on convenience and appropriateness that have been put forward recently. None of these suggestions can be put forward in addition to making the people do their best, but also taking advantage of the time and making the best of the situation. In general, these suggestions are not suitable for the people in the near future, and will certainly be unfavorable to the imperial court in the future.

古文：名与实反，有乖政体。
现代文：名与实是相对的，它违反施政的根本。
English: Name and reality are relative, and it violates the fundamentals of governance.

古文：凡如此等，诚宜深察。 上纳之而止。
现代文：大凡像以上这类事情，实在是应该深思熟虑、三思而后行。 
English: When something like this happens, you really have to think long and hard before you act.

古文：魏主访群臣以安民之术。
现代文：武帝采纳了顾宪之的建议，没有轻举妄动。孝文帝向文武百官们询问安定人民的办法。
English: Emperor Wu adopted Gu Xizhi's suggestion and did not make any rash moves. Emperor Xiaowen asked the hundreds of civil and military officials for ways to stabilize the people.

古文：秘书丞李彪上封事，以为： 豪贵之家，奢僭过度，第宅车服，宜为之等制。 又，国之兴亡，在冢嗣之善恶；冢嗣之善恶，在教谕之得失。
现代文：秘书丞李彪呈上密奏，认为： 豪门富贵人家，奢侈挥霍没有限度。所以，对他们的住宅、车马和衣服，都应该制定一个标准进行管理。另外，一个国家是走向兴盛还是走向衰亡，关键在于帝王承继人是善良还是酷恶，而继任者的善恶，又在于教育训导的得失。
English: Secretary-general Li Biao presented a secret report, saying: There is no limit to the extravagance of the rich and famous. Therefore, a standard should be set for the management of their houses, cars, horses and clothes. In addition, whether a country prospers or declines depends on whether the emperor's successor is good or evil, and the good or evil of the successor depends on the gains and losses of education and training.

古文：高宗文成皇帝尝谓群臣曰： 朕始学之日，年尚幼冲，情未能专；既临万机，不遑温习。
现代文：文成皇帝曾经对文武百官们说： 朕从前刚刚开始学习的时候，年龄还小，心还不能专一。等到后来崐登上帝位，亲自日理万机了，又没有多余的时间温习以前的功课了。
English: Emperor Wencheng once said to the military and civilian officials: When I just started to study, I was still young and my heart was not able to be single-minded. Later, when I ascended to the throne of God, I was too busy to study, and I did not have extra time to review my previous lessons.

古文：今日思之。岂唯予咎，抑亦师傅之不勤。 
现代文：今天想起来，岂能说只是我个人的过错，也是师傅管教得不严，不勤勉努力的结果。 
English: Looking back on it today, I can't say it was just my own fault, but also the result of my master's lax discipline and lack of diligence.

古文：尚书李讠斤免冠谢。
现代文：当时，尚书李立刻脱下帽子，请求处分。
English: At that time, Shang Shuli immediately took off his hat and asked for punishment.

古文：此近事之可鉴者也。
现代文：这是不久前发生的事，值得借鉴。
English: This is something that happened not long ago and is worth learning from.

古文：臣谓宜准古立师傅之官，以训导太子。
现代文：我认为，应该以古代方法为准绳，也设立师傅这一官职，让他们专门引导太子。
English: In my opinion, ancient methods should be used as the yardstick, and the official position of master should be established, so that they can guide the prince.

古文： 又，汉置常平仓以救匮乏。
现代文： 另外，汉朝曾经在平时设置常平仓，遇到灾荒年月，就用仓中的粮食救济灾民。
English: In addition, the Han Dynasty used to set up warehouses in peacetime, and in times of disaster and famine, they used the grain in the warehouse to help the victims.

古文：去岁京师不稔，移民就丰，既废营生，困而后达，又于国体，实有虚损。
现代文：去年，京城农作物歉收，如果把老百姓都迁移到丰收富裕地区，这样既荒废了人民正常的生活劳作，又要面临艰难困苦、千里流离的困境，才能到达目的地，而且对于国家来说，损耗也很大。
English: Last year, the crops in Beijing failed. If the people were all relocated to areas with rich harvests, this would not only waste the normal life and work of the people, but also face the difficulties of hardship and thousands of miles of displacement in order to reach the destination. Moreover, for the country, the loss is also great.

古文：曷若豫储仓粟，安而给之，岂不愈于驱督老弱餬口千里之外哉！
现代文：为什么不事先把粮食储存起来建立粮仓，安安稳稳地发放给灾民？这难道不比把老老少少驱赶到千里之外去乞讨糊口更好些吗？
English: Why not store the grain in advance, build a granary, and distribute it to the victims safely and steadily? Isn't this better than driving the old and the young thousands of miles away to beg for a living?

古文：宜析州郡常调九分之二，京师度支岁用之馀，各立官司，年丰籴粟积之于仓，俭则加私之二粜之于人。
现代文：所以，朝廷应该在州郡正常的税收中抽出九分之二，将京城全年开支剩余的费用全部拿出来，分别建立管理机构，在丰收时买进粮食，全部储存在仓库里；遇上歉收年月，就可以加两分利卖给老百姓。
English: Therefore, the imperial court should take out two-ninths of the normal state and county taxes, take out all the remaining expenses of the capital city's annual expenditure, separately establish a management organization, buy grain during the harvest, and store it all in a warehouse; in the event of a poor harvest, it can be sold to the people with a two-point profit.

古文：如此，民必力田以取官绢，积财以取官粟。
现代文：这样一来，老百姓一定会努力种田，用以购买官府的绢帛；积蓄钱财，用来购买官府的粮食。
English: In this way, the common people will surely make efforts to cultivate the fields to buy the government's straw and save money to buy the government's grain.

古文：年登则常积，岁凶则直给。
现代文：丰收年月，就一直储存，等到灾年，就直接出售给老百姓。
English: In good years they are saved, in bad years they are sold.

古文：数年之中，谷积而人足，虽灾不为害矣。
现代文：几年之内，我们就会储存大量的粮食，而且老百姓人人充足，即使是有什么灾荒，也不会造成多大灾难。
English: Within a few years, we will have stored a large amount of grain, and the people will have enough for everyone. Even if there is some kind of disaster, it will not cause much disaster.

古文： 又，宜于河表七州人中，擢其门才，引令赴阙，依中州官比，随能序之。
现代文： 另外，应该在黄河以南七州人民之中，选拔有才能的人，征召到京城，按照中州官员任用的程序，按照他们的能力分别加以任用。
English: In addition, talented people should be selected from among the people of the seven states south of the Yellow River, summoned to Beijing, and appointed according to their abilities in accordance with the procedure for appointing officials in the central state.

古文：一可以广圣朝均新旧之义，一可以怀江、汉归有道之情。
现代文：这样做，第一，可以推广圣朝对新人、旧人平等对待，一视同仁的大义，第二，可以安抚长江、汉水一带归附于圣朝的人心。
English: Doing so, firstly, can promote the great righteousness of the Holy Dynasty to treat new people and old people equally, and secondly, it can appease the Yangtze River and Hanshui area to adhere to the Holy Dynasty.

古文： 又，父子兄弟，异体同气；罪不相及，乃君上之厚恩。
现代文： 另外，父子兄弟之间，虽然各有形体，但血缘却是相同的。
English: In addition, although the father and son brothers have different physical bodies, their blood is the same.

古文：至于忧惧相连，固自然之恒理也。
现代文：对于犯罪的罪人进行惩处，问罪并不牵连他的亲人，这是皇上的隆厚恩德。
English: It was the emperor's generous kindness to punish the criminal and not implicate his relatives.

古文：无情之人，父兄系狱，子弟无惨惕之容；子弟逃刑，父兄无愧恧之色；宴安荣位，游从自若，车马衣冠，不变华饰；骨肉之恩，岂当然也！
现代文：至于说到他们之间同忧愁、共恐惧，这本来是自然而然、情理之中的事。也有些无情无义的人，父兄被囚禁狱中，他们的儿子、兄弟们的脸上竟没有一点儿悲哀愁惨的神色。有的儿子、兄弟逃避刑罚，他们的父亲、哥哥们的脸上竟也没有羞愧气愤的样子。他们只是若无其事地继续享受他们的荣华富贵，安于宴饮，自由自在地游逛，而且无论是骑坐的车马，还是穿的衣服、戴的帽子，仍然一如过去一样豪华奢侈，亲骨肉之间的恩情怎么能到了这种地步！
English: As for the common sorrow and fear between them, this is a natural and reasonable thing. There are also ruthless people, whose fathers and brothers are imprisoned in prison, but their sons and brothers do not have a sad and miserable look on their faces at all. Some sons and brothers escape punishment, but their fathers and brothers do not have the look of shame and anger on their faces. They just continue to enjoy their glory and wealth without incident, feasting peacefully, wandering freely, and whether riding horses or wearing clothes or hats, they are still as luxurious as before. How can the kindness between flesh and blood reach such a level!

古文：臣愚以为父兄有犯，宜令子弟素服肉袒，诣阙请罪。
现代文：我认为，父亲、哥哥犯了罪，应该让他们的儿子、弟弟穿白色衣服，袒露胸背，到皇宫门外请求处罚。
English: I think that the father and brother have committed a crime, and their son and brother should be allowed to wear white clothes, bare their chests, and go outside the palace gate to ask for punishment.

古文：子弟有坐，宜令父兄露板引咎，乞解所司；若职任必要，不宜许者，慰勉留之。
现代文：儿子、弟弟犯罪入狱，也应该让他们的父亲、哥哥公开上书，引咎自责，请求解除他们所担任的官职，如果他们的职位确实重要，不适于批准辞职的，则不妨加以安慰，劝他们留任。
English: If a son or a younger brother is jailed for a crime, their father or older brother should also be allowed to publicly write a letter, blaming themselves and requesting that they be relieved of their official position. If their position is really important and not suitable for approval of resignation, they may wish to be consoled and persuaded to remain in office.

古文：如此，足以敦厉凡薄，使人知所耻矣。
现代文：只有这样做，才只可以督促那些庸俗薄情的人，让人们知道什么是羞耻。
English: Only in this way can only urge those vulgar and insensitive people to let people know what is shame.

古文： 又，朝臣遭亲丧者，假满赴职。衣锦乘轩，从郊庙之祀；鸣玉垂纟委，同庆赐之燕。伤人子之道，亏天地之经。
现代文： 另外，朝廷大臣遭到父母亲人去世的情况时，丧假一满，就得回来任职，同时，得照样穿绫罗绵段，乘坐豪华高大的车辆，跟随皇上去祭祀天地祖先，身佩宝玉，头垂帽穗，和其他官员一样去参加庆贺赏赐的宴请，这样做，实崐在是在伤害做儿子的孝道之心，违背了天地万物的根本自然的法则。
English: In addition, when a minister of the Imperial Court is affected by the death of a parent or relative, he or she must return to work as soon as the bereavement leave is over. At the same time, he or she must still wear a long robe, ride in a luxurious and tall vehicle, follow the emperor to worship the ancestors of heaven and earth, wear gems, hang a hat, and attend the celebration banquet like other officials. In doing so, he or she is hurting the filial piety of being a son and violating the fundamental natural laws of heaven and earth.

古文：愚谓凡遭大父母、父母丧者，皆听终服；若无其人，职业有旷者，则优旨慰喻，起令视事，但综司出纳、敷奏而已，国之吉庆，一令无预。
现代文：我认为，大凡是遇上祖父母、父母去世的人，都应该允许他们守丧三年。如果没有他，该部门职务出现空缺、无法继续工作时，就应该下达安慰劝抚的诏书，让他任职工作，但也只是让他负责总的大方面事情，诸如支出与收入、奏报陈述而已，国家的吉庆大典，一律不让他参加。
English: In my opinion, anyone who has lost a grandparent or a parent should be allowed to mourn for three years. If there is no such person, if there is a vacancy in the department and it is impossible to continue working, a letter of consolation and encouragement should be issued to let him work, but only to let him be responsible for the general aspects of things, such as expenses and income, report submission, and he should not be allowed to participate in the national auspicious celebration.

古文：其军旅之警，墨缞从役，虽愆于礼，事所宜行也。 
现代文：如果他身为军职，在发生紧急情况时，那么他就应像古代晋国将帅一样穿上黑色丧服，跟随军队执行命令，这样做，虽然不合礼教，但情况急迫，也就应该这样做了。 
English: If he is a military official, in the event of an emergency, then he should put on a black mourning dress like the ancient Jin generals, follow the army to carry out orders, and do so, although it is not polite, but the situation is urgent, so he should do so.

古文：魏主皆从之。
现代文：对秘书丞李彪的建议，孝文帝全部接受。
English: Emperor Xiaowen accepted all of the suggestions made by Secretary General Li Biao.

古文：由是公私丰赡，虽时有水旱，而民不困穷。
现代文：从此以后，北魏朝廷与老百姓个人的财力都充裕丰厚起来，虽然有时遇上水灾、旱灾，但老百姓的生活并没有困苦、贫穷。
English: From then on, the financial resources of the Northern Wei Dynasty and the ordinary people were both abundant and plentiful. Although floods and droughts sometimes occurred, the lives of the ordinary people were not difficult or poor.

古文：魏遣兵击百济，为百济所败。
现代文：北魏朝廷派人进攻百济王国，被百济王国打败。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent people to attack the Baekje Kingdom and was defeated by the Baekje Kingdom.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下永明七年春，正月，辛亥，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：七年春季，正月，辛亥，南齐武帝前往南郊祭天，实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the first month, Xinhai, Emperor Nanqiwu went to the southern suburbs to hold a festival and implement an amnesty.

古文：魏主祀南郊，始备大驾。
现代文：孝文帝到平城南郊祭祀天神，开始使用大驾出行。
English: Emperor Xiaowen went to the southern suburb of Pingcheng to worship Tenjin, and began to use a large car to travel.

古文：壬戌，临川献王映卒。
现代文：壬戌，南齐临川献王萧映去世。
English: Xiao Ying, the King of Nanzhi Linchuan, passed away.

古文：初，上为镇西长史，主簿王晏以倾谄为上所亲，自是常在上府。
现代文：当初，武帝担任镇西长史时，主簿王晏竭力谄媚阿谀，受到武帝的宠信，从那以后，王晏就经常逗留在武帝的府中。
English: At the beginning, when Emperor Wu was in charge of the long history of the western part of the town, the chief accountant Wang Yao tried his best to flatter the grandma, and was favored by Emperor Wu. Since then, Wang Yao has often stayed in Emperor Wu's residence.

古文：上为太子，晏为中庶子。
现代文：武帝为太子时，王晏就担任了中庶子。
English: When Emperor Wu was crown prince, Wang Xi served as the middle child.

古文：上之得罪于太祖也，晏称疾自疏。
现代文：后来武帝惹怒过高帝，王晏马上声称有病，同武帝疏远了。
English: Later, Emperor Wu angered Emperor Gao, and Wang Yao immediately claimed to be ill and distanced himself from Emperor Wu.

古文：及即位，为丹阳尹，意任如旧，朝夕进见，议论朝事；自豫章王嶷及王俭皆降意接之。
现代文：武帝继位后，任命王晏为丹杨尹，对他的感情和信任，一如往日，每天朝晨和晚上都要召见一次，商讨国家大事。从豫章王萧嶷到王俭以下的官员，都曲意奉迎，想方设法和王晏交往。
English: After Emperor Wu succeeded to the throne, he appointed Wang Qian as Danyang Yin. His feelings and trust in him, as in the past, were summoned once every morning and evening to discuss national affairs. Officials from Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqian to Wang Jian and below, all bowed to his wishes and tried their best to communicate with Wang Qian.

古文：二月，壬寅，出为江州刺史；晏不愿外出，复留为吏部尚书。
现代文：二月，壬寅，武帝任命王晏为江州刺史，王晏不想远离朝廷，又把他留下来，命他为吏部尚书。
English: In February, Emperor Wu appointed Wang Xi as the governor of Jiangzhou. Wang Xi did not want to be far away from the imperial court, so he kept him and ordered him to be the secretary.

古文：三月，甲寅，立皇子子岳为临贺王，子峻为广汉王，子琳为宣城王，子珉为义安王。
现代文：三月，甲寅，武帝立皇子萧子岳为临贺王，萧子峻为广汉王，萧子琳为宣城王，萧子珉为义安王。
English: In March, Emperor Wu established Prince Xiao Ziyue as the King of Linhe, Prince Xiao Zijun as the King of Guanghan, Prince Xiao Zilin as the King of Xuancheng, and Prince Xiao Zixuan as the King of Yian.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑，魏主诏曰： 升楼散物以赍百姓，至使人马腾践，多有伤毁；今可断之，以本所费之物，赐老疾贫独者。 
现代文：夏季，四月，丁丑，孝文帝下诏说： 登到城楼上去散发救济品，接济灾民，致使人群与马匹相互践踏，很多人受伤致残。从现在起一律禁止，所有分发的救济品，直接送给孤寡老人、病人、穷人和孤儿。 
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xiaowen issued the following edict: "Climb to the city tower to distribute relief goods to help the victims of the disaster, causing the crowd and horses to trample each other, and many people were injured and disabled. From now on, it is prohibited, and all distributed relief goods will be sent directly to the lonely elderly, the sick, the poor and the orphans.

古文：丁亥，魏主如灵泉池，遂如方山；己丑，还宫。
现代文：丁亥，孝文帝前往灵泉池，又前往方山。己丑，返回宫中。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pond, and then to Fangshan. He felt ugly and returned to the palace.

古文：上优礼南昌文宪公王俭，诏三日一还朝，尚书令史出外谘事。
现代文：南齐武帝对尚书令、南昌文献公王俭礼遇非常优厚，命他每隔三天来朝廷一趟，其他时间则由尚书令史去他那里请示。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu treated Shang Shuling and Nanchang Literature Prince Jian very well. He ordered him to come to the imperial court every three days, and at other times, Shang Shuling Shi would go to him for instructions.

古文：上犹以往来烦数，复诏俭还尚书下省，月听十日出外。
现代文：武帝认为这样做过于烦琐，又命令王俭回到尚书下省，每月有十天可以在家。
English: Emperor Wu thought this was too cumbersome, and ordered Wang Jian to return to Shangshu Province, where he could spend ten days a month at home.

古文：俭固求解选。诏改中书监，参掌选事。
现代文：而王俭则坚决请求辞去吏部，武帝改命他为中书监、参掌选事。
English: Wang Jian, on the other hand, resolutely requested to resign from the cadre department, and Emperor Wu appointed him as the Central Library Supervisor and a member of the election committee.

古文：五月，乙巳，俭卒。
现代文：五月，乙巳，王俭去世。
English: In May, Wang Jian passed away.

古文：王晏既领选，权行台阁，与俭颇不平。
现代文：王晏掌握朝官任免大权后，在朝中任意行使，与王俭之间很不和。
English: After Wang Qian seized the power to appoint and remove officials, he exercised it arbitrarily in the court, and there was a lot of discord between him and Wang Jian.

古文：礼官欲依王导，谥俭为文献。
现代文：在王俭去世后，礼官打算按照王导的先例，加王俭谥号为文献。
English: After Wang Jian's death, the etiquette official planned to follow Wang Du's precedent and add Wang Jian's pen name to the document.

古文：晏启上曰： 导乃得此谥；但宋氏以来，不加异姓。 
现代文：王晏报告武帝说： 过去只有王导才得到这一谥号，但自从宋朝崐以来，不曾把它加给皇族外其他姓氏的人。 
English: Wang Yao reported to Emperor Wu: In the past, only Wang Dao got this nickname, but since the Song Dynasty, it has not been added to people with other surnames outside the royal family.

古文：出，谓亲人曰：  平头宪 事已行矣。 
现代文：王晏从宫内出来，对他亲近的人说：  平头宪 是王俭的谥号，事情已经定下来了。 
English: Wang Yao came out of the palace and said to those close to him: "Flat-headed Constitution is Wang Jian's nickname, the matter has been settled.

古文：徐湛之之死也，其孙孝嗣在孕得免。
现代文：徐湛之被杀时，他的孙子徐孝嗣还在母亲腹中，因而得以幸免。
English: When Xu Zhanzhi was killed, his grandson Xu Xiaozhi was still in his mother's womb, so he was spared.

古文：八岁，袭爵枝江县公，尚宋康乐公主。
现代文：等到他八岁时，承袭了祖父徐湛之的枝江县公的封号，娶了宋孝武帝的女儿康乐公主为妻。
English: When he was eight years old, he inherited the title of Yejiang County official from his grandfather Xu Zhanzhi and married Princess Kangle, the daughter of Emperor Song Xiaowu.

古文：及上即位，孝嗣为御史中丞，风仪端简。
现代文：齐武帝即位后，徐孝嗣担任了御史中丞，他仪表端庄，做事干练。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Qiwu, Xu Xiaozhi served as the Vice-President of the Imperial History Commission. He was dignified in appearance and diligent in his work.

古文：王俭谓人曰： 徐孝嗣将来必为宰相。 
现代文：王俭对别人说： 徐孝嗣将来肯定会做宰相。 
English: Wang Jian said to others, "Xu Xiaozhi will definitely become the prime minister in the future."

古文：上尝问俭： 谁可继卿者？ 
现代文：武帝也曾经问过王俭： 谁可以接任你的职位？ 
English: Emperor Wu also once asked Wang Qian: Who can take over your position?

古文：俭曰： 臣东都之日，其在徐孝嗣乎！ 
现代文：王俭回答说： 臣解除宰相职位后，恐怕只有徐孝嗣最适合接任。 
English: Wang Jian replied: After the minister's dismissal from the post of prime minister, I am afraid that only Xu Xiaozhi is best suited to take over.

古文：俭卒，孝嗣时为吴兴太守，征为五兵尚书。
现代文：王俭去世时，徐孝嗣担任吴兴太守。武帝征召他为五兵尚书。
English: At the time of Wang Jian's death, Xu Xiaozhi served as Wu Xing's eunuch. Emperor Wu enlisted him as one of the five soldiers.

古文：庚戌，魏主祭方泽。
现代文：庚戌，孝文帝在沼泽中建筑方坛，祭祀地神。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Xiaowen built a square altar in the swamp to worship the earth god.

古文：上欲用领军王奂为尚书令，以问王晏。
现代文：南齐武帝想要起用领军将军王奂为尚书令，征求王晏的意见。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu wanted to appoint the leading general Wang Hui as Shang Shuling, and solicited Wang Hui's opinion.

古文：晏与奂不相能，对曰： 柳世隆有勋望，恐不宜在奂后。 
现代文：王晏和王奂之间彼此不相容，王晏回答说： 柳世隆建过大功，很有声望，恐怕不宜在王奂之下。 
English: Wang Xi and Wang Yao were incompatible with each other. Wang Yao replied, "Yu Shilong has made great achievements and is very famous. I'm afraid it's not appropriate for him to be under Wang Yao."

古文：甲子，以尚书左仆射柳世隆为尚书令，王奂为左仆射。
现代文：甲子，武帝任命尚书左仆射柳世隆为尚书令，王奂为左仆射。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Liu Shilong, as Shangshu's second-in-command, and Wang Xi as his left-hand man.

古文：六月，丁亥，上如琅邪城。
现代文：六月，丁亥，南齐武帝前往琅邪城。
English: In June, Dinghai, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi went to Shanyi.

古文：魏怀朔镇将汝阴灵王天赐，长安镇都大将、雍州刺史南安惠王桢，皆坐脏当死。
现代文：北魏怀朔镇将、汝阴灵王拓跋天赐和长安镇都大将、雍州刺史、南安惠王拓跋桢二人，都因贪污罪当处死。
English: Two generals of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Huai Shuo Zhen, Ru Yin Ling Wang Tuoba Tian Zhen, and Chang'an Zhen, Yongzhou Zhi Shi, Nan'an Hui Wang Tuoba, were all executed for corruption.

古文：冯太后及魏主临皇信堂，引见王公，太后令曰： 卿等以为当存亲以毁令邪？当灭亲以明法邪？ 
现代文：冯太后和孝文帝为此亲自到皇信堂，召见王公要人。冯太后首先发问说： 你们认为，应该顾念亲情、毁弃法律呢，还是应该大义灭亲，以严明法律呢？ 
English: For this reason, Empress Dowager Feng and Emperor Xiaowen personally went to the Emperor's Palace and summoned the king's dignitaries. Empress Dowager Feng first asked: "Do you think that we should consider the feelings of relatives and abandon the law, or should we eliminate relatives in the name of justice and strictly enforce the law?"

古文：群臣皆言： 二王，景穆皇帝之子，宜蒙矜恕。 
现代文：大臣们都说： 二王都是景穆皇帝的儿子，应该得到宽恕。 
English: The ministers all said: Both kings are the sons of Emperor Jingmu and should be pardoned.

古文：太后不应。
现代文：冯太后没有回答。
English: Empress Dowager Feng did not answer.

古文：魏主乃下诏，称： 二王所犯难恕，而太皇太后追惟高宗孔怀之恩；且南安王事母孝谨，闻于中外，并特免死，削夺官爵，禁锢终身。 
现代文：孝文帝下诏声称： 二王所犯的罪行，实在是难以宽恕。但是，太皇太后追思文成帝的大恩，顾念手足之情，再加上南安王侍奉母亲，十分孝敬恭谨，内外闻名。因此，现在特别赦免二王的死罪，撤销官职和爵位，终身监禁。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said in his edict: "The crimes committed by the two kings are really hard to forgive. However, the great empress dowager recalled the great kindness of Emperor Wencheng, thought about the feelings of brothers and sisters, and added that King Nan'an served his mother, was very filial and respectful, and was famous both at home and abroad. Therefore, the death penalty of the two kings is now specially pardoned, the official position and peerage are revoked, and they are imprisoned for life.

古文：初，魏朝闻桢贪暴，遣中散闾文祖诣长安察之，文祖受桢赂，为之隐；事觉，文祖亦抵罪。
现代文：最初，北魏朝廷得知拓跋桢贪婪暴虐，就派中散吕文祖抵达长安调查，吕文祖暗中接受了拓跋桢的贿赂，为他隐瞒了事实真相。
English: At first, when the Northern Wei court learned of Tuobao's greed and brutality, it sent Lu Wenzhu, a Chinese dissident, to Chang'an to investigate. Lu Wenzhu secretly accepted Tuobao's bribe and concealed the truth from him.

古文：冯太后谓群臣曰： 文祖前自谓廉，今竟犯法。
现代文：事情被查以后，闾文祖也受到了同样的处罚。冯太后对大臣们说： 吕文祖以前自称廉洁奉公，而今竟也贪赃枉法。
English: After the case was investigated, the same punishment was given to Lu Wenzhu. Empress Dowager Feng said to the ministers: "Lu Wenzhu used to call himself an honest public servant, but now he is also corrupt.

古文：以此言之，人心信不可知！ 
现代文：从这件事上可以看出，人心叵测，难以探知。 
English: From this incident, it can be seen that people are unpredictable and difficult to detect.

古文：魏主曰： 古有待放之臣。
现代文：孝文帝说： 古代有一种待放的大臣。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: In ancient times, there was a kind of minister to be released.

古文：卿等自审不胜贪心者，听辞位归第。 
现代文：你们在座的如果扪心自省，认为自己不能克制贪欲，允许你们辞职回家。 
English: If any of you in this room look at yourselves and think that you cannot control your greed, I will allow you to resign and go home.

古文：宰官、中散慕容契进曰： 小人之心无常，而帝王之法有常；以无常之心奉有常之法，非所克堪，乞从退黜。 
现代文：宰官、中散大夫慕容契进言说： 小人之心常变，帝王的法律却是永恒不变的，以常变之心去应付不变的法律，恐怕不是我所能够担当的，所以，我请求辞职免官。 
English: The vice-governor, Dr. Zhongshan Murongqi, said: "The heart of a small person is always changing, but the law of the emperor is eternal and unchanging. I am afraid that it is not my responsibility to deal with the unchanging law with a constantly changing heart. Therefore, I request to resign and be removed from office.

古文：魏主曰： 契知心不可常，则知贪之可恶矣，何必求退！ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 慕容契知道人心是不可能不变的，就一定知道贪婪是令人厌恶的，你何必请求辞职呢！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Murongjie knows that it is impossible for people's hearts to remain unchanged, so he must know that greed is disgusting. Why don't you ask for resignation?"

古文：迁宰官令。
现代文：于是提升他为宰官令。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of vice-prefect.

古文：契，白曜之弟子也。
现代文：慕容契是慕容白曜的侄子。
English: Murong Che is the nephew of Murong Bai You.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，魏主如灵泉池。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙寅，孝文帝前往灵泉池。
English: In autumn, in July, Cui Yin and Emperor Xiaowen went to Lingquan Pool.

古文：魏主使群臣议， 久与齐绝，今欲通使，何如？ 
现代文：孝文帝召集文武百官讨论， 我国和齐国断绝交往已经很久了，如今，我打算派人出使齐国，各位认为如何？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen has convened a hundred military and civilian officials to discuss. It has been a long time since our country broke off relations with Qi. Now, I plan to send an envoy to Qi. What do you think?

古文：尚书游明根曰： 朝廷不遣使者，又筑醴阳深入彼境，皆直在萧赜。
现代文：尚书游明根说： 朝廷没有派人出使齐国，又深入齐国境地兴筑了醴阳城，这二件事的道理都在萧赜一边。
English: Shang Shuyou Minggen said: The imperial court did not send an envoy to Qi, and built Shenyang City deep into the Qi border. The reason for these two things is on Xiao Yu's side.

古文：不复追使，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：如今再派遣使节前去，这不是很好吗？ 
English: Would it not be better to send the envoys now?

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：孝文帝接受游明根的建议。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：八月，乙亥，遣兼员外散骑常侍邢产等来聘。
现代文：八月，乙亥，派遣兼员外散骑常侍的邢产等人来访。
English: In August, in the Year of the Boar, they dispatched the part-time non-commissioned officer, the free-rider, the regular attendant, and others to visit.

古文：九月，魏出宫人以赐北镇人贫无妻者。
现代文：九月，北魏朝廷遣散出大批宫女，把她们赏赐给北方六镇没有妻子的贫民。
English: In September, the Northern Wei court dismissed a large number of maids of honor and gave them to the poor without wives in six towns in the north.

古文：冬，十一月，己未，魏安丰匡王猛卒。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己未，北魏安丰匡王拓跋猛去世。
English: In the winter, in November, the Northern Wei Anfeng Kuang Wang Tuo passed away.

古文：十二月，丙子，魏河东王苟颓卒。
现代文：十二月，丙子，北魏河东王拓跋苟颓去世。
English: In December, Hanzi, the king of the Northern Wei Dynasty, died.

古文：平南参军颜幼明等聘于魏。
现代文：南齐平南参军颜幼明等人前往北魏访问。
English: Yan Youming, a member of the Southern Qi-Ping Army, and others went to visit the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏以尚书令尉元为司徒，左仆射穆亮为司空。
现代文：北魏朝廷任命尚书令尉元为司徒，左仆射穆亮为司空。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Shang Shuling as the tutor, and Zuo Mu Liang as the secretary.

古文：豫章王嶷自以地位隆重，深怀退素，是岁，启求还第；上令其世子子廉代镇东府。
现代文：南齐豫章王萧嶷自认为地位很高，深怀激流勇退之心。这一年，他上书请求辞职，返回旧邸。武帝命令萧嶷的世子萧子廉代替父亲镇守东府。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Xiao Zi Liang, the son of Xiao Zi Liang, to replace his father as the governor of the Eastern Capital.

古文：太子詹事张绪领扬州中正，长沙王晃属用吴兴闻人邕为州议曹，绪不许。
现代文：太子詹事张绪兼领扬州中正时，长沙王萧晃托付他起用吴兴人闻人邕为州议曹，张绪不同意。
English: When Prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Xu was concurrently leading the Yangzhou Central Military Commission, Changsha King Xiao Xuan entrusted him with the appointment of Wu Xingren and Wen Ronglu as state councillors. Zhang Xu did not agree.

古文：晃使书佐固请，绪正色曰： 此是身家州乡，殿下何得见逼！ 
现代文：于是，萧晃又派书佐坚持请求，张绪面色严肃地说： 这里是我自己的家乡，殿下怎么能这么逼迫我？ 
English: As a result, Xiao Hui sent Shuzo again to insist on the request, Zhang Xu looked serious and said: This is my own hometown, how can His Royal Highness persecute me like this?

古文：侍中江斅为都官尚书。
现代文：南齐侍中江担任都官尚书。
English: Nanzhi attendant Zhongjiang served as the capital official Shangshu.

古文：中书舍人纪僧真得幸于上，容表有士风，请于上曰： 臣出自本县武吏，邀逢圣时，阶荣至此；为儿昏得荀昭光女，即时无复所须，唯就陛下乞作士大夫。 
现代文：中书舍人纪僧真得到武帝的宠信，纪僧真举止仪容都具有士大夫风采，他向武帝请求说： 臣不过是出身于本县的一名武官，幸运地赶上了清明盛世，官阶和荣耀才如此之高。我的儿子还娶了荀昭光的女儿。现在，我已经不再有其他的需求，只请求陛下能允许我加入大夫行列。 
English: Emperor Wu favored Ji Sang Zhen, a scholar of the Chinese classics, and Ji Sang Zhen's manners and appearance were those of a scholar-official. He pleaded with Emperor Wu, saying, "My father is just a military officer from this county, who was lucky enough to catch up with the Qing and Ming dynasties, which is why his rank and glory are so high. My son also married the daughter of Zou Zhaoguang. Now, I no longer have any other needs, I only ask Your Majesty to allow me to join the ranks of doctors.

古文：上曰： 此由江斅、谢瀹，我不得措意，可自诣之。 
现代文：武帝说： 这件事应该由江、谢瀹决定，我不能参与，你可以自己去他们那里请求。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "This matter should be decided by Jiang and Xie Jun. I can't get involved. You can go and ask them yourself."

古文：僧真承旨诣斅，登榻坐定，斅顾命左右曰： 移吾床远客！ 
现代文：于是，纪僧真就按照武帝的旨意来到江那里，在榻席上坐稳后，江回过头去命令他的左右侍从们说： 把我的坐榻抬远些，远离客人！ 
English: As a result, Ji Sang Zhen came to Jiang in accordance with Emperor Wu's will. After sitting firmly on the couch, Jiang turned around and ordered his right and left attendants to say: "Move my couch further away, away from the guests!"

古文：僧真丧气而退，告上曰： 士大夫故非天子所命！ 
现代文：纪僧真垂头丧气地退出来了，向武帝报告说： 士大夫原来不是皇上能够命令的！ 
English: Disheartened, Ji Sozhen bowed his head and withdrew, reporting to Emperor Wu: Originally, the shidafu was not something the emperor could order!

古文：斅，湛之孙；瀹，朏之弟也。
现代文：江是江湛的孙子。谢瀹是谢的弟弟。
English: Jiang is the grandson of Jiang Zhan. Xie Yao is the younger brother of Xie Cang.

古文：柔然别帅叱吕勤帅众降魏。
现代文：柔然汗国另外一部落首领叱吕勤率众投降北魏。
English: Another part of the Mongolian Khanate surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

