古文：李沆，字太初，洺州肥乡人。
现代文：李沆，字太初，洺州肥乡人。
English: Li Qian, the character of Taizhong, is a native of Feixiang, Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖丰，泰陵令。
现代文：他的曾祖叫李丰，任泰陵县令。
English: His great-grandfather, Li Feng, was the governor of Tailing County.

古文：祖滔，洺州团练判官。
现代文：他的祖父叫李滔，任氵名州团练判官。
English: His grandfather's name was Li Tao, and he served as a judge for the Ming and Qing dynasties.

古文：父炳，从邢帅薛怀让辟，为观察支使。
现代文：他的父亲叫李炳，跟随邢州主帅薛怀让，征召为观察支使。
English: His father's name is Li Jun, and he was called up as an observer with Zhangzhou coach Xue Huaijan.

古文：怀让徙同州，又为掌书记，历邠州、凤翔判官，拜殿中侍御史、知舒州。
现代文：薛怀让调同州任职，李炳又跟随他任管书记，历任州、凤翔判官，升任殿中侍御史、舒州知州。
English: Xue Huai was transferred to the same state, and Li Qiming followed him as secretary of administration, successive states, Feng Xiang judge, promoted to palace attendant, and Shuzhou Chizhou.

古文：太祖征金陵，缘淮供亿，惟舒尤甚，以劳加侍御史，卒。
现代文：宋太祖征伐金陵，沿淮一线供给，惟有舒州供给尤其甚多，因功劳加官侍御史，后死去。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty conquered Jinling and supplied it along the Huai line, but Shuzhou supplied a great deal, and he was promoted to be an official to serve the emperor for his merits. He later died.

古文：沆少好学，器度宏远，炳尝语人曰： 此儿异日必至公辅。 太平兴国五年，举进士甲科，为将作监丞、通判潭州，迁右赞善大夫，转著作郎。
现代文：李沆年少时喜欢学习，气量很大，李炳曾对别人说 ：这个儿子他日一定会官至公辅。 太平兴国五年，李沆中进士甲科，任将作监丞、潭州通判，升任右赞善大夫，转任著作郎。
English: When he was young, Li Yao liked to study and was very spirited. Li Yao once said to others, "This son will surely become a public assistant some day." In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, Li Yao Junior High School entered Shijia Science, and was appointed as a superintendent, a judge in Tanzhou, and was promoted to a doctor of the right zanzan, and was transferred to a writer.

古文：相府召试约束边将诏书，既奏御，太宗甚悦，命直史馆。
现代文：宰相府召他考试写约束边将的诏书，上奏给皇上后，宋太宗看后很高兴，授任直史馆。
English: The Prime Minister's Office called him to take an exam to write an edict to restrict the border generals, which was presented to the empress. Song Taizong was very happy after reading it, and was awarded the direct history museum.

古文：雍熙三年，右拾遗王化基上书自荐，太宗谓宰相曰： 李沆、宋湜，皆嘉士也。 即命中书并化基召试，并除右补阙、知制诰。
现代文：雍熙三年，右拾遗王化基上书亲自推荐，太宗对宰相说 ：李沆、宋，都是有才能的人。 即刻命中书和王化基一起召他们考试，一并授他们右补阙、知制诰。
English: In the third year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, Wang Huaji, the Right Reverend Wang Huaji, wrote a letter personally recommending him, and Emperor Taizong said to the prime minister: "Li Xi and Song are both talented people.

古文：沆位最下，特升于上，各赐钱百万。
现代文：李沆职位最低，特别升其职于上，赐给各人钱百万。
English: Li Gan, the lowest-ranking official, was specially promoted to the highest-ranking official, and each of them was given millions of money.

古文：又以沆素贫，多负人钱，别赐三十万偿之。
现代文：又以李沆素来贫困，多欠别人的钱，另外赐钱三十万给他偿债。
English: He also said that Li Yuxuan had always been poor and owed a lot of money to others, and gave him another 300,000 yuan to pay off his debts.

古文：四年，与翰林学士宋白同知贡举。
现代文：雍熙四年，李沆与翰林学士宋白一起知贡举。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, Li Qian and Song Bai, a scholar of Hanlin, made a tribute together.

古文：谤议虽众，而不归咎于沆。
现代文：公开指责议论这事的人虽然很多，而皇帝没有归咎于李沆。
English: Although there were many people who publicly criticized and discussed this matter, the emperor did not blame Li Qiye.

古文：迁职方员外郎，召入翰林为学士。
现代文：升李沆任职方员外郎，召他进入翰林院当学士。
English: He promoted Li Jie to the position of outside counselor and called him to enter the Hanlin Academy as a bachelor.

古文：淳化二年，判吏部铨。
现代文：淳化二年，李沆判吏部铨。
English: In the second year of Chunhua, Li Jian was sentenced to be dismissed from the cadre department.

古文：尝侍曲宴，太宗目送之曰： 李沆风度端凝，真贵人也。 三年，拜给事中、参知政事。
现代文：他曾侍奉音乐宴会，宋太宗用目光看着他说 ：李沆风度端庄稳正，确实是显贵的人。 淳化三年，授李沆给事中、参知政事。
English: He once served at a musical banquet, and Song Taizong looked at him with his eyes and said, "Li Gan has a dignified and upright demeanor, and is truly a dignified person.

古文：四年，以本官罢，奉朝请。
现代文：淳化四年，以本官罢免，逢一日、五日朝见皇上。
English: In the fourth year of Chunhua, he was dismissed from his post and had to see the emperor every morning.

古文：未几，丁内艰，起复，遂出知升州。
现代文：没多久，李沆遭遇母亲丧事，未等服丧期满就被起用，于是外任升州知州。
English: Not long after, Li Yao suffered the death of his mother. He was appointed to the post before the end of the mourning period, and was then promoted to the post of Zhizhou governor.

古文：未行，改知河南府。
现代文：尚未成行，又改授知河南府。
English: It has not yet been implemented, and has been changed to Henan Prefecture.

古文：真宗升储，迁礼部侍郎兼太子宾客，诏东宫待以师傅礼。
现代文：宋真宗赵恒进升为皇储时，李沆升任礼部侍郎兼太子宾客，太宗诏东宫太子赵恒以师傅之礼对待李沆。
English: When Song Zhenzong's Zhao Hengjin was promoted to crown prince, Li Qiye was promoted to attendant of the etiquette department and guest of the prince. Zhao Heng, the prince of the East Palace of Emperor Taizong, treated Li Qiye with the courtesy of a master.

古文：真宗即位，迁户部侍郎、参知政事。
现代文：宋真宗赵恒即皇位，任命李沆为户部侍郎、参知政事。
English: Song Zhenzong Zhao Heng, i.e. the emperor, appointed Li Qian as a household attendant and a political advisor.

古文：咸平初，以本官平章事，监修国史，改中书侍郎。
现代文：咸平初年，李沆以本官平章事、监修国史，改任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Xianping era, Li Yu, who had been appointed as the official of the Heping chapter and the supervisor of the national history, was transferred to the position of the secretary of the middle school.

古文：会契丹犯边，真宗北幸，命沆留守，京师肃然。
现代文：逢契丹侵犯边境，宋真宗亲自北征，命令李沆留守京城，京城肃然。
English: When the Khitan invaded the border, Song Zhenzong personally marched north and ordered Li Xi to stay in Beijing. Beijing was stunned.

古文：真宗还，沆迎于郊，命坐置酒，慰劳久之。
现代文：真宗回京城，李沆在城郊迎接，真宗命他坐下摆好酒，连连慰劳他。
English: When Zhenzong returned to Beijing, Li Yao met him on the outskirts of the city. Zhenzong ordered him to sit down, set out the wine, and repeatedly consoled him.

古文：累加门下侍郎、尚书右仆射。
现代文：李沆接连加职至门下侍郎、尚书右仆射。
English: Li Wei was successively promoted to the position of a footman and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：真宗问治道所宜先，沆曰： 不用浮薄新进喜事之人，此最为先。 问其人，曰： 如梅询、曾致尧等是矣。 后致尧副温仲舒安抚陕西，于阁门疏言仲舒不足与共事。轻锐之党无不称快，沆不喜也，因用他人副仲舒，罢致尧。
现代文：真宗问这些人指谁。李沆说 ：像梅询、曾致尧这班人就是这类人。 后来曾致尧任副职同温仲舒安抚陕西，曾在门向皇帝奏言说温仲舒这人不值得与他共事。那些浅薄小人对这事无不称快，李沆很不高兴，于是用别人任温仲舒的副职，罢免曾致尧。
English: Zhenzong asked who these people were. Li Yan said, "Like Mei Yan and Zeng Zhirong, these people are the same kind of people. Later, Zeng Zhirong served as deputy to Wen Zhongshu to pacify Shaanxi, and once reported to the emperor at the gate that Wen Zhongshu was not worthy of working with him. Those shallow little people were very happy about this, Li Yan was very unhappy, so he used others to appoint Wen Zhongshu's deputy, and dismissed Zeng Zhirong.

古文：帝尝语及唐人树党难制，遂使王室微弱，盖奸邪难辨尔。
现代文：真宗曾说起唐代之人结党难以控制，就使王室衰微变弱，大概是奸邪难以辨别吧。
English: Zhen Zong once said that it was difficult to control the party formation in the Tang Dynasty, which made the royal family weak and weak. It is probably difficult to distinguish the evil of treason.

古文：沆对曰： 佞言似忠，奸言似信，至如卢杞蒙蔽德宗，李勉以为真奸邪是也。 真宗曰： 奸邪之迹，虽曰难辨，然久之自败。 
现代文：李沆答说 ：谄媚之人的说话像忠心，狡诈之人说话像可信，至于像卢杞蒙蔽欺骗唐德宗，李勉认为他是真正的奸邪之人，就是这样。 真宗说 ：奸邪之人的形迹，虽然说难辨别，然而过久了会自己败露出来。 
English: Li Lan replied, "A charming person speaks as if he is loyal, and a cunning person speaks as if he is trustworthy. As for Lu Yao deceiving Tang Dezong, Li Yan thought that he was a true traitor, and that's how it is." Zhenzong said, "The trait of a traitor, although it is difficult to distinguish, will reveal itself after a long time.

古文：一夕，遣使持手诏欲以刘氏为贵妃，沆对使者引烛焚诏，附奏曰： 但道臣沆以为不可。 其议遂寝。
现代文：一天晚上，真宗派使持他的手诏想升刘氏为贵妃，李沆当着使者用蜡烛烧掉诏书，凑近使者说： 你只说李沆认为不行。 
English: One evening, the True Sect sent an envoy with his hand-written edict to elevate Liu as a noble consort. Li Qiye burned the edict with a candle in front of the envoy, approached the envoy and said: "You can't just say that Li Qiye thinks so.

古文：驸马都尉石保吉求为使相，复问沆，沆曰： 赏典之行，须有所自。
现代文：皇帝的这个主张就此停办了。驸马都尉石保吉请求任使相，真宗又问李沆，李沆说： 执行奖赏制度，须有本人亲身干的成绩。
English: The emperor's proposal was therefore abandoned. Shima's lieutenant, Ishibokichi, requested to be appointed envoy, and Shinshong asked Li Yao. Li Yao said: "To implement the reward system, you must have the achievement of doing it yourself."

古文：保吉因缘戚里，无攻战之劳，台席之拜，恐腾物议。 他日再三问之，执议如初，遂止。
现代文：石保吉凭借亲戚乡里的缘故，没有攻城作战之功，依靠我授以官职，恐怕会使众人的非议到处流传。 
English: I am afraid that Ishibokichi's reliance on his relatives in his hometown as a reason for not having fought in the siege of the city, and his reliance on me to grant him an official post, will cause many people's criticisms to spread everywhere.

古文：帝以沆无密奏，谓之曰： 人皆有密启，卿独无，何也？ 对曰： 臣待罪宰相，公事则公言之，何用密启？
现代文：另一天真宗又再三问起石保吉的事，李沆像当初那样坚持原议，该事就停止了。真宗因李沆没有秘密奏折，对他说： 别人都有秘密奏言，你独独没有，为什么？ 李沆回答说： 我蒙皇恩授以宰相职，公事就公开说明它，何必用秘密上奏的方式？
English: On another day, Zhenzong asked again and again about the matter of Shi Baoji, and Li Lan insisted on the original proposal as he did at the beginning, and the matter was stopped. Zhenzong, because Li Lan did not have a secret transcript, said to him: Others have secret transcripts, you alone do not have one, why? Li Lan replied: I was given the post of prime minister by the grace of the emperor, and I will publicly explain it in public affairs. Why should I use a secret transcript?

古文：夫人臣有密启者，非谗即佞，臣常恶之，岂可效尤？ 
现代文：一般秘密奏言的大臣，不是说坏话的人就是谄媚之人，我平常就憎恨他们，怎么能明知是错还是照样去做。 
English: Generally, secret speech ministers are either bad-mouthers or sycophants. I usually hate them. How can I know if it is wrong and still do it?

古文：时李继迁久叛，兵众日盛，有图取朔方之意。
现代文：当时李继迁反叛宋朝廷已很久，兵力日益强盛，有图谋夺取朔方的意图。
English: At that time, Li Jijian had been rebelling against the Song Dynasty for a long time, and his troops were becoming increasingly powerful, with the intention of seizing the Shuo side.

古文：朝廷困于飞輓，中外咸以为灵州乃必争之地，苟失之，则缘边诸郡皆不可保。
现代文：朝廷困扰于无根据的牵扯，朝廷内外都认为灵州是兵家必争之地，如果失去灵州，那么它周围各郡都不能守住。
English: The imperial court was troubled by the unwarranted involvement. Both inside and outside the imperial court believed that Lingzhou was a must-win place for soldiers. If Lingzhou was lost, then the counties around it would not be able to hold on.

古文：帝颇惑之，因访于沆。
现代文：皇帝对此颇为困惑，就向李沆询问。
English: The emperor was puzzled by this and asked Li Qiye about it.

古文：沆曰： 继迁不死，灵州非朝廷有也。
现代文：李沆说： 李继迁不死，灵州就不能为朝廷所占有。
English: Li Yu said: If Li Jiquan did not die, Lingzhou could not be occupied by the imperial court.

古文：莫若遣使密召州将，使部分军民空垒而归，如此，则关右之民息肩矣。 方众议各异，未即从沆言，未几而灵州陷，帝由是益重之。
现代文：不如派使者秘密诏令各州将领，命令分别统领军队和百姓使堡垒空着而归到一处，若这样，那么关右的百姓就可得到生息了。 其时众人的意见各不相同，没立即采纳李沆的建议，没多久灵州就陷落了，真宗从此更加看重李沆。
English: It would be better to send an envoy to secretly issue an edict to the generals of each state, ordering them to lead the army and the people separately to make the fortress empty and return to one place. If so, then the people of Guan Yu can get a living. At that time, everyone's opinions were different. If they did not immediately adopt Li Yu's suggestion, Lingzhou would soon fall, and the True Sect would pay more attention to Li Yu from then on.

古文：沆为相，王旦参政事，以西北用兵，或至旰食。
现代文：李沆任宰相，王旦任参知政事，因为西北边地用兵，有时到天黑才吃饭。
English: Li Xi served as prime minister, and Wang Dan served as co-chairman of government affairs. Because soldiers were used in the northwest frontier, they sometimes did not eat until it was dark.

古文：旦叹曰： 我辈安能坐致太平，得优游无事耶？ 沆曰： 少有忧勤，足为警戒。
现代文：王旦叹息说 ：我们这班人怎么才能坐致太平，能够优闲自得没事呢？ 李沆说： 稍微有些担忧辛劳，足作为警戒。
English: Wang Dan sighed and said, "How can we, this group of people, sit peacefully and be able to enjoy ourselves without any problems?" Li Wei said, "I'm a little worried about the hard work, and I keep my feet as a warning.

古文：他日四方宁谧，朝廷未必无事。 后契丹和亲，旦问何如，沆曰： 善则善矣，然边患既息，恐人主渐生侈心耳。 旦未以为然。
现代文：将来四方宁静，国家未必没有大事发生。 后来契丹与宋和亲，王旦问这怎么样，李沆说 ：好当然是好事，然而边疆的忧患停止后，恐怕皇上渐渐产生奢侈放纵的想法。 王旦对此不以为然。
English: In the future, there will be peace in the four directions, and the country may not be without major events. Later, Khitan and Song made peace, and Wang Dan asked how it was, and Li Gan said, "Good is of course a good thing, but after the sorrow of the frontier has stopped, I am afraid that the emperor will gradually have the idea of extravagant indulgence." Wang Dan did not agree with this.

古文：沆又日取四方水旱盗贼奏之，旦以为细事不足烦上听。
现代文：李沆又拿四方水旱盗贼之事上奏真宗，王旦认为这些细小的事不值得烦劳皇帝处理。
English: Li Qian also took the matter of the thieves in the four directions and played the role of the true religion. Wang Dan thought that these small things were not worth the trouble of the emperor.

古文：沆曰： 人主少年，当使知四方艰难。
现代文：李沆说 ：皇上年少，应当让皇上知道四方的艰难。
English: "Since the emperor is young, he should be made aware of the hardships in the four directions," Li Wei said.

古文：不然，血气方刚，不留意声色犬马，则土木、甲兵、祷祠之事作矣。
现代文：不这样，皇上血气方刚，大加留意声色犬马之事，那么动土木、兴甲兵，向宗祠求福等事就会发生了。
English: Otherwise, the emperor's blood would run cold, and he would pay great attention to the things that were said and done, and then things like moving earthworks, arming soldiers, and seeking blessings from ancestral shrines would happen.

古文：吾老，不及见此，此参政他日之忧也。 沆没后，真宗以契丹既和，西夏纳款，遂封岱祠汾，大营宫观，蒐讲坠典，靡有暇日。
现代文：我年老了，等不到看见这些，这是你参知政事将来的忧患。 李沆死后，宋真宗认为契丹已经修和，西夏纳款归顺，就封岱山、祭汾阴，大规模营建宫观，春秋打猎的制度被破坏，这些事没有闲停下来的时日。
English: After the death of Li Yu, Song Zhenzong thought that the Khitan had been reconciled and the Western Shannars had surrendered, so he sealed Mount Lushan, held a festival at Mount Yin, built the palace complex on a large scale, and destroyed the system of hunting in spring and autumn.

古文：寇准与丁谓善，屡以谓才荐于沆，不用。准问之，沆曰： 顾其为人，可使之在人上乎？ 准曰： 如谓者，相公终能抑之使在人下乎？ 沆笑曰： 他日后悔，当思吾言也。 准后为谓所倾，始伏沆言。
现代文：王旦亲眼看见王钦若、丁谓等人所作所为，想向皇帝进谏却又已经与他们一起共事，想离去却又念及皇帝待己很好。王旦这才认识到李沆事先预知很远，并叹息说 ：李文靖真是圣人。 当时就称他为 圣相 。寇准与丁谓友好，多次认为丁谓有才而向李沆推荐，李沆不用丁谓。寇准问李沆，李沆说： 看他为人处事，可以让他职位居于别人之上吗？ 寇准说 ：像丁谓这样的人，宰相你一直能压抑他使他居于别人之下吗？ 李沆笑着说 ：将来你后悔，就会想起我的话。 寇准后来被丁谓所排挤，才信服李沆的话。
English: Wang Dan saw with his own eyes the deeds of Wang Qinruo, Ding Zuo and others. He wanted to go to the emperor, but he had already worked with them. He wanted to leave, but he thought that the emperor treated him well. Wang Dan only realized that Li Qiye had a far-reaching foresight, and sighed: Li Wenzhong was really a saint. At that time, he called him a sage. Qo Jun and Ding Zuo were friendly, and many times they thought that Ding Zuo was talented and recommended him to Li Qiye. Li Qo Jun did not need Ding Zuo. Qo Jun asked Li Qiye, Li Qiye said: Seeing

古文：沆为相，接宾客，常寡言。
现代文：李沆任宰相，接待宾客，经常很少说话。
English: As prime minister, Li Lan received guests and often spoke very little.

古文：马亮与沆同年生，又与其弟维善，语维曰： 外议以大兄为无口匏。 维乘间达亮语，沆曰： 吾非不知也。
现代文：马亮与李沆同一年出生，又与他的弟弟李维交好，对李维说： 外面议论说你大哥是没口的瓢葫芦。 李维趁空把马亮的话告诉了哥哥。李沆说 ：我不是不知道呵。
English: Ma Liang was born in the same year as Li Yao, and was good friends with his younger brother Li Wei Rong. He said to Li Wei: There is a rumor that your older brother is a gourd without a mouth. Li Wei took the opportunity to tell his brother what Ma Liang said. Li Yao said: I don't know.

古文：然今之朝士得升殿言事，上封论奏，了无壅蔽，多下有司，皆见之矣。
现代文：然而现在的朝士得以入殿议事，皇上封爵论奏，全无阻塞蒙蔽，政令多能下达到各级部门，大家都可看见它。
English: However, today's courtier can enter the palace for deliberation, the emperor's knighthood can be discussed, there is no obstruction or obfuscation, and government orders can reach departments at all levels, and everyone can see it.

古文：若邦国大事，北有契丹，西有夏人，日旰条议所以备御之策，非不详究。
现代文：比如国家大事，北边有契丹，西边有夏人，我白天晚上逐项商议所要防备抵御的策略，我没有不详细探究的。
English: For example, national events, the Khitan in the north and the Xia people in the west, I discussed the strategies to be prepared and resisted one by one during the day and night, and I did not explore them in detail.

古文：荐绅如李宗谔、赵安仁，皆时之英秀，与之谈，犹不能启发吾意。自余通籍之子，坐起拜揖，尚周章失次，即席必自论功最，以希宠奖，此有何策而与之接语哉？
现代文：缙绅如李宗谔、赵安仁，都是当时杰出的人才，我与他们谈论，尚不能启发我的思想，其余的新进仕宦之子，他们坐、起、拜、揖，尚且乱了典章顺序等级，入席必定自论功劳最多，以希求得到宠爱奖赏，又有什么策划值得与他们接触交谈呢？
English: Senior officials such as Li Zongyao and Zhao Anren were outstanding talents at that time. When I talk to them, I still can't inspire my thoughts. The rest of the sons of the newly promoted officials, they sit, rise, worship, bow, and they have messed up the order and level of the ceremony. Attendance must be based on merit. In order to get a favorite reward, what kind of plan is worth contacting and talking with them?

古文：苟屈意妄言，即世所谓笼罩。
现代文：如果委屈自己的意愿乱说就是世人所说的像被笼子和罩子网住后随遇而安，笼罩之事，我是不愿承担的。 
English: If misrepresenting one's own will is what the world calls being ensnared, ensnared, and ensnared by a cage and a net, I am not willing to bear it.

古文：笼罩之事，仆病未能也。 沆又尝言： 居重位实无补，惟中外所陈利害，一切报罢之，此少以报国尔。
现代文：李沆又曾说 ：处在重要的职位实在没有益处，朝廷内外官员所陈述的利害，都要上报，确定是批准还是不批准，用以报答国家。
English: Li Xi also once said: "There is really no benefit to being in an important position. The interests stated by officials both inside and outside the imperial court must be reported to determine whether to approve or disapprove, and used to repay the country."

古文：朝廷防制，纤悉备具，或徇所陈请，施行一事，即所伤多矣，陆象先曰 庸人扰之 是已。
现代文：国家的防御制度，连细小的都得准备好，或者向众宣示他们的陈请，实行一件事，就要受到很多伤害。陆象先说： 庸人扰之 就是这样。
English: The country's defense system, even small ones, must be prepared, or they must announce their requests to the public, and if one thing is done, it will be a lot of harm. Lu Xiang first said: "That's how it is with meddlesome people."

古文：憸人苟一时之进，岂念厉民耶？ 沆为相，常读《论语》。或问之，沆曰： 沆为宰相，如《论语》中 节用而爱人，使民以时 ，尚未能行。
现代文：奸邪小人只图一时升官发财，哪里考虑到会虐害人民呢？ 李沆任宰相，经常读《论语》，有的人问他，李沆说 ：我任宰相，像《论语》中说的 节用而爱人 ，使民以时，尚没能执行。
English: Treacherous villains only plan to get promoted and get rich for a while, where do they consider that they will abuse and harm the people? Li Xi served as prime minister and often read "The Analects." Some people asked him, Li Xi said: I was appointed as prime minister, and like "The Analects" said, "Be frugal and love others," so that the people can live longer, but I have not yet been able to implement it.

古文：圣人之言，终身诵之可也。 
现代文：圣人的话，终身诵读它是可以的。 
English: It is possible to recite the words of a saint for a lifetime.

古文：景德元年七月，沆待漏将朝，疾作而归，诏太医诊视，抚问之使相望于道。
现代文：景德元年七月，李沆在殿廷等待上朝的时刻，疾病发作而回家，真宗诏令太医诊断病情，来安抚问候的使者相望于道。
English: In July of the first year of King Jingde's reign, when Li Lan was waiting for the emperor to arrive at the imperial court, he fell ill and returned home. Emperor Zhenzong ordered the imperial physician to diagnose his illness, and the emissaries who came to appease and greet him looked at each other.

古文：明日，驾往临问，赐白金五千两。
现代文：第二天，真宗来他家里亲临慰问，赏赐银子五千两。
English: The next day, Emperor Zhenzong came to his home in person to offer his condolences and rewarded him with 5,000 taels of silver.

古文：方还宫而沆薨，年五十八。
现代文：皇帝刚回宫而李沆就死了，终年五十八岁。
English: The emperor had just returned to the palace when Li Lan died, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：上闻之惊叹，趣驾再往，临哭之恸，谓左右曰： 沆为大臣，忠良纯厚，始终如一，岂意不享遐寿！ 言终又泣下。
现代文：真宗听说李沆死讯很震惊、叹息，急忙起驾再去李沆家，极度悲哀地痛哭，对随从说 ：李沆做大臣，忠心善良纯正厚道，自始至终都一样，怎么会想到他不享有长寿！ 
English: When the True Sect heard of Li Xi's death, they were shocked and sighed. They hurriedly drove back to Li Xi's house, wept with great sorrow, and said to their followers: Li Xi was a minister, loyal, kind, pure and virtuous, and remained the same from beginning to end. How could they think that he would not enjoy a long life!

古文：废朝五日，赠太尉、中书令，谥文靖。
现代文：真宗说完又流下了泪，停朝五天，赠李沆太尉、中书令，谥号文靖。
English: After Shinsong finished speaking, he shed tears again. He was suspended for five days, and was given the title of Li Juntaifei, the title of Chushurei, and the posthumous name of Wenjing.

古文：录其弟国子博士贽为虞部员外郎，光禄寺丞源为太子中舍，屯田员外郎、直集贤院维为户部员外郎。
现代文：朝廷录用李沆弟弟国子博士李贽任虞部员外郎，光禄寺丞李源任太子中舍、屯田员外郎，直集贤院李维任户部员外郎。
English: The imperial court hired Li Xi's younger brother, Dr. Guo Zi, Li Xi as a member of the Department of State Affairs, Li Yuan, a priest of the Guanglu Temple, as a member of the Department of Prince's Middle House, the Department of Military Affairs, and Li Wei, a member of the Department of Household Affairs, of the Institute of Confucian Scholars.

古文：子宗简为大理评事。
现代文：录用李沆之子李宗简任大理评事。
English: Li Zongjian, the son of Li Ying, was hired as a senior commentator.

古文：甥苏昂、妻兄之子朱涛并同进士出身。
现代文：录用李沆外甥苏昂、妻兄之子朱涛一起同进士出身。
English: Li Yao's nephew, Su Ang, and his brother-in-law's son, Zhu Tao, were both recruited and graduated from the same college.

古文：乾兴元年，仁宗即位，诏配享真宗庙庭。
现代文：乾兴元年，宋仁宗赵桢登皇位，诏令李沆的灵位在宋真宗的庙庭中附带享受祭祀。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianxing, Zhao Hong of the Song Ren sect ascended to the throne, and Li Hong's spiritual position in the temple garden of the Song Zhen sect was allowed to enjoy sacrifice.

古文：沆性直谅，内行修谨，言无枝叶，识大体。
现代文：李沆性格直爽诚信，家居时品行美好严谨，言谈没有琐碎的空话，识大体。
English: Li Yao has a straightforward and honest personality. When at home, his behavior is beautiful and rigorous. There are no trivial empty words in his speech, and he is well-informed.

古文：居位慎密，不求声誉，动遵条制，人莫能干以私。
现代文：任职时谨慎细致，不追求名声荣誉。行动遵守规章制度，没有人能徇私办事。
English: Be cautious and meticulous when holding office, do not pursue fame and honor, act in accordance with rules and regulations, and no one can do things for personal gain.

古文：公退，终日危坐，未尝跛倚。
现代文：李沆辞去官职，整天正襟危坐，未曾斜靠着。
English: After resigning from his official post, Li Qiye sat straight-backed all day, never leaning forward.

古文：治第封丘门内，厅事前仅容旋马。
现代文：在封丘门内建有住宅，大厅前只容许有马打转之地。
English: There is a house built inside the gate of the mound, and only a place for horses to turn around is allowed in front of the hall.

古文：或言其太隘，沆笑曰： 居第当传子孙，此为宰相厅事诚隘，为太祝、奉礼厅事已宽矣。 至于垣颓壁损，不以屑虑。
现代文：有人说这太狭窄，李沆笑说 ：这住宅要传给子孙，这里作为宰相官署大厅确实小了，作为太祝、奉礼官的大厅已经够宽了。 甚至对于墙塌壁坏，他也不介意。
English: Some people say it's too narrow, but Li Yan said with a smile, "This house is to be passed down to our children and grandchildren. Here, as the hall of the Prime Minister's Office, it's really small, but as the hall of the Great Congratulatory and Ceremonial Officials, it's wide enough. He doesn't even mind if the walls collapse.

古文：堂前药阑坏，妻戒守舍者勿葺以试沆，沆朝夕见之，经月终不言。
现代文：堂屋前的药栏坏了，其妻告诫守屋者不要修补用来试李沆，李沆早晚都看见它，经过一个月始终不说。
English: The medicine shelf in front of the hall was broken, and his wife warned the keepers not to repair it. It was used to test Li Yao. Li Yao saw it sooner or later, but after a month he never mentioned it.

古文：妻以语沆，沆曰： 岂可以此动吾一念哉！ 家人劝治居第，未尝答。
现代文：妻子把这事告诉李沆，李沆说： 怎么能因这事改变我一贯的想法！ 家人劝他好好修缮住宅，他未曾回答。
English: His wife told Li Yao about this, and Li Yao said, "How can I change my habitual thoughts because of this?" His family advised him to properly repair the house, but he did not respond.

古文：弟维因语次及之，沆曰： 身食厚禄，时有横赐，计囊装亦可以治第，但念内典以此世界为缺陷，安得圆满如意，自求称足？
现代文：他弟弟李维于是说起该事，李沆说： 我们身食朝廷厚禄，不时还有意外的赏赐，用得来的俸禄也可用以修理住宅，只要想着佛家内典认为这个世界是有缺陷的，怎么有圆满如意，各自都求得称心满足呢？
English: His younger brother, Li Wei, then spoke about the matter. Li Yao said: "We live off the generous income of the imperial court, and from time to time there are unexpected rewards. The salary we use can also be used to repair houses. As long as Buddhists think that the world is flawed, how can there be fulfillment, and each of us can seek satisfaction?

古文：今市新宅，须一年缮完，人生朝暮不可保，又岂能久居？
现代文：现在买新的住宅，须一年修缮好，人一生早晚都没法保全，又怎么能长久居住呢？
English: If you buy a new house now, it needs to be repaired within a year. You can't keep it safe all your life. How can you live in it for a long time?

古文：巢林一枝，聊自足耳，安事丰屋哉？ 
现代文：鸟在林中树枝上做个窝，姑且可满足，干嘛做这些华丽的房屋呢？ 
English: A bird can make a nest in the branches of a tree in the forest and be satisfied with it, so why make these magnificent houses?

古文：沆与诸弟友爱，尤器重维，暇日相对宴饮清言，未尝及朝政，亦未尝问家事。
现代文：李沆与几个弟弟友爱，尤其器重李维，他俩闲日相对宴饮清谈，未曾谈及朝政，也未曾问起家里的事。
English: Li Yao and several of his younger brothers loved each other, especially Li Wei, and the two of them spent their free time feasting and chatting with each other. They never talked about court politics, nor did they ask about family matters.

古文：子师锡，虞部员外郎；公谨，太子中舍。
现代文：李沆死后，有人向朝廷推荐梅询说他可用，宋真宗反对说 ：李沆曾说他不是君子。 
English: After Li Qiye's death, someone recommended to the imperial court that Mei Xuan say that he was available, but Song Zhenzong objected, saying: Li Qiye once said that he was not a gentleman.

古文：王旦，字子明，大名莘人。
现代文：李沆被真宗信任倚重达如此程度。王旦字子明，大名府莘县人。
English: Li Jie was trusted by the True Religion to such an extent. Wang Tan Zi Ming, a daimyo from Jixian County.

古文：曾祖言，黎阳令。
现代文：曾祖王言，黎阳县令。
English: Zeng Zu Wangyan, Liyang County Governor.

古文：祖彻，左拾遗。
现代文：祖父王彻，左拾遗。
English: His grandfather, Wang Che, is on the left.

古文：父祐，尚书兵部侍郎，以文章显于汉、周之际，事太祖、太宗为名臣。
现代文：父亲王，尚书兵部侍郎，以文章显名于后汉、后周之际，事奉太祖、太宗为名臣。
English: Wang's father, Shang Shuxu, a waiter of the military department, was famous for his articles in the late Han Dynasty and the late Zhou Dynasty, and served the great-grandfather and the great-grandfather as a famous minister.

古文：尝谕杜重威使无反汉，拒卢多逊害赵普之谋，以百口明符彦卿无罪，世多称其阴德。
现代文：曾晓谕杜重威使其不反叛后汉，拒绝卢多逊杀害赵普的谋划，极力辨明符彦卿无罪，世人多称道他的阴德。
English: Du Chongwei had told him not to rebel against the Han Dynasty, to reject Ludosun's plan to kill Zhao Pu, and to try his best to clear Fu Yanqing. The world praised his virtue.

古文：祐手植三槐于庭，曰： 吾之后世，必有为三公者，此其所以志也。 
现代文：王亲手在庭院种植三棵槐树，说： 我的后代，必定有做三公大官的人，这是用来纪念的。 
English: The king himself planted three eucalyptus trees in the courtyard, saying: My descendants will certainly have people who will be the three great officials. This is for commemoration.

古文：旦幼沉默，好学有文，祐器之曰： 此儿当至公相。 太平兴国五年，进士及第，为大理评事、知平江县。
现代文：王旦小时候沉默寡言，好学有文才，王器重他说 ：这个孩子当至王公宰相的职位。 太平兴国五年，王旦进士及第，任大理评事、平江县知县。
English: When Wang Dan was a child, he was taciturn, eager to learn and talented in literature. Wang Ji Rong respected him and said, "This child should be appointed to the position of Wang Gong's prime minister." In the fifth year of Taiping's rise to power, Wang Dan was promoted to the first rank of scholar and critic, and appointed to the position of Pingjiang County intellectual.

古文：其廨旧传有物怪凭戾，居多不宁。旦将至前夕，守吏闻群鬼啸呼云： 相君至矣，当避去。 自是遂绝。
现代文：平江县官舍旧传有怪物占据暴戾，居住多不安宁，王旦到任前夕，看守的吏员听见群鬼啸呼说： 宰相君到了，应逃避而去。 从此怪遂绝迹。
English: The old official residence in Pingjiang County was rumored to be haunted by a monster. On the eve of Wang Dan's arrival, the official guarding the residence heard a group of ghosts screaming, "The prime minister has arrived, you should run away." Since then, the monster has vanished.

古文：就改将作监丞。
现代文：就地改任将作监丞。
English: He will be reassigned to the post of superintendent.

古文：赵昌言为转运使，以威望自任，属吏屏畏，入旦境，称其善政，以女妻之。
现代文：赵昌言为转运使，以威望按自己的意志行事，下属官吏退避害怕，但进入王旦管辖的境地，称赞他的善政，把女儿嫁给他。
English: Zhao Changyan, as a transfer envoy, used his prestige to act according to his own will. Subordinate officials shied away and were afraid, but entered the situation under Wang Dan's jurisdiction, praised his good governance, and married his daughter to him.

古文：代还，命监潭州银场。
现代文：更替回朝，命令他监潭州银场。
English: He was sent back to the imperial court and ordered to supervise the silver mine in Tamzhou.

古文：何承矩典郡，荐入为著作佐郎，预编《文苑英华》、《诗类》。
现代文：何承矩典掌潭州，推荐王旦入朝为著作佐郎，参与编修《文苑英华？诗类》。
English: He Chengmao, a scholar of Tanzhou, recommended Wang Dan to the imperial court as the author of "Saro" and participated in the editing of "Wen Yuan Yinghua? Poetry."

古文：迁殿中丞、通判郑州。
现代文：升任殿中丞、郑州通判。
English: He was promoted to the post of court middle-ranked official and Zhengzhou magistrate.

古文：表请天下建常平仓，以塞兼并之路。
现代文：上表请求朝廷建立天下常平仓，以堵塞兼并的路径。
English: The above table requests the Imperial Court to establish the world's permanent closing position to block the path of annexation.

古文：徙濠州。
现代文：移任濠州。
English: Transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：淳化初，王禹偁荐其才任转运使，驿召至京，旦不乐吏职，献文。召试，命直史馆。
现代文：淳化初年，王禹翶推荐他的才能，任转运使。通过驿站被召到京城，王旦不喜欢吏员的职务，进献文章召试，被任命为直史馆。
English: In the first year of Chunhua, Wang Ufan recommended his talent and appointed him as a transfer envoy. He was called to Beijing through the railway station. Wang Dan did not like the duties of the clerk, submitted an article to the examination, and was appointed as a direct history museum.

古文：二年，拜右正言、知制诰。
现代文：淳化二年，被授任右正言、知制诰。
English: In the second year of the Chunhua era, he was appointed to the posts of Ujishogen and Chishojo.

古文：初，祐以宿名久掌书命，旦不十年继其任，时论美之。
现代文：开始，王以重名长久主掌制书诏命，王旦不到十年继承他的职位，时论称美。
English: At the beginning, Wang Du Rong was in charge of the imperial edict for a long time, and Wang Dan inherited his position in less than ten years, which was praised by critics.

古文：钱若水有人伦鉴，见旦曰： 真宰相器也。 与之同列，每曰： 王君凌霄耸壑，栋梁之材，贵不可涯，非吾所及。 李沆以同年生，亦推重为远大之器。
现代文：钱若水有识别各类人的能力，见到王旦说 ：这真是宰相的料子。 与王旦同事，每每说： 王君凌霄耸壑，是栋梁之材，显贵不可限量，不是我所能赶得上的。 李沆以同举进士同学的身份，也推重王旦为远大之器。
English: Qian Ruoshui had the ability to recognize all kinds of people, and when he saw Wang Dan, he said, "This is really prime minister material." With Wang Dan's colleagues, he always said, "Wang Jun is a towering figure, he is a pillar of strength, he is immeasurably distinguished, and I can't catch up with him." Li Wei, as a fellow student, also emphasized Wang Dan as a great instrument.

古文：明年，与苏易简同知贡举，加虞部员外郎、同判吏部流内铨、知考课院。
现代文：第二年，王旦与苏易简同知贡举，加官虞部员外郎、同判吏部流内铨、知考课院。
English: In the second year, Wang Dan and Su Yi Jian were awarded the honorary title of Zhigong, and were promoted to the posts of the vice-minister, the vice-minister, the vice-minister, the vice-minister, the vice-minister, the vice-minister, and the vice-minister.

古文：赵昌言参机务，旦避嫌，引唐独孤郁、权德舆故事辞职。
现代文：赵昌言参预朝廷的重要事务，王旦避嫌，引用唐代独孤郁、权德舆原有的成例辞职。
English: Zhao Changyan participated in the important affairs of the pre-imperial court, Wang Dan avoided criticism, and resigned citing the original precedent of the Tang Dynasty's isolationism and authoritarianism.

古文：太宗嘉其识体，改礼部郎中、集贤殿修撰。
现代文：太宗称赞他识大体，改任礼部郎中、集贤殿修撰。
English: Taizong praised him for his general knowledge, and he was reassigned to be a junior member of the etiquette department and a scribe at the Jixian Palace.

古文：昌言出知凤翔，即日以旦知制诰，仍兼修撰、判院事，面赐金紫，择牯犀带宠之，又令冠西阁。
现代文：赵昌言出任凤翔知府，当天以王旦任知制诰，仍兼任修撰、判院事，当面赐予金紫，挑选牯犀带以示宠爱他，又令王旦位居西阁第一。
English: Zhao Changyan served as Fengxiang's chifu, and on the same day, he appointed Wang Dan as his chifu, and still concurrently served as a reviewer and judge, and gave him gold and purple in person, selected a rhinoceros ribbon to show his favor, and placed Wang Dan in the first place in the West Pavilion.

古文：至道元年，知理检院。
现代文：至道元年，知理检院。
English: In the first year of the Dao, the Zhili Procuratorate was established.

古文：二年，进兵部郎中。
现代文：二年，升任兵部郎中。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Hyobu roju.

古文：真宗即位，拜中书舍人，数月，为翰林学士兼知审官院、通进银台封驳司。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位，被授任中书舍人，几个月后，为翰林学士兼知审官院、通进银台封驳司。
English: Jinsong, that is, the emperor, was awarded the title of the book keeper of the Middle Kingdom, and a few months later, he was awarded the title of the scholar of Hanlin, the scholar of the court of knowledge, and the scholar of the seal of the Yintai Dynasty.

古文：帝素贤旦，尝奏事退，目送之曰： 为朕致太平者，必斯人也。 钱若水罢枢务，得对苑中，访近臣之可用者，若水言： 旦有德望，堪任大事。 帝曰： 此固朕心所属也。 咸平三年，又知贡举，锁宿旬日，拜给事中、同知枢密院事。
现代文：真宗素来认为王旦贤能，王旦曾奏事后退下，真宗目送他说： 替朕导致太平的人，必定是此人。 钱若水被免除枢密院职务，得以在苑中召对，真宗询问大臣中可以任用的人，钱若水说： 王旦有德行威望，能够胜任大事。 真宗说 ：这本来是朕心里所属的人。 咸平三年，王旦又任知贡举，被锁宿十天，授任给事中、同知枢密院事。
English: Shinshong had always considered Wang Dan to be a man of virtue. Wang Dan had resigned after an incident, and Shinshong sent him a message saying, "The person who will bring about peace for me must be this person." Qian Ruoshui was relieved of his duties in the Privy Council and was able to summon him in the courtyard. Shinshong asked who among the ministers could be appointed, and Qian Ruoshui said, "Wang Dan has the prestige of virtue and is capable of handling important matters." Shinshong said, "This is a person who originally belonged to my heart." In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianping, Wang Dan was also

古文：逾年，以工部侍郎参知政事。
现代文：过了一年，以工部侍郎的身份任参知政事。
English: A year later, he was appointed as a member of the Council of State in the capacity of a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：契丹犯边，从幸澶州。
现代文：契丹侵犯边境，王旦随从真宗到澶州。
English: When Khitan invaded the border, Wang Dan followed Shenzong to Zhangzhou.

古文：雍王元份留守东京，遇暴疾，命旦驰还，权留守事。
现代文：雍王赵元份留守东京，遭逢急病，命令王旦急速返回，代理留守事。
English: The Yong Wang, Zhao Yuanfen, was away in Tokyo and suffered a sudden illness. Wang Dan was ordered to return quickly and act as his deputy.

古文：旦曰： 愿宣寇准，臣有所陈。 准至，旦奏曰： 十日之间未有捷报，时当如何？ 帝默然良久，曰： 立皇太子。 旦既至京，直入禁中，下令甚严，使人不得传播。
现代文：王旦说： 希望宣召寇准，我有所陈述。 寇准到，王旦奏请说： 十天之间没有捷报时，应怎么办？ 真宗沉默了很久后说 ：立皇太子。 王旦既到达京城，径直进入禁中，下命令很严格，使人不得传播消息。
English: Wang Dan said, "I have something to report, I hope to summon Qozun." When Qozun arrived, Wang Dan asked, "If there is no good news within ten days, what should we do?" After a long silence, Shingzong said, "Appoint a crown prince." Once Wang Dan arrived in Beijing, he went straight to the Forbidden City, and the order was very strict, people were not allowed to spread the news.

古文：及驾还，旦子弟及家人皆迎于郊，忽闻后有驺诃声，惊视之，乃旦也。
现代文：等到真宗返回，王旦的子弟及家人都在郊外迎接，忽然听见后面有骑士的呵斥声，惊异一看，是王旦。
English: Waiting for Zhenzong to return, Wang Dan's children and family were all in the suburbs to welcome him. Suddenly, they heard the roar of a knight behind them. To their surprise, it was Wang Dan.

古文：二年，加尚书左丞。
现代文：景德二年，王旦被加官尚书左丞。
English: In the second year of King Jingde's reign, Wang Dan was promoted to Shang Shuzhanzhong.

古文：三年，拜工部尚书、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士、监修《两朝国史》。
现代文：三年，拜工部尚书、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士、监修《两朝国史》。
English: In three years, he was awarded the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Shimohei Shoshoji of the Middle School of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Shixianden University Scholar, and supervised the "History of the Two Dynasties."

古文：契丹既受盟，寇准以为功，有自得之色，真宗亦自得也。
现代文：契丹既已接受盟约，寇准以此为功劳，有自得之色，真宗也自为得意。
English: Since Khitan had already accepted the covenant, Kojun took this as a merit, and was pleased with himself, and the True Sect was also pleased with itself.

古文：王钦若忌准，欲倾之，从容言曰： 此《春秋》城下之盟也，诸侯犹耻之，而陛下以为功，臣窃不取。 帝愀然曰： 为之奈何？ 钦若度帝厌兵，即谬曰： 陛下以兵取幽燕，乃可涤耻。 帝曰： 河朔生灵始免兵革，朕安能为此？
现代文：王钦若憎恨寇准，想要搞倒他，从容不迫地说 ：这是《春秋》城下之盟，诸侯还以之为耻辱，而陛下认为是功劳，我私下认为不可取。 
English: If Wang Qin hated Qojun and wanted to overthrow him, he would calmly say: This is the alliance under the castle of "Spring and Autumn," the lords also regard it as a disgrace, while His Majesty considers it a merit, I privately consider it undesirable.

古文：可思其次。 钦若曰： 唯有封禅泰山，可以镇服四海，夸示外国。
现代文：真宗凄怆地说： 有什么办法呢？ 王钦若估计真宗厌倦打仗，就诡言道 ：陛下以军队攻取幽燕之地，才可洗去耻辱。 
English: If Wang Qin thought that Genzong was tired of fighting, he would say deceitfully, "Your Majesty can only wash away the shame of conquering the land of Yuyan with an army."

古文：会幸秘阁，骤问杜镐曰： 古所谓河出图、洛出书，果何事耶？ 镐老儒，不测其旨，漫应之曰： 此圣人以神道设教尔。 帝由此意决，遂召旦饮，欢甚，赐以尊酒，曰： 此酒极佳，归与妻孥共之。 既归发之，皆珠也。
现代文：恰逢临幸秘阁，突然问杜镐说： 古代所谓河出图、洛出书，果真是什么事呢？ 杜镐是老儒，不能推测皇帝的旨意，随意应付说 ：这是圣人以神道设教而已。 真宗由此心意断决，于是召王旦饮酒，非常高兴，把尊酒赐给王旦，说： 这酒极佳，回去与妻子家人共同享用。 等回家后打开，都是珠宝。
English: It happened to coincide with the Linhong Secret Cabinet, and suddenly Du Juan asked, "What really happened to the ancient so-called Houtu map and Luo Duan book?" Du Juan was an old man, unable to guess the emperor's will, and freely replied, "This is just a saint teaching Shintoism." From this, Shinsong made up his mind, so he invited Wang Dan to drink, and was very happy. He gave the precious wine to Wang Dan, saying, "This wine is excellent, go back and enjoy it with your wife and family. When you open it when you get home, it's all jewelry."

古文：由是凡天书、封禅等事，旦不复异议。
现代文：由于这样凡是天书、封禅等事，王旦不再有异议。
English: Because of this, Wang Dan no longer had any objections to the heavenly book, the seal of Zen, and other things.

古文：大中祥符初，为天书仪仗使，从封泰山，为大礼使，进中书侍郎兼刑部尚书。
现代文：大中祥符初年，王旦为天书仪仗使，随从真宗封禅泰山，任大礼使，升中书侍郎、刑部尚书。
English: In the first year of his junior high school, Wang Dan was appointed as the messenger of the heavenly book, followed the Shinshu Fuzan Taishan, was appointed as the grand messenger, was promoted to the junior high school secretary, and was appointed to the criminal investigation department.

古文：受诏撰《封祀坛颂》，加兵部尚书。
现代文：奉诏命撰写《封禅坛颂》，加官兵部尚书。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to write the "Song of the Enclosed Zen Altar," which was added to the official records of the military department.

古文：四年，祀汾阴，又为大礼使，迁右仆射、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：大中祥符四年，祭祀汾阴，王旦又为大礼使，升任右仆射、昭文馆大学士。
English: In the fourth year of college and junior high school, Wang Dan, who was also a grand envoy, was promoted to right-hand man and scholar of the Shobunkwan University.

古文：仍撰《祠坛颂》，将复进秩，恳辞得免，止加功臣。
现代文：又撰写《祠坛颂》，将再次进升官秩，王旦恳切辞谢得免，只加封功臣。
English: He also wrote "Ode to the Ancestor's Shrine," and will be promoted to the official rank again. Wang Dan earnestly resigned and was pardoned, and was only awarded the title of meritorious subject.

古文：俄兼门下侍郎、玉清昭应宫使。
现代文：不久兼任门下侍郎、玉清昭应宫使。
English: Soon, he also served as a chamberlain to his pupil, Tamakiyo Akira, as an envoy to the court.

古文：五年，为玉清奉圣像大礼使。
现代文：五年，为玉清奉圣像大礼使。
English: For five years, he served as an envoy to the Jade Emperor.

古文：景灵宫建，又为朝修使。
现代文：景灵宫建造，又为朝修使。
English: The Jingling Palace was built, and it was also used as a place for morning prayers.

古文：七年，刻天书，兼刻玉使，选御厩三马赐之。
现代文：七年，雕刻天书，王旦兼刻玉使，挑选皇帝马栏中的三匹马赐给他。
English: In the seventh year, Wang Dan, the sculptor of the Book of Heaven and the envoy of the Jade Emperor, selected three horses from the emperor's stables and gave them to him.

古文：玉清昭应宫成，拜司空。
现代文：玉清昭应宫建成，授任司空。
English: In response to the completion of the palace, Tamakiyo Akira was given the post of Jikku.

古文：京师赐酺，旦以惨恤不赴会，帝赐诗导意焉。《国史》成，迁司空。
现代文：京师举行皇帝特许的大聚会，王旦悲伤忧虑没有赴会，真宗赐给诗开导他的心意。《国史》修成，升司空。
English: Beijing held a grand gathering specially approved by the emperor, Wang Dan did not attend the meeting out of sorrow and worry, and Shinshu gave him the heart to teach poetry. "National History" was completed and promoted to the sky.

古文：旦为天书使，每有大礼，辄奉天书以行，恒邑邑不乐。
现代文：王旦为天书使，每有大礼，就奉天书以行事，常常悒悒不乐。
English: Wang Dan is a messenger from heaven. Whenever there is a grand ceremony, he acts according to the heavenly book and is often unhappy.

古文：凡柄用十八年，为相仅一纪。
现代文：为皇帝信任而掌握大权共十八年，为宰相仅十二年。
English: He held power for a total of eighteen years because of the emperor's trust, but only twelve years as prime minister.

古文：会契丹修和，西夏誓守故地，二边兵罢不用，真宗以无事治天下。
现代文：适逢契丹倡和，西夏发誓驻守故地，二边军队被解除不用，真宗以无事治理天下。
English: When Khitan initiated peace, Western Xia swore to stay at home, the two-sided army was disbanded, and Shinsong ruled the world with nothing.

古文：旦谓祖宗之法具在，务行故事，慎所变改。
现代文：王旦认为祖宗的法制都在，务必实行原有的成例，谨慎地有所改变。
English: Wang Dan believes that the legal system of the ancestors are all gone, and it is imperative to implement the original precedent and cautiously change it.

古文：帝久益信之，言无不听，凡大臣有所请，必曰： 王旦以为如何？ 旦与人寡言笑，默坐终日，及奏事，群臣异同，旦徐一言以定。
现代文：真宗更加信任他，言无不听，凡是大臣有所请求，必定说： 王旦认为怎么样？ 王旦与人交往很少言笑，终日默坐，等到奏议事情，群臣意见不一，王旦缓缓地说一句话来决定。
English: Zhenzong trusted him more and listened to his every word. Whenever a minister had a request, he would say, "What do you think of Wang Dan?" Wang Dan rarely talked or laughed with people. He would sit in silence all day. When things were being discussed and the ministers had different opinions, Wang Dan would slowly say a sentence to decide.

古文：归家，或不去冠带，入静室独坐，家人莫敢见之。
现代文：回到家里有时不脱下帽子腰带，进入静室独坐，家人没人敢见他。
English: When he returns home, he sometimes doesn't take off his hat and belt and sits alone in the quiet room. No one in his family dares to see him.

古文：旦弟以问赵安仁，安仁曰： 方议事，公不欲行而未决，此必忧朝廷矣。 
现代文：王旦的弟弟因问赵安仁，赵安仁说： 刚刚议论国事，王公不打算实行而没有决定，这必定是忧虑朝廷了。 
English: When Wang Dan's younger brother asked Zhao Anren about this, Zhao Anren said, "We have just discussed state affairs, and the prince has not yet decided whether or not to implement it. This must be a cause for concern for the imperial court."

古文：帝尝示二府《喜雨诗》，旦袖归曰： 上诗有一字误写，莫进入改却否？ 王钦若曰： 此亦无害。 而密奏之。
现代文：真宗曾经出示枢密院、中书门下二府以御作《喜雨诗》，王旦纳入袖内回去说 ：皇帝的诗有一字误写，不知是不是进献时更改了？ 王钦若说 ：这也没有害处。 但秘密上奏此事。
English: The True Sect once presented the Privy Council and the two governments under the auspices of the Chinese Academy of Letters with its own "Singing Rain Poem," and Wang Dan put it in his sleeve and went back and said, "The emperor's poem has a misspelled word, I wonder if it was changed when it was presented?" Wang Qin said, "There is no harm in that," but secretly reported the matter.

古文：帝愠，谓旦曰： 昨日诗有误字，何不来奏？ 旦曰： 臣得诗未暇再阅，有失上陈。 惶惧再拜谢，诸臣皆拜，独枢密马知节不拜，具以实奏，且曰： 王旦略不辨，真宰相器也。 帝顾旦而笑焉。
现代文：真宗不高兴，对王旦说 ：昨天诗有误字，为什么不来上奏？ 王旦说： 我得到诗没有时间再阅，有失上陈。 惶恐再次跪拜谢罪，众臣都跪拜，只有枢密使马知节不跪拜，按实际情况全部上奏，并且说： 王旦疏略不辨明错误，真是宰相之才。 真宗看看王旦而笑。
English: Wang Dan said: I got the poem and didn't have time to re-read it, I lost it. Panicked, I knelt down again to thank him, and all the ministers knelt down. Only the Privy Councilor didn't kneel down on the day of the Magi Festival, but played it all according to the actual situation, and said: Wang Dan is really a prime minister's talent because he doesn't make mistakes and doesn't recognize mistakes. Wang Dang looked at Wang Dan and smiled.

古文：天下大蝗，使人于野得死蝗，帝以示大臣。
现代文：天下发生大蝗灾，派人在荒野得到死蝗虫，皇帝把它给大臣看。
English: When a great plague of locusts swept the land, the emperor sent someone out into the wilderness to collect the dead locusts and show them to his ministers.

古文：明日，执政遂袖死蝗进曰： 蝗实死矣，请示于朝，率百官贺。 旦独不可。
现代文：第二天，执政大臣就把死蝗纳入袖内进献说 ：蝗虫实实在在死了，请示于朝廷，率领百官庆贺。 王旦惟独不同意。
English: The next day, the ruling minister presented the dead locust in his sleeve and said, "The locust is really dead, please inform the imperial court and lead hundreds of officials to celebrate." Wang Dan only disagreed.

古文：后数日，方奏事，飞蝗蔽天，帝顾旦曰： 使百官方贺，而蝗如此，岂不为天下笑耶？ 
现代文：几天后正奏事，飞蝗遮蔽天空，真宗看着王旦说 ：假使百官刚刚庆贺，而蝗灾如此，岂不被天下笑话吗？ 
English: A few days later, when the news was being reported and the flying locusts were covering the sky, Zhenzong looked at Wang Dan and said: If the officials had just celebrated and the locusts were so bad, wouldn't the whole world laugh at them?

古文：宫禁火灾，旦驰入。
现代文：宫中发生火灾，王旦急忙进入。
English: When a fire broke out in the palace, Wang Dan rushed in.

古文：帝曰： 两朝所积，朕不妄费，一朝殆尽，诚可惜也。 旦对曰： 陛下富有天下，财帛不足忧，所虑者政令赏罚之不当。
现代文：真宗说 ：这里两朝积累下来的，朕不妄加花费，一朝之间将尽，确实可惜。 王旦回答说 ：陛下富有天下，财物丝帛不足忧虑，所忧虑的是政令赏罚的不适当。
English: Zhenzong said, "I don't want to spend too much money on what has been accumulated by the two dynasties, and it's really a pity that it will all be used up between the two dynasties." Wang Dan replied, "Your Majesty is very rich, and you are worried about the lack of wealth, but what you are worried about is that the reward and punishment decreed by the government is not appropriate."

古文：臣备位宰府，天灾如此，臣当罢免。 继上表待罪，帝乃降诏罪己，许中外封事言得失。
现代文：我备位宰相府，天灾如此，我应该罢免职务。 接着上奏表待罪，真宗于是降下诏书罪责自己，允许中外奏事谈论利弊得失。
English: I prepared the prime minister's office, and the natural disaster was such that I should be removed from office. Next, I submitted a report to be punished, and the True Sect then issued an edict to blame itself, allowing Chinese and foreign reporters to talk about the pros and cons.

古文：后有言荣王宫火所延，非天灾，请置狱劾，当坐死者百余人。
现代文：后来有人说是荣王宫的火所蔓延，不是天灾，请求设置狱案弹劾，应牵连而死的一百多人。
English: Later, some people said that the fire in the Rongwang Palace was caused by the spread of fire, not a natural disaster, and requested that a prison case be set up to impeach, and more than a hundred people should be implicated and die.

古文：旦独请曰： 始火时，陛下已罪己诏天下，臣等皆上章待罪。
现代文：王旦独自请求说 ：开始发生火灾时，陛下已经责怪自己诏令天下，我们都上奏章待罪。
English: Wang Dan pleaded alone, saying, "When the fire broke out, Your Majesty already blamed yourself and issued an edict to the world, and we are all on the record awaiting punishment."

古文：今反归咎于人，何以示信？
现代文：现在反而归咎于人，怎么能表示信用？ 
English: Now, instead, they are blaming others. How can they show trust?

古文：且火虽有迹，宁知非天谴耶？ 当坐者皆免。日者上书言宫禁事，坐诛。
现代文：应牵连而死的人都得免。占候占筮的人上书谈论皇宫中的事情，被杀。
English: Those who should have been implicated and died were spared. Those who were waiting for someone to write a letter to talk about things in the palace were killed.

古文：籍其家，得朝士所与往还占问吉凶之说。
现代文：抄他的家时，得到朝廷士人所与他往来占问吉凶的书信。
English: When they searched his house, they found letters from courtiers asking about his fortunes.

古文：帝怒，欲付御史问状。旦曰： 此人之常情，且语不及朝廷，不足罪。 真宗怒不解，旦因自取尝所占问之书进曰： 臣少贱时，不免为此。必以为罪，愿并臣付狱。 真宗曰： 此事已发，何可免？ 旦曰： 臣为宰相执国法，岂可自为之，幸于不发而以罪人。 帝意解。
现代文：王旦说 ：我身为宰相执行国家的法令，怎么可以自己为之，侥幸于没有被揭露而以罪人。 
English: Wang Dan said: As the prime minister, I implement the laws of the country, how can I do it myself, fortunately without being exposed as a criminal.

古文：旦至中书，悉焚所得书。
现代文：真宗的心意消释。王旦到中书省，全部焚烧所得的书信。
English: Wang Dan went to the Chinese Ministry of Literature and burned all the letters he received.

古文：既而复悔，驰取之，而已焚之矣。
现代文：不久又后悔，急忙去取，但已经焚烧了。
English: He soon regretted it and hurried to retrieve it, but it had already been burned.

古文：由是皆免。
现代文：由于这样都得以免罪。
English: As a result, they were all acquitted.

古文：仁宗为皇太子，太子谕德见旦，称太子学书有法。
现代文：仁宗为皇太子，太子谕德见到王旦，称赞太子学习书法有章法。
English: Ninsong is the crown prince, and the prince asked Wang Dan to meet him, and praised the prince for learning calligraphy.

古文：契丹得之，大惭。
现代文：契丹得到谕旨，大为惭愧。
English: When Khitan received the order, he was very ashamed.

古文：次年，复下有司： 契丹所借金币六万，事属微末，今仍依常数与之，后不为比。 西夏赵德明言民饥，求粮百万斛。
现代文：第二年，又下令有关官府： 契丹所借金币六万，事属微末，现仍然依照常数给予他，后不为例。 西夏赵德明说百姓饥荒，求取粮食一百万斛。
English: In the second year, he also ordered the relevant government offices: The 60,000 gold coins borrowed by Khitan were insignificant, and they are still being given to him in accordance with the constant number, and will not be taken as an example. Western Xia Zhao Deming said that the people were starving and asked for one million baht of grain.

古文：大臣皆曰： 德明新纳誓而敢违，请以诏责之。 帝以问旦，旦请敕有司具粟百万于京师，而诏德明来取之。
现代文：大臣们都说 ：赵德明刚刚缔结盟约而敢于违背，请以诏书责斥他。 真宗因而询问王旦，王旦请求敕令官吏备办粟米一百万斛于京师，而诏令赵德明来领取。
English: The ministers all said: Zhao Deming just signed an alliance agreement and dared to renege, please reprimand him with an edict. Shinshong therefore asked Wang Dan, Wang Dan requested that officials prepare one million bags of corn in Beijing, and ordered Zhao Deming to collect it.

古文：德明得诏，惭且拜曰： 朝廷有人。 
现代文：赵德明得到诏书，惭愧而且拜谢说 ：朝廷有人才。 
English: When Zhao Deming received the imperial edict, he was ashamed and thanked God, saying, "The imperial court has talent."

古文：寇准数短旦，旦专称准。
现代文：寇准几次说王旦的短处，王旦专门称赞寇准。
English: Kojun mentioned Wang Dan's shortcomings several times, and Wang Dan specifically praised Kojun.

古文：帝谓旦曰： 卿虽称其美，彼专谈卿恶。 旦曰： 理固当然。
现代文：真宗对王旦说 ：你虽然称赞他的优点，他专门谈你的缺点。 王旦说： 论理本来是这样。
English: Shinsong said to Wang Dan, "Although you praised his merits, he only talked about your shortcomings." Wang Dan said, "This is the way it should be.

古文：臣在相位久，政事阙失必多。
现代文：我在宰相的职位上时间长，政事阙失必定多。
English: I have been in the position of prime minister for a long time, and there are bound to be more political missteps.

古文：准对陛下无所隐，益见其忠直，此臣所以重准也。 帝以是愈贤旦。
现代文：寇准对陛下无所隐瞒，更加见其忠心正直，这是我之所以看重寇准的原因。 
English: This is the reason why I value Kojun. He has nothing to hide from His Majesty, and his loyalty and honesty are even more apparent.

古文：中书有事送密院，违诏格，准在密院，以事上闻。
现代文：真宗因此更加认为王旦有德行。中书省有事送往枢密院，违反诏书式样，寇准在枢密院，把事情报告真宗。
English: As a result, the True Sect believed Wang Dan to be more virtuous. When the Chinese Ministry of Letters sent a matter to the Privy Council, in violation of the Imperial Rescript style, Kojun was in the Privy Council and reported the matter to the True Sect.

古文：旦被责，第拜谢，堂吏皆见罚。
现代文：王旦被责斥，只拜谢，朝堂官吏都被处罚。
English: Wang Dan was reprimanded, only thanked, and the court officials were all punished.

古文：不逾月，密院有事送中书，亦违诏格，堂吏欣然呈旦，旦令送还密院。
现代文：没过一个月，枢密院有事送往中书省，也违反诏书式样，朝堂官吏兴奋地呈给王旦，王旦命令送回枢密院。
English: Less than a month later, the Privy Council sent a matter to the Chinese Ministry of Literature, also in violation of the imperial edict style, the court officials excitedly presented it to Wang Dan, and Wang Dan ordered it to be returned to the Privy Council.

古文：准大惭，见旦曰： 同年，甚得许大度量？ 旦不答。
现代文：寇准很惭愧，见王旦说： 我们同科考中，你怎么得到如此大的度量？ 王旦没有应答。
English: Kou Jun was very ashamed to see Wang Dan saying, "How did you get such a high grade in our science exam?" Wang Dan did not answer.

古文：寇准罢枢密使，托人私求为使相，旦惊曰： 将相之任，岂可求耶！
现代文：寇准被免除枢密使，托人私下求做使相，王旦惊异地说： 将相的任命，怎么强以求取呢！
English: When Kojun was exempted from being a privy envoy, he had someone secretly ask him to be an envoy. Wang Dan said in surprise, "How can you force someone to be an envoy?

古文：吾不受私请。 准深憾之。
现代文：我不接受私人请托。 寇准很是怀憾。
English: I don't accept personal requests, and I'm very sorry to have let Kojun go.

古文：已而除准武胜军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：不久任命寇准为武胜军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the victorious army, and he was awarded the title of Pingzhang.

古文：准入见，谢曰： 非陛下知臣，安能至此？ 帝具道旦所以荐者。准愧叹，以为不可及。准在藩镇，生辰，造山棚大宴，又服用僣侈，为人所奏。
现代文：寇准惭愧感叹，认为自己赶不上王旦。寇准在要郡任职，生日那天，建造山棚大宴，又服饰用度僭越奢侈，被他人所告。真宗生气，对王旦说： 寇准每件事都想要仿效朕，行吗？ 
English: Kou Jun sighed with shame, thinking that he could not catch up with Wang Dan. On the day of his birthday, when Kou Jun was in charge of the county, he was accused by others of building a mountain hut banquet, and of being extravagant in the use of clothing. Really angry, he said to Wang Dan: "Kou Jun wants to imitate me in everything, okay?

古文：帝怒，谓旦曰： 寇准每事欲效朕，可乎？ 旦徐对曰： 准诚贤能，无如騃何。 真宗意遂解，曰： 然，此正是騃尔。 遂不问。
现代文：王旦缓缓地回答说 ：寇准确实贤能，对他的呆有什么办法。 真宗心意于是消释，说： 对，这正是呆而已。 于是不过问此事。
English: Wang Dan slowly replied, "Kozhun is indeed a wise man, what can be done about his stupidity?" and Shingzong's heart softened and he said, "Yes, this is just stupidity." So he did not ignore the matter.

古文：翰林学士陈彭年呈政府科场条目，旦投之地曰： 内翰得官几日，乃欲隔截天下进士耶？ 彭年皇恐而退。
现代文：翰林学士陈彭年呈给政府科场条目，王旦把它丢到地上说： 内翰得官几天，就想要隔断截留天下进士吗？ 陈彭年惶恐而退。
English: Chen Pengnian, an academician of Hanlin, submitted an entry to the government science field, Wang Dan threw it to the ground and said: If Neihan becomes an official for a few days, do you want to cut off the world's progress? Chen Pengnian panicked and withdrew.

古文：时向敏中同在中书，出彭年所留文字，旦瞑目取纸封之。
现代文：当时向敏中同时在中书省，拿出陈彭年所留下的文字，王旦闭上眼睛取纸封住。
English: At that time, Xiang Minzhong, who was also in the Chinese Book Ministry, took out the text left by Chen Pengnian, Wang Dan closed his eyes to take out the paper and seal it.

古文：敏中请一览，旦曰： 不过兴建符瑞图进尔。 后彭年与王曾、张知白参预政事，同谓旦曰： 每奏事，其间有不经上览者，公批旨奉行，恐人言之以为不可。 旦逊谢而已。
现代文：向敏中请求一看，王旦说 ：不过是兴建符瑞图进献罢了。 后来陈彭年与王曾、张知白参预政事，一同对王旦说 ：每次奏事，其中有不经过皇帝阅览的，您批旨奉行，恐怕人言认为不可以。 王旦辞谢而已。
English: Afterward, Chen Pengnian, together with Wang Zeng and Zhang Zhibai, who were involved in pre-political affairs, said to Wang Dan, "Every time you submit a report, including those that have not been read by the emperor, I am afraid that people will think it is not possible to follow your approval.

古文：一日奏对，旦退，曾等稍留，帝惊曰： 有何事不与王旦来？ 皆以前事对。
现代文：一天奏对，王旦退出，王曾等人稍留，真宗惊奇地说 ：有什么事不与王旦一起来？ 都以前事应对。
English: On the day of the match, Wang Dan withdrew, Wang Zeng and others stayed for a while, and Zhen Zong said in surprise, "What's the matter with not coming with Wang Dan?

古文：帝曰： 旦在朕左右多年，朕察之无毫发私。
现代文：真宗说 ：王旦在朕左右多年，朕考察他没有丝毫的私心。
English: Shenzong said, "Wang Dan has been around me for many years, and I have found him to be completely selfless.

古文：自东封后，朕谕以小事一面奉行，卿等谨奉之。 曾等退而愧谢，旦曰： 正赖诸公规益。 略不介意。
现代文：自从东去封禅后，朕谕示他小事情独自奉行，你等恭谨奉之。 王曾等人退出后愧谢，王旦说： 正是依仗诸公规益。 毫不介意。
English: After Wang Zeng and the others withdrew, Wang Dan said, "It is in accordance with all the rules and regulations. I don't mind at all."

古文：帝欲相王钦若，旦曰： 钦若遭逢陛下，恩礼已隆，且乞留之枢密，两府亦均。
现代文：真宗打算以王钦若为宰相，王旦说： 王钦若遭逢陛下，恩典礼遇已经隆厚，且请把他留在枢密院，两府也均衡。
English: Wang Dan said, "If Wang Qin meets with Your Majesty, he will be treated with great grace and courtesy, and please keep him in the Privy Council, so that there is a balance between the two governments."

古文：臣见祖宗朝未尝有南人当国者，虽古称立贤无方，然须贤士乃可。
现代文：我见祖宗朝从没有南人当权的，虽然古称立贤无方，但必须贤士才可以。
English: I saw that the Ancestral Dynasty never had a Nan people in power. Although it was said in ancient times that there was no way to become a wise man, it was necessary to become a wise man.

古文：臣为宰相，不敢沮抑人，此亦公议也。 真宗遂止。
现代文：我作为宰相，不敢沮丧压抑人才，这也是公议。 
English: As Prime Minister, I dare not depress and suppress talent, which is also public opinion.

古文：旦没后，钦若始大用，语人曰： 为王公迟我十年作宰相。 钦若与陈尧叟、马知节同在枢府，因奏事忿争。
现代文：真宗于是停止了以王钦若为宰相的想法。王旦死后，王钦若才被大加任用，告诉他人说： 被王公让我推迟十年当宰相。 王钦若与陈尧叟、马知节同在枢密院，因为奏事忿恨争执。
English: After Wang Dan's death, Wang Chinrao was only appointed to a higher position, and he told others, "The prince asked me to postpone becoming prime minister for ten years." Wang Chinrao was in the Privy Council with Chen Xi and Machi Jie, and they had an angry dispute over the report.

古文：真宗召旦至，钦若犹哗不已，知节流涕曰： 愿与钦若同下御史府。 旦叱钦若使退。
现代文：真宗把王旦召来，王钦若还是喧闹不停，马知节流涕说 ：希望与王钦若一起下御史府。 王旦叱责王钦若让他退下。
English: Wang Dan scolded Wang Qin if he allowed Wang Qin to withdraw, saying that he hoped to go down to the Imperial Palace with Wang Qin.

古文：帝大怒，命付狱。
现代文：真宗大怒，命令交付狱案。
English: Genzong was furious and ordered him to be sent to prison.

古文：旦从容曰： 钦若等恃陛下厚顾，上烦谴诃，当行朝典。
现代文：王旦从容地说 ：王钦若等人依恃陛下的优厚照顾，陛下烦于谴责呵斥，应实行朝廷刑典。
English: Wang Dan said calmly: "If Wang Qin and others take advantage of His Majesty's generous care, and His Majesty is tired of condemning and rebuking, the Imperial Penal Code should be implemented."

古文：愿且还内，来日取旨。 明日，召旦前问之，旦曰： 钦若等当黜，未知坐以何罪？ 帝曰： 坐忿争无礼。 旦曰： 陛下奄有天下，使大臣坐忿争无礼之罪，或闻外国，恐无以威远。 帝曰： 卿意如何？ 旦曰： 愿至中书，召钦若等宣示陛下含容之意，且戒约之。俟少间，罢之未晚也。 帝曰： 非卿之言，朕固难忍。 后月余，钦若等皆罢。
现代文：真宗说： 不是你的话，朕必难以忍住。 此后一个多月，王钦若等人都被罢免。
English: After more than a month, Wang Qinru and the others were dismissed.

古文：旦尝与杨亿评品人物，亿曰： 丁谓久远当何如？ 旦曰： 才则才矣，语道则未。
现代文：王旦曾经与杨亿评品人物，杨亿说： 丁谓以后当会怎么样？ 王旦说： 才能就是才能，说治道就未必。
English: Wang Dan was once a judge with Yang Billion, Yang Billion said: Ding said, "What will happen in the future?" Wang Dan said: "Talent is talent, but it is not necessarily the way to rule."

古文：他日在上位，使有德者助之，庶得终吉；若独当权，必为身累尔。 后谓果如言。
现代文：将来他在高位，让有德行的人帮助他，可能得以终身吉祥；如果他独揽大权，必定被自身牵累。 后来丁谓果然像王旦所说的那样。
English: In the future, he will be in a high position, and if he allows people with virtue to help him, he may be blessed for life; if he monopolizes power, he will certainly be dragged down by himself.

古文：旦为兖州景灵宫朝修使，内臣周怀政偕行，或乘间请见，旦必俟从者尽至，冠带出见于堂皇，白事而退。
现代文：王旦为兖州景灵宫朝修使，宦官周怀政陪同出行，有时趁机会请见，王旦一定等待随从都到，戴上帽子系上腰带出来在大厅会见，报告事情后退出。
English: Wang Dan is the morning attendant of the Jingling Palace in Zhangzhou, and is accompanied by the eunuch Zhou Huai Zheng. Sometimes he takes the opportunity to see him. Wang Dan must wait for the attendants to arrive, put on a hat and tie a belt to meet in the hall, report the matter and exit.

古文：后怀政以事败，方知旦远虑。
现代文：后来周怀政因事败露，才知王旦长远的考虑。
English: Later, when Zhou Huai Zheng's defeat was revealed, Wang Dan began to think long-term.

古文：内臣刘承规以忠谨得幸，病且死，求为节度使。
现代文：宦官刘承规因忠心谨慎得到宠爱，得病快要死了，请求为节度使。
English: The eunuch Liu Chengbin was favored for his loyalty and prudence, but he fell ill and was about to die, so he asked for help.

古文：帝语旦曰： 承规待此以瞑目。 旦执不可，曰： 他日将有求为枢密使者，奈何？ 遂止。
现代文：真宗告诉王旦说 ：刘承规等待节度使以瞑目。 王旦坚持不可以，说： 以后将有人请求为枢密使，怎么办？ 
English: Shinsong told Wang Dan, "Liu Chenggui is waiting for the festival to send him to mediate." Wang Dan insisted that he could not, saying, "In the future, someone will ask to be a confidential envoy, what should I do?"

古文：自是内臣官不过留后。
现代文：于是停止了这一做法。从此宦官官职不超过留后。
English: So this practice was stopped. From then on, the post of eunuch did not last long.

古文：旦为相，宾客满堂，无敢以私请。
现代文：王旦为宰相，宾客满堂，没人敢因私请托。
English: Wang Dan is the prime minister, the hall is full of guests, no one dares to ask for my help.

古文：察可与言及素知名者，数月后，召与语，询访四方利病，或使疏其言而献之。
现代文：王旦考察可与言以及素来知名的人，几个月后，召来与他谈话，询问访求四方利弊，或者让他陈述其言进献。
English: After a few months, Wang Dan called him to talk to him, inquired about the pros and cons of visiting the Quartet, or asked him to present his speech.

古文：观才之所长，密籍其名，其人复来，不见也。
现代文：观察有才能者的长处，秘密登记他的名字，其人再来，不接见。
English: Observe the strengths of a talented person, secretly register his name, and the person will come again without being received.

古文：每有差除，先密疏四三人姓名以请，所用者帝以笔点之。
现代文：每有差遣除授，首先秘密疏陈三四人姓名以请求，所录用的人真宗用笔标记。
English: Whenever there is a dismissal, the names of three or four people are first secretly scanned with a request, and the person hired is marked with a pen.

古文：同列不知，争有所用，惟旦所用，奏入无不可。
现代文：同事不知道此事，争论有所任用，惟独王旦所用，奏入没有不行的。
English: Colleagues do not know the matter, the dispute has been appointed, but only Wang Dan used, it is not possible to report.

古文：丁谓以是数毁旦，帝益厚之。
现代文：丁谓因此几次毁谤王旦，真宗更加厚爱他。
English: As a result, Ding Zuo slandered Wang Dan several times, but Zhen Zong loved him even more.

古文：故参政李穆子行简，以将作监丞家居，有贤行，迁太子中允。
现代文：已故参政李穆的儿子李行简，以将作监丞的身份在家居住，有德行，升太子中允。
English: Li Xingjian, the son of the late politician Li Mu, lived at home with the status of being a superintendent. He was virtuous and rose to the position of crown prince.

古文：使者不知其宅，真宗命就中书问旦，人始知行简为旦所荐。
现代文：朝廷使者不知道他的住所，真宗命使者到中书省问王旦，人们才知道李行简是王旦所推荐的。
English: The emissary of the imperial court did not know his address, and the emissary of the True Sect's mission asked Wang Dan in Zhongshu Province. Only then did people know that Li Xingjian was recommended by Wang Dan.

古文：旦凡所荐，皆人未尝知。
现代文：凡是王旦所荐举的，都是人们从不知道的。
English: Whatever Wang Dan recommended, people never knew about it.

古文：旦没后，史官修《真宗实录》，得内出奏章，始知朝士多旦所荐云。
现代文：王旦死后，史官修撰《真宗实录》，得到内廷出示的奏章，才知道朝廷士人多是王旦所推荐。
English: After Wang Dan's death, a historian compiled "The True Record of the True Sect" and obtained the record presented by the Inner Court. Only then did he know that most of the imperial court officials were recommended by Wang Dan.

古文：谏议大夫张师德两诣旦门，不得见，意为人所毁，以告向敏中，为从容明之。
现代文：谏议大夫张师德两次到王旦家，没能见面，认为是他人所毁谤，把此事告诉向敏中，替他慢慢明察。
English: Zhang Shide, the doctor of deliberation, went to Wang Dan's house twice, but could not meet him. He thought it was someone else's slander, so he told this to Xiang Minzhong and slowly investigated for him.

古文：及议知制诰，旦曰： 可惜张师德。 敏中问之，旦曰： 累于上前言师德名家子，有士行，不意两及吾门。
现代文：等到议论知制诰，王旦说： 可惜张师德。 向敏中询问他，王旦说： 我屡次在皇帝面前说张师德是名家子弟，有士人行操，没料到两次到我家。
English: Waiting for the discussion on knowledge and discipline, Wang Dan said: It's a pity about Zhang Shide. When asked about him by Xiang Minzhong, Wang Dan said: I have repeatedly said in front of the emperor that Zhang Shide is the son of a famous family, and there are nobles who practice martial arts, but I did not expect to come to my home twice.

古文：状元及第，荣进素定，但当静以待之尔。
现代文：状元及第，荣进已定，只应冷静地守候而已。
English: First and foremost, Rongjin has been decided, we should only wait calmly.

古文：若复奔竞，使无阶而入者当如何也。 敏中启以师德之意，旦曰： 旦处安得有人敢轻毁人，但师德后进，待我薄尔。 敏中固称： 适有阙，望公弗遗。 旦曰： 第缓之，使师德知，聊以戒贪进、激薄俗也。 
现代文：如果他再为名利而奔走竞争，使没有门径求官的人该当怎么做呢。 向敏中陈述张师德的意思，王旦说： 我这里怎么能够有人敢轻率毁谤他人，只是张师德后进，对待我轻薄而已。 向敏中坚持称： 如果有空阙，希望您不要忘记。 王旦说： 暂且缓一缓，使师德知道，聊以劝戒贪图进用、激励薄俗。 
English: If he continues to compete for fame and fortune, what should be done for those who do not have a career path? Wang Dan said to Xiang Minzhong, stating the meaning of Zhang Shide: How can anyone dare to slander others rashly here, but Zhang Shide is a latecomer and treats me lightly. Xiang Minzhong insisted: If there is a vacancy, I hope you do not forget. Wang Dan said: Slow down for a while, let the teacher know, talk to discourage greed and encourage vulgarity.

古文：石普知许州不法，朝议欲就劾。
现代文：石普知许州，违反法令，朝廷舆论打算就此弹劾。
English: Shi Pu Zhi Xuzhou, in violation of the law, the court of public opinion intends to impeach.

古文：旦曰： 普武人，不明典宪，恐恃薄效，妄有生事。
现代文：王旦说： 石普是武人，不清楚典章法令，恐怕他依恃薄有微功，妄自惹起事端。
English: Wang Dan said: Shipu is a warrior, he doesn't know the rules and regulations, I'm afraid he's just trying to stir up trouble.

古文：必须重行，乞召归置狱。 乃下御史按之，一日而狱具。
现代文：必须从重执行，请召他回来设立狱案。 于是传送御史审查，一天而狱案备办。
English: It must be implemented seriously, and he was called back to set up a prison case. Therefore, he was sent to the Imperial History Review, and the prison case was prepared in one day.

古文：议者以为不屈国法而保全武臣，真国体也。
现代文：议者认为不屈国法而保全武臣，这是真正的国体。
English: The legislator believed that it is the true national identity to preserve the samurai class without bowing to the national law.

古文：薛奎为江、淮发运使，辞旦，旦无他语，但云： 东南民力竭矣。 奎退而曰： 真宰相之言也。 张士逊为江西转运使，辞旦求教，旦曰： 朝廷榷利至矣。 士逊迭更是职，思旦之言，未尝求利，识者曰： 此运使识大体。 张咏知成都，召还，以任中正代之，言者以为不可。
现代文：薛奎为江、淮发运使，向王旦辞别，王旦没有其他话，只是说： 东南民力困乏了。 薛奎退而说： 这真是宰相的言论。 张士逊为江西转运使，向王旦辞别求教，王旦说 ：朝廷专卖利益最大了。 张士逊轮流改任发运使这个职位，想到王旦的话，从没有求取利益，认识他的人说： 这个转运使识大体。 张咏知成都，朝廷召他回来，以任中正代替他，谏官认为不可以。
English: Xue Kui, the envoy sent by Jiang and Huai, said goodbye to Wang Dan. Wang Dan had no other words but to say, "Southeastern China is short of manpower." Xue Kui retreated and said, "This is really the prime minister's statement." Zhang Shisong, the envoy sent by Jiangxi, said goodbye to Wang Dan and asked for advice. Wang Dan said, "The monopoly profit of the imperial court is the largest." Zhang Shisong took turns to be appointed as the envoy of the imperial court. Thinking about Wang Dan's words, he never sought profit. People who knew him said, "This transfer is a generalization. Zhang

古文：帝问旦，对曰： 非中正不能守咏之规。
现代文：皇帝问王旦，王旦回答说： 非任中正不能守张咏的规制。
English: The emperor asked Wang Dan, and Wang Dan replied, "I can't abide by Zhang Ye's regulations when I'm not in office.

古文：他人往，妄有变更矣。 李迪、贺边有时名，举进士，迪以赋落韵，边以《当仁不让于师论》以 师 为 众 ，与注疏异，皆不预。
现代文：其他人前往，妄有变更了。 李迪、贾边在当时享有声名，考进士，李迪以赋落韵，贾边以《当仁不让于师论》把 师 字理解为 众 字，与注疏不同，都落榜。
English: Li Di and Jia Bian enjoyed fame at that time. As candidates for the entrance examination, Li Di used Fu Luo rhyme, and Jia Bian understood the word "teacher" as "many words" in "On Being a Reluctant Teacher," which was different from the annotation, and both fell off the list.

古文：主文奏乞收试，旦曰： 迪虽犯不考，然出于不意，其过可略。
现代文：主考官奏请收试，王旦说： 李迪虽然没有思考，但是出于粗心大意，他的过失可以忽略不计。
English: Wang Dan, the chief examiner, said: Although Li Di did not think about it, his negligence was negligible.

古文：边特立异说，将令后生务为穿凿，渐不可长。 遂收迪而黜边。
现代文：贾边特地立异说，将会令年轻人务为穿凿附会，一开始不能助长。 于是录用李迪而贬退贾边。
English: Jia Bian specifically said that it would make young people work as a drill drill auxiliary, and could not be promoted at the beginning, so he hired Lidi and demoted Jia Bian.

古文：旦任事久，人有谤之者，辄引咎不辨。至人有过失，虽人主盛怒，可辨者辨之，必得而后已。
现代文：王旦任事时间长，有人毁谤他，他往往反省自己不加争辩；至于他人有过失，即使是皇帝盛怒，可以争辩的就争辩，必得而后已。
English: Wang Dan has been in charge for a long time. If someone slanders him, he often reflects on himself without arguing. As for the fault of others, even if the emperor is angry, if you can argue, you must argue.

古文：素羸多疾，自东鲁复命，连岁求解，优诏褒答，继以面谕，委任无贰。
现代文：王旦素来体弱多病，从东鲁回复君命，连年请求解除职务，皇帝优诏褒奖，既而当面晓谕，委任没有疑忌。
English: Wang Dan had always been frail and sickly. He had returned from Donglu to accept the king's command. He had petitioned for years to be relieved of his duties. The emperor had given him a high commendation, and since he had received it in person, there was no doubt about his appointment.

古文：天禧初，进位太保，为兖州太极观奉上宝册使，复加太尉兼侍中，五日一赴起居，入中书，遇军国重事，不限时日入预参决。
现代文：天禧初年，进官位太保，为兖州太极观奉上宝册使，又加太尉兼侍中，五天一次前往起居院，到中书省，遇到军国大事，不限定时间入预参决。
English: In the first year of the Jubilee of Heaven, he was promoted to the rank of Taibo, and was given a treasure book envoy for Zhangzhou Taijiquan. He was also promoted to the rank of Taijiquan lieutenant and attendant. He went to the residence once every five days, to the Chinese Literature Department, encountered military and national events, and entered the preliminary election for an unlimited period of time.

古文：旦愈畏避，上疏恳辞，又托同列奏白。
现代文：王旦更加害怕避开，上疏恳请辞谢，又委托同僚奏请报告。
English: Wang Dan was even more afraid of evasion. He earnestly asked for his resignation and entrusted his colleagues to submit a report.

古文：帝重违其意，止加封邑。
现代文：皇帝多次违背他的意思，到加封邑。
English: The emperor repeatedly went against his wishes and went to Gafu.

古文：一日，独对滋福殿，帝曰： 朕方以大事托卿，而卿疾如此。 因命皇太子出拜，旦皇恐走避，太子随而拜之。
现代文：一天，独自一人在滋福殿应对，皇帝说 ：朕正以大事委托你，但你的病这样严重。 因而命皇太子出来拜见，王旦惶恐逃避，皇太子随从他而跪拜。
English: One day, when Wang Dan was alone at the Jifu Palace, the emperor said to him, "I am entrusting you with a great task, but your illness is so serious. Therefore, I ordered the crown prince to come out to meet me. Wang Dan panicked and fled, and the crown prince followed him and bowed down.

古文：旦言： 太子盛德，必任陛下事。 因荐可为大臣者十余人，其后不至宰相惟李及、凌策二人，亦为名臣。
现代文：王旦说 ：太子盛德，一定能承担陛下的事业。 因而推荐可以有所作为的大臣十多人，其后没有位至宰相的只有李及、凌策二人，也为名臣。
English: Wang Dan said, "Prince Shengde can certainly undertake His Majesty's business, so he recommended more than ten ministers who can make a difference, and only Li Ji and Ling Ce, two famous ministers, have not been promoted to the position of prime minister.

古文：旦复求避位，帝睹其形瘁，悯然许之。
现代文：王旦又请求辞去职位，皇帝看到他身体有病，怜惜地答应了他的请求。
English: Wang Dan also asked to resign from his post. The emperor saw that he was ill and mercifully agreed to his request.

古文：以太尉领玉清昭应宫使，给宰相半奉。
现代文：王旦以太尉的身份掌领玉清昭应宫使，给予宰相一半的俸禄。
English: Wang Dan, as captain of the ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal ethereal.

古文：初，旦以宰相兼使，今罢相，使犹领之，其专置使自旦始焉。
现代文：开始，王旦以宰相的身份兼任使臣，现在罢免宰相，使他还是掌领使臣职务，其专门设立使臣从王旦开始。
English: At the beginning, Wang Dan concurrently served as an envoy in the capacity of the prime minister. Now, the prime minister has been dismissed, so that he still holds the envoy position. The special establishment of envoys began with Wang Dan.

古文：寻又命肩舆入禁，使子雍与直省吏挟扶，见于延和殿。
现代文：不久又命坐轿子进入禁宫中，让他的儿子王雍与直省官吏扶持，在延和殿见皇帝。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to enter the Forbidden Palace in a palanquin, and his son, Wang Yong, with the support of officials from Zhizhong Province, went to see the emperor at Yanhe.

古文：帝曰： 卿今疾亟，万一有不讳，使朕以天下事付之谁乎？ 旦曰： 知臣莫若君，惟明主择之。 再三问，不对。
现代文：皇帝说 ：你现在病很重，万一有个三长两短，让朕把天下事交付给谁呢？ 王旦说 ：知臣莫若君，惟贤明的君主选择。 皇帝再三询问，王旦没有回答。
English: The emperor said, "You are very ill now. In case there is a conflict, to whom should I entrust the affairs of the world?" Wang Dan said, "If you are not a wise minister, you should be chosen by a wise monarch." The emperor repeatedly inquired, but Wang Dan did not answer.

古文：时张咏、马亮皆为尚书，帝历问二人，亦不对。
现代文：当时张咏、马亮都为尚书，皇帝一一问这二人，王旦也不回答。
English: At that time, Zhang Xuan and Ma Liang were both scholars. The emperor asked these two people one by one, but Wang Dan did not answer.

古文：因曰： 试以卿意言之。 旦强起举笏曰： 以臣之愚，莫如寇准。 帝曰： 准性刚褊，卿更思其次。 旦曰： 他人，臣所不知也。
现代文：皇帝因而说： 试以你的意思说说。 王旦勉强起身举着朝笏说 ：以我的愚见，莫如寇准。 皇帝说： 寇准性情刚直狭隘，你再思考下一个。 王旦说： 其他人，是我所不知道的。
English: So the emperor said, "Please try to say what you mean." Wang Dan reluctantly got up and held up the imperial scepter and said, "In my foolish opinion, there is no such thing as a concubine." The emperor said, "If concubines are rigid and narrow-minded, you should think about the next one." Wang Dan said, "I don't know about other people."

古文：臣病困，不能久侍。 遂辞退。
现代文：我病困，不能侍奉很久。 于是辞别退下。
English: I'm too ill to serve for long, so I'm resigning.

古文：后旦没岁余，竟用准为相。
现代文：后来王旦死后一年多，皇帝终于任用寇准为宰相。
English: Later, more than a year after Wang Dan's death, the emperor finally appointed Kojun as prime minister.

古文：旦疾甚，遣内侍问者日或三四，帝手自和药，并薯蓣粥赐之。
现代文：王旦病重，皇帝派内侍探望一天有时达三四次，皇帝亲手自己和药，并同山药粥赐给他。
English: Wang Dan was seriously ill. The emperor sent a chamberlain to visit him, sometimes three or four times a day. The emperor personally gave him medicine and yam porridge.

古文：旦与杨亿素厚，延至卧内，请撰遗表。
现代文：王旦与杨亿向来交好，延请杨亿到卧室内，请他撰写遗表。
English: Wang Dan and Yang Yi have always been friends. He invited Yang Yi to his bedroom and asked him to write a will.

古文：且言： 忝为宰辅，不可以将尽之言，为宗亲求官，止叙生平遭遇，愿日亲庶政，进用贤士，少减焦劳之意。 仍戒子弟： 我家盛名清德，当务俭素，保守门风，不得事于泰侈，勿为厚葬以金宝置柩中。 表上，真宗叹之，遂幸其第，赐白金五千两。
现代文：而且说 ：辱为宰相辅臣，不能用将尽之言，替宗族亲戚求取官职；只叙述生平遭遇，希望每天亲自处理各种重要政务，进用贤士，稍减忧劳之心。 又告诫子弟： 我家盛名清德，应致力于俭朴，保守门风，不得太奢侈，不要搞厚葬把黄金财宝放入棺柩中。 遗表呈上，真宗为之感叹，于是临幸王旦的住宅，赐给五千两银子。
English: Moreover, he said, "I am humiliated to be a chancellor, a minister, and a vassal, and I can't use all the words to seek an official position for my relatives of the clan; I only describe what happened in my life, I hope to personally handle various important government affairs every day, use sages, and slightly reduce the heart of worry and labor. I also cautioned my son: My family is famous for its purity, we should be committed to frugality, conservative manners, not too extravagant, don't engage in a lavish funeral and put gold treasures in the coffin. The will was presented, and Shinshu lamented it, so he gave

古文：旦作奏辞之，藁末，自益四句云： 益惧多藏，况无所用，见欲散施，以息咎殃。 即舁至内闼，诏不许。
现代文：王旦写奏状辞谢，稿子末尾自加四句说： 更加害怕多藏财物，况且没有什么用处，现在想要散发施予，以平息罪责祸害。 马上让人抬他到宫内小门，诏令不准许。
English: Wang Dan wrote a letter of thanks, adding four sentences at the end of the manuscript: He is more afraid of hiding more wealth, and moreover, it is of no use, and now he wants to distribute alms to appease the scourge of guilt. Immediately let him be carried to the palace gate, the edict does not allow.

古文：还至门，旦已薨，年六十一。
现代文：回到家门，王旦已经去世，终年六十一岁。
English: Back at home, Wang Dan has passed away at the age of 61.

古文：帝临其丧恸，废朝三日，赠太师、尚书令、魏国公，谥文正，又别次发哀。
现代文：皇帝亲临其丧悲伤，停废上朝三天，赠王旦太师、尚书令、魏国公，谥号文正，又另外停留发丧哀悼。
English: The emperor was so saddened by his death that he suspended the imperial court for three days, bestowed the titles of Wang Dan Taishi, Shang Shuling, Wei Guogong, and Wen Zheng, and also stopped to mourn.

古文：后数日，张旻赴镇河阳，例宜饮饯，以旦故，不举乐。
现代文：几天后，张前往镇守河阳，按照成例应饮酒饯行，因王旦的原因，没有举行宴乐。
English: A few days later, Zhang went to the town of Heyang, and in accordance with the established practice, he should drink alcohol. Due to the reasons of Wang Dan, there was no banquet.

古文：录其子、弟、侄、外孙、门客、常从，授官者十数人。
现代文：录用其儿子、弟弟、侄儿、外孙、门客、常从，十多人被授予官职。
English: His son, younger brother, nephew, grandchild, protégé, and frequent disciple have been hired, and more than ten people have been awarded official positions.

古文：诸子服除，又各进一官。
现代文：众子守丧期满，又各自进升一官。
English: At the end of the mourning period, each of the sons was promoted to a higher position.

古文：已而闻旦奏藁自益四句，取视，泣下久之。
现代文：不久听说王旦奏稿自加四句，皇帝取来看，流了很长时间的泪。
English: Soon he heard that Wang Dan had added four sentences of his own to the play, and when the emperor took a look at it, he shed tears for a long time.

古文：旦有文集二十卷。
现代文：王旦有文集二十卷。
English: Wang Dan has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：乾兴初，诏配享真宗庙廷。
现代文：乾兴初，诏令配享真宗庙廷。
English: At the beginning of the Qianxing era, the imperial edict allocated the right to enjoy the True Sect temple court.

古文：及建碑，仁宗篆其首曰： 全德元老之碑。 
现代文：等到建造墓碑，仁宗用篆书写碑头说 ：全德元老之碑。 
English: While waiting for the tombstone to be built, Rinzong wrote the inscription on the headstone in ink, saying: "The monument to the patriarchs of all Germany."

古文：旦事寡嫂有礼，与弟旭友爱甚笃。
现代文：王旦事奉寡嫂有礼节，与弟弟王旭友爱甚笃。
English: Wang Dan served his widowed sister-in-law with etiquette, and was very friendly with his brother Wang Xu.

古文：有货玉带者，弟以为佳，呈旦，旦命系之，曰： 还见佳否？ 弟曰： 系之安得自见？ 旦曰： 自负重而使观者称好，无乃劳乎！ 亟还之。
现代文：婚姻不求门第。被子衣服质朴，家人打算用丝绵装饰毡席，王旦不同意。有人卖玉制的腰带，弟弟认为很好，呈给王旦，王旦命弟弟系上，说 ：还见得好不好？ 弟弟说 ：系着它怎么能自己看见？ 王旦说 ：自己负重而让观看的人称赞好，这不是劳烦吗！ 弟弟赶快归还玉带。
English: Marriage was out of the question. The quilt was simple, and the family planned to use silk to decorate the banquet. Wang Dan did not agree. Someone was selling a jade belt, and his brother thought it was very good, so he presented it to Wang Dan. Wang Dan ordered his brother to tie it on, saying, "Does it still look good?" His brother said, "How can I see with it on?" Wang Dan said, "Isn't it tiresome to carry your own weight and have people praise you for it?" His brother quickly returned the jade belt.

古文：故所服止于赐带。
现代文：因此王旦所系的止于赐给的带子。
English: Therefore, Wang Dan's system stops at the given tape.

古文：家人未尝见其怒，饮食不精洁，但不食而已。
现代文：家人从没有见他生气，饮食不干净，只是不吃而已。
English: His family never saw him angry. His diet wasn't clean, he just didn't eat.

古文：尝试以少埃墨投羹中，旦惟啖饭，问何不啜羹，则曰： 我偶不喜肉。 后又墨其饭，则曰： 吾今日不喜饭，可别具粥。 旦不置田宅，曰： 子孙当各念自立，何必田宅，徒使争财为不义尔。 真宗以其所居陋，欲治之，旦辞以先人旧庐，乃止。
现代文：曾试着以少许埃墨投放肉汤中，王旦只吃饭，问他为什么不吃肉汤，就说 ：我偶尔不喜欢吃肉。 后来又把墨放到饭中，就说： 我今天不想吃饭，可以另外备办稀饭。 王旦不购置田产住宅，说 ：子孙应各念自立，何况田地第宅，仅仅是让他们争夺财产为不义而已。 真宗认为王旦所居的房子简陋，想要修治，王旦以先人的旧舍为借口辞谢，才停止。
English: Once he tried to put a little bit of ink in broth, but Wang Dan only ate. When he asked why he didn't eat broth, he said, "I don't like to eat meat sometimes." Later, he put the ink in the meal and said, "I don't want to eat today, I can prepare porridge." Wang Dan didn't buy a farmhouse, saying, "Children and grandchildren should be independent, not to mention a farmhouse, it's just unfair to let them compete for property." The True Sect thought that the house Wang Dan lived in was humble, and wanted to improve it, but Wang Dan used the old house of his ancestors as an excuse to

古文：宅门坏，主者彻新之，暂于庑下启侧门出入。
现代文：住宅门坏了，负责的人把门彻底更新，暂时在走廊下开侧门出入。
English: The door of the house was broken, and the person in charge completely renewed the door, temporarily opening the side door under the corridor.

古文：旦至侧门，据鞍俯过，门成复由之，皆不问焉。
现代文：王旦到侧门，凭依马鞍俯身经过，宅门修成又由宅门进去，都不过问。
English: Wang Dan went to the side gate, leaned over with his saddle and passed by. Once the gate was repaired, he went in through the gate, no questions asked.

古文：三子：雍，国子博士；冲，左赞善大夫；素，别有传。
现代文：三个儿子：王雍，国子博士；王冲，左赞善大夫；王素，另外有传。
English: Three sons: Wang Yong, Dr. Kuniko; Wang Chong, Dr. Zuo Zanzan; Wang Su, also known as Wu.

古文：向敏中，字常之，开封人。
现代文：向敏中字常之，开封人。
English: Xiang Min in the middle of the word, the person who opened the envelope.

古文：父瑀，仕汉符离令。
现代文：父亲向王禹，在后汉时任官符离县令。
English: His father, Xiang Wang Yu, was appointed as an official in the Later Han Dynasty.

古文：性严毅，惟敏中一子，躬自教督，不假颜色。
现代文：性情严肃刚毅，只有向敏中一个儿子，亲自教育督促，不假脸色。
English: Serious and strong-willed, with only one son in Xiang Min Middle School, he personally supervises his education and does not put on a false face.

古文：尝谓其母曰： 大吾门者，此儿也。 敏中随瑀赴调京师，有书生过门，见敏中，谓邻母曰： 此儿风骨秀异，贵且寿。 邻母入告其家，比出，已不见矣。
现代文：曾对他的母亲说： 光大我门庭的，是这个孩子。 敏中随从向王禹赴调京城，有书生从门前经过，看见敏中，对邻居的母亲说： 这孩子风骨秀异，尊贵而且年寿高。 邻母入告其家，等到出来时，书生已不见了。
English: He once said to his mother: "This child is the one who shines the brightest in my court." Min Chung followed Wang Yu to the capital, and a scholar passed in front of the door. Seeing Min Chung, he said to the neighbor's mother: "This child is distinguished, noble and has a long life expectancy." The neighbor's mother called to his house, and when she came out, the scholar was gone.

古文：及冠，继丁内外忧，能刻厉自立，有大志，不屑贫窭。
现代文：等到二十岁，敏中父母相继去世，但能刻厉自立，有远大的志向，不计较贫寒。
English: At the age of twenty, Min's parents died one after another, but he was able to work hard to become self-reliant and had lofty aspirations, regardless of poverty.

古文：太平兴国五年进士，解褐将作监丞、通判吉州，就改右赞善大夫。
现代文：敏中为太平兴国五年进士，授官将作监丞、吉州通判，就地改任右赞善大夫。
English: Minshong was promoted to Taiping Xingguo five years ago. He will be awarded the posts of Jianjo and Jizhou Tongan, and will be transferred to the post of Uzenzen Doctor on the spot.

古文：转运使张齐贤荐其材，代还，为著作郎。
现代文：转运使张齐贤推荐他的才能，更替回朝，为著作郎。
English: The transfer caused Zhang Qixian to recommend his talent, and he returned to the imperial court as a scholar.

古文：召见便殿，占对明畅，太宗善之，命为户部推官，出为淮南转运副使。
现代文：皇帝在便殿召见他，对答明畅，太宗称许他，任命他为户部推官，出任淮南转运副使。
English: The emperor summoned him to meet him at the Ben Hall, and he gave him a clear answer. Emperor Taizong praised him and appointed him as the adjutant of the Household Department and the deputy envoy of Huainan Transportation.

古文：时领外计者，皆以权宠自尊，所至畏惮，敏中不尚威察，待僚属有礼，勤于劝勖，职务修举。
现代文：当时掌领外郡财计的人，都因权宠自尊，所到之处令人畏惧，敏中不崇尚威察，对待同僚部下有礼，勤于劝勉，致力于整治选拔人才。
English: At that time, the people in charge of the county's finances were all proud of their power, feared everywhere they went, did not respect authority, treated their colleagues and subordinates with courtesy, were diligent in persuasion, and were committed to rectifying and selecting talents.

古文：或荐其有武干者，召入，将授诸司副使。
现代文：有人推荐他有军事才干，皇帝召他入朝，打算授予诸司副使。
English: Someone recommended that he had military talent, and the emperor called him to the imperial court, intending to award him the title of vice-envoy.

古文：敏中恳辞，仍献所著文，加直史馆，遣还任。
现代文：敏中恳切辞谢，就进献所写的文章，加官直史馆，遣还任。
English: Mianzhong earnestly thanked him for resigning, and was sent back to his post on the basis of the article he had written on the introduction of the official history museum.

古文：以耕籍恩，超左司谏，入为户部判官、知制诰。
现代文：因皇帝耕籍田恩典，越级提拔为左司谏，入为户部判官、知制诰。
English: Due to the emperor's blessing of cultivating his birth place, he was promoted beyond his rank to Zuo Jian, and became a judge of the household department and the head of the intellectual system.

古文：未几，权判大理寺。
现代文：不久，暂代判大理寺。
English: Soon, he was temporarily assigned to Dali Temple.

古文：时没入祖吉赃钱，分赐法吏，敏中引钟离意委珠事，独不受。
现代文：当时没收祖吉的赃钱，分别赐给执法官吏，敏中援引钟离意推脱宝珠事件，独独没有接受。
English: At that time, Zuji's stolen money was confiscated and separately given to law enforcement officials. Minzhong cited Zhong Liang's intention to evade the treasure ball incident, but did not accept it.

古文：妖尼道安构狱，事连开封判官张去华，敏中妻父也，以故得请不预决谳。
现代文：妖尼道安构成狱案，事情牵连到开封判官张去华，张去华是敏中的岳父，因为这个缘故必须请求不参预审判定案。
English: Yoni and Ni Daoan constitute a prison case, the matter involves the Kaifeng judge Zhang Dehua, Zhang Dehua is the father-in-law of Minzhong, for this reason, it is necessary to request not to participate in the pre-trial final case.

古文：既而法官皆贬，犹以亲累落职，出知广州。
现代文：不久法官都被贬斥，敏中还是因亲戚连累落职，出任广州知州。
English: The judges were soon reprimanded, but Minzhong was still removed from his post by his relatives and appointed to Guangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：入辞，面叙其事，太宗为之感动，许以不三岁召还。
现代文：入朝辞谢，向皇帝当面叙述此事，太宗为之感动，答应不到三年召他回朝。
English: Taizong was so moved by this that he promised to call him back to the imperial court in less than three years.

古文：翌日，迁职方员外郎，遣之。
现代文：第二天，升任职方员外郎，派遣他去上任。
English: The next day, he promoted Gairo to the post of party member and sent him to take office.

古文：是州兼掌市舶，前守多涉讥议。
现代文：广州兼掌管市舶事务，前任知州多涉及讥议。
English: Guangzhou is also in charge of the city's shipping affairs, while his predecessor Zhizhou was mostly involved in scandals.

古文：敏中至荆南，预市药物以往，在任无所须，以清廉闻。
现代文：敏中到荆南，预买药物前往广州，在任无所需求，以清正廉洁闻名。
English: Min Zhong went to Jingnan, pre-purchased drugs and went to Guangzhou. At any time, there was no demand, and he was known for his honesty and integrity.

古文：就擢广南东路转运使，召为工部郎中。
现代文：就地提拔为广南东路转运使，召为工部郎中。
English: He was promoted to the post of the transfer envoy of the Guangdong East Road, and was called to be a junior member of the Engineering Department.

古文：太宗飞白书敏中洎张咏二名付中书，曰： 此二人，名臣也，朕将用之。 左右因称其材，并命为枢密直学士。
现代文：太宗以飞白体，书写敏中及张咏二人的姓名交付中书省，说： 这二个人，是名臣，朕将任用他们。 左右侍臣因而称赞他们的才能，二人一同被任命为枢密直学士。
English: Emperor Taizong presented the names of the two men, Minzhong and Zhangye, to the Ministry of Education and Culture, saying, "These two men are distinguished ministers, and I will appoint them." The attendants praised their talents, and the two men were appointed as Privy Scholars.

古文：时通进、银台司主出纳书奏，领于枢密院，颇多壅遏，或至漏失。
现代文：当时通进银司台负责出纳书奏，由枢密院管领，颇多壅塞阻遏，有时至于遗漏失误。
English: At that time, Tongjin Bank was responsible for the cashier's calligraphy, led by the Privy Council, and there was a lot of obstruction and sometimes omissions.

古文：敏中具奏其事，恐远方有失事机，请别置局，命官专莅，校其簿籍，诏命敏中与咏领其局。
现代文：敏中据实奏说此事，担心边远地区有失事机，请求另外设置机构，任命官员专门视事，校正簿书典籍，诏命敏中与张咏掌领这个机构。
English: According to the actual report, Minzhong said that he was worried about the accident in the remote area, and requested to set up a separate organization, appoint officials to specially inspect the matter, and correct the books and classics. He and Zhang Jun were in charge of this organization.

古文：太宗欲大任敏中，当途者忌之。
现代文：太宗想要大加任用敏中，当权大臣忌妒他。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to appoint Min to a higher position, and the ministers in power were jealous of him.

古文：会有言敏中在法寺时，皇甫侃监无为军榷务，以贿败，发书历诣朝贵求为末减，敏中亦受之。
现代文：恰逢有人说敏中在法寺时，皇甫侃监无为军榷务，因贿赂败露，写信给朝廷大臣要求从轻发落，敏中也接受了此信。
English: Just when someone said that Min Chung was at the Law Temple, the emperor's privy councillor, who was not in charge of military affairs and had been exposed for bribery, wrote to the minister of the court to ask for a lighter sentence. Min Chung also accepted this letter.

古文：事下御史，按实，尝有书及门，敏中睹其名，不启封遣去。
现代文：事情下传到御史台，审察事实，曾经有书信送到敏中家，敏中看到了他的名字，没有打开信封就打发使者离去。
English: The matter was reported to the Imperial History Channel, which investigated the facts. A letter was once sent to Min Chung's home. When Min Chung saw his name, he sent the messenger away without opening the envelope.

古文：俄捕得侃私僮诘之，云其书寻纳筒中，瘗临江传舍。
现代文：不久捕捉得皇甫侃的私僮诘问此事，说那封信不久被丢进筒中，埋在临江驿传房舍。
English: Soon after, the emperor's private secretary was caught asking about the matter, saying that the letter was soon thrown into a canister and buried in the Linjiang Yuchuan House.

古文：驰驿掘得，封题如故。
现代文：赶紧往驿站挖掘得到书信，封题如故。
English: He hurried to the post office to dig up the letter and got it, with the same title.

古文：太宗大惊异，召见，慰谕赏激，遂决于登用。
现代文：太宗大为惊异，召见敏中，安慰赏激，于是决定升用敏中。
English: Taizong was very surprised, summoned Minzhong, consoled and rewarded him, and then decided to promote him to Minzhong.

古文：未几，拜右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
现代文：不久，拜右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
English: Soon after, he became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：自郎中至是百余日，超擢如此。
现代文：从任郎中到这时一百多天，越级提拔如此。
English: It has been more than a hundred days since Ren Lang was promoted to this position.

古文：时西北用兵，枢机之任，专主谋议，敏中明辨有才略，遇事敏速，凡二边道路、斥堠、走集之所，莫不周知。
现代文：当时西北用兵，枢密院的职责，专门负责图谋计议，敏中明辨具有才能谋略，遇事敏捷，凡是二边道路、关卡、不定期的集市的地方，莫不周知。
English: At that time, soldiers were used in the northwest, and the duties of the Privy Council were specifically responsible for planning and deliberation. They were sensitive, discriminating, able to strategize, and agile in times of trouble. They knew everything about the two-sided roads, checkpoints, and irregular markets.

古文：至道初，迁给事中。
现代文：至道初年，升任给事中。
English: In the first year of the course, he was promoted to the middle of the course.

古文：真宗即位，敏中适在疾告，力起，见于东序，即遣视事。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位，敏中刚好有疾告假，勉力起身，真宗在宫室的东厢接见了他，马上派遣他就职治事。
English: Zhenzong was the emperor. When Minzhong had to take sick leave, he struggled to get up. Zhenzong received him in the east wing of the palace, and immediately sent him to work.

古文：进户部侍郎。
现代文：进升户部侍郎。
English: He rose through the ranks to become a steward of the household.

古文：会曹彬为枢密使，改为副使。
现代文：恰逢曹彬为枢密使，敏中改任枢密副使。
English: Coincidentally, Cao Bin was appointed as the Privy Envoy, and Min Zhong was appointed as the Deputy Privy Envoy.

古文：咸平初，拜兵部侍郎、参知政事。
现代文：咸平初年，授官兵部侍郎、参知政事。
English: In the first year of Xianping, he was promoted to attendant of the military department, and became a member of the Council of State.

古文：从幸大名，属宋湜病，代兼知枢密院事。
现代文：跟随真宗临幸大名，代理兼知枢密院事。
English: He followed Rinchen Daimyo of the Shinshu Sect, acting as his agent, and became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：时大兵之后，议遣重臣慰抚边郡，命为河北、河东安抚大使，以陈尧叟、冯拯为副，发禁兵万人翼从。
现代文：当时是大仗之后，朝廷议论派重臣慰问安抚边郡，任命敏中为河北、河东安抚大使，以陈尧叟、冯拯为副使，派一万禁兵护卫随从。
English: At that time, after the great war, the imperial court sent a senior minister to console and pacify Bian County, appointed Minzhong as the ambassador of pacification in Hebei and Hedong, with Chen Qi and Feng Zheng as deputy envoys, and sent ten thousand forbidden soldiers to escort.

古文：所至访民疾苦，宴犒官吏，莫不感悦。
现代文：所至之地访问百姓疾苦，设宴犒劳官吏，莫不感动高兴。
English: There is nothing more moving and joyful than visiting a place where people are suffering and setting up a banquet to reward hard-working officials.

古文：四年，以本官同平章事，充集贤殿大学士。
现代文：咸平四年，敏中以安抚大使同平章事，充任集贤殿大学士。
English: In the fourth year of Xianping, Minzhong was appointed as a scholar of Jixianden University with the title of Tongping Ambassador of Pacification.

古文：故相薛居正孙安上不肖，其居第有诏无得贸易，敏中违诏质之。
现代文：已故宰相薛居正的孙子薛安上无能，他的居宅有诏命不得买卖，敏中违反诏令买其宅。
English: Xue An Shang, the grandson of the late Prime Minister Xue Jizheng, was incompetent. His residence was forbidden to be bought and sold by imperial edict. Minzhong violated the imperial edict and bought his residence.

古文：会居正子惟吉嫠妇柴将携赀产适张齐贤，安上诉其事，柴遂言敏中尝求娶己，不许，以是阴庇安上。
现代文：适逢薛居正的儿子薛惟吉的寡妇柴氏将携带资产嫁给张齐贤，薛安上诉讼此事，柴氏于是说敏中曾向自己求婚，没有答应，因此暗中庇护薛安上。
English: At the right time, Chai, the widow of Xue Weijing, the son of Xue Juzheng, was going to marry Zhang Qixian, the son of Xue Juzheng. Xue An sued the matter. Chai then said that Minzhong had proposed to him, but he did not agree, so he secretly protected Xue An.

古文：真宗以问敏中，敏中言近丧妻不复议婚，未尝求婚于柴，真宗因不复问。
现代文：真宗因而问敏中，敏中说不久前丧妻不再议论婚事，从没有向柴氏求婚，真宗因不再追究。
English: As a result, Shinso asked Minchu, and Minchu said that his recently deceased wife no longer talked about marriage, never proposed to Chai, and Shinso would no longer investigate the reason.

古文：柴又伐鼓，讼益急，遂下御史台，并得敏中质宅之状。
现代文：柴氏又击鼓，诉讼越来越急迫，于是把此事下传到御史台处理，并得到敏中买宅的状文。
English: Chai also beat the drum, the lawsuit became more and more urgent, so he sent the matter down to the Imperial History Bureau for processing, and received a petition from Minzhong to buy the house.

古文：时王嗣宗为盐铁使，素忌敏中，因对言，敏中议娶王承衍女弟，密约已定而未纳采。
现代文：当时王嗣宗为盐铁使，向来忌妒敏中，因而回答说，敏中议娶王承衍的妹妹，密约已定但没有备礼前去求婚。
English: At that time, Wang Shizong was a salt and iron envoy, and he had always been jealous of Min Zhong. Therefore, he replied that Min Zhong had proposed to marry Wang Chengyan's sister, and a secret agreement had been made, but there was no preparation to go ahead and propose.

古文：真宗询于王氏，得其实，以敏中前言为妄，罢为户部侍郎，出知永兴军。
现代文：真宗询问于王氏得到证实，以敏中以前说不再议婚事是妄语，罢免他为户部侍郎，出任永兴军知军。
English: Shinshu's inquiry to the Wang clan was confirmed, and Yimin Zhong, who had previously said that he would no longer discuss marriage, was delusional. He was dismissed as the head of the household and became the chieftain of the Yongxing Army.

古文：景德初，复兵部侍郎。
现代文：景德初年，恢复兵部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingde, he was reinstated as an attendant of the military department.

古文：夏州李继迁兵败，为潘罗支射伤，自度孤危且死，属其子德明必归宋，曰： 一表不听则再请，虽累百表，不得，请勿止也。 继迁卒，德明纳款，就命敏中为鄜延路缘边安抚使，俄还京兆。
现代文：夏州李继迁兵败，被潘罗支射伤，自己估计势孤力危快要死去，嘱咐他的儿子赵德明一定归附宋朝，说： 一次表奏没有得到批准就再次请求，即使累累百次表奏，如没能得到批准就不停止。 李继迁去世，赵德明投诚，就任命敏中为延路缘边安抚使，不久返回京兆。
English: Xia Zhou Li Ji Qian was defeated and shot by Pan Luo, and he estimated that he was in danger of dying, and ordered his son Zhao Deming to definitely join the Song Dynasty, saying: If a performance is not approved, he will request again, even if it is a hundred performances, if it is not approved, it will not stop. When Li Ji Qian died and Zhao Deming surrendered, he appointed Min Zhong as a roadside pacification envoy, and soon returned to Beijing.

古文：是冬，真宗幸澶渊，赐敏中密诏，尽付西鄙，许便宜从事。
现代文：当年冬天，真宗临幸澶渊，赐给敏中密诏，把西部边地全部交付给他，允许全权处理。
English: In the winter of that year, the True Sect of Buddhism traveled to Shanyuan and issued a secret edict to Min Zhong, entrusting him with all the western borderlands and allowing him to dispose of them as he saw fit.

古文：敏中得诏藏之，视政如常日。
现代文：敏中得到诏书后收藏起来，像平常一样处理政务。
English: After receiving the edict, Min Chung collected it and dealt with government affairs as usual.

古文：会大傩，有告禁卒欲倚傩为乱者，敏中密使麾兵被甲伏庑下幕中。
现代文：恰逢腊月禳祭以驱除瘟疫，有人报告禁兵打算趁禳祭时作乱，敏中秘密派部下军队身披铠甲埋伏在走廊下帷幕中。
English: At the time of the Dragon Boat Festival to drive away the plague, there was a report that the soldiers were planning to take advantage of the festival to make trouble, and Min Zhong secretly sent his troops to lie in ambush in the corridor under the curtain, wearing armor.

古文：明日，尽召宾僚兵官，置酒纵阅，无一人预知者。
现代文：第二天，把宾客僚属军官全部召来，设酒听任检阅，没有一人预先知道。
English: The next day, all the guests and officers were summoned, and the wine was set up for inspection. No one knew in advance.

古文：命傩入，先驰骋于中门外，后召至阶，敏中振袂一挥，伏出，尽擒之，果各怀短刃，即席斩焉。
现代文：命令禳祭的人进入，先是驰骋于中门外，后召到阶台，敏中振振衣袖一挥，伏兵出来，把禁兵全部擒捉，果然各怀短刀，当场斩杀于此。
English: The person who ordered the sacrificial offering to enter, first galloped outside the middle gate, then called to the steps, Min Zhong shook his sleeves and waved, the ambush came out, caught all the forbidden soldiers, and indeed each carried a knife and killed them on the spot.

古文：既屏其尸，以灰沙扫庭，张乐宴饮，坐客皆股栗，边藩遂安。
现代文：接着除去尸体，用灰沙打扫院庭，张乐宴饮，在座的客人都两腿发抖，边藩于是安定。
English: Next, the bodies were removed, the courtyard was cleaned with grey sand, and the banquet was held. The guests present were all trembling, and the border domain was thus stabilized.

古文：时旧相出镇，不以军事为意。
现代文：当时旧相出外镇，不以军事为意。
English: At that time, the old phase was out of town and not interested in the military.

古文：寇准虽有重名，所至终日游宴，则以所爱伶人或付富室，辄厚有得。
现代文：寇准虽然有重名，所到之处整天游玩宴乐，就以所喜爱的歌妓交付给富室，往往所得丰厚。
English: Although Kojun had several names, he spent all day partying wherever he went. He would give his favorite geisha to rich families, often earning a lot of money.

古文：张齐贤倜傥任情，获劫盗或至纵遣。
现代文：张齐贤倜傥任情，获取劫掠盗窃有时至于听任遣走。
English: Zhang Qixian was allowed to do as he pleased. He was allowed to loot and steal, and sometimes he was allowed to be sent away.

古文：帝闻之，称敏中曰： 大臣出临四方，惟敏中尽心于民事尔。 于是有复用之意。
现代文：真宗听说这些事，称许敏中说 ：大臣出临四方，只有敏中尽心于民事而已。 于是有再用敏中的意思。
English: When Shinshu heard about these events, he praised Ho Min for saying, "Ministers come from all over the country, but only Min is dedicated to civil affairs," with the intention of using Min again.

古文：二年，又以德明誓约未定，徙敏中为鄜延路都部署兼知延州，委以经略，改知河南府兼西京留守。
现代文：景德二年，又因赵德明盟约没有决定，流放敏中为延路都部署兼知延州，委任他策划处理，改任河南府知府兼西京留守。
English: In the second year of King Jingde's reign, due to the fact that Zhao Deming's alliance had not been decided, the exile Min was deployed to Yanlu and Yanzhou, and he was assigned to plan and deal with the situation. He was transferred to the post of governor of Henan Province and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：大中祥符初，议封泰山，以敏中旧德有人望，召入，权东京留守。
现代文：大中祥符初年，议论封禅泰山，以敏中德高有人望，召入朝廷，代理东京留守。
English: In the first year of Shobu Junior High School, he discussed the fief of Mount Tai, and was called to the Imperial Court as a representative of Tokyo.

古文：礼成，拜尚书右丞。
现代文：祀礼成功，授任尚书右丞。
English: The ceremony was a success, and he was awarded the title of Shoshu Ujo.

古文：时吏部选人多稽滞者，命敏中与温仲舒领其事。
现代文：当时吏部幕职州县官多有稽留阻滞，朝廷命敏中与温仲舒掌领其事。
English: At that time, most of the officials of the Ministry of Personnel, the Shogunate, and the prefectural and county officials had delays, and the Imperial Court was in charge of the matter with Wen Zhongshu.

古文：俄兼秘书监，又领工部尚书，充资政殿大学士，赐御诗褒宠。
现代文：敏中不久兼任秘书监，又领工部尚书，充任资政殿大学士，赐给御诗褒奖宠爱。
English: Not long after, Min Junior High School concurrently served as the secretary supervisor, and also led the engineering department to write a book, and served as the vice-president of the university, and gave the poem award to the favorite.

古文：祀汾阴，复为留守。
现代文：真宗祭祀汾阴，敏中又为留守。
English: The Shinshu sect held a religious service in Shinkin, but Minchu was absent.

古文：敏中以厚重镇静，人情帖然，帝作诗遣使驰赐之。
现代文：敏中因厚重镇静，人情敬服，真宗作诗派使者驰马赐给他。
English: Due to Min Zhong's great composure and respect for human feelings, he was given a horse by the poet-messenger of the True Sect.

古文：拜刑部尚书。
现代文：授官刑部尚书。
English: The punishment section of the awarding of posts is still in writing.

古文：五年，复拜同平章事，充集贤殿大学士，加中书侍郎。
现代文：大中祥符五年，再授同平章事，充集贤殿大学士，加中书侍郎。
English: After five years of high school, he was awarded the title of Tongping, and became a full member of the Xiantian University, and a junior high school librarian.

古文：寻充景灵宫使，宫成，进兵部尚书，为兖州景灵宫庆成使。
现代文：不久充任景灵宫使，宫建成，进升兵部尚书，为兖州景灵宫庆成使。
English: He was soon appointed as an envoy to the Jingling Palace, the palace was completed, he was promoted to the military department, and he became an envoy to celebrate the success of the Jingling Palace in Zhangzhou.

古文：天禧初，加吏部尚书，又为应天院奉安太祖圣容礼仪使。
现代文：天禧初年，加官吏部尚书，又为应天院奉安太祖圣容礼仪使。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's Jubilee, he was made an official of the Ministry of Civil Service, and he also served as a ceremonial envoy to the Imperial Court to pay homage to Emperor Antaizu.

古文：进右仆射兼门下侍郎，监修国史。
现代文：进升右仆射兼门下侍郎、监修国史。
English: Shinsho's right-hand man, Sho, also served as his manservant and supervised the study of national history.

古文：是日，翰林学士李宗谔当对，帝曰： 朕自即位，未尝除仆射，今命敏中，此殊命也，敏中应甚喜。 又曰： 敏中今日贺客必多，卿往观之，勿言朕意也。 宗谔既至，敏中谢客，门阑寂然。
现代文：这天，翰林学士李宗谔当值应对，真宗说： 朕自即位以来，从没有任命仆射，现任命敏中，这是特殊的命令，敏中应该很高兴。 又说： 敏中今天的贺客一定很多，你前往看看，不要说是朕的意思。 李宗谔到达后，敏中谢绝客人，门庭寂静无声。
English: On this day, the scholar of Hanlin, Li Zongyao, was on duty to respond, and Zhenzong said: Since I ascended the throne, I have never appointed a servant, but now I have appointed Minzhong, this is a special order, Minzhong should be happy. He also said: There must be a lot of well-wishers at Minzhong today, you should go and see, don't say that I mean. After Li Zongyao arrived, Minzhong declined the guests, and the courtyard was silent.

古文：宗谔与其亲径入，徐贺曰： 今日闻降麻，士大夫莫不欢慰相庆。 敏中但唯唯。
现代文：李宗谔与他的亲信径直入内，缓缓祝贺说： 今天听说降下任命的诏书，士大夫莫不欢慰相庆。 敏中只是谦卑应答。
English: Li Zongyao and his close confidants went straight inside, slowly congratulated and said: "Today, when I heard that the imperial rescript was issued, I couldn't help but rejoice and celebrate.

古文：又曰： 自上即位，未尝除端揆，非勋德隆重，眷倚殊越，何以至此。 敏中复唯唯。
现代文：李宗谔又说： 自从皇上即位以来，从没有除授宰相，不是功劳道德隆重，关心倚重超过一般，何以至此。 敏中又是谦卑应答。
English: Li Zongyao also said, "Since the emperor ascended the throne, there has never been a prime minister who has been stripped of his title, and it is not because of his great merits and morality, but because he cares more than usual.

古文：又历陈前世为仆射者勋德礼命之重，敏中亦唯唯，卒无一言。
现代文：李宗谔又历陈前代为仆射的人勋德礼命之重，敏中也谦卑应答，终无一言。
English: Li Zongyao also went through Chen's predecessor as the person who shot the bearer of the honor, the dignity and the weight of life, and he humbly responded, but there was no word in the end.

古文：既退，使人问庖中，今日有亲宾饮宴否，亦无一人。
现代文：李宗谔退出后，派人问厨房，今天有亲戚宾客设宴饮酒没有，也没有一人。
English: After Li Zongyao withdrew, he sent someone to ask the kitchen if there were any relatives or guests who had set up a banquet to drink alcohol today. There was no one.

古文：明日，具以所见对。
现代文：第二天，李宗谔全以所见到的应对。
English: The next day, Mr. Lee reacted to what he saw.

古文：帝曰： 向敏中大耐官职。 徙玉清昭应宫使。
现代文：真宗说 ：向敏中很经得起官职。 徙玉清昭应宫使。
English: Shinshu said: "Xiang Min junior is very capable of holding an official post. Iyotama Kiyoshi should be a palace envoy."

古文：以年老，累请致政，优诏不许。
现代文：因年老屡次请求辞官，特诏不准许。
English: Due to his advanced age, he has repeatedly asked to be demoted, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：三年重阳，宴苑中，暮归中风眩，郊祀不任陪从。
现代文：天禧三年重阳节，在皇苑中宴饮，傍晚回去中风眩病，郊祀没有任陪从。
English: On Chung Yeung Festival, the third year of the Heavenly Jubilee, there was a banquet in the middle of the imperial garden, and in the evening I went back with apoplexy and vertigo, and there was no one to accompany me.

古文：进左仆射、昭文馆大学士，奉表恳让，又表求解，皆不许。
现代文：进升左仆射、昭文馆大学士，奉表奏恳求辞让，又上表请求解除职务，都没有得到批准。
English: Jin Sheng, Zuo Fuxia, and Zhaowen University Scholar, submitted a written request to resign, and also requested to be relieved of their duties, but none of these requests were approved.

古文：明年三月卒，年七十二。
现代文：第二年三月去世，终年七十二岁。
English: He died in March of the following year, at the age of 72.

古文：帝亲临，哭之恸，废朝三日，赠太尉、中书令，谥文简。
现代文：真宗亲自临丧，哭得很伤心，停止朝会三天，赠敏中太尉、中书令，谥号文简。
English: Shinsong himself came to the funeral, wept very sad, stopped the imperial meeting for three days, gave Min the rank of lieutenant, the order of the book, and the nickname Wen Jian.

古文：五子、诸婿并迁官，亲校又官数人。
现代文：敏中的五个儿子、众女婿一同升官，亲族受官的又有几人。
English: Five of Min's sons and all of his sons-in-law were promoted together, and several relatives were also promoted.

古文：敏中姿表瑰硕，有仪矩，性端厚岂弟，多智，晓民政，善处繁剧，慎于采拔。
现代文：敏中姿态仪表奇伟高大，有礼节规矩，性情端厚平易近人，多智谋，通晓民政，善于处理繁杂剧烈的事务，对选用提拔持慎重态度。
English: Sensitive, medium to tall, good manners, polite, approachable, resourceful, familiar with civil affairs, good at handling complicated and strenuous affairs, cautious about selection and promotion.

古文：居大任三十年，时以重德目之，为人主所优礼，故虽衰疾，终不得谢。
现代文：他居重要职位三十年，当时以重德称他，被皇帝所优礼，因此虽然衰老生病，终不能辞谢。
English: He held an important position for thirty years. At that time, he was praised for his great virtue and was honored by the emperor. Therefore, although he was old and sick, he could not refuse to thank him.

古文：及追命制入，帝特批曰： 敏中淳谨温良，宜益此意。 其恩顾如此。
现代文：等到追赠的制书入朝，真宗特批说： 敏中淳厚恭谨温和善良，宜益此意。 其恩顾如此。
English: When the posthumous book was presented to the Imperial Court, Shinshong gave a special commendation, saying, "He is sensitive, honest, courteous, gentle, and kind, and it is fitting that he should be so regarded.

古文：有文集十五卷。
现代文：敏中有文集十五卷。
English: There are 15 volumes in Min's anthology.

古文：子传正，国子博士；传式，龙图阁直学士；传亮，驾部员外郎；传师，殿中丞；传范，娶南阳郡王惟吉女安福县主，为密州观察使，谥惠节。
现代文：儿子传正，国子博士；传式，龙图阁直学士；传亮，驾部员外郎；传师，殿中丞；传范，娶南阳郡王赵惟吉女安福县主为妻，任密州观察使，谥号惠节。
English: His son Chuan Zheng, Dr. Guo Zi; Chuan Shih, Dr. Long Tu Ge; Chuan Liang, the driver's brother; Chuan Shih, the palace junior secretary; Chuan Fan, married to the daughter of Wang Zhao Wei Ji, the lord of Anfu County in Nanyang County, served as the observation envoy of Myizhou, and was given the name Hui Jie.

古文：传亮子经，定国军留后，谥康懿。
现代文：传亮的儿子向经，定国军留后，谥号康懿。
English: After Chuang Liang's son, Xiang Jing, stayed behind with the Dingguo Army, he took the name Kangxi.

古文：经女即钦圣宪肃皇后也，以后族赠敏中燕王、传亮周王、经吴王。
现代文：向经的女儿即是钦圣宪肃皇后，因后族赠敏中燕王、传亮周王、向经吴王。
English: Xiang Jing's daughter was the Empress Qinsheng Xiansu, who was given the titles of the King of the Middle Yan, the King of the Bright Zhou, and the King of the Wu to Xiang Jing.

古文：敏中余孙绎、绛，并官太子中书。
现代文：敏中其余的孙子向绎、向绛，都官太子中书。
English: The remaining grandsons of Min Zhong, Xiang Yu and Xiang Yao, became the princes of the capital.

