古文：吴王昏乃戒，令秣马食士。
现代文：吴王夫差于是在黄昏时发布命令，让士卒饱餐并喂足战马。
English: Wu Wangfu then issued an order at dusk to give the soldiers a full meal and feed the horses.

古文：夜中，乃令服兵擐甲，系马舌，出火灶，陈士卒百人，以为彻行百行。
现代文：半夜时分下令全军穿好铠甲，缚住马舌，把行军灶里的火移出来照明，一百名士卒排成一行，共排成一百行。
English: At midnight, he ordered the whole army to put on armor, tie the horse's tongue, and move the fire from the marching stove to illuminate. One hundred soldiers were lined up in a row, a total of one hundred rows.

古文：行头皆官师，拥铎拱稽，建肥胡，奉文犀之渠。
现代文：每行排头的都是官师，抱着金属做的大铃，捧着士兵名册，旁边树着幡旗和犀牛皮做的盾牌。
English: At the head of each line are officers and instructors, holding a large metal bell, holding a roster of soldiers, with flags and rhinoceros-hide shields next to them.

古文：十行一嬖大夫，建旌提鼓，挟经秉枹。
现代文：每十行由一名下大夫率领，竖着旌旗，提着战鼓，挟着兵书，拿着鼓槌。
English: Each of the ten lines is led by a junior doctor, holding a banner, carrying a war drum, holding a military book, and holding a drumstick.

古文：十旌一将军，载常建鼓，挟经秉枹。
现代文：一百行由一名将军率领，竖着日月旗，支起战鼓，将军挟着兵书，拿着鼓槌。
English: One hundred marches were led by a general, with the sun and moon flag raised, war drums propped up, the general clutching a military manual and holding a drumstick.

古文：万人以为方阵，皆白裳、白旂、素甲、白羽之矰，望之如荼。
现代文：一万人组成一个方阵，都穿着白色的下衣，打着白色的旗帜，披着白色的铠甲，带着白羽毛制作的箭，远看像一片白色的茅草花。
English: Ten thousand people formed a phalanx, all wearing white underwear, waving white flags, wearing white armor, carrying arrows made of white feathers, looking like a white thatch flower from a distance.

古文：王亲秉钺，载白旗以中阵而立。
现代文：吴王亲自拿着钺，身旁树着白色军旗在方阵中间站立。
English: King Wu himself stood in the middle of the phalanx, holding a scepter and with a white flag of truce next to him.

古文：左军亦如之，皆赤裳，赤、丹甲、朱羽之矰，望之如火。
现代文：左军也像中军这样列阵，但都穿着红色的下衣，打着红色的旗帜，披着红色的铠甲，带着红羽毛制作的箭，远看像一片鲜红的火焰。
English: The left army also lined up like the Chinese army, but they all wore red underwear, carried red flags, wore red armor, and carried arrows made of red feathers. From a distance, they looked like a bright red flame.

古文：右军亦如之，皆玄裳、玄旗、黑甲、乌羽之矰，望之如墨。
现代文：右军也像中军这样列阵，但都穿着黑色的下衣，打着黑色的旗帜，披着黑色的铠甲，带着黑羽毛制作的箭，远看像一片黑色的乌云。
English: The right-wing army also lined up like the Chinese army, but they all wore black underwear, carried black flags, wore black armor, and carried arrows made of black feathers. From a distance, they looked like a black cloud.

古文：为带甲三万，以势攻，鸡鸣乃定。既陈，去晋军一里。
现代文：左中右三军披戴铠甲的将士共三万人，气势十足向前进攻，鸡叫时就摆定阵势，距晋军只有一里路。
English: The three armies on the left, center, and right have a total of 30,000 soldiers wearing armor. They are full of momentum to advance and attack. When the rooster crows, they will set up their positions. They are only one mile away from the Jin army.

古文：昧明，王乃秉枹，亲就鸣钟鼓、丁宁、于振铎，勇怯尽应，三军皆哗釦以振旅，其声动天地。
现代文：天未大亮，吴王便拿起鼓槌亲自擂鼓，敲响了铜钲、金玦和金铎，三军勇敢的、胆怯的一起响应，齐声呐喊鼓动，声浪震动天地。
English: Before dawn, King Wu picked up the drumstick and personally beat the drum, and sounded the gong, gong and gong. The three armies, brave and timid, responded together, shouting and agitating in unison, and the sound waves shook the world.

古文：晋师大骇不出，周军饬垒，乃令董褐请事，曰： 两君偃兵接好，日中为期。今大国越录，而造于弊邑之军垒，敢请乱故。 
现代文：晋军大惊，不敢出来应战，加强戒备，修缮营垒，派董褐前去问话，说： 两国君主商定撤兵和好，以中午为期，现在贵国违反约定，来到敝国的军营外，请问乱了次序是为何原因？ 
English: The Jin army was shocked and did not dare to come out to fight, they strengthened their alertness, repaired the camp, and sent Dong Rong to ask questions, saying: The two monarchs agreed to withdraw troops and make peace at noon, and now your country violated the agreement and came outside the military camp of Shandong. Please ask why the order was out of order.

古文：吴王亲对之曰： 天子有命，周室卑约，贡献莫入，上帝鬼神而不可以告。无姬姓之振也，徒遽来告。
现代文：吴王亲自回答说： 周天子有命令，眼下王室衰微，没有诸侯纳贡，连告祭天地鬼神的牺牲也缺乏，又没有姬姓的本家来救援。
English: The king of Wu himself replied: Zhou Tianzi has an order, at the moment the royal family is in decline, there is no feudal tribute, even the sacrifice to the gods and spirits of heaven and earth is lacking, and there is no family with the surname of Hime to rescue.

古文：孤日夜相继，匍匐就君。
现代文：有人步行或乘车来告诉我这个命令，所以我日夜兼程，赶到晋君这儿。
English: Some people came on foot or by car to tell me about this order, so I drove day and night to get to Jinjun.

古文：君今非王室不平安是忧，亿负晋众庶，不式诸戎、狄、楚、秦；将不长弟，以力征一二兄弟之国。
现代文：如今晋君不为王室的困难忧虑，虽拥有晋国的兵众，却不去征讨藐视王室的戎狄、楚、秦等国，还不讲长幼的礼节，攻打同姓的兄弟国家。
English: Today, Jinjun is not worried about the difficulties of the royal family. Although he has the largest number of soldiers in Jin, he does not go to conquer the armies of Di, Chu, Qin and other countries that despise the royal family. He does not talk about the etiquette of the elders and children, and attacks the brother countries with the same surname.

古文：孤欲守吾先君之班爵，进则不敢，退则不可。
现代文：我想保住我先君的爵位，超越先君我不敢，不及先君我也不愿。
English: I want to keep my predecessor's title. I don't dare to surpass him, and I don't want to fall short of him.

古文：今会日薄矣，恐事之不集，以为诸侯笑。孤之事君在今日，不得事君亦在今日。
现代文：现在盟会的日期已临近了，我恐怕事情不成功而被诸侯耻笑，我是屈服于晋君，还是战胜晋君当盟主，都决定于今天。
English: Now that the date of the alliance meeting is approaching, I'm afraid that if things don't work out, I'll be ridiculed by the lords. Whether I give in to Jinjun or win over Jinjun as the leader of the alliance will be decided today.

古文：为使者之无远也，孤用亲听命于藩篱之外。 
现代文：你这个使者就在我旁边不远，我将亲自在军营外听取你们的决定。 
English: You, the messenger, are not far from me, and I will personally listen to your decision outside the camp.

古文：董褐将还，王称左畸曰： 摄少司马兹与王士五人，坐于王前。 
现代文：董褐将要返回，吴王召唤左部的军吏说： 把少司马兹和五个王士抓来，坐在我面前。 
English: When Dong Rong was about to return, King Wu summoned the officers on his left and said, "Bring in Major Maze and the five princes and sit in front of me."

古文：乃皆进，自刭于客前以酬客。
现代文：六人便一齐向前，在客使董褐面前自杀以谢客。
English: The six of them then went forward together and committed suicide in front of the guest, Dong Rong, in order to thank the guest.

古文：董褐既致命，乃告赵鞅曰： 臣观吴王之色，类有大忧，小则嬖妾、嫡子死，不则国有大难；大则越入吴。
现代文：董褐向晋君复命后，便告诉赵鞅说： 我观察吴王的气色，似乎有大的忧患，从小的方面说也许是他的宠妾或嫡子死了，不然就是国内有叛乱；从大的方面说也许是越国已攻入吴国。
English: After Dong Rong gave his life back to Jinjun, he told Zhao Yu: I observed the appearance of the king of Wu. He seemed to be in great distress. On a small scale, perhaps his favorite concubine or legitimate son had died, or else there was a rebellion in the country. On a large scale, perhaps Yueguo had invaded Wu.

古文：将毒，不可与战。
现代文：被逼到困境的人将会非常残暴，不可与这样的人作战。
English: He who is forced into a corner will be very violent, and one should not fight with such a person.

古文：主其许之先，无以待危，然而不可徒许也。 
现代文：你还是答应让他先歃血作盟主，不要等着冒风险，但不能白白答应他。 
English: You still promised to let him be the first to draw blood as the leader, don't wait to take risks, but you can't promise him for nothing.

古文：赵鞅许诺。
现代文：赵鞅表示同意。
English: Zhao Wei agreed.

古文：晋乃令董褐复命曰： 寡君未敢观兵身见，使褐复命曰： 曩君之言，周室既卑，诸侯失礼于天子，请贞于阳卜，收文、武之诸侯。
现代文：晋国于是令董褐去复命说： 敝国国君不敢显示军威，也不敢亲自露面，派我来复命说： 如同刚才贵国国君所言，眼下周室已经衰微，诸侯大夫们对天子失礼，贵国国君准备用龟甲占卜，恢复周文王、周武王时期诸侯们事奉天子的义务。
English: Jin therefore ordered Dong Rong to reply and said: "King of Jin does not dare to show military power, nor does he dare to appear in person, so he sent me to reply and said: As your king said just now, the next generation has waned, the princes' doctors are disrespectful to the heavenly son, and your king is preparing to use tortoise shell divination to restore the obligation of princes to serve the heavenly son during the period of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu.

古文：孤以下密迩于天子，无所逃罪，讯让日至，曰：昔吴伯父不失，春秋必率诸侯以顾在余一人。
现代文：我们晋国接近天子，没有逃避罪责的理由，不断听到天子对我们的责备，说：从前吴国的先君不失礼，一年四季必定率领诸侯朝见我。
English: We, the people of Jin, are close to the Son of Heaven, and there is no reason to evade our responsibility. We constantly hear the Son of Heaven reproach us, saying, "In the past, the forefathers of the State of Wu were not impolite, and they would certainly lead the princes of the court to see me all year round.

古文：今伯父有蛮、荆之虞，礼世不续，用命孤礼佐周公，以见我一二兄弟之国，以休君忧。
现代文：如今的吴国国君有蛮荆威胁，不能继续先君的朝聘之礼，所以让我们晋国效劳辅助周太宰，并邀集同姓的兄弟国家朝聘天子，消除他的忧虑。
English: Today's Wu Guo Guo Jun is under the threat of being unable to continue the previous Jun's imperial appointment, so let us serve the promotion of the country to assist Zhou Dazai, and invite the brothers of the same surname to the imperial appointment to eliminate his worries.

古文：今君掩王东海，以淫名闻于天子，君有短垣，而自逾之，况蛮、荆则何有于周室？
现代文：现在贵国国君的权威复盖东海，僭越的名声已经传到天子耳中，虽有礼仪之防，可是贵国国君却自己逾越了，更何况蛮荆之人，他们对周室还讲什么礼仪呢？
English: Now that the authority of your country's sovereign covers the East China Sea, the reputation of arrogance has spread to the ears of heaven. Although there are etiquette defenses, your country's sovereign has exceeded them, not to mention the barbarians. What kind of etiquette do they still teach to the Zhou family?

古文：夫命圭有命，固曰吴伯，不曰吴王。诸侯是以敢辞。
现代文：天子命圭时早有命令，称吴国的国君为吴伯而不称吴王，所以诸侯才敢不尊事吴。
English: According to God's will, there was an early order to call the sovereign of the State of Wu as Wu Bo instead of Wu Wang, so the princes dared to disrespect Wu.

古文：夫诸侯无二君，而周无二王，君若无卑天子，以干其不祥，而曰吴公，孤敢不顺从君命长弟！  
现代文：诸侯不可有两个盟主，周室也不可有两个王，贵国国君如果不鄙视和冒犯天子，并以吴公自称的话，我们晋国怎敢不顺从他的命令让他先歃血呢！  
English: Princes should not have two lords, nor should the Zhou dynasty have two kings. If the sovereign of your country does not despise and offend the Son of Heaven, and if he does not call himself Wu Gong, how dare we, the State of Jin, disobey his order and let him draw blood first!

古文：吴王许诺，乃退就幕而会。
现代文：吴王同意了，便退兵然后进入幕帐举行盟会。
English: King Wu agreed, withdrew his troops and then entered the tent to hold a league meeting.

古文：吴公先歃，晋侯亚之。
现代文：吴王先歃血，晋侯排在他后面。
English: Wu Wang was the first to draw blood, followed by Jin Hou.

古文：吴王既会，越闻愈章，恐齐、宋之为己害也，乃命王孙雒先与勇获帅徒师，以为过宾于宋，以焚其北郛焉而过之。
现代文：吴王参加盟会以后，越国的声威更大了，吴王恐怕齐、宋两国给他造成危害，便派王孙雒先和勇获率领步兵，以回国路过为名来到宋国，焚烧了宋国国都北面的外城作为恫吓然后才过境。
English: After King Wu participated in the alliance, the prestige of Vietnam became greater. King Wu was afraid that the two countries of Qi and Song would cause him harm, so he sent Wang Sun Rongxian and Yong Guo to lead the infantry. They came to Song in the name of passing by, and burned the outer city north of the Song capital as a threat before crossing the border.

