古文：孝怀皇帝讳炽，字丰度，武帝第二十五子也。
现代文：孝怀皇帝名炽，字丰度，是武帝的第二十五个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaohai was a famous and prolific writer. He was the twenty-fifth son of Emperor Wu.

古文：太熙元年，封豫章郡王。
现代文：太熙元年被封为豫章郡王。
English: In the first year of the Tahei era, he was named the King of Yuzhang County.

古文：属孝惠之时，宗室构祸，帝冲素自守，门绝宾游，不交世事，专玩史籍，有誉于时。
现代文：当惠帝在位的时候，皇室成员交相作乱，皇帝平和自守，闭门谢客，不问世事，专心研究历史典籍，在当时很有声誉。
English: When Hui Di was on the throne, the members of the royal family made trouble with each other, the emperor was peaceful and self-protective, thanked guests behind closed doors, did not ask about worldly affairs, and concentrated on studying historical classics, which was very reputable at that time.

古文：初拜散骑常侍，及赵王伦篡，见收。
现代文：起初担任散骑常侍，到了赵王司马俭篡取帝位时，曾被监禁。
English: At first, he served as a knight errant. When Zhao Wang Sima Jian usurped the throne, he was imprisoned.

古文：伦败，为射声校尉。
现代文：司马伦失败后，担任射声校尉。
English: After Smalen's failure, he became a gunnery lieutenant.

古文：累迁车骑大将军、都督青州诸军事。未之镇。
现代文：逐渐升任车骑大将军、都督青州诸军事，但没有到镇所去。
English: He was gradually promoted to the general of cavalry and chariot and the military governor of Qingzhou, but he did not go to the town.

古文：永兴元年，改授镇北大将军、都督鄴城守诸军事。
现代文：丞垒元年，改任镇北大将军、都督邺城守诸军事。
English: In the first year of his military service, he was reassigned to the post of General of the Northern Towns, and the post of the governor of the city was transferred to the military.

古文：十二月丁亥，立为皇太弟。
现代文：十二月丁亥，立为皇太弟。
English: In December, Ding Hai became the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：帝以清河王覃本太子也，惧不敢当。
现代文：皇帝认为清河王司马覃本是太子，因此感到恐惧而不敢承当。
English: The emperor thought that Sima Ye, the king of Qinghe, was the crown prince, so he was afraid and did not dare to undertake it.

古文：典书令庐陵修肃曰： 二相经营王室，志宁社稷，储贰之重，宜归时望，亲贤之举，非大王而谁？
现代文：典书令庐医人恺盛说： 二相管理王室事务，志在安定社稷，皇储地位重要，应该让众望所归的人担当，要推举贤人，除了大王还有谁呢?
English: According to the edict, the doctor, Jinsheng, said: "Two phases manage the royal affairs, aiming at a stable society. The position of the crown prince is important. The person who is popular should be in charge, and the wise man should be elected. Who else is there besides the great king?

古文：清河幼弱，未允众心，是以既升东宫，复赞籓国。
现代文：清河王幼小稚弱，不称众人的心，因此已经进了东宫，又回封国当清河王。
English: King Qinghe was too young and too weak to win the hearts of the people, so he had already entered the East Palace and returned to the country as King Qinghe.

古文：今乘舆播越，二宫久旷，常恐氐羌饮马于泾川，蚁众控弦于霸水。
现代文：如今皇上颠沛流离，二宫长久无人，常常担心氐人、羌人攻略到，像蚂蚁一样的敌众来到霸水之滨耀武扬威。
English: Now that the emperor has fled, the second palace has been empty for a long time, and it is often feared that the eunuchs and eunuchs will capture it, and the enemy like ants will come to the waterfront to show off.

古文：宜及吉辰，时登储副，上翼大驾，早宁东京，下允黔首喁喁之望。 帝曰： 卿，吾之宋昌也。 
现代文：理应趁吉日良辰，及时登上储君之位，上可以辅佐皇帝，早日平定塞塞这屋，下可以满足百姓们诚恳急切的愿望。 怀帝说： 你呀，真是我的宋垦。 
English: It was only natural that he should take advantage of the auspicious day and ascend to the position of crown prince in a timely manner. Above, he could assist the emperor, pacify this house as soon as possible, and below, he could satisfy the sincere and urgent wishes of the people.

古文：乃从之。
现代文：于是就听从了脩肃的意见。
English: So he followed the advice of Gong Su.

古文：光熙元年十一月庚午，孝惠帝崩。
现代文：光压元年十一月庚午，耋赵去世。
English: On the afternoon of November in the first year of the Qing dynasty, Zhai Zhao passed away.

古文：羊皇后以于太弟为嫂，不得为太后，催清河王覃入，已至尚书阁，侍中华混等急召太弟。
现代文：芏皇后认为自己对于皇太弟来说衹是嫂嫂，不能当皇太后，就催促清河王司马覃入宫，已经到了尚书合，侍中华混等人急忙召来太弟。
English: The Empress Dowager thought that she was the sister-in-law of the younger brother of the Crown Prince and could not be the Empress Dowager, so she urged the King of the Qing River, Sima Qian, to enter the palace. He had already arrived at Shang Shuhe, and the attendants of Zhong Zhong and others hurriedly summoned the younger brother.

古文：癸酉，即皇帝位，大赦，尊皇后羊氏为惠皇后，居弘训宫，追尊所生太妃王氏为皇太后，立妃梁氏为皇后。
现代文：癸酉，即皇帝位，大赦天下，尊奉皇后羊氏为惠皇后，让她居住在弘训宫，追尊生母太妃王氏为皇太后，立妃凿压为皇后。
English: , that is, the emperor's throne, was granted to the whole world, and Queen Yang was revered as Empress Hui, and she was allowed to live in the Hongxun Palace. His biological mother, Princess Wang, was revered as the empress dowager, and Princess Li was revered as the empress.

古文：十二月壬午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十壬午朔日，有日食。
English: There will be a solar eclipse on the New Year's Day.

古文：己亥，封彭城王植子融为乐城县王。
现代文：己亥，封堑越王旦昼堕的儿子司马融为乐城县王。
English: Ji Hai, the son of the late Fong Yue Wang, Sima Rong, became the king of Lecheng County.

古文：南阳王模杀河间王颙于雍谷。
现代文：直压眶司马模在壅查杀了河间王司马颐。
English: The direct pressure of Wang Sima Miao killed Wang Sima Jiao of Hebei Province.

古文：辛丑，以中书监温羡为司徒，尚书左仆射王衍为司空。
现代文：辛丑，任命中书监为司徒，尚书左仆射王堑为司空。
English: Xin Ug, appointed the book supervisor as the steward, and Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Wangqi, as the steward.

古文：己酉，葬孝惠皇帝于太阳陵。
现代文：己酉，将孝惠皇帝安葬在主垦噬。
English: The Emperor Xiaohui was buried in the main hall.

古文：李雄别帅李离寇梁州。
现代文：奎堡的部将奎整侵扰銮业。
English: Kuiborg's subordinate general, Kuijian, invaded Xingye.

古文：永嘉元年春正月癸丑朔，大赦，改元，除三族刑。
现代文：永嘉元年春正月癸丑朔日，大赦天下，改年号，废除诛连三族的刑罚。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongjia, the world was amnestied, the year was changed, and the punishment of the three tribes of Qilian was abolished.

古文：以太傅、东海王越辅政，杀御史中丞诸葛玫。
现代文：让太傅、束海王司马越辅佐朝政，杀了御史中丞诸葛玫。
English: Let Taifu and Sokai King Sima Yue, assistant to the Imperial Court, kill the Imperial Historian Chujo Zhuge Mei.

古文：二月辛巳，东莱人王弥起兵反，寇青、徐二州，长广太守宋罴、东牟太守庞伉并遇害。
现代文：二月辛巳，东莱人王弥起兵谋反，侵扰青、徐两州，长广太守宋罢、东牟太守庞伉都被杀害。
English: In February, Wang Ya, a Donglai man, started a military rebellion and invaded the two states of Qing and Xu. Changguang Taishu Songba and Dongmu Taishu Pangyao were both killed.

古文：三月己未朔，平东将军周馥斩送陈敏首。
现代文：三月己未朔日，平束将军周馥斩了陈敏的首级送来。
English: The month of March had not yet dawned, when General Zhou Jizhe of Pingzhu cut off Chen Min's head and sent it to me.

古文：丁卯，改葬武悼杨皇后。
现代文：丁卯，将武悼杨皇后改葬。
English: Dingwu changed the funeral to the military mourning of Empress Yang.

古文：庚午，立豫章王诠为皇太子。
现代文：庚午，立豫章王司马诠为皇太子。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Yuanzhang appointed Wang Sima as the crown prince.

古文：辛未，大赦。
现代文：辛未，大赦天下。
English: Xinwei, the implementation of the amnesty.

古文：庚辰，东海王越出镇许昌。
现代文：庚辰，束海王司马越出京镇守许昌。
English: Geng Chen and Sokkai King Sima Yue went to Beijing to defend Xu Chang.

古文：以征东将军、高密王简为征南大将军、都督荆州诸军事，镇襄阳；改封安北将军、东燕王腾为新蔡王、都督司冀二州诸军事，镇鄴；以征南将军、南阳王模为征西大将军、都督秦雍梁益四州诸军事，镇长安。
现代文：任命征东将军、高密王司马简为征南大将军、都督荆州诸军事，镇守襄阳；改封安北将军、束燕王司马腾为新蔡王、都督司冀诸军事，镇守邺；任命征南将军、南阳王司马模为征西大将军、都督秦雍梁益四州诸军事，镇守长安。
English: He appointed the general of the East Conquest, Gaomi Wang Sima Jian, as the general of the South Conquest, the military governor of Jingzhou, and the town guard of Xiangyang; changed the title of the general of Anbei, Shuyan Wang Sima Teng, as the new king of Cai, the military governor of Hebei, and the town guard of Handan; appointed the general of the South Conquest, Nanyang King Sima Miao, as the general of the West Conquest, and the military governor of Qin Yongliang, the military governor of Shizhou, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：并州诸郡为刘元海所陷，刺史刘琨独保晋阳。
现代文：并州各郡被刘元海攻陷，衹有晋阳被刺史刘琨守住。
English: And all counties in the prefecture were invaded and occupied by Liu Yuanhai, and all of Jinyang was held by Liu Ye.

古文：夏五月，马牧帅汲桑聚众反，败魏郡太守冯嵩，遂陷鄴城，害新蔡王腾。
现代文：夏五月，马牧帅汲桑聚众谋反，打败魏郡太守冯嵩，接着攻陷邺城，杀害新蔡王司马腾。
English: In the summer of May, Ma Mu Shuai gathered the Kuisang people to plot a rebellion, defeated Wei County Governor Feng Song, and then attacked Lucheng, killing the new Cai Wang Sima Teng.

古文：烧鄴宫，火旬日不灭。
现代文：焚烧邺宫，大火十天不减。
English: Burning of the Summer Palace, the fire continued unabated for ten days.

古文：又杀前幽州刺史石鲜于乐陵，入掠平原，山阳公刘秋遇害。
现代文：又在乐陵杀了前幽州刺史石匙，进入平原抢掠，山阳公刘秋被害。
English: He also killed the former Yuzhou assassin Shi Shi in Le Ling, entered the plains to plunder, and killed Liu Qiu, the Prince of Shanyang.

古文：洛阳步广里地陷，有二鹅出，色苍者冲天，白者不能飞。
现代文：洛阳步广里一带地面沉陷，有两只鹅冒出来，苍色的冲天而去，白色的不能飞。
English: The ground sank in the area of Luoyang Bu Guangli, two geese emerged, the pale one flew away, the white one could not fly.

古文：建宁郡夷攻陷宁州，死者三千余人。
现代文：建宁郡的夷人攻陷宁州城，死了三千多人。
English: The Yi people of Jianning County captured Ningzhou City, and more than three thousand people died.

古文：秋七月己酉朔，东海王越进屯官渡，以讨汲桑。
现代文：秋季七月己酉朔日，束海王司马越进驻官渡，准备讨伐汲桑。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the king of Sokkai, Sima Yue, arrived in Kandu, ready to fight the Kuisang.

古文：己未，以平东将军、琅邪王睿为安东将军、都督扬州江南诸军事、假节，镇建鄴。
现代文：己未，任命平东将军、琅邪王司马睿为安东将军、都督扬州江南诸军事、暂持节、镇守建邺。
English: At the same time, he appointed General Pingdong and the evil king Sima Rui as General Andong, the military governor of Yangzhou Jiangnan Province, the temporary festival, and the town guard Jianye.

古文：八月己卯朔，抚军将军苟晞败汲桑于鄴。
现代文：八月己卯朔日，抚军将军苟晞在邺打败汲桑。
English: In August, on the first day of the new year, the general of the Fuzhou army, Guo Zheng, defeated the Kuisang army.

古文：甲辰，曲赦幽、并、司、冀、兗、豫等六州。
现代文：甲辰，特赦幽、并、司、冀、兖、辽等六州。
English: Six prefectures, including Jia, Chen, Yu, Bian, Si, Hebei, Handan and Liao, were granted amnesty.

古文：分荆州、江州八郡为湘州。
现代文：分出荆州、江州中的八个郡为湘州。
English: The eight counties in Jingzhou and Jiangzhou are called Hunan.

古文：九月戊申，苟晞又破汲桑，陷其九垒。
现代文：九月戊申，苟晞又打败汲桑，攻下他的九座营垒。
English: In September, in Wushin, Goguryeo defeated Kuisang and captured his nine strongholds.

古文：辛亥，有大星如日，小者如斗，自西方流于东北，天尽赤，俄有声如雷。
现代文：辛亥，有大星像太阳，小的像斗，从西方流向东北，天空全红了，不久有声音像雷鸣。
English: In Xinhai, there are big stars like the sun, small ones like a bucket, flowing from the west to the northeast, the sky is all red, and soon there is a sound like thunder.

古文：始修千金堨于许昌以通运。
现代文：开始在姜旦修建王金堡，以方便运输。
English: Began construction of the Wangjin Fort in Jiangdan to facilitate transportation.

古文：冬十一月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十一月戊申初一，有日食。
English: In winter, November, the first day of Boshin, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲寅，以尚书右仆射和郁为征北将军，镇鄴。
现代文：甲寅，任命尚书右仆射和郁为征北将军，镇守邺。
English: Emperor Jiajing appointed Shangshu's right-hand men, Jia and Yu, as Northern Expeditionary Generals and town guards.

古文：十二月戊寅，并州人田兰、薄盛等斩汲桑于乐陵。
现代文：十二月戊寅，差州人田兰、薄盛等在乐陵杀死汲桑。
English: In December, Wu Yin, Tian Lan, Bo Sheng, and other people from Zhangzhou killed Kuisang in Le Ling.

古文：甲午，以前太傅刘寔为太尉。
现代文：甲午，任命前太傅刘室为太尉。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Liu Shuxu, the former Taifu, was promoted to the rank of Taifu.

古文：庚子，以光禄大夫、延陵公高光为尚书令。
现代文：庚子，任命光禄大夫、延陵公直韭为尚书令。
English: Geng Zi, appointed Guanglu Doctor and Yanling Gong Zhiyao as Shang Shuling.

古文：东海王越矫诏囚清河王覃于金墉城。
现代文：塞眶塱墨越假传韶书将渣河王司马覃囚禁在金墉城。
English: According to the false legend, Jiehe King Sima Jiao was imprisoned in Jinyuan City.

古文：癸卯，越自为丞相。
现代文：癸卯，司区越自命为丞相。
English: At the same time, Shikuetsu appointed himself as chancellor.

古文：以抚军将军苟晞为征东大将军。
现代文：任命抚军将军苟晞为征东大将军。
English: Appointed the general of the Fuzhong army, Guo Jun, as the general of the eastward expedition.

古文：二年春正月丙子朔，日有蚀之，日有蚀之。
现代文：二年春正月丙午初一，有日食。丁未，大赦天下。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：三月，东海王越镇鄄城。刘元海侵汲郡，略有顿丘、河内之地。
现代文：二月辛卯，清河王司马覃被东海王司马越杀害。庚子，互勤侵犯鲎旦，安北将军工涂讨伐打败了他。
English: In February Xinwu, the Qing River King Sima Yi was killed by the East Sea King Sima Yue. Geng Zi, who was busy invading Shandong, defeated him in the Battle of Anbei.

古文：王弥寇青、徐、兗、豫四州。
现代文：三月，束海王司马越镇守鄄城。困侵犯脚，占据扯、龃一带。题侵犯壹、途、兖、涂四州。
English: In March, Sima Yue, the king of Sokhai, took up the defense of Lucheng. He encroached on Lucheng and occupied the areas of Lucheng and Lucheng. He encroached on Shizhou, Tu, Lucheng and Tu.

古文：夏四月丁亥，入许昌，诸郡守将皆奔走。
现代文：夏四月丁亥，进入许旦，各郡驻守的将领全都逃跑了。
English: In the summer and April of Dinghai, into Xu Dan, the generals stationed in each county all fled.

古文：五月甲子，弥遂寇洛阳，司徒王衍帅众御之，弥退走。
现代文：五月甲子，王疆接着侵犯迢昼，司徒工堑率部众抵御，王迩退兵。
English: In May, Wang Jian continued to encroach on Jia Rong's territory, which was resisted by the Jia Rong's subordinates, and Wang Jia retreated.

古文：秋七月甲辰，刘元海寇平阳，太守宋抽奔京师，河东太守路述力战，死之。
现代文：秋七月甲辰，刘五痉侵扰垩荡，太守塞抽逃往京城，眯太守蹬述力战，死于战阵。
English: In the first hour of the autumn and July, Liu Wuxuan intruded into the capital, the dean of the imperial palace fled to the capital, and the dean of the imperial palace died in the battle.

古文：十一月乙巳，尚书令高光卒；丁卯，以太子少傅荀籓为尚书令。
现代文：八月丁亥，束海王司马越从坚球移驻到遗盟。九月，互勤侵犯垄缀，征北将军壬噻从邺奔逃到适量。冬十月甲戌，型五涂在卫区僭称帝号，仍叫选。
English: In August of Dinghai, Sima Yue, the king of the Sokhai Kingdom, moved from Jianqiu to the abandoned alliance. In September, the reciprocal invasion of the ridges occurred, and the Northern General Ren Yu fled to the right amount. In the winter of October, Jia Yu, the type five coated in the defense area, was called the imperial name, and was still called the election.

古文：己酉，石勒寇鄴，魏郡太守王粹战败，死之。
现代文：十一月乙巳，尚书令高光去世；己酉，石勒侵犯邺，蕴邓太守王整战败，死于阵中。
English: On the second day of November, Gao Guang, the commander of Shang Shuling, passed away; Ji Yao, Shi Le encroached on Gao, and Ying Deng, the governor of Taizhou, was defeated and died in the battle.

古文：十二月辛未朔，大赦。
现代文：丁卯，任命太子少傅茎蓬为尚书令。十二月辛未初一，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, appointed the young prince Fu Zi Peng as Shang Shuling. On the first day of December, he was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：立长沙王乂子硕为长沙王，鲜为临淮王。
现代文：立长沙王司马义的儿子司马硕为垦兰哇，司马匙为临淮王。
English: Changsha King Sima Yi's son, Sima Shuo, is known as Yulanwa, and Sima Key is known as Linhuai.

古文：三年春正月甲午，彭城王释薨。
现代文：三年春正月甲午，彭城王司马释去世。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of spring in the third year, Pengcheng Wang Simasong passed away.

古文：三月戊申，征南大将军、高密王简薨。
现代文：三月戊申，征南大将军、高密王司马简去世。
English: In March, Wushin, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Gaomi Wang Sima Jian passed away.

古文：以尚书左仆射山简为征南将军、都尉荆湘交广等四州诸军事，司隶校尉刘暾为尚书左仆射。
现代文：任命尚书左仆射山简为征南将军、都督荆、湘、奎、庐等四州诸军事，任命司隶校尉刘暾为尚书左仆射。
English: He appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Shaoshan Jian, as the general of the Southern Expedition and the military governor of Jing, Hunan, Guizhou, and Handan in the four states, and appointed Liu Jian, a non-commissioned officer, as Shangshu's left-hand man.

古文：丁巳，东海王越归京师。
现代文：丁巳，东海王司马越回到京城。
English: Soon after, the king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, returned to Beijing.

古文：乙丑，勒兵人宫，于帝侧收近臣中书令缪播、帝舅王延等十余人，并害之。
现代文：乙丑。带兵进入皇宫，从皇帝身边捉走亲近大臣中书令垄钟、帝舅父工延等十多人，全部杀害。
English: B Ugly. He led soldiers into the imperial palace and seized from the emperor's side more than ten people close to the emperor, including the minister Zhongshu Ling Rong Zhong, and the emperor's uncle Gong Yan, all of whom were killed.

古文：丙寅，曲赦河南郡。
现代文：丙寅，特赦回宜型。
English: He Yin, amnesty reciprocity type.

古文：丁卯，太尉刘寔请老，以司徒王衍为太尉。
现代文：丁卯，太尉刘室请求退休，任命司徒王衍为太尉。
English: Dingwu, Lieutenant Liu requested to retire, and appointed Szu Wangyan as Lieutenant.

古文：东海王越领司徒。
现代文：东海王司马越兼任司徒。
English: The king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, also served as a tutor.

古文：刘元海冠黎阳，遣车骑将军王堪击之，王师败绩于延津，死者三万余人。
现代文：刘元海侵犯黎阳，派遣车骑将军王堪去攻打他，王堪的部队在延津大败，死了三万多人。
English: Liu Yuanhai invaded Liyang and sent the chariot and cavalry general Wang Kan to attack him. Wang Kan's troops were soundly defeated in Yanjin, and more than thirty thousand people died.

古文：大旱，江、汉、河、洛皆竭，可涉。
现代文：天大旱，长江、汉水、黄河、洛水都水少，可以涉水过去。
English: Due to the severe drought, the Yangtze River, Han River, Yellow River and Luoshui all have less water, so you can wade across.

古文：夏四月，左积弩将军硃诞叛奔于刘元海。
现代文：夏四月，左积弩将军朱诞叛逃刘元海处。
English: In the summer of April, General Zuo Jiechi defected to Liu Yuanhai.

古文：石勒攻陷冀州郡县百余壁。
现代文：石勒攻占冀州各郡县中的一百多处营垒。
English: Shi Le captured more than a hundred camps in counties and counties in Jizhou.

古文：秋七月戊辰，当阳地裂三所，各广三丈，长三百余步。
现代文：秋七月戊辰，当阳一带地面裂开三处，各宽三丈，长三百多步。
English: In autumn and July, the ground around Dangyang cracked in three places, each three feet wide and more than three hundred paces long.

古文：辛未，平阳人刘芒荡自称汉后，诳诱羌戎，僭帝号于马兰山。
现代文：辛未，平阳人刘芒荡自称是汉皇室后裔，诱骗羌戎部落的人，在马兰山僭称帝号。
English: In Xinwei, the Pingyang man Liu Menglang claimed to be a descendant of the Han royal family, tricked the people of the Qiong Rong tribe, and assumed the title of emperor in the Malan Mountain.

古文：支胡五斗叟、郝索聚众数千为乱，屯新丰，与芒荡合党。
现代文：支胡的五斗叟、郝索聚集数千人作乱，驻在新丰，和芒荡结党联合。
English: Thousands of people gathered in Wuduo and Yingsao of Zhifu to make a disturbance, stationed in Xinfeng, and united with Meng Xiang to form a party.

古文：刘元海遣子聪及王弥寇上党，围壶关。
现代文：刘元海派儿子刘聪和王弥一起侵犯上党，围困壶关。
English: Liu Yuanhai sent his son Liu Cong and Wang Ya together to invade the upper party and besiege Juguan.

古文：并州刺史刘琨使兵救之，为聪所败。
现代文：并州刺史刘琨出兵救援，被刘聪打败。
English: and sent troops to rescue Liu Wei, the governor of Zhoushi Province, who was defeated by Liu Cong.

古文：淮南内史王旷、将军施融、曹超及聪战，又败，超、融死之。
现代文：淮南内史王旷、将军施融、曹超和刘聪交战，又被打败，曹超、施融战死。
English: Wang Kuang, general Shi Rong, Cao Chao and Liu Cong fought in Huainan and were defeated again. Cao Chao and Shi Rong died in the battle.

古文：上党太守庞淳以郡降贼。
现代文：上党太守庞淳以郡城投降叛贼。
English: Shang Dang Daju Pang Chun surrenders the county seat to the traitors.

古文：九月丙寅，刘聪围浚仪，遣平北将军曹武讨之。
现代文：九月丙寅，刘聪围攻浚仪，派遣平北将军曹武讨伐刘聪。
English: In September, Hsin-yin and Liu-cong besieged Dredge, and sent the North Korean general Cao Wu to fight Liu-cong.

古文：丁丑，王师败绩。
现代文：丁丑，官军大败。
English: Ding Yuxi, the official army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：东海王越人保京城。
现代文：束海王司马越来保卫京城。
English: Sokai King Sima Yue came to defend the capital.

古文：聪至西明门，越御之，战于宣阳门外，大破之。
现代文：刘聪打到西明门，束海王司马越进行抵御，在宣阳门外交战，大败刘聪。
English: Liu Cong fought to the Ximing Gate, Shu Hai Wang Sima Yue resisted, and won the diplomatic battle at the Xuanyang Gate, defeating Liu Cong.

古文：石勒寇常山，安北将军王浚使鲜卑骑救之，大破勒于飞龙山。
现代文：石勒侵犯常山，安北将军王浚让鲜卑骑兵救援，在飞龙山大败石勒。
English: Shi Le invaded Changshan, and Anbei General Wang Jun allowed the Xianbei cavalry to rescue him, defeating Shi Le at the Flying Dragon Mountain.

古文：征西大将军、南阳王模使其将淳于定破刘芒荡、五斗叟，并斩之。
现代文：征西大将军、南阳王司马模派他的部将淳于定打败刘芒荡、五斗叟，把他们都杀了。
English: The great general of the Western Conquest, Nanyang King Sima Miao, sent his subordinate, Jun Yuding, to defeat Liu Menghuang and Wudu Yao, and killed them all.

古文：使车骑将军王堪、平北将军曹武讨刘聪，王师败绩，堪奔还京师。
现代文：派车骑将军王堪、平北将军曹武讨伐刘聪，官军大败，王堪逃回京城。
English: General Wang Kan and General Cao Wu of North Pyongan Province were sent by car to fight Liu Cong. The government army was soundly defeated and Wang Kan fled back to the capital.

古文：李雄别帅罗羡以梓潼归顺。
现代文：李雄的副帅罗羡以梓潼来归顺。
English: Li Xiong's second-in-command, Luo En, surrenders to Zizhao.

古文：刘聪攻洛阳西明门，不克。
现代文：刘聪攻打洛阳西明门，没有成功。
English: Liu Cong attacked Luoyang Ximing Gate, but without success.

古文：宜都夷道山崩，荆、湘二州地震。
现代文：宜都夷道发生山崩，荆、湘两个州地震。
English: A landslide occurred in Yiduyi Road, and earthquakes occurred in Jing and Hunan Provinces.

古文：冬十一月，石勒陷长乐，安北将军王斌遇害。因屠黎阳。
现代文：冬十一月，石勒攻陷长乐，安北将军王斌遇害，并在黎阳大肆屠杀。
English: In the winter of November, Shille captured Changle, Anbei General Wang Bin was killed, and massacres were carried out in Liyang.

古文：乞活帅李恽、薄盛等帅众救京师，聪退走。
现代文：难民首领李惮、薄盛等率领众人援救京城，刘聪退兵逃走。
English: Refugee leaders Li Shuang, Bo Sheng and others led the crowd to rescue Beijing, and Liu Cong retreated and fled.

古文：恽等又破王弥于新汲。
现代文：李惮等又在新汲打败王弥。
English: Li Shao and others beat Wang Ya again in Xinqiu.

古文：十二月乙亥，夜有白气如带，自地升天，南北各二丈。
现代文：十二月乙亥，夜间有白气像带子一样，从地面升向天空，南北各有两丈。
English: In December of the first year of the Heian period, white gas rose like a ribbon in the night, rising from the ground to the sky, with two heights in the north and south.

古文：四年春正月乙丑朔，大赦。
现代文：四年春正月乙丑初一，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Spring, the first day of the second month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the

古文：二月，石勒袭鄄城，兗州刺史袁孚战败，为其部下所害。
现代文：二月，石勒袭击鄄城，兖州刺史袁孚战败，被他的部下杀害。
English: In February, Shi Le attacked Handan City, Handan Jishi Yuan Fu was defeated and killed by his subordinates.

古文：勒又袭白马，车骑将军王堪死之。
现代文：石勒又袭击白马，车骑将军王堪战死。
English: Shi Le attacked the white horse again, and the rider, General Wang Kan, was killed.

古文：李雄将文硕杀雄大将军李国，以巴西归顺。
现代文：李雄的部将文硕杀死李雄的大将军李国，以巴西来归顺。
English: Li Xiong's general, Wen Shuo, killed Li Xiong's general, Li Guorong, and surrendered to Brazil.

古文：戊午，吴兴人钱璯反，自称平西将军。
现代文：戊午，吴兴人钱坟反叛，自称为平西将军。
English: At noon, Wu Xingren rebelled against Qianbo and called himself General Pingxi.

古文：三月，丞相仓曹属周帅乡人讨璯，斩之。
现代文：三月，丞相仓曹属周圮率领乡人讨伐钱脍，杀了他。
English: In March, the chancellor Cang Cao Zhen Zhou Qi led the villagers to fight Qian Qi and killed him.

古文：夏四月，大水。
现代文：夏四月，发洪水。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a flood.

古文：将军祁弘破刘元海将刘灵曜于广宗。李雄陷梓潼。
现代文：将军祁弘在广宗打败刘元海的部将刘灵曜。李雄攻陷梓潼。
English: General Gong Hong defeated Liu Yuanhai's subordinate Liu Ling You in Guangzong. Li Xiong captured Zizhi.

古文：兗州地震。
现代文：兖州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，石勒寇汲郡，执太守胡宠，遂南济河，荥阳太守裴纯奔建鄴。
现代文：五月，石勒侵犯汲郡，捉住太守胡宠，接着向南渡过黄河，荣阳太守裴纯逃奔建邺。
English: In May, Shiller invaded Kyu County, captured the governor Hu Jia, and then crossed the Yellow River to the south. The governor of Rongyang, Pei Chun, fled to Jianye.

古文：大风折木。
现代文：大风吹折树木。
English: High winds snapped trees.

古文：地震。
现代文：地震。
English: An earthquake.

古文：幽、并、司、冀、秦、雍等六州大蝗，食草木，牛马毛皆尽。
现代文：幽、并、司、冀、秦、雍等六州蝗虫成灾，草木、牛马的毛全被吃光。
English: Locusts in six prefectures, including Yu, Bin, Shih, Hebei, Qin, and Yong, caused havoc. All the grass, trees, and the hair of cattle and horses were eaten away.

古文：六月，刘元海死，其子和嗣伪位，和弟聪杀和而自立。
现代文：六月，刘元海死，他的儿子刘和接任伪皇帝位，刘和的弟弟刘聪谋杀了刘和而自立为伪皇帝。
English: In June, Liu Yuanhai died, and his son Liu He took over as the pseudo-emperor. Liu He's brother Liu Cong murdered Liu He and became the pseudo-emperor.

古文：秋七月，刘聪从弟曜及其将石勒围怀，诏征虏将军宋抽救之，为曜所败，抽死之。
现代文：秋七月，刘聪的从弟刘曜和他的部将石勒围攻怀，下韶让征虏将军宋抽去援救，被刘曜打败，宋抽战死。
English: In autumn and July, Liu Cong's younger brother Liu You and his subordinates besieged Shilou, and ordered the captive general Song Yu to come to their rescue. Liu You defeated Song Yu and he was killed in the battle.

古文：九月，河内人乐仰执太守裴整叛，降于石勒。
现代文：九月，河内人乐仰捉住太守裴整而反叛，投降了石勒。
English: In September, the people of Hanoi gladly rebelled against the capture of the governor Pei Ting and surrendered to Shile.

古文：徐州监军王隆自下邳弃军奔于周馥。
现代文：徐州监军王隆从下邳抛弃军队逃到周馥那裹。
English: Wang Long, the military governor of Xuzhou, abandoned the army and fled to Zhouyuan from Jiaozuo.

古文：雍州人王如举兵反于宛，杀害令长，自号大将军、司雍二州牧，大掠汉沔，新平人庞寔、冯翊人严嶷、京兆人侯脱等各起兵应之。
现代文：雍州人王如首先起兵在宛谋反，杀害地方长官，自称大将军、司雍二州牧，大肆抢掠汉沔地区，新平人庞塞、冯翊人严嶷、京兆人侯脱等各自起兵响应他。
English: For example, the king of the Yongzhou people first raised an army to rebel, killed the local governor, claimed to be the general and the leader of the Yongzhou people, and plundered the Hanzhong area. The Xinping people Pang Xie, the Fengyu people Yan Xie, and the Beijing Zhao people Hou Tuo each raised an army to respond to him.

古文：征南将军山简、荆州刺史王澄、南中郎将杜蕤并遣兵援京师，及如战于宛，诸军皆大败；王澄独以众进至沶口，众溃而归。
现代文：征南将军山简、荆州刺史王澄、南中郎将杜蕤都派兵援救京城，和王如在宛交战，各军都大败；仅有王澄率部进驻到泺口，因部众溃散而返回。
English: Southern-conquering generals Shan Jian, Jing Zhou, Wang Cheng, and Nan Zhong Lang sent troops to rescue the capital, and fought with Wang Ru in Wan, and all the armies were defeated; only Wang Cheng and his troops were stationed in Hekou, and returned because the troops were dispersed.

古文：冬十月辛卯，昼昏，至于庚子。
现代文：冬十月辛卯，白昼昏暗，一直持续十天到庚子日。
English: Winter and October are harsh, the daylight is dim, and it lasts for ten days until Geng Zi Day.

古文：大星西南坠，有声。
现代文：有大星往西南方向坠落，有响声。
English: A large star fell to the southwest and made a loud noise.

古文：壬寅，石勒围仓垣，陈留内史王赞击败之，勒走河北。
现代文：壬寅，石勒围攻仓垣，陈留内史王赞打败了他，石勒逃往黄河以北。
English: Ren Yin and Shiller besieged Cangak, Chen Runeishi and Wang Zan defeated him, and Shiller fled north of the Yellow River.

古文：壬子，以骠骑将军王浚为司空，平北将军刘琨为平北大将军。
现代文：壬子，任命骠骑将军王浚为司空，任命平北将军刘琨为平北大将军。
English: Ren Zi appointed the cavalry general Wang Jun as the sky marshal, and appointed the general of North Pyongan Province, Liu Ye, as the general of North Pyongan Province.

古文：京师饥。
现代文：京城饥荒。
English: Famine in Kyoto.

古文：东海王越羽檄征天下兵，帝谓使者曰： 为我语诸征镇，若今日，尚可救，后则无逮矣。 
现代文：东海王司马越用羽毛檄书紧急征召天下军队，皇帝对使者们说： 替我告知各位将军，如果马上发兵，还可以救我们，再迟就来不及了。 
English: The king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, urgently summoned the world's armies with a feathered letter. The emperor said to the envoys: Tell the generals for me that if they send troops right away, they can still save us, and it will be too late.

古文：时莫有至者。
现代文：当时没有一个将军来救的。
English: There was no general to come to the rescue.

古文：石勒陷襄城，太守崔旷遇害，遂至宛。
现代文：石勒攻陷襄城，太守崔旷被杀，接着攻到宛。
English: Shi Le captured Xiangcheng, the governor Cui Yu was killed, and then attacked Wan.

古文：王浚遣鲜卑文鸯帅骑救之，勒退。
现代文：王浚派遣鲜卑文鸯率领骑兵救援那裹，石勒退兵。
English: Wang Jun dispatched Xingbei Wenqi to lead the cavalry to rescue Na Wulai, and Shi Le retreated.

古文：浚又遣别将王申始讨勒于汶石津，大破之。
现代文：王浚又派遣部将王申始在汶石津讨伐石勒，大败石勒。
English: Wang Jun also dispatched the general Wang Shenshi to fight against Shilai in Wenshijin, and defeated Shilai.

古文：十一月甲戌，东海王越帅众出许昌，以行台自随。
现代文：十一月甲戌，束海王司马越率领部众离开许昌，让行台跟随自己。
English: In November, at the Battle of Armor, Sima Yue, the Prince of Sokhai, led his troops to leave Xu Chang and let the troops follow him.

古文：宫省无复守卫，荒馑日甚，殿内死人交横，府寺营署并掘堑自守，盗贼公行，桴鼓之音不绝。
现代文：宫廷官署不再有守卫，荒灾饥馑一天天严重，殿襄的死人横七竖八，府寺营署等都挖掘堑壕来防守，小偷强盗公然活动，报警的鼓音不绝于耳。
English: The palace government offices no longer have guards, the devastation and famine are getting worse every day, the dead in the palace are piling up, the prefectural and temple camp offices are digging trenches to defend themselves, thieves and robbers are openly active, and the sound of police alarms is incessant.

古文：越军次项，自领豫州牧，以太尉王衍为军司。
现代文：束海王司马越的部队驻扎在项，自己兼任豫州牧，让太尉王衍担任军司。
English: The troops of the Sokha King Sima Yue were stationed in Xiang, and he also served as the governor of Yuzhou, leaving Lieutenant Wang Yan to serve as the military commander.

古文：丁丑，流氐隗伯等袭宜都，太守嵇晞奔建鄴。
现代文：丁丑，流窜的氐人隗伯等袭击宜都，太守嵇晞逃奔建邺。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the fugitive Han people Zibo and others attacked Yidu, and the Tai Shou Yan fled to Jianyuan.

古文：王申始攻刘曜、王弥于瓶垒，破之。
现代文：王申始在瓶垒进攻刘曜、王弥，打败了他们。
English: Wang Shenshi attacked Liu You and Wang Ya in the middle of the ring and defeated them.

古文：镇东将军周馥表迎大驾迁都寿阳，越使裴硕讨馥，为馥所败，走保东城，请救于琅邪王睿。
现代文：镇束将军周馥上表要迎接皇帝迁都到寿阳，东海王司马越派裴硕讨伐周馥，被周馥打败，逃往东城防守，向琅邪王司马睿求救。
English: Zhou Yu, the general of Zhenzuk, wanted to welcome the emperor's relocation to Shouyang, and the East Sea King Sima Yue sent Pei Shuo to fight Zhou Yu. He was defeated by Zhou Yu, fled to the East City for defense, and asked the evil king Sima Rui for help.

古文：襄阳大疫，死者三千余人。
现代文：襄阳发生大瘟疫，死的有三千多人。
English: A great plague occurred in Yangyang, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：加凉州刺史张轨安西将军。
现代文：加凉州刺史张轨为安西将军。
English: Zhang Lu, the famous general in the history of Liangshan, was the general of Anxi.

古文：十二月，征东大将军苟晞攻王弥别帅曹嶷，破之。
现代文：十二月，征东大将军苟晞进攻王弥副将曹嶷，打败了他。
English: In December, the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, Guo Gan, attacked the vice-general of Wang Ya, Cao Qi, and defeated him.

古文：乙酉，平阳人李洪帅流人入定陵作乱。
现代文：乙酉，平阳人李洪率领流民进入定陵作乱。
English: acetylene, Li Hong, a Pingyang man, led the displaced people into Dingling to create a disturbance.

古文：五年春正月，帝密诏苟晞讨东海王越。
现代文：五年春正月，皇帝秘密下诏让苟晞讨伐束海王司马越。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the emperor secretly issued an edict to let Goguryeo fight for the felling of the sea king Sima Yue.

古文：壬申，晞为曹嶷所破。
现代文：壬申，苟晞被曹嶷打败。
English: In Jinshin, Gong Li was defeated by Cao Pi.

古文：乙未，越遣从事中郎将杨瑁、徐州刺史裴盾共击晞。
现代文：乙未，东海王司马越派遣从事中郎将杨瑁、徐州刺史裴盾共同攻打苟晞。
English: At the same time, the East Sea King Sima Yue dispatched the middle lords Yang Qian and Xuzhou chief Baidun to jointly attack Goguryeo.

古文：癸酉，石勒入江夏，太守杨珉奔于武昌。
现代文：癸酉，石勒进犯江夏，太守杨珉逃奔到武昌。
English: At the same time, Shi Le invaded Jiangxia, and Yang Hui fled to Wuchang.

古文：乙亥，李雄攻陷涪城，梓潼太守谯登遇害。
现代文：乙亥，李雄攻陷涪城，梓潼太守谯登被杀害。
English: Yi Hai and Li Xiong captured Lucheng, and Zi Yu, the Empress Dowager of Lucheng, was killed.

古文：湘州流人杜弢据长沙反。
现代文：湘州流民杜搜占据长沙谋反。
English: Hunan refugee Du Zuo occupied Changsha and plotted a rebellion.

古文：戊寅，安东将军、琅邪王睿使将军甘卓攻镇东将军周馥于寿春，馥众溃。
现代文：戊寅，安束将军、琅邪王司马睿让将军甘卓进攻镇束将军周馥于寿春，周馥的部下溃散。
English: Wu Yin, General Anzac, and the Evil King, Sima Rui, ordered General Gan Zhuo to attack General Zhenzac, Zhou Jun, in Shuchun, and Zhou Jun's men scattered.

古文：庚辰，太保、平原王干薨。
现代文：庚辰，太保、乎原王司马干去世。
English: Geng Chen, Tai Po, and Wang Sima Gan passed away.

古文：二月，石勒寇汝南，汝南王祐奔建鄴。
现代文：二月，石勒侵犯汝南，汝南王司马枯逃奔建邺。
English: In February, Shile invaded the south of Ryukyu, and the king of Ryukyu, Sima Ku, fled to Jianye.

古文：三月戊午，诏下东海王越罪状，告方镇讨之。
现代文：三月戊午，下韶公布束海王司马越的罪行，要各地的守将讨伐他。
English: On the afternoon of March 3rd, the lower court announced the crime of Sima Yue, the king of Sokkai, and called for the defenders of various regions to fight him.

古文：以证东大将军苟晞为大将军。
现代文：任命征柬大将军苟晞为大将军。
English: Appointed the conscript general of Cambodia, Goh Joon, as the general.

古文：丙子，东海王越薨。
现代文：丙子，束海王司马越去世。
English: His son, Sokai King Sima Yue passed away.

古文：四月戊子，石勒追东海王越丧，及于东郡，将军钱端战死，军溃，太尉王衍、吏部尚书刘望、廷尉诸葛铨、尚书郑豫、武陵王澹等皆遇害，王公已下死者十余万人。
现代文：四月戊子，石勒追逐束海王司马越的灵柩，在东郡赶上，将军饯端战死，军队溃散，太尉王衍、吏部尚书刘望、廷尉诸葛铨、尚书郑豫、武陵王司马澹等都被杀害，自王公以下死了的有十多万人。
English: In April, Wu Zi and Shi Le chased the coffin of the dhow king Sima Yue and caught up with it in Dong County. The general Shantuan was killed in the battle, and the army was dispersed. The lieutenant Wang Yan, the official Shang Shu Liu Wang, the courtier Zhu Ge Jun, the official Shang Shu Zheng Yu, and the Wuling king Sima Jun were all killed, and more than 100,000 people died since Wang Gong.

古文：东海世子毗及宗室四十八王寻又没于石勒。
现代文：束海王的世子司马毗和宗室的四十八个王不久又被石勒所杀。
English: King Sokkai's heir, Sima Bi, and the forty-eight kings of his family were soon killed by the stone.

古文：贼王桑、冷道陷徐州，刺史裴盾遇害，桑遂济淮，至于历阳。
现代文：强盗王桑、冷道攻陷徐州，刺史裴盾被杀害，王桑接着渡过淮河，到达历阳。
English: The robber Wang Sang and the Cold Road captured Xuzhou, and the assassin Shi Pei Dun was killed. Wang Sang then crossed the Huaihe River and reached Liyang.

古文：五月，益州流人汝班、梁州流人蹇抚作乱于湘州，虏刺史苟眺，南破零、桂诸郡，东掠武昌，安城太守郭察、劭陵太守郑融、衡阳内史滕育并遇害。
现代文：五月，益州流民汝班、梁州流民蹇抚在湘州作乱，俘虏刺史苟眺，往南攻破零、桂各郡，往东抢掠武昌，安城太守郭察、邵陵太守郑融、衡阳内史滕育都被杀害。
English: In May, the Yizhou exiles Ru Ban and the Liangzhou exiles Xun Fu rioted in Hunan. The captives Zi Shi and Guo Guan went south to break the zero, Gui counties, and east to loot Wuchang. The Ancheng governor Guo Zha, the Shao Ling governor Zheng Rong, and the Hengyang governor Sheng Yu were all killed.

古文：进司空王浚为大司马，征西大将军、南阳王模为太尉，太子太傅傅祗为司徒，尚书令荀籓为司空，安东将军、琅邪王睿为镇东大将军。
现代文：升司空王浚为大司马，征西大将军、南阳王司马模为太尉，太子太傅傅祗为司徒，尚书令苟藩为司空，安东将军、琅邪王司马睿为镇东大将军。
English: Sheng Shi Kuo Wang Jun was the grand steward, Zheng Xi Da Gen, Nanyang Wang Sima Miao was the first lieutenant, Taizhi Taifu Fu Jun was the steward, Shang Shuling Guo Han was the steward, General Andong, and Xie Yao Wang Sima Rui was the general of Zhen Dong Da Gen.

古文：东海王越之出也，使河南尹潘滔居守。
现代文：东海王司马越离开京城的时候，让河南尹潘滔留守。
English: When the East Sea king Sima Yue left Beijing, he left Henan's Yin Pengtao behind.

古文：大将军苟晞表迁都仓垣，帝将从之，诸大臣畏滔，不敢奉诏，且宫中及黄门恋资财，不欲出。
现代文：大将军苟晞上表请求迁都到仓垣，皇帝准备听从他的意见，各大臣畏惧潘滔，不敢奉行韶令，况且宫中人和宦官们贪恋资财，不想出京。
English: The great general Gohan made a request to move the capital to Kuragaki, and the emperor was ready to listen to his opinion. The ministers were afraid of Pan Tao and did not dare to carry out the royal order. Moreover, the people in the palace and the eunuchs were greedy for money and did not want to go to Beijing.

古文：至是饥甚，人相食，百官流亡者十八九。
现代文：到遣时饿极了，人吃人，百宫中流亡的有十之八九。
English: When they arrived, they were starving. People were eating each other. Out of a hundred palaces, nine out of ten were in exile.

古文：帝召群臣会议，将行而警卫不备。
现代文：皇帝召集群臣商议，准备出行可是没有警卫。
English: The emperor called his courtiers together for consultation. They prepared to leave, but without guards.

古文：帝抚手叹曰： 如何会无车舆！ 
现代文：皇帝搓着手叹息说： 怎么竟然没有车辆啊! 
English: The emperor rubbed his hands together and sighed, "How come there are no cars!"

古文：乃使司徒傅祗出诣河阴，修舟楫，为水行之备。
现代文：就让司徒傅祗出城到河阴，修理船只，为走水路作准备。
English: So he sent his son-in-law out of the city to Heyin to repair the boat and prepare for the voyage.

古文：朝士数人导从。
现代文：朝中官员数十个人随从。
English: Dozens of officials from North Korea and China accompanied him.

古文：帝步出西掖门。至铜驰街，为盗所掠，不得进而还。
现代文：皇帝步行走出西掖门，到铜驰街，被强盗抢掠，不能前进而返回宫中。
English: The emperor walked out of the West Gate and went to Tongchi Street. He was robbed by robbers and could not go forward, so he returned to the palace.

古文：六月癸未，刘曜、王弥、石勒同寇洛川，王师频为贼所败，死者甚众。
现代文：癸未，刘曜、王弥、石勒一同侵扰洛川，朝廷的军队频频被叛贼打败，死了很多人。
English: Soon after, Liu You, Wang Ya, and Shi Le invaded Luochuan together. The imperial army was frequently defeated by the traitors, and many people died.

古文：庚寅，司空荀籓、光禄大夫荀组奔轘辕，太子左率温几夜开广莫门奔小平津。
现代文：六月庚寅，司空荀藩、光禄大夫荀组逃奔辕辕，太子左率温畿夜间打开广莫门逃奔小平津。
English: In June, Geng Yin, the Secretary of the Kuomintang Domain, and the Guanglu Doctor of the Kuomintang Group fled the Kuomintang, and the Prince of the Kuomintang, Wen Gui, opened the Guangmo Gate at night and fled to Xiaoping.

古文：丁酉、刘曜、王弥入京师。
现代文：丁酉，刘曜、王弥进入京城。
English: Ding Jun, Liu You and Wang Ya enter Beijing.

古文：帝开华林园门，出河阴藕池，欲幸长安，为曜等所追及。
现代文：皇帝打开华林园门，经河阴藕池，想前往长安，被刘曜等追赶上。
English: The emperor opened the gate of the Hualin Garden and passed through Heyin and Dianchi. He wanted to go to Chang'an, but was chased by Liu You and others.

古文：曜等遂焚烧宫庙，逼辱妃后，吴王晏、竟陵王楙、尚书左仆射和郁、右仆射曹馥、尚书闾丘冲、袁粲、王绲、河南尹刘默等皆遇害，百官士庶死者三万余人。
现代文：刘曜等于是焚烧宫庙，逼迫侮辱妃嫔皇后，吴王司马晏、竟陵王司马榊、尚书左仆射和郁、右仆射曹馥、尚书闾丘冲、袁粲、王绲、河南尹刘默等人都被杀害，百官士人庶民死的有三万多人。
English: Liu You is equivalent to burning the palace and temple, persecuting and insulting the Empress Dowager, Wu Wang Simatai, Wang Simatai, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao He, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shao He, Shang Shux

古文：帝蒙尘于平阳，刘聪以帝为会稽公。
现代文：皇帝在平阳被俘虏，刘聪以皇帝为会稽公。
English: The emperor was captured in Pingyang, and Liu Cong took the emperor as his inspector.

古文：荀籓移檄州镇，以琅邪王为盟主。
现代文：荀藩发送檄文给各州各军镇，以琅邪王作为盟主。
English: The Yan clan sent a letter to all the military towns in all the states, with the leader of the Yan clan as the leader.

古文：豫章王端东奔苟晞，晞立为皇太子，自领尚书令，具置官属，保梁国之蒙县。
现代文：豫章王司马端往东逃奔苟晞，苟晞立他为皇太子，自己兼任尚书令，设置各种官府机构，驻守梁国的蒙县。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Simatang fled eastward to Goguryeo, and Goguryeo made him crown prince. He also served as Shang Shuling, set up various government agencies, and garrisoned Meng County in Liang Province.

古文：百姓饥俭，米斛万余价。
现代文：百姓饥饿，又歉收，米价一斛一万多钱。
English: The people are hungry, the harvest is poor, and the price of rice is more than ten thousand yuan per stalk.

古文：秋七月，大司马王浚承制假立太子，置百官，署征镇。
现代文：秋七月，大司马王浚秉承皇帝旨意暂立太子，设置百官，安排各军镇。
English: In the autumn and July, the grand secretary Ma Wangjun, adhering to the emperor's will, temporarily established the prince, set up hundreds of officials, and arranged each military town.

古文：石勒寇谷阳，沛王滋战败遇害。
现代文：石勒侵犯谷阳，沛王司马滋战败被杀害。
English: Shi Le encroached on Gu Yang, and Pei Wang Sima Zi was defeated and killed.

古文：八月，刘聪使子粲攻陷长安，太尉、征西将军、南阳王模遇害，长安遗人四千余家奔汉中。
现代文：八月，刘聪派儿子刘粲攻陷长安，太尉、征西将军、南阳王司马模被杀害，长安遣民有四千多家逃奔汉中。
English: In August, Liu Cong sent his son Liu Xuan to invade Chang'an. Lieutenant, General of the Western Expedition, and Nanyang King Sima Miao were killed. More than four thousand people from Chang'an fled to Hanzhong.

古文：九月癸亥，石勒袭阳夏，至于蒙县，大将军苟晞、豫章王端并没于贼。
现代文：九月癸亥，石勒袭击阳夏，直到蒙县，大将军苟晞、豫章王司马端都被叛贼杀死。
English: In September, Shi Le attacked Yangxia, until Meng County, the great generals Gou Ye and Yu Zhang Wang Simatang were killed by the traitors.

古文：冬十月，勒寇豫州，诸军至江而还。
现代文：冬十月，石勒侵犯豫州各郡，到长江才返回。
English: In the winter of October, Shiller invaded the counties of Yuzhou, and only returned to the Yangtze River.

古文：十一月，猗卢寇太原，平北将军刘琨不能制，徙五县百姓于新兴，以其地居之。
现代文：十一月，猗卢侵犯太原，平北将军刘琨不能控制，把五个县的百姓迁移到新兴，让他们在那裹居住生活。
English: In November, when the KMT invaded Taiyuan, the general of Pingbei, Liu Bei, could not control it, so he moved the people of five counties to Xinxing, and let them live there.

古文：六年春正月，帝在平阳。
现代文：六年春正月，皇帝在平阳。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, the emperor was in Pingyang.

古文：刘聪寇太原。
现代文：刘聪侵犯太原。
English: Liu Cong invaded Taiyuan.

古文：故镇南府牙门将胡亢聚众寇荆土，自号楚公。
现代文：前镇南府牙门将胡亢聚众侵犯荆州一带，自号楚公。
English: In the former town of Nanfu, Hu Gan gathered a crowd to invade the Jingzhou area, calling himself Chu Gong.

古文：二月壬子，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月壬子，有日食。
English: In February, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸丑，镇东大将军、琅邪王睿上尚书，檄四方以讨石勒。
现代文：癸丑，镇东大将军、琅邪王司马睿上书给尚书，主张发布檄文征召各地兵马讨伐石勒。
English: Zeng Ug, Zhen Dongda General, and Zi Yao Wang Sima Rui sent a letter to Shang Shu, advocating the issuance of a letter to conscript soldiers and horses from all over the country to fight against Shile.

古文：大司马王浚移檄天下，称被中诏承制，以荀籓为太尉。
现代文：大司马王浚转发檄文给天下，声称接受宫中诏书、秉承皇帝旨意，任命荀藩为太尉。
English: Grand Secretary Ma Wangjun forwarded the imperial edict to the world, claiming to accept the imperial edict and upholding the emperor's will, and appointed Zhang Han as the first lieutenant.

古文：汝阳王熙为石勒所害。
现代文：汝阳王司马熙被石勒杀害。
English: Ruyang King Sima Xi was killed by Shi Le.

古文：夏四月丙寅，征南将军山简卒。
现代文：夏四月丙寅，征南将军山简去世。
English: In the summer of April, the Southern Expeditionary General Shan Jian passed away.

古文：秋七月，岁星、荧惑、太白聚于牛斗。
现代文：秋七月，岁星、荧惑、太白会聚在牛宿斗宿之间。
English: In autumn and July, the stars of the year, the butterflies, and the butterflies gather in the Ushijuku and Doujuku.

古文：石勒寇冀州。
现代文：石勒侵犯冀州。
English: Shiller encroaches on Jizhou.

古文：刘粲寇晋阳，平北将军刘琨遣部将郝诜帅众御粲，诜败绩，死之，太原太守高乔以晋阳降粲。
现代文：刘粲侵犯晋阳，平北将军刘琨派遣部将郝说率领军队抵御刘粲，郝说被打败，战死，太原太守高乔以晋阳投降刘粲。
English: Liu Bei invaded Jinyang, and the dispatching department of the general Liu Bei from the north said that he led the army to resist Liu Bei. Liu Bei said that he was defeated and died in battle, and the Taiyuan governor Gao Qiao surrendered Jinyang to Liu Bei.

古文：八月庚戌，刘琨奔于常山。
现代文：八月庚戌，刘琨逃奔到常山。
English: In August, Geng Yao and Liu Yao fled to Changshan.

古文：辛亥，阴平都尉董冲逐太守王鉴，以郡叛降于李雄。
现代文：己亥，阴平都尉董冲赶走太守王鉴，率郡背叛而向李雄投降。
English: Ji Hai, Yin Ping captain Dong Chong drove away the governor Wang Jian, led the county to betray and surrendered to Li Xiong.

古文：乙亥，刘琨乞师于猗卢，表卢为代公。
现代文：辛亥，刘琨向猗卢乞求援兵，上表推荐猗卢为代公。
English: At Xinhai, Liu Bei begged for reinforcements from Yanlu, and the above table recommended Yanlu as the deputy.

古文：九月己卯，猗卢使子利孙赴琨，不得进。
现代文：九月己卯，猗卢派儿子利孙前往刘琨那裹，不能到达。
English: In September, Gonglu sent his son Lishun to travel to Liu Bei, but he was unable to reach him.

古文：辛巳，前雍州刺史贾疋讨刘粲于三辅，走之，关中小定，乃与卫将军梁芬、京兆太守梁综共奉秦王鄴为皇太子于长安。
现代文：辛巳，前雍州刺史买疋在三辅讨伐刘粲，打跑了他，关中稍微安定，于是和卫将军梁芬、京兆太守梁综在长安共同尊奉秦王司马邺为皇太子。
English: After all, the former Yongzhou assassin, Miao Zhi, fought Liu Bei in the Three-Auxiliary Crusade, defeated him, and the situation was somewhat stable, so he and the Wei general, Liang Fen, and the Beijing Zhaotai governor, Liang Simi, jointly honored the Qin king, Sima Yu, as the crown prince in Chang'an.

古文：冬十月，猗卢自将六万骑次于盆城。
现代文：冬十月，猗卢自己统领六万骑兵进驻盂城。
English: In the winter of October, Gonglu himself led sixty thousand cavalry into Gongcheng.

古文：十一月甲午，刘粲遁走，刘琨收其遗众，保于阳曲。
现代文：十一月甲午，刘粲悄悄撤兵逃走，刘琨收编他的残部，守在阳曲。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Liu Bei quietly withdrew his troops and fled. Liu Bei collected his remnants and stayed in Yangqu.

古文：是岁大疫。
现代文：逭一年大瘟疫流行。
English: There was a major outbreak of plague the following year.

古文：七年春正月，刘聪大会，使帝著青衣行酒。
现代文：七年春正月，刘聪召集群臣宴会，让皇帝穿上青衣来回劝酒。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Liu Cong convened a banquet of courtiers and had the emperor put on a blue robe and go back and forth to persuade them to drink.

古文：侍中庾珉号哭，聪恶之。
现代文：侍中庾珉号啕大哭，刘聪很讨厌他。
English: The chamberlain cried loudly, and Liu Cong hated him.

古文：丁未，帝遇弑，崩于平阳，时年三十。
现代文：丁未，皇帝被杀，在平阳去世，当年三十岁。
English: Ding Wei, the emperor who was killed, died in Pingyang at the age of thirty.

古文：帝初诞，有嘉禾生于豫章之南昌。
现代文：皇帝当初诞生时，有吉祥禾苗生在豫章郡的南昌。
English: When the emperor was first born, there were auspicious grass seedlings in Nanchang, Yuzhang County.

古文：先是望气者云 豫章有天子气 ，其后竟以豫章王为皇太弟。
现代文：在此之前，观察气象的方士说 豫章郡有天于气 后来果然以豫章王的身份成为皇太弟。
English: Prior to this, a weather observer said that Yuanzhang County was blessed with good weather. Later, he became the crown prince as Yuanzhang King.

古文：在东宫，恂恂谦损，接引朝士，讲论书籍。
现代文：在束宫时，恭敬谨慎、谦逊自律，和朝士交往，讨论史书典籍。
English: When he was in Sokoku, he was respectful, prudent, humble, and self-disciplined. He interacted with the Asashi and discussed history books and classics.

古文：及即位，始遵旧制，临太极殿，使尚书郎读时令，又于东堂听政。
现代文：到即位时，开始遵行旧制，到太极殿，让尚书郎宣读按季节制定的政令，又在东堂听政。
English: When he came to the throne, he began to follow the old system, going to the Taiji Hall to have Shang Shulang read out the decrees made according to the season, and listening to the government in the East Hall.

古文：至于宴会，辄与群官论众务，考经籍。
现代文：每逢宴会，总是和群臣讨论各种事务，考证经书典籍。
English: At every banquet, he always discussed various matters with his courtiers and read the classics.

古文：黄门侍郎傅宣叹曰： 今日复见武帝之世矣！ 
现代文：黄门侍郎傅宣赞叹说： 如今又见到武帝的时代了! 
English: Huangmen waiter Fu Xuan was full of praise, saying, "Nowadays, we have seen the era of Emperor Wu!

古文：秘书监荀崧又常谓人曰： 怀帝天姿清劭，少著英猷，若遭承平，足为守文佳主。
现代文：秘书监荀崧又常常对人说： 怀帝天生的禀赋清雅美好，从小就有卓越的才智，如果遇上太平时代，完全可以成为遵从旧制的好君主。
English: The secretary often said to people: Emperor Huai's natural endowment is elegant and beautiful, and he has had outstanding talent since childhood. If there is a time of peace, he can completely become a good monarch who follows the old system.

古文：而继惠帝扰乱之后，东海专政，无幽厉之衅，而有流亡之祸。 
现代文：可是在惠帝扰乱之后，束海王专政，没有周幽王、周厉王那样的灾祸，却有流亡的祸难。 
English: However, after Hui Di's disturbance, the dictatorship of Zakkai Wang began. There was no calamity like Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang, but there was the calamity of exile.

古文：孝愍皇帝讳鄴，字彦旗，武帝孙，吴孝王晏之子也。
现代文：孝愍皇帝名司马邺，字产毖，是亘造的孙子，吴孝王司马晏的儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan was named Sima Yao, and his nickname was Bao Yao. He was the grandson of King Wu Xiao and the son of King Sima Yao.

古文：出继后伯父秦献王柬，袭封秦王。
现代文：过继给伯父室卢旺司马东，后来承袭封位为画王。
English: He was succeeded by his uncle, Rou Wang Simadong, who later inherited the title of painting king.

古文：永嘉二年，拜散骑常侍、抚军将军。
现代文：丞塞二年，任散骑常侍、抚军将军。
English: In the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was appointed a knight errant, a regular attendant, and a general of the army.

古文：及洛阳倾覆，避难于荥阳密县，与舅荀籓、荀组相遇，自密南趋许颍。
现代文：洛阳失守时，避难到荣阳密县，和舅舅荀藩、荀组相遇，一起从密县往南前往许昌、颖川。
English: When Luoyang was lost to the enemy, he took refuge in Rongyang County, and met with his uncle, uncle, and uncle, and together they went south from Rongyang County to Xuchang and Yingchuan.

古文：豫州刺史阎鼎与前抚军长史王毗、司徒长史刘畴、中书郎李昕及籓、组等同谋奉帝归于长安，而畴等中涂复叛，鼎追杀之，籓、组仅而获免。
现代文：豫州刺史间鼎和前抚军长史王毗、司徒长史刘畴、中书郎李昕及荀藩、荀组等共同谋划侍奉皇帝到长安安身，可是刘畴等人在中途又叛变，阎鼎追赶杀了他们，荀藩、荀组侥幸免于一死。
English: Yu Zhou stabbed Zhi Zhongding, together with the forerunner commander Shi Wangvi, the leader of the Sifu army, Liu Zheng, the chief scribe of the Central Committee, Li Zheng, and Shifan and Shigetai, to jointly plan to serve the emperor to Chang'an. However, Liu Zheng and others mutinied again in the middle of the journey, and Yan Ding chased and killed them. Shifan and Shigetai were lucky to escape death.

古文：鼎遂挟帝乘牛车，自宛趣武关，频遇山贼，士卒亡散，次于蓝田。
现代文：阎鼎便挟持皇帝乘坐牛车，从宛往武关走，多次遇到山上强盗，士卒死伤逃散，在蓝田临时住下。
English: Yan Ding then took the emperor for a ride in an ox cart, and walked from Wan to Wuguan. He repeatedly encountered bandits on the mountain, and several soldiers were killed or wounded and fled. He temporarily lived in Lantian.

古文：鼎告雍州刺史贾疋，疋遽遣州兵迎卫，达于长安，又使辅国将军梁综助守之。
现代文：问鼎告知雍州刺史买疋，贾疋急忙派遣本州的军队去迎接侍卫，终于抵达长安，又让辅国将军梁综协助守卫。
English: Asking Ding to inform Yongzhou, Jia Yu hurriedly dispatched troops from his home state to meet the bodyguards, and finally arrived in Chang'an. He also asked Liang Zi, the general of the auxiliary state, to assist the guards.

古文：时有玉龟出霸水，神马鸣城南焉。六年九月辛巳，奉秦王为皇太子，登坛告类，建宗庙社稷，大赦。
现代文：当时有玉龟在霸水出现，神马在城南嘶鸣的事情发生，六年九月辛巳，尊奉秦王为皇太子，登坛告祭上天和五帝，设立宗庙和社稷，大赦天下。
English: At that time, a turtle appeared in the water, and a divine horse hissed in the south of the city. In September of the sixth year, Xin Xi honored King Qin as the crown prince, ascended the altar to offer sacrifices to heaven and the five emperors, set up the ancestral temple and shrine, and forgave the world.

古文：加疋征西大将军，以秦州刺史、南阳王保为大司马。
现代文：加授买疋为征西大将军，任命秦州刺史、南阳王司马保为大司马。
English: He also conferred the title of General of the Western Conquest on Ma Ying, and appointed Qin Zhou Zhishi and Nanyang Wang Sima Bao as major generals.

古文：贾疋讨贼张连，遇害，众推始平太守麹允领雍州刺史，为盟主，承制选置。
现代文：买疋讨伐叛贼张连，被杀。大家推举始乎太守曲允兼任雍州刺史，担任盟主，秉承皇帝旨意选人设官。
English: Zhang Lian, a traitor who was bought and killed, was killed. People began to nominate the eunuch Qu Yun, who also served as the governor of Yongzhou, as the commander-in-chief, adhering to the emperor's will to select and appoint officials.

古文：建兴元年夏四月丙午，奉怀帝崩问，举哀成礼。
现代文：建兴元年夏四月丙午，得知怀帝去世的消息，按照礼仪举行哀悼仪式。
English: In the summer of Jianxing in the first year of the Republic of China, on the afternoon of April 3rd, after learning the news of Emperor Huai's death, a mourning ceremony was held in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：壬申，即皇帝位，大赦，改元。
现代文：壬申，即位为皇帝，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Jinshin, enthroned as emperor, pardoned the world, changed the year name.

古文：以卫将军梁芬为司徒，雍州刺史麹允为使持节、领军将军、录尚书事，京兆大守索綝为尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命卫将军梁芬为司徒，任命雍州刺史曲允为使持节、领军将军、录尚书事，任命京兆太守索绋为尚书右仆射。
English: He appointed the general of the imperial guard Liang Fen as the tutor, appointed Yangzhou Zhi Shi Qu Yun as the envoy, the leading general, and recorded the records, and appointed the governor of Beijing Zhaozhou, Soran, as the right-hand man of the records.

古文：石勒攻龙骧将军李恽于上白，恽败，死之。
现代文：石勒在上白进攻龙骧将军李惮，李惮被打败，战死。
English: In Shangbai, Shi Le attacked the Longjing general Li Shuo. Li Shuo was defeated and died in battle.

古文：五月壬辰，以镇东大将军、琅邪王睿为侍中、左丞相、大都督陕东诸军事，大司马、南阳王保为右丞相、大都督陕西诸军事。
现代文：五月壬辰，任命镇东大将军、琅邪王司马睿为侍中、左丞相、大都督陕束诸军事，任命大司马、南阳王司马保为右丞相、大都督陕西诸军事。
English: In May, Emperor Jinchen appointed Zhen Dongda Gen. Zhen Yidang Wang Sima Rui as the Vice-Admiral, the Left Vice-Admiral, and the Grand Military Governor of Shaanxi Province, and appointed Grand Vice-Admiral Zhen Dongda Gen. Zhen Dongda Gen. Zhen Yidang Wang Sima Rui as the Vice-Admiral, the Left Vice-Admiral, and the Grand Military Governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：又诏二王曰： 夫阳九百六之灾，虽在盛世，犹或遘之。
现代文：又下诏给这两个王说： 说到灾荒和厄运，即使是在朝代鼎盛的时期，仍然有时候会遇上。
English: He also issued an edict to the two kings, saying, "When it comes to disaster and misfortune, even in the heyday of the dynasty, it still sometimes happens.

古文：朕以幼冲，纂承洪绪，庶凭祖宗之灵，群公义士之力，荡灭凶寇，拯拔幽宫，瞻望未达，肝心分裂。
现代文：朕年龄还小，继承大统，希望凭仗祖宗神灵的佑护，群臣及忠义之士的辅助，扫荡消灭凶恶的寇贼，拯救扶持遭难的王室，期望还没有实现，肝心碎裂。
English: I am still young, I will succeed to the throne, I hope to rely on the protection of the ancestral spirits, the support of the ministers and loyal people, sweep away and destroy the vicious bandits, save and support the royal family in distress, my expectations have not yet been realized, and my heart is broken.

古文：昔周邵分陕，姬氏以隆；平王东迁，晋郑为辅。
现代文：从前周公、邵公分陕而治，姬氏因此兴隆；周平王束迁到洛邑，晋国、郑国成为他的辅佐。
English: Former Zhou Gong and Shao Gong divided Shaanxi and ruled it, and the Ji clan flourished as a result; Zhou Ping Wang Shu moved to Luoyang, and Jin Guo and Zheng Guo became his assistants.

古文：今左右丞相茂德齐圣，国之昵属，当恃二公，扫除鲸鲵，奉迎梓宫，克复中兴。
现代文：如今左右丞相德高可以比得上古代圣人，是国家最亲近的人，自然要依仗二位，扫灭清除恶人，敬迎回先帝的灵柩，克复中兴。
English: Nowadays, the left and right chancellors can be compared to the ancient saints, and they are the closest people to the country. It is natural to rely on the two, eliminate the wicked, welcome back the coffin of the former emperor, and restore and rejuvenate.

古文：令幽、并两州勒卒三十万，直造平阳。
现代文：命令幽、并两州起兵三十万，一直打向平阳。
English: He ordered Yu and the two states to raise an army of three hundred thousand, and continued to fight toward Pingyang.

古文：右丞相宜帅秦、凉、梁、雍武旅三十万，径诣长安。
现代文：右丞相应当统率秦、凉、梁、雍武装三十万，径直到长安来。
English: The Minister of the Right should lead 300,000 soldiers from Qin, Liang, Liang and Yong to Chang'an.

古文：左丞相帅所领精兵二十万，径造洛阳。
现代文：左丞相统率部下的精兵二十万，径直攻向洛阳。
English: Zuo Zheng led 200,000 elite soldiers under his command and attacked Luoyang directly.

古文：分遣前锋，为幽并后驻。
现代文：分别派遣前锋部队，作为幽、并军队的后援。
English: Forward troops will be dispatched separately to act as backup for the combined forces.

古文：赴同大限，克成元勋。 
现代文：共同奔赴决战，完成伟大的功业。 
English: Together, we will go to the decisive battle and accomplish great feats.

古文：又诏琅邪王曰： 朕以冲昧，纂承洪绪，未能枭夷凶逆，奉迎梓宫，枕戈烦冤，肝心抽裂。
现代文：又下诏给琅邪王说： 朕在年幼不懂事的时候，继承大统，还没有能够斩杀消灭凶徒叛逆，敬迎回先帝的灵柩，战事不断，心中愁闷，肝心颤碎。
English: He also issued an edict to the evil king, saying, "When I was young and inexperienced, I inherited the supreme leadership, but I have not yet been able to kill and eliminate the traitors and welcome back the coffin of the former emperor. The war continues, my heart is sad, and my heart is shattered.

古文：前得魏浚表，知公帅先三军，已据寿春，传檄诸侯，协齐威势，想今渐进，已达洛阳。
现代文：不久前接到魏浚的表章，知道公率领三军，已经立足寿春，发布檄文给各诸侯，协力会合成威武的军势，料想如今渐渐推进，已经抵达洛阳。
English: Not long ago, we received the seal of Wei Jun, and knew that the three armies led by the prince had already established themselves in Shuchun, issued the imperial edict to all the princes, and would work together to form a formidable military force. It is expected that they will gradually advance now and have arrived in Luoyang.

古文：凉州刺史张轨，乃心王室，连旗万里，已到氵幵陇；梁州刺史张光，亦遣巴汉之卒，屯在骆谷：秦川骁勇，其会如林。
现代文：凉州刺史张轨，忠于朝廷，率部自远方赶来，已经到达沂、陇；梁州刺史张光，也派遣巴、汉的军队，驻在骆谷；秦川的骁将勇士，纷纷会聚在一起。
English: Liangzhou's Zhang Guoli, loyal to the imperial court, led his troops from afar and has arrived in Luoyang and Shandong; Liangzhou's Zhang Guang, also dispatched the armies of the Ba and Han, stationed in Luogu; and the warriors of the Qin River, gathered together.

古文：间遣使适还，具知平阳定问，云幽并隆盛，余胡衰破，然犹恃险，当须大举。
现代文：最近派遣使者去平阳方面，已经返回，知道平阳方面的确实消息，说幽、并方面兴隆昌盛，残余的胡人衰亡破败，但是仍然凭恃着险要顽抗，必须大举进攻。
English: Recently, an envoy was sent to Pingyang, but he has already returned. Knowing the true news from Pingyang, he said that it was quiet and prosperous. The remaining Hu people have fallen into ruin, but they still have to resist by clinging to danger, and they must attack in a big way.

古文：未知公今所到，是以息兵秣马，未便进军。
现代文：因为还不知道公如今到了什么地方，所以暂时息兵休整，还没有立即进攻。
English: As they did not yet know where the prince had gone, they rested for a while and did not immediately attack.

古文：今为已至何许，当须来旨，便乘舆自出，会除中原也。
现代文：现在已经到了什么地方，应当来告知，朕就乘车亲自出征，会兵扫除中原的敌人。
English: Now that I have arrived somewhere, I should inform you that I will personally go out by car to join the army to sweep away the enemy in the Central Plains.

古文：公宜思弘谋猷，勖济远略，使山陵旋反，四海有赖。
现代文：公应该考虑发挥才智，努力完成远大的计划，使先帝灵柩能够回来，四海百姓有所依靠。
English: The public should consider giving play to their talents and strive to complete the ambitious plan so that the coffin of the former emperor can return and the people of all over the world can rely on it.

古文：故遣殿中都尉刘蜀、苏马等具宣朕意。
现代文：为此派遣殿中都尉刘蜀、苏马等具体宣示朕的意旨。
English: To this end, I dispatched Lieutenant Liu Shu and Sumer to the palace to specifically declare my intention.

古文：公茂德昵属，宣隆东夏，恢融六合，非公而谁！
现代文：公德行卓越，又是亲近的宗室成员，振兴华夏，统一中原，除了公还有谁!
English: He was an outstanding public moralist and a close member of the imperial family. He revitalized China and unified the Central Plains. Who else but him!

古文：但洛都陵庙，不可空旷，公宜镇抚，以绥山东。
现代文：不过洛都的陵寝宗庙，不可以空旷无人，公应当镇守保护，以安定山东。
English: However, the mausoleum of Lodu must not be empty and unattended, and the public should guard and protect it in order to stabilize Shandong.

古文：右丞相当入辅弼，追踪周邵，以隆中兴也。 
现代文：右丞相应当入朝辅佐朝政，效法古代的周公邵公，来完成中兴的大业。 
English: The Minister of the Right should enter the government as an aide-de-camp and follow the example of the ancient Zhou Gong Shao Gong to complete the great cause of ZTE.

古文：六月，石勒害兗州刺史田徽。
现代文：六月，石勒杀害兖州刺史田徽。
English: In June, Shi Le killed the Zhangzhou assassin Tian Hui.

古文：是时，山东郡邑相继陷于勒。
现代文：这时，山东的郡邑一个接一个地被石勒攻陷。
English: At this time, Shandong's counties were invaded one after another by Shi Le.

古文：秋八月癸亥，刘蜀等达于扬州。
现代文：秋八月癸亥，刘蜀等人到达扬州。
English: In autumn and August, Yan Hai, Liu Shu and others arrived in Yangzhou.

古文：改建鄴为建康，改鄴为临漳。
现代文：把建邺改名为建鏖，把邺改为临漳。
English: Rename Jianye to Jianye, and change the name of Jianye to Jinye.

古文：杜弢寇武昌，焚烧城邑。
现代文：杜殁侵犯武昌，纵火焚烧城中住宅。
English: Cuckoo invaded Wuchang and set fire to houses in the city.

古文：弢别将王真袭沔阳，荆州刺史周顗奔于健康。
现代文：杜搜的别将王真袭击沔阳，荆州刺史周颢逃奔到建康。
English: Du So's subordinate Wang Zhen attacked Shenyang, and Jingzhou's subordinate Zhou Qi fled to Jiankang.

古文：九月，司空荀籓薨于荥阳。
现代文：九月，司空苟藩在荣阳去世。
English: In September, Sikuogohan passed away in Rongyang.

古文：刘聪寇河南，河南尹张髦死之。
现代文：刘聪侵犯河南，河南尹张髦战死。
English: Liu Cong invaded Henan, and Henan's Yin Zhangxiao died in battle.

古文：冬十月，荆州刺史陶侃讨杜弢党杜曾于石城，为曾所败。
现代文：冬十月，荆州刺史陶侃讨伐杜强的党徒杜曾，在石城被杜曾打败。
English: In the winter of October, Du Zeng, a party member from Jingzhou who fought against Du Qiang, was defeated by Du Zeng in Shicheng.

古文：己巳，大雨雹。
现代文：己巳，降大冰雹。
English: Come on, let's have a big hailstorm.

古文：庚午，大雪。
现代文：庚午，下大雪。
English: In the late afternoon, it snowed heavily.

古文：十一月，流人杨武攻陷梁州。
现代文：十一月，流民杨武攻陷梁州。
English: In November, Yang Wu, a refugee, captured Liangzhou.

古文：十二月，河东地震，雨肉。
现代文：十二月，河东发生地震，下肉雨。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in Hedong, and it rained heavily.

古文：二年春正月己巳朔，黑雾著人如墨，连夜，五日乃止。
现代文：二年春正月己巳初一，有黑雾，沾在人身上像墨迹，昼夜难分，连续五天才散去。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, there was a black fog, sticking to people like ink, difficult to distinguish between day and night, and it took five consecutive days to disperse.

古文：辛未，辰时日陨于地。
现代文：辛未，早晨辰时太阳就落下地去。
English: In the early morning, the sun goes down.

古文：又有三日相承，出于西方而东行。
现代文：又有三个太阳相连，从西方出来而往东行去。
English: And there were three suns, one after another, coming out of the west and going to the east.

古文：丁丑，大赦。
现代文：丁丑，大赦天下。
English: Ding Chuxi, amnesty to the world.

古文：杨武大略汉中，遂奔李雄。
现代文：杨武大肆抢掠汉中一带，接着投奔李雄。
English: Yang Wu plundered the Hanzhong area, and then went to Lixiong.

古文：二月壬寅，以司空王浚为大司马，卫将军荀组为司空，凉州刺史张轨为太尉，封西平郡公，并州刺史刘琨为大将军。
现代文：二月壬寅，任命司空王浚为大司马，卫将军荀组为司空，凉州刺史张轨为太尉，封张轨为西平郡公，任命并州刺史刘琨为大将军。
English: In February, Jinyin appointed Sikuo Wangjun as the chief steward, Wei general Yu Gang as Sikuo, Liangzhou magistrate Zhang Rail as the first lieutenant, Fang Zhang Rail as the governor of Xiping County, and appointed and state magistrate Liu Ye as the general.

古文：三月癸酉，石勒陷幽州，杀侍中、大司马、幽州牧、博陵公王浚，焚烧城邑，害万余人。
现代文：三月癸酉，石勒攻陷幽州，杀死侍中、大司马、幽州牧、博陵公王浚，纵火焚烧城中住宅房屋，杀害一万多人。
English: At the end of March, Shiller invaded Yuzhou, killed the chamberlain, grand steward, Yuzhou herdsman, and Boling Prince Jun, set fire to residential buildings in the city, and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：杜弢别帅王真袭荆州刺史陶侃于林鄣，侃奔滠中。
现代文：杜搜的副帅王真在林鄣袭击荆州刺史陶侃，陶侃逃奔添中。
English: Du Suo's deputy commander Wang Zhen attacked Jingzhou in Linfen, stabbed Tao Kan, and Tao Kan fled.

古文：夏四月甲辰，地震。
现代文：夏四月甲辰，地震。
English: Summer, April, January, earthquake.

古文：五月壬辰，太尉、领护羌校尉、凉州刺史、西平公张轨薨。
现代文：五月壬辰，太尉、领护羌校尉、凉州刺史、西平公张轨去世。
English: In May, Imjin, Taijun, Lianwu, Zoujun, Liangzhou Zishi and Xiping Gong Zhanglu passed away.

古文：六月，刘曜、赵冉寇新丰诸县，安东将军索綝讨破之。
现代文：六月，刘曜、趟冉侵犯新丰各县，安东将军索绋讨伐并击败了他们。
English: In June, Liu You and Watan Ran invaded Xinfeng counties, and General Anton Suo fought and defeated them.

古文：秋七月，曜、冉等又逼京都，领军将军麹允讨破之，冉中流矢而死。
现代文：秋七月，刘曜、赵冉等又进逼京都，领军将军曲允讨伐并打败了他们，赵冉中流箭而死。
English: In the autumn and July, Liu You, Zhao Ran, and others again pushed into Kyoto. The leading general, Qu Yun, fought and defeated them, and Zhao Ran died in the middle of the stream.

古文：九月，北中郎将刘演克顿丘，斩石勒所署太守邵攀。丙戌，麟见襄平。
现代文：九月，北中郎将刘演攻克顿丘，将石勒委任的太守邵攀斩首丙戌，有麒麟出现在襄平。
English: In September, Beizhong Lang led Liu to conquer Ke Dongqiu and decapitated Shao Pang, the governor appointed by Shi Ler, at the same time, Kirin appeared in Xiangping.

古文：单于代公猗卢遣使献马。
现代文：单于代公猗卢派遣使者来献马。
English: On his behalf, Emperor Gongzong of Lu sent an envoy to offer a horse.

古文：蒲子马生人。
现代文：蒲子的马生出了人。
English: The horse of Gamo gave birth to a man.

古文：三年春正月，盗杀晋昌太守赵佩。
现代文：三年春正月，盗贼杀害晋昌太守赵佩。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, thieves killed Zhao Pei, the governor of Jinchang.

古文：吴兴人徐馥害太守袁琇。
现代文：吴兴人徐馥害死太守袁诱。
English: Wu Xingren and Xu Xi killed Yuan Yu, the grand marshal.

古文：以侍中宋哲为平东将军。屯华阴。
现代文：任命侍中宋哲为平东将军，驻兵在华阴。
English: He appointed the chamberlain Song Zhe as the general of Pingdong and stationed soldiers in Huayin.

古文：二月丙子，进左丞相、琅邪王睿为大都督、督中外诸军事，右丞相、南阳王保为相国，司空荀组为太尉，大将军刘琨为司空。
现代文：二月丙子，升左丞相、琅邪王司马睿为大都督、督中外诸军事，右丞相、南阳王司马保为相国，司空荀组为太尉，大将军刘琨为司空。
English: In February, Cixi was promoted to minister of the left, and Wang Sima Rui, the king of Qi, was promoted to the grand governor of the capital and the military governor of the Middle and Foreign Provinces, and Wang Sima Bao, the king of Nanyang, was promoted to minister of the right, and Wang Sima Bao, the king of Nanyang, was promoted to minister of the right, and Wang Sima Rui, the king of Qi, was promoted to minister of the left, and Wang Sima Rui, the king of Qi, was promoted to the grand governor of the capital and the military governor of the Middle and Foreign Provinces, and Wang Sima

古文：进封代公猗卢为代王。
现代文：进封代公猗卢为代王。
English: Jinfeng's regent, Guanlu, became the acting king.

古文：荆州刺史陶侃破王真于巴陵。
现代文：荆州刺史陶侃在巴陵打败王真。
English: Jingzhou acolyte Tao Kan defeated Wang Zhen in Baling.

古文：杜弢别将杜弘、张彦与临川内史谢摛战于海昏，摛败绩，死之。
现代文：杜搜的别将杜弘、张彦在海昏和临川内史谢搞交战，谢摘失败，战死。
English: Du So's lieutenants, Du Hong and Zhang Yan, engaged in a battle with Shixie in Haikou and Linchuan, but Shixie was defeated and died in the battle.

古文：三月，豫率内史周访击杜弘，走之，斩张彦于陈。
现代文：三月，豫章内史周访攻打杜弘，赶跑了他，在阵中斩了张彦。
English: In March, Zhou Zhiqi attacked Du Hong in Yuzhang, chased him away, and beheaded Zhang Yan in the battle.

古文：夏四月，大赦。
现代文：夏四月，大赦天下。
English: In the summer of April, there was a general amnesty.

古文：五月，刘聪寇并州。
现代文：五月刘聪侵犯并州。
English: In May, Liu Cong invaded and annexed the state.

古文：六月，盗发汉霸、杜二陵及薄太后陵，太后面如生，得金玉彩帛不可胜记。
现代文：六月，盗贼挖掘漠代的霸、杜两座陵墓以及薄太后陵，太后的脸像活着的时候一样，得到的金玉彩帛不可胜数。
English: In June, thieves excavated the two mausoleums of Ba and Du in the desert era, as well as the tomb of the Empress Dowager Bo. The empress dowager's face looked as if she were still alive, and the number of gold and jade jewels they obtained was countless.

古文：时以朝廷草创，服章多阙，敕收其余，以实内府。
现代文：当时因为朝廷初创，官员服饰不够，皇帝敕命没收盗墓所余，归入皇室仓库。
English: At that time, because the imperial court was in its infancy and officials did not have enough clothing, the emperor tried his best to confiscate the rest of the stolen tombs and put them into the royal warehouse.

古文：丁卯，地震。
现代文：丁卯，长安地震。
English: Dingwu, Chang'an earthquake.

古文：辛巳，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，大赦天下。
English: It's time for a general amnesty.

古文：敕雍州掩骼埋胔，修复陵墓，有犯者诛及三族。
现代文：敕命雍州方面掩埋枯骨腐肉，修复陵墓，再有犯法盗墓的诛灭三族。
English: The Yongzhou side buried the dead bones and carrion, repaired the mausoleum, and then destroyed the three tribes who violated the law and stole the tomb.

古文：秋七月，石勒陷濮阳，害太守韩弘。
现代文：秋七月，石勒攻陷濮阳，杀死太守韩弘。
English: In autumn and July, Shiller invaded Shenyang and killed the governor Han Hong.

古文：刘聪寇上党，刘琨遣将救之。
现代文：刘聪侵犯上党，刘琨派将领去援救。
English: Liu Cong encroached on the party, and Liu Ye sent a general to rescue him.

古文：八月癸亥，战于襄垣，王师败绩。
现代文：八月癸亥，在襄垣交战，王师被打败。
English: In August of the year of the boar, there was a battle in Xiangyuan, and Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：荆州刺史陶侃攻杜弢，弢败走，道死，湘州平。
现代文：荆州刺史陶侃进攻杜殁，杜搜败逃，死在途中，湘州平定。
English: Jingzhou stabber Tao Kan attacked Du Zuo, Du Zuo was defeated and fled, died on the way, and Hunan was pacified.

古文：九月，刘曜寇北地，命领军将军麹允讨之。
现代文：九月，刘曜侵犯北地，命令领军将军曲允讨伐他。
English: In September, Liu You invaded the North and ordered the leading general, Qu Yun, to fight him.

古文：冬十月，允进攻青白城。
现代文：冬十月，曲允进兵攻打青白城。
English: In the winter of October, Qu Yun entered the army to attack Qingbai City.

古文：以豫州牧、征东将军索綝为尚书仆射、都督宫城诸军事。
现代文：任命豫州牧、征束将军索绋为尚书仆射、都督宫城诸军事。
English: He appointed the governor of Yuzhou, the general of conscription Sokun, and the military governor of Miyagi.

古文：刘聪陷冯翊，太守梁肃奔万年。
现代文：刘聪攻陷冯翊，太守梁肃逃奔万年。
English: Liu Cong captured Feng Xuan, and the grand marshal Liang Su fled for his life.

古文：十二月，凉州刺史张寔送皇帝行玺一纽。
现代文：十二月，凉州刺史张宣送来皇帝行玺一纽。
English: In December, Zhang Xuan, the statesman of Liangzhou, sent Emperor Xingzong a necklace.

古文：盗杀安定太守赵班。
现代文：强盗杀死安定太守赵班。
English: The robbers killed Zhao Ban, the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：四年春三月，代王猗卢薨，其众归于刘琨。
现代文：四年春三月，代王猗卢去世，他的部下归属于刘琨。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year, the acting Wang Qilu died, and his subordinates belonged to Liu Bei.

古文：夏四月丁丑，刘曜寇上郡，太守籍韦率其众奔于南郑。
现代文：夏四月丁丑，刘曜侵犯上郡，太守籍韦率领部下逃奔到南郑。
English: Xia April Ding Ugly, Liu Yow encroached on Shang County, and Tai Shou Zi Wei led his subordinates to flee to Nan Zheng.

古文：凉州刺史张寔遣步骑五千来赴京都。
现代文：凉州刺史张室派遣步兵骑兵共五千人到京都来。
English: A total of five thousand infantry and cavalry were dispatched to Kyoto by the Zhang family, the feudal lords of Liangzhou.

古文：石勒陷廪丘，北中郎将刘演出奔。
现代文：石勒攻陷廪丘，北中郎将刘演出逃。
English: Shi Le captured Shaoshan Hill, while Kitanakura sent Liu Jing to escape.

古文：五月，平夷太守雷照害南广太守孟桓，帅二郡三千余家叛降于李雄。
现代文：五月，平夷太守雷照杀害南广太守孟桓，率领两个郡三干多家反叛，投降李雄。
English: In May, the governor of Pingyi Province, Lei Zhao, killed the governor of Southern Guangxi Province, Meng Huan, and led more than three dozen rebels from two counties to surrender to Li Xiong.

古文：六月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月丁巳初一，有日食，蝗虫成灾。
English: In June, on the first day of the new year, there was a solar eclipse and a plague of locusts.

古文：大蝗。秋七月，刘曜攻北地，麹允帅步骑三万救之。
现代文：秋七月，刘曜进攻北地，曲允率领步兵骑兵共三万去援救。
English: In autumn and July, Liu You attacked the north, and Qu Yun led a total of 30,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue.

古文：王师不战而溃，北地太守麹昌奔于京师。
现代文：王师不战而溃，北地太守曲昌逃奔到京师。
English: Wang Shih was defeated without a fight, and the northern governor Qu Chang fled to Beijing Shih.

古文：曜进至泾阳，渭北诸城悉溃，建威将军鲁克、散骑常侍梁纬、少府皇甫阳等皆死之。
现代文：刘曜进到泾阳，渭水以北各城全都失守，建威将军鲁充、散骑常侍梁纬、少府皇甫阳等人都战死。
English: Liu You went to Fenyang, and all the cities north of Surabaya were lost, with General Jian Wei Ruchun, Cavalryman Liang Wei, Shobu Emperor Fuyang and others all dying in battle.

古文：八月，刘曜逼京师，内外断绝，镇西将军焦嵩、平东将军宋哲、始平太守竺恢等同赴国难，麹允与公卿守长安小城以自固，散骑常侍华辑监京兆、冯翊、弘农、上洛四郡兵东屯霸上，镇军将军胡崧帅城西诸郡兵屯遮马桥，并不敢进。
现代文：八月，刘曜进逼京师，城内舆城外交通断绝。镇西将军焦嵩、平束将军宋哲、始平太守竺恢等人同赴国难。曲允与公卿们坚守长安小城以自卫。散骑常侍华辑监督京兆、冯翊、弘农、上洛四个郡的军队驻在城束的霸上，镇军将军胡崧率领城西的各郡兵马驻在遮马桥，都不敢进兵。
English: In August, Liu Youjin forced the Beijing division, and the traffic in and out of the city was cut off. Zhenxi General Jiao Song, Pingzhu General Song Zhe, Shi Ping Taishu Xinghuai and others went to the national emergency together. Qu Yun and the nobles defended Chang'an Town in self-defense. The troops of the four counties of Jingzhao, Feng Zheng, Hongnong and Shangluo supervised by the cavalryman Hua Ji were stationed on the hegemony of the castle, and the soldiers and horses of the counties in the west of the city, led by the town's general Hu Zheng, were stationed on the bridge, and they

古文：冬十月，京师饥甚，米斗金二两，人相食，死者太半。
现代文：冬十月，京师内饥荒严重，一斗米值二两黄金，人吃人，死人大半。
English: In the winter of October, there was a severe famine in the capital, and a barrel of rice was worth two gold coins. People were eating each other, and most of them died.

古文：太仓有曲数饼，麹允屑为粥以供帝，至是复尽。
现代文：太仓中剩有几十个酒抽饼，曲允搓成碎屑熬粥给皇帝吃，到这时全吃完了。
English: There were dozens of wine cakes left in the warehouse, and Qu Yun broke them into crumbs to make porridge for the emperor to eat. By this time, they had all been eaten.

古文：帝泣谓允曰： 今窘厄如此，外无救援，死于社稷，是朕事也。
现代文：皇帝流着泪对曲允说： 如今窘迫困厄到这个地步，外面又没有来救援的，为社稷去死，是朕的事情。
English: With tears streaming down his face, the emperor said to Qu Yun, "Nowadays, the distress has reached such a level that there is no one outside to come to the rescue. It is my business to die for the society."

古文：然念将士暴离斯酷，今欲因城未陷为羞死之事，庶令黎元免屠烂之苦。
现代文：可是顾念将士们不幸落到这样残酷的地步，现在我想当城还没有被攻陷就做羞辱之事，希望能使黎民百姓免遭屠杀的苦难。
English: However, in consideration of the fact that the soldiers have unfortunately fallen to such a cruel level, I now want to do something humiliating when the city has not yet been captured, hoping to save the Lebanese people from the suffering of slaughter.

古文：行矣遣书，朕意决矣。 
现代文：去吧，送一份投降书，朕的决心已经下定了。 
English: Go ahead, send a letter of surrender, my mind is made up.

古文：十一月乙末，使侍中宋敞送笺于曜，帝乘羊车，肉袒衔壁，舆榇出降。
现代文：十一月乙未，派侍中宋敞送信给刘曜，皇帝乘坐羊车，裸露上体、口衔玉璧，用车载着棺材出城投降。
English: In November of the same year, he sent his attendant, Song Zhan, to send a message to Liu You. The emperor rode in a carriage, bare-chested and with a title of Jade Pi, and drove out of the city with a coffin to surrender.

古文：群臣号泣攀车，执帝之手，帝亦悲不自胜。
现代文：群臣哭喊着攀住车子，紧紧拉着皇帝的手，皇帝也悲哀不能自禁。
English: The courtiers cried and clung to the car, tightly pulling the emperor's hand, and the emperor could not help but be sad.

古文：御史中丞吉朗自杀。
现代文：御史中丞吉朗自杀。
English: Goshi Chujo Jiro committed suicide.

古文：曜焚榇受壁，使宋敞奉帝还宫。
现代文：刘曜烧掉棺材，接受玉璧，让宋敞侍奉皇帝返回宫中。
English: Liu You burned the coffin, accepted the jade, and let Song Zhan serve the emperor and return to the palace.

古文：初，有童谣曰： 天子何在豆田中。 
现代文：当初，有童谣说： 天子为什么在豆田裹。 
English: In the beginning, there was a nursery rhyme that said: Why is the son of heaven wrapped in a bean field?

古文：时王浚在幽州，以豆有藿，杀隐士霍原以应之。
现代文：当时王浚正在幽州，认为豆叶叫藿，就杀了隐士霍原来使童谣应验。
English: At that time, Wang Jun was in Yuzhou, and he thought that bean leaves were noisy, so he killed the hermit Huo to make the nursery rhyme come true.

古文：及帝如曜营，营实在城东豆田壁。
现代文：等到皇帝前往刘曜军营，那军营正在城束的豆田壁。
English: Wait until the emperor goes to Liu Yue's military camp, which is in the bean field wall of the castle.

古文：辛丑，帝蒙尘于平阳，麹允及群官并从。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝被带到平阳囚禁，曲允和群官一同随从。
English: Sin ugly, the emperor was taken to Pingyang prison, Qu Yun and the officials followed.

古文：刘聪假帝光禄大夫、怀安侯。
现代文：刘聪让皇帝暂为光禄大夫、怀安侯。
English: Liu Cong let the emperor temporarily become the doctor of Guanglu and Huai'an.

古文：壬寅，聪临殿，帝稽首于前，麹允伏地恸哭，因自杀。
现代文：壬寅，刘聪上殿，皇帝在他面前叩头稽首，曲允伏在地上痛哭，随后自杀。
English: Ren Yin, Liu Cong went to the palace, the emperor bowed his head in front of him, Qu Yun prostrated on the ground and cried bitterly, and then committed suicide.

古文：尚书梁允、侍中梁浚、散骑常侍严敦、左丞臧振、黄门侍郎任播、张伟、杜曼及诸郡守并为曜所害，华辑奔南山。
现代文：尚书梁允、侍中梁浚、散骑常侍严敦、左丞臧振、黄门侍郎任播、张伟、杜曼以及各郡太守都被刘曜杀害，华辑逃奔南山。
English: Shang Shul Liang Yun, Liang Jun, a chamberlain, Yan Tun, a knight-errant, Yu Zhen, a left-hand man, Ren Bo, a Yellow Gate chamberlain, Zhang Wei, Duman, and the governors of each county were all killed by Liu You, and Hua Ji fled to Nanshan.

古文：石勒围乐平，司空刘琨遣兵援之，为勒所败，乐平太守韩据出奔。
现代文：石勒围攻乐平，司空刘琨派兵救援，被石勒打败，乐平太守韩据出逃。
English: Shi Ler besieged Leping, and Liu Ye, the commander of the air force, sent troops to rescue them. Shi Ler was defeated, and Han Zong, the governor of Leping, fled.

古文：司空长史李弘以并州叛降于勒。
现代文：司空长史李弘以并州背叛，投降石勒。
English: Li Hong, the Chief of the General Staff of the Air Force, betrayed the annexation of the state and surrendered to Shile.

古文：十二月甲申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月乙卯初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：己未，刘琨奔蓟，依段匹磾。
现代文：己未，刘琨逃奔蓟，依附段匹禅。
English: Before he knew it, Liu Yi was running away, clinging to Duan Pi Zhen.

古文：五年春正月，帝在平阳。
现代文：五年春正月，皇帝在平阳。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, the emperor was in Pingyang.

古文：庚子，虹霓弥天，三日并照。
现代文：庚子，虹霓满天，三个太阳同时照耀。
English: Geng Zi, the rainbow fills the sky, three suns shine at the same time.

古文：平东将军宋哲奔江左。
现代文：平东将军宋哲逃奔江左。
English: Pingdong General Song Zhe fled to the left of the river.

古文：李雄使其将李恭、罗寅寇巴东。
现代文：李雄派遣他的部将李恭、罗寅侵犯巴束。
English: Li Xiong dispatched his subordinates Li Gong and Luo Yin to invade Bazhou.

古文：二月，刘聪使其将刘暢攻荥阳，太守李矩击破之。
现代文：二月，刘聪派他的部将刘畅攻打荣阳，太守李矩打败了他。
English: In February, Liu Cong sent his general, Liu Chang, to attack Rongyang, but he was defeated by the grand marshal, Li An.

古文：三月，琅邪王睿承制改元，称晋王于建康。
现代文：三月，琅邪王司马睿秉承皇帝旨意改年号，在建康自称晋王。
English: In March, the evil king Sima Rui changed his name in accordance with the emperor's will, and called himself Jin Wang in Jiankang.

古文：夏五月丙子，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏五月丙子，有日食。
English: Summer, May, and September have solar eclipses.

古文：秋七月，大暑，司、冀、青、雍等四州螽蝗。
现代文：秋七月，大旱，司、冀、青、雍等四州有螽蝗。
English: In autumn and July, due to the severe drought, locusts appeared in four prefectures including Shih, Hebei, Qing and Yong.

古文：石勒亦竞取百姓禾，时人谓之 胡蝗 。
现代文：石勒也抢着收取百姓的庄稼，当时人们称他们是 胡蝗 。
English: Shiller also raced to collect people's crops, when people called them locusts.

古文：八月，刘聪使赵固袭卫将军华荟于定颍，遂害之。
现代文：八月，刘聪派赵固在临颖袭击卫将军华蕾，并且杀害了他。
English: In August, Liu Cong sent Zhao Gu to attack Wei general Hua Lei in Linying and killed him.

古文：冬十月丙子，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月丙子，有日食。
English: In winter, in October, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：刘聪出猎，令帝行车骑将军，戎服执戟为导，百姓聚而观之，故老或歔欷流涕，聪闻而恶之。
现代文：刘聪出去打猎，命令皇帝充当车骑将军，穿戎装拿着戟作前导，百姓聚集观看他，旧臣有的哭泣流泪，刘聪听到后很反感。
English: Liu Cong went out to hunt, ordered the emperor to act as a chariot and cavalry general, wearing a military uniform and holding a scepter as a guide, the people gathered to watch him, some of the old subjects cried and shed tears, Liu Cong was disgusted after hearing.

古文：聪后因大会，使帝行酒洗爵，反而更衣，又使帝执盖，晋臣在坐者多失声而泣，尚书郎辛宾抱帝恸哭，为聪所害。
现代文：后来刘聪在宴会上，让皇帝劝酒、涮洗酒爵，上厕所时，又让皇帝拿着便桶盖子。在座的晋朝旧臣有很多人失声哭泣，尚书郎辛宾抱着皇帝痛哭，被刘聪杀害。
English: Later, at a banquet, Liu Cong asked the emperor to persuade him to drink and wash his sake, and when he went to the toilet, he also asked the emperor to hold the lid of the toilet. There were many former ministers of the Jin Dynasty present who lost their voices and wept. Shang Shulang Xinbin hugged the emperor and cried bitterly, and was killed by Liu Cong.

古文：十二月戊戌，帝遇弑，崩于平阳，时年十八。
现代文：十二月戊戌，皇帝被杀，在乎阳去世，时年十八岁。
English: In December, the emperor was assassinated, and Guan Yang died at the age of eighteen.

古文：帝之继皇统也，属永嘉之乱，天下崩离，长安城中户不盈百，墙宇颓毁，蒿棘成林。
现代文：皇帝继承皇统的时候，正当永嘉之乱，天下分崩离析，长安城中住户不满百家，围墙殿宇颓倒倾毁，蒿草荆棘成林。
English: When the emperor succeeded to the throne, the Yongjia Rebellion broke out, and the whole country fell apart. There were less than a hundred households in Chang'an City, the walls of the palace were destroyed, and the thorns of egrets grew into a forest.

古文：朝廷无车马章服，唯桑版署号而已。
现代文：朝廷没有车辆马匹服饰，衹是用桑木板写上名号罢了。
English: The imperial court did not have cars, horses, or clothes. The only thing they had was a name written on a piece of mulberry wood.

古文：众唯一旅，公私有车四乘，器械多阙，运馈不继。
现代文：士兵衹有一旅，公家私家一共有车四乘，器械有很多都缺乏，粮食不接。
English: Soldiers have only one trip, the public and private sectors have a total of four vehicles, many lack equipment, and do not receive food.

古文：巨猾滔天，帝京危急，诸侯无释位之志，征镇阙勤王之举，故君臣窘迫，以至杀辱云。
现代文：大奸巨猾气焰熏天，京城情势非常危急，诸侯们没有舍掉爵位的勇气，将军们缺乏为皇帝尽力的行动，因此国君臣子困窘而被逼迫，终于被杀害羞辱。
English: The great traitor was extremely cunning, the situation in the capital was very critical, the lords did not have the courage to give up their titles, the generals lacked the action to do their best for the emperor, so the sovereigns and courtiers were embarrassed and persecuted, and finally they were killed and humiliated.

古文：史臣曰：昔炎晖杪暮，英雄多假于宗室。金德韬华，颠沛共推于怀愍。
现代文：史臣曰：王朝像辉煌的太阳到了黄昏的时候，救国的英雄就大多出自于皇室宗族；国家的命运像金玉隐去了光华，颠沛流离的皇帝都认为应当敷怀帝和愍帝。
English: Shichen said: "Dynasties are like the brilliant sun at dusk, the heroes of national salvation are mostly from the royal family; the fate of the country is like a golden jewel that has lost its brilliance, and the emperors who are wandering around think that they should cherish the emperor and the emperor.

古文：樊阳寂寥，兵车靡会，岂力不足而情有余乎？
现代文：阳樊寂静，空无一人，兵车没有来聚会，难道是实力不够而忠心有余吗?
English: Impotent silence, no one there, no troop cars coming to the meeting. Is it a case of not being strong enough but being loyal enough?

古文：喋喋遗萌，苟存其主，譬彼诗人，爱其棠树。
现代文：劫后余生之民，艰难地使君主生存，好比那古代的诗人，爱护那棠棣树一样。
English: After the disaster, the remaining people struggled to keep the monarch alive, just as the ancient poet loved the dragonfly tree.

古文：夫有非常之事，而无非常之功，详观发迹，用非天启，是以舆棺齿剑，可得而言焉。
现代文：发生了非同寻常的事件，却没有谁建立非同寻常的功业，仔细考察发迹的情况，不是出于上天的启示，因此才有用车载着棺材，牙齿咬着利剑去请罪投降的事情发生。
English: An extraordinary event has occurred, but no one has built an extraordinary work, carefully examined the circumstances of the birth, not because of the revelation of heaven, so it is necessary to use a car carrying a coffin, with teeth biting a sharp sword to plead guilty and surrender.

古文：于时五岳三涂，并皆沦寇，龙州、牛首，故以立君。
现代文：于是五岳三涂等山川，全都沦陷到敌寇手中，龙州、牛首这样的地方，被用作君主立足的处所。
English: As a result, the mountains and rivers such as the Five Mountains and the Three Mountains all fell into the hands of the enemy, and places such as Longzhou and Niu Shou were used as places for the monarch to stand on.

古文：股肱非挑战之秋，刘石有滔天之势，疗饥中断，婴戈外绝，两京沦狄，再驾徂戎。
现代文：股肱大臣不是能够讨敌的人才，刘、石二人有滔天之势，结果内无充饥的粮食，外无救援的兵马，两座京城被狄人攻陷，两个皇帝被押往戎人的大营。
English: Minister Quanzhang is not a talented person who can defeat the enemy. Liu and Shi are two men with tremendous potential. As a result, there is no food to feed the hungry inside, and there are no rescuing soldiers and horses outside. The two capitals were captured by the Di people, and the two emperors were sent to the big camp of the Eunuchs.

古文：周王陨首于骊峰，卫公亡肝于淇上，思为一郡，其可得乎！
现代文：周幽王在骊山掉了脑袋，卫武公在淇水边伤心欲绝，想要得到一个郡的地方，岂能够做到呢!
English: Zhou Yu Wang lost his head in Lushan, Wei Wu Gong was heartbroken in Qi Shui Bian, if you want to get a county place, how can you do it!

古文：干宝有言曰：昔高祖宣皇帝以雄才硕量，应时而仕，值魏太祖创基之初，筹画军国，嘉谋屡中，遂服舆轸，驱驰三世。
现代文：干宝评论说：从前高祖宣皇帝凭雄才大略，顺应时势而出任官职，正当魏太祖开始创立基业的时候，筹划军国大事，妙计嘉谋屡屡成功，于是身负重任，辛劳征战了三朝。
English: Gan Bao commented: In the past, Emperor Gaozhu Xuan took advantage of his great talent and took office in accordance with the current situation. Just as Wei Taizu began to establish the foundation, he planned military and national events, and his ingenious plans were repeatedly successful. Therefore, he shouldered a heavy responsibility and fought the three dynasties with hard work.

古文：性深阻有若城府，而能宽绰以容纳；行任数以御物，而知人善采拔。
现代文：性格深沉而有城府，能够宽宏大量而容纳众人；行事听凭自然来驾驭事物，而又知人善任。
English: He has a deep and refined personality, is able to accommodate everyone with a large amount of generosity; he acts according to nature to control things, and knows people well.

古文：故贤愚咸怀，大小毕力。
现代文：所以不论贤者愚夫都敬服他，做大事小事全都尽力而为。
English: Therefore, no matter whether they are wise or foolish, they all respect him and do their best in all matters.

古文：尔乃取邓艾于农隙，引州泰于行役，委以文武，各善其事。
现代文：这样才有提拔身为管农事的小官邓艾，引荐在军中职务卑微的州泰，委派给他们文武职位，他们都很胜任。
English: This is how Deng Ai Rong, a minor official in charge of agricultural affairs, was promoted, Shoutai, who had a humble position in the army, was recommended, and they were assigned to the positions of literature and military affairs. They are all very competent.

古文：故能西禽孟达，东举公孙，内夷曹爽，外袭王凌。
现代文：因此能够西征制服孟达，东征战胜公孙文懿，对内平息曹爽，对外奇袭王棱。
English: Therefore, he was able to subdue Meng Da in the Western Expedition, defeat Gongsun Wenyi in the Eastern Expedition, pacify Cao Shuang internally, and surprise Wang Ren externally.

古文：神略独断，征伐四克，维御群后，大权在己。
现代文：谋略神奇而断事独到，征战讨伐四方获胜，维护天子诸侯，大权在握。
English: The strategy is magical and the judgment is unique, the four sides win the war, the princes are protected, and the power is in their hands.

古文：于是百姓与能，大象始构。
现代文：在这种情况下，百姓亲近有才能的人，大势开始形成。
English: In this situation, the people are close to the talented people, and the general trend is beginning to take shape.

古文：世宗承基，太祖继业，玄丰乱内，钦诞寇外，潜谋虽密，而在机必兆；淮浦再扰，而许洛不震：咸黜异图，用融前烈。
现代文：世宗和太祖开创基业，夏侯玄、李丰在朝中作乱，文钦、诸葛诞在外兴兵为寇，阴谋进行得虽然秘密，可是在紧要关头必定会暴露；淮水岸边一再被骚扰，可是许、洛一带不受震动：反叛的图谋全被制止。
English: Shizong and the great-grandfather started the foundation, Xia Hoxuan and Li Feng led a rebellion in the DPRK and China, Wenqin and Zhuge were born abroad and raised an army to invade. Although the conspiracy was carried out secretly, it would certainly be exposed at a critical moment; the coast of Huai Shui was repeatedly harassed, but the Xu and Luo areas were not shaken: the rebel plot was completely stopped.

古文：然后推毂钟邓，长驱庸蜀，三关电埽，而刘禅入臣，天符人事，于是信矣。
现代文：前辈的功烈因此发扬光大。然后重用钟会和邓艾，长驱攻入庸、蜀，三关如闪电般被扫平，刘禅来投降称臣，天降瑞符和人谋，到这时候都成为事实。
English: The exploits of the predecessors were thus carried forward. Then, the re-use of Zhonghui and Deng Ai, the long drive into Yong and Shu, the three passes were swept away like lightning, Liu Zhen came to surrender and praised the minister, the heaven-sent Ruifu and the man-made plan, all became a reality at this time.

古文：始当非常之礼，终受备物之锡。
现代文：初始得到非同寻常的礼遇，接受无舆伦比的最高赏赐。
English: At the beginning, he received extraordinary courtesy and received the highest award without comparison.

古文：至于世祖，遂享皇极。
现代文：到了世祖，终于登极为皇帝。
English: At the time of the founding of the world, he was finally crowned emperor.

古文：仁以厚下，俭以足用，和而不驰，宽而能断，故民咏维新，四海悦劝矣。
现代文：仁而使臣民丰厚，俭而使用度充足，平和而不使法纪松弛，宽厚而处理政事果断，因此人民歌颂革新，四海愉快地接受教令。
English: Benevolence makes the subjects rich, frugality makes the use sufficient, peace does not make the legal discipline slack, and clemency resolutely deals with political affairs. Therefore, the people sing the praises of innovation and happily accept the edicts of all directions.

古文：聿修祖宗之志，思辑战国之苦。
现代文：弘扬祖宗的志向，平息战乱的痛苦。
English: to carry forward the aspirations of our ancestors and to relieve the suffering caused by the war.

古文：腹心不同，公卿异议，而独纳羊祜之策，杖王杜之决，役不二时，江湘来同。
现代文：腹心大臣想法不一致，公卿们意见不相同，却单单采纳羊枯的策略，依仗王浚、杜预的决断，征战不到两个季度，江、湘一带归于统一。
English: The minister's confidant did not have the same idea, and the nobles did not have the same opinion, but they simply adopted the strategy of withering the sheep. Relying on the decision of Wang Jun and Du Yu, the war was less than two quarters, and the Jiang and Hunan regions were unified.

古文：掩唐虞之旧域，班正朔于八荒，天下书同文，车同轨，牛马被野，余粮委亩，故于时有 天下无穷人 之谚。
现代文：统辖有唐尧、虞舜旧时的地域，新的历法达到八方荒远之地，天下人书写用同一种文字，车马道路用同样的规格，牛马满山遍野，余粮堆积在田间地头，所以当时有 天下无穷人 的谚语。
English: At that time, there was a saying that there were no poor people in the world, because the old regions of Tang and Yunnan were under its jurisdiction, and the new calendar had reached far and wide. People all over the world wrote in the same script, used the same specifications for vehicles and roads, and there were mountains full of cattle and horses, and surplus grain was piled up in the fields.

古文：虽太平未洽，亦足以明吏奉其法，民乐其生矣。
现代文：虽然还没有完全太平下来，也足以说明官吏奉公守法，人民安居乐业了。
English: Although the situation is not completely peaceful, it is enough to show that government officials are abiding by the law and the people are living and working in peace.

古文：武皇既崩，山陵未乾，而杨骏被诛，母后废黜。
现代文：亘蝗去世后，山陵之土还没有干，杨骏就被诛杀，母后被废黜。
English: After the death of Guo Locust, the soil of the mountains had not yet dried. Yang Xuan was killed and his mother was dethroned.

古文：寻以二公、楚王之变，宗子无维城之助，师尹无具瞻之贵，至乃易天子以太上之号，而有免官之谣。
现代文：不久又因为害死太宰和太保并诛杀楚王，宗子没有了保护自己的佐助人物，百官的首领没有为众人所瞻仰的显贵身份，致使改天子为太上皇，而有了免官的谣谚。
English: Soon, because he killed the Dazai and the Taibao and assassinated the King of Chu, the patriarch did not have a Sasuke to protect him, and the head of the hundred officials did not have the distinguished status that many people admired, resulting in changing the emperor to the emperor, and there was a rumor of dismissal.

古文：民不见德，惟乱是闻，朝为伊周，夕成桀蹠，善恶陷于成败，毁誉胁于世利，内外混淆，庶官失才，名实反错，天纲解纽。
现代文：人民见不到德行，祇听说作乱，早晨还是伊尹周公似的贤人，晚上就变成夏基盗堕一类的恶人了。善恶受成败左右，毁誉被世利支配，内外混淆不清，庶人官吏不随身份而定，名与实倒错不符，天纲法纪疏漏不整。
English: The people do not see virtue, only hear and see disorder. In the morning, they are still wise men like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, and in the evening, they turn into evil people like Shaki. Good and evil are affected by success and failure, reputation is controlled by worldly interests, internal and external confusion is unclear, ordinary officials do not depend on their status, the name does not match the reality, and the Ten Gang Law and Discipline is incomplete.

古文：国政迭移于乱人，禁兵外散于四方，方岳无钧石之镇，关门无结草之固。
现代文：国家的政事接连被作乱的人掌管，禁卫的军队出走流散到四面八方，方岳重地没有得力的人镇守，关隘城门没有丝毫的防卫。
English: The political affairs of the country were successively controlled by the troublemakers, the guarded troops fled and scattered to all directions, there were no effective people to guard the town, and there was no defense of the gate.

古文：李辰、石冰倾之于荆杨，元海、王弥挠之于青冀，戎羯称制，二帝失尊，何哉？树立失权，托付非才，四维不张，而苟且之政多也。
现代文：李辰、石冰在荆、杨造反，刘五涂、王迩在直、冀作乱，戎、担称帝，堕、监二帝失去尊严成为囚犯，这是为什么呢所重用的人丧失权柄，所树立的人没有才能，国家法纪不能伸张，而敷衍政事太多。
English: Li Chen and Shi Bing rebelled in Jing and Yang, Liu Wuduo and Wang Qian rebelled in Zhi and Hebei, and they lost their dignity as emperors and became prisoners. This is why those who have been reused have lost their power, those who have been established have no talent, national laws and regulations cannot be extended, and there are too many perfunctory government affairs.

古文：夫作法于治，其弊犹乱；作法于乱，谁能救之！彼元海者，离石之将兵都尉；王弥者，青州之散吏也。
现代文：为治乱而制定法规，出现了弊病尚且会造成祸乱；制定法规却不循常理，谁还能救他那刘元海，是离石的带兵都尉；王弥，是青州的散官。
English: To formulate laws and regulations for the purpose of controlling chaos, even if there are maladies, they will still cause disasters; to formulate laws and regulations without following common sense, who can save his Liu Yuanhai, is the captain of Liushi; Wang Ya, is the liaison officer of Qingzhou.

古文：盖皆弓马之士，驱走之人，非有吴先主、诸葛孔明之能也；新起之寇，乌合之众，非吴蜀之敌也；脱耒为兵，裂裳为旗，非战国之器也；自下逆上，非邻国之势也。
现代文：他们都是引弓走马，为人驱使的人，并非有吴先主、诸葛孔明那样的才能；新起的寇贼，乌合之众，不能和吴、蜀相比；放下农具成为士兵，撕裂衣裳做旗帜，不是征战伐国的利器；从下面来反朝廷，不是邻国一样的势力。
English: They are all people who lead by example and are driven by people, but they do not have the talent of Wu Xiancheng and Zhuge Kongming; the newly emerged bandits and rabble cannot be compared with Wu and Shu; they put down their farm tools to become soldiers, and tore their clothes to make flags, but they are not a sharp tool for conquering and destroying the country; they come from below to oppose the imperial court, but they are not the same forces as their neighbors.

古文：然而扰天下如驱群羊，举二都如拾遗芥，将相王侯连颈以受戮，后嫔妃主虏辱于戎卒，岂不哀哉！天下，大器也；群生，重畜也。
现代文：然而扰乱天下就像驱赶羊群，攻占二都就像拾起遣落的芥草，将相王侯接连被杀害，皇后嫔妃公主被戎卒俘虏污辱，多么悲哀呀天下，是帝位的基础；百姓，是最宝贵的财富。
English: However, disturbing the world is like driving away a flock of sheep, capturing two capitals is like picking up the mustard seed that has been sent down, the king and prince were killed one after another, the queen and princess were insulted by the prisoners of war, how sad the world is, is the foundation of the throne; the people are the most precious wealth.

古文：爱恶相攻，利害相夺，其势常也。
现代文：因为喜爱或厌恶而互相攻打，因为利害关系而互相争夺，那情势是常有的。
English: To attack each other because of liking or disliking, to fight each other because of interests, that situation is always there.

古文：若积水于防，燎火于原，未尝暂静也。
现代文：好比蓄积的水在堤坝内，点燃的火在草原上，从没有一刻静止安宁。
English: Like accumulated water in a dike or a fire on the prairie, there is never a moment of stillness.

古文：器大者，不可以小道治；势重者，不可以争竞扰。
现代文：国家大了，不能够用普通的方法治理；权势重了，不能够用争夺的方式获得。
English: The country is big and cannot be governed by ordinary methods; the power is heavy and cannot be obtained by means of competition.

古文：古先哲王知其然也，是以捍其大患，御其大灾。
现代文：古时候明智的帝王了解这个道理，因此防备的是大祸患，抵御的是大灾难。
English: In ancient times, wise emperors understood this principle, so they prepared for a great disaster and resisted a great disaster.

古文：百姓皆知上德之生己，而不谓浚己以生也，是以感而应之，悦而归之，如晨风之郁北林，龙鱼之趣薮泽也。
现代文：百姓们都知道是帝王仁德使自己生存，而不认为是压榨自己而生存，因此感激而顺应他，满意而归附他，好像晨风吹到茂盛的林间，龙鱼游往沼泽大湖。
English: The people all know that it is the benevolence of the emperor that allows them to survive, and they do not think that they are living by squeezing themselves. Therefore, they are grateful and obedient to him, satisfied and attached to him, like the morning wind blowing to the lush forest, and the dragon fish swimming to the swampy lake.

古文：然后设礼文以理之，断刑罚以威之，谨好恶以示之，审祸福以喻之，求明察以官之，尊慈爱以固之。
现代文：然后设置礼仪教化来治理他们，决断刑狱赏罚来镇慑他们，谨慎分别出美好与丑恶来给他们看，明辨祸福缘由来教诲他们，务求明察秋毫地来管理他们，尊重并崇尚慈爱之心来笼络他们。
English: Then set up etiquette and education to govern them, decide on punishment and reward to deter them, carefully distinguish between good and evil to show them, clearly distinguish the origin of misfortune and good fortune to teach them, so as to carefully manage them, respect and advocate the heart of love to entice them.

古文：故众知向方，皆乐其生而哀其死，悦其教而安其俗；君子勤礼，小人尽力，廉耻笃于家闾，邪辟消于胸怀。
现代文：所以民众懂得追求什么，都为他的存在而高兴，为他的死亡而悲哀，对他的教令感到愉快而安心地接受他的道德规范；君子勤修礼义，小人尽力劳作，廉耻推行到家庭间巷，邪恶之念被消灭在胸怀初发的时候。
English: Therefore, the people know what to pursue, are happy for his existence, are sad for his death, are happy for his edict and accept his moral code with confidence; the gentleman diligently practices propriety, the villain works hard, shamelessness is promoted to the family alley, and evil thoughts are eliminated in the heart at the first onset.

古文：故其民有见危以授命，而不求生以害义，又况可奋臂大呼，聚之以干纪作乱乎！基广则难倾，根深则难拔，理节则不乱，胶结则不迁，是以昔之有天下者之所以长久也。
现代文：所以民众有见到危难能挺身而出，而不会为了求得活命而损害道义，又怎么能被奋臂大呼，就聚集起来去作乱呢基础宽厚就难以倾倒，根深就难以拔除，纹理有规则就不会紊乱，胶粘结在一起就不会移动，因此从前据有天下的人能够长久下去。
English: Therefore, when the people see the danger, they can come forward without compromising morality in order to survive, and how can they be shouted, they gather together to make trouble? The foundation is broad and difficult to pour, the roots are deep and difficult to remove, the texture is regular and will not be disordered, and the glue will not move together. Therefore, people who once had the world can go on for a long time.

古文：夫岂无僻主，赖道德典刑以维持之也。
现代文：岂能没有几个有差错的君主呢，全靠道德和法制来维持着呀。
English: How could there not be a few errant monarchs, all sustained by morality and the rule of law?

古文：昔周之兴也，后稷生于姜嫄，而天命昭显，文武之功起于后稷。
现代文：从前周朝的兴起，在姜螈生下后稷的时候，上天的意旨就清楚地表露了，文王、武王的功业是从后稷那裹开始的。
English: From the rise of the previous Zhou Dynasty, when Jiang Chen gave birth to Hou Yi, the will of heaven was clearly revealed. The work of King Wen and King Wu began from Hou Yi.

古文：至于公刘，遭夏人之乱，去邰之豳，身服厥劳。
现代文：到公刘那时，遇到夏朝战乱，就离开邰迁往豳，亲身从事辛苦的劳作。
English: At the time of Gong Liu, when the summer war broke out, he moved from Handan to Handan and personally engaged in hard work.

古文：至于太王，为戎翟所逼，而不忍百姓之命，杖策而去之。
现代文：到了太王时，被戎、翟威逼，却又不忍心伤害百姓，于是杖策出走而离开了豳。
English: When he arrived at Taiwang, he was bullied by Rong and Yao, but he couldn't bear to hurt the people, so he made his escape and left Yao.

古文：故从之如归市，一年成邑，二年成都，三年五倍其初。
现代文：所以百姓跟随他就像去赶集一样，一年形成邑，两年形成都，三年后规模是当初的五倍。
English: Therefore, the people followed him as if they were going to the fair, forming a township in one year, a capital in two years, and five times the original size in three years.

古文：至于王季，能貊其德音；至于文王，而维新其命。
现代文：到了王季，能肃清是非流言，人心安定；到了文王，使周的命运更新。
English: When it came to Wang Ji, he was able to clear up rumors and stabilize people's hearts; when it came to King Wen, he was able to renew Zhou's fate.

古文：由此观之，周家世积忠厚，仁及草木，内隆九族，外尊事黄耇，以成其福禄者也。
现代文：由此看来，周家世代忠厚，仁德施及草木，对内使九族兴隆，对外尊敬服事长者，所以才造成那样的福禄。
English: From this perspective, the loyalty of the Zhou family generation, the benevolence and generosity to the grass and trees, the prosperity of the nine ethnic groups at home, and the respect for the elders abroad, are the reasons for such a blessing.

古文：而其妃后躬行四教，尊敬师傅，服瀚濯之衣，修烦辱之事，化天下以成妇道。
现代文：而且他们的妃后亲身实行妇女的四德，尊敬师傅，穿着洗过的衣服，从事烦琐卑贱的家务，从而影响天下人而使妇道形成。
English: Moreover, their queens personally practice the four virtues of women, respect teachers, wear washed clothes, and engage in tedious and menial household chores, thus influencing the world and shaping the feminine way.

古文：是以汉滨之女，守洁白之志，中林之士，有纯一之德，始于忧勤，终于逸乐。
现代文：因此女子如汉水边的游女，能守护自己的贞洁清白，隐逸之士，具有纯正坚定的品德，在操心和勤奋中开始，在安逸和快乐中结束。
English: Therefore, women, like the wandering women along the Han River, are able to guard their chastity and innocence, are secluded people, have pure and firm moral character, begin in worry and diligence, and end in ease and happiness.

古文：以三圣之知，伐独夫之纣，犹正其名教，曰逆取顺守。
现代文：凭着三位圣人的智慧，讨伐纣这样的独夫，尚且要有正当的名义，叫做以武力夺天下，修文教治天下。
English: With the wisdom of the three sages, to fight against such a lone man, it is necessary to have a legitimate name. It is called conquering the world by force, and cultivating literature and teaching to rule the world.

古文：及周公遭变，陈后稷先公风化之所由，致王业之艰难者，则皆农夫女工衣食之事也。
现代文：到周公遭遇事变时，陈述后稷先公教化百姓的历史，讲先王创业的艰难，内容都是和农夫女工衣食相关的事。
English: When Zhou Gong encountered an incident, he recounted the history of Zhou Xianxian's public education of the people and the difficulties of Zhou Xianwang's entrepreneurship, all of which were related to the clothing and food of female farmers.

古文：故自后稷之始基靖民，十五王而文始平之，十六王而武始居之，十八王而康克安之。
现代文：所以自从后稷开始建立基业安抚百姓，经历十五代而到文王平定天下，经历十六代到武王据有天下，经历十八王而到康王终于安定天下。
English: Therefore, since Hou Yi began to establish a foundation to appease the people, it has gone through 15 generations to King Wen to pacify the world, 16 generations to King Wu to maintain the world, and 18 generations to King Kang to finally stabilize the world.

古文：故其积基树本，经纬礼俗，节理人情，恤隐民事，如此之缠绵也。
现代文：他们积累基础，培植根本，推行礼仪风俗，调理人情安抚民事，就是如此细致持久啊。
English: They accumulate the foundation, cultivate the fundamentals, promote the etiquette and customs, adjust the human feelings and pacify the civil affairs, which is so meticulous and lasting.

古文：今晋之兴也，功烈于百王，事捷于三代。
现代文：如今晋朝的兴起，功业比历代帝王都显赫，事业比三代更成功。
English: Today, the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the achievements are more prominent than the previous emperors, and the cause is more successful than the three generations.

古文：宣景遭多难之时，诛庶孽以便事，不及修公刘、太王之仁也。
现代文：宣帝、景帝遭逢许多祸难的时候，诛戮庶孽来解决事端，顾不上推行公刘、太王那样的仁政。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan and Emperor Jing encountered many calamities, they resorted to violence to solve the problems, and did not pay attention to promoting benevolent politics like Emperor Liu and Emperor Taizu.

古文：受遗辅政，屡遇废置，故齐王不明，不获思庸于亳；高贵冲人，不得复子明辟也。
现代文：接受遣命辅佐朝政，多次遇上废置皇帝的事情，因此齐王不明政事礼法，未能重掌朝政于亳；高贵乡公年幼无知，没有恢复他皇帝的地位。
English: He was sent as an assistant to the imperial government, and the emperor was deposed several times. As a result, King Qi did not know the etiquette of political affairs, and was unable to resume the imperial government at the imperial palace. Gao Guixiang was young and ignorant, and did not restore his status as emperor.

古文：二祖逼禅代之期，不暇待参分八百之会也。
现代文：二位先祖威逼禅位代立的时候，是没有闲暇等待各路诸侯来聚会推举的。
English: When the two ancestors coerced Zenji to stand in for them, there was no time to wait for the various lords to gather for the election.

古文：是其创基立本，异于先代者也。
现代文：遣正是他们开创基业建立国本时，不同于前代的地方。
English: They were sent to a different place than the previous generation when they started the foundation and established the country.

古文：加以朝寡纯德之人，乡乏不贰之老，风俗淫僻，耻尚失所，学者以老庄为宗而黜《六经》，谈者以虚荡为辨而贱名检，行身者以放浊为通而狭节信，进仕者以苟得为贵而鄙居正，当官者以望空为高而笑勤恪。
现代文：加上朝中少有品德纯正的人，乡间缺乏忠心的长者，风俗不正，丧失了耻辱感和应该崇尚的目标，学者把老庄思想当作正宗而不学《六经》，清谈的人把虚空当作目标而看不起名誉道德，处身行事的人把放任浊行当作通达而少守节操讲信义，为官者看重苟且贪得而鄙视清正，当权者把不问政务当作高明而讥笑勤勉。
English: In addition, there are few people with pure moral character in the imperial court, the elders in the countryside lack loyalty, the customs are unjust, and they have lost the sense of shame and the goal that should be revered. Scholars regard Lao Zhuang Thought as authentic and do not study the "Six Classics," the clear talkers regard emptiness as the goal and despise honor and morality, the people who act in their daily lives regard the laissez-faire and laxity as being able to achieve, but do not observe discipline and speak truthfully, the officials attach importance to meticulousness and greed, but despise purity, and the people in power regard not asking about politics as being clever, but

古文：是以刘颂屡言治道，傅咸每纠邪正，皆谓之俗吏；其倚杖虚旷，依阿无心者皆名重海内。
现代文：因此刘颂常常谈论治政的方法，傅咸往往纠偏正邪，都被称作俗吏；那些推崇虚空，依凭无为的人都名重海内。
English: Therefore, Liu Song often talks about the methods of governance, Fu Xian often corrects and rectifies evil, and they are all called secular officials; those who worship the void and rely on inaction are all famous.

古文：若夫文王日旰不暇食，仲山甫夙夜匪懈者，盖共嗤黜以为灰尘矣。
现代文：至于像周文王那样日头偏西而没工夫吃饭，像仲山甫那样从早到晚不敢懈怠的人，被众人嗤笑而当作灰尘。
English: As for those who, like King Zhou Wen, had no time to eat because the sun was setting in the west, and those who, like Zhong Shan Fu, dared not slacken from morning to night, were laughed at by everyone and treated as dust.

古文：由是毁誉乱于善恶之实，情慝奔于货欲之涂。
现代文：由此而对善与恶的批评舆赞誉变得混淆，真情和好伪在货赂与私欲的道路上失去了界限。
English: As a result, the criticism and praise of good and evil have become confused, and the true and false have lost their boundaries on the road of bribery and selfishness.

古文：选者为人择官，官者为身择利，而执钧当轴之士，身兼官以十数。
现代文：选拔人才的人按人情选择官吏，担任官职的人为自己决定利害取舍，而执钧当轴的掌权人士，一身兼任的官职有十几个甚至几十个。
English: Those who select talents choose officials according to human nature, those who hold official positions decide their own interests, and those who hold power have more than a dozen or even dozens of official positions.

古文：大极其尊，小录其耍，而世族贵戚之子弟，陵迈超越，不拘资次。
现代文：大的达到尊宠的极限，小的也是个要职，至于世族贵戚的子弟，越级超拔，不论资历班秩。
English: The eldest reaches the limit of respect, the youngest is also an important position, as for the children of noble relatives, they are superior, regardless of seniority class rank.

古文：悠悠风尘，皆奔竞之士，列官千百，无让贤之举。
现代文：悠悠风尘中，都是竞逐名利的人，列位的冗官成百上千，没有让贤的举动。
English: In the hustle and bustle, people are competing for fame and fortune. There are hundreds and thousands of redundant officials in the ranks, and there is no move to let them be.

古文：子真著崇让而莫之省，子雅制九班而不得用。
现代文：刘子真着《崇让论》而无人理会，刘子雅制定九班的制度而不能实行。
English: Liu Zizhen wrote "On the Theory of Concession" and was ignored. Liu Ziya established a nine-class system but could not implement it.

古文：其妇女，庄栉织纴皆取成于婢仆，未尝知女工丝枲之业，中馈酒食之事也。
现代文：那时的妇女，梳洗打扮纺织裁衣都靠婢女仆人，从来不知道女工丝臬方面的事，也不懂烹调酒食方面的事。
English: At that time, women relied on maidservants to do their hair, dress, weave, and cut their clothes. They never knew anything about the women who made silk scarves, nor did they know anything about cooking and drinking.

古文：先时而婚，任情而动，故皆不耻淫泆之过，不拘妒忌之恶，父兄不之罪也，天下莫之非也，又况责之闻四教于古，修贞顺于今，以辅佐君子者哉！
现代文：不到时候就结婚，任情感而动，所以都不认为淫荡放纵是可耻，不克制妒忌一类的恶行，父兄们不责备她们的罪过，天下人没有一个说她们的不是。更何从要求她们学习古代的妇女四德，在现在培养贞节测顷的品行，来辅佐君子呢!
English: They get married at the wrong time, let their emotions move them, so they don't consider licentious indulgence to be shameful, don't restrain evil deeds such as jealousy, their fathers and brothers don't reproach them for their sins, and no one in the world says that theirs are not. What's more, they don't support gentlemen by requiring them to learn the four virtues of ancient women, and cultivate chastity-measuring behavior now!

古文：礼法刑政于此大坏，如水斯积而决其提防，如火斯畜而离其薪燎也。
现代文：礼法刑政在逭方面彻底被破坏，好像水积蓄而冲决了堤岸，火积蓄而烧着了柴堆。
English: The etiquette, law and criminal justice system has been completely destroyed in the area of eavesdropping, just as water accumulates and breaks through the embankment, and fire accumulates and burns the woodpile.

古文：国之将亡，未必先颠，其此之谓乎！
现代文：国家将要灭亡，根基必定先要颠覆，说的就是这种情况!
English: The country is going to perish, the foundation must first be overturned, this is the situation!

古文：故观阮籍之行，而觉礼教崩驰之所由也。
现代文：所以观察阮籍的行为，就能发觉礼教废弛的原因。
English: Therefore, observing Nguyen Quoc's behavior can reveal the reasons for the decline of etiquette.

古文：察庾纯、贾充之争，而见师尹之多僻；考平吴之功，而知将帅之不让；思郭钦之谋，而寤戎狄之有衅；览傅玄、刘毅之言，而得百官之邪；核傅咸之奏、《钱神》之论，而睹宠赂之彰。
现代文：察度庾纯、贾充的矛盾，就能看出师尹大臣有很多不合正道的地方；考究平定吴地的战功，就能知道将帅们很不谦让；回头看当年郭钦的谋略，就能省悟到戎狄会挑起战乱；听傅玄、刘毅的言论，就能知道百官们的好邪；核实傅咸的奏议、《钱神》中的论述，就能看到宠幸贿赂一类的行为。
English: Observing the contradictions of Gong Chun and Jia Chong, it can be seen that there are many unethical things about the teacher Yin Minister; studying the war exploits of pacifying Wu Di, it can be known that the generals are very immodest; looking back at Guo Qin's strategy of that year, it can be realized that the Eun Di will provoke war; listening to Fu Xuan and Liu Yi's remarks, it can be known the good and evil of the officials; verifying Fu Xian's report and the discussion in "God of Money," it can be seen the behavior of favoritism and bribery.

古文：民风国势如此，虽以中庸之主治之，辛有必见之于祭祀，季札必得之于声乐，范燮必为之请死，贾谊必为之痛哭，又况我惠帝以放荡之德临之哉！
现代文：民风和国势到了这种地步，即使让才德中庸，能遵守成法的君主来治理，辛有也必然会从祭祀上有所发现，季札也必然会从声乐中得到启示，范燮必然会为这样的情况而请死，贾谊必然会为这样的情况而痛哭，又何况惠帝足以放荡的德行来统治百姓和天下!
English: The people's customs and the national situation have reached such a level that even if the monarch who is able to abide by the established laws is allowed to govern, he will inevitably find something from the sacrificial rites, the Ji Zha will inevitably receive inspiration from the vocal music, Fan Yu will inevitably die for such a situation, Jia Yi will inevitably cry for such a situation, and moreover, Hui Di has enough debauched virtues to rule the people and the world!

古文：怀帝承乱得位，羁于强臣，愍帝奔播之后，徒厕其虚名，天下之政既去，非命世之雄才，不能取之矣！
现代文：怀帝在乱世中继位，被强臣控制；愍帝在流亡中执政，徒有虚名；天下的政事大势已去，如果不是盖世的雄才，不可能取得天下!
English: Emperor Huai succeeded to the throne in a chaotic world and was controlled by strong ministers; Emperor Zhao ruled in exile, but with a false name; the political situation in the world has gone, if it were not for the great talent of the world, it would be impossible to obtain the world!

古文：淳耀之烈未渝，故大命重集于中宗皇帝。
现代文：祖先伟大辉煌的业绩还没有完全丧失，所以上天赋予的权力和使命又加在中宗元皇帝身上。
English: The great and brilliant achievements of the ancestors have not been completely lost, so the power and mission given by heaven have been added to Emperor Zhongzongyuan.

古文：赞曰：怀佩玉玺，愍居黄屋。
现代文：赞曰：怀帝佩着玉玺，愍帝坐在黄缯车盖下。
English: Zang Zai said: "Hai Di is wearing a jade bracelet, and Yan Di is sitting under a yellow bracelet."

古文：鰲坠三山，鲸吞九服，獯入金商，穹居未央。
现代文：鳖使三山翻坠，鲸将各地吞并。獯鬻闯入金商门，穹庐搭在未央宫。
English: The dragonfly made the three mountains tumble down, the whale swallowed up all over the country. The dragonfly broke into the Golden Gate, and the dome was set up in the Weiyang Palace.

古文：圜颅尽仆，方趾咸僵。大夫反首，徙我平阳。
现代文：百姓沦落，人民遭殃，大夫们披头散发，跟随被俘的皇帝迁往平阳。
English: The people fell, the people suffered, the doctors scattered and followed the captured emperor to Pingyang.

古文：主忧臣哭，于何不臧！
现代文：主上忧虑而臣子哭泣，为什么如此不幸!
English: The lord is worried and the vassal is weeping, why so unhappy!

