古文：尹昌隆，字彦谦，泰和人。
现代文：尹昌隆，字彦谦，泰和人。
English: Yin Changlong, Aza Hikoqian, Tai He Ren.

古文：洪武中进士及第。
现代文：洪武年间，进士及第。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was promoted to the first and second rank.

古文：授修撰，改监察御史。
现代文：被授予修撰，后改任监察御史。
English: He was awarded the title of Shoshu, and later he was appointed to the post of inspector general of history.

古文：惠帝初即位，视朝晏。昌隆疏谏曰： 高皇帝鸡鸣而起，昧爽而朝，未日出而临百官，故能庶绩咸熙，天下乂安。
现代文：惠帝刚即位时，出来视朝较晚，昌隆上疏劝谏道： 高皇帝鸡鸣而起，黎明即上朝，太阳没出已经接见百官了，所以能够百务振兴，天下平安。
English: When Hui Di had just ascended the throne, he came out to see the late morning, and Changlong Shangso advised him: Emperor Gao's rooster crowed, dawning in the morning, and the sun had not yet risen, he had already met with hundreds of officials, so he could revitalize Baimu, and the world was safe.

古文：陛下嗣守大业，宜追绳祖武，兢兢业业，忧勤万几。
现代文：陛下继承大业，应该继承祖宗的雄武精神，兢兢业业，忧勤万机。
English: His Majesty, inheriting a great cause, should inherit the heroic spirit of his ancestors, be conscientious and diligent.

古文：今乃即于晏安，日上数刻，犹未临朝。
现代文：但现在却已图安逸，太阳已出来数刻，还没有临朝。
English: But now it's too late, the sun has been out for a few hours, and it's not yet dawn.

古文：群臣宿卫，疲于伺候，旷职废业，上下懈弛。
现代文：群臣宿卫宫中，疲于等候，旷职废业，上下松弛。
English: In the group of courtiers staying at the palace, they are tired of waiting, absent from work, wasteful, and slack.

古文：播之天下，传之四裔，非社稷福也。 
现代文：如果这种现象传到天下四裔，将不是社稷之福。 
English: If this phenomenon were to spread to all four corners of the globe, it would not be a blessing for society.

古文：帝曰： 昌隆言切直，礼部其宣示天下，使知朕过。 
现代文：皇上说 ：昌隆的话很恳切坦直，礼部将他的话宣示天下，使天下知道我的过错。 
English: The emperor said, "Changlong's words were very sincere and straightforward. The etiquette department will announce his words to the world, so that the world will know my mistake."

古文：未几，以地震上言，谪福宁知县。
现代文：不久，他因有地震又上书，被贬任福宁县知县。
English: Not long after, he was demoted to the post of county magistrate of Funing County due to an earthquake.

古文：燕兵既逼，昌隆以北来奏章动引周公辅成王为词，劝帝罢兵，许王入朝。设有蹉跌，便举位让之。若沈吟不断，进退失据，将求为丹徒布衣且不可得。
现代文：燕王军队逼近时，昌隆以北方来的章奏动辄便引周公辅佐成王的故事为由，劝皇上罢兵，允许燕王入京朝见；如果有了差错，便让出皇位；如果现在沉吟不断，进退唯艰，那以后想求作丹徒布衣也不行了。
English: When Yan Wang's army was approaching, Changlong persuaded the emperor to call off the troops and allow Yan Wang to visit the imperial court in Beijing, citing the story of Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang, who came from the north and was known for his quick wit. If there was a mistake, he would give up the imperial throne. If he continued to meditate and had difficulty advancing and retreating, he would not be able to make Dantu cloth clothes in the future.

古文：成祖入京师，昌隆名在奸臣中。以前奏贷死，命傅世子于北平。
现代文：成祖入京师后，昌隆名在奸臣之中，因前面这篇奏章被免去死罪，命他到北平教授世子。
English: After Cheng Zu entered Beijing as a teacher, Chang Long was famous among his treacherous vassals. Because of the previous piece of music, he was exempted from the death penalty and ordered him to teach his son in Peking.

古文：永乐二年册世子为皇太子，擢昌隆左春坊左中允。
现代文：永乐二年，册封世子为皇太子，升昌隆为左春坊左中允。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the heir to the throne was named crown prince, and Shosho Ryu was named Zuochunbo Zuochunjun.

古文：随事匡谏，太子甚重之。
现代文：他随事匡正劝谏，太子很敬重他。
English: He is always correcting and advising, and the prince respects him very much.

古文：解缙之黜，同日改昌隆礼部主事。
现代文：解缙被贬退时，同一天改任昌隆为礼部主事。
English: When he was demoted, he was reassigned to Changlong as the head of the ceremonial department on the same day.

古文：尚书吕震方用事，性刻忮。当其独处精思，以手指刮眉尾，则必有密谋深计。官属相戒，无敢白事者。
现代文：尚书吕震正在掌权，他性格刻薄妒嫉，当他独处深思时，如果用手指刮眉毛，则定有密谋深计，他的属官一发现便互相告诫，没有人敢在这种时候来汇报事情。
English: Shangshu Lucheng is in power, his character is mean and jealous, when he is alone and deep in thought, if he shaves his eyebrows with his fingers, there must be a conspiracy, his subordinates will warn each other as soon as they find out, no one dares to report things at this time.

古文：昌隆前白事，震怒不应；移时又白之，震愈怒，拂衣起。
现代文：昌隆上前汇报，吕震怒而不应。过了一会儿昌隆又汇报，吕震更怒了，拂衣而起。
English: Changlong stepped forward to report that Lv Zhen was angry and should not be. After a while, Changlong reported again, Lv Zhen was even angrier and whipped off his clothes.

古文：昌隆退白太子，取令旨行之。
现代文：昌隆退下去向太子汇报，取得令旨来实行。
English: Changlong retreated to report to the prince and obtained an order to implement it.

古文：震大怒，奏昌隆假托宫僚，阴欲树结，潜蓄无君心。
现代文：吕震大怒，上奏说昌隆假托东宫臣僚，暗中想结党，蓄藏无君之心。
English: Lv Zhen was furious and made a report that Chang Long was pretending to be a minister of the East Palace, secretly wanted to form a party, and harbored a monarchless heart.

古文：逮下狱。寻遇赦复官。
现代文：昌隆被逮捕入狱，不久遇上赦令得以复官。
English: Changlong was arrested and jailed, but was soon pardoned and reinstated.

古文：父忧起复。谒震，震温言接之。
现代文：父亲去世后，他不待守孝期满，即被召回任职，他去拜见吕震，吕震温言接待他。
English: After his father's death, he did not wait for the term of filial piety to expire, that is, he was recalled to office. He went to meet Lv Zhen, and Lv Zhen warmly received him.

古文：入理前奏，复下锦衣卫狱，籍其家。
现代文：他入宫处理先前的奏章，又被投进锦衣卫监狱，并被抄了家。
English: He was taken to the palace to deal with the previous record, and was also thrown into the Jinlingwei Prison and his home was confiscated.

古文：帝凡巡幸，下诏狱者率舆以从，谓之随驾重囚，昌隆与焉。
现代文：皇上每次出京巡幸，被投进诏狱人的都被车载随从，称为随驾重犯，昌隆也在其中。
English: Every time the emperor went on a tour of Beijing, those who were sent to the imperial prison were accompanied by a car, known as a repeat offender, and Changlong was also among them.

古文：后数年，谷王谋反事发。
现代文：过了几年，谷王谋反之事发。
English: A few years later, Gu Wang plotted a counter-attack.

古文：致仕归，卒。戴纶，高密人。
现代文：因谷王先前曾奏请昌隆做他的长史，就判他以同谋之罪，诏令公卿一起审问。昌隆不停地申辩，吕震驳斥他。
English: Because the king of Gu had previously asked Changlong to write his long history, he sentenced him to the crime of conspiracy and ordered the nobles to interrogate him together. Changlong kept pleading, and Lü Zhen refuted him.

古文：永乐中，自昌邑训导擢礼科给事中，与编修林长懋俱侍皇太孙说书。
现代文：定案之后，把他极刑处死，并将他诛族。后来吕震病重将死，叫喊 尹相 ，说见到昌隆想杀他。戴纶，高密人。永乐年间，由昌邑县训导升为礼科给事中，与编修林长懋一同侍奉皇太孙说书。
English: After the case was decided, he was put to death by capital punishment, and he was Shih. Later, Lu Zhen was seriously ill and about to die, shouting Yin Xiang, saying that he wanted to kill him when he saw Changlong. Dai Yao, Gaomi. During the Yongle years, he was promoted from the Changyi County training guide to the etiquette department, and served the imperial grandson's story with the editor Lin Changyao.

古文：历中允、谕德。
现代文：历任中允、谕德。
English: Successive vice-premiers and governors-general.

古文：仁宗即位，太孙为太子，迁洗马，仍侍讲读。
现代文：仁宗即位后，太孙成为太子，戴纶升为洗马，仍侍奉太子讲读经史。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, his great-grandson became the crown prince, and Dai Jun was promoted to wash horses. He still served the crown prince and lectured on the history of scripture.

古文：始成祖命太孙习武事，太孙亦雅好之，时出骑射。
现代文：当初成祖命太孙练习武事时，太孙也雅好练武，时常出去骑马射箭。
English: At the beginning, when Cheng Zu's grandson was practicing martial arts, his grandson was also good at practicing martial arts, and often went out to ride horses and shoot arrows.

古文：纶与长懋以太孙春秋方富，不宜荒学问而事游畋，时时进谏。
现代文：戴纶与林长懋认为太孙正当年轻，不应该荒废学问而专事游玩打猎，便经常劝谏太孙。
English: Dai Yao and Lin Changyao believed that the great-grandson was justly young, and should not waste his learning and concentrate on hunting, so they often advised the great-grandson.

古文：纶又具疏为帝言之。
现代文：戴纶还写了一篇奏疏对皇上谈及此事。
English: Dai Ye also wrote a report to the emperor about the matter.

古文：他日，太孙侍，帝问： 宫臣相得者谁也？ 
现代文：过了几天，太孙侍奉皇上，皇上问道： 宫臣中你与谁最合得来？ 
English: A few days later, when the great-grandson was serving the emperor, the emperor asked, "Which of the palace courtiers do you get along with the best?"

古文：太孙以纶对。
现代文：太孙说是戴纶。
English: The great-grandson said it was because he wore a skullcap.

古文：因出纶奏付之，太孙由此怨纶。
现代文：皇上便拿出戴纶的奏疏交给他，太孙因此而怨恨戴纶。
English: The emperor then took out the cymbals and gave them to him, which made the great-grandson resent the cymbals.

古文：长懋者，莆田人。以乡荐历青州教授，擢编修。
现代文：林长懋是莆田人，以乡荐历任青州教授，升为编修。
English: Lin Changyu is from Putian. He was recommended by his hometown to be a professor in Qingzhou and was promoted to be an editor.

古文：仁宗初，进中允。
现代文：仁宗即位之初，他升为中允。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Nintsune, he was promoted to chujo.

古文：为人刚严，累进直言，与纶善。
现代文：他为人刚正严厉，多次进献直言，与戴纶关系很好。
English: He is an upright and stern person, he has been outspoken many times, and he has a good relationship with Dai Yong.

古文：宣宗即位，加恩宫僚，擢纶兵部侍郎。
现代文：宣宗即位后，加恩给东宫臣僚，升戴纶为兵部侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Gan was given to the Eastern Court's ministers and promoted to the position of attendant of the military department.

古文：顷之，复以谏猎忤旨，命参赞交阯军务。
现代文：不久，他又因劝谏皇上打猎而忤逆了皇上的心意，被派去参赞交趾军务。
English: Soon after, he went against the emperor's wishes by advising him to go hunting, and was sent to the military as a counsellor.

古文：而长懋自南京来，后至，亦出为郁林知州。
现代文：而林长懋从南京来京，因为迟到，也被出任为郁林州知州。
English: And Lin Changyao came to Beijing from Nanjing, because he was late, he was also appointed as Yu Linzhou Chizhou.

古文：无何，坐怨望，并逮至京，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：不久，说他们有怨望情绪，把他们都逮到京师，投进锦衣卫监狱。
English: Soon, they were all arrested by the Beijing Division and thrown into the Jinlingwei Prison, saying that they had resentment.

古文：帝临鞫之，纶抗辩，触帝怒，立箠死，籍其家。
现代文：皇上亲临审问他们，戴纶抗辩，触怒了皇上，立即把他打死，并抄了他的家。
English: The emperor came to interrogate them in person, and they pleaded guilty. This angered the emperor, who immediately killed him and plundered his house.

古文：诸父河南知府贤、太仆寺卿希文皆被系。
现代文：他的叔父河南知府戴贤、太仆寺卿戴希文也都被关押起来。
English: His uncle, the Henan prefectural governor Dai Xian, and the grand steward of the temple Dai Xiwen have also been detained.

古文：而长懋在狱十年，英宗立，乃得释。复其官，还守郁林，有惠政。
现代文：而林长懋在监狱十年，英宗即位后才被释放出来，恢复原官，回任郁林知州，实行过仁惠之政。
English: While Lin Changyu was in prison for ten years, he was released only after Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, resumed his original post, returned to the post of Yu Lin Zhizhou, and implemented a benevolent policy.

古文：其卒也，州人立庙祀之。
现代文：他死后，州人立庙来祭祀他。
English: After his death, the people of the prefecture built a temple to worship him.

古文：陈祚，字永锡，吴人。
现代文：陈祚，字永锡，吴县人。
English: Chen Yao, surnamed Yongxi, from Wuxian County.

古文：永乐中进士。
现代文：永乐年间中进士。
English: Yongle became a junior high school transfer student.

古文：擢河南参议。
现代文：升为河南参议。
English: He was promoted to Henan State Councilor.

古文：十五年与布政使周文褒、王文振合疏，言建都北京非便，并谪均州太和山佃户。
现代文：十五年，他与布政使周文褒、王文振联合上疏说建都北京不便，结果他们都被贬到均州太和山做佃户。
English: In the fifteenth year, he and the political envoys of Bu, Zhou Wenbo and Wang Wenzhen, jointly said that it was inconvenient to build the capital in Beijing. As a result, they were all relegated to the Taihe Mountain in Junzhou as tenants.

古文：躬耕力作，处之晏然。
现代文：陈祚躬耕力作，泰然处之。
English: Chen Yiming worked hard and dealt with it calmly.

古文：仁宗立，诏选用迁谪诸臣，祚在选中。
现代文：仁宗即位后，下诏选用被贬出的诸臣，陈祚也在被选之列。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, the following edict selected the ministers who had been dethroned, and Chen Xi was also among those selected.

古文：会帝崩，不果用。
现代文：正值皇上去世，他没能被起用。
English: At the time of the Emperor's death, he was not appointed to the throne.

古文：宣德二年命宪臣即均州群试之，祚策第一。
现代文：宣德二年，命地方长官到均州考核他们，陈祚考取第一名。
English: In the second year of Xuande, the local governor was ordered to go to Junzhou to examine them, and Chen Xi won the first place.

古文：试吏部，复第一。
现代文：吏部考试，他又是第一。
English: In the cadre examination, he came in first again.

古文：遂擢御史，巡按福建。
现代文：皇上于是升他为御史，巡按福建。
English: The Emperor then promoted him to the position of Imperial Historian, and he went on a tour of Fujian.

古文：方面大吏多被弹击，禁止和买，闽人德之。
现代文：他在任时方面大官多被弹劾，他还禁止和买，福建人很感激他。
English: When he was in office, many high-ranking officials were impeached, he also banned and bought, Fujian people are very grateful to him.

古文：还奏白塔河上通邵伯湖，下注大江，苏、松舟楫，多从往来，浅狭湮塞，请开浚。
现代文：他回来后上奏说白塔河上通邵伯湖，下注入大江，苏州、松江的船只，多由此往来，而河道过于浅狭，并且有淤塞，请求开通疏浚。
English: After his return, he reported that the Baita River flows up to Shobo Lake and flows down into the Dajiang, Suzhou, and Songjiang Rivers, and most of the ships come and go from there. However, the river is too shallow and narrow, and there are blockages. He requested that dredging be opened.

古文：从之，转漕果便。
现代文：皇上听从了。转运漕米果然更加方便了。
English: The emperor obeyed. The transshipment of rice was indeed more convenient.

古文：寻出按江西。
现代文：不久他出京巡按江西。
English: Soon after, he went on a tour of Beijing and Jiangxi.

古文：时天下承平，帝颇事游猎玩好。
现代文：当时天下承平，皇上很喜欢游玩打猎以及玩好之物。
English: At that time, the world was at peace, and the emperor liked to go hunting and play with good things.

古文：祚驰疏劝勤圣学。
现代文：陈祚传上奏疏劝皇上勤于圣人之学。
English: Chen Yuchuan appealed to the emperor to devote himself to the study of saints.

古文：其略曰： 帝王之学先明理，明理在读书。
现代文：大略是说 ：帝王之学首先要明理，明理在于读书。
English: In a nutshell: Imperial learning requires above all clarity, and clarity lies in reading.

古文：陛下虽有圣德，而经筵未甚兴举，讲学未有程度，圣贤精微，古今治乱，岂能周知洞晰？
现代文：陛下虽然有圣德，而讲经筵不怎么举行，讲学也达不到应有的程度，圣贤思想的精微、古今的治乱，怎能周知洞悉呢？
English: Although His Majesty is a saint, his sermons are not well-attended, and his lectures are not as extensive as they should be. How can the subtleties of the thoughts of sages and sages and the management of turmoil, both ancient and modern, be known and understood?

古文：真德秀《大学衍义》一书，圣贤格言，无不毕载。
现代文：真德秀的《大学衍义》一书，对于圣贤的格言，无不详加记载。
English: Zhendexiu's book, "College Derivation," is a detailed account of the sage's maxim.

古文：愿于听政之暇，命儒臣讲说，非有大故，无得间断。
现代文：愿陛下在听政之余，命儒臣讲解，没有大的原因，不得间断。
English: May His Majesty, in addition to listening to politics, order Confucius to give a lecture, without any major reason, without interruption.

古文：使知古今若何而治，政事若何而得。必能开广聪明，增光德业。而邪佞之以奇巧荡圣心者自见疏远，天下人民受福无穷矣。 
现代文：如果知道古今怎么得到治理，政事怎么处理，一定能使陛下开广耳目，增光德业，而企图以奇技淫巧来动摇皇上意志的邪佞之徒自然会日见疏远，天下人民则受福无穷了。 
English: If you know how the past and present have been governed and how government affairs have been handled, you will surely be able to make your majesty open his ears and eyes, and enhance his virtue. And the evil-doers who attempt to shake the emperor's will with magic tricks will naturally become estranged, and the people of the world will be blessed beyond measure.

古文：帝见疏大怒曰： 竖儒谓朕未读《大学》耶！
现代文：皇上见到奏疏后大怒说 ：这小儒敢说朕没读过《大学》吗？
English: When the emperor saw Sozoro, he was furious and said, "How dare this little Confucius say that I haven't read Daigaku?"

古文：薄朕至此，不可不诛。 
现代文：他这样来鄙薄我，不可不诛。 
English: He's got to be kidding to treat me with such contempt.

古文：学士陈循顿首曰： 俗士处远，不知上无书不读也。 
现代文：学士陈循叩头说道 ：俗士处在远方，不知道圣上无书不读罢了。 
English: The scholar Chen Xun kowtowed and said, "The layman is far away and doesn't know that there is no book in heaven, only reading."

古文：帝意稍解。
现代文：皇上怒意稍解。
English: Emperor Guangwu's anger subsided slightly.

古文：下祚狱，逮其家人十余口，隔别禁系者五年，其父竟瘐死。
现代文：把陈祚投进监狱，并将他的家人十余口也逮捕了，分别隔离关押了五年，他的父亲竟死于狱中。
English: Chen Qi was thrown into prison, and more than ten members of his family were also arrested and detained separately for five years. His father actually died in prison.

古文：其时，刑部主事郭循谏拓西内皇城修离宫，逮入面诘之。
现代文：那时，刑部主事郭循谏阻拓宽西内的皇城来修建离宫，被逮入宫当面责问。
English: At that time, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Guo Xunjun, blocked the expansion of the imperial city in the west to build a palace, and was arrested and interrogated in the palace.

古文：循抗辩不屈，亦下狱。
现代文：郭循抗辩不屈，也被投进监狱。
English: Guo Xun refused to give in and was also thrown into prison.

古文：英宗立，祚与循皆得释复官。
现代文：英宗即位后，陈祚和郭循都得释放复官。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Chen Xi and Guo Xun were both released and reinstated.

古文：祚再按湖广。
现代文：陈祚再次巡按湖广。
English: Chen Zhen again went on a tour of the lake.

古文：以奏辽王贵烚罪有所隐，与巡抚侍郎吴政逮至京，下狱。
现代文：他因为上奏辽王朱贵有隐罪，与巡抚侍郎吴政被逮到京，投进监狱。
English: He was arrested in Beijing and thrown into prison together with Wu Zheng, the steward of the governor, for the hidden crime of playing Zhu Gui, the king of Liao.

古文：寻赦出。
现代文：不久被赦免出来。
English: He was soon pardoned.

古文：时王振用事，法务严峻，祚上言： 乃者法司论狱，多违定律。
现代文：当时王振专权，执法专务严峻，陈祚上书说 ：近来法律部门断案，多违背固有的法律。
English: At that time, Wang Zhen had absolute power, and the law enforcement work was severe. Chen Zhen said in a letter: Recently, the legal department has broken the case, mostly violating the inherent laws.

古文：如侍郎吴玺误举主事吴軏，宜坐贡举非其人律，乃坐以奏事有规避律斩。
现代文：如侍郎吴玺错误举荐主事吴车兀，应判推荐非人之罪，而现在却依奏事有规避的律条判了斩刑。
English: If the waiter Wu Qi mistakenly recommended the host Wu Cheqi, he should be sentenced to the crime of recommending inhuman, but now he was sentenced to beheading according to the rule of circumventing the rules.

古文：及軏自经死，狱官狱卒罪应递减，乃援不应为重罪，概杖之。
现代文：吴车兀自杀后，狱官狱卒之罪应递减，却援引不应为重罪的条文，一概杖打他们。
English: After Wu Chejun's suicide, the prison officer and the prison guard's crime should be reduced, but they invoked the provision that it should not be a serious crime and beat them all.

古文：一事如此，余可推矣。
现代文：一事如此，其他的可以推想了。
English: If this is the case, everything else can be deduced.

古文：天时不顺，灾沴数见，未必非此。 
现代文：如今天时不顺，灾异频繁发生，未必不与此有关。 
English: If today is not a good time, and disasters occur frequently, it may not be unrelated to this.

古文：帝是之，以其章示法司。
现代文：皇上很赞同他的意见，将他的奏章出示给司法官员。
English: The emperor very much agreed with his opinion and showed his report to the judicial officials.

古文：寻改南京，迁福建按察使佥事。
现代文：不久他改调南京，升为福建按察司佥事。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Nanjing and promoted to the post of Fujian deputy inspector general.

古文：有威惠，神祠不载祀典者悉撤去。
现代文：他任官威严但也仁爱，对不载入祀典的神祠都全部撤除。
English: He was dignified but also benevolent, removing all shrines that were not listed in the ritual.

古文：久之，以疾归，卒。
现代文：后来，他因病归家。
English: He later returned home due to illness.

古文：既复职，进郎中，以尚书魏源荐，擢广东参政，有剿寇功。
现代文：去世。陈祚生性威严，即使对子弟也很少跟他们言笑，唯独敬重乡人邢量。邢量是博学之士，以占卜隐居，几间破屋，有时几天不生火。
English: Chen Xinsheng was dignified and rarely spoke or laughed with his children, except for his respect for his fellow villagers. They were learned people who secluded themselves with divination, lived in several broken houses, and sometimes did not light a fire for several days.

古文：景泰初卒。刘球，字廷振，安福人。
现代文：陈祚经常挟着书去向他请教，往往到晚上才回来。刘球，字廷振，安福人。
English: Chen Yao often went to him with a book to ask for advice, and often did not return until the evening. Liu Qiu, Zhi Ting Zhen, An Fu Ren.

古文：永乐十九年进士。家居读书十年，从学者甚众。
现代文：永乐十九年，中进士，随后在家读书十年，听他讲学的人很多。
English: Yongle was a junior high school student for nineteen years, and then studied at home for ten years. Many people listened to his lectures.

古文：授礼部主事。
现代文：后被授予礼部主事。
English: Later, he was awarded the position of the head of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：胡濙荐侍经筵，与修《宣宗实录》，改翰林侍讲。
现代文：胡氵荧推荐他侍奉讲经筵，参与编修《宣宗实录》，改任翰林侍讲。
English: Hu Yuxuan recommended him to serve as a lecturer of the classics, participated in the editing of the "Proclamation Record," and was reappointed as a lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：从弟玭知莆田，遗一夏布。
现代文：他的堂弟刘王比任莆田县知县，送给他一匹夏布。
English: His cousin Liu Wangbin from Putian County gave him a horse named Xia Bu.

古文：球封还，贻书戒之。
现代文：刘球封还给他，并写了一封信告诫他。
English: Liu Qufeng returned it to him and wrote him a letter of admonition.

古文：正统六年，帝以王振言，大举征麓川。
现代文：正统六年，皇上因王振的建议，大举征讨麓川。
English: In the sixth year of his reign, the emperor, on the advice of Wang Zhen, embarked on a large-scale campaign to conquer the Luohu River.

古文：球上疏曰：
现代文：刘球上疏说：
English: Liu Keqiang said:

古文：帝王之驭四裔，必宥其小而防其大。所以适缓急之宜，为天下久安计也。
现代文： 帝王统治四方，必定宽宥小敌而防备大敌，以此制定缓急之策，以期达到天下义安。
English: The emperor, who rules over the four quarters, will certainly pardon the minor enemy and guard against the major enemy. In this way, he will formulate a delaying strategy, with a view to achieving world peace.

古文：周伐崇不克，退修德教以待其降。至于玁狁，则命南仲城朔方以备之。
现代文：周代伐崇不克，便退而施行德教，等待他来投降；至于犭严狁，则命南仲修朔方城来防备他们。
English: If Zhou did not attack Chongke, he would retreat and practice moral education, waiting for him to surrender; as for Yan Yan, he ordered Nanzhong to attack Fangcheng to prevent them.

古文：汉征南越不利，即罢兵赐书通好。至于匈奴，虽已和亲，犹募民徙居塞下，入粟实边，复命魏尚守云中拒之。
现代文：汉朝征伐南越不利，便罢兵赐书信与他们通好；至于匈奴，虽然已经和亲，仍招募百姓迁居塞下，输运粮食充实边防，又命魏尚驻守云中以抗拒他们。
English: The Han Dynasty was not good at conquering South Vietnam, so it sent soldiers and letters to make friends with them. As for the Xiongnu, although they were already friendly, they still recruited people to move under the dam, transported grain to enrich the border defense, and ordered Wei Shang to stay in the clouds to resist them.

古文：今麓川残寇思任发素本羁属，以边将失驭，致勤大兵。
现代文： 现在麓川的残寇思任发一向本是我国的羁縻属民，因为边将统驭失误，致使他反叛，惊动大兵。
English: Now, the remnants of the Luchuan have always been our country's subordinate people, because the border guard's control failure caused him to rebel and alarm the soldiers.

古文：虽渠魁未歼，亦多戮群丑，为诛为舍，无系轻重。
现代文：虽然巨魁还没有消灭，但也杀戮了群丑不少，是诛杀还是放过他，已经无关轻重。
English: Although the big boss has not been eliminated, but also killed a lot of ugly people, whether to fight and kill or let him go is no longer important.

古文：玺书原其罪衅，使得自新，甚盛德也。
现代文：皇上在玺书中原谅了他的罪恶，使他得以自新，这本是盛德之举。
English: In the imperial edict, the emperor forgave his sins and allowed him to reform, which was a great act of virtue.

古文：边将不达圣意，复议大举。欲屯十二万众于云南，以趣其降，不降则攻之。
现代文：边将不了解皇上圣意，又计划大举兴兵，想在云南屯驻十二万部队，以促使他投降，不投降便攻打他。
English: The frontier general did not understand the emperor's sacred will, and planned to raise a large number of troops and wanted to station 120,000 troops in Yunnan to force him to surrender. If he did not surrender, he would attack him.

古文：不虑王师不可轻出，蛮性不可骤驯，地险不可用众，客兵不可久淹。
现代文：他们没有考虑到王师不可轻易出动，蛮夷的品性不可骤然驯服，地形太险不可以动众，客地之兵不可长久滞留该地。
English: They did not take into account that the king's division should not be easily dispatched, that the barbaric nature of the barbarians should not be suddenly tamed, that the terrain is too dangerous to move the crowd, and that the soldiers of the guest should not stay in the area for a long time.

古文：况南方水旱相仍，军民交困，若复动众，纷扰为忧。
现代文：况且南方水灾旱灾不断，军民交困，如果又要动众，因此而造成的纷扰很值得担扰。
English: Moreover, the floods and droughts in the south continue, the military and the people are in trouble, and if they want to move the masses, the disturbance caused by this is worth worrying about.

古文：臣窃谓宜缓天诛，如周、汉之于崇、越也。
现代文：臣私下以为应延缓天诛之举，就像周、汉之对付崇、南越那样。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that it would be better to postpone the providential move, just as Zhou and Han had done against Chong and South Vietnam.

古文：至于瓦剌，终为边患。
现代文： 至于瓦剌，终究要成为边防的祸患。
English: As for the corrugated iron, it will eventually become the scourge of border defense.

古文：及其未即骚动，正宜以时防御。
现代文：在他还没有骚动的时候，正宜抓紧时机防御。
English: While he is not yet agitated, it is advisable to seize the opportunity to defend.

古文：乃欲移甘肃守将以事南征，卒然有警，何以为御？
现代文：而现在却想调甘肃守将去南征，如果突然有警，怎么抵御？
English: But now they want to transfer the Gansu guards to the south. If there are suddenly police, how can they resist?

古文：臣窃以为宜慎防遏，如周、汉之于玁狁、匈奴也。
现代文：臣私下以为应慎重防范，就像周、汉之对付犭严狁、匈奴那样。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that he should be cautious and take precautions, just as Zhou and Han dealt with Yan Yan and Xiongnu.

古文：伏望陛下罢大举之议。推选智谋将帅，辅以才识大臣，量调官军，分屯金齿诸要害。结木邦诸蛮以为援，乘间进攻，因便抚谕，寇自可服。
现代文： 臣衷心希望陛下停罢大举用兵的建议，推荐有智谋的将帅，以有才识的大臣辅佐，酌情调遣官军，分屯金齿等要害地区，联结木帮各蛮人作为援兵，乘隙进攻，顺便进行招抚，这样贼寇自会屈服。
English: The minister sincerely hoped that His Majesty would stop the proposal to raise a large number of soldiers, recommend a clever general, and with the assistance of a talented minister, dispatch the official army as appropriate, detach Jinzu and other key areas, connect the wood to help the barbarians as reinforcements, take advantage of the gap attack, and carry out the coaxing incidentally, so that the thieves would give in.

古文：至于西北障塞，当敕边臣巡视。浚筑沟垣，增缮城堡，勤训练，严守望，以防不虞，有备无患之道也。
现代文：至于西北边塞，应当敕令边臣巡视，疏浚沟渠，构筑城墙，增修城堡，勤于训练，严于守备和望，以防不测，这才是有备无患之道。 
English: As for the northwest frontier fortress, it is necessary to order the border officials to patrol, dredge the ditch, build the city wall, add the castle, diligently train, and strictly guard and look out to prevent accidents. This is the only way to be prepared.

古文：章下兵部。
现代文：奏章下到兵部。
English: Go down to the military department.

古文：谓南征已有成命，不用球言。
现代文：他们说南征已有成命，没有采纳刘球的建议。
English: They said that the Southern Expedition had already been ordered, and they did not accept Liu Qiu's suggestion.

古文：八年五月雷震奉天殿。
现代文：八年五月，雷击奉天殿。
English: In May of the eighth year, lightning struck the temple.

古文：球应诏上言所宜先者十事。
现代文：刘球响应诏令，上书提出应当首先实行的十项建议。
English: In response to the imperial edict, Liu Qiu proposed ten suggestions that should be implemented first.

古文：其略曰：
现代文：大略是说：
English: The article said in summary:

古文：古圣王不作无益，故心正而天不违之。
现代文： 古代圣王不做无益之举，所以心正而上天不反对他。
English: The ancient holy king did not do anything useless, so he did not oppose him with a righteous and heavenly heart.

古文：臣愿皇上勤御经筵，数进儒臣，讲求至道。务使学问功至，理欲判然，则圣心正而天心自顺。
现代文：臣愿皇上勤于御临讲经筵，引进一些儒臣，来讲解追求至上之道，务必使学问功夫到家，理性和欲望判然可分，这样则圣心正而天心自顺。
English: It is the wish of the subjects that the emperor will be diligent in his visit to lecture on the classics and introduce some Confucian scholars to explain the pursuit of the supreme way. It is imperative to make the learning effort come home. Reason and desire can be clearly distinguished. In this way, the holy heart is upright and the heavenly heart is self-sufficient.

古文：夫政由已出，则权不下移。
现代文：政令出自皇上自己，则权力就不会下移。
English: If the decree comes from the emperor himself, then the power will not be transferred.

古文：太祖、太宗日视三朝，时召大臣于便殿裁决庶政，权归总于上。
现代文：太祖、太宗每天临朝三次，经常把大臣召到便殿处理百政，权力归总于上。
English: Taizu and Taizong visited the imperial court three times a day, and often summoned ministers to the hall to deal with matters of state. All power was vested in the emperor.

古文：皇上临御九年，事体日熟。愿守二圣成规，复亲决故事，使权归于一。
现代文：皇上已登基九年，对于事体已经逐渐熟悉，愿陛下遵守二圣的成规，恢复他们亲自裁决政事的做法，使权力归一。
English: The emperor has been on the throne for nine years, and has gradually become familiar with the matter. May His Majesty abide by the rules of the two saints, resume their practice of personally adjudicating political affairs, and unify power.

古文：古之择大臣者，必询诸左右、大夫、国人。
现代文： 古代选择大臣，必定先询问身边的人，以及大夫、国人。
English: To choose a minister in ancient times, you must first ask people around you, as well as doctors and compatriots.

古文：今用大臣未尝皆出公论。
现代文：大臣犯有过失，虽犯到大辟之罪也不用刑具处决，只将他赐死。
English: The minister was guilty of negligence, and although he had committed a heinous crime, he was not executed with instruments of torture, but was only sentenced to death.

古文：及有小失，辄桎梏箠楚之；然未几时，又复其职。甚非所以待大臣也。
现代文：现在选用大臣不曾都出于公论，到他们有了小的过失，便加以桎梏，拷打他们。但过了不久，又给他们复职，这很不是待大臣之礼。
English: Now, the selection of ministers has not always been based on public opinion, and when they have a small fault, they are beaten and tortured. But after a short time, they are reinstated, which is not the courtesy of the minister.

古文：自今择任大臣，宜允惬众论。
现代文：从今以后选择任用大臣，应使公论感到满意。
English: From now on, the choice of appointing ministers should satisfy public opinion.

古文：小犯则置之。
现代文：大臣有小过，则放过不问。
English: If a minister does something wrong, he or she will be let off the hook.

古文：果不可容，下法司定罪，使自为计。
现代文：果真是不可原谅，也要交给法律部门定罪，让他们自作打算。
English: If it's really inexcusable, it's up to the legal department to convict and let them make their own minds up.

古文：勿辄系，庶不乖共天职之意。
现代文：不要动辄就抓起来，以便不违背他们供奉天职之意。
English: Don't arrest them at every turn, so that they don't violate their sacred duty.

古文：今之太常，即古之秩宗，必得清慎习礼之臣，然后可交神明。
现代文： 现在的太常，也就是古代的秩宗，一定要选得清明谨慎、熟习礼法的大臣，然后才可与神明沟通。
English: The current Taijo, that is, the ancient Chichibu sect, must choose a minister who is clear and cautious and familiar with etiquette before he can communicate with the gods.

古文：今卿贰皆缺，宜选择儒臣，使领其职。
现代文：如今太常寺正卿佐官都出缺，应选择儒臣，使他们掌管这一职务。
English: Nowadays, the posts of counselor to the Shogun of the Taijo-ji Temple are vacant. Confucian scholars should be selected to take charge of this post.

古文：古者省方巡狩，所以察吏得失，问民疾苦。
现代文： 古代出巡考察行狩，目的是为了考察官吏得失，询问民间疾苦。
English: In ancient times, the purpose of the inspection tour was to inspect the gains and losses of officials and inquire about the hardships of the people.

古文：两汉、唐、宋盛时，数遣使巡行郡县，洪、永间亦尝行之。
现代文：两汉、唐、宋鼎盛时期，都多次派遣使者巡行郡县，洪武、永乐年间，也曾实行过。
English: During the heyday of the Han Dynasty, Tang Dynasty and Song Dynasty, emissaries were repeatedly sent to patrol counties and counties. During the Hongwu and Yongle Dynasties, it was also implemented.

古文：今久不举，故吏多贪虐，民不聊生，而军卫尤甚。
现代文：现在已久不这么做了，所以官吏多贪污残暴，民不聊生，而军卫之中尤甚。
English: This has not been done for a long time, so officials are often corrupt and brutal, and the people are not interested in life, especially among the military guards.

古文：宜择公明廉干之臣，分行天下。
现代文：应选择公正廉明能干之臣，派他们分别巡行天下。
English: We should select just, honest, and capable ministers and send them on separate tours of the country.

古文：古人君不亲刑狱，必付理官，盖恐徇喜怒而有所轻重也。
现代文： 古代君主不亲自审理刑狱，一定要交付理刑官，是因为担心会凭自己的喜怒而在定刑时有所轻重。
English: Ancient monarchs did not personally judge the punishment of prison, must be handed over to the correctional officer, because they were afraid that they would use their own emotions to determine the severity of the punishment.

古文：迩法司所上狱，多奉敕增减轻重，法司不能执奏。及讯他囚，又观望以为轻重，民用多冤。宜使各举其职。
现代文：近来法律部门所呈上的案件，多是奉了敕令增减轻重。法律部门不能坚持原则上奏，到审讯别的囚犯时，又观望圣旨以为轻重，因此百姓多受冤枉，应该让他们各司其职。
English: Recently, most of the cases presented by the legal department were increased in severity by order of the king. The legal department cannot insist on the principle of appeal, and when interrogating other prisoners, it also considers the sacred will to be important. Therefore, the people are often wronged, and they should be allowed to perform their duties.

古文：至运砖输米诸例，均非古法，尤宜罢之。
现代文：至于运转输米等作法，都不是古法，尤其应该废除。
English: As for the operation of rice transportation and other practices, they are not ancient laws, and should be abolished in particular.

古文：《春秋》营筑悉书，戒劳民也。
现代文： 《春秋》对于营造建筑工程，都加以记载，是告诫后人不要烦劳百姓。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records the construction of building projects, warning future generations not to bother the people.

古文：京师兴作五六年矣，曰 不烦民而役军 ，军独非国家赤子乎？
现代文：京师修建已五六年了，说是不烦劳百姓，但却役使士兵，难道军人不是国家赤子吗？
English: It's been five or six years since the capital was built. They say they don't bother the people, but they use the soldiers. Aren't the soldiers the babies of the country?

古文：况营作多完，宜罢工以苏其力。
现代文：况且工程多已完工，应该停工以解除人民的压力。
English: Moreover, most of the projects have been completed and should be suspended to relieve the pressure of the people.

古文：各处水旱，有司既不振救，请减租税，或亦徒事虚文。
现代文： 各地水旱灾害发生，有关官员既不赈济救灾，又不请减免租税，有的还是徒事虚文而已。
English: When floods and droughts occur in various regions, the relevant officials neither provide disaster relief nor request tax reductions and exemptions. Some of them are just empty words.

古文：宜令户部以时振济，量加减免，使不致失业。
现代文：应令户部定期赈济，量加减免租税，使百姓不至于失业。
English: The Ministry of Households should be ordered to regularly subsidize, increase the amount of tax reduction and exemption, so that the people will not be unemployed.

古文：麓川连年用兵，死者十七八，军赀爵赏不可胜计。
现代文： 麓川连年用兵，死亡十分之七八，军费开支和封赏的爵位不可胜计。
English: Luchuan has been using soldiers for years, with a death rate of seven or eight out of ten, and military expenditure and awards of peerages are incalculable.

古文：今又遣蒋贵远征缅甸，责献思任发。
现代文：现在又派蒋贵远征缅甸，责成他们献出思任发。
English: Now he has sent Chiang Kai-shek on an expedition to Burma and ordered them to give their best.

古文：果擒以归，不过枭诸通衢而已。
现代文：即使真的擒拿回来，不过是悬首于通衢示众而已。
English: Even if they do get it back, it's just a case of hanging their heads in public.

古文：缅将挟以为功，必求与木邦共分其地。
现代文：而缅甸将因此要挟功劳，一定请求与木邦共同瓜分其地。
English: As a result, Myanmar will try to claim the credit, and will certainly request to share the land with China.

古文：不与则致怒，与之则两蛮坐大，是减一麓川生二麓川也。
现代文：如果不给则会惹他们动怒，给他们则两蛮坐大，这是减一麓川而生出两个麓川。
English: If you don't give it to them, it will make them angry, but if you give it to them, it will make them angry.

古文：设有蹉跎，兵事无已。
现代文：假如一有失误，则兵事不已。
English: If there is a mistake, the soldiers will not stop.

古文：臣见皇上每录重囚，多宥令从军，仁心若此。
现代文：臣见皇上每次审理重犯，多宽宥他们，令他们从军，仁心如此！
English: The Emperor's courtiers see the repeat offenders every time they are tried, how much they forgive them and let them join the army, such benevolence!

古文：今欲生得一失地之窜寇，而驱数万无罪之众以就死地，岂不有乖于好生之仁哉？
现代文：现在却因为想生擒一个失地的逃窜之寇，而驱使数万无罪之众奔赴死地，这岂不是有悖皇上好生之仁！
English: But now, because they want to capture a fleeing bandit who has lost his land, they are driving tens of thousands of innocent people to rush to their deaths. Isn't this against the emperor's benevolence to live?

古文：况思机发已尝遣人来贡，非无悔过乞免之意。
现代文：况且思机发已曾派人来朝贡，并非没有悔过乞免之意。
English: Moreover, Shih Chih-fa had sent people to pay tribute to the imperial court, and it was not without remorse that he begged for forgiveness.

古文：若敕缅斩任发首来献，仍敕思机发尽削四境之地，分于各寨新附之蛮，则一方可宁矣。
现代文：如果敕令缅甸斩思任发的头来献，仍敕令思机发全部割出四境之地，分给各寨新归附的蛮人，则一方可得安宁了。
English: If the emperor ordered Burma to make every effort to conquer all the land in the four provinces and distribute it to the newly-annexed barbarians in each province, then one side would have peace.

古文：迤北贡使日增，包藏祸心，诚为难测。
现代文： 迤北朝贡使者越来越多，包藏祸心，诚然难以估测。
English: There are more and more envoys from the Northern Song Dynasty paying tribute to the emperor, and it is difficult to estimate how many of them harbor evil intentions.

古文：宜分遣给事、御史阅视京边官军，及时训练，勿使借工各厂，服役私家。
现代文：应分派给事中、御史巡视京师边防各军，及时训练，不要让他们向各厂借用工役之人，服役于私家。
English: They should be assigned to inspect the troops of the Beijing Division of the Border Defense Force during and after the inspection, and train them in a timely manner. They should not be allowed to borrow laborers from various factories to serve in private homes.

古文：公武举之选以求良将，定召募之法以来武勇。广屯田，公盐法，以厚储蓄。庶武备无缺，而外患有防。
现代文：公开实行武选以求良将，制定招募之法以招来武勇之人；广办屯田，公行盐法，以充实储蓄，使武备不缺，而对于外患也有防范。 
English: Openly carry out military selection to find good generals, and formulate recruitment methods to attract the most courageous people; widely carry out military training, and publicly carry out the salt method to enrich savings, so that there is no shortage of military preparedness, and there is also prevention against external disasters.

古文：疏入，下廷议。
现代文：奏疏呈入后，皇上交廷臣讨论。
English: After the report was submitted, the Emperor asked courtiers to discuss it.

古文：言球所奏，惟择太常官宜从，令吏部推举。
现代文：廷臣说刘球的奏请，只有选择太常官这一条应该听从。皇上令吏部推举人选。
English: The courtier said that Liu Qiu's petition should be obeyed only in the selection of the permanent secretary. The emperor ordered the personnel department to nominate candidates.

古文：修撰董璘遂乞改官太常，奉享祀事。
现代文：修撰董瞞于是请改任太常官，奉行祭祀事务。
English: As a result, he asked Dong Xie, the compiler, to be reassigned to the position of the Grand Steward to carry out sacrificial affairs.

古文：初，球言麓川事，振固已衔之。
现代文：当初，刘球说麓川之事时，王振已经恨他。
English: At first, Wang Zhen already hated Liu Qiu when he talked about the matter of Luchuan.

古文：钦天监正彭德清者，球乡人也，素为振腹心。
现代文：钦天监正彭德清与刘球是同乡，一向做王振的心腹。
English: Qin Tianjun Zheng, Peng Deqing and Liu Qiu are compatriots and have always been Wang Zhen's confidants.

古文：凡天文有变，皆匿不奏，倚振势为奸，公卿多趋谒。球绝不与通。
现代文：凡天文有变，他都隐匿不报，倚仗王振的权势为奸。公卿多去拜谒他，刘球却绝不与他往来。
English: Whenever there was a change in the astronomical situation, he would hide it and rely on Wang Zhen's power as a traitor. The nobles often went to pay homage to him, but Liu Qiu never interacted with him.

古文：德清恨之，遂摘疏中揽权语，谓振曰： 此指公耳。 
现代文：彭德清恨他，便摘引奏疏中揽权的那段话，对王振说： 这是指您。 
English: Peng Deqing hated him, so he quoted the passage about the power grab in the Song Dynasty and said to Wang Zhen: This refers to you.

古文：振益大怒。
现代文：王振更加愤怒。
English: Wang Zhen was even more angry.

古文：会璘疏上，振遂指球同谋，并逮下诏狱，属指挥马顺杀球。
现代文：正好董瞞的奏疏呈上了，王振便说刘球与他同谋，将他们都逮入诏狱，吩咐指挥马顺杀刘球。
English: Just as Dong Xie's report was submitted, Wang Zhen said that Liu Qiu was his accomplice, arrested them all to the imperial prison, and ordered the commander Ma Shun to kill Liu Qiu.

古文：顺深夜携一小校持刀至球所。
现代文：马顺深夜带着一名小校持刀到关押刘球的地方。
English: Late at night, Ma Shun took a schoolboy with a knife to the place where Liu Qiu was being held.

古文：球方卧，起立，大呼太祖、太宗。
现代文：刘球正睡着，马上起身站起，大喊太祖、太宗。
English: Liu Qiu was falling asleep and immediately got up and stood up, shouting "Taizu, Taizong."

古文：颈断，体犹植。
现代文：他头被砍断了，身体还站着。
English: His head was cut off and his body was still standing.

古文：遂支解之，瘗狱户下。
现代文：马顺遂将他肢解，埋在监狱门口之下。
English: Ma Shun then dismembered him and buried him under the prison gate.

古文：璘从旁窃血裙遗球家。
现代文：董瞞从旁边偷出血裙送给刘球家人。
English: Dong Zhe stole a bloody skirt from the side and gave it to Liu Qiu's family.

古文：后其子钺求得一臂，裹裙以殓。
现代文：后来他的儿子刘钺找到一条手臂，用血裙裹起来装殓了。
English: Later, his son Liu Wei found an arm, wrapped it in a blood dress and decorated it.

古文：顺有子病久，忽起捽顺发，拳且蹴之曰： 老贼，令尔他日祸逾我！我，刘球也。 
现代文：马顺有个儿子病了很久了，突然起来抓住马顺的头发，拳脚相加说道： 老贼，我要让你将来死得比我还惨！我，是刘球。 
English: Ma Shun had a son who had been ill for a long time. He suddenly got up, grabbed Ma Shun's hair, and said, "Old thief, I want you to die more miserably than me in the future! I am Liu Qiu."

古文：顺惊悸。
现代文：马顺非常吃惊。
English: Ma Shun was very surprised.

古文：俄而子死，小校亦死。
现代文：不久他的儿子死了，那名小校也死了。
English: Soon after, his son died, as did the schoolboy.

古文：璘，字德文，高邮人。有孝行。
现代文：董瞞，字德文，高邮人，有孝行。
English: Dong Zhe, written in German, a high-ranking postman, had a filial piety.

古文：狱解，遂归，不复出。
现代文：出狱之后，他便回家了，从此不再出来做官。
English: After he was released from prison, he went back home and never came out to work again.

古文：球死数年，瓦剌果入寇。
现代文：刘球死后几年，瓦剌果然入侵。
English: A few years after Liu Qiu's death, the Varangians invaded.

古文：谦以书示王文。
现代文：英宗被俘，王振被杀。
English: Yingzong was captured and Wang Zhen was killed.

古文：文曰： 书生不知忌讳，要为有胆，当进一官处之。 
现代文：朝廷官员立即击打马顺，将他打死了。而彭德清从土木堡逃回来后，被投进监狱，判了斩刑，不久他死于狱中。
English: The court officials immediately beat Ma Shun and killed him, while Peng Deqing, after escaping from the earthen fort, was thrown into prison, sentenced to beheading, and soon died in prison.

古文：乃以集知安州。
现代文：诏令将他戮尸。
English: The imperial edict ordered that his body be dismembered.

古文：玘，闽人；集，常熟人也。章纶，字大经，乐清人。
现代文：景帝怜惜刘球的忠诚，赠给他翰林学士，谥忠愍，在他的家乡立祠祭祀他。章纶，字大经，乐清人。
English: Emperor Jing took pity on Liu Qiu's loyalty and presented him with the Hanlin Baccalaureate, 忠, and set up an ancestral shrine in his hometown to worship him. Zhang Qiu, Zha Da Jing, Le Qing Ren.

古文：正统四年进士。
现代文：正统四年，中进士。
English: Four years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：授南京礼部主事。
现代文：被授予南京礼部主事。
English: He was awarded the post of the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：景泰初，召为仪制郎中。
现代文：景泰初年，他被召回任仪制郎中。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai's reign, he was called back to be the second-in-command.

古文：纶见国家多故，每慷慨论事。
现代文：章纶见国家多有变故，经常慷慨上书论事。
English: Zhang Rong saw that the country had many vicissitudes, and he often wrote about it generously.

古文：尝上太平十六策，反复万余言。
现代文：他曾呈上太平十六策，总共达一万余言。
English: He once presented 16 pacifist policies, totaling more than 10,000 words.

古文：也先既议和，请力图修攘以待其变。
现代文：也先议和后，章纶请求全力修整武备，以待将来之变。
English: After discussing peace first, Zhang Xuan requested that all efforts be made to improve military preparedness to await future changes.

古文：中官兴安请帝建大隆福寺成，将临幸。
现代文：宦官兴安请皇上修建大隆福寺，建成之后，皇上将临幸该寺，章纶上疏劝谏。
English: The eunuch Xing'an asked the emperor to build Dalongfu Temple. After the temple was completed, the emperor paid a visit to the temple, and the eunuch Xing'an advised the emperor.

古文：纶具疏谏，河东盐运判官济南杨浩除官未行，亦上章谏，帝即罢幸。浩后累官副都御史，巡抚延绥。
现代文：河东盐运判官济南人杨浩受到任命后还没上任，也上疏劝谏。皇上便撤消临幸的计划，杨浩后来累任副都御史，巡抚延绥。
English: Yang Hao from Jinan, the judge of the Salt Transport in Hedong, had not yet taken office when he was appointed, and he was also advised by Shang Suo. The emperor then revoked the plan for Linying, and Yang Hao later served as vice-governor of the capital and governor of Yan'an.

古文：纶又因灾异请求致变之由，语颇切至。
现代文：章纶又因发生灾异，请求寻找导致灾变的原因，用语非常恳切。
English: Zhang Ye also requested to find the cause of the disaster due to the occurrence of disasters, and the language was very earnest.

古文：五年五月，钟同上奏请复储。
现代文：五年五月，钟同上奏请求恢复储君。
English: In May of the fifth year, Zhongdong made a request to restore the crown prince.

古文：越二日，纶亦抗疏陈修德弭灾十四事。
现代文：过了两天，章纶也上疏陈述修德消灾等十四项建议。
English: Two days later, Zhang Rong also made a brief statement on the fourteen suggestions such as moral education and disaster relief.

古文：其大者谓： 内官不可干外政，佞臣不可假事权，后宫不可盛声色。
现代文：主要是说 ：宦官不可干预外朝政事，佞臣不可偷窃事权，后宫不可盛行声色。
English: The main points were: eunuchs must not interfere in the political affairs of foreign dynasties, vassals must not steal power, and the harem must not indulge in sexual misconduct.

古文：凡阴盛之属，请悉禁罢。 
现代文：凡阴盛之类的事，请都禁止。 
English: Please ban all things like yin and sheng.

古文：又言： 孝弟者，百行之本。
现代文：他又说： 孝悌是百行之本。
English: He also said: Filial piety is the book of a hundred actions.

古文：愿退朝后朝谒两宫皇太后，修问安视膳之仪。
现代文：愿陛下退朝之后朝见两宫皇太后，修问安视膳食之仪。
English: May His Majesty see the Empress Dowager of the Two Imperial Palaces in the morning after retiring from the throne, and ask her about the etiquette of the meal.

古文：上皇君临天下十有四年，是天下之父也；陛下亲受册封，是上皇之臣也。陛下与上皇，虽殊形体，实同一人。
现代文：上皇君临天下十四年，是天下之父。陛下曾亲受册封，是上皇之臣。陛下与上皇，形虽异体，实同一人。
English: Fourteen years after the death of the last emperor, he is the father of the world. His Majesty was personally canonized and is a vassal of the last emperor. His Majesty and the last emperor, although different in form, are actually one and the same person.

古文：伏读奉迎还宫之诏曰： 礼惟加而无替，义以卑而奉尊。 
现代文：臣伏读奉迎上皇回宫的诏书说 ：礼惟有加尊而不能降低，义则以卑来奉尊。 
English: The imperial rescript read by the courtiers to welcome the emperor back to the palace said: "Rites can only increase respect, not decrease it. Righteousness, on the other hand, must be honored with humility."

古文：望陛下允蹈斯言。或朔望，或节旦，率群臣朝见延和门，以展友于之情，实天下之至愿也。
现代文：望陛下履行这一诺言，或者在初一、十五，或者在节日元旦，率领群臣在延和门朝见上皇，以示兄弟之情，这实是天下的至愿。
English: I hope that His Majesty will fulfill this promise, or on the first day of the first month, the fifteenth day of the first month, or on the New Year's Day, he will lead his ministers to meet the Emperor at Yanhe Gate to show brotherly love. This is truly the greatest wish of the world.

古文：更请复汪后于中宫，正天下之母仪；还沂王之储位，定天下之大本。
现代文：还要请恢复汪后中宫的地位，以正天下之母仪；恢复沂王储君的地位，以定天下之大本。
English: Also, please restore the status of the Middle Palace of the Empress Dowager Wang to be the mother of the world; restore the status of the Crown Prince Zou to be the leader of the world.

古文：如此则和气充溢，灾沴自弭。 
现代文：这样则和气充盈，灾异自消。 
English: In this way, harmony will abound and calamities will disappear.

古文：疏入，帝大怒。
现代文：奏疏呈入后，皇上大怒。
English: The Emperor was furious after Sonosu was presented.

古文：时日已暝，宫门闭。乃传旨自门隙中出，立执纶及钟同下诏狱。
现代文：当时太阳已经落山，宫门已经关闭，皇上于是命将圣旨从门缝中传出，立即将章纶和钟同逮入诏狱。
English: At that time, the sun had already set and the palace gate was already closed, so the emperor ordered the imperial edict to be passed out through the cracks in the gate, and immediately arrested Zhang Jun and Zhong into the imperial prison.

古文：榜掠惨酷，逼引主使及交通南宫状。
现代文：他们受到惨酷的拷打，逼迫他们交待主使人以及交通南宫的情况。
English: They were brutally tortured to force them to reveal the identity of the masterminds and the situation at the Southern Palace.

古文：濒死，无一语。
现代文：他们濒临死亡，但终无一语。
English: They were on the verge of death, but there was no word.

古文：会大风扬沙，昼晦，狱得稍缓，令锢之。
现代文：正好刮起大风，飞扬的尘沙使白昼变暗，案情稍得缓解。皇上令禁锢他们。
English: Just as a strong wind was blowing and the flying dust was darkening the day, the case was slightly mitigated. The emperor ordered them to be imprisoned.

古文：明年杖廖庄阙下。因封杖就狱中杖纶、同各百。
现代文：第二年杖打廖庄于宫门之下，并封杖到狱中杖打章纶、钟同各一百下。
English: In the second year, Liu Zhuang was beaten with a cane under the palace gate, and the cane was sealed in the prison. The cane was beaten with a hundred strokes each.

古文：同竟死，纶长系如故。
现代文：钟同竟被打死，章纶仍长期关押。
English: Zhong Tong was actually beaten to death, and Zhang Ye was still detained for a long time.

古文：英宗复位，郭登言纶与廖庄、林聪、左鼎、倪敬等皆直言忤时，宜加旌擢。
现代文：英宗复位后，郭登说章纶和廖庄、林聪、左鼎、倪敬等人都因直言而忤逆了时政，宜加以表彰和提拔。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Guo Deng said that Zhang Rong, Liao Zhuang, Lin Cong, Zuo Ding, Ni Jing and others all rebelled against the current government because of their outspokenness, and should be commended and promoted.

古文：帝乃立释纶。
现代文：皇上于是立即释放章纶。
English: The emperor then immediately released Zhang Ye.

古文：命内侍检前疏，不得。
现代文：皇上命内侍宦官寻找章纶先前的奏疏，但找不到。
English: The Imperial Household Eunuchs searched for Zhang Ye's previous records, but could not find them.

古文：内侍从旁诵数语，帝嗟叹再三，擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：内侍从旁背诵了几句，皇上叹息再三，升章纶为礼部右侍郎。
English: An attendant recited a few lines from the sidelines, the Emperor sighed repeatedly, and Shoshojo was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Division.

古文：纶既以大节为帝所重，而性亢直，不能谐俗。
现代文：章纶既因具备大节被皇上所重，但性格仍很刚直，不能随俗。
English: Even though Zhang Ye was favored by the emperor because of his large stature, his character was still very upright and he could not follow the world.

古文：石亨贵幸招公卿饮，纶辞不往，又数与尚书杨善论事不合。亨、善共短纶。
现代文：石亨贵幸之后，召公卿去饮酒，章纶推辞不去，又多次与尚书杨善论事意见不合，石亨、杨善便一同贬低章纶。
English: After Shi Heng Gui Xing, he invited the nobles to drink alcohol, but Zhang Ye refused to go. He also repeatedly disagreed with Shang Shu Yang Shan on matters, and Shi Heng and Yang Shan together belittled Zhang Ye.

古文：乃调南京礼部，就改吏部。
现代文：章纶于是被调到南京礼部，又在那里改调到吏部。
English: Zhang Jun was then transferred to the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, where he was also transferred to the Personnel Department.

古文：宪宗即位，有司以遗诏请大婚。
现代文：宪宗即位后，有关官员根据遗诏请求皇上举行大婚。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, the relevant officials requested the emperor to hold a grand wedding according to the imperial edict.

古文：纶言： 山陵尚新，元朔未改，百日从吉，心宁自安。
现代文：章纶说 ：先帝山陵尚新，年号还没改，先帝逝世百日即改行吉礼，心中能自安吗？
English: Zhang Ye said: The former emperor's tomb is still new, the year has not changed, and the auspicious ceremony will be changed on the 100th day of the former emperor's death. Can you be at peace in your heart?

古文：陛下践阼之初，当以孝治天下，三纲五常实原于此。乞俟来春举行。 
现代文：陛下登基之初，应当以孝治天下。三纲五常实根源于此，请待来春之后再举行。 
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's enthronement, it is necessary to rule the world with filial piety. The three principles and five constants are rooted in this, so please wait until next spring.

古文：议虽不从，天下咸重其言。
现代文：他的建议虽然不被采纳，但天下都很敬重他的话。
English: Although his suggestion was not accepted, the world respected his words.

古文：成化元年，两淮饥，奏救荒四事。
现代文：成化元年，两淮闹饥荒，他上奏救荒四条建议，都被批准了。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, there was a famine in Zhuhai and Hebei. He submitted four proposals for famine relief, all of which were approved.

古文：皆报可。四年秋，子玄应以冒籍举京闱。给事中朱清、御史杨智等因劾纶，命侍郎叶盛勘之。
现代文：四年秋，他的儿子玄应冒名考中会试。给事中朱清、御史杨智等人因此弹劾章纶，皇上命侍郎叶盛调查。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, his son Xuan Ying passed the middle school entrance examination. As a result, Zhu Qing, Goshi Yang Zhi and others impeached Zhang Ye, and the emperor ordered Ye Sheng to investigate.

古文：明年，纶及佥都御史高明考察庶官，两人议不协。
现代文：第二年，章纶与佥都御史高明考察百官，两人意见不合。
English: In the second year, Zhang Ye and Zhengdu Mishi Gaoming inspected a hundred officials, and the two disagreed.

古文：疏既上，纶复独奏给事中王让不赴考察，且言明刚愎自用，己言多不见从，乞与明俱罢。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，章纶又独自上奏说给事中王让不参加考察，并且说高明刚愎自用，自己的意见多不见赞同，请求将他与高明一同罢免。
English: After the summary report was submitted, Zhang Ye also independently submitted a report saying that Wang Ye would not participate in the investigation, and that Gao Ming Gangyao was self-serving and his own opinions were mostly not approved, requesting that he and Gao Ming be dismissed together.

古文：章并下盛等。
现代文：他的奏章都下到叶盛等人手中。
English: His musical scores all ended up in the hands of Ye Sheng and others.

古文：于是让及下考诸臣连章劾纶。
现代文：于是王让以及参加考察的诸臣连着上书弹劾章纶。
English: As a result, Wang Zhan and the courtiers who participated in the inspection left with the impeachment letter.

古文：纶亦屡疏求罢。
现代文：章纶也多次上疏请求罢免。
English: Zhang Ye also repeatedly petitioned Shang Su for his dismissal.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：既而盛等勘上玄应实冒籍。
现代文：后来叶盛等人查出玄应确实是冒名。
English: Later, Ye Sheng and others found out that Xuan Ying was indeed a fake.

古文：帝宥纶，而所奏他事，亦悉不问。
现代文：皇上宽宥了章纶，而他所奏的其他事情，也都不问。
English: The emperor pardoned Zhang Xuan, and did not ask him about the other things he played.

古文：未几，复转礼部。
现代文：不久，他又转调礼部。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the etiquette department.

古文：温州知府范奎被论调官。纶言： 温州臣乡郡，奎大得民心。
现代文：温州知府范奎被弹劾调官，章纶说： 温州是臣的故乡，范奎大得民心。
English: Wenzhou Governor Fan Kui was impeached and transferred, Zhang Ye said: Wenzhou is the hometown of the minister, Fan Kui has won the hearts of the people.

古文：解官之日，士民三万人哭泣攀辕，留十八日乃得去。
现代文：他解官之日，士民三万人哭泣攀着车辕，留了十八天才得离去。
English: On the day he was relieved of his post, 30,000 weeping members of the judiciary and the people clung to their carriages. They had to leave after eighteen days.

古文：请还之以慰民望。 
现代文：请求让他回任，以安慰民望。 
English: Calls for him to be reinstated to placate public opinion are growing.

古文：章下所司，竟报寝。
现代文：奏章下到有关部门，竟被反对。
English: The report was sent to the relevant departments, but they objected.

古文：纶性戆，好直言，不为当事者所喜。
现代文：章纶性戆直，好直言，不为当权者所喜欢。
English: Zhang Xuan is straightforward and outspoken, which is not liked by those in power.

古文：偕同官论陈钺罪，忤旨停俸。
现代文：他任侍郎二十年，不得升迁，以年老请求离去。
English: He served as chamberlain for twenty years, was not allowed to be promoted, and asked to leave due to old age.

古文：孝宗嗣位，上治本五事。
现代文：后来他去世。过了几年，他的妻子张氏呈上他的奏稿，并请加恩。
English: He later died, and a few years later, his wife, Ms. Zhang, presented him with the manuscript and asked Mr. Gahn to compose it.

古文：仕终广东布政使。廖庄，字安止，吉水人。
现代文：皇上嘉奖叹息，赠他为南京礼部尚书，谥恭毅，授予他的一个儿子为鸿胪寺典簿。廖庄，字安止，吉水人。
English: The emperor commended and sighed, presented him with a book of Nanjing etiquette, and awarded one of his sons with a book of Hongye Temple. Liaozhuang, Anzhi, Jishui people.

古文：宣德五年进士。
现代文：宣德五年，中进士。
English: Xuande five years, junior high school graduate.

古文：八年改庶吉士，与知县孔友谅等七人历事六科。
现代文：八年，改任庶吉士，与知事孔友谅等七人历事六科。
English: Eight years later, he was reappointed as the second-in-command, and seven people, including the governor Kong Youjun, were appointed to the six departments of history.

古文：英宗初，授刑科给事中。
现代文：英宗即位之初，他被授予刑科给事中。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Yingzong's reign, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：正统二年，御史元亮请如诏书蠲边军侵没粮饷，不允。
现代文：正统二年，御史元亮请如诏书中所说免除边防军吞没的粮饷，皇上不准。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, Emperor Shih Gengliang asked the emperor to exempt the grain sacks swallowed up by the frontier troops as stated in the imperial edict. The emperor did not approve.

古文：按察使龚鐩亦请如诏书宥盗犯之未获者，法司亦寝不行。
现代文：按察使龚钅遂也请如诏书中所说宽宥还没有被抓获的盗窃犯，司法部门也压下不执行。
English: In accordance with the edict, the inspector general also requested that the thieves who had not yet been caught be pardoned, as stated in the edict, and the judicial department also put pressure on them not to carry out the order.

古文：庄以诏书当信，上章争之。
现代文：廖庄认为诏书当言而有信，上书力争。
English: Liao Zhuang believed that the imperial edict was true to its word and had credibility, and made efforts to submit the letter.

古文：五年诏京官出修荒政，兼征民逋。
现代文：五年，诏令京官出京治理救荒之政，兼追回逃亡的百姓。
English: In the fifth year, the imperial edict ordered the Beijing officials to go to Beijing to administer the famine relief policy, and also to recover the fleeing people.

古文：庄虑使者督趣困民，请宽灾伤州县，俟秋成。从之。
现代文：廖庄担心使者催促百姓，从而使百姓受困，便请宽免受灾的州县，以待秋成，皇上听从了。
English: Liao Zhuang was worried that the envoy would rush the people and thus cause the people to be trapped, so he asked the states and counties to be spared from the disaster to wait for the autumn, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：振荒陕西，全活甚众。
现代文：他在陕西救荒，救活了很多人。
English: He rescued many people from the famine in Shaanxi.

古文：还奏宽恤九事，多议行。
现代文：回来后他上奏宽免抚恤九项建议，多得讨论实行。
English: After his return, he made nine suggestions for leniency and exemption from pension, many of which had to be discussed and implemented.

古文：杨士奇家人犯法，偕同官论列。
现代文：杨士奇家人犯法，他与同官弹劾。
English: Yang Shiqi's family members violated the law, and he and his colleagues impeached them.

古文：或曰： 独不为杨公地乎？ 
现代文：有人说 ：难道不要为杨公留个退路吗？ 
English: Some people said, "Shouldn't there be a way out for Yang Gong?"

古文：曰： 正所以为杨公也。 
现代文：廖庄说： 这正是为了杨公。 
English: Liao Zhuang said: This is exactly for Yang Gong.

古文：八年命与御史张骥同署大理寺事。
现代文：八年，命他与御史张骥共同代理大理寺事务。
English: In the eighth year, he was ordered to jointly represent the affairs of Dali Temple with the historian Zhang Ye.

古文：逾月，授左寺丞。
现代文：过了一个月，他被授予左寺丞。
English: A month later, he was awarded Zuiderajo.

古文：十一年迁南京大理少卿。
现代文：十一年，他升为南京大理寺少卿。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was promoted to the position of Shokei of Nanjing Dali Temple.

古文：逾二年，奸人陈玞者，与所亲贾福争袭指挥职。
现代文：过了两年，奸人陈王夫与亲戚贾福争袭指挥一职。
English: Two years later, the traitor Chen Wangfu competed with his relative Jia Fu for the position of commander.

古文：南京刑部侍郎齐韶纳玞贿，欲夺福官与之，为庄所驳。
现代文：南京刑部侍郎齐韶接受陈王夫的贿赂，想夺贾福的官给他，被廖庄驳斥。
English: The Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department's waiter Qi Yan accepted Chen Wangfu's bribe and wanted to give him Jia Fu's position, which was refuted by Liao Zhuang.

古文：韶捶福至死，被逮。玞亦诬庄，俱征下诏狱。
现代文：齐韶将贾福捶打至死，被逮捕，陈王夫也诬陷廖庄，两人都被投进诏狱。
English: Qi Yao beat Jia Fook to death and was arrested, Chen Wangfu also framed Liao Zhuang, and both were thrown into the imperial prison.

古文：会韶他罪并发，弃市，庄乃得释。
现代文：正好齐韶别的罪行也败露了，便将他押到市场斩首，暴尸街头，廖庄才得到释放。
English: Just as Qi Yan's other crimes came to light, he was taken to the market, beheaded, and left for dead on the streets of Liaozhuang before being released.

古文：景泰五年七月上疏曰： 臣曩在朝，见上皇遣使册封陛下，每遇庆节，必令群臣朝谒东庑，恩礼隆洽，群臣皆感叹，谓上皇兄弟友爱如此。
现代文：景泰五年七月，廖庄上疏说： 臣从前在朝廷的时候，见上皇派使者册封陛下，每遇庆典节日，一定令群臣在东庑朝谒陛下，上皇对您的恩礼非常隆重，群臣也都感叹，说上皇对兄弟竟是这么友爱。
English: In July of the fifth year of King Taejo's reign, Liao Zhuang Shangxu said, "When I was in the imperial court, I once saw the last emperor send an envoy to crown His Majesty. Whenever there is a festival, it is certain to make the courtiers make a pilgrimage to Dongcheng. Your Majesty, the last emperor's favor to you is very grand, and the courtiers are also lamenting, saying that the last emperor is so kind to his brother.

古文：今陛下奉天下以事上皇，愿时时朝见南宫，或讲明家法，或商略治道，岁时令节，俾群臣朝见，以慰上皇之心，则祖宗在天之神安，天地之心亦安矣。
现代文：现在陛下奏天下以侍奉上皇，愿陛下时常到南宫朝见上皇，或者讨论家法，或者商量治国之道，逢年过节，让群臣去朝见他，以安慰上皇之心。这样则祖宗在天之神安，天地之心也安。
English: Now that His Majesty is serving the Emperor, may His Majesty often visit the Southern Court to see the Emperor, or discuss family law, or discuss the way of governing the country. Every year, let the courtiers go to see him to comfort the Emperor's heart. In this way, the ancestors will be safe in heaven, and the heart of heaven and earth will be safe.

古文：太子者，天下之本。
现代文：太子，是天下的根本。
English: The prince is the foundation of the world.

古文：上皇之子，陛下之犹子也。
现代文：上皇之子，也就是陛下之子。
English: The Emperor's son, that is, His Majesty's son.

古文：宜令亲儒臣，习书策，以待皇嗣之生，使天下臣民晓然知陛下有公天下之心，岂不美欤？
现代文：应令太子亲近儒臣，学习书策，以待皇上后嗣的诞生，使天下臣民都知道陛下有公天下之心，岂不美哉？
English: Wouldn't it be wonderful if the crown prince were ordered to get close to Confucianism and Confucianism, to learn book strategy, to wait for the birth of the emperor's heir, so that all the subjects of the world know that His Majesty has the heart of a public servant?

古文：盖天下者，太祖、太宗之天下。
现代文：天下者，是太祖、太宗的天下。
English: Those who rule the world are the ancestors and descendants of the world.

古文：仁宗、宣宗继体守成者，此天下也。
现代文：仁宗、宣宗继承大统守成的，是这个天下。
English: Ren Zong and Xuan Zong are the inheritors of the Great Preservation, and this is the world.

古文：上皇北征，亦为此天下也。
现代文：上皇北征，也是为了这个天下。
English: The last emperor's Northern Expedition was also for this world.

古文：今陛下抚而有之，宜念祖宗创业之艰难，思所以系属天下之人心，即弭灾召祥之道莫过于此。 
现代文：现在陛下拥有这个天下，应念祖宗创业之艰难，想想怎样去收取天下人心，消灾召祥之道莫过于此。 
English: Now that His Majesty owns the world, he should remember the hardships of his ancestors' entrepreneurship, and think about how to win the hearts and minds of the world. There is no better way to eliminate disasters and bring prosperity.

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏呈入后，不见回报。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：明年，庄以母丧，赴京关给勘合，诣东角门朝见。
现代文：第二年，廖庄因母亲去世，赴京交回勘合，到东角门朝见皇上。
English: The following year, due to the death of his mother, Liao Zhuang went to Beijing to return the marriage certificate and went to the East Gate to see the emperor.

古文：帝忆庄前疏，命廷杖八十，谪定羌驿丞。
现代文：皇上想起廖庄前头的奏疏，命将他廷杖八十下，贬为定羌驿丞。
English: The emperor thought of Liao Zhuang's predecessor Song Zuo and ordered him to lower his imperial scepter eighty degrees, demoting him to Ding Rong Rong.

古文：天顺初，召还。
现代文：天顺初年，他被召回。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was recalled.

古文：时母丧未终，复遭父丧，特予祭葬，命起复，仍官南京。
现代文：当时母亲丧期还没结束，又遭父丧，皇上特给予祭葬，命令他起复，仍在南京供职。
English: At that time, his mother's mourning period had not yet ended, and his father was also in mourning. The emperor gave him a special funeral and ordered him to resume his duties, still serving in Nanjing.

古文：天顺五年就擢礼部右侍郎，改刑部。
现代文：天顺五年，就在南京升为礼部右侍郎，又改调到刑部。
English: In the fifth year of Tenshun, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department in Nanjing, and then transferred to the Criminal Department.

古文：成化初，召为刑部左侍郎。
现代文：成化初年，他被召回任刑部左侍郎。
English: In the first year of his apprenticeship, he was called back to serve as the Left Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：逾年卒。赠尚书，谥恭敏。
现代文：过了一年他去世，赠尚书，谥恭敏。
English: A year later, he passed away, leaving the book to his granddaughter, Gong Gongmin.

古文：庄性刚，喜面折人过，而实坦怀无芥蒂。
现代文：廖庄个性刚直，喜欢当面指出别人的过错。但他实是胸怀坦荡，毫无芥蒂。
English: Liao Zhuang has an upright personality and likes to point out the mistakes of others in person. But he is really open-minded and has no bitterness.

古文：不屑细谨，好存谢宾客为欢狎。
现代文：他不屑于谨小慎微，喜欢留下宾客欢饮。
English: He disdains small-mindedness and likes to leave his guests to enjoy their drinks.

古文：既官法司，或劝稍屏谢往来，远嫌疑。
现代文：任司法官后，有人劝他稍稍辞谢一些交往，以免嫌疑。
English: After his appointment as a judicial officer, someone advised him to slightly renounce some contacts in order to avoid suspicion.

古文：庄笑曰： 昔人有言 臣门如市，臣心如水 ，吾无愧吾心而已。 
现代文：廖庄笑道： 前人有句话说 ：臣门如市，臣心如水。 我无愧于我心而已。 
English: Liao Zhuang laughed: The ancients had a saying: "The gate of a vassal is like a city, the heart of a vassal is like water. I am only worthy of my heart."

古文：卒之日，无以为敛，众裒钱助其丧。
现代文：他去世后，竟没有东西装殓，众人出钱财帮助办理了他的丧事。
English: After his death, there was nothing to decorate, and people paid money to help pay for his funeral.

古文：初，景帝时，英宗在南宫，左右为离间。
现代文：当初，景帝时期，英宗在南宫，左右的人进行离间。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Jing, Yingzong was in the southern palace, and people on both sides were quarreling.

古文：及怀宪太子薨，群小恐沂王复立，谗构愈甚。
现代文：怀宪太子死后，群小人恐怕沂王复立为太子，谗言陷害更加严重。
English: After the death of Prince Huai Xian, a group of villains are suspected of plotting to reinstate Prince Huai as the crown prince, and the slander and frame-up are even more serious.

古文：故钟同、章纶与庄相继力言，皆得罪。然帝颇感悟。
现代文：所以钟同、章纶与廖庄相继极力陈言，都得了罪，但皇上颇有感悟。
English: As a result, Zhongdong, Zhang Ye and Liao Zhuang were all punished for speaking out, but the emperor was quite impressed.

古文：六年七月辛巳，刑科给事中徐正请间言事。
现代文：六年七月辛巳，刑科给事中徐正请秘密言事。
English: In July of the same year, Xu Zheng was asked to speak confidentially in a criminal investigation.

古文：亟召入，乃言： 上皇临御岁久，沂王尝位储副，天下臣民仰戴。
现代文：皇上急忙把他召入，徐正于是说 ：上皇在位岁久，沂王曾经是太子，为天下臣民敬仰。
English: The emperor hurriedly called him in, and Xu Zheng said, "The emperor has been on the throne for a long time, and Shao Wang was once a prince, and is admired by all the subjects in the world.

古文：宜迁置所封之地，以绝人望。
现代文：应该迁沂王到他所封之地，以绝人民之望。
English: The king should be relocated to the land he has made his own, so as to fulfil the people's expectations.

古文：别选亲王子育之宫中。 
现代文：另选亲王的儿子养在宫中。 
English: In addition, the prince's son was raised in the palace.

古文：帝惊愕，大怒，立叱出之。
现代文：皇上惊愕，大怒，立即叱他出去，想把他定罪。
English: The Emperor was astonished and enraged. He immediately scolded him and wanted to convict him.

古文：欲正其罪，虑骇众，乃命谪远任，而帝怒未解。
现代文：但皇上又担心惊动众人，便下令贬他到远方去任职，但皇上怒意并没消解。
English: But the emperor was also worried about alarming everyone, so he ordered him to be sent far away to work, but the emperor's anger did not dissipate.

古文：己，复得其淫秽事，谪戍铁岭卫。
现代文：不久，又获得他淫秽的事情，便把他遣戍铁岭卫。
English: Soon after, he was charged with obscenity and sent to Tielingwei.

古文：贫甚，课耕自给。罗俊尝巡按四川，有廉声。
现代文：大概是皇上虽然怒钟同等人的话过激，但小人的话也没有马上听从。
English: It was probably the emperor who did not immediately listen to the villain's words, even though they were as extreme as those of the angry bell.

古文：仕终南雄知府。杨瑄，字廷献，丰城人。
现代文：英宗复辟后，于谦、王文以图谋立外藩为太子，被诛死，此事遂弄不清楚了。杨瑄，字廷献，丰城人。
English: After the restoration of the Yingzong, Yu Qian and Wang Wen were strangled to death for attempting to establish a foreign clan as the prince, and the matter eventually became unclear.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年，中进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：授御史。
现代文：被授予御史。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：刚直尚气节。
现代文：他刚直而崇尚气节。
English: He is forthright and a stickler for etiquette.

古文：景帝不豫，廷臣请立东宫，帝不允。
现代文：景帝病危，廷臣请立东宫太子。皇上不允许。
English: Emperor Jing was critically ill, and courtiers asked him to appoint a crown prince for the East Palace. The emperor would not allow it.

古文：瑄与同官钱琎、樊英等约疏争，会 夺门 事起，乃已。
现代文：杨瑄与同官钱、樊英等人相约上书抗争，正值 夺门 之变发生，便罢了。
English: Yang Hui and his fellow officials Qian and Zou Ying and others agreed to write a letter of protest, and it was just at the time of the revolution.

古文：天顺初，印马畿内。
现代文：天顺初年，杨瑄到畿内印马。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Yang Hui went to Inma in the Kinai region.

古文：至河间，民诉曹吉祥、石亨夺其田。
现代文：到河间府时，百姓状告曹吉祥、石亨夺占他们的田地。
English: When they arrived at Kawamafu, the people sued Cao Jixiang and Shi Heng for seizing their fields.

古文：瑄以闻，并列二人怙宠专权状。
现代文：杨瑄上报朝廷，并罗列了曹、石两人恃宠专权的情况。
English: Yang Xuan reported to the imperial court, and listed the situation of Cao and Shi's exclusive power.

古文：帝语大学士李贤、徐有贞曰： 真御史也。 
现代文：皇上对大学士李贤、徐有贞说： 这才是真正的御史。 
English: The emperor said to the university scholars Li Xian and Xu Youzhen: This is the real imperial history.

古文：遂遣官按核，而命吏部识瑄名，将擢用。
现代文：遂派官员调查此事，而命吏部记下杨瑄之名，准备升用。
English: Officials were then sent to investigate the matter, and the Ministry of Justice took down Yang Yao's name in preparation for his promotion.

古文：吉祥闻之惧，诉于帝，请罪之。
现代文：曹吉祥听说后很害怕，向皇上告状，请求加罪给杨瑄。
English: Cao Jixiang was very afraid after hearing this, and he complained to the emperor, requesting that Yang Xuan be punished.

古文：不许。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：未几，亨西征还，适彗星见，十三道掌道御史张鹏、盛颙、周斌、费广、张宽、王鉴、赵文博、彭烈、张奎、李人仪、邵铜、郑冕、陶复及御史刘泰、魏翰、康骥将劾亨、吉祥诸违法事。
现代文：不久，石亨西征回来，正好彗星出现。十三道掌道御史张鹏、盛、周斌、费广、张宽、王鉴、赵文博、彭烈、张奎、李人仪、邵铜、郑冕、陶复以及御史刘泰、魏翰、康骥将要弹劾石亨、曹吉祥各种违法之事。
English: Soon after, Shi Heng returned from the Western Expedition, just as the comet appeared. The 13 generals Zhang Peng, Sheng, Zhou Bin, Fei Guang, Zhang Guang, Wang Jian, Zhao Wenbo, Peng Lai, Zhang Kui, Li Ren Yi, Shao Tong, Zheng Guan, Tao Fu, and the generals Liu Tai, Wei Han, and Kang Xi were going to impeach Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang for various illegal activities.

古文：先一日，给事中王铉泄于亨。
现代文：在他们要上奏的前一天，给事中王铉泄露给了石亨。
English: On the day before they were to perform, Wang Yao leaked the news to Shi Heng.

古文：亨与吉祥泣诉帝，诬鹏等为已诛内官张永从子，结党排陷，欲为永报仇。
现代文：石亨和曹吉祥便向皇上哭诉，诬陷张鹏等人是被自己诛杀的宦官张永的侄子，他们结党排斥异己，陷害他人，想为张永报仇。
English: Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang then cried to the emperor, falsely accusing Zhang Peng and others of being the nephews of Zhang Yong, the eunuch who was killed by himself. They formed a party to exclude dissidents, frame others, and wanted to avenge Zhang Yong.

古文：明日疏入，帝大怒，收鹏及瑄。
现代文：第二天奏疏呈入后，皇上大怒，收捕张鹏和杨瑄。
English: The next day, after the report was submitted, the emperor was furious and arrested Zhang Peng and Yang Hui.

古文：御文华殿，悉召诸御史，掷弹章，俾自读。
现代文：皇上御临文华殿，把那些御史全部召来，掷下奏章，让他们自己读。
English: Empress Dowager Wenhua, bring all those imperial histories, throw down the music, and let them read for themselves.

古文：斌且读且对，神色自若。
现代文：周斌一边读一边对答，神色自若。
English: Zhou Bin read and answered questions at the same time, looking confident.

古文：至冒功滥职，帝诘之曰： 彼帅将士迎驾，朝廷论功行赏，何云冒滥？ 
现代文：读到冒功滥职时，皇上质问他道： 他们率将士迎驾，朝廷论功行赏，怎能说是冒滥？ 
English: When reading about the abuse of power, the emperor questioned him, saying: They led the generals to meet the emperor, and the imperial court discussed and rewarded their actions. How can it be said to be abuse of power?

古文：斌曰： 当时迎驾止数百人，光禄赐酒馔，名数具在。
现代文：周斌说： 当时迎驾的不过数百人，光禄寺赐给酒肴，姓名人数俱在。
English: Zhou Bin said: At that time, there were only a few hundred people, and Guanglu Temple gave them wine and food, and the names of the people were all there.

古文：今超迁至数千人，非冒滥而何？ 
现代文：现在获得超升的达数千人，不是冒滥是什么？ 
English: Now, thousands of people have been promoted to higher ranks. Isn't this an abuse of power?

古文：帝默然，竟下瑄、鹏及诸御史于狱。
现代文：皇上默然，但还是把杨瑄、张鹏以及各位御史投进监狱。
English: The emperor was silent, but he still threw Yang Xuan, Zhang Peng, and the other emperors into prison.

古文：榜掠备至，诘主使者，瑄等无所引，乃坐都御史耿九畴、罗绮主谋，亦下狱。
现代文：将他们严刑拷打，质问谁是主使者，杨瑄等人没有供认，便判都御史耿九畴、罗绮是主谋，把他们也投进监狱。
English: They were severely tortured and interrogated as to who was the main messenger, and since Yang Xi et al. did not confess, they were sentenced to nine years in prison. Luo Xi was the mastermind, and they were also thrown into prison.

古文：论瑄、鹏死，余遣戍。
现代文：判杨瑄、张鹏死罪，其他的遣去戍边。
English: Yang Hui and Zhang Peng were sentenced to death, while the others were sent to Lijiang.

古文：亨等复谮诸言官。
现代文：石亨等人又陷害各个言官。
English: Shi Heng and others also set up various officials.

古文：帝谕吏部，给事、御史年逾三十者留之，余悉调外。
现代文：皇上于是传谕吏部，给事中、御史年过三十的留下，其他人全部调为外任。
English: The emperor then sent a message to the officials, leaving those who were in the middle of the matter and over 30 years old, and all others were transferred to outside positions.

古文：尚书〈王翱〉列上给事中何玘等十三人，御史吴祯等二十三人。
现代文：尚书王翱列上给事中何王己等十三人、御史吴祯等二十三人。
English: On the list of the king's advisers, there were thirteen, including Ho Wang Zi, and twenty-three, including Goshi Wu Yao.

古文：诏以玘等为州判官，祯等为知县。
现代文：诏令以何王己等人为州判官、吴祯等人为知县。
English: The imperial edict designated He Wangji and others as prefectural magistrates and Wu Xi and others as county magistrates.

古文：会大风震雷，拔木发屋，须臾大雨雹。
现代文：正值有大风雷震，吹倒大树，掀掉屋顶，过了一会儿下起了大冰雹。
English: There were strong winds and thunderstorms at the time, blowing down large trees and lifting off roofs. Moments later, large hailstones fell.

古文：亨、吉祥家大木俱折，二人亦惧。
现代文：石亨、曹吉祥家中的大树都被刮断，两人也害怕了。
English: Both Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang's large trees were uprooted, and they were scared.

古文：掌钦天监礼部侍郎汤序本亨党，亦言上天示警，宜恤刑狱。
现代文：掌钦天监的礼部侍郎汤序本是石亨的党羽，也上书说上天示警，应抚恤刑狱。
English: The etiquette attendant, Tang Zi, who served the heavenly overseer, was originally a follower of Shi Heng. He also wrote a letter saying that heaven had warned him that he should be punished with a fine and imprisonment.

古文：于是帝感悟，戍瑄、鹏铁岭卫，余贬知县，泰、翰、骥三人复职，而玘、祯等亦得无调。
现代文：于是皇上感悟了，把杨瑄、张鹏遣戍铁岭卫，其他人贬为知县，刘泰、魏翰、康骥三人复职，而何王己、吴祯等人也得以不外调。
English: As a result, the emperor was impressed and demoted Yang Qi and Zhang Peng to Tielingwei, and the others to Zhixian. Liu Tai, Wei Han and Kang Qi were reinstated, while He Wang Ji and Wu Xi were also allowed to remain.

古文：玘、鹏行半道，适承天门灾，肆赦放还。
现代文：杨瑄、张鹏走到半路，正好承天门失火，皇上大赦，他们被放回。
English: Yang Hui and Zhang Peng walked to the middle of the road, just as the Gate of Heaven caught fire, the emperor pardoned them and they were allowed to return.

古文：或谓当诣亨、吉祥谢，二人卒不往，复谪戍南丹。
现代文：有人说应当到石亨、曹吉祥处致谢，但两人终不去，又被贬戍南丹。
English: Some people said that they should go to Shiheng and Cao Jixiang's place to thank them, but in the end, the two did not go, and they were relegated to Nantan.

古文：宪宗即位，并还故官。
现代文：宪宗即位后，将他们恢复原官。
English: After Emperor Kenzong ascended to the throne, they were restored to their original posts.

古文：瑄寻迁浙江副使。
现代文：杨瑄不久升为浙江副使。
English: Yang Hui was soon promoted to vice-envoy of Zhejiang.

古文：按行海道，禁将校私纵戍卒。
现代文：他巡行海路，禁止将校私自放回戍卒。
English: He patrolled the sea lanes, forbidding officers from returning to their posts without permission.

古文：修捍海塘，筑海盐堤岸二千三百丈，民得奠居。
现代文：修筑捍海塘，以及海盐堤岸二千三百丈，使百姓得以安居。
English: The construction of the Hanhai Pond and the 2,300-meter-high sea salt embankment has enabled the people to live safely.

古文：为副使十余年，政绩卓然，进按察使。
现代文：他任副使十几年，政绩卓然，进升为按察使。
English: He served as vice-envoy for more than ten years, with outstanding achievements, and was promoted to the post of inspector.

古文：西湖水旧可溉诸县田四十六万顷，时堙塞过半，瑄请浚之。
现代文：西湖水原来可灌溉各县田四十六万顷，当时已淤塞过半，杨瑄请疏浚它。
English: Originally, the West Lake water could irrigate 460,000 hectares of county fields. At that time, more than half of it was silted up. Yang Wei asked to dredge it.

古文：设防置闸，以利灌溉，功未就，卒。
现代文：他又设置闸门，以利灌溉，功末成而死。
English: He also set up sluice gates to facilitate irrigation, and died in the process.

古文：海盐人祠祀之。
现代文：海盐人民立祠祭祀他。
English: The Haiyan People's Ancestral Hall was built to enshrine him.

