古文：为齐献书赵王，使臣与复丑曰： 臣一见，而能令王坐而天下致名宝。
现代文：有人为齐国向赵惠文王呈献书信，说： 臣下拜见一次君王，能使君王坐着得到天下各国致送的名尊宝器。
English: Someone presented a letter of dedication to King Zhao Huiwen on behalf of the State of Qi, saying: "If a vassal visits the king once, he can make the king sit down and receive the precious treasures sent by all countries in the world."

古文：而臣窃怪王之不试见臣，而穷臣也。
现代文：可是臣下奇怪大王不试着会见一下臣下，而使臣下处于窘迫境地。
English: However, the vassal was surprised that the great king did not try to meet the vassal, which put the vassal in a difficult situation.

古文：群臣必多以臣为不能者，故王重见臣也。
现代文：这一定是大臣们认为臣下不能做到，所以大王没有召见。
English: This must have been what the ministers thought their vassals could not do, so the great king did not summon him.

古文：以臣为不能者非他，欲用王之兵，成其私者也。
现代文：认为臣下不能做到没有别的原因，这是有人想要利用大王的兵力，成就他自己的心愿。
English: There was no other reason for thinking that the vassal could not do it, it was someone who wanted to use the great king's army to fulfill his own wishes.

古文：非然，则交有所偏者也；非然，则知不足者也；非然，则欲以天下之重恐王，而取行于王者也。
现代文：如果不是这样，那就是结交外国有偏颇之心；如果还不是这样，那就是智慧不足；如果还不是这样，那就是想要用天下重大的事情恐吓大王，来使大王相信他的学说。
English: If it is not so, it is a partiality for foreign friends; if it is not so, it is a lack of wisdom; if it is not so, it is an attempt to frighten the great king with the great things of the world in order to make the great king believe in his doctrine.

古文：臣以齐循事王，王能亡燕，能亡韩、魏，能攻秦，能孤秦。
现代文：臣下以齐国名义顺从事奉大王，大王就能灭掉燕国，就能灭掉韩国、魏国，就能进攻秦国，孤立秦国。
English: If the vassals obey and serve the great king in the name of Qi, the great king will be able to eliminate Yan, Korea and Wei, and attack and isolate Qin.

古文：臣以为齐致尊名于王，天下孰敢不致尊名于王?
现代文：臣下以齐国名义向大王致送尊名，天下谁敢不向大王致送尊名？
English: In the name of the state of Qi, the vassals send their honorifics to the great king. Who in the world would dare not to send their honorifics to the great king?

古文：臣以齐为王求名于燕及韩、魏，孰敢辞之?
现代文：臣以齐国名义送给大王土地，天下谁敢不送给大王土地？臣下以齐国名义为大王向燕国和韩国、魏国求取尊名，谁敢推辞？
English: The vassal in the name of Qi gave the great king land, who in the world would dare not to give the great king land? The vassal in the name of Qi asked the great king in the name of Yan and South Korea and Wei, who would dare to refuse?

古文：臣之能也，其前可见也已。
现代文：臣下的能力，大概目前就可以显现出来了。
English: The ability of the vassals can probably be seen at this time.

古文：齐先重王，故天下尽重王；无齐，天下必尽轻王也。
现代文：齐国首先尊重大王，所以天下各国都会尊重大王；没有齐国尊重大王，天下各国一定都会轻视大王。
English: Qi country respects the great king first, so all countries in the world will respect the great king; if Qi country does not respect the great king, all countries in the world will certainly despise the great king.

古文：秦之疆，以无齐之故重王，燕、魏自以无齐故重王。
现代文：秦国如此强大，因为没有齐国帮助的缘故，所以尊重大王，燕国、魏国自以为得不到齐国的帮助，所以重视大王。
English: Qin was so powerful that it respected the great king because it did not have the help of Qi. Yan and Wei believed that they could not get the help of Qi, so they valued the great king.

古文：今王无齐独安得无重天下?故劝王无齐者，非知不足也，则不忠者也。
现代文：如今大王如果没有齐国的帮助怎么能不去讨好天下诸侯因此劝说大王不要齐国帮助的人，不是智力不足，那就是对大王不忠诚的人。
English: Nowadays, if the king does not have the help of Qi, how can he not please the princes of the world? Therefore, those who persuade the king not to help Qi are not intellectually deficient, that is, those who are not loyal to the king.

古文：非然，则欲用王之兵成其私者也；非然，则欲轻王以天下之重，取引于王者也；非然，则位尊而能卑者也。
现代文：如果不是这样，那就是想要借重大王的兵力成就他自己的心愿；如果不是这样，那就是想要用天下的重大事情使大王受到轻视，而使大王推行他的主张；如果不是这样，那就是因为他们地位尊贵能力低下。
English: If it is not so, it is because he wants to use the great king's army to achieve his own wishes; if it is not so, it is because he wants to use the great things of the world to make the great king despised and make the great king promote his ideas; if it is not so, it is because they are low in status and ability.

古文：愿王之熟虑无齐之利害也。 
现代文：希望大王仔细考虑没有齐国帮助的利害关系。 
English: It is hoped that the king will carefully consider the interests of the country without the help of Qi.

