古文：人臣引古规戒，当近取前代，则事势相接，言之者有证，听之者足以监。《诗》曰： 殷监不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：臣僚引述古代的事例规劝君主时，应当选取时代较近的前代史实，这群事势相接，说的人得到了强有力的证据，听的人足以引以为戒。《诗经》说： 殷监不远，在夏后之世。 
English: When ministers cite ancient cases to persuade the monarch, they should choose the historical facts of the recent past. This group of events is connected. Those who speak have received strong evidence, and those who listen are enough to be cautioned. "Song of Songs" says: Yin Jian is not far away, in the post-summer world.

古文：《周书》曰： 今惟殷坠厥命，我其可不大监！ 
现代文：《尚书》说： 现在商朝已经葬送了自己的江山，我们周朝难道不深深地引以为鉴吗？ 
English: "Shangshu" said: Now that the Shang Dynasty has buried its own country, shouldn't we Zhou Dynasty deeply learn from it?

古文：又曰： 我不可不监于有殷。 
现代文：又说： 我不能不以商朝为信鉴。 
English: He also said: I can't help but take the Shang Dynasty as a reference.

古文：又曰： 有殷受天命，惟有历年，惟不敬厥德，乃早坠厥命。 
现代文：又说： 谈乍爪幼天命的年欲不少了、只为不敬天事，不修其德，以致过早地亡了国。 
English: He also said, "There are many people who talk about the fate of the world when they were young, but they did not respect the fate of the world and did not cultivate their virtue, so that they lost their country prematurely.

古文：周公作《无逸》，称商三宗。汉祖命群臣言吾所以有天下，项氏所以失天下，命陆贾著秦所以失天下。
现代文：周公旦作《无逸》，文中称颂商朝的中宗、高宗和祖甲三位国王，汉高祖命群臣谈论自己为什么能得天下，项羽为什么失天下，又命陆贾撰文论述秦朝之所以灭之的原因。
English: Zhou Gongdan wrote "Mou Yat," in which he praised the three kings of the Shang Dynasty, Zhong Zong, Gao Zong and Zu Jia, and ordered the ministers to talk about why they could win the world, why Xiang Yu lost the world, and ordered Lu Jia to write an article on the reasons for the extinction of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：张释之为文帝言秦、汉之间事，秦所以失，汉所以兴。贾山借秦为喻。
现代文：张释之为汉文帝讲解秦、汉之间的历史，以此证明秦朝之所以失败，汉朝之所以成功的根源，贾山借秦朝作比喻，来说明朝代交替的原因。
English: Zhang explained that Emperor Hanwen explained the history between the Qin and Han dynasties to prove that the Qin dynasty failed and the Han dynasty succeeded, and Jashan used the Qin dynasty as a metaphor to explain the reasons for the alternation of the Ming dynasty.

古文：贾谊请人主引商、周、秦事而观之。
现代文：贾谊建议君主阅读有关商朝、周朝和秦朝历史的书籍。
English: Jia Yi suggested that the monarch read books about the history of the Shang, Zhou and Qin Dynasties.

古文：魏郑公上书于太宗云： 方隋之未乱，自谓必无乱；方隋之未亡，自谓必无亡。
现代文：魏征给太宗上书说： 当隋朝尚未乱的时候，自以为必定不会灭亡；当隋朝尚未亡的时候，自以为必定不会亡。
English: Wei Zheng wrote to Emperor Taizong: When the Sui Dynasty was not yet in chaos, I thought I would not die; when the Sui Dynasty was not yet dead, I thought I would not die.

古文：臣愿当今动静以隋为监。 
现代文：我希望现在的珍惜应以隋朝为鉴。 
English: I hope that the current treasuring should follow the example of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：马周云： 炀帝笑齐，魏之失国，今之视炀帝，亦犹炀帝之视齐，魏也。 
现代文：马周说： 隋炀帝嘲笑齐、魏亡国，今天看隋炀帝，也如同炀帝看齐、魏。 
English: Ma Zhou said: Sui and Yan emperors ridiculed Qi and Wei for ruining the country. Looking at Sui and Yan emperors today is like looking at Qi and Wei emperors.

古文：张玄素谏太宗治洛阳宫曰： 乾阳毕功，隋人解体，恐陛下之过，甚于炀帝。
现代文：张玄素谏唐太宗整修洛阳宫说： 乾阳宫修成，隋朝瓦解，我担心陛下的过失比隋炀帝更甚。
English: Zhang Xuansu, who assisted Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty in renovating Luoyang Palace, said, "The Qianyang Palace was completed, but the Sui Dynasty collapsed. I am worried that His Majesty's fault is even greater than that of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：若此役不息，同归于乱耳！ 
现代文：如果这项工程不停，我朝也将与隋朝一样陷于动乱！ 
English: If this project does not stop, my dynasty will also be in turmoil like the Sui dynasty!

古文：考《诗》、《书》反载及汉、唐诸名臣之论，有国者之龟镜也，议论之臣，宜以为法。
现代文：《诗经》和《尚书》所载，以及汉唐诸名臣的论述，是有国家之人的借鉴、负责谏议的大臣们也应当深入地学习，用心的体会。
English: The treatises contained in the "Book of Songs" and the "Book of Songs," as well as the treatises of the famous ministers of the Han and Tang Dynasties, are a reference for those who have a country, and the ministers responsible for deliberation should also study in depth and experience with their hearts.

