古文：世宗纪世宗宣武皇帝，讳恪，高祖孝文皇帝第二子。
现代文：世宗宣武皇帝，讳称元恪，高祖孝文皇帝第二子。
English: Emperor Shizong Xuanwu, secretly called Yuan Ke, was the second son of Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen.

古文：母曰高夫人，初，梦为日所逐，避于床下。日化为龙，绕己数匝，寤而惊悸，既而有娠。
现代文：母亲叫高夫人，当初，梦见被太阳追逐，躲到床下，太阳变成了龙，绕自己几圈，梦醒后惊悸不已，接着有孕。
English: At first, her mother, Mrs. Gao, dreamed of being chased by the sun and hid under the bed. The sun turned into a dragon and circled around her several times. When she woke up, she was startled and became pregnant.

古文：太和七年闰四月，生帝于平城宫。
现代文：太和七年闰四月，世宗在平城宫中出生。
English: On leap April in the seventh year of the Taihei era, Sejong was born in the Heijo Palace.

古文：二十一年正月甲午，立为皇太子。
现代文：太和二十一年正月十七日，被立为皇太子。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the 21st year of the Taiwa era, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：二十三年夏四月丁巳，即皇帝位于鲁阳，大赦天下。
现代文：太和二十三年夏季四月十二日，世宗在鲁阳即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month in the summer of 23rd year, Shizong ascended to the throne in Luyang.

古文：帝居谅暗，委政宰辅。
现代文：世宗年少，政柄委任给左右宰相。
English: As Sejong was young, he was appointed to the post of prime minister.

古文：五月丙子朔，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：五月初一，高丽国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the first day of May, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：六月乙卯，分遣侍臣巡行郡国，问民疾苦，考察守令，黜陟幽明。文武应求、道著丘园者，皆加褒礼。
现代文：六月十一日，朝廷分别派出侍臣巡察各郡国，问民疾苦，考察郡守县令，黜暗升明，文武应求，道著当世的，都加以褒奖礼遇。
English: On June 11th, the imperial court sent courtiers to inspect the counties and prefectures, inquire about the hardships of the people, inspect the county governors and prefectural governors, and reward and treat them accordingly.

古文：戊辰，追尊皇妣曰文昭皇后。
现代文：二十四日，追尊皇母为文昭皇后。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Suizong's mother became Empress Wenzhao.

古文：秋八月戊申，遵遗诏，高祖三夫人已下悉归家。
现代文：秋季八月初五，遵照先帝遗诏，高祖三夫人以下全部回家。
English: In the autumn, on the fifth day of the first month of August, in accordance with the Emperor's last will and testament, the three wives of Emperor Gaozong and their children all returned home.

古文：癸丑，宫臣增位一级。癸亥，南徐州刺史沈陵南叛。
现代文：二十日，南徐州刺史沈陵南叛。
English: On the 20th, the southern Xuzhou stabbed the history of the southern rebellion in Shenling.

古文：冬十月辛未，邓至国王像舒彭来朝。
现代文：冬季十月辛未日，邓至国王像舒彭前来朝见。
English: In the winter of October Xinwei, Deng Zi, the king, came to the court like Shupeng.

古文：丙戌，车驾谒长陵。
现代文：十四日，皇帝车驾到长陵祭拜。
English: On the 14th, the emperor drove to the Changling Mausoleum to pay homage.

古文：丁酉，有事于太庙。
现代文：二十五日，在太庙祭祀祖先。
English: On the 25th, ancestor worship was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：十有一月，幽州民王惠定聚众反，自称明法皇帝，刺史李肃捕斩之。
现代文：十一月，幽州百姓王惠定聚众造反，自称明法皇帝，刺史李肃捕获并斩了他。
English: In November, the people of Yuzhou, Wang Huiding, gathered a crowd to rebel, claiming to be the Mingfa Emperor. The assassin, Li Su, captured and beheaded him.

古文：是岁，州镇十八水，民饥，分遣使者开仓赈恤。
现代文：这一年，州郡十分之八都遭了水灾，百姓闹饥荒，皇帝分遣使者开仓赈灾。
English: In that year, eight-tenths of the prefectures and counties were flooded, the people suffered from famine, and the emperor dispatched emissaries to deal with the disaster.

古文：高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽国派使者朝献。
English: The Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：景明元年春正月壬寅，车驾谒长陵。
现代文：景明元年春季正月初二，皇帝车驾谒拜长陵。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jingming, the emperor drove to the Changling Mausoleum.

古文：乙巳，大赦，改年。
现代文：初五，朝廷大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：丁未，萧宝卷豫州刺史裴叔业以寿春内属，骠骑大将军、彭城王勰帅车骑十万赴之。
现代文：初七，萧宝卷的豫州刺史裴叔业以寿春郡投归朝廷，骠骑大将军、彭城王元勰率领军马十万人前去接应。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xiao Bao's son of Yuzhou, Shi Pei, returned to the imperial court in Shuchun County, accompanied by the cavalry general, Pengcheng Wangyuan, who led an army of 100,000 men to meet him.

古文：二月戊戌，复以彭城王勰为司徒。
现代文：二月二十八日，又任彭城王元勰为司徒。
English: On February 28, Wang Yuanjun of Pengcheng was also appointed as a disciple.

古文：宝卷将胡松、李居士率众万余屯宛，陈伯之水军溯淮而上，以逼寿春。
现代文：萧宝卷将领胡松、李居士率领一万人马屯驻宛城，陈伯之的水军溯淮而上，以逼困寿春。
English: Xiao Baowan's generals, Hu Song and Li Kui Si, stationed 10,000 troops in Wancheng, and Chen Bozhi's naval forces advanced rapidly to force Shuchun into a corner.

古文：夏四月丙申，彭城王勰、车骑将军王肃大破之，斩首万数。
现代文：夏季四月二十七日，彭城王元勰、车骑将军王肃大破敌军，杀了万人。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun and the cavalry general Wang Su defeated the enemy army and killed ten thousand people.

古文：己亥，皇弟恌薨。
现代文：三十日，皇弟元忄兆逝世。
English: On the 30th, the younger brother of the emperor, Yuan Shanzhao, passed away.

古文：五月甲寅，以北镇大饥，遣兼侍中杨播巡抚赈恤。
现代文：五月十五日，因北方各镇发生大饥荒，皇帝派兼侍中杨播巡抚赈济。
English: On the 15th of May, due to the great famine in the northern towns, the emperor sent Yang Bo, the inspector, to provide relief.

古文：六月丙子，司徒、彭城王勰进位大司马，车骑将军王肃加开府仪同三司。
现代文：六月初八，司徒、彭城王元勰进位大司马，车骑将军王肃加授开府仪同三司。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the lunar year, Sutu and Pengcheng Wangyuanqian were promoted to the rank of grand secretary of the Horse, and the cavalry general Wang Su Jia was awarded the ceremony of opening the government and the three departments.

古文：癸未，大阳蛮酋田育丘等率户内附。
现代文：十五日，大阳蛮族酋长田育丘等率领民户归附朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Taiyang barbarian chieftain Tian Yuqiu and other leaders of the people's households joined the imperial court.

古文：秋七月，宝卷又遣陈伯之寇淮南。
现代文：秋季七月，萧宝卷又派陈伯之侵犯淮南。
English: In the autumn of July, Xiao Baowan also sent Chen Bozhu to invade Huainan.

古文：庚子，吐谷浑国遣使朝献。
现代文：初二，吐谷浑国派使者朝献。
English: On the second day of the first month, Tugu Hunkuro sent an envoy to present the gift to the emperor.

古文：八月乙酉，彭城王勰破伯之于肥口。
现代文：八月十八日，彭城王元勰在淝水打败陈伯之。
English: On August 18th, Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun defeated Chen Bozhi in Surabaya.

古文：乙未，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 28th, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月乙丑，东豫州刺史田益宗破宝卷将吴子阳、邓元起于长风。
现代文：九月二十七日，东豫州刺史田益宗在长风打败萧宝卷将吴子阳、邓元起。
English: On September 27th, in Changfeng, Tian Yizong, a scholar from East Henan Province, defeated Xiao Baozhong and defeated Wu Ziyang and Deng Yuanqi.

古文：齐州民柳世明聚众反。
现代文：齐州百姓柳世明聚众造反。
English: The people of Qizhou, including Liu Shiming, rallied to revolt.

古文：冬十月丁卯朔，车驾谒长陵。
现代文：冬十月初一，皇帝车驾谒拜长陵。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the emperor drove to the Changling Mausoleum.

古文：庚寅，齐、兗二州讨世明，平之。
现代文：二十四日，齐、兖二州合兵讨伐柳世明，平定了叛乱。
English: On the 24th, Qi and Yan of the two states joined forces to fight against Liu Shiming and quelled the rebellion.

古文：丁亥，改授彭城王勰为司徒、录尚书事。
现代文：三十日，朝廷改授彭城王元勰为司徒、录尚书事。
English: On the 30th, the imperial court awarded Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan as a scholar and recorded his records.

古文：甲午，诏寿春置兵四万人。
现代文：十七日，世宗下诏招兵四万人。
English: On the 17th, Sejong issued an edict to recruit 40,000 soldiers.

古文：十有一月巳亥，荆州刺史桓道进攻宝卷下笮戍，拔之，降者二千余户。
现代文：十一月初三，荆州刺史桓道进在下笮关对萧宝卷发起攻击，拔除关隘，投降的有二千多户。
English: On the 3rd day of the first month of November, Jing Zhou stabbed Shih Huan Daojin to launch an attack on Xiao Baowan in the lower Shuguang Pass, uprooted the pass, and more than two thousand households surrendered.

古文：丁巳，阳平王颐薨。
现代文：二十日，阳平王元颐去世。
English: On the 20th, Yangping Wang Yuanxuan passed away.

古文：是岁，十七州大饥，分遣使者开仓赈恤。
现代文：这一年，十七州发生大饥荒，皇帝分派使者开仓济民。
English: That year, a great famine occurred in seventeen states, and the emperor dispatched an envoy to open warehouses to help the people.

古文：是冬，岛夷萧衍起兵东下，伐其主萧宝卷。
现代文：这年冬天，萧衍起兵向东进发，讨伐其君主萧宝卷。
English: In the winter of that year, Xiao Yan sent troops to the east to fight against his overlord Xiao Baolu.

古文：二年春正月丙申朔，车驾谒长陵。
现代文：二年春季正月初一，皇帝车驾拜谒长陵。
English: In the spring of the second year, on the first day of the first month, the emperor drove to visit the Long Mausoleum.

古文：庚戌，帝始亲政。
现代文：十五日，世宗开始亲自处理朝政。
English: On the fifteenth day, Sejong began to personally handle the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：遵遗诏，听司徒、彭城王勰以王归第。
现代文：遵照先帝遗诏，听任司徒、彭城王元勰以王爵还归宅第。
English: In accordance with the last emperor's last will and testament, Pengcheng Wangyuanqian, who had been appointed as a magistrate, returned to his residence with the title of prince.

古文：太尉、咸阳王禧进位太保，司空、北海王详为大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：太尉、咸阳王元禧进位太保，司空、北海王元详为大将军、录尚书事。
English: The captain, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, was promoted to the rank of Taibo, and Sikuo and Beihai Wang Yuan were detailed as grand generals, according to records.

古文：丁巳，引见群臣于太极前殿，告以览政之意。
现代文：二十一日，在太极前殿召见群臣，告诉他们自己亲理朝政的意见。
English: On the twenty-first day, he summoned his ministers to the front hall of the Taiji Palace to tell them his personal views on imperial politics.

古文：辛酉，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十五日，高丽国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 25th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to present a gift to the Imperial Court.

古文：壬戌，以太保、咸阳王禧领太尉，大将军、广陵王羽为司徒。
现代文：二十六日，任命太保、咸阳王元禧领太尉，大将军、广陵王元羽为司徒。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Taibao, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, lieutenant, general, and Guangling Wang Yuanyu as officers.

古文：诏曰： 朕幼承宝历，艰忧在疚，庶事不亲，风化未洽。
现代文：世宗下诏书说： 朕幼承宝历，艰忧内怀，不理政事，风化不宁。
English: The imperial edict issued by King Sejong said: I am a child inheriting the treasure of history, full of hardships, careless of politics, and restless.

古文：今始览政务，义协惟新，思使四方风从率善，可分遣大使，黜陟幽明。 
现代文：今天才开始料理政务，首要之举就是同心协力，推陈出新，思谋使四方闻风尽善，可以分派大使，黜幽升明。 
English: Today is the first day of the government's work. The most important task is to make concerted efforts, push forward new ideas, and think about how to make the four parties have a good reputation and can assign ambassadors.

古文：二月庚午，宿卫之官进位一级。
现代文：二月初七，担任宿卫官职的官员晋升一级官阶。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, the officials who served as the guards were promoted to the first rank.

古文：甲戌，大赦天下。
现代文：十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the 27th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三月乙未朔，诏曰： 比年以来，连有军旅，役务既多，百姓雕弊。
现代文：三月初一，世宗下诏书说： 近年以来，连年征战，劳役既多，老百姓穷苦凋敝。
English: On the first day of March, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "In recent years, there have been successive years of war, there are many forced laborers, and the common people are poor and withered.

古文：宜时矜量，以拯民瘼。
现代文：官府应当体恤民情，以救人民于水火。
English: The government should sympathize with the people's feelings to save the people from disaster.

古文：正调之外，诸妨害损民一时蠲罢。 
现代文：正式赋役之外，各种妨碍百姓利益的杂赋全部免去。 
English: In addition to formal enlistment, all kinds of miscellaneous enlistment that hindered the interests of the people were completely exempted.

古文：辛亥，诏曰： 诸州刺史，不亲民事，缓于督察，郡县稽逋，旬月之间，才一览决。
现代文：十七日，下诏说： 各州刺史，不亲民事，缓于督察，郡县稽捕狱讼，一旬一月之间，才处理一次。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the next edict said: "Each state should handle criminal cases, civil cases should be handled by inspectors, and county-level criminal cases should be handled only once between January and March.

古文：淹狱久讼，动延时序，百姓怨嗟，方成困弊。
现代文：淹狱久讼，拖延时日，百姓怨声载道，已成困弊情势。
English: Prolonged litigation, delays, and complaints from the people have led to a difficult situation.

古文：尚书可明条制，申下四方，令日亲庶事，严勒守宰，不得因循，宽怠亏政。 
现代文：尚书可申明条例，布告四方，命地方长官每日亲理政事，勤勉奉公，不得因循旧弊，荒废公务。 
English: The document may state the regulations, announce the four directions, and order the local governor to personally manage government affairs and diligently serve the public on a daily basis, and must not follow the old practices and waste official duties.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 治尚简静，任贵应事。
现代文：二十八日，下诏说： 治理国家崇尚简明清静，为官一方贵在处理一应事务。
English: On the 28th, the next imperial edict said: The governance of the country advocates conciseness and tranquility, and officials are dealing with urgent matters.

古文：州府佐史，除板稍多，方成损弊，无益政道。
现代文：州府佐官，提升渐多，已成损弊，无助政道。
English: The prefectural adjutant, promoted more and more, has become a disadvantage, helpless political path.

古文：又京师百司，僚局殷杂，官有闲长者，亦同此例。
现代文：又京城百司，官僚衙门多而杂，官员有闲暇过长的，都属这种情况。
English: In addition, the fact that there are hundreds of departments in Beijing, that bureaucratic procedures are many and complicated, and that officials have too much leisure time, all belong to this situation.

古文：苟非称要，悉从蠲省。 
现代文：如果不是必需的，一律革除。 
English: If it's not essential, get rid of it.

古文：青、齐、徐、兗四州大饥，民死者万余口。
现代文：青、齐、徐、兖四州发生大饥荒，老百姓饿死的达万余人。
English: A great famine occurred in the four prefectures of Qing, Qi, Xu and Qin, and more than 10,000 people died of starvation.

古文：是月，萧衍立宝卷弟南康王宝融为主，年号中兴，东赴建业。
现代文：这个月，萧衍立萧宝卷之弟南康王萧宝融为皇帝，年号中兴，率军东赴建业。
English: This month, Xiao Yan established Xiao Bao, the younger brother of Nankang King Xiao Bao Rong, as emperor. The year was named Zhongxing, and he led the army to the east to build the industry.

古文：夏五月壬子，广陵王羽薨。
现代文：夏季五月十九日，广陵王元羽逝世。
English: In the summer of May 19th, Guangling Wang Yuanyu passed away.

古文：壬戌，太保、咸阳王禧谋反，赐死。
现代文：二十九日，太保咸阳王元禧谋反，被赐死。
English: On the 29th, the eunuch Xianyang Wang Yuanxi plotted a rebellion and was sentenced to death.

古文：六月丁亥，考诸州刺史，加以黜陟。
现代文：六月二十三日，考核各州刺史政绩，加以升降。
English: On June 23rd, the performance of each state was evaluated and promoted or demoted.

古文：秋七月乙巳，蠕蠕犯塞。乙未，东豫州刺史田益宗破萧宝卷将黄天赐于赤亭。
现代文：秋七月十三日，蠕蠕侵犯边境，乙未日，东豫州刺史田益宗在赤亭打败萧宝卷将领黄天赐。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Cree invaded the border. On the 18th day of the same month, Tian Yuxong, a statesman from East Henan Province, defeated General Xiao Baotan and General Huang Tianfeng in Chateung.

古文：辛酉，大赦天下。
现代文：二十九日，大赦天下。
English: On the 29th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：壬戌，车骑将军、仪同三司王肃薨。
现代文：三十日，车骑将军、仪同三司王肃逝世。
English: On the 30th, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the commander of the 3rd Division, Wang Su, passed away.

古文：九月丁酉，发畿内夫五万人筑京师三百二十三坊，四旬而罢。
现代文：九月初六，下诏征召京畿之内民夫五万人修筑京城三百二十三坊，四十天就完工了。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the next edict called for 50,000 people to build 323 wards of the capital, which was completed in 40 days.

古文：己亥，立皇后于氏。
现代文：初八，立皇后于氏。
English: In the eighth year of the Hatsuhachi era, the Empress was enthroned.

古文：乙卯，免寿春营户为扬州民。
现代文：二十四日，免寿春官营民户为扬州百姓。
English: On the 24th, the people of Yangzhou were exempted from the Spring Festival.

古文：冬十月丁卯，吐谷浑国遣使朝献。
现代文：冬季十月初六，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, an envoy from the Hun Kingdom of Tugu came to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：辛未，萧宝卷零陵戍主华候率户内属。
现代文：初十，萧宝卷零陵郡长官率领本郡军民归顺朝廷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xiao Bao, the governor of Zhuling County, led the troops and people of the county to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：十有一月丙申，以骠骑大将军穆亮为司空。
现代文：十一月初六，任命骠骑大将军穆亮为司空。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, General Mu Liang, the commander of the cavalry, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：丁酉，大将军、北海王详为太傅，领司徒。
现代文：初七，大将军、北海王元详任太傅，领授司徒官职。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, the great general, Beihai Wangyuan, was appointed taifu and received the post of steward.

古文：壬寅，改筑圆丘于伊水之阳。
现代文：十二日，在伊水北面改筑园丘。二十五日，有祝祭之事。
English: On the 12th, a garden mound was rebuilt on the north side of the Yishui River, and on the 25th, a festival was held.

古文：乙卯，仍有事焉。十二月，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月，高丽国派使者前来朝贡。
English: In December, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是月，宝卷直后张齐杀其主宝卷降萧衍，衍克建业。
现代文：这个月，萧宝卷直后张齐杀死其君主萧宝卷投降萧衍，萧衍攻克建业。
English: This month, immediately after Xiao Baojun was killed by Zhang Qi, his monarch Xiao Baojun surrendered to Xiao Yan, and Xiao Yan defeated Jianye.

古文：三年春二月戊寅，诏曰： 自比阳旱积时，农民废殖；寤言增愧，在予良多。
现代文：景明三年二月二十五日，世宗下诏说： 一段时间来，旱灾严重，农民荒废农时，提起来朕就很惭愧，罪责主要在我。
English: On the 25th day of the 2nd month of the 3rd year of the reign of King Jingming, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "For some time now, when the drought has been severe and farmers have been devastated, I am very ashamed to mention it. The main blame lies with me.

古文：申下州郡，有骸骨暴露者，悉可埋瘗。 
现代文：申告受旱各州郡，如有尸骨暴露于野的，都加以掩埋。 
English: Declare drought-stricken states and counties, if there are bones exposed to the field, are buried.

古文：三月，鲁阳蛮反。
现代文：三月，鲁阳的蛮人反叛朝廷。
English: In March, the barbarians of Luyang rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：萧宝卷弟建安王宝夤来降。
现代文：南齐皇帝萧宝卷之弟建安王萧宝夤来降。
English: Xiao Baozhong, the younger brother of Emperor Xiao Baozhong of Nanqi, and King Xiao Baozhong of Jian'an, came and abdicated.

古文：夏四月，诏抚军将军李崇讨鲁阳反蛮。
现代文：夏四月，世宗命抚军将军李崇征讨鲁阳反蛮。
English: In the summer of April, Shizong ordered General Li Chong of the Fuzhou army to invade Luyang.

古文：是月，萧衍又废其主宝融而僭立，自称曰梁。
现代文：这个月，萧衍又废除了其君主萧宝融，自己僭登皇位，自称梁。
English: This month, Xiao Yan abolished his monarch Xiao Baorong and ascended the throne himself, calling himself Liang.

古文：闰月丁巳，司空穆亮薨。
现代文：闰月三十日，司空穆亮逝世。
English: On the 30th day of the leap month, Siku Mu Liang passed away.

古文：五月，扬州小岘戍主党法宗袭萧衍大岘戍，破之，擒其龙骧将军邾菩萨，送之京师。
现代文：五月，扬州小岘军事长官党法宗袭击萧衍大岘戍关，攻克，擒获其龙骧将军邾菩萨，送到京城。
English: In May, Yangzhou Xiaojuan's military commander, the Party's Fa Zong, attacked Xiao Yan's Dazhongguan, conquered it, captured its Longjing general Zou Bodhisattva, and sent him to Beijing.

古文：秋七月癸酉，于阗国遣使朝献。
现代文：秋季七月十八日，于阗国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month in autumn, Yunnan sent an envoy to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：诏加文官从征显达宿卫者二阶，闲散者一阶。
现代文：世宗下诏，文官跟随征讨显达充任宿卫的升二级官阶。
English: Sejong issued an edict, and the civil officials followed suit in recruiting Xanda to serve as the second-ranking official.

古文：八月癸卯，萧宝融镇南大将军、江州刺史陈伯之遣使请降。
现代文：八月十八日，萧宝融政权的镇南大将军、江州刺史陈伯之派使前来请求投降。
English: On August 18th, the envoys of Zhenan Grand General of Xiao Baorong's regime and Chen Bo, the governor of Jiangsu Province, came to request surrender.

古文：乙卯，以前太傅、平阳公丕为三老。
现代文：三十日，尊称前太傅、平阳公元丕为三老。
English: On the 30th, the former Taifu and the former Pingyang were honored as the Three Elders.

古文：九月丁巳，车驾行幸鄴。
现代文：九月初二，皇帝车驾行幸邺城。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the emperor drove to the city of Xingyuan.

古文：丁卯，诏使者吊殷比干墓。
现代文：十二日，下诏派使者祭吊殷朝比干墓。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor sent an envoy to the tomb of Yin Dynasty Bi Gan.

古文：戊寅，阅武于鄴南。
现代文：二十三日，在邺城南检阅武备。
English: On the 23rd, a military parade was held in the south of Lucheng.

古文：庚辰，武兴国世子杨绍先遣使朝献。
现代文：二十五日，武兴国世子杨绍先派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 25th, Yang Shao, the heir to the throne of Wuxing, sent an envoy to present it to the emperor.

古文：冬十月庚子，帝亲射，远及一里五十步，群臣勒铭于射所。
现代文：冬季十月十六日，皇帝亲自御射演习，箭射到一里五十步的地方，众大臣在射箭的地方刻碑铭记。
English: On the 16th day of October in winter, the emperor himself held an archery drill. At the place where the arrows were shot to one mile and fifty paces, the ministers engraved a monument in memory of the place where the archery took place.

古文：甲辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十日，世宗车驾回宫。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：十有一月己卯，诏： 京洛兵芜，岁逾十纪。
现代文：十一月二十五日，世宗下诏书说： 京城洛阳一带，兵荒马乱，已有十年。
English: On November 25th, Shizong issued an imperial edict saying: In the vicinity of the capital Luoyang, there has been a war and horse turmoil for ten years.

古文：先皇定鼎旧都，惟新魏历，翦扫榛荒，创兹云构，鸿功茂绩，规模长远。
现代文：先皇在旧都奠定国基，开创大业，扫除荒旧，创下宏构，鸿功茂绩，规模长远。
English: The first emperor laid the foundation of the country in the old capital, created a great cause, swept away the old and barren, created a grand structure, made great achievements, and had a long-term scale.

古文：今庙社乃建，宫极斯崇，便当以来月中旬，蠲吉徙御。
现代文：今天庙社已建，宫极崇伟，应当在下个月中旬，移驾祝吉。
English: Today, the temple has been built, the palace is very magnificent, it should be moved in the middle of next month, good luck.

古文：仰寻遗意，感庆交衷。
现代文：仰寻遗意，感庆交加。
English: Looking back on the legacy, mixed feelings.

古文：既礼盛周宣《斯干》之制，事高汉祖壮丽之仪，可依典故，备兹考告，以称遐迩人臣之望。 
现代文：既然礼度比周宣王时代斯干之制还要隆盛，汉高祖壮丽的仪制还要完备，便可依照典故旧例，备此考告，以满足远近人臣的愿望。 
English: Since the etiquette is more prosperous than that of the Sukang system in the time of King Zhou Xuan, and the magnificent ceremonial system of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty is more complete, it can be prepared according to the old tradition to meet the wishes of people near and far.

古文：十有二月戊子，诏曰： 民本农桑，国重蚕籍，粢盛所凭，冕织攸寄。
现代文：十二月初四，世宗下诏书说： 农桑为农民之本，蚕事乃国家之重，储积丰厚，才能不怕寒暑。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, King Sejong issued an edict saying: "The agricultural mulberry is the heritage of the farmers, the silkworm business is the weight of the country, the reserves are abundant, and the ability to not be afraid of cold and heat.

古文：比京邑初基，耕桑暂缺，遗规往旨，宜必祗修。
现代文：最近以来，京城开始建设，耕种蚕桑暂时短缺，追寻以往，必须倡导。
English: Recently, the construction of the capital city has begun, and there is a temporary shortage of cultivated silkworms and mulberries. In order to pursue the past, we must advocate.

古文：今寝殿显成，移御维始，春郊无远，拂羽有辰。
现代文：而今寝殿已成，移御初始，春郊不远，耕种有辰。
English: But now the sleeping hall has been completed, the relocation has begun, the spring suburbs are not far away, and there is time for farming.

古文：便可表营千亩，开设宫坛，秉耒援筐，躬劝亿兆。 
现代文：可以立即着手营造千亩耕地，开设宫坛，朕要亲自握耒援筐，劝民耕种。 
English: We can immediately begin to create a thousand mu of arable land and open a palace altar. I want to personally hold a basket and encourage people to cultivate.

古文：壬寅，飨群臣于太极前殿，赐布帛有差，以初成也。
现代文：十八日，在太极前殿宴请群臣，各赐布帛不等，因宫殿初成的缘故。
English: On the eighteenth day, a banquet was held for the courtiers in the hall in front of the Taiji, and they were all given cloth bags, because the palace was still in its infancy.

古文：甲辰，扬州破萧衍将张嚣之，斩级二千。
现代文：二十日，扬州军打败萧衍的将领张嚣之，杀了两千人。
English: On the 20th, the Yangzhou Army defeated Xiao Yan's generals and killed two thousand people.

古文：是岁，疏勒、罽宾、婆罗捺、乌苌、阿喻陀、罗婆、不仑、陀拔罗、弗波女提、斯罗、哒舍、伏耆奚那太、罗般、乌稽、悉万斤、朱居般、诃盘陀、拨斤、厌味、朱沴洛、南天竺、持沙那斯头诸国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，疏勒、宾、婆罗捺、乌苌、阿喻、罗婆、不岑、拔罗、弗波女提、斯罗、哒舍、优耆奚那太、罗、乌稽、悉万斤、朱居、诃盘、拔斤、厌口末、朱洛、南天竺、持沙那斯头等国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: In that year, the following countries sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court: Sule, Bin, Borobudur, Ulu, Ami, Raba, Bura, Bharat, Bhubaneswar, Surat, Uxmal, Ujjnath, Rao, Uki, Sivankin, Jui, Upan, Urakin, Ujjnath, Julo, Nantianlu, and Chisarnas.

古文：河州大饥，死者二千余口。
现代文：河州发生大饥荒，死的人有二千多。
English: A great famine occurred in Hezhou, in which more than two thousand people died.

古文：四年春正月乙亥，车驾籍田于千亩。
现代文：景明四年春季正月二十二日，世宗在皇田中举行耕种仪式。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of King Jingming, Sejong held a cultivation ceremony in the middle of the imperial field.

古文：梁州氐杨会反。
现代文：梁州氐族人杨会造反。
English: Yang Hui rebels in Liangzhou.

古文：诏行梁州事杨椿、左将军羊祉讨之。
现代文：魏世宗命行梁州事杨椿、左将军羊祉前去讨伐。
English: Wei Shizong gave the order to Yang Tsun, the left general, to go to the front to fight.

古文：三月己巳，皇后先蚕于北郊。
现代文：三月十七日，皇后在北郊亲临蚕桑仪式。
English: On March 17th, the Empress attended the silkworm and mulberry ceremony in the northern suburbs.

古文：庚辰，扬州破萧衍将于阴山，斩其龙骧将军吴道爽等数千级。
现代文：二十八日，扬州军队在阴山打败萧衍的军队，斩杀了他的龙骧将军吴道爽等数千人。
English: On the 28th, the Yangzhou army defeated Xiao Yan's army in Yinshan, and killed thousands of his Longjing general Wu Daoshuang.

古文：夏四月癸未朔，以萧宝夤为镇东将军、东扬州刺史，封丹阳郡开国公、齐王。
现代文：夏季四月初一，朝廷授萧宝夤为镇东将军、东扬州刺史，封为丹阳郡开国公、齐王。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, the imperial court awarded Xiao Baojun the title of Zhendong General, Dongyang State Historian, and the title of Danyang County Founding Prince and Qi King.

古文：庚寅，南天竺国献辟支佛牙。
现代文：初八，南天竺国敬献辟支佛牙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Southern Celestial Empire made a donation of Buddha's tooth.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 酷吏为祸，绵古同患；孝妇淫刑，东海焦壤。
现代文：十六日，世宗下诏书说： 酷吏为祸，绵古同患；孝妇淫刑，东海为之焦壤。
English: On the 16th, King Sejong issued an edict saying: "Cruel officials are a scourge that has plagued mankind since time immemorial; filial perversion is the scourge of the East Sea.

古文：今不雨十旬，意者其有冤狱乎？
现代文：现在已连续一百天没有下雨了，是不是有冤狱沉埋？
English: It hasn't rained for a hundred days in a row now. Are there any unjust prisons buried?

古文：尚书鞫京师见囚，务尽听察之理。 
现代文：尚书推检京师被囚的犯人，一定要竭尽听讼察断的责任。 
English: Prisoners who are detained by the procuratorate of the Beijing Municipal People's Procuratorate must do their best to fulfill the responsibility of hearing and judging.

古文：己亥，帝以旱减膳彻悬。
现代文：十七日，世宗因旱灾减少饮食睡眠。
English: On the 17th, Sejong reduced food and sleep because of the drought.

古文：辛丑，澍雨大洽。
现代文：十九日，暴雨猛降。
English: On the 19th, torrential rain fell.

古文：五月甲戌，杨椿、羊祉大破反氐，斩首数千级。
现代文：五月二十三日，杨椿、羊祉大破反叛的氐人，杀了千余人。
English: On May 23rd, Yang Tsubaki and Yang Zhibi defeated the rebellious Xiang people and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：六月壬午朔，封皇弟悦为汝南王。
现代文：六月初一，加封皇弟元悦为汝南王。
English: On the first day of June, Yuan Rong's younger brother Yuan Rong ascended to the throne.

古文：丙戌，发冀、定、瀛、相、并、济六州二万人、马千匹，增配寿春。
现代文：初五，调拨冀、定、瀛、相、并、济六州二万人、马千匹，增配给寿春。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, 20,000 people and 1,000 horses from six prefectures of Ji, Ding, Handan, Xiang and Jie were allocated to Shuchun.

古文：秋七月乙卯，三老、平阳公丕薨。
现代文：秋季七月初五，三老、平阳公元丕逝世。
English: In the autumn, on the fifth day of the seventh month, the Three Elders of Pingyang died.

古文：庚午，诏还收盐池利以入公。
现代文：二十日，朝廷下诏收还盐池利税交归国库。
English: On the 20th, the Imperial Court issued an edict to recover the salt pond tax and return it to the national treasury.

古文：辛未，以彭城王勰为太师。
现代文：二十一日，以彭城王元勰为太师。
English: On the 21st, Wang Yuanlu of Pengcheng was appointed Grand Master.

古文：八月庚子，以吏部尚书元英假镇南将军，攻萧衍义阳。
现代文：八月二十日，任命吏部尚书元英为假镇南将军，进攻萧衍的义阳郡。
English: On August 20th, Shangshu Yuanying of the cadre department was appointed as the general of Fuzhen South to attack Xiao Yan's Yiyang County.

古文：勿吉国贡楛矢。
现代文：勿吉国贡奉眓矢。
English: Tribute from the Kingdom of Besshi for the arrow.

古文：辛丑，行幸河南城离宫。
现代文：二十一日，世宗行幸至河南城行宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, Shizong Xingyong arrived at the Henan Chengxing Palace.

古文：冬十有一月壬子，扬州大破萧衍军，斩其徐州刺史潘佃怜，擒司马明素。
现代文：冬季十一月初三，扬州大破萧衍的军队，杀了他的徐州刺史潘佃怜，擒获了司马明素。
English: On the third day of November in winter, the army of Yangzhou defeated the army of Xiao Yan, killed his Xuzhou thorn, and captured Sima Mingsu.

古文：己未，以武兴国世子杨绍先为其国王。
现代文：十一日，以武兴国世子杨绍先为其国王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yang Shao, the heir of Wuxing, ascended to the throne.

古文：癸亥，诏尚书左仆射源怀抚劳代都、北镇，随方拯恤。
现代文：十五日，世宗下诏让尚书左仆射源怀抚慰劳问代都、北方各镇郡，随时拯恤。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, King Sejong issued an edict instructing Shangshu's left-hand man, Shayuan Huaifu, to visit the capital and all the towns and counties in the north, and to rescue them at any time.

古文：乙亥，镇南将军元英大破萧衍将吴子阳于白沙，擒斩千数。
现代文：二十七日，镇南将军元英在白沙大破萧衍将吴子阳，擒斩数千敌人。
English: On the 27th, Zhenan general Yuan Ying defeated Xiaoyan general Wu Ziyang in Baisha and killed thousands of enemies.

古文：十有二月庚寅，诏镇南将军李崇讨东荆反蛮。
现代文：十二月十三日，世宗下诏命镇南将军李崇讨伐东荆州反叛的蛮族人。
English: On December 13th, Shizong issued an edict ordering Zhenan General Li Chong to attack the rebel barbarians in East Jingzhou.

古文：丙申，诏曰： 先朝制立轨式，庶事惟允。
现代文：十九日，世宗下诏书说： 先朝制定制度，诸事应时公允。
English: On the 19th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "The previous government established the system, and everything should be fair.

古文：但岁积人移，物情乖惰。
现代文：但是时间推移，人事变迁，物情变异乖惰。
English: However, the passage of time, changes in personnel, and changes in the situation have been stubborn.

古文：比或擅有增损，废坠不行；或守旧遗宜，时有舛妨；或职分错乱，互相推委。
现代文：近一时期以来，或者动辄有所增损，废堕不行；或者有旧时合适，但现今不合的；或者是职责名分错乱，各官互相推诿的。
English: Since the recent period, there have been frequent additions and subtractions, and it is not acceptable to abolish or degrade; or there are things that were appropriate in the old days, but are not appropriate now; or the names of responsibilities are out of order, and officials are pushing each other around.

古文：其下百司，列其疑阙，速以奏闻。 
现代文：各政府部门，列举其有遗漏、缺损的条文，迅速上奏。 
English: All government departments should list the articles that have omissions or defects and promptly submit them.

古文：癸卯，萧衍梁州刺史平阳县开国侯翟远、徐州刺史永昌县开国侯陈虎牙降。
现代文：二十六日，萧衍的梁州刺史平阳县开国侯翟远、徐州刺史永昌县开国侯陈虎牙投降朝廷。
English: On the 26th, Xiao Yan's Liangzhou cadet Shi Pingyang County cadet Gaoyuan, and Xuzhou cadet Shi Yongchang County cadet Chen Huya surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：正始元年春正月庚戌，江州刺史曲江公陈伯之破萧衍将赵祖悦于东关。
现代文：正始元年正月初三，江州刺史曲江公陈伯之在东关打败萧衍将领赵祖悦。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year, on the third day of the first month, Chen Bozhi, the prince of Qujiang, defeated Zhao Zuyue, the general of Xiao Yan, in Dongguan.

古文：丙辰，东荆州刺史杨大眼大破群蛮樊季安等。
现代文：初九，东荆州刺史杨大眼大破群蛮樊季安等。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the East Jingzhou Zhishi Yang Dajian broke the group of barbarians, and the third quarter was safe.

古文：丙寅，大赦，改年。
现代文：十九日，朝廷大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 19th, the imperial court amnestied the whole country and changed the year.

古文：二月戊子，萧衍将姜庆真袭陷寿春外郭，州军击走之。
现代文：二月十一日，萧衍将领姜庆真偷袭寿春外城，州军打退了他们。
English: On February 11, Xiao Yan's general Jiang Qingzhen made a sneak attack on Shouchun's outer city, and the state army repulsed them.

古文：丁酉，扬州统军刘思祖大破衍众于邵阳，擒其冠军将军、邵阳县开国侯张惠绍，骁骑将军、祁阳县开国男赵景悦等十将，斩获数千级。
现代文：二十日，扬州统军刘思祖在邵阳大破萧衍部众，擒获了他的冠军将军、邵阳县开国侯张惠绍，骁骑将军、祁阳县开国男赵景悦等十余名将领，斩首捕获数千名敌人。
English: On the 20th, Liu Sizu of the Yangzhou United Army defeated Xiao Yan's troops in Shaoyang and captured his champion general, Zhang Huishao, the founding lord of Shaoyang County, Zhao Jingyue, the founding son of Shenyang County, and more than ten other generals, beheading and capturing thousands of enemies.

古文：三月壬申，元英破衍将王僧炳于樊城。
现代文：三月初一，元英在樊城打败萧衍将领王僧炳的部队。
English: On the first day of March, Yuan Ying defeated the troops of Xiao Yan's general Wang Xiangyao in Handan.

古文：夏四月辛卯，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：夏季四月十五日，高丽国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month in summer, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月丁未朔，太傅、北海王详以罪废为庶人。
现代文：五月初一，太傅、北海王元祥因为犯了罪被废黜为庶人。
English: On the first day of May, Taifu and Beihai Wang Yuanxiang were dethroned as commoners for committing a crime.

古文：六月，以旱彻乐减膳。
现代文：六月，因为境内干旱撤除音乐，减少进食。
English: In June, because of the drought in the territory, the music was removed and eating was reduced.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 朕以匪德，政刑多舛，阳旱历旬，京甸枯瘁，在予之责，夙宵疚怀。
现代文：十八日，世宗下诏书说： 朕因为德行薄浅，政制刑治多出舛误，以致干旱累旬，京畿禾苗干枯，这都是朕的过失，为此朕日夜不安。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "I have made many mistakes due to my lack of virtue and the government's system of punishment. As a result, the drought has lasted for a long time, and the seedlings in Gyeonggi Province have withered. These are all my mistakes, and I am worried day and night.

古文：有司可循案旧典，祗行六事：囹圄冤滞，平处决之；庶尹废职，量加修举；鳏寡困穷，在所存恤；役赋殷烦，咸加蠲省；贤良谠直，以礼进之；贪残佞谀，时加屏黜；男女怨旷，务令媾会。
现代文：有关部门可查按旧典，行使六事：狱讼冤案，秉公而断；众长官玩忽职守，量情处置；鳏寡困穷的人，抚恤赈济；繁杂的赋役，都加以减免；贤良正直的人，都要依礼加以提拔，贪赃枉法，谄谀谗媚的人，及时加以摈退黜除；怨女旷男，一定要让他们结婚生子。
English: The relevant departments can investigate and exercise six things according to the old code: the unjust case of prison litigation should be adjudicated in a fair manner; the superiors should neglect their duties and dispose of the situation in a reasonable manner; the widows and the poor should be subsidized; the complicated labor service should be reduced and exempted; the virtuous and the honest should be promoted according to the etiquette; the corrupt and the charming should be expelled and eliminated in a timely manner; the malevolent women should be married and have children.

古文：称朕意焉。 
现代文：这样的话，朕就高兴了。 
English: If that happens, I'll be happy.

古文：甲午，帝以旱亲荐享于太庙。
现代文：十九日，世宗因发生大旱在太庙亲自主持祭祀。
English: On the 19th, Sejong held a self-sacrifice in the temple due to the drought.

古文：戊戌，诏立周旦、夷、齐庙于首阳山。庚子，以旱见公卿已下，引咎责躬。
现代文：二十三日，下诏在首阳山上建立周公旦、伯夷叔齐的庙。二十五日，因旱见公卿以下官员，引咎自责。
English: On the 23rd, an edict was issued to build a temple for Zhou Gongdan and Bai Xiuqi on Shouyang Mountain. On the 25th, officials from the nobility down blamed themselves for the drought.

古文：又录京师见囚，殊死已下皆减一等，鞭杖之坐悉皆原之。
现代文：又审查京城中被困禁的犯人，除了死罪以外其他一律减罪一等，应服鞭刑杖刑的一律免除。
English: It was also examined that the prisoners who were imprisoned in Beijing, in addition to the death penalty, all other crimes were reduced to the first degree, and they were all exempted from the punishment of whipping and caning.

古文：秋七月癸丑，萧衍角城戍主柴庆宗以城来降。
现代文：秋季七月初八，萧衍政权的角城守军长官柴庆宗举城前来归降。
English: In the autumn, on the eighth day of the seventh month of the year, Zhai Qingzong, the chief of the defense force of the Cape Town of the Xiao Yan regime, came to the city to surrender.

古文：李崇大破诸蛮帅樊素安。
现代文：李崇大败众蛮人帅官樊素安。
English: Li Chong defeated all the barbarians, and the handsome official, Yu Suan, took the lead.

古文：八月丙子，元英破萧衍将马仙琕于义阳。
现代文：八月初二，元英在义阳大败萧衍的将领马仙鴘。
English: On the second day of August, Yuan Ying defeated the general Ma Xianqi in Yiyang.

古文：诏洛阳令有大事听面敷奏。
现代文：世宗下诏让洛阳令如有大事可面奏皇帝。
English: Emperor Shizong decreed that Luoyang should be allowed to play host to the emperor in the event of a major event.

古文：乙酉，元英攻义阳，拔之，擒送萧衍冠军将军蔡灵恩等十余将。
现代文：十一日，元英攻打义阳，攻陷城池，擒获冠军将军蔡灵恩等十多名梁军将领。
English: On the 11th day, Yuan Ying attacked Yiyang, captured the city, and captured more than ten generals of Liang's army, including the champion general Cai Ling'en.

古文：辛卯，英又大破衍将，仍清三关。
现代文：十七日，元英大破萧衍将领的部队，安定了三关。
English: On the 17th, Yuan Ying defeated General Xiao Yan's troops and stabilized the Three Passes.

古文：丁酉，封元英为中山王。
现代文：二十五日，世宗封元英为中山王。
English: On the 25th, Shizong Fong Yuanying became the King of Zhongshan.

古文：戊戌，西羌宋万率户四千内附。
现代文：二十六日，西羌人宗万率领四千户羌人归附朝廷。
English: On the 26th, the West Han people, So Man, led 4,000 households of Han people to join the imperial court.

古文：九月丙午，诏缘淮南北所在镇戍，皆令及秋播麦，春种粟稻，随其土宜，水陆兼用，必使地无遗利，兵无余力，比及来稔，令公私俱济也。
现代文：九月初五，世宗下诏沿淮河南北所有各镇戍，都让其秋季播麦，春季种粟和稻，随其土质所宜，水陆兼用，一定要使地无遗利，兵尽其用，等到谷麦丰登，公私利益都可兼顾。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Shizong issued an edict to all towns along the north and south of the Huai River to sow wheat in the autumn, and to plant corn and rice in the spring. According to the soil quality, both land and water should be used, and the land should not be wasted, and the army should be used as much as possible. When the valley is rich in wheat, both public and private interests can be taken into account.

古文：又诏诸州蠲停徭役，不得横有征发。
现代文：又下诏让各州一律停止徭役，不得横征暴敛。
English: He also issued an edict to all states to stop forced labor and not to arbitrarily collect taxes.

古文：甲子，诏中山王英所执萧衍冠军将军、监司州事蔡灵恩等随才擢叙。
现代文：二十日，世宗下诏对中山王元英所俘萧衍的冠军将军、监司州事蔡灵恩等人按其才能选拔任用。
English: On the 20th, King Sejong issued an edict to select and appoint the champion general Xiao Yan who was captured by King Yuanying of Zhongshan, the supervisor of the state affairs Cai Ling'en and others according to their talents.

古文：乙丑，肃衍霍州刺史田道龙、义州刺史张宗之遣使内附。
现代文：二十一日，萧衍政权霍州刺史田道龙、义州刺史张宗之派使者前来请求内附。
English: On the twenty-first day, envoys sent by the Xiao Yan regime to Huzhou and Yizhou sent envoys to Shidao Long and Yizhou and Zhang Zong respectively to request the enclosure.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞，诏左仆射源怀讨之。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边疆，世宗下诏让左仆射源怀前去征讨。
English: When the Cree invaded the frontier, Shizong issued an edict to have his left-hand man, Shiyuan Huai, go to the front to fight.

古文：冬十月乙未，诏断群官白衣募吏。
现代文：冬季十月二十日，下诏不准群官在百姓中招募衙吏。
English: In the winter, on October 20th, it was decreed that officials were not allowed to recruit eunuchs from among the people.

古文：十有一月戊午，诏曰： 古之哲王，创业垂统，安民立化，莫不崇建胶序，开训国胄，昭宣《三礼》，崇明四术，使道暢群邦，风流万宇。
现代文：十一月十五日，世宗下诏书说： 古代贤哲的君王，创立帝业，垂泽皇统，安抚百姓，建立教化，无不崇建成式，开训国亲，昭宣《三礼》，弘扬四术，以使道畅群邦，风教流播海内。
English: On November 15th, King Sejong issued an edict saying: "The ancient wise and sagacious kings, founded the empire, established the imperial system, pacified the people, established enlightenment, revered the completed form, began to train the relatives of the country, promulgated the "Three Rites," and promoted the four arts, so as to make the nation prosperous, and spread the teachings to the sea.

古文：自皇基徙构，光宅中区，军国务殷，未遑经建。靖言思之，有惭古烈。
现代文：自从大魏皇都移徙中原，军国事务纷繁，新都没有来得及经营建设，朕静心思此，愧对列祖列宗。
English: Since the imperial capital of the Great Wei Dynasty migrated to the Central Plains, the military affairs of the country have been complicated, and the new generation has not had time to manage and build. I meditate on this and feel sorry for the ancestors.

古文：可敕有司依汉魏旧章，营缮国学。 
现代文：可命有关部门依照汉、魏旧章，营造国学。 
English: Relevant departments may be ordered to build up the study of Chinese classics in accordance with the old chapters of Han and Wei.

古文：十有二月丙子，以苑牧公田分赐代迁之户。
现代文：十二月初四，把皇家苑囿的公田分别赐给代都迁来的民户。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month, the public land of the imperial garden was given separately to the private households who had moved to the capital.

古文：己卯，诏群臣议定律令。
现代文：初七，世宗下诏让群臣议定律令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, King Sejong issued an edict to have the ministers agree on the ritsuryo.

古文：己亥，行幸伊阙。
现代文：二十七日，世宗行幸伊阙。
English: On the 27th, Sejong left for Ili.

古文：闰月癸卯朔，萧衍行梁州事夏侯道迁据汉中来降，假尚书邢峦镇西将军，率众以赴之。
现代文：闰十二月初一，萧衍政权行梁州事夏侯道迁以汉中郡归降朝廷，假尚书令邢峦为镇西将军，率部前去接应。
English: On the first day of the second month of the 12th month, Xia Yan's regime carried out the Liangzhou Incident, Xia Hou Dao moved to Hanzhong County to surrender to the imperial court, and pretended to be the general of Zhenxi, and led the department to respond.

古文：乙丑，骠骑大将军、高阳王雍为司空，尚书令、广阳王嘉加仪同三司。
现代文：二十三日，骠骑大将军、高阳王元雍任司空，尚书令、广阳王元嘉加授仪同三司。
English: On the 23rd, the general of the cavalry, Gaoyang Wangyuan Yong, was appointed as the secretary of the sky, Shang Shuling, and Guangyang Wangyuan Jiaga were awarded the ceremony with the three departments.

古文：二年春正月丙子，以宕昌国世子梁弥博为其国王。
现代文：正始二年正月十三日，命宕昌国世子梁弥博为其国王。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Zheng He, Liang Mibo, the heir of Chang Guo, became the king.

古文：邓至国遣使朝贡。
现代文：邓至国派使者前来朝贡。
English: Deng Zhi Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月，梁州氐反，绝汉中运路。
现代文：二月，梁州氐族人造反，截断汉中运输路线。
English: In February, the Liangzhou Yi people rebelled and cut off the Han-Chinese transportation route.

古文：刺史邢峦频大破之。
现代文：刺史邢峦频频大败敌人。
English: Zushi Zou frequently defeated the enemy.

古文：夏四月己未，城阳王鸾薨。
现代文：夏季四月十九日，城阳王元鸾逝世。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month in summer, King Yuanxuan of Chengyang passed away.

古文：乙丑，诏曰： 任贤明治，自昔通规；宣风赞务，实惟多士。
现代文：二十五日，世宗下诏书说： 任贤明治，自古以来皆为通行规则，宣明风教，赞辅政务，实在是需要很多的人才。
English: On the 25th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "From ancient times to the Meiji era, it has been the general rule to appoint sages, preach morality, and support government affairs. It really requires a lot of talent.

古文：而中正所铨，但存门第，吏部彝伦，仍不才举。
现代文：但现在中正所录，只看门第，吏部选用官吏，仍然是不以才举士。
English: But now, according to the record of the CPC Central Committee, it is still the case that officials are selected by the cadre department without regard to ability.

古文：遂使英德罕升，司务多滞。
现代文：于是使英杰少有升迁，衙司事务多有滞缓。
English: As a result, Yingjie rarely got promoted, and the affairs of the department were mostly slow.

古文：不精厥选，将何考陟？
现代文：不精士人之选，那以什么来考核提拔官员？
English: If it is not the selection of the best person, then what is the basis for assessing the promotion of officials?

古文：八座可审议往代贡士之方，擢贤之体，必令才学并申，资望兼致。 
现代文：各官可审议往代贡举士人的办法，擢拔贤才的体制，一定要做到被选的人才学并佳，资望都好。 
English: All officials can consider the method of giving tribute to the past, the system of promoting talents, and must ensure that the selected talents are equally good at learning and have good reputation.

古文：丙寅，以仇池氐叛，诏光禄大夫杨椿假平西将军，率众以讨之。
现代文：二十六日，因为仇池氐族人反叛，世宗下诏让光禄大夫杨椿为假平西将军，率部前去征讨。
English: On the 26th, because of the rebellion of the Quchi Yi people, King Sejong issued an edict to make Guanglu doctor Yang Tsubaki a fake Pingxi general, and he led his troops to go and fight.

古文：邢峦遣统军王足西伐，频破萧衍诸军，遂入剑阁，执衍辅国将军范始男送京师。
现代文：邢峦派统军王足西征，频频打败萧衍的部队，于是进入剑阁，俘获萧衍的辅国将军范始男送往京城。
English: Gong sent the unified army Wangfujing to the West, frequently defeated Xiao Yan's troops, and then entered Jiange, captured Xiao Yan's auxiliary general Fan Shixiong and sent him to Beijing.

古文：五月辛巳，氐贼囗虎率众降。
现代文：五月初十，氐族人□虎率部前来投降。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, a group of Yi people led by a tiger came to surrender.

古文：六月己丑，诏曰： 先朝勋臣，或身罹谴黜，子孙沉滞；或宦途失次，有替旧流。因而弗采，何以奖劝？
现代文：六月初二，世宗下诏书说： 先朝有功之臣，或者是身遭责谴黜免，他们的子孙沉沦潦倒；或者是宦途失却次序，新旧颠倒，因而不被重用，这样怎么去奖励臣民？
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month, Emperor Shijong issued an edict saying: The meritorious vassals of the previous dynasty were either punished or pardoned, and their descendants were ruined; or they lost their way and lost their order, and the old and new were reversed, so they were not reused, so how to reward the subjects?

古文：言念前绩，情有亲疏。
现代文：思念前绩，情有亲疏。
English: They miss their previous achievements and have a kinship.

古文：宗及庶族，祖曾功绩可纪而无朝官、有官而才堪优引者随才铨授。 
现代文：从宗亲到庶族，如祖上曾经立下功绩录记在簿，却没有官职，有官而才堪优先提拔的，按其才能授给他们官职。 
English: From the ancestral relatives to the commoners, if the ancestors have recorded their achievements in the record book, but there is no official position, if there is an official position and they are eligible for preferential promotion, they will be given an official position according to their ability.

古文：甲寅，萧衍冠军将军李畋等置营始平郡东、涪水之北。
现代文：十五日，萧衍政权的冠军将军李畋等在始平郡东面、涪水北面扎营。
English: On the 15th, the champion of Xiao Yan's regime, General Li Jie, and others set up camp in the east of Shiping County and the north of Surabaya.

古文：王足逆击败之，斩衍冠军将军张汤，辅国将军马市，宁朔将军李当、姜见祖，辅国将军冯文豪，龙骧将军何营之等。
现代文：王足迎战并打败了他们，杀了冠军将军张汤、辅国将军马市、宁朔将军李当、姜见祖、辅国将军冯文豪、龙骧将军何营之等人。
English: Wang Fei fought and defeated them, killing champion general Zhang Tang, auxiliary general Ma Shi, Ningshuo generals Li Dang, Jiang Jizhu, auxiliary general Feng Wenhao, Longyu general He Ying and others.

古文：甲子，诏尚书李崇、太府卿于忠、散骑常侍游肇、谏议大夫邓羡，崇、忠使持节并兼侍中，羡兼黄门，俱为大使，纠断外州畿内，其守令之徒咎失彰露者，即便施决；州镇重职，听为表闻。
现代文：二十五日，世宗诏尚书李崇、太府卿于忠、散骑常侍游肇、谏议大夫邓羡，李崇、于忠为使持节并兼任侍中，邓羡兼任黄门郎，一起为大使，纠察决断外部各州及京郊的行政长官的过失罪责，当即决断，如果州镇的要员犯罪，上报朝廷。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor's edict was issued, and Li Chong, the grand vizier Yu Zhong, and the knights-errant Zhao and Deng Qian, the councilors, Li Chong and Yu Zhong as envoys and also as chamberlains, and Deng Qian as Huang Men Lang, together as ambassadors, picketed and decided the culpability of the chief administrators of the outer provinces and the suburbs of Beijing, and immediately decided that if the dignitaries of the provincial towns committed crimes, they would be reported to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，萧衍冠军将军王景胤、辅国将军鲁方达等攻竹亭，王足大破之，斩其辅国将军王明达、龙骧将军张方炽。
现代文：二十六日，萧衍的冠军将军王景胤、辅国将军鲁方达等攻打竹亭，王足大败来敌，杀了其辅国将军王明达、龙骧将军张方炽。
English: On the 26th, Xiao Yan's champion general Wang Jingyin and auxiliary general Lu Fangda attacked Bamboo Pavilion. Wang Jie was defeated by the enemy and killed his auxiliary generals Wang Mingda and Longyu general Zhang Fangglang.

古文：丁卯，扬州刺史薛真度大破萧衍将王超宗，俘斩三千级。
现代文：二十八日，扬州刺史薛真度大败萧衍将王超宗，俘获斩杀敌人三千多人。
English: On the 28th, Yangzhou assassin Xue Zhendu defeated Xiaoyan general Wang Chaozong, capturing and killing more than 3,000 enemies.

古文：戊辰，萧衍将鲁方达屯戍新城，足又遣统军卢祖迁等击败之，斩衍冠军将军杨伯仁、宁朔将军任安定。
现代文：二十九日，萧衍将领鲁方达屯军新城，王足又派统军卢祖迁等人打败了他们，斩杀萧衍冠军将军杨伯仁、宁朔将军任安定。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Yan's general Lu Fang led the Dattun army to Xincheng, and Wang Fut also sent the unified army Lu Zuqian and others to defeat them, killing Xiao Yan's champion general Yang Boren and Ningshuo general Ren Ding'an.

古文：秋七月甲戌，诏曰： 朕纂驭宝历，于今七载。德泽未敷，鉴不烛远；人之冤瘼，所在犹滋；而纠察之狱未暢于下，贤愚靡分，皁白均贯，非所以革民耳目，使善恶励心。
现代文：秋季七月初五，世宗下诏书说： 朕继承皇位，至今已经七年，可朕德泽未施于民，不能高瞻远瞩，人们的冤滞之情，尚且很多，而纠察之狱未畅于下，贤愚不分，皂白不清，这不是革民耳目、劝善惩恶而应有的现象。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "I have succeeded to the throne, and it has been seven years since then. However, I have not shown any virtue to the people, and I have not been able to look ahead. There are still a lot of unjust feelings among the people, and the picket prison has not been smoothed down. There is no distinction between the wise and the foolish, and it is not clear. This is not a phenomenon that should be seen by the revolutionary people, and it is not a phenomenon that should be seen by the people, and it is not a phenomenon that should be seen by the people.

古文：今分遣大使，省方巡检，随其愆负与风响相符者，即加纠黜，以明雷霆之威，以申旄轩之举。
现代文：现在朕分派大使，巡察四方，那些罪行与风传相符合的，即加以纠查判理，以申明皇朝雷霆之威，以申举正义之旗。
English: Now I am dispatching ambassadors to inspect the four directions. Those crimes that are consistent with the legend will be investigated and judged, so as to affirm the thunderous might of the imperial dynasty and raise the banner of justice.

古文：因以观风辨俗，采访功过，褒赏贤者，纠罚淫慝，理穷恤弊，以称朕心。 
现代文：另外，要观风辨俗，奖功惩过，褒扬赏赐有功贤德的人，纠罚淫恶阴险的人，救济贫困，体恤凋弊，以满足朕的心愿。 
English: In addition, it is necessary to observe and distinguish customs, reward and punish, praise and reward those who have merits and virtues, correct and punish those who are obscene and insidious, relieve poverty, and sympathize with evils, in order to meet my wishes.

古文：戊子，王足击破萧衍军，斩其龙骧将军喻增晖、宁朔将军库保寿、辅国将军鲁天惠、建武将军王文标。
现代文：十九日，王足打败萧衍的军队，杀了他的龙骧将军喻增晖、宁朔将军库保寿、辅国将军鲁天惠、建武将军王文标。
English: On the 19th, Wang Fei defeated Xiao Yan's army and killed his Longyu generals Yu Zengjun, Ningshuo general Ku Baoshou, Fu Guo general Lu Tianhui, and Jianwu general Wang Wenbiao.

古文：王足逼涪城。壬辰，萧衍巴西太守庾域，冠军将军、统军主李畋等逆战，足击破之，俘斩千数。
现代文：王足兵逼涪城，二十三日，萧衍巴西太守庾域，冠军将军、统军主将李畋等迎战，王足打败敌人，俘获斩首数千人。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Yan, the Emperor of Brazil, who was in charge of the Warring States, was confronted by the champion general and the leader of the unified army, Li Qian. Wang Fei defeated the enemy and captured thousands of people.

古文：八月壬寅，诏中山王英南讨襄、沔。
现代文：八月初四，世宗下诏让中山王元英率军南讨襄、沔各地。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, King Sejong issued an edict to let Zhongshan Wang Yuanying lead the army to the south and fight in various regions.

古文：庚戌，王足遣统军纪洪雅、卢祖迁等攻破衍军，斩其秦梁二州刺史鲁方达等十五人。
现代文：十二日，王足派统军纪洪雅、卢祖迁等攻破萧衍军队，斩杀其秦、梁二州刺史鲁方达等十五人。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Wang Yu sent the unified army of Ji Hongya, Lu Zuqian and others to defeat Xiao Yan's army, and killed 15 people including Qin Qin, Liang Erzhou and Shilufangda.

古文：壬子，王足又遣统军卢祖迁等击破衍军，斩其都督、冠军将军、梓潼县开国子王景胤，刘达等二十四将军。
现代文：十四日，王足又派统军卢祖迁等人打败萧衍军队，杀了其都督、冠军将军、梓潼县开国子王景胤，以及刘达等二十四名将军。
English: On the 14th, Wang Jie also sent Lu Zuqian and others of the United Army to defeat Xiao Yan's army, killing its governor, champion general, Wang Jingyin, the founder of Zizhi County, and Liu Da and other twenty-four generals.

古文：甲寅，扬州击衍将姜庆真于羊石，破之。
现代文：十六日，扬州军在羊石与萧衍将领姜庆真交战，将其击败。
English: On the 16th, the Yangzhou Army fought against Xiao Yan's general Jiang Qingzhen in Yangshi and defeated him.

古文：是月，衍沔东太守田青喜率郡七、县三十一、户万九十内附。
现代文：这个月，萧衍政权的沔东太守田青喜率七郡、三十一县、一万零九十户内附朝廷。
English: This month, Qingdong Governor Tian Qingxi of the Xiao Yan regime took seven counties, thirty-one counties, and ten thousand and ninety households to the imperial court.

古文：九月己巳，扬州刺史元嵩击破衍湘州刺史杨公则等，斩获数千。
现代文：九月初一，扬州刺史元嵩打败萧衍湘州刺史杨公则等人，斩杀俘获数千人。
English: On the first day of September, Yangzhou assassin Yuan Song defeated Xiao Yan, Hunan assassin Yang Gongze and others, killing and capturing thousands of people.

古文：冬十有一月戊辰朔，武兴国王杨绍先叔父集起谋反，诏光禄大夫杨椿讨之。
现代文：冬季十一月初一，武兴国王杨绍先的叔父杨集起谋反，世宗下诏命光禄大夫杨椿率军前去讨伐。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Yang Jiu, the uncle of King Yang Shaoshan of Wuxing, plotted a rebellion, and the king ordered Yang Qin, the doctor of Guanglu, to lead the army to fight.

古文：王足围涪城，益州诸郡戍降者十二三，民送编籍者五万余户。
现代文：王足围困涪城，益州各郡戍投降的十有二三，百姓接受编藉的有五万多户。
English: Wangfei besieged Lucheng. Twenty-three out of every ten counties in Yizhou surrendered. More than fifty thousand households accepted enlistment.

古文：既而足引军而退。
现代文：接着王足引军撤退。
English: Then Wang Zu led the troops in retreat.

古文：十有二月庚申，又诏骠骑大将军源怀慎，令讨武兴反氐。
现代文：十二月二十四日，世宗又下诏让骠骑大将军源怀慎讨伐武兴反叛的氐人。
English: On December 24th, Shizong also issued an edict to have the commander of the imperial cavalry, Yuan Haishen, attack the rebels in Wuxing.

古文：三年春正月丁卯朔，皇子生，大赦天下。
现代文：正始三年正月初一，皇子降生，世宗大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the third year, the prince was born, and the world was at peace.

古文：壬申，梁秦二州刺史邢峦连破氐贼，克武兴。
现代文：初六，梁、秦二州刺史邢峦接连打败氐贼，攻克武兴。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liang and Qin Erzhou Zhi Shi Jie successively defeated the bandits and conquered Wu Xing.

古文：萧衍冀州刺史桓和入寇南青州，州军击走之。
现代文：萧衍冀州刺史桓和侵犯南青州，州中军队击退了敌人。
English: Xiaoyan Jizhou attacked Shihuan and invaded South Qingzhou, and the troops in the state repulsed the enemy.

古文：秦州民王智等聚众二千，自号王公。寻推秦州主簿吕苟兒为主，年号建明。
现代文：秦州百姓王智等人聚集二千人，自称王公，不久推举秦州主簿吕苟儿为主帅，年号建明。
English: Qin people Wang Zhi and others gathered two thousand people, calling themselves Wang Gong, and soon elected Qin State Master Luguo as the head coach, and the year was Jianming.

古文：己卯，杨集起兄弟相率降。
现代文：十三日，杨集起兄弟相继投降。
English: On the 13th, Yang Jiji's brothers surrendered one after another.

古文：二月丙辰，诏曰： 昔虞戒面从，昌言屡进；周任谏辅，王阙必箴。
现代文：二月二十一日，世宗下诏书说： 过去虞皇禁止群臣无原则地服从皇帝意见，好的建议屡屡进上；周代任用劝谏之臣辅助王政，帝王大业十分昌盛。
English: On February 21, Shizong issued an imperial edict saying: In the past, Emperor Yuga forbade his courtiers from unprincipledly obeying the emperor's opinions, and good suggestions repeatedly advanced; Zhou appointed courtiers to assist the royal government, and the emperor's great cause was very prosperous.

古文：朕仰缵鸿基，伏膺宝历，思康庶绩，一日万几，是以侧望忠言，虚求谠直。
现代文：朕仰承鸿基，伏膺宝历，思兴业绩，日理万机，所以翘首盼望忠直之言。
English: I am a follower of Hongji, Fushun Baoli, Shixing performance, and Nikkei Wanji, so I am looking forward to the words of loyalty.

古文：而良策弗进，规画无闻，岂所谓弼谐元首，匡救不逮者乎？
现代文：但到现在仍然是良策不进，规划无闻，这哪里是辅佐君主，匡救社稷的做法呢？
English: But up to now, it is still the case that good policies do not advance and plans are unheard of. Where is the practice of assisting the monarch and saving the society?

古文：可诏王公已下，其有嘉谋深图、直言忠谏、利国便民、矫时厉俗者，咸令指事陈奏，无或依违。 
现代文：可命王公以下，凡有嘉谋深图、直言忠谏、利国便民、矫正时俗有利于时的，都要他们针对事情陈奏于朕，以事实说话，不论情面。 
English: However, it is the duty of the prince and those under him to report to me on all matters that are well-planned, honest, beneficial to the country and the people, and beneficial to the people, and to speak truthfully, regardless of their feelings.

古文：戊午，诏右卫将军元丽等讨吕苟兒。
现代文：二十三日，世宗下诏让右卫将军元丽等讨伐吕苟儿。
English: On the 23rd, King Sejong issued an edict to have the right guard general, Yuan Li, and others attack Luguo.

古文：乙丑，平南将军陈伯之破萧衍徐州刺史昌义之于梁城。
现代文：二十九日，平南将军陈伯之在梁城打败萧衍的徐州刺史昌义之的部队。
English: On the 29th, the Pingnan general Chen Bozhi defeated Xiao Yan's Xuzhou assassin Chang Yizhi's troops in Liangcheng.

古文：是月，衍将萧昞率众五万寇淮阳。
现代文：这个月，萧衍将领萧日丙率五万人马侵犯淮阳。
English: This month, Xiao Yan's general Xiao Rihong led 50,000 troops to invade Huaiyang.

古文：三月己巳，以戎旅大兴，诏罢诸作。
现代文：三月初四，因为连年战事不断，下诏罢除各种役作。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, because of the continuous war for several years, the next edict was to abolish all kinds of yakitori.

古文：己卯，诏荆州刺史赵怡、平南将军奚康生赴淮阳。
现代文：十四日，世宗下诏命荆州刺史赵怡、平南将军奚康生奔赴淮阳。
English: On the 14th, King Sejong issued an edict ordering Jingzhou governor Zhao Yi and Pingnan general Gong Kangsheng to rush to Huaiyang.

古文：乐良王长命坐杀人赐死，国除。
现代文：乐良王元长命犯了杀人罪被赐死，封国被削除。
English: Lerang Wangyuanlong committed the crime of homicide and was sentenced to death, and the state seal was removed.

古文：戊子，名皇子曰昌。
现代文：二十三日，给皇子取名叫昌。
English: On the 23rd, the prince was named Chang.

古文：庚寅，平南将军、曲江县开国公陈伯之自梁城南奔。
现代文：二十五日，平南将军、曲江县开国公陈伯之自梁城南逃。
English: On the 25th, Pingnan General Chen Bo, the founding father of Qujiang County, fled from Liangcheng South.

古文：夏四月乙未，诏罢盐池禁。
现代文：夏季四月初一，世宗下诏罢除盐池禁令。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Emperor Sejong issued an edict to repeal the ban on salt ponds.

古文：甲辰，诏遣使者巡慰北边酋庶。
现代文：初九，世宗下诏派使者巡察抚慰北方边境的酋长百姓。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to inspect and comfort the chiefs and people on the northern border.

古文：庚戌，以中山王英为征南将军、都督扬徐二道诸军事，指授边将。
现代文：十五日，以中山王元英为征南将军、都督扬、徐二道诸军事，指授边将。
English: On the 15th, with Zhongshan Wang Yuanying as the general of the Southern Expedition, Yang, the governor of the capital, and Xu Erdao as the military, he was awarded the rank of general.

古文：萧衍江州刺史王茂先寇荆州，屯于河南城，诏平南将军杨大眼讨之。
现代文：萧衍政权的江州刺史王茂先侵犯荆州，在河南城屯军，世宗下诏命平南将军杨大眼讨伐敌人。
English: Wang Maozhi, the governor of Jiangzhou under the Xiao Yan regime, invaded Jingzhou first and set up a garrison in Henan City. Shizong ordered the Pingnan general Yang Dajian to fight the enemy.

古文：辛酉，大破之，斩其辅国将军王花，首虏二千余。
现代文：二十六日，大破敌军。斩其辅国将军王花，俘虏二千多人。
English: On the 26th, the enemy army was defeated. The auxiliary general Wang Hua was beheaded, and more than two thousand people were taken prisoner.

古文：进攻河南城，茂先逃溃，追奔至于汉水，拔其五城。
现代文：进而攻打河南城，王茂先溃逃而去，大眼追到汉水，拔除敌人五座城池。
English: He then attacked Henan City. Wang Mao fled first, but Daemen chased him to Hanshui and uprooted five enemy fortresses.

古文：将军宇文福略衍司州，俘获千余口而还。
现代文：将军宇文福攻打萧衍司州城，俘敌千余人而还。
English: General U Wenfu attacked Xiao Yan's Shizhou City, captured more than a thousand enemies and returned.

古文：五月乙丑朔，诏尚书拯义阳初附之户。
现代文：五月初一，世宗下诏抚慰义阳刚刚归附的民户。
English: On the first day of May, Sejong issued an imperial edict to comfort the newly annexed households in Yiyang.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 掩骼埋胔，古之令典；顺辰修令，朝之恆式。
现代文：初二，世宗下诏书说： 掩埋尸骨，自古通典，按时修令，朝廷恒式。
English: On the second day of the first month of the new year, Emperor Sejong issued an edict saying, "Bury the bones, since ancient times, amend the edict on time, and the imperial court is consistent.

古文：今时泽未降，春稼已旱。
现代文：而今时雨未降，春苗已旱。
English: But now the rain has not fallen, and the spring seedlings have sprouted.

古文：或有孤老馁疾，无人赡救，因以致死，暴露沟堑者，洛阳部尉依法棺埋。 
现代文：或是野有孤老馁饥疾病之人，无人赡养拯救，因此致死。凡是暴尸沟壑的，洛阳部尉依式备棺掩埋。 
English: Or there is a lonely old man, suffering from starvation and disease, who has no one to support and save him, so he dies. If there is a dead body in the ravine, Luo Yang will prepare a coffin and bury it according to the rules.

古文：壬申，萧衍将张惠绍入寇，陷宿豫。
现代文：初八，萧衍将领张惠绍侵犯边疆，攻陷宿豫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Yan's general Zhang Huishao invaded the frontier and captured Suqian.

古文：乙亥，衍将萧容陷梁城。
现代文：十一日，萧衍将领萧容攻陷梁城。
English: On the 11th day, General Xiao Yan and General Xiao Rong captured Liangcheng.

古文：辛巳，衍将韦睿陷合肥城。
现代文：十七日，萧衍将领韦睿又攻陷合肥城。
English: On the 17th, General Wei Rui and General Xiao Yan attacked and captured Hefei City.

古文：壬午，诏尚书元遥率众南讨。
现代文：十八日，世宗下诏让尚书元遥率军南讨。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong issued an edict to let Shang Shugen lead the army south.

古文：癸未，以秦陇未平，诏征西将军于劲节度诸军。
现代文：十九日，因秦、陇二州没有平定，世宗下诏命征西将军于劲节度诸军。
English: On the 19th, because the two states of Qin and Qin had not been pacified, King Sejong issued an edict to summon the Western General to rally the troops.

古文：己丑，衍将又陷羊石、霍丘二城。
现代文：二十五日，萧衍将领又攻陷羊石、霍丘二城。
English: On the 25th, General Xiao Yan also captured the two cities of Sheep Rock and Huoqiu.

古文：六月辛丑，又陷小岘戍。
现代文：六月初八，又攻陷小岘戍关。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, Xiaoshu Pass was attacked again.

古文：乙巳，安西将军元丽大破秦贼，斩贼帅王智五人，枭首六千。
现代文：十二日，安西将军元丽大破秦贼，斩杀贼帅王智等五人，杀了六千名敌兵。
English: On the 12th, the Anxi general Yuan Li made a great effort to break the Qin bandits, killed five people including the bandit commander Wang Zhi, and killed six thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：丁未，假平南将军奚康生破萧衍将张惠绍，斩其徐州刺史宋黑。
现代文：十四日，假平南将军奚康生打败萧衍将张惠绍，杀了其徐州刺史宋黑。
English: On the 14th, the fake Pingnan general Zou Kangsheng defeated Xiao Yan's general Zhang Huishao and killed his Xuzhou assassin Song He.

古文：丁巳，诏尚书邢峦出讨徐兗。
现代文：二十四日，世宗下诏命尚书邢峦出征讨伐徐、兖二州。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Shizong issued an edict ordering Shang Shuxuan to go out to fight against Xu and the two states.

古文：秋七月丙寅，衍将桓和寇孤山，陷固城。
现代文：秋季七月初三，萧衍将领桓和侵犯孤山，攻陷固城。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, General Xiao Yan led the troops of Huanhe to invade the lonely mountain and capture Gucheng.

古文：庚辰，元丽大破秦贼，降吕苟兒及其王公三十余人。秦泾二州平。
现代文：十七日，元丽大败秦州贼寇，吕苟儿及其王公三十多人投降，秦、泾二州平定下来。
English: On the 17th, Yuanli defeated the Qin state bandits, and more than 30 people from Luguo and its princes surrendered, and the two states of Qin and Min were pacified.

古文：戊子，中山王英大破衍徐州刺史王伯敖于阴陵，斩其将二十五人，首虏五千有余。
现代文：二十五日，中山王元英大败萧衍的徐州刺史王伯敖于阴陵，杀其将二十五人，俘虏五千多人。
English: On the 25th, Zhongshan King Yuanying defeated Xiao Yan's Xuzhou vassal King Bo Xun in Yinling, killing 25 of his generals and taking more than 5,000 prisoners.

古文：己丑，诏发定、冀、瀛、相、江、肆六州十万人以济南军。
现代文：二十六日，世宗下诏征发定、冀、瀛、相、并、肆六州十万人以增援南征军队。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Sejong issued an edict to recruit 100,000 men from six prefectures including Ding, Hebei, Shandong, Xiang and He to reinforce the southern expeditionary army.

古文：八月壬寅，安东将军邢峦破萧衍将桓和于孤山，斩首万余级。
现代文：八月初九，安东将军邢峦在孤山打败萧衍的将领桓和，杀了万余名敌人。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, General Anton Zou defeated Xiao Yan's general Huan He in the Lonely Mountain and killed more than 10,000 enemies.

古文：将军元恆别克固城，斩衍冠军将军桓方庆。
现代文：将军元恒攻克固城，杀了萧衍的冠军将军桓方庆。
English: General Yuan Heng conquered Gucheng and killed General Huan Fangqing, the champion of Xiao Yan.

古文：统军毕祖朽别克蒙山，斩衍龙骧将军矫道仪等，斩贼及赴沂死者四千余人。
现代文：统军毕祖朽攻克蒙山，杀了萧衍的龙骧将军矫道仪等人，被杀的以及在沂水中淹死的有四千多人。
English: The unified army led by Bi Zu Gui conquered Mount Kemeng, killed Xiao Yan's Longjing General Zhi Dao Yi and others, and more than four thousand people were killed and drowned in the flood.

古文：兗州平。
现代文：兖州平定。
English: Zhangzhou was pacified.

古文：己酉，诏平南将军、安乐王诠督后发诸军以赴淮南。
现代文：十六日，世宗下诏让平南将军、安乐王元诠督领后发诸路军马奔赴淮南。
English: On the 16th, King Sejong issued an edict to let General Pingnan and Governor Anle Wangyuan lead the troops and horses to go to Huainan.

古文：壬戌，曲赦泾、秦、岐、凉、河五州。
现代文：十七日，赦免泾、秦、岐、凉、河五州有罪的人。
English: On the 17th, he pardoned those who had committed crimes in five prefectures including Handan, Qin, Qi, Liang and He.

古文：九月癸酉，邢峦大破衍军于宿豫，斩其大将蓝怀恭等四十余人。
现代文：九月十一日，邢峦在宿豫大破萧衍军队，杀了其大将蓝怀恭及其四十多员将领。
English: On September 11, Xing defeated Xiao Yan's army at Suyuan and killed his general Lan Huaiqong and more than forty of his generals.

古文：张惠绍弃宿豫，萧昞弃淮阳南走，追斩数万级。
现代文：张惠绍放弃宿豫，萧日丙放弃淮阳向南逃去，被追杀数万人。
English: Zhang Huishao abandoned Suyuan, and Xiao Rihe abandoned Huaiyang and fled to the south. Tens of thousands of people were chased and killed.

古文：徐州平。
现代文：徐州平定。
English: Xuzhou is pacified.

古文：己丑，中山王英大破衍军于淮南，衍中军大将军、临川王萧宏，尚书右仆射柳惔，徐州刺史昌义之等弃梁城沿淮东走。
现代文：二十七日，中山王元英在淮南大败萧衍的军队，萧衍中军大将军、临川王萧宏，尚书右仆射柳忄炎，徐州刺史昌义之等人放弃梁城沿淮河向东逃去。
English: On the 27th, Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan defeated Xiao Yan's army in Huainan, and Xiao Yan's generals, Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Liu Xuanyan, and Xuzhou assassin Shi Changyi abandoned Liangcheng and fled east along the Huai River.

古文：追奔次于马头，衍冠军将军、戍主朱思远弃城宵遁，擒送衍将四十余人，斩获士卒五万有余。
现代文：追奔到马头山，萧衍冠军将军、镇守主帅朱思远放弃城池在夜间逃走，擒获萧衍将领四十余人，斩杀俘获士兵五万多人。
English: They chased Xiao Yan's champion general and town guard commander Zhu Siyuan to Mount Ma Tou, but he abandoned the city and fled at night. More than forty of Xiao Yan's generals were captured, and more than fifty thousand soldiers were killed or captured.

古文：英遂攻钟离。
现代文：元英于是攻打钟离。
English: Therefore, Yuan Ying attacked Zhong Li.

古文：高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：高丽国派使者朝贡。
English: Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：萧衍遣将士卒三万寇义阳。
现代文：萧衍派将领带领三万人马侵犯义阳。
English: General Xiao Yan led 30,000 soldiers to invade Yiyang.

古文：丁酉，夜遁走。郢州刺史娄悦追击，破之。
现代文：十月初六，乘着黑夜来敌逃走，郢州刺史娄悦追击敌人，打败了他们。
English: On the 6th day of October, taking advantage of the darkness to escape from the enemy, Zhangzhou Zishi Meiyue chased the enemy and defeated them.

古文：戊申，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十七日，蠕蠕国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己未，征虏将军赵遐大破衍众于灙城桑坪。
现代文：二十八日，征虏将军赵遐在氵党城的桑坪大败萧衍的军队。
English: On the 28th, the conscript general Zhao Wei defeated the army of Xiao Yan in Sangping, the capital of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：十有一月甲子，帝为京兆王愉、清河王怿、广平王怀、汝南王悦讲《孝经》于式乾殿。
现代文：十一月初三，世宗在式乾殿给京兆王元愉、清河王元怿、广平王元怀、汝南王元悦讲授《孝经》。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, King Sejong gave lectures on the "Book of Filial Piety" to King Gyeongjo, King Gyeongcheon, King Wonhyo, King Gwangpyeong and King Wonhyo of South Korea.

古文：庚寅，诏曰： 往岁陇右扇逆，合境不民。
现代文：二十九日，世宗下诏说： 往年陇右逆贼叛乱，全境百姓都被卷入。
English: On the 29th, King Sejong issued an edict saying: In previous years, when the right-wing traitors rebelled, the people of the whole territory were involved.

古文：其中犹有卒能自守，无豫衅乱。
现代文：但其中犹有始终洁身自守，不参与叛乱的。
English: However, among them, there are still those who always keep themselves clean and do not participate in the rebellion.

古文：疾风知劲，良在可嘉。
现代文：疾风知劲草，确实可嘉。
English: It is indeed commendable that the gale-force winds have woken up the grass.

古文：尚书可甄量报赏，以表诚义。 
现代文：尚书可甄别选拔量功报赏，以表彰他们的深明大义。 
English: Shangshu can screen the selection of merit reward, in recognition of their profound righteousness.

古文：是月，梁州再破反獠。
现代文：这个月，梁州再次打败反叛的獠人。
English: This month, Liangzhou once again defeated the rebellious Xingren.

古文：四年春二月丙午，吐谷浑、宕昌国并遣使朝献。
现代文：正始四年春季二月十四日，吐谷浑、宕昌国都派使者前来朝献。
English: On February 14th, in the spring of the first year of the fourth year of the Heian period, envoys from the provinces of Togakushi and Takamatsu came to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：己未，勿吉国贡楛矢。
现代文：二十七日，勿吉国贡献眓矢。
English: On the 27th, Beiji Province contributed a crossbow.

古文：三月丙子，叠伏罗国遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月十三日，叠伏罗国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 13th of March, Jamboree sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月戊戌，钟离大水。
现代文：夏季四月初九，钟离发生大洪水。
English: On the ninth day of the fourth month of summer, a great flood occurred in Zhongli.

古文：中山王英败绩而还。
现代文：中山王元英战败而还。
English: Zhongshan Wang Yuanying was defeated but survived.

古文：壬寅，吐谷浑、鸠磨罗、阿拔磨拔切磨勒、悉万斤诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十三日，吐谷浑、鸠磨罗、阿拔磨拔切磨勒、悉万斤诸国都派使者前来朝献。
English: On the thirteenth day, emissaries from all over the country, including Tugu Hun, Zi Ma Luo, Aba Ma Ba Chie Ma Le, and Si Wan Jian, came to present offerings to the emperor.

古文：六月己丑朔，诏曰： 高祖德格两仪，明并日月，播文教以怀远人，调礼学以旌俊造；徙县中区，光宅天邑，总霜露之所均，一姬卜于洛涘。
现代文：六月初一，世宗下诏书说： 高祖德兼两仪，与日月同辉，广播文教以招抚远方的人，调理礼学以旌表才俊，移都中土，光照苍穹，总霜露之所均，可与洛水河畔的姬昌相媲美。
English: On the first day of June, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "Gao Zude and the two rites are as bright as the sun and the moon, broadcasting literature and education to attract people from far away, regulating etiquette with etiquette, moving the capital to the middle of the earth, illuminating the sky, and the total frost and dew are all comparable to that of Ji Chang on the banks of the Luoshui River.

古文：戎缮兼兴，未遑儒教。
现代文：军戎国业兼而兴治，惟没有兼顾儒教。
English: The military ruled the country and ruled the country, but they did not take Confucianism into account.

古文：朕纂承鸿绪，君临宝历，思模圣规，述遵先志。
现代文：朕登上皇基，君临宝历，想模仿圣贤规范，述说遵循先圣之志。
English: I ascended to the imperial foundation, the king is in the treasure calendar, I want to imitate the norms of the sages, and follow the wishes of the first saint.

古文：今天平地宁，方隅无事，可敕有司准访前式，置国子，立太学，树小学于四门。 
现代文：而今天平地宁，四方无事，可命有关部门按照前代体式，设置国子学，建立太学，在四门外建设小学。 
English: Today, however, there is nothing to worry about, and the relevant departments can be ordered to set up a national school, establish a university, and build a primary school outside the four gates in accordance with the previous generation.

古文：丙午，萧衍龙骧将军、冯翊太守宇文子生等七郡相率内附。
现代文：十八日，萧衍政权的龙骧将军、冯翊太守宇文子生等人统辖的七个郡相继归附朝廷。
English: On the 18th, seven counties under the jurisdiction of General Long Yu, Feng Yu, Empress Dowager Uwen Zi Sheng and others of the Xiao Yan regime were successively annexed to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，社兰达那罗、舍弥、比罗直诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十九日，社兰达那罗、舍弥、比罗直等国都派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 19th, Shilandanaro, Shemi, Birojo and other countries sent envoys to present offerings to the emperor.

古文：秋八月辛卯，契丹国遣使朝献。
现代文：秋季八月初四，契丹国派使者前来朝献。
English: In the autumn, on the fourth day of the first month of August, the Khitan kingdom sent an envoy to present offerings to the emperor.

古文：己亥，中山王英、齐王萧宝夤坐钟离败退，并除名为民。
现代文：十二日，中山王元英、齐王萧宝夤因钟离一役败退而归，都被除名为民。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhongshan Wang Yuanying and Qi Wang Xiao Baojun returned home after losing a battle, and were both expelled as citizens.

古文：庚子，库莫奚、宕昌、吐谷浑诸国遣使朝献。
现代文：十三日，库莫奚、宕昌、吐谷浑等国都派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 13th, envoys from Kumo, Gocho, Togakushi, and other provinces came to present offerings to the emperor.

古文：辛丑，敦煌民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：十四日，敦煌发生大饥荒，官府开仓济民。
English: On the 14th, a great famine occurred in Dunhuang, and the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：九月己未，诏曰： 朕秉历承天，履年将纪，徙正宫极，岁浃归余。
现代文：九月初三，世宗下诏书说： 朕秉历承天，登基将近十二年，亲掌朝政，已近十年。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "I have been enthroned for nearly twelve years, and I have been ruling the country for nearly ten years.

古文：台懿茂亲，祗勤已久；列司英彦，庸绩未酬。
现代文：大臣皇亲，辛勤已久；各司英杰，丰功未报。
English: Minister Wang Qian has been working hard for a long time; all departments are outstanding, and great achievements have not been reported.

古文：非所谓有功见知，赏以时及。
现代文：这不是所谓有功知闻，赏罚及时。
English: This is not the so-called meritorious, timely reward and punishment.

古文：其以司空、高阳王雍为太尉，尚书令、广阳王嘉为司空，百官悉进位一级。 
现代文：命司空、高阳王元雍为太尉，尚书令、广阳王元嘉为司空，百官都晋升一级。 
English: Gaoyang Wangyuan Yong was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, Shang Shuling and Guangyang Wangyuan Jia were promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and hundreds of officials were promoted to the first level.

古文：庚申，夏州长史曹明谋反，伏诛。
现代文：初四日，夏州长史曹明谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Xia Governor Shi Cao Ming plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：甲子，开斜谷旧道。
现代文：初八，重开斜谷旧道。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the old road in the valley was reopened.

古文：疏勒、车勒阿驹、南天竺、婆罗等诸国遣使朝献。
现代文：疏勒、车勒阿驹、南天竺、婆罗等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Countries such as Shule, Chele, Nan Tian, and Borah sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丙戌，司州民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：三十日，司州百姓发生饥荒，官府开仓济民。
English: On the 30th, the people of Sizhou experienced a famine, and the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：闰月甲午，禁大司马门不得车马出入。
现代文：闰月初八，发布禁令，大司马门不得让车马出入。
English: On the eighth day of the leap month, a ban was issued, and horses and carriages were not allowed to enter and leave the main gate.

古文：冬十月丁巳，高丽、半社、悉万斤、可流伽、比沙、疏勒、于阗等诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：冬季十月初七，高丽、半社、悉万斤、可流伽、比沙、疏勒、于阗等国都派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, envoys from Goryeo, Hansha, Siwanjin, Koryuga, Bisha, Shule, and Yunnan were sent to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，皇后于氏崩。
现代文：十七日，皇后于氏逝世。
English: On the 17th, Empress Yu passed away.

古文：戊辰，疏勒国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十八日，疏勒国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 18th, Sule sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，淮阳太守安乐以城南叛。
现代文：二十日，淮阳太守安乐举城南叛。
English: On the 20th, Huaiyang Daju Anle rebelled south of the city.

古文：辛未，嚈哒、波斯、渴槃陀、渴文提不那杖忸杖提等诸国，并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十一日，口厌哒、波斯渴硋、渴文提不那杖提忸杖等各国，都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, envoys from all over the world, including China, Persia, and Japan, came to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，葬顺皇后于永泰陵。
现代文：乙酉，在永泰陵埋葬顺皇后。
English: and buried the Shun empress in Yongtai Mausoleum.

古文：十有一月丁未，禁河南畜牝马。
现代文：十一月二十二日，发布禁令，不准黄河以南蓄养母马。
English: On November 22, a ban was issued, prohibiting the breeding of mares south of the Yellow River.

古文：自碣石至于剑阁，东西七千里，置二十二都督。
现代文：从碣石到剑阁，东西长七千里，朝廷设置二十二个都尉。
English: From Shaoshi to Jiange, a distance of 7,000 miles from east to west, the imperial court set up 22 captains.

古文：巳酉，阿与陀、呵罗槃、陀跋吐罗诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十四日，阿与、呵罗、跋吐罗等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 24th, the countries of Ayo, Koro, and Baturo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十有二月戊午，诏兵士钟离没落者，复一房田租三年。
现代文：十二月初四，世宗下诏让那些在钟离之役中战死的人，免除其家一房的三年田租。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month, Shizong issued an edict that those who died in the Battle of Zhongli were exempt from paying the three-year farm rent for one room in their homes.

古文：辛酉，特那杖提莎钵离阿失勒摩致钵诸国遣使朝贡。
现代文：七日，特那杖提莎钵离阿失勒摩致钵等国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the seventh day, Tenazde Tisha left Ahzlem, and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，蠕蠕、高车民他莫孤率部来降。丁丑，钵仑、波利伏佛胄善、乾达诸国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十日，蠕蠕、高车百姓他莫孤率部前来归降二十三日，钵仑、波利伏佛胄善、乾达等国遣使朝贡。
English: On the 10th day, the people of Cnh Cm and Cnh Cm led by Thàm M Quang came to surrender. On the 23rd day, the countries of Qung Ln, Bnh Bc Hnh, and Qung Đà sent tributes.

古文：永平元年春正月戊戌，颍川太守王神念奔于萧衍。
现代文：永平元年春季正月二十日，颍川太守王神念投奔萧衍。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yongping era, King Shen, the governor of the Min River, decided to go to Xiaoyan.

古文：二月辛未，勿吉、南天竺国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二月二十一日，勿吉、南天竺国都派使者来朝拜纳贡。
English: On February 21, the emissaries from the kingdoms of Bukit and Nantian were sent to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三月戊子，皇子昌薨。
现代文：三月初七，皇子元昌去世。
English: On March 7th, Prince Yuanchang passed away.

古文：己亥，斯罗、阿陀、比罗、阿夷义多、婆那伽、伽师达、于阗诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十八日，斯罗、阿、比罗、阿夷义多、婆那伽、伽师达、于阗等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 18th, envoys from Suru, Ah, Biro, Aitoto, Banaga, Gashida, and Yuga, among others, came to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，以去年旱俭，遣使者所在赒恤。
现代文：二十五日，因头年旱灾减产，世宗派使者在发生灾荒的地方赈济百姓。
English: On the 25th, due to the reduced production caused by the drought in the previous year, the missionaries of the world sects came to help the people in the place where the disaster occurred.

古文：夏四月，阿伏至罗国遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏季四月，阿伏至罗国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: In the summer of April, Avos sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月癸未，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：五月初六，高丽国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛卯，帝以旱故，减膳撤悬。
现代文：十四日，世宗因为干旱的缘故，减膳撤乐。
English: On the 14th, because of the drought, Shizong cut down on meals and withdrew from entertainment.

古文：六月壬申，诏曰： 慎狱重刑，著于往诰。
现代文：六月二十三日，世宗下诏说： 慎重对待诉讼，仔细处理刑罚，以往诰令中就一再申明了。
English: On June 23rd, King Sejong issued the following edict: "Treat lawsuits with caution and punishments with care. This has been repeatedly stated in previous edicts.

古文：朕御兹宝历，明鉴未远，断决烦疑，实有攸愧。
现代文：朕登上皇极，明鉴未远，断决烦讼疑案，实在是没有把握。
English: I have ascended to the imperial throne, the final judgment is not far away, and it is really uncertain to decide the doubtful cases.

古文：可依洛阳旧图，修听讼观，农隙起功，及冬令就。
现代文：现可依洛阳旧图，修建听讼观，农闲开始，冬季来临即建成。
English: According to the old map of Luoyang, the construction can be completed as soon as the winter comes.

古文：当与王公卿士亲临录问。 
现代文：朕与王公卿士亲临审问各种狱案。 
English: I and Wang Gongqing personally interrogated all kinds of prison cases.

古文：癸酉，高车国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十四日，高车国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 24th, Gaochao sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月辛卯，高车、契丹、汗畔、罽宾诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：秋季七月十五日，高车、契丹、汗畔、宾等国都派使者前来朝见纳贡。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, envoys from Gaozhe, Khitan, Khanhan, Bin and other countries came to see the tribute.

古文：甲午，以夫人高氏为皇后。乙未，诏曰： 察狱以情，审之五听；枷杖小大，各宜定准。
现代文：十八日，世宗下诏书说： 审理案件要合情合理，要遵循五听的程序，枷锁罚杖大小，各应有一定的标准。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict, saying: The trial of cases should be reasonable and reasonable, the five-hearing procedure should be followed, and the size of the shackles and canes should have a certain standard.

古文：然比廷尉、司州、河南、洛阳、河阴及诸狱官，鞫讯之理，未尽矜恕；掠拷之苦，每多切酷，非所以祗宪量衷、慎刑重命者也。
现代文：但最近一段时间以来，廷尉、司州、河南、洛阳、河阴及各狱官，审讯的时候，并没有做到矜悯宽恕拷打之苦，经常都很残酷，这并不是据律据情、慎刑重命的做法。
English: However, in recent times, the court officers, officials from Suzhou, Henan, Luoyang, and Hebei, as well as various prison officials, have not been able to show mercy and forgive the suffering of torture during interrogation, and are often cruel. This is not a practice based on rules and conditions, and is a method of meting out severe punishment.

古文：推滥究枉，良轸于怀。
现代文：推滥究枉，朕挂于怀。
English: I don't care about the abuse.

古文：可付尚书精检枷杖违制之由，断罪闻奏。 
现代文：可让尚书仔细检查枷锁杖罚违制的理由，断罪闻奏。 
English: Can let Shang Shu carefully examine the reasons for the violation of the yoke and cane punishment, and make a judgment.

古文：八月癸亥，冀州刺史、京兆王愉据州反。
现代文：八月十五日，冀州刺史、京兆王元愉据州反叛。
English: On August 15th, the history of Jizhou and the rebellion of Jingzhao Wangyuan were recorded.

古文：乙丑，假尚书李平镇北将军、行冀州事以讨之。
现代文：十七日，下诏命尚书李平为镇北将军、行冀州事，前去讨伐。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered Shangshu Li Ping to be the general of Zhenbei, to go to Jizhou, and to go to the crusade.

古文：丁卯，大赦，改年。
现代文：十九日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 19th, the world was amnestied, and the year was changed.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑、库莫奚国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十二日，吐谷浑、库莫奚国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 22nd, envoys from the provinces of Tugu, Hun, and Kumo were sent to pay tribute.

古文：九月辛巳朔，李平大破元愉于草桥。丙戌，复前中山王英本封。
现代文：九月初一，李平在草桥大败元愉。初六，恢复前中山王元英本来的封爵。
English: On the first day of September, Li Ping defeated Yuan Rong in Caoqiao. In the sixth grade, the former Zhongshan King Yuan Rong was reinstated.

古文：壬辰，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二日，蠕蠕国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 12th, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：定州刺史、安乐王诠大破元愉于信都北。
现代文：定州刺史、安乐王元诠在信都北面大败元愉。
English: The history of Jingzhou and the history of Anle Wangyuan were defeated in the north of Xindu.

古文：戊戌，杀侍中、太师、彭城王勰。
现代文：十八日，世宗杀了侍中、太师、彭城王元勰。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong killed Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, a chamberlain and grand master.

古文：辛丑，诏赦冀州民杂工役为元愉所诖误者。其能斩获逆党，别加优赏。
现代文：二十一日，下诏赦免被元愉所蒙骗的冀州民杂工役，其中如能斩杀逆党的，另加优赏。
English: On the 21st, he issued an edict to pardon the Jizhou handicraftsmen who had been deceived by Yuan Yu, and if they could kill the traitor, they would be rewarded.

古文：癸卯，李平克信都，元愉北走，斩其所署冀州牧韦超、右卫将军睦雅、尚书仆射刘子直、吏部尚书崔朏等。
现代文：二十三日，李平攻克信都，元愉北逃，杀了其所封的冀州牧韦超、右将军睦雅、尚书仆射刘子直、吏部尚书崔月出等人。
English: On the 23rd, Li Ping conquered Xindu, Yuan You escaped to the north, and killed Jizhou Mu Wei Chao, Right General Mutya, Shang Shubu Liu Zizhong, Shang Shubu Cui Yue De and others.

古文：统军叔孙头执愉送信都。
现代文：统军叔孙头把元愉抓起来送往信都。
English: Uncle Sun, the head of the United Front Army, arrested Yuan Yu and sent him to Xindu.

古文：群臣请诛愉，帝弗许，诏送京师。
现代文：大臣们都请求杀了元愉，世宗不同意，下诏把他送到京城。
English: The ministers all requested that Yuan Yu be killed, but Shizong disagreed and ordered him to be sent to the capital.

古文：冀州平。
现代文：冀州平定。
English: Jizhou was pacified.

古文：庚子，郢州司马彭珍、治中督荣祖等谋叛，潜引萧衍众入义阳。郢州刺史娄悦击走之。
现代文：三十日，郢州司马彭珍、治中督荣祖等人谋反，暗地里把萧衍的军队引入义阳，郢州刺史娄悦打退了他们。
English: On the 30th, Bozhou Sima Pengzhen, Zhizhongdu Rongzu and others plotted a rebellion and secretly brought Xiao Yan's army to Yiyang, and Bozhou Sisi Yuyue repulsed them.

古文：诏将军胡季智、屈祖等南赴义阳。
现代文：世宗下诏让将军胡季智、屈祖等率部南赴义阳。
English: King Sejong issued an edict ordering General Hu Jizhi, Qu Zu and others to head south to Yiyang.

古文：三关戍主侯登、阳凤省等以城南叛，娄悦婴城固守。
现代文：三关戍主侯登、阳凰省等以城南叛萧衍政权，娄悦绕城固守。
English: Sanguan, Shandong Province, and Yanghuang Province rebelled against Xiao Yan's regime in the south of the city, while Meiyue held fast around the city.

古文：遣中山王英督步骑三万以赴之。
现代文：世宗派中山王元英督领马步兵三万人赶去支援。
English: The Sect sent 30,000 foot soldiers led by Zhongshan Wang Yuan Yingduo to help.

古文：冬十月丁巳，诏复故北海王详本封，葬以王礼。
现代文：冬十月十三日，世宗下诏恢复已故北海王元详本封，以王礼埋葬了他。
English: On the 13th day of winter in October, King Sejong issued an edict to restore the imperial seal of the late King Yuan of the North Sea and buried him with royal honors.

古文：豫州彭城人白早生杀刺史司马悦，据城南叛，萧衍遣将齐苟仁等四将以助之。
现代文：豫州彭城人白早生杀害了刺史司马悦，据城南叛，萧衍派齐苟仁等四名将领前去支援他。
English: Bai, a resident of Pengcheng, Yuzhou, killed the assassin Sima Yue at an early age. According to the rebels in the southern part of the city, Xiao Yan sent four generals, including Qi Guoren, to support him.

古文：诏尚书邢峦行豫州事，督将军崔暹率骑讨之。
现代文：世宗下诏命尚书邢峦为行豫州事，督领将军崔暹率领骑兵去讨伐他。
English: Emperor Shizong issued an edict ordering Shang Shuxuan to conduct the affairs of Henan Province, and the commander-in-chief, General Cui Siam, led the cavalry to fight him.

古文：丙子，邢峦大破早生及苟仁军于鲍口。
现代文：二十八日，邢峦在鲍口大败早生及苟仁的军队。
English: On the 28th, Yao defeated the army of Gao Ren in Baokou.

古文：丁丑，前宿豫戍主成安乐子景俊杀宿豫戍主严仲贤，以城南叛。
现代文：二十九日，前宿豫戍主成安乐的儿子成景俊杀了宿豫戍主严仲贤，以城南叛。
English: On the 29th, Cheng Jingjun, the son of the former innkeeper Cheng Anle, killed the innkeeper Yan Zhongxian and rebelled to the south of the city.

古文：十有一月庚寅，诏安东将军杨椿率众四万攻宿豫。
现代文：十一月十六日，世宗下诏让安东将军杨椿率领四万人马攻打宿豫。
English: On November 16th, Shizong issued an edict to let General Anton Yang Tsubaki lead 40,000 men to attack Shukuyuan.

古文：十有二月己未，邢峦克悬瓠，斩白早生，擒齐苟仁等，俘萧衍卒三千余人，分赐王公已下。
现代文：十二月十一日，邢峦攻克悬弧，斩杀白早生，擒获齐苟生等人，俘获萧衍的士兵三千多人，世宗分别赐给王公以下各人。
English: On December 11th, Shizong conquered the Suspension Arc, killed Baizongsheng, captured Qigosheng and others, and captured more than three thousand soldiers from Xiaoyan. Shizong gave them to everyone below the prince.

古文：癸亥，中山王英破衍将于楚城，擒衍宁朔将军张疑等。
现代文：十五日，中山王元英在楚城打败萧衍的军队，擒获萧衍的宁朔将军张疑等人。
English: On the 15th, Zhongshan Wang Yuanying defeated Xiao Yan's army in Chucheng and captured Xiao Yan's Ningshuo general Zhang Ji and others.

古文：郢州刺史娄悦破衍将马仙琕于金山。
现代文：郢州刺史娄悦在金山打败萧衍的将领马仙王卑。
English: In Jinshan, Zhangzhou's Zhang Shi Jie Yue defeated Xiao Yan's general Ma Xian Wang Bi.

古文：壬申，汉东蛮民一万七千户相率内附。
现代文：二十四日，汉水东面蛮民一万七千户相继内附。
English: On the 24th, 17,000 barbarian households in the eastern part of Hanshui were annexed one after another.

古文：丙子，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 28th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，高昌国王麹嘉遣其兄子私署左卫将军孝亮奉表来朝，因求内徙，乞师迎接。
现代文：这一年，高昌国王嘉派其兄的儿子私署左卫将军孝亮持表前来朝拜，请求向内地迁徙，乞求朝廷派军队迎接。
English: In that year, King Jia of Gaochang sent his brother's son, the Privy Guard General Zuo Wei Xiao Liang, to pay homage to the emperor, requesting that he move inland and begging the imperial court to send troops to meet him.

古文：二年春正月，萧衍遣王神念寇南兗。
现代文：永平二年春季正月，萧衍派王神念率部侵犯南兖州。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Yongping, Xiao Yan sent Wang Shennian to invade Nanluozhou.

古文：诏辅国将军长孙稚假平南将军为都督，率统军邴虬等五军以讨之。
现代文：世宗下诏命辅国将军长孙稚为平南将军、都督，率领统军邴虬等五军人马前去讨伐。
English: Emperor Sejong issued an edict ordering Sun Waki, the chief general of the Auxiliary Provinces, to become the general of Pingnan Province and the governor of the capital, and to lead five soldiers, including the commander-in-chief, on horseback to fight.

古文：丁亥，胡密、步就磨、忸密、般是、悉万斤、辛豆那、越拔忸诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：初八，胡密、步就磨、忸密、是、悉万斤、辛豆那、越拔忸等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from as far away as Hatsuhachi, Ho-mi, Bu-jyo-ma, Su-mi, Ye, Si-wan-jin, Sinzu-na, Yue-baju, and other provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，嚈哒、薄知国遣使来朝，贡白象一。
现代文：十三日，口厌哒达、薄知国派使者前来朝拜，进贡白象一头。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the kingdoms of Banda and Bochi sent envoys to pay homage, and a white elephant was brought as a tribute.

古文：乙未，高昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十六日，高昌国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 16th, Gaochang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙申，中山王英进逼萧衍长薄戍。戊戌，宵溃，杀伤千数。
现代文：十七日，中山王元英进逼萧衍的长薄戍镇，十九日，敌人乘黑夜溃逃，被追杀了数千人。
English: On the 17th, the king of Zhongshan, Yuan Ying, entered the town of Changbo, where Xiao Yan was being chased. On the 19th, the enemy took advantage of the darkness to escape, and thousands of people were chased and killed.

古文：丁酉，拔武阳关，擒衍云骑将军、松滋县开国侯马广，冠军将军、迁陵县开国子彭甕生，骁骑将军、当阳县开国伯徐元季等二十六将，俘获七千余人。
现代文：十八日，拔除武阳关，擒获萧衍的云骑将军、松滋县开国侯马广，冠军将军、迁陵县开国子彭瓮生，骁骑将军、当阳县开国伯徐元季等二十六名将领，俘获七千多人。
English: On the 18th, 26 generals, including General Yunjie, the founder of Songzhi County, General Maquan, the champion of Songzhi County, the son of the founder of Qianling County, Peng Yansheng, the general of Xingjie, and the founder of Dangyang County, Xu Yuanji, were captured, and more than 7,000 people were captured.

古文：进攻黄岘、西关。
现代文：接着进攻黄岘、西关。
English: Then they attacked Huangpi and Xiguan.

古文：衍将马仙琕弃西关，李元履弃黄岘遁走。
现代文：萧衍将领马仙王卑放弃西关，李元履放弃黄岘逃走。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the commander Ma Xian Wang Bei to abandon Xiguan, and Li Yuanlu abandoned Huangpi and fled.

古文：是月，泾州沙门刘慧汪聚众反。
现代文：这个月，泾州和尚刘慧汪聚众造反。
English: This month, Zhangzhou and Shang Liu Hui Wang gathered to rebel.

古文：诏华州刺史奚康生讨之。
现代文：世宗下诏命华州刺史奚康生前去讨伐。
English: King Sejong issued an imperial edict to go to the front to fight for the sake of the life of Huazhou Sashihongkang.

古文：二月乙卯，诏曰： 比军役频兴，仗多毁败，在库戎器，见有无几。
现代文：二月初六，世宗下诏说： 一向以来，战伐频繁，器仗多有毁损，放在兵库中的武器所剩无几。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "Since ancient times, there have been frequent battles, many weapons have been destroyed, and there are few weapons left in the arsenal.

古文：安不忘危，古人所戒；五兵之器，事须充积，经造既殷，非众莫举。
现代文：居安思危，古人所戒，五兵之器，必须充足，打造既多，必须有众多的人参与打造。
English: To live a safe and secure life, as the ancients warned, the five soldiers' tools must be sufficient. As there are many to build, there must be many people to participate in building.

古文：今可量造四万人杂仗。 
现代文：现在可安排打造四万人用的器仗。 
English: Now you can arrange to build a tool for forty thousand people.

古文：三月癸未，磨石罗、阿曜社苏突阇、地伏罗诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：三月初十，磨豆罗、阿曜社苏突、地伏罗等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, envoys from Mazuro, Ayosha, Suthu, Diburo and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月己酉，诏以武川镇饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：夏季四月初八，世宗因为武川镇发生饥荒，下令开仓济民。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Sejong ordered the opening of warehouses to help the people because of the famine in Bukawa Town.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 圣人济世，随物污隆，或正或权，理无恆在。
现代文：二十三日，世宗下诏说： 圣人济世救民，方式随着事物的变化而不同，或依正典，或以民宜，灵活机动，理无恒在。
English: On the 23rd, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "The way for saints to save the world and save the people varies according to the changes in things. It can be done according to the canon or according to the people's needs. It is flexible and flexible, and there is no reason why it should not be done.

古文：先朝以云驾甫迁，嵩基始构；河洛民庶，徙旧未安，代来新宅，尚不能就；伊阙西南，群蛮填聚；沔阳贼城，连邑作戍；蠢尔愚巴，心未纯款，故暂抑造育之仁，权缓肃奸之法。
现代文：先朝因皇都新迁，嵩基始构，河、洛百姓人数众多，离开旧地者未曾安稳，新迁民户的新居所也不能一蹴而就。伊阙西南，蛮人聚居；沔水北面的敌人，连城作戍；愚蠢的巴人，并未对朝廷心悦诚服。所以先朝暂时抑止滋育黎民的慈心，权且缓滞整肃奸邪之法。
English: Due to the new relocation of the imperial capital and the construction of Songji, there were a large number of people in He and Luo. Those who left the old land were not stable, and the new residences of the newly relocated households could not be completed at once. In the southwest of Yili, the barbarians lived together; the enemy in the north of Surabaya, even the city was attacked; the stupid Ba people did not satisfy the heart of the imperial court. Therefore, the first dynasty temporarily restrained the benevolence that nurtured the people of Lai and delayed the rectification of the evil.

古文：今京师天固，与昔不同。
现代文：而今京城已成天固，与过去大不相同。
English: Now, however, the capital has become impregnable, and is very different from the past.

古文：杨郢荆益，皆悉我有；保险诸蛮，罔不归附；商洛民情，诚倍往日。
现代文：扬、郢、荆、益各州，都属我皇魏所有；险顽诸蛮，无不归附；商、洛民众，忠诚倍增。
English: Yang, Handan, Jing and Yixing provinces all belong to my Emperor Wei; all the barbarians, all the barbarians, all belong to me; merchants, Luo people, loyalty multiplied.

古文：唯樊襄已南，仁乖道政，被拘隔化，非民之咎。
现代文：只有樊、襄两州以南，违背仁道，悖离教化，这不是百姓的过错。
English: It is only in the south of the two prefectures of Handan and Xiangyang that the people have gone against the path of benevolence and deviated from the path of enlightenment. This is not the fault of the people.

古文：而无赖之徒，轻相劫掠，屠害良善，离人父兄。
现代文：而无赖之徒，竞相劫掠，屠害良善，离人父兄。
English: The ruffians, on the other hand, compete in pillaging, slaughtering the good, and abandoning their parents and brothers.

古文：衍之为酷，实亦深矣。
现代文：萧衍的酷害，实在已是十分深重的。
English: The damage caused by Xiao Yan is already very serious.

古文：便可放彼掠民，示其大惠，舍此残贼，未令之愆。
现代文：现在可把掠来的百姓放回去，给他们示以大惠泽，舍此残余贼寇，不让他们再犯新的罪行。
English: Now we can return the plundered people, show them great benefit, and spare the remnants of the thieves and robbers, and prevent them from committing new crimes.

古文：并敕缘边州镇，自今已后，不听境外寇盗，犯者罪同境内。
现代文：并令沿边境各州镇，从今以后，在境外寇盗犯罪的人罪同境内。
English: and ordered the towns of all prefectures along the border to henceforth treat the crime of robbery committed outside the country as the same as the crime committed within the country.

古文：若州镇主将，知容不纠，坐之如律。 
现代文：如州镇主将，知罪容恕不纠，依法惩处。 
English: If you are the head of a county town, you will be punished according to the law, even if you are found guilty.

古文：五月，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：五月，高丽国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: In May, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛丑，帝以旱故，减膳彻悬，禁断屠杀。
现代文：三十日，世宗因为干旱的原因，减膳撤乐，禁止屠宰。
English: On the 30th, because of the drought, Shizong cut back on food and entertainment and banned slaughter.

古文：甲辰，幸华林都亭，亲录囚徒，犯死罪已下降一等。
现代文：六月初三，驾临华林都亭，亲审囚徒，犯死罪以下的人降罪一等。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, he came to Huarintu Pavilion to personally judge the prisoners, and those who committed less than the death penalty were reduced to the first class.

古文：六月，高昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：六月，高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In June, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：辛亥，诏曰： 江海方同，车书宜一。
现代文：初十，世宗下诏说： 海内一统，车书应同，而现在各州路径南北尺度大小不一。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "There should be uniformity within the country, and the license plates should be the same, but now the size of the north-south route in each province is different.

古文：诸州轨辙南北不等，今可申敕四方，使远近无二。 
现代文：今可明宣四方，统一道路建制。 秋季七月十三日，契丹国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Khitan Empire sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月癸未，契丹国遣使朝献。
现代文：八月初六，邓至国派使者朝献。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Deng Zhi Guo sent an envoy to the Imperial Court.

古文：八月丁未，邓至国遣使朝献。戊申，以邓至国世子像览蹄为其国王。
现代文：初七，命邓至国世子像览蹄为其国王。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Deng Zhiguo, the heir to the throne of the country, was appointed as the king.

古文：高昌、勿吉、库莫奚诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：高昌、勿吉、库莫奚等国派使者前来朝献。
English: Envoys from Gaochang, Bukit, Kumo and other provinces came to present offerings to the emperor.

古文：九月辛巳，封故北海王子颢为北海王。
现代文：九月十一日，世宗封已故北海王子元颢为北海王。
English: On September 11, the late Prince of the North Sea, Yuan Zongfu, was enthroned as the King of the North Sea.

古文：壬午，诏定诸门闼名。
现代文：十二日，世宗下诏确定各宫中小门的名称。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Sejong issued an edict to determine the names of the small and medium gates of each palace.

古文：冬十月癸丑，以司空、广阳王嘉为司徒。
现代文：冬季十月十四日，任命司空、广阳王元嘉为司徒。
English: On October 14th in winter, he appointed Siku and Guangyang Wang Yuanjia as his assistants.

古文：庚午，郢州献七宝床，诏不纳。
现代文：三十一日，郢州献七宝床，世宗下诏不接受。
English: On the 31st, Zhangzhou offered seven treasure beds, but Shizong did not accept it.

古文：十有一月甲申，诏禁屠杀含孕，以为永制。
现代文：十一月十四日，世宗下诏禁止屠杀有孕的牲畜，作为永久的制度。
English: On November 14th, Emperor Sejong issued an edict prohibiting the slaughter of pregnant animals as a permanent regulation.

古文：己丑，帝于式乾殿为诸僧、朝臣讲《维摩诘经》。
现代文：十九日，世宗在式乾殿给众僧、朝中大臣讲授《维摩诘经》。
English: On the 19th, Sejong gave a lecture on the "Vima Sutra" to the monks and the ministers of the Imperial Court at Shikiken-den.

古文：十有二月，诏曰： 五等诸侯，比无选式。
现代文：十二月，世宗下诏书说： 五等诸侯，一向以来没有选举程式。
English: In December, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "The five great lordships are gone, and there has been no election procedure since then.

古文：其同姓者出身：公正六下，侯从六上，伯从六下，子正七上，男正七下。
现代文：朕现在宣布，同姓者出身：公为正六品下，侯为从六品上，伯为从六品下，子为正七品上，男为正七品下。
English: I now announce that people with the same surname are from the following families: Gong is from the 6th grade, Hou is from the 6th grade, Bo is from the 6th grade, Son is from the 7th grade, Male is from the 7th grade.

古文：异族出身：公从七上，侯从七下，伯正八上，子正八下，男从八上。
现代文：异族出身：公为从七品上，侯为从七品下，伯为正八品下，子为正八品上，男为从八品上。
English: Foreign origin: Gong is from the seventh grade up, Hou is from the seventh grade down, Bo is from the eighth grade down, Son is from the eighth grade up, Male is from the eighth grade up.

古文：清修出身：公从八下，侯正九上，伯正九下，子从九上，男从九下。
现代文：清修出身：公为从八品下，侯为正九品上，伯为正九品下，子为从九品上，男为从九品下。
English: Cleansing origin: Gong is from eight grades down, Hou is from nine grades up, Bo is from nine grades down, Son is from nine grades up, Male is from nine grades down.

古文：可依此叙之。 
现代文：可依此执行。 
English: This is how it works.

古文：叠伏罗、弗菩提、朝陀咤、波罗诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：叠伏罗、弗菩提、朝咤、波罗等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from countries such as Sumavro, Phobodhi, Chosroes, and Baltics came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春二月丙午，高昌、邓至国并遣使朝献。
现代文：永平三年春季二月初三，高昌、邓至国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the third day of February in the spring of the third year of Yongping, Gaochang and Deng Zhi Guo sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：壬子，秦州沙门刘光秀谋反。
现代文：初九日，秦州和尚刘光秀谋反。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Qin Zhou and Shang Liu Guangxiu conspired to rebel.

古文：州郡捕斩之。
现代文：州郡军队捕获斩杀了他。
English: State and county troopers captured and killed him.

古文：癸亥，秦州陇西羌杀镇将赵俊，阻兵反叛。
现代文：二十日，秦州陇西羌族人杀害镇守将领赵俊，以武力反叛朝廷。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the Qin State Xizang Yi people killed the town guard general Zhao Jun and rebelled against the imperial court by force.

古文：州军讨平之。三月丙戌，皇子生，大赦天下。
现代文：三月十四日，皇子出生，朝廷大赦天下。
English: On March 14th, the prince was born, and the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：高丽、吐谷浑、宕昌诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、吐谷浑、宕昌等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from Goryeo, Tukgukgun, and Goseong came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：夏四月，平阳郡之禽昌、襄陵二县大疫，自正月至此月，死者二千七百三十人。
现代文：夏季四月，平阳郡的禽昌、襄陵二县发生大瘟疫，从正月到本月，死了的人已达二千七百三十人。
English: In the summer of April, a major plague occurred in the two counties of Yuchang and Xiangling in Pingyang County. From the first month to this month, 2,730 people have died.

古文：五月丁亥，诏以冀定二州旱俭，开仓赈恤。
现代文：五月十六日，世宗下诏因冀定两州灾荒减收，官府开仓济贫。
English: On May 16th, Sejong issued an edict that the government would open warehouses to help the poor due to the drought in the two states.

古文：六月壬寅，诏重求遗书于天下。丁卯，名皇子曰诩。
现代文：六月初二，世宗下诏在天下重求遗书。三十日，给皇子取名叫诩。
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month, Emperor Sejong issued an imperial edict to re-solicit the will. On the 30th day, Emperor Sejong gave the prince a new name, Ye.

古文：闰月己亥，吐谷浑、高丽、契丹诸国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰月二十九日，吐谷浑、高丽、契丹等国各派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 29th day of the leap month, envoys from various countries including Tugu, Goryeo, and Khitan came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月己未，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋季七月十九日，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the envoys of the Hun Kingdom of Tuvalu came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：八月巳卯，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：八月初八，勿吉国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8

古文：九月壬寅，乌苌、伽秀沙尼诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：九月初一，乌苌、伽秀沙尼等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the first day of September, the emissaries of U Thant, Ghasiushani and other countries came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丙辰，高车别帅可略汗等率众一千七百内属。
现代文：十五日，高车国别帅可略汗等率领一千七百多人归顺朝廷。
English: On the 15th, Gao Che, the country's military commander, led more than 1,700 people to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月辛卯，中山王英薨。
现代文：冬季十月二十日，中山王元英逝世。
English: In the winter of October 20th, Zhongshan Wang Yuanying passed away.

古文：丙申，诏曰： 朕乘乾御历，年周一纪，而道谢击壤，教惭刑厝。
现代文：二十五日，世宗下诏书说： 朕登上皇位，至今已经十二年了，而道治愧对苍生，教化惭于刑法。
English: On the 25th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "It has been twelve years since I ascended the throne, and I am ashamed of the way I have treated people, and I am ashamed of the criminal law.

古文：至于下民之茕鳏疾苦，心常愍之。此而不恤，岂为民父母之意也！
现代文：对于百姓鳏寡孤独、贫寒疾病之苦，朕内心经常挂念，此时如不抚恤，哪还能谈得上为民父母的胸怀呢。
English: For the people's suffering of widowhood, loneliness, poverty and disease, my heart often worries. At this time, if there is no pension, how can we talk about the hearts of the people's parents?

古文：可敕太常于闲敞之处，别立一馆，使京畿内外疾病之徒，咸令居处。
现代文：可命太常在空闲的地方，另外建起一处馆舍，让京城内外患病的人，都住进去。
English: However, it is often ordered to build a library in a vacant place, so that people who are sick in and out of the capital can live there.

古文：严敕医署，分师疗治，考其能否，而行赏罚。
现代文：严令医疗部门，分人医治，考核其治疗成绩，行使赏罚。
English: Strictly order the medical department to divide people into treatment groups, assess their treatment results, and exercise rewards and punishments.

古文：虽龄数有期，修短分定，然三疾不同，或赖针石，庶秦扁之言，理验今日。
现代文：虽然说人的寿命有限，长短有定，但三疾四痛各各不同，或可依赖治疗获得起色。庶几是昔日秦医、扁鹊之言，理验今日。
English: Although it is said that a person's lifespan is limited and the length is fixed, the three diseases and four pains are all different, and may depend on treatment to get better.

古文：又经方浩博，流传处广，应病投药，卒难穷究。
现代文：加上经验之方浩广渊博，流传极远，对症投药，终难考究。
English: In addition, the experience is vast, far-reaching, and far-reaching, and it is difficult to study the correct medication.

古文：更令有司，集诸医工，寻篇推简，务存精要，取三十余卷，以班九服。郡县备写，布下乡邑，使知救患之术耳。 
现代文：可别令有关部门，召集医务人员，寻篇推句，务存精要，选取其中内容汇成三十余卷的医书，颁布于天下，各郡县务求备写，广告乡邑，让老百姓都知道救治疾患的方法。 
English: But don't order the relevant departments, convene medical personnel, find the text, store the essence, select the medical book with more than 30 volumes of contents, and publish it to the world. All counties should prepare to write and advertise the townships, so that the people know the methods of treating diseases.

古文：戊戌，高车、龟兹、难地、那竭、库莫奚等诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十七日，高车、龟兹、难地、那竭、库莫奚等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 27th, envoys from Gaochu, Guizi, Nanchi, Nazhen, Kumo and other provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：十有二月己卯，高丽、比沙杖国遣使朝献。
现代文：十二月初七，高丽、比沙杖国派使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, envoys from Goryeo and Bishaseki sent to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，江阳王继坐事除名。
现代文：初九，江阳王元继因犯罪被解除官爵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Jiangyang Wangyuan was stripped of his title for committing a crime.

古文：甲申，诏于青州立高祖庙。
现代文：十二日，世宗下诏在青州建立高祖庙。
English: On the 12th, Sejong issued an edict to establish the Gaozhu Temple in Qingzhou.

古文：殿中侍御史王敞谋反伏诛。
现代文：殿中侍御史王敞因谋反被诛杀。
English: The palace chamberlain, Shi Wangchan, was beaten to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：四年春正月丁巳，汾州刘龙驹聚众反。诏谏议大夫薛和率众讨之。
现代文：永平四年春季正月二十日，汾州刘龙驹聚众造反，世宗下诏命谏议大夫薛和率众讨伐。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Yongping, Liu Longyao of Zhangzhou gathered the people to rebel, and Sejong ordered the doctor Xue He to lead the people to fight.

古文：甲子，阿悦陀、不数罗国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十七日，阿悦、不数罗国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 27th, Ayutthaya and numerous other countries sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二月壬午，青、齐、徐、兗四州民饥甚，遣使赈恤。
现代文：二月十五日，青、齐、徐、兖四州百姓闹大饥荒，朝廷派使者前去赈济抚恤。
English: On February 15th, the people of Qing, Qi, Xu and Qin provinces suffered from severe famine, and the imperial court sent an envoy to provide relief.

古文：三月癸卯，婆比幡弥、乌苌、比地、乾达诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：三月初五，婆比幡弥、乌苌、比地、乾达等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month, emissaries from Bhutan, Bhutan, Bhutan, Kenda and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：壬戌，司徒、广阳王嘉薨。
现代文：二十四日，司徒、广阳王元嘉逝世。
English: On the 24th, Sito and Guangyang Wang Yuanjia passed away.

古文：夏四月，琅邪民王万寿斩萧衍辅国将军、琅邪东莞二郡太守刘晣首，以朐山来降。
现代文：夏季四月，琅笽百姓王万寿斩杀萧衍辅国将军琅笽、东莞二郡太守刘晰，举朐山前来投降。
English: In the summer of April, the common people Wang Wanshou killed General Xiao Yanfu and Liu Qiao, the governor of Dongguan Second County, and came to surrender.

古文：徐州刺史卢昶遣琅邪戍主傅文骥率众据之。
现代文：徐州刺史卢昶派琅笽戍主傅文骥率部据守。
English: The Xuzhou Zhishuli Luyuan faction, led by its chief Fu Wenjun, held on.

古文：甲戌，薛和大破山胡。
现代文：初九，薛和大败山胡。
English: Zhujiu, Xue and Dafu Mountain Goose.

古文：萧衍遣其镇北将军张稷及马仙琕寇朐山。
现代文：萧衍派其镇北将军张稷及马仙鴘侵犯朐山。
English: Xiao Yan sent his Zhenbei generals Zhang Qi and Ma Xianqi to invade Lushan.

古文：诏卢昶率众赴之。
现代文：世宗下诏让卢昶率部阻击。
English: King Sejong issued an edict that Lu Ye should lead the troops to block the attack.

古文：五月己亥，迁代京铜龙置天渊池。
现代文：五月初四，朝廷把代京的铜龙迁到天渊池。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the imperial court moved the bronze dragon from Daikyo to Tianyuan Pond.

古文：丙辰，诏禁天文之学。
现代文：二十一日，世宗下诏禁止天文学。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Sejong issued an edict banning astronomy.

古文：六月乙亥，乾达、阿婆罗、达舍、越伽使密、不流沙诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：六月初九，乾达、阿婆罗、达舍、越伽使密、不流沙等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Qian Da, Abaro, Dashe, Yue Ga sent envoys from Mei, Bu Liusha and other countries to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：秋七月辛酉，吐谷浑、契丹国并遣使朝献。
现代文：秋季七月二十四日，吐谷浑、契丹国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emissaries of the Kingdoms of Tuvalu and Khitan came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：八月辛未，阿婆罗、达舍、越伽使密、不流沙等诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：八月初三，阿婆罗、达舍、越伽使密、不流沙等国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, emissaries from Abara, Dashe, Yuega, Buxa and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，勿吉国献楛矢。
现代文：二十六日，勿吉国献眓矢。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the people of Beji Province made offerings.

古文：九月甲寅，萧衍九山戍主苟仁以戍来降。
现代文：九月十七日，萧衍政权的九山戍主苟仁举戍关前来投降。
English: On September 17th, Gou Ren, the leader of the Xiao Yan regime, came to surrender.

古文：嚈哒、朱居槃波罗、莫伽陀、移婆仆罗、俱萨罗、舍弥、罗乐陀等诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：口厌哒、朱居、波婆、莫伽、移罗仆罗、俱萨罗、舍弥、罗乐等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: Envoys from countries such as Kuchiba, Zhuji, Baba, Moga, Imropuro, Kussaro, Shemi, and Rorae came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月丁丑，婆比幡弥、乌苌、比地、乾达等诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：冬季十月十五，婆比幡弥、乌苌、比地、乾达等国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 15th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emissaries of Bhutan, Bhutan, Kandal and other countries came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十有一月甲午，宕昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：十一月初二，宕昌国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Tang and Chang states sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：己亥，诏李崇、奚康生等治兵寿春，以分朐山之寇。
现代文：初七，世宗下诏命李崇、奚康生等在寿春练兵，以分击朐山来侵敌人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, King Sejong issued an imperial edict ordering Li Chong, Yao Kang Sheng, and others to train soldiers in Shouchun and invade the enemy by striking Shaoshan.

古文：戊申，难地、伏罗国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十六日，难地、伏罗国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the sixteenth day, in a difficult situation, Voro sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：朐城陷，卢昶大败而还。
现代文：朐城被敌人攻陷，卢昶大败而归。
English: Lucheng was invaded by the enemy, and Lushan was defeated and returned.

古文：十有二月壬申，诏曰： 进善退恶，治之通规；三载考察，政之明典。
现代文：十二月十一日，世宗下诏说： 奖励提拔善良，黜退邪恶，是治理国家的通行规则，三载考察一次官员，是国家明典。
English: On December 11th, Shizong issued an edict saying: Rewarding and promoting the good and repelling the evil are the common rules for governing the country, and inspecting officials once every three years is a national code.

古文：正始二年以来，于今未考，功过难齐，宁无升降？
现代文：自正始二年以来，官员政绩至今未曾考核，功过是非难以确定，难道他们就不该有个升降？
English: Since the first two years, the performance of officials has not been evaluated so far, and it is difficult to determine the merits. Shouldn't they have a promotion?

古文：从景明二年至永平四年，通考以闻。 
现代文：现在对官员从景明二年到永平四年的政绩，通考一遍上报朝廷。 
English: Now, for the political achievements of officials from the second year of Jingming to the fourth year of Yongping, all examinations are reported to the imperial court.

古文：戊子，大罗汗、婆来伽国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十七日，大罗汗、婆来伽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 27th day, the great Luo Khan and the country of Balaiga sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：延昌元年春正月乙巳，以频水旱，百姓饥弊，分遣使者开仓赈恤。
现代文：延昌元年春正月初八，因国家连年发生旱灾，百姓饥荒凋弊，世宗分派使者开仓赈济百姓。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yanchang, due to the country's consecutive droughts and the people's famine, the sect sent an envoy to open the warehouse to help the people.

古文：戊申，疏勒国遣使朝献。
现代文：十一日，疏勒国派遣使者朝拜纳贡。
English: On the eleventh day, Sule sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙辰，以车骑大将军、尚书令高肇为司徒公，光禄大夫、清河王怿为司空，司州牧、广平王怀进号骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十九日，任命车骑大将军、尚书令高肇为司徒公，光禄大夫、清河王元怿为司空，司州牧、广平王元怀进号骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the 19th, Gaozhao, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Shang Shuling, was appointed as the grand steward, Dr. Guang Lu, Wang Yuanjun of Qinghe as the grand steward, and Shuzhou Maki, Wang Yuanhuaijin of Guangping as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：三月辛卯朔，渴槃陀国遣使朝献。
现代文：三月初一，渴国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the first day of March, the thirsty country sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：甲午，州郡十一大水，诏开仓赈恤。
现代文：初四，境内州郡有十分之一发大水，世宗下诏开仓济民。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, one-tenth of the prefectures and counties in the territory were flooded, and Emperor Sejong issued an edict to open warehouses to help the people.

古文：以京师谷贵，出仓粟八十万石以赈贫者。
现代文：因为京城粮食价格昂贵，拿出国库的八十万担粮食以赈济贫苦百姓。
English: Because the price of grain in Beijing was expensive, 800,000 tons of grain from the national treasury were used to feed the poor.

古文：己未，安乐王诠薨。
现代文：二十九日，安乐王元诠逝世。
English: On the 29th, Wang Yuanqin passed away.

古文：夏四月，诏以旱故，食粟之畜皆断之。
现代文：夏季四月，世宗下诏因干旱的原因，以粟饲养的牲畜一律不再以粟为饲料。
English: In the summer of April, because of the drought, Shizong issued an edict that all livestock raised on millet would no longer be fed with millet.

古文：丁卯，诏曰： 迁京嵩县，年将二纪，虎闱阙唱演之音，四门绝讲诵之业。博士端然，虚禄岁祀；贵游之胄，叹同子衿。
现代文：初七，世宗下诏书说： 皇都迁至洛阳，将近二十四年了，宫中缺少唱演之音，四门断绝学校讲授之业，博士们端然处朝，枉拿俸禄，不临岁祭，贵族子弟，莘莘欲学之人，无不感叹，静静思之，羞颜难当。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Shizong issued an edict saying: The imperial capital has been moved to Luoyang for nearly twenty-four years, the palace lacks the sound of singing, the four gates have cut off the teaching of schools, the doctors are arrogant, they take salaries in vain, they do not attend the New Year's Eve festival, the sons of nobles, and those who want to study are all lamenting, quietly thinking, and ashamed.

古文：靖言念之，有兼愧慨。可严敕有司，国子学孟冬使成，太学、四门明年暮春令就。 
现代文：可严令有关部门，国子学舍务必在冬季十一月建成，太学、四门学舍明年暮春三月完工。 
English: However, the relevant departments have been strictly ordered that the Kuniko campus must be completed in the winter of November, and the Taigaku and Shimen campuses must be completed in the late spring of March next year.

古文：戊辰，以旱，诏尚书与群司鞠理狱讼，诏河北民就谷燕恆二州。
现代文：初八，因旱灾，世宗下诏命尚书与各有关部门审理案件诉讼，下诏让黄河以北的百姓到燕、恒两州就食。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, due to drought, Shizong issued an edict ordering Shang Shu and all relevant departments to hear cases and litigate, and issued an edict ordering the people north of the Yellow River to eat in Yan and Heng.

古文：辛未，诏饥民就谷六镇。
现代文：十一日，下诏让饥民在六镇就食。
English: On the eleventh day, an edict was issued to allow the hungry to eat in six towns.

古文：丁丑，帝以旱故，减膳撤悬。
现代文：十七日，世宗因干旱的原因，减少膳食，撤除音乐。
English: On the 17th, because of the drought, Sejong reduced meals and removed music.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 肆州地震陷裂，死伤甚多。言念毁没，有酸怀抱。
现代文：二十三日，世宗下诏书说： 肆州地震，死伤人数众多，朕每每念及此事，不觉酸痛有加。
English: On the 23rd, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying, "The earthquake in Wuzhou has caused a large number of deaths and injuries. Every time I think about this, I feel more and more soreness.

古文：亡者不可复追，生病之徒宜加疗救。
现代文：死去的人不可追还，生病的人应该加以医疗救助。
English: Those who have died cannot be brought back, and those who are ill should be given medical assistance.

古文：可遣太医、折伤医，并给所须之药，就治之。 
现代文：可派朝中太医、外科医生携带必须的药品，就地进行治疗。 
English: It is possible to send Chinese and Korean doctors and surgeons to bring the necessary medicines and carry out treatment on site.

古文：乙酉，大赦，改年。
现代文：二十五日，世宗大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 25th, the Sejong Emperor pardoned the whole country and changed the year.

古文：诏立理诉殿、申讼车，以尽冤穷之理。
现代文：下诏建造理诉殿、申讼车，以尽申冤穷之理。
English: He issued an edict to build a court of arbitration and a court of appeal, in order to fully redress the grievances of the poor.

古文：五月辛卯，疏勒及高丽国并遣使朝献。
现代文：五月初一，疏勒及高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the first day of May, Sule and Goryeo sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丙午，诏天下有粟之家，供年之外，悉贷饥民。
现代文：十六日，世宗下诏令天下有余粮的家庭，除了留下自家一年的口粮，其余全部拿出来借给饥民。
English: On the 16th, King Sejong issued an edict ordering all families with surplus grain to lend the rest of their grain to the starving people, except for one year's worth of their own grain.

古文：自二月不雨至于是晦。
现代文：国家从二月不下滴雨一直到这个月底，连续干旱。
English: The country has been in a continuous drought from February, when there was no rain, until the end of this month.

古文：六月壬申，澍雨大洽。
现代文：六月十一日，喜雨倾盆。
English: On June 11th, it rained a lot.

古文：戊寅，通河南牝马之禁。
现代文：十七日，解除黄河以南禁止养母马的禁令。
English: On the 17th, the ban on breeding mares south of the Yellow River was lifted.

古文：己卯，诏曰： 去岁水灾，今春炎旱。百姓饥馁，救命靡寄，虽经蚕月，不能养绩。
现代文：十八日，世宗下诏书说： 去年水灾，今年春天又发生旱灾，百姓饥馁，救命无计，眼下虽处养蚕月份，然却无法养织。
English: On the 18th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict saying: Last year's flood, this spring's drought, the people are starving, and there is no way to save their lives. Although it is the month for raising silkworms, it is impossible to raise silkworms.

古文：今秋输将及，郡县期于责办，尚书可严勒诸州，量民资产，明加检校，以救艰弊。 
现代文：今年秋天的纳税交租日期将到，各郡县限期责办，尚书可严令各州，要以百姓实际的收入为准，明加检校，不得强行催交，以拯救艰难凋弊之人。 
English: This autumn's tax and rent payment date will arrive, and each county and county will be responsible for the deadline. The book can strictly order each state to take the actual income of the people as the criterion, and clearly check the school, and must not force the payment, in order to save the people who are struggling.

古文：庚辰，诏出太仓粟五十万石，以赈京师及州郡饥民。
现代文：二十日，世宗下诏发放太仓粮食五十万担，以赈济京城及州郡的饥民。
English: On the 20th, King Sejong issued an edict to distribute half a million cords of grain from Taicang to feed the hungry in the capital and prefectures.

古文：秋七月，吐谷浑、契丹国并遣朝献。
现代文：秋季七月，吐谷浑、契丹国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In the autumn, in July, envoys from the Kingdoms of Tuvalu and Khitan came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：八月壬戌，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：八月初一，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the first day of August, an envoy from the Kingdom of Tugu was sent to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丁亥，勿吉国贡楛矢。
现代文：二十六日，勿吉国贡奉眓矢。
English: On the 26th, the tribute from Beji Province was sent.

古文：冬十月乙亥，立皇子诩为皇太子。
现代文：冬季十月十八日，立皇子元诩为皇太子。
English: On the 18th day of October in winter, Prince Motohiro was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：是月，嚈哒、于阗、高昌及库莫奚诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：这个月，口厌哒、于阗、高昌以及库莫奚等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: This month, countries such as Guizhou, Yunnan, Gaochang and Kumho sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十有一月丙申，诏曰： 朕运承天休，统御宸宇。太子体藉灵明，肇建宫华。明两既孚，三善方洽，宜泽均率壤，荣泛庶胤。
现代文：十一月初十，世宗下诏书说： 朕登临皇基，统理天下，太子体借神灵，始立宫华，君与储君两明既符，三善方合，应让泽惠广布海内。荣耀施及亿兆黎民。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "I ascended to the imperial throne to rule the world. I took the form of a prince by borrowing from the gods to establish the imperial court. The position of the crown prince and the position of the regent are clearly compatible, and the three virtues are compatible. I should let Ze Hui spread out across the sea. I will bestow glory on the people of a hundred trillion li."

古文：其赐天下为父后者爵一级，孝子、顺孙、廉夫、节妇旌表门闾，量给粟帛。 
现代文：可赐给天下继承父业者爵一级，孝子、顺孙、廉夫、节妇表彰门里，量情赐给一定的粮食布匹。 
English: Can be given to the world to inherit his father's peerage, filial son, great-grandson, husband, wife commended the door, the amount given to a certain grain cloth.

古文：十有二月己巳，诏守宰为御史所弹遇赦免者、及考在中第，皆代之。
现代文：十二月十八日，下诏各州郡长官被御史所弹劾批评遇赦免罪的，以及政绩考核处于中游的，一律被取代。
English: On December 18th, all prefectural governors of the following prefectures who were impeached and criticized by the Imperial History Research Institute and pardoned, as well as those who were in the middle of the political performance assessment, were replaced.

古文：二年春正月戊戌，帝御申讼车，亲理冤讼。
现代文：延昌二年春季正月十三日，世宗亲临申讼车，亲自审理冤案。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the second year of Yanchang, Shizong personally came to the complaint car and personally tried the case.

古文：高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二月丙辰朔，赈恤京师贫民。
现代文：二月初一，赈济京城中贫苦百姓。
English: On the first day of February, the middle-class and poor people in Beijing were given relief.

古文：甲戌，以六镇大饥，开仓赈赡。
现代文：二月十九日，因六镇发生大饥荒，开仓济民。
English: On February 19th, due to the great famine in six towns, they opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：己卯，太尉、高阳王雍进位太保。
现代文：二十四日，太尉、高阳王元雍进位太保。
English: On the 24th, the first lieutenant, Goyang Wangyuan Yong, was promoted to the position of Taiho.

古文：庚辰，萧衍郁州民徐玄明等斩送衍镇北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷首，以州内附。诏前南兗州刺史樊鲁率众赴之。
现代文：二十五日，梁朝郁州百姓徐玄明等杀了梁朝的镇北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷，把他的脑袋送到朝廷，举州归附，世宗下诏让前南兖州刺史樊鲁率部前去支援。
English: On the 25th, Xu Xuanming, a commoner from Yuzhou of the Liang Dynasty, and others killed the general of Zhenbei of the Liang Dynasty and the statesman of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, Zhang Xuan, and sent his head to the imperial court, the state of Yuzhou was annexed, and Shizong issued an edict to let the former southern state of Yuzhou, Shizhonglu, lead the department to go to support.

古文：闰二月辛丑，以苑牧之地赐代迁民无田者。
现代文：闰二月十六日，世宗把皇家放牧的地方赐给代郡那些没有田地的老百姓。
English: On the 16th day of the second month of the leap year, King Sejong gave the royal grazing land to the common people of Dae-gun who had no fields.

古文：癸卯，定奴良之制，以景明为断。
现代文：十八日，规定奴隶良民的划分办法，以景明年间为分界线。
English: On the 18th, it stipulated the division of slaves and good people, with Jingye District as the dividing line.

古文：三月丙寅，高昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：三月十三日，高昌国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On March 13, Gaochang sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：是春，民饥，饿死者数万口。
现代文：这年春天，百姓饥荒，被饿死的有数万人之多。
English: In the spring of that year, there was a famine among the people, and tens of thousands died of starvation.

古文：夏四月庚子，以绢十五万匹赈恤河南郡饥民。
现代文：夏季四月十六日，发放绢十五万匹以赈济抚恤河南郡饥民。
English: In the summer, on April 16, 150,000 yakitori were distributed to feed the hungry in Henan County.

古文：五月，寿春大水，遣平东将军奚康生等步骑数千赴之。
现代文：五月，寿春发生大水灾，世宗派平东将军奚康生等率领步骑兵数千人前去救援。
English: In May, a major flood occurred in Shuchun, and the Sect dispatched General Pingdong Hao Kangsheng and others to lead thousands of infantry cavalry to the rescue.

古文：高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：六月乙酉，青州民饥，诏使者开仓赈恤。
现代文：六月二十日，青州百姓闹饥荒，世宗下诏命使者开仓赈济。
English: On June 20th, the people of Qingzhou were suffering from famine, and Emperor Shizong issued an edict ordering an envoy to open a warehouse to provide relief.

古文：甲午，曲赦扬州。
现代文：二十九日，朝廷在扬州实行特赦。
English: On the 29th, the imperial court issued an amnesty in Yangzhou.

古文：辛亥，帝御申讼车，亲理冤讼。
现代文：七月初八，世宗亲临申讼车，亲自处理冤狱。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of the year, Sejong personally went to the complaint car and personally dealt with the unjust imprisonment.

古文：是夏，州郡十三大水。
现代文：这年夏天，境内州郡十分之三发生大水灾。
English: In the summer of that year, three-tenths of the prefectures and counties in the region experienced major flooding.

古文：秋八月辛卯，诏曰： 顷水旱互侵，频年饥俭，百姓窘弊，多陷罪辜。烦刑之愧，朕用惧矣。
现代文：秋天八月初七，世宗下诏书说： 一向以来水旱交加，连年饥荒，百姓窘迫不堪，不得已铤而走险，身陷牢狱，令朕忧惧不安。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the autumn, King Sejong issued an edict saying, "Since time immemorial, there have been droughts and famines year after year, and the people have been in great distress. I have been forced to take desperate measures and end up in prison, which makes me feel worried and uneasy.

古文：其杀人、掠卖人、群强盗首，及虽非首而杀伤财主、曾经再犯公断道路劫夺行人者，依法行决；自余恕死。
现代文：那些杀人、掠卖人口、强盗团伙的首犯，以及虽非首犯却杀伤财主，屡次犯有拦路抢劫罪的罪犯，可依法处决；其余的人免除死罪。
English: Those who are the ringleaders of gangs of murderers, human traffickers, and robbers, as well as those who are not the ringleaders but kill or injure the rich, and those who repeatedly commit the crime of highway robbery, may be executed in accordance with the law; the rest of the people are exempt from the death penalty.

古文：徒流已下各准减降。 
现代文：罪行在流放以下的各准减刑。 
English: Offences punishable by anything less than banishment.

古文：庚戌，嚈哒、于阗、槃陀及契丹、库莫奚诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十六日，口厌哒、于阗、渴以及契丹、库莫奚各国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 26th, envoys from all over the world, including China, Japan, Thailand, Bhutan, and Cambodia, came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：九月丙辰，以贵族豪门崇习奢侈，诏尚书严立限级，节其流宕。
现代文：九月初二，因贵族豪门崇尚奢侈，世宗下诏让尚书立下严格的等级，以节制其风气。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month, because the aristocrats advocated luxury, the emperor issued an edict to let Shang Shu set a strict level to control its style.

古文：是月，勿吉、吐谷浑、邓至国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这个月，勿吉、吐谷浑、邓至国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In this month, the emissaries of Bekichi, Tukugan, and Dengzhi all came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：冬十月，诏以恆、肆地震，民多死伤，蠲两河一年租赋。
现代文：冬季十月，世宗下诏因恒、肆二州发生地震，老百姓多有死伤，免除黄、淮地区百姓一年的租赋。
English: In the winter of October, an earthquake occurred in two prefectures of Shizong, Zhaoying and He, in which many people were killed or injured. The people in Huang and Huai regions were exempted from paying rent for one year.

古文：十有二月丙戌，丐洛阳、河阴二县租赋。
现代文：十二月初一，免除洛阳、河阴两县的租赋。
English: On the first day of December, Luoyang and Hexin counties were exempted from rent.

古文：乙巳，诏以恆、肆地震，民多离灾，其有课丁没尽、老幼单辛、家无受复者，各赐廪以接来稔。
现代文：初十，世宗下诏，因恒、肆两州发生地震，百姓多灾多难，其中有担负劳役租赋的青壮年死尽、老幼孤单辛苦、家中没有享受到什么优抚的，各各赐给府库粮食让他们维持到来年谷熟。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Shizong issued an edict that, due to the earthquake that occurred in the two prefectures of Hengduan and Hezhou, the people suffered many disasters and hardships. Among them, the young and strong who were responsible for labor and rent died out, the old and young were lonely and hardworking, and those who did not enjoy any special treatment at home, each gave grain to the prefectural treasury so that they could maintain the harvest of the coming year.

古文：高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春二月乙未，诏曰： 肆州秀容郡敷城县、雁门郡原平县，并自去年四月以来，山鸣地震，于今不巳。告谴彰咎，朕甚惧焉；祗畏兢兢，若临渊谷。可恤瘼宽刑，以答灾谪。 
现代文：延昌三年春季二月十六日，世宗下诏书说： 肆州秀容郡敷城县、雁门郡原平县，都从去年四月以来，山鸣地震，至今不止，苍天告罪彰咎，朕心中十分惧怕，畏神之情战战兢兢，如临渊谷，现可体恤疾苦宽释刑罚，以酬答灾祸。 
English: On the 16th day of February in the spring of the 3rd year of Yanchang, Shizong issued an edict saying: Since last April, the earthquake in Shuming, Shijicheng County, Xiurong County, and Yuanping County, Yanmen County, all occurred in Wuzhou, and it has not stopped until now. The heavens have condemned and blamed. I am very afraid in my heart. I tremble with the fear of God. Like Linyu Valley, I can now sympathize with the suffering, pardon the punishment, and respond to the disaster with reward.

古文：三月，三关别将李世哲大破群蛮，斩萧衍龙骧将军文思之、文天生。
现代文：三月，三关别将李世哲大败群蛮，杀了萧衍龙骧将军文思之、文天生。
English: In March, the three generals defeated Li Shizhe and killed Xiao Yan Longqin's generals Wen Sizhi and Wen Tian Sheng.

古文：夏四月，青州民饥。
现代文：夏季四月，青州百姓发生饥荒。
English: In the summer of April, the people of Qingzhou suffered from famine.

古文：辛巳，开仓赈恤。
现代文：初七，官府开仓济民。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：乙巳，上御申讼车，亲理冤讼。
现代文：二十五日，世宗亲临申讼车，亲自处理冤案。
English: On the 25th, Sejong personally went to the complaint car and personally handled the grievance.

古文：六月，南荆州刺史桓叔兴大破萧衍军于九山，斩其虎旅将军、新丰县开国子蔡令孙，冠军将军席世兴，贞义将军蓝次孙。
现代文：六月，南荆州刺史桓叔兴在九山大败萧衍的军队，杀了其虎旅将军、新丰县开国子蔡令孙、冠军将军席世兴、贞义将军蓝次孙。
English: In June, South Jingzhou assassin Huan Shuxing defeated Xiao Yan's army in Jiu Mountain, and killed his tiger brigade general, Cai Ling Sun, the founder of Xinfeng County, champion general Xi Shixing, and the second grandson of General Zhengyi Lan.

古文：秋七月丙子，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋季七月三十日，勿吉国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of autumn, an envoy from the State of Bekichi came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：八月甲申，帝临朝堂，考百司而加黜陟。
现代文：八月初七，世宗亲临朝堂，考核百官政绩加以升降。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Shizong personally visited the Imperial Palace to evaluate the performance of 100 officials and promote and demote them.

古文：九月，吐谷浑、契丹、勿吉诸国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：九月，吐谷浑、契丹、勿吉等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: In September, emissaries from Tugu Gun, Khitan, Bekji and other countries came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：冬十月庚辰，诏骁骑将军马义舒慰谕蠕蠕。
现代文：冬季十月初五，世宗下诏命骁骑将军马义舒抚慰蠕蠕。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the winter, King Sejong issued an edict to ride General Ma Yi to comfort and console him.

古文：库莫奚国遣使朝贡。
现代文：库莫奚国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: The Kuomintang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十有一月庚戌，南天竺、佐越费实诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十一月十五日，南天竺、佐越费实等国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 15th of November, the countries of South Tianzhu and Sasebo sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：辛亥，诏司徒高肇为大将军、平蜀大都督，步骑十万西伐。
现代文：十六日，世宗下诏命司徒高肇为大将军、平蜀大都督，率领骑步兵十万人西征。
English: On the 16th, King Sejong issued an imperial edict ordering Sittu Gaozhao to become the grand general and the grand governor of Pingshu, and to lead 100,000 cavalry and infantry to the west.

古文：益州刺史傅竖眼出巴北，平南将军羊祉出涪城，安西将军奚康生出绵竹，抚军将军甄琛出剑阁。
现代文：益州刺史傅竖眼率部出巴山北，平南将军羊祉率部出涪城，安西将军奚康生兵出绵竹，抚军将军甄琛率兵出剑阁。
English: Yizhou general Shi Fu and his troops marched to the north of Bashan, Pingnan general Yang Zhi and his troops marched to Jiancheng, Anxi general Jian Kang and his troops marched to Mianzhu, and Fuzhou general Zhen Rong and his troops marched to Jiange.

古文：乙卯，以中护军元遥为征南将军、东道都督，镇遏梁楚。
现代文：二十日，任命中护军元遥为征南将军、东道都督，镇守梁、楚。
English: On the 20th, Yuan Yao, the middle guard, was appointed as the general of the southern expedition, the host governor, and the town guards Liang and Chu.

古文：丁巳，幽州沙门刘僧绍聚众反，自号净居国明法王。
现代文：二十二日，幽州和尚刘僧绍聚众造反，自号净居国明法王。
English: On the 22nd, Yuzhou and Shang Liu monk Shao gathered a crowd to rebel, calling himself the Pure Land Ming Fa Wang.

古文：州郡捕斩之。
现代文：州郡军队捕获并斩杀了他。
English: State and county troopers captured and killed him.

古文：甲戌，高丽国遣使朝献。
现代文：十二月初八，高丽国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：十有二月庚寅，诏立明堂。
现代文：二十四日，世宗下诏建立明堂以举行祝祀活动。
English: On the 24th, Sejong issued an edict to build Myeongdong to hold the celebration.

古文：四年春正月甲寅，帝不豫，丁巳，崩于式乾殿，时年三十三。
现代文：延昌四年春季正月初十，世宗病情恶化，十三日，在式乾殿逝世。时年三十三岁。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Yanchang, Shizong's condition worsened, and on the 13th day, he died in Shikian Hall. He was 33 years old.

古文：二月甲戌朔，上尊谥曰宣武皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：二月初一，皇上被遵谥为宣武皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: On the first day of February, the emperor was enthroned as Emperor Xuanwu, with the title of Emperor Shizong.

古文：甲午，葬景陵。
现代文：二十一日，葬于景陵。
English: He was buried in Jingling Mausoleum on the 21st.

古文：帝幼有大度，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：世宗幼年起即有宽阔的胸怀，喜怒不形于色。
English: Since he was a child, Sejong has had a broad mind, and his emotions are always the same.

古文：雅性俭素。
现代文：生性节俭朴素。
English: Frugal and simple by nature.

古文：初，高祖欲观诸子志尚，乃大陈宝物，任其所取，京兆王愉等皆竞取珍玩，帝唯取骨如意而已。
现代文：当初，高祖欲检查诸子的志趣风尚，便大摆宝物，任听各个儿子拿取，京兆王元愉等全都竞相选取珍宝玩好，世宗只是挑了一个骨制如意而已。
English: At first, Gao Zu wanted to check the children's hobbies and fashions, so he displayed the treasures, and allowed each son to take them. King Zhao Wang Yuan Yu and others all competed to choose the treasures to play with. Shizong just picked a bone system as he liked.

古文：高祖大奇之。
现代文：高祖大为惊奇。
English: Gaozu was very surprised.

古文：庶人恂失德，高祖谓彭城王勰曰： 吾固疑此兒有非常志相，今果然矣。 
现代文：庶人元恂失德，高祖对彭城王元勰说： 我一向觉得这孩子有非常的志向，今天果然不错。 
English: Gao Zu said to Pengcheng Wang Yuanlu: I have always felt that this child has a very strong aspiration, and today is really a good day.

古文：乃立为储贰。
现代文：于是立他为储君。
English: So he made him crown prince.

古文：雅爱经史。尤长释氏之义，每至讲论，连夜忘疲。
现代文：世宗雅爱经书史籍，尤其长于佛理，每每到讲论佛典的时候，没日没夜，疲劳全忘。
English: Shizong Yazong loved the scriptures and historical books, especially the sutras, and whenever he came to lecture on Buddhism, he would work day and night, completely forgetting his fatigue.

古文：善风仪，美容貌，临朝渊默，端严若神，有人君之量矣。
现代文：世宗风度翩翩，容貌俊美，临朝听政深沉静默，端整严肃犹如神灵，大有人君的度量胸怀。
English: Shizong has a graceful demeanor, handsome appearance, deep and silent listening to politics in the imperial court, neat and serious as if he were a god, and he has a great heart.

古文：史臣曰：世宗承圣考德业，天下想望风化，垂拱无为，边徼稽服。
现代文：史臣曰：世宗继承皇魏先祖的大业，天下之人闻风顺化，世宗端坐垂拱无为而治，边塞之民稽首归服。
English: Shichen said: Shizong inherited the great cause of the imperial and Wei ancestors, the people of the world heard the wind and became prosperous, Shizong sat at the end of the arch and did nothing, and the people of the border fortress were subdued.

古文：而宽以摄下，从容不断，太和之风替矣。
现代文：而世宗宽而治国，从容不迫，太和之风已被更替。
English: However, Shizong's broad-minded and easy-going approach to governing the country has been replaced by a more conciliatory approach.

古文：比夫汉世，元、成、安、顺之俦欤？
现代文：比之汉代，世宗岂不可以与元、成、安、顺各朝皇帝媲美吗？
English: Compared to the Han Dynasty, shouldn't Shizong be comparable to the emperors of the Yuan, Cheng, An, and Shun dynasties?

