古文：虢之会，鲁人食言，楚令尹围将以鲁叔孙穆子为戮，乐王鲋求货焉不予。
现代文：在郑国虢地会盟时，鲁国人自食其言。楚国的令尹围要把鲁国的叔孙穆子杀掉，乐王鲋向叔孙穆子索取财货，穆子不肯给。
English: At the time of the alliance between Zheng Guo and Lu Guo, the Lu Guo people took advantage of their own words. The order of Yin Wai of Chu Guo wanted to kill Lu Guo's great-uncle Mu Zi, and Le Wang Zi asked his great-uncle Mu Zi for money and goods, which Mu Zi refused to give.

古文：赵文子谓叔孙曰： 夫楚令尹有欲于楚，少懦于诸侯。
现代文：赵文子对叔孙穆子说： 楚国的令尹围想得到楚国的王位，认为诸侯们都很弱小。
English: Zhao Wenzi said to his great-uncle Mu Zi: The ruler of the State of Chu, Yin Wai, wanted to obtain the throne of the State of Chu, and thought that the princes were weak.

古文：诸侯之故，求治之，不求致也。
现代文：诸侯会盟的事，是求得解决问题，不仅仅是要求都到会就行了。
English: The purpose of the association of lords is to solve problems, not just to ask everyone to attend.

古文：其为人也，刚而尚宠，若及，必不避也。子盍逃之？
现代文：令尹围的为人，刚愎自用，好自尊宠，如果被他碰上，肯定无法躲避。你何不逃走呢？
English: Ling Yinwei is a man of great self-discipline and self-respect. If he comes across you, you will not be able to avoid him. Why don't you run away?

古文：不幸，必及于子。 
现代文：万一发生不幸，一定会危及到你。 
English: In the unlikely event of misfortune, it will certainly endanger you.

古文：对曰： 豹也受命于君，以从诸侯之盟，为社稷也。
现代文：叔孙穆子回答说： 我奉国君的命令，来参加诸侯的会盟，是为了国家。
English: Uncle Sun Muzi replied, "I came to join the union of lords on the order of the sovereign, for the sake of the country.

古文：若鲁有罪，而受盟者逃，必不免，是吾出而危之也。
现代文：如果鲁国有罪，而来参加会盟的使者逃了，那鲁国一定免不了要遭到讨伐，这样我出来反倒危害了国家。
English: If Lu Guo is guilty and the envoy who came to join the League escapes, then Lu Guo will inevitably be attacked, so I came out and harmed the country.

古文：若为诸侯戮者，鲁诛尽矣，必不加师，请为戮也。
现代文：如果我被诸侯们杀害，那对鲁国的诛伐也就到此为止了，必定不会再兴师问罪了，请杀我吧。
English: If I were to be killed by the lords, that would be the end of the campaign against Lu, and there would certainly be no more persecution. Please kill me.

古文：夫戮出于身实难，自他及之何害？
现代文：杀害是出于自身犯罪的话，那确实难堪，如果是由于他人连累到自己，又有什么妨害？
English: If the killing is due to one's own crime, it is indeed embarrassing, but if it is due to someone else's involvement, what is the hindrance?

古文：苟可以安君利国，美恶一心也。 
现代文：如果可以使国君平安，对国家有利，生与死都是一样的。 
English: If you can make the sovereign safe, it is good for the country. Life and death are the same.

古文：文子将请之于楚，乐王鲋曰： 诸侯有盟未退，而鲁背之，安用齐盟？
现代文：赵文子将向楚国求情，乐王鲋说： 诸侯缔结盟约，还没散会，而鲁国就违背它，那又何必缔结盟约呢？
English: Zhao Wenzi will plead with the State of Chu, and Le Wangyu said: The princes have made an alliance agreement, but it has not yet been dissolved, and the State of Lu will violate it, so why should they make an alliance agreement?

古文：纵不能讨，又免其受盟者，晋何以为盟主矣，必杀叔孙豹。 
现代文：纵然不能出兵讨伐鲁国，却又要赦免鲁国来参加会盟的使者，那晋国还凭什么作为盟主呢？一定要杀死叔孙豹。 
English: Even though it cannot send troops to fight the Lu nation, it has to pardon the envoy of the Lu nation to participate in the alliance, so what can Jin nation rely on as the alliance leader? It must kill the uncle and grandson of the leopard.

古文：文子曰： 有人不难以死安利其国，可无爱乎！
现代文：文子说： 有人不惜一死以保卫国家利益，这样的人难道可以不加爱护吗？
English: Fumiko said: If someone is willing to die to defend the interests of the country, can such a person not be cherished?

古文：若皆恤国如是，则大不丧威，而小不见陵矣。
现代文：如果都能这样爱护国家，那么大国就不会丧失威严，小国也不会受到欺侮。
English: If we could all cherish the country in this way, then the big countries would not lose their dignity, and the small countries would not be bullied.

古文：若是道也果，可以教训，何败国之有！
现代文：如果按照这个道理去实行，就可以教训百姓，又怎么会败坏国家呢！
English: If it is carried out according to this principle, it can teach the people a lesson, but how can it corrupt the country!

古文：吾闻之曰： 善人在患，弗救不祥；恶人在位，不去亦不祥。 
现代文：我听说： 好人有患难，不救他不吉祥；恶人在位，不除掉也不吉祥。 
English: I have heard it said, "When a good man is in trouble, it is not good to rescue him; when a wicked man is in power, it is not good to remove him."

古文：必免叔孙。 
现代文：因此，一定要赦免叔孙豹。 
English: Therefore, we must pardon uncle and grandson.

古文：固请于楚而免之。
现代文：赵武子坚决向楚国请求，而赦免了叔孙豹。
English: Zhao Wu Zi resolutely appealed to the State of Chu, and the uncle and grandson of the leopard were pardoned.

