古文：徐达常遇春
现代文：徐达，字天德，濠州人，祖先世代务农。
English: Xuda, Zeta Tiande, Zhangzhou people, ancestors have been farming for generations.

古文：徐达，字天德，濠人，世业农。达少有大志，长身高颧，刚毅武勇。
现代文：徐达年少有大志，身长高颧，刚毅武勇。
English: Xu Daxian had lofty aspirations, was tall and slender, and was strong and courageous.

古文：太祖之为郭子兴部帅也，达时年二十二，往从之，一见语合。
现代文：朱元璋成为郭子兴的部帅时，徐达二十二岁，前去投奔朱元璋，双方一见如故，言谈十分投机。
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang became Guo Zixing's general, Xu Daru, twenty-two years old, went to join Zhu Yuanzhang. Both sides saw the same thing, and the talk was very speculative.

古文：及太祖南略定远，帅二十四人往，达首与焉。
现代文：到朱元璋南征定远时，率领二十四人前往，徐达就已位列第一。
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang went to the south to conquer and settle far away, he led twenty-four people to go, and Xu Da was already in the first place.

古文：寻从破元兵于滁州涧，从取和州，子兴授达镇抚。
现代文：不久随朱元璋在滁州涧打败元军，攻取和州，郭子兴授徐达为镇抚。
English: Soon after, Zhu Yuanzhang defeated the Yuan army in Zhangzhou and conquered Hezhou. Guo Zixing taught Xu Da to be the governor.

古文：子兴执孙德崖，德崖军亦执太祖，达挺身诣德崖军请代，太祖乃得归，达亦获免。
现代文：当郭子兴捉住孙德崖，孙德崖军也拘捕了朱元璋时，徐达挺身而出，到孙德崖军中请求代替朱元璋，朱元璋得以获还，徐达也获免逃脱。
English: When Guo Zixing captured Sun Deya and Sun Deya's army also arrested Zhu Yuanzhang, Xu Da stepped forward and went to Sun Deya's army to request to replace Zhu Yuanzhang. Zhu Yuanzhang was able to be returned, and Xu Da was also allowed to escape.

古文：从渡江，拔采石，取太平，与常遇春皆为军锋冠。
现代文：以后跟随朱元璋渡江，拔采石，取太平，徐达与常遇春都是军中先锋。
English: Later, he followed Zhu Yuanzhang to cross the Yangtze River, quarried stone, and conquered Taiping. Xu Da and Changyu Chun were pioneers in the army.

古文：从破擒元将陈野先，别将兵取溧阳、溧水，从下集庆。
现代文：又随朱元璋破获元将陈野先，并率军攻取溧阳、溧水，又随朱元璋攻下集庆。
English: He also followed Zhu Yuanzhang in defeating the former general Chen Nosen, and led the army to capture Fenyang and Lishui. He also followed Zhu Yuanzhang in capturing Jieqing.

古文：太祖身居守，而命达为大将，帅诸军东攻镇江，拔之。
现代文：朱元璋驻守集庆，命徐达为大将，率诸军东克镇江。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang stationed in Jieqing, appointed Xu Da as the general, and led the troops to Dongke Zhenjiang.

古文：号令明肃，城中宴然。
现代文：徐达军中号令严明，城中秩序井然。
English: Xu Da's army issued strict orders, and the city was orderly.

古文：授淮兴翼统军元帅。
现代文：徐达被授予淮兴翼统军元帅。
English: Xu Da was awarded the title of Marshal of the United Front Army.

古文：时张士诚已据常州，挟江东叛将陈保二以舟师攻镇江。
现代文：当时张士诚已经占据常州，挟制江东叛将陈保二以水师攻镇江。
English: At that time, Zhang Shicheng had already occupied Changzhou, and Chen Baoji, the traitor who controlled the East River, attacked the Zhenjiang River with sailors.

古文：达败之于龙潭，遂请益兵以围常州。
现代文：徐达在龙潭将其击败，然后请求增兵围攻常州。
English: Xu Da defeated them at Longtan, and then requested more troops to besiege Changzhou.

古文：士诚遣将来援。达以敌狡而锐，未易力取，乃离城设二伏以待，别遣将王均用为奇兵，而自督军战。
现代文：张士诚遣将来援，徐达因为敌人既狡猾又强大，强攻不易，便在城外二处设伏等待，另外派将领王均用为奇兵，徐达则亲自督军作战。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent reinforcements, and Xu Da, because the enemy was cunning and powerful, and it was not easy to attack forcefully, set up ambushes in two places outside the city to wait. In addition, he sent generals and emperors to be used as extraordinary soldiers, and Xu Da personally commanded the army to fight.

古文：敌退走遇伏，大败之，获其张、汤二将，进围常州。明年克之。
现代文：敌军撤退时遇上埋伏，徐达军将其击败，抓获张、汤二将，进兵围攻常州，第二年将它攻克。
English: When the enemy army was retreating, it was ambushed. Xu Da's army defeated it, captured Zhang and Tang Er, and besieged Changzhou, and conquered it the next year.

古文：进佥枢密院事。
现代文：徐达晋升为佥枢密院事。
English: Promoted to Privy Councillor.

古文：继克宁国，徇宜兴，使前锋赵德胜下常熟，擒士诚弟士德。
现代文：继而攻占宁国、宜兴，派前锋赵德胜攻下常熟，擒获张士诚之弟张士德。
English: Subsequently, they conquered Ningguo and Yixing, and sent the forward Zhao Desheng to conquer Changshu, and captured Zhang Shide, the younger brother of Zhang Shicheng.

古文：明年复攻宜兴，克之。
现代文：第二年复攻宜兴，将其攻克。
English: In the second year, they resumed the attack on Yixing and conquered it.

古文：太祖自将攻婺州，命达留守应天，别遣兵袭破天完将赵普胜，复池州。
现代文：朱元璋亲自率军进攻婺州，命徐达留守应天，另外派兵袭击天完守将赵普胜，将其打败，收复池州。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang personally led the army to attack Zhangzhou, and ordered Xu Da to stay in Yingtian. In addition, he sent troops to attack Zhao Pusheng, the commander of Tianwan, to defeat him and recover Chizhou.

古文：迁奉国上将军、同知枢密院事。
现代文：徐达升为奉国上将军，同知枢密院事。
English: Xu Daxing was promoted to the post of minister to the country, and he was also a member of the Privy Council.

古文：进攻安庆，自无为陆行，夜掩浮山寨，破普胜部将于青山，遂克潜山。
现代文：进而攻安庆，自无为出发，沿陆地行走，趁夜袭击浮山寨，在青山打败赵普胜的部将，攻克潜山。
English: Then he attacked Anqing, starting from nothing, walking along the land, taking advantage of the night to attack the floating village, defeating Zhao Pusheng's captain in Aoyama, and conquering the hidden mountain.

古文：还镇池州，与遇春设伏，败陈友谅军于九华山下，斩首万人，生擒三千人。
现代文：回师镇守池州，与常遇春设下埋伏，在九华山下将陈友谅打败，斩首万人，生擒三千。
English: Hui Shizhen guarded Chizhou, and set up an ambush with Changyu Chun, defeated Chen Youxian at the foot of Jihua Mountain, beheaded ten thousand people, and killed three thousand.

古文：遇春曰： 此劲旅也，不杀为后患。 
现代文：常遇春认为 ：这是一支劲旅，不杀的话，将会成为后患。 
English: Oft-encountered spring believes: This is a vigorous journey, if not killed, it will become a hindrance.

古文：达不可，乃以状闻。
现代文：徐达不同意，便将此事报告朱元璋。
English: Xu Da disagreed and reported the matter to Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：而遇春先以夜坑其人过半，太祖不怿，悉纵遣余众。
现代文：而常遇春则抢先在夜里活埋被俘者过半，朱元璋闻此不悦，将其余的人全部释放。
English: In spring, however, more than half of the captives were buried alive at night, and Zhu Yuanzhang was displeased and released all the rest.

古文：于是始命达尽护诸将。
现代文：于是朱元璋开始命徐达全面统辖其他将领。
English: As a result, Zhu Yuanzhang began to order Xu Da to exercise overall control over other generals.

古文：陈友谅犯龙江，达军南门外，与诸将力战破之，追及之慈湖，焚其舟。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙江时，徐达率军伏于南门外，与诸将奋力拼杀，将其打败，乘胜追到慈湖，将其船只烧毁。
English: When Chen Youjun invaded the Longjiang River, Xu Da led the army to lie down outside the south gate, fought with the generals, defeated them, chased them to Cixi Lake, and burned their ships.

古文：明年，从伐汉，取江州。
现代文：第二年，徐达跟随朱元璋征伐陈友谅，攻取江州。
English: In the second year, Xu Da followed Zhu Yuanzhang to conquer Chen Youzong and capture Jiangzhou.

古文：友谅走武昌，达追之。
现代文：陈友谅逃往武昌，徐达率军追击。
English: Chen Youyong fled to Wuchang, and Xu Da and his army pursued him.

古文：友谅出战舰沔阳，达营汉阳沌口以遏之。
现代文：陈友谅出动战舰到沔阳，徐达在汉阳沌口扎营遏制。
English: Chen Youyuan dispatched a warship to Fenyang, and Xu Da set up camp at Hanyang Chaokou to contain it.

古文：进中书右丞。
现代文：这时徐达晋升为中书右丞。
English: At this time, Xu Da was promoted to Zhongshu Rongzheng.

古文：明年，太祖定南昌，降将祝宗、康泰叛。达以沌口军讨平之。
现代文：一年后，朱元璋平定南昌，降将祝宗、康泰反叛，徐达率沌口驻军将其讨平。
English: A year later, Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Nanchang, Zhu Zong and Kangtai rebelled, and Xu Da led the troops stationed in Chaonkou to defeat them.

古文：从援安丰，破吴将吕珍，遂围庐州。
现代文：不久跟随朱元璋支援安丰，打败吴将吕珍，然后包围庐州。
English: He soon followed Zhu Yuanzhang to support Anfeng, defeated Wu general Luzhen, and then encircled Zhangzhou.

古文：会汉人寇南昌，太祖召达自庐州来会师，遇于鄱阳湖。友谅军甚盛，达身先诸将力战，败其前锋，杀千五百人，获一巨舟。
现代文：当时正遇陈友谅围攻南昌，朱元璋召徐达从庐州前来会师，与陈友谅军在鄱阳湖遭遇，陈友谅军非常强大，徐达身先士卒，率军拼力奋战，将敌前锋打败，杀一千五百人，获一巨舰。
English: At that time, Chen You Yue was besieging Nanchang. Zhu Yuanzhang called Xu Daru from Zhangzhou to join the division and encountered Chen You Yue's army in Poyang Lake. Chen You Yue's army was very powerful. Xu Daru was the first to lead the army and fought hard. He defeated the enemy front, killed 1,500 people and won a huge ship.

古文：太祖知敌可破，而虑士诚内犯，即夜遣达还守应天，自帅诸将鏖战，竟毙友谅。
现代文：朱元璋知道此敌可破，而又担心张士诚内犯，马上连夜派徐达还守应天，自己亲率诸将鏖战，最后击毙陈友谅。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang knew that this enemy could be defeated, but he was worried that Zhang Shicheng was an insider, so he immediately sent Xu Da to guard Ying Tian overnight. He personally led the generals to fight, and finally killed Chen Youyuan.

古文：明年，太祖称吴王，以达为左相国。
现代文：第二年，朱元璋称吴王，以徐达为左相国。
English: In the following year, Zhu Yuanzhang called himself the King of Wu, with Xu Da as his left-hand man.

古文：复引兵围庐州，克其城。略下江陵、辰州、衡州、宝庆诸路，湖、湘平。
现代文：徐达再次引兵围攻庐州，攻克此城，连下江陵、辰州、衡州、宝庆诸路，平定湖、湘。
English: Xu Da once again led an army to besiege Bozhou and conquered the city, and went down to Jiangling, Chenzhou, Hengzhou, Baoqing, Pingding Lake, and Hunan.

古文：召还，帅遇春等徇淮东，克泰州。
现代文：应召返回后，率常遇春等巡行淮东，攻克泰州。
English: After returning at the call of duty, he often led the Spring Festival parade to Huaidong and conquered Taizhou.

古文：吴人陷宜兴，达还救复之。
现代文：吴人攻陷宜兴，徐达回军援救，将其收复。
English: The Wu people invaded Yixing, and Xu Da returned to the army to rescue and recover it.

古文：复引兵渡江，克高邮，俘吴将士千余人。
现代文：又引兵渡江，攻克高邮，俘获吴将士千余人。
English: He also led troops to cross the Yangtze River, conquered Gaoyou, and captured more than a thousand Wu soldiers.

古文：会遇春攻淮安，破吴军于马骡港，守将梅思祖以城降。
现代文：会合常遇春攻淮安，在马骡港打败吴军，守将梅思祖以城投降。
English: He often encountered the Spring Offensive against Huai'an, defeated the Wu army in the port of Ma'an, and surrendered the city of Meizhu.

古文：进破安丰，获元将忻都，走左君弼，尽得其运艘。
现代文：进而攻破安丰，俘获元将忻都，赶走左君弼，尽得其运输船只。
English: He then broke through the Anfeng, captured the Yuan general Xindu, drove away the Zuo Junxuan, and made the best of his transport ships.

古文：元兵侵徐州，迎击，大破之，俘斩万计。
现代文：元兵侵犯徐州，徐达率军迎击，大败元兵，俘获斩首数以万计。
English: Yuan soldiers invaded Xuzhou, Xu Da led the army to counterattack, defeated the Yuan soldiers, captured and beheaded tens of thousands.

古文：淮南、北悉平。
现代文：淮南、淮北全部平定。
English: South Huaian and North Huaian have been completely pacified.

古文：师还，太祖议征吴。右相国李善长请缓之。达曰： 张氏汰而苛，大将李伯升辈徒拥子女玉帛，易与耳。
现代文：回师之后，朱元璋与群臣商议征吴之事，右相国李善长请求暂缓，徐达则说 ：张氏无能而苛刻，大将李伯升之辈徒拥子女玉帛，容易对付。
English: After returning to his master, Zhu Yuanzhang and his courtiers discussed the matter of recruiting Wu. His right-hand man, Li Shanzhong, asked for a delay, while Xu Da said, "The Zhang clan is incompetent and harsh, and the descendants of the general Li Bosheng have their children, Yulan, and are easy to deal with."

古文：用事者，黄、蔡、叶三参军，书生不知大计。
现代文：处理事务的黄、蔡、叶三参军，都是书生，不知大计。
English: Huang, Cai and Ye San, who handle affairs, joined the army. They are all students, and they don't know what to do.

古文：臣奉主上威德，以大军蹙之，三吴可计日定。 
现代文：臣蒙主上威德，率大军前去进攻，平定三吴，便计日可待。 
English: With the Lord's blessing, the vassal led a large army to attack and pacify Sanwu, and then waited for the day to come.

古文：太祖大悦，拜达大将军，平章遇春为副将军，帅舟师二十万人薄湖州。
现代文：朱元璋听后大为高兴。便拜徐达为大将军，平章常遇春为副将军，率水师二十万人直逼湖州。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was very happy to hear this. He promoted Xu Da to general and Ping Zhang Changyu Chun to vice-general, leading 200,000 sailors straight to Huzhou.

古文：敌三道出战，达亦分三军应之，别遣兵扼其归路。
现代文：敌人三路出击，徐达也分三路军应战，另外派兵扼其归路。
English: The enemy launched a three-pronged attack, and Xu Da also divided the three-pronged army to meet the challenge. In addition, he sent soldiers to narrow the way back.

古文：敌战败返走，不得入城。还战，大破之，擒将吏二百人，围其城。
现代文：敌人战败回逃，不能入城，只得返回作战，徐达大败敌军，擒获将吏二百人，包围湖州城。
English: The enemy was defeated and fled back, unable to enter the city, but had to return to battle. Xu Da defeated the enemy army, captured 200 generals and surrounded Huzhou City.

古文：士诚遣吕珍等以兵六万赴救，屯旧馆，筑五寨自固。
现代文：张士诚派吕珍等率军六万前来援救，驻屯旧馆，修筑五寨以自固。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent 60,000 troops led by Lü Zhen and others to come to the rescue, stationed in the old pavilion, and built Wuzhai to fortify themselves.

古文：达使遇春等为十垒以遮之。
现代文：徐达让常遇春等建造十座堡垒加以围阻。
English: Xu Dada ordered the construction of ten fortresses to block the invasion.

古文：士诚自以精兵来援，大破之于皂林。士诚走，遂拔升山水陆寨。
现代文：张士诚又亲率精兵来援，徐达在皂林大败其军，张士诚逃走，遂攻克升山水陆寨。
English: Zhang Shicheng also led his elite soldiers to come to the rescue, Xu Da defeated his army in Saurin, Zhang Shicheng fled, and then conquered Shengshan Luzhai.

古文：五太子、朱暹、吕珍等皆降，以徇于城下，湖州降。
现代文：五太子、朱暹、吕珍等都投降，徐达巡行城下，湖州投降。
English: The Five Princes, Zhu Siam, Lü Zhen, etc. all surrendered, Xu Da marched under the city, and Huzhou surrendered.

古文：遂下吴江州，从太湖进围平江。
现代文：然后攻下吴江州，从太湖进围平江。
English: Then they captured Wujiangzhou and advanced from Taihu to encircle Pingjiang.

古文：达军葑门，遇春军虎丘，郭子兴军娄门，华云龙军胥门，汤和军阊门，王弼军盘门，张温军西门，康茂才军北门，耿炳文军城东北，仇成军城西南，何文辉军城西北，筑长围困之。
现代文：徐达驻扎葑门，常遇春驻扎虎丘，郭子兴驻扎娄门，华云龙驻扎胥门，汤和驻扎阊门，王弼驻扎盘门，张温驻扎西门，康茂才驻扎北门，耿炳文驻扎城东北，仇成军驻扎城西南，何文辉驻扎城西北，筑成长墙围困城中之敌。
English: Xu Da stationed at the gate, often in the spring stationed Tiger Hill, Guo Zixing stationed at the gate, Huayun Long stationed at the gate, Tang He stationed at the gate, Wang Qian stationed at the gate, Zhang Wen stationed at the west gate, Kang Maocai stationed at the north gate, Geng Qianwen stationed in the northeast of the city, the enemy army stationed in the southwest of the city, He Wenhui stationed in the northwest of the city, building a long wall to besiege the enemy in the city.

古文：架木塔与城中浮屠等。别筑台三成，瞰城中，置弓弩火筒。
现代文：架木塔与城中佛塔同高，另外筑台三层，俯视城中，装置弩弓、火筒。
English: The wooden tower is the same height as the pagoda in the city. In addition, there is a three-storey platform overlooking the city, equipped with a crossbow and a firebox.

古文：台上又置巨礮，所击辄糜碎。城中大震。
现代文：台上又装置大炮，大炮所击之处都被炸成粉碎，城中为此大震。
English: A cannon was also installed on the platform, and everywhere the cannon hit was blown to smithereens, causing a major earthquake in the city.

古文：达遣使请事，太祖敕劳之曰： 将军谋勇绝伦，故能遏乱略，削群雄。
现代文：徐达派人向朱元璋请示，朱元璋下诏慰劳他说： 将军谋勇绝伦，故能遏制各地兵乱，削弱群雄。
English: Xu Da sent a person to Zhu Yuanzhang for instructions. Zhu Yuanzhang's subordinate sent a message of consolation to him, saying: "The general's bravery is unparalleled, so he can curb the military turmoil in various regions and weaken the heroes."

古文：今事必禀命，此将军之忠，吾甚嘉之。
现代文：今日你事必禀明受命，这表明了将军的忠诚，对此我非常赞许。
English: Today, you have been given a clear mandate, which shows the general's loyalty, for which I highly commend him.

古文：然将在外，君不御。
现代文：不过将领在外带兵打仗，君主不加干涉。
English: However, generals led soldiers to fight abroad, and the monarch did not interfere.

古文：军中缓急，将军其便宜行之，吾不中制。 
现代文：军中缓急，将军可根据情况，选择有利时机采取行动，我不宜控制。 
English: According to the army's priorities, the general can choose a favorable time to take action according to the situation. I should not control it.

古文：既而平江破，执士诚，传送应天，得胜兵二十五万人。
现代文：不久，徐达攻取平江，捉拿张士诚，押送应天，俘获强兵二十五万。
English: Soon, Xu Da conquered Pingjiang, captured Zhang Shicheng, escorted him to Yingtian, and captured 250,000 strong soldiers.

古文：城之将破也，达与遇春约曰： 师入，我营其左，公营其右。 
现代文：在平江城即将被攻克时，徐达与常遇春相约说： 军队入城，我军扎营城左，你军扎营城右。 
English: When Pingjiang City was about to be conquered, Xu Da made an appointment with Changyu Chunxiang and said: When the army enters the city, our army will camp on the left side of the city, and your army will camp on the right side of the city.

古文：又令荅士曰： 掠民财者死，毁民居者死，离营二十里者死。 
现代文：又命令将士道： 抢劫百姓财物者死，毁坏百姓房屋者死，擅自离营二十里者死。 
English: He also ordered the generals: Those who robbed the people's property will die, those who destroyed the people's houses will die, and those who left the camp 20 miles away without permission will die.

古文：既入，吴人安堵如故。
现代文：入城之后，吴人安然如故。
English: After entering the city, the people of Wuzhen are as safe as ever.

古文：师还，封信国公。
现代文：还师之后，徐达被封为信国公。
English: After returning to school, Xu Da was given the title of Shinkongguo.

古文：寻拜征虏大将军，以遇春为副，帅步骑二十五万人，北取中原，太祖亲祃于龙江。
现代文：不久徐达又拜为征虏大将军，以常遇春为副将军，率步骑二十五万，北取中原，朱元璋亲自在龙江为这次征讨举行祭神仪式。
English: Soon, Xu Da was appointed as the general of the conquest, with Changyu Chun as the deputy general, leading 250,000 horsemen to take the Central Plains in the north, and Zhu Yuanzhang personally held a ceremony to worship the gods in Longjiang for this conquest.

古文：是时称名将，必推达、遇春。
现代文：当时能称作名将的人，首推徐达、常遇春。
English: At that time, those who could be called great generals were first promoted by Xu Da and often met with spring.

古文：两人才勇相类，皆太祖所倚重。
现代文：两人才勇相当，都为朱元璋所倚重。
English: Both men are equally courageous, and both are important to Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：遇春剽疾敢深入，而达尤长于谋略。
现代文：常遇春剽悍、急躁，作战勇敢，而徐达擅长谋略。
English: They are often impetuous, impatient, and brave in battle, but Xu Da is good at strategizing.

古文：遇春下城邑不能无诛僇，达所至不扰，即获壮士与谍，结以恩义，俾为己用。
现代文：常遇春攻下城邑后不能做到毫无杀戮，而徐达所到之处，从不骚扰百姓，如果俘获壮士与间谍，便与他们以恩义结交，使他们为己所用。
English: It often happened that no killing could be done after the city was conquered by the Spring, but wherever Xu Da went, he never harassed the people. If he captured strongmen and spies, he would befriend them with gratitude and use them for his own purposes.

古文：由此多乐附大将军者。
现代文：因为这样，许多人都乐意归附大将军。
English: Because of this, many people are happy to follow the general.

古文：至是，太祖谕诸将御军持重有纪律，战胜攻取得为将之体者，莫如大将军达。
现代文：因此，朱元璋传谕诸将：指挥军队必须持重有纪律；而带兵作战，攻城略地，为将之道，徐达堪为楷模。
English: Therefore, Zhu Yuanzhang preached to the generals: the command of the army must be serious and disciplined; and leading soldiers in battle and attacking the city is the way of generals, and Xu Dacan is a model.

古文：又谓达，进取方略，宜自山东始。
现代文：又告诉徐达，进取方略，应当从山东开始。
English: He also told Xu Da that the enterprising strategy should start from Shandong.

古文：师行，克沂州，降守将王宣。
现代文：徐达率军而行，攻克沂州，招降守将王宣。
English: Xu Da led the army to conquer Zhangzhou and recruit the surrendering commander Wang Xuan.

古文：进克峄州，王宣复叛，击斩之。
现代文：进一步攻克峄州，王宣重新反叛，徐达便将他击杀。
English: After further conquering Zhangzhou, Wang Xuan rebelled again, and Xu Da killed him.

古文：莒、密、海诸州悉下。
现代文：攻下莒、密、海诸州，然后派韩政分兵扼守黄河。
English: He conquered the states of Min, Miy and Hai, and then sent Korean government troops to guard the Yellow River.

古文：乃使韩政分兵扼河，张兴祖取东平、济宁，而自帅大军拔益都，徇下濰、胶诸州县。济南降，分兵取登、莱。齐地悉定。
现代文：张兴祖攻取东平、济宁，而自己率大军攻取益都，攻下淮、胶等州县。济南投降，徐达分兵攻取登、莱，齐地全部平定。
English: Zhang Xingzu conquered Dongping and Jining, while he led a large army to conquer Yidu, and conquered Huai, Jia and other prefectures. Jinan surrendered, Xu Da's detachment captured Deng and Lai, and all of them were pacified.

古文：洪武元年，太祖即帝位，以达为右丞相。册立皇太子，以达兼太子少傅。
现代文：洪武元年，朱元璋即皇帝位，以徐达为右丞相，册立皇太子，以徐达兼太子少傅。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Zhu Yuanzhang was the emperor, with Xu Da as the minister of the right, the crown prince, and Xu Da as the prince's younger brother.

古文：副将军遇春克东昌，会师济南，击斩乐安反者。
现代文：副将军常遇春攻克东昌，会师济南，击斩乐安反叛者。
English: The vice-general often encountered the spring to conquer Dongchang, join Jinan, and defeat the rebels of Le'an.

古文：还军济宁，引舟师溯河，趋汴梁，守将李克彝走，左君弼、竹贞等降。
现代文：然后徐达还军济宁，引水师溯黄河而上，直趋汴梁，守将李克彝逃走，左君弼、竹贞等投降。
English: Then Xu Da returned the army to Jining, led the water division upstream of the Yellow River, and headed straight for Qiliang. The guard Li Keqiang fled, and Zuojun Qi, Zhu Zhen and others surrendered.

古文：遂自虎牢关入洛阳，与元将脱因帖木儿大战洛水北，破走之。
现代文：于是从虎牢关进入洛阳，与元将脱因帖木儿大战于洛水之北，元将兵败逃走。
English: As a result, he entered Luoyang from Tigardongguan, and fought with Yuanming Du against Timur in the north of Luoshui. Yuanming Du was defeated and fled.

古文：梁王阿鲁温以河南降，略定嵩、陕、陈、汝诸州，遂捣潼关。
现代文：梁王阿鲁温以河南投降，徐达率军平定嵩、陕、陈、汝等州，然后直捣潼关。
English: Liang Wang Aruwin surrendered in Henan, Xu Da led the army to pacify Ding Song, Shaanxi, Chen, Ru and other states, and then directly attacked Shouguan.

古文：李思齐奔凤翔，张思道奔鹿阝城，遂入关，西至华州。
现代文：李思齐逃往凤翔，张思道逃往鹿阝城，徐达率军入关，西到华州。
English: Li Sizi fled to Fengxiang, Zhang Sidu fled to Lucheng, Xu Da led the army into the customs, and went west to Huazhou.

古文：捷闻，太祖幸汴梁，召达诣行在所，置酒劳之，且谋北伐。
现代文：捷报传来后，太祖巡幸汴梁，召徐达到其住所，摆酒设宴慰劳，并与他商议北伐之事。
English: After the news of the victory came, the great-grandfather went on a pleasure tour of Liang, summoned Xu to his residence, set up a banquet to console him, and discussed the Northern Expedition with him.

古文：达曰： 大军平齐鲁，扫河洛，王保保逡巡观望；潼关既克，思齐辈狼狈西奔。
现代文：徐达说： 我大军平定齐鲁，扫平河洛，王保保徘徊观望；潼关已克，李思齐之辈狼狈西逃。
English: Xu Da said: My army has subdued Qilu, swept the Hailu River, Wang Baobao wandered around to watch; Shaoguan has been broken, and Li Siqi's generation fled to the west.

古文：元声援已绝，今乘势直捣元都，可不战有也。 
现代文：元朝声援已绝，现在我们乘势直捣元都，便可以不战而取。 
English: Solidarity with the Yuan Dynasty has been exhausted. Now we can take advantage of the situation to directly attack the Yuan Dynasty and take it without a fight.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：太祖听后赞道 ：你说得对。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：达复进曰： 元都克，而其主北走，将穷追之乎？ 
现代文：徐达进一步说 ：元都攻克后，如果其主向北逃走，我军要不要继续追击呢？ 
English: Xu Da further said: After conquering Yuandu, if its master fled to the north, should our army continue to pursue it?

古文：帝曰： 元运衰矣，行自澌灭，不烦穷兵。
现代文：太祖说： 元朝国运已衰，即将自行灭亡，不必烦劳军队去追击了。
English: The great-grandfather said: The national movement of the Yuan Dynasty has declined and is about to self-destruct. There is no need to bother the army to pursue it.

古文：出塞之后，固守封疆，防其侵轶可也。 
现代文：你们出塞之后，固守封疆，防止他们侵袭便可以了。 
English: After you get out of the blockade, you can hold fast to the blockaded territory and prevent them from invading.

古文：达顿首受命。
现代文：徐达顿首领命。
English: Chief Xu Datong's orders.

古文：遂与副将军会师河阴，遣裨将分道徇河北地，连下卫辉、彰德、广平。
现代文：于是与副将军常遇春会师河阴，派遣副将分道巡行河北之地，连下卫辉、彰德、广平。
English: As a result, he and the vice-general often encountered the Spring Festival Division of Heyin, and dispatched the vice-general to patrol the land of Hebei separately, including Weihui, Changde and Guangping.

古文：师次临清，使傅友德开陆道通步骑，顾时浚河通舟师，遂引而北。
现代文：军队临时驻扎临清，派傅友德开辟陆路使步骑通过，派顾时疏通河道使水师通行，然后引兵向北。
English: The army temporarily stationed in Linqing, sent Fu Youde to open up the land route to let the cavalry pass, sent Gu to clear the river to let the sailors pass, and then led the troops to the north.

古文：遇春已克德州，合兵取长芦，扼直沽，作浮桥以济师。
现代文：常遇春已克德州，与徐达合兵攻取长芦，扼直沽，搭浮桥让军队过河。
English: He often encountered Chun, who had conquered Dezhou, and joined forces with Xu Da to capture Changlu, narrow the strait, and build a pontoon bridge to let the army cross the river.

古文：水陆并进，大败元军于河西务，进克通州。
现代文：水陆并进，在河西务大败元军，进一步攻克通州。
English: They advanced by land and sea, defeated the Yuan army in Hexi Province, and further conquered Tongzhou.

古文：顺帝帅后妃太子北去。
现代文：元顺帝携后妃、太子向北逃走。
English: The former Shun Emperor fled north with his consort and the crown prince.

古文：逾日，达陈兵齐化门，填濠登城。
现代文：一天后，徐达陈兵齐化门，填濠登城。
English: A day later, Xu Da, Chen Bing and Qi Huamen entered the city.

古文：监国淮王帖木儿不花，左丞相庆童，平章迭儿必失、朴赛因不花，右丞张康伯，御史中丞满川等不降，斩之，其余不戮一人。
现代文：监国淮王帖木儿不花、左丞相庆童、平章迭儿必失、朴赛因不花、右丞张康伯、御史中丞满川等拒不投降，徐达便将他们斩首，除此之外，没杀一人。
English: Supervisor Huai Wang Tsmuer refused to surrender, Left Vice-Minister Qing Tong, Left Vice-Minister Ping Zhang Dier refused to surrender, Park Sai In refused to surrender, Right Vice-Minister Zhang Kangbo, and Vice-Minister of History Manchuan refused to surrender, so Xu Da beheaded them, but did not kill anyone else.

古文：封府库，籍图书宝物，令指挥张胜以兵千人守宫殿门，使宦者护视诸宫人、妃、主，禁士卒毋所侵暴。
现代文：然后命人封闭府库，登记书籍、宝物，并命指挥张胜带领一千士兵看守宫殿门，让宦官看护那些宫人、嫔妃、公主，严禁士兵侵扰欺凌她们。
English: Then he ordered people to close the government treasury, register books and treasures, and ordered commander Zhang Sheng to lead a thousand soldiers to guard the palace door, let eunuchs take care of those courtiers, concubines and princesses, and strictly prohibit soldiers from harassing and bullying them.

古文：吏民安居，市不易肆。
现代文：城中官民安居乐业，店铺照常营业。
English: Officials and citizens in the city live and work in peace, and shops are open as usual.

古文：捷闻，诏以元都为北平府，置六卫，留孙兴祖等守之，而命达与遇春进取山西。
现代文：捷报传来，太祖下诏以元都为北平府，设置六卫，命孙兴祖等留守，而命徐达与常遇春进取山西。
English: When the news of victory came, the great-grandfather issued an edict that the capital should be Beipingfu, and set up six garrisons. He ordered Sun Xingzu and others to stay behind, while he ordered Xu Da and Changyu Chun to advance into Shanxi.

古文：遇春先下保定、中山、真定，冯胜、汤和下怀庆，度太行，取泽、潞，达以大军继之。
现代文：常遇春先下保定、中山、真定，冯胜、汤和攻下怀庆，越过太行，攻取泽、潞，徐达率大军随后跟进。
English: It often happens that in spring, Baoding, Zhongshan, and Zhending advance first, Feng Sheng and Tang He capture Huaiqing, cross Taihang, capture Zhe and Handan, and then the army led by Xu Da follows up.

古文：时扩廓帖木儿方引兵出雁门，将由居庸以攻北平。
现代文：当时扩廓帖木儿正引兵出雁门，将由居庸进攻北平。
English: At that time, the expanded Timur was leading troops out of the Wild Goose Gate, and it would be Ju Yong who would attack Beiping.

古文：达闻之，与诸将谋曰： 扩廓远出，太原必虚。
现代文：徐达知道后，与诸将商议道 ：扩廓率军远行，太原必定空虚。
English: After Xu Da learned of this, he discussed with the generals, saying, "If you expand your territory and lead an army far away, Taiyuan will surely become empty."

古文：北平有孙都督在，足以御之。
现代文：北平有孙都督在，足以御敌。
English: The presence of Sun Tudou in Beiping is enough to defeat the enemy.

古文：今乘敌不备，直捣太原，使进不得战，退无所守，所谓批亢捣虚者也。
现代文：现在我们乘敌不备，直捣太原，使其进不能战，退无所守，这就是攻击敌人的要害和虚弱之处。
English: Now we are taking advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness and directly striking the Taiyuan, making it unable to advance and unable to defend itself. This is the key to attacking the enemy's weakness.

古文：彼若西还自救，此成擒耳。 
现代文：如果扩廓西还自救，我们就能将他擒获。 
English: If the gunman is still alive, we will be able to capture him.

古文：诸将皆曰： 善。 
现代文：诸将听后都说 ：说得对啊。 
English: The generals all said: OK.

古文：乃引兵趋太原。扩廓至保安，果还救。
现代文：于是，徐达引兵直趋太原，扩廓到保安，果然返回援救。
English: As a result, Xu Dadu led the soldiers straight to Taiyuan, expanded to security, and returned to rescue.

古文：达选精兵夜袭其营。扩廓以十八骑遁去。
现代文：徐达挑选精兵夜袭其营，扩廓率十八名骑兵逃跑。
English: Xu Da selected elite soldiers to attack his battalion at night, and eighteen cavalrymen fled.

古文：尽降其众，遂克太原。
现代文：徐达尽降其部众，攻克太原。
English: Xu Da did his best to subordinate his subordinates and conquer Taiyuan.

古文：乘势收大同，分兵徇未下州县。山西悉平。
现代文：又乘势收取大同，分兵巡行还未攻下的州县，山西全部平定。
English: He also took advantage of the situation to take Datong, and subdued all prefectures and counties in Shanxi that had not yet been conquered.

古文：二年引兵西渡河。至鹿台，张思道遁，遂克奉元。
现代文：二年，徐达引兵向西渡河，到达鹿台，张思道逃走，于是攻克奉元。
English: In the second year, Xu Dadu led the soldiers to cross the river to the west and reached Lutetia. Zhang Sidao fled, and then conquered Fengyuan.

古文：时遇春下凤翔，李思齐走临洮，达会诸将议所向。皆曰： 张思道之才不如李思齐，而庆阳易于临洮，请先庆阳。 
现代文：当时常遇春攻下凤翔，李思齐逃至临洮，徐达会集诸将商议军队的进攻方向，诸将都说 ：张思道的才能不如李思齐，而庆阳又比临洮易攻，请求先攻庆阳。 
English: At that time, it often happened that Chun captured Fengxiang, Li Sizi fled to Linyi, and Xu Da would gather generals to discuss the direction of the army's attack. The generals all said: Zhang Sido's ability was not as good as Li Sizi, and Qingyang was easier to attack than Linyi, and they requested to attack Qingyang first.

古文：达曰： 不然，庆阳城险而兵精，猝未易拔也。
现代文：而徐达则说 ：你们说得不对，庆阳城险而兵精，如果突然进攻，不容易攻取。
English: On the other hand, Xu Da said, "You are wrong. Qingyang City is dangerous and well-armed. If there is a sudden attack, it will not be easy to capture."

古文：临洮北界河、湟，西控羌、戎，得之，其人足备战斗，物产足佐军储。
现代文：而临洮北接河、湟，西控羌、戎，获得此城，其人便可利用来增强战斗力，物产也足以提供军队的物资粮饷。
English: However, Linyi, north of Jiehe and Handan, and west of Gyeongbuk and Eunpyeong, obtained this city, its people could use it to enhance their combat effectiveness, and the property was also sufficient to provide the army with materials and grain.

古文：蹙以大兵，思齐不走，则束手缚矣。
现代文：如果以大军进逼，李思齐不弃城逃走，他就是束手待擒了。
English: If Li Siqi does not abandon the city and run away, he will be defeated by a large army.

古文：临洮既克，于旁郡何有？ 
现代文：临洮攻克后，邻郡还能存在么？ 
English: After the conquest of Linyi, will the neighboring counties still exist?

古文：遂渡陇，克秦州，下伏羌、宁远，入巩昌，遣右副将军冯胜逼临洮，思齐果不战降。
现代文：于是率军渡陇，攻克秦州，攻下伏羌、宁远，进入巩昌，派右副将军冯胜进逼临洮，李思齐果然不战而降。
English: Therefore, he led the army to Waduye, conquered Qinzhou, conquered Fuzhou and Ningyuan, entered Gongchang, sent the right vice-general Feng Shengjin to force Linyi, and Li Siqi actually surrendered without a fight.

古文：分兵克兰州，袭走豫王，尽收其部落辎重。
现代文：然后分兵攻克兰州，击走豫王，全部缴获其部队辎重行李。
English: Then a detachment of soldiers attacked Kranzhou, drove away Yu Wang, and captured all of his troops and heavy baggage.

古文：还出萧关，下平凉。思道走宁夏，为扩廓所执，其弟良臣以庆阳降。达遣薛显受之。
现代文：回军出萧关，攻下平凉，张思道逃往宁夏，被扩廓所捉，其弟张良臣以庆阳投降，徐达派薛显受降。
English: The returning troops went out of Shouguan and conquered Pingliang. Zhang Sidao fled to Ningxia and was captured by the expansion, his brother Zhang Liangchen surrendered to Qingyang, and Xu Da sent Xue Xian to accept the surrender.

古文：良臣复叛，夜出兵袭伤显。
现代文：张良臣重新反叛，趁夜出兵袭击，打伤薛显。
English: Zhang Liangchen rebelled again, taking advantage of the night to attack and injure Xue Xian.

古文：达督军围之。扩廓遣将来援，逆击败去，遂拔庆阳。良臣父子投于井，引出斩之。
现代文：徐达督军包围张良臣叛军，扩廓遣将前来援救，徐达率军迎击，将其打败逃走，于是攻取庆阳，张良臣父子投入井中，便将其拉出斩首，陕西之地全部平定。
English: Xu Dadu's army encircled Zhang Liangchen's rebel army, sent reinforcements to come to the rescue, Xu Dadu led the army to meet the attack, defeated it and fled, then captured Qingyang, Zhang Liangchen father and son into the well, then pulled it out and beheaded it, and the land of Shaanxi was all pacified.

古文：尽定陕西地。诏达班师，赐白金文绮甚厚。
现代文：太祖下诏，徐达班师回朝，赏赐丰厚的白金和丝绸。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict, Xu Daban returned to the North, and was rewarded with rich platinum and silk.

古文：将论功大封，会扩廓攻兰州，杀指挥使，副将军遇春已卒，三年春帝复以达为大将军，平章李文忠为副将军，分道出兵。
现代文：将要论功大封时，正遇扩廓兵攻兰州，杀指挥使，副将军常遇春此时已死，因此，三年春，太祖又以徐达为大将军，平章李文忠为副将军，分路出兵。
English: When he wanted to discuss the merits of the grand seal, he was facing the expansion of the army to attack Lanzhou, killing the commander, and the vice-general Changchun was dead at this time. Therefore, in the spring of the third year, the great-grandfather sent troops in different directions with Xu Da as the general and Pingzhang Li Wenzhong as the vice-general.

古文：达自潼关出西道，捣定西，取扩廓。
现代文：徐达自潼关从西路出击，直捣定西，攻打扩廓。
English: Xu Dazhiguan attacked from the west road, heading straight to the west, attacking the widening gap.

古文：文忠自居庸出东道，绝大漠，追元嗣主。
现代文：李文忠自居庸从东路出击，横穿沙漠，追击元嗣主。
English: Li Wenzhong and Zijiong attacked from the east road, crossed the desert, and pursued the former heir.

古文：达至定西，扩廓退屯沈儿峪，进军薄之。
现代文：徐达兵至定西时，扩廓退驻沈儿峪，徐达挥师逼近。
English: When Xu Dabing reached Dingxi, he expanded his territory and retreated to Shen Ertao. Xu Dabing's division was approaching.

古文：隔沟而垒，日数交。
现代文：双方隔沟而垒，一天之内交战数次。
English: The two sides dug in and fought several times in one day.

古文：扩廓遣精兵从间道劫东南垒，左丞胡德济仓卒失措，军惊扰，达帅兵击却之。
现代文：扩廓派精兵从小路出发，进攻东南垒，左丞胡德济仓惶失措，军中惊扰，徐达率军将扩廓击退。
English: Zangguo sent his elite soldiers to attack the southeastern bastion from a small road. Left Wing Commander Hu Deji panicked and panicked. The army was alarmed, and Xu Da led the army to repel Zangguo.

古文：德济，大海子也，达以其功臣子，械送之京师，而斩其下指挥等数人以徇。
现代文：胡德济是胡大海的儿子，徐达因为他是功臣之子，便将他戴上镣铐送往京城，而将他手下指挥斩首数人以示众。
English: Hu Deji was the son of Hu Haihai, and Xu Da, because he was the son of a meritorious subject, sent him to the capital in chains, and ordered his men to behead several people for public display.

古文：明日，整兵夺沟，殊死战，大破扩廓兵。擒郯王、文济王及国公、平章以下文武僚属千八百六十余人，将士八万四千五百余人，马驼杂畜以巨万计。
现代文：第二天，整顿军队，进兵夺沟，殊死作战，大破扩廓军，擒获郯王、文济王及国公、平章以下文武官属一千八百六十余人，将士八万四千五百余人，马匹、骆驼等牲畜数以万计。
English: On the second day, the rectification of the army, the entry of soldiers to seize the ditch, the desperate battle, the large-scale expansion of the army, the capture of King Zou, King Wenzhi and the Duke, the civil and military officers under the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, more than 1,860 people, more than 84,500 soldiers, tens of thousands of horses, camels and other livestock.

古文：扩廓仅挟妻子数人奔和林。
现代文：扩廓仅携妻子、儿女数人逃往和林。
English: He fled to Warim with only his wife and a few children.

古文：德济至京，帝释之，而以书谕达： 将军效卫青不斩苏建耳，独不见穰苴之待庄贾乎？
现代文：胡德济被押至京城后，太祖释放了他，却又写信告诉徐达： 将军仿效卫青不斩苏建之事，难道你没看见穰苴是怎么对待庄贾的吗？
English: After Hu Deji was sent to Beijing, the great-grandfather released him, but he also wrote to Xu Da: The general followed the example of Wei Qing and did not cut the Soviet construction. Can't you see how Zou treated Zhuang Jia?

古文：将军诛之，则已。
现代文：将军杀了他，也便罢了。
English: The general killed him and got away with it.

古文：今下廷议，吾且念其信州、诸暨功，不忍加诛。
现代文：今天到朝廷商议此事，我且念他在信州、诸暨所立之功，不忍将他处死。
English: I went to the Imperial Court today to discuss the matter, and I cannot bear to put him to death, considering his achievements in Shinshu and Zhuji.

古文：继自今，将军毋事姑息。 
现代文：从今以后，将军对这类事情不要再妄加姑息了。 
English: From now on, the general will no longer tolerate such things.

古文：达既破扩廓，即帅师自徽州南一百八渡至略阳，克沔州，入连云栈，攻兴元，取之。
现代文：徐达打败扩廓之后，立即率军从徽州南一百八渡到略阳，攻克沔州，进入连云栈，进攻兴元，将其攻克。
English: After defeating the expansion, Xu Da immediately led the army from the south of Huizhou to Liangyang, conquered Zhangzhou, entered Lianyungang, attacked Xingyuan, and conquered it.

古文：而副将军文忠亦克应昌，获元嫡孙妃主将相。
现代文：而副将军李文忠也攻克应昌，俘获元帝嫡孙妃嫔、公主及将相。
English: However, Vice-General Li Wenzhong also conquered Yingchang and captured the Emperor's granddaughter, the princess, and the general.

古文：先后露布闻，诏振旅还京师。帝迎劳于龙江。
现代文：捷报先后传到朝廷，太祖下诏令劲旅返回京城，并亲自在龙江迎接、慰劳。
English: The news of the victory was successively transmitted to the imperial court, and the great-grandfather issued an edict to return to the capital, and personally greeted and consoled in the Longjiang River.

古文：乃下诏大封功臣，授达开国辅运推诚宣力武臣，特进光禄大夫、左柱国、太傅、中书右丞相参军国事，改封魏国公，岁禄五千石，予世券。
现代文：然后下诏大封功臣，授徐达为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣，特进为光禄大夫、左柱国、太傅、中书右丞相参军国事，改封为魏国公，年禄五千石，给予世袭凭证。
English: Then, he issued the edict to bestow the title of Da Feng on meritorious vassals, award the title of Xu Da to the vassals who assisted in the founding of the country and promoted sincerity and propaganda, and specially promote the title of Guang Lu Da Fu, Zuozhu Guo, Taifu, and Zhongshu Rong Rong to participate in the military affairs of the state, and change the title to Wei Guogong, with a yearly salary of 5,000 koku, and give the hereditary certificate.

古文：明年帅盛熙等赴北平练军马，修城池，徙山后军民实诸卫府，置二百五十四屯，垦田一千三百余顷。
现代文：第二年，徐达率盛熙等赴北平操练兵马，修筑城池，将山后军民迁移到各卫府，设置二百五十四屯，垦田一千三百余顷。
English: In the second year, Xu Da and Sheng Hei went to Peiping to train soldiers and horses, built a castle, and moved the troops and civilians from Shanhou to various garrisons, setting up 254 townships and more than 1,300 hectares of farmland.

古文：其冬，召还。
现代文：该年冬天，徐达应召返回京城。
English: In the winter of that year, Xu Da was called back to Beijing.

古文：五年复大发兵征扩廓。达以征虏大将军出中道，左副将军李文忠出东道，征西将军冯胜出西道，各将五万骑出塞。
现代文：五年，太祖又大举发兵征讨扩廓，徐达作为征虏大将军从中路出发，左副将军李文忠从东路出发，征西将军冯胜从西路出发，各率五万骑兵出塞。
English: In the fifth year, Emperor Taizu once again sent a large number of troops to recruit and expand. Xu Da, as the conscript general, set out from the middle road, the left vice-general Li Wenzhong set out from the east road, and the western conscript general Feng Sheng set out from the west road, each leading fifty thousand cavalry out of the fortress.

古文：达遣都督蓝玉击败扩廓于土刺河。
现代文：徐达派都督蓝玉在土剌河击败扩廓。
English: Xu Dada sent the governor, Lan Yu, to defeat the expansionists in the Tuyun River.

古文：扩廓与贺宗哲合兵力拒，达战不利，死者数万人。
现代文：扩廓与贺宗哲合兵力拒，徐达战而不利，死者数万人。
English: Zengaku and He Zongzhe joined forces to resist, but they were defeated, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：帝以达功大，弗问也。
现代文：太祖因为徐达功劳大，所以对此未予追究。
English: The great-great-grandfather was not investigated because of Xu Da's great merits.

古文：时文忠军亦不利，引还。
现代文：当时李文忠军也作战失利，引兵返回。
English: At that time, Li Wenzhong's army was also defeated in battle, and the troops were led back.

古文：独胜至西凉获全胜，坐匿驼马，赏不行，事具《文忠》、《胜传》。
现代文：唯独冯胜到西凉，获得全胜，却因隐藏骆驼、马匹而获罪，太祖对他未予奖赏，这些事情全部载入了《李文忠传》、《冯胜传》。
English: However, Feng Sheng alone went to Xilang and won a complete victory, but he was found guilty of hiding camels and horses. The great-grandfather did not reward him. All these things are recorded in the "Biographies of Li Wenzhong" and "Biographies of Feng Sheng."

古文：明年，达复帅诸将行边，破敌于答剌海，还军北平，留三年而归。
现代文：第二年，徐达又率领诸将前往边疆，破敌于答剌海，然后还军北平，驻留三年才返回。
English: The following year, Xu Da again led his generals to the frontier, defeated the enemy in the Bohai Sea, and then returned to Peiping, where he stayed for three years before returning.

古文：十四年，复帅汤和等讨乃儿不花。
现代文：十四年，又率汤和等征讨乃儿不花。
English: Fourteen years later, he again led Tang He and others to collect money, but it didn't work.

古文：已，复还镇。
现代文：不久，又返回镇守北平。
English: Soon, he returned to the town of Beiping.

古文：每岁春出，冬暮召还，以为常。
现代文：徐达每年春天率军出征，晚冬又应召返回，习以为常。
English: Every spring, Xu Da led the army to go to war, and he was called back in late winter, which was quite normal.

古文：还辄上将印，赐休沐，宴见欢饮，有布衣兄弟称，而达愈恭慎。
现代文：回京之后，总是把大将印章上交皇帝，皇帝赐他休假，设宴畅饮，与徐达以布衣兄弟相称，而徐达却对皇帝更加恭敬谨慎。
English: After returning to Beijing, he always submitted the general's seal to the emperor. The emperor gave him a vacation, set up a banquet and enjoyed drinking, which was commensurate with Xuda's cloth brothers, but Xuda was more respectful and cautious to the emperor.

古文：帝尝从容言： 徐兄功大，未有宁居，可赐以旧邸。 
现代文：皇帝曾从容对徐达说 ：徐兄功劳很大，至今却还没有一个安宁的住处，我可以将旧邸送给你。 
English: The emperor once calmly said to Xu Daru: "Brother Xu has done a great deal of work, but so far he has not had a peaceful place to live. I can give you the old mansion."

古文：旧邸者，太祖为吴王时所居也。
现代文：旧邸是太祖做吴王时居住的宫邸。
English: The old residence is the palace residence where the great-grandfather lived when he was the king of Wu.

古文：达固辞。
现代文：徐达坚决推辞。
English: Xu Da resolutely refused.

古文：一日，帝与达之邸，强饮之醉，而蒙之被，舁卧正寝。
现代文：有一天，皇帝与徐达一起到旧邸去，硬让徐达喝酒喝醉，然后让人给他蒙上被子，抬到正室睡觉。
English: One day, the emperor went to the old residence with Xu Da. He forced Xu Da to drink and get drunk, and then had someone cover him with a quilt and carry him to the main room to sleep.

古文：达醒，惊趋下阶，俯伏呼死罪。
现代文：徐达醒后，大吃一惊，慌忙跑下台阶，俯伏在地高喊死罪。
English: When Xu Da woke up, he was taken aback. He hurriedly ran down the steps, prostrated himself on the ground and shouted for capital punishment.

古文：帝觇之，大悦。
现代文：朱元璋从旁窥视，看到他这么害怕，非常高兴。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang peered from the side and was very happy to see him so scared.

古文：乃命有司即旧邸前治甲第，表其坊曰 大功 。
现代文：于是命令有关官员在旧邸前为徐达建造府宅，并在宅前立坊题上 大功 二字。
English: So he ordered the relevant officials to build a mansion for Xu Da in front of his former residence, and to write the word "great achievement" on the wall in front of the house.

古文：胡惟庸为丞相，欲结好于达，达薄其人，不答，则赂达阍者福寿使图达。福寿发之，达亦不问；惟时时为帝言惟庸不任相。
现代文：胡惟庸当丞相时，想结交徐达，徐达很轻视此人，不予理睬，胡惟庸便贿赂徐达的看门人福寿，让他对徐达图谋不轨，福寿揭发了他，徐达也不予追究，只是时时向皇帝进言说胡惟庸不能胜任丞相之职。
English: When Hu Wei Rong was chancellor, he wanted to make friends with Xu Da. Xu Da despised this person and ignored him. Hu Wei Rong then bribed Xu Da's gatekeeper Fu Shou to let him plot against Xu Da. Fu Shou exposed him. Xu Da did not pursue the matter, but constantly told the emperor that Hu Wei Rong was not competent to serve as chancellor.

古文：后果败，帝益重达。
现代文：后来胡惟庸果然失败，朱元璋为此更加重视徐达。
English: Later, Hu Wei Rong failed, and Zhu Yuanzhang paid more attention to Xu Da Rong.

古文：十七年，太阴犯上将，帝心恶之。
现代文：十七年，太阴侵犯上将，朱元璋心中憎恶。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Great Yin invaded the Admiral, and Zhu Yuanzhang hated it in his heart.

古文：达在北平病背疽，稍愈，帝遣达长子辉祖赍敕往劳，寻召还。
现代文：徐达在北平患了背疽，稍好一点时，皇帝派徐达的长子徐辉祖携带他的亲笔信前往慰问，不久应召返回。
English: Xu Da suffered from diphtheria in Peking. When he was a little better, the emperor sent Xu Da's eldest son, Xu Huizu, with a letter of his own to offer condolences. He was soon called back.

古文：明年二月，病笃，遂卒，年五十四。
现代文：第二年二月，徐达病重死去，终年五十四岁。
English: In February of the following year, Xu Da became seriously ill and died at the age of fifty-four.

古文：帝为辍朝，临丧悲恸不已。
现代文：皇帝为此停止临朝听政，发丧时悲恸不已。
English: For this reason, the emperor stopped attending the imperial court to listen to politics. When the funeral was held, he was grief-stricken.

古文：追封中山王，谥武宁，赠三世皆王爵。
现代文：追封徐达为中山王，谥号武宁，赠其子孙三世都为王爵。
English: He posthumously made Xu Da the King of Zhongshan, and gave him the posthumous title of Wu Ning. He also gave his third generation of descendants the title of Wang Jue.

古文：赐葬钟山之阴，御制神道碑文。
现代文：赐葬于钟山之阴，御制神道碑文。
English: He was buried in the shadow of the bell mountain, with a sacred Shinto inscription.

古文：配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，位皆第一。
现代文：徐达配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，都位列第一。
English: Xu Da was awarded the first place in the grand temple and the portrait hero temple.

古文：达言简虑精。在军，令出不二。诸将奉持凛凛，而帝前恭谨如不能言。
现代文：徐达言简虑精，在军中，令不二出，在诸将面前总是保持令人遵从的严肃样子，而在皇帝面前却恭敬谨慎，好像不会说话似的。
English: Xu Da's speech was concise and precise. In the army, his orders were consistent, and he always maintained a serious and obedient appearance in front of the generals, but in front of the emperor, he was respectful and cautious, as if he could not speak.

古文：善拊循，与下同甘苦，士无不感恩效死，以故所向克捷。
现代文：徐达善于安抚部下，能与他们同甘共苦，士兵对他无不感恩，以死相报，所以，徐达军能所向披靡。
English: Xu Da was good at appeasing his subordinates and could share their joys and sorrows with them. The soldiers were very grateful to him and rewarded him with death. Therefore, Xu Da's military prowess was invincible.

古文：尤严戢部伍，所平大都二，省会三，郡邑百数，闾井宴然，民不苦兵。
现代文：徐达对部队要求非常严格，所平元都二个，省会三个，郡邑数以百计，各地街巷井然有序，百姓从不为军旅所苦。
English: Xu Da was very strict with the troops. There were two capital cities, three provincial capitals, hundreds of counties and towns, and the streets and lanes were well-ordered. The people never suffered from military travel.

古文：归朝之日，单车就舍，延礼儒生，谈议终日，雍雍如也。
现代文：率军归朝之日，徐达总是陋车简舍，礼邀儒生，终日高谈，气氛和谐。
English: On the day he led his army back to the imperial court, Xu Da always had a humble car and a simple house, invited Confucian students, talked all day long, and the atmosphere was harmonious.

古文：帝尝称之曰： 受命而出，成功而旋，不矜不伐，妇女无所爱，财宝无所取，中正无疵，昭明乎日月，大将军一人而已。 
现代文：皇帝曾称赞他说： 受命而出，成功而归，不骄傲，不自夸，妇女无所爱，财宝无所取，行为正派无疵，品德高尚可与日月相比，这只有大将军徐达一人堪当于此。 
English: The emperor once praised him, saying, "Only the great general Xu Da is worthy of this, who was ordered to go out, returned successfully, is not proud, does not boast, does not love women, does not take treasure, behaves decently and impeccably, and has a high moral character that can be compared to the sun and moon.

古文：膺绪，授尚宝司卿，累迁中军都督佥事，奉朝请，世袭指挥使。常遇春，字伯仁，怀远人。
现代文：徐达有四子：辉祖、添福、膺绪、增寿。长女为文皇帝皇后，次女为代王妃，三女为安王妃。常遇春，字伯仁，怀远人。
English: Xu Da had four sons: Huizhu, Tianfu, Xingxu, and Zengshu. The eldest daughter was the empress of the Emperor Wen, the second daughter was the acting princess, and the third daughter was the princess of An. He often met spring, was called Bo Ren, and was a nostalgic person.

古文：貌奇伟，勇力绝人，猿臂善射。
现代文：相貌奇伟，勇力绝人，长臂善射。
English: Amazing appearance, great courage, long arms and good shooting.

古文：初从刘聚为盗，察聚终无成，归太祖于和阳。
现代文：开始跟随刘聚为盗贼，后来发觉刘聚终将无所作为，便在和阳归附朱元璋。
English: He began to follow Liu Ju as a thief, and later found out that Liu Ju would eventually do nothing, so he joined Zhu Yuanzhang in Heyang.

古文：未至，困卧田间，梦神人被甲拥盾呼曰： 起起，主君来。 
现代文：朱元璋还未到和阳时，常遇春因困倦躺卧田间，梦见有一神人披甲拥盾在叫他 ：起来，起来，主君到了。 
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang had not yet reached Wanyang, he often lay down in the fields in the spring because he was sleepy. He dreamed that a godman wearing armor and holding a shield was calling him: "Get up, get up, your master has arrived."

古文：惊寤，而太祖适至，即迎拜。时至正十五年四月也。
现代文：常遇春从梦中惊醒，而朱元璋正好经过，常遇春当即迎拜，当时是至正十五年四月。
English: Often spring wakes up from a dream, and Zhu Yuanzhang just passes by, often spring is immediately greeted, at that time it was April of the 15th year of the Zheng He.

古文：无何，自请为前锋。
现代文：由于尚无寸功，常遇春自请为前锋。
English: Due to the fact that there is still no inch of work, it is often the case that the spring is the striker.

古文：太祖曰： 汝特饥来就食耳，吾安得汝留也。 
现代文：朱元璋说道 ：你只不过是因为饥饿来寻找食物，我怎么能将你留下呢？ 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang said, "You are just looking for food because you are hungry. How can I leave you behind?"

古文：遇春固请。
现代文：常遇春仍坚决请求。
English: Often spring is still a strong request.

古文：太祖曰： 俟渡江，事我未晚也。 
现代文：朱元璋便说道 ：等到渡江之后，你再来为我效力也不迟呀？ 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang then said, "After crossing the river, it is not too late for you to work for me again."

古文：及兵薄牛渚矶，元兵陈矶上，舟距岸且三丈余，莫能登。
现代文：等到朱元璋军队进逼牛渚矶，元兵列阵矶上，朱元璋军船离岸三丈多，没人能登上岸。
English: By the time Zhu Yuanzhang's army entered and forced the cattle onto the beach, and the Yuan soldiers were lined up on the beach, Zhu Yuanzhang's warship was more than three yards away from the shore, and no one could get ashore.

古文：遇春飞舸至，太祖麾之前。遇春应声，奋戈直前。
现代文：常遇春飞舟而至，朱元璋命他向前冲击，常遇春领命，挥戈直冲向前。
English: Often encountered spring flying boat, Zhu Yuanzhong life he forward impact, often encountered spring leading life, waving straight forward.

古文：敌接其戈，乘势跃而上，大呼跳荡，元军披靡。
现代文：敌兵抓住他的戈，常遇春乘势一跃，跳上石矶，大声喊叫冲入敌阵，元军望风而逃。
English: The enemy soldiers caught hold of his go, often taking advantage of the spring, jumping onto the rocks, shouting loudly and rushing into the enemy lines. The former soldiers fled at the sight of the wind.

古文：诸将乘之，遂拔采石，进取太平。
现代文：诸将乘胜上岸攻击，于是攻克采石，攻取太平。
English: Taking advantage of their victory, the generals attacked ashore, whereupon they overcame the quarry and conquered Taiping.

古文：授总管府先锋，进总管都督。
现代文：常遇春被授以总管府先锋，晋升为总管都督。
English: He was awarded the title of Chief Administrator Pioneer in the spring and promoted to Chief Administrator Governor.

古文：时将士妻子辎重皆在和州，元中丞蛮子海牙复以舟师袭据采石，道中梗。
现代文：当时，朱元璋将士的妻子儿女及辎重都在和州，元中丞蛮子海牙再次以水师袭据采石，使朱元璋军回和州的道路中途被阻。
English: At that time, the wives and children of Zhu Yuanzhang's soldiers and their baggage were all in Hezhou. The former Vice-Commander in Chief, the barbarian Hague, once again attacked the quarry with sailors, so that the road of Zhu Yuanzhang's army back to Hezhou was blocked halfway.

古文：太祖自将攻之，遣遇春多张疑兵分敌势。
现代文：朱元璋亲自率军进攻，派常遇春到处布兵迷惑敌人，分散敌人的兵力。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang personally led the army to attack, and often sent troops to confuse the enemy and disperse the enemy's troops.

古文：战既合，遇春操轻舸，冲海牙舟为二。左右纵击，大败之，尽得其舟。江路复通。
现代文：两军会合后，常遇春操纵轻舟，将海牙的船队一分为二，然后从左右两侧猛攻，将其大败，尽获其船，江路重新畅通无阻。
English: After the meeting of the two armies, Changyu Chun maneuvered the light boat, divided the fleet of the Hague into two, and then stormed from the left and right sides, defeated it, captured all its ships, and the river road was again unimpeded.

古文：寻命守溧阳，从攻集庆，功最。
现代文：随即汤和受命驻守溧阳，跟随朱元璋进攻集庆，功劳最大。
English: Subsequently, Tang He was ordered to stay in Fenyang and followed Zhu Yuanzhang to attack and celebrate, which was the greatest achievement.

古文：从元帅徐达取镇江，进取常州。
现代文：后随元帅徐达攻取镇江，进取常州。
English: He later followed Marshal Xu Da in conquering Zhenjiang and Changzhou.

古文：吴兵围达于牛塘，遇春往援，破解之，擒其将，进统军大元帅。
现代文：吴兵将徐达围困在牛塘，常遇春前去援救，破敌解围，擒获敌将，晋升为统军大元帅。
English: Wu Bing besieged Xu Da in Niu Tang, and often went to the rescue before the spring, broke the enemy siege, captured the enemy general, and was promoted to the grand marshal of the United Army.

古文：克常州，迁中翼大元帅。
现代文：攻克常州，升为中翼大元帅。
English: He conquered Changzhou and was promoted to the middle wing grand marshal.

古文：从达攻宁国，中流矢，裹创斗，克之。
现代文：又随徐达进攻宁国，被飞箭射中，他裹住伤口之后坚持战斗，攻克宁国。
English: He also followed Xu Da's attack on Ningguo and was shot by flying arrows. After he wrapped up his wound, he insisted on fighting and conquered Ningguo.

古文：别取马驼沙，以舟师攻池州，下之，进行省都督马步水军大元帅。
现代文：另外攻取马驼沙，以水师攻取池州，晋升为行省都督马步水军大元帅。
English: In addition, he captured Ma Lamsa, captured Chizhou with a naval division, and was promoted to the provincial governor and grand marshal of Ma Bu's naval army.

古文：从取婺州，转同佥枢密院事，守婺。
现代文：又随徐达攻取婺州，转任同佥枢密院事，驻守婺州。
English: He also followed Xu Da in conquering Ganzhou, and was transferred to the Tonglu Privy Council, stationed in Ganzhou.

古文：移兵围衢州，以奇兵突入南门瓮城，毁其战具，急攻之，遂下，得甲士万人，进佥枢密院事。
现代文：常遇春调兵围攻衢州，首先派奇兵突入围绕南门外的小城，毁掉敌人的战具，然后发动猛攻，将城攻破，俘获披甲之士万人，晋升为佥枢密院事。
English: When the Spring Army besieged Bozhou, he first sent a special force to rush into the small city around the south gate, destroying the enemy's war equipment, and then launched a fierce attack to break through the city, captured tens of thousands of armored soldiers, and was promoted to Bozhuang Privy Councillor.

古文：攻杭州，失利，召还应天。
现代文：常遇春率军进攻常州，战斗失利，应召返回应天。
English: He often led the Spring Army to attack Changzhou, lost the battle, and was called back to answer the call of heaven.

古文：从达拔赵普胜之水寨，从守池州，大破汉兵于九华山下，语具《达传》。
现代文：跟随徐达攻取赵普胜的水寨，随守池州，大破陈友谅兵于九华山下，这些都记载于《徐达传》里。
English: Following Xu Da to capture Zhao Pusheng's water castle, following Chizhou, and defeating Chen Youxuan's soldiers at the foot of Jihua Mountain are all recorded in "The Biography of Xu Da."

古文：友谅薄龙湾，遇春以五翼军设伏，大破之，遂复太平，功最。
现代文：陈友谅进逼龙湾，常遇春以五路军设下埋伏，大破陈友谅军，收复太平，功劳最大。
English: Chen Youyou entered Longwan, and often set up an ambush with the Fifth Route Army in the spring. He defeated Chen Youyou's army and restored peace, which was his greatest achievement.

古文：太祖追友谅于江州，命遇春留守，用法严，军民肃然无敢犯，进行省参知政事。
现代文：朱元璋率军追击陈友谅至江州，命常遇春留守，他执法严格，城中军民井然守序，不敢有所冒犯，又晋升为行省参知政事。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang led the army to chase Chen Youpeng to Jiangzhou, but he was left behind in the spring. He enforced the law strictly, and the soldiers and civilians in the city kept order and did not dare to offend. He was also promoted to the post of provincial governor.

古文：从取安庆。汉军出江游徼，遇春击之，皆反走，乘胜取江州。还守龙湾，援长兴，俘杀吴兵五千余人，其将李伯升解围遁。
现代文：并随攻安庆，汉军出江四处拦截，常遇春率军出击，汉军慌忙调头逃跑，汤和等乘胜攻取江州，然后还守龙湾，兵援长兴，俘杀吴兵五千余人，敌将李伯升突围逃走。
English: And with the attack on Anqing, the Chinese army went out of the river to intercept everywhere, often the spring led the army to attack, the Chinese army hurriedly turned their heads and fled, Tang He and others took advantage of the victory to capture Jiangzhou, and then guarded Longwan, supported Changxing, captured more than five thousand Wu soldiers, and the enemy Li Bo Sheng broke through and fled.

古文：命甓安庆城。
现代文：常遇春军受命加固安庆城。
English: The Spring Army was ordered to reinforce Anqing City.

古文：先是，太祖所任将帅最著者，平章邵荣、右丞徐达与遇春为三。
现代文：在此之前，朱元璋所任用的将帅中功劳最大的，要数平章邵荣、右丞徐达与常遇春三人。
English: Prior to this, the most meritorious generals appointed by Zhu Yuanzhang were Pingzhang Shao Rong, Yu Rong Xu Da and Changyu Chun.

古文：而荣尤宿将善战，至是骄蹇有异志，与参政赵继祖谋伏兵为变。
现代文：而邵荣尤其是一位善战、有经验的老将，这时他已非常骄横，并有异心，与参政赵继祖图谋设伏兵发动兵变。
English: Shaorong, in particular, was an experienced veteran who was good at fighting. At that time, he was already very arrogant and had an ulterior motive. He and Zhao Jizu, who was involved in politics, planned to set up an ambush to launch a mutiny.

古文：事觉，太祖欲宥荣死，遇春直前曰： 人臣以反名，尚何可宥，臣义不与共生。 
现代文：事情败露之后，朱元璋想赦免邵荣的死罪，常遇春秉直说道： 为人之臣有了谋反的罪名，还有什么可以原谅的呢？我决不与其共生。 
English: After the affair was exposed, Zhu Yuanzhang wanted to pardon Shao Rong's capital crime, and often met with Chun Bingzhu, who said: "If a man's vassal is guilty of plotting a rebellion, what else can be forgiven? I will never live with him."

古文：太祖乃饮荣酒，流涕而戮之，以是益爱重遇春。
现代文：朱元璋于是赐邵荣喝酒，流着眼泪将其处死，因为这件事，朱元璋更加偏爱倚重常遇春。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang then gave Shao Rong alcohol and executed him in tears. Because of this incident, Zhu Yuanzhang preferred to rely more on the Spring Festival.

古文：池州帅罗友贤据神山寨，通张士诚，遇春破斩之。
现代文：池州守将罗友贤占据神山寨，私通张士诚，常遇春将其打败并斩首。
English: Luo Youxian, the governor of Chizhou, occupied the Shenshan Village and had an illicit affair with Zhang Shicheng, whom he defeated and beheaded in the spring.

古文：从援安丰。比至，吕珍已陷其城，杀刘福通，闻大军至，盛兵拒守。太祖左右军皆败，遇春横击其阵，三战三破之，俘获士马无算。
现代文：又跟随朱元璋援救安丰，等到常遇春率军到达时，吕珍已经攻陷安丰，杀死刘福通，听说大军到来，便率强兵扼守，朱元璋左右军都进攻失败，常遇春横击敌阵，三战三捷，俘获士兵、马匹无数。
English: He also followed Zhu Yuanzhang to rescue Anfeng. By the time Zhu Yuanzhang's army arrived, Lu Zhen had already invaded Anfeng and killed Liu Futong. When he heard that a large army was coming, he led a strong army to defend it. Zhu Yuanzhang's left and right armies all failed in their attacks. Zhu Yuanzhang often attacked the enemy's lines, and achieved three victories in three battles, capturing countless soldiers and horses.

古文：遂从达围庐州。
现代文：然后跟随徐达围攻庐州。
English: Then he followed Xu Da to besiege Ganzhou.

古文：城将下，陈友谅围洪都，召还。
现代文：城将攻破时，陈友谅围攻洪都，常遇春应召返回。
English: When the castle was breached, Chen Youzhen besieged Hongdu, and often returned in the spring.

古文：会师伐汉，遇于彭蠡之康郎山。汉军舟大，乘上流，锋锐甚。
现代文：会师伐汉，与汉军在彭蠡的康郎山遭遇，汉军船大，又处于上流，前锋非常强大。
English: He met the Han army at Kanglang Mountain in Penghu. The Han army had large ships and was in the upper stream. Their forwards were very powerful.

古文：遇春偕诸将大战，呼声动天地，无不一当百。
现代文：常遇春协同诸将投入大战，呼声震天动地，无不以一当百。
English: Often, the Spring Alliance will be put into the Great War, and the cries are earth-shattering, all of them are one hundred.

古文：友谅骁将张定边直犯太祖舟，舟胶于浅，几殆。
现代文：陈友谅的骁将张定边直冲朱元璋的指挥船，船已搁浅，朱元璋处境非常危险。
English: Chen Youzhen's anchor pushed Zhang Dingbian straight into Zhu Yuanzhang's command ship. The ship was stranded, and Zhu Yuanzhang was in a very dangerous situation.

古文：遇春射中定边，太祖舟得脱，而遇春舟复胶于浅。
现代文：常遇春射中张定边，朱元璋的船才得以脱险，而常遇春的船却又搁浅。
English: Zhang Dingbian was often caught in spring shoots, and Zhu Yuanzhang's boat was able to escape danger, but the boat that was often caught in spring was stranded again.

古文：有败舟顺流下，触遇春舟乃脱。
现代文：这时，有一只坏船顺流而下，碰撞常遇春的船只，这才得以离开浅滩。
English: At this time, there was a bad boat down the river, collision often spring ships, it was able to leave the shoal.

古文：转战三日，纵火焚汉舟，湖水皆赤，友谅不敢复战。
现代文：转战三日，放火烧毁汉军船只，湖水因此变成了红色，陈友谅不敢再战。
English: On the third day of the turn of the war, he set fire to the ships of the Chinese army, and the lake water turned red as a result. Chen Youxian did not dare to fight again.

古文：诸将以汉军尚强，欲纵之去，遇春独无言。
现代文：诸将认为汉军兵力仍然较强，想放他们离开，唯独常遇春不说话。
English: The generals thought that the strength of the Chinese army was still relatively strong and wanted to let them leave, but they often did not speak in the spring.

古文：比出湖口，诸将欲放舟东下，太祖命扼上流。
现代文：等到船出湖口时，诸将正要放船东下，朱元璋却命令扼住上游。
English: When the ship left the mouth of the lake, the generals were about to let the ship go to the east, but Zhu Yuanzhang ordered to hold back the upstream.

古文：遇春乃溯江而上，诸将从之。
现代文：常遇春便溯江而上，诸将跟随其后。
English: Spring often flows up the river, and all things will follow.

古文：友谅穷蹙，以百艘突围。
现代文：陈友谅走投无路，率百船突围。
English: Chen Youzhen was cornered, and he managed to break through with a hundred ships.

古文：诸将邀击之，汉军遂大溃，友谅死。
现代文：诸将半路拦截敌军，汉军于是分崩瓦解，陈友谅死。
English: Zhu will intercept the enemy army halfway, the Chinese army will collapse and disintegrate, and Chen Youjun will die.

古文：师还，第功最，赉金帛土田甚厚。
现代文：还师之后，常遇春功劳最大，朱元璋赏赐给他很多黄金、布帛、田地。
English: After returning to his master, he often received the greatest credit in the spring, and Zhu Yuanzhang rewarded him with a lot of gold, cloth and fields.

古文：从围武昌，太祖还应天，留遇春督军困之。
现代文：攻武昌时，朱元璋返回应天，命常遇春留下督军围困武昌。
English: During the attack on Wuchang, Zhu Yuanzhang returned to Yingtian, leaving behind the viceroy's army to besiege Wuchang.

古文：明年，太祖即吴王位，进遇春平章政事。
现代文：第二年，朱元璋即吴王位，晋升常遇春为平章政事。
English: In the following year, Zhu Yuanzhang ascended to the throne of Wu and was promoted to Pingzhang in the spring.

古文：太祖复视师武昌。汉丞相张必先自岳来援。遇春乘其未集，急击擒之。
现代文：朱元璋又派兵进攻武昌，汉丞相张必先自岳阳来援，常遇春乘其还未会合，迅速进攻，将张必先擒获。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also sent troops to attack Wuchang, and the Han chancellor Zhang must first come from Yueyang to help. Often, Chuncheng did not meet him yet, quickly attacked, and Zhang must be captured first.

古文：城中由是气夺，陈理遂降，尽取荆、湖地。
现代文：城中士气尽失，陈理投降，常遇春尽取荆、湖之地。
English: The morale of the city is exhausted, Chen Li surrenders, and often the spring is exhausted, and the lake lands.

古文：从左相国达取庐州，别将兵略定临江之沙坑、麻岭、牛陂诸寨，擒伪知州邓克明，遂下吉安。
现代文：然后随左相国徐达攻取庐州，另外率军平定临江的沙坑、麻岭、牛陂等寨，擒获伪知州邓克明，攻下吉安。
English: Then, he followed Xu Da of Zuo Province to conquer Bozhou, and led another army to subdue the sand pits, Ma Ling, Niu Yao and other villages along the river, captured the pseudo-Chizhou Deng Keming, and conquered Ji'an.

古文：围赣州，熊天瑞固守不下。
现代文：围攻赣州，熊天瑞固守不下。
English: In the siege of Zhangzhou, Xiong Tianrui could not hold out.

古文：太祖使使谕遇春： 克城无多杀。
现代文：朱元璋派使者告诫常遇春： 攻克此城时，不要多杀人。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang sent an envoy to warn Changchun: When conquering this city, do not kill more people.

古文：苟得地，无民何益？ 
现代文：如果获得了地盘，却没有老百姓，那又有什么好处呢？ 
English: What good is it if you get a piece of land but no people?

古文：于是遇春浚壕立栅以困之。顿兵六月，天瑞力尽乃降，遇春果不杀。
现代文：于是常遇春疏通壕沟，设立栅栏，围攻赣州，屯兵六个月，熊天瑞兵力耗尽，于是投降，常遇春果然不杀他。
English: As a result, Chang Chun dredged a trench, set up a fence, besieged Luzhou, stationed troops for six months, and Xiong Tianrui's forces were exhausted, so he surrendered. Chang Chun did not kill him.

古文：太祖大喜，赐书褒勉。
现代文：朱元璋大为高兴，赐信褒奖勉励。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was very pleased and gave him a letter of commendation and encouragement.

古文：遇春遂因兵威谕降南雄、韶州，还定安陆、襄阳。
现代文：常遇春于是凭借军威招降了南雄、韶州，回军时又平定安陆、襄阳。
English: In the spring, he used his military power to conquer Nanxiong and Zhangzhou, and when he returned to the army, he conquered Anlu and Yangyang.

古文：复从徐达克泰州，败士诚援兵，督水军壁海安壩以遏之。
现代文：又随徐达攻克泰州，打败张士诚的援兵，督促水军在海安坝建造围墙阻拦敌军。
English: He also followed Xu Da in conquering Ketaizhou, defeated Zhang Shicheng's reinforcements, and urged the navy to build a wall at Hai'an Dam to block the enemy army.

古文：其秋拜副将军，伐吴。
现代文：同年秋天，常遇春被授为副将军，率军伐吴。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Changyu Chun was promoted to vice-general and led the army to attack Wu.

古文：败吴军于太湖，于毗山，于三里桥，遂薄湖州。
现代文：在太湖、毗山、三里桥打败吴军，进逼湖州。
English: They defeated the Wu army at Taihu Lake, Bishan Mountain, and Sanli Bridge, and entered Huzhou.

古文：士诚遣兵来援，屯于旧馆，出大军后。
现代文：张士诚派兵来援，驻扎旧馆，出现在常遇春大军之后。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent soldiers to come to the rescue, stationed in the old hall, and appeared after the spring army.

古文：遇春将奇兵由大全港营东阡，更出其后。
现代文：常遇春率奇兵由大全港扎营东阡，更处于张士诚援兵之后。
English: It was often the case that the spring-loaded soldiers from Daquan Port camped in Donglu, especially after Zhang Shicheng's reinforcement.

古文：敌出精卒搏战，奋击破之。
现代文：敌人派出精兵出击，常遇春率军奋力攻击，将敌兵打败。
English: The enemy dispatched elite soldiers to attack, and often the spring rate army attacked hard and defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：袭其右丞徐义于平望，尽燔其赤龙船，复败之于乌镇，逐北至升山，破其水陆寨，悉俘旧馆兵，湖州遂下。
现代文：在平望袭击其右丞徐义，将其赤龙船全部烧毁，又败之于乌镇，向北追击至升山，攻破其水陆寨，将旧馆援兵全部俘获，湖州遂被攻下。
English: In Pingwang, he attacked his right-hand man Xu Yi, burned all of his red dragon ships, defeated him again in Wuzhen, chased him north to Shengshan, broke through his water and land fortress, captured all of the old pavilion reinforcements, and Huzhou was then captured.

古文：进围平江，军虎丘。
现代文：进而围攻平江，驻军虎丘。
English: They then besieged Pingjiang and garrisoned Tiger Hill.

古文：士诚潜师趋遇春，遇春与战北濠，破之，几获士诚。
现代文：张士诚偷偷率军靠近常遇春，常遇春与其战于北濠，将其打败，几乎俘获张士诚。
English: Zhang Shicheng secretly led an army close to Changyu Chun, fought against Changyu Chun in Beilun, defeated him, and almost captured Zhang Shicheng.

古文：久之，诸将破葑门，遇春亦破阊门以入，吴平。
现代文：时间一久，诸将攻破葑门，常遇春也攻破阊门进入平江，吴地平定。
English: After a long period of time, they will break through the gate, and often spring will also break through the gate into the Pingjiang River, and Wu will be determined.

古文：进中书平章军国重事，封鄂国公。
现代文：常遇春晋升为中书平章军国重事，封为鄂国公。
English: He was often promoted to the rank of Zhongshu Pingzhang in the spring for important military and national affairs, and was given the title of E Guogong.

古文：复拜副将军，与大将军达帅兵北征。
现代文：常遇春又被授为副将军，与大将军徐达一起率兵北征。
English: He was promoted to vice-general in the spring and led the Northern Expedition together with General Xu Da.

古文：帝亲谕曰： 当百万众，摧锋陷坚，莫如副将军。
现代文：皇帝亲自嘱咐他： 面对百万之众，击溃敌人精锐部队，攻陷敌人的坚固阵地，无人能比得上副将军。
English: The emperor himself instructed him: Facing a million people, defeating the enemy's elite troops, and capturing the enemy's strong positions, no one can match the vice-general.

古文：不虑不能战，虑轻战耳。
现代文：我不担心你不能打胜，而担心你轻战。
English: I'm not worried that you won't win, I'm worried that you won't fight.

古文：身为大将，顾好与小校角，甚非所望也。 
现代文：你身为大将，好与兵卒角斗，这尤其不是我所期望的。 
English: As a general, you like to fight with soldiers, which is not what I expected.

古文：遇春拜谢。
现代文：常遇春跪下拜谢。
English: When spring comes, kneel down and give thanks.

古文：既行，以遇春兼太子少保，从下山东诸郡，取汴梁，进攻河南。
现代文：出发之后，以常遇春兼太子少保，随攻山东诸郡后，又攻取汴梁，进取河南。
English: After the departure, he attacked the counties in Shandong Province, and then captured Qilian and advanced to Henan Province.

古文：元兵五万陈洛水北。遇春单骑突其阵，敌二十余骑攒〈木朔〉刺之。遇春一矢殪其前锋，大呼驰入，麾下壮士从之。
现代文：元兵五万军队陈兵洛水之北，常遇春单骑冲向敌阵，敌人二十多名骑兵手持长矛一齐刺向常遇春，而常遇春一箭将其前锋射死，大叫一声冲入敌阵，麾下壮士也跟随他向前冲去。
English: The fifty thousand soldiers of the former army north of Chenbei and Loushui often rushed to the enemy line on horseback, and more than twenty enemy cavalrymen armed with spears rushed to the enemy line, and often shot their forwards to death with an arrow, and rushed into the enemy line with a loud cry, and the strong men under him also rushed forward.

古文：敌大溃，追奔五十余里。
现代文：敌兵大溃，常遇春追奔五十余里。
English: The enemy soldiers were routed and often chased for more than fifty miles in the spring.

古文：降梁王阿鲁温，河南郡邑以次下。
现代文：降服梁王阿鲁温，河南郡县依次被攻下。
English: Liang Wang surrendered to Aruwin, and Henan County was conquered in turn.

古文：谒帝于汴梁，遂与大将军下河北诸郡。
现代文：常遇春到汴梁谒见皇帝后，与大将军徐达一起攻下河北诸郡。
English: In the spring, he often went to Qilian to see the emperor, and together with the general Xu Da, he conquered the counties of Hebei.

古文：先驱取德州，将舟师并河而进，破元兵于河西务，克通州，遂入元都。
现代文：先锋攻取德州后，常遇春率水师沿黄河而进，破元兵于河西务，攻克通州，于是进入元都。
English: After the vanguard captured Dezhou, it often happened that the spring sailors advanced along the Yellow River, defeated the Yuan soldiers in the west of the river, conquered Tongzhou, and then entered the Yuan capital.

古文：别下保定、河间、真定。
现代文：另外攻下保定、河间、真定。
English: In addition, the capture of Baoding, Hama, and Jinding.

古文：与大将军攻太原，扩廓帖木儿来援。
现代文：常遇春与大将军徐达一起进攻太原，扩廓帖木儿前来救援。
English: Changyu Chun attacked Taiyuan together with the general Xu Da, and the general Timur came to the rescue.

古文：遇春言于达曰： 我骑兵虽集，步卒未至，骤与战必多杀伤，夜劫之可得志。 
现代文：常遇春对徐达说 ：我军骑兵虽然已经聚集，但步兵还未赶到，突然与敌人发生战斗，一定会死伤很多，只有趁夜攻打才能获胜。 徐达说道 ：你说得对。 
English: Changyu Chun said to Xu Da: Although our cavalry has already gathered, the infantry has not arrived yet. If there is a sudden battle with the enemy, there will certainly be a lot of deaths and injuries. Only by attacking at night can we win. Xu Da said: You are right.

古文：达曰： 善。 会扩廓部将豁鼻马来约降，且请为内应，乃选精骑夜衔枚往袭。
现代文：这时正好扩廓的部将豁鼻马前来约定投降之事，便暂且请他作为内应，挑选精锐骑兵口含木片，悄悄出发去袭击敌人。
English: At this time, the general of the expansion of the profile came to the horse to agree to surrender, and temporarily asked him to act as an internal response, select the elite cavalry mouth with wood chips, and quietly set off to attack the enemy.

古文：扩廓方燃烛治军书，仓卒不知所出，跣一足，乘孱马，以十八骑走大同。
现代文：扩廓当时正点着蜡烛学习军书，仓促之间不知所措，赤着一只脚，骑上一匹瘦弱的马，率领十八名骑兵逃往大同。
English: At that time, Zhan Guo was studying military books by candlelight. He was overwhelmed by haste, barefoot, riding a thin horse, and leading eighteen cavalrymen to escape to Datong.

古文：豁鼻马降，得甲士四万，遂克太原。
现代文：豁鼻马投降，常遇春获得四万披甲之士，攻克太原。
English: He surrenders at the drop of a hat, and often gains forty thousand armor-clad warriors in the spring to conquer Taiyuan.

古文：遇春追扩廓至忻州而还。
现代文：常遇春追击扩廓到忻州之后才返回。
English: They often return after chasing the larvae to Ganzhou in the spring.

古文：诏改遇春左副将军，居右副将军冯胜上。
现代文：朱元璋下诏改常遇春为左副将军，位居右副将军冯胜之上。
English: Under Zhu Yuan, he was often promoted to the left vice-general in the spring, ranking higher than the right vice-general Feng Sheng.

古文：北取大同，转徇河东，下奉元路，与胜军合，西拔凤翔。
现代文：然后向北攻取大同，转而巡行河东，攻下奉元路，与冯胜军会合，向西攻占凤翔。
English: Then, they attacked Datong to the north, and went on a patrol to the east of Hedong, captured Fengyuan Road, met with Feng Sheng's army, and captured Fengxiang to the west.

古文：会元将也速攻通州，诏遇春还备，以平章李文忠副之，帅步骑九万，发北平，径会州，败敌将江文清于锦州，败也速于全宁。
现代文：恰遇元将也速进攻通州，朱元璋下诏常遇春回军守备，让平章李文忠帮助他，率步骑九万，从北平出发，取道会州，败敌将江文清于锦州，败也速于全宁。
English: When the time was right, General Yuan also quickly attacked Tongzhou. Zhu Yuan, under the command of Zhu Yuanzhong, often encountered the Spring Return Army on the defensive, and asked Pingzhang Li Wenzhong to help him. He rode at the rate of 90,000 and set out from Beiping to take Daohuizhou. He defeated the enemy Jiang Wenzhong in Jinzhou, and also quickly lost in Quanning.

古文：进攻大兴州，分千骑为八伏。
现代文：进一步进攻大兴州，将一千名骑兵分别埋伏八处。
English: They further attacked Daxingzhou and ambushed one thousand cavalrymen in eight places.

古文：守将夜遁，尽擒之，遂拔开平。
现代文：当大兴州守将趁夜逃跑时，常遇春将他们全部擒获，于是攻克开平。
English: When the Greater Xingzhou defenders took advantage of the night to escape, Changyu captured all of them in the spring, and then conquered Kaiping.

古文：元帝北走，追奔数百里。获其宗王庆生及平章鼎住等将士万人，车万辆，马三千匹，牛五万头，子女宝货称是。
现代文：元帝向北逃走，常遇春追奔数百里，俘获其宗王庆生及平章鼎住等将士万人，车万辆，马三千匹，牛五万头，以及敌人子女、宝货等物。
English: Emperor Yuan fled to the north, often chasing hundreds of miles in the spring, capturing tens of thousands of soldiers, tens of thousands of vehicles, three thousand horses, fifty thousand head of cattle, as well as enemy children, treasures and other things.

古文：师还，次柳河川，暴疾卒，年仅四十。太祖闻之，大震悼。丧至龙江，亲出奠，命礼官议天子为大臣发哀礼。议上，用宋太宗丧韩王赵普故事。制曰 可 。
现代文：朱元璋知道后，大惊，十分悲痛。在龙江举行葬礼，太祖亲自出奠，并命礼官就天子为大臣主持葬礼之事进行商议，商议结果上报太祖，沿用宋太祖追悼韩王赵普的先例。太祖下诏说 ：可以。 
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang found out, he was shocked and very sad. The funeral was held in Longjiang, and the great-grandfather himself paid his respects, and ordered the etiquette officer to discuss the matter of the emperor presiding over the minister's funeral. The result of the discussion was reported to the great-grandfather, following the precedent of the Song great-grandfather to mourn Han Wang Zhao Pu. The great-grandfather said: yes.

古文：赐葬钟山原，给明器九十事纳墓中。
现代文：赐葬于钟山平地，赐给金银器物九十件随葬墓中。
English: He was buried on the plain of Zhongshan Mountain, and ninety pieces of gold and silver objects were given to him to be buried with him.

古文：赠翊运推诚宣德靖远功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、太保、中书右丞相，追封开平王，谥忠武。
现代文：赠封常遇春为翊运推诚宣德靖远功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、太保、中书右丞相，追封开平王，谥号忠武。
English: In the spring of the year, he was awarded the titles of the meritorious vassals of the Qing Dynasty, including Xuancheng Xuande Jingyuan, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, Shangzhu Guo, Taibo, Zhongshu Rongzheng, followed by the title of Kaiping Wang, and the posthumous title of Zhongwu.

古文：配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，位皆第二。
现代文：常遇春配享太庙，肖像功臣庙，都位列第二。
English: The Temple of the Eternal Spring and the Temple of the Portrait of the Heroic, both ranked second.

古文：遇春沉鸷果敢，善抚士卒，摧锋陷阵，未尝败北。
现代文：常遇春性情深沉、勇猛、果敢，善于爱抚士兵，冲锋陷阵，从未吃过败仗。
English: Spring is often deep, brave and courageous, good at caressing soldiers, storming into battle, and has never been defeated.

古文：虽不习书史，用兵辄与古合。
现代文：虽然没有学过典籍史书，但他用兵打仗却总是与古代兵书相符合。
English: Although he did not study classics and history books, he always used soldiers to fight wars in accordance with ancient military books.

古文：长于大将军达二岁，数从征伐，听约束惟谨，一时名将称徐、常。
现代文：他比大将军徐达大二岁，屡次跟随徐达率军征讨，都非常认真地听从徐达的指挥，当时的名将首推徐、常二人。
English: He was two years older than the great general Xu Da, and repeatedly followed Xu Da to lead the army to conquer. He listened to Xu Da's command very carefully. At that time, the two famous generals were Xu and Chang.

古文：遇春尝自言能将十万众，横行天下，军中又称 常十万 云。
现代文：常遇春曾经自称能统领十万人马，横行天下，军中将士又称他为 常十万 。
English: Changyu Chun once claimed to be able to command a hundred thousand horses and run rampant throughout the world. The lieutenant general also called him Changyu Chun.

古文：遇春从弟荣，积功为指挥同知，从李文忠出塞，战死胪朐河。
现代文：常遇春的堂弟常荣，多次立功，升为指挥同知，跟随李文忠出塞，战死于胪朐河。
English: Chang Rong, a cousin of Chang Chun, made meritorious service many times, rose to the rank of conductor and was a friend of Li Wenzhong. He followed Li Wenzhong out of Tibet and died in the Battle of Lu River.

古文：遇春二子，茂、升。
现代文：常遇春有二子：常茂、常升。
English: Spring often has two sons: Changmao and Changsheng.

