古文：凡骑兵与步兵战者，若遇山林、险阻、陂泽之地，疾行急去，是必败之地，勿得与战。
现代文：凡是骑兵对步兵作战的，如果遇到山林险隘、沼泽水网的地形，一定要赶快离开。因为这是对骑兵作战不利而易取败的不利地形，不可在此种地域与敌交战。
English: All cavalry fighting against infantry must leave quickly if they encounter mountainous terrain, steep forests, swamps and water networks. Because this is an unfavorable terrain for cavalry to fight and easy to defeat, it is not possible to engage the enemy in this area.

古文：欲战，须得平易之地，进退无碍，战则必胜。
现代文：如要对敌交战，一定要选择平坦开阔的地带，这样，方可进退自如，战而必胜。
English: If you want to fight against the enemy, you must choose a flat and open area, so that you can advance and retreat freely and win the battle.

古文：法曰： 易地则用骑。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 在开阔平坦的地势作战，就派出骑兵部队。 
English: Just as the laws of war say: When fighting on open, flat terrain, send out cavalry units.

古文：《五代史》：唐庄宗救赵，与梁军相拒于柏乡五里，营于野河北。
现代文：《新五代史》记载：晋王李存勖率兵援救赵王王镕，与后梁军对峙于距柏乡五里的地方，并把部队集结于野河之北。
English: "New Five Dynasties History" records: Jin king Li Cunxu led troops to rescue Zhao Wang Wangqi, and confronted Hou Liang's army at a place five miles away from Baixiang, and concentrated the troops in the north of Yihe.

古文：晋兵少，梁将王景仁将兵虽多，而精锐者亦少。
现代文：当时，晋军兵少，而梁将王景仁所率之兵虽多，但精锐主力也不多。
English: At that time, the Jin army had few soldiers, and although there were many soldiers led by the general Wang Jingren, there were not many elite main forces.

古文：晋军望之色动。周德威勉其众曰： 此汴、宋佣，易败耳。 
现代文：晋军看到对方兵多，有些畏怯失色，晋将周德威针对此情而勉励部下说： 梁军这些人不过是从汴宋地区临时雇佣来的乌合之众，要打败他们非常容易 他回营还把这事向庄宗报告。
English: When the Jin army saw the large number of opposing soldiers, some of them lost their fear. In response to this situation, the Jin general Zhou Dewei encouraged his subordinates, saying: "These Liang soldiers are just temporary hired rabble from the Song Dynasty. It is very easy to defeat them." He also reported this to Zhuangzong when he returned to the camp.

古文：退而告之。庄宗曰： 吾提孤兵出千里，利在速战。
现代文：李存勖说： 我带这支深入敌地的军队出征千里之外，利在速战速决。
English: Li Cunxu said, "I am taking this army, which has penetrated deep into the enemy's territory, thousands of miles away for a campaign. The advantage is in a quick battle and a quick decision.

古文：今若不乘势而急击之，使敌人知我之众寡，则计无所施矣。 
现代文：目前如不乘势急速出击，一旦敌人了解了我们的兵力就无计可施了。 
English: If we do not take advantage of the current situation to launch a quick attack, once the enemy understands our strength, there will be nothing we can do.

古文：德威曰： 不然。
现代文：德威反驳说： 事情并非这样。
English: Dulwich retorted: "That is not the case.

古文：赵人皆能城守而不能野战；吾之取胜，利在骑兵。平原旷野，骑兵之所长也。
现代文：赵王之军善于守城而不擅长野战，我军赖以取胜的有利条件在于骑兵，只有在平原旷野地域作战，才能发挥骑兵的威力。
English: King Zhao's army is good at defending the city but not good at field battles. The favorable conditions for our army to win are the cavalry. Only when fighting in the plains and wilderness areas can the power of the cavalry be brought into play.

古文：今吾军于河上，迫近营门，非吾用长之地也。 
现代文：现在我军扎营于河边，临近敌人营门，这样就不能发挥我军的特长了！ 
English: Now our army is encamped by the river, close to the enemy's camp gate, so we can't make use of our army's strengths!

古文：庄宗不悦，退卧帐中，诸将无敢入见者。
现代文：李存勖听后很不高兴，回到帐中就卧床休息了。众将见此情形，无一人敢于入帐请求进见。
English: After hearing this, Li Cunxu was very unhappy and went back to his account to rest in bed. Everyone saw this, and no one dared to ask to see the account.

古文：德威乃谓监军张承业曰： 王怒老将。
现代文：周德威无奈，只好对监军张承业说： 晋王生我气了。
English: Reluctantly, Zhou Dewei had no choice but to say to the supervisor Zhang Chengye: Jin Wang is angry with me.

古文：不速战者，非怯也。且吾兵少而临贼营门，所恃者一水隔耳。
现代文：我不主张速战速决，并不是因为我畏敌怯战，主要考虑我军兵少而又临近敌人营门，所依恃的仅仅一水之隔罢了。
English: I do not advocate a quick war and a quick decision, not because I am afraid of the enemy and war, but mainly because our army is small and close to the enemy's camp, and we are only a stone's throw away.

古文：使梁得舟筏渡河，吾无类矣。
现代文：如果梁军弄到船只渡过河来，我军将无一幸免于难了。
English: If Liang's army got the ships to cross the river, none of our army would be spared.

古文：不如退军高邑，诱敌出营，扰而劳之，可以策胜也。 
现代文：似此情况，不如把部队撤到高邑，以引诱敌人脱离营垒，骚扰他们使其疲惫不堪，然后就可以运用计谋战胜它了。 
English: In such a situation, it is better to withdraw the troops to Gaoyou to lure the enemy out of the camp, harass them and make them tired, and then you can use tactics to defeat it.

古文：承业入言曰： 德威老将知兵，愿无忽其言。 
现代文：承业听完，立即入见晋王说： 德威是员老将，深知用兵打仗之法。
English: After listening to the lecture, he immediately went to see Jin Wang and said: Dewey is a veteran and knows how to fight with soldiers.

古文：庄宗遽起曰： 吾方思之耳。 
现代文：希望您不要忽视他的建议。 晋王听后骤然坐起说： 我正在考虑他的意见。 
English: Tang Zhuozong then stood up and said: I am considering it.

古文：已而，德威获梁游兵，问景仁何为？
现代文：不久，德威抓获了后梁的巡哨兵，问他王景仁现今在做什么？
English: Soon after, Dulwich captured Hou Liang's patrolman and asked him, "What is Wang Jingren doing now?"

古文：曰： 治舟数百，将以为浮梁。 
现代文：他回答说： 已经建造了数百艘船只，将用以搭设浮桥渡河。 
English: He replied: Hundreds of boats have been built and will be used to build a pontoon bridge to cross the river.

古文：德威乃与俱见庄宗，笑曰： 果如公所料。 
现代文：德威于是带着俘虏一起去见晋王。晋王笑着说： 果然如你所料到的那样。 
English: Dewey then went with the captives to see King Jin, who smiled and said, "It's just as you expected."

古文：乃退军高邑。
现代文：随后下令将军队撤退到到高邑。
English: He then ordered the troops to retreat to Gaoyou.

古文：德威乃遣骑三百，扣梁营挑战，自以劲兵三千继之。
现代文：周德威清晨派出三百骑兵前往梁营挑战，他自己亲率三千精兵随后跟进。
English: In the early morning, Zhou Dewei sent three hundred cavalrymen to Liang Camp to challenge, and he himself led three thousand elite soldiers to follow.

古文：景仁怒，悉以其军出，与德威转斗数十里，至于高南，两军皆阵。
现代文：梁将王景仁见此大怒，遂下令梁军全部出击，同周德威部转战数十里，进至鄗邑之南，双方都列阵以待决战。
English: Seeing this great anger, Liang's general Wang Jingren ordered Liang's entire army to attack. They fought with Zhou Dewei's army for dozens of miles and entered the south of Zouyi. Both sides were lined up for a decisive battle.

古文：梁军横亘六、七里。
现代文：梁军依仗兵多，横排列阵六、七里之长。
English: Liang's army was supported by a large number of soldiers and lined up horizontally for six or seven miles.

古文：庄宗策马登高，望而喜曰： 平原浅草，可前可却，真吾制胜之地也。 
现代文：此时，晋王策马登上高处观察敌阵，喜出望外地说： 此地平原草矮，既便于前进，又便于退却，真是我们战胜敌人的好地方。 
English: At this time, Jin Wang Zema climbed to a high place to observe the enemy line and was overjoyed to say: This plain is short, easy to advance and easy to retreat, it is really a good place for us to defeat the enemy.

古文：乃使人告德威曰： 吾当为公 德威谏曰： 梁军轻出，而远来与吾转战，其来既速，必不暇赉粮糗；纵其能，亦不暇食。
现代文：于是派人告诉德威说： 我当做你的先锋，你可随后跟进。 德威劝阻说： 梁军轻装远来同我辗转交战，既然他们来得这么快，必定来不及携带干粮，纵然能带干粮，也没有时间吃。
English: So they sent someone to tell Dewey: "I'll be your vanguard, and you can follow later." Dewey dissuaded them, saying: "If Liang's army has come all this way to fight me, since they came so quickly, they must not have had time to bring dry rations, and even if they could bring dry rations, they wouldn't have time to eat.

古文：不及日午，人马饥渴，其军必退。
现代文：这样，等不到中午，他们就会人饥马乏，其军必定退却。
English: Thus, by midday, they would be starving and their army would have retreated.

古文：退而击之，必获胜焉。 
现代文：乘其退却而攻击他们，一定能获得胜利。 
English: If you attack them while they are retreating, you are sure to win.

古文：至未、申时，梁军中尘烟大起，德威鼓噪而进，梁军大败。
现代文：等到下午日头偏西的时候，梁军阵地果因人马后退而烟尘大起，德威乘机擂鼓呐喊，发起猛烈攻击，结果大败后梁军。
English: In the afternoon, when the sun was in the west, the Liang army's positions were covered with smoke and dust due to the retreat of people and horses. Dulwei took the opportunity to shout and launch a fierce attack. As a result, the Liang army was defeated.

