古文：凡战，所谓声者，张虚声也。
现代文：凡是作战中所说的 声战 ，就是虚张声势迷惑敌人。
English: All the so-called vocal warfare in combat is just bluffing to confuse the enemy.

古文：声东而击西，声彼而击此，使敌人不知其所备，则我所攻者，乃敌人所不守也。
现代文：扬言攻其东而实际袭击其西，扬言袭击这边实际攻打那边。这样，便可迫使敌人不知道究竟从哪里进行防守；而我军真正所要进攻的，恰好是敌人没有防备的地方。
English: By threatening to attack in the east and actually attacking in the west, by threatening to attack on this side and actually attacking on that side, we can force the enemy to defend itself from who knows where; but what our army really wants to attack is precisely the place where the enemy is unprepared.

古文：法曰： 善攻者，敌不知其所守。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 善于实施进攻作战的军队，能使敌人不知道怎样防守。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: An army that is good at attacking can make the enemy not know how to defend.

古文：后汉建武五年，耿弇与张步相拒，步使其弟蓝将精兵二万守西安，诸郡太守合万余人守临淄，相去四十余里。
现代文：东汉建武五年，大将耿弇率军同割据势力张步相对抗。时据守剧县的张步，派遣其弟张蓝率领精锐部队二万人坚守西安，并令其所辖诸郡太守集中兵力万余人驻守临淄，两城相距四十余里。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, General Geng Kun led the army to fight against the separatist forces in Zhangpu. At that time, according to Zhangpu of Shouyuan County, he sent his brother Zhang Lan to lead 20,000 elite troops to defend Xi'an, and ordered the county governors under his jurisdiction to concentrate more than 10,000 troops to defend Linyi. The two cities are more than 40 miles apart.

古文：弇进兵画中，居二城之间。
现代文：耿弇率军进至画中，此地位于西安与临淄二城之间。
English: Geng Xuan led the army into the painting, which is located between Xi'an and Linyi.

古文：视西安城小而坚，且蓝兵又精；临淄虽大而易攻，乃敕诸将会后五日攻西安。
现代文：耿弇侦察知道西安城小而坚固，且有张蓝精锐部队防守；临淄城虽大却容易攻取。于是，耿弇责令诸将集会一处，宣布说五天后进攻西安。
English: Geng Yao's reconnaissance knew that Xi'an City was small but strong, and was defended by Zhang Lan's elite troops; Linyi City, although large, was easy to capture. Therefore, Geng Yao ordered the generals to gather in one place and announced that they would attack Xi'an five days later.

古文：蓝闻之，日夜为备。
现代文：张蓝获此消息后，昼夜严加戒备。
English: After Zhang Lan received this news, he was on high alert day and night.

古文：至期夜半，弇敕诸将皆蓐食，会明，至临淄。
现代文：到了第五天，耿弇命令全军将士提前于半夜起床吃饱饭，天亮时候进至临淄城下。
English: On the fifth day, Geng Hui ordered all the soldiers to get up before midnight, eat a full meal, and march to the outskirts of Linyi at dawn.

古文：护军荀梁等争之，以为宜速攻西安。
现代文：这时，护军荀梁等人在攻打临淄的问题上同耿弇发生了争执，他们认为应当迅速攻打西安。
English: Defenders such as Zou Liang argued that Xi'an should be attacked immediately.

古文：弇曰： 西安闻吾欲攻之，日夜备守；临淄出其不意，至必惊扰，攻之，则一日可拔。
现代文：耿弇分析指出说： 不能先打西安。因为西安的守敌听说我军要进攻他们，已经昼夜加紧守备；我们现在进攻临淄乃是出其不意，必使该城守敌惊慌失措，猛攻一天就可破城。
English: Geng Rong pointed out: It is not possible to attack Xi'an first. Because the defenders of Xi'an have heard that our army is going to attack them, they have stepped up their defense day and night. Our current attack on Linyi is unexpected, which will surely make the city's defenders panic, and the onslaught can break the city in one day.

古文：拔临淄则西安孤，张蓝与步阻绝，必自亡去，所谓击一而得二者也。
现代文：攻克临淄，西安就陷入孤立境地，张蓝因与张步之间交通断绝而成孤立无援之敌，因此必定又将弃城逃跑。
English: After conquering Linyi, Xi'an fell into an isolated situation. Zhang Lan became a helpless enemy due to the severance of communication between him and Zhang Bu, so he would definitely abandon the city and flee.

古文：若攻西安，不卒下，顿兵坚城，死伤必多。
现代文：这就是通常所说的一箭双雕的战法。如果先攻西安，不能很快攻克，顿兵于坚城之下，必会给我军造成更多伤亡。
English: This is what is commonly referred to as the "one arrow, two carvings" method of warfare. If Xi'an is attacked first, and cannot be quickly conquered, and the Dong soldiers are under the stronghold, it will certainly cause more casualties to our army.

古文：纵能拔之，蓝帅兵奔还临淄，并兵合势，观人虚实。
现代文：纵然能够攻克西安，张蓝率兵逃往临淄，与该城守军合兵协力，便可寻机向我发动进攻。
English: Even though he was able to conquer Xi'an, Zhang Lan and his soldiers fled to Linyi and joined forces with the city's defenders, so they could find an opportunity to launch an attack on me.

古文：吾深入敌地，后无转输，旬日之间，不战而困。
现代文：我们已深入敌境，后方缺乏供应，不过十天八天，虽然敌人未作反击，困难更加增多。
English: We had penetrated deep into enemy territory and there was a lack of supplies in the rear, but after eight days and ten days, although the enemy had not counter-attacked, the difficulties increased.

古文：诸君之言，未见其宜。 
现代文：因此你们所说的未必正确。
English: So what you are saying is not necessarily true.

古文：遂攻临淄，半日拔之，入据其城。张蓝闻之，果将兵亡去。
现代文：因此你们所说的未必正确。 于是，耿弇率军不到半天就攻下临淄，迅速占领城池。张蓝听说，果然带兵弃城而逃。
English: Therefore, what you said may not be correct. As a result, Geng Xuan led the army to capture Linyi in less than half a day and quickly occupied the city. Zhang Lan heard that he had indeed abandoned the city with his soldiers.

