古文：宗本本名阿鲁。
现代文：宗本，原名阿鲁。
English: Munemoto, formerly known as Aru.

古文：皇统九年，为右丞相兼中书令，进太保，邻三省事。
现代文：皇统九年，他任右丞相兼中书令，又进升为太保，领三省事。
English: In the ninth year of imperial unification, he was appointed as the Minister of the Right and the Vice-Regent, and was promoted to the position of Taiho, leading three provincial affairs.

古文：海陵篡立，进太傅，领三省事。
现代文：海陵篡位后，宗本进职为太傅，并领三省事。
English: After the usurpation of the throne by Hailing, Munemoto was promoted to Taifu, and was in charge of three provincial affairs.

古文：初，宗干谋诛宗磐，故海陵心忌太宗诸子。
现代文：起初，宗斡阴谋诛杀宗磐，因而海陵心中戒备太宗的几个儿子。
English: At first, Emperor Zongwu plotted to kill Emperor Zongan, so Hai Ling was wary of several of Emperor Taizong's sons.

古文：熙宗时，海陵私议宗本等势强，主上不宜优宠太甚。
现代文：熙宗在位时，海陵私下建议说宗本等人势力强大，主上不应过于宠幸。
English: When Emperor Xizong was on the throne, Hailing privately suggested that Emperor Xizong should not be too favored by powerful people such as Zonben.

古文：及篡立，猜忌益深，遂与秘书监萧裕谋杀太宗诸子。
现代文：他篡位之后，猜忌更深，于是与秘书监萧裕密谋杀掉太宗的各个儿子。
English: After he usurped the throne, he was even more suspicious, so he and his secretary, Guan Xiaoyu, conspired to murder the sons of Emperor Taizong.

古文：诬以秉德出领行台，与宗本别，因会饮，约内外相应。
现代文：他们诬蔑秉德出任统领行台之前，与宗本告别，一同饮酒，约定内外相应。
English: Before they slandered Bingde as the leader of the procession, they said goodbye to Munemoto, drank together, and agreed to do the same inside and outside.

古文：使尚书省令史萧玉告宗本亲谓玉言： 以汝于我故旧，必无它意，可布腹心事。
现代文：海陵让尚书省令史萧玉诬告宗本亲口对萧玉说： 因为你跟我是故交，必定没有其他心思，我可以把心里事告诉你。
English: Hailing let Shang Shuxin order Shi XiaoYu to falsely accuse the patriarch himself and said to XiaoYu: Because you and I are old friends, there must be no other thoughts, I can tell you what is in my heart.

古文：邻省临行，言彼在外谕说军民，无以外患为虑。
现代文：领省临走之前，说他在外面传告军民，不要忧虑外边的祸患。
English: Before he left, he said that he would tell the soldiers and civilians outside not to worry about external disasters.

古文：若太傅为内应，何事不成。 
现代文：如果太傅做内应，有什么事做不成？ 
English: What can't be done if the grandmaster does as he is told?

古文：又云： 长子锁里虎当大贵，因是不令见主上。 
现代文：还说： 我的长子锁里虎该有大富贵，因此不让他进见主上。 
English: He also said, "My firstborn son Zoliri Tora must be very rich, so I won't let him see the Lord."

古文：宗本又言： 左丞相于我及我妃处，称主上近日见之辄不喜，故心常恐惧，若太傅一日得大位，此心方安。 
现代文：宗本又说 ：左丞相到我和我妻子这儿来，声称主上看见他就不高兴，所以心中时常恐惧，假若太傅有一天得到高位，我心才安。 
English: Munemoto also said, "Sojo-senpai came to me and my wife, claiming that the Lord was not happy to see him, so I was always afraid in my heart. If Taifu were to get a high position one day, my heart would be at peace.

古文：唐括辩谓宗本言： 内侍张彦善相，相太傅有天子分。 
现代文：唐括辩对宗本说： 内侍张彦善于相面，看出太傅有天子之相。 
English: Tang Parenthesis said to the Patriarch: The chambermaid Zhang Yan is good at facial expressions, and can see that Taifu has the appearance of the Son of Heaven.

古文：宗本答曰： 宗本有兄东京留守在，宗本何能为是。 
现代文：宗本答道 ：宗本有兄长现为东京留守，我怎能这样做？ 
English: Munemoto replied, "I have an older brother who is currently away in Tokyo. How can I do this?

古文：时宗美言 太傅正是太宗主家子，秪太傅便合为北京留守。 
现代文：当时宗美说： 太傅正是太宗本家子弟，只有太傅应当做北京留守。 
English: At that time, Zongmei said, "Taifu is the son of Taizong's own family, and only Taifu should stay in Beijing.

古文：卞临行与宗本言 事不可迟 。
现代文：卞临走前对宗本说 ：事情不可拖延。 
English: Before leaving, Min said to Munemoto, "Things cannot be delayed.

古文：宗本与玉言 大计只于日近围场内予决 。
现代文：宗本对萧玉说 大计只于近日在猎场中决断 。
English: Munemoto told Xiao Yu that the grand plan was only decided recently at the hunting ground.

古文：宗本因以马一匹、袍一领与玉，充表识物。
现代文：宗本因此把一匹马、一件袍服送给萧玉，充当表证。
English: So Munemoto gave a horse and a robe to Xiao Yu as a token.

古文：玉恐围场日近，身縻于外，不能亲奏，遂以告秘书监萧裕。
现代文：萧玉恐怕打猎的日期临近，而自己在外边有事务缠身，不能亲自上奏君王，就把这些报告给秘书监萧裕。
English: Xiao Yu was afraid that the date of the hunt was approaching, and he was busy with affairs outside, and could not personally report to the king, so he sent these reports to the secretary, Inspector Xiao Yu.

古文：裕具以闻。
现代文：萧裕全部报告给皇上。
English: Xiao Yu reported everything to the emperor.

古文：萧玉出入宗本家，亲信如家人。
现代文：萧玉进出宗本的家，亲密信任如同一家人。
English: Xiao Yu goes in and out of the family's home with the same intimacy and trust as a family member.

古文：海陵既与萧裕谋杀宗本、秉德，诏天下，恐天下以宗本、秉德辇皆懿亲大臣，本无反状，裕构成其事，而萧玉与宗本厚，人所共知，使玉上变，庶可示信。
现代文：海陵已经与萧裕谋划好要杀宗本、秉德，下诏明告天下人。又恐怕天下人认为宗本、秉德等人物都是皇室宗亲大臣，原本没有谋反罪状，是萧裕虚构这件事，而萧玉与宗本关系密切是人所共知的，让萧玉上奏说宗本叛变，民众才会表示相信。
English: Hailing had already plotted with Xiao Yu to kill Zonben and Bingde, and announced it to the world. I am afraid that the world thinks that Zonben, Bingde and other figures are the imperial patriarchal ministers, originally there was no charge of treason, it was Xiao Yu who fabricated the matter, and Xiao Yu's close relationship with Zonben is well known to everyone. Let Xiao Yu report on Zonben's rebellion, and the people will believe it.

古文：于是使人召宗本等击鞠，海陵先登楼，命左卫将军徒单特思及萧裕妹婿近侍局副使耶律辟离刺小底密伺宗本及判大宗正事宗美，至，即杀之。
现代文：随后派人召集宗本等人打鞠游乐，海陵先上楼，命令左卫将军徒单特思以及萧裕的妹夫、近侍局副使耶律辟离剌小底，暗中等候宗本和判大宗正事宗美，他们一来，就杀掉他们。
English: Subsequently, someone was sent to summon Zonben and the others for a game of bowls. Hailing first, they went upstairs and ordered the left guard general, Tu Shan Te Si, as well as Xiao Yu's brother-in-law, the deputy envoy of the Board of Attendants, Ye Lu, to stay away from Zang Xiaodi. They secretly awaited Zonben and the judge, Daizong Zhengji Zonmei. If they came, they would kill them.

古文：宗美本名胡里甲，临死神色不变。
现代文：宗美原名胡里甲，他临死时神色不变。
English: Zongmei, whose original name was Huli Jia, looked unchanged as he was dying.

古文：宗本已死，萧裕使人召萧玉。
现代文：宗本死后，萧裕派人召见萧玉。
English: After the death of Munemoto, Xiao Yu sent someone to summon Xiao Yu.

古文：是日，玉送客出城，醉酒，露发披衣，以车载至裕弟点检萧祚家。
现代文：当天，萧玉送客人出城，喝醉了酒，披衣散发，用车把他运载到萧裕的弟弟、点检萧祚家。
English: On the same day, Xiao Yu sent a guest out of the city. He was drunk, spread his clothes, and transported him by car to Xiao Yu's brother, Xiao Yan's house.

古文：逮日暮，玉酒醒，见军士围守之，意为人所累得罪，故至此。
现代文：到日落时候，萧玉酒醒，看见被军士围守，以为被人连累获得罪过，因此到了这儿。
English: At sunset, Xiao Yu woke up drunk and saw that he was surrounded by sergeants. He thought that he would be punished by being tied up, so he came here.

古文：以头触屋壁，号咷曰： 臣未尝犯罪，老母年七十，愿哀怜之。 
现代文：他用头撞墙壁，号啕大哭道： 臣没有犯罪，我有老母亲七十岁了，可怜可怜吧。 
English: He banged his head against the wall and wailed loudly: "The minister did not commit a crime. I have a 70-year-old mother. I pity her."

古文：裕附耳告之曰： 主上以宗本诸人不可留，已诛之矣，欲加以反罪，令汝主告其事。
现代文：萧裕附在他耳边告诉他 ：主上认为宗本等人不能留下，已把他们诛杀，要加以谋反的罪名，命你负责上告这件事。
English: Xiao Yu whispered in his ear and told him, "The Lord thinks that Zonben and the others cannot stay. He has killed them and ordered you to take charge of appealing the case, accusing them of plotting to rebel."

古文：今书汝告款已具，上即问汝，汝但言宗本辈反如状，勿复异词，恐祸及汝家也。 
现代文：现在你上告的款项文字都已准备好，皇上就要问你话，你只按照状纸说宗本等人如何谋反，不要再说别的不同言词，否则会殃及你的全家。 
English: Now that your appeal for payment has been prepared, the emperor is about to ask you a question. You only need to say how Zonben and the others plotted the rebellion according to the charge sheet. Don't say anything else, otherwise it will affect your whole family.

古文：裕乃以巾服与玉，引见海陵。
现代文：萧裕于是把头巾衣服拿给萧玉，引他来见海陵。
English: Xiao Yu then took his turban and clothes to Xiao Yu and led him to see the mausoleum.

古文：海陵问玉。玉言宗本反，具如裕所教。
现代文：海陵向萧玉提问，萧玉说宗本谋反的话都是按萧裕教的那样讲。
English: Hailing asked Xiao Yu a question. Xiao Yu said that the words of the patriarch plotting a rebellion were all spoken in accordance with Xiao Yu's words.

古文：海陵遗使杀东京留守宗懿、北京留守卞。
现代文：海陵派使臣杀死东京留守宗懿、北京留守卞。
English: Hailing sent envoys to kill the Tokyo governor, Sōshō, and the Beijing governor, Shōshō.

古文：及迁益都尹毕王宗哲、平阳尹禀、左宣徽使京等，家属分置别所，止听各以奴婢五人自随。
现代文：又放逐益都尹毕王宗哲、平阳尹禀、左宣徽使京等人，把他们的家属安置到别处，只让他们各自随身带奴婢五人。
English: They also banished Yin Bi Wang Zong Zhe, Pingyang Yin Zhou, Zuo Xuan Hui Jing and others from Yidu, and resettled their families elsewhere, only allowing them to take five slaves with them.

古文：既而使人要之于路，并其子男无少长皆杀之。
现代文：之后又派人在路上堵截，把他们子弟中的男性不论长幼全部杀死。
English: After that, they sent people to block the road and killed all the males among their children, regardless of whether they were old or young.

古文：而中京留守宗雅喜事佛，世称 善大王 ，海陵知其无能，将存之以奉太宗。
现代文：而中京留守宗雅喜好做佛事，世人称他 善大王 ，海陵知道他无能，要留下他侍奉太宗。
English: However, Zongya, who remained in the capital, preferred to do Buddhist activities. The world called him the Good Great King, but Hailing knew he was incompetent and wanted to keep him to serve Emperor Taizong.

古文：后召至关，不数日，竟杀之。
现代文：后来把宗雅召进宫门，没几天，竟然杀了他。
English: Later, he summoned Zoya to the palace gate, and a few days later, he actually killed him.

古文：太宗子孙死者七十余人，太宗后遂绝。
现代文：太宗的子孙死了七十多人，于是绝了后。
English: More than seventy of Taizong's descendants died, and he became extinct.

古文：卞本名可喜。
现代文：卞原名可喜。
English: Its original name was Kappo.

古文：禀本名胡离改。
现代文：禀原名胡离改。
English: His original name was Hu Yizhuo.

古文：京，宗固子，本名胡石赉。
现代文：京是宗固的儿子，原名胡石赉。
English: Kyo was the son of Mungu, whose original name was Hu Shihong.

古文：萧玉既如萧裕教对海陵，海陵遂以宗本、秉德等罪诏天下，以玉上变实之。
现代文：萧玉既然能按萧裕教给的那样对答海陵，海陵就把宗本、秉德等人的罪状下诏通告天下，用萧玉上告叛变来作为实证。
English: Since Xiao Yu was able to answer Hailing in the way that Xiao Yuqing gave, Hailing announced to the world the indictment of Zonben, Bingde and others, and used Xiao Yu's accusation of rebellion as positive evidence.

古文：海陵使太府监完颜冯六籍宗本诸家，戒之曰： 珠玉金帛入于官，什器吾将分赐诸臣。 
现代文：海陵让太府监完颜冯六去登记并没收宗本各家亲眷的财产，告诫他说： 把珠玉金帛收进官府，对于日用杂物我要分赐给各位大臣。 
English: Hai Ling asked Yan Fenglu, the grand steward of the palace, to register and confiscate the property of the relatives of each family in the family tree, and warned him: Take the precious gold ingots to the government office, and I will distribute the daily necessities to the ministers.

古文：冯六以此不复拘籍什器，往往为人持去，冯六家童亦取其檀木屏风。
现代文：完颜冯六因而不再登记没收杂物，这些东西常常被人拿走，完颜冯六的家童也拿了檀木屏风。
English: As a result, Fengrui no longer registered the confiscation of miscellaneous items, which were often taken away by people. Fengrui's children also took the sandalwood screen.

古文：少监刘景前为监丞时，太府监失火，案牍尽焚毁，数月方取诸司簿帐补之，监吏坐是稽缓，当得罪。
现代文：少监刘景以前做监丞的时候，太府监失火，文书全被烧毁，过了好几个月才拿来各司账簿补写出来，监吏做事这样迟缓，应当治罪。
English: When Liu Jing, a junior inspector, was a superintendent, the superintendent's office caught fire, and all the paperwork was burned. It took several months to get the books and records of all the departments to make up for it. Supervisors should be punished for being so slow to do things.

古文：景为吏，倒署年月。
现代文：刘景身为监吏，却把出事日期提前签署。
English: Liu Jing, who was a supervisor, signed the accident date in advance.

古文：太仓都监焦子忠与景有旧，坐逋负，久不得调，景为尽力出之。
现代文：太仓都监焦子忠与刘景有旧交情，焦子忠由于拖欠亏空而坐牢，很久得不到开脱，刘景尽力救他出狱。
English: The governor of Taicang, Jiao Zizhong, had an old friendship with Liu Jing. Jiao Zizhong had been in prison for a long time because of a bad debt. Liu Jing tried his best to get him out of prison.

古文：久之，冯六与景就宫中相忿争，冯六言景倒署年月及出焦子忠事。
现代文：过了很长时间，完颜冯六与刘景由于在宫中忿然争斗，说出刘景倒署事故年月以及放出焦子忠的事情。
English: After a long time, after Feng Lu and Liu Jing fought angrily in the palace, she told Liu Jing the date of the accident and the release of Jiao Zizhong.

古文：御史劾奏景，景党诱冯六家奴发盗屏事。
现代文：御史上奏弹劾刘景，刘景的朋党引诱完颜冯六的家奴揭发偷盗屏风的事。
English: Liu Jing was impeached. Liu Jing's cronies lured Yan Fengrui's manservant into exposing the theft of the screen.

古文：冯六自陈于尚书省。
现代文：完颜冯六自己向尚书省陈述此事。
English: Fengrui herself reported the matter to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：海陵使御史大夫赵资福、大理少卿许竑杂治。
现代文：海陵派御史大夫赵资福、大理少卿许一同审察。
English: The imperial historian Zhao Zifu and Dali Shaoqing Xu of the Hailing School examined it together.

古文：资福等奏冯六非自盗，又尝自首。
现代文：赵资福等人禀奏说完颜冯六自己没有偷盗，又曾自首。
English: Zhao Zifu and others said that Yan Fengrui did not steal and had surrendered.

古文：海陵素恶冯六与宗室游从，谓宰臣曰： 冯六尝用所盗物，其自首不及此。
现代文：海陵向来厌恶冯六与皇室宗亲交往，就对群臣说： 冯六曾经使用偷盗来的东西，他自首也盖不过这事。
English: Hailing Feng Liou's long-standing aversion to associating with the imperial family, Hailing said to the courtiers: "Feng Liou once used stolen goods, and he can't cover this up by turning himself in.

古文：法，盗宫中物者死，诸物已籍入官，与宫中物何异。 
现代文：依法，偷盗宫中物品者要处死，各样物品已登记没收进官府，和宫中物品有何不同？ 
English: According to the law, those who steal items from the palace are to be put to death, and all kinds of items have been registered and confiscated by the government. How are they different from the items from the palace?

古文：谓冯六曰： 太府掌宫中财贿，汝当防制奸欺，而自用盗物。 
现代文：又对冯六说 ：太府掌管宫中财产，你应当防止欺瞒奸骗行为，却反而自己使用偷来的东西。 
English: He also said to Feng Li, "The Grand Mufu is in charge of the palace's property. You should prevent deception and fraud, but instead you use stolen goods yourself."

古文：于是，冯六弃市，资福、竑坐鞫狱不尽，决杖有差。
现代文：于是，冯六被处死并弃尸于市上，赵资福、许因审案不周全，被各自处以不同的杖刑。
English: As a result, Feng Liu was executed and his body was dumped in the city, while Zhao Zifu and Xu were each sentenced to a different cane punishment due to the incomplete trial.

古文：海陵造谋，杀宗本兄弟不遗余力。
现代文：刘景也因接受焦子忠贿赂的黄金而服罪。
English: Liu Jing also pleaded guilty to accepting gold bribes from Jiao Zizhong.

古文：太宗举宋而有中原，金百世不迁之庙也，再传而无噍类，于是太祖之美意无复几微存者。
现代文：海陵说 ：受贿的事没有证人，而刘景倒签年月，以开脱监吏罪责，这些事不能饶恕。 于是杀掉刘景。
English: Hailing said: There are no witnesses to the bribe-taking, and Liu Jing signed back the years to absolve the prison officials of their guilt, these things cannot be forgiven, so he killed Liu Jing.

古文：春秋之世，宋公舍与夷而立其弟，祸延数世，害及五国，诚足为后世监乎。杲本名斜也，世祖第五子，太祖母弟。
现代文：大定二年，皇上追封宗固为鲁王、宗雅为曹王、宗顺为隋王、宗懿为郑王、宗美为卫王、宗哲为韩王、宗本为潞王、神土门为豳王、斛孛束为沈王、斡烈为鄂王，胡里改、胡什赉、可喜一起授予金吾卫上将军，只有宗磐、阿鲁补、斛沙虎、鹘懒四个人没再加封。杲，原名斜也，是世祖的第五个儿子，太祖的同母弟弟。
English: In the 2nd year of Dading, the emperor conferred posthumous titles on Zong Gu as King of Lu, Zong Ya as King of Cao, Zong Shun as King of Sui, Zong Yi as King of Zheng, Zong Mei as King of Wei, Zong Zhe as King of Han, Zong Ben as King of Zhai, Shintumen as King of Zhai, Zhaozhu as King of Shen, Yuzhong as King of Hubei, and Huligai, Hushun, and Kexi as General of Jinwuwei. Only four people, Zong Ban, Aru Qi, Bao Sha Hu, and

古文：收国元年，太宗为谙班勃极烈，杲为国论吴勃极烈。
现代文：收国元年，太宗任谙班勃极烈，杲任国论昊勃极烈。
English: In the first year of the National Reunification, Taizong presided over a vigorous national debate.

古文：天辅元年，杲以兵一万攻泰州，下金山县，女固、脾室四部及渤海人皆来降，遂克泰州。
现代文：天辅元年，杲带领军队一万人攻打泰州，占下金山县。女固、脾室的四个部族以及渤海人都来投降，于是攻克泰州。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Yao led an army of ten thousand to attack Taizhou, occupying the lower Jinshan County. The four tribes of Nengu, Spleen Room and Bohai all surrendered, thus conquering Taizhou.

古文：城中积粟转致乌林野，赈先降诸部，因徙之内地。
现代文：城中贮存的粮食转运到乌林野，赈济先来投降的各部族，顺势把他们迁徙到内地。
English: The grain stored in the city was transported to Ulin, where it was used to help the first tribes to surrender, and then they were moved inland.

古文：天辅五年，为忽鲁勃极烈，都统内外诸军，取中京实北京也，蒲家奴、宗翰、宗干、宗磐副之，宗峻领合紥猛安，皆受金牌，耶律余睹为乡导。
现代文：天辅五年，杲任忽鲁勃极烈，都统内外各路军队，进攻中京，即北京。蒲家奴、宗翰、宗干、宗磐做副手，宗峻受职合扎猛安，都被给予金牌，耶律余睹做向导。
English: In the 5th year of Tian Yu's reign, Hu Rubo, who was in charge of the capital, was so powerful that all the armies in and out of the capital attacked Beijing. Pu Jia Nu, Zong Han, Zong Gan, and Zong Ban served as his deputies, Zong Jun accepted the post, and Zaza Meng'an was given a gold medal, while Yeru Yu served as his guide.

古文：诏曰： 辽政不纲，人神共弃。
现代文：皇帝诏曰： 辽国政治混乱，为人神所共弃。
English: The Emperor Zhao said: The political turmoil in Liaoning Province has been abandoned by both man and gods.

古文：今欲中外一统，故命汝率大军，以行讨伐。
现代文：如今要中外统一，因此命你率大军，前去讨伐。
English: Now it is necessary to unify China and the rest of the world, so I order you to lead a large army and go on a crusade.

古文：尔其慎重兵事，择用善谋。赏罚必行，粮饷必继。
现代文：你要慎重用兵，选用良策，施行赏罚，供足粮饷。
English: You should use soldiers prudently, choose good strategies, implement rewards and punishments, and provide enough food.

古文：勿扰降服，勿纵俘掠。
现代文：不要搅扰降服之众，不要纵容部下抢掠。
English: Don't disturb the people who have surrendered, and don't allow your subordinates to loot.

古文：见可而进，无淹师期。
现代文：见情势可以便进兵，不要延误军机。
English: Don't delay the military aircraft.

古文：事有从权，毋烦奏禀。 
现代文：遇事有权定夺，无须烦琐禀奏。 
English: You have the power to make decisions in the event of an emergency, and there is no need for tedious trivia.

古文：复诏曰： 若克中京，所得礼乐图书文籍，并先次律发赴阙。 
现代文：又下诏说： 如果攻克中京，所缴获的礼乐图书文籍，一并陆续送进宫中。 
English: He also issued the following edict: If Chukyo is conquered, the captured ceremonial music books and literature will be successively sent to the Imperial Palace.

古文：当是时，辽人守中京者，闻知师期，焚刍粮，欲徙居民遁去。
现代文：在这时，辽国驻守中京的人，得知军队过来，便焚烧粮草，要迁徙居民逃跑。
English: At this time, the Liao garrison in Zhongjing, having learned that the army was coming, burned grain and grass to force the residents to flee.

古文：奚王霞未则欲视我兵少则迎战，若不敌则退保山西。
现代文：奚王霞末却要看我军人少就迎战，如果敌不过就退守山西。
English: Xia Wang Xia Mian, however, wants to see how few of our soldiers go to war, and if the enemy is too few, he will retreat to Shanxi.

古文：杲知辽人无斗志，乃委辎重，以轻兵击之。
现代文：杲知道辽人没有战斗的意志，就丢下军用器物，用轻装军兵去进攻。
English: Knowing that the Liao people had no will to fight, Zou threw away military equipment and attacked with lightly armed soldiers.

古文：六年正月，克高、恩回纥三城，进至中京。
现代文：天辅六年正月，攻克高、恩、回纥三座城，进军到中京。
English: In the first month of Tianshu's sixth year, he conquered Gao, En, and Hulun three cities and marched into central Beijing.

古文：辽兵皆不战而溃，遂克中京。
现代文：辽兵都不战而溃败，于是占领中京。
English: The Liao soldiers were defeated without a fight, so they occupied central Beijing.

古文：获马一千二百、牛五百、驼一百七十、羊四万七千、车三百五十两。
现代文：缴获一千二百匹马、五百头牛、一百七十头骆驼、四万七千只羊、三百五十辆车。
English: They captured twelve hundred horses, five hundred oxen, one hundred and seventy camels, forty-seven thousand sheep, and three hundred and fifty chariots.

古文：乃分兵屯守要害之地。
现代文：然后分派兵士驻守要害地方。
English: Soldiers are then assigned to guard key locations.

古文：驻兵中京，使使奏捷、献俘。
现代文：军队驻扎在中京后，杲派使者禀奏捷报，献上俘虏。
English: After the army was stationed in Chukyo, the emperor sent an envoy to present the captives.

古文：诏曰： 汝等提兵于外，克副所任，攻下城邑，抚安人民，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：皇上诏曰 ：你们在外统兵，克守职责，攻下城邑，安抚百姓，朕很赞赏。
English: Emperor Zhao said: You led the troops outside, fulfilled your duties, captured the city, and pacified the people. I really appreciate this.

古文：分遣将士招降山前诸部，计已抚定。
现代文：分派将士招降山前各部族，已计划妥定。
English: A plan has been finalized to assign soldiers to recruit from the tribes in front of the mountain.

古文：山后若未可往，即营田牧，俟秋大举，更当熟议，见可则行。
现代文：山后假若不能去，就垦田放牧，等秋天起兵，再深入计议，情况许可就行进。
English: If it is not possible to go to the back of the mountain, they will graze in the ploughed field, wait for the autumn to raise an army, and then discuss it in depth. If the situation permits, they will march.

古文：如欲益兵，具数来上。
现代文：如果要增兵，把数目报上来。
English: If you want more troops, give us the number.

古文：无恃一战之胜，辄自弛慢。
现代文：不要凭一次战斗的胜利，就兀自松弛怠慢。
English: Don't rely on the victory of a single battle and become slack and negligent.

古文：善抚存降附，宣谕将士，使知朕意。 
现代文：妥善安抚投降归附者，向将士宣读谕旨，使他们明白朕的心意。 
English: Properly pacify those who have surrendered and joined, and read the edict to the soldiers so that they understand My will.

古文：完颜欢都游兵出中京南，遇骑兵三十余绐曰： 乞明旦来降于此。 
现代文：完颜欢都的军队走到中京以南，遇上三十多个骑兵，他们谎称： 请让我们明早来这里投降。 
English: When the troops from Yanhuangdu marched south of Zhongjing, they encountered more than thirty cavalrymen, who lied and said, "Please let us come here tomorrow morning to surrender."

古文：杲信之，使温迪痕阿里出、纳合钝恩、蒲察婆罗偎、诸甲拔剔邻往迎之。
现代文：杲相信了他们的话，派温迪痕阿里出、纳合钝恩、蒲察婆罗偎、诸甲拔剔邻前往迎接。
English: He believed their words and sent Wendy Yan Ali, Naha Blunt En, Pucha Boroban, and Zhuge Bao to meet them.

古文：奚王霞末兵围阿里出等。
现代文：奚王霞末的军兵包围了温迪痕阿里出等人。
English: At the end of Xia Wang's reign, soldiers surrounded Wendy Yan, Ali Yu and others.

古文：遂据坂去马，皆殊死战，败霞末兵，追杀至暮而还。
现代文：这些人就据守山坡，丢开马匹，全都殊死战斗，打败了霞末的军兵，并追杀到天黑才回来。
English: These men held the hillside, threw away their horses, and fought to the death, defeating the soldiers of the end of the haze and chasing them until dark.

古文：是役，纳合钝恩功为多。
现代文：这次战役，纳合钝恩立功最多。
English: In this battle, Naha blunt en made the most contributions.

古文：宗翰降北安州，希尹获辽护卫习泥烈，言辽主在鸳鸯泺畋猎，可袭取之。
现代文：宗翰降伏北安州，希尹抓获辽国护卫习泥烈，说辽君主在鸳鸯泺狩猎，可去袭击擒拿。
English: Zonghan surrenders Bei'an Province, Xi Yin captures the Liao escort Xi Murei, saying that the Liao monarch is hunting in Yunnan and can go to attack Yunnan.

古文：宗翰移书于杲，请进兵。
现代文：宗翰写信给杲，请求进兵。
English: Zonghan wrote to Zou, requesting to join the army.

古文：使者再往，曰： 一失机会，事难图矣。 
现代文：又再派人去，说： 一旦失去机会，事情就难办了。 
English: And he sent another, saying, When opportunity is lost, there is difficulty.

古文：杲意尚未决。
现代文：杲的主意还没决定。
English: I haven't made up my mind yet.

古文：宗干劝杲当从宗翰策，杲乃约宗翰会奚王岭。
现代文：宗干劝杲应当听从宗翰的计策，杲才约定与宗翰在奚王岭会面。
English: Dzongkang advised him that he should follow Dzongkhan's strategy, and it was only then that he agreed to meet Dzongkhan at Shao Wangling.

古文：既会，始定议，杲出青岭，宗翰出瓢岭，期羊城泺会军。
现代文：见了面，才开始商定计划，杲从青岭出发，宗翰从瓢岭出发，约定在羊城泺军队会合。
English: It was only after they met that they began to agree on a plan. Zou started from Qingling, Zonghan from Fuling, and they agreed to meet in Yangcheng.

古文：时辽主在草泺，使宗翰与宗干率精兵六千袭之。
现代文：这时，辽主在草泺，杲派宗翰与宗干率精兵六千去袭击。
English: At this time, Liao Lord was in Caozhou, and Zou sent Zonghan and Zongan to attack with six thousand elite soldiers.

古文：辽主西走，其都统马哥趋捣里。
现代文：辽主向西逃跑，他的都统马哥赶奔捣里。
English: Lord Liao fled to the west, and his brother, the governor of the capital, rushed to join him.

古文：宗翰遣挞懒以兵一千往击之。
现代文：宗翰派挞懒带兵一千去攻打他。
English: Zonghan sent Lazy to attack him with a thousand soldiers.

古文：挞懒请益兵于都统杲，而获辽枢密使得里底父子。
现代文：挞懒向都统杲请求增兵，继而抓住辽国枢密使得里底父子。
English: He lazily asked for more troops from the Central Military Commission, and then seized the Liao State Privy Council to make Lidi father and son.

古文：西京已降得叛，杲使招之不从，遂攻之。
现代文：西京归降后又反叛，杲派人招降，西京不服从，于是杲举兵攻打。
English: After the fall of Saikyo, it rebelled again. He sent people to invite surrender, but Saikyo did not obey, so he raised an army to attack.

古文：留守萧察刺逾城降。
现代文：留守萧察剌翻越出城来投降。
English: Left-behind Xiao Zhaojun fled the city to surrender.

古文：四月，复取西京。
现代文：四月，再次攻取西京。
English: In April, he once again captured Saikyo.

古文：杲率大军趋白水泺，分遣诸将招抚未降州郡及诸部族。
现代文：杲率领大军赶赴白水泺，分派各将招降安抚没有归降的州郡以及各部族。
English: Xing led a large army to rush to Baishuiyuan, assigning each general to recruit and pacify the states and counties that did not surrender, as well as the tribes.

古文：于是，辽秦晋国王耶律捏里自立于燕京。
现代文：在这时，辽国秦晋国王耶律捏里在燕京自立为帝。
English: At this time, the king of the Qin and Jin dynasties in the Liao Dynasty, Yeluchunli, established himself as emperor in Yanjing.

古文：山西诸城虽降，而人心未固，杲遣宗望奏事，仍请上临军。
现代文：山西各城池虽然投降，但人心没有稳固。杲派宗望上奏军情，并由此请求皇上驾临军中。
English: Although all the cities in Shanxi surrendered, the people's hearts were not stable. The Shao faction of the Zongwang sect reported on the military situation, and thus requested the emperor to join the army.

古文：耶律坦招西南招讨司及所属诸部，西至夏境皆降，耶律佛顶亦降于坦。
现代文：耶律坦招降西南招讨司及其所属各部族，西到夏国边境的地方全都归顺了，耶律佛顶也向耶律坦投降。
English: Yerutam surrendered the Southwest Invitation and Investigation Division and all the tribes it belonged to, and all the places west to the border of Xia all surrendered, and Yerutam's Buddha's head also surrendered to Yerutam.

古文：金肃、西平二郡汉军四千叛去，坦与阿沙兀野、挞不野简料新降丁壮，迨夜袭之。
现代文：金肃、西平两个郡里有四千汉军叛逃离去，耶律坦与阿沙兀野、挞不野简单整顿出新近投降的壮年男子，趁黑夜前去袭击。
English: In the two counties of Jinshu and Xiping, there were 4,000 Han rebels who fled. Yerutang, Asha, and Shifu made a simple rectification of the newly surrendered men, and took advantage of the darkness to attack.

古文：诘旦，战于河上，大败其众，皆委仗就擒。
现代文：第二天早晨，在河上交战，大败汉军，汉军都丢下兵器俯首就擒。
English: The next morning, they fought on the river and defeated the Han army. The Han army threw down their weapons and went to bed.

古文：耶律捏里移书于杲请和，杲复书，责以不先禀命上国，辄称大号，若能自归，当以燕京留守处之。
现代文：耶律捏里写信给杲请求讲和，杲回信，斥责他不先向上国禀奏就自封帝号，如果能自己归降，将会给与燕京留守的职务。
English: Ye Luqin wrote a letter to Yan Hui asking him to make peace, and Yan Hui replied, reprimanding him for proclaiming himself emperor without first making peace with Shang Guo. If he could surrender, he would be given the post of remaining in Yanjing.

古文：捏里复以书来，其略曰： 昨即位时，在两国绝聘交兵之际。
现代文：耶律捏里也回信来，意思大致是说 ：先前即位时，是在两国绝交相战之际。
English: Jeroen also wrote back, saying roughly that when he had previously ascended to the throne, it was at a time when the two countries were at war.

古文：奚王与文武百官同心推戴，何暇请命。
现代文：奚王与文武百官同心推举拥戴，我哪里有时间向朝廷请命呢？
English: Where would I find the time to ask the imperial court for my life?

古文：今诸军已集，傥欲加兵，未能束手待毙也。
现代文：现在各军已聚集，如果要发兵，我不能再束手待毙。
English: Now that the armies have assembled, I can no longer stand idly by if I have to send in the troops.

古文：昔我先世，未尝残害大金人民，宠以位呈，日益强大。
现代文：昔日我的先祖不曾残害大金人民，封号授职给的恩宠，使民族日益强大。
English: In the past, my ancestors did not massacre the people of Daqing. The grace given by the conferment of the title has made the nation increasingly strong.

古文：今忘此施，欲绝我宗祀，于义何如也。
现代文：现在忘却这些恩德，要断绝我家族宗祀，有何道义？
English: What is the morality of forgetting these blessings now, of breaking off my family's religion?

古文：傥蒙惠顾，则感戴恩德，何有穷已。 
现代文：倘若承蒙照顾，那么我感戴您的恩德，没有穷尽。 
English: If you take care of me, then I will appreciate your kindness without end.

古文：杲复书曰： 閤下向为元帅，总统诸军，任非不重，竟无尺寸之功。
现代文：杲又回信说： 阁下向来身为元帅，统领各军，责任不是不重大，却没有一点功绩。
English: Zou also wrote back: Your Excellency has always been a marshal, commanding all the armies. The responsibility is not insignificant, but there is no merit at all.

古文：欲据一城，以抗国兵，不亦难乎。
现代文：你想据守一座城来抵抗国家军队，不是很难吗？
English: If you want to defend a city against a national army, isn't it difficult?

古文：所任用者，前既不能死国，今谁肯为閤下用者。
现代文：你任用的人，以前既然不能为国而死，现在谁肯受阁下指派呢？
English: If those whom you have appointed could not die for their country before, who will you appoint now?

古文：而云主辱臣死，欲恃此以成功，计亦疏矣。
现代文：再说主上受辱臣下必死，想靠此成功，这种打算也不周全。
English: Moreover, it is not a complete plan to say that the master must be humiliated and the vassal must die, and to rely on this for success.

古文：幕府奉诏，归者官之，逆者讨之。
现代文：幕府遵奉皇上诏令，归顺者授官，逆反者讨伐。
English: The bakufu obeyed the Emperor's edict, granting positions to those who surrendered and cracking down on those who rebelled.

古文：若执迷不从，期于殄灭而后已。 
现代文：阁下如果执迷不悟，不肯顺从，就等被消灭后再了结吧。 
English: If your excellency persists and refuses to comply, let him wait until he is eliminated before ending it.

古文：捏里乃遣使请于太祖。赐捏里诏曰： 汝，辽之所属，位居将相，不能与国存亡，乃窃据孤城，僣称大号，若不降附，将有后悔。 
现代文：耶律捏里于是派使者去向太祖请命，太祖赐给他的诏书说： 你是辽国亲属，职位居于将相，却不能与国家共存亡，并私自据守孤城，伪称大号，假若不肯降伏，将要后悔。 
English: Yeluchinli then sent an envoy to ask the great-grandfather for his life. The edict given to him by the great-grandfather said: You are a relative of Liao, your position is in the position of commander, but you cannot coexist with the country, and you are privately defending a lonely city, falsely calling yourself a great-grandfather. If you refuse to surrender, you will regret it.

古文：六月，上发京师，诏都统曰： 汝等欲朕亲征，已于今月朔旦启行。
现代文：六月，皇上从京师发兵，下诏给都统道 ：你们要朕亲自出征，朕已于本月初一早晨启程。
English: In June, the emperor sent troops from the Beijing Division and issued the following edict to the Duotong Province: You want me to go to war in person. I left on the morning of the first day of this month.

古文：辽主今定何在？
现代文：辽主现在哪里，有何计策可以取胜？
English: Where is the Liao Lord now, what are the strategies to win?

古文：何计可以取之，其具以闻。 
现代文：全都报告上来。 杲派马和尚在挞鲁河恭迎太祖。
English: All the reports came in. Zou sent a horse and a monk to greet the great ancestor at the Jilu River.

古文：杲使马和尚奉迎太祖于挞鲁河。斡鲁、娄室败夏将李良辅，杲使完颜希尹等奏捷，且请徙西南招讨司诸部于内地。
现代文：斡鲁、娄室打败夏国将领李良辅，杲派完颜希尹等人上奏报捷，并且请求把西南招讨司的各部族迁移到内地。
English: Yang Lu and Yiming defeated Li Liang Fu, the general of Xia, and sent Yan Xiyin and others to report the victory, and requested that the tribes of Southwest Zhaotong be relocated to the mainland.

古文：希尹等见上于大泺西南，上嘉赏之。
现代文：希尹等人在大泺西南进见皇上，皇上嘉奖了他们。
English: Xi Yin and others went to see the emperor in the southwest of Dalian, and the emperor commended them.

古文：上至鸳鸯泺，杲上谒。
现代文：皇上来到鸳鸯泺，杲前去谒见。
English: The emperor came to see me. I went to see him.

古文：上追辽主至回离畛川，南伐燕京，次奉圣州。诏曰： 自今诸诉讼书付都统杲决遣。
现代文：皇上追击辽主到了回离畛川，南下攻伐燕京，来到奉圣州，下诏说 ：从今后所有诉讼文书都交给都统杲决断。
English: The emperor pursued the Liao Lord to Huiyuan, went south to attack Yanjing, came to Fengshengzhou, and issued the following edict: From now on, all litigation documents will be submitted to the central government for adjudication.

古文：若有大疑，即令闻奏。 
现代文：如果有大的疑难之事，要即刻奏明。 
English: If there is a major problem, report it immediately.

古文：太祖定燕京，还次鸳鸯泺，以宗翰为都统，杲从上还京师。
现代文：太祖平定燕京，返回鸳鸯泺，任命宗翰为都统，杲跟随太祖返回京师。
English: The great ancestor conquered Yanjing, returned to Zou, appointed Zonghan as the governor of the capital, and Zou followed the great ancestor back to Beijing.

古文：太宗即位，杲为谙班勃极烈，与宗干俱治国政。
现代文：太宗即位，杲任谙班勃极烈，与宗干一同治理国政。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and Zeng Ren and Ban Bo became extremely powerful, governing state affairs together with Zong Gang.

古文：天会三年伐宋，杲领都元帅，居京师。
现代文：天会三年攻伐宋国，杲出任都元帅，住在京师。
English: Heaven will invade Song for three years, and Zou will serve as the capital's marshal, living in Beijing.

古文：宗翰、宗望分道进兵。
现代文：宗翰、宗望分路进兵。
English: Zonghan and Zongwang marched into the army separately.

古文：四年，再伐宋，获宋二主以归。
现代文：天会四年，再次征讨宋国，擒获宋国两位君主而回兵。
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, the Song Dynasty was once again invaded, and the two monarchs of the Song Dynasty were captured and returned to the army.

古文：天会八年，薨。
现代文：天会八年，杲去世。
English: Eight years after the heavenly meeting, Zou passed away.

古文：皇统三年，追封辽越国王。
现代文：皇统三年，杲被追封为辽越国王。
English: In the third year of imperial rule, Zou was posthumously crowned King of Liao Yue.

古文：天德二年，酏享太祖庙廷。
现代文：天德二年，被纎祭于太祖庙廷。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, he was awarded the imperial title of the Grand Ancestor of the Imperial Court.

古文：正隆例封辽王。
现代文：正隆时期，按定例杲被封为辽王。
English: During the Zhenglong period, according to the regular order, Zeng was named Liao King.

古文：大定十五年，谥曰智烈。
现代文：大定十五年，受封谥号为 智烈 。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading's reign, he was given the title of Zhi Rong.

古文：子孛吉。
现代文：杲的儿子叫孛吉。
English: The son of Toad is called Toadfish.

