古文：时运交移，质文代变，古今情理，如可言乎？
现代文：随着时代交替推移的变化发展，质朴和华丽的文风也跟着变化。古往今来的写作情况和道理，大概还可以论述一下吧？
English: With the change and development of the alternation of eras, the simple and gorgeous style of writing has also changed. The situation and reason for writing from ancient times to the present can probably be discussed?

古文：昔在陶唐，德盛化钧，野老吐 何力 之谈，郊童含 不识 之歌。
现代文：从前在唐尧时期，恩德隆盛，教化普及；所以者百姓做了《击壤歌》，儿童们也唱了《康衢谣》。
English: Once upon a time, during the Tang Dynasty, Nderong flourished and enlightenment was widespread; therefore, the people made "The Song of the Groundbreaking," and the children also sang "The Song of the Groundbreaking."

古文：有虞继作，政阜民暇，薰风咏于元后， 烂云 歌于列臣。
现代文：接着是虞舜时期，政治昌明，百姓安闲；于是舜写了《南风歌》，群臣也和他同唱了《卿云歌》。
English: Then came the period of the Yuezhi Dynasty, when politics was flourishing and the people were at ease. Therefore, Zeng wrote the "Southern Wind Song," and the courtiers also sang the "Song of the Clouds" with him.

古文：尽其美者何？
现代文：这些作品为什么给人非常美好的感觉呢？
English: Why do these works give people a very good feeling?

古文：乃心乐而声泰也。
现代文：就是因为大家心情舒畅，所以诗歌音调也是安乐的。
English: Just because everyone is in a relaxed mood, the tone of the poem is also relaxed.

古文：至大禹敷土，九序咏功，成汤圣敬， 猗欤 作颂。
现代文：到夏禹治理好国土，各项工作都走上轨道，所以产生了歌颂的作品。商汤英明严肃，因而出现了《诗经·商颂》里的《那》诗。
English: By the time Xia Yu governed the country well, all kinds of work were on track, so the works of praise were produced. Shang Tang was wise and serious, and thus the "That" poem in the "Book of Poems · Song of Commerce" appeared.

古文：逮姬文之德盛，《周南》勤而不怨；大王之化淳，《邠风》乐而不淫。
现代文：后来周文王恩德隆盛，这时《周南》中的诗篇，体现了当时作者勤劳而无怨言的思想；文王以前，太王的教化很淳厚，所以《豳风》里的诗歌表达了作者快乐而不过分的心情。
English: Later, Zhou Wen Wang and Delong Sheng, at that time, the poems in "Zhou Nan" reflected the author's diligent and uncomplaining thoughts at that time; before King Wen, the king's enlightenment was very pure, so the poems in "Fury of the Wind" expressed the author's happy but not excessive mood.

古文：幽厉昏而《板》、《荡》怒，平王微而《黍离》哀。
现代文：但是后来厉王、幽王时期政治黑暗，因而《大雅》里的《板》、《荡》等诗充满愤怒；平王时，周室渐渐衰落，于是出现了情调悲哀的《王风·黍离》。
English: But later, during the reigns of King Li and King You, politics was dark, so poems such as "Plank" and "Swing" in "Daya" were full of anger; during the reign of King Ping, the Zhou dynasty gradually declined, and the sad "King Wind, Separation" appeared.

古文：故知歌谣文理，与世推移，风动于上，而波震于下者也。
现代文：这些歌谣写作的道理，是和时代一起演变的；时代像风一样在上边刮着，文学就像波浪一样在下边跟着震动。
English: The reason for writing these songs has evolved with the times; the times are like the wind blowing above, and literature is like the waves following below.

古文：春秋以后，角战英雄，六经泥蟠，百家飙骇。
现代文：春秋以后，列国群雄互相争战；儒家经典不被重视，诸子百家风起云涌地出现了。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period, the heroes of all countries fought against each other; Confucian classics were not valued, and hundreds of schools of thought emerged.

古文：方是时也，韩魏力政，燕赵任权；五蠹六虱，严于秦令；唯齐、楚两国，颇有文学。
现代文：这时韩、魏诸国使用武力争夺胜负，燕赵诸国相信权谋；而秦国对于韩非所谓五种害国的蛀虫，商鞅所说六种害国的虱子，都控制得很严格。
English: At this time, the Han and Wei states used force to compete for victory and defeat, and the Yan and Zhao states believed in power strategy; while the Qin state strictly controlled the so-called five pests of the country and the six pests of the country.

古文：齐开庄衢之第，楚广兰台之宫，孟轲宾馆，荀卿宰邑，故稷下扇其清风，兰陵郁其茂俗，邹子以谈天飞誉，驺奭以雕龙驰响，屈平联藻于日月，宋玉交彩于风云。
现代文：只有齐、楚两国还颇有文化学术：齐国准备了大公馆，楚国扩大了兰台宫，来款待贤人；孟子到齐国去做贵宾，荀子到楚国去做兰陵令；所以齐国的稷下就传开优良的风气，楚国的兰陵也形成美好的习俗；邹衍以谈天称著，驺奭以文才驰名，屈原的诗篇更可媲美日月，宋玉的文采也美如风云。
English: Only the two countries of Qi and Chu still have quite a bit of culture and learning: Qi prepared a grand mansion, and Chu expanded the Lantai Palace to entertain the wise men; Mencius went to Qi to be a VIP, and Shanzi went to Chu to do the Lanling order; therefore, under the auspices of Qi, a fine ethos was spread, and the Lanling in Chu also formed a beautiful custom; Yan Yan is famous for talking about heaven, and Yan is famous for writing, Qu Yuan's poetry is more comparable to the sun and moon, and Song Yu's poetry is as beautiful as the wind and clouds.

古文：观其艳说，则笼罩《雅》、《颂》，故知炜烨之奇意，出乎纵横之诡俗也。
现代文：从文采上看他们美好的言论和著作，简直超过了《诗经》；可见他们光芒四射的幻想，来自这时纵横驰骋的不平凡的风气。
English: From the literary point of view, their beautiful words and writings are almost superior to the "Song of Songs"; it can be seen that their radiant fantasy comes from the extraordinary culture that is running rampant at this time.

古文：爰至有汉，运接燔书，高祖尚武，戏儒简学。
现代文：到汉朝，时间处在秦始皇焚书后，汉高祖崇尚武功，戏弄儒生，怠慢学者。
English: In the Han Dynasty, after Qin Shihuang burned the books, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty advocated martial arts, teased Confucianism, and neglected scholars.

古文：虽礼律草创，《诗》、《书》未遑，然《大风》、《鸿鹄》之歌，亦天纵之英作也。
现代文：虽然国家礼制律法已开始创作，但还没来得及整理研究《诗经》《尚书》这些典籍，尽管如此，但汉高祖的《大风歌》和《鸿鹄歌》，也称得上是天才之作。
English: Although the creation of the national ceremonial law has begun, it has not yet had time to sort out and study the classics such as "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs." Nevertheless, Han Gaozu's "Great Wind Song" and "Song of the Wild Goose" can also be said to be works of genius.

古文：施及孝惠，迄于文景，经术颇兴，而辞人勿用，贾谊抑而邹枚沉，亦可知已。
现代文：汉高祖的尚武爱好影响到孝惠帝，直到汉文帝、汉景帝，经学才稍微兴起，但文人仍得不到重用，这点看看贾谊遭到排斥贬抑，邹阳枚乘地位低下久不得志，就能明白。
English: Emperor Xiao Hui was influenced by Emperor Gaozu's love of martial arts. It wasn't until Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanjing that the study of literature began to make a slight comeback, but the literati still didn't get much use. This can be understood by looking at the fact that the Jia Yi people were ostracized and demeaned, and the status of the Jia Yang people was low for a long time.

古文：逮孝武崇儒，润色鸿业，礼乐争辉，辞藻竞骛∶柏梁展朝宴之诗，金堤制恤民之咏，征枚乘以蒲轮，申主父以鼎食，擢公孙之对策，叹倪宽之拟奏，买臣负薪而衣锦，相如涤器而被绣。于是史迁寿王之徒，严终枚皋之属，应对固无方，篇章亦不匮，遗风馀采，莫与比盛。
现代文：到了汉武帝，开始尊崇儒家学说，并用华丽文采粉饰鸿大功绩，于是制礼作乐，光辉争相放映，文辞与华藻竞相纷驰。汉武帝曾在柏梁台席宴与群臣联句做《柏梁诗》，在黄河堤坝作忧民的《金堤咏》，还用安稳舒适的蒲轮车征聘枚乘，给主父偃以鼎食高官礼遇，因为公孙弘的对策好，就提拔他加以任用，倪宽写的奏章文采非同一般，因此受到赞叹，贫穷以卖柴为生的朱买臣，被重用得以穿上官服锦衣，生活窘迫只能在酒馆洗杯碗的司马相如，披上皇家绣袍担任使节，于是这个时期，司马迁、吾丘寿王这些人，严安、终军、枚皋一类人，有的回应问题确实想法灵变，有的文章写得很多，其风流文采也遗传下来，文学氛围没有比那时更兴盛的了。
English: When Emperor Hanwu came to power, he began to venerate the Confucian doctrine, and embellished his great achievements with magnificent literature. As a result, he made ceremonial music, the radiance was emitted, and the rhetoric competed with the Chinese algae. Emperor Hanwu once wrote "The Poem of Bai Liang" with the joint sentence of the ministers at the banquet of Bai Liang, and "The Golden Embankment" that worried the people at the Yellow River Embankment. He also used a stable and comfortable wheelbarrow to recruit passengers, and gave his father the courtesy of a high-ranking official. Because Gongsun Hong's countermeasures were good

古文：越昭及宣，实继武绩，驰骋石渠，暇豫文会，集雕篆之轶材，发绮縠之高喻，于是王褒之伦，底禄待诏。
现代文：经过汉昭帝到汉宣帝，确实继承了汉武帝的事业，群儒学者在石渠阁展开经学辩论，文士们在文会从容讨论，既聚集了众多具有辞赋创作天赋的杰出人才，又发出了贬低辞赋尊重经书的高论。这时，像王褒这些有文才的人，凭着文采能等到皇帝诏令得到高官厚禄。
English: From Emperor Han Zhao to Emperor Han Xuan, he indeed inherited the cause of Emperor Han Wudi. A group of Confucian scholars held a debate on the classics at Shiquijie Pavilion, and the scribes calmly discussed at the literary association. Not only did they gather many outstanding talents with the gift of writing, but they also issued a high theory that disparaged the gift of writing and respected the scriptures. At this time, people with literary talent such as Wang Bo could wait until the emperor issued a decree to get high-ranking officials with their literary skills.

古文：自元暨成，降意图籍，美玉屑之谈，清金马之路。子云锐思于千首，子政雠校于六艺，亦已美矣。
现代文：从汉元帝到汉成帝，很重视收集整理图书典籍，赞美像温润珠玉的美好言辞，这为文人扫清了通向金马门的道路，因此扬雄在上千首篇赋中极尽心思，刘向整理校订的六经，很是精心到家。
English: From Emperor Han Yuan to Emperor Han Cheng, great importance was attached to collecting and arranging books and classics, and praising the beautiful words like warm gems. This cleared the path to the Golden Horse Gate for the literati. Therefore, Yang Xiong put his heart and soul into the thousands of Fu, and Liu Xiang's arrangement and editing of the Six Classics was very well received.

古文：爰自汉室，迄至成哀，虽世渐百龄，辞人九变，而大抵所归，祖述《楚辞》，灵均馀影，于是乎在。
现代文：自从汉武帝开始重视辞赋写作起，到汉成帝、汉哀帝，虽然历史发展经历百余年，文人辞赋创作变化很多，然而从总体趋势来看，还是继承了《楚辞》传统，屈原留下的深远影响，在这些作品中都能看到。
English: Since Emperor Hanwu began to attach importance to the writing of dictionaries, to Emperor Han Chengdu and Emperor Han Lei, although the historical development has experienced more than a hundred years, the creation of literary dictionaries has changed a lot, however, from the overall trend, it still inherited the "Chuji" tradition, and the far-reaching influence left by Qu Yuan can be seen in these works.

古文：自哀、平陵替，光武中兴，深怀图谶，颇略文华，然杜笃献诔以免刑，班彪参奏以补令，虽非旁求，亦不遐弃。
现代文：到了哀帝平帝的时候，汉朝已经开始趋向衰微没落，光武帝重建东汉王朝；他只惦记着谁能得天下的预言，却不关心文学艺术。但是杜笃因诔文做得好就减免刑罚，班彪因起草奏文被赏识而做了县令；可见光武帝虽然没有广泛搜罗文士，但也没有完全不理会。
English: By the time of the lamentation of Emperor Ping, the Han Dynasty had already begun to decline and fall, and Emperor Guangwu rebuilt the Eastern Han Dynasty; he only thought about who could get the prophecy of the world, but did not care about literature and art. However, Du Du Du was commuted because he was good at writing, and Ban Biao became a county magistrate because he was appreciated for drafting a petition; it can be seen that although Emperor Guangwu did not extensively collect writers, he did not completely ignore them.

古文：及明帝叠耀，崇爱儒术，肄礼璧堂，讲文虎观，孟坚珥笔于国史，贾逵给札于瑞颂；东平擅其懿文，沛王振其通论；帝则藩仪，辉光相照矣。
现代文：到明帝、章帝两朝，较为尊崇儒学；在辟雍里学习古礼，在白虎观研究经学。这时班固撰述国史，贾逵作《神雀颂》，刘苍写了不少好文章，刘辅也著了《五经论》。天子与藩王的典范，就发出相互辉映的光彩了。
English: During the Ming and Zhang dynasties, Confucianism was held in higher esteem. In Biyongli, ancient rituals were studied, and in Baigu, the study of scripture was carried out. At this time, Pan Gu wrote about the history of the country, Jia Yu wrote "Song of the Divine Sparrow," Liu Cang wrote many good articles, and Liu Yu also wrote "On the Five Classics." The example of the heavenly son and the king of the domain reflected each other's brilliance.

古文：自和安以下，迄至顺桓，则有班傅三崔，王马张蔡，磊落鸿儒，才不时乏，而文章之选，存而不论。
现代文：从安帝、和帝以后，直到顺帝、桓帝时期，则有班固、傅毅、崔骃、崔瑗、崔寔、王延寿、马融、张衡、蔡邕等大量作家。此外，还有不少大儒，他们都颇有才华，其中文章做得好的，就不必一一列举了。
English: From the time of Emperor An and Emperor He to the time of Emperor Shun and Emperor Huan, there were a large number of writers such as Ban Gu, Fu Yi, Cui Wei, Cui Wei, Cui Wei, Wang Yan Shou, Ma Rong, Zhang Heng, Cai Wei, and so on. In addition, there were many great Confucian scholars, all of whom were quite talented. It is not necessary to list all of their well-done articles.

古文：然中兴之后，群才稍改前辙，华实所附，斟酌经辞，盖历政讲聚，故渐靡儒风者也。
现代文：不过东汉作家走的道路和以前不同，他们在文采和思想内容上，是依据儒家的经典；这就因为他们有政治经验，又不断讲述经学，所以渐渐接受了儒家的影响。
English: However, the Eastern Han writers took a different path from before. In terms of literary style and ideological content, they were based on the Confucian classics. This was because they had political experience and continued to teach the classics, so they gradually accepted the influence of Confucianism.

古文：降及灵帝，时好辞制，造皇羲之书，开鸿都之赋，而乐松之徒，招集浅陋，故杨赐号为驩兜，蔡邕比之俳优，其馀风遗文，盖蔑如也。
现代文：后来灵帝喜爱文学，曾著《皇羲篇》一书，并召集文士到鸿都门写作。可是乐松等人，却引来一些不学无术之辈；所以杨赐称之为 驩兜 一类的坏人，而蔡邕则比之于弄臣。他们的文风和作品，是没有什么价值的。
English: Later, Emperor Lingdi loved literature. He wrote the book "The Emperor's Eulogy" and summoned scribes to Hongdu Gate to write. However, Le Song and others attracted some uneducated and unskilled people; therefore, Yang Zi called them villains like Xing Dabu, while Cai Zi compared them to jesters. Their literary style and works were of little value.

古文：自献帝播迁，文学蓬转，建安之末，区宇方辑。魏武以相王之尊，雅爱诗章；文帝以副君之重，妙善辞赋；陈思以公子之豪，下笔琳琅；并体貌英逸，故俊才云蒸。
现代文：自从汉献帝流离迁移后，文人学士也像蓬草一样随风飘荡辗转四方；直到建安末年，北方地区才渐渐安定，曹操居丞相和魏王的地位，很喜爱诗章；曹丕身为魏王太子，善于写作辞赋；曹植是豪华的公子，更写出不少珠玉般的作品。
English: After the Han Emperor Xian was exiled and relocated, literati scholars also drifted with the wind like pengcao; until the end of Jianan, the northern region gradually stabilized, Cao Cao held the position of prime minister and Wei king, and was very fond of poetry; Cao Xuan was the prince of the Wei king, and was good at writing words; Cao Zhi was a luxurious nobleman, and he wrote a lot of jewel-like works.

古文：仲宣委质于汉南，孔璋归命于河北，伟长从宦于青土，公干徇质于海隅；德琏综其斐然之思；元瑜展其翩翩之乐。文蔚、休伯之俦，于叔、德祖之侣，傲雅觞豆之前，雍容衽席之上，洒笔以成酣歌，和墨以藉谈笑。
现代文：他们三人都重视文才，所以吸引来许多优秀作家：王粲从荆州来归顺，陈琳从冀州来听命，徐幹从北海来从仕，刘桢从东平来归附；应玚运用其丰盛的文思，阮瑀以施展才华为乐趣；还有路粹、繁钦之流，邯鄣淳、杨修等辈，都有威仪地优游于诗酒之间，从容不迫地周旋于筵席之上，下笔而成高歌，挥毫可助谈笑。
English: All three of them attach great importance to literary talent, so they have attracted many excellent writers: Wang Qun from Jingzhou to submit, Chen Lin from Jizhou to obey, Xu Gan from the North Sea to submit, Liu Qun from Dongping to submit; Ying Qun uses his rich literary thoughts, Ruan Qun is fun to show talent; and Lu Qun, Fanzhong Qin, Zou Jun, Yang Xiu and other generations have a dignified superiority to travel between poetry and wine, leisurely circulate around the banquet, and the next stroke is a high song, which can help to talk and laugh.

古文：观其时文，雅好慷慨，良由世积乱离，风衰俗怨，并志深而笔长，故梗概而多气也。
现代文：试看这一时期的作品，常常慷慨激昂；的确由于长期的社会动荡，风气衰落，人心怨恨，因而作者情志比较深刻，笔意比较深长，作品也就常常激昂慷慨而气势旺盛了。
English: If you look at the works of this period, they are often impassioned; indeed, due to the long-term social turmoil, the decline of morals, and the resentment of the people, the author's feelings are more profound, the writing is more profound, and the works are often impassioned, generous and vigorous.

古文：至明帝纂戎，制诗度曲，征篇章之士，置崇文之观，何刘群才，迭相照耀。
现代文：到魏明帝继位，自己能写作诗歌；同时也搜罗文士，设立崇文观。何晏、刘劭等人，都相继发挥才华。
English: When Emperor Ming of Wei succeeded to the throne, he was able to write poetry himself; at the same time, he collected writers and established a lofty view of literature. He Yu, Liu Yu and others have successively exerted their talents.

古文：少主相仍，唯高贵英雅，顾盼含章，动言成论。
现代文：在以后几代年青皇帝中，只有高贵乡公尚有文才；他举目就有了文章，发言便成了理论。
English: Among the young emperors of the following generations, only the noble townsman still had literary talent; when he raised his eyes, he had an article, and his speech became a theory.

古文：于时正始馀风，篇体轻澹，而嵇阮应缪，并驰文路矣。
现代文：这时还有正始年间留下的风气，作品风格比较轻淡；嵇康、阮籍、应璩、缪袭等人，都活跃于当时的文坛上。
English: At this time, there was still the culture left over from the beginning of the year, and the style of the work was relatively light; Yu Kang, Ruan Zi, Ying Zi, Miao Hei and others were all active in the literary world at that time.

古文：逮晋宣始基，景文克构，并迹沉儒雅，而务深方术。
现代文：到了晋宣帝司马懿开始打下家国基础，晋景帝、晋文帝继承父志；他们在行为上忽略儒学风雅，致力于皇权地位争夺的阴谋权术。
English: By the time of Emperor Sima Qian of the Jin Dynasty, he had begun to lay the foundation of his homeland. Emperor Jinjing and Emperor Jinwen followed in his footsteps. In their behavior, they ignored Confucian elegance and devoted themselves to the intrigue and power tactics of competing for imperial power.

古文：至武帝惟新，承平受命，而胶序篇章，弗简皇虑。
现代文：至晋武帝建立新王朝称帝后，关于学校和辞章的修正普及，却也没有引起他的注意。
English: After Emperor Jinwu established a new dynasty and became emperor, the revision and popularization of schools and slogans did not attract his attention.

古文：降及怀愍，缀旒而已。
现代文：下传到晋怀帝和晋愍帝，皇帝只成了装饰品，哪有余力谈文章事业！
English: Down to Emperor Jinhuai and Emperor Jinbi, the emperor only became an ornament, and there was no room to talk about the cause of the article!

古文：然晋虽不文，人才实盛∶茂先摇笔而散珠，太冲动墨而横锦，岳湛曜联璧之华，机云标二俊之采。应傅三张之徒，孙挚成公之属，并结藻清英，流韵绮靡。
现代文：然而，晋代皇帝虽不重视文学事业，但实际上有才之人却很多：张华摇动笔杆像会落下珍珠，左思挥洒墨汁就像展开的锦绣，潘岳、夏侯湛的文章像双璧映照，陆机、陆云显示出个人文采，应贞、傅玄、张载、张协、张亢之徒，孙楚、挚虞、成公绥之辈，文章辞藻都清新英俊，兼有风韵华艳细腻的特点。
English: However, although the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty did not attach importance to the literary cause, there were actually many talented people: Zhang Hua shook the pen and the pearls would fall, Zuo Si waved the ink like an unfolding brocade, Pan Yue and Xia Hou Zhan's articles were like double reflections, Lu Ji and Lu Yun showed personal literary excellence, Ying Zhen, Fu Xuan, Zhang Zai, Zhang Xie, Zhang Xuan's disciple, Sun Chu, Ying Yu, and Cheng Gongyi's generation, the article words were all fresh and handsome, and had the characteristics of rich and delicate.

古文：前史以为运涉季世，人未尽才，诚哉斯谈，可为叹息。
现代文：以前史学家认为时代进入末世，这些人都没尽量发挥才华，确实是这样，这一点也使人叹息！
English: Historians used to think that the era had entered the end of the world, and that these people did not make the most of their talents. This is indeed the case, and this is also a cause for lamentation!

古文：元皇中兴，披文建学，刘刁礼吏而宠荣，景纯文敏而优擢。
现代文：东晋元帝，大力提倡文学事业，兴建学校。文人刘隗、刁协精通礼法制度并受到皇帝尊重；郭璞因文思敏捷而受到优先提拔。
English: The Eastern Jin Emperor, Eastern Jin Emperor, vigorously promoted literature and built schools. The literati Liu Xi and Guo Hui were proficient in the etiquette system and were respected by the emperor; Guo Xi was given priority promotion because of his quick wit.

古文：逮明帝秉哲，雅好文会，升储御极，孳孳讲艺，练情于诰策，振采于辞赋，庾以笔才愈亲，温以文思益厚，揄扬风流，亦彼时之汉武也。
现代文：到了晋明帝，他天资聪明，素来好与文人学士会聚，从被立为太子到继位，都孜孜不懈地讲论六经，在写作诰书、策问上倾情注意研讨，在辞赋上发挥特长，庾亮因有写作才华愈加受到亲近，温峤因文思敏捷而越发受到厚待。晋明帝在提倡文风方面，算得上是东晋时代的汉武帝了。
English: By the time of Emperor Jinming, he was gifted and intelligent, and he was always happy to meet with literati scholars. From the time he was appointed crown prince to the time of his succession, he tirelessly lectured on the Six Classics, paid close attention to and discussed the writing of imperial edicts and questions, and played to his strengths in rhetoric. He was increasingly close to Lu Liang because of his writing talent, and to Wen Xi because of his quick wit. In terms of advocating literary style, Emperor Jinming could be regarded as the Han Emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：及成康促龄，穆哀短祚，简文勃兴，渊乎清峻，微言精理，函满玄席；澹思浓采，时洒文囿。
现代文：后来孝成帝康帝寿运短促，穆帝哀帝在位时间也不长。简文帝时文学事业突然兴起，气度深沉，风格清新，精妙语言，深厚道理，常常充满在玄学清谈的讲席上；道家思想，浓厚文采，时时流布到文学苑池上来。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaocheng and Emperor Kang had a short lifespan, and Emperor Mudiayu did not reign for a long time. During the reign of Emperor Jianwen, the literary cause suddenly arose, with a deep temperament, fresh style, exquisite language, profound truth, often filled with metaphysical lectures; Taoist thought, rich in literature, always spread to the literary pool.

古文：至孝武不嗣，安恭已矣。其文史则有袁殷之曹，孙干之辈，虽才或浅深，珪璋足用。
现代文：到了孝武帝，因为没有合适继承人，政权逐渐被刘裕转移并篡夺，到安帝和恭帝，东晋王朝就完结了。这段时期的文学家兼史学家有袁宏、殷仲文等人，孙盛、干宝等辈，虽然他们的才智各有浅深，但也像珍珠宝玉般被朝廷采用了。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowu, because there was no suitable successor, the power was gradually transferred and usurped by Liu Yu. By the time of Emperor An and Emperor Gong, the Eastern Jin Dynasty was over. The writers and historians of this period included Yuan Hong, Yin Zhongwen and others, Sun Sheng, Gan Bao and others. Although their talents were shallow and deep, they were also used by the imperial court like pearls.

古文：自中朝贵玄，江左称盛，因谈馀气，流成文体。
现代文：自从晋朝看重文学清谈，到东晋南渡后这种风气更为流行，受清谈玄学风气的影响，文坛形成一种新的文风。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty valued literary discussion, this style became more popular after the Southern Expedition of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Influenced by the discussion of metaphysics, the literary world formed a new literary style.

古文：是以世极迍邅，而辞意夷泰，诗必柱下之旨归，赋乃漆园之义疏。
现代文：所以尽管当时的世道极度艰难，但同期的文学作品文辞平静宽缓，诗歌一定是以老子庄子思想作为宗旨和归宿，辞赋只能是以老子庄子著作做讲义解释。
English: Therefore, although the world at that time was extremely difficult, the literary works of the same period were calm and gentle, and the poetry must be based on Lao Zi Zhuo Zi's thought as the purpose and destination. The words can only be interpreted as lectures based on Lao Zi Zhuo Zi's works.

古文：故知文变染乎世情，兴废系乎时序，原始以要终，虽百世可知也。
现代文：所以我们知道文章变化总是受时代情况感染，不同文体的发展兴衰和历史时代的发展兴衰相联系，探究它的开始，总归它的终结，即使是百世文学变化也能推知。
English: Therefore, we know that the change of the article is always affected by the situation of the times, and the rise and fall of the development of different styles is related to the rise and fall of the development of the historical era, exploring its beginning, and ultimately its end. Even the changes of literature in the world can be predicted.

古文：自宋武爱文，文帝彬雅，秉文之德，孝武多才，英采云构。
现代文：自从宋武帝爱好文学，到宋文帝也是儒雅彬彬，宋武帝具有宋文帝的德行才华，多才多艺，文章辞采丰富。
English: Since Emperor Songwu was fond of literature, Emperor Songwen was also a Confucian. Emperor Songwu had the virtues and talents of Emperor Songwu, was versatile, and wrote a wealth of words.

古文：自明帝以下，文理替矣。
现代文：从宋明帝以下，文辞儒学的风气便衰退了。
English: From Emperor Song Ming onwards, the style of literary Confucianism began to decline.

古文：尔其缙绅之林，霞蔚而飙起。
现代文：刘宋时代的士大夫中，文士像云霞艳丽众多，影响力像狂风突起。
English: Among the scholars and doctors in the era of Liu Song, the scribes are as numerous as the clouds, and their influence is as strong as the wind.

古文：王袁联宗以龙章，颜谢重叶以凤采，何范张沈之徒，亦不可胜数也。
现代文：王僧达和袁淑两宗族中接连出现文才人物；颜延之和谢灵运两世家的子弟也有好几代以文采著名；还有何逊、范云、张邵、沈约等人，多得不胜枚举。
English: Wang Zongda and Yuan Shu are two families that have produced literary figures in succession; the children of the two families of Yan Yan and Xie Lingyun have also been famous for their literary achievements for several generations; there are also He Xun, Fan Yun, Zhang Shao, Shen Yoyo and others, too numerous to list.

古文：盖闻之于世，故略举大较。
现代文：这里只就当时著名的文人，约略说下大概情况。
English: Here is just a brief overview of the famous literary figures of the time.

古文：暨皇齐驭宝，运集休明∶太祖以圣武膺箓，世祖以睿文纂业，文帝以贰离含章，高宗以上哲兴运，并文明自天，缉熙景祚。
现代文：到大齐建国后，国运昌盛。齐高帝英明创业，齐武帝善于继承，文惠太子富有文采，齐明帝加以发展：他们都有天才，前途光明远大。
English: After the founding of Daiqi, the national movement flourished. Emperor Gao of Qi was a wise entrepreneur, Emperor Wu of Qi was good at succession, Prince Wen Hui was rich in literature, and Emperor Ming of Qi developed it: they all had genius and a bright future.

古文：今圣历方兴，文思光被，海岳降神，才英秀发，驭飞龙于天衢，驾骐骥于万里。
现代文：当今皇帝刚刚继位，文化学术普遍开展；山川钟灵毓秀，产生了大量卓越的作家；像乘着神龙飞跃天上，像驾着良马驰骋万里。
English: Today's emperor has just succeeded to the throne, and cultural and academic activities have been widely carried out; the mountains and rivers are beautiful, and a large number of outstanding writers have been produced; it is like riding a divine dragon into the sky, like driving a good horse for thousands of miles.

古文：经典礼章，跨周轹汉，唐、虞之文，其鼎盛乎！
现代文：著作和制度都超过了周汉两代，简直和唐虞时期的文章一样，正当兴盛之际！
English: The works and the system have surpassed the Zhou and Han dynasties, just like the articles of the Tang and Yu dynasties, just at the time of prosperity!

古文：鸿风懿采，短笔敢陈；扬言赞时，请寄明哲！
现代文：对于这些既有巨大教育意义，又有美好文采的作品，我哪敢妄加论述？分析评论的工作，请交给高明的评论家吧。总结：
English: For these works, which have both great educational significance and beautiful literature, how can I dare to discuss them? Please leave the work of analyzing the review to a clever critic. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶蔚映十代，辞采九变。
现代文：在这十个朝代中，文学经历了许多的变化。
English: During these ten dynasties, literature underwent many changes.

古文：枢中所动，环流无倦。
现代文：时代是中心，文学围绕着它不断演进。
English: The era is the center, and literature is constantly evolving around it.

古文：质文沿时，崇替在选。
现代文：文风的朴质与华丽随时而变，文坛的繁荣与衰落也与世相关。
English: The simplicity and splendor of the literary style change at any time, and the prosperity and decline of the literary world are also related to the world.

古文：终古虽远，僾焉如面。
现代文：历史虽然很长久，只要掌握文学和时代的关系，就清楚得如在眼前了。
English: Although the history is long, as long as we grasp the relationship between literature and the times, it is clear as day.

