古文：若夫天下寺院之领于内外宣政院，曰禅，曰教，曰律，则固各守其业，惟所谓白云宗、白莲宗者，亦或颇通奸利云。丘处机，登州栖霞人，自号长春子。
现代文：丘处机，登州栖霞人，自号长春子。
English: He was born in Danzhou, Jixia County, and went by the name of Changchunzi.

古文：儿时，有相者谓其异日当为神仙宗伯。
现代文：儿时，有个看相的人说他以后当成为神仙的领袖。
English: When he was a child, a fortune teller told him that he would one day become the leader of the immortals.

古文：年十九，为全真学于宁海之昆仑山，与马钰、谭处端、刘处玄、王处一、郝大通、孙不二同师重阳王真人。
现代文：年十九，在宁海的昆仑山，同马钰、谭处端、刘处玄、王处一、郝大通、孙不二等拜全真道的重阳王真人为师。
English: In the 19th year, in the Kunlun Mountains of Ninghai, Tong Ma Jun, Tan Shituan, Liu Shituan Xuan, Wang Shituan I, Zou Datong, Sun Fuji and others worshiped Chongyang Wang Zhen of Quan Zhen Dao as a teacher.

古文：重阳一见处机，大器之。金、宋之季，俱遣使来召，不赴。
现代文：重阳十分器重处机。金、宋两王朝，都曾派使来召，处机也没有应召。
English: Both the Jin and Song dynasties had sent envoys to summon him, but he did not respond.

古文：岁己卯，太祖自乃蛮命近臣札八儿、刘仲禄持诏求之。
现代文：成吉思汗十四年，太祖铁木真自乃蛮令亲信扎八儿、刘仲禄奉诏起用处机。
English: In the 14th year of Genghis Khan, the great-grandfather Tiemu Zizhen ordered his cronies, Liu Zhonglu, to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：处机一日忽语其徒，使促装，曰： 天使来召我，我当往。 
现代文：当二使还在中途时，处机忽让徒弟整理行装，并说： 天使将来召我，我应当去。 
English: When the second messenger was still in the middle of the journey, he suddenly asked the disciple to sort out the luggage and said: The angel will call me in the future, I should go.

古文：翌日，二人者至，处机乃与弟子十有八人同往见焉。
现代文：次日，果然二使来，处机便和弟子十八人同往会见铁木真。
English: The next day, two envoys did indeed come, and Dechi and eighteen disciples went to meet Temujin.

古文：常马行深雪中，马上举策试之，未及积雪之半。
现代文：第二年在山北久留，派人去上表称谢，并反复劝太祖不要杀戮民众。
English: The following year, when he stayed in Yamakita for a long time, he sent someone to the table to express his gratitude, and repeatedly advised Taizu not to kill the people.

古文：既见，太祖大悦，赐食、设庐帐甚饬。太祖时方西征，日事攻战，处机每言欲一天下者，必在乎不嗜杀人。
现代文：又次年，催促处机启程的使者又来，乃从抚州出发，经数十国，行程万余里，所见到的或是遍地流血的战场、或是逃避战乱的僻地、或是缺乏粮草的沙漠。自昆仑动身经过四年，始到雪山。见太祖，太祖很高兴，赐食，还为处机设置装饰很好的庐帐。当时太祖正西征，每天进行攻战。处机每次谈话，总是强调要想统一天下的人，一定不能嗜好杀人。
English: The following year, the messenger who urged him to leave came again. He set out from Fuzhou, traveled through dozens of countries, and traveled more than ten thousand miles. What he saw was either a battlefield full of bloodshed, or a remote place to escape the war, or a desert lacking grain and grass. It took four years from Kunlun to reach the Snow Mountain. See Taizu, Taizu was happy, gave food, and set up a well-decorated account for him. At that time, Taizu was on a western expedition, fighting every day. In every conversation, Taizu always emphasized that people who want to unify the world must not be addicted to killing.

古文：及问为治之方，则对以敬天爱民为本。
现代文：太祖问及如何才能管理好民众，他说要以敬天爱民为本。
English: The great-grandfather asked how to manage the people well, and he said to respect God and love the people.

古文：问长生久视之道，则告以清心寡欲为要。
现代文：询问长生不老之道时，他指出以清心寡欲为要。
English: When asked about the way to eternal life, he pointed out that it is important to have a pure heart and few desires.

古文：太祖深契其言，曰： 天锡仙翁，以寤朕志。 
现代文：太祖很重视他的话，并说 ：天赐仙翁，开悟我心智。 
English: The great-grandfather paid great attention to his words and said, "God-given fairy, enlighten my mind."

古文：命左右书之，且以训诸子焉。
现代文：并命手下人把这些话写下来，以教训他的儿子们。
English: And he commanded his servants to write these words, and to teach them to his sons.

古文：于是锡之虎符，副以玺书，不斥其名，惟曰 神仙 。
现代文：赐处机虎符、玺书，有事不直呼其名，只称 神仙 。
English: He was given the ability to read and write, and he was not called by his real name. He was only referred to as the Divine Immortal.

古文：一日雷震，太祖以问，处机对曰： 雷，天威也。
现代文：一日，大雷，太祖问之，处机说 ：雷是天向人示威的表现。
English: One day, the great thunder, the great ancestor asked, and the machine said: Thunder is a manifestation of the sky to the people.

古文：人罪莫大于不孝，不孝则不顺乎天，故天威震动以警之。
现代文：人罪莫大于不孝，不孝的人不会顺从天意，故天以震雷之威警告之。
English: There is no greater sin than being unfilial, and those who are unfilial will not obey the will of heaven, so heaven warns them with the might of thunder.

古文：似闻境内不孝者多，陛下宜明天威，以导有众。 
现代文：我听说好像境内不孝的人很多，陛下也应把天威的事向大家说明，以引导民众讲孝道。 
English: I have heard that there are many people in the country who are not filial, and His Majesty should also explain the matter of Tianwei to everyone in order to guide the people to preach filial piety.

古文：太祖从之。
现代文：太祖接受此建议。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed him.

古文：岁癸未，太祖大猎于东山，马踣，处机请曰： 天道好生，陛下春秋高，数畋猎，非宜。 
现代文：十八年，太祖在东山打猎，马仆倒，处机便乘机对太祖说： 天之道，在于好生，陛下年事已高，还经常打猎，太不合适了。 
English: In the eighteenth year, the great-grandfather was hunting in the eastern mountains, and his horse fell down. He took the opportunity to say to the great-grandfather: The way of heaven is to have a good life. His Majesty is old and often hunts, which is too inappropriate.

古文：太祖为罢猎者久之。
现代文：太祖听了后，便好久没有打猎。
English: After hearing this, the great-grandfather did not go hunting for a long time.

古文：时国兵践蹂中原，河南、北尤甚，民罹俘戮，无所逃命。
现代文：时蒙古军蹂躏中原，河南、河北尤其灾难深重。人民遭受俘戮，无处逃命。
English: At that time, the Mongolian army ravaged the Central Plains, and Henan and Hebei were particularly devastated. People were captured and had nowhere to escape.

古文：处机还燕，使其徒持牒招求于战伐之余，由是为人奴者得复为良，与滨死而得更生者，毋虑二三万人。中州人至今称道之。
现代文：处机回燕后，便使徒弟带文书去解救那些饱受战争灾难之苦而沦为人奴的百姓复为良民，使生命垂危的人又得再生，如是者不下二三万人，中州人民至今还称道不已。
English: After the return of Yan, the apostle brother took the document to rescue the people who suffered from the suffering of the war disaster and became slaves to become good people, so that the people who were in danger of dying had to be regenerated, such as no less than twenty or thirty thousand people, the people of Zhongzhou still praise.

古文：岁乙酉，荧惑犯尾，其占在燕，处机祷之，果退舍。
现代文：二十年，火星犯尾星，观察征兆在燕。处机一祷告，果然退去。
English: For twenty years, Mars has been chasing the tail of the star, observing the signs in the swallow. The first opportunity to pray, and indeed retreat.

古文：丁亥，又为旱祷，期以三日雨，当名瑞应，已而亦验。
现代文：二十二年，又为大旱祈祷，约定三月后有雨，后来果然灵验。
English: Twenty-two years later, he prayed for a drought, and rain was promised after March, which later came to pass.

古文：有旨改赐宫名曰长春，且遣使劳问，制若曰： 朕常念神仙，神仙毋忘朕也。 
现代文：蒙主改宫名为长春，遣使持诏问处机时说： 朕常念神仙，神仙不要忘了朕。 
English: After the palace was renamed Changchun by the Lord, the envoy holding the imperial edict said, "I often think of the immortals. The immortals should not forget me."

古文：六月，浴于东溪，越二日，天大雷雨，太液池岸北水入东湖，声闻数里，鱼鳖尽去，池遂涸，而北口高岸亦崩，处机叹曰： 山其摧乎，池其涸乎，吾将与之俱乎！ 遂卒，年八十。
现代文：六月，蒙主在东川游泳。过两天，有大雷雨，太液池岸北的水流入东湖，声闻数里，鱼鳖都跑了，池也干涸了，北口的高岸也崩溃了。处机叹气说， 山垮了，池干了，我将和它一起消失了 ，说着便逝世了，时年八十岁。
English: In June, I was given the opportunity to swim in the East River. Two days later, there was a heavy thunderstorm. The water from the north shore of the Taiye Pool flowed into the East Lake. I heard the sound for several miles. The fish's fins ran away, the pool dried up, and the high bank at the north entrance collapsed. I sighed and said, "The mountain collapsed, the pool dried up, and I will disappear with it," and passed away at the age of eighty.

古文：其徒尹志平等世奉玺书袭掌其教，至大间加赐金印。
现代文：其徒尹志平等世世代代奉玺书继续掌管教派的活动。至大年间，加赐金印。
English: His disciples, such as Yin Zhi and others, have continued to administer the activities of the sect for generations.

古文：处机之四传有曰祁志诚者，居云州金阁山，道誉甚著。
现代文：处机的第四代传人叫祁志诚，住云州金阁山，在道教徒中声誉甚著。
English: The fourth generation descendant of the founder is called Zou Zhicheng, who lives in Jingu Mountain, Yunnan Province, and is well-known among Taoists.

古文：丞相安童尝过而问之，志诚告以修身治世之要。
现代文：丞相安童曾路过云州时访问他，志诚告以修身治世的要领。
English: Prime Minister Ando once visited him when he was passing through Yunnan, and sincerely told him the essentials of self-cultivation.

古文：安童感其言，故其相世祖也，以清静忠厚为主。
现代文：安童被他说的道理所感动，故在安童辅佐世祖时，总坚持为政以清静忠厚为主。
English: Ando was moved by what he said, so when Ando assisted his ancestor, he always insisted on being calm and loyal.

古文：及罢还第，退然若无与于世者，人以为有得于志诚之言。
现代文：及其罢官回家时，也能保持与世无争的心情。人们都认为，这是因为他从志诚的语言中得到教益的结果。
English: When he returned home after his dismissal, he was also able to maintain an unrivaled mood, which is believed to be the result of the lessons he learned from Zicheng's words.

古文：其后安童复被召入相，辞，不可，遂往决于志诚。志诚曰： 昔与子同列者何人？
现代文：其后，安童再次被召为丞相，安童推辞，世祖不准，安童便请志诚裁决，志诚说 ：昔日与你同朝办事的是何人？
English: After that, Ando was once again called to be chancellor. Ando declined and the patriarch did not allow it. Ando then asked Shicheng to adjudicate. Shicheng said, "How many people worked with you in the past?"

古文：今同列者何人？ 
现代文：今日与你同朝办事的又是何人？ 
English: How many people are working with you today?

古文：安童悟，入见世祖，辞曰： 臣昔为宰相，年尚少，幸不失陛下事者，丞佐皆臣所师友。
现代文：安童听此话后，便觉悟了。入见世祖时，便说 ：我昔日做宰相，还年轻，能万幸没有坏你的事，是因为丞佐皆是我视为师友的人。
English: After hearing this, Ando came to his senses. When he met Shisaku, he said, "I used to be prime minister when I was young. I'm lucky that I didn't do anything bad to you, because all of you are people I consider to be my mentors and friends."

古文：今事臣者，皆进与臣俱，则臣之为政能有加于前乎！ 世祖曰： 谁为卿言是？ 对曰： 祁真人。 
现代文：现在来辅佐我的，都是我的同辈，现在政务能比以前办得更好吗？ 世祖说 ：是谁为你说这些话？ 答道 ：祁真人。 
English: The people who come to assist me now are my peers. Can the government affairs be run better now than before? The patriarch said, "Who is saying these things for you?" He replied, "Shizhenren."

古文：世祖叹异者久之。
现代文：世祖久久叹异不释。
English: The ancestor sighed for a long time.

古文：正一天师者，始自汉张道陵，其后四代曰盛，来居信之龙虎山。
现代文：正一教的天师，是汉朝张道陵创立的。其后四代天师张盛，居信州龙虎山。
English: Zheng Yi's heavenly teacher was founded by Zhang Daoling in the Han Dynasty. The next four heavenly teachers were Zhang Sheng and Guixin County's Longhu Mountain.

古文：相传至三十六代宗演，当至元十三年，世祖已平江南，遣使召之。至则命廷臣郊劳，待以客礼。
现代文：至元十三年，世祖忽必烈已平定江南，便遣使召三十六代天师张宗演入朝。宗演至京时，世祖命朝臣到郊区迎接，并以客礼待之。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the founder Kublai Khan had already pacified the south of the Yangtze River, and he sent an envoy to summon the thirty-sixth heavenly teacher Zhang Zongyuan to the imperial court. When Zongyuan arrived in Beijing, the founder ordered courtiers to go to the suburbs to welcome him, and treated him with courtesy.

古文：及见，语之曰： 昔岁己未，朕次鄂渚，尝令王一清往访卿父，卿父使报朕曰：后二十年天下当混一。
现代文：见面时，世祖对他说 ，宪宗九年，我在鄂州，曾令王一清访问你的父亲，你父亲叫王告诉我，过二十年后，天下将统一。
English: When they met, the patriarch told him, "I was in Ezhou in the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong. I asked Wang Yiching to visit your father. Your father called Wang to tell me that in twenty years, the world will be unified.

古文：神仙之言验于今矣。 
现代文：这位神仙的话，现在真的应验了。 
English: The words of this immortal have now come true.

古文：因命坐，锡宴，特赐玉芙蓉冠、组金无缝服，命主领江南道教，仍赐银印。
现代文：因而对宗演特别热情，赐座赐宴，赐玉芙蓉冠和织金无缝衣，还赐给他一颗银印。命他主持江南的道教。
English: Therefore, he was particularly enthusiastic about Zong En, gave him a seat, a banquet, a jade hibiscus crown and a gold-woven seamless garment, and also gave him a silver seal. He was ordered to preside over Taoism in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：十八年、二十五年再入觐。
现代文：至元十八年和二十五年，宗演两次进见世祖。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty and the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zong Rong twice visited his ancestor.

古文：世祖尝命取其祖天师所传玉印、宝剑观之，语侍臣曰： 朝代更易已不知其几，而天师剑印传子若孙尚至今日，其果有神明之相矣乎！ 
现代文：世祖曾要他把祖天师传下来的玉印、宝剑取来一看，看后对近臣们说 ：改朝换代已是多次了，而天师印剑，一代代传给子孙直至今日，这大概是有神明的表现吧！ 
English: The ancestor had asked him to take a look at the seal and sword passed down by his forefather, the Heavenly Master, and after looking at them, he said to his close vassals, "Changing dynasties and generations has already happened many times, but the Heavenly Master's seal and sword have been passed down from generation to generation to our children and grandchildren to this day. This is probably a manifestation of divinity!"

古文：嗟叹久之。
现代文：对此赞叹不已。
English: We are full of admiration for this.

古文：二十九年卒，子与棣嗣，为三十七代，袭掌江南道教。
现代文：二十九年宗演逝世，子与礻隶继为三十七代天师，袭掌江南道教。
English: In the 29th year of his reign, Suen passed away, and his son and son-in-law became the 37th generation of heavenly teachers, inheriting the reins of Jiangnan Taoism.

古文：三十一年入觐，卒于京师。
现代文：三十一年与礻隶进见世祖时，在京去世。
English: In the 31st year of his reign, when he went to see his ancestor, he died in Kyoto.

古文：元贞元年，弟与材嗣，为三十八代，袭掌道教。
现代文：元贞元年，弟与材继掌道教，是为三十八代。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, his younger brother and son-in-law followed him into Taoism, making it the thirty-eighth generation.

古文：时潮啮盐官、海盐两州，为患特甚，与材以术治之。
现代文：在与材继掌正一道时，潮水浸蚀盐官、海盐两州，为害很大，与材便以法术治潮。
English: When walking hand in hand with the timber, the tides erode the saltpeter and sea salt, causing great harm, and the timber then uses magic to control the tide.

古文：一夕大雷电以震，明日见有物鱼首龟形者磔于水裔，潮患遂息。
现代文：一日夜晚，雷电大震，天明，见有一鱼头龟身的怪物被雷劈死于水边，潮水之害便消失了。
English: One night, there was a thunder and lightning earthquake, and at dawn, a monster with a fish head and turtle body was struck by lightning and died at the water's edge, and the harm of the tide disappeared.

古文：大德五年，召见于上都幄殿。
现代文：大德五年，成宗在上都召见了与材。
English: In the fifth year of the Great German Reign, Chengzong summoned all of his vassals to Shangdu.

古文：八年，授正一教主，主领三山符箓。
现代文：八年，授与材正一教主的头衔，主领三山道教符。
English: In the eighth year, he was awarded the title of Zazheng I Teacher, the leader of the Three Mountain Teaching Symbols.

古文：武宗即位，来觐，特授金紫光禄大夫，封留国公，锡金印。
现代文：武宗即位，与材进见，武宗特授与金紫光禄大夫，封留国公，赐金印。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he was so impressed with the talent that he specially awarded King Wuzong the title of Jin Zi Guang Luo Daifu, the title of Fei Rui Guo Guo, and gave him the gold seal.

古文：仁宗即位，特赐宝冠、组织文金之服。
现代文：仁宗即位，又赐玉冠，织有金文的衣服。
English: Rinzong ascended the throne, and was given a jade crown and clothed in gold.

古文：延祐三年卒。四年，子嗣成嗣，为三十九代，袭领江南道教，主领三山符箓如故。
现代文：延三年与材去世，次年子嗣成继为三十九代天师，袭领江南道教。主领三山的道教簿籍如故。
English: Yan died three years later, and the following year, his descendants successively became the thirty-ninth generation of heavenly teachers, inheriting the Southern Jiangsu Taoism. The Taoist books of the Three Mountains remained unchanged.

古文：其徒张留孙者，字师汉，信州贵溪人。
现代文：嗣成之弟子张留孙字师汉，信州贵溪人。
English: Zhang Liusun, a disciple of Succession, was a calligrapher from Guixi, Shinshu.

古文：少时入龙虎山为道士，有道人相之曰： 神仙宰相也。 
现代文：少时在龙虎山为道士，有道人看了他的相后说 ：此乃神仙宰相也。 
English: When he was young, he was a Taoist in Longhu Mountain. Some Taoists saw his face and said, "This is also the Prime Minister of the Immortals."

古文：至元十三年，从天师张宗演入朝，世祖与语，称旨，遂留侍阙下。
现代文：至元十三年，随天师张宗演入朝，和世祖谈话，深得世祖好感，就留在京师侍奉皇帝。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Zong, the heavenly teacher, entered the imperial court and talked with Shizuo. Shizuo was so impressed that he stayed in Beijing to serve the emperor.

古文：世祖尝亲祠幄殿，皇太子侍。忽风雨暴至，众骇惧，留孙祷之立止。
现代文：有一天，世祖亲自在帐篷内祈祷，皇太子在身旁，忽来狂风暴雨，众人皆惊骇，留孙一祈祷，暴风雨就立即停止了。
English: One day, the patriarch himself was praying in the tent, with the crown prince by his side. Suddenly, there was a violent storm, and everyone was shocked. As soon as the grandson prayed, the storm stopped immediately.

古文：又尝次日月山，昭睿顺圣皇后得疾危甚，亟召留孙请祷。
现代文：又在日月山时，昭睿顺圣皇后得病，很危急，连忙召见留孙，请他祈祷。
English: Also, at the time of the Sun Moon Mountain, Zhaorai Shunsheng, the empress, fell ill and was in critical condition. She hurriedly summoned her grandson and asked him to pray.

古文：既而后梦有朱衣长髯，从甲士，导朱辇白兽行草间者。
现代文：接着皇后梦见有朱衣长髯的人，随甲士引导红车白兽在草中行走。
English: Then the queen dreamed of a man with a scarlet robe and a long beard, walking in the grass with a horseman leading a red chariot and a white beast.

古文：觉而异之，以问留孙，对曰： 甲士导辇兽者，臣所佩法箓中将吏也；朱衣长髯者，汉祖天师也；行草间者，春时也。
现代文：醒后感到很奇怪，便问留孙，此梦是何征兆？留孙说： 甲士引导是我所佩的法符中的将吏；朱衣长髯的人，是汉时的祖天师；在草间行走，是春天。
English: After he woke up, he felt very strange and asked his grandson, what was the sign of this dream? His grandson said, "The warrior guides are the generals in the magic symbols I wear; the man in the red robe is the ancestor teacher of the Han Dynasty; walking in the grass, it is spring.

古文：殿下之疾，其及春而瘳乎！ 
现代文：皇后的病，大概在春天就会好起来吧！ 
English: The Queen's illness will probably get better in the spring!

古文：后命取所事画像以进，视之果梦中所见者。
现代文：皇后命他画出她在梦中所见的人，结果和梦中所见的人完全相似。
English: The queen asked him to draw the man she had seen in her dream, and the result was exactly like the man she had seen in her dream.

古文：帝后大悦，即命留孙为天师，留孙固辞不敢当，乃号之上卿，命尚方铸宝剑以赐，建崇真宫于两京，俾留孙居之，专掌祠事。
现代文：元帝和皇后都十分高兴，即命留孙为天师。留孙不敢当，固辞。便改赐 上卿 之号，令专制宫廷器物的尚方铸宝剑赐留孙。又建崇真宫于上都和大都，以便留孙居住，专掌祭祀之事。
English: Both the emperor and the empress were very happy, that is, they were ordered to keep their grandson as a heavenly teacher. They did not dare to keep their grandson, and they firmly resigned. They changed the title of Shangye to Shangfang Casting Sword, which was an autocratic palace utensil, and gave it to their grandson. They also built the Chongzheng Palace in Shangdu and Datu, so that their grandson could live there and focus on the sacrificial rites.

古文：十五年，授玄教宗师，锡银印。
现代文：十五年，又授予留孙玄教宗师称号，赐银印。
English: Fifteen years later, he also conferred the title of grandmaster on Remnant's grandson, Xuanzang, and gave him a silver seal.

古文：又特任其父信州路治中，寻复升江东道同知宣慰司事。
现代文：又特任其父为信州路治中，接着又升为江东道同知宣慰司事。
English: In addition, his father was specially appointed to Shinshu Luzhi Middle School, and then he was promoted to the secretary of Jiangdu Tongzhi Xuan comfort.

古文：是时天下大定，世祖思与民休息，留孙待诏尚方，因论黄老治道贵清净、圣人在宥天下之旨，深契主衷。
现代文：此时，天下已大定，世祖想与民休养生息，留孙便在尚方和皇帝论及黄老治世之道，贵在清净；圣人之所以为圣人，在于厚待天下人等。这些见解，深合帝意。
English: At this time, the world had been settled. The founder of the world wanted to rest and recuperate with the people, so he left his grandson in Shangfang to discuss with the emperor the way for Huanglao to rule the world. You should be pure. The reason why a saint is a saint is that he is kind to the people of the world. These opinions are deeply in line with the emperor's will.

古文：及将以完泽为相，命留孙筮之，得《同人》之《豫》，留孙进曰：  《同人》，柔得位而应乎乾 ，君臣之合也； 《豫》，利建侯 ，命相之事也。何吉如之，愿陛下勿疑。 
现代文：及帝将任命完泽为相时，命留孙卜之，得《同人》卦之《豫》。留孙说： 《同人》，柔得位而应乎乾，是君臣的一致。《豫》利建侯，命相之事，是何等吉祥的兆头，愿陛下不要怀疑。 
English: When the emperor was about to appoint Kanshaku as his consort, he left it to his grandson Bu Zhi to obtain "Yu" from the "Dong Ren" story. The grandson said: "Dong Ren" is the same as the monarch and the minister. "Yu" is beneficial to the construction of the temple, and the matter of the consort's life is an auspicious omen. Please do not doubt your majesty.

古文：及拜完泽，天下果以为得贤相。
现代文：及下达任命后，天下都认为是得到了贤相。
English: And after the appointment was made, the whole world thought that the wise men had won.

古文：大德中，加号玄教大宗师，同知集贤院道教事，且追封其三代皆魏国公，官阶品俱第一。
现代文：大德年间，加留孙尊号为玄教大宗师，同知集贤院道教事，且追封其三代皆为魏国公。官阶都是一品。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong, Qaruzongzon was known as the grand master of Xuanjiao, and was also the teacher of Taoism at Jixian Academy, and all three of his successors were Wei Guogong. All of them were of the same rank.

古文：武宗立，召见，赐坐，升大真人，知集贤院，位大学士上。
现代文：武宗即位后，召见留孙，赐坐，升大真人、知集贤院，位在大学士上。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he summoned his remaining grandsons, bestowed the throne on them, promoted Zhenren and Zhixian to higher ranks, and made them university scholars.

古文：寻又加特进。
现代文：不久，又加特进。
English: Soon after, Gatt came in.

古文：进讲老子推明谦让之道。及仁宗即位，犹恒诵其言，且谕近臣曰： 累朝旧德，仅余张上卿尔。 
现代文：让他讲解老子道德经。及仁宗即位，还常诵读留孙说过的话，且告诉近臣 ：历朝有德望的老臣，仅剩张上卿而已。 
English: Let him explain the Laozi Daodejing and the enthronement of Rinzong, and often recite the words said by his grandson, and tell his close vassals: Only Zhang Shangqing is left, an old vassal who has been respected throughout the ages.

古文：进开府仪同三司，加号辅成赞化保运玄教大宗师，刻玉为玄教大宗师印以赐。
现代文：进而任他为开府仪同三司、加号辅成赞化保运玄教大宗师，还为他雕了一颗文为 玄教大宗师 的玉印。
English: Then, he was appointed as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and his additional title was Zheng Zhan Huo Yun Xuan Jiao Da Zong Shi, and he was also engraved with a jade seal of Xuan Jiao Da Zong Shi.

古文：至治元年十二月卒，年七十四。
现代文：到至治元年十二月逝世，年七十四岁。
English: He died in December, 1861, at the age of seventy-four.

古文：天历元年，追赠道祖神德真君。其徒吴全节嗣。
现代文：天历元年，追赠为道祖神德真君，徒弟吴全节嗣之。
English: In the first year of the calendar, it was posthumously presented to the ancestor of Taoism, De Zhenjun, and his apprentice, Wu Quan Jie.

古文：全节字成季，饶州安仁人。
现代文：吴全节字成季，饶州安仁人。
English: Wu Quanzhijie character Cheng Ji, Raozhou Anren people.

古文：年十三学道于龙虎山。
现代文：年十三学道于龙虎山。
English: In the thirteenth year, he studied the Tao in Longhu Mountain.

古文：二年，制授特进、上卿、玄教大宗师、崇文弘道玄德真人、总摄江淮荆襄等处道教、知集贤院道教事，玉印一、银印二并授之。
现代文：至元二十四年到京师，随留孙朝见世祖。大德十一年授玄教嗣师，赐银印，视同二品。留孙逝世的次年，英宗诏授吴全节为大宗师、崇文弘道玄德真人，总管江淮荆襄等处道教、知集贤院道教事。还授与一颗玉印、两颗银印。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he came to Beijing as a teacher, and stayed with the Sun Dynasty to see the founder of the world. In the eleventh year of the Great German Empire, he awarded Xuanzang as the successor teacher, gave him a silver seal, and regarded him as second class. The next year after the death of his grandson, the British Emperor awarded Wu Quanzhang as the great master teacher, the great master of the Wenzhong School of Taoism, the great master of the Jianghuai School of Taoism, and the great master of the Zhixian School of Taoism. He also awarded him a golden seal and two silver seals.

古文：全节尝代祀岳渎还，成宗问曰： 卿所过郡县，有善治民者乎？ 
现代文：全节曾代朝廷祭祀名山大川，成宗问道 ：你经过的郡县，有善于管理百姓的人吗？ 
English: The whole section was dedicated to the famous Yamayama River, which was once a ceremonial river for the imperial court. Chengzong asked, "In the counties you passed through, were there any people who were good at managing the people?"

古文：对曰： 臣过洛阳，太守卢挚平易无为，而民以安靖。 
现代文：答道： 我经洛阳，太守卢挚平易无为，而百姓得以安居乐业。 
English: He replied, "I passed through Luoyang, and the grand marshal Lu Xizhi was easy-going and did nothing, while the people were able to live and work in peace.

古文：成宗曰： 吾忆其人。 
现代文：成宗说： 我想起了这个人。 
English: Chengzong said, "I remember this man.

古文：即日召拜集贤学士。
现代文：即日，便召为集贤学士。
English: On the same day, he was called to be a scholar.

古文：成宗崩，仁宗至自怀孟，有狂士以危言讦翰林学士阎复者，事叵测。全节力为言于李孟，孟以闻，仁宗意解，复告老而去。
现代文：成宗崩，仁宗至自怀孟，有狂士危言攻击翰林学士阎复，居心不良，全节乃尽力在李孟面前为阎复申辩，李孟将意见转告仁宗，仁宗打消了狂士对他的影响，没有处分阎复，阎复乃告老而去。
English: Cheng Zong passed away, Ren Zong fell into Meng's arms, and a madman threatened to attack Hanlin Scholar Yan Fu, with bad intentions. The whole section was an effort to defend Yan Fu in front of Li Meng. Li Meng conveyed the opinion to Ren Zong, and Ren Zong eliminated the influence of the madman on him. There was no punishment for Yan Fu, and Yan Fu passed away.

古文：当时以为朝廷得敬大臣体，而不以口语伤贤者，全节盖有力焉。
现代文：当时就有人认为，朝廷之所以有敬大臣而不以口语伤圣者的好风气，全节是有功的。
English: At that time, some people believed that the reason why the imperial court had a good tradition of respecting ministers and not using colloquial language to offend the saints was due to the whole section.

古文：全节雅好结士大夫，无所不倾其交，长者尤见亲而敬，推毂善类，唯恐不尽其力。
现代文：全节好与士大夫倾情交往，对长者尤其亲近、尊敬，推荐好人唯恐不尽其力。
English: Throughout the festival, it is good to have affectionate interactions with scholars and doctors, especially close and respectful to the elderly, and recommend good people to do their best.

古文：至于振穷周急，又未尝以恩怨异其心，当时以为颇有侠气云。
现代文：至于帮助贫困者改善处境，使有急事者得到周济，而又不以个人恩怨来改变他人的心事。对于全节的这些做法，当时人认为他是颇有侠气的。
English: As for helping the poor to improve their situation, so that those in urgent need could receive financial aid, without using personal grudges to change the minds of others, for all these practices, he was considered quite chivalrous at the time.

古文：全节卒，年八十有二，其徒夏文泳嗣。
现代文：全节去世时年八十有二，由他的徒弟夏文泳继承他的事业。
English: Zeng Jie died at the age of eighty-two, and his apprentice, Xia Wen Rong, inherited his business.

古文：真大道教者，始自金季，道士刘德仁之所立也。
现代文：真大道教是金朝末年道士刘德仁创立的。
English: True Taoism was founded by the Taoist Liu Deren at the end of the Kim dynasty.

古文：其教以苦节危行为要，而不妄取于人、不苟侈于己者也。
现代文：这个教派讲究苦行，不随便要别人的钱财，自己也不奢侈挥霍。传五世而至郦希成，住燕城天宝宫。
English: This sect emphasizes asceticism, does not casually ask for other people's money, and does not spend extravagantly themselves. It has been passed down to the fifth generation and lives in Yancheng Tianbao Palace.

古文：五传而至郦希成，居燕城天宝宫，见知宪宗，始名其教曰真大道，授希成太玄真人，领教事，内出冠服以赐；仍给紫衣三十袭，赐其从者。
现代文：宪宗了解后，始给这个教取名真大道，并授予郦希成太玄真人衔，使主持教务。除赐给郦冠服外，还将紫衣三十件，赐予郦的从者。
English: After understanding this, the founder of the Jurchen Sect of Buddhism, Gensong, began to give this sect the title of Meizhen Dao, and conferred the title of Juxicheng Taixuanzheng on him, so that he could preside over the affairs of the sect. In addition to bestowing the crowned robe of the Jurchen Sect, he also bestowed thirty purple robes on the followers of the Jurchen Sect.

古文：至元五年，世祖命其徒孙德福统辖诸路真大道，锡铜章。
现代文：至元五年，世祖命郦的徒弟孙德福统管各地的真大道，赐铜章。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sun Defu, a disciple of Shizuo, was awarded a bronze medal.

古文：二十年，改赐银印二。
现代文：二十年，改赐银印两枚。
English: Twenty years later, he was awarded two silver seals.

古文：又三传而至张清志，其教益盛，授演教大宗师、凝神冲妙玄应真人。
现代文：又三传而至张清志，这个教派更为兴旺，世祖授清志以演教大宗师、凝神冲妙玄应真人。
English: Three more were passed down to Zhang Qingzhi, and this sect became even more prosperous. The forefathers taught Qingzhi to be a great teacher of acting and a man of concentration.

古文：清志事亲孝，尤耐辛苦，制行坚峻。
现代文：清志事亲至孝，能忍耐艰辛，约束自己的行为，严峻坚决。
English: Qing Zhi is close to filial piety, can endure hardships, restrain his behavior, and is stern and resolute.

古文：东海珠、牢山旧多虎，清志往结茅居之，虎皆避徙，然颇为人害。清志曰： 是吾夺其所也！ 
现代文：东海珠山牢山原来多虎，清志前往搭茅棚住下后，老虎都走了，结果反而到处伤人，清志知道后说， 是我抢夺了老虎的住处，才使老虎四处害人的 ，于是他便自己搬走了。
English: Originally, there were many tigers in Zhushan Leshan, East China Sea. After Qing Zhi went to build a hut to live in, the tigers all left. As a result, instead, they hurt people everywhere. After Qing Zhi knew, he said, I robbed the tiger's residence, only to make the tiger harm people everywhere, so he moved away by himself.

古文：遂去之。后居临汾，地大震，城郭邑屋摧压，死者不可胜计，独清志所居裂为二，无少损焉。
现代文：后来迁至临汾居住，发生大地震，城郭房屋倒塌，死人无数。独清志住的屋一裂为二，没有什么损失。
English: Later, they moved to Linyi to live, a major earthquake occurred, the castle buildings collapsed, and countless people died. The house where Doku Qingzhi lived split in two, with little damage.

古文：乃遍巡木石间，听呻吟声，救活者甚众。
现代文：这时清志在乱木石堆中到处走动，以便听到呻吟之声进行抢救，这样救了不少的人。
English: At this time, Qing Zhi walked around in the jumbled piles of wood and stone to hear the groans for rescue, thus saving a lot of people.

古文：朝廷重其名，给驿致之掌教事。清志舍传徒步至京师，深居简出，人或不识其面。
现代文：朝廷重其名，派人去召来掌管教务，清志徒步至京师，深居简出，一般的人都没和他见过面。
English: The imperial court respected his name, sent someone to summon him to take charge of academic affairs, and he resolved to walk to Beijing to study. He lived a simple life, and the average person had never met him.

古文：贵人达官来见，率告病，伏卧内不起。
现代文：达官贵人来看他，他也卧床不起，称病不见。
English: A high-ranking dignitary came to see him, but he was also bedridden and claimed to be ill.

古文：至于道德缙绅先生，则纳屣杖屦求见，不以为难。
现代文：至于对一些有道德的缙绅先生，清志拖着鞋或扶着手杖穿鞋去见他们也不以为难事。
English: As for some virtuous gentry, it is not difficult for them to drag their shoes or support their canes to wear shoes to see them.

古文：时人高其风，至画为图以相传焉。
现代文：时人认为他风格高尚，以致有的把他的像画下来相传以为纪念。
English: People at the time thought he had a noble style, so much so that some had his portrait painted as a memento.

古文：太一教者，始金天眷中道士萧抱珍，传太一三元法箓之术，因名其教曰太一。
现代文：太一教，金朝天眷年间道士萧抱珍所创立，传授太一三元法之术，故称其教派为太一。
English: Taichi sect, founded by Taoist priest Xiao Baozhen during the time of the Kim dynasty, teaches the art of Taichi triad, so its sect is called Taichi.

古文：四传而至萧辅道。
现代文：传四代而至萧辅道。
English: It has been passed down for four generations to Xiao Yu.

古文：世祖在潜邸闻其名，命史天泽召至和林，赐对称旨，留居宫邸。
现代文：世祖在即位前便闻其名，命史天泽请萧至和林，谈吐合世祖意，乃留萧居宫内。
English: The founder of the world knew his name before he ascended to the throne, and by order of Emperor Tianze, he invited Xiao Zhi and Lin to talk and express the will of the founder of the world, but Xiao stayed in the palace.

古文：以老，请授弟子李居寿掌其教事。
现代文：后因萧年老，乃请世祖同意让他徒弟李居寿掌太一教事。
English: Later, due to old age, he asked the patriarch to agree to let his apprentice, Li Jiushou, become the first teacher.

古文：至元十一年，建太一宫于两京，命居寿居之，领祠事，且禋祀六丁，以继太保刘秉忠之术。
现代文：至元十一年建太一宫于两京，给居寿居住，使主持祭祀之事。还祭祀六丁女神，以继太保刘秉忠的法术。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Taichi-gu Shrine was built in the two capitals, where Jiushou lived and presided over the sacrifices. Six goddesses were also sacrificed, following the spell of Taibo Liu Bingzhong.

古文：十三年，赐太一掌教宗师印。
现代文：十三年，赐太一掌教宗师印。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was given the seal of the great master.

古文：十六年十月辛丑，月直元辰，敕居寿祠醮，奏赤章于天，凡五昼夜。
现代文：十六年十月，世祖敕居寿举行五昼夜的道场，向上天献奏表以禳除灾祟。
English: In October of the 16th year, the ancestor held a five-day and five-night dojo to offer a musical instrument to the heavens to remove the curse.

古文：事毕，居寿请间曰： 皇太子春秋鼎盛，宜参预国政。 
现代文：事后，居寿请求说些与朝政有关的话，他说， 皇太子年轻力壮，宜参预国政。 
English: Afterwards, Ju Shou asked him to say something about the politics of the dynasty. He said that the crown prince was young and vigorous, and it was appropriate for him to participate in national politics.

古文：且又因典瑞董文忠以为言，世祖喜曰： 行将及之。 
现代文：因为当时典瑞董文忠也说了这些话，故世祖高兴地说： 快要让他参政了。 
English: Because at that time, Deng Rui and Dong Wenzhong also said these words, the late patriarch said happily: I am about to let him participate in politics.

古文：其后诏太子参决朝政，庶事皆先启后闻者，盖居寿为之先也。
现代文：其后，便下诏书要太子参决朝政。后来万事要先向太子陈述再向世祖报告的做法，实在是由居寿先提倡后才实行的。
English: Subsequently, an imperial edict was issued calling for the prince to participate in the decision-making of the imperial government. Later, the practice of reporting everything first to the prince and then to the patriarch was actually advocated by Ju Shou before it was implemented.

