古文：司马相如《上林赋》叙上林诸水曰：丹水，紫渊，灞、浐、泾、谓， 八川分流，相背而异态 ， 灏溔潢漾东注太湖。 
现代文：司马相如的《上林赋》中记叙了上林苑各个水流说： 丹水、紫渊，灞、浐、泾、谓，八川分流，相背而异态，灏溔潢漾，东注太湖。 
English: Sima Xiangru's "Shanglin Fu" describes the various streams of Shanglin Yuan: Dan Shui, Ziyuan, Zou, Zou, Zou, Zou, Zou, Yachuan diversion, opposite and heterogeneous, Zou, East Lake Taihu.

古文：八川自入大河，大河去太湖数千里，中间隔太山及淮、济、大江，何缘与太湖相涉？
现代文：这八条河流原本流入黄河，而黄河和太湖相距几千里，中间还隔着泰山以及淮水、济水、长江，怎么会和太湖扯上联系呢？
English: These eight rivers originally flowed into the Yellow River, but the Yellow River and Taihu Lake are thousands of miles apart, with Mount Tai, Huai Shui, Jishui and the Yangtze River in between. How could they be connected to Taihu Lake?

古文：郭璞《江赋》云： 注五湖以漫漭，灌三江而漰沛。 
现代文：郭璞的《江赋》中说： 注五湖以漫漭，灌三江而漰沛。 
English: Guo Gan's "Jiang Fu" said: "The five lakes are full of water, and the three rivers are full of water.

古文：《墨子》曰： 禹治天下，南为江、汉、淮、汝，东流注之五湖。 
现代文：《墨子》中又说： 禹治天下，南为江、汉、淮、汝，东流注之五湖。 
English: "Mozi" also said: Yu rules the world, the south is the river, Han, Huai, Ru, and the east is the five lakes.

古文：孔安国曰： 自彭蠡，江分为三，入于震泽后，为北江而入于海。 
现代文：孔安国说： 自彭蠡江分为三，入于震泽，遂为北江而入于海。 
English: Kong An Guo said: Since the Penghu River is divided into three, it enters the tremor, and then the North River enters the sea.

古文：此皆未尝详考地理。
现代文：这些都不曾详细考察过地理情况。
English: None of this has looked at the geography in any detail.

古文：江、汉至五湖自隔山，其末乃绕出五湖之下流径入于海，何缘入于五湖？
现代文：长江、汉水到太湖中间还隔着大山，其下游又绕过了太湖而流向下方，径直流入大海，又怎么会流入到太湖呢？
English: The Yangtze River, the Han River and the Taihu Lake are still separated by mountains in the middle, and its downstream flows around the Taihu Lake and flows downward, flowing directly into the sea. How can it flow into the Taihu Lake?

古文：淮、汝径自徐州入海，全无交涉。《禹贡》云： 彭蠡既潴，阳鸟攸居。
现代文：淮水、汝水则直接从徐州境内流入大海，其间更是和太湖一点联系都没有。《禹贡》中记载： 彭蠡既潴，阳鸟攸居。
English: Huai Shui and Ru Shui flow directly from the territory of Xuzhou into the sea, during which there is no connection with Taihu Lake at all.Recorded in "Yugong": Peng Yao is a cormorant, Yang Jiao You Jiu.

古文：三江既入，震泽厎定。 
现代文：三江既入，震泽厎定。 
English: The Sanjiang River has been inundated, and the tremors have subsided.

古文：以对文言，则彭蠡水之所潴，三江水之所入，非入于震泽也。
现代文：从语言的对应关系上来说，彭蠡是水流停留积聚的地方，三江是水流注入的地方，并不是说流入太湖。
English: From the perspective of linguistic correspondence, Penghu is the place where the water flow stays and accumulates, and Sanjiang is the place where the water flow is injected, not to say that it flows into Taihu Lake.

古文：震泽上源，皆山环之，了无大川；震泽之委，乃多大川，亦莫知孰为三江者。
现代文：太湖的上游被群山环绕，完全没有比较大的河流；太湖的下游，则有很多大的河流，也不知道哪些是所谓的三江。
English: The upper reaches of Lake Taihu are surrounded by mountains, and there are no relatively large rivers; the lower reaches of Lake Taihu have many large rivers, and it is not known which are the so-called three rivers.

古文：盖三江之水无所入，则震泽壅而为害；三江之水有所入，然后震泽厎定。
现代文：如果三江的水没有地方可去，那么太湖水便会堵塞而成为祸害；如果三江的水有地方可以注入，那么太湖就可以安定。
English: If the water of Sanjiang has no place to go, then the water of Taihu Lake will be blocked and become a scourge; if the water of Sanjiang has a place to inject, then Taihu Lake can be stable.

古文：此水之理也。
现代文：这大概便是水的本性吧。
English: This is probably the nature of water.

古文：海州东海县西北有二古墓，《图志》谓之 黄儿墓 。
现代文：海州东海县西北方向有两座古墓，当地的方志称它们为 黄儿墓 。
English: There are two ancient tombs in the northwest direction of Donghai County, Haizhou. The local Fangzhi called them Huang'er Tomb.

古文：有一石碑，已漫灭不可读，莫知黄儿者何人。
现代文：墓旁边有一块石碑，石碑上的字迹已经模糊得看不清了，没人知道黄儿是谁。
English: There is a stone tablet next to the grave. The writing on the stone tablet has become so fuzzy that it cannot be seen clearly. No one knows who Huang Er is.

古文：石延年通判海州，因行县见之，曰： 汉二疏，东海人，此必其墓也。 
现代文：石延年任海州通判时，有一次巡视下辖各县因而见到了这墓，说： 汉代的疏广、疏受就是东海人，这一定是他们的墓地。 
English: When Shi Yanren served as Haizhou magistrate, he once made a tour of the counties under his jurisdiction and saw this tomb, saying: The Han Dynasty's "Sohang" and "Sohye" were the people of the East Sea, and this must be their cemetery.

古文：遂谓之 二疏墓 ，刻碑于其傍；后人又收入《图经》。
现代文：于是称它们为 二疏墓 ，并在旁边刻了石碑，后人又把这碑文收入了《图经》中。
English: As a result, they were called Er Soh tombs, and a stone tablet was engraved next to them, and later generations included this inscription in the "Sutra."

古文：余按，疏广，东海兰陵人，兰陵今属沂州承县；今东海县乃汉之赣榆，自属琅琊郡，非古人之东海也。
现代文：根据我的考证，疏广是东海兰陵人，兰陵今天属沂州承县，今天的东海县乃汉之赣榆，原本属于琅琊郡，不是古代的东海县。
English: According to my research, Soguang was a resident of Lanling in the East China Sea. Lanling today belongs to Zhangzhou Chengxian County, while today's Donghai County belongs to the Han Dynasty. Originally, it belonged to Zhangxian County, not the ancient Donghai County.

古文：今承县东四十里自有疏广墓，其东又二里有疏受墓。
现代文：今天承县东四十里自有疏广墓，向东又二里有疏受墓。
English: Today, forty miles to the east of Chengxian County, there is a cemetery belonging to So Guang, and two miles to the east, there is a cemetery belonging to So Ye.

古文：延年不讲地志，但见今谓之东海县，遂以 二疏 名之，极为乖误。
现代文：石延年不查考地志，只因为现在这里被称为东海县，就认为那两座墓是 二疏 的墓，这是非常错误的。
English: It is very wrong to think that the two tombs are the tombs of the two brothers just because it is now called Donghai County without checking the geography.

古文：大凡地名如此者至多，无足纪者。
现代文：一般来讲地名像这种情况的很多，没必要一一记述。
English: Generally speaking, there are many place names like this, so there is no need to describe them one by one.

古文：此乃余初仕为沐阳主簿日，始见《图经》中增经事，后世不知其因，往往以为实录。
现代文：我刚刚担任沭阳县主簿时，见到地方志中增加了此事，后世人不知道缘由往往认为是据实记录的。
English: When I was just in charge of the main book of Shenyang County, I saw that this matter was added to the local history. Later, the world did not know the reason, but it was often considered to be a factual record.

古文：谩志于此，以见天下地书皆不可坚信。其北又有 孝女冢 ，庙貌甚盛，著在祀典。
现代文：因此把这件事随手记录在这里，以表明天下的地理书籍也并不是完全可信的。 黄儿墓 的北面又有 孝女冢 ，庙的外观很雄伟，是属于官府祭祀的庙宇。
English: Therefore, I have recorded this incident here to show that the world's geography books are not completely reliable. To the north of Huang Er's tomb is Xiao Niao's tomb, the temple has a magnificent appearance and is a temple belonging to the government's ritual.

古文：孝女亦东海人。
现代文：孝女也是东海人。
English: The filial daughter is also from the East China Sea.

古文：赣榆既非东海故境，则孝女冢庙，亦后人附会县名为之耳。
现代文：汉代的赣榆既不属于现今的东海县的旧地，现在的东海既然不是古时东海的边境，那么孝女的墓地和庙宇，大概也是后人为了附和县名而捏造的吧。
English: The Han Dynasty's Yunnan did not belong to the old land of today's Donghai County. Since today's East Sea is not the border of the East Sea in ancient times, the cemetery and temple of the filial daughter were probably fabricated by later generations in order to add the county name.

古文：《杨文公谈苑》记江南后主患清暑阁前草生，徐锴令以桂屑布砖缝中，宿草尽死。
现代文：《杨文公谈苑》记载南唐后主厌烦清暑阁前长草，徐锴就让后主把桂树枝的碎屑撒在地上的砖缝中，多年生的杂草就全死了。
English: "Yang Wen Gong Dan Yuan" records that the Southern Tang empress was tired of clearing the long grass in front of the summer pavilion, and Xu Xi asked the empress to scatter the debris of the cinnamon branch in the brick cracks on the ground, and all the perennial weeds died.

古文：谓《吕氏春秋》云 桂枝之下无杂木。 
现代文：并说《吕氏春秋》上提到 桂枝之下无杂木 。
English: He also said that "Lu's Spring and Autumn" mentioned that there was no debris under the cinnamon branch.

古文：盖桂枝味辛螫故也。
现代文：大概是由于桂树的气味能蜇死草木的缘故。
English: This is probably due to the fact that the scent of the tree can choke the plants.

古文：然桂之杀草木，自是其性，不为辛螫也。
现代文：但桂树能杀死草木，自是它本来的特性使然，它并不用气味去蜇草木。
English: However, the cinnamon tree can kill plants, which is due to its original characteristics. It does not use its scent to kill plants.

古文：《雷公炮炙论》云： 以桂为丁，以钉木中，其木即死。 
现代文：《雷公炮炙论》上说： 把桂木切成小丁，用以钉在其他树上，那树就会死去。 
English: "Thunderbolt Cannon Roasting" said: If you cut the cinnamon wood into small pieces and use it to nail it to other trees, that tree will die.

古文：一丁至微，未必能螯大木，自其性相制耳。
现代文：一个桂木丁是极微小的，未必能够蜇死大树，自是它的特性与其他草木相克罢了。
English: An acacia is very small and may not be able to kill a large tree, since its characteristics are different from other plants and trees.

古文：天下地名错乱乖谬，率难考信。
现代文：天下间的地名错乱混杂，很难考察明白。
English: The place names around the world are jumbled and confusing, and it is difficult to investigate and understand them.

古文：如楚章华台，亳州城父县、陈州商水县、荆州江陵、长林、监利县皆有之。乾溪亦有数处。
现代文：比如楚国的章华台，亳州城父县、陈州商水县、荆州江陵、长林、监利县都有，乾溪也有好几处。
English: For example, in Chu, Zhanghuatai, Zhangzhou Chengchi County, Chenzhou Shangshui County, Jingzhou Jiangling, Changlin, and Jianli counties, and several places in Qianxi.

古文：据《左传》，楚灵王七年， 成章华之台，与诸侯落之。 
现代文：据《左传》，楚灵王七年， 成章华之台，与诸侯落之。 
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," in the seventh year of King Chu Ling, he became the ruler of Zhanghua and fell out with the princes.

古文：杜预注： 章华台，在华容城中。 
现代文：杜预的注释是： 章华台，在华容城中。 
English: Du Yu's comment was: Zhang Huatai, in the middle of Huarong City.

古文：华容即今之监利县，非岳州之华容也。
现代文：华容即今天的监利县，并非岳州的华容县。
English: Huarong is today's Jianli County, not Huarong County in Yuezhou.

古文：至今有章华故台，在县郭中，与杜预之说相符。
现代文：监利县至今有章华台的遗址在县城中，与杜预的说法相符。
English: The site of Zhang Huatai still exists in the county seat of Jianli County, which is consistent with Du Yuan's statement.

古文：毫州城父县有乾溪，其侧亦有章华台，故台基下往往得人骨，云楚灵王战死于此。
现代文：亳州城父县有乾溪，它旁边也有章华台，在遗址的台基下常常会挖掘到人骨，据说是楚灵王便战死在这里。
English: There is a dry creek in Chenzhou's Chengchi County, and next to it there is Zhang Huatai. Human bones are often excavated under the foundation of the site. It is said that King Chuling died in battle here.

古文：商吕县章华之侧，亦有乾溪。
现代文：商水县章华台旁边，也有乾溪。
English: Beside Zhanghuatai in Shangshui County, there is also a dry creek.

古文：薛综注张衡《东京赋》引《左氏传》乃云： 楚子成章华之台于乾溪。 
现代文：薛综注释张衡《东京赋》引《左氏传》乃云： 楚子成章华之台于乾溪。 
English: Xue Comprehensive Commentary Zhang Heng's "Tokyo Fu" quoted from "The Biography of Zuo" is a cloud: Chu Zi Chengzhang Hua's stage is in Qianxi.

古文：皆误说也，《左传》实无此文。
现代文：这些说法都是错误的，《左传》中根本就没有这些记载。
English: These claims are false, and there is no record of them in Zuo Zhuan at all.

古文：章华与乾溪，无非一处。
现代文：章华台与乾溪原非一个地方。
English: Zhanghuatai and Qianxiyuan are not the same place.

古文：楚灵王十二年，王狩于州来，使荡侯、潘子、司马督、嚣尹午、陵尹喜帅师围徐以惧吴，王次于乾溪。
现代文：楚灵王十一年，王狩于州来，使荡侯、潘子、司马督、嚣尹午、陵尹喜帅师围徐以惧吴，王次于乾溪。
English: In the eleventh year of King Chuling, Wang Gui came to Yuzhou, and sent Wang Hou, Pan Zi, Sima Du, Yan Yin Wu, and Ling Yin Xisai to surround Xu Yixian Wu, second only to Qianxi.

古文：此则城父之乾溪。
现代文：这里就是城父县的乾溪。
English: This is the dry creek in Chengdu County.

古文：灵王八年许迁于夷者，乃此地。
现代文：楚灵王八年许迁于夷，夷就在这个地方。
English: In the eighth year of King Chuling's reign, he moved to Yiwu, and Yiwu is in this place.

古文：十三年，公子比为乱，使观从从师于乾溪，王从溃，灵王亡，不知所在；平王即位，杀囚，衣之王服，而流诸汉，乃取葬之，以靖国人，而赴以乾溪。
现代文：楚灵王十二年，公子比作乱，楚灵王派遣观从跟随军队于乾溪，楚王的军队溃败，楚灵王逃亡到不知什么地方了。楚平王即位后，杀了一个囚徒，把楚灵王的衣服穿到囚徒的身上，把尸体扔进汉水漂流，然后把尸体打捞上来当做楚灵王安葬，以此来安定人心，而且让人从乾溪来报丧。
English: In the twelfth year of King Chuling, the prince likened it to a riot. King Chuling sent a watchman to follow the army in the dry creek. King Chuling's army was defeated, and King Chuling fled to I don't know where. After King Chuping ascended to the throne, he killed a prisoner, put King Chuling's clothes on the prisoner's body, threw the body into the Han water to drift, and then salvaged the body to be buried as King Chuling, in order to calm people's hearts, and let people come from the dry creek to report the funeral.

古文：灵王实缢于芋尹申亥氏，他年申以王柩告，乃改葬之，而非死于乾溪也。
现代文：楚灵王实际上被芊尹申亥氏勒死的，后来申亥氏把楚灵王的灵柩上报给了朝廷，朝廷才改葬了楚灵王，楚灵王并非死在乾溪。
English: In fact, King Chuling was strangled to death by Yu Yin Shen Hai. Later, Shen Hai reported King Chuling's coffin to the imperial court. The imperial court then reburied King Chuling. King Chuling did not die in the dry creek.

古文：昭王二十七年，吴伐陈，王帅师救陈，次于城父；将战，王卒于城父。
现代文：昭王二十七年，吴国讨伐陈国，楚昭王率领军队救陈国时，驻扎在城父县，将要开战时，楚昭王在城父县去世了。
English: In the 27th year of King Zhao, the State of Wu fought against the State of Chen. When King Zhao of Chu led the army to save the State of Chen, he was stationed in Chengdu County. When the war was about to begin, King Zhao of Chu died in Chengdu County.

古文：而《春秋》又云： 弑其君于乾溪。 
现代文：而《春秋》又说： 弑其君于乾溪。 
English: However, "Spring and Autumn" also said: "The king of Qi is in Qianxi."

古文：则后世谓灵王实死于是，理不足怪也。
现代文：那么后代的人说楚灵王确实死在这里，也就不奇怪了。
English: So it is not surprising that the descendants say that King Chuling really died here.

古文：今人守郡谓之 建麾 ，盖用颜延年诗： 一麾乃出守。 此误也。
现代文：今人将出任地方州郡长官称为 建麾 ，大概是借用颜延年 一麾乃出守 的诗句而来的，这是一种误用。
English: It is a misnomer to call the person who will now serve as the local prefectural governor as Jian Ye, probably borrowed from the poem "Yan Yan Nian Yi Xuan Nao Dechu."

古文：延年谓 一麾 者，乃指麾之麾，如武王 右秉白旄以麾 之麾，非旌麾之麾也。
现代文：延年所说的 一麾 是指麾的 麾 ，如同周武王 右秉白旄以麾 的 麾 ，而不是旌麾的 麾 。
English: The  that Yan Nian said refers to the  of the, just as the king of Zhou Wu used the  of the, not the  of the.

古文：延年《阮始平》诗云 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守 者，谓山涛荐咸为吏部郎，三上武帝，不用，后为荀勖一挤，遂出始平，故有此句。
现代文：延年《阮始平》诗的 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守 ，说的是山涛推荐阮咸为吏部郎官，为此三次上奏武帝，武帝都不用，后来阮咸为荀勖所排挤，一挥而斥之，遂出为始平太守，故延年有此诗句。
English: According to the poem "Nguyn Xípíng" by Quan Nian, the repeated recommendation did not make it into the government, but once he was sent to the capital, it is said that the mountains recommended Nguyn Háng to be the leader of the government, and for this reason he was sent to the emperor three times, but the emperor did not need to be sent. Later, Nguyn Háng was pushed out by Quan Nian, and he was rejected with a wave of the hand, so he became the emperor of Xípíng. That is why Quan Nian wrote this poem.

古文：延年被摈，以此自托耳。
现代文：延年也是被摈斥而为始安太守的，他作此诗也是用以寄托自己的情绪。
English: Yan Nian was also rejected and became the abbot of Shi'an, and he also wrote this poem to express his feelings.

古文：自杜牧为《登乐游原》诗云： 拟把一麾江海去，乐游原上望昭陵。 始谬用一麾，自此遂为故事。
现代文：自从杜牧作《登乐游原》诗，而称 拟把一麾江海去，乐游原上望昭陵 ，始误用 一麾 一词，从此守郡称 建麾 遂成为典故。
English: Since Du Mu wrote the poem "Dengle Youyuan" and said that he intended to take a raft to the river and sea, and look at Zhao Ling on the raft, he began to misuse the word, and from then on, the county was called Jianye, and it became an allusion.

古文：除拜官职，谓除其旧籍，不然也。
现代文：现在的人所说的除拜官职中的 除 是解除其原任职务的意思，其实不是这样的。
English: What people nowadays mean by "removal from office" is "dismissal from one's original post," but this is not the case.

古文：除，犹易也，以新易旧曰除，如新旧歳之交谓之 歳除 ，《易》： 除戒器，戒不虞。 
现代文：这个 除 犹如当交换讲的 易 ，以新易旧叫做 除 ，如新旧岁之交的那一天就称为 岁除 。
English: This division is similar to the division between the old and new years, which is called the old-new division. For example, the day when the old and new years meet is called the old-new division.

古文：以新易弊，所以备不虞也。
现代文：《易经》上说 除戎器，戒不虞 ，意思是用新的兵器来更换旧的兵器，以防备意外情况的发生。
English: In the I Ching, it is said, "Take off your armor, beware of danger," which means to replace old weapons with new weapons to prevent accidents from happening.

古文：除谓之除者，自下而上，亦更易之义。
现代文：而台阶所以被称为 除 ，也是因为登台阶要自下而上，也有更换的意思。
English: The reason why the steps are called "除" is also because the steps have to be climbed from the bottom up, which also means replacement.

古文：世人画韩退之，小面而美髯，著纱帽。
现代文：世人画韩愈的像，脸面小而有美胡须，头戴纱帽。
English: The world paints a picture of Han Yu, with a small face and a beautiful beard, wearing a cap.

古文：此乃江南韩熙载耳，尚有当时所画，题志甚明。
现代文：这像所画的其实是南唐韩熙载，现在还有当时所画的韩熙载的像存着，题词非常明确。
English: This image was actually painted by Han Xizai of the Southern Tang Dynasty. The image of Han Xizai painted at that time still exists, and the inscription is very clear.

古文：熙载谥文靖，江南人谓之韩文公，因此遂谬以为退之。
现代文：熙载谥文靖，江南人称之为韩文公，因此世人遂误以为退之。
English: South of the Yangtze River, he was called Han Wen Gong, so the world mistakenly thought he was retired.

古文：退之肥而寡髯。
现代文：韩愈身体肥胖而胡须较少。
English: Han Yu is obese and has few whiskers.

古文：元丰中，以退之从享文宣王庙，郡县所画，皆是熙载。
现代文：元丰年间，以韩愈配享文宣王孔子庙，各州县孔庙所画的都是韩熙载。
English: During the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, the Confucius Temple of King Xuanxuan was decorated with paintings of Han Yu. The Confucius Temples in all prefectures and counties were all painted by Han Xizai.

古文：后世不復可辨，退之遂为熙载矣。
现代文：后世不再能辨别，韩愈竟变为韩熙载了。
English: Future generations will no longer be able to tell the difference, and Han Yu has turned into Han Xizai.

古文：今之数钱，百钱谓之陌者，借陌字用之，其实只是百字，如什与伍耳。
现代文：如今在计算钱币的数量时，称一百钱为 陌 ，虽借用 陌 字，其实它只是 佰 字，就跟十钱用 什 字、五钱用 伍 字一样。
English: Nowadays, when calculating the number of coins, one hundred money is called "Mou," although the word "Mou" is borrowed, it is actually just "Mou," just like the word "Shi" for ten money and the word "Wu" for five money.

古文：唐自皇甫镈为垫钱法，至昭宗末，乃定八十为陌。
现代文：唐代自皇甫镈始行垫钱法，至昭宗末年乃规定以八十钱为一陌。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Fuxi began to implement the cushion money method, and by the last years of the Zhaozong Dynasty, it was stipulated that one mu should be 80 yuan.

古文：今蜀郡亦以十参为一铢。参吾古之絫字，恐相传之误耳。
现代文：后汉隐帝时，三司使王章每开支国库钱币，又减去三钱，以七十七钱为一陌，输入国库的钱币则仍以八十钱为一陌。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Han Yin, the three departments made Wang Zhang subtract three coins for every treasury coin he spent, making 77 coins equal to 1 mu, while the coins he brought into the treasury were still 80 coins equal to 1 mu.

古文：前史称严武为剑南节度使，放肆不法，李白为之作《蜀道难》。
现代文：到现在收入国库的钱币还有以八十钱为陌的。《新唐书》称严武为剑南节度使，放肆不遵礼法，李白因作《蜀道难》以斥之。
English: Up to now, the coins received by the national treasury are still unfamiliar with eighty coins. "New Tang Dynasty Book" called Yan Wu the Jianan Festival envoy, and he was impudent and did not follow the etiquette law. Li Bai was repulsed because of his work "Shu Daodan."

古文：按孟棨所记，白初至京师，贺知章闻其名，首诣之，白出《蜀道难》，读未毕，称叹数四。
现代文：按孟綮《本事诗》所记，李白初到京师，贺知章闻其名，最先去拜访他；李白出示《蜀道难》，贺知章还未读完，就已经再三再四地叹赏。
English: According to Meng Wei's "Honest Poem," Li Bai was the first to arrive in Beijing, and He Zhizhang heard his name and went to visit him first; Li Bai presented "The Difficult Path of Shu," and He Zhizhang had not yet finished reading it, but had already repeatedly admired it.

古文：时乃天宝初也，此时白已作《蜀道难》。严武为剑南，乃在至德以后肃宗时，年代甚远。
现代文：这时应是天宝初年。其时李白已经创作了《蜀道难》，严武为剑南节度使则在至德以后的肃宗时期，二者年代相差甚远。
English: At that time, Li Bai had already created "The Difficult Path of Shu," and Yan Wu was the chief of the Jianan Festival in the Su Zong period after Zhi De. The two years are very far apart.

古文：盖小说所记，各得于一时见闻，本末不相知，率多舛误，皆此文之类。
现代文：大抵稗官小说所记，各得于一时的见闻，并不清楚事情的本末源流，故大多舛误，皆类似此种记载。
English: Most of the eunuch novels are similar to this kind of record, in that the characters each gain knowledge in a moment and do not know the origin of the events. Therefore, most of them are inaccurate.

古文：李白集中称 刺章仇兼琼 ，与《唐书》所载不同，此《唐书》误也。
现代文：李白的文集中称《蜀道难》是指斥章仇兼琼的，与《新唐书》所载不同，此事应是《新唐书》的记载有误。
English: Li Bai's collection of essays said that "Shu Daodan" refers to the "rejection" of the "new Tang Dynasty," which is different from the "new Tang Dynasty." This should be a mistake in the "new Tang Dynasty."

古文：旧《尚书·禹贡》云： 云梦士作乂。 太宗皇帝时，得古本《尚书》，作 云土梦作乂 ，诏改《禹贡》从古本。
现代文：以往所传《尚书·禹贡》篇记载 云梦土作乂 ，本朝太宗皇帝时得古本《尚书》，作 云土梦作乂 ，于是指示将现存本《禹贡》篇的这五个字改从古本。
English: In the past, the "Shangshu, Yugong" was said to have been written in the form of a dream, but Emperor Taizong of this dynasty obtained the old "Shangshu" and wrote "Yundu, Yugong" in the form of a dream, so he ordered that these five words in the existing "Yugong" be changed from the old version.

古文：余按，孔安国注： 云梦之泽在江南。 不然也。
现代文：我查考现存孔安国的注，谓 云梦之泽在江南 ，这说法是不确实的。
English: I checked the existing note of Kong An Guo, saying that Yunmeng Lake is in the south of the Yangtze River, which is not true.

古文：据《左传》： 吴人入郢，楚子涉雎济江，入于云中。
现代文：据《左传》所载： 吴人攻入郢都楚昭王涉过雎水，又渡过长江，逃入云泽之中。
English: According to "Zhu Chuan": The Wu people invaded the capital of Shandong. King Chu Zhao waded through the muddy water, crossed the Yangtze River, and escaped into the clouds.

古文：王寝，盗攻之，以戈击王，王奔郧。 
现代文：昭王在泽中寝睡时，有劫盗攻击他，用戈来刺昭王于是逃奔郧地。 
English: While Zhao Wang was sleeping in the middle of the lake, a robber attacked him. He stabbed Zhao Wang with a club, and then fled the scene.

古文：楚子自郢西走涉雎，则当出于江南；其后涉江入于云中，遂奔郧，郧则今之安州。
现代文：楚昭王自郢都西逃而涉过雎水，那么他出逃时应该是先逃到了长江以南；此后他渡过长江而进入云泽，又从云泽逃奔郧地，郧即现在的安陆州。
English: If King Chu Zhao waded through Surabaya to escape from the west of Shandong, then he must have fled south of the Yangtze River; after that, he crossed the Yangtze River into Yunze, and then fled from Yunze to Shandong, which is now Anlu Prefecture.

古文：涉江而后至云，入云然后至郡，则云在江北也。
现代文：渡过长江而后至于云泽，进入云泽然后至于郧地，那么云泽必定是在长江以北。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River, as for Yunze, entering Yunze and then as for Handan, then Yunze must be north of the Yangtze River.

古文：《左传》曰： 郑伯如楚，王以田江南之梦。 
现代文：《左传》又记载： 郑简公到楚国访问楚王和他一起在江南的梦泽打猎。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" also records: Zheng Jian Gong went to the State of Chu to visit King Chu and went hunting with him in Mengze in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：杜预注云： 楚之云、梦，跨江南、北。 
现代文：杜预注释说： 楚国的云梦泽，跨长江南北。 
English: Du Yu commented, "Chu's country is full of dreams, spanning the Yangtze River from north to south.

古文：曰 江南之梦 ，则云在江北明矣。
现代文：《左传》说 江南之梦 ，则云泽在江北就是显而易见的了。
English: According to "Zhuan," the dream of the south of the Yangtze River, the clouds are obvious in the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：元丰中，余自随州道安陆，于入汉口，有景陵主簿郭思者，能言汉、沔间地理，亦以谓江南为梦，江北为云。
现代文：元丰年间，我从随州取道安陆而到汉口，有个做景陵主簿的郭思，能谈论汉沔地区的古今地理，他也以为在长江以南的是梦泽，在长江以北的是云泽。
English: During the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, I traveled from Suizhou to Hankou via Anlu. There was a Guo Si, who was in charge of the master book of landscapes and tombs, and could talk about the ancient and modern geography of the Hankou region. He also thought that south of the Yangtze River was Mengze, and north of the Yangtze River was Yunze.

古文：余以《左传》验之，思之说信然。
现代文：我用《左传》的记载检验，郭思的说法是可信的。
English: I used the records of "Zo Zhuan" to test, Guo Si's argument is credible.

古文：江南则今之公安、石首、建宁等县，江北则玉沙、监利、景陵等县，乃水之所委，其地最下。
现代文：长江以南即今日的公安、石首、建宁等县，长江以北则即玉沙、监利、景陵等县。
English: To the south of the Yangtze River are the present-day counties of Public Security, Shishou, and Jianning, and to the north of the Yangtze River are the counties of Yusha, Jianli, and Jingling.

古文：江南二浙，水出稍高，云方土而梦已作乂矣，此古本之为允也。
现代文：大抵这一带众多水流的汇聚，以云梦之地最为低下，而长江以南的湿地，在大水消退后要较江北稍高一些，所以说云泽中的土地刚刚露出水面，而梦泽中的土地已开始耕作了。此种记载，应该是古本的文字更为妥当。
English: Most of the time, the confluence of numerous water currents in this area is the lowest in the land of clouds and dreams, while the wetlands south of the Yangtze River are slightly higher than those north of the river after the water recedes. Therefore, the land in the clouds has just been exposed to the water surface, while the land in the dreams has begun to be cultivated. Such a record should be more appropriate for ancient texts.

