古文：魏学曾，字惟贯，泾阳人。
现代文：魏学曾，字惟贯，陕西泾阳人。
English: Wei Xue Zeng, surnamed Wei Jian, was from Shenyang, Shaanxi Province.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士。除户部主事，迁郎中。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年中进士，授职户部主事，升郎中。
English: Jiajing, 32 years old, was promoted to the position of the head of the household department, and promoted to the middle.

古文：中官为商人请支刍粮银巨万，学曾持不可，乃已。
现代文：有宦官为商人请求支取上万两粮草银。魏学曾坚持认为不可以，于是停止。
English: A eunuch asked to withdraw 10,000 taels of grain, straw and silver for the merchant. Wei Xue once insisted that it was not possible, so he stopped.

古文：寻擢光禄少卿，进右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：不久，升为光禄少卿，又升右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Guanglu Shaoqing, and then to the Right Hand of the Capital, the Governor of Liaodong.

古文：隆庆初，土蛮大入永平。
现代文：隆庆初年，当地少数民族大举进攻永平。
English: In the first year of Longqing, local ethnic minorities launched a large-scale attack on Yongping.

古文：学曾入驻山海，檄诸将王治道等追击至义院口，大捷。
现代文：魏学曾进驻山海关，下令诸将王治道等追击至义院口，取得大胜。
English: Wei Xue was once stationed at the Shanhaiguan Customs and ordered the generals to chase Wang Zhidou and others to the entrance of Yiyin, and won a great victory.

古文：进右副都御史。
现代文：魏学曾升为右副都御史。
English: He was promoted again to the post of Right Vice-Governor.

古文：学曾乃易置将吏，招纳降附，厘屯田二千余顷，数破敌，被赏赉。
现代文：于是，他调换将吏，招纳降将，规范屯田二千多顷，数次击败敌人，被朝廷封赏。
English: As a result, he replaced generals, recruited subordinate generals, standardized more than two thousand hectares of military camps, defeated the enemy several times, and was rewarded by the imperial court.

古文：以疾去。
现代文：后因病离任。
English: He later resigned due to illness.

古文：起兵部右侍郎，提督神枢营。旋改吏部，转左侍郎。
现代文：又起用为兵部右侍郎，提督神枢营，很快改在吏部任职，转为左侍郎。
English: He was also appointed as the right attendant of the military department, Admiral Shinshu Camp, and soon changed to serve in the personnel department, and then to the left attendant.

古文：穆宗崩，大学士高拱欲去冯保，属言官论劾。
现代文：穆宗皇帝去世，大学士高拱想排挤冯保，嘱咐御史官弹劾他。
English: Emperor Mu Zong passed away, the University Scholar wanted to oust Feng Bao, and ordered the Historian to impeach him.

古文：学曾遗书大学士张居正曰： 外人皆言公与保有谋，遗诏亦出公手。
现代文：魏学曾修书大学士张居正，说： 朝廷官吏都说您与冯保有图谋，先帝遗诏也是出自您之手。
English: Zhang Juzheng, a scholar at the University of Wei who once studied literature, said: The imperial officials all said that you were plotting with Feng Han, and the last emperor's will was also from your hand.

古文：今日之事，不宜复护此阉。 
现代文：今天的事情是不应该庇护这个阉官。 
English: Today's case is not about protecting this eunuch.

古文：居正怒。
现代文：张居正大怒。
English: Zhang Jizheng was furious.

古文：及拱被逐，举朝失色，学曾独大言曰： 上践阼伊始，辄逐顾命大臣，且诏出何人，不可不明示百官。 
现代文：等到高拱被赶出朝廷，满朝的文武都大惊失色。唯独魏学曾高声地说： 皇上登位伊始，就贬逐顾命大臣，诏书出自何人，不能不公开告诉百官。 
English: When Gao Gong was driven out of the imperial court, the literati and warriors of the whole dynasty were shocked. However, Wei Xue once said in a loud voice: At the beginning of the emperor's ascension to the throne, he dismissed the minister in charge of the emperor's life, and it was impossible not to tell the hundred officials who the imperial rescript came from.

古文：要诸大臣诣居正邸争之。诸大臣多不往，居正亦辞以疾。
现代文：他要求各位大臣到张居正的府邸争论此事，各大臣大多数不肯去，张居正也以疾病推辞诸臣来访，从此更加与张居正相违悖。
English: He asked the ministers to go to Zhang Juzheng's residence to discuss the matter, but most of the ministers refused to go. Zhang Juzheng also declined the visit of the ministers due to illness, which further contradicted Zhang Juzheng.

古文：自是益忤。出为南京右都御史。
现代文：魏学曾贬为南京右都御史。
English: Wei Xue was once relegated to the position of Nanjing Uto goshi.

古文：未上，给事中宗弘暹希居正指劾之。
现代文：没有上任，给事中宗弘暹迎合张居正弹劾他。
English: He did not take up the post, and he was impeached by Zhong Zonghong Si and Zhang Jizheng.

古文：诏以故官候调，学曾遂归。
现代文：朝廷下诏让他以过去的官职等候调遣，魏学曾于是回到家乡。
English: The imperial court ordered him to wait for transfer with his former official position, and Wei Xue once returned to his hometown.

古文：居正殁逾年，起南京户部右侍郎。
现代文：张居正死了一年多后，他被起用为南京户部右侍郎。
English: More than a year after Zhang Jizheng's death, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the household in Nanjing.

古文：召为右都御史，督仓场。
现代文：征召为右都御史，督察仓场。
English: He was conscripted as Udotsu Imperial Historian and Inspector of Warehouses.

古文：寻以南京户部尚书致仕。
现代文：不久从南京户部尚书任上退休。
English: Soon after, he retired from the post of secretary of the Nanjing Household Department.

古文：万历十八年，顺义王扯撦力克西赴青海，火落赤、真相犯洮河，副总兵李奎、李联芳先后被杀。
现代文：万历十八年，顺义王扯力克西赴青海，火落赤、真相进犯洮河，副总兵李奎、李联芳先后被杀。
English: In the 18th year of Wanli, Shunyi Wang went to the west of Qinghai, the fire fell red, the truth invaded the Wei River, and the deputy chief soldiers Li Kui and Li Lianfang were killed successively.

古文：朝命尚书郑洛经略七镇，兼领总督，洛固辞总督。
现代文：朝廷命尚书郑洛经营管理七镇并兼任总督，郑洛坚持推辞任总督之职。
English: The imperial court ordered Shangshu Zhengluo to operate and manage the seven towns and also serve as governor, Zhengluo insisted on resigning from the post of governor.

古文：明年春，阁臣王锡爵荐学曾。
现代文：第二年春天，内阁大臣王锡爵推荐魏学曾。
English: In the spring of the following year, the cabinet minister Wang Xizhe recommended Wei Xuezen.

古文：起兵部尚书，总督陕西、延、宁、甘肃军务。
现代文：于是，魏学曾起用为兵部尚书，总督陕西、延、宁、甘肃军务。
English: As a result, Wei Xue was once appointed as the military commander of Shangshu, the military governor of Shaanxi, Yan, Ning and Gansu.

古文：时洛专主款，学曾至，与议不合，陕西巡抚叶梦熊助之。
现代文：当时郑洛一心一意主张议和。魏学曾到来后，与他意见不合。陕西巡抚叶梦熊帮助魏学曾。
English: At that time, Zheng Luo was a single-minded advocate of peace talks. After Wei Xue Zeng arrived, he disagreed with him. Ye Meng Xiong, the governor of Shaanxi, helped Wei Xue Zeng.

古文：初，顺义王封，梦熊以谏沮坐得罪，学曾亦为高拱言不便。
现代文：起初，顺义王受封时，叶梦熊因为直言劝谏阻止而获罪。魏学曾也向高拱说不便于这样做。
English: At first, when Shunyi Wang was given the title, Ye Mengxiong was found guilty of persuading and preventing him. Wei Xue had also told Gao Gonglu that it was inconvenient to do so.

古文：至是，撦力克助叛，学曾、梦熊欲遂讨之，诋洛玩寇。
现代文：这时，扯力克帮助叛乱，魏学曾、叶梦熊想征讨他们，抨击郑洛不认真对待敌人。
English: At this time, Zhelike helped the rebellion, Wei Xuecheng and Ye Mengxiong wanted to solicit them, and criticized Zheng Luo for not taking the enemy seriously.

古文：会撦力克东归，火落赤诸部亦徙去，学曾奏撦力克虽归，阴留精兵二万于嘉峪，欲助火落赤、真相。
现代文：恰好扯力克东归，火落赤诸部也迁走，魏学曾上奏认为扯力克虽然归去，暗地里却留了两万精兵在嘉峪，想帮助火落赤、真相。
English: It just so happened that Zi Li Ke returned to the east, and the various departments of the fire-reducing army also moved away. Wei Xue once said that although Zi Li Ke returned, he secretly left 20,000 elite soldiers in Jiayu, wanting to help the fire-reducing army, the truth.

古文：其说本采诸道路，朝士乃争附和之。
现代文：这个话本来是道听途说，朝廷官吏却争相附和。
English: This was originally hearsay, but court officials concurred.

古文：锡爵意悔，具疏言状，又遗书责梦熊。
现代文：王锡爵心里后悔，上疏奏明，又送信责备叶梦熊。
English: Wang Xizhe regretted in his heart, wrote to Shang Shuo, and sent a letter of reproach to Ye Mengxiong.

古文：而兵部尚书石星以顺义既东，宣、大事急，召洛还定抚议，置学曾疏不问。
现代文：兵部尚书石星以为顺义王既然东归，宣府大事情就很紧急。将郑洛召回商议安抚事宜，不理魏学曾的奏疏。
English: Shang Shuxi of the Military Department thought that since King Shunyi had returned to the East, the great matter of the Xuanfu was very urgent. He recalled Zheng Luo to discuss matters of appeasement, ignoring Wei Xuezen's lack of response.

古文：未几，河套部长土昧明安入市毕，要请增赏。
现代文：没有多久，河套部落首领土昧明安完成互市交易，要求增加赏赐。
English: It didn't take long for the head of the Hetao tribe to complete the transaction between the two cities and demand an increase in reward.

古文：学曾令总兵官杜桐、神木参将张刚、孤山游击李绍祖出不意击斩明安，俘馘四百八十余级，夺马畜器械称是。
现代文：魏学曾命令总兵杜桐、神木参将张刚、孤山游击李绍祖出其不意斩杀明安，俘杀四百八十余首级，夺马匹器械无数。
English: Wei Xue once ordered the general soldier Du Tong, the sacred tree general Zhang Gang, and the lonely mountain guerrilla Li Shaozu to kill Ming'an unintentionally, capture more than 480 heads, and seize countless horses and equipment.

古文：学曾以功加太子少保。
现代文：魏学曾因功加封为太子少保。
English: Wei Xue was awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector for his achievements.

古文：而明安子摆言太声言复仇，号召诸部。
现代文：而明安的儿子摆言太声明要复仇，号召各部落。
English: But Ming'an's son declared that he wanted revenge and called on all tribes.

古文：明年，哱拜反，遂煽诸部为乱。
现代文：第二年，継拜反叛，于是煽动诸部落叛乱。
English: The following year, he incited the tribes to rebel.

古文：拜，西部人也。嘉靖中得罪其部长，父兄皆见杀，拜跳脱来降，骁勇屡立战功。
现代文：継拜，西部人，嘉靖中得罪其部落首领，父亲兄弟都被杀死，継拜逃脱投降朝廷，英勇善战屡立战功。
English: Succession, westerners, Jiajing middle offended his tribal leader, his father and brothers were all killed, Succession escaped and surrendered to the imperial court, heroic and good at war repeatedly made war exploits.

古文：前督抚王崇古、石茂华先后奏加副总兵，遂多畜亡命。
现代文：前任督抚王崇古、石茂华先后奏请加封他为副总兵，于是多收集一些亡命之徒。
English: The previous superintendent Wang Chonggu and Shi Maohua successively requested that he be appointed as the deputy general, so he collected more outlaws.

古文：子承恩，拜梦妖物入妻施胁而生，狼形枭啼，性狠戾。
现代文：其子承恩，是継拜梦到妖物进入他的妻子施的肋骨后而出生的，身体像狼，啼哭像枭，性格凶狠、乖戾。
English: His son, Cheng En, was born after he followed a dream of a monster entering his wife Shi's ribs. His body is like a wolf, he cries like a baboon, and his personality is fierce and mischievous.

古文：拜老，承恩袭父爵。
现代文：継拜老了，承恩承袭他的爵位。
English: Succession to the throne of the old, he inherited his title.

古文：十九年，洮、河告警，御史周弘禴举承恩及指挥土文秀、拜义子哱云等。
现代文：万历十九年，洮河有警报，御史周弘礻仑推举承恩及指挥土文秀、継拜义子継云等。
English: In the 19th year of the Wanli era, there was an alarm in the Minhe River, and the governor Zhou Hongyulun selected Heung-en and the commander Do-wen-hsiu, and the successor Yoshiko Jiyun.

古文：巡抚党馨檄文秀西援，拜谒经略郑洛，愿与子承恩从出师。
现代文：巡抚党馨下令文秀西援，継拜谒见经略郑洛，表示愿意与儿子承恩一同出师。
English: The governor of the party, Xin, ordered Wenxiu Xi'an, followed by Zheng Luo, expressed his willingness to become a teacher together with his son, Cheng En.

古文：馨恶其自荐，抑损之，拜以故心怨。
现代文：党馨讨厌他的自荐，故意压制他，継拜因此心生怨气。
English: Dangxin hated his self-recommendation, deliberately suppressed him, and felt resentment because of his follow-up.

古文：至金城，见诸镇兵皆出其下。
现代文：到金城，看见各镇士兵都出于他的手下。
English: When he got to Jincheng, he saw that soldiers from every town had left his service.

古文：比贼退，取道塞外还，寇骑遇之皆辟易，遂有轻中外心。
现代文：等到击退叛贼，取道塞外回来，敌人骑兵遇到他都避开，于是有轻视中原内外之心。
English: He waited until he had repulsed the traitors and returned by taking a route outside the city. When he encountered enemy cavalry, he avoided them, and so he despised the heart of the Central Plains and beyond.

古文：馨数裁拜，且按承恩罪箠之二十，云、文秀亦以他故怨馨。
现代文：党馨数次裁制継拜，并且按治承恩罪行鞭打了他二十下，継云、土文秀也因为其他原因怨恨党馨。
English: Dangxin punished Jiubai several times, and whipped him twenty times according to Ji Cheng'en's crimes. Jiyun and Tu Wenxiu also resented Dangxin for other reasons.

古文：会戍卒请衣粮久弗给，拜遂嗾军锋刘东旸、许朝作乱。
现代文：恰好戍卒请求衣服、粮食，很久都没有得到。継拜就唆使军队先锋刘东阳、许朝犯上作乱。
English: It just so happened that the eunuch asked for clothes and food, but he did not get them for a long time. He then instigated the army vanguard Liu Dongyang and Xu Chaozhong to start a riot.

古文：二十年三月，杀馨及副使石继芳，逼总兵官张维忠缢死。
现代文：万历二十年二月杀死党馨及副使石继芳，逼迫总兵官张维忠自杀。
English: In February of the 20th year of Wanli, he killed the party leader and his deputy, Shi Jifang, and forced the general officer Zhang Weizhong to commit suicide.

古文：云、文秀杀游击梁琦、守备马承光，东旸称总兵，奉拜为谋主，承恩、朝为左、右副总兵，云、文秀为左、右参将。
现代文：継云、土文秀杀死游击梁琦，守备马承光、刘东，自称总兵，推举継拜为主谋，承恩、许朝为左、右副总兵，継云、土文秀为左、右参将。
English: Cui Yun and Tu Wenxiu killed the guerrilla fighter Liang Qian, and guarded Ma Chengguang and Liu Dong, who claimed to be the commander-in-chief, and promoted Cui Bai as the chief strategist, Cui En and Xu Chao as the left and right deputy commander-in-chief, and Cui Yun and Tu Wenxiu as the left and right general officers.

古文：承恩遂陷玉泉营、中卫、广武，河西望风靡。
现代文：承恩于是攻陷玉泉营、中卫、广武，黄河以西地带望风而降。
English: Cheng En then attacked and captured Yuquan Camp, Zhongwei and Guangwu, and descended to the west of the Yellow River to wait for the wind.

古文：惟文秀徇平虏，参将萧如薰坚守不下。
现代文：只有土文秀进攻平虏，参将萧如党坚守不投降。
English: Only Tu Wenxiu attacked the besiegers, while General Xiao Ruzhu's party stood firm and refused to surrender.

古文：贼既取河西四十七堡，且渡河，复诱河套著力兔、宰僧犯平虏、花马池。全陕皆震动。
现代文：叛贼已经夺取了黄河以西四十七座城堡，而且渡过了黄河，又诱使河套著力兔、宰僧进犯平虏、花马池，陕西全境震动。
English: The traitors have already seized forty-seven castles west of the Yellow River, and have crossed the Yellow River. They have also induced the Hetao to attack Pingru, Huama and Qi, and the whole territory of Shaanxi has been shaken.

古文：学曾檄副总兵李昫率游击吴显趋灵州，别遣游击赵武趋鸣沙州，沿河扼贼南渡，而自驻花马池，当贼卫。
现代文：魏学曾下令副总兵李日句率游击吴显赶赴灵州，另遣游击赵武赴鸣沙州，沿黄河一带阻止叛贼南渡，自己进驻花马池，正当叛贼的冲要。
English: Wei Xue once ordered the vice-chief soldier Li Riku to lead the guerrilla Wu Xian to rush to Lingshou, and sent the guerrilla Zhao Wu to Mingsha, along the Yellow River to prevent the traitors from crossing to the south, and stationed himself in Huama Pool, just as the traitors wanted.

古文：昫等渡河，贼将多遁去，四十七堡皆复，惟宁夏镇城尚为贼据。
现代文：李煦等渡过黄河，叛将大多逃跑，四十七座城堡全都收复，只有宁夏镇城还被叛贼盘踞。
English: Li Qiye and others crossed the Yellow River, most of the rebel generals fled, all 47 castles were recovered, and only Ningxia Town was still occupied by the traitors.

古文：著力兔等中外相呼应，拜、文秀攻赵武于玉泉。
现代文：著力兔等部落与明兵叛军遥相呼应，継拜、土文秀进攻赵武于玉泉。
English: Tribes such as the Xiangli Hare echoed the Ming soldiers and rebels from afar, followed by the attack of Zhao Wu in Yuquan.

古文：云引著力兔攻平虏，如薰设伏射杀云。
现代文：継云引导著力兔攻平虏，如薰设下埋伏射死継云。
English: Tsuneyun guided the rabbit to attack and level the enemy, such as setting up an ambush and shooting Tsuneyun to death.

古文：昫救武，围亦解。
现代文：李日句回救赵武，围困才解除。
English: Li Nichigu responded to rescue Zhao Wu, and the siege was lifted.

古文：四月，昫引兵与故总兵牛秉忠抵镇城下。
现代文：四月，李日句领兵与前任总兵牛秉忠抵达宁夏镇城下。
English: In April, Li Hecun, the military leader, and the former commander-in-chief, Niu Bingzhong, arrived at the outskirts of Ningxia Town.

古文：帝已擢董一奎为总兵，李蕡副之，已，复擢如薰代一奎，而以麻贵代蕡。
现代文：皇上已提拔董一奎为总兵，李贲为副职。不久，又提拔如薰代替董一奎，以麻贵代替李贲。
English: The emperor had already promoted Dong Yik Kui to the rank of general and Li Ye to the rank of vice admiral. Soon, he promoted Ru Xuan to replace Dong Yik Kui, and Ma Gui to replace Li Ye.

古文：未至，昫等攻城。
现代文：他们还没有到，李日句等已经攻城。
English: They haven't arrived yet, but they've already attacked the city.

古文：贼于东西二门各出骁骑三千搏战，步卒列火车为营。
现代文：叛贼从东西二个门各出骁勇善战的骑兵三千迎战，步兵排列火车为阵营。
English: The rebels came out from the two gates of the east and west, and three thousand brave and skillful cavalrymen faced the battle, and the infantry lined up the train as a camp.

古文：官军击之，夺其车百辆，追奔入湖，贼溺死无算。
现代文：官军冲上来，夺得战车百辆乘胜追击，将叛军逼入湖内，叛军淹死的不可胜计。
English: The government army rushed up, captured a hundred chariots and chased them, forcing the rebels into the lake. The rebels were drowned.

古文：副总兵王通战尤力。家丁高益等乘胜入北门，后兵不继被杀，通亦负伤，榆林游击俞尚德战死。
现代文：副总兵王通作战尤其卖力，他的家丁高益等乘胜进入北门，后因援兵没到而被杀死，王通也负了伤，榆林游击俞尚德力战而死。
English: Wang Tong, the vice-commander-in-chief, fought particularly hard. His family, Ding Gaoyi and others, took advantage of the victory to enter the north gate, and were later killed because reinforcements did not arrive. Wang Tong was also injured, and the Yulin guerrilla, Gong Shangde, died in the battle.

古文：翼日，朝、文秀胁庆王上东城，乞暂罢兵，诡言愿献首恶。
现代文：第二天，许朝、土文秀胁迫庆王登上东城，乞求暂时罢兵，诡称愿意献出首倡叛乱者的脑袋。
English: The next day, Xu and Tu Wenxiu coerced Qing Wang to board the East City, begged for a temporary strike, and pretended to be willing to offer the head of the initiator of the rebellion.

古文：会官军粮尽，乃引退，休近堡。
现代文：正好官军粮食吃完了，于是领兵退去，在附近城堡休整。
English: Just as the official army finished eating the grain, the leader of the army retreated and rested in a nearby castle.

古文：学曾日夜趣刍饷，调延绥、庄浪、兰、靖、榆林兵。
现代文：魏学曾日夜办理粮草，调动延绥、庄浪、兰、靖、榆林的部队。
English: Wei Xue once handled grain and grass day and night, mobilizing troops from Yancheng, Zhuanglang, Lan, Jing and Yulin.

古文：道回远，所治舟亦未具，乃驻花马池，俟军至移灵州。
现代文：道路遥远，打造的船只也没有准备好，于是驻于花马池，等部队一到就移到灵州。
English: The roads were far away and the ships were not ready, so they were stationed in Hanamachi and moved to Lingzhou as soon as the troops arrived.

古文：顷之，延绥游击姜显谟、都司萧如蕙，甘州故总兵张杰及麻贵军皆至，复抵镇城攻之。
现代文：很快，延绥游击姜显谟、都司萧如蕙，甘州前任总兵张杰及麻贵军都到了，又抵达宁夏镇城进攻。
English: Soon, Yancheng guerrilla Jiang Xianmo, Du Si Xiao Rucheng, Gansu former general Zhang Jie and Makui army all arrived, and arrived at Ningxia Town to attack.

古文：贼计延绥、榆林兵出内虚，勾黄台吉妻，令其子舍达大、从子火落赤、土昧铁雷掠旧安边、砖井堡以牵我兵。
现代文：叛贼考虑到延绥、榆林兵士出来后，城内空虚，便勾结黄台吉的妻子，命令他儿子舍达夫、侄子火落赤、土昧铁雷攻掠旧安边、砖井堡以牵制官兵。
English: Considering that the city was empty after the soldiers from Yanbian and Yulin came out, the traitors colluded with Huang Taiji's wife and ordered his son Shedaf and his nephew to attack and plunder the old Anbian and Qixi Fort with fire and lightning to deter the officers and soldiers.

古文：承恩复以间合寇兵，伏延汉渠，掠粮车二百。
现代文：継承恩又以计谋集合叛贼兵力，埋伏在延汉渠，抢掠二百辆运粮的车子。
English: Succession Grace also gathered traitor troops by stratagem, ambushed in Yanhan Canal, and robbed two hundred cars transporting grain.

古文：学曾自花马池还灵州，被围，救至而解。
现代文：魏学曾从花马池回灵州，被叛贼包围，救援部队到后才解围。
English: Wei Xue had returned to Lingshou from Hanamachi and was surrounded by traitors. The siege was lifted only after the arrival of rescue forces.

古文：贵等数攻城不能克，贼杀庆王妃，尽掠其宫人金帛。
现代文：麻贵等数次攻城未能攻下，叛贼杀死庆王的妃子，将宫人、金帛一抢而空。
English: Magui and others attacked the city several times but failed to capture it. The traitors killed the concubine of King Gyeongbokgung and robbed the palace and the gold mine.

古文：乃遣成梁子如松为提督，将辽东、宣、大、山西诸镇兵以往。
现代文：朱秉忠在战斗中右腿负伤，于是官军再次将部队撤回。皇上听从尚书石星的建议，赐给魏学曾尚方宝剑督战。
English: Zhu Bingzhong was wounded in the right leg in the battle, so the government army withdrew the troops again. The emperor listened to the suggestion of Shang Shuxi Shixing and gave Wei Xue Zeng Shangfang the sword.

古文：而国桢监其军，遂与如松至宁夏。初，学曾欲招东旸、朝，令杀拜父子赎罪，遣卒叶得新往。
现代文：正好宁夏巡抚朱正色、甘肃巡抚叶梦熊、监军御史梅国桢，各位大将刘承嗣、董一奎、李如松先后到来，六月再一次攻城，连战不下。起初，魏学曾想招降刘东、许朝，命令他们杀死継拜父子以赎罪，派遣部下叶得新前去。
English: Just as the Ningxia governor Zhu Zhengxie, the Gansu governor Ye Mengxiong, the supervising general Shimei Guozhen, and the generals Liu Chengzhi, Dong Yikui, and Li Rusong arrived successively, they once again attacked the city in June and did not go down without a fight. At first, Wei Xue had wanted to recruit Liu Dong and Xu Dong, ordered them to kill the stepfather and son to atone for their sins, and sent his subordinates to Ye Derxin.

古文：四人方约同死，折得新胫，置之狱。
现代文：刘东等四人相约同日同月死，于是折断叶得新的小腿，将他关在狱中。
English: Liu Dong and four others died on the same day in the same month, so he broke Ye's new calf and put him in prison.

古文：巡抚朱正色以贼诡请降，而张杰尝总宁夏兵，故与拜善，遣杰入城招之。
现代文：巡抚朱正色听信叛贼诡称请求投降的话，张杰曾总管过宁夏兵，过去与継拜很要好，于是，朱正色派他进城招降。
English: The governor Zhu Zhengxie listened to the traitor's sly request to surrender. Zhang Jie had been in charge of the Ningxia soldiers in the past, and he was very fond of Suibai. Therefore, Zhu Zhengxie sent him to the city to invite him to surrender.

古文：朝乃舁得新见杰，得新大骂贼，被杀，杰亦系不遣。
现代文：许朝于是命令叶得新与张杰见面，叶得新大骂叛贼，被杀死，张杰也被扣压不让他回去。
English: Xu then ordered Ye Derxin to meet with Zhang Jie. Ye Derxin cursed the traitor loudly and was killed. Zhang Jie was also detained and not allowed to return.

古文：而学曾以贼求抚为之请，帝切责。
现代文：魏学曾以叛贼要求安抚为之请求，皇帝严厉地予以责备。
English: Wei Xue had asked for appeasement of the traitors, and the emperor severely rebuked him.

古文：及是，城中百户姚钦、武生张遐龄射书城外，约内应，夜半举火。
现代文：等到这时，镇城中百户姚钦、武生张遐岭用箭将一信射到城外，相约为内应，半夜点火为信号。
English: At this time, Yao Qin and Takefu Zhang Yuling, who were among the hundred households in the town, used arrows to shoot a letter outside the town, which was equivalent to the internal correspondence, and the midnight ignition was the signal.

古文：外兵不至，贼杀其党五十人，钦缒城出，来奔。
现代文：火点后，城外的官军未到，叛贼将与姚钦同谋的人五十余人杀死。姚钦逃了出来，投奔魏学曾。
English: After the flashpoint, before the arrival of the government troops outside the city, the traitors killed more than 50 people who conspired with Yao Qin. Yao Qin escaped and went to Wei Xue Zeng.

古文：当是时，贼外以求抚缓兵，而阴结寇为助，然粮尽，势且困。
现代文：当时，叛贼对外假意要求抚恤以缓兵，暗地里与盗匪勾结，然而粮食已吃完，形势更为不利。
English: At that time, the rebels pretended to the outside world to ask for a pension to delay the troops, secretly colluding with the bandits, but the grain had been eaten, and the situation was even more unfavorable.

古文：七月，学曾与梦熊、国桢定计，决黄河大坝水灌之，水抵城下。
现代文：七月，魏学曾与叶梦熊、梅国桢定下计策，决黄河大坝让黄河之水灌城，水达到城下。
English: In July, Wei Xue had made a plan with Ye Meng Xiong and Mei Guojun to dam the Yellow River and let the water of the Yellow River flood the city, and the water reached the city.

古文：时套寇卜失兔、庄秃赖以三万骑犯定边、小盐池，用土昧铁雷为前锋，而别遣宰僧以万骑从花马池西沙湃口入，为拜声援。
现代文：此时，河套盗匪卜失免、庄秃赖率三万骑兵进犯定边、小盐池，以土昧铁雷为前锋，而另外派遣宰僧领万骑从花马池西沙湃口进攻，声援継拜。
English: At this time, the 30,000 cavalry led by Zhuang Balerai and the bandits from Hetao attacked Dingbian and Xiaoyanchi, with the iron mine of Tuamai as the vanguard, and in addition, they sent the monk leader Wanjie to attack from the west of the flower pond, and supported the succession of worship.

古文：麻贵击之右沟，寇稍挫，分趋下马关及鸣沙洲。
现代文：麻贵在右沟阻击，其士气稍稍有些挫折，分路赴下马关及鸣沙州。
English: Magui blocked the attack in the right ditch, and his morale suffered a slight setback. He went to Ma Guan and Ming Sha Zhou.

古文：学曾令游击龚子敬扼沙湃口，而檄延绥总兵官董一元捣土昧铁雷巢，斩首百三十余级，寇大惊引去。
现代文：魏学曾命令游击龚子敬扼守沙湃口，征召延绥总兵官董一元捣毁土昧铁雷的巢穴，斩首一百三十余级，盗寇大惊而走。
English: Wei Xue had ordered the guerrilla muleteers to guard the mouth of the Shapai River, conscripted the Yunnan general officer Dong Yiyuan to destroy the lair of the muddy iron mine, beheaded more than one hundred and thirty levels, and the robbers were shocked and walked away.

古文：遇子敬，围之十重，子敬死，寇亦去，贼援遂绝。
现代文：在沙湃口遇上龚子敬，将他重重包围，龚子敬战死，外寇也离开了，叛贼的援军没有了。
English: At the mouth of the Sa-pai River, he encountered Zong Zi Jing, and encircled him. Zong Zi Jing was killed in the battle, the foreign invaders also left, and there were no reinforcements for the traitors.

古文：学曾益决大坝水。
现代文：魏学曾增大坝水决口。
English: Wei Xue had increased the water discharge of the dam.

古文：八月，河决堤坏，复缮治之，城外水深八九尺，东西城崩百余丈。
现代文：八月，黄河决口，大堤毁坏，又修治大堤，城外水深有八、九尺，东西城崩塌百余丈。
English: In August, at the mouth of the Yellow River, the levee was destroyed, and the levee was repaired. The water outside the city was eight or nine feet deep, and the east and west of the city collapsed by more than a hundred feet.

古文：著力兔、宰僧复入李刚堡。
现代文：著力兔、宰僧又进入李刚堡。
English: The rabbit and the priest entered the Li Gang Fortress again.

古文：如松、贵等击败之，追奔至贺兰山。
现代文：李如松、麻贵等打败他们，将他们一直追赶到贺兰山。
English: Li Rusong, Magui and others defeated them and chased them all the way to Mount Helan.

古文：贼益惧求款，未决，会学曾得罪罢。
现代文：叛贼更加害怕，要求和议，悬而未决时，魏学曾因得罪被罢官。
English: The traitors were even more afraid. When the request for reconciliation was pending, Wei Xue was dismissed for his offense.

古文：朝命以梦熊代，梦熊遂成功。
现代文：朝廷命令叶梦熊代替他，叶梦熊于是取得成功。
English: The imperial court ordered Ye Meng Xiong to replace him, and Ye Meng Xiong succeeded.

古文：初，学曾之遣人招东旸、朝也，留固原十余日以俟之，帝责其玩寇；李昫渡河又稍迟，松山、河套寇先入，官军用是再失利。
现代文：起初，魏学曾遣人招降刘东、许朝，曾在固原停留十余日等待消息，皇帝责备他玩忽职守。李日句渡黄河又迟了点，松山、河套的盗匪先进入，官军由是再次失利。
English: At first, Wei Xue had sent people to recruit Liu Dong and Xu Dynasty, and had stayed in Guyuan for more than ten days to wait for news. The emperor reproached him for dereliction of duty. Li Riku was a little late to cross the Yellow River again. The robbers from Matsuyama and Hetao entered first, and the government army lost again.

古文：学曾尝上疏令监军无与兵事，帝为饬国桢如其言，国桢颇憾之。
现代文：魏学曾曾上疏要求监军不要参与兵事，皇上命令梅国桢遵守这一点，梅国桢颇不满意。
English: Wei Xue had once asked Shang Shou not to participate in military affairs, and the emperor ordered Mei Guotao to comply with this. Mei Guotao was quite dissatisfied.

古文：及至军，劾诸将观望，而颇以玩寇为学曾罪。
现代文：等他来到军队，梅国桢弹劾诸将观望，而定魏学曾玩忽职守罪。
English: When he came to the army, Mei Guozhen impeached the generals for watching, and decided that Wei Xue was guilty of dereliction of duty.

古文：帝御门受贺，诏磔承恩于市，梦熊、正色、国桢各荫世官，如松功第一，如薰、贵、秉忠等加恩有差。学曾初夺职为民，叙功，以原官致仕。
现代文：给事中许子伟也弹劾魏学曾为招抚所迷惑，耽误了国家大事。梅国桢又说佥事随府从城上逃下，叛贼命令四个人下来捉拿，我军距离咫尺却不敢上前救援，又北边盗匪数万人截断我军粮道，杀戮无数，却隐匿而不上报。皇上于是大怒，将魏学曾逮至京城。魏学曾逮捕不到一个月，宁夏城破，明朝大军乘势而入，叛贼被灭。
English: During the incident, Xu Ziwei also accused Wei Xue of being fooled by the cajoling and delaying national affairs. Mei Guoqi also said that Wei Xue had escaped from the city with the government, the traitor ordered four people to come down and catch him, our army was only a short distance away but did not dare to come forward for rescue, and tens of thousands of robbers on the north side cut off our army's food supply, killed countless people, but concealed and did not report it. The emperor was furious, and arrested Wei Xue to Beijing. Wei Xue was arrested for less than a month, Ningxia City was broken, the Ming Dynasty army entered

古文：学曾任事劳勚。
现代文：魏学曾任事勤劳。
English: Wei Xue was once a diligent worker.

古文：灌城招降之策，本其所建。
现代文：灌城招降的计策，本来是他的建议。
English: The tactic of luring Guancheng was originally his suggestion.

古文：及宣捷，帝召见大学士赵志皋、张位，志皋、位力为学曾解，尚书星以下多白学曾无罪。
现代文：等到宣报大捷，皇上召见大学士赵志皋、张位，赵、张二位极力为魏学曾辩解，尚书石星以下多说魏学曾无罪。
English: When the announcement of the great victory was made, the emperor summoned the university scholars Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi. Zhao and Zhang Yi tried their best to defend Wei Xue Zeng, and the following writers mostly said that Wei Xue Zeng was not guilty.

古文：国桢亦上疏言： 学曾应变稍缓，臣请责诸将以振士气，而逮学曾之命，发自臣疏，窃自悔恨。学曾不早雪，臣将受万世讥。 
现代文：梅国桢也上疏说： 魏学曾应变稍慢，臣请求责备诸将是要振奋士气，而逮捕魏学曾的命令，发自我的上疏，我暗暗地感到悔恨，魏学曾不昭雪，我将受到万世的讥讽。 
English: Mei Guozhu also said to Shang Zuo: Wei Xue Zeng was a bit slow to adapt, the minister's request to reproach the generals was to boost morale, and the order to arrest Wei Xue Zeng was issued by my Shang Zuo, I secretly felt remorse, Wei Xue Zeng was not snow-capped, I will be ridiculed by the world.

古文：如松亦言： 学曾被逮时，三军雨泣。 
现代文：李如松也说： 魏学曾被逮捕时，三军将士泪如雨下。 
English: Li Rusong also said: When Wei Xue was arrested, the three army generals were in tears.

古文：在镇三年，节省市赏银十五万两有奇。
现代文：叶梦熊也将功劳归于魏学曾。皇帝开始不听，后恢复他的官职。
English: Ye Mengxiong also gave credit to Wei Xuecheng. The emperor did not listen at first, but later restored his official position.

古文：父丧归，未起而卒。
现代文：魏学曾在家乡居住数年后死去。
English: Wei Xue died after living in his hometown for several years.

古文：赠右都御史。
现代文：叶梦熊因为功劳提拔为右都御史。
English: It was donated to the Utsunomiya Imperial Palace.

古文：李化龙，字于田，长垣人。
现代文：李化龙，字于田，长垣人。
English: Li Hualong, surnamed Yu Tian, from Nagagaki.

古文：万历二年进士。除嵩县知县。
现代文：万历二年进士，授职嵩县知县。
English: In the second year of Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and was bestowed the post of Songxian Zhixian.

古文：年甫二十，胥吏易之。
现代文：年刚二十，胥吏很轻视他。
English: In his early twenties, the magistrates despised him.

古文：化龙阴察其奸，悉召置之法，县中大治。
现代文：李化龙暗中访察到他们的奸情，一一将他们法办，县中大治。
English: Li Hualong secretly visited them and discovered their treachery. He ordered them to be prosecuted one by one.

古文：迁南京工部主事，历右通政使。
现代文：升为南京工部主事，担任右通政使。
English: He was promoted to the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department and served as the right-hand political envoy.

古文：二十二年夏，擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：万历二十二年夏天，提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: In the summer of the 22nd year of Wanli, he was promoted to the Right Hand of the Capital, the Governor of Liaodong.

古文：初，总兵官李成梁破杀泰宁速把亥，其子把兔儿弟炒花据旧辽阳以北，居两河之中，益结土蛮为患。
现代文：起初，总兵官李成梁杀死泰宁速把亥，其子把兔儿的弟弟炒花占据旧辽阳以北，住于两河之中，勾结土蛮作乱。
English: At first, the general officer Li Chengliang killed Taining to quickly take Hai, and his son took the rabbit's brother, stirred up flowers to occupy the north of the old Liaoyang, lived in the middle of the two rivers, and colluded with the barbarians to make trouble.

古文：其年四月，把兔儿围辽阳，朵颜小歹青、福余伯言儿分犯锦、义，掠清细河，巡抚韩取善坐免。
现代文：这一年四月，把兔儿围攻辽阳，朵颜小歹青、福余伯言儿分路进犯锦、义，掠夺清细河，巡抚韩取善因犯罪被罢免。
English: In April of this year, the rabbits besieged Liaoyang, and Doan Xiaoyangqing and Fuyu Bogan separately invaded Jin and Yi, and plundered Qingxiaohe. The patrolman Han Torisan was dismissed for the crime.

古文：化龙受事甫两月，把兔儿与伯言儿等寇镇武，又约土蛮子卜言台周犯右屯。
现代文：李化龙上任刚两个月，把兔儿与伯言儿等进犯镇武，又约定土蛮之子卜言台周进攻右屯。
English: Just two months after taking office, Li Hualong attacked the town of Yutong with Tuxer and Bojan, and also agreed to attack the town of Yutong with Bojan Tai Zhou, the son of a barbarian.

古文：把兔儿先至吴家坟。
现代文：把兔儿先至吴家坟。
English: Take the rabbit to the Wu Family Tomb first.

古文：化龙与总兵官董一元定计先击把兔、伯言儿，伯言儿中流矢死，把兔被伤。
现代文：李化龙与总兵董一元定下计策先击败把兔儿、伯言儿，伯言儿中流箭死去，把兔儿被击伤。
English: Li Hualong and the commander-in-chief Dong Yi Yuan decided on a strategy to defeat the rabbit and the bird first, and the bird died in the middle of the arrow, and the rabbit was injured.

古文：卜言台周至，攻右屯不利，亦解去。
现代文：卜言台周至，进攻右屯不利，也撤兵走了。
English: The attack on Uditun did not go well, and the troops withdrew.

古文：于是把兔、小歹青、卜言台周益相结，谋复前耻。
现代文：于是把兔儿、小歹青、卜言台周愈加勾结，阴谋雪耻。
English: As a result, the rabbit, the young villain, and the soothsayer are increasingly colluding and conspiring.

古文：化龙与一元严备之。
现代文：李化龙与董一元严加防备。
English: Li Hualong and Dong Yiyuan are on high alert.

古文：一元又出塞，捣巢有功，而把兔伤重竟死，边塞袭服。
现代文：董一元又出塞，捣毁敌人巢穴，立下了战功，把兔儿负重伤后死去，边塞由是安宁。
English: Dong Yiyuan went out again, destroyed the enemy's lair, won the war, and died after seriously injuring the rabbit. The frontier was peaceful.

古文：详具一元传。化龙进兵部右侍郎。
现代文：李化龙升为兵部右侍郎。
English: Li Hualong was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Military Department.

古文：明年，小歹青悔祸款塞，请开木市于义州，且告朵颜长昂将犯边。
现代文：第二年，小歹青悔恨前此行动，请求在义州开通木市，而且报告朵颜长昂将进犯边塞。
English: The following year, Xiao Yanzhong regretted his previous action and requested the opening of a wood market in Yizhou. He also reported that Duoyan Chang'ang would attack the border fortress.

古文：已，长昂果犯锦、义，副总兵李如梅击却之。
现代文：不久，长昂果然进犯锦、义，副总兵李如梅将他击退。
English: Soon after, Chang'ang attacked Jin and Yi, and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Li Rumei repelled him.

古文：歹青言既信，化龙遂许其请。
现代文：歹青之言既然可信，李化成于是准许他的请求。
English: Since the young man's words were credible, Li Hacheng granted his request.

古文：上疏曰：
现代文：上疏说：
English: Shang Zuo said:

古文：环辽皆敌也，迤北土蛮种类多不可数。
现代文： 环辽东一带都是敌人。往北，土蛮种类多得不可胜数。
English: The area around Liaodong is full of enemies. To the north, there are countless types of barbarians.

古文：近边者，直宁前则长昂，直锦、义则小歹青，直广宁、辽、沈则把兔、炒花、花大，直开、铁则伯言、烧兔，其在东边海西则猛骨孛罗、那林孛罗、卜寨，皆与辽地项背相望。
现代文：靠近边塞，宁前的正面是长昂，锦、义的正面则是小歹青，广、宁、辽沈则是把兔儿、炒花、花大，开、铁则为伯言、暖兔，东边的海西则有猛骨孛罗、那林孛罗、卜寨，都与辽地项背相望。
English: Close to the border fortress, the front of Ningye is Chang'an, the front of Jin and Yi is Xiaogangqing, the front of Guang, Ning and Liaoshen is the rabbit, fried flower, flower big, the open and iron are Bo Yan and warm rabbit, and the west coast of the east coast has Mammoth Bone, Narimiao and Buzhai, all of which are across from Liao Di.

古文：并墙围猎，则刁斗声相闻，盖肘腋忧也。
现代文：沿着边墙围猎，则军号之声相闻，是身边隐患。
English: If you hunt along the perimeter wall, you will hear the sound of the bugle, which is a hidden danger.

古文：自那卜被剿，数年东陲无事。去年把兔、伯言战死，炒花、花大一败涂地。
现代文：自从那卜被剿灭，东边数年无事，去年把兔儿、伯言儿战死，炒花、花大一败涂地。
English: Since Nabu was annihilated, there has been nothing on the east side for several years. Last year, Bunny and Hokkien died in battle, and Fried Flowers and Flower University were completely defeated.

古文：今伯言子宰赛受罚，入市广宁，辽、沈、开、铁间警报渐希。
现代文：现在，伯言之子宰赛受到惩罚，在广宁做交易，辽、沈、开、铁之间警报逐渐稀少。
English: Now, Boga's son, Zaisai, has been punished for doing business in Guangning, and there are fewer and fewer alarms between Liao, Shen, Kai, and Tie.

古文：所未驯伏者，惟小歹青与长昂耳。
现代文：没有制服的，只有小歹青与长昂。
English: The only ones without uniforms are Xiaogangqing and Chang'an.

古文：小歹青素凶狡，雄长诸部。西助长昂，东助炒花。
现代文： 小歹青素以凶狠、狡诈著称，向西帮助长昂，东边支援炒花。
English: The minor villain Atsuko is known for her fierceness and cunning, helping Chang'an in the west and stir-fried flowers in the east.

古文：大举动以数万，小窃则飞骑出没锦、义间。
现代文：大行动有数万人，小偷小摸则飞骑出没于锦、义之间。
English: There are tens of thousands of people in the big action, and petty thieves are flying between the brocade and righteousness.

古文：自周之望、柏朝翠战殁，无敢以一矢加遗。
现代文：自从周之望、柏朝翠战死，没有人敢于和他接战。
English: Ever since Zhou Zhiwang and Bai Chaocui died in battle, no one dared to fight against him.

古文：凌河上下方数百里，野多暴骨，民无宁宇。
现代文：凌河上下方圆数百里，旷野多暴骨，老百姓没有安宁的地方。
English: There are hundreds of miles above and below the Linghe River, the wilderness is often violent, and there is no place of peace for the common people.

古文：远虑者每以河西不保为虞。
现代文：有长远考虑的人每每以河西不保而担心。
English: People with long-term considerations are always worried about the insecurity of Hexi.

古文：今乃叩关求市，臣遍询将领及彼地居民，佥言木市开有五利。
现代文：今天，他叩关请求互市，我遍问诸将及当地百姓，都说开通木市有五大便利。
English: Today, he knocked on the gate to ask for an exchange market. I asked all the generals and local people, and they all said that the opening of the wood market has five major conveniences.

古文：河西无木，皆在边外，叛乱以来，仰给河东，以边警又不时至。故河西木贵于玉，市通则材木不可胜用。利一。
现代文： 河西没有木材，木材皆产自边外，叛乱以来，靠河东供给，因为边患，时时不能运到，所以河西的木材比玉还贵，市场开通后，木材就可供过于求，便利之一。
English: There is no timber in the west of the river. All timber is produced outside the border. Since the rebellion, it has been supplied by the east of the river. Because of border problems, it cannot be transported at all times. Therefore, the timber in the west of the river is more expensive than jade. After the market opens, the timber will be available for excess demand, which is one of the conveniences.

古文：所疑于歹青者，无信耳。彼重市为生路，当市时必不行掠。即今年市而明年掠，我已收今年不掠之利矣。利二。
现代文：唯一放心不下的就是小歹青没有信用，他重视互市，将它看作是一条生路，当开互市时必定不会抢掠，即使今年互市、明年抢掠，我方已收到今年没有抢掠之利了，便利之二。
English: The only thing that can't be assured is that the small villain has no trust. He attaches importance to the inter-market and regards it as a way of life. When the inter-market is opened, he will certainly not loot. Even if the inter-market is looted this year and next year, we have received no profit from looting this year, which is convenient.

古文：辽东马市，成祖所开，无他赏，本听商民与交易。
现代文：辽东的马市，是成祖所开，没有其他的赏赐，任商人与百姓交易。
English: The horse market in Liaodong was opened by Cheng Zu. There was no other reward. Merchants were allowed to trade with the common people.

古文：木市与马市等，有利于民，不费于官。利三。
现代文：木市与马市等同，有利于百姓，不费官府的钱财，有利者之三。
English: The wooden market is the same as the horse market, which is beneficial to the people, does not cost the government money and resources, and is one of the three advantages.

古文：大举之害酷而希，零窃之害轻而数。
现代文：大举进攻之害惨酷而稀少，零星的窃取为害很轻，而且次数有限。
English: The harm of large-scale attacks is cruel and rare, and the harm of sporadic thefts is very light, and the number is limited.

古文：小歹青不掠锦、义，零窃少矣。
现代文：小歹青不抢掠锦、义，零星的偷窃就少了。
English: If petty criminals do not rob and plunder, there will be less sporadic theft.

古文：又西不助长昂，东不助炒花，则敌势渐分。
现代文：况且向西不帮助长昂，东边不助炒花，则敌人的势利逐渐分化。
English: Moreover, if the west does not help Chang'an and the east does not help stir-fried flowers, then the enemy's snobbery will gradually diverge.

古文：即宁前、广宁患亦渐减。
现代文：即宁前、广宁的祸患也少了。
English: That is to say, the number of disasters in Ningye and Guangning has also decreased.

古文：且大举先报，又得预为备。利四。
现代文：而且大举进攻先来报告，又可以预备，有利之四。
English: Moreover, it is advantageous to be the first to report a large-scale attack and to be able to prepare.

古文：零窃既希，边人益得修备。利五。
现代文：零散的劫掠既然少了，边塞之人更可以把主要精力放在修治战备上，有利之五。 
English: Now that there are fewer sporadic robberies, the people of the frontier fortress can focus their main energy on improving their combat readiness, which is the fifth advantage.

古文：疏入，从之。
现代文：奏疏传至朝廷，皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: His advice was passed on to the imperial court, and the emperor followed his advice.

古文：化龙寻以病去，木市亦停止。
现代文：李化龙不久因病离去，木市也就停止了。
English: Li Hualong soon left due to illness, and the wood market stopped.

古文：其后总兵官马林复议开市，与巡抚李植相左，论久不决，小歹青遂复为寇云。
现代文：其后总兵官马林再一次请求开市，与巡抚李植的意见不一致，辩论很久没有结果，小歹青于是又为边寇了。
English: After that, the commander-in-chief, Marin, once again requested the opening of the market. He disagreed with the inspector, Li Zhi, and the debate went on for a long time without result. The young ruffian then became a border robber.

古文：二十七年三月，化龙起故官，总督湖广、川、贵军务兼巡抚四川，讨播州叛臣杨应龙。
现代文：万历二十七年三月，李化龙被启用为原官，总督湖广、川、贵军务兼巡抚四川，征讨播州叛臣杨应龙。
English: In March 27th, Li Hualong was appointed as the original official, the governor of Huguang, Sichuan and Guizhou, the military affairs and the governor of Sichuan, to recruit Yang Yinglong, the traitor of Banzhou.

古文：应龙之先曰杨铿。
现代文：杨应龙的祖先叫杨铿。
English: Yang Yinglong's ancestor was called Yang Jiu.

古文：明初内附，授宣慰使。
现代文：明初归附，授职宣慰使。
English: It was annexed at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, and the post of Xuancheng envoy was conferred.

古文：应龙性猜狠嗜杀。
现代文：杨应龙性格猜忌、凶狠、嗜杀。
English: Yang Yinglong's character is suspicious, fierce and homicidal.

古文：数从征调，恃功骄蹇。
现代文：数次跟从征调，恃功倨傲。
English: He has been transferred several times and is proud of his achievements.

古文：知川兵脆弱，阴有据蜀志，间出剽州县。
现代文：知道川兵力量不足，暗地有占据蜀地的打算，四出剽掠州县。
English: Knowing that the strength of the Sichuan soldiers was insufficient, he secretly had the intention of occupying Shu, and went out to plunder Shu County.

古文：嬖小妻田雌凤，谗杀妻张氏，屠其家。
现代文：宠幸小老婆田雌凤，谗言杀死妻子张氏，屠掠她的全家。
English: Tian Meifeng, a beloved little old woman, was accused of killing Mr. Zhang's wife and slaughtering her entire family.

古文：用诛罚立威，所属五司七姓不堪其虐，走贵州告变。
现代文：使用惨酷的处罚树立他的威信，被他管辖的五个土司七姓不堪他的残暴统治，便逃至贵州报告。
English: He used cruel punishments to establish his prestige. Five local governors under his jurisdiction fled to Guizhou to report his brutal rule.

古文：巡抚叶梦熊疏请大征。
现代文：巡抚叶梦熊上疏请求征讨。
English: Ye Meng Xiong Shang So, the governor, requested a levy.

古文：诏不听，逮系重庆狱。
现代文：皇上下诏命令将杨应龙逮捕至重庆。
English: The imperial edict ordered Yang Yinglong to be arrested and taken to Chongqing.

古文：应龙诡将兵征倭自效，得脱归。
现代文：杨应龙诡称将带兵征讨倭寇，得以脱身。
English: Yang Yinglong cunningly said that he would lead an army to fight the wokou, and was able to escape.

古文：复逮，不出。
现代文：再次去逮捕时，他就不出来了。
English: When they went to arrest him again, he wouldn't come out.

古文：四川巡抚王继光发兵讨，覆于白石，应龙诿罪诸苗。
现代文：四川巡抚王继光发兵征讨，在白石覆没，杨应龙将罪过推到苗人身上。
English: Wang Jiguang, the governor of Sichuan, sent troops to investigate, and in Baishi, Yang Yinglong blamed the crime on Miao people.

古文：朝廷命邢玠总督。
现代文：朝廷命邢总督军务。
English: The imperial court ordered the military affairs of the governor-general.

古文：值东西用兵，势未能穷治，因招抚之。
现代文：正值东西两方用兵，力量不足以全部消灭他，因而朝廷招抚了他。
English: At a time when both the East and the West were deploying troops, the forces were not strong enough to completely destroy him, so the imperial court appeased him.

古文：应龙益结生苗，夺五司七姓地，并湖广四十八屯以畀之，岁出侵掠。
现代文：杨应龙变本加厉勾结苗人，夺占五土司七姓的土地，而吞并湖广四十八屯给他们。年年出来侵扰。
English: Yang Yinglong intensified his efforts to collude with the Miao people, seized the land of five provinces, seven families, and annexed forty-eight townships in Hukang to them. Year after year, they came out to intrude.

古文：是年二月，败官军于飞练堡，都司杨国柱、指挥李廷栋等皆死。
现代文：这年二月在飞练堡击败官军，都司杨国柱、指挥李延栋等都战死。
English: In February of this year, they defeated the government army at the Flying Training Fort, and the commander Yang Guozhu and the commander Li Yandong were killed in the battle.

古文：已，复破杀綦江参将房嘉宠、游击张良贤，投尸蔽江下。
现代文：不久，又攻破綦江，杀死参将房嘉宠、游击张良贤，扔下的尸体顺江而下遮蔽了江面。
English: Soon, they broke through the Li River, killed the general Fang Jiachou and the guerrilla Zhang Liangxian, and threw the bodies down the river to cover the river.

古文：伪军师孙时泰请直取重庆，捣成都，劫蜀王为质，而应龙迁延，声言争地界，冀曲赦如曩时。
现代文：伪军师孙时泰请求直取重庆、捣毁成都，劫持蜀王为人质，而杨应龙拖延，声称只是为了争夺地界，希望得到如先前一样的赦免。
English: The pseudo-army master Sun Shih-tai requested to directly take Chongqing, destroy Chengdu, and take King Shu hostage, while Yang Yinglong delayed, claiming that it was only to compete for the land boundary, hoping to get the same pardon as before.

古文：化龙至成都，征兵未至，亦谬为好语縻之。
现代文：李化龙到成都，征兵未到，也假意与他好言好语，以牵制他。
English: When Li Hualong arrived in Chengdu, before the conscription arrived, he also pretended to have a good talk with him in order to restrain him.

古文：帝闻綦江破，大怒。
现代文：后来听到綦江被攻破的消息，大怒。
English: Later, when he heard the news that the Lijiang River had been breached, he was furious.

古文：追褫前四川、贵州巡抚谭希思、江东之职，而赐化龙剑，假便宜讨贼。
现代文：撤去前四川、贵州巡抚谭希思、江东之的职务，赐给李化龙尚方宝剑，为他征讨叛贼提供方便。
English: He removed the posts of the former Sichuan and Guizhou governor, Tan Heath, and Jiangdong, and gave Li Hualong Shangfang Sword to make it easier for him to recruit rebels.

古文：贼焚东坡、烂桥，梗湖、贵路，又焚龙泉，走都司杨惟忠。
现代文：叛贼焚毁东坡、烂桥，阻塞湖广、贵州道路，又焚烧龙泉，赶走都司杨惟忠。
English: The traitors burned Dongpo and Rotten Bridge, blocked the roads of Hukang and Guizhou, burned Longquan, and drove away the governor Yang Weizhong.

古文：化龙劾诸大帅不用命者，沈尚文逮治，童元镇、刘廷皆革职充为事官。
现代文：李化龙弹劾诸大将不听从命令的，沈尚被逮捕，童元镇、刘纟廷都被革职充为事官。
English: Li Hualong impeached generals who disobeyed orders, Shen Shang was arrested, Tongyuan Zhen and Liu Bingting were all dismissed as officials.

古文：诸军大集，化龙先檄水西兵三万守贵州，断招苗路，乃移重庆，大誓文武。
现代文：各军大集，李化龙先令水西兵三万守住贵州，截断杨应龙征招苗人的道路，之后他移兵重庆，大会文武官兵。
English: The armies gathered in large numbers, and Li Hualong sent 30,000 soldiers to defend Guizhou and cut off Yang Yinglong's way of recruiting seedlings. After that, he moved his army to Chongqing and held a grand meeting of officers and soldiers.

古文：明年二月，分八道进兵。
现代文：第二年二月分兵八路进攻。
English: In February of the following year, the detachment launched an eight-pronged attack.

古文：川师四路：总兵官刘綎由綦江，总兵官马孔英由南川，总兵官吴广由合江，副将曹希彬受广节制，由永宁。
现代文：川兵分四路：总兵官刘纟廷由綦江出兵，总兵官马孔英出南川，总兵官吴广出合江，副将曹希彬受吴广节制，出永宁。
English: The river soldiers were divided into four routes: the general officer Liu Bingding sent troops from the Minjiang River, the general officer Ma Kongying from the Nanchuan River, the general officer Wu Guang from the Hejiang River, and the vice-commander Cao Xibin from the Yongning River.

古文：黔师三路：总兵官童元镇由乌江，参将朱鹤龄受元镇节制，统宣慰使安疆臣由沙溪，总兵官李应祥由兴隆。
现代文：贵州兵分三路：总兵官童元镇由乌江出发，参将朱鹤龄受董元镇节制，统领宣慰使安疆臣由沙溪出发，总兵官李应祥由兴隆出发。
English: The Guizhou soldiers were divided into three routes: the general officer Tongyuanzhen departed from Wujiang, the general officer Zhu Hailing was restrained by Dongyuanzhen, the commander-in-chief Xuancheng sent Anjiang minister from Shaxi, and the general officer Li Yingxiang departed from Xinglong.

古文：楚师一路分两翼：总兵官陈璘由偏桥，副总兵陈良玭受璘节制，由龙泉。
现代文：湖广兵一路分为两翼：总兵官陈瞞由偏远出师，副总兵陈良笿受陈瞞节制，由龙泉出师。
English: The Hukang soldiers were divided into two wings: the general officer Chen Shizhe went to the remote division, and the deputy general officer Chen Liangyao was restrained by Chen Shizhe and went to the Longquan division.

古文：每路兵三万，官兵三之，土司七之。
现代文：每路各有三万兵，官兵十分之三，土司十分之七。
English: Each line had 30,000 soldiers, three-tenths officers and men, and seven-tenths sergeants.

古文：贵州巡抚郭子章驻贵阳，湖广巡抚支可大移沅州，化龙自将中军策应。
现代文：贵州巡抚郭子章驻守贵阳，湖广巡抚支可大移驻沅州，李化龙亲自领中军策应。
English: Guizhou's governor Guo Zizhang was stationed in Guiyang, while the governor of Hubei Province was stationed in Zhangzhou. Li Hualong personally led the Chinese military response.

古文：帝以楚地辽阔，又擢江铎为佥都御史，巡抚偏、沅。
现代文：皇上认为楚地辽阔，又提拔江铎为佥都御史，巡抚偏、沅。
English: The emperor thought that Chu was vast, and promoted Jiang Chen to be the governor of Chu, and the governor was biased and arrogant.

古文：湖广设偏沅巡抚，自铎始也。
现代文：湖广设偏、沅巡抚，从江铎开始。
English: The governor of Hubei Province and the governor of Jiangxi Province were set up, starting from Jiangxi Province.

古文：推官高折枝先以南川兵进，据桑木镇，綎复自綦江入。
现代文：推官高析枝先从南川进兵，占据桑木镇，刘纟廷又从綦江入。
English: The commander Gao Jingzhi marched in from Nanchuan first and occupied the town of Mulberry, and Liu Bingding marched in from the Li River.

古文：应龙以劲兵二万属其子朝栋曰： 尔破綦江，驰南川，尽焚积聚，彼无能为也。 
现代文：杨应龙以劲兵二万交给他的儿子朝栋说： 你破綦江，奔驰南川，全部焚毁积聚，他们就没有办法。 
English: Yang Yinglong gave twenty thousand strong soldiers to his son Chaodong and said: If you break the Minjiang River, rush the South River, burn and accumulate everything, they will have no choice.

古文：比抗诸路兵，皆大败，应龙顿足叹曰： 吾不用时泰计，今死矣！ 
现代文：等到抗击诸路官军的部队都大败，杨应龙顿脚叹息说： 我不用孙时泰的计策，今天死定了！ 
English: When the troops that fought against all kinds of government troops were defeated, Yang Yinglong sighed and said: I don't need Sun Shih-tai's strategy, I'm dead today!

古文：或言水西佐贼，化龙诘之疆臣，斩贼使，二氏交遂绝。
现代文：有的人说水西帮助叛贼，李化龙责问安疆臣，斩杀叛贼的使者，二个部落于是断绝往来。
English: Some people say that Shuixi helped the traitors, Li Hualong reprimanded An Jiangcheng and killed the traitor's envoy, and the two tribes then cut off contacts.

古文：乌江兵败绩，逮下元镇于理，诸将益奋。
现代文：乌江兵败报告传来，逮捕童元镇，诸位将领更加奋勇。
English: The report of the defeat of the Wujiang soldiers came, Tongyuan Town was arrested, and the generals became more courageous.

古文：綎先入娄山关，直抵海龙囤，璘、疆臣兵亦至。
现代文：刘纟廷率先进入娄山关，直达海龙囤，陈瞞、安疆臣部也到达了。
English: Liu Qingting took the lead in entering Shaoshan Pass, straight to Hailong Pass, and Chen Xie and Anjiang subordinates also arrived.

古文：贼势急，上囤死守，遣使诈降。
现代文：叛贼见形势危急，上囤死守，派遣使者假装投降。
English: The traitors saw the situation as critical and sent an emissary to pretend to surrender.

古文：化龙檄诸将斩使，焚书。
现代文：李化龙令诸将杀死使者，烧掉来函。
English: Li Huadong ordered his generals to kill the messenger and burn the letter.

古文：以綎与应龙有旧，谕无通贼，綎械其人以自明。
现代文：因为刘纟廷与杨应龙旧有交情，晓谕他不要与叛贼私通，刘纟廷将使者拘禁以表明自己的态度。
English: Because Liu Bingding had an old friendship with Yang Yinglong and told him not to have sexual intercourse with the traitor, Liu Bingding detained the envoy to show his attitude.

古文：八路兵皆会囤下，筑长围困之，更番迭攻。
现代文：八路部队都汇集囤下，修筑长围围困叛贼，轮番进攻。
English: The eight-way troops all gathered under the command, built a long siege to besiege the traitors, and took turns to attack.

古文：六月，綎破土、月二城，应龙窘，与二妾俱缢。
现代文：六日，刘纟廷攻破土、月二城，杨应龙走投无路，与二妾自杀身亡。
English: On the sixth day, Liu Bingding broke through the earth and moon two cities, Yang Yinglong was cornered, and he and his two concubines committed suicide.

古文：明晨，官军入城，七子皆被执。
现代文：第二天早晨，官军进入城内，他的七个儿子都被抓到。
English: The next morning, government troops entered the city and all seven of his sons were arrested.

古文：诏磔应龙尸并子朝栋于市。
现代文：皇上下诏将杨应龙的尸体和他儿子朝栋在市中肢解。
English: The emperor decreed that Yang Yinglong's body and that of his son Chaodong be dismembered in the city.

古文：自出师至灭贼，凡百有十四日。
现代文：从出兵到灭贼，共一百十四天。
English: A total of one hundred and fourteen days passed from the dispatch of troops to the extermination of the bandits.

古文：播自唐乾符中入杨氏，二十九世，八百余年，至应龙而绝，以其地置遵义、平越二府，分属川、贵。
现代文：播州从唐乾符中由杨氏统治，凡二十九世，八百余年，到杨应龙时为止。皇上将播州地设置遵义、平越二府，分属川、贵两行省。
English: Banzhou was ruled by the Yang clan from the time of Emperor Qianfu in the Tang Dynasty for more than 800 years until the time of Emperor Yang Yinglong in the 29th century. The emperor set up two prefectures in Banzhou, Zunyi and Pingyue, which were divided into the provinces of Sichuan and Guizhou.

古文：化龙初闻父丧，以金革起复，至是乞归终制。
现代文：李化龙起初听到父亲死去的消息，准备赴丧但因军务需要，被起用，到这时乞求回家居丧。
English: At first, Li Hualong heard the news of his father's death and prepared to go to the funeral, but due to military needs, he was drafted. At this time, he begged to go home to mourn.

古文：三十一年四月，起工部右侍郎，总理河道，与淮、扬巡抚李三才奏开淤河，由直河入泇口抵夏镇二百六十里，避黄河吕梁之险。
现代文：万历三十一年四月起用为工部右侍郎，总理河道，与淮、扬巡抚李三才奏请开通淤塞的黄河，由直河入氵加口抵达夏镇二百六十里，避开黄河吕梁险峻地带。
English: In April of the 31st month of the lunar calendar, he was appointed as the right hand man of the Ministry of Industry, the prime minister of the river channel, and the Huai and Yang inspector Li Sancai made a request to open the silted Yellow River, and arrived in Xia Town 260 miles from the entrance of the Zhihe River to the mouth of the Yingge, avoiding the dangerous area of the Yellow River Luliang.

古文：再以忧去，未代。
现代文：再次以父母去世离职，没有人代替他。
English: Once again, he left his post due to the death of his parents, and no one replaced him.

古文：叙前平播功，晋兵部尚书，加少保，荫一子世锦衣指挥使。
现代文：朝廷品评他从前平定播州的功劳，晋升为兵部尚书，加少保官，庇荫一个儿子世袭锦衣指挥使之职。
English: The imperial court praised the merits of his former conquest of Banzhou, promoted him to the military department of Shangshu, promoted him to the minor security officer, and appointed one of his sons to the post of hereditary brocade commander.

古文：三十五年夏，起戎政尚书。
现代文：万历三十五年夏天，起用为戎政尚书。
English: In the summer of the thirty-fifth year of Wanli, he was appointed as the leader of the military government.

古文：化龙以京营根本，奏陈十一滥、十二苦、十九宜，又上屯政十二事，皆置不理。
现代文：李化龙认为京营乃根本之所在，上奏陈述有十一滥、十二苦、十九件宜做之事，又奏上屯政十二事，都被朝廷置之不理。
English: Li Hualong believed that the Beijing camp was the root cause, and the imperial court ignored the report of eleven abuses, twelve hardships, nineteen things that should be done, and the report of the twelve things of the military occupation.

古文：兵部自二十七年后，左、右侍郎皆空署。
现代文：兵部从二十七年后，左、右侍郎都是虚设。
English: Twenty-seven years after Hyobu, the left and right attendants are all fictitious.

古文：未几，尚书萧大亨亦致仕，化龙掌部事。
现代文：没有多久，尚书萧大亨也退休了，由李化龙掌管部里之事。
English: Soon after, Shang Shuxiao Tycoon also retired, and Li Hualong took charge of the department.

古文：三十七年正月，京师讹言寇至，民争避匿，边民逃入都门者亦数万，九门昼闭。
现代文：三十七年正月，京师讹传盗匪将到，老百姓争着逃避。边塞百姓逃入都城的也有数万人，九个城门全部关闭。
English: In the first month of the thirty-seventh year, thieves and bandits were rumored to be arriving in Beijing, and the common people scrambled to escape. Tens of thousands of people from the border fortress also fled into the capital, and all nine gates were closed.

古文：辅臣言兵部尚书惟一人，何以应猝变，帝亦不报。
现代文：辅臣说兵部尚书只有一个人，何以能应付突然的变化，皇上也不声张。
English: The aide-de-camp said that there was only one person in the military department, Shangshu, who could not cope with the sudden change, and the emperor did not make a fuss.

古文：辽战士二万余皆老弱，而税监高淮肆虐，辽人切齿。
现代文：辽东战士二万都是老弱贫残之人，而税监高淮残暴，辽东人恨得咬牙切齿。
English: The 20,000 soldiers in Liaodong are all old, weak and poor, while the tax inspectors are cruel. Liaodong people hate them with all their teeth.

古文：化龙请停税课，且增兵万人，又条上兵食款战之策，帝皆不报。
现代文：李化龙请求停止收税课、增加兵士数万人，又呈上兵士粮食、和议、战斗之策，皇上皆不批示下来。
English: Li Hualong requested to stop the tax collection class, increase the number of soldiers by tens of thousands, and presented soldiers with grain, peace talks, and battle strategies, but the emperor did not issue any orders.

古文：一品秩满，加柱国、少傅兼太子太保。
现代文：一品任期满后，加柱国、少傅兼太子太保。
English: After the expiration of the one-year term of office, the additional pillar country, the young master and the crown prince were added.

古文：卒官，年七十。
现代文：死于任上，终年七十岁。
English: He died in office, aged 70.

古文：谥襄毅，赠少师，加赠太师。
现代文：谥号襄毅，赠少师，加赠太师。
English: His posthumous name was Xiang Yi, and he was awarded the title of Shao Shi, and also the title of Taishi.

古文：化龙具文武才。
现代文：李化龙具有文武之才。
English: Li Hualong is talented in both literature and martial arts.

古文：播州之役，以刘綎骄蹇，先摧挫之而荐其才，故綎为尽力。
现代文：播州战役，因刘纟廷骄纵，故先压制他，再推崇其才，所以刘纟廷尽心尽力。
English: In the Battle of Banzhou, because of Liu Bingting's arrogance, he was suppressed first, and then his talent was praised, so Liu Bingting did his best.

古文：开河之功，为漕渠永利，详见《河渠志》。
现代文：开通黄河之功，对漕运渠道永远有利，详细情况见《河渠志》。
English: The achievement of opening up the Yellow River will always be beneficial to the rowing channel. For details, see the "History of Rivers and Canals."

