古文：昕字元景，少笃学，能诵书，日以中叠举手极上为率。与太原王延业俱诣魏安丰王延明。延明叹美之。
现代文：王昕，字元景，从小就很爱学习，能背诵《尚书》。王昕与太原王延业一起去见魏安丰王延明，延明非常赞美王昕。
English: Wang Yao, the character Yuanjing, loved to study from a young age and could recite "Shang Shu." Wang Yao and Taiyuan Wang Yanye went to see Wei Anfeng Wang Yanming, Yanming praised Wang Yao very much.

古文：太尉、汝南王悦辟为骑兵参军。
现代文：太尉、汝南王元悦任用他为骑兵参军。
English: Captain, Junan Wang Yuan Yue appointed him to join the cavalry.

古文：旧事，王出则骑兵武服持刀陪从。
现代文：按旧规矩，王外出时骑兵要穿上戎装，持刀陪从。
English: According to the old rules, when the king went out, the cavalry had to put on uniforms and accompany him with swords.

古文：昕耻之，未尝肯依行列。悦好逸游，或驰骋信宿，昕辄弃还。
现代文：王昕觉得很羞耻，所以不肯跟在骑兵行列里，元悦喜欢出游，有时骑马整夜在外，王昕便不管他，自己回来。
English: Wang Yao felt very ashamed, so he refused to follow the cavalry. Yuan Yue liked to travel, sometimes riding all night. Wang Yao ignored him and came back on his own.

古文：悦乃令骑兵在前，手为驱策。
现代文：元悦让他在前骑马，挥鞭驱赶，王昕却放开缰绳，让马随意乱跑。
English: Yuan Yue let him ride in front and drive away with a whip, but Wang Yao let go of the reins and let the horse run wild.

古文：昕舍辔高拱，任马所之，左右言其诞慢。悦曰： 府望唯在此贤，不可责也。 
现代文：元悦的随从说王昕故意怠慢，悦说： 府中有名望的只有这个贤士，不能责备他。 
English: Yuan Yue's attendant said that Wang Xuan was deliberately negligent, and Yue said: The only famous person in the palace is this sage, and I can't blame him.

古文：悦数散钱于地，令诸佐争拾之，昕独不拾。
现代文：元悦经常扔一些钱在地上，让他的侍从们去争着拾，只有王昕不拾。
English: Yuan Yue often threw some money on the ground and let his attendants scramble to pick it up, but Wang Yao couldn't pick it up.

古文：悦又散银钱以目昕，乃取其一。
现代文：有一次，元悦又扔了银钱，并看了王昕一眼，王昕只好拾了一个钱。
English: Once, Yuan Yue threw another coin and glanced at Wang Yao. Wang Yao had to pick up a coin.

古文：悦与府寮饮酒，起自移床，人争进手，昕独执板却立。
现代文：元悦与他的府僚饮酒，亲自起身抬床，周围的人都争着帮忙，只有王昕手拿板站着。
English: Yuan Yue and his officials were drinking, and he himself got up to lift the bed. The people around him scrambled to help, but only Wang Yao stood there holding the board.

古文：悦作色曰： 我帝孙，帝子，帝弟，帝叔，今亲起舆床，卿何偃蹇？
现代文：元悦变了脸色，说： 我是皇帝的孙子、儿子、弟弟和叔叔，现在亲自来抬床，你为什么那么傲慢呢？ 
English: Yuan Yue turned pale and said, "I am the emperor's grandson, son, younger brother and uncle, and I have come to carry the bed myself. Why are you so arrogant?

古文：对曰： 元景位望微劣，不足使殿下式瞻仪形，安敢以亲王僚采，从厮养之役。 
现代文：王昕回答说 ：我的地位低下，又没有威望，不能使殿下保持风度，怎么敢以亲王的幕僚和宾客的身份，来干仆役干的活呢？ 
English: Wang Yao replied, "My status is low, I have no prestige, and I cannot keep your highness in good graces. How dare I do the work of a servant as the prince's aide and guest?"

古文：悦谢焉。
现代文：元悦听了此话便向他道歉。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Yue apologized to him.

古文：坐上皆引满酣暢；昕先起，卧于闲室，频召不至。
现代文：和元悦一起喝酒的人都斟满酒畅饮。王昕却先行离席，躺在一间房间里休息，多次去人叫他，他也不去酒席前。
English: The people who were drinking with Yuan Yue were all full of wine and drinking. Wang Yao, on the other hand, left the table first, lay down in a room to rest, and repeatedly went to people to call him, but he did not go to the reception.

古文：悦乃自诣呼之，曰： 怀其才而忽府主，可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：元悦亲自去找他，说： 自负有才而轻视他的主人，能说是仁吗？ 
English: Yuan Yue went to see him in person and said, "A man who is conceited and despises his master, can he be called benevolent?

古文：昕曰： 商辛沈湎，其亡也忽诸。府主自忽傲，寮佐敢任其咎？ 
现代文：王昕说： 商纣王沉缅酒色，他灭亡也就很快，府主自身轻忽自傲，僚佐能承担过错吗？ 
English: Wang Yao said: the king of merchants is drunk, and his demise will be quick. The ruler himself is careless and conceited. Can his vassal bear the fault?

古文：悦大笑而去。
现代文：元悦大笑着走了。
English: Yuan Yue laughed loudly and walked away.

古文：后除著作佐郎。以兵乱渐起，将避地海隅。侍中李琰之、黄门侍郎王遵业惜其名士，不容外任，奏除尚书右外兵郎中。出为光州长史，故免河阴之难。
现代文：后来，王昕被任命为著作佐郎，因为各地渐有兵乱，王昕准备到僻静的地方避难，侍中李琰之、黄门侍郎王道业认为这样的名士远走实在太可惜，不让他赴外任，便上奏任命王昕为尚书右外兵部郎中，出任光州刺史，所以免于河阴之难。
English: Later, Wang Xuan was appointed as the military governor of Gwangju. Because there were increasingly frequent military conflicts in various regions, Wang Xuan was preparing to take refuge in a secluded place. The attendant Li Yanzhi and the Yellow Gate attendant Wang Daoye thought that it was too bad for such a famous person to go far away. They did not allow him to go abroad, so they made a report and appointed Wang Xuan to be the foreign military officer of Gwangju, so he was spared the hardships of the river.

古文：迁东莱太守。
现代文：后又改任东莱太守。
English: Later, he was appointed the governor of Donglai.

古文：于时年凶，人多相食，昕勤恤人隐，多所全济。
现代文：当时年成十分不好，人吃人的事时有发生。王昕勤于抚恤，多方救济灾民。
English: At that time, the year was very bad, and cannibalism occurred from time to time. Wang Hao was diligent in providing pensions and relief to the victims in many ways.

古文：昕少时与河间邢邵俱为元罗宾友，及守东莱，邵举室就之。
现代文：王昕年轻时与河间人邢邵同为元罗的宾客。他当了东莱太守后，邢邵全家来投奔他。
English: When Wang Xi was young, he was a guest of Yuan Luo together with the Kawamian man Zou Shao. After he became the empress dowager of Donglai, Zou Shao's whole family came to him.

古文：郡人以邵是邢杲从弟，会兵将执之。
现代文：东莱人因邢邵是邢杲的堂弟，便聚集在一起，拿着兵器要抓邢邵。
English: Donglai people gathered together with weapons to catch Gong Shao because Gong Shao was Gong's cousin.

古文：昕以身蔽伏其上，呼曰： 欲执子才，当先执我。 
现代文：王昕用身体扑在邢邵身上，高声叫着： 要抓子才，就先抓我。 
English: Wang Yao threw his body on Zou Shao's body and shouted loudly: "If you want to catch me, catch me first."

古文：邵乃免。
现代文：这样，邢邵才没有被众人抓去。
English: In this way, Zou Shao was not arrested by the crowd.

古文：太昌初，还洛。吏部尚书李神俊奏言： 比因多故，常侍遂无员限。今以王元景等为常侍，定限八员。 
现代文：太昌初年，王昕回到洛阳，吏部尚书李神亻隽上奏说 ：过去因为多种原因，常侍这一职务没有数量的规定，现在要以王元景等人为常侍，定员八人。 
English: In the first year of Taichang, Wang Hui returned to Luoyang, and the head of the personnel department, Shang Shu and Li Shenqi, reported: "In the past, for many reasons, there was no provision for the number of regular attendants. Now, Wang Yuanjing and others will be the regular attendants, with a fixed number of eight people.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：王昕还被加封金紫光禄大夫。
English: Wang Qi was also awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：武帝或时袒露，与近臣戏狎，每见昕，即正冠而敛容焉。
现代文：太武帝有时袒露身体，和他的近臣玩笑、闹着玩，但每次见到王昕便整好帽子，表情也庄重起来。
English: Emperor Taibu sometimes exposed his body, joking and playing with his vassals, but every time he saw Wang Yao, he straightened his hat and his expression became more solemn.

古文：昕体素甚肥，遭丧后，遂终身羸瘠。杨愔重其德素，以为人之师表。
现代文：王昕本来很胖，后遇到守丧，便渐渐变得全身瘦弱，杨很看重王昕的品德素养，认为他可以为人师表。
English: Wang Yao was originally very fat, but after the funeral, he gradually became thin. Yang valued Wang Yao's moral qualities and thought that he could be a mentor.

古文：元象元年，兼散骑常侍，聘梁，魏收为副，并为朝廷所重。
现代文：元象元年，王昕兼散骑常侍，聘问梁朝，魏收当他的副手，两人都受到朝廷的重用。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Qian and Sanzhijian, the imperial equerry, hired Qian Liang, and Wei Hui became his deputy. Both of them were reused by the imperial court.

古文：使还，高隆之求货不得，讽宪台劾昕、收在江东大将商人市易，并坐禁止。
现代文：他们出使回来，高隆之向他们索贿却没能得到，便让御史台弹劾王昕、魏收，说他们在江南和商人做生意，王昕、魏收因此一起获罪被关起来。
English: When they returned from their mission, Gao Longzhi asked them for a bribe, but they couldn't get it, so they asked the Imperial History Channel to impeach Wang Qian and Wei Jie, saying that they were doing business with merchants in the south of the Yangtze River. As a result, Wang Qian and Wei Jie were convicted and imprisoned together.

古文：齐文襄营救之。
现代文：齐文襄帝营救了他们。
English: Emperor Qibun rescued them.

古文：累迁秘书监。
现代文：后来王昕又多次升迁，官至秘书监。
English: Later, Wang Yao was promoted several times, rising to the position of secretary-supervisor.

古文：昕雅好清言，词无浅俗。
现代文：王昕爱好作诗，他的诗句不浅不俗。
English: Wang Yao likes to write poetry, and his verses are not shallow and vulgar.

古文：在东莱时，获杀其同行侣者，诘之未服。昕谓曰： 彼物故不归，卿无恙而反，何以自明？ 
现代文：在东莱时，他抓获了一个杀了同行伙伴的人，审问后这人仍不服罪，王昕说 ：那人无故不归，你却无恙而回，何以解释？ 
English: When he was in Donglai, he caught a man who killed a colleague. After interrogation, the man still did not admit his guilt. Wang Yao said: That man did not return for no reason, but you returned unharmed. How do you explain that?

古文：邢邵后见文襄，说此言以为笑乐。
现代文：邢邵后来见了齐文襄帝，把这事当作笑话来谈论。
English: Zou Shao later met with Qibin Xiangdi and talked about the matter as a joke.

古文：昕闻之，诣邵曰： 卿不识造化。 还谓人曰： 子才应死，我骂之极深。 
现代文：王昕对邢邵说： 你不识造化。 还对人说： 子才该死，我骂他骂得厉害。 
English: Wang Yao said to Yao Shao, "You are not an intellectual." He also said to the man, "The young man deserves to die. I cursed him terribly."

古文：顷之，以被谤，左迁阳平太守。在郡有称绩。
现代文：不久，王昕因受诬陷，降为阳平太守，在阳平，王昕的政绩得到称赞。
English: Soon after, Wang Hui was falsely accused and demoted to Yangping governor. In Yangping, Wang Hui's political achievements were highly praised.

古文：文襄谓人曰： 王元景殊获我力，由吾数戏之，其在吏事，遂为良二千石。 
现代文：齐文襄帝对人说： 王元景得到我特殊关照，被我多次戏耍，他当官员，竟成为二千石的良吏了！ 
English: Qi Wenxiang told the man: Wang Yuanqing received my special attention and was played with by me many times. He became an official and became a good official of two thousand koku!

古文：齐文宣践阼，拜七兵尚书。
现代文：齐文宣帝即位后，任王昕为七兵尚书。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Qibun Xuan, Ren Wangye became the seventh soldier of Shangshu.

古文：以参议礼，封宜君县男。
现代文：王昕因参议礼仪之事，被封为宜君县男。
English: Wang Hui was named the man of Yijun County because of the senate etiquette.

古文：尝有鲜卑聚语，崔昂戏问昕曰： 颇解此不？ 
现代文：曾有一次，鲜卑人聚在一起讲话，崔昂开玩笑地问王昕说： 你能懂一些吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, when the Xianbei gathered together to speak, Cui Ang jokingly asked Wang Yao: Can you understand something?

古文：昕曰： 楼罗，楼罗，实自难解。
现代文：王昕说： 楼罗、楼罗，实在很难懂。
English: Wang Yao said, "Lou Luo, Lou Luo, it's really hard to understand.

古文：时唱染于，似道我辈。 
现代文：有时唱着染干，好像在说我们。 
English: Sometimes they sing about dyeing and drying, as if they were talking about us.

古文：文宣以昕疏诞，非济世才，骂： 好门户，恶人身！ 
现代文：齐文宣帝认为王昕怪诞不羁，不是济世之才，骂道： 真是好门户、恶人身。 
English: Qiwen Xuandi thought that Wang Yao was grotesque and uninhibited, not a world-class talent, and scolded him: "He is really a good portal and an evil person."

古文：又有谗之者，云： 王元景每嗟水运不应遂绝。 
现代文：这时，又有人进谗言，说 ：王元景常感叹说魏国水运，不应当就此断绝。 
English: At this time, someone else chimed in, saying: Wang Yuanqing often lamented that Wei Guo Shui Yun should not be cut off.

古文：帝愈怒，乃下诏曰： 元景本自庸才，素无勋行，早沾缨绂，遂履清途。发自畿邦，超居詹事。俄佩龙文之剑，仍启带砺之书。语其器分，何因到此？
现代文：文宣帝更加生气，就下诏说： 元景本是庸才，并无功勋，却早得官职，走上仕途，出于京畿，担任詹事，佩带龙文之剑，翻阅磨砺之书，以其才能，怎能至此！
English: Emperor Wenzhong was even more angry, and issued an edict saying: Yuan Jie was a mediocre man with no merits, but he was given a government post early on, embarked on a career, came from Gyeonggi Province, served as an official, wore the sword of Longwen, and read the book of sharpening, with his talent, how could he do this!

古文：诚宜清心励己，少酬万一。
现代文：正应清心自励，略报万一。
English: It's time to be clear-minded and self-motivated, and to be prepared in case of a slight setback.

古文：尚书百揆之本，庶务攸归。元景与夺任情，威福在己。能使直而为枉，曲反成弦。
现代文：尚书为百官之本，各项政务所归，元景凭感情办事，自己作威作福，以直为曲，曲反成直。
English: Shangshu is the book of a hundred officials, all government affairs belong to Shangshu, the original vision is to act according to feelings, to do one's own will is to do good, to be straight is to be straight, and to be straight is to be crooked.

古文：害政损公，名义安在？
现代文：危害朝政，有损公门，尚书名义何在？
English: Endangering the imperial government, damaging the public gate, what is in the name of Shangshu?

古文：伪赏宾郎之味，好咏轻薄之篇。自谓模拟伧楚，曲尽风制。推此为长，余何足取。
现代文：装腔作势以赏味，好咏轻薄之诗文，自以为模拟楚调，尽得风韵；除此所长，有何可取？
English: Pretentiousness with taste, fond of trifling and frivolous poetry, fancies itself an imitation of Chu Tone, does its best to charm; other than this, what is there to be desired?

古文：此而不绳，后将焉肃？在身官爵，宜从削夺。 
现代文：此风不煞，后将难治，王昕官爵，应于削夺。 
English: This wind is not bad, it will be difficult to cure later, Wang Qian Jie, should be scrapped.

古文：于是徙幽州为百姓。
现代文：于是王昕被迁徙到幽州，当了平民百姓。
English: As a result, Wang Qi was moved to Yuzhou and became a commoner.

古文：昕任运穷通，不改其操。
现代文：王昕听任时运的变化，并不改变他的操守。
English: Wang Hui does not change his conduct according to the changes of the times.

古文：未几，征还，奉敕送萧庄于梁为主。除银青光禄大夫，判祠部尚书。
现代文：不久，他又被召回，奉旨送萧庄到梁为国君，王昕任银青光禄大夫、祠部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was recalled again, and was sent by order to Xiaozhuang to Liang as the sovereign, and Wang Xi served as the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu and the priest of the ancestral hall.

古文：帝怒临漳令嵇晔及舍人李文师，以晔赐薛丰洛，文师赐崔士顺为奴。
现代文：皇帝很恨临漳县令嵇晔和舍人李文师。他把嵇晔赐给了薛丰洛，李文师赐给了崔士顺当奴仆。
English: The emperor hated Linyi County's warlord and deserter, Li Wenshi, very much. He gave the scepter to Xue Fengluo and Li Wenshi to Cui Shishun as a slave.

古文：郑子默私诱昕曰： 自古无朝士作奴。 
现代文：郑子默私下引诱王昕说 ：自古以来，没有朝廷的士大夫做奴隶的啊！ 
English: Zheng Zimou secretly seduced Wang Yao and said, "Since ancient times, no court official has been a slave!"

古文：昕曰： 箕子为之奴，何言无也？ 
现代文：王昕说 ：箕子曾做过人家的奴隶，怎么说没有？ 
English: Wang Yao said: Yao Zi had once been someone's slave, how to say no?

古文：子默遂以昕言启文宣，仍曰： 王元景比陛下于纣。 
现代文：郑子默把王昕的话告诉了文宣帝，并说： 王元景把陛下比作商纣王。 
English: Zheng Zi tacitly told Wang Yao's words to Emperor Wenxuan, and said: Wang Yuanjing compared His Majesty to King Shang Yao.

古文：杨愔微为解之。帝谓愔曰： 王元景是尔博士，尔语皆元景所教。 
现代文：杨在一旁为王昕解释，文宣帝对杨说： 王元景是你的博士，你的话都是王元景教的。 
English: Yang explained for Wang Yao on the sidelines. Emperor Wenzhong said to Yang: Wang Yuanjing is your doctor, your words are all from Wang Yuanjing.

古文：帝后与朝臣酣饮，昕称疾不至。帝遣骑执之，见其方摇膝吟咏，遂斩于御前，投尸漳水。
现代文：后来，文宣帝召朝臣一起饮酒，王昕说他有病，因此没有去，皇帝便派骑兵去抓他，见他正摇动着身子吟咏诗文，便将他抓到皇帝面前杀了，他的尸体被扔进了漳水。
English: Later, Emperor Wenxuan called his courtiers to drink alcohol together. Wang Yao said that he was ill, so he did not go. The emperor sent cavalry to catch him. Seeing that he was swaying and chanting poetry, he was caught and killed in front of the emperor. His body was thrown into the brackish water.

古文：天统末，追赠吏部尚书。有文集二十卷。
现代文：天统末年，王昕被追赠吏部尚书，他的遗作有文集二十卷。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, Wang Xi was posthumously awarded the title of Li Bu Shang Shu. His posthumous works include 20 volumes of anthologies.

