古文：兴宗孝康皇帝标，太祖长子也。
现代文：兴宗孝康皇帝朱标，明太祖的长子。
English: Emperor Xingzong Xiaokang Zhu Bei, the eldest son of Emperor Ming Taizu.

古文：母高皇后。
现代文：母亲是高皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Gao.

古文：元至正十五年生于太平陈迪家。
现代文：元朝至正十五年，朱标生于太平的陈迪家。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the 15th year of the Taiping Dynasty, Zhu Biao was born in the Chen Di family.

古文：太祖为吴王，立为王世子，从宋濂受经。
现代文：朱元璋称吴王后，朱标被立为王世子，跟随宋濂学习经典。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was called the Queen of Wu, Zhu Bian was appointed as the king's heir, and he studied the classics with Song Xi.

古文：吴元年，年十三矣，命省临濠墓，谕曰： 商高宗旧劳于外，周成王早闻《无逸》之训，皆知小民疾苦，故在位勤俭，为守成令主。
现代文：吴元年，朱标年仅十三岁，太祖便命他前去巡察临濠墓地，并对他说： 商高宗过去烦劳于外，周成王很早就接受《无逸》之训，他俩都懂得百姓的疾若，所以在位期间能勤俭持政，成为好的守成之君。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, when Zhu Biao was only thirteen years old, the great-grandfather ordered him to go and inspect the Linyi cemetery, and said to him: Shang Gaozong used to work hard outside, and Zhou Cheng Wang received the "no deviation" training very early. Both of them understand the people's illness, so they can be diligent and frugal in politics during their reign, and become a good guardian of the king.

古文：儿生长富贵，习于晏安。
现代文：我儿你生长于富贵，习惯了安逸的生活。
English: My son, you grew up in wealth and were accustomed to a life of ease.

古文：今出旁近郡县，游览山川，经历田野，其因道途险易以知鞍马勤劳，观闾阎生业以知衣食艰难，察民情好恶以知风俗美恶，即祖宗所居，访求父老，问吾起兵渡江时事，识之于心，以知吾创业不易。 
现代文：今天要前往旁近郡县，游览山川，跨越田野，可以因征途的险易而知道鞍马的勤劳，看到民间百姓的生业而知道衣食的艰难，体察民情的好恶而知道风俗的美恶。到了祖宗住地，你要访求父老乡亲，向他们询问我当年起兵渡江时的事情，并将它牢记在心，以明白我创业是多么不容易。 
English: Today, I want to go to the nearby counties and counties, tour the mountains and rivers, and cross the fields. You can know the hard work of the pommel horse because of the difficulty of the journey, see the livelihood of the common people and know the difficulty of food and clothing, experience the likes and dislikes of the people and know the virtues and vices of the customs. When you get to the ancestral residence, you should visit your father and fellow villagers, ask them about the things I did when I crossed the river in the war, and keep it in mind to understand how difficult it is for me to start a business.

古文：又命中书省择官辅行。
现代文：又命中书省选择官吏陪同朱标前行。
English: He also ordered officials from the Ministry of Education to accompany Zhu Biao on his journey.

古文：凡所过郡邑城隍山川之神，皆祭以少牢。
现代文：凡所经过的郡县城壕山川之神，朱标都以羊猪祭祀。
English: All the gods of counties, towns, moats, mountains, and rivers that passed through Zhu Biao were worshipped with the sacrifice of sheep and pigs.

古文：过太平访迪家，赐白金五十两。
现代文：经过太平时，朱标特地拜访了他出生的陈迪家，赏赐白金五十两。
English: After a period of peace, Zhu Biao paid a special visit to the Chen Di family, where he was born, and awarded them fifty taels of platinum.

古文：至泗、濠告祭诸祖墓。
现代文：到达泗州、濠州后，朱标告祭了诸祖墓。
English: After arriving in Ganzhou and Ganzhou, Zhu Biao announced and dedicated the ancestral tombs.

古文：是冬从太祖观郊坛，令左右导之农家，遍观服食器具，又指道旁荆楚曰： 古用此为扑刑，以其能去风，虽伤不杀人。
现代文：这年冬天，朱标跟随太祖视察郊坛，太祖命左右随从将朱标引到农家，遍观服食器具，太祖又指着路旁的荆棘对他说： 古人用它施以扑刑，因为它能祛除风寒，虽然会伤人却不会杀死人。
English: This winter, Zhu Bei followed his great-grandfather to inspect the rural altar. Zhu Bei was led to the farmer's house by the great-grandfather's right and left attendants to observe the eating utensils. The great-grandfather also pointed to the thorns by the roadside and said to him: The ancients used it to inflict punishment, because it can remove wind and cold, although it can hurt people, it will not kill people.

古文：古人用心仁厚如此，儿念之。 
现代文：古人的用心如此仁厚，我儿要牢记心中。 
English: The intentions of the ancients are so benevolent, my son should keep them in mind.

古文：洪武元年正月，立为皇太子。
现代文：洪武元年正月，朱标被立为皇太子。
English: In the first month of the first year of Hongwu, Zhu Biao was appointed crown prince.

古文：带刀舍人周宗上书乞教太子。帝嘉纳。
现代文：带刀舍人周宗上书乞求教授太子，太祖给予嘉奖，并接受了他的请求。
English: Zhou Zong, the sword-bearer, wrote a letter begging the crown prince and great-grandfather to give him an award, and his request was accepted.

古文：中书省都督府请仿元制，以太子为中书令。
现代文：中书省都督府请求仿效元朝旧制，以太子为中书令。
English: The prefectural government of the People's Republic of China's Calligraphy Province requested that the old system of the Yuan Dynasty be followed, and the Chinese Calligraphy Order came into being.

古文：帝以元制不足法，令詹同考历代东宫官制，选勋德老成及新进贤者，兼领东宫官。
现代文：太祖认为元朝旧制不值得仿效，便命令詹同考据历代东宫官制，然后挑选勋德老成及新提升的贤士兼任东宫官属。
English: The great-grandfather thought that the old system of the Yuan Dynasty was not worth emulating, so he ordered Zhan Tong to study the official system of the East Palace of successive dynasties, and then select the old and newly promoted sages to serve as officials of the East Palace.

古文：于是左丞相李善长兼太子少师，右丞相徐达兼太子少傅，中书平章录军国重事常遇春兼太子少保，右都督冯宗异兼右詹事，中书平章政事胡廷端、廖永忠、李伯升兼同知詹事院事，中书左、右丞赵庸、王溥兼副詹事，中书参政杨宪兼詹事丞，傅瓛兼詹事，同知大都督康茂才、张兴祖兼左右率府使，大都督府副使顾时、孙兴祖同知左右率府事，佥大都督府事吴桢、耿炳文兼左右率府副使，御史大夫邓愈、汤和兼谕德，御史中丞刘基、章溢兼赞善大夫，治书侍御史文原吉、范显祖兼太子宾客。
现代文：于是，左丞相李善长兼太子少师，右丞相徐达兼太子少傅，中书平章录军国重事常遇春兼太子少保，右都督冯宗异兼右詹事，中书平章政事胡廷瑞、廖永忠、李伯升兼同知詹事院事，中书左右丞赵庸、王溥兼副詹事，中书参政杨宪兼詹事丞，傅王献兼詹事，同知大都督康茂才、张兴祖兼左右率府使，大都督府副使顾时、孙兴祖同知左右率府事，佥大都督府事吴桢、耿炳文兼左右率府副使，御史大夫邓愈、汤和兼谕德，御使中丞刘基、章溢兼赞善大夫，治书侍御史文原吉、范显祖兼太子宾客。
English: As a result, the left chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice, the right chancellor Xu Da and the prince's apprentice Fu, the left chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice, the right chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice Fu, the left chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice, the right chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice Fu, the left chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice Fu, the left chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice Fu, the right chancellor Li Shanchang and the prince's apprentice Fu, the left chancellor

古文：谕之曰： 朕于东宫不别设府僚，而以卿等兼领者，盖军旅未息，朕若有事于外，必太子监国。若设府僚，卿等在内，事当启闻，太子或听断不明，与卿等意见不合，卿等必谓府僚导之，嫌隙易生。
现代文：太祖嘱咐他们说 ：朕之所以在东宫不另设府僚，而以卿等兼任，其原因在于现在战事尚未平息，朕若有事在外，必定是太子监管国家，如果设立府僚，那么包括卿等在内，遇事得向上陈述，让太子知道，太子有时可能听断不明，与卿等意见不合，卿等一定会说这是府僚让他这么做的，于是隔阂就容易产生。
English: The great-grandfather told them, "The reason why I don't have a separate cabinet secretary in the East Palace, but concurrently have a secretary and so on, is because the war has not yet subsided. If I have something to do outside, it must be the prince supervising the country. If a cabinet secretary is established, then it must be reported to the top, including the secretary and so on, so that the prince knows that the prince may sometimes be hard of hearing and disagree with the secretary and so on. The secretary and so on will certainly say that the cabinet secretary asked him to do so, so estrangement is likely to occur.

古文：又所以特置宾客谕德等官者，欲辅成太子德性，且选名儒为之，职此故也。
现代文：朕之所以又特别设置宾客、谕德等官，是想让他们辅成太子的德性，并且挑选名儒担任，就是这个缘故。
English: The reason why I have specially set up guests, officials, and so on is that I want them to supplement the virtue of the prince, and that is why I have selected famous Confucian scholars to serve.

古文：昔周公教成王克诘戎兵，召公教康王张皇六师，此居安虑危，不忘武备。
现代文：昔日周公教育成王严格整顿军队，召公教导康王设立皇家六师，这么做都是为了居安思危，不忘武备。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong educated Cheng Wang to strictly rectify the army, and summoned Gong Wang to teach Kang Wang to set up the royal six divisions. All of this was done in order to stay safe and not forget military preparedness.

古文：盖继世之君，生长富贵，昵于安逸，不谙军旅，一有缓急，罔知所措。
现代文：因为即位之君，生长于富贵，受宠于安逸的生活中，不熟悉军队，一有缓急，便不知所措。
English: Because the soon-to-be-emperor grew up in wealth and luxury, was favored with a comfortable life, is unfamiliar with the military, and is at a loss when it comes to priorities.

古文：二公之言，其并识之。 
现代文：所以周、召二公之言，你们都要牢记心中。 
English: Therefore, you should bear in mind the words of Zhou and Zhao.

古文：是年，命选国子生国琦、王璞、张杰等十余人，侍太子读书禁中。
现代文：这一年，太祖下令挑选国子监学生国琦、王璞、张杰等十余人，到宫禁为太子伴读。
English: In that year, Emperor Taizu ordered the selection of more than ten students, including Guojun, Wang Yao, and Zhang Jie, who were the students of the Imperial College of Nursing, to go to the Imperial Palace to accompany the prince.

古文：琦等入对谨身殿，仪状明秀，应对详雅。
现代文：国琦等到谨身殿回答太祖的问题，他们容貌俊秀，应对详细，出语不俗。
English: The emperors waited until they were in the presence of the emperor to answer the questions of their great-grandfathers. They were handsome, detailed, and eloquent.

古文：帝喜，因谓殿中侍御史郭渊友等曰： 诸生于文艺习矣，然与太子处，当端其心术，不流浮靡，庶储德亦获裨助。 
现代文：太祖十分高兴，因此对殿中侍御史郭渊友等说 ：这些学生熟悉文学艺术，但是与太子相处，应当使他们心术端正，不致轻浮、奢侈，这样对太子的品行也有帮助。 
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, so he said to the palace attendant Shi Guo Yuanyou and others: These students are familiar with literature and art, but when they get along with the prince, they should keep their minds straight and not be frivolous or extravagant. This will also help the prince's moral conduct.

古文：因厚赐之。未几，以梁贞、王仪为太子宾客，秦庸、卢德明、张昌为太子谕德。
现代文：不久，又以梁贞、王仪为太子宾客，秦庸、卢德明、张昌为太子谕德。
English: Soon, Liang Zhen and Wang Yi were the guests of the prince, and Qin Yong, Ludming and Zhang Chang were the guests of the prince.

古文：先是，建大本堂，取古今图籍充其中，征四方名儒教太子诸王，分番夜直，选才俊之士充伴读。
现代文：在此之前，太祖下令修建大本堂，将古今地图书籍充斥其中，然后征求四方名儒教育太子诸王，轮流昼夜值班，挑选才智出众之士充当伴读。
English: Prior to this, the great ancestor ordered the construction of a large main hall, filled it with ancient and modern books, and then solicited four famous Confucian education princes and kings, taking turns on duty day and night, selecting the most talented people to act as reading accompaniment.

古文：帝时时赐宴赋诗，商搉古今，评论文字无虚日。
现代文：太祖时常赐宴赋诗，与他们商榷古今之事，评论文章。
English: The great-grandfather often gave feasts and poems, discussed ancient and modern things with them, and commented on articles.

古文：命诸儒作《钟山龙蟠赋》。
现代文：太祖命诸儒写成《钟山龙蟠赋》。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Zhu Zhu to write "Bell Mountain Dragon Gift."

古文：置酒欢甚，自作《时雪赋》，赐东宫官。
现代文：有一次，太祖摆酒欢饮，兴致盎然，自作《时雪赋》，赐给东宫官。
English: On one occasion, the great-great-grandfather drank wine and was so enthusiastic that he made his own "Snowy Season" and gave it to an official of the East Palace.

古文：令三师、谕德朝贺东宫，东宫答拜。
现代文：下令三位老师、谕德朝贺东宫，东宫予以答拜。
English: He ordered the three teachers to go to the East Palace, and the East Palace responded.

古文：又命东宫及王府官编缉古人行事可为鉴戒者，训谕太子诸王。
现代文：又命东宫及王府官吏编辑可以作为借鉴的古人之事，训谕太子诸王。
English: He also ordered the East Palace and the officials of the royal court to edit the ancient people who could be used as a reference, and to instruct the princes and kings.

古文：四年春，制《大本堂玉图记》，赐太子。
现代文：四年春，太祖命人制作《大本堂玉图记》，赐给太子。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the great-grandfather ordered the production of the "Diary of the Great Main Hall" and gave it to the prince.

古文：十年，令自今政事并启太子处分，然后奏闻。
现代文：十年，太祖下令从今开始政事全部交给太子处理，然后由太子上奏。
English: Ten years later, the great-grandfather ordered that from now on, all government affairs be handed over to the crown prince to deal with, and then played by the crown prince.

古文：谕曰： 自古创业之君，历涉勤劳，达人情，周物理，故处事咸当。
现代文：他嘱咐太子道 ：自古创业之君，历涉勤劳，通达人情，明白事理，遇事故能处理得当。
English: He instructed the crown prince: the prince of entrepreneurship since ancient times, experienced in hard work, understanding human feelings, understands things, and can deal with accidents properly.

古文：守成之君，生长富贵，若非平昔练达，少有不谬者。
现代文：而守成之君生长于富贵，若非平日磨练，很少有不犯错的。
English: On the other hand, Shosei no kimi was born into wealth and privilege, and if he is not well-trained on a daily basis, he will rarely make a mistake.

古文：故吾特命尔日临群臣，听断诸司启事，以练习国政。
现代文：所以我特地命你每日面对群臣，听断诸司所陈之事，以熟悉国政。
English: That is why I specifically ordered you to face your ministers every day, listen to what they have to say, and familiarize yourself with national politics.

古文：惟仁不失于疏暴，惟明不惑于邪佞，惟勤不溺于安逸，惟断不牵于文法。
现代文：惟有仁爱之心不至于对人残暴，惟有处事英明不至于被奸佞所惑，惟有勤俭持政不至于沉溺于安逸，惟有当机立断不至于拘泥于文法。
English: Only a benevolent heart will not be cruel to others, only a wise way of doing things will not be confused by treachery, only a diligent and frugal way of governing will not indulge in ease, and only a quick-witted decision will not be stuck in grammar.

古文：凡此皆心为权度。
现代文：所有这些都须用心来权衡。
English: All of this must be weighed carefully.

古文：吾自有天下以来，未尝暇逸，于诸事务惟恐毫发失当，以负上天付托之意。
现代文：我自有天下以来，还未曾有过空闲之日，我对所有事务都惟恐有丝毫不妥之处，惟恐辜负上天的托付。
English: Ever since I was born, I have never had a day off. I am afraid of making mistakes in everything I do, afraid of failing to live up to God's commission.

古文：戴星而朝，夜分而寝，尔所亲见。
现代文：所以总是头顶星星上朝，夜半时分入寝，这些你都亲眼所见。
English: That's why you always wake up with the stars above your head and go to bed at midnight. You've seen it all with your own eyes.

古文：尔能体而行之，天下之福也。 
现代文：你如果也能身体力行，那便是天下之福啊。 
English: If you can do it yourself, then you are blessed.

古文：时令儒臣为太子讲《大学衍义》。
现代文：当时，太祖下令儒臣为太子讲解《大学衍义》。
English: At that time, the great-great-grandfather ordered Ju Chen to explain "The Meaning of University" to the prince.

古文：二十二年，置詹事院。
现代文：二十二年，设置詹事院。
English: In 1922, Zhanji Institute was established.

古文：二十四年八月，敕太子巡抚陕西。
现代文：二十四年八月，太祖命太子巡视、安抚陕西。
English: In August 1924, the great-grandfather, the crown prince, went on a tour to pacify Shaanxi.

古文：先是，帝以应天、开封为南北京，临濠为中都。
现代文：在此之前，太祖以应天、开封为南、北京，临濠为中都。
English: Prior to this, Taizu used Yingtian and Kaifeng as the southern capital, Beijing and Linyi as the central capital.

古文：御史胡子祺上书曰： 天下形胜地可都者四。
现代文：御史胡子祺上书说道 ：天下地势优越可作为首都的地方有四个。
English: "There are four places in the world with superior terrain that can serve as the capital," said Mishi Huzi in his petition.

古文：河东地势高，控制西北，尧尝都之，然其地苦寒。
现代文：河东地势较高，控制西北，尧帝曾以它为都，但这个地方十分寒冷。
English: The eastern part of the river is higher and controls the north-west. Emperor Zhao once used it as the capital, but this place is very cold.

古文：汴梁襟带河、淮，宋尝都之，然其地平旷，无险可凭。
现代文：汴梁连着黄河、淮水，宋朝曾以它为都，但它地势平旷，无险可凭。
English: Qilian is connected to the Yellow River and Huai Shui. The Song Dynasty once used it as the capital, but it is flat and there is no danger.

古文：洛阳周公卜之，周、汉迁之，然嵩、邙非有殽函、终南之阻，涧、瀍、伊、洛非有泾、渭、氵霸、浐之雄。
现代文：洛阳，周公曾卜卦，认为它可做都城，周、汉迁都于此，但嵩、邙没有肴殳函、终南之险要，涧、绶、伊、洛没有泾、渭、灞、氵产之雄壮。
English: Luoyang, Zhou Gong once speculated, thought that it could be the capital city, Zhou and Han migrated here, but Song and Han did not have enough food, Han and Nan were at risk, and Luoyang, Yunnan, Yi and Luo did not have enough rice, rice, rice and rice production.

古文：夫据百二河山之胜，可以耸诸侯之望，举天下莫关中若也。 
现代文：而拥有众多河山的优点，可以位于诸侯之首，控制天下的莫过于关中了。 
English: But with the advantages of numerous rivers and mountains, it can be located at the head of the princes, and there is nothing better to control the world than Guanzhong.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：太祖觉得他说得有理。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：至是，谕太子曰： 天下山川惟秦地号为险固，汝往以省观风俗，慰劳秦父老子弟。 
现代文：到这时，太祖便对太子说： 天下山川只有秦地可称得上险固，你可以前去察看当地风俗，慰劳秦地父老子弟。 
English: At this time, the great-grandfather said to the prince: Only Qin can be said to be dangerous in the mountains and rivers of the world. You can go to see the local customs and comfort Qin's parents and children.

古文：于是择文武诸臣扈太子行。
现代文：于是选择文武诸臣护随太子前行。
English: Therefore, he chose Monmu and other retainers to accompany the crown prince.

古文：既行，使谕曰： 尔昨渡江，震雷忽起于东南，导尔前行，是威震之兆也。
现代文：太子出发后，太祖派使臣前往嘱咐太子： 你昨日渡江，雷声忽然起于东南，引导你前行，这是威震之兆啊。
English: After the prince set out, the great-grandfather sent an envoy to the prince and instructed him: You crossed the river yesterday, and thunder suddenly arose in the southeast, guiding you forward. This is a sign of great power.

古文：然一旬久阴不雨，占有阴谋，宜慎举动，严宿卫，施仁布惠，以回天意。 
现代文：但是，十天来一直久阴不雨，占卜有阴谋发生，你应当谨慎行事，在驻地严加防守，施仁布惠，以改变天意。 
English: However, it has been cloudy and rainy for ten days, and divination has conspired to occur. You should act cautiously, strictly defend your residence, and give benevolence to change the providence.

古文：仍申谕从行诸臣以宿顿闻。
现代文：太祖仍再三告诫随行诸臣经常报告太子的行踪。
English: The great-grandfather still repeatedly admonished the attendant courtiers to frequently report the prince's whereabouts.

古文：比还，献陕西地图，遂病。
现代文：太子从陕西返回京城，献上陕西地图，然后就病了。
English: The prince returned to Beijing from Shaanxi, presented a map of Shaanxi, and then fell ill.

古文：病中上言经略建都事。
现代文：太子在病中上奏经略建都之事。
English: During his illness, the crown prince made a short speech about the construction of the capital.

古文：明年四月丙子薨，帝恸哭。
现代文：第二年四月二十五日，太子去世，太祖为之痛哭。
English: On April 25th of the following year, the prince died, and the great-grandfather wept bitterly.

古文：礼官议期丧，请以日易。
现代文：礼官商议办丧日期，请求改日。
English: The etiquette officer discussed the date of the funeral and requested a change of date.

古文：及当除服，帝不忍。
现代文：等到可以脱掉丧服时，太祖不忍。
English: When it was time to take off the mourning clothes, the great-grandfather could not bear to wait.

古文：礼官请之，始释服视朝。
现代文：经礼官请求，才脱下丧服上朝。
English: At the request of the etiquette officer, he only took off his mourning clothes to go to the funeral.

古文：八月庚申祔葬孝陵东，谥曰懿文。
现代文：八月十一日，太子附葬于孝陵东侧，谥号为懿文。
English: On August 11, the crown prince was buried on the east side of the Xiaoling Mausoleum. His posthumous name was Xiwen.

古文：太子为人友爱。
现代文：太子为人友爱。
English: The prince is a very friendly person.

古文：秦、周诸王数有过，辄调护之，得返国。
现代文：秦、周诸王屡犯过错，太子总是从中调解保护，他们才得以返回藩地。
English: Qin and Zhou kings repeatedly made mistakes, and the prince always mediated and protected them, and they were able to return to the domain.

古文：有告晋王异谋者，太子为涕泣请，帝乃感悟。
现代文：有人告发晋王企图谋反，太子在太祖面前流着泪请求，太祖才感悟。
English: Someone reported that the King of Jin was attempting to rebel. The prince pleaded with tears in front of the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather was impressed.

古文：帝初抚兄子文正、姊子李文忠及沐英等为子，高后视如己出。
现代文：太祖当初将兄长的儿子朱文正、姐姐的儿子李文忠及沐英当作自己的儿子抚养，高皇后也将他们视如己出。
English: The great-grandfather originally raised his brother's son Zhu Wenzheng, his sister's son Li Wenzhong and Mu Ying as his own sons, and Empress Gao also regarded them as her own.

古文：帝或以事督过之，太子辄告高后为慰解，其仁慈天性然也。
现代文：太祖有时因事对他们责罚过重，太子总是告诉高皇后，进行劝慰，太子仁慈的天性就是这样。
English: The great-grandfather sometimes punished them too severely for some reason, and the prince always told Queen Gao and consoled her, such was the prince's benevolent nature.

古文：太子元妃常氏，继妃吕氏。
现代文：太子元配妃子常氏，继妃吕氏。
English: The prince was originally married to Princess Tsuneuji, followed by Princess Ryuuji.

古文：生子五：长雄英，次建文皇帝，次允熥，次允熞，次允熙。
现代文：共生有五子，依次为：雄英、建文皇帝、允火通、允火坚、允熙。
English: Symbiosis had five sons, in order: Xiong Ying, Emperor Jianwen, Yunhuatong, Yunhuajian, and Yunxi.

古文：而其时秦王樉亦纳王保保妹为妃，又以邓愈女为配，皆前代故事所无也。睿宗兴献皇帝祐杬，宪宗第四子。
现代文：建文元年，太子被追尊为孝康皇帝，庙号兴宗。燕王即帝位后，又称他为懿文皇太子。睿宗兴献皇帝朱祐杬，宪宗第四子。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, the prince was revered as Emperor Xiaokang, and his temple name was Xingzong. After the reign of Emperor Yan, he was also known as the crown prince of Xingwen. Ruizong was dedicated to Emperor Zhu Youyi, the fourth son of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：母邵贵妃。
现代文：母亲是邵贵妃。
English: His mother was Shao Guifei.

古文：成化二十三年封兴王。
现代文：成化二十三年，他被封为兴王。
English: In the 23rd year of Chenghua, he was named the King of Xing.

古文：弘治四年建邸德安。
现代文：弘治四年，兴王在德安建造府邸。
English: In the fourth year of Hongzhi, Xingwang built a mansion in De'an.

古文：已，改安陆。
现代文：不久，改在安陆。
English: Soon, it was changed to Anlu.

古文：七年之藩，舟次龙江，有慈乌数万绕舟，至黄州复然，人以为瑞。
现代文：七年，兴王起程前往藩地，船只中途停泊龙江时，有数万慈乌绕船而飞，到达黄州后也出现了同样的事情，人们都将它看作吉兆。
English: In the seventh year, Xing Wang set off for the territory of the domain. When the ship stopped at the Longjiang River halfway, tens of thousands of Ciwu flew around the ship. The same thing happened after arriving in Huangzhou. People regarded it as a good omen.

古文：谢疏陈五事。孝宗嘉之，赐予异诸弟。
现代文：兴王在辞别奏议上陈述了五件国事，孝宗给予嘉奖，对他的赏赐与其他弟弟不同。
English: In his farewell speech, King Heung stated five state affairs, and Emperor Xiaozong gave him an award, which was different from that given to his other younger brothers.

古文：王嗜诗书，绝珍玩，不畜女乐，非公宴不设牲醴。
现代文：兴王喜爱诗书，对珍宝玩物毫无兴趣，也从不沉溺于女色音乐之中，不是公开酒宴从不摆设酒肉。
English: Heung-Wang loved poetry books, had no interest in precious toys, never indulged in feminine music, and never served wine and meat at public banquets.

古文：楚俗尚巫觋而轻医药，乃选布良方，设药饵以济病者。
现代文：楚地风俗崇尚巫术而轻视医药，兴王便选布良方，以医药救济患病者。
English: Chu customs advocated witchcraft and despised medicine, so Xingwang chose Bu Liang Fang to use medicine to help the sick.

古文：长史张景明献所著《六益》于王，赐之金帛，曰： 吾以此悬宫门矣。 
现代文：长史张景明将其所著的《六益》献给兴王，兴王回赐他黄金布帛，并对他说 ：我会将它悬在宫门上。 
English: Changshi Zhang Jingming dedicated his book "Six Benefits" to King Heung. King Heung gave him a golden cloth and said, "I will hang it on the palace gate."

古文：邸旁有台曰阳春，数与群臣宾从登临赋诗。
现代文：兴王宫邸旁有一高台，名为 阳春 ，兴王多次与群臣、宾客一起登临赋诗。
English: There is a hill next to the residence of the Xingwang Palace, called Yangchun. Xingwang often climbed the hill with his ministers and guests.

古文：正德十四年薨，谥曰献。
现代文：正德十四年，兴王去世，谥号为献。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, Xing Wang passed away, and his posthumous name was Wu Xing.

古文：王薨二年而武宗崩，召王世子入嗣大统，是为世宗。
现代文：兴王去世二年之后，武宗去世，召兴王世子入嗣大统，这就是世宗。
English: Two years after the death of King Heung, King Busong passed away and summoned King Heung's heir to the throne, which was King Sejong.

古文：礼臣毛澄等援汉定陶、宋濮王故事，考孝宗，改称王为 皇叔父兴献大王 ，王妃为 皇叔母 。
现代文：礼臣毛澄等引用以往汉朝定陶、宋朝濮王的旧例，以孝宗为皇考，改称兴王为 皇叔父兴献大王 ，兴王妃为 皇叔母 。
English: The courtiers Mao Cheng and others quoted the old examples of the Han Dynasty Ding Tao and the Song Dynasty Zhou Wang in the past, taking Xiaozong as the imperial examination, and renamed Xing Wang as "Imperial Uncle Xing Xian Da Wang" and Xing Wangfei as "Imperial Aunt."

古文：帝命廷臣集议，未决。
现代文：世宗命廷臣集中商议，没能作出决定。
English: Sejong ordered his courtiers to discuss the matter intensively, but they were unable to reach a decision.

古文：进士张璁上书请考兴献王，帝大悦。
现代文：进士张璁上书请求以兴献王为皇考，世宗非常高兴。
English: Sejong was very pleased to receive a letter from Zhang Ye, a new member of the imperial court, requesting that King Xingxian be given the imperial examination.

古文：会母妃至自安陆，止通州不入。
现代文：当时正巧其母妃从安陆出发，只到通州而不入宫。
English: At that time, it just so happened that his mother-in-law set out from Anlu and only went to Tongzhou without entering the palace.

古文：帝启张太后，欲避天子位，奉母妃归藩。群臣惶惧。
现代文：世宗便告诉张太后，要避天子之位，侍奉母妃返回藩地，群臣获悉十分惊慌。
English: Sejong then told Empress Dowager Zhang to avoid the position of heavenly son and return to the domain to serve his mother. The courtiers were very alarmed.

古文：太后命进王为兴献帝，妃为兴献后。
现代文：太后乃命进升兴王为兴献帝，兴王妃为兴献后。
English: The empress dowager was ordered to present the crown prince to the emperor and the crown princess to the empress dowager.

古文：璁更为《大礼或问》以进，而主事霍韬、桂萼，给事中熊浃议与璁合。
现代文：张璁将上书改为《太礼或问》进献世宗，而且主事霍韬、桂萼，给事中熊浃的意见与张璁相同。
English: Zhang Qian changed the letter to "Tai Li or Qian" and presented it to the world, and the principals, Huo Qian and Gui Qian, gave the same opinion as Zhang Qian.

古文：帝因谕辅臣杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪，帝、后加称 皇 。
现代文：世宗因此晓谕辅臣杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪，兴献帝、兴献后加称 皇 。
English: As a result, King Sejong ordered his vassals Yang Tinghe, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji to offer sacrifices to the emperor, and after the offering they were given the title of emperor.

古文：廷和等合廷臣争之，未决。
现代文：杨廷和等会合廷臣进行争辩，没有结果。
English: Yang Tinghe and other courtiers at the meeting argued, but to no avail.

古文：嘉靖元年，禁中火，廷和及给事中邓继曾、朱鸣阳引五行五事，为废礼之证。
现代文：嘉靖元年，宫禁失火，杨廷和及给事中邓继曾、朱鸣阳引用五行五事，作为废弃此礼的证据。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, when the palace was destroyed by fire, Yang Tinghe and Deng Jizeng and Zhu Mingyang cited five lines and five events as evidence of the abandonment of this ceremony.

古文：乃辍称 皇 ，加称本生父兴献帝，尊园曰陵，黄屋监卫如制，设祠署安陆，岁时享祀，用十二笾豆，乐用八佾。
现代文：世宗才停止称兴王为 皇 ，加称 本生父兴献帝 ，尊其墓为陵，根据制度设黄屋监卫，在安陆设立祠庙，每年祀典之时用十二笾豆祭祀，乐舞则采用八佾。
English: It was not until the time of King Sejong that he stopped calling King Heungwang the emperor, added the title of his real father, King Heungjeong, and revered his tomb as a mausoleum. According to the system, Huangya guards were set up, an ancestral temple was set up in Anlu, twelve peas were sacrificed every year at the time of the ceremony, and eight gongs were used for music and dance.

古文：帝心终未慊。
现代文：世宗心中始终未能满意。
English: Sejong was never satisfied.

古文：三年加称为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝，兴国太后为本生圣母章圣皇太后，建庙奉先殿西，曰观德殿，祭如太庙。
现代文：三年，加称兴王为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝，兴献太后为本生圣母章圣皇太后，建庙于奉先殿西侧，名为观德殿，祭祀礼仪与太庙相同。
English: In the third year, the temple was built on the west side of Bonsen-den, named Kundera-den, and the sacrificial rites were the same as those of the Imperial Temple.

古文：七月，谕去本生号。
现代文：七月，世宗下令去掉本生号。
English: In July, Sejong ordered the removal of the hongseong.

古文：九月，诏称孝宗皇伯考，称献皇帝曰皇考。
现代文：九月，下诏称孝宗为皇伯考，称献皇帝为皇考。
English: In September, the next imperial edict declared that Emperor Xiaozong was the imperial examiner and Emperor Xian was the imperial examiner.

古文：璁、萼等既骤贵，干进者争以言礼希上意。
现代文：张璁、桂萼等人骤然显贵，于是，那些希望求取功名、蒙受皇帝恩赏的人争相谈论礼仪。
English: Zhang Xuan, Gui Cale and others were suddenly distinguished, so those who hoped to gain fame and receive the emperor's favor were competing to talk about etiquette.

古文：百户随全、录事钱子勋言献皇帝宜迁葬天寿山。
现代文：百户随全、录事钱子勋说献皇帝应当迁葬天寿山。
English: Hundreds of households followed suit, and the record of Qian Zixun said that the emperor should be moved to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：礼部尚书席书议： 高皇帝不迁祖陵，太宗不迁孝陵，盖其慎也。
现代文：礼部尚书席书则建议说： 高皇帝不迁祖陵，太宗不迁孝陵，他们这都是谨慎行事啊。
English: Shang Shuxishu of the Ministry of Ceremonies suggested: Emperor Gao did not move the ancestral mausoleum, Emperor Taizong did not move the filial mausoleum, they were all cautious.

古文：小臣妄议山陵，宜罪。 
现代文：小臣妄议山陵，应当治罪。 
English: Minions who discuss the mausoleum inappropriately should be punished.

古文：工部尚书赵璜亦言不可。
现代文：工部尚书赵璜也力言不可，此事才作罢。
English: Shangshu Zhao of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce also insisted that the matter should be dropped.

古文：乃止。尊陵名曰显陵。明年，修《献皇帝实录》，建世庙于太庙左。
现代文：尊称兴王陵为显陵。第二年，世宗下令编修《献皇帝实录》，建世庙于太庙左侧。
English: In the following year, King Sejong ordered the compilation of the "Emperor's Offering Record" and the world temple was built on the left side of the imperial temple.

古文：六年，以观德殿狭隘，改建崇先殿。七年，命璁等集《明伦大典》，成，加上尊谥曰恭睿渊仁宽穆纯圣献皇帝。
现代文：六年，以观德殿狭窄为由，改建崇先殿，七年，世宗命张璁等集《明伦大典》成，为兴王加上尊谥号为恭睿渊仁宽穆纯圣献皇帝。
English: In the sixth year, on the grounds that the Guan De Hall was too narrow, the Chong Xian Hall was rebuilt. In the seventh year, according to the order of the Sejong, Zhang Ye and others compiled the "Ming Lun Grand Text," adding the honorific title of "Gong Rui Yuan Ren Kuan Mu Chun Sheng Xian Emperor" for King Heung.

古文：亲制《显陵碑》，封松林山为纯德山，从祀方泽，次五镇，改安陆州为承天府。
现代文：亲自题写《显陵碑》，封松林山为纯德山，祭于方泽，仅次于五镇。改安陆州为承天府。
English: He personally inscribed the "Hengling Monument" and designated Songlin Mountain as a pure and virtuous mountain, and it was enshrined in Fangze, second only to the Five Towns. Luzhou was renamed as Chengtianfu.

古文：十七年，通州同知丰坊请加尊皇考庙号，称宗以配上帝。
现代文：十七年，通州同知丰坊请求加尊皇考庙号，以与先帝相称。
English: In the seventeenth year, Tongzhou Tongzhi Fengfang requested to add the name of the imperial examination temple to be commensurate with the former emperor.

古文：九月，加上尊谥知天守道洪德渊仁宽穆纯圣恭俭敬文献皇帝，庙号睿宗，祔太庙，位次武宗上。
现代文：九月，为兴王加上尊谥号为知天守道洪德渊仁宽穆纯圣恭俭敬文献皇帝，庙号睿宗，附祭于太庙，位居武宗之上。
English: In September, Heung-Wang was given the honorary title of knowing heaven and earth, guarding the path of Hung, De, Yuan, Ren, Kuan, Mu, Chun, Sheng, and Trivial, honoring the Emperor of Literature, and the temple name of Ruizong, which was enshrined in the Great Temple and ranked higher than that of Wuzong.

古文：明堂大享，奉主配天，罢世庙之祭。
现代文：明堂大享奉主配天，停止世庙之祭。
English: Myeongdong enjoys the blessing of the Lord, and stops the festival of the world temple.

古文：四十四年，芝生世庙柱，复作玉芝官祀焉。
现代文：四十四年，有灵芝草长在世庙柱子之上，世宗于是又将它称作玉芝宫，并在此祭祀。
English: In the 44th year of King Sejong's reign, a reishi mushroom grew on a pillar in the temple, and Sejong called it the Jade Palace and held a religious ceremony there.

古文：穆宗立，乃罢明堂配享。
现代文：穆宗即位，乃停止明堂配享。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, the allocation of Myeongdong was stopped.

古文：初，杨廷和等议封益王次子崇仁王厚炫为兴王，奉献帝祀。
现代文：当初，杨廷和等建议封益王次子崇仁王厚火玄为兴王，以奉侍献帝。
English: At first, Yang Tinghe and others suggested that Fong Yik Wang's second son, Chong Ren Wang Hou Huo Xuan, be crowned King Xing and serve the emperor.

古文：不允。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：兴国封除。
现代文：兴国之封被取消。
English: The seal of the rejuvenation of the country was cancelled.

古文：献帝有长子厚熙，生五日而殇。
现代文：献帝的长子厚熙，出生五天便夭折了。
English: Emperor's eldest son, Houxi, died five days after birth.

古文：嘉靖四年赠岳王，谥曰怀献。
现代文：嘉靖四年，厚熙被追赠为岳王，谥号怀献。
English: In the fourth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Huxi was posthumously awarded the title of Yue Wang.

