古文：史昭，合肥人。
现代文：史昭，合肥人。
English: Shi Zhao, from Hefei.

古文：永乐初，积功至都指挥佥事。
现代文：永乐初年，他积功升至都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was promoted to the post of commander of the capital.

古文：八年充总兵官，镇凉州。
现代文：八年，史昭充任总兵官，镇守凉州。
English: Eight years later, Shi Zhaocheng was appointed chief military officer, and remained the town guard of Liangzhou.

古文：土军老的罕先与千户虎保作乱，虎保败，老的罕就抚。
现代文：土军老的罕开始与千户虎保作乱，虎保失败，老的罕接受招抚。
English: The old Turks began to make trouble with the thousand-household tiger guards. The tiger guards failed, and the old Turks were appeased.

古文：昭上书言其必叛状。
现代文：史昭上书说他一定会反叛。
English: Shi Zhao wrote that he would definitely rebel.

古文：未至，而老的罕果叛。
现代文：奏书还未到朝廷，老的罕果然反叛了。
English: Before the report reached the imperial court, the old man rebelled.

古文：昭与都指挥满都等击平之。
现代文：史昭与都指挥满都等击平之。
English: Shi Zhao and the commander of the capital, Mandu, fought to a draw.

古文：移镇西宁。
现代文：然后移镇西宁。
English: Then moved to Xining.

古文：仁宗立，进都督佥事。
现代文：仁宗即位后，史昭进升为都督佥事。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Shi Zhaozhong was promoted to the post of the capital.

古文：上言西宁风俗鄙悍，请设学校如中土。报可。
现代文：他上书说西宁风俗庸陋野蛮，请求像中原一样设立学校。朝廷答允可以。
English: He wrote a letter saying that Xining's customs were vulgar and barbaric, and requested that a school be established like the one in Zhongyuan. The imperial court agreed.

古文：宣德初，昭以卫军守御，不暇屯种，其家属愿力田者七百七十余人，请俾耕艺，收其赋以足军食。
现代文：宣德初年，史昭认为守军要全力防御，无暇屯种，而军中家属中有七百七十余人愿意耕田，所以请求让他们耕种，收取其租赋来补充军粮。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Shi Zhao believed that the defending army should make every effort to defend and had no time to plant crops, and more than 770 family members in the army were willing to farm, so he asked them to farm and collect their rents to supplement military rations.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷又听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五年，曲先卫都指挥使散即思邀劫西域使臣，昭率参将赵安偕中官王安、王瑾讨之。
现代文：五年，曲先卫都指挥使散即思拦劫西域使臣，史昭率参将赵安偕同宦官王安、王瑾前去讨伐。
English: In the fifth year, Qu Xianwei commanded the envoy San Juxi to stop the robbery of the western region envoys, and Shi Zhao led the general Zhao Anqian and the eunuchs Wang An and Wang Yao to fight.

古文：长驱至曲先，散即思望风遁，擒其党答答不花等，获男女三百四十人，马驼牛羊三十余万，威震塞外。
现代文：军队长驱直人到达曲先，散即思望风而逃，于是擒获其同党答答不花等，俘获男女三百四十人，马驼牛羊三十余万，威震塞外。
English: The commander of the army drove Naohito to arrive at Quxian, but he ran away as soon as he thought of the wind, so he captured his fellow party members without waiting for an answer, captured three hundred and forty men and women, more than three hundred thousand camels, cattle and sheep, and was overwhelmed.

古文：捷闻，玺书慰劳，赏赉加等。
现代文：捷报上奏后，皇上以玺书慰劳，赏赐有加。
English: After the announcement of the victory, the emperor consoled him with a letter of commendation, and rewarded him generously.

古文：七年春，以征西将军镇宁夏。
现代文：七年春，史昭以征西将军的身份镇守宁夏。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Shi Zhao guarded Ningxia as the general of the Western Conquest.

古文：孛的达里麻犯边，遣兵击之。至阔台察罕，俘获甚众。
现代文：李的达里麻进侵边境，史昭派兵迎击，到达阔台察罕，俘获甚多。
English: Li's Darima invaded the border, Shi Zhao sent troops to meet the attack, reached the broad plateau of Chahan, and captured a lot.

古文：进都督同知。
现代文：史昭进升为都督同知。
English: Shi Zhaozhong was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：正统初，昭以宁夏孤悬河外，东抵绥德二千里，旷远难守，请于花马池筑哨马营，增设烽堠，直接哈剌兀速之境。
现代文：正统初年，史昭认为宁夏孤悬于黄河之外，东抵绥德达二千里，旷远难守，请求在花马池修筑哨马营，增设烽火台，直接哈刺兀速之境。
English: In the first year of the orthodoxy, Shi Zhao believed that Ningxia was isolated beyond the Yellow River, and it was difficult to defend it as it was 2,000 miles to the east of Shunde. He requested that a sentry camp be built in Huamaike, and that a campfire be added, which would directly lead to the situation of hasty retreat.

古文：边备大固。
现代文：从而使边防更加坚固。
English: Thus making the border more secure.

古文：寻进右都督。
现代文：史昭随即进升为右都督。
English: Shi Zhao was immediately promoted to the post of right-hand governor.

古文：时阿台、朵儿只伯数寇边。
现代文：当时阿台、朵儿只伯屡次侵扰边境。
English: At that time, Adai and Dor only repeatedly invaded the border.

古文：诏昭与甘肃守将蒋贵、赵安进剿。
现代文：史昭奉诏与甘肃守将蒋贵、赵安前往进剿。
English: Shi Zhao and the Gansu governor sent Jiang Gui and Zhao An to Jinlu.

古文：并无功，被昭切责，贬都督佥事。
现代文：都无功劳，被下诏切责，史昭被贬为都督佥事。
English: Both were without merit and were severely reprimanded by the emperor, and Shi Zhao was relegated to the role of a provincial governor.

古文：三年复右都督，八年以老召还。
现代文：三年，他恢复右都督之职。八年，因年老应诏回京。
English: Three years later, he was reinstated as the right-hand governor, and eight years later, due to old age, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：昭居宁夏十二年，老成持重，兵政修举，亦会敌势衰弱，边境得无事。
现代文：史昭在宁夏十二年，老成持重，军政齐举，也正逢敌势衰弱，边境得以无事。
English: In his twelfth year in Ningxia, Shi Zhao was an old man, and the military and government were at the same time. At the same time, the enemy was weakening, and there was no trouble at the border.

古文：兵部尚书王骥、宁夏参将王荣尝举其过。
现代文：兵部尚书王骥、宁夏参将王荣曾检举他的过失。
English: He was accused of wrongdoing by the military commissar, Shangshu Wang Qi, and the Ningxia general staff, Wang Rong.

古文：朝议，以昭守边久，习兵事，不易也。
现代文：朝议以史昭守边已久，熟悉兵事，而没有更换他。
English: The imperial court deliberated on replacing Shi Zhao, who had been in the position for a long time and was familiar with military affairs, but did not replace him.

古文：正统中，致仕。巫凯，句容人。由庐州卫百户积功至都指挥同知。
现代文：与史昭一起任边将最久，又有勋绩与他相称的人：都督同知刘昭镇守西宁达二十年，都指挥李远镇守洮州达四十年，都为蕃人、汉人所畏服。巫凯，句容人。由庐州卫百户积功升至都指挥同知。
English: Along with Shi Zhao, he was the longest-serving governor-general, and there were people whose achievements were commensurate with his: Liu Zhao, the governor-general's comrade-in-arms, held Xining for twenty years, and Li Yuan, the governor-general's comrade-in-arms, held Bozhou for forty years, both of whom were feared by the people of Bozhou and Han. Wu Kai, the governor-general's comrade-in-arms, and Gu Rong, the governor-general's comrade-in-arms, rose to the position of commander-in-chief of Bozhou from the hundred households of

古文：永乐六年以从英国公张辅平交阯功，迁辽东都指挥使。
现代文：永乐六年，巫凯因跟随英国公张辅平定交趾有功，升为辽东都指挥使。
English: In the sixth year of Yongle, Wu Kai was promoted to Liaodongdu Commander-in-Chief for his contribution to following the British public Zhang Fu's pacification of the enemy.

古文：十一年召帅所部会北京。
现代文：十一年，巫凯奉诏率所部会集北京。
English: In the eleventh year, Wukai Bongao led the club to Beijing.

古文：明年从征沙漠，命先还。
现代文：第二年，随军征讨沙漠，受命先返。
English: The following year, he went with the army to fight in the desert and was ordered to return first.

古文：凯言诸卫兵宜以三之二守御，而以其一屯粮，开原市马悉给本卫乘操。
现代文：巫凯建议诸卫兵应当以三分之二负责防守，三分之一屯田种粮，并将在开原买人的马匹全部交给本卫操练。
English: Wu Kai suggested that the guards should be responsible for two-thirds of the defense, one-third of the farmland to grow grain, and all the horses bought in Kaiyuan should be handed over to the guards for training.

古文：从之。
现代文：这些都被采纳。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宣宗立，以都督佥事佩征虏前将军印，代朱荣镇辽东。
现代文：宣宗即位后，巫凯以都督佥事的身份佩带征虏前将军印，代替朱荣镇守辽东。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Wukai, as the prefect of the Ancestral Capital, wore the seal of the former general in charge of conquering and taking captives, and replaced Zhu Rong as the commander of Liaodong.

古文：时中国人自塞外脱归者，令悉送京师，俟亲属赴领。
现代文：当时对从塞外逃回的中原人，朝廷下令全部送往京城，等其亲属前来认领。
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered that all the Central Plains people who had fled from outside of Serbia be sent to the capital, waiting for their relatives to come and claim them.

古文：凯言远道往来，恐致失所，阻远人慕归心。
现代文：巫凯却说远道往来，恐怕会使他们流离失所，从而阻碍远方人们的慕归之心。
English: However, Wukai said that long-distance travel would probably cause them to be displaced, thus hindering people's longing to return.

古文：乃更令有马及少壮者送京师，余得自便。
现代文：朝廷于是改为将有马的人及年少体壮者送往京城，其他的可以自便。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court changed its policy to send people with horses and the young and able-bodied to the capital, while others could go on their own.

古文：敌掠西山，凯击败之，尽得所掠者，降敕褒勉。
现代文：敌寇抢掠西山，巫凯率军击败之，缴获敌寇所抢掠的全部东西，皇上降旨褒勉他。
English: The enemy raiders plundered the West Mountain, Wukai and his army defeated them and captured everything that the enemy raiders had looted, and the emperor issued an order to commend him.

古文：帝尝遣使造舟松花江招诸部。
现代文：皇上曾派遣使者在松花江造船招抚诸部。
English: The emperor once sent an envoy to the shipbuilding industry in the Songhua River to solicit various ministries.

古文：地远，军民转输大困，多逃亡。
现代文：因为地处偏远，军民转运十分艰难，许多人逃亡。
English: Because of its remote location, it was very difficult to transport soldiers and civilians, and many fled.

古文：会有警，凯力请罢其役，而逃军入海西诸部者已五百余人。
现代文：当时正有紧急情况，巫凯极力请求停止此役，而加人海西诸部的逃兵已有五百余人。
English: At that time, there was an emergency, Wuchai strongly requested to stop the campaign, and there were more than five hundred deserters in the western part of the Canary Islands.

古文：既而造舟役复兴，中官阮尧民、都指挥刘清等董之。
现代文：不久，重又开始造船劳役，由宦官阮尧民、都指挥刘清等监督管理。
English: Soon after, Chong again began shipbuilding labor service, supervised and managed by eunuch Ruan Haomin, Du Du commander Liu Qing and others.

古文：多不法，致激变。
现代文：他们多行不法，以致造成激变。
English: They have committed many iniquities, and they have made great havoc.

古文：凯劾尧民等，下之吏。
现代文：巫凯弹劾阮尧民等人，将他们交给司法官吏审问治罪。
English: Wu Kai impeached Nguyen Xuan Minh and others and handed them over to judicial officials for trial and punishment.

古文：英宗登极，进都督同知，上言边情八事。
现代文：英宗即位后，巫凯升为都督同知，他上奏八件边防事宜。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Wuchai became the same acquaintance as the governor, and he reported eight border defense matters.

古文：请厚恤死事者家，益官吏折俸钞，岁给军士冬衣布棉，军中口粮刍粟如旧制，且召商实边。
现代文：他请求厚恤那些为国效力而死者的家人，增加官吏的折棒纸币，每年供给士兵冬天的衣服、棉布，军中口粮、草粮一切照旧，并且应招来商人充实边境。
English: He requested that the families of those who died in the service of the country should be treated generously, that the amount of paper money given to officials should be increased, that the soldiers should be provided with winter clothes, cotton cloth, military rations, and grass grain every year as before, and that merchants should be invited to enrich the border.

古文：俱允行。
现代文：朝廷都应允实行。
English: The Imperial Court agreed to implement it.

古文：未几，为兵部尚书王骥所劾。
现代文：不久，巫凯被兵部尚书王骥所弹劾。
English: Soon after, Wu Kai was impeached by the commander of the Military Department, Shang Shu Wang.

古文：朝廷知凯贤，令凯自陈。
现代文：朝廷知道巫凯很贤能，命巫凯诉说自己的情况。
English: The imperial court knew that Wu Kai was very capable, and ordered Wu Kai to tell them about his situation.

古文：并谕廷臣，文武官有罪得实始奏，诬者罪不贷。
现代文：并且谕示廷臣，文武百官中如果有罪，必得得到证据后才能上奏，诬告者罪不能免。
English: He also instructed courtiers that if any of the hundreds of civil and military officials were guilty, they must obtain evidence before reporting it. False accusers could not be absolved of their crimes.

古文：凯由是得行其志。
现代文：巫凯因此得以去实现他的志向。
English: As a result, Wu Kai was able to realize his ambition to become a star.

古文：正统三年十二月有疾，命医驰视，未至而卒。
现代文：正统三年十二月，巫凯得病，皇上命医生迅速赶去看病，人还未到，巫凯便去世了。
English: In December of the third year of Zheng Zheng, Wukai fell ill. The imperial doctor quickly rushed to see him, but before anyone arrived, Wukai passed away.

古文：凯性刚毅，饶智略，驭众严而有恩。
现代文：巫凯性情刚毅，富有智谋，对部属严而有恩。
English: Wukai was a man of fortitude, resourceful, and strict with subordinates.

古文：在辽东三十余年，威惠并行，边务修饬。
现代文：他在辽东三十余年，威惠并行，边防大获整顿。
English: He has been in Liaodong for more than 30 years, and the border defense has been greatly rectified.

古文：前后守东陲者，曹义外皆莫及。
现代文：前后驻守东方边陲的人，除了曹义之外，谁也不能与巫凯相比。
English: Apart from Cao Yi, no one who has been stationed on the eastern border can be compared to Wu Kai.

古文：义，字敬方，仪真人。
现代文：曹义，字敬方，仪真人。
English: Cao Yi, Zi Jing Fang, Yi Zhenren.

古文：以燕山左卫指挥佥事累功至都督佥事，副凯守辽东。
现代文：从燕山左卫指挥佥事积功升至都督佥事，协助巫凯驻守辽东。
English: He rose from the commander of the Yanshan Left Division to the governor of the capital, and assisted Wu Kai in garrisoning Liaodong.

古文：凯卒，代为总兵官。
现代文：巫凯去世后，曹义代替他为总兵官。
English: After the death of Wu Kai, Cao Yi replaced him as the general officer.

古文：凯，名将，义承其后，廉介有守，辽人安之。
现代文：巫凯是一位名将，曹义承继其后，廉洁有操守，使辽东从此能安居乐业。
English: Wukai was a famous general, and Cao Yi succeeded him. He was a man of integrity, enabling Liaodong to live and work in peace.

古文：兀良哈犯广宁前屯，诏切责，命王翱往饬军务，劾义死罪。
现代文：兀良哈侵犯广宁前屯，朝廷下诏切责他，并命王翱前去整顿军务，将曹义弹劾成死罪。
English: Gong Liang Ha violated the Guangning Qian Tun, the imperial court issued an edict to severely reprimand him, and ordered Wang Xi to go to rectify the military affairs and impeach Cao Yi as a capital crime.

古文：顷之，义获犯边孛台等，诏戮于市。
现代文：不久，曹义俘获侵犯边境的李台等人，朝廷下诏将他们在街市上斩首。
English: Soon after, Cao Yi captured Li Tai and others who had violated the border, and the imperial court ordered that they be beheaded in the market.

古文：自是义数与兀良哈战。
现代文：从此，曹义多次与兀良哈交战。
English: From then on, Cao Yi fought with Ao Liang Ha many times.

古文：正统九年，会朱勇军夹击。斩获多，进都督同知，累官左都督。
现代文：正统九年，他会合朱勇军夹击敌寇，俘斩很多，进升为都督同知，后屡升为左都督。
English: In the ninth year of orthodoxy, he would join the Zhu Yong Army to crush the enemy corsairs, capture and behead many, and was promoted to the same rank as the governor, and later repeatedly promoted to the left governor.

古文：义在边二十年，无赫赫功，然能谨守边陲。
现代文：曹义在边疆二十年，没有赫赫功劳，但却能谨守边陲。
English: Cao Yi has been in the frontier for twenty years, without any great achievements, but he can guard the border.

古文：其麾下施聚、焦礼等皆至大将。
现代文：其部下施聚、焦礼等都升至大将。
English: His subordinates Shi Ju and Jiao Li were promoted to the rank of general.

古文：英宗复辟，特封义丰润伯，聚亦封怀柔伯。
现代文：英宗复辟后，特封曹义为丰润伯、施聚为怀柔伯。
English: After the restoration of the Yingzong, Cao Yi was given the title of Fengrun Pu, and Shi Jiu was given the title of Huairou Pu.

古文：居四年，义卒，赠侯，谥庄武。
现代文：过了四年，曹义去世，被赠为侯，谥号庄武。
English: Four years later, Cao Yi passed away and was given the title of marquis and the posthumous name of Zhuangwu.

古文：继室李氏殉，诏旌之。
现代文：其继室李氏以死殉夫，朝廷下诏表彰了她。
English: His step-sister, Li, died in childbirth, and the imperial court honored her with an imperial edict.

古文：施聚，其先沙漠人，居顺天通州。
现代文：施聚，其祖先是沙漠人，住在顺天通州。
English: Shi Jiu, whose ancestors were desert people, lives in Shuntian Tongzhou.

古文：父忠为金吾右卫指挥使，从北征，阵殁，聚嗣职。
现代文：父亲施忠为金吾右卫指挥使，跟随北征时战死，施聚承袭其职。
English: Shizhong's father was the commanding officer of the Jinwuwei army and died during the Northern Expedition. Shizhong inherited his position.

古文：宣德中，备御辽东，累擢都指挥同知。
现代文：宣德年中，施聚防守辽东，屡升至都指挥同知。
English: In the middle of the Xuande year, Shizhu defended Liaodong and repeatedly rose to the top of the city command.

古文：以义荐，进都指挥使。
现代文：因曹义的推荐，施聚进升为都指挥使。
English: As a result of Cao Yi's recommendation, Shi Juxin was promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：义与兀良哈战，聚皆从。
现代文：曹义与兀良哈作战，施聚都跟随着他。
English: Cao Yi fought with Gong Liang Ha, and all of Shizhu followed him.

古文：也先逼京师，景帝诏聚与焦礼俱入卫。
现代文：也先进逼京城，景帝诏令施聚与焦礼都入京保卫。
English: They also advanced to force the capital, and Emperor Jing ordered Shi Jiu and Jiao Li to enter and defend the capital.

古文：聚恸哭，即日引兵西。
现代文：施聚痛哭不已，即日便引兵往西。
English: Shizhu wept bitterly, and on the same day he led his army westward.

古文：部下进牛酒，聚挥之曰： 天子安在？吾属何心飨此！ 
现代文：部下献上牛肉与酒，施聚甩掉说道： 现在天子在何处，我们哪还有心思享受这些东西呢？ 
English: His subordinates presented him with beef and wine, threw away the gifts and said: "Where is God now, how can we still have the heart to enjoy these things?

古文：比至，寇已退，乃还。
现代文：当他们赶到京城时，敌寇已退，于是又返回辽东。
English: When they arrived in Beijing, the enemy bandits had retreated, so they returned to Liaodong.

古文：聚以勇敢称，官至左都督。
现代文：施聚以勇敢闻名，升至左都督。
English: Shi Jiu, known for his bravery, was promoted to left-wing governor.

古文：值英宗推恩，得封伯。
现代文：正值英宗推恩，他得以封为伯。
English: It was at the time of the enthronement of Emperor Yingzong that he was given the title of grand patriarch.

古文：后义二年卒，赠侯，谥威靖。
现代文：他在曹义死后二年去世，被赠为侯，谥号威靖。
English: He died two years after Cao Yi's death and was given the title of marquis and the posthumous name of Weijing.

古文：义三传至栋，聚四传至瑾，吏部皆言不当复袭，世宗特许之。
现代文：曹义下传三代至曹栋，施聚下传四代至施瑾时，吏部都说不应当再继续承袭爵位，世宗却特许之。
English: When Cao Yi was passed down for three generations to Caodong, and Shijun was passed down for four generations to Shijun, the officials all said that they should not continue to inherit the title, but the Sejong specifically allowed it.

古文：传爵至明亡。
现代文：两家爵位一直传至明朝灭亡。
English: The two peerages were passed down until the fall of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：许贵，字用和，江都人，永新伯成子也。
现代文：许贵，字用和，江都人，永新伯许成之子。
English: Xu Gui, the character with and, Jiangdu people, Yongxin Bo, the son of Xu Chenglu.

古文：袭职为羽林左卫指挥使。
现代文：他承袭羽林左卫指挥使之职。
English: He succeeds Ulin Sawei in commanding the troupe.

古文：安乡伯张安举贵将才，试骑射及策皆最，擢署都指挥同知。
现代文：安乡伯张安举荐许贵为将才，在测试骑射及策问时，许贵都名列第一，被提拔为代理都指挥同知。
English: Anxiang Bo Zhang An recommended Xu Gui as a general. In the test of riding and shooting and questioning, Xu Gui ranked first and was promoted as an agent.

古文：寻以武进伯朱冕荐擢山西行都司，督操大同诸卫士马。
现代文：随即又因武进伯朱冕的推荐而被提升为山西行都司，监督大同诸卫兵马操练。
English: Subsequently, he was promoted to the Shanxi Provincial Governor on the recommendation of Wujin Baizhu Guan, supervising the horse exercise of Datong guards.

古文：正统末，守备大同西路。
现代文：正统末年，许贵防守大同西路。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, Xu Gui defended West Datong Road.

古文：也先入寇，从石亨战阳和后口，败绩，贵力战得还。
现代文：也先人侵，许贵跟随石亨与敌战于阳和后口，战败，许贵拼力奋战才得以返回。
English: The ancestors also invaded, Xu Gui followed Shi Heng and fought with the enemy in Yang and Houkou, defeated, Xu Gui fought hard to return.

古文：英宗北狩，边城悉残破，大同当敌冲，人心尤恟惧。
现代文：英宗被俘后，边城全都残破不堪，大同直挡敌寇要冲，人心更加惶惶不安。
English: After Yingzong was captured, the border towns were all in ruins, Datong directly blocked the enemy's attack, and people were even more anxious.

古文：贵以忠义激战士。
现代文：许贵以忠义之言激励将士。
English: Xu Gui encouraged the soldiers with words of loyalty.

古文：敌来，击败之。进都指挥使。
现代文：敌寇来侵，许贵率军将敌击败，进升为都指挥使。
English: When the enemy corsairs invaded, Xu Gui led the army to defeat the enemy and was promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：景泰元年春，充右参将。
现代文：景泰元年春，许贵充任右参将。
English: In the spring of the first year of Jing Tai, Xu Gui was appointed as the right-hand general.

古文：敌寇威远，追败之浦州营，夺还所掠人畜。
现代文：敌军侵犯威远，许贵率军追至蒲州营，击败敌军，夺回其所掠人畜。
English: The enemy army invaded Dafeng, and Xu Gui led the army to the Puzhou camp, defeated the enemy army, and recaptured the human and livestock it had looted.

古文：敌万骑逼城下，御却之。
现代文：敌军一万骑兵进逼城下，许贵又将其击退。
English: The enemy's army of ten thousand cavalrymen entered and forced the city down, and Xu Gui repulsed them.

古文：再迁都督同知。
现代文：他再升为都督同知。
English: He was later promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：大同乏马，命求民间，得八百余匹。
现代文：大同缺乏马匹，奉命在民间寻找，获得八百余匹。
English: Datong was short of horses and was ordered to look for them among the people, obtaining more than eight hundred horses.

古文：所司不给直，贵为请，乃予之。
现代文：官府不愿付钱，许贵代为请求，才同意支付。
English: The government didn't want to pay, and only agreed to pay after Mr. Xu petitioned on its behalf.

古文：尝募死士入贼垒，劫马百余，悉畀战士，士皆乐为用。
现代文：他曾招募敢死队进入贼垒，劫回百余匹马，全部交给战士，士兵骑上都很高兴。
English: He once recruited death squads to enter the bastion of thieves, recaptured more than a hundred horses, and handed them all over to the soldiers. The soldiers were very happy to ride.

古文：分守中官韦力转淫虐，众莫敢言，贵劾奏之。
现代文：分守宦官韦力转放荡残暴，无人敢言，许贵上奏弹劾他。
English: When Wei Li, the eunuch in charge, turned to debauchery and brutality, no one dared to say that Xu Gui should impeach him.

古文：三年，疾还京。
现代文：三年，许贵因病返京。
English: Three years later, Xu Gui returned to Beijing due to illness.

古文：英宗复辟，命理左府事，寻调南京。
现代文：英宗复辟后，许贵奉命管理左府事务，随即又调往南京。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Xu Gui was ordered to manage the affairs of Zuofu, and was immediately transferred to Nanjing.

古文：松潘地杂番苗，密迩董卜韩胡，旧设参将一人。
现代文：松潘有苗族杂居，贴近董卜韩胡，以前设有参将一人。
English: Songpan has mixed-race Miao residents, is close to Dongbu Hanhu, and used to have one general.

古文：天顺五年，守臣告警，廷议设副总兵，以贵镇守。
现代文：天顺五年，守臣告急，朝廷商议设立副总兵，命许贵前去镇守。
English: In the fifth year of Tenshun, Shouin was in a hurry, and the imperial court deliberated on the establishment of a deputy general, and ordered Xu Gui to go to the town guard.

古文：子泰，自有传。周贤，滁人，袭宣府前卫千户。
现代文：周贤，滁阳人，承袭宣府前卫千户之职。
English: Zhou Xian, a native of Shenyang, inherits the post of the vanguard of the Xuanfu.

古文：景泰初，累功至都指挥佥事，守备西猫儿峪，助副总兵孙安守石八城。
现代文：景泰初年，他积功升至都指挥佥事，防守西猫儿峪，协助副总兵孙安驻守石八城。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he rose to the rank of commander of the capital, defended the West Cat Village, and assisted Vice-Commander-in-Chief Sun An in garrisoning Shi Baicheng.

古文：寻充右参将，代安镇守。
现代文：周贤随即充任右参将，代替孙安镇守石八城。
English: Zhou Xian was immediately appointed to the post of Right Assistant General, replacing Sun Anzhen as the governor of Shishihacheng.

古文：兀良哈入寇，总兵官过兴令宣府副将杨信及贤合击。
现代文：兀良哈人侵，总兵官过兴命宣府副将杨信及周贤率军合击。
English: Qianliangha invaded, and the commander-in-chief ordered the vice generals Yang Xin and Zhou Xian to lead the army in a joint attack.

古文：贤不俟信，径击败之。
现代文：周贤未等杨信到达，便径自击败敌军。
English: Zhou Xian did not wait for Yang Xin to arrive, and he defeated the enemy army on his own.

古文：信被劾，都御史李秉言信缓师，贤亦弃约。
现代文：杨信被弹劾，都御史李秉说杨信出师太慢，周贤也未守约。
English: Yang Xin was impeached, and the governor of the capital, Li Bing, said that Yang Xin was too slow in appointing a teacher, and Zhou Xian did not keep his promise.

古文：帝两宥之。
现代文：皇上皆予宽恕。
English: The emperor pardoned them all.

古文：天顺初，总兵官杨能奏贤擢都督佥事。
现代文：天顺初年，总兵官杨能上奏，使周贤被提拔为都督佥事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Yang Neng, the chief military officer, was promoted to the post of general, and Zhou Xian was promoted to the post of provincial governor.

古文：寇驻塞下，能檄贤与大军会，失期，征下狱。
现代文：敌寇驻扎塞下，杨能命周贤与大军会合，周贤贻误军机而被追究下狱。
English: After the enemy corsairs were encamped, Yang Neng ordered Zhou Xian to meet with the large army. Zhou Xian missed the military plane and was prosecuted and sent to prison.

古文：以故官赴宁夏，隶定远伯石彪。
现代文：他以原职奔赴宁夏，隶属定远伯石彪。
English: He rushed to Ningxia with his original post and was subordinate to Dingyuan Bo Shibiao.

古文：寇二万骑入安边营。
现代文：二万敌寇进入安边营。
English: Twenty thousand enemy raiders entered the Anbian camp.

古文：彪率贤等击之，连战皆捷，追至野马涧、半坡墩，寇大败。
现代文：石彪率周贤等攻击之，连战皆捷，追至野马涧、半坡墩，敌寇大败。
English: Shi Biao led Zhou Xian and others to attack, and they were successful in consecutive battles. They chased them to Mustang and Half Slope, and the enemy bandits were defeated.

古文：后莅甘肃，部下屡失事，又侵屯田。
现代文：而周贤仍不停地追，不幸被飞箭射中死去。皇上下诏赠他为都督同知。
English: However, Zhou Xian still chased after him, and unfortunately was shot by an arrow and died. The emperor presented him with the imperial edict as a friend of the governor.

古文：死后事发，子袭职，降二等。欧信，嗣世职金吾右卫指挥使。
现代文：周贤当初被交给司法官吏审问治罪，自觉不会再被起用，当他被释放时，他感激不已，发誓要以死相报，结果真的如他所愿。欧信，承袭世袭职位任金吾右卫指挥史。
English: Zhou Xian was initially handed over to judicial officials for interrogation and punishment, and he knew that he would not be used again. When he was released, he was so grateful that he vowed to repay with his death, and the result was really as he wished.

古文：景泰三年以广东破贼功，擢都指挥同知。
现代文：景泰三年，欧信因在广东破贼有功，被提拔为都指挥同知。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, Ou Xin was promoted to be the leader of the city because of his achievements in Guangdong.

古文：已，命守备白羊口，迁大宁都指挥使。
现代文：不久，他奉命守备白羊口，升为大宁都指挥使。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to guard the White Goat Pass and was promoted to the commanding officer of the Dairen capital.

古文：天顺初，以都督佥事充参将，守备广东雷、廉诸府。
现代文：天顺初年，欧信以都督佥事的身份充任参将，守备广东之雷、廉诸府。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Ou Xin served as a general in the capacity of the governor of Anji, guarding the lightning of Guangdong and the provinces.

古文：巡抚叶盛荐其廉勇。进都督同知，代副总兵翁信。
现代文：巡抚叶盛举荐说欧信廉洁而勇猛，欧信于是进升为都督同知，代替副总兵翁信。
English: Ye Sheng, the procurator, recommended that Ou Xin was honest and brave. Ou Xin was then promoted to the same rank as the governor, replacing the vice-chief soldier Weng Xin.

古文：两广瑶僮陷开建，杀官吏，帝趣进兵。
现代文：两广的瑶、僮两族人攻陷开建，杀害官吏，皇上催促进兵。
English: In the two provinces, people from the Min and Min peoples attacked and began construction, killing officials, and the emperor urged the promotion of soldiers.

古文：信破贼化州之马里村，再破之石城，击斩海南卫反者邵瑄。
现代文：欧信在化州之马里村击败贼寇，又败之于石城，击杀海南卫谋反者邵瑄。
English: Ou Xin defeated the bandits in Mali Village of Huazhou, and defeated them again in Shicheng, and killed the Hainan resistance fighter Shao Jun.

古文：时所在盗群起，将吏不能定。
现代文：当时欧信所在之处群贼四起，将吏们平定不了。
English: At that time, a group of thieves gathered at the place where Ou Xin was, and the officials could not be subdued.

古文：广西参将范信守浔、梧，瑶尽在境内，阴纳瑶赂，纵使越境流劫，约毋犯己。
现代文：广西参将范信驻守得、梧二州，瑶族全都住在境内，他暗自收纳瑶族的贿赂，纵使他们越境流窜劫掠，相约只要他们不在自己境内骚扰就行。
English: Fan Xin, the senior general of Guangxi, was stationed in Guizhou and Guizhou, and the Yi people all lived in the territory. He secretly accepted bribes from the Yi people, and even if they crossed the border to loot and plunder, they agreed to do so as long as they did not harass in their own territory.

古文：于是雷、廉、高、肇悉被寇。
现代文：于是雷、廉、高、肇全受到他们的骚扰。
English: As a result, Lei, Lian, Gao and Zhao were all harassed by them.

古文：帝命广西总兵官陈泾及信合剿。
现代文：皇上命广西总兵官陈泾及欧信合兵围剿。
English: The emperor ordered the Guangxi military commander Chen Qi and the European believers to join forces to encircle the enemy.

古文：时有斩馘，而贼势不衰，朝廷犹倚范信。
现代文：虽然时有斩获，而贼势却并未衰弱，朝廷也仍然倚重欧信。
English: Although there have been some gains, the power of the thieves has not weakened, and the imperial court still relies on Euronews.

古文：会泾以罪征，乃擢范信都督佥事充副总兵，镇广东，而命信佩征蛮将军印，代泾镇广西。
现代文：又逢陈泾因罪受到追究，于是朝廷提升欧信以都督佥事的身份充任副总兵，镇守广东，而命欧信佩带征蛮将军印，代替陈泾镇守广西。
English: Whenever Chen Xi was investigated for a crime, the imperial court promoted Ou Xin to the post of deputy commander-in-chief to guard Guangdong, and ordered Ou Xin to wear the seal of a conquering general to guard Guangxi in place of Chen Xi.

古文：成化元年，贼掠英德诸县，信讨斩五百余人，夺还人口。
现代文：成化元年，贼寇抢掠英德诸县，欧信出兵征讨并斩首五百余人，夺回被掠人口。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, thieves and robbers plundered Yingde counties, and the Ouxin dispatched troops to recruit and behead more than 500 people to recapture the plundered population.

古文：韩雍督师，令信等分五哨，攻破大藤峡。
现代文：韩雍督率军队，命欧信等分兵五路，攻破大藤峡。
English: Commander Han Yong led the army and ordered five detachments, including Ou Xin, to break through the Dafeng Gorge.

古文：已而余贼复入浔州，信被劾获宥，召还，理前府事。
现代文：不久，余贼又人侵得浔州，欧信被弹劾，却又获得宽恕，应诏回京，管理前府事务。
English: Soon, the remaining thieves invaded Zhangzhou again. Ou Xin was impeached, but he was pardoned and returned to Beijing to manage the affairs of the former capital.

古文：七年春，充总兵官，镇守辽东，累败福余三卫。
现代文：七年春，欧信充任总兵官，镇守辽东，屡败福余三卫。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Ou Xin was appointed as the chief military officer, the town guard of Liaodong, and repeatedly defeated Fu Yu Sanwei.

古文：言者谓信已老，请召还。
现代文：在朝议论者说欧信已老，请求将他召回。
English: In the DPRK, commentators said that Ou Xin was old and requested that he be recalled.

古文：巡抚彭谊奏： 官军耆老五千余人，皆言信忠谨有谋勇，累立战功，威镇边陲。
现代文：巡抚彭谊却上奏说： 官军中耆老五千余人，都说欧信忠诚、谨慎，有勇有谋，屡立战功，威震边陲。
English: However, the governor, Peng Jiyi, made a report, saying, "More than five thousand veterans in the government army all said that Ou Xin was loyal, prudent, brave and resourceful, and had repeatedly made great achievements in war.

古文：年六旬，骑射胜壮士，不宜召回。 
现代文：虽年已六旬，骑马射箭却胜过壮士，不应当召回他。 
English: Although he is sixty years old, he is better at horse riding and archery than a strong man. He should not be recalled.

古文：乃留镇如故。
现代文：欧信这才留镇辽东。
English: It was only then that the European letter stayed in Liaodong.

古文：久之，陈钺代谊。
现代文：久之，陈锁代替了彭谊之职。
English: After a long time, Chen Zhao took the place of Peng Rui.

古文：钺贪功，信不能违，十四年为巡按王崇之所劾。
现代文：陈锁贪功，欧信不能违背他，十四年，被巡按王崇之所弹劾。
English: Chen Zhao was greedy for power, and the European letter could not go against him. In fourteen years, he was impeached by the procurator Wang Chongzhi.

古文：其冬，乃召归。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷将欧信召回京城。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial court summoned him back to the capital.

古文：寻遣中官汪直等往按，直右钺，归罪信等。
现代文：随即派遣宦官汪直等前往辽东审察此事，汪直包庇陈钺，将事情归罪于欧信等人。
English: The eunuch Wang Zhi and others were immediately dispatched to Liaodong to investigate the matter. Wang Zhi protected Chen Qi and blamed the matter on Ou Xin and others.

古文：下狱，镌一官闲住，饮恨而卒。
现代文：欧信被下狱，官降一级闲住无聊，终饮恨而死。
English: Ou Xin was sent to prison, demoted one level, idle and bored, and eventually died of hatred.

古文：范信既徙广东，贼势愈盛，劫掠不止，乃语人曰： 今贼仍犯广东，亦我遣之耶。 
现代文：欧信被调任广东后，贼势更盛，劫掠不止，范信于是对人说道： 现在贼寇仍在侵犯广东，难道也是我让他们这么做的吗？ 
English: After Ou Xin was transferred to Guangdong, the bandits became more powerful and robbed more and more, so Fan Xin said to others: Now the bandits are still invading Guangdong, did I let them do it?

古文：而是时都督颜彪佩征夷将军印，讨贼久无功，滥杀良民报捷。
现代文：而这时都督颜彪佩征夷将军印，讨贼久而无功，却为了报捷而滥杀良民。
English: At this time, however, Yan Biao, the governor of the capital, wore the seal of a general in charge of conquering the barbarians. He had been trying to persuade the thieves for a long time without success, but he killed good people indiscriminately in order to achieve success.

古文：岭南人咸疾之。
现代文：岭南人都十分憎恨他。
English: Lingnan people all hate him very much.

古文：王玺，太原左卫指挥同知也。
现代文：王玺是太原左卫指挥同知。
English: Wang Yao is a friend of Taiyuan Zuwei's conductor.

古文：成化初，擢署都指挥佥事，守御黄河七墅。
现代文：成化初年，他被提升为代理都指挥佥事，守备黄河七座别墅。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was promoted to acting commander and guarded seven villas on the Yellow River.

古文：巡抚李侃荐于朝。
现代文：巡抚李侃向朝廷推荐他。
English: The governor, Li Kan, recommended him to the imperial court.

古文：阿鲁出寇延绥，命充游击将军赴援，战孤山堡，败之。
现代文：阿鲁出侵犯延绥，王玺奉命充任游击将军赴援，与敌寇战于孤山堡，击败之。
English: Aru invaded Yancheng, and Wang Xi was ordered to serve as a guerrilla general to come to the rescue. He fought with the enemy bandits in the lonely mountain fortress and defeated them.

古文：寇再入，战漫天岭、刘宗坞及漫塔、水磨川，皆有功。
现代文：敌寇再次人侵，王玺战于漫天岭、刘宗坞及漫塔、水磨川，都有功劳。
English: The enemy corsairs invaded again, and Wang Xi fought in Mantianling, Liu Zongwu and Manta, and Suima River, all of which were meritorious.

古文：进都指挥同知，充副总兵，镇守宁夏。
现代文：他因而进升为都指挥同知，充任副总兵，镇守宁夏。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the same rank as the commander of the capital, serving as deputy commander-in-chief and garrison commander of Ningxia.

古文：九年以将才与周玉同荐。
现代文：九年，王玺作为将才与周玉一同被荐举。
English: In the ninth year, Wang Qi was recommended for promotion together with Zhou Yu as a general.

古文：十二年擢署都督佥事，充总兵官，镇守甘肃。
现代文：十二年，他被提升为代理都督佥事，充任总兵官，镇守甘肃。
English: In 12 years, he was promoted to acting governor of Anji, appointed chief military officer, and became the town guard of Gansu.

古文：黄河以西，自庄浪抵肃州南山，其外番人阿吉等二十九族所居也。
现代文：黄河以西，自庄浪至肃州南山，是外番人阿吉等二十九族人所居之处。
English: To the west of the Yellow River, from Zhuanglang to Nanshan of Suzhou, is the place where the people of 29 ethnic groups, including the outside watchman Aji, live.

古文：洪武间，立石画界，约樵牧毋越疆，岁久湮废，诸番往往阑入，而中国无赖人又潜与交通为边患。
现代文：洪武年间，立石划界，相约砍樵放牧不能越过疆界。界石因岁久被埋没废弃，诸番往往擅自进入，而中原的无赖又暗中与之来往，成为边患。
English: During the Hongwu era, a boundary stone was set up to delineate the boundary, and it was agreed that no cattle could cross the boundary. As the boundary stone had been buried and abandoned for a long time, the guards often entered without permission, and the scoundrels in the Central Plains secretly interacted with them, becoming a border problem.

古文：玺请 复画疆域，召集诸番，谕以界石废，恐官军欺凌诸部，今复立之，听界外驻牧，互市则入关。
现代文：王玺请求道： 重新划定疆界，然后召集诸番，告诉他们因为界石已废，惟恐官军欺凌诸部，现在重新立石，任凭他们在界外驻留放牧，互市时则可人关。
English: Wang Yao pleaded: Re-draw the boundary, then convene the officials and tell them that because the boundary stone has been abolished, but for fear of the official army bullying the ministries, now re-erect the stone, let them stay outside the boundary for grazing, and they can be closed when trading.

古文：如此，番人必听命，可潜消他日忧。 
现代文：如此，番族必然听命，便可悄悄消除他日之忧患。 
English: In this way, the vassals will inevitably obey orders, and they can quietly eliminate the worries of the day.

古文：帝称善，从之。
现代文：皇上觉得有理，便听从了他。
English: The Emperor felt justified and obeyed him.

古文：十七年进署都督同知。
现代文：十七年，王玺进升为理都督同知。
English: In the seventeenth year, Wang Xingjin was promoted to the position of the provincial governor.

古文：时玺以都督佥事为总兵官，而鲁鉴以署都督同知为参将，玺恐难于节制，乞解兵柄，故有是命。
现代文：当时王玺以都督佥事的身份任总兵官，而鲁鉴以代理都督同知的身份为参将，王玺惟恐难于节制，请求解除兵权，因此才有以上的任命。
English: At that time, Wang Xi was appointed as the commander-in-chief with the status of the deputy governor, while Lu Jian was appointed as the deputy governor with the status of the deputy governor. Wang Xi, however, feared that it would be difficult to restrain himself and requested to be relieved of his military powers, which is why he was appointed above.

古文：初，哈密为土鲁番所扰，使其将牙兰守之。
现代文：当初，哈密为吐鲁番所骚扰，便命其将牙兰驻守。
English: At first, Hami was harassed by Turuban and ordered him to garrison Aslan.

古文：都督罕慎寄居苦峪口，近赤斤、罕东，数相攻，罕慎势穷无援。
现代文：都督罕慎寄居苦峪口，挨近赤斤、罕东，双方多次互相攻击，罕慎势穷无援。
English: The governor, Han Sheng, lived in Kudankou, close to Chakjin and Handong. The two sides repeatedly attacked each other, and Han Sheng was helpless.

古文：朝议敕玺筑城苦峪，别立哈密卫以居之。
现代文：朝廷商议后命王玺在苦峪口筑城，另立哈密卫驻守。
English: After deliberation, the imperial court ordered Wang Qian to build a city at the mouth of the Cu Chi River, and set up a separate Hamiwei garrison.

古文：玺遣谍者间牙兰。
现代文：王玺派间谍去离间牙兰。
English: Wang Yao sent spies to separate the two countries.

古文：牙兰不听，得其所羁掠九十余人以归，具悉虚实。
现代文：牙兰不听，间谍于是夺得被其所掠的九十余人而归，将所探虚实全部上报。
English: As Gawain did not listen, the spy returned with the more than ninety people he had captured, and reported everything he had discovered.

古文：十七年召集赤斤、罕东将士，犒以牛酒，令助罕慎。
现代文：十七年，王玺召集赤斤、罕东将士，以牛肉、酒食犒劳，命他们协助罕慎。
English: In the seventeenth year, Wang Yao called together the Red Cranes and the East Han soldiers, rewarded them with beef, wine and food, and ordered them to help Han Sheng.

古文：罕慎合二卫兵，夜袭哈密及剌木等八城，遂复其地，仍令罕慎居之。
现代文：罕慎会合二卫兵，夜袭哈密及刺木等八城，于是收复其地，仍命罕慎驻守。
English: The two guards met at night and attacked eight cities, including Hami and Sashiki, and then recaptured their lands. They remained on guard for the rest of their lives.

古文：事闻，奖劳，赉金币。
现代文：捷报上奏，朝廷给予褒奖慰劳，并赏赐金币。
English: The victory was reported, and the imperial court gave a commendation and reward, and awarded gold coins.

古文：已，罕东入寇，玺御却之，请兴师以讨。
现代文：不久，罕慎自东人侵，王玺击退之，并请求兴师征讨。
English: Not long after, Han Shan invaded from the east, and Wang Xi repulsed them and requested Xing Division to fight against them.

古文：帝念其常助罕慎，第遣使责谕。
现代文：皇上念其时常协助罕慎，只派遣使臣予以责备。
English: The emperor thought it prudent to assist him from time to time, and only sent envoys to reprimand him.

古文：明年，北寇杀哨卒，玺率参将李俊及赤斤兵击之于狼心山、黑河西，多所斩获。
现代文：第二年，北寇杀死哨兵，王玺率领参将李俊及赤斤兵在狼心山、黑河之西打击他们，多有斩获。
English: In the second year, the Northern Cossacks killed the sentries, and Wang Xi led the generalissimo Li Jun and the Red Army soldiers to fight them in the Wolf's Heart Mountain and the west of the Heihe River, and made many gains.

古文：二十年移镇大同。
现代文：二十年，王玺移镇大同。
English: Twenty years have passed since Wang Bingyi moved to Datong.

古文：玺有复哈密功，官不进，陈于朝，乃实授都督同知。
现代文：他有收复哈密之功，却没升官，于是向朝廷诉说，才被授为都督同知。
English: He had the merit of recovering Hami, but he was not promoted, so he told the court that he was only awarded the title of "Todocho."

古文：玺习韬略，谙文事，勇而有谋。
现代文：王玺熟悉韬略，深谙文辞，勇而有谋。
English: Wang Yao is familiar with the subtleties, has a deep knowledge of literature, and is courageous and resourceful.

古文：廷臣多称之。
现代文：廷臣大多赞许他。
English: Most courtiers approve of him.

古文：在边二十余年，为番人所惮。
现代文：王玺在边疆二十多年，番人十分害怕他。
English: Wang Yao has been on the frontier for more than 20 years. The guards are very afraid of him.

古文：弘治元年卒。
现代文：弘治元年，王玺去世。
English: Wang Xi passed away in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：赐祭葬，赠恤有加。
现代文：皇上赐其祭葬，赠恤有加。
English: The emperor gave him a ceremonial burial, with a bonus.

古文：鲁鉴，其先西大通人。
现代文：鲁鉴，祖先是西大通人。
English: Lu Jian, whose ancestor was a West University scholar.

古文：祖阿失都巩卜失加，明初率部落归附，太祖授为百夫长，俾统所部居庄浪。
现代文：祖父阿失都巩卜失加，明初率部落归附，太祖授他为百夫长，命他统领所部住在庄浪。
English: His grandfather, Ah Fudu, was named Gong Bu Fuga. He was the first to lead the tribe to annexation. His great-grandfather made him a centurion and ordered him to live in Zhuanglang.

古文：传子失加，累官庄浪卫指挥同知。
现代文：传子失加，屡升至庄浪卫指挥同知。
English: He was a prodigal son who failed to make the grade, and was repeatedly promoted to the same rank as Zhuang Langwei.

古文：正统末，鉴嗣父职。
现代文：正统末年，鲁鉴承袭父职。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, Lu Jian inherited his father's position.

古文：久之，擢署都指挥佥事。
现代文：久之，他被提升为代理都指挥佥事。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to acting captain.

古文：成化四年，固原满四反，鉴以土兵千人从征。
现代文：成化四年，团原满四反叛，鲁鉴率领一千名士兵随军征讨。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, the original four regiments rebelled, and Lu Jian led a thousand soldiers to follow the army to fight.

古文：诸军围石城，日挑战，鉴出则先驱，入则殿后，最为贼所惮。
现代文：诸军包围了石城，每日挑战不止，鲁鉴出则先驱，人则殿后，贼军最害怕了。
English: The armies have encircled Shicheng, and the daily challenges are endless. Lu Jian is the pioneer, and others are behind the palace. The thief army is most afraid.

古文：贼平，进署都督同知。
现代文：贼平之后，鲁鉴进升为工理都督同知。
English: After Kuiping, Lu Jian was promoted to the position of the governor of the city of Tongzhi.

古文：寻充左参将，分守庄浪。
现代文：随即充任左参将，分守庄浪。
English: He was immediately appointed to the position of General of the Left Division, in charge of Shonan.

古文：命其子麟为百户，统治土军。
现代文：其子鲁麟被任命为百户，统领土军。
English: His son, Lu Lin, was appointed as the leader of the Hundred Households and the Unified Territorial Army.

古文：十七年坐寇入境，戴罪立功。
现代文：十七年，鲁鉴因贼寇人境获罪，而奉命戴罪立功。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, Lu Jian was ordered to take the blame for being a thief and robber.

古文：寻充左副总兵，协守甘肃。
现代文：随即充任左副总兵，协守甘肃。
English: He was immediately appointed to the post of deputy commander of the left, and became the deputy governor of Gansu Province.

古文：寇犯永昌。被劾。
现代文：贼寇进犯永昌，鲁鉴遭弹劾。
English: Thieves invaded Yongchang, and Lu Jian was impeached.

古文：鉴疏辨，第停其俸两月。
现代文：他上疏自辩，只被停支两个月俸禄。
English: He defended himself and was only suspended for two months' salary.

古文：俄命充总兵官，镇守延绥。
现代文：马上又奉命充任总兵官，镇守延绥。
English: Immediately, he was ordered to serve as the chief military officer, the town guard of Yancheng.

古文：自陈往功，予实授。
现代文：他自陈往日的功劳，因而被实授官职。
English: He was given an official position because of his past achievements.

古文：孝宗立，得疾，致仕。
现代文：孝宗即位后，鲁鉴因病退休。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Lu Jian retired due to illness.

古文：弘治初，命麟袭指挥使，加都指挥佥事。
现代文：弘治初年，鲁麟奉命承袭指挥之职，并加行都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Lu Lin was ordered to take over the post of conductor, and added the post of conductor of the capital.

古文：已，进同知，充甘肃游击将军。
现代文：不久，他进升为都指挥同知，充任甘肃游击将军。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the same rank as the commander of the capital, and served as the guerrilla general of Gansu.

古文：鲁氏世守西陲，有捍御功，至鉴官益显，其世业益大，而所部土军生齿又日盛。
现代文：鲁氏世代防守西部边陲，御敌捍卫有功，到鲁鉴时官职更显，世业更大，而所部土军人口又日益兴盛。
English: Lu's generation defended the western borderlands, and their defense of the enemy was effective. By the time of Lu Jian, the official position was more prominent, the industry was greater, and the population of the Turkish army in Shobu was increasingly prosperous.

古文：麟既移甘肃，帝以土军非鉴不能治，特起治之，且命有司建坊旌其世绩。
现代文：鲁麟调往甘肃后，皇上以土军非鲁鉴统领不可为由，特地起用鲁鉴来统领之，并且命有关官员建坊表彰鲁家的世代功绩。
English: After the transfer of Lu Lin to Gansu, the emperor specifically appointed Lu Ken to lead the Turkish army on the grounds that it was not possible to lead the Turkish army without Lu Ken, and ordered the relevant officials to build a temple to commend Lu family's generational achievements.

古文：诏许之。经骁勇，奉职寡过，继祖父为大帅，保功名，称良将。
现代文：鲁鉴于是条列上奏四件边防事宜，朝廷大多商议执行。鲁鉴富有才勇，遇上敌军总是冒死往前，多次受伤，却从不丧气，所以才能积功升至大将。
English: Since Lu was the first of the four border defense issues listed above, the imperial court mostly discussed the implementation. Lu Jian was full of talent and courage, and when encountering the enemy army, he always ventured forward, was injured many times, but never lost heart, so he was able to accumulate merits and rise to the rank of general.

古文：三十五年卒。
现代文：十五年，他因旧伤复发而死。
English: Fifteen years later, he died from a recurrence of his old injury.

古文：赐恤如制。刘宁，字世安，其先山阳人。
现代文：皇上追赠他为右都督，并按照制度予以赏赐抚恤。刘宁，字世安，其祖先是山阳人。
English: The emperor posthumously made him the rightful governor of the capital, and awarded him a pension in accordance with the system. Liu Ning, a.k.a. Shian, whose ancestors were from Shanyang.

古文：袭世职，为永宁卫指挥使。
现代文：他继承世袭职位，为永宁卫指挥使。
English: He inherits the hereditary position and is the Yongning Wei commander.

古文：勇敢善战。
现代文：勇敢善战。
English: Fight bravely and well.

古文：自以冗散无所见，会延绥用兵，疏请效死。
现代文：自觉冗散无所见长，恰逢朝廷用兵延绥，刘宁上疏请求效死。
English: Self-consciously rambling and lacking insight, it coincided with the imperial court's use of soldiers to prolong the war, and Liu Ning's request for an honorable death.

古文：尚书白圭许之。
现代文：尚书白圭同意了他的请求。
English: Shangshu Bai Gui agreed to his request.

古文：屡以功迁都指挥使，充宣府游击将军。
现代文：刘宁因功累升至都指挥使，充任宣府游击将军。
English: Liu Ning was promoted to the post of capital commander due to his merits, and served as the guerrilla general of Xuanwu.

古文：周玺，字廷玉，迁安人。
现代文：周玺，字廷玉，迁安人。
English: Zhou Qian, Zi Tingyu, Qian Anren.

古文：嗣职为开平卫指挥使。
现代文：承袭开平卫指挥使之职。
English: He succeeded the command of Kaipingwei.

古文：负气习兵书，善骑射。
现代文：他负有才气，熟读兵书，善于骑射。
English: He is talented, a good reader of military books, and good at riding and shooting.

古文：以征北功，擢署都指挥佥事充右参将，分守阳和，敕部兵三千训肄听调。
现代文：因北征有功，周玺被提升为代理都指挥佥事，充行右参将，分守阳和，并奉诏训练所部士兵三千人听从调遣。
English: Due to his meritorious service in the Northern Expedition, Zhou Jun was promoted to acting commander of the Northern Expedition, acting as the right adjutant general, guarding Yanghe, and dispatching three thousand soldiers from the training center.

古文：成化十六年，从王越征威宁海子，累进都指挥使。
现代文：成化十六年，刘宁跟随王越征伐威宁海子，累升为都指挥使。
English: In the 16th year of Chenghua, Liu Ning followed Wang Yue in the conquest of Weininghaizi, and was promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：时边寇无虚岁。
现代文：当时边境经常遭受贼寇的侵扰。
English: At that time, the border was often invaded by bandits.

古文：十八年分道入掠，玺与游击董昇战黑石崖，宁战塔儿山，皆有功。
现代文：十八年，贼寇分道而人，进行抢掠。周玺与游击将军董升在黑石崖与贼寇交战，刘宁战于塔儿山，都有功劳。
English: In 18 years, the bandits went their separate ways and carried out looting. Zhou Qi and the guerrilla general Dong Sheng fought against the bandits in the Black Rock Cliff, and Liu Ning fought in the Tal Mountain, both of which were meritorious.

古文：玺进署都督佥事，迁大同副总兵。
现代文：周玺进升为代理都督佥事，升任大同副总兵。
English: Zhou Yuxin was promoted to acting governor of Anji and promoted to vice-commander-in-chief of Datong.

古文：宁进都督佥事，改左参将，分守阳和。
现代文：刘宁进升为都督佥事，改行左参将，分守阳和。
English: Liu Ning was promoted to the post of prefectural governor, changed his career to that of a left-wing general, and was assigned to guard Yanghe.

古文：十九年秋，亦思马因大入。
现代文：十九年秋，亦思马因大肆人侵。
English: In the autumn of nineteen, also Sima was attacked by a large number of people.

古文：大同总兵官许宁分遣玺守怀仁，宁与董昇营西山，自将中军，击之夏米庄，败绩。
现代文：大同总兵官许宁分派调周玺防守怀仁，刘宁与董升扎营西山，自己则统率中军，在夏米庄进击贼寇，但不利，兵败。
English: Datong commander-in-chief Xu Ning dispatched Zhou Qi to defend Huairen, Liu Ning and Dong Sheng encamped in Xishan, and he himself led the Chinese army to attack the bandits in Xiamezhuang, but it was unfavorable and he was defeated.

古文：宁、昇被围数重，几陷。
现代文：刘宁、董升被围数重，几乎被敌攻溃。
English: Liu Ning and Dong Sheng were besieged several times and were almost defeated by the enemy.

古文：亟发巨炮击之，敌多死，围乃解。
现代文：急忙发射巨炮轰击，许多敌寇被炸死，重围才得以解除。
English: Huge cannons were hurriedly fired, and many of the enemy raiders were killed, and the siege was finally lifted.

古文：玺闻中军失利，亟还兵援。
现代文：周玺获悉中军失利，迅速还兵援救。
English: Zhou Yu learned of the defeat of the Chinese army and quickly returned to rescue the soldiers.

古文：夜遇敌，乘胜前，锐甚。
现代文：夜遇敌寇，乘胜而前，锐气十足。
English: Encountering enemy raiders at night, taking advantage of the victory and moving forward, full of vigor.

古文：玺厉将士曰： 今日有进无退！ 
现代文：周玺激励将士道： 今日有进无退。 
English: Zhou Yuxuan inspired the generals: Today, there is no retreat.

古文：大呼陷阵，敌少却。
现代文：然后大喊着冲向敌阵，敌军被迫后退。
English: He then ran towards the enemy shouting, and the enemy was forced to retreat.

古文：久之，短兵接。臂中流矢，拔镞战益急，与子鹏及麾下壮士击杀数十人。
现代文：双方短兵相接，周玺臂中飞箭，他拔掉箭头，奋战更猛，与其子周鹏及磨下壮士击杀数十人。
English: Both sides were in close contact, and Zhou Rong had an arrow in his arm. He pulled out the arrow and fought even harder, killing dozens of people with his son Zhou Peng and other strong men.

古文：会宁兵至，中军溃卒亦稍集，敌乃退，许宁等亦还。
现代文：这时刘宁兵赶到，中军溃兵也逐渐聚集起来了，敌寇这才退兵，许宁等也返回。
English: At this time, Liu Ning's soldiers arrived, the Chinese army's routed soldiers gradually gathered, the enemy just withdrew, and Xu Ning and others also returned.

古文：无何复入掠。
现代文：不久，敌寇重又人侵抢掠。
English: Soon, the enemy invaded and plundered again.

古文：宁将兵三千，遇之聚落站西，连战败之。
现代文：刘宁率兵三千，在聚落站之西与敌寇遭遇，连战败之。
English: Liu Ning led three thousand soldiers, encountered the enemy bandits in the west of the settlement station, and was defeated.

古文：复败之白登、柳林，又追败之小鹁鸽谷。
现代文：复败之于白登、柳林，又追败之于小鹑鸽谷。
English: They were defeated in the rematch in Baidong and Liulin, and they were defeated in the pursuit in Xiaohui Pigeon Valley.

古文：而大同西路参将庄鉴亦邀其归路，战于牛心山，敌遂遁。
现代文：而大同西路参将庄鉴也在敌寇的归途中拦击，双方战于牛心山，敌寇纷纷逃遁。
English: And the Datong West Road gendarme Zhuang Jian also intercepted the enemy bandits on their way back. The two sides fought in Niu Xin Mountain, and the enemy bandits fled.

古文：时诸将多失利，许宁以下获罪，而玺以功予实授，宁超迁都督同知，庄鉴以所部无失亡，亦赉银币。
现代文：当时诸将大多失利，许宁以下都因此获罪，而周玺却因功被实授官职，刘宁越级升为都督同知，庄鉴因所部无人流亡，也被赏赐银币。
English: At that time, most of the generals were defeated, and Xu Ning and his subordinates were punished for this, but Zhou Qi was actually awarded an official post for his service, Liu Ning Yue was promoted to the same rank as the governor, and Zhuang Jian was also awarded silver coins because no one in his department was exiled.

古文：鉴，辽东人。
现代文：庄鉴，辽东人。
English: Zhuang Jian, a native of Liaodong.

古文：天顺中，袭定辽右卫指挥使。
现代文：天顺年中，承袭定辽右卫指挥使。
English: In the middle of the year, he succeeded Ding Liao Rongwei as commander.

古文：骁猛有胆决。
现代文：他晓勇有胆识。
English: He is courageous and daring.

古文：遇贼辄奋，数有功，累官都督佥事，掌左府。
现代文：遇到贼寇，总是奋力拼杀，多次立功，累升至都督佥事，掌管左府。
English: When encountering thieves and bandits, he always fought hard, made meritorious contributions many times, and was elevated to the position of prefectural governor, in charge of Saifu.

古文：弘治十一年佩镇朔将军印，镇宣府。
现代文：弘治十一年，庄鉴佩带镇朔将军印，镇守宣府。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongzhi, Zhuang Jian wore the seal of Zhenshuo general and became the town guard of Xuanfu.

古文：以才与大同总兵官张俊易镇。
现代文：他以其才能与大同总兵官张俊换地镇守。
English: With his talent, he replaced the town guard with Datong general officer Zhang Jun.

古文：兵部侍郎熊绣奏其经画功，进都督同知。
现代文：兵部侍郎熊绣将其经略之功上奏，庄鉴于是进升为都督同知。
English: The attendant of the military department, Xiong Xiu, played up the merits of his stratagem, and Zhuang Zhen knew that he would be promoted to the governor-general.

古文：玺寻以右副总兵分守代州，兼督偏头诸关，而改宁左副总兵，协守大同。
现代文：周玺随即以右副总兵的身份分守代州，并兼督偏头诸关。而刘宁改任左副总兵，协守大同。
English: Zhou Qian was immediately assigned to defend Daizhou as the right vice-commander-in-chief, while Liu Ning was assigned to be the left vice-commander-in-chief and co-captain of Datong.

古文：二人并著功北边，称名将。
现代文：二人一同立功北疆，堪称名将。
English: Both of them have made great contributions to Northern Xinjiang, and can be called great generals.

古文：玺以偏头去太原远，请改分守为镇守，又以镇守不当听节制，乞易总兵衔。
现代文：周玺以偏头诸关离太原太远，请求改分守为镇守，又认为镇守不应当听从节制，请求改为总兵衔。
English: Zhou Qi considered the outposts to be too far away from Taiyuan, and requested that the outpost guards be changed to town guards. He also believed that the town guards should not be subject to restraint, and the request was changed to the general rank.

古文：宪宗皆曲从之。
现代文：宪宗都曲从之。
English: The Kenzong Duqu follows it.

古文：弘治初，移镇陕西，讨平扶风诸县附籍回回。
现代文：弘治初年，周玺移镇陕西，讨平扶风诸县编人户籍的回回人。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Zhou Bingyi, a town in Shaanxi Province, tried to settle disputes with the compilers of household registrations in various counties.

古文：三年佩征西将军印，镇守宁夏，甫一岁卒。
现代文：三年，他佩带征西将军印，镇守宁夏，刚去一年便去世了。
English: In three years, he wore the seal of the General of the Western Conquest and guarded Ningxia. He passed away just a year later.

古文：且死，召诸子曰： 吾佩印分阃，分已足，独未尝大破敌，抱恨入地矣。 
现代文：他临终时，将诸子召来说道： 我佩印分守，已经很满足了，唯独未曾大破敌军，现在只能抱恨人地了。 
English: On his deathbed, he called his sons together and said, "I have fulfilled my duty as the keeper of the seal, except that I have not defeated the enemy army, and now I can only hold grudges."

古文：连呼 杀贼 而瞑。
现代文：然后连喊 杀贼 而死。
English: Then he yelled "murderer" and died.

古文：子鹏，累官锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：其子周鹏，累升至锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: His son, Zhou Peng, rose to the rank of the commander of the Jinling Guards.

古文：玺殁后三年，而宁佩平羌将军印，镇甘肃。
现代文：周玺死后三年，而刘宁佩带平羌将军印，镇守甘肃。
English: Three years after Zhou Yu's death, Liu Ning wore the seal of General Pingyao and became the town guard of Gansu.

古文：其冬，寇犯凉州，宁与战抹山墩，擒斩五十余，相持至暮，收辎重南行。
现代文：这年冬天，敌寇进犯凉州，刘宁与其战于抹山墩，俘斩五十余人，相持至黄昏，刘宁收其辎重南行。
English: In the winter of that year, the enemy raiders invaded Liangzhou. Liu Ning fought with them at Matsuyama Pass, captured and killed more than fifty people, and held on to each other until dusk. Liu Ning retreated south.

古文：寇复来袭，擒其长一人。
现代文：敌寇重又来袭，刘宁擒获其一名首领。
English: The enemy raiders attacked again, and Liu Ningyi captured one of their leaders.

古文：明日，参将颜玉来援，副将陶祯兵亦至，寇乃遁。
现代文：第二天，参将颜玉来援，副将陶祯兵也赶到，敌寇这才逃遁。
English: The next day, Vice Admiral Yan Yuping came to the rescue, Vice Admiral Tao Qian also arrived, and the enemy bandits fled.

古文：俘其稚弱，获马驼牛羊二千，进右都督。
现代文：刘宁俘获敌寇的幼弱者，并获得马驼牛羊二千，因此进升为左都督。
English: Liu Ning captured the weaklings of the enemy raiders, and obtained two thousand horses, camels, cattle and sheep, so he was promoted to the left governor.

古文：明年，与巡抚许进袭破土鲁番于哈密，进左都督，增俸百石，以疾还京。
现代文：第二年，刘宁与巡抚许进在哈密攻破吐鲁番，进升为右都督，增加俸禄一百石，因病返回京城。
English: In the second year, Liu Ning and the governor Xu Jin defeated Turpan in Hami, promoted to the right governor, increased the salary by one hundred koku, and returned to Beijing due to illness.

古文：十三年，大同告警，命宁为副总兵，从平江伯陈锐御之。
现代文：十三年，大同告警，刘宁奉命为副总兵，跟随平江伯陈锐前往抵御。
English: In the thirteenth year, Datong gave a warning, and Liu Ning was ordered to be the deputy commander-in-chief and follow Pingjiang He Chen Rui to resist.

古文：锐无将略，与宁不协，止毋战，寇遂得志去，坐停半俸闲住。
现代文：陈锐不懂用兵的谋略，不能与刘宁共同协作，而是止兵不战，致使敌寇得志而去，刘宁被停领一半俸禄，并闲住在家。
English: Chen Rui did not understand the strategy of using soldiers and could not work together with Liu Ning. Instead, he stopped the army and did not fight, causing the enemy to be disheartened. Liu Ning was suspended from receiving half of his salary and lived idly at home.

古文：寻以参将赞画朱晖军务，亦无功。
现代文：随即以参将的身份辅佐朱晖筹划军务，也无功劳。
English: He then assisted Zhu Xi in the planning of military affairs in the capacity of a general, which was also without merit.

古文：宁自陈哈密功，乞封伯，诏还全俸。
现代文：刘宁于是自陈哈密之功，请求封伯，皇上乃下诏恢复他的全棒。
English: Liu Ning then requested the emperor to restore his whole stick from Chen Hami's merit.

古文：宁有胆智，为大同副将时，入贡者数万人怀异志。
现代文：刘宁富有胆略智谋，他为大同副将时，数万前来进贡者心怀异志。
English: Liu Ning is bold and resourceful. When he was the vice-commander of Datong, tens of thousands of tributaries came to him with different aspirations.

古文：宁率二十骑直抵其营，众骇愕。
现代文：刘宁率领二十名骑兵，直抵其营垒，众人惊骇不已。
English: Liu Ning led twenty horsemen straight to his camp, and everyone was shocked.

古文：有部长勒马引弓出。
现代文：其中一名首领勒马怀弓而出。
English: One of the leaders leapt out with a bow.

古文：宁前下马，与诸部长坐，举策指画，宣天子威德。
现代文：刘宁上前下马，与各首领坐下来，挥动马鞭，宣示天子的威德。
English: Liu Ning got on and off the horse, sat down with the leaders, waved the whip, and proclaimed the virtue of the heavenly son.

古文：一人语不逊，宁掴其面，奋臂起，其长叱之退。
现代文：有一人出言不逊，刘宁捆了他一巴掌，奋臂而起，大声呵斥他退下。
English: Liu Ning slapped one of them who said something insolent, made him stand up, and shouted at him to back down.

古文：宁复坐与语，呼酒欢饮，皆感悟，卒如约。
现代文：刘宁然后再坐下来谈话，叫酒欢饮，这些人全都感悟，最后如约而行。
English: Liu Ning then sat down to talk, ordered wine to drink, these people were all impressed, and finally went as promised.

古文：尝仿古番上法，以五十八人为队，队伍重为阵，建五色帜。
现代文：刘宁还曾仿效古代轮番上阵的方法，以五十八人为一队，五队组成一阵，设五色旗。
English: Liu Ning also imitated the ancient method of taking turns to go into battle, with fifty-eight people as a team, five teams forming a line, and a five-colored flag.

古文：又各建五巨帜于中军，中帜起，五阵各视其色应之，循环无端，每战用是取胜。
现代文：又在中军各设五面巨旗，一旦树起中军旗帜，五阵便各视其色起而响应，循环无常，每战因此总是获胜。
English: In addition, five huge flags were set up in each of the Chinese armies. Once the Chinese army flag was raised, the five armies would respond according to their colors. The cycle is impermanent, so every battle is always won.

古文：晚再赴大同，已老病，帅又怯懦，故无成功，然孝宗朝良将称宁。
现代文：刘宁后来再赴大同，但已年老有病，部帅又很怯懦，因此他再无功劳，但孝宗时，刘宁堪称良将。
English: Liu Ning later went to Datong again, but he was old and sick, and the captain was very cowardly, so he had no merit, but when he was a filial son, Liu Ning was a good general.

古文：十七年卒，赠广昌伯。
现代文：十七年，刘宁去世，被赠为广昌伯。
English: Seventeen years later, Liu Ning died and was given the title of Guangchangbo.

古文：彭清，字源洁，榆林人。
现代文：彭清，字源洁，榆林人。
English: Peng Qing, Ziyuan Jie, Yulin people.

古文：初袭绥德卫指挥使，以功擢都指挥佥事。
现代文：当初承袭绥德卫指挥使之职，后因功被提升为都指挥佥事。
English: At first, he succeeded to the post of commanding officer of Xingdewei. Later, he was promoted to commanding officer of the capital due to his merits.

古文：弘治初，充右参将，分守肃州。
现代文：弘治初年，彭清充任右参将，分守肃州。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, Peng Qingming was appointed to the post of right-hand general, and was assigned to guard Suzhou.

古文：寇入犯，率兵蹑之，获马驼器仗及所掠人畜而还。
现代文：贼寇人侵，他率兵跟踪追击，俘获马匹、骆驼、兵器及所掠人畜而返。
English: Thieves and robbers invaded, he led the soldiers to follow and pursue, captured horses, camels, weapons and looted people and animals and returned.

古文：寻与巡抚王继恢复哈密有功。
现代文：随即又与巡抚王继恢复哈密有功。
English: He immediately worked with the governor Wang Ji to restore Hami.

古文：清虽位偏校，而好谋有勇略，名闻中朝，尤为尚书马文升所器。
现代文：彭清虽位列偏校，却喜好谋划，富有胆略，闻名朝中内外，尤为尚书马文升所器重。
English: Although Peng Qing is ranked as a partisan school, he likes to plan, is bold, and is famous inside and outside the DPRK, especially in the field of calligraphy and painting.

古文：尝引疾乞休，文升力言于朝，慰留之。
现代文：他曾经因病请求退休，马文升在朝廷力争，安慰挽留他。
English: He once asked to retire due to illness, and Ma Wen Sheng tried to persuade the imperial court to keep him.

古文：八年，甘肃有警，以文升荐，擢左副总兵，仍守甘肃。
现代文：八年，甘肃告警，因马文升的推荐，彭清被提升为左副总兵，仍驻守甘肃。
English: Eight years later, Gansu reported to the police, and on the recommendation of Ma Wensheng, Peng Qing was promoted to the left vice-commander of the general staff, still stationed in Gansu.

古文：未几，巡抚许进乞移清凉州。
现代文：不久，巡抚许进请求将彭清调往凉州。
English: Soon after, the governor, Xu Jin, requested that Peng Qing be transferred to Liangzhou.

古文：而是时哈密复为土鲁番所据，文升方密图恢复，倚清成功，言 肃州多故，而清名著西域，不可易 ，乃寝。
现代文：而这时哈密重又被吐鲁番所占，马文升正密图恢复，要倚仗彭清再立功劳，便说： 肃州多事，而彭清名闻西域，不能调离他。 
English: At this time, Hamizhong was occupied by Turpan, and Ma Wen Shengzheng resumed the secret plan. To rely on Peng Qing to make another contribution, he said: Suzhou is full of events, and Peng Qing is famous for the western region, and cannot be transferred away from him.

古文：文升既得杨翥策，锐欲捣哈密袭牙兰，乃发罕东、赤斤暨哈密兵，令清统之为前锋，从许进潜往。
现代文：此事才作罢。马文升采纳杨翥之策，想趁势直捣哈密，袭击牙兰，于是派遣罕东、赤斤暨哈密兵，命彭清统领作为前锋，跟随许进悄悄出发。
English: This was the last straw. Adopting the strategy of Yang Xuan, Ma Wensheng wanted to take advantage of the situation to directly attack Hami and attack Galan, so he dispatched Handong, Chakjin and Hami soldiers, ordered Peng Qing to lead as a forward, and quietly set off following Xu Jin.

古文：行半月，抵其城下，攻克之。
现代文：半个月后，抵达城下，力攻而破。
English: Half a month later, they reached the outskirts of the city and broke through by force.

古文：牙兰已先遁，乃抚安哈密遗种，全师而还。
现代文：牙兰已事先逃走，彭清于是安抚仍留在哈密的番人，然后全军返回。
English: As Aslan had already fled, Peng Qing pacified the guards still remaining in Hami, and then the whole army returned.

古文：是役也，文升授方略，拟从间道往，而进仍由故道，牙兰遂逸去，斩获无几。
现代文：在这一战役中，马文升授以方略，准备从小路前往，而许进仍走旧路，致使牙兰得以逃跑，斩获无几。
English: In this battle, Marvin learned the strategy and prepared to go from the side road, while Xu Jin still took the old road, which allowed Dagan to escape with few gains.

古文：然番人素轻中国，谓不能涉其地，至是始知畏。
现代文：但是番人素来轻视中国，说中国人不能进入其地，到现在才开始感到畏惧。
English: But the guards have always despised China, saying that Chinese people cannot enter the country, and only now are they beginning to feel afraid.

古文：清功居多，稍迁都指挥使。
现代文：彭清功劳居多，逐渐进升为都指挥使。
English: Peng Qing received most of the credit and was gradually promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：十年，总兵官刘宁罢，擢清都督佥事代之。
现代文：十年，总兵官刘宁被免职，彭清以都督佥事的身份代替他。
English: Ten years later, the commander-in-chief Liu Ning was removed from his post, and Peng Qing replaced him as the governor-general.

古文：其冬，土鲁番归哈密忠顺王陕巴，且乞通贡，西域复定。
现代文：这年冬天，吐鲁番归附哈密忠顺王陕巴，并且请求进贡，西域重被平定。
English: In the winter of that year, Turpan was annexed by King Hami Zhongshun of Shaanxi and requested tribute, and the western region was once again pacified.

古文：屡辞疾，请解兵柄，不允。
现代文：彭清多次以病辞官，请求解除兵权，未被允许。
English: Peng Qing repeatedly called in sick and requested to be discharged from the military, but was not allowed.

古文：十五年卒。
现代文：十五年，彭清去世。
English: Jian Xing died fifteen years ago.

古文：清御士有恩，久镇西陲，威名甚著，番夷惮之。
现代文：彭清待部下有恩，长期镇守西部边陲，威名显著，番夷深为畏惧。
English: Peng Qing was kind to his subordinates, and guarded the western borderlands for a long time. His prestige was remarkable, and he was deeply feared by the barbarians.

古文：性廉洁，在镇遭母及妻妹四丧，贫不能归葬。
现代文：他性情廉洁，在职镇守时遭逢母亲及妻、妹四人之丧，却因家贫不能归葬。
English: He was a man of incorruptible character. While on duty as a town watchman, he suffered the loss of his mother, wife, and four younger sisters, but was unable to bury them due to his family's poverty.

古文：卒之日，将士及庶民妇竖皆流涕。
现代文：他死之日，将士及民妇、仆人全都为之流泪。
English: On the day of his death, all the officers and men, women and servants shed tears for him.

古文：遗命其子不得受赙赠，故其丧亦不能归。
现代文：他遗命其子不得接受馈赠，所以也不能归葬。
English: He left instructions for his son not to accept gifts, so he could not be buried.

古文：帝闻之，命抚臣发帑钱，资送归里，赐祭葬如制。姜汉，榆林卫人。
现代文：皇上听说后，命抚臣发放府库钱币，资助运送其灵柩返回故乡，并根据制度赐其祭葬。姜汉，榆林卫人。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he ordered his vassals to distribute the government treasury coins, subsidize the transportation of his coffin back to his hometown, and give him a ceremonial funeral according to the system.

古文：弘治中，嗣世职，为本卫指挥使。
现代文：弘治年中，他继承世袭职位，任本卫指挥使。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, he succeeded to the hereditary post and was appointed as the commander of the Imperial Guards.

古文：御史胡希颜荐其材勇，进都指挥佥事，充延绥游击将军。
现代文：御史胡希颜推荐姜汉，说他有才有勇，姜汉于是进升为都指挥佥事，充任延绥游击将军。
English: Gu Shi Hu Xiyan recommended Jiang Han, saying that he had talent and courage, so Jiang Han was promoted to be the commander of the capital, and served as the guerrilla general of Yancheng.

古文：十八年春，寇犯宁夏兴武营。汉帅所部驰援，遇于中沙墩，击败之。
现代文：十八年春，贼寇进犯宁夏兴武营，姜汉率所部迅速赴援，与贼寇在中沙墩遭遇，将其击败。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the bandits invaded the Ningxia Xingwu camp, Jiang Han and his staff quickly went to the rescue, encountered the bandits in Zhongshazhou, and defeated them.

古文：赐敕奖劳。
现代文：皇上赐诏褒奖慰劳。
English: The emperor bestowed the imperial proclamation of commendation and consolation.

古文：武宗嗣位，寇大举犯宣、大，汉偕副总兵曹雄、参将王戟分道援，有功。
现代文：武宗继位后，贼寇大举进犯宣、大，姜汉偕同副总兵曹雄、参将王戟分道救援，立有功劳。
English: After the succession of Emperor Wuzong, the bandits made a large-scale attack on Xuanwu and Dadu, and Jiang Hanzhong, together with the vice-commander Cao Xiong and the general Wang Hui, made great contributions to the rescue.

古文：寻代雄为副总兵，协守延绥。
现代文：他随即代替曹雄为副总兵，协守延绥。
English: He immediately replaced Cao Xiong as deputy commander-in-chief and co-defender of Yancheng.

古文：正德三年移守凉州。
现代文：正德三年，他移守凉州。
English: After three years in Zhengde, he moved to Liangzhou.

古文：明年冬，擢署都督佥事，充总兵官，镇宁夏。
现代文：第二年冬，姜汉提升为代理都督佥事，充任总兵官，镇守宁夏。
English: In the winter of the following year, Jiang Han was promoted to acting governor of Anji, and served as commander-in-chief of Ningxia.

古文：汉驭军严整，得将士心。
现代文：姜汉治军严整，深得将士之心。
English: Jiang Han's army was well-organized, and he had a soldier's heart.

古文：甫数月而安化王寘鐇谋逆，置酒召汉及巡抚安惟学等宴。
现代文：到任刚数月，安化王蜫鐇图谋反叛，摆酒设宴招待姜汉及巡抚安惟学等。
English: Just a few months after taking office, Wang Xi of Anhua plotted a rebellion, set up a banquet with wine and invited Jiang Han and the procurator An Wei Xue.

古文：酒半，其党何锦等率众入，即座上执汉。
现代文：酒席进行到中途时，其党羽何锦等率众而人，当场在座位上捉拿姜汉。
English: When the banquet was halfway through, He Jin and other members of his party led the crowd to catch Jiang Han on the spot.

古文：汉奋起，怒骂不屈，遂杀之。
现代文：姜汉奋起怒骂，不愿屈服，因而被杀。
English: Jiang Han shouted angrily and did not want to give in, so he was killed.

古文：子奭逃免。
现代文：其子姜幸免逃脱。
English: His son Jiang escaped unhurt.

古文：贼平，讼于朝。
现代文：贼寇平定之后，姜向朝廷诉说。
English: After defeating the bandits, Jiang appealed to the imperial court.

古文：姜氏为大将，著边功，凡五世。
现代文：皇上下诏赐予姜汉祭葬。官府为他立祠，春秋祭祠。嘉靖时，又听从巡抚张琦之请，赐给写有 悯忠 二字的牌匾。
English: The imperial edict gave Jiang Han a ceremonial funeral. The government built a shrine for him, the Spring and Autumn Festival Shrine. At the time of Jiajing, he also listened to the request of the governor Zhang Jun and gave him a plaque with the word "Mercy and Loyalty."

古文：安国，字良臣，绥德卫人。
现代文：安国，字良臣，绥德卫人。
English: An Guo, also known as a good minister, was a member of the Shunde Garrison.

古文：初为诸生，通《春秋》子史，知名里中。
现代文：当初他是一名儒生，精通《春秋》子史，闻名乡里。
English: At first, he was a Confucian scholar, well-versed in the history of "Spring and Autumn," and well-known in his hometown.

古文：后袭世职，为指挥佥事。
现代文：后来他继承世袭职位，为指挥佥事。
English: Later he succeeded to the hereditary post and became a conductor.

古文：正德三年中武会举第一，进署指挥使，赴陕西三边立功。
现代文：正德三年，安国考中武会举第一名，进升为代理指挥使，奔赴陕西三边立功。
English: In the third year of Zhengde, he won the first place in the national examination of the Central Military Commission, was promoted to acting commander, and went to Shaanxi to make contributions to the three sides.

古文：刘瑾要贿，国同举六十人咸无赀，瑾乃编之行伍，有警听调，禁其擅归。
现代文：刘瑾想要收受贿赂，安国等同时中举的六十人都没有钱，刘瑾便将他们编人军队，在出现紧急情况时听从调遣，并禁止他们擅自返回。
English: Liu Bei wanted to accept bribes, but An Guo and the other sixty people who were simultaneously enlisted did not have money. Liu Bei then organized them into an army, listened to the dispatch in the event of an emergency, and forbade them to return without authorization.

古文：六十人者悉大窘，侪于戍卒，不聊生。
现代文：这六十人处境大为窘迫，挤身于边卒之中，无法生活。
English: These sixty people are in a very difficult situation, squeezed in among the border guards, unable to live.

古文：而边臣惮瑾，竟无有收恤之者。
现代文：而边臣害怕刘瑾，竟无人敢收纳、体恤他们。
English: However, the frontier officials were afraid of Liu Bei, and no one dared to receive or sympathize with them.

古文：寘鐇反，肆赦，始放还。
现代文：蜫鐇谋反后，朝廷大赦，安国等才被放回。
English: After plotting a rebellion, the imperial court granted amnesty, and An Guo and others were allowed to return.

古文：通政丛兰请收用，瑾怒，讽给事中张瓒等劾诸人皆庸才，悉停其加官。
现代文：通政业兰请求收用他们，刘瑾大怒，暗示给事中张瓒等弹劾这些人都是庸才，朝廷于是全部停止给他们加官。
English: Tongzheng Yelan requested to recruit them, Liu Ye was furious, suggesting to impeach Zhang Ye and others in the matter that these people were mediocre, and the court then stopped all promotions for them.

古文：瑾诛，始以故官分守宁夏西路。
现代文：刘谨被诛之后，安国才以旧官职分守宁夏西路。
English: It was only after Liu Jian was arrested that An Guo took up his old post of guarding Ningxia West Road.

古文：寻进署都指挥佥事，充右参将，擢右副总兵，协守大同，徙延绥。
现代文：随即进升为代理都指挥佥事，充任右参将，又升任右副总兵，协守大同，后调往延绥。
English: He was immediately promoted to acting commander of the Anecdotes, appointed to the post of right adjutant general, and promoted to the post of right deputy general, co-captain of Datong, and later transferred to Yancheng.

古文：十一年冬，寇二万骑分掠偏头关诸处，国偕游击杭雄驰败之岢岚州，斩首八十余级，获马千余匹。
现代文：十一年冬，敌寇二万骑兵分道劫掠偏头关诸处，安国偕同游击将军杭雄等在奇岚州迅速击败之，斩首八十余人，获得千余匹马。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, the enemy raiding party of twenty thousand cavalrymen divided their way and plundered all parts of Yehotou Pass. An Guozhen and the guerrilla general Hang Xiong quickly defeated them in Qizhou, beheaded more than eighty people, and obtained more than one thousand horses.

古文：寇遂遁。
现代文：敌寇于是逃跑了。
English: The enemy raider then fled.

古文：初，寇大入白羊口，帝遣中官张忠、都督刘晖、侍郎丁凤统京军讨之，比至，已饱掠去。
现代文：当初，敌寇大肆人侵白羊口，皇上派遣宦官张忠、都督刘晖、侍郎丁凤统领京军前往征讨，当他们到达时，敌寇已经饱掠而去。
English: At first, a large number of enemy raiders invaded Baiyangkou, and the emperor sent eunuch Zhang Zhong, governor Liu Ye, and chamberlain Ding Feng to lead the Beijing army to fight. When they arrived, the enemy raiders had already fled.

古文：忠、晖耻无功，纪功御史刘澄甫攘国等功归之，大行迁赏，忠等悉增禄，予世荫。
现代文：张忠、刘晖耻于无功，记功御史刘澄甫窃夺安国等的功劳而归于他们，并大行迁赏，张忠等全被增加俸禄，世代享受。
English: Zhang Zhong and Liu Xuan were ashamed of their lack of merit, and they were rewarded with great rewards. Zhang Zhong and Liu Xuan were all given an increase in salary, which they would enjoy for generations.

古文：尚书王琼亦加少保，荫子锦衣。
现代文：尚书王琼也加封为太保，庇荫其子为锦衣卫官员。
English: Shangshu Wang Qiong was also awarded the title of Taibo, and his son was named Jin Rongwei official.

古文：国时以署都督佥事为宁夏总兵官，仅予实授，意不平，不敢自列，乃具疏力辞，为部卒重伤者乞叙录。
现代文：安国当时以代理都督佥事的身份为宁夏总兵官，仅被实授为都督佥事，他心中不平，又不敢自陈其功，于是上疏力辞，为部卒中重伤者请求奖励、记功。
English: At that time, An Guo was the chief military officer of Ningxia in the capacity of acting governor of Anji, but was only actually awarded as governor of Anji. He was not satisfied and did not dare to show his merit, so he resigned and asked for awards and recognition for those who were seriously injured in the accident.

古文：琼请再叙国功，始进都督同知。
现代文：王琼请求重新给安国记功，安国这才进升为都督同知。
English: Wang Qiong requested to give An Guo Ji Gong again, and it was only then that An Guo was promoted to the same rank as the governor.

古文：当是时，佞幸擅朝，债帅风大炽，独国以材武致大将。
现代文：那个时候，奸佞宠臣独揽朝政，以贿赂谋取将帅职位之风大为盛行，唯独安国以其才勇而升至大将。
English: At that time, the favorite vassals of the traitors monopolized the politics of the court, and bribery to obtain the position of commander-in-chief was very popular. Only An Guo was promoted to general because of his talent and courage.

古文：端谨练戎务，所至思尽职，推将材者必归焉。
现代文：他正直、谨慎，勤理军务，所到之处尽职尽责，若论将才必然首推安国。
English: He is honest, prudent, diligent in military affairs, and diligent in his duties wherever he goes. If he were to be promoted to general, he would certainly be promoted to An Guo first.

古文：在镇四年卒。
现代文：他镇守四年之后去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：特谥武敏。
现代文：被特赠谥号武敏。
English: He was specially awarded the nickname Wu Min.

古文：杭雄，字世威，世为绥德卫总旗。
现代文：杭雄，字世威，世代为绥德卫总旗。
English: Hangxiong, the word of the world, has been the general flag of the German Wei Dynasty for generations.

古文：雄承荫，数先登，积首功，六迁至指挥使。
现代文：杭雄承袭这一职务，多次冲锋在前，屡立首功，经六次迁升而至指挥使。
English: Hang Xiong inherited this post, repeatedly charged forward, repeatedly made outstanding contributions, and was promoted to commander after six times.

古文：正德七年进署都指挥佥事，剿贼四川，寻守备西宁。
现代文：正德七年，杭雄进升为代理都指挥佥事，在四川围剿贼寇，随即守备西宁。
English: In the seventh year of Zhengde, Hangxiong Jinsheng became the acting commander of the army. He besieged the bandits in Sichuan, and then defended Xining.

古文：用尚书杨一清荐，擢延绥游击将军。
现代文：由于尚书杨一清的举荐，杭雄被提升为延绥游击将军。
English: As a result of the recommendation of Shangshu Yang Yiching, Hangxiong was promoted to the post of Yancheng guerrilla general.

古文：从都御史彭泽经略哈密，偕副将安国破敌岢岚，进都督佥事。改参将，擢都督同知，统边兵操于西内。
现代文：他跟随都御史彭泽经略哈密，偕同副将安国破敌于奇岚，于是进升为都督佥事，改任参将，又升为都督同知，统领边兵在西内操练。
English: He followed the governor of the capital, Shibunze, through the strategy of Hami, and together with the vice-commander, An Guo, defeated the enemy in Qixian. He was promoted to the governor of the capital, changed his post to the general, and was promoted to the governor of the capital, Tongzhi, and led the border soldiers to practice in the west.

古文：武宗幸宣府、大同，雄扈从，即拜大同总兵官。
现代文：武宗巡幸宣府、大同时，杭雄是启从，随即被授为大同总兵官。
English: When Emperor Wuzong visited Xuanfu and the Grand Council, Hangxiong was the first to follow, and was immediately appointed as the general officer of the Grand Council.

古文：嘉靖初，汰传奉官，雄当贬，以方守边，命署都督佥事，镇守如故。
现代文：嘉靖初年，朝廷要淘汰传奉，杭雄本当降职，因他正在防守边境，便被任命为代理都督佥事，镇守如故。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the imperial court wanted to weed out the propagandists, and Hang Xiongwen was demoted because he was defending the border. He was then appointed acting governor of Anji, and remained in charge of the town.

古文：小王子万余骑入沙河堡，雄战却之。
现代文：小王子万余骑兵进入沙河堡，杭雄击退之。
English: More than 10,000 cavalrymen of the Little Prince entered the Sand River Fort, and Hang Xiong repelled them.

古文：未几，复大入，不能御，求罢不许。
现代文：不久，大军再次到来，杭雄抵御不住，请求免职而未被允许。
English: Soon, the army arrived again, and Hang Xiong could not resist and asked to be relieved of his duties, which was not allowed.

古文：移延绥，召佥书后军都督府。
现代文：他被调往延绥，任后军都督府佥书。
English: He was transferred to Yancheng, and after his appointment, he was assigned to the military governor's office.

古文：三年秋，土鲁番侵甘肃，诏尚书金献民视师，以雄佩平虏大将军印，充总兵官，提督陕西、延绥、宁夏、甘肃四镇军务。
现代文：三年秋，土鲁番侵犯甘肃，皇上诏令尚书金献民督师，命杭雄佩带平虏大将军印，充任总兵官，提督陕西、延绥、宁夏、甘肃四镇军务。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Turuban invaded Gansu, and the emperor ordered Shang Shujin to be appointed as the people's inspector, to wear the seal of General Pingru, to serve as the chief military officer, and to be the admiral of the military affairs of Shaanxi, Yancheng, Ningxia and Gansu.

古文：列侯出征，始佩大将军印，无授都督者，至是特以命雄。
现代文：以往列侯出征，开始只佩带大将军印，而无人被授为都督，现在却特别任命杭雄为都督。
English: In the past, when lords and princes went to war, they only wore the general's seal at first, and no one was awarded the title of viceroy. Now, however, Hang Xiong has been specially appointed as viceroy.

古文：甫至，寇已破走，而雄亦得荫锦衣千户。
现代文：他们刚刚赶到，敌寇已经败退，而杭雄也因此被授为锦衣千户。
English: They had just arrived, and the enemy raiders had already retreated. As a result, Hangxiong was awarded the title of "the best dressed of a thousand households."

古文：既班师，复出镇宁夏。
现代文：班师之后，他又出外镇守宁夏。
English: After the class, he went out again to guard Ningxia.

古文：吉囊大入，总督王宪檄雄等破之，进都督同知。
现代文：吉囊大军人侵，总督王宪命杭雄等出兵败之，杭雄进升为都督同知。
English: After the invasion of the invading soldiers, the governor Wang Xianmei defeated the troops sent by Hang Xiong, and Hang Xiong was promoted to the governor of the capital.

古文：寇八千骑乘冰犯宁夏。
现代文：敌寇八千骑兵乘着水面结冰进犯宁夏。
English: Eight thousand enemy cavalrymen rode into Ningxia on the icy surface of the water.

古文：雄及副总兵赵镇御之，前锋陷伏中，雄等皆败。
现代文：杭雄及副总兵赵镇率军抵御，前锋深陷埋伏之中，杭雄等都战败。
English: Hangxiong and vice-chief soldier Zhao Zhen led the army to resist, the front fell deep into the ambush, and Hangxiong and others were defeated.

古文：总督王琼劾之，夺官闲住。
现代文：总督王琼弹劾他，他因而被夺官闲住。
English: Governor Wang Qiong impeached him, and he was removed from office.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：雄敢战。
现代文：杭雄敢拼敢战。
English: Hangxiong dares to fight.

古文：尝以数骑行边，敌麕至。
现代文：他曾率数名骑兵巡边，敌寇成群而至。
English: He once led several cavalrymen on a patrol, and hordes of enemy raiders arrived.

古文：乃下马积鞍为垒，跪而射之。
现代文：杭雄于是下马积鞍为垒，跪下射击。
English: Hangxiong then dismounted and kneeled down to fire.

古文：敌退，解衣，腋凝血，乃知中飞矢。
现代文：敌寇退走，他解开衣服，发现腋下凝血，才知自己被飞箭射中。
English: As the bandits retreated, he undid his clothes and discovered blood clotting under his armpits. Only then did he know that he had been hit by a flying arrow.

古文：武宗在大同，见雄毡帷敝甚，曰： 老杭穷乃尔。 
现代文：武宗在大同时，见杭雄的毡帷十分破旧，说道： 老杭竟穷成这样。 
English: At the same time, when Wu Zong saw that Hang Xiong's curtain was very worn, he said, "Old Hang is so poor.

古文：寇至，帝将亲击。
现代文：敌寇到来，皇上打算亲自率军攻击。
English: When enemy raiders arrive, the Emperor intends to personally lead an army to attack.

古文：雄叩马谏曰： 主人畜犬，不使吠盗，奚用犬为？
现代文：杭雄拉住马劝谏道： 主人养犬，不让犬叫赶盗，那还用犬做什么呢？
English: Hang Xiong held the horse and advised the donkey, "The owner keeps a dog and does not allow the dog to chase the thief, so what is the use of a dog?

古文：愿听臣等效力。 
现代文：希望皇上能让臣等效力。 
English: I hope the Emperor will allow me to serve.

古文：帝笑而止。
现代文：皇上大笑止步。
English: The Emperor stopped laughing.

古文：少役延绥巡抚行台，既贵，每至台议事，不敢正席坐，曰： 此当年役所也。 
现代文：杭雄年少时在延绥巡抚行台供役，他升职之后，每当到行台议事时，都不敢正席而坐，并说： 这是我当年供役的地方。 
English: When he was young, Hangxiong served on the patrol platform of Yancheng. After his promotion, whenever he went to the platform for deliberation, he did not dare to sit in the main seat, and said: This is the place where I served.

古文：正德、嘉靖间，西北名将，马永而下称雄云。
现代文：正德、嘉靖年间，西北的名将，马永之下便是杭雄了。
English: During the Zhengde and Jiajing years, the famous player in the northwest, under Ma Yong, was Hang Xiong.

古文：赞曰：时平则将略无由见。
现代文：赞曰：时代太平，那么将才的谋略就没有办法体现。
English: Zang said: Times are peaceful, so there is no way to embody the strategy of generals.

古文：或绾符出镇，守疆御侮，著有劳效，以功名终，亦足尚矣。
现代文：有的人掌握将符带兵镇守，守卫疆土抵御外侮，建有功绩，以功名而终，也足以称赞了。
English: It is enough to praise some people who have mastered the art of guarding the town with soldiers, guarding the territory against foreign attacks, and have made achievements that end in fame.

古文：许贵、周贤、鲁鉴、姜汉家世为将，勋阀相承，而贤与汉死事尤烈。
现代文：许贵、周贤、鲁鉴、姜汉家族世代为将，功勋相承，而周贤与姜汉之死尤为壮烈。
English: The generations of the Xu Gui, Zhou Xian, Lu Jian and Jiang Han families are all generals, and their achievements are inherited, and the death of Zhou Xian and Jiang Han is particularly magnificent.

古文：彭清、杭雄之清节，斯又其最优者欤。
现代文：彭清、杭雄清廉的节操，这又是最优秀的吧。
English: Peng Qing and Hang Xiong's incorruptible self-restraint, this is the best.

