古文：汉光武虽以征伐定天下，而其心未尝不以仁恩招怀为本。
现代文：东汉光武帝虽然依靠武力征伐平定天下，可是他的用心总是以仁慈、恩情、招降、安抚为根本。
English: Although Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty relied on military conquest to pacify the world, his intentions were always based on benevolence, kindness, submission, and appeasement.

古文：隗嚣受官爵而复叛，赐诏告之曰： 若束手自诣，保无他也。 
现代文：隗嚣接受官爵后再次反叛，光武帝下诏书告诉他： 如果你放弃抵抗主动投降，保证没有其它处分。 
English: After arrogantly accepting the official title and rebelling again, Emperor Guangwu issued an edict telling him: If you give up resistance and voluntarily surrender, there will be no other punishment.

古文：公孙述据蜀，大军征之垂灭矣，犹下诏谕之曰： 勿以来歙、岑彭受害自疑，今以时自诣，则家族全，诏书手记不可数得，朕不食言。 
现代文：公孙述据守蜀地，光武帝派大军前去征讨，即将平灭时还下诏告诉他： 不要因为你杀了我的大将来歙、岑彭而心怀疑虑，现在及时归降，仍可以保全家族。皇帝亲笔诏书不可多得，我说话算数。 
English: According to Gongsun, Emperor Guangwu sent a large army to defend Shu, and when it was about to be defeated, he issued an edict telling him: Don't be suspicious because you killed my great-grandsons, Zhou and Peng. If you surrender in time, you can still save your family. The emperor's handwritten edict is hard to come by, I'm a man of my word.

古文：遣冯异西征，戒以平定安集为急。
现代文：派遣冯异西征，告诫他平定地方、安抚百姓是当务之急。
English: Sending Feng Yixing on a western expedition and admonishing him to pacify the region and pacify the people is a top priority.

古文：怒吴汉杀降，责以失斩将吊民之义，可谓仁君矣。
现代文：因为吴汉杀降将而怒，责备他不合斩杀敌将、吊慰民众的道理，可以说是仁君了。
English: Because Wu Han was angered by the killing of the surrendering general, and reproached him for not killing the enemy general and comforting the people, it can be said that he was a benevolent ruler.

古文：萧铣举荆楚降唐，而高祖怒其逐鹿之对，诛之于市，其隘如此，《新史》犹以高祖为圣，岂理也哉？
现代文：萧铣割据长江中游，兵败降唐，可是唐高祖恼怒他曾跟自己争夺天下，把他杀死在长安的大街上，李渊心地狭隘到这种地步，《新唐书》还把他称为圣人，有这样的道理吗？
English: Xiao Rong was stationed in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River and was defeated and surrendered to Tang. However, Tang Gaozu was angry that he had competed with himself for the world and killed him on the streets of Chang'an. Li Yuan was narrow-minded to such an extent that the "New Book of Tang" also called him a saint. Is there any reason for this?

