古文：○裴度裴度，字中立，河东闻喜人。
现代文：裴度字中立，河东闻喜人。
English: Pei Du is a neutral character, and Hedong is a pleasant person.

古文：祖有邻，濮州濮阳令。
现代文：祖父裴有邻，是濮州濮阳县令。
English: His grandfather, Pei Yucheng, was the magistrate of Shenyang County, Zhangzhou.

古文：父溆，河南府渑池丞。
现代文：父亲裴溆，是河南府渑池县丞。
English: His father, Pei Jun, was the county magistrate of Dianchi County, Henan Province.

古文：度，贞元五年进士擢第，登宏辞科。
现代文：裴度于贞元五年考中进士，中选宏辞科。
English: Pei Du was promoted to a scholar in the fifth year of the Zhenyuan Middle School Examination, and was selected in the major of macro-diction.

古文：应制举贤良方正、能直言极谏科，对策高等，授河阴县尉。
现代文：参加皇帝在殿廷亲自诏试的贤良方正、能直言极谏科考试，应对策问成绩优等，被委任为河阴县尉。
English: The virtuous Fang Zheng, who took part in the emperor's imperial examination in person at the imperial court, and was able to speak frankly about the examination of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline of the discipline.

古文：迁监察御史，密疏论权幸，语切忤旨，出为河南府功曹。
现代文：晋升为监察御史后，因密章奏论皇帝宠信的权臣，措语直切，违逆君心，被调出朝廷任河南府功曹。
English: After he was promoted to inspector of imperial history, he was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as a meritorious officer of Henan Province because of a secret chapter he wrote on the emperor's favorite subject, which was bluntly worded and violated the emperor's heart.

古文：迁起居舍人。
现代文：后提升为起居舍人。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chief householder.

古文：元和六年，以司封员外郎知制诰，寻转本司郎中。
现代文：元和六年，他以司封员外郎职务掌管拟制诏令，不久转任本司郎中。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was in charge of drafting the edict with the post of secretary of the palace guard, and was soon transferred to the post of secretary of the palace guard.

古文：七年，魏博节度使田季安卒。其子怀谏幼年不任军政，牙军立小将田兴为留后。
现代文：元和七年，魏博节度使田季安去世，其子田怀谏年幼不能担任军政职务，府营中的军官拥立小将田兴担任留后官。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Wei Bo Festival caused the death of Tian Ji'an. His son, Tian Huai'en, was too young to serve in military and political positions, and the officers in the prefectural camp supported the young general Tian Xing to serve as a post-officer.

古文：兴布心腹于朝廷，请守国法，除吏输常赋，宪宗遣度使魏州宣谕。
现代文：田兴安排心腹去到朝廷，奏请魏博遵守朝廷法令，由朝廷委任魏博官吏，向朝廷缴纳法定赋税。宪宗派裴度出使魏州宣布解说朝廷旨意。
English: Tian Xing arranged for his confidant to go to the imperial court and petition Wei Bo to comply with the imperial decree, and the imperial court appointed Wei Bo as an official to pay the statutory tax to the imperial court. Constitutionalist Baidu sent an envoy to Weizhou to announce the interpretation of the imperial decree.

古文：兴承僭侈之后，车服垣屋，有逾制度，视事斋阁，尤加宏敞。
现代文：田兴任留后之时，其先任僭伪不守礼法而侈奢浮华，享用的车辆、服饰、住房，超过制度的规定，处理政务的厅堂楼阁更为宽敞。
English: When Tian Xing stayed in office, his predecessor falsely did not observe the etiquette and was extravagant. The vehicles, clothing and housing he enjoyed exceeded the requirements of the system, and the hall to deal with government affairs was more spacious.

古文：兴恶之，不于其间视事，乃除旧采访使居之，请度为壁记，述兴谦降奉法，魏人深德之。
现代文：田兴避忌，不去那里处理公务，仍取用原采访使的官厅居住；于是请裴度在他居所的墙壁上写下题文，记述田兴的谦卑奉法，魏博人十分感激裴度。
English: Tian Xing avoided the taboo and did not go there to deal with official business, but still used the official office of the original envoy to live. He then asked Pei Du to write an inscription on the walls of his residence, describing Tian Xing's humble practice of the law. The people of Weibo are very grateful to Pei Du.

古文：兴又请度遍至属郡，宣述诏旨，魏人郊迎感悦。
现代文：田兴又请裴度遍行所属的各郡，传达皇帝的诏书旨意，魏博人到郊外迎接，倍感欣悦。
English: Tian Xing also asked Pei Du to travel throughout the counties he belonged to and convey the emperor's edict. Wei Bo people went to the suburbs to welcome him and were very pleased.

古文：使还，拜中书舍人。
现代文：裴度出使魏博回朝后，被任命为中书舍人。
English: After Wei Bo, sent by Pei Du, returned to the imperial court, he was appointed as the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：九年十月，改御史中丞。
现代文：元和九年十月，裴度改任御史中丞。
English: In October of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pei Du was reappointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：宣徽院五坊小使，每岁秋按鹰犬于畿甸，所至官吏必厚邀供饷，小不如意，即恣其须索，百姓畏之如寇盗。
现代文：宣徽院的五坊小使，每年秋季都要到京城附近地区试放宫廷的鹰犬行猎。所到之处，官吏必须盛情相邀厚礼馈赠，小使们稍不满意，便任意勒索。百姓们畏惧他们如同害怕盗寇。
English: Every autumn, the five courtiers of the Xuanhui Academy go hunting in the area near the capital to test the release of the eagle dogs of the court. Wherever they go, officials must be cordially invited with gifts. If the courtiers are not satisfied, they will blackmail them at will. The people are afraid of them as if they were afraid of robbers.

古文：先是，贞元末，此辈暴横尤甚，乃至张网罗于民家门及井，不令出入汲水，曰： 惊我供奉鸟雀。 
现代文：在此之前，贞元末年，这帮小使尤为暴虐蛮横，甚至用网罩住平民家门和井口，不许住户出入打水，说是： 有人出入会惊吓了我们豢养的皇家鸟雀。 
English: Prior to this, in the last years of the Zhengyuan era, these gangs of henchmen were particularly brutal and tyrannical. They even used nets to cover the doors of civilians' homes and wells, not allowing residents to enter and exit to fetch water, saying, "If anyone enters or exits, it will frighten the royal birds and finches that we raise."

古文：又群聚于卖酒食家，肆情饮啖。
现代文：还成群结伙到酒食店聚饮，纵情放肆吃喝。
English: They also gather in groups to drink at restaurants and bars, indulging in licentious eating and drinking.

古文：将去，留蛇一箧，诫之曰： 吾以此蛇致供奉鸟雀，可善饲之，无使饥渴。 
现代文：临走，留下一箱蛇，并警告店家说： 我们用这些蛇喂养皇家鸟雀，要好好喂养这些蛇，不得让它们受渴挨饿。 
English: Before leaving, he left behind a box of snakes and warned the shopkeeper: "We use these snakes to feed the royal birds and finches. We must feed these snakes well and not let them go hungry or thirsty."

古文：主人赂而谢之，方肯携蛇箧而去。
现代文：店东贿赂、道歉，小使们才肯将蛇箱带走。
English: The shop owner had to bribe and apologize before the boys were willing to take the snake box away.

古文：至元和初，虽数治其弊，故态未绝。
现代文：到元和初年，虽屡屡整治这类弊病，小使们的惯常恶行始终不能根绝。
English: Although such maladies were repeatedly rectified in the Yuan and the first year, the habitual misdeeds of the henchmen could not be eradicated.

古文：小使尝至下邽县，县令裴寰性严刻，嫉其凶暴，公馆之外，一无曲奉。
现代文：这时，一帮五坊小使曾到下圭阝县试放鹰犬，县令裴寰性格严厉苛刻，痛恶这帮小使的凶恶暴虐，除向他们提供公务馆所外，其他一无曲意奉承。
English: At this time, a group of five small envoys had come to lower Guizhou County to test the release of eagle dogs. The county magistrate Pei Yao was stern and harsh, abhorring the vicious brutality of these small envoys. In addition to providing them with an official pavilion, there was no other flattery.

古文：小使怒，构寰出慢言。
现代文：小使们怒恼，诬陷裴寰狂言侮辱朝廷，并传到皇帝那里。
English: Enraged, the envoys falsely accused Pei of insulting the imperial court with his wild talk, and this was passed on to the emperor.

古文：及上闻，宪宗怒，促令摄寰下狱，欲以大不敬论。
现代文：宪宗发怒，催促拘捕裴寰入狱，打算以 不敬皇帝 的大罪处置裴寰。
English: Kenzong was furious, urged the arrest and imprisonment of Pei Jun, and planned to deal with Pei Jun with the serious crime of disrespecting the emperor.

古文：宰相武元衡等以理开悟，帝怒不解。
现代文：宰相武元衡等人以理劝解，想使皇帝省悟，宪宗怒气不消。
English: The prime minister, Takemoto Hirai, and others tried to reason with the emperor to make him see reason, but Kenzong's anger did not go away.

古文：度入延英奏事，因极言论列，言寰无罪。
现代文：裴度入延英殿进奏政事，趁机竭力论理评说，陈述裴寰无罪。
English: Baidu entered Yan Ying's palace to report on government affairs, and took the opportunity to try his best to make a rational evaluation and report that Baidu was innocent.

古文：上愈怒曰： 如卿之言，寰无罪即决五坊小使；如小使无罪，即决裴寰。 
现代文：宪宗更加恼怒，说： 按你的意见，裴寰无罪就处决五坊小使；如果小使们无罪，就处决裴寰。 
English: Kenzong became even more angry and said, "According to your opinion, if Pei Xuan is not guilty, then execute the five minor emissaries; if the minor emissaries are not guilty, then execute Pei Xuan."

古文：度对曰： 按罪诚如圣旨，但以裴寰为令长，忧惜陛下百姓如此，岂可加罪？ 
现代文：裴度回答说： 论罪，确如圣上所言，只是任用裴寰为县令，他替陛下忧心、顾惜百姓才至于如此，怎么可以加罪于他呢？ 
English: Pei Du replied: "As for the crime, indeed, as the saint said, it was only by appointing Pei Du as the county magistrate that he worried about His Majesty and took care of the people, so how can you add guilt to him?

古文：上怒色遽霁。
现代文：宪宗怒色立消。
English: Kenzong angrily stormed off.

古文：翌日，令释寰。
现代文：次日，便下令释放了裴寰。
English: The next day, he ordered the release of Pei Xuan.

古文：寻以度兼刑部侍郎，奉使蔡州行营，宣谕诸军。
现代文：不久，委任裴度兼刑部侍郎，并奉旨出使蔡州行营，向诸军将领传达讲述朝廷旨意。
English: Soon after, he appointed Pei Du to be the attendant of the Department of Justice, and sent him to Caizhou to convey the will of the imperial court to the generals.

古文：既还，帝问诸将之才，度曰： 臣观李光颜见义能勇，终有所成。 
现代文：回朝后，宪宗向裴度询问各将领的才干，裴度说： 据臣看，李光颜深明大义、能干勇为，终将有所成就。 
English: After returning to the imperial court, Emperor Gensong asked Pei Du about the talents of the generals. Pei Du said, "According to the courtier, Li Guangyan is profound in virtue, capable and courageous, and will eventually achieve something."

古文：不数日，光颜奏大破贼军于时曲，帝尤叹度之知人。
现代文：不几天，李光颜向朝廷报捷：在时曲大破贼军。宪宗更加叹服裴度的知人之明。
English: Within a few days, Li Guangyan reported his success to the imperial court: At the time of the song, the bandit army was defeated. Xianzong was even more impressed by Pei Du's acquaintance.

古文：十年六月，王承宗、李师道俱遣刺客刺宰相武元衡，亦令刺度。
现代文：元和十年六月，王承宗、李师道都派遣刺客刺杀宰相武元衡，同时指使刺杀裴度。
English: In June of the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian, Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao both sent assassins to assassinate the prime minister, Wu Yuanhei, and at the same time ordered the assassination of Pei Du.

古文：是日，度出通化里，盗三以剑击度，初断靴带，次中背，才绝单衣，后微伤其首，度堕马。
现代文：这天，裴度从通化里出来，刺客向裴度击刺三剑：头一剑砍断了裴度的靴带；第二剑刺中背部，刚刚划破内衣；末一剑微伤裴度的头部。裴度跌下马来。
English: On this day, Pei Du came out of Tonghua, and the assassin stabbed Pei Du with three swords: the first sword cut off Pei Du's shoelace; the second sword stabbed Pei Du in the back, just cutting through his underwear; the last sword slightly injured Pei Du's head. Pei Du fell to the ground.

古文：会度带氈帽，故创不至深。
现代文：适逢裴度头戴毡帽，因此头部伤不很深。
English: At the time, Baidu was wearing a skullcap, so the head injury was not very deep.

古文：贼又挥刃追度，度从人王义乃持贼连呼甚急，贼反刃断义手，乃得去。
现代文：刺客又挥剑追杀裴度。裴度的随从王义便抓住刺客连连急声呼救，刺客回剑砍断了王义的手，才得脱身。
English: The assassin chased and killed Pei Du with his sword. Wang Yi, a follower of Pei Du, grabbed the assassin and shouted for help. The assassin cut off Wang Yi's hand with his sword before he could escape.

古文：度已堕沟中，贼谓度已死，乃舍去。
现代文：裴度跌进沟中，刺客以为裴度已死，这才罢手离去。
English: Pei Du fell into a ditch. The assassin thought Pei Du was dead, so he stopped and left.

古文：居三日，诏以度为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：事隔三日，宪宗下诏委任裴度为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Three days later, Emperor Kenzong issued an imperial edict appointing Pei Du as the attendant of his disciple and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：度劲正而言辩，尤长于政体，凡所陈谕，感动物情。
现代文：裴度为人刚强正直，而且能言善辩，尤其擅长把握施政要领，凡是他陈情讲述的事，总能感动人心。
English: Baidu is a strong and honest person, and he can speak well. He is especially good at grasping the essentials of governance. Everything he says can always touch people's hearts.

古文：自魏博使还，宣达称旨，帝深嘉属。
现代文：自出使魏博返朝，因传布朝廷旨意使宪宗称心，皇帝十分赞许、看重。
English: Since Wei Bo was sent to return to the imperial court, the emperor highly praised and valued him for spreading the will of the imperial court and making Emperor Xianzong happy.

古文：又自蔡州劳军还，益听其言。
现代文：再从蔡州劳军回京，宪宗更加听从他的意见。
English: After returning to Beijing from the Caizhou Labour Corps, Emperor Xianzong paid more attention to his advice.

古文：尚以元衡秉政，大用未果，自盗发都邑，便以大计属之。
现代文：皇帝因武元衡执政，委以重任却未见成效，自从京城发生刺杀宰相事件，便将朝廷的重大谋划决策任务托付给了裴度。
English: The emperor was in power because of Wu Yuanheng, but he did not succeed in entrusting important tasks. Since the assassination of the prime minister in Beijing, he entrusted the important planning and decision-making tasks of the imperial court to Pei Du.

古文：初，元衡遇害，献计者或请罢度官以安二镇之心，宪宗大怒曰： 若罢度官，是奸计得行，朝纲何以振举？
现代文：起初，武元衡遇害，某些献计者奏请罢免裴度的官职，以安抚王承宗、李师道二藩镇的心，宪宗大怒说： 如果罢了裴度的官，这就是让奸计得逞，朝廷纲纪如何得以整顿树立？
English: At first, when Wu Yuanheng was killed, some donors petitioned for the removal of Pei Du as an official, in order to appease Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao, the leaders of the two clans. Xianzong said angrily, "If we remove Pei Du as an official, it means that the treachery has been successful. How can the discipline of the imperial court be rectified and established?"

古文：吾用度一人，足以破此二贼矣。 
现代文：我任用裴度一人，足以击败这两个乱臣逆贼子。 
English: I appointed Baidu alone, which was enough to defeat these two rascals and traitors.

古文：度亦以平贼为己任。
现代文：裴度也以平定逆贼为己任。
English: Pei Du also took it upon himself to subdue the traitors.

古文：度以所伤请告二十余日，诏以卫兵宿度私第，中使问讯不绝。
现代文：当他因所受刺伤向朝廷请求告假二十余日时，宪宗下诏派卫兵到裴度的私宅值夜守卫，内宫使臣前往他家问候探询络绎不绝。
English: When he requested leave of absence from the Imperial Court for more than 20 days due to the stab wound he suffered, Emperor Genso sent guards to Peidu's private home to stand guard at night, and courtiers from the Imperial Household went to his home to greet and inquire incessantly.

古文：未拜前一日，宣旨谓度曰： 不用宣政参假，即延英对来。 
现代文：在授予裴度任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事前一日，宪宗对裴度宣布诏书称： 不用去宣政殿参加报到，即入延英殿来应答。 
English: One day before awarding Pei Du the title of a courtier to his pupil and the title of a scholar to his pupil, Emperor Gensong issued an edict to Pei Du, saying, "You don't have to go to the Xuan Zheng Palace to report for duty, you can come to the Yan Ying Palace to answer questions."

古文：及度入对，抚谕周至。
现代文：到裴度进殿应答，宪宗对他安抚告慰备至。
English: When Pei Du entered the hall to answer the question, Emperor Xianzong comforted and consoled him.

古文：时群盗干纪，变起都城，朝野恐骇。
现代文：这时盗寇群起违反法纪，京城内惊扰四起，朝野一片惊恐。
English: At this time, a group of robbers rose up to violate the law and order, four cases of disturbance occurred in the capital, and there was a panic in the morning and evening.

古文：及度命相制下，人情始安，以为必能殄寇。
现代文：待到委任裴度为宰相的制诰下达，人心方才安定，认为他必定能消灭盗寇。
English: It was not until the imperial edict was issued appointing Pei Du as prime minister that the people's minds were stabilized, believing that he would surely be able to eliminate the bandits.

古文：自是诛贼之计，日闻献替，用军愈急。
现代文：从此诛除盗贼的计策，日日都有进献，调兵遣将愈益紧急。
English: From now on, there will be more and more strategies to get rid of the thieves, and the deployment of troops will become more and more urgent.

古文：十一年，庄宪皇后崩，度为礼仪使。
现代文：元和十二年，庄宪皇后逝世，裴度任礼仪使。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Empress Zhuo Xian died, Pei Du became the ceremonial envoy.

古文：上不听政，欲准故事置冢宰，以总百司。
现代文：宪宗不上朝处理政事，想按旧例设置冢宰来总领百官。
English: Kenzong did not go to the court to deal with political affairs, and he wanted to set up a vice-regent to lead a hundred officials according to the old example.

古文：度献议曰： 冢宰是殷、周六官之首，既掌邦理，实统百司。
现代文：裴度进献建议说： 冢宰为殷、周二朝的六官之首，执掌全部的邦国治理，实际上统管百官。
English: Pei Duxian suggested: Zhai Zai is Yin, the head of the six officials of the Tuesday morning, in charge of all the governance of the state, in fact, in charge of a hundred officials.

古文：故王者谅闇，百官有权听之制。
现代文：因此帝王居丧，对百官有冢宰暂代掌管的制度。
English: Therefore, the emperor is in mourning, and there is a system of temporary control over the officials.

古文：后代设官，既无此号，不可虚设。
现代文：后代设官，已无这一官号，不可凭空虚设。
English: Subsequent generations of officials do not have this official title, and it cannot be created out of thin air.

古文：且国朝故事，或置或否，古今异制，不必因循。 
现代文：而且我朝旧例，也是有时设置有时不设；古今体制不同，不必因循旧例。 
English: Moreover, I follow the old example, sometimes setting and sometimes not setting; the old and new systems are different, and there is no need to follow the old example.

古文：敕旨曰： 诸司公事，宜权取中书门下处分。 
现代文：宪宗下令： 诸官公事，当暂受中书门下省处置。 
English: Gensong ordered: All officials' official business should be temporarily handled by Zhongshumen subordinate province.

古文：识者是之。
现代文：有见识的人认为这样做正确。
English: People with insight think it's the right thing to do.

古文：六月，蔡州行营唐邓节度使高霞寓兵败于铁城，中外恟骇。
现代文：六月，蔡州行营的唐邓节度使高霞寓兵败铁城，宫廷内外震惊忧恐。
English: In June, Emperor Tang's military expedition to Caizhou resulted in Gaoxia's defeat of Tiecheng, causing shock and consternation both inside and outside the court.

古文：先是，诏群臣各献诛吴元济可否之状。
现代文：在此之前，宪宗诏令群臣各自进献关于讨伐逆贼吴元济是否妥当的意见。
English: Prior to this, the Emperor had ordered his courtiers to submit their own opinions on the appropriateness of fighting the traitor Wu Yuanji.

古文：朝臣多言罢兵赦罪为便，翰林学士钱徽、萧俛语尤切，唯度言贼不可赦。
现代文：朝廷大臣大多认为以停止征讨、实行赦免为宜，翰林学士钱徽、萧亻免言辞尤为直切。惟有裴度声称：吴元济不可赦免。
English: Most of the ministers of the imperial court believed that it was appropriate to stop the requisition and grant amnesty. Hanlin Scholar Qian Hui and Xiao Yan were particularly outspoken. Only Baidu claimed that Wu Yuanji could not be pardoned.

古文：及霞寓败，宰相以上必厌兵，欲以罢兵为对。
现代文：及至高霞寓兵败，宰相们以为皇上必定厌倦用兵，想以停止征讨应答。
English: When Gao Xia was defeated, the prime ministers thought that the emperor must be tired of using soldiers and wanted to stop the conscription.

古文：延英方奏，宪宗曰： 夫一胜一负，兵家常势。
现代文：众宰辅大臣在延英殿刚要启奏，宪宗说： 一胜一负，是兵家的常态。
English: The vice-chancellors were just about to open the concert at Yan Ying Hall, when Kenzong said: "One win and one loss is the norm for soldiers.

古文：若帝王之兵不合败，则自古何难于用兵，累圣不应留此凶贼。
现代文：若是帝王的军队就不该失败，那么自古以来朝廷用兵还有何难？屡屡无所不能，就不应留有这号凶贼。
English: If the emperor's army should not fail, then how difficult is it for the imperial court to use soldiers since ancient times?

古文：今但论此兵合用与否，及朝廷制置当否，卿等唯须要害处置。
现代文：今天只论此次用兵该与不该，以及朝廷决断处置是否妥当，众卿只须在关键问题上做出处理。
English: Today, on the issue of whether or not this use of troops is appropriate, and whether or not the Imperial Court's decision is appropriate, Your Excellencies only need to deal with the key issues.

古文：将帅有不可者，去之勿疑；兵力有不足者，速与应接。
现代文：将帅有不合适的，撤去，毋须迟疑；兵力不足的，迅速给予接应。
English: If the commander-in-chief is unsuitable, he should be removed without hesitation; if there are insufficient troops, they should be quickly accommodated.

古文：何可以一将不利，便沮成计？ 
现代文：怎么能够因一个将领的失利，就阻止既定的大计？ 
English: How can the defeat of a general prevent the implementation of a grand plan?

古文：于是宰臣不得措言，朝廷无敢言罢兵者，故度计得行。
现代文：这时宰辅大臣不容再执异词，朝廷之上没有再敢提罢兵的人，因而裴度的计划得以施行。
English: At this time, the Vice-Minister of Defense was no longer allowed to hold dissenting opinions, and no one in the Imperial Court dared to propose a military strike, so Pei Du's plan was implemented.

古文：王稷家二奴告稷换父遗表，隐没进奉物。
现代文：王稷家的两个奴仆告发王稷掉换其父的遗表，隐瞒了进奉朝廷的财物。
English: Two servants of the Wang Hui family accused Wang Hui of exchanging his father's watch and concealing the property of the imperial court.

古文：留其奴于仗内，遣中使往东都检责稷之家财。
现代文：宪宗将这两个奴仆留在宫内，派宫内使臣去东都搜查、索取王稷的家财。
English: Emperor Xianzong kept the two servants in the palace and sent palace envoys to Dongdu to search and claim Wang Yao's family wealth.

古文：度奏曰： 王锷身殁之后，其家进奉已多。
现代文：裴度进奏说： 王锷去世之后，他家进奉朝廷的财物已经很多。
English: Pei Duzheng said: After Wang Xi's death, his family had already donated a lot of property to the imperial court.

古文：今因其奴告检责其家事，臣恐天下将帅闻之，必有以家为计者。 
现代文：现因其家奴告发，就查抄他的家财，我担心全国的将帅听说后，必将会有为保全家财而谋虑的人了。 
English: Now, because of his family slave's denunciation, his family wealth is being investigated. I am afraid that after the country's generals hear about this, there will surely be people who are concerned about the preservation of family wealth.

古文：宪宗即日遣中使还，二奴付京兆府决杀。
现代文：宪宗当天就让宫内使臣返回，两个家奴交给京兆府处死。
English: On the same day, Kenzong let the imperial envoy return, and the two servants were handed over to the capital to be executed.

古文：十二年，李醖、李光颜屡奏破贼，然国家聚兵淮右四年，度支供饷，不胜其弊，诸将玩寇相视，未有成功，上亦病之。
现代文：元和十二年，李訫、李光颜屡屡奏报攻破贼军，但国家在淮右集结军队四年，支付供给的粮饷，朝廷难以承受其消耗，诸军将领彼此观望，轻忽剿寇，毫无收获，宪宗也以此为忧。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Yu and Li Guangyan repeatedly reported that they had defeated the bandit army. However, the country had been amassing troops in Huaiyu for four years to pay for the grain supply, and the imperial court could not bear its consumption. The generals of the armies looked at each other, treated the bandits lightly, and gained nothing. Xianzong was also worried about this.

古文：宰相李逢吉、王涯等三人，以劳师弊赋，意欲罢兵，见上互陈利害。
现代文：宰相李逢吉、王涯等三人，以劳损军力、耗费财赋为由，想要停止进剿，面见皇帝，交相陈述用军、罢兵的利与害。
English: Prime Minister Li Fengji, Wang Ya and three others, on the grounds of straining military strength and wasting financial resources, wanted to stop the invasion, meet with the emperor, and make a report to the emperor on the benefits and harms of using the army and the strike.

古文：度独无言。帝问之，对曰： 臣请身自督战。 
现代文：惟独裴度缄默不语，宪宗问他的意见，裴度回答说： 臣请求亲自督战。 
English: However, Pei Du remained silent. When the Emperor asked him for his opinion, Pei Du replied, "The vassal asked me to personally supervise the battle."

古文：明日延英重议，逢吉等出，独留度，谓之曰： 卿必能为朕行乎？ 
现代文：次日在延英殿重议此事，李逢吉等出殿后，宪宗单独留下裴度，对他说： 卿确能替朕出巡吗？ 
English: On the next day, the matter was reconsidered at the Yan Ying Palace. After Li Fengji and others left the palace, Xianzong left Pei Du alone and said to him: Sir, can you really go on a tour for me?

古文：度俯伏流涕曰： 臣誓不与此贼偕全。 
现代文：裴度匍伏流泪说： 臣与此贼誓不两全！ 
English: Pei Duowu said with tears streaming down his face, "My vassal and this thief cannot have it both ways!

古文：上亦为之改容。
现代文：皇帝也为之动容。
English: The emperor was also moved.

古文：度复奏曰： 臣昨见吴元济乞降表，料此逆贼势实窘蹙。但诸将不一，未能迫之，故未降耳。
现代文：裴度又进言说： 臣日前看到吴元济的乞降表，料想这个逆贼，处境实已窘迫，只是我军诸将持见不一，未能进逼，所以未降罢了。
English: Pei Du also said: "A minister recently saw Wu Yuanji's begging list, and thought that the situation of this traitor was really in distress. However, the generals of our army had different opinions, and they could not force him, so they did not surrender.

古文：若臣自赴行营，则诸将各欲立功以固恩宠，破贼必矣！ 
现代文：如果臣亲赴行营，那么诸将各都想要立功以巩固皇上的恩宠，剿灭此贼是必定无疑的了！ 
English: If the vassals go to the camp, then all the generals will want to do their best to consolidate the emperor's favor, and there is no doubt that this thief will be destroyed!

古文：上然之。
现代文：宪宗同意他的见解。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：翌日，诏曰：
现代文：次日，拟制诏书说：
English: The next day, the proposed edict said:

古文：辅弼之臣，军国是赖。兴化致理，秉钧以居。取威定功，则分阃而出。
现代文： 宰辅大臣，是军务、国政的依靠：振兴教化，达到治世，执政于朝廷；凭借德威，定国建功，统兵于京外。
English: The Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission is the pillar of military affairs and national politics: he is responsible for the revitalization of education, the achievement of the reign, and the administration of the imperial court; by virtue of his virtue, he is responsible for the national construction, and he is responsible for the unified army outside of Beijing.

古文：所以同君臣之体，一中外之任焉。
现代文：因此，君王辅臣如同一体，朝廷内外所任如一。
English: As a result, the monarch, his aides and ministers are as one and the same, both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：属者问罪汝南，致诛淮右，盖欲刷其污俗，吊彼顽人。
现代文：近时兴兵汝南，征剿淮右，本为清除败坏的世风，怜悯当地的愚民。
English: Recently, Xingfei Runan, Zenghuaihuai, was originally launched to clean up the corrupt world style and pity the local fools.

古文：虽挈地求生者实繁有徒，而婴城执迷者未翦其类，何兽困而犹斗，岂鸟穷之无归欤？
现代文：虽然献地归顺以谋求生存者大有人在，然而负隅顽抗而执迷不悟者尚未剪除；因何被困之兽依然苦斗，岂是穷途之鸟不愿回归？
English: Although there are many people who have surrendered their lands in search of survival, those who are stubborn and obstinate have not yet been eliminated; why is the trapped beast still struggling, is it a desperate bird unwilling to return?

古文：由是遥听鼓鼙，更张琴瑟，烦我台席，董兹戎旃。
现代文：因此发兵远征，改弦更张，烦劳宰相，督察军旅。
English: As a result, he sent an expeditionary force, changed his mind, annoyed the prime minister, and inspected the military brigade.

古文：朝议大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、飞骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋裴度，为时降生，协朕梦卜，精辨宣力，坚明纳忠。
现代文：朝议大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、飞骑尉、受赐紫服金袋的重臣裴度，应时运而降生，合朕心之贤相，精于明察，致力治世，坚毅明本，奉献忠心。
English: Pei Du, the doctor of the Council of Elders, the secretary of the Board of Guardians, Tongping Zhangji, Fei Jiao, and the chief retainer Pei Du, who was given a purple robe and a gold bag, was born in accordance with the time, and he was a wise man of my heart, he was good at observation, he was committed to governing the world, he was steadfast and dedicated, and he was loyal.

古文：当轴而才谋老成，运筹而智略有定。
现代文：他主持政事才能谋划老到，帷幄运筹智谋韬略得法。
English: Only when he presides over political affairs can he plan for a long time, and he is able to strategize and strategize.

古文：司其枢务，备知四方之事；付以兵要，必得万人之心。
现代文：执掌朝政，尽知四方之事；付予兵权，必得万众之心。
English: In charge of the imperial government, he knows everything about the four directions; if you give him military power, you will win the hearts of the people.

古文：是用祷于上玄，拣此吉日，带丞相之印绶，所以尊其名；赐诸侯之斧钺，所以重其命。
现代文：故此敬祷上苍，择此吉日，佩挂丞相之印绶，以尊崇其名位；授予诸侯之斧钺，以推重其使命。
English: Therefore, on this auspicious day, I respectfully pray to the heavens and wear the seal of the prime minister to honor his name, and the axe of the princes to promote his mission.

古文：尔宜宣布清问，恢壮皇猷，感励连营，荡平多垒，招怀孤疾，字抚夷伤。
现代文：你当宣谕朕意、详察下情，拓展扩大帝王宏图，感化激励方镇的将士，扫荡平定逆贼的营堡，招致怀德归顺的孤苦受害的民众，治理安抚备受战乱创伤的百姓。
English: You should proclaim our will, examine the situation in detail, expand and enlarge the emperor's grand plan, inspire and motivate the soldiers of Fangzhen, sweep and pacify the camp of the traitors, invite the lonely and suffering people who are submissive to Huai De, and govern and pacify the people who are traumatized by the war.

古文：况淮西一军，素效忠节，过海赴难，史册书勋。
现代文：况且淮西军队，一向效忠尽节，过海趋救国难，功勋载于史册。
English: Moreover, the Huaxi army has always been loyal to the end, crossing the sea to save the country, and its achievements are recorded in the history books.

古文：建中初，攻破襄阳，擒灭崇义。
现代文：建中初年，攻克襄阳郡，生擒梁崇义。
English: In the first year of middle school, he conquered Xiangyang County and became Liang Chongyi.

古文：比者胁于凶逆，归命无由。
现代文：只是近来受到凶暴逆贼胁迫，没有机缘归顺朝廷。
English: However, recently they have been coerced by vicious traitors and have no chance to submit to the imperial court.

古文：每念前劳，常思安抚。
现代文：朕每每念及前功，常常谋虑安抚。
English: Every time I think about my past achievements, I often try to placate them.

古文：所以内辍辅臣，俾为师率，实欲保全慰谕，各使得宜。
现代文：之所以暂时让出宰辅大臣，派他担任军队统领，实为保持生灵、好言慰解，以使军民人等各得所宜。
English: The reason for temporarily relinquishing the post of Vice-Minister of Defense and appointing him as the commander of the army is indeed to save lives and offer consolation, so that the military and the people can do as they please.

古文：汝往钦哉！无越我丕训。
现代文：你前往奉行朕命，应当恭谨从事，不要违背朕的训诫！
English: You go to carry out my order, you should do it respectfully, don't go against my instruction!

古文：可门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、蔡州刺史，充彰义军节度、申光蔡观察等使，仍充淮西宣慰招讨处置使。
现代文：准以门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、蔡州刺史身份，担任彰义军节度使，申、光、蔡州观察使，兼任淮西宣慰招讨处置使。 
English: He was appointed as a subordinate attendant, a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：诏出，度以韩弘为淮西行营都统，不欲更为招讨，请只称宣慰处置使。
现代文：诏书拟成后，裴度因韩弘已是淮西行营都统，不想再给自己加 招讨 职份，请求只称 宣慰处置使 。
English: After the edict was drafted, Pei Du, who did not want to give himself any more posts because Han Hong had already been sent to Huaixi, only requested to be called "Comfort and Disposition Envoy."

古文：又以此行既兼招抚，请改 翦其类 为 革其志 。
现代文：又因此行既兼招抚，请求将 剪除 改为 革心 。
English: Therefore, the request was made to change the word "cut out" to "revolution."

古文：又以弘已为都统，请改 更张琴瑟 为 近辍枢衡 ，请改 烦我台席 为 授以成算 ，皆从之。
现代文：同时，韩弘已是都统，请求将 改弦更张 改为 暂停枢衡 ，将 烦劳宰相 改为 授以成谋 ，宪宗一一采纳了他的建议。
English: At the same time, Han Hong, who was already a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), requested that "Changing the chord" be changed to "Suspending the balance," and "Bothering the Prime Minister" be changed to "Granting a plot," and Kenzong adopted his suggestions one by one.

古文：仍奏刑部侍郎马总为宣慰副使，太子右庶子韩愈为彰义行军司马，司勋员外郎李正封、都官员外郎冯宿、礼部员外郎李宗闵等为两使判官书记，皆从之。
现代文：裴度又奏请委任刑部侍郎马总为宣慰副使，太子右庶子韩愈为彰义行军司马，司勋员外郎李正封、都官员外郎冯宿、礼部员外郎李宗闵等人任两使判官书记，以上奏请也都获准。
English: Baidu also requested the appointment of the general secretary of the Criminal Department, Ma Jun, as the vice-envoy of condolence, the prince's son-in-law, Han Yu, as the general secretary of the march of the army in Changyi, and the secretary of the magistrate of the two envoys, the grand-nephew of the grand-nephew, Li Zhengfeng, the grand-nephew of the grand-nephew, the grand-nephew of the grand-nephew, Feng Shu, the grand-nephew of the grand-nephew, and the grand-nephew of the grand-nephew

古文：初，德宗朝政多僻，朝官或相过从，多令金吾伺察密奏，宰相不敢于私第见宾客。
现代文：原先，德宗时朝政有许多乖情悖理之举，朝廷官员偶有过从，也多命掌管京城治安的执金吾暗中侦察，密报皇帝，以致宰相不敢在自己家中会见宾客。
English: Originally, during the reign of Emperor Dezong, the government of the dynasty had many perverse actions. The officials of the imperial court occasionally obeyed, and the eunuch in charge of the security of the capital secretly investigated and reported to the emperor, so that the prime minister did not dare to meet guests in his own home.

古文：及度辅政，以群贼未诛，宜延接奇士，共为筹画，乃请于私居接延宾客，宪宗许之。
现代文：到裴度辅政，因众乱臣逆贼尚未诛除，应接待奇才能士，共商破贼计谋，于是奏请在宰相私宅接见宾客，宪宗准奏。
English: At the time of the Baidu Auxiliary Government, because the rebels of the disorderly ministers had not yet been eliminated, it was necessary to receive the extraordinary talents and discuss the plan to break the thieves. Therefore, he asked to receive the guests at the prime minister's private residence, and the guest was Kenzo Junso.

古文：自是天下贤俊，得以效计议于丞相，接士于私第，由度之请也。
现代文：从此天下贤才俊杰得以向丞相献计出谋，宰相能在私宅接待才士，是由裴度奏请而施行的。
English: Since then, the world's talented people have been able to offer their advice to the prime minister, and the prime minister has been able to receive talented people in his private home. This was done at the request of Pei Duoxiao.

古文：自讨淮西，王师屡败。
现代文：自讨伐淮西以来，朝廷的军队屡遭失败。
English: Since the campaign against Huaxi, the imperial army has suffered repeated defeats.

古文：论者以杀伤滋甚，转输不逮，拟议密疏，纷纭交进。
现代文：论谏官员因官军被杀伤的人愈来愈多，转送不及，考虑息兵撤军，频繁交相进奏。
English: On the other hand, there are more and more officials who have been killed and injured by the official army, unable to transfer, considering the withdrawal of peacekeepers, and frequent interchanges.

古文：度以腹心之疾，不时去之，终为大患，不然，两河之盗，亦将视此为高下。
现代文：裴度认为根本的祸患不及时除掉，终将酿成大祸；不除淮西的腹心之患，两河的寇贼，也将效法淮西逆贼，与朝廷一争高下。
English: Pei Du believed that if the fundamental scourge was not eliminated in time, it would eventually lead to a great calamity; if Huaixi's confidant was not eliminated, the bandits in the two rivers would also follow the example of Huaixi's rebels and compete with the imperial court.

古文：遂坚请讨伐，上深委信，故听之不疑。
现代文：于是坚决请求坚持讨伐，宪宗十分倾心信赖裴度，因此言听计从毫不犹疑。
English: Therefore, he firmly requested to persist in the crusade, and Kenzong was very devoted to and trusted Pei Du, so he never hesitated to do as he was told.

古文：度既受命，召对于延英，奏曰： 主忧臣辱，义在必死。
现代文：裴度接受讨伐任务后，奉召在延英殿对答皇帝的策问，进陈衷情说： 君主忧愁是臣子的耻辱，理当赴义捐生献必死之力。
English: After Pei Du accepted the crusade mission, he was summoned to answer the emperor's question at the Yan Ying Palace, and said sincerely: The monarch's sorrow is the disgrace of the vassal, and it is right to go to charity and sacrifice his life.

古文：贼灭，则朝天有日；贼在，则归阙无期。 
现代文：逆贼被灭，则将有朝见天子之日；贼在一日，则将无返回朝廷之期。 
English: If the traitor is killed, there will be a day when he will see the Son of Heaven; if the traitor is killed on the same day, there will be no time for him to return to the imperial court.

古文：上为之恻然流涕。
现代文：宪宗为他的恳切陈情潸然泪下。
English: Kenzong burst into tears at his heartfelt plea.

古文：十二年八月三日，度赴淮西，诏以神策军三百骑卫从，上御通化门慰勉之。
现代文：元和十二年八月初三，裴度前往淮西，宪宗诏令神策军派三百名骑士随从护卫，并亲至通化门慰问勉励他。
English: On the third day of the third month of August in the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pei Du went to Huaxi, and the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Divine Providence Army to send three hundred knights to escort him, and to visit Tonghua Gate to console and encourage him.

古文：度楼下衔涕而辞，赐之犀带。
现代文：裴度在城楼下含泪辞别，宪宗赐给他帝王佩用的通天犀角腰带。
English: At the foot of the castle, Pei Du bids a tearful farewell, and Emperor Xianzong gives him the rhinoceros horn belt worn by emperors.

古文：度名虽宣慰，其实行元帅事，仍以郾城为治所。
现代文：裴度名义上虽是宣抚使，实际上行使元帅职权，仍以郾城为官署所在地。
English: Although Pei Du was nominally an envoy, he actually exercised the powers of a marshal, and the government office was still located in Shicheng.

古文：上以李逢吉与度不协，乃罢知政事，出为剑南东川节度。
现代文：宪宗因李逢吉与裴度不和，于是免除了李逢吉执掌朝政的职务，调出朝廷任剑南东川节度使。
English: Because of the discord between Li Fengji and Pei Du, Emperor Xianzong relieved Li Fengji of his duties in charge of the imperial government and transferred him to the imperial court as the envoy to the Jianan Dongchuan Festival.

古文：既离京，淮西行营大将李光颜、乌重胤谓监军梁守谦曰： 若俟度至而有功，即非我利。
现代文：裴度离京后，淮西行营大将李光颜、乌重胤对监军梁守谦说： 如果等裴度到来并建立了军功，就会对我们不利。
English: After Pei Du left Beijing, Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan, the generals of Huaixi Campaign, said to Liang Shouqian, the overseer of the army: If Pei Du arrived and established military merit, it would be unfavorable to us.

古文：可疾战，先事立功。 
现代文：当迅疾出战，先行立功。 
English: When the swift go out to battle, the swift get the credit.

古文：是月六日，将出兵，与贼战于贾店，为贼所败。
现代文：本月六日，率军出战，与贼军在贾店交锋，被贼打败。
English: On the sixth day of this month, he led his army into battle, clashed with the thief army in Jia Dian, and was defeated by the thief.

古文：度二十七日至郾城，巡抚诸军，宣达上旨，士皆贾勇。
现代文：裴度二十七日抵达郾城，巡视抚慰诸军，宣告传达皇帝旨意，军士人人勇气十足。
English: Pei Du arrived in Lucheng on the 27th, inspected and comforted the troops, announced and conveyed the emperor's will, and the soldiers were full of courage.

古文：时诸道兵皆有中使监阵，进退不由主将，战胜则先使献捷，偶衄则凌挫百端。
现代文：当时各道军队均派有宦官监军督阵，军队的进兵撤退不由主将指挥；取胜监军的宦官便抢先向朝廷报捷，受挫便对主将百般凌辱。
English: At that time, each army was assigned a eunuch overseer of the army, and the army's advance and retreat were not commanded by the commander-in-chief. The eunuch who won the overseer of the army would first report to the imperial court, and if he was frustrated, he would insult the commander-in-chief in various ways.

古文：度至行营，并奏去之，兵柄专制之于将，众皆喜悦。
现代文：裴度到行营后，奏请朝廷将所有监军宦官一并撤掉，兵权由主将掌握行使，众军将领都十分高兴。
English: After Pei Du arrived at the encampment, he petitioned the imperial court to remove all the eunuchs supervising the troops together, and the military power was exercised by the commander-in-chief. The generals of the army were very happy.

古文：军法严肃，号令画一，以是出战皆捷。
现代文：军法严明整肃，指挥号令统一，因此连战皆捷。
English: The military law was strictly rectified, and the command orders were unified, so all the battles were successful.

古文：度遣使入蔡州，元济与度书曰： 比密有降款，而索日进隔河大呼，遂令三军防元济，故归首无路。 
现代文：裴度派使者去蔡州，吴元济给裴度写信称：近来我有归降的诚意，但索日进却隔河大声呼喊，于是命令三军防范吴元济，因而我投案自首无路。
English: Pei Du sent an envoy to Caizhou, and Wu Yuanji wrote to Pei Du saying, "Recently, I had the sincerity to surrender, but Suo Sunjin shouted loudly across the river, so he ordered the three armies to guard against Wu Yuanji, so I gave in and surrendered.

古文：十月十一日，唐邓节度使李醖，袭破悬瓠城，擒吴元济。
现代文：十月十一日，唐邓节度使李腄，袭击攻破悬瓠城，擒获吴元济。
English: On October 11th, Tang Deng Jiedu ordered Li Qian to attack and break through the Hanging Fort and capture Wu Yuanji.

古文：度先遣宣慰副使马总入城安抚。
现代文：裴度先派宣慰副使马总入城安抚。
English: Pei Duxian sent the vice-envoy Ma Chong into the city to appease.

古文：明日，度建彰义军节，领洄曲降卒万人继进。李愬具櫜鞬以军礼迎度，拜之路左。
现代文：次日，裴度执持彰义军使符节，带领洄曲投降的士卒万人，相继进往，李腄身着戎装以军礼迎接裴度，在路旁拜见。
English: The next day, Pei Du carried out the festival of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation of the proclamation.

古文：度既视事，蔡人大悦。
现代文：裴度处置政务后，蔡州的人极其高兴。
English: The people of Caizhou are extremely happy after Pei Du's handling of government affairs.

古文：旧令：途无偶语，夜不燃烛，人或以酒食相过从者，以军法论。
现代文：旧时法令：路途上不许相对密谈；夜晚不得燃点火烛；有以酒食相交往的人，按军法论处。
English: Old-time decrees: Relatively intimate conversations are not allowed on the road; candles may not be lit at night; people who have contact with alcohol and food are dealt with according to military law.

古文：度乃约法，唯盗贼、斗杀外，余尽除之，其往来者，不复以昼夜为限。
现代文：裴度却减省刑法：除盗贼斗杀外，其余旧法一概取消，相互往来，不再以白天、夜晚作为限制。
English: Pei Du, however, reduced the criminal law: except for theft and murder, the rest of the old laws were abolished, mutual exchanges were no longer restricted by day and night.

古文：于是蔡之遗黎，始知有生人之乐。
现代文：到这时，归降朝廷的蔡州人才知道有人生的欢乐。
English: By this time, the people of Caizhou, who had surrendered to the imperial court, knew the joy of living.

古文：初，度以蔡卒为牙兵。或以为反侧之子，其心未安，不可自去其备。
现代文：开始，裴度用蔡州的士卒担任署府卫兵，有人认为反叛地区刚刚归顺的人，他们尚未安心，不可自己撤去防备。
English: At the beginning, Pei Du used soldiers from Caizhou to serve as guards for the government office. Some people believed that those who had just surrendered in the rebel areas were not yet at ease and could not withdraw to defend themselves.

古文：度笑而答曰： 吾受命为彰义军节度使，元恶就擒，蔡人即吾人也。 
现代文：裴度笑着回答说： 我受朝廷任命做彰义军节度使，叛逆的元凶已经被擒，蔡州黎民就是本朝的黎民了。 
English: Pei Du replied with a smile, "I was appointed by the imperial court to be the delegate to celebrate the festival of the rebel army. The culprit of the rebellion has been arrested. Cai Zhou Limin is the Limin of this dynasty."

古文：蔡之父老，无不感泣。申、光之民，即时平定。
现代文：蔡州的父老乡亲听说后，无不感激涕零；申州、光州的百姓，立即平稳安定下来。
English: After hearing this, the parents and fellow countrymen of Caizhou were very grateful; the people of Shenzhou and Gwangju immediately settled down smoothly.

古文：十一月二十八日，度自蔡州入朝，留副使马总为彰义军留后。
现代文：十一月二十八日，裴度由蔡州入朝，留下副使马总担任彰义军留后。
English: On November 28th, Baidu entered the imperial court from Caizhou, leaving the vice-commander Ma as the commander of the Zhangyi Army.

古文：初，度入蔡州，或谮度没入元济妇女珍宝。闻，上颇疑之。
现代文：开初，裴度刚进入蔡州时，有人诬陷裴度，说他私自没收了吴元济家的妇人和珍宝，传闻皇帝颇怀疑他。
English: At the beginning, when Pei Du had just entered Caizhou, someone framed Pei Du, saying that he had personally confiscated the women and treasures of the Wu Yuanji family. It was rumored that the emperor was quite suspicious of him.

古文：上欲尽诛元济旧将，封二剑以授梁守谦，使往蔡州。
现代文：这时宪宗想将吴元济的旧将全部诛杀，加授给梁守谦两支宝剑，派他前往蔡州执行。
English: At this time, Xianzong wanted to kill all of Wu Yuanji's old generals, and gave two swords to Liang Shouqian and sent him to Caizhou for execution.

古文：度回至郾城遇之，乃复与守谦入蔡州，量罪加刑，不尽如诏。
现代文：裴度回朝，走到郾城遇见梁守谦，便又与梁守谦返回蔡州，按罪行轻重对吴元济的旧将施以刑罚，并不完全按宪宗的诏令行事。
English: When Pei Du returned to China and met Liang Shouqian in Shicheng, he and Liang Shouqian returned to Caizhou to impose punishment on Wu Yuanji's old commander according to the severity of the crime, and did not fully act according to the edict of the Emperor.

古文：守谦固以诏止，度先以疏陈，乃径赴阙下。
现代文：梁守谦一再以诏令制止裴度的做法，裴度先以奏疏陈述，然而直接去朝面陈。
English: Liang Shouqian repeatedly used the edict to stop Pei Du's practice. Pei Du first made a brief statement, but then went directly to the North to make a statement.

古文：二月，诏加度金紫光禄大夫、弘文馆大学士，赐勋上柱国，封晋国公，食邑三千户，复知政事。
现代文：次年二月，宪宗下诏令给裴度加授金紫光禄大夫、弘文馆大学士官职，赐予 上柱国 勋号，封为晋国公，食邑三千户，仍执掌朝政。
English: In February of the following year, Emperor Gensong issued an imperial edict awarding Baidu the title of gold and purple doctor, the title of non-commissioned officer of the Hongwu University, the title of Shangzhul National Order, the title of Jin Guoguo, and 3,000 households, and he was still in charge of the imperial government.

古文：宪宗以淮西贼平，因功臣李光颜等来朝，欲开内宴，诏六军使修麟德殿之东廊。
现代文：宪宗因淮西叛贼被平定，趁功臣李光颜等来朝廷，打算在宫内为他们设宴，诏令六军使派人修葺麟德殿的东廊。
English: Because the Huaixi rebels had been subdued, Emperor Xianzong took advantage of Li Guangyan, a meritorious subject, and others to come to the imperial court, intending to hold a banquet for them in the palace, and ordered the envoys of the Six Armies to send people to repair the east corridor of the Lin De Hall.

古文：军使张奉国以公费不足，出私财以助用，诉于执政。
现代文：军使张奉国因公费不足，拿出私家钱财以补助费用，他向执政大臣诉说了这件事。
English: The military envoy Zhang Fengguo took out private money to subsidize the cost due to the shortage of public funds, and he told the ruling minister about this.

古文：度从容启曰： 陛下营造，有将作监等司局，岂可使功臣破产营缮？ 
现代文：裴度委婉禀奏说： 陛下营造宫室，有将作监等司局经管，怎么能让功臣破费家产来营建修缮？ 
English: Pei Du said euphemistically: His Majesty has built the palace room, and there is a superintendent and other departments to manage it. How can he let the heroes and heroines spend their own money to build and repair it?

古文：上怒奉国泄漏，乃令致仕。
现代文：宪宗恼怒张奉国泄露了此事，便让他辞官归居。
English: Angered by Zhang Bongguo's leaking of the matter, the Constitutionalist Church dismissed him from his post and ordered him to return home.

古文：其浚龙首渠，起凝晖殿，雕饰绮焕，徙佛寺花木以植于庭。
现代文：疏浚龙首渠，兴建凝晖殿，雕塑装饰绮丽光华，将佛寺的花木移植到内宫庭院。
English: The Dragon's Head Canal was dredged, the Condensation Hall was built, the sculptures were decorated with splendor, and the flowers and trees of the Buddhist temple were transplanted to the inner palace courtyard.

古文：有程异、皇甫镈者，奸纤用事，二人领度支盐铁，数贡羡余钱，助帝营造。
现代文：程异、皇甫二人，行事奸狡伪巧，兼任度支使、盐铁使，屡屡进贡超额的钱财，帮助宪宗营造宫室。
English: The two men, Cheng Yixing and Wang Fu, acted cunningly and deceptively, concurrently serving as the imperial envoy and the envoy of salt and iron, repeatedly bringing in excess money and wealth to help Kenzong build a palace.

古文：帝又以异、镈平蔡时供馈不乏，二人并命拜同平章事。
现代文：宪宗又以程异、皇甫在平定蔡州时供给粮饷不少，同时授予二人同平章事职位。
English: With the help of Cheng Yi and Wang Fu, Emperor Xianzong also provided a large amount of grain and rice in the pacification of Caizhou, and at the same time granted the two men the same official posts.

古文：度延英面论曰： 程异、皇甫镈，钱谷吏耳，非代天理物之器也。
现代文：裴度在延英殿面奏时论析说： 程异、皇甫，不过是管理钱粮的小吏而已，不是代承天命治理万众的大器之才。
English: Pei Du analyzed the situation in front of Yan Ying Dian and said: Cheng Yi and Wang Fu are just minor officials who manage money and grain, not great talents who inherit the mandate of heaven to govern the masses.

古文：陛下徇耳目之欲，拔置相位，天下人腾口掉舌，以为不可，于陛下无益。
现代文：陛下为求得满足耳目之需，将他们提拔置于宰相之位，天下人议论纷纷，认为不应这样做，这种做法对陛下没有好处。
English: His Majesty, in order to satisfy the needs of his ears and eyes, promoted them to the position of prime minister, and people around the world argued that this should not be done, and this practice is not beneficial to His Majesty.

古文：愿徐思其宜。 
现代文：望陛下稳妥慎思适合与否。 
English: I would like His Majesty to think carefully about whether it is appropriate or not.

古文：帝不省纳。度三上疏论之，请罢己相位，上都不省。
现代文：宪宗不予考虑采纳；裴度三次上疏论析此事，甚至请求免除自己的宰相职位，宪宗都不省悟。
English: Kaizong did not consider adopting it; Baidu discussed the matter in detail three times, and even requested to be relieved of his position as prime minister, but Kaizong did not think about it.

古文：事见《镈传》。又贾人张陟负五坊使杨朝汶息利钱潜匿，朝汶于陟家得私簿记，有负钱人卢载初，云是故西川节度使卢坦大夫书迹，朝汶即捕坦家人拘之。
现代文：又，商人张陟欠五坊使杨朝汶的利息钱潜藏隐迹，杨朝汶在张陟家搜到一个私人记事簿，有个欠债人卢载初，说是已故的西川节度使卢坦大夫的手书笔迹，杨朝汶就逮捕卢坦家的人关押起来。
English: In addition, the merchant Zhang Wei owed Wufang, which made Yang Chaowen's interest money hidden. Yang Chaowen searched a private record book in Zhang Wei's house. At the beginning of the year, there was a debtor who said that the late Saikawa Seto had made Dr. Lu Tan's handwriting. Yang Chaowen arrested and detained the people of the Lu Tan family.

古文：坦男不敢申理，即以私钱偿之。
现代文：卢坦的儿子不敢申辩鸣冤，便用自己的钱偿还杨朝汶。
English: Lutan's son did not dare to plead his case, so he used his own money to repay Yang Chaowen.

古文：及征验书迹，乃故郑滑节度卢群手书也。
现代文：经验证笔迹，却是已故郑滑节度使卢群的手笔。
English: The handwriting has been verified, but it is the handwriting of the late Zheng Nuxu Jiedu who made Lu Qun.

古文：坦男理其事，朝汶曰： 钱已进过，不可复得。 
现代文：卢坦的儿子为此事申辩索还代偿的钱，杨朝汶说： 钱已进缴入宫，不可能再得到。 
English: Lutan's son claimed compensation money for this matter, Yang Chaowen said: The money has been paid into the palace, it is impossible to get it again.

古文：御史中丞萧俛及谏官上疏陈其暴横之状，度与崔群因延英对，极言之。
现代文：御史中丞萧亻免与谏官们向皇帝上疏，陈述杨朝汶强暴蛮横的情况，裴度与崔群趁延英殿对答策问，也竭力禀陈其暴横。
English: Grand Historian Xiao Yuming and the eunuchs went to the emperor to report the situation of the Yang Dynasty's violence and tyranny. Pei Du and Cui Qun took advantage of Yan Ying's palace to answer questions, and also tried their best to expose his violence.

古文：宪宗曰： 且欲与卿商量东军，此小事我自处置。 
现代文：宪宗说： 我要与你们商量东线的军事，这样的小事我自会处置。 
English: Kenzong said: I want to discuss the military situation on the eastern front with you. I will handle such a small matter myself.

古文：度奏曰： 用兵，小事也；五坊追捕平人，大事也。
现代文：裴度进奏说： 用兵是小事，五坊使追捕无辜平民是大事。
English: Pei Dujinso said: The use of soldiers is a small matter, but the persecution of innocent civilians is a big deal.

古文：兵事不理，只忧山东；五坊使暴横，恐乱辇毂。 
现代文：军事不顺，可忧的只是山东一地；五坊使滥施暴虐强横，恐怕将会乱了皇城危及天子。 
English: The military is not going well, and there is only one place in Shandong that is worrisome; Wufang is using violence and violence, and I am afraid that it will disrupt the imperial city and endanger the emperor.

古文：上不悦。
现代文：宪宗很不高兴。
English: Wenzong was not happy with Chen Yigang's words.

古文：帝久方省悟，召杨朝汶数之曰： 向者为尔使我羞见宰相。 
现代文：过了许久，宪宗才省悟过来，召见杨朝汶斥责他说： 前回为了你使我无颜见宰相。 
English: It took a long time for Kenzong to come to his senses. He summoned Yang Chaowen and scolded him, saying, "Last time, you made me lose face in front of the prime minister.

古文：遽命诛之。
现代文：立即命令杀了杨朝汶。
English: Yang Chaowen was immediately ordered to be killed.

古文：初，淮、蔡既平，镇、冀王承宗甚惧。度遣辩士游说，客于赵、魏间。使说承宗，令割地入质以效顺。
现代文：起初，淮西、蔡州刚被平定时，镇州、冀州的王承宗十分恐惧，裴度派善辩之士前去游说，旅居在赵、魏二州之间，使者劝说王承宗，让他献出领地，送其子入朝做人质，以示投诚。
English: At first, when Huaxi and Caizhou had just been pacified, Wang Chengzong of Zhenzhou and Jizhou was very afraid. Pei Du sent a good debater to lobby. He lived between Zhao and Wei. The envoy persuaded Wang Chengzong to give up his territory and send his son to the North as a hostage to show his sincerity.

古文：故承宗求援于田弘正，由度使客讽动之，故兵不血刃，而承宗鼠伏。
现代文：原先王承宗曾向田弘正求援，经由裴度派去的使者劝说打动，因而兵不血刃，而使王承宗降伏。
English: Originally, Wang Chengzong had appealed to Tian Hongzheng for help, and was persuaded by an envoy sent by Pei Du. As a result, there was no bloodshed, and Wang Chengzong surrendered.

古文：十三年，李师道翻覆违命，诏宣武、义成、武宁、横海四节度之师与田弘正会军讨之。
现代文：元和十三年，李师道一再违背朝廷命令，宪宗下诏书调集宣武、义成、武宁、横海四个节度使的军队与田弘正会师讨伐。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Heian, Li Shidao repeatedly violated the order of the imperial court, and under the edict of the emperor, he mobilized the armies of the four festival envoys of Xuanwu, Yicheng, Wu Ning and Henghai to fight against Tian Hongzheng.

古文：弘正奏请取黎阳渡河，会李光颜等军齐进。
现代文：田弘正奏请取道黎阳渡过黄河，会同李光颜等的队伍一齐进军。
English: Tian Hongzheng asked Li Yang to cross the Yellow River and march together with Li Guangyan's team.

古文：帝召宰臣于延英议可否，皆曰： 阃外之事，大将制之，既有奏陈，宜遂其请。 
现代文：宪宗在延英殿召集宰辅大臣商议可否，其他宰臣都说： 统兵在外的事，由大将裁决，既然已有奏陈，自当听从他的奏请。 
English: Kenzong called together the vice-ministers at Yan Ying's palace to discuss whether or not to do so. The other vice-ministers all said, "It is up to the general to rule on the matter of the unified army. Since there is a report, you should listen to his report."

古文：度独以为不可，奏曰： 魏博一军，不同诸道。
现代文：惟独裴度认为不可取黎阳渡河，进言说： 魏博军队与其他各道的军队不同。
English: However, Pei Du alone thought that Li Yang could not be used to cross the river, and said: Wei Bo's army is different from the armies of other provinces.

古文：过河之后，却退不得，便须进击，方见成功。
现代文：此次用兵，过河之后，不可退却，必须进击，才能成功。
English: This time, after crossing the river, the soldiers must not retreat, they must advance in order to succeed.

古文：若取黎阳渡河，既才离本界，便至滑州，徒有供饷之劳，又生顾望之势。
现代文：若取道黎阳渡河，则刚一离开自家地界，便到了滑州，与敌毗邻，空有供给粮饷之劳，又因担心战火波及本境而生顾盼不前之势。
English: If they took the Liyang Road to cross the river, they would have just left their home territory and arrived in Leshou, which was adjacent to the enemy, had no supply of grain or labor, and was worried that the war would spread to the local territory, so they were reluctant to move forward.

古文：况弘正、光颜并少威断，更相疑惑，必恐迁延。
现代文：况且，田弘正、李光颜二人均缺少当机立断的威势，交相疑惑不定，势必延误军机。
English: Moreover, both Tian Hongzheng and Li Guangyan lack the authority to make decisions on the spot, and the communication is uncertain, which is bound to delay the military aircraft.

古文：然兵事不从中制一定处分。或虑不可。
现代文：然而用兵之事不容中途插手节制，一开始决策，应有不可行的谋虑。
English: However, it is inadmissible to interfere with the use of troops in the middle of the way. At the beginning of the decision-making, there should be unfeasible considerations.

古文：若欲于河南持重，则不如河北养威。
现代文：如果想倚重河南，倒不如扬威河北。
English: If you want to rely on Henan, it is better to go to Yangwei Hebei.

古文：不然，则且秣马厉兵，候霜降水落，于杨刘渡河，直抵郓州。
现代文：否则，就暂且秣兵厉马，等待霜降水落，从杨刘渡过黄河，直抵郓州。
English: Otherwise, they will wait for the frost to fall and cross the Yellow River from Yang Liu to Luzhou.

古文：但得至阳谷已来下营，则兵势自盛，贼形自挠。 
现代文：只要到达阳谷安营扎寨，那时朝廷军队的威势自必旺盛，逆贼的军力自必衰弱。 
English: As long as they set up camp in Yanggu, the imperial army will be strong and the rebel army will be weak.

古文：上曰： 卿言是矣。 
现代文：宪宗说： 裴卿所言极是。 
English: Gensong said, "What Baekyeong said is absolutely right.

古文：乃诏弘正取杨刘渡河。
现代文：于是诏令田弘正取道杨刘渡河。
English: So he ordered Tian Hongzheng to take Yang Liu's route to cross the river.

古文：及弘正军既济河而南，距郓州四十里筑垒，贼势果蹙。
现代文：当田弘正渡过黄河向南进军，距离郓州四十里处构筑营垒时，贼军威势果然顿减。
English: When Hiromasa Tada crossed the Yellow River and marched southward, building a camp forty miles away from Zhangzhou, the power of the invaders was reduced.

古文：顷之，诛师道。
现代文：不久，就诛灭了李师道。
English: Soon, Li Shidao was wiped out.

古文：度执性不回，忠于事上，时政或有所阙，靡不极言之，故为奸臣皇甫镈所构，宪宗不悦。
现代文：裴度为人执著，不改禀性，忠心侍奉皇帝，当时的朝政凡有失误他无不极力进言，因此被奸臣皇甫挑拔离间，使宪宗对裴度心生不悦。
English: Pei Du was a persistent person, never changed his nature, and served the emperor loyally. At that time, whenever there was a mistake in the imperial government, he always tried his best to advise. Therefore, he was picked apart by the treacherous vassal Emperor Fu, which made the Constitutionalist unhappy with Pei Du.

古文：十四年，检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：元和十四年，裴度任检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pei Du was appointed as the left attendant of the inspection of the school, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate, the subordinate of the school gate.

古文：穆宗即位，长庆元年秋，张弘靖为幽州军所囚，田弘正于镇州遇害，硃克融、王廷凑复乱河朔，诏度以本官充镇州四面行营招讨使。
现代文：穆宗即位，长庆元年秋，张弘靖被幽州军囚禁，田弘正在镇州遇害，朱克融、王廷凑又在河朔作乱，穆宗诏令裴度以本官职担任镇州四面行营招讨使。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the reign of Mu Zong, Zhang Hongjing was imprisoned by the Yuzhou army, Tian Hongzhe was killed in Zhenzhou, Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Tingpai again made trouble in Hexuo, and Mu Zong ordered Pei Du to serve as a recruiting envoy to Zhenzhou with his official position.

古文：时骄主荒僻，辅相庸才，制置非宜，致其复乱。
现代文：这时骄纵的皇帝荒唐乖戾，辅政的宰相才能平庸，治国谋划不当，致使再度兴乱。
English: At this time, the arrogant emperor was absurdly obstinate, the deputy prime minister was mediocre, and the governance plan was inappropriate, leading to renewed unrest.

古文：虽李光颜、乌重胤等称为名将，以十数万兵击贼，无尺寸之功。
现代文：即使李光颜、乌重胤等号为名将，率领十余万军队攻打逆贼，也无一点成效。
English: Even if Li Guangyan, Wu Chungyan and other famous generals led more than one hundred thousand troops to attack the traitors, there was no effect.

古文：盖以势既横流，无能复振。
现代文：因为局势已经动荡，无力再振朝纲。
English: Because the situation has been turbulent, unable to reinvigorate the program.

古文：然度受命之日，搜兵补卒，不遑寝息。
现代文：然而，裴度八日接受委任之日起，便检阅军队，补充士卒，无暇安寝。
English: However, from the day Pei Du accepted the appointment on the 8th, he inspected the army, replenished the soldiers, and had no time to sleep.

古文：自董西师，临于贼境，屠城斩将，屡以捷闻。
现代文：又亲自督战西线军队，身临敌境，攻破敌城，斩杀贼将，频频向朝廷报捷。
English: He also personally commanded the army on the Western Front, faced the enemy, broke through the enemy city, killed the thief, and frequently reported to the court.

古文：穆宗深嘉其忠款，中使抚谕无虚月，进位检校司空，兼充押北山诸蕃使。
现代文：穆宗十分嘉许裴度的忠诚，月月派遣宫中使臣前往抚慰，晋升裴度官位为检校司空，兼任掌管北山诸蕃使。
English: Mu Zong highly appreciated Pei Du's loyalty, and sent palace envoys to comfort him every month. He promoted Pei Du to the position of school inspector, and also served as the person in charge of the North Mountain envoys.

古文：时翰林学士元稹，交结内官，求为宰相，与知枢密魏弘简为刎颈之交。
现代文：这时，翰林学士元稹，勾结皇帝的近侍官员，谋求充任宰相，与知枢密魏弘简是刎颈之交。
English: At this time, Hanlin scholar Yuan Qi, in collusion with the emperor's close attendant officials, sought to be appointed prime minister, and was a close friend of Wei Hongjian.

古文：稹虽与度无憾，然颇忌前达加于己上。
现代文：元稹虽与裴度没有怨恨，但非常忌妒先前的贤达在自己之上。
English: Although Yuan Xuan had no grudge against Pei Du, he was very jealous of the previous sages who were above him.

古文：度方用兵山东，每处置军事，有所论奏，多为稹辈所持。
现代文：裴度正在山东指挥作战，每每处置军务有所论奏，多被元稹留持。
English: Pei Du was commanding operations in Shandong at the time. He was often involved in military affairs, and was often retained by Yuan Shao.

古文：天下皆言稹恃宠荧惑上听，度在军上疏论之曰：
现代文：天下人都说元稹恃宠迷乱皇帝的视听，裴度在军中上疏奏论此事道：
English: People all over the world say that Yuan Shao favored the bewitched emperor's audio-visual, Pei Du said in the middle of the army:

古文：臣闻主圣臣直。
现代文： 臣听说君主圣明则臣子正直。
English: The vassal heard that the Monarch Shengming was the most honest vassal.

古文：今既遇圣主，辄为直臣，上答殊私，下塞群谤，誓除国蠹，无以家为。
现代文：今时既遇圣明之主，就当做正直之臣，报答皇上的异常恩遇，杜绝群小的诽谤议论，誓除国贼，不计身家。
English: Now that you have met the Lord of the Sacred Light, you should act as an honest vassal, repay the emperor's unusual favor, put an end to small-scale slanderous talk, and swear to eliminate traitors, regardless of wealth.

古文：苟献替之可行，何性命之足惜？
现代文：如若进谏可行，性命又何足惜？
English: If it is possible to enter the cocoon, what is the value of life?

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下恭承丕业，光启雄图，方殄顽人之风，以立太平之事。
现代文：敬思皇帝陛下，恭承帝业，大展宏图，正灭除逆乱之祸端，以建树太平的事业。
English: He thinks highly of His Majesty the Emperor, honors the imperial cause, and is making great efforts to eradicate the scourge of rebellion and build a peaceful society.

古文：而逆竖构乱，震惊山东；奸臣作朋，挠败国政。
现代文：而叛贼作乱，震惊山东，奸臣结党，败坏国政。
English: But the traitors made a riot, shocking Shandong, and the treacherous vassals formed a party, corrupting the national politics.

古文：陛下欲扫荡幽、镇，宜肃清朝廷。
现代文：陛下要想扫荡幽、镇二州，应当首先肃清朝廷。
English: If His Majesty wants to sweep the countryside and towns of the two states, he should first clean up the imperial court.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：为患有大小，议事有先后。
现代文：危害有大有小，议事有先有后。
English: The harm varies from large to small, and the deliberation varies from large to small.

古文：河朔逆贼，只乱山东；禁闱奸臣，必乱天下。
现代文：河朔的叛贼，仅只扰乱山东；宫廷内奸臣，必定祸及天下。
English: The traitors in Heshaku only disturbed Shandong; the treacherous courtiers in the court will surely bring disaster to the world.

古文：是则河朔患小，禁闱患大。
现代文：因此河朔叛贼祸患小，宫内奸臣祸患大。
English: Therefore, the traitor in the palace is a minor evil, while the treacherous vassal in the palace is a major evil.

古文：小者，臣等与诸戎臣必能翦灭；大者，非陛下制断，非陛下觉悟，无计驱除。
现代文：小祸乱，臣下等人与诸位武将必能将其灭除；大祸乱，则非陛下决断不可：不赖陛下省悟，无法驱除奸臣。
English: If there is a minor calamity, his vassals and generals will surely be able to eliminate it; if there is a major calamity, His Majesty must make a decisive decision: His Majesty must realize that he cannot expel a treacherous vassal.

古文：今文武百僚，中外万品，有心者无不愤忿，有口者无不咨嗟。
现代文：现今，朝廷文武百官，宫内宫外万众，有头脑者无不愤恨，凡有口者无不叹息。
English: Nowadays, there are hundreds of officials in the imperial court, inside and outside the palace. Those who have brains are resentful, and those who have mouths are sighing.

古文：直以威权方重，奖用方深，无所畏避，不敢抵触，恐事未行祸已及，不为国计，且为身谋。
现代文：只是因为威势权力正盛，奖励擢用正重，害怕无处躲避，才不敢公然抵触，担心尚未行事祸已及身，因而不为国家考虑，姑且先谋保身。
English: It is only because of the prevalence of power, the importance of rewards and promotion, and the fear of nowhere to hide that they do not dare to openly resist, fearing that they have not yet acted and the disaster has already reached them, so they do not consider the country, and seek to protect themselves first.

古文：臣比者犹思隐忍，不愿发明。
现代文： 臣近来仍想克制忍耐，不愿明说。
English: Recently, the minister still wants to restrain his patience and does not want to say it.

古文：一则以罪恶如山，怨谤如雷，伏料圣明，必自诛殛；一则以四方无事，万枢且过，虽纪纲潜坏，贿赂公行，俟其贯盈，必自颠覆。
现代文：一则因为他们罪恶如山，指斥如雷，敬料皇上圣明，自必将其诛除。一则因为四方相安无事，众多大关已过，即令暗中败坏法度，公然收受贿赂，待其恶贯满盈，自必彻底垮台。
English: On the one hand, because their sins are like a mountain, they are rebuked like thunder, and they respect the emperor's holiness, they will certainly be eradicated. On the other hand, because the four parties have no problems with each other, many milestones have passed, even if they secretly corrupt the law, openly accept bribes, wait for their evil to be complete, and they will certainly collapse completely.

古文：今属凶徒扰攘，宸衷忧轸，凡有制命，计于安危。
现代文：现在，凶徒作乱纷扰，圣上忧心聚集，凡有诏书诰命，虑及社稷安危。
English: Now, the criminals are creating chaos and confusion, and people's hearts are filled with anxiety. Anyone who has the power to issue an edict risks his or her life, and the safety of society is at risk.

古文：痛此奸邪，恣行欺罔，干乱圣略，非止一途。
现代文：痛恶这般奸邪之徒，恣意肆行欺君罔上，干扰搅乱圣上经略，种种恶行不止一端。
English: I abhor such evil-doers, who wantonly act to cheat the emperor, interfere with and disrupt the sacred sutras, and commit all kinds of evil deeds.

古文：又翰苑旧臣，结为朋党，陛下听其所说，更访于近臣，私相计会，更唱迭和，蔽惑聪明。
现代文：又，翰林院中旧臣，勾结成为朋党，陛下听了他们的话，再向身边近臣查询，他们私下相互计议，彼此轮番唱和，蒙蔽惑乱圣上耳目。
English: Moreover, the old courtiers in the Hanlin Courthouse colluded to become a crony party. His Majesty listened to their words, and then inquired from the close courtiers around him. They discussed with each other in private, sang and chanted with each other in turn, and blinded and confused the eyes and ears of the saint.

古文：所以臣自兵兴已来，所陈章疏，事皆要切，所奉书诏，多有参差。
现代文：所以臣自兴兵讨贼以来，所陈奏疏，都是紧要之事；而所奉接的诏书，却与臣之所奏多不一致。
English: Therefore, what the vassal has done since he raised an army to fight the bandits is a matter of urgency; however, the imperial edict he received is not consistent with what the vassal has done.

古文：惜陛下委付之意不轻，被奸臣抑损之事不少。
现代文：可惜陛下付与为臣的圣意不轻，而被奸臣从中压制损害的事情不少。
English: It is a pity that the sacred intention of His Majesty's subordinates is not light, and there are many things that are suppressed and damaged by treacherous subordinates.

古文：臣素知佞幸，亦无雠嫌，只是昨者，臣请乘传诣阙，面陈戎事，奸臣之徒，最所畏惧。
现代文： 臣旧日与以谄媚得宠的佞幸们交往概无仇怨，只是日前臣奏请乘驿车到朝廷，面陈军事，奸佞之徒，最为害怕。
English: In the old days, vassals had no grudge against mingling with the lucky ones who were favored with their charms. However, recently, a vassal was invited to take a carriage to the imperial court, and he was most afraid of the military and the traitors.

古文：知臣若到御坐之前，必能悉数其过，以此百计止臣此行。
现代文：知道臣若到圣上跟前，必定会全部列出他们的过失，因此千方百计阻止臣的此次返朝之行。
English: Knowing that if the vassal came to the saint, he would surely list all their faults, he did everything possible to prevent the vassal's return to the court.

古文：臣又请领兵齐进，逐便攻讨，奸臣之党，曲加阻碍。
现代文：臣又奏请领兵一齐进军，以求有利于进攻讨伐贼军，奸臣的党羽，从中横加阻碍，怕臣统率诸道兵力，或许奏效成功。
English: The vassal also requested that the soldiers march together, in order to facilitate the attack against the thief army, the party feathers of the treacherous vassal, from which they hindered, fearing that the vassal would lead the troops of all roads, may be effective and successful.

古文：恐臣统率诸道，或有成功，进退皆受羁牵，意见悉遭蔽塞。
现代文：臣的进退行动全都受到羁绊牵制，臣的奏章进言尽都遭到阻挡堵塞。
English: The advance and retreat of the minister were all hampered by the shackles, and the minister's speeches were blocked.

古文：复共一二憸狡，同辞合力。
现代文：他们还伙同一、两个奸邪狡诈之辈，同执一辞齐心合力对付为臣。
English: They also teamed up with the same, two treacherous and cunning generation, adhering to the same words and working together to deal with each other.

古文：或两道招抚，逗留旬时；或遣蔚州行营，拖曳日月。
现代文：有时分成两路前来招抚，逗留耽搁时间；有时将使臣派往蔚州行营，故意拖延光阴。
English: Sometimes he comes in two separate ways to woo, delaying the time; sometimes he sends his vassals to camp in Ulshu, deliberately delaying the time.

古文：但欲令臣失所，使臣无成，则天下理乱，山东胜负，悉不顾矣。
现代文：他们一心只想让臣处置失当，使我一无所成，竟然连天下的治、乱大局，山东的军事胜负，全都置之不顾了。
English: They only wanted to let their subordinates handle the matter improperly, so that I could not achieve anything. They even disregarded the world's governance, the chaotic situation, and the military victory and defeat in Shandong.

古文：为臣事君，一至于此。
现代文：为臣侍奉君主，竟到如此地步。
English: To serve the sovereign as a vassal, it has come to this.

古文：且陛下左右前后，忠良至多，亦有熟会典章，亦有饱谙师旅，足得任使，何独斯人？
现代文：况且陛下左右前后，忠良大臣极多，也有熟知典章的人，也有精通军旅之士，足以胜任使臣，难道偏偏惟有此人不行？
English: Moreover, around and around His Majesty, there are many loyal ministers, as well as those who are familiar with the regulations, and those who are proficient in military travel, enough to be competent envoys. Is it not possible to have only this person?

古文：以臣愚见，若朝中奸臣尽去，则河朔逆贼，不讨而自平；若朝中奸臣尚在，则逆贼纵平无益。
现代文：据臣们的愚见，如果朝中奸臣尽都去掉，那么，河朔的逆贼，可不攻讨而自平；如果朝中奸臣仍然存在，那么，逆贼纵然被平定，依旧无益。
English: According to the foolishness of the courtiers, if all the traitorous courtiers in the middle of the dynasty are eliminated, then the traitors in Heshaku can be leveled without attacking; if the traitorous courtiers in the middle of the dynasty still exist, then even if the traitors are leveled, it is still useless.

古文：臣读国史，知代宗朝蕃戎侵轶，直犯都城。
现代文： 臣读本朝国史，得知代宗朝时，吐蕃军入侵，直犯都城。
English: A vassal read the national history of this dynasty and learned that during the reign of Emperor Daizong, the Tubo army invaded and directly attacked the capital city.

古文：代宗不知，盖被程元振蒙蔽，几危社稷。
现代文：代宗不知道，因为遭受程元振蒙蔽，几乎危及社稷。
English: Daizong did not know that because he was deceived by Cheng Yuanzhen, he almost endangered the society.

古文：当时柳伉，乃太常一博士耳，犹能抗表归罪，为国除害。
现代文：当时，柳伉仅只是太常寺的一个博士而已，尚且能上表归罪于程元振，为国除害。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was only a doctor at Taiji Temple, but he was able to publicly blame Cheng Yuan Zhen and eliminate the harm to the country.

古文：今臣年处，兼总将相，岂肯坐观凶邪，有曀日月。
现代文：现今臣所处的位置，一身兼领将相，岂肯坐视凶邪行恶，而使圣上德如日月的光明有所晦暗！
English: The current position of the minister, who is also the commander-in-chief, would he be willing to sit back and watch the evil do evil, and let the light of the holy God, like the sun and the moon, be dimmed!

古文：不胜感愤嫉恶之至！
现代文：不胜愤慨嫉恶之至！
English: So much anger, so much jealousy!

古文：谨附中使赵奉国以闻。
现代文：谨将此奏疏付交宫廷使臣赵奉国上呈皇帝知闻。
English: I would like to present this report to the court envoy Zhao Bongguo to present to the emperor.

古文：倘陛下未信忠言，犹惑奸党，伏乞出臣此表，令三事大夫与百僚集议。
现代文：倘若陛下还不相信臣的忠心之言，仍受惑于奸党，敬求陛下出示臣的这份奏表，让三事大夫与文武百官会同评议。
English: If Your Majesty still does not believe my words of loyalty and is still being misled by the traitorous party, I respectfully ask Your Majesty to show me this report card and let the three things doctor and the civil and military hundred officials discuss it together.

古文：彼不受责，臣合伏辜，天鉴孔明，照臣肝血。
现代文：那些奸党不受指责，臣当服罪。天鉴至明，照臣肝血。
English: Those traitors are not to be blamed, and the vassals should confess their sins.

古文：但得天下之人，知臣不负陛下，则虽死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：只要让天下人知道臣不负于陛下，那么，即使是赴死之日，仍如在生之年。 
English: As long as you let the world know that you are loyal to your majesty, then even if you die, you will still be alive.

古文：继上三章，辞情激切。
现代文：裴度相继上呈三个奏章，情激辞切。
English: Baidu successively presented three movements, and the mood was furious.

古文：穆宗虽不悦，虽惧大臣正议，乃以魏弘简为弓箭库使，罢元稹内职。然宠稹之意未衰。
现代文：穆宗虽不高兴，但惧怕大臣们的公正议论，于是调任魏弘简为弓箭库使，免去了元稹宫廷内的官职，但偏宠元稹的心意未减。
English: Although Mu Zong was not happy, he was afraid of the fair discussion of the ministers, so he transferred Wei Hongjian to the bow and arrow warehouse, exempted from the official position in the court of the Yuan Dynasty, but the intention to favor the Yuan Dynasty did not diminish.

古文：俄拜稹平章事，寻罢度兵权，守司徒、同平章事，充东都留守。
现代文：不久，授予元稹平章事职位；接着取消了裴度的兵权，暂代司徒、同平章事，任东都留守。
English: Not long after, Yuan Xuanping was given the position of the military commander; then Pei Du's military power was cancelled, and the temporary military commanders, Sitou and Tongping, were left behind.

古文：谏官相率伏阁诣延英门者日二三。
现代文：谏官们相继从便殿角门拜伏到延英门进谏，每日二三起。
English: The eunuchs successively prostrated themselves from the corner gate of the toilet hall to the entrance of the Yan Ying Gate, two or three times a day.

古文：帝知其谏，不即被召，皆上疏言：时未偃兵，度有将相全才，不宜置之散地。
现代文：穆宗明白他们谏奏什么，不及时召见；谏官们都上疏说：当前尚未息兵，裴度有将相的全才，不应将他安置在闲散之地。
English: Mu Zong understood what they were playing at, but he did not summon them in time; the eunuchs all said: At present, there are no soldiers, and Pei Du has the ability to be a general, and he should not be placed in an idle place.

古文：帝以章疏旁午，无如之何，知人情在度，遂诏度自太原由京师赴洛。
现代文：穆宗因奏疏纷繁，不知怎么办，知道人心在裴度，便诏令裴度由太原起程，经京都赴洛阳。
English: Mu Zong did not know what to do because of the many and varied reasons, but knowing that the people's hearts were in Pei Du, he ordered Pei Du to start from Taiyuan and go to Luoyang via Kyoto.

古文：及元稹为相，请上罢兵，洗雪廷凑、克融，解深州之围，盖欲罢度兵柄故也。
现代文：当时元稹做宰相，奏请皇帝罢兵，以替王廷凑、朱克融昭雪，来解深州之围，其目的是想取消裴度的兵权。
English: At that time, Yuan Zheng, as the prime minister, requested the emperor to call off the troops and use Wang Tingpiao and Zhu Ke Rongzhao Xue to relieve the siege of Shenzhou. The purpose was to abolish Pei Du's military power.

古文：二年三月，度至京师。既见，先叙克融、廷凑暴乱河朔，受命讨贼无功；次陈除职东都，许令入觐。
现代文：长庆二年三月，裴度到达京城，见到穆宗后，先叙述朱克融、王廷凑在河朔暴乱，自己奉命讨贼无功；再陈述受职东都，准许让他进京朝见。
English: In March of the second year of Changqing, Pei Du arrived in Beijing, and after seeing Mu Zong, he first described Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Tingpai's riot in Hexuo, and he was ordered to fight the bandits to no avail; then he stated that he had been assigned to Dongdu, and he was allowed to go to Beijing to see the imperial court.

古文：辞和气劲，感动左右。
现代文：言辞温和，气势强劲，感动了周围在座的人。
English: His speech was gentle and powerful, and moved those around him.

古文：度伏奏龙墀，涕泗鸣咽，帝为之动容，口自谕之曰： 所谢知，朕于延英待卿。 
现代文：裴度拜伏在殿前台阶上进奏，泪水横溢，声音呜咽，穆宗为之动容，亲自口谕说： 所奏谢恩之意已明，朕在延英殿接见你。 
English: Pei Dou Bai prostrated himself on the front steps of the hall and played the marching march. His voice was full of tears, his voice was sobbing, and Mu Zong was moved by it. He personally spoke and said, "The meaning of the thanks I have played is already clear. I will meet you at the Yan Ying Hall."

古文：初，人以度无左右之助，为奸邪排摈，虽度勋德，恐不能感动人主。
现代文：事先，人们认为裴度没有皇帝的近臣帮助，被奸邪大臣排斥，尽管裴度有功勋德望，仍恐怕不能感动皇帝。
English: In advance, people thought that Pei Du did not have the help of the emperor's close vassals, and was rejected by the Minister of Treachery. Although Pei Du had merits and expectations, he still could not move the emperor.

古文：及度奏河北事，慷慨激切，扬于殿廷，在位者无不耸动。
现代文：待到裴度禀奏河北讨贼情况，陈辞慷慨激切，扬声于殿廷，在座者无不直身敬重。
English: Waiting for Pei Du to comment on the situation of Hebei's anti-thief campaign, Chen's words were generous and passionate, and his voice was heard in the imperial court. Everyone present held him in high regard.

古文：虽武夫贵介，亦有咨嗟出涕者。
现代文：即使是武将公卿，也有为之叹息落泪者。
English: Even warriors and nobles have people who shed tears for them.

古文：翌日，以度守司徒、扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使，进阶光禄大夫。
现代文：次日，委任裴度代理司徒、扬州大都督府长史，担任淮南节度使，官阶晋升为光禄大夫。
English: The next day, he appointed Pei Du as acting governor and Yangzhou grand governor, served as Huainan provincial delegate, and was promoted to Guanglu doctor.

古文：时硃克融、王廷凑虽受朝廷节钺，未解深州之围。
现代文：当时，朱克融、王廷凑虽然接受了朝廷授予的符节和斧钺，仍未解除对深州的围困。
English: At that time, although Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Tingpai accepted the symbols and axes granted by the imperial court, they still did not lift the siege on Shenzhou.

古文：度初发太原，与二镇书，谕以大义。
现代文：裴度刚从太原出发时，即去信给朱、王二人，晓以大义。
English: When Pei Du had just set out from Taiyuan, he immediately sent a letter to Zhu and Wang.

古文：克融解围而去，廷凑亦退舍。
现代文：朱克融撤退围困的军队离去，王廷凑也撤军退却。
English: Zhu Ke Rong withdrew and the besieged army left, and Wang Ting Tong also withdrew and retreated.

古文：有中使自深州来言之，穆宗甚喜。即日又遣中使往深州取牛元翼，更命度致书与廷凑。
现代文：宫廷使臣有人从深州返京禀报军情，穆宗非常高兴，当天又派宫廷使臣去深州接出牛元翼；并让裴度再次去信给王廷凑。
English: A court envoy returned to Beijing from Shenzhou to report on the military situation. Mu Zong was very happy. On the same day, he sent a court envoy to Shenzhou to pick up Niu Yuan Ying; and asked Pei Du to write to the royal court again.

古文：度沿路奉诏，中使得度书云： 朝谢后，即归留务。
现代文：裴度在顺路来京都长安途中接到诏书，宫廷使臣得到裴度的信，称： 入朝谢恩后，立即在东都执行留守任务。
English: Baidu received the imperial decree on his way to Kyoto Chang'an, and the palace envoys received a letter from Baidu, saying: After entering the court, immediately carry out the left-behind task in Dongdu.

古文：恐廷凑知度无兵权，即背前约，请度易之。 
现代文：恐怕王廷凑得知度已无兵权，便违背以前的约定，请考虑改换别给他去信。 
English: I am afraid that if Wang Tingqian learns that Du has no military power, he will violate the previous agreement. Please consider changing it and do not send him a letter.

古文：中使乃进度书草，具奏其事。
现代文：使臣便将裴度的信呈送朝廷，并拟更奏报此事。
English: The envoy then submitted Pei Du's letter to the imperial court and planned to report the matter again.

古文：及度至京师，进退明辩，帝方忧深州之围，遂授度淮南节度使。
现代文：待到裴度抵达京城，进殿应对明辨是非，穆宗正为深州被围忧愁，于是委任裴度为淮南节度使。
English: When Pei Du arrived in Beijing, he went to the imperial court to clarify the rights and wrongs. Mu Zong was worried about Shenzhou being besieged, so he appointed Pei Du as the envoy of Huainan Festival.

古文：先是，监军使刘承偕恃宠凌节度使刘悟，三军愤发大噪，擒承偕，欲杀之。
现代文：在此之前，监军使刘承偕倚仗皇帝宠信凌辱节度使刘悟，三军将士群情愤激，大肆喧闹，抓了刘承偕，打算杀了他。
English: Prior to this, Liu Chengyao's overseer sent Liu Chengyao to rely on the emperor's favor and insulted Liu Wuguo. The soldiers of the three armies were angry and noisy, and they caught Liu Chengyao and planned to kill him.

古文：已杀其二傔，悟救之获免，而囚承偕。
现代文：他的两个侍从已被杀，刘悟护救，刘承偕才得以免死，因而将刘承偕囚禁起来。
English: His two attendants had been killed, Liu Gou protected them, Liu Chengyao was spared from death, so Liu Chengyao was imprisoned.

古文：诏遣归京，悟托以军情，不时奉诏。
现代文：穆宗下诏让刘悟将刘承偕送还京城，刘悟以军情推托，不按时奉行诏令。
English: Mu Zong issued an edict to Liu Gou to send Liu Chengyao back to Beijing, but Liu Gou did not carry out the edict on time, citing military reasons.

古文：至是，宰臣延英奏事，度亦在列。上顾谓度曰： 刘悟拘承偕而不遣，如何处置？ 
现代文：到裴度受任淮南节度使时，宰相们在延英殿进奏，裴度也在场，穆宗向裴度询问说： 刘悟拘囚刘承偕仍不放他回朝，如何处置？ 
English: When Pei Du was appointed as the envoy of Huainan Festival, the prime ministers marched to the accompaniment of music in Yan Ying Hall. Pei Du was also present. Mu Zong asked Pei Du, "Liu Wugu prisoner Liu Chengyao still won't let him return to the imperial court. What should we do?"

古文：度辞以蕃臣不合议军国事。
现代文：裴度以藩镇之臣不当议论朝廷军国事务为由推辞不答。
English: Pei Du did not reply on the grounds that it was improper for a vassal of a domain or town to discuss the military affairs of the imperial court.

古文：上固问之，且曰： 刘悟负我，我以仆射宠之，近又赐绢五百万疋，不思报功，翻纵军众凌辱监军，我实难奈此事。 
现代文：穆宗一再问他，并说： 刘悟有负于我，我以仆射的职位给他尊荣，近时又赐给他绢五万匹，他不考虑建功报答，反而放纵军众凌辱监军使臣，我实在难以忍耐此事。 
English: Mu Zong asked him again and again, and said: "Liu Wugu is inferior to me. I gave him the honor of the position of a foot soldier, and recently gave him fifty thousand horses. He does not consider the reward of merit, but indulges the army to abuse the inspector and the envoy. I really find it difficult to tolerate this.

古文：度对曰： 承偕在昭义不法，臣尽知之，昨刘悟在行营与臣书，数论其事。
现代文：裴度回答说： 刘承偕在昭义军的不法行为，臣全都知道；日前刘悟在行营给臣去信，历论刘承偕之所为。
English: Pei Du replied: "Liu Chengyao's illegal acts in the Shao Yi Army are well known to all his ministers. Recently, Liu Wou wrote a letter to his ministers in the encampment, detailing Liu Chengyao's actions.

古文：是时有中使赵弘亮在臣军，仍持悟书将去，欲自奏，不知奏否？ 
现代文：当时有宫廷使臣赵弘亮在臣军营，还将刘悟的信带走，想亲自进奏朝廷，不知进奏没有？ 
English: At that time, there was a court envoy, Zhao Hongliang, in the court's military camp. He also took Liu Gou's letter with him and wanted to play for the court in person. I don't know, did he play for the court?

古文：上曰： 我都不知，悟何不密奏其事，我岂不能处置？ 
现代文：穆宗说： 我完全不知道这回事。刘悟为什么不秘密呈章奏报刘承偕的事，难道我不能处置此事？ 
English: Mu Zong said, "I don't know about this at all. Why didn't Liu Gou secretly file a report about Liu Chengyao? Can't I handle this?

古文：度曰： 刘悟武臣，不知大臣体例。
现代文：裴度说： 刘悟是武臣，不懂大臣办事的例规。
English: Pei Du said: Liu Wou is a military minister, he doesn't understand the routine of ministerial work.

古文：虽然，臣窃以悟纵有密奏，陛下必不能处置。
现代文：尽管这是他不对，臣暗自寻思：纵然刘悟向陛下密奏，陛下肯定不能处置刘承偕的事。
English: Although this was not his right, the vassal secretly thought to himself: Even if Liu Wugu secretly played for His Majesty, His Majesty would certainly not be able to deal with Liu Chengyao.

古文：今日事状如此，臣等面论，陛下犹未能决，悟单辞岂能动圣听哉？ 
现代文：现今事情已经禀陈到如此地步，臣等当面议论，陛下尚且不能决断，刘悟一面之辞难道能打动圣上处置刘承偕吗？ 
English: Now that things have come to such a pass, with ministers and others debating face-to-face, and His Majesty still unable to make a decision, can Liu Gou's one-sided speech really move His Holiness to dispose of Liu Chengyao?

古文：上曰： 前事勿论，直言此时如何处置？ 
现代文：穆宗说： 过去的事不要再谈了，直说眼下该如何处置这件事？ 
English: Muzong said, "Let's stop talking about the past. To be honest, how should we handle this now?"

古文：度曰： 陛下必欲收忠义之心，使天下戎臣为陛下死节，唯有下半纸诏书，言任使不明，致承偕乱法如此，令悟集三军斩之。
现代文：裴度说： 陛下如果想获得忠义之心，使所有军中将领为陛下献身尽节，惟有下一简短诏书，说：任用使臣不严明，致使刘承偕如此乱纪违法，命令刘悟召集三军将斩杀刘承偕。
English: Pei Du said, "Your Majesty, if you want to win the loyalty of all the generals in the army and have them devote themselves to Your Majesty to the end, the only way is to issue a short edict, saying, "The appointment of envoys is not strict, which has led Liu Chengkun to be so undisciplined and illegal. Order Liu Wou to gather three armies and slaughter Liu Chengkun."

古文：如此，则万方毕命，群盗破胆，天下无事矣。
现代文：这样，就会使四方将士尽力效命，所有盗贼胆破心惊，天下就太平无事了。
English: In this way, the soldiers of the four sides will do their best to serve their lives, all the thieves will be discouraged, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：苟不能如此，虽与刘悟改官赐绢，臣亦恐于事无益。 
现代文：如若不能这样做，即使是给刘悟升官赐绢，臣仍担心于事无补。 
English: If this is not possible, even if Liu Wosheng is given the post, the minister is still worried that it will not help.

古文：上俛首良久，曰： 朕不惜承偕。
现代文：穆宗低下头思考了好久，说： 我并不怜惜刘承偕，只是因为他是太后的养子。
English: Mu Zong bowed his head and thought for a long time, saying: I do not pity Liu Chengyao, but only because he is the adopted son of the empress dowager.

古文：缘是太后养子，今被囚絷，太后未知，如卿处置未得，可更议其宜。 
现代文：现在他被囚禁，太后还不知道。如果你的处置办法还未想好，可再议合适的办法。 
English: Now he is in prison, and the empress dowager still does not know what to do. If you have not thought out your disposal method, you can discuss the appropriate method again.

古文：度与王播等复奏曰： 但配流远恶处，承偕必得出。 
现代文：裴度与王播等再进奏说： 只要将刘承偕流放到偏远条件恶劣的地方，他一定能被放出来。 
English: "As long as Liu Chengyao is exiled to a remote place with harsh conditions, he will definitely be able to be released," Baidu said.

古文：上以为然，承偕果得归。
现代文：穆宗认为这样处置恰当，刘承偕果然得以返回京城。
English: Mu Zong believed that this was an appropriate solution, and Liu Chengyao was able to return to Beijing.

古文：度方受册司徒，徐州奏节度副使王智兴自河北行营率师还，逐节度使崔群，自称留后。
现代文：裴度刚被册封为司徒，徐州奏报：节度副使王智兴从河北行营率军返回徐州，驱逐了节度使崔群，自称留后。
English: Pei Duang has just been canonized as a saint, Xuzhou Report: Wang Zhixing, the vice-envoy of the festival, returned to Xuzhou from Hebei to lead the army, expelled the festival envoy Cui Qun, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：朝廷骇惧，即日宣制，以度守司徒、同平章事，复知政事。乃以宰相王播代度镇淮南。
现代文：朝廷惊骇恐惧，当即宣布诏命：委任裴度执掌司徒、同平章事之职，仍然主持朝政；并委派宰相王播替代裴度镇守淮南。
English: The imperial court was shocked and frightened, and immediately announced the imperial decree: to appoint Pei Du to hold the post of chief magistrate, and still preside over the imperial government; and to appoint the prime minister Wang Bo to replace Pei Du as the town guard of Huainan.

古文：度与李逢吉素不协。度自太原入朝，而恶度者以逢吉善于阴计，足能构度，乃自襄阳召逢吉入朝，为兵部尚书。
现代文：裴度与李逢吉一向不和，裴度从太原入朝奏事，那些忌恨裴度的大臣认为李逢吉善于搞阴谋诡计，足以设计构陷裴度，于是从襄阳召李逢吉入朝，任兵部尚书。
English: Pei Du and Li Fengji have always been at odds. Pei Du entered the imperial court from Taiyuan. Those ministers who hated Pei Du thought that Li Fengji was good at scheming and plotting and was good enough to plot and frame Pei Du. Therefore, they summoned Li Fengji from Xiangyang to enter the imperial court and serve as the secretary of the military department.

古文：度既复知政事，而魏弘简、刘承偕之党在禁中。
现代文：裴度再次主持朝政后，魏弘简、刘承偕的党羽仍在宫中。
English: After Baidu once again presided over the imperial government, Wei Hongjian and Liu Chengyao's party were still in the palace.

古文：逢吉用族子仲言之谋，因医人郑注与中尉王守澄交结，内官皆为之助。
现代文：李逢吉采用同宗兄弟之子李仲言的计谋，通过医士郑注与中尉王守澄勾结，使宫内官员都帮助李逢吉。
English: Li Fengji adopted the stratagem of Li Zhongyan, the son of a brother of the same clan, and colluded with Lieutenant Wang Shoucheng through the physician Zheng Zhu, so that the palace officials all helped Li Fengji.

古文：五月，左神策军奏告事人李赏称和王府司马于方受元稹所使，结客欲刺裴度。
现代文：五月，左神策军奏报：告发人李赏声称和王府司马于方受元稹指使，勾结刺客要行刺裴度。
English: In May, Zuoshensha reported that the whistleblower Li Yun claimed that he and Wangfusima Yufang were instructed by Yuan Shao to collude with the assassins to assassinate Pei Du.

古文：诏左仆射韩皋、给事中郑覃与李逢吉三人鞫于方之狱。未竟，罢元稹为同州刺史，罢度为左仆射，李逢吉代度为宰相。
现代文：穆宗诏令左仆射韩皋、给事中郑覃与李逢吉三人审理于方一案，案未审毕，就将元稹贬为同州刺史，裴度贬为左仆射，李逢吉替换裴度任宰相。
English: Mu Zongzhao ordered his left-hand man, Han Zhao, and the three others involved in the case, Zheng Zi and Li Fengji, to try the case in Fang. Before the case was over, he demoted Yuan Zhao to the same state, Pei Du to the left-hand man, and Li Fengji replaced Pei Du as prime minister.

古文：自是，逢吉之党李仲言、张又新、李续等，内结中官，外扇朝士，立朋党以沮度，时号 八关十六子 ，皆交结相关之人数也。
现代文：从此，李逢吉的党羽李仲言、张又新、李续等，勾结宫内宦官，煽动朝廷官吏，建立朋党以阻挠裴度，当时号称 八关十六子 ， 八 、 十六 ，都是所勾结相关人员数字。
English: From then on, Li Zhongyan, Zhang Yuxin, Li Zhai and other members of Li Fengji's party colluded with eunuchs in the palace, incited officials of the imperial court, and established a crony party to obstruct Pei Du. At that time, the so-called "Eight Guan Sixteen Sons," "Eight," and "Sixteen" were all the numbers of related personnel who colluded.

古文：而度之丑誉日闻，俄出度为山南西道节度使，不带平章事。
现代文：而裴度的丑恶名声，传闻日甚一日，不久就将裴度调出朝廷任山南西道节度使，不带 平章事 衔。
English: However, Pei Du's bad reputation was rumored day by day. Soon, Pei Du was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the envoy of the Shannan West Road Festival, without the title of a peer.

古文：长庆四年，襄阳节度使牛元翼卒。
现代文：长庆四年，襄阳节度使牛元翼去世。
English: In the fourth year of Changqing, the Yangyang Festival caused the death of Niuyuan Ying.

古文：其家先在镇州，朝廷累遣中使取之，王廷凑迁延不遣。
现代文：他的家原先在镇州，朝廷屡屡派宫廷使臣去迎取，王廷凑拖延不放。
English: His home was originally in Zhenzhou. The imperial court repeatedly sent court envoys to meet him, and the royal court did not let go of the delay.

古文：至是，闻元翼卒，乃尽屠其家。
现代文：到这时，听说牛元翼去世，竟将他一家杀尽。
English: At this time, they heard that Niu Yuan Ying had passed away, and they killed his entire family.

古文：昭愍皇帝闻之，嗟惋累日，因叹宰辅非才，致奸臣悖逆如此。
现代文：刚即位不久的皇帝敬宗听说牛家全部惨遭屠杀，连日痛惋叹息，因而感叹宰相不是所任之才，致使奸臣抗命忤逆到如此地步。
English: Emperor Keizong, who had just ascended the throne, heard that the entire Niu family had been brutally slaughtered, and he sighed bitterly for days. He therefore lamented that the prime minister was not the right person for the job, causing his treacherous vassals to disobey orders and rebel to such an extent.

古文：翰林学士韦处厚上言曰：
现代文：翰林学士韦处厚上疏说：
English: Hanlin Scholar Wei Chuangzhuang said:

古文：臣闻汲黯在朝，淮南不敢谋叛；干木处魏，诸侯不敢加兵。
现代文： 臣听说，西汉时汲黯在朝廷，逆臣淮南王不敢谋反；战国时段干木居魏国，各诸侯不敢兴兵侵犯。
English: The minister heard that when the Western Han Dynasty was in the imperial court, the rebellious minister Huainan Wang did not dare to rebel; during the Warring States Period, the dry wood stayed in Wei, and the princes did not dare to invade.

古文：王霸之理，皆以一士而止百万之师，以一贤而制千里之难。
现代文：为王称霸的道理相通，都是任用一个有才之士而制止百万大军，凭借一个贤能之人而遏制千里灾祸。
English: The principle of hegemony for the king is the same, it is to appoint a talented person to stop the million-strong army, and to curb the disaster of thousands of miles with the help of a capable person.

古文：臣伏以裴度勋高中夏，声播外夷，廷凑、克融皆惮其用，吐蕃、回鹘悉服其名。
现代文：臣以为：裴度功高盖国，名传外邦，廷凑、克融都害怕他被重用，吐蕃、回鹘均钦服他的威名。
English: The vassal thought: Pei Du's great achievements have covered the country, and his fame has spread to foreign countries. Both Tingchi and Ke Rong were afraid that he would be used for multiple purposes. Both Tubo and Hui Rong admired his prestige.

古文：今若置之岩廊，委其参决，西夷北虏，未测中华；河北山东，必禀庙算。
现代文：今时如果安置他任职朝廷，委任他参预决策，西夷北虏，就不敢窥测中华大地；河北山东，必受制于朝廷的谋略。
English: Today, if he were to be appointed to a position in the imperial court, and if he were to be appointed to participate in preliminary decision-making, Xi'an and Hubei would not dare to speculate about the land of China, and Hebei and Shandong would be bound by the imperial court's strategy.

古文：况幽、镇未静，尤资重臣。
现代文：况且幽、镇一方尚未平静，尤其需要倚仗重要大臣。
English: Moreover, the other side of the town is not yet calm, and it is especially important to rely on important ministers.

古文：管仲曰： 人离而听之则愚，合而听之则圣。 
现代文：管仲说：人才流散而听之任之是愚暗，人才聚合而用之信之是圣明。
English: Guanzhong said: "Talent dispersed and left to the mercy of others is foolishness, while talent gathered and put to good use is sacredness."

古文：理乱之本，非有他术，顺人则理，违人则乱。
现代文：治理国家的根本，没有其他方法，顺应人心就太平，违背人心就动乱。
English: There is no other way to govern the country. If you follow the will of the people, there will be peace. If you go against the will of the people, there will be turmoil.

古文：伏承陛下当食叹息，恨无萧、曹。
现代文：敬奉陛下对食叹息、遗憾本朝无萧何、曹参之意。
English: I would like to express my respect for His Majesty's sigh of regret over the food and regret that there is no Xiao He and Cao San this morning.

古文：今有一裴度尚不留驱使，此冯生所以感悟汉文，云虽有廉颇、李牧不能用也。
现代文：现有一个裴度又不留在朝廷驱遣，这正是冯唐用来使汉文帝受到感悟所说的：即使有廉颇、李牧也不能任用。
English: Now there is a Pei Du who does not stay at the imperial court and is driven away. This is exactly what Feng Tang said to impress Emperor Hanwen: Even if there is a rich man, Li Mu cannot be appointed.

古文：夫御宰相，当委之信之，亲之礼之。
现代文： 驾驭宰相，应当任用他，信任他，亲近他，礼遇他。
English: If you want to control the prime minister, you should appoint him, trust him, be close to him, and treat him with courtesy.

古文：如于事不效，于国无劳，则置之散僚，黜之远郡。
现代文：如果他治理政事无成效，对国家没有功劳，就把他放在闲散官位上，贬黜到边远的郡县。
English: If his governance is ineffective and of no merit to the country, he will be placed in an idle position and relegated to a remote county.

古文：如此，则在位者不敢不励，将进者不敢苟求。
现代文：能像这样，那么，在宰相位置上，他就不敢不奋勉；打算晋升宰相职位的人，就不敢苟且求职。
English: If it can be like this, then in the position of prime minister, he would not dare not to work hard; those who intend to promote the position of prime minister would not dare not to seek a job.

古文：陛下存终始之分，但不永弃，则君臣之厚也。
现代文：陛下心存始终如一的情分，只要不长期遗忘他，君臣情谊就深厚了。
English: As long as His Majesty does not forget him for a long time, the friendship between him and his subjects will be profound.

古文：今进皆负四海责望，退不失六部尚书，不肖者无因而劝。
现代文：现在晋职任宰相者都遭受天下人的指责抱怨，免除宰相职务者不失去六部尚书的官职，无才寡德者没有依据给予劝戒。
English: At present, those who are promoted to the post of prime minister are subjected to the criticism and complaints of the people of the world. Those who are exempted from the post of prime minister do not lose the official position of the six Shangshu, and those who are untalented and immoral have no basis for giving admonition.

古文：臣与李逢吉素无雠嫌，臣尝被裴度因事贬黜。
现代文：臣与李逢吉历来没有仇怨，我却曾经被裴度因事贬黜。
English: My father-in-law and Li Fengji have never had any grudge against each other, but I was once disparaged by Pei Du because of an incident.

古文：今之所陈，上答圣明，下达君议，披肝感激，伏地涕流。
现代文：今日的陈奏，对上报答皇帝的圣明，对下传达群臣的议论，竭尽受感动而奋发的真诚，匍伏在地，潸然落泪。
English: Today's recital, to repay the emperor's holy light, to convey the discussion of the ministers, to do their best to be moved by the sincerity, prostrate on the ground, burst into tears.

古文：伏望鉴臣爱君，矜臣体国，则天下幸甚。
现代文：敬望陛下明察臣下爱君之心，怜悯臣下忧国之诚，这将是普天下的大幸。 
English: It will be a great happiness for the whole world to see His Majesty's subjects' love for him, their compassion for him, and their devotion to the country.

古文：昭愍愕然省悟，见度奏状不带平章事，谓处厚曰： 度曾为宰相，何无平章事？ 
现代文：敬宗感到惊讶而省悟，见裴度的奏章不署 平章事 职衔，问韦处厚说： 裴度曾任宰相，为什么没有 平章事 职衔？ 
English: Keizong was surprised and paused for reflection. Seeing that Pei Du's record was not signed with the title of Pingzhang, he asked Wei Du Hou: Pei Du was once the prime minister, why did he not have the title of Pingzhang?

古文：处厚因奏： 为逢吉所挤，度自仆射出镇兴元，遂于旧使衔中减落。 
现代文：韦处厚于是奏禀： 被李逢吉排挤，裴度以仆射出镇兴元，就从原有的职衔中去掉了。 
English: Wei Shuchuo then made an announcement: He was ousted by Li Fengji, and Pei Du was removed from his original title when he was appointed as a servant of Zhen Xingyuan.

古文：帝曰： 何至是也。 
现代文：敬宗说： 怎么到这种地步。 
English: Keizong said, "How did it get to this point?"

古文：翌日下制，复兼同平章事。
现代文：次日下诏令，恢复裴度兼同平章事。
English: The next day, an imperial decree was issued to restore the title of Pei Du and Tong Ping.

古文：然逢吉之党，巧为毁沮，恐度复用。
现代文：然而李逢吉的党羽，奸巧地破坏阻挠，害怕裴度重被起用。
English: However, the faction of Li Fengji, treacherously sabotaged the obstruction, fearing that Pei Duan would be reappointed.

古文：有陈留人武昭者，性果敢而辩舌。
现代文：有个陈留人，叫武昭的，禀性果敢而且善辩。
English: There is a Chen leftover, called Wu Zhao, who is stubborn, courageous and eloquent.

古文：度之讨淮西也，昭求进于军门，乃令入蔡州说吴元济。
现代文：裴度讨伐淮西时，武昭到军营求取仕进，便派他到蔡州劝说吴元济。
English: When Pei Du was campaigning in Huaxi, Wu Zhao went to the military camp to solicit contributions, and sent him to Caizhou to persuade Wu Yuanji.

古文：元济临之以兵，昭气色自若，善待而还。
现代文：吴元济以武力相加，武昭神色自若，终于受到友善的待遇而回。
English: Wu Yuanji added force to force, Wu Zhao looked confident, and finally received friendly treatment and returned.

古文：度以为可用，署之军职，随度镇太原，奏授石州刺史。
现代文：裴度认为他可以任用，授予军职试用，随从裴度镇守太原，后奏请朝廷委任他为石州刺史。
English: Pei Du thought that he could be appointed, granted a military probation, followed Pei Du to the town of Taiyuan, and later asked the court to appoint him as the governor of Shishu.

古文：罢郡，除袁王府长史。
现代文：该州郡撤销后，任命他为袁王府长史。
English: After the county of the state was revoked, he was appointed as Yuan Wang prefectural governor.

古文：昭既在散位，心微悒郁，而有怨逢吉之言。
现代文：武昭任散官后，心怀忧郁，因而有抱怨李逢吉的言语。
English: After Wu Zhao was dismissed, he was depressed and complained about Li Fengji's words.

古文：而奸邪之党，使卫尉卿刘遵古从人安再荣告事，言武昭欲谋害李逢吉。
现代文：奸邪们的党羽，指使卫尉卿刘遵古的随从安再荣告发，声称武昭想要谋害李逢吉。
English: The partisans of the traitors ordered Liu Zungu's follower An Zairong to denounce him, claiming that Wu Zhao wanted to assassinate Li Fengji.

古文：狱具，而武昭死，盖欲讦度旧事以污之也。
现代文：判罪定案时，武昭已死，大概是想牵连出裴度的往事以此攻击他。
English: At the time of the conviction, Takeaki was already dead, presumably in an attempt to implicate Pei's past in order to attack him.

古文：然士君子公论，皆佑度而罪逢吉。
现代文：然而正派士大夫的公众舆论，都卫护裴度而归罪李逢吉。
English: However, the public opinion of the official doctors all defended and supported Li Fengji.

古文：天子渐明其端，每中使过兴元，必传密旨抚谕，且有征还之约。
现代文：敬宗逐渐明白了事情的真象，凡有宫廷使前往兴元，必定传告密旨抚慰，并有将他召回朝廷的约定。
English: Keizong gradually came to understand the truth of the matter. Whenever a court envoy went to Xingyuan, he would certainly convey a secret message of consolation, and there was an agreement to recall him to the court.

古文：宝历元年十一月，度疏请入觐京师。
现代文：宝历元年十一月，裴度上奏请求到京都参加朝见皇帝。
English: In November of the first year of the Horyaku era, Pei requested to go to Kyoto to attend the imperial court.

古文：明年正月，度至，帝礼遇隆厚，数日，宣制复知政事。
现代文：次年正月，裴度抵达都城，敬宗待他礼遇隆重优厚，不几日，宣布诏令恢复裴度主持政事。
English: In the first month of the following year, Pei Du arrived in the capital. He was treated with great respect and courtesy. A few days later, it was announced that the imperial edict restored Pei Du to preside over state affairs.

古文：而逢吉党有左拾遗张权舆者，尤出死力。
现代文：李逢吉的一个党羽左拾遗张权舆，更是拼命出力诽谤裴度。
English: A faction of Li Fengji's party picked up Zhang Quanzhong's remains and even went to great lengths to slander Pei Du.

古文：度自兴元请入朝也，权舆上疏曰： 度名应图谶，宅据冈原，不召自来，其心可见。 
现代文：裴度从兴元呈奏请求入朝，张权舆上疏称： 裴度的名字应了图谶之言，住宅占据了山脊的平地，不召自来，居心可知。 
English: Pei Du from Xingyuan made a request to enter the imperial court, and Zhang Quanzhong said: Pei Du's name was inspired by Tu Yao, and the house occupied the flat land of the mountain ridge. He came uninvited, and his intentions were clear.

古文：先是奸党忌度，作谣辞云： 非衣小兒坦其腹，天上有口被驱逐。 
现代文：在此之前，李逢吉奸党忌恨裴度，编了一支童谣说： 非衣小儿袒露腹，天上有口被驱逐。 
English: Prior to this, Li Fengji's treacherous party hated Pei Du and made up a nursery rhyme saying: "Non-clothed children bare their bellies, and those with mouths in the sky are expelled."

古文： 天口 言度尝平吴元济也。
现代文： 天口 是说裴度曾平定吴元济。
English: Tiankou said that Pei Du had subdued Wu Yuanji.

古文：又帝城东西，横亘六岗，合《易象乾》卦之数。
现代文：又，皇城的东、西两厢横亘六道山岗，与《易象》的 乾 卦相合。
English: In addition, the east and west wings of the imperial city stretch across six hills, which coincides with the legend of the "Elephant."

古文：度平乐里第，偶当第五岗，故权舆取为语辞。
现代文：裴度在平乐里的府宅，碰巧在第五道山岗，因此张权舆用来编派了上述那些话。
English: Pei Du's mansion in Pingle Li happened to be in the Fifth Avenue Hill, so Zhang Quanzhong used the above-mentioned words to compose the scene.

古文：昭愍虽少年，深明其诬谤，奖度之意不衰，奸邪无能措言。
现代文：敬宗虽然年轻，却非常明白这些话是诬陷诽谤，奖掖裴度的心意不减，从而使奸邪之徒无法再制谗言。
English: Although young, Jingzong was very clear that these words were slanderous, and his intention to reward and punish was undiminished, so that the traitors could no longer control his words.

古文：时昭愍欲行幸洛阳，宰相李逢吉及两省谏官，累疏论列，帝正色曰： 朕去意已定。
现代文：当时，敬宗打算游历东都洛阳，宰相李逢吉和门下、中书两省谏官，屡屡上疏劝阻。敬宗神情严肃地说： 我去洛阳的心意已定。
English: At that time, Keizong planned to travel to the eastern capital of Luoyang. Premier Li Fengji and his subordinates, the eunuchs of the two provinces of Zhongshu, repeatedly tried to dissuade him. Keizong said seriously: I have decided to go to Luoyang.

古文：其从官宫人，悉令自备糗粮，不劳百姓供馈。 
现代文：那些侍从官员和随行宫人，全让他们自备干粮，无需烦劳百姓供奉饮食。 
English: The attendants of the officials and the attendants of the palace, all let them prepare their own dry food, without bothering the people to provide meals.

古文：逢吉顿首言曰： 东都千里而近，宫阙具存，以时巡游，固亦常典。
现代文：李逢吉叩首进言说： 东都行程在千里以内，宫殿俱在，按时节前去巡游，本来也是常例。
English: Li Fengji bowed his head and said: The Dongdu trip is less than a thousand miles, the palace is all there, and it is customary to go on a parade before the time.

古文：但以法驾一动，事须备仪，千乘万骑，不可减省。
现代文：只是皇帝的车驾一动，事事必须礼仪齐备，千乘万骑，不可减少。
English: It's just that the emperor's chariot moves, everything must be complete with etiquette, and it can't be reduced.

古文：纵不费用绝广，亦须丰俭得宜，岂可自备糗粮，顿失大体？
现代文：纵然不耗费极大，也当丰华、节俭得体，哪里可以自备干粮，舍弃君主出行的大礼呢？
English: Even if it does not consume a great deal of money, it should be affluent and thrifty. Where can you prepare your own dry food and give up the gift of the monarch's travel?

古文：今干戈未甚戢，边鄙未甚宁，恐人心动摇，伏乞稍回宸虑。 
现代文：如今战事尚未完全停止，边境尚不十分安宁，恐怕陛下出行致使人心动摇，敬祈圣上稍稍改变主意。 
English: Now that the war has not completely stopped and the border is not completely peaceful, I am afraid that His Majesty's trip has caused people's hearts to be shaken, and I pray for a slight change of heart.

古文：帝不听，令度支员外郎卢贞往东都已来，检计行宫及洛阳大内。
现代文：敬宗不听谏劝，命令度支员外郎卢贞前往东都检查沿途行营及东都洛阳的皇宫。
English: Keizong did not listen to his advice, and ordered Lu Zhen to go to Dongdu to inspect the camps along the way and the imperial palace in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：朝廷方怀忧恐，会度自兴元来，因延英奏事，帝语及巡幸。
现代文：朝廷大臣正忧惧惶恐，适逢裴度从兴元来京，随同到延英殿议事，敬宗谈到游历东都的事。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court were worried and panicked when Pei Du came to Beijing from Xingyuan and accompanied him to the Yan Ying Palace for deliberation, and Keizong talked about traveling to Dongdu.

古文：度曰： 国家营创两都，盖备巡幸。
现代文：裴度说： 国家营建两个都城，原来是供帝王游历。
English: Pei Du said: The country built two capital cities, originally for emperors to travel around.

古文：然自艰难已来，此事遂绝。东都宫阙及六军营垒、百司廨署，悉多荒废。
现代文：然而自国事艰难以来，游历东都也就中止，东都的宫殿及六军的营垒、百官的府舍，大多荒芜。
English: However, since the difficult state of affairs, the tour of Dongdu has also been suspended. The palaces of Dongdu and the camps of the six armies, the residences of hundreds of officials, are mostly deserted.

古文：陛下必欲行幸，亦须稍稍修葺。
现代文：陛下一定要去游历，也应稍加修整再去。
English: His Majesty must go on a tour, and he should also go with a little touch-up.

古文：一年半岁后，方可议行。 
现代文：一年半载后，才能计议陛下出行的事。 
English: It will be a year and a half before His Majesty's trip can be considered.

古文：帝曰： 群臣意不及此，但云不合去。
现代文：敬宗说： 群臣奏谏没有说明这一点，只是说不该去。
English: Keizong said: The ministers did not explain this, but only said that they should not go.

古文：若如卿奏，不行亦得止后期。 
现代文：如果是像你所禀奏的情况，不去也可以，岂止是延期？ 
English: If it's a situation like the one you're describing, it's okay not to go. Isn't it just a postponement?

古文：旋又硃克融、史宪诚各请以丁匠五千，助修东都，帝遂停东幸。
现代文：不久，朱克融、史宪诚又奏请各派五千名服役的工匠，帮助修复东都。敬宗于是停止东游之行。
English: Soon after, Zhu Ke Rong and Shi Xiancheng also requested 5,000 craftsmen from each faction to help restore Dongdu. Keizong then stopped his eastward journey.

古文：幽州硃克融执留赐春衣使杨文端，奏称衣段疏薄；又奏今岁三军春衣不足，拟于度支请给一季春衣，约三十万端匹；又请助丁匠五千修东都。
现代文：幽州镇使朱克融扣留了赐春衣使杨文端，奏称所赐春衣布料粗劣，又奏称今年三军春衣不足，拟从度支府请求拨给一个季度的春衣布料，约计三十万端匹；又奏请派出五千名服役工匠帮助修复东都。
English: Yuzhou Town detained Zhu Ke Rong for giving spring clothes to Yang Wenduan, saying that the spring clothes given were of poor quality. He also said that the spring clothes of the three armies were insufficient this year, and that he was going to request from Du Prefecture to allocate a quarter of spring clothes, about 300,000 pairs. He also requested to send 5,000 service craftsmen to help repair Dongdu.

古文：上忧其不逊，问宰臣曰： 克融所奏，如何处分？
现代文：敬宗忧惧朱克融怀有不顺从朝廷之心，询问宰相： 朱克融的奏请，如何处置？
English: Keizong worried that Zhu Ke Rong harbored a heart of disobedience to the imperial court, and asked the prime minister: Zhu Ke Rong's petition, how to deal with it?

古文：我欲遣一重臣往宣慰，便索春衣使，可乎？ 
现代文：我想派一位重要大臣前往宣示抚慰，趁便要回春衣使，这样做可以吗？ 
English: I want to send an important minister to go to declare consolation, and take the opportunity to return to the spring coat, is this OK?

古文：度对曰： 克融家本凶族，无故又行凌悖，必将灭亡，陛下不足为虑。
现代文：裴度回答说： 朱克融家族本是凶暴之徒，又无端地肆行犯上狂悖，必将自取灭亡，陛下不必为此忧虑。
English: Pei Du replied, "The Zhu Keh Rong family are violent people, and they have committed wanton crimes without any reason. They will certainly destroy themselves. Your Majesty need not worry about this.

古文：譬如一豺虎，于山林间自吼自跃，但不以为事，则自无能为。
现代文：譬如一只豺狼或虎豹，在山林中自吼自跳，只管不把他当回事，他就无计可施。
English: For example, a jackal or a tiger leopard, roaring and jumping in the mountain forest, even if he is not taken seriously, he has nothing to do.

古文：此贼只敢于巢穴中无礼，动即不得。
现代文：这个逆贼只敢在他自己巢穴中行非礼之事，一出外行动就不行了。
English: This traitor only dares to commit indecent acts in his own lair, but not when he is out of the country.

古文：今亦不须遣使宣慰，亦不要索所留敕使，但更缓旬日已来，与一诏云： 闻中官到彼稍失去就，待到，我当有处分。
现代文：现在也不必派使臣前去宣旨抚慰，也不用去要被他扣留的奉旨使臣，只须再延缓一段时间，给他一道诏书，说： 听说宫廷使臣到你那里后，进退举止稍失分寸，待他回朝，我当对他有所处置。
English: Now, there is no need to send an envoy to announce and comfort him, nor is there any need to go to the envoys he has ordered to be detained. It is only necessary to delay for a while longer and give him an edict saying, "I heard that after the palace envoy came to you, he lost his temper a little. I should deal with him until he returns to the palace."

古文：所赐卿春衣，有司制造不谨，我甚要知之，已令科处。 
现代文：所赐给卿的春衣，有关官员监制不严，我很想了解这件事情，已经下令依法处置。 
English: The spring coats given to Sir, the supervision of the relevant officials is not strict, I would like to understand this matter, I have ordered to dispose of it according to law.

古文：所请丁匠五千人及兵马赴东都，固是虚语。
现代文：他所奏请的派五千名服役的工匠及兵马赴东都，本来就是假话。
English: His request to send five thousand service craftsmen and soldiers to Dongdu was actually a lie.

古文：臣料贼中，必出不得，今欲直挫其奸意，即报云： 卿所请丁匠修宫阙，可速遣来，已敕魏博等道，令所在排比供拟。 
现代文：我料定此贼军中，绝对派不出来。现在想要直截了当地挫败他的奸诈意图，可答复说： 卿所奏请派服役的工匠修复东都宫殿，可迅即派来，我已下令魏博各藩镇，让他们在各自的地盘上安排供给。 
English: Now, I want to defeat his treacherous intention in a straightforward manner, I can reply: The artisans whom you requested to repair the Dongdu Palace can be sent immediately. I have ordered all the townships in Weibo to arrange supplies on their respective territories.

古文：料得此诏，必章惶失计。
现代文：料想朱克融得到此诏书，必定张惶失措。
English: Zhu Ke Rong must have panicked when he received this edict.

古文：若未能如此，犹示含容，则报云： 东都宫阙，所要修葺，事在有司，不假卿遣丁匠远来。
现代文：如果陛下觉得还不能把事情做到这种地步，还想示以包涵宽容，就答复说： 东都宫殿，凡要修复的地方，由有关官府办理，你不必派工匠远道而来。
English: If His Majesty felt that he could not take things to such a level, and still wanted to show tolerance, he would reply: Dongdu Palace, any place that needs to be repaired will be handled by the relevant government office, you do not have to send craftsmen from far away.

古文：又所言三军春衣，自是本道常事。
现代文：又，所说的三军春衣问题，历来是各道常例自办的事。
English: In addition, the so-called three-army spring coat issue has always been a matter for each province to handle on its own.

古文：比来朝廷或有事赐与，皆缘征发，须是优恩，若寻常则无此例。
现代文：近来朝廷或因有事赐给，都是由于征调了该地的人力、物资，终究是优待照顾，若在平时就没有这样的常例。
English: Lately, the imperial court has been giving preferential treatment to some regions, either because of the manpower or materials that have been transferred there, or because of other reasons. After all, this is preferential treatment, but in normal times, this would not be the case.

古文：我固不惜三二十万端疋，只是事体不可独与范阳。
现代文：我实在不是吝惜二、三十万端匹布料，只是按规矩不能独给范阳一地。
English: I really do not begrudge two or three hundred thousand pieces of fabric, but according to the rules, I cannot give Fanyang a place alone.

古文：卿宜知悉。 
现代文：你应该知道。 
English: You should know.

古文：只如此处分即得，陛下更不要介意。 
现代文：只需这样处置即可，陛下再不要把此事放在心上。 
English: That's all you have to do, Your Majesty, and don't worry about it.

古文：上从之，遂进诏章，至皆如度所料。
现代文：敬宗听从他的建议，由他进呈诏书拟文。诏书到达幽州，情况全如裴度所料。
English: Keizong listened to his suggestion and let him submit a draft of the imperial edict. The imperial edict arrived in Yuzhou, and everything was as Baidu had expected.

古文：不旬日，幽州杀克融并其二子。
现代文：不到十天，幽州人杀了朱克融和他的两个儿子。
English: Less than ten days later, the people of Yuzhou killed Zhu Ke Rong and his two sons.

古文：时帝童年骄纵，倦接群臣。度从容奏曰： 比者，陛下每月约六七度坐朝。
现代文：当时敬宗年少骄纵，厌倦接见群臣，裴度和缓地进言说： 近来，陛下每月坐朝约六、七次。
English: At that time, Keizong was a young and arrogant man who was tired of receiving ministers. Pei slowly said: Recently, His Majesty has been sitting in the morning about six or seven times a month.

古文：天下人心，无不知陛下躬亲庶政，乃至河北贼臣远闻，亦皆耸听。
现代文：天下人的心里，无不知道陛下亲自处理各种政务，甚至河北的逆臣在遥远的地方听到传闻，也都惊惧。
English: In the hearts of the people of the world, there is no one who does not know that His Majesty personally handles all kinds of government affairs. Even the rebellious ministers of Hebei heard rumors in distant places and were also alarmed.

古文：自两月已来，入阁开延英稍稀，或恐大段公事须禀睿谋者，有所拥滞。
现代文：自从这两个月以来，陛下朝会百官、开延英殿议事渐渐稀少，常常担心必须禀奏皇上明断的重要公事，有所耽搁延误。
English: Since these past two months, His Majesty's Imperial Court, which is made up of hundreds of officials, and the Imperial Household Agency have been holding fewer and fewer meetings. They are often worried about having to carry out the Emperor's important public duties, and there have been delays.

古文：伏冀陛下乘凉数坐，以广延问。
现代文：敬望陛下趁凉爽时间增多坐朝，以扩大接见、讯问。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will take advantage of the cooler weather to spend more time in the morning in order to expand the scope of his interviews and inquiries.

古文：伏以颐养圣躬，在于顺适时候。
现代文：臣下以为陛下保养身体，在于顺应时令气候。
English: His subjects believe that the best way for His Majesty to take care of his body is to adapt to the seasonal climate.

古文：若饮食有节，寝兴有常，四体唯和，万寿可保。
现代文：如果饮食有节制，安寝、起床有常度，身体惟求康和，可保长寿。
English: If you have a moderate diet, a regular bedtime and wake-up time, and a healthy body, you can live a long life.

古文：道书云： 春夏早起，取鸡鸣时；秋冬晏起，取日出时。 
现代文：《道书》讲： 春、夏早起，在鸡鸣之时；秋、冬晚起，在日出之时。 
English: "Dao Shu" says: In spring and summer, get up early, at the time of the rooster crowing; in autumn and winter, get up late, at the time of sunrise.

古文：盖在阳则欲及阴凉，在阴则欲及温暖。
现代文：原因是：节令在阳气上升时需要求得阴凉，在阴气上升时需要求得温暖。
English: The reason for this is that when the yang rises, it is necessary to seek shade, and when the yin rises, it is necessary to seek warmth.

古文：今陛下忧勤庶政，亲览万机，每御延英，召臣等奏对，方属盛夏，宜在清晨。
现代文：如今陛下忧愁、劳苦于各种政务，日理万机，每次亲至延英殿，召集臣等奏事答问，正值盛夏，应在清晨。
English: Nowadays, His Majesty is sad and busy with all kinds of government affairs, and every time he comes to Yan Ying Palace, he convenes his ministers to answer questions. It is midsummer, and it should be in the early morning.

古文：如至巳午之间，即当炎赫之际，虽日昃忘食，不惮其劳，仰瞻扆旒，亦似烦热。
现代文：如果已至中午，正当酷热之际，即使夕阳西下，废食忘餐，不畏劳苦，仰瞻圣上，也很烦热。
English: If it is already noon, when it is very hot, even if the sun is setting, if you forget to eat, if you are not afraid of hard work, if you look up to the saint, it is very hot.

古文：臣等已曾陈论，切望听纳。 
现代文：臣等已曾上陈论议，切望陛下听取采纳。 
English: The ministers have already discussed the matter and are anxious for His Majesty to hear and approve it.

古文：自后，视事稍频。
现代文：此后，敬宗坐朝理政次数稍有增多。
English: Since then, there has been a slight increase in the number of times that Keizong sat in the imperial court to administer the government.

古文：未几，兼领度支。
现代文：不久，裴度兼任度支使。
English: Soon, Pei Du also served as Du's special envoy.

古文：属盗起禁闱，宫车晏驾，度与中贵人密谋，诛刘克明等，迎江王立为天子。
现代文：直至宫内发生篡位，敬宗逝世，裴度与皇帝宠信的宦官密谋，诛除刘克明等人，迎立江王李昂为天子。
English: Until the usurpation occurred in the imperial court, the death of Emperor Keizong, Pei Du conspired with the eunuchs who were favored by the emperor, eliminated Liu Kemin and others, and welcomed King Liang as the son of heaven.

古文：以功加门下侍郎、集贤殿大学士、太清宫使，余如故。以赞导之勋，进阶特进。
现代文：裴度因功加授门下侍郎、集贤殿大学士、太清使诸官职，其他职位依旧；以辅佐导引的功勋，晋升官阶为特进。
English: Pei Du was awarded the title of junior chamberlain, the title of scholar of Jixian Palace, and the title of Taiqing envoy for his meritorious service, but the other positions remained the same. He was promoted to a higher rank for his meritorious service as an assistant leader.

古文：时沧景节度使李全略死，其子同捷窃弄兵柄，以求继袭。度请行诛伐，逾年而同捷诛。
现代文：那时，沧景节度使李全略去世，其子李同捷窃取兵权，谋求承袭父职，裴度奏请进行讨伐，经历数年，诛杀了李同捷。
English: At that time, the vicissitudes of the Qing Dynasty caused the death of Li Quanliao, and his son Li Tongjie stole military power and sought to inherit his father's position. Pei Duoxiao asked him to carry out a crusade, and after several years, he killed Li Tongjie.

古文：因拜疏上陈调兵食非宰相事，请归诸有司。
现代文：裴度于是上疏陈奏：调派军粮不是宰相的职责，请将度支使职权归还各有关官吏。
English: Pei Du then went on to say: It is not the responsibility of the prime minister to allocate military food, please return the power of dispatch to the relevant officials.

古文：诏从之。赐实封三百户。
现代文：文宗下诏书遵从他的奏疏，赐给他实收租赋的食户三百户。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Wenzong followed his advice and granted him 300 households that actually received rent.

古文：度年高多病，上疏恳辞机务，恩礼弥厚。
现代文：裴度年岁高迈而又多病，上疏恳请辞去军政机要职务，皇帝对他的礼遇更加深厚。
English: Pei Du was very old and sickly. He was earnestly asked to resign from his important military and political positions. The emperor treated him with even greater courtesy.

古文：文宗遣御医诊视，日令中使抚问。
现代文：文宗派宫廷医师替他诊断治病，每天让宫廷使臣前去安抚慰问。
English: The court physician of the Moon Sect diagnosed and treated him, and every day he sent court envoys to comfort and console him.

古文：四年六月，诏曰：
现代文：太和四年六月，文宗下诏称：
English: In June of the 4th year of the Taiwa era, Emperor Wenzong issued the following edict:

古文：昔汉以孔光降置几之诏，晋以郑冲申奉册之命。
现代文： 从前，汉皇为孔光特颁赐给几案的诏书，晋君因郑冲重申授册封赏的命令。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Han granted several cases to Kong Guangte, and Jin Jun reiterated the order of awarding the award because of Zheng Chong.

古文：虽优隆耆德，显重元臣，而议政不及于咨询，用礼止在于安逸。
现代文：虽然是厚待尊崇年高望重的德士，显扬推重资望高深的元勋，然而商议朝政不再向他们咨询，礼遇厚待仅在于使其安逸。
English: Although they are highly esteemed and respected for their years of service, and highly respected for their contributions to the country, they are no longer consulted when it comes to deliberation on government affairs, and they are treated with courtesy only to make them feel at ease.

古文：朕勤求至理，所宝唯贤，顾諟旧劳，敢不加敬。
现代文：朕力求实行最为完美的政治，一心珍惜德才兼备的贤臣，对此功臣故老，能不倍加敬重？
English: I strive to implement the most perfect politics, and cherish the virtuous and talented sages. Can we not pay more respect to these veteran heroes?

古文：由是委宰制于大政，释参决于繁务。时因听断，诚望弼谐，迁秩上公，式是殊宠。
现代文：因此把军国大事托付给他们总领统管，将众多要务放交给他们参预决策，按照听取陈述、做出决定，切望辅政大臣协和一致，官升至众爵位之上，享用此特殊的宠荣。
English: Therefore, the military and national affairs were entrusted to them as the commander-in-chief, and many important tasks were entrusted to them to participate in the preliminary decision-making, listen to the presentation, make decisions, and eagerly hope that the Vice-Minister of State will be in harmony and rise above the peerage to enjoy this special favor.

古文：特进、守司徒、兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，充集贤殿大学士、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户、食实封三百户裴度，禀河岳之英灵，受乾坤之间气；珪璋特达，城府洞开。
现代文：特进、守司徒、兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、充任集贤殿大学士、上柱国、受封为晋国公、食邑三千户、享有实收赋税三百户的裴度，禀受山川的精灵，容涵天地的秀气，如玉的美德出类拔萃，阔大的襟怀纯明坦荡。
English: He was promoted to the rank of special envoy, tutor of the provincial constable, attendant of his disciple at the same time, scholar of the middle school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of the same school of

古文：外茂九功，内苞一德。器为社稷之镇，才实邦国之桢。
现代文：外秀，能建六府三事之功；内美，蕴含一心报国之德；器度，足以成为社稷根基；才干，实在堪称邦国支柱。
English: Gaishu, the achievement of being able to build three things in six prefectures; Naimei, the best, contains the virtue of one-hearted service to the country; wit, enough to become the foundation of society; talent, really can be called the pillar of the country.

古文：故能祗事累朝，宣融景化。
现代文：因此能够恭敬侍奉几代君王，效力长久光明顺随。
English: Therefore, they can respectfully serve several generations of monarchs, and their effectiveness is long and bright.

古文：在宪宗时，扫涤区宇，尔则有出车殄寇之勋；在穆宗时，混同文轨，尔则有参戎入辅之绩；在敬宗时，阜康兆庶，尔则有活国庇人之勤。
现代文：在宪宗时，平定四方，你有兴兵出师消灭寇贼的大功。在穆宗时，统一四海，你有参谋军务入朝辅政的业绩。在敬宗时，阜物康民，你有振兴国家荫庇人民的辛劳。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzong, you had the great achievement of pacifying the four directions by dispatching troops to wipe out the bandits. At the time of Emperor Muzong, you had the achievement of unifying the four seas, you had the performance of the staff officer of military affairs entering the government to assist the government. At the time of Emperor Huizong, you had the prosperity of the people, you had the hard work of revitalizing the country and protecting the people.

古文：迨弼朕躬，总齐方夏，尔则有吊伐底宁之力。
现代文：到辅佐本朝，治理全国，你有吊民伐罪达到安定的功劳。
English: To assist this dynasty and govern the whole country, you have the merit of achieving stability by hanging people for the crime of logging.

古文：皆不遗庙算，布在简编，功利及人，不可悉数。
现代文：以上勋业，尽见于朝廷的谋略中，陈述在编就的书册上，功效利益遍及世人，在此无法一一列举。
English: The above-mentioned meritorious deeds can be seen in the strategy of the imperial court, and are described in the compiled books. The effects and benefits are all over the world, and cannot be enumerated here.

古文：而朝论益重，我心实知。
现代文：而朝中评论日益加重，在我心里明明白白。
English: But the North Korea-China comments are getting more and more serious, and they are crystal clear in my mind.

古文：方用皋陶之谟，适值留侯之疾，沥恳牢让，备列奏章，塞诏上言，动形颜色。
现代文：正待取用你那贤臣皋陶般的高明策略，适逢你这留侯张良式的谋士染病。你竭诚辞让要职，详明陈述于奏章；据实进言相告，衷情流露于言表。
English: You are about to use the brilliant strategy of your wise adviser, Shintao, when you, a Zhang Liang-style strategist, fall ill. You sincerely resign from your important position and state it in detail in the report; you report truthfully and show your heartfelt feelings in your statement.

古文：果闻勿药之喜，更俟调鼎之功，而体力未和，音容尚阻。
现代文：终于听到你病体痊愈的喜讯，更加期待你履行宰相的职责；只是你身体尚未复原，想见你眼下还有困难。
English: After finally hearing the good news that you have recovered from your illness, I am even more looking forward to seeing you perform your duties as Prime Minister; however, you have not yet recovered and it is difficult to see you right now.

古文：不有优崇之命，孰彰宠待之恩？
现代文：不给予优渥重大的封赐，怎么能显示厚待的恩典？
English: How can one show the grace of hospitality without bestowing a great gift?

古文：宜其协赞机衡，弘敷教典；论道而仪刑卿士，宣德而镇抚华夷。
现代文：你当协同赞助朝政要务，广泛传布政教法令，讲论治国之道给士大夫们示范，宣扬德政教化以安定抚慰中外。
English: You should jointly sponsor the important political affairs of the DPRK, widely disseminate the political and religious decrees, lecture on the way of governing the country and give demonstrations to scholars and doctors, and promote the transformation of the German political and religious system into a stable and comforting one at home and abroad.

古文：啬养精神，保绥福履，为国元老，毗予一人。
现代文：望蓄养精神，安保福禄，作为国家元老，辅佐我一个人。
English: Hoping to nurture the spirit, the security benefit, as a national elder, I am assisted by one person.

古文：可司徒、平章军国重事，待疾损日，每三日、五日一度入中书。
现代文：值得过问的司徒、平章军国要务，等到你疾病消除的时候，每三、五日去中书省一次。
English: When your illness is cured, you should go to the Chinese Academy of Sciences once every three to five days.

古文：散官勋封实封如故。
现代文：你的散官、勋号、封邑以及实封食户与以往一样。
English: Your non-commissioned officers, honorary titles, fiefs, and real fiefs are the same as before.

古文：仍备礼册命。
现代文：依旧备办文书任命封赏。 
English: It is still necessary to prepare documents for the appointment and award.

古文：度表辞曰： 伏以公台崇礼，典册盛仪，庸臣当之，实谓忝越。
现代文：裴度上表辞让说： 又赐以三公辅臣的尊崇优待，皇帝策封的隆重礼仪，我这平庸无能之臣领受它们，实在超过臣的本份，受之有愧。
English: Pei Du said in his epitaph: I have also been given the reverence and preferential treatment of the three princes and their attendants, and the grand etiquette of the emperor's seal. I, a mediocre and incompetent vassal, have received them, which is really beyond my duties as a vassal, and I am not worthy of receiving them.

古文：况累承宠命，亦为便蕃，前后三度，已行此礼。
现代文：况且屡受加恩任命，确实对臣多有偏爱，前后已有三次赐予这种礼遇。
English: Moreover, having been repeatedly appointed by Gahn, he does have a preference for his vassals, having granted them this courtesy on three occasions.

古文：令臣犹参枢近，窃惧无以弼谐，重此劳烦，有靦面目。
现代文：让臣继续参预朝廷机要政务，臣下心中忧惧无力辅佐谐和，担任此繁劳重任，将让臣羞惭汗颜。
English: Allowing a vassal to continue to take part in the important political affairs of the imperial court, while the vassals are worried and powerless to support the harmony, will make the vassal ashamed to take on this arduous and important task.

古文：伏乞天恩且课臣效官，责臣实事，册命之仪，特赐停罢。
现代文：敬祈天子开恩，将督促臣担负朝廷官职、要求臣从事机要实务、授予臣宦爵的策封礼仪，破格赐恩一并撤销。
English: The etiquette of encouraging a vassal to assume an official position in the imperial court, requiring a vassal to engage in important practical work, and awarding a vassal a title of nobility were all abolished.

古文：则素餐高位，空负耻于中心；弁冕轻车，免讥诮于众口。 
现代文：那么，即或臣不劳而获高位厚禄，也仅内心惭愧自羞，身著礼服乘坐轻车，亦可避免舆论谴责。 
English: So, even if a minister has received a high rank and a generous salary without any effort, he can avoid public condemnation only if he is ashamed of himself in his heart and rides in a light car wearing a gown.

古文：优诏从之。
现代文：文宗以优容态度下诏依从了他的请求。
English: Wenzong complied with his request in a courteous manner.

古文：九月，加守司徒、兼侍中、襄州刺史，充山南东道节度观察、临汉监牧等使。
现代文：九月，裴度以加守司徒、兼侍中、襄州刺史官衔的身份，担任山南东道节度使、观察使、临汉监牧使。
English: In September, Pei Du served as the Shannan Host Festival Envoy, Observation Envoy, and Linhan Supervision and Pastoral Envoy, with the status of the official title of Jia Guo Szu, and the official title of Zhan Zhong, and the official title of Xiangzhou Szu Shi.

古文：度素称坚正，事上不回，故累为奸邪所排，几至颠沛。
现代文：裴度一向有坚贞正直的声誉，侍奉君主百折不回，因而屡屡遭受奸邪之辈的排挤打击，几乎陷于难以摆脱的艰难窘迫困境。
English: Baidu has always had the reputation of being steadfast and honest, and has served the monarch unremittingly. As a result, it has repeatedly suffered from the exclusion of evil-doers, and has almost fallen into a difficult predicament that is difficult to get out of.

古文：及晚节，稍浮沉以避祸。
现代文：到了晚年，渐渐追随世俗以避免身遭祸事。
English: In his later years, he gradually followed the world to avoid misfortune.

古文：初，度支盐铁使王播，广事进奉以希宠，度亦掇拾羡余以效播，士君子少之。
现代文：起先，度支盐铁使王播，大肆向朝廷进献财物，希求得到皇帝的宠信。裴度也效法王播，收取无名杂税进献，遭到有节操的士大夫轻视。
English: At first, Du Du, supported by Wang Bo, lavishly donated wealth to the imperial court, hoping to receive the emperor's favor. Pei Du also followed Wang Bo's example, collecting anonymous miscellaneous tax donations, and was despised by the disciplined tax inspector.

古文：复引韦厚叔、南卓为补阙拾遗，俾弥缝结纳，为目安之计。
现代文：后又引荐韦厚叔、南卓担任补阙拾遗，以求弥合矛盾扩大交结。
English: Later, Uncle Wei Hou and Nanzhuo were also recommended to serve as supplementary sources in order to bridge the contradiction and expand the intersection.

古文：而后进宰相李宗闵、牛僧孺等不悦其所为，故因度谢病罢相位，复出为襄阳节度。
现代文：而后来被进用的宰相李宗闵、牛僧孺等不满意他的所作所为，因此趁裴度以病为由辞官，罢免了他的宰相职位，然后又将他调出京都担任襄阳节度使。
English: However, the prime ministers Li Zongyao and Niu Zongyao, who were later used, were not satisfied with his actions, so they took advantage of Pei Du's resignation on the grounds of illness, dismissed him from the post of prime minister, and then transferred him out of Kyoto to serve as the Yangyang Festival envoy.

古文：初，元和十四年，于襄阳置临汉监牧。废百姓田四百顷，其牧马三千二百余匹。
现代文：原先，宪宗元和十四年时，在襄阳设置了临汉监牧，废毁百姓的农田四百顷，放牧官马三千二百余匹。
English: Originally, when Xian Zongyuan was 14 years old, the Linhan Supervisor of Pastoralism was set up in Xiangyang, destroying 400 hectares of people's farmland and herding more than 3,200 horses.

古文：度以牧马数少，虚废民田，奏罢之，除其使名。
现代文：裴度以牧马数量少、又空废民田为由，奏请朝廷取消这一牧场，撤销临汉监牧使。
English: On the grounds that the number of herdsmen was small and the fields were empty, Pei Du petitioned the imperial court to cancel the ranch and revoke the Linhan overseer.

古文：八年三月，以本官判东都尚书省事，充东都留守。
现代文：文宗太和八年三月，裴度以本官职位兼任东都尚书省的职务，充任东都留守。
English: In March of the eighth year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, Baidu concurrently held the post of Dongdu Shang Shuxuan with his official position, and stayed in Dongdu.

古文：九年十月，进位中书令。
现代文：九年十月，晋升官位为中书令。
English: In October of the ninth year, he was promoted to the official rank of Zhongshirong.

古文：十一月，诛李训、王涯、贾餗、舒元舆等四宰相，其亲属门人从坐者数十百人；下狱讯劾，欲加流窜。
现代文：十一月，李训、王涯、贾饣、舒元舆等四个宰相被宦官诛除，他们的亲属、门生受株连者上百人，被投入监狱审讯定罪，并打算将他们流放。
English: In November, four prime ministers including Li Xun, Wang Ya, Jia Jun and Shu Yuanwu were purged by eunuchs, and hundreds of their relatives and disciples were put in prison, tried and convicted, and it was planned to exile them.

古文：度上疏理之，全活者数十家。
现代文：裴度上疏朝廷为他们申辩，被保全、救活的有几十家。
English: The imperial court defended them, and dozens of families were preserved and revived.

古文：自是，中官用事，衣冠道丧。
现代文：从此以后，宦官当权，士大夫的道统沦丧。
English: Since then, eunuchs have been in power, and the scholar-official system has fallen into ruin.

古文：度以年及悬舆，王纲版荡，不复以出处为意。
现代文：裴度因已到辞官居家的年纪，朝廷纲纪又已败坏，不再把仕途的进退放在心上。
English: Because Pei Du had reached the age of a retired official, and the discipline of the imperial court had deteriorated, he no longer cared about the advancement or decline of his career.

古文：东都立第于集贤里，筑山穿池，竹木丛萃，有风亭水榭，梯桥架阁，岛屿回环，极都城之胜概。
现代文：他在东都的集贤里建立府宅，构筑假山，开凿池塘，竹树荟萃，建有风亭水榭、梯桥架阁，岛屿四环，极尽都城的丽色佳境。
English: He built a mansion in Jixianli in Dongdu, constructed a rockery, dug a pond, bamboo trees, built a pavilion, a bridge, four islands, and made the most of the beautiful scenery of the capital.

古文：又于午桥创别墅，花木万株；中起凉台暑馆，名曰 绿野堂 。
现代文：另在午桥建造了别墅，裁培花木万株，其中修建了一座歇凉避暑的亭阁，名叫绿野堂。
English: In addition, a villa was built in the afternoon bridge, and thousands of flowers and trees were pruned. Among them, a pavilion was built to cool off and escape the summer heat, called Midorino-do.

古文：引甘水贯其中，酾引脉分，映带左右。
现代文：引入清水灌注其中，导引分流贯通有序，两岸景物交相映衬。
English: With the introduction of fresh water perfusion, the guided diversion flowed through in an orderly manner, and the scenery on both sides of the strait contrasted with each other.

古文：度视事之隙，与诗人白居易、刘禹锡酣宴终日，高歌放言，以诗酒琴书自乐，当时名士，皆从之游。
现代文：裴度处理公务之暇，在这里与诗人白居易、刘禹锡整日酣畅宴饮，放声吟唱纵情谈论，借吟诗、饮酒、弹琴、书法自娱自乐。当时的名士，都相从交游。
English: In his spare time, Baidu dealt with his official duties. Here, he and the poets Bai Juyi and Liu Yuxi spent the whole day feasting, chanting and talking, and entertaining themselves with poetry, drinking, playing the piano, and calligraphy. The famous people of the time all traveled together.

古文：每有人士自都还京，文宗必先问之曰： 卿见裴度否？ 
现代文：每次有名望的人士从东都返回京都，文宗必定首先询问他： 你见到了裴度吗？ 
English: Whenever a famous person returned to Kyoto from the eastern capital, Wenzong would always ask him first: Did you see Pei Du?

古文：上以其足疾，不便朝谒，而年未甚衰，开成二年五月，复以本官兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：文宗认为裴度虽然脚有毛病，来京朝见君主不方便，但他精力尚未十分衰减，开成二年五月，又让他以本官职兼任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: Wenzong thought that although Pei Du had a foot problem and it was inconvenient for him to come to Beijing to see the monarch, his energy had not yet completely waned. In May of the following year, he also made him concurrently serve as the official of Taiyuan Yin, the official of Beidou, and the official of Hedong Festival.

古文：诏出，度累表固辞老疾，不愿更典兵权。优诏不允。
现代文：诏书发出后，裴度连续上表一再以年迈有病推辞，不愿再掌兵权；要言复诏不允。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, Pei Du repeatedly declined to take command of the army, saying that he was too old and ill to do so. He refused to reply to the imperial edict.

古文：文宗遣吏部郎中卢弘往东都宣旨曰： 卿虽多病，年未甚老，为朕卧镇北门可也。 
现代文：文宗派吏部郎中卢弘去往东都宣布皇帝诏书： 卿虽然多病，还不很衰迈，替朕垂衣拱手坐镇北门即可。 
English: Lu Hong, the secretary of the Wen sect, went to Dongdu to announce the emperor's edict: Sir, although he is very sick, he is not very old, so you can take off your clothes and sit at the north gate of the town.

古文：促令上路，度不获已，之任。
现代文：催促起程，裴度不得已而赴任。
English: Urged to start, Pei Du was forced to take up the post.

古文：三年冬，病甚，乞还东都养病。
现代文：开成三年冬季，裴度病重，祈请返回东都养病。
English: In the winter of the third year, Pei Du was seriously ill. Please pray for him to recover in Dongdu.

古文：四年正月，诏许还京，拜中书令。
现代文：四年正月，文宗下诏准许裴度返回京城，授官中书令。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Emperor Wenzong issued an imperial edict allowing Pei Du to return to Beijing and conferring him the title of chancellor.

古文：以疾未任朝谢。诏曰： 司徒、中书令度，绰有大勋，累居台鼎。
现代文：裴度因病不能入朝向皇帝谢恩，文宗下诏书说： 司徒、中书令裴度，多有大功，历居三台之位。
English: Due to illness, Pei Du was unable to enter the court to express his gratitude to the emperor. The imperial rescript issued by Emperor Wenzong said: "Stu, the Chinese Emperor Pei Du, has many great achievements, and has always been in the third rank.

古文：今以疾恙，未任谢上，其本官俸料，宜自计日支给。 
现代文：现因疾病，未能入朝谢恩，他所任本官的俸禄食粮，应依旧计日支给。 
English: Due to illness, Shane was unable to enter the imperial court. The salary and food allowance for the post he held should still be paid on a daily basis.

古文：又遣国医就第诊视。
现代文：又派御医去他家给他治病。
English: He also sent a doctor to his home to treat him.

古文：属上巳曲江赐宴，群臣赋诗，度以疾不能赴。
现代文：适逢三月初三上巳节皇帝在曲江池赏赐宴饮，群臣赋诗，裴度因病不能赴宴。
English: At the beginning of March, on the 3rd day of the 3rd lunar month, the emperor held a banquet at Qujiang Pool. A group of courtiers recited poems, but Pei Du was unable to attend the banquet due to illness.

古文：文宗遣中使赐度诗曰： 注想待元老，识君恨不早。
现代文：文宗派宦官赐给裴度诗一首： 注想待元老，识君恨不早。
English: The eunuchs of the Wen sect gave a poem to Pei Du: "Be mindful of the elders, it is not too early to be wise."

古文：我家柱石衰，忧来学丘祷。 
现代文：我家柱石衰，忧来学丘祷。 
English: The pillars of my house are decaying, and I am afraid to learn the hill prayer.

古文：仍赐御札曰： 朕诗集中欲得见卿唱和诗，故令示此。
现代文：并随赠诗附亲笔书信说： 朕诗集中想见到你的唱和诗，因此将此诗给你看。
English: The poem was accompanied by a handwritten letter saying: "I would like to see your song and poem in my poetry collection, so I will show you this poem."

古文：卿疾恙未痊，固无心力，但异日进来。
现代文：你病未痊愈，必定乏力无心和诗，尽管改日将诗进献给我。
English: If you don't recover from your illness, you're bound to be tired, listless, and forgetful of poetry, even if you dedicate a poem to me some other day.

古文：春时俗说难于将摄，勉加调护，速就和平。
现代文：春季，通常说是难于养病的季节，需要尽力调养护理，尽快血气和顺。
English: Spring is usually said to be a season that is difficult to recover from illness. It is necessary to make every effort to raise and care for the health of the body, so that the blood will be harmonious as soon as possible.

古文：千百胸怀，不具一二。
现代文：心中怀念千百，所写不及一二。
English: In my heart, I miss thousands and hundreds of things, but I have written less than one or two.

古文：药物所须，无惮奏请之烦也。 
现代文：药物治病所须，不要顾忌奏请频繁。 
English: Medicines are needed to treat diseases, so don't be afraid to use them frequently.

古文：御札及门，而度已薨，四年三月四日也。
现代文：文宗的亲笔书信刚到裴度家门口，裴度已经逝世，时间是开成四年三月初四。
English: Wenzong's handwritten letter just arrived at Pei Du's doorstep. Pei Du has passed away. The time is the fourth day of the third month of the fourth year.

古文：上闻之，震悼久之，重令缮写，置之灵座。
现代文：文宗听到噩耗后，惊悸悲痛了很长时间，又让人重新缮写了那封亲笔信，将它放在裴度的灵位上。
English: After Wen Zong heard the bad news, he was shocked and grieved for a long time, and had someone rewrite the handwritten letter and place it on Pei Du's shrine.

古文：时年七十五，册赠太傅，辍朝四日，赗赙加等。
现代文：这时，裴度七十五岁，文宗下诏追赠他为太傅，停止上朝四天，加等赐给他家助葬的车马、布帛、财物。
English: At this time, Pei Du was seventy-five years old, and Emperor Wenzong issued an edict to posthumously award him the title of Taifu, suspending his accession to the throne for four days, and granting him a carriage, horse, cloth and other belongings to help with the funeral.

古文：诏京兆尹郑复监护丧事，所须皆官给。
现代文：下诏京兆尹郑复监护料理丧事，办理丧事所需的东西，全由官府供给。
English: According to the following edict of the Beijing Zhaoyun Zhengfu, the guardianship and cooking of the funeral, and the things needed to handle the funeral, are all provided by the government.

古文：上怪度无遗表。中使问之，家人进其稿草。其旨以未定储贰为忧，言不及家事。
现代文：文宗惊讶诧异裴度没有遗表，宦官去他家询问这件事，裴度家属送上裴度遗表的草稿，它的主旨以皇帝尚未确定皇储为忧虑，没有谈及家事。
English: Wen Zong was surprised and surprised that Pei Du did not leave a will. The eunuch went to his home to inquire about the matter. Pei Du's family members sent a draft of Pei Du's will. Its main theme was that the emperor was worried that the crown prince had not yet been determined. There was no mention of family affairs.

古文：度始自书生以辞策中科选，数年之间，翔泳清切。
现代文：裴度开始由一书生凭辞章辩才、对答策问考中制科，数年之间，几经浮沉，获得清贵、接近皇帝的官职。
English: Pei Du began as a student who excelled in rhetoric and argumentation in the middle school examination. Over the years, through ups and downs, he gained a noble and close to the emperor's official position.

古文：逢时艰否，而能奋命决策，横身讨贼，为中兴宗臣。
现代文：适逢时局艰难困苦，而能奋发奏召决策机要，亲身广行讨伐逆贼，成为人们崇仰的中兴名臣。
English: When the times were tough and difficult, he was able to summon the decision-making body and personally crusade against the traitors, becoming a respected ZTE minister.

古文：当元和、长庆间，乱臣贼子，蓄锐丧气，惮度之威稜。
现代文：在宪宗元和、穆宗长庆年间，众乱臣贼子，积蓄了力量却意气衰颓，害怕的是裴度的声威。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xianzong Yuan and Emperor Mu Zong Changqing, there were many unruly vassals and thieves. They had accumulated strength, but their spirits were fading. What they feared was the influence of Pei Du.

古文：度状貌不逾中人，而风彩俊爽，占对雄辩，观听者为之耸然。
现代文：裴度身材不超过中等，但风神俊爽、文采出众，应口答对雄辩有力，观者听者为之震动。
English: Baidu's stature is no more than medium, but his demeanor is handsome, his writing is outstanding, and his eloquence is powerful. Viewers and listeners are shocked.

古文：时有奉使绝域者，四夷君长必问度之年龄几何，状貌孰似，天子用否？
现代文：当时凡有出使极远地区的使臣，东夷、南蛮、西戎、北狄的君长必定问裴度的年岁多大，形貌与谁相似，天子是否正任用他。
English: At that time, all emissaries dispatched to faraway regions, such as the rulers of Eastern Yi, Southern Manchu, Western Ryukyu, and Northern Di, must have asked Baidu how old he was, whom he resembled in appearance, and whether the Son of Heaven was appointing him.

古文：其威名播于憬俗，为华夷畏服也如此。
现代文：他的威名传扬到远方、流传于俗众，中原、异邦对他都如此畏惧钦服。
English: His prestige spread far and wide, and he was revered by the common people. The Central Plains and foreign countries feared and admired him.

古文：时威望德业，侔于郭子仪，出入中外，以身系国之安危、时之轻重者二十年。
现代文：当时的威信名望、德操功业，与郭子仪并驾齐驱。进入、调出朝廷，以他一身维系国家的安危，对时局有举足轻重的影响达二十年。
English: At that time, Guo Ziyi's prestige, reputation, and moral performance were at the same level as that of Guo Ziyi. He entered and transferred out of the imperial court, maintaining the security of the country with his own body, and had a significant impact on the current situation for twenty years.

古文：凡命将相，无贤不肖，皆推度为首，其为士君子爱重也如此。
现代文：凡是委任将相，不论贤士还是不正派的人，无不首推裴度，他被士大夫爱戴推重到如此境地。
English: Anyone who appoints a shogun, regardless of whether he is a wise man or a crook, must first promote Baidu, and he was loved and promoted to such a position by Shidafu.

古文：虽江左王导、谢安坐镇雅俗，而訏谟方略，度又过之。
现代文：即使是晋代的江左王导、谢安，在风雅之士与流俗之辈中安坐能起镇定作用，但在大的谋略上，裴度又超过了他们。
English: Even Jiangza Wangdu and Xie'an in the Jin Dynasty could calm down the elegant and vulgar people by sitting quietly, but in terms of grand strategy, Pei Du was superior to them.

