古文：自书契之兴，先哲可得而纪者，莫不备乎经传。
现代文：自从文章兴盛以来，过去的贤哲可以记述的人，没有不是记载在经传中的。
English: Since the rise of the essay, there is no one who can be described by the sages of the past who is not recorded in the scriptures.

古文：若乃选君德于列辟，观遗烈于风声，帝莫高于尧、舜，王莫显于文、武。
现代文：如果选君德于历代君主之内，观察遣烈事迹于传说之中，帝君没有高出尧、舜的，君王没有超出文、武的。
English: If the virtue of selecting emperors is among the monarchs of all times, and the deeds of dispatching martyrs are observed in legends, the emperor is not higher than the warrior, and the king is not higher than the scholar and the warrior.

古文：是以圣人祖述其道，垂文于六学；宪章其教，作范于百王。
现代文：所以圣人阐述理论，作出文章为六经的学说；规范伦理行为，用百王的模范。
English: Therefore, sages expound theories and make articles for the doctrine of the Six Classics; standardize ethical behavior, and use the model of the hundred kings.

古文：自兹以降，三微骤迁，五纪递袭，损益异术，治乱殊涂。
现代文：从那时一直往后，三代迅速变迁，日月时光不停地流失接替，损益各有不同的方式，治乱之道各不相同。
English: Since then, there have been three generations of rapid changes, the sun and the moon have been constantly lost and replaced, the losses and gains have different ways, and the ways to control the chaos are different.

古文：秦承累世之基，任刑法而殄灭；汉无尺土之业，崇经术而长久。
现代文：秦朝承嗣累世基础，刑法太酷而亡国；汉朝本来没有尺土之业，崇尚经术而得以长久。
English: The Qin Dynasty inherited the foundation of successive generations, the criminal law was too harsh and the country was destroyed; the Han Dynasty originally did not have the business of shaku-tsuchi, but it was able to last for a long time by advocating scripture.

古文：雕虫是贵，魏道所以陵夷；玄风既兴，晋纲于焉大坏。
现代文：雕虫小技被看得尊贵，魏朝政道所以衰落丧失；谈玄风气兴起，晋朝纲纪因此大坏。
English: The minor skill of carving insects was regarded as noble, so the Wei Dynasty lost its political power; the rise of the occult culture led to the rise of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：考九流之殿最，校四代之兴衰，正君臣，明贵贱，美教化，移风俗，莫尚于儒。
现代文：查考各种学术流派的高低，比较四代的兴盛衰落，正君臣名分，明确贵贱区别，崇美教化，改易风俗，没有超出儒学的。
English: Examining the highs and lows of various academic schools, comparing the four generations of prosperity and decline, correcting monarchs and subjects, clarifying the distinction between noble and humble, revering beauty and enlightenment, and changing customs, did not go beyond Confucianism.

古文：故皇王以之致刑措而反淳朴，贤达以之镂金石而雕竹素。
现代文：所以皇王用以做到不必刑律而返回到淳朴，贤达用以刻镂金石而雕清素的竹木。
English: Therefore, emperors used it to return to simplicity without the need for punishment, and sages used it to engrave gold and stone to carve pure bamboo.

古文：儒之时义大矣哉！
现代文：儒学的社会意义实在是大啊!
English: The social significance of Confucianism is really great!

古文：自有魏道消，海内版荡，彝伦攸斁，戎马生郊。
现代文：自从有魏政道消弱，海内混战，学术不盛，兵荒马乱。
English: Since the end of the Wei Dynasty, the political system has weakened, there have been naval skirmishes, academic failure, and military chaos.

古文：先王之旧章，往圣之遗训，扫地尽矣。
现代文：先王所用的旧典章经籍，以往圣人遣留下的训诫，扫地一般都没有了。
English: The old ordinances and scriptures used by the former king, as well as the exhortations left behind by the saints in the past, have generally disappeared.

古文：及太祖受命，雅好经术。
现代文：当太祖承命执朝纲，喜好儒学经术。
English: When the great-great-grandfather took it upon himself to carry out the imperial program, he was fond of Confucianism.

古文：求阙文于三古，得至理于千载，黜魏、晋之制度，复姬旦之茂典。
现代文：寻求上古佚失之文，求得千载的至理，废除魏、晋的制度，恢复姬旦的完善典章。
English: To seek the lost texts of the ancients, to seek the truth of thousands of years, to abolish the Wei and Jin systems, and to restore the perfect code of Hetan.

古文：卢景宣学通群艺，修五礼之缺；长孙绍远才称洽闻，正六乐之坏。
现代文：卢景宣学识通各门学问，将五礼所缺部分修补齐全；长孙绍远才气堪称博闻，订正六乐所受的损坏。
English: Lu Jingxuan's culture permeated the six arts and rectified the defects of the five rites; his eldest grandson, Shaoyuan, had extensive knowledge and corrected the damaged six arts.

古文：由是朝章渐备，学者向风。
现代文：因此朝廷典章制度渐渐齐备，学者相从如风。
English: As a result, imperial edicts gradually became available, and scholars read about them with longing.

古文：世宗纂历，敦尚学艺。
现代文：世宗继承尊位，崇尚学术礼仪。
English: The Sejong inherits the dignity, and advocates academic etiquette.

古文：内有崇文之观，外重成均之职。
现代文：在内设有崇文观，在外看重经学教化职任。
English: Inside, it has a lofty view of literature, and outside, it attaches importance to the duty of education and enlightenment.

古文：握素怀鈆重席解颐之士，间出于朝廷；圆冠方领执经负笈之生，着录于京邑。
现代文：才学广博可资询问解愁排难之士，常出入于朝廷；着圆冠方领装束攻读经术典籍的儒生，于京城著录记载。
English: A man of wide learning, who could ask questions to solve problems, often visited the imperial court; a Confucian scholar who studied the classics of Chinese classics, dressed in a round crown and square collar, was recorded in the records of the capital.

古文：济济焉足以踰于向时矣。
现代文：人才济济足以超出往昔。
English: There's more talent out there than ever before.

古文：洎高祖保定三年，乃下诏尊太傅燕公为三老。
现代文：到高祖保定三年，于是下韶书尊奉太傅燕公为三老。
English: Gaozhu Baoding for three years, so the lower Yanshu worshiped Tai Fu Yan Gong as the three elders.

古文：帝于是服衮冕，乘碧辂，陈文物，备礼容，清跸而临太学。
现代文：帝为此穿上皇服戴上皇冠，乘坐碧车，陈列礼文器物，备好礼仪，清道禁行而驾临太学。
English: To this end, the emperor put on the imperial robe and crown, rode a blue car, displayed ceremonial artifacts, prepared etiquette, and drove to Taigaku with a clear road.

古文：袒割以食之，奉觞以酳之。
现代文：袒衣割牲以食相供，捧着酒杯共同相饮。
English: They share food and drink with each other, holding wine glasses.

古文：斯固一世之盛事也。
现代文：造成了一世的盛事。
English: It was a once-in-a-lifetime event.

古文：其后命輶轩以致玉帛，征沉重于南荆。
现代文：其后备下重礼，将沉重从南荆征召入京。
English: The reserve, with a heavy salute, will be heavily conscripted from Nanjing to Beijing.

古文：及定山东，降至尊而劳万乘，待熊生以殊礼。
现代文：平定山东后，放下至尊的身份而以万乘之主亲身亲为，以特殊之礼相接熊生。
English: After the pacification of Shandong, he let go of his supreme status and took the Lord of the Ten Thousand Buddhas as his own, and received the birth of the bear with a special ceremony.

古文：是以天下慕向，文教远覃。
现代文：因此天下归慕向往，文教兴盛。
English: Therefore, people all over the world are envious and yearning, and the article is far-reaching in its enlightenment.

古文：衣儒者之服，挟先王之道，开黉舍延学徒者比肩；励从师之志，守专门之业，辞亲戚甘勤苦者成市。
现代文：穿儒者衣服，掌握先王之道，开学校招延学徒者多至比肩；立志从师学习，得以有专门学业，告别亲戚甘心情愿勤苦者多如市场中一样。
English: The number of people who wear Confucian clothes, master the ways of the ancestors, and open schools to recruit apprentices is almost equal; those who are determined to learn from teachers, have special studies, and say goodbye to relatives are as willing to work hard as those in the market.

古文：虽遗风盛业，不逮魏、晋之辰，而风移俗变，抑亦近代之美也。
现代文：虽然所遗风气兴盛之业，不能与魏、晋时期相比，而移风易俗，也是近代的美事。
English: Although the prosperity of the inherited customs cannot be compared with that of the Wei and Jin dynasties, the change of customs is also a beautiful thing in modern times.

古文：其儒者自有别传及终于隋之中年者，则不兼录。
现代文：其中有些儒者另有传记或终于隋之中年者，则不再撰录。
English: Among them, some Confucians have other biographies, or those who are finally middle-aged in the Sui Dynasty are no longer recorded.

古文：自余撰于此篇云。
现代文：其余在此篇中撰述。
English: The rest is described in this article.

古文：卢诞，范阳涿人也，本名恭祖。
现代文：卢诞，是范阳涿人，本名恭祖。
English: Lu Xizhi is Fan Yang Xuanren, whose real name is Gong Zu.

古文：曾祖晏，博学善隶书，有名于世。
现代文：曾祖卢晏，博学擅长隶书，有名于世。
English: Zeng Zulu Lu Wei, erudite, good at writing, famous in the world.

古文：仕燕为给事黄门侍郎、营丘成周二郡守。
现代文：仕宫于燕为给事黄门侍郎、营丘成周二郡守。
English: Shigu Yuyan was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, and Yingqiu Cheng as the county governor on Tuesday.

古文：祖寿，太子洗马。
现代文：祖父卢寿，任太子洗马。
English: His grandfather, Lu Shou, was appointed crown prince.

古文：燕灭入魏，为鲁郡守。
现代文：燕灭亡后入魏，为鲁郡守。
English: After the death of Yan, he entered Wei and became the governor of Lu County.

古文：父叔仁，年十八，州辟主簿。
现代文：父叔仁，十八岁时，州征召为主簿。
English: My father, Uncle Jin, was 18 years old when he was drafted by the state.

古文：举秀才，除员外郎。
现代文：举秀才，授员外郎。
English: Let's promote a talented person, a member of the teaching staff, Gairo.

古文：以亲老，乃辞归就养。
现代文：由于父母年老，就辞职归家奉养。
English: Due to the old age of his parents, he resigned to take care of his family.

古文：父母既殁，哀毁六年，躬营坟垄，遂有终焉之志。
现代文：父母去世，哀毁守丧六年，亲身营建坟墓，有从此不再为官的想法。
English: After the death of his parents, he mourned for six years, built his own grave, and had the idea of no longer being an official.

古文：魏景明中，被征入洛，授威远将军、武贲中郎将，非其好也。
现代文：魏景明年间，征召入洛阳，授威远将军、武贲中郎将，但他并不喜好。
English: During the next year, Wei Jing was conscripted into Luoyang, and was given the titles of General Wei Yuan and General Wu Xi Zhong Lang, but he did not like it.

古文：寻除镇远将军、通直散骑常侍，并称疾不朝。
现代文：不久授镇远将军、通直散骑常侍，都称病不到职。
English: Soon after, Zhenyuan was promoted to the rank of general, and Tsongzhizangai, a regular attendant, announced that he was ill and unable to perform his duties.

古文：乃出为幽州司马，又辞归乡里。
现代文：于是出任幽州司马，又辞归乡里。
English: As a result, he was appointed Yuzhou Sima, and then resigned to return to his hometown.

古文：当时咸称其高尚焉。
现代文：当时都称其气节高尚。
English: At that time, it was said to be noble.

古文：诞幼而通亮，博学有词彩。
现代文：卢诞幼年时便通达聪敏，博学有文采。
English: When Lu Xizhe was a child, he was very intelligent and erudite.

古文：郡辟功曹，州举秀才，不行。
现代文：郡征召为功曹，州举之为秀才，均未赴任。
English: The county conscripted him as a meritorious student, and the state promoted him as an outstanding student, but neither of them took up their posts.

古文：起家侍御史，累迁辅国将军、太中大夫、幽州别驾、北豫州都督府长史。
现代文：出仕为侍御史，屡经升迁为辅国将军、太中大夫、幽州别驾、韭豫州都督府长史。
English: He served as an attendant to the Grand Historian, and was repeatedly promoted to Assistant Provincial General, Grand Vice-Minister of Health, Governor of Yuzhou, and Governor of Yan'an.

古文：时刺史高仲密以州归朝，朝廷遣大将军李远率军赴援，诞与文武二千余人奉候大军。
现代文：当时刺史高仲密以州归附朝廷，朝廷遣大将军李远率军赴援，卢诞与文武二千多人奉迎大军。
English: At that time, Shishi Gao Zhongmi annexed Izhou to the imperial court, the imperial court dispatched General Li Yuan to lead the army to assist, and Lu Xitong and more than two thousand men and women of arms welcomed the army.

古文：以功授镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫，封固安县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：以功授镇束将军、金紫光禄大夫，封固安县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was awarded the title of General Zhenzuk, Doctor Jin Zi Guanglu, Count of Fengguan County, and 500 households of food villages.

古文：寻加散骑侍郎，拜给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久加散骑侍郎，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Sanzhiyi waiter and given the post of Huangmen waiter.

古文：魏帝诏曰： 经师易求，人师难得。
现代文：魏帝下诏称： 经师易求，人师难得。
English: Emperor Wei decreed: It is easy to ask for a teacher, but it is difficult to get one.

古文：朕诸儿稍长，欲令卿为师。 于是亲幸晋王第，敕晋王以下，皆拜之于帝前。
现代文：朕诸儿渐渐长大，欲令卿为其老师。 于是亲临晋王府第，敕令晋王以下，皆在帝面前拜其为师。
English: As my children grew up, they came to visit the palace of King Jin himself, and everyone from King Jin on down worshipped him as their teacher in front of the emperor.

古文：因赐名曰诞。
现代文：因此赐名为诞。
English: That's why it was given the name "Christmas."

古文：加征东将军、散骑常侍。
现代文：加征东将军、散骑常侍。
English: In addition, General Seiji Higashi and a samurai on horseback also appear.

古文：太祖又以诞儒宗学府，为当世所推，乃拜国子祭酒。
现代文：太祖又因为卢诞是儒学宗师，学问渊博，为当世所推崇，就任他为国子祭酒。
English: The great-grandfather also appointed Lu Guo as the son of the country because Lu Guo is the master of Confucianism, has a wealth of knowledge, and is respected by the contemporary world.

古文：进车骑大将军，仪同三司。
现代文：晋为车骑大将军，仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to General of the Cavalry and Cavalry, and promoted to the Third Division.

古文：魏恭帝二年，除秘书监。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，授秘书监。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was awarded the title of secretary superintendent.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：卢光字景仁，小字伯，范阳公辩之弟也。
现代文：卢光字景仁，小名伯，是范阳公卢辩的弟弟。
English: Lu Guang, also known as Jing Ren, was a minor nobleman and the younger brother of Fan Yang Gong Lu Yuan.

古文：性温谨，博览群书，精于三礼，善阴阳，解钟律，又好玄言。
现代文：性情温和谨慎，博览群书，精通《三礼》，善解阴阳，懂得音乐，喜好谈论玄言。
English: His temperament is mild and cautious, he is well-read, is proficient in the "Three Rites," is good at understanding yin and yang, understands music, and likes to talk about gossip.

古文：孝昌初，释褐司空府参军事，稍迁明威将军、员外侍郎。
现代文：孝昌初年，出仕任司空府参军事，逐渐迁升明威将军、员外侍郎。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he served as the Secretary of the Air Force to participate in the military, and gradually moved up to General Mingwei and the Foreign Correspondent.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，光于山东立义，遥授大都督、晋州刺史、安西将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：当魏孝武帝西迁时，卢光于山东举义，遥授大都督、晋州刺史、安西将军、银青光禄大夫。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Lu Guang was raised in Shandong, and was awarded the title of grand governor, Jinzhou chief historian, Anxi general, and Yinqing Guanglu doctor.

古文：大统六年，携家西入。
现代文：大统六年，全家迁入关西。
English: Six years after unification, the whole family moved to Kansai.

古文：太祖深礼之，除丞相府记室参军，赐爵范阳县伯。
现代文：太祖十分礼遇他，授丞相府记室参军，赐爵范阳县伯。
English: The great-grandfather treated him with great courtesy, awarding him the post of secretary of the prime minister's office for joining the army, and giving him the title of Fanyang County magistrate.

古文：俄拜行台郎中，专掌书记。
现代文：不久拜行台郎中，专掌书记。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of assistant secretary.

古文：十年，改封安息县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：十年，改封安息县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Ten years later, it was renamed Banshu County, with 500 households.

古文：迁行台右丞，出为华州长史，寻征拜将作大匠。
现代文：升为行台右丞。出朝任华州长史，不久征召授任将作大匠。
English: He rose to the position of Gangdai Ujo. He was appointed to the position of Governor of Hwaseong Province, and was soon called up to serve as Grand Craftsman.

古文：魏废帝元年，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，除京兆郡守，迁侍中。
现代文：魏废帝元年，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，授京兆郡守，迁为侍中。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the general of the cavalry and the three departments of the imperial etiquette. He was given the title of the governor of Jingzhao County and moved to the position of a chamberlain.

古文：六官建，授小匠师下大夫，进授开府仪同三司、匠师中大夫，进爵为侯，增邑五百户，转工部中大夫。
现代文：建立六官时，授小匠师下大夫，晋为开府仪同三司、匠师中大夫，晋爵为侯，增加食邑五百户，转工部中大夫。
English: When the six offices were established, small craftsmen were given the title of junior doctor, Kaifu ceremony was promoted to the third division, craftsmen were promoted to junior doctor, peerage was promoted to marquis, 500 households were added to food villages, and junior doctors were transferred to the engineering department.

古文：大司马贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，以光为长史，进爵燕郡公。
现代文：大司马贺兰祥征讨吐谷浑时，任命卢光为长史，晋爵为憨郡公。
English: The chief magistrate, Magoran Xiangzheng, appointed Lu Guang as the long history and Jinjie as the county magistrate.

古文：武成二年，诏光监营宗庙，既成，增邑四百户。
现代文：武成二年，诏令卢光监营宗庙，事成之后，增加食邑四百户。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, Lu Guang oversaw the construction of the ancestral temple, and after the event, the number of food villages increased by 400.

古文：出为虞州刺史，寻治陕州总管府长史。
现代文：外任虞州刺史，不久任陕州总管府长史。
English: He served as the outside governor of Yuzhou Province, and later as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：重论讨浑之功，增邑并前一千九百户。
现代文：再次讨论征讨吐谷运的功劳，食邑增至一千九百户。
English: The merits of the Tugun Movement were discussed again, and the number of food towns increased to nineteen hundred.

古文：天和二年卒，时年六十二。
现代文：天和二年去世，时年六十二岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of 62.

古文：高祖少时，尝受业于光，故赠赙有加恒典。
现代文：高祖年轻时曾受业于卢光，因而所赠治丧的财物超过常规。
English: Gaozu had been apprenticed to Lu Guang when he was young, so his gift of property for the funeral was more than usual.

古文：赠少傅。
现代文：追赠少傅。
English: A posthumous promotion to sous chef.

古文：谥曰简。
现代文：谧号为简。
English: Her nickname is Jane.

古文：旋光性崇佛道，至诚信敬。
现代文：卢光崇敬佛教，非常诚信。
English: Lu Guang reveres Buddhism and is very honest.

古文：尝从太祖狩于檀台山。
现代文：曾经随从太祖于檀台山狩猎。
English: He once went hunting with his great-grandfather on Mt.

古文：时猎围既合，太祖遥指山上谓群公等曰： 公等有所见不？ 
现代文：当时已经合围，太祖遥指山上对群公说： 公等看到什么吗? 
English: At that time, they were already surrounded, and the great-great-grandfather pointed to the mountains and said to the group: "Do the public see anything?

古文：咸曰： 无所见。 光独曰： 见一桑门。 
现代文：都回答说： 没看到什么。 衹有卢光说： 看到一名僧人。 
English: They all replied, "I didn't see anything." Lu Guang said, "I saw a monk."

古文：太祖曰： 是也。 即解围而还。
现代文：太祖说： 是。 即刻解围而还。
English: The great-grandfather said, "Yes, I will immediately lift the siege and return."

古文：令光于桑门立处造浮图，掘基一丈，得瓦钵、锡杖各一。
现代文：令卢光于僧人所立处建造佛塔，掘基一丈深，获得瓦钵、锡杖各一件。
English: Lu Guang built a pagoda at the place where the monks were standing, dug the foundation to a depth of one meter, and obtained a piece of corrugated iron and a tin cane.

古文：太祖称叹，因立寺焉。
现代文：太祖称叹，因此在此处建立寺院。
English: Emperor Taizu was so impressed that he decided to build a temple here.

古文：及为京兆，而郡舍先是数有妖怪，前后郡将无敢居者。
现代文：当他任京兆郡守时，郡舍此前多次有妖怪出现的传说，前后郡守无人敢在此居住。
English: When he served as the county magistrate of Jingzhao County, there were many legends of monsters appearing in the county seat, and no county magistrate dared to live here before or after.

古文：光曰： 吉凶由人，妖不妄作。 遂入居之。
现代文：卢光说： 是否吉凶原因在于人，妖怪异象不会随便出现。 于是入住此宅。
English: Lu Guang said, "Whether it is auspicious or inauspicious depends on the person, and strange phenomena will not appear randomly." So he moved into this house.

古文：未几，光所乘马忽升厅事，登床南首而立；又食器无故自破。
现代文：没过多久，卢光所乘的马突然走上大厅，登床南首而立；食器又无故自破。
English: Not long after, Lu Guang's horse suddenly walked into the hall, climbed onto the bed and stood on its head; the tableware broke for no reason.

古文：光并不以介怀。
现代文：卢光并不介意。
English: Lu Guang doesn't mind.

古文：其精诚守正如此。
现代文：他精诚守正皆如此类。
English: He's very conscientious, and that's what they're all like.

古文：撰道德经章句，行于世。
现代文：所撰《道德经章句》，流行于世。
English: His "Ethics Chapter" is popular in the world.

古文：子贲嗣。
现代文：其子卢贲继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Lu Xun.

古文：大象中，开府仪同大将军。
现代文：大象年间，任开府仪同大将军
English: During the Year of the Elephant, Ren Kaifu and the Great General

古文：沉重字德厚，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沉重字德厚，是吴兴武康人。
English: Wu Xingwu Kangren is a heavy character with a strong moral character.

古文：性聪悟，有异常童。
现代文：生性聪明有悟性，有异于平常儿童。
English: By nature, they are intelligent and insightful, which is different from ordinary children.

古文：弱岁而孤，居丧合礼。
现代文：少年丧父，居丧合于礼仪。
English: When a boy loses his father, mourning is part of the ritual.

古文：及长，专心儒学，从师不远千里，遂博览群书，尤明诗、礼及左氏春秋。
现代文：长大后，专心于儒学，不远千里寻求老师，因此能博览群书，尤其精通《诗经》、《礼记》、《左氏春秋》。
English: After growing up, he devoted himself to Confucianism and traveled thousands of miles to find a teacher. As a result, he was well-versed in books, especially in "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Rites" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo."

古文：梁大通三年，起家王国常侍。
现代文：梁朝大通三年，出仕为王国常侍。
English: Liang Chao Datong served as a royal equerry for three years.

古文：梁武帝欲高置学官，以崇儒教。
现代文：梁武帝欲提高学官地位，用以崇敬儒教。
English: Emperor Liangwu wanted to elevate the status of scholar-officials and use them to venerate Confucianism.

古文：中大通四年，乃革选，以重补国子助教。
现代文：中大通四年，于是认真选择，以沉重补国子助教。
English: After four years at junior high school, he made a conscientious choice to become a teaching assistant.

古文：大同二年，除五经博士。
现代文：大同二年，授《五经》博士。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was awarded the doctorate of "Five Classics."

古文：梁元帝之在藩也，甚叹异之。
现代文：梁元帝在藩时，对其赞叹称奇。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan admired it greatly when he was in the domain.

古文：及即位，乃遣主书何武迎重西上。
现代文：即位后，就派遣主书何武迎接沉重西上。
English: After he ascended the throne, he sent the chief scribe He Wu to meet the heavy westward.

古文：及江陵平，重乃留事梁主萧察，除中书侍郎，兼中书舍人。
现代文：当江陵平定，沉重留下任事梁主萧察，授中书侍郎，兼中书舍人。
English: When Gangneung was pacified, Xiao Zha, the leader of the Liang Clan, was left behind with a heavy burden. He was awarded the title of Junior High School Teacher's aide, and also became a Junior High School Teacher's aide.

古文：累迁员外散骑侍郎、廷尉卿，领江陵令。
现代文：屡经升迁为员外散骑侍郎、廷尉卿，领江陵令。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the positions of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, courtier, and governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：还拜通直散骑常侍、都官尚书，领羽林监。
现代文：又任通直散骑常侍、都官尚书，领羽林监。
English: He was also appointed as Tsuchida sanshiki tsuneishi, tokan shosho, and ryoue forester.

古文：察又令重于合欢殿讲周礼。
现代文：萧察又令沉重于合欢殿讲授《周礼》。
English: Xiao Zha also gave a lecture on "Weekly Rituals" at Hehuan Hall.

古文：高祖以重经明行修，乃遣宣纳上士柳裘至梁征之。
现代文：高祖以沉重明经修行有道，于是派遣宣纳上士柳裘至梁朝征召。
English: Gaozhu had the virtue of practicing the heavy Ming Dynasty sutra, so he sent an envoy to recruit the staff sergeant Liu Qiu to Liang Dynasty.

古文：仍致书曰：
现代文：并致以一封书信：
English: He also sent a letter:

古文：皇帝问梁都官尚书沉重。
现代文：皇帝问候梁朝都官尚书沉重。
English: The emperor's greetings to Liang were written in heavy script.

古文：观夫八圣六君，七情十义，殊方所以会轨，异代于是率由。
现代文：观察八位圣人六位君主，喜怒等七情忠孝等十义，各地方所以能合于相同道路，不同时代因此都能相从。
English: Observe eight saints, six monarchs, seven emotions such as joy and anger, loyalty and filial piety, and other ten meanings, so that all places can follow the same path, and different eras can follow each other.

古文：莫不趣大顺之遥涂，履中和之盛致。
现代文：没有不奔往大顺的遥远地方，行使中和的安定鼎盛。
English: There is no distant place that does not rush to Dashun, and the stability of the exercise of neutralization is at its peak.

古文：及青缃起焰，素篆从风，文逐世疏，义随运舛，大礼存于玉帛之间，至乐形于钟鼓之外。
现代文：到浅黄色绸做书衣的书卷起火焰盛行，洁素的文章随从轻风流行，文辞追逐不同时代而变化，文义随时运而不同，大礼在玉帛之中保存，最好的声乐在钟鼓乐器之外表现。
English: To the light yellow silk to make the book cover of the book roll up the flame prevails, the articles of Jie Su follow the light wind and fashion, the words chase different times and change, the meaning of the text is different at any time, the gift is preserved in the jade bowl, and the best vocal music is performed outside the bell and drum musical instruments.

古文：虽分蛇、聚纬，郁郁之辞盖阙；当涂、典午，抑抑之旨无闻。
现代文：虽然分蛇、聚纬时时更替，美好的文辞已经有所阙失；夏禹娶涂山民当涂聚集诸侯、司马氏建立晋朝，没有听闻其宗旨。
English: Although the division of snakes and the gathering of latitudes and longitudes change from time to time, the beautiful words have been lost; Xia Yu married the mountain people of Tu, gathered the princes and the Sima clan to establish the Jin Dynasty, and did not hear its purpose.

古文：有周开基，爰踪圣哲，拯苍生之已沦，补文物之将坠。
现代文：有周建立政权，上溯承嗣圣人贤哲，将沦陷的苍生加以拯救，将快要失去的文物加以补充。
English: Yu Zhou established a political power, traced the successors of saints and sages, saved the fallen sentient beings, and replenished the cultural relics that were about to be lost.

古文：天爵具修，人纪咸理。
现代文：天道都得以完备，人间政道纲纪都得到治理。
English: The heavenly way has been perfected, and the human politics, doctrines and disciplines have been governed.

古文：朕寅奉神器，恭惟宝阙。
现代文：朕在朝廷做皇帝，掌管天下海内。
English: I am the emperor in the imperial court, in charge of the country and the world.

古文：常思复礼殷周之年，迁化唐虞之世。
现代文：常常想恢复殷、周礼仪，移风化俗成为唐虞之世。
English: They often want to restore Yin and Zhou etiquette, and become the world of the Tang and Yu dynasties.

古文：惧三千尚乖于治俗，九变未协于移风。
现代文：惧怕的是三干措施还是有违于治理，九次变化不能真正成功。
English: What is feared is that the three measures are still contrary to governance, and the nine changes cannot really succeed.

古文：欲定画一之文，思杜二家之说。
现代文：想确定统一的言论思想文章，想杜绝二家的学说言论。
English: They want to establish a unified discourse of thought, and they want to eliminate the doctrinal discourse of the two families.

古文：知卿学冠儒宗，行标士则。
现代文：知道卿的学术居于儒家宗师之首，言行举止为士人的榜样。
English: It is known that his scholarship is at the top of the Confucian gurus, and his words and deeds are an example for scholars.

古文：卞宝复润于荆阴，随照更明于汉浦。
现代文：卞和宝玉又出现在荆江水畔，随侯珠再次照亮汉水河浦。
English: The Dragonfly and the Jewel appear again on the banks of the Jing River, illuminating the Han River once again.

古文：是用寤寐增劳，瞻望轸念。
现代文：所以日夜在思虑，远远瞻望心中思念。
English: Therefore, day and night, I am thinking, looking far ahead, and thinking in my heart.

古文：爰致束帛之聘，命翘车之招。
现代文：现在以微薄之礼前去聘请，命令使者前往用车相接。
English: Now, with a meager gift, go ahead and hire them, and order the emissary to go and meet them with a car.

古文：所望凤举鸿翻，俄而萃止。
现代文：所希望的是如凤凰高飞鸿雁来临，很快便可实现。
English: The hope is that if the phoenix flies high and the geese fly low, it will soon be realized.

古文：明斯隐滞，合彼异同。
现代文：将不清楚的事解答明白，将有矛盾异同的学识整理清晰。
English: Clarify and explain unclear things, and sort out contradictory and similar knowledge.

古文：上庠弗坠于微言，中经罔阙于逸义。
现代文：在学中不忽视片言只语，讲求经义不会遗漏忘记佚失的部分。
English: In learning, do not ignore the fragmentary language, pay attention to the meaning of the sutra, and do not omit or forget the lost part.

古文：近取无独善之讥，远应有兼济之美。
现代文：现在可做到没有独善的讥讽，长远而看各方面都顾及成为一件美事。
English: Now it can be done without self-righteous sarcasm, and in the long run, taking into account all aspects has become a beautiful thing.

古文：可不盛欤。
现代文：这可就相当好啊!
English: That's pretty good!

古文：昔申涪鲐背，方辞东国；公孙黄发，始造西京。
现代文：往昔著名诗人申培年老时，方才告别家乡鲁地入朝廷；儒师公孙头发都因年岁大而黄了，才到达西京长安。
English: In the past, when the famous poet Shen Pei was old, he had just bid farewell to his hometown of Ludi and entered the imperial court; the Confucian scholar's grandchildren's hair turned yellow due to their age, and they only arrived in West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：遂使道为艺基，功参治本。
现代文：因而使道成为学术文章言论思想的根基，有了基础就可溯及本源。
English: As a result, the Tao became the foundation of academic discourse and thought. Once you have a foundation, you can trace it back to its source.

古文：今者一征，谅兼其二。
现代文：现在一次征召你入朝，想必上述二者都兼有了。
English: Now that you have been called up to the imperial court for the first time, you must have both of the above qualities.

古文：若居形声而去影响，尚迷邦而忘观国，非所谓也。
现代文：如果衹有外形的声气而失去出现的响应，衹是沉迷于家乡之邦却忘记国家，是不可取的。
English: It is not advisable to indulge in one's home country while forgetting the country, if one has the appearance of tone and loses the response.

古文：又敕襄州总管、卫公直敦喻遣之，在途供给，务从优厚。
现代文：又敕令襄州总管、卫公宇文直敦谕遣送上路，途中的供给，务必优厚。
English: He also ordered the chief administrator of Xiangzhou, Wei Gong Uwen, to send them on their way, and the supplies on the way must be good.

古文：保定末，重至于京师。
现代文：保定末年，沉重到达京师。
English: In the last years of Baoding, he arrived in Beijing with a heavy heart.

古文：诏令讨论五经，并校定钟律。
现代文：韶令讨论《五经》，校定音律。
English: The imperial edict discussed the "Five Classics" and calibrated the music.

古文：天和中，复于紫极殿讲三教义。
现代文：天和年间，又于紫极殿讲授三教义。
English: During the years of Heaven and Earth, he also taught the Three Teachings in the Hall of the Purple God.

古文：朝士、儒生、桑门、道士至者二千余人。
现代文：朝士、儒生、僧人、道士有二千多人听讲。
English: More than two thousand morning warriors, Confucianists, monks and Taoists came to listen to the lecture.

古文：重辞义优洽，枢机明辩，凡所解释，咸为诸儒所推。
现代文：沉重言辞理义优洽，枢机明辩，所有的解释，都为各位儒生所推许。
English: Heavy rhetoric, rationality and excellence, cardinal arguments, all explanations are recommended by Confucian scholars.

古文：六年，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、露门博士。
现代文：六年，授予骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、露门博士。
English: In six years, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the title of Lumen Doctor.

古文：仍于露门馆为皇太子讲论。
现代文：于是于露门馆为皇太子讲学。
English: So he began lecturing for the Crown Prince at the Lumen Hall.

古文：建德末，重自以入朝既久，且年过时制，表请还梁。
现代文：建德末年，沉重认为自己入朝已经很长时间了，而且年纪已超过了当时的制度，上表请求回梁朝。
English: In the last years of Jiande's life, he thought that it had been a long time since he had entered the court, and he was older than the system at that time. He requested to return to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：高祖优诏答之曰： 开府汉南杞梓，每轸虚衿；江东竹箭，亟疲延首。
现代文：高祖优诏回答说： 开府是漠南的良材，故常在车的横木上虚设青衿；江东的竹箭，伸脖子眺望已很疲倦。
English: Gao Zu You Zhao replied: Kaifu is a good material in the south of the desert, so it is often placed on the crossbar of the car; the bamboo arrows in the east of the river, stretching his neck to look out is very tired.

古文：故束帛聘申，蒲轮征伏。
现代文：所以备礼物聘请申生，用安称的车子征召伏生。
English: Therefore, prepare a gift to hire the applicant, and use the safe car to recruit the candidate.

古文：加以梁朝旧齿，结绶三世，沐浴荣光，祗承宠渥，不忘恋本，深足嘉尚。
现代文：加以本是梁朝的旧臣，前后三世在朝任官，沐浴荣崇光耀，受到宠信重用，没有忘记怀念根本，确实是要加以嘉奖崇尚的。
English: He was an old vassal of the Liang Dynasty, and was the third generation to hold a post in the dynasty. He was showered with honor, revered and glorified. He was favored and used. He did not forget to cherish the fundamentals. He really should be commended and revered.

古文：而楚材晋用，岂无先哲。
现代文：但是楚地之材为晋所利用，岂会没有先例。
English: However, there is no precedent for Chu Di's timber to be used by Jin.

古文：方事求贤，义乖来肃。 重固请，乃许焉。
现代文：现在朕正谋求贤才，于义不要来要求走。 沉重坚决请求，才允许。
English: Now I am in search of a wise man, do not come to me with a request for justice, but with a request for permission.

古文：遣小司门上士杨送之。
现代文：派遣小司门上士杨汪送沉重回梁朝。
English: Dispatch the small gate officer Yang Wang to send the heavy load back to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：梁主萧岿拜重散骑常侍、太常卿。
现代文：梁主萧归拜沉重为散骑常侍、太常卿。
English: Liang Lord Xiao Guibai was a heavy horse rider, a regular attendant, and a regular minister.

古文：大象二年，来朝京师。
现代文：大象二年，来朝京师。
English: Elephants are two years old and come to Kyoto to train.

古文：开皇三年，卒，年八十四。
现代文：开皇三年，去世，时年八十四岁。
English: He died three years after becoming emperor, at the age of eighty-four.

古文：隋文帝遣舍人萧子宝祭以少牢，赠使持节、上开府仪同三司、许州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝遣舍人萧子宝祭以少牢，追赠使持节、上开府仪同三司、许州刺史。
English: Emperor Sui Wen sent Xiao Zi's treasure festival to Shao Jiao, posthumously gave him Jizhi Festival, Shang Kaifu Ceremony with three divisions, and Xu Zhou stabbing history.

古文：重学业该博，为当世儒宗。
现代文：沉重学业广博，为当世儒学宗师。
English: He studied hard and extensively, and is the current master of Confucianism.

古文：至于阴阳图纬，道经释典，靡不毕综。
现代文：有关阴阳圆纬、道教佛教的经典掌故，全都熟悉。
English: They are all familiar with the classic palmistry of yin and yang, and Taoism and Buddhism.

古文：又多所撰述，咸得其指要。
现代文：撰述很多，都能得其指要。
English: There is a lot to write about, and you can get the gist of it.

古文：其行于世者，周礼义三十一卷、仪礼义三十五卷、礼记义三十卷、毛诗义二十八卷、丧服经义五卷、周礼音一卷、仪礼音一卷、礼记音二卷、毛诗音二卷。
现代文：流行于世的著作，为《周礼义》三十一卷、《仪礼义》三十五卷、《礼记义》三十卷、《毛诗义》二十八卷、《丧服经义》五卷、《周礼音》一卷、《仪礼音》一卷、《礼记音》二卷、《毛诗音》二卷。
English: The most popular works in the world are "Chou Li Yi" 31 volumes, "Ri Li Yi" 35 volumes, "Ri Ji Yi" 30 volumes, "Mao Shi Yi" 28 volumes, "Shu Fu Jing Yi" 5 volumes, "Chou Li Yin" 1 volume, "Ri Li Yin" 1 volume, "Ri Ji Yin" 2 volumes, "Mao Shi Yin" 2 volumes.

古文：樊深字文深，河东猗氏人也。
现代文：樊深字文深，是河东猗氏人。
English: 深字文深, is a member of the Eastern Min clan.

古文：早丧母，事继母甚谨。
现代文：早年丧母，侍候继母十分孝顺谨慎。
English: His mother died at an early age, and he was very dutiful and careful in waiting for his stepmother.

古文：弱冠好学，负书从师于三河，讲习五经，昼夜不倦。
现代文：弱冠之年喜好学习，背负书籍从师于三河，讲议研习《五经》，日日夜夜不知疲倦。
English: In his twilight years, he loved to study. He carried books on his back to study with his teachers in Sanhe, lectured and studied the Five Classics, and never tired day and night.

古文：魏永安中，随军征讨，以功除荡寇将军，累迁伏波、征虏将军，中散大夫。
现代文：魏永安年间，随军征讨，以功任荡寇将军，数次升迁为伏波、征虏将军，中散大夫。
English: During the Wei and Yong'an dynasties, he went along with the army to collect taxes, and was promoted several times to the general of Fubo, the general of conscription, and the doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：尝读书见吾丘子，遂归侍养。
现代文：曾经于读书时读到吾丘子，因而归家侍候奉养父母。
English: He once read about my father when he was a student, so he returned home to serve his foster parents.

古文：魏孝武西迁，樊、王二姓举义，为东魏所诛。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，樊、王二姓举义，被东魏诛杀。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty moved to the West, and his son, Wang Er, surnamed Qiu Yi, was killed by the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：深父保周、叔父欢周并被害。
现代文：樊深父保周、叔父欢周都被杀害。
English: His father, Baozhou, and uncle, Huanzhou, were both killed.

古文：深因避难，坠崖伤足，绝食再宿。
现代文：樊深因为避难，坠落山崖跌伤脚，两天没吃饭。
English: Because of taking refuge, Gong Sheng fell down the cliff and hurt his foot. He did not eat for two days.

古文：于后遇得一箪饼，欲食之；然念继母年老患痹，或免虏掠，乃弗食。
现代文：后得到一箪饼，本想食之；但想到继母年老身患痹症，可能没有遇难，因而不吃。
English: Afterward, he was given a loaf of bread, which he wanted to eat, but he did not eat it because he thought that his stepmother, who was old and suffered from polio, might not have been killed.

古文：夜中匍匐寻母，偶得相见，因以馈母。
现代文：夜晚匍匐寻找继母，得以相见，将食物给继母。
English: At night, the baboon searches for its stepmother, meets her, and gives her food.

古文：还复遁去，改易姓名，游学于汾、晋之间，习天文及算历之术。
现代文：然后悄悄离开家乡，改易姓名，于汾、晋地区游学，学习天文及数学历法之术。
English: Then he quietly left his hometown, changed his name, and traveled to the regions of Min and Jin to study astronomy and the art of the mathematical calendar.

古文：后为人所告，囚送河东。
现代文：后来被人所告，囚送至眯。
English: Later, he was accused by someone and sent to Shandong Province.

古文：属魏将韩轨长史张曜重其儒学，延深至家，因是更得逃隐。
现代文：正好球将韩轨长史张曜器重他儒学有成，将樊深带回家中，得以免去祸害。
English: Just at the right time, the ball took the Korean track long history Zhang Youki to his successful Confucianism, and brought Zou Sheng home, so as to avoid the scourge.

古文：太祖平河东，赠保周南郢州刺史，欢周仪同三司。
现代文：太祖平定河东，追赠保周南郢州刺史，欢周仪同三司。
English: The great-great-grandfather pacified the eastern part of Hedong, and posthumously awarded Baozhunan, Zhangzhou, Zhizhuang, Huanchou and Sanji.

古文：深归葬其父，负土成坟。
现代文：樊深归家安葬其父，亲身背着泥土建成坟墓。
English: Zou Sheng returned home to bury his father, personally carrying the soil to build a grave.

古文：寻而于谨引为其府参军，令在馆教授子孙。
现代文：不久于谨任其为府参军，令其在馆中教授子孙。
English: Soon after, he was allowed to join the army and taught his children and grandchildren at the museum.

古文：除抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，迁开府属，转从事中郎。
现代文：授抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，迁任开府属，转任从事中郎。
English: He was assigned to be a general of the imperial tutelage army and a doctor of the silver Qingguanglu. He was transferred to be a subordinate of the Kaifu, and then he was assigned to be a middle-ranking official.

古文：谨拜司空，以深为谘议。
现代文：于谨被任为司空，以樊深为谘议。
English: I am honored to be appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, and to consult with the Navy.

古文：大统十五年，行下邽县事。
现代文：大统十五年，代理下邦县事。
English: In the 15th year of the Great Reunification, he acted as the deputy of the lower state and county affairs.

古文：太祖置学东馆，教诸将子弟，以深为博士。
现代文：太祖置束馆设学校，教授诸将子弟，任樊深为博士。
English: The great-great-grandfather set up a school in Jishu Pavilion to teach the sons and daughters of generals, and appointed Yu Sheng as a doctor.

古文：深经学通赡，每解书，尝多引汉、魏以来诸家义而说之。
现代文：樊深精通经学，讲解经书时，经常引用汉、魏以来各家学说。
English: Gong Sheng was well versed in the study of scripture, and when explaining scriptures, he often quoted the teachings of various schools since Han and Wei.

古文：故后生听其言者，不能晓悟。
现代文：所以听讲的学生，不能理解。
English: Therefore, students who listen to lectures cannot understand them.

古文：皆背而讥之曰： 樊生讲书多门户，不可解。 然儒者推其博物。
现代文：背后都讥讽他： 樊生讲书所引门户太多，不可理解。 但是儒生都推许他学识渊博。
English: Behind his back, they all ridiculed him: "There are too many portals led by his lectures, which are incomprehensible," but the Confucians all praised him for his profound knowledge.

古文：性好学，老而不怠。
现代文：其性情喜好学习，到老也不懈怠。
English: His disposition likes to study, and he will not slack off until he is old.

古文：朝暮还往，常据鞍读书，至马惊坠地，损折支体，终亦不改。
现代文：早晚来往，骑在马上也读书不停，以至于马惊而坠地，手脚都摔折了，但最终还是没有改变这种习性。
English: He commuted to and from work in the morning and evening, and read books while riding his horse, so much so that the horse fell to the ground in shock, breaking both hands and feet, but in the end he did not change this habit.

古文：后除国子博士，赐姓万纽于氏。
现代文：后来授国子博士，赐姓万纽于氏。
English: He was later awarded the title of Kuniko hakase and given the family name of Mannyuu.

古文：六官建，拜大学助教，迁博士，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：建立六官，拜任太学助教，迁任博士，加车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The establishment of six officials, the appointment of assistant professor, the appointment of doctor, the addition of the general of the cavalry, and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：天和二年，迁县伯中大夫，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：天和二年，迁任县伯中大夫，加开府仪同三司。
English: In 1902, he was transferred to the post of the county's chief doctor, and was also appointed to the Kaifu Ceremonial Office and the Third Division.

古文：建德元年，表乞骸骨，诏许之。
现代文：建德元年，上表请求退休，韶书允许。
English: In the first year of Jiande, the above table requested retirement, with permission.

古文：朝廷有疑议，常召问焉。
现代文：朝廷有疑问的事情，经常召他来询问。
English: The court often called him in for questioning when there was a doubt.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：深既专经，又读诸史及苍雅、篆籀、阴阳、卜筮之书。
现代文：樊深既专于经书，又熟悉诸史及《苍》《雅》、篆籀、阴阳、卜筮之书。
English: Yan Shen is not only specialized in scriptures, but also familiar with histories and the books of "Clouds," "Beauty," Yin and Yang, and Divination.

古文：学虽博赡，讷于辞辩，故不为当时所称。
现代文：所学虽然广博，但言辞辩解较差，所以当时人不加以称赞。
English: Although his learning was wide-ranging, he was a poor rhetorical debater, so people did not praise him at the time.

古文：撰孝经、丧服问疑各一卷，撰七经异同说三卷、义略论并录三十一卷，并行于世。
现代文：撰有《孝经》、《丧服问疑》各一卷。另撰《七经异同说》三卷、《义纲略论》并《目录》三十一卷，都流行于世。
English: He wrote "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "Questions and Answers on Mourning Clothes" in one volume each, as well as "The Seven Sutras" in three volumes, "Summary of the Doctrine" and "Catalogue" in thirty-one volumes, all of which are popular in the world.

古文：熊安生字植之，长乐阜城人也。
现代文：熊安生字植之，是长乐阜城人。
English: Xiong An Sheng Zi Zhi is a native of Fufu City, Changle Province.

古文：少好学，励精不倦。
现代文：年少好学，勤奋不知疲倦。
English: Since childhood, he has loved to learn, and has been tireless in his efforts to keep his spirits up.

古文：初从陈达受三传，又从房虬受周礼，并通大义。
现代文：最初随从陈达学习《三传》，后又跟从房虬学习《周礼》，都能通晓其大义。
English: At first, I studied "Three Traditions" with Chen Da, and later I studied "Weekly Rituals" with Fong Yao, and I was able to understand its great meaning.

古文：后事徐遵明，服膺历年。
现代文：此后师事徐遵明，经历多年。
English: After that, he studied under Xu Zunming for many years.

古文：东魏天平中，受礼于李宝鼎。遂博通五经。
现代文：东魏天平年间，跟随奎宣叠学《礼记》。于是博通《五经》。
English: During the period of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he followed Kuixuan to study the "Rituals" and then read the "Five Classics."

古文：然专以三礼教授。
现代文：但是专以《三礼》教授学生。
English: However, he teaches students exclusively with the "Three Rites."

古文：弟子自远方至者，千余人。
现代文：从远方来的弟子，有一千多人。
English: There are more than a thousand disciples who have come from afar.

古文：乃讨论图纬，捃摭异闻，先儒所未悟者，皆发明之。
现代文：讨论图纬，采集异闻，前代儒师未解悟出来的，皆一一解释明白。
English: Discussing theories, collecting anecdotes, and explaining what the previous generation of Confucian scholars did not understand are all understandable.

古文：齐河清中，阳休之特奏为国子博士。
现代文：齐朝河清年间，阳休之特意奏请为国子博士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu Chenghe in the Qing Dynasty, Yang Xiu specially invited Xiong An Sheng to become a national doctor.

古文：时朝廷既行周礼，公卿以下多习其业，有宿疑礩滞者数十条，皆莫能详辨。
现代文：当时朝廷实行《周礼》，公卿以下都习练此一门学问，有数十条疑问，都得不到详细的辩解。
English: At that time, the imperial court implemented the "weekly etiquette," and the court nobles and below all practiced this discipline. There were dozens of questions, but none of them could be explained in detail.

古文：天和三年，齐请通好，兵部尹公正使焉。
现代文：天和三年，齐朝请求通好，周派遣兵部尹公正为使臣。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, Zhou dispatched the commander of the military department, Yin Zheng, as an envoy at the request of Qi.

古文：与齐人语及周礼，齐人不能对。
现代文：与齐人谈论到《周礼》，齐人无从作答。
English: When discussing "Zhou Li" with Qi people, Qi people are unable to answer.

古文：乃令安生至宾馆与公正言。
现代文：乃令安生至宾馆与公正相对。
English: Ordering him to the hotel was contrary to justice.

古文：公正有口辩，安生语所未至者，便撮机要而骤问之。
现代文：公正辩才很好，安生语所未至，他便挑出核心问题而追问。
English: Yin Zhengyi is a good debater. Whenever Xiong An Sheng says something he doesn't know, he suddenly asks Xiong An Sheng a key question.

古文：安生曰： 礼义弘深，自有条贯。
现代文：安生说： 礼义弘深，自有条理。
English: Anson said, "His courtesy and loyalty are profound, and he is self-organized.

古文：必欲升堂睹奥，宁可汩其先后。
现代文：如果一定要探深奥所在，就不必以其先后。
English: If you must plumb the depths, you don't have to do it sequentially.

古文：但能留意，当为次第陈之。 公正于是具问所疑，安生皆为一一演说，咸究其根本。
现代文：如果你有心有意的话，当一一为你陈述。 公正于是提出各种疑问，安生一一为他解说，全都寻根究底。
English: If you are interested, I will explain it to you one by one.Fairness then raised all kinds of questions, and Anson explained it to him one by one, all to get to the bottom of it.

古文：公正深所嗟服，还，具言之于高祖。
现代文：公正深深嗟服，返回之后全都告知高祖。
English: He was deeply impressed by the fairness and told Gao Zu everything after he returned.

古文：高祖大钦重之。
现代文：高祖十分钦佩敬重。
English: Gaozu is greatly admired and respected.

古文：及高祖入邺，安生遽令扫门。
现代文：当高祖入邺时，安生立即令人清扫门庭。
English: When Gao Zu entered the palace, An Sheng immediately ordered the courtyard to be cleaned.

古文：家人怪而问之,安生曰： 周帝重道尊儒，必将见我矣。 俄而高祖幸其第，诏不听拜，亲执其手，引与同坐。
现代文：家人觉得奇怪而问他，安生说： 周帝重道尊儒，肯定要和我相见的。 很快高祖便临幸其宅第，下诏不必拜见，亲自握住其手，共同相坐。
English: His family thought it was strange and asked him about it. Anson said, "The Zhou Emperor is a great admirer of Confucianism, and he definitely wants to meet with me. Soon Gao Zu went to Gao Zu's house. He did not have to visit Gao Zu, but he personally shook his hand and they sat together.

古文：谓之曰： 朕未能去兵，以此为愧。 
现代文：对他说： 朕未能消除战争，以此而惭愧。 
English: I am ashamed that I have not been able to eliminate war.

古文：安生曰： 黄帝尚有阪泉之战，况陛下龚行天罚乎。 高祖又曰： 齐氏赋役繁兴，竭民财力。
现代文：安生说： 黄帝尚且有阪泉之战，何况陛下所行的是天罚。 高祖又说： 齐氏赋税劳役苛重，民众竭尽财力。
English: Ansheng said: The Yellow Emperor still had the Battle of Hanquan, and what's more, what His Majesty did was Heaven's punishment. Gao Zu also said: The Qi clan imposed heavy taxes and labor, and the people exhausted their financial resources.

古文：朕救焚拯溺，思革其弊。
现代文：朕救民于水火，想革除其弊端。
English: I have rescued people from hardship and want to eliminate its drawbacks.

古文：欲以府库及三台杂物散之百姓，公以为何如？ 安生曰： 昔武王克商，散鹿台之财，发钜桥之粟。
现代文：欲以府库及三台杂物散发给百姓，公以为这样做好吗? 安生说： 往昔武王平定商朝，散鹿台之财，发钜桥之粟。
English: He wants to use the prefectural treasury and three units of miscellaneous goods to distribute to the people, does the public think this is a good idea? Ansheng said: In the past, King Wu conquered the Shang Dynasty, scattered the wealth of Deer Terrace, and sent the poppies of Liaoqiao.

古文：陛下此诏，异代同美。 高祖又曰： 朕何如武王？ 
现代文：陛下这一诏书，不同时代却同为美事。 高祖又问他说： 朕和武王相比怎样评价? 
English: His Majesty, this edict, although issued in different eras, is still a beautiful thing. Gaozu also asked him, "How do you evaluate me compared to King Wu?"

古文：安生曰： 武王伐纣，县首白旗；陛下平齐，兵不血刃。
现代文：安生说： 武王征伐纣王，悬首白旗；陛下平定齐朝，兵不血刃。
English: Anson said: King Wu subdued King Zhaozhou and hoisted a white flag; His Majesty subdued the Qi Dynasty without bloodshed.

古文：愚谓圣略为优。 高祖大悦，赐帛三百匹、米三百石、宅一区，并赐象笏及九环金带，自余什物称是。
现代文：愚下认为圣上策略为优。 高祖十分高兴，赐给三百匹帛、三百石米、一座宅院，另赐象笏及九环金带，其他物品与之相称。
English: Gaozu was very pleased and gave him three hundred horses and mules, three hundred koku meters of rice, a mansion, an elephant shackle and a nine-ring gold belt, and other items to match.

古文：又诏所司给安车驷马，随驾入朝，并敕所在供给。
现代文：又诏令主管部门给予安车驷马，随驾入朝，敕令所到的地方好好招待。
English: He also ordered the competent authorities to give him a horse-drawn carriage to drive into the morning and invite him to the place where the order came from.

古文：至京，敕令于大乘佛寺参议五礼。
现代文：到达京城，敕令于大乘佛寺参议五礼。
English: Arriving in the capital, the Emperor ordered five prostrations at the Great Buddha Temple.

古文：宣政元年，拜露门学博士、下大夫，其时年已八十余。
现代文：宣政元年，任为露门学博士、下大夫，其时已经八十余岁。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he was appointed Doctor of Lumen Science and Junior Doctor. At that time, he was already more than eighty years old.

古文：寻致仕，卒于家。
现代文：不久离职退休，在家去世。
English: He soon retired and died at home.

古文：安生既学为儒宗，当时受其业擅名于后者，有马荣伯、张黑奴、窦士荣、孔笼、刘焯、刘炫等，皆其门人焉。
现代文：安生为儒学宗师，当时从其受业而后世有名者，有马荣伯、张黑奴、窦士荣、子笼、刘焯、刘煌等人，都是其门人弟子。
English: An Sheng was the master of Confucianism. At that time, Ma Rongbo, Zhang Hei Niu, Dou Shirong, Zige, Liu Ye, Liu Huang, and others, who became famous in later generations from their studies, were his disciples.

古文：所撰周礼义疏二十卷、礼记义疏四十卷、孝经义疏一卷，并行于世。
现代文：所撰《周礼义疏》二十卷、《礼记义疏》四十卷、《孝经义疏》一卷，都流行于世。
English: The 20 volumes of "Zhou Li Yi Shu," 40 volumes of "Li Ji Yi Shu" and 1 volume of "Xiao Jing Yi Shu" are all popular in the world.

古文：乐逊字遵贤，河东猗氏人也。
现代文：乐逊字遵贤，是河东猗氏人。
English: Le Xun Zi Zun Xian is a member of the Dongluo clan.

古文：年在幼童，便有成人之操。
现代文：幼童之时，已有成人的操守。
English: When you are a child, you already have the manners of an adult.

古文：弱冠，为郡主簿。
现代文：刚成年，任郡主簿。
English: He had just come of age when he was appointed as the chief steward of the county.

古文：魏正光中，闻硕儒徐遵明领徒赵、魏，乃就学孝经、丧服、论语、诗、书、礼、易、左氏春秋大义。
现代文：魏正光年问，闻知著名儒学大师徐遵明于赵、魏领徒，因而从之学《孝经》、《丧服》、《论语》、《诗经》、《尚书》、《礼记》、《易经》、《左氏春秋》大义。
English: Wei Zhengguang learned about the famous Confucian master Xu Zunming from Zhao and Wei Lintong, and thus learned from him the "Filial Piety Sutra," "Funeral Robe," "Analects," "Book of Poetry," "Book of Etiquette," "Book of Rites," "Book of Changes" and "The Spring and Autumn of the Zuo Dynasty."

古文：寻而山东寇乱，学者散逸，逊于扰攘之中，犹志道不倦。
现代文：不久山东出现动乱，学者散逸，乐逊在动乱之中，却不失其志，不倦于其道。
English: Soon after, there was turmoil in Shandong, scholars scattered, musicians were in turmoil, but they did not lose their will and did not get tired of their way.

古文：永安中，释褐安西府长流参军。
现代文：永安年间，出仕任安西府长流参军。
English: During the Yongan era, he served as the Anxi prefectural governor and joined the army.

古文：大统七年，除子都督。
现代文：大统七年，授子都督。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Reunification, a son was given the title of governor-general.

古文：九年，太尉李弼请逊教授诸子。既而太祖盛选贤良，授以守令。
现代文：九年，太尉李弼请乐逊教授诸子不久太祖选定贤良，授任为守令。
English: In the ninth year, Lieutenant Li Yan asked the sons of Professor Lexon to select a virtuous person for the soon-to-be-great-grandfather and appointed him as a guard.

古文：相府户曹柳敏、行台郎中卢光、河东郡丞辛粲相继举逊，称有牧民之才。
现代文：相府户曹柳敏、行台郎中卢光、河东郡丞辛粲相继推举乐逊，称其有治理社会民众的行政之才。
English: Cao Liu Min, the governor of the neighboring prefectures, Lu Guang, the governor of Xingtai, and Xin Yao, the governor of Hedong County, successively nominated Le Xun, saying that he had the administrative ability to govern the people of the society.

古文：弼请留不遣。
现代文：李弼请求留用而不遣回。
English: Li Yao requested to be retained and not sent back.

古文：十六年，加授建忠将军、左中郎将，迁辅国将军、中散大夫、都督，历弼府西合祭酒、功曹谘议参军。
现代文：十六年，加授建忠将军、左中郎将，迁任辅国将军、中散大夫、都督，历任李弼府西合祭酒、功曹谘议参军。
English: In the 16th year, General Jianzhong and General Zuozhongro were conferred, and the posts of General of the Auxiliary Province, Dr. Zhongshan, and Governor of the Capital were transferred, and the successors of the Xigao Festival Wine and the Gong Cao were consulted to join the army.

古文：魏废帝二年，太祖召逊教授诸子。
现代文：魏废帝二年，太祖征召乐逊教授诸子。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's dethronement, Emperor Taizu conscripted the sons of the professor, Le Xun.

古文：在馆六年，与诸儒分授经业。
现代文：在馆六年，与诸儒分别讲授经学。
English: During his six years at the museum, he taught the study of scripture separately from other Confucian scholars.

古文：逊讲孝经、论语、毛诗及服虔所注春秋左氏传。
现代文：乐逊讲授《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》及服虔所注《春秋左氏传》。
English: Raksun teaches "The Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects of Confucius," "Mao Poetry" and "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi."

古文：魏恭帝二年，授太学助教。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，授太学助教。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei's reign, he became an assistant teacher at the Imperial Academy of Sciences.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，以逊有理务材，除秋官府上士。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，以乐逊有处理政务之才，授秋官府上士。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne, and with his ability to handle government affairs, he was awarded the title of shangguanfu sheriff.

古文：其年，治太学博士，转治小师氏下大夫。
现代文：其年，任为太学博士，转任为小师氏下大夫。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as a Doctor of Taihaku, and later as a Junior Doctor.

古文：自谯王俭以下，并束修行弟子之礼。
现代文：自谯王宇文俭以下，全都以束脩敬师行弟子之礼。
English: From Wang Yu to Wen Jian, all of them paid homage to their teachers.

古文：逊以经术教授，甚有训导之方。
现代文：乐逊教授以经术，训导十分有方。
English: Professor Laksun is very skillful in his teachings.

古文：及卫公直镇蒲州，以逊为直府主簿，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：当卫公宇文直镇守蒲州时，以乐逊为宇文直府主簿，加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: When Wei Gong Uwen Zhi Zhen was guarding Puzhou, he used Lexon as the main book of Uwen Zhi Zhen, as well as the general of the cavalry and the doctor of the left light.

古文：武成元年六月，以霖雨经时，诏百官上封事。
现代文：武成元年六月，因为大雨连绵经久不停，下韶百官上书议事。
English: In June of the first year of Wucheng, because of the continuous heavy rain, hundreds of officials came to the meeting.

古文：逊陈时宜一十四条，其五条切于政要。
现代文：乐逊陈述与时政有关的意见十四条，其中五条舆重要政策密切相关。
English: There are 14 opinions related to current affairs, of which five are closely related to important public policies.

古文：其一，崇治方，曰：窃惟今之在官者，多求清身克济，不至惠民爱物。
现代文：其一，看重治理的方式，说道：我看现在任官的人，大多衹求自身清廉有所成就，不去想给人民恩惠爱护百姓。
English: On the one hand, he valued the way of governance, saying, "I see that most of the people who are currently in office are seeking their own integrity and achievements, and do not want to give favors to the people and care for the people.

古文：何者？
现代文：为何如此?
English: Why is that?

古文：比来守令年期既促，岁责有成。
现代文：近年来守令任职期短促，每年都要督责他们做出业绩。
English: In recent years, the tenure of the guards has been short, and they are required to supervise their performance every year.

古文：盖谓猛济为贤，未甚优养。
现代文：以刚猛治政的是好官吏，对百姓则不讲宽容养护。
English: Those who govern with firmness are good officials, while those who do not show tolerance and care for the people are not.

古文：此政既代，后者复然。
现代文：这一任官员既然如此，后来者也是一样。
English: If that is the case with this official, it is also the case with subsequent ones.

古文：夫政之于民，过急则刻薄，伤缓则弛慢。
现代文：行政对于民众来说，过急就是苛刻，放任自由就会无从管理。
English: As far as the public is concerned, an administration that is too hasty will be harsh, and one that is too permissive will not be able to manage.

古文：是以周失舒缓，秦败急酷。
现代文：因此周朝的失误是舒缓，秦朝的败亡因急酷。
English: Therefore, the mistakes of the Zhou Dynasty were mitigated, while the defeat of the Qin Dynasty was precipitous.

古文：民非赤子，当以赤子遇之。
现代文：百姓不是刚生下的婴儿，还是应当作为赤子来对待。
English: People are not newborn babies, they should still be treated as babies.

古文：宜在舒疾得衷，不使劳扰。
现代文：适宜的是宽松和紧急适中，不使百姓过于劳苦烦扰。
English: What is appropriate is a loose and moderate emergency, so as not to make the people work too hard.

古文：顷承魏之衰政，人习逋违。
现代文：如今承受魏朝的衰政，人们习惯了不遵守政令。
English: Now, having suffered the decadence of the Wei Dynasty, people have become accustomed to disobeying government orders.

古文：先王朝宪备行，民咸识法。
现代文：先王朝政法规都齐备，民众都识知法规。
English: The previous dynasties had complete laws and regulations, and the people were familiar with the laws and regulations.

古文：但可宣风正俗，纳民轨训而已。
现代文：衹要宣行风气矫正民俗，将人民纳入正轨训导就可以了。
English: It is enough to promote the rectification of folk customs and bring the people onto the right track.

古文：自非军旅之中，何用过为迫切。
现代文：又不是军旅时期，何必使用太过分迫切的政令。
English: It's not a time of war, so why use an overly urgent decree?

古文：至于兴邦致治，事由德教，渐以成之，非在仓卒。
现代文：至于振兴邦国达到治理良好，这事应从道德教化入手，逐渐形成，不是仓促间可成的。
English: As for the revitalization of the state to achieve good governance, this should start with moral education and gradually take shape, not in a hurry.

古文：窃谓姬周盛德，治兴文、武，政穆成、康。
现代文：私下想到姬周的盛德，文、武时治理良好而国家兴盛，成、康时为政温和而社会安宁。
English: Privately, I thought of Ji Zhou's Shengde, Wen and Wu when the governance was good and the country flourished, and Cheng and Kang when the government was moderate and the society was peaceful.

古文：自斯厥后，不能无事。
现代文：自此以后，不会不出现事件。
English: Since then, there has been no shortage of incidents.

古文：昔申侯将奔，楚子诲之曰 无适小国 。
现代文：往昔申侯准备奔逃，楚子教诲他说 不要去小国 。
English: In the past, when Shen Hou was preparing to flee, Chu Zi warned him not to go to a small country.

古文：言以政狭法峻，将不汝容。
现代文：此言是说小国治政急迫法制酷峻，难以相容。
English: This is to say that the small country's governance is urgent and the legal system is harsh, which is incompatible.

古文：敬仲入齐，称曰 幸若获宥，及于宽政 。
现代文：敬仲进入齐国，称赞说 幸好获得宽宥，得处于宽政之下 。
English: When Jingzhong entered Qi, he praised that he was fortunate to be pardoned and to be under the benevolent government.

古文：然关东诸州，沦陷日久，人在涂炭，当慕息肩。
现代文：然而关东各个州，沦陷时间太长，人民生活艰辛，想求得休息生养。
English: However, the Kanto states had been occupied for too long, and the people were living a hard life and wanted to rest and recuperate.

古文：若不布政优优，闻诸境外，将何以使彼劳民，归就乐土。
现代文：如果不颁布好政策行使仁政，使境外知闻，怎么能够使这些劳苦人民，回归快乐的家园。
English: If we do not promulgate good policies, exercise benevolent governance, and make them known abroad, how can we make these hard-working people return to their happy homes?

古文：其二，省造作，曰：顷者魏都洛阳，一时殷盛，贵势之家，各营第宅，车服器玩，皆尚奢靡。
现代文：其二，减少各种建造，说道：一段时期魏朝首都洛阳，一时繁荣兴盛，权豪贵势之家，纷纷营造第宅，车辆服装用器摆设，都追求奢侈豪华。
English: Second, reduce all kinds of construction, he said: Luoyang, the capital of the Wei Dynasty, was prosperous for a period of time. It was the home of the rich and powerful, and they built mansions, vehicles, clothing and utensils. They all pursued luxury and luxury.

古文：世逐浮竞，人习浇薄，终使祸乱交兴，天下丧败。
现代文：世间都讲究和攀比奢侈，人情浮薄，终于使得祸乱不断发生。因而丧失天下社会衰败。
English: The world is obsessed with luxury and competition, and people are weak-willed, which eventually leads to the continuous occurrence of disasters. As a result, the world's social decay is lost.

古文：比来朝贡，器服稍华，百工造作，务尽奇巧。
现代文：近来朝廷权贵，器物服饰渐为华丽，百工制作则极尽奇异巧妙。
English: In recent years, the imperial court has become more and more powerful, the utensils and clothing have gradually become more and more gorgeous, and the production of hundred craftsmen has become extremely bizarre and ingenious.

古文：臣诚恐物逐好移，有损政俗。
现代文：臣恐怕物品随着人们的喜好变得越来越奢华，会损害政治民俗。
English: I'm afraid that as people's preferences become more and more luxurious, it will damage political and folk customs.

古文：如此等事，颇宜禁省。
现代文：像这样的事情，应该禁止。
English: Things like this should be banned.

古文：记言 无作淫巧，以荡上心 。
现代文：《礼记》说道 不要作淫侈奇巧器物，使主上放荡心思 。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says, "Don't be a lascivious, extravagant, and debauched person.

古文：传称 宫室崇侈，民力雕弊 。
现代文：《传》说道 宫殿崇尚奢华，便使民力大大减损 。
English: "Biography" said that the palace advocated luxury, which greatly reduced the power of the people.

古文：汉景有云： 黄金珠玉，饥不可食，寒不可衣。  雕文刻镂，伤农事者也。
现代文：汉景帝曾经说： 黄金珠玉，饥饿时不能做食品，寒冷时不能做衣裳。  费工费时雕镂出来的器物，伤害了农业生产。
English: Han Jingdi once said: "Gold and jewels can't be used as food when people are hungry, and they can't be used as clothing when people are cold.

古文：锦绣纂组，害女功者也。 以二者为饥寒之本源矣。
现代文：精心制作的锦绣，伤害了纺织。 认为这二者是饥寒的根本原因。
English: The elaborate brocades, which hurt the fabric, are thought to be the root cause of cold and hunger.

古文：然国家非为军戎器用、时事要须而造者，皆徒费功力，损国害民。
现代文：所以国家除了军戎器械、时事所须物品要加以制作，别的都是白白地浪费功力，对国家和人民都是损害。
English: Therefore, in addition to military equipment and items necessary for current affairs, the country should produce them. Anything else is a waste of effort and is harmful to the country and the people.

古文：未如广劝农桑，以衣食为务，使国储丰积，大功易举。
现代文：不如广泛地推进农桑生产，以衣食为根本，使国家有丰富储蓄，要得到大功也很容易。
English: It is better to widely promote agricultural mulberry production, with food and clothing as the foundation, so that the country has abundant savings, and it is easy to get great credit.

古文：其三，明选举，曰：选曹赏录勋贤，补拟官爵，必宜与众共之，有明扬之授。
现代文：其三，公开职官选举，说道：选取官吏的部门奖励贤能，确定授予官爵，必须与大家一同论定，公开明白地授予。
English: Third, open election of officials, he said: the department that selects officials should reward merit and determine the awarding of titles and ranks. It must be discussed with everyone and awarded openly and clearly.

古文：使人得尽心，如睹白日。
现代文：从而使人得以全部知道，如同睹视白天的太阳一样清楚。
English: so that all may be known, as clearly as the sun is seen in the day.

古文：其材有升降，其功有厚薄，禄秩所加，无容不审。
现代文：被选的人材质能力有高有低，功劳有大有小，任以官职给予俸禄，不能够不加以审定。
English: The material ability of the selected person varies from high to low, the merit varies from large to small, and the salary is assigned to the official position. It cannot be without verification.

古文：即如州郡选置，犹集乡闾，况天下选曹，不取物州郡，自可内除。
现代文：就是州郡选取安置吏员，也要集合乡间人士议论，何况朝廷选官，不能衹选取知名的人士。
English: Even if it is the prefectures and counties that select the officials to be resettled, it is also necessary to gather people from the countryside to discuss. Moreover, it is not possible to select well-known people from the imperial court.

古文：此外付曹铨者，既非机事，何足可密。
现代文：如果是地方上的州郡，当然可以自行任命。此外交付朝廷选官部门的，也不是什么机密，不必保守秘密。
English: If it is a local prefecture, of course, they can make their own appointment. This is not a secret and does not need to be kept secret.

古文：人生处世，以荣禄为重，修身履行，以纂身为名。
现代文：人生处在世上，所看重的是地位身份等荣耀，注意自己的言行举止符合规范，是为了名声。
English: Life is in the world, what is valued is the status, identity and other glory, pay attention to their words and deeds in line with the norms, for the sake of fame.

古文：然逢时既难，失时为易。
现代文：但是遭逢时运很难，失去时运却容易。
English: But it's hard to get lucky, but it's easy to lose it.

古文：其选置之日，宜令众心明白，然后呈奏。
现代文：在选拔任用的时候，应让大家心中都明白，然后呈报上去。
English: At the time of selection and appointment, it should be made clear to everyone in their hearts, and then reported.

古文：使功勤见知，品物称悦。
现代文：以便使功劳苦劳才能都能知道，所作评定得到赞同。
English: In order that merit and hard work can be known, the assessment made is endorsed.

古文：其四，重战伐，曰：魏祚告终，天睠在德。
现代文：其四，认真对待战争征伐，说道：魏朝国运已经终止，上天所喜爱的在于仁德。
English: Fourthly, taking the war conquest seriously, he said: the national movement of the Wei Dynasty has ended, and the benevolence is the favorite of Heaven.

古文：而高洋称僭，先迷未败，拥逼山东，事切肘腋。
现代文：但是高洋僭称帝位，先迷失却未败亡，占据山东地区，此事如同肘腋之患。
English: However, Gao Yangqin claimed the imperial throne, but he was first lost but not defeated, occupying the Shandong region, which was like a plague of boils.

古文：譬犹棋劫相持，争行先后。
现代文：就如同下棋劫打双方相持，都争着谁先谁后。
English: Just as in a game of chess, both sides hold each other hostage and fight over who is first and who is last.

古文：若一行非当，或成彼利。
现代文：如果一下失先，可能就成了对方的利益。
English: If you lose the lead at once, it may become the other side's benefit.

古文：诚应舍小营大，先保封域，不宜贪利在边，轻为兴动。
现代文：确实应该舍小而着眼大处，先保住疆域，不要贪求边境小利，轻举妄动。
English: It is true that we should give up small things and focus on the big things. First, we should keep our territory, and not covet small profits at the border and act rashly.

古文：捷则劳兵分守，败则所损已多。
现代文：胜利就要劳烦军队分别驻守，失败则损失很大。
English: Victory requires the army to be stationed separately, while defeat is a great loss.

古文：国家虽强，洋不受弱。
现代文：国家虽然强大，高洋也不示弱。
English: Although the country is strong, Gaoyang is not weak.

古文：诗云： 德则不竞，何惮于病！ 唯德可以庇民，非恃强也。
现代文：《诗经》裹面说： 有德就不必去相争，不用害怕有损失! 惟有德行可以庇护民众，不是恃以强力。
English: The "Song of Songs" says: "If you have virtue, you don't have to fight, and you don't have to be afraid of losing! Only virtue can protect the people, not force."

古文：夫力均势敌，则进德者胜。
现代文：如果势均力敌的话，则行仁德者可以获胜。
English: If there is a tie, the benevolent one can win.

古文：君子道长，则小人道消。
现代文：君子之道盛行，则小人之道消减。
English: When the way of the superior man prevails, the way of the inferior man declines.

古文：故昔之善战者，先为不可胜，以待敌之可胜。
现代文：所以往昔善于作战者，先想到的不是肯定要胜，而是等待可以胜敌的机会。
English: Therefore, in the past, those who were good at fighting did not first think of winning, but of waiting for an opportunity to defeat the enemy.

古文：彼行暴戾，我则宽仁。
现代文：他们行使暴戾行为，我们则行使宽厚仁义。
English: They practice violence, we practice kindness.

古文：彼为刻薄，我必惠化。
现代文：他们行政刻薄，我们实行恩惠教化。
English: Their administration is harsh, we practice benevolence and enlightenment.

古文：使德泽旁流，人思有道。
现代文：使仁德恩泽布于各处，人人都想到有道兴盛。
English: Let benevolence, benevolence and benevolence prevail everywhere, and everyone will think of prosperity.

古文：然后观衅而作，可以集事。
现代文：然后观望到机会而行动。可以成功。
English: Then wait for an opportunity to act. You can succeed.

古文：其五，禁奢侈，曰：按礼，人有贵贱，物有等差，使用之有节，品类之有度。
现代文：其五，要禁止奢侈，说道：按照礼仪，人有贵贱的分别，事物有不同的等级差别，使用物品要有节制，所有品类要控制尺度。
English: Fifth, extravagance should be prohibited, he said. According to etiquette, people should be distinguished according to their nobility and lowliness, things should have different grades, the use of items should be controlled, and all categories should be controlled.

古文：马后为天下母，而身服大练，所以率下也。
现代文：马后作为皇后是天下之母，穿的衣服是布帛制成的，为的是对下人作出表率。
English: As the queen, the horse queen is the mother of the world. The clothes she wears are made of cloth, in order to set an example for the people below.

古文：季孙相三君矣，家无衣帛之妾，所以励俗也。
现代文：季孙任过三位君主的丞相，家中的妾氏没有穿丝绸衣服的，用以激励民俗。
English: Ji Sun served as the prime minister of three monarchs, and the concubines in the family did not wear silk clothes, which was used to inspire folk customs.

古文：比来富贵之家，为意稍广，无不资装婢隶，作车后容仪，服饰华美，昡曜街衢。
现代文：近来富贵的人家，越来越讲排场，奴婢都衣装鲜亮，作为随从车辆的仪容，服饰华丽，在大街小巷眩曜。
English: Recently, the rich and noble families are becoming more and more ostentatious, and the servants and maids are dressed in bright clothes, as the attendants of the vehicle, the dress is gorgeous, and the streets and alleys are dazzling.

古文：仍使行者辍足，路人倾盖。
现代文：以致行者都停下脚步观看，路旁的人成堆。
English: As a result, pedestrians stopped to watch, and there were piles of people on the roadside.

古文：论其输力公家，未若介冑之士；然其坐受优赏，自踰攻战之人。
现代文：论他们对公家的贡献，还不如一个普通的士兵；但是他们却坐受丰厚的待遇，超出攻战的将士。
English: In terms of their contribution to the public, they are not as good as an ordinary soldier; but they are richly treated, beyond the offensive soldiers.

古文：纵令不惜功费，岂不有亏厥德。
现代文：就是不可惜费用，难道不有损德义。
English: Even if the expense is regrettable, isn't it detrimental to virtue?

古文：必有储蓄之余，孰与务恤军士。
现代文：有了储蓄的余额，不如用作抚恤军士。
English: With the balance of savings, it is better to be used as a pension sergeant.

古文：鲁庄公有云： 衣食所安，不敢爱也，必以分人。 诗言： 岂曰无衣，与子同袍。 皆所以取人力也。
现代文：鲁庄公曾经说： 有了衣服食物，不敢自己占有，一定要分给他人。 《诗经》中说： 怎么会说没有衣裳，我和你共同穿衣。 这些都是取自人力。
English: Lu Zhuang Gong once said: "If you have clothes and food, don't dare to possess them yourself, be sure to give them to others." In the "Song of Songs," he said: "How can you say that you have no clothes, I will dress with you." These are all taken from manpower.

古文：又陈事上议之徒，亦应不少，当有上彻天听者。
现代文：又陈述事物往上议论的人，数量应该是不少的，应当有帝君所知道的。
English: Also, the number of people who state things and discuss them should not be small, and they should be known to the emperor.

古文：未闻是非。陛下虽念存物议，欲尽天下之情，而天下之情犹为未尽。
现代文：但是不知道是非，陛下虽然注重这些议论，想解决天下各种事情，然而天下的事情并没有全部解决。
English: But I don't know whether it's right or not. Although His Majesty pays attention to these discussions and wants to solve all kinds of things in the world, things in the world have not all been solved.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么如此呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：取人受言，贵在显用。若纳而不显，是而不用，则言之者或寡矣。
现代文：取人的言论，所贵在于明确使用，如果采纳了却不突出，等于没有采用，则上言的人就少了。
English: What is valuable about the speech of someone is that it is clearly used. If it is adopted but not prominent, it is equivalent to not being adopted, and then there are fewer people who speak up.

古文：保定二年，以训导有方，频加赏赐。
现代文：保定二年，因训导有方，频频加以赏赐。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was frequently rewarded for his excellent training and guidance.

古文：迁遂伯中大夫，授骠骑将军、大都督。
现代文：迁任遂伯中大夫，授骠骑将军、大都督。
English: He was transferred to the post of Su Bo Middle Doctor, given the title of General of Cavalry and the title of Grand Governor.

古文：四年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：四年，晋为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In four years, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：五年，诏鲁公赟、毕公贤等，俱以束修之礼，同受业焉。
现代文：五年，诏令鲁公宇文卖、毕公宇文贤等人，俱以束脩之礼，受业为弟子。
English: In the fifth year, Lu Gongwu Wensai, Bi Gongwu Wensian, and others were ordained as disciples.

古文：天和元年，岐州刺史、陈公纯举逊为贤良。
现代文：天和元年，岐州刺史、陈公宇文纯举乐逊为贤良。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Qizhou Shishi and Chen Gongyubun were ranked as the most virtuous.

古文：五年，逊以年在悬车，上表致仕，优诏不许。
现代文：五年，乐逊年纪已老，上表请求退休，优诏不允许。
English: Five years later, when Leshun was already old, he asked to retire, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：于是赐以粟帛及钱等，授湖州刺史，封安邑县子，邑四百户。
现代文：于是赐以粟帛和钱财等，授湖州刺史，封安邑县子爵位，食邑四百户。
English: As a result, he gave him millet and money, conferred the title of Huzhou Sashishi, the title of Viscount of Anyi County, and 400 households of Shiyou.

古文：民多蛮左，未习儒风。
现代文：当地民以蛮族为多，未曾习沐儒风。
English: The local people are mostly barbarians and have never practiced the Confucianism.

古文：逊劝励生徒，加以课试，数年之间，化洽州境。
现代文：乐逊劝励经学生徒，课试确定高下，数年之间，全州得以化洽。
English: Students were encouraged through music and song, and high school students were determined through examinations. Within a few years, the whole state was able to be harmonized.

古文：蛮俗生子，长大多与父母别居。
现代文：蛮族风俗生子，长大后多与父母别居。
English: Barbarians have a custom that when they have children, they mostly live apart from their parents when they grow up.

古文：逊每加劝导，多革前弊。
现代文：乐逊经常加以劝导，革除这些弊端。
English: Le Son often advises them to get rid of these drawbacks.

古文：在任数载，频被褒锡。
现代文：任职数年，屡受嘉奖。
English: He has been in office for several years and has received many awards.

古文：秩满还朝，拜皇太子谏议，复在露门教授皇子，增邑一百户。
现代文：任期届满还朝，拜皇太子谏议，又在露门教授皇子，增加一百户食邑。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to the imperial court to ask the crown prince for advice, and taught the prince in Lumen, increasing the number of restaurants by one hundred.

古文：宣政元年，进位上仪同大将军。
现代文：宣政元年，晋为上仪同大将军。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zheng, he was promoted to Shangyi Tongdao.

古文：大象初，进爵崇业郡公，增邑通前二千户，又为露门博士。
现代文：大象初年，晋爵为崇业郡公，食邑增至二千户，又任露门博士。
English: In the first year of the elephant, Jinjie was the county magistrate of Chongye County, the food village increased to two thousand households, and he was also appointed as Dr. Lu Men.

古文：二年，进位开府仪同大将军，出为汾阴郡守。
现代文：二年，晋为开府仪同大将军，出朝任汾阴郡守。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to General of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, and was appointed governor of Shuyin County.

古文：逊以老病固辞，诏许之。
现代文：乐逊以年老有病固辞，韶令允许。
English: It is permitted by imperial edict for musicians to use the excuse that they are old or ill.

古文：乃改授东扬州刺史，仍赐安车、衣服及奴婢等。
现代文：改授束扬州刺史，赐给安车、衣服及奴婢等。
English: He was awarded a set of Yangzhou sashimi, given a horse-drawn carriage, clothes and slaves.

古文：又于本郡赐田十顷。
现代文：又于本郡赐田十顷。
English: In addition, ten hectares of rice fields have been provided in this county.

古文：儒者以为荣。
现代文：儒者都以他为荣。
English: Confucians are proud of him.

古文：隋开皇元年，卒于家，年八十二。
现代文：隋代开皇元年，在家去世，终年八十二岁。
English: He died at home in the first year of the Sui Dynasty, at the age of 82.

古文：赠本官，加蒲、陕二州刺史。
现代文：追赠本官，加蒲、陕二州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title, and was awarded the titles of Jia Pu and Shaanxi Erzhou Sashih.

古文：逊性柔谨，寡于交游。
现代文：乐逊性情温和恭谨，不善于交际。
English: Le Xun is gentle and respectful, but not good at socializing.

古文：立身以忠信为本，不自矜尚。
现代文：立身以忠信为本，从不骄矜自大。
English: Based on loyalty, never arrogant.

古文：每在众中，言论未尝为人之先。
现代文：在众人之中，不愿意在他人之先谈论。
English: In a crowd, not wanting to be the first to speak.

古文：学者以此称之。
现代文：学者因此十分称赞。
English: For this reason, scholars are full of praise.

古文：所着孝经、论语、毛诗、左氏春秋序论十余篇。
现代文：著作有《孝致、《论语》、《毛诗》、《左氏春秋序论》十余篇。
English: He is the author of more than ten books, including "Celebrating Filial Piety," "Analects," "Mao Poems" and "The Introduction to Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：又着春秋序义，通贾、服说，发杜氏违，辞理并可观。
现代文：又着《春秋序义》，通买、服学说，发杜氏微义，辞理都有一定水平。
English: In addition, the "Spring and Autumn Prelude," the theory of buying and wearing clothes, the theory of making tea, and the theory of rhetoric are all of a certain level.

古文：史臣曰：前世通六艺之士，莫不兼达政术，故云拾青紫如地芥。
现代文：史臣曰：前代精通六艺学术的士人，都兼而懂得从政之术，所以称为任官任职如同在地上捡拾芥菜那么容易。
English: Shichen said: the previous generation of scholars who were proficient in the six arts of scholarship also understood the art of politics, so it was as easy to be appointed as picking up mustard greens on the ground.

古文：近代守一经之儒，多暗于时务，故有贫且贱之耻。
现代文：近代儒生所学衹守住一经，对时务不太熟悉，所以有贫困和低贱的耻辱。
English: Modern Confucian scholars are not very familiar with the current affairs, so there is a stigma of poverty and lowliness.

古文：虽通塞有命，而大抵皆然。
现代文：虽然通达或堵塞各由命运，而大体上基本是如此。
English: Although access or blockage is a matter of fate, this is generally the case.

古文：尝论之曰：夫金之质也至刚，铸之可以成器；水之性也柔弱，壅之可以坏山。
现代文：曾经有评论说：金的质地十分刚硬，加以铸造可以成为器皿；水的性质是很柔弱的，壅塞之后可以毁坏大山。
English: It was once commented that: the texture of gold is very hard, and it can be cast into a vessel; the nature of water is very soft, and it can destroy a mountain after it is blocked.

古文：况乎肖天地之貌，含五常之德，朱蓝易染，熏莸可变，固以随邹俗而好长缨，化齐风而贵紫服。
现代文：何况似同天地形貌，含带五常仁德，红色蓝色容易染，善恶香臭可以改变，所以追随邹地风俗而喜好教化出仕，习染齐地风俗而看重学业仕途。
English: What's more, it is similar to the shape of heaven and earth, containing the five permanent benevolent virtues, red and blue are easy to dye, and good and evil fragrances and odors can be changed. Therefore, they follow the customs of Shunde and like to be educated, and they value the academic career.

古文：若乃进趣矜尚，中庸之常情；高秩厚礼，上智之所欲。
现代文：如果上进追求矜持谦让，是中庸之道的常情；任职高官受到尊重礼敬，是有上等智力的人所追求的。
English: If progress is pursued with modesty and restraint, it is the norm of the middle way; if high-ranking officials are respected and revered, it is the pursuit of people with superior intelligence.

古文：是以两汉之朝，重经术而轻律令。
现代文：因此两汉朝廷，看重经术而轻视法律。
English: As a result, the two Han dynasties valued the arts and despised the law.

古文：其聪明特达者，咸励精于专门。
现代文：其中聪明突出的人，都勤奋精练专门学术。
English: Among them, the smart and outstanding people are all diligent, refined and specialized in academics.

古文：以通贤之质，挟黼藻之美，大则必至公卿，小则不失守令。
现代文：以通达贤良的才质，取得出仕任官的美名，官职高的必做到公卿，官小的也做到郡守县令。
English: With the talent of reaching a virtuous quality, he obtained the reputation of a serving official. The high-ranking official must be a noble, and the low-ranking official must be a county magistrate.

古文：近代之政，先法令而后经术。
现代文：近代的行政治理，先是法律条令而后才是经术。
English: In modern administrative governance, laws and regulations come first, followed by management techniques.

古文：其沉默孤微者，亦笃志于章句，以先王之道，饰腐儒之姿，达则不过侍讲训冑，穷则终于弊衣箪食。
现代文：其中沉默无闻孤微无从上进的人，也就一片心志放在章句之学上面，利用先王的道义，掩饰无能儒生的迂腐姿态，处境好一些的衹不过是侍候讲书加一些训导，处境困窘的则一生穿破衣吃普通饭菜。
English: Among them, those who are silent, unheard, lonely, and have no upward progress, also put a piece of mind on the study of chapters and sentences, use the morality of the former king to cover up the incompetence of Confucian pedantry, and those who are in a better situation are just waiting for lectures and some training, and those who are in a difficult situation wear tattered clothes and eat ordinary meals all their lives.

古文：由斯言之，非两汉栋梁之所育，近代薪樗之所产哉，盖好尚之道殊，遭遇之时异也。
现代文：以此而论，不是两汉以栋梁之材所哺育的，近代以柴草臭椿所产出的，也是喜好选择的原则不同，不同时代遭遇也就不同。
English: On this basis, it is not that the two Han dynasties were nurtured with the material of beams, but that the modern times were produced with the material of firewood, grass and camellia. It is also the principle of preference selection that is different, and the encounters in different times are also different.

古文：史臣每闻故老，称沉重所学，非止六经而已。
现代文：史臣经常闻知故老，称赞沉重所学，不仅仅是《六经》。
English: Shichen often listens to the wisdom of the ancients and praises the hard-learned, not just the "Six Classics."

古文：至于天官、律历、阴阳、纬候，流略所载，释老之典，靡不博综，穷其幽赜。
现代文：至于天官、律历、阴阳、纬候，流略所载，佛教道教典籍，都十分熟悉，深入了解其中的深奥意义。
English: As for the celestial bodies, the lunar calendar, yin and yang, and latitude and longitude, they are all very familiar with the Buddhist Taoist classics contained in the outline, and they have a deep understanding of the profound significance.

古文：故能驰声海内，为一代儒宗。
现代文：所以能够驰声于海内，成为一代儒学宗师。
English: As a result, he was able to make a name for himself overseas and become a master of Confucianism for a generation.

古文：虽前世徐广、何承天之俦，不足过也。
现代文：虽前世的徐广、何承天等人，也超不过他。
English: Although Xu Guang, He Chengtian and others in the previous life, they are also superior to him.

