古文：王承休蜀后主王衍宦官王承休，后主以优笑狎暱见宠。
现代文：前蜀后主王衍在位期间，宦官王承休因为善于戏谑、狎玩，深得王衍的宠爱与欢心。
English: During the reign of the former Queen of Shu, Wang Yan, the eunuch Wang Chengyu, because he was good at joking and playing pranks, was deeply loved and pleased by Wang Yan.

古文：有美色，恒侍少王寝息，久而专房。
现代文：王承休容貌俊秀，一向服侍王衍睡卧，长期成为王衍的专夜。
English: Wang Chengyu is handsome and handsome. He has always served Wang Yan as a sleeper, and has long been Wang Yan's special night.

古文：承休多以邪僻奸秽之事媚其主，主愈宠之。
现代文：他经常用一些怪诞淫秽的事情来讨取王衍的欢心，因此更加获得后主对他的宠爱了。
English: He often used some grotesque and obscene things to win Wang Yan's favor, which made him even more beloved by his successor.

古文：与韩昭为刎颈之交，所谋皆互相表里。
现代文：王承休跟成都府尹韩昭是莫逆之交，凡有所谋划都宫内宫外互相串联勾结。
English: Wang Chengxu was a close friend of Chengdu Governor Yin Han Zhao, and there was collusion inside and outside the palace whenever there was a plan.

古文：承休一日请从诸军拣选官健，得骁勇数千，号龙武军。承休自为统帅，并特加衣粮，日有优给。
现代文：一天，王承休请奏王衍允许他从诸路军中选拔出官府供给军饷的几千骁勇善战的兵卒，单独编成一队，号称为龙武军，由王承休亲自统帅，并且特殊增加衣服、粮食、兵械，每天都有特殊的优惠待遇。
English: One day, Wang Chengxiu asked Song Wangyan to allow him to select several thousand brave soldiers from the troops of the various armies, who were supplied by the government, and form a separate team, called the Longwu Army, personally commanded by Wang Chengxiu, and specially increase clothes, grain, and weapons, and have special preferential treatment every day.

古文：因乞秦州节度使，且云：原与陛下于秦州采掇美丽。
现代文：王承休奏请王衍授任他为秦州刺史，并且说：我愿为皇上在秦州搜寻采置佳人美女，供您享乐。
English: Wang Chengxiu asked Wang Yan to appoint him as the head of Qin State, and said: I am willing to search for and purchase beautiful women for the emperor in Qin State for your enjoyment.

古文：旦说秦州之风土，多出国色。
现代文：秦州山明水秀，自古以来多出倾国丽人。
English: Qinzhou is famous for its mountains and rivers. Since ancient times, it has attracted many beautiful women.

古文：仍请幸天水。
现代文：臣赴任后，即请皇上巡狩天水一游。
English: After the vassal took office, he immediately invited the emperor to take a tour of the castle grounds.

古文：少主甚悦，即遣仗节赴镇。
现代文：后主王衍所了非常高兴，立即授予王承休秦州节度使的仗节绶印，派遣他立即去秦州上任。
English: Afterward, the master Wang Yan was very pleased and immediately awarded Wang Chengxiu the Warring States Seal of the Qin State Festival, and sent him to Qin State to take office immediately.

古文：应所选龙武精锐，并充衙队从行。
现代文：并将王承休新编的龙武军，赐给他为卫队随行。
English: And he gave Wang Chengxiu the newly formed Longwu Army to accompany him as a guard.

古文：到方镇下车，当日毁拆衙庭，发丁夫采取材石，创立公署使宅，一如宫殿之制。
现代文：王承休到达秦州下车伊始，当天就拆毁秦州原有的衙署，征发丁夫差役伐木采石，建造新的公署命使宅，规模宏大，装饰豪华，一切都按皇宫的样式建造。
English: Wang Chengxiu arrived in Qinzhou and got off at the beginning of the train. On the same day, he demolished Qinzhou's original cadastral office, conscripted Dingfu for logging and quarrying, and built a new official residence. It was grand in scale and luxuriously decorated. Everything was built according to the style of the imperial palace.

古文：兼以严刑峻法，妇女不免土木之役。
现代文：同时，他在秦州施行严刑厉法，妇女也同男人一样去服劳役，采运山石薪木。
English: At the same time, he carried out severe punishments in Qinzhou, and women also went to labor service like men to collect and transport mountain and stone firewood.

古文：又密令强取民间子弟，使教歌舞伎乐。
现代文：又暗中让手下亲信强行索求民间青年男女，教授他们唱歌跳舞与演习各种乐器、伎艺。
English: He also secretly had his cronies forcibly solicit young men and women from the folk, teaching them to sing, dance and practice various musical instruments and skills.

古文：被获者，令画工图真及录名氏，急递中送韩昭。
现代文：被索要来的青年男女，让画工为他们绘画图像，并注明名氏，派人紧急送回成都韩昭。
English: The young men and women who were asked to come had an artist draw images for them, with their names noted, and sent someone to urgently send them back to Chengdu Han Zhao.

古文：昭又密呈少主。
现代文：朝昭立即秘密虽送后主王衍。
English: Asaka immediately secretly sent his mistress, Wang Yan, away.

古文：少主睹之，不觉心狂。
现代文：王衍看到这些美女的画像后，不由得淫心萌动，狂喜异常。
English: After Wang Yan saw the pictures of these beautiful women, he couldn't help but become horny and ecstatic.

古文：遂决幸秦之计，因下制曰：朕闻前王巡狩，观土地之惨舒，历代省方，慰黎元之傒望。
现代文：于是立即决定巡游秦州，发布文告说：我听说父王当年出巡视察，亲自察看土地耕种的好坏，百姓生活的忧乐，历代君主巡视四方，都为黎民百姓带去抚慰与希望。
English: So he immediately decided to make a tour of Qinzhou, releasing a statement saying: I heard that my father, the king, went on a tour of inspection that year, personally inspecting the quality of land cultivation, the joys and sorrows of the people's lives, and the monarchs of all generations visited the four directions, all of which brought comfort and hope to the people of Lai.

古文：西秦封域，远在边隅。
现代文：现今我朝西部疆土秦州，远在边陲。
English: Now I am in the western part of the country, in the province of Qin, far away from the border.

古文：先皇帝画此山河，历年征讨，虽归王化，未浃惠风。今耕稼既属有年。
现代文：先皇经过多年的征讨才将这块地域并入我蜀国疆域，虽然施行了我朝法制，但是还没有沾润到我朝的更多恩惠。到现在，我朝百姓在这块土地上耕种生息已经有些年月了。
English: It took the first emperor many years of campaigning to incorporate this region into the territory of our Shu state. Although the legal system of our dynasty was implemented, more favors from our dynasty have yet to trickle down. By now, the people of our dynasty have been cultivating and living on this land for several years.

古文：军民颇闻望幸，用安疆场。
现代文：听说，当地的军民都非常希望我去视察，以安定疆界。
English: I've heard that the local military and civilians are very keen for me to visit in order to stabilize the border.

古文：聊议省巡，朕选取今年十月三日幸秦州。
现代文：于是，我暂且议定去巡察秦州，出巡的日期选定在今年十月三日。
English: As a result, I tentatively agreed to inspect Qinzhou, and the date of the inspection was selected as October 3 this year.

古文：布告中外，咸使闻之。
现代文：特此布告朝廷内外，使你们都知道这样事情。
English: I hereby make this announcement both inside and outside the Imperial Court so that you all know about this matter.

古文：由是中外切谏不从。
现代文：告示文本发出后，立即有许多朝野人士恳切地劝谏后主王衍取消这次巡游。
English: Immediately after the text of the announcement was issued, many people in and out of court earnestly urged the empress dowager Wang Yan to cancel the parade.

古文：母后泣而止之，以至绝食。
现代文：王衍的母亲痛哭流涕地劝阻他，最后用绝食的方法表示劝阻的决心。
English: Wang Yan's mother tearfully dissuaded him, and finally expressed her determination to dissuade him by means of a hunger strike.

古文：前秦州节度使判官蒲禹卿叩马泣血，上表谏曰：臣闻尧有敢谏之鼓，舜有诽谤之木，汤有司过之士，周有诫慎之鞀。
现代文：前秦州节度判官蒲禹卿勒住王衍的马缰、哭得眼泪带血，呈上奏表劝谏说：我听说唐尧有让人进谏劝戒的鼓，虞舜有让人指斥责备的木械，商汤有专职检查自己过失错误的官员，周朝有劝诫谨慎的小鼓。
English: The former judge of the Qin State Festival, Pu Yuqing, held Wang Yan's horse by the bridle, wept with tears and blood, and presented a report form to persuade him, saying: I heard that Tang Dynasty had a drum for people to exhort, Yu Dynasty had a wooden instrument for people to rebuke, Shang Tang had a full-time official to check their mistakes, and Zhou Dynasty had a small drum for exhortation.

古文：盖古者明君，克全帝道，欲知己过，要纳谠言。
现代文：上述这些说的是，凡是古代的明君，他们都想方设法实现帝王的圣明之道，深知要想知道自己的过失，必须听取正直的话。
English: All of the above is to say that all the wise rulers of ancient times, who tried their best to realize the emperor's wisdom, knew that to know their own faults, they must listen to honest words.

古文：将引咎而责躬，庶理人而修德。
现代文：而且能够敢于承认自己的过失、责备自己，能够为治理黎民百姓的事情实行德政。
English: Moreover, they can dare to admit their mistakes and reproach themselves, and they can implement moral governance for the governance of the people of Lebanon.

古文：陛下自承祧秉录，正位当天，爱闻逆耳之忠言，每犯颜而直谏。
现代文：皇上您自承奉祖庙的祭祀、接管簿籍以来，身居主管整个国家的重要位职，喜爱听取逆耳的忠言，使得臣属们都敢于冒着触犯您的危险而直言劝诫。
English: Your Imperial Highness, since you took over the bookkeeping of the ancestral temple, you have held the important position of being in charge of the entire country. You like to listen to unheard-of advice, which has made your subjects dare to speak out at the risk of offending you.

古文：且先皇帝许昌发迹，阆苑起身，历艰辛于草昧之中，受危险于虎争之际。
现代文：况且，先皇帝起自许昌寒微之士，但由占据阆州起家，在草创基业时历尽了艰辛险阻，时时面对着与虎争斗的危险。
English: Moreover, the first emperor Xu Chang was a man of humble beginnings, but he started his family by occupying Zhangzhou. He went through hardships and obstacles when he started the foundation, and he was always faced with the danger of fighting with tigers.

古文：胼胝戈甲，寝寤风霜，申武力而拘诸原，立战功而平多垒。
现代文：由于长期披甲执戈，手脚全身都磨出老茧，废寝忘食、餐风宿露，凭藉武力征战而制服了诸多的元酋，用赫赫的战功而扫平许多割据的壁垒。
English: Due to the long-term wearing of armor, the hands and feet of the whole body are worn out, the sleep is wasted, the food is forgotten, the dining style is dewy, and many former chiefs have been subdued by force of arms, and many barriers of separation have been leveled with great war achievements.

古文：亡躯致命，事主勤王，方得成家，至于开国。
现代文：冒着生命危险，侍奉唐主、守土裂疆，方能成就了这份家业，开创了我堂堂蜀国。
English: I risked my life to serve the Tang Lord and defend the motherland, and I was able to achieve this family business and create my own country of Shu.

古文：今日鸿基霸盛，大业雄崇。
现代文：现在，先皇开创的基业正值强盛兴旺的时候，宏大的事业正欲发展壮大。
English: Now, when the foundation business pioneered by the first emperor is strong and prosperous, the grand cause is eager to develop and grow.

古文：地及雍凉，界连南北。
现代文：我们蜀国疆域一直发展到雍、凉各州，疆界南北相连。
English: The territory of our Shu State has been developed to the states of Yong and Liang, and the borders are connected from north to south.

古文：德通吴越，威定蛮陬。
现代文：我们的德政布及到吴越之地，威力摄服到南疆蛮夷的荒僻角落。
English: Our virtuous governance has spread to the land of Wuyue, and we have powerfully subdued the remote corners of the barbaric Southern Xinjiang.

古文：郡府颇多，关河渐广。
现代文：我们蜀国治理郡、府很多，疆域在继续扩大。
English: We have many administrative counties and prefectures in Shu, and our territory continues to expand.

古文：人物秀丽，土地繁华。
现代文：人才济济。多出聪慧有识之士；土地肥沃，盛产稻粟豆麦之粮。
English: Talents abound. There are many intelligent and insightful people; the land is fertile, rich in rice, corn and wheat.

古文：当四海辐裂之秋，成万代龙兴之业。
现代文：而且，眼下正面临着天下分崩离析之际，这正是成就万代封疆建国伟业的最好的时机。
English: Moreover, we are now facing the time when the world is falling apart, which is the best time to achieve the great cause of founding a country in the feudal country for all generations.

古文：陛下生居富贵，坐得乾坤。
现代文：皇上生下来就生活在富贵中，没费操戈之劳就承继了这么宏大的基业。
English: The emperor was born into a life of wealth and privilege, and he inherited such a grand legacy without much effort.

古文：但好欢娱，不思机变。
现代文：因此，喜欢娱乐享受，很少考虑利用这个大好的机会发展国家。
English: Therefore, they like to have fun and enjoy themselves, and rarely consider using this great opportunity to develop the country.

古文：臣欲望陛下，以名教而自节，以礼乐而自防。
现代文：我非常希望皇上您以儒家名教作为自己的操守。以礼乐加强自己的修养。
English: I very much hope that you, the emperor, will take Confucianism as your moral code and strengthen your self-cultivation with liturgical music.

古文：循道德之规，受师傅之训。
现代文：遵守道德规范，承继师传古训。
English: Adhere to ethical standards, inherit the ancient teachings of teachers.

古文：知社稷之不易，想稼穑之最难。
现代文：深知这大好的江山基业得来的不容易，体察到黎民百姓耕种田亩的艰辛。
English: He was well aware that it was not easy to obtain such a good foundation for the country, and he realized the hardships of the Li people in cultivating acres of land.

古文：惜高祖之基扃，似太宗之临御。
现代文：珍惜先皇开创下的这份基业，象唐朝开国皇帝太宗李世民那样事必躬亲。
English: To cherish this heritage created by the first emperor, like the founding emperor of the Tang Dynasty, Taizong Li Shimin, everything must be done by hand.

古文：贤贤易色，孜孜为心。
现代文：尊重德才兼备的人，并接受他们的影响，专心致致地治理国家。
English: Respect and accept the influence of people with both virtues and talents, and concentrate on governing the country.

古文：无稽之言勿听，弗询之谋勿用。
现代文：虚妄的话不要听，违拗的计谋不要采纳。
English: Listen not to lying lips, and attend not to the counsel of the froward.

古文：听五音而受谏，以三镜而照怀。
现代文：聆听音乐用来提高自己的修养，用镜、古、人三鉴来经常对照自己。
English: Listening to music is used to improve one's self-cultivation, and one should constantly compare oneself with the mirror, the ancients, and the people.

古文：少止息于诸处林亭，多观览于前王经史。
现代文：少去各地的园林亭榭处去游玩娱乐，多阅读古代帝王留下来的经史，用来增长自己的才干、经验。
English: They should not go to gardens, pavilions and other places to play and have fun, but should read the scriptures left by ancient emperors to increase their talents and experience.

古文：别修上德，用卜远图。
现代文：应当特别加强高尚品德的修养，准备实现远大的志向。
English: In particular, they should strengthen the cultivation of high moral character and be prepared to achieve lofty aspirations.

古文：莫遣色荒，母令酒惑。
现代文：且不要沉湎在恣情淫乐的享受中，也不要整日迷惑在酒宴上。
English: Do not indulge in sensual pleasures, and do not spend all day at a party.

古文：常亲政事，勿恣闲游。
现代文：经常亲自处理国家政事，且勿恣意闲游不务正业。
English: Always handle national affairs personally, and do not wantonly loaf around without doing any real work.

古文：臣窃闻陛下欲出成都，往巡边垒。
现代文：我听说皇上想要移驾出京，前去巡察边境。
English: I heard that the emperor wants to move out of Kyoto and go to inspect the border.

古文：且天水地远，峻恶难行。
现代文：天水远隔千山万水，地处荒远，道路险恶难行。
English: Tianshui is far away from thousands of mountains and rivers, the land is desolate, and the road is dangerous and difficult to travel.

古文：险栈欹云，危峰插汉。
现代文：险要的栈道高入云端，高峻的山峰直插霄汉。
English: The precipitous boardwalk soars high into the clouds, and the lofty peaks plunge straight into the sky.

古文：微雨则吹摧阁道，稍泥则沮滑山程。
现代文：微微降些雨就可以冲毁栈道，稍稍滑些泥就会阻塞山路。
English: A few drops of rain can wash away the boardwalk, and a little slippery mud can block the mountain road.

古文：岂可鸣銮，那堪叱驭。
现代文：这样险恶的地方，怎么可以行驶銮舆，那堪骑马？
English: In such a dangerous place, how can you travel on horseback?

古文：又复敌京咫尺，塞邑荒凉。民杂蕃戎，地多岚瘴。
现代文：再加上，天水离敌国的京城很近，城邑特别荒凉，汉人与胡夷之人杂居，又名瘴疠岚气，没有什么特别的风光、美景。
English: In addition, Tianshui is very close to the capital of the enemy country, the cities are particularly desolate, the Han people and the Hui people live together, also known as the Hui, and there is no special scenery or beauty.

古文：别无华风异景，不可选胜寻幽。
现代文：既没有什么胜景可览，也没有什么幽境可觅。
English: There's nothing spectacular to see, nothing secluded to explore.

古文：陇水声悲，胡笳韵咽。
现代文：陇水悲鸣，胡笳呜咽。
English: The reeds wail, the reeds moan.

古文：营中止带甲之土，城上宿枕戈之人。
现代文：军营中看到的只有披甲执戈的兵士，城头上住宿的尽是枕戈待旦的戍卒。
English: The only soldiers to be seen in the military camp were the soldiers in armour who were in charge of the army, and those who were accommodated at the top of the castle were all pawns waiting to die.

古文：看探虏于孤峰，朝朝疑虑。睹望旗于峻岭，日日堤防。
现代文：在孤独的烽火台上察看胡虏的动向，天天让人担惊受怕；远望敌军的旌旗插在险峻的山岭中，日日叫你提防不懈。
English: Watching the movement of the Hukuru on the lonely campfire, every day people are frightened; watching the enemy's banner planted in the steep mountains, every day you have to be on guard.

古文：是多山足水之乡，即易动难安之地。
现代文：秦州是山多水足的地方，也是容易动乱难于治理的穷乡僻壤。
English: Qinzhou is a mountainous and waterlogged place, and it is also a poor and remote land that is prone to turmoil and difficult to control.

古文：麦积崖无可瞻恋，米谷峡何亚连知。
现代文：麦积山没有什么值得观瞻留恋的，米谷峡也不能让你流连忘返。
English: There is nothing worth seeing in the Maijishan Mountains, nor can you linger in the Yidu Gorge.

古文：路遇嗟山，程通怨水。
现代文：一路上，尽是让人惊嗟的不茅的荒山。沿途中，全是叫你怨忿不已的恶水。
English: Along the way, it's all stunning barren mountains. Along the way, it's all bad water that makes you resentful.

古文：秦穆圉马之地，隗嚣僭位之邦。
现代文：它本是秦穆公养马的荒凉之地，东汉人隗嚣簪位称王的蛮夷之邦。
English: Originally, it was a desolate land where Qin Mu Gong raised horses, and a barbarian country where the Eastern Han people held sway.

古文：是以一人出行，百司参从，千群雾拥，万众星驰。
现代文：虽然，皇上您一个人圣驾出巡，却需要文武百官、警卫部队、侍从夫役伴随。千人簇拥，万人警卫。
English: Although you, the emperor, are traveling alone, you need to be accompanied by hundreds of officers, guards, and attendants. Thousands of people crowd around you, and there are tens of thousands of guards.

古文：当路州县摧残，所在馆驿隘少，止宿尚犹不易。供须固是为难。
现代文：这样一支庞大的巡行队伍，沿途经过的州县一定会受到严重的骚扰与损害。况且，沿途驿站稀少而且房屋狭窄，住宿都成问题，饮食供应更是困难百倍的了。
English: With such a huge procession, the states and counties along the route are bound to be seriously harassed and damaged. Moreover, the stations along the route are scarce and the houses are narrow, accommodation is a problem, and food supply is a hundred times more difficult.

古文：纵若就中指挥，自破属省钱物，未免因依扰践，触处凌迟。
现代文：即使是皇上您派人指挥安排这一切，让他就地筹措所需要的物资用品，势不可免地要扰攘这些地方，使得所过之处受到摧残与破坏。
English: Even if you, the emperor, sent someone to direct and arrange all this, and let him procure the necessary materials and supplies on the spot, he would inevitably disturb these places, causing devastation and destruction wherever he passed.

古文：以此商论，不合轻动。
现代文：由此看来，皇上您且不可轻易巡行天水。
English: From this point of view, it is not easy for you, the emperor, to patrol Tianshui.

古文：其类苍龙出海，云行雨施。
现代文：您的出巡，犹如苍龙出海，必然行云布雨，怎么能够风平浪静呢？
English: Your tour, like a dragon out to sea, is bound to be cloudy and rainy, how can the wind be calm?

古文：岂教浪静风恬，必见伤苗损稼。
现代文：所过之地一定会践踏伤害庄稼的。
English: The crops will be damaged by trampling on the ground.

古文：所以銮舆须止，天步难移。
现代文：因此圣驾不适宜巡行天水，请把一切准备工作都停下来吧。
English: Therefore, it is not appropriate for the sacred vehicle to parade through the heavenly water, so please stop all preparations.

古文：况顷年大驾，只到山南，犹不关进发兵士。
现代文：况且，近年来皇上的圣驾只巡行过山南，并且没有派遣军队，加强山南的防务。
English: Moreover, in recent years, the emperor's sacred chariot has only paraded through Shannan, and has not sent troops to strengthen the defense of Shannan.

古文：此时直至天水，未审如何制止。
现代文：此时直接巡行到天水，山南的防务还没有确定和安排好。
English: At this time, the parade went directly to Tianshui. The defense of Shannan had not yet been determined and arranged.

古文：自当初打破梁原城池，掳掠义宁户口。
现代文：自从当初先帝攻破梁原的城池，抢掠裹胁义宁人丁。
English: Ever since the first emperor stormed Liangyuan's citadel and plundered the besieged Yining.

古文：截腕者非一，斩首者甚多。
现代文：这些人被砍去胳膊的，不只一个人，被处死斩首的也有很多。
English: There was not only one man who had his arm cut off, but there were also many who were beheaded.

古文：匪惟生彼人心，抑亦损兹圣德。
现代文：这样，皇上一定要远巡天水，不但让这些地方的人心生异志，而且还会损害皇上您的圣德名声。
English: In this way, the emperor must survey the heavens and the waters far and wide, not only to let the people in these places have different aspirations, but also to damage the emperor's reputation for holiness.

古文：今去洛京不远，复闻大驾重来。
现代文：皇上要巡行的天水离唐邦的京城洛阳不算遥远，唐邦又听说您的圣驾要巡行天水。
English: Tianshui, which the emperor wants to parade, is not far from Luoyang, the capital city of Tang, and Tang has heard that your holy driver wants to parade Tianshui.

古文：若彼预有计谋，此则便须征讨。
现代文：假若唐邦事先有预谋准备，这次就要发生征战。
English: If Tang Bang had planned and prepared in advance, this time there would be conscription.

古文：况凤翔久为进敌，必贮奸谋。
现代文：况且风翔很长时间就想进犯我邦，这次趁皇上远巡天水，必然会阴谋策划滋生奸心的。
English: Moreover, Fengxiang has wanted to invade our country for a long time. This time, taking advantage of the emperor's distant inspection of the sky and water, he will inevitably plot and plan to breed treachery.

古文：切虑妄构妖词，致生衅隙。
现代文：因此，一定要考虑到不要轻信迷惑皇上圣心的话，导至不利的事情发生。
English: Therefore, we must consider that we should not be gullible enough to be deceived by the words of the Emperor's Sacred Heart, leading to unfavorable things happening.

古文：又陛下与唐主始申欢好，信币交驰。
现代文：还有，皇上刚刚与唐王互通友好，书信与钱货可以往来。
English: Moreover, the emperor had just established friendly relations with Tang Wang, and letters and money could be exchanged.

古文：但虑闻道圣驾亲行，别怀疑忌，其必特差使命，请陛下境上会盟。
现代文：皇上要想到唐王听说您亲临天水，产生什么怀疑猜忌，他必然特殊派使臣邀请皇上在边界上会盟相见。
English: The emperor must have thought of the suspicion that Tang Wang would have when he heard that you were visiting Tianshui, and he must have sent a special envoy to invite the emperor to meet at the border.

古文：未审圣躬去与不去？
现代文：果真如此，不知道皇上您是去会盟还是不去？
English: If that's true, I don't know if you're going to the league or not, Your Majesty.

古文：若去则相似秦赵争强，彼此难屈；若不去，即便同鲁卫不睦。
现代文：如果前去会盟，势必会出现当年秦国与赵国争夺疆土的场面，彼此都很难屈尊退让；如果不去会盟，又会出现当年鲁国与卫国不和的事情。
English: If you go to the alliance, you will inevitably see the scene of Qin and Zhao countries competing for territory, and it will be difficult for each other to deign to concede; if you do not go to the alliance, there will be the discord between Lu and the defense of the country.

古文：战伐寻兴，酌彼未萌，料其先见。
现代文：寻找战争发生的原因，必须在战争还没有萌生的时候，在它发生前就应预料到。希望皇上您能予以考虑。
English: In searching for the causes of a war, it is necessary to anticipate a war before it breaks out and before it happens. I hope you will consider this, Your Majesty.

古文：愿陛下思忖。臣伏闻自古帝王，省方巡狩，吊民伐罪，展义观风，然后便归九重，别安万姓。
现代文：我听说自古以来的明君圣主，巡视四方，或慰问百姓，或讨伐叛逆，都扩大自己的德义，省察民风民情，然后便立即回到京都来，告别百姓。
English: I have heard that since ancient times, the Ming monarchs and saints have visited the four directions, either to console the people or to fight against rebellions, have expanded their virtue, examined the customs and conditions of the people, and then immediately returned to Kyoto to bid farewell to the people.

古文：今陛下累曾游历，未闻一件教条。
现代文：现在皇上您多次巡行出游，未听说您曾发布或宣谕一条劝谕百姓的法律、制度。
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have been on tour many times. I have not heard that you have issued or promulgated a law or system to advise the people.

古文：止于跋涉山川，驱驰人马。
现代文：只是限于跋山涉水，劳顿驱役人马。
English: It is only limited to wading through the mountains and rivers, and driving officials to work.

古文：秦苑则舟船几溺，青城则嫔采将沈。
现代文：巡游秦苑则舟船几次翻溺，出行青城则嫔妃几乎沉水。
English: During the Qin Court cruise, the boat capsized several times, and during the trip to Qingcheng, the boat almost sank.

古文：自取惊忧，为何切事？
现代文：自取这些惊忧，难道是为了什么急迫的事情吗？
English: Did he take these worries upon himself because of some pressing matter?

古文：却还京辇，不悦军民，但郁众情，莫彰帝德。
现代文：还得还驾回京，使得军人、百姓都不高兴，只是让人们心情忧郁，一点也不能宣张皇上的义德。
English: He also had to drive back to Beijing, which made the soldiers and people unhappy, but made people feel gloomy, and could not proclaim the emperor's righteousness at all.

古文：忆昔先皇在日，未尝无故巡游。
现代文：回想先皇在世时，从来没有过无缘无故就出行巡游的事情。
English: I recall that when the former emperor was alive, there was never a time when he went on a cruise for no reason.

古文：陛下纂承已来，率意频离宫阙，劳心费力，有何所为？
现代文：皇上即位以来，随意频频离开京城出游，既劳心神又耗费人力财力，有什么作为呢？
English: Since the Emperor ascended the throne, he has frequently left the capital to travel at will, which is both a labor of love and a drain on human and financial resources. What has he done?

古文：此际依前整跸，又拟远别宸居。
现代文：现在正在向先前一样整顿禁军卫队，又准备远离京城出巡秦州。
English: Now, the Imperial Guard is being reorganized as before, and they are preparing to patrol Qinzhou far away from Beijing.

古文：昔秦皇之鸾驾不回，炀帝之龙舟不返。
现代文：您想过没有，从前秦始皇出巡鸾驾未归而病死沙丘，隋炀帝巡行江南龙舟不返而就戮场州。
English: Have you ever thought that from the time of the former Qin Dynasty, the first emperor went on a cruise to the dunes and died of illness before returning, and the Sui and Qin emperors went on a cruise to the south of the Yangtze River in a dragon boat and did not return to the battlefield.

古文：陛下圣逾秦帝，明甚隋皇。
现代文：皇上，您的圣德超越秦始皇，您的明智胜过隋炀帝。
English: Emperor, your virtue surpasses that of Qin Shihuang, and your wisdom surpasses that of Sui and Qin Dynasties.

古文：且无北筑之虞，焉有南游之弊？
现代文：而且，北疆没有修筑长城的必要，怎么会有隋炀帝南巡的弊端呢？
English: Moreover, there is no need to build the Great Wall in Northern Xinjiang, so how can there be any drawbacks of the Southern Tour of the Sui and Qian Dynasties?

古文：宽仁大度，笃孝深慈。
现代文：做为皇上一国之君主，应该宽怀仁厚、大度容人，至诚孝道、深怀善心。
English: As the monarch of a country, the emperor should be benevolent, tolerant, filial and kind-hearted.

古文：知稼穑之艰难，识古今之成败。
现代文：知晓百姓耕地种田的艰难辛苦，熟谙古今成败兴亡的缘由道理。
English: Know the hardships of the people cultivating the land, and be familiar with the reasons for the success and failure of the past and present.

古文：自防得失，不纵襟怀。
现代文：自身提防得失，从不纵情享乐。
English: Guard yourself against gains and losses, and never indulge in pleasure.

古文：忍教致却宗言将道断，使烝民以何托，令慈母以何辜。
现代文：怎么忍心让国家衰落、圣道断绝？致使黎民百姓没有了依托，让慈爱的母后失去了希望。
English: How could they bear to let the country decline and the holy path be cut off? As a result, the Lebanese people had no support, and their loving mother lost hope.

古文：若何虑以危亡，但恐乖于仁孝。
现代文：如果不考虑到国家的危亡，只恐怕也会失之于仁慈孝道。
English: If you do not consider the peril of the country, I am afraid you will lose out to the benevolence and filial piety.

古文：况玉京金阙，宝殿珠楼，内苑上林，琼池环圃，香风满槛，瑞露盈盘。
现代文：何况京城成都，玉宇金阙、宝殿珠楼。皇宫内的御苑上林，琼地四周环抱着花圃，阵阵花香布满整个宫院，祥瑞的甘露盛满玉盘。
English: Not to mention the capital city of Chengdu, the Jade Palace, and the Jewel Palace. The imperial garden in the imperial palace is covered with trees, and the garden is surrounded by flowerbeds. Bursts of flowers and incense fill the entire palace, and the sweet nectar is full of jade plates.

古文：钧天之乐奏九韶，回雪之舞呈八佾。
现代文：要听天上的仙乐，可让宫中乐师演奏九韶之乐；欲观回雪的舞蹈，方命梨园歌使献演八俏之舞。
English: If you want to listen to celestial celestial music, you can let the palace musicians play the music of the nine harps; if you want to watch the dance of snow, Fangmei Liyuan singer will perform the dance of the eight harps.

古文：簇神仙于清虚之境，列歌舞于阆苑之中。
现代文：可以在清虚的皇家寺院里，跟神仙们顿着相聚；可以在华丽的宫中阆苑中，观赏高雅的歌舞表演。
English: You can gather with the immortals in the serene royal temple; you can watch the elegant song and dance performance in the gorgeous palace garden.

古文：人间胜致，天下所无，时或赏游，足观奇趣。
现代文：人间最美好的景致都在我们的京城成都，可以随时供皇上您游乐观赏，完全能满足您观奇猎异的意愿。
English: The most beautiful scenery in the world is in our capital city of Chengdu, which can be enjoyed by you at any time. It can fully satisfy your desire to watch and explore.

古文：何必须于远塞，看彼荒山。
现代文：何必非去那么遥远荒僻的地方，去看那些荒山恶水呢？
English: Why not go to such a remote and desolate place, to see those barren mountains and evil waters?

古文：不惜圣躯，有何裨益。
现代文：这样不顾长途跋涉的劳顿对圣体造成的损害，又有什么益处呢？
English: And what is the benefit of this, regardless of the damage caused to the Blessed Sacrament by the fatigue of the long journey?

古文：方今岐阳不顺，梁园已亡。
现代文：现在正赶上岐山以南动乱不安，汴京的小朝廷已经灭亡。
English: Now the south of Qishan is in turmoil and unrest, and the small imperial court in Hejing has been destroyed.

古文：中原有人，大事未了。
现代文：中原有人正在争夺天下，政局处在动荡中。
English: Someone in the Central Plains is vying for power, and the political situation is in turmoil.

古文：且当国生灵受弊，盗贼横行。
现代文：整个国家的黎民百姓正曹受苦难，到处都是盗贼横行。
English: The people of the entire country are suffering, and thieves are rampant everywhere.

古文：纵边延无峰火之危，而内地有腹心之患。
现代文：纵然是我蜀国边境没有战事的危险，中原内地尚存心腹之患。
English: Even though there is no danger of war on the border of our country, the Central Plains still have internal problems.

古文：陛下千年膺运，一国称尊。
现代文：皇上您正逢千年难遇的大好时机。
English: Your Majesty, this is the best time in a thousand years.

古文：文德武功，经天纬地。
现代文：您以一国之君而称尊天下，既有文德又有武功，身负经天纬地的才干。
English: You are honored by the world as the ruler of a country. You have both literary virtue and martial arts, and you have the ability to travel across the world.

古文：考逾于舜，仁甚于汤。
现代文：您的孝道超越虞舜，您的仁德胜过夏汤。
English: Your filial piety surpasses the yakitori, and your benevolence surpasses the summer soup.

古文：百行皆全，万机不扰。
现代文：各种条件部已俱备，日理万机不受干扰。
English: All kinds of conditions have been prepared, and the day-to-day operation of the machine is not disturbed.

古文：聪明博达，识量变通。深负智谋，独怀英杰。
现代文：您聪明睿智，博才明达；审时度势，随机变通；深谋远虑，足智多谋；志向宏大，独怀英才。
English: You are clever and wise, knowledgeable and knowledgeable; you can judge the situation at any time, and adapt to it at random; you are far-sighted and resourceful; you are ambitious and talented.

古文：方居大宝，正是少年。
现代文：且刚刚登上帝位，正值青春年少。
English: And he has just ascended to the throne, just at the peak of his youth.

古文：既成社稷之基，复把山河之险。
现代文：既承继下先皇开创的基业，又据有山川的险要。
English: It not only inherits the foundation created by the previous emperor, but also has mountains and rivers.

古文：但不远听深察，居安虑危。
现代文：但是不远听深察，居安思危，也成就不了大业。
English: But not far away listening to deep observation, living in peace and thinking about danger, can not achieve a great cause.

古文：辟四门以求贤，总万邦而行事。咸有一德，端坐九重。
现代文：须打开各路大门，广泛延揽贤才。总领万邦行使经国的大业，自始至终都具备这些德尚，庄严地位居帝位上面。
English: It is necessary to open the doors of all roads and widely recruit talents. The leader of all nations in the exercise of the great cause of running the country has these virtues from beginning to end, and has a solemn position above the imperial throne.

古文：使恩威并行，赏罚必当。
现代文：使您的恩德与威严同时行使，奖惩分明，赏罚得当。
English: Let your grace and majesty be exercised at the same time, reward and punishment be clear, and reward and punishment be appropriate.

古文：平分雨露，遍及疮痍。
现代文：平均分配您的恩惠，普遍照顾到穷困的地方。
English: Distribute your bounty equitably, and be generous to the poor.

古文：令表里以宽舒，使子孙以昌盛。
现代文：让人民里外都感到宽松舒畅，使子孙万代永远昌盛。
English: Let the people at home and abroad feel relaxed and comfortable, so that future generations will always be prosperous.

古文：布临人之惠化，立济众之玄功。
现代文：广布泽德于黎民百姓。长立伟大的功业于劳苦众生。
English: Guangbu Zed is from the people of Lijiang, and the great achievements are from the hard-working people.

古文：选拣雄师，思量大计。
现代文：同时，还要选拔精兵良将组成强大的军队，谋划兴邦立国的大业。
English: At the same time, it is also necessary to select elite soldiers to form a strong army and plan the great cause of rejuvenating the country.

古文：振彼鸱张之势，壮兹虎视之威。
现代文：制止住对方的嚣张气焰，壮大我们的威摄力量。
English: stop the arrogance of the other side and strengthen our deterrent power.

古文：秣马训兵，丰粮利器。
现代文：喂养好战马，训练好兵士，准备下充足的粮草，打制好坚利的武器。
English: Feed good war horses, train good soldiers, prepare enough grain and grass, and make good weapons.

古文：彼若稍有微衅，此即直下平吞。
现代文：对方如果稍有举动，我们立即大兵陈境平推过去。
English: If the other side makes the slightest move, we will immediately push the soldier Chen Jingping over.

古文：正取时机，大行王道。
现代文：眼下正是成就大业的好机会啊！
English: Right now is a great opportunity to achieve a great career!

古文：自然百灵垂佑，四海归仁。
现代文：我们大力实行的是以仁义治理天下的王道，自然各种神灵都会保祐我们的。
English: What we vigorously practice is the royal way of governing the world with benevolence and righteousness. Naturally, all kinds of gods will protect us.

古文：众心成城，天下治理。即目蜀都强盛，诸国不如。
现代文：四海之内都会归附我们的仁政，万众一心就会形成无坚不摧的钢铁长城，一定会治理好整个国家的。眼下我们蜀国特别强盛，所有国家都赶不上。
English: All the four seas will come under our benevolent rule, and all the people with one heart will form an impregnable steel Great Wall, and will surely govern the whole country well. At present, our Shu Province is particularly strong, and all countries cannot keep up with it.

古文：贤士满朝，圣人当极。
现代文：我们蜀国贤达之士满朝皆是，而且有您这样圣明的皇帝在执掌这个国家的朝政。
English: We, the sages of Shu, all belong to the Richmond dynasty, and we have such a holy emperor as you in charge of this country's imperial politics.

古文：臣愿百姓乐于贞观，万乘明于太宗。
现代文：我唯一的愿望就是：黎民百姓能过上贞观年间的太平安乐的生活，皇上您比唐朝的开国皇帝太宗还要圣明勤勉。
English: My only wish is that the people of Limin can live a peaceful and happy life in the Zhenguan era. Your Majesty is more saintly and diligent than the founder of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong.

古文：采药石之言，听刍荛之说。
现代文：能够纳购良药苦口之言，听取我的这番浅陋的见解。
English: To be able to buy good medicine and listen to my shallow opinions.

古文：爱惜社稷，医疗军民。
现代文：倍加爱惜国家社稷，悉心疗治军民的疾苦。
English: We will spare no effort to care for the country and society, and conscientiously treat the sufferings of the military and the people.

古文：似周武谔谔而昌，知辛纣唯唯而灭。
现代文：象周武王那样听取直言使国家昌盛发达，知晓辛纣王缄住人口，不听劝谏最后灭国丧权的教训。
English: Like King Zhouwu, he listened to the straight talk and made the country prosperous and developed. He knew that King Xinzhuang oppressed the population and did not listen to the advice and finally destroyed the country and lost power.

古文：无饰非拒谏之事，有面折廷争之人。
现代文：杜绝掩饰过失拒绝劝谏的事情，发扬当面批评殿上争论的风气。
English: We must stop covering up faults and refusing to seek advice, and carry forward the tradition of face-to-face criticism and argument in the palace.

古文：因我睿朝，益我皇化。
现代文：承袭我朝的圣明，发扬我皇的教化。
English: Inherit the holy light of my dynasty, carry forward the enlightenment of my emperor.

古文：陛下莫见居人稠垒，谓言京辇繁华。
现代文：皇上您不要只看到京城成都居民稠密，就说京城繁华。
English: Your Majesty, don't just see that the capital Chengdu is densely populated, say that the capital is prosperous.

古文：盖是外处凌残，住止不得。所以竞来臻凑，贵且偷安。
现代文：其实是京城以外的地方凌落残破，无法居住生活，所以才都竞相奔趋到京城中来，暂且苟活偷生。
English: In fact, the places outside the capital are in ruins and can't be lived in. That's why everyone is rushing to the center of the capital to stay alive.

古文：今诸州虐理处多，百姓失业欲尽。
现代文：现在京外各州郡县，官吏暴虐，鱼肉百姓。
English: Now, in every prefecture and county outside of Beijing, officials are tyrannical, and the common people are treated like fish and meat.

古文：荒田不少，盗贼成群。
现代文：百姓几乎都不能正常地耕田种地操持家业。
English: The people can hardly cultivate the land and run the family business normally.

古文：乞陛下广布腹心，特令闻见。
现代文：随处可见许多荒芜的田亩，到处都有成群的盗贼。
English: There are many deserted acres everywhere, and there are hordes of thieves everywhere.

古文：且蜀国从来创业，多乏永谋。
现代文：因此恳望皇上广派心腹之人，到各处去调查搜集材料报告您知晓。
English: Therefore, I implore the emperor to send his confidants everywhere to investigate and collect materials. You know the report.

古文：或德不及于两朝，或祚不延于七代。
现代文：况且，蜀国有始以来创立基业的人，多数都缺乏深谋远虑，宏图大志。有的人德政施行不到两朝，有的人国家的福祚延续不到七代。
English: Moreover, most of the people who have founded the foundation since the beginning of Shu have lacked foresight and ambition. Some people's moral government has been implemented for less than two dynasties, and some people's national blessing has lasted for less than seven generations.

古文：刘禅俄降于邓艾，李势遽归于桓温。
现代文：三国时蜀汉后主刘禅刚刚即位就归降了曹魏的大将邓艾，西晋时的蜀主李势，桓温率兵入蜀便立即顺服。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Liu Zhen, the empress of Shu Han, surrendered to Deng Ai, the general of Cao Wei, as soon as he ascended to the throne. Li Xian, the lord of Shu during the Western Jin Dynasty, immediately submitted to Guan Wen when he led his army into Shu.

古文：皆为不取直言，不恤政事。不行王道，不念生灵。
现代文：他们亡国的原因，都在于不能听取直言劝戒，不能顾及朝中政务，不能施行仁义的德政，不体念黎民百姓的苦难。
English: The reasons for their downfall all lie in their inability to listen to straightforward advice and admonition, their inability to take into account the political affairs of the DPRK and China, their inability to carry out benevolent and righteous moral government, and their inability to bear in mind the suffering of the Lebanese people.

古文：以至国人之心，无一可保。山河之险，不足可凭。
现代文：以至国人的心没有一个忠诚于你，山河的险要也不足以凭借。
English: So much so that the hearts of the people of this country are not loyal to you, nor are the dangers of the mountains and rivers enough to rely on.

古文：陛下至圣至明，如尧如舜。岂后主之相匹，岂子仁之比伦。
现代文：皇上您最圣明，象唐尧，如虞舜，蜀汉的后主刘禅怎么能跟您相媲美呢？
English: Emperor, your most sacred, like Tang Xuan, such as Yu Xuan, Shu Han's empress Liu Zhen, how can she be compared to you?

古文：有宽慈至孝之名，有远见长谋之策。
现代文：西晋时的蜀主李势怎么能跟您相伦比呢？您有宽厚仁慈至孝的名声，有远见深谋图强的策略。
English: How can the Western Jin Dynasty's Shu ruler, Li Xian, be compared to you? You have a reputation for being generous, benevolent and filial, and you have the foresight to devise strong strategies.

古文：不信谄媚，不恣耽荒。
现代文：您从不听信谄言媚语，从不恣情沉缅酒色。
English: You never listen to flattery, never indulge in sensual indulgence.

古文：出入而有所可征，动静而无非经久。
现代文：时事的变化，都有可以预兆的迹象；动静相替、治乱更叠，无一不是经久的。
English: The changes in current affairs all have signs that can be foreshadowed; the alternation of dynamic and static, and the overlapping of chaos, are all long-lasting.

古文：必致万年之业，终为四海之君。
现代文：只要皇上您能作好准备、因势利导，就一定能建树万年不朽的基业，最终将成为四海之内的国君。
English: As long as you, the emperor, are able to make preparations and are guided by your own interests, you will surely be able to build an everlasting foundation and will eventually become the ruler of the four seas.

古文：臣愿陛下且住銮舆，莫离京国。
现代文：我希望皇上暂且停住车马，且莫远离京都。
English: I hope the emperor will stop his car and horse for the time being, and not stray too far from Kyoto.

古文：候中原无事，八表来王。
现代文：静候中原内地战事息灭。
English: Waiting for the end of the war in the Central Plains.

古文：天下人心，咸归我主。
现代文：八方前来朝拜您，普天下的人心都归附皇上。
English: People from all over the world come to pay homage to you, and the hearts of people all over the world are attached to the emperor.

古文：若群流赴海，众蚁慕膻。
现代文：就象诸条江河奔向大海，众多蚂蚁慕恋腥膻。
English: Just like rivers and streams rushing to the sea, many ants yearn to swim in the sea.

古文：有道自彰，无思不服。
现代文：有道德的人，自己就会扩大影响，威名远震；无所用心的人，没有人会仰慕服你的。
English: If you are a moral person, you will expand your influence and make a name for yourself. If you are careless, no one will admire and obey you.

古文：匪惟要看天水，直可便坐长安。
现代文：非但要巡行天水，而且直接便可以坐在长安的金殿上。
English: Not only do you have to parade through Tianshui, but you can also sit directly on the Golden Hall in Chang'an.

古文：是微臣之至恳，举国之深愿。
现代文：这是我这个作臣子的最大的恳求，举国上下最深切的愿望。
English: This is my greatest request as a courtier, and the deepest wish of the whole country.

古文：臣闻天子有诤臣七人，虽无道，不失其天下。
现代文：我听说天子有七位敢于直谏劝诫的忠臣，虽然无道，也不会失去他的天下。
English: I have heard that the Son of Heaven has seven loyal servants who dare to stand up to him and admonish him. Although they have no morals, they will not lose his kingdom.

古文：是以辄倾丹恳，仰谏圣明。
现代文：因此，立即说出我的真诚的恳求，来劝谏圣主您。
English: Therefore, I make a heartfelt appeal to you to intercede with the Lord.

古文：不藉官荣，不沽多誉。情非讪上，理直忧君。
现代文：不用记载在为官的档案里图升迁，也不想用此来沽得好的名声，也不是有意诋毁皇上。而是讲明事理为皇上担心。
English: There was no need to record the promotion in the official's file, nor did he want to use it to gain a good reputation, nor did he intend to defame the Emperor. Rather, he was concerned about making things clear.

古文：虽无折槛之能，但有触鳞之罪。
现代文：虽然没有汉朱云折断殿不监直言相诉的能力。但是却有触犯皇上的罪过。
English: Although Han Zhuyun did not have the ability to sue directly, he was guilty of offending the emperor.

古文：不避诛殛，辄扣天庭。
现代文：我不躲避被处死或者被流放的罪过，擅自叩启宫门。
English: I do not hide from the crime for which I was executed or exiled, and I do not knock on the palace door without permission.

古文：臣死如万类之中，去一蝼蚁。陛下或全无忖度，须向边陲。
现代文：我死就象大千世界中死去一只蝼蚁似的，皇上也许一点也不动心，必须出巡天水。
English: My death will be like the death of an ant in the great world. The emperor may not be at all moved, and must go out to survey the heavens.

古文：遗圣母以忧心，令庶寮以怀虑。全迷得失，自取疲劳。
现代文：让皇太后在心中忧虑挂念，让臣僚百姓为您担心。完全不分得失，自己去找麻烦。
English: Let the Empress Dowager be worried in her heart, let the courtiers and the people worry for you. Do not distinguish between gain and loss, go looking for trouble yourself.

古文：事有不虞，悔将何在。
现代文：一旦发生出忽意料的事情，后悔也来不及了。
English: Once something unexpected happens, it's too late to regret.

古文：臣愿陛下，稍开谏路，微纳臣言。
现代文：我诚恳地希望皇上您，稍稍打开些让臣僚谏以的门路，微微采纳一点我的劝谏。
English: I sincerely hope that you, the Emperor, will open the door a little wider for your ministers, and that you will accept a little of my advice.

古文：勿违圣后之情，且允国人之望。
现代文：不要违背了皇太后的一片心愿，暂且应允举国上下对您的期望。
English: Don't go against the wishes of the Empress Dowager. For the time being, fulfill the expectations of the nation.

古文：俯存大计，勿出远边。
现代文：安下心来准备立国兴邦的大计，且勿远行天水。
English: Let's calm down and prepare for the grand plan of building a prosperous country, and don't go too far.

古文：后主竟不从之。韩昭谓禹卿曰：我取汝表彰，候秦州回日，下狱逐节勘之。
现代文：后主王衍一点也没有采纳蒲禹卿的意见与规劝，执意远行天水。成都府尹韩昭指着蒲禹卿的鼻子说：我拿来了你上奏皇上的表章，待到皇上巡狩秦州回来后，一定将你辅入牢狱中逐条审问你。
English: Later, the lord Wang Yan did not accept Pu Yu's advice and exhortation at all, and insisted on going to Tianshui. Chengdu Governor Yin Han Zhao pointed to Pu Yu's nose and said: "I have brought you the emperor's watch badge. When the emperor returns from his hunting tour in Qinzhou, I will definitely put you in prison and interrogate you one by one."

古文：勿悔！
现代文：到那时候，你不要后悔哟！
English: Until then, don't regret it!

古文：至十月三日，发离成都，四日到汉州。
现代文：十月三日，后主王衍及文武百官和随行人员从成都出发，开始远巡天水的路程。四日，后主一行到达汉州。
English: On October 3, the empress dowager Wang Yan, along with hundreds of civil and military officials and accompanying personnel, set out from Chengdu and began a long journey to inspect Tianshui. On the fourth day, the empress dowager and her entourage arrived in Hanzhou.

古文：凤州王承捷飞驿骑到秦云：东朝差兴圣令公，统军十余万，取九月到凤州。
现代文：凤州王承捷派驿吏信使飞马来报，说：东朝唐王派兴圣令公，统师大军十多万人，定在九月兵进凤州。
English: Wang Chengjie of Fengzhou sent an official messenger on a flying horse to report, saying: The king of the East Tang Dynasty sent Xing Shengling, the commander of an army of more than 100,000 people, to march into Fengzhou in September.

古文：少主独谓臣下设计，要沮其东行。曰：朕恰要亲看相杀，又何患乎？不顾而进。
现代文：少主王衍还认为是臣僚们设下的计谋，想阻止他东行天水，回答使臣说：我正要看看两军是怎样互相厮杀战斗的，又有什么可以顾及的呢？
English: The minor lord Wang Yan also thought that it was a trick set up by his ministers, who wanted to stop him from going to the east, and replied to the envoy: I just want to see how the two armies fight each other, and what can I take into account?

古文：上梓潼山，少主有诗云：乔岩簇泛烟，幽迳上寒天。
现代文：不顾边境发来的战报，继续率领臣僚们向天水进发。少主一行登上樟潼山，少主即兴吟诗一首：乔岩簇泛烟，幽迳上寒天。
English: In spite of the battle report sent from the border, he continued to lead his ministers to Tianshui. The young master and his party ascended Lushan Mountain, and the young master improvised a poem: Qiao Rock Cluster Smoky, Secluded Upper Cold Sky.

古文：下瞰峨嵋岭，上窥华岳巅。
现代文：下瞰峨嵋岭，上窥华岳巅。
English: Looking down on Emei Ridge, looking up at Huayue Peak.

古文：驱驰非取乐，按幸为忧边。
现代文：驱驰非取乐，按幸为忧边。
English: To drive is not to have fun, but to drive with joy.

古文：此去将登陟，歌楼路几千。
现代文：此去将登陟，歌楼路几千。
English: There are thousands of songs to sing.

古文：宣令从官继和。
现代文：少主宣诏命令随行的官员们写诗奉和。
English: Shoshu issued an edict ordering the officials accompanying him to write poems in praise of peace.

古文：中书舍人王仁裕和曰：采杖拂寒烟，鸣驺在半天。
现代文：中书舍人王仁裕和诗一首：采杖拂寒烟，鸣驺在半天。
English: There is a poem by Wang Renyu, a scholar of Chinese literature and a poet: "A cane is used to fend off cold smoke, and a flute is played for half a day."

古文：黄云生马足，白日下松巅。
现代文：黄去生马足，白日下松巅。
English: The horse's feet turn yellow, and the pines grow taller by the day.

古文：盛得安疲俗，仁风扇极边。
现代文：盛得安疲俗，仁风扇极边。
English: The food is delicious, and the fans are extremely enthusiastic.

古文：前程问成纪，此去尚三千。
现代文：前程问成纪，此云尚三千。
English: Looking ahead, this cloud is still three thousand years old.

古文：成都尹韩昭、翰林学士李浩弼、徐光浦并继和，亡其本。
现代文：成都尹韩昭、翰林学士李浩弼、徐光浦都有和诗，都遗失了。
English: Chengdu Yin Han Zhao, Hanlin Scholar Li Haozhu, and Xu Guangpu all had waka poems, but they have all been lost.

古文：至剑州西二十里已来，夜过一磎山。
现代文：少主王衍一行走到剑州西二十多里，深夜经过一座有溪水深谷的大山。
English: The young lord Wang Yan and his party walked more than twenty miles west of Jianzhou, passing a large mountain with a deep valley in the middle of the night.

古文：忽闻前后数十里，军人行旅，振革鸣金，连山叫噪，声动溪谷。
现代文：忽然听到前后几十里路之间，都有随行的军族击鼓吹号，喊叫声山山相连，声音震动溪谷。
English: Suddenly, I heard the accompanying military families beating drums, blowing horns and shouting for dozens of miles, connecting mountains and mountains, and shaking the valley.

古文：问人云：将过税人场，惧有鸷兽搏人，是以噪之。
现代文：有人询问发生了什么事情？回答说：就要经过山王吃人的地方啦！怕有凶猛的野兽追捕人，所以击鼓鸣金喊叫。
English: When someone asked what had happened, he replied: "I am about to pass through the place where the mountain king eats people! I am afraid that a ferocious beast will chase me, so I am beating a drum, singing and shouting.

古文：其乘马亦咆哮恐惧，垂之不肯前进。
现代文：说话的这个兵士骑乘的马也惊恐地嘶叫不已，直往后退，用鞭子抽打它也不肯往前走。
English: The horse ridden by the soldier who was speaking also screamed in terror and retreated, beating it with a whip and refusing to go forward.

古文：众中有人言曰：适有大驾前，鸷兽自路左丛林间跃出，于万人中攫将一夫而去。
现代文：人群中有人说：适才，在皇上大驾到来之前，有一头凶兽从路边右侧的丛林中跃出来，在人群中扑倒一人用嘴叼着奔突而去。
English: Someone in the crowd said: "That's right. Before the emperor arrived, a ferocious beast leapt out of the jungle on the right side of the road, pounced on a person in the crowd and ran away with its jaws open.

古文：其人衔到溪洞间，尚闻唱救命之声。
现代文：待到天亮后，有几个兵士按照凶兽的足迹一路寻找，在一片扑卧不堪的草丛中只找到了这个人的几块残余骸骨！
English: After waiting until dawn, several soldiers followed the tracks of the beast all the way and found only a few remnants of the man's skeleton in a patch of overgrown grass!

古文：况天色未晓，无人敢捕逐者。路人无不流汗。
现代文：少主一行来到剑州行宫，安顿下来后，少主问身边的臣僚路上发生了什么事？
English: The young lord and his party came to the Jianzhou Imperial Palace. After settling down, the young lord asked the ministers around him what had happened on the road.

古文：少主至行宫，顾问臣僚，皆陈恐惧之事。寻命从臣令各赋诗。
现代文：臣僚们争相讲述凶兽吃人的事情。少主听了后，随即命令臣属们各赋一诗，纪咏这件事情。
English: After listening to this, the young lord immediately ordered his vassals to each compose a poem to explain the matter.

古文：王仁裕诗曰：剑牙钉舌血毛腥，窥算劳心岂暂停。
现代文：中书舍人王仁裕立即赋诗一首进献给少主。这首诗是这样的：剑牙钉舌血毛腥，窥算劳心岂暂停。
English: Wang Renyu, a teacher of Chinese calligraphy, immediately composed a poem dedicated to the young master. This poem is as follows: Sword, teeth, nails, and tongue are bloody and hairy.

古文：不与天朝除患难，惟于当路食生灵。
现代文：不与大朝除患难，惟于当路食生灵。
English: It does not remove the difficulties with the Great Dynasties, but only feeds the living on the road.

古文：从将户口资馋口，未委三丁税几丁。
现代文：从将户口资馋口，未委三丁税几丁。
English: From the source of funds for the household registration, there is a certain amount of tax.

古文：今日帝王亲出狩，白云岩下好藏形。
现代文：今日帝王亲出狩，白云岩下好藏形。
English: Today, the emperor himself is out hunting, and the Baiyun Rock is a good place to hide.

古文：翰学士李浩弼进诗曰：岩下年年自寝讹，生灵餐尽意如何。
现代文：翰林学士李浩弼也献诗一首。这首诗是这样的：岩下年年自寝讹，生灵餐尽意如何。
English: Li Haojun, a scholar of Hanlin, also presented a poem. This poem is as follows: I have been sleeping in the same bed for years. How would you like to have a spiritual meal?

古文：爪牙众后民随减，溪壑深来骨已多。
现代文：爪牙众后民随减，溪壑深来骨已多。
English: The number of minions and followers is decreasing, and there are already many bones coming from the depths of the stream.

古文：天子纪纲犹被弄，客人穷独困难过。
现代文：天子纪纲犹被弄，客人穷独固难过。
English: Tianzi Jigang is still being made, and the guests are very sad.

古文：长途莫怪无人迹，尽被山王税杀他。
现代文：长途莫怪无人迹，尽被山王税杀他。
English: There was no trace of him for a long time, and he was killed by the mountain king's tax.

古文：少王览此二篇，大笑曰：此二臣之诗，各有旨也。
现代文：少主王衍看了这两首诗后，哈哈大笑，说：韩昭、李浩弼二位臣属赋的诗各有题旨啊。
English: After reading these two poems, the minor lord Wang Yan laughed loudly and said: Han Zhao and Li Haojun's two subordinate poems each have a theme.

古文：朕亦于马上构思，三十余里，终不就。
现代文：我在马上构思，行了三十多里，还没有赋出一首诗来。
English: I conceived the idea right away, travelled more than thirty miles, and have yet to come up with a poem.

古文：于是命各官从臣。
现代文：于是，命令其他臣僚写诗随从。
English: As a result, other ministers were ordered to write poems to follow suit.

古文：翰林学士徐光浦、水部员外王巽亦进诗。
现代文：翰林学士徐光浦、水部员外王巽也各有诗进献。
English: Xu Guangpu, a scholar of Hanlin, and Wa Wangtao, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, also each contributed a poem.

古文：至剑门，少主乃题曰：缓辔逾双剑，行行蹑石陵。
现代文：到了剑门，少主王衍终于赋出一首诗。诗是这样：缓辔逾双剑，行行蹑石陵。
English: When he arrived at the Gate of Swords, the young lord Wang Yan finally uttered a poem. The poem is as follows: "Slowly crossing over the two swords, walking over the stone mausoleum."

古文：作千寻壁垒，为万祀依凭。
现代文：作千寻壁垒，为万祀依凭。
English: Build the Chihiro barrier, and you'll have everything you need.

古文：道德虽无取，江山粗可矜。
现代文：道德虽无取，江山粗可矜。
English: Although there is no advantage in morality, the country can be rough.

古文：回看成阙路，云垒树层层。
现代文：回看成阙路，云垒树层层。
English: Looking back, it was a winding road with clouds and trees.

古文：后侍臣继，成都尹翰昭和曰：闭关防外寇，孰敢振威陵。
现代文：下面是随行的侍臣们续写的诗。成都府尹韩昭的续诗大意是这样的：闭关防外寇，孰敢振威陵。
English: The following is a continuation of the poem written by the attendant courtiers. Chengdu prefect Yin Han Zhao's continuation of the poem is as follows: "Close the gate to prevent foreign invaders, dare to shake the imperial mausoleum."

古文：险固疑天设，山河自古凭。
现代文：险固疑天设，山河自古凭。
English: Dangers are doubtless created by nature, and mountains and rivers have existed since ancient times.

古文：三川奚所赖，双剑最堪矜。
现代文：三川奚所赖，双剑最堪矜。
English: According to Mikawa Shiori, double swords are the best.

古文：鸟道微通处，烟霞巢百层。
现代文：鸟道微通处，烟霞巢百层。
English: A bird's-eye micro-passage, a hundred-story smog nest.

古文：王仁裕和曰：孟阳曾有语，刊在白云陵。
现代文：中书舍人王仁裕的续诗大意是这样的：孟阳曾有语，刊在白云陵。
English: The continuation of the poem by Wang Renyu, a scholar of Chinese literature, is as follows: Meng Yang once had a speech, which was published in Baiyunling.

古文：李杜常挨托，孙刘亦恃凭。
现代文：李杜常挨托，孙刘亦恃凭。
English: Li Du was often entrusted, and Sun Liu also played a role.

古文：暗指长天路，浓峦蔽几层。又命制《秦中父老望幸赋》一首进之，今亡其本。
现代文：少主王衍又命令随行群臣各自撰写《秦中父老望幸赋》一首，进献给他。现在这些词赋都遗失了。
English: The young lord Wang Yan also ordered the attendant courtiers to each write a "Qin Zhong Fu Lao Wang Xing Fu" and dedicate it to him. Now these words are lost.

古文：过白卫岭，大尹韩昭进诗曰：吾王巡狩为安边，此去秦享尚数千。
现代文：过白卫岭，成都府尹韩昭献诗一首。诗的大意是这样的：吾王巡狩为安边，此去秦亭尚数千。
English: Over the Baiwei Mountains, Chengdu Yin Han Zhao dedicated a poem. The gist of the poem is as follows: My king's inspection is safe, and thousands of people still visit Qinting.

古文：夜照路歧山店火，晓通消息戍瓶烟。
现代文：夜照路歧山店火，晓通消息戍瓶烟。
English: At night, the fire of the Qibishan store on the road shines, and the news of the news comes from the bottle smoke.

古文：为云巫峡虽神女，跨凤秦楼是谪仙。
现代文：为云巫峡虽神女，跨凤秦楼是谪仙。
English: Although she is a goddess of Yunwuxia Gorge, she is a fairy godmother of Qinlou Pagoda.

古文：八骏似龙人似虎，何愁飞过大漫天。
现代文：八骏似龙人似虎，何愁飞过大漫天。
English: Eight dragonflies look like dragons, and people look like tigers. What sorrow flies across the sky?

古文：少主和曰：先朝神武力开边，画断封疆四五千。
现代文：少主王衍和诗一首。诗的大意是：先朝神武力开边，画断封疆四五千。
English: There is a poem by a minor lord, Wang Yan. The gist of the poem is: The previous emperor used divine power to open the borders and cut off four or five thousand sealed territories.

古文：前望陇山屯剑戟，后凭巫峡巢烽烟。
现代文：前望陇山屯剑戟，后凭巫峡巢烽烟。
English: Looking ahead, the Lushan Mountains and the Jianye Mountains are in the foreground, and the Wuxia Gorge is in the background.

古文：轩皇尚自亲平寇，嬴政徒劳爱学仙。
现代文：轩皇尚自亲平寇，嬴政徒劳爱学仙。
English: Emperor Xuan is still a relative of Emperor Pingko, and he is a scholar of politics.

古文：想到隗宫寻胜处，正应莺语暮春天。
现代文：想到隗宫寻胜处，正应莺语暮春天。
English: When I think of the Saginomiya shrine, I think of late spring.

古文：王仁裕和曰：龙旆飘摇指极边，到时犹更二三千。
现代文：中书舍人王仁裕和诗一首。这首诗的大意是：龙旗飘摇指极边，到时犹更二三千。
English: There is a poem written by Wang Renyu, a scholar of Chinese literature, which says: The dragon flag is waving at the edge of the world, and by then there will be more than two or three thousand.

古文：登高晓蹋巉岩石，冒冷朝充断续烟。
现代文：登高晓蹋儿岩石，冒冷朝充断续烟。
English: The cold morning filled with intermittent smoke.

古文：自学汉皇开土字，不同周穆好神仙。
现代文：自学汉皇开土字，不同周穆好神仙。
English: Self-taught Han Emperor Kaidou characters, different Zhou Mu good immortals.

古文：秦民莫遣无恩及，大散关东别有天。
现代文：秦民莫遣无恩及，大散关东别有天。
English: The Qin people have no mercy and no mercy, and there will never be a day when Daxanguandong will be destroyed.

古文：洎至利州，已闻东师下固镇矣。
现代文：少主一行到达利州时，已经得到了后唐军攻占了固镇的消息！
English: When the young lord and his party arrived in Lizhou, they had already received the news that the post-Tang army had captured Guzhen!

古文：旬日内，又闻金牛败卒，塞硖而至。
现代文：十天之内，又听说金牛战败而死，后唐军塞峡而入。
English: Within ten days, it was also heard that Jinniu had been defeated and died, after which the Tang army entered Saixia.

古文：其时蜀师十余万，自绵汉至于深渡千余里，首尾相继，皆无心斗敌。
现代文：这时，蜀军尚有十多万人，自绵竹至汉州，陈兵在一千多里的防线上，首尾相连，但是都无心思跟入侵的唐军战斗。
English: At this time, the Shu army still had more than a hundred thousand people, from Mianzhu to Hanzhou, and Chen soldiers were connected end to end on a defense line of more than a thousand miles, but they had no intention of fighting the invading Tang army.

古文：遣使臣逼促，则回枪刺之曰：请唤取龙武军相战。
现代文：派去使臣督战逼迫急了，就调转枪头刺向使臣说：请你调来龙武军与敌战斗吧。
English: When it became urgent to send an envoy to supervise the battle, he turned the muzzle of the gun and said to the envoy: "Please bring the dragon army to fight the enemy."

古文：不惟勇敢，况且偏请衣粮。
现代文：龙武军不但骁勇，他们还多得到武器装备、粮晌。
English: The Longwu army not only fought bravely, they also received more weapons, equipment and food.

古文：我等拣退不堪，何能相杀。
现代文：我们都是被挑选乘下来的不合格者，怎么能够跟敌军相拼杀呢？
English: We are all unqualified people who have been selected, how can we fight with the enemy?

古文：实无余何，十月二十九日狼狈而归。
现代文：前去督战的使臣一点办法也没有。少主王衍一行，于十月二十九日中途返回。
English: The envoys who went to supervise the battle had no way of doing so. Shoshu Wangyan and his party returned in the middle of the day on October 29.

古文：于栈阁悬险溪岩壑之中，连夜继昼，却入成都。
现代文：在悬伏在险溪山谷的栈道上，夜以继日地狼狈逃回京城成都。
English: On the suspended walkway in the valley of the dangerous creek, night after night, they fled back to the capital city of Chengdu.

古文：康延孝与魏王继踵而入，少主于是树降。
现代文：后唐的康延孝与魏王朱继踵率兵进入城都，少主王衍立即树起白旗归降。
English: After Tang's Kang Yanxiao and Wei's King Zhu succeeded in leading the troops into the capital, the young lord Wang Yan immediately raised the white flag and surrendered.

古文：东军未入前，王宗弼杀韩昭、枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄、宣徽州使李周辂、欧阳冕等。
现代文：在后唐军没进入成都前，王宗弼杀掉了成都府尹韩昭，枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄，宣徽使李周辂、欧阳冕等。
English: Before the post-Tang army entered Chengdu, Wang Zongqi killed the Chengdu prefect Yin Han Zhao, the confidential envoys Song Guangzhi and Jing Runcheng, and the heraldic envoys Li Zhouqi and Ouyang Guan.

古文：王承休握锐兵于天水，兵刃不举。
现代文：王承休手握精锐的龙武军在天水，按兵不动。
English: Wang Chengyu shook hands with the elite dragon army in Tianshui and ordered his soldiers not to move.

古文：既知东军入蜀，遂拥麾下之师及妇女孩幼万余口，金银缯帛，于西蕃买路归蜀。
现代文：待知道后唐军攻入蜀中后，才率领龙武军及妇女孩童一万多人，用金银锦帛等买通羌人头领绕道回蜀。
English: It is to be known that after the Tang army invaded Shuzhong, it was only after he led the dragon army and more than ten thousand women and children, and used gold, silver, brocade, etc. to bribe the leader to return to Shuzhong.

古文：沿路为左衽掳夺，并经溪山，冻饿相践而死。
现代文：一路上经常遭遇到当地夷、狄、胡人的骚扰、掳掠。同时在翻越大山、涉过溪水时，冻饿而死与互相践踏而死的人不计其数。
English: Along the way, they were often harassed and plundered by local Yi, Di, and Hu people. At the same time, when climbing over mountains and wading through streams, countless people died of starvation and trampling each other.

古文：迨至蜀，存者百余人，唯与田宗汭等脱身而至。
现代文：回到蜀地时，侥幸生还的仅仅有一百多人，只有王承休与田宗汭等人逃回来了。
English: When they returned to Shoudi, there were only a hundred or so survivors, and only Wang Chengxiu and Tian Zongyao and others managed to escape.

古文：魏王使人诘之曰：亲握锐兵，何得不战？
现代文：魏王朱继踵派人责问王承休：你身为蜀国重臣，手握精锐之师，为什么不抵抗我唐军的进入？
English: King Zhu of Wei sent someone to ask Wang Chengxiu: As the chief minister of Shu and the teacher of the elite, why didn't you resist the entry of the Tang army?

古文：曰：惮大王神武，不敢当其锋。
现代文：王承休说：惧怕大王的神勇威武，不敢抵挡他的锋芒。
English: Wang Chengxiu said: The fear of the great king's bravery and might, dare not resist his edge.

古文：曰：何不早降？
现代文：来人问：为什么不早点投降？
English: People ask: Why didn't you surrender earlier?

古文：曰：盖缘王师不入封部，无门输款。
现代文：王承休说：都是因为大王的军队还没有进入蜀中，没有门路投降的缘故啊。
English: Wang Chengxiu said: It was all because the great king's army had not yet entered Shuzhong, and there was no way to surrender.

古文：曰：其初入蕃部，几许人同行？
现代文：来人问：当初进入西羌蕃人居住的地域时，有多少人和你同行？
English: A questioner asked: How many people were with you when you first entered the area inhabited by the Xidi people?

古文：曰：万余口。
现代文：王承休说：一万多人。
English: Wang Chengxiu said, "More than ten thousand people have come."

古文：今存者几何？
现代文：来人问：现在还剩有多少人？
English: People ask: how many people are left now?

古文：曰：才及百数。
现代文：王承休说：才有百余人。
English: Wang Chengxiu said: Only a hundred or so people left.

古文：魏王曰：汝可赏此万人之命。
现代文：魏王听到这里，说：你可以抵偿这死去的一万多人的性命。
English: When the Wei king heard this, he said, "You can compensate for the lives of the more than ten thousand people who died.

古文：遂尽斩之。
现代文：于是将王承休处斩。
English: As a result, Wang Chengyu was executed.

古文：蜀师不战，坐取亡灭者，盖承休、韩昭之所致也。
现代文：前蜀的军队不抵抗进入的唐军，蜀国君臣坐取灭亡，都是王承休、韩昭之流所造成的啊！
English: The former Shu army did not resist the invading Tang army, and the Shu monarchs and ministers sat down and perished, all caused by Wang Chengxiu and Han Zhao's line!

古文：人多不知之。
现代文：很多人都不知道其中的缘由。
English: Many people don't know why.

