古文：靖郭君将城薛，客多以谏。
现代文：靖郭君田婴准备在封地薛修筑城防工事，因为会引起齐王猜疑，不少门客去谏阻他。
English: Jing Guo Jun Tian Yu was preparing to build fortifications in the fief of Xue, because it would arouse the suspicion of King Qi, and many of his followers tried to stop him.

古文：靖郭君谓谒者，无为客通。
现代文：田婴于是吩咐传达人员不要为劝谏的门客通报。
English: Tian Ying then ordered the communicators not to inform the customers of the persuasion.

古文：齐人有请者曰： 臣请三言而已矣!益一言，臣请烹。 
现代文：有个门客请求谒见田婴，他保证说： 我只说三个字就走，要是多一个字，愿意领受烹杀之刑。 
English: When a disciple asked to see Tianying, he assured him, "I will only say three words before I leave. If I say one more word, I am willing to accept the punishment of being boiled alive."

古文：靖郭君因见之。
现代文：田婴于是接见他。
English: So Tianying went to see him.

古文：客趋而进曰： 海大鱼。 
现代文：客人快步走到他跟前，说： 海大鱼。 
English: The guest walked quickly up to him and said, "Big fish in the sea."

古文：因反走。
现代文：然后转身就走。
English: After saying this, he walked away.

古文：君曰： 客有于此。 
现代文：田婴赶忙问： 先生还有要说的话吧？ 
English: Tian Ying hurriedly asked: Does the teacher have anything else to say?

古文：客曰： 鄙臣不敢以死为戏。 
现代文：客人说： 我可不敢拿性命当儿戏！ 
English: The guest said: I wouldn't dare to play with my life!

古文：君曰： 亡，更言之。 
现代文：田婴说： 不碍事，先生请讲！ 
English: Tianying said: No problem, sir, please speak!

古文：对曰： 君不闻大鱼乎？
现代文：客人这才回答道： 你没听说过海里的大鱼吗？
English: The guest then replied: Haven't you heard of the big fish in the sea?

古文：网不能止，钩不能牵，荡而失水，则蝼蚁得意焉。
现代文：鱼网钓钩对它无能为力，但一旦因为得意忘形离开了水域，那么蝼蚁也能随意摆布它。
English: The fishnet hook can't do anything to it, but once it has left the water because it got carried away, then the ants can manipulate it at will.

古文：今夫齐，亦君之水也，君长有齐阴，奚以薛为？
现代文：以此相比，齐国也就如同殿下的 水 ，如果你永远拥有齐国，要了薛地有什么用呢？
English: Compared with this, Qi Province is like the water of His Highness, if you always have Qi Province, what is the use of Xue Di?

古文：夫齐，虽隆薛之城到于天，犹之无益也。 
现代文：而你如果失去了齐国，即使将薛邑的城墙筑得跟天一样高，又有什么作用呢？ 田婴称赞说： 对。 
English: And if you lose Qi, even if you build the walls of Xueyun as high as the sky, what good will it do? Tianying praised and said, "That's right."

古文：君曰： 善。 
现代文：于是停止了筑城的事。
English: As a result, the construction of the city was stopped.

