古文：帝女乃公侯主婚，故有公主之称；帝婿非正驾之车，乃是附马之职。
现代文：皇帝的女儿出嫁是由公侯主婚，所以皇帝的女儿称 公主 ；皇帝的女婿不能在中央驾车，所以称为 驸马 。
English: The emperor's daughter was married by the prince, so the emperor's daughter was called the princess; the emperor's son-in-law could not drive in the center, so he was called the horse.

古文：郡主县君，皆宗女之谓；仪宾国宾，皆宗婿之称。
现代文： 郡主 和 县君 是对皇帝同宗女儿的称呼； 仪宾 、 国宾 是对皇帝同宗女婿的称呼。
English: "Princess" and "Countess" were the names given to the emperor's daughters from the same family; "guest of honor" and "state guest" were the names given to the emperor's sons-in-law from the same family.

古文：旧好曰通家，好亲日懿戚。
现代文：世代交好叫 通家 ；皇室宗亲称 懿戚 。
English: Intergenerational friendship is called family ties; the royal family's relatives are called relatives.

古文：冰清玉润，丈人女婿同荣；泰水泰山，岳母岳父两号。
现代文： 冰清玉润 是说丈人和女婿同享殊荣； 泰山 、 泰水 是对岳父。
English: Bingqing Yurun means that the father-in-law and son-in-law share the honor; Mount Tai and Water Tai are for the father-in-law.

古文：新婿曰娇客，贵婿日乘龙。
现代文：岳母的称呼。新婚的女婿称作 娇客 ；称心的佳婿叫 乘龙 。
English: The newly married son-in-law is called 娇客; the grateful son-in-law is called 乘龙.

古文：赘婚曰馆甥，贤婿曰快婿。
现代文：入赘的女婿叫做 馆甥 ；有贤德的女婿叫 快婿 。
English: A son-in-law who enters the imperial court is called a grandnephew; a son-in-law with virtue is called a fast son-in-law.

古文：凡属东床，俱称半子。
现代文：凡是女婿都是半个儿子。
English: Every son-in-law is half a son.

古文：女子号门楣，唐贵妃有光于父母；外甥称宅相，晋魏舒期报于母家。
现代文：女子被称为 门楣 ，是因为杨贵妃使父母得到了荣耀；外甥称为 宅相 ，晋代魏舒期望以显贵来报答母家。
English: A woman was called a "door keeper" because Yang Guifei had brought honor to her parents; a nephew was called a "house minister," and the Jin Dynasty Wei Shu hoped to reward his mother's family with prominence.

古文：共叙旧姻，曰原有瓜葛之亲；自谦劣戚，曰忝在葭莩之末。
现代文：共叙旧时姻亲，便说 原有瓜葛之亲 ；自谦是无所作为的亲戚，便说 忝在葭莩之末 。
English: When old in-laws are recounted together, they are said to be relatives of the original relationship; relatives who are self-effacing and do nothing are said to be at the end of their tether.

古文：大乔小乔，皆姨夫之号；连襟连袂，亦姨夫之称。
现代文： 大乔 、 小乔 指代姐妹的丈夫； 连襟 、 连袂 是对姐妹丈夫的称呼。
English: Da Qiao, Xiao Qiao refer to the husbands of sisters; Lian Er, Lian Jiao refer to the husbands of sisters.

古文：蒹葭依玉树，自谦借戚属之光；茑萝施乔松，自幸得依附之所。
现代文： 蒹葭傍依玉树 ，是自谦借了亲戚的荣光； 茑萝施乔松 ，是比喻自己有了依托。
English: To lean on a jade tree is to humbly borrow the glory of one's relatives; to lean on a lotus is to have one's own support.

