古文：大学之道，在明明德，在亲民，在止于至善。
现代文：大学的宗旨在于弘扬光明正大的品德，在于使人弃旧图新，在于使人达到最完善的境界。
English: The purpose of a university is to promote the virtue of rectitude, to make people abandon the old and embrace the new, and to enable people to reach the most perfect realm.

古文：知止而后有定，定而后能静，静而后能安，安而后能虑，虑而后能得。
现代文：知道应达到的境界才能够志向坚定；志向坚定才能够镇静不躁；镇静不躁才能够心安理得；心安理得才能够思虑周详；思虑周详才能够有所收获。
English: To be able to know where to stop, to stop at the best, then the will has the power of concentration; the will has the power of concentration, then the heart can calm down and will not move; to be able to do the heart not to move, then to be able to be at peace with the situation; to be able to be at peace with the situation, then to be able to handle things carefully and thoughtfully; to be able to think carefully, to get the realm of the best.

古文：物有本末，事有终始。
现代文：每样东西都有根本有枝末，每件事情都有开始有终结。
English: Everything has a root and branches, everything has a beginning and an end.

古文：知所先后，则近道矣。
现代文：明白了这本末始终的道理，就接近事物发展的规律了。
English: If you understand this fundamental truth, you will be closer to the law of development of things.

古文：古之欲明明德于天下者，先治其国。欲治其国者，先齐其家。欲齐其家者，先修其身。欲修其身者，先正其心。欲正其心者，先诚其意。欲诚其意者，先致其知。致知在格物。
现代文：古代那些要想在天下弘扬光明正大品德的人，先要治理好自己的国家；要想治理好自己的国家，先要管理好自己的家庭和家族；要想管理好自己的家庭和家族，先要修养自身的品性；要想修养自身的品性，先要端正自己的心思；要想端正自己的心思，先要使自己的意念真诚；要想使自己的意念真诚，先要使自己获得知识；获得知识的途径在于认识、研究万事万物。
English: In ancient times, those who wanted to promote the principles of righteousness and virtue in the world should first govern their own country well; if they wanted to govern their own country well, they should first manage their own family; if they wanted to manage their own family well, they should first cultivate their own character; if they wanted to cultivate their own character, they should first rectify their own mind; if they wanted to rectify their own mind, they should first make their thoughts sincere; if they wanted to make their thoughts sincere, they should first gain knowledge; the way to gain knowledge is to know and study everything.

古文：物格而后知至，知至而后意诚，意诚而后心正，心正而后身修，身修而后家齐，家齐而后国治，国治而后天下平。
现代文：通过对万事万物的认识、研究后才能获得知识；获得知识后意念才能真诚；意念真诚后心思才能端正；心思端正后才能修养品性；品性修养后才能管理好家庭和家族；管理好家庭和家族后才能治理好国家；治理好国家后天下才能太平。
English: Through the understanding and study of all things, knowledge can be obtained only after knowledge is obtained; after knowledge is obtained, thoughts can be sincere; after thoughts are sincere, thoughts can be correct; after thoughts are correct, character can be cultivated; after character can be cultivated, families and families can be managed well; after families and families can be managed well, the country can be governed well; after the country can be governed well, the world can be peaceful.

古文：自天子以至于庶人，壹是皆以修身为本。
现代文：上至天子下至平民百姓，都应该以修养自身的品德为根本。
English: From the head of state down to the common people, everyone should take the cultivation of character as the fundamental.

古文：其本乱而末治者否矣。
现代文：人的根本败坏了，末节反倒能调理好，这是不可能的。
English: It is impossible for a person to be fundamentally corrupt and still be well-adjusted at the end.

古文：其所厚者薄，而其所薄者厚，未之有也。
现代文：轻视重要的根本，而重视次要的末节，这在古代圣人那里是没有的。
English: It is also impossible to set priorities and do things well while putting the cart before the horse!

古文：此谓知本，此谓知之至也。
现代文：这才叫知道根本，这才是至上的智慧。
English: This is the essence of wisdom, the highest level of wisdom.

古文：所谓诚其意者，毋自欺也。
现代文：所谓使自己的意念诚实，就是说不要自己欺骗自己。
English: To be honest with oneself means not to deceive oneself.

古文：如恶恶臭，如好好色，此之谓自慊。
现代文：就像厌恶难闻的气味，喜好美色一样出自真心，这样才算是满足自己的心意。
English: Just as aversion to bad smells and a liking for beauty come from the heart, so does the satisfaction of one's own mind.

古文：故君子必慎其独也。
现代文：所以品德高尚的人在一人独处的时候一定要十分小心谨慎。
English: Therefore, a gentleman must be cautious when he is alone.

古文：小人闲居为不善，无所不至，见君子而后厌然，掩其不善而著其善。
现代文：品德低下的人在私下里无恶不作。见到君子之后便躲躲藏藏，将他们做的坏事掩藏起来，表面上装作善良恭顺。
English: People with low moral character do nothing but evil in private. When they see a gentleman, they hide and hide, cover up the bad things they have done, and pretend to be kind and obedient on the surface.

古文：人之视己，如见其肺肝然，则何益矣。
现代文：殊不知，别人看你自己，就像能看见你的心肺肝脏一样清楚，这样掩盖又有什么用呢？
English: After all, others can see you just as clearly as they can see your heart, lungs and liver, so what's the point of covering up?

古文：此谓诚于中，形于外，故君子必慎其独也。
现代文：这就是所谓的内心的真实情况，一定会显露在外表上。所以品德高尚的人哪怕是独处的时候，也一定要十分小心谨慎。
English: This is called the truth of the heart will show up on the outside. Therefore, people of high moral character, even when alone, must also be cautious.

古文：曾子曰： 十目所视，十手所指，其严乎！ 
现代文：曾子说： 一个人被众人注视，被众人指责，这是多么令人畏惧啊！ 
English: Zeng Zi said, "Many pairs of eyes are watching, many fingers are pointing. Isn't this frightening?

古文：富润屋，德润身，心广体胖，故君子必诚其意。
现代文：财富可以装饰房屋，品德可以修养身心，心胸宽广能体态安适，所以，品德高尚的人一定要意念真诚。
English: Wealth can decorate a house, but virtue can cultivate the mind and body, making the mind broad and the body comfortable and healthy.

古文：《诗》云： 瞻彼淇澳，菉竹猗猗。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 看那弯弯的淇水岸边，绿竹苍郁。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Look at the water's curved shore, the lush green bamboo.

古文：有斐君子，如切如磋，如琢如磨。
现代文：那文质彬彬的君子，像切磋骨器、琢磨玉器那样治学修身。
English: That gentleman, with his refined manners, studied and cultivated himself like he studied bone tools and polished jade tools.

古文：瑟兮僴兮，赫兮喧兮。
现代文：他庄重威严，光明显耀。
English: He is dignified and cheerful, with a regal air.

古文：有斐君子，终不可喧兮。 
现代文：那文质彬彬的君子啊，令人难以忘记！ 
English: That gentleman with his refined manners is hard to forget!

古文： 如切如磋 者，道学也。 如琢如磨 者，自修也。 瑟兮僴兮 者，恂傈也。 赫兮喧兮 者，威仪也。 有斐君子，终不可喧兮 者，道盛德至善，民之不能忘也。《诗》云： 於戏，前王不忘！ 
现代文：所谓 像切磋骨器 ，是说治学之道；所谓 像琢磨玉器 ，是说自身的品德修养；所谓 庄重威严 ，是说君子谦逊谨慎，所谓 光明显耀 ，是说君子仪表的威严； 那文质彬彬的君子啊，令人难以忘记 ，是说君子的品德完美，达到了最高境界的善，百姓自然不会忘记他。《诗经》上说： 哎呀，先前的贤王不会被人忘记。 
English: The so-called "like sharpening a bone tool" refers to the way of learning; the so-called "like polishing a jade tool" refers to the cultivation of one's own moral character; the so-called "solemn majesty" refers to the gentleman's modesty and prudence, the so-called "bright and shining" refers to the majesty of the gentleman's appearance; the gentleman with a refined temperament is hard to forget, the gentleman's moral character is perfect and has reached the highest level of goodness, and the people will naturally not forget him. "Song of Songs" said: Alas, the previous wise king will not be forgotten.

古文：君子贤其贤而亲其亲，小人乐其乐而利其利，此以没世不忘也。
现代文：后世君子，尊前代贤王之所尊，亲前代贤王之所亲，后代百姓因先前贤王而享安乐，获收益。
English: This is because the monarchs and aristocrats can follow the example of the previous generation of monarchs, respect the wise, and be close to relatives. Ordinary people also receive grace, enjoy comfort, and gain benefits. Therefore, although the previous generation of monarchs has passed away, people will never forget them.

古文：《康诰》曰： 克明德。 
现代文：这样前代贤王虽过世而不会被人遗忘。《尚书·周书》中的《康诰》篇上说： 能够弘扬美德。 
English: "Kang Ye" said: Be able to carry forward the bright moral.

古文：《大甲》曰： 顾諟天之明命。 
现代文：《尚书·商书》中的《太甲》篇中说： 思念上天的高尚品德。 
English: "Taijia" said: "Don't forget to remember the light and vitality bestowed by heaven."

古文：《帝典》曰： 克明峻德。 
现代文：《尚书·虞书》中《帝典》篇中说： 能够弘扬伟大的德行。 
English: "Emperor's Code" says: Be able to promote the noble character.

古文：皆自明也。
现代文：这些都是说要自己发扬美德。
English: All of this is to say that they should promote the virtue of being above board.

古文：汤之《盘铭》曰： 苟日新，日日新，又日新。 《康诰》曰： 作新民。 
现代文：商汤的《盘铭》上说： 如果一日洗刷干净了，就应该天天洗净，不间断。 《康诰》篇上说： 劝勉人们自新。 
English: "If you can make it new for a day, you should keep it new every day, and if it's new, you should update it," said the motto inscribed on the bathtub by the Tang Dynasty merchant.

古文：《诗》曰： 周虽旧邦，其命维新。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 周朝虽是旧国，但文王承受天命是新的。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Although the Zhou Dynasty is an old country, it has received a new destiny.

古文：是故君子无所不用其极。《诗》云： 邦畿千里，维民所止。 
现代文：因此，君子处处都要追求至善的境界。《诗经》上说： 京城方圆千里，都为百姓居住。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman should pursue the realm of perfection everywhere. "The Book of Songs" says: The capital is surrounded by thousands of miles and is inhabited by common people.

古文：《诗》云： 缗蛮黄鸟，止于丘隅。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 啁啾鸣叫的黄莺，栖息在多树的山丘上。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: "The hooting swan roosts on the tree-covered hills.

古文：子曰： 于止，知其所止，可以人而不如鸟乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 啊呀，黄莺都知道自己的栖息之处，难道人反而不如鸟吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Even a yellow bird knows where it should roost. Can a person be better than a bird?

古文：《诗》云： 穆穆文王，於缉熙敬止！ 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 仪态端庄美好的文王啊，他德行高尚，使人无不仰慕。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: O King Wen, who is of high moral character, you are a bright and upright person, and you always do things with solemnity and caution.

古文：为人君，止于仁；为人臣止于敬；为人子，止于孝；为人父，止于慈；与国人交，止于信。
现代文：身为国君，当努力施仁政；身为下臣，当尊敬君主；身为人之子，当孝顺父母；身为人之父，当慈爱为怀；与国人交往，应当诚实，有信用。
English: As a sovereign, you should strive to practice benevolent politics; as a vassal, you should respect the monarch; as a son, you should be filial; as a father, you should be loving; and in your dealings with the people of your country, you should be honest and trustworthy.

古文：子曰： 听讼，吾犹人也。必也使无讼乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 审断争讼，我的能力与他人的一般无二，但我力争使争讼根本就不发生。 
English: Confucius said, "When I hear of a lawsuit being tried, I, like everyone else, aim to prevent the lawsuit from happening again.

古文：无情者不得尽其辞，大畏民志。
现代文：违背实情的人，不能尽狡辩之能事，使民心敬畏。
English: Those who go against the facts cannot do their best to arouse the people's awe.

古文：此谓知本 。
现代文：这叫做知道什么是根本。
English: It's called knowing what's fundamental.

古文：所谓修身在正其心者，身有所忿懥，则不得其正，有所恐惧，则不得其正，有所好乐，则不得其正，有所忧患，则不得其正。
现代文：如要修养好品德，则先要端正心意。心中愤愤不平，则得不到端正；心中恐惧不安，则得不到端正；心里有偏好，则得不到端正；心里有忧患，则得不到端正。
English: The so-called cultivation of the body is to rectify one's heart, that is to say, if one has resentment and anger, the heart cannot be rectified; if one has fear, the heart cannot be rectified; if one has liking, the heart cannot be rectified; if one has worry, the heart cannot be rectified.

古文：心不在焉，视而不见，听而不闻，食而不知其味。
现代文：一旦心不在焉，就是看了，却什么也看不到；听了，却什么也听不到；吃了，却辨别不出味道。
English: The mind is not right, just as the mind is not in oneself: although looking, it is as if it does not see; although listening, it is as if it does not hear; although eating, it does not know what it is.

古文：此谓修身在正其心。
现代文：所以说，修养品德关键在端正心意。
English: Therefore, in order to cultivate one's own character, one must first be mindful and focused.

古文：所谓齐其家在修其身者，人之其所亲爱而辟焉，之其所贱恶而辟焉，之其所畏敬而辟焉，之其所哀矜而辟焉，之其所敖惰而辟焉。
现代文：如要调整好家族，则先要修养好品德，为什么呢？因为人往往对他所亲近喜爱的人有偏见，对他所轻视讨厌的人有偏见，对他所畏惧恭敬的人有偏见，对他所怜惜同情的人有偏见，对他所傲视怠慢的人有偏见。
English: The reason why it is said that the management of a good home and family must first cultivate oneself is because people will have preferences for those they love; they will have preferences for those they dislike; they will have preferences for those they revere; they will have preferences for those they sympathize with; and they will have prejudices for those they despise.

古文：故好而知其恶，恶而知其美者，天下鲜矣。
现代文：所以喜爱一个人但又认识到他的缺点，不喜欢一个人但又认识到他优点的人，也少见。
English: That is why it is rare to find someone who likes a person but recognizes his shortcomings, and someone who dislikes a person but recognizes his strengths.

古文：故谚有之曰： 人莫知其子之恶，莫知其苗之硕。 
现代文：因此有一则谚语说： 人看不到自己孩子的过错，人察觉不到自己的庄稼好。 
English: Therefore there is a saying: One does not see the faults of one's children, one does not notice the good of one's crops.

古文：此谓身不修，不可以齐其家。
现代文：这就是不修养好品德，就调整不好家族的道理。
English: This is the reason that if you do not cultivate a good character, you will not be able to adjust your family.

古文：所谓治国必先齐其家者，其家不可教而能教人者，无之。
现代文：要治理好国家，必须先要调整好自己的家族，因为不能教育好自己家族的人反而能教育好一国之民，这是从来不会有的事情。
English: If you want to govern a country well, you must first adjust your own family, because those who cannot educate their own family well can educate the people of a country well, which is something that will never happen.

古文：故君子不出家而成教于国。
现代文：所以，君子不出家门而能施教于国民。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can teach the people without leaving home.

古文：孝者，所以事君也；弟者，所以事长也；慈者，所以使众也。《康诰》曰： 如保赤子。 
现代文：孝顺，是侍奉君主的原则，尊兄，是侍奉长官的原则，仁慈，是控制民众的原则。《康诰》中说： 像爱护婴儿那样。 
English: Filial piety is the principle of serving the monarch, respect for one's elder brother is the principle of serving the magistrate, and benevolence is the principle of controlling the people.

古文：心诚求之，虽不中，不远矣。
现代文：诚心诚意去爱护，即便不合乎婴儿的心意，也相差不远。
English: Pursue sincerely from the heart, and even if you do not reach the goal, it will not be too far away.

古文：未有学养子而后嫁者也。
现代文：不曾有过先学养育孩子再出嫁的人呀！
English: You know, people who haven't learned how to raise children before getting married!

古文：一家仁，一国兴仁；一家让，一国兴让；一人贪戾，一国作乱，其机如此。
现代文：一家仁爱相亲，一国就会仁爱成风；一家谦让相敬，一国就会谦让成风；一人贪婪暴戾，一国就会大乱一一它们的相互关系就是这样。
English: One benevolence, one country will rise benevolence; one courtesy, one country will rise courtesy; one greedy and violent, one country will commit disorder, the connection is so close.

古文：此谓一言偾事，一人定国。
现代文：这就叫做一句话可以败坏大事，一个人可以决定国家。
English: This is called: one word can cause bad things, one person can stabilize the country.

古文：尧、舜率天下以仁，而民从之。
现代文：尧、舜用仁政统治天下，百姓就跟从他们实施仁爱。
English: ,  used benevolent politics to rule the world, and the people followed them to practice benevolence.

古文：桀、纣率天下以暴，而民从之。
现代文：桀、纣用暴政统治天下，百姓就跟从他们残暴不仁。
English: , used tyranny to rule the world, and the people followed their cruel lead.

古文：其所令反其所好，而民不从。
现代文：他们命令大家做的，与他自己所喜爱的凶暴相反，因此百姓不服从。
English: The ruler's orders are contrary to his actual practices, and the people will not obey.

古文：是故君子有诸己而后求诸人，无诸己而后非诸人。
现代文：因此，君子要求自己具有品德后再要求他人，自己先不做坏事，然后再要求他人不做。
English: Therefore, a virtuous person always does it himself first, and then asks others to do it; he does not do it himself first, and then asks others not to do it.

古文：所藏乎身不恕，而能喻诸人者，未之有也。
现代文：自己藏有不合 己所不欲，勿施于人 这一恕道的行为，却能使他人明白恕道，这是不会有的事情。
English: What is hidden in the heart cannot be pushed out to others, but it can make others understand, which is impossible.

古文：故治国在齐其家。
现代文：因此，国家的治理，在于先调整好家族。
English: Therefore, if you want to govern the country, you must first manage your own home and family.

古文：《诗》云： 桃之夭夭，其叶蓁蓁。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 桃花绚烂，枝繁叶茂。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The peach blossoms are brilliant, the branches and leaves are luxuriant.

古文：之子于归，宜其家人。 
现代文：姑娘出嫁，合家欢快。 
English: When a girl marries, the family is happy.

古文：宜其家人，而后可以教国人。《诗》云： 宜兄宜弟。 
现代文：只有合家相亲和睦后，才能够调教一国之民。《诗经》上说： 尊兄爱弟。 
English: Let the whole family be in harmony, and only then can the people of a country be in harmony. "The Book of Songs" says: "Brotherly harmony."

古文：宜兄宜弟，而后可以教国人。
现代文：兄弟相处和睦后，才可以调教一国的人民。
English: Once brothers are reconciled, only then can the people of a country be reconciled.

古文：《诗》云： 其仪不忒，正是四国。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 他的仪容没有差错，成为四方之国的准则。 
English: "The Book of Songs" said: His appearance and demeanor were solemn and serious, and he became a role model for the countries of the four quarters.

古文：其为父子兄弟足法，而后民法之也。
现代文：能使父亲、儿子、兄长、弟弟各谋其位，百姓才能效法。
English: It is only when a man is worthy of emulation, whether as a father, a son, or an elder or younger brother, that the people will emulate him.

古文：此谓治国在齐其家。
现代文：这就叫做治理好国家首先要调整好家族。
English: This is the reason why, in order to govern the country, it is necessary to first manage the home and the family.

古文：所谓平天下在治其国者，上老老而民兴孝，上长长而民兴弟，上恤孤而民不倍，是以君子有絜矩之道也。
现代文：要平定天下，先要治理好自己的国家。因为居上位的人敬重老人，百姓就会敬重老人；居上位的人敬重兄长，百姓就会敬重兄长，居上位的人怜爱孤小，百姓就不会不讲信义。所以，君子的言行具有模范作用。
English: In order to pacify the world, it is first necessary to govern one's own country well. Because those who hold high positions respect the elderly, the people will respect the elderly; those who hold high positions respect their brothers and sisters, the people will respect their brothers and sisters; those who hold high positions love the lonely and the small, and the people will not be unfaithful. Therefore, the words and deeds of a gentleman have an exemplary role.

古文：所恶于上，毋以使下，所恶于下，毋以事上；所恶于前，毋以先后；所恶于后，毋以从前；所恶于右，毋以交于左；所恶于左，毋以交于右；此之谓絜矩之道。《诗》云： 乐只君子，民之父母。 
现代文：厌恶上级的所作所为，就不要用同样的做法对待下级；厌恶下级的所作所为，就不要用同样的做法对待上级；厌恶在我之前的人的所作所为，就不要用同样的做法对待在我之后的人，厌恶在我之后的人的所作所为，就不要用同样的做法对待在我之前的人，厌恶在我右边的人的所作所为，就不要用同样的方法与我左侧的人交往；厌恶在我左边的人的所作所为，就不要用同样的方法与我右侧的人交往。这就是所说的模范作用。《诗经》上说： 快乐啊国君，你是百姓的父母。 
English: If you dislike a certain action of your superior, do not do it to your subordinate; if you dislike a certain action of your subordinate, do not do it to your superior; if you dislike a certain action of the person in front of you, do not do it to the person behind you; if you dislike a certain action of the person behind you, do not do it to the person in front of you; if you dislike a certain action of the person on your right, do not do it to the person on your left; if you dislike a certain action of the person on your left, do not do it to the person on your right.

古文：民之所好好之，民之所恶恶之，此之谓民之父母。《诗》云： 节彼南山，维石岩岩。
现代文：百姓喜爱的他就喜爱，百姓厌恶的他就厌恶，这就是所说的百姓的父母。《诗经》上说： 高高的南山啊，重峦叠嶂。
English: He also likes what the common people like, and he also dislikes what the common people dislike. Such a sovereign can be said to be the common people's parents. "Song of Songs" says: Towering Nanshan, the rock stands tall.

古文：赫赫师尹，民具尔瞻。 
现代文：光耀显赫的尹太师啊，众人都把你仰望。 
English: Eminent Yin Taishi, the people are looking up to you.

古文：有国者不可以不慎，辟，则为天下僇矣。
现代文：统治国家的人不能不谨慎，出了差错就会被天下百姓杀掉。
English: Those who govern the country must be cautious. If they are a little biased, they will be overthrown by the people of the world.

古文：《诗》云： 殷之未丧师，克配上帝。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 殷朝没有丧失民众时，能够与上天的意旨相配合。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When the Yin Dynasty has not lost the hearts of the people, it can still meet the requirements of heaven.

古文：仪监于殷，峻命不易。 
现代文：应以殷朝的覆亡为鉴，天命得来不易啊。 
English: Please use Yin Dynasty as a warning. It is not an easy thing to keep one's destiny.

古文：道得众则得国，失众则失国。
现代文：这就是说得到民众的拥护，就会得到国家；失去民众的拥护，就会失去国家。
English: That is to say, if you win the people's hearts, you will win the country, and if you lose the people's hearts, you will lose the country.

古文：是故君子先慎乎德。
现代文：所以，君子应该谨慎地修养德行。
English: Therefore, people with high moral character first pay attention to cultivating virtue.

古文：有德此有人，有人此有土，有土此有财，有财此有用。
现代文：具备了德行才能获得民众，有了民众才会有国土，有了国土才会有财富，有了财富才能享用。
English: Virtue is needed to be supported, support is needed to hold land, land is needed to have wealth, and wealth is needed to supply and use.

古文：德者本也，财者末也。
现代文：德行为根本，财富为末端。
English: Virtue is the root, and wealth is the end.

古文：外本内末，争民施夺。
现代文：如若本末倒置，民众就会互相争斗、抢夺。
English: If the roles were reversed, people would fight and rob each other.

古文：是故财聚则民散，财散则民聚。
现代文：因此，财富聚集在国君手中，就可以使百姓离散，财富疏散给百姓，百姓就会聚在国君身边。
English: Therefore, if a king amasses wealth and hoards goods, the people's hearts will be scattered; if a king scatters wealth and hoards goods, the people's hearts will be gathered together.

古文：是故言悖而出者，亦悖而入；货悖而入者，亦悖而出。《康诰》曰： 惟命不于常。 
现代文：所以你用不合情理的言语说别人，别人也会用不合情理的言语说你，用不合情理的方法获取的财富，也会被人用不合情理的方法夺走。《康诰》上说： 天命不是始终如一的。 
English: Just as you speak unreasonably, people will answer you with unreasonable words; the wealth obtained by improper means will be taken away by others in an improper manner. "Kang Xi" said: The fate of heaven will not be consistent.

古文：道善则得之，不善则失之矣。
现代文：德行好的就会得天命，德行不好就会失掉天命。
English: That is to say, if you do a good deed, you will get a good fortune, and if you don't do a good deed, you will lose a good fortune.

古文：《楚书》曰： 楚国无以为宝，惟善以为宝。 
现代文：《楚书》上说： 楚国没有什么可以当做珍宝的，只是把德行当做珍宝。 
English: "The Book of Chu" says: Nothing in the State of Chu is a treasure, only the good is considered a treasure.

古文：舅犯曰： 亡人无以为宝，仁亲以为宝。 
现代文：舅犯说： 流亡的人没有什么可以当做珍宝的，只是把挚爱亲人当做珍宝。 
English: My fugitive, my uncle said, does not treasure wealth, but kindness.

古文：《秦誓》曰： 若有一介臣，断断兮无他技，其心休休焉，其如有容焉。
现代文：《秦誓》上说： 如果有这样一个大臣，他虽没有什么才能，但心地诚实宽大，能够容纳他人。
English: "Qin Zhe" said: If there is such a minister, sincere and faithful, with no other special skills, but his character is noble, his heart is generous, and he can accommodate people.

古文：人之有技，若己有之；人之彦圣，其心好之，不啻若自其口出。
现代文：别人有才能，如同他自己有一样；别人德才兼备，他诚心诚意喜欢，不只是口头上说说而已。
English: Others have talent, as he has; others have both talent and virtue, and he likes them sincerely, not just verbally.

古文：实能容之，以能保我子孙黎民，尚亦有利哉！
现代文：能够留用这人，便能够保护我的子孙百姓。这对百姓是多么有利啊。
English: If I can keep this man, I will be able to protect my descendants and the people. How beneficial this is for the people.

古文：人之有技，媢疾以恶之；人之彦圣，而违之俾不通：实不能容，以不能保我子孙黎民，亦曰殆哉！ 
现代文：如果别人有才能，就嫉妒厌恶；别人德才兼备，就阻拦他施展才干。不能留用这样的人，他不能保护我的子孙百姓，这种人也实在是危险啊。 
English: If someone has talent, he envies and loathes him; if someone has both virtue and talent, he prevents him from exercising his talent. Such a person cannot be retained, he cannot protect my children and grandchildren, and such a person is really dangerous.

古文：唯仁人放流之，迸诸四夷，不与同中国。
现代文：只有仁德的人能把这种嫉妒贤人的人流放，驱逐到边远地区，使他们不能留在国家的中心地区。
English: Only a benevolent ruler can exile these jealous people, banish them to Shii, and not live with them in the country.

古文：此谓唯仁人为能爱人，能恶人。
现代文：这叫做只有仁德的人能够爱人，能够恨人。
English: That is to say, only a benevolent person knows what kind of person to love and what kind of person to loathe.

古文：见贤而不能举，举而不能先，命也；见不善而不能退，退而不能远，过也。
现代文：看到贤人而不举荐，举荐了但不尽快使用，这是怠慢。看到不好的人却不能摈弃，摈弃了却不能放逐到远方，这是过错。
English: To see a wise man and not recommend him, or to recommend him and not reuse him, is negligence; to see a bad man and not expel him, or to expel him and not exile him far away, is a mistake.

古文：好人之所恶，恶人之所好，是谓拂人之性，菑必逮夫身。
现代文：喜欢人所厌恶的，厌恶人所喜欢的，这是违背了人性，灾害必然会降临到他的身上。
English: It is against human nature to like what is disliked, and to dislike what is liked. Disaster is bound to befall him.

古文：是故君子有大道，必忠信以得之，骄泰以失之。
现代文：因此，君子所有的高尚德行，一定要忠诚老实才能够获得，骄纵放肆便会失去。
English: Therefore, there is a correct way for a person to be a sovereign: if you are loyal and faithful, you will gain everything; if you are arrogant and indulgent, you will lose everything.

古文：生财有大道，生之者众，食之者寡，为之者疾，用之者舒，则财恒足矣。
现代文：发财致富有这样一条原则：生产财富的人要多，消耗财富的人要少；干得要快，用得要慢，这样就可以永远保持富足了。
English: There is also a correct way to produce wealth; more people produce, fewer people consume; people who produce are diligent, and people who consume are thrifty.

古文：仁者以财发身，不仁者以身发财。
现代文：有德行的人会舍财修身，没有德行的人会舍身求财。
English: In this way, wealth will always be plentiful. Benevolent people cultivate their virtues by saving money for the sake of righteousness. Uncharitable people save money for the sake of wealth at the cost of their lives.

古文：未有上好仁而下不好义者也，未有好义其事不终者也，未有府库财非其财者也。
现代文：没有居上位的人喜爱仁慈而下位的人不喜爱忠义的；没有喜爱忠义而完不成自己事业的；没有国库里的财富最终不归属于国君的。
English: There is no one at the top who loves kindness, and no one at the bottom who loves faithfulness; there is no one at the bottom who loves faithfulness and does things half-heartedly; there is no treasure in the treasury that does not belong to the sovereign.

古文：孟献子曰： 畜马乘，不察于鸡豚；伐冰之家，不畜牛羊；百乘之家，不畜聚敛之臣。
现代文：孟献子说： 拥有一车四马的人，不应计较一鸡一猪的财物；卿大夫家不饲养牛羊；拥有马车百辆的人家，不豢养收敛财富的家臣。
English: Meng Xianzi said: A person who owns a cart and four horses should not care about the property of a chicken and a pig; the doctor's family does not raise cattle and sheep; a family that owns a hundred carriages does not raise a wealth-constrained vassal.

古文：与其有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣。 
现代文：与其有聚敛民财的家臣，还不如有盗贼式的家臣。 
English: It is better to have a vassal who steals than to have a vassal who steals.

古文：此谓国不以利为利，以义为利也。
现代文：这是说，国家不应把财物当做利益，而应把仁义作为利益。
English: Therefore, a country should not take wealth and goods as its interests, but should take benevolence as its interests.

古文：长国家而务财用者，必自小人矣。
现代文：掌管国家大事的人只致力于财富的聚敛，这一定是来自小人的主张。
English: People in charge of national affairs are only committed to the accumulation of wealth. This must be the opinion of a villain.

古文：彼为善之，小人之使为国家，灾害并至。虽有善者，亦无如之何矣！
现代文：假如认为这种做法是好的，小人被用来为国家服务，那么灾害就会一起来到，纵使有贤臣，也无济于事啊！
English: If this practice is considered to be good, and villains are used to serve the state, then disasters will come together, and even if there are wise men, it won't help!

古文：此谓国不以利为利，以义为利也。
现代文：这就是说国家不要把财利当做利益，而应把仁义当做利益。
English: Therefore, a country should not take wealth and goods as its interests, but should take benevolence as its interests.

