古文：朱化李詹王公直黄敏陈君棱王洞微孙季贞崔道纪何泽岳州人徐可范建业妇人广陵男子何马子章邵韩立善僧修准宇文氏李贞僧秀荣毋乾昭李绍
现代文：朱化李詹王公直黄敏陈君棱王洞微孙季贞崔道纪何泽岳州人徐可范建业妇人广陵男子何马子章邵韩立善僧修准宇文氏李贞僧秀荣毋乾昭李绍
English: Zhu Hua Li Zhan Wang Gong Zhi Huang Min Chen Jun Ren Wang Dong Wei Sun Ji Zhen Cui Dao Ji He Zhe Yue Zhou People Xu Ke Fan Construction Women Guang Ling Men He Ma Zi Zhang Shao Han Li Good Monk Xiu Jun Wu Wen Clan Li Zhen Monk Xiu Rong Wu Qian Zhao Li Shao

古文：朱化
现代文：朱化
English: Zhuhua

古文：洛阳人朱化者，以贩羊为业。
现代文：洛阳人朱化，以贩卖羊为职业。
English: Zhu Hua, from Luoyang, is a sheep trader.

古文：唐贞元初，西行抵邠宁，回易其羊。
现代文：唐朝贞元初年，往西走到邠宁，买了那地方的羊返回。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, he went west to Huning, bought a sheep from that place and returned.

古文：有一人见化谓曰： 君市羊求利，当求丰赡，君见羊之小者，以为不可易也。殊不知小者不久而大也，自小而易，及货而大，其利不亦博乎！
现代文：有一人见到朱化对他说： 你买卖羊赚钱，应该想办法多赚钱，但你看到小羊，就认为不可以买，你不知道小羊不久就会变为大羊，从小把它买来，等你卖的时候就大了，这里的利润不是很大吗？
English: One person who saw Zhu Hua said to him, "If you make money by trading sheep, you should find a way to make more money. But when you see a lamb, you think you can't buy it. You don't know that a lamb will soon turn into a big lamb. Buy it when you are young, and it will be big when you sell it. Isn't the profit here huge?"

古文：易之大者，其羊必少，易之小者，其羊必多，羊多则利厚也，羊少则利寡也。 
现代文：你买大羊，一定买得少；买小羊，就会买得很多。羊多，赚的钱也多；羊少，赚的钱也少。 
English: If you buy a large sheep, you will definitely buy less cattle; if you buy a small sheep, you will buy a lot. If you have more sheep, you will earn more money; if you have fewer sheep, you will earn less money.

古文：其人数日乃引一羊主至，化遂易得小羊百十口，大小羊相杂为群，回归洛阳。
现代文：朱化觉得是这么回事，就告诉那个人：你要是知道哪里有小羊，我就全买下。那个人不几天就带一个养羊的主人来了。朱化于是买到小羊一百多头。把大羊和小羊混杂在一起赶回了洛阳。
English: Zhu Hua thought this was the case and told the man: "If you know where there are lambs, I will buy them all." The man brought a shepherd with him within a few days. Zhu Hua then bought more than a hundred lambs. He mixed the big sheep with the little sheep and drove them back to Luoyang.

古文：行至关下，一夕所易之小羊，尽化为鬼而走。
现代文：走到洛阳城下，只一个晚上所买的小羊都变成鬼跑了。
English: When I walked to the foot of Luoyang City, the lamb I bought only one night turned into a ghost and ran away.

古文：化大骇，莫测其由。
现代文：朱化很害怕，猜不出这是怎么回事。
English: Zhu Hua was very scared and couldn't figure out what was going on.

古文：明年复往邠宁，见前言小羊之人，化甚怒，将执之诣官府。
现代文：到第二年又去邠宁，看到和他说买小羊的那个人，很生气，就要把他送到官府去治罪。
English: The following year, he went to Suining again, and when he saw the man he had told about buying the lamb, he was very angry and wanted to send him to the government office to be punished.

古文：其人曰： 我何罪也？ 
现代文：那人说： 我有什么罪？ 
English: And he said, What have I sinned?

古文：化曰： 尔以小羊回易，我驱至关下，尽化为鬼，得非汝用妖术乎！ 
现代文：朱分说： 你劝我买小羊，我赶到洛阳城下的时候，都变成鬼跑了，这难道不是你使的妖术吗？ 
English: Zhu Fen said, "You advised me to buy a lamb, but when I arrived at the foot of Luoyang City, I turned into a ghost and ran away. Isn't this your magic?

古文：其人曰： 尔贩卖群羊，以求厚利，杀害性命，不知纪极，罪已弥天矣。自终不悟，而反怒我，我即鬼也，当与群羊执尔而戮之。 
现代文：那人说： 你贩卖羊，想多赚钱，杀生害命，不知收敛，你犯了弥天大罪，到现在还不醒悟，反而对我发怒，我就是鬼，应该和群羊一块儿抓你杀了你。 
English: The man said: You sell sheep, you want to make more money, you kill and destroy, and you don't know how to stop. You have committed a great sin, and you still haven't woken up, but instead you are angry with me. I am a ghost, and I should catch you with the sheep and kill you.

古文：言论而灭，化大惊惧，寻死于邠宁焉。李詹
现代文：说完就不见踪影。朱化更加害怕，不久就死在邠宁。李詹
English: After saying this, Zhu Hua disappeared. Zhu Hua was even more afraid, and soon died in Fuling. Li Zhan

古文：唐李詹，大中七年崔瑶下擢进士第。
现代文：唐朝的李詹，宣宗大中七年在崔瑶主持的考试中进士及第。
English: Li Zhan of the Tang Dynasty, Xuan Zong University for seven years in the examination presided over by Cui Yao.

古文：平生广求滋味，每食鳖，辄缄其足，暴于烈日。
现代文：他平生多方寻找特殊味道的菜肴。每次吃鳖，就绑上它的脚。
English: He spent his life searching for dishes with a special taste. Every time he ate a maggot, he tied its feet.

古文：鳖既渴，即饮以酒而烹之，鳖方醉，已熟矣。
现代文：放到烈日下曝晒，等鳖很渴的时候给它酒喝，然后拿到厨房烹煮，鳖正醉的时候已经被做熟了。
English: Put it under the scorching sun, give it wine when it is thirsty, then take it to the kitchen to cook, and when it is drunk, it is already cooked.

古文：复取驴絷于庭中，围之以火，驴渴即饮灰水，荡其肠胃，然后取酒，调以诸辛味，复饮之，驴未绝而为火所逼烁，外已熟矣。
现代文：又有时把驴拴在庭院里，周围点上火，驴渴得没办法就喝含碱的灰水，洗它的肠胃，然后再拿酒，放入各种调料，再让驴喝，驴未死而被烈火所烤、外边的肉已经熟了。
English: Sometimes the donkey is tied up in the courtyard and a fire is lit around it. The donkey is so thirsty that it cannot help but drink the alkaline grey water and wash its intestines and stomach. Then the wine is taken, various spices are put in, and the donkey is allowed to drink. The donkey is roasted by the fire before it dies, and the meat on the outside is already ripe.

古文：詹一日，方巾首，失力仆地而卒。
现代文：有一天，李詹刚戴上头巾，突然站不住了，倒地而死。
English: One day, Li Zhan had just put on her headscarf when she suddenly couldn't stand up, fell to the ground and died.

古文：顷之，詹膳夫亦卒。
现代文：不一会，李詹的厨师也死了。
English: Soon after, Li Zhan's chef also died.

古文：一夕，膳夫复苏曰： 某见詹，为地下责其过害物命，詹对以某所为，某即以詹命不可违。
现代文：过了一天，厨师又苏醒过来了，他说： 我看到李詹了，闫王正追责他过分残害动物的生命，李詹对闫王说是我干的，我就说： 李詹让我干我敢不干吗？ 
English: A day later, the chef woke up again. He said, "I saw Li Zhan. The king of Yao was accusing him of excessively mutilating the lives of animals. Li Zhan said to the king of Yao that I did it. I said, "Li Zhan let me do it. Do I dare not do it?"

古文：答之。詹又曰： 某素不知，皆狄慎思所传。 
现代文：李詹又说： 我根本不知道那样办，是狄慎思传授给我的。 
English: Li Zhan also said, "I didn't know how to do that at all. It was taught to me by Dickinson."

古文：故得以回。 
现代文：所以我才免死又回来了。 
English: That's why I escaped death and came back.

古文：无何，慎思复卒。
现代文：过了没多久，狄慎思也死了。
English: Not long after, Dickinson died, too.

古文：慎思亦登进士第，时为小谏。
现代文：狄慎思也是进士及第，当时作小谏。
English: Dickinson was also promoted to second lieutenant, serving as a petty officer at the time.

古文：王公直
现代文：王公直
English: Wang Gongzhi

古文：唐咸通庚寅岁，洛师大饥，谷价腾贵，民有殍于沟塍者。
现代文：唐朝咸通庚寅年，洛阳地区饥荒。谷价飞涨，在阴沟里、田梗上到处都有饿死的百姓尸首。
English: In the year of Emperor Heung-in of the Tang Dynasty, Luoyang region suffered from famine. Grain prices soared, and there were corpses of starving people everywhere in the gutters and fields.

古文：至蚕月，而桑多为虫食，叶一斤直一锾。
现代文：到了放蚕的季节，而桑叶大多被虫子吃了，桑叶每斤值一锾。
English: When it came to the season for releasing silkworms, most of the mulberry leaves were eaten by insects. Each catty of mulberry leaves was worth one corm.

古文：新安县慈涧店北村民王公直者，有桑数十株，特茂盛荫翳，公直与妻谋曰： 歉俭若此，家无见粮，徒竭力于此蚕，尚未知其得失。
现代文：新安县慈涧店北村有个村民叫王公直，有桑树几十棵，特别荫翳茂盛。公宜就和妻子商量说： 饥荒这么重，家中也没有粮食，就是尽力养蚕，也不知后果会怎么样。
English: Wang Gongzhong, a villager in Cixi North Village, Xin'an County, has dozens of mulberry trees, and the shade is particularly lush. Gongyi consulted with his wife and said: "The famine is so severe, there is no food at home, even if we try our best to raise silkworms, we don't know what the consequences will be.

古文：以我计者，莫若弃蚕，乘贵货叶，可获钱十万，蓄一月之粮，则接麦矣，岂不胜为馁死乎？ 妻曰： 善。 
现代文：依我看，不如放弃养蚕，乘着现在桑叶价贵就卖桑叶，这样可以赚钱十万。能积蓄一个月的粮食，就可接上麦秋了，难道不比饿死强吗？ 妻子说： 好 。
English: In my opinion, it would be better to give up raising silkworms and take advantage of the current high price of mulberry leaves to sell mulberry leaves, so you can make 100,000 yuan. If you can save a month's grain, you can connect to wheat autumn. Isn't it better than starving to death? My wife said: Good.

古文：乃携锸坎地，卷蚕数箔瘗焉。
现代文：于是他就拿着锹挖了一个坑，卷起那几张蚕子埋了。
English: So he dug a hole with a pickaxe, rolled up the few silkworms and buried them.

古文：明日凌晨，荷桑诣都市鬻之，得三千文，市彘肩及饼饵以归。
现代文：第二天起早，挑着桑叶到城里的集市上卖掉桑叶，得钱三千文。又在集市上买了个猪腿以及烧饼、菜肴等回家。
English: The next day, I got up early and took mulberry leaves to the city's market to sell mulberry leaves, earning 3,000 yuan. I also bought a pork leg at the market, as well as grilled bread and other dishes to take home.

古文：至徽安门，门吏见囊中殷血，连洒于地，遂止诘之。
现代文：到了徽安门，门吏见他的口袋里流血，点点滴滴洒了一地，于是就让他停下盘问他。
English: When he arrived at the Hui'an Gate, the gatekeeper saw the blood in his pocket, dripping onto the ground, so he asked him to stop and interrogated him.

古文：公直曰： 适卖叶得钱，市彘肉及饼饵贮囊，无他也。 
现代文：公直说： 我刚才卖了桑叶赚到钱，买了猪腿肉以及烧饼等东西装在口袋里，没有别的什么。 
English: To be honest: I just sold mulberry leaves to earn money, bought pork leg meat and baked cakes and other things in my pocket, nothing else.

古文：请吏搜索之。既发囊，唯有人左臂，若新支解焉。
现代文：公直请门吏搜查，打开口袋，只见有一个人的左臂，好象刚肢解下来的。
English: Openly asked the doorman to search, opened the bag, only to see a man's left arm, as if it had just been dismembered.

古文：群吏乃反接送于居守，居守命付河南府尹正瑯琊王公凝，令纲纪鞠之。
现代文：于是一群门吏把公直反绑了送到居守衙门。居守命令送交河南府尹正王公凝审理。王公命令人审问，要依法处置。
English: As a result, a group of gatekeepers tied him up and sent him to the residence guard. The residence guard order was sent to Yin Zheng Wang Gonggen of Henan Province for trial. Wang Gong ordered to interrogate him and dispose of him according to law.

古文：其欵示：某瘗蚕卖桑叶，市肉以归，实不杀人，特请检验。
现代文：公直招供道：我埋了蚕卖掉桑叶，买肉回家，确实没有杀人。请派人到家里检验。
English: He openly confessed: "I buried silkworms, sold mulberry leaves and bought meat to take home. I did not kill anyone. Please send someone to my home to investigate."

古文：尹判差所由监领，就村检埋蚕之处。
现代文：府尹就派差吏所由监管，带公直到村里去检查埋蚕的地方。
English: The prefectural government sent officers to supervise and take the public to the village to inspect the place where the silkworms were buried.

古文：所由领公直至村，先集邻保，责手状，皆称实知王公直埋蚕，别无恶迹。乃与村众及公直，同发蚕坑，中唯有箔角一死人，而缺其左臂，取得臂附之，宛然符合。
现代文：所由领公直到村里后，先召集邻里和保长，画押签字。大家都说确实知道公直埋蚕，没干别的什么坏事，差吏就同村里的众人及公直到埋蚕的地方一块儿挖坑，却坑里只有箔角上有一个死人，缺一左臂，等把公直口袋里那个左臂拿来附上，正好相合。
English: Everyone said that they really knew that Gong Zhi had buried the silkworms and had not done anything else bad. The officers dug a pit together with the people in the village and Gong Zhi to the place where the silkworms were buried. However, in the pit, there was only a dead man on the corner of the foil, missing his left arm, so they attached the left arm in Gong Zhi's pocket to make it fit.

古文：遂复领公直诣府，白尹，尹曰： 王公直虽无杀人之事，且有坑蚕之咎，法或可恕，情在难容。
现代文：差吏就带公直到府里去报告，把情况向府尹说了。
English: The police officer took the public official to report to the prefectural government and told the prefectural government about the situation.

古文：蚕者天地灵虫，绵帛之本，故加剿绝，与杀人不殊，当置严刑，以绝凶丑。 
现代文：府尹说： 王公直虽然没有杀人的事。却有坑埋桑蚕之罪，法律上可以饶恕，但情理难容。蚕是天地间的灵虫，是纺纱织布的根本，故意剿杀绝尽，同杀人没有什么两样，应该施以严刑，以兹禁绝凶丑。 
English: Fu Yin said: Although Wang Gongzhi did not kill anyone, he did commit the crime of burying mulberry silkworms in a pit, which can be legally forgiven, but the circumstances are difficult to accept. Silkworms are the spirit worms of heaven and earth, and are the basis of spinning and weaving. Deliberately killing them is no different from killing them. Severe punishment should be imposed to prevent cruelty.

古文：遂命于市杖杀之。
现代文：遂命人在刑场上用刑杖打死。
English: The condemned man was then beaten to death with a cane on the execution ground.

古文：使验死者，则复为腐蚕矣。
现代文：等到派人再到那埋蚕的坑里验尸，则又变成腐烂的蚕了。
English: Wait until they send someone to examine the corpse in the pit where the silkworm was buried, and it will turn into a rotting silkworm.

古文：黄敏
现代文：黄敏
English: Huang Min

古文：江西都校黄敏者，因御寇坠马，折其左股，其下遂速以石碎生龟，傅之，月余乃愈。
现代文：江西都校黄敏，因为抗击敌寇从马上坠下来，摔断了左大腿，他手下的人迅速地用石头砸碎一只活着的乌龟，给他敷上，一个多月腿就长好了。
English: Huang Min, a schoolmaster in Jiangxi Province, fell from his horse and broke his left thigh as a result of fighting against the enemy bandits. His subordinates quickly smashed a live turtle with a rock and put it on a mattress, and the leg grew back in just over a month.

古文：而龟头尚活，龟腹间与髀肉相连而生，敏遂恶之，他日割去。欲下刃，痛楚与己肉无异，不能而止。
现代文：然而敷在伤腿上的乌龟的头还活着，龟的腹部与黄敏的大腿肉长在一起。黄敏很讨厌它，想把它割掉，刚想下刀，疼痛得像割他自己的肉一样，不能割，只好停止。
English: However, the turtle's head on the injured leg is still alive, and the turtle's abdomen grows together with Huang Min's thigh meat. Huang Min hates it, wants to cut it off, just wants to get off the knife, the pain is like cutting his own flesh, can not cut, had to stop.

古文：龟目所视，亦同己所见也。
现代文：龟目看到的，与他自己看到的相同。
English: What the tortoise sees is the same as what he sees.

古文：陈君棱
现代文：陈君棱
English: Chen Junren

古文：曹宋二州西界有大鹤陂，陂左村人陈君棱，少小捕鱼为业。
现代文：曹、宋二州西边有个大鹤陂，在陂左的村庄里有个人叫陈君棱。这人少小时就以捕鱼为职业。
English: There is a large crane on the west side of the two states of Cao and Song, and there is a man named Chen Junren in the village to the left of the crane. This man took up fishing as a career when he was young.

古文：后得患，恒被众鱼所食，痛苦不能自持。
现代文：后来得了病，觉得经常被很多鱼所咬，痛苦不堪，不知怎么办好。
English: Later, I got sick and felt that I was often bitten by many fishes. I was in great pain and didn't know what to do.

古文：若以鱼网葢之，痛即止。
现代文：如果用鱼网盖在身上，疼痛就停止了。
English: If you cover yourself with a fishing net, the pain stops.

古文：后为村人盗网去，数日间，不胜痛而死。
现代文：后来村里人把他的鱼网偷走，几天之间，因为忍受不了痛苦而死。
English: Later, villagers stole his fishing net and he died in agony a few days later.

古文：德州刺史邓某曾任考城令，知此事。
现代文：德州刺史姓邓的曾任考城县令。知道这件事。
English: A former Kaocheng County magistrate surnamed Deng from Zhishi, Texas, knew about this.

古文：王洞微
现代文：王洞微
English: Wang Dongwei

古文：唐汾州景云观道士王洞微者，家于孝义县，初为小胥，性喜杀，常钓弋渔猎。
现代文：唐朝汾州的景云观有个道士名叫王洞微。家在孝义县。
English: There was a Taoist monk named Wang Dongwei in Jingyunkan of Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty. His home was in Xiaoyi County.

古文：自弱冠至壮年，凡杀狼狐雉兔，洎鱼鳖飞鸟，计以万数。
现代文：当初作过小官。此人爱好杀生，常钓鱼打猎，从二十岁到壮年，共计杀死的狼、狐狸、雉鸡、野兔，鱼鳖、飞鸟可达万数。
English: He was a petty officer at the beginning. He loved to kill, often fishing and hunting, and from the age of twenty to his prime, he killed up to ten thousand wolves, foxes, pheasants, hares, fish, and birds.

古文：后为里尹，患病热月余，忽觉室内有禽兽鱼鳖万数，环其榻而噬之，疮痏被身，殆无完肤。
现代文：后来当里尹，得了病发烧一个多月，那时他忽然觉得屋里有禽兽鱼鳖一万多只，环绕在他的床前咬他，满身都是伤口，几乎没有一点好的皮肤。
English: Later, when Li Yin had been ill with fever for more than a month, he suddenly felt that there were more than ten thousand beasts and fishes in the room, surrounding and biting him in front of his bed. His body was covered with wounds, and there was hardly any good skin.

古文：中夕之后，其父母兄弟，俱闻洞微卧内，有群鸟啁啾，历然可辨。
现代文：半夜之后，他的父母兄弟都听到他的卧室里有群鸟鸣叫的声音，声音清晰。
English: After midnight, his parents and brothers all heard birds chirping in his bedroom, loud and clear.

古文：凡数年，疾益甚，或有谓洞微父曰： 汝子病且亟，宜迁居景云观。 
现代文：这样过了几年，他的病更重了。有人对洞微的父亲说： 你的儿子病很重，最好让他到景云观去出家。 
English: After a few years of this, his illness became more severe. Someone said to Dong Wei's father: "Your son is very ill, it is best for him to go to Jingyunkan to become a monk."

古文：于是卜日徙居。
现代文：于是就挑选了一个吉日搬到景云观。
English: So they picked a good day to move to Jingyun Mountain.

古文：月余，会群道士修斋授録，是夕洞微瘳。
现代文：在一个多月内，会集很多道士为他修斋授符，洞微的病就好了。
English: In more than a month, many Taoists will gather for him to practice fasting, and his illness will be cured.

古文：后十年，竟以疾卒。
现代文：十年以后、洞微还是得病死了。
English: Ten years later, Dong Wei still got sick and died.

古文：孙季贞
现代文：孙季贞
English: Sun Qizhen

古文：唐孙季贞，陈州人，少好捕网飞走，尤爱啗鸡卵，每每欲食，辄焚而熟之，卒且三年矣。
现代文：唐期的孙季贞，陈州人。少年时就好捕捉飞禽走兽，尤其爱吃鸡蛋，每次要吃鸡蛋，就烧熟了吃。死了已经三年了。
English: Sun Jizhen of the Tang Dynasty, a native of Chenzhou. When he was young, he was good at catching birds and beasts, and especially loved to eat eggs. Every time he wanted to eat eggs, he cooked them and ate them. He has been dead for three years.

古文：邻有张生者，亦以病卒三日也。
现代文：邻居有个叫张生的人，也已病死三天。
English: A neighbour, a man named Zhang Sheng, has also been ill for three days.

古文：忽便起坐，既行，乃径往孙氏家，称季贞，听其言，实季贞，其形故张生也。
现代文：这一天忽然坐起来，能下地走，直奔孙家，自称是孙季贞。听他说的话，确实是季贞，但形体又确实是张生啊。
English: On this day, he suddenly sat up, was able to walk, and went straight to Sun's house, claiming to be Sun Qizhen. Listening to what he said, it was indeed Qizhen, but the body was indeed Zhang Sheng.

古文：张氏之族，即诣官以诉。
现代文：张氏家的人就去官府告状。
English: Members of the Zhang family went to the government to file a complaint.

古文：孙云： 先是吾不当死，以生平多害物命，故为冤债所诉，以食鸡卵过甚，被驱入于空城中，比入则户阖矣。第见满城火灰，既为烧烁，不知所为。东顾，方见城户双启，即奔从之，至则复阖矣。
现代文：在官府里，孙季贞说： 以前是我不该死，因为一生杀了很多动物，所以被那些冤魂告了，又因吃鸡蛋太多，被赶了阴曹的空城里，刚进去，城门就关上了，只见满城灰火，不一会大火通亮闪烁，我也不知道往哪里去，往东看，才看见两扇城门都开着，我就跑过去想出去，但是等我跑到那里时城门又关上了。
English: In the government office, Sun Jizhen said, "In the past, it was I who did not deserve to die, because I killed a lot of animals in my life, so I was accused by those evil spirits, and because I ate too many eggs, I was driven into the empty city of the devil. As soon as I entered, the gate was closed. I only saw the city full of gray fire, and soon the fire was bright and flashing. I did not know where to go. I looked to the east and saw that both gates were open. I ran to get out, but when I got there, the gate was closed again.

古文：西顾，从之复然。南顾北顾，从之亦然。
现代文：再往西看，同东城门一样，往南往北都是一样。
English: Looking further to the west, it is the same as the east gate, and to the south and north it is the same.

古文：其苦楚备尝之矣。
现代文：烟熏火烤，又累又乏，那苦痛让我尝尽了。
English: Grilled over a smoky fire, tired and weary, I'd had enough of the pain.

古文：一旦，王谓季贞曰： 尔寿未尽，然死且三年矣，何以复还？ 
现代文：一天早晨，闫王对我说： 你的寿命没尽，然而你死了三年了，怎么复生呢？ 
English: One morning, the skull king said to me, "Your lifespan is not over, but you have been dead for three years. How can you be revived?"

古文：主者曰：  邻有张某，死才三日，可借此以托其神魂。 
现代文：这时主簿说 他的邻居有个张生，死了才三天，可以借尸还魂。 
English: At this time, the bookkeeper said that his neighbor had a son named Zhang Sheng, who had only been dead for three days, and that he could borrow the body to return the soul.

古文：王然之，今我实季贞也。 
现代文：阎王就同意了。现在我实在是孙季贞。 
English: Yan Wang agreed. Now I really am Sun Jizhen.

古文：官不能断。
现代文：官府不能决断。
English: The government can't decide.

古文：郡牧刘尚书廙，亲呼问之，曰： 宜以平生一事，人无知者以为验。 
现代文：郡牧尚书刘廙，亲自来问他，然后说： 应该用他平生的一件事，必须是别人不知道的来验证。 
English: The county magistrate, Liu Wei, came to ask him in person, and then said: He should use one thing in his life, which must be unknown to others, to verify.

古文：季贞曰： 某未死前，尝藏佛经两卷于屋瓦，人实无知者。 
现代文：季贞就说：我没死以前，曾把两卷佛经藏在屋瓦下面，谁也不知道。 
English: Ji Zhen said: "Before I died, I hid two volumes of Buddhist scriptures under the roof tiles, and no one knows.

古文：命探之，存焉，断归孙氏。
现代文：官府命人去探查，果然还在。最后孙季贞判归孙家。
English: The government ordered someone to investigate, and sure enough, she was still there. In the end, Sun Jizhen was sentenced to return to the Sun family.

古文：崔道纪
现代文：崔道纪
English: Cui Daoji

古文：唐前进士崔道纪，及第后，游江淮间。
现代文：唐朝前进士崔道纪，考中后，游览于江淮之间。
English: Cui Daoji, a forerunner of the Tang Dynasty, visited between the Yangtze River and the Huai River after the middle school entrance examination.

古文：遇酒醉甚，卧于客馆中。其仆使井中汲水，有一鱼随桶而上，仆者得之，以告道纪。道纪喜曰： 鱼羹甚能醒酒，可速烹之。 
现代文：有一次醉得很厉害，躺在客馆里，他的仆人到井里去打水，有一条鱼随着水桶里的水被打上来，仆人得到这条鱼后，把这件事告诉了崔道纪，崔道纪听后很高兴，说： 鱼汤最能解酒，赶快做了。 
English: Once, when he was very drunk and lying in the guesthouse, his servant went to the well to draw water. A fish was brought up with the water in the bucket. After the servant got the fish, he told Cui Daoji about it. Cui Daoji was very happy after listening and said, "Fish soup is the best way to get rid of alcohol. Make it quickly."

古文：既食良久，有黄衣使者，自天而下，立于庭中，连呼道纪，使人执捉，宣敕曰： 崔道纪，下士小民，敢杀龙子，官合至宰相，寿命七十，并宜除。 
现代文：吃了鱼汤后很长时间，有一个穿黄衣的使臣从天上下来，立在庭院里，连声呼叫崔道纪，并派人把他拉过来，宣布诏命说： 崔道纪，下方土地的小民，意敢杀害龙子，本来官应至宰相，寿命到七十，现应免除。 
English: After eating the fish soup for a long time, a yellow-clad envoy descended from the sky and stood in the courtyard, calling out to Cui Daoji in unison, and sent someone to pull him over and announce the edict: Cui Daoji, the common people of the land below, dare to kill Longzi, originally the official should be the prime minister, life expectancy to seventy, now should be exempted.

古文：言讫，升天而去。
现代文：说完就升天而去。
English: After Taibai finished speaking, he took off into the sky.

古文：是夜道纪暴卒，时年三十五。
现代文：当天晚上，崔道纪暴病身亡，当时三十五岁。
English: That evening, Cui Daoji died of violent illness, at the age of thirty-five.

古文：何泽
现代文：何泽
English: Heze

古文：唐何泽者，容州人也，尝摄广州四会县令。
现代文：唐朝的何泽，是容州人。曾经当过广州四会县令。
English: Jose of the Tang Dynasty was a native of Yeongju. He was once the county magistrate of the Guangzhou Four Associations.

古文：性豪横，唯以饮啖为事，尤嗜鹅鸭。
现代文：性情豪强专横。整天不是吃就是喝，尤其爱吃鹅鸭。
English: He is strong-willed and domineering. He either eats or drinks all day long, and especially loves to eat goose and duck.

古文：乡胥里正，恒令供纳，常豢养鹅鸭千万头，日加烹杀。
现代文：乡胥里正，他经常命令他们供纳，在家里经常养鹅鸭上千只，每天都烹杀几只。
English: In the village, he often ordered them to pay. At home, he often raised thousands of geese and ducks, and cooked and killed a few every day.

古文：泽只有一子，爱怜特甚。
现代文：何泽只有一个儿子，他特别爱怜娇惯。
English: Heze only has one son, and he's especially fond of pampering him.

古文：尝一日烹双鸡，爨汤以待沸，其子似有鬼物撮置镬中。一家惊骇，就出之，则与双鸡俱溃烂矣。
现代文：有一天杀了两只鸡，在灶上烧了火等着水开，他的儿子好象有鬼抓似地被扔到锅里，一家人惊吓得不得了，马上捞出来，他儿子已经和那两只鸡都烂熟了。
English: One day he killed two chickens, lit a fire on the stove and waited for the water to boil. His son was thrown into the pot like a ghost, and the family was so shocked that they immediately fished him out. His son was already familiar with the two chickens.

古文：岳州人
现代文：岳州人
English: People from Yuezhou

古文：唐咸通中，岳州人有村人，涸湖池取鱼，获龟犹倍多。
现代文：唐朝咸通年间，岳州有一个村人。他把湖池的水放干了抓鱼，结果抓到了很多龟。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a villager in Yuezhou who drained the water of the lake to catch fish. As a result, he caught a lot of turtles.

古文：悉刳其肉，载龟板至江陵鬻之，厚得金帛。
现代文：把龟肉剖挖干净后，装着龟板到江陵去卖，卖了很多钱。
English: After digging up the turtle meat, he went to Gangneung with a turtle board to sell it. He sold it for a lot of money.

古文：后归家，忽遍身患疮，楚痛号叫，邻里不忍闻。
现代文：回到家里以后，突然遍身生疮，疼得他大哭大叫，邻居都不忍心听。
English: After returning home, he suddenly developed sores all over his body. He cried out in pain, and his neighbors couldn't bear to listen.

古文：须得大盆贮水，举体投水中，渐变作龟形。
现代文：只有把身体全都泡在一个装满水的大盆里，他的身体渐渐地变成了龟的形状才好些。
English: It was only after he was submerged in a large basin full of water that his body gradually took on the shape of a turtle.

古文：逾年，肉烂腐坠而死。
现代文：过了一年，他全身的肉都烂掉而死了。
English: A year later, all his flesh had rotted away and he died.

古文：徐可范
现代文：徐可范
English: Xu Kofan

古文：唐内侍徐可范，性好畋猎，杀害甚众。
现代文：唐朝的内侍官徐可范，好打猎，杀害鸟兽生灵很多。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Inner Steward, Xu Kofan, was fond of hunting and killed many animals and birds.

古文：尝取活鳖，凿其甲，以热油注之，谓之鳖堆。
现代文：曾拿来活鳖，把甲凿开，然后用热油浇烫，称之为鳖饼。
English: They used to take live maggots, chisel off the carapace, and then pour hot oil on them, calling them maggot cakes.

古文：又性嗜龍驴，以驴縻绊于一室内，盆盛五味汁于前，四面迫以烈火，待其渴饮五味汁尽，取其肠胃为馔。
现代文：他又特别爱吃驴肉，作法也特别：把驴拴绑在屋子里，用盆调好五味汁液在驴的前面，在驴的周围点上烈火，等驴渴了把五味汁液喝光，再杀驴取肠胃作菜吃。
English: He is also particularly fond of eating donkey meat, and his method is also special: he ties the donkey's bridle in the house, uses a basin to adjust the five-flavor juice in front of the donkey, and lights a fire around the donkey. When the donkey is thirsty, he drinks up the five-flavor juice, and then kills the donkey to take the intestines and stomach to make a dish to eat.

古文：前后烹宰，不记其数。
现代文：前后烹宰的驴不计其数。
English: The number of donkeys that are cooked before and after is countless.

古文：后扈从僖宗幸蜀，得疾。每睡，见群兽鸟雀啄食其肉，痛苦万状。又须于床下布火，及以油醋灌其身，乃以罟网葢覆，方暂得睡。
现代文：后来随从僖宗到四川得了病，每次睡觉都看见一群鸟兽啄吃他身上的肉，他痛苦万状，必须在他的床下面笼上火，再用油醋等浇他的身体，用鱼网覆盖全身，才能觉得好受些暂时睡一会儿。
English: Later, he traveled from Shanzong to Sichuan and fell ill. Every time he slept, he saw a group of birds and animals eating his flesh. He was in great pain. He had to light a fire under his bed, pour oil and vinegar on his body, and cover his whole body with a fish net in order to feel better and sleep for a while.

古文：以日继夜，常须如此，命将尽，惟一束黑骨而已。
现代文：这样日以继夜，必须经常这样作。等他要死的时候，只剩一把黑骨头了。
English: He had to do this day in and day out. By the time he died, there was only one black bone left.

古文：建业妇人
现代文：建业妇人
English: Women in construction

古文：近岁建业有妇人，背生一瘤，大如数斗囊，中有物如茧栗甚众，行即有声。
现代文：近年来建业有一个妇女，背上生一个大肉瘤，大得象斗囊，里面象有很多茧和栗子，走起来能听到声音。
English: In recent years, there was a woman in Jianye who had a large sarcoma on her back. It was as big as a duffel bag, and there seemed to be a lot of gourds and chestnuts inside. When she walked, she could hear voices.

古文：恒乞于市，自言村妇也，常与娣姒辈分养蚕，己独频年损耗，因窃其姒一囊茧焚之。
现代文：她在街市上讨饭，自己说是一个村妇，平常和妯娌们一块儿养蚕，但唯独她养不好，连年亏本，因此她就偷了妯娌的一口袋茧烧了。
English: She begged for food at the street market. She said she was a village woman and usually raised silkworms with the cocoons. However, she was not good at raising silkworms and lost money for years, so she stole a bag of cocoons and roasted them.

古文：顷之，背患此疮，渐成此瘤。
现代文：刚烧完，她的背上就生了疮，逐渐变成这个大瘤。
English: As soon as the burn was over, she developed sores on her back, which gradually turned into this large lump.

古文：以衣覆之，即气闭闷，常露之乃可，而重如负囊矣。
现代文：用衣服盖上瘤就觉得弊闷，只有经常露在外面才行，而这肉瘤重得象背个大口袋一样。
English: Covering the tumour with clothes is tedious, only frequent exposure is possible, and the tumour weighs as much as a large backpack.

古文：广陵男子
现代文：广陵男子
English: Guangling men's team

古文：广陵有男子行乞于市，每见马矢，即取食。
现代文：广陵有个男子在街市上讨饭。每次见到马粪，就拿过来吃。
English: In Guangling, there is a man who begs for food at the street market. Every time he sees horse manure, he takes it and eats it.

古文：自云：尝为人饲马，慵不能夜起，其主恒自检视，见槽中无草，督责之。
现代文：他自己说：曾经给别人喂马，因为懒，晚上起不来，半夜不能给马上草料，主人家经常亲见检查察视，看到槽中无草，就要训斥他。
English: He said himself: he once fed a horse to someone else, because he was lazy, he could not get up at night, he could not give the horse grass in the middle of the night, the owner's family often saw the inspection in person, and when they saw no grass in the trough, they would reprimand him.

古文：乃取乌梅并以饲马，马齿楚，不能食，竟以是致死。
现代文：于是，他就把乌梅和草料混在一起喂马，马的牙被刺痛，就不吃了。最后马竟因此而死。
English: So he fed the horse a mixture of prickly pear and herbs. The horse's teeth were stung and it refused to eat. The horse eventually died as a result.

古文：己后因患病，见马矢，辄流涎欲食，食之，与乌梅味正同，了无秽气。
现代文：他自己也因这个缘故而得病，看见马粪，就馋得流口水想吃，吃了觉得和乌梅的味是一样的，一点臭味也没有。
English: He himself became ill because of this. When he saw horse manure, he was so disgusted that he wanted to eat it, and when he did, he thought it tasted just like ume, without any bad smell at all.

古文：何马子
现代文：何马子
English: Ho Ma Zi

古文：遂州人何马子好食蜂儿，坐罪，令众于市。
现代文：遂州人何马子好吃蜂卵，因为犯罪，令他在当街示众。
English: Suizhou man He Ma Zi likes to eat bee eggs. Because of his crime, he was made to appear in public.

古文：忽有大蜂数个，螫其面，痛楚叫呼。守者驱而复来，抵暮方绝，如此经旬乃死。
现代文：忽然有几十个大蜂飞来螫他的脸，他痛苦不堪大声呼叫，看守他的人替他驱赶那些蜂，但赶跑了又回来，直到晚上才绝迹。象这样经过十多天他就死了。
English: Suddenly, dozens of large bees flew to sting his face, and he cried out in pain. His guards drove the bees away for him, but they ran away and came back again, only to disappear in the evening. After more than ten days like this, he died.

古文：章邵
现代文：章邵
English: Zhang Shao

古文：章邵者，恒为商贾，巨有财帛，而终不舍路歧，贪猥诛求。
现代文：章邵，作商人多年，成为巨富，广有钱财。但他仍干些劫路营生，以求不义之财。
English: Zhang Shao, a businessman for many years, became very rich and had a lot of money. However, he still did some robberies to make a living in order to seek ill-gotten gains.

古文：因逢鹿，避人而去，鹿子为邵之所获。
现代文：有一次遇到鹿，鹿因怕人而逃走，而鹿子却被章邵抓获，邵当即打死，丢弃在树林中。
English: Once he encountered a deer. The deer was afraid of people and ran away. However, the deer was caught by Zhang Shao. Shao immediately killed the deer and left it in the forest.

古文：邵便打杀，弃之林中，其鹿母遥见悲号，其声不已。
现代文：那母鹿在很远处看见惨状，悲号不停。当天，邵想谋财害命晚上走。
English: The doe saw the misery in the distance and howled in anguish. That day, Shao wanted to make money, so he killed himself and left in the evening.

古文：其日，邵欲夜行，意有所谋也。邵只有子一人，年方弱冠，先父一程行，及困，于大树下憩歇，以伺其父。
现代文：章邵只有一个儿子，年纪刚有二十岁，这儿子就先走一步与父亲拉开一段路程，走着走着就困了，便在路边的大树下歇一会儿，等着父亲来。
English: Zhang Shao has only one son, who is just twenty years old. This son took the first step to pull away from his father. As he walked, he got sleepy, so he rested for a while under a big tree on the side of the road and waited for his father to come.

古文：未间，且寝于树阴中，邵乃不晓是子，但见衣袱在旁，一人熟寐而已。
现代文：不多会儿，就睡在树荫里，章邵不知道是自己的儿子，只见衣服包袱在身旁，而那人熟睡不醒。
English: Before long, he was sleeping in the shade of a tree. Zhang Shao didn't know it was his son. He saw his clothes and luggage next to him, but the man was fast asleep.

古文：遂就抽腰刀，刺其喉，取衣袱而前行。
现代文：于是就抽出腰刀，对准那人咽喉刺去，抢走了衣服包袱往前走了。
English: So he took out his pocket knife, aimed it at the man's throat and stabbed him. He took away his clothes and luggage and went on his way.

古文：及天渐晓，见其衣袱，乃知杀者是己子也。
现代文：等天渐渐亮了，看清了衣服包袱，才知道杀死的是自己的儿子。唉！
English: It wasn't until it was getting light and he could see his clothes and luggage that he realised it was his son who had been killed. Alas!

古文：嗟乎，章邵凶率如此，报应亦宜然。
现代文：章邵凶恶残忍到这种地步，报应也是应该的呀！
English: Zhang Shao's heinous cruelty has reached such a level that retribution is also due!

古文：韩立善
现代文：韩立善
English: by Han Lishen

古文：蜀金雁桥，有韩立善者，作钓钩，积有年矣。
现代文：蜀地的金雁桥，有个韩立善，作钓鱼的钩已经很多年了。
English: In Jinganqiao, Shunde, there is a fisherman, Han Lisen, who has been making fishing hooks for many years.

古文：因食鱼，鲠喉成疮，颔脱而死。
现代文：有一次吃鱼，鱼鲠卡住咽喉，后变成疮。下巴烂掉后死了。
English: Once when he was eating fish, the hook got stuck in his throat and turned into an ulcer. His jaw rotted off and he died.

古文：僧修准
现代文：僧修准
English: Monk Shujun

古文：蜀郡大慈寺律师修准，虽云奉律，性甚褊躁。
现代文：蜀郡大慈寺专管戒律的法师修准。虽整天念经拜佛，但性格偏激暴躁。
English: Mage Shujun, who is in charge of the precepts at Dai Ci Temple in Shu County. Although he chants and worships Buddha all day long, his personality is extremely hot-tempered.

古文：庭前植竹，多蚁子缘栏槛。
现代文：寺的庭院前种着竹子。很多小蚂蚁攀缘直到栏槛。
English: Bamboo is planted in front of the courtyard of the temple. Many small ants climb up to the threshold.

古文：准怒，伐去竹，尽取蚁子，弃灰火中。
现代文：修准看到后很生气，砍去竹子，把那些小蚂蚁收集起来扔到火里烧了。
English: Seeing this, Xiu Jian was very angry. He chopped down the bamboo, collected the little ants and threw them into the fire.

古文：准后忽患癣，疮遍头面。
现代文：修准后来忽然得了癣疮病，遍头脸都是疮。
English: After the surgery, she suddenly got scabies, and her face was covered with sores.

古文：医者云蚁漏疮，不可医，后竟终。
现代文：医生说这是蚁漏疮，不能治，最终死了。
English: The doctor said it was anthrax, it couldn't be cured, and he eventually died.

古文：宇文氏
现代文：宇文氏
English: The Umun clan

古文：宇文氏，伪蜀之富家也。
现代文：宇文氏，是伪蜀时的有钱人家。
English: The Uwen family was a wealthy family at the time of the false Shu Dynasty.

古文：孀居国之东门，尝闻寝室上有人行，命仆隶升屋视之，获得野狸三头并狸母，宇文氏杀狸母而存其子焉。
现代文：在都城的东门孀居。曾听到她的寝室上有人走步的声音，就让仆奴上房看看，结果抓获了三个小狐狸和一个母狐狸。宇文氏就杀了那母狐狸而把三个小狐狸留下了。
English: She lived in the east gate of the capital. She once heard the sound of someone walking on her bedroom, so she asked her servant to look at the room. As a result, three little foxes and a female fox were captured. Mr. Uwen killed the mother fox and left the three little foxes.

古文：未期岁，宇文氏适护戎王承丕。丕杀判官郭延钧一家，宇文氏并前夫一男二女，下狱定罪，赦男女，斩宇文氏。
现代文：还没等到年末，宇文氏嫁给了护戎王承丕，因为承丕杀了判官郭延钧一家，宇文氏和前夫的一个儿子两个女儿也被下狱定罪。后来放了孩子，宇文氏被斩首。
English: Before the end of the year, Uwen married the royal bodyguard Wang Chenglu, because Chenglu had killed the judge Guo Yanzhong's family. Uwen and one of her ex-husband's sons and two daughters were also sentenced to prison. Later, the children were released, and Uwen was beheaded.

古文：吁，得非杀狸母之所报也。
现代文：唉！这难道不是她杀母狸的报应吗？
English: Alas! Was this not her revenge for killing her mother?

古文：李贞
现代文：李贞
English: Li Zhen

古文：蜀锦浦坊民李贞家，养狗名黑儿，贞因醉，持斧击杀之。
现代文：蜀地锦浦坊的百姓李贞家里养了一条狗，名叫黑儿。李贞因为喝醉了酒拿着斧子把狗砍死了。
English: Li Zhen, a villager from Jinpu Square, Shu Di, had a dog named Heyer at home. Li Zhen killed the dog with an axe because she was drunk.

古文：李贞临老，与邻舍恶少白昌祚争竞，昌祚承醉，以斧击贞死焉。
现代文：李贞年老时，和邻居一个恶少年白昌祚喝酒时争强好胜，昌祚醉了，拿斧子把李贞砍死了。
English: When Li Zhen was old, he and his neighbor Bai Changyu, an evil boy, had a heated argument while drinking. When Bai was drunk, he took an axe and chopped Li Zhen to death.

古文：时昌祚年十九岁，与杀狗年正同，昌祚小字黑儿。
现代文：当时白昌祚十九岁，与李贞杀狗时的年岁正好相同，昌祚的小名叫黑儿。
English: At that time, Bai Changyu was nineteen years old, exactly the same age as Li Zhen when he killed the dog. Changyu's little name was Heyer.

古文：冤报显然，不差丝发。
现代文：很明显这冤怨相报，竟是不差毫发。
English: It's clear that this backlash has been nothing short of devastating.

古文：僧秀荣
现代文：僧秀荣
English: Monk Xiu Rong

古文：蜀郡金华寺法师秀荣，院内多松柏，生毛虫，色黄，长三二寸。
现代文：蜀郡金华寺有个法师叫秀荣。寺院内种植了很多松柏。生一种毛虫，黄色，有二三寸长。
English: Shu County Jinhua Temple has a mage named Xiu Rong. A lot of conifers are planted in the temple. A kind of caterpillar is born, yellow, two or three inches long.

古文：莫知纪极，秀荣使人扫除埋瘗，或弃于柴积内，僧仁秀取柴煮料，于烈日中晒干，虫死者无数。
现代文：这些毛虫到处乱爬，秀荣就派人扫除埋掉，有些就扔到柴堆里，和尚仁秀取柴煮药料，柴取走了，那些毛虫就在烈日下被晒干，死者无数。
English: These caterpillars were crawling everywhere. Soorong sent someone to sweep and bury them, and some were thrown into the woodpile. Monk Jin Soorong took the wood to cook the medicine, and the wood was taken away. Those caterpillars were dried under the hot sun, and there were countless deaths.

古文：经月余，秀荣暴卒。
现代文：经过一个多月，秀荣暴病身亡。
English: After more than a month, Xiurong fell violently ill and died.

古文：金华寺有僧入冥，见秀荣荷铁枷，坐空地烈日中，有万万虫咂噬。
现代文：金华寺有个僧人入冥府，看见秀荣戴着铁枷，坐在空地的烈日中，有数不清的毛虫咬他。
English: A monk from Jinhua Temple entered the Underworld and saw Xiurong wearing iron shackles, sitting in the hot sun in an open space, with countless caterpillars biting him.

古文：僧还魂，备说与仁秀，仁秀大骇。遂患背疮，数日而卒。
现代文：这个僧人还魂后，把看到的详细说给仁秀听，仁秀非常害怕，立刻就得了背疮病，几天就死了。
English: After the monk regained consciousness, he recounted what he had seen in detail to Rinxiu, who was so frightened that he immediately fell ill with a back ailment and died a few days later.

古文：毋乾昭
现代文：毋乾昭
English: Without a doubt.

古文：蜀人毋乾昭有庄在射洪县，因往庄收刈，有鹿遭射逐之，惊忙走投乾昭。
现代文：蜀郡毋乾昭在射洪县有块庄稼地。
English: Zhu County's Bezo Qian Zhao owns a piece of farmland in Shehong County.

古文：昭闭于空房中，说与邻僧法惠，法惠笑曰： 天送食物，岂宜轻舍。 
现代文：因为去收割庄稼。正碰上有一只鹿被人射了一箭并有人追赶，那鹿在惊慌之际跑到乾昭处，乾昭就把它关在空房子里。后来把这件事说给邻居有个叫法惠的和尚，法惠听完笑着说： 天送给的食物，怎么能轻易舍掉呢？ 
English: Because he went to harvest crops. He was running into a deer that had been shot with an arrow and was being chased by someone. The deer ran to Qian Zhao in a panic, and Qian Zhao shut it in an empty house. Later, a monk named Fa Hui told his neighbor about this. After listening to Fa Hui, he smiled and said: How can you easily give up food that was given to you by heaven?

古文：乃杀之，沽酒炙鹿，共僧饮啖。
现代文：于是就杀了鹿，买酒烤鹿肉，乾昭与法惠同饮同喝。
English: So they killed the deer, bought wine and roasted the venison, and drank together with Fa Hui.

古文：僧食一块，忽大叫云： 刀割我心。 
现代文：法惠和尚刚吃一块鹿肉，忽然大叫有刀割他的心。
English: Fa Hui Monk had just eaten a piece of venison when he suddenly shouted that a knife had cut his heart.

古文：呕血，至夕而死。
现代文：然后呕血，当天晚上就死了。
English: He then vomited blood and died that evening.

古文：李绍
现代文：李绍
English: Li Shaohong

古文：蜀民李绍好食犬，前后杀犬数百千头。
现代文：蜀郡百姓李绍好吃狗肉。他前后杀狗数百千头。
English: Li Shao, a citizen of Shu County, likes to eat dog meat. He has killed hundreds of thousands of dogs.

古文：尝得一黑犬，绍怜之，蓄养颇厚。
现代文：曾得到一黑犬，李绍很爱怜它，并饲养起来。
English: Once he got a black dog, Li Shao loved it very much and raised it.

古文：绍因醉夜归，犬迎门号吠，绍怒，取斧击犬。
现代文：有一次李绍因醉很晚才回来，那黑犬迎门号吠，绍很生气，找到斧子要砍那犬。
English: Once, Li Shao came back very late because he was drunk. The black dog barked at the door. Shao was very angry and wanted to find an axe to cut the dog.

古文：有儿子自内走出，斧正中其首，立死。
现代文：这时他的儿子从里面出来，斧子正中其头，当即就死了。
English: When his son came out, the axe hit him in the head and he died instantly.

古文：一家惶骇，且捕犬，犬走，不知所之。
现代文：一家人惊慌害怕，要捕那黑狗，狗不知跑到哪里去了。
English: Panicked and scared, the family tried to catch the black dog, but they didn't know where it had gone.

古文：绍后得病，作狗嗥而死。
现代文：李绍后来得了病，象狗叫一样而死去。
English: Li Shao later fell ill and died like a dog barking.

