古文：二年春，齐侯伐我北鄙。
现代文：二年春季，齐侯攻打我国北部边境。
English: In the spring of the second year, Qi Hou attacked the northern border of our country.

古文：夏四月丙戌，卫孙良夫帅师及齐师战于新筑，卫师败绩。
现代文：夏季四月丙戌日，卫国的孙良夫率领军队与齐国军队在新筑交战，卫国被打败。
English: In the summer of April, on the 6th day of the month, Sun Liangfu, the defender of the country, led the army to fight against the Qi army in Xinzhu, and the defender of the country was defeated.

古文：六月癸酉，季孙行父、臧孙许、叔孙侨如、公孙婴齐帅师会晋郤克、卫孙良夫、曹公子首及齐侯战于鞌，齐师败绩。
现代文：六月癸酉日，季孙行父、臧孙许、叔孙侨如、公孙婴一起率领军队在鞌地与晋国的郤克、卫国孙良夫、曹国公子首一起率领的军队交战，齐军被打败。
English: On the third day of June, Qisun Xingfu, Qisun Xu, Qisun Xiaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun Gaoju, Qisun

古文：秋七月，齐侯使国佐如师。
现代文：秋季七月，齐侯派遣发大夫国佐到诸侯军队驻地。
English: In the autumn of July, the Qihou sent the military doctor Guo Zuo to the military garrison of the princes.

古文：己酉，及国佐盟于袁娄。
现代文：己酉日，晋国大夫邯克与国佐在袁娄这个地方结盟。
English: On the same day, the Jin statesman Yan Ke and Guo Zu formed an alliance at this place in Yuancheng.

古文：八月壬午，宋公鲍卒。
现代文：八月壬午日，宋文公去世。
English: On the afternoon of August 3, Song Wengong passed away.

古文：庚寅，卫侯速卒。
现代文：庚寅日，卫穆公去世。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, Wei Mu Gong passed away.

古文：取汶阳田。
现代文：占取了汶阳的田地。
English: They took over the fields in Wenyang.

古文：冬，楚师、郑师侵卫。
现代文：冬季，楚国、郑国军队入侵卫国。
English: In winter, the armies of Chu and Zheng invaded the motherland.

古文：十有一月，公会楚公子婴齐于蜀。
现代文：十一月，成公寓楚国公子婴齐在蜀地会见。
English: In November, the leaders of Chengdu and Chu met in Shudi.

古文：丙申，公及楚人、秦人、宋人、陈人、卫人、郑人、齐人、曹人、邾人、薛人、鄫人盟于蜀。
现代文：丙申日，成公与楚国人、秦国人、宋国人、卫国人、郑国人、齐国人、曹国人、邾国人、薛国人、鄫国人在蜀地结盟。
English: On the same day, Chengong allied with the people of Chu, Qin, Song, Wei, Zheng, Qi, Cao, Yao, Xue and Yao in Shu.

古文：二年春，齐侯伐我北鄙，围龙。
现代文：二年春季，齐顷公进攻我国北部边境，包围龙地。
English: In the spring of the second year, King Qi He attacked the northern border of our country and surrounded Longji.

古文：顷公之嬖人卢蒲就魁门焉，龙人囚之。
现代文：齐顷公的宠臣卢蒲就魁攻打城门，龙地的人把他逮住囚禁。
English: Lu Pu, the favorite of the Duke of Qi, attacked the city gate, and the people of Longji arrested and imprisoned him.

古文：齐侯曰： 勿杀！吾与而盟，无入而封。 
现代文：齐顷公说： 不要杀，我和你们盟誓，不进入你们的境内。 
English: Zi Hao said, "Don't kill him, I swear to you, I won't enter your territory."

古文：弗听，杀而膊诸城上。
现代文：龙地的人不听，把他杀了，暴尸城上。
English: The people of Dragonland didn't listen, and killed him, and the corpse rose to the top of the city.

古文：齐侯亲鼓士陵城，三日，取龙，遂南侵及巢丘。
现代文：齐顷公亲自击鼓，兵士爬上城墙。三天，占领了龙地。于是就向南入侵，到达巢丘。
English: Lord Qi Hao personally beat the drum, soldiers climbed the city wall. For three days, they occupied Longji. So they invaded southward and reached the nest hill.

古文：卫侯使孙良夫、石稷、甯相、向禽将侵齐，与齐师遇。
现代文：卫穆公派遣孙良夫、石稷、宁相、向禽率兵入侵齐国，和齐军相遇。
English: Emperor Wei Mu dispatched Sun Liangfu, Shi Zheng, Ning Xiang, and Xiang Yi to invade Qi, and met with the Qi army.

古文：石子欲还，孙子曰： 不可。
现代文：石稷想要回去，孙良夫说： 不行。
English: Shi Hao wanted to go back, but Sun Liangfu said, "No."

古文：以师伐人，遇其师而还，将谓君何？
现代文：用军队攻打别人，遇上敌人就回去，将怎样对国君说呢？
English: What will you say to the sovereign when you attack others with an army, but turn back when you meet the enemy?

古文：若知不能，则如无出。
现代文：如果知道不能作戕，就应当不出兵。
English: If you know you can't fight, you shouldn't be in the army.

古文：今既遇矣，不如战也。 
现代文：现在既然和敌军相遇，不如打一仗。 夏季，有。
English: Now that we have met the enemy, it is better to fight a battle.

古文：夏有石成子曰： 师败矣。子不少须，众惧尽。
现代文：石稷说： 军队战败了，您如果不稍稍等待，顶住敌军，将会全军覆灭。
English: Shi Hao said, "The army has been defeated. If you don't wait a bit and resist the enemy army, the whole army will be destroyed."

古文：子丧师徒，何以复命？ 
现代文：您丧失了军队，如何回报君命？ 
English: You have lost your army, how can you give back your life?

古文：皆不对。
现代文：大家都不回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：又曰： 子，国卿也。
现代文：石稷又说： 您，是国家的卿。
English: Shi Yan also said, "You are the lord of the country.

古文：陨子，辱矣。
现代文：损失了您，就是一种羞耻了。
English: It's a shame to lose you.

古文：子以众退，我此乃止。 
现代文：您带着大家撤退，我就留在这里。 
English: You evacuate with everyone, I'll stay here.

古文：且告车来甚众。
现代文：同时通告军中，说援军的战车来了不少。
English: At the same time, it was announced to the troops that many reinforcement chariots had arrived.

古文：齐师乃止，次于鞫居。
现代文：齐国的军队就停止前进，驻扎在鞠居。
English: The army of Qi stopped advancing and was stationed in Jiuyue.

古文：新筑人仲叔于奚救孙桓子，桓子是以免。
现代文：新筑大夫仲叔于奚援救了孙良夫，孙良夫因此得免于难。
English: The new Tsukuda doctor, Chuzo Yuya, rescued Sun Ryofu, and Sun Ryofu was thus spared.

古文：既，卫人赏之以邑，辞。
现代文：不久，卫国人把城邑赏给仲叔于奚。
English: Not long after, the defenders of the country awarded the city to Uncle Zhong.

古文：请曲县、繁缨以朝，许之。
现代文：仲叔于奚辞谢，而请求得到诸侯所用三面悬挂的乐器，并用繁缨装饰马匹来朝见，卫君允许了。
English: Uncle Zhong thanked him in his farewell speech, and asked for the musical instruments used by the lords to be hung on three sides, and decorated with horses to see the emperor, which the prince allowed.

古文：仲尼闻之曰： 惜也，不如多与之邑。
现代文：孔子听说这件事，说： 可惜啊，还不如多给他城邑。
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said, "What a pity, it would have been better to give him more cities."

古文：唯器与名，不可以假人，君之所司也。
现代文：惟有器物和名号，不能假借给别人，这是国君掌握的。
English: Only the utensils and the name cannot be lent to others. This is in the hands of the sovereign.

古文：名以出信，信以守器，器以藏礼，礼以行义，义以生利，利以平民，政之大节也。
现代文：名号用来赋予威信，威信用来保持器物，器物用来体现礼制，礼制用来推行道义，道义用来产生利益，利益用来治理百姓，这是政权中的大节。
English: The name is used to confer prestige, the prestige is used to keep the utensils, the utensils are used to reflect the etiquette, the etiquette is used to promote morality, morality is used to generate profits, and profits are used to govern the people. This is a major festival in the regime.

古文：若以假人，与人政也。
现代文：如果把名位、礼器假借给别人，这就是把政权给了别人。
English: If you lend your title and ceremonial objects to someone else, you are giving power to someone else.

古文：政亡，则国家从之，弗可止也已。 
现代文：失去政权，国家也就跟着失去，这是不能阻止的。 
English: If the regime falls, the country will fall with it. This cannot be stopped.

古文：孙桓子还于新筑，不入，遂如晋乞师。
现代文：孙桓子回到新筑，不进国都，就到晋国请求出兵。
English: Sun Huan Zi returned to Xinzhu, and instead of entering the capital, he went to Jin Province to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：臧宣叔亦如晋乞师。
现代文：臧宣叔也到晋国请求出兵。
English: Uncle Zou Xuan also went to Jin to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：皆主郤献子。
现代文：两人都投奔郤克。
English: Both of them went to Zengke.

古文：晋侯许之七百乘。
现代文：晋景公答应派出七百辆战车。
English: Lord Jinjing agreed to send seven hundred chariots.

古文：郤子曰： 此城濮之赋也。
现代文：郤克说： 这是城濮之战的战车数。
English: Yan Ke said, "This is the number of chariots in the Battle of Chenghuang.

古文：有先君之明与先大夫之肃，故捷。
现代文：当时有先君的明察和先大夫的敏捷，所以得胜。
English: At that time, there was the forefather's clear observation and the forefather's doctor's agility, so he won.

古文：克于先大夫，无能为役。 请八百乘，许之。
现代文：克和先大夫相比，还不足以做他们的仆人。请发八百乘战车。 
English: Compared to the previous doctor, I am not good enough to be their servant. Please send eight hundred chariots.

古文：郤克将中军，士燮佐上军，栾书将下军，韩厥为司马，以救鲁、卫。臧宣叔逆晋师，且道之。
现代文：晋景公答应了。郤克率领中军，士燮辅佐上军，栾书率领下军，韩厥做司马，以救援鲁国和卫国，臧宣叔迎接晋军，同时向导开路。
English: Jin Jing Gong agreed. Yan Ke led the central army, Shifu assisted the upper army, Ying Shu led the lower army, Han Jue acted as Sima to rescue Lu and defend the country, and Uncle Yu Xuan greeted the Jin army and opened the way for the guide.

古文：季文子帅师会之。
现代文：季文子率领军队和他们会合。
English: Ji Fumiko led the troops to join them.

古文：及卫地，韩献子将斩人，郤献子驰，将救之，至则既斩之矣。
现代文：到达卫国境内，韩厥要杀人，郤克驾车疾驰赶去，打算救下那个人。等赶到，已经杀了。
English: When Han Jue arrived in the territory of the Republic of China, he wanted to kill someone. Yan Ke drove there at high speed, intending to save the person. When he arrived, he had already killed the person.

古文：郤子使速以徇，告其仆曰： 吾以分谤也。 
现代文：郤献子赶快把尸体示众，还告诉他的御者说： 我用这样的做法来分担指责。 
English: The sacrificial son quickly showed the body to the crowd and told his driver, "I am sharing the blame in this way.

古文：师从齐师于莘。
现代文：晋、鲁、卫联军在莘地追上齐军。
English: The Jin, Lu, and Wei allied forces caught up with the Qi army in Shunde.

古文：六月壬申，师至于靡笄之下。
现代文：六月十六日，军队到达靡笄山下。
English: On June 16, the troops arrived at the foot of Mt. Meili.

古文：齐侯使请战，曰： 子以君师，辱于敝邑，不腆敝赋，诘朝请见。 
现代文：齐顷公派人请战，说： 您带领国君的军队光临敝邑，敝国的士兵不强，也请在明天早晨相见决战。 
English: Qiu Hao sent an official to ask for battle, saying, "You are leading the king's army to visit Ye, the soldiers of Ye are not strong, please meet tomorrow morning for a decisive battle."

古文：对曰： 晋与鲁、卫，兄弟也。来告曰： 大国朝夕释憾于敝邑之地。 
现代文：郤克回答说： 晋和鲁、卫是兄弟国家，他们前来告诉我们说： 大国不分早晚都在敝邑的土地上发泄气愤。 
English: Yan Ke replied, "Jin, Lu and Wei are brotherly countries. They came to tell us, 'All great nations vent their anger on the land of Gan sooner or later.

古文：寡君不忍，使群臣请于大国，无令舆师淹于君地。
现代文：寡君不忍，派下臣们前来向大国请求，同时又不让我军长久留在贵国。
English: The tyrant could not bear it and sent his subordinates to beg the great power, but at the same time he did not want our army to stay in your country for a long time.

古文：能进不能退，君无所辱命。 
现代文：我们只能前进不能后退，您的命令是不会不照办的。 
English: We can only move forward, not backward. We will not disobey your orders.

古文：齐侯曰： 大夫之许，寡人之愿也；若其不许，亦将见也。 
现代文：齐顷公说： 大夫允许，正是齐国的愿望；如果不允许，也要兵戎相见的。 
English: Qi Hao Gong said, "If the doctor allows it, it is the wish of Qi Guo; if he does not allow it, we should meet each other in battle."

古文：齐高固入晋师，桀石以投人，禽之而乘其车，系桑本焉以徇齐垒，曰： 欲勇者贾余馀勇。 
现代文：齐国的高固攻打晋军，拿起石头扔向晋军，抓住晋军战俘，然后坐上他的战车，把桑树根子系在车上，巡行到齐营说： 想要勇气的人可以来买我剩下的勇气！ 
English: Gao Gu of Qi attacked the Jin army, picked up stones and threw them at the Jin army, caught the Jin army prisoners of war, and then sat in his chariot, tied the mulberry roots to the car, marched to Qi camp and said: Those who want courage can come and buy my remaining courage!

古文：癸酉，师陈于鞌。
现代文：十七日，齐、晋两军在鞌地摆开阵势。
English: On the 17th, the two armies of Qi and Jin set up their positions on the plain.

古文：邴夏御齐侯，逢丑父为右。
现代文：邴夏为齐顷公驾车，逢丑父作为车右。
English: Zou Xia is driving the car for Qi He Gong, Feng Qiu father is driving the car on the right.

古文：晋解张御郤克，郑丘缓为右。
现代文：晋国的解张为郤克驾车，郑丘缓作为车右。
English: Jin Province's Jie Zhang is driving for Yan Ke, Zheng Qiu is driving on the right.

古文：齐侯曰： 余姑翦灭此而朝食。 
现代文：齐顷公说： 我暂且消灭了这些人再进行聚餐。 
English: Qi Haogong said: I have temporarily eliminated these people, and then we will have a meal.

古文：不介马而驰之。
现代文：不给马披上甲胄就驱马进击。
English: You don't put armor on a horse and lead it into battle.

古文：郤克伤于矢，流血及屦，未绝鼓音，曰： 余病矣！ 
现代文：郤克受了箭伤，血流到鞋子上，但是鼓声不断，说： 我受伤了！ 
English: He suffered an arrow wound and blood flowed onto his shoes, but the drumbeat continued, saying: I'm injured!

古文：张侯曰： 自始合，而矢贯余手及肘，余折以御，左轮朱殷，岂敢言病。
现代文：解张说： 从一开始交战，箭就射穿了我的手和肘，我折断了箭杆仍驾车，左边的车轮都染成黑红色，哪里敢说受伤？
English: Commentator Zhang said: From the beginning of the battle, the arrow shot through my hand and elbow, I broke the arrow shaft and still drove, the left wheel was dyed black and red, how dare I say I was injured?

古文：吾子忍之！ 
现代文：您忍着点吧！ 
English: You have to be patient!

古文：缓曰： 自始合，苟有险，余必下推车，子岂识之？
现代文：郑丘缓说： 从一开始交战，只要有不平之地，我必定下车推车，您难道了解吗？
English: Zheng Qiu said slowly: From the beginning of the war, as long as there is an uneven ground, I will certainly get off and push the cart, do you understand?

古文：然子病矣！ 
现代文：不过您真是受伤了！ 
English: But you're really hurt!

古文：张侯曰： 师之耳目，在吾旗鼓，进退从之。
现代文：解张说： 军队的耳目，在于我的旗子和鼓声，前进后退都要听从它。
English: The commentary said: The ears and eyes of the army are in my flag and drums, and they must obey it when advancing and retreating.

古文：此车一人殿之，可以集事，若之何其以病败君之大事也？
现代文：这辆车子由一个人镇守，战事就可以完成。为什么要为了一点痛苦而败坏国君的大事呢？
English: This vehicle can be guarded by one person, and the battle can be completed. Why ruin the important work of the sovereign for the sake of a little pain?

古文：擐甲执兵，固即死也。病未及死，吾子勉之！ 
现代文：身披盔甲，手执武器，本来就抱定必死的决心，受伤还没有到死的程度，你还是尽力而为吧！ 
English: Dressed in armor, holding a weapon in your hand, you are already determined to die, the injury is not to the extent of death, you should still do your best!

古文：左并辔，右援枹而鼓，马逸不能止，师从之。
现代文：于是就左手一把握着马缰，右手拿着鼓槌击鼓。马奔跑不能停止，全军就跟着上去。
English: So he took hold of the stirrup with his left hand, and with his right hand he held the drumstick and beat the drum. The horse could not stop running, and the whole army followed.

古文：齐师败绩。逐之，三周华不注。
现代文：齐军大败，晋国追赶齐军，绕了华不注山三圈。
English: The Qi army was defeated, and Jin Province chased the Qi army and circled Huabushan Mountain three times.

古文：韩厥梦子舆谓己曰： 旦辟左右。 
现代文：韩厥梦见他父亲子舆对他说： 明天不要站在战车左右两侧。 
English: Han Jue dreamed that his father Zi Me told him: "Tomorrow, don't stand on the left and right sides of the chariot.

古文：故中御而从齐侯。
现代文：因此韩厥就在中间驾战车而追赶齐顷公。
English: Therefore, Han Jue drove a chariot in the middle to catch up with Qi Hao.

古文：邴夏曰： 射其御者，君子也。 
现代文：邴夏说： 射那位驾车人，他是君子。 
English: Zou Xia said, "Shoot that driver, he is a gentleman."

古文：公曰： 谓之君子而射之，非礼也。 
现代文：齐顷公说： 认为他是君子而射他，这不合于礼。 
English: Qi Haogong said, "It is not proper to think that he is a gentleman and shoot him.

古文：射其左，越于车下。
现代文：射车左，车左死在车下。
English: Shoot the car on the left, the car on the left dies under the car.

古文：射其右，毙于车中。
现代文：射车右，车右死在车中。
English: Shoot the car on the right, the car on the right dies in the car.

古文：綦毋张丧车，从韩厥，曰： 请寓乘从左右。 
现代文：綦毋张丢失了战车，跟上韩厥说： 请允许我搭乘您的战车。 
English: He had lost his chariot, so he followed Han Jue and said, "Please let me ride in your chariot."

古文：皆肘之，使立于后。
现代文：上车，准备站在左边或右边，韩厥用肘推他，使他站在身后。
English: He got on the bus and prepared to stand on the left or right side. Han Jue pushed him with his elbow and made him stand behind him.

古文：韩厥俛，定其右。
现代文：韩厥弯下身子，放稳车右的尸体。
English: Han Jue bent down and steadied the body on the right side of the car.

古文：逢丑父与公易位。
现代文：逢丑父和齐顷公乘机互换位置。
English: Feng Chuxufu and Qi He swap places on a public plane.

古文：将及华泉，骖絓于木而止。
现代文：将要到达华泉，骖马被树木绊住了。
English: Just before reaching Huaquan, the horse got stuck in the trees.

古文：丑父寝于轏中，蛇出于其下，以肱击之，伤而匿之，故不能推车而及。
现代文：头几天，逢丑父睡在栈车里，有一条蛇爬到他身边，他用小臂去打蛇，小臂受伤，但隐瞒了这件事，由于这样，他不能用臂推车前进，这样才被韩厥追上。
English: In the first few days, Feng Ugly's father was sleeping in the truck, and a snake crawled up to him. He used his small arm to hit the snake. His small arm was injured, but he concealed the fact. As a result, he could not push the truck with his arm, so he was caught by Han Jue.

古文：韩厥执絷马前，再拜稽首，奉觞加璧以进，曰： 寡君使群臣为鲁、卫请曰： 无令舆师陷入君地。 
现代文：韩厥拿着马缰走向马前，跪下叩头，捧着酒杯加上玉璧献上，说： 寡君派臣下们替鲁、卫两国请求，说： 不要让军队进入齐国的土地。 
English: Han Jue walked to the front of the horse with the bridle, kneeled down and bowed, holding a wine glass and presented it with a gem, saying: The oligarchs sent their subordinates to request Lu and Wei countries, saying: Do not let the army enter the land of Qi.

古文：下臣不幸，属当戎行，无所逃隐。
现代文：下臣不幸，正好在军队服役，不能逃避服役。
English: Unfortunately, his vassal happened to serve in the army, so he couldn't avoid serving.

古文：且惧奔辟而忝两君，臣辱戎士，敢告不敏，摄官承乏。 
现代文：而且也害怕奔走逃避成为两国国君的耻辱。下臣身为一名战士，谨向君王报告我的无能，但由于人手缺乏，只好承当这个官职。 
English: Moreover, I am afraid of running away to avoid the disgrace of becoming the sovereign of the two countries. As a soldier, I would like to report my incompetence to the king, but due to lack of manpower, I have to assume this post.

古文：丑父使公下，如华泉取饮。
现代文：逢丑父要齐顷公下车，到华泉去取水。
English: Feng Ugly's father wants Qi He Gong to get off the bus and go to Huaquan to fetch water.

古文：郑周父御佐车，宛茷为右，载齐侯以免。
现代文：郑周父驾御副车，宛茷作为车右，带着齐顷公逃走而免于被俘。
English: Zheng Zhou's father drove the second car, and took Qi Aagong with him to avoid being captured.

古文：韩厥献丑父，郤献子将戮之。
现代文：韩厥献上逢丑父，郤克要杀死逢丑父。
English: Han Jue presented Feng Chuxing, and Yan Ke wanted to kill Feng Chuxing.

古文：呼曰： 自今无有代其君任患者，有一于此，将为戮乎！ 
现代文：逢丑父喊叫说： 直到目前为止没有能代替自己国君承担祸难的人，有一个在这里，还要被杀死吗？ 
English: Feng Ugly Father shouted, "Up until now, there was no one who could bear the calamity in place of his sovereign. Is there someone here who should be killed?"

古文：郤子曰： 人不难以死免其君，我戮之不祥，赦之以劝事君者。 
现代文：郤克说： 一个人不畏惧用死来使他的国君免于祸患，我杀了他，不吉利。赦免了他，用来勉励事奉国君的人。 
English: Zeng Ke said: A person is not afraid to use death to save his sovereign from harm. I killed him, unlucky. I pardoned him, to encourage those who serve the sovereign.

古文：乃免之。
现代文：于是就释放了逢丑父。
English: So they let him go.

古文：齐侯免，求丑父，三入三出。
现代文：齐顷公免于被俘以后，寻找逢丑父，在晋军中三进三出。
English: After Qi Hao was released from captivity, he searched for his father, and was in and out of the Jin army three times.

古文：每出，齐师以帅退，入于狄卒。
现代文：每次出来的时候，齐军都簇拥着护卫他。
English: Every time he came out, the Qi army surrounded and escorted him.

古文：狄卒皆抽戈楯冒之，以入于卫师。
现代文：进入狄人军队中，狄人的士兵都抽出戈和盾以保护齐顷公。
English: Entering the Di people's army, the Di people's soldiers all took out their shields and shields to protect Qi Hao.

古文：卫师免之。
现代文：进入卫国的军队中，卫军也对他们不加伤害。
English: When they joined the national guard, the guards did not harm them.

古文：遂自徐关入。
现代文：于是，齐顷公就从徐关进入齐国临淄。
English: As a result, King Qi He went from Xu Guan to Linyi, Qi Province.

古文：齐侯见保者，曰： 勉之！
现代文：齐顷公看到守军，说： 你们努力吧！
English: When Prince Qi saw the defenders, he said, "Do your best!

古文：齐师败矣。 
现代文：齐军战败了！ 
English: The Qi army was defeated!

古文：辟女子，女子曰： 君免乎？ 曰： 免矣。 
现代文：齐顷公的车前进时使一个女子让路，这个女子说： 国君免于祸难了吗？ 说： 免了。 
English: When Prince Qi's carriage was moving forward, a woman stepped out of the way. The woman said, "Is the sovereign free from the calamity?" He said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 锐司徒免乎？ 曰： 免矣。 
现代文：她说： 锐司徒免于祸难了吗？ 说： 免了。 
English: And she said, Are the Reims free from evil? And she said, They are free.

古文：曰： 苟君与吾父免矣，可若何！ 
现代文：她说： 如果国君和我父亲免于祸难了，还要怎么样？ 
English: She said: "If the sovereign and my father are spared from disaster, what else is there to do?

古文：乃奔。
现代文：就跑开了。
English: and ran away.

古文：齐侯以为有礼，既而问之，辟司徒之妻也。予之石窌。
现代文：齐顷公认为她知礼，不久查询，才知道是辟司徒的妻子，就赐给她石窌地方作为封邑。
English: Qi immediately recognized her as a wise woman, and soon inquired, only to find out that she was the wife of a scholar, and gave her Shijiazhuang as a fiefdom.

古文：晋师从齐师，入自丘舆，击马陉。
现代文：晋军追赶齐军，从丘舆进入齐国，进攻马陉。
English: The Jin army chased the Qi army, entered Qi country from Qiuwu, and attacked Matsu.

古文：齐侯使宾媚人赂以纪甗、玉磬与地。不可，则听客之所为。
现代文：齐顷公派遣宾媚人把纪甗、玉磬和土地送给战胜诸国，说： 如果他们不同意讲和，就随他们怎么办吧。 
English: Qiaoguang sent his flatterers to give Jizhao, Jade Dragonfly and land to the victorious countries, saying: If they don't agree to make peace, let them do what they want.

古文：宾媚人致赂，晋人不可，曰： 必以萧同叔子为质，而使齐之封内尽东其亩。 
现代文：宾媚人送去财礼，晋国人不同意，说： 一定要让萧同叔子作为人质，同时使齐国境内的田陇全部东向。 
English: The Jin people did not agree to this and said, "We must keep Uncle Xiao Tong as a hostage, and at the same time move all the rice fields in Qi to the east."

古文：对曰： 萧同叔子非他，寡君之母也。若以匹敌，则亦晋君之母也。
现代文：宾媚人回答说：萧同叔子不是别人，是寡君的母亲，如果从对等地位来说，那也就是晋军的母亲。
English: Binmei replied: Xiao Tongzhi is none other than the mother of the Wang Jun, and from the perspective of equal status, it is also the mother of the Jin Army.

古文：吾子布大命于诸侯，而曰： 必质其母以为信。 其若王命何？
现代文：您在诸侯中发布重大的命令，反而说一定要把人家的母亲作为人质以取信，您又将要怎样对待周天子的命令呢？
English: You issue a major order among the princes, but say that you must take someone's mother as a hostage to get a letter. What will you do with Zhou Tianzi's order?

古文：且是以不孝令也。
现代文：而且这样做，就是用不孝来命令诸侯。
English: And to do so is to command the lords with a lack of filial piety.

古文：《诗》曰： 孝子不匮，永锡尔类。 
现代文：《诗》说： 孝子的孝心没有竭尽，永远可以感染你的同类。 
English: "Poetry" says: The filial piety of a filial son is inexhaustible, and it can always influence your peers.

古文：若以不孝令于诸侯，其无乃非德类也乎？
现代文：如果用不孝号令诸侯，这恐怕不是道德的准则吧！
English: If you order your lords to be unfilial, I'm afraid that's not a moral code!

古文：先王疆理天下物土之宜，而布其利，故《诗》曰： 我疆我理，南东其亩。 
现代文：先王对天下的土地，定疆界、分地理，因地制宜，以获取应得的利益。所以《诗》说： 我划定疆界、分别地理，南向东向开辟田亩。 
English: For the land of the world, the Ancestor set boundaries, divided geographically, and adapted to local conditions in order to obtain deserved benefits. Therefore, the "Poem" said: I set boundaries, separated geographically, and opened up fields from south to east.

古文：今吾子疆理诸侯，而曰 尽东其亩 而已，唯吾子戎车是利，无顾土宜，其无乃非先王之命也乎？
现代文：现在您让诸侯定疆界、分地理，反而只说什么 田垄全部东向 ，不顾地势是否适宜，只管自己兵车进出的有利，恐怕不是先王的政令吧！
English: Now you let the princes set the borders and divide the geography, but instead you only say that all the fields and ridges are eastward, regardless of whether the terrain is suitable, although it is advantageous for your own chariots to enter and exit, I am afraid it is not the king's decree!

古文：反先王则不义，何以为盟主？
现代文：违反先王的遗命就是不合道义，怎么能做盟主？
English: It is immoral to violate the last will and testament of the late king. How can he be the leader?

古文：其晋实有阙。
现代文：晋国确实是有缺点的。
English: Jin really did have its drawbacks.

古文：四王之王也，树德而济同欲焉。五伯之霸也，勤而抚之，以役王命。
现代文：四王能统一天下，主要是能树立德行而满足诸侯的共同愿望；五伯能领导诸侯，主要是能自己勤劳而安抚诸侯，使大家服从天子的命令。
English: If the four kings can unify the country, it is mainly because they can establish virtue and satisfy the common desire of the princes; if the five bishops can lead the princes, it is mainly because they can work hard to appease the princes and make everyone obey the orders of the Son of Heaven.

古文：今吾子求合诸侯，以逞无疆之欲。
现代文：现在您要求会合诸侯，来满足没有止境的欲望。
English: Now you call for a meeting of lords to satisfy your insatiable appetite.

古文：《诗》曰： 布政优优，百禄是遒。 
现代文：《诗》说： 政事的推行宽大和缓，各种福禄都将积聚。 
English: "Poetry" said: The implementation of government affairs is generous and slow, and all kinds of benefits will be accumulated.

古文：子实不优，而弃百禄，诸侯何害焉！
现代文：您确实不能宽大，丢弃了各种福禄，这对诸侯有什么害处呢？
English: You really can't afford to be lenient. You have thrown away all kinds of benefits. What harm does this do to the lords?

古文：不然，寡君之命使臣则有辞矣，曰： 子以君师，辱于敝邑，不腆敝赋，以犒从者。
现代文：如果您不肯答应，寡君命令我使臣，就有话可说了： 您带领国君的军队光临敝邑，敝邑用很少的财富，来犒劳您的左右随员。
English: If you do not want to agree, and the monarch orders me to send an envoy, there is something to be said: You led the sovereign's army to visit Gyeongju, and Gyeongju used very little wealth to reward your right and left attendants.

古文：畏君之震，师徒桡败。
现代文：害怕贵国国君的愤怒，我军战败。
English: Fearing the wrath of your sovereign, our army was defeated.

古文：吾子惠徼齐国之福，不泯其社稷，使继旧好，唯是先君之敝器、土地不敢爱。
现代文：您惠临而肯赐齐国的福，不灭亡我们的国家，让齐、晋两国继续过去的友好，那么先君的破旧器物和土地我们是不敢吝啬的。
English: If you come and are willing to bestow blessings on Qi and not destroy our country, and allow Qi and Jin to continue their past friendship, then we dare not be stingy with our forefather's worn-out utensils and land.

古文：子又不许。请收合馀烬，背城借一。
现代文：您如果又不肯允许，我们就请求收集残兵败将，背靠自己的城下再决最后一战。
English: If you refuse to allow it, we will ask you to gather the remnants of the defeated soldiers and go back to the castle to fight the last battle.

古文：敝邑之幸，亦云从也。况其不幸，敢不唯命是听。  
现代文：敝邑有幸而战胜，也会依从贵国的；何况不幸而败，哪敢不听从您的命令？ 
English: If we are lucky and win, we will obey your country; if we are unlucky and lose, how can we disobey your orders?

古文：鲁、卫谏曰： 齐疾我矣！
现代文：鲁、卫两国劝谏郤克说： 齐国怨恨我们了。
English: Lu and Wei both advised Zeng Ke, saying, "Qi has come to resent us.

古文：其死亡者，皆亲暱也。
现代文：齐国死去和溃散的，都是齐侯亲近的人。
English: Those who died and scattered in Qi were all people who were close to Qi Hou.

古文：子若不许，仇我必甚。
现代文：您如果不肯答应，必然更加仇恨我们。
English: If you do not agree, you are bound to hate us even more.

古文：唯子则又何求？
现代文：即使是您，还有什么可追求的？
English: Even you, what is there to pursue?

古文：子得其国宝，我亦得地，而纾于难，其荣多矣！
现代文：如果您得到齐国的国室，我们也得到失地，而缓和了祸难，这荣耀也就很多了。
English: If you get the imperial family of Qi, we also get the loss of land, and alleviate the calamity, which is a lot of glory.

古文：齐、晋亦唯天所授，岂必晋？ 
现代文：齐国和晋国都是由上天授与的，难道一定只有晋国永久胜利吗？ 
English: Both Qi Province and Jin Province were bestowed by heaven. Is it certain that only Jin Province will be victorious forever?

古文：晋人许之，对曰： 群臣帅赋舆以为鲁、卫请，若苟有以藉口而复于寡君，君之惠也。
现代文：晋国人答应了鲁、卫的意见，回答说： 下臣们率领兵车，来为鲁、卫两国请求。如果有话可以向寡君复命，这就是君王的恩惠了。
English: The people of Jin Province agreed to Lu and Wei's suggestion and replied: "The subordinates led the chariots and came to make a request for Lu and Wei. If there is anything that can be said to the oligarchs, this is the king's favor."

古文：敢不唯命是听。 禽郑自师逆公。
现代文：岂敢不遵命？ 禽郑从军中去迎接鲁成公。
English: Would you dare to disobey an order? Poultry Zheng went to meet Lu Chenggong from the army.

古文：秋七月，晋师及齐国佐盟于爰娄，使齐人归我汶阳之田。
现代文：秋季，七月，晋军和齐国宾媚人在爰娄结盟，让齐国归还我国汶阳的土田。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Jin army and the guests of Qi were allied in Yunnan, so that Qi would return the soil of our country, the soil of Wenyang.

古文：公会晋师于上鄍，赐三帅先路三命之服，司马、司空、舆帅、候正、亚旅，皆受一命之服。
现代文：成公在上鄍会见晋军，把先路和三命的车赐给三位高级将领，司马、司空、舆帅、候正、亚旅都接受了一命的车服。
English: Cheng Gong met with the Jin army in Zhangye, and gave the car of the first road and the three lives to the three senior generals. Sima, Siku, Minshuai, Huzheng, and Yatai all accepted the car clothes of the first life.

古文：八月，宋文公卒。
现代文：八月，宋文公去世。
English: In August, Song Wengong passed away.

古文：始厚葬，用蜃炭，益车马，始用殉。
现代文：开始厚葬：用蚌蛤和木炭，增加陪葬的车马，开始用活人殉葬，用很多器物陪葬。
English: The mass burial began: with straw and charcoal, the number of chariots and horses accompanying the burial increased, the use of living martyrs began, and many objects were used to accompany the burial.

古文：重器备，椁有四阿，棺有翰桧。
现代文：椁有四面呈坡形，棺有翰、桧等装饰。
English: The four sides of the coffin have a slope shape, and the coffin is decorated with ornaments.

古文：君子谓： 华元、乐举，于是乎不臣。
现代文：君子认为： 华元、乐举，在这里有失为臣之道。
English: The nobles thought: Hua Yuan, Le Zhu, there is no way to be a vassal here.

古文：臣治烦去惑者也，是以伏死而争。
现代文：臣子，是为国君去掉烦乱解除迷惑的，因此要冒死去谏诤。
English: The vassal is the one who removes the disturbance and clears up the confusion for the sovereign, so he must risk death.

古文：今二子者，君生则纵其惑，死又益其侈，是弃君于恶也。
现代文：现在这两个人，国君活着的时候就由他去放纵作恶，死了以后又增加他的奢侈，这是把国君推入邪恶里去，这算是什么臣子？ 
English: Now these two people, when the sovereign was alive, they let him indulge in evil, and after his death, they increased his luxury. This is pushing the sovereign into evil. What kind of vassal is this?

古文：何臣之为？ 九月，卫穆公卒，晋三子自役吊焉，哭于大门之外。
现代文：九月，卫穆公去世，晋国的三位将领从战地率兵返国途中顺便去吊唁，在大门之外哭吊。
English: In September, Emperor Wei Mu passed away. Three generals from Jin Province, who were on their way back from the battlefield, stopped by to offer their condolences and wept outside the gate.

古文：卫人逆之，妇人哭于门内，送亦如之。
现代文：卫国人迎接他们，女人在门内哭。送他们的时候也是这样。
English: The guards greet them, and the woman cries inside the gate. It's the same when they take them away.

古文：遂常以葬。楚之讨陈夏氏也，庄王欲纳夏姬，申公巫臣曰： 不可。
现代文：以后别国官员来吊唁就是以此为常，直到下葬。楚国在攻打陈国夏氏的时候，楚庄王想收纳夏姬。申公巫臣说： 不行。
English: Later, when officials from other countries came to offer condolences, this was the custom until the funeral. When Chu attacked the Chen Guoxia clan, the king of Chu Zhuang wanted to receive Xia Ji. Shengong Wushu said, "No."

古文：君召诸侯，以讨罪也。今纳夏姬，贪其色也。
现代文：君王召集诸侯，是为了讨伐有罪；现在收纳夏姬，就是贪恋她的美色了。
English: The king gathers his lords to fight crime, but to receive Shaggy is to covet her beauty.

古文：贪色为淫，淫为大罚。
现代文：贪恋美色叫做淫，淫就会受到重大处罚。
English: Lust for beauty is called lewdness, and lewdness is severely punished.

古文：《周书》曰： 明德慎罚。 文王所以造周也。
现代文：《周书》说： 宣扬道德，谨慎惩罚 ，文王因此而创立周朝。
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "Preach morality, be careful to punish, King Wen thus founded the Zhou Dynasty."

古文：明德，务崇之之谓也。慎罚，务去之之谓也。
现代文：宣扬道德，就是致力于提倡它，谨慎惩罚，就是致力于不用它。
English: To preach morality is to endeavor to promote it; to be careful in inflicting punishment is to endeavor not to use it.

古文：若兴诸侯，以取大罚，非慎之也。
现代文：如果出动诸侯的军队反而得到重大处罚，就是不谨慎了。君王还是考虑一下吧！ 
English: It would be imprudent to call out the armies of the lords and receive a severe punishment. The king should think about it!

古文：君其图之！ 
现代文：楚庄王就不要夏姬了。
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：王乃止。子反欲取之，巫臣曰： 是不祥人也！
现代文：子反想要娶夏姬，巫臣说： 这是个不吉利的人。
English: When his son wanted to marry her, the sorcerer said, "This is an unlucky person.

古文：是夭子蛮，杀御叔，杀灵侯，戮夏南，出孔、仪，丧陈国，何不祥如是！
现代文：她使子蛮早死，杀了御叔，弑了灵侯，诛了夏南，使孔宁、仪行父逃亡在外，陈国因此被灭亡，为什么不吉利到这个样子！
English: She caused her son to die at a very early age, killed her uncle, killed Ling Hou, killed Xia Nan, and caused Kongning and Yi Xingfu to flee abroad. As a result, Chen Guo was destroyed. Why was it so unlucky?

古文：人生实难，其有不获死乎？
现代文：人生在世实在很不容易，如果娶了夏姬，恐怕不得好死吧！
English: Life in this world is really not easy. If I marry Shaggy, I'm afraid I'll have to die!

古文：天下多美妇人，何必是？ 
现代文：天下多的是漂亮的女人，为什么一定要她？ 
English: There are many beautiful women in the world, why does she have to be the one?

古文：子反乃止。
现代文：子反也就不要她了。
English: Her son, on the other hand, no longer wants her.

古文：王以予连尹襄老。
现代文：楚庄王把夏姬给了连尹襄老。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang gave Xia Ji to Lian Yin Xiang Lao.

古文：襄老死于邲，不获其尸，其子黑要烝焉。
现代文：襄老在邲地战役中死去，没有找到尸首。他的儿子黑要和夏姬私通。
English: Xiang Lao died in the Battle of Plains of Abraham, and his body was never found. His son, Heiguo, had an affair with Xia Ji.

古文：巫臣使道焉，曰： 归！
现代文：巫臣派人向夏姬示意，说： 回娘家去，我娶你。 
English: The sorcerer sent someone to tell her, "Go back to your mother's house, and I will marry you."

古文：吾聘女。 又使自郑召之，曰： 尸可得也，必来逆之。 
现代文：又派人从郑国召唤她说： 襄老尸首可以得到，一定要亲自来接。 
English: They also sent someone from Zheng Guo to summon her and said, "You can get the corpse of Xiang Lao, you must come and pick it up in person."

古文：姬以告王，王问诸屈巫。
现代文：夏姬把这话报告楚庄王。楚庄王就问巫臣。
English: She reported this to King Chu Zhuang, who asked the sorcerer.

古文：对曰： 其信！
现代文：巫臣回答说： 恐怕是靠得住的。
English: The sorcerer replied, "I'm afraid it's reliable."

古文：知之父，成公之嬖也，而中行伯之季弟也，新佐中军，而善郑皇戌，甚爱此子。其必因郑而归王子与襄老之尸以求之。
现代文：知罃的父亲，是成公的宠臣，又是中行伯的小兄弟，新近做了中军佐，和郑国的皇戌交情很好，非常喜爱这个儿子，他一定是想通过郑国而归还王子和襄老尸首而来要求交换知罃。
English: Zhisheng's father, Chenggong's favorite and Zhongxingbo's younger brother, had recently been made a vice-commander of the Chinese army. He had a good relationship with the Empress Dowager of Zheng, and loved this son very much. He must have wanted to return the prince and the corpse of Xiang Lao through Zheng and demanded the exchange of Zhisheng.

古文：郑人惧于邲之役而欲求媚于晋，其必许之。 
现代文：郑国人对邲地战役感到害怕，同时要讨好于晋国，他们一定会答应。 
English: The Zheng people were afraid of the Battle of Ploughshares, and at the same time they wanted to please the Jin, and they would certainly agree.

古文：王遣夏姬归。
现代文：楚庄王就打发夏姬回去。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang sent Xia Ji back home.

古文：将行，谓送者曰： 不得尸，吾不反矣。 
现代文：将要动身的时候，夏姬对送行的人说： 不能得到尸首，我就不回来了。 
English: "If I don't get the body, I'm not coming back," she told the crowd as she prepared to leave.

古文：巫臣聘诸郑，郑伯许之。
现代文：巫臣在郑国聘她为妻，郑襄公允许了。
English: The sorcerer hired her as his wife in Zheng Guo, and Zheng Xianggong allowed it.

古文：及共王即位，将为阳桥之役，使屈巫聘于齐，且告师期，巫臣尽室以行。
现代文：等到楚共王即位，将要发动阳桥战役，派巫臣到齐国聘问，同时把出兵的日期告诉齐国。
English: When the Chu king ascends the throne, he will launch the Yangqiao Campaign, send wizards and wise men to Qi to ask questions, and at the same time inform Qi of the date of dispatch of troops.

古文：申叔跪从其父将適郢，遇之，曰： 异哉！
现代文：巫臣把一切家财全部带走。申叔跪跟着他的父亲将要到郢都去，碰上巫臣，说： 怪哉！
English: The sorcerer took away all the family's wealth. Uncle Shin knelt down and followed his father, who was about to go to the capital. When he met the sorcerer, he said, "How strange!

古文：夫子有三军之惧，而又有《桑中》之喜，宜将窃妻以逃者也。 
现代文：这个人有肩负军事重任的戒惧之心，却又有 桑中 幽会的喜悦之色，可能是将要带着别人的妻子私奔吧！ 
English: This man has the fear of shouldering military responsibilities, but also the joy of a get-together. He may be about to run away with someone else's wife!

古文：及郑，使介反币，而以夏姬行。
现代文：到了郑国，巫臣派副使带回财礼，就带着夏姬走了。
English: When they arrived in Zheng Guo, the Wiccans sent a vice-envoy to bring back gifts of money, and they took Xia Ji with them.

古文：将奔齐，齐师新败，曰： 吾不处不胜之国。 
现代文：准备逃亡到齐国，齐国又被战败，巫臣说： 我不住在不打胜仗的国家。 
English: Preparing to flee to Qi, Qi was defeated again, and the sorcerer said: I don't live in a country that doesn't win wars.

古文：遂奔晋，而因郤至以臣于晋。
现代文：就逃亡到晋国，并且由于郤至的关系在晋国做臣下。
English: He fled to Jin, and because of his connection to the imperial family, he became a vassal of Jin.

古文：晋人使为邢大夫。
现代文：晋国人让他做邢地的大夫。
English: The people of Jin Province asked him to be the doctor of Shunde.

古文：子反请以重币锢之，王曰： 止！
现代文：子反请求把巨款送给晋国，而要求晋国对巫臣永不录用，楚共王说： 别那样做！
English: The son counter-sued, demanding that the huge sum of money be sent to Jin, and that Jin should never hire the sorcerer. The King of Chu said, "Don't do that!

古文：其自为谋也，则过矣。其为吾先君谋也，则忠。
现代文：他为自己打算是错误的，他为我的先君打算则是忠诚的。
English: What he intended for himself was wrong, but what he intended for my ancestor was right.

古文：忠，社稷之固也，所盖多矣。
现代文：忠诚，国家靠着它来巩固，所能保护的东西就多了。
English: Loyalty, by which a country is held together, is all the more to be protected.

古文：且彼若能利国家，虽重币，晋将可乎？
现代文：而且他如果能有利于晋国，虽然送去重礼，晋国会同意永不录用吗？
English: Moreover, if he can be of benefit to Jin, will Jin agree never to hire him, even though he sends a heavy gift?

古文：若无益于晋，晋将弃之，何劳锢焉。 
现代文：如果对晋国没有好处，晋国将会不要他，何必求其永不录用呢？ 
English: If there is no benefit to Jin Guo, Jin Guo will not want him. Why not ask him never to be hired?

古文：晋师归，范文子后入。
现代文：晋国军队回国，范文子最后回来。
English: The Jin army returned to China, and Fan Fanzi was the last to come back.

古文：武子曰： 无为吾望尔也乎？ 
现代文：他的父亲范武子说 你不也知道我在盼望你吗？ 
English: His father, Fan Muxi, said, "Don't you know that I am looking forward to seeing you?

古文：对曰： 师有功，国人喜以逆之，先入，必属耳目焉，是代帅受名也，故不敢。 
现代文：范文子回答说： 出兵有功劳，国内的人们高兴地迎接他们。先回来，一定受到人们的注意，这是代替统帅接受荣誉，所以我不敢。 
English: Fan Wenzi replied, "There is merit in sending troops, and people in China are happy to welcome them. If they return first, they will certainly receive people's attention. This is to accept honors in place of the commander-in-chief, so I dare not.

古文：武子曰： 吾知免矣。 
现代文：武子说： 你这样谦让，我认为可以免于祸害了。 
English: Takeko said, "I know I can avoid the disaster."

古文：郤伯见，公曰： 子之力也夫！ 
现代文：郤伯入见，晋景公说： 这是您的功劳啊！ 
English: Zibo was impressed, and Jin Jinggong said, "This is your achievement!

古文：对曰： 君之训也，二三子之力也，臣何力之有焉！ 
现代文：郤伯回答说： 这是君王的教导，诸位将帅的功劳，下臣有什么功劳呢？ 
English: The eunuch replied, "This is the teaching of the king. It is the merit of the generals. What is the merit of the subordinates?

古文：范叔见，劳之如郤伯，对曰： 庚所命也，克之制也，燮何力之有焉！ 
现代文：范文子入见，晋景公像对郤伯一样慰劳他。范文子回答说： 这是范庚的命令，郤克的节制，小臣士燮有什么功劳呢？ 
English: Fan Wenzi thought for a while, and Jin Jinggong consoled him as if he were a beggar. Fan Wenzi replied, "This is Fan Geng's order. What is the merit of Xie Ke's self-restraint?

古文：栾伯见，公亦如之，对曰： 燮之诏也，士用命也，书何力之有焉！ 
现代文：栾伯进见，晋景公也如同慰劳郤伯他们一样慰劳他。栾伯回答说： 这是士燮的指示，士兵服从命令，小臣栾书有什么功劳呢？ 
English: When the eunuchs came to see him, the Duke of Jinjing consoled him just as he had consoled them. The eunuchs replied, "This is a scholar's instruction, soldiers obey orders, so what merit does it have for a vassal to write a letter?"

古文：宣公使求好于楚。庄王卒，宣公薨，不克作好。
现代文：鲁宣公曾派遣使者到楚国要求建立友好关系，由于楚庄王死了，不久鲁宣公也死去，没有能够建立友好关系。
English: Lu Xuan Gong had sent an envoy to the State of Chu to request the establishment of friendly relations. However, since the King of Chu Zhuang died, Lu Xuan Gong also died soon after, and was unable to establish friendly relations.

古文：公即位，受盟于晋。会晋伐齐。
现代文：鲁成公即位，在晋国接受盟约，会合晋国进攻齐国。
English: Lu Chenggong ascended the throne, accepted the covenant in Jin, and gathered Jin to attack Qi.

古文：卫人不行使于楚，而亦受盟于晋，从于伐齐。
现代文：卫国人不派使者去楚国聘问，也在晋国接受盟约，跟从着进攻齐国。
English: The defenders of the country did not send envoys to Chu to ask questions, but also accepted the covenant in Jin and followed the attack of Qi.

古文：故楚令尹子重为阳桥之役以救齐。
现代文：因此楚国的令尹子重发动阳桥战役来救齐国。
English: Therefore, Chu ordered Yin Zi Rong to launch the Yangqiao Campaign to save Qi.

古文：将起师，子重曰： 君弱，群臣不如先大夫，师众而后可。
现代文：将要发兵，子重说： 国君年幼，臣下们又比不上先大夫，军队人数众多然后才可以取胜。
English: He was about to dispatch an army, and Zi Chong said: The sovereign is young, his subjects are not as good as the first doctor, and the number of troops is large, and only then can they win.

古文：《诗》曰： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：《诗》说： 众多的人士，文王借以安宁。 
English: "Poetry" said: Many people, King Wen borrowed tranquility.

古文：夫文王犹用众，况吾侪乎？
现代文：文王尚且使用大众，何况是我们这些人呢？
English: King Wen still uses the public, let alone us?

古文：且先君庄王属之曰： 无德以及远方，莫如惠恤其民而善用之。  
现代文：而且先君庄王把国君嘱托给我们说： 如果没有德行到达边远的地方，还不如加恩体恤百姓而很好地使用他们。  
English: Moreover, the former King Zhuangzhu entrusted us with the command of the sovereign, saying: If there is no virtue to reach the remote places, it is better to use them well by sympathizing with the people.

古文：乃大户，已责，逮鳏，救乏，赦罪，悉师。
现代文：于是楚国就大事清查户口，免除税收的拖欠，施舍鳏夫，救济困乏，赦免罪人。
English: As a result, the state of Chu took the lead in checking accounts, exempting tax arrears, giving alms, relieving poverty, and pardoning sinners.

古文：王卒尽行，彭名御戎，蔡景公为左，许灵公为右。
现代文：动员全部军队，楚王的警卫军也全部出动。彭名驾御战车，蔡景公作为车左，许灵公作为车右。
English: The entire army was mobilized, and all of King Chu's guards were also dispatched. Peng Nian drove the chariot, Cai Jing Gong drove the left side, and Xu Ling Gong drove the right side.

古文：二君弱，皆强冠之。
现代文：两位国君还没有成年，都勉强行了冠礼。
English: The two sovereigns were not yet of age, and both reluctantly performed the coronation.

古文：冬，楚师侵卫，遂侵我，师于蜀。
现代文：冬季，楚军入侵卫国，就乘机在蜀地进攻我国。
English: In winter, the Chu army invaded the defense of the country, and took the opportunity to attack our country in Shudi.

古文：使臧孙往，辞曰： 楚远而久，固将退矣。
现代文：派臧孙去到楚军中求和。臧孙辞谢说： 楚军远离本国为时很久，本来就要退兵了。
English: He sent his grandson to the Chu army to sue for peace. The grandson declined, saying, "The Chu army has been away from the motherland for a long time, and they were about to withdraw.

古文：无功而受名，臣不敢。 
现代文：没有功劳而接受荣誉，下臣不敢。 
English: A subordinate does not dare to accept an honor without merit.

古文：楚侵及阳桥，孟孙请往赂之。以执斫、执针、织纴，皆百人，公衡为质，以请盟。
现代文：楚军进攻到达阳桥，孟孙请求前去送给楚军木工、缝工、织工各一百人，公衡作为人质，请求结盟。
English: When the attack of the Chu army reached Yangqiao, Meng Sun requested to go and give the Chu army 100 carpenters, seamstresses, and weavers each, and to take Fair Balance as a hostage, and to request an alliance.

古文：楚人许平。
现代文：楚国人答应讲和。
English: The people of Chu promised to make peace.

古文：十一月，公及楚公子婴齐、蔡侯、许男、秦右大夫说、宋华元、陈公孙宁、卫孙良夫、郑公子去疾及齐国之大夫盟于蜀。
现代文：十一月，鲁成公和楚国公子婴齐、蔡景侯、许灵公、秦国右大夫说、宋国华元、陈国公孙宁、卫国孙良夫、郑国公子去疾和齐国大夫在蜀地结盟。
English: In November, Lu Chenggong and the princes of Chu, Zhi Qi, Cai Jing Hou, Xu Ling Gong, and Qin Guoyu Doctor said that Song Guo Huayuan, Chen Guogong Sunning, Wei Guogong Sun Liangfu, Zheng Guogong Zi and Qi Guoguo Doctor were allied in Shu.

古文：卿不书，匮盟也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载卿的名字，这是由于结盟缺乏诚意。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the name of the lord, this is due to the lack of sincerity of the alliance.

古文：于是乎畏晋而窃与楚盟，故曰匮盟。
现代文：在这种情况下又因为鲁国畏惧晋国而偷偷和楚国结盟，所以说 结盟缺乏诚意 。
English: Under these circumstances, because Lu was afraid of Jin and secretly allied with Chu, it was said that the alliance lacked sincerity.

古文：蔡侯、许男不书，乘楚车也，谓之失位。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载蔡景侯、许灵公，这是由于他们乘坐了楚国的战车，叫做失去了身份。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record Cai Jinghou and Xu Linggong, this is because they took the chariot of Chu, called lost identity.

古文：君子曰： 位其不可不慎也乎！
现代文：君子说： 身份是不可以不慎重的啊！
English: The gentleman said, "One mustn't be careless with one's status!"

古文：蔡、许之君，一失其位，不得列于诸侯，况其下乎？
现代文：蔡、许两国国君，一旦失去身份，就不能列在诸侯之中，何况在他们之下的人呢！
English: Cai and Xu, once the sovereigns of the two countries lose their status, they cannot be listed among the princes, let alone the people under them!

古文：《诗》曰： 不解于位，民之攸塈。 
现代文：《诗》说： 在高位的人不懈怠，百姓就能得到休息。 
English: "Poetry" said: If you do not slacken in his position, the people can rest.

古文：其是之谓矣。 
现代文：说的就是这种情况了。 
English: This is exactly what happened.

古文：楚师及宋，公衡逃归。
现代文：楚军到达宋国，公衡逃了回来。
English: The Chu army reached Song, and Gongheng fled back.

古文：臧宣叔曰： 衡父不忍数年之不宴，以弃鲁国，国将若之何？
现代文：臧孙说： 衡父不能忍耐几年的不安宁，抛弃鲁国，国家将怎么办？
English: The great-grandson said, "If my father can't tolerate a few years of unrest, and abandons the country, what will the country do?

古文：谁居？
现代文：谁来受祸？
English: Who is it?

古文：后之人必有任是夫！
现代文：他的后代一定会有受到祸患的！
English: Woe to his descendants!

古文：国弃矣。 
现代文：国家被抛弃了 
English: The country has been abandoned

古文：是行也，晋辟楚，畏其众也。君子曰： 众之不可以已也。
现代文：在这次军事行动中，晋军避开楚军，由于害怕他们人数过多。君子说： 大众是不可以不用的。
English: During this military operation, the Jin army avoided the Chu army, fearing that they were too numerous. The gentleman said: The public is not allowed to use it.

古文：大夫为政，犹以众克，况明君而善用其众乎？
现代文：大夫当政，尚且可以利用大众来战胜敌人，何况是贤明的国君而且又能善于使用大众呢？
English: If a doctor in power can use the masses to defeat his enemies, how much more can a wise ruler use the masses?

古文：《大誓》所谓 商兆民离，周十人同 者，众也。 
现代文：《大誓》所说商朝亿万人离心离德，周朝十个人同心同德，都是说的大众啊。 
English: "Big Oath" said that hundreds of millions of Shang and Zhou dynasties were separated from the German people, and ten Zhou and Zhou dynasties were united with the German people.

古文：晋侯使巩朔献齐捷于周，王弗见，使单襄公辞焉，曰： 蛮夷戎狄，不式王命，淫湎毁常，王命伐之，则有献捷，王亲受而劳之，所以惩不敬，劝有功也。
现代文：晋景公派遣巩朔到成周进献战胜齐国的战利品，周定王不接见，派遣单襄公辞谢，说： 蛮夷戎狄，不遵奉天子的命令，迷恋酒色，败坏了天子的制度，天子命令讨伐他，就有了进献战利品的礼仪。天子亲自接受而加以慰劳，用这来惩罚不敬，勉励有功。
English: Jin Jing Gong sent Gong Shuo to Cheng Zhou to present the spoils of victory over Qi. Zhou Ding Wang did not receive the gift, but sent a one-sentence thank-you message, saying: "You are a barbarian, you do not follow the orders of the Son of Heaven, you are infatuated with wine, you have corrupted the system of the Son of Heaven, the Son of Heaven has ordered you to fight him, so there is a ritual of presenting the spoils. The Son of Heaven personally accepted it and consoled it, using it to punish disrespect and encourage meritorious deeds."

古文：兄弟甥舅，侵败王略，王命伐之，告事而已，不献其功，所以敬亲暱，禁淫慝也。
现代文：如果是兄弟甥舅的国家侵犯败坏天子的法度，天子命令讨伐他，只向天子报告一下情况罢了，不用进献俘虏，用这来尊敬亲近、禁止邪恶。
English: If a brother's or nephew's country violates the law of corrupting the Son of Heaven, and the Son of Heaven orders a crusade against him, it is only necessary to report the situation to the Son of Heaven. There is no need to sacrifice prisoners. Use this to respect closeness and prohibit evil.

古文：今叔父克遂有功于齐，而不使命卿镇抚王室，所使来抚余一人，而巩伯实来，未有职司于王室，又奸先王之礼，余虽欲于巩伯，其敢废旧典以忝叔父？
现代文：现在叔父能够顺利成功，在齐国建立了功勋，而不派遣曾受天子任命的卿来安抚王室，所派遣来安抚我的使者，仅仅是巩伯，他在王室中没有担任职务，又违反了先王的礼制。我虽然喜爱巩伯，岂敢废弃旧的典章制度以羞辱叔父？
English: Now that my uncle has been able to succeed smoothly and has established a meritorious record in Qi Province, instead of sending a lord who was appointed by the Son of Heaven to appease the royal family, the envoy sent to appease me is just Gongbo, who does not hold a position in the royal family and violates the etiquette of the former king. Although I love Gongbo, how dare I discard the old award system to humiliate my uncle?

古文：夫齐，甥舅之国也，而大师之后也，宁不亦淫从其欲以怒叔父，抑岂不可谏诲？ 
现代文：齐国和周室是甥舅之国，而且是姜太公的后代，叔父攻打齐国，难道是齐国放纵了私欲以激怒了叔父？或是齐国已经不可谏诤和教诲了呢？ 
English: Qi and Zhou were the nephew's country, and they were the descendants of Jiang Taigong. The uncle attacked Qi. Was it because Qi indulged his selfish desires and angered his uncle? Or was it because Qi was no longer willing to make peace?

古文：士庄伯不能对。
现代文：巩朔不能回答。
English: Gong Shuo couldn't answer.

古文：王使委于三吏，礼之如侯伯克敌使大夫告庆之礼，降于卿礼一等。
现代文：周定王把接待的事情交给三公，让他们用侯、伯战胜敌人派大夫告捷的礼节接待巩朔，比接待卿的礼节低一等。
English: Zhou Dingwang left the matter of the reception to the three princes, and let them receive Gongshuo with the etiquette of Hou and Bo defeating the enemy and sending the doctor to succeed, which was one level lower than the etiquette of receiving the lord.

古文：王以巩伯宴而私贿之。使相告之曰： 非礼也，勿籍。 
现代文：周定王和巩伯饮宴，私下送给他财礼，让相礼者告诉他说： 这是不合于礼制的，不要记载在史册上。 
English: Zhou Ding Wang and Gong Bo had a banquet, and privately gave him a gift of money, and asked the celebrant to tell him: This is not in accordance with the etiquette, and should not be recorded in the annals.

