古文：左雄字伯豪，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：◆左雄传，左雄字伯豪，南阳涅阳人。
English: ◆Zaoxiong Zhen, Zuoyong Zi Bo Hao, Nanyang Nieyang Ren.

古文：安帝时，举孝廉，稍迁冀州刺史。
现代文：安帝时，被推举为孝廉，升冀州刺史。
English: At the time of An Di, he was elected as a filial piety, and was promoted to the top position in the history of Jizhou.

古文：州部多豪族，好请托，雄常闭门不与交通。
现代文：州部多大族，喜欢拉关系，走后门。左雄经常把门关着，不与他们来往。
English: The large ethnic groups in the state department like to pull relations and go through the back door. Zuo often closes the door and does not interact with them.

古文：奏案贪猾二千石，无所回忌。
现代文：拿办那些贪污狡猾凶狠的二千石，不讲半点面子。
English: To take on those corrupt, cunning, and ferocious 2,000-koku bosses, without a shred of shame.

古文：永建初，公车征拜议郎。
现代文：永建初年，公车征拜议郎。
English: In the first year of Yongjian, the public bus called for a mediator.

古文：时，顺帝新立，大臣懈怠，朝多阙政，雄数言事，其辞深切。
现代文：这时，顺帝新立，大臣们因循苟且，朝廷好多工作都未作。
English: At this time, Emperor Shun was newly established, the ministers were following the rules, and the imperial court did not do a lot of work.

古文：尚书仆射虞诩以雄有忠公节，上疏荐之曰 臣见方今公卿以下，类多拱默，以树恩为贤，尽节为愚，至相戒曰：白璧不可为，容容多后福。
现代文：左雄几次上书，措词激烈。尚书仆射虞诩认为左雄有忠直的大节，给皇上写报告推荐他，说： 我所见现在公卿以下百官，大多数是缄默自守，把施恩为贤，把忠于朝廷为愚，甚至彼此相戒说 ：不能像白璧那样一点污点也没有，马马虎虎终归多福。 
English: Zuo Xiong wrote several times, and the wording was fierce. Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Yu Jun, thought that Zuo Xiong was a loyal and upright person, and wrote a report to the emperor recommending him, saying: I have seen that most of the hundreds of officials below the nobility are silent and keep to themselves. They consider kindness to be virtuous, and loyalty to the court to be foolish. They even admonish each other, saying, "You can't be as spotless as Bai Bi, and you will eventually be blessed."

古文：伏见议郎左雄，数上封事，至引陛下身遭难厄，以为警戒，实有王臣蹇蹇之节，周公谟成王之风。
现代文：我见左雄几次上奏，竟敢引皇上身遭困厄的事实，以为警戒，真有大臣忠直不阿的气概，有周公辅成王的高风，以之充任言官，一定能得到匡正辅佐的好处。 
English: I saw Zuo play several times, how dare he bring the fact that the emperor was in trouble, I thought that the vigilance, the minister's loyal and upright spirit, and Zhou Gongfu's high winds, with which he served as a spokesman, would certainly get the benefits of Kuang Zheng's assistant.

古文：臣闻柔远和迩，莫大宁人，宁人之务，莫重用贤，用贤之道，必存考黜。
现代文：因此拜左雄为尚书，再升尚书令。左雄上奏说 ：我听说对边远地区要采取怀柔政策，对内地要用和平手段，这样做，最要紧的是使人民能得到安宁，而要人民安宁，最要紧的是任用贤人。而用贤人的方法，必须有奖有罚。
English: So Zuo was promoted to Shangshu and then Shangshu Ling. Zuo Shangso said, "I have heard that we should adopt a soft-hearted policy towards the remote areas and use peaceful means towards the inland. To do so, the most important thing is to enable the people to have peace, and to have peace, the most important thing is to appoint wise men. And to use wise men's methods, there must be reward and punishment."

古文：是以皋陶对禹，贵在知人。 安人则惠，黎民怀之 分伯建侯，代位亲民，民用和穆，礼让以兴。
现代文：所以皋陶对答夏禹 ：贵在知人。要使人民安宁，就必须爱人民，这样，老百姓就会爱戴你。 封伯建侯，代皇上爱民，民便因此和穆，讲礼讲让的风俗便由此而兴。
English: Therefore, Zhai Tao replied to Xia Yu: You are valuable because you know people. In order to make the people peaceful, you must love the people, in this way, the people will love you. Fobo Jianhou, the emperor loved the people, so the people were friendly, and the custom of courtesy and concession arose from this.

古文：故《诗》云 有渰凄凄，兴雨祁祁。
现代文：所以《诗经》说 ：阴云油然，好雨为丝，先下到公田里啊！
English: That's why the "Song of Songs" says: A cloudy sky is like oil, and good rain is like silk. Go down to the fields first!

古文：雨我公田，遂及我私 及幽、厉昏乱，不自为政，褒艳用权，七子党进，贤愚错绪，深谷为陵。
现代文：再落到我的私田。 到了幽王、厉王昏乱的时代，不好好治理国家，褒姒专权，七子结党横行，贤愚不分，万丈深谷，变为高峻的山岭。
English: Then it fell to my private field. It came to the era of the king and the king of chaos, it was not easy to govern the country, the dictatorship was promoted, the party of the seven sons was rampant, the wise and the foolish were not distinguished, the valley was deep and became a high mountain range.

古文：故其诗云 四国无政，不用其良 又曰 哀今之人，胡为虺蜴 言人畏吏如虺蜴也。
现代文：所以有诗云 ：四方之国，政治腐败，是不用贤才的缘故。 又云 ：现在的人可怜啊！如虺蜴一样，看见官吏就逃走了。 
English: Therefore, there is a poem cloud: the country of the four directions, political corruption, is the result of not using wisdom. Another cloud: the current people are pitiful! Like a lizard, when they saw the officials, they fled.

古文：宗周既灭，六国并秦，坑儒泯典，刬革五等，更立郡县，县设令苛救敝，悦以济难，抚而循之。
现代文：大汉建立，虽然没有恢复古代的制度，然而，能够慎重选拔百官，废除苛政，改正弊端，安抚老百姓，解决他们的困难问题。
English: Although the establishment of the Great Han Dynasty did not restore the ancient system, it was able to carefully select officials, abolish harsh government, correct defects, appease the people and solve their difficult problems.

古文：至于文、景，天下康乂。诚由玄靖宽柔，克慎官人故也。
现代文：到文、景时代，天下太平，真正是由于清静无为、慎选官吏的结果。
English: During the Wen and Jing dynasties, the world was peaceful, which was truly the result of calmness, inaction, and the careful selection of officials.

古文：降及宣帝，兴于仄陋，综核名实，知时所病，刺史守相，辄亲引见，考察言行，信赏必罚。
现代文：下及宣帝，因为出身微贱，循名责实，知道当时政治坏在什么地方。对刺史、守相一类官员，亲自引见，考察他们的一言一行，信赏必罚。
English: Emperor Xuan and Emperor Xuan, because of their humble origins, knew where the bad politics was at the time. They personally introduced themselves to officials such as Sanzhi and Shou, and examined their every word and deed. Reward must be punished.

古文：帝乃叹曰 民所以安而无怨者，政平吏良也。
现代文：宣帝叹说： 百姓现在安宁没有怨气，是因为政策好官吏好的结果。
English: Emperor Xuan said with a sigh, "The fact that the people are now peaceful and have no grudges is the result of good policies and good officials.

古文：与我共此者，其唯良二千石乎 以为吏数变易，则下不安业。久于其事，则民服教化。
现代文：与我一道做到这个地步的，都是这些很好的二千石啊！ 认为官吏经常变动，下面就不安于其业，干得时间长，百姓就为他的教育所感化。
English: It's all these good 2,000-koku people who have made it this far with me! He thinks that officials change frequently, so people are insecure about their careers, that they work for a long time, and that the people are influenced by his education.

古文：其有政理者，辄以玺书勉励，增秩赐金，或爵至关内侯，公卿缺则以次用之。
现代文：干得成绩出色的，就亲笔写信勉励，升级并发给奖金。有的升至关内侯，公卿有缺额就按次调补。
English: Those who did an outstanding job would write a letter of encouragement in person, be promoted and given a bonus. Some promotions were up to the inner lord, and if there was a shortage of nobles, they would be reshuffled according to the time.

古文：是以吏称其职，人安其业。
现代文：所以官吏都称职，百姓安居乐业。
English: Therefore, government officials are competent, and the people live and work in peace.

古文：汉世良吏，于兹为盛，故能降来仪之端，建中兴之功。汉初至今，三百馀载，俗浸雕敝，巧伪滋萌，下饰其诈，上肆其残。
现代文：汉代的好官，这时最多。所以发生了有凤凰五至的瑞兆，建了中兴的功业。 从汉代初年到现在，三百多年，风俗渐渐败坏，作伪作巧的事，多所滋长，下面掩饰其欺诈，上面残虐无已。
English: From the first year of the Han Dynasty to the present, for more than 300 years, customs have gradually deteriorated, and many things have grown up in the way of forgery and trickery, with fraud being covered up underneath and cruelty on top.

古文：曲城百里，转动无常，各怀一切，莫虑长久。
现代文：无论刺史还是县令，调动都过于频繁，各人有各人的想法，不作长久的考虑。
English: Regardless of whether it is a magistrate or a county magistrate, transfers are too frequent, everyone has their own ideas, and no long-term considerations are made.

古文：谓杀害不辜为威风，聚敛整辨为贤能，以理已安民为劣弱，以奉法循理为不化。
现代文：说杀害无罪之人是有威风，横征暴敛是有办法，认为以身作则安民是庸弱无能，认为奉公守法按法办事是呆板不灵活。
English: It is said that killing innocent people is a formidable style, that there is a way to extort violently, that it is weak and incompetent to lead the people by example, and that it is rigid and inflexible to act in accordance with the law.

古文：髡钳之戮，生于睚眦。
现代文：微不足道的小事，动辄剃去人的头发用铁圈把颈束起来。
English: Trivial little things, like shaving someone's hair and putting an iron collar around their neck.

古文：覆尸之祸，成于喜怒。
现代文：喜怒之间，往往置人于死地。
English: Between joy and anger, people are often put to death.

古文：视民如寇雠，税之如豺虎。
现代文：把老百姓看作敌人，征收赋税，凶如虎豹豺狼。
English: They regard the common people as enemies, levy taxes, and are as fierce as tigers, leopards, and wolves.

古文：监司项背相望，与同疾騊，见非不举，闻恶不察，观政于停传，责成于期月，言善不称德，论功不据实，虚诞者获誉，拘检者离毁。
现代文：负责监察的官员，前后相顾，却狼狈为奸。见非不揭发，听了坏事不纠察。在驿站观察政治，在短短的时间里要求事业有成，这只能是说善不称德，论功无实绩，弄虚作假的获得美名，拘谨的人遭到诽谤。
English: The officials in charge of supervision look after each other, but they are in cahoots. If they see something, they don't expose it, if they hear something bad, they don't picket. Observing politics at the station and demanding a successful career in a short time, this can only be said to be good or bad, to have no real achievements, to gain a good name by deceiving and cheating, and to slander the prudent.

古文：或因罪而引高，或色斯以求名。
现代文：有的因罪逃跑，以求高尚之名，有的看人颜色行事，也能得到好的名声。
English: Some people run away from their crimes in order to gain a good reputation, while others see the bad behavior of others and gain a good reputation.

古文：州宰不覆，竞共辟召，踊跃升腾，超等逾匹。
现代文：州宰不考核，争起推举征召，连续升迁，超等提拔。
English: Without examination by the prefectural government, they compete for promotion, conscription, consecutive promotion, and super promotion.

古文：或考奏捕案，而亡不受罪，会赦行赂，复见洗涤。
现代文：有的正要逮捕归案，竟逃跑了事，不受惩办；碰到大赦，就大行贿赂，居然无事。
English: Some were about to be arrested and brought to justice, but they ran away and were not punished; when there was an amnesty, they paid large bribes, but nothing happened.

古文：朱紫同色，清浊不分。
现代文：朱的与紫的混同一色，清的与浊的不分。
English: The vermilion and the purple are of the same color, and the clear and the ochre are indistinguishable.

古文：故使奸猾枉滥，轻忽去就，拜除如流，缺动百数。
现代文：所以奸猾之徒充斥，去就随便。任命的命令像流水一般，而遗缺往往以百计。
English: Therefore, treacherous people abound, and it is easy to go. Appointment orders are like running water, and there are often hundreds of vacancies.

古文：乡官部吏，职斯禄薄，车马衣服，一出于民，谦者取足，贪者充家，特选横调，纷纷不绝，送迎烦费，损政伤民。
现代文：乡官部吏，一般官员，职务低贱，俸禄微薄，车马衣服，都出于老百姓。廉洁的拿足了就算，贪污的就要让全家什么都有。特选征调，纷纷不绝，送往迎来，烦费不少，损政害民。
English: Township officials, ordinary officials, low-ranking positions, meager salaries, and clothes for horses and carts, all come from the common people. Even if the incorruptible get enough, the corrupt have to let the whole family have everything. Special election conscription, one after another, sent to usher in, a lot of trouble, damage politics and harm the people.

古文：和气未洽，灾眚不消，咎皆在此。
现代文：和气不洽，灾异不消，罪咎的根源就在这里。
English: This is the root of the blame for the lack of harmony and the persistence of disasters and differences.

古文：今之墨绶，犹古之诸侯，拜爵王庭，舆服有庸，而齐于匹竖，叛命避负，非所以崇宪明理，惠育元元也。
现代文：现在的县长，等于古代的诸侯。由官府任命，衣服、舆马都有规定，而事实上无异于匹夫小子，亡命避债之流，这不能说是严肃法纪，讲求治理，爱护百姓。
English: The current county governors are equivalent to the ancient princes. They are appointed by the government, and their clothes and horses are all regulated. In fact, they are no different from the Peacock Boys, who run away to avoid debts. This cannot be said to be serious about law and order, seeking governance, and caring for the people.

古文：臣愚以为守相长吏，惠和有显效者，可就增秩，勿使移徙，非父母丧不得去官。
现代文：我虽愚陋，却认为守相长吏，治绩显著的，可就地升级，不使移徙，不是死了父母，不得离职。
English: Although I am stupid, I believe that officials who keep the party discipline and have outstanding performance can be promoted on the spot, do not have to migrate, do not have dead parents, and are not allowed to leave their jobs.

古文：其不从法禁，不式王命，锢之终身，虽会赦令，不得齿列。
现代文：有不服从法禁，不听王命的，勒令终身不准许做官，虽遇上赦令，不得与好人并列。
English: Those who disobey the legal prohibition and disobey the king's order shall be ordered not to be allowed to work as an official for life. Even if they are pardoned, they shall not be ranked with good people.

古文：若被劾奏，亡不就法者，徙家边郡，以惩其后。
现代文：如果是被弹劾应法办的，逃跑不服法的，迁徙到边远地区，以惩戒后人。
English: If the impeachment is carried out in accordance with the law, they will run away in defiance of the law and migrate to remote areas to discipline future generations.

古文：乡部亲民之吏，皆用儒生清白任从政者，宽其负算，增其秩禄，吏职满岁，宰府州郡乃得辟举。
现代文：乡部亲民的官，都用儒生清白能够从政的，欠的口钱，不追逼，增加他一些俸禄，干满一岁，宰府州郡方可征召推举。
English: The officials who are close to the people in the countryside all use Confucian students who are innocent and can participate in politics. They do not pursue the owed money, increase his salary, and when he is one year old, the Zaifu County Party can recruit him for election.

古文：如此，威福之路塞，虚伪之端绝，送迎之役损，赋敛之源息。
现代文：这样，断绝了作威作福的路子，弄虚作假的没有了，送往迎来的劳役减少了，横征暴敛的根源堵绝了。
English: In this way, the way of bullying and cheating was cut off, there was no deception, the number of laborers sent to usher in was reduced, and the root cause of illegal collection was eliminated.

古文：循理之吏，得成其化。率土之民，各宁其所。
现代文：按法治理的官，能够教化大行；四海之内的老百姓，能够安居乐业。
English: Officials who govern according to the law can enlighten the masses; the common people within the four seas can live and work in peace.

古文：追配文、宣中兴之轨，流光垂祚，永世不刊。
现代文：追配文、宣中兴的盛业，德泽流传后世，永远不灭。 
English: The flourishing career of pursuing and matching texts and promoting propaganda has been passed down from generation to generation, and will never die out.

古文：帝感其言：申下有司，考其真伪，详所施行。
现代文：顺帝被左雄的话感动了，一再下令官吏，考察真假，审慎施行。
English: Shun Di was moved by Zuo's words and repeatedly ordered officials to investigate the truth and falsehood and implement it prudently.

古文：雄之所言，皆明达政体，而宦竖擅权，终不能用。
现代文：左雄说的，都阐明了治政体要，因为宦官专权，始终不采用。
English: What Zuo Xiong said clarified the importance of the governance system, because the eunuch's exclusive power was never adopted.

古文：自是选代交互，令长月易，迎新送旧，劳扰无已，或官寺空旷，无人案事，每选部剧，乃至逃亡。
现代文：自此以后，荐举代替交互而行，县令月月换，迎新送旧，劳耗骚扰没完没了。有的官府空旷无人办事，每当选部工作紧张时，竟至有逃跑的。
English: Since then, recommendation-promotion has taken the place of interaction, county orders have been changed from month to month, welcoming the new and sending the old, and there has been endless harassment. Some government offices are empty and there is no one to do the work, and every time the work of the election department is tense, there are even people who run away.

古文：永建三年，京师、汉阳地皆震裂，水泉涌出。
现代文：永建三年，京师、汉阳地都震裂开了，有水泉涌出。
English: In the third year of Yongjian, the Beijing Division and the Hanyang Division were shaken and cracked, and water springs gushed out.

古文：四年，司、冀复有大水。
现代文：四年，司、冀又有大水。
English: In four years, Shiji and Hebei had a flood.

古文：雄推较灾异，以为下人有逆上之征，又上疏言 宜密为备，以俟不虞 寻而青、冀、杨、州盗贼连发，数年之间，海内扰乱。
现代文：左雄推算灾异的产生，认为下面的人有反叛的迹象。又上疏说 ：应该严密地作好准备，以对付意外事件的发生。 不久，青、冀、扬州盗贼相继为患，几年内，海内扰乱。
English: Zuo Xiong calculated the occurrence of disasters and considered that the people below had signs of rebellion. He also said: It is necessary to make strict preparations to deal with the occurrence of unexpected events. Soon, Qing, Hebei, and Yangzhou thieves were affected one after another, and within a few years, the sea was disturbed.

古文：其后天下大赦，贼虽颇解，而官犹无备，流叛之馀，数月复起。雄与仆射郭虔共上疏，以为 寇贼连年，死亡太半，一人犯法，举宗群亡。
现代文：后来，朝廷大赦天下，盗贼虽稍稍缓解了，官吏仍是没有戒备，流亡反叛的余党，数月又起来作乱，左雄与仆射郭虔联名上疏，认为 寇贼连年，死亡大半，一人犯法，全族人都共与死亡。
English: Later, the imperial court pardoned the whole world, although the thieves were slightly relieved, the officials were still unprepared, the exiled rebel Remnant Party rose up again in a few months to make trouble, and Zuo Xiong and his servant Guo Qian were estranged, believing that the robbers had been killed for years, most of them had died, one person had broken the law, and the whole family had died.

古文：宜及其尚微，开令改悔。若告党与者，听除其罪。能诛斩者，明加其赏 书奏，并不省。
现代文：应该趁其作恶还轻微的时候，教育他改过自新，如果有揭发同伙的，可以免除其罪；能反戈一击，诛杀罪犯的，予以嘉奖。 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the time when his evil deed is still minor to educate him to reform himself. If anyone exposes his accomplice, he can be absolved of his crime; if anyone can fight back and kill the criminal, he should be commended.

古文：又上言 宜崇经术，缮修太学 帝从之。
现代文：疏送上去，都没有采纳。又上言： 应该尊崇经术，修建太学。 顺帝听了他的。
English: He sent an envoy to the emperor, but it was not accepted. He also made the following suggestion: It is necessary to respect and venerate the scriptures and build a great school. Emperor Shun listened to him.

古文：阳嘉元年，太学新成，诏试明经者补弟子，增甲乙之科，员各十人。除京师及郡国耆儒年六十以上为郎、舍人、诸王国郎者百三十八人。
现代文：阳嘉元年，太学落成，皇上下令试明经的补弟子，增加甲乙两种，生员各十人，授予京师及郡国老儒生年龄六十以上的为郎、舍人、诸王国郎的三十八人。
English: In the first year of the Yangjia era, the Grand Academy was completed, and the emperor and his subordinates ordered to test the disciples of the Ming Dynasty, adding two kinds of students, ten students each, and awarding thirty-eight students over the age of sixty to the Beijing Teacher and the county elder Confucius.

古文：雄又上言 郡国孝廉，古之贡士，出则宰民，宣协风教。
现代文：左雄又上言： 郡国孝廉，就是古时候的贡士。出来做官，就要协理风俗，宣扬教化。
English: Zuo went on to say, "County-state filial piety is the ancient gongshi. If you want to become an official, you must conform to the customs and preach enlightenment.

古文：若其面墙，则无所施用。
现代文：若是不学无术，那就一点用也没有。
English: If you don't learn anything, it's no use at all.

古文：孔子曰四十不惑，《礼》称强仕。
现代文：孔子说 ：四十岁的人不会有什么疑惑不明的事了。 
English: Confucius said, "At the age of forty, no one will have any doubts."

古文：请自今孝廉年不满四十，不得察举，皆先诣公府，诸生试家法，文吏课笺奏，副之端门，练其虚实，以观异能，以美风俗。
现代文：《礼》称 四十曰强而仕 ，就是说男子年四十，智虑气力皆强盛，可以出来做官了。请自今以后，孝廉年不满四十的，不得推举，都先去公府，诸生儒家一家之学，文官考公文。端门复试，考其虚实，观察他的特异才能，以美风俗。
English: "Li" said, "Forty is a strong age to serve," which means that a man is forty years old, and his wisdom and strength are strong, and he can come out to be an official. From now on, the filial piety of those under the age of forty is not allowed to be elected, and they must first go to the government, study the Confucian family, and take the civil service examination. Then, retake the entrance examination, test his truthfulness, observe his special talents, and take beauty customs.

古文：有不承科令者，正其罪法。
现代文：有不遵守法令的，按法处理。
English: Those who do not comply with the law shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：若有茂才异行，自可不拘年齿 帝从之，于是班下郡国。
现代文：如果遇有特殊才能的人，自然可以不拘年龄。 顺帝采纳了。于是颁布郡国。
English: If there is a person with special talent, it is natural that it can be done regardless of age. Emperor Shun adopted it. Therefore, the county was promulgated.

古文：明年，有广陵孝廉徐淑，年未及举，台郎疑而诘之。
现代文：第二年，有广陵孝廉徐淑，还未到推举的年龄，台郎怀疑，问他是怎么回事。
English: In the second year, there was Guangling Xiaolian Xu Shu, who had not yet reached the age of election, and Tai Lang was suspicious and asked him what was going on.

古文：对曰 诏书曰有如颜回、子奇，不拘年齿，是故本郡以臣充选 郎不能屈。
现代文：徐淑回答说 ：诏书上说的 有如颜回、子奇，不拘年齿。 所以我们郡让我充选。 郎不能屈服他。
English: Xu Shu replied, "The imperial edict says that there are such people as Yan Hui and Zi Qi, no matter how old they are, so our county asked me to make the final selection. My husband cannot give in to him.

古文：雄诘之曰 昔颜回闻一知十，孝廉闻一知几邪 淑无以对，乃谴却郡。
现代文：左雄问他说： 从前颜回听说一，就知道十，孝廉听说一知道几呢？ 徐淑没有办法回答，于是训了他一顿令他回郡去了。
English: Zuo Xiong asked him, "In the past, if Yan Hui heard about something, he would know ten things, but if Xiao Lian heard about it, how much would he know? Xu Shu couldn't answer, so he gave him a lecture and told him to go back to the county.

古文：于是济阴太守胡广等十馀人皆坐谬举免黜，唯汝南陈蕃、颍川李膺、下邳陈球等三十馀人得拜郎中。
现代文：因此济阴太守胡广等十几个人，都因推举错误免了官，惟汝南陈蕃、颍川李膺、下邳陈球等三十余人得拜郎中。
English: As a result, more than a dozen people, including Hu Guang, the governor of Jilin Province, were removed from their posts due to election errors. However, more than 30 people, including Runan Chen Jie, Xichuan Li Jie, and Xiaoju Chen Jiu, were promoted.

古文：自是牧守畏栗，莫敢轻举。
现代文：从此以后，牧守害怕，不敢随便推举孝廉。
English: From then on, the herdsman was afraid and did not dare to nominate Xiaolian.

古文：迄于永憙，察选清平，多得其人。
现代文：到永熹时，选举清正，录用了不少人才。
English: When I arrived in Yongkang, the election was fair, and many talented people were hired.

古文：雄又奏征海内名儒为博士，使公卿子弟为诸生。
现代文：左雄又奏请征召海内有名的儒生为博士，使公卿的子弟为诸生。
English: Zuo also requested that a famous Confucian scholar be recruited as a doctor, so that the children of the nobles would be the next generation.

古文：有志操者，加其俸禄。
现代文：有志气有操行的，增加待遇。
English: If you have ambition and drive, you'll get a raise.

古文：及汝南谢廉，河南赵建，年始十二，各能通经，雄并奏拜童子郎。
现代文：汝南谢廉、河南赵建，才十二岁，都通经术，左雄都奏请拜童子郎。
English: Runan Xie Lian and Henan Zhao Jian are only 12 years old. Both have been through the operation, and the left male plays the role of the boy.

古文：于是负书来学，云集京师。
现代文：因此背起书包来京师学习的，很多很多。
English: As a result, there are a lot of people who have picked up their school bags and come to Beijing to study.

古文：初，帝废为济阴王，乳母宋娥与黄门孙程等共议立帝，帝后以娥前有谋，遂封为山阳君，邑五千户。
现代文：起先，顺帝被废为济阴王，乳母宋娥与黄门孙程商量立帝，帝后来认为宋娥曾有谋划，就封她为山阳君，邑五千户。
English: At first, Emperor Shun was dethroned as the king of Jiyin. His wet nurse Song E and Huang Men's grandson Cheng discussed the establishment of the emperor. The emperor later thought that Song E had a plan, and made her the ruler of Shanyang, with 5,000 households.

古文：又封大将军梁商子冀襄邑侯。
现代文：又封大将军梁商子梁冀为襄邑侯。
English: He also appointed the great general Liang Shangzi Liang Jie as the mayor of Xiangyue.

古文：雄上封事曰 夫裂土封侯，王制所重。
现代文：左雄秘密上书说： 把土地分封给侯王，这是王家的大事。
English: Zuo secretly wrote: It is an important matter for the royal family to divide the land among the princes.

古文：高皇帝约，非刘氏不王，非有功不侯。
现代文：高皇帝曾经有规定 ：不是姓刘的不得封王，不是有功劳的不得封侯。 
English: Emperor Gao once had a rule: no one with the surname Liu could be crowned king, and no one with meritorious deeds could be made a prince.

古文：孝安皇帝封江京、王圣等，遂致地震之异。
现代文：孝安皇帝封江京、王圣等，就招来地震的灾异。
English: Emperor Xiao'an fenced Jiangjing, Wang Sheng, and so on, which caused the earthquake disaster.

古文：永建二年，封阴谋之功，又有日食之变。
现代文：永建二年，封阴谋之功，又有日食之变。
English: In the second year of Yongjian, the conspiracy of sealing the achievement, and the change of the solar eclipse.

古文：数术之士，咸归咎于封爵。
现代文：一些阴阳迷信家都把这些怪异归罪于封王封侯上。
English: Some yin and yang superstitious people have blamed these strange things on the feudal lord.

古文：今青州饑虚，盗贼未息，民有乏绝，上求禀贷。
现代文：现在青州闹饥荒，盗贼没有平息，人民生活乏绝，要求国家帮助。
English: Now there is famine in Qingzhou, the thieves have not calmed down, the people's lives are exhausted, and they are asking the state for help.

古文：陛下乾乾劳思，以济民为务。
现代文：皇上整天勤劳忧思，把关心人民的疾苦，作为自己的首要任务。
English: The emperor worked hard all day and thought about the people's sufferings as his primary task.

古文：宜循古法，宁静无为，以求天意，以消灾异。
现代文：应该遵行古法，宁静无为，以求天意，消除灾异。
English: We should follow the ancient law, remain calm and do nothing, seek the will of heaven, and eliminate disasters.

古文：诚不宜追录小恩，亏失大典 帝不听。
现代文：实在不应该因追记小小的恩情，而使国家的大典遭到破坏。 帝不采纳。
English: It really shouldn't be possible to destroy a great national document because of a small act of kindness.

古文：雄复谏曰：臣闻人君莫不好忠正而恶谗谀，然而历世之患，莫不以忠正得罪，谗谀蒙幸者，盖听忠难，从谀易也。
现代文：左雄又劝谏说 ：我听说君主没有不爱忠正而恶谗谄阿谀的，然而历代有大患，没有不是因忠正获罪，谗谄得到宠幸的。大概是忠言难听谄谀的话爱听之故。
English: Zuo also advised Zou, saying, "I have heard that there is no monarch who does not love the loyal and upright, but abhors and worships them. However, there have been great calamities throughout the ages, and there is no one who has not been punished for being loyal and upright, but has been favored by them. It is probably because they love to hear the words of those who are loyal and upright.

古文：夫刑罪，人情之所甚恶。贵宠，人情之所甚欲。
现代文：一般来说，犯刑判罪，总是人情所最恶的，得到皇上的宠爱，升官封爵，总是人情所最希望的。
English: Generally speaking, to be punished and sentenced is always the worst for human feelings, and to be favored by the emperor, promoted and knighted is always the most hoped for by human feelings.

古文：是以时俗为忠者少，而习谀者多。
现代文：所以世上为忠的少，学阿谀的人多。
English: Therefore, there are few loyal people in the world, but many people who learn from grandma.

古文：故令人主数闻其美，稀知其过，迷而不悟，至于危亡。
现代文：使人主只听见说他好的，很少听说他的缺点的，胡胡涂涂，不知醒悟，到最后至于危亡。
English: So that people only hear what is good about him, and seldom hear what is bad about him. They are deceived and do not know how to wake up, and in the end they are in danger of death.

古文：臣伏见诏书，顾念阿母旧德宿恩。欲特加显赏。
现代文：我见诏书顾念不忘阿母旧德旧恩，想特别奖赏她。
English: When I read the imperial edict, I couldn't help but remember my grandmother's old virtues and kindness, and I wanted to give her a special reward.

古文：案尚书故事，无乳母爵邑之制，唯先帝时阿母王圣为野王君。
现代文：根据尚书老例，没有乳母封爵赐邑的制度，只有先帝时阿母王圣封了野王君。
English: According to Shangshu's long-standing practice, there is no nanny knighting system, only the former emperor's mother-in-law consecrated the wild king.

古文：圣造生谗贼废立之祸，生为天下所咀嚼，死为海内所欢快。
现代文：王圣制造了废立的大祸，在生时，为天下的人切齿痛恨；死了，四海之内，没有不高兴的。
English: Wang Sheng created the great calamity of wasteful construction. When he was alive, he was hated by people all over the world. When he died, no one in the four seas was unhappy.

古文：桀、纣贵为天子，而庸仆羞与为比者，以其无义也。
现代文：桀、纣贵为天子，而奴仆也以与他在一起为耻，是因为桀、纣无义啊！
English: He is the Son of God, and His servants are ashamed to be associated with Him, because He is without sin.

古文：夷、齐贱为匹夫，而王侯争与为伍者，以其有德也。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐是普通的老百姓，而王公大人争起来与他俩为朋友，是因为伯夷、叔齐有德啊！
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are ordinary people, and Wang Gong's dispute with the two of them is a friend, because Bo Yi and Uncle Qi have virtue!

古文：今阿母躬蹈约俭，以身率下，群僚蒸庶，莫不向风，而与王圣并同爵号，惧违本操，失其常愿。
现代文：现在阿母生活俭朴，以身作则，百官及一般百姓，没有不学习她的。如果与王圣一样封爵，我怕违反了她的操守，反而违背了她的愿望。
English: Now Amma lives a frugal life, leading by example, and there is not a single official or ordinary citizen who does not learn from her. If she were to receive a knighthood like Wang Sheng, I am afraid it would violate her ethics and go against her wishes.

古文：臣愚以为凡人之心，理不相远，其所不安，古今一也。
现代文：我以为人凡都是一样的，道理也不会相差得太远，凡属不对的事，古今的认识都是一样的。
English: I thought that people are all the same, the truth will not be too far apart, everything that is wrong, ancient and modern knowledge are the same.

古文：百姓深惩王圣倾覆之祸，民萌之命，危于累卵，常惧时世复有此类。
现代文：百姓深恶痛绝王圣倾覆国家的巨祸，人民的生命，好像堆叠鸡蛋一样，是非常危险的。
English: The people deeply hate and abhor the great calamity of Wang Sheng's overthrow of the country. People's lives, like stacked eggs, are very dangerous.

古文：怵惕之念，未离于心。
现代文：我经常担心再发生这类事情。
English: I often worry that something like this will happen again.

古文：恐惧之言，未绝乎口。
现代文：因为警惕的念头，常在胸中，所以恐惧的言语，也就不离于口。
English: For the spirit of fear is always in the heart, and the words of the fearful are never far from the mouth.

古文：乞如前议，岁以千万给奉阿母，内足以尽恩爱之欢，外可不为吏民所怪。
现代文：请还是按照以前议定的，每年拿千万钱给阿母，一则尽了自己恩爱之情，二则也不会为吏民所责怪。
English: Please continue to pay tens of millions of money to my mother every year as previously agreed. On the one hand, you have done your best, and on the other hand, you will not be blamed by the officials and the people.

古文：梁冀之封，事非机急，宜过灾厄之运，然后平议可否。
现代文：梁冀的封侯，不是当前所急，应该过了灾异厄运之后，然后评议可与不可。 
English: The enthronement of Liang Jie is not urgent at the moment. It should be done after the calamitous misfortune, and then the review can and must take place.

古文：会复有地震、缑氏山崩之异，雄复上疏谏曰 先帝封野王君，汉阳地震，今封山阳君而京城复震，专政在阴，其灾尤大。
现代文：正好又有地震、缑氏山崩的怪异出现，左雄又上疏劝谏说 ：先帝封野王君，汉阳地震，现在封山阳君，京城又有地震，女子干政，灾害特大。
English: Just as there was another earthquake and the strange appearance of a landslide caused by the Shih clan, Zuo also went to Shang So to persuade Zou, saying, "The former emperor fenced off the King of the Field, the earthquake in Hanyang, and now the fencing off of the King of the Mountain, there is another earthquake in Beijing, women are involved in politics, and the disaster is extremely large."

古文：臣前后瞽言封爵至重，王者可私人以财，不可以官，宜还阿母之封，以塞灾异。
现代文：我前后瞎说封爵的事关系重大，王者可以把钱给人，而不可以把官给人。应当追还阿母的封号，堵塞灾异之源。
English: I kept saying that the matter of the knighthood was of great importance, that the king could give money to someone, but not an official. It was necessary to recover my mother's title and to stop the source of the disaster.

古文：今冀已高让，山阳君亦宜崇其本节 雄言数切至，娥亦畏惧辞让，而帝恋恋不能已，卒封之。
现代文：现在梁冀已经让侯了，山阳君也当尊重自己的本节，把封爵让出来。 左雄屡次进言劝谏，说得很迫切，宋娥也害怕，要求辞让封爵，帝还是恋恋不已，终于封了山阳君。
English: Now that Liang Jie has relinquished his title, Sanyangjun should also respect his vows and relinquish his knighthood. Zuo Xiong repeatedly urged and urged, said very urgently, Song E was also afraid, asked to relinquish the knighthood, the emperor was still in love, and finally sealed Sanyangjun.

古文：后阿母遂以交遘失爵。
现代文：后来阿母终究因构陷失去了爵位。
English: Later, Amma eventually lost her peerage because of the frame-up.

古文：是时，大司农刘据以职事被谴，召诣尚书，传呼促步，又加以捶扑。
现代文：这时大司农刘据因失职被谴责，把他叫到尚书，大声呼叫，又赶又打。
English: At this time, the chief secretary, farmer Liu Yiming, was reprimanded for dereliction of duty. He was called to Shangshu, called out loudly, and beaten.

古文：雄上言 九卿位亚三事，班在大臣，行有佩玉之节，动有庠序之仪。
现代文：左雄上言 ：九卿的官位仅仅次于三事，是大臣一级，行有佩玉的规矩，动有学者的风度。
English: Zuo's last words: The official rank of Jiuqing is only second to three things, it is a ministerial level, it has the etiquette of a peer, and it has the demeanor of a scholar.

古文：孝明皇帝始有扑罚，皆非古典 帝从而改之，其后九卿无复捶扑者。
现代文：孝明皇帝才有扑打的刑罚，但不合于古时的法制。 帝听了他的并作了改正，此后九卿再没有受到捶打的。
English: Emperor Xiaoming was the first to impose the punishment of flogging, but it was not in accordance with the ancient legal system. The emperor listened to him and made corrections, after which the nine nobles were not beaten again.

古文：自雄掌纳言，多所匡肃，每有章表奏议，台阁以为故事。迁司隶校尉。
现代文：自从左雄掌管纳言之官，匡正的事很多。每有章表奏议，台阁把它作典型，升司隶校尉。
English: Since Zuo Xiong took charge of the Naxi Office, many things have been rectified. Every chapter has been discussed, the cabinet has made it a model, and the promotion to the rank of lieutenant has been made.

古文：初，雄荐周举为尚书，举既称职，议者咸称焉。
现代文：先是，左雄推荐周举为尚书，周举干得很好，大家都称赞左雄。
English: First of all, Zuo recommended Zhou Jiu as his disciple, Zhou Jiu did a good job, and everyone praised Zuo.

古文：及在司隶，又举故冀州刺史冯直以为将帅，而直尝坐臧受罪，举以此劾奏雄。
现代文：升了司隶，又推举前冀州刺吏冯直为将帅。而冯直曾经因接受赃款获罪，周举拿这件事上奏弹劾左雄。
English: He promoted the former Jizhou assassin Feng Zhi to the rank of general and promoted the former Jizhou assassin Feng Zhi to the rank of general. Feng Zhi was once convicted of accepting stolen money, and Zhou Zhi took this matter to impeach Zuo.

古文：雄悦曰 吾尝事冯直之父而又与直善，今宣光以此奏吾，乃是韩厥之举也 由是天下服焉。
现代文：左雄高兴地说 ：我曾经是冯直的父亲的僚属，与冯直又很相好。现在周举拿这个弹劾我，这是春秋时晋韩厥的行为啊！ 因此，天下都口服心服。
English: Zuo Xiong said happily, "I used to be a colleague of Feng Zhi's father, and we were very good friends. Now Zhou Zhi is using this to impeach me. This is the behavior of Jin Han Jue in the Spring and Autumn Period! Therefore, the whole world is convinced.

古文：明年坐法免。后复为尚书。
现代文：第二年获罪免官，后来又为尚书。
English: The following year he was exonerated, and later he was canonized.

古文：永和三年卒。
现代文：永和三年去世。
English: Yonghe passed away three years later.

古文：周举字宣光，汝南汝阳人，陈留太守防之子。
现代文：◆周举传，周举字宣光，汝南郡汝阳县人。陈留太守周防的儿子。
English: ◆Zhou Ji Chuan, Zhou Ji Zi Xuan Guang, a native of Ruyang County, Runan County. He was the son of Chen Liu, the Grand Prince of Zhou.

古文：防在《儒林传》。
现代文：周防在《儒林传》。
English: Zhou Fang in "Rulin Biography."

古文：举姿貌短陋，而博学洽闻，为儒者所宗，故京师为之语曰 《五经》从横周宣光 
现代文：周举身材短小，容貌丑陋，但博学多闻，为儒家崇仰，故京师流行这样一句话： 五经纵横周宣光。 
English: Zhou Jie was short and ugly, but he was well-read and admired by Confucians. Therefore, the following saying was popular among Confucian scholars in Beijing: Zhou Xuan Guang is the Five Classics.

古文：延光四年，辟司徒李郃府。
现代文：延光四年，被征召到司徒李郃府中做官。
English: Yan Guang was four years old when he was called up to work as an official in the Szu Lijuan Government Middle School.

古文：时宦者孙程等既立顺帝，诛灭诸阎，议郎陈禅以为阎太后与帝无母子恩，宜徙别馆，绝朝见。
现代文：当时宦官孙程等已立顺帝，诛灭诸闫氏，议郎陈禅以为闫太后与帝没有母子的恩情，应该徙居别馆，断绝朝见。
English: At that time, eunuch Sun Cheng and others had already established Emperor Shun and wiped out the Yi clan. The mediator Chen Zen thought that the Empress Dowager and the emperor did not have a mother-son relationship and should move to a separate palace and break off the imperial court.

古文：群臣议者咸以为宜。
现代文：朝廷里的臣子，都认为合适。
English: All the courtiers in the imperial court thought it was appropriate.

古文：举谓郃曰 昔郑武姜谋杀严公，严公誓之黄泉。秦始皇怨母失行，久而隔绝，后感颍考叔、茅焦之言，循复子道。书传美之。
现代文：周举对李说： 从前郑武姜谋杀严公，严公发誓与她在地下相见；秦始皇抱怨他母亲行为不好，与他母亲隔绝好久，不相往来，后来感于颍考叔和茅焦的话，再恢复了儿子之道，书传称赞他们。
English: Zhou Ji said to Li: Once upon a time, Zheng Wujing murdered Yan Gong, and Yan Gong vowed to meet her underground; Qin Shi Huang complained that his mother's behavior was not good, and he was cut off from his mother for a long time, and they did not communicate with each other. Later, he was impressed by the words of Uncle Gongkao and Maojiao, and then restored the son's way, and the book praised them.

古文：今诸阎新诛，太皇幽在离宫，若悲愁生疾，一旦不虞，主上将何以令于天下。
现代文：现在诸闫刚刚伏罪，太后幽禁离宫，如果悲痛忧愁生病，一旦死去，皇上将怎样号令天下呢？
English: Now, the emperors have just committed treason, the empress dowager has been banished from the palace, if the grief and sorrow are sick, once she dies, how will the emperor command the world?

古文：如从禅议，后世归咎明公。
现代文：如果依从陈禅的话，后世把罪责推到您的身上。
English: If you follow Chen Zen's words, future generations will put the blame on you.

古文：宜密表朝廷，令奉太后，率厉群臣，朝觐如旧，以厌天心，以答人望 郃即上疏陈之。
现代文：应该秘密上表朝廷，尊奉太后，率领群臣，朝见如旧，以足天心，以答百姓的希望。 李就上疏陈述了这件事。
English: He should secretly appeal to the imperial court, respect and serve the empress dowager, lead the courtiers, and see the imperial court as before, with a heavenly heart, to answer the people's hope.

古文：明年正月，帝乃朝于东宫，太后由此以安。
现代文：第二年正月，顺帝朝于东宫，太后由此安宁。
English: In the first month of the second year, Emperor Shun's court was in the East Palace, and the empress dowager was at peace.

古文：后长乐少府朱伥代郃为司徒，举犹为吏。
现代文：后来长乐少府朱伥，代理李为司徒。周举还是为吏。
English: Later, Zhu Xi, the minor prefect of Changle, replaced Li as the deputy. Zhou He was still the official.

古文：时孙程等坐怀表上殿争功，帝怒，悉徙封远县，敕洛阳令促期发遣。
现代文：这时孙程等人因怀表上殿争功，帝发怒，统统把他们徙封远县，下令洛阳令限期遣送。
English: At this time, Sun Cheng and others were competing for merit in the palace because of their pocket watches, and the emperor was angry. He ordered Luoyang to send them all to distant counties.

古文：举说朱伥曰 朝廷在西钟下时，非孙程等岂立。
现代文：周举说朱伥： 皇上在西钟下时，不是孙程等人难道得立为君？
English: Zhou Qiu said to Zhu Xi: When the emperor was under the Western Clock, didn't Sun Cheng and others have to stand up for him?

古文：虽韩、彭、吴、贾之功，何以加诸。今忘其大德，录其小过，如道路夭折，帝有杀功臣之讥。
现代文：现在忘记他们的大德，记他们的小过，如果他们在道路死亡，帝有杀功臣之讥。趁现在他们还未走，应该赶快上表劝劝皇上。 
English: Now forget their great virtues, remember their small faults, if they die on the road, the emperor has the ridicule of killing a meritorious subject. Taking advantage of the fact that they have not yet left, they should quickly go to the table to persuade the emperor.

古文：及今未去，宜急表之 伥曰 今诏怒，二尚书已奏其事，吾独表此，必致罪谴 举曰 明公年过八十，位为台辅，不于今时竭忠报国，惜身安宠，欲以何求。
现代文：朱伥说： 现在皇上正怒，二位尚书已经奏了，我独上表，一定要获罪过。 周举说： 您年纪已经八十多了，位为台辅，不在今天尽忠报国，爱惜自己的身家性命，以已得的宠信为安，想再求什么呢？
English: Zhu Xi said: Now the emperor is angry, the two Shangshu have already played, I am the only table, I must be guilty. Zhou Ji said: You are more than eighty years old, you are a Taiwanese assistant, you are not loyal to the country today, you cherish your own family and life, you are satisfied with the favor you have received, what do you want to ask for?

古文：禄位虽全，必陷佞邪之讥。谏而获罪，犹有忠贞之名。
现代文：禄位虽全，一定要陷谗谄奸邪一流；劝谏获罪，还有个忠贞的名声。
English: Although his position is complete, he must be a first-class traitor; if he is convicted, he will have a reputation for loyalty.

古文：若举言不足采，请从此辞 伥乃表谏，帝果从之。
现代文：如果我所说不足采纳，我就从此与你相别了。 朱伥于是上表劝谏，帝果然听了朱伥的话。
English: If you accept what I say as insufficient, I will part ways with you. Zhu Xi then went to the table to persuade him, and the emperor really listened to Zhu Xi's words.

古文：举后举茂才，为平丘令。上书言当世得失，辞甚切正。
现代文：周举后来被举为茂才，任平丘令，上书说当世的得失，词甚激切正直。
English: Zhou Ji, who was later promoted to Maozai and Ren Pingqiu, wrote about the gains and losses of the current world, and his words were very honest.

古文：尚书郭虔、应贺等见之叹息，共上疏称举忠直，欲帝置章御坐，以为规诫。
现代文：尚书郭虔、应贺等看了赞叹不止，共同上书举周举忠直，请帝把周举上书放在帝坐之旁，以为规诫。
English: Shang Shuxu Guo Qian, Ying He, and others were full of admiration when they saw it. They jointly wrote a letter to Zhou Zhou Zhongzhong, and asked the emperor to put the Zhou Zhou letter next to the emperor's seat as a warning.

古文：举稍迁并州刺史。
现代文：周举稍迁并州刺史。
English: Zhou Ge slightly moved and merged into the state history.

古文：太原一郡，旧俗以介子推焚骸，有龙忌之禁。
现代文：太原一郡，旧俗因介子推焚烧而死，有禁火的风俗。
English: In one county of Taiyuan, the old custom died out due to the burning of jellies, and there is a custom of forbidding fire.

古文：至其亡月，咸言神灵不乐举火，由是士民每冬中辄一月寒食，莫敢烟爨，老小不堪，岁多死者。
现代文：到了介子推死的那个月，都说神灵不喜举火，因此百姓每年冬季有一个月要吃冷食，不敢生火煮饭，老小不堪冷食，每年死不少人。
English: When it came to the month in which he died, it was said that the gods did not like to light fires, so the people had to eat cold food for one month every winter and did not dare to light a fire to cook rice. The old man could not stand cold food, and many people died every year.

古文：举既到州，乃作吊书以置子推之庙，言盛冬去火，残损民命，非贤者之意，以宣示愚民，使还温食。
现代文：周举到并州，作吊介子推文放在他的庙里，说盛冬去火，残损百姓生命，这不是贤人的意思，向百姓宣传，使他们恢复熟食。
English: Zhou went to Bianzhou and posted a tweet in his temple, saying that it was not the wise man's intention to go to the fire in the middle of winter and damage the lives of the people, and to propagandize the people so that they could restore cooked food.

古文：于是众惑稍解，风俗颇革。
现代文：于是百姓的迷惑稍稍得以解释，风俗渐渐改变。
English: As a result, the confusion of the people was slightly explained, and customs gradually changed.

古文：转冀州刺史。
现代文：调冀州刺史。
English: It is a turning point in the history of Jizhou.

古文：阳嘉三年，司隶校尉左雄荐举，征拜尚书。
现代文：阳嘉三年，司隶校尉左雄荐周举，征授尚书。
English: In the third year of Yang Jia, Sili Lieutenant Zuo recommended Zhou Ji, and he was awarded the title of Shang Shu.

古文：举与仆射黄琼同心辅政，名重朝廷，左右惮之。
现代文：周举与仆射黄琼同心辅政，名气重于朝廷，朝廷左右的人敬畏他。
English: Zhou Jiu and his servant Huang Qiong supported the government with the same heart. His fame was more important than the imperial court. People around the imperial court were in awe of him.

古文：是岁河南、三辅大旱，五谷灾伤，天子亲自露坐德阳殿东厢请雨，又下司隶、河南祷祀河神、名山、大泽。
现代文：这年河南、三辅大旱，五谷受灾，天子亲自露天坐德阳殿东厢请雨，又命令司隶、河南祈祷祭祀河神、名山、大泽。
English: In that year, Henan Province, Sanfu Province suffered from a severe drought, and Itani Province was hit by a natural disaster. The heavenly son personally sat in the open air in the east wing of Deyang Hall to pray for rain, and ordered the priests and followers in Henan Province to pray and offer sacrifices to the river god, famous mountains, and Osawa.

古文：诏书以举才学优深，特下策问曰 朕以不德，仰承三统，夙兴夜寐，思协大中。
现代文：诏书以周举才学优深，特别策问说 ：我以不德，仰承天统、地统、人统，早起晚睡，想协调大中之道行天下。
English: The imperial edict said that it was necessary to study hard and deeply in order to pass the examination. In particular, it said, "I am a virtuous person who follows the principles of Heaven, Earth, and Humanity. I get up early and go to bed late. I want to harmonize the principles of college and university and travel the world."

古文：顷年以来，旱灾屡应，稼穑焦枯，民食困乏。
现代文：近年以来，旱灾不断，庄稼焦枯，百姓没得吃的。
English: In recent years, droughts have continued, crops have withered, and people have not had enough to eat.

古文：五品不训，王泽未流，群司素餐，据非其位。
现代文：五常的教化不行，王者的德泽未遍，百官尸位素餐，不称其职。
English: The enlightenment of the five constants is not possible, the king's virtue is not perfect, and the officials are not qualified for their duties.

古文：审所贬黜，变复之征，厥效何由。
现代文：审查贬谪罢黜，变复的征兆，由何而来？
English: Where do the signs of censorship, denigration, removal, and replacement come from?

古文：分别具对，勿有所讳 举对曰：臣闻《易》称 天尊地卑，乾坤以定 。
现代文：分别对答，不要有任何顾虑。 周举对说： 我听《易经》上说： 天高地下，乾坤因此而定。 
English: Answer separately, do not have any concerns.Zhou said: I heard the "I Ching" say: The sky is high and the earth is low, and everything depends on this.

古文：二仪交构，乃生万物，万物之中，以人为贵。
现代文：天地交合，于是生万物，万物中以人为贵。
English: Heaven and earth mingle, and all things come into being. Of all things, man is the most precious.

古文：故圣人养之以君，成之以化，顺四节之宜，适阴阳之和，便男女婚娶不过其时。
现代文：所以古时候的圣人，设立君主以养育百姓，施教化使他们成长，春夏秋冬四节顺时更替，阴阳相和，使男女婚姻不过时。
English: Therefore, the ancient sages set up monarchs to nurture the people, educate them and make them grow. The four festivals of spring, summer, autumn and winter change in accordance with the time, and the yin and yang are harmonious, so that the marriage between men and women does not become obsolete.

古文：包之以仁恩，导之以德教，示之以灾异，训之以嘉祥。
现代文：以仁义恩泽包涵他们，以教化道德诱导他们，以灾异警告他们，以嘉瑞吉祥训勉他们。
English: He forgave them with benevolence, righteousness, and grace, guided them with moral education, warned them with calamities, and admonished them with auspicious and auspicious signs.

古文：此先圣承乾养物之始也。
现代文：这是先圣仰承天意以养万物的基础。
English: This is the foundation for the first generation to follow God's will to nurture all things.

古文：夫阴阳闭隔，则二气否塞。二气否塞，则人物不昌。人物不昌，则风雨不时。风雨不时，则水旱成灾。
现代文：天地闭隔，阴阳就不和，阴阳不和，人物就不昌盛；人物不昌盛，风雨就不时，风雨不时，水旱就成灾。
English: If heaven and earth are closed, yin and yang will not be in harmony, if yin and yang are not in harmony, people will not prosper; if people are not prosperous, wind and rain will not come from time to time, wind and rain will not come from time to time, and floods and droughts will become disasters.

古文：陛下处唐、虞之位，未行尧、舜之政，近废文帝、光武之法，而循亡秦奢侈之欲，内积怨女，外有旷夫。
现代文：皇上处在唐尧虞舜的位子上，没有施行尧舜的政治，连文帝、光武的法制，也废而不行，却跟着亡秦奢侈的道路前进，宫廷里充斥了怨女，四野之处，多的是没有妻子的旷夫。
English: The emperor was in the position of the ruler of the Tang Dynasty, and did not carry out the politics of the Qing Dynasty. Even the legal system of Emperor Wen and Emperor Guangwu was abolished, but he followed the extravagant path of the late Qin Dynasty. The court was full of bitter women, and in the four provinces, there were many widowers without wives.

古文：今皇嗣不兴，东宫未立，伤和逆理，断绝人伦之所致也。
现代文：现在还没有皇太子，东宫没立，这是伤和气，逆天理，断绝人伦的结果。
English: There is still no crown prince, and the East Palace has not been established. This is the result of a breach of harmony, a violation of the laws of nature, and the severing of human relations.

古文：非但陛下行此而已，竖宦之人，亦复虚以形势，威侮良家，取女闭之，至有白首殁无配偶，逆于天心。
现代文：不仅是皇上如此而已，宦官们弄虚作假，威吓侮辱良家子女，取女禁闭，有白首至死无配偶的，上违天心。
English: It is not only the emperor who is like this. The eunuchs play tricks, threaten and insult the children of good families, imprison women, and go to the grave without a spouse, which is against the will of heaven.

古文：昔武王入殷，出倾宫之女。
现代文：从前武王入殷，把宫廷的女子统统放出来，使她们成婚结偶。
English: Once upon a time, King Wu entered Yin and released all the women of the court so that they could get married.

古文：成汤遭灾，以六事克己。
现代文：成汤遭了七年的旱灾，以行耶？谗夫昌邪？
English: Chengtang has suffered seven years of drought, to do what?

古文：鲁僖遇旱，而自责祈雨。皆以精诚，转祸为福。
现代文：宫室荣耶？女谒行耶？ 六事反躬自责；鲁僖遇旱，自责求雨；都以精诚感天，转祸为福。
English: The palace is glorious, the maiden is virtuous, the six things are self-condemnation; Lu Xun is in drought, and self-condemnation is rain; they all feel the heavens with sincerity, and turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：自枯旱以来，弥历年岁，未闻陛下改过之效，徒劳至尊暴露风尘，诚无益也。
现代文：自从枯旱以来，已有好几年了，没有听说皇上改过的言行，枉自暴露风尘，这有什么用呢。
English: It's been several years since the drought, and I haven't heard anything about the emperor's reformed words and deeds, so what's the use of exposing himself?

古文：又下州郡祈神致请。
现代文：又下诏州郡祈神求雨。
English: He also went to Zhaozhou County to pray for rain.

古文：昔齐有大旱，景公欲祀河伯，晏子谏曰 不可。
现代文：从前齐国大旱，景公想祭河伯，晏子劝谏说： 不可。
English: Once upon a time, there was a great drought in the state of Qi. Jing Gong wanted to sacrifice Hebe, but Zizi advised him not to.

古文：夫河伯以水为城国，鲁鳖为民庶。水尽鱼枯，岂不欲雨。
现代文：河伯以水为城为国，鱼鳖是它的老百姓，水尽鱼枯，难道不想下雨？
English: Hebei takes water as its city and country, and the fish hooks are its people. When the water runs out, the fish withers. Don't you want it to rain?

古文：自是不能致也 陛下所行，但务其华，不寻其实，犹缘木求鱼，却行求前。
现代文：只是求不到啊！ 皇上所作所为，只图表面好看，不求实际，这好比攀木求鱼，退行求前。
English: It's just that you can't ask for it! The emperor's actions are only good-looking on the surface, not practical. It's like climbing a tree to look for a fish, and going backwards to look forwards.

古文：诚宜推信革政，崇道变惑，出后宫不御之女，理天下冤枉之狱，除太官重膳之费。
现代文：真正应该老老实实改革弊政，重道除惑，把后宫多余的女子放出去，平反天下的冤假错案，除去太官伙食过于豪华的费用。
English: What we really should do is to honestly reform the maladministration, clear up the confusion, release the excess women from the harem, rectify the injustice and wrongdoing in the world, and remove the extravagant cost of the eunuch's meal.

古文：夫五品不训，责在司徒，有非其位，宜急黜斥。
现代文：五常的教育不行，这是司徒的责任，不称职官员，应该撤职的赶快撤职，罢免的罢免。
English: The education of the five permanent members is not enough. This is the responsibility of the magistrates. Incompetent officials should be removed from office as soon as possible.

古文：臣自藩外擢典纳言，学薄智浅，不足以对。《易传》曰 阳感天，不旋日 惟陛下留神裁察。
现代文：我是外地调朝廷掌管进言的，学识浅薄，智能短缺，不足应对。《易传》说： 阳感天，不旋日。 阳就是天子，为善一日，天立应以善。
English: I am from out of town, transferred to the imperial court to be in charge of giving advice, my knowledge is shallow, my intelligence is short, and I can't cope with the shortage. "Easy to pass on" said: The yang feels the sky, but does not turn the sun. The yang is the son of heaven, one day is good, and the sky should be good.

古文：因召见举及尚书令成翊世、仆射黄琼，问以得失。
现代文：请皇上留神察看。 皇上于是召见周举及尚书令成翊世、仆射黄琼，问朝廷为政的得失。
English: Ask the emperor to keep an eye on it. The emperor then summoned Zhou Ji, Shang Shuling, Cheng Shuxi, and Zhu Ya, Huang Qiong, to ask the court about the gains and losses of the policy.

古文：举等并对以为宜慎官人，去斥贪污，离远佞邪，循文帝之俭，尊孝明之教，则时雨必应。
现代文：周举等都对以应该谨慎地挑选官吏，罢斥贪污，不要接近奸邪谗佞的坏人，遵守文帝节俭的传统，遵守孝明的教化，这样，时雨必应。
English: Zhou Zhou and others all agree that officials should be carefully selected, corruption should be repudiated, bad people who commit treason should not be approached, the tradition of Emperor Wen's frugality should be observed, and the education of filial piety should be observed. In this way, the rainy season is inevitable.

古文：帝曰 百官贪污佞邪者为谁乎 举独对曰 臣从下州，超备机密，不足以别群臣。
现代文：帝说 ：百官中贪污佞邪的都是哪些人呢？ 周举一个人答说 ：我是下州来的，提拔任机密的工作，对群臣不甚了解。
English: The emperor said, "Of the hundreds of officials, who are the most corrupt and evil?" Zhou named one and replied, "I am from Shinshu, I was promoted to a confidential job, and I don't know much about the ministers."

古文：然公卿大臣数有直言者，忠贞也。阿谀苟容者，佞邪也。
现代文：然而，公卿大臣能够经常敢于说正直的话的，就是忠贞；阿谀卖乖弄巧的，就是奸佞谗邪。
English: However, a court noble or a minister who can always dare to speak honestly is loyal; a flatterer is a traitor.

古文：司徒视事六年，未闻有忠言异谋，愚心在此 其后以事免司徒刘崎，迁举司隶校尉。
现代文：司徒到职六年，没听说有什么忠言和特异的谋略，我说的就是他。 后来因事免去了刘崎司徒的官，升周举为司隶校尉。
English: Six years into his term of office, I have not heard of any loyal advice or unusual strategies, I am talking about him. Later, Liu Qi removed Sito from his post due to an incident, and promoted him to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：永和元年，灾异数见，省内恶之。
现代文：永和元年，灾异经常发生。宫中认为不祥、可怕。
English: In the first year of the Edo period, disasters occurred frequently, which the Imperial Court considered to be ominous and terrible.

古文：诏召公、卿、中二千石、尚书诣显亲殿，问曰 言事者多云，昔周公摄天子事，及薨，成王欲以公礼葬之，天为动变。
现代文：诏召公卿、中二千石、尚书到显亲殿，问说： 言事的多说，从前周公代天子处理政事，周公死，成王想用公礼葬他，天为此动变。
English: Zhao summoned the court noble, middle-aged with 2,000 koku, Shang Shu to the Hsien Chien Palace and asked, "Tell me more about the matter. Once upon a time, Zhou Gong, the son of Heaven, was in charge of government affairs. Zhou Gong died, and Cheng Wang wanted to bury him with a public ceremony. Heaven was moved by this.

古文：及更葬以天子之礼，即有反风之应。
现代文：等到用天子礼改葬，就有天立风雨，禾稼尽起的感应。
English: When they are reburied with the blessing of heaven, there will be a sense of the end of the world and the beginning of the end of the harvest.

古文：北乡侯亲为天子而葬以王礼，故数有灾异，宜加尊谥，列于昭穆 群臣议者多谓宜如诏旨，举独对曰 昔周公有请命之应，隆太平之功，故皇天动威，以章圣德。
现代文：北乡侯本为天子而用王礼葬他，所以屡见灾异，应当加天子尊谥，列于左昭右穆之中。 群臣参加讨论的，大多说应当如皇上说的。周举一个人答说 ：从前周公有请命之应，致天下太平的高功，所以皇天动威，为的是要彰明圣德。
English: The northern townspeople buried him with the king's rites because he was the son of heaven, so they often saw strange things, and it should be added that the son of heaven should be respected and listed among the right and left. Most of the ministers who participated in the discussion said that it should be as the emperor said. Zhou cited a person and replied: From the previous week, the public has responded to the request for orders, and has made great contributions to the world's peace, so the emperor has moved his authority in order to demonstrate his holiness.

古文：北乡侯本非正统，奸臣所立，立不逾岁，年号未改，皇天不祐，大命夭昏。
现代文：北乡侯本来就不是正统，奸臣拥立，立没有一年，年号也没有更改，皇天不保佑他，以致短命。
English: Originally, the prince of Beicheng was not an orthodox one. He was supported by his treacherous vassals. He had been in power for less than a year, and his era name had not been changed. Emperor Tian did not bless him, and his life was cut short.

古文：《春秋》王子猛不称崩，鲁子野不书葬。
现代文：《春秋》王子猛不说 崩 ，鲁子野不书 葬 。
English: The prince of "Spring and Autumn" did not die, and Lu Zino did not write.

古文：今北乡侯无它功德，以王礼葬之，于事已崇，不宜称谥。
现代文：现在北乡侯没有别的什么功德，用王礼葬他，于事已很隆重了，不应该称谥。
English: Now, there is no other merit of the Hokkien lord, and to bury him with the king's rites is already a very grand event, and should not be praised.

古文：灾眚之来，弗由此也 于是司徒黄尚、太常桓焉等七十人同举议，帝从之。
现代文：灾异之来，不是由于这个。 于是司徒黄尚、太常桓焉等七十人都同意周举说的，帝依从了。
English: It was not because of this that the calamity came. Therefore, seventy people, including the emperors Huang Shang and Taizhang Huanan, agreed with Zhou Qiu, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：尚字伯河，南郡人也，少历显位，亦以政事称。
现代文：黄尚字伯河，南郡人，年轻时，任了不少显要的职务，也以政事见长。
English: Huang Shangzhe, a native of Nan County, held a number of important positions when he was young, and was also good at politics.

古文：举出为蜀郡太守，坐事免。
现代文：周举调任蜀郡太守，因事免官。
English: Zhou was transferred to the post of Shuxi County Governor and removed from his post.

古文：大将军梁商表为从事中郎，甚敬重焉。
现代文：大将军梁商上表荐为从事中郎，很受敬重。
English: General Liang was recommended by the merchants as a middle-ranking official, and he was highly respected.

古文：六年三月上已日，商大会宾客，宴于洛水，举时称疾不往。
现代文：六年三月上已日，梁商大会宾客，在洛水大摆筵席，周举这时托病不去。
English: On the last day of March in the sixth year, the guests of the Liang Businessmen's Conference held a grand banquet in Luoshui, and Zhou Ji did not go to the hospital at this time.

古文：商与亲昵酣饮极欢，及酒阑倡罢，继以《Ε露》之歌，坐中闻者，皆为掩涕。
现代文：梁商与他所亲近的人喝得酩酊大醉，极为欢乐。酒尽女乐撤罢，接着是唱《鈄露》歌，座中听了的，都为之流泪。
English: Liang Shang and the people close to him got very drunk and were very happy. They drank all the wine and then sang the song "Dew Dew," which made everyone in the audience shed tears.

古文：太仆张种时亦在焉，会还，以事告举。举叹曰 此所谓哀乐失时，非其所也，殃将及乎 商至秋果薨。
现代文：太仆张种当时也在。回来之后，把这事告诉了周举，周举叹说： 这就是所说的哀乐失时，又不是地方，灾祸将临啊！ 梁商到秋天，果然逝世。
English: Zhang Zeng, the eunuch, was also there at the time. After returning, he told Zhou Jiu about this, and Zhou Jiu sighed and said, "This is the time of sorrow and loss, not a place, disaster is coming! Liang Shang died in the autumn.

古文：商疾笃，帝亲临幸，问以遗言。
现代文：梁商病危时，帝亲临探看，问他有什么话要说。
English: When Liang Shang was critically ill, the emperor personally visited him and asked him if he had anything to say.

古文：对曰 人之将死，其言也善。
现代文：梁商答说： 人将要死了，他说的话好。
English: Liang Shang replied: People are going to die, what he said is good.

古文：臣从事中郎周举，清高忠正，可重任也 由是拜举谏议大夫。
现代文：我的从事中郎周举，清高忠直，可以任以重职。 因此授周举为谏议大夫。
English: I am engaged in Zhong Lang Zhou Ji, Qing Gao Zhong Zhi, and can be assigned to a heavy duty. Therefore, Zhou Ji is awarded as a doctor of deliberation.

古文：时，连有灾异，帝思商言，召举于显亲殿，问以变眚。
现代文：这时灾异不断，帝想起梁商的话来，召见周举于显亲殿，问他灾异发生的原因。
English: At this time, disasters continued to occur. The emperor remembered Liang Shang's words and summoned Zhou Ji to the Hsien Chien Palace to ask him the reason for the disasters.

古文：举对曰 陛下初立，遵修旧典，兴化致政，远近肃然。
现代文：周举回答说： 皇上继位，遵行国家原来的典章制度，推行教化以求治，远近肃然，没有什么不安宁的迹象。
English: Zhou Jiu replied: The emperor's succession to the throne, compliance with the country's original award system, and the implementation of indoctrination to cure, are far and near, and there is no sign of uneasiness.

古文：顷年以来，稍违于前，朝多宠幸，禄不序德。
现代文：近年以来，稍稍违背了以前的作法，朝廷里一些坏人受到宠幸，任用官吏，不注重品德。
English: In recent years, a little contrary to the previous practice, some bad people in the imperial court have been favored, appointed officials, and do not pay attention to morality.

古文：时，诏遣八使巡行风俗，皆选素有威名者，乃拜举为侍中，与侍中杜乔、守光禄大夫周栩、前青州刺史冯羡、尚书栾巴、侍御史张纲、兖州刺史郭遵、太尉长史刘班，并守光禄大夫，分行天下。
现代文：这时朝廷下诏派八使考察风俗。都是挑选平常最有威望的人充任。授周举为侍中，与侍中杜乔、代理光禄大夫周相、前青州刺史冯羡、尚书栾巴、侍御史张纲、兖州刺史郭遵、太尉长史刘班并守光禄大夫，分行天下。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent eight envoys to investigate the customs. They were all selected to be the most prestigious people. Zhou Zhou was appointed as a chamberlain, and the chamberlain Du Qiao, the acting Guanglu doctor Zhou Xiang, the former Qingzhou barber Feng En, Shang Shuba, the chamberlain Zhang Gang, the Zhangzhou barber Guo Zun, and the captain Liu Ban also guarded Guanglu doctor, and the branch was under the world.

古文：其刺史、二千石有臧罪显明者，驿马上之。墨绶以下，便辄收举。
现代文：对于刺史、二千石赃罪显著的，可由驿马上诏；县令以下，可以即行逮捕。
English: For the crimes of stabbing history and stealing 2,000 koku of rice, the magistrate may immediately issue an edict; below the county ordinance, the offender may be immediately arrested.

古文：其有清忠惠利，为百姓所安，宜表异者，皆以状上。
现代文：对于那些清廉正直有政绩，百姓拥护，应该表扬的，都上报朝廷。
English: For those who are honest and have political achievements, supported by the people, and should be commended, they are reported to the imperial court.

古文：于是八使同时俱拜，天下号曰 八俊 。
现代文：于是八使同时任命，天下号称 八俊 。
English: As a result, the eight envoys were appointed at the same time, and the world became known as the eight young men.

古文：举于是劾奏贪猾，表荐公清，朝廷称之。
现代文：周举劾奏贪污大猾，表荐公正清廉，朝廷非常满意。
English: The imperial court was very satisfied with Zhou's impeachment for corruption and cunning, and his recommendation for fairness and probity.

古文：迁河内太守，征为大鸿胪。
现代文：征为大鸿胪。
English: He was conscripted into the Taihong Army.

古文：及梁太后临朝，诏以殇帝幼崩，庙次宜在顺帝下。
现代文：梁太后临朝理政，下诏认为殇帝幼小就死了，他的庙号秩序应当在顺帝下。
English: Empress Dowager Liang was in charge of the political affairs of the imperial court, and issued an edict that Emperor Qian died as a child, and the order of his temple name should be under Emperor Shun.

古文：太常马访奏宜如诏书，谏议大夫吕勃以为应依昭穆之序，先殇帝，后顺帝。
现代文：太常马访上奏说，应该如诏所说。谏议大夫吕勃认为应按照左昭右穆的秩序，先殇帝，后顺帝。
English: It should be as stated in the edict. The deliberation doctor Lü Bo thought that it should be in accordance with the order of Zuo Zhao and Yu Mu, first Emperor Zhao, then Emperor Shun.

古文：诏下公卿。
现代文：诏书令公卿讨论。
English: The imperial rescript called for a discussion among the nobles.

古文：举议曰 《春秋》鲁闵公无子，庶兄僖公代立，其子文公遂跻僖于闵上。
现代文：周举说 ：春秋时，鲁闵公无子，庶兄僖公代立，他的儿子文公就把僖公列于闵公之上。
English: Zhou Qiu said: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Lu Qigong had no son, and his brother-in-law Qigong stood in for him. His son Wengong ranked Qigong higher than Qigong.

古文：孔子讥之，书曰：有事于太庙，跻僖公。
现代文：孔子讥议这件事，在《春秋》上说： 有事于太庙，跻僖公。 
English: Confucius scoffed at this matter, saying in Spring and Autumn, "If it is a matter for the imperial temple, it should be brought to the imperial court."

古文：《传》曰：逆祀也。
现代文：《左传》说 ：这是倒祀。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: This is the opposite of worship.

古文：及定公正其序，经曰从祀先公，为万世法也。
现代文：到定公才正了这个秩序。《春秋》经说 ：从祀先公。 正了闵公、僖公的位。为万世师法。
English: The "Spring and Autumn" sutra says, "From worshiping the first prince, the position of the second prince and the third prince is correct, and he is the universal teacher of the Fa."

古文：今殇帝在先，于秩为父，顺帝在后，于亲为子，先后之义不可改，昭穆之序不可乱。
现代文：现在殇帝在先，按秩序为父，顺帝在后，按亲属为子，先后的大义不可改，左昭右穆的秩序不可乱。
English: Now, Emperor Gong is the first, according to the order as the father, Emperor Shun is the second, according to the relatives as the son, successively the great righteousness cannot be changed, and the order of Zuo Zhao and Yu Mu cannot be disturbed.

古文：吕勃议是也 太后下诏从之。
现代文：吕勃说的对。 太后下诏同意了。
English: Lü Bu was right. The empress dowager gave her formal approval.

古文：迁光禄勋，会遭母忧去职，后拜光禄大夫。
现代文：升光禄勋，遇母丧去职，后来授光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Guanglu Honour, but lost his position when his mother died. Later, he was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：建和三年卒。朝廷以举清公亮直，方欲以为宰相，深痛惜之。
现代文：周举建和三年逝世，朝廷认为周举清公亮直，正准备任他为宰相，对他的逝世，深为悲痛而可惜。
English: Three years after the death of Zhou Jianhe, the imperial court believed that Zhou Jianhe was an upright and honest person and was preparing to appoint him as prime minister. His death was deeply sad and regrettable.

古文：乃诏先光禄勋、汝南太守曰 昔在前世，求贤如渴，封墓轼闾，以光贤哲。
现代文：于是下诏告光禄勋汝南太守说 ： 昔在前世，求贤如渴。武王入殷，封比干墓，轼商容闾。 
English: Therefore, he issued an imperial edict to Guanglu Xun Run, the Southern Empress Dowager, saying, "In the past, in the previous life, the pursuit of virtue was so thirsty. King Wu entered Yin, the tomb was sealed, and the merchant was killed.

古文：故公叔见诔，翁归蒙述，所以昭忠厉俗，作范后昆。
现代文：班固说： 翁归承风，帝扬厥声。 都是为了阐扬忠节，鼓励风俗，为后代作楷模。
English: Ban Gu said, "Weng inherits the wind, and the emperor inherits the voice. It is all for the purpose of expounding the loyal festival, encouraging customs, and setting an example for future generations.

古文：故光禄大夫周举，性侔夷、鱼，忠逾随、管，前授牧守，及还纳言，出入京辇，有钦哉之绩，在禁闱有密静之风。
现代文：已故光禄大夫周举，品德与伯夷、史鱼一样高洁，忠节超过了随会、管仲，以前任地方官，后来入朝廷进言，出入京城，他的功绩，值得钦佩。在朝有谨严静穆之风。
English: The late Dr. Guanglu Zhou Ji, whose moral character was as high and pure as that of Bo Yi and Shi Yu, and whose loyalty exceeded that of Sui Hui and Guanzhong, was formerly a local official, and later entered the imperial court as an adviser, and went in and out of Beijing. His achievements are worthy of admiration. He had a strict and quiet demeanor in the imperial court.

古文：予录乃勋，用登九列。
现代文：我叙录他的功勋，列为九卿。
English: I recorded his merits and ranked him as one of the nine nobles.

古文：方欲式序百官，亮协三事，不永夙终，用乖远图。
现代文：正想他总领百官，协和正德、利用厚生三事，不幸早逝，使我的远大的计划，不得实现。
English: I was just thinking that he was the leader of a hundred officials, promoted harmony and virtue, and made use of welfare. Unfortunately, he died early, so my ambitious plan could not be realized.

古文：朝廷愍悼，良为怆然。
现代文：朝廷哀悼，悲伤不已。
English: The Imperial Court is in mourning, grief-stricken.

古文：《诗》不云乎：肇敏戎功，用锡尔祉。
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 赶快叙你的功劳，赐给你福啊 。 
English: Isn't it said in "Poetry"? Quickly recount your merits and bestow blessings on you.

古文：其令将大夫以下到丧发日复会吊。
现代文：令将大夫以下到丧发日，再集会哀悼。
English: He ordered the generals and doctors to wait until the day of the death before gathering to mourn.

古文：加赐钱十万，以旌委蛇素丝之节焉 子勰。
现代文：加赐钱十万，旌表他夙夜从公清廉公正的节操。有儿子周勰。
English: In addition, he was given one hundred thousand yuan, and he was known for his scrupulous adherence to the principles of honesty, integrity, and fairness. He had a son, Zhou Qi.

古文：勰字巨胜，少尚玄虚，以父任为郎，自免归家。
现代文：◆周勰传，周勰字巨胜，年轻时，喜欢玄虚之学，因父亲的关系，为郎。自己辞职归家。
English: ◆ Zhou Yuxuan, Zhou Xizhu Juxing, when he was young, he liked the study of the occult, and because of his father's relationship, he was the son. He resigned and returned home.

古文：父故吏河南召夔为郡将，卑身降礼，致敬于勰。
现代文：父亲的旧部河南召夔为郡将，卑躬厚礼，向周勰表示敬意。
English: His father's old Henan Province summoned Zhou to be the county commander, bowed low and showed respect to Zhou.

古文：勰耻交报之，因杜门自绝。
现代文：周勰以与他来往可耻，关着门自绝于他。
English: Zhou Yu was ashamed to associate with him, and closed the door on him.

古文：后太太守举孝廉，复以疾去。
现代文：后来太守举他为孝廉，又托疾不去。
English: Later, he was praised as a filial son by the grand marshal, but he did not go.

古文：时梁冀贵盛，被其征命者，莫敢不应，唯勰前后三辟，竟不能屈。
现代文：这时梁冀权势煊赫，被他征召的，不敢不应，只有周勰前后三次被征，终究没有屈服他。
English: At this time, Liang Jizhe, with his power and influence, did not dare to refuse to be conscripted by him. Only Zhou Qi, who had been conscripted three times before and after, did not give in to him.

古文：后举贤良方正，不应。
现代文：后来又举贤良方正，不应。
English: Later, they promoted the virtuous Fang Zheng, but it was not to be.

古文：又公车征，玄纁备礼，固辞废疾。
现代文：又公车征召，钱帛备礼，以病疾坚辞。
English: He was also called up by bus, paid a fine and resigned due to illness.

古文：常隐处窜身，慕老聃清静，杜绝人事，巷生荆棘，十有馀岁。
现代文：经常在隐蔽的地方栖身，羡慕老子清静无为，不与任何人联系。十多年住的巷子里长满了荆棘。
English: He often hides in secluded places, admiring Lao Zi's quietness and inactivity, not communicating with anyone. The alley where he has lived for more than ten years is full of thorns.

古文：至延熹二年，乃开门延宾，游谈宴乐，及秋而梁冀诛，年终而勰卒，时年五十。
现代文：到延熹二年，才开门延接宾客，游谈宴乐，秋天，梁冀诛灭，这年终，周勰逝世，时年五十。
English: It was not until the second year of Yanqi that the door was opened to receive guests, talk about banquets, autumn, Liang Jie's death, and at the end of the year, Zhou Qi died at the age of fifty.

古文：蔡邕以为知命。
现代文：蔡邕认为他知天命。
English: Cai Wei thinks he knows the fate of the world.

古文：自勰曾祖父扬至勰孙恂，六世一身，皆知名云。
现代文：自周勰曾祖父周扬，到周勰的孙子周恂，六世都是独生子，皆有名。
English: From Zhou Ye's great-grandfather Zhou Yang, to Zhou Ye's grandson Zhou Ye, the sixth generation are all only children, all are famous.

古文：黄琼字世英，江夏安陆人，魏郡太守香之子也。
现代文：◆黄琼传，黄琼字世英，江夏郡安陆县人，魏郡太守黄香的儿子。
English: ◆Huang Qiong Chuan, Huang Qiong Zi Shying, a native of Anlu County, Jiangxia County, the son of Huang Xiang, the governor of Wei County.

古文：香在《文苑传》。
现代文：黄香在《文苑传》。
English: Huang Xiang in "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：琼初以父任为太子舍人，辞病不就。
现代文：黄琼起初因父亲的关系任太子舍人，托病不就职。
English: At first, Huang Qiong did not take up his post because of his father's relationship with the crown prince.

古文：遭父忧，服阕，五府俱辟，连年不应。
现代文：父亲逝世，服丧期满，五府都辟召他，几年不应。
English: When my father passed away and the mourning period was over, all five prefectures summoned him, which took several years.

古文：永建中，公卿多荐琼者，于是与会稽贺纯、广汉杨厚俱公车征。
现代文：永建年间，有很多公卿荐举黄琼的，于是黄琼与会稽贺纯，广汉杨厚都应公车征召。
English: During the Yongjian era, there were many nobles who recommended Huang Qiong, so Huang Qiong attended the meeting, and He Jun and Guanghan Yang Hou were called up by bus.

古文：琼至纶氏，称疾不进。
现代文：黄琼到纶氏，托病不去。
English: Huang Qiong went to Mr. Zou, but did not go because of illness.

古文：有司劾不敬，诏下县以礼慰遣，遂不得已。
现代文：官吏检举他对皇帝不敬，皇帝下诏到县里，令以礼安慰他，派送他，黄琼不得已，应了征召。
English: The officials accused him of being disrespectful to the emperor. The emperor sent an imperial edict to the county, ordered that he be consoled with courtesy, and sent him away. Huang Qiong had no choice but to be conscripted.

古文：先是，征聘处士多不称望，李固素慕于琼，乃以书逆遗之曰：闻已度伊、洛，近在万岁亭，岂即事有渐，将顺王命乎。
现代文：以前征聘的处士，多不称声望，李固平常就仰慕黄琼，于是预先写信给他： 听说您已经渡了伊水和洛水，近在万岁亭，难道迟迟其行，是顺从皇帝的命令吗？
English: Li Gu, who was usually an admirer of Huang Qiong, wrote to him in advance: I heard that you have already crossed the Yizhu and Luoshu Rivers and are close to Wanzhong Pavilion. Isn't it obeying the emperor's order to travel slowly?

古文：盖君子谓伯夷隘，柳下惠不恭，故传曰 不夷不惠，可否之间 。
现代文：君子所谓伯夷狭隘，柳下惠不恭谨，《传》说 ：不要像伯夷那样狭隘，也不要像柳下惠那样降志辱身，可否之间，折衷而已。 
English: Nobles are said to be narrow-minded, and Yanagishita Hui is not respectful. "Biography" said: Don't be as narrow-minded as Bo Yi, and don't humiliate yourself like Yanagishita Hui. It's just a compromise between what is possible and what is not.

古文：盖圣贤居身之所珍也。
现代文：这是圣贤立身之宝啊！
English: This is the treasure of sages and sages!

古文：诚遂欲枕山栖谷，拟亦巢、由，斯则可矣。若当辅政济民，今其时也。
现代文：真正想隐居山林，学习巢父、许由，这样也可以；如果想从政为百姓做番事业，现在正是时候。
English: If you really want to live in seclusion in the mountains and learn from your parents and grandparents, you can do so; if you want to work in politics for the people, now is the time.

古文：自生民以来，善政少而乱俗多，必待尧、舜之君，此为志士终无时矣。
现代文：自从有生民以来，太平盛世少，纷乱的时期多。如果一定要等到有尧舜之君才出世做事，那作一个有志之士，始终没有时机了。
English: Since there have been people, there have been fewer peaceful prosperous times and more turbulent times. If you have to wait until you have a prince to do things, then you will never have the time to be a man of ambition.

古文：常闻语曰 峣峣者易缺，皦皦者易污 《阳春》之曲，和者必寡，盛名之下，其实难副。
现代文：曾经听说： 高峻的东西，容易折缺；洁白的东西，容易弄污。 《阳春》之曲，和唱的少，盛名之下，其实难副。
English: I once heard: A lofty thing is easily cracked; a pure white thing is easily defiled. The song of "Yangchun" is rarely sung, and under its prestigious name, it is actually difficult to match.

古文：近鲁阳樊君，被征初至，朝廷设坛席，犹待神明。
现代文：最近，鲁阳樊君被征召刚到，朝廷设坛席欢迎，如对待神明一样。
English: Recently, Lu Yangjun just arrived after being conscripted, and the imperial court set up a dais to welcome him, as if he were treated like a god.

古文：虽无大异，而言行所守无缺。
现代文：虽然没有什么特出的才能，但一言一行，没有什么缺点。
English: Although there is no outstanding talent, there is no shortcoming in every word and action.

古文：而毁谤布流，应时折减者，岂非观听望深，声名太盛乎。
现代文：而毁谤传播流行，应时折减，难道不是由于吏民观听期望太深，声名太盛吗？
English: But the popularity of defamation should be reduced from time to time. Isn't it because the expectations of officials and the public are too high, and the reputation is too strong?

古文：自顷征聘之士，胡元安、薛孟尝、朱仲昭、顾季鸿等，其功业皆无所采，是故俗论皆言处士纯盗虚声。
现代文：最近征聘的如胡元安、薛孟尝、朱仲昭、顾季鸿等，他们的功业都没有什么可取之处，所以时下的舆论都说处士全都是窃取虚假的名声。
English: Recent recruits such as Hu Yuan'an, Xue Mengqi, Zhu Zhongzhao, Gu Jihong, etc. have nothing to commend their work, so the current public opinion is that the officials are all stealing false reputation.

古文：愿先生弘此远谟，令众人叹服，一雪此言耳。
现代文：希望先生弘扬远大的谋划，使大家敬服，洗掉这窃取虚假名声的话啊！ 
English: Let Mr. Hope carry forward his great plan, win the respect of everyone, and wash away the words of stealing a false reputation!

古文：琼至，即拜议郎，稍迁尚书仆射。
现代文：黄琼到朝廷，即授议郎之官，稍升为尚书仆射。
English: When Huang Qiong arrived at the imperial court, he was given the post of deputy, and was later promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：初，琼随父在台阁，习见故事。
现代文：先前，黄琼跟父亲在尚书省，熟悉历史旧闻。
English: Previously, Huang Qiong and her father were in Shangshu Province, familiar with the history and old news.

古文：及后居职，达练官曹，争议朝堂，莫能抗夺。
现代文：等到任职朝廷，处理政务，非常能干，在朝廷里争论什么，没有胜过他的。
English: When he became a member of the imperial court and dealt with government affairs, he was very capable, and there was no one better than him to argue anything in the imperial court.

古文：时连有灾异，琼上疏顺帝曰 间者以来，卦位错谬，寒燠相干，蒙气数兴，日暗月散。
现代文：当时连续出现灾异，黄琼上疏顺帝说 ：近来，卦位错乱，冷热相侵，阴气屡作，太阳无光，月亮不明。
English: At that time, there were continuous disasters, Huang Qiong Shang Shushun Emperor said: Recently, the divination position is disordered, cold and heat invade each other, gloomy weather is frequent, the sun has no light, and the moon is unknown.

古文：原之天意，殆不虚然。
现代文：考求天意，大概不是偶然的。
English: God willing, it's probably not a coincidence.

古文：陛下宜开石室，案《河》、《洛》，外命史官，悉条上永建以前至汉初灾异，与永建以后讫于今日，孰为多少。
现代文：皇上应该把石室打开，查阅《河洛》图书，命令史官，条上永建以前到汉初的全部灾异，比较永建以后到今天，何多何少。
English: The emperor should open the stone room, consult the "Holo" book, and order the historian to list all the disasters before Yongjian to the beginning of the Han Dynasty, and compare how many and how few after Yongjian to today.

古文：又使近臣儒者参考政事，数见公卿，察问得失。
现代文：又使近臣儒者参考政事，多召见公卿，访察询问得失。
English: He also made his close vassals, the Confucians, refer to political affairs, summoned many of them to meet with court nobles, and visited them to inquire about their gains and losses.

古文：诸无功德者，宜皆斥黜。
现代文：那些无功无德的，应该罢免的罢免，降级的降级。
English: Those without merit, those who should be dismissed, those who should be dismissed, those who should be demoted.

古文：臣前颇陈灾眚，并荐光禄大夫樊英、太中大夫薛包及会稽贺纯、广汉杨厚，未蒙御省。伏见处士巴郡黄错、汉阳任棠，年皆耆耋，有作者七人之志。
现代文：我以前对于灾祸有所陈述，并且推举了光大夫樊英、太中大夫薛包及会稽贺纯、广汉杨厚，没有被采纳，处士巴郡黄错、汉阳任棠，年纪都六七十了，有伯夷、叔齐、虞仲、夷逸、朱张、柳下惠、少连之志，应该接见他们，任用他们，帮助弘扬政化。 
English: I have previously made a statement about the disaster, and I nominated Dr. Guang Rongying, Dr. Taizhong Xue Bao, and the party secretary He Jun, Guanghan Yang Hou, but they were not adopted. The officials of Ba County Huang Xie, Hanyang Rintang, are all in their sixties and seventies, and have the aspirations of Bo Yi, Shu Qi, Yu Zhong, Yi Yi, Zhu Zhang, Liu Shimo Hui, and Shao Lian. We should receive them, appoint them, and help promote the political reform.

古文：宜更见引致，助崇大化 于是有诏公车征错等。三年，大旱。琼复上疏曰 昔鲁僖遇旱，以六事自让，躬节俭，闭女谒，放谗佞者十三人，诛税民受货者九人，退舍南郊，天立大雨。
现代文：于是诏令公车征召黄错等人。三年，大旱，黄琼又上疏说： 从前鲁僖公时遭旱灾，僖公以六种罪过自责，躬行节约，不近女色，放逐阿谀进谗言的坏人十三个，杀贪污受贿的九个，退居南郊，老天立刻下了大雨。
English: After three years of drought, Huang Qiong said again: "Once upon a time, when Luqin suffered a drought, Luqin blamed himself for six kinds of sins, practiced thrift, avoided women, exiled thirteen bad people who were corrupt, killed nine people who were corrupt and took bribes, and retreated to the southern suburbs. God immediately sent a heavy rain.

古文：今亦宜顾省政事，有所损阙，务存质俭，以易民听。
现代文：现在应该考查政事，有无不当的措施，务必实实在在，厉行节俭，改变百姓对政府的看法。
English: Now it is time to examine the government affairs, check whether there are any improper measures, be sure to be realistic, practice frugality, and change the people's view of the government.

古文：尚方御府，息除烦费。
现代文：尚方御府，要除去不必要的开支。
English: Shangfangofu, we must eliminate unnecessary expenses.

古文：明敕近臣，使遵法度，如有不移，示以好恶。
现代文：明告近臣，遵守法纪，如果不听，则要给他们好看。
English: Tell your close vassals to abide by laws and regulations, and if they don't listen, make them look good.

古文：数见公卿，引纳儒士，访以政化，使陈得失。
现代文：要多接见公卿大员，引用儒士，询求政治教化的道理，要他们陈述朝政的得失。
English: It is necessary to receive more members of the nobility, quote Confucianism, inquire about the principle of political education, and ask them to state the gains and losses of court politics.

古文：又囚徒尚积，多致死亡，亦足以感伤和气，招降灾旱。
现代文：又囚徒系狱太多，没有处理，多致死亡，也可以感伤天地的和气。招来灾旱。
English: In addition, there are too many prisoners in the prison system, and if they are not dealt with, many will die, and they can also be sentimental about the harmony of heaven and earth.

古文：若改敝从善，择用嘉谋，则灾消福至矣 书奏，引见德阳殿，使中常侍以琼奏书属主者施行。
现代文：如果改过从善，选用好的政策，自然灾异消除太平盛世来临了。 书奏，皇上召见于德阳殿，命中常侍拿了黄琼的奏书给主管部门执行。
English: If we change from being good to being virtuous, and adopt good policies, we will eliminate natural disasters and natural calamities, and a prosperous and peaceful world will come. The emperor was summoned to the Deyang Palace for a report, and he was ordered to take Huang Qiong's report to the competent department for implementation.

古文：自帝即位以后，不行籍田之礼。琼以国之大典不宜久废，上疏奏
现代文：自帝即位以后，不举行皇帝亲耕农田的礼仪，黄琼认为国家的大典，不宜久废，上疏奏曰： 自古贤明的君主，没有不尽心祭祀，增致福祥。
English: Since the enthronement of the emperor, the emperor's pro-cultivation farmland ceremony has not been held. Huang Qiong believed that the national ceremony should not be abandoned for a long time, and the chorus said: Since ancient times, the wise monarchs have not made sacrifices, which has increased the blessing.

古文：自古圣帝哲王，莫不敬恭明祀，增致福祥，故必躬郊庙之礼，亲籍田之勤，以先群萌，率劝农功。昔周宣王不籍千亩，虢文公以为大讥，卒有姜戎之难，终损中兴之名。
现代文：所以一定亲自举行郊庙的祭礼，亲自耕种农田，作百姓的榜样，奖励农耕。从前周宣王不亲自耕种农田，虢文公因此大肆批评，终于发生了姜戎的寇乱，损害了中兴的好名声。
English: Therefore, he must personally hold the festival of the suburb temple, personally cultivate farmland, set an example for the people, and reward farming. Previously, Zhou Xuanwang did not personally cultivate farmland, and Zou Wengong criticized it. Finally, Jiang Rong's rebellion occurred, damaging ZTE's good reputation.

古文：窃见陛下遵稽古之鸿业，体虔肃以应天，顺时奉元，怀柔百神，朝夕触尘埃于道路，昼暮聆庶政以恤人。
现代文：皇上守先人的大业，恭敬严肃以应天兆，顺时奉元，祭祀百神，早晚冒尘埃于道路，白天晚上处理政事，爱恤人民。
English: Emperors guard the great cause of their predecessors, respectfully and seriously respond to the signs of heaven, follow the time, worship the elements, worship hundreds of gods, leave dust on the road in the morning and evening, deal with political affairs during the day and at night, and love the people.

古文：虽《诗》咏成汤之不怠遑，《书》美文王之不暇食，诚不能加。
现代文：虽然《诗经》歌颂成汤 不僭不滥，不敢怠遑 ，《书经》赞美 文王至于日中昃，不皇暇食 ，也不能超过。
English: Although the "Song of Songs" praises Cheng Tang for not indulging in extravagance and not daring to be lazy, the "Book of Songs" praises King Wen, and as far as the day-to-day diet is concerned, it cannot exceed the emperor's leisure food.

古文：今庙祀适阕，而祈谷洁斋之事，近在明日。
现代文：现在宗庙的祭祀正缺，祈丰年斋戒，就在明天。
English: At present, there is a shortage of sacrificial rites at the ancestral temple. The prayer for a good year of fasting will begin tomorrow.

古文：臣恐左右之心，不欲屡动圣躬，以为亲耕之礼，可得而废。
现代文：我怕皇上左右的人，不想多惊动您，认为亲耕的礼可以废掉。
English: I'm afraid of the people around the emperor, I don't want to alarm you too much, I think that the gift of personal cultivation can be scrapped.

古文：臣闻先王制典，籍田有日，司徒咸戒，司空除坛。
现代文：我听说先王制定典章，皇帝亲耕农田的日子将到，司徒斋戒，司空扫除坛地。
English: I heard that the former king had issued a decree that the day would come when the emperor would personally cultivate farmland, the priests would fast, and the magistrates would sweep the altar.

古文：先时五日，有协风之应，王即斋官，飨醴载耒，诚重之也。
现代文：五天以前，有和风的应兆，王到斋宫，祭祀之后，启用农具，真是慎重极了。
English: Five days ago, in response to the signs of a conciliatory wind, the king came to the Saigu, and after the ritual, he started using agricultural tools, which was very prudent.

古文：自癸巳以来，仍西北风，甘泽不集，寒凉尚结。
现代文：自癸巳以来，一直西北风，好雨不下，寒气不散。
English: Since then, the northwest wind has been blowing, the rain has not stopped, and the cold has not dissipated.

古文：迎春东郊，既不躬亲，先农之礼，所宜自勉，以逆和气，以致时风。
现代文：迎春东郊，既然没有亲去，为百姓作表彰，这是应当的，这样才可迎来和气，招引时风。
English: In the eastern suburbs to welcome the spring, since there is no relative to go and commend the people, this is appropriate. This is the only way to usher in harmony and attract the times.

古文：《易》曰 君子自强不息 斯其道也。
现代文：《易》说 君子自强不息 ，就是这个道理。 
English: "Yi" says that a gentleman is self-reliant, this is the reason.

古文：书奏，帝从之。
现代文：奏书送上，皇帝采纳了。
English: The report was sent to the emperor, who accepted it.

古文：顷之，迁尚书令。
现代文：不久，黄琼升尚书令。
English: Soon after, Huang Qiong was promoted to the rank of Shuling.

古文：琼以前左雄所上孝廉之选，专用儒学文吏，于取士之义，犹有所遗，乃奏增孝悌及能从政者为四科，事竟施行。
现代文：黄琼认为以前左雄上奏关于选举孝廉，专用儒学文吏的办法，对于选拔士人，尚有不足的地方。于是奏请增加孝悌及能从政者为四科，全部得到施行。
English: Huang Qiong believed that the method of election of filial piety and dedicated Confucian literati proposed by Zuo Xiong in the past was still insufficient for the selection of scholars. Therefore, the request to increase filial piety and political ability to four subjects was made, and all of them were implemented.

古文：又雄前议举吏先试之于公府，又覆之于端门，后尚书张盛奏除此科。
现代文：又左雄前议选举官吏先在公府考试，端门复试，后来尚书张盛奏请废除。
English: In addition, Zuo Xiong previously proposed that election officials should first take a public examination and then retake the examination, and later that they should write a book to ask for the abolition of the grand performance.

古文：琼复上言 覆试之作，将以澄洗清浊，覆实虚滥，不宜改革 帝乃止。
现代文：黄琼又上言 ：复试这种办法，是为了澄洗清浊，核查虚伪和失实，不应当改革。 皇帝于是没有废除此科。
English: Huang Qiong also said that the re-examination of this method was in order to clarify and verify the hypocrisy and untruth, and should not be reformed. The emperor therefore did not abolish this department.

古文：出为魏郡太守，稍迁太常。
现代文：调魏郡太守，稍迁太常。
English: Wei County Governor, a little too often.

古文：和平中，以选入侍讲禁中。
现代文：和平年间，选入宫中，为皇帝讲学。
English: During peacetime, he was elected to the imperial court and lectured for the emperor.

古文：元嘉元年，迁司空。
现代文：元嘉元年，升司空。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Jia era, he was promoted to the second rank.

古文：桓帝欲褒崇大将军梁冀，使中朝二千石以上会议其礼。
现代文：桓帝想表扬大将军梁冀，使朝中二千石以上讨论表扬的礼仪。
English: Emperor Kuan wanted to praise the great general Liang Jie, causing more than two thousand koku to discuss the etiquette of praise.

古文：特进胡广、太常羊溥、司隶校尉祝恬、太中大夫边韶等，咸称冀之勋德，其制度赍赏，以宜比周公，锡之山川、土田、附庸。
现代文：特进胡广、太常羊溥、司隶校尉祝恬，太中大夫边韶等，都称颂梁冀的功勋德行，认为表扬的礼仪赏赐，应比周公，赐给山川、土田、附庸。
English: Special Inspector Hu Guang, Superintendent Yang Qi, Superintendent Lieutenant Zhu Qi, and Superintendent Doctor Bian Qi all praised Liang Ji's merits and virtues, and believed that the etiquette reward of praise should be given to Shanchuan, Tsuchida, and the vassal.

古文：琼独建议曰 冀前以亲迎之劳，增邑三千，又其子胤亦加封赏。
现代文：黄琼独建议说 ：梁冀前因亲迎皇上的功劳，增邑三千，又对他儿子梁胤也增加了封赏。
English: Huang Qiongde suggested that Liang Jizhen be awarded an additional 3,000 yuans for his services in welcoming the emperor, and that his son Liang Tian also be awarded an additional reward.

古文：昔周公辅相成王，制礼作乐，化致太平，是以大启土宇，开地七百。
现代文：从前周公辅佐成王，制礼作乐，使天下太平，所以大辟土宇，开地七百。
English: From the previous Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang, the system of etiquette and music made the world peaceful, so he greatly expanded the land and opened seven hundred lands.

古文：今诸侯以户邑为制，不以里数为限。
现代文：现在诸侯按户邑为制，不按里数计算。
English: At present, the number of lords is based on the number of households and towns, not on the number of miles.

古文：萧何识高祖于泗水，霍光定倾危以兴国，皆益户增封，以显其功。
现代文：萧何在泗水结识了高祖，霍光挽救危亡了的局势，复兴国家，都是益户增封，以显扬他们的功业。
English: Xiao He met Gao Zu in Surabaya, and Huo Guang saved the endangered situation and revived the country. All of them were awarded additional seals to highlight their achievements.

古文：冀可比邓禹，合食四县，赏赐之差，同于霍光，使天下知赏必当功，爵不越德 朝廷从之。
现代文：梁冀可以比邓禹，宜食四县，赏赐可同霍光，使天下晓得赏一定要与功相当，爵位不要越超他的德行。 朝廷采纳了。
English: Liang Ji can be compared to Deng Yu, it is appropriate to eat four counties, the reward can be the same as Huo Guang, so that the world knows that the reward must be equivalent to the merit, and the title should not exceed his virtue.

古文：冀意以为恨。
现代文：梁冀怀恨在心。
English: Liang Jie has a grudge.

古文：会以地动策免。复为太仆。
现代文：正值地震，诏令免了他司空的官，再任为太仆。
English: At the time of the earthquake, the imperial edict relieved him of the post of Sikyong and reappointed him as Taibu.

古文：永兴元年，迁司徒，转太尉。
现代文：永兴元年，升司徒，调太尉。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, he was promoted to apprentice and promoted to captain.

古文：梁冀前后所托辟召，一无所用。
现代文：梁冀前后托黄琼推举征召的，一个也没有任用。
English: None of the candidates who were nominated and recruited by Huang Qiong before and after Liang Jie were appointed.

古文：虽有善人而为冀所饰举者，亦不加命。
现代文：虽有好人而是梁冀所看得起推举的，也不任命。
English: Even if there are good people, they will not be appointed, even if they are the ones that Liang Jie deems worthy of appointment.

古文：延熹元年，以日食免。
现代文：延熹元年，因日蚀被免职。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, he was dismissed from his post due to a solar eclipse.

古文：复为大司农。
现代文：不久，又被任命为大司农。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of Chief Secretary for Agriculture.

古文：明年，梁冀被诛，太尉胡广、司徒韩縯、司空孙朗皆坐阿附免废，复拜琼为太尉。
现代文：第二年，梁冀被杀。太尉胡广、司徒韩缤、司空孙朗都因阿谀依附梁冀罢免，再任黄琼为太尉。
English: The following year, Liang Jie was killed. Second lieutenants Hu Guang, Szeto Han Zheng, and Siku Sun Lang were all dismissed for their dependence on Liang Jie, and Huang Qiong was reappointed as second lieutenant.

古文：以师傅之恩，而不阿梁氏，乃封为邟乡侯，邑千户。
现代文：因为是师傅，又不阿谀依附梁冀，封为亢阝乡侯，邑千户。
English: Because he was a master, he was not dependent on Liang Jie, and he was awarded the title of "village headman" with a thousand households.

古文：琼辞疾让封六七上，言旨恳恻，乃许之。
现代文：黄琼以病辞让六、七次，言词恳切真挚，终于得到皇上的批准。
English: Huang Qiong used his sick leave to resign six or seven times, and his words were earnest and sincere. Finally, he received the emperor's approval.

古文：梁冀既诛，琼首居公位，举奏州郡素行贪污至死徙者十馀人，海内由是翕然望之。
现代文：梁冀既诛，黄琼在朝廷位居第一。检举州郡贪污至死的十多人，海内由是希望黄琼很快整顿朝纲。
English: Liang Jizhe is already dead, Huang Qiong is in the first place in the imperial court. More than ten people have been indicted for corruption to death in Zhoushu County, and the reason is that the mainland hopes that Huang Qiong will soon rectify the imperial program.

古文：寻而五侯擅权，倾动内外，自度力不能匡，乃称疾不起。
现代文：然而，不久就有五侯擅权，朝廷内外动乱，黄琼自己考虑无力量匡正，于是托病不工作。
English: Soon, however, the Five Great Princes usurped power, and there was turmoil inside and outside the court. Huang Qiong considered himself powerless to rectify the situation, so he feigned illness and did not work.

古文：四年，以寇贼免。
现代文：延熹四年，因寇贼骚扰，免职。
English: Four years later, he was dismissed from his post due to harassment by a burglar.

古文：其年复为司空。
现代文：这年再任为司空。
English: In the same year, he was reappointed as Soku.

古文：秋，以地震免。
现代文：秋天，因发生地震，免职。
English: In autumn, he was relieved of his duties due to an earthquake.

古文：七年，疾笃，上疏谏曰：其年卒，时年七十九。
现代文：延熹七年，黄琼病重，上疏劝谏说 ：我听说天者务在刚其气，君者务在强其政。
English: Seven years later, when Huang Qiong was seriously ill, Shang Su advised him, saying, "I have heard that it is the duty of Heaven to strengthen one's spirit, and it is the duty of the ruler to strengthen one's government.

古文：赠车骑将军，谥曰忠侯。
现代文：所以王者处高要自持，不可不安；履危要任力，不可不据。
English: Therefore, the king should be self-reliant when he is high, and should not be anxious; he should be self-reliant when he is in danger, and should not be unreasonable.

古文：孙琬。琬字子琰。
现代文：自持不安，就会跌倒，任力不据就危险。
English: If you are not confident, you will fall, and if you are not self-reliant, you will be in danger.

古文：少失父。早而辩慧。
现代文：所以圣人升高据上，就要以德义为首，涉危蹈倾，就要以贤者为力。
English: Therefore, according to the elevation of saints, it is necessary to take virtue and righteousness as the head, and when it comes to danger, it is necessary to take the wise as the strength.

古文：祖父琼，初为魏郡太守，建和元年正月日食，京师不见而琼以状闻。
现代文：唐尧以德化为首，以稷、契为筋力。高而更高，动而更定，这就是从前圣王所以能长守万国，永保社稷的原因啊！
English: Tang Xuan takes virtue as the top priority, and the tenets and covenants as the strength. High and higher, moving and changing, this is the reason why the holy king was able to protect all countries and safeguard society forever!

古文：太后诏问所食多少，琼思其对而未知所况。
现代文：从前汉高祖应天顺民，用武力称王，扫除秦朝、项羽的势力，革命创建国家，以德化施于后世。到了哀帝、平帝时，帝道不纲。
English: In the past, the ancestors of the Han and Gao dynasties obeyed the will of heaven and the will of the people, proclaimed the king by force, swept away the forces of the Qin Dynasty and Xiang Yu, created the country by revolution, and applied virtue to future generations.

古文：琬年七岁，在傍，曰 何不言日食之馀，如月之初 琼大惊，即以其言应诏，而深奇爱之。
现代文：政治一天一天地紊乱，使奸人谄媚之徒专政，外戚胡作乱为，不重仁义，不用贤佐，终于垮台，西汉灭亡。天柱倾颓，人民鬼神悲怆，幸皇天爱护，火德复辉。
English: Day by day, the politics became chaotic, making the dictatorship of the deceiver and the flatterer supreme, and the maternal relative ran amok. There was no emphasis on benevolence and righteousness, and there was no need for a wise advisor. Finally, the Western Han Dynasty fell, the Temple of Heaven fell, the people were saddened by the ghosts and gods, the emperor was blessed and protected by heaven, and virtue was restored.

古文：后琼为司徒，琬以公孙拜童子郎，辞病不就，知名京师。
现代文：光武皇帝天生圣武，继承大统，复兴汉业。创立基业于危险之中，立足于艰难之际。
English: Emperor Guangwu was born as a holy warrior, inheriting the Great Unification and reviving the Han Dynasty. The founding of the foundation was in danger, and it was established in a difficult time.

古文：时司空盛允有疾，琼遣琬候问，会江夏上蛮贼事副府，允发书视毕，微戏琬曰 江夏大邦，而蛮多士少 琬奉手对曰 蛮夷猾夏，责在司空 因拂衣辞去，允甚奇之。
现代文：于普通人中选拔贤者，在未有天下之形兆时，奖励有功之士。
English: Among ordinary people, the wise are selected, and when there is no sign of the world, the meritorious are rewarded.

古文：稍迁五官中郎将。
现代文：战争中还注重礼义，乱离之际，也遵循道德教化。
English: In the war, they also paid attention to etiquette and righteousness, and also followed moral education in the event of chaos and separation.

古文：时陈蕃为光禄勋，深相敬待，数与议事。
现代文：这样，因而历高而不倾倒，任力危而不跌，复兴大业，开建中兴，光被八极，垂名无穷。到了中世，盛业慢慢衰微。
English: In this way, it was able to rise high and not fall down, to face danger and not fall, to revive a great cause, to build and prosper, and to be praised endlessly. In the Middle Ages, the prosperity slowly faded away.

古文：旧制，光禄举三署郎，以高功久次才德尤异者为茂才四行。
现代文：皇上原在藩国，升登帝位，天下的人拭目盼望，说天下可见太平。
English: The emperor was originally in the domain, ascended to the throne, and people all over the world looked forward to it and said that the world was peaceful.

古文：时权富子弟多以人事得举，而贫约守志者以穷退见遗，京师为之谣曰 欲得不能，光禄茂才 于是琬、蕃同心，显用志士，平原刘醇、河东朱山、蜀郡殷参等并以才行蒙举。
现代文：但是即位以来，没有看到好的政治措施。
English: But since his accession to the throne, there have been no good political measures.

古文：蕃、琬遂为权富郎所见中伤，事下御史中丞王畅、侍御史刁韪。韪、畅素重蕃、琬，不举其事，而左右复陷以朋党，畅坐左转议郎而免蕃官，琬、韪俱禁锢。
现代文：梁冀一家大权独揽，宦官充满了朝廷。爵位一封再封，官职一升再升，倾乱朝廷，卿校牧守的选拔任用，都是他们的门生党羽，羽毛齿革，明珠南金等珍宝，堆满了他们的房室，富比王府，势回天地。
English: The Liang Jie family monopolized power and filled the imperial court with eunuchs. Every time a title of nobility was re-awarded, and every time an official post was raised, the imperial court was in turmoil. The selection and appointment of the pastors of noble schools were all their protégé's party feathers, feathers, tooth leather, pearls, southern gold, and other precious treasures. Their rooms were full of them. The Fubi royal palace was filled with them. They were destined to return to heaven and earth.

古文：韪字子荣，彭城人。
现代文：说他们的，一定遭到灭族，依附他们的，一定升官发财。
English: Those who talk about them are sure to be exterminated, and those who cling to them are sure to be promoted and become rich.

古文：后陈蕃被征，而言事者多讼韪，复拜议郎，迁尚书。
现代文：忠臣因为怕死而堵着嘴巴，万夫因为怕惹祸而不敢说话。
English: The loyal vassal is gagged for fear of death, and the millionaire is afraid to speak for fear of getting into trouble.

古文：在朝有鲠直节，出为鲁、东海二郡相。
现代文：堵塞皇上耳目，使他成为又聋又瞎的君主。已故太尉李固、杜乔，尽忠直言，用德辅政，忧念国家，忘记了自己的一切，以死相报。
English: Blocked the emperor's ears and eyes, making him a deaf and blind monarch. The late Lieutenants Li Gu and Du Qiao were loyal and outspoken, used German auxiliary politics, mourned the country, forgot everything about themselves, and paid back with death.

古文：性抗厉，有明略，所在称神。
现代文：只是因为陈述国事，就被杀害。
English: He was killed just for making a statement on national affairs.

古文：常以法度自整，家人莫见墯容焉。
现代文：贤愚痛心，海内悲伤害怕。又前白马令李云，指责宦官罪大当杀，都是由于大家有这样的思想，挽救危险的朝政。
English: The virtuous and the foolish are heartbroken, and those at home are afraid of being hurt by the tragedy. The former White Horse ordered Li Yun to accuse the eunuch of the crime of high treason, all because everyone had such a thought to save the dangerous imperial government.

古文：琬被废弃几二十年。至光和末，大尉杨赐上书荐琬有拨乱之才，由是征拜议郎，擢为青州刺史，迁侍中。
现代文：弘农杜众，知道李云说得对可以实行，怕李云因忠获罪，上书申述，请求与李云同一天处死。想感动皇上，希望李云能够获免一死。
English: Honnong Du Zong, knowing that Li Yun's words were right and could be put into practice, and fearing that Li Yun would be punished for his loyalty, petitioned to be executed on the same day as Li Yun. He wanted to impress the emperor and hoped that Li Yun would be spared death.

古文：中平初，出为右扶风，征拜将作大芹、少府、太仆。又为豫州牧。
现代文：结果李云既以无辜遭害，杜众也因上书而死。天下最为伤痛，更加怨结。
English: As a result, Li Yun was not only harmed innocently, but Du Zhong also died as a result of the book. The world is the most painful, more resentful.

古文：时寇贼陆梁，州境雕残，琬讨击平之，威声大震。
现代文：所以朝野之人，不敢尽忠皇上。从前赵简子杀窦鸣犊，孔子到黄河边而返回去，是伤于好人见杀，不见赵简子。噢，巢覆卵破，凤凰不飞，刳牲死胎，麒麟不来。
English: Therefore, the people of the court and the field do not dare to be loyal to the emperor. Once upon a time, Zhao Jianzi killed Dou Mingtong, Confucius went to the Yellow River and returned. It was hurt by the good people who saw the killing and did not see Zhao Jianzi. Oh, the nest is broken, the phoenix does not fly, the sacrifice is stillborn, and the unicorn does not come.

古文：政绩为天下表，封关内侯。
现代文：物类互相感应，道理必然是这样的。
English: Things interact with each other, the reason must be like this.

古文：及董卓秉政，以琬名臣，征为司徒，迁太仆，更封阳泉乡侯。
现代文：尚书周永，前为沛令，久侍梁冀，为梁冀的威势，摇旗呐喊，因事当处罪，而越级优职任用。
English: Shangshu Zhou Yong, formerly Pei Ling, long-serving Liang Ji, for the prestige of Liang Ji, waving the flag and shouting, due to the crime of the time, and the superior superior appointment.

古文：卓议迁都长安，琬与司徒杨彪同谏不从。
现代文：看到梁冀将败，就表面上攻击梁冀，表示忠于皇上，这样，他的奸计得逞，也取得了封侯。
English: Seeing that Liang Jie was about to be defeated, he attacked Liang Jie on the surface to show his loyalty to the emperor. In this way, his treachery was successful and he was also made a vassal.

古文：琬退而驳议之曰 昔周公营洛邑以宁姬，光武卜东郡以隆汉，天之所启，神之所安。
现代文：又黄门协邪，相互结党，自从梁冀擅权，前后相从，朝夕出谋划策，同恶相济。到梁冀当诛之际，本来无计可施的，却记了梁冀的罪恶，以邀爵赏。
English: Since Liang Jie assumed power, they have followed each other, making plans in the morning and evening, and helping each other. When Liang Jie came to power, there was nothing they could do, but they remembered Liang Jie's sins and rewarded him with a peerage.

古文：大业既定，岂宜妄有迁动，以亏四海之望 时人惧卓暴怒，琬必及害，固谏之。琬对曰 昔白公作乱于楚，屈庐冒刃而前。
现代文：皇上不加澄清，审别真假，把他们与忠臣同时显封，使红的紫的混为一色，白的黑的搅在一起，投金玉于沙砾，碎王圭璧于泥土。
English: Without clarifying, the emperor separated the true from the false, and made them and his loyal vassals appear at the same time. He mixed the red and purple together, mixed the white and black together, threw the gold into the sand and gravel, and crushed Wang Gui into the dirt.

古文：崔杼弑君于齐，晏婴不惧其盟。
现代文：四方听了，没有不愤慨叹息的，从前曾子是个大孝子，因为听了谗言慈母投杼而走，伯奇最贤，终遭流放。
English: All sides listened, and there was no one who did not sigh with indignation. Once upon a time, Zeng Zi was a great filial son. Because he listened to his mother's nagging and left, Bo Qi was the wisest and was eventually exiled.

古文：吾虽不德，诚慕古人之节 琬竟坐免。
现代文：谗言阿谀，不管多高的地方，都能达到；阿党相抑，无论多深的水，也能激起波纹。
English: As the saying goes, no matter how high a place is, it can be reached; as the saying goes, no matter how deep the water is, it can also stir up ripples.

古文：卓犹敬其名德旧族，不敢害。
现代文：切不可马虎大意啊！我顽固愚驽，世世代代托了国家的恩泽，身轻位重，虽然勤谨，也不能抵偿我的罪过。
English: Don't be careless! I'm stubborn and stupid, I've been entrusted with the nation's bounty for generations, I'm short and heavy, although I'm diligent, I can't make up for my sins.

古文：后与杨彪同拜光禄大夫，及徙西都，转司隶校尉，与司徒王允同谋诛卓。及卓将李傕、郭汜攻破长安，遂收琬下狱死，时年五十二。
现代文：然而害怕一死，负罪更深。所以敢于在临死的时刻，陈述自己所不该说的话，希望有万分之一有补于皇上，那我在九泉之下，便无遗憾了。 就在这年黄琼逝世，年七十九，赠车骑将军，谥曰忠侯。孙黄琬。
English: However, I was afraid of death, and my guilt was deeper. Therefore, I dared to state what I should not say at the moment of death, hoping that one ten-thousandth would be added to the emperor, then I would have no regrets. In this year, Huang Qiong died, in the year of seventy-nine, and was given a car to ride the general, 曰忠侯.孙黄.

