古文：李光，字泰发，越州上虞人。
现代文：李光字泰发，越州上饶人。
English: Li Guangzhi Taifa, Yuezhou Shangrao.

古文：童稚不戏弄。父高称曰： 吾儿云间鹤，其兴吾门乎！ 亲丧，哀毁如成人，有致赙者，悉辞之。
现代文：童年时不玩恶作剧，其父李高称赞说： 我的儿子是云间之鹤，将要使我家业兴旺。 父亲去世，他悲哀得像成人，有人送来财物，他都谢绝了。
English: When he was a child, he did not play pranks, and his father, Li Gao, praised him, saying: My son is a crane in the clouds and will make my family business flourish. When his father died, he was as sad as an adult. If someone sent him money, he refused it.

古文：及葬，礼皆中节。
现代文：到下葬时，礼节非常合适。
English: When it comes to funerals, etiquette is very appropriate.

古文：服除，游太学，登崇宁五年进士第。
现代文：守丧期满，进入太学，考中崇宁五年进士。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he entered Taigaku and passed the junior high school entrance examination in Chongning five years later.

古文：调开化令，有政声，召赴都堂审察，时宰不悦，处以监当，改秩，知平江府常熟县。
现代文：调任开化令，有政声，朝廷召他到都堂审察，当时宰相不喜欢他，任命他为监当改官，知平江府常熟县。
English: The imperial court summoned him to the capital for an inspection after he was transferred to the post of Kaikairei due to his political views. At that time, the prime minister did not like him and appointed him as the supervisor of the post change, in Changshu County, Jipingjiang Prefecture.

古文：朱勔父冲倚势暴横，光械治其家僮。
现代文：朱面力的父亲朱冲倚势横暴，李光囚绑其家僮治罪。
English: Zhu Mengli's father, Zhu Chong, was violent, and Li Guangzhu tied up his family to punish him.

古文：冲怒，风部使者移令吴江，光不为屈。
现代文：朱冲大怒，讽劝部使者改调他到吴江，李光不被屈服。
English: Zhu Chong flew into a rage and mockingly persuaded the envoy to reassign him to Wujiang, but Li Guang would not be cowed.

古文：改京东西学事司管勾文字。
现代文：改任京东西学事司管勾文字。
English: He was appointed as the director of the Beijing East-West Academic Affairs Bureau.

古文：刘安世居南京，光以师礼见之。
现代文：刘安世住在南京，李光执学生礼去拜见他。
English: Liu Anshi lived in Nanjing, and Li Guang went to pay homage to him.

古文：安世告以所闻于温公者曰： 学当自无妄中入。 光欣然领会。
现代文：刘安世告诉他在温公那里听到的一句话 ：学问应当从无妄中入门。 李光欣然领会。
English: Liu Anshi told him a sentence he had heard from Wengong: "Learning should start from no-nonsense." Li Guang readily understood.

古文：除太常博士，迁司封。
现代文：授任太常博士，升为司封。
English: He was awarded the title of Taijō hakase and promoted to the rank of Sifu.

古文：首论士大夫谀佞成风，至妄引荀卿 有听从，无谏诤 之说，以杜塞言路；又言怨嗟之气，结为妖沴。
现代文：首先指责士大夫阿谀奸佞成风，甚至援引荀卿 有听从，无谏诤 的话，来堵塞言路；又认为怨嗟之气，聚结为妖气。
English: First of all, he accused the magistrate of being a traitor, and even quoted the words of Lord Zou, "There is obedience, there is no evil," to block the way of speech. He also believed that the spirit of bitterness gathered into a demonic spirit.

古文：王黼恶之，令部注桂州阳朔县。
现代文：王黼厌恶他，令吏部任他为桂州阳朔知县。
English: Wang Yao detested him and ordered the cadre department to appoint him as the head of Yangshuo County, Guizhou.

古文：安世闻光以论事贬，贻书伟之。
现代文：安世听说李光因为议论政事被贬，写信称赞他。
English: When An Shih heard that Li Guang had been demoted for discussing politics, he wrote a letter praising him.

古文：李纲亦以论水灾去国，居义兴，伺光于水驿，自出呼曰： 非越州李司封船乎？ 留数日，定交而别。
现代文：李纲也因为评论水灾一事离开朝廷，住在义兴，在水驿等候李光，亲自出来喊道 ：不是赵州李司封的船吗？ 逗留几天，二人定交而别。
English: Li Gang also left the imperial court because of his comment on the flood disaster. He lived in Yixing and waited for Li Guang in Shuiyan. He came out in person and shouted, "Isn't that the ship of Zhao Zhou Li Sifeng? Stay for a few days, and the two of them parted ways.

古文：除司勋员外郎，迁符宝郎。
现代文：授任司勋员外郎，升任符宝郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Shihonin Gairo and promoted to Fu Baoro.

古文：郭药师叛，光知徽宗有内禅意，因纳符，谓知枢密院蔡攸曰： 公家所为，皆咈众心。
现代文：郭药师叛乱，李光知道徽宗有内禅之意，于是交出符玺，对知枢密院蔡攸说 ：皇上所为，都违背众心。
English: When Guo Yakushi rebelled, Li Guang knew that Huizong had the meaning of inner Zen, so he handed over the seal and said to Cai You, the Privy Councilor: What the emperor has done is contrary to the hearts of the people.

古文：今日之事，非皇太子则国家俱危。 攸矍然，不敢为异。
现代文：今日之事，没有皇太子就会国、家俱危。 蔡攸很畏惧，不敢有异举。
English: Today, without the crown prince, the country and the family are in danger. Cai You is very afraid and does not dare to do anything different.

古文：钦宗受禅，擢右司谏。
现代文：钦宗受禅即位，提升他为右司谏。
English: Qin Zong was enthroned by Zen and promoted to Right Hierarch.

古文：上皇东幸，憸人间两宫，光请集议奉迎典礼。
现代文：皇上到东方，小人离间两宫关系，李光请求商议奉迎典礼。
English: When the emperor went to the East, the villain severed the relationship between the two palaces. Li Guang requested to discuss the welcoming ceremony.

古文：又奏： 东南财用，尽于朱勔，西北财用，困于李彦，天下根本之财，竭于蔡京、王黼。
现代文：又奏称： 东南财用，被朱面力耗尽了；西北财用，被李彦耗困了；天下根本之财，被蔡京、王黼耗竭了。
English: He also said: Southeastern finance has been exhausted by Zhu Mianli; Northwest finance has been exhausted by Li Yan; The world's fundamental wealth has been exhausted by Cai Jing and Wang Xi.

古文：名为应奉，实入私室，公家无半岁之储，百姓无旬日之积。
现代文：借名应奉，其实到了私家，官府没有半年的储蓄，百姓没有十天的积粮。
English: In fact, when it comes to private households, the government does not have half a year's savings, and the people do not have ten days of grain reserves.

古文：乞依旧制，三省、枢密院通知兵民财计，与户部量一岁之出入，以制国用，选吏考核，使利源归一。 
现代文：请求根据旧制，三省、枢密院通知军民财计，与户部计算一年的收支，控制国家费用，选择官吏考核，使财源归一。 
English: According to the old system, the three provinces and the Privy Council notified the military and civilian financial estimates, and the Household Department calculated the annual income and expenditure, controlled the national expenses, selected the official assessment, and unified the financial resources.

古文：金人围太原，援兵无功。
现代文：金人围攻太原，援兵没有立功。
English: The Chinese besieged Taiyuan, and the reinforcements did no good.

古文：光言： 三镇之地，祖宗百战得之，一旦举以与敌，何以为国？
现代文：李光说 ：三镇之地，祖宗百战才得到它，一旦送与敌人，怎么立国？
English: Li Guang said: the land of three towns, the ancestors fought a hundred battles to get it, once given to the enemy, how to establish a country?

古文：望诏大臣别议攻守之策，仍间道遣使檄河东、北两路，尽起强壮策应，首尾掩击。 迁侍御史。
现代文：希望诏令大臣商议攻守之策，仍暗中派人檄令河东、河北两地，征发全部强壮兵丁策应，首尾掩击敌人。 升任侍御史。
English: He hoped that the emperor would order the minister to discuss the strategy of attack and defense, and still secretly sent people to command the two places of Hedong and Hebei, and conscripted all the strong soldiers to cover the enemy from end to end.

古文：时言者犹主王安石之学，诏榜庙堂。
现代文：当时舆论还主张实行王安石之政，诏令张榜于庙堂。
English: At that time, public opinion still advocated the implementation of Wang Anshi's policy, and the edict was posted in the temple.

古文：光又言： 祖宗规摹宏远，安石欲尽废法度，则谓人主制法而不当制于法；欲尽逐元老，则谓人主当化俗而不当化于俗。
现代文：李光又说 ：祖宗规谋宏远，安石想尽行废除旧法，于是声称人主制定法令而不被法令所制；想尽行驱逐元老大臣，于是声称人主应当改变风俗而不应当被风俗改变。
English: Li Guang also said: Ancestors planned far and wide, and Anshi wanted to do everything possible to abolish the old law, so he claimed that people should make laws and not be controlled by laws; he wanted to do everything possible to expel the minister of veterans, so he claimed that people should change customs and not be changed by customs.

古文：蔡京兄弟祖述其说，五十年间，毒流四海。
现代文：蔡京兄弟继承他的学说，五十年间，流毒遍四海。
English: The Caijing brothers inherited his doctrine, and in fifty years, the poison spread all over the world.

古文：今又风示中外，鼓惑民听，岂朝廷之福？ 
现代文：现在又传示中外，蛊惑百姓耳目，哪里是朝廷之福。 
English: Now it is spreading the message both at home and abroad, bewitching the people's ears and eyes. Where is the happiness of the imperial court?

古文：蔡攸欲以扈卫上皇行宫因缘入都，光奏： 攸若果入，则百姓必致生变，万一惊犯属车之尘，臣坐不预言之罪。
现代文：蔡攸打算趁保卫太上皇行宫入都，李光说 ：蔡攸如果入朝，则百姓必定导致变乱，万一惊犯皇上车驾，我会犯不预言之罪。
English: Cai You intends to take advantage of the protection of the Emperor's trip to the palace to enter the capital, Li Guang said: If Cai You enters the country, the people will certainly lead to turmoil. If I accidentally drive the imperial car, I will commit the sin of not predicting.

古文：望早黜责。 时已葺撷景园为宁德宫，而太上皇后乃欲入居禁中。
现代文：希望早些贬斥他。 当时已修治撷景园为宁德宫，而太上皇后想到禁中居住。
English: It was hoped that he would denounce him earlier. At that time, the Yongjing Garden had been renovated into the Ningde Palace, and the Empress Dowager wanted to live in the Forbidden City.

古文：光奏： 禁中者，天子之宫。正使陛下欲便温凊，奉迎入内，亦当躬禀上皇，下有司讨论典礼。 乃下光章，使两宫臣奏知，于是太上皇后居宁德宫。
现代文：李光说 ：禁中，是天子的宫殿，正应使陛下寒暖方便，奉迎太上皇后入宫，也应当禀太上皇，交有关部门讨论典礼。 于是把李光的奏章，交付有关部门，让两宫大臣奏知，于是太上皇后住在宁德宫。
English: Li Guang said, "In the Forbidden City, which is the palace of the Son of Heaven, it is necessary to make it convenient for His Majesty to keep warm and to welcome the Empress Dowager into the palace, and it is also necessary to invite the Empress Dowager to the palace and to submit the relevant departments to discuss the ceremony. Therefore, Li Guang's music chapter was handed over to the relevant departments for the ministers of the two palaces to report, and the Empress Dowager lived in the Ningde Palace.

古文：金人逼京城，士大夫委职而去者五十二人，罪同罚异，士论纷然，光请付理寺公行之。
现代文：金兵逼近京城，士大夫弃职而逃者五十二人，罪过相同而惩罚相异，舆论纷然，李光请求交付大理寺公正处理。
English: The gold soldiers were approaching the capital, fifty-two scholars and doctors had abandoned their posts and fled, the crimes were the same but the punishments were different, and public opinion was in an uproar. Li Guang requested to be handed over to Dali Temple for fair treatment.

古文：太原围急，奏： 乞就委折彦质尽起晋、绛、慈、隰、泽、潞、威胜、汾八州民兵及本路诸县弓手，俾守令各自部辖。
现代文：太原被围，事态危急，李光上言说 ：请就地委任折彦质征发全部晋、绛、慈、隰、泽、潞、威、胜、汾八州民及本路各县弓箭手，使守令各自统率。
English: When Taiyuan was besieged and the situation was critical, Li Guang said, "Please locally appoint Orihiko to recruit and dispatch all Jin, Yao, Ci, Yao, Ze, Yao, Wei, Sheng, Yao and other archers from the eight prefectures and counties along this road, and let the guards take the lead.

古文：其土豪、士人愿为首领者，假以初官、应副器甲，协力赴援。
现代文：如果有土豪、士人愿意当首令的，给予他们初官、应副器甲，协力赴援。
English: If there are local heroes and nobles who are willing to be the leaders, they should be given the first post, should be the second assistant, and should work together to go to the rescue.

古文：女真劫质亲王，以三镇为辞，势必深入，请大修京城守御之备，以伐敌人之谋。 
现代文：女真族劫持亲王，以三镇为借口，势必深入，请大修京城守御装备，以击碎敌人的阴谋。 
English: The Jurchen abduction of the prince, using the three towns as an excuse, is bound to go deep. Please overhaul the capital's defense equipment to crush the enemy's plot.

古文：又言： 朱勔托应奉胁制州县，田园第宅，富拟王室。
现代文：又上言说： 朱面力托口应奉胁制州县，田园第宅，富比王室。
English: It was also said above: Zhu Mianli's mouthpiece should be subject to the state and county system, the pastoral residence, and the rich royal family.

古文：乞择清强官置司，追摄勔父子及奉承监司、守令，如胡直孺、卢宗原、陆寘、王促闵、赵霖、宋晦等，根勘驱磨，计资没入，其强夺编户产业者还之。 
现代文：请求选择清廉强干官员设立机关，追究朱面力父子及奉承监司、守令，如胡直孺、卢宗原、陆蜫、王仲闵、赵霖、宋晦等人，查根究底，计资没收，把他们强夺的百姓财产还给百姓。 
English: Request the establishment of an agency to select clean and strong officials, investigate Zhu Mengli and his son, and flatter supervisors and guards, such as Hu Zhiyao, Lu Zongyuan, Lu Wei, Wang Zhongyao, Zhao Lin, Song Yu and others, investigate the root cause, calculate and confiscate, and return the people's property they have seized to the people.

古文：李会、李擢复以谏官召。
现代文：李会、李擢被召回任谏官。
English: Li Hui and Li Zhuang were recalled to serve as eunuchs.

古文：光奏： 蔡京复用，时会、擢迭为台官，禁不发一语；金人围城，与白时中、李邦彦专主避敌割地之谋。
现代文：李光上言说 ：蔡京再度执政时，李会、李擢相继为谏官，对政事不发一言；金人围城时，与白时中、李邦彦专倡避敌割地之谋。
English: Li Guang went on to say: When Cai Jing was in power again, Li Hui and Li Zhanzhong were successively eunuchs and did not say a word about politics; when the Jin people besieged the city, Li Bangyan and Bai Zhizhong advocated the strategy of avoiding enemy territory.

古文：时中、邦彦坐是落职，而会、擢反被召用，复预谏诤之列。
现代文：白时中、李邦彦因此罪罢职，而李会、李擢反被召用，又加入谏诤职务之列。
English: Bai Shizhong and Li Bangyan resigned as a result of the crime, while Li Hui and Li Xiangtao were recalled and added to the list of dismissed officials.

古文：乞寝成命。 不报。
现代文：请求撤回成命。 皇上不予答复。
English: The request was withdrawn, and the Emperor did not reply.

古文：光丐外，亦不报。
现代文：李光请求调任到地方，皇上也不答复。
English: Li Guang requested to be transferred to a local post, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：彗出寅、艮间，耿南仲辈皆谓应在外夷，不足忧。
现代文：彗星出现在寅、艮间，耿南仲等人都认为感应在外夷，不足忧。
English: When the comet appeared between the constellations of Yin and Yang, Geng Nanzhong and others all thought that it should be felt outside the country, and that there was no need to worry.

古文：光奏： 孔子作《春秋》，不书祥瑞者，盖欲使人君恐惧修省，未闻以灾异归之外夷也。 疏奏，监汀州酒税。
现代文：李光奏称： 孔子做《春秋》，不记载祥瑞，是想使人君常怀恐惧从而修省政事，没有听说过把灾异归于外夷。 表疏上奏后，被贬任监汀州酒税。
English: Li Guangso said: Confucius did "Spring and Autumn," but did not record the auspicious and inauspicious, he wanted to make people always fear, so as to govern the province, he had never heard of attributing disasters to foreigners.

古文：高宗即位，擢秘书少监，除知江州；未几，擢侍御史，皆以道梗不赴。
现代文：高宗即帝位，提升他为秘书少监，授任知江州；不久，升任侍御史，都因为道路梗阻不赴任。
English: Gao Zong immediately ascended to the throne, he was promoted to secretary and junior superintendent, and was assigned to Zhijiang Province; shortly after, he was promoted to the position of imperial secretary, but he did not go to the post because of the road obstruction.

古文：建炎三年，车驾自临安移跸建康，除知宣州。
现代文：建炎三年，皇帝从临安到建康，授任他知宣州。
English: Jianyan three years, the emperor from Lin'an to Jiankang, awarded him the title of Xuanzhou.

古文：时范琼将过军，光先入视事，琼至则开门延劳，留三日而去，无敢哗者。
现代文：当时范琼将率军经过，李光先入州处理政事，范琼到了就开城门慰劳，留住三天后离去，无人敢喧哗。
English: At that time, Fan Qiong led the army to pass by. Li Guang entered the state first to deal with political affairs. When Fan Qiong arrived, he opened the city gate to offer consolation. After three days, he left. No one dared to make a fuss.

古文：光以宣密迩行都，乃缮城池，聚兵粮，籍六邑之民，保伍相比，谓之义社。
现代文：李光认为宣州离行都最近，于是修理城池，积聚军粮，把地方百姓编册，按保伍分编，称为义社。
English: Li Guang thought that Xuanzhou was the most recently departed capital, so he repaired the city, accumulated military rations, and cataloged the local people, according to Baowu, and called it a charity.

古文：择其健武者，统以土豪，得保甲万余，号 精拣军 。
现代文：选择其中健壮者，以土豪为统率，得到保甲一万多人，号称 精拣军 。
English: Among them, the robust ones were selected, with the local heroes as the leader, and more than 10,000 people were guaranteed armor, known as the elite army.

古文：又栅险要二十三所谨戍之，厘城止为十地分，分巡内外，昼则自便，夜则守城，有警则战。
现代文：又在二十三处险要之地设立兵营谨慎戍守，把全城分为十处地方，分别巡逻内外，白天自由行动，晚上守城，有敌情就参战。
English: He also set up barracks in 23 critical locations to guard them carefully, and divided the entire city into 10 areas, patrolling inside and outside, moving freely during the day, guarding the city at night, and entering the war if there was a hostile situation.

古文：苗租岁输邑者，悉命输郡。
现代文：苗租按年交县的，都送到州里。
English: If the seedling rent is paid to the county on an annual basis, it will be sent to the state.

古文：初欢言不便，及守城之日，赡军养民，迄赖以济。
现代文：当初人们纷纷指责不方便，到守城时，赡养军民，终于得以成功。
English: At first, people complained that it was inconvenient, but when it came to defending the city, supporting the military and civilians, it was finally successful.

古文：事闻，授管内安抚，许便宜从事，进直龙图阁。
现代文：政事传到朝廷，被任命为管内安抚，允许他见机行事，晋升为直龙图阁。
English: The political situation spread to the imperial court, and he was appointed to pacify the administration, allowing him to act as he saw fit. He was promoted to the post of Jialong Tougu.

古文：杜充以建康降，金人夺马家渡。
现代文：杜充以建康降敌，金兵夺取马家渡。
English: Du Chong surrenders to the enemy with Jiankang, and the gold soldiers capture Majiadu.

古文：御营统制王〈王燮〉、王〈王民〉素不相能，至是，拥溃兵砦城外索斗。
现代文：御营统制王王燮、王珉历来不和，到这时，率领溃兵在城外扎营互斗。
English: Wang Wangyao, the commander-in-chief of the battalion, and Wang Yao had always been at odds with each other. At this time, he led the routed soldiers to set up camp outside the city to fight each other.

古文：光亲至营，谕以先国家后私雠之义，皆感悟解去。
现代文：李光亲自到二人兵营，劝说他们先国家后私仇之义，二人都感悟而解。
English: Li Guang personally went to the two men's barracks and persuaded them to put the country first and their personal vendetta second. Both of them were impressed and understood.

古文：时奔将、散卒至者，光悉厚赀给遗。
现代文：当时逃将、散卒到宣州的，李光都送给很多财物。
English: At that time, fugitive general and lone ranger to Xuanzhou, Li Guang gave him a lot of property.

古文：有水军叛于繁昌，逼宣境，即遣兵援击，出贼不意，遂宵遁。
现代文：有水师在繁昌叛乱，逼近宣州境内，李光立即派兵歼击，出敌不意，敌人于是连夜逃走。
English: When a naval division rebelled in Fanchang and approached the territory of Xuanzhou, Li Guang immediately dispatched troops to annihilate them, catching the enemy by surprise. The enemy then fled overnight.

古文：进右文殿修撰。
现代文：升任右文殿修撰。
English: Promoted to the post of Umonden Shoseki.

古文：光奏： 金人虽深入江、浙，然违天时地利，臣已移文刘光世领大兵赴州，并力攻讨。
现代文：李光上言说 ：金人虽然深入江、浙，但是违背天时地利，我已送文书让刘光世率领大军到宣州，合力攻讨金兵。
English: Li Guangjian said: Although the Jin people have penetrated deep into Jiangsu and Zhejiang, but contrary to the time and place, I have sent a document to Liu Guangzhe to lead a large army to Xuanzhou and work together to attack the Jin soldiers.

古文：乞速委宣抚使周望，约日水陆并进。 
现代文：请迅速委托宣抚使周望，约定日期水陆并进。 
English: Please quickly entrust the announcement to Zhou Wang, and the agreed date will go forward.

古文：溃将邵青自真州拥舟数百艘，剽当涂、芜湖两邑间，光招谕之，遗米二千斛。
现代文：溃将邵青从真州率数百艘舰船，在当涂、芜湖两县之间剽掠，李光招抚劝说他，送给他二千斛大米。
English: After defeating hundreds of ships led by Shao Qing from Zhenzhou and plundering between the two counties of Dangtu and Wuhu, Li Guang coaxed and persuaded him and gave him two thousand stalks of rice.

古文：青喜，谓使者曰： 我官军也，所过皆以盗贼见遇，独李公不疑我。 于是秋毫无犯。
现代文：邵青非常高兴，对使者说： 我们是政府军，所经之地都把我们当盗贼对待，只有李光不怀疑我。 于是秋毫无犯。
English: Shao Qing was very happy and said to the messenger: We are the government army, everywhere we go we are treated as thieves, only Li Guang does not suspect me. So Qiu did not commit any crime.

古文：他日，舟过繁昌，或绐之曰： 宣境也。 乃掠北岸而去。
现代文：后来，船队经过繁昌，有人骗他说： 这是宣州境内。 于是沿北岸离去。
English: Later, when the fleet passed through Hanchang, someone lied to him and said, "This is within the territory of Xuanzhou," so he left along the northern coast.

古文：剧盗戚方破宁国县，抵城下，分兵四击。光募勇敢劫之，贼惊扰，自相屠蹂。
现代文：巨盗戚方攻破宁国县，抵达城下，分兵四面围攻；李光招募勇敢之士抵御，贼兵惊忧，以致自相残杀。
English: The giant bandits broke through Ningguo County and arrived at the foot of the city, and the detachments besieged on all sides; Li Guang recruited brave men to resist, and the bandits were so worried that they killed each other.

古文：朝廷遣统制官巨师古、刘晏兼程来援。
现代文：朝廷派统制官巨师古、刘晏兼程来援。
English: The imperial court sent the regent Jiu Shigu and Liu Xuan and Cheng to come to the rescue.

古文：贼急攻朝京门，缆竹木为浮梁以济。
现代文：敌人急攻朝京门，把竹木编起来当浮桥渡过护城河。
English: The enemy stormed through the gates of the capital, weaving bamboo and wood into a floating bridge across the moat.

古文：须臾，军傅城，列炮具，立石对楼。
现代文：不久，敌军爬上城墙，把大炮架在石对楼上。
English: Before long, the enemy had climbed the city wall and set up cannons on the stone staircase.

古文：光命编竹若帘揭之，炮至即反坠，不能伤。
现代文：李光下令把竹子编成帘状迎着炮弹，炮弹打来就反附地下，不能伤人。
English: Li Guang ordered the bamboo to be woven into a curtain shape to meet the cannonballs. When the cannonballs hit, they stuck to the ground and could not hurt anyone.

古文：取桱木为撞竿，倚女墙以御对楼，贼引却。
现代文：取巨木做撞竿，靠凸凹的小墙抵御对楼，敌人退走。
English: Take a huge tree as a battering ram, rely on a bumpy small wall to resist the opposite building, and the enemy retreats.

古文：刘晏率赤心队直捣其砦，贼阳退，晏追之，伏发遇害。
现代文：刘晏率领赤心队直捣敌营。敌人假装败退，刘晏追击他们，中了埋伏遇害。
English: Liu Wei led the red heart team to directly attack the enemy camp. The enemy pretended to retreat, Liu Wei chased them, was ambushed and killed.

古文：师古以中军大破贼，贼遁去。
现代文：师古率领中军大败敌人，敌人逃走。
English: The Chinese army led by Shigu defeated the enemy, and the enemy fled.

古文：初，戚方围宣，与其副并马巡城，指画攻具。
现代文：当初，戚方围攻宣州，与他的副职并马巡城，商量攻城计划。
English: At first, relatives besieged Xuanzhou, and he and his deputy went on a tour of the city to discuss the siege plan.

古文：光以书傅矢射其副马前，言： 戚方穷寇，天诛必加，汝为将家子，何至附贼。 二人相疑，攻稍缓，始得为备，而援师至矣。
现代文：李光把信绑在箭上射到他的副职的马前，说： 戚方是穷途末路之寇，上天必然诛杀他，你是将门之子，哪里能依附盗贼？ 二人互相怀疑，攻势稍缓，才得到时间作战斗准备，而援军到了。
English: Li Guang tied the letter to an arrow and shot it in front of his second-in-command's horse, saying, "My relative is a robber at the end of his rope. Heaven will surely strike him dead. You are the son of a general. How can you cling to a thief?" The two men were suspicious of each other, and the offensive was slightly delayed until they had time to prepare for battle, when reinforcements arrived.

古文：尝置匕首枕匣中，与家人约曰： 城不可必保，若使人取匕首，我必死。
现代文：他曾经把匕首放在枕匣中，与家人约道 ：城不一定能保住，如果让人来取匕首，我一定会死。
English: He once put the dagger in a pillowcase and made a pact with his family: the city might not survive, and if someone came to take the dagger, I would surely die.

古文：汝辈宜自杀，无落贼手。 除徽猷阁待制、知临安府。
现代文：你们应自杀，不要落到盗贼手中。 授任他为徽猷阁待制、知临安府。
English: You should commit suicide so that you do not fall into the hands of thieves.

古文：绍兴元年正月，除知洪州，固辞，提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：绍兴元年正月，被授任为知洪州，他坚决谢绝，任提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: In the first month of the first year of Shaoxing, he was awarded the title of Chihong Prefecture, but he resolutely declined, preferring Lin'an Prefecture Dongxiao Palace.

古文：除知婺州，甫至郡，擢吏部侍郎。
现代文：授任知婺州，刚到任，提升为吏部侍郎。
English: He was awarded the post of Zhiyang Prefecture, and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：光奏疏极论朋党之害： 议论之臣，各怀顾避，莫肯以持危扶颠为己任。
现代文：李光上疏极力指责朋党的危害 ：议谏大臣，各人怀有避讳顾虑之意，不肯把持危抉颠作为己任。
English: Li Guangzheng accused his friends of harming the Party: "Minister He, every one of you harbored the intention of shunning and avoiding, and were not willing to take on the responsibility of making critical decisions.

古文：驻跸会稽，首尾三载。
现代文：行都在会稽，前后历时三载。
English: All lines were audited, which took three years.

古文：自去秋迄今，敌人无复南渡之意，淮甸咫尺，了不经营，长江千里，不为限制，惴惴焉日为乘桴浮海之计。
现代文：从去年到现在，敌人不再有南渡意向，淮甸近在咫尺，一点也不着意经营，长江千里，不设防备敌，每天怀着怯意细考乘船浮海之计。
English: From last year to now, the enemy no longer has any intention of crossing to the south, Huai Dian is close at hand, and there is no intention of doing business. The Yangtze River is thousands of miles long, and there is no defense against the enemy. Every day, with timidity, they carefully examine the plan of floating by boat.

古文：晋元帝区区草创，犹能立宗社，修宫阙，保江、浙。
现代文：晋元帝区区草创，还能建立国家，修建宫殿，保有江、浙。
English: Emperor Jin of the Yuan Dynasty was a pioneer, and he was able to establish a country, build a palace, and keep Jiang and Zhejiang.

古文：刘琨、祖逖与逆胡拒战于并、冀、兖、豫、司、雍诸州，未尝陷没也。
现代文：刘琨、祖逖与逆胡在并、冀、兖、司、雍诸州抵抗作战，这些地方从未陷没。
English: Liu Bei, Zhu Di and Hu Jie were in the same battle, and Hebei, Shandong, Sichuan and Yongzhou were in the same battle. These places have never fallen.

古文：石季龙重兵已至历阳，命王导都督中外诸军以御之，未闻专主避狄如今日也。
现代文：石季龙重兵已到历阳，晋元帝任命王导都督中外诸军以抗御敌人，没有听过专门躲避胡狄像今天这样的。
English: Shi Jilong's heavy troops have arrived in Liyang, and Emperor Jin Yuan has appointed Wang Du as the governor of all foreign armies to resist the enemy. I have never heard of a special evasion of Hudi like today.

古文：陛下驻跸会稽，江、浙为根本之地，使进足以战、退足以守者，莫如建康。
现代文：陛下驾临会稽，江、浙是天下之根本，能够进足以战，退足以守的地方，莫如建康。
English: His Majesty arrived at the meeting. Jiangsu and Zhejiang are the foundation of the world. There is no better way to build a healthy society than to be able to go into a place that is strong enough to fight and retreat to a place that is strong enough to defend.

古文：建康至姑熟一百八十里，其隘可守者有六：曰江宁镇，曰碙砂夹，曰采石，曰大信，其上则有芜湖、繁昌，皆与淮南对境。
现代文：建康到姑熟一百八十里，其间险要可守之地有六处：江宁镇、砜砂夹、采石、大信，上游则有芜湖、繁昌，都与淮南对境。
English: Jiankang is 180 miles from Guzhu, and there are six places that can be defended in the meantime: Jiangning Town, Lingsha Clip, Quarry, Daxin, and upstream there are Lugu Lake and Prosperous, all of which are on the border with Huainan.

古文：其余皆芦蓧之场，或石奇岸水势湍悍，难施舟楫。
现代文：其余都是芦条枝蔓之地，或是奇岸险滩水势湍急，难于行走舟船。
English: The rest is a land of reeds and branches, or a strange beach with dangerous waters, difficult to navigate.

古文：莫若预于诸隘屯兵积粟，命将士各管地分，调发旁近乡兵，协力守御。
现代文：不如预先在各险要之地屯兵积粮，命令将士分管各地，调发邻近乡兵，协力守御。
English: It would be better to pre-deploy troops to stockpile grain in all critical areas, order officers to be in charge of various regions, and dispatch soldiers from neighboring villages to work together to defend the country.

古文：乞明诏大臣，参酌施行。 
现代文：请求明诏命令大臣，斟酌实行。 
English: Request the Minister to issue a decree, to be implemented at his discretion.

古文：时有诏，金人深入，诸郡守臣相度，或守或避，令得自便。
现代文：当时有诏令，金兵攻入，各地守臣互相商量，可守可避，得以自便。
English: At that time, there was an imperial edict, the gold soldiers invaded, and the local retainers discussed with each other whether to defend or avoid, so that they could take advantage of it.

古文：光言： 守臣任人民、社稷之重，固当存亡以之。
现代文：李光上言 ：守臣担负人民、国家的重任，应当责之以存亡。
English: Li Guang's last words: Shouwen shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the people and the country, and should be responsible for their survival.

古文：若预开迁避之门，是诱之遁也，愿追寝前诏。 上欲移跸临安，被旨节制临安府见屯诸军，兼户部侍郎、督营缮事。
现代文：如果预先开启迁避之门，是引诱他们逃跑，希望追回前命。 皇上打算迁到临安，李光受旨节制临安府现时驻扎诸军，兼任户部侍郎，督营缮后之事。
English: If the door of evacuation is opened in advance, it is to entice them to flee, hoping to recover their former lives. The emperor planned to move to Lin'an, Li Guang was ordered to restrain the Lin'an government, currently stationed troops, and also served as a household attendant, supervising the post-war restoration.

古文：光经营撙节，不扰而办。
现代文：李光处理军政适宜，不惊扰百姓而办好了政事。
English: Li Guang handled the military and political affairs appropriately, and managed the political affairs without alarming the people.

古文：奏蠲减二浙积负及九邑科配，以示施德自近之意。
现代文：奏请减免两浙历年积欠及九县赋敛，以表示施德自近之意。
English: He asked for the reduction and remission of the accumulated arrears of two years and nine counties to show that the city is getting closer.

古文：戚方以管军属节制，甚惧，拜庭下。
现代文：戚方以管军隶属于李光节制，非常恐惧，跪拜在庭下。
English: His relative Fang Yiguan, who was subordinate to Li Guangbiao, was terrified and prostrated himself in front of the court.

古文：光握手起之，曰： 公昔为盗，某为守，分当相直；今俱为臣子，当共勉力忠义，勿以前事为疑。 方谢且泣。
现代文：李光握着他的手扶起他，说： 你过去做盗贼，我任郡守，抓捕你是我份内的事；现在都是臣子，应当共同勉励忠义，不要以先前的事猜疑。 戚方感激得哭泣起来。
English: Li Guang held his hand and helped him up, saying: You were a thief in the past, I was the county governor, and it was my duty to arrest you; now we are all courtiers, we should encourage loyalty together, and not be suspicious of previous events.

古文：兼侍读，因奏： 金人内寇，百姓失业为盗贼，本非获已，尚可诚感。
现代文：兼任侍读，于是上言说： 金人侵犯内地，百姓失业为强盗，本非其意，可以用诚意感召他们。
English: He also worked as a waiter, so his last words were: "The rich encroach on the mainland, and the unemployed are robbers. It was not my intention, but I can inspire them with sincerity."

古文：自李成北走，群盗离心，傥因斯时显用一二酋豪，以风厉其党，必更相效慕，以次就降。 擢吏部尚书。
现代文：自从李成逃到北方，群盗离心，如果此时选用一两个盗贼首领，以激励他们，一定会互相钦慕，相继归降。 升任吏部尚书。
English: Since Li Cheng fled to the north, the bandits have been distracted. If one or two leaders of the bandits are selected at this time to inspire them, they will admire each other and surrender one after another.

古文：大将韩世清本苗傅余党，久屯宣城，擅据仓库，调发不行。
现代文：大将韩世清本是苗傅余党，长期驻扎宣城，擅自占据仓库，不听征调。
English: General Han Shiching was originally a member of the Miao Fu Yu Party. He was stationed in Xuancheng for a long time, occupied warehouses without authorization, and did not listen to conscription.

古文：光请先事除之，乃授光淮西招抚使。
现代文：李光请求先行除掉他，于是任命李光为淮西招抚使。
English: Li Guang requested to get rid of him first, so he appointed Li Guang as the Huaixi leader.

古文：光假道至郡，世清入谒，缚送阙下伏诛。
现代文：李光假道到宣城，世清前来相见，李光把他捆送到朝廷受诛。
English: Li Guang pretended to go to Xuancheng, the Qing Dynasty came to see him, Li Guang bundled him to the court to be arrested.

古文：初，光于上前面禀成算，宰相以不预闻，怒之。
现代文：当初，李光在皇上面前陈述计划，宰相没有事先知道，怀怒于他。
English: At first, Li Guang presented the plan in front of the emperor. The prime minister did not know in advance and was angry with him.

古文：未至，道除端明殿学士、江东安抚大使、知建康府、寿春滁濠庐和无为宣抚使。
现代文：他还未到任，途中任命他为端明殿学士、江东安抚大使、知建安府，寿春、滁、濠、庐、和、无为宣抚使。
English: He had not yet arrived at the post, but on the way he was appointed as the Duanming Palace scholar, the Jiangdong pacification ambassador, the Zhijian Anfu, the Shuchun, the Zou, the Zou, the Zou, the Zou, and the non-action envoy.

古文：时太平州卒陆德囚守臣据城叛，光多设方略，尽擒其党。
现代文：当时太平州士卒陆德囚禁当地守臣据城叛乱，李光多方设计，全部捉获叛贼。
English: At that time, Lu De, a member of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, imprisoned the local vassals who rebelled against the city. Li Guang made many plans, and all the traitors were captured.

古文：秦桧既罢，吕颐浩、朱胜非并相，光议论素与不合。
现代文：秦桧被罢相后，吕颐浩、朱胜非共同任宰相，李光历来与他们政见不合。
English: After Qin Hui was dismissed as premier, Lv Yinghao and Zhu Shengfei jointly held the post of prime minister. Li Guang had always disagreed with their political views.

古文：言者指光为桧党，落职奉祠。
现代文：谏官指斥他为秦桧同党，被夺职奉祠。
English: The eunuch rebuked him for being a member of the same party as Qin Hui, and he was deprived of his post to serve the shrine.

古文：寻复宝文阁待制、知湖州，除显谟阁直学士，移守平江，除礼部尚书。
现代文：不久复任宝文阁待制、知湖州，授任显谟阁直学士，改任知平州，授任礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated as the vice-governor of Baowen Pavilion and the vice-governor of Zhihuzhou, and was awarded the title of the direct bachelor of Xianmu Pavilion. He was also appointed as the vice-governor of Zhipingzhou and the honorary secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：光言： 自古创业中兴，必有所因而起。
现代文：李光上言说： 自古创业中兴，一定有所依恃而起。
English: Li Guang went on to say: Since the founding of ZTE, there must be something to cling to.

古文：汉高因关中，光武因河内，驻跸东南，两浙非根本所因之地乎？
现代文：汉高祖依恃关中，汉光武帝依恃河内，皇上驻扎东南，两浙难道不是天下的根本，是可倚恃之地吗？
English: The founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, was based in Guanzhong, Emperor Guangwu was based in Hanoi, and the emperor was stationed in the southeast. Aren't the two Zhejiang provinces the foundation of the world, and a place that can be relied on?

古文：自冬及春，雨雪不已，百姓失业，乞选台谏察实以闻。
现代文：从冬天到春天，雨雪不停，百姓失业，请求选择谏官考察实情予以报告。
English: From winter to spring, it rained and snowed incessantly, the people lost their jobs, and requested the eunuchs to investigate and report the situation.

古文：兼比岁福建、湖南盗作，范汝为、杨么相挺而起，朝廷发大兵诛讨，杀戮过当。
现代文：加之连年福建、湖南盗贼作乱，范汝为、杨么相继而起，朝廷派大军诛讨，杀戮过当。
English: In addition, the bandits in Fujian and Hunan have been rioting for years, and Fan Ruwei and Yang Zuo have risen one after another. The imperial court has sent a large army to investigate and kill them.

古文：今诸路旱荒，流丐满路，盗贼出入。
现代文：现在各地旱荒，流丐满路，盗贼出入。
English: Now there is drought all over the country, the roads are full of beggars, and thieves come and go.

古文：宜选良吏招怀抚纳，责诸路监司按贪赃，恤流殍。 
现代文：应选择良吏招怀抚纳，责令各地监司惩治贪赃，抚恤饥民。 
English: It is necessary to select good officials to solicit donations, and order the supervisors of various regions to punish corruption and feed the hungry.

古文：议臣欲推行四川交子法于江、浙，光言： 有钱则交子可行。
现代文：大臣建议把四川交子法推广到江、浙，李光说： 有钱则交子可行。
English: The minister suggested that the Sichuan trading method be extended to Jiangsu and Zhejiang. Li Guang said: If you have money, trading is feasible.

古文：今已谓桩办若干钱，行若干交子，此议者欲朝廷欺陛下，使陛下异时不免欺百姓也。
现代文：现在已经声称筹办多少钱，发行多少交子，提出此议的人打算让朝廷欺骗陛下，使陛下今后不免欺骗百姓。
English: Now it has been claimed that the amount of money to be raised and the number of bills of exchange to be issued, the person who proposed this motion intends to let the court deceive His Majesty, so that His Majesty will not be able to deceive the people in the future.

古文：若已桩办见钱，则目今所行钱关子，已是通快，何至纷纷？
现代文：如果已经筹办现钱，则目前所发行的钱关子，已是流畅无阻，何至议论纷纷？
English: If the current money has been prepared, then the current issue of Qianguanzi has been smooth and unimpeded. Why are there so many discussions?

古文：其工部铸到交子务铜印，臣未敢给降。 除端明殿学士，守台州，俄改温州。
现代文：工部所铸造的交子务铜印，我不敢下发。 授任端明殿学士，守台州，不久改任知温州。
English: I don't dare to issue the bronze seal of the Ministry of Industry, which was cast by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. He was awarded the title of Duanmingdian Baccalaureate, the governor of Taizhou, and was soon transferred to Zhiwenzhou.

古文：刘光世、张俊连以捷闻。
现代文：刘光世、张俊接连传来捷报。
English: Liu Guangxi and Zhang Jun successively reported.

古文：光言： 观金人布置，必有主谋。
现代文：李光说 ：观察金人部署，一定有阴谋。
English: Li Guang said: Observing the deployment of the Jin people, there must be a conspiracy.

古文：今已据东南形势，敌人万里远来，利于速战，宜戒诸将持重以老之。
现代文：现在我方已占据东南形势，敌人万里来袭，利于速战，应当戒令诸将持重而拖延消耗敌人。
English: Now that our side has occupied the southeastern situation, the enemy is coming from thousands of miles away, which is conducive to a quick war. It is necessary to order the generals to hold their weight and delay the enemy.

古文：不过数月，彼食尽，则胜算在我矣。 除江西安抚、知洪州兼制置大使，擢吏部尚书，逾月，除参知政事。
现代文：不过数月，敌人粮食耗尽，则胜券操在我方手里。 授任江西安抚、知洪州兼制置大使，升任吏部尚书；过了一月，授任参知政事。
English: However, a few months later, when the enemy ran out of grain, the winning ticket was in our hands. He was appointed as the ambassador of Jiangxi pacification and Chihon Prefecture, and was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs; after one month, he was appointed to the post of governor and political affairs.

古文：时秦桧初定和议，将揭榜，欲籍光名镇压。
现代文：当时秦桧开始倡议和议，准备张榜告示，打算借李光的名望来压制民心。
English: At that time, Qin Hui began to advocate peace talks and prepared to post a notice, intending to use Li Guang's reputation to suppress the people's hearts.

古文：上意不欲用光，桧言： 光有人望，若同押榜，浮议自息。 遂用之。
现代文：皇上本意不想用李光，秦桧说： 李光有名望，如果一起签名，浮议会自动停息。 于是用了李光。
English: The emperor originally did not want to use Li Guang, but Qin Hui said: Li Guang is famous, if you sign together, the floating council will automatically stop.

古文：同郡杨炜上光书，责以附时相取尊官，堕黠虏奸计，隳平时大节。
现代文：同郡人杨炜上书李光，指责他借依附权相谋取高官，中了敌人奸议，毁掉了平日的气节。
English: Fellow county resident Yang Wei sent a letter to Li Guang, accusing him of conspiring to obtain a high-ranking official by means of the right of attachment, of being deceived by the enemy, and of ruining the day-to-day atmosphere.

古文：光本意谓但可因和而为自治之计。
现代文：李光本意认为只是趁和议之机作自治的打算。
English: Li Guang originally thought that it was just taking advantage of the opportunity of peaceful discussion to make plans for self-government.

古文：既而桧议彻淮南守备，夺诸将兵权，光极言戎狄狼子野心，和不可恃，备不可彻。
现代文：后来秦桧建议撤掉河南守备，夺去诸将兵权，李光极力陈述戎狄狼子野心，和谈不可依恃，守备不可撤除。
English: Later, Qin Hui proposed to withdraw the Henan garrison and deprive the generals of their military power. Li Guang vigorously stated the ambition of the Yong Di wolf, peace talks can not be attached, and the garrison can not be removed.

古文：桧恶之。
现代文：秦桧憎恶他。
English: Qin Yu detested him.

古文：桧以亲党郑亿年为资政殿学士，光于榻前面折之，又与桧语难上前，因曰： 观桧之意，是欲壅蔽陛下耳目，盗弄国权，怀奸误国，不可不察。 桧大怒，明日，光丐去。
现代文：秦桧任命亲党郑亿年为资政殿学士，李光在皇上面前当面反对；又与秦桧在皇上面前辩论，于是说： 看秦桧的心意，是想堵塞蒙蔽陛下的耳目，盗弄国权，怀奸误国，不可不察。 秦桧大怒。第二天，李光请求罢职。
English: Qin Hui appointed the pro-Party Zheng Ernian as the academician of the Palace of Capital and Politics, Li Guang opposed it in front of the emperor; he also debated with Qin Hui in front of the emperor, and said: "It is impossible not to see that Qin Hui's intention is to block the eyes and ears of His Majesty, to steal the power of the country, and to commit treason against the country." Qin Hui was furious. The next day, Li Guang requested to resign.

古文：高宗曰： 卿昨面叱秦桧，举措如古人。
现代文：高宗说 ：你昨天当面斥责秦桧，举动像古人。
English: Gaozong said, "You scolded Qin Yu in person yesterday, acting like an old man.

古文：朕退而叹息，方寄卿以腹心，何乃引去？ 光曰： 臣与宰相争论，不可留。 章九上，乃除资政殿学士、知绍兴府，改提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：我退朝后叹息，正要寄心腹于你，为什么要辞职呢？ 李光说： 我与宰相争论，不可留任。 九次上章请求，于是被授任为资政殿学士、知绍兴府，改任提举临安洞霄宫。
English: Li Guang said, "I argued with the prime minister, and I can't stay in my post." After nine requests from the emperor, he was awarded the title of "Bachelor of the Palace of Capital and Government" and the title of "Master of the Palace of Capital and Government" and the title of "Master of the Palace of Capital and Government" and the title of "Master of the Palace of Capital and Government."

古文：十一年冬，中丞万俟禼论光阴怀怨望，责授建宁军节度副使，藤州安置。
现代文：十一年冬天，御史中丞万俟指责李光阴怀怨恨，贬职为建宁军节度副使，安置在藤州。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of the Heian period, the Imperial Historian Chujo Manju accused Li Guangyin of harboring a grudge, demoted him to the position of deputy envoy of the Jianning Army, and placed him in Fujian.

古文：越四年，移琼州。
现代文：过了四年，移置琼州。
English: Four years later, it was moved to Qiongzhou.

古文：居琼州八年，仲子孟坚坐陆升之诬以私撰国史，狱成；吕愿中又告光与胡铨诗赋倡和，讥讪朝政，移昌化军。
现代文：住在琼州八年，次子李孟坚因为被陆升之诬为私撰国史，被立案；吕愿中又告李光与胡铨诗赋唱和，讥谤朝政，移置昌化军。
English: After living in Qiongzhou for eight years, his second son, Li Mengjian, was put on the case because he was falsely accused by Lu Sheng of privately compiling a national history. Lu Wanzhong also accused Li Guang of singing and humming poems, mocking the imperial government, and transferring the Changhua Army.

古文：论文考史，怡然自适。
现代文：他议论文章考证历史，怡然自得。
English: He discussed the article on the study of historical evidence and was pleased with himself.

古文：年逾八十，笔力精健。
现代文：年过八十，笔力精健。
English: He is over eighty years old and has a fine handwriting.

古文：博学多闻，持身甚严，时推能世其家。
现代文：又过了三年，才因为郊祭之恩，复官任左朝奉大夫，任其自便居住。
English: It took another three years, but thanks to the grace of the suburb festival, he was reinstated as a doctor of the Left Court and allowed to live as he pleased.

古文：许翰，字崧老，拱州襄邑人。
现代文：到江州去世。孝宗即位后，追任为资政殿学士，赐谥号为 庄简 。许翰字崧老，拱州襄邑人。
English: He died in Jiangzhou. After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was posthumously appointed as a scholar of the House of Councillors, and was given the posthumous name Zhuang Jian. Xu Han, the eldest son, was from Xiangyip, Gongzhou.

古文：中元祐三年进士第。
现代文：考中元三年进士。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination three years ago.

古文：宣和七年，召为给事中。
现代文：宣和七年，召用为给事中。
English: Seven years have passed since the declaration of peace.

古文：为书抵时相，谓百姓困弊，起为盗贼，天下有危亡之忧。
现代文：写信诋毁当时宰相，认为百姓困敝，起而为盗，天下有危亡之忧。
English: He wrote a letter slandering the prime minister at the time, saying that the people were impoverished, that they had been robbed, and that the world was in danger.

古文：愿罢云中之师，修边保境，与民休息。
现代文：希望停止云中战事，修边保境，与民休息。
English: It is hoped that the war will stop in the clouds, the border will be repaired and protected, and the people will have a rest.

古文：高丽入贡，调民开运河，民间骚然。
现代文：高丽入贡，朝廷征调百姓开凿运河，百姓骚动。
English: Goryeo paid tribute, the imperial court conscripted people to dig canals, and the people rioted.

古文：中书舍人孙傅论高丽于国无功，不宜兴大役，傅坐罢。
现代文：中书舍人孙傅指责高丽于国无功，不应兴大役，孙傅因此被罢职。
English: Sun Fu, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, accused Goryeo of doing nothing for the country and should not be allowed to hold high office. As a result, Sun Fu was dismissed from his post.

古文：翰谓傅不当黜，时相怒，落职，提举江州太平观。
现代文：许翰认为孙傅不应被罢免，当时宰相大怒，免去他的职务，任提举江州太平观。
English: Xu Han believed that Sun Fu should not be dismissed. At that time, the prime minister was furious, dismissed him from his post, and appointed Jiangzhou Taiping.

古文：靖康初，复以给事中召。
现代文：靖康初年，重又被召用为给事中。
English: In the first year of Jingkang, Chong was once again called to serve in the middle of an incident.

古文：时金人攻京师甫退，翰造阙，即日赐对，除翰林学士，寻改御史中丞。
现代文：当时金兵进攻京城刚退，许翰到宫廷，当日晋见皇上，授任为翰林学士，不久改任御史中丞。
English: At that time, the Jin soldiers had just retreated from the attack on the capital, and Xu Han went to the court. On the same day, Jin met the emperor and was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate, and soon he was reassigned to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：上疏言边事，因陈决胜之策。
现代文：上言议论边事，趁机陈述决胜之策。
English: The last speech discussed side issues and took the opportunity to present the winning strategy.

古文：陈邦昌为太宰，翰上疏力争之。
现代文：张邦昌任宰相，许翰上疏极力争论。
English: Zhang Bangchang was appointed prime minister, and Xu Han vigorously disputed the succession.

古文：种师道罢为中太一宫使，翰言： 师道名将，沉毅有谋，山西士卒，人人信服，不可使解兵柄。 钦宗谓其老难用，翰曰： 秦始皇老王翦而用李信，兵辱于楚；汉宣帝老赵充国，而卒能成金城之功。
现代文：种师道被贬为中太一宫使，许翰对皇上说 ：师道是名将，沉毅有谋略，山西士兵，人人信服，不可解去他的兵权。 钦宗认为他年老难用，许翰说： 秦始皇认为王翦老而不用，信用李信，终于兵败于楚；汉宣帝任用老将赵充国，终于取得金城之战的成功。
English: When Shi Dao was relegated to being an envoy of Emperor Taizu, Xu Han said to the emperor, "Shi Dao is a famous general, with great determination and strategy, a Shanxi soldier, everyone is convinced, and his military power cannot be removed." Qin Zong thought that he was too old to be used, Xu Han said, "Qin Shi Huang thought that Wang Xuan was too old to be used, and trusted Li Xin, and finally the soldiers were defeated by Chu; Han Xuan Di appointed veteran Zhao Chongguo, and finally achieved success in the Battle of Jincheng."

古文：自吕望以来，用老将收功者，难一二数。
现代文：从吕望以来，任用老将取得功业的，不止一两个人。
English: Since Lü Wang, there have been more than one or two people who have made achievements by appointing veterans.

古文：以古揆今，师道虽老，可用也。 且谓： 金人此行，存亡所系，令一大创，使失利去，则中原可保，四夷可服。
现代文：从古鉴今，师老虽然年老，可以任用。 并且说： 金人此次行动，关系到我方存亡，现在如果重创金兵，使之失利而逃，则中原可保，四夷可服。
English: From ancient times to the present, although the old masters are old, they can be appointed, and they said: This action of the goldsmiths is related to our survival, now if the goldsmiths are seriously injured and flee in defeat, then the Central Plains can be protected and the barbarians can be subdued.

古文：不然，将来再举，必有不救之忧。
现代文：否则，将来再想行动，一定有不可救应之忧。
English: Otherwise, if we want to act again in the future, we will have to worry about it.

古文：宜起师道邀击之。 上不能用。
现代文：应当起用师道抗击金兵。 皇上不能听从。
English: It is necessary to use the teacher's way to resist the golden soldiers. The emperor can not obey.

古文：擢中大夫、同知枢密院，论益不合，以病去，除延康殿学士、知亳州。
现代文：提升他为中大夫、同知枢密院，政见越是与同僚不合，因病去职，任延康殿学士、知亳州。
English: He was promoted to the position of junior doctor, the same as the Privy Council, and the more his political views disagreed with his colleagues, the more he left the post due to illness, and was appointed as a member of the Yonkang Academy and the Zhisheng Prefecture.

古文：坐言者落职，提举南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：因谏官指责而被罢职，任提举南庆鸿庆宫。
English: Due to eunuch's accusation, he was dismissed from his post, and Nanqing Hongqing Palace was elevated to the top.

古文：高宗即位，用李纲荐，召复延康殿学士。
现代文：高宗即帝位，因李纲的推荐，召用他为延康殿学士。
English: Emperor Gaozong, on the recommendation of Li Gang, appointed him as a scholar of the Yan Kang Palace.

古文：既至，拜尚书右丞兼权门下侍郎。
现代文：到朝后，被授任为尚书右丞兼代理门下侍郎。
English: After his arrival in the imperial court, he was appointed as Shoshu Ujo and acting junior attendant.

古文：时建炎大变之后，河北山东大盗李成、孔彦舟等，聚众各数十万，皆以勤王为名，愿得张所为帅。
现代文：当时建炎大乱之后，河北山东大盗李成、孔彦舟等人，聚结军队各数十万，都以勤王为名，希望得到张所任元帅。
English: At that time, after the Jianyan Rebellion, Li Cheng, the great thief of Shandong Province of Hebei Province, Kong Yanzhou and others gathered hundreds of thousands of troops each, all in the name of the king, hoping to be appointed marshal by Zhang.

古文：所为御史，尝论黄潜善奸邪不可用，由此得罪。
现代文：张所任御史，曾经责论黄潜善奸邪不可用，由此得罪。
English: Zhang, who was in charge of imperial history, once accused Huang Xuan of not being able to use good, evil and treachery, which offended him.

古文：李纲为相，乃以所为河北等路招抚使，率成等众渡河，号召诸路，为兴复计。
现代文：李纲任宰相。于是任命张所为河北等路招抚使，率领李成等人部队渡过黄河，号召各地，为兴复大计。
English: Li Gang was appointed as the prime minister. Therefore, he appointed Zhang So as the envoy of Hebei and other provinces, led Li Cheng and other troops to cross the Yellow River, and called on various regions to plan for recovery.

古文：潜善力沮之。
现代文：黄潜善极力阻止。
English: Huang Kuanzhen tried his best to stop it.

古文：宗泽论车驾不宜南幸，宜还京师，且诋潜善等。
现代文：宗泽建议皇帝不应到南方，应当回到京城，并且诋毁黄潜善等人。
English: Soze suggested that the emperor should not go to the south, but should return to the capital and slander Huang Kuanzhen and others.

古文：潜善等请罢泽，翰极论以为不可。
现代文：黄潜善等人请求罢免宗泽，许翰极力争论不可。
English: Huang Kuanzhen and others requested the dismissal of Soze, but Xu Han could not argue with them.

古文：李纲罢，翰言： 纲忠义英发，舍之无以佐中兴，今罢纲，臣留无益。 力求去，高宗未许。
现代文：李纲被罢，许翰说： 李纲忠义英发，没有他无人能辅助中兴，现在罢免李纲，我留任无益。 极力请求去职，高宗不同意。
English: When Li Gang was ousted, Xu Han said: Li Gang is loyal, no one can assist ZTE without him. If Li Gang is ousted now, it will be useless for me to stay. Gao Zong did not agree to his request to leave the post.

古文：时潜善奏诛陈东，翰谓所亲曰： 吾与东，皆争李纲者。
现代文：当时黄潜善奏请诛斩陈东，许翰对亲信们说： 我与陈东，都力争留用李纲，陈东被斩于东市，我在朝廷合适吗？ 
English: At that time, Huang Xuan Zensong asked Zou to behead Chen Dong, and Xu Han said to his intimates: I and Chen Dong are both striving to retain the use of Li Gang, Chen Dong was beheaded in Dongshi, am I suitable for the imperial court?

古文：东戮东市，吾在庙堂可乎？ 求去益力，章八上，以资政殿大学士提举洞霄宫。复以言者落职。
现代文：越是极力求辞职，八次上章，被任命为以资政殿大学士身份提举洞霄宫。又因为谏官指责罢职。
English: The more he tried to resign, the eight times he was appointed to the chapter, he was appointed as a member of the Board of Trustees of the Imperial Palace. He also resigned because of the eunuch's accusation.

古文：绍兴元年，召复端明殿学士、提举万寿观，辞不至。
现代文：绍兴元年，召用恢复他为端明殿学士、提举万寿观，坚辞不至。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, he was called to resume his position as a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and raised the concept of longevity.

古文：二月，复资政殿学士。
现代文：二月，复任资政殿学士。
English: In February, he was reappointed as the Vice-President of the Academy of Sciences.

古文：三年五月，卒，赠光禄大夫。
现代文：绍兴三年五月，去世，追赠光禄大夫。
English: Shaoxing three years in May, passed away, posthumously awarded the Guanglu doctor.

古文：翰通经术，正直不挠，历事三朝，致位政府，徒以黼、攸、潜善辈薰莸异味，横遭口语，志卒不展。
现代文：许翰通晓经术，正直不屈，历事三朝，位至执政，只是因为与王黼、蔡攸、黄潜善等人政见不合，横遭诬陷，志向终究无法实现。
English: Xu Han was well versed in the classics, honest and unyielding, experienced three dynasties, and came to power. However, because he did not agree with the political views of Wang Qian, Cai You, Huang Qianzen and others, he was framed, and his ambition could not be realized after all.

古文：纲虽力引之，不旋踵去，翰亦斥逐而死。
现代文：李纲虽极力引荐他，但自己很快被罢免，许翰也遭斥逐而死。
English: Although Li Gang tried his best to recommend him, he was soon ousted, and Xu Han was also ousted and died.

古文：所著书有《论语解》、《春秋传》。
现代文：他的著作有《论语解》、《春秋传》。
English: His works include "On the Interpretation of Language" and "The Spring and Autumn Annals."

古文：许景衡，字少伊，温州瑞安人。
现代文：许景衡字少伊，温州瑞安人。
English: Xu Jingheng, surnamed Shao Yi, was born in Ruian, Wenzhou.

古文：登元祐九年进士第。
现代文：考中元九年进士。
English: He became a member in the ninth year of the middle school entrance examination.

古文：宣和六年，召为监察御史，迁殿中侍御史。
现代文：宣和六年，被召任为监察御史，升任殿中侍御史。
English: Six years after the declaration of peace, he was appointed inspector of history and promoted to the position of palace attendant of history.

古文：是时，王黼、蔡攸用事，景衡言： 尚书省比阙长官，而同知枢密院亦久阙。
现代文：当时，王黼、蔡攸执政，许景衡建议 ：尚书省长期缺首脑，而同知枢密院也长期缺人。
English: At that time, Wang Qian and Cai You were in power, and Xu Jingheng suggested: Shangshu Province has been lacking a head for a long time, and Tongzhi Privy Council has also been lacking people for a long time.

古文：虽三公通治三省，然文昌政事之本，枢密总兵之地，各有攸属，安可久虚其位？
现代文：虽然三公总管三省，但是文昌是政事的根本，而枢密是掌管军事的要害部门，各自职责，怎能长期虚位无人？
English: Although the three officials are in charge of the three provinces, but Wenchang is the foundation of government affairs, and the privy council is the key department in charge of the military, their respective responsibilities, how can there be no one in the vacant position for a long time?

古文：愿博采公议，遴选忠贤，以补政府之阙。 遂大忤黼意。
现代文：希望广征公议，挑选忠贤，以补政府之缺。 于是大逆王黼心意。
English: He hoped to recruit a wide range of public opinion and select loyal and talented people to make up for the government's shortfall, and thus went against Wang Xi's will.

古文：朝廷用童贯为河东、北宣抚使，将北伐，景衡论其贪缪不可用者数十事，不报。
现代文：朝廷任用童贯为河东、河北宣抚使，打算北伐，许景衡指责童贯贪谬不可任用者数十事，皇上不答复。
English: The imperial court appointed Tongran as the Hengtong and Hebei propaganda envoy, intending to march to the north. Xu Jingheng accused Tongran of being greedy and absurd. There were dozens of reasons why he could not be appointed. The emperor did not reply.

古文：睦寇平，江、浙郡县残毁，而茶盐比较之法如故。
现代文：贼寇平息后，江、浙郡县残破，而茶盐比较之法依然如旧。
English: After the banditry subsided, Jiang and Zhejiang counties were left in ruins, but the method of comparing tea and salt remained the same.

古文：景衡奏： 茶盐之法，当以食之众寡为岁额之高下。
现代文：许景衡上奏说： 茶盐之法，应当统计食盐的多少作为每年征收的依据。
English: Xu Jingheng said in his report: According to the method of tea salt, the amount of salt should be counted as the basis for the annual levy.

古文：今收复之后，户版半耗，民力萧然，而茶盐比较不减于昔。
现代文：目前收复之后，户口减半，百姓财力萧竭，而茶盐比较不减于以前。
English: After the current recovery, the household registration has been halved, the people's financial resources have been exhausted, and the tea salt has not decreased compared to before.

古文：民欲无困得乎？ 奏上，诏两浙、江东路权免茶盐比较，贼平日仍旧。
现代文：百姓想不穷困做得到吗？ 奏章上报后，诏令两浙、江东路暂时免去茶盐比较，贼寇平定后照旧执行。
English: Can the people do it without poverty? After the report was published, the imperial edict temporarily exempted the two Zhejiang and Jiangdong roads from the comparison of tea and salt, and the implementation was carried out as usual after the theft and robbery were settled.

古文：朝廷既兴燕云之师，调度不继，诛求益急。
现代文：朝廷调集征伐燕云之师，供给不继，索求越急。
English: The imperial court mobilized to recruit Yan Yun's division, the supply did not continue, and the demand became more urgent.

古文：景衡奏： 财力匮乏在节用，民力困弊在恤民。
现代文：许景衡上奏说 ：财力匮乏应该节省开支，百姓贫困应该抚恤百姓。
English: Xu Jingheng said in his report: the lack of financial resources should save expenses, and the poverty of the people should support the people.

古文：今不急之务。若营缮诸役，花石纲运，其名不一。
现代文：现在经营不急之务过多，如营建诸役，花石纲运，其名不一。
English: At present, there are too many non-urgent tasks, such as the construction of Zhuye, Huashi Gangun, and their names are different.

古文：吏员猥多，军额冗滥。又无名功赏，非常赐予，皆夤缘侥幸，干请无厌，宜节以祖宗之制而省去之。 且极论和买、和籴、盐法之害，不报。
现代文：官吏冗多，军费冗滥，加之无名功赏，非常例赐与，都是趁机侥幸，请求无厌，应当用祖宗之制加以节省。 并且极力论责和买、和籴、盐法之害，皇上不答复。
English: The plethora of officials and the excessive military expenditure, together with the nameless awards and the extraordinary gifts, are all opportunistic and lucky, and the request is insatiable, it should be saved by the ancestral system, and the emperor does not reply.

古文：会知洋州吴岩夫以私书抵执政子，道景衡之贤。
现代文：正好详州知州吴岩夫写私信诋毁执政大臣，而称道景衡的忠贤。
English: At the same time, Wu Yanwu of Zhezhou wrote a private letter slandering the ruling minister and praising the loyalty of Dao Jingheng.

古文：因从子婿符宝郎周离亨以达，离亨缪以其书误致王黼，黼用是中景衡，逐之。
现代文：交侄女婿符宝郎周离亨传递，离亨把书信误送到王黼手里，王黼因此中伤景衡，斥逐了他。
English: His niece's son-in-law, Fubaorang Zhou, passed it on to Heng, and Heng sent the letter to Wang Yao by mistake. As a result, Wang Yao slandered Jingheng and expelled him.

古文：钦宗即位，以左正言召，旋改太常少卿兼太子谕德，迁中书舍人。
现代文：钦宗即位，召用他为左正言，不久改任太常少卿兼太子谕德，升任中书舍人。
English: When Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as Zuo Zhenggen, and soon he was promoted to Taizang Shaoqing (太常少卿) and Taizhukude (太子谕德), and was promoted to Zhongshushe Renren (中書舍人).

古文：侍御史李光、正言程瑀以鲠亮忤执政斥，景衡为辨白，坐落职予祠。
现代文：侍御史李光、正言程王禹因为鲠直忤逆执政大臣遭斥罢，景衡替他们辩白，因此被罢职任祠官。
English: The attendants, the historian Li Guang and the orator Cheng Wang Yu, were dismissed because of their opposition to the ruling minister, and Jing Heng defended them, so he was dismissed from his post as an ancestral official.

古文：高宗即位，以给事中召，既至，除御史中丞。
现代文：高宗即帝位，以给事中职召用他，到朝后，授任为御史中丞。
English: Gaozong was enthroned as emperor, and he was appointed to the position of goshi chujo. After he became emperor, he was given the position of goshi chujo.

古文：宗泽为东京留守，言者附黄潜善等，多攻其短，欲逐去之。
现代文：宗泽任东京留守，谏官们依附黄潜善等人，经常攻击宗泽的短处，想斥逐他。
English: Sozawa stayed in Tokyo, and the eunuchs, supported by Huang Kuanzhen and others, often attacked Sozawa's shortcomings and tried to expel him.

古文：景衡奏曰： 臣自浙渡淮，以至行在。
现代文：景衡上奏说： 我从浙江渡过淮河，到达行都。
English: Jingheng said: I crossed the Huaihe River from Zhejiang and arrived at the capital.

古文：闻泽之为尹，威名政事，卓然过人，虽不识其人，窃用叹慕。
现代文：听说宗泽为官，威名政事，卓然过人，虽然不认识他，私下很钦慕他。
English: I have heard that although I do not know him, I privately admire him very much.

古文：臣以为去冬京城内，有赤心为国如泽等数辈，其祸变未至如是之酷。
现代文：我认为去年冬天京城内，如果有像宗泽那样忠心大臣几名，那么祸灾不致像现在这样酷烈。
English: I think that if there had been a few loyal ministers like Sozawa in Kyoto last winter, the disaster would not have been as severe as it is now.

古文：今若较其小短，不顾尽忠徇国之节，则不恕已甚。
现代文：现在如果计较他的小错，不顾他尽忠报国的气节，那么太不宽恕了。
English: Now, if his small mistake is taken into account, regardless of his loyalty to serve the country, then it is too unforgiving.

古文：且开封宗庙社稷所在，苟欲罢泽，别遣留守，不识搢绅中威名政事有加于泽者乎？ 疏入，上大悟，封以示泽，泽乃安。
现代文：况且开封是宗庙社稷所在，如果要罢免宗泽，另外委任留守，不知大臣们中有谁能超过宗泽的威名政绩？ 奏疏上报，皇上大为醒悟，把此疏封起来给宗泽看，宗泽才安心下来。
English: What's more, the seal of the Imperial Household Agency was on the seal. If Munezawa was to be dismissed and another person appointed to stay on, I wonder which of the ministers could surpass Munezawa's prestigious achievements? When the report was submitted, the Emperor was greatly enlightened. He sealed the report and showed it to Munezawa, and Munezawa felt at ease.

古文：杭州叛卒陈通作乱，权浙西提刑赵叔近招降之，请授以官。
现代文：杭州叛卒陈通作乱，代理浙西提刑赵叔近招降了他，请朝廷授予他官职。
English: Chen Tong, a renegade from Hangzhou, started a riot, and Zhao Shuxin, the deputy of the Zhejiang and Xidi Prefectures, recruited and demoted him, and asked the imperial court to grant him an official post.

古文：景衡曰： 官吏无罪而受诛。叛卒有罪而蒙赏，赏罚倒置，莫此为甚。 卒奏罢之。
现代文：景衡说 ：官吏无罪而被杀，叛卒有罪而被赏，赏罚倒置，没有超过这样的。 终于奏请罢免了他。
English: Jingheng said: "Officials were killed without guilt, traitors were rewarded with guilt, rewards and punishments were inverted, nothing more than that.

古文：除尚书右丞。
现代文：授任景衡为尚书右丞。
English: Jingheng was appointed to the post of Shangshu Rojo.

古文：有大政事，必请间极论。
现代文：凡有重大政事，一定趁机极力议论。
English: Whenever there is a major political event, we must seize the opportunity to discuss it vigorously.

古文：潜善、伯彦以景衡异己，共排沮之。
现代文：潜善、伯彦认为景衡是异己分子，共同排挤他。
English: Kukenzan and Hakuhiko thought that Jinghe was a dissident and jointly ousted him.

古文：或言正、二月之交，乃太一正迁之日，宜于禁中设坛望拜。
现代文：有人说正月二月之交，是太一正迁之日，应当在宫中设坛望拜。
English: Some people say that the first day of the first month and the turn of the second month is the day of Taichi Shosei, and that an altar should be set up in the palace for worship.

古文：高宗以问景衡，曰： 修德爱民，天自降福，何迎拜太一之有？ 
现代文：高宗询问景衡，景衡说： 修德爱民，上天自然降福，何必迎拜太一？ 
English: Gaozong inquired of King Heung. King Heung said, "To cultivate virtue and love the people, Heaven will naturally bestow blessings. Why do you have to bow to Taiyi?

古文：初，李纲议建都，以关中为上，南阳次之，建康为下。
现代文：当初，李纲建议建都，以关中为上，南阳次之，建康为下。
English: Initially, Li Gang proposed to build the capital, with Guanzhong as the top, Nanyang as the second, and Jiankang as the bottom.

古文：至是，谍报金人攻河阳、汜水，景衡又奏请南幸建康。
现代文：李纲被罢相之后，于是主张南阳之议。景衡任中丞，上奏说 ：南阳没有险阻，且太近盗贼，漕运不继，不如建康有天险可据，请定计南巡。 
English: After Li Gang was dismissed as a minister, he then advocated the Nanyang proposal. Jingheng was appointed as a middle-ranking officer, and said: Nanyang has no obstacles, and it is too close to the thieves, and the rowing is not continued, it is better to build health with natural hazards, please estimate the southern tour.

古文：已而有诏还京，罢景衡为资政殿大学士、提举杭州洞霄宫。
现代文：后来有诏令还京，罢贬景衡为资政殿学士、提举杭州洞霄宫。
English: Later, there was a decree to return to Beijing, which demoted Jingheng to the rank of scholar of the Palace of Succession, and promoted him to Hangzhou Dongxiao Palace.

古文：至瓜洲，得暍疾，及京口卒，年五十七，谥忠简。
现代文：到瓜州时，得了暑病，到京口去世，终年五十七岁，赐谥号为 忠简 。
English: When he arrived in Guazhou, he got heatstroke. When he arrived in Beijing, he died. He was 57 years old. His posthumous name was Zhong Jian.

古文：景衡得程颐之学，志虑忠纯，议论不与时俯仰。
现代文：景衡学得程颐之学，志虑忠纯，议论不随波逐流。
English: Jingheng learned from Cheng Xuan's learning, his thoughts were pure, and his discussions did not drift with the tide.

古文：建炎初，李纲议幸南阳，宗泽请还京，景衡乃请幸建康。
现代文：建炎初年，李纲建议皇上到南阳，宗泽请求还京，景衡于是请求皇上到建康。
English: In the first year of Jianyan, Li Gang suggested that the emperor go to Nanyang, Soze requested to return to Beijing, and Jingheng then asked the emperor to go to Jiankang.

古文：卒，谥忠穆。上每念之，谓悫谋国尽忠，遇事敢谏，古之遗直也。
现代文：黄潜善等人向来厌恶他不同流合污，皇上车驾驻扎在扬州，迫于所闻，不得已下还京之诏，于是借渡江之议责怪他，斥逐而死。景衡去世后，高宗思念他说 ：我从即位以来，执政忠直，遇事敢言者，只有景衡一人。 
English: Huang Kuanzhen and others always disliked him because of his mixed blood. The emperor's carriage was stationed in Yangzhou, and because of what he heard, he had no choice but to return to Beijing, so he blamed him for crossing the river and was banished to his death. After the death of King Heung, Gao Zong thought about him and said, "Since I ascended the throne, I have been loyal to the government, and I am the only one who dares to speak out in times of trouble.

古文：张所，青州人。
现代文：诏令赐景衡家一栋温州官舍。张所，青州人。
English: The imperial edict gave the Jingheng family a government house in Wenzhou. Zhang So, from Qingzhou.

古文：登进士第，历官为监察御史。
现代文：考中进士，历官至监察御史。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination and rose through the ranks to inspector general of history.

古文：高宗即位，遣所按视陵寝，还，上疏言： 河东、河北，天下之根本。
现代文：高宗即帝位，派张所巡视寝陵，回朝后，上疏说： 河东、河北，是天下的根本。
English: Gaozong was the emperor, and the Zhang faction inspected the tomb. After returning to the imperial court, Shang Shou said: "Hedong and Hebei are the foundation of the world."

古文：昨者误用奸臣之谋，始割三镇，继割两河，其民怨入骨髓，至今无不扼腕。
现代文：以前误用奸臣之计，开始割去三镇，接着割去两河，造成民怨深入骨髓，到现在还无不扼腕痛惜。
English: In the past, he misused the trick of treacherous vassals, began to cut off three towns, and then cut off two rivers, causing the people's resentment to go deep into the bone marrow, and he still regrets it.

古文：若因而用之，则可藉以守；不则两河兵民，无所系望，陛下之事去矣。 且论还京师有五利，谓国之安危，在乎兵之强弱、将相之贤不肖，不在乎都之迁不迁。
现代文：如果利用民心，就可借以为守；不然两河兵民，失去系望，陛下大事就无法成功。 并且议论还回京城有五利，认为国家的安危，在于军队的强弱、将相的贤与不肖，不在于迁不迁都。
English: If you take advantage of the people's heart, you can use it to defend yourself; otherwise, the soldiers and people of the two rivers will lose their hope, and your majesty's great event will not succeed.In addition, there are five advantages to returning to Beijing, and it is believed that the security of the country lies in the strength and weakness of the army, the virtue and vice of the commander, and not in the relocation of the capital.

古文：又条上两河利害。
现代文：又上疏具列两河利害。
English: There are also two rivers in the ditch.

古文：上欲以其事付所，会所言黄潜善奸邪不可用，恐害新政。
现代文：皇上打算把他的建议之事交付他办理，正好张所议论黄潜善奸邪不可用，恐怕他有害新政。
English: The emperor intended to entrust the matter of his proposal to him, just as Zhang had argued that Huang Xuan's good, evil and treachery could not be used. I am afraid that he would be harmful to the New Deal.

古文：乃罢所御史，改兵部郎中。
现代文：于是罢去张所的御史职务，改任兵部郎中。
English: As a result, he was dismissed from his position as historian of the Zhang family and was appointed as a junior secretary of the military department.

古文：寻责所凤州团练副使，江州安置。
现代文：不久贬任张所为凤州团练副使，安置在江州。
English: Soon after, Zhang was appointed deputy envoy of the Fengzhou Rehearsal Group and was stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：后李纲入相，欲荐所经略两河，以其尝言潜善故，难之。
现代文：后来李纲入朝任相，打算推荐张所经略两河，又因为他曾经指责攻击潜善的缘故，感到为难。
English: Later, when Li Gang became the minister of the imperial court, he intended to recommend Zhang's strategy, but he was embarrassed because he had once blamed the attack on the potential.

古文：一日，与潜善从容言曰： 今河北未有人，独一张所可用，又以狂言抵罪。
现代文：一天，与潜善从容商量说 ：现在河北没有人，只有一个张所可用，却又因为狂言抵罪。
English: One day, he had a discussion with Xuanzang Zongrong and said, "There is no one in Hebei now, there is only one Zhang available, but he has confessed to the crime because of the Kyogen."

古文：不得已抆拭用之，使为招抚，冒死立功以赎过，不亦善乎？ 潜善许诺，乃借所直龙图阁，充河北招抚使。
现代文：不得已先试用他，让他任招抚，冒死立功以赎过，不是很好吗？ 黄潜善同意了，于是任命张所为直龙图阁，充河北招抚使。
English: Wasn't it great to have to try him out first, let him do the wooing, and risk his life to redeem himself? Huang Qianshan agreed, so he appointed Zhang So as the Jialong Tu Ge, acting as the Hebei wooing envoy.

古文：赐内府钱百万缗，给空名告千余道；以京西卒三千为卫，将佐官属，许自辟置，一切以便宜从事。
现代文：赐给他内府钱数百万缗，发给他空白名告一千多道；以京西士卒三千人为卫队，将佐属官，允许他自行任用，一切可以见机行事。
English: He was given millions of baht in inner-prefectural money, and more than a thousand blank notices were sent to him. He was allowed to appoint his own guards, including 3,000 officers from Beijing and Xi'an, and subordinate officers. Everything could be done at his own discretion.

古文：所入见，条上利害。
现代文：张所入宫晋见，上疏条陈利害。
English: Zhang So entered the palace to see Jin, on the other hand, it was Chen Zeki who entered the palace.

古文：上赐五品服遣行，命直秘阁王圭为宣抚司参谋官佐之。
现代文：皇上赐给他五品官服送行，任命直秘阁王圭为宣抚司参谋官辅佐他。
English: The emperor gave him five official uniforms to see him off, and appointed the direct secretary of the cabinet, Wang Gui, as the staff officer of the Propaganda Department to assist him.

古文：河北转运副使张益谦附黄潜善意，奏所置司北京非是；且言自置招抚，河北盗贼愈炽，不若罢之，专以其事付帅司。
现代文：河北转运副使张益谦依附黄潜善心意，奏称张所在北京开府不对；又说自从设置招抚，河北盗贼越来越多，不如停设，把其职权交付帅司。
English: Zhang Yikian, deputy envoy of Hebei Transportation, adhered to Huang Qian's good intentions and said that Zhang's location in Beijing was not right; he also said that since the establishment of the enticement, the thieves in Hebei have become more and more, it is better to stop the establishment and hand over its powers to the commander.

古文：李纲言： 张所今留京师，招集将佐，尚未及行，益谦何以知其扰？
现代文：李纲说： 张所现在留在京城，招集将佐，还未出发，益谦从哪里知道他的扰动地方？
English: Li Gang said: Zhang So is now staying in Beijing, calling up generals, and has not yet set off. How does Yi Qian know where his disturbance is?

古文：朝廷以河北民无所归，聚而为盗，故置司招抚，因其力而用之，岂由置司乃有盗贼乎？
现代文：朝廷因为河北百姓无所归向，聚结为盗，所以设置招抚司，因民力而用之，怎会是因为置司才出盗贼呢？
English: Because the people of Hebei had nowhere to turn and banded together to steal, the imperial court set up an office of solicitation, which was used because of the people's power. How could it be because of the office that thieves emerged?

古文：今京东、西群盗公行，攻掠郡县，亦岂招抚司过耶？
现代文：现在京东、京西群盗公开横行，攻掠郡县，也难道是招抚司的罪过吗？
English: Now, the gangs of robbers in Beijing East and Beijing West are openly rampant, raiding counties and counties. Is this also the fault of the Fostering Division?

古文：时方艰危，朝廷欲有所经理，益谦小臣，乃以非理沮抑，此必有使之者。 上乃命益谦分析，命下枢密院，汪伯彦犹用其奏诘责招抚司。
现代文：现在正是艰危时期，朝廷正要有所作为，益谦是下等臣子，竟然以非理阻抑，这一定有指使他的人。 皇上于是下令治益谦的罪，命令下到枢密院，汪伯彦还用益谦的奏疏责问招抚司。
English: Now is a difficult time, the imperial court is trying to make a difference, Yixian is a lower-ranking courtier, and he is being held back unreasonably, which must have been instigated by someone. The emperor then ordered to deal with Yixian's crime, ordered to go to the Privy Council, and Wang Bohian also used Yixian's negligence to ask the solicitor.

古文：李纲与伯彦争于上前，伯彦语塞。
现代文：李纲与汪伯彦在皇上面前争论，汪伯彦语塞。
English: Li Gang and Wang Bohian argued in front of the emperor, and Wang Bohian broke up the argument.

古文：所方招来豪杰，以王彦为都统制，岳飞为准备将，而李纲已罢相。
现代文：张所正招集豪杰，任命王彦为都统制，岳飞为准备将，而李纲已被罢相。
English: Zhang Sozheng is calling up heroes, appointing Wang Yan as the governor of the capital, Yue Fei as the preparatory general, and Li Gang has been dismissed.

古文：朝廷以王圭代之，所落直龙图阁，岭南安置。
现代文：朝廷任命王圭替代他，张所被贬任为直龙图阁，安置在岭南。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Gui to replace him, and Zhang So was demoted to Zhilong Tu Ge and placed in Lingnan.

古文：卒于贬所。
现代文：在贬所去世。
English: He died in hospital.

古文：子宗本，以岳飞奏补官。
现代文：他的儿子张宗本，因为岳飞的奏请而补官。
English: His son, Zhang Zongben, filled the post because of Yuefei's request.

古文：陈禾，字秀实，明州鄞县人。
现代文：陈禾字秀实，明州鄞县人。
English: Chen He Zi Shuxi, a native of Min County, Ming State.

古文：举元符三年进士。
现代文：考中元符三年进士。
English: The middle school entrance examination results in three years of promotion.

古文：累迁辟雍博士。
现代文：历任升辟雍博士。
English: Successive successors have been promoted to Dr. Yong.

古文：时方以传注记问为学，禾始崇尚义理，黜抑浮华。
现代文：当时时尚以传注记问为学，陈禾开始崇尚义理，黜却浮华。
English: At that time, the fashion was to learn from biographies, and Chen He began to advocate the principle of righteousness, but he was flashy.

古文：入对契旨，擢监察御史、殿中侍御史。
现代文：入宫对答时符合皇上心意，被提升为监察御史、殿中侍御史。
English: When he entered the palace, his answers were in line with the emperor's wishes, and he was promoted to inspector of history and attendant of history in the palace.

古文：蔡京遣酷使李孝寿穷治章綖铸钱狱，连及士大夫甚众，禾奏免孝寿。
现代文：蔡京派酷吏李孝寿穷追章纟延铸钱之案，连及士大夫极多，陈禾奏请罢免孝寿。
English: In the case of Li Xiaoshou, a hard-line official of the Caijing faction, who was pursuing Zhang Ye and prolonging the minting of money, there were a large number of officials and scholars. Chen Hesong asked for the removal of Li Xiaoshou.

古文：京子壝为太常少卿，何执中婿蔡芝为将作监，皆疏其罪，罢之。
现代文：蔡京的儿子蔡闞任太常少卿，何执中的女婿蔡芝任将作监，陈禾上疏指责他们的罪过，使二人遭到罢免。
English: Cai Jing's son, Cai Ren, was promoted to the rank of junior minister, and his son-in-law, Cai Zhiren, was promoted to the rank of inspector. Chen He Shangsuo accused them of wrongdoing, and the two were dismissed.

古文：天下久平，武备宽弛，东南尤甚。
现代文：天下长期太平，守备松弛，东南尤其厉害。
English: The country has been at peace for a long time, and the defense is slack, especially in the southeast.

古文：禾请增戍、缮城壁，以戒不虞。
现代文：陈禾请求增加戍卒、修缮城堡，以备不测。
English: Chen He requested to increase the number of guards and repair the castle in case of emergency.

古文：或指为生事，格不下。
现代文：有人指责他是狂妄生事端，阻止下诏。
English: Some people accused him of being arrogant and causing trouble to prevent the promulgation of the edict.

古文：其后盗起，人服其先见。
现代文：后来盗贼大起，人们佩服他的先见。
English: Later, the thief rose to prominence, and people admired his foresight.

古文：迁左正言，俄除给事中。
现代文：升任左正言，不久被授任给事中。
English: He was promoted to Zuo Zhenggen (Left Vice-Councilor of State) and was soon assigned to Chongzheng.

古文：时童贯权益张，与黄经臣胥用事，御史中丞卢航表里为奸，搢绅侧目。
现代文：当时童贯权势薰天，与黄经臣共同执政，御史中丞卢航与他们狼狈为奸，大臣们侧目而视。
English: At that time, Tong Quan wielded great power and ruled jointly with Huang Jingchen. The Minister of History, Lu Hang, was in cahoots with them, and the ministers looked the other way.

古文：禾曰： 此国家安危之本也。
现代文：陈禾说 ：这是国家安危的根本。
English: Chen He said: This is fundamental to national security.

古文：吾位言责，此而不言，一迁给舍，则非其职矣。 未拜命，首抗疏劾贯。
现代文：我身居言官之位，对此不发表意见，一旦升为给舍，就不是职权之内的事了。 还没有接受任命，首先上疏弹劾童贯。
English: I am in the position of a spokesman, I do not express an opinion on this, once promoted to the position, it is not within the scope of authority. I have not yet accepted the appointment, first of all, I will impeach Tong Quan.

古文：复劾经臣： 怙宠弄权，夸炫朝列。
现代文：又弹劾经臣说 ：依恃恩宠玩弄权力，在朝官们面前夸耀。
English: He also impeached the minister, saying, "He is playing with power by relying on favors and boasting in front of the imperial officials."

古文：每云诏令皆出其手，言上将用某人，举某事，已而诏下，悉如其言。
现代文：常常自言诏令都出自他的手，说皇上打算任用某人，要办某件事，不久诏书下达，都像他所说的那样。
English: He often said to himself that the edict came from his hand, that the emperor intended to appoint someone, to do something, and that the edict would be issued soon, all as he said.

古文：夫发号施令，国之重事，黜幽陟明，天子大权，奈何使宦寺得与？
现代文：发号施令，是国家重大政事，升降官吏，是皇帝的大权，为什么让宦官得以参与？
English: Issuing orders is a major national political event. The promotion and demotion of officials is the emperor's prerogative. Why allow eunuchs to participate?

古文：臣之所忧，不独经臣，此涂一开，类进者众，国家之祸，有不可遏，愿亟窜之远方。 
现代文：我所忧虑的，不仅是经臣，这条途径一开，如此升进的人多了，是国家的祸患，有了开始便不能遏制其发展，希望赶紧把他贬逐到远方。 
English: I am not only worried about the minister of economy. Once this path is opened, more people will be promoted. It is a national disaster. Once it starts, it is impossible to curb its development. I hope to quickly banish him to a faraway place.

古文：论奏未终，上拂衣起。
现代文：奏论还未结束，皇上拂衣而起。
English: The discussion was not yet over, and the Emperor began to whip off his robe.

古文：禾引上衣，请毕其说。
现代文：陈禾拉着皇上的衣服，请求让自己说完。
English: Chen Wo tugged at the emperor's clothes and begged him to let him finish.

古文：衣裾落，上曰： 正言碎朕衣矣。 禾言： 陛下不惜碎衣，臣岂惜碎首以报陛下？
现代文：衣边脱落，皇上说： 正言扯碎我的衣服了。 陈禾说： 陛下不可惜衣服被扯碎，我怎能可惜头颅来报答陛下？
English: When the hem of his robe fell off, the emperor said, "I have torn my robe." Chen He said, "Your majesty, it is a pity that your robe was torn, but how can I repay your majesty with my head?"

古文：此曹今日受富贵之利，陛下他日受危亡之祸。 言愈切，上变色曰： 卿能如此，朕复何忧？ 内侍请上易衣，上却之曰： 留以旌直臣。 翌日，贯等相率前诉，谓国家极治，安得此不详语。
现代文：他们今天收取富贵之利，陛下日后遭受危亡之祸。 言辞愈是激烈，皇上变色说： 你能做到这样，我还忧虑什么呢？ 内侍请皇上换衣，皇上推辞说： 留着表彰忠直之臣。 第二天，童贯等人相继在皇上面前诉说，认为国家大治，怎么能说出这样不吉祥的话。
English: The more heated the rhetoric, the more the emperor changed his tone and said, "If you can do this, what should I be worried about?" The palace attendant asked the emperor to change his clothes, but the emperor said, "Let's keep the award for loyal and upright ministers." The next day, Tong Ran and others successively appealed to the emperor, saying that they thought the country was in a great state, so how could they say such unlucky words.

古文：卢航奏禾狂妄，谪监信州酒。
现代文：卢航指责陈禾狂妄，陈禾被任为监信州酒。
English: Lu Hang accused Chen He of being arrogant, and Chen He was appointed as the supervisor of the state liquor.

古文：遇赦，得自便还里。
现代文：遇到赦免，得以自便回到家乡。
English: When he was pardoned, he was able to return to his hometown of his own accord.

古文：初，陈瓘归自岭外，居于鄞，与禾相好，遣其子正汇从学。
现代文：当初，陈馞从岭外归来，住在鄞州，与陈禾相好，送他的儿子陈正汇跟他学习。
English: At first, Chen Hao returned from Lingwai and lived in Zhangzhou. He was good friends with Chen He and sent his son Chen Zhenghui to study with him.

古文：后正汇告京罪，执诣阙，瓘亦就逮。
现代文：后来陈正汇上告蔡京之罪，被绑送到朝廷，陈馞也被捕。
English: Later, Chen Zhenghui sued Cai Jing for the crime and was taken to the imperial court. Chen Xi was also arrested.

古文：经臣莅其狱，檄禾取证，禾答以事有之，罪不敢逃。
现代文：经臣主管此案，传令陈禾取证，陈禾回答有这件事，不敢逃罪。
English: The minister in charge of the case sent Chen He to collect evidence, and Chen He answered that he did not dare to evade the crime.

古文：或谓其失对，禾曰： 祸福死生，命也，岂可以死易不义耶？
现代文：有人认为他应对失误，陈禾说： 祸福死生，是命运，怎么可以因为怕死而置自己于不义之地呢？
English: Some people think that he should deal with mistakes, Chen He said: Misfortune is fate, how can you put yourself in an unjust place because you are afraid of death?

古文：愿得分贤者罪。 遂坐瓘党停官。
现代文：愿意分担贤者的罪责。 于是被指为陈馞同党被罢官。
English: He was willing to share the guilt of the wise men, and was therefore accused of being a member of the same party as Chen Xi, and was removed from office.

古文：遇赦，复起知广德军，移知和州。
现代文：遇到赦免，被调任知广德军，改任知和州。
English: When he was pardoned, he was transferred to the German army in Zhiguang and reassigned to Zhizhou.

古文：寻遭内艰，服除，知秀州。
现代文：不久遭母丧，守丧期满，任秀州知州。
English: Soon after, his mother passed away, and the mourning period expired, Ren Xiuzhou went to Zhizhou.

古文：王黼新得政，禾曰： 安能出黼门下？ 力辞，改汝州。
现代文：王黼刚刚执政，陈禾说： 怎能出自王黼门下？ 竭力推辞做官，改任知汝州。
English: Wang Hui had just come to power, and Chen He said, "How can I be from Wang Hui's lineage?

古文：辞益坚，曰： 宁饿死。 黼闻而衔之。
现代文：越是坚决推辞，说： 宁可饿死。 王黼听说后怀恨于他。
English: The more resolutely he refused, saying, "I'd rather starve to death," the more Wang Yao hated him after hearing this.

古文：禾兄秉时为寿春府教授，禾侍兄官居。
现代文：陈禾的哥哥陈秉任寿春府教授，陈禾侍奉兄长居官。
English: Chen He's brother, Chen Bing, is a professor at Shuchun University, and Chen He serves as his elder brother's chief aide.

古文：适童贯领兵道府下，谒不得入，馈之不受。
现代文：正好童贯领兵经过府城，想求见陈禾而未遂，送东西给陈禾也未被接受。
English: Just as Tongran led the soldiers through the capital, he tried unsuccessfully to see Chen He. He was not allowed to give him anything.

古文：贯怒，归而谮之，上曰： 此人素如此，汝不能容邪？ 久之，知舒州，命下而卒，赠中大夫，谥文介。
现代文：童贯大怒，回朝后诬陷他，皇上说： 这个人从来都是这样，你不能容忍他吗？ 很久以后，授任知舒州，诏命下达时去世，追赠中大夫，赐谥号为 文介 。
English: Tong Rong was furious. After returning to the imperial court, he framed him, and the emperor said: "This man has always been like this. Can't you tolerate him? After a long time, he was appointed to Zhishuzhou, died when the edict was issued, was posthumously awarded the title of doctor, and was given the nickname Wen Jie.

古文：禾性不苟合，立朝挺挺有风操。有《易传》九卷，《春秋传》十二卷，《论语》、《孟子解》各十卷。
现代文：陈禾为人不苟合，在朝任职挺挺有风骨，著有《易传》九卷，《春秋传》十二卷，《论语解》、《孟子解》各十卷。
English: Chen He was a meticulous person, and he had a strong character when he served in the DPRK. He was the author of "I Chuan" nine volumes, "Chunqiu Chuan" twelve volumes, "On Semantics" and "Mencius" ten volumes each.

