古文：景福元年正月，镇州王镕恃燕人之援，率兵十余万攻邢州之尧山。
现代文：景福元年一月，镇州王依靠燕人援助，率兵十多万进攻邢州的尧山。
English: In January of the first year of Jingfu, Zhenzhou Wang, relying on the assistance of Yanren, led more than one hundred thousand soldiers to attack Lushan in Luzhou.

古文：武皇遣李存信将兵应援，李存孝素与存信不协，递相猜贰，留兵不进。
现代文：武皇派李存信带兵救援，李存孝一直与李存信不和，互相猜疑，驻兵不进。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Cunxin to rescue the soldiers. Li Cunxiao had always been at odds with Li Cunxin, suspicious of each other, and the garrison did not advance.

古文：武皇又遣李嗣勋、李存审将兵援之，大破燕、赵之众，斩首三万，收其军实。
现代文：武皇又派李嗣勋、李存审带兵救援，大破燕、赵众军，斩首三万，缴获了他们的军用物资。
English: Emperor Wu also sent Li Shixun and Li Cunxin to lead the soldiers to rescue and defeat Yan and Zhao's army, beheading 30,000 people and seizing their military supplies.

古文：三月，武皇进军渡滹沱，攻栾城，下鼓城、藁城。
现代文：三月，武皇进军渡过滹沱河，进攻栾城，占领鼓城、高木城。
English: In March, Emperor Wu marched across the Min River, attacked Min City, and occupied Gucheng and Takagi City.

古文：四月，燕军寇云、代，武皇班师。
现代文：四月，燕军侵犯云州、代州，武皇回师。
English: In April, Yan's army invaded Yunnan and Daizhou, and Emperor Wu returned to his division.

古文：八月，赫连铎诱幽州李匡威之众八万，寇天成军，遂攻云州，营于州北，连亘数里。
现代文：八月，赫连铎引诱幽州李匡威士兵八万侵犯天成军，接着进攻云州，在州北扎营，连绵数里。
English: In August, He Lianyao lured 80,000 soldiers of Yuzhou Li Kuangwei to invade Tiancheng Army, then attacked Yunnan and camped in the north of the state for several miles.

古文：武皇潜军入于云州，诘旦，出骑军以击之，斩获数万，李匡威烧营而遁。
现代文：武皇暗地派军进入云州，天亮，领骑兵出城攻击，斩获数万，李匡威焚烧军营逃走。
English: Emperor Wu secretly sent troops into Yunnan. At dawn, the cavalry leader attacked from the city and captured tens of thousands. Li Kuangwei burned the military camp and fled.

古文：十月，邢州李存孝叛，纳款于梁，李存信构之也。
现代文：十月，邢州李存孝叛变，与汴梁讲和，是李存信构陷所造成的。
English: In October, Li Cunxiao of Zhangzhou rebelled and made peace with Zou Liang, which was caused by the rise and fall of Li Cunxin.

古文：景福二年春，大举以伐王镕，以其通好于李存孝也。
现代文：景福二年春，大举进军讨伐王，因他与李存孝通好。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jingfu's reign, he marched against the king in a big way, because he had a good relationship with Li Cunxiao.

古文：二月，攻天长镇，旬日不下。
现代文：二月，进攻天长镇，十几天没攻下。
English: In February, they attacked Tianchang Town, but did not take it for more than ten days.

古文：王镕出师三万来援，武皇逆战于叱日岭下，镇人败，斩首万余级。
现代文：王出兵三万来援助，武皇在叱日岭下迎战，镇州人失败，被斩首万余级。
English: The king sent 30,000 soldiers to help, the Emperor Wu fought under the scourge of the sun, the Zhenzhou people failed, and more than 10,000 were beheaded.

古文：时岁饥，军乏食，脯尸肉而食之。
现代文：这年闹饥荒，军队缺食，腌死人肉吃。
English: This year, there was a famine, the army was short of food, and they ate human flesh.

古文：进军下井陉，李存孝将兵夜入镇州，镇人乞师于汴；汴帅方攻时溥，不暇应之。
现代文：进军攻下井陉，李存孝带兵夜入镇州，镇州人向汴州求援，汴帅朱温正忙于进攻时溥，无暇顾及镇州。
English: After marching to capture Jingye, Li Cunxiao led his troops into Zhenzhou at night. The people of Zhenzhou asked Zhangzhou for help. Zhu Wen, the commander of Zhangye, was too busy attacking Zhangye to pay attention to Zhenzhou.

古文：乃求援于幽州，李匡威率兵赴之，武皇乃班师。
现代文：于是向幽州求援，李匡威率兵赴援，武皇便回师。
English: So he asked Yuzhou for help, Li Kuangwei led the troops to help, and Emperor Wu returned to his division.

古文：七月，武皇讨李存孝于邢州，遂攻平山，渡滹水，攻镇州。
现代文：七月，武皇在邢州讨伐李存孝，接着进攻平山，渡过滹水，再次攻打镇州。
English: In July, Emperor Wu defeated Li Cunxiao in Zhangzhou, then attacked Pingshan, crossed the Yanshui River, and attacked Zhenzhou again.

古文：王镕惧，以帛五十万犒军，请修旧好，仍以镇、冀之师助击存孝，许之。
现代文：王害怕，用帛布五十万犒劳军队，请修复旧好，并以镇州、冀州的军队协助攻击李存孝，武皇同意了。
English: The king was afraid, and asked the army of 500 thousand soldiers to restore the old order, and to attack Li Cunxiao with the help of the army of Zhenzhou and Jizhou. Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：武皇进围邢州。
现代文：武皇进军包围邢州。
English: Emperor Wu marched into and surrounded Bozhou.

古文：十二月，武皇狩于近郊，获白兔，有角长三寸。
现代文：十二月，武皇在近郊打猎，捕获白兔，有三寸长的角。
English: In December, Emperor Wu was hunting in the suburbs and caught a white rabbit with a three-inch-long horn.

古文：乾宁元年三月，邢州李存孝出城首罪，絷归太原，轘于市。
现代文：乾宁元年三月，邢州李存孝出城认罪，被押回太原，在大街上车裂处死。
English: In March of the first year of Qianning, Li Cunxiao from Zhangzhou went out of the city to plead guilty, was taken back to Taiyuan, and was sentenced to death on the street.

古文：邢、洺、磁三州平。
现代文：邢、氵名、磁三州平定。
English: The three prefectures of Gyeongnam, Jeonnam and Gimhae were pacified.

古文：武皇表马师素为邢州节度使。
现代文：武皇上表任马师素为邢州节度使。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Ma Shishi as the chief envoy of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：五月，郓州节度使硃瑄为汴军所攻，遣使来乞师。武皇遣骑将安福顺、安福应、安福迁督精骑五百，假道于魏州以应之。
现代文：五月，郓州节度使朱王宣被汴军打败，派使者来求援军，武皇派骑将安福顺、安福应、安福迁带精锐骑兵五百，借道魏州去救援。
English: In May, the Zhangzhou Festival caused Zhu Wangxuan to be defeated by the Zhang army, and he sent an envoy to ask for reinforcements. Emperor Wu sent cavalry commanders An Fushun, An Fu Ying, and An Fu Qian with 500 elite cavalrymen to go to the rescue via Weizhou.

古文：九月，潞州节度使康君立以鸩死。
现代文：九月，潞州节度使康君立喝毒酒而死。
English: In September, the Zhangzhou Festival made Kang Junli drink poisoned wine and die.

古文：十月，武皇自晋阳率师伐幽州。
现代文：十月，武皇自晋阳率军队讨伐幽州。
English: In October, Emperor Wu led troops from Jinyang to besiege Yuzhou.

古文：初，李匡俦夺据兄位，燕人多不义之，安塞军戍将刘仁恭挈族归于武皇，武皇遇之甚厚。
现代文：起初，李匡俦夺取其兄职位，燕州人多认为他不义，安塞军戍将刘仁恭带全族人归顺武皇，武皇优厚地对待他。
English: At first, Li Kuangyao usurped his brother's position, and many people in Yanzhou thought that he was unjust. The Ansei generals brought Liu Rengong and the whole nation to submit to Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wu treated him generously.

古文：仁恭数进画于盖寓，言幽州可取之状，愿得兵一万，指期平定。
现代文：刘仁恭几次向盖寓献计策，陈述幽州可以攻取的道理，愿带一万兵，指日平定。
English: Liu Renkong several times presented strategies to Gai Fiao, stating the principle that Yuzhou could be conquered, and that he was willing to bring ten thousand soldiers to pacify Japan.

古文：武皇方讨李存孝于邢州，辍兵数千，欲纳仁恭，不利而还。
现代文：武皇正在邢州讨伐李存孝，收兵数千，想采纳刘仁恭的计划，因失利而回。
English: Emperor Wu was campaigning against Li Cunxiao in Zhangzhou and had gathered thousands of soldiers. He wanted to adopt Liu Rengong's plan, but returned home after losing the battle.

古文：匡俦由是骄怠，数犯边境，武皇怒，故率军以讨之。
现代文：李匡俦因此骄傲怠慢，几次侵犯边境，武皇大怒，所以率军讨伐他。
English: As a result, Li Kuang-tao was proud and negligent, violated the border several times, and the Emperor Wu was furious, so he led an army to fight him.

古文：是时，云州吐浑赫连铎、白义诚并来归，命皆笞而释之。
现代文：这时，云州吐谷浑赫连铎、白义诚一起来归顺，武皇命各鞭打一顿，然后释放。
English: At this time, Yunzhou Tuyun Hunhe Lianqian and Bai Yicheng came together to surrender. Emperor Wu ordered that each of them be whipped and then released.

古文：十一月，进攻武州。
现代文：十一月，进攻武州。
English: In November, the attack on Wuzhou began.

古文：甲寅，攻新州。
现代文：又攻新州。
English: Another attack on NSW.

古文：十二月，李匡俦命大将率步骑六万救新州；武皇选精甲逆战，燕军大败，斩首万余级，生获将领百余人，曳练徇于新州城下。
现代文：十二月，李匡俦命大将率步兵骑兵六万援救新州，武皇选精锐甲士迎战，燕军大败，斩首万余级，活捉将领一百多人，在新州城下用长布牵着绕城行走示众。
English: In December, General Li Kuang Rong led 60,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue Xinzhou, and the Emperor Wu selected elite knights to meet the battle. Yan's army was defeated, and more than 10,000 generals were beheaded. More than 100 generals were captured alive, and they were led around the city with a long cloth to show the public.

古文：是夜，新州降。
现代文：这一夜，新州投降。
English: That night, NSW surrendered.

古文：辛亥，进攻妫州。
现代文：二十三日，进攻妫州。
English: On the 23rd, the attack on Zhangzhou began.

古文：壬子，燕兵复合于居庸关拒战，武皇命精骑以疲之，令步将李存审由他道击之，自午至晡，燕军复败。
现代文：二十四日，燕兵又聚合在居庸关抵抗，武皇命精锐骑兵拖住他们，令步兵将领李存审从别的道路进击，从中午到傍晚，燕军再次失败。
English: On the 24th, the Yan soldiers gathered again to resist at Juyongguan. The Emperor Wu ordered the elite cavalry to hold them back and ordered the infantry general Li Cunxin to attack from another road. From noon to evening, the Yan army failed again.

古文：甲寅，李匡俦携其族弃城而遁，将之沧州，随行辎车，臧获妓妾甚众。
现代文：二十六日，李匡俦携带族人弃城逃走，将要去沧州，随行的军车、奴仆妓妾很多。
English: On the 26th, Li Kuangyao fled the city with his people, and will go to Cangzhou, accompanied by many military vehicles, servants, prostitutes and concubines.

古文：沧帅卢彦威利其货，以兵攻匡俦于景城，杀之，盖掳其众。
现代文：沧州主帅卢彦威看上了这些财物，领兵在景城攻击李匡俦，杀了他，把所有人俘虏了。
English: Cangzhou coach Lu Yanwei took a fancy to these belongings. The team leader attacked Li Kuangyao in Jingcheng, killed him, and took everyone prisoner.

古文：丙辰，进军幽州，其守城大将请降，武皇令李存审与刘仁恭入城抚劳，居人如故，市不改肆，封府库以迎武皇。
现代文：二十八日，进军幽州，其守城大将请求投降，武皇令李存审和刘仁恭进城抚慰，居民照常生活，市场不受惊动，封闭府库以迎接武皇。
English: On the 28th, the army marched into Yuzhou, and the commander of the city's garrison requested surrender. Emperor Wu ordered Li Cunxuan and Liu Rengong to enter the city for consolation. The residents lived as usual, the market was not disturbed, and the government treasury was closed to welcome Emperor Wu.

古文：乾宁二年正月，武皇在幽州，命李存审、刘仁恭徇诸属郡。
现代文：乾宁二年一月，武皇在幽州，命李存审、刘仁恭攻占各属郡。
English: In January of the second year of Qianning, Emperor Wu in Yuzhou ordered Li Cunxuan and Liu Rengong to occupy their respective counties.

古文：二月，以仁恭为权幽州留后，从燕人之请也。留腹心燕留德等十余人分典军政，武皇遂班师，凡驻幽州四十日。
现代文：二月，听从燕人的请求，以刘仁恭为临时幽州留后。留下心腹燕留德等十几人分别掌管军政，武皇遂回师。驻扎在幽州的时间一共有四十天。
English: In February, at the request of Yan people, Liu Rengong was temporarily stationed in Yuzhou. He left more than a dozen people such as his confidant Yan Ruide to take charge of military and political affairs, and Emperor Wu finally returned to the division. The total time stationed in Yuzhou was forty days.

古文：六月，武皇率蕃汉之师自晋阳趋三辅，讨凤翔李茂贞、邠州王行瑜、华州韩建之乱。
现代文：六月，武皇率蕃汉军队从晋阳前往三秦，讨伐凤翔李茂贞、州王行瑜、华州韩建之乱。
English: In June, Emperor Wu led the Han army from Jinyang to Sanqin to fight against Fengxiang Li Maozhen, Shu Wang Xingyu, and Huazhou Han Jian's rebellion.

古文：先是，三帅称兵向阙，同弱王室，杀害宰辅。
现代文：在这之前，三镇主帅率兵杀向京城，削弱王室，杀害宰相大臣。
English: Prior to this, the commander of the Three Towns led his troops to attack the capital, weaken the royal family, and kill the prime minister.

古文：时河中节度使王重盈卒，重荣之子珂，即武皇之子婿也，权典军政。
现代文：此时河中节度使王重盈去世，其子王珂，即武皇的女婿，暂时掌管军政。
English: At this time, Wang Chung-ying passed away, and his son Wang Ke, the son-in-law of Emperor Wu, temporarily took charge of the military government.

古文：其兄珙为陕州节度使，瑶为绛州刺史，与珂争河中，遂诉于岐、邠、华三镇，言珂本苍头，不当袭位。
现代文：其兄王珙为陕州节度使、王瑶为绛州刺史，与王珂争夺河中，于是向岐？华三镇诉说，说王珂本来只是王家的家奴，不应当接替王重荣的位置。
English: His elder brother, Wang Qi, was the official of the festival of Shaanxi Province, and Wang Qi was the official of Zhangzhou Province. They competed with Wang Ke for the middle of the river, so they told the three towns of Guizhou and Huazhong that Wang Ke was originally just a slave of the Wang family, and should not succeed the position of Wang Chong Rong.

古文：珂亦诉于武皇，武皇上表保荐珂，乞授河中旄钺，诏可之。
现代文：王珂也向武皇诉说，武皇上奏保荐王珂，请授王珂河中节度使的旄钺仪仗，皇上下诏答应了。
English: Wang Ke also told Emperor Wu that Emperor Wu's envoy recommended Wang Ke, and asked that Wang Ke be awarded the ceremonial battle in the middle of the river, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三帅遂以兵入觐，大掠京师，请授王珂同州节度使，王瑶河中节度使，天子亦许之。
现代文：三镇主帅遂带兵进见皇帝，大肆抢掠京师，请改授王珂为同州节度使，授王瑶为河中节度使，皇帝也答应了。
English: The commanders of the three towns then marched to the emperor with their troops and plundered the capital. They requested that Wang Ke be appointed as the envoy to the festival in the same province, and that Wang Jie be appointed as the envoy to the festival in the middle of the river. The emperor also agreed.

古文：武皇遂举兵表三帅之罪，复移檄三镇，三镇大惧。
现代文：武皇遂举兵宣告三镇主帅的罪行，又送檄文到三镇，三镇大为害怕。
English: Emperor Wu then raised an army to proclaim the crimes of the three towns' chiefs, and sent letters to the three towns. The three towns were very afraid.

古文：是月，次绛州，刺史王瑶登陴拒命，武皇攻之，旬日而拔，斩王瑶于军门，诛其党千余人。
现代文：这个月，到绛州，刺史王瑶登城抗拒，武皇进攻，十来天后攻下，在军门斩杀王瑶，并杀死其同党一千多人。
English: This month, in Bozhou, Zishi Wang Hui went to the city to resist the Emperor Wu's attack. Ten days later, he attacked and killed Wang Hui at the military gate, and killed more than a thousand of his fellow party members.

古文：七月，次河中，王珂迎谒于路。
现代文：七月，到河中，王珂到路上迎接拜见。
English: In July, when he was in the middle of the river, Wang Ke went to meet him on the road.

古文：己未，同州节度使王行约弃城奔京师，与左军兵士劫掠西市，都民大扰。
现代文：四日，同州节度使王行约弃城逃往京师，与右军士兵劫掠西市，城中居民大受惊扰。
English: On the fourth day, the festival of the same state caused Wang Xing to abandon the city and flee to the Beijing Division. He and the soldiers of the Right Army looted the West City, and the residents of the city were greatly disturbed.

古文：行约，即行瑜弟也。
现代文：王行约是王行瑜的弟弟。
English: Wang Xingyao is Wang Xingyu's younger brother.

古文：庚申，枢密使骆全瓘以武皇之军将至，请天子幸。
现代文：五日，枢密使骆全馞因武皇军队将要到，请皇帝巡幸凤翔。
English: On the fifth day, the confidential envoy Luo Quanzhang, because the Emperor Wu's army was about to arrive, invited the Emperor to inspect Fengxiang.

古文：右军指挥使李继鹏，茂贞假子也，本姓阎，名珪，与全瓘谋劫天子幸凤翔。
现代文：左军指挥使李继鹏，是李茂贞的养子，本姓阎，名王圭，和骆全馞策划劫持天子到凤翔。
English: The commander of the Left Army sent Li Jipeng, the adopted son of Li Maozhen, whose original surname was Yan, to Wang Gui and Luo Quanzhang to plan the abduction of Tianzi to Fengxiang.

古文：左军指挥使王行实，亦行瑜之弟也，与刘景宣欲劫天子幸邠州。
现代文：左军指挥使王行实，也是王行瑜的弟弟，和刘景宜想劫持天子到州。
English: The commander of the Left Army, Wang Xingshi, who was also the younger brother of Wang Xingyu, and Liu Jingyi wanted to kidnap Tianzi and take him to Zhou.

古文：两军相攻，纵火烧内门，烟火蔽天。
现代文：两军互相攻杀，放火焚烧内门，烟火遮天。
English: The two armies attacked and killed each other, set fire to the inner gate, and the fireworks obscured the sky.

古文：天子急诏盐州六都兵士，令追杀乱兵，左右军退走。
现代文：皇帝急忙下诏要盐州六都士兵追杀乱兵，左右军才退走。
English: The emperor hastily issued an edict to the soldiers of the six capitals of Yanzhou to chase and kill the disorderly soldiers, and only then did the left and right armies retreat.

古文：王行瑜、李茂贞声言自来迎驾，天子惧，出幸南山，驻跸于莎城。
现代文：王行瑜、李茂贞声言亲自来京迎接皇帝，皇帝害怕，出走到南山，驻扎在莎城。
English: Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen claimed to have come to Beijing to meet the emperor in person, but the emperor was afraid and went to Nanshan, stationed in Shacheng.

古文：是夜，荧惑犯心。
现代文：这一夜火星犯心宿。
English: On this night, Mars is in a bad mood.

古文：壬戌，武皇进收同州，闻天子幸石门，遣判官王瑰奉表奔问，天子遣使赐诏，令与王珂同讨邠、凤。
现代文：七日，武皇进军收复同州，听说皇帝到了石门，就派判官王瑰奉表文前去问候，天子派使者赐诏，命他和王珂一同讨伐州、凤翔。
English: On the seventh day, Emperor Wu marched to recover Tongzhou. When he heard that the emperor had arrived at Shimen, he sent the judge Wang Jifeng to send a letter of greeting. The Son of Heaven sent an envoy to issue an edict, ordering him and Wang Ke to fight together against the state and Fengxiang.

古文：时武皇方攻华州，俄闻李茂贞领兵士三万至盩啡，王行瑜领兵至兴平，欲往石门迎驾，乃解华州之围，进营渭桥。
现代文：此时武皇正在进攻华州，不久听说李茂贞领兵三万到了周至，王行瑜领兵周至到兴平，都想到石门胁迫皇帝，于是解除对华州的包围，前进到渭桥扎营。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was attacking Huazhou. Soon, he heard that Li Maozhen had led 30,000 soldiers to Zhouzhi, and Wang Xingyu had led soldiers from Zhouzhi to Xingping. Both of them thought that Shimen was threatening the emperor, so they lifted the siege on Huazhou and advanced to camp at Qianqiao.

古文：天子遣延王戒丕、丹王允赍诏，促武皇兵直抵邠、凤。
现代文：天子派延王李戒丕、丹王李允持诏书催促武皇军队直抵州、凤翔。
English: The Son of Heaven sent Yan Wang, Li Jiechi, and Dan Wang, Li Yun, to urge Emperor Wu's army to come straight to Shuzhou and Fengxiang.

古文：八月乙酉，供奉官张承业赍诏告谕。
现代文：八月一日，供奉官张承业持诏书告谕。
English: On August 1, Zhang Chengye, the official in charge of the memorial service, issued an imperial edict.

古文：泾帅张铛已领步骑三万于京西北，扼邠、岐之路。
现代文：泾州主帅张铛已领步兵骑兵三万到京城西北，扼守通往州、岐下的道路。
English: Zhang Ye, the coach of Zhangzhou, has led 30,000 infantry and cavalry to the northwest of Beijing to guard the roads leading to and from the city.

古文：武皇进营渭北，遣史俨将三千骑往石门扈驾，遣李存信、李存审会鄜延之兵攻行瑜之梨园寨。
现代文：武皇进军在渭北扎营，派史俨带三千骑兵到石门护驾，派李存信、李存审会合州、延州军队攻打王行瑜的梨园寨。
English: Emperor Wu marched into the camp in the north of Shandong, sent Shi Yan with three thousand cavalry to the Stone Gate to escort, and sent Li Cunxin, Li Cunxuan, Huizhou and Yanzhou troops to attack Wang Xingyu's pear orchard.

古文：天子削夺行瑜官爵，以武皇为天下兵马都招讨使，以鄜州李思孝为北面招讨使，以泾州张铛为西南面招讨使。
现代文：天子削夺了王行瑜的官爵，任武皇为天下兵马都招讨使，任州李思孝为北面招讨使，任泾州张铛为西南面招讨使。
English: Tianzi stripped Wang Xingyu of his official title, appointed Emperor Wu as the envoy to recruit soldiers and horses for the whole country, appointed Li Si Xiao as the envoy to recruit soldiers and horses for the north, and appointed Zhang Qian as the envoy to recruit soldiers and horses for the southwest.

古文：天子又遣延王、丹王赐武皇御衣及大将茶酒、弓矢，命二王兄事武皇。
现代文：天子又派延王、丹王赐给武皇御衣及大将茶酒、弓矢，命两位王把武皇当兄长看待。
English: The heavenly son also sent Yan Wang and Dan Wang to give Emperor Wu the imperial robe, tea, wine and bows and arrows, and ordered the two kings to treat Emperor Wu as their elder brother.

古文：延王传天子密旨云： 日昨非卿至此，已为贼庭行酒之人矣。
现代文：延王传天子密旨说 ：昨日若不是您赶到这里，我已成为贼庭送酒的仆役了。
English: Yan Wang said, "If you hadn't arrived here yesterday, I would have been a servant serving wine in a court of thieves."

古文：所虑者二凶缔合，卒难翦除，且欲姑息茂贞，令与卿修好，俟枭斩行瑜，更与卿商量。 
现代文：担心的是李、王二凶勾结在一起，难以消灭，想暂且姑息李茂贞，令他与您修好，等到杀了王行瑜，再与你商量。 
English: What you are worried about is that Li and Wang are colluding with each other, which is difficult to eliminate. You want to temporarily appease Li Maozhen, make him make peace with you, wait until he kills Wang Xingyu, and then discuss with you.

古文：武皇上表，请驾还京。
现代文：武皇上奏表，请皇帝回京城。
English: Emperor Wu came to deliver the report and asked the emperor to return to the capital.

古文：令李存节领二千骑于京西北，以防邠贼奔突。
现代文：令李存节领二千骑兵到京城西北，防止州贼军扰乱。
English: Li Cunjie was ordered to lead two thousand cavalry to the northwest of the capital to prevent the state thief army from disturbing.

古文：辛亥，天子还宫，加武皇守太师、中书令、邠宁四面行营都统。
现代文：二十七日，天子回宫，加武皇守太师、中书令、宁四面行营都统。
English: On the 27th day, Emperor Tianzi returned to the palace, and Emperor Gaowu, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, and Empress Dowager Nin marched in all directions.

古文：时王行瑜弟兄固守梨园寨，我师攻之甚急，李茂贞遣兵万余来援行瑜，营于龙泉镇，茂贞自率兵三万迫咸阳。
现代文：此时王行瑜弟兄固守梨园寨，朝廷军攻之很急。李茂贞派一万多兵力前来援助王行瑜，在龙泉镇扎营，李茂贞亲自率三万士兵逼近咸阳。
English: At this time, Wang Xingyu's brothers held fast to the Pear Orchard Village, and the imperial army was in a hurry to attack. Li Maozhen sent more than ten thousand troops to come to Wang Xingyu's aid and set up camp in Longquan Town. Li Maozhen personally led thirty thousand soldiers to approach Xianyang.

古文：武皇奉请诏茂贞罢兵，兼请削夺茂贞官爵。诏曰： 茂贞勒兵，盖备非常，寻已发遣归镇。 
现代文：武皇奏请下诏要李茂贞罢兵，并请削夺李茂贞官爵，下诏说 ：李茂贞统率军队，是防备非常事件，已经派遣回镇。 
English: Emperor Wu requested the next edict to order Li Maozhen to withdraw from the army, and requested that Li Maozhen be stripped of his official title. The next edict said: Li Maozhen led the army, was prepared for an emergency, and had been sent back to the town.

古文：又言： 茂贞已诛李继鹏、李继晸，卿可切戒兵甲，无犯土疆。 
现代文：又说 ：李茂贞已杀李继鹏、李继，你可切切告诫部下，不要侵犯他的疆土。 
English: He also said: Li Maozhen has killed Li Jipeng and Li Jie, you can earnestly warn your subordinates not to encroach on his territory.

古文：武皇请赐河中王珂旌节，三表许之。
现代文：武皇请赐河中王珂旌旗节仗，三次上表，皇上同意了。
English: Emperor Wu asked King Kesong of the Middle Kingdom to give him a banner for the festival, and he presented it to him three times. The emperor agreed.

古文：又表李罕之为副都统。
现代文：又上表荐李罕之为副都统。
English: He also recommended Li Hanjie as deputy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：十月丙戌，李存信于梨园寨北遇贼军，斩首千余级，自是贼闭壁不出。
现代文：十月三日，李存信在梨园寨北与贼军遭遇，斩首千余级，从此贼军闭门不出。
English: On October 3, Li Cunxin encountered the bandits in the north of Liyuan Zhai and beheaded more than a thousand people. Since then, the bandits have never left.

古文：戊子，天子赐武皇内弟子四人，又降硃书御札，赐魏国夫人陈氏。
现代文：五日，天子赐武皇内弟子四人，又写来朱书御札，赐魏国夫人陈氏。
English: On the fifth day, the Son of Heaven bestowed four disciples on Emperor Wu, and also wrote Zhu Shu Gozada to bestow the Chen Clan on the wife of Wei.

古文：是月，王行瑜因败衄之后，闭壁自固，武皇令李罕之昼夜急攻，贼军乏食，拔营而去。
现代文：这个月，王行瑜因失败之后，闭关固守，武皇令李罕之昼夜急攻，贼军缺乏粮食，收营而去。
English: This month, after the failure of Wang Xingyu, he closed the gate and held fast. Emperor Wu ordered Li Han to attack day and night. The thief army lacked food, closed the camp and left.

古文：李存信与罕之等先伏军于厄路，俟贼军之至，纵兵击之，杀戮万计。
现代文：李存信与李罕之等人先埋伏军队在要道旁，等贼军来到，发起进攻，杀戮数万。
English: Li Cunxin and Li Hanzhi and others first ambushed the army on the side of the main road, waited for the thief army to come, launched an attack, and killed tens of thousands.

古文：是日，收梨园等三寨，生擒行瑜之子知进，并母丘氏、大将李元福等二百人，送赴阙庭。
现代文：这一天，收复梨园等三寨，活捉王行瑜之子王知进，和他母亲丘氏、大将李元福等二百人，送交给朝廷。
English: On this day, they recovered the Pear Garden and other three villages, captured Wang Zhizhong, the son of Wang Xingyu, and his mother Qiu, General Li Yuanfu and other 200 people alive, and handed them over to the imperial court.

古文：庚寅，王行约、王行实烧劫宁州遁走，宁州守将徐景乞降。
现代文：七日，王行约、王行实焚烧抢劫宁州后逃走，宁州守将徐景乞求投降。
English: On the seventh day, Wang Xingyao and Wang Xingshi burned and looted Ningzhou and then fled. The governor of Ningzhou, Xu Jinglong, begged for surrender.

古文：武皇表苏文建为邠州节度使，且于宁州为治所。
现代文：武皇上表任苏文建为州节度使，并且在宁州设置官府。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Su Wenjian as the state festival envoy, and set up the government office in Ningzhou.

古文：十一月丁巳，收龙泉寨。
现代文：十一月五日，收复龙泉寨。
English: On November 5, Longquanzhai was recovered.

古文：时行瑜以精甲五千守之，李茂贞出兵来援，为李罕之所败，邠贼遂弃龙泉寨而去。
现代文：此时王行瑜领精锐甲士五千守卫，李茂贞出兵援助，被李罕之打败，州贼军遂弃龙泉寨而去。
English: At this time, Wang Xingyu led five thousand guards of elite warriors, and Li Maozhen sent troops to help. He was defeated by Li Hanzhi, and the state thief army abandoned Longquan Village.

古文：行瑜复入邠州，大军进逼其城，行瑜登城号哭曰： 行瑜无罪，昨杀南北司大臣，是岐帅将兵胁制主上，请治岐州，行瑜乞束身归朝。 
现代文：王行瑜又进入州，大军进逼州城，王行瑜登城大哭说： 我没有罪，以前杀南北司大臣，是岐帅李茂贞带兵胁制皇帝，请惩治李茂贞，我请求自缚回朝。 
English: Wang Xingyu entered the prefecture again, the army entered the prefecture city, Wang Xingyu went to the city and cried loudly, "I am not guilty, I used to kill the Minister of the North and South Departments, it was the Qisai General Li Maozhen who led the troops to coerce the emperor, please punish Li Maozhen, I ask to be bound back to the imperial court."

古文：武皇报曰： 王尚父何恭之甚耶！
现代文：武皇回答说 ：王尚父怎么如此恭敬了？
English: Emperor Wu replied, "How did Wang Shangpai become so respectful?"

古文：仆受命讨三贼臣，公其一也。
现代文：我受命讨伐三个贼臣，你是其中一个。
English: I've been ordered to fight three traitors, and you're one of them.

古文：如能束身归阙，老夫未敢专命，为公奏取进止。 
现代文：如要自缚回朝，我可不敢自作主张，为您奏请皇上决定。 
English: If I want to return to the Imperial Court, I dare not make my own proposal. I will ask the Emperor to make the decision for you.

古文：行瑜惧，弃城而遁。
现代文：王行瑜害怕，弃城逃跑。
English: Wang Xingyu was scared and fled the city.

古文：武皇收其城，封府库，遽以捷闻。
现代文：武皇收复州城，封闭府库，立即向皇上报捷。
English: Emperor Wu seized Fuzhou City, closed the provincial treasury, and immediately reported his success to the emperor.

古文：既而庆州奏，王行瑜将家属五百人到州界，为部下所杀，传首阙下。
现代文：不久庆州上奏，王行瑜带家属五百人逃到庆州州界，被部下杀了，将他的首级送往朝廷。
English: Soon after the Gyeongju uprising, Wang Xingyu fled to the Gyeongju border with 500 of his family members. He was killed by his subordinates, who sent his head to the imperial court.

古文：武皇既平行瑜，还军渭北。
现代文：武皇平定王行瑜后，回师到渭北。
English: After Emperor Wu had subdued Wang Xingyu, he returned to teach in northern Anhui.

古文：十二月，武皇营于云阳，候讨凤翔进止。
现代文：十二月，武皇在云阳扎营，准备讨伐凤翔。
English: In December, Emperor Wu camped in Yunyang and prepared to fight Fengxiang.

古文：乙未，天子赐武皇为忠贞平难功臣，进封晋王，加实封二百户。
现代文：十三日，天子赐武皇为忠贞平难功臣，进封为晋王，加实封二百户。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Emperor Wu was given the title of Jin Wang by the Son of Heaven for being a loyal, peaceful and meritorious vassal, and 200 households were given additional titles.

古文：武皇复上表请讨李茂贞，天子不允。
现代文：武皇再次上表请求讨伐李茂贞，天子不允许。
English: Emperor Wu once again petitioned for a crusade against Li Maozhen, but Heaven did not allow it.

古文：武皇私谓诏使曰： 观主上意，疑仆别有他肠，复何言哉！
现代文：武皇私下对皇上派来的诏使说 ：看皇上的意思，是怀疑我别有异心，这还有什么好说的呢！
English: Emperor Wu privately said to the imperial envoy sent by the emperor: Look at the emperor's intention, it is to suspect that I have other intentions, what else is there to say!

古文：但祸不去胎，忧患未已。 
现代文：但是祸患不从胎腹中除去，忧患将不会停止。 
English: But woe is not removed from the womb, and sorrow does not cease.

古文：又奏： 臣统领大军，不敢径赴朝觐。 
现代文：又上奏说 ：我正统领着大军，不敢径直到朝廷进见。 
English: He also reported, "I am leading a large army in accordance with the law, and I dare not go to the imperial court.

古文：遂班师。
现代文：遂回师。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：乾宁三年正月，汴人大举以攻兗、郓，硃瑄、硃瑾再乞师于武皇，假道于魏州，罗宏信许之。
现代文：乾宁三年一月，汴军大举进攻兖州、郓州，朱王宣、朱瑾再次向武皇求援军，武皇从魏州借道，罗弘信允许了。
English: In January of the third year of Qianning, the Han army launched a large-scale attack on Ganzhou and Ganzhou. Zhu Wangxuan and Zhu Xi again asked the Emperor Wu for reinforcements. The Emperor Wu took a detour from Weizhou, and Luo Hongxin allowed it.

古文：乃令都指挥使李存信将步骑三万与李承嗣、史俨会军，以拒汴人。
现代文：于是令都指挥使李存信带步兵骑兵三万与李承嗣、史俨会合，以抵抗汴州军队。
English: As a result, the commander of the capital ordered Li Cunxin to bring 30,000 infantry and cavalry together with Li Chengzhi and Shi Yan to resist the Zhangzhou army.

古文：存信军于莘，与硃瑾合势，频挫汴军，汴帅患之，乃间魏人。
现代文：李存信在莘县驻军，与朱瑾合势，频频挫败汴军，汴帅朱温很伤脑筋，于是离间魏人。
English: Li Cunxin garrisoned troops in Handan County, joined forces with Zhu Xi, and frequently defeated the Handan army. Zhu Wen, the head of the Handan army, was very nervous, so he split the Wei people.

古文：存信御兵无法，稍侵魏之刍牧者，宏信乃与汴帅通，出师三万攻存信军。
现代文：李存信带兵没有军纪，军人渐渐侵犯魏州打柴放牧的百姓，罗弘信便与汴帅交结，出兵三万攻打李存信军队。
English: Li Cunxin led troops without military discipline, and the soldiers gradually encroached on the people of Weizhou who were playing firewood and grazing. Luo Hongxin then crossed paths with Yu Shuai and sent 30,000 troops to attack Li Cunxin's army.

古文：存信揭营而退，保于洺州。
现代文：李存信拔营而退，保守氵名州。
English: Li Cunxin pulled out of the camp and retreated, leaving Meizhou to the conservatives.

古文：三月，武皇大掠相、魏诸邑，攻李固、洹水，杀魏兵万余人，进攻魏州。
现代文：三月，武皇大肆抢掠相州、魏州各邑，进攻李固、洹水，杀死魏兵一万多人，进攻魏州。
English: In March, Emperor Wu pillaged and plundered various towns in Xiangzhou and Weizhou, attacked Ligu and Surabaya, killed more than 10,000 Wei soldiers, and attacked Weizhou.

古文：五月，汴将葛从周、氏叔琮引兵赴援。
现代文：五月，汴将葛从周、氏叔琮引兵援助魏州。
English: In May, he brought Ge from Zhou and Uji from Shu to aid Wei.

古文：六月，李茂贞举兵犯京师。
现代文：六月，李茂贞发兵攻打京师。
English: In June, Li Maozhen sent troops to attack the Beijing Division.

古文：七月，车驾幸华州。
现代文：七月，皇帝到华州。
English: In July, the emperor went to Huazhou.

古文：是月，武皇与汴军战于洹水之上，铁林指挥使落落被擒。
现代文：这个月，武皇与汴军在洹水之上交战，铁林军指挥使落落被擒。
English: This month, Emperor Wu and the Wei army fought over Surabaya, and the commander of the Tielin army was captured.

古文：落落，武皇之长子也。
现代文：落落是武皇的长子。
English: He was the eldest son of Emperor Wu.

古文：既战，马踣于坎，武皇驰骑以救之，其马亦踣，汴之追兵将及，武皇背射一发而毙，乃退。
现代文：交战后落落的坐骑被土坎绊倒在地，武皇骑马奔来救他，自己的战马也摔倒了，汴军追兵就要赶上来，武皇背着射一箭，射死一个追兵，追兵才退。
English: After the battle, the fallen horse was tripped by a clay block and fell to the ground. Emperor Wu ran on horseback to save him. His own horse also fell down, and the chasing soldiers had to catch up. Emperor Wu shot an arrow with his back, killing a pursuing soldier, and the pursuing soldiers retreated.

古文：九月，李存信攻魏之临清，汴将葛从周等引军来援，大败于宗城北。
现代文：九月，李存信进攻魏州的临清，汴将葛从周等引军来援救，在宗城以北大败。
English: In September, Li Cunxin attacked Linqing in Weizhou, and Gan brought Ge from Zhou to come to the rescue, but was defeated in the north of Zongcheng.

古文：存信进攻魏州。
现代文：李存信进攻魏州。
English: Li Cunxin attacks Weizhou.

古文：十月，武皇败魏军于白龙潭，追击至观音门，汴军救至，乃退。
现代文：十月，武皇在白龙潭击败魏军，追击到观音门，汴军援军赶到，才退。
English: In October, Emperor Wu defeated the Wei army in Bailongtan and pursued it to Guanyin Gate. The Wei army reinforcements arrived before retreating.

古文：十一月，武皇征兵于幽、镇、定三州，将迎驾于华下，幽州刘仁恭托以契丹入寇，俟敌退听命。
现代文：十一月，武皇在幽、镇、定三州征兵，准备到华州迎接皇帝，幽州刘仁恭借口契丹入侵加以推托，要等敌军退后才听命。
English: In November, Emperor Wu recruited soldiers in the three states of Yuzhou, Zhen and Ding and prepared to go to Huazhou to meet the emperor. Yuzhou Liu Rengong used the excuse of the Khitan invasion to postpone it, and waited for the enemy to retreat before obeying his orders.

古文：乾宁四年正月，汴军陷兗、郓，骑将李承嗣、史俨与硃瑾同奔于淮南。
现代文：乾宁四年一月，汴军攻陷兖州、郓州，骑将李承嗣、史俨与朱瑾一同投奔淮南吴国。
English: In January of the 4th year of Qianning, the Wei army invaded and occupied Ganzhou and Ganzhou, and the cavalrymen Li Chengzhi, Shi Jun and Zhu Jun went to Huainan and Wuzhou together.

古文：三月，陕帅王珙攻河中，王珂来告难；武皇遣李嗣昭率二千骑赴之，破陕军于猗氏，乃解河中之围。
现代文：三月，陕州主帅王珙进攻河中，王珂前来告急，武皇派李嗣昭率二千骑兵救援，在猗氏击败陕军，解除了对河中的包围。
English: In March, the head coach of Shaanxi Province, Wang Hui, attacked Hezhong, and Wang Ke came to make an urgent appeal. Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao to lead 2,000 cavalrymen to rescue, defeat the Shaanxi army at He, and lift the siege of Hezhong.

古文：至是，天子遣延王戒丕至晋阳，传宣旨于武皇： 朕不取卿言，以及于此，苟非英贤竭力，朕何由再谒庙廷！
现代文：到这时，天子派延王李戒丕到晋阳，传旨给武皇： 我不听你的话，所以到这个地步，如不是你英勇贤明竭忠尽力，我靠什么再回朝廷，我希望你能起表率作用。 
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven sent Yan Wang Li Jiechi to Jinyang to convey a message to Emperor Wu: I do not listen to you, so to this point, if it were not for your heroic, wise and loyal efforts, what would I rely on to return to the imperial court, I hope you can play a leading role.

古文：在卿表率，予所望也。 七月，武皇复征兵于幽州，刘仁恭辞旨不逊，武皇以书让之；仁恭捧书谩骂，抵之于地，仍囚武皇之行人。八月，大举以伐仁恭。
现代文：七月，武皇又在幽州征兵，刘仁恭出言不逊，武皇写信责备他，刘仁恭看着信大骂，又把信扔到地上，并且囚禁武皇的使者。八月，武皇大举发兵讨伐刘仁恭。
English: In July, Emperor Wu again conscripted soldiers in Yuzhou, Liu Rengong made an insolent remark, Emperor Wu wrote a letter to rebuke him, Liu Rengong looked at the letter and cursed, threw the letter to the ground, and imprisoned Emperor Wu's envoy. In August, Emperor Wu sent a large army to fight Liu Rengong.

古文：九月，师次蔚州。
现代文：九月，大军到蔚州。
English: In September, the large army arrived in Ulju.

古文：戊寅，晨雾晦暝，占者云不利深入。
现代文：六日，晨雾弥漫阴暗，占卜者说不利于深入。
English: On the sixth day, the morning mist was thick and gloomy, and soothsayers said it was not conducive to going deeper.

古文：辛巳，攻安塞，俄报 燕将单可及领骑军至矣。 
现代文：九日，进攻安塞，一会儿有报告说： 燕州将军单可及领骑兵到了。 
English: On the 9th, they attacked Ansei. A short while later, there was a report: General Yanzhou has just arrived with his cavalry.

古文：武皇方置酒高会，前锋又报 贼至矣 ！
现代文：武皇正在设酒席聚会，前锋又来报告说 ：贼军到了！ 
English: Emperor Wu is holding a banquet party, and the vanguard comes to report: the bandits have arrived!

古文：武皇曰： 仁恭何在？ 
现代文：武皇问 ：刘仁恭在哪里？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked: Where is Liu Renkong?

古文：曰： 但见可及辈。 
现代文：答道： 只看见单可及等人。 
English: He replied, "I only see people who can do it alone."

古文：武皇张目怒曰： 可及辈何足为敌！ 
现代文：武皇瞪着眼睛大怒道 ：单可及辈哪能与我配敌！ 
English: Emperor Wu glared with his eyes and said angrily, "I alone can match my generation!

古文：仍促令出师。
现代文：于是催促出兵。
English: He then urged the dispatch of troops.

古文：燕军已击武皇军寨，武皇乘醉击贼，燕军披靡。
现代文：燕军已在攻击武皇军寨，武皇乘醉杀敌，燕军溃散。
English: Yan's army has attacked Emperor Wu's army camp, Emperor Wu killed the enemy by drunkenness, and Yan's army was dispersed.

古文：时步兵望贼而退，为燕军所乘，大败于木瓜涧。俄而大风雨震电，燕军解去，武皇方醒。
现代文：这时步兵望见贼军而退兵，被燕军抓住机会，大败于木瓜涧，又突然大起风雨雷电，燕军撤回，武皇才醒酒。
English: At this time, the infantry retreated at the sight of the thief army, and the Yan army seized the opportunity, was defeated in the papaya war, and suddenly there was a storm, thunder and lightning, the Yan army withdrew, and Emperor Wu sobered up.

古文：甲午，师次代州，刘仁恭遣使谢罪于武皇，武皇亦以书报之，自此有檄十余返。
现代文：二十二日，进军到代州，刘仁恭派使者向武皇谢罪，武皇也回信答复，从此互传檄书来往十几次。
English: On the 22nd, after marching into Daizhou, Liu Rengong sent an envoy to Emperor Wu to express his gratitude. Emperor Wu also replied in writing. Since then, they have exchanged letters more than a dozen times.

古文：光化元年春正月，凤翔李茂贞、华州韩建皆致书于武皇，乞修和好，同奖王室，兼乞助丁匠修缮秦宫，武皇许之。
现代文：光化元年一月，凤翔李茂贞、华州韩建都写信给武皇，请修和好，共同辅助王室，兼求助民夫工匠修缮秦宫，武皇答应了。
English: In January of the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, Fengxiang Li Maozhen and Huazhou Hanjian both wrote to Emperor Wu, asking him to make peace, jointly assist the royal family, and seek the help of craftsmen to repair the Qin Palace. Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：四月，汴将葛从周寇邢、洺、磁等州，旬日之内，三州连陷。
现代文：四月，汴将葛从周入侵邢、氵名、磁等州，十来天之内，三州接连被攻陷。
English: In April, Zhang invaded Zhou, Henan, Hebei and other provinces. Within ten days, the three provinces were successively conquered.

古文：汴人以葛从周为邢州节度使。
现代文：汴人任葛从周为邢州节度使。
English: Shanshan people appointed Ge Zhou as the special envoy of the Shanzhou Festival.

古文：大将李存信收军，自马岭而旋。
现代文：大将李存信收集军队从马岭而回。
English: General Li Cunxin gathers his troops and heads back from Maling.

古文：八月壬戌，天子自华还宫。
现代文：八月二十五日，天子自华州回宫。
English: On August 25, the emperor returned to the palace from Huazhou.

古文：是时，车驾初复，而欲诸侯辑睦，赐武皇诏，令与汴帅通好。
现代文：这时，天子因刚回宫，希望诸侯和睦相处，赐诏书给武皇，令他与汴帅和好。
English: At this time, the emperor, who had just returned to the palace, hoped that the princes would live in harmony, and issued an imperial edict to Emperor Wu, so that he would be reconciled with Xinshuai.

古文：武皇不欲先下汴帅，乃致书于镇州王镕，令导其意。
现代文：武皇不想先给汴帅去信，便写信给镇州王钅容，令他传达自己的意思。
English: Emperor Wu did not want to write to Zeng Shuai first, so he wrote to Zhenzhou Wang Rongrong, asking him to convey his intention.

古文：明年，汴帅遣使奉书币来修好，武皇亦报之。
现代文：第二年，汴帅派使者带书信礼物来修好，武皇也予以回报。
English: In the second year, Emperor Gaoshuai sent an envoy with a gift of letters to mend fences, and Emperor Wu also reciprocated.

古文：自是使车交驰，朝野相贺。
现代文：从此使者车驾交相来往，朝野互相庆贺。
English: Since then, the envoys have been driving back and forth, and the Asano have been congratulating each other.

古文：九月，武皇遣周德威、李嗣昭率兵三万出青山口，以迫邢、洺。
现代文：九月，武皇派周德威、李嗣昭率兵三万出青山口，逼近邢州、氵名州。
English: In September, Emperor Wu sent Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao to lead 30,000 soldiers out of Qingshan Pass, approaching Zhangzhou and Zhangmeng.

古文：十月，遇汴将葛从周于张公桥，既战，我军大败。
现代文：十月，在张公桥与汴将葛从周相遇，交战后，武皇军队大败。
English: In October, Zhang Gongqiao and the warlord Ge Zhou met, and after the battle, Emperor Wu's army was defeated.

古文：是月，河中王珂来告急，言王珙引汴军来寇，武皇遣李嗣昭将兵三千以援之，屯于胡壁堡。
现代文：这个月，河中王珂来告急，说王珙引汴军来犯，武皇派李嗣昭带兵三千援助，在胡壁堡扎营。
English: This month, King Kele of the Middle Kingdom of Korea was in a hurry, saying that King Gojong had led an army of barbarians to invade. King Wu sent Li Shizhao with 3,000 soldiers to help, and they camped at Hubei Fort.

古文：汴军万余人来拒战，嗣昭击退之。
现代文：汴军一万多人前来拒战，李嗣昭击退他们。
English: More than ten thousand Shan soldiers came to oppose the war, and Li Shizhao repulsed them.

古文：十二月，潞州节度使薛志勤卒，泽州刺史李罕之以本军夜入潞州，据城以叛。
现代文：十二月，潞州节度使薛志勤去世，泽州刺史李罕之带本军夜里进入潞州，占城叛变。
English: In December, the Bozhou Festival caused the death of Xue Zhiqin, and the Zhezhou assassin Li Hanzhi led his army into Bozhou at night, occupying the city and rebelling.

古文：罕之报武皇曰： 薛铁山新死，潞民无主，虑军城有变，辄专命镇抚。 
现代文：李罕之对武皇去信说 ：薛铁山刚死，潞州百姓无主，我担心城中有变，便自作主张加以镇守安抚。 
English: Li Hanzhi sent a letter to Emperor Wu, saying: "Xue Tieshan has just died, the people of Zhangzhou have no master, I am worried that there will be a change in the city, so I will make my own proposal to appease the town guards.

古文：武皇令人让之，罕之乃归于汴。
现代文：武皇令人责备他，李罕之便归顺汴州。
English: Emperor Wu rebuked him, and Li Hanzhi returned to Shun and Zhangzhou.

古文：武皇遣李嗣昭将兵讨之，下泽州，收罕之家属，拘送晋阳。
现代文：武皇派李嗣昭带兵讨伐，攻下泽州，收捕李罕之家属，押送晋阳。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao to lead the troops in the crusade, to conquer Zezhou, to arrest the family members of Li Han, and to escort them to Jinyang.

古文：光化二年春正月，李罕之陷沁州。
现代文：光化二年一月，李罕之攻陷沁州。
English: In January of the second year of the Gwanghwa era, Li Hanji invaded and occupied Ganzhou.

古文：三月，汴将葛从周、氏叔琮自土门陷承天军，又陷辽州，进军榆次。
现代文：三月，汴将葛从周、氏叔琮自土门攻陷承天军，又攻陷辽州，进军榆次。
English: In March, he led Ge from Zhou and Uji from Tutu to attack and capture the Heaven's Army, and then invaded Liaozhou and marched into Shiji.

古文：武皇令周德威击之，败汴军于洞涡驿，叔琮弃营而遁，德威追击，出石曾关，杀千余人。
现代文：武皇令周德威打击他们，在洞涡驿打败汴军，氏叔琮弃营逃走，周德威追击，出石会关，杀死一千多人。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Zhou Dewei to fight them. He defeated the Wei army in the cave vortex, and his uncle abandoned the camp and fled. Zhou Dewei chased them, came out of the stone gate, and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：汴人复陷泽州。
现代文：汴军又攻陷泽州。
English: The Wei army invaded and occupied Zezhou again.

古文：五月，武皇令都指挥使李君庆将兵收泽、潞，为汴军所败而还。
现代文：五月，武皇令都指挥使李君庆带兵收复泽州、潞州，被汴军打败而回。
English: In May, Emperor Wu ordered Li Junqing to lead troops to recover Zezhou and Zhangzhou, but he was defeated by Zhang's army and returned.

古文：以李嗣昭为都指挥使，进攻潞州。
现代文：武皇任李嗣昭为都指挥使，再次进攻潞州。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Li Shizhao as the commander of the capital, and once again attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：八月，嗣昭营于潞州城下，前锋下泽州。
现代文：八月，李嗣昭在潞州城下扎营，前锋已攻下泽州。
English: In August, Li Shizhao camped at the foot of Zhangzhou Castle. The vanguard had already conquered Zhezhou.

古文：时汴将贺德伦、张归厚等守潞州。
现代文：此时由汴将贺德伦、张归厚等把守潞州。
English: At this time, He Deren, Zhang Gui Hou and others were put in charge of the defense of Zhangzhou.

古文：是月，德伦等弃城而遁，潞州平。
现代文：这个月，贺德伦等人弃城逃走，潞州平定。
English: This month, Hedlund and others abandoned the city and fled, and Bozhou was pacified.

古文：九月，武皇表汾州刺史孟迁为潞州节度使。
现代文：九月，武皇上表推荐汾州刺史孟迁为潞州节度使。
English: In September, Emperor Wu recommended that Zhangzhou Zishi Meng Qian be appointed as the festival envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：光化三年，汴军大寇河朔，幽州刘仁恭乞师，武皇遣周德威帅五千骑以援之。
现代文：光化三年，汴军大举入侵河朔，幽州刘仁恭向武皇请求援军，武皇派周德威率五千骑兵救援。
English: In the third year of the Gwanghwa era, the Han army invaded Heshuo in a big way. Liu Rengong of Yuzhou requested reinforcements from Emperor Wu, who sent Zhou Dewei and five thousand cavalry to the rescue.

古文：七月，李嗣昭攻尧山，至内丘，败汴军于沙河；进攻洺州，下之。
现代文：七月，李嗣昭攻尧山，到内丘，在沙河击败汴军，进攻并占领了氵名州。
English: In July, Li Shizhao attacked Shaoshan, went to Neiqiu, defeated the Shaoshan army in Shahe, and attacked and occupied Shannan Prefecture.

古文：九月，汴帅自将兵三万围洺州，嗣昭弃城而归，葛从周设伏于青山口，嗣昭之军不利。
现代文：九月，汴帅朱温亲自带兵三万包围氵名州，李嗣昭弃城而归，葛从周在青山口伏击，李嗣昭军失利。
English: In September, Zhu Wen personally led 30,000 soldiers to encircle Yanming Prefecture, Li Shizhao abandoned the city and returned, Ge Zhou ambushed in Qingshankou, and Li Shizhao's army was defeated.

古文：十月，汴人乘胜寇镇、定，镇、定惧，皆纳赂于汴。
现代文：十月，汴军乘胜侵犯镇州、定州，镇州、定州害怕，都向汴州交纳钱物。
English: In October, the Shan army took advantage of the victory to invade Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. Zhenzhou and Dingzhou were afraid, and they all paid money and goods to Zhangzhou.

古文：是时，周德威与燕军刘守光败汴人二万于望都，闻定州王郜来奔，乃班师。
现代文：这时，周德威与燕军刘守光在望都击败汴军二万，听说定州王郜奔来，便回师。
English: At this time, Zhou Dewei and Liu Shouguang of the Yan army defeated the Shao army of twenty thousand in Wangdu, and when they heard that Dingzhou Wang Yao was coming, they returned to the division.

古文：是月，天子加武皇实封一百户。
现代文：这个月，天子加武皇实封一百户。
English: This month, Emperor Kanmu sealed one hundred households.

古文：遣李嗣昭率步骑三万攻怀州，下之。
现代文：武皇派李嗣昭率步兵骑兵三万攻克怀州。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao and 30,000 infantry and cavalry to invade Huai Zhou.

古文：进攻河阳，汴将阎宝率军来援，嗣昭退保怀州。
现代文：进攻河阳，汴将阎宝率军援助，李嗣昭退保怀州。
English: Attacking Heyang, Zhai sent Yan Bao to lead the army to help, while Li Shizhao retreated to Baohai Prefecture.

古文：天复元年正月，汴将张存敬攻陷晋、绛二州，以兵二万屯绛州，以扼援路。
现代文：天复元年一月，汴将张存敬攻陷晋、绛二州，带兵二万驻扎在绛州，以扼守武皇援军的来路。
English: In January of the first year after the restoration of the emperor, Zhang Cunjing was sent by the emperor to invade Jin and Zhang Erzhou, and stationed in Zhangzhou with 20,000 soldiers in order to guard the route of the emperor's reinforcements.

古文：二月，张存敬迫河中，王珂告急于武皇，使者相望于路。
现代文：二月，张存敬逼近河中，王珂向武皇告急，使者来往不绝于路。
English: In February, when Zhang Cunjing was approaching the middle of the river, Wang Ke was in a hurry to see Emperor Wu, and the envoys were constantly on the road.

古文：邠国夫人，武皇爱女也，亦以书至，恳切求援。
现代文：王珂的妻子国夫人是武皇的爱女，也写信来，恳切求援。
English: Wang Ke's wife, Lady Guo, the beloved daughter of Emperor Wu, also wrote to him, earnestly pleading for help.

古文：武皇报曰： 贼阻道路，众寡不敌，救尔即与尔两亡，可与王郎弃城归朝。 
现代文：武皇回信说： 敌军阻挡了道路，寡不敌众，我救你就会和你一起灭亡，可以和王郎弃城回到朝廷。 
English: Emperor Wu replied in a letter, "The enemy army has blocked the road, and we are outnumbered. If I save you, you will perish with them. You can abandon the city and return to the imperial court with Wang Lang."

古文：珂遂送款于张存敬。
现代文：王珂只得与张存敬讲和。
English: Wang Ke had to make peace with Zhang Cun Rong.

古文：三月，汴帅自大梁至河中，王珂遂出迎，寻徙于汴。
现代文：三月，汴帅自大梁来到河中，王珂出来迎接，接着迁徙到汴州。
English: In March, Gong Shuai from Dalian came to the river, Wang Ke came out to meet him, and then migrated to Ganzhou.

古文：天子以汴帅兼镇河中，武皇自是不复能援京师，霸业由是中否。
现代文：天子以汴帅朱温兼镇守河中。武皇从此不再能救援京师，霸业因此而中途衰落。
English: Emperor Wu was no longer able to rescue the imperial army, and therefore, the imperial army was in a state of decline.

古文：四月，汴将氏叔琮率兵五万自太行路寇泽、潞，魏博大将张文恭领军自新口入，葛从周领兗、郓之众自土门入，张归厚以邢、洺之众自马岭入，定州王处直之众自飞狐入，侯言以晋、绛之兵自阴地入。
现代文：四月，汴将氏叔琮率兵五万自太行路侵犯泽州、潞州，魏博大将张文恭领军队自新口进入，葛从周领兖州、郓州众兵自土门进入，张归厚以邢州、氵名州众兵自马岭进入，定州王处直众兵自飞狐进入，侯言以晋州、绛州兵自阴地关进入。
English: In April, the general of Wei Bo, Zhang Wenyong, led an army of 50,000 soldiers from the Taihang Road to invade Zhezhou and Zhangzhou. The general of Wei Bo, Zhang Wenyong, led an army to enter from Xinkou, Ge from Zhou led an army of soldiers from Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou to enter from Dumen, Zhang Guihou led an army of soldiers from Zhangzhou and Zhangmian to enter from Maling, Dingzhou Wang Shanzhong led an army of soldiers from Feihu to enter, and Houyan led an army of soldiers from Jinzhou and Zhangzhou to enter from Yinjiguan.

古文：氏叔琮、康怀英营于泽州之昂车。
现代文：氏叔琮、康怀英在泽州的昂车扎营。
English: Uji no Tsukuda and Kang Huaiying set up camp in Angche, Zezhou.

古文：武皇令李嗣昭将三千骑赴泽州援李存璋，而归贺德伦。
现代文：武皇令李嗣昭带三千骑兵赴泽州援助李存璋，存璋逃回。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Li Shizhao and three thousand cavalry to go to Zhezhou to help Li Cunxu. Cunxu fled back.

古文：氏叔琮军至潞州，孟迁开门迎，沁州刺史蔡训亦以城降于汴，氏叔琮悉其众趋石会关。
现代文：氏叔琮军到潞州，孟迁开城门迎接，沁州刺史蔡训也以城投降汴军，氏叔琮带着所有众兵到石会关。
English: Mr. Shu's army arrived in Zhangzhou, Meng Qian opened the city gate to welcome them, Zhangzhou's governor Cai Xun also surrendered the city to the Zhang army, and Mr. Shu took all the soldiers to Shijie Pass.

古文：是时，偏将李审建先统兵三千在潞州，亦与孟迁降于汴；及叔琮之入寇也，审建为其乡导。
现代文：这时，偏将李审建先带兵三千驻在潞州，也和孟迁向汴军投降，到氏叔琮入侵时，李审建做他的向导。
English: At this time, Li Qianjian, who was stationed in Zhangzhou with 3,000 soldiers, also surrendered to the Zhang army with Meng Qian. When Uji Shuxuan invaded, Li Qianjian was his guide.

古文：汴人营于洞涡，别将白奉国与镇州大将石公立自井陉入，陷承天军。
现代文：汴军在洞涡扎营，别将白奉国与镇州大将石公立自井陉进入，攻陷承天军。
English: The Wei army encamped in the cave vortex. Bai Fengguo and the Zhenzhou general Shi Guozhong marched into the cave to attack and capture the Heavenly Army.

古文：及攻寿阳，辽州刺史张鄂以城降于汴，都人大恐。
现代文：进攻寿阳时，辽州刺史张鄂献城向汴军投降，晋阳城中人大为恐慌。
English: During the attack on Shouyang, Liaozhou's Zhang Ekeng City surrendered to the Han army, and people in Jinyang City panicked.

古文：时霖雨积旬，汴军屯聚既众，刍粮不给，复多痢疟，师人多死。
现代文：此时大雨连着下了十几天，汴军聚集驻扎了很多士兵，粮草供应不够，又有很多人生痢疾、疟疾，军人多有死亡。
English: At this time, heavy rain fell for more than a dozen days in a row, and many soldiers were gathered and stationed by the Shan army. The supply of grain and grass was insufficient, and many people suffered from dysentery and malaria, and many soldiers died.

古文：时大将李嗣昭、李嗣源每夜率骁骑突营掩杀，敌众恐惧。
现代文：同时大将李嗣昭、李嗣源每夜率骁勇骑兵突击到营中掩杀，敌兵十分恐惧。
English: At the same time, the generals Li Shizhao and Li Shiyuan led the brave cavalry to the camp every night to hide and kill, and the enemy soldiers were very afraid.

古文：五月，汴军皆退。
现代文：五月，汴军都退走。
English: In May, the Xing forces all withdrew.

古文：氏叔琮军出石会，周德威、李嗣昭以精骑五千蹑之，杀戮万计。
现代文：氏叔琮军出石会，周德威、李嗣昭以精锐骑兵五千跟踪追击，杀戮数万。
English: Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao led 5,000 elite cavalrymen to pursue and kill tens of thousands of people.

古文：初，汴军之将入寇也，汾州刺史李瑭据城叛，以连汴人，至是武皇令李嗣昭、李存审将兵讨之。
现代文：起初，汴军将要入侵时，汾州刺史李瑭据城叛变，与汴军联络，到这时武皇令李嗣昭、李存审带兵讨伐他。
English: At first, when the Qin army was about to invade, the Qin statesman Li Shizhen mutinied and contacted the Qin army. At this time, Emperor Wu ordered Li Shizhao and Li Cunxin to lead troops to fight him.

古文：是岁，并、汾饥，粟暴贵，人多附瑭为乱，嗣昭悉力攻城，三日而拔，擒李瑭等斩于晋阳市。
现代文：这一年，并州、汾州饥荒，米价暴涨，人多依附李瑭叛乱，李嗣昭尽力攻城，三日后攻下，捉住李瑭等斩于晋阳街上。
English: In the same year, there were famines in Bozhou and Ganzhou, rice prices skyrocketed, and many people followed Li Shizhao's rebellion. Li Shizhao tried his best to attack the city, and three days later he captured, captured, and beheaded Li Shizhao on Jinyang Street.

古文：氏叔琮既旋军，过潞州，掳孟迁以归。
现代文：氏叔琮回师路过潞州时，抓走孟迁南归。
English: When Mr. Meng's uncle, Zhu Hui, was passing through Zhangzhou, he arrested Meng Qian Nangui.

古文：汴帅以丁会为潞州节度使。
现代文：汴帅任丁会为潞州节度使。
English: Ren Ding, the governor of Zhangzhou, will serve as the envoy of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：六月，遣李嗣昭、周德威将兵出阴地，攻慈、隰二郡，隰州刺史唐礼、慈州刺史张瑰并以城来降。
现代文：六月，派李嗣昭、周德威带兵出阴地关，进攻慈、隰二州，隰州刺史唐礼、慈州刺史张瑰都献城投降。
English: In June, he sent Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei to lead the troops out of Yinji Pass to attack Cizhou, Zhangjiakou, Cangzhou and Zhangjiakou and surrender the city.

古文：武皇以汴寇方盛，难以兵服，佯降心以缓其谋，乃遣牙将张特持币马书檄以谕之，陈当时利害，请复旧好。
现代文：武皇因为汴军势力正旺盛，难以用武力制服，便假装自己屈服以稳住他们，派牙将张特持礼物书檄告诉对方，陈述当前利害关系，请修复旧好。
English: Emperor Wu, as it was difficult to subdue them by force, pretended to surrender in order to stabilize them. He sent Zhang with a special gift to tell the other side about the current situation, and asked them to restore the old friendship.

古文：十一月壬子，汴帅营于渭滨。
现代文：十一月四日，朱温在渭水边扎营。
English: On November 4, Zhu Wen set up camp at the edge of Surabaya.

古文：甲寅，天子出幸凤翔。
现代文：六日，天子出巡到凤翔。
English: On the sixth day, Tianzi went on a tour to Fengxiang.

古文：《新唐书》：帝如凤翔，李茂贞、韩全诲请召克用入卫，克用间道遣使者奔问，并诒书全忠，劝还汴，全忠不答。武皇遣李嗣昭率兵三千自沁州趋平阳，遇汴军于晋州北，斩首五百级。
现代文：武皇派李嗣昭率兵三千自沁州前往平阳，在晋州北与汴军相遇，斩首五百级。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao and three thousand soldiers from Zhangzhou to Pingyang. They met the Zhang army in the north of Jinzhou and beheaded five hundred soldiers.

古文：天复二年二月，李嗣昭、周德威领大军自慈、隰进攻晋、绛，营于蒲县。
现代文：天复二年二月，李嗣昭、周德威领大军自慈州、隰州进攻晋州、绛州，在蒲县扎营。
English: In February of the second year of Tianfu, Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei led a large army from Zichizhou and Zhangzhou to attack Jinzhou and Zhangzhou and set up camp in Pu County.

古文：乙未，汴将硃友宁、氏叔琮将兵十万，营于蒲县之南。
现代文：十八日，汴将朱友宁、氏叔琮带兵十万，在蒲县之南扎营。
English: On the 18th, he sent Zhu Youning and Uji Shuxuan with 100,000 soldiers to set up camp in the south of Pu County.

古文：乙巳，汴帅自领军至晋州，德威之军大恐。
现代文：二十八日，朱温亲自领军到晋州，周德威军心大为恐慌。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Wen personally led the army to Jinzhou. Zhou Dewei's army was panicked.

古文：三月丁巳，有虹贯德威之营。
现代文：三月十一日，长虹贯穿周德威营地上空。
English: On March 11th, a rainbow streaked across the sky above the Zhou Dewei Camp.

古文：戊午，氏叔琮率军来战，德威逆击，为汴人所败，兵仗、辎车委弃殆尽。
现代文：十二日，氏叔琮率军来战，周德威迎战，被汴军打败，兵仗、辎车全部丢光。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Mr. Zhu Rong led his army to fight, and Zhou Dewei fought against him. He was defeated by Mr. Zhu Rong's army, and lost all his soldiers and wagons.

古文：硃友宁长驱至汾州，慈、隰二州复为汴人所据。
现代文：朱友宁长驱直入到汾州，慈、隰二州又被汴军占据。
English: Zhu Youning drove straight into Ganzhou, and the two states of Cixi and Handan were occupied by the Handan army.

古文：辛酉，汴军营于晋阳之西北，攻城西门，周德威、李嗣昭缘山保其余众而旋。
现代文：十五日，汴军在晋阳西北扎营，攻城西门，周德威、李嗣昭沿山保着剩下众兵而回。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Wei army camped in the northwest of Jinyang and attacked the west gate of the city. Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao protected the remaining soldiers along the mountain and returned.

古文：武皇驱丁壮登陴拒守，汴军攻城日急；武皇召李嗣昭、周德威等谋将出奔云州，嗣昭以为不可。
现代文：武皇驱赶壮丁登上城墙拒守，汴军攻城一日急过一日，武皇召来李嗣昭、周德威等商量准备出奔去云州，李嗣昭认为不行。
English: Emperor Wu drove Zhuang Ding to climb the city wall to refuse to defend, and the Han army attacked the city one day after another. Emperor Wu summoned Li Shizhao, Zhou Dewei and others to discuss and prepare to go to Yunnan. Li Shizhao thought it was impossible.

古文：李存信坚请且入北蕃，续图进取，嗣昭等固争之，太妃刘氏亦极言于内，乃止。
现代文：李存信坚持请武皇暂且进入北方蕃族地界，以后再图谋反攻，李嗣昭等人仍坚持自己的看法相争，太妃刘氏也在宫里极力劝说，武皇才作罢。
English: Li Cunxin insisted on asking Emperor Wu to temporarily enter the northern Yi territory and then plan a counter-offensive. Li Shizhao and others still insisted on their own opinions and argued. Princess Liu also tried her best in the palace to persuade Emperor Wu to stop.

古文：居数日，亡散之士复集，军城稍安。
现代文：过了几天，流散的士兵又集合到一起，城中稍为安定。
English: After a few days, the scattered soldiers gathered again, and the city was somewhat stable.

古文：李嗣昭与李嗣源夜入汴军，斩将搴旗，敌人扞御不暇，自相惊扰。
现代文：李嗣昭和李嗣源夜里攻入汴军中，斩将夺旗，敌人来不及抵抗，自相惊扰。
English: Li Shiguo and Li Shiguang invaded the enemy's army at night and captured the flag. The enemy was too late to resist, and they were startled.

古文：丁卯，硃友宁烧营而遁，周德威追至白壁关，俘斩万计，因收复慈、隰、汾等三州。
现代文：二十一日，朱友宁烧掉军营逃走，周德威追到白壁关，俘斩数万，因而收复慈、隰、汾等三州。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Youning burned down the military camp and fled. Zhou Dewei chased him to Baijie Pass, captured and killed tens of thousands of people, and thus recovered the three states of Zi, Zou and Zou.

古文：天复三年正月，天子自凤翔归京。
现代文：天复三年一月，天子自凤翔回京城。
English: In January of the third year after Tianfu, Tianzi returned to Beijing from Fengxiang.

古文：五月，云州都将王敬晖杀刺史刘再立，以城归于刘仁恭。
现代文：五月，云州都将王敬晖杀刺史刘再立，以城归顺刘仁恭。
English: In May, Wang Jingyi was assassinated by Liu Zairian, the governor of Yunnan Province, and the city was handed over to Liu Renkong.

古文：武皇遣李嗣昭讨之，仁恭遣将以兵五万来援云州，嗣昭退保乐安，燕人掳敬晖，弃城而去。
现代文：武皇派李嗣昭讨伐他，刘仁恭派将军率兵五万来援助云州，李嗣昭退兵保守乐安，燕人俘虏了王敬晖，弃城而去。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao to fight him, Liu Rengong sent a general and 50,000 soldiers to aid Yunnan, Li Shizhao withdrew to preserve peace, Yanren captured Wang Jingyao and abandoned the city.

古文：武皇怒，笞嗣昭及李存审而削其官。
现代文：武皇大怒，鞭打李嗣昭和李存审并且罢免他们官职。
English: Emperor Wu flew into a rage, whipped Li He, Showa and Li Cunxin, and dismissed them from their posts.

古文：天祐元年闰四月，汴帅迫天子迁都于洛阳。《新唐书》：帝东迁，诏至太原，克用泣谓其下曰： 乘舆不复西矣！ 
现代文：这时，亲军几万都是边塞部族人，动不动就违反纪律，百姓深受其苦，身边的人对武皇说到此事，武皇说： 这些人胆量过人，几十年跟随我征伐，近年以来，国库空虚，众军士家中靠卖马度日。现在四方诸侯都在悬重赏召募勇士，我如果用法纪约束他们，太严格了他们会离开我，我又怎能独存呢！等到时运好转后，我自然有办法处置。 
English: At this time, tens of thousands of pro-army troops were border fortress tribesmen, violating discipline at every turn, and the people were deeply suffering from it. People around him told Emperor Wu about this. Emperor Wu said: These people are courageous, they have followed me for decades. In recent years, the treasury has been empty, and all the soldiers' families have been selling horses to get by. Now all the princes in the four directions are hanging heavy rewards to recruit warriors. If I use legal discipline to restrain them, it will be too strict and they will leave me. How can I survive on my own? When my luck improves, I will naturally have a way to deal with it.

古文：遣使者奔问行在。
现代文：天祐元年闰四月，朱温逼迫天子迁都到洛阳。
English: In leap April of the first year of Tianyu, Zhu Wen forced Tianzi to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：五月乙丑，天子制授武皇叶盟同力功臣，加食邑三千户，实封三百户。
现代文：五月一日，天子下令授武皇为叶盟同力功臣，加食邑三千户，实封三百户。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Taishi ordered the conferment of the Emperor for Ye Meng's meritorious service, adding three thousand households in food villages and three hundred households in real estate.

古文：八月，汴帅遣硃友恭弑昭宗于洛阳宫，辉王即位。
现代文：八月，朱温派朱友恭在洛阳宫杀死昭宗，由辉王即帝位。
English: In August, Zhu Wen sent Zhu Yougong to kill Zhaozong in Luoyang Palace, and King Hui ascended to the throne.

古文：告哀使至晋阳，武皇南向恸哭，三军缟素。
现代文：告哀使到晋阳时，武皇朝南痛哭，三军披孝守丧。
English: When the mourning envoy arrived in Jinyang, Emperor Wu was crying bitterly, and the three armies were in mourning.

古文：天祐二年春，契丹安巴坚始盛，武皇召之，安巴坚领部族三凡十万至云州，与武皇会于云州之东，握手甚欢，结为兄弟，旬日而去，留马千匹，牛羊万计，期以冬初大举渡河。
现代文：天祐二年春，契丹阿保机开始兴盛，武皇召见他，阿保机领部族三十万到云州，和武皇在云州东边相会，握手甚欢，结为兄弟，十天后回去，留下一千匹马，牛羊数万，约好初冬大举行动南渡黄河。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian period, the Khitan Ahoji began to flourish. Emperor Wu summoned him. Ahoji led 300,000 tribesmen to Yunnan. He and Emperor Wu met on the eastern edge of Yunnan, shook hands with great pleasure, became brothers, and returned ten days later, leaving behind a thousand horses, tens of thousands of cattle and sheep. They agreed to make a big move in early winter to cross the Yellow River to the south.

古文：天祐三年正月，魏博既杀牙军，魏将史仁遇据高唐以叛，遣人乞师于武皇，武皇遣李嗣昭率三千骑攻邢州以应之，遇汴将牛存节、张筠于青山口，嗣昭不利而还。
现代文：天祐三年一月，魏博诛杀了牙军后，魏将史仁遇据高唐反叛朱温，派人向武皇请求援军，武皇派李嗣昭率三千骑兵攻击邢州以响应他，在青山口与汴将牛存节、张筠相遇，李嗣昭失利而回。
English: In January of the third year of Tianyu, after Wei Bo Zhe killed the Yaga army, Wei general Shiren met the Gaotang rebel Zhu Wen and sent someone to the Emperor Wu to request reinforcements. The Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao to attack Ganzhou with three thousand cavalry in response to him. In Qingshankou, Li Shizhao met Niu Cunjie and Zhang Xuan, and Li Shizhao returned in defeat.

古文：九月，汴帅亲率兵攻沧州，幽州刘仁恭遣使来乞师，武皇乃征兵于仁恭，将攻潞州，以解沧州之围。
现代文：九月，汴帅朱温亲自率兵进攻沧州，幽州刘仁恭派使者来求援军，武皇便向刘仁恭征兵，准备进攻潞州，以解除沧州之围。
English: In September, the general Zhu Wen personally led the troops to attack Cangzhou. Liu Rengong of Yuzhou sent an envoy to Liu Rengong to ask for reinforcements. Emperor Wu then conscripted soldiers from Liu Rengong to prepare to attack Zhangzhou in order to lift the siege of Cangzhou.

古文：仁恭遣掌书记马郁、都指挥使李溥等将兵三万，会于晋阳，武皇遣周德威、李嗣昭合燕军以攻泽、潞。
现代文：刘仁恭派掌书记马郁、都指挥使李溥等人带兵三万，到晋阳会合，武皇派周德威、李嗣昭联合燕军攻击泽州、潞州。
English: Liu Rengong sent Ma Yu, the secretary of the palace, and Li Yu, the commander of the capital, to lead 30,000 soldiers to the meeting in Jinyang. Emperor Wu sent Zhou Dewei, Li Shizhao and the Yan army to attack Zezhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，潞州节度使丁会开门迎降，命李嗣昭为潞州节度使，以丁会归于晋阳。
现代文：十二月，潞州节度使开门投降，武皇命李嗣昭为潞州节度使，把丁会带回晋阳。
English: In December, the Bozhou Festival envoy opened the door and surrendered. Emperor Wu ordered Li Shizhao to be the Bozhou Festival envoy and take the Ding Association back to Jinyang.

古文：所承良讯，非仆深心，天下其谓我何，有国非吾节也。
现代文：天祐四年一月七日，汴帅朱温听说潞州失守，便自沧州焚烧军营逃走。四月，天子将帝位禅让给朱温，朱温奉天子为济阴王，改元为开平，立国号为大梁。
English: On January 7th, the 4th year of Tenyu, Zhu Wen, the commander-in-chief of the Qing Dynasty, heard that Zhangzhou was lost, so he fled from Cangzhou and set fire to the military camp. In April, Tianzi ceded the imperial throne to Zhu Wen, Zhu Wen honored Tianzi as the king of Jiyin, changed Yuan to Kaiping, and established the country as Dalian.

古文：凄凄孤恳，此不尽陈。五月，梁祖遣其将康怀英率兵十万围潞州，怀英驱率士众，筑垒环城，城中音信断绝。
现代文：这一年，四川王建派来使者，劝武皇各自在一方称王，等消灭国贼朱温后，再访求唐朝宗室以接续帝位，然后各归藩镇。武皇没同意。五月，梁太祖朱温派其将军康怀英率兵十万包围潞州，康怀英驱使士卒，修筑堡垒环绕潞州州城，城中音信断绝。
English: In the same year, Wang Jian of Sichuan sent an envoy to advise Emperor Wu that they should each proclaim themselves king on the one hand, and then, after eliminating the traitor Zhu Wen, visit the Tang Dynasty's family to succeed to the throne, and then return to their respective towns. Emperor Wu did not agree. In May, Emperor Liang's great-grandfather Zhu Wen sent his general Kang Huai Ying and 100,000 soldiers to encircle Zhangzhou. Kang Huai Ying drove the soldiers to build a fortress around Zhangzhou City, and communication was cut off in the city.

古文：武皇遣周德威将兵赴援，德威军于余吾，率先锋挑战，日有俘获，怀英不敢即战。
现代文：武皇派周德威带兵援救潞州，周德威在余吾驻军，率领先锋挑战，每天都有俘获，康怀英不敢接战。
English: Emperor Wu sent Zhou Dewei to lead troops to rescue Zhangzhou. Zhou Dewei stationed troops in Yuwu and led the vanguard to challenge. There were prisoners every day, and Kang Huaiying did not dare to fight.

古文：梁祖以怀英无功，乃以李思安代之。思安引军将营于潞城，周德威以五千骑搏之，梁军大败，斩首千余级。
现代文：梁太祖因康怀英没有战果，便以李思安代替他，李思安引军准备在潞城扎营，周德威领五千骑兵攻击他，梁军大败，斩首一千多。
English: Liang Taizu replaced Kang Huaiying with Li Sian as Kang Huaiying had no military achievements. Li Sian led an army to prepare to camp in Lucheng. Zhou Dewei led five thousand cavalry to attack him. Liang's army was defeated and more than one thousand were beheaded.

古文：思安退保坚壁，别筑外垒，谓之 夹塞 ，以抗我之援军。
现代文：李思安退守坚壁，另外筑外垒，称之为 夹寨 ，以抵抗武皇的援军。
English: Li Sian retreated to defend the strong wall, and built another outer wall, called "Ji Zhai," to resist Emperor Wu's reinforcements.

古文：梁祖调发山东之民以供馈运，德威日以轻骑掩之，运路艰阻，众心益恐。
现代文：梁太祖调发山东百姓运输粮饷，周德威每天领轻骑袭击他们，运路艰险，众心更加恐慌。
English: Liang Taizu dispatched the people of Shandong to transport grain, and Zhou Dewei led the light cavalry to attack them every day. The transportation route was arduous, and the hearts of the people were even more panicked.

古文：李思安乃自东南山口筑夹道，连接夹寨，以通馈运，自是梁军坚保夹塞。
现代文：李思安便从东南山口修筑夹道，连接夹寨，以保证运输，从此梁军坚守夹寨。
English: Li Sian then built a road from the southeastern mountain pass to connect the entanglement to ensure transportation. Since then, Liang's army has adhered to the entanglement.

古文：冬十月，武皇有疾，是时晋阳城无故自坏，占者恶之。
现代文：十月，武皇生病。这时晋阳城无故崩坏，占卜者认为不祥。
English: In October, Emperor Wu fell ill. At this time, Jinyang City collapsed for no reason, which was considered ominous by soothsayers.

古文：天祐五年正月戊子朔，武皇疾革。
现代文：天祐五年一月一日，武皇病情加重。
English: On January 1st, Emperor Wu's illness worsened.

古文：辛卯，崩于晋阳，年五十三。
现代文：四月，在晋阳去世，时年五十三岁。
English: In April, he passed away in Jinyang at the age of 53.

古文：遣令薄葬，发丧后二十七日除服。
现代文：遗令薄葬，发丧后二十七日除去丧服。
English: The remains were buried in a shallow grave, and the funeral clothes were removed on the 27th day after the funeral.

古文：庄宗即位，追谥武皇帝，庙号太祖，陵在雁门。
现代文：庄宗即位后，追谥为武皇帝，庙号太祖，陵墓在雁门。
English: After Zhuangzong's accession to the throne, he was named Emperor Wu and given the title of Grand Patriarch. His mausoleum is located in Yanmen.

