古文：○徽宗三二年春正月甲子，制：上书邪等人并不除监司。
现代文：政和二年春正月初六，发布制书说：上书邪等人一律不授给监司一职。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring and the 1st month of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Zheng He, it was announced that no one would be awarded the post of supervisor.

古文：二月戊子朔，蔡京复太师致仕，赐第京师。
现代文：二月初一，蔡京再次以太师职衔退休，在京师开封赐给他住宅。
English: On the first day of February, Cai Jing once again retired from the title of ether master, and he was given a house in Kaifeng, Beijing.

古文：庚子，以婉容崔氏为贤妃。
现代文：十三日，以婉容崔氏为贤妃。
English: On the 13th, Wanrong Cui was crowned as the virtuous empress.

古文：三月戊午朔，定国公共薨。
现代文：三月初一，定国公越供逝世。
English: On the first day of March, Ding Guoguang passed away.

古文：己巳，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：十二日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 12th, he went to Shueiden to make a plan to enter the priesthood.

古文：己卯，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身七百十三人。
现代文：二十二日，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身七百一十三人。
English: On the 22nd, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies conferred honorary doctorates on 713 people.

古文：夏四月己丑，诏县令以十二事劝农于境内，躬行阡陌，程督勤惰。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏县令从有关农事的十二个方面在辖区劝农力耕，自己要亲自带头，按规章赏勤罚懒。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the next Zhaoxian County Decree was issued to encourage agricultural work in the jurisdiction from twelve aspects related to agriculture. They should personally take the lead and reward diligence and punish laziness according to regulations.

古文：辛卯，复行方田。
现代文：初五，又实行方田法。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Fangda Law was implemented.

古文：日中有黑子。
现代文：太阳中出现黑子。
English: Spots appear in the sun.

古文：甲午，宴蔡京等于太清楼。
现代文：初八，在太清楼宴请蔡京等人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Cai Jing and others were invited to a banquet at the Taiqing Building.

古文：乙巳，以定国军节度使仲忽为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十九日，任命定国军节度使赵仲忽为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 19th, the appointment of the Dingguo Jun Festival made Zhao Zhonghu become the third division of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：庚戌，以何执中为司空。
现代文：二十四日，任命何执中为司空。
English: On the 24th, He Xingzhong was appointed as Sifu.

古文：壬子，赐张商英自便。
现代文：二十六日，赐给张商英自便。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Shangying was given a car of his own.

古文：五月癸亥，虑囚。
现代文：五月初七，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, the criminal status of the prisoners was investigated.

古文：丁卯，封子椿为庆国公。
现代文：初五，封儿子赵椿为庆国公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Zhaming, a son of Fu, became Qing Guogong.

古文：己巳，蔡京落致仕，三日一至都堂议事。
现代文：初七，朝廷特命蔡京复出任职，三日去一次政事堂，参加商议国家大事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial court specially ordered Cai Jing to resume his duties, and on the third day he went to the government hall to participate in the deliberation of national events.

古文：六月己丑，以资政殿学士余深为门下侍郎。
现代文：六月初四，任命资政殿学士余深为门下侍郎。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, Yu Sheng, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：乙卯，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十九日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 29th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：秋七月壬申，访天下遗书。
现代文：秋七月十七日，访求全国遗书。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, he visited the whole country to leave a suicide note.

古文：丙子，置礼制局。
现代文：二十一日，设立礼制局。
English: On the 21st, the Bureau of Etiquette was established.

古文：九月壬午，改太尉以冠武阶。
现代文：九月二十八日，太尉改冠武阶。
English: On September 28th, he was promoted to the rank of taifu.

古文：癸未，正三公、三孤官。
现代文：二十九日，整伤三公、三孤官，三公为太师、太傅、太保，三孤为少师、少傅、少保。
English: On the 29th, three officials and three non-commissioned officers were injured. The three officials were Taishi, Taifu, and Taibo, and the non-commissioned officers were Shoshi, Shofu, and Shobo.

古文：改侍中为左辅，中书令为右弼，左、右仆射为太宰、少宰，罢尚书令。
现代文：改侍中为左辅，中书令为右弼，左右仆射为太宰、少宰，罢除尚书令。
English: He was promoted to assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the right, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right, assistant secretary in the middle, assistant secretary in the left and right.

古文：冬十月乙巳，得玉圭于民间。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，在民间获得礼器玉圭。
English: In winter, on October 21st, the ceremonial instrument, the tamagui, was given to the people.

古文：十一月己未，置知客省、引进、四方馆、东西上阁门事。
现代文：十一月初六，设置知客省、引进、四方馆、东西上间门事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, the departments of guest education, introduction, square pavilion, and east and west were set up.

古文：戊寅，日南至，受元圭于大庆殿，赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，冬至，在大庆殿接受元圭，赦免全国。
English: On the 25th day, the winter solstice, he received Yuan Gui at Daqing Hall and pardoned the whole country.

古文：辛巳，蔡京进封鲁国公。
现代文：二十八日，进封蔡京为鲁国公。
English: On the 28th, Cai Jing was enthroned as the Prince of Lu.

古文：以何执中为少傅、太宰兼门下侍郎，执政皆进秩。
现代文：任命何执中为少傅、太宰兼门下侍郎。执政官都升级。
English: He appointed He Xingzhong as Shao Fu, Dazai and his servant. The consuls were all upgraded.

古文：十二月甲申，行给地牧马法。
现代文：十二月初一，实行给地牧马法。
English: On the first day of December, the horse-breeding law will come into effect.

古文：乙酉，以郑居中为特进。
现代文：初二，任命郑居中为特进。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Zheng Ju was appointed as a special student.

古文：丙戌，以武信军节度使童贯为太尉。
现代文：初三，任命武信军节度使童贯为太尉。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the appointment of the military commander of the Wuxin Army made Tong Run a second lieutenant.

古文：乙巳，定命妇名为九等。
现代文：二十二日，确定命妇名为九等。
English: On the 22nd, the names of nine women were confirmed.

古文：丙午，燕辅臣于延福宫。
现代文：二十三日，在延福宫设宴招待辅臣。
English: On the 23rd, a banquet was held at Yanfu Palace to invite the vice-ministers.

古文：辛亥，封子楃为卫国公。
现代文：二十八日，封儿子越憧为卫国公。
English: On the 28th, Fong's son Yue Yong became the Prince of National Defense.

古文：是岁，成都府、苏州火。
现代文：这一年，成都府、苏州发生火灾。
English: This year, fires occurred in Chengdu and Suzhou.

古文：出宫女三百八十三人。
现代文：放出宫女三百八十三人。
English: Three hundred and eighty-three maids of honour were released.

古文：高丽入贡。
现代文：高丽来进贡。
English: Goryeo pays tribute.

古文：成都路夷人董舜咨、董彦博内附，置祺、亨二州。
现代文：成都路夷人董舜咨、董彦博内附朝廷，设置棋州、亨州。
English: Chengdu emperors Dong Shizhe and Dong Yanbo were attached to the imperial court and set up the states of Shizhou and Hengzhou.

古文：三年春正月己未，以定王桓、嘉王楷并为太保。
现代文：政和三年春正月初六，任命定王赵桓、嘉王赵楷为太保。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the third year of Zheng He, Ding Wang Zhao Huan and Jia Wang Zhao Kai were appointed as Tai Bao.

古文：庚申，以广平郡王构为检校太保。
现代文：初七，任命广平郡王赵构为检校太保。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Wang Zhao Jie of Guangping County was appointed as the school inspector.

古文：甲子，诏以天赐元圭，遣官册告永裕、永泰陵。
现代文：十一日，下诏因天赐元圭，派官员册告裕陵、永泰陵。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor sent officials to inform Yuling and Yongtai Mausoleums of the death of Yuan Gui.

古文：丙寅，以燕王俣为太傅。
现代文：十三日，任命燕王赵误为太傅。
English: On the 13th, Yan Wang Zhao was mistakenly appointed Taifu.

古文：癸酉，追封王安石为舒王，子雱为临川伯，配飨文宣王庙。
现代文：二十日，追封王安石为舒王，他的儿子王稣为临川伯，配享文宣王庙。
English: On the 20th, Wang Anshi was posthumously named King of Shu, and his son, Wang Zu, was named Linchuan Bo, with the right to enjoy the King Wenxuan Temple.

古文：丁丑，吴居厚罢，以观文殿学士郑居中知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，吴居厚被罢免，任命观文殿学士郑居中为知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, Wu Ju Hou was removed from office, and Zheng Ju Zhong, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：己卯，以越王偲为太傅，封子楗为韩国公。
现代文：二十六日，任命越王赵为太傅，封儿子赵健为韩国公。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Yue Wang Zhao as Taifu, and appointed his son Zhao Jian as the Prince of Korea.

古文：二月甲申，以德妃王氏为淑妃。
现代文：二月初二，以德妃王氏为淑妃。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the

古文：庚寅，罢文臣勋官。
现代文：初八，废罢文臣勋官。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the post of civil servant was abolished.

古文：辛卯，崇恩太后暴崩。
现代文：初九，崇恩太后突然逝世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Empress Dowager Chong En died suddenly.

古文：甲午，以辽、女真相持，诏河北治边防。
现代文：十二日，因辽朝、女真族之间发生战争，下诏河北整治边防。
English: On the 12th, due to the war between the Liao Dynasty and the Jurchen, Hebei issued an order to rectify the border defense.

古文：丁酉，诏百官奉祠禄者并以三年为任。
现代文：十五日，下诏百官奉祠禄者一律以三年为期限。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, it was decreed that the period of three years would apply to all those who had served as officials in the past.

古文：乙巳，增定六朝勋臣一百一十六人。
现代文：二十三日，增定六朝勋臣一百一十六人。
English: On the 23rd, one hundred and sixteen honored vassals of the Six Dynasties were added.

古文：三月壬子朔，日有食之。戊辰，进神宗淑妃宋氏为贵妃。升永安县为永安军。癸酉，赐上舍生十九人及第。
现代文：三月初一，日食。十七日，进神宗德妃宋氏为贵妃。升永安县为永安军。二十二日，赐上舍生十九人及第。
English: On the first day of March, there was a solar eclipse. On the 17th, Jin Shen Zong Te Roi Song became a noble consort. He was promoted to Yongan County as a member of the Yongan Army. On the 22nd, he was given the title of 19th.

古文：夏四月戊子，作保和殿。
现代文：夏四月初七，修建保和殿。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month in summer, construction of the Peace Memorial Hall began.

古文：庚寅，以复溱、播，等州降德音于梓夔路。
现代文：初九，因收复揍、播等州向梓夔路颁降德音文告。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the state issued a letter of demotion to Zizang Road due to the resumption of the railway and broadcasting.

古文：癸巳，邓洵仁罢。
现代文：十二日，邓询仁被罢免。
English: On the 12th, Deng Yingren was removed from office.

古文：乙巳，以福宁殿东建玉清和阳宫。
现代文：二十四日，在福宁殿东建造玉清和阳宫。
English: On the 24th, the Jade Qing Heyang Palace was built to the east of the Fu Ning Palace.

古文：丙午，升定州为中山府。
现代文：二十五日，升定州为中山府。
English: On the 25th, Shingding Prefecture was elevated to Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：己酉，以资政殿学士薛昂为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十八日，任命资政殿学士薛昂为尚书右承。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Xue Ang, a Scholar of the Academy of Governance, as his successor.

古文：庚戌，班《五礼新仪》。
现代文：二十九日，颁布瓦礼新协。
English: On the 29th, the Wali New Association was promulgated.

古文：闰月丙辰，改公主为帝姬。
现代文：闰四月初六，改公主为帝姬。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, the princess was changed to Teiji.

古文：戊午，复置医学。
现代文：初八，重新设置医学。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, medicine was re-established.

古文：辛酉，上崇恩太后谥曰昭怀。
现代文：十一日，敬上崇恩太后溢号为昭怀。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the honourable Empress Dowager Chong En was awarded the honorary title.

古文：庚午，庆国公椿薨。
现代文：二十日，庆国公赵椿逝世。
English: On the 20th, Qing Guo Gong Zhao Zhin passed away.

古文：五月乙酉，虑囚。
现代文：五月初六，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the criminal status of the prisoners was investigated.

古文：丙申，升苏州为平江府。
现代文：十七日，升苏州为平江府。
English: On the 17th, Suzhou was upgraded to Pingjiang Prefecture.

古文：庚子，大盈仓火。
现代文：二十一日，大盈仓发生火灾。
English: On the 21st, a fire broke out in Daying Warehouse.

古文：壬寅，以筑溱、播进执政官一等。
现代文：二十三日，因修筑揍州、播州城升执政一级官。
English: On the 23rd, he was promoted to the first-level government official due to the construction of Bozhou and Banzhou.

古文：丙午，葬昭怀皇后于永泰陵。
现代文：二十七日，葬昭怀皇后于永泰陵。
English: On the 27th, the funeral of Empress Zhaohui was held at Yongtai Mausoleum.

古文：丁未，诏尚书内省分六司，以掌外省六曹所上之事；置内宰、副宰、内史、治中等官及都事以下吏员。
现代文：二十八日，下诏尚书内省分六司，安排掌管外省六曹所上事情；设置内宰、副宰、内史、治中等官及都事以下吏员。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued, dividing the province into six departments, and arranging to take charge of the affairs of the six provinces outside the province; setting up the internal affairs manager, deputy manager, internal history, justice and other officials, and city affairs and other officials.

古文：己酉，班新燕乐。
现代文：三十日，颁布新燕乐。
English: On the 30th, the new bird song was promulgated.

古文：六月癸亥，祔昭怀皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：六月二十四日，在太庙附祭昭怀皇后神主。
English: On the 24th of June, there was an additional festival in the Imperial Temple to celebrate the Empress Shinshu.

古文：戊辰，降两京、河阳、郑州囚罪一等，民缘园陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：二十九日，两京、河阳、郑州囚犯减罪一等，民户因园陵服役者免除赋税。
English: On the 29th, prisoners in Beijing, Heyang and Zhengzhou were given first-class reduction of crime, and private households were exempted from paying taxes for those who served as gardeners.

古文：秋七月癸未，升赵城县为庆祚军。
现代文：秋七月初五，升赵城县为庆柞军。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Sheng Zhaocheng County was taken over by the Qing Dynasty army.

古文：甲申，还王珪、孙固赠谥，追复韩忠彦、曾布、安焘、李清臣、黄履等官职。
现代文：初六，归还巨盖、孙固所赠溢号，追复韩忠彦、曾布、安煮、李清臣、黄履等人官职。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Juguai and Sun Gu were given back their honorary titles, and Han Tadahiko, Zengbu, Anqi, Li Qingchen and Huang Li were restored to their official positions.

古文：庚子，贵妃刘氏薨。
现代文：二十二日，贵妃刘氏逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Princess Liu passed away.

古文：壬寅，复置白州。
现代文：二十四日，重新设置白州。
English: On the 24th, Baishu was re-established.

古文：八月甲戌，以燕乐成，进执政官一等。
现代文：八月二十六日，因燕乐完成升执政一级官。
English: On August 26th, he was promoted to the first-level government official due to the completion of Yanle.

古文：丙子，以何执中为少师。
现代文：二十八日，任命何执中为少师。
English: On the 28th, He Xingzhong was appointed as a junior teacher.

古文：丁丑，升润州为镇江府。
现代文：二十九日，升润州为镇江府。
English: On the 29th, Shenrun Prefecture became Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：戊寅，封四镇山为王。
现代文：三十日，封四镇山为王。
English: On the 30th, he became the king of Shizhen Mountain.

古文：九月庚寅，诏大理寺、开封府不得奏狱空，其推恩支赐并罢。
现代文：九月十二日，下诏大理寺、开封府不得上奏监狱是空的，罢除因奏狱空而赐给的恩惠。
English: On September 12th, the following edict was issued to the Dali Temple that the Kaifeng government must not announce that the prison was empty, and the favors given for announcing the prison was empty were cancelled.

古文：戊戌，追册贵妃刘氏为皇后，谥曰明达。
现代文：十八日，追册贵妃刘氏为皇后，溢号为明达。
English: On the 18th, Princess Liu was posthumously registered as empress, and her posthumous name was Mingda.

古文：冬十月乙丑，阅新乐器于崇政殿，出古器以示百官。
现代文：冬十月十八日，在崇政殿检阅新乐器，把古器拿给百官欣赏。
English: On the 18th day of October in winter, new musical instruments were inspected at the Soongjeongjeon Palace, and the old ones were shown to hundreds of officials for appreciation.

古文：戊辰，诏冬祀大礼及朝景灵宫，并以道士百人执威仪前导。
现代文：二十一日，下诏冬祀大礼及朝拜景灵宫，一律让道士带领仪仗和随从作为前导。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following year, the winter ritual ceremony and the worship of the Jingling Palace were decreed, all of which were to be led by Taoists and their followers.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：冬十一月初四，祭祀景灵宫。
English: In winter, on the fourth day of the first month of November, there is a ritual at Jingling Temple.

古文：壬午，飨太庙，加上神宗谥曰体元显道法古立宪帝德王功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，改上哲宗谥曰宪元继道世德扬功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
现代文：初五，祭祀太庙，又敬献神宗溢号为体元显道法古立宪帝德王功英文烈武钦仁圣孝皇帝，改上哲宗溢号为宪元继道世德扬功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the temple was dedicated, and the shinzong was revered with the exclamation mark of the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the founder of Buddhism, the

古文：癸未，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，大赦天下。
现代文：初六，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，大赦全国。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the god Haotian was worshipped at the round mound, and a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：升端州为兴庆府。
现代文：升端州为兴庆府。
English: Ascendant Prefecture is Xingqing Prefecture.

古文：乙酉，以天神降，诏告在位，作《天真降临示现记》。
现代文：初八，因天神降临，下诏告谕居官任职者，作沃真降临示现主己。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, due to the arrival of the angels, the following edict was issued to the officials in office, as the arrival of Wozhen showed the present master.

古文：乙丑，以贤妃崔氏为德妃。
现代文：十二日，升贤妃崔氏为德妃。
English: On the 12th, Princess Seunghyun of the Choe clan became Empress Deokhyun.

古文：壬辰，筑祥州。
现代文：十五日，筑样州城。
English: On the fifteenth day, the construction of the sample state city began.

古文：己亥，诏有官人许举八行。
现代文：二十二日，下诏有官人推举八行人才。
English: On the 22nd, it was announced that officials would nominate eight talents.

古文：十二月癸丑，诏天下访求道教仙经。
现代文：十二月初六，下诏全国访寻道教仙经。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th lunar month, the emperor issued an edict to visit all parts of the country in search of the Taoist Immortal Classic.

古文：乙卯，诏天下贡医士。
现代文：初八，下诏全国各地贡举医士。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that the whole country should pay tribute to doctors.

古文：辛酉，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：是岁，江东旱，温、封、滋三州火。
现代文：这一年，江东早灾，温、封、滋三州发生火灾。
English: In this year, there were early disasters in Jiangdong, and fires occurred in Wenzhou, Fengshan and Zhizhou.

古文：出宫女二百七十有九人。
现代文：放出宫女二百七十九人。
English: And he sent out two hundred and seventy-nine maidens.

古文：四年春正月戊寅朔，置道阶凡二十六等。
现代文：政和四年春正月初一，设置道阶，共二十六等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring Festival, a total of 26 steps were set up.

古文：辛丑，追封濮王子宗谊为祁王，宗咏为莱王，宗师为温王，宗辅为楚王，宗博为萧王，宗沔为霍王，宗荩为建王，宗胜为袁王。
现代文：二十四日，追封攫王子赵宗宜为祁王，赵宗咏为莱王，赵宗师为温王，赵宗辅为楚王，赵宗博为萧王，赵宗洒为霍王，赵宗草为建王，赵宗胜为袁王。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Zongyi, the prince of Zhai, was named the king of Zhai, Zhao Zongyi was named the king of Lai, Zhao Zongshi was named the king of Wen, Zhao Zongfu was named the king of Chu, Zhao Zongbo was named the king of Xiao, Zhao Zongsu was named the king of Huo, Zhao Zong Cao was named the king of Jian, and Zhao Zongsheng was named the king of Yuan.

古文：二月丁巳，赐上舍生十七人及第。
现代文：二月十一日，赐上舍生十七人及第。
English: On February 11th, the 17th and final batch of trainees were awarded.

古文：癸亥，改淯井监为长宁军。
现代文：十七日，改清井监为长宁军。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the well inspectors of the Qing Dynasty were replaced by the Changning Army.

古文：癸酉，长子桓冠。
现代文：二十七日，长子赵桓举行成人礼。
English: On the 27th, the eldest son, Zhao Huan, held a coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：三月丙子朔，以淑妃王氏为贵妃。
现代文：三月初一，以淑妃王氏为贵妃。
English: On the first day of March, Princess Shukfei Wang was crowned as an honorary consort.

古文：夏四月庚戌，幸尚书省，以手诏训诫蔡京、何执中，各官迁秩，吏赐帛有差。
现代文：夏四月初五，到尚书省，手诏训诫蔡京、何执中，官员分别升级，吏赐给不等的帛。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to Shangshu Province to give a handwritten admonition to Cai Jing and He Xingzhong. The officials were upgraded separately, and the officials were given different ranks.

古文：癸丑，阅太学、辟雍诸生雅乐。
现代文：初八，视察太学、辟雍生员雅乐。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he inspected Taigaku and saw the Yongsheng member, Yara.

古文：甲子，改戎州为叙州。
现代文：十九日，改戎州为叙州。
English: On the 19th, Yongzhou was changed to Xuzhou.

古文：五月丙戌，始祭地于方泽，以太祖配。
现代文：五月十二日，开始在方泽祭地，以太祖配享。
English: On May 12th, the distribution of ethereal ancestors began at the Fonze festival site.

古文：降德音于天下。
现代文：向全国颁降德音文告。
English: He issued a proclamation of surrender to the whole country.

古文：子机薨。
现代文：儿子赵机逝世。
English: His son Zhao Ji passed away.

古文：六月戊午，虑囚。
现代文：六月十五日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On June 15th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：壬申，以广西溪洞地置隆、兑二州。
现代文：二十九日，以广西溪洞地建置隆州、兑州。
English: On the 29th, Longzhou and Duizhou were built with Guangxi Xidong.

古文：秋七月丁丑，置保寿粹和馆，以养宫人有疾者。
现代文：秋七月初四，设置保寿粹和馆用来抚养宫人有疾病的人。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month in autumn, a hospice was set up to care for people with illnesses.

古文：戊寅，焚苑东门所储毒药可以杀人者，仍禁勿得复贡。
现代文：初五，焚烧苑东门所储藏的可以杀死人的毒药，并且严禁各地再进贡这样的毒药。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the poison that can kill people stored in the east gate of the garden was incinerated, and it is strictly forbidden for other regions to pay tribute for such poison.

古文：甲午，祔明达皇后神主于别庙。
现代文：二十一日，在别庙附祭明达皇后神主。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a memorial service was held for the Mingda Empress in another temple.

古文：八月乙巳，改端明殿学士为延康殿学士，枢密直学士为述古殿直学士。
现代文：八月初三，改端明殿学士为延康殿学士，枢密直学士为述古殿直学士。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the year, the graduates of Changduan Mingden were renamed as the graduates of Yankangden, and the graduates of Privy College were renamed as the graduates of Suiguoden.

古文：癸亥，定武臣横班以五十员为额。
现代文：二十一日，裁定武臣横班，以五十人为定额。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was decided that the number of samurai would be divided into two groups, with fifty being the quota.

古文：九月乙卯，以安静军节度使王宪为开府仪同三司。
现代文：九月初七，任命安静军节度使王宪为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Wang Xian was appointed as the keeper of ceremonies and the third secretary of the Quiet Army Festival.

古文：己亥，诏诸路兵应役京师者，并以十月朔遣归。
现代文：二十七日，下诏在京师应役的各路士兵一律在十月一日遣归原地。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that all soldiers serving in the Beijing Division would be sent back to their original places on October 1.

古文：冬十月乙巳，复置拱州。
现代文：冬十月初四，重置拱州。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, resetting gongzhou.

古文：十一月丁丑，封子梴为相国公。
现代文：十一月初六，封儿子赵诞为相国公。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, Fong's son Zhao was born as the Prince of the same country.

古文：十二月己酉，以禁中神御殿成，减天下囚罪一等。
现代文：十二月初八，因修成禁中神御殿，全国囚犯减罪一等。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the year, because of the completion of the construction of the Forbidden Middle God's Palace, the national prisoners had their crimes reduced to the first class.

古文：癸丑，定朝议、奉直大夫以八十员为额。
现代文：十二日，裁定朝议大夫、奉直大夫以八十人为定额。
English: On the 12th, it was decided that Dr. Choi and Dr. Bong Chung would be promoted to a quota of 80 people.

古文：己未，诏广南市舶司岁贡真珠、犀角、象齿。
现代文：十八日，下诏广南市舶司每年进贡真珠、犀角、象齿。
English: On the 18th, the Guangnan Shipbuilding Bureau announced that pearls, rhinoceros horns and elephant tusks would be donated every year.

古文：是岁，相州野蚕成茧。
现代文：这一年，相州野蚕成茧。
English: In this year, the Sichuan wild silkworm became a cocoon.

古文：出宫女六十八人。
现代文：放出宫女六十八人。
English: Sixty-eight maids of honour were released.

古文：五年春正月庚辰，泸南晏州夷反，寻诏梓州路转运使赵遹等督兵讨平之。
现代文：政和五年春正月初九，沪南晏州夷反叛，不久下诏梓州路转运使赵等率军讨平。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 5th year of Zheng He, the Zhangzhou Yi rebelled in the south of Shanghai, and soon after the Zizhou Road Transit was issued to make Zhao and other troops lead the army to settle the dispute.

古文：己丑，令诸州县置医学，立贡额。
现代文：十八日，命令各州县设置医学，立定贡额。
English: On the 18th, it ordered all prefectures and counties to set up medical institutions and establish a fixed tribute.

古文：甲午，改龙州为政州。
现代文：二十三日，改龙州为政州。
English: On the 23rd, Longzhou was changed to Shengzhou.

古文：二月乙巳，立定王桓为皇太子。
现代文：二月初五，立定王赵桓为皇太子。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Prince Zhao Huan of Liding became crown prince.

古文：甲寅，册皇太子，赦天下。
现代文：十四日，册封皇太子，赦免全国。
English: On the 14th, he was crowned crown prince and pardoned the whole country.

古文：庚午，以童贯领六路边事。
现代文：三十日，任命童贯统领六路边事。
English: On the 30th, Tong Quan was appointed to lead the six-way border affairs.

古文：三月辛未朔，太白昼见。
现代文：三月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of March, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：己卯，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初九，到集英殿策试进士。
English: At the age of nine, he went to Shueiden to prepare for the entrance exam.

古文：甲申，追论至和、嘉祐定策功，封韩琦为魏郡王，复文彦博官。
现代文：十四日，追论至和、嘉定策大功，封韩琦为魏郡王，恢复文彦博官职。
English: On the 14th, after discussing the great achievements of Zhihe and Jiading, Han Zheng was named the king of Wei County, and Fenyangbo was restored to his official position.

古文：丁亥，诏以立皇太子，见责降文武臣僚并与牵复甄叙，凡千五百人。
现代文：十七日，下诏因立皇太子，现受处罚贬降的文武官员一律复位录用，共一千五百人。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict was issued to reinstate the crown prince, and all civil and military officials who had been punished and demoted were reinstated, a total of 1,500 people.

古文：壬辰，升舒州为德庆军。
现代文：二十二日，升舒州为德庆军。
English: On the 22nd, Sheng Shuzhou was taken by the Deqing Army.

古文：癸巳，赐礼部奏名进士出身六百七十人。
现代文：二十三日，赐礼部奏名进士出身六百七十人。
English: On the twenty-third day, six hundred and seventy people from the ceremony department were named.

古文：夏四月甲辰，作葆真宫。
现代文：夏四月初五，修建葆真宫。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, the construction of the Shizhen Palace began.

古文：丁未，诣景灵宫，还，幸秘书省，进馆职官一等。
现代文：初八，到景灵宫，回时到秘书省，馆阁官晋升一级。
English: On his eighth day of junior high school, he went to Jingling Palace, and then to the Ministry of Secretaries, and was promoted to the first level as a cabinet official.

古文：庚戌，改集英殿为右文殿。
现代文：十一日，改集贤殿为右文殿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Shisen-den hall was changed to the Umon-den hall.

古文：癸亥，置宣和殿学士。
现代文：二十四日，设置宣和殿学士。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the establishment of the Xuanwu Academy.

古文：诏东宫讲读官罢读史。
现代文：下诏东宫讲读官废除读史。
English: Under the Emperor's edict, the East Palace Lecturer abolished reading history.

古文：五月壬辰，虑囚。
现代文：五月二十三日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On May 23, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：六月癸丑，以修三山河桥，降德音于河北、京东、京西路。
现代文：六月十五日，因修建三山河桥，向河北、京东、京西路颁降德音文告。
English: On June 15th, due to the construction of the Sanzhan River Bridge, Hebei, East Beijing and West Beijing Roads were issued with the notice of German descent.

古文：秋七月戊辰朔，日有食之。乙亥，升汝州为陆海军。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。初八，升汝州为陆海军。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the sun will be eclipsed. On the eighth day of the first month, Ruzhou will be taken over by the army and navy.

古文：丁丑，诏建明堂于寝殿之南。
现代文：初十，下诏在寝殿南面建造明堂。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, the emperor issued an edict to build a Ming hall on the south side of the sleeping hall.

古文：甲申，昭庆军节度使蔡卞为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十七日，昭庆军节度使蔡卞为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 17th, the Shaoqing Army Festival made Cai Wei the third division of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：丁亥，封子越为瀛国公。
现代文：二十日，封儿子越越为赢国公。
English: On the 20th, Fong's son became more and more victorious.

古文：八月己酉，以秘书省地为明堂。
现代文：八月十二日，以秘书省地盘建为明堂。
English: On August 12th, the Ming Hall was built according to the secretarial land-saving plan.

古文：辛亥，升通利军为濬州、平川军节度。
现代文：十四日，升通利军为浚州平川军节度。
English: On the 14th, the Shentongli Army won the victory over the Junzhou Pingchuan Army.

古文：嗣濮王仲增薨。
现代文：嗣攫王赵仲增逝世。
English: Zhao Zhongzheng, the heir to the throne, passed away.

古文：九月己卯，封仲御为嗣濮王。
现代文：九月十三日，封赵仲御为嗣攫王。
English: On September 13th, Zhao Zhongguo was named the heir to the throne.

古文：丙戌，封子楧为惠国公。
现代文：十八日，封儿子枷英为惠国公。
English: On the 18th, his son, Yao Ying, became the Prince of Hui Province.

古文：冬十月癸卯，以嵩山道人王仔昔为冲隐处士。
现代文：冬十月初七，以篙山道士王仔昔为冲隐处士。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Wang Zi, a Taoist from Lushan, used to be a priest of Chongyin.

古文：戊午，夏国入贡。
现代文：二十二日，夏国来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月癸酉，录昭宪皇后杜氏之裔。
现代文：十一月初八，录用昭宪皇后杜氏的后代。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the descendants of Empress Shoken's toji were hired.

古文：庚寅，高丽遣子弟入学。
现代文：二十五日，高丽派遣子弟人学。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo sent its children to study.

古文：十二月己亥，升遂州为遂宁府。
现代文：十二月初四，升遂州为遂宁府。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Suizhou was elevated to Suining Prefecture.

古文：庚申，以平晏夷，曲赦四川。
现代文：二十五日，因平定晏夷特赦免四川。
English: On the 25th, he pardoned Sichuan for suppressing the barbarians.

古文：癸亥，置缘边安抚司于泸州。
现代文：二十八日，在沪州设置缘边安抚司。
English: On the 28th, the Boundary Pacification Division was set up in Huzhou.

古文：是岁，平江府、常、湖、秀州水。出宫女五十人。
现代文：这一年，平江府、常州、湖州、秀州发生水灾，放出五十名宫女。
English: In the same year, floods occurred in Pingjiang, Changzhou, Huzhou and Xiuzhou, releasing fifty maids of honor.

古文：六年春正月戊子，以泸南献捷，转宰执一官。
现代文：政和六年春正月二十三日，因沪南献上捷报转宰执一官。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of the Zheng He era, he was promoted to the post of vice-governor as a result of Hunan's submission of a victory report.

古文：以童贯宣抚陕西、河北。
现代文：任命童贯宣抚陕西、河北。
English: Tong Rong was appointed as the procurator of Shaanxi and Hebei.

古文：闰月壬寅，升颍州为顺昌府。
现代文：闰正月初七，升颖州为顺昌府。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the leap year, Shining Prefecture became Shunchang Prefecture.

古文：丁未，置道学。
现代文：十二日，设置道学。
English: On the 12th, a Taoist school was established.

古文：二月丁亥，诏增广天下学舍。
现代文：二月二十三日，下诏扩大全国学舍。
English: On February 23rd, the next edict was issued to expand school buildings nationwide.

古文：庚寅，诏广京城。
现代文：二十六日，下诏扩大京城。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict was issued to expand the capital.

古文：三月癸丑，赐上舍生十一人及第。
现代文：三月十九日，赐上舍生十一人及第。
English: On March 19th, the eleventh and last son was born.

古文：夏四月乙丑，会道士于上清宝箓宫。
现代文：夏四月初二，在上清宝宫会见道士。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, I met a Taoist monk at the Treasure Palace of the Upper Qing Dynasty.

古文：辛未，以何执中为太傅致仕，朝朔望。
现代文：初八，命令何执中以太傅衔退休，逢一日、十五日朝见皇帝。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered He Xingzhong to retire from the title of ether fu and to meet the emperor in the morning every day and the fifteenth day.

古文：丁丑，诏天宁诸节及壬戌日，杖已下罪听赎。
现代文：十四日，下诏： 天宁节等节及壬戊日，杖刑以下罪允许赎罪。 
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: On the Tianning Festival and other festivals, as well as on the 3rd day of the 3rd lunar month, the punishment of less than a cane is allowed for atonement.

古文：丙戌，却监司、守臣进献。
现代文：二十三日，拒绝监司、守臣进献的物品。
English: On the 23rd, he refused the items presented by the supervisors and guards.

古文：庚寅，诏蔡京三日一朝，正公相位，总治三省事。
现代文：二十七日，下诏蔡京三日朝见皇帝一次，扶正他的公相爵位，总治三省事务。
English: On the 27th, Cai Jing met with the emperor once in the morning of the 3rd, restored his title of the courtier, and presided over the affairs of the three provinces.

古文：五月丁酉，废锡钱。
现代文：五月初四，废除锡钱。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, tin money was abolished.

古文：庚子，以郑居中为少保、太宰兼门下侍郎，刘正夫为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初七，任命郑居中为少保、太宰兼门下侍郎，刘正夫为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Zheng Jizhong was appointed as Junior Vice-Minister, Dazai and Junior Secretary, and Liu Zhengfu was appointed as Senior Vice-Minister, Junior Secretary and Junior Secretary.

古文：壬寅，以保大军节度使邓洵武知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命保大军节度使邓询武为知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Deng Xuanwu was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：六月丙寅，班中书官制格。
现代文：六月初四，颁布中书官制条例。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth lunar month, the Regulations on the Chinese Calligraphy Official System were promulgated.

古文：庚午，虑囚。
现代文：初八，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：甲戌，诏堂吏迁官至奉直大夫止。
现代文：十二日，下诏官吏迁官至奉直大夫为止。
English: On the 12th, the lower-ranking officials were transferred to the position of doctor.

古文：癸未，皇太子纳妃朱氏。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子纳妃朱氏。
English: On the twenty-first day, Crown Prince Na and Princess Zhu left.

古文：秋七月壬辰朔，以震武城为震武军。
现代文：秋七月初一，以震武城为震武军。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Shibu Castle was taken over by the Shibu Army.

古文：甲午，以德妃崔氏为贵妃。
现代文：初三，以德妃崔氏为贵妃。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Tefui Cui will be honored as a princess.

古文：辛亥，以河阳三城节度使王荐为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十日，任命河阳三城节度使王荐为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Wang Xian to be the keeper of ceremonies and the third secretary of the festival of the three cities in Heyang.

古文：诸盗晏州卜漏阙一字沅州黄安俊、定边军李吪移伏诛，诏函首于甲库。
现代文：盗贼晏州卜漏、沉州黄安俊、定边军李毗霏处以死刑，下诏函首置放甲库。
English: Thieves Gongzhou Bu Luo, Shenzhou Huang Anjun, and Dingbian Army Li Fei Yao were sentenced to death, and placed in the armoury at the beginning of the following edict.

古文：壬子，曲赦湖北。
现代文：二十一日，因特殊情况赦免湖北。
English: On the 21st, Hubei was pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：己未，解池生红盐。
现代文：二十八日，解池生出红盐。
English: On the 28th, red salt emerged from the digester.

古文：辛酉，改走马承受公事为廉访使者。
现代文：三十日，改走马承受公事为廉访使者。
English: On the 30th, he was transferred to a horse to undertake official duties as an emissary to investigate corruption.

古文：八月壬戌朔，戒北边帅臣毋生事。
现代文：八月初一，告诫北边帅臣不要滋生事端。
English: On the first day of August, he admonished the North Korean leader not to stir up trouble.

古文：壬午，诏天下监司、郡守搜访岩谷之士，虽恢诡谲怪自晦者悉以名闻。
现代文：二十一日，下诏全国监司、郡守搜求寻访隐逸之士，即使是离奇神异隐居不出者也全都把名字报到朝廷。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the procuratorate and county governors of the whole country issued an order to search for and visit the secluded people, and even those who did not live in seclusion reported their names to the imperial court.

古文：丁亥，幸蔡京第。
现代文：二十六日，到蔡京家。
English: On the 26th, he went to Cai Jing's home.

古文：己丑，升晋州为平阳、寿州为寿春、齐州为济南府。
现代文：二十八日，升晋州为平阳府、寿州为寿春府、齐州为济南府。
English: On the 28th, Pingyang Prefecture, Shoushou Prefecture, Shoushun Prefecture and Jinan Prefecture were promoted to Jinan Prefecture.

古文：九月辛卯朔，诣玉清和阳宫，上太上开天执符御历含真体道昊天玉皇上帝徽号宝册。
现代文：九月初一，到玉清和阳宫，敬献太上开天执符御历含真体道昊天玉皇上帝徽号宝册。
English: On the first day of September, I went to the Jade Emperor's Palace of Peace and Harmony to present to the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：丙申，赦天下。
现代文：初六，赦免全国。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the entire country was pardoned.

古文：令洞天福地修建宫观，塑造圣像。
现代文：命令洞天福地修建宫观，塑造圣像。
English: He ordered Dong Tianfu to build a palace and sculpt sacred images.

古文：以西内成，曲赦京西。
现代文：因西内宫殿竣工特赦免京西。
English: Due to the completion of the inner palace, the western part of Kyoto was given a special amnesty.

古文：己未，以童贯为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，任命童贯为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 29th, Tong Quan was appointed as the head of the three departments of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：冬十月乙丑，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十一月丁酉，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一月初八，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the ritual at Jingling Temple began.

古文：戊戌，飨太庙。
现代文：初九，祭祀太庙。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：己亥，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：初十，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, the god Haotian was sacrificed at the round mound, and the whole country was pardoned.

古文：庚子，以礼部尚书白时中为尚书右丞。
现代文：十一日，任命礼部尚书白时中为尚书右承。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：辛丑，魏国公材薨。
现代文：十二日，魏国公赵材逝世。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Zai, the Prince of Wei, passed away.

古文：戊申，以侯蒙为中书侍郎，薛昂为尚书左丞。
现代文：十九日，任命侯蒙为中书侍郎，薛昂为尚书左承。
English: On the 19th, he appointed Hou Meng as the attendant of the Chinese book, and Xue Ang as the heir of the Chinese book.

古文：己未，徙封卫国公楃为郓国公。
现代文：三十日，徙封卫国公赵憧为邪国公。
English: On the 30th, Zhao Yong, the protector of the state, was exiled and became the prince of a foreign country.

古文：增横班为十三阶。
现代文：增加横班为十三阶。
English: The horizontal class was increased to 13 ranks.

古文：十二月己巳，以婉仪刘氏为贤妃。
现代文：十二月初十，以婉仪刘氏为贤妃。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, Wan Yi Liu was crowned as the virtuous empress.

古文：戊寅，以熙河进筑功成，进执政一官。
现代文：十九日，因修筑熙河成功，执政官晋升一级。
English: On the 19th, due to the success of the construction of the Heihe River, the consul was promoted to the first level.

古文：乙酉，奠九鼎于圜像徽调阁。
现代文：二十六日，在圆像徽调阁安放九鼎。
English: On the 26th, Jiuding was placed in the round pavilion.

古文：刘正夫为开府仪同三司致仕。
现代文：刘正夫以开府仪同三司身份退休。
English: Liu Zhengfu retired as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：戊子，以宗粹为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，任命赵宗粹为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Zongzi was appointed as the head of the Third Division of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：是岁，冀州三山黄河清。
现代文：这一年，冀州三山段黄河清澈见底。
English: This year, the three-mountain section of the Yellow River in Jizhou was crystal clear to the bottom.

古文：出宫女六百人。
现代文：放出六百名宫女。
English: Release six hundred maids of honour.

古文：高丽、占城、大食、真腊、大理、夏国入贡，茂州夷郅永寿内附。
现代文：高丽、占城、大食、真腊、大理、夏国来进贡，茂州夷邱永寿内附朝廷。
English: Goryeo, Zhancheng, Taekwondo, Jinla, Dali and Xia Guo came to pay tribute, and the imperial court was attached to the Yongshou Palace in Shoushou.

古文：七年春正月丁酉，于阗入贡。
现代文：政和七年春正月初八，于闻来进贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Zheng He, tribute was paid to Wenlai.

古文：庚子，以殿前都指挥使高俅为太尉。
现代文：十一日，任命殿前都指挥使高球为太尉。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Household Agency appointed Gao to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：二月癸亥，以大理国主段和誉为云南节度使、大理国王。
现代文：二月初五，任命大理国主段和誉为云南节度使、大理国王。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, he was appointed the head of the Dali Kingdom and was hailed as the ambassador of the Yunnan Festival and the King of Dali.

古文：甲子，会道士二千余人于上清宝箓宫，诏通真先生林灵素谕以帝君降临事。
现代文：初六，在上清宝宫会见道士二千多人，下诏通真先生林灵素告示帝君降临事。
English: On his 6th day of junior high school, he met with more than 2,000 Taoists at the Shangqing Treasure Palace, and under the edict of Tongzhen, Mr. Lin Lingsu announced the arrival of the emperor.

古文：丁卯，御集英殿策高丽进士。
现代文：初九，到集英殿策试高丽进士。
English: At the age of nine, she went to the Shuei-den to try out for the role of Goryeo envoy.

古文：辛未，改天宁万寿观为神霄玉清万寿宫。
现代文：十三日，改全国天宁万寿观为神霄玉清万寿宫。
English: On the thirteenth day, the national Tianning longevity concept was changed to Shenxiao Yuching Longevity Palace.

古文：乙亥，幸上清宝箓宫，命林灵素讲道经。
现代文：十七日，到上清宝宫，命令林灵素讲解道经。
English: On the 17th, he went to the Shangqing Treasure Palace and ordered Lin Lingsu to give a sermon.

古文：三月庚寅，赐高丽祭器。
现代文：三月初二，赐给高丽祭器。
English: On the second day of the third month of the lunar calendar, a sacred object was given to Goryeo.

古文：高丽进士权适等四人赐上舍及第。
现代文：赐给高丽进士权适等四人上舍及第。
English: Goryeo Jinzhi was given the right to choose the top four and the first place.

古文：乙未，以童贯权领枢密院。
现代文：初七，任命童贯暂领枢密院。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Tong Yan was appointed as the provisional leader of the Privy Council.

古文：丙申，升鼎州为常德军。
现代文：初八，升鼎州为常德军。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, Shandong Province was conquered by the German army.

古文：夏四月庚申，帝讽道箓院上章，册己为教主道君皇帝，止于教门章疏内用。
现代文：夏四月初二，徽宗托辞婉言劝说道院递上奏章，册封自己为教主道君皇帝，只在教门章疏内使用。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Huizong's entreaty and gentle persuasion persuaded the court to submit the record, and he proclaimed himself the head of the church, Emperor Daojun. It was only used in the door chapter of the church.

古文：辛酉，升温州为应道军。
现代文：初三，升温州为应道军。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Sheng Wenzhou was the runner-up.

古文：五月戊子朔，升庆州为庆阳军、渭州为平凉军。
现代文：五月初一，升庆州为庆阳军、渭州为平凉军。
English: On the first day of May, the Qingyang Army and the Pingliang Army were in the ascendant in Qingzhou and the Pingliang Army was in the ascendant in Zhangzhou.

古文：己丑，如玉清和阳宫，上承天效法厚德光大后土皇地祇徽号宝册。
现代文：初二，到玉清和阳宫，敬献承天效法厚德光大后土皇地机徽号宝册。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, they went to the Jade Emperor's Palace of Peace and Harmony to dedicate a treasure book of the Turkish emperor's land machine emblem to the emperor.

古文：辛卯，命蔡攸提举秘书省并左右街道箓院。
现代文：初四，命令蔡枚提举秘书省和左右街道院。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, he ordered Cai Mei to nominate the secretaries of the ministry and the left and right streets.

古文：乙未，诏权罢宫室修造。
现代文：初八，下诏暂停宫室修造。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the emperor issued an edict suspending the construction of the palace.

古文：辛丑，祭地于方泽，降德音于诸路。
现代文：十四日，在方泽祭地，向各路颁降德音文告。
English: On the 14th, at the Fonze Festival Grounds, a proclamation was issued to all roads.

古文：以监司州县共为奸赃，令廉访使者察奏，仍许民径赴尚书省陈诉。
现代文：因监司州县官共同勾结贪赃为奸，命令廉访使者核察上奏，并且允许百姓直接到尚书省陈诉。
English: Because the supervisors of the prefectural and county officials colluded with each other to commit corruption, they ordered the emissary to investigate and report corruption, and allowed the people to go directly to Shangshu to file a complaint.

古文：癸卯，改玉清和阳宫为玉清神霄宫。
现代文：十六日，改玉清和阳宫为玉清神霄宫。
English: On the 16th, the Jade Qing Heyang Palace was changed to the Jade Qing Shenxiao Palace.

古文：六月戊午朔，以明堂成，进封蔡京为陈、鲁国公。
现代文：六月初一，因明堂修成，进封蔡京为陈、鲁两国公。
English: On the first day of June, with the completion of the Ming Hall, Cai Jing was enthroned as the prince of Chen and Lu.

古文：戊辰，以嘉王楷为太傅。
现代文：十一日，任命嘉王赵楷为太傅。
English: On the 11th day, Ji Wang Zhao Kai was appointed as Taifu.

古文：改节度观察留后为承宣使。
现代文：改节度观察留后为承宣使。
English: After the observation of the degree of reform and opening-up, it was announced.

古文：己巳，蔡京辞两国不拜，诏官其亲属二人。
现代文：十二日，蔡京辞谢两国公，不接受任命，下诏给他亲属二人官职。
English: On the 12th, Cai Jing resigned in gratitude to the two countries, did not accept the appointment, and issued a decree to give two of his relatives official positions.

古文：壬午，诏禁巫觋。
现代文：二十五日，下诏严禁男巫、女巫。
English: On the 25th, the following edict strictly prohibited male witches and witches.

古文：丙戌，贵妃宋氏薨。
现代文：二十九日，贵妃宋氏逝世。
English: On the 29th, Princess Song passed away.

古文：秋七月壬辰，熙河、环庆、泾原地震。
现代文：秋七月初六，熙河、环庆、径原发生地震。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, an earthquake occurred in Xihe, Huanqing and Jianyuan.

古文：庚子，诏八宝增定命宝。
现代文：十四日，下诏八宝增定命宝。
English: On the 14th, the following eight treasures were added to the treasure of life.

古文：八月癸亥，诏明堂并祠五帝。
现代文：八月初八，诏明堂并祠五帝。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the

古文：郑居中以母忧去位。
现代文：郑居中因遭母丧离职。
English: Zheng Juzhong resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：九月戊子，诏湖北民力未纾，胡耳西道可罢进筑。
现代文：九月初三，下诏湖北民力没有得到缓和，胡耳西道可以废罢进筑。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, Hubei people's power was not eased, and Hulusi Road could be abandoned and built.

古文：辛卯，大飨明堂，赦天下。
现代文：初六，在明堂举行大规模祭祀，赦免全国。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, a large-scale religious service was held in Myeongdong, and the entire country was pardoned.

古文：乙未，刘正夫卒。
现代文：初十，刘正夫去世。
English: At the age of ten, Liu Zhengfu passed away.

古文：丁酉，西蕃王子益麻党征降，见于紫宸殿。
现代文：十二日，西蕃王子益麻党征投降，徽宗在紫哀殿接见了他。
English: On the 12th, the prince of Xidi, Yisma, surrendered to the party. Huizong received him at the Purple Shrine.

古文：壬寅，进宰执官一等。
现代文：十七日，宰执官晋升一级。
English: On the 17th, the vice-chairman was promoted to the first level.

古文：甲辰，以薛昂为特进。
现代文：十九日，任命薛昂为特进。
English: On the 19th, Xue Ang was appointed as a special envoy.

古文：癸丑，贵妃王氏薨。
现代文：二十八日，贵妃王氏逝世。
English: On the 28th, Guifei Wang died.

古文：冬十月乙卯朔，初御明堂，班朔布政。戊寅，侯蒙罢。
现代文：冬十月初一，初到明堂，班朔布政。二十四日，侯蒙被罢免。
English: On the first day of October in winter, he arrived at the Ming Hall for the first time, and was appointed to the post of minister. On the 24th, Hou Meng was dismissed.

古文：十一月庚寅，命蔡京五日一赴都堂治事。
现代文：十一月初六，命令蔡京五日到都堂一次处理政事。
English: On early November 6, he ordered Cai Jing to come to the Great Hall of the People on the 5th to deal with political affairs.

古文：辛卯，郑居中起复。
现代文：初七，郑居中守丧未满三年被朝廷重新起用。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zheng Ju, the middle-ranking official, was reappointed by the imperial court less than three years after his death.

古文：以余深为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎，白时中为中书侍郎。
现代文：任命余深为特进、少宰兼中书侍郎，白时中为中书侍郎。
English: Yushin was appointed as Tokujin, Shosai and Chusho-sajiro, and Hakuchijo as Chusho-sajiro.

古文：壬辰，复置醴州。
现代文：初八，重置醛州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, reset the aldehyde state.

古文：丙申，何执中卒。
现代文：十二日，何执中去世。
English: On the 12th, He Xingzhong passed away.

古文：升石泉县为军。
现代文：升石泉县为军。
English: He joined the army in Shosheiquan County.

古文：十二月戊申朔，有星如月。
现代文：十二月戊申朔，有星如月。
English: December wu shen shuang, there are stars like the moon.

古文：丁巳，以薛昂为门下侍郎。
现代文：初四，任命薛昂为门下侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he appointed Xue Ang as his tutor.

古文：戊辰，诏天神降于坤宁殿，刻石以纪之。
现代文：十五日，下诏天神在坤宁殿降临，刻石记载这件事。
English: On the fifteenth day, the following day, the gods descended on Kunning Hall, and the event was recorded in stone.

古文：庚午，以童贯领枢密院。
现代文：十七日，任命童贯领枢密院。
English: On the 17th, Tong Lanluo was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：命户部侍郎孟揆作万岁山。
现代文：命令户部侍郎孟撰造作万岁山。
English: He ordered Meng, an attendant of the household department, to compose a poem about the mountain.

古文：是岁，三山河水清。
现代文：这一年，三山段黄河水清澈见底。
English: This year, the water of the Yellow River in the three mountain ranges was crystal clear to the bottom.

古文：出宫女六十八人。
现代文：放出六十八名宫女。
English: Sixty-eight maids of honour were released.

古文：重和元年春正月甲申朔，受定命宝于大庆殿。戊子，封孙谌为崇国公。
现代文：重和元年春正月，在大庆殿接受定命宝。初五，封孙赵堪为崇国公。
English: In the first month of the new year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year

古文：己丑，赦天下。
现代文：初六，赦免全国。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the entire country was pardoned.

古文：应元符末上书邪中等人，依无过人例。
现代文：元符末年上书被划为邪等中等人者，按照没有过错的人使用安排。
English: At the end of the Yuan era, middle-class people who were classified as evil in the previous year's document were arranged according to the use of people who did not make mistakes.

古文：乙巳，封侄有奕为和义郡王。
现代文：二十二日，封侄赵有奕为和义郡王。
English: On the 22nd, the nephew Zhao Youyi became the king of Heyi County.

古文：庚戌，以翰林学士承旨王黼为尚书左丞。
现代文：二十七日，任命翰林学士承旨王敞为尚书左承。
English: On the 27th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zhi Wang Chang was appointed as Zheng Zhi's successor.

古文：二月戊辰，增诸路酒价。
现代文：二月十六日，提高各路酒价。
English: On February 16th, the price of wine will be raised.

古文：庚午，遣武义大夫马政由海道使女真，约夹攻辽。
现代文：十八日，派遣武义大夫马政从海道出使女真，约定夹攻辽朝。
English: On the 18th, Ma Zhen, the doctor of Wuyi, was dispatched from the sea to attack the Liao Dynasty.

古文：甲戌，升六安县为六安军。
现代文：二十二日，升六安县为六安军。
English: On the 22nd, Sheng Liuan County was taken over by the Liuan Army.

古文：丁丑，诏监司辄以禁钱买物为苞苴馈献，论以大不恭。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：监司动不动用禁钱买物来行贿进献，以大不恭论处。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Supervisors should not use prohibited money to buy things to offer bribes, and should be treated with great indignation.

古文：三月丙戌，诏监司、郡守自今须满三岁乃得代，仍毋得通理。
现代文：三月初四，下诏：监司、郡守从今以后必须任满三年才能替代，并且不得通理。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the following edict was issued: Supervisors and county governors must now have served for three years before they can be replaced, and they must not be divorced.

古文：癸巳，令嘉王楷赴廷对。
现代文：十一日，命令嘉王赵楷到朝廷回答问题。
English: On the 11th, Ji Wang ordered Zhao Kai to come to the imperial court to answer questions.

古文：丙申，以茂州蕃族平，曲赦四川。
现代文：十四日，因茂州蕃族平定，特赦免四少。
English: On the 14th, due to the subjugation of the Yi people in Muzhou, special amnesty was given to four ethnic minorities.

古文：丁酉，知建昌陈并等改建神霄宫不虔及科决道士，诏并勒停。
现代文：十五日，建昌知军陈并等人因改建神霄宫不虔诚及科决道士，下诏一律勒令停职。
English: On the 15th, Jianchang Zhijun, Chen Nian and others were ordered to be suspended from duty because they were not pious and Kecheng Taoists.

古文：戊戌，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：十六日，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 16th, he went to Shiei-den to make a plan to enter the priesthood.

古文：戊申，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身七百八十三人。
现代文：二十六日，赐礼部奏名进士及第、出身七百八十三人。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, seven hundred and eighty-three people from the first and second generations were awarded the title of Song of the Rite.

古文：有司以嘉王楷第一，帝不欲楷先多士，遂以王昂为榜首。
现代文：有关部门把嘉王赵楷排在第一，徽宗不想让赵楷领先其他士人，于是把王昂排在榜首。
English: The relevant departments ranked Jiahuang Zhao Kai as the first. Huizong did not want Zhao Kai to be ahead of other scholars, so he put Wang Angyu at the top of the list.

古文：夏四月癸丑朔，筑靖夏城、制戎城。
现代文：夏四月初一，修筑靖夏城、制戎城。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Jingxia Town and Zaebong Town were built.

古文：录吕余庆后。
现代文：录用吕徐庆后代。
English: Lu Xuqing's descendants were hired.

古文：癸亥，减捶刑。
现代文：十一日，减捶刑。
English: On the 11th, the sentence was reduced.

古文：己卯，诏每岁以季秋亲祠明堂，如孟月朝献礼。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：每年秋季的第三个月即九月亲自祭祀明堂，如同四季第一个月的祭祀礼仪。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: Every year, in the third month of autumn, that is, in September, I will personally sacrifice Myodo, just like the ritual of sacrifice in the first month of the four seasons.

古文：以太上混元上德皇帝二月十五日生辰为贞元节。
现代文：以太上混元上德皇帝二月十五日生辰为贞元节。
English: The Emperor's birthday, February 15th, is the first day of the Chinese New Year.

古文：五月壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：乙酉，诏诸路选漕臣一员，提举本路神霄宫。
现代文：初四，下诏各路选择槽臣一名，提举本路神霄宫。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the new year, each path chooses a groom, and the main path, Shenxiao Palace, is raised.

古文：丁亥，以林灵素为通真达灵元妙先生，张虚白为通元冲妙先生。
现代文：初六，以林灵素为通真达灵元妙先生，张虚白为通元妙先生。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Lin Lingsu was chosen as Mr. Tong Zhenda Lingyuan Miao, and Zhang Xubai as Mr. Tongyuan Miao.

古文：壬辰，班御制《圣济经》。
现代文：十一日，颁布御制圣济经。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Imperial Rule of the Sutra of St. Francis was promulgated.

古文：以青华帝君八月九日生辰为元成节。
现代文：把青华帝君的生日八月九日作为元成节。
English: August 9th, the birthday of Emperor Qinghua, is celebrated as Yuancheng Festival.

古文：庚戌，手敕两浙漕司，以权添酒钱尽给御前工作。
现代文：二十九日，徽宗手救两浙槽司，把暂增酒钱全部供给皇上所在之处工作所需。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Huizong rescued the two Zhe troughs and provided all the temporarily increased wine money needed for the work at the emperor's place.

古文：六月乙卯，以贤妃刘氏为淑妃。
现代文：六月初四，以贤妃刘氏为淑妃。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th lunar month, with the virtuous Liu clan as the queen.

古文：己巳，以淮西盗平，曲赦。
现代文：十八日，因淮西盗贼平定，特赦免该地。
English: On the 18th, because the Huaixi thieves were subdued, the place was specially pardoned.

古文：庚子，虑囚。
现代文：十九日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 19th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：甲戌，以西边献捷，曲赦陕西、河东路。
现代文：二十三日，因西部边境奏上捷报，特赦免陕西、河东路。
English: On the 23rd, due to the successful report on the western border, Shaanxi and Hedong Road were specially pardoned.

古文：秋七月壬午，以西师有功，加蔡京恩，官其一子。郑居中为少傅，余深为少保，邓洵武为特进，进执政官一等。
现代文：秋七月初二，因西部边境立功，加给蔡京恩惠，授给他儿子一人官职，郑居中为少傅，余深为少保，邓询武为特进，执政官升官一级。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of autumn, because of his meritorious service on the western border, Tsai Jing was granted a favor, and one of his sons was given an official post. Zheng Juzhong was the junior minister, Yu Sheng was the junior official, Deng Xuanwu was the special promotion, and the consul was promoted to the first level.

古文：己酉，遣廉访使者六人振济东南诸路水灾。
现代文：二十九日，派遣廉访使者六人贩济东南各路水灾地区。
English: On the 29th, six traffickers were sent to the flood-stricken areas in southeastern Zhejiang Province.

古文：八月甲寅，以童贯为太保。
现代文：八月初四，委任童贯为太保。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Tong Quan was appointed as Tai Po.

古文：辛酉，诏班御注《道德经》。
现代文：十一日，下诏颁布皇上注释的道德经。
English: On the 11th, the Imperial edict promulgating the Emperor's commentary on the Tao Te Ching was issued.

古文：壬申，诏执政非入谢及丐去，毋得独留奏事。
现代文：二十二日，下诏执政官不是上朝辞谢和请求离去，不得独自一人留下来奏事。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that if the consul did not leave with a letter of resignation and a request to leave, he must not be left alone to report.

古文：癸酉，封子椅为嘉国公。
现代文：二十三日，封儿子赵椅为嘉国公。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Xing, the son of Feng, became the ruler of Jiaguogu.

古文：乙亥，升兖州为袭庆府。
现代文：二十五日，升充州为袭庆府。
English: On the 25th, Shentongzhou attacked Qingfu.

古文：九月辛巳，大飨明堂。
现代文：九月初二，大规模祭祀明堂。
English: On September 13th, Daisuki Myodo will close.

古文：壬午，诏罢拘白地、禁榷货、增方田税、添酒价、取醋息、河北加折耗米、东南水灾强籴等事。
现代文：初三，下诏废罢拘白地、禁榷货、增方田税、添酒价、取醋息、河北加折耗米、东南水灾强来等事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the following decrees were issued: abolishing the ban on white rice, banning stolen goods, increasing farmland tax, increasing the price of wine, taking vinegar interest, increasing the consumption of rice in Hebei Province, and flooding in southeastern China.

古文：丙戌，诏太学、辟雍各置《内经》、《道德经》、《庄子》、《列子》博士二员。己丑，以岁当戌、月当壬为元命，降德音于天下。
现代文：初七，下诏太学、辟雍分别设置《内经、植德纽、注于、烦叮于博士二名。初十，以岁当戊、月当壬为元命，向全国颁布德音文告。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edicts were issued: "Teaching the Inner Canon," "Planting the German New Year," "Paying attention to," and "Disturbing the Two Doctors," respectively. On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the edicts were issued to the whole country, with the year being wu and the month being ren.

古文：庚寅，薛昂罢。
现代文：十一日，薛昂被罢免。
English: On the 11th day, Xue Ang was removed from office.

古文：以白时中为门下侍郎，王黼为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨冯熙载为尚书左丞，刑部尚书范致虚为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命白时中为门下侍郎，王敞为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨冯熙载为尚书左承，刑部尚书范致虚为尚书右承。
English: He appointed Bai Shizhong as his junior attendant, Wang Miao as his junior attendant, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Feng Xizhe as his junior attendant, and the head of the Department of Criminal Law, Zongzhi Fan Zhihu, as his junior attendant.

古文：壬辰，禁州郡遏籴及边将杀降以幸功赏者。
现代文：十三日，严禁州郡遏来以及边将为了邀功请赏而杀死投降归服者。
English: On the 13th, it was strictly forbidden for prefectures and counties to suppress or kill those who surrendered in order to reward them.

古文：癸巳，禁群臣朋党。
现代文：十四日，严禁大臣们结为朋党派别。
English: On the 14th, it was strictly forbidden for ministers to form crony parties.

古文：丁酉，用蔡京言，集古今道教事为纪志，赐名《道史》。
现代文：十八日，采纳蔡京的请求，辑集古今道教事为纪志，赐名为植史。
English: On the 18th, at the request of Cai Jing, a collection of ancient and modern Taoist teachings was compiled as a chronicle and given the name "Planting History."

古文：辛丑，郑居中罢，乞持余服，诏从之。
现代文：二十二日，郑居中被罢免，请求服完母丧，下诏批准。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Ju was removed from his post, and requested to complete his mother's funeral, which was approved by imperial edict.

古文：诏察县令治行、诸路监司能改正州县事者，较为殿最。
现代文：下诏核察县令治绩、各路监司能改正州县事者，相互比较作为考核好坏的依据。
English: According to the following edict, the performance of county orders and performance of counties shall be inspected, and the supervisors of each county shall be able to correct the state and county affairs, and compare with each other as the basis for the assessment of good and bad.

古文：诏视中大夫林灵素、视中奉大夫张虚白并特授本品真官。
现代文：下诏：林灵素视作中大夫、张虚白视作中奉大夫，都特授本品真官。
English: The following edict: Lin Lingsu is regarded as a junior doctor, Zhang Xubai is regarded as a junior doctor, and both are specially awarded this title.

古文：闰月庚申，诏江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广监司督责州县还集流民。
现代文：闰九月十一日，下诏江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广监司督促州县官招回流民。
English: On September 11th, the supervisors of Jiangsu, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangxi urged the prefectural and county officials to recruit the displaced people.

古文：丁卯，进封楷为郓王。
现代文：十八日，进封赵楷为邪王。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Kai was crowned the evil king.

古文：丙子，诏：周柴氏后已封崇义公，复立恭帝后以为宣义郎，监周陵庙，世世为国三恪。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：后周柴氏后代已经封为崇义公，再立恭帝后代为宣义郎，监管后周陵庙，世世为国三烙，以客礼相待后周子孙。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: The descendants of Emperor Zhou and the Chai clan have been appointed as Emperor Su Yiguo, the descendants of Emperor Zengong have been appointed as Emperor Xuan Yiro, the descendants of Emperor Zhou and the Chai clan have been appointed as the guardians of Emperor Zhou's mausoleum and temple, and the descendants of Emperor Zhou and the Chai clan have been appointed as the three national heroes. The descendants of Emperor Zhou and the Chai clan have been treated with courtesy.

古文：冬十月己卯朔，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：己亥，改兴庆军为肇庆府。
现代文：二十一日，改兴庆军为肇庆府。
English: On the 21st, the Xingqing Army was renamed Zhaoqing Army.

古文：甲辰，置道官二十六等，道职八等。
现代文：二十六日，设置道官二十六等，道职八等。
English: On the 26th, the 26th rank of prefectural officials and the 8th rank of prefectural officials were established.

古文：十一月己酉朔，改元，大赦天下。辛亥，日中有黑子。
现代文：十一月初一，改元，大赦全国。初三，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the era was changed, and the whole country was amnestied. On the third day of the first month, a black spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丙辰，以婉容王氏为贤妃。
现代文：初八，以婉容王氏为贤妃。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wanrong Wang was crowned as the virtuous empress.

古文：辛酉，补上书人安尧臣官。
现代文：十三日，补给上书人安尧臣官职。
English: On the thirteenth day, the person who delivered the letter was promoted to the post of Vice-Minister.

古文：己巳，升梓州为潼川府。
现代文：二十一日，升梓州为撞川府。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shangzizhou became Qianchuan Prefecture.

古文：十二月戊寅朔，复京西钱监。
现代文：十二月初一，恢复京西钱监。
English: On the first day of December, the West Beijing Money Supervision Bureau was reinstated.

古文：己丑，置裕民局。
现代文：十二日，设置裕民局。
English: On the 12th, the Yu Min Bureau was established.

古文：是岁，江、淮、荆、浙、梓州水。
现代文：这一年，江、淮、荆、浙、梓州发生水灾。
English: This year, floods occurred in Jiang, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang and Zizhou.

古文：出宫女百七十八人。
现代文：放出七十八名宫女。
English: Seventy-eight maids of honour were released.

古文：黄岩民妻一产四男子。
现代文：黄岩一百姓的妻子一胎生下四个儿子。
English: The wife of a citizen of Huangyan gave birth to four sons in one birth.

古文：于阗、高丽入贡。
现代文：于闻、高丽来进贡。
English: Yu Wen and Goryeo came to pay tribute.

