古文：○高宗一高宗受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝，讳构，字德基，徽宗第九子，母曰显仁皇后韦氏。
现代文：高宗受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝，名构，字德基，徽宗第九个儿子，母亲是显仁皇后韦氏。
English: Gao Zong was ordered by Emperor Wu Zhaoren, the ninth son of Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren, Emperor Wu Zhaoren.

古文：大观元年五月乙巳生东京之大内，赤光照室。
现代文：大观元年五月二十日，出生在东京开封皇宫，当时红光照遍宫室。
English: Daikan was born in Tokyo's Kaifeng Imperial Palace on May 20, 1861. At that time, red light shone throughout the palace.

古文：八月丁丑，赐名，授定武军节度使、检校太尉，封蜀国公。
现代文：八月二十四日，赐给名字，授官为定武军节度使、检校太尉，封蜀国公。
English: On August 24th, he was given his name, and was appointed as the festival envoy of the Dingwu army, the inspecting officer of the school, and the crown prince of Shu.

古文：二年正月庚申，封广平郡王。
现代文：二年正月初九，封广平郡王。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the second year, he was crowned the king of Guangping County.

古文：宣和三年十二月壬子，进封康王。
现代文：宣和三年十二月二十二日，进封康王。
English: On the 22nd day of December in the year of the declaration of peace, King Kang was enthroned.

古文：资性朗悟，博学强记，读书日诵千余言，挽弓至一石五斗。
现代文：天性聪颖，博学强记，读书每天背诵千余言，挽弓可达一石五斗。
English: Naturally intelligent, erudite and strong in memory, reading and reciting more than a thousand words every day, bowing up to one stone and five doos.

古文：宣和四年，始冠，出就外第。
现代文：宣和四年，行成人礼，搬到宫外的府邸。
English: Four years after the declaration of peace, he celebrated his coming-of-age ceremony and moved to a mansion outside the palace.

古文：靖康元年春正月，金人犯京师，军于城西北，遣使入城，邀亲王、宰臣议和军中。
现代文：靖康元年春正月，金人进犯京师，驻军在京城西北面，派遣使臣进人京城，邀请亲王、宰臣到金军营中议和。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yasukuni era, the Jin people attacked the Beijing division, stationed troops in the northwest of the capital, sent envoys into the capital, and invited the prince and the vice-minister to the Jin military camp to discuss peace.

古文：朝廷方遣同知枢密院事李棁等使金，议割太原、中山、河间三镇，遣宰臣授地，亲王送大军过河。
现代文：朝廷才派遣同知枢密院事李等出使金营，商议割让太原、中山、河间三镇，派遣宰臣交割土地，亲王送金军过黄河。
English: It was only then that the imperial court dispatched Li, the secretary of the Privy Council, and others to negotiate the cession of the three towns of Taiyuan, Zhongshan, and Hema, dispatched the aides-de-camp to hand over the land, and the prince sent the gold army across the Yellow River.

古文：钦宗召帝谕指，帝慷慨请行。
现代文：钦宗召高宗讲明圣意，高宗慷慨请求出发。
English: Qin Zong called Gao Zong to clarify the sacred intention, and Gao Zong generously asked him to leave.

古文：遂命少宰张邦昌为计议使，与帝俱。
现代文：于是命令少宰张邦昌做计议使，与高宗一同前往。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhang Bangchang, the minor general secretary, to go with Gao Zong as an envoy.

古文：金帅斡离不留之军中旬日，帝意气闲暇。
现代文：金军元帅斡离不把他们留在军中十来天，高宗神情悠闲。
English: Gao Zong wore a relaxed expression as he had not left them in the army for more than ten days after the marshal of the People's Liberation Army arranged for them to leave.

古文：二月，会京畿宣抚司都统制姚平仲夜袭金人砦不克，金人见责，邦昌恐惧涕泣，帝不为动，斡离不异之，更请肃王。
现代文：二月，适逢京瓷宣抚司都统制姚平仲夜袭金军营寨未获成功，金军怪罪起来，张邦昌吓得哭泣起来，高宗不为所动，斡离不感到他不寻常，要求更换肃王为人质。
English: In February, coinciding with Yao Ping Zhong's night attack on the Jin army camp, which did not succeed, the Jin army blamed the crime, Zhang Bangchang was scared and cried, Gao Zong was not moved, the mediation did not feel unusual, and demanded the replacement of Su Wang as a hostage.

古文：癸卯，肃王至军中，许割三镇地。
现代文：初七，肃王来到金军营中，答应割让三镇土地。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Su Wang came to Jin's military camp and promised to cede three towns of land.

古文：进邦昌为太宰，留质军中，帝始得还。
现代文：进封张邦昌为太宰，留在金军营中做人质，高宗才得以归还。
English: Zhang Bangchang, the Dazai of Jinfu, remained in the Jin camp as a hostage, and only then was Gaozong returned.

古文：金兵退，复遣给事中王云使金，以租赋赎三镇地。
现代文：金兵退走后，又派遣给事中王云出使金朝，用租赋赎回三镇土地。
English: After the retreat of the Jin soldiers, Wang Yun sent an envoy to the Jin Dynasty to redeem the land of the three towns with rents.

古文：又以蜡书结辽降将耶律余睹，为金人所得。
现代文：又因宋军将领用蜡书勾结辽朝降将耶律余睹，证据落到金军手中。
English: In addition, because the Song generals used wax books to collude with the Liao Dynasty to bring down Yelu, the evidence fell into the hands of the Golden Army.

古文：八月，金帅粘罕复引兵深入，陷太原。
现代文：八月，金军统帅粘罕又出兵侵宋，攻陷太原。
English: In August, the commander of the Golden Army, Mu Han, sent troops to invade Song and capture Taiyuan.

古文：斡离不破真定。
现代文：斡离不攻破真定。
English: It is not possible to break the truce without breaking the truce.

古文：冬十月，王云从吏自金先还，言金人须帝再至乃议和。
现代文：冬十月，王云的侍从官从金朝先回京城，报告说金人要高宗再次到金军营中才答应议和。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Yun's aide-de-camp returned to Beijing from the Jin Dynasty first, reporting that the Jin people wanted Gao Zong to return to the Jin camp before agreeing to negotiate peace.

古文：云归，言金人坚欲得地，不然，进兵取汴都。
现代文：王云归还京师，报告说金军一定要割取三镇土地，不然的话，就发兵攻取京城开封。
English: Wang Yun returned the Beijing division and reported that the gold army must cut off three towns of land, otherwise, they would send troops to capture the capital Kaifeng.

古文：十一月，诏帝使河北，奉衮冕、玉辂，尊金主为伯，上尊号十八字。
现代文：十一月，下诏高宗出使河北，贡奉礼服、礼帽和玉格，尊称金主为伯，敬上尊号十八字。
English: In November, Emperor Gaozong sent an envoy to Hebei Province to pay tribute to the ceremonial dress, ceremonial hat and jade lattice. The emperor was given the honorific title of "King of Kings" and the honorific title of "Lord of Lords."

古文：被命，即发京师。
现代文：高宗得到命令，就从京城出发。
English: When Gao Zong received the order, he set out from the capital.

古文：以门下侍郎耿南仲主和议，请与俱，乃以其子中书舍人延禧为参议官偕行。
现代文：因为门下侍郎耿南仲主张与金军议和，高宗请求他和自己一同前往，于是任命他的儿子中书舍人耿延禧为参议官，一起到金朝军营议和。
English: Gaozong asked Gaozong to go with him, because Gaozong's footman, Geng Nanzhong, advocated negotiating peace with the Kim army. Gaozong then appointed his son, Geng Yanxi, a scholar, as a senator, and they went to the Kim army camp to negotiate peace.

古文：帝由滑、浚至磁州，守臣宗泽请曰： 肃王去不返，金兵已迫，复去何益？
现代文：高宗一行从滑州、浚州到达磁州，守臣宗泽请求说： 肃王去了还没回，金军已经逼近，又去有什么用呢？
English: Gao Zong and his party arrived in Magneto from Slant and Danzhou. The retainer Soze requested: "Soo Wang has not yet returned, the Golden Army is already approaching, what's the use of going there?

古文：请留磁。 
现代文：请留在磁州。 
English: Please stay in the magnetic state.

古文：磁人以云将挟帝入金，遂杀云。
现代文：磁州军民认为王云将要挟持高宗到金营，于是杀死王云。
English: The soldiers and civilians of Magengzhou believed that Wang Yun was going to kidnap Gao Zong and take him to Jinying, so they killed Wang Yun.

古文：时粘罕、斡离不已率兵渡河，相继围京师。
现代文：当时粘罕、斡离不已经率领金军南渡黄河，相继进围京城。
English: At that time, Mu Han, the mediator, had already led the gold army to the south of the Yellow River and successively entered the siege of Beijing.

古文：从者以磁不可留，知相州汪伯彦亦以蜡书请帝还相州。
现代文：跟随的人都认为磁州非久留之地，相州知州汪伯彦也用蜡书邀请高宗退回到相州。
English: Those who followed Gao Zong believed that Gwangju was not a place to stay for a long time. Wang Bohian also used a wax book to invite Gao Zong to return to Gwangju.

古文：闰月，耿南仲驰至相，见帝致辞，以面受钦宗之旨，尽起河北兵入卫，帝乃同南仲募兵勤王。
现代文：闰十一月，耿南仲急忙赶到相州，见到高宗，致辞问候，当面授给钦宗的命令，发动所有的河北兵马人卫京城，高宗于是同耿南仲一道募勤王兵。
English: In leap November, Geng Nanzhong hurried to Xiangzhou, met Gao Zong, gave a speech and greetings, and gave an order to Qin Zong in person to mobilize all Hebei soldiers and horses to defend the capital. Gao Zong then worked with Geng Nanzhong to recruit loyal soldiers.

古文：初，朝廷闻金兵渡河，欲拜帝为元帅。
现代文：开始，朝廷听说金兵渡过黄河，打算任命高宗为元帅。
English: At first, the imperial court heard that Jinbei had crossed the Yellow River and intended to appoint Gao Zong as marshal.

古文：至是，殿中侍御史胡唐老复申元帅之议，尚书右仆射何拟诏书以进，钦宗遣阁门祗候秦仔持蜡诏至相，拜帝为河北兵马大元帅，知中山府陈亨伯为元帅，汪伯彦、宗泽为副元帅。
现代文：到这时，殿中侍御史胡唐老又一次申奏元帅的议论，尚书右仆射何镐昔拟诏书进呈，钦宗派遣间门抵候秦仔持蜡书到相州，任命高宗为河北兵马大元帅，中山府知府陈亨伯为元帅，汪伯彦、宗泽为副元帅。
English: At this time, the palace attendant Shi Hu Tang Lao once again played the speech of the marshal, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sho He Jun, submitted the old draft of the edict, Qin Zong sent the porter to wait for Qin Zi to hold the wax book to Xiangzhou, and appointed Gao Zong as the marshal of the Hebei Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the governor of Zhongshan Prefecture, Chen Heng Bo, as the marshal, and Wang Bohian and Soze as the deputy marshal.

古文：仔于顶发中出诏，帝读之呜咽，兵民感动。
现代文：秦仔从头发中拿出诏书，高宗读后呜咽哭泣，兵民非常感动。
English: Qin Zai took out the edict from his hair. Gao Zong sobbed and cried after reading it. The soldiers were very moved.

古文：十二月壬戌朔，帝开大元帅府，有兵万人，分为五军，命武显大夫陈淬都统制军马。
现代文：十二月初一，高宗建立大元帅府，有士兵一万人，分为五军，任命武显大夫陈淬为军马都统制。
English: On the first day of December, Gaozong established a grand marshal's office, with 10,000 soldiers, divided into five armies, and appointed Wu Xian's doctor Chen Qi as the military governor.

古文：阁门祗候侯章赍蜡书至自京师，诏帝尽发河北兵，命守臣自将。
现代文：门抵候侯章持蜡书从京城赶到，下诏高宗发动所有的河北兵马，命令各地守臣自己率领。
English: Upon the arrival of the gate, the marquess arrived from Beijing holding a wax book, and Gaozong ordered all the soldiers and horses in Hebei Province to be led by the local retainers.

古文：帝乃下令诸郡守与诸将，议引兵渡河。
现代文：高宗于是发布命令，各郡守和将领率兵南渡黄河。
English: Gao Zong then issued an order, and the county governors and generals led soldiers to cross the Yellow River to the south.

古文：乙亥，帝率兵离相州。
现代文：十四日，高宗率军离开相州。
English: On the 14th, Gao Zong led the army to leave Xiangzhou.

古文：丙子，履冰渡河。
现代文：十五日，踏着冰渡过黄河。
English: On the 15th, he crossed the Yellow River on the ice.

古文：丁丑，次大名府。
现代文：十六日，驻军大名府。
English: On the 16th, the garrisoned daimyo's residence was completed.

古文：宗泽以二千人先诸军至，知信德府梁扬祖以三千人继至，张俊、苗傅、杨沂中、田师中皆在麾下，兵威稍振。
现代文：宗泽率领二千人比其他各军先期到达，信德知府梁扬祖率领三千人随后赶到，张俊、苗傅、杨沂中、田师中都在自己的指挥之下，兵威稍微有些起色。
English: Soze led 2,000 men and arrived earlier than the other armies. Shinde prefectural governor Liang Yangzu led 3,000 men and arrived later. Zhang Jun, Miao Fu, Yang Xizhong, and Tian Shizhong were all under his command, and their military power slightly improved.

古文：会签书枢密院事曹辅赍蜡诏至，云金人登城不下，方议和好，可屯兵近甸，毋轻动。
现代文：适逢签书枢密院事曹辅持蜡书诏命赶到，说金军已经抵达京城，正在议论和好，可以屯兵附近，不要轻举妄动。
English: At the time of the signing of the document, Cao Fu, the Secretary of the Privy Council, arrived with a written order, saying that the gold army had arrived in Beijing and was discussing reconciliation. They could camp near the soldiers and should not make any rash moves.

古文：汪伯彦等皆信和议，惟宗泽请直趋澶渊为壁，次第解京城之围。
现代文：汪伯彦等人都主张议和，只有宗泽请求直趋擅渊结兵为壁垒，设法一步一步解除京城之围。
English: Wang Bohian and others all advocated peace talks, but only Soze requested that troops be formed as a barrier and tried to lift the siege of the capital city step by step.

古文：伯彦、南仲请移军东平。
现代文：汪伯彦、耿南仲请求把军队开往东平。
English: Wang Bohian and Geng Nanzhong requested that the army be sent to Dongping.

古文：帝遂遣泽以万人进屯澶渊，扬言帝在军中。
现代文：高宗于是派遣宗泽率一万军队进屯擅渊，对外面说是高宗的军队。
English: Gao Zong then dispatched 10,000 troops led by Soze into the town of Shobuan, which was said to be Gao Zong's army.

古文：自是泽不复预府中谋议。
现代文：从此以后，宗泽再没有参与大元帅府中有关事务的谋议。
English: From then on, Sozawa did not participate in the deliberation of relevant affairs in the Grand Marshal's office.

古文：帝决意趋东平。
现代文：高宗下决心前往东平。
English: Gao Zong made up his mind to go to Dongping.

古文：庚寅，帝发大名。
现代文：二十九日，高宗从大名出发。
English: On the 29th, Gaozong set out from Daimyo.

古文：建炎元年春正月癸巳，帝至东平。
现代文：建炎元年春正月初三，高宗到达东平。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jianyan, Gaozong arrived in Dongping.

古文：初，帝军在相州，京城围久，中外莫知帝处。
现代文：开始，高宗所率军队在相州，京城被金军围困已有一段时间，朝廷内外不知道高宗在哪里。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zong's army was in Xiangzhou, and the capital had been besieged by the Chinese army for some time. Both inside and outside the court did not know where Gao Zong was.

古文：及是，陈请四集，取决帅府。
现代文：到这时，陈述请求从四方集中，要求元帅府处理。
English: By this time, requests for statements were coming from all four sides, demanding that the marshal's office deal with them.

古文：壬寅，高阳关路安抚使黄潜善、总管杨惟忠亦部兵数千至东平。
现代文：十二日，高阳关路安抚使黄潜善、总管杨惟忠也率军数千人投奔高宗，到达东平。
English: On the 12th, Gaoyang Pass Road was pacified and Huang Kuanzhen and Yang Weizhong led thousands of troops to Gaozong and arrived in Dongping.

古文：命潜善进屯兴仁，留惟忠为元帅都统制。
现代文：高宗命令黄潜善进屯兴仁，留下杨惟忠为元帅都统制。
English: Gao Zong ordered Huang Kuanshan to enter Tunxingren, leaving Yang Weizhong as the marshal to control the capital.

古文：金人闻帝在澶渊，遣甲士及中书舍人张澂来召。
现代文：金军听说高宗在擅渊，派遣甲士及中书舍人张膺前来召降。
English: The Jin army heard that Gaozong was in Shouyuan, and sent Gaozong's knights and the Chinese scholar Zhang Ye to come and call for his surrender.

古文：宗泽命壮士射之，澂乃遁。
现代文：宗泽命令壮士用箭射，张膺才退走。
English: Soze ordered the strong man to shoot with an arrow, and Zhang Ye retreated.

古文：伯彦等请帝如济州。
现代文：汪伯彦请求高宗到济州。
English: Wang Bohian asked Gao Zong to come to Jeju.

古文：二月庚辰，发东平。
现代文：二月二十日，从东平出发。
English: February 20th, departure from Dongping.

古文：癸未，次济州。
现代文：二十三日，到达济州。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived in Jeju.

古文：时帅府官军及群盗来归者号百万人，分屯济、濮诸州府，而诸路勤王兵不得进。
现代文：当时元帅府官军及起义群众来投归者，号称百万，分别屯驻济、攫等州府，而各路勤王兵不得前进。
English: At that time, the official army of the marshal's office and the insurgent people who came to return, known as one million, were stationed in the state capitals of Ji and Handan, respectively, while the royalist soldiers were not allowed to advance.

古文：二帝已在金人军中。
现代文：徽、钦二帝已在金人军中。
English: Hui and Qin II were already in the Jin army.

古文：三月丁酉，金人立张邦昌为帝，称大楚。
现代文：三月初七，金军立张邦昌为帝，称大楚。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the Jin army made Zhang Bangchang emperor, calling him the Great Chu.

古文：黄潜善以告，帝恸哭，僚属欲奉帝驻军宿州，谋渡江左，帝闻三军籍籍，遂辄。
现代文：黄潜善报告高宗，高宗痛哭流涕，部属臣僚打算拥护高宗驻军宿州，策划渡江到江左，高宗听说三军将士纷纷动心，骚扰不安，于是没有执行这一计划。
English: Huang Xunshan reported to Gao Zong, Gao Zong cried bitterly, subordinate ministers planned to support Gao Zong's garrison in Shuzhou and planned to cross the river to the left of the river, Gao Zong heard that the three soldiers were anxious and disturbed, so he did not implement this plan.

古文：承制以宗泽为徽猷阁待制。
现代文：秉承意旨任命宗泽为徽酞阁待制。
English: Adhering to the intention, Soze was appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：丁巳，斡离不退师，徽宗北迁。
现代文：二十七日，斡离不退兵，徽宗被俘北上。
English: On the 27th, he was persuaded not to retreat, and Huizong was taken prisoner to the north.

古文：戊午，承制以汪伯彦为显谟阁待制，充元帅；潜善为徽猷阁待制，充副元帅。
现代文：二十八日，秉承意旨任命汪伯彦为显漠阁待制，担任元帅；黄潜善为徽酞阁待制，担任副元帅。
English: On the 28th, Wang Bohian was appointed as the vice marshal of Hsien Mokgak, and Huang Kuanshan was appointed as the vice marshal of Huiyanggak.

古文：夏四月，粘罕退师，钦宗北迁。
现代文：夏四月，粘罕退兵，钦宗被俘随金军北上。
English: In the summer of April, Mui Han retired from the army, and Qin Zong was captured and went north with the Golden Army.

古文：癸亥，邦昌尊元祐皇后为宋太后，遣人至济州访帝，又遣吏部尚书谢克家来迎。
现代文：初四，张邦昌尊元皇后为宋太后，派人到济州寻访高宗，又派遣吏部尚书谢克家来迎接。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Empress Zhang Bangchang sent someone to Jeju to look for Gao Zong, and also dispatched Shang Shusheke's family to meet him.

古文：耿南仲率幕僚劝进，帝避席流涕，逊辞不受。
现代文：耿南仲率幕府臣僚劝高宗为帝，高宗离席痛哭，推辞不接受。
English: Geng Nanzhong led the shogunate ministers to persuade Gaozong to become emperor, but Gaozong left the throne in tears and did not accept the resignation.

古文：伯彦等引天命人心为请，且谓靖康纪元，为十二月立康之兆。
现代文：汪伯彦等引用天命人心为据来请求，并且说靖康纪元，正是十二月立康王的征兆。
English: Wang Bohian and others cited the Mandate of Heaven as the basis for their request, and said that the era of Jingkang is a sign of the establishment of King Kang in December.

古文：帝曰： 当更思之。 
现代文：高宗说： 让我再思考思考这件事。 
English: Gao Zong said: Let me think about it again.

古文：以知淮宁府赵子崧为宝文阁学士、元帅府参议官、东南道总管，统东南勤王兵。
现代文：任命淮宁知府赵子裕为宝文阁学士、元帅府参议官、东南道总管，统率东南一带勤王兵。
English: He appointed Zhao Ziyu from Huaining Prefecture to be an academician of the Baowen Cabinet, a councillor of the Marshal's Office, the general manager of the Southeast Province, and the leader of the royalists in the southeast.

古文：邦昌遣阁门宣赞舍人蒋师愈等持书诣帝，自言从权济事，及将归宝避位之意。
现代文：张邦昌派遣阎门宣赞舍人蒋师愈等人持书告谕高宗，说自己为帝是权宜从事，即将把帝位让给高宗。
English: Zhang Bangchang dispatched Yanmen Xuan Zhan, Jiang Shiyu and others to hold a book to tell Gao Zong that it was expedient for him to be emperor and that he was about to cede the imperial throne to Gao Zong.

古文：帝亦贻诸帅书，以未得至京，已至者毋辄入。
现代文：高宗也致书各将帅，因没法到京城，已经到达的军队不要进人。
English: Gao Zong also wrote to the generals, saying that since they could not get to the capital, they should not enter the army that had already arrived.

古文：闻资政殿大学士、领开封府事李纲在湖北，遣刘默持书访之。
现代文：听说资政殿大学士、领开封府事李纲在荆湖北路，派遣刘默持节寻访李纲。
English: I heard that Li Gang, a scholar of the University of the Palace of the Great Counselor of the State and the leader of the opening ceremony of the prefectural affairs, was in the north road of Jinghu, and sent Liu Mochi to visit Li Gang on the day of the festival.

古文：又谕宗泽等，以受伪命之人义当诛讨，然虑事出权宜，未可轻动。
现代文：又告谕宗泽等人，接受张邦昌大楚任命的人在道义上理当诛讨，但是考虑到事出权宜，不可轻举妄动。
English: He also told Zongze and others that those who accepted Zhang Bangchang's appointment as grand chu were morally justified, but considering the circumstances, they should not act rashly.

古文：泽复书谓邦昌篡乱踪迹已无可疑，宜早正天位，兴复社稷，不可不断。
现代文：宗泽回信高宗说，张邦昌乱中篡权，没有什么值得怀疑的地方，应该趁早匡正帝位，兴复赵宋，不可以迟延，应该果断。
English: Zongze replied to Gao Zong that there was nothing suspicious about Zhang Bangchang's usurpation of power in the turmoil, and that it was necessary to rectify the imperial throne and restore Zhao Song as soon as possible. This could not be delayed, and should be done decisively.

古文：门下侍郎吕好问亦以蜡书来，言帝不自立，恐有不当立而立者。
现代文：门下侍郎吕好问也送来蜡书，说高宗如果不谋自立的话，恐怕出现不应该当皇帝而当上皇帝的人。
English: His manservant, Lü Haotong, also sent a wax book, saying that if Gaozong did not seek independence, there would probably be someone who should not be emperor but would become emperor.

古文：丁卯，谢克家以 大宋受命之宝 至济州，帝恸哭跪受，命克家还京师，趣办仪物。
现代文：初八，谢克家持 大宋受命之宝 到济州，高宗痛哭跪下接受，命令谢克家回到京师，赶快办理仪物。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Gao Zong, the head of the Shiek family and the treasure of the Great Song Dynasty, came to Jeju. Gao Zong cried bitterly, knelt down to accept, and ordered the Shiek family to return to Beijing and quickly handle the ceremonial objects.

古文：戊辰，济州父老诣军门，言州四旁望见城中火光属天，请帝即位于济。
现代文：初九，济州百姓父老到军前，说州的四方能看见城中火光冲天，请求高宗在济州即皇帝位。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the people of Jeju came to the front of the army, saying that the four sides of the state could see the flames in the city soaring into the sky, and asked Gaozong to be the emperor in Jeju.

古文：会宗泽来言，南京乃艺祖兴王之地，取四方中，漕运尤易。
现代文：适逢宗泽来信说，南京是太祖兴起为王之地，距离四方位置适中，槽运又很容易。
English: Coinciding with this, Sozawa sent a letter saying that Nanjing was the place where Taizu rose to power. The distance from the four directions was moderate, and it was easy to transport goods.

古文：遂决意趋应天。
现代文：于是决定前往应天府。
English: So they decided to go to Yingtianfu.

古文：是夕，邦昌手书上延福宫太后尊号曰元祐皇后，入居禁中，以尚书左丞冯澥为奉迎使。
现代文：这天晚上，张邦昌亲手书写敬上延福宫太后尊号为元皇后，人居皇宫，任命尚书左承冯懈为奉迎使。
English: That evening, Zhang Bangchang personally wrote a tribute to the former empress of Yanfu Palace, named the former empress, inhabited the royal palace, and appointed Shangshuzhong Fenglu as a messenger.

古文：皇后又遣兄子卫尉少卿孟忠厚持手书遗帝。
现代文：皇后又派遣她哥哥的儿子卫尉少卿孟忠厚持手书给高宗。
English: The empress also sent her brother's son, Weiwei Shaoqing Meng Zhonghou, with a handwritten letter to Gao Zong.

古文：皇后垂帘听政。
现代文：皇后垂帘听政。
English: The empress is ready to listen to the government.

古文：邦昌权尚书左仆射，率在京百官上表劝进，不许。
现代文：张邦昌代理尚书左仆射，率在京的文武百官上表请求称帝，没有答应。
English: Zhang Bangchang's agent, Shang Shuxi Zuofu Jie, led hundreds of civil and military officials in Beijing to petition the emperor, but he did not agree.

古文：甲戌，皇后手书告中外，俾帝嗣统。
现代文：十五日，皇后亲手书写诏令告谕朝廷内外，要康王赵构即帝位。
English: On the fifteenth day, the empress personally wrote a decree to announce to the imperial court and beyond that King Kang Zhaojie should be enthroned.

古文：乙亥，百官再上表，又不许。
现代文：十六日，文武百官再次上表，还是没有答应。
English: On the 16th, the civil and military officials once again went to the table, but still did not agree.

古文：丁丑，冯澥等至济州，百官三上表，许以权听国事。
现代文：十八日，冯解等人到济州，文武百官第三次上表劝进，高宗答应代理处理军国事务。
English: On the 18th, Feng Jie and others went to Jeju. For the third time, hundreds of civil and military officials went to the table to persuade, and Gaozong agreed to act as an agent to deal with military affairs.

古文：戊寅，命宗泽先勒兵分驻长垣、韦城等县，以备非常。
现代文：十九日，命令宗泽先率军分别驻扎长垣、韦城等县，用来防备发生意外事件。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Munezawa and his army to be stationed in Nagagaki, Weicheng and other counties to prevent accidents.

古文：东道副总管朱胜非至济州，宣抚司统制官韩世忠以兵来会。
现代文：东道副总管朱胜非到济州，宣抚司统制官韩世忠率军来投奔高宗。
English: Zhu Shengfei, the vice-governor of the host province, went to Jeju, and Han Shizhong, the procurator-general, led an army to Gaozong.

古文：庚辰，帝发济州，鄜延副总管刘光世自陕州来会，以光世为五军都提举。
现代文：二十一日，高宗从济州出发，延副总管刘光世从陕州来会合，任命刘光世为五军都提举。
English: On the twenty-first day, Gao Zong set off from Jeju, and Yan vice-governor Liu Guangze came from Shaanxi to the meeting, and appointed Liu Guangze as the Five Military Commanders.

古文：辛巳，次单州。
现代文：二十二日，到达单州。
English: On the 22nd, they arrived in Shan State.

古文：壬午，次虞城县。
现代文：二十三日，到达虞城县。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived in Yucheng County.

古文：西道都总管王襄自襄阳来会。
现代文：西道都总管王襄率军从襄阳来会合。
English: Wang Xiang, the head of the western capital, led the army from Xiangyang to the meeting.

古文：癸未，至应天府。
现代文：二十四日，到达应天府。
English: On the 24th, they arrived at Yingtianfu.

古文：皇后诏有司备法驾仪仗。
现代文：皇后下诏有关部门准备仪卫兵仗和车驾。
English: The Queen ordered the relevant departments to prepare for the ceremonial guard and carriage procession.

古文：乙酉，张邦昌至，伏地恸哭请死，帝慰抚之。
现代文：二十六日，张邦昌到南京应天府，跪在地上痛哭请求处以死罪，高宗慰问抚恤他。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Bangchang went to Nanjing to plead with Tianfu, kneeled on the ground and cried, and was sentenced to death. Gaozong expressed his condolences and pardoned him.

古文：承制以汪伯彦为显谟阁直学士，黄潜善为徽猷阁直学士。
现代文：秉承诏旨任命汪伯彦为显漠阁直学士，黄潜善为徽酞阁直学士。
English: Adhering to the imperial edict, Wang Bohian was appointed as a direct scholar of Xianmo Pavilion, and Huang Xuanzen was appointed as a direct scholar of Huiyang Pavilion.

古文：权吏部尚书王时雍等奉乘舆服御至，群臣劝进者益众，命有司筑坛府门之左。
现代文：代理吏部尚书王时雍等人供奉车驾和礼服到达南京，大臣们请求高宗称帝的越来越多，命令有关部门在府门的左边筑坛。
English: Acting officials such as Shangshu Wang Shiyong and others arrived in Nanjing by car and ceremonial dress. The ministers requested that Gao Zong be proclaimed emperor more and more, and ordered the relevant departments to build an altar on the left side of the government gate.

古文：五月庚寅朔，帝登坛受命，礼毕恸哭，遥谢二帝，即位于府治。
现代文：五月初一，高宗登上高坛接受天命即位，礼仪完毕后痛哭，在远方谢罪于徽、钦二帝，在应天府治即位。
English: On the first day of May, Gaozong ascended the high altar to accept the mandate of heaven and ascend the throne. After the ceremony, he wept bitterly. In the distance, he thanked Hui and Qin for his sins, and ascended the throne in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：改元建炎。
现代文：改元建炎。
English: Renovation of the original building is in full swing.

古文：大赦，常赦所不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：大赦，平常赦免得不到原谅的全部赦免。
English: An amnesty, a general amnesty, a total amnesty.

古文：张邦昌及应于供奉金国之人，一切不问。
现代文：张邦昌及答应效力金朝的人，一律不问罪。
English: Zhang Bangchang and all those who promised to serve the Kim dynasty will not be charged with any crime.

古文：命西京留守司修奉祖宗陵寝。
现代文：命令西京留守司修缮崇奉祖宗陵寝。
English: He ordered the West Beijing Remaining Division to renovate the mausoleum of the revered founder.

古文：罢天下神霄宫。
现代文：罢除全国神霄宫。
English: The national Shenxiao Palace was abolished.

古文：住散青苗钱。
现代文：停止给散青苗钱。
English: Stop giving money to stragglers.

古文：应死节及殁于王事者并推恩。
现代文：为国捐躯及为保卫康王而死的人家属都得到恩惠奖赏。
English: The families of those who gave their lives for the country and those who died in the defense of King Kham have been rewarded.

古文：奉使未还者，禄其家一年。
现代文：奉命出使金朝没有归国的人，供给家庭一年的棒禄。
English: He was ordered to send people who did not return from the Kim dynasty to provide families with a year's bonus.

古文：应选人并循资，已系承直郎者，改次等京官。
现代文：应选人及循资者，已经是承直郎的人，改授次等京官。
English: Candidates and fund-raisers, who were already Jochiro's people, were relegated to second-class Beijing officials.

古文：臣僚因乱去官者，限一月还任。
现代文：臣僚因动乱离位的人，限一月的时间回到原任。
English: Ministers who left their posts due to the turmoil were given one month to return to their original posts.

古文：溃兵、群资咸许自新。
现代文：溃兵、群盗都允许改过自新，归顺朝廷。
English: Defeated soldiers and bandits were allowed to reform and become obedient to the imperial court.

古文：免系官欠负，蠲南京及元帅府常驻军一月以上州县夏税。
现代文：免除对官府的欠负，免除南京及元帅府曾经驻军一个月以上州县的夏税。
English: Exempt from the burden on the government, exempt from the summer tax of the states and counties where Nanjing and the Marshal's office had been stationed for more than a month.

古文：应天府特奏名举人并与同进士出身，免解人与免省试。
现代文：应天府特奏名举人一律给予同进士出身，免除解试和省试。
English: According to the nomination of Tianfu Special Recital, all the nominees are from the same generation, and are exempted from the examination and provincial examination.

古文：诸路特奏名三举以上及宗室尝预贡者，并推恩。
现代文：各路特奏名三次附试以上的人及宗室曾经参加贡举考试的人，都得到恩惠。
English: Those who have passed the three supplementary examinations and those whose family members have participated in the tribute examination have all received favors.

古文：应募兵勤王人以兵付州县主兵官，听赴行在。
现代文：那些勤王募兵的人把军队交给州县统军的人，然后赶往行在南京。
English: Those diligent recruiters handed over the army to the people of the unified state and county army, and then rushed to Nanjing.

古文：中外臣庶许言民间疾苦，虽诋讦亦不加罪。
现代文：朝廷内外官员及百姓都可以上书陈述民间疾苦，即使冒犯朝廷和皇帝也不问罪。
English: Officials inside and outside the imperial court, as well as ordinary people, could submit letters to report the hardships of the people, and even if they offended the imperial court or the emperor, they would not be punished.

古文：命官犯罪，更不取特旨裁断。
现代文：朝廷任命的官员犯罪，不再听取皇帝圣旨裁决。
English: Officials appointed by the imperial court committed crimes and were no longer subject to the emperor's edict.

古文：蔡京、童贯、朱勔、李彦、孟昌龄、梁师成、谭稹及其子孙，更不收叙。
现代文：蔡京、童贯、未豹、李彦、孟昌龄、梁师成、谭棋及其子孙，不再进用。
English: Cai Jing, Tong Ran, We Leopard, Li Yan, Meng Changling, Liang Shicheng, Tan Qi and their descendants will no longer be used.

古文：内外大臣，限十日各举布衣有材略者一人。
现代文：朝廷内外大臣，在十日内外分别推举平民百姓有才略的人一名。
English: Within ten days, the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior of the Imperial Court shall separately nominate one person of talent from the common people.

古文：余如故事。
现代文：其他事宜按惯例办理。
English: Other matters will be handled in accordance with established practice.

古文：以黄潜善为中书侍郎，汪伯彦同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命黄潜善为中书侍郎，汪伯彦为同知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Huang Kuanzhen as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Wang Boyan as the secretary of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：元祐皇后在东京，是日彻帘。
现代文：元皇后在东京开封，这一天撤除帘布，不再听政。
English: The former empress opened the seal in Tokyo. On this day, she removed the curtain and no longer listened to politics.

古文：辛卯，遥尊乾龙皇帝为孝慈渊圣皇帝，元祐皇后为元祐太后。
现代文：初二，遥尊乾龙皇帝为孝慈渊圣皇帝，元皇后为元太后。
English: On the second day of the school year, Emperor Qianlong was honored as the Holy Emperor and Empress Yuan as the Empress Dowager.

古文：诏史官辨宣仁圣烈皇后诬谤。
现代文：下诏史官辨别宣仁圣烈高皇后所遭受的诬谤。
English: Under the Imperial Rescript, the historian identified the slander suffered by Empress Shenren Shenglegao.

古文：筑景灵宫于江宁府。
现代文：在江宁府修筑景灵宫。
English: The Jingling Palace will be built in Jiangning Prefecture.

古文：壬辰，以张邦昌为太保、奉国军节度使、同安郡王，五日一赴都堂参决大事。
现代文：初三，任命张邦昌为太保、奉国军节度使、同安郡王，每五天去一次尚书省参决大事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Bangchang was appointed as Taiho, the festival envoy of the national army, and the county king of Tongan, and went to Shangshu to participate in the election every five days.

古文：以河东、北宣抚使范讷为京城留守。
现代文：任命河东、北宣抚使范呐为京城留守。
English: He appointed the Hengtong and Beifenfu to make Fan Na stay in Beijing.

古文：癸巳，遥尊帝母韦贤妃为宣和皇后，遥立嘉国夫人邢氏为皇后。
现代文：初四，遥尊母亲韦贤妃为宣和皇后，遥立嘉国夫人邢氏为皇后。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yuanzhong's mother, Wei Xianfei, became the Empress of Xuanhe, and Yuanzhong's wife, Yuanzhong, became the Empress of Yuanzhong.

古文：耿南仲罢。
现代文：耿南仲罢职。
English: Geng Nanzhong resigns.

古文：甲午，以李纲为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，趣赴行在，杨惟忠为建武军节度使，主管殿前司公事。
现代文：初五，任命李纲为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，赶快前往应天府；杨惟忠为建武军节度使，主管殿前司公事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Gang was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the attendant of Zhong Shu, and quickly went to Yingtianfu; Yang Weizhong was the festival envoy of the Jianwu Army and was in charge of the front office of the palace.

古文：罢诸盗及民兵之为统制者，简其士马隶五军。
现代文：罢除诸盗及民兵为统制的人，精减他们统率的士兵和马匹隶属五军。
English: Thieves and militiamen were removed as commanders, and soldiers and horses belonging to the Five Armies were reduced.

古文：乙未，以生辰为天申节。
现代文：初六，以生日为天申节。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the birthday is celebrated as Tenshin-sai.

古文：冯澥罢，以兵部尚书吕好问为尚书右丞。
现代文：冯懈罢职，以兵部尚书吕好问为尚书右承。
English: Feng Lian resigned from his post, and asked the military department's Shangshu Lv to succeed him.

古文：命中军统制马忠、后军统制张昪率兵万人，趣河间府追袭金人。
现代文：命令中军统制马忠、后军统制张涣率军一万人，赶到河间府追击袭扰金军。
English: He ordered the central army to control Ma Zhong, and the rear army to control Zhang Ye, who led an army of ten thousand and rushed to Hema Prefecture to chase and attack the intruding Jin army.

古文：丙申，以吕好问兼门下侍郎。
现代文：初七，任命吕好问兼任门下侍郎。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he appointed Lü Hao-men to serve as his disciple's chamberlain.

古文：丁酉，以黄潜善兼御营使，汪伯彦副之，真定府路副总管王渊为都统制，鄜延路副总管刘光世提举一行事务。王时雍黄州安置。
现代文：初八，任命黄潜善兼任御营使，汪伯彦为副使，真定府路副总管王渊为都统制，延路副总管刘光世提举一行事务，王时雍贬为黄州安置。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Huang Kuanzhen was appointed as the imperial envoy, Wang Bohian as the deputy envoy, Wang Yuan, the deputy head of Jindingfu Road, was appointed as the governor of the capital, Liu Guangshi, the deputy head of Yanlu Road, was appointed as the governor of a province, and Wang Shiyong was appointed as the governor of Huangzhou.

古文：命统制官薛广、张琼率兵六千人会河北山水砦义兵，共复磁、相。
现代文：命令统制官薛广、张琼率军六千人会合河北山水寨义兵，共同恢复磁州、相州。
English: He ordered the commanding officers Xue Guang and Zhang Qiong to lead the army of six thousand people to join the Hebei Shan Shui Zhai volunteers to jointly restore the magnetic state and the relative state.

古文：戊戌，以资政殿学士路允迪为京城抚谕使，龙图阁学士耿延禧副之。
现代文：初九，任命资政殿学士路允迪为京城抚谕使，龙图阁直学士耿延禧为副使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Lu Yundi, the Scholar of the Palace of Succession, was appointed as the Beijing envoy, and Geng Yanxi, the Scholar of Longtu Pavilion, was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：赠吏部侍郎李若水观文殿学士，谥忠愍。
现代文：赠吏部侍郎李若水为观文殿学士，溢号忠憨。
English: Li Ruoshui, who was awarded the title of Chamberlain of the General Staff Department, was a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and was known as a loyal disciple.

古文：己亥，召太学生陈东赴行在。
现代文：初十，召太学生陈东前往南京应天府。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Chen Dong, a student, was summoned to Nanjing Yingtianfu.

古文：李纲至江宁，诛叛卒周德等。
现代文：李纲到江宁，杀死叛乱士卒周德等人。
English: Li Gang went to Jiangning and killed the rebel soldier Zhou De and others.

古文：庚子，诏：以靖康大臣主和误国，责李邦彦为建宁军节度副使、浔州安置，徙吴敏柳州，蔡懋英州。李棁、宇文虚中、郑望之、李邺皆以使金请割地，责广南诸州并安置。
现代文：十一日，下诏：因靖康大臣主张求和导致误国，李邦彦贬为建宁军节度副使，得州安置；吴敏被迁移柳州，蔡愈被迁移英州；李、宁文虚中、郑望之、李邺都因出使金朝请求割地，被贬往广南各州并安置其地。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Li Bangyan was demoted to the position of deputy envoy of the Jianning Army and relocated to Dezhou; Wu Min was moved to Liuzhou; Cai Yu was moved to Yingzhou; Li, Ning Wenqizhong, Zheng Wangzhi, and Li Hui were all demoted to the provinces of Guangnan and resettled there because they had sent envoys to the Kim dynasty to request the division of land.

古文：辛丑，诏张邦昌知几达变，勋在社稷，如文彦博例，月两赴都堂。
现代文：十二日，下诏：张邦昌临机应变，对国家有功，象文彦博一样，每月两次到尚书省。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Zhang Bangchang took advantage of the situation and contributed to the country. Like Wen Yanbo, he went to Shangshu twice a month.

古文：壬寅，封后宫潘氏为贤妃。
现代文：十三日，封后宫潘氏为贤妃。
English: On the 13th, she was given the title of "Princess Consort" by Emperor Pan.

古文：以江、淮发运使梁扬祖提领东南茶盐事。
现代文：任命江、淮发运使梁扬祖提领东南茶盐事。
English: Jiang and Huai were appointed to dispatch Liang Yangzu to take charge of the southeast tea and salt affairs.

古文：癸卯，天申节，罢百官上寿。
现代文：十四日，天申节，罢除文武百官祝寿。
English: On the 14th day of the lunar new year, hundreds of civil and military officials were dismissed to celebrate their birthdays.

古文：乙己，赐诸路勤王兵还营者钱，人三千。
现代文：十六日，赐给各路勤王兵还营的士兵钱，每人三千。
English: On the sixteenth day of the month, he gave money to each of the soldiers who had fought for the king, three thousand each.

古文：丙午，以诬谤宣仁圣烈皇后，追贬蔡确、蔡卞、邢怒、蔡懋官。
现代文：十七日，因诬谤宣仁圣烈高皇后，追贬蔡确、蔡卞、邢恕、蔡愈官职。
English: On the 17th, for slandering Empress Xuanren Shenglegao, Cai Jizhen, Cai Jun, Xun Zhou, and Cai Yuru were demoted from their posts.

古文：以保静军节度使姚古知河南府。
现代文：任命保静军节度使姚古知河南府。
English: The appointment of Bao Jingjun as the military commander of the festival caused Yao Guci to leave Henan Province.

古文：金人陷河中府，权府事郝仲连死之。
现代文：金军攻陷河中府，代理知府事郝仲连战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Hechu Prefecture, and the acting governor, Jizhong Zhonglian, was killed in the battle.

古文：丁未，徽宗至燕山府。
现代文：十八日，徽宗到达燕山府。
English: On the 18th, Huizong arrived in Yanshan Prefecture.

古文：庚戌，以宗泽为龙图阁学士、知襄阳府。
现代文：二十一日，任命宗泽为龙图阁学士、襄阳知府。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Soze was appointed as a Longtuge Academy graduate and governor of Xiangyang.

古文：壬子，进张邦昌太傅。
现代文：二十三日，进封张邦昌为太傅。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Bangchang was promoted to Taifu.

古文：丙辰，罢监察御史张所，寻责江州安置。
现代文：二十七日，罢默监察御史张所，不久贬为江州安置。
English: On the 27th, the Zhang Institute of Supervision and History was silenced, and soon it was downgraded to Jiangzhou resettlement.

古文：丁巳，诏成都、京兆、襄阳、荆南、江宁府、邓、扬二州储资粮，修城垒，以备巡幸。
现代文：二十八日，下诏成都、京北、襄阳、荆南、江宁府及邓、扬二州储蓄物资粮食，修筑城垒，准备接待高宗巡视。
English: On the 28th, Chengdu, Beijing North, Yangyang, Jingnan, Jiangning and the two prefectures of Deng and Yang were ordered to stockpile supplies and grain, build fortresses and prepare to receive Gaozong's inspection.

古文：以签书枢密院事张叔夜尝援京城力战，从徽宗北行，遥命为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使。
现代文：因签书枢密院事张叔夜曾经援救京城，顽强战斗，跟随徽宗北上，被遥命为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使。
English: Because of the signature of the Privy Council, Zhang Shuyai once came to the rescue of Beijing, fought tenaciously, followed Huizong to the north, and was remotely appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and a scholar of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：戊午，右谏议大夫范宗尹罢。
现代文：二十九日，右谏议大夫范宗尹罢职。
English: On the 29th, Fan Zongyin, the doctor of the Right Council of Elders, resigned.

古文：遣太常少卿周望使河北军前通问二帝。
现代文：派遣太常少卿周望出使河北，到前线打听徽、钦二帝的消息。
English: Zhou Wang, the too-frequent minor general, was dispatched to Hebei Province to inquire about Hui and Qin II at the front.

古文：西道总管王襄、北道总管赵野坐勤王稽缓，并分司，襄阳府、青州居住。
现代文：西道总管王襄、北道总管赵野因勤王迟缓，都遭到处罚，分别被降为襄阳府、青州居住。
English: Wang Xiang, the general manager of the West Road, and Zhao Ye, the general manager of the North Road, were both punished for being tardy, and were reduced to living in Xiangyang Prefecture and Qingzhou, respectively.

古文：寻责襄永州、野邵州，并安置。
现代文：不久，被贬为永州、邵州安置。
English: Soon, it was downgraded to Yongzhou and Shaozhou.

古文：六月己未朔，李纲入见，上十议，曰国是、巡幸、赦令、僭逆、伪命、战、守、本政、责成、修德。
现代文：六月初一，李纲到朝廷进见高宗，呈上十议，这就是国是议、巡幸议、赦令议、僧逆议、伪命议、战议、守议、本政议、责成议、修德议。
English: On the first day of June, Li Gang went to the imperial court to see Gao Zong and presented ten motions, namely, the motion of national sovereignty, the motion of inspection, the motion of pardon, the motion of monk rebellion, the motion of false order, the motion of war, the motion of self-preservation, the motion of self-government, the motion of duty, and the motion of virtue.

古文：以前殿前副都指挥使王宗濋引卫兵遁逃，致都城失守，责官、邵州安置。
现代文：因前殿前副都指挥使王宗灌带领卫兵逃跑，导致都城开封失守，被贬降为邵州安置。
English: Because the former deputy commander of the former palace ordered Wang Zongkan to lead the guards to escape, leading to the loss of the capital Kaifeng, which was demoted to Shaozhou.

古文：徽猷阁直学士徐秉哲假资政殿学士，为大金通问使，秉哲辞。
现代文：徽酞阁直学士徐秉哲借资政殿学士，为大金通问使，徐秉哲推辞了。
English: Xu Bingzhe, a direct graduate of Huizhong Academy, borrowed money from a graduate of the Hall of State, and was an envoy of big money. Xu Bingzhe resigned.

古文：庚申，封靖康军节度使仲湜嗣濮王。粘罕还屯云中。
现代文：初二，封靖康军节度使仲嗣攫王。粘罕迁屯云中。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Qing and Kang armies made Zhong Shih the king. Mu Han moved to Tuenyun.

古文：辛酉，命新任郎官未经上殿者并引对。
现代文：初三，命令新任郎官没有上殿的人都可以引对。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, anyone who ordered the new steward not to go to the hall could be led to the right.

古文：御史中丞颜岐罢。
现代文：御史中承颜岐罢职。
English: This is the first time in history that a president has resigned from office.

古文：徐秉哲责官、梅州安置。
现代文：徐秉哲降为梅州安置。
English: Xu Bingzhe was relegated to Meizhou.

古文：诏河北、京、陕、淮、湖、江、浙州军县镇募人修筑城壁。
现代文：下诏河北、京、陕、淮、湖、江、浙州军县镇募人修筑城垒墙壁。
English: The following towns in Hebei, Beijing, Shaanxi, Huai, Hubei, Jiangsu and Zhejiang are recruiting people to build fortress walls.

古文：壬戌，置登闻检鼓院。
现代文：初四，设置登闻检鼓院。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the Nobunaga Drum School was established.

古文：癸亥，以黄潜善为门下侍郎兼权中书侍郎。
现代文：初五，任命黄潜善为门下侍郎兼代理中书侍郎。
English: In the fifth year of his junior high school career, Huang Xuanzen was appointed as a junior attendant and acting junior secretary.

古文：张邦昌坐僭逆，责降昭化军节度副使、潭州安置。
现代文：张邦昌因僧逆，责降昭化军节度副使，潭州安置。
English: Zhang Bangchang was demoted to vice-envoy of the Shao-Hua army and resettled in Tanzhou due to his rebellion.

古文：及受伪命臣僚：王时雍高州，吴开永州，莫俦全州，李擢柳州，孙觌归州，并安置。
现代文：接受伪命的臣僚王时雍贬为高州安置，昊汗永州安置，莫侍全州安置，李摺柳州安置，孙规归州安置。
English: Wang Shiyong, the minister who accepted the false order, was demoted to Gaozhou resettlement, Hao Khan to Yongzhou resettlement, Mo Zhi to Quanzhou resettlement, Li Suri to Liuzhou resettlement, Sun Gui to Quanzhou resettlement.

古文：颜博文、王绍以下论罪有差。
现代文：颜博文、王绍以下，遭到不等的处罚。
English: Yan Bowen, Wang Shaowen and others received varying degrees of punishment.

古文：以知怀州霍安国、河东宣抚使刘韐死节，赠安国延康殿学士，韐资政殿大学士。
现代文：因怀州知州霍安国、河东宣抚使刘洽为国捐躯，赠霍安国延康殿学士，刘洽资政殿大学士。
English: Because of the proclamation of Huai Zhou, Zhizhou, Hoan Guo, and Hedong, Liu Cai sacrificed his life for the country, and was presented with a bachelor's degree from the Yan Kang Palace of Hoan Guo, and a bachelor's degree from the Liu Cai Foundation for Political Science.

古文：甲子，命李纲兼御营使。
现代文：初六，命令李纲兼任御营使。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, Li Gang was also ordered to serve as an envoy.

古文：乙丑，以龙神卫四厢都指挥使马忠为河北经制使，措置民兵。
现代文：初七，任命龙、神卫四厢军都指挥使马忠为河北经制使，措置民兵抗金事宜。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Long and Shenwei were appointed to command the four-vehicle army, and Ma Zhong was appointed as the chief envoy of Hebei Province to deal with the issue of the resistance of the militia.

古文：洪刍罢左谏议大夫，下台狱。
现代文：洪当罢去左谏议大夫，下御史台狱。
English: Hongtang was dismissed from his post as Zuo Jianbing doctor and sent to the Lower Mi-Stai Prison.

古文：丁卯，以祠部员外郎喻汝砺为四川抚谕，督漕计羡缗及常平钱物。
现代文：初九，任命祠部员外郎喻汝砺为四川抚谕，督促槽计羡络及常平钱物。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, he appointed a member of the ancestral hall, Wai Lang Yu Rong, as the Sichuan Fuzhu, to supervise the tank, the envious and the ordinary money.

古文：罢开封、诸州、军、府司录曹掾官。
现代文：罢除开封各州、军、府司录曹椽官。
English: Remove Caofeng officials from the provincial, military and prefectural secretaries.

古文：州、军通判二员者省其一。
现代文：州军有二名通判的精简一名。
English: The State Troopers have two full-time officers, up from one.

古文：权减宰执奉赐三之一。
现代文：暂时减少宰执棒赐三分之一。
English: Temporarily reducing the number of jockeys by one-third.

古文：省诸路提举常平司、两浙、福建提举市舶司。
现代文：免除各路提举常平司及两浙、福建提举市舶司。
English: exempting the Changping Shipyard and the shipyards of Zhuhai, Zhejiang and Fujian.

古文：贼李孝忠寇襄阳，守臣黄叔敖弃城遁。
现代文：贼李孝忠攻打襄阳，守臣黄叔敖弃城逃跑。
English: The thief Li Xiaozhong attacked Xiangyang, and the vassal Huang Shu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：立格买马。
现代文：确定标准买马。
English: Determine the criteria for buying a horse.

古文：辛未，以子旉生，大赦。
现代文：十三日，因儿子赵惠出生，举行大赦。
English: On the 13th, due to the birth of her son Zhao Hui, an amnesty was held.

古文：籍天下神霄宫钱谷充经费。
现代文：没收全国神霄宫钱谷充作军国经费。
English: Confiscate the whole country's Shenxiao Palace and Qiantan to be used as military state funds.

古文：拘天下职田钱隶提刑司。
现代文：拘收全国职田钱隶属提刑司。
English: The detention of the whole country's vocational field money is subordinated to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：还元祐党籍及上书人恩数。
现代文：恢复元党人及上书人的恩惠和待遇。
English: to restore the favors and treatment of former Party members and petitioners.

古文：癸酉，诏陕西、山东诸路帅臣团结军民，互相应援。
现代文：十四日，诏令陕西、山东各路帅臣团结军民，互相应援。
English: On the 14th, Shaanxi and Shandong generals and ministers were ordered to unite the military and the people and support each other.

古文：乙亥，增诸县弓手，置武尉领之。
现代文：十六日，增加各县弓手数量，设置武尉率领他们。
English: On the 16th, the number of archers in each county was increased, and military officers were set up to lead them.

古文：宗室叔向以所募勤王兵屯京师，或言为变，命刘光世捕诛之。
现代文：宗室叔向把所募集到的勤王兵安扎在京师开封，有人说是准备叛乱，命令刘光世率兵捕杀他们。
English: Uncle Zongshu ordered Anza, the royalist soldier he had recruited, to be stationed in Beijing. Some said they were preparing a rebellion, and ordered Liu Guangxie to lead an army to hunt them down and kill them.

古文：戊寅，以汪伯彦知枢密院事。
现代文：十九日，任命汪伯彦为知枢密院事。
English: On the 19th, Wang Bohian was appointed as a member of the State Intellectual Property Office.

古文：遣宣义郎傅雱使河东军前，通问二帝。
现代文：派遣宣义郎傅稣出使河东军前，打听徽、钦二帝的消息。
English: He dispatched Xuan Yilang Fu Cao to the front of the Hedong army to inquire about the information of Hui and Qin.

古文：己卯，置沿河、沿淮、沿江帅府十有九，要郡三十九，次要郡三十八，帅守兼都总管，守臣兼钤辖、都监，总置军九十六万七千五百人。
现代文：二十日，设置沿河、沿淮、沿江帅府十九个，重要的郡三十九个，次重要的郡三十八个，帅守兼都总管，守臣兼铃辖、都监，总共置军九十六万七千五百人。
English: On the 20th, nineteen governorates along the river, along the Huai River and along the Yangtze River, thirty-nine important counties and thirty-eight less important counties were set up, with the governor as the head of the capital, the governor as the subordinate of the capital, and the governor as the subordinate of the capital, with a total of 967,500 soldiers.

古文：别置水军七十七将，造舟江、淮诸路。
现代文：另外设置水军七十七将，在江、淮各路制造战船。
English: In addition, the Seventy-seven Generals of the Navy were set up to manufacture warships along the Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：置三省、枢密院赏功司。
现代文：设置三省、枢密院赏功司。
English: Three provinces and the Privy Council were set up to reward meritorious service.

古文：东京留守范讷落节钺、淄州居住。
现代文：东京留守范呐被罢除军权，淄州居住。
English: Fanna, who stayed behind in Tokyo, was removed from military power and went to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚辰，以二帝未还，禁州县用乐。
现代文：二十一日，因徽、钦二帝没有回国，禁止州县用乐。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Qin did not return to China, and the use of music in counties and prefectures was prohibited.

古文：辛巳，置沿河巡察六使。
现代文：二十二日，设置沿河巡察六使。
English: On the 22nd, six inspectors were set up to patrol along the river.

古文：壬午，以户部尚书张悫同知枢密院事兼提举措置户部财用。
现代文：二十三日，任命户部尚书张意为同知枢密院事兼提举措置户部财用。
English: On the 23rd, the appointment of the Household Department was announced as the Tongzhi Privy Council's initiative to set up the Household Department for financial use.

古文：癸未，吕好问罢。
现代文：二十四日，吕好问被罢职。
English: On the 24th, Lü Haowen was dismissed from his post.

古文：甲申，并尚书户部右曹所掌归左曹，命尚书总领。
现代文：二十五日，尚书户部右曹所掌管的事务归并到左曹，命令尚书统管。
English: On the 25th, the affairs under the control of the Right Cao of the Household Department of Shang Shuxu were merged into the Left Cao, and Shang Shuxu was ordered to be in charge.

古文：乙酉，以宗泽为东京留守，杜充为北京留守，罢监司州郡职田。
现代文：二十六日，任命宗泽为东京留守，杜充为北京留守。罢除监司州郡职田。
English: On the 26th, Sozawa was appointed to stay in Tokyo, and Duchong to stay in Beijing. Supervisor Shuzhongtuda was dismissed.

古文：丙戌，诏陕西、河北、京东西路募兵合十万人，更番入卫行在。
现代文：二十七日，诏令陕西、河北、京东西路招募十万人充军，轮番人卫行在。
English: On the 27th, Shaanxi, Hebei and East-West Beijing were ordered to recruit 100,000 men to join the army.

古文：命京东、西路造战车。
现代文：命令京东西路制造战车。
English: He ordered the eastern and western districts of Beijing to build chariots.

古文：丁亥，以张所为河北西路招抚使。
现代文：二十八日，任命张所为河北西路招抚使。
English: On the 28th, Zhang was appointed as the envoy of Hebei West Road.

古文：括买官民马，劝出财助国。
现代文：括买官民喂养的马匹，鼓励出财补助国家经费的不足。
English: Buy horses fed by both the public and private sectors, and encourage people to contribute money to supplement the shortage of state funds.

古文：戊子，以钱盖为陕西经制使，封赵怀恩为安化郡王，因召五路兵赴行在。
现代文：二十九日，任命钱盖为陕西经制使，封赵怀恩为安化郡王，于是号召五路兵马赶赴行在。
English: On the 29th, Qian Gai was appointed as the Minister of Shaanxi Province, and Zhao Huain was appointed as the King of Anhua County. Therefore, he called for five soldiers and horses to rush to the scene.

古文：秋七月己丑朔，以枢密副都承旨王燮为河东经制使。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命枢密副都承旨王燮为河东经制使。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Wang Qi, the vice-premier of the Privy Council, was appointed as the chief envoy to Hedong.

古文：庚寅，诏王渊、刘光世、统制官张俊、乔仲福、韩世忠分讨陈州军贼杜用、京东贼李昱及黎驿、鱼台溃兵，皆平之。
现代文：初二，下诏王渊、刘光世和统制官张俊、乔仲福、韩世忠分别征讨陈州军贼杜用、京东贼李星及黎骚、鱼台溃兵，都被平定。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Wang Yuan, Liu Guangze, and the commanding officers Zhang Jun, Qiao Zhongfu, and Han Shizhong were separately conscripted to fight against the Chenzhou bandits Duyong, the Jingdong bandits Li Xing and Lishao, and the Yutai routed soldiers, and were all subdued.

古文：辛卯，籍东南诸州神霄宫及赡学钱助国用。
现代文：初三，籍没东南各州神霄宫及赡学钱补助国家经费开支。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was not enrolled in the Shenxiao Palace of the southeastern states and the alimony money subsidized the state fund expenditure.

古文：叔右监门卫大将军、贵州团练使士珸以磁、洺义兵复洺州。
现代文：叔右监门卫大将军、贵州团练使匕吾率领磁州、洛州义兵收复洛州。
English: Uncle Right Supervisor Gatekeeper General, Guizhou Rehearsal Corps sent Xingguo to lead the Magizhou and Luozhou volunteers to recover Luozhou.

古文：乙未，以温州观察使范琼为定武军承宣使、御营司同都统制。
现代文：初七，任命温州观察使范琼为定武军承宣使、御营司同都统制。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Fan Qiong, the Wenzhou observation envoy, was appointed as the envoy of the Dingwu army and the commander of the capital.

古文：丙申，赐诸路强壮巡社名为 忠义巡社 ，专隶安抚司。
现代文：初八，赐各路强壮巡社名为 忠义巡社 ，专隶安抚司。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the strong patrol company was given the name "Chungyi Patrol Company," which was under the pacification department.

古文：戊戌，钦宗至燕山府。
现代文：初十，钦宗到达燕山府。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Qin Zong arrived in Yanshan Prefecture.

古文：以忻州观察使张昪为河北制置使。
现代文：任命忻州观察使张换为河北制置使。
English: Zhang was appointed as Zhangzhou Observation Envoy and changed to Hebei Observation Envoy.

古文：东都宣武卒杜林谋据成都叛，伏诛。
现代文：东都宣武士兵杜林策划占据成都举行叛乱，被处以死刑。
English: Dongdu Xuanwu soldier Du Lin planned to occupy Chengdu and hold a rebellion, and was sentenced to death.

古文：己亥，诏台省、寺监繁简相兼，学官、馆职减旧制之半。
现代文：十一日，下诏台省、寺监繁简相兼，学官、馆职精简原设的一半。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, as well as the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology were reduced by half.

古文：辛丑，复议吴开、莫俦等十一人罪，并广南、江、湖诸州安置，余递贬有差。
现代文：十三日，重新审议昊汗、莫侍等十一人罪状，均贬为广南、江、湖各州安置，其余人递贬不等。
English: On the 13th, eleven people, including Hao Khan and Mo Zhi, were re-examined, and their charges were all reduced to resettlement in the provinces of Guangnan, Jiangsu and Hubei, while the remaining people received varying degrees of reduction.

古文：壬寅，诏： 奉元祐太后如东南，六宫及卫士家属从行，朕当独留中原，与金人决战。 
现代文：十四日，下诏： 奉迁元太后到东南，六宫及卫士家属跟随前往。我一个人留在中原，与金军决战。 
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: After the relocation of Empress Dowager Yuan to the southeast, Liugong and the guards' families followed. I stayed alone in the Central Plains and fought a decisive battle with the Golden Army.

古文：以延康殿学士许翰为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命延康殿学士许翰为尚书右承。
English: He appointed Xu Han, an academician of Yan Kang Palace, as the rightful successor of Shang Shuxu.

古文：甲辰，以右谏议大夫宋齐愈当金人谋立异姓，书张邦昌姓名，斩于都市。
现代文：十六日，因右谏议大夫宋齐愈在金军谋立异姓为帝时，书写张邦昌姓名，在都市处死。
English: On the 16th, Song Qiyu, a right-wing doctor, was executed in the city for writing Zhang Bangchang's name when the Jin army was seeking to establish a different name for the emperor.

古文：乙巳，手诏： 京师未可往，当巡幸东南。 
现代文：十七日，亲自书写诏书： 京师开封不可能前往，应该出巡到东南。 
English: On the 17th, he personally wrote an imperial edict: It is impossible for the Beijing division to go to Kaifeng, it should go to the southeast.

古文：丙午，诏定议巡幸南阳。
现代文：十八日，下诏商定巡幸南阳。
English: On the 18th, they agreed to visit Nanyang.

古文：以观文殿学士范致虚知邓州，修城池，缮宫室，输钱谷以实之。
现代文：任命观文殿学士范致虚为邓州知州，修建城池，缮复宫室，运输钱谷充实州城。
English: He appointed Guanwenden's bachelor Fan Zhixu as Dengzhou Zhizhou, built the castle, renovated the palace room, and transported Qianya to enrich the state capital.

古文：丁未，遣官诣京师迎奉太庙神主赴行在。
现代文：十九日，派遣官员到京师开封迎奉太庙神主到行在。
English: On the 19th, officials were dispatched to Beijing and Kaifeng to welcome the arrival of the god of the temple.

古文：己酉，罢四道都总管。
现代文：二十一日，罢除四道都总管。
English: On the 21st, the chief administrators of the four provinces were dismissed.

古文：以尚书虞部员外郎张浚为殿中侍御史。
现代文：任命尚书虞部员外郎张浚为殿中侍御史。
English: He appointed Gairo Zhang Jun, a member of the Imperial Household Archives, as the courtier-historian of the palace.

古文：庚戌，征诸道兵，期八月会行在。
现代文：二十二日，在各道征兵，约定八月在行在会合。
English: On the 22nd, soldiers were recruited in each province, and it was agreed that a meeting would be held in August.

古文：丙辰，徽宗自燕山密遣阁门宣赞舍人曹勋至，赐帝绢半臂，书其领曰： 便可即真，来援父母。 
现代文：二十八日，徽宗在燕山府秘密派遣阁门宣赞舍人曹勋回国，赐给高宗半匹绢，在绢上写道： 可正式即皇帝位，伺机前来援救父母。 
English: On the 28th, Emperor Huizong secretly sent Cao Xun, a courtier to Yanshan Prefecture, to return to China and gave Gao Zong half a horse. On the horse, he wrote: "You can officially become the emperor and come to the rescue of your parents."

古文：帝泣以示辅臣。
现代文：高宗一边哭泣一边拿给辅臣们看。
English: While crying, Gao Zong showed it to his aides.

古文：张所、傅亮军发行在。
现代文：张所、傅亮率军从行在出发。
English: Zhang So and Fu Liang led the army to leave from Xingzai.

古文：是月，关中贼史斌犯兴州，僭号称帝。
现代文：这个月，关中贼史斌侵犯兴州，僧号称帝。
English: This month, Guanzhong thief Shi Bin invaded Xingzhou, and the monk proclaimed himself emperor.

古文：八月戊午朔，洪刍等坐围城日括金银自盗，及私纳宫人，刍及余大均、陈冲贷死，流沙门岛，余五人罪有差。
现代文：八月初一，洪当等人因在金兵围攻京城的时候搜括金银，中饱私囊，并且私自开纳宫人，洪当及余大均、陈冲免除死罪，流放沙门岛，另外五人分别处以不等的罪刑。
English: On the first day of August, Hongtang, Yu Dajun and Chen Chong were exiled to Shamen Island, while the other five were separately sentenced to varying degrees of punishment, for collecting gold and silver and enriching themselves while the Golden Army was besieging the capital city of Lhasa, as well as secretly hiring palace staff.

古文：胜捷军校陈通作乱于杭州，执帅臣叶梦得，杀漕臣吴昉。
现代文：胜捷军校陈通在杭州叛乱，俘获帅臣叶梦得，杀死槽臣吴意。
English: Chen Tong of the Shengjie Military Academy rebelled in Hangzhou, captured the handsome vassal Ye Mengde, and killed the vassal Wu Yi.

古文：己未，元祐太后发京师。
现代文：初二，元太后从京师出发。
English: On the second day of the school year, the former empress dowager set out from the capital.

古文：庚申，以刘光世为奉国军节度使，韩世忠、张俊皆进一官。
现代文：初三，任命刘光世为奉国军节度使，韩世忠、张俊都升官一级。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Liu Guangshi was appointed as the festival envoy of the national army, and Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun were promoted to the first level.

古文：辛酉，右司谏潘良贵罢。
现代文：初四，右司谏潘良贵罢职。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Pan Liangui, Right Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, resigned.

古文：壬戌，以李纲为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，黄潜善为右仆射兼中书侍郎，张悫兼御营副使。
现代文：初五，任命李纲为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，黄潜善为右仆射兼中书侍郎，张意兼御营副使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Gang was appointed as Sho Sho's left-hand servant and attendant, Huang Kuanzhen was appointed as Sho Sho's right-hand servant and attendant, and Zhang Yi was appointed as Oying's deputy.

古文：癸亥，命御营使、副大阅五军。
现代文：初六，命令御营使和副使大规模检阅五军。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, he ordered the envoy and deputy envoy to conduct a large-scale inspection of the five armies.

古文：庚午，更号元祐太后为隆祐太后。
现代文：十三日，改称元太后为隆太后。
English: On the 13th, she was renamed the Empress Dowager Yuan to Empress Dowager Long.

古文：辛未，罢傅亮经制副使，召赴行在。
现代文：十四日，罢除傅亮经制副使的职务，命令他赶赴行在。
English: On the 14th, Fu Liang dismissed the vice-envoy and ordered him to leave immediately.

古文：壬申，召布衣谯定赴行在。
现代文：十五日，命令平民憔定赶赴行在。
English: On the fifteenth day, the civilians were ordered to hurry and leave.

古文：命御营统制辛道宗讨陈通。
现代文：命令御营统制辛道宗讨伐陈通。
English: He ordered Oyake to control the Shinto sect and fight Chen Tong.

古文：是夕，东北方有赤气。
现代文：这天晚上，东北方向有红气出现。
English: That evening, red gas appeared in the northeast direction.

古文：癸酉，以耿南仲主和误国，南雄州安置。
现代文：十六日，因耿南仲主和误国，贬南雄州安置。
English: On the 16th, due to Geng Nanzhong's mistreatment of the country, he was demoted and relocated to Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：乙亥，用张浚言，罢李纲左仆射。
现代文：十八日，按张浚的意见，罢除李纲左仆射职务。
English: On the 18th, according to Zhang Jun's opinion, Li Gangzuo was removed from his post.

古文：丙子，隆祐太后发南京，命侍卫马军都指挥使郭仲荀护卫如江宁，兼节制江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广诸州，制置东南盗贼。
现代文：十九日，隆太后从南京出发，命令侍卫马军都指挥使郭仲荀护卫到江宁，兼节制江、淮、荆、浙、闽、广各州，全权处理东南盗贼。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Long set out from Nanjing, ordered the guards to escort Guo Zhongya to Jiangning, and also controlled Jiang, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang, Handan and Guangzhou, and had full authority to deal with the Southeastern thieves.

古文：丁丑，以龙图阁直学士钱伯言知杭州，节制两浙、淮东将兵及福建枪杖手，讨陈通。
现代文：二十日，任命龙图阁直学士钱伯言为杭州知州，节制两浙、淮东将兵及福建枪杖手，讨伐陈通。
English: On the 20th, Longtu Ge Zhizhong Scholar Qian Boyan was appointed as Hangzhou Chizhou, restraining the generals and soldiers from Zhejiang, Huaidong and Fujian to fight against Chen Tong.

古文：庚辰，降榜招谕杭州乱兵。
现代文：二十三日，下榜招谕杭州叛乱士兵。
English: On the 23rd, the Hangzhou rebel soldiers were invited to come down from the list.

古文：壬午，用黄潜善议，杀上书太学生陈东、崇仁布衣欧阳澈。
现代文：二十五日，采用黄潜善的议论，杀死上书太学生陈东及崇仁平民欧阳澈。
English: On the 25th, using the argument of Huang Quchan, he killed Chen Dong, a student who submitted a letter, and Ouyang Che, a civilian from Chongren.

古文：乙酉，遣兵部员外郎江端友等抚谕闽、浙、湖、广、江、淮、京东西诸路，及体访官吏贪廉、军民利病。
现代文：二十八日，派遣兵部员外郎江端友等人抚谕闽、浙、湖、江、淮、京东西路，及体察访问官吏贪廉、军民利病等问题。
English: On the 28th, he dispatched members of the Military Department, such as Wei Lang, Jiang Duan You and others, to visit the eastern and western roads of Handan, Zhejiang, Hubei, Jiangsu, Huaihe, and Beijing, and to investigate the problems of corruption among officials and corruption among the military and the people.

古文：许翰罢。
现代文：许翰罢职。
English: Xu Han resigns.

古文：丁亥，博州卒宫仪作乱，犯莱州。
现代文：三十日，博州军士宫仪叛乱，进犯莱州。
English: On the 30th, the Bozhou sergeant-at-arms, Gongyi, rebelled and attacked Laizhou.

古文：九月己丑，建州军校张员等作乱，执守臣张动，转运副使毛奎、判官曹仔为所杀，婴城自守。
现代文：九月初二，建州军校张员等人叛乱，活捉守臣张动，转运副使毛奎、判官曹仔被杀死，环城盘踞，拼命固守。
English: At the beginning of September 2nd, Zhang members of Jianzhou Military Academy and others rebelled, captured Shoucheng alive, killed Mao Kui, the deputy envoy for transportation, and Cao Zai, the judge, surrounded the city, and desperately held on.

古文：范琼捕斩李孝忠于复州。
现代文：范琼在复州捕杀李孝忠。
English: Fan Qiong killed Li Xiaozhong in Fuzhou.

古文：壬辰，以金人犯河阳、汜水，诏择日巡幸淮甸。
现代文：初五，因金军侵犯河阳、祀水，下诏选择日期巡幸淮甸。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, due to the invasion of the Kheyang and Shishui by the Golden Army, the date for the inspection of Huai Dian was selected.

古文：铸建炎通宝钱。
现代文：铸造建炎通宝钱。
English: The casting of Jianyuan Tongluo treasure money.

古文：命淮、浙沿海诸州增修城壁，招训民兵，以备海道。
现代文：命令淮、浙沿海各州增修城壁，招集训练民兵，用来防备海道。
English: He ordered the coastal states of Huai and Zhejiang to build additional city walls, and called for the training of militias to guard the sea routes.

古文：甲午，命扬州守臣吕颐浩缮修城池。
现代文：初七，命令扬州守臣吕颐浩修缮城池。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered Yangzhou's governor, Lv Yinghao, to repair the city pond.

古文：宗泽往河北视师，七日还。
现代文：宗泽前往河北视察军队，七天后回。
English: Soze went to Hebei to inspect the troops and returned seven days later.

古文：是夜，辛道宗兵溃于嘉兴县。
现代文：这天傍晚，辛道宗率领的军队在嘉兴县溃败。
English: In the evening of that day, the army led by Xin Daozong was defeated in Jiaxing County.

古文：丁酉，诏荆襄、关陕、江淮皆备巡幸。
现代文：初十，下诏荆襄、关陕、江淮都准备高宗出巡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Jingxiang, Guanshan and Jianghuai all prepared for Gaozong to go on a tour.

古文：戊戌，罢买马。
现代文：十一日，罢除买马。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the horse-buying ban was lifted.

古文：己亥，以子旉为检校少保、集庆军节度使，封魏国公。
现代文：十二日，任命儿子赵薯为检校少保、集庆军节度使，封魏国公。
English: On the 12th, he appointed his son, Zhao Jia, as the junior guard of the inspection school, the festival envoy of the gathering of the army, and the crown prince of Wei.

古文：诏内外官司参用嘉祐、元丰敕，以俟新书。
现代文：下诏朝廷内外各部门，参考沿用嚎、元丰救，等待新制度的颁布。
English: All departments inside and outside the Imperial Court are hereby ordered to wait for the promulgation of the new system, with reference to the long-standing  and 元丰救.

古文：庚子，二帝徙居郡。
现代文：十三日，徽、钦二帝迁居肇郡。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin II moved to Zhao County.

古文：辛丑，陈通劫提点刑狱周格营，杀格，执提点刑狱高士曈。
现代文：十四日，陈通袭击提点刑狱周格军营，杀死周格，活捉提点刑狱高士董。
English: On the 14th, Chen Tong attacked the military camp of Zhou Ge, a high-ranking prison official, killing Zhou Ge and capturing high-ranking prison official Dong alive.

古文：壬寅，遣徽猷阁待制孟忠厚迎奉太庙神主赴扬州。
现代文：十五日，派遣徽酞阁待制孟忠厚迎奉太庙神主到扬州。
English: On the 15th, Meng Zhonghou, the governor of Hubei Province, was dispatched to Yangzhou to welcome and venerate the temple's god.

古文：以直秘阁王圭为招抚判官，代张所，寻责所广南安置。
现代文：任命直秘阁王圭为招抚判官代替张所，不久张所被贬广南安置。
English: The direct secretary of the cabinet, Wang Gui, was appointed as the judge to replace Zhang Zuo. Soon, Zhang Zuo was demoted and relocated to Guangnan.

古文：乙巳，宗泽表请车驾还阙。
现代文：十八日，宗泽上表请求高宗回到开封。
English: On the 18th, Sozawa sent a request to Gao Zong to return to Kaifeng.

古文：戊申，河北招抚司都统制王彦渡河击金人，破之，复新乡县。
现代文：二十一日，河北招抚司都统制王彦渡过黄河攻击金军，打败金军，收复新乡县。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Yan, the head of the Hebei Provincial Recruiting Office, crossed the Yellow River to attack the gold army, defeated the gold army, and recovered Xinxiang County.

古文：己酉，以谍报金人欲犯江、浙，诏暂驻淮甸捍御，稍定即还京阙。
现代文：二十二日，得到金军打算进犯江、浙的情报，下诏暂时驻扎淮甸抗御金军，待形势稍有好转即回到开封。
English: On the 22nd, after receiving intelligence that the Chinese army was planning to invade the Yangtze River and Zhejiang Province, he ordered the temporary stationing of troops in Huadian to resist the Chinese army, and then returned to Kaifeng when the situation improved slightly.

古文：募民入赀授官。
现代文：招募百姓人资授官。
English: Recruiting the people's human resources and awarding positions.

古文：军贼赵万入常州，执守臣何衮。
现代文：军贼赵万进人常州，活捉守臣何衷。
English: The military bandit Zhao Wanjin was from Changzhou and was captured alive by Shouwen Hezhen.

古文：罢诸路经制招抚使。
现代文：罢除各路经制招抚使。
English: We will dismiss the envoys of the various economic systems.

古文：庚戌，始通当三大钱于淮、浙、荆湖诸路。
现代文：二十三日，三大钱开始在淮&;;浙&;;荆湖各路流通。
English: On the 23rd, the three major coins began to circulate in Huai'an, Zhejiang and Jinghu.

古文：壬子，命湖南抚谕官马伸持诏赐张邦昌死于潭州，并诛王时雍。
现代文：二十五日，命令湖南抚谕官马伸手持诏书，在潭州赐死张邦昌，并诛杀王时雍。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the Hunan magistrate Ma Sheng to hold the imperial edict in his hand, to give death to Zhang Bangchang in Tanzhou, and to kill Wang Shiyong.

古文：癸丑，诏有敢妄议惑众沮巡幸者，许告而罪之，不告者斩。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：有敢妄议惑众阻挠巡幸的人，允许告发并治罪，知而不告的人斩杀。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Those who dare to discuss and mislead the public to obstruct the pilgrimage are allowed to be reported and punished, and those who do not report are to be killed.

古文：乙卯，王彦及金人战，败绩，奔太行山聚众，其裨将岳飞引其部曲自为一军。
现代文：二十八日，王彦与金军交战，失利，到太行山聚集群众，他的副将岳飞率部曲自为一军。
English: On the 28th, Wang Yan fought against the Chinese army and was defeated. He went to Taihang Mountain to gather the masses. His vice-commander Yue Fei led the troops.

古文：赵万陷镇江府，守臣赵子崧弃城渡江，保瓜洲。
现代文：赵万攻陷镇江府，守臣赵子裕弃城渡江图保瓜州。
English: Zhao Wan captured Zhenjiang Prefecture, and his vassal Zhao Ziyu abandoned the city and crossed the river to Guazhou.

古文：是秋，金人分兵据两河州县，惟中山、庆源府、保、莫、邢洺、冀、磁、绛、相州久之乃陷。
现代文：这年秋天，金军分兵占据两河地区州县，只有中山、庆源府及保、莫、邢、洛、冀、磁、绛、相等州坚持了很久才被攻陷。
English: In the autumn of that year, the detachments of the Golden Army occupied the counties and prefectures in the Liuhe area. Only Zhongshan, Qingyuanfu and the counties of Bao, Mo, Handan, Luo, Hebei, Magong, Handan and Tongli persisted for a long time before they were captured.

古文：冬十月丁巳朔，帝登舟幸淮甸。
现代文：冬十月初一，高宗上船到淮甸。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Gao Zong boarded a ship to Huai Dian.

古文：戊午，太后至扬州。
现代文：初二，太后到达扬州。
English: On the second day of the first month, the empress dowager arrived in Yangzhou.

古文：己未，罢诸路劝诱献纳钱物。
现代文：初三，罢除各路劝诱献纳钱物。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, all methods of persuasion and inducement to donate money were abolished.

古文：庚申，罢诸路召募溃兵忠义等人，及寄居官擅集勤王兵者。
现代文：初四，罢除各路招募溃兵忠义等人，及寄居官擅自招集勤王兵的人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, those who recruited loyal soldiers from all directions, and those who recruited royal soldiers without permission from sojourners, were dismissed.

古文：癸亥，募群盗能并灭贼众者官之。
现代文：初七，招募盗贼中能消灭贼众的人任命为官。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, recruit thieves who can destroy the thieves and appoint them as officials.

古文：甲子，以张浚论李纲不已，落纲观文殿大学士，止奉宫祠。
现代文：初八，因张浚不断纠弹攻击李纲，李纲落职为观文殿大学士，只奉宫祠。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, due to Zhang Jun's constant reprimand attack on Li Gang, Li Gang was dismissed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and only served as an ancestral hall.

古文：知秀州兼权浙西提点刑狱赵叔近入杭州招抚陈通。
现代文：秀州知州兼代理浙西提点刑狱赵叔近到杭州招抚陈通。
English: Xiuzhou, Zhizhou, and the agent of Zhejiang and Xizhou to raise the point of imprisonment, Zhao Shuxian, came to Hangzhou to solicit Chen Tong.

古文：乙丑，罢帅府、要郡、次要郡新军及水军。
现代文：初九，罢除帅府、要郡、次要郡新军及水军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the new army and navy of Shuaifu, important counties, and minor counties were dismissed.

古文：丁卯，以王渊为杭州制置盗贼使，统制官张俊从行。
现代文：十一日，任命王渊为杭州制置盗贼使，统制官张俊跟随前往。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Yuan was appointed as the thief envoy for Hangzhou, and the controlling officer Zhang Jun followed him.

古文：庚午，次泗州，幸普照寺。
现代文：十四日，停留泅州，到普照寺。
English: On the 14th, we stopped at Bozhou and went to Fushou Temple.

古文：甲戌，太白昼见。
现代文：十八日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：己卯，次楚州宝应县。
现代文：二十三日，到楚州宝应县。
English: On the 23rd, to Baoying County, Chuzhou.

古文：后军将孙琦等作乱，逼左正言卢臣中堕水死。
现代文：后军将官孙琦等人叛乱，逼迫左正言卢臣中跳水淹死。
English: Later, the general Sun Yat-sen and others rebelled and forced Lu Zhenzhong to jump into the water and drown.

古文：庚辰，命刘光世讨镇江叛兵。
现代文：二十四日，命令刘光世讨伐镇江叛军。
English: On the 24th, he ordered Liu Guangxi to crush the rebels in Zhenjiang.

古文：辛巳，以光世为滁和濠州、江宁府界招捉盗贼制置使，御营统制官苗傅为使司都统制。
现代文：二十五日，任命刘光世为滁、和、壕州及江宁府界招捉盗贼制置使，御营统制官苗傅为使司都统制。
English: On the 25th, Liu Guangze was appointed as the envoy to recruit and catch thieves in the areas of Handan, Hezhou, Hezhou and Jiangning prefectures, and Miao Fu, the official of the Imperial General Headquarters, was appointed as the envoy of the General Headquarters.

古文：朝请郎李棫提举广西左、右两江峒丁公事。
现代文：任命朝请郎龚域提举广西左、右两江酮丁公事。
English: The appointment of the morning to invite the Langye region to nominate the Guangxi left and right two rivers Ketonding public affairs.

古文：癸未，至扬州，禁内侍统兵官相见。
现代文：二十七日，到扬州，禁止内侍统兵官相见。
English: On the 27th, he went to Yangzhou and forbade the general officer of the Imperial Household to see him.

古文：丙戌，王渊、张俊诱赵万等，悉诛之。
现代文：三十日，王渊、张俊诱杀了赵万等人。
English: On the 30th, Wang Yuan and Zhang Jun lured Zhao Wan and others to their deaths.

古文：十一月戊子，李纲鄂州居住。
现代文：十一月初二，李纲贬鄂州居住。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Li Gang went to live in Ezhou.

古文：真定军贼张遇入池州，守臣滕祐弃城遁。
现代文：真定军贼张遇进人池州，守臣滕弃城逃跑。
English: When Zhang, the real war criminal, entered Renchi Prefecture, his retainer Teng abandoned the city and fled.

古文：己丑，诏杂犯死罪有疑及情理可悯者，抚谕官同提刑司酌情减降，先断后闻。
现代文：初三，下诏：杂犯死罪有疑虑及情理可怜悯的人，抚谕官同提刑司商议酌情减刑，先行审断后报告朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: For those who have doubts and reasonable compassion about the death penalty for minor offenders, the magistrate will discuss with the criminal justice department to reduce the sentence as appropriate, and report to the imperial court after preliminary adjudication.

古文：壬辰，遣王伦等为金国通问使。
现代文：初六，派遣王伦等人为金国通问使。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wang Lun and others were sent as envoys to inquire about the situation in China.

古文：乙未，以张悫为尚书左丞，工部尚书颜岐同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命张意为尚书左承，工部尚书颜岐同知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhang Yi was appointed as the successor of Shang Shuxu, and Shang Shuxu Yanqi, a member of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：丙申，曲赦应天府、毫、宿、扬、泗、楚州、高邮军。
现代文：初十，因特殊情况赦免应天府及毫、宿、扬、泅、楚州和高邮军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, due to special circumstances, the troops of Yingtianfu, Miao, Shuku, Yang, Handan, Chuzhou and Gaoyou were pardoned.

古文：丙午，以张悫为中书侍郎。
现代文：二十日，任命张意为中书侍郎。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Yi was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：戊申，以颜岐为尚书左丞兼权门下侍郎，御史中丞许景衡为右丞，刑部尚书郭三益同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，任命颜岐为尚书左承兼代理门下侍郎，御史中承许景衡为右承，刑部尚书郭三益为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd, Yanqi was appointed as the left successor and acting servant of the disciple of Shangshu Rong, the right successor of the disciple of Shangshu Rong, and the right successor of the disciple of Shangshu Rong, and the three benefits of the criminal department of Shangshu Rong were the same as the Privy Council.

古文：权密州赵野弃城遁，军校杜彦据州，追野，杀之。
现代文：暂代密州知州赵野弃城逃跑，军校杜彦占据密州，追击赵野，并杀死了他。
English: Chizhou Zhao Ye abandoned the city of Chizhou and fled. Duyan, a military school student, occupied Chizhou, pursued Zhao Ye and killed him.

古文：辛亥，命福建路增招弓手。
现代文：二十五日，命令福建路增招弓手。
English: On the 25th, he ordered Fujian Road to increase the number of archers.

古文：金人陷河间府。
现代文：金军攻陷河间府。
English: The Kim army captured Kawama-fu.

古文：是月，军贼丁进围寿春府，守臣康允之拒却之。
现代文：这个月，军贼丁进围攻寿春府，守臣康允之拒战，打退了丁进。
English: This month, the military bandit Ding Jin besieged Shuchunfu, and the vassal Yasunobu refused to fight, and repulsed Ding Jin.

古文：十二月丙辰朔，命从臣四员充讲读官，就内殿讲读。
现代文：十二月初一，任命从臣四名担任讲读官，在内殿讲读。
English: On the first day of December, four courtiers were appointed as lecturers to give lectures in the inner hall.

古文：丁巳，诏诸路提刑司选官，即转运司所在州类省试进士，以待亲策。
现代文：初二，下诏各路提刑司选官，就转运司所在州挑选省试进士，等待高宗亲自策试。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, all the roads were ordered to nominate the criminal justice department to select officers, and the state where the transportation department was located was selected for the provincial examination, waiting for Gao Zong to personally plan the examination.

古文：辛酉，王渊入杭州，执陈通等诛之。
现代文：初六，王渊进军杭州，捉到陈通等人，杀死他们。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wang Yuan marched into Hangzhou, captured Chen Tong and others, and killed them.

古文：壬戌，青州败将王定以兵作乱，杀帅臣曾孝序。
现代文：初七，青州败将王定兴兵叛乱，杀死帅臣曾孝序。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Qingzhou defeated Wang Ding Xinghe's rebellion and killed the handsome minister Zeng Xiaozhuang.

古文：癸亥，粘罕犯汜水关，西京留守孙昭远遣将拒之，战殁，昭远将兵南遁，寻命部将王仔奉启运宫神御赴行在。
现代文：初八，粘罕侵犯祀水关，西京留守孙昭远派遣将领率军队抵抗金军，战死。孙昭远带兵南逃，不久命令部将王仔奉启运宫神主到行在。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Kishi invaded Shishiguan, and Sun Zhaoyuan, who remained in West Beijing, sent a general to lead an army to resist the Jin army and died in battle. Sun Zhaoyuan led the soldiers to flee south, and soon ordered the ministry to send Wang Zi to escort the palace god.

古文：甲子，改授后父徽猷阁待制邢焕为光州观察使。
现代文：初九，改授后父徽酞阁待制邢焕为光州观察使。
English: At the age of nine, he was awarded the title of Gwangju Observation Envoy after his father, Hwu Yeongge, was awarded the title.

古文：乙丑，诏凡刑赏大政并经三省，其干请墨敕行下者罪之。
现代文：初十，下诏：凡是处罚、奖赏大政都要经过三省批准，托人说情，不经外廷直接下达皇帝书写的诏令，要予以处罚治罪。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: All punishments and rewards of the grand policy must be approved by the three provinces, and a person must be appointed to intercede. Without a written edict directly issued by the emperor from the court, they must be punished and punished.

古文：丙寅，张遇犯江州。
现代文：十一日，张遇进犯江州。
English: On the 11th day, Zhang Yu invaded Jiangzhou.

古文：戊辰，金人围棣州，守臣姜刚之固守，金兵解去。
现代文：十三日，金军转攻棣州，守臣姜刚之顽强抵抗坚守，金军退走。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese army turned to attack Bozhou. The guarding vassal Jiang Gang stubbornly resisted, and the Chinese army retreated.

古文：甲戌，金人陷同州，守臣郑骧死之。
现代文：十九日，金军攻陷同州，守臣郑骤战死。
English: On the 19th, the Golden Army invaded and occupied Tongzhou, and the guarding vassal Zheng Shuang died in battle.

古文：张遇犯黄州。
现代文：张遇进犯黄州。
English: Zhang Yu invaded Huangzhou.

古文：己卯，金人陷汝州，入西京。
现代文：二十四日，金军攻陷汝州，进人西京洛阳。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army invaded Ruzhou and marched into West Beijing and Luoyang.

古文：庚辰，金人陷华州。
现代文：二十五日，金军攻陷华州。
English: On the 25th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Huazhou.

古文：辛巳，破潼关。河东经制使王燮自同州引兵遁入蜀。
现代文：二十六日，金军攻破撞关，河东经制使王燮从同少率兵逃到蜀。
English: On the 26th, the Chinese army broke through the pass, and the Hengtong Emperor ordered Wang Qi to flee to Shu with a small number of soldiers.

古文：丁进诣宗泽降。
现代文：丁进到宗泽军中投降。
English: Ding Jin surrendered to Soze's army.

古文：乙酉，增置广西弓手以备边。
现代文：三十日，增加设置广西弓手，防备边患。
English: On the 30th, Guangxi archers were added to guard against border incidents.

古文：以户部尚书黄潜厚为延康殿学士、同提举措置财用。
现代文：任命户部尚书黄潜厚为延康殿学士、同提举措置财用。
English: Appointed the head of the household, Shangshu Huang Qianhou, as a scholar of Yan Kang, and the same measure was used to invest.

