古文：海内东南陬以西者。
现代文：海内南经所记载的是东南角以西的地方。
English: It is the place west of the southeast corner that is recorded in the Hainan Nanjing.

古文：瓯居海中。
现代文：瓯位于海中。
English: The anchor is located in the sea.

古文：闽在海中，其西北有山。
现代文：闽在海中，它的西北方有山。
English: It lies in the middle of the sea, with mountains to the northwest.

古文：一曰闽中山在海中。
现代文：一说闽一带的山在海中。
English: It is said that the mountains around the reeds are in the sea.

古文：三天子鄣山在闽西海北。
现代文：三天子鄣山在闽的西北方。
English: San Tianzi Lushan is located in the northwest of Handan.

古文：一曰在海中。
现代文：另一种说法认为三天子鄣山在海中。
English: Another theory is that the three-day-old Lushan is floating in the sea.

古文：桂林八树在番隅东。
现代文：桂林的八棵树处在番隅的东面。
English: Guilin's Eight Trees is on the east side of the Bund.

古文：伯虑国、离耳国、雕题国、北朐国皆在郁水南。
现代文：伯虑国、离耳国、雕题国、北朐国都在郁水的南边。
English: Bo Xian Guo, Li Er Guo, Jia Zhi Guo and Beilun Guo are all on the south side of Yu Shui.

古文：郁水出湘陵南海。
现代文：郁水发源于湘陵，流入南海。
English: Yu Shui originates from Xiangling and flows into the South China Sea.

古文：一曰相虑。
现代文：一说伯虑应作相虑。
English: It is said that one's concern should be mutual.

古文：枭阳国在北朐之西。
现代文：枭阳国在北朐国的西面。
English: Shenyang Province is in the west of Beilun Province.

古文：其为人人面长唇，黑身有毛，反踵，见人笑亦笑手操管。
现代文：那里的人长着人的面孔，嘴唇很长，黑黑的身子上还有长毛，脚跟在前而脚尖在后，一看见人就张口大笑；左手握着一根竹筒。
English: The people there have human faces, long lips, long hair on their black bodies, their heels point forward and backward, and they open their mouths to laugh when they see someone; they hold a bamboo cane in their left hand.

古文：兕在舜葬东，湘水南。
现代文：兕在帝舜所葬之地的东面，在湘水的南岸。
English: It stands on the south bank of the Xiangshui River, to the east of the place where the emperor was buried.

古文：其状如牛，苍黑，一角。
现代文：兕的外形像牛，通身是青黑色，长着一只角。
English: The beak is shaped like a cow, with a blue-black body and a single horn.

古文：苍梧之山，帝舜葬于阳，帝丹朱葬于阴。
现代文：苍梧山，帝舜葬在这座山的南面，帝丹朱葬在这座山的北面。
English: Cangwu Mountain, Emperor Qian was buried on the south side of this mountain, Emperor Dan Zhu was buried on the north side of this mountain.

古文：泛林方三百里，在东。
现代文：泛林方圆三百里，在猩猩生活之地的东面。
English: Three hundred miles to the east of where the orangutans live.

古文：兕兕知人名，其为兽如豕而人面，在舜葬西。
现代文：猩猩能知道人的姓名，这种野兽的外形像猪却长着人的面孔，生活在帝舜所葬之地的西面。
English: The orangutan can recognize people's names. This beast, which looks like a pig but has a human face, lives in the west of the land where the emperor was buried.

古文：兕兕西北有犀牛，其状如牛而黑。
现代文：猩猩的西北面有犀牛，它的外形像牛而全身是黑色。
English: To the northwest of the orangutan is the rhinoceros, which looks like a cow and is completely black.

古文：夏后启之臣曰孟涂，是司神于巴。
现代文：夏朝国王启的臣子叫孟涂，是主管巴地诉讼的神。
English: Meng Tu, a retainer of the king of the Xia Dynasty, was the god in charge of litigation in the Badi.

古文：人请讼于孟涂之所，其衣有血者乃执之。
现代文：巴地的人到孟涂那里去告状，而告状人中有谁的衣服沾上血迹的就被孟涂拘禁起来。
English: The people of Bati went to Mengtu to file a complaint, and Mengtu detained any of the complainants whose clothes were stained with blood.

古文：是请生，在丹山西。
现代文：这样就不出现冤枉而有好生之德。孟涂住在一座山上，这座山在丹山的西面。
English: Meng Tuo lived on a mountain, which is on the west side of Mount Danzan.

古文：丹山在丹阳南，丹阳居属也。
现代文：丹山在丹阳的南面，而丹阳是巴的属地。
English: Danshan is in the south of Danyang, and Danyang is the province of Ba.

古文：窫窳龙首，居弱水中，在兕兕知人名之西，其状如龙首，食人。
现代文：窫窳长着龙一样的脑袋，居住在弱水中，位于能知道人的名字的猩猩所居之地的西边，它的形状像，长着龙一样的脑袋，会吃人。
English: The dragon-headed dragonfly, which lives in shallow water to the west of where the name-recognizing orangutans live, is shaped like, has a dragon-like head, and eats humans.

古文：有木，其状如牛，引之有皮，若缨、黄蛇。
现代文：有一种树木，形状像牛，一拉就剥落下树皮，样子像冠帽上缨带、黄色蛇皮。
English: There is a kind of tree, shaped like a cow, the bark peels off with a single pull, looking like the umbilical cord on the crown cap, yellow snakeskin.

古文：其叶如罗，其实如栾，其木若蓲，其名曰建木。
现代文：它的叶子像罗网，果实像栾树结的果实，树干像刺榆，名称是建木。
English: Its leaves are like cobwebs, its fruit like the fruit of an elm tree, its trunk like a hedgehog, and its name is Jianmu.

古文：在窳西弱水上。
现代文：这种建木生长在窫窳所在地之西的弱水边上。
English: This tree grows on the edge of shallow water west of the cormorant's location.

古文：氐人国在建木西，其为人人面而鱼身，无足。
现代文：氐人国在建木所在地的西面，那里的人都长着人的脸，鱼一样的身子，没有脚。
English: The land of the deaf is to the west of the place where Jianmu is located. The people there have human faces, fish-like bodies, and no feet.

古文：巴蛇食象，三岁而出其骨，君子服之，无心腹之疾。
现代文：巴蛇能吞下大象，吞吃后三年才吐出大象的骨头，有才能德品的人吃了巴蛇的肉，就不患心痛或肚子痛之类的病。
English: The boa constrictor can swallow an elephant and only vomit up the elephant's bones three years after swallowing it. If a talented and virtuous person eats the meat of the boa constrictor, he will not suffer from heartache or stomachache.

古文：其为蛇青赤黑。
现代文：这种巴蛇的颜色是青色、黄色、红色、黑色混合间杂的。
English: The colour of this viper is a mixture of blue, yellow, red and black.

古文：一曰黑蛇青首，在犀牛西。
现代文：另一种说法认为巴蛇是黑色身子青色脑袋，在犀牛所在地的西面。
English: Another theory is that the python is a black body with a blue head, in the west of the rhino's location.

古文：旄马，其状如马，四节有毛。
现代文：旄马，外形像马，但四条腿的关节上都有长毛。
English: a draught horse, resembling a horse in appearance, but with long hair on the joints of all four legs.

古文：在巴蛇西北，高山南。
现代文：它生活在巴蛇所居之地的西北，高山的南边。
English: It lives in the northwest of the land where the python lives, south of the high mountains.

古文：匈奴、开题之国。列人之国并在西北。
现代文：匈奴、开题国、列人国都在西北地区。
English: The Xiongnu, the opening country, and the people's country are all in the northwest region.

