古文：戊寅三月二十七日自南丹北鄙岜ｂā歹村，易骑入重山中，渐履无人之境。
现代文：戊寅年三月二十七日自南丹州北郊的岂歹村，换了马进入重山之中，渐入无人之境。
English: On the 27th of March in the year of Wu Yin, I changed horses and rode into the heavy mountains from the village of Tao Gang in the northern suburbs of Nantan Province, gradually entering a no man's land.

古文：五里，逾山界岭。
现代文：走了五里路，越过山界岭。
English: Walked five miles, crossed the mountain ridge.

古文：南丹下司界。又北一里，逾石隘，是为艰坪岭。
现代文：又往北行一里，穿过一处石头隘口，这是艰坪岭。
English: Another mile north, through a stone pass, is Herping Ridge.

古文：其石极嵯峨，其树极蒙密，其路极崎岖，黔、粤之界，以此而分，南北之水，亦由此而别。
现代文：山上的岩石极为巍峨，树木极其浓密，道路非常崎岖，黔、粤两省的交界，从此处划分，南北两面的河流，也从此地分流。
English: The rocks on the mountain are extremely high, the trees are extremely dense, and the roads are very rugged. The junction of the two provinces of Yunnan and Guangdong is divided from here, and the rivers on the north and south sides are also diverted from here.

古文：然其水亦俱下都泥，则石隘之脊，乃自东而西度，尽于巴鹅之境，而多灵大脊犹在其东也。
现代文：然而这里的水流也全都下流进都泥江，所以石头隘口处的山脊，是自东往西延伸，尽头在巴鹅的境内，而多灵山的主脊还在它的东面。
English: However, all the streams here also flow down into the Mud River, so the ridge at the stone pass extends from east to west, ending in the territory of Bagoos, while the main ridge of Dorling Mountain is still to the east of it.

古文：北下一里，就峡西行，一里，始有田塍，又半里，峡转北，坞始大开。
现代文：往北下行一里，就着峡谷西行，一里，开始有农田。又走半里，峡谷转向北去，山坞这才十分开阔。
English: Go one mile north and west along the canyon. After one mile, farmland begins. After another half mile, the canyon turns north, and the dock is wide open.

古文：又北一里，有村在西坞中，曰由彝。
现代文：又向北行一里，有个村庄在西边山坞中，叫由彝。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a village in the western dock, called Yuzhuang.

古文：此中诸坞，四面皆高，不知水从何出。
现代文：这一带的各个山坞，四面地势都高，不知水从哪里流出去。
English: The various docks in this area are high on all sides, and I don't know where the water flows from.

古文：然由彝村南石壁下，有洞东向，细流自畦中淙淙入，透山西而去，固知大脊犹在东也。
现代文：然而由彝村南边的石壁下，有个洞向东，细细的水流自水田中涂涂地流进去，穿过山腹向西而去。
English: However, under the stone wall on the south side of the village, there is a hole to the east. A thin stream of water trickles into it from the paddy fields and flows through the mountainside to the west.

古文：至此南丹差骑辞去。
现代文：本来我就知道主脊还在东面，到此地后南丹州来的差人坐骑告辞走了。
English: Originally, I knew that the main ridge was still in the east, and after arriving here, the police horse from South Danzhou resigned.

古文：由彝人始许夫骑，久乃不至，促久之，止以二夫负担去。
现代文：由彝村的人起初答应派给差夫和坐骑，等了许久仍不见来，催促了很久，只派两个差夫挑着担子走了。
English: At first, the people of Yu village promised to send a porter and a horse, but after waiting for a long time, they still did not come. After urging them for a long time, they only sent two porters to carry the burden.

古文：余独坐其栏，从午至暮，始得骑。
现代文：我独自坐在他们的竹楼中，从中午等到傍晚，这才得到坐骑。
English: I sat alone in their bamboo hut from midday until the evening, when I was given a horse.

古文：西北二里，至山寨，则寨人已送担亦前去。
现代文：往西北行二里，到山寨，可寨里人也已送担子往前去了。
English: Two miles to the northwest, to the cottage, but the villagers have also sent the burden forward.

古文：乃由其东上岭，越脊北下一里，行壑中。
现代文：于是由寨东上岭，越过岭脊向北下走一里，行走在壑谷中。
English: So I walked from Zhaidong to Shangling, crossed the ridge and walked one mile to the north, walking in the middle of the valley.

古文：又北一里，再越岭脊，下行峡中。
现代文：又向北一里，再次越过岭脊，下岭行走在山峡中。
English: Another mile to the north, again over the ridge, down the ridge walking in the canyon.

古文：壑圆而峡长，南北向皆有脊中亘，无泄水之隙，而北亘之脊，石齿如锯，横锋坚锷，莫可投足。
现代文：壑谷呈圆形而山峡呈长形，南北方向都有山脊在当中横亘着，没有泄水的缺口。而北面横亘的山脊，岩石如锯齿，横的竖的都似刀剑的锋刃，没有可下脚的地方。
English: The valley is circular and the canyon is elongated. In the north-south direction, there are ridges in the middle, with no drainage gaps. And the ridges in the north, the rocks are like saw teeth, the horizontal and vertical ones are like the blade of a sword, and there is no place to set foot.

古文：时已昏暮，跃马而下，此骑真堪托死生也。
现代文：此时夭已昏黑，跃马而下，这匹坐骑可真算是把生死托付给它了呀！
English: At this time, it was already dark, and the horse jumped down. This horse was really entrusted with life and death!

古文：越脊，直坠峡底，逾所上数倍，姑知前之圆壑长峡，犹在半山也。
现代文：越过山脊，一直下坠到峡底，超过上山时的几倍路程，这才知道先前的圆壑谷与长形山峡还在半山腰呢。
English: After crossing the ridge and falling all the way down to the bottom of the canyon, which is several times the distance when climbing the mountain, I knew that the previous rounded valley and long-shaped canyon were still halfway down the mountain.

古文：峡底有流，从南脊下溢，遂滔滔成流。
现代文：峡底有水流，从南面的山脊上往下溢出，于是形成滔滔的流水。
English: There is a stream at the bottom of the canyon, spilling down from the ridge on the south side, creating a torrent of water.

古文：随之西向行，共里许，有村在南山麓，担夫已换去。又骑而西半里，担夫又已去。
现代文：沿着水流向西行，共走一里左右，有个村庄在南山山麓下，挑夫已换了离去 又骑马向西半里，担夫又离去。
English: Along the water flow to the west, a total of one mile or so, there is a village at the foot of the Nanshan Mountain, the porter has changed and left and rode half a mile to the west, and the porter left again.

古文：盖村人恐余止其家，故函换之行，而又无骑换，骑夫不肯前，余强之暗行摸黑走路。
现代文：大概是村里人害怕我住在他们家里，故而急急忙忙换了挑夫就上路；但是又没有坐骑来替换，马夫不肯再往前，我强迫他摸黑赶路。
English: Probably the villagers were afraid of me living in their house, so they hurriedly changed the driver and went on the road; but there was no horse to replace it, the groom did not want to go any further, and I forced him to find his way in the dark.

古文：西北半里，有溪自东而西，横堰其中，左右渊深，由堰上北度，马蹄得得，险甚。
现代文：往西北走半里，有条溪水自东流向西，溪中横着一道堤坝，左右两侧是深渊，从堤上向北过溪，马蹄 得得得 地响，危险极了。
English: Half a mile to the northwest, there is a stream flowing from east to west. There is an embankment across the stream, with an abyss on both sides. Crossing the stream from the embankment to the north, the horse's hoofs can be heard, which is extremely dangerous.

古文：又西转过一村，半里，由村西而北向逾岭，始与双担同行，暗中呼声相属，不辨其为石为影也。
现代文：又往西绕过一村，半里，由村西向北越过山岭，这才与两个挑夫同行，在黑暗中高声呼唤相跟着走，辨不清是岩石还是人影。
English: Then he went west around a village, half a mile, from the west of the village to the north over the mountains, and then he walked with two porters, shouting in the dark to follow each other, and it was not clear whether it was a rock or a shadow.

古文：共二上二下，遂行田塍间。
现代文：共两次上山两次下山，终于走到田野间。
English: A total of two times uphill and two times downhill, and finally walked to the fields.

古文：共五里，过一寨，排门人，居人颇盛。
现代文：共行五里，路过一个寨子，推开寨门进去，居民很多。
English: We walked five miles together, passed a stockade, pushed open the gate to enter the stockade, and there were many residents.

古文：半里，复排一门出，又行田塍中。
现代文：半里，再推开一道门出寨，又行走在田野中。
English: After half a mile, he pushed open a gate to leave the village and walked through the fields.

古文：一里半，叩门入旧司，门以内茅舍俱闭，莫为启。
现代文：一里半，敲开寨门进入旧司，寨门以内的茅屋家家都关着，无人肯开门。
English: A mile and a half, knocking open the gate to enter the old division, the gate within the cottage are closed, no one is willing to open the door.

古文：久之，守一启户者，无茅无饭而卧。
现代文：守了很久之后，一家才开了门，没有铺茅草没有吃饭便睡。
English: After keeping vigil for a long time, the family only opened the door and went to sleep without spreading thatch or eating.

古文：上、下二司者，即丰宁司也。
现代文：上、下二司，就是丰宁司了。
English: The upper and lower two divisions, that is, the Fengning Division.

古文：濒南界者，分为下司，与南丹接壤。
现代文：濒临南面边界的地区，划分出来设为下司，与南丹州接壤。
English: The area near the southern border was divided into lower divisions, and bordered Nantan Province.

古文：二司皆杨姓兄弟也，而不相睦。
现代文：二处土司都是杨姓兄弟，但互相不和睦。
English: The two tozis are brothers surnamed Yang, but they do not get along with each other.

古文：今上司为杨柚，强而有制，道路开治，盗贼屏息。
现代文：现今上司土司是杨柚，强干有才能，制度严明，道路畅通，治安良好，盗贼收敛。
English: Nowadays, the boss is Yang Yu, strong and talented, the system is strict, the roads are smooth, the public security is good, and the thieves are converging.

古文：下司为杨国贤，地乱不能辖，民皆剽掠，三里之内，靡非贼窟。
现代文：下司土司是杨国贤，地方上混乱不能管束，百姓都去抢劫，三里之内，无处不是贼窝。
English: The lower steward is Yang Guoxian, local chaos cannot be controlled, the people all go to rob, within three miles, nowhere is a den of thieves.

古文：其东有七榜之地，地宽而渥，桀赘指世风不太平尤甚，其叔杨云道，聚众其中为乱首，人莫敢入。
现代文：它的东面有处叫七榜的地方，地域宽广而且肥沃，那里的人，鸳鹜不驯尤其严重。他的叔父杨云道，为首聚众在那一带作乱，无人敢进去。
English: To the east of it, there is a place called the Seven Mountains, a vast and fertile region, where the people are particularly unruly. His uncle, Yang Yundao, was the first to gather people to make trouble in that area, and no one dared to enter.

古文：旧司者，下司昔日司治也，为上司所破，国贤移居寨上。
现代文：旧司，是下司昔日土司衙门所在地，被上司所攻占，杨国贤移驻到寨子上。
English: The old division, which was the location of the lower division of the former Tusi gate, was occupied by the boss, and Yang Guoxian moved to the stockade.

古文：寨在南山麓，与旧司南北相对，中隔一坞，然亦无奇险也。
现代文：寨子在南山山麓，与旧司南北相对，中间隔着一个山坞，然而也无什么奇险之处。
English: The stockade is at the foot of the Nanshan Mountain, opposite the old section from north to south, with a dock in the middle. However, there is nothing dangerous about it.

古文：二十八日平明起，雨霏霏下。
现代文：二十八日黎明起床，细雨霏霏。
English: I got up at dawn on the 28th, and it was drizzling.

古文：余令随夫以盐易米而炊。
现代文：我命令随行的挑夫用盐换米来做饭。
English: I ordered the porter accompanying me to cook rice with salt.

古文：余以刺索夫于南寨，国贤避不出，托言与上司不合，不敢发夫。止许护送者两三人送出境。
现代文：我拿名帖去南面的寨子索要差夫，杨国贤躲避着不出来，推托说与上司不合，不敢派夫，只同意派两三个人护送我出境。
English: I took a famous postcard and went to the southern stockade to ask for a porter. Yang Guoxian could not come out of hiding. He said that he disagreed with his boss and did not dare to send a porter. He only agreed to send two or three people to escort me out of the country.

古文：余饭而待之，送者亦不至，乃雇夫分肩行李，从旧司北向逾岭行。
现代文：我吃了饭便等候着他们，护送的人不来，只好雇了挑夫分别担着行李，从旧司向北越岭前行。
English: After I had eaten, I waited for them. The escort didn't come, so I had to hire a porter to carry my luggage separately and go from the old station to Beiyue Ridge.

古文：共三里余，下至饿鬼桥，有小水自东北注西南，小石梁跨其上，御人者拦路抢劫的人每每横行于此。
现代文：共走三里多，下行到饿鬼桥，有条小河自东北流向西南，小石桥横跨在河上，盗贼常常在此横行。
English: A total of more than three miles, down to the Hungry Ghost Bridge, there is a small river flowing from the northeast to the southwest, a small stone bridge across the river, thieves often run rampant here.

古文：又北二里，逾岭，已为上司界。
现代文：又往北二里，越过山岭，已是上司境内。
English: Another two miles north, over the mountains, is the boss's territory.

古文：下岭二里，有村在西坞，而路东有枫木树对之。
现代文：下岭行二里，有个村庄在西面山坞中，而路东面有枫树面对着它。
English: Two miles down the ridge, there is a village in the western dock, and a maple tree faces it on the east side of the road.

古文：又东北逾岭二里，有村在东坞，其前环山为壑，中洼为田。
现代文：又向东北越岭走二里，有个村庄在东面山坞中，村前群山环绕成壑谷，中央下洼垦为农田。
English: Another two miles to the northeast over the ridge, there is a village in the middle of the dock on the east side, the mountains in front of the village are surrounded by a valley, and the central valley is farmland.

古文：村倚东峰，有石崖当村后；路循西岭，与村隔垄相向，始敢对之息肩。
现代文：村子紧靠东面的山峰，有石崖位于村后；路顺着西边的山岭走，与村子隔着土垄相望，这才敢对着村子歇歇肩头。
English: The village is close to the mountain peak in the east, with a stone cliff behind the village; walking along the mountain ridge in the west, looking across the ridge from the village, it is only then that one dares to look back at the village.

古文：又西北逾岭二里，转而西向行，于是峡大开，南北相向，南山下村居甚稠，北山则大路倚之。
现代文：又往西北越岭行二里，转向西行，到这里山峡十分开阔，南北两山相对，南山下村庄居民十分稠密，沿北山有条大路紧傍着。
English: They also went two miles northwest across the ridge and turned west. At this point, the gorge was very wide, with the north and south mountains opposite each other. The villages below the south mountain were very densely populated, and there was a large road along the north mountain.

古文：西行五里，路复西北逾岭。
现代文：西行五里，路再次往西北越岭。
English: Go west for five miles, and the road crosses the ridge to the northwest again.

古文：盖此地大山在东北，路俱缘其西南上，虽有升降，然俱上多下少，逶迤以升者也。
现代文：大体上此地的大山在东北方，路全是沿着山的西南面上行，虽然有上有下，不过上山多下山少，都是透透巡渔上升的路。
English: Generally speaking, the big mountain here is in the northeast, and the roads are all along the southwest face of the mountain. Although there are ups and downs, there are more ups and downs than downs, and they are all the way up through the patrol.

古文：又西北二里，逾岭。
现代文：又向西北走二里，越过山岭。
English: Another two miles to the northwest, over the mountains.

古文：路北有峰，回亘层叠，俨若天盘龙髻。
现代文：路北有山峰，回绕绵亘层层叠叠，俨然如天上盘旋着的龙状发髻。
English: On the north side of the road, there are mountains, which are encircled in layers and layers, resembling a dragon-like cocoon hovering in the sky.

古文：崖半有洞，门西向，数十家倚之。
现代文：山崖半腰上有个洞，洞口向西、数十家人依傍着它。
English: There is a hole halfway up the cliff, the mouth of which faces west, and dozens of people are clinging to it.

古文：路乃北转，又一里，越其西冈北向下。
现代文：路于是转向北，又是一里，越过山峰的西冈向北下行。
English: The road then turns to the north for another mile, crossing the west ridge of the mountain peak and heading north.

古文：西冈者，大山分支西突为盘髻峰，其下横冈西度者也。
现代文：西冈，是大山的分支向西突出形成盘绕的发髻状山峰，峰下横着的山冈向西延伸形成的。
English: The west ridge is formed by the branch of the large mountain protruding to the west to form a coiled hairpin-like peak, and the horizontal ridge under the peak extending to the west.

古文：西冈之北，山又东西排闼。
现代文：西冈之北，山势又形成东西排列的门扉。
English: To the north of Nishioka, the mountains form an east-west doorway.

古文：北望西界山，一圆石高插峰头，矗然倚天之柱，其北石崖回沓，即上司治所托也；东界土山，即路所循而行者。
现代文：北望西面一列山，一块圆石高插在峰头，矗立的样子似擎天之柱，它北边石崖回绕杂沓，便是上司治所依托之处了；东面一列土山，就是路顺着行走的山。
English: Looking to the north and west, there is a line of mountains. A boulder is stuck high on the peak, standing like a pillar of heaven. It is the north side of the rock cliff, which is supported by the superintendent's office. To the east, there is a line of earthen hills, which is the mountain walking along the road.

古文：共北五里，路与西界矗柱对。
现代文：共往北五里，道路与西面矗立的石柱相对。
English: A total of five miles to the north, the road is opposite to the stone pillar standing in the west.

古文：又北二里，忽山雨大至。
现代文：又向北二里，忽然山雨暴降。
English: Another two miles to the north, a sudden downpour of rain.

古文：担夫停担，各牵笠蔽雨，余持伞亦蔽一挑。
现代文：挑夫停下担子，各自拉个斗笠遮雨，我打着伞也遮着一副担子。
English: The porters stopped their loads and each of them pulled on a raincoat to shield themselves from the rain. I also took an umbrella to cover one of the loads.

古文：忽有四人持镖负弩，悬剑橐矢，自后奔突而至。
现代文：急然有四个人拿着飞镖背负弓弩，腰挂长剑，箭囊中盛着箭矢，从后面急奔而来。
English: Suddenly, four men carrying darts, a crossbow, a long sword, and a quiver of arrows rushed up from behind.

古文：两人趋余伞下，一人趋顾仆伞下，一人趋担夫笠下，皆勇壮凶狞，似避雨，又似夹持。
现代文：两人奔到我的伞下，一人赶去顾仆伞下，一个跑到挑夫斗笠下边，全都勇武健壮凶狠狰狞，似来避雨，又似来挟持。
English: Two of them ran under my umbrella, one ran under the umbrella of Gu Zhu, and one ran under the pick-up man's cap. All of them were brave, strong, and ferocious. They seemed to be sheltering from the rain, and they also seemed to be carrying something.

古文：余甚恐。
现代文：我非常恐惧。
English: I'm very scared.

古文：问余何往，余对以都匀。
现代文：问我前往何处，我回答去都匀。
English: Ask me where I'm going and I'll tell you I'm going everywhere.

古文：问余求烟，余对以不用。
现代文：间我要烟，我回答不抽烟。
English: When I ask for a cigarette, I answer that I don't smoke.

古文：久之。雨不止而势少杀，余曰： 可行矣。 
现代文：许久，雨没停可雨势稍弱下来，我讲： 可以走了。 
English: For a long time, the rain did not stop, but the rain weakened slightly, and I said: I can go.

古文：其人亦曰： 可去。 余以为将同往而前者，及余行而彼复止。
现代文：那些人也说： 可以离开了  我以为是将一同往前走的样子，到我动身时他们却又停下来，我益发明白他们必定不是好人。
English: Those people also said: You can leave. I thought we were going to go forward together, but when I started, they stopped again, and I realized more and more that they must not be good people.

古文：余益知其必非良人，然入其吻而不下咽，其心犹良也。更北半里，转而西又一里余，有营当两界夹中阜上，壁垒新整。
现代文：不过进了他们嘴里却不咽下去，他们的心肠仍然还是好的。再往北半里，转向西又走一里多，有处军营位于两列山夹峙之中的土阜上，壁垒崭新整齐。
English: Half a mile further north, and more than a mile to the west, there is a military camp on top of the earthen mound, sandwiched between two mountain ranges, its ramparts newly in order.

古文：由其下又西一里，入上司南门，有土垣环绕，门内即宿铺。
现代文：由此下又西行一里，进入上司南门，有土墙环绕着，门内就是住宿的释馆。
English: From there, it's another mile west to the boss's south gate, which is surrounded by an earthen wall. Inside the gate is the guesthouse.

古文：江西人。自下司至此，居舍中各半土半栏。时雨过街湿，余乘湿履，遂由街北转而西，有巨塘汇其内，西筑堤为堰，甃为驰道甚整。
现代文：此时雨过天晴街道还潮湿，我踩着湿鞋子，就经由街上往北转向西走，有个巨大的水塘，西边筑了堤修成堰塘，堤上砌成驰道十分宽整。
English: At this time, the rain had passed and the streets were still wet. I stepped on my wet shoes and walked through the streets to the north and west. There was a huge pond. On the west side, a dike was built into a weir, and the dike was built into a very wide and neat road.

古文：又北半里，直抵囤山堡垒东麓，北向入一门。
现代文：又往北走半里，直达囤子所在之山的东麓，向北进入一道门。
English: Another half-mile north, straight to the eastern foot of the mountain where the raft is located, north into a gate.

古文：有石罅一缕在东麓下，当其尽处，凿孔如盂，深尺许，可贮水一斗。
现代文：有一线石缝在东麓下，在它的尽头，凿了个孔如钵盂一样大，深一尺左右，可贮水一斗。
English: There was a line of stone sewn under the eastern foot of the mountain, and at the end of it, a hole as big as a cocoon was drilled, about a foot deep, capable of storing a bucket of water.

古文：囤上下人俱以盎候而酌之，谓其水甘冽，迥异他水。
现代文：囤子上下的人都用瓦盆等着舀水，声称这水甘甜清冽，与别处的水迥然不同。
English: People on and off the rafts waited with earthenware pots to draw water, claiming that the water was sweet and clear and completely different from the water elsewhere.

古文：余酌而尝之，果不虚也。
现代文：我舀了点尝了尝，果然不假。
English: I nibbled a bit and tasted it, and sure enough, it wasn't fake.

古文：由此循囤麓转入北峡，峡中居人甚多，皆头目之为心膂ｌǔ亲信得力的人寄者；又编竹架囤于峡中，分行贮粟焉。
现代文：由这里沿囤子所在的山麓转入北面山峡中，峡中居民很多，都是头自的心腹；又用竹子编成粮囤架在峡中，分别把粮食贮藏在其中。
English: From here, along the foot of the mountain where the raft is located, it turns into the canyon to the north. There are many residents in the canyon, all of whom are self-made; they also use bamboo to weave grain baskets in the canyon and store the grain in them separately.

古文：由北陕西向行，已入囤后，有脊自西北连属于囤，乃囤之结蒂处也。
现代文：由北面的山峡向西行，很快走入囤子后方，有条山脊自西北而来连接着囤子，那是囤子联结的关键之处。
English: From the canyon in the north to the west, we soon entered the back of the raft. There is a ridge connecting the raft from the northwest, which is the key point of the raft connection.

古文：脊东峡中，有洞倚囤麓，其门北向，甚隘而深。
现代文：山脊东面的峡谷中，有个山洞紧依着囤子所在的山麓，洞口向北，十分狭窄却很深。
English: In the canyon on the east side of the ridge, there is a cave close to the foot of the mountain where the raft is located. The cave entrance is to the north, very narrow but very deep.

古文：有二人将上囤，余问： 此洞深否？ 
现代文：有两个人将要上囤子去，我问道： 此洞深不深？ 
English: There are two people about to go on the raft, and I ask: Is this hole deep?

古文：云： 其洞不深。
现代文：说： 这个洞不深。
English: He said, "This hole isn't deep.

古文：上至囤半，有大洞颇深而有水，须以炬入。 
现代文：上到囤子半山腰，有个大洞很深而且有水，必须拿火把才能进去。 
English: Halfway up the mountain, there is a big, deep hole with water. You have to take a torch to get in.

古文：由下仰眺，囤上居舍累累，惟司官所居三四层，皆以瓦覆，以垩土饰。
现代文：由下边抬头眺望，囤子上居民房屋层层叠叠，只有土司居住的三四层房屋，都用瓦盖顶，用白土粉饰。
English: Looking up from below, the residents' houses are stacked on top of each other. The three- and four-story houses, where only the toji live, are all tiled and whitewashed.

古文：囤险而居整，反出南丹上也。
现代文：囤子险要而居屋整齐，反而超出南丹之上了。
English: Hanzi insurance is required, and the I-House is tidy, but it exceeds Nantan.

古文：余乃随其人拾级上囤，其级甚峻，而甃整。
现代文：我于是跟随那两人沿石阶遂级上囤子去，那石阶非常陡峻，但开凿敷砌得宽阔平整。
English: So I followed the two of them up the stone steps, which were very steep, but wide and level.

古文：竭撅而上，共半里，折而东，有楼三楹跨路间，乃囤半之隘关也。
现代文：竭力跌跌绊绊向上登，共半里，折向东，有楼三间横跨在路中间，这是囤子半山腰的关隘了。
English: I stumbled and tripped my way up, a total of half a mile, turning to the east, with three buildings straddling the middle of the road. This was the narrow pass halfway up the mountain.

古文：洞在中楹之后，前为楼所蔽不可见。
现代文：山洞在中间一间楼房的后边，前面被楼遮住不能见到。
English: The cave is behind a building in the middle, and cannot be seen because the front is covered by the building.

古文：有男妇各一，炊中楹下。
现代文：有男女各一人，在中间一间楼下烧火做饭。
English: There is one man and one woman, and they cook over an open fire in the middle room downstairs.

古文：二人指余入，遂登囤去。
现代文：那二人指点我入洞，便登上囤子去了。
English: The two men pointed me into the hole and got on the raft.

古文：余索炬于炊者，则楹后即猪栏马栈。
现代文：我向做饭的人要了火把，楼后就是猪窝马圈。
English: I asked the cook for a torch, and behind the building was a pigsty and a stable.

古文：践之下洞，洞门北向，洼坠而下，下皆污土，上多滴沥，不堪驻足，乃复出而下。
现代文：踩着污物下洞，洞口向北，洞势下洼直坠而下，下面皆是污泥，顶上落下许多浙浙沥沥的水滴，不能停足，就又出洞来往下走。
English: I stepped on the dirt and went down the hole. The hole opened to the north, and the hole went straight down. The bottom was all sludge, and a lot of water droplets fell on the top. I couldn't stop, so I went out of the hole and went back down.

古文：先是令一夫随行，至脊下，不敢登，余乃独上。
现代文：这之前命令一个挑夫随行，到了山脊下，挑夫不敢上登，我便独自上山。
English: Before that, I ordered a porter to accompany me. When I reached the bottom of the ridge, the porter did not dare to climb up, so I went up the mountain alone.

古文：然囤上之形，可以外瞭而见，惟此洞为楼掩，非身至不知也。
现代文：然而囤子上的地形，可以从外面便望得见，唯有此洞被楼遮住，非亲身到达是不会知道的。
English: However, the terrain on the raft can be seen from the outside, only this hole is covered by the building, and you will not know if you do not arrive in person.

古文：上司则司治俱在上，而环囤而居者，皆其头目也。
现代文：仍经由原路走了一里多，返回住宿的客馆，却已近黄昏了。饭也已做熟，便吃了饭躺下。上司土司杨袖，由长官而升任副总兵，是由于水西之役的缘故。
English: He still walked more than a mile along the original route, but it was nearly dusk when he returned to the guesthouse where he was staying. The meal was already cooked, so he ate it and lay down. His boss, Toji Yangsode, was promoted from commander to vice-commander-in-chief due to the Battle of Mizushima.

古文：南丹第三弟走荔波，为莫伋ｊí用着人名所执；第四弟走上司，至今为外难，日惴惴焉。
现代文：他的辖地小却与南丹结仇，互相攻杀，所以两地土司各自退居到囤子上。南丹土司的三弟逃往荔波县，被莫极囚禁了；四弟逃到上司，至今仍为外患，终日惴惴不安。
English: However, the small area under his jurisdiction had a feud with Nandan, and they attacked and killed each other, so the local magistrates of the two regions each retreated to Muxian. The third brother of Nandan's magistrate fled to Libo County and was imprisoned by Moji; the fourth brother fled to the boss, and is still an outsider, and is uneasy all day long.

古文：其囤圆而大，四面绝壁，惟西北有脊通级而上，路必环旋于下峡，故为天险。
现代文：这个囤子又圆又大，四面是绝壁，仅在西北方有条山脊通有石阶上囤子，路必定要环绕到下边的峡谷中，所以是天险。
English: The ditch is round and large, with cliffs on all sides. Only in the northwest is there a ridge leading to the ditch on the stone steps. The road must go around to the canyon below, so it is a natural hazard.

古文：峡中水西南下，合塘中及外峡南北诸流，俱透西南腋中坠去。
现代文：几峡中的水流向西南下流，汇合塘中及外面峡中南北诸处水流，全都穿过西南一侧下坠而去。
English: The water flow in several gorges flows down to the southwest, merging with the north-south water flow in the middle of the pond and the outer gorge, all falling down through the southwest side.

古文：二十九日由上司出南门，仍渡门东小水，溯之东北行。
现代文：二十九日由上司出了南门，仍然渡过门东的小河，溯流往东北行。
English: On the 29th, the boss went out of the south gate, still crossed the small river east of the gate, and followed the flow to the northeast.

古文：一里，蹑土山而上。
现代文：一里，踏着土山而上。
English: One mile, up the dirt road.

古文：四里，逾土山西度之脊，其西石峰突兀，至此北尽。
现代文：四里，越过土山西延的山脊，山脊西头石峰突兀，至此北面的山脊完了。
English: Four miles, over the ridge of the west extension of the soil mountain, the west peak of the ridge is abrupt, and the northern ridge is complete.

古文：逾脊西北行一里半，岭头石脊，复夹成隘门，两旁石骨嶙峋指石头杂乱参差。
现代文：翻过山脊向西北行一里半，岭头的石头山脊再度夹成隘口，两旁石骨嶙峋。
English: Turning over the ridge to the northwest for a mile and a half, the stone ridge at the head of the ridge is again clamped into a pass, with stone bones on both sides.

古文：由隘西出，转而东北下，半里，下抵坞中。
现代文：由隘口向西而出，转向东北下行，半里路，下到山坞中。
English: From the pass, go west, turn to the northeast downhill, half-mile road, down to the dock.

古文：又北一里，复越土山西下脊，是为上司、独山州界，于是下岭循东山行。
现代文：又往北一里，再次越过土山向西下延的山脊，这是上司、独山州的交界处，从此下岭沿东山行。
English: Another mile to the north, once again over the hill to the west down the ridge, this is the boss, the junction of the mountain state, and then down the ridge along the Dongshan.

古文：又二里，有村在西山坞中，为苴村。
现代文：又走二里，有个村庄在西面山坞中，是直查村。
English: Another two miles away, there is a village in the west of the dockyard, it is the village of Zichao.

古文：其处东西两界皆土山，中开大坞，有水自北来，界于坞中，绕苴查之东，乃西向破峡去。
现代文：该处东西两边都是土山，中间拓开为大山坞，有河水自北流来，介于山坞之中，绕过宜查村的东面，便向西冲破山峡流去。
English: Both the east and west sides of this place are earthen mounds, and the middle is widened into a large mountain dock, with river water flowing from the north, bypassing the east side of Yicha Village in the middle of the dock, and then rushing westward through the mountain gorge.

古文：循东界山溯水北向行，又三里，水分二支来，一自西北，一自东北，如 丫 字会于中支山尽处。
现代文：顺着东边一列山溯水流向北行，又走三里，河水分为两支流来，一条来自西北，一条来自东北，如同一个 丫 字交汇于中间一支山脉的尽头处。
English: Following the east side of a mountain stream to the north, and walking three miles, the river water is divided into two streams, one from the northwest, one from the northeast, like a river meeting at the end of a mountain range in the middle.

古文：西北者较大，路溯东北行，一里半始渡之。
现代文：自西北来的水流较大，路溯流往东北行，走了一里半才渡河。
English: The water flow coming from the northwest is large, and the backwash flows to the northeast, and it takes a mile and a half to cross the river.

古文：于中支山东麓，得坛子窑村，乃土官蒙氏之族也。
现代文：在中间这支山脉的东麓，走到坛子窑村，是土司蒙家的族人。
English: At the eastern foot of this mountain range in the middle, walk to the village of Danzi Yao, a member of the Tusi Mengjia tribe.

古文：村北溪中皆碎石，时涸时溢。
现代文：村北溪中都是碎右，有时干涸有时水满。
English: The creeks in the north of the village are choppy, sometimes dry and sometimes full of water.

古文：又东渡之，东北上冈头。共里许，有土环遗址，名曰关上，而无居舍。
现代文：又向东渡过溪水，往东北登上冈头，共一里左右，有环形土墙遗址，名叫关上，可是无居民房屋。
English: They also crossed the stream to the east and ascended the ridge to the northeast, a total of about one mile. There is a ring-shaped earthen wall site, named Guancheng, but there are no residential houses.

古文：又东北一里，水尽坞穷，于是蹑岭，其岭甚峻。
现代文：又往东北走一里，流水和山坞都到了头，从此登岭，此岭极其险峻。
English: Another mile to the northeast, the water and the dock have come to an end, and from here the ridge, this ridge is extremely steep.

古文：三里，北逾其脊，隘中底石如铺，两旁有屼ｗù立峰，是名鸡公关。
现代文：三里路，向北越过岭脊，山隘中平整滑腻的石块如像人工铺砌的一般，两旁有矗立的山峰，这里名叫鸡公关。
English: Sanli Road, crossing the ridge to the north, the smooth and smooth stones in the mountain pass are like artificial paving, and there are standing peaks on both sides. It is called Chicken Public Relations.

古文：其脉自独山州西北，绕州治东南过此，又东南度六寨之东，而下蛮王峰者也。
现代文：此地的山脉起自独山州西北面，绕过州城东南延过此地，又往东南延伸到六寨的东面，再下延到蛮王峰。
English: The mountains in this area start from the northwest of Duxanzhou, go around the southeast of the city of Duxanzhou, extend through this area, and then extend southeast to the east of Liuzhai, and then down to Banwang Peak.

古文：脊西南水，下苴查而入都泥；脊东北水，由合江州下荔波而入龙江。
现代文：岭脊西南侧的水流，下流到直查村而后流入都泥江；岭脊东北面的水流，由合江州下流到荔波县而后流入龙江。
English: The water flow on the southwest side of the ridge flows down to Zhucha Village and then flows into the Duode River; the water flow on the northeast side of the ridge flows down from Hejiang Prefecture to Libo County and then flows into the Longjiang River.

古文：从脊东北眺，则崇山蜿蜒，列屏于前，与此山遥对成两界，中夹大坞，自西北向东南焉。
现代文：从岭脊上向东北眺望，则崇山蜿蜒，似屏风排列在眼前，与此山遥遥相对形成两列界山，中间夹住一个大山坞，自西北延向东南。
English: Looking northeast from the ridge, the lofty mountains meander and line up like a screen in front of you. Far away from this mountain, two border mountains form, with a large dock in the middle, stretching from northwest to southeast.

古文：下山即转北行，一里抵坞，转东，即有小水东南下。
现代文：下山后立即转向北行，一里路抵达坞中。转向东走，即刻有条小河向东南流下来。
English: After descending the mountain, immediately turn to the north, one mile to the middle of the dock. Turn to the east, and immediately a small river flows down to the southeast.

古文：又东一里，逾陟冈阜，忽有溪自西北注东南，水于此复出，为龙江上流矣。
现代文：又往东一里，跋涉翻越在土冈之上，忽然有溪流自西北流向东南，水流在此地重新出现，是龙江的上游了。
English: Another mile to the east, trudging over the earth mound, suddenly there is a stream flowing from the northwest to the southeast, the water flow reappears here, it is the upper reaches of the Longjiang River.

古文：渡溪东上，于是升陟彼垅，东北行坞中。
现代文：渡过澳流向东上行，从此处上登山坡土垄，往东北行走在山坞中。
English: Cross the Ao River to the east and walk uphill. From here, walk up the mountain slope to the ridge, and walk northeast to the dock.

古文：五里，有数家之村，在东北山下。
现代文：五里，有个几家人的村庄，在东北方山下。
English: Wuli, there is a village of several families, at the foot of the mountain in the northeast.

古文：从其前复转入西峡，北一里，过一脊，始北向下岭。
现代文：从村前再转入西边的峡谷，北行一里，过了一条山脊，开始向北下岭。
English: From the front of the village, turn into the canyon on the west side, travel north for one mile, cross a ridge, and start heading north down the ridge.

古文：其下甚深，半里抵其麓，始知前所行俱在山上也。
现代文：岭极深，半里路到达山麓，这才知道前边所走的路全是在山上。
English: The ridge is very deep, and it takes half a mile to reach the foot of the mountain. Only then do you know that the road ahead is all on the mountain.

古文：又北行坞中一里半，有大溪汪然，自西峡层山是出，东注而去，亦由合江州而下荔波、思恩者。
现代文：又向北在坞中走一里半，有条大溪水势浩大，自西面峡谷的层层山峦中涌出，往东奔注而去，这也是由合江州而流下荔波、思恩的河流。
English: Another mile and a half north in the dock, there is a large stream with enormous water potential, gushing out from the layers of mountains in the western canyon and rushing eastward. This is also the river flowing down from Hejiangzhou to Libo and Sion.

古文：历石壑而渡其北。又缘西界支陇北行五里，为羊用寨。
现代文：经过岩石壑谷渡到溪北，又沿着西面一列山分支的土垄向北行五里，是羊角寨。
English: After passing through the rocky valley to the north of the creek, and along the ridge of a mountain branch to the west, five miles north, is Yangjiao Village.

古文：又北三里，有小水自西坡东注，涉之。
现代文：又往北行三里，有条小溪自西面山坡向东流注，涉过此溪。
English: Another three miles to the north, there is a stream flowing from the western slope of the mountain to the east, wading through this stream.

古文：又北二里，入独山州之南隘门。
现代文：又向北二里，进入独山州的南隘门。
English: Another two miles to the north, into the southern pass of Dokshan Prefecture.

古文：其州无城，一土知州，一明知州。
现代文：该州没有城池，一个土知州，一个明朝廷派来的知州。
English: The state does not have a castle, a tutchi state, a chizhou sent by the Ming court.

古文：土官蒙姓，所属皆土人。
现代文：土司姓蒙，下属都是土人。
English: The toastmaster's family name is Meng, and his subordinates are all natives.

古文：即苗仲。明官多缺，以经历管出纳文书的官署篆某管代理，所属皆客户。余所主者，江西南昌人黄南溪也，其人忠厚长者，家有楼可栖。
现代文：明朝廷派来的官员大多空缺着，以经历代掌官印，下属都是客居的民户。我的房主人，是江西南昌人黄南溪，此人是个忠厚长者，家中有楼可以栖身。
English: Most of the officials sent by the Ming court are vacant, with experience serving as their stamp of approval. Their subordinates are private households living as guests. The owner of my house is Huang Nanxi, a native of Chang in southwestern Jiangsu Province. He is a loyal elder and has a floor in his home where he can live.

古文：盖是州虽无城，而夹街楼房连属，俱用瓦盖，无复茅栏牛圈之陋矣。
现代文：此州虽然没有城池，可夹街两侧的楼房相连，都用瓦盖顶，不再有草棚牛圈的简陋景象了。
English: Although there is no city in this prefecture, the buildings on both sides of the street can be connected, all with tile roofs, and there is no longer the humble sight of grass-covered cattle pens.

古文：独山土官昔为蒙诏，四年前观灯，为其子所弑ｓｈì臣杀君或子女杀死父母。
现代文：独山州的土司过去是蒙诏，四年前观赏灯火时，被他儿子杀了。做母亲的赶去救护，也被杀了。
English: Toji, a former monk, was killed by his son while watching the lanterns four years ago. His mother, who rushed to help, was also killed.

古文：母趋救，亦弑之。乃托言杀一头目，误伤其父，竟无问者。
现代文：却推说是杀一个头目，误伤了自己的父亲，竟然无人查问。
English: But they inferred that he had killed a leader and accidentally wounded his own father, and no one even inquired about it.

古文：今现为土官，可恨也！
现代文：现今做了土司，可恨呀！
English: Now I've made a toast, how disgusting!

