古文：秦攻宜阳，周君谓赵累曰： 子以为何如？ 
现代文：秦国攻打韩国宜阳，周赧王对大臣赵累说： 你认为这件事会怎样发展？ 
English: When Qin attacked Yiyang in South Korea, Zhou Binwang said to Minister Zhao Lei: How do you think this matter will develop?

古文：对曰： 宜阳必拔也。 
现代文：赵累回答说： 宜阳会被秦国攻破。 
English: Zhao Lei replied: Yiyang will be broken by Qin.

古文：君曰： 宜阳城方八里，材士十万，粟支数年，公仲之军二十万，景翠以楚之众，临山而救之，秦必无功。 
现代文：周赧王说： 宜阳方圆八公里，有十万善战的将士，储存的粮食也能够支撑好几年；且它附近还有韩国国相公仲的二十万大军，附近还有楚国大将景翠率领的兵士，依山扎寨，相机援救宜阳，秦国一定不会成功、宜阳不会被秦国攻破的。 
English: Zhou Bingwang said: Yiyang is eight kilometers in circumference, there are one hundred thousand soldiers who are good at war, and the stored grain can also support several years; and it is near the two hundred thousand army of South Korea, near the soldiers led by General Jing Cui of the State of Chu, following the mountains and cameras to rescue Yiyang, Qin will not succeed, Yiyang will not be defeated by Qin.

古文：对曰： 甘茂羁旅也，攻宜阳而有功，则周公旦也；无功，则削迹于秦。
现代文：赵累回答说： 攻打宜阳的秦将甘茂是寄居秦国的客将，如果他攻下宜阳就有功，相当于秦国的周公旦；如果不成功，就会被秦国被革除官职。
English: Zhao Lei replied: Qin general Ganmao, who attacked Yiyang, was a guest general living in Qin. If he attacked Yiyang, he would be credited with the equivalent of Zhou Gongdan of Qin. If he did not succeed, he would be removed from his post by Qin.

古文：秦王不听群臣父兄之议而攻宜阳，宜阳不拔，秦王耻之。
现代文：秦武王不听群臣父兄们的意见，执意要进攻宜阳，如宜阳攻不下来，秦武王会以此为耻。
English: Qin King Wu did not listen to the opinions of his father and brothers, and insisted on attacking Yiyang. If Yiyang could not be attacked, Qin King Wu would be ashamed of it.

古文：臣故曰拔。 
现代文：大势所趋，所以我说宜阳会被攻破。 
English: The general trend, so I said that Yiyang will be broken.

古文：君曰： 子为寡人谋，且奈何？ 
现代文：周赧王说： 那么你替寡人谋划一下，我们应该怎么做？ 
English: Zhou Yingwang said: Then you should make a plan for us. What should we do?

古文：对曰： 君谓景翠曰： 公爵为执圭，官为柱国，战而胜，则无加焉矣，不胜则死。
现代文：赵累回答说： 请君王对楚将景翠说： 你的爵位已经是执圭，你的官职已经是柱国，即使你这次战争获胜，你的官爵也无法再升了；但如果不获胜的话，那么你就会被判死罪。
English: Zhao Lei replied, "Please ask the king to say to Chu's general Jing Cui: Your title is already a vassal, your official position is already a pillar country, even if you win this war, your title will not be able to rise again; but if you do not win, then you will be sentenced to death.

古文：不如背秦，秦拔宜阳，公进兵，秦恐公之乘其弊也，必以宝事公；公仲慕公之为己乘秦也，亦必尽其宝。  
现代文：不如与秦国作对而去援助宜阳。只要你一出兵，秦国就会害怕你要乘秦军疲惫去袭击它，就一定会拿出宝物送给你，韩国国相公仲也会因为你乘虚攻打秦国而敬慕你，他也一定会宝物送给你。  
English: It would be better to fight against Qin and help Yiyang. As long as you send troops, Qin will be afraid that you will attack it by taking advantage of the Qin army's exhaustion, and will surely give you treasures. The South Korean Minister of State for Foreign Affairs will also admire you for taking advantage of the false attack on Qin, and he will surely give you treasures.

古文：秦拔宜阳，景翠果进兵。
现代文：秦军攻下宜阳后，楚将景翠听取周王意见发兵攻秦。
English: After the Qin army captured Yiyang, Chu Jingcui listened to the opinion of King Zhou and sent troops to attack Qin.

古文：秦惧，遽效煮枣，韩氏果亦效重宝。
现代文：秦国大为恐惧，赶紧把煮枣地方献给景翠。韩国果然也拿出重宝酬谢景翠。
English: Qin Guoda was so afraid that he quickly offered the place where the jujube was boiled to Jing Cui. South Korea also came up with a valuable reward to thank Jing Cui.

古文：景翠得城于秦，受宝于韩，而德东周。
现代文：景翠不但得到了秦国的煮枣城，还从韩国那得到了财宝，因此他非常感激东周对他的恩德。
English: Jing Cui not only got the boiled jujube city of Qin, but also got the treasure from Korea, so he was very grateful to Dong Zhou for his kindness.

