古文：安重诲，其先本北部豪长。
现代文：安重诲，祖先本是北部豪强首领。
English: It is important to remember that our forefathers were once powerful leaders in the north.

古文：父福迁，为河东将，救兗、郓而没。
现代文：父安福迁为河东将军，在救援兖州、郓州时战死。
English: His father, Anfu, was transferred to become the general of Hedong Province. He died in battle while rescuing Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：重诲自明宗龙潜时得给事左右。及镇邢州，以重诲为中门使。随从征讨，凡十余年，委信无间，勤劳亦至。洎鄴城之变，佐命之功，独居其右。
现代文：安重诲在明宗未登帝位时当他的给事，明宗镇邢州时，任安重诲为中门使，随从征讨，共十多年，信任无间，勤劳从事，到邺城之变，辅佐之功独居第一。
English: When Mingzong did not ascend to the throne, An Chongchao was assigned to him, and when Mingzong was in Bozhou, An Chongchao was appointed as the middle gate envoy, and he accompanied the enlistment for a total of more than ten years. There was a lot of trust, and he worked diligently. By the time of the change of Bozhong, the role of the assistant was the first.

古文：明宗践祚，领枢密使，俄迁左领军卫大将军充职。
现代文：明宗即皇帝位后，安重诲领枢密使，不久迁左领军卫大将军职。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Mingzong, An Chong was appointed to the post of Privy Councilor, and he was soon transferred to the post of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：案：以下有阙文。明宗遣回鹘侯三驰传至其国，侯三至醴泉县，地素僻，无驿马，县令刘知章出猎，不时给马，侯三遽以闻。
现代文：明宗派回鹘人侯三骑马回他的国家传信，侯三到醴泉县，这个县很偏僻，没有驿马，县令刘知章出去打猎，没及时给马，侯三立即上报。
English: The Ming sect sent Hou San, a Hui person, to convey a message back to his country on horseback. Hou San went to Luquan County, which is very remote and has no horses. The county leader Liu Zhizhang went out to hunt and did not give the horses in time. Hou San immediately reported it.

古文：后李鏻得淮南谍者言： 徐知诰欲奉其国称籓，臣愿得安公一言以为信。 
现代文：明宗大怒，拘押刘知章到京师，准备杀掉他，靠安重诲从容为他说话，才得免死。明宗到汴州，安重诲建议趁机会讨伐吴国，明宗觉得很难。
English: Mingzong was furious, detained Liu Zhizhang to Beijing Division, prepared to kill him, and relied on An Chongyi to speak calmly for him, only to be spared death. When Mingzong went to Zhangzhou, An Chongyi suggested that he take the opportunity to fight against Wu, but Mingzong found it difficult.

古文：鏻即引谍者见重诲。
现代文：其后，户部尚书李頮便引间谍见安重诲。
English: After that, the head of the household, Shangshu Li, brought the spy to see An Chongyun.

古文：重诲大喜，以为然，乃以玉带与谍者，使遗知诰为信，其直千缗。
现代文：安重诲大喜，认为可以，于是把玉带交给间谍，让他带给徐知诰作为凭据，玉带值千缗钱。
English: He was overjoyed and thought he could, so he gave the jade belt to the spy and asked him to bring it to Xu Zhisheng as a proof. The jade belt was worth thousands of yuan.

古文：重诲为枢密使，四五年间，独绾大任，臧否自若，环卫、酋长、贵戚、近习，无敢干政者。
现代文：安重诲为枢密使，四五年里面，独掌大权，决断全由自己，环卫、酋长、贵戚、近臣，没有敢干预朝政的。
English: During the four or five years that An Chongzhen was the Privy Envoy, he held all the power and made all the decisions by himself. The guards, chiefs, relatives, and courtiers did not dare to interfere in the government of the dynasty.

古文：弟牧郑州，子镇怀、孟，身为中令，任过其才，议者谓必有覆餗之祸。
现代文：他弟弟管郑州，他儿子镇守怀州、孟州，身为中令，担任的职务已超过其才能，有议论认为必有倾覆之祸。
English: His younger brother was in charge of Zhengzhou, and his son was in charge of Huaizhou and Mengzhou. As a middle-ranking officer, he held a position that exceeded his abilities, and there were discussions that there would be a disaster of overthrow.

古文：无何，有吏人李虔徽弟扬言于众云： 闻相者言其贵不可言，今将统军征淮南。 
现代文：不久，有吏人李虔徽的弟弟对大家扬言说 ：听相命的说他贵不可言，现在将要率军征讨淮南。 
English: Soon after, the younger brother of an official, Li Qianhui, threatened everyone, saying that he would lead an army to invade Huainan.

古文：时有军将密以是闻，颇骇上听。
现代文：此时有军将秘密地把这话上报，明宗听了很惊异。
English: At this time, a military commander secretly reported this to Mingzong, who was very surprised.

古文：明宗谓重诲曰： 闻卿树心腹，私市兵仗，欲自讨淮南，有之否？ 
现代文：对安重诲说： 听说你安插心腹，私购兵器，想自己讨伐淮南，有这事吗？ 
English: To An Chongyun, he said: I heard that you, An, had put your heart and soul into purchasing weapons illegally and wanted to fight Huainan on your own. Is this true?

古文：重诲惶恐，奏曰： 兴师命将，出自宸衷，必是奸人结构，臣愿陛下穷诘所言者。 
现代文：安重诲惶恐，上奏说： 发兵任将，由皇上决定，必定是奸人造谣诬陷我，请陛下穷追谣传此事的人。 
English: With great trepidation, the Emperor said, "It is up to the Emperor to decide who will be appointed as commander of the dispatch of troops. It must be someone who has slandered me, and I ask Your Majesty to relentlessly pursue the rumor-mongers."

古文：翌日，帝召侍卫指挥使安从进、药彦稠等，谓之曰： 有人告安重诲私置兵仗，将不利于社稷，其若之何？ 
现代文：第二天，皇上召侍卫指挥使安从进、药彦稠等人，对他们说 ：有人告安重诲私自置办兵器仪仗，将对国家有不利行为，对这事怎么办？ 
English: The next day, the emperor summoned the commander of the bodyguards to send An Zongjin, Yao Yan Cong and others, and said to them: "Someone has accused An Zongjin of privately purchasing weapons and holding a ceremonial battle, which will be detrimental to the country. What should be done about this?

古文：从进等奏曰： 此是奸人结构，离间陛下勋旧。
现代文：安从进等人上奏说： 这是奸人造谣，离间陛下的功臣勋旧。
English: An Congjin and others made a report, saying, "This is a false rumor fabricated by a traitor, and it has caused a rift between His Majesty's meritorious vassals.

古文：且重诲事陛下三十年，从微至著，无不尽心，今日何苦乃图不轨！
现代文：而且安重诲跟随陛下三十年，小事大事，无不尽心。今天何苦图谋不轨！
English: Moreover, I have been following Your Majesty for thirty years, small things and big things, all to my heart's content. Today, what a pain in the neck!

古文：臣等以家属保明，必无此事。 
现代文：我们以家属担保，必没这种事。 
English: With our family members as guarantors, there will be no such thing.

古文：帝意乃解。
现代文：明宗才放下心。
English: It was only then that Mingzong put his heart into it.

古文：重诲三上表乞解机务，诏不允。
现代文：安重诲三次上表章请求解除机枢大权，下诏不同意。
English: Mr. An reiterated his request to lift the power of the central government three times in the previous chapter, but the next chapter disagreed.

古文：复面奏： 乞与臣一镇，以息谤议。 
现代文：又面见上奏 ：请让我管一镇，以平息诽谤议论。 
English: I also met with the following: Please let me manage a town to quell the slanderous talk.

古文：明宗不悦。重诲奏不已，明宗怒，谓曰： 放卿出，朕自有人！ 
现代文：明宗不高兴，安重诲不停地上奏，明宗发怒，说： 放你走，我自有人！ 
English: Mingzong was not happy, An Chong Yu kept playing on the floor, Mingzong was angry and said: Let you go, I have my own people!

古文：即令武德使孟汉琼至中书，与宰臣商量重诲事。
现代文：立即令武德使孟汉琼到中书，与宰臣商量安重诲的事情。
English: He immediately ordered Wu De to send Meng Han Qiong to Zhongshu to discuss matters of peace and reconciliation with the vassal.

古文：冯道言曰： 诸人苟惜安令公，解枢务为便。 
现代文：冯道说： 各位如爱惜安令公，以解除他的枢务为好。 
English: Feng Dao said, "If you all cherish An Rongguo, it would be best to relieve him of his duties.

古文：赵凤曰： 大臣岂可轻动，公失言也。 
现代文：赵凤说 ：大臣怎么可以轻易换动，您失言了。 
English: Zhao Feng said: How can a minister be changed so easily? You have made a mistake.

古文：道等因附汉琼奏曰： 此断自宸旨，然重臣不可轻议移改。 
现代文：冯道等人便附和孟汉琼上奏说： 这事由皇上决断，然而重臣不可随便议论更动。 
English: Feng Dao and others then echoed Meng Hanqiong's report, saying: This matter is decided by the emperor, but senior ministers should not discuss or change it at will.

古文：由是兼命范延光为枢密使，重诲如故。
现代文：因此兼命范延光为枢密使，安重诲照旧。
English: Therefore, Fan Yanguang was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：时以东川帅董璋恃险难制，乃以武虔裕为绵州刺史，董璋益怀疑忌，遂絷虔裕以叛。
现代文：这时因为东川统帅董璋凭恃险阻不服管制，便任武虔裕为绵州刺史，董璋更怀疑心顾忌，于是绑架武虔裕叛乱。
English: At this time, because Dongchuan commander-in-chief Dong Xuan refused to accept the control because of the danger of resistance, he appointed Wu Qianyu to write a history of Mianzhou. Dong Xuan was even more suspicious, so he kidnapped Wu Qianyu for rebellion.

古文：及石敬瑭领王师伐蜀，峡路艰阻，粮运不继，明宗忧之，而重诲请行。
现代文：到石敬瑭率领王师伐蜀，峡路艰险，粮食运输跟不上，明宗忧虑此事，安重诲请求派自己出行。
English: When Wang Shi led his troops to Shijiazhuang, the canyon road was difficult and dangerous, and the grain transportation could not keep up. Mingzong was worried about this matter and requested to be sent on his own trip.

古文：翌日，领数骑而出，日驰数百里，西诸侯闻之，莫不惶骇。
现代文：第二天，安重诲领几名骑兵出发，每天奔跑几百里，西边诸侯听说，无不惊骇。
English: The next day, An Chongzhen led several cavalrymen to set off, running hundreds of miles every day. The western princes heard about it and were shocked.

古文：所在钱帛粮料，星夜辇运，人乘毙踣于山路者不可胜纪，百姓苦之。
现代文：所有钱帛粮草，连夜用车运输，人马累死摔死在山路上的不可计数，百姓深为困苦。
English: All the money and grain and grass were transported by car overnight, and countless people died on the mountain road. The people were in deep distress.

古文：重诲至凤翔，节度使硃宏昭延于寝室，令妻子奉食器，敬事尤谨。
现代文：安重诲到凤翔，节度使朱弘昭请进寝室，令妻子奉上食具，伺候谨慎。
English: Reassuring Fengxiang, Zhu Hongzhao invited him into the bedroom at the right time, and asked his wife to serve him with utensils.

古文：重诲坐中言及： 昨有人谗构，几不保全，赖圣上保鉴，苟获全族。 
现代文：安重诲座中谈到 ：前不久有人陷害我，几乎不能保全性命，赖皇上明察，得免灾祸。 
English: In the sermon, he said, "Not long ago, someone set me up, and I was barely able to save my life. Thanks to the Emperor's foresight, I was able to avoid disaster."

古文：因泣下。
现代文：并哭泣。
English: And cry.

古文：重诲既辞，宏昭遣人具奏： 重诲怨望出恶言，不可令至行营，恐夺石敬瑭兵柄。 
现代文：安重诲告辞后，朱弘昭派人详细上奏： 安重诲怨恨出恶言，不可让他到行营，怕他夺了石敬瑭的兵权。 
English: After An Chung Chi's farewell speech, Zhu Hongzhao sent someone to recite in detail: An Chung Chi's resentment caused him to say bad words, and he should not be allowed to go to the camp, for fear that he would take away Shi Jingyao's military power.

古文：而宣徽使孟汉琼自西回，亦奏重诲过恶。
现代文：而且宣徽使孟汉琼从西边回朝，也报告安重诲过恶。
English: Moreover, Xuan Hui made Meng Han Qiong return to the North from the West, and also reported that the situation was stable.

古文：重诲已至三泉，复令归阙。
现代文：安重诲已到三泉，又命令他回朝廷。
English: An Chongchuan had already arrived at Sanquan, and ordered him to return to the imperial court.

古文：再过凤翔，硃宏昭拒而不纳，重诲惧，急骑奔程，未至京师，制授河中帅。
现代文：再经过凤翔时，朱弘昭拒绝而不接纳他，安重诲害怕，急忙骑马往回赶，还没到京师，诏令授河中帅。
English: When he passed Fengxiang again, Zhu Hongzhao refused to go and did not accept him. He was afraid and hurriedly rode back. Before he reached Beijing, he issued a decree to award him the title of middle marshal of the river.

古文：既至镇，心不自安，遂请致仕。
现代文：到任后，心中不安，遂申请退休。
English: After taking office, he felt uneasy and applied for retirement.

古文：制初下，其子崇赞、崇绪走归河中。
现代文：诏令刚下时，他儿子安崇赞、安崇绪回到河中。
English: When the edict was just issued, his sons, An Chongzan and An Chongxu, returned to the river.

古文：二子初至，重诲骇然曰； 渠安得来？ 
现代文：二子刚到，安重诲害怕地说： 他们怎么来了？ 
English: As soon as the two sons arrived, An Rong said fearfully, "How did they get here?"

古文：家人欲问故，重诲曰： 吾知之矣，此非渠意，是他人教来。
现代文：家人想问原因，安重诲说： 我知道了，这不是他们的意愿，是别人教他们的。
English: When the family members wanted to ask why, An Chongzheng said, "I know, it wasn't their will, it was taught to them by others."

古文：吾但以一死报国家，余复何言！ 
现代文：我只以一死报答国家，其他还有什么可说的！ 
English: I have only repaid the state with my death, what else is there to say!

古文：翌日，中使至，见重诲，号泣久之。
现代文：第二天，中使到来，见到安重诲，哭泣了好一会儿。
English: The next day, when the Chinese envoy arrived and saw An Chongzhen, he cried for a long time.

古文：重诲曰： 公但言其故，勿过相愍。 
现代文：安重诲说： 你只管说是什么缘故，不要太可怜我。 
English: "Just say what the reason is, and don't feel too sorry for me," cautioned Ahn.

古文：中使曰： 人言令公据城异志矣！ 
现代文：中使说 ：有人说您占据城池有异心了。 
English: The Chinese envoy said, "Some people say that you have an ulterior motive for occupying the city."

古文：重诲曰： 吾一死未塞责，已负君亲，安敢辄怀异志，遽劳朝廷兴师，增圣上宵旰，则仆之罪更万万矣！ 
现代文：安重诲说 ：我一死不能解除我的罪责，已负君亲，怎么敢就怀有异心，招致朝廷发兵，增加皇上劳累，则我的罪过更加万死难辞了。 
English: I can't get rid of my guilt once I'm dead. I've already failed the prince. How dare I harbor ill will, invite the imperial court to send troops, and increase the emperor's fatigue? Then my sin is even more unforgivable.

古文：时遣翟光鄴使河中，如察重诲有异志，则诛之。
现代文：这时皇上派翟光邺出使河中，如果察得安重诲有异心，就杀掉。
English: At this time, the emperor sent Juguang out to the middle of the river, and if he detected any hostility, he would kill him.

古文：既至，李从璋自率甲士围其第，仍拜重诲于其庭，重诲下阶迎拜曰： 太傅过礼。 
现代文：到了后，李从璋亲自率甲士包围了安重诲的府第，才在庭院中拜见安重诲，安重诲走下台阶迎拜说： 太傅过礼了。 
English: After arriving, Li Conglu personally led the soldiers to surround An Chongyao's residence, and only then did he meet An Chongyao in the courtyard. An Chongyao walked down the steps to greet him and said, "Taifu, you've overstepped the mark."

古文：俯首方拜，从璋以楇击其首，其妻惊走抱之，曰： 令公死亦不迟，太傅何遽如此！ 
现代文：俯首正要下拜，李从璋用木棒击他的头，安重诲的妻子惊得跑来抱住他，说： 令公死也不迟，太傅何必这么急！ 
English: As he was about to bow his head, Li Conglu hit him on the head with a wooden club. His wife, who was relieved, ran to hug him in shock and said, "It's not too late to have the prince killed. Why is the grandmaster in such a hurry?"

古文：并击重诲妻首碎，并剥其衣服，夫妻裸形踣于廊下，血流盈庭。
现代文：李从璋一并击碎安重诲妻子的头，并剥去他们衣服，夫妻裸体倒在廊下，血流满庭。
English: Together, Li Conglu smashed the head of An Rongchu's wife, and stripped them of their clothes. The husband and wife fell naked in the hallway, and blood flowed all over the yard.

古文：翌日，副使判官白从璋，愿以衣服覆其尸，坚请方许。
现代文：第二天，副使判官对李从璋说，请人用衣服盖住他们的尸体，坚持请求很久才允许。
English: The next day, the deputy magistrate told Li Conglu that he asked someone to cover their bodies with clothes and insisted on the request for a long time before allowing it.

古文：及从璋疏重诲家财不及数千缗，议者以重诲有经纶社稷之大功，然志大才短，不能回避权宠，亲礼士大夫，求周身辅国之远图，而悉自恣胸襟，果贻颠覆。
现代文：到李从璋清查安重诲的家财时，不到数千缗钱，有议论认为安重诲有整理国家的大功，然而志大才疏，不能回避权贵宠臣，礼遇亲近士大夫，以求保全自身辅助国家的远谋，而全靠自己恣意而为，果然招来杀身之祸。
English: By the time Li Congluqing investigated the family wealth of An Rongchu, it was less than thousands of baht. There was a debate that An Rongchu had a great contribution to sorting out the country. However, he lacked ambition, could not avoid powerful and noble favorites, and was close to Shidafu in order to preserve his long-term plan to assist the country, but he did it all by himself, which really brought about the disaster of suicide.

