古文：王贾颜真卿
现代文：王贾颜真卿
English: Wang Jiayan Zhenqing

古文：王贾
现代文：王贾
English: Wang Jia

古文：婺州参军王贾，本太原人，移家覃怀，而先人之垄，在于临汝。
现代文：婺州参军王贾本是太原人。他搬家住到覃怀，而他祖先的坟墓在临安。
English: Zhangzhou's warlord, Jaben, was from Taiyuan. He moved to Xuchang, but his ancestors' graves are in Lin'an.

古文：贾少而聪颖，未尝有过，沉静少言。
现代文：王贾小时候很聪明，不曾有什么过错，性情沉静，话语很少。
English: When Wang Jia was a child, he was very smart, never did anything wrong, had a calm temperament, and rarely spoke.

古文：年十四，忽谓诸兄曰： 不出三日，家中当恐，且有大丧。 
现代文：十四岁那年，他忽然对哥哥说： 不出三天，家里会发生一件很吓人的事，而且还会发生丧事。 
English: At the age of fourteen, he suddenly said to his brother: "In less than three days, a very scary thing will happen at home, and there will be a funeral.

古文：居二日，宅中火，延烧堂室，祖母年老震惊，自投于床而卒。
现代文：过了两天，家里起了火，延连烧了堂屋，他的祖母年老震惊，自己掉到床下死了。
English: Two days later, a fire broke out in the family home and burned down the entire house. His grandmother, shocked by old age, fell under the bed and died.

古文：兄以贾言闻诸父，诸父讯贾。贾曰： 卜筮而知。 
现代文：他哥哥就把他的话告诉了他的父亲和叔叔大爷们，父亲和叔叔大爷们便问他是怎么知道的，他说： 是占卜知道的。 
English: His brother told his words to his father and uncles, and his father and uncles asked him how he knew, and he said, "Divination knows."

古文：后又白诸父曰： 太行南，泌河湾澳内，有两龙居之。欲识真龙，请同观之。 
现代文：后来他又告诉父亲和叔叔大爷们说： 太行山南面，泌河的湾里，有两条龙住在里边，想要认识真龙，可以和我一块去看。 
English: Later, he told his father and uncles, "In the south of Taihang Mountain, in the bay of Jinghe River, there are two dragons living there. If you want to know the real dragon, you can go and see it with me."

古文：诸父怒曰： 小子好诡言骇物，当笞之。 贾跪曰： 实有。 
现代文：父亲和叔叔大爷们生气地说： 你小子可真能胡说八道，得揍你了！ 他跪下说： 确实有！ 
English: His father and uncles said angrily: "You boy can really talk nonsense, you've got to be joking!" He knelt down and said: "Indeed!

古文：故请观之。
现代文：他坚决请求父亲和叔叔大爷们去看。
English: He insisted that his father and uncles go to see it.

古文：诸父怒曰： 小子好诡。 
现代文：父亲和叔叔大爷们生气地说： 这小子真诡诈！ 
English: His father and uncles said angrily, "This boy is so deceitful!"

古文：与同行。
现代文：于是和他一块去看。
English: So I went to see it with him.

古文：贾请具雨衣。
现代文：他让大家都带上雨衣。
English: He told everyone to bring a raincoat.

古文：于是至泌河浦深处。贾入水，以鞭画之，水为之分。
现代文：到了泌河岸边深处，他走进水里，用鞭子一画，水就分开了。
English: When he came to the deep bank of the Jinghe River, he waded into the water, and with a stroke of his whip, the water parted.

古文：下有大石，二龙盘绕之，一白一黑，各长数丈。见人冲天。
现代文：下面有一块大石头，两条龙盘绕在那上面，一条白的，一条黑的，各都有几丈长，见了人便冲天而去。
English: Below there is a large stone, on which two dragons are coiled, a white one and a black one, each several feet long. Anyone who sees them will fly into the sky.

古文：诸父大惊，良久瞻视。贾曰： 既见矣，将复还。 
现代文：父亲及叔叔大爷们很惊讶，看了好久。王贾说： 已经看见了，应该回去了。 
English: His father and uncles were very surprised and watched for a long time. Wang Jia said: "I have already seen it, I should go back."

古文：因以鞭挥之，水合如旧。
现代文：于是用鞭子一挥，水合恢复原来的样子。
English: So with a swipe of the whip, the hydration is restored to its original state.

古文：则云雾昼昏，雷电且至。
现代文：这时候天却阴了，响起了雷声。王贾说： 父亲和叔叔大爷们赶快离开吧！ 
English: At this time, it was cloudy and thunder was heard. Wang Jia said, "Father and uncles, hurry up and leave!"

古文：贾曰： 诸父驶去。 
现代文：于是大家就赶快飞奔。
English: As a result, everyone hurried away.

古文：因驰，未里余，飞雨大注。方知非常人也。
现代文：奔跑不到半里，大雨倾盆而下，这才知道王贾不是平常人。
English: Less than half a mile into the run, heavy rain poured down, and that's when I knew that Wang Jia was no ordinary person.

古文：贾年十七，诣京举孝廉，既擢第，乃娶清河崔氏。
现代文：王贾十七岁的时候，进京参加举人考试，考中之后，他娶了清河的崔氏为妻。
English: When Wang Jia was seventeen years old, he went to Beijing to participate in the examination. After the middle school examination, he married Ms. Cui from Qinghe.

古文：后选授婺州参军，还过东都。
现代文：后来他被选授为婺洲参军，他回来的时候路过东都。
English: Later, he was selected to join the army in Luzhou. When he came back, he passed by Dongdu.

古文：贾母之表妹，死已经年，常于灵帐发言，处置家事。
现代文：他母亲的表妹死了已经一年多，却常常在灵帐里讲话，处理家务事。
English: His mother's cousin, who has been dead for more than a year, often speaks from the hearse and takes care of household chores.

古文：儿女僮妾，不敢为非。
现代文：她的儿女和家中的仆人们，不敢不按她的要求去做。
English: Her children and the servants of the house did not dare not to do as she asked.

古文：每索饮食衣服，有不应求，即加笞骂。
现代文：她常常索要饮食和衣服，有不应时送来的时候，她就大加打骂。
English: She often asked for food and clothing, and when she did not get what she wanted, she lashed out.

古文：亲戚咸怪之。
现代文：亲戚朋友们都感到奇怪。
English: Relatives and friends are all puzzled.

古文：贾曰： 此必妖异。 
现代文：王贾说： 这一定是妖怪！ 
English: Wang Jia said: This must be a monster!

古文：因造姨宅，唁姨诸子。
现代文：于是他来到姨家，向姨的儿子们表示吊唁。
English: So he went to his aunt's house to express his condolences to her sons.

古文：先是姨谓诸子曰： 明日王家外甥来，必莫令进，此小子大罪过人。 
现代文：在这以前姨对儿子们说： 明天王家外甥到咱家来，一定不要让他进来，这小子是个有大罪过的人。 
English: Before this, the aunt said to her sons: "If the Wang family's nephew comes to our house tomorrow, don't let him in. This boy is a man of great sin.

古文：贾既至门，不得进。
现代文：王贾到了门前之后，不能进屋。
English: After Wang Jia arrived in front of the door, he could not enter the house.

古文：贾令召老苍头谓曰： 宅内言者，非汝主母，乃妖魅耳。
现代文：王贾就对一位老奴仆说： 在宅子里说话的那个人，不是你家主人的母亲，是个妖怪罢了。
English: Wang Jia said to an old slave: "The person who spoke in the house is not your master's mother, but a monster.

古文：汝但私语汝主，令引我入，当为除去之。 
现代文：你只要偷偷地告诉你家主人，让我进去，我就能把妖怪除掉。 
English: All you have to do is secretly tell the owner of your house to let me in, and I will be able to get rid of the monster.

古文：家人素病之，乃潜言于诸郎。诸郎亦悟，邀贾入。
现代文：家人们平常被她弄得很难受，就偷偷告诉了各位儿子，儿子们也醒悟了，就让王贾进来。
English: The family members were usually made uncomfortable by her, so they secretly told their sons, and when the sons came to their senses, they let Wang Jia in.

古文：贾拜吊已因向灵言曰： 闻姨亡来大有神，言语如旧，今故谒姨，何不与贾言也。 
现代文：王贾拜吊完了，就对着灵帐说： 听说姨母死了之后很有神，说话和原先一样，现在我特意来拜谒姨母，姨母为什么不和我说话呢？ 
English: When Wang Jabai had finished hanging himself, he said to the accountant: "I heard that after my aunt died, she was very happy and spoke the same as before. Now I have come specially to pay my respects to my aunt. Why doesn't my aunt speak to me?

古文：不应。
现代文：灵帐里没有动静。
English: There was no movement in the hearse.

古文：贾又邀之曰： 今故来谒，姨若不言，终不去矣，当止于此。 
现代文：王贾又请求说： 我现在是特意来拜谒的，姨母要是不说话，我就不走了，在这里住定了！ 
English: Wang Jia also pleaded, "I've come specially to pay my respects. If my aunt doesn't speak, I won't leave. I've decided to live here!"

古文：魅知不免，乃帐中言曰： 甥比佳乎？
现代文：妖怪知道不能回避，就在灵帐中说道： 外甥你近来好吗？
English: Knowing that he could not avoid it, the specter said in the spirit book: Nephew, how have you been lately?

古文：何期别后，生死遂隔。
现代文：哪里想到，分别之后，活人和死人就隔开了。
English: After the separation, the living and the dead were separated.

古文：汝不忘吾，犹能相访，愧不可言。 
现代文：你没有忘了我，还能来看我，我感谢的心情简直没法表达。 
English: You haven't forgotten me, you still come to see me, I can't thank you enough.

古文：因涕泣言语，皆姨平生声也。
现代文：于是她便哭泣着述说，那声音全都是姨母的声音。
English: Then she began to weep and said that the sound was all her aunt's.

古文：诸子闻之号泣。
现代文：儿子们听了也都哭起来。
English: My sons burst into tears when they heard the news.

古文：姨令具馔，坐贾于前，命酒相对，殷勤不已。
现代文：姨母让准备饮食，让王贾坐在前面，斟上酒与她相对而饮，不住地献殷勤。
English: My aunt let me prepare the food and let Wang Jia sit in front of her. He poured the wine and drank it in front of her.

古文：醉后，贾因请曰： 姨既神异，何不令贾见形！ 
现代文：喝醉之后，王贾就请求说： 姨母既然是神仙，为什么不让我看看你的样子呢？ 
English: After getting drunk, Wang Jia pleaded: "Since my aunt is a fairy godmother, why don't you let me see what you look like?

古文：姨曰： 幽明道殊，何要相见？ 
现代文：姨母说： 阴间和阳间的道路不一样，为什么要见我呢？ 
English: My aunt said, "The path between the underworld and the sun is not the same. Why do you want to see me?

古文：贾曰： 姨不能全出，请露半面。不然，呈一手一足，令贾见之。如不相示，亦终不去。 
现代文：王贾说： 姨母不能露出全身，就请露出半张脸来；不然，露出一只手一只脚也可以，如果不让我看看，我也是坚决不离开。 
English: Wang Jia said, "If my aunt can't show her whole body, please show half of her face; otherwise, you can show one hand and one foot. If you don't let me see, I will absolutely not leave."

古文：魅既被邀苦至，因见左手，于手指宛然，又姨之手也。
现代文：妖怪被逼得实在没有办法，就伸出了左手。手指和原先一样，还是姨母的手。
English: The yokai was forced to the point where there was nothing he could do, so he stretched out his left hand. The fingers were the same as before, still my aunt's.

古文：诸子又号泣。
现代文：儿子们又是一阵号泣。
English: Again, the sons burst into tears.

古文：贾因前执其手。
现代文：王贾就上前握住那只手。
English: Wang Jia stepped forward and took hold of the hand.

古文：姨惊呼诸子曰： 外甥无礼，何不举手。 
现代文：姨母惊叫道： 外甥如此不礼貌，你们为什么还不动手？ 
English: My aunt exclaimed, "My nephew is so impolite, why haven't you done something about him?

古文：诸子未进，贾遂引其手，扑之于地，尚犹哀叫，扑之数四，即死，乃老狐也。
现代文：未等儿子们上前，王贾就用力一拉那手，她便扑倒在地上，还哀叫着。他扑打她几次便把她打死了，原来是一只老狐狸。
English: Without waiting for his sons to come forward, Wang Jia forcefully pulled her hand away, and she fell to the ground, still wailing. He slapped her several times and killed her. It turned out to be an old fox.

古文：形既见，体裸无毛。
现代文：它已经现了原形，浑身没有毛。
English: It is already in its original form, completely hairless.

古文：命火焚之，灵语遂绝。
现代文：王贾让人用火把它烧了，灵帐中的话语再也没有了。
English: Wang Jia had it burned with fire, and the words in the ledger were no longer there.

古文：贾至婺州，以事到东阳。
现代文：王贾到了婺州，因事来到东阳县。
English: Wang Jia arrived in Ganzhou and came to Dongyang County due to the incident.

古文：令有女，病魅数年，医不能愈。
现代文：县令有个女儿，她患了妖魅病多年了，怎么治也治不好。
English: The county magistrate has a daughter. She has been suffering from demonic possession for many years. There is no cure.

古文：令邀贾到宅，置茗馔而不敢有言。
现代文：县令把王贾请到家中，摆上茶和饮食招待他，但是不敢明说。
English: The county magistrate invited Wang Jia to his home and served him tea and food, but he did not dare to say anything.

古文：贾知之，谓令曰： 闻君有女病魅，当为去之。 
现代文：王贾知道，对县令说： 听说你有个女儿得了妖魅病，我应当为你除掉它。 
English: Wang Jia knew, and said to the county magistrate: I heard that you have a daughter who has been afflicted with the disease of enchantment. I should get rid of it for you.

古文：因为桃符，令置所卧床前。
现代文：于是王贾为他们做了桃符，让他们把桃符放到女儿的床前。
English: So Wang Jia made peach charms for them and asked them to put them in front of their daughter's bed.

古文：女见符泣而骂。须臾眠熟。
现代文：女儿见了桃符又哭又骂，不大一会儿就睡熟了。
English: When her daughter saw the peach charm, she cried and cursed, and soon fell asleep.

古文：有大狸腰斩，死于床下，疾乃止。
现代文：有一只大狸猫被拦腰斩断，死在床下，于是病就好了。
English: There was a large civet cat that was chopped off at the waist and died under a bed, so the disease was cured.

古文：时杜暹为婺州参军，与贾同列，相得甚欢。
现代文：当时杜暹是婺州参军，和王贾的职位相同，交情很厚。
English: At that time, Du Siam was a member of the military in Zhangzhou and held the same position as Wang Jia. They had a close friendship.

古文：与暹同部领，使于洛阳。过钱塘江，登罗刹山，观浙江潮。
现代文：王贾和杜暹一起到洛阳出差，路过钱塘江，登上罗刹山，观览浙江潮。
English: Wang Jia and Du Siam went to Luoyang together on a business trip, passed the Qiantang River, climbed Mount Luo and watched the Zhejiang tide.

古文：谓暹曰： 大禹真圣者，当理水时，所有金柜玉符，以镇川渎。
现代文：王贾对杜暹说： 大禹是真正的圣人，当年他治水的时候，所有的金柜玉符都用来镇压河川沟渠了。
English: Wang Jia said to Du Siam: Dayu is a true saint. When he was in charge of flood control, all the gold and jewels were used to suppress rivers and ditches.

古文：若此杭州城不镇压，寻当陷矣。 
现代文：如果这杭州城不镇压，不久就得陷下去。 
English: If this city of Hangzhou is not suppressed, it will soon fall.

古文：暹曰： 何以知之。 
现代文：杜暹说： 你怎么知道？ 
English: Du Siam said: How do you know?

古文：贾曰： 此石下是。
现代文：王贾说： 这石下就是，咱们一块去看看。 
English: Wang Jia said: This is the bottom of the rock, let's go and have a look.

古文：相与观焉。 因令暹闭目，执其手，令暹跳下。
现代文：于是他让杜暹闭上眼睛，他拉着杜暹的手，让杜暹跳下。
English: So he told Du Siem to close his eyes, he took Du Siem's hand and told Du Siem to jump.

古文：暹忽闭目，已至水底。
现代文：杜暹刚闭上眼睛，就已经来到水底了。
English: Du Siem had just closed his eyes when he was underwater.

古文：其空处如堂，有大石柜，高丈余，锁之。
现代文：那空处就像一处堂屋，有一个大石柜，高一丈还多，锁着。
English: That empty space is like a hall, with a large stone cabinet, more than a meter high, locked.

古文：贾手开其锁，去其盖，引暹手登之，因同入柜中。
现代文：王贾打开那锁，去掉柜盖，拉着杜暹的手登上去，一同进到柜子里。
English: Wang Jia opened the lock, removed the lid of the cabinet, took Du Siam's hand to climb up, and entered the cabinet together.

古文：又有金柜，可高三尺，金锁锁之。
现代文：柜子里又有一个金柜，有三尺高，用金锁锁着。
English: In the cabinet there was another gold cabinet, three feet high, locked with a gold lock.

古文：贾曰： 玉符在中，然世人不合见。 
现代文：王贾说： 玉符在这里边，但是世上凡人不应该看见它。 
English: Wang Jia said, "The jade charm is here, but no mortal should see it.

古文：暹观之既已，又接其手，令腾出。
现代文：杜暹看完之后，王贾又拉住他的手，让他跳出来。
English: After Du Siam finished watching, Wang Jia grabbed his hand again and made him jump out.

古文：暹距跃则至岸矣。
现代文：杜暹一跳便来到岸上了。
English: Du Siem jumped into the boat and came ashore.

古文：既与暹交熟，乃告暹曰： 君有宰相禄，当自保爱。 
现代文：等到二人的交情深了，王贾就对杜暹说： 你有当宰相的福气，应当自己保重，珍爱。 
English: When the friendship between the two became deep, Wang Jia said to Du Siam: You have the blessing of being the prime minister, you should take care of yourself and cherish yourself.

古文：因示其拜官历任，及于年寿，周细语之。
现代文：于是王贾把杜暹将来都能当什么官，以及杜暹的寿命，详细地告诉了杜暹。
English: So Wang Jia told Du Siem in detail what kind of official he could be in the future, as well as Du Siem's life expectancy.

古文：暹后迁拜，一如其说。
现代文：杜暹后来做官的情况，完全和他讲的一样。
English: The circumstances of Du Siam's subsequent rise to power are exactly as he described them.

古文：既而至吴郡停船，而女子夭死，生五年矣。
现代文：后来王贾来到吴郡停船，王贾的女儿夭亡了。仅五岁。
English: Later, Wang Jia came to Wu County to stop the ship. Wang Jia's daughter died young. She was only five years old.

古文：母抚之哀恸，而贾不哭。
现代文：作母亲的抚摸着女儿悲伤地恸哭，但是王贾不哭。
English: The mother caresses her daughter and she cries sadly, but Wang Jia does not cry.

古文：暹重贾，各见妻子，如一家。
现代文：杜暹很敬重王贾，逐个地和他的妻子儿女相见，亲如一家。
English: Du Siam respects Wang Jia very much, and meets his wife and children one by one, as if they were family.

古文：于是对其妻谓暹曰： 吾第三天人也，有罪，谪为世人二十五年，今已满矣。
现代文：于是王贾当着妻子的面对杜暹说： 我是第三重天上的人，因为犯了罪，才被谪贬为凡人二十五年。现在已期满，后天就得走了。
English: So Wang Jia said to Du Siam in front of his wife: "I am a third-class heavenly person. Because I committed a crime, I was reduced to a mortal for twenty-five years. Now it has expired, and I have to leave the day after tomorrow.

古文：后日当行。此女亦非吾子也，所以早夭。
现代文：这个女孩也不是我的孩子，所以她早早就死了。
English: This girl wasn't my child either, so she died early.

古文：妻崔氏亦非吾妻，即吉州别驾李乙妻也，缘时岁未到，乙未合妻。
现代文：妻子崔氏也不是我的妻子。她是吉州别驾李乙的妻子。因为时候未到，李乙没能娶她。
English: Mr. Cui's wife is not my wife either. She is the wife of the governor of Jizhou Province, Li B. Li B could not marry her because the time was not right.

古文：以世人亦合有室，故司命权以妻吾。
现代文：因为世人也应该有妻室，所以司命神暂且把她嫁给我为妻。
English: Because the world should also have a wife, so the presiding deity temporarily married her to me as a wife.

古文：吾今期尽，妻即当过李氏。
现代文：现在我在人间的期限已经到了，妻子应该归还李乙。
English: Now that my time on earth has come to an end, my wife should be returned to Li Biao.

古文：李氏三品禄数任，生五子。
现代文：李乙有做三品大官的福气，而且可以做好几任，将有五个儿子。
English: Li Yi has the good fortune to be a three-star general, and he can do several jobs, and he will have five sons.

古文：世人不知，何为妄哭？ 
现代文：当然，世人是不知道这些的。
English: Of course, the world doesn't know this.

古文：妻久知其夫灵异，因辍哭请曰： 吾方年盛，君何忍见舍？
现代文：那么，为什么还要哭呢？ 他的妻子早知丈夫神奇，就止住哭声请求道： 我正年轻，你怎么忍心抛弃我？
English: His wife, who knew her husband was a miracle, stopped crying and pleaded, "I'm so young, how could you abandon me?

古文：且暑月在途，零丁如此，请送至洛，得遂栖息。
现代文：况且大热天走在路上，如此孤单！请把我送到洛阳，就能有地方住下歇息。
English: On top of that, I was walking on the road on a very hot day, so lonely! Please send me to Luoyang, so I can have a place to stay and rest.

古文：行路之人，犹合矜愍；况室家之好。
现代文：走路的人还应该互相怜悯，何况是很好的夫妻呢？
English: Should people who are walking still have pity on each other, let alone be a good husband and wife?

古文：而忽遗弃耶？ 
现代文：你为什么忽然就要遗弃我呢？ 
English: Why are you suddenly abandoning me?

古文：贾笑而不答，因令造棺器，纳亡女其中，置之船下。
现代文：王贾笑而不答。
English: Wang Jia laughed and did not answer.

古文：又嘱暹以身后事曰： 吾卒后，为素棺，漆其缝，将至先莹，与女子皆袝于墓。
现代文：于是他让人做了棺材，把死了的女儿装到棺材里，放到船上，又把自己的身后事嘱咐杜暹说： 我死后，做白色棺材，漆好中间的缝隙，送到祖先的茔地，和女儿埋到一个坟墓里。
English: So he had someone make a coffin, put his dead daughter in the coffin, and put it on the boat. He also told Du Siam about his past, saying: After I die, make a white coffin, paint the gap in the middle, send it to the ancestral burial ground, and bury my daughter in a grave.

古文：殓后即发，使至宋州。
现代文：装入棺材就要出发。
English: The coffin is being loaded for departure.

古文：崔氏伯任宋州别驾，当留其侄。听之。
现代文：如果到了宋州，崔氏的伯父在宋州任别驾，应当留下他的侄女，要听从他。
English: If he comes to Songzhou, Cui's uncle should leave his niece alone in Songzhou, and she should obey him.

古文：至冬初，李乙必充计入京，与崔氏伯相见，即伯之故人，因求婚。
现代文：到了冬初，李乙一定会因为考核官吏到京城来，和崔氏的伯父相见。他是崔氏伯父的老朋友，因而就会求婚。
English: At the beginning of winter, Li B will definitely meet Cui's uncle, who is an old friend of Cui's uncle, because the official will come to Beijing.

古文：崔别驾以侄妻之，事已定矣。 
现代文：崔别驾把侄女嫁给李别驾为妻，这事已经肯定了。 
English: Cui Bie Jie married his niece to Li Bie Jie as his wife, this has been confirmed.

古文：暹然之。
现代文：杜暹认为只好这样。
English: Du Siam thinks this is the only way.

古文：其妻日夜涕泣，请其少留。
现代文：王贾的妻子日夜哭泣，请求他多留些日子再走。
English: Wang Jia's wife cried day and night, begging him to stay longer.

古文：终不答。
现代文：他始终不答应。
English: He never said yes.

古文：至日沐浴，衣新衣。
现代文：到了这一天，他洗头洗身，换了新衣服。
English: On this day, he washed his hair and body and changed his clothes.

古文：暮时召暹，相对言谈。
现代文：天将黑的时候，他把杜暹找来，面对面地交谈。
English: When it was getting dark, he sought out Du Siam and had a face-to-face conversation.

古文：顷而卧，遂卒。
现代文：过了一会儿他就躺下，于是就死了。
English: After a while he lay down and died.

古文：暹哭之恸，为制朋友之服，如其言殓之。
现代文：杜暹哭得很厉害，为他穿了朋友的孝服，按照他的要求装殓了他。
English: Du Siam cried very hard, put on his friend's filial piety for him, and decorated him according to his request.

古文：行及宋州，崔别驾果留其侄。
现代文：走到宋州，崔别驾果然留他的侄女住下。
English: When he got to Songzhou, Cui Bie Jie decided to let his niece stay with him.

古文：暹至临汝，乃厚葬贾及其女。
现代文：杜暹来到临安，就厚葬了王贾和他的女儿。
English: Du Siam came to Lin'an and buried Wang Jia and his daughter.

古文：其冬，李乙至宋州，求婿其妻。崔别驾以妻之。
现代文：那年冬天，李乙来到宋州，向崔别驾求婚，崔别驾就把侄女嫁给了他。
English: That winter, Li Yi came to Songzhou and proposed to Cui Beijie. Cui Beijie then married his niece to him.

古文：暹后作相，历中外，皆如其语。
现代文：杜暹后来作了宰相，他在京中京外做官的情形，全都像王贾预言的那样。
English: Du Siam later became prime minister, and the circumstances in which he served as an official in Beijing and outside of Beijing were all as Wang Jia predicted.

古文：颜真卿
现代文：颜真卿
English: Yan Zhenqing

古文：颜真卿字清臣，琅琊临沂人也，北齐黄门侍郎之推五代孙。
现代文：颜真卿字清臣，是琅琊临沂人。他是北齐时黄门侍郎颜之推的第五代孙子。
English: Yan Zhenqing, also known as Qingcheng, was the fifth-generation grandson of Yan Zhituo, a Yellow Gate servant in the Northern Qi Dynasty.

古文：幼而勤学，举进士，累登甲科。
现代文：有一个道士从他家门前路过，自称是北山君。
English: A Taoist monk passed in front of his house, claiming to be Kitayama-kun.

古文：真卿年十八九时，卧疾百余日，医不能愈。
现代文：北山君拿出几颗米粒大小的丹砂来救他，他顷刻之间就痊愈了。
English: Kitayama-kun took out a few grains of sand the size of a grain of rice to save him, and he recovered in an instant.

古文：有道士过其家，自称北山君，出丹砂粟许救之，顷刻即愈，谓之曰： 子有清简之名，已志金台，可以度世，上补仙宫，不宜自沉于名宦之海；若不能摆脱尘网，去世之日，可以尔之形炼神阴景，然后得道也。
现代文：道士对他说： 你有清正简朴的美名，已经记在黄金台上，可以度世成仙，到天上去做仙官，不应该自己沉沦在人间名宦。如果你不能摆脱尘世的大网，去世的那天，可以用你的形骸炼神阴景，也能得道成仙。 
English: The Taoist priest said to him, "You have a pure, simple and beautiful name, which has been recorded on the golden tablet, and you can spend your life as a immortal and go to heaven to become a celestial official. You should not sink into worldly fame. If you can't get rid of the earthly net, the day you die, you can use your skeleton to refine the shadow of the gods, and you can also become a Taoist.

古文：复以丹一粒授之，戒之曰： 抗节辅主，勤俭致身，百年外，吾期尔于伊洛之间矣。 
现代文：道士又交给他一粒丹药，警告他说： 坚持节操辅佐君主，一定要勤俭度日，甘于奉献。一百年之后，我在伊水和洛水之间等你。 
English: The moralist also gave him a piece of elixir and warned him: "If you persist in austerity and assist the monarch, you must be diligent and willing to sacrifice. After a hundred years, I will be waiting for you between Ishu and Loushu."

古文：真卿亦自负才器，将俟大用；而吟阅之暇，常留心仙道。
现代文：颜真卿也自负才气，等待着自己被重用。他学习之余，常常留心仙道。
English: Yan Zhenqing is also proud of his talent, waiting to be reused. In addition to studying, he often pays attention to the fairy tale.

古文：既中科第，四命为监察御史，充河西陇左军城覆屯交兵使。
现代文：考中进士之后，多次被命为监察御史，充当河西陇左军城覆屯交兵使。
English: After passing the junior high school entrance examination, he was repeatedly ordered to supervise the imperial history and act as the envoy of the Hexi Xizang Left Army to overturn the settlement.

古文：五原有冤狱，久不决。
现代文：五原县有一起冤狱，久久不能判决。
English: In Gohara County, there is a wrongful imprisonment case that has not been decided for a long time.

古文：真卿至，辨之。
现代文：颜真卿来到五原后，明辨了这起冤案。
English: After Yan Zhenqing came to Wuhara, he clearly identified this unjust case.

古文：天时方旱，狱决乃雨，郡人呼为御史雨。
现代文：当时天气正旱，冤案解决之后天就下了雨，郡中人都称这雨为御史雨。
English: At that time, the weather was dry. After the settlement of the grievance case, it rained. People in the county called this rain the "historic rain."

古文：河东有郑延祚者，母卒二十九年，殡于僧舍堙垣地。真卿劾奏之。兄弟三十年不齿，天下耸动。
现代文：河东有一个叫郑延祚的人，他母亲死了二十九年了，埋葬在寺庙外面的墙下，颜真卿向皇帝检举了郑延祚的罪状，郑家兄弟三十年都被世人不齿。天下人都对他表示敬重。
English: There was a man in Hedong named Zheng Yanyuan. His mother had been dead for 29 years and was buried under the wall outside the temple. Yan Zhenqing reported Zheng Yanyuan's crimes to the emperor. The Zheng brothers were despised by the world for 30 years. People all over the world respected him.

古文：迁殿中侍御史武部员外。杨国忠怒其不附己，出为平原太守。
现代文：后来他被任命为殿中侍御史武部员外，杨国忠恨他不依附自己，把他派出京城作了平原太守。
English: Later, he was appointed as a member of the palace attendant's history and military department, but Yang Guozhong hated him for not adhering to himself and sent him to Beijing to become the governor of the plain.

古文：安禄山逆节颇著，真卿讬以霖雨，修城浚壕，阴料丁壮，实储廪。佯命文士泛舟，饮酒赋诗。
现代文：安禄山反叛大唐的野心很明显，颜真卿以连连下雨为借口，修城墙，挖沟壕，暗中招兵买马，储备粮草；他假意与文士泛舟水上，饮酒赋诗。
English: The ambition of the rebel Great Tang of Anlu Mountain is obvious. Yan Zhenqing used the continuous rain as an excuse to repair the city wall, dig trenches, secretly recruit soldiers and horses, and reserve grain and grass; he pretended to raft on the water with the scribes, drinking and writing poetry.

古文：禄山密侦之，以为书生，不足虞也。
现代文：安禄山秘密地侦察他，认为他是一介书生，不足为忧。
English: An Lushan secretly scouted him and thought that he was a scholar, so he was not worried.

古文：无几，禄山反，河朔尽陷，唯平原城有备焉，乃使司兵参军驰奏。
现代文：不久，安禄山反了，黄河以北全部沦陷，只有平原城有所准备，派司兵参军骑马到京城报告。
English: Soon, Anlu Mountain rebelled, and everything north of the Yellow River fell. Only Plains City was prepared, sending officers and soldiers to join the army and ride to Beijing to report.

古文：玄宗喜曰： 河北二十四郡，唯真卿一人而已。
现代文：唐玄宗高兴地说： 黄河以北二十四郡，只有颜真卿一人而已！
English: Tang Xuan Zong said happily: There are twenty-four counties north of the Yellow River, and Yan Zhenqing is the only one!

古文：朕恨未识其形状耳。 
现代文：我真恨自己太不了解他。 
English: I hate that I don't know him.

古文：禄山既陷洛阳，杀留守李憕，以其首招降河北。
现代文：安禄山攻下洛阳之后，杀了留守李憕，用李憕的首级在黄河以北招降其他唐将。
English: After conquering Luoyang, An Lushan killed the left-behind Li Xi, and used Li Xi's head rank to recruit and demote other Tang generals north of the Yellow River.

古文：真卿恐摇人心，杀其使者，乃谓诸将曰： 我识李憕，此首非真也。 
现代文：颜真卿怕动摇人心，杀了安禄山派来的使者，对将领们说： 我认识李憕，这个首级不是真的。 
English: Yan Zhenqing, afraid of shaking people's hearts, killed the envoy sent by Anlu Shan and said to the generals: I know Li Xi, this head is not real.

古文：久之为冠饰，以草续支体，棺而葬之。
现代文：过些时候他为李憕弄来帽子、饰物，用草做一个假肢体，装到棺材里埋葬了。
English: Later, he brought a hat and ornaments for Li Yao, made a prosthetic limb from grass, and buried it in a coffin.

古文：禄山以兵守土门。
现代文：安禄山派兵守住土门。
English: An Lushan sent soldiers to guard the earthen gate.

古文：真卿兄杲卿，为常山太守，共破土门。十七郡同日归顺，推真卿为帅，得兵二十万，横绝燕赵。
现代文：颜真卿的哥哥颜杲卿是常山太守，他和颜真卿共同攻破了土门，十七个郡同一天归顺了大唐，共同推举颜真卿做元帅，得到了军队二十万人。他指挥部队纵横燕赵一带。
English: Yan Zhenqing's brother, Yan Xuanqing, was the governor of Changshan. He and Yan Zhenqing jointly broke through the mud gate, and seventeen counties surrendered to Datang on the same day. They jointly elected Yan Zhenqing as a marshal, and obtained an army of two hundred thousand people. He commanded troops throughout Yan Zhao.

古文：诏加户部侍郎平原太守。
现代文：皇帝下诏书封他为户部侍郎平原太守。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint him as the steward of the household and the governor of the plain.

古文：时清河郡客李萼，谒于军前。真卿与之经略，共破禄山党二万余人于堂邑。
现代文：当时清河郡的李萼在军前拜谒，颜真卿与他共同谋划，一起在堂邑打败了安禄山的两万多人。
English: At that time, Li Caly of Qinghe County was in the front of the army, Yan Zhenqing and he jointly planned and defeated more than 20,000 people of Anlu Mountain in Tongyi.

古文：肃宗幸灵武，诏授工部尚书御史大夫。
现代文：唐肃宗在灵武时，下令封他为工部尚书御史大夫。
English: At the time of Lingwu, Tang Su Zong ordered him to be appointed as the chief historian of the Ministry of Works.

古文：真卿间道朝于凤翔，拜宪部尚书，寻加御史大夫。
现代文：颜真卿走偏僻的小道到凤翔朝见天子，天子又拜他为宪部尚书，不久又加封御史大夫。
English: Yan Zhenqing took a remote path to Fengxiang to see Tianzi in the morning. Tianzi also worshiped him as the Constitutional Secretary, and soon he was appointed as the Imperial Historian.

古文：弹奏黜陟，朝纲大举。
现代文：他每每弹劾、禀奏，使不称职的被贬，使有才干的升职，使朝纲大振。
English: He has impeached and dismissed every time, demoted the incompetent, promoted the talented, and greatly strengthened the system of the imperial court.

古文：连典蒲州、同州，皆有遗爱。
现代文：他连年治理蒲州和同州，都有仁爱遗留于后世。
English: He governed Puzhou and Tongzhou for years on end, leaving a legacy of benevolence for future generations.

古文：为御史唐实所构，宰臣所忌。贬饶州刺史。复拜升州浙西节度使，徵为刑部尚书。
现代文：后来他被御史唐实陷害，又受到宰相的忌妒，被贬为饶州刺史，又被任命为升州浙西节度使，征召为刑部尚书。
English: Later, he was framed by Emperor Tang Zi, and was envied by the Prime Minister, and was relegated to the position of Raozhou scribe. He was also appointed as the envoy of the Western Zhejing Festival, and was conscripted as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：又为李辅国所谮，贬蓬州长史。
现代文：后来又被李辅国诽谤，贬为蓬州长史。
English: Later, he was slandered by Li Yuxuo and relegated to the history of the governor of Penghu.

古文：代宗嗣位，拜利州刺史，入为户部侍郎，荆南节度使，寻除右丞，封鲁郡公。
现代文：唐代宗继位，他被拜为利州刺史，回京做了户部侍郎、荆南节度使，不久又做了右丞相，封为鲁郡公。
English: When Emperor Zong of Tang Dynasty succeeded to the throne, he was worshipped as the chief historian of Lishu, and he returned to Beijing as the chamberlain of the household, the secretary of the Jingnan Festival, and soon he became the minister of the right and was named the governor of Lu County.

古文：宰相元载，私树朋党，惧朝臣言其长短，奏令百官凡欲论事，皆先白长官，长官白宰相，然后上闻。
现代文：宰相元载，私立朋党，他担心朝臣们揭发他的问题，就向皇帝奏请：文武百官凡是要向皇上汇报事情的，都要先向自己的长官说明，长官再向宰相说明，然后再奏明皇上。
English: The prime minister had been a private friend of the party for a long time, and he was worried that the courtiers would expose his problem, so he asked the emperor to report to the emperor: If any civil or military official wants to report to the emperor, he must first explain to his superior, and then the superior will explain to the prime minister, and then report to the emperor.

古文：真卿奏疏极言之乃止。
现代文：颜真卿上疏坚决反对元载的主张，元载才没有得逞。
English: Yan Zhenqing and Shang So resolutely opposed Yuan Zai's proposal, and Yuan Zai did not succeed.

古文：后因摄祭太庙，以祭器不修言于朝。元载以为诽谤时政，贬硖州别驾，复为抚州湖州刺史。
现代文：后来颜真卿主持祭太庙，在朝廷中谈论祭器不完整不齐全，元载认为这是诽谤朝政，贬他为硖州别驾。后来又做了抚州湖州刺史。
English: Later, Yan Zhenqing presided over the Great Temple Festival and talked about the incomplete and incomplete sacrificial vessels in the imperial court. The original record considered this to be a slander against the imperial government and relegated him to the status of a provincial governor. Later, he also made a history of Fuzhou and Huzhou.

古文：元载伏诛，拜刑部尚书。
现代文：元载被诛杀之后，颜真卿又被拜为刑部尚书。
English: After Yuan Zhao was killed, Yan Zhenqing was worshiped as the leader of the criminal investigation department.

古文：代宗崩，为礼仪使。
现代文：代宗驾崩的时候，颜真卿是礼仪使。
English: When Emperor Daizong passed away, Yan Zhenqing was the ceremonial envoy.

古文：又以高祖已下七圣，谥号繁多，上议请取初谥为定，为宰相杨炎所忌，不行。
现代文：又因为唐高祖以下的七位皇帝，谥号繁多，他上疏议请取初谥的为准，被宰相杨炎忌妒，奏请没有被采纳。
English: In addition, because the seven emperors below Tang Gaozu had many posthumous names, he was jealous of the Prime Minister Yang Yan, and his request was not accepted.

古文：改太子少傅，潜夺其权。
现代文：他被改任为太子少傅，暗中夺了他的权。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Prince Junior Master, and his power was secretly usurped.

古文：又改太子太师。
现代文：后来又改任为太子太师。
English: Later, he was reappointed as Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：时李希烈陷汝州，宰相卢杞，素忌其刚正，将中害之。奏以真卿重德，四方所瞻。使往谕希烈，可不血刃而平大寇矣。
现代文：当时李希烈攻破了汝州，宰相卢杞平常就忌恨颜真卿的刚正，要趁机陷害他，就上奏说颜真卿德高望重，四方敬仰，让他去说服李希烈，可以兵不血刃而平定强敌。
English: At that time, when Li Xilai invaded Ruzhou, the Prime Minister Lu Xun usually hated Yan Zhenqing's uprightness. To take advantage of the opportunity to frame him, he said that Yan Zhenqing was highly respected and admired by all sides, and asked him to convince Li Xilai that he could defeat a strong enemy without bloodshed.

古文：上从之。事行，朝野失色。
现代文：皇上听了卢杞的话，事情开始推行，朝野震惊。
English: The emperor listened to Lu Wei's words, and the matter began to be implemented, shocking the Asano.

古文：李勉闻之，以为失一国老，贻朝廷羞，密表请留。
现代文：李勉听说后，觉得这事会让国家失去一位国老，朝廷也会因此蒙羞，秘密地上奏章请求留下颜真卿。
English: After hearing about this, Li Mian thought that the country would lose a national elder and the imperial court would be disgraced, so he secretly wrote a petition asking Yan Zhenwu to stay.

古文：又遣人逆之于路，不及。
现代文：又派人到路上去截住颜真卿，没有来得及。
English: He also sent someone to the road to intercept Yan Zhencong, but he didn't have time.

古文：既见希烈，方宣诏旨，希烈养子千余人，雪刃争前欲杀之。
现代文：颜真卿见了李希烈之后，正宣读诏书，李希烈的养子等一千多人亮出兵刃争先恐后地要杀他，围绕在四周骂他。
English: After Yan Zhenqing saw Li Xilai, he was reading out the edict. More than a thousand people, including Li Xilai's adopted son, rushed to kill him, surrounding him and cursing him.

古文：丛绕诟骂，神色不动。
现代文：他神色不动。
English: His face was impassive.

古文：希烈以身蔽之，乃就馆舍。
现代文：李希烈用身体蔽护他，把他安置到馆舍里。
English: Li Xirei shielded him with her body and placed him in the guesthouse.

古文：希烈因宴其党，召真卿坐观之。
现代文：李希烈宴请朋党，让颜真卿坐在那里观看。
English: Li Xili invited friends to the banquet, and let Yan Zhenqing sit there and watch.

古文：使倡优讟朝政以为戏。真卿怒曰： 相公人臣也，奈何使小辈如此。 
现代文：李希烈让倡优攻击朝政当，以此做戏，颜真卿愤怒地说： 你也是人臣，怎么能让小辈们这样！ 
English: Li Xirei let Yan Zhenqing make a play by letting Yan Zhenqing attack the government. Yan Zhenqing said angrily: You are also a minister, how can you let the younger generation do this!

古文：遂起。
现代文：于是他就站了起来。
English: So he stood up.

古文：希烈使人问仪制于真卿。答曰： 老夫耄矣，曾掌国礼，所记者诸侯朝觐礼耳。 
现代文：李希烈让人向颜真卿问朝廷的礼仪制度，颜真卿回答说： 我老了，虽然曾经掌管过国礼，但是所记的都是诸侯朝觐的礼仪罢了。 
English: Li Xilai had someone ask Yan Zhenqing about the etiquette system of the imperial court. Yan Zhenqing replied, "I am old, and although I once presided over the national ceremony, all that is recorded is the etiquette of the princes' pilgrimage."

古文：真卿投身赴火。其逆党救之。
现代文：后来，李希烈让人在院子堆积了柴薪，浇上油，让人对颜真卿说： 你不投降，就烧死你！ 
English: Later, Li Xirei had people pile up firewood in the courtyard, pour oil on it, and have people say to Yan Zhenqing: If you don't surrender, I'll burn you to death!

古文：真卿乃自作遗表、墓志、祭文，示以必死。
现代文：颜真卿自己跳到火里去。那些叛贼把他救出来，颜真卿就自己作了和皇帝决别的奏章、墓志铭和祭文，用来表示自己必死的决心。
English: Yan Zhenqing himself jumped into the fire. Those traitors rescued him, and Yan Zhenqing himself made a farewell song, an epitaph and a dedication to the emperor to express his determination to die.

古文：贼党使缢之，兴元元年八月三日也。年七十七。
现代文：叛贼就把他吊死了。那天是兴元元年八月三日，享年七十七岁。
English: The traitor hanged him on August 3, 1861, when he was 77 years old.

古文：朝廷闻之，辍朝五日，谥文忠公。
现代文：朝廷听到这一消息之后，停止办公五天，谥号文忠公。
English: After the Imperial Court heard this news, it suspended its work for five days.

古文：真卿四朝重德，正直敢言，老而弥壮。为卢杞所排，身殃于贼，天下冤之。
现代文：颜真卿是四朝元老，德高望重，正直敢言，老当益壮，被卢杞排挤，死在叛贼之手，是天下的奇冤。
English: Yan Zhenqing is a veteran of four dynasties, highly respected, honest and dare to say, growing stronger and stronger. He was ousted by Lu Wei and died at the hands of a traitor, which is a strange misfortune in the world.

古文：《别传》云，真卿将缢，解金带以遗使者曰： 吾尝修道，以形全为先。 
现代文：《别传》说，颜真卿将要被吊死的时候，解下金带送给使者说： 我曾经修炼过道术，以保全躯体为先。
English: "Biography" says that when Yan Zhenqing was about to be hanged, he untied the gold belt and gave it to the messenger, saying: I once practiced Taoism, with the preservation of the body as the first priority.

古文：吾死之后，但割吾支节血，为吾吭血，以绐之，则吾死无所恨矣。 
现代文：我死之后，只需要割开我的肢关节放点血，再把我咳的血清理一下，把我葬了，保全我的躯体，我就死而无恨了。 
English: After I die, I only need to cut my limbs and joints to let some blood, and then clean up the blood I coughed, bury me, and preserve my body. I will die without hatred.

古文：缢者如其言。既死，复收瘗之。
现代文：来勒他的人按他的话做了，他死后又埋葬了他。
English: His captors did as he said and buried him when he died.

古文：贼平，真卿家迁丧上京。启殡视之，棺朽败而尸形俨然，肌肉如生，手足柔软，髭发青黑，握拳不开，爪透手背。
现代文：叛贼被平定之后，颜真卿家把颜真卿迁葬上京，打开棺材一看，棺材朽烂了，但是他的躯体还是原来那样，肌肉像活人一样，手脚很柔软，胡须头发青黑，拳握着，指甲透过手背。
English: After the traitors were subdued, Yan Zhenqing's family moved Yan Zhenqing's funeral to Beijing. When they opened the coffin, they saw that the coffin was rotten, but his body was still the same as before. His muscles were like a living person, his hands and feet were very soft, his beard and hair were dark blue, his fists were clenched, and his nails went through the back of his hands.

古文：远近惊异焉。
现代文：远近的人都感到惊奇。
English: People near and far were astonished.

古文：行及中路，旅榇渐轻，后达葬所，空棺而已。
现代文：走在半路上，感到棺木越来越轻。后来到了下葬的地方，打开一看，是一口空棺而已。
English: Halfway through the walk, I felt that the coffin was getting lighter and lighter. Later, when I arrived at the place of burial, I opened it and saw that it was just an empty coffin.

古文：《开天传信记》详而载焉。
现代文：《开天传信记》详细地记载了这件事。
English: The "Analects of Confucius" recorded this event in detail.

古文：《别传》又云，真卿将往蔡州，谓其子曰： 吾与元载俱服上药，彼为酒色所败，故不及吾。
现代文：《别传》又说，颜真卿有一次要到蔡州去，对他儿子说： 我和元载都服过天上的灵药，只不过他的药力被酒色破坏了，所以不如我。
English: "Bequest" also said that Yan Zhenqing once wanted to go to Caizhou and said to his son: I and Yuan Zai have both taken the heavenly elixir, but his potency was destroyed by alcohol, so it was not as good as mine.

古文：此去蔡州，必为逆贼所害，尔后可迎吾丧于华阴，开棺视之，必异于众。 
现代文：我这次去蔡州，一定会被逆贼杀害。你以后可以把我接回来埋葬到华阴。到时候你打开棺材看看，肯定与众不同。 
English: If I go to Caizhou this time, I will definitely be killed by the traitors. You can take me back later and bury me in Huayin. When you open the coffin, it will definitely be different.

古文：及是开棺，果睹其异。
现代文：等到打开棺材一看，果然与众不同。
English: When they opened the coffin, they saw that it was different.

古文：道士邢和璞曰： 此谓形仙者也。
现代文：道士邢和璞说： 这就是我们平常所说的成仙啊！
English: Taoist priests Zou and Zou said, "This is what we usually call becoming an immortal!"

古文：虽藏于铁石之中，炼形数满，自当擘裂飞去矣。 
现代文：虽然藏在铁石之中，但是修炼的时日已满，自然会裂开而飞走。 
English: Although hidden in the iron and stone, the crane's time of cultivation is over, and it will naturally crack and fly away.

古文：其后十余年，颜氏之家，自雍遣家仆往郑州，徵庄租，回及洛京，此仆偶到同德寺，见鲁公衣长白衫，张盖，在佛殿上坐。
现代文：过了十多年，颜真卿家从雍州派一个仆人到郑州去收租，回来的时候走到洛京，这个仆人偶然来到同德寺，见颜真卿穿着白色的长衫，开着伞，坐在佛殿上。
English: More than ten years later, Yan Zhenqing's family sent a servant from Yongzhou to Zhengzhou to collect rent. When he returned, he went to Luojing. This servant accidentally came to the Tongde Temple and saw Yan Zhenqing wearing a white shirt, holding an umbrella and sitting on the Buddha hall.

古文：此仆遽欲近前拜之。
现代文：这个仆人急忙上前，想要参拜。
English: The servant hurried forward to pay his respects.

古文：公遂转身去。
现代文：颜真卿却转身离开了。
English: Yan Zhenqing turned around and left.

古文：仰观佛壁，亦左右随之。
现代文：他仰着头看佛寺的墙壁。
English: He looked up at the walls of the Buddhist temple.

古文：终不令仆见其面。
现代文：仆人就或左或右地跟在他后边，但他始终不让仆人看到他的脸。
English: The servant followed him to the right and to the left, but he never let the servant see his face.

古文：乃下佛殿，出寺去。
现代文：过一会儿他就走下佛殿，出门而去。
English: After a while, he stepped out of the Buddhist hall and walked away.

古文：仆亦步随之，径归城东北隅荒菜园中。
现代文：仆人也一步一步地跟着他。他径直回到城东北角的荒菜园中。
English: His servant followed him step by step, and he went straight back to the deserted vegetable garden in the northeast corner of the city.

古文：有两间破屋，门上悬箔子。
现代文：园中有两间破屋，门上悬挂着帘子。
English: There are two ramshackle houses in the park with curtains hanging from the doors.

古文：公便揭箔而入。
现代文：颜真卿便挑帘走了进去。
English: Yan Zhenqing picked up the curtain and walked in.

古文：仆遂隔箔子唱喏。
现代文：仆人就隔着帘子行礼，并出声致敬。颜真卿说： 你是谁？ 
English: The servant bowed across the curtain and saluted. Yan Zhenqing said: Who are you?

古文：公曰： 何人？ 仆对以名。公曰： 入来。 
现代文：仆人说出了自己的名字。颜真卿说： 进来吧！ 
English: The servant said his name. Yan Zhenqing said: Come in!

古文：仆既入拜，辄拟哭。公遽止之。
现代文：仆人进去之后，拜见完了就想哭，颜真卿急忙制止了他。
English: After the servant went in, he wanted to cry after seeing her, but Yan Zhenqing hurriedly stopped him.

古文：遂略问一二儿侄了。
现代文：于是颜真卿就大略问了问儿子侄儿的情况。
English: So Yan Zhenqing asked his son and nephew about the situation.

古文：公探怀中，出金十两付仆，以救家费，仍遣速去， 归勿与人说。后家内阙，即再来。 
现代文：他从怀中掏出十两黄金交给仆人，让仆人带回去补助一下家用，还打发仆人赶快离开，嘱咐他回去之后不要对别人讲，以后家里有困难，可以再来。
English: He took out ten taels of gold from his bosom and gave it to his servant. He asked the servant to take it back with him to supplement the household. He also sent the servant away quickly, instructing him not to tell anyone when he returned, and that he could come back later if there were any difficulties at home.

古文：仆还雍，其家大惊。
现代文：仆人回到雍州，颜家全家大惊。
English: When the servant returned to Yongzhou, the Yan family was shocked.

古文：货其金，乃真金也。
现代文：去卖那黄金，竟然是真正的黄金。
English: I went to sell the gold, and it turned out to be real gold.

古文：颜氏子便市鞍马，与向仆疾来省觐，复至前处，但满眼榛芜，一无所有。
现代文：颜氏子孙便买了鞍马，和那个仆人一起飞驰而来探望。又到了以前那个地方，却只剩下了满眼的榛芜，其余什么也没有。
English: The children and grandchildren of the Yan family then bought a pommel horse and galloped with the servant to visit the place. They arrived at the same place again, but only the eyes of the donkey were left, and there was nothing else.

古文：时人皆称鲁公尸解得道焉。
现代文：当时的人们都说颜真卿尸解，得道成仙了。
English: At that time, people said that Yan Zhenqing's autopsy had made him immortal.

