古文：凡与敌战，若我势虚，当伪示以实形，使敌莫能测其虚实所在，必不敢轻与我战，则我可以全师保军。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果我军兵力弱，就要伪装成实力强大的样子，让敌人摸不清虚实，敌人必定不敢轻易与我交战。这样，我就可以保全实力不受损失。
English: In any battle against the enemy, if my army is weak, I must disguise myself as a strong one, so that the enemy can't figure out the truth. The enemy must not dare to fight me easily. In this way, I can preserve my strength from loss.

古文：法曰： 敌不得与我战者，乖其所之也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 敌人不敢同五军交战，是由于我采取示形之法而改变其进攻方向的缘故。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: The reason why the enemy does not dare to engage the Five Armies is that I have changed the direction of his attack by adopting the method of demonstration.

古文：三国，蜀将诸葛亮在阳平，魏延诸将并兵东下，亮惟留万余守城。
现代文：三国时期，蜀国丞相诸葛亮率军驻守在阳平关，派部将魏延等率主力东进，只留下万余人守卫阳平城。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, led the army stationed in Yangping Pass, and Wei Yan, the faction leader, led the main force eastward, leaving only more than 10,000 people to guard Yangping City.

古文：魏司马懿率二十万众拒亮，与延军错道，径前，当亮军六十里，候还，白懿云： 亮城中兵少力弱。 
现代文：魏国大将司马懿率军二十万人前来截击诸葛亮，与东进的魏延军错道而行，径直进至距诸葛亮六十里的地方，其侦察人员回来向司马懿报告说：诸葛亮所在阳平城中兵力不多，力量虚弱。
English: The Wei general Sima Yu led an army of 200,000 men to intercept Zhuge Liang. He went the wrong way with the eastward Wei Yan army and went straight to a place 60 miles away from Zhuge Liang. His reconnaissance personnel came back and reported to Sima Yu: Zhuge Liang's troops in Yangping City are few and weak.

古文：亮亦知懿军垂至，恐与己相逼，欲赴延军，相去又远，势不能及。
现代文：而诸葛亮也知道司马懿军即将来到，担心他向自己逼近，打算开赴魏延处，但彼此相距太远，事态紧迫已经来不及了。
English: Zhuge Liang also knew that Sima Qian's army was about to arrive, and worried that he was approaching him, he planned to go to Wei Yan's place, but they were too far away from each other, and it was too late for the urgency of the situation.

古文：将士失色，莫知其计。
现代文：因此，蜀军将士个个惊慌失色，不知应当采取什么办法。
English: As a result, the soldiers of the Shu army panicked and lost their color, and did not know what to do.

古文：亮意气自若，敕命军中皆偃旗息鼓，不得妄出；又令大开四门，扫地却洒。
现代文：然而，诸葛亮却神态自若，镇静如常。他命令城中蜀军都放倒旗帜，停息鼓声，任何人不得擅自出入营地；又命令士兵大开四面城门，让士兵在门前洒水扫地。
English: However, Zhuge Liang looked confident and calm as usual. He ordered the Shu troops in the city to put down their flags and stop the drums, and no one was allowed to enter or leave the camp without permission. He also ordered the soldiers to open the four gates and let the soldiers sprinkle water and sweep the ground in front of the gates.

古文：懿尝谓亮持重，而复见以弱势，疑其有伏兵。于是，率众退北山。
现代文：司马懿一贯认为诸葛亮用兵谨慎持重，如今摆出这副将少兵弱的模样，肯定是有埋伏，于是便率领大军退往北山之下。
English: Sima Qian always thought that Zhuge Liang was prudent in the use of soldiers, and now this pair of generals looked weak, there must have been an ambush, so he led a large army to retreat under the North Mountain.

古文：明日食时，亮与参佐拊手大笑曰： 司马必谓吾示怯，将有强伏，循山走矣。 
现代文：到了第二天吃饭的时候，诸葛亮同他的参谋助手们拍手大笑说： 司马懿一定认为我故意装出怯弱的样子，埋设着强大的伏兵，所以才沿着山麓退走了。 
English: When it was time to eat the next day, Zhuge Liang and his staff assistants clapped their hands and laughed loudly, saying: Sima Yi must have thought that I deliberately pretended to be weak and set up a strong ambush, so I retreated along the foot of the mountain.

古文：候还白，如亮言。
现代文：蜀军侦察人员此时回来报告的情况，完全像诸葛亮所预料的那样。
English: The Shu army reconnaissance personnel returned at this time to report the situation, exactly as Zhuge Liang had expected.

古文：懿后知之，深以为恨。
现代文：司马懿知道事情原委后，很是懊悔。
English: Sima Yi was very remorseful after he learned that the matter had been referred to the committee.

