古文：万章曰： 士之不托诸侯，何也？ 
现代文：万章问： 读书人不能依托于诸侯，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: Readers can't rely on princes, why is that?

古文：孟子曰： 不敢也。
现代文：孟子说： 是不敢。
English: Mencius said, "Don't you dare."

古文：诸侯失国，而后托于诸侯，礼也；士之托于诸侯，非礼也。 
现代文：诸侯失去了自己的国家，去依附别的国家，这合礼；读书人依附于诸侯，不合礼。 
English: It is proper for princes who have lost their own country to attach themselves to other countries; it is not proper for readers to attach themselves to princes.

古文：万章曰： 君馈之粟，则受之乎？ 曰： 受之。 
现代文：万章说： 如果国君赠送粮食给他，那接不接受呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "If the sovereign gave him grain as a gift, would he not accept it?"

古文： 受之何义也？ 
现代文：孟子说： 可以接受。 
English: Mencius said, "That is acceptable."

古文：曰： 君之于氓也，固周之。 
现代文：万章说： 接受馈赠是什么道理呢？ 孟子说： 国君对于流动的外来百姓，也是要周济的。 
English: Wanzhang said, "What is the reason for accepting gifts?" Mencius said, "The sovereign is also generous to the floating foreign people.

古文：曰： 周之则受，赐之则不受，何也？ 
现代文：万章说： 周济则接受，赏赐则不接受，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang said: Zhou Jizhi is acceptable, but reward is not acceptable. Why is this?

古文：曰： 不敢也。 
现代文：孟子说： 不敢呀。 
English: Mencius said: I dare not.

古文：曰： 敢问其不敢何也？ 
现代文：万章说： 冒昧地请问这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "May I be so bold as to ask what is the reason for this?

古文：曰： 抱关击柝者，皆有常职以食于上。无常职而赐于上者，以为不恭也。 曰： 君馈之，则受之，不识可常继乎？ 
现代文：孟子说： 看门打更的人都正当职务并能从上面领取俸禄，没有正当职务接受国君的赏赐，这是一种不恭敬的行为。 万章说： 国君赠送，就接受，不知道能经常这样吗？ 
English: Mencius said, "All those who keep the doors and beat the guards have a legitimate position and can receive a salary from above. Without a legitimate position, accepting a reward from the sovereign is a disrespectful act." Wanzhang said, "When the sovereign gives a gift, it is accepted. I don't know if this can happen often."

古文：曰： 缪公之于子思也，亟问，亟馈鼎肉。
现代文：孟子说： 鲁缪公对于子思，屡次派人去问候，并赠送肉食。
English: Mencius said, "Rumu sent greetings to Zisi many times and gave him meat.

古文：子思不悦。
现代文：子思对此很不高兴。
English: Zisi is not happy about this.

古文：于卒也，摽使者出诸大门之外，北面稽首再拜而不受。曰： 今而后知君之犬马畜伋。 
现代文：最终，直接把来的使者赶出了大门，向北面叩头作揖而拒绝接受馈送，说： 至今才知道君主是把我孔伋当成狗马来畜养。 
English: In the end, he directly drove the messenger out of the gate, bowed to the north and refused to accept the feed, saying: So far, I only know that the monarch is raising my Kongtao as a dog.

古文：盖自是台无馈也。
现代文：就是从这时起使者不再来送东西了。
English: From that time on, the messengers stopped coming.

古文：悦贤不能举，又不能养也，可谓悦贤乎？ 
现代文：很喜欢贤才但不举荐任用，又不能用养贤的方法来对待，这能说是喜欢贤才吗？ 
English: It likes talents but does not recommend them for appointment, and cannot use the method of cultivating talents to treat them. Can this be said to like talents?

古文：曰： 敢问国君欲养君子，如何斯可谓养矣？ 
现代文：万章说： 冒昧地请问国君想奉养君子，怎样做才能说是奉养呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "May I be so bold as to ask you, if the sovereign wants to foster a gentleman, how can he be said to be fostering him?

古文：曰： 以君命将之，再拜稽首而受。
现代文：孟子说： 用国君的名义馈赠，他先作揖、后叩头地接受了。
English: Mencius said: When he received a gift in the name of the sovereign, he first bowed and then accepted it.

古文：其后廪人继粟，庖人继肉，不以君命将之。
现代文：以后管仓库的人不断送来粮食，管膳食的人不断送来肉食，就不再用国君的名义。
English: From then on, the person in charge of the warehouse kept sending grain, and the person in charge of meals kept sending meat, and they no longer used the name of the sovereign.

古文：子思以为鼎肉，使己仆仆尔亟拜也，非养君子之道也。
现代文：子思认为，馈送肉食使自己十分麻烦地一再作拜行礼，这不是供养君子的办法。
English: Zisi thought that it was not the way to feed a gentleman to feed meat and make it very troublesome for him to make repeated prostrations.

古文：尧之于舜也，使其子九男事之，二女女焉，百官牛羊仓廪备，以养舜于畎亩之中，后举而加诸上位。故曰： 王公之尊贤者也。 
现代文：尧对于舜，使自己的九个儿子侍奉舜，又把两个女儿嫁给舜，百官、牛羊、仓库等都齐备了，使舜在田野中接受供养，然后才提升他担任很高的职位，所以说，王公之尊贤者是这样的。 
English: For example, he made his nine sons serve him, and married his two daughters to him. He had all the officials, cattle, sheep, and storehouses ready, so that he could be supported in the fields before he was promoted to a high position.

