古文：清泰三年春正月辛卯朔，帝御文明殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：清泰三年一月一日，末帝到文明殿接受朝贺，仪仗排列整肃。
English: On the first day of January in the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the late emperor went to the Hall of Civilization to receive morning greetings, and the ceremonial battle was arranged.

古文：乙未，百济遣使献方物。
现代文：五日，百济派使者献特产。
English: On the fifth day, Baekje sent an envoy to offer special products.

古文：戊戌，幸龙门佛寺祈雪。
现代文：八日，末帝到龙门寺祈求降雪。
English: On the eighth day, the late emperor went to Longmen Temple to pray for snow.

古文：癸卯，以给事中、充枢密院直学士吕琦为端明殿学士；以六军诸卫判官、尚书工部郎中薛文遇为枢密院直学士。
现代文：十三日，任给事中、兼枢密院直学士吕琦为端明殿学士，任六军诸卫判官、尚书工部郎中薛文遇为枢密院直学士。
English: On the 13th, Lv Ying, who was also a member of the Privy Council, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and Xue Wenyu, who was a member of the Sixth Army and a member of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：乙巳，以上元夜京城张灯，帝微行，置酒于赵延寿之第。
现代文：十五日，上元节夜里京城张灯结彩，末帝微服出行，在赵延寿家中设酒宴。
English: On the 15th, on the night of the Lantern Festival, the lights of Beijing were lit, the last emperor traveled, and a wine banquet was held at the home of Zhao Yanshou.

古文：丁未，皇子河南尹、判六军诸卫事重美封雍王。
现代文：十七日，皇子河南尹、判六军诸卫事李重美封为雍王。
English: On the seventeenth day, the prince Henan Yin and the guards of the Six Armies, Li Chongmei, were crowned as the Yong Wang.

古文：己未，以前司农卿王彦镕为太仆卿。
现代文：二十九日，任前司农卿王彦为太仆卿。
English: On the 29th, Wang Yan, the former Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was promoted to Dajuqing.

古文：二月戊辰，吐浑宁朔两府留后李可久加检校司徒。
现代文：二月九日，吐谷浑宁朔、奉化两府留后李可久加授检校司徒。
English: On February 9th, after staying in the two prefectures of Tugu, Huningshuo and Fenghua, Li Kejiu was awarded the title of inspector of schools.

古文：可久本姓白氏，前朝赐姓。
现代文：李可久本来姓白，前朝赐姓李。
English: Li Kejiu was originally surnamed Bai, but was given the surname Li by the previous government.

古文：从之。辛丑，权知福建节度使王昶奏，节度使王延钧以去年十月十四日卒。
现代文：十一日，监修国史姚岂页、史官张昭远、李祥、吴承范等人修撰《明宗实录》三十卷献上。三月十二日，临时福建节度使王昶上奏，节度使王延钧在去年十月十四日去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the supervisor of the national history, Yao Guozhe, the historian Zhang Zhaoyuan, Li Xiang, Wu Chengfan and others compiled 30 volumes of "Ming Zong Record" and presented it. On March 12th, the temporary Fujian festival made Wang Xuan play, and the festival made Wang Yanxuan die on October 14th of last year.

古文：是时延钧父子虽僭窃于闽岭，犹称籓于朝廷，故有是奏。
现代文：当时王延钧父子虽然窃据闽岭僭称闽国皇帝，仍然对朝廷称藩属，所以有这次上奏。
English: At that time, although Wang Yanxuan and his son stole the title of the Emperor of Shandong Province, they still called the imperial court a member of the clan, so there was this uproar.

古文：甲辰，以右神武统军杨汉章为彰武军节度使。
现代文：十五日，任右神武统军杨汉章为彰武军节度使。
English: On the 15th, Yang Hanzhang of the Right Shenwu United Army was appointed as the festival envoy of the Shouwu Army.

古文：案《通鉴》：吕琦与李崧建和亲契丹之策，为薛文遇所沮，改为御史中丞，盖疏之也。戊午，御史中丞卢损责授右赞善大夫，知杂侍御史韦税责授太仆寺丞，侍御史魏逊责授太府寺主簿，侍御史王岳责授司农寺主簿。初，延州保安镇将白文审闻兵兴岐下，专杀郡人赵思谦等十余人，已伏其罪，复下台追系推鞫，未竟。
现代文：十七日，任翰林学士、礼部侍郎马裔孙为中书侍郎、同平章事。二十七日，御史中丞卢损贬任右赞善大夫，知杂侍御史韦税贬任太仆寺丞，侍御史魏逊贬任太府寺主簿，侍御史王岳贬任司农寺主簿。起初，延州保安镇将白文审听说岐下兴兵，便擅杀郡人赵思谦等十几人，已经伏罪，又交付司法部门追究审讯，没有结果。
English: On the 17th, Sun, who was a scholar of Hanlin and an attendant of the etiquette department, was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese book and Tongping Zhangji. On the 27th, Lu Jia, the secretary of the history department, was appointed as the doctor of the right zanzan, Shi Wei Jian, the secretary of the miscellaneous department, was appointed as the secretary of the temple, Shi Wei Xun, the secretary of the temple, and Wang Yue, the secretary of the history department, was appointed as the secretary of the temple. At first, Yanzhou Baozhu Town heard that the white paper trial had killed more than a dozen soldiers

古文：戊辰，以太子詹事卢演为工部尚书致仕。
现代文：碰上去年五月十二日皇上大赦，除去十恶五逆、放火杀人外全都释放。卢损轻易打开枷锁释放了白文审，末帝大怒，收捕白文审并杀掉了他。
English: On the 12th day of May last year, the emperor issued an amnesty, releasing everyone except the ten evils, five traitors, and arsonists. Luzia easily opened the shackles and released Bai Wenxiu. The last emperor was furious, arrested Bai Wenxiu and killed him.

古文：辛未，以中书舍人、史馆修撰张昭远为礼部侍郎；以前沧州节度使李金全为右领军上将军。
现代文：大理寺因误放罪人论处，所以有这次贬任。这个月，有老鼠与蛇在师子门外相斗，老鼠存活而蛇死去。四月一日，任左卫上将军王景戡为左神武统军，任右领军上将军李顷为华清宫使。
English: This month, there was a fight between a rat and a snake outside the disciple's gate. The rat survived, but the snake died. On April 1, Wang Jingyao, the left-guarding general, was appointed as the left-guarding general, and Li He, the right-guarding general, was appointed as the Huaqing palace envoy.

古文：是月，有熊入京城捕人。
现代文：十日，任太子詹事卢演为工部尚书退休。这个月，有野熊进入京城咬人。
English: On the 10th, Prince Zhan Zhi Lu retired from the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. This month, a wild bear entered Beijing to bite people.

古文：五月辛卯，以河东节度使、兼大同彰国振武威塞等军蕃汉马步总管、检校太师、兼中书令、驸马都尉石敬瑭为郓州节度使，进封赵国公。
现代文：五月三日，任河东节度使，兼大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉马军步军总管、检校太师、兼中书令、驸马都尉石敬瑭为郓州节度使、进封赵国公。
English: On May 3, Shi Jingyao, who was appointed as the Hedong Festival envoy, also served as the commander-in-chief of the foot troops of the Han and Ma armies of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu and Wuxi armies, the inspector-in-chief of the school, and the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the Zhangzhou Festival envoy and sent to Zhao Guogong.

古文：以河阳节度使、充侍卫马步军都指挥使宋审虔为河东节度使。
现代文：任河阳节度使、兼侍卫马军步军都指挥使宋审虔为河东节度使。
English: He appointed Song Jianqian as the festival envoy of Hedong, and Song Jianqian as the festival envoy of Hedong.

古文：甲午，以前晋州节度使、大同彰国振武威塞等军蕃汉副总管张敬达充西北面蕃汉马步都部署，落副总管。
现代文：六日，任前晋州节度使，大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉副总管张敬达任西北面蕃汉马军步军都部署，免去副都管职。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Jingda, the former Jinzhou festival envoy and the deputy commander of the Han troops in Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu, and Wuxi, was appointed as the deputy commander of the Han horse troops in the northwest, and was relieved of his duties.

古文：乙未，诏： 诸州两使判官、畿赤令有阙，取省郎、遗补、丞博、少列宫僚，选择擢任。 以忠正军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使张彦琪为河阳节度使，充侍卫马军都指挥使；以彰圣都指挥使、饶州刺史符彦饶为忠正军节度使，充侍卫步军都指挥使。
现代文：七日，任忠正军节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使张彦琪为河阳节度使、兼侍卫马军都指挥使；任彰圣军都指挥使、饶州刺史符彦饶为忠正军节度使、兼侍卫步军都指挥使。
English: On the seventh day, Zhang Yanqi was appointed as the commander of the festival of the Zhongzheng Army and the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops; Zhang Yanqi was appointed as the commander of the festival of the Kheyang Army and the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops; Zhang Xuejun was appointed as the commander of the holy army; and Raozhou Zhishi Fuhangrao was appointed as the commander of the festival of the Zhongzheng Army and the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops.

古文：丙申，以雍王重美与汴州节度使范延光结婚，诏兗王从温主之。
现代文：八日，由于雍王李重美和汴州节度使范延光结婚，下诏要兖王李从温主持此事。
English: On the eighth day, as the Yong Wang Li Chongmei and the Zhangzhou Festival made Fan Yanguang get married, the next edict was to have the Zhang Wang Li Congwen preside over the matter.

古文：丁酉，以国子祭酒马缟卒废朝。
现代文：九日，因国子祭酒马缟去世而停止上朝。
English: On the 9th, due to the death of Kuniko Matsuri sake groom, the procession to the Imperial Palace was stopped.

古文：戊戌，昭义奏，河东节度使石敬瑭叛。
现代文：十日，昭义军报告，河东节度使石敬瑭叛变。
English: On the 10th, the Shouyi Army reported that the Hedong Festival had made Shi Jingyao mutiny.

古文：以鸿胪卿兼通事舍人、判四方馆王景崇为卫尉卿，充引进使。
现代文：任鸿胪卿兼通事舍人、判四方馆王景崇为卫尉卿，兼引进使。
English: He also appointed Wang Jingtong of the Sifang Pavilion as the captain of the guards and the envoy of introduction.

古文：壬寅，削夺石敬瑭官爵，便令张敬达进军攻讨。
现代文：十四日，削夺石敬瑭的官爵，下令张敬达进军攻讨。
English: On the 14th, the government official who had seized Shishi Jingtang ordered Zhang Jingtang to attack.

古文：乙卯。以晋州节度使张敬达为太原四面兵马都部署，寻改为招讨使；以河阳节度使、侍卫马军都指挥使张彦琪为太原四面马步军都指挥使；以邢州节度使安审琦为太原四面马军都指挥使；以陕州节度使相里金为太原四面步军都指挥使；以右监门上将军武廷翰为壕寨使。
现代文：二十七日，任晋州节度使张敬达为太原四面兵马都部署，接着改为招讨使；任河阳节度使、侍卫马军都指挥使张彦琪为太原四面马军步军都指挥使；任邢州节度使安审琦为太原四面马军都指挥使；任陕州节度使相里金为太原四面步军都指挥使；任右监门上将军武廷翰为壕寨使。
English: On the 27th, the Jinzhou Festival appointed Zhang Jingda as the commander of the Taiyuan four-faced troops and horses, and then changed it to the recruiting envoy; the Heyang Festival appointed Zhang Yanqi as the commander of the Taiyuan four-faced troops and horses, the commander of the guards and horses, the commander of the Taiyuan four-faced troops and horses, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers, the commander of the foot soldiers

古文：丙辰，以定州节度使杨光远为太原四面兵马副部署、兼马步都虞候，寻改为太原四面副招讨使，都虞候如故。以前彰武军节度使高行周为太原四面招抚兼排阵使。
现代文：二十八日，任定州节度使杨光远为太原四面兵马副部署、兼马步军都虞候，不久改为太原四面副招讨使，都虞候一职照旧；任前彰武军节度使高行周为太原四面招抚兼排阵使。
English: On the 28th, Yang Guangyuan was appointed by the Jingshou Festival to be the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan and the deputy commander of the horse-mounted infantry, and was soon changed to the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan, and the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan, and the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan, and the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan, and the deputy commander of the troops and horses in the four directions of Taiyuan.

古文：初，帝疑河东有异志，与近臣语及其事，帝曰： 石郎与朕近亲，在不疑之地，流言毁誉，朕心自明，万一失欢，如何和解？ 
现代文：起初，末帝怀疑河东石敬瑭有异志，和近臣谈到此事，末帝说： 石郎和朕是近亲，是不应怀疑的，流言毁誉，朕心里自然明白，万一与他失欢，该怎么和解？ 
English: At first, the last emperor suspected that Shih Jiong of Hedong had a different ambition, and discussed the matter with his close vassal. The last emperor said: Shih Rong and I are close relatives, there should be no doubt about it. Rumors tarnish reputations. I naturally understand in my heart. In case of falling out of love with him, how should we reconcile?

古文：左右皆不对。
现代文：左右的人都不对答。
English: People on both sides didn't answer.

古文：翼日，欲移石敬瑭于郓州，房暠等坚言不可，司天监赵延乂亦言星辰失度，尤宜安静，由是稍缓其事。
现代文：第二天，想把石敬瑭调到郓州，房詗等人坚持说不可以，司天监赵延义也说天上的星辰失去法度，尤其需要安静，这件事于是稍微缓慢了一些。
English: The next day, when they wanted to transfer Shi Jingyao to Zhangzhou, Fang Yao and others insisted that it was not possible, and Siyuan Zhao Yanyi also said that the stars in the sky had lost their law and especially needed to be quiet, so the matter slowed down a bit.

古文：会薛文遇独宿于禁中，帝召之，谕以太原之事。
现代文：正好薛文遇在禁中独宿，末帝召见他，告诉他太原之事。
English: Just as Xue Wen happened to be staying alone in the ban, the late emperor summoned him and told him about Taiyuan.

古文：文遇奏曰： 臣闻作舍于道，三年不成，国家利害，断自宸旨以臣料之，石敬瑭除亦叛，不除亦叛，不如先事图之。 
现代文：薛文遇说 ：我听说在大路边盖房子，三年都盖不成，有关国家利害的大事，由皇帝做决断。据我料想，若除掉石敬瑭，他要叛乱；不除他，他也要叛乱，不如先下手除掉他。 
English: Xue Wenyuan said: I heard that it would take three years to build a house on the side of the highway, and the emperor would make the final decision on important matters concerning the interests of the country. According to my expectation, if Shi Jingyao were to be removed, he would rebel; if he were not removed, he would also rebel, so it would be better to remove him first.

古文：帝喜曰： 闻卿此言，豁吾愤气。 
现代文：末帝欣喜地说 ：听你这番话，发泄了我一肚子气。 
English: The last emperor said with joy, "Listening to your words, I let out all my anger."

古文：先是，有人言国家明年合得一贤佐主谋，平定天下，帝意亦疑贤佐者属在文遇，即令手书除目，子夜下学士院草制。
现代文：在这之前，有人说国家明年会得到一位贤才辅佐主上，平定天下，末帝心想这贤才大概就是薛文遇了，立即下令写了授任官职的文书，半夜交学士院制定。
English: Prior to this, some people said that the country would get a genius next year to assist the emperor and pacify the world. The last emperor thought that this genius was probably Xue Wen, and immediately ordered to write a document to confer the official position, which was formulated by the Academy of Civil Service at midnight.

古文：翼日，宣制之际，两班失色。
现代文：第二天，宣布任命时，文武两班官员大惊失色。
English: The next day, when the appointment was announced, the officials of the two classes were shocked and disgraced.

古文：居六七日，敬瑭上章云： 明宗社稷，陛下纂承，未契舆情，宜推令辟。
现代文：过了六七天，石敬瑭上表章说： 明宗的社稷，由陛下继承，而不能和洽众人的心意，应辞让给有名望的人。
English: After sixty-seven days had passed, the inscription on the stone votive tablet said: "The Ming sect's votive tablet, inherited by His Majesty, but unable to harmonize with the will of the people, should be relinquished to a person of renown."

古文：许王先朝血绪，养德皇闱，傥循当璧之言，免负阋墙之议。 
现代文：许王李从益是先朝的血亲，在皇宫中养大，如果让位给合法继承人，也免得受人议论说兄弟相争。 
English: Xu Wang Li Congyip is a blood relative of the previous dynasty and was raised in the imperial palace. If he were to give up his place to the legitimate heir, he would not be subject to rumors that the brothers were fighting.

古文：帝览奏不悦，手攘抵地，召马裔孙草诏报曰： 父有社稷，传之于子；君有祸难，倚之于亲。
现代文：末帝看了表章后不高兴，把表章摔到地上，召马裔孙草拟诏书回答： 父有社稷、传给儿子；君有祸难，依靠亲人。
English: The last emperor was not happy after seeing the seal. He threw the seal to the ground and summoned the horse-descended Sun Cao to draft an edict to answer: The father has a social status and passes it on to his son; the prince has misfortune and relies on relatives.

古文：卿于鄂王，故非疏远。
现代文：你和鄂王之间，固然不算疏远，往年卫州之事，天下都知道。
English: Between you and Hwang, of course, is not an estrangement, but the past years of the state of Weizhou are known all over the world.

古文：往岁卫州之事，天下皆知；今朝许王之言，人谁肯信！
现代文：现在所说许王的话，谁肯相信呢！英雄贤俊做事，怎么能这样！ 
English: Who would believe what King Xu is saying now? How can a hero and a wise man do things like this?

古文：英贤立事，安肯如斯 云。戊申，张敬达奏，西北面先锋都指挥使安审信率雄义左第二指挥二百二十七骑，并部下共五百骑，剽劫百井，叛入太原。
现代文：二十日，张敬达报告，西北面先锋都指挥使安审信率雄义军左第二指挥二百二十七个骑兵，以及部下共五百个骑兵，掠抢百井后叛逃入太原。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Jingda reported that the vanguard in the northwest all commanded the left second command of 227 cavalry and a total of 500 cavalry, and defected to Taiyuan after looting hundreds of wells.

古文：又奏，大军已至太原城下。
现代文：又报告，朝廷大军已到太原城下。
English: He also reported that the imperial army had arrived at the foot of Taiyuan Castle.

古文：诏安审信及雄义兵士妻男并处斩，家产没官。
现代文：末帝下诏把安审信及雄义军兵士的妻子儿子一并杀死，家产没收归官府。
English: The last emperor issued an edict to kill An Xuxinxin and the wife and son of a male volunteer soldier together, and the family property was confiscated and returned to the government.

古文：先是，雄义都在伏州屯戍，其指挥使安元信谋杀伏州刺史张朗，事泄，戍兵自溃，奔安审信军，审信与之入太原。
现代文：这之前，雄义军在代州驻扎，其指挥使安元信谋杀代州刺史张朗，事情泄密，守兵自行溃散，逃奔到安审信军队里，安审信和他们一起进入太原。
English: Prior to this, the rebel army was stationed in Daizhou. Its commander, An Yuanxin, ordered the murder of the Daizhou assassin, Zhang Lang. The matter was leaked, and the guards dispersed on their own and fled to the army of An Jixin. An Jixin entered Taiyuan with them.

古文：太常奏，于河南府东权立宣宪太后寝宫，从之。
现代文：太常上奏，在河南府东暂建宣宪太后寝宫，末帝同意了。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed to temporarily build a palace for Empress Dowager Xuan Xian in the east of Henan Province.

古文：己酉，振武节度使安叔千奏，西北界巡检使安重荣驱掠戍兵五百骑叛入太原。
现代文：二十一日，振武军节度使安叔千报告，西北界巡检使安重荣驱赶戍守的骑兵五百人，叛入太原。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Zhenwu army sent Anshu Qian to report the festival, and the northwest border patrol sent An Chong Rong to drive out the 500 cavalrymen and break into Taiyuan.

古文：以新授河东节度使宋审虔为宣州节度使，充侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：末帝任新授河东节度使宋审虔为宣州节度使，兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: The late emperor newly awarded the Hedong Festival to Song Jianqian as the Xuanzhou Festival envoy, and he also served as the commander of the Horse Guards.

古文：壬子，鄴都屯驻捧圣都虞候张令昭逐节度使刘延皓，据城叛。
现代文：二十四日，邺都屯驻捧圣都虞候张令昭驱逐节度使刘延皓，占据都城叛乱。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhang Lingzhao, who was stationed in the capital of the Sacred Capital, drove out Liu Yanxuan, who was stationed in the capital of the Sacred Capital, and occupied the capital of the rebellion.

古文：翼日，令昭召副使边仁嗣已下逼令奏请节旄。
现代文：第二天，张令昭召副使边仁嗣以下官员逼迫他们上奏请授官符。
English: The next day, Zhang Ling Zhao summoned the deputy envoy, Bian Renzhi, and other officials to force them to submit official certificates.

古文：六月辛酉，天雄军节度使刘延皓削夺官爵，勒归私第。
现代文：六月四日，天雄军节度使刘延皓被削夺官爵，勒令回归家中。
English: On June 4th, the Tianxiong Army Festival caused Liu Yanqi to be stripped of his title and ordered to return home.

古文：癸亥，以天雄军守御、右捧圣第二军都虞候张令昭为检校司空，行右千牛将军，权知天雄军府事。
现代文：六日，任天雄军守御、右捧圣第二军都虞候张令昭为检校司空，暂任右千牛将军，临时主管天雄军府事务。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Lingzhao, who was appointed as the guardian of the Tianxiong Army and the second army of the Second Army, was appointed as the school inspector, temporarily serving as the general of the Right Thousand Cows and temporarily in charge of Tianxiong Military Affairs.

古文：丙寅，御敷政殿，遣工部尚书崔居俭奉宣宪皇太后宝册于寝宫。
现代文：九日，末帝到敷政殿，派工部尚书崔居俭奉送宣宪皇太后宝册到寝宫。
English: On the 9th, the late emperor went to the Shikisei-den and sent Choi Ju-chun, the secretary of the Ministry of Works, to deliver the treasure book of the Empress Dowager to her bedchamber.

古文：时陵园在河东，适会兵兴，故权于京城修奉寝宫上谥焉。
现代文：当时陵园在河东，适逢战事兴起，所以暂且在京城修建寝宫奉上谥号。
English: At that time, the cemetery was in the east of the river, coinciding with the outbreak of war, so the construction of the sleeping palace in the capital was temporarily given the nickname.

古文：己巳，以西上阁门副使、少府监兼通事舍人刘颀为鸿胪卿，职如故。
现代文：十二日，任西上阁门副使、少府监兼通事舍人刘颀为鸿胪卿，职务如旧。
English: On the 12th, Liu Xuan, who was appointed as the vice-envoy of the West Shanggamen and the minor prefectural inspector as well as the secretary-general, became the Hongyuan Sir, with the same duties as before.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 时雨稍愆，颇伤农稼，分命朝臣祈祷。 
现代文：十三日，下诏说 ：时雨稍微过份了，对庄稼有损害，命令朝臣分别做祈祷。 
English: On the 13th, he issued an edict saying that the rain had been a little excessive and had damaged the crops, and ordered the courtiers to pray separately.

古文：辛未，工部尚书致仕许寂卒。
现代文：十四日，退休的工部尚书许寂去世。
English: On the 14th, retired Ministry of Industry and Trade official Shang Shuxu passed away.

古文：以权知魏府事、右千牛将军张令昭为齐州防御使，以捧圣右第三指挥使邢立为德州刺史，以捧圣第五指挥使康福进为鄚州刺史。
现代文：任临时魏府事务主管、右千牛将军张令昭为齐州防御使，任捧圣军右第三指挥使邢立为德州刺史，任捧圣军第五指挥使康福进为州刺史。
English: Zhang Lingzhao, the head of the provisional Wei government affairs and the right thousand cattle general, was appointed as the defense envoy of Qizhou, the right third commander of the holy army was appointed as the Texas history, and the fifth commander of the holy army was appointed as the state history.

古文：甲戌，以汴州节度使范延光为天雄军四面招讨使，知行府事。
现代文：十七日，任汴州节度使范延光为天雄军四面招讨使，主管行府事务。
English: On the 17th, Fan Yanguang, who was appointed as the chief of the Bozhou Festival, was appointed as the envoy to invite Tianxiong's army from all directions, and was in charge of government affairs.

古文：丙子，以西京留守李周为天雄军四面副招讨使兼兵马都监。
现代文：十九日，任西京留守李周为天雄军四面副招讨使兼兵马都监。
English: On the 19th, Li Zhou, who stayed in West Beijing, became the deputy envoy of the Tianxiong Army and the inspector of the Central Military Region.

古文：诏河东将佐节度判官赵莹以下十四人并籍没家产。
现代文：下诏将河东将佐节度判官赵莹以下十四人的家产一并没收。
English: The following edict will confiscate the family assets of the 14 people below the judge Zhao Ying from the East River.

古文：秋七月戊子，范延光奏，领军至鄴都攻城。
现代文：七月二日，范延光报告，率领军队到邺都攻城。
English: On July 2nd, Fan Yanguang reported that he would lead the army to attack the city.

古文：己丑，诛右卫上将军石重英、皇城副使石重裔，皆敬瑭之子也。
现代文：三日，杀死右卫上将军石重英、皇城副使石重裔，都是石敬瑭的儿子。
English: On the third day, he killed the general of the Right Division, Shi Chung-ying, and the deputy imperial envoy, Shi Chung-hong, both of whom were the sons of Shi Jingyao.

古文：时重英等匿于民家井中，获而诛之，并族所匿之家。
现代文：当时石重英等人藏在民家井中，抓获后被杀掉，并把隐藏石重英的那家人全族都杀了。
English: At that time, Shih Chung-ying and others hid in a well of a private house. After they were caught, they were killed, and the whole family of the family that hid Shih Chung-ying was killed.

古文：奚首领达罕军遣通事介老奏，奚王李素姑谋叛入契丹，已处斩讫，达喇罕权知本部落事。
现代文：奚族首领达剌干派通事介老报告，奚王李素姑策划叛入契丹，已经被处决了，达剌干暂且管理本部落。
English: The leader of the Shan people, Dajiangan, sent a messenger to report to the old man that the king of Shan, Li Sugu, had planned to rebel against the Khitan and had already been executed. Dajiangan temporarily managed the tribe.

古文：辛卯，沂州奏，诛都指挥使石敬德，并族其家，敬瑭之弟也。
现代文：九日，沂州报告，杀死沂州都指挥使石敬德，并杀掉他全家人，他是石敬瑭的弟弟。
English: On the 9th, Zhangzhou reported that it had killed the commander of Zhangzhou, Shi Jingde, and killed his entire family. He was the younger brother of Shi Jingyao.

古文：乙未，以前彰武军节度使高行周为潞州节度使，充太原四面招抚排阵使；以潞州节度使皇甫立为华州节度使。
现代文：十三日，任前彰武军节度使高行周为潞州节度使，兼太原四面招抚排阵使；任潞州节度使皇甫立为华州节度使。
English: On the 13th, Gao Xingzhou, who was previously the commander of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as the commander of the Zhangzhou Festival; Gao Xingzhou, who was previously the commander of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as the commander of the Zhangzhou Festival; Gao Xingzhou, who was previously the commander of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as the commander of the Zhangzhou Festival; Gao Xingzhou, who was previously the commander of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as the commander of the Zhangwu Army; Gao Xingzhou, who was previously the commander of the Zhangwu Army, was appointed as

古文：丁酉，云州节度使沙彦珣奏，此月二日夜，步军指挥使桑迁作乱，以兵围子城，彦珣突围出城，就西山据雷公口。
现代文：十五日，云州节度使沙彦王旬报告，这个月二日夜晚，步军指挥使桑迁叛乱，领兵包围子城，沙彦王旬突围出城，到西山占据雷公口。
English: On the fifteenth day of the Yunnan Festival, Shajian Wangjun reported that on the evening of the second day of this month, the infantry commander ordered the Sangqian rebellion, led the soldiers to surround the city, and Shajian Wangjun broke out of the city and occupied Lei Gongkou in the West Mountain.

古文：三日，招集兵士入城诛乱军，军城如故。
现代文：三日，召集士兵进城诛灭乱军，军城如故。
English: On the third day, soldiers were called into the city to crush the rebel army, and the military city remained as it was.

古文：辛丑，以将作监丞、介国公宇文颉为汝州襄城令。
现代文：十九日，任将作监丞、介国公宇文颉为汝州襄城令。
English: On the 19th, he was appointed as the superintendent, and the governor of Yunnan Province, Wu Wenyi, was appointed as the governor of Xiangcheng, Yuzhou.

古文：乙巳，以卫尉卿聂延祚为太子宾客。
现代文：二十三日，任卫尉卿聂延祚为太子宾客。
English: On the 23rd, Yan Yan, who was appointed as an officer of the Imperial Guards, came as a guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：戊申，范延光奏，此月二十一日收复鄴都，群臣称贺。
现代文：二十六日，范延光报告，这个月二十一日收复邺都，群臣向末帝祝贺。
English: On the 26th, Fan Yanguang reported that on the 21st of this month, the capital was recaptured, and the courtiers congratulated the late emperor.

古文：己酉，以礼部侍郎张昭远为御史中丞；以御史中丞吕琦为礼部侍郎，充端明殿学士。
现代文：二十七日，任礼部侍郎张昭远为御史中丞；任御史中丞吕琦为礼部侍郎，充端明殿学士。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Zhaoyuan, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, was appointed as the Vice-President of the History Department; the Vice-President of the History Department, Lv Ying, was appointed as the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and became a scholar of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：庚戌，中书奏： 刘延皓宾佐等，帅臣既已削夺，其行军司马李延筠、副使边仁嗣以下，望命放归田里。 
现代文：二十八日，中书上奏 ：刘延皓身边宾客佐僚等人，主帅既然已经被削夺官爵，其行军司马李延筠、副使边仁嗣以下官员，希望下令放归乡里。 
English: On the 28th, the following was published in the official report: Liu Yanqi's entourage, guests, advisors and others, since the commander-in-chief had already been stripped of his title, his marching secretary Ma Li Yanqi, deputy envoy Bian Renzhi and other officials, hope to be ordered to return to the countryside.

古文：奏入，帝大怒，诏大理曰： 帅臣失守，已行削夺，其僚佐合当何罪？ 
现代文：奏本送上，末帝大怒，下诏给大理寺说 ：主帅失守，已经削夺官职，其部下僚佐又该当什么罪？ 
English: When the report was sent, the last emperor was furious, and gave the following edict to the Dali Temple: "The head coach has lost his position, he has lost his official position, and what is the crime of his assistant ministers?

古文：既而竟依中书所奏。
现代文：过了一会儿还是依从了中书所奏。
English: After a while, I still followed what was written in the book.

古文：壬子，诏范延光诛张令昭部下五指挥及忠锐、忠肃两指挥。
现代文：三十日，诏令范延光诛杀张令昭部下五位指挥以及忠锐、忠肃军两位指挥。
English: On the 30th, Fan Yanguang killed the five commanders under Zhang Lingzhao, as well as the two commanders of the Zhongrui and Zhongsu armies.

古文：继范延光奏，追兵遣袭张令昭部下败兵至邢州沙河，斩首三百级，并献张令昭、邢立、李贵等首级。
现代文：接着范延光报告，派追兵袭击张令昭部下败兵到邢州沙河，斩首三百级，并献上张令昭、邢立、李贵等人的首级。
English: Next, Fan Yanguang reported that he would send a pursuit force to attack Zhang Lingzhao's defeated soldiers in Zhangzhou Shahe, beheading three hundred of them, and presenting the severed heads of Zhang Lingzhao, Zhi Li, Li Gui and others.

古文：洺州奏擒获魏府作乱捧圣指挥使马彦柔以下五十八人。邢、磁州相次擒获乱兵，并送京师。
现代文：又报告，抓获张令昭同党捧圣指挥使米全以下各指挥使都头共十三人，都在府门杀掉。氵名州上奏： 擒获魏府作乱捧圣指挥使马彦柔以下五十八人，邢州、磁州相继擒获乱兵，一并送到京师。
English: It was also reported that a total of thirteen people in the capital were killed at the gate after Zhang Lingzhao was captured with the party's commander and envoy Mai Quan. The following was reported from Ming Prefecture: Fifty-eight people under the command of Wei Prefecture were captured after the party's commander and envoy Ma Yanrou was captured after the party's commander and envoy Mai Quan was captured after the party's commander and envoy Mai Quan. They were sent to the capital together.

古文：彰圣指挥使张万迪以部下五百骑叛入太原，诏诛家属于怀州本营。
现代文：彰圣指挥使张万迪带部下五百骑兵叛入太原。 下诏在怀州本营诛杀叛军家属。
English: Commander Zhang Wandi and his 500 cavalrymen were ordered by Commander Zhang Sheng to invade Taiyuan, and the following order was issued to kill the families of the rebels at the base camp in Waizhou.

古文：八月戊午，契丹遣使摩哩入朝。
现代文：八月二日，契丹派使者梅里来朝廷。
English: On August 2, Khitan sent an envoy, Meri, to the imperial court.

古文：己未，以汴州节度使范延光为天雄军节度使、守太傅、兼中书令；以西京留守李周为汴州节度使、检校太尉、同平章事。
现代文：三日，任汴州节度使范延光为天雄军节度使、守太傅、兼中书令，任西京留守李周为汴州节度使、检校太尉、同平章事。
English: On the third day, Fan Yanguang, who was appointed as the Bozhou festival delegate, was appointed as the Tianxiong army festival delegate, the guard taifu, and the middle school secretary, and Li Zhou, who was appointed as the West Beijing stayer, was appointed as the Bozhou festival delegate, the school inspection taifu, and the peerage.

古文：癸亥，应州奏，契丹三千骑迫城。
现代文：七日，应州报告，契丹三千骑兵迫近州城。
English: On the 7th, in response to the state's report, 3,000 Khitan cavalry approached the state capital.

古文：诏端明殿学士吕琦往河东忻、代诸屯戍所犒军。
现代文：诏令端明殿学士吕琦到河东忻州、代州各屯戍地犒劳军队。
English: The imperial edict ordered Lyu Hao, a scholar of the Ming Dynasty, to go to Bozhou and Daizhou in the east of the river to reward the troops for their hard work.

古文：以左龙武大将军袁义为右监门上将军，以振武军节度使安叔千充代北兵马都部署。
现代文：任左龙武大将军袁山义为右监门上将军，任振武军节度使安叔千兼代北兵马都部署。
English: General Yuan Shanyi of the Great General Zalongwu was appointed as the superior general of the right guard gate, and General Anshu of the Zhenwu Army was appointed as the commander of the Northern Terracotta Army.

古文：己巳，云州沙彦珣奏，供奉官李让勋送夏衣到州，纵酒凌轹军都行，劫杀兵马都监张思殷、都指挥使党行进，其李让勋已处斩讫。
现代文：十二日，云州沙彦王旬报告，供奉官李让勋送夏衣到本州时，喝醉了酒凌辱军士，劫杀兵马总监张思、都指挥使党行进，李让勋已经处决。
English: On the 12th, Yunnan's Sha Yan Wang Jun reported that when the official Li Jang Xun sent Xia Yi to Honshu, he was drunk and insulted the sergeant, kidnapped and killed the director of the cavalry Zhang Si, and commanded the party to march. Li Jang Xun had been executed.

古文：张敬达奏，造五龙桥攻太原城次。
现代文：张敬达报告，造五龙桥攻打太原城。
English: Zhang Jingda reported that the five-dragon bridge was built to attack Taiyuan City.

古文：戊寅，以镇州节度使董温琪充东北面副招讨使。
现代文：二十一日，任镇州节度使董温琪兼东北面副招讨使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Dong Wenqi was appointed as the Zhenzhou Festival Envoy and the Deputy Invitation Envoy for the Northeast.

古文：己卯，洺州献野茧二十斤。
现代文：二十二日，氵名州献上二十斤野蚕茧。
English: On the 22nd, 20 catties of wild silkworm cocoons were presented by the mayor of Yunnan.

古文：辛巳，张敬达奏，贼城内出骑军三十队、步卒三千人冲长连城，高行周袭杀入壕，溺死者大半，擒贼将安小喜以下百余人，甲马一百八十匹。
现代文：二十四日，张敬达报告，敌城内出来骑兵三十队、步兵三千人连接成长阵，高行周进入城壕袭击，淹死者一大半，擒获敌将安小喜以下一百多人，甲马一百八十匹。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhang Jingda reported that thirty cavalry teams and three thousand infantry connected to a growing formation came out of the enemy city. Gao Xingzhou entered the trench attack, drowned more than half of the dead, captured more than one hundred people under the enemy general An Xiaoxi, and one hundred and eighty horses.

古文：九月甲辰，张敬达奏，此月十五日，与契丹战于太原城下，王师败绩。
现代文：九月十八日，张敬达报告，这个月十五日，与契丹在太原城下交战，我方失败了。
English: On September 18th, Zhang Jinda reported that on the 15th of this month, he and Khitan fought under Taiyuan Castle, and our side lost.

古文：时契丹主自率部族来援太原，高行周、符彦卿率左右厢骑军出斗，蕃军引退。
现代文：此时契丹主亲自率领部族来援救太原石敬瑭，高行周、符彦卿率领左右厢骑兵出战，契丹军后退。
English: At this time, the Khitan lord himself led the tribe to rescue Taiyuan Shi Jingjun, Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing led the cavalry of the left and right carriages to fight, and the Khitan army retreated.

古文：巳时后，蕃军复成列，张敬达、杨光远、安审琦等阵于贼城西北，倚山横阵，诸将奋击，蕃军屡却。
现代文：上午十时后，契丹军又排成阵列，张敬达、杨光远、安审琦等在敌城西北列阵，倚靠山势，各位将军奋勇出击，契丹军多次被击退。
English: After ten o'clock in the morning, the Khitan army lined up again. Zhang Jingda, Yang Guangyuan, An Siyuan and others lined up in the northwest of the enemy city, leaning against the mountains. The generals bravely attacked, and the Khitan army was repeatedly repulsed.

古文：至晡，我骑军将移阵，蕃军如山而进，王师大败，投兵仗相藉而死者山积。
现代文：到傍晚，我军骑兵将要转移阵地，契丹军像山一样进击，我军大败，丢弃兵器、互相挤压而死的人堆积如山。
English: By the evening, our cavalry will move their positions, the Khitan army will advance like a mountain, our army will be defeated, weapons will be discarded, and people who die by squeezing each other will pile up like a mountain.

古文：是夕，收合余众，保于晋祠南晋安寨，蕃军堑而围之，自是音闻阻绝。
现代文：这一晚，收集余下众兵，在晋祠南边晋安寨固守，契丹军挖掘堑壕围住，从此音讯隔绝。
English: That night, they gathered the remaining soldiers and held fast to Jin Anzai on the southern edge of Jinji. The Khitan army dug trenches and surrounded them, and they were cut off from all communication.

古文：朝廷大恐。
现代文：朝廷大为恐慌。
English: The imperial court panicked.

古文：是日，遣侍卫步军都指挥使符彦饶率兵屯河阳，诏范延光率兵由青山路趋榆次，诏幽州赵德钧由飞狐路出敌军后，辉州防御使潘环合防戍军出慈、隰以援张敬达。
现代文：这一天，派侍卫步军都指挥使符彦饶率兵驻守河阳，诏令范延光率兵从青山路奔赴榆次，诏令幽州赵德钧从飞狐路到敌军后方，令耀州防御使潘环会合防戍军出慈州、隰州以救援张敬达。
English: On this day, he ordered the guards and foot soldiers to be stationed in Heyang, ordered Fan Yanguang to lead the soldiers from Aoyama Road to Shiji, ordered Yuzhou Zhao Dejun from Feixiu Road to the enemy's rear, ordered the defense of Yaozhou, and sent the Panhuan Association Flood Control Army out of Cishu and Shizhou to rescue Zhang Jingda.

古文：以前绛州刺史韩彦恽为太子宾客。
现代文：任前绛州刺史韩彦恽为太子宾客。
English: The former governor of Ganzhou, Han Yanjun, was a guest of the crown prince.

古文：契丹主移帐于柳林。
现代文：契丹主转移到柳林。
English: The Khitan leader was transferred to Liulin.

古文：乙巳，诏取二十二日幸北面军前。
现代文：十九日，下诏说，准备在二十二日末帝亲临北面军前。
English: On the 19th, the next imperial edict stated that preparations would be made for the emperor to personally appear before the northern army at the end of the 22nd.

古文：戊申，帝发京师，路经徽陵，帝亲行谒奠。
现代文：二十二日，末帝从京师出发，经过徽陵，末帝亲自拜谒祭奠。
English: On the 22nd, the last emperor set out from Beijing and passed by the Imperial mausoleum. The last emperor himself paid homage to the god.

古文：夕次河阳，召群臣议进取，卢文纪劝帝驻河桥。
现代文：晚上到达河阳，召见群臣议论进军一事，卢文纪劝末帝驻在河桥。
English: In the evening, he arrived in Kheyang and summoned a group of courtiers to discuss the matter of marching into the army. Lu Wenji advised the late emperor to stay in Heqiao.

古文：庚戌，枢密使赵延寿先赴潞州。
现代文：二十四日，枢密使赵延寿先去潞州。
English: On the 24th, the confidential envoy Zhao Yanshou went to Zhangzhou first.

古文：辛亥，幸怀州。
现代文：二十五日，到怀州。
English: On the 25th, to Waizhou.

古文：召吏部侍郎龙敏访以机事，敏劝帝立东丹王赞华为契丹主，以兵援送入蕃，则契丹主有后顾之患，不能久驻汉地矣。
现代文：召见吏部侍郎龙敏询问机要大事，龙敏劝末帝立东丹王赞华为契丹主，用兵护送入契丹，则契丹主有后顾之忧，不能在汉地长久住下去。
English: Long Min, the steward of the personnel department, was summoned to inquire about important matters. Long Min advised the last emperor of the Eastern Dan Kingdom to praise the Khitan lord and escort him into Khitan with soldiers. The Khitan lord was worried about the future and could not live in Han for a long time.

古文：壬戌，诏天下括马，又诏民十户出兵一人，器甲自备。
现代文：末帝很赞同他的看法，却又不用他的计谋。末帝从此饮酒悲歌，形神沮丧。臣下劝他亲征，则说： 你们不要提到石郎，使我心胆落地。 
English: The last emperor very much agreed with his opinion, but did not use his strategy. The last emperor has been drinking sad songs ever since, and is depressed. When his vassals advised him to enlist in person, he said: "Don't mention Ishiro, it makes my heart sink.

古文：《契丹国志》：唐发民为兵，每七户出征夫一人，自备铠仗，谓之 义军 ，凡得马二千余匹，征夫五千人，民间大扰。
现代文：他害怕疲惫到这种地步。
English: He dreaded being so exhausted.

古文：戊辰，代州刺史张朗超授检校太保，以其屡杀敌众，故以是命奖之。
现代文：十月二日夜，彗星出现在虚危，一尺多长。七日，下诏在天下搜集马匹，又下诏要百姓每十户出一人当兵，自己备好武器盔甲。十三日，代州刺史张朗破格授检校太保，因他多次击杀敌众兵，所以有此任命奖励他。
English: On the night of October 2nd, a comet appeared in the sky, more than a foot long. On the 7th, an edict was issued to collect horses from all over the world, and an edict was issued to the people to send one person from every ten households to be a soldier, and to prepare their own weapons and armor. On the 13th, Zhang Lang, the governor of Daizhou, was awarded the title of inspector of schools. Because he had killed many enemy soldiers, he was rewarded with this appointment.

古文：癸酉，幽州赵德钧以本军三千骑与镇州董温琪由吴兒谷趋潞州。
现代文：十八日，幽州赵德钧带本军二千骑兵和镇州董温琪从吴儿谷前往潞州。
English: On the 18th, Yuzhou Zhao Deyu led his army of two thousand cavalrymen and Zhenzhou Dong Wenqi from Wu'er Valley to Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月戊子，以赵德钧为诸道行营都统，以赵延寿为河东道南面行营招讨使，以刘延朗副之。
现代文：十一月三日，任赵德钧为各道行营都统，任赵延寿为河东道南面行营招讨使，任刘延朗为副使。
English: On November 3rd, Zhao Deyu was appointed as the envoy for the unification of the campaigns of all provinces, Zhao Yanshou was appointed as the envoy for the southern campaign of Hedao, and Liu Yanlang was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：庚寅，以范延光为河东道东南面行营招讨使，以李周副之。
现代文：五日，任范延光为河东道东南面行营招讨使，任李周为副使。
English: On the fifth day, Fan Yanguang was appointed as the envoy to the southeast of the river, and Li Zhou was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：帝以吕琦尝佐幽州幕，乃命赍都统官告以赐德钧，兼犒军士。
现代文：末帝因吕琦曾在幽州幕中做过僚佐，便命令他带都统官文书赐给赵德钧，附带慰劳军士。
English: The last emperor ordered him to give Zhao Deyao the official document of the commander-in-chief along with a consolation prize for his service as an aide-de-camp in the Yuzhou shogunate because Lv Yao had served as an aide-de-camp.

古文：琦至，从容宣帝委任之意，德钧曰： 既以兵相委，焉敢惜死！ 
现代文：吕琦到军营，从容宣布末帝委任大意，赵德钧说： 既然将兵权托付给我，怎么敢贪生怕死！ 
English: Lv Ying went to the military camp and calmly announced the appointment of the last emperor. Zhao Deyao said: Since you have entrusted the military power to me, how dare you be greedy for life and afraid of death!

古文：德钧志在并范延光军，奏请与延光会合。
现代文：赵德钧想吞并范延光的军队，上奏请让他与范延光会合。
English: Zhao Deyu wants to annex Fan Yanguang's army, so please let him meet with Fan Yanguang.

古文：帝以诏谕延光，延光不从。
现代文：末帝下诏告诉范延光，范延光不听从。
English: The late emperor issued an edict telling Fan Yanguang that Fan Yanguang would not listen.

古文：丁酉，延州上言，节度使杨汉章为部众所杀，以前坊州刺史刘景严为延州留后。
现代文：十二日，延州上奏节度使杨汉章被部下众兵所杀，以前坊州刺史刘景岩为延州留后。
English: On the twelfth day, Yang Hanzhang was killed by his subordinates on the way to Yanzhou. Liu Jingyan, the former governor of Fangzhou, stayed behind in Yanzhou.

古文：庚子，赵德钧奏，大军至团柏谷，前锋杀蕃军五百骑。
现代文：十五日，赵德钧报告，大军到团柏谷，前锋杀契丹军五百骑兵。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao Deyu reported that a large army had arrived at Tuanba Valley, and the vanguard had killed five hundred cavalrymen of the Khitan army.

古文：范延光奏，军至榆次，蕃军退入河东川界。
现代文：范延光报告，军队到榆次，契丹军退入河东川界。
English: Fan Yanguang reported that the army had arrived in Ganzi and the Khitan army had retreated into the Hedong River area.

古文：潘环奏，隰州逐退蕃军。
现代文：潘环报告，隰州逐退契丹军。
English: Panhuan reports that the Khitan army has retreated from Ganzhou.

古文：壬寅，赵德钧奏，军出谷口，蕃军渐退，契丹主见驻柳林寨。
现代文：十七日，赵德钧报告，军队出谷口，契丹军渐渐退走，契丹主现在驻扎在柳林寨。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Deyu reported that the army had left the valley, the Khitan army had gradually retreated, and the Khitan leader was now stationed in Liulinzhai.

古文：时德钧累奏乞授延寿镇州节制，帝怒曰： 德钧父子坚要镇州，苟能逐退蕃戎，要代予位，亦甘心矣。
现代文：这时赵德钧多次上奏请求授予赵延寿镇州节制，末帝怒道： 赵德钧父子坚持要镇州，如能逐退敌兵，就是要代替我的位置，也心甘情愿。
English: At this time, Zhao Dejun repeatedly requested that Zhao Yanshou be granted zhenzhou restraint, and the late emperor angrily said: Zhao Dejun father and son insisted on zhenzhou, if they could drive away the enemy soldiers, they would replace my position, and they were willing.

古文：辛酉，以右龙武统军李从昶为左龙武统军，以前邠州节度使杨思权为右龙武统军。
现代文：若以敌人为要挟，玩弄我，只怕猎狗和野兔都会同归于尽。 赵德钧听了不高兴。闰十一月一日，冬至，群臣到行宫称贺，末帝说： 晋安寨内的将士，一定在思念家国吧。 因而久久哭泣流泪，六日，任右龙武统军李从昶为左龙武统军，任前分阝州节度使杨思权为右龙武统军。
English: If you use the enemy as a threat and play with me, I am afraid that the hunting dogs and hares will all die together. Zhao Deya was not happy to hear this. On the first day of November, the winter solstice, a group of ministers came to the palace to congratulate, and the last emperor said: "The soldiers in Jinan Village must be thinking about their home country. Therefore, they cried and shed tears for a long time. On the sixth day, Li Conglu, who was appointed as the right dragon military leader, became the left dragon military leader, and Yang Siquan, who was appointed as the right dragon military leader, became the right dragon military leader.

古文：壬戌，丹州刺史康承询停任，配流邓州。
现代文：七日，丹州刺史康承询停职，流放邓州。
English: On the 7th, Danzhou's top official, Shikang, was suspended for questioning and exiled to Danzhou.

古文：时承询奉诏率义军赴延州义军乱，承询奔鄜州，故有是责。
现代文：当时康承询奉诏率义军开往延州，义军作乱，康承询奔到鹿阝州，所以有这次处分。
English: At that time, Kangcheng led the rebel army to Yanzhou after receiving the imperial edict. The rebel army caused a disturbance, and Kangcheng rushed to Luzhou, so there was this punishment.

古文：甲子，太原行营副招讨使杨光远杀招讨使张敬达于晋安寨，以兵降契丹。
现代文：九日，太原行营副招讨使杨光远杀死招讨使张敬达于晋安寨，率兵投降契丹。
English: On the 9th, Yang Guangyuan was killed by the Taiyuan encampment sub-solicitation, and Zhang Jing reached Jin Anzhai and led the troops to surrender to the Khitan.

古文：时契丹围寨，自十一月以后刍粮乏绝，军士毁居屋茅、淘马粪、削松甗以供秣饲，马尾鬣相食俱尽。
现代文：当时契丹人包围晋安寨，从十一月以后粮草断绝，士兵毁掉住房茅草、淘马粪、削松柿来供应饲料，马尾巴以及颈脖上的毛也吃光了。
English: At that time, the Khitan besieged Jin'an Village, and after November, the grain and grass were cut off. The soldiers destroyed the houses to supply fodder with thatch, horse manure, and pine needles. The horses' tails and the hair on their necks were also eaten up.

古文：杨光远谓敬达曰： 少时人马俱尽，不如奋命血战，十得三四，犹胜坐受其弊。 
现代文：杨光远对张敬达说 ：过不多久人马都完了，不如拼命血战，十个里面活下三四个，也比坐在这里等死要强。 
English: Yang Guangyuan said to Zhang Jingda, "In a short time, all the men and horses will be gone. It is better to fight desperately. Three or four out of ten will survive. It is better than sitting here and waiting for death."

古文：敬达曰： 更少待之。 
现代文：张敬达说： 再等一会儿。 
English: Zhang Jingda said: Wait a little longer.

古文：一日，光远伺敬达无备，遂杀之，与诸将同降契丹。
现代文：一天，杨光远趁张敬达没有防备，便杀了他，和诸位将军一同投降契丹。
English: One day, Yang Guangyuan took advantage of Zhang Jingda's unpreparedness, killed him, and surrendered to the Khitan together with the generals.

古文：时马犹有五千匹，契丹主以汉军与石敬瑭，其马及甲仗即赍驱出塞。
现代文：这时战马还有五千匹，契丹主把投降汉军合并到石敬瑭军中，把马和甲仗都带往塞外。
English: At this time, there were still five thousand horses, and the Khitan lord merged the surrendering Chinese army into the Shijingshan army, and took the horses and armored vehicles out of the country.

古文：丁卯，契丹立石敬瑭为大晋皇帝，约为父子之国，改元为天福。
现代文：十二日，契丹主立石敬瑭为大晋皇帝，约定为父子之国，改元为天福。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the Khitan ruler, Shi Jianqian, became the emperor of Dajin, which was designated as the father and son's country, and the era name was changed to Tianfu.

古文：契丹与晋高祖南行，赵德钧父子与诸将自团柏谷南奔，王师为蕃骑所蹙，投戈弃甲，自相腾践，挤于岩谷者不可胜纪。
现代文：契丹主与晋高祖石敬瑭一同南行，赵德钧父子和各位将军从团柏谷南逃，唐军被契丹骑兵所围困，投戈弃甲，自相践踏，拥挤掉到岩谷以下的人不可计数。
English: The Khitan lord went south together with the ancestor of Jingu Gao, Jing Yi. Zhao Deyu, his son and other generals fled from the southern part of the Bago Valley. The Tang army was besieged by the Khitan cavalry, abandoned, trampled on each other, and the number of people who fell into the valley below was incalculable.

古文：己巳，帝闻晋安寨为敌所陷，诏移幸河阳，时议以魏府军尚全，契丹必惮山东，未敢南下，车驾可幸鄴城。
现代文：十四日，末帝听说晋安寨被敌人攻陷，下诏转移到河阳，当时议论认为魏府军队还完备，契丹主必然害怕山东，不敢南下，皇上可以到邺城。
English: On the 14th, the last emperor heard that Jin Anzhai had been captured by the enemy and was transferred to Heyang. At that time, it was argued that the Wei army was still complete, the Khitan lord must be afraid of Shandong and did not dare to go south, and the emperor could go to Lucheng.

古文：帝以李崧与范延光相善，召入谋之。
现代文：末帝因李崧和范延光关系好，召李崧前来相谋。
English: Because of the good relationship between Li Qiye and Fan Yanguang, the last emperor summoned Li Qiye to come and conspire.

古文：薛文遇不知而继至，帝变色，崧蹑文遇足，乃出。
现代文：薛文遇不知道而跟着来到，末帝脸色大变，李崧暗地踩薛文遇的脚，薛文遇才出去。
English: Xue Wen Rong didn't know and followed him. The emperor's face changed dramatically. Li Yao secretly stepped on Xue Wen Rong's foot. Xue Wen Rong then went out.

古文：帝曰： 我见此物肉颤，适拟抽刀刺之。 
现代文：末帝说： 我看见这个东西就发抖，正想拔刀杀了他。 
English: "When I saw this thing, I started to tremble and was about to draw my sword to kill it," he said.

古文：崧曰： 文遇小人，致误大事，刺之益丑。 
现代文：李崧说 ：薛文遇是个小人，以致误了大事，杀他更加不好。 
English: Li Wei said: Xue Wenyu is a villain, so he missed a big event, and it's even worse to kill him.

古文：崧因请帝归京。
现代文：李崧因而请末帝回京城。
English: Li Gan therefore invited the late emperor to return to the capital.

古文：壬申，车驾至河阳。
现代文：十七日，末帝车驾到河阳。
English: On the 17th, the last car drove to Heyang.

古文：甲戌，晋高祖与契丹至潞州，契丹遣蕃将大详衮率五千骑送晋高祖南行。
现代文：十九日，晋高祖和契丹主到潞州，契丹主派契丹将军大相温率五千骑兵护送晋高祖南行。
English: On the 19th, Jin Gaozu and the Khitan lord went to Zhangzhou. The Khitan lord sent General Qidan with 5,000 cavalrymen to escort Jin Gaozu southward.

古文：丁丑，车驾至自河阳。
现代文：二十二日，车驾从河阳来到。
English: On the 22nd, the car came from Hayao.

古文：时左右劝帝固守河阳。
现代文：当时左右近臣劝末帝固守河阳。
English: At that time, close advisers on both sides advised the last emperor to hold fast to Kawayo.

古文：居数日，符彦饶、张彦琪至，奏帝不可城守。
现代文：过了几天，符彦饶、张彦琪来到，对末帝说不可据城固守。
English: A few days later, Fuhiko Rao and Zhang Yanqi arrived and told the late emperor that he should not hold on to the castle.

古文：是日晚，至东上门，小黄门鸣鞘于路，索然无声。
现代文：这一天晚上，到东上门，小宦官在路上甩动鞭梢，竟索然无声。
English: On this night, on the way to Dongshengmen, the little eunuch flicked his whip on the road, but there was no sound.

古文：己卯，帝遣马军都指挥使宋审虔率千余骑至白马坡，言踏阵地，时诸将谓审虔曰： 何地不堪交战，谁人肯立于此？ 
现代文：二十四日，末帝派马军都指挥使宋审虔率一千多骑兵到白马坡，勘察阵地，此时各位将军对宋审虔说 ：哪里不可以交战，何必要在这里？ 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the last emperor sent the horse army to command Song Xianqian to lead more than a thousand cavalry to Baima slope and survey the position. At this time, the generals said to Song Xianqian: Where can we not fight, why is it necessary here?

古文：审虔乃请帝还宫。
现代文：宋审虔便请末帝回宫。
English: Song Qianqian then invited the late emperor to return to the palace.

古文：庚辰，晋高祖至河阳。
现代文：二十五日，晋高祖到河阳。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Emperor Gaozong went to Heyang.

古文：辛巳辰时，帝举族与皇太后曹氏自燔于元武楼。
现代文：二十六日上午八时，末帝率全族人和太后曹氏在玄武楼自焚。
English: At eight o'clock in the morning on the 26th, the last emperor led the whole nation and the Empress Dowager Cao to self-immolate in the Xuanwu Building.

古文：晋高祖入洛，得帝烬骨于火中，来年三月，诏葬于徽陵之封中。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳，在火中得到末帝骨灰，第二年三月，下诏葬在徽陵的墓中。
English: Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang, obtained the ashes of the last emperor in the fire, and was buried in the tomb of Hui Mausoleum in March of the following year.

古文：帝在位共二年，年五十二。
现代文：末帝在位共二年，五十二岁。
English: The last emperor reigned for a total of two years and was 52 years old.

