古文：起强圉大渊献，尽屠维赤奋若，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：世祖光武皇帝上之下建武三年
现代文：汉光武帝建武三年
English: Han Guangwu Emperor Jianwu three years

古文：春，正月，甲子，冯异为征西大将军。
现代文：春季，正月甲子，刘秀任命冯异为征西大将军。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Liu Xiu appointed Feng Yi as the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：邓禹惭于受任无功，数以饥卒徼赤眉战，辄不利；乃率车骑将军邓弘等自河北度至湖，要冯异共攻赤眉。
现代文：邓禹对于自己身受重任而没有功劳感到惭愧，多次用饥饿的士卒去攻击赤眉军，却总是打败仗。于是他率领车骑将军邓弘等通过河北县抵达湖县，邀冯异和他一起攻打赤眉。
English: Deng Yu felt ashamed that he had taken on a heavy task without merit, and repeatedly used hungry soldiers to attack the Red Eyebrows, but always lost the battle. So he led the cavalry general Deng Hong and others through Hebei County to arrive in Huxian, and invited Feng Ying to attack the Red Eyebrows with him.

古文：异曰： 异与贼相拒数十日，虽虏获雄将，馀众尚多，可稍以恩信倾诱，难卒用兵破也。
现代文：冯异说： 我同赤眉对抗数十天，虽然俘虏了他们的干将，但剩下的人数还很多。可逐渐用恩德信义动摇引诱他们，很难一下子就用武力打败。
English: Feng Yin said: I have been fighting against the Red Eyebrows for dozens of days. Although I have captured their leaders, there are still a lot of people left. They can be gradually lured by the swaying of loyalty and loyalty, and it is difficult to defeat them by force at once.

古文：上今使诸将屯渑池，要其东，而异击其西，一举取之，此万成计也！ 
现代文：现在皇上派将领们屯驻在渑池，威胁赤眉的东翼，而我攻打赤眉的西翼，一举消灭他们，这是万全之计！ 
English: Now the emperor has stationed generals in Longchi, threatening the east wing of the Red Eyebrows, and I am attacking the west wing of the Red Eyebrows, eliminating them at one stroke. This is a perfect plan!

古文：禹、弘不从，弘遂大战移日。
现代文：邓禹、邓弘不接受冯异的主张。
English: Deng Yu and Deng Hong do not accept Feng Yi's claim.

古文：赤眉阳败，弃辎重走；车皆载土，以豆覆其上，兵士饥，争取之。
现代文：于是邓弘同赤眉军大战了一整天。赤眉假装战败，丢弃辎重逃走。辎重车上装的全是土，用豆子覆盖在最上面。邓弘的士卒饥饿，争着去取豆子。
English: So Deng Hong fought with the Red Eyebrows for a whole day. The Red Eyebrows pretended to be defeated and fled, abandoning the cart. The cart was loaded with earth and covered with beans on the top. Deng Hong's soldiers were hungry and fought to get the beans.

古文：赤眉引还，击弘，弘军溃乱；异与禹合兵救之，赤眉小却。
现代文：赤眉军乘机返回，攻打邓弘，邓弘的军队大乱。冯异和邓禹联合起来救助邓弘，赤眉军稍稍退却。
English: The Red Eyebrows took the opportunity to return and attack Deng Hong. Deng Hong's army was in chaos. Feng Ying and Deng Yu joined forces to rescue Deng Hong. The Red Eyebrows retreated slightly.

古文：异以士卒饥倦，可且休。
现代文：冯异认为士兵们又饿又累，应该暂且休息。
English: Feng Yin thought that the soldiers were hungry and tired and should take a break.

古文：禹不听，复战，大为所败，死伤者三千馀人，禹以二十四骑脱归宜阳。
现代文：邓禹不听，又去交战，被赤眉打得大败，死伤三千余人。邓禹带着二十四名骑兵逃出战场回到宜阳。
English: Deng Yu did not listen, and went to fight again. He was soundly defeated by the Red Eyebrows, and more than three thousand people were killed and wounded. Deng Yu fled the battlefield with twenty-four cavalrymen and returned to Yiyang.

古文：异弃马步走，上回溪孤，与麾下数人归营，收其散卒，复坚壁自守。
现代文：冯异抛弃战马奔逃，上了回阪，和部下数人回到营寨，招集离散的士兵，重新固垒自保。
English: Feng Yixin abandoned his horse and ran away, went to Huizhan, and returned to the camp with several of his subordinates, called up scattered soldiers, and re-fortified the base for self-protection.

古文：辛巳，立四亲庙于雒阳，祀父南顿君以上至春陵节候。
现代文：辛巳，刘秀在洛阳建立四亲祭庙。祭祀父亲南顿君，往上直到高祖父舂陵节侯。
English: Soon after, Liu Xiu established the Four Parents' Festival Temple in Luoyang. The father, Nantong Jun, was worshipped until his great-grandfather, Fuling Festival.

古文：壬午，大赦。
现代文：壬午，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：闰月，乙巳，邓禹上大司徒、梁侯印绶；诏还梁侯印绶，以为右将军。
现代文：闰月乙巳，邓禹呈上大司徒、梁侯的印信绶带。刘秀下诏还给邓禹梁侯的印信绶带，任命他为右将军。
English: On the second day of the leap month, Deng Yu presented the imperial seal sash of the Grand Prince and the Prince of Liang. Liu Xiu returned the imperial seal sash of the Prince of Liang to Deng Yu and appointed him as the right general.

古文：冯异与赤眉约期会战，使壮士变服与赤眉同，伏于道侧。
现代文：冯异同赤眉军定好日期会战。他挑选精壮的士兵，让他们改换服装，穿戴和赤眉军一样，在路边埋伏下来。
English: Feng Yixing and the Red Eyebrows set a date for the battle. He selected strong soldiers, let them change their clothes, dressed like the Red Eyebrows, and ambushed them on the roadside.

古文：旦日，赤眉使万人攻异前部，异少出兵以救之；贼见势弱，遂悉众攻异，异乃纵兵大战。
现代文：第二天，赤眉派出一万人攻击冯异军的前部，冯异出动少数军队救援。赤眉见冯异军势弱，于是全军进攻冯异，冯异这才发兵同赤眉军大战。
English: The next day, Red Eyebrow sent ten thousand men to attack the front of Feng Yi's army, and Feng Yi sent a small number of troops to rescue them. Red Eyebrow saw that Feng Yi's army was weak, so the whole army attacked Feng Yi. It was only then that Feng Yi sent troops to fight the Red Eyebrow army.

古文：日昃，贼气衰，伏兵卒起，衣服相乱，赤眉不复识别，众遂惊溃；追击，大破之于崤底，降男女八万人。
现代文：到太阳偏西，赤眉军士气衰落，路边的伏兵突然杀出来，因衣服混杂，赤眉军不能再辨别谁是自己人，于是惊恐溃散。冯异军追击，在崤底大败赤眉军，收降赤眉军男女八万人。
English: To the west of the sun, the morale of the Red Eyebrows army declined, the roadside ambush suddenly came out, and because of the mixed clothes, the Red Eyebrows army could no longer distinguish who was their own, so they panicked and dispersed. Feng Yi's army pursued and defeated the Red Eyebrows army in Loudi, and the Red Eyebrows army of 80,000 men and women surrendered.

古文：帝降玺书劳异曰： 始虽垂翅回溪，终能奋翼渑池，可谓失之东隅，收之桑榆。
现代文：刘秀下诏书慰劳冯异说： 你虽然开始时在回阪垂下翅膀，但最终能在渑池奋起双翼。可以说早上在东方丢了东西，晚上在西方找回来。
English: Liu Xiu sent a message of consolation to Feng Ying, saying: Although you initially hung your wings in Huizhan, you were eventually able to raise your wings in Dianchi. It can be said that you lost something in the east in the morning and found it back in the west in the evening.

古文：方论功赏，以答大勋。 
现代文：正在为你论功行赏，以报答你卓越的功勋。 
English: We are discussing a merit award to reward you for your great service.

古文：赤眉馀众东向宜阳。
现代文：赤眉军残部向东方的宜阳移动。
English: The remnants of the Red Eyebrows moved east to Yiyang.

古文：甲辰，帝亲勒六军，严阵以待之。
现代文：甲辰，刘秀亲率大军，严阵以待。
English: Jiachen, Liu Xiu's relatives led a large army, waiting in line.

古文：赤眉忽遇大军，惊震不知所谓，乃遣刘恭乞降曰： 盆子将百万众降陛下，何以待之？ 
现代文：赤眉突然遇到大军，震惊得不知所措。于是，刘盆子派刘恭向刘秀乞降，说： 我率领百万部众投降陛下，陛下怎样对待呢？ 
English: Red-brow suddenly encountered a large army, shocked and overwhelmed. Therefore, Liu Bonzi sent Liu Gong to Liu Xiu to beg for surrender, saying: I led a million people to surrender to His Majesty, how did His Majesty treat me?

古文：帝曰： 待汝以不死耳！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 饶恕你不死罢了！ 
English: Liu Xiu said: Forgive me for not letting you die!

古文：丙午，盆子及丞相徐宣以下三十馀人肉袒降，上所得传国玺绶。
现代文：丙午，刘盆子和丞相徐宣及以下三十余人袒露出臂膀投降，献出所得的传国玉玺和绶带。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Liu Bonzi, the prime minister Xu Xuan and more than 30 people who followed them showed their arms and surrendered, and presented the national jade bracelet and ribbon.

古文：积兵甲宜阳城西，与熊耳山齐。
现代文：赤眉的兵器堆积在宜阳城西，和熊耳山一样高。
English: The captured weapons are piled up in the west of Yiyang City, as high as Mount Xiong'er.

古文：赤眉众尚十馀万人，帝令县厨皆赐食。
现代文：赤眉部众还有十余万人，刘秀命令宜阳县厨房赐给所有的人食物。
English: Liu Xiu ordered the kitchen of Yiyang County to give food to all the people.

古文：明旦，大陈兵马临雒水，令盆子君臣列而观之。
现代文：第二天，刘秀在洛水边陈列大军，命刘盆子君臣排队观看。
English: The next day, Liu Xiu displayed a large army at the water's edge of Luo, and ordered Liu Bon Zi's princes and ministers to line up to watch.

古文：帝谓樊崇等曰： 得无悔降乎？
现代文：刘秀对樊崇等人说： 该不会后悔投降吧？
English: Liu Xiu said to Yu Chong and others, "Shouldn't we regret surrendering?

古文：朕今遣卿归营，勒兵鸣鼓相攻，决其胜负，不俗强相服也。 
现代文：我今天送你们回营，统率军队鸣起战鼓再战，一决胜负。不想强迫你们服输。 
English: Today, I am sending you back to the camp, leading the army to sound the war drum and fight again to decide the outcome. I don't want to force you to accept defeat.

古文：徐宣等叩头曰： 臣等出长安东都门，君臣计议，归命圣德。
现代文：徐宣等叩头说： 我们走出长安东都门，君臣商议，要把自己的生命交给陛下。
English: Xu Xuan and others kowtowed and said, "As we walk out of the Chang'an Dongdu Gate, the monarchs and courtiers are discussing whether to give their lives to His Majesty.

古文：百姓可与乐成，难与图始，故不告众耳。
现代文：可以和百姓同享受成果，难以和他们同谋开端，所以没有告诉众人。
English: The people can rejoice with them after the event, but at the beginning it was difficult to conspire with him, so we did not tell the masses in advance.

古文：今日得降，犹去虎口归慈母，诚欢诚喜，无所恨也！ 
现代文：今天能够投降，就像离开虎口，回到慈母的怀抱，确实欢乐欣喜，没有什么可遗憾的！ 
English: To be able to surrender today is like leaving the clutches of the tiger and returning to the embrace of a loving mother. It is truly joyful, and there is nothing to regret!

古文：帝曰： 卿所谓铁中铮铮，亻庸中佼佼者也。 
现代文：刘秀说： 你就是所谓铁中的刚利部分，凡人中的出类拔萃者！ 
English: Liu Xiu said: You are the so-called iron part of the iron, the outstanding person among mortals!

古文：戊申，还自宜阳。
现代文：戊申，刘秀从宜阳返回洛阳。
English: Wushin, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang from Yiyang.

古文：帝令樊崇等各与妻子居雒阳，赐之田宅。
现代文：他让樊崇等人各自偕妻子儿女住在洛阳，赐给他们田地和住宅。
English: He let Gong Chong and others live with their wives and children in Luoyang, and gave them fields and houses.

古文：其后樊崇、逢安反，诛；杨音、徐宣卒于乡里。
现代文：后来樊崇、逢安谋反，被诛杀。杨音、徐宣在他们的故乡去世。
English: Later, Gong Chong and Fang An plotted a rebellion and were killed. Yang Yin and Xu Xuan passed away in their hometown.

古文：帝怜盆子，以为赵王郎中；后病失明，赐荥阳均输官地，使食其税终身。
现代文：刘秀可怜刘盆子，任命他当赵王刘良的郎中。后来刘盆子患病，双目失明，刘秀把荥阳均输官掌握的国有土地赏赐给他，使他终身以收取地租为生。
English: Liu Xiu took pity on Liu Bonzi and appointed him to be the son-in-law of Zhao Wang Liu Liang. Later, Liu Bonzi fell ill and lost his eyesight. Liu Xiu rewarded him with the state-owned land owned by the official in charge of transportation in Fenyang, so that he could make a living by collecting land rent for life.

古文：刘恭为更始报仇，杀谢禄，自系狱；帝赦不诛。
现代文：刘恭替刘玄报仇，杀了谢禄，自己投入临狱。
English: Liu Gong took revenge for Liu Xuan, killed Xie Lu, and was himself sent to prison.

古文：二月，刘永立董宪为海西王。
现代文：刘秀赦免了他，不予诛杀。二月，刘永封董宪为海西王。
English: Liu Xiu pardoned him and did not have him killed. In February, Liu Yongfeng crowned Dong Xian as the King of the West Sea.

古文：永闻伏隆至剧，亦遣使立张步为齐王。
现代文：刘永听说伏隆到达剧县，便也派遣使者封张步为齐王。
English: When Liu Yong heard that Fulong had arrived in Yunxian County, he also sent an envoy to seal Zhangbu as the King of Qi.

古文：步贪王爵，犹豫未决。
现代文：张步贪图王爵，犹豫不决。
English: Zhang Bu coveted the crown and hesitated.

古文：隆晓譬曰： 高祖与天下约，非刘氏不王；今可得为十万户侯耳！ 
现代文：伏隆解释说： 高祖曾向天下规定，除刘姓皇族外不能封王爵，现在你仅能成为做十万户侯罢了！ 
English: Furlong explained: Gao Zu once stipulated to the world that no one except the Liu royal family could be given the title of prince, but now you can only become the lord of a hundred thousand households!

古文：步欲留隆，与共守二州；隆不听，求得反命，步遂执隆而受永封。
现代文：张步想留下伏隆，与他共同据守青、徐二州。伏隆不同意，要求能返回洛阳报告情况。于是张步拘捕伏隆而接受刘永的封爵。
English: Zhang Bu wanted to keep Furlong, and together with him they held Qing and Xu Erzhou. Furlong disagreed, demanding to be able to return to Luoyang to report the situation. So Zhang Bu arrested Furlong and accepted Liu Yong's knighthood.

古文：隆遣间使上书曰： 臣隆奉使无状，受执凶逆；虽在困厄，授命不顾。
现代文：伏隆派密使上书说： 我奉命出使，不能完成使命，被叛逆拘捕，处于险境。
English: Furong sent an envoy with a letter saying, "I have been ordered to go on a mission, but I cannot complete it. I have been arrested as a traitor, and I am in danger.

古文：又，吏民知步反畔，心不附之，愿以时进兵，无以臣隆为念！
现代文：我虽然身处艰难窘迫之中，但为完成陛下授予的使命，即使牺牲生命，也在所不惜。再有，官民们知道张步叛变，民心不能归附。希望陛下及时进军，不要顾念我。
English: Although I am in a difficult predicament, I am willing to sacrifice my life to complete the mission entrusted to me by His Majesty. Moreover, the government and the people know about Zhang Bu's mutiny, and the people's hearts cannot be won over. I hope that His Majesty will march into battle in time, and not think about me.

古文：臣隆得生到阙廷，受诛有司，此其大愿。
现代文：我能够活着回到朝廷，被主管官吏诛杀，这是我最大的愿望。
English: It is my greatest wish that I can return to the imperial court alive and be killed by the officials in charge.

古文：若令没身寇手，以父母、昆弟长累陛下。
现代文：假如我死于叛贼之手，就把父母兄弟长期托付给陛下。
English: If I die at the hands of a traitor, I entrust my parents and brothers to Your Majesty for a long time.

古文：陛下与皇后、太子永享万国，与天无极！ 
现代文：祝福陛下和皇后、太子永远享受万国的拥戴，同上天一样无穷无尽！ 
English: May His Majesty, the Empress, and the Crown Prince forever enjoy the support of all nations, which is as endless as the sky above!

古文：帝得隆奏，召其父湛，流涕示之曰： 恨不且许而遽求还也！ 
现代文：刘秀得到伏隆的奏书，召见他的父亲伏湛，流着眼泪把奏书拿给他看，说： 我恨不得暂且许诺张步封王而马上求得伏隆返回！ 
English: Liu Xiu got Furlong's playbook, summoned his father, Futan, showed him the playbook with tears, and said, "I can't wait to temporarily promise Zhangbu to the king and immediately ask Furlong to return!"

古文：其后步遂杀之。
现代文：后来，张步终于杀了伏隆。
English: Later, Zhang Bu finally killed Furlong.

古文：帝方北忧渔阳，南事梁、楚，故张步得专集齐地，据郡十二焉。
现代文：当时，刘秀北方担心渔阳，南方担心梁国、楚国，所以张步能够独霸齐地，占据十二个郡。
English: At that time, Liu Xiu was worried about Yuyang in the north and about Liang and Chu in the south, so Zhang Bu was able to dominate the country, occupying twelve counties.

古文：帝幸怀。
现代文：刘秀到达怀县。
English: Liu Xiu arrives in Huai County.

古文：吴汉率耿弇、盖延击青犊于轵西，大破降之。
现代文：吴汉率领耿、盖延在轵县西攻打青犊军，大破青犊军并使之归降。
English: Wu Han, led by Geng and Gai Yan, attacked the Qinghan army in the west of Handan County, defeated the Qinghan army and forced it to surrender.

古文：三月，壬寅，以司直伏湛为大司徒。
现代文：三月壬寅，刘秀提拔司直伏湛当大司徒。
English: In March, Liu Jinyin and Liu Xiu promoted Zhifu Zhan to be the chief disciple.

古文：涿郡太守张丰反，自称天上大将军，与彭宠连兵。
现代文：涿郡太守张丰反叛，自称无上大将军，和彭宠的军队联合起来。
English: Zhang Feng, the governor of Qian County, rebelled, claimed to be the supreme general, and united with Peng Cang's army.

古文：硃浮以帝不自征彭宠，上疏求救。
现代文：朱浮因为刘秀不亲自讨伐彭宠，向刘秀上书求援。
English: Zhu Fu, because Liu Xiu did not personally fight against Peng Ji, sent a letter to Liu Xiu for help.

古文：诏报曰： 往年赤眉跋扈长安，吾策其无谷必东；果来归附。
现代文：刘秀下诏回答说： 去年赤眉军在长安飞扬跋扈，我叛定他们在没有粮食的时候一定向东撤。后果然前来归顺。
English: Liu Xiu replied, "Last year, the Red Eyed Army was in full swing in Chang'an. I determined that they would retreat to the east when there was no food. As a result, they came to surrender.

古文：今度此反虏，势无久全，其中必有内相斩者。
现代文：现在估计这些叛逆，势必不能长期保全，他们内部一定会出现互相斩杀的情况。
English: Now that this counter-capture is expected, the situation cannot last for long. Someone within the bandits must behead the bandits.

古文：今军资未充，故须后麦耳！ 
现代文：现在我军的军事物资不充足，所以要等小麦收割以后才行。 
English: Now our army's military supplies are insufficient, so we have to wait until after the wheat harvest.

古文：浮城中粮尽，人相食，会耿况遣骑来救，浮乃得脱身走，蓟城遂降于彭宠。
现代文：朱浮所在的蓟城粮食吃尽，出现了人吃人的现象，正赶上耿况派骑兵来救援，朱浮才能够脱身逃跑。于是蓟城向彭宠投降。
English: Zhu Fuxing, who was in Lucheng, ran out of food, and there was a man-eating phenomenon. Geng Jiao sent cavalry to rescue Zhu Fuxing just in time, and Zhu Fuxing was able to escape. So Lucheng surrendered to Peng Jia.

古文：宠自称燕王，攻拔右北平、上谷数县，赂遣匈奴，借兵为助；又南结张步及富平、获索诸贼，皆与交通。
现代文：彭宠自称为燕王，进攻夺取右北平、上谷的几个县。他还送礼物贿赂北方的匈奴，向匈奴借兵作为援军，又向南结交张步及富平、获索各路贼军，与他们全都建立了联系。
English: Peng Jia, calling himself the King of Swallows, attacked and captured several counties in the right Beiping and Shangguan. He also sent gifts to bribe the Huns in the north, borrowed soldiers from the Huns as reinforcements, and made friends with Zhangbu and Fuping in the south, and won the support of various thieves, and established contacts with them all.

古文：帝自将征邓奉，至堵阳。
现代文：刘秀亲自率军讨伐邓奉，抵达堵阳。
English: Liu Xiu personally led the army to fight Deng Bong and arrived in Doyang.

古文：奉逃归淯阳，董降。
现代文：邓奉逃回阳，董投降。
English: Deng Feng fled back to Yang, and Dong surrendered.

古文：夏，四月，帝追奉至小长安，与战，大破之；奉肉袒因硃祜降。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘秀追击邓奉到小长安，同邓奉交战，大败邓奉。因朱祜从中调和，邓奉露出臂膀投降。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu chased Deng Bong to Xiaochang'an, fought with Deng Bong, and defeated Deng Bong. As Zhu Xi mediated, Deng Bong exposed his arms and surrendered.

古文：帝怜奉旧功臣，且衅起吴汉，欲全宥之。
现代文：刘秀怜惜邓奉是功臣故旧，而且反叛是因吴汉所逼，想要保全宽恕他。
English: Guangwu pity Deng Bong is an old hero, and he rebelled because the Wu and Han officials and soldiers violated the people and wanted to pardon him.

古文：岑彭、耿弇谏曰： 邓奉背恩反逆，暴师经年，陛下既至，不知悔善，而亲在行陈，兵败乃降；若不诛奉，无以惩恶！ 
现代文：岑彭、耿进谏说： 邓奉背叛恩主，起兵叛变，一连几年残暴掳掠。陛下亲征抵达堵阳，他不知悔过从善，反而亲自上阵和您交战，打败了才被迫投降。如果不杀邓奉，就不能惩办邪恶。 
English: Gong Peng and Geng Jinqi said, "Deng Feng betrayed his benefactor, started a mutiny, and brutally plundered and pillaged for several years in a row. His Majesty himself arrived in Doyang as a conscript. He never regretted doing good, but instead personally went to war with you, and was defeated before being forced to surrender. If you don't kill Deng Feng, you can't punish evil.

古文：于是斩之。复硃祜位。
现代文：于是，斩邓奉，恢复朱祜的官职。
English: As a result, Deng Bong was beheaded, and Zhu Xi's official position was restored.

古文：延岑既破赤眉，即拜置牧守，欲据关中。
现代文：延岑打败赤眉军以后，即刻任命州牧郡守等官职，打算占据关中。
English: After Yancheng defeated the Red Eyebrows, he immediately appointed officials such as the governor of Shumu County, intending to occupy Guanzhong.

古文：时关中众寇犹盛，岑据蓝田，王歆据下邽，芳丹据新丰，蒋震据霸陵，张邯据长安，公孙守据长陵，杨周据谷口，吕鲔据陈仓，角闳据汧，骆延据盩厔，任良据雩阝，汝章据槐里，各称将军，拥兵多者万馀人，少者数千人，转相攻击。
现代文：当时关中地区各路盗贼气势还很旺盛。延岑占据蓝田，王歆占据下，芳丹占据新丰，蒋震占据霸陵，张邯占据长安，公孙守占据长陵，杨周占据谷口，吕鲔占据陈仓，角闳占据，骆延占据，任良占据，汝章占据槐里。他们各称将军，拥有士兵，多的一万余人，少的数千人，各军之间互相攻击。
English: At that time, the thieves of all roads in Guanzhong area were still very vigorous. Yan Xun occupied Lantian, Wang Qian occupied the bottom, Fang Dan occupied Xinfeng, Jiang Zhen occupied the bully, Zhang Qian occupied Chang'an, Gong Sun Gu occupied Changling, Yang Zhou occupied Taniguchi, Lyu Qian occupied Chen Cang, Jiao Qian occupied, Luo Yan occupied, Ren Liang occupied, Ru Zhang occupied Baoli. They were each called generals, had soldiers, more than ten thousand people, less thousands of people, and the armies attacked each other.

古文：冯异且战且行，屯军上林苑中。
现代文：冯异一边作战，一边向前推进，军队屯驻于上林苑中。
English: Feng Yi fought on one side and advanced on the other side. The army was stationed in Shanglinyuan Middle.

古文：延岑引张邯、任良共攻异；异击，大破之，诸营保附岑者皆来降，岑遂自武关走南阳。
现代文：延岑联合张邯、任良一起攻打冯异，冯异迎击，大败延岑等联军，归附延岑的营垒都来投降冯异，延岑于是从武关向南阳逃跑。
English: Yancheng allied with Zhang Ye and Ren Liang to attack Feng Yi, Feng Yi counterattacked, defeated Yancheng and other allied forces, and the camp attached to Yancheng surrendered to Feng Yi. Yancheng then fled from Wuguan to Nanyang.

古文：时百姓饥饿，黄金一斤易豆五升，道路断隔，委输不至，冯异军士悉以果实为粮。
现代文：当时百姓饥饿，用一斤黄金才换五升豆子。道路断绝，运送的粮食不能到达，冯异的士兵都以果实充饥。
English: At that time, the people were starving, and one kilo of gold was exchanged for five litres of beans. Roads were cut off, and the grain could not be delivered, so Fengyi's soldiers fed themselves with fruit.

古文：诏拜南阳赵匡为右扶风，将兵助异，并送缣、谷。
现代文：刘秀下诏任命南阳人赵匡当右扶风，率军协助冯异，并运送绢帛、粮食。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict appointing Zhao Kuang from Nanyang as the right-hand man, leading the army to assist Feng Yi, and transporting straw and grain.

古文：异兵谷渐盛，乃稍诛击豪杰不从令者，褒赏降附有功劳者，悉遣诸营渠帅诣京师，散其众归本业，威行关中。
现代文：冯异的军队逐渐强盛，粮食渐渐充足，于是逐步诛杀打击不服从命令的豪强，褒扬奖赏归降有功劳的人，把各营寨的首领全都送到洛阳，遣散他们的徒众，使徒众回到各自本来的行业，冯异威振关中。
English: Feng Yiyi's army gradually became stronger, and food became more plentiful. Therefore, he gradually killed and cracked down on those who disobeyed orders, praised and rewarded those who returned with merits, sent all the leaders of each camp to Luoyang, dismissed their disciples, and sent the apostles back to their original professions, Feng Yiyi and Zhenguan.

古文：唯吕鲔、张邯、蒋震遣使降蜀，其馀悉平。
现代文：只有吕鲔、张邯、蒋震派出使者投降了占据西蜀的公孙述，其余全部平定。
English: Only Lv Ying, Zhang Ye, and Jiang Zhen sent envoys to surrender to Gongsun Su, who occupied West Shuxi, and the rest were all pacified.

古文：吴汉率骠骑大将军杜茂等七将军，围苏茂于广乐，周建招集得十馀万人救之。
现代文：吴汉率领骠骑大将军杜茂等七位将军在广乐包围苏茂。周建招集到十余万人援救苏茂。
English: Wu Han led seven generals, including the cavalry general Du Mao, to surround Sumo in Guangle. Zhou Jian called up more than one hundred thousand people to rescue Sumo.

古文：汉迎与之战，不利，堕马伤膝，还营；建等遂连兵入城。
现代文：吴汉迎战周建，不能取胜，从马上摔下，膝盖受伤，回到大营。于是周建等带兵进城。
English: Wu Han fought against Zhou Jian, could not win, fell off his horse, injured his knee, and returned to the camp. So Zhou Jian and other soldiers entered the city.

古文：诸将谓汉曰： 大敌在前，而公伤卧，众心惧矣！ 
现代文：将领们对吴汉说： 大敌当前，而您受伤躺在床上，大家心里感到恐惧。 
English: The generals said to Wu Han: The great enemy is present, and you are lying injured on the bed, and everyone feels fear in their hearts.

古文：汉乃勃然裹创而起，椎牛飨士，慰勉之，士气自倍。
现代文：吴汉于是包扎伤口，勃然而起，杀牛犒劳战士，慰问勉励他们，军中士气倍增。
English: Wu Han then bandaged the wound and got an erection, slaughtered the overworked soldiers, consoled and encouraged them, and the morale of the sergeants doubled.

古文：旦日，苏茂、周建出兵围汉；汉奋击，大破之，茂走还湖陵。
现代文：第二天，苏茂、周建出兵包围吴汉，吴汉奋力反击，大败敌军。苏茂逃回湖陵。
English: The next day, Sumo and Zhou Jian sent troops to surround Wu Han. Wu Han fought back and defeated the enemy. Sumo fled back to Huling.

古文：睢阳人反城迎刘永，盖延率诸将围之；吴汉留杜茂、陈俊守广乐，自将兵助延围睢阳。
现代文：这时，睢阳人在城内叛乱，迎接刘永进城。东汉大将盖延率众将领包围睢阳。吴汉留下杜茂、陈俊守卫广乐，自己带兵协助盖延包围睢阳。
English: At this time, the people of Shenyang rebelled in the city and welcomed Liu Yong into the city. Eastern Han Dynasty General Gaien led the generals to encircle Shenyang. Wu Han left Du Mao and Chen Jun to guard Guangle, and led his own soldiers to assist Gaien to encircle Shenyang.

古文：车驾自小长安引还，令岑彭率傅俊、臧宫、刘宏等三万馀人南击秦丰。
现代文：刘秀从小长安率军返回。命令岑彭率领傅俊、臧宫、刘宏等三万余人向南攻打秦丰。
English: Liu Xiu returned from Xiaochang'an leading an army, and ordered more than 30,000 people, including Fu Jun, Gong Gong, and Liu Hong, led by Nie Peng, to attack Qinfeng to the south.

古文：五月，己酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：五月己酉，刘秀回到洛阳皇宫。
English: In May, Liu Xiu returned to the Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：乙卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：乙卯晦，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：六月，壬戌，大赦。
现代文：六月壬戌，大赦天下。
English: In June, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：延岑攻南阳，得数城；建威大将军耿弇与战于穰，大破之。
现代文：延岑进攻南阳，夺取了几座城。东汉建威大将军耿同延岑在穰城交战，大败延岑。
English: Yancheng attacked Nanyang and captured several cities. Eastern Han Dynasty General Geng Tong Yancheng fought in Yancheng and defeated Yancheng.

古文：岑与数骑走东阳，与秦丰合；丰以女妻之。
现代文：延岑和几个人骑马逃向东阳，与秦丰联合。秦丰把女儿嫁给延岑。
English: Yan Xuan and several men fled on horseback to Dongyang and united with Qin Feng. Qin Feng married his daughter to Yan Xuan.

古文：建义大将军硃祜率祭遵等与岑战于东阳，破之；岑走归秦丰。
现代文：东汉建义大将军朱祜率领祭遵等同延岑在东阳交战，打败延岑。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty's Jianyi General Zhu Xi led the Zuni to fight with the Yan in Dongyang, defeating the Yan.

古文：祜遂南与岑彭等军合。
现代文：延岑逃跑回到秦丰所在的黎丘。于是朱祜南下与岑彭等军队汇合。
English: Yan Xuan fled back to Liqiu, where Qin Feng was. So Zhu Xi went south to join forces with Yao Peng and others.

古文：延岑护军邓仲况拥兵据阴县，而刘歆、孙龚为其谋主；前侍中扶风苏竟以书说之，仲况与龚降。
现代文：延岑的护军邓仲况领兵占据阴县，而刘歆的孙子刘龚是他的主要谋士，前侍中扶风人苏竟写信劝说他们。邓仲况与刘龚便投降了刘秀。
English: Deng Zhongzheng, the guardian of Yanqi, led the troops to occupy Yin County, and Liu Xi's grandson Liu Xi was his main adviser. The former attendant Su, the wind-up man, wrote a letter to persuade them. Deng Zhongzheng and Liu Xi then surrendered to Liu Xiu.

古文：竟终不伐其功，隐身乐道，寿终于家。
现代文：苏竟始终不夸耀这份功劳，隐退故里，乐守圣人之道，在家乡寿终。
English: Su never boasted of this achievement and retired to his hometown, where he lived out the rest of his life as a saint.

古文：秦丰拒岑彭于邓，秋，七月，彭击破之。
现代文：秦丰在邓县抗拒岑彭。秋季，七月，岑彭击败秦丰。
English: Qin Feng resisted Zhaopeng in Deng County. In the autumn, in July, Zhaopeng defeated Qin Feng.

古文：进围丰于黎丘，别遣积弩将军傅俊将兵徇江东，扬州悉定。
现代文：又进军在黎丘包围秦丰，另外派遣积弩将军傅俊领兵攻占长江以东地区，扬州全部平定。
English: He also marched into Liqiu to encircle Qinfeng, and dispatched General Fu Jun to lead the troops to occupy the area east of the Yangtze River. Yangzhou was completely pacified.

古文：盖延围睢阳百日，刘永、苏茂、周建突出，将走酂；延追击之急，永将庆吾斩永首降。
现代文：盖延包围睢阳达一百天。刘永、苏茂、周建突围而出，准备逃往县。盖延急速追击，刘永的将领庆吾砍下刘永的人头投降。
English: Gayan encircled Fenyang for 100 days. Liu Yong, Sumo, and Zhou Jian broke out of the encirclement and prepared to flee to the county. Gayan quickly pursued, and Liu Yong's generals chopped off Liu Yong's head and surrendered.

古文：苏茂、周建奔垂惠，共立永子纡为梁王。
现代文：苏茂、周建逃到垂惠，一齐拥立刘永的儿子刘纡当梁王。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian fled to Zhuhui and jointly established Liu Yong's son Liu Wei as Liang Wang.

古文：佼强奔保西防。
现代文：刘永的另一将领佼强逃到西防据守。
English: Liu Yong's other general, Kiao Qiang, fled to Xi'an.

古文：冬，十月，壬申，上幸春陵，祠园庙。
现代文：冬季，十月壬申，刘秀到达故乡舂陵，祭祀祖先的陵园祭庙。
English: In winter, in October in Jinshin, Liu Xiu arrived at his hometown, Fuling, to make a sacrifice at the ancestor's cemetery and temple.

古文：耿弇从容言于帝，自请北收上谷兵未发者，定彭宠于渔阳，取张丰于涿郡，还收富平、获索，东攻张步，以平齐地。
现代文：耿从容地向刘秀说，他请求北上招收上谷郡还没有调动的士兵，在渔阳铲除彭宠，在涿郡打败张丰；返回洛阳时消灭富平、获索军；向东攻击张步，从而平定齐地。
English: Geng calmly told Liu Xiu that he asked him to go to the north to recruit soldiers who had not yet been mobilized in Shanggu County, eradicate Peng Ji in Yuyang, defeat Zhang Feng in Shixian County, destroy Fuping and capture the Soso Army when returning to Luoyang, and attack Zhangbu to the east, thus pacifying the country.

古文：帝壮其意，许之。
现代文：刘秀认为他很有雄心壮志，答应了他的要求。
English: Liu Xiu thought he was very ambitious and agreed to his request.

古文：十一月，乙未，帝还自春陵。
现代文：十一月乙未，刘秀从舂陵返回。
English: In November, Liu Xiu returned from Fuling.

古文：是岁，李宪称帝，置百官，拥九城，众十馀万。
现代文：这一年，李宪在庐江称帝，设置百官，拥有九座城，部众十余万人。
English: In this year, Li Xian became emperor in the Li River, set up hundreds of officials, owned nine cities, and had more than one hundred thousand followers.

古文：帝谓太中大夫来歙曰： 今西州未附，子阳称帝，道里阻远，诸将方务关东，思西州方略，未知所在，奈何？ 
现代文：刘秀对太中大夫来歙说： 现在西州没有归附，公孙述自称皇帝，道路阻塞遥远，将领们正把力量用在关东。思量攻相西州的策略，不知道怎么办好。 
English: Liu Xiu said to Taizhong Doctor Laiwu: Now Xizhou has not been annexed, Gongsun Shu claims to be the emperor, the road is blocked far away, the generals are using their strength in Kanto. Thinking about the strategy of attacking Xizhou, I don't know what to do.

古文：歙曰： 臣尝与隗嚣相遇长安。
现代文：来歙说： 我曾经和隗嚣在长安会见。
English: Lai Wei said: I once met with Gong Han in Chang'an.

古文：其人始起，以汉为名。
现代文：这个人最初起兵时，以恢复汉王朝为名义。
English: When this man first took up arms, he did so in the name of restoring the Han Dynasty.

古文：臣愿得奉威命，开以丹青之信，嚣必束手自归。
现代文：我请求奉陛下之命，开诚布公，他一定会束手归附。
English: I beg, by your majesty's command, to be candid, and he will be bound to oblige.

古文：则述自亡之势，不足图也！ 帝然之，始令歙使于嚣。
现代文：刘秀用特殊的礼仪进行回报，交谈时对隗嚣用表字，用对待地位平等国家的礼仪相待，安慰推许他，充满了深情厚谊。
English: Liu Xiu used a special etiquette to reciprocate. When talking with him, he used formal words to express his indignation, treated him with the etiquette of a country with equal status, comforted and commended him, and was full of affection and friendship.

古文：嚣既有功于汉，又受邓禹爵署，其腹心议者多劝通使京师，嚣乃奉奏诣阙。帝报以殊礼，言称字，用敌国之仪，所以慰藉之甚厚。世祖光武皇帝上之下建武四年正月，甲申，大赦。二月，壬子，上行幸怀；壬申，还雒阳。
现代文：建武四年正月甲申，刘秀实行大赦。二月壬子，刘秀前往怀县。壬申，返回洛阳。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Jianwu, Liu Xiu was amnestied. In February, Liu Xiu went to Huai County. In Jinshin, he returned to Luoyang.

古文：延岑复寇顺阳；遣邓禹将兵击破之。
现代文：延岑又攻打顺阳。刘秀派邓禹率领军队击败延岑。
English: Yancheng also attacked Shunyang. Liu Xiu sent Deng Yu to lead the army to defeat Yancheng.

古文：岑奔汉中。
现代文：延岑逃往汉中。
English: Yan Xun fled to Hanzhong Middle School.

古文：公孙述以岑为大司马，封汝宁王。
现代文：公孙述任命延岑当大司马，封为汝宁王。
English: According to Gongsun, he appointed Yan Xuan as the grand steward and crowned him as the King of Ruining.

古文：田戎闻秦丰破，恐惧，欲降。
现代文：田戎听说秦丰被打败，感到恐慌，准备投降。
English: When Tian Rong heard that Qin Feng had been defeated, he panicked and prepared to surrender.

古文：其妻兄辛臣图彭宠、张步、董宪、公孙述等所得郡国以示戎曰： 雒阳地如掌耳，不如且按甲以观其变。 
现代文：田戎妻子的哥哥辛臣画出彭宠、张步、董宪、公孙述等占有的郡国给田戎看，对他说： 洛阳这块地方，不过像手掌那么大罢了，我们不如暂且按兵不动，以观察局势的变化。 
English: Tian Rong's wife's brother Xin Chen showed Tian Rong the counties occupied by Peng Jia, Zhang Bu Rong, Dong Xian, Gong Sun Su and others, and said to him: Luoyang is only as big as the palm of your hand, so we might as well stay put for the time being to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：戎曰： 以秦王之强，犹为征南所围，吾降决矣！ 
现代文：田戎说： 凭着秦丰的强盛，还陷于征南大将军岑彭的包围之中，我决心投降了！ 
English: Tian Rong said: With the strength of Qin Feng, and still trapped in the encirclement of the Southern Expeditionary General Zhou Peng, I am determined to surrender!

古文：乃留辛臣使守夷陵，自将兵沿江溯沔止黎丘。
现代文：于是留下辛臣，让他守卫夷陵，自己率领军队沿着长江至沔江，逆流而上进军黎丘。
English: So he left Xincheng to guard the Yili Tombs, and led his army along the Yangtze River to the Min River, marching upstream to Liqiu.

古文：辛臣于后盗戎珍宝，从间道先降于岑彭，而以书招戎曰： 宜以时降，无拘前计！ 
现代文：辛臣在田戎出发后，盗取田戎的珍宝，抄小路逃跑，先向岑彭投降，然后写信招降田戎说： 你应该及时投降，不要拘泥于我们以前的打算！ 
English: After Xincheng set out from Tian Rong, he stole Tian Rong's precious treasures, cut a path to escape, first surrendered to Zhaopeng, and then wrote a letter to Tian Rong, saying: You should surrender in time, don't stick to our previous plan!

古文：戎疑臣卖己，灼鱼卜降，兆中坼，遂复反，与秦丰合。
现代文：田戎怀疑辛臣出卖自己，烧龟甲占卜应否投降。龟甲从中裂开，大凶。于是又进行反叛，同秦丰联合。
English: Tian Rong suspected Xin Chen of betraying him, and burned the tortoise shell to see if he should surrender. The tortoise shell cracked from the inside, causing great harm. So he rebelled again and united with Qin Feng.

古文：岑彭击破之，戎亡归夷陵。
现代文：岑彭打败田戎，田戎逃回夷陵。
English: Yan Peng defeated Tian Rong, and Tian Rong fled back to Yiling.

古文：夏，四月，丁巳，上行幸鄴；己巳，幸临平，遣吴汉、陈俊、王梁击破五校于临平。
现代文：夏季，四月丁巳，刘秀前往邺城。己巳，前往临平。派遣吴汉、陈俊、王梁在临平击败五校军。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu went to Lucheng. In the same year, he went to Linping. He dispatched Wu Han, Chen Jun and Wang Liang to defeat the Fifth School Army in Linping.

古文：鬲县五姓共逐守长，据城而反；诸将争欲攻之。
现代文：鬲县五大家族联合起兵，驱逐代理县长，占据县城反叛。将领们争先恐后地要前去攻打。
English: Five major families in Handan County jointly raised an army, drove out the acting county governor, and occupied the county seat in rebellion. The generals scrambled to attack.

古文：吴汉曰： 使鬲反者，守长罪也。
现代文：吴汉说： 促使鬲县人反叛的，是代理县长的罪过。
English: Wu Han said: It was the acting county governor's fault that the people of Handan County rebelled.

古文：敢轻冒进兵者斩！ 
现代文：胆敢轻率进兵的，一律斩首！ 
English: Anyone who dares to enter the army rashly will be beheaded!

古文：乃移檄告郡使收守长，而使人谢；城中五姓大喜，即相率降。
现代文：于是用公文通告郡府拘捕代理县长，并派人酬谢。城中五大家族非常高兴，立刻相继投降。
English: The five families in the town were very happy and immediately surrendered one after another.

古文：诸将乃服，曰： 不战而下城，非众所及也！ 
现代文：将领们于是佩服吴汉，说： 不经过战斗就能得到城池，这种本领不是一般人所能赶得上的！ 
English: The generals then admired Wu Han and said, "He can capture a city without fighting. This kind of ability is beyond the reach of ordinary people!"

古文：五月，上幸元氏，辛巳，幸卢奴，将亲征彭宠。
现代文：五月，刘秀前往元氏。辛巳，抵达卢奴，准备亲自征讨彭宠。
English: In May, Liu Xiu went to the Yuan Dynasty. Xin Si, arrived at Lunu, prepared to personally solicit Peng Cun.

古文：伏湛谏曰： 今兗、豫、青、冀，中国之都，而寇贼纵横，未及从化。
现代文：伏湛劝阻说： 现在，兖州、豫州、青州、冀州本是中国的内地，而盗匪贼寇横行无忌，还没有来得及使他们顺从，接受教化。
English: Fuzhan dissuaded: At present, Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, Qingzhou and Jizhou are the mainland of China, and the bandits and thieves are running rampant. It is not yet time to make them obey and accept enlightenment.

古文：渔阳边外荒耗，岂足先图！
现代文：渔阳不过是临近北方外族的荒凉地方，怎么值得先去图谋呢？
English: Yuyang is just a desolate place close to the northern foreigners, how is it worth to go there first?

古文：陛下舍近务远，弃易求难，诚臣之所惑也！ 
现代文：陛下舍近求远，放弃容易做的事，去做难做的事，真使我感到迷惑！ 
English: I am really puzzled by His Majesty's desire to go further and further, to give up what is easy and do what is difficult!

古文：上乃还。
现代文：刘秀这才返回。
English: Only then did Liu Xiu return.

古文：帝遣建义大将军硃祜、建威大将军耿弇、征虏将军祭遵、骁骑将军刘喜讨张丰于涿郡。
现代文：刘秀派遣建议大将军朱祜、建威大将军耿、征虏将军祭遵、骁骑将军刘喜在涿群讨伐张丰。
English: Liu Xiu dispatched General Zhu Xi, General Geng Jianwei, Conscript General Zai Zun, and Cavalry General Liu Xi to fight against Zhang Feng in Qunqun.

古文：祭遵先至，急攻丰；禽之。
现代文：祭遵先行到达，猛烈攻打张丰，把他生擒。
English: Matsu Zun arrived first and attacked Zhang Feng violently, knocking him unconscious.

古文：初，丰好方术，有道士言丰当为天子，以五彩囊裹石系丰肘，云， 石中有玉玺 。
现代文：当初，张丰喜好法术，有个道士说张丰会做皇帝，并用五彩的口袋包裹石头绑在张丰的肘上，说： 石头中有皇帝用的玉玺。 
English: At the beginning, Zhang Feng was fond of magic. A Taoist said that Zhang Feng would become an emperor, and wrapped a stone in a colorful bag and tied it to Zhang Feng's elbow, saying: There is a jade bracelet for the emperor in the stone.

古文：丰信之，遂反。
现代文：张丰相信道士的话，于是叛变。
English: Zhang Feng believed it and rebelled.

古文：既执，当斩，犹曰： 肘石有玉玺。 
现代文：把他捉住以后，应当斩首，他还说： 我肘上的石头里有玉玺。 
English: And he said, There is a piece of amethyst in the rock that is at my elbow.

古文：傍人为椎破之，丰乃知被诈，仰天叹曰： 当死无恨！ 
现代文：旁人为他用槌子打破石头，张丰才知受骗了。他仰天长叹说： 我应当死，死而无恨！ 
English: Zhang Fengcai was tricked by someone breaking stones for him with a hammer. He looked up to heaven and sighed: "I should die, die without hatred!"

古文：上诏耿弇进击彭宠。
现代文：刘秀颁下诏书，命令耿进攻彭宠。
English: Liu Xiu issued an edict, ordering Geng to attack Pengcai.

古文：弇以父况与宠同功，又兄弟无在京师者，不敢独进，求诣雒阳。
现代文：耿因为父亲耿况和彭宠有同样的功劳，再加上兄弟没有人在洛阳做人质，不敢单独进军，请求返回洛阳。
English: Geng did not dare to march into Luoyang alone, because his father, Geng Cunhu, had the same merit as Peng Cunhu, and none of his brothers were hostages in Luoyang, so he asked to return to Luoyang.

古文：诏报曰： 将军举宗为国，功效尤著，何嫌何疑，而欲求征！ 
现代文：刘秀下诏回答说： 将军全家为国效忠，功劳卓著，有什么嫌疑而要求征召回洛阳呢？ 
English: Liu Xiu replied, "The general's whole family is loyal to the country and has made outstanding contributions. What is the suspicion that made him request to be called back to Luoyang?"

古文：况闻之，更遣弇弟国入侍。
现代文：耿况听说以后，另外派耿的弟弟耿国前往洛阳，到宫廷服务。
English: After learning of Geng's situation, he also sent Geng's younger brother, Geng Guo, to Luoyang to serve at the court.

古文：时祭遵屯良乡，刘喜屯阳乡，彭宠引匈奴兵欲击之；耿况使其子舒袭破匈奴兵，斩两王，宠乃退走。
现代文：这时，祭遵驻屯良乡，刘喜驻屯阳乡，彭宠率领匈奴的军队准备袭击。耿况命他的儿子耿舒击败匈奴军，诛杀匈奴两位亲王，彭宠这才退兵。
English: At this time, Zai Zun was stationed in Tuen Liang Township, Liu Xi was stationed in Tuen Yang Township, and Peng Cai led the Xiongnu army to prepare for the attack. Geng then ordered his son Geng Shu to defeat the Xiongnu army and kill the two Xiongnu princes. Peng Cai only then left the army.

古文：六月，辛亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：六月辛亥，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: In June of Xinhai, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，上幸谯，遣捕虏将军马武、骑都尉王霸围刘纡、周建于垂惠。
现代文：秋季，七月丁亥，刘秀到谯城。派遣捕虏将军马武、骑都尉王霸在垂惠包围刘纡、周建。
English: In the autumn, in July of Dinghai, Liu Xiu arrived in Lucheng. He dispatched the captive general Ma Wu and the cavalry captain Wang Ba to surround Liu Ye and Zhou Jian in Tulihui.

古文：董宪将贲休以兰陵降；宪闻之，自郯围之。
现代文：董宪的将领贲休献出兰陵县投降。董宪得到消息，从郯县率军包围兰陵。
English: Dong Xian's general, Xie Xiu, surrendered Lanling County. Upon receiving the news, Dong Xian led his army from Xing County to encircle Lanling.

古文：盖延及平狄将军山阳庞萌在楚，请往救之。
现代文：盖延与平狄将军山阳人庞萌在楚驻屯，请求前往兰陵救援贲休。
English: Gai Yan and Ping Di's general, the Sanyang man Pang Meng, were stationed in Chu and requested to go to Lanling for rescue.

古文：帝敕曰： 可直往捣郯，则兰陵自解。 
现代文：刘秀告诫说： 大军可以去直捣郯县，兰陵之围自然就会解除。 
English: Liu Xiu cautioned that: The large army can go straight to Lintong County, and the Lanling siege will naturally be lifted.

古文：延等以贲休城危，遂先赴之。
现代文：盖延等认为贲休所守的兰陵城危险，于是先奔赴兰陵救援。
English: Gai Yan and others thought that Lanling City, which was guarded by Yu Xiu, was in danger, so they rushed to Lanling for rescue.

古文：宪逆战而阳败退，延等因拔围入城。
现代文：董宪迎战，然后假装战败撤退。盖延等因此攻破围军进城内。
English: Dong Xian met the battle and then withdrew pretending to be defeated. As a result, Gai Yan and others broke through the besieging army and entered the city.

古文：明日，宪大出兵合围；延等惧，遽出突走，因往攻郯。
现代文：第二天，董宪率大军合围。盖延等恐惧，迅速突围逃跑，于是前往攻打郯县。
English: The next day, Dong Xian led a large army to encircle. Guy Yan was so afraid that he quickly broke through the encirclement and fled, so he went to attack Lu County.

古文：帝让之曰： 间欲先赴郯者，以其不意故耳。
现代文：刘秀责备盖延等人说： 先前要进攻郯县，是由于出其不意的缘故罢了！
English: The emperor scolded, "You were ordered to attack first, but the enemy caught you unawares.

古文：今既奔走，贼计已立，围岂可解乎！ 
现代文：现在既然败逃，敌人的计谋已经确定，怎么还能解除兰陵之围呢！ 
English: Now that the escape has been defeated and the enemy's strategy has been determined, how can the Lanling siege be lifted?

古文：延等至郯，果不能克；而董宪遂拔兰陵，杀贲休。
现代文：盖延等到达郯县，果然不能攻克。而董宪终于攻陷兰陵，诛杀贲休。
English: Gai Yan and others arrived in Jixian County, but they could not conquer it. And Dong Xian finally conquered Lanling, and fought and killed Yu Xiu.

古文：八月，戊午，上幸寿春，遣扬武将军南阳马成，率诛虏将军南阳刘隆等三将军发会稽、丹杨、九江、六安四郡兵击李宪。
现代文：八月戊午，刘秀到寿春县。派遣扬武将军南阳人马成率领诛虏将军南阳人刘隆等三位将军，征调会稽、丹阳、九江、六安四个郡的兵力攻打李宪。
English: In the afternoon of August, Liu Xiu went to Shuchun County and dispatched three generals, including Yangwu General Nanyang Jinma Cheng, who led the attack on Li Xian, and Nanyang General Liu Long, who led the attack on Li Xian, to recruit troops from four counties: Hefei, Danyang, Jiujiang and Lu'an to attack Li Xian.

古文：九月，围宪于舒。
现代文：九月，在舒县包围李宪。
English: In September, it encircled Li Xian in Shu County.

古文：王莽末，天下乱，临淮大尹河南侯霸独能保全其郡。
现代文：王莽末年，天下大乱，唯独临淮郡大尹河南人侯霸能够保全一郡平安。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, the world was in turmoil. Only Houba, a man from the south of the Yin River in Linhuai County, was able to keep the county safe.

古文：帝征霸会寿春，拜尚书令。
现代文：刘秀征召侯霸在寿春见面，任命他当尚书令。
English: Liu Xiu summoned Houba to meet him in Shouchun and appointed him as Shang Shuling.

古文：时朝廷无故典，又少旧臣，霸明习故事，收录遗文，条奏前世善政法度，施行之。
现代文：当时朝廷没有旧法则可依，又缺少旧臣，侯霸熟悉过去的典章制度，搜集失散的文献档案，列出前朝好的政策和法令制度上奏，予以施行。
English: At that time, the imperial court did not have the old laws to follow, and there was a lack of former ministers. Houba was familiar with the past legal system, collected lost documents and archives, listed the policies and legal systems that were good in the previous dynasty, and implemented them.

古文：冬，十月，甲寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月甲寅，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：隗嚣使马援往观公孙述。
现代文：隗嚣派马援前往成都观察公孙述的情况。
English: Gong Rong sent horse aid to Chengdu to observe the situation described by Gongsun.

古文：援素与述同里闬，相善，以为既至，当握手欢如平生；而述盛陈陛卫以延援入，交拜礼毕，使出就馆。
现代文：在宗庙中召集百官，设立了旧交老友的座位。公孙述用绣着鸾鸟的旗帜、披头散发的骑士作前导，开路清道，实行警戒，登车出发。他向左向迎侯的官员屈身作答后，进入宗庙。礼仪祭品及百官的阵容十分盛大。
English: Hundreds of officials were summoned to the ancestral temple, and seats were set up for old friends and old friends. Gongsun Sui used a banner embroidered with an ostrich and a knight with a headdress as a guide to clear the way, exercise vigilance, and board the vehicle. He bowed to the left to the welcoming officials and entered the ancestral temple. The ceremonial offerings and the lineup of hundreds of officials were very grand.

古文：更为援制都布单衣、交让冠，会百官于宗庙中，立旧交之位，述鸾旗、旄骑，警跸就车，磬折而入，礼飨官属甚盛，欲授援以封侯大将军位。
现代文：公孙述准备封马援侯爵，任命当大将军。
English: Gongsun said that he was preparing to be given the title of Marquis of Ma'an and appointed as a general.

古文：宾客皆乐留，援晓之曰： 天下雄雌未定，公孙不吐哺走迎国士，与图成败，反修饰边幅，如偶人形，此子何足久稽天下士乎！ 
现代文：马援带领的宾客们都乐意留下来。马援向他们解释说： 天下胜负未定，公孙述不懂得吐出口中的饭，奔走迎接有才干的人，与他共同图谋成败的大事，他反而注重繁琐的小节，就像一个木偶人，这种人怎么能够长久留住天下有志之士呢？ 
English: The guests led by Ma Yuan were all happy to stay. Ma Yuan explained to them: The world is still undecided. Gongsun Shu does not know how to spit out the rice in his mouth, run to meet talented people, and work with him to plot success or failure. Instead, he pays attention to tedious details, like a puppet. How can such a person keep the world's aspirants for a long time?

古文：因辞归，谓嚣曰： 子阳，井底蛙耳，而妄自尊大；不如专意东方。 
现代文：因此告辞返回，对隗嚣说： 公孙述不过是井底之蛙罢了，却妄自尊大！我们不如一心与东方的刘秀往来。 
English: Therefore, he returned with a farewell and said to the hubbub: Gongsun Zhuang is just a frog at the bottom of the well, but he is arrogant! We are better off dealing with Liu Xiu in the East.

古文：嚣乃使援奉书雒阳。
现代文：于是隗嚣派马援带着给刘秀的信到洛阳去。
English: Therefore, Yan Yan sent Ma Yuan to Luoyang with a letter to Liu Xiu.

古文：援初到，良久，中黄门引入。
现代文：马援初到，等了很久，中黄门引进。
English: Ma Yuan arrived for the first time, waited for a long time, and was introduced to Zhonghuangmen.

古文：帝在宣德殿南庑下，但帻，坐，迎笑，谓援曰： 卿遨游二帝间，今见卿，使人大惭。 
现代文：刘秀在宣德殿南面的廊屋里，只戴着头巾，坐在那里，笑迎马援。刘秀对马援说： 您在两个皇帝之间游历，今天见到您，令人非常惭愧。 
English: Liu Xiu, wearing only a headscarf, sat in the corridor on the south side of the Xuande Hall, smiling and welcoming Ma Yuan. Liu Xiu said to Ma Yuan: You have traveled between two emperors, and it is very shameful to see you today.

古文：援顿首辞谢，因曰： 当今之世，非但君择臣，臣亦择君矣。
现代文：马援叩头辞谢，于是说： 当今的天下，不但君主选择臣子，臣子也选择君主。
English: Ma Yuan bowed and said, "In today's world, not only does the sovereign choose the vassal, but the vassal also chooses the sovereign.

古文：臣与公孙述同县，少相善；臣前至蜀，述陛戟而后进臣。
现代文：我和公孙述同是一县的人，自幼关系很好。我前些时候到成都，公孙述让武士持戟立在殿阶下，然后才接见我。
English: I and my great-grandson Shu are from the same county, and we have had a good relationship since childhood. When I arrived in Chengdu some time ago, my great-grandson Shu had a samurai warrior stand at the foot of the palace steps before receiving me.

古文：臣今远来，陛下何知非刺客奸人，而简易若是！ 
现代文：我今天远道而来，您怎么知道我不是刺客或奸恶的人，而这样平易地接见我！ 
English: I have come a long way today, how do you know that I am not an assassin or a traitor, and yet you receive me so easily!

古文：帝复笑曰： 卿非刺客，顾说客耳。 
现代文：刘秀又笑着说： 您不是刺客，不过是说客罢了。 
English: Ti Mata laughed and said, "You are not an assassin, but a lobbyist."

古文：援曰： 天下反覆，盗名字者不可胜数；今见陛下恢廓大度，同符高祖，乃知帝王自有真也。 
现代文：马援说： 天下大局，反复未定，盗用帝王称号的人不计其数。今天我看见您恢宏大度，和高祖一样，才知道自有真正的天子。 
English: Ma Yuan said: The overall situation of the world is repeatedly undecided, and there are countless people who have stolen the title of emperor. Today I saw your magnificence, and like Gaozu, I knew that I had a true son of heaven.

古文：太傅卓茂薨。
现代文：太傅卓茂去世。
English: Taifu Zhuo Mao passed away.

古文：十一月，丙申，上行幸宛。
现代文：十一月丙申，刘秀前往宛城。
English: In November, Liu Xiu went to Wancheng.

古文：岑彭攻秦丰三岁，斩首九万馀级；丰馀兵裁千人，食且尽。
现代文：岑彭围攻秦丰三年，斩杀九万余人。秦丰剩余的军队才一千人，粮食将要耗尽。
English: Zhaopeng besieged Qinfeng for three years, killing more than ninety thousand people. Qinfeng's remaining army was only a thousand, and grain was about to run out.

古文：十二月，丙寅，帝幸黎丘，遣使招丰，丰不肯降；乃使硃祜等代岑彭围黎丘，使岑彭、傅俊南击田戎。
现代文：十二月丙寅，刘秀抵达黎丘，派使者招降秦丰，秦丰不肯投降。于是派遣朱祜等代替岑彭包围黎丘；派遣岑彭、傅俊率军南下，攻打田戎。
English: In December, Qin Yin and Liu Xiu arrived in Liqiu and sent an envoy to invite Qin Feng to surrender, but Qin Feng refused to surrender. Therefore, Zhu Xi and others were sent to surround Liqiu in place of Zi Peng; Zi Peng and Fu Jun were sent south with their army to attack Tian Rong.

古文：公孙述聚兵数十万人，积粮汉中；又造十层楼船，多刻天下牧守印章。
现代文：公孙述聚集军队数十万人，在汉中囤积粮食。又建造十层高的楼船，大量刻制天下州郡长官的印章。
English: Gongsun gathered hundreds of thousands of troops and hoarded grain in Hanzhong. He also built a ten-story building ship and engraved a large number of seals of county governors.

古文：遣将军李育、程乌将数万众出屯陈仓，就吕鲔，将徇三辅；冯异迎击，大破之，育、乌俱奔汉中。
现代文：公孙述派遣将军李育、程焉率领数万军队进军，在陈仓驻屯，去和吕鲔合兵，准备攻占三辅地区。冯异迎击，大败敌军。李育、程焉都逃往汉中。
English: According to Gongsun, he dispatched generals Li Yu and Cheng Yan to lead tens of thousands of troops into the army, stationed in Chencang, and went to join forces with Lv Ying to prepare to capture the Sanfu area. Feng Ying counterattacked and defeated the enemy army. Li Yu and Cheng Yan both fled to Hanzhong.

古文：异还，击破吕鲔，营保降者甚众。
现代文：冯异返回，击败吕鲔，有大量营寨投降。
English: Feng Yi returned, defeated Lü Gan, and a large number of camps surrendered.

古文：是时，隗嚣遣兵佐异有功，遣使上状，帝报以手书曰： 慕乐德义，思相结纳。
现代文：当时，隗嚣派遣军队协助冯异作战有功，派使者人给刘秀上书报告情况。刘秀亲笔写信回答说： 因为思慕道德仁义，盼望与将军结交。
English: At that time, Zang Han dispatched troops to assist Feng Yixing in the battle, and sent an envoy to Liu Xiu to report the situation. Liu Xiu personally wrote a letter and replied: Because I think about morality and benevolence, I hope to make friends with the general.

古文：昔文王三分，犹服事殷，但驽马、铅刀，不可强扶，数蒙伯乐一顾之价。
现代文：从前周文王占有天下的三分之二，仍向商朝称臣，但劣马和铅质的刀，不能勉强扶持，我却几次承蒙您这位伯乐看顾一眼的荣耀。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wen occupied two-thirds of the world and still claimed to be a vassal of the Shang Dynasty. However, he could barely support his inferior horses and leaden swords. However, I had the honor of receiving a glance from you, the courtier, several times.

古文：将军南拒公孙之兵，北御羌、胡之乱，是以冯异西征，得以数千百人踯躅三辅。
现代文：您在南方抗拒公孙述的军队，在北方抵御羌、胡外族的骚扰。因此冯异西征，能够仅用数千人在三辅地区周旋。
English: In the south, you resisted the army of Gongsun in the south, and in the north, you resisted the harassment of the Zang and Hu foreign ethnic groups. Therefore, Feng Yixing's westward expedition could only use thousands of people to maneuver in the Sanfu area.

古文：微将军之助，则咸阳已为它人禽矣！
现代文：如果没有将军的帮助，咸阳就已被别人占领了。
English: Without the general's help, Xianyang would have been occupied by others.

古文：如令子阳到汉中，三辅愿因将军兵马，鼓旗相当。
现代文：假如公孙述到汉中，三辅地区愿凭借将军的军队和他对抗，使双方力量旗鼓相当。
English: If Gongsun were to enter the Han dynasty, the Sanfu region would be willing to use the general's army to oppose him, so that the two sides would be equal in strength.

古文：傥肯如言，即智士计功割地之秋也！
现代文：如果您肯像我说的这样做，那就是给智士贤人计算功劳、分封土地的时候！
English: If you are willing to do as I say, it is time to give the wise men and sages credit and assign land!

古文：管仲曰： 生我者父母，成我者鲍子。 
现代文：管仲说过： 生养我的是父母，使我成功的是鲍叔牙。 
English: Guanzhong said: It was my parents who raised me, and it was Uncle Bao who made me successful.

古文：自今以后，手书相闻，勿用傍人间构之言。 
现代文：从今以后，我们之间用亲笔书信互通消息，不要听信别人挑拨离间的话。 
English: From now on, we will use our own letters to exchange information, and do not listen to the words of others to sow discord.

古文：其后公孙述数遣将间出，嚣辄与冯异合势，共摧挫之。
现代文：从那以后，公孙述几次派将领秘密出兵，隗嚣都同冯异联合起来，一齐将公孙述军挫败。
English: Since then, Gongsun Susu has sent generals to secretly dispatch troops several times, and all of them have united with Feng Yi to defeat Gongsun Susu's army together.

古文：述遣使以大司空、扶安王印绶授嚣；嚣斩其使，出兵击之，以故蜀兵不复北出。
现代文：公孙述派使者将大司空、扶安王的印信绶带授给隗嚣，隗嚣诛杀使者，派出军队攻击。因此公孙述的军队不再向北进攻。
English: Gongsun Susu sent an envoy to confer the seal of Daishi Ku and Fuan Wang to Gonglun, Gonglun killed the envoy and sent an army to attack. Therefore, Gongsun Susu's army no longer attacked to the north.

古文：泰山豪杰多与张步连兵。
现代文：泰山郡的豪强大多和张步的军队联合。
English: Most of the mighty warriors of Taishan County joined Zhangbu's army.

古文：吴汉荐强驽大将军陈俊为泰山太守，击破步兵，遂定泰山。
现代文：吴汉举荐强弩大将军陈俊做泰山太守，击败张步的军队，因而平定了泰山郡。
English: Wu Han recommended the strong general Chen Jun to be the governor of Taishan, defeated Zhang Bu's army, and thus leveled Taishan County.

古文：世祖光武皇帝上之下建武五年
现代文：建武五年春季，正月癸巳，刘秀回到洛阳。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Jianwu, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：春，正月，癸巳，车驾还宫。帝使来歙持节送马援归陇右。
现代文：刘秀派遣来歙持符节送马援回到陇右。
English: Liu Xiu dispatched to hold the festival to send horses back to the right.

古文：隗嚣与援共卧起，问以东方事，曰： 前到朝廷，上引见数十，每接燕语，自夕至旦，才明勇略，非人敌也。
现代文：隗嚣和马援一同睡觉、起床，询问东方的情况。
English: Gong Han and Ma Yuan slept together, got up together, and inquired about the situation in the East.

古文：且开心见诚，无所隐伏，阔达多大节，略与高帝同；经学博览，政事文辩，前世无比。 
现代文：并且心胸开阔，坦率真诚，无所隐藏，豁达而注重大节，和汉高祖很相像。他博读经书，政事处理得条理清楚，前世的帝王没人能够和他相比。 
English: Moreover, he is open-minded, frank and sincere, has nothing to hide, is open-minded and pays attention to important festivals, and is very similar to Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty. He reads scriptures well, and deals with political affairs in a well-organized and clear manner. No previous emperor can be compared to him.

古文：嚣曰： 卿谓何如高帝？ 
现代文：隗嚣说： 你认为他和汉高祖相比，怎样？ 
English: "What do you mean, he's better than Gao Di?

古文：援曰： 不如也。
现代文：马援说： 不如。
English: Ma Yuan said: Not so good.

古文：高帝无可无不可；今上好吏事，动如节度，又不喜饮酒。 
现代文：高祖没有什么可以不可以，而当今皇上喜好处理政务，行动符合规矩，又不喜欢喝酒。 
English: Gao Di is omnipotent; while Guangwu likes politics, can handle politics properly, but does not like drinking.

古文：嚣意不怿，曰： 如卿言，反复胜邪！ 
现代文：隗嚣感到不高兴，说： 要像你说的那样，皇上反而比高祖更高明了！ 
English: Gong Rong was displeased and said, "As you said, the emperor is more intelligent than Gao Zu!"

古文：二月，丙午，大赦。
现代文：二月丙午，刘秀实行大赦。
English: On the afternoon of February 3rd, Liu Xiu implemented an amnesty.

古文：苏茂将五校兵救周建于垂惠。
现代文：苏茂率领五校军在垂惠援救周建。
English: Su Mao led the Five-Varsity Army to rescue Zhou Jian.

古文：马武为茂、建所败，奔过王霸营，大呼求救。
现代文：马武被苏茂、周建打败，奔逃时经过王霸营垒，大声呼救。
English: Mabu was defeated by Sumo and Zhou Jian, and when he ran away, he passed through Wangba's camp and shouted for help.

古文：霸曰： 贼兵盛，出必两败，弩力而已！ 
现代文：王霸说： 贼军的士气很盛，我如果出兵，你我两军一定会都被打败，你只有自己努力了！ 
English: Wang Ba said, "The morale of the thief army is very high. If I send troops, you and my two armies will definitely be defeated. You only have to work hard!

古文：乃闭营坚壁。
现代文：于是关闭营门，严密戒备。
English: Having said that, he closed the camp gate and insisted on not going out.

古文：军吏皆争之，霸曰： 茂兵精锐，其众又多，吾吏士心恐，而捕虏与吾相恃，两军不一，此败道也。
现代文：军官们全表示反对，王霸说： 苏茂的军队很精锐，人数又多，我们的将士内心恐惧。而马武依赖我军，两支军队不一致，这是失败之道。
English: The officers all objected, and Wang Ba said: "Sumo's army is very elite and numerous, and our soldiers are afraid. But Mabu relies on our army, and the two armies are not consistent. This is the road to failure."

古文：今闭营固守，示不相援，贼必乘胜轻进；捕虏无救，其战自倍。
现代文：现在我们闭营坚守，表示我们不援助马武，贼军定会乘胜轻举冒进。马武得不到救兵，战斗力自然培增。
English: Now they are holding fast to the closed camp, showing a posture of not wanting to be rescued. The thief soldiers will inevitably take advantage of the victory and advance lightly. If there is no rescue in the eyes of the captor general, the hard battle will be doubled.

古文：如此，茂众疲劳，吾承其敝，乃可克也。 
现代文：这样，苏茂的军队就会疲劳，我们趁他疲劳的时候进攻，才可以打败他。 
English: In this way, Sumo's army will be tired, and we can only defeat him by attacking when he is tired.

古文：茂、建果悉出攻武，合战良久，霸军中壮士数十人断发请战，霸乃开营后，出精骑袭其背。
现代文：苏茂、周建果然出动所有的军队进攻马武。交战了很长时间，王霸军中有数十名壮士割断头发请战。于是王霸打开营垒后门，派出精锐骑兵从背后袭击苏茂、周建。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian sent out all the troops to attack Mawu. The battle lasted for a long time, and dozens of strong men in Wang Ba's army cut their hair to fight. So Wang Ba opened the back gate of the camp and sent elite cavalry to attack Su Mao and Zhou Jian from behind.

古文：茂、建前后受敌，惊乱败走，霸、武各归营。
现代文：苏茂、周建前后受敌，在惊慌混乱中败阵逃跑，王霸、马武各自回营。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian were defeated by the enemy and fled in panic. Wang Ba and Ma Wu returned to their respective camps.

古文：茂、建复聚兵挑战，霸坚卧不出，方飨士作倡乐；茂雨射营中，中霸前酒樽，霸安坐不动。
现代文：苏茂、周建又聚集起军队挑战。王霸坚守不出战，正在大宴部下，唱歌取乐，苏茂向王霸营中放箭，箭如雨下，射中王霸面前的酒杯，王霸安然坐在那里不动。
English: Su Mao and Zhou Jian again gathered an army to challenge. Wang Ba insisted on not going to war, and was singing to his subordinates at a big banquet. Sumo shot arrows at Wang Ba's camp, and the arrows rained down, hitting the wine glass in front of Wang Ba. Wang Ba sat there peacefully and did not move.

古文：军吏皆曰： 茂前日已破，今易击也。 
现代文：军官们都说： 我们昨天已经击败了苏茂，现在容易打他！ 
English: The officers all said, "We defeated Sumo yesterday, now it's easy to beat him!"

古文：霸曰： 不然。苏茂客兵远来，粮食不足，故数挑战，以徼一时之胜。
现代文：王霸道： 不是这样，苏茂的军队从远道而来，粮食不足，所以频繁挑战，想取得一时的胜利。
English: Wang Baduo: That's not true. Sumo's army came from far away, and there was a shortage of food, so they frequently challenged and wanted to achieve a temporary victory.

古文：今闭营休士，所谓 不战而屈人兵 者也。 
现代文：现在我们关闭营门，休整军队，正是所谓 不用打仗就能使敌人屈服 ！ 
English: Now we are closing the camp gates and resting the troops. This is what is known as bringing the enemy to heel without fighting!

古文：茂、建既不得战，乃引还营。
现代文：苏茂、周建既然不能和王霸交战，只好率军回营。
English: Since Su Mao and Zhou Jian could not fight with Wang Ba, they had no choice but to lead the army back to camp.

古文：其夜，周建兄子诵反，闭城拒之。
现代文：夜里，周建哥哥的儿子周诵反叛，关闭垂惠城门，不让他们进城。
English: In the night, Zhou Jian's brother's son Zhou Chuan rebelled and closed the Zhuhui gate, not allowing them to enter the city.

古文：建于道死；茂奔下邳，与董宪合；刘纡奔佼强。
现代文：周建死在途中，苏茂逃奔到下邳，与董宪会合。梁王刘纡投奔佼强。
English: Zhou Jian died on the way, Su Mao fled to the Lower Yangtze River and met with Dong Xian. Liang Wang Liu Yao took the lead.

古文：乙丑，上行幸魏郡。
现代文：乙丑，刘秀前往魏郡。
English: Second ugly, Liu Xiu went to Wei County.

古文：彭宠妻数为恶梦，又多见怪变；卜筮、望气者皆言兵当从中起。
现代文：彭宠的妻子多次做恶梦，又常常看到奇异反常的现象。占卜师、望气先生都说兵乱要从内部兴起。
English: Peng Cuo's wife had nightmares many times and often saw strange and abnormal phenomena. Both the soothsayer and Mr. Wang Qi said that the rebellion would arise from within.

古文：宠以子后兰卿质汉归，不信之，使将兵居外，无亲于中。
现代文：彭宠因为堂弟子后兰卿在洛阳做人质后归来，不信任他，派他率领军队住在外地，远离宫中。
English: Peng Ciao did not trust Hou Lanqing, a disciple of Tong Tong, because he returned after being a hostage in Luoyang. He sent him to lead the army to live in a foreign country, far away from the palace.

古文：宠斋在便室，苍头子密等三人因宠卧寐，共缚著床，告外吏云： 大王斋禁，皆使吏休。 
现代文：彭宠在供休息用的便室斋戒，奴仆子密等三人趁彭宠在躺着睡觉，一起把他绑在床上，告诉外面的官员： 大王正在斋戒，官吏们全都放假。 
English: Peng Qiao was fasting in the rest room. Three servants, including Zimin, took advantage of Peng Qiao lying down to sleep, tied him to the bed together, and told the officials outside: The great king is fasting, and the officials are all on vacation.

古文：伪称宠命，收缚奴婢，各置一处。
现代文：又假传彭宠的命令，把男女奴仆全都捆起来，分别囚禁。
English: They also falsely reported the order of Peng Jiao to tie up all male and female slaves and imprison them separately.

古文：又以宠命呼其妻，妻入，惊曰： 奴反！ 
现代文：又以彭宠的命令唤请他的妻子，彭宠的妻子进入便室，一惊，说： 奴才反了！ 
English: At Peng Cun's command, he called for his wife. Peng Cun's wife entered the toilet room, surprised, and said, "The slave has turned against me!"

古文：奴乃捽其头，击其颊。
现代文：家奴们竟然揪着她的头，狠打她耳光。
English: The thugs held her head and slapped her in the face.

古文：宠急呼曰： 趣为诸将军办装！ 
现代文：彭宠急忙叫道： 赶快为将军们置办行装！ 
English: Peng Cang hurriedly shouted: Hurry up and buy uniforms for the generals!

古文：于是两奴将妻入取宝物，留一奴守宠。
现代文：于是两个奴仆押着彭宠妻子到后宫收取珍珠财宝，留一个奴仆看守彭宠。
English: Therefore, two servants escorted Peng Ji's wife to the harem to collect the pearl treasure, leaving one servant to watch over Peng Ji.

古文：宠谓守奴曰： 若小儿，吾素所爱也。
现代文：彭宠对看守自己的奴仆说： 你这个小孩子，我一向爱护你。
English: Peng Chou said to the slave who was guarding him, "You little child, I have always loved you.

古文：今为子密所迫劫耳！
现代文：而今你不过被子密胁迫罢了！
English: Now you're just being blackmailed!

古文：解我缚，当以女珠妻汝，家中财物皆以与若。 
现代文：替我解开绳索，我将把女儿彭珠给你做妻子，家里的财宝全都给你。 
English: Untie the ropes for me, and I will give you my daughter, Pengzhu, as your wife, and all the family's treasure.

古文：小奴意欲解之，视户外，见子密听其语，遂不敢解。
现代文：小奴仆想要解开绳索，看看门外，见子密正听他们说话，便不敢去解。
English: The little servant wanted to untie the ropes and look outside the door, but when he saw that Zicomi was listening to them, he did not dare to untie the ropes.

古文：于是收金玉衣物，至宠所装之，被马六匹，使妻缝两缣囊。
现代文：于是子密等人收取了后宫中的财宝衣物，回到彭宠所在的便室装好，备好六匹马，命彭宠的妻子缝制两个细绢做的口袋。
English: So he packed up his golden clothes and went to Peng Jia's residence to get them ready. He prepared six horses and asked his wife to sew two packages.

古文：昏夜后，解宠手，令作记告城门将军云： 今遣子密等至子后兰卿所，速开门出，勿稽留之。 
现代文：天黑以后，解开彭宠的手，命他给守卫城门的将军亲笔下命令： 今派子密等人到子后兰卿处，不要留难。 
English: After dark, he untied Peng Ciao's hands and ordered him to write an order in his own handwriting to the general guarding the city gate: Send Zi Mei and the others to Zi Hou Lan's place now, don't delay.

古文：书成，斩宠及妻头置囊中，使持记驰出城，因以诣阙。
现代文：写好之后，子密等人斩杀彭宠和他的妻子，把人头放到口袋里，就拿着彭宠的手令骑马疾驰出城，将人头等送到东汉京师洛阳。
English: After writing it, Zimi and others killed Peng Ciao and his wife, put the heads in their pockets, took Peng Ciao's order and rode out of the city, sending the heads to Luoyang, the capital of East Han.

古文：明旦，阁门不开，官属逾墙而入，见宠尸，惊怖。
现代文：第二天，宫门不开，彭宠的官属们翻墙而入，看到彭宠的尸体，惊慌恐怖。
English: The next day, when the palace gate would not open, Peng Qiao's officials and dependents climbed over the wall and saw Peng Qiao's corpse, panicking and terrified.

古文：其尚书韩立等共立宠子午为王，国师韩利斩午首诣祭遵降，夷其宗族。
现代文：彭宠的尚书韩立等共同拥立彭宠的儿子彭午为燕王。国师韩利诛杀彭午，砍下人头，带到东汉征虏将军祭遵处投降。
English: Peng Chong's disciple Han Li and others jointly supported Peng Chong's son Peng Wu as the King of Swans. Han Li, the national teacher, killed Peng Wu, cut off his head, and took it to the Eastern Han Conquest General's Festival in Zun to surrender.

古文：帝封子密为不义侯。
现代文：祭遵把彭宠家族全部杀死。刘秀封子密为不义侯。
English: Matsu Zun killed the entire Peng Jia family. Liu Xiufeng and his son were treated unjustly.

古文：权德舆议曰：伯通之叛命，子密之戕君，同归于乱，罪不相蔽，宜各致于法，昭示王度，反乃爵于五等，又以 不义 为名。
现代文：权德舆议曰：彭宠叛变，子密杀君，同样是乱臣贼子，罪恶不能相遮盖，应当分别绳之以法，使王法显示于天下。但刘秀反而封子密做五等爵，又冠以 不义 的称号。
English: The public opinion of power and virtue said: Peng Cai's mutiny, his son-in-law's assassination, and his son-in-law's theft are the same, the evil cannot be covered up, and they should be brought to justice separately, so that the king's law can be shown to the world. However, Liu Xiu instead made his son-in-law a fifth-class peer, and he was also awarded the title of injustice.

古文：且举以不义，莫可侯也；此而可侯，汉爵为不足劝矣。
现代文：既然提出他不义，就不可以封侯。如果这样的行为可以封侯的话，汉朝的爵位就失去劝勉的意义了。
English: Since he is unjust, he should not be given a title of nobility. If such an act can be given a title of nobility, the titles of nobility in the Han Dynasty would lose their meaning of encouragement.

古文：春秋书齐豹盗、三人名之义，无乃异于乎！
现代文：《春秋》把因私仇杀害卫侯兄孟絷的卫国司寇齐豹称为强盗；记载庶其、牟夷、射三个叛徒的名字，它的原则恐怕与此不同吧！
English: "Spring and Autumn" called the secretary of defense, who killed Wei Hou's brother Meng Yao, a robber; it recorded the names of three traitors, Shiji, Mu Yi, and Sha, but I'm afraid its principle is different from this!

古文：帝以扶风郭为渔阳太守。
现代文：刘秀任命扶风人郭做渔阳太守。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Guo Fengren as the governor of Yuyang.

古文：承离乱之后，养民训兵，开示威信，盗贼销散，匈奴远迹；在职五年，户口增倍。
现代文：郭接受的是流离战乱后的烂摊子，他休养百姓，训练士兵，建立威信。不久盗贼消散，匈奴人的踪迹远去。郭在职五年，户口增加一倍。
English: Guo accepted the chaos caused by the displaced people after the war. He rested the people, trained soldiers, and established prestige. Soon the thieves dispersed, and the traces of the Huns were gone. Guo was in office for five years, and the household registration doubled.

古文：帝使光禄大夫樊宏持节迎耿况于上谷，曰： 边郡寒苦，不足久居。 
现代文：刘秀命光禄大夫樊宏持符节在上谷郡迎接耿况，说： 边疆郡县，寒冷贫穷，不能长期居住。 
English: Liu Xiumei Guanglu doctor Zou Hong held a festival to welcome Geng situation in Shanggu County, said: Border counties, cold and poor, can not live long.

古文：况至京师，赐甲第，奉朝请，封牟平侯。
现代文：耿况到达洛阳，被赐予上等住宅，有权参加朝会封他为牟平侯。
English: Geng arrived in Luoyang, was given a first-class residence, the right to participate in the imperial court, and was given the title of Muping.

古文：吴汉率耿弇、王常击富平、获索贼于平原，大破之；追讨馀党，至勃海，降者上万馀人。
现代文：吴汉率领耿、王常在平原郡攻打富平、获索贼军，大败贼军。追击余部至勃海郡，有四万余人投降。
English: Led by Wu Han, Geng and Wang Chang, they attacked Fuping in Pingyuan County, captured the Suo thief army, and defeated the thief army. They chased the rest to Bohai County, and more than 40,000 people surrendered.

古文：上因诏弇进讨张步。
现代文：刘秀接着颁诏书，命耿进军讨伐张步。
English: Liu Xiu then issued an imperial edict, ordering Geng to march against Zhangpu.

古文：平敌将军庞萌，为人逊顺，帝信爱之，常称曰： 可以托六尺之孤，寄百里之命者，庞萌是也。 
现代文：平敌将军庞萌为人谦逊和顺，刘秀信任并喜爱他，常常称赞他说： 可以托付六尺高的孤儿，托付一县百里土地的是庞萌。 
English: General Pang Meng, who defeated the enemy, was a humble and obedient person. Liu Xiu trusted and loved him, and often praised him, saying, "You can entrust a six-foot-tall orphan, but it is Pang Meng who entrusts a county with a hundred miles of land."

古文：使与盖延共击董宪。
现代文：派他和盖延共同攻打董宪。
English: He sent him and Gai Yan to jointly attack Dong Xian.

古文：归诏书独下延而不及萌，萌以为延谮己，自疑，遂反，袭延军，破之；与董宪连和，自号东平王，屯桃乡之北。
现代文：当时诏书只颁给盖延而没有颁给庞萌，庞萌以为是盖延在刘秀面前说了自己的坏话，起了疑心，于是叛变，袭击盖延军，打败盖延和董宪联合起来，自称东平王，在桃乡以北驻扎军队。
English: At that time, the imperial decree was only issued to Gai Yan, but not to Pang Meng. Pang Meng thought that Gai Yan had spoken ill of him in front of Liu Xiu, and became suspicious, so he mutinied, attacked Gai Yan's army, defeated Gai Yan and Dong Xian, united, called himself Dongping Wang, and stationed troops north of Taoxiang.

古文：帝闻之，大怒，自将讨萌，与诸将书曰： 吾常以庞萌为社稷之臣，将军得无笑其言乎！
现代文：刘秀听到庞萌叛变的消息，大怒，亲率军队讨伐庞萌，他给将领们写信说： 我曾经以为庞萌是可以把国家托付给他的重臣，将军们恐怕要笑我说的话吧？
English: When Liu Xiu heard the news of Pang Meng's defection, he was furious and led his own troops to fight against Pang Meng. He wrote to the generals saying: I once thought that Pang Meng could entrust the country to his chief minister. I'm afraid the generals will laugh at my words, right?

古文：老贼当族，其各厉兵马，会睢阳！ 
现代文：庞萌这个老贼应当灭族，你们加紧操练军队，在睢阳会师！ 
English: Pang Meng, this old thief, should exterminate the nation. You should step up your military drills and meet your division in Shenyang!

古文：庞萌攻破彭城，将杀楚郡太守孙萌。
现代文：岑彭攻下彭城，要杀楚郡太守孙萌。
English: Yao Peng captured Pengcheng and wanted to kill Sun Meng, the governor of Chu County.

古文：太守已绝复苏，渴求饮，平倾创血以饮之。
现代文：楚郡官吏刘平趴在太守身上，哭号着请求代替太守去死，身上受了七处伤。
English: Liu Ping, an official from Chu County, was lying on the body of the Emperor, crying and begging to die in place of the Emperor. He suffered seven injuries.

古文：岑彭攻拔夷陵，田戎亡入蜀，尽获其妻子、士众数万人。
现代文：庞萌觉得他很讲义气而赦免了孙萌。孙萌已经气绝，又苏醒过来，口渴想要喝水，刘平将伤口流出的血倒给孙萌喝。
English: Pang Meng felt that he was very righteous and pardoned Sun Meng. Sun Meng was exhausted, woke up again, thirsty and wanted to drink water. Liu Ping poured the blood from the wound to Sun Meng to drink.

古文：公孙述以戎为翼江王。
现代文：岑彭策划攻打蜀地。
English: Sui and Peng planned to attack Shu.

古文：岑彭谋伐蜀，以夹川谷少，水险难漕，留威虏将军冯骏军江州，都尉田鸿军夷陵，领军李玄军夷道；自引兵还屯津乡，当荆州要会，喻告诸蛮夷降者，奏封其君长。
现代文：因长江两岸粮食不足，水势险恶，而漕运困难，留下威虏将军冯骏驻屯江州、都尉田鸿驻屯夷陵，领军李玄驻屯夷道。岑彭自己率领军队返回，驻屯津乡，把守荆州要冲，通告投降的各夷蛮族，已经上奏请求封他们的首领。
English: Due to the shortage of grain on both sides of the Yangtze River, the perilous water situation, and the difficulty of rowing, he left the tyrant general Feng Yu stationed in Tunjiangzhou, the captain Tian Hong stationed in Tunyiling, and the leader of the army Li Xuan stationed in Tunyi Road. Zi Peng himself led the army back, stationed in Tunjin Township, and wanted to rush the defense of Jingzhou, and announced the surrender of the barbarian tribes of the barbarians, and has appealed for the sealing of their leaders.

古文：夏，四月，旱，蝗。
现代文：夏季，四月，天旱，出现蝗灾。
English: Summer, April, drought, locust plague.

古文：隗嚣问于班彪曰： 往者周亡，战国并争，数世然后定。
现代文：隗嚣问班彪说： 从前，周朝灭亡，战国时期群雄争战，几代以后天下才统一。
English: Pan Biao said, "Once upon a time, the Zhou Dynasty perished, and during the Warring States Period, many heroes fought against each other. It took several generations before the world was unified.

古文：意者从横之事复起于今乎？
现代文：大概合纵连横的旧事将会在今天重演吧？
English: Perhaps the same old story will repeat itself today?

古文：将承运迭兴，在于一人也？ 
现代文：将由一个人承受天命，再度兴起吗？ 
English: Or do they assume the task of renewing the world, concentrating on one person?

古文：彪曰： 周之废兴，与汉殊异。
现代文：班彪说： 周朝的兴亡，同汉朝完全不同。
English: Ban Biao said: The rise and fall of the Zhou Dynasty is completely different from that of the Han Dynasty.

古文：昔周爵五等，诸侯从政，本根既微，枝叶强大，故其末流有从横之事，势数然也。
现代文：过去周朝把爵位分成五等，诸侯各自为政。衰微以后，枝叶强大，所以到了末期出现合纵连横的事，是形势发展的必然结果。
English: Before the Zhou Dynasty, there were five kinds of vassals: princes, vassals, nobles, sons, and men. The vassals controlled their own territories independently, just like a big tree. The root was very weak, and the branches and leaves were very luxuriant. Therefore, later, the situation was the reason for the succession of vassals.

古文：汉承秦制，改立郡县，主有专己之威，臣无百年之柄。
现代文：汉朝继承秦朝的政治制度，改置郡县，君主有专制独裁的威严，臣下没有积累到一百年的权力。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the political system of the Qin Dynasty and rearranged counties. The monarch had the majesty of an autocratic dictatorship, and his vassals did not accumulate power for a hundred years.

古文：至于成帝，假借外家，哀、平短祚，国嗣三绝，故王氏擅朝，因窃号位，危自上起，伤不及下，是以即真之后，天下莫不引领而叹。
现代文：到了汉成帝时，把皇帝的威严让给外戚。以后汉哀帝、汉平帝在位时间都很短，皇位的合法继承人三次断绝。所以王莽专擅朝政，得以篡夺皇位。国家的危机来自最上层，没有伤害到百姓。所以王莽篡夺皇位成为事实以后，天下人无不伸长脖子叹息。
English: When it came to Emperor Hancheng, he gave up the emperor's majesty to his relative. Later, Emperor Han Ying and Emperor Han Ping had very short reigns, and the legitimate heir to the throne was cut off three times. Therefore, Wang Mang was exclusively in charge of the imperial government and was able to usurp the throne. The crisis of the country came from the top and did not hurt the people. Therefore, after Wang Mang usurped the throne became a fact, everyone in the world stretched their necks and sighed.

古文：十馀年间，中外骚扰，远近俱发，假号云合，咸称刘氏，不谋同辞。
现代文：在十余年时间里，内扰外乱，远近一齐爆发。各路人马风起云涌，全都假借刘姓宗室的名号，大家不谋而合。
English: In more than ten years, internal and external disturbances have erupted far and near at the same time. People from all walks of life have gathered, all of them have borrowed the name of Liu's family, and everyone has coincided.

古文：方今雄桀带州域者，皆无七国世业之资，而百姓讴吟思汉。汉必复兴，已可知矣。 
现代文：当今拥有州郡的英雄豪杰，都没有六国那种世代积累的资本，而老百姓讴歌、吟咏、思念、仰慕的是汉朝，汉朝必然复兴，已经可以知道了。 
English: Today's heroes and heroines of the state and county do not have the capital accumulated by generations like the Six Kingdoms, but the common people sing, chant, miss and admire the Han Dynasty, and the inevitable revival of the Han Dynasty can already be known.

古文：嚣曰： 生言周、汉之势可也，至于但见愚人习识刘氏姓号之故，而谓汉复兴，疏矣！
现代文：隗嚣说： 先生讲的周朝、汉朝的形势是对的，至于只看见愚昧的人习惯于刘氏宗室统治的缘故，就说汉朝一定复兴，看法就不周密了。
English: Gong Han said: The situation of the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty mentioned by the professor is correct. As for those who only see the folly of getting used to the rule of the Liu family, they say that the Han Dynasty will definitely be revived, but their view is not thorough.

古文：昔秦失其鹿，刘季逐而掎之，时民复知汉乎？ 
现代文：从前，秦朝失去了天下，刘邦奋起而夺得天下，当时的老百姓又能知道汉朝吗？ 
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty lost deer, Liu Ji chased and won. At that time, how did the people know there were Han?

古文：彪乃为之著《王命论》以风切之曰： 昔尧之禅舜曰： 天之历数在尔躬。 
现代文：于是班彪为他撰写了《王命论》，用深刻的话进行讽喻，劝告隗嚣说： 从前，尧把天下禅让给舜时说： 上天的大命落在你的身上。 
English: Therefore, Ban Biao wrote "The Theory of the King's Life" for him, using profound words to carry out a parable, exhorting Gong Hanran to say: Once upon a time, when Gong gave the world of Zen to Gong, he said: The great life of heaven falls on you.

古文：舜亦以命禹。
现代文：舜也将同样的话告诉禹。
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：洎于稷、契，咸佐唐、虞，至汤、武而有天下。
现代文：到后稷、子契，他们都辅佐唐尧、虞舜。一直到商汤、周武王而拥有天下。
English: After the arrival of Houyi and Ziqi, they all assisted Tang Qi and Yu Qi. All the way to Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang, they owned the world.

古文：刘氏承尧之祚，尧据火德而汉绍之，有赤帝子之符，故为鬼神所福飨，天下所归往。
现代文：刘姓继承的是尧的大业，尧是火德，而汉朝承袭下来，刘邦有赤帝儿子的符命，因此被鬼神祝福供奉，天下全都归附于他。
English: The Liu family name inherited the great cause of the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty inherited it. Liu Bang had the fate of the son of the Red Emperor, so he was blessed and worshiped by ghosts and gods, and the whole world was attached to him.

古文：由是言之，未见运世无本，功德不纪，而得屈起在此位者也！
现代文：由此可以说，从未见过命运没有基础，功德不为人所记，而能够崛起处在帝王之位的。
English: From this we can say that we have never seen a fate without a foundation, a merit that is not remembered by people, but can rise to the throne.

古文：俗见高祖兴于布衣，不达其故，至比天下于逐鹿，幸捷而得之。不知神器有命，不可以智力求也。
现代文：按照世俗的观点，看到刘邦从一个普通的老百姓登上皇帝的宝座，不明白其中的缘故，甚至认为争夺天下就像追逐奔跑的鹿，幸运腿快的就能捉到，却不知帝王的权力自有命运注定，不能凭借智慧和力量追求。
English: According to the secular point of view, seeing Liu Bang ascend the throne of the emperor from an ordinary commoner, he did not understand the reason, and even thought that competing for the world was like chasing a running deer, and the lucky leg could be caught quickly, but he did not know that the emperor's power was destined by its own fate and could not be pursued by virtue of wisdom and strength.

古文：悲夫，此世所以多乱臣贼子者也！
现代文：可悲呵，这就是世上所以多有乱臣贼子的原因。
English: Sadly, this is why there are so many traitors in the world.

古文：夫饿馑流隶，饥寒道路，所愿不过一金，然终转死沟壑，何则？
现代文：饥饿的流民在路途上挨饿受冻，他们的愿望不过是能有一点钱，然而最终辗转死于沟壑。为什么？
English: Hungry migrants starve and freeze on the road, hoping for a bit of money, only to die in a ravine. Why?

古文：贫穷亦有命也。
现代文：因为贫穷也是命运注定的。
English: Poverty is also destiny.

古文：况乎天子之贵，四海之富，神明之祚，可得而妄处哉！故虽遭厄会，窃其权柄，勇如信、布，强如梁、籍，成如王莽，然卒润镬伏质，亨醢分裂；又况幺么尚不及数子，而欲暗奸天位者乎！
现代文：况且帝王的尊贵，拥有四海的富饶，受到神明的赐福，能够随便处置吗？ 所以，虽然国家遇到忧患和战乱，有的人窃取了权力，但是勇猛如同韩信、英布；强大如同项梁、项羽；成功如同王莽，尚且最终败亡，被烹杀斩首，剁成肉酱，肢体分裂。又何况一些微不足道的小人物，还不如上述这几个人，却想趁着黑暗篡夺天子的尊位呢！
English: Moreover, is the dignity of the emperor, possessing the riches of the four seas, blessed by the gods, able to dispose of it at will? Therefore, although the country has encountered sorrow and war, some people have stolen power, but they are as brave as Han Xin and Ying Bu; strong as Xiao Liang and Xiao Yu; successful as Wang Mang, yet they are ultimately defeated, killed, beheaded, minced into meat sauce, and their limbs are divided. Moreover, some insignificant little people, not as good as the above-mentioned people, want to take advantage of the darkness to usurp the dignity of the heavenly son!

古文：昔陈婴之母以婴家世贫贱，卒富贵不祥，止婴勿王；王陵之母知汉王必得天下，伏剑而死，以固勉陵。
现代文：过去，陈婴的母亲因为陈婴家世代贫贱，突然富贵，认为是不吉祥，阻止陈婴当王。王陵的母亲知道刘邦一定会得到天下，用宝剑自杀，以坚定和勉励王陵效忠刘邦的决心。
English: In the past, Chen Ying's mother, because Chen Ying's family had been poor for generations and suddenly became rich, thought it was unlucky and prevented Chen Ying from becoming king. Wang Ling's mother knew that Liu Bang would definitely gain the world and committed suicide with a sword, with the determination to firmly encourage Wang Ling to be loyal to Liu Bang.

古文：夫以匹妇之明，犹能推事理之致，探祸福之机，而全宗祀于无穷，垂策书于春秋，而况大丈夫之事乎！
现代文：凭一个老妇人的明智，还能够推断事理的精到之处，探知祸福的关键，而永久保全家族，使事迹记载在史书上。何况大丈夫的业绩呢？
English: With the intelligence of ordinary people, they can still deduce the subtleties of reason and reason, explore the key to misfortune and fortune, and can preserve the family generation without worry, fame and history, let alone act well!

古文：是故穷达有命，吉凶由人，婴母知废，陵母知兴，审此二者，帝王之分决矣。
现代文：因此，贫贱富贵由命运安排，吉凶由自己掌握。陈婴的母亲知道谁会灭亡，王陵的母亲知道谁会兴起。详知这两个方面，帝王何在就清楚了。
English: Therefore, poverty is predestined, good fortune or misfortune depends on the individual, the mother of a premature baby knows the reason for decline and death, the mother of a royal tomb understands the reason for prosperity, and examines two points, it can be seen that the emperor's life has been predetermined.

古文：加之高祖宽明而仁恕，知人善任使。
现代文：加上刘邦宽厚英明，仁爱忠恕，知人善任。
English: In addition, Liu Bang is generous and wise, benevolent and loyal, and is a good friend.

古文：当食吐哺，纳子房之策；拔足挥洗，捐郦生之说；举韩信于行陈，收陈平于亡命；英雄陈力，群策毕举，此高祖之大略所以成帝业也。
现代文：正在吃饭的时候，能够吐出口中的饭食，接受张良提出的策略；正在洗脚的时候，能够拔出脚，为郦食其的话而作揖，在军队的行列中选拔韩信，在逃亡奔命后任用陈平。英雄们献出力量，各种计策都被提出，这就是高祖的雄才大略，他因此而成就了帝王大业。
English: When he was eating, he was able to spit out his meal and accept the strategy proposed by Zhang Liang; when he was washing his feet, he was able to pull out his feet and make a cocoon for eating his words. Han Xin was selected in the ranks of the army, and Chen Ping was appointed after fleeing for his life. The heroes gave their strength, and various strategies were proposed. This is Gaozu's great talent, and he thus achieved the great cause of the emperor.

古文：若乃灵瑞符应，其事甚众，故淮阴、留侯谓之天授，非人力也。
现代文：至于灵验的预兆，瑞符的应验，这种事很多。所以韩信、张良认为是上天授予，而不是由于人的力量。
English: As for the effective omens, the fulfillment of auspicious signs, there are many such things. Therefore, Han Xin and Zhang Liang believed that it was bestowed by heaven, not by human power.

古文：英雄诚知觉寤，超然远览，渊然深识，收陵、婴之明分，绝信、布之觊觎，距逐鹿之瞽说，审神器之有授，毋贪不可冀，为二母之所笑，则福祚流于子孙，天禄其永终矣！ 
现代文：英雄如果能够知道觉悟，高瞻远瞩，深刻认识，学习王陵、陈婴的明白自己的本分，弃绝韩信、英布的野心，抵制 逐鹿 的那些盲人瞎话，认识到皇帝的至高无上的权力是上天授予的；不贪图不可希冀的东西，不被陈婴、王陵的母亲嘲笑，那么，福分就会流传给子孙，上天将永远赐福！ 
English: If the hero can know awareness, high vision, deep understanding, learn the tomb of the king and the tomb of the infant, understand his duty, abandon the ambition of Han Xin and Ying Bu, resist the nonsense of those blind people who chase deer, realize that the emperor's supreme power is granted by heaven; do not covet what cannot be hoped for, and do not be ridiculed by the mother of the tomb of the king and the tomb of the infant, then the blessing will be passed on to the children and grandchildren, and heaven will bless forever!

古文：嚣不听。
现代文：隗嚣不听班彪的劝告。
English: He did not listen to Ban Biao's advice.

古文：彪遂避地河西。
现代文：班彪于是躲避到河西。
English: Ban Biao then fled to Hexi.

古文：窦融以为从事甚礼重之。
现代文：窦融任命他当从事，十分礼敬尊重。
English: Dou Rong appointed him to be engaged, and he was highly respected.

古文：彪遂为融画策，使之专意事汉焉。
现代文：班彪于是替窦融谋划，使窦融专心一意为东汉朝廷效力。
English: Ban Biao then planned for Dou Rong and made Dou Rong concentrate on serving the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：初，窦融等闻帝威德，心欲东向，以河西隔远，未能自通，乃从隗嚣受建武王朔；嚣皆假其将军印绶。
现代文：当初，窦融等听说刘秀的威望恩德，一心向往东方，因为河西和洛阳相隔遥远，自己不能直接联系，于是自隗嚣那里接受东汉 建武 的年号。隗嚣一并授给他将军印信和绶带。
English: At first, Dou Rong and others heard of Liu Xiu's prestige and virtue, and yearned for the East, because Hexi and Luoyang were far apart and they could not directly contact each other, so they accepted the year name of Eastern Han Dynasty Jianwu from Gong Han. Gong Han also gave him the general's seal and sash.

古文：嚣外顺人望，内怀异心，使辩士张玄说融等曰： 更始事已成，寻复亡灭，此一姓不再兴之效也！
现代文：隗嚣表面上顺应众望，实际上怀有二心，他派善辩之士张玄劝说窦融等人道： 更始的大事已经成功，但很快又灭亡，这是刘氏一姓不能再起的证明。
English: On the surface, Yanran complied with the expectations of the public, but in fact, he had two minds. He sent Zhang Xuan, a good debater, to persuade Dou Rong and other humanitarians: The great event of the beginning has been successful, but it will soon perish, which is proof that the Liu family name cannot be revived.

古文：今即有所主，便相系属，一旦拘制，自令失柄，后有危败，虽悔无及。
现代文：如果马上就认定君主，隶属于他，一旦受到束缚和制约，自己就会失掉权力。以后跟着他败亡，后悔莫及。
English: If you immediately identify the monarch and subordinate to him, once you are bound and restricted, you will lose your power. Later, you will follow him to defeat and regret.

古文：方今豪桀竞逐，雌雄未决，当各据土宇，与陇、蜀合从，高可为六国，下不失尉佗。 
现代文：当今英雄豪杰相互竞争，胜败未定。我们应当各守地盘，和陇西隗嚣、西蜀公孙述结成合纵联盟。搞得好可以成为战国时代的六国之一，搞不好也可成为南海尉佗。 
English: Today's heroes and heroines are competing with each other, and their victory or defeat is yet to be determined. We should each defend our turf, and form a vertical alliance with Shaanxi Hanran and West Shukong Sunsu. If we do well, we can become one of the six countries in the Warring States period, and if not, we can also become a South Sea lieutenant.

古文：融等召豪桀议之，其中识者皆曰： 今皇帝姓名见于图书，自前世博物道术之士谷子云、夏贺良等皆言汉有再受命之符，故刘子骏改易名字，冀应其占。
现代文：窦融等召集豪杰们商议，其中有见识的人都说： 当今皇帝的名字，在预言书中可以看到，前辈的法术大师谷子云、夏贺良等都认为，汉朝有再度兴起的祥瑞征兆，所以刘歆改名为刘秀，希望应和预言书上的话。
English: Dou Rong and others convened the heroes to discuss, and some of the knowledgeable people said: The name of today's emperor can be seen in the prophecy book. The predecessors of the magic masters, such as Gu Ziyun and Xia He Liang, all believed that the Han Dynasty had signs of re-emerging auspiciousness, so Liu Bei changed his name to Liu Xiu, hoping to correspond to the words in the prophecy book.

古文：及莽末，西门君惠谋立子骏，事觉被杀，出谓观者曰： 谶文不误，刘秀真汝主也！ 
现代文：等到王莽末年，西门君惠谋划拥立刘歆做皇帝，事情败露被杀。西门在被绑缚刑场的途中，对围观的人说： 预言书上的话不错，刘秀确实是你们的君主！ 
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, Ximen Junhui plotted to make Liu Xiu emperor, but the plot was uncovered and he was killed. On his way to the execution site, Ximen said to the onlookers: "The words in the prophecy are true, Liu Xiu is indeed your monarch!

古文：此皆近事暴著，众所共见者也。
现代文：这是近年发生的事，人人皆知，大家亲眼所见。
English: This is something that has happened in recent years, everyone knows about it, everyone has seen it with their own eyes.

古文：况今称帝者数人，而雒阳土地最广，甲兵最强，号令最明，观符命而察人事，它姓殆未能当也！ 
现代文：何况当今号称皇帝的几个人中，刘秀拥有的土地最多，兵力最为强盛，军令最为严明。观察预言书上的话，考察世间的事情，其他姓氏的人恐怕不能担当君主。 
English: Moreover, among the few people who claim to be emperors today, Liu Xiu owns the most land, has the most powerful army, and has the strictest military orders. Observe the words in the prophecy book, examine the things of the world, and people with other surnames may not be able to serve as monarchs.

古文：众议或同或异。
现代文：大家商议，有的赞同，有的反对。
English: Everyone deliberated, some agreed, some disagreed.

古文：融遂决策东向，遣长史刘钧等奉书诣雒阳。
现代文：窦融于是决定归顺东方的刘秀，派长史刘钧等人带着给刘秀的信到洛阳去。
English: Dou Rong then decided to submit to Liu Xiu in the East, and sent the commander Shi Liu Yao and others to Luoyang with a letter to Liu Xiu.

古文：先是，帝亦发使遗融书以招之，遇钧于道，即与俱还。
现代文：在这之前，刘秀也派使者给窦融送信招致他。刘秀的使者在路上遇到刘钧，就和刘钧一起返回洛阳。
English: Prior to this, Liu Xiu also sent an envoy to Dou Rong to invite him. Liu Xiu's envoy met Liu Yao on the road and returned to Luoyang with Liu Yao.

古文：帝见钧欢甚，礼飨毕，乃遣令还，赐融玺书曰： 今益州有公孙子阳，天水有隗将军。
现代文：刘秀见到刘钧十分高兴，和他以礼相见，设宴款待，然后，让他回去汇报，赐给窦融诏书说： 现在益州有公孙述，天水有隗嚣。
English: Liu Xiu was very happy to see Liu Ye. He met him with courtesy, set up a banquet, and then let him go back to report. He gave Dou Rong an imperial edict saying: Now, Yizhou has a great-grandson, and Tianshui has a great-grandson.

古文：方蜀、汉相攻，权在将军，举足左右，便有轻重。
现代文：公孙述和隗嚣两家正互相攻打，胜败的命运掌握在将军手中，有着举足轻重的作用。
English: The two families of Gongsunsu and Yanran are attacking each other, and the fate of victory and defeat is in the hands of the general, which plays a pivotal role.

古文：以此言之，欲相厚岂有量哉！
现代文：由此说来，您打算帮助某一方时，力量岂能计量！
English: With this in mind, is there a limit to how much you want to be together?

古文：欲遂立桓、文，辅微国，当勉卒功业；欲三分鼎足，连衡合从，亦宜以时定。
现代文：如果要创立齐桓公、晋文公的霸业，辅佐我这个弱小的政权，就应当努力完成这一功业；如果想实现三足鼎立的局面，连横合纵，也应该抓住时机决定。
English: If you want to establish the cause of Qi Kan Jinwen and support the micro-nation, you should strive to complete the supporting work; if you want to achieve the three-point peak, even the horizontal and vertical, it should also depend on the time.

古文：天下未并，吾与尔绝域，非相吞之国。
现代文：天下还没有统一，我和您土地不接壤，不会互相吞并。
English: There is no unification under heaven, I am not in the same region with you, not a country that annexes each other.

古文：今之议者，必有任嚣教尉佗制七郡之计。
现代文：现在谈论这件事的人，一定有像任嚣让尉佗控制七个郡那样的计策。
English: Those who are talking about it now must have a plan like letting Ren Rong control the seven counties.

古文：王者有分土，无分民，自适己事而已。 
现代文：君王可以分封土地，便不分割百姓，自己做适合自己的事情罢了。 
English: The king has a share of the land but not of the people, he just has to deal with his own affairs properly.

古文：因授融为凉州牧。
现代文：于是任命窦融当凉州牧。
English: So he appointed Dou Rong as the head of Liangzhou.

古文：玺书至河西，河西皆惊，以为天子明见万里之外。
现代文：诏书传到河西，整个地区震惊，认为天子明察，远到万里之外。
English: The edict spread to Hexi, shocking the entire region, which believed that the Son of Heaven was watching from thousands of miles away.

古文：硃祜急攻黎丘，六月，秦丰穷困出降；轞车送洛阳。
现代文：朱祜猛烈攻打黎丘。六月，秦丰因处于困境而出城投降。朱祜用囚车把秦丰送到洛阳。
English: Zhu Xi fiercely attacked Li Qiu. In June, Qin Feng went out of the city to surrender because he was in a difficult situation. Zhu Xi sent Qin Feng to Luoyang in a prison wagon.

古文：吴汉劾祜废诏命，受丰降。
现代文：吴汉弹劾朱祜不顾诏命，接受秦丰投降。
English: Wu Han impeached Zhu Xi and accepted Qin Feng's surrender in spite of the imperial order.

古文：上诛丰，不罪祜。
现代文：刘秀杀掉秦丰，不怪罪朱祜。
English: Liu Xiu did not blame Zhu Xi for killing Qin Feng.

古文：董宪与刘纡、苏茂、佼强去下邳还兰陵，使茂，强助庞萌围桃城。
现代文：董宪和刘纡、苏茂、佼强离开下邳，回到兰陵，让苏茂、佼强协助庞萌围攻桃城。
English: Dong Xian, Liu Ye, Su Mao, and Qiao Qiang left the lower moat and returned to Lanling. They asked Su Mao and Qiao Qiang to help Pang Meng to besiege Taocheng.

古文：帝时幸蒙，闻之，乃留辎重，自将轻兵晨夜驰赴。
现代文：刘秀当时正在蒙县，听说之后，就留下辎重，亲自率领轻装的部队，日夜奔驰赶赴救援。
English: Liu Xiu was in Mengxian at the time. After hearing the news, he left the heavy load behind and personally led the lightly armed troops. Day and night, the Mercedes rushed to the rescue.

古文：至亢父，或言百官疲倦，可且止宿；上不听，复行十里，宿任城，去桃城六十里。
现代文：到达亢父县，有人说官员们都很疲劳，可暂且停止行军，住宿休息。刘秀不同意，又行军十里路，在任城住宿，距离桃城六十里。
English: Arriving in Shichifu County, some people said that the officials were very tired, and could temporarily stop marching and stay overnight. Liu Xiu disagreed, and marched ten miles and stayed in Rencheng, sixty miles away from Taocheng.

古文：旦日，诸将请进，庞萌等亦勒兵挑战。
现代文：第二天，将领们请求进军，庞萌等也派军挑战。
English: The next day, the generals requested to march in, and Pang Meng and others also sent troops to challenge.

古文：帝令诸将不得出，休士养锐以挫其锋。
现代文：刘秀命令将领们不得出击，休整部众，养精蓄锐，以挫败敌军的锐气。
English: Liu Xiu ordered the generals not to attack, but to rest and recuperate in order to defeat the enemy's sharpness.

古文：时吴汉等在东郡，驰使召之。
现代文：当时吴汉等在东郡，刘秀派人骑快马招他前来。
English: At this time, Wu Han was waiting in Dong County, and the emperor sent someone to summon him.

古文：萌等惊曰： 数百里晨夜行，以为至当战，而坚坐任城，致人城下，真不可往也！ 
现代文：庞萌等吃惊说： 数百里路日夜行军，以为就会投入战斗，可是刘秀却稳坐任城，招别人到城下。我们确实不能前往！ 
English: Pang Meng and others were surprised and said, "We marched hundreds of miles day and night, thinking that we would be engaged in battle, but Liu Xiu sat firmly in the city and recruited others to go to the city. We really can't go!

古文：乃悉兵攻桃城。
现代文：于是全力进攻桃城。
English: As a result, they launched an all-out attack on Taocheng.

古文：城中闻车驾至，众心益固；萌等攻二十馀日，众疲困，不能下。
现代文：城内的人听说皇帝自来救援，军心更加牢固。庞萌等攻打二十多天，将士们疲劳不堪，不能攻陷。
English: The people in the city heard that the emperor had come to the rescue, and the military spirit was even stronger. Pang Meng waited for more than twenty days to attack, and the soldiers were too tired to attack.

古文：吴汉、王常、盖延、王梁、马武、王霸等皆至，帝乃率众军进救桃城，亲自搏战，大破之。
现代文：吴汉、王常、盖延、王梁、马武、王霸等都到达后，刘秀便率领各路大军进攻桃城，亲自参加战斗，大破敌军。
English: After Wu Han, Wang Chang, Gai Yan, Wang Liang, Ma Wu, Wang Ba and others arrived, Liu Xiu led the various armies to attack Taocheng, personally participated in the battle, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：庞萌、苏茂、佼强夜走从董宪。
现代文：庞萌、苏茂、佼强连夜逃跑，投奔董宪。
English: Pang Meng, Sumo, and Qiao Qiang fled overnight and joined Dong Xian.

古文：秋，七月，丁丑，帝幸沛，进幸湖陵。
现代文：秋季，七月丁丑，刘秀到达沛县，又到达湖陵。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ding Yuxi and Liu Xiu arrived in Peixian and Huling.

古文：董宪与刘纡悉其兵数万人屯昌虑；宪招诱五校馀贼，与之抿守建阳。
现代文：董宪和刘纡带领全部兵马数万人屯驻在昌虑县。董宪招致引诱五校军残部，和他们防守建阳。
English: Dong Xian and Liu Bei stationed tens of thousands of soldiers and horses in Changxian County. Dong Xian invited the remnants of the Five-School Army and they defended Jianyang.

古文：帝至蕃，去宪所百馀里，诸将请进，帝不听，知五校乏食当退，敕各坚壁以待其敝。
现代文：刘秀到达蕃县，距离董宪的营垒一百余里，将领们请求进攻。刘秀不同意，知道五校军缺乏粮食，就会撤退。告诫各路大军坚守营垒，以等待敌军疲惫。
English: Liu Xiu arrived in Min County, more than a hundred miles away from Dong Xian's camp, and the generals requested an attack. Liu Xiu disagreed, knowing that the five-school army lacked food, he would retreat. He warned all the armies to hold the camp to wait for the enemy to get tired.

古文：顷之，五校果引去。
现代文：不久，五校军果然离去。
English: Soon after, the five-unit army did indeed leave.

古文：帝乃亲临，四面攻宪，三日，大破之。
现代文：刘秀于是亲临战场，四面围攻董宪。三天后，大破董宪的军队。
English: Liu Xiu then went to the battlefield in person and besieged Dong Xian on all sides. Three days later, he defeated Dong Xian's army.

古文：佼强将其众降，苏茂奔张步，宪及庞萌走保郯。
现代文：佼强率领部众投降，苏茂投奔张步，董宪和庞萌逃跑，据守郯县。
English: Qiao Qiang led his subordinates to surrender, Su Mao rushed to Zhangpu, and Dong Xian and Pang Meng fled, leaving the county under siege.

古文：八月，己酉，帝幸郯，留吴汉攻之，车驾转徇彭城、下邳。
现代文：八月己酉，刘秀到达郯县，留下吴汉攻城，自己转而攻取彭城、下邳。
English: In August, Liu Xiu arrived in Jixian, leaving Wu Han to attack the city, and he turned to capture Pengcheng and Jiaozuo.

古文：吴汉拔郯，董宪、庞萌走保朐。
现代文：吴汉攻占郯县，董宪、庞萌逃到朐县据守。
English: Wu Han conquered Min County, while Dong Xian and Pang Meng fled to Min County.

古文：刘纡不知所归，其军士高扈斩之以降。
现代文：刘纡不知该逃往何处，被他的军士高扈所斩，高扈投降刘秀。
English: Liu Xuan did not know where to flee, and was beheaded by his sergeant Gao Yao. Gao Yao surrendered to Liu Xiu.

古文：吴汉进围朐。
现代文：吴汉进军包围朐县。
English: Wu Han marched into Waiyi County.

古文：冬，十月，帝幸鲁。
现代文：冬季，十月，刘秀到达鲁城。
English: In winter, in October, Liu Xiu arrived in Lucheng.

古文：张步闻耿弇将至，使其大将军费邑军历下，又令兵屯祝阿，别于泰山、钟城列营数十以待之。
现代文：张步听说耿将要到达，命他的大将军费邑驻屯历下城；又派军队驻屯祝阿县；另外在泰山、钟城排列数十个营垒，等待耿军。
English: Zhang Bu heard that Geng was about to arrive, and ordered his general Fei Yi to stay in Lixia Town; he also sent troops to stay in Zhua County; in addition, dozens of camps were lined up in Taishan and Zhongcheng to wait for Geng's army.

古文：弇渡河，先击祝阿，自旦攻城，日未中而拔之；故开围一角，令其众得奔归钟城。钟城人闻祝阿已溃，大恐惧，遂空壁亡去。
现代文：耿渡过黄河，先攻打祝阿。
English: Geng crossed the Yellow River, and attacked Zhu first.

古文：费邑分遣弟敢守巨里。
现代文：从早晨开始攻城，还没到中午就攻陷城池。
English: Fei Eup separately dispatched his younger brother Fei Dang to guard Jiu Li.

古文：弇进兵先胁巨里，严令军中趣修攻具，宣敕诸部，后三日当悉力攻巨里城；阴缓生口，令得亡归，以弇期告邑。
现代文：故意打开一个缺口，让城里的残兵得以跑出，投奔钟城。钟城的军队听说祝阿已经陷落，极度恐慌，于是留下一座空城逃走。费邑派遣弟弟费敢据守巨里。耿进兵先威胁巨里，严令军队立即准备攻城工具，通告全军，三天后将要全力进攻巨里城。暗中释放几名俘虏，让他们逃回，把耿的行动日期告诉费邑。
English: He purposely opened a gap so that the remaining soldiers in the city could escape and run to Zhongcheng. When the army in Zhongcheng heard that Zhu'a had fallen, they panicked and fled, leaving behind an empty city. Fei Yu sent his brother Fei Gan to defend Jiu Li. Geng Jin first threatened Jiu Li, ordered the army to immediately prepare siege tools, and announced to the whole army that they would attack Jiu Li three days later. He secretly released several prisoners, let them escape, and told Fei Yu the date of Geng's action.

古文：邑至日，果自将精兵三万馀人来救之。
现代文：费邑在三天后，果然亲自率领精锐部队三万余人赶来援救。
English: Three days later, Fei Yu personally led more than 30,000 elite troops to come to the rescue.

古文：弇喜，谓诸将曰： 吾所以修攻具者，欲诱致之耳。
现代文：耿非常高兴，对将领们说： 我准备攻城工具的目的，就是要引诱费邑前来。
English: Geng was very happy and said to the generals, "The purpose of my preparing the siege tools is to lure Fei Yu to come.

古文：野兵不击，何以城为！ 
现代文：不攻打他们的野战部队，要城干什么！ 
English: If you don't attack their field troops, what do you want with the city!

古文：即分三千人守巨里，自引精兵上冈阪，乘高合战，大破之，临陈斩邑。
现代文：马上分兵三千人看守巨里；自己统率精兵登上山坡，占据高地和费邑交战，大破敌军，在阵地上斩杀费邑。
English: Immediately, a detachment of three thousand soldiers guarded the giant; he himself led the elite soldiers up the hillside, occupied the highlands and Feiyu, defeated the enemy army, and killed Feiyu in the position.

古文：既而收首级以示城中，城中凶惧。
现代文：然后把费邑的人头带给巨里城中的人看，城中震恐。
English: Then he showed the heads of the Fei people to the people in the city of Joli, and the city was shocked.

古文：费敢悉众亡归张步。
现代文：费敢率全体部众逃跑，投奔张步。
English: Fei Dare led the entire group to flee and rush to Zhangpu.

古文：弇复收其积聚，纵兵击诸未下者，平四十馀营，遂定济南。
现代文：耿又收取费敢留下的粮草，派兵攻取那些未归附的营寨，扫平四十余座，于是平定济南郡。
English: Geng also collected the grain and grass left by Fei Dang, sent troops to capture those camps that had not been annexed, and razed more than forty camps, thus pacifying Jinan County.

古文：时张步都剧，使其弟蓝将精兵二万守西安，诸郡太守合万馀人守临菑，相去四十里。
现代文：当时张步以剧县作为都城。他派弟弟张蓝率领精兵二万人驻守西安县，派各郡太守集合一万余人守卫临县，两地相距四十里。
English: At that time, Zhang Bu used Yunxian County as the capital. He sent his brother Zhang Lan to lead 20,000 elite soldiers to guard Xi'an County, and sent the county governors to gather more than 10,000 people to guard Lin County. The two places are forty miles apart.

古文：弇进军画中，居二城之间。
现代文：耿率军进军画中，画中位于西安和临之间。
English: During Geng Xuan's advance, he was in the middle of the two cities.

古文：弇视西安城小而坚，且蓝兵又精，临菑名虽大而实易攻，乃敕诸校后五日会攻西安。
现代文：耿看到西安城垣小，但很坚固，而且张蓝的军队又很精锐，临虽有盛名，但实际上却容易攻取。于是，耿命令各指挥官，五天以后联合攻打西安。
English: Geng saw that the city walls of Xi'an were small, but very strong, and that Zhang Lan's army was very elite. Although it was famous, it was actually easy to capture. Therefore, Geng ordered the commanders to jointly attack Xi'an in five days.

古文：蓝闻之，晨夜警守。
现代文：张蓝听说以后，日夜警戒守卫。
English: After Zhang Lan heard about it, he was on guard day and night.

古文：至期，夜半，弇敕诸将皆蓐食，会明，至临菑城。
现代文：到了预定日期，夜半时分，耿命将领们全都在住宿地吃饭。到天亮时，抵达临城。
English: On the scheduled date, at midnight, Geng's generals all had dinner at the lodging place. By dawn, they arrived at Lincheng.

古文：护军荀梁等争之，以为 攻临菑，西安必救之，攻西安，临菑不能救，不如攻西安。 
现代文：护军荀梁等表示反对，认为： 攻打临，西安必定救援；攻打西安，临不能救援，不如攻打西安。 
English: Gong Liang, one of the guards, objected, saying, "If we attack Lin, Xi'an will certainly come to our rescue; if we attack Xi'an and Lin cannot come to our rescue, it is better to attack Xi'an."

古文：弇曰： 不然，西安闻吾欲攻之，日夜为备，方自忧，何暇救人！
现代文：耿说： 不是这样。西安方面知道我们要攻打他们，日夜戒备，正担心自己的安全，哪有功夫援救别人！
English: Geng said: "That's not true. The Xi'an side knows that we are going to attack them, they are on alert day and night, they are worried about their own safety, how can they rescue others!

古文：临菑出不意而至，必惊拢，吾攻之一日，必拔。
现代文：临方面想不到我们会去攻打他们，一定会惊慌失措。我用一天的时间，必能攻破。
English: If the enemy doesn't think we're going to attack them, they'll surely panic. I'll be able to break through in a day.

古文：拔临菑，即西安孤，与剧隔绝，必复亡去，所谓 击一而得二 者也。
现代文：攻陷了临，西安立即变得孤立，和剧县的交通被我们切断，西安守军必然再弃城逃跑。这正是所谓 击一而得二 。
English: When the attack was imminent, Xi'an immediately became isolated, and we cut off the communication with Yunxian County. The defenders of Xi'an were bound to abandon the city and flee again. This is the so-called "strike one and get two."

古文：若先攻西安，不能卒下，顿兵坚城，死伤必多。
现代文：如果先攻打西安，不能很快攻下，军队被困在坚城之下，伤亡一定很多。
English: If you attack Xi'an first, you won't be able to take it quickly, the army will be trapped under the fortress, and there will be many casualties.

古文：纵能拔之，蓝引军还奔临菑，并兵合势，观人虚实。
现代文：纵使能够攻破，张蓝将率军逃回临，和那里的守军合并，观察我们的虚实。
English: Even if we are able to break through, Zhang Lan will lead the army to flee back to Jin, merge with the defenders there, and observe our falsity and reality.

古文：吾深入敌地，后无转输，旬月之间，不战而困矣。 
现代文：我们深入敌地，后面没有补给运送，一个月之内，不打仗就已困窘不堪了。 
English: We went deep into enemy territory, with no supplies behind us, and within a month, without fighting, we were in dire straits.

古文：遂攻临菑。半日，拔之，入据其城。
现代文：于是进攻临，半天时间后攻陷，进占该城。
English: As a result, the attack was imminent, and half a day later the city was captured and occupied.

古文：张蓝闻之，惧，遂将其众亡归剧。
现代文：张蓝听到消息，十分恐惧，于是率领军队逃回到剧县。
English: Zhang Lan was very frightened when he heard the news, so he led the army to flee back to Yuxian.

古文：弇乃令军中无得虏掠、须张步至乃取之，以激怒步。
现代文：耿于是下令军队不能掳掠，等到张步到来时才取财物，以激怒张步。
English: Geng then ordered the army not to loot, and to wait until Zhangbu arrived before taking property, in order to provoke Zhangbu.

古文：步闻，大笑曰： 以尤来、大彤十馀万众，吾皆即其营而破之。
现代文：张步听后，大笑说： 以尤来、大彤的十余万人之多，我都到他们的营垒摧毁他们。
English: After listening to Zhang Gao, he laughed loudly and said: I have come to destroy more than a hundred thousand people in Daju, and I have come to their camp.

古文：今大耿兵少于彼，又皆疲劳，何足惧乎！ 
现代文：现在耿的军队比他们少，又全疲劳不堪，有什么可怕的？ 
English: Now Geng's army is smaller than theirs, and they are all exhausted. What's so terrible?

古文：乃与三弟蓝、弘、寿及故大彤渠帅重异等兵号二十万，至临菑大城东，将攻弇。
现代文：于是联合三个弟弟张蓝、张弘、张寿以及前大彤军首领重异等的军队，号称二十万人，抵达临大城东，准备进攻耿。
English: So he united the three younger brothers Zhang Lan, Zhang Hong and Zhang Shou, as well as the former leader of the Taiyuan army, to form a disparate army, said to be 200,000 strong, which arrived in the east of Lintai and prepared to attack Geng.

古文：弇上书曰： 臣据临菑，深堑高垒；张步从剧县来攻，疲劳饥渴。
现代文：耿向刘秀报告军情说： 我占据临城，挖深壕，筑高墙。张步从剧县前来攻打，军队疲劳饥渴。
English: Geng reported the military situation to Liu Xiu, saying, "I occupied the outskirts of the city, dug deep trenches, and built high walls. Zhangpu came from Yingxian to attack, and the army was tired and thirsty.

古文：欲进，诱而攻之；欲去，随而击之。
现代文：他要推进，我就引诱而攻打他；他要撤退，我尾随而追击他。
English: If he advances, I will draw him out and fight him; if he retreats, I will pursue and overtake him.

古文：臣依营而战，精锐百倍，以逸待劳，以实击虚，旬日之间，步首可获。 
现代文：我依靠自己的营垒作战，精锐百倍，以逸待劳，以实攻虚，十天之内，可以获得张步首级。 
English: I rely on my own battalion to fight, I am a hundred times more elite, I use weakness to wait for labor, I attack weakness with reality, within ten days, I can get the first level of Zhangbu.

古文：于是弇先出菑水上，与重异遇；突骑欲纵，弇恐挫其锋，令步不敢进，故示弱以盛其气，乃引归小城，陈兵于内，使都尉刘歆、泰山太守陈俊分陈于城下。
现代文：于是耿率军先出营到水边，与重异遭遇。骑兵突击队就进攻，耿恐怕挫败敌军锐气，使张步不敢前进，就有意显示自己懦弱而助长对方的骄气，率军回到临小城，陈兵城内，派都尉刘歆、泰山太守陈俊分别在城下布阵。
English: As a result, Geng led the army to the water's edge first, where they encountered serious difficulties. The cavalry commando attacked, and Geng feared that he would frustrate the enemy's spirit and make Zhang step afraid to advance, so he deliberately showed his cowardice and encouraged the other side's pride. He led the army back to Linxiao City, Chen soldiers in the city, and sent Captain Liu Wei and Taishan Governor Chen Jun to set up a line of battle under the city.

古文：步气盛，直攻弇营，与刘歆等合战。
现代文：张步气盛，径直攻打耿军营，同刘歆等交战。
English: Zhang Bu, full of energy, attacked Geng's camp directly and fought with Liu Bei and others.

古文：弇升王宫坏台望之，视歆等锋交，乃自引精兵以横突步陈于东城下，大破之。
现代文：耿登上原齐国宫殿残破的高台观望，察看刘歆等同张步作战的情况，于是亲自率领精锐部队，在东城下横冲进张步的军队，大败敌军。
English: Geng boarded the high platform of the ruined palace of the former Qi State to watch and observe the situation of Liu Bei and others fighting at the same pace, so he personally led the elite troops to storm into the army of Zhangpu under the East City and defeated the enemy army.

古文：飞矢中弇股，以佩刀截之，左右无知者。
现代文：流箭射中耿大腿。耿用佩刀截断箭杆，左右没人知道主帅受伤。
English: A stray arrow hit Geng in the thigh. Geng used his sword to cut off the arrow shaft, and no one on either side knew that the coach was injured.

古文：至暮，罢。
现代文：战到天黑，收兵。
English: Fight until dark. Fall back.

古文：弇明旦复勒兵出。
现代文：第二天早晨，耿又率军出营。
English: The next morning, Geng led the army out of the camp.

古文：是时帝在鲁，闻弇为步所攻，自往救之。
现代文：这时刘秀在鲁城，听说耿被张步攻击的消息，亲自率军前去援救。
English: At this time, Liu Xiu, who was in Lucheng, heard the news that Geng had been attacked by Zhang Bu, and personally led the army to rescue him.

古文：未至，陈俊谓弇曰： 剧虏兵盛，可且闭营休士，以须上来。 
现代文：还未抵达，陈俊对耿说： 剧县敌兵士气正盛，我们可以暂且关闭营门，休养军士，等皇上前来。 
English: Before they arrived, Chen Jun said to Geng: "The enemy soldiers in Dajian County are in high spirits. We can temporarily close the gate of the camp, recuperate the soldiers and wait for the emperor to come.

古文：弇曰： 乘舆且到，臣子当击牛、酾酒以待百官，反欲以贼虏遗君父邪？ 
现代文：耿说： 皇上将到，臣子应当杀牛备酒等待百官，反而要把盗贼匪徒送给君王吗！ 
English: Geng said: When the emperor arrives, the courtiers should kill cattle and prepare wine to wait for the hundred officials, but instead they want to give thieves and bandits to the king!

古文：乃出兵大战。
现代文：于是出兵大战，从早晨到黄昏，再次大败敌军。
English: As a result, troops were sent out to fight from the morning until dusk, again defeating the enemy.

古文：自旦及昏，复大破之；杀伤无数，沟堑皆满。弇知步困将退，豫置左右翼为伏以待之。
现代文：杀伤敌人无数，尸体填满了水沟战壕。耿料到张步受到重创以后将会撤军，预先在左右两翼设下伏兵等候。
English: Countless enemies were killed and wounded, and the trenches were filled with corpses. Geng expected that after Zhang Bu suffered heavy losses, the army would withdraw, and set up ambushes on the left and right wings in advance.

古文：人定时，步果引去，伏兵起纵击，追至臣昧水上，八九十里，僵尸相属，收得辎重二千馀两。
现代文：深夜，张步果然率军离去。伏兵奋起攻击，一直追到臣水畔。前后八九十里，死尸相连。耿缴获张步的辎重车两千余辆。
English: In the middle of the night, Zhang Bu did indeed leave with his army. The ambushed soldiers rose up and attacked, chasing them all the way to the banks of the Omi River. For eighty or ninety miles back and forth, the dead bodies were connected. Geng captured more than two thousand of Zhang Bu's armored trucks.

古文：步还剧，兄弟各分兵散去。
现代文：张步逃回剧县，兄弟们各自带兵离开。
English: Zhang walked back to the play, and the brothers dispersed to their respective soldiers.

古文：后数日，车驾至临菑，自劳军，群臣大会。
现代文：又过了几天，刘秀抵达临，亲自慰劳军队，大会文武百官。
English: A few days later, Liu Xiu arrived in Linyi and personally consoled the troops and the hundreds of military and civilian officials.

古文：帝谓弇曰： 昔韩信破历下以开基，今将军攻祝阿以发迹，此皆齐之西界，功足相方。
现代文：刘秀对耿说： 过去韩信攻破历下，开创了大业的基础；今天将军攻破祝阿，建立了功绩，这些地方全是故齐国的西方边界，你们二人的功劳足可以相比。
English: The emperor said to Geng Yao, "In the past, Han Xin broke the Qi soldiers to lay the foundation for success in history, but now the general has broken the Qi soldiers to make a mark. This is all in the West, and the merits are quite comparable."

古文：而韩信袭击已降，将军独拔勍敌，其功又难于信也。
现代文：而韩信攻击的是已经投降的军队，将军单独打败强大的敌人，建功又比韩信艰难了。
English: Han Xin, on the other hand, attacked an army that had already surrendered. The general defeated a powerful enemy single-handedly, and it was more difficult to make contributions than Han Xin.

古文：又，田横亨郦生，及田横降，高帝诏卫尉不听为仇；张步前亦杀伏隆，若步来归命，吾当诏大司徒释其怨，又事尤相类也。
现代文：再有，田横曾经烹杀郦食其，等到田横投降刘邦，刘邦下诏卫尉郦商不要报仇。张步先前也杀了伏隆，今天如果他来归顺，我将下诏让大司徒伏湛解除怨恨，这两件事情又尤其相似。
English: Moreover, Tian Yang had prepared to kill and eat him, and when Tian Yang surrendered to Liu Bang, Liu Bang ordered the guards not to take revenge on the merchant. Zhang Bu had also killed Furlong before, and if he surrendered today, I would give the order to let the chief disciple Fuchan release his grudge. These two things are particularly similar.

古文：将军前在南阳，建此大策，常以为落落难合，有志者事竟成也！ 
现代文：将军以前在南阳时，曾提出建树这项功业的重大策略。我总感到计划庞大，难以实现。但对于有志的人，事情终究可以成功！ 
English: When the general was in Nanyang in the past, he proposed a major strategy for building this project. I always feel that the plan is huge and difficult to achieve. But for those who have aspirations, things can eventually succeed!

古文：帝进幸剧。
现代文：刘秀进抵剧县。
English: Liu Xiujin arrived in the county.

古文：耿弇复追张步，步奔平寿，苏茂将万馀人来救之。
现代文：耿又追击张步。张步逃奔平寿县，苏茂率领一万余人前来援救。
English: Geng chased Zhang Bu again. Zhang Bu fled to Pingshou County, and Sumo led more than 10,000 people to come to the rescue.

古文：茂让步曰： 以南阳兵精，延岑善战，而耿弇走之，大王奈何就攻其营？
现代文：苏茂责备张步说： 以南阳军队的精锐，延岑的勇敢善战，耿却击败了他们。大王为什么靠近并攻击耿的阵地呢？
English: Su Mao reproached Zhang Bu, saying, "Geng defeated the elite of the Nanyang army with the bravery and skill of Yan Xun. Why did the great king approach and attack Geng's position?

古文：既呼茂，不能待邪？ 
现代文：您既然征召我，就不能等待吗？ 
English: Since you have called me up, can't you wait?

古文：步曰： 负负，无可言者！ 
现代文：张步说： 惭愧惭愧，我没有什么可说的。 
English: Zhang Bu said, "I am ashamed, I have nothing to say.

古文：帝遣使告步、茂，能相斩降者，封为列侯。
现代文：刘秀派人告诉张步、苏茂，能诛杀对方而投降的，封侯。
English: Liu Xiu sent someone to tell Zhang Bu and Sumo that if they could fight and kill each other and surrender, they would be put under house arrest.

古文：步遂斩茂，诣耿弇军门肉袒降。
现代文：于是张步杀了苏茂，到耿军营门前，露出臂膀投降。
English: So Zhang Bu killed Sumo, went to the gate of Geng's camp, and surrendered with his arms outstretched.

古文：弇传诣行在所，而勒兵入据其城，树十二郡旗鼓，令步兵各以郡人诣旗下，众尚十馀万，辎重七千馀两，皆罢遣归乡里。
现代文：耿用驿车把张步送到刘秀驻地，自己率军进入平寿城。树起十二个郡的旗帜，在旗下设鼓，命张步的士兵分别到本郡的旗下。此时，张步军队还有十余万，辎重车七千余辆，全部遣散返回乡里。
English: Geng sent Zhang Bu to Liu Xiu's garrison by stagecoach, and led the army into Pingshou City. He raised the flags of twelve counties and set up a drum under his banner. The soldiers who wanted to follow Zhang Bu went to the flags of their own counties. At this time, Zhang Bu's army still had more than one hundred thousand soldiers and more than seven thousand heavy vehicles, and they were all discharged and returned to the countryside.

古文：张步三弟各自系所在狱，诏皆赦之，封步为安丘侯，与妻子居雒阳。
现代文：把张步的三个弟弟分别囚禁在当地的监狱，刘秀下诏全都赦免，封张步为安丘侯，让他和妻子儿女住在洛阳。
English: Zhang Bu's three younger brothers were imprisoned separately in the local prison. Liu Xiu pardoned all of them, and Zhang Bu was given the title of Anqiu Hou, allowing him to live in Luoyang with his wife and children.

古文：于是琅邪未平，上徙陈俊为琅邪太守；始入境，盗贼皆散。
现代文：当时琅邪郡还没有平定，刘秀调陈俊当琅邪太守。陈俊刚刚入境，盗贼全都散去。
English: At that time, Suye County had not yet been pacified, and Liu Xiu transferred Chen Jun to be the governor of Suye County. Chen Jun had just entered the country, and the thieves had all dispersed.

古文：耿弇复引兵至城阳，降五校馀党，齐地悉平，振旅还京师。
现代文：耿又率军抵达城阳，收降五校军残部，齐地全部平定。耿整军返回洛阳。
English: Geng again led the army to Chengyang, defeated the remnants of the Five-School Army, and completely subdued it. Geng's whole army returned to Luoyang.

古文：弇为将，凡所平郡四十六，屠城三百，未尝挫折焉。
现代文：耿为将领，一共平定四十六个郡；屠城三百座，未曾被敌人击败过。
English: As a general, Geng conquered a total of 46 counties and 300 slaughterhouses, and was never defeated by the enemy.

古文：初起太学。
现代文：东汉开始兴建太学。
English: Taigakko began to be established.

古文：车驾还宫，幸太学，稽式古典，修明礼乐，焕然文物可观矣。
现代文：刘秀返回洛阳，到太学视察。效法古代的旧规，昌明礼乐，典章制度焕然一新，大为可观。
English: Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang and inspected Taixu. Following the old rules of ancient times, Changming ceremony and music, the ceremony system was completely renewed, which was very impressive.

古文：十一月，大司徒伏湛免，以侯霸为大司徒。
现代文：十一月，免去大司徒伏湛的职务，任命侯霸当大司徒。
English: In November, Fu Zhan was relieved of his duties as grand steward, and Hou Ba was appointed as grand steward.

古文：霸闻太原闵仲叔之名而辟之，既至，霸不及政事，徒劳苦而已。
现代文：侯霸听说太原人闵仲叔的名声，征召他到洛阳。闵仲叔到洛阳后，侯霸不与他谈国家大事，只是慰劳他旅途的辛苦。
English: Houba heard of the reputation of Taiyuan's Shizhong Uncle and summoned him to Luoyang. After Shizhong Uncle arrived in Luoyang, Houba did not discuss national affairs with him, but only consoled him for the hardships of his journey.

古文：仲叔恨曰： 始蒙嘉命，且喜且惧。
现代文：闵仲叔不满地说： 刚刚接到征召的命令时，又高兴又害怕。
English: Uncle Zou Zhong said with dissatisfaction, "When I just received the order to be drafted, I was both happy and afraid.

古文：今见明公，喜惧皆去。
现代文：今天见到您，高兴和害怕全都消失了。
English: Seeing you today, the joy and fear are all gone.

古文：以仲叔为不足问邪，不当辟也。
现代文：如果认为我不值得您发问，那么就不应征召我。
English: If you don't think I'm worthy of your questions, then you shouldn't have drafted me.

古文：辟而不问，是失人也！ 
现代文：您征召我而不询问我，是失去人才。 
English: If you call me up and don't ask me, you've lost a talent.

古文：遂辞出，投劾而去。
现代文：于是告辞出来，递送自责的辞呈然后离去。
English: So he quit, handed in a self-flagellating resignation letter and left.

古文：初，五原人李兴、随昱、朔方人田飒、代郡人石鲔、闵堪各起兵自称将军。
现代文：当初，五原人李兴、随昱，朔方人田飒，代郡人石鲔、闵堪分别起兵，自称将军。
English: At first, Li Xing, Sui Ye, Shuo Fang, Tian Ye, Shi Ye, and Sui Kan, who were from Wuhuan, raised their armies separately and called themselves generals.

古文：匈奴单于遣使与兴等和亲，欲令卢芳还汉地为帝。
现代文：匈奴单于派人同李兴等人结亲通好，想让卢芳返回中国当皇帝。
English: The Xiongnu alone sent people to make friends with Li Xing and others, and wanted Lu Fang to return to China as emperor.

古文：兴等引兵至单于庭迎芳。
现代文：李兴等率军到匈奴单于的王庭迎接卢芳。
English: Li Xing and others led the army to the royal court of Xiongnu Shan Yu to meet Lu Fang.

古文：十二月，与俱入塞，都九原县；掠有五原、朔方、云中、定襄、雁门五郡，并置守、令，与胡通兵侵苦北边。
现代文：十二月，卢芳和李兴一起进入边塞，在九原县建都，夺取五原、朔方、云中、定襄、雁门五郡，并设置郡守、县令，和匈奴军队一起侵扰、掠夺北方边境地区。
English: In December, Lu Fang and Li Xing entered the border fortress together, built the capital in Jiuyuan County, captured the five counties of Wuhuan, Shuofang, Yunzhong, Dingxiang, and Yanmen, and set up the county governor and county magistrate, and invaded and plundered the northern border area together with the Xiongnu army.

古文：冯异治关中，出入三岁，上林成都。
现代文：冯异治理关中地区，历经三年，上林像都市一样繁华。
English: Fengyi governs Guanzhong District. After three years, Shanglin is as prosperous as a city.

古文：人有上章言： 异威权至重，百姓归心，号为咸阳王。 
现代文：有人给刘秀上奏章说： 冯异威望和权力太大，人心归附，号称咸阳王。 
English: Someone wrote to Liu Xiu: "Feng Yiyi's prestige and power are too great, and people's hearts are attached to him. He is known as the King of Xianyang.

古文：帝以章示异；异惶惧，上书陈谢。
现代文：刘秀把奏章给冯异看。冯异十分惶恐，上书谢罪。
English: Liu Xiu showed the score to Feng Yiyi. Feng Yiyi was very frightened and wrote a letter of apology.

古文：诏报曰： 将军之于国家，义为君臣，恩犹父子，何嫌何疑，而有惧意！ 
现代文：刘秀下诏书回答说： 将军对于我，从道义上讲是君臣关系，从情义上讲就像父子，你有什么嫌疑而要害怕！ 
English: Liu Xiu replied in his edict: "For me, the general is a monarch-subordinate relationship from a moral point of view, and is like a father and son from a practical point of view. If you suspect anything, be afraid!

古文：隗嚣矜己饰智，每自比西伯，与诸将议欲称王。
现代文：隗嚣夸耀自己，矫饰弄巧，常常自比周文王。他和将领们商议，想要称王。
English: Boasting of himself, he often compared himself to King Zhouwen. He discussed with the generals and wanted to be crowned king.

古文：郑兴曰： 昔文王三分天下有其二，尚服事殷；武王八百诸侯不谋同会，犹还兵待时；高帝征伐累年，犹以沛公行师。
现代文：郑兴说： 过去周文王占有天下的三分之二，还向商朝称臣。周武王和八百个诸侯事先没有商量而一同集结起来，还要退兵等待时机。高帝连年征战，还用 沛公 的名义指挥军队。
English: Zheng Xing said: In the past, King Zhou Wen occupied two-thirds of the world, and also claimed to be a vassal of the Shang Dynasty. King Zhou Wu and eight hundred princes gathered together without prior consultation, but also withdrew to wait for the opportunity. Emperor Gao went to war for years, and also commanded the army in the name of Pei Gong.

古文：今令德虽明，世无宗周之祚；威略虽振，未有高祖之功；而欲举未可之事，昭速祸患，无乃不可乎！ 
现代文：如今您的恩德虽然显明，但是没有周朝世代相承的王位；您的威望才略虽然高，但没有高帝的战功。想要做不可能做到的事，显然会加速祸患的降临，恐怕不能这样做吧！ 
English: Today, although your benevolence is obvious, you do not have the throne inherited by generations of the Zhou Dynasty; although your prestige is slightly high, you do not have the war exploits of Emperor Gao. If you want to do something impossible, it will obviously accelerate the advent of disaster. I'm afraid you can't do that!

古文：嚣乃止。
现代文：隗嚣于是放弃自己的打算。
English: So he gave up his plan.

古文：后又置广职位以自尊高，郑兴曰： 夫中郎将、太中大夫、使持节官，皆王者之器，非人臣所当制也。
现代文：后来隗嚣又大量任命官员，以示自己的尊严和高贵。郑兴说： 中郎将、太中大夫、使持节官，都是帝王的规格，不是臣子所应设置的。
English: Later, there was a clamor to appoint a large number of officials in order to show their dignity and nobility. Zheng Xing said: "Middle steward, grand steward, and envoy are the specifications of the emperor, not the ones that should be set up by the vassal.

古文：无益于实，有损于名，非尊上之意也。 
现代文：对实际并无好处，对名义却有损害，不是尊重主上的本意。 
English: It is of no practical benefit, and is harmful to reputation, and is not respectful of the emperor's will.

古文：嚣病之而止。
现代文：隗嚣很不满意，但也只好作罢。
English: The hullabaloo of embarrassment ceased.

古文：时关中将帅数上书，言蜀可击之状，帝以书示嚣，因使击蜀以效其信。
现代文：当时，关中将领们多次向刘秀上书，说明可以攻打西蜀公孙述的理由。刘秀把这些奏书送给隗嚣看，趁势让隗嚣攻打公孙述，以证明他的信义。
English: At that time, the generals of Guanzhong repeatedly sent letters to Liu Xiu, explaining the reasons why they could attack the West Shu Gongsun Su. Liu Xiu sent these letters to Gongran, and took advantage of the situation to let Gongran attack Gongsun Su to prove his loyalty.

古文：嚣上书，盛言三辅单弱，刘文伯在边，未宜谋蜀。
现代文：隗嚣上书，大谈三辅的孤单薄弱，卢芳在北方边境的威胁，不适宜谋取西蜀。
English: It is not appropriate to seek Western Shu by writing fanatically, talking about the loneliness and weakness of Sanfu, and the threat of Lu Fang on the northern border.

古文：帝知嚣欲持要端，不愿天下统一，于是稍黜其礼，正君臣之仪。
现代文：刘秀知道隗嚣想要脚踩两只船，不愿天下统一，于是逐渐降低对他的礼节，以端正君臣之间的礼仪。
English: Liu Xiu knew that Yan Hanran wanted to step on two boats and did not want to unify the world, so he gradually lowered his etiquette to correct the etiquette between monarchs and ministers.

古文：帝以嚣与马援、来歙相善，数使歙、援奉使往来，劝令入朝，许以重爵。
现代文：刘秀因为隗嚣和马援、来歙关系很好，多次派来歙、马援遵奉使命前往隗嚣处，规劝他到洛阳朝见，并许诺封给他尊贵的爵位。
English: Liu Xiu had a very good relationship with Gong Han, Ma Yuan and Lai Han, so he sent Lai Han and Ma Yuan to Gong Han several times to persuade him to meet him in Luoyang, and promised to give him a noble title.

古文：嚣连遣使，深持谦辞，言无功德，须四方平定，退伏闾里。
现代文：隗嚣接连派遣使者到洛阳去，用十分谦恭的语言，说自己没有建树功德，等到四方平定，就隐退回乡。
English: He sent emissaries to Luoyang one after another, saying, in very humble language, that he had not accomplished anything, and that he would return to his hometown after the war was over.

古文：帝复遣来歙说嚣遣子入侍，嚣闻刘永、彭宠皆已破灭，乃遣长子恂随歙诣阙；帝以为胡骑校尉，封镌羌侯。
现代文：刘秀又派来歙劝说隗嚣派长子到宫廷服务。隗嚣听说刘永、彭宠都已败亡，于是派遣长子隗恂跟随来歙到洛阳去。刘秀任命隗恂当胡骑校尉，封镌羌侯。
English: Liu Xiu also sent Zou to persuade Yanran to send his eldest son to serve at the court. Yanran heard that Liu Yong and Peng Jiao had both been defeated, so he sent his eldest son Zou to follow Zou to Luoyang. Liu Xiu appointed Zou as the captain of Hu Jiao and the prince of Zhou.

古文：郑兴因恂求归葬父母，嚣不听，而徒兴舍，益其秩礼。
现代文：郑兴趁隗恂之行，请求返回故乡安葬父母，隗嚣不同意，却让郑兴迁居舍，增加俸禄和礼遇。
English: Taking advantage of Zheng Xing's trip, he requested to return to his hometown to bury his parents. However, they did not agree, but let Zheng Xing move to a new residence and increase his salary and benefits.

古文：兴入见曰： 今为父母未葬，乞骸骨；若以增秩徒舍，中更停留，是以亲为饵也，无礼甚矣，将军焉用之！
现代文：郑兴来见隗嚣，说： 我如今因为父母没有安葬，请求返回家乡。如果以增加俸禄，迁移住所，就改变主意留下来，是用双亲做诱饵，太无礼了！将军怎么能够任用这样的人呢？
English: Zheng Xing came to see the hubbub and said: I am now asking to return to my hometown because my parents have not been buried. If I change my mind to stay by increasing my salary and moving my residence, using my parents as bait is too rude! How can the general appoint such a person?

古文：愿留妻子独归葬，将军又何猜焉！ 
现代文：我情愿留下妻子儿女，只身返回故乡安葬双亲，将军还猜疑什么呢？ 
English: I would rather leave my wife and children behind and return alone to my hometown to bury my parents. What else did the general suspect?

古文：嚣乃令与妻子俱东。
现代文：隗嚣于是允许郑兴和妻子儿女一起东行。
English: He then allowed Zheng Xing and his wife and children to travel east together.

古文：马援亦将家属随恂归雒阳，以所将宾客猥多，求屯田上林苑中；帝许之。
现代文：马援也带着家属随同隗恂东回洛阳，因为所带的宾客太多，请求在长安上林苑垦田耕种，刘秀准许。
English: Ma Yuan also took his family members with him back to Luoyang, because there were too many guests, and asked Liu Xiu to allow him to cultivate the fields in Shanglin Garden in Chang'an.

古文：嚣将王元以为天下成败未可知，不愿专心内事，说嚣曰： 昔更始西都，四方响应，天下喁喁，谓之太平；一旦坏败，将军几无所厝。
现代文：隗嚣的将领王元认为天下胜败还不能预料，不愿意专心经营境内，劝说隗嚣道： 过去刘玄定都西安，四方群起响应，天下人心归向，认为已太平。一旦败亡，将军几乎没有安身之地。
English: The tumultuous general Wang Yuan thought that victory or defeat could not be predicted by the world, and was unwilling to concentrate on managing the territory. He persuaded the tumultuous: In the past, Liu Xuan decided to make Xi'an the capital, and people from all over the world responded, and the world's people felt at peace. Once defeated, the general had almost no place to stay.

古文：今南有子阳，北有文伯，江湖海岱，王公十数，而欲牵儒生之说，弃千乘之基，羁旅危国以求万全，此循覆车之轨者也。
现代文：现在，南方有公孙述，北方有卢芳，江湖山海，称王称公的有十数人。而要听从儒生的劝说，舍弃诸侯的基业，寄居在危险的国家以求万全，这是沿着翻车的轨迹走下去。
English: Now, in the south, there is Gongsun Shu, in the north, there is Lu Fang, and in the provinces, lakes, mountains, and seas, there are more than a dozen people who claim to be kings. But to listen to the persuasion of Confucianism, to abandon the inheritance of princes, and to live in a dangerous country in order to be perfect, is to follow the trajectory of the overturned car.

古文：今天水完富，士马最强，元请以一丸泥为大王东封函谷关，此万世一时也。
现代文：当今天水完整富饶，兵马最强。我请求用一丸泥土替大王在东边封闭函谷关，这是千载难逢的好时机。
English: Today, when the water is full and rich, and the soldiers and horses are at their strongest, I request that a ball of earth be used to seal off the eastern side of Hakodate Pass for the great king. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：若计不及此，且畜养士马，据隘自守，旷日持久，以待四方之变；图王不成，其敝犹足以霸。
现代文：如果计议不到这里，可暂且休养军士，训练战马，占据险要关口自守，旷日持久，以等待四方发生变化。图谋王位不成，败落时还足可以称霸一方。
English: If the deliberation does not reach here, it can temporarily recuperate the sergeants, train the horses, occupy the critical point of self-defense, and wait for a long time for the four sides to change. The attempt at the throne will not succeed, and when it is defeated, it is enough to dominate one side.

古文：要之，鱼不可脱于渊，神龙失势，与蚯蚓同！ 
现代文：重要的是，鱼不能脱离水，神龙失去凭借，和蚯蚓相同！ 
English: The important thing is that the fish can't get out of the water, the divine dragon loses its power, and the dragonfly is the same!

古文：嚣心然元计，虽遣子入质，犹负其险厄，欲专制方面。
现代文：隗嚣心里赞同王元的计策，他虽然派遣长子到洛阳当人质，但仍然依靠地势的险阻，想要专制一方。
English: He wholeheartedly agreed with Wang Yuan's strategy. Although he sent his eldest son to Luoyang to be a hostage, he still relied on the obstacles of the terrain and wanted to be an autocrat.

古文：申屠刚谏曰： 愚闻人所归者天所与，人所畔者天所去也。
现代文：申屠刚劝谏隗嚣说： 我听说，人心归附他时，上天就会赐与他；人心背叛他时，上天就会除掉他。
English: Shen Tuo said, "I have heard that when a person's heart belongs to him, Heaven will give him; when a person's heart betrays him, Heaven will eliminate him."

古文：本朝诚天之所福，非人力也。
现代文：当今王朝确实是天所赐福，不是人力所及。
English: Today's dynasty is indeed blessed by heaven, not by man.

古文：今玺书数到，委国归信，欲与将军共同吉凶。
现代文：现在诏书不断到来，托付国土，表达信任，愿同将军同当祸福。
English: Now, the imperial edict has been issued several times, and the country is showing its trust and wants to work with the general.

古文：布衣相与，尚有没身不负然诺之信，况于万乘者哉！
现代文：平民相交，还有终身不忘承诺的信义，何况对于君王呢？
English: The common people work together, and there is also the trust that promises will not be broken until death, not to mention the monarch who is a millionaire!

古文：今何畏何利，而久疑若是？
现代文：如今你害怕什么？贪图什么？
English: What are you afraid of now? What do you yearn for?

古文：卒有非常之变，上负忠孝、下愧当世。
现代文：为何这样长时间地迟疑不决？一旦发生异乎寻常的变化，将上违背忠孝，下愧对世人。
English: Why such a long period of indecision? In the event of an extraordinary change, it would be a breach of loyalty and a disgrace to the world.

古文：夫未至豫言，固常为虚；及其已至，又无所及。
现代文：事情没有发生时的预言，原本常被认为是虚幻。等到事情已经发生，又什么都来不及了。
English: Predictions when things don't happen are often dismissed as fantasy, and by the time they do happen, it's too late.

古文：是以忠言至谏，希得为用，诚愿反覆愚老之言！ 
现代文：所以用忠言恳切地规劝，希望能够被采纳，真心希望您再三考虑我这个愚昧老人的话！ 
English: Therefore, I earnestly exhort you with my sincere advice, hoping to be accepted, and sincerely hope that you will repeatedly consider the words of me, a foolish old man!

古文：嚣不纳，于是游士长者稍稍去之。
现代文：隗嚣不听，于是外来的士人及长者逐渐地离开他。
English: He did not listen to the clamor, so the foreign scholars and elders gradually left him.

古文：王莽末，交趾诸郡闭境自守。
现代文：王莽末年，交趾所属各郡封闭边境自守。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, all counties belonging to Koji closed their borders to protect themselves.

古文：岑彭素与交趾牧邓让厚善，与让书，陈国家威德；又遣偏将军屈充移檄江南，班行诏命。
现代文：岑彭平素和交趾牧邓让友情深厚，给邓让写信，陈述东汉朝廷的威望和恩德；又派遣偏将军屈充在江南地区传布文告，颁行皇上的命令。
English: He had a deep friendship with his comrade Deng Zheng, and wrote a letter to Deng Zheng, stating the prestige and benevolence of the Eastern Han Dynasty; he also sent General Quanzhong to spread the message in the south of the Yangtze River and issue the emperor's order.

古文：于是让与江夏太守侯登、武陵太守王堂、长沙相韩福、桂阳太守张隆、零陵太守田翕、苍梧太守杜穆、交趾太守锡光等相率遣使贡献；悉封为列侯。
现代文：于是，邓让和江夏太守侯登、武陵太守王堂、长沙国相韩福、桂阳太守张隆、零陵太守田翕、苍梧太守杜穆、交趾太守锡光等，相继派遣使者向朝廷进贡。
English: As a result, Deng Zhan and Jiangxia Governor Hou Deng, Wuling Governor Wang Dong, Changsha Governor Han Fu, Guiyang Governor Zhang Long, Luling Governor Tian Qi, Cangwu Governor Dumu, and Jiaozi Governor Xiguang successively sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：锡光者，汉中人，在交趾，教民夷以礼义。
现代文：刘秀将他们全部封为侯爵。锡光是汉中人，在交趾用中原的礼仪教导百姓和外族。
English: Liu Xiu made them all marquesses. Xiguang was a Han Chinese and taught the people and foreigners the etiquette of the Central Plains.

古文：帝复以宛人任延为九真太守，延教民耕种嫁娶。
现代文：刘秀又任命宛城人任延当九真太守。任廷教当地百姓耕种以及婚配的礼仪。
English: Liu Xiu also appointed Yan Yan, a native of Ancheng, as the 9th Empress Dowager. Yan Yan taught the local people how to farm and the etiquette of marriage.

古文：故岭南华风始于二守焉。
现代文：所以岭南地区接受中原的文化习俗，是从锡光、任廷两位郡太守开始的。
English: Therefore, the Lingnan region began to accept the cultural customs of the Central Plains from the time of Xiguang and Renting, the two county governors.

古文：是岁，诏征处士太原周党、会稽严光等至京师。
现代文：这一年，刘秀下诏征召隐居的士人。太原人周党、会稽人严光等到洛阳。
English: In that year, Liu Xiu issued an edict to conscript secluded scholars. The Taiyuan people, the Zhou party, and the auditor Yan Guang waited until Luoyang.

古文：党入见，伏而不谒，自陈愿守所志。
现代文：周党晋见时，伏下身子，不叩头拜谒，也不通报姓名，对刘秀说愿意恪守自己的志向。
English: When he met with Zhou Dangjin, he bowed down, did not bow down, did not announce his name, and told Liu Xiu that he was willing to abide by his own aspirations.

古文：博士范升奏曰： 伏见太原周党、东海王良、山阳王成等，蒙受厚恩，使者三聘，乃肯就车。
现代文：博士范升上奏章说： 我看到，太原人周党、东海人王良、山阳人王成等，承蒙陛下的厚恩，使者三次聘请，才肯上车动身。
English: Dr. Fan Sheng said in his speech: I saw that the Taiyuan people Zhou Dang, the East China Sea people Wang Liang, the Sanyang people Wang Cheng, etc., thanks to His Majesty's kindness, the envoys were hired three times before they were willing to get on the car and leave.

古文：及陛见帝廷，党不以礼屈，伏而不谒，偃蹇骄悍，同时俱逝。
现代文：到宫廷晋见陛下时，周党不顾礼仪，仅伏下身子不叩头，行动随便迟缓，骄横无理，同时一起离开。
English: When His Majesty arrived at the Imperial Court, Zhou's party did not bow down, they were proud and arrogant, and they all left at the same time.

古文：党等文不能演义，武不能死君，钓采华名，庶几三公之位。
现代文：周党等人文不能引申、发挥大义，武不能替君王去死，沽名钓誉，期望三公的高位。
English: Zhou Dangdang and other humanities can't perform righteousness, martial arts can't kill you, fishing for a good reputation, almost ranked in the position of the three kings.

古文：臣愿与坐云台之下，考试图国之道。
现代文：我愿意和他们同坐在珍藏图书典籍的云台下面，考究治理国家之道。
English: Their subjects would like to sit with them under a canopy of clouds and examine the methods of governing the country.

古文：不如臣言，伏虚妄之罪；而敢私窃虚名，夸上求高，皆大不敬！ 
现代文：如果我说得不对，则担当虚夸妄诞的罪名；如果他们胆敢盗窃虚名，向上夸耀，谋求高位，全应以 大不敬 的罪名惩处。 
English: If I'm wrong, I'll be charged with false boasting; if they dare to steal a false name, boast, and seek a high position, they should all be punished with the charge of great disrespect.

古文：书奏，诏曰： 自古明王、圣主，必有不宾之士。
现代文：奏章呈给刘秀，刘秀下诏说： 自古以来，英明的君王，圣贤的天子，都必定会遇到不服从的士人。
English: The petition was presented to Liu Xiu, who issued the following edict: Since ancient times, wise kings, sages, and heavenly sons have always encountered disobedient nobles.

古文：伯夷、叔齐不食周粟，太原周党不受朕禄，亦各有志焉。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐不吃周王朝的粮食，太原人周党不接受我的俸禄，也是各有志向。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi did not eat the millet of the Zhou Dynasty, and the Taiyuan Zhou Party did not accept my salary. They also had their own ambitions.

古文：其赐帛四十匹，罢之。 
现代文：赐给周党帛四十匹，送回故乡。 
English: Zhou was given forty yakitori and sent back to his hometown.

古文：帝少与严光同游学，及即位，以物色访之。
现代文：刘秀幼时和严光同窗读书，等到刘秀即帝位，派人按照形貌察访，在齐地找到了严光。
English: When Liu Xiu was a child, he and Yan Guang were classmates at school. When Liu Xiu became emperor, he sent someone to investigate according to the physical appearance, and found Yan Guang in Qi.

古文：得于齐国，累征乃至；拜谏议大夫，不肯受，去，耕钓于富春山中。
现代文：刘秀多次征召后，严光才到洛阳。任命他当谏议大夫，严光不肯接受。他离开了洛阳，在富春山种田钓鱼，最后在故乡寿终。
English: After Liu Xiu was conscripted several times, Yan Guang finally came to Luoyang. He was appointed as a medical officer, but Yan Guang refused to accept it. He left Luoyang, farmed and fished in Fuchun Mountain, and finally died in his hometown.

古文：以寿终于家。王良后历沛郡太守、大司徒司直，在位恭俭，布被瓦器，妻子不入官舍。
现代文：王良后来历任沛郡太守、大司徒司直，在位时谦恭节俭，用的是布做的被子和瓦质的器具，妻子儿女，从来不进官署。
English: Later, Wang Liang successively served as the governor of Pei County and the grand steward Sizhong. When he was on the throne, he was modest and frugal. He used quilts made of cloth and tiles, his wife and children, and never went to the government office.

古文：后以病归，一岁复征；至荥阳，疾笃，不任进道，过其友人。
现代文：后因病返回故乡，一年后又被征召。走到荥阳，病情加重，不能再走。
English: After returning to his hometown due to illness, he was conscripted again a year later. When he went to Fenyang, his condition worsened and he could no longer go.

古文：友人不肯见，曰： 不有忠言奇谋而取大位，何其往来屑屑不惮烦也！ 
现代文：他去拜访朋友，那位朋友不肯见他，说： 没有忠言和奇谋，却取得高位，怎么这样来来往往不怕烦！ 
English: He went to visit a friend, but the friend refused to see him, saying, "Without persuasion or stratagem, yet you have attained a high position. Why do you come and go so often?

古文：遂拒之。
现代文：于是拒绝王良登门。
English: As a result, Wang Liang refused to come.

古文：良惭，自后连征不应，卒于家。
现代文：王良感到惭愧。从此以后，接连征召全都不应征，在家乡寿终。
English: Wang Liang felt ashamed. From then on, he did not respond to successive conscription and died in his hometown.

古文：元帝之世，莎车王延尝为侍子京师，慕乐中国。
现代文：西汉元帝时代，莎车王延曾经在京都长安当人质，羡慕喜欢汉朝。
English: In the era of Emperor Yuan of the Western Han Dynasty, Zakka Wang Yan was once a hostage in Kyoto Chang'an, admiring the Han Dynasty.

古文：及王莽之乱，匈奴略有西域，唯延不肯附属，常敕诸子： 当世奉汉家，不可负也。 
现代文：等到王莽之乱时，匈奴夺取占有西域各国，只有延不肯归附。他常常告诫儿子们： 应当世代事奉汉朝，不能背叛！ 
English: By the time of the Wang Mang Disturbance, the Huns had seized all the countries in the Western Regions, but Yan refused to join them. He often admonished his sons: You should serve the Han Dynasty for generations, and not betray it!

古文：延卒，子康立。
现代文：延去世，儿子康继位。
English: Yan died and was succeeded by his son Kang.

古文：康率傍国拒匈奴，拥卫故都护吏士、妻子千馀口。檄书河西，问中国动静。
现代文：康率领邻国抗拒匈奴，保护原都护官员和他们的妻子儿女一千余人，写文书给河西，询问中原的情况。
English: Kang led the neighboring countries to resist the Huns, protected more than a thousand former capital protection officials and their wives and children, wrote a letter to Hexi, and inquired about the situation in the Central Plains.

古文：窦融乃承制立康为汉莎车建功怀德王、西域大都尉，五十五国皆属焉。
现代文：窦融于是承旧制，封康为汉莎车建功怀德王、西域大都尉，五十五国全隶属于莎车。
English: Dou Rong thus inherited the old system. He was awarded the title of King of the West and the title of Grand Captain of the Western Regions for his contribution to the construction of the Hansa cart. All 55 countries were affiliated with the Hansa cart.

