古文：傅亮，字季友，北地灵州人也。
现代文：傅亮字季友，是北地灵州人。
English: Fu Liang, alias Ji You, is from Lingshou, North China.

古文：祖咸，司隶校尉。
现代文：高祖傅咸是司录校尉。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Fu Xian, was a school captain.

古文：父瑗，以学业知名，位至安成太守。
现代文：父亲傅瑗，因学业有成就而闻名，官至安成太守。
English: His father, Fu Xi, was famous for his academic achievements and rose through the ranks to become the governor of Ancheng.

古文：瑗与郗超善，超尝造瑗，瑗见其二子迪及亮。
现代文：傅瑗与郗超关系很好，郗超曾经到傅瑗家，傅瑗让他的两个儿子傅迪和傅亮出来拜见郗超。
English: Fu Rong and Gong Chao have a good relationship. Gong Chao once went to Fu Rong's home, and Fu Rong let his two sons, Fu Di and Fu Liang, come out to meet Gong Chao.

古文：亮年四五岁，超令人解亮衣，使左右持去，初无吝色。
现代文：傅亮当年只有四五岁，郗超叫人把傅亮的衣服脱下，让手下人把衣服拿走，傅亮没有丝毫吝惜的样子。
English: Fu Liang was only four or five years old at the time. Zou Chao ordered someone to take Fu Liang's clothes off and let his subordinates take the clothes away. Fu Liang did not show any mercy.

古文：超谓瑗曰： 卿小兒才名位宦，当远逾于兄。
现代文：郗超对傅瑗说： 你的小儿子将来的名声与官位，必定大大高过他的哥哥。
English: Gong Chao said to Fu Jun: Your younger son's future fame and official position will certainly be much higher than his brother.

古文：然保家传祚，终在大者。 
现代文：但保持家业传宗接代，还得依靠大的。 
English: But to keep the family business going, you still have to rely on the big ones.

古文：迪字长猷，亦儒学，官至五兵尚书。
现代文：傅迪字长猷，也是儒生，官至五兵尚书。
English: Fu Di, also a Confucian, rose to the rank of five-star general.

古文：永初二年卒，追赠太常。
现代文：永初二年去世，追赠为太常。
English: He died two years after Yongchu and was posthumously awarded the title of Taizang.

古文：亮博涉经史，尤善文词。
现代文：傅亮广博涉猎经史，尤其擅长文词。
English: Fu Liang is widely involved in the history of literature, and is particularly good at writing.

古文：初为建威参军，桓谦中军行参军。
现代文：开始作建威将军，桓谦的中军行参军。
English: He began as General Jian Wei, and the Chinese army of Kan Qian marched to join the army.

古文：桓玄篡位，闻其博学有文采，选为秘书郎，欲令整正秘阁，未及拜而玄败。
现代文：桓玄篡位，听说傅亮有学问而文章又写得好，便选中他作秘书郎，想让他整顿秘阁，傅亮还没来得及做这个官，桓玄就垮台了。
English: Kuan Xuan usurped the position. Hearing that Fu Liang was learned and his articles were well written, he chose him as secretary and wanted him to straighten out the secret cabinet. Before Fu Liang had time to do this, Kuan Xuan collapsed.

古文：义旗初，丹阳尹孟昶以为建威参军。
现代文：举义之初，丹阳尹孟昶让他做建威参军。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, Danyang Yin Mengyao made him join the army.

古文：义熙元年，除员外散骑侍郎，直西省，典掌诏命。
现代文：义熙元年，做员外散骑侍郎，到西省，掌管诏书命令之事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he went to the West Province as a non-commissioned officer to supervise the issuing of the imperial edict.

古文：转领军长史，以中书郎滕演代之。
现代文：后又调任为领军长史，让中书郎滕演取代他原来的职位。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the leader of Changshi, and let Zhongshurang Tengyuan replace him in his original position.

古文：亮未拜，遭母忧，服阕，为刘毅抚军记室参军，又补领军司马。
现代文：傅亮未到任，因母亲去世，在家守孝，做刘毅抚军记室参军，又加任领军司马之职。
English: Fu Liang did not arrive at the post, due to the death of his mother, he stayed at home to be a filial son, joined the army as Liu Yifu's military record office, and was also appointed as the leader of the army.

古文：七年，迁散骑侍郎，复代演直西省。仍转中书黄门侍郎，直西省如故。
现代文：义熙七年迁为散骑侍郎，又代滕演到西省，还是任中书黄门侍郎，像以前一样管理西省。
English: In the seventh year of Yixi's reign, he was transferred to the position of Zangjia waiter, and he also went to the West Province in place of Teng Ying. He was still the waiter of Zhongshu Huangmen, and managed the West Province as before.

古文：高祖以其久直勤劳，欲以为东阳郡，先以语迪，迪大喜告亮。
现代文：高祖因他很久以来一直很勤劳，想让他到东阳郡做官，先把这件事告诉了傅迪，傅迪十分高兴地告诉了傅亮。
English: Gao Zu, because he has been very diligent for a long time, wanted him to go to Dongyang County to work as an official. He first told Fu Di about this, and Fu Di was very happy to tell Fu Liang.

古文：亮不答，即驰见高祖曰： 伏闻恩旨，赐拟东阳，家贫忝禄，私计为幸。
现代文：傅亮听后不语，立即去见高祖说： 我知道您的恩典，想让我到东阳。家中贫困有了俸禄，以一家之私而想，实在是幸运。
English: After listening, Fu Liang was speechless and immediately went to see Gao Zu and said, "I know your grace, you want me to go to Dongyang. Poverty in my family has brought me a salary, so I think of myself as a member of the family, which is really fortunate.

古文：但凭廕之愿，实结本心，乞归天宇，不乐外出。 
现代文：但我平生心中所想只愿留在京都，不想到外地做官。 
English: But all I ever wanted in my heart was to stay in Kyoto, I didn't want to work as a bureaucrat in a foreign country.

古文：高祖笑曰： 谓卿之须禄耳，若能如此，甚协所望。 
现代文：高祖笑道： 只考虑到你很需要俸禄才想调你到东阳。若能像你所说的这样，那么就按你希望的办吧。 
English: Gaozu laughed, "I only wanted to transfer you to Dongyang because I thought you needed the salary. If you can do as you said, then do as you wish."

古文：会西讨司马休之，以为太尉从事中郎，掌记室。以太尉参军羊徽为中书郎，代直西省。
现代文：当时正碰上西讨司马休之，高祖让他做太尉从事中郎，掌管记室，让太尉参军羊徽做中书郎，代管西省。
English: At that time, he was meeting with the Western Military Commander, Sima Xuzhi. Gao Zu made him a lieutenant in charge of the record room, and made him a lieutenant in charge of the Western Province.

古文：亮从征关、洛，还至彭城。
现代文：傅亮跟从高祖征伐关、洛，回到彭城。
English: Fu Liang followed Gao Zu to conquer Guanzhong and Luo and returned to Pengcheng.

古文：宋国初建，令书除侍中，领世子中庶子。
现代文：宋国初建，让他做侍中，领受世子中庶子。
English: It was first built in the Song Dynasty, and he was made a chamberlain to receive the heir's illegitimate son.

古文：徙中书令，领中庶子如故。
现代文：调为中书令，仍然领中庶子。
English: He was transferred to the Middle Shoryo, still leading the Middle Shoryo.

古文：从还寿阳。
现代文：跟随高祖回到寿阳。
English: Follow Gao Zu back to Shouyang.

古文：高祖有受禅意，而难于发言，乃集朝臣宴饮，从容言曰： 桓玄暴篡，鼎命已移，我首唱大义，复兴皇室，南征北伐，平定四海，功成业著，遂荷九锡。
现代文：高祖有接受东晋禅让的意思，但又不好开口，于是宴请朝中大臣，沉着地说： 桓玄残暴篡位，东晋皇权已移于外人之手，我首先倡导大义，复兴了皇室。南征北伐，平定四海，功高勋显，于是担起了国家的重担。
English: Gaozu had the intention of accepting the transfer of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, but he was not good at opening his mouth, so he invited the ministers of the Middle Kingdom and said calmly: Huan Xuan brutally usurped the throne, the Eastern Jin Dynasty's imperial power has been transferred to the hands of foreigners, I first advocated the great righteousness and revived the royal family. The Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition, the pacification of the four seas, and the outstanding achievements, so I shouldered the burden of the country.

古文：今年将衰暮，崇极如此，物戒盛满，非可久安。
现代文：现在我快老了，受重用、受人尊敬已到现在这样了，万事万物都要戒过盛过满，否则不能长久安定。
English: Now that I'm getting old, I've been used and respected so much that I have to stop over-indulging in everything. Otherwise, I won't be able to stay stable for long.

古文：今欲奉还爵位，归老京师。 
现代文：现在我想奉还我的官位，告老还乡。 
English: Now I want to be given back my official position and return to my hometown.

古文：群臣唯盛称功德，莫晓此意。
现代文：群臣只有热烈赞颂高祖的功德，并不明白高祖真的心意。
English: The courtiers only enthusiastically praised Gaozu's merits, but did not understand Gaozu's true intentions.

古文：日晚坐散，亮还外，乃悟旨，而宫门已闭；亮于是叩扉请见，高祖即开门见之。
现代文：宴会至晚才散，傅亮告辞走到外面，才领悟了高祖的意思，但宫门已关，傅亮于是敲门求见，高祖马上开门接见了他。
English: The banquet did not end until late in the evening. Fu Liang went outside to say goodbye, and only then realized Gao Zu's meaning. However, the palace gate was already closed, so Fu Liang knocked on the door to see him, and Gao Zu immediately opened the door to meet him.

古文：亮入便曰： 臣暂宜还都。 
现代文：傅亮进来后说： 我现在最好回一趟京城。 
English: After Fu Liang came in, he said: I'd better go back to Beijing now.

古文：高祖达解此意，无复他言，直云： 须几人自送？ 
现代文：高祖懂得傅亮的意思，不再说别的，直接说： 需要几个人送你？ 
English: Gaozu understood Fu Liang's meaning, and without saying anything else, directly said: "How many people are needed to escort you?"

古文：亮曰： 须数十人便足。 
现代文：傅亮说： 几十个人就够了。 
English: Fu Liang said: A few dozen people are enough.

古文：于是即便奉辞。亮既出，已夜，见长星竟天。
现代文：傅亮出门，已到了夜晚，见长星划过天空。
English: Fu Liang went out, it was already night, and he saw a long star streaking across the sky.

古文：亮拊髀曰： 我常不信天文，今始验矣！ 
现代文：傅亮见此拍着大腿说： 我一向不信天人感应，可现在却应验了。 
English: Seeing this, Fu Liang patted his thigh and said: I have always disbelieved in divine inspiration, but now it has come true.

古文：至都，即征高祖入辅。
现代文：傅亮一到京都，东晋皇帝就征召高祖入辅为相。
English: As soon as Fu Liang arrived in Kyoto, the Eastern Jin Emperor conscripted Gao Zu into the auxiliary.

古文：永初元年，迁太子詹事，中书令如故。
现代文：永初元年，傅亮迁官为太子詹事，仍作中书令。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, Fu Liang was transferred to the office of the prince Zhanji, and still made the middle letter.

古文：以佐命功，封建城县公，食邑二千户。
现代文：因辅佐有功，封为建城县公，食邑二千户。
English: Due to the success of his assistance, he was awarded the title of Jiancheng County official, and 2,000 households in Jiancheng County were provided with food.

古文：入直中书省，专典诏命。
现代文：进入中书省，专管诏书命令。
English: Entered the Ministry of Literature, in charge of the imperial edict.

古文：以亮任总国权，听于省见客。
现代文：让傅亮担任总国权，在省中接见宾客。
English: Let Fu Liang serve as the general state power and receive guests in the province.

古文：演字彦将，南阳西鄂人，官至黄门郎，秘书监。
现代文：神虎门外每天大早就停车数百辆。高祖开始进入京城时，所有书信全是记室参军滕演代写，北征广固时，把这些事都托给了长史王诞。
English: Hundreds of cars are parked outside the gate every morning. When Gaozu began to enter the capital, all letters were written on behalf of Teng Yuan, a member of the army, and when the Northern Expedition was in full swing, these matters were entrusted to Changshi Wangxing.

古文：义熙八年卒。二年，亮转尚书仆射，中书令、詹事如故。
现代文：自此以后，一直到高祖接受皇位，所有的表、策等文件都是出于傅亮之手。永初二年，傅亮调任为尚书仆射、中书令，并仍为詹事。
English: From then on, until Emperor Gaozhu accepted the throne, all documents such as watches and policies were made by Fu Liang. In the first two years of the Yongzheng era, Fu Liang was transferred to the position of Shang Shupuxi and the position of Zhong Shuling, and he was still in charge.

古文：明年，高祖不豫，与徐羡之、谢晦并受顾命，给班剑二十人。
现代文：第二年，高祖生命垂危，傅亮与徐羡之、谢晦一同接受高祖遗命，配班剑二十人。
English: In the second year, Gao Zu's life was in danger. Fu Liang, Xu Enzhi and Xie Hui accepted Gao Zu's last will and testament together, and twenty swordsmen were assigned.

古文：少帝即位，进为中书监，尚书令。
现代文：少帝即位，傅亮被提升为中书监、尚书令。
English: The young emperor ascended to the throne, and Fu Liang was promoted to the position of middle school librarian and senior librarian.

古文：景平二年，领护军将军。
现代文：景平二年，做护军将军。
English: In the second year of Jingping, he became a general of the escorting army.

古文：少帝废，亮率行台至江陵奉迎太祖。
现代文：少帝被废黜，傅亮率行台官员到江陵奉迎太祖。
English: When the young emperor was deposed, Fu Liang and other officials from Taiwan went to Gangneung to pay homage to the great ancestor.

古文：既至，立行门于江陵城南，题曰 大司马门。 
现代文：到了之后，在江陵城南立行门，题为 大司马门 。
English: After arriving, he set up a gate in the south of Gangneung City, named Daesima Gate.

古文：率行台百僚诣门拜表，威仪礼容甚盛。
现代文：带领行台众官到门前拜表，威仪礼节非常隆重。
English: He led all the officials to bow to the table in front of the door. The pomp and ceremony was very grand.

古文：太祖将下，引见亮，哭恸甚，哀动左右。
现代文：太祖要下来时，召见傅亮，大声痛哭，悲哀之情震动左右。
English: When the great-grandfather was about to come down, he called Fu Liang, cried loudly and bitterly, and his sadness shook his right and left sides.

古文：既而问义真及少帝薨废本末，悲号呜咽，侍侧者莫能仰视。
现代文：然后问义真以及少帝的死和被废黜的本末情由，悲痛哭号，侍立在旁的人不能抬头相视。
English: Then he asked Yoshizane about the death of the young emperor and the reason for his dethronement. He cried out in grief, and the people standing nearby couldn't look at each other.

古文：亮流汗沾背，不能答。
现代文：傅亮汗流浃背，什么话也回答不出来。
English: Fu Liang was drenched in sweat and couldn't answer a word.

古文：于是布腹心于到彦之、王华等，深自结纳。
现代文：于是派心腹在到彦之、王华等人面前，极力结纳。
English: As a result, they sent their henchmen to do their best in front of Drahonko, Wang Hua and others.

古文：太祖登阼，加散骑常侍、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，本官悉如故。
现代文：太祖登位之后，加傅亮官为散骑常侍、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，原来的官职也同时保留。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended the throne, Ga Fu Liang was appointed as the strolling equerry, the doctor of the left light, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three officials, and the original official position was also retained.

古文：司空府文武即为左光禄府。又进爵始兴郡公，食邑四千户，固让进封。
现代文：又授傅亮为始兴郡公，食邑四千户，傅亮坚决推辞太祖的这次封赏。
English: Fu Liang was also awarded the title of Shixing County Governor, with 4,000 households in the county. Fu Liang resolutely refused this award from his great-grandfather.

古文：元嘉三年，太祖欲诛亮，先呼入见；省内密有报之者，亮辞以嫂病笃，求暂还家。遣信报徐羡之，因乘车出郭门，骑马奔兄迪墓。
现代文：元嘉三年，太祖想杀傅亮，先喊他进见。宫内有人密报给傅亮。于是傅亮推说嫂子病重，请求暂时回家，并派人送信给徐羡之，自己乘车出城门，然后乘马奔往哥哥傅迪的墓前。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, the great-grandfather wanted to kill Fu Liang, and first called him to come and see him. Someone in the palace secretly reported to Fu Liang. So Fu Liang suggested that his sister-in-law was seriously ill, asked to go home for a while, and sent someone to send a letter to Xu Enzhi. He left the city gate by car, and then ran to his brother Fu Di's grave by horse.

古文：屯骑校尉郭泓收付廷尉，伏诛。时年五十三。
现代文：屯骑校尉郭泓抓住了傅亮并交给了廷尉，傅亮被杀，当时五十三岁。
English: The cavalry lieutenant Guo Wei caught Fu Liang and handed him over to the court lieutenant. Fu Liang was killed at the age of fifty-three.

古文：初至广莫门，上遣中书舍人以诏书示亮，并谓曰： 以公江陵之诚，当使诸子无恙。 
现代文：开始到广莫门的时候，太祖派中书舍人把诏书给傅亮看，并对他说： 因你在江陵诚心诚意迎奉太祖，所以你的儿子们不会被杀。 
English: When they first arrived at Guangmo Gate, the great-grandfather sent a scholar to show Fu Liang the edict and said to him: Because you sincerely welcomed the great-grandfather in Jiangling, your sons will not be killed.

古文：初，亮见世路屯险，著论名曰《演慎》，曰：
现代文：起初，傅亮见人生之路艰险，于是写了一篇文章，名为《演慎》，文为：
English: At first, Fu Liang saw that the road of life was arduous and dangerous, so he wrote an article called "Deng Sheng," which read:

古文：大道有言，慎终如始，则无败事矣。《易》曰： 括囊无咎。 慎不害也。
现代文：人们常说，自始自终谨慎，就不会有失败之事。《易经》说： 括囊无咎， 谨慎是没有害处的。
English: It is often said that if one is cautious from the beginning to the end, there will be no failure. "I Ching" says: There is no blame, there is no harm in being cautious.

古文：又曰： 藉之用茅，何咎之有。 
现代文：又说： 藉之用茅，何咎之有。 
English: He also said, "There is no blame on you if you take advantage of it."

古文：慎之至也。
现代文：谨慎到了极点。
English: That's extreme caution.

古文：文王小心，《大雅》咏其多福；仲由好勇，冯河贻其苦箴。
现代文：文王事事小心，《大雅》咏颂他多福；仲由为人勇猛，冯河给他良苦的劝戒。
English: King Wen was careful in everything. "Daya" extolled his many blessings; Zhongye was a brave man, and Fenghe gave him good and bad admonitions.

古文：《虞书》著慎身之誉，周庙铭陛坐之侧。
现代文：《虞书》中著有为人谨慎的格言，周庙中把它刻在陛座之侧。
English: There is a prudent motto in the "Book of Fortunes," and it is engraved on the side of His Majesty in the Zhou Temple.

古文：因斯以谈，所以保身全德，其莫尚于慎乎！
现代文：由此说来，要能够保全自身及其品德，就要谨慎。
English: Therefore, if you want to be able to preserve yourself and your character, you must be careful.

古文：夫四道好谦，三材忌满，祥萃虚室，鬼瞰高屋，丰屋有蔀家之灾，鼎食无百年之贵。
现代文：四道喜欢谦逊，三材忌讳圆满，吉祥聚于空室，鬼魅俯视高屋。殷实之家也许有倾家荡产之灾难，钟鸣鼎食不会有百年的富贵。
English: The four directions like modesty, the three wood taboos are complete, the auspicious gather in the empty room, and the ghosts look down on the high-rise. The affluent home may have the disaster of falling house prices, and the bell-ringing food will not be rich for a hundred years.

古文：然而徇欲厚生者，忽而不戒；知进忘退者，曾莫之惩。
现代文：然而纵欲贪生之人，忽视谨慎而又不戒除陋习，只知前进而不知急流勇退，没有不受到惩罚的。
English: But there is no impunity for those who are lustful and greedy for life, who disregard caution and do not give up bad habits, who only know how to advance, but do not know how to retreat from the rapids.

古文：故语有之曰，诚能慎之，福之根也。曰是何伤，祸之门尔。
现代文：前车已被摧毁，后面的车子仍不知停息，车正在危险之中只不过是暂时安全，侥幸走过一段险路，这样必有颠覆坠落灭亡的灾难，生命惨遭伤亡之祸。这是什么原因呢？
English: The front car has been destroyed, the car behind still does not know how to stop, the car is in danger, it is only temporarily safe, it has luckily gone through a dangerous road, so there must be a disaster of subversion, fall and death, life is suffering from casualties. What is the reason for this?

古文：言慎而已矣。亮布衣儒生，侥幸际会，既居宰辅，兼总重权。
现代文：流连沉溺而忘返，把生命看作比俗世之物还轻的缘故啊。傅亮是一个贫穷读书人，因偶然的机会做了宰辅，手握重权。
English: This is the reason why he indulges himself and forgets, and regards life as lighter than worldly goods. Fu Liang is a poor reader who, by chance, became a chief assistant and holds a lot of power.

古文：少帝失德，内怀忧惧，作《感物赋》以寄意焉。其辞曰：
现代文：见少帝没有德行，心怀忧惧，作《感物赋》来寄托他的情怀，其文为：
English: Seeing that the young emperor had no virtue, he was worried and wrote "Sentimental Fu" to express his feelings. The text reads:

古文：余以暮秋之月，述职内禁，夜清务隙，游目艺苑。于时风霜初戒，蛰类尚繁，飞蛾翔羽，翩翾满室，赴轩幌，集明烛者，必以燋灭为度。
现代文：我在暮秋的一个月夜，在宫中办完了公事，游目艺苑，见霜初降，蛰虫还很多，飞蛾四处乱飞，满室皆是，聚集在有烛火的地方，直到被烧死才罢休。
English: On a moonlit evening in late autumn, I had finished my duties at the Imperial Palace. I was in the Yu Mei Art Garden when the first frost fell. There were still a lot of aphids, and moths were flying everywhere. The room was full of them, and they gathered in places with candlelight until they were burned to death.

古文：虽则微物，矜怀者久之。
现代文：飞蛾虽是小小动物，但我仍怜惜怀想它很久。
English: Although the moth is a small animal, I still think about it for a long time.

古文：退感庄生异鹊之事，与彼同迷而忘反鉴之道，此先师所以鄙智，及齐客所以难日论也。
现代文：回想庄生异鹊的事情，与他同样迷途忘返，这是先师之所以鄙视有智之人，以及齐人之所以用日论为难的原因。
English: Thinking back on what happened to Zhuang Sheng, he was just as lost and oblivious as he was. This was the reason why his predecessor despised people with wisdom, and why Qi people were puzzled by the theory of Japan.

古文：怅然有怀，感物兴思，遂赋之云尔。
现代文：惆怅万分，心有所想，观物有感，脑中思绪翻腾，于是写了此赋。
English: With my mind racing, my heart thinking, my eyes feeling, my thoughts churning in my head, I wrote this fu.

古文：在西成之暮晷，肃皇命于禁中。
现代文：在秋日的夜晚，奉皇命在禁宫。
English: On an autumn night, I was summoned by the emperor to the Forbidden City.

古文：聆蜻蛚于前庑，鉴朗月于房栊。
现代文：听秋虫在前院鸣唱，看明亮的月光照在房子上。
English: Listen to the songbirds chirping in the front yard, watch the bright moonlight shine on the house.

古文：风萧瑟以陵幌，霜皑皑而被墉。
现代文：秋风萧瑟吹动帘帷，霜花皑皑铺满地平。
English: The autumn wind is blowing, the curtains are moving, and the ground is covered with frost.

古文：怜鸣蜩之应节，惜落景之怀东。
现代文：惋惜蜩鸣正在秋景中，怜悯花落而怀念春天。
English: Lamenting the hooting of the crickets in the autumn scenery, pitying the falling flowers and missing the spring.

古文：嗟劳人之萃感，何夕永而虑充。
现代文：可叹辛劳的人多感慨，为何白天黑夜忧虑重重。
English: People who lament their hard work often lament why they are worried day and night.

古文：眇今古以遐念，若循环之无终。
现代文：遐想古今，循环无尽。
English: Daydreaming about the past and the present, the cycle is endless.

古文：咏倚相之遗矩，希董生之方融。
现代文：咏叹伊相留下的规矩，盼望董生的正相融合。
English: He lamented the rules left by Yi Xiang and hoped that Dong Sheng's positive phase would merge.

古文：钻光灯而散袠，温圣哲之遗踪。
现代文：在灯光下打开书卷，温习圣哲们的遗迹。
English: Under the lights, open the scrolls and study the relics of the saints.

古文：坟素杳以难暨，九流纷其异封。
现代文：典籍一向难以查找，源流各别，纷纷都有不同。
English: Classic books have always been difficult to find, with different sources.

古文：领三百于无邪，贯五千于有宗。
现代文：在以前史书中稽考旧闻，探访心迹。
English: In the previous history books, review the old news and visit the heart.

古文：考旧闻于前史，访心迹于污隆。
现代文：人生中道路平坦或险阻在于命运，成全或丧失完全在于自身。
English: In life, whether the road is smooth or dangerous depends on fate, and whether it is completed or lost depends entirely on oneself.

古文：辞存丽而去秽，旨既雅而能通。
现代文：文辞保存华丽的而剔除污秽的，含义高雅而又易懂。
English: The wording preserves the gorgeous and removes the filth, the meaning is elegant and easy to understand.

古文：虽源流之深浩，且扬榷而发蒙。
现代文：虽然源流深远，但拿来大家探讨仍有启发教育作用。
English: Although the source is far-reaching, there is still an enlightening educational role for everyone to explore.

古文：习习飞蚋，飘飘纤蝇，缘幌求隙，望爓思陵。
现代文：飞来飞去的小虫，飘来飘去的小蝇，沿着布帷寻找缝隙，看到火焰想去追随。
English: Small insects flying around, small flies floating around, looking for a gap along the curtain, seeing the flame and wanting to follow it.

古文：重明照蓬艾，万品同率由。
现代文：使兰膏靡烂而不后悔，扑向明烛也在所不惜。看到前面路不通，也不知改道。
English: It does not regret to make the orchid paste rot, and it does not hesitate to rush to the candle. Seeing that the road ahead is impassable, it does not know how to change the road.

古文：忠诰岂假知，式微发直讴。 
现代文：并不是这些小东西值得我哀悼、惆怅怀念。
English: It's not the little things that I mourn and miss.

古文：亮自知倾覆，求退无由，又作辛有、穆生、董仲道赞，称其见微之美。
现代文：虫与人所走道路相同实在可贵，看来这两种东西灵魂是一样的。开始，傅亮奉迎大驾，在路上赋诗三首，其中一首流露了后悔与害怕的意思。傅亮自己明白将要倒台，但又没有办法退身，于是又写了辛有、穆生、董仲道的讠赞文，称赞他们的见解正确。
English: Insects are as precious as the path taken by human beings, and it seems that the souls of these two things are the same. At the beginning, Fu Liang followed the leader and composed three poems on the road, one of which expressed regret and fear. Fu Liang knew that he would fall, but he had no way to retreat, so he wrote a eulogy for Xin You, Musheng, and Dong Zhongdu, praising their correct opinions.

古文：长子演，秘书郎，先亮卒。
现代文：傅亮的长子傅演，为官秘书郎，比傅亮先去世。
English: Fu Liang's eldest son Fu Yuan, who was the official secretary, died before Fu Liang.

古文：演弟悝、湛逃亡。
现代文：傅演的弟弟傅悝、傅湛都逃走了。
English: Fu Yuan's younger brothers, Fu Yao and Fu Zhan, both fled.

古文：湛弟都，徙建安郡；世祖孝建之中，并还京师。
现代文：傅湛的弟弟傅都，迁到建安郡，世祖孝建年中，他们都回到了京都。
English: Fu Zhan's younger brother, Fu Du, moved to Jian'an County, and the founder, Xiao Jian, moved to the middle of the year, and they both returned to Kyoto.

