古文：傅玄，字休奕，北地泥阳人也。
现代文：傅玄字休奕，北地泥陽人。
English: Fu Xuan Zi Xiu Yi, the north of the mud Yangren.

古文：祖燮，汉汉阳太守。
现代文：祖父傅燮，是汉代的汉陽太守。
English: His grandfather, Fu Xi, was the ruler of Hanyang in the Han Dynasty.

古文：父干，魏扶风太守。
现代文：父亲傅干，是魏国的扶风太守。
English: His father, Fu Gan, was the Fufeng Daju of Wei.

古文：玄少孤贫，博学善属文，解钟律。
现代文：傅玄少时孤苦贫寒，博学，很会写文章，懂得乐律。
English: When he was young, Fu Xuan was lonely, poor, and erudite. He was good at writing articles and knew music rhythms.

古文：性刚劲亮直，不能容人之短。
现代文：性格刚强正直，不能容忍别人的短处。
English: He has a strong and honest character, and cannot tolerate the shortcomings of others.

古文：郡上计吏再举孝廉，太尉辟，皆不就。
现代文：郡里任为计吏，两次推举为孝廉，太尉征召，都不就任。
English: He was appointed as a tax collector in the county, twice elected as a filial piety, and was called up as a captain, but he did not take office.

古文：州举秀才，除郎中，与东海缪施俱以时誉选入著作，撰集魏书。
现代文：参加州考中了秀才，任郎中，与东海缪施都因当时的美名而被选为著作郎，撰集魏书。
English: Ren Rongzhong and Donghai Miao Shidu, both of whom were famous at the time, were chosen to be authors and to compile the Wei Shu.

古文：后参安东、卫军军事，转温令，再迁弘农太守，领典农校尉。
现代文：后来参知安东、卫军军事。转任温县县令，又升迁为弘农太守。掌管典农校尉之职。
English: Later, he served in the Sanchi Anton and the military of the Imperial Guard. He was transferred to the post of Wenshan County Governor, and promoted to the post of Hongnong Dazhong. He was in charge of the post of Tienong School Lieutenant.

古文：所居称职，数上书陈便宜，多所匡正。
现代文：居官称职，多次上书陈奏，辅正很多。
English: He is a competent resident official. He has been promoted many times. He has many assistants.

古文：五等建，封鹑觚男。
现代文：五等制建立后，封为鹑觚男爵。
English: After the establishment of the five-class system, he was given the title of Baron Zou.

古文：武帝为晋王，以玄为散骑常侍。
现代文：武帝司马炎当晋王时，曾委任他为散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Sima Yan of Wu was the king of Jin, he appointed him as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：及受禅，进爵为子，加附马都尉。
现代文：等到武帝受禅继位，晋级为子爵，加官驸马都尉。
English: Wait until Emperor Wu accepts Zen's succession, promoted to viscount, and promoted to lieutenant.

古文：帝初即位，广纳直言，开不讳之路，玄及散骑常侍皇甫陶共掌谏职。
现代文：武帝刚即位，广泛采纳直言，开通不忌讳的言路，傅玄跟散骑常侍皇甫陶共同掌管谏官之职。
English: As soon as Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he widely adopted direct speech and opened up a way of speech that was not taboo. Fu Xuan and the strolling attendant Emperor Futao jointly held the position of eunuch.

古文：玄上疏曰： 臣闻先王之临天下也，明其大教，长其义节。道化隆于上，清议行于下，上下相奉，人怀义心。
现代文：傅玄上疏说： 我听说先王君临天下，申明弘大教化，增加礼义风节；教化在朝廷兴盛，公议就在下面流行，上下共同奉行，人人怀有仁义之心。
English: Fu Xuan Shang Shou said: I heard that when the former king came to the world, he affirmed the promotion of great enlightenment and the increase of etiquette and righteousness. Enlightenment flourished in the imperial court, public deliberation was popular below, and it was jointly pursued by the upper and lower levels, and everyone had a heart of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：亡秦荡灭先王之制，以法术相御，而义心亡矣。
现代文：灭亡了的秦朝荡灭先王典制，用苛法统治，仁义之心就衰亡了。
English: The defunct Qin Dynasty overthrew the previous imperial system, ruled with harsh laws, and the heart of benevolence and righteousness withered away.

古文：近者魏武好法术，而天下贵刑名；魏文慕通达，而天下贱守节。
现代文：近代魏武帝曹操喜欢法术，于是天下看重刑名；魏文帝曹丕仰慕通晓事理，于是天下轻视守节。
English: Modern Wei Emperor Cao Cao liked magic, so the world attached great importance to the name of the punishment; Wei Emperor Cao Wei admired the wisdom, so the world despised the observance of the festival.

古文：其后纲维不摄，而虚无放诞之论盈于朝野，使天下无复清议，而亡秦之病复发于今。
现代文：从此以后朝纲不能统理，因而空虚无用放诞不羁的议论充斥朝野，致使天下不再有公正的议论，亡秦的弊病又在今天复发。
English: Since then, the imperial edict has not been able to govern, so the empty, useless and unrestrained discussions have flooded the court and the country. As a result, there is no longer any fair discussion in the world, and the ills of the late Qin Dynasty have recurred today.

古文：陛下圣德，龙兴受禅，弘尧、舜之化，开正直之路，体夏禹之至俭，综殷周之典文，臣咏叹而已，将又奚言！
现代文：陛下的道德至高无上，王朝兴起，承继帝位，弘扬尧舜的教化，广开正言直谏的道路，体验夏禹的节约俭朴，综合商周的典章杂文，我只有感叹而已，还打算说什么呢！
English: His Majesty's moral supremacy, the rise of the dynasty, the succession of the imperial throne, the promotion of the enlightenment of the eunuchs, the expansion of the path of the righteous, the experience of Xia Yu's thrift and frugality, the comprehensive business week's ordinance essays, I can only sigh, what else am I going to say!

古文：惟未举清远有礼之臣，以敦风节；未退虚鄙，以惩不恪，臣是以犹敢有言。 
现代文：只是没有推荐志操高远彬彬有礼的臣子，来敦厚风节；没有罢黜虚伪卑鄙的小人，以惩戒不恭敬的臣子，我因此还敢有话说。 
English: However, I dare to say that I did not recommend high-minded, courteous and courteous courtiers to come to the Dunhuang Festival; I did not banish hypocritical and despicable villains to discipline disrespectful courtiers.

古文：诏报曰： 举清远有礼之臣者，此尤今之要也。 
现代文：诏书答复说： 推荐志操高远有礼义之臣，这是当今尤其重要的事。 
English: The imperial edict replied: It is especially important today to recommend courteous and righteous subjects who have lofty aspirations.

古文：乃使玄草诏进之。
现代文：于是让傅玄草拟诏书献上。
English: Therefore, Fu Xuan was asked to draft the imperial edict and present it.

古文：玄复上疏曰：
现代文：傅玄又上疏说：
English: Fu Xuan went on to say:

古文：臣闻舜举五臣，无为而化，用人得其要也。
现代文：我听说舜举荐五臣，无为而治，这是因为用人得到了要领。
English: I've heard it said that you should recommend five ministers and do nothing. This is because you've got the essentials.

古文：天下群司猥多，不可不审得其人也。
现代文：因为天下各种官职杂乱，不可不审察得到合适的人。
English: Because the world is cluttered with all kinds of official positions, it is essential to get the right person through examination.

古文：不得其人，一日则损不赀，况积日乎！
现代文：不得到合适的人，一天就浪费不少资财，何况累积时日呢？
English: If you don't get the right person, you will waste a lot of money and resources in a day, not to mention the accumulated time.

古文：典谟曰 无旷庶官 ，言职之不可久废也。
现代文：《尚书·皋陶谟》上说： 不要空置百官 ，是说职位不能长久废弃。
English: "Shangshu Zhitangmo" said: Don't leave hundreds of posts vacant, which means that the posts can't be abandoned for a long time.

古文：诸有疾病满百日不差，宜令去职，优其礼秩而宠存之，既差而后更用。
现代文：那些病了一百天还不痊愈的人，应当让他离职，给他优厚的礼遇俸秩供奉他，病愈之后再用。
English: Those who have been ill for a hundred days and have not yet recovered should be allowed to leave their jobs, be given a generous salary and rank to serve him, and then be used again after they have recovered.

古文：臣不废职于朝，国无旷官之累，此王政之急也。
现代文：臣下在朝不会废弃职位，国家，没有闲官的拖累，这是王政的当务之急。
English: Subordinates in the government will not abandon their posts, the country, without the drag of idle officials, this is the top priority of the royal government.

古文：臣闻先王分士农工商以经国制事，各一其业而殊其务。
现代文：我听说前代帝王按士农工商分工来治理国事，各有一业而事情不同。
English: I heard that the previous emperors governed the affairs of the state according to the division of labor between workers, farmers, craftsmen and businessmen. Each had their own business and things were different.

古文：自士已上子弟，为之立太学以教之，选明师以训之，各随其才优劣而授用之。
现代文：士人以上的子弟，为他们建立太学教育他们，选择圣明的老师教导他们，按他们各自的才能优劣授职任用。
English: For the sons of scholars and above, establish a university to educate them, choose a wise teacher to teach them, and appoint them according to their respective abilities.

古文：农以丰其食，工以足其器，商贾以通其货。
现代文：农业要使粮食丰收，工业要使器具充足，商贾要使货物流通。
English: Agriculture should make grain harvest, industry should make equipment sufficient, merchants should make goods circulation.

古文：故虽天下之大，兆庶之众，无有一人游手。
现代文：所以天下很大，百姓很多，没有一个人会空着手。
English: Therefore, the world is big, there are many people, and no one will start empty-handed.

古文：分数之法，周备如此。
现代文：分工的办法是如此的周密完备。
English: The method of division of labor is so thorough and complete.

古文：汉、魏不定其分，百官子弟不修经艺而务交游，未知莅事而坐享天禄；农工之业多废，或逐淫利而离其事；徒系名于太学，然不闻先王之风。
现代文：而汉代魏代没有固定的分工，百官的子弟不学习五经六艺而从事交游，还不懂得做事就坐享朝廷俸禄；农业工业多有废弃，有的追逐暴利而离开他的正事；白白在太学挂名，却没听到过先王的教化。
English: However, the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty did not have a fixed division of labor. The sons of officials did not study the Five Classics and the Six Arts, but engaged in socializing. They did not know how to do things, so they enjoyed the imperial salary. Agricultural industries were mostly abandoned, and some left their main business in pursuit of windfall profits. They signed up for Taixue for nothing, but did not hear the enlightenment of the first king.

古文：今圣明之政资始，而汉、魏之失未改，散官众而学校未设，游手多而亲农者少，工器不尽其宜。
现代文：现在圣明的政治开始，可汉朝魏朝的失误没有改变，散官多而没设学校，不务正业的人多而从事农业的人少，工业制作的器物不尽合适用。
English: Now the politics of Shengming has begun, but the mistakes of the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty have not changed. There are more officials than schools, more people are not engaged in real work and fewer people are engaged in agriculture, and industrial products are not fully applicable.

古文：臣以为亟定其制，通计天下若干人为士，足以副在官之吏；若干人为农，三年足有一年之储；若干人为工，足其器用；若干人为商贾，足以通货而已。
现代文：我认为赶快制定制度，统一规划天下若干人为士人，使他们足以充当各种官吏；若干人是农民，使他们劳动三年足有一年的储备粮；若干人当工人，使得各种器具充足；若干人经商，足以使货物流通而已。
English: In my opinion, we should quickly establish a system and make a unified plan to ensure that a certain number of people in the world are scholars, so that they can serve as various officials; a certain number of people are farmers, so that they can work for three years and have a year's supply of grain; a certain number of people are workers, so that all kinds of utensils are sufficient; a certain number of people are in business, so that goods can only circulate.

古文：尊儒尚学，贵农贱商，此皆事业之要务也。
现代文：尊崇儒道崇尚学术，以农业为贵，以商业为贱，这都是国家事务中的重要事务。
English: Respecting Confucianism and Taoism, advocating academia, valuing agriculture, and undervaluing commerce are all important matters in national affairs.

古文：前皇甫陶上事，欲令赐拜散官皆课使亲耕，天下享足食之利。
现代文：先前皇甫陶上奏，要求任命散官的事都经过考核，让他们亲自耕种，让天下享受粮食充足的好处。
English: The previous Emperor Tao made a speech, demanding that the appointment of officials should be examined, so that they could personally cultivate and let the world enjoy the benefits of sufficient grain.

古文：禹、稷躬稼，祚流后世，是以《明堂》、《月令》著帝藉之制。
现代文：夏禹后稷，亲自务农，福祚流传后世，因此《礼记》中的《明堂》《月令》篇记载了天子籍田的制度。
English: Hsia Yu Houyi personally engaged in farming, and the blessing was passed down to future generations. Therefore, the "Ming Hall" and "Monthly Calendar" in the "Rituals" recorded the system of Tianzi Kechitian.

古文：伊尹古之名臣，耕于有莘；晏婴齐之大夫，避庄公之难，亦耕于海滨。
现代文：伊尹是古代的名臣，在有莘耕作；晏婴是齐国的大夫，躲避齐庄公的灾祸，也到海滨耕种。
English: Yi Yin was a famous minister in ancient times, and he farmed in Yulun; Zou Jiao was a doctor in Qi, and he avoided the calamity of Qi Zhuangguo and also farmed on the seashore.

古文：昔者圣帝明王，贤佐俊士，皆尝从事于农矣。
现代文：从前的圣明帝王，贤能俊杰之士，都曾经从事过农业生产。
English: In the past, the Holy Emperor Ming and all the virtuous and talented people were once engaged in agricultural production.

古文：王人赐官，冗散无事者，不督使学，则当使耕，无缘放之使坐食百姓也。
现代文：天子授人官职，对那些多余闲散没有事做的官员，不督促他们学习，就应当让他们耕作，没有理由放纵他们坐吃百姓的粮食。
English: The Son of Heaven bestows official positions on people. For those officials who are superfluous, idle and have nothing to do, they should be allowed to farm without urging them to study. There is no reason to indulge them in eating the people's grain.

古文：今文武之官既众，而拜赐不在职者又多，加以服役为兵，不得耕稼，当农者之半，南面食禄者参倍于前。
现代文：现在文武百官已经很多，而拜官不在其职的还多，加上服役当兵，不能种庄稼，又是农民的一半，这样面朝南坐食俸禄的人是前朝的三倍。
English: Nowadays, there are already many civil and military officials, but there are also more worshipers who are not in their positions. In addition to serving as soldiers, they cannot grow crops, and they are half of the farmers. The number of people who face south and live on salaries is three times that of the previous dynasty.

古文：使冗散之官农，而收其租税，家得其实，而天下之谷可以无乏矣。
现代文：让闲散多余的官员务农，收纳他们的租税，私人也得到实利，而天下的粮食就可以不缺乏了。
English: Let the idle and superfluous officials work in agriculture, collect their taxes, and private individuals also receive real profits, and there will be no shortage of grain in the world.

古文：夫家足食，为子则孝，为父则慈，为兄则友，为弟则悌。
现代文：家家的粮食充足，当儿子的就孝顺，做父亲的就慈爱，当兄长的就友爱，当弟弟的就孝悌。
English: There is enough food in the family. If you are a son, you should be dutiful. If you are a father, you should be kind. If you are an elder brother, you should be friendly. If you are a younger brother, you should be filial.

古文：天下足食，则仁义之教可不令而行也。
现代文：天下丰衣足食，那么仁义教化不用命令就已实行。
English: There is plenty of food and clothing in the world, so benevolence and righteousness education has been implemented without orders.

古文：为政之要，计人而置官，分人而授事，士农工商之分不可斯须废也。
现代文：为政的关键，按照总人数来设置官员，分工到人授以职事，士农工商的分工是时刻都不能废弃的。
English: As the key to politics, officials should be set up according to the total number of people, the division of labor should be assigned to people, and the division of labor between the government, agriculture and industry should not be abandoned at any time.

古文：若未能精其防制，计天下文武之官足为副贰者使学，其余皆归之于农。
现代文：如果不能精确制定相应的制度，就应考核天下的文武官员，能为长官辅佐的人让他们学习，其余的都让他们务农。
English: If it is not possible to precisely formulate a corresponding system, then the world's civil and military officials should be examined, and those who can assist the chief should be allowed to study, and the rest should be allowed to work in agriculture.

古文：若百工商贾有长者，亦皆归之于农。
现代文：至于百工商贾中有多余的人，也都让他们从事农业。
English: As for the superfluous people in the hundred industrial and commercial villages, they also let them engage in agriculture.

古文：务农若此，何有不赡乎！
现代文：像这样务农，有什么不充足呢？
English: With farming like this, what's not to like?

古文：《虞书》曰： 三载考绩，三考黜陟幽明。 
现代文：《尚书·舜典》中说： 三年考核一次政绩，三次考核后罢黜低劣升迁优异的人。 
English: "Shangshu·Shuxuan" said: Three years of performance appraisal once, after three appraisals, the inferior and superior people will be promoted and promoted.

古文：是为九年之后乃有迁叙也。
现代文：可见九年之后才有升迁的次第。
English: You can see how it took nine years to get promoted.

古文：故居官久，则念立慎终之化，居不见久，则竞为一切之政。
现代文：所以居官时间久，才会想到建立良好的教化；居官时间短，就会争着干一些有政绩的事。
English: Therefore, it is only when a person has been in office for a long time that he or she would think of establishing a good education system; when a person has been in office for a short time, he or she would strive to do something with political merit.

古文：六年之限，日月浅近，不周黜陟。
现代文：六年期限，时间不长，贬黜或升迁都不够周密。
English: The six-year term is not long, and the demotion or promotion is not thorough enough.

古文：陶之所上，义合古制。
现代文：皇甫陶所上奏之事，合乎古代礼制。
English: The fact that it was performed by the Imperial Household Agency is in accordance with ancient etiquette.

古文：夫儒学者，王教之首也。
现代文：儒家学术，是王政的首事。
English: Confucian scholarship is the top priority of the royal government.

古文：尊其道，贵其业，重其选，犹恐化之不崇；忽而不以为急，臣惧日有陵迟而不觉也。仲尼有言： 人能弘道，非道弘人。 
现代文：遵从儒道，看重儒业，重视儒士选拔，尚且还担心教化不能推崇；现在竟然又不以儒学为当务之急，我怕一天天衰落却还没察觉。孔子说过： 人能弘扬道，不是道弘扬人。 
English: Following Confucianism, valuing Confucianism, and valuing the selection of Confucianists, I am still worried that enlightenment cannot be promoted; now I am not taking Confucianism as a top priority, I am afraid that I have not noticed the decline day by day. Confucius said: People can promote the way, but not the way.

古文：然则尊其道者，非惟尊其书而已，尊其人之谓也。
现代文：如此说来，那么尊重儒道的人，不只是尊重儒家的书而已，而要尊重儒家的人。
English: In this way, those who respect Confucianism not only respect Confucian books, but also respect Confucian people.

古文：贵其业者，不妄教非其人也。重其选者，不妄用非其人也。
现代文：所谓看重儒业，是不胡乱教育那些不合儒道的人；所谓重视儒士选拔，是不要胡乱任用不从儒道的人。
English: The so-called emphasis on Confucianism is to educate those who do not conform to Confucianism; the so-called emphasis on the selection of Confucians is not to appoint people who do not follow Confucianism.

古文：若此，而学校之纲举矣。
现代文：像这样，学校教育大纲就确立了。
English: Thus, the school curriculum was established.

古文：书奏，帝下诏曰： 二常侍恳恳于所论，可谓乃心欲佐益时事者也。
现代文：书上奏后，皇帝下诏说： 两位常侍所论很诚恳，可以说你们是想补益时事。
English: After the presentation of the book, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: The two attendants spoke very sincerely, and it can be said that you are trying to make up for the current affairs.

古文：而主者率以常制裁之，岂得不使发愤耶！
现代文：可是主管的人大抵以常制来裁决，怎能不使你们抒发愤懑呢？
English: But the people in charge usually adjudicate on a regular basis, so how can you not express your anger?

古文：二常侍所论，或举其大较而未备其条目，亦可便令作之，然后主者八坐广共研精。
现代文：两位常侍所论，有的列举了大纲而条目不详备，也可让他们裁制，然后让五曹尚书、二仆射、宗令等八座官员共同研究以求缜密。
English: On the subject of the two attendants, some enumerated the outline and the items were not detailed, and they could also be allowed to make a ruling, and then let the eight officials such as the five Cao Shangshu, the two servants, and the patriarchal order study together to ensure accuracy.

古文：凡关言于人主，人臣之所至难。
现代文：大凡关系到人君的言论，是臣子最难办的。
English: The most difficult thing for a courtier to do is to make a statement that has a great deal to do with the emperor.

古文：而人主若不能虚心听纳，自古忠臣直士之所慷慨，至使杜口结舌。
现代文：而国君如果不能虚心采纳，就只会使自古以来的忠心之臣和直谏之人万分感慨，以至于闭口不语。
English: On the other hand, if the sovereign does not adopt it with an open mind, it will only make the loyal vassals and those who have been loyal to him since ancient times extremely emotional, so much so that they will not speak.

古文：每念于此，未尝不叹息也。
现代文：每每想到这些，没有不叹息的。
English: Every time I think about it, I can't help but sigh.

古文：故前诏敢有直言，勿有所距，庶几得以发懞补过，获保高位。
现代文：所以上次诏书要求臣下敢于直言，不要有所中止，差不多可以启发昏昧补正过失，永保帝位。
English: Therefore, the last imperial edict asked the vassals to dare to speak frankly and not to suspend, which can almost enlighten the ambiguity, correct the mistakes, and maintain the throne forever.

古文：苟言有偏善，情在忠益，虽文辞有谬误，言语有失得，皆当旷然恕之。
现代文：如果言论有些可取，心情合乎忠诚，即使文辞有错误，言语有得失，都应当宽宥饶恕。
English: If the words are somewhat desirable, the mood is loyal, even if the words are wrong, the words have gains and losses, they should be forgiven and forgiven.

古文：古人犹不拒诽谤，况皆善意在可采录乎！
现代文：古人尚且不拒绝别人背后议论批评，何况都是值得采纳的意思呢？
English: The ancients did not refuse to criticize others behind their backs, and what's more, they were all worth adopting.

古文：近者孔晁、綦毋皆案以轻慢之罪，所以皆原，欲使四海知区区之朝无讳言之忌也。 
现代文：近来孔、綦毋騄都判为轻慢之罪，我之所以都宽恕了他们，正是要使天下人知道我大晋朝不必忌讳言论。 
English: Recently, both Kong and Zou were convicted of the crime of contempt, and the reason why I have pardoned them is precisely to let the world know that I do not have to refrain from speech during the Great Jin Dynasty.

古文：俄迁侍中。
现代文：不久将傅玄升迁为侍中。
English: He soon promoted Fu Xuan to the position of chamberlain.

古文：初，玄进皇甫陶，及入而抵，玄以事与陶争，言喧哗，为有司所奏，二人竟坐免官。
现代文：当初，傅玄推荐皇甫陶，等到入朝后两人就有抵触，傅玄因政事与皇甫陶争执，争吵声喧哗，被有司陈奏，两人都获罪免官。
English: At first, Fu Xuan recommended Wang Futao, but after he entered the court, the two had a conflict. Fu Xuan quarreled with Wang Futao over political affairs, and the quarrel was loud and noisy. He was reprimanded by Yu Si Chen, and both were exonerated.

古文：泰始四年，以为御史中丞。
现代文：泰始四年，任命为御史中丞。
English: In the fourth year of Taisho, he was appointed to Goshi chujo.

古文：时颇有水旱之灾，玄复上疏曰：
现代文：当时多有水涝旱灾，傅玄又上疏说：
English: At that time, there were many floods and droughts, and Fu Xuan said:

古文：臣闻圣帝明王受命，天时未必无灾，是以尧有九年之水，汤有七年之旱，惟能济之以人事耳。
现代文：我听说圣明帝王承继天命，天时不一定没有灾害，因此尧有九年水灾，商汤有七年旱灾，只不过能用人事赈济它罢了。
English: I heard that Emperor Shengming, following the destiny of heaven, is not necessarily free from disasters at all times, so there are nine years of floods and seven years of drought in Shangtang, but he can only use personnel to relieve it.

古文：故洪水滔天而免沈溺，野无生草而不困匮。
现代文：所以洪水滔天都能避免淹没，地不长草却不困乏。
English: Therefore, the flood can avoid flooding, and the grass does not grow, but it is not tired.

古文：伏惟陛下圣德钦明，时小水旱，人未大饥，下祗畏之诏，求极意之言，同禹、汤之罪己，侔周文之夕惕。
现代文：我想陛下您道德操行圣明，现时小小的水旱灾害，百姓没有大的饥荒，下发敬天命的诏书，寻求符合天意的言论，像夏禹商汤一样严格要求自己，同周文王一样谨慎小心，不敢怠慢。
English: I think, Your Majesty, your moral conduct is sacred. At present, minor floods and droughts are rare, and the people do not suffer from major famines. You issue decrees that respect the decrees of Heaven, and seek to make statements that are in line with Heaven's will. Like Xia Yu Shangtang, you are strict with yourself, and like King Zhou Wen, you are cautious and do not dare to be negligent.

古文：臣伏欢喜，上便宜五事：
现代文：我很高兴，上疏陈述应该做的五件事：
English: I'm happy to say that there are five things you should do with your resume:

古文：其一曰，耕夫务多种而耕不熟，徒丧功力而无收。
现代文：第一件事是：现在耕种的人务求多种却因干旱不能成熟，白白浪费劳力没有收成。
English: The first thing is that the people who are cultivating now are trying to have a variety of crops, but because of the drought, they can't ripen, so they waste their labor and don't get a harvest.

古文：又旧兵持官牛者，官得六分，士得四分；自持私牛者，与官中分，施行来久，众心安之。
现代文：另外从前士兵用官府的牛，官府得收成的十分之六，士兵得十分之四，用私人的牛，与官府平分，施行已久，众心安定。
English: In addition, former soldiers used the government's cattle, the government got six-tenths of the harvest, and soldiers got four-tenths, and used private cattle, equally divided with the government. It has been implemented for a long time, and everyone's hearts are stable.

古文：今一朝减持官牛者，官得八分，士得二分；持私牛及无牛者，官得七分，士得三分，人失其所，必不欢乐。
现代文：现在一旦减少用官府牛的分成比例，官府得十分之八，士卒得十分之二；用私牛以及没有牛的，官府得十分之七，士兵得十分之三，人人失其所得，一定都不高兴。
English: Now, if the proportion of government cattle used is reduced, the government will get eight-tenths, and the soldiers will get two-tenths; if private cattle are used or no cattle are used, the government will get seven-tenths, and the soldiers will get three-tenths. Everyone will lose their income, and they will not be happy.

古文：臣愚以为宜佃兵持官牛者与四分，持私牛与官中分，则天下兵作欢然悦乐，爱惜成谷，无有损弃之忧。
现代文：我以为雇佣士兵用官府的牛给他十分之四，用私人的牛与官府平分，那么天下士兵都欢欣鼓舞，爱惜粮食，就没有损农弃业的忧患了。
English: I thought that if the hired soldiers gave him four-tenths of the government's cattle, and the private cattle were equally divided with the government, then the soldiers all over the world would rejoice and cherish grain, and there would be no worries about farmers abandoning their businesses.

古文：其二曰，以二千石虽奉务农之诏，犹不勤心以尽地利。
现代文：第二件事是：由于二千石俸禄的官吏虽然承奉致力农业的诏书，但还是不尽心尽责以获地利。
English: The second reason is that officials with a stipend of two thousand koku, although they are committed to agriculture, still do not do their best to earn their positions.

古文：昔汉氏以垦田不实，征杀二千石以十数。
现代文：从前汉代因开垦农田不务实，验证后诛杀二千石俸禄的官吏用十计算。
English: In the former Han Dynasty, because it was impractical to reclaim farmland, officials who reclaimed 2,000 koku of stipend after verification were counted in ten.

古文：臣愚以为宜申汉氏旧典，以警戒天下郡县，皆以死刑督之。
现代文：我认为应该重申汉代的旧典，以警戒天下郡县，都用死刑督促他们。
English: I think it is necessary to reiterate the old code of the Han Dynasty and urge them to use the death penalty as a warning to all counties in the world.

古文：其三曰，以魏初未留意于水事，先帝统百揆，分河堤为四部，并本凡五谒者，以水功至大，与农事并兴，非一人所周故也。
现代文：第三件事是：魏代以来，没有留意兴修水利，先帝统领百官，把执掌河堤的分为四部，连同本部共有五位河堤谒者，因为水利事关重大，跟农事一并兴起不是一个人所能考虑周全的。
English: The third thing is: since the Wei Dynasty, there has been no attention paid to the construction of water conservancy. The former emperor, leading hundreds of officials, divided the management of river dikes into four departments. Together with the headquarters, there are a total of five river dikes. Because water conservancy is of great importance, it is not possible for one person to consider everything thoroughly.

古文：今谒者一人之力，行天下诸水，无时得遍。
现代文：现在河堤谒者只有一个人，管理天下各地水利，无法考虑周全。
English: At present, there is only one person in charge of damming the river, managing water conservancy in all parts of the world, and it is impossible to consider everything thoroughly.

古文：伏见河堤谒者车谊不知水势，转为他职，更选知水者代之。
现代文：我看河堤谒者车谊也不懂水利形势，可转任别的职务，再选了解水利的人代替他。
English: I think that the person who damaged the river dike, Chari, does not understand the water conservancy situation. He can be transferred to another position, and then a person who understands water conservancy can be elected to replace him.

古文：可分为五部，使各精其方宜。
现代文：可以分为五部，使他们各自精通分掌的职事。
English: It can be divided into five parts, so that they are each proficient in the duties of the division.

古文：其四曰，古以步百为亩，今以二百四十步为一亩，所觉过倍。
现代文：第四件事是：古代以一百方步为一亩，现在以二百四十方步为一亩，所差超过一倍。
English: The fourth thing is: In ancient times, one mu was equal to one hundred cubits; now, one mu is equal to two hundred and forty cubits, which is more than double.

古文：近魏初课田，不务多其顷亩，但务修其功力，故白田收至十余斛，水田收数十斛。
现代文：近代魏朝开始抽田税，不求多收田亩，但求休整劳力，所以白田收到十多斛，水田收几十斛。
English: The modern Wei Dynasty began to collect field tax. They did not seek to collect more mu of fields, but sought to rest and rectify labor. Therefore, white fields received more than ten mu, and paddy fields received dozens of mu.

古文：自顷以来，日增田顷亩之课，而田兵益甚，功不能修理，至亩数斛已还，或不足以偿种。
现代文：近来，一天天增加田亩的赋税，而种田的士兵更厉害，劳力不能休整，甚至一亩几斛以上，有的还不够偿还成本。
English: Recently, the tax on fields and mu has been increasing day by day, and the soldiers who farm the fields have become more powerful, and the labor cannot be rested, even more than a few mu, and some are not enough to repay the cost.

古文：非与曩时异天地，横遇灾害也，其病正在于务多顷亩而功不修耳。
现代文：并不是跟从前的天地不同，横遭灾祸，其弊病正是由于务求田亩增多而不休整劳力。
English: It is not that the world is different from the previous world and is plagued by disasters. Its malady is precisely due to the increase in the number of acres and the lack of labor.

古文：窃见河堤谒者石恢甚精练水事及田事，知其利害，乞中书召恢，委曲问其得失，必有所补益。
现代文：我私下看到河堤谒者石恢很精于水利和农田，知道利弊，请求中书召见石恢，仔细寻问农业水利的得失，一定会有所补益。
English: Privately, I saw that the dike dweller Shih Huan was very proficient in water conservancy and farmland, and knew the pros and cons. I asked for a written invitation to see Shih Huan, and carefully inquired about the gains and losses of agricultural water conservancy. There will definitely be complementary benefits.

古文：其五曰，臣以为胡夷兽心，不与华同，鲜卑最甚。
现代文：第五件事是：我认为胡夷之族是人面兽心，不与华夏相同，鲜卑族最厉害。
English: The fifth thing is: I think that the Hui people are human-faced and animal-hearted, not the same as the Chinese, and the Xianbei people are the most powerful.

古文：本邓艾苟欲取一时之利，不虑后患，使鲜卑数万散居人间，此必为害之势也。
现代文：当初邓艾只想取得一时利益，没有考虑到后患，使鲜卑族几万人散居在民间，这必然会有灾祸。
English: At first, Deng Ai only wanted to make a short-term profit and did not consider the consequences, so that tens of thousands of Xianbei people were scattered among the people, which would inevitably lead to disaster.

古文：秦州刺史胡烈素有恩信于西方，今烈往，诸胡虽已无恶，必且消弭，然兽心难保，不必其可久安也。
现代文：秦州刺史胡烈一向对西方有恩，现在胡烈前往，各种胡人虽然已没有作乱，必将消除，但兽心难保不发，不一定能长治久安。
English: Qin State's ruler, Huli, has always been kind to the West, and now Huli is going there. Although all kinds of Hu people have not caused chaos, they will certainly be eliminated, but the animal's heart is difficult to keep, and it may not be able to maintain long-term peace.

古文：若后有动衅，烈计能制之。
现代文：如果以后有动乱的迹兆，胡烈的计谋能制伏他们。
English: If there are signs of unrest in the future, Hu Rong's strategy will be able to subdue them.

古文：惟恐胡虏适困于讨击，便能东入安定，西赴武威，外名为降，可动复动。
现代文：只是担心胡虏刚刚被征讨所困，就会向东逃到安定，向西逃到武威，表面上降服，能够騷动时还是騷动。
English: They are just worried that the Huns, who have just been trapped by the conquest, will flee to the east to stability, and to the west to Wuwei. On the surface, they will surrender, but they will still riot when they can riot.

古文：此二郡非烈所制，则恶胡东西有窟穴浮游之地，故复为患，无以禁之也。
现代文：这两郡不受胡烈控制，那么凶恶的胡人东西都有窟穴缓冲漫游，所以以后再生祸患，是没有办法禁止的。
English: These two counties are not under the control of the Hu Lie, so the vicious Hu people all have holes to buffer roaming, so there is no way to prohibit the regeneration of the scourge in the future.

古文：宜更置一郡于高平川，因安定西州都尉募乐徙民，重其复除以充之，以通北道，渐以实边。
现代文：应该在高平川再设一郡，让安定西州的都尉征募乐意迁徙的百姓，大量免除徭役之数来补充，打通北行道路，渐渐充实边境。
English: Another county should be set up in Gaoping River, and the governor of the stable western state should be allowed to recruit people who are willing to migrate, and a large number of officials should be exempted to supplement, open the northbound road, and gradually enrich the border.

古文：详议此二郡及新置郡，皆使并属秦州，令烈得专御边之宜。
现代文：最好考虑这两郡和所置的郡都统一属于秦州，使胡烈能够统管边境事宜。
English: It is best to consider that these two counties and the counties placed belong to Qin State, so that Hu Lie can control the border affairs.

古文：诏曰： 得所陈便宜，言农事得失及水官兴废，又安边御胡政事宽猛之宜，申省周备，一二具之，此诚为国大本，当今急务也。
现代文：诏书说： 得到所陈奏的应办之事，谈到农事的得失和水利官员的兴废，以及安定边境抗御胡夷政事宽严的事、陈述周详完备，一应俱全，这的确是治国的根本大事，当今的迫切任务。
English: The edict said, "The things to be done, the gains and losses of agricultural affairs, the rise and fall of water conservancy officials, the stability of the border, the resistance to the Hui government, the leniency of the government, and the thoroughness of the presentation are all complete. This is indeed a fundamental matter of statecraft and an urgent task today.

古文：如所论皆善，深知乃心，广思诸宜，动静以闻也。 
现代文：论述都正确，深知你忠心王室，你要更广泛地思考应做之事，并把情况告诉我。 
English: I know that you are loyal to the royal family, and you should think more broadly about what you should do and tell me the situation.

古文：五年，迁太仆。
现代文：泰始五年，任太仆。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed as a courtier.

古文：时比年不登，羌胡扰边，诏公卿会议。
现代文：当时连年五谷不登，西羌胡人騷扰边境，皇帝下诏让公卿讨论。
English: At that time, the grain did not rise year after year, the Xishuanghu people harassed the border, and the emperor issued an edict to let the nobles discuss.

古文：玄应对所问，陈事切直，虽不尽施行，而常见优容。
现代文：傅玄应答皇帝所问，陈述事理恳切率直，虽没有全部施行，但时常被宽容。
English: Fu Xuan answered the emperor's question, stating the facts sincerely and frankly. Although not all of them were implemented, they were often tolerated.

古文：转司隶校尉。
现代文：转任司隶校尉。
English: Transferred to the rank of captain.

古文：献皇后崩于弘训宫，设丧位。
现代文：献皇后在弘训宫驾崩，设立祭丧的位置。
English: The Empress Dowager passed away at Hongxun Palace, and a place of mourning was set up.

古文：旧制，司隶于端门外坐，在诸卿上，绝席。
现代文：按旧制，司隶应在端门外面就坐，在众卿之上，独坐一席。
English: According to the old system, the subordinate should sit just outside the front door, above the nobles, and sit alone.

古文：其入殿，按本品秩在诸卿下，以次坐，不绝席。
现代文：进入宫殿，按本品的官秩在众卿之下，按次序坐，与人同坐一席。
English: Entering the palace, according to the official rank of this product, they are under the lords, sit in order, and sit with others.

古文：而谒者以弘训宫为殿内，制玄位在卿下。
现代文：而谒者认为弘训宫是在殿内，把傅玄的位置设在卿位之下。
English: However, the eunuchs believed that Hongxun Palace was inside the palace, and placed Fu Xuan's position below that of the nobility.

古文：玄恚怒，厉声色而责谒者。
现代文：傅玄大怒，大声呵叱谒者。
English: Fu Xuan was enraged and loudly scolded the man.

古文：谒者妄称尚书所处，玄对百僚而骂尚书以下。
现代文：谒者假称是尚书安排的，傅玄面对百官大骂尚书并下了席。
English: Assuming that it was arranged by Shang Shu, Fu Xuan scolded Shang Shu in front of hundreds of officials and left the table.

古文：御史中丞庾纯奏玄不敬，玄又自表不以实，坐免官。
现代文：御史中丞庾纯上奏傅玄大不敬，傅玄自己上表又不符事实，坐罪免官。
English: Gu Shizhong Rongzheng played Fu Xuan with great disrespect, and Fu Xuan himself did not match the facts in the above table, and was exonerated.

古文：然玄天性峻急，不能有所容；每有奏劾，或值日暮，捧白简，整簪带，竦踊不寐，坐而待旦。
现代文：然而傅玄天性严峻急躁，遇事不能有所宽容；每次有奏疏检举，或遇天晚，便手捧奏章，整饬冠带，焦躁不安地不睡觉，坐着等天亮。
English: However, Fu Xuan's nature is severe and impatient, and he can't tolerate things. Every time there is an inspection, or if it is late, he will hold the song chapter, straighten the crown, restlessly not sleep, sit and wait for the dawn.

古文：于是贵游慑伏，台阁生风。
现代文：于是那些无官职的王公贵族畏惧屈服，尚书顿生威风。
English: As a result, those princes and aristocrats without official positions were afraid to give in, and Shang Shu suddenly gained prestige.

古文：寻卒于家，时年六十二，谥曰刚。
现代文：不久死在家中，享年六十二岁，谥号叫刚。
English: He died at home not long after, at the age of sixty-two. His nickname was Gang.

古文：玄少时避难于河内，专心诵学，后虽显贵，而著述不废。
现代文：傅玄年少时在河内避难，专心读书，其后虽然显达富贵，但著述没有荒废。
English: When he was young, Fu Xuan took refuge in Hanoi and devoted himself to reading. Although he later became wealthy, his writings were not wasted.

古文：撰论经国九流及三史故事，评断得失，各为区例，名为《傅子》，为内、外、中篇，凡有四部、六录，合百四十首，数十万言，并文集百余卷行于世。
现代文：撰述著作评论治国的三教九流以及三史旧事，评断得失，各为条例，书名叫《傅子》，分为内、外、中三篇，共有四部、六录，合共一百四十首，几十万字，连同文集一百余卷流行于世。
English: He wrote a book called "Fu Zi," which was divided into three parts, Inner, Outer and Middle, with a total of four parts and six excerpts, a total of one hundred and forty poems, hundreds of thousands of words, together with more than one hundred volumes of anthologies, popular in the world.

古文：玄初作内篇成，子咸以示司空王沈。
现代文：傅玄当初写成内篇，儿子傅咸交给司空王沈看。
English: Fu Xuan was originally written as an inside story, and his son Fu Xian gave it to Sikuo Wang Shen to read.

古文：沈与玄书曰： 省足下所著书，言富理济，经纶政体，存重儒教，足以塞杨、墨之流遁，齐孙、孟于往代。
现代文：王沈给傅玄的信中说： 看到您所著的书，言辞宏富道理齐备，筹划治理国家大事，重视儒家教化道义，足以堵塞杨朱、墨翟学说的放浪形迹，可以跟往古的荀况、孟轲相比并。
English: In a letter to Fu Xuan, Wang Shen said: "Seeing the book you have written, the words of grandeur, wealth and reason are complete, the planning of the governance of national affairs, and the importance of Confucian education and morality, are enough to block the wandering traces of Yang Zhu and Mokou's doctrine, and can be compared with the situation in ancient times and Meng Xuan.

古文：每开卷，未尝不叹息也。 不见贾生，自以过之，乃今不及 ，信矣！ 
现代文：每次开卷，没有不感慨叹息的。 不见贾谊，自己认为超过他，现在才知道比不上 。
English: Every time I open the book, I can't help but sigh with emotion. I don't see my brother-in-law, I thought I was better than him, but now I know I'm no match.

古文：其后追封清泉侯。子咸嗣。
现代文：真是这样啊！ 后来追封为清泉侯，儿子傅咸继承爵位。
English: That's right! He was later posthumously made the Marquis of Qingquan, and his son Fu Xian inherited the title.

古文：咸字长虞，刚简有大节。
现代文：傅咸字长虞，刚正简直有大节。
English: Fu Han's character is Chang Yu, and Gang Zheng almost has a major section.

古文：风格峻整，识性明悟，疾恶如仇，推贤乐善，常慕季文子、仲山甫之志。
现代文：风度品行严整，见多识广聪慧明达，疾恶如仇，推举贤能，乐善好施，经常仰幕季文子、仲山甫的志向。
English: He has a strict demeanor and character, is well-informed, broad-minded, wise and intelligent, hates evil, praises virtue, likes to do good, and often reflects the aspirations of Ji Wenzi and Zhong Shanfu.

古文：好属文论，虽绮丽不足，而言成规鉴。
现代文：喜欢写文论，虽然文采不够绚丽，但言论可为鉴戒。
English: I like to write literary criticism, although the writing is not brilliant enough, but the speech can be a warning.

古文：颍川庾纯常叹曰： 长虞之文近乎诗人之作矣！ 
现代文：颍川的庾纯常常感叹说： 傅长虞的文章与诗人的创作接近了。 
English: Lu Chuan of Lu River often lamented: Fu Changyu's article is close to the poet's creation.

古文：咸宁初，袭父爵，拜太子洗马，累迁尚书右丞。出为冀州刺史，继母杜氏不肯随咸之官，自表解职。
现代文：咸宁初年，继承父亲的爵位，拜为太子洗马，累迁为尚书右丞，出朝任冀州刺史，后母杜氏不肯随傅咸前往，于是傅咸上表请求免职。
English: In the first year of Xianning, he inherited his father's title, prayed for the prince to wash his horse, moved to Shangshu Rongzheng, and was appointed to the history of Jizhou. His stepmother, Du Shi, refused to go with Fu Xian, so Fu Xian requested to be relieved of his duties.

古文：三旬之间，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：三旬之后，改任为司徒左长史。
English: After the age of thirty, he was reassigned to the post of Stusa Choshu.

古文：时帝留心政事，诏访朝臣政之损益。
现代文：当时武帝注意政事，下诏向朝臣访求政事好坏。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu paid attention to political affairs, and issued an edict to the courtiers to visit and inquire about the state of affairs.

古文：咸上言曰： 陛下处至尊之位，而修布衣之事，亲览万机，劳心日昃。
现代文：傅咸上书说： 陛下身处最显贵的地位，却干布衣所做的事，亲自日理万机，辛苦操劳到太陽偏西。
English: Fu Xian said in the letter: His Majesty is in the most prominent position, but he does what cloth and clothes do, and he personally manages everything on a daily basis, working hard to the west of the sun.

古文：在昔帝王，躬自菲薄，以利天下，未有逾陛下也。
现代文：从前的帝王，亲自干微薄的事，以利天下，也不会超过陛下。
English: Former emperors, who personally did meager things to benefit the world, will not surpass His Majesty.

古文：然泰始开元以暨于今，十有五年矣。而军国未丰，百姓不赡，一岁不登便有菜色者，诚由官众事殷，复除猥滥，蚕食者多而亲农者少也。
现代文：但是自泰始初创基到如今，十五年了，而军队国家不够充实，百姓不够富裕，一个年成不好，便有饥荒出现，的确是因为官职太多事务冗杂，免除徭役的人又多又滥，蚕食的人多而务农的人少。
English: However, from the beginning of Thailand to the present, fifteen years have passed, but the military state is not rich enough, the people are not rich enough, and if the year is not good, there will be famine. It is indeed because there are too many complicated affairs in the government, there are too many people who are exempt from the corvee, and there are too many people who are cannibalistic and too few people who are farmers.

古文：臣以顽疏，谬忝近职，每见圣诏以百姓饥馑为虑，无能云补，伏用惭恧，敢不自竭，以对天问。
现代文：我因愚昧粗疏，愧居本职，每每见到诏书思虑百姓年成的饥馑，没法补益，万分惭愧，岂敢不竭尽愚虑，回答皇上的询问呢？
English: Because of my stupidity and coarseness, I am ashamed of my duty. Every time I see an edict, I think about the people's annual famine. I can't make up for it. I am ashamed. How dare I answer the emperor's inquiry without exhausting my foolishness?

古文：旧都督有四，今并监军，乃盈于十。
现代文：从前有四位都督，现在加上监军，就超过十人。
English: In the past, there were four governors, but now, with the addition of supervisors, there are more than ten.

古文：夏禹敷土，分为九州，今之刺史，几向一倍。户口比汉十分之一，而置郡县更多。
现代文：夏禹划分土地，分为九州，现在的刺史，几乎是原来的一倍，住户人口只比得上汉代的十分之一，设置的郡县就更多。
English: Xia Yu divided the land and divided it into Kyushu, and the current history is almost double the original. The household population is only one-tenth of that in the Han Dynasty, and there are more counties.

古文：空校牙门，无益宿卫，而虚立军府，动有百数。
现代文：空空的校尉牙门，无益于宫中警卫，却凭空设置军府，动辄有几百个。
English: Empty captain's teeth gates are of no use to palace guards, but military headquarters are set up out of thin air, and there are often hundreds of them.

古文：五等诸侯，复坐置官属。
现代文：五等诸侯，又设置官属。
English: Fifth-class lords and officials were also set up.

古文：诸所宠给，皆生于百姓。
现代文：各种宠幸的给养，都从百姓中拿出。
English: All kinds of favored sustenance are taken from the people.

古文：一夫不农，有受其饥，今之不农，不可胜计。
现代文：一人不种田，就有人受饥饿，现在不种田的，不计其数。
English: If one person doesn't farm, someone will go hungry. There are countless people who don't farm now.

古文：纵使五稼普收，仅足相接；暂有灾患，便不继赡。
现代文：纵使五谷丰收，也仅仅能满足青黄相接；突然有灾患，便供养不上。
English: Even if there is a bumper harvest, it can only meet the needs of the poor; if there is a sudden disaster, it will not be able to provide for the poor.

古文：以为当今之急，先并官省事，静事息役，上下用心，惟农是务也。 
现代文：我认为当务之急，要先合并官职，简省琐事，宁息差事，停止徭役，上下齐心，致力农业生产。 
English: In my opinion, the most urgent task is to first consolidate government posts, simplify trifles, relax errands, stop serving as overseers, unify the top and bottom, and devote ourselves to agricultural production.

古文：咸在位多所执正。
现代文：傅咸在任多能主持公道。
English: Fu Xian can preside over justice as long as he is in office.

古文：豫州大中正夏侯骏上言，鲁国小中正、司空司马孔毓，四移病所，不能接宾，求以尚书郎曹馥代毓，旬日复上毓为中正。
现代文：豫州大中正夏侯骏上书说：鲁国小中正、司空司马孔毓，四次转移养病处所，不能接待宾客，请求让尚书郎曹馥代替孔毓。十多天后又上疏让孔毓继续当中正。
English: Xia Houyi, the principal of the Yuanzhou University Middle School, wrote in a letter: Lu Guo Xiao Middle School, and Sima Kongyi, the principal of Sima Middle School, were transferred four times to recuperate. They could not receive guests, and asked Shang Shulang Cao Yi to replace Kongyi. More than ten days later, Shang Shulang allowed Kongyi to continue as the middle school.

古文：司徒三却，骏故据正。
现代文：司徒三次推辞不受理，夏侯骏仍坚持己见。
English: Szeto's three refusals were not accepted, and Xia Houya still insisted on his own opinion.

古文：咸以骏与夺惟意，乃奏免骏大中正。
现代文：傅咸认为夏侯骏褒贬随心所欲，便上奏罢免他的大中正之职。
English: Fu Xian thought that Xia Hou's promotion and demotion was as good as his will, so he dismissed him from his position as the president of the university.

古文：司徒魏舒，骏之姻属，屡却不署，咸据正甚苦。
现代文：司徒魏舒与夏侯骏有姻亲关系，屡次推托不签署，傅咸据理力争费尽口舌。
English: Szu Wei Shu and Xia Houyao are relatives by marriage. He repeatedly refused to sign, while Fu Xian tried his best to persuade him.

古文：舒终不从，咸遂独上。
现代文：魏舒最终不同意，傅咸于是独自上书。
English: Wei Shu finally disagreed, and Fu Xian then submitted the book on his own.

古文：舒奏咸激讪不直，诏转咸为车骑司马。
现代文：魏舒上奏说傅咸毁谤过激，不够正直，下诏让他转任车骑司马。
English: Wei Shu said at the top that Fu Xian's slander was excessive and not honest enough, and ordered him to be transferred to the post of carriage driver.

古文：咸以世俗奢侈，又上书曰： 臣以为谷帛难生，而用之不节，无缘不匮。
现代文：傅咸见世俗奢侈，又上书说： 我认为衣食难以生产，如果不节约使用，没缘由不缺乏。
English: Fu Xian saw worldly luxury, and wrote: I think that food and clothing are difficult to produce. If they are not used sparingly, there is no reason for lack.

古文：故先王之化天下，食肉衣帛，皆有其制。
现代文：所以先王风化天下，吃肉穿帛，都有定制。
English: That's why meat-eating has become so popular. Everything is custom-made.

古文：窃谓奢侈之费，甚于天灾。
现代文：我私下认为奢侈浪费，比天灾还厉害。
English: Privately, I believe that extravagant waste is worse than natural disasters.

古文：古者尧有茅茨，今之百姓竞丰其屋。古者臣无玉食，今之贾竖皆厌粱肉。古者后妃乃有殊饰，今之婢妾被服绫罗。古者大夫乃不徒行，今之贱隶乘轻驱肥。
现代文：古时候帝尧只有茅草屋，现在的平民百姓却竞相建宽大的房屋；古时候大臣没有精美的食物，现在的商人竖子都能饱餐美味佳肴；古时候后妃才有特殊的服饰，而今奴婢妻妾都穿戴绫罗绸缎；古时候大夫才有车骑，现在低贱的奴隶也驾轻车骑肥马。
English: In ancient times, emperors only had thatched houses, but now common people are competing to build spacious houses; in ancient times, ministers did not have fine food, but now merchants can feast on delicious food; in ancient times, queens only had special clothing, but now slaves, wives and concubines all wear satin satin; in ancient times, doctors only rode in cars, but now lowly slaves also drive light cars and ride fat horses.

古文：古者人稠地狭而有储蓄，由于节也；今者土广人稀而患不足，由于奢也。
现代文：古时候人口稠密地域狭小却有储蓄，是因为节俭；现在土地宽广人口稀少却忧虑不足，是因为奢侈。
English: In ancient times, the densely populated areas were small but had savings, because of frugality; now the land is wide and the population is sparse, but there is not enough concern, because of luxury.

古文：欲时之俭，当诘其奢；奢不见诘，转相高尚。
现代文：想时俗节俭，应当禁止奢侈；奢侈不禁止，便会竞相比高。
English: If you want to be thrifty, you should ban luxury; if you don't ban luxury, you'll end up competing with each other.

古文：昔毛玠为吏部尚书，时无敢好衣美食者。
现代文：以前毛王介任吏部尚书，没人敢穿漂亮衣服、吃美味食物。
English: In the past, Mao Wang Jie was in charge of the personnel department, and no one dared to wear beautiful clothes and eat delicious food.

古文：魏武帝叹曰： 孤之法不如毛尚书。 
现代文：魏武帝感叹到： 我的法令不如毛尚书。 
English: Emperor Wu of Wei lamented: My decrees are not as good as Mao's book.

古文：令使诸部用心，各如毛玠，风俗之移，在不难矣。 
现代文：假使各部的用心，都像毛王介一样，风俗的改变，确实不是困难的事情。 
English: If the intentions of all ministries are like that of Mao Wangsui, the change of customs is really not a difficult thing.

古文：又议移县狱于郡及二社应立，朝廷从之。
现代文：又议论把县里的监狱移到郡，以及应当建立两社，朝廷都同意了。
English: It was also discussed that the county prison should be moved to the county, and that two companies should be established, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：迁尚书左丞。
现代文：迁任尚书左丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoshu-zojo.

古文：惠帝即位，杨骏辅政。
现代文：惠帝司马衷继位，杨骏辅佐朝政。
English: Hui Di Sima Zhen succeeded to the throne, and Yang Pi assisted the imperial government.

古文：咸言于骏曰： 事与世变，礼随时宜，谅暗之不行尚矣。
现代文：傅咸对杨骏说： 事情随时而变，礼义随时而宜，天子不实行居丧之制已很久了。
English: Fu Xian said to Yang Hui, "Things can change at any time, etiquette is appropriate at any time, and it has been a long time since Tianzi did not implement the mourning system.

古文：由世道弥薄，权不可假，故虽斩焉在疚，而躬览万机也。
现代文：因为世风更加衰落，政事不可代为治理，所以虽然处在哀痛的服丧期间，还要亲自日理万机。
English: Because the world has become more decadent and government affairs cannot be managed on behalf of the people, although we are in a period of grief and mourning, we still have to manage everything ourselves.

古文：逮至汉文，以天下体大，服重难久，遂制既葬而除。
现代文：到汉文帝刘恒时，他认为天下庞大，服丧太重难以持久，于是制定了下葬后就除服。
English: By the time of Emperor Liu Heng of the Han Dynasty, he thought that the world was too big, and the mourning was too heavy to last, so he made a rule to remove the clothes after the funeral.

古文：世祖武皇帝虽大孝蒸蒸，亦从时释服，制心丧三年，至于万机之事，则有不遑。
现代文：武皇帝司马炎大孝敦厚，也随时除服，制定守心丧三年，至于日理万机的大事，则忙得没有空闲的时候。
English: Emperor Wu, Sima Yan Da Xiaotong Dunhuang, also removed his clothes at any time and set a three-year mourning period. As for the important matters of Japan, he was too busy to have any free time.

古文：今圣上欲委政于公，谅暗自居，此虽谦让之心，而天下未以为善。
现代文：现在圣上想把政事交给你，让他守丧自居，这虽然是谦让的态度，可天下的人并不认为很合适。
English: Now His Holiness wants to hand over the reins of government to you, so that he can do as he pleases. Although this is a humble attitude, people around the world do not think it is very appropriate.

古文：天下未以为善者，以亿兆颙颙，戴仰宸极，听于冢宰，惧天光有蔽。
现代文：其不很合适的原因，是因为万民仰慕敬戴天子，如果听命太宰，恐怕遮蔽了天光。
English: The reason why it is not very suitable is because all people admire and respect the Son of Heaven, and if they follow the orders of Dazai, I am afraid they will block the light of heaven.

古文：人心既已若此，而明公处之固未为易也。
现代文：人心既然如此，那么你处在摄政地位也不会容易。
English: The human heart being what it is, it won't be easy for you to be in the position of regent.

古文：窃谓山陵之事既毕，明公当思隆替之宜。
现代文：我私下认为治丧已经完毕，你应当想到兴废的时宜。
English: Privately, I think the mourning period is over, and you should think about when to celebrate.

古文：周公圣人，犹不免谤。
现代文：周公是圣人，且不能避免毁谤。
English: Zhou Gong is a saint and cannot avoid being slandered.

古文：以此推之，周公之任既未易而处，况圣上春秋非成王之年乎！
现代文：由此推断，周公任职已经不容易处理，何况现在圣上的年龄不是周成王的年龄呢？
English: From this, it can be deduced that Zhou Gong's post is no longer easy to handle, and what's more, the current age of the saint is not the age of Zhou Chengwang.

古文：得意忘言，言未易尽。
现代文：我得意忘言，话语不容易说透。
English: I was so elated that I forgot to speak. It's not easy to get the words out.

古文：苟明公有以察其悾款，言岂在多。 
现代文：如果你能觉察到我的诚意，话语又哪在乎多呢？ 
English: If you can sense my sincerity, what do words matter?

古文：时司隶荀恺从兄丧，自表赴哀，诏听之而未下，恺乃造骏。
现代文：当时司隶荀恺的堂兄死了，自己上表赴丧，诏书同意还没下达，荀恺便拜访杨骏。
English: At that time, the cousin of the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China died, and he went to the funeral on his own. The imperial edict had not yet been issued, so he went to visit Yang Xuan.

古文：咸因奏曰： 死丧之戚，兄弟孔怀。同堂亡陨，方在信宿，圣恩矜悯，听使临丧。
现代文：傅咸因此上奏说： 死丧是令人哀戚的，兄弟之丧更令人伤怀，荀恺同堂去世，也才几天，天子怜悯，同意他临丧。
English: Fu Xian therefore made a report, saying: The death and mourning is saddening, and the brother's death is even more saddening. He passed away in the same house, only a few days ago. The Son of Heaven was compassionate and agreed to his funeral.

古文：诏未下而便以行造，急谄媚之敬，无友于之情。
现代文：诏书还没下就去辞行，拜访要人，急于表现谄媚的恭敬，并无友爱兄弟的真情。
English: He resigned before the imperial edict was issued, visited dignitaries, was eager to show flattering deference, and had no true feelings of brotherly love.

古文：宜加显贬，以隆风教。 
现代文：应当从重贬黜，以崇尚风俗教化。 
English: It is necessary to re-evaluate and re-educate the people by advocating customs and manners.

古文：帝以骏管朝政，有诏不问，骏甚惮之。
现代文：天子以为杨骏管理朝政，有诏下问，杨骏很害怕。
English: Tianzi thought that Yang Hui was in charge of the imperial government. When asked about this, Yang Hui was very scared.

古文：咸复与骏笺讽切之，骏意稍折，渐以不平。
现代文：傅咸又给杨骏写信，讽谏切直，杨骏稍稍收敛，逐渐产生不满。
English: Fu Xian also wrote a letter to Yang Hui, ridiculing Yang Hui, and Yang Hui gradually became dissatisfied.

古文：由是欲出为京兆、弘农太守，骏甥李斌说骏，不宜斥出正人，乃止。
现代文：便想让傅咸出任京兆、弘农太守，杨骏的外甥李斌劝说杨骏，不应该贬斥正直的人出任外官，才得以中止。
English: He wanted to make Fu Ham the governor of Beijing and Hongnong, and Yang Jie's nephew Li Bin persuaded Yang Jie that he should not disparage an honest person to become a foreign minister, before he was able to cancel it.

古文：骏弟济素与咸善，与咸书曰： 江海之流混混，故能成其深广也。
现代文：杨骏的弟弟杨济一向跟傅咸友好，他给傅咸写信说： 江海的流水波涛滚滚，所以能成就它的深广。
English: Yang Jie, the younger brother of Yang Hui, had always been friendly with Fu Xian. He wrote to Fu Xian saying, "The flowing water of the river and the sea are rolling waves, so it can achieve its depth and breadth.

古文：天下大器，非可稍了，而相观每事欲了。
现代文：天下是个大器物，不可能很明白，而我看你是每件事都想弄明白。
English: The world is a big place and it's impossible to know everything, and I think you want to know everything.

古文：生子痴，了官事，官事未易了也。
现代文：你生性痴呆，却想明了官事，而官事也是不容易明白的。
English: You have congenital dementia, but you think you understand government affairs, and government affairs are not easy to understand.

古文：了事正作痴，复为快耳！
现代文：明了官事正该痴呆，又是痛快的事。
English: It's a pleasure to know that official business is just what it should be.

古文：左丞总司天台，维正八坐，此未易居。
现代文：左丞总领朝廷，辅正八座公卿百官，此位不容易居。
English: As the head of the Imperial Court and the vice-premier of eight courts, this position is not easy to hold.

古文：以君尽性而处未易居之任，益不易也。
现代文：以你的任性直言而又处在不易居的职位，就更不容易了。
English: With your headstrong outspokenness and being in a difficult position, it is even more difficult.

古文：想虑破头，故具有白。 
现代文：想得头疼，所以陈述如上。 
English: It hurts my head to think about it, so I'll just state it as it is.

古文：咸答曰： 卫公云酒色之杀人，此甚于作直。
现代文：傅咸答复说： 卫公说，用酒色杀人，这比作正直之人更厉害。
English: Fu Han replied, "Weigong said that killing people with liquor is more powerful than being an honest person.

古文：坐酒色死，人不为悔。
现代文：因贪酒色而死，个人不后悔。
English: A person does not regret dying of alcoholism.

古文：逆畏以直致祸，此由心不直正，欲以苟且为明哲耳！
现代文：事先害怕因正直招致灾祸，这是由于心地不正直，想把苟且偷生当作聪明圣哲罢了！
English: To fear beforehand the calamity of honesty is to be dishonest in heart, and to fancy oneself a wise sage.

古文：自古以直致祸者，当自矫枉过直，或不忠允，欲以亢厉为声，故致忿耳。
现代文：自古以来因正直招致祸患的人，应是自己矫枉过正，或者不够忠诚允当，要用极度的严酷树立声誉，所以遭致忿恨。
English: From time immemorial, those who incurred misfortune because of their honesty should have overcompensated themselves, or were not loyal enough, and had to establish their reputation with extreme severity, so they were resented.

古文：安有空空为忠益，而当见疾乎！ 
现代文：哪有诚恳尽忠而被嫉妒憎恨的呢！ 
English: Where is the one who is sincerely loyal and is hated by jealousy?

古文：居无何，骏诛。咸转为太子中庶子，迁御史中丞。
现代文：过了不久，杨骏被诛，傅咸转任太子中庶子，升为御史中丞。
English: Soon after, Yang Xuan was executed, and Fu Xian was transferred to the position of the prince's middle son, and was promoted to the position of goshi chujo.

古文：时太宰、汝南王亮辅政，咸致书曰： 咸以为太甲、成王年在蒙幼，故有伊、周之事。
现代文：当时是太宰、汝南王司马亮辅佐朝政。傅咸致书说： 我认为商朝的太甲、周朝的成王时值年幼，所以才会有伊尹、周公辅政的事情。
English: At that time, it was the Dazaifu, the king of Yunnan, Sima Liang, who assisted the imperial government. Fu Xian wrote: I think that the Taiga of the Shang Dynasty and the Chengwang of the Zhou Dynasty were young at the time, which is why there was the matter of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong assisting the imperial government.

古文：圣人且犹不免疑，况臣既不圣，王非孺子，而可以行伊、周之事乎！
现代文：前代圣贤尚且免不了被怀疑，何况现在的臣属本非圣人，君王也非孺子，怎么可以仿效伊尹周公的旧事呢！
English: The previous generation of sages are still inevitably suspected, not to mention that the current vassals are not saints, and the monarch is not a cripple. How can we imitate the old story of Yi Yin Zhou Gong?

古文：上在谅暗，听于冢宰，而杨骏无状，便作伊、周，自为居天下之安，所以至死。
现代文：君主居丧，听命于太宰，杨骏无礼，却想当伊尹周公，自以为可以辅佐朝政，安定天下，所以致死。
English: The monarch is in mourning and obeys the order of the grand vizier, Yang Xuan is rude, but he wants to be Yi Yin Zhou Gong, he thinks he can assist the government and stabilize the world, so he dies.

古文：其罪既不可胜，亦是殿下所见。
现代文：他的罪行已不可胜数，这是殿下你目睹了的。
English: His crimes are innumerable, as Your Highness has witnessed.

古文：骏之见讨，发自天聪，孟观、李肇与知密旨耳。
现代文：杨骏遭讨伐，出自天子的圣明，孟观、李肇只是参与知道密旨罢了。
English: Yang Hui was crusaded, from the Holy Son of Heaven, Meng Guan and Li Zhao only participated to know the secret intention.

古文：至于论功，当归美于上。
现代文：至于评论功劳，应当归于皇上。
English: As for the commentary, the credit should go to the emperor.

古文：观等已数千户县侯，圣上以骏死莫不欣悦，故论功宁厚，以叙其欢心。
现代文：孟观等人已经是几千户的大县侯爵，圣上因为诛杀杨骏莫大欢欣，所以论功行赏宁可优厚，以表达他的喜悦心情。
English: Meng Guan and others have already been the marquis of several thousand households in large counties. The saint was very happy because of the killing of Yang Xuan, so he would rather reward the meritorious deed generously to express his joy.

古文：此群下所宜以实裁量，而遂扇动，东安封王，孟、李郡公，余侯伯子男，既妄有加，复又三等超迁。
现代文：这是群臣下属应当权衡的实情。可是现在却由此鼓动怂恿，东安公封为王，孟观、李肇都封为郡公，其余封为侯、伯、子、男，虚妄加封之后，又使三等破格升迁。
English: This is a fact that should be weighed by the subordinates of the vassals. However, it is now being used as an excuse to promote Dongan to the king, Mengguan and Li Zhaozhou to the county governor, and the rest to the lord, great-grandfather, son, and son-in-law. After falsely adding seals, the third-class promotion was also made.

古文：此之熏赫，震动天地，自古以来，封赏未有若此者也。
现代文：这种显赫的气势，震动大地，自古以来，没有过这样的封赏。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been such a reward for such a prominent and powerful person.

古文：无功而厚赏，莫不乐国有祸，祸起当复有大功也。
现代文：没有功劳却厚加封赏，就没有谁不高兴国家有灾祸，因为灾祸兴起又会有大功了。
English: If there is no merit, but there is a reward, there is no one who is not happy that the country has a disaster, because there will be great merit in the rise of the disaster.

古文：人而乐祸，其可极乎！
现代文：人们以祸乱为乐，哪还有个极限呢！
English: People take pleasure in calamity, where is the limit!

古文：作此者，皆由东安公。
现代文：这种作法，都出自东安公。
English: This kind of practice all comes from Dongan.

古文：谓殿下至止，当有以正之。
现代文：殿下就任后，自当有办法纠正它。
English: After His Royal Highness took office, he should have found a way to rectify it.

古文：正之以道，众亦何所怒乎！
现代文：用大道使之正，众人还有什么愤怒呢？
English: What is there for people to be angry about other than using the streets to set them straight?

古文：众之所怒，在于不平耳。
现代文：众人所愤怒的，只在于不公平罢了。
English: It is only the unfairness that people are angry about.

古文：而今皆更倍论，莫不失望。
现代文：如今都在背地议论，没有谁不大失所望。
English: Now they are all talking behind each other's backs, and no one is very disappointed.

古文：咸之愚冗，不惟失望而已，窃以为忧。
现代文：我愚钝，不只是失望而已，还私下感到忧虑。
English: I'm dumbfounded, not just disappointed, but privately worried.

古文：又讨骏之时，殿下在外，实所不综。
现代文：另外，声讨杨骏的时候，殿下你还在朝廷之外，委实不曾参与。
English: In addition, when criticizing Yang Hui, Your Royal Highness was still outside the imperial court and did not actually participate.

古文：今欲委重，故令殿下论功。
现代文：现在要委以重任，所以让殿下论功。
English: It's a big job now, so let His Royal Highness do the talking.

古文：论功之事，实未易可处，莫若坐观得失，有居正之事宜也。 
现代文：论功的事，实在不容易处置，不如坐观其利弊得失，就有居位正直的事实了。 
English: On the merits of the matter, it is really not easy to deal with, it is better to sit and watch its advantages and disadvantages, there is the fact of being honest.

古文：咸复以亮辅政专权，又谏曰： 杨骏有震主之威，委任亲戚，此天下所以喧哗。
现代文：傅咸又因司马亮辅政专权，便上谏言： 杨骏有让国君震动的威势，委任亲戚，这是天下喧哗的原因。
English: Fu Xian also criticized Sima Liang's rise to power, saying: "Yang Xi has the power to shake the country and appoint relatives, which is the reason for the world's clamor.

古文：今之处重，宜反此失。
现代文：现在你居职辅政，应纠正这种过失。
English: Now that you are an assistant to the government, you should correct this mistake.

古文：谓宜静默颐神，有大得失，乃维持之；自非大事，一皆抑遣。
现代文：我觉得应该静心养神，有大的得失，便维持处理，除了大事，一律抑制遣散。
English: I think that we should meditate to refresh our minds. If there is a big gain or loss, we should keep dealing with it. Except for major events, we should restrain dismissals.

古文：比四造诣，及经过尊门，冠盖车马，填塞街衢，此之翕习，既宜弭息。
现代文：四次拜访贵府以及平时经过您的门前，总见官宦车马，充塞街道，这种夙习，也应止息。
English: After visiting your capital four times and passing in front of your door in normal times, you always see officials driving cars and horses and clogging up the streets. This bad habit should also stop.

古文：又夏侯长容奉使为先帝请命，祈祷无感，先帝崩背，宜自咎责，而自求请命之劳，而公以为少府。
现代文：另外夏侯长容奉使为先帝请命，祈祷没有感动上苍，先帝驾崩，夏侯长容应该引咎自责，可是现在却自求请命的功劳，你竟任命他为少府。
English: In addition, Xia Hou Chang Rong sent an envoy to plead for the death of the former emperor. The prayer did not move the heavens, and the former emperor died. Xia Hou Chang Rong should blame himself, but now he is asking for the merit of pleading for his life. You have appointed him as Shao Fu.

古文：私窃之论，云长容则公之姻，故至于此。
现代文：我私下认为，夏侯长容是你的姻亲，所以才至如此。 一犬吠形，群犬吠声 。
English: I privately believe that Xia Hou Chang Rong is your in-laws, so that's why it's like this. A dog barks, a group of dogs barks.

古文：一犬吠形，群犬吠声，惧于群吠，遂至叵听也。咸之为人，不能面从而有后言。
现代文：因害怕群犬的叫声，于是就不可依从了。我的为人，就是不能当面阿谀顺从，背后又有诽谤之言。
English: For fear of the noise of the dogs, therefore obey ye not: for I am not a man, that I should obey a king in his presence, but I should obey a base man in his presence.

古文：尝触杨骏，几为身祸；况于殿下，而当有惜！
现代文：原来曾经触犯杨骏，几乎身遭祸害，何况对殿下，自当有所珍惜。
English: Originally, he had offended Yang Mi and almost suffered a disaster, not to mention that he should have cherished his royal highness.

古文：往从驾，殿下见语： 卿不识韩非逆鳞之言耶，而欻摩天子逆鳞！ 
现代文：先前随驾，你对我说： 你难道不知道韩非子所说的触犯人君如同触摸龙倒生的鳞片的话吗？而你竟然在触摸天子倒生的鳞片。 
English: Earlier, when I was driving along, you said to me, "Don't you know that Han Feizi said that touching a criminal is like touching the scales of a dragon's rebirth? And you are actually touching the scales of the rebirth of a heavenly son."

古文：自知所陈，诚触猛兽之须耳。
现代文：我自知所陈述的，的确是在不停止地触摸猛兽的胡须。
English: I know that what I am describing is indeed the incessant touching of the beast's whiskers.

古文：所以敢言，庶殿下当识其不胜区区。
现代文：而我之所以敢言，是希望殿下你会了解我区区之心。
English: And the reason I dare to say this is that I hope Your Royal Highness will understand my true heart.

古文：前摩天子逆鳞，欲以尽忠；今触猛兽之须，非欲为恶，必将以此见恕。 
现代文：先前摸天子倒生的鳞片，想要尽忠；现在触摸猛兽的胡须，也不是要作恶，因而必将被宽恕。 
English: Previously, he touched the scales of the reborn son of heaven, wanting to be loyal; now he touches the whiskers of the beast, not to do evil, and therefore he will be forgiven.

古文：亮不纳。
现代文：司马亮没有采纳。
English: Sima Liang did not adopt it.

古文：长容者，夏侯骏也。
现代文：夏侯长容就是夏侯骏。
English: Xia Hou Chang Rong is Xia Hou Yao.

古文：会丙寅，诏群僚举郡县之职以补内官。
现代文：五月二十八日，下诏让百官推荐各郡县的官员补充朝官。
English: On May 28th, the emperor issued an edict to have 100 officials recommend officials from each county to supplement the imperial officials.

古文：咸复上书曰： 臣咸以为夫兴化之要，在于官人。才非一流，职有不同。
现代文：傅咸又上书说： 我认为国家兴隆教化的关键，在于选取人才给予恰当的官职。才能不只一类，职务各有不同。
English: Fu Xian also wrote: I believe that the key to the country's prosperity and enlightenment lies in selecting talents and giving them appropriate official positions. Talent is not just one type, positions are different.

古文：譬诸林木，洪纤枉直，各有攸施。
现代文：例如林木，粗细曲直，各有用途。
English: For example, forest trees, thick and thin, curved and straight, each has its own use.

古文：故明扬逮于仄陋，畴咨无拘内外。内外之任，出处随宜，中间选用，惟内是隆。外举既穨，复多节目，竞内薄外，遂成风俗。
现代文：所以明察并举荐出身微贱之人，谋划咨询不论内外，内外任职，只求合宜，现在选拔任用，只推重内官；地方官举荐既已偏废，又多生枝节，人们争当朝官轻视地方任职。便成风俗。
English: For this reason, people of humble origin are carefully examined and recommended, and only suitable candidates are sought for consultation and planning, both at home and abroad, and for positions both at home and abroad. Currently, only inner officials are given priority in the selection and appointment process. The recommendation of local officials has become obsolete and fraught with problems, and it has become a custom for people to despise local positions in order to become imperial officials.

古文：此弊诚宜亟革之，当内外通塞无所偏耳。
现代文：这种弊病真应该马上改正，使内官外职选拔渠道畅通而且无所偏重。
English: This kind of malady should really be corrected immediately, so that the channels for the selection of internal and external officials are smooth and unbiased.

古文：既使通塞无偏，若选用不平，有以深责，责之苟深，无忧不平也。
现代文：使渠道畅通无所偏颇之后，如果选用不公平，就有办法重责；责罚加重，就不用担心不公平了。
English: After making the channels smooth and unbiased, if the selection is unfair, there is a way to increase the responsibility; if the punishment is increased, there is no need to worry about unfairness.

古文：且胶柱不可以调瑟，况乎官人而可以限乎！
现代文：再说，粘住弦就不能调瑟，何况选拔人才任职又怎么可以限制呢？
English: Besides, it is not possible to adjust the tuning by sticking to the strings. Besides, how can the selection of talent be restricted?

古文：伏思所限者，以防选用不能出人。不能出人，当随事而制，无须限法。
现代文：我想之所以限制，是为了防止选用不能超出众人，若不能超出众人，应按事情制裁，不用限制选用办法。
English: I think the reason for the restriction is to prevent the selection from exceeding the number of people. If it cannot exceed the number of people, it should be sanctioned according to the circumstances, and there is no need to restrict the selection method.

古文：法之有限，其于致远，无乃泥乎！
现代文：选拔办法有限制，要想实行久远，恐怕也太拘泥了吧！
English: There are limitations to the selection method, and if it is to be implemented for a long time, I am afraid it will be too rigid!

古文：或谓不制其法，以何为贵？臣闻刑惩小人，义责君子，君子之责，在心不在限也。
现代文：有人认为不制定选拔办法，凭什么选拔，我听说用刑罚惩治小人，用道义要求君子，对君子的要求在内心而不在限制。
English: Some people think that the selection method should not be formulated, but what kind of selection should be used? I have heard that the villain should be punished with punishment, the gentleman should be required with morality, and the requirements for the gentleman should be in the heart and not limited.

古文：正始中，任何晏以选举，内外之众职各得其才，粲然之美于斯可观。
现代文：正始年间，委任何晏选举，朝廷内外的各种职官都得到了合适的人才，杰出的人才于此可观。
English: At the beginning of the year, all kinds of officials inside and outside the imperial court got the right talent, and the outstanding talent was considerable.

古文：如此，非徒御之以限，法之所致，乃委任之由也。委任之惧，甚于限法。
现代文：所以这样，不是用限制统御，也不是凭措施招致，而是委任的原因，受委任者的担心，比限定方法更厉害。
English: So in this way, it is not controlled by restrictions, nor is it caused by measures, but the reason for the appointment, the fear of the appointee, is more powerful than the method of restriction.

古文：是法之失，非己之尤，尤不在己，责之无惧，所谓 齐之以刑，人免而无耻 者也。
现代文：这是因为办法失误，不是自己的过失，既然过错不在自己，责备他也不用担忧，正所谓 用刑律使人们行动统一，人们虽免于犯法，却没有廉耻之心 。
English: This is because of the method error, not his own fault, since the fault is not his own, there is no need to worry about blaming him, just as the so-called use of criminal law to unify people's actions, people are free from breaking the law, but they have no sense of shame.

古文：苟委任之，一则虑罪之及，二则惧致怨谤。
现代文：如果用委任之法，一是考虑罪责连及自己，二是害怕遭到怨恨诽谤。
English: If you use the method of appointment, one is to consider the culpability of oneself, and the other is the fear of being maligned.

古文：己快则朝野称咏，不善则众恶见归，此之战战，孰与倚限法以苟免乎！ 
现代文：自己快意则朝廷内外称颂，自己不善则各种罪恶加身，这种使人胆颤心惊，与依靠限定法律幸免哪种更有效呢？ 
English: One's own good will is praised inside and outside the imperial court, while one's own bad will brings all kinds of evils upon oneself. This kind of thing makes people tremble with fear. Which is more effective, to rely on restrictive laws to be spared?

古文：咸再为本郡中正，遭继母忧去官。
现代文：傅咸再次任本郡中正，时值继母去世离职。
English: Fu Xian was reappointed as the county's vice-premier, but left office when his stepmother passed away.

古文：顷之，起以议郎，长兼司隶校尉。
现代文：不久起用为议郎，并兼任司隶校尉。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of umpire, and also served as the captain of the division.

古文：咸前后固辞，不听，敕使者就拜，咸复送还印绶。
现代文：傅咸前后推辞多次，都未获准。朝廷让使者到家中授职，傅咸又送还印绶。
English: Fu Xian repeatedly submitted his resignation, but it was not approved. The imperial court sent an emissary to his home to confer the post, and Fu Xian returned the seal.

古文：公车不通，催使摄职。
现代文：公车不为他通报，催促他就职理事。
English: The bus did not inform him and urged him to become a director.

古文：咸以身无兄弟，丧祭无主，重自陈乞，乃使于官舍设灵坐。
现代文：傅咸由于没有兄弟，丧祭无人主持，又再次请求，于是让他在官舍设灵位。
English: Since Fu Xian had no brother and no one to preside over the funeral, he asked again, so he let him set up a shrine in the official residence.

古文：咸又上表曰： 臣既驽弱，不胜重任。
现代文：傅咸又上表说： 我既然驽钝懦弱，不能担当重任。
English: Fu Xian also said on the table: Since I am dull and weak, I can not take on heavy responsibilities.

古文：加在哀疚，假息日阕，陛下过意，授非所堪。
现代文：又加上哀丧，请假休息时日，陛下过分厚意，授予我难以胜任之职。
English: In addition to mourning and taking time off to rest, His Majesty has been kind enough to give me a difficult position.

古文：披露丹款，归穷上闻，谬诏既往，终然无改。
现代文：我表白赤诚之心，冒死上报，既已违诏，最终不会改变。
English: I declare my sincerity, I risked my life to report it, and since I have already violated the edict, it will not change in the end.

古文：臣虽不能灭身以全礼教，义无靦然，虚忝隆宠。
现代文：我虽然不能以死保全礼教，但按道义也不能回心转意，空受恩宠。
English: Although I can't die to preserve etiquette, I can't morally change my mind and receive grace.

古文：前受严诏，视事之日，私心自誓，陨越为报。
现代文：以前接受严诏，任职之时，私下发誓，以死为报。
English: When he was in office, he swore in private that he would die in return for accepting the edict.

古文：以货赂流行，所宜深绝，切敕都官，以此为先。
现代文：因为贿赂之风流行，应该深深杜绝，务必敕令都官，以此事为首。
English: Because the trend of bribery is popular, it should be thoroughly eradicated, and it is imperative to order the government officials to take the lead in this matter.

古文：而经弥日月，未有所得。
现代文：可是经年累月，未有所获。
English: However, after many years, nothing has been achieved.

古文：斯由陛下有以奖厉，虑于愚戆，将必死系，故自掩检以避其锋耳。
现代文：这是因为陛下有奖励的办法，考虑到愚昧不明之人，必定死亡或系罪，所以自然掩饰检点过失以避免锋芒。
English: This is because His Majesty has a way of rewarding, taking into account the stupidity of unknown people, must die or be guilty, so naturally cover up the fault to avoid the edge.

古文：在职有日，既无赫然之举，又不应弦垂翅，人谁复惮？
现代文：在职已有时日，既没有显赫的举止，又不能应弦落鸟，谁人还会害怕？
English: Having been in office for some time, and having neither distinguished manners nor the ability to answer the call of nature, who would be afraid?

古文：故光禄大夫刘毅为司隶，声震内外，远近清肃。
现代文：所以光禄大夫刘毅当司隶，声威震动朝廷内外，远近清正肃敬。
English: Therefore, Guanglu doctor Liu Yi, as a subordinate, shook the imperial court inside and outside, and was respected far and wide.

古文：非徒毅有王臣匪躬之节，亦由所奏见从，威风得伸也。 
现代文：不单是刘毅有辅助王室、尽忠君王的节操，也是由于他所陈奏的都依从，所以威风才能施展。 
English: Not only does Liu Yi have the discipline to assist the royal family and be loyal to the king, but also because he obeys everything he says, so he can exert his authority.

古文：诏曰： 但当思必应绳中理，威风日伸，何独刘毅！ 
现代文：诏书说： 你只应想到一切都符合绳墨法度，让威风日益伸展，又哪只是一个刘毅呢？ 
English: The edict said: You should only think that everything is in accordance with the law of the rope and ink, and let the authority expand day by day. And what is just a Liu Yi?

古文：时朝廷宽弛，豪右放恣，交私请托，朝野溷淆。
现代文：当时朝廷政治宽松，豪强大族放纵恣事，交私友讠乇人情，朝野混乱。
English: At that time, the imperial court was politically loose, the powerful and powerful people indulged in arbitrary things, friendships and personal feelings were mixed, and the court and the country were in chaos.

古文：咸奏免河南尹澹、左将军倩、廷尉高光、兼河南尹何攀等，京都肃然，贵戚慑伏。
现代文：傅咸上奏罢免河南尹澹、左将军倩、廷尉高光、兼河南尹何攀等，京都肃敬，贵戚慑威伏服。
English: Fu Xian played the leading role in the dismissal of Henan Yin Xi, Zuo Zhengyuan Xi, Imperial Lieutenant Gao Guang, and Henan Yin He Pang, and Kyoto was solemn and dignified.

古文：咸以 圣人久于其道，天下化成。
现代文：傅咸认为 圣人治理大道长久，天下才成教化。
English: Fu Xian believed that sages had ruled the world for a long time before the world became civilized.

古文：是以唐、虞三载考绩，九年黜陟。
现代文：因此尧舜三年考核政绩，九年讨论升降职务。
English: Therefore, there is a three-year assessment of government performance, and a nine-year discussion of promotion and demotion.

古文：其在《周礼》，三年大比。
现代文：《周礼》也实行三年大比。
English: "Weekly Rituals" also implement a three-year ratio.

古文：孔子亦云， 三年有成 。
现代文：孔子也说过： 三年有成。 
English: Confucius also said, "Success comes in three years."

古文：而中间以来，长吏到官，未几便迁，百姓困于无定，吏卒疲于送迎 。
现代文：可到了近来，长吏到官署任职，不久就改任。百姓为没有固定的官员而困扰，吏卒为送旧迎新而疲劳 。
English: However, recently, officials have been assigned to government offices and changed their posts soon after. The people are troubled by the fact that there is no fixed official, and the officials are tired of sending off the old and welcoming the new.

古文：时仆射王戎兼吏部，咸奏： 戎备位台辅，兼掌选举，不能谧静风俗，以凝庶绩，至令人心倾动，开张浮竞。
现代文：当时的仆射王戎兼管吏部，傅咸上奏说： 王戎位在台辅，兼管选举，却没有使风俗宁静，聚集功绩，致使人心倾侧不安，大开浮竞之风。
English: Fu Xian, the then-servant of Wang Rong, who was also in charge of the cadre department, said: Wang Rong was in Taifu, and he was also in charge of the election, but he did not make the customs calm and gather merits, which made people's hearts uneasy and opened up the wind of competition.

古文：中郎李重、李义不相匡正。
现代文：中郎李重、李义也不加以匡正。
English: The middle-ranking officials, Li Chung and Li Yi, also failed to rectify the situation.

古文：请免戎等官。 
现代文：我请求免除王戎等人的职务。 
English: I request that Wang Rong and others be relieved of their duties.

古文：诏曰： 政道之本，诚宜久于其职，咸奏是也。
现代文：诏书说： 政道的根本，确实应当任职长久，傅咸上奏的正确。
English: The edict said: The fundamental principle of politics is indeed to serve for a long time, and Fu Xian's ascension is correct.

古文：戎职在论道，吾所崇委，其解禁止。 
现代文：王戎的职责在于评议事理，是我所推崇委任的，禁止免职。 
English: Wang Rong's duty is to assess the deliberation, which is my respected appointment, and it is forbidden to dismiss him.

古文：御史中丞解结以咸劾戎为违典制，越局侵官，干非其分，奏免咸官。诏亦不许。
现代文：御史中丞解结认为傅咸弹劾王戎是违背典制，越位侵权，干涉了非他职权之内的事，于是上奏罢免傅咸的官职，诏书也不同意。
English: The Imperial Historian, Zhongzheng, considered that Fu Xian's impeachment of Wang Rong was a violation of the code, an infringement of offside, and interfered with matters that were not within his authority. Therefore, Fu Xian was removed from office, and the edict also disagreed.

古文：咸上事以为 按令，御史中丞督司百僚。
现代文：傅咸上疏认为： 按照法令，御中中丞督察百官。
English: Fu Xian Shangxiao believes that: According to the law, the superintendent of the middle school is a hundred officials.

古文：皇太子以下，其在行马内，有违法宪者皆弹纠之。虽在行马外，而监司不纠，亦得奏之。
现代文：皇太子以下诸事，在检校御史掌管行马的范围内，有违犯法令的人都要弹劾纠正，即使在行马范围以外，如果监司不纠查，也可弹劾。
English: For all matters below the crown prince, within the scope of the supervision of the inspection of the school, those who have violated the law should be impeached and corrected. Even outside the scope of the inspection, if the supervisor does not investigate, it can also be impeached.

古文：如令之文，行马之内有违法宪，谓禁防之事耳。宫内禁防，外司不得而行，故专施中丞。
现代文：按照法令条文，行马之内违背宪法，认为是禁止防范的事，宫廷内禁止防范，外官不能执行，所以让中丞专任。
English: According to the provisions of the decree, marching inside the horse violates the constitution and is considered to be a matter of prohibition of prevention, prevention is prohibited in the court, and the foreign official cannot carry it out, so let Chujo take full-time.

古文：今道路桥梁不修，斗讼屠沽不绝，如此之比，中丞推责州坐，即今所谓行马内语施于禁防。
现代文：现在道路桥梁没有修建，斗殴诉讼的屠夫酤客接连不断，像这类事情，中丞推卸责任于州郡长官，就是现在所谓行马之内施行禁止防范。
English: Now that the roads and bridges have not been built, the butchers and brokers of the brawl litigation continue to follow one after another. In such cases, the middle-ranking officials shirk their responsibilities to the state and county governors, that is, the so-called enforcement of prohibition and prevention within the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：既云中丞督司百僚矣，何复说行马之内乎！
现代文：既然说中丞督察百官，又何必再说行马之内呢？
English: Since it is said that there are hundreds of junior officers and inspectors, why is it necessary to say that it is within walking distance?

古文：既云百僚，而不得复说行马之内者，内外众官谓之百僚，则通内外矣。
现代文：既然说百官，就不能再说行马之内，内外的各种官员都叫百官，本来内外勾通了。
English: Since it is said that there are a hundred officials, it can no longer be said that there are within walking distance. All kinds of officials at home and abroad are called a hundred officials. Originally, there was collusion between inside and outside.

古文：司隶所以不复说行马内外者，禁防之事已于中丞说之故也。
现代文：司隶之所以不再说行马内外，也正是禁止防范的事已对中丞说过的缘故。
English: The reason why the magistrate no longer said "in and out of the horse" was precisely because the prohibition of prevention had already been said to the junior high school student.

古文：中丞、司隶俱纠皇太子以下，则共对司内外矣，不为中丞专司内百僚，司隶专司外百僚。自有中丞、司隶以来，更互奏内外众官，惟所纠得无内外之限也。
现代文：中丞、司隶都纠察皇太子以下诸事，实际上是共同掌管内外，不是说中丞专管内廷百官，司隶专管外廷百官，自从有司隶、中丞以来，更互奏内外百官，只是所纠察的恐怕不会有内外的限制。
English: Chujo and Shizuku picketed everything from the crown prince on down, and in fact, they jointly controlled both domestic and foreign affairs. This is not to say that Chujo was in charge of the 100 officials in the inner court, and Shizuku was in charge of the 100 officials outside the inner court. Ever since there were Shizuku and Chujo, there has been more interaction between the 100 officials inside and outside the country. However, what they picketed would probably not have any internal or external restrictions.

古文：而结一旦横挫臣，臣前所以不罗缕者，冀因结奏得从私愿也。
现代文：而解结却突然对我横加指责，我先前之所以不辩解，是希望解结的奏疏能遂我心愿。
English: But the disentanglement suddenly accused me. The reason why I did not defend myself earlier was that I hoped that the disentanglement would be successful.

古文：今既所愿不从，而敕云但为过耳，非所不及也，以此见原。
现代文：现在既然不能如愿，而敕书说只是过失罢了，而不是言所不及，因此原谅。
English: Now that I can't do what I want, and the letter says it's just a mistake, not beyond words, so forgive me.

古文：臣忝司直之任，宜当正己率人，若其有过，不敢受原，是以申陈其愚。
现代文：我掌管直谏之任，应当端正自身品德来为人表率，如果有过错，我就不敢接收原谅，因此陈述一下自己的愚见。
English: I am in charge of Naosuke's duty, I should rectify my character and be a role model, if I am at fault, I dare not accept forgiveness, so let me state my stupidity.

古文：司隶与中丞俱共纠皇太子以下，则从皇太子以下无所不纠也。
现代文：司隶和中丞共同纠责皇太子以下诸事，那么从皇太子以下就没有谁不能纠查。
English: If the imperial secretary and the chancellor jointly reprimand the crown prince and his subordinates, then there is no one below the crown prince who cannot be reprimanded.

古文：得纠皇太子而不得纠尚书，臣之暗塞既所未譬。
现代文：如果能纠查皇太子却不能纠查尚书，这是我所不能明白的。
English: If they can investigate the crown prince but not Shang Shu, I don't understand it.

古文：皇太子为在行马之内邪，皇太子在行马之内而得纠之，尚书在行马之内而不得纠，无有此理。
现代文：皇太子算不算是行马之内呢？如果皇太子在行马之内就能纠查他，而尚书在行马之内却不能纠查，没有这个道理。
English: Is the crown prince considered to be within the cavalcade? If the crown prince is within the cavalcade, he can be investigated, but Shangshu cannot be investigated within the cavalcade, there is no such reason.

古文：此理灼然，而结以此挫臣。
现代文：道理本来很明白，而解结却以此指责我。
English: The reason was very clear, but the unraveling accused me of it.

古文：臣可无恨耳，其于观听，无乃有怪邪！
现代文：我可以不怨恨，而旁观者难道也不奇怪吗？
English: May I not hate, and may not the onlooker wonder?

古文：臣识石公前在殿上脱衣，为司隶荀恺所奏，先帝不以为非，于时莫谓侵官；今臣裁纠尚书，而当有罪乎？ 
现代文：我记得石公在殿上脱衣服，被司隶荀恺所奏，先帝没认为不对，当时无人说是侵位越权，现在我纠查尚书，就合当有罪吗？ 
English: I remember that Shigong undressed in the palace and was played by Shilun. The former emperor did not think it was wrong. At that time, no one said it was an abuse of power. Now that I am investigating Shangshu, should I be guilty?

古文：咸累自上称引故事，条理灼然，朝廷无以易之。
现代文：傅咸累次上书都称引过去的事实，条理清晰明了，朝廷无法改动。
English: Fu Xianli said that the facts of the past were cited in the letter, the order was clear and clear, and the court could not change it.

古文：吴郡顾荣常与亲故书曰： 傅长虞为司隶，劲直忠果，劾按惊人。
现代文：吴郡的顾荣时常给他的亲戚写信说： 傅咸当司隶，刚直忠勇果敢，弹劾的奏章让人吃惊。
English: Gu Rong of Wuxi County often wrote to his relatives, saying: Fu Xian is a subordinate officer, he is upright, loyal and courageous, and the impeachment report is surprising.

古文：虽非周才，偏亮可贵也。 
现代文：虽不是完美的人才，而在正直方面却很可贵。 
English: Though not a perfect person, he is very valuable in terms of honesty.

古文：元康四年卒官，时年五十六，诏赠司隶校尉，朝服一具、衣一袭、钱二十万，谥曰贞。
现代文：元康四年死在官署，享年五十六岁。诏书赠他为司隶校尉，一套朝服，一领袭衣，二十万钱，谥号叫贞。
English: Yuan Kang died four years later at the government office, at the age of fifty-six. The imperial edict gave him the rank of lieutenant, a set of imperial robes, a collar, two hundred thousand yuan, and the nickname Zhen.

古文：有三子：敷、晞、纂。
现代文：傅咸有三个儿子：傅敷、傅日希和傅纂。
English: Fu Xian had three sons: Fu Shiki, Fu Rixi and Fu Zuo.

古文：长子敷嗣。
现代文：大儿子傅敷继承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Fushiki, succeeded to the peerage.

