古文：濮阳人吕不韦贾于邯郸，见秦质子异人，归而谓父曰： 耕田之利几倍? 
现代文：濮阳人吕不韦在邯郸做生意，见到了在赵国做质子的秦国公子异人。回到家里，吕不韦对他的父亲说： 耕田种庄稼能获得几倍的利益啊？ 
English: Lu Buwei, a native of Shenyang, was doing business in Handan when he met Qin Guo Gongzi, a foreigner who was a proton in Zhao. Back home, Lu Buwei said to his father: "How many times more profit can you get by cultivating fields and planting crops?"

古文：曰： 十倍。 
现代文：他父亲回答说： 十倍。 
English: His father replied, "Ten times."

古文： 珠玉之赢几倍? 
现代文：吕不韦问： 珠宝生意能获得几倍的利益啊？ 
English: Lu Buwei asked: How many times profit can the jewelry business get?

古文：曰： 百倍。 
现代文：他父亲回答说： 一百倍。 
English: His father replied, "A hundred times."

古文： 立国家之主赢几倍? 
现代文：吕不韦问： 让一个人做了国君能获得几倍的利益啊？ 
English: Lü Buwei asked: How many times can a person gain benefits by becoming a sovereign?

古文：曰： 无数。 
现代文：他父亲回答说： 无数倍。 
English: His father replied: Many times.

古文：曰： 今力田疾作，不得暖衣余食；今建国立君，泽可以遗世。
现代文：吕不韦说： 现在我即使努力地种田，勤奋地劳作，依然不能达到衣食无忧，而现在有一个机会来拥立国君，恩泽可以流传到后世。
English: Lu Buwei said: Even if I work hard at farming and diligently work, I still can't achieve food and clothing without worry, but now there is an opportunity to support the establishment of the king, and the grace can be passed on to future generations.

古文：愿往事之。 
现代文：我愿意做这笔生意。 
English: I'm willing to do the business.

古文：秦之异人质于赵，处于城。
现代文：秦国公子异人正在赵国做质子，居住在城里。
English: The prince of Qin is now a proton in Zhao and lives in the city.

古文：故往说之口： 子傒有承国之业，又有母在中。
现代文：因此吕不韦前去游说他，说： 公子傒有资格继承王位，再加上他的母亲也在宫中。
English: Therefore, Lü Buwei went to persuade him, saying, "Prince Xuan is eligible to inherit the throne, and his mother is also in the palace.

古文：今子无母于中，外托于不可知之国，一日倍约，自为粪土。
现代文：但是现在公子没有母亲在宫中照应，自身又处于祸福难料的国家，一旦秦国背弃盟约，和赵国打起来的话，公子就如同粪土一样了。
English: But now the prince has no mother to take care of him in the palace, and he is in a country with unpredictable fortune and misfortune. Once the Qin state reneges on the treaty and fights with the Zhao state, the prince will be like dung.

古文：今子听吾计事，求归，可以有秦国。
现代文：如果公子按照我的计策行事，我就有办法让您回到秦国，还可以继承秦国的王位。
English: If the prince acts according to my plan, I will have a way to let you return to Qin and inherit the throne of Qin.

古文：吾为子使秦，必来请子。 
现代文：我为公子出使秦国，必定会回来接您回国。 
English: I am on a mission to Qin for my son, and I will definitely come back to pick you up.

古文：乃说秦王后弟阳泉君曰： 君之罪至死，君知之乎?
现代文：于是，吕不韦前去游说秦孝文王王后华阳夫人的弟弟阳泉君说： 阁下可知？阁下罪已至死！
English: As a result, Lü Buwei went to persuade Yang Quanjun, the younger brother of Qin Xiaowen's queen Huayang, saying: "Your excellency, do you know? Your excellency's sin has reached death!

古文：君之门下无不居高尊位，太子门下无贵者。
现代文：您门下的宾客无不位高势尊，相反太子门下无一显贵。
English: Your guests are all high-ranking dignitaries. On the other hand, none of the princes are high-ranking dignitaries.

古文：君之府藏珍珠宝玉，君之骏马盈外厩，美女充后庭。
现代文：而且阁下府中珍宝、骏马、佳丽多不可数，老实说，这可不是什么好事。
English: And there are countless treasures, horses, and beauties in your house. To be honest, this is not a good thing.

古文：王之春秋高，一日山陵崩，太子用事，君危于累卵，而不寿于朝生。
现代文：如今大王年事已高，一旦驾崩，太子执政，阁下则危如累卵，生死在旦夕之间。
English: Now that the great king is very old, once he passes away and the crown prince takes office, your excellency will be in grave danger and will be in a life-or-death situation.

古文：说有可以一切而使君富贵千万岁，其宁于太山四维，必无危亡之患矣。 
现代文：小人倒有条权宜之计，可令阁下富贵万年且稳如泰山，绝无后顾之忧。 
English: The villain, on the other hand, has an expedient plan that can make you rich and stable as Mount Tai, with no worries.

古文：阳泉君避席，请闻其说。
现代文：阳泉君赶忙让座施礼，恭敬地表示请教。
English: Yang Quan hurriedly bowed and respectfully asked for advice.

古文：不韦曰： 王年高矣，王后无子，子傒有承国之业，士仓又辅之。
现代文：吕不韦献策说： 大王年事已高，华阳夫人却无子嗣，有资格继承王位的子?
English: Lu Buwei said: The great king is old, but Lady Hua Yang has no son. Is there a son who is qualified to inherit the throne?

古文：王一日山陵崩，子傒立，士仓用事，王后之门，必生蓬蒿。
现代文：继位后一定重用秦臣士仓，到那时王后的门庭必定长满蒿野草，萧条冷落。
English: After the succession, the Qin courtier's storeroom must be reused. By then, the queen's courtyard must be overgrown with weeds and neglected.

古文：子异人贤材也，弃在于赵，无母于内，引领西望，而愿一得归。
现代文：现在在赵国为质的公子异人才德兼备，可惜没有母亲在宫中庇护，每每翘首西望家邦，极想回到秦国来。
English: Now in Zhao, he is a young man of different talents and virtues. Unfortunately, he does not have a mother to shelter him in the palace. He is always looking forward to his home country and desperately wants to return to Qin.

古文：王后诚请而立之，是子异人无国而有国，王后无子而有子也。 阳泉君曰： 然。 
现代文：王后倘若能立异人为太子，这样一来，不是储君的异人也能继位为王，他肯定会感念华阳夫人的恩德，而无子的华阳夫人也因此有了日后的依靠。 阳泉君说： 对，有道理！ 
English: If the queen could make someone else the crown prince, then someone other than the crown prince could succeed to the throne. He would surely be moved by the kindness of Lady Huayang, and the childless Lady Huayang would thus have someone to rely on in the future. Yang Quanjun said, "Yes, that makes sense!"

古文：入说王后，王后乃请赵而归之。
现代文：便进宫说服王后，王后便要求赵国将公子异人遣返秦国。
English: He then went to the palace to persuade the queen, who then asked Zhao to repatriate the prince to Qin.

古文：赵未之遣，不韦说赵曰： 子异人，秦之宠子也，无母于中，王后欲取而子之。
现代文：赵国并不愿意遣返异人。吕不韦就去游说赵王： 公子异人是秦王所宠爱的儿子，只是失去了母亲照顾，现在华阳王后想要让他做自己的儿子。
English: Zhao Guo was not willing to repatriate the stranger. Lü Buwei went to lobby King Zhao: The prince stranger was the favorite son of King Qin, but he lost his mother's care. Now Queen Huayang wants him to be her son.

古文：使秦而欲屠赵，不顾一子而留计，是抱空质也。
现代文：大王试想，如果秦国想要侵略赵国，也不会因为一个王子的缘故而耽误灭赵大计，这样赵国就徒有一个人质了？
English: Imagine, if Qin wanted to invade Zhao, it would not delay the plan to destroy Zhao because of a prince, so Zhao would have a hostage?

古文：若使子异人归而得立，赵厚送遣之，是不敢倍德畔施，是自为德讲。
现代文：但如果赵国让其回国继承王位，并以厚礼把他送回去，这样一来，公子是不会忘记大王的恩义的，这是以礼相交的作法。
English: However, if the State of Zhao allows him to return to the country to inherit the throne, and sends him back with a generous gift, then the prince will not forget the great king's gratitude. This is the practice of courtesy.

古文：秦王老矣，一日晏驾，虽有子异人，不足以结秦。 
现代文：如今孝文王已经老迈，一旦驾崩，赵国虽仍有异人为质，也没有资历与秦相国亲近了。 
English: Now Xiaowen Wang is already old, once he dies, although Zhao still has a different hostage, he has no qualifications to be close to Qin.

古文：赵乃遣之。
现代文：于是，赵王就将异人送回秦国。
English: As a result, King Zhao sent the stranger back to Qin.

古文：异人至，不韦使楚服而见。
现代文：公子异回国后，吕不韦让他身着楚服晋见原是楚国人的华阳夫人。
English: After the prince returned to his country, Lü Buwei had him dressed in a Chu costume to meet the Huayang lady, who was originally from Chu.

古文：王后悦其状，高其知，曰： 吾楚人也。 
现代文：华阳夫人对他的打扮十分高兴，认为他很有心计，并特地亲近说： 我是楚国人。 
English: Mrs. Huayang was very pleased with his attire, thought he was very thoughtful, and said with special closeness: I am a native of Chu.

古文：而自子之，乃变其名曰楚，王使子诵，子曰： 少弃捐在外，尝无师傅所教学，不习于诵。 
现代文：于是把公子异人认作儿子，并替他更名为 楚 。
English: As a result, he recognized the nobleman as his son and changed his name to Chu.

古文：王罢之，乃留止。
现代文：秦王也就罢了，让他留宿宫中。
English: Let King Qin stay in the palace.

古文：间曰： 陛下尝轫车于赵矣，赵之豪桀，得知名者不少。
现代文：一次，异人乘秦王空闲时，进言道： 陛下也曾羁留赵国，赵国豪杰之士知道陛下大名的不在少数。
English: On one occasion, when a stranger took advantage of Qin Wang's free time, he said: His Majesty also detained Zhao, and the heroes of Zhao knew that His Majesty's daimyo were not a few.

古文：今大王反国，皆西面而望。大王无一公之使以存之，臣恐其皆有怨心。
现代文：如今陛下返秦为君，他们都惦念着您，可是陛下却连一个使臣未曾遣派去抚慰他们。孩儿担心他们会心生怨恨之心。
English: Now that Your Majesty has returned to the Qin Dynasty, they are all thinking about you, but Your Majesty has not even sent an envoy to comfort them. I am afraid that they will have resentment in their hearts.

古文：使边境早闭晚开。 
现代文：希望大王将边境城门迟开而早闭，防患于未然。 
English: It is hoped that the king will open the border gate late and close it early to prevent problems in advance.

古文：王以为然，奇其计。
现代文：秦王觉得他说话极有道理，为他的奇谋感到惊讶。
English: King Qin thought his words were very reasonable and was surprised by his stratagem.

古文：王后劝立之。
现代文：华阳夫人乘机劝秦王立之为太子。
English: Lady Huayang took the opportunity to persuade King Qin to make him crown prince.

古文：王乃召相，令之曰： 寡人子莫若楚。 
现代文：秦王召来丞相，下诏说： 寡人的儿子数子楚最能干。 
English: The king of Qin summoned the prime minister and issued the following edict: "Number one's son, Chu Zi Chu, is the most capable.

古文：立以为太子。
现代文：于是立异人为太子。
English: As a result, an innovator became crown prince.

古文：子楚立，以不韦为相，号曰文信侯，食蓝田十二县。
现代文：公子楚继承秦国的王位以后，任吕不韦为相，封他为文信侯，将蓝田十二县作为他的食邑。
English: After Prince Chu succeeded to the throne of Qin, he appointed Lü Bu Wei as his consort, made him the Prince of Letters, and made the twelve counties of Lantian his capital.

古文：王后为华阳太后，诸侯皆致秦邑。
现代文：而王后改称华阳太后，之后各个诸侯也都向秦奉送了土地。
English: The queen changed her name to the Empress Dowager Huayang, after which all the lords also sent land to the Qin.

