古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝讳漼，宣宗长子也。母曰元昭皇太后晁氏。
现代文：懿宗，名誛，宣宗的长子。母亲是元昭皇太后晁氏。起初被封为郓王。
English: The eldest son of Shinso, Meisho, and Shinso. His mother was the former Empress Dowager Shinshi. At first, he was given the title of Shinno.

古文：始封郓王。宣宗爱夔王滋，欲立为皇太子，而郓王长，故久不决。
现代文：宣宗钟爱夔王李滋，想立李滋为皇太子，但李誛是长子，因而久悬未决。
English: Emperor Xuanzong loved King Li Zhi and wanted to make Li Zhi the crown prince, but Li Zhi was the eldest son, so it was not decided for a long time.

古文：大中十三年八月，宣宗疾大渐，以夔王属内枢密使王归长、马公儒、宣徽南院使王居方等。
现代文：大中十三年八月，宣宗病危，将立李滋为皇太子的事托付给内枢密使王归长、马公儒，宣徽南院使王居方等人。
English: In August of the 13th year of the middle school, when Emperor Xuanzong was critically ill, he entrusted the matter of establishing Li Zhi as the crown prince to Wang Guichang, Ma Gongru, the Inner Privy Council's envoy, and Wang Jifang, the envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council, and others.

古文：而左神策护军中尉王宗实、副使丌元实矫诏立郓王为皇太子。
现代文：而左神策护军中尉王宗实、副使丌元实诈传伪诏将郓王李誛立做了皇太子。
English: However, Lieutenant Wang Zongshi and Deputy Envoy Xingyuanshi of the Left God's Protection Army fraudulently transmitted a false edict to make King Gong Li Xingli the crown prince.

古文：癸巳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：初十，李誛在宣宗灵柩前登皇帝位。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Yu ascended to the throne before the funeral of Xuanzong.

古文：王宗实杀王归长、马公儒、王居方。
现代文：王宗实杀了王归长、马公儒、王居方。
English: Wang Zongshi killed Wang Guichang, Ma Gongru, and Wang Jifang.

古文：庚子，始听政。
现代文：十七日，懿宗开始临朝处理国事。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizong began to deal with state affairs.

古文：癸卯，令狐綯为司空。
现代文：二十日，令狐任司空。
English: On the 20th, the fox was appointed as the deputy.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后。
现代文：懿宗尊奉皇太后为太皇太后。
English: Emperor Taizong honored the empress dowager as the great empress dowager.

古文：九月庚申，追尊母为皇太后。
现代文：九月初八，懿宗追尊母亲晁氏为皇太后。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, Emperor Taizong made his mother, Empress Dowager Yi, the empress dowager.

古文：十月辛卯，大赦。
现代文：十月初九，施行大赦。
English: On the 9th of October, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，耆老粟帛。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，赐给高寿老人粮食布帛。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors, and peerages, and senior citizens were given grain baskets.

古文：十一月戊午，萧鄴罢。
现代文：十一月初七，萧邺被免职。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Xiao Yao was removed from his post.

古文：十二月甲申，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杜审权同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月初三，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杜审权任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Hanlin Scholar Zong Zi and Hyobu Attendant Du Xian Quan were appointed to the Chushumen Shimohei chapter.

古文：丁酉，令狐綯罢。
现代文：十六日，令狐被免职。
English: On the 16th, Linghu was relieved of his duties.

古文：荆南节度使白敏中为司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：荆南节度使白敏中任司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Jingnan Jiedu made Bai Min serve as a tutor, as well as a junior attendant, and a junior subordinate subordinate subordinate at the same time.

古文：是岁，云南蛮陷播州。
现代文：本年，云南蛮族军队攻破播州。
English: This year, the Yunnan barbarian army broke through Banzhou.

古文：咸通元年正月，浙东人仇甫反，安南经略使王式为浙江东道观察使以讨之。
现代文：咸通元年正月，浙东人仇甫反叛，安南经略使王式任浙江东道观察使进行讨伐。
English: In the first month of the first year of Hamdong, the people of eastern Zhejiang rebelled against Qufu, and Annan sent Wang Shih as the host of Zhejiang to carry out the crusade.

古文：二月丙申，葬圣武献文孝皇帝于贞陵。五月，京师地震。
现代文：二月十五日，将宣宗安葬在贞陵。五月，京城长安地震。
English: On February 15, Emperor Xuanzong was buried in Zhengrong Mausoleum. In May, the Beijing Chang'an Earthquake occurred.

古文：袁王绅薨。
现代文：袁王李绅去世。
English: Yuan Wang Lishen passed away.

古文：七月，封叔忄丐为信王。
现代文：七月，懿宗封叔父李忄丐为信王。
English: In July, Yi Zongfeng's uncle Li Bingye became the letter king.

古文：八月，卫王灌薨。
现代文：八月，卫王李灌去世。
English: In August, Wei Wang Li Guan passed away.

古文：己卯，仇甫伏诛。
现代文：初一，仇甫伏法。
English: On the first day of the new year, Chou Fu Fu Fa is performed.

古文：九月戊申，白敏中为中书令。
现代文：九月初一，白敏中任中书令。
English: On the first day of September, Bai Min was promoted to the position of middle secretary.

古文：十月，安南都护李鄠克播州。
现代文：十月，安南都护李攻克播州。
English: In October, Annan sent troops to conquer Banzhou.

古文：己亥，夏侯孜罢。
现代文：二十三日，夏侯孜被免职。
English: On the 23rd, Xia Houzé was removed from office.

古文：户部尚书、判度支毕諴为礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部尚书、判度支毕讠咸任礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: The household department and the etiquette department, as well as the middle school, will be closed.

古文：闰月乙亥，朝献于太清宫。十一月丙子，朝享于太庙。
现代文：闰十月二十九日，懿宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。十一月初一，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 29th day of leap October, Emperor Taizong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the worshippers dressed up and enjoyed the offerings. On the first day of the month of November, a ceremony was held at the Grand Temple.

古文：丁丑，有事于南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：初二，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦，更改年号为咸通。
English: On the second day of junior high school, in the southern suburbs of Beijing, an amnesty was carried out, and the year name was changed to Hamdong.

古文：是月，庆王沂薨。
现代文：本月，庆王李沂去世。
English: This month, Qingwang Lijun passed away.

古文：十二月戊申，云南蛮寇安南。
现代文：十二月初三，云南蛮军进犯安南。
English: On the third day of December, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded Annan.

古文：癸亥，福王绾为司空。
现代文：十八日，福王李绾任司空。
English: On the 18th, Fu Wang Lijun assumed the post of Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：二年二月，白敏中罢。
现代文：咸通二年二月，白敏中被免职。
English: In February of the second year of Hamdang, Bai Min was removed from office.

古文：尚书左仆射、判度支杜悰兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：尚书左仆射、判度支杜兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Shosho's left-hand servant Sho, Shido's assistant and servant, and Shosho's right-hand man Shimodaira.

古文：福王绾薨。
现代文：福王李绾去世。
English: King of Fortune Li Xi passed away.

古文：六月，盐州刺史王宽为安南经略招讨使。
现代文：六月，盐州刺史王宽任安南经略招讨使。
English: In June, Wang Guang, the vice-governor of Yanzhou, was appointed as a special envoy of Annan.

古文：八月，云南蛮寇邕州。
现代文：八月，云南蛮军进犯邕州。
English: In August, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：九月，寇巂州。
现代文：九月，进犯州。
English: In September, they invaded the state.

古文：三年正月庚午，群臣上尊号曰睿文明圣孝德皇帝。
现代文：咸通三年正月初一，群臣给懿宗奉加尊号为睿文明圣孝德皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Hamdang, a group of courtiers gave him the honorary title of the Emperor of Wisdom, Civilization and filial piety.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：是月，蒋伸罢。
现代文：本月，蒋伸被免职。
English: Jiang was removed from his post this month.

古文：二月庚子，杜悰为司空。是月，隶王惴薨。
现代文：二月初一，杜任司空。本月，棣王李惴去世。
English: On the first day of February, Du was appointed as the first secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee. This month, the King of Gongs, Li Yong, passed away.

古文：湖南观察使蔡袭为安南经略招讨使。
现代文：湖南观察使蔡袭任安南经略招讨使。
English: Hunan Observation made Cai succeed Annan as the envoy.

古文：三月戊寅，归义军节度使张义潮克凉州。
现代文：三月初十，归义军节度使张义潮攻克凉州。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the festival of returning to the rebel army caused the Zhangyi tide to invade and conquer Liangzhou.

古文：七月，武宁军乱，逐其节度使温璋。
现代文：七月，武宁军骚乱，驱逐其节度使温璋。
English: In July, the Wu Ning Army rioted, and the expulsion of its soldiers led to the rise of Wen Xuan.

古文：剑南酉川节度使夏侯孜为尚书左仆射，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：剑南西川节度使夏侯孜任左仆射，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Jiannan Nishikawa Setsudo appointed Xia Houzhi as his left-hand man, as well as his attendant, and made him a member of the middle school's literary club.

古文：九月，岭南西道军乱，逐其节度使蔡京。
现代文：九月，岭南西道的军队发生骚乱，驱逐其节度使蔡京。
English: In September, there was a riot in the army of Lingnan West Road, and they expelled their commander, Cai Jing.

古文：十月丙申，封子佾为魏王，侹凉王，佶蜀王。
现代文：十月初一，懿宗封其子李佾为魏王，李亻廷为凉王，李佶为蜀王。
English: On the first day of October, Emperor Taizong made his son Li Zong the king of Wei, Li Yueting the king of Liang, and Li Yu the king of Shu.

古文：杜悰为司徒。
现代文：杜任司空。
English: Du Ren, Sifu.

古文：十一月，封叔祖缉为蕲王，叔忄责荣王。
现代文：十一月，懿宗封叔祖父李缉为蕲王、叔父李忄责为荣王。
English: In November, Yi Zongfeng's great-uncle, Li Zhe, became the king of Zhen, and his uncle, Li Xuan, became the king of Rong.

古文：云南蛮寇安南。
现代文：云南蛮军进犯安南。
English: The Yunnan barbarian army invaded Annan.

古文：丙寅，降囚罪，免徐州秋税。
现代文：初二，对囚犯减刑，免征徐州的秋税。
English: On the second day of the new year, the sentence of prisoners will be reduced and the autumn tax of Xuzhou will be exempted.

古文：十二月，翼王繟薨。
现代文：十二月，翼王李纟单去世。
English: In December, the Wing King, Li Yidan, passed away.

古文：四年正月戊辰，朝献于太清宫。己巳，朝享于太庙。
现代文：咸通四年正月初五，懿宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的祭礼。初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Hamdang Emperor, Emperor Taizong held a festival at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up to enjoy the offerings.

古文：庚午，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：初七，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：云南蛮陷安南，蔡袭死之。
现代文：云南蛮军攻破安南，经略招讨使蔡袭阵亡。
English: The barbarian army of Yunnan defeated Annan, and after a little persuasion, Cai Qi was killed in battle.

古文：庚辰，抚王纮为司空。
现代文：十七日，抚王李任司空。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Fowang Li was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：二月，拜十六陵。
现代文：二月，懿宗拜祭十六陵。
English: In February, the sixteen mausoleums of the Zongbei Festival were completed.

古文：秦州经略使高骈为安南经略招讨使。
现代文：秦州经略使高骈任安南经略招讨使。
English: Qinzhou Economic Delegate Gao Jun was appointed as Annan Economic Delegate.

古文：四月，毕諴罢。
现代文：四月，毕讠咸被免职。
English: In April, Mr. Bi was removed from his post.

古文：五月己巳，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杨收同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月初七，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎杨收任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of the year, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and Yang, the attendant of the military department, were appointed to the same school.

古文：戊子，杜审权罢。
现代文：二十六日，杜审权被免职。
English: On the 26th, Du Xianquan was removed from office.

古文：闰六月，杜悰罢。
现代文：闰六月，杜被免职。
English: In June, Du was removed from his post.

古文：兵部侍郎、判度支曹确同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、判度支曹确任同中书门下平章事。
English: The attendant of the Military Department and the assistant of the Judgement Department were appointed as the subordinate of the disciple of the same school.

古文：七月辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：免安南户税、丁钱二岁，弛廉州珠池禁。
现代文：免除安南按户征收的赋税和人口税二年，解除廉州珠池的禁令。
English: Annan was exempted from the tax and population tax levied by households for two years, and the ban on Zhuqi in Lianzhou was lifted.

古文：八月，夔王滋薨。
现代文：八月，夔王李滋去世。
English: In August, Gong Wang Lizhi passed away.

古文：十二月乙酉，昭义军乱，杀其节度使沈询。
现代文：十二月二十七日，昭义军发生骚乱，杀了节度使沈询。
English: On December 27th, the rebels rioted and killed the regent Shen Ying.

古文：五年正月丙午，云南蛮寇隽州。
现代文：咸通五年正月十九日，云南蛮军进犯州。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the fifth year of Hamdang, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded the state.

古文：三月，寇邕州。
现代文：三月，进犯邕州。
English: In March, it invaded Bozhou.

古文：四月，兵部侍郎、判户部萧寘同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月，兵部侍郎、判户部萧蜫任同中书门下平章事。
English: In April, Xiao Yao, the attendant of the military department and the judge of the household department, was appointed to the same middle school.

古文：五月丁酉，瘗邕、巂州死事者。
现代文：五月十二日，埋葬邕、二州死于国难的人员。
English: On May 12th, the bodies of those who died in the national tragedy in Shandong and the two provinces were buried.

古文：己亥，有彗星出于娄。
现代文：十四日，在星官娄宿三星间有彗星出现。
English: On the 14th, a comet appeared between the three stars in the constellation of Pleiades.

古文：八月丁卯，夏侯孜为司空。
现代文：八月十三日，夏侯孜任司空。
English: On August 13th, Xia Houzhe was appointed as Sikuo.

古文：十月，贞陵隧隐。
现代文：十月，贞陵墓道坍陷。
English: In October, Zhengrong Cemetery Road collapsed.

古文：十一月戊戌，寘夏侯孜罢。
现代文：十一月十五日，夏侯孜被免职。
English: On November 15th, Xia Houzhe was removed from his post.

古文：壬寅，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎路岩同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十九日，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎路岩任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 19th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs Lu Yan Ren and Zhong Shumen Shimo Ping signed the document.

古文：六年三月，萧寘薨。
现代文：咸通六年三月，萧蜫去世。
English: In March of the sixth year of Hamdang, Xiao Yao passed away.

古文：四月，剑南东川节度使高璩为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月，剑南东川节度使高璩任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In April, the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival made Gao Yao serve as the attendant of the military department and the scholar of the same school.

古文：五月，高骈及云南蛮战于邕州，败之。
现代文：五月，高骈在邕州与云南蛮军交战，打败蛮军。
English: In May, Gao Jun fought against the Yunnan barbarian army in Luzhou and defeated the barbarian army.

古文：六月，高璩薨。
现代文：六月，高璩去世。
English: In June, Gao Yao passed away.

古文：御史大夫徐商为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：御史大夫徐商任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The master historian Xu Shang served as the attendant of the military department, and the scholar of the same department, Heping Zhangji.

古文：七月，封子侃为郢王。
现代文：七月，懿宗封其子李侃为郢王。
English: In July, Emperor Taizong made his son, Li Kan, the King of Taizong.

古文：十二月，晋、绛二州地震。
现代文：十二月，晋、绛二州地震。
English: In December, the Jin and Shandong provinces were hit by earthquakes.

古文：壬子，太皇太后崩。
现代文：初五，太皇太后去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：七年二月戊申，免河南府、同华陕虢四州一岁税，湖南及桂邕容三管、岳州夏秋税之半。
现代文：咸通七年二月初二，免除河南府以及同、华、陕、虢四州的赋税一年，减免湖南及桂、邕、容三管和岳州的夏税、秋税一半。
English: On the second day of the second month of February in the seventh year of Hamdang, Henan Prefecture and Tong, Hua, Shaanxi and Shandong provinces were exempted from taxes for one year, and Hunan and Guizhou, Handan, Yongsan and Yue provinces were exempted from half of the summer tax and autumn tax.

古文：三月，成德军节度使王昭懿卒，其兄子景崇自称留后。
现代文：三月，成德军节度使王绍懿去世，其侄王景崇自称留后。
English: In March, Wang Shaoqi died on the German Army Day, and his nephew Wang Jingsong said that he would stay behind.

古文：闰月，吐蕃寇邠、宁。
现代文：闰三月，吐蕃军进犯、宁二州地震。
English: In leap March, the Tubo army invaded and the Ningyuzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：五月甲辰，葬孝明太皇太后于景陵之园。
现代文：五月初一，在景陵园内安葬孝明太皇太后。
English: On the first day of May, Empress Dowager Xiaoming was buried in Jingling Park.

古文：六月，魏博节度使何弘敬卒，其子全皞自称留后。
现代文：六月，魏博节度使何弘敬去世，其子何全白皋自称留后。
English: In June, the Wei Bo Festival caused the death of He Hongjing, and his son He Quanzhong claimed to stay behind.

古文：八月辛卯，昼晦。
现代文：八月十九日，白昼天昏地暗。
English: On the 19th of August, the day became dark and gloomy.

古文：十月壬申，杨收罢。
现代文：十月初一，杨收被免职。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Hui was removed from office.

古文：是月，高骈克安南。
现代文：本月，高骈攻克安南。
English: This month, Gao Jun conquered Annan.

古文：十一月辛亥，大赦，免咸通三年以前逋负，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：十一月初十，施行大赦，免去咸通三年以前拖欠的租赋，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: At the beginning of November 10, an amnesty was implemented, exempting Hamdang from the rent arrears three years ago, and awarding civil and military officials official ranks, honors, and peerages.

古文：八年正月丁未，河中府、晋绛二州地震。
现代文：咸通八年正月初六，河中府与晋、绛二州发生地震。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the eighth year of Hamdang, an earthquake occurred in the two prefectures of Hechu, Jin and Handan.

古文：五月丙辰，以不豫降囚罪，出宫人五百，纵神策、五坊、飞龙鹰鹞，禁延庆、端午节献女口。
现代文：五月十八日，懿宗因患病对囚犯减刑，放出宫女五百人，放掉神策军、五坊及飞龙厩豢养的鹰鹞，禁止在延庆、端午节进献妇女人口。
English: On May 18th, Emperor Taizong commuted the sentences of the prisoners due to illness, released five hundred palace maids, released eagle owls raised by the Shensha Army, the Wufang and the Flying Dragon Stables, and banned the donation of female population in Yanqing and the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：七月，雨汤于下邳。
现代文：七月，在下邳天降高温热雨。
English: In July, high temperature and hot rain fall on the following day.

古文：壬寅，蕲王缉薨。
现代文：初五，蕲王李缉去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Gong Wang Li Jie passed away.

古文：乙巳，怀州民乱，逐其刺史刘仁规。
现代文：初八，怀州百姓动乱，驱逐本州刺史刘仁规。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the people of Huizhou revolted and drove out Liu Rengui, the governor of Huizhou.

古文：甲子，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使于琮同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使于琮任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, the attendant of the military department and the envoy of salt and iron transportation in all directions were appointed by Yu Xuan to go to the gate of the middle school.

古文：十一月辛丑，疾愈，避正殿，赐民年七十而痼疾及军士战伤者帛。
现代文：十一月初六，懿宗病愈，避离正殿，赐给平民中七十岁以上老人身患痼疾与军士中战斗负伤者布帛。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：十二月，信王忄丐薨。
现代文：十二日，信王李忄丐去世。
English: On the 12th, Prince Li Bingye passed away.

古文：九年正月，有彗星出于娄、胃。
现代文：咸通九年正月，有彗星在星官娄宿、胃宿间出现。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Hamdangdong, a comet appeared in the space between the Star Officer's Quarters and the Gastric Quarters.

古文：七月，武宁军节度粮料判官庞勋反于桂州。
现代文：七月，武宁军节度粮料判官庞勋在桂州反叛。
English: In July, Pang Xun, the judge of the grain ration of the Wu Ning Army, rebelled in Guizhou.

古文：十月庚午，陷宿州。
现代文：十月初十，庞勋攻破宿州。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month, Pang Xun defeated Shukuju.

古文：丁丑，陷徐州，观察使崔彦曾死之。
现代文：十七日，攻破徐州，徐州观察使崔彦曾死难。
English: On the 17th, they broke through Xuzhou, and the observation of Xuzhou caused the death of Cui Yan.

古文：十一月，陷濠州，刺史卢望回死之。
现代文：十一月，庞勋攻破濠州，刺史卢望回死难。
English: In November, Pang Xun broke through Zhangzhou, and it was difficult for Shilou Wang to return.

古文：右金吾卫大将军康承训为徐泗行营兵马都招讨使，神武大将军王晏权为北面招讨使，羽林将军戴可师为南面招讨使。
现代文：右金吾卫大将军康承训任徐泗行营兵马都招讨使，神武大将军王晏权任北面招讨使，羽林将军戴可师任南面招讨使。
English: On the right, King Wuwei's General Kang Chengxun was appointed as the envoy of Xu Xingxing to recruit soldiers and horses, Shenwu's General Wang Bingquan was appointed as the envoy of the north, and Ulin's General Dai Ke was appointed as the envoy of the south.

古文：十二月，庞勋陷和、滁二州，滁州刺史高锡望死之。
现代文：十二月，庞勋攻破和、滁二州，滁州刺史高锡望死难。
English: In December, Pang Xun broke through He, Zang Er Zhou, and Zhang Zhou stabbed Gao Si to death.

古文：壬申，戴可师及庞勋战于都梁山，死之。
现代文：十三日，戴可师在都梁山与庞勋作战，阵亡。
English: On the 13th, Dai Ke's division fought against Pang Xun in Du Liang Mountain and was killed in action.

古文：是月，前天雄军节度使马举为南面招讨使，泰宁军节度使曹翔为北面招讨使。
现代文：本月，前天雄军节度使马举任南面招讨使，泰宁军节度使曹翔任北面招讨使。
English: This month, the day before yesterday, the Xiongjun Festival appointed Ma as the Southern Invitation Envoy, and the Taining Army Festival appointed Cao Xiang as the Northern Invitation Envoy.

古文：十年二月，杀欢州流人杨收。
现代文：咸通十年二月，杀流放州的杨收。
English: In February of the 10th year of Hamdang Tong, Yang Jie, who was exiled from the state, was killed.

古文：三月，徙封侃为威王。
现代文：三月，改封李侃为威王。
English: In March, Li Kan was given the title of "Wei Wang."

古文：四月，杀镇南军节度使严撰。
现代文：四月，杀镇南军节度使严讠巽。
English: In April, the "Kill the Southern Army" festival was held.

古文：康承训及庞勋战于柳子，败之。
现代文：康承训在柳子与庞勋作战，打败庞勋。
English: Kang Chengxun fought with Pang Xun in Liuzi and defeated him.

古文：六月，神策军将军宋威为西北面招讨使。
现代文：六月，神策将军宋威任西北面招讨使。
English: In June, Shenze General Song Wei was appointed as the envoy to the northwest.

古文：戊戌，以蝗旱理囚。
现代文：十二日，懿宗因蝗、旱灾害讯察囚犯的罪案。
English: On the 12th, due to locusts and droughts, the Shanzong investigated the crimes of prisoners.

古文：癸卯，徐商罢。
现代文：十七日，徐商被免职。
English: On the 17th, Xu Shang was dismissed.

古文：翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎刘瞻同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎刘瞻任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zong Zi, Household Attendant Liu Zhan Ren and Zhong Shumen Shimo Ping signed the document.

古文：八月，有彗星出于大陵。
现代文：八月，在星官大陵八星间有彗星出现。
English: In August, a comet appeared between the eight stars of the Great Hall of the Star Chamber.

古文：九月癸酉，庞勋伏诛。
现代文：九月十九日，庞勋伏法处死。
English: On September 19, Pang Xunfu was executed.

古文：十月戊戌，免徐、宿、濠、泗四州三岁税役。
现代文：十月十四日，免除徐、宿、濠、泗四州三年赋税、徭役。
English: On October 14th, the four prefectures of Xu, Shukou, Handan and Handan were exempted from taxes and labor service for three years.

古文：十二月壬子，云南蛮寇嘉州。
现代文：十二月二十九日，云南蛮族军进犯嘉州。
English: On December 29, the Yunnan barbarian army invaded Jiazhou.

古文：十一年正月甲寅，群臣上尊号曰睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝。
现代文：咸通十一年正月初一，群臣为懿宗加奉尊号：睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Hamzong, a group of courtiers conferred the honorific title on Emperor Gongzong: Emperor Rui Wen Ying Wu Ming De Zhi Ren Da Sheng Guang Xiao.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：云南蛮寇黎、雅二州，及成都。
现代文：云南蛮军进犯黎、雅二州及成都。
English: The Yunnan barbarian army invaded Lijiang, Ya'erzhou and Chengdu.

古文：二月甲申，剑南西川节度副使王建立及云南蛮战于城北，死之。
现代文：二月初二，剑南西川节度副使王建立在成都城北与云南蛮军交战，阵亡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：甲午，剑南东川节度使颜庆复及云南蛮战于新都，败之。
现代文：十二日，剑南东川节度使颜庆复在新都与云南蛮军交战，打败蛮军。
English: On the 12th, the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival made Yan Qingfu fight with the Yunnan barbarian army in Xindu and defeat the barbarian army.

古文：三月，曹确罢。
现代文：三月，曹确被免职。
English: In March, Cao Zhengyi was removed from his post.

古文：四月丙午，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎韦保衡同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月二十四日，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎韦保衡任同中书门下平章事。
English: On April 24th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, and Wei Baoheng, the attendant of the military department, were appointed as the junior high school students of the same school.

古文：八月，杀医待诏韩宗绍。
现代文：八月，杀医待诏韩宗绍。
English: In August, Han Zongshao was sentenced to death.

古文：魏博军乱，杀其节度使何全皞，其将韩君雄自称留后。
现代文：魏博军队骚乱，杀了节度使何全白皋，其部将韩君雄自称留后。
English: Wei Bo's army rioted and killed the military commander He Quanbai, while his subordinate Han Junxiong claimed to be left behind.

古文：九月丙辰，刘瞻罢。
现代文：九月初七，刘瞻被免职。
English: On the 7th of September, Liu Zhan was removed from his post.

古文：十一月辛亥，礼部尚书、判度支王鐸同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一月初三，礼部尚书、判度支王铎任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Rites and Shou Shu of the Ministry of Justice and Wang Shu of the Ministry of Justice and Shou Shu of the Ministry of Education and Culture were promoted to the same level.

古文：十二年四月癸卯，路岩罢。
现代文：咸通十二年四月二十七日，路岩被免职。
English: Lu Yan was dismissed from his post on April 27th, 2012.

古文：五月庚申，理囚。
现代文：五月十五日，懿宗讯察囚犯的罪案。
English: On May 15, Xizong inquired about the prisoner's crime.

古文：十月，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使刘鄴为礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月，兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使刘邺任礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: In October, Liu Xuan, the attendant of the military department and the transfer of salt and iron to various provinces, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Culture and Literature, and was promoted to the position of the deputy secretary of the Ministry of Culture and Literature.

古文：十三年二月丁巳，于琮罢。
现代文：咸通十三年二月初五，于琮被免职。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 13th year of Hamdang, Yu Qi was dismissed from his post.

古文：刑部侍郎、判户部赵隐为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：刑部侍郎、判户部赵隐任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhao Ying was appointed as the attendant of the Department of Justice, Zhao Yin as the attendant of the Department of Justice, and Xia Ping Zhangji as the assistant of the Department of Justice.

古文：幽州卢龙军节度使张允伸卒，其子简会自称留后。
现代文：幽州卢龙军节度使张允伸去世，其子张简会自称留后。
English: The Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Zhang Yunshen to die, and his son Zhang Jianhui claimed to stay behind.

古文：三月癸酉，平州刺史张公素逐简会，自称留后。
现代文：三月初三，平州刺史张公素驱逐张简会。自称留后。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Zhang Gongsu, the governor of Pingzhou, expelled the Zhang Jianhui. He claimed to stay behind.

古文：四月庚子，浙江东西道地震。
现代文：四月初一，浙江东道、西道地区发生地震。
English: On the first day of April, an earthquake occurred in the Dongdu and West Road areas of Zhejiang Province.

古文：封子保为吉王，杰寿王，倚睦王。
现代文：懿宗封其子李保为吉王，李杰为寿王，李倚为睦王。
English: Emperor Taizong designated his son Li Bao as the auspicious king, Li Jie as the auspicious king, and Li Yi as the auspicious king.

古文：五月乙亥，杀国子司业韦殷裕。
现代文：五月初六，杀国子司业韦殷裕。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, Wei Yinyu, the secretary of the State Security Bureau, was killed.

古文：十一月，王鐸为司徒，韦保衡为司空。
现代文：十一月，王铎任司徒，韦保衡任司空。
English: In November, Wang Xuan was appointed as the secretary, and Wei Baoheng was appointed as the secretary.

古文：十四年正月，沙陀寇代北。
现代文：咸通十四年正月，沙陀军进犯代北。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of Hamdang, the Satang army invaded the north.

古文：三月，迎佛骨于凤翔。
现代文：三月，懿宗从凤翔迎接佛骨至长安。
English: In March, Shizong traveled from Fengxiang to Chang'an to receive the Buddha bones.

古文：癸巳，雨土。
现代文：二十九日，空中降土如雨。
English: On the 29th, it rained from the sky.

古文：四月，并州民产子二头四手。
现代文：四月，并州有百姓生出孩子两个头、四只手。
English: In April, people in Hebei Province gave birth to a child with two heads and four hands.

古文：壬寅，大赦。
现代文：初八，施行大赦。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：六月，不豫。
现代文：六月，懿宗患病。
English: In June, Enzong fell ill.

古文：王鐸罢。
现代文：王铎被免职。
English: Wang Qi was dismissed from his post.

古文：七月辛巳，皇帝崩于咸宁殿，年四十一。
现代文：七月十九日，懿宗在咸宁殿逝世，终年四十一岁。
English: On July 19th, Emperor Taizong passed away at the age of forty-one in Xianning Palace.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝讳儇，懿宗第五子也。母曰惠安皇太后王氏。始封普王，名俨。
现代文：僖宗名儇，是懿宗的第五个儿子。母亲是惠安皇太后王氏。起初，他被封为普王，名叫李俨。
English: He was the fifth son of Emperor Xizong, and his mother was the Empress Dowager Wang of Hui'an. At first, he was given the title of King Pu, and his name was Li Yu.

古文：咸通十四年七月，懿宗疾大渐，左右神策护军中尉刘行深、韩文约立普王为皇太子。
现代文：咸通十四年七月，懿宗病危，左右神策护军中尉刘行深、韩文约立普王李俨为皇太子。
English: In July of the 14th year of Hamdang Tong, Emperor Taizong was critically ill, and Lieutenant Liu Xingshen of the Divine Protection Army and King Lijun of the Han Dynasty became the crown prince.

古文：辛巳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：十九日，李俨在懿宗灵柩前就皇帝位。
English: On the 19th, Li Yong ascended to the throne before the funeral of Emperor Xizong.

古文：八月癸巳，始听政。
现代文：八月初一，僖宗开始上朝处理国政。
English: On the first day of August, Emperor Taizong began to deal with state affairs.

古文：丁未，追尊母为皇太后。
现代文：十五日，追尊生母王氏为皇太后。
English: On the fifteenth day, she became the empress dowager after her biological mother, Wang.

古文：乙卯，韦保衡为司徒。
现代文：二十三日，委任韦保衡为司徒。
English: On the 23rd, Wei Baoheng was appointed as a magistrate.

古文：九月，贬保衡为贺州刺史。
现代文：九月，将韦保衡贬官为贺州刺史。
English: In September, Wei Baoheng was demoted to the position of Hezhou chief historian.

古文：十月乙未，尚书左仆射萧仿为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月初五，委任尚书左仆射萧癮为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 5th of October, he appointed Sho Sho's left-hand servant, Sho Shoan, to be Chusho's chamberlain and Chusho's disciple, Shitahira.

古文：十二月，震电。
现代文：十二月，霹雳闪电大作。
English: In December, there was a lightning storm.

古文：癸卯，大赦，免水旱州县租赋，罢贡鹰鹘。
现代文：十二日，施行大赦，免除遭受水、旱灾害各州县的租赋，停止各地向宫廷进贡鹰鹘一类玩物。
English: On the 12th, an amnesty was implemented, exempting all states and counties that had suffered from water and drought disasters from paying tribute, and stopping all regions from paying tribute to the court for eagles, falcons and other toys.

古文：云南蛮寇黎州。
现代文：云南蛮族进犯黎州。
English: Yunnan barbarians invaded Lizhou.

古文：乾符元年二月甲午，葬昭圣恭惠孝皇帝于简陵。癸丑，降死罪以下。
现代文：乾符元年二月初五，将懿宗安葬于简陵。二十四日，对死罪以下囚犯实行减刑。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 1st year of the Chinese lunar calendar, he was buried in a simple mausoleum. On the 24th day, the death penalty was commuted for prisoners with less than death penalty.

古文：赵隐罢。
现代文：赵隐被免职。
English: Zhao Ying was removed from office.

古文：华州刺史裴坦为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：华州刺史裴坦任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Huazhou scholar Pei Tan was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the lower level of the middle school.

古文：四月辛卯，以旱理囚。
现代文：四月初三，因旱灾，僖宗讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, due to the drought, the Xizong Interrogation recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：五月乙未，裴坦薨。
现代文：五月初八，裴坦去世。
English: Pétain died on 8 May.

古文：刑部尚书刘瞻为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：刑部尚书刘瞻任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Liu Zhan, a high-ranking official of the Department of Criminal Law, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the lower level of the middle school.

古文：八月辛未，瞻薨。
现代文：八月十五日，刘瞻去世。
English: On August 15, Liu Zhan passed away.

古文：兵部侍郎、判度支崔彦昭为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎、判度支崔彦昭任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Hyobu-ziroro, Shido-shitsu Cui-hiko Akira was appointed Chusho-ziroro, and Shido-chusho-mon Shimohei-shoji.

古文：十月，刘鄴罢。
现代文：十月，刘邺被免职。
English: In October, Liu Wei was removed from his post.

古文：吏部侍郎郑畋为兵部侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎卢携：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部侍郎郑畋任兵部侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎卢携并为同中书门下平章事。
English: Zheng Jian, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, Han Lin, the bachelor, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Lu Qi, the attendant of the household department, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school.

古文：十一月庚寅，改元。
现代文：十一月初五，更改年号为乾符。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the year name was changed to a Chinese character.

古文：群臣上尊号曰圣神聪睿仁哲明孝皇帝。
现代文：群臣给僖宗敬奉尊号为 圣神聪睿仁哲明孝皇帝 。
English: The group of courtiers gave him the honorific title of "Holy God, Wise and Compassionate, Wise and Compassionate Emperor."

古文：是月，萧仿为司空。
现代文：本月，萧癮任司空。
English: This month, Xiao Yan will take up the post of Secretary for Space.

古文：魏博节度使韩允中卒，其子简自称留后。
现代文：魏博节度使韩允中去世，其子韩简自称留后。
English: The Wei Bo Festival caused the death of Han Yunzhong, and his son Han Jian claimed to stay behind.

古文：十二月，党项、回鹘寇天德军。
现代文：十二月，党项、回鹘军队进犯天德军。
English: In December, the troops of Danzhong and Huiyang invaded the German army.

古文：云南蛮寇黎、雅二州，河西、河东、山南东道、东川兵伐云南。
现代文：云南蛮族进犯黎、雅二州；河西、河东、山南东道、东川军队奉命征讨云南。
English: Yunnan barbarians invaded Lijiang and Ya'erzhou; troops from Hexi, Hedong, Shandong and Dongchuan were ordered to invade Yunnan.

古文：二年正月己丑，朝献于太清宫。庚寅，朝享于太庙。
现代文：乾符二年正月初五，僖宗在太清宫举行代扮受祭者享用祭品的祭祖仪式。初六，在太庙祭祖。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2

古文：辛卯，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：初七，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the third day of the new year, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，文宣王及二王后、三恪一子官。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋号、爵位。赐给文宣王孔子，隋朝、北周皇室后代及商、周、汉三朝后代的嗣子一人官职。
English: The official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages were given to the civil and military officials, and one official post was given to the heir of Confucius, the Prince of Manchu, the descendants of the Sui Dynasty and the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and the descendants of the Shang, Zhou, and Han Dynasties.

古文：云南蛮请和。
现代文：云南蛮族求和。
English: Yunnan barbarians sue for peace.

古文：四月庚辰，太白昼见。
现代文：四月二十八日，白日出现太白星。
English: On April 28, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：浙西突陈将王郢反。
现代文：浙西突阵将王郢反叛。
English: West Zhejiang's sudden attack will make Wang Qi rebel.

古文：五月，右龙武军大将军宋皓讨之。
现代文：五月，右龙武军大将军宋皓讨伐王郢。
English: In May, the great general of the Right Dragon Army, Song Tao, went to fight Wang Tao.

古文：萧仿薨。
现代文：萧癮去世。
English: Xiao Yan passed away.

古文：六月，濮州贼王仙芝、尚君长陷曹、濮二州，河南诸镇兵讨之。
现代文：六月，反叛朝廷的濮州王仙芝、尚君长攻破曹、濮二州，河南道各镇的军队征讨他们。
English: In June, Wang Xianzhi and Shang Junlong of Zhangzhou, who rebelled against the imperial court, defeated Cao and Zou of the two states, and the army of each town of Henan Province conscripted them.

古文：吏部尚书李蔚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部尚书李蔚任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Li Wei, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the lower level of the middle school.

古文：幽州将李茂勋逐其节度使张公素，自称留后。
现代文：幽州将领李茂勋驱逐了本州节度使张公素，自称留后官。
English: Yuzhou General Li Maoxun expelled Zhang Gongsu, the governor of Yuzhou, and claimed to be the successor.

古文：七月，以蝗避正殿，减膳。
现代文：七月，僖宗因蝗灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: In July, due to a plague of locusts, Shizong fled the main hall and cut back on meals.

古文：十一月，震电。
现代文：十一月，霹雳、闪电大作。
English: In November, the thunderbolt and lightning strike.

古文：三年二月丙子，以旱降死罪以下。
现代文：乾符三年二月二十八日，因旱灾对死罪以下的囚犯实行减刑。
English: On February 28th of this year, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty had their sentences reduced due to the drought.

古文：三月，葬暴骸。
现代文：三月，掩埋暴露地面的尸骨。
English: In March, they buried the bones on the exposed ground.

古文：平卢军节度使宋威为指挥诸道招讨草贼使，检校左散骑常侍曾元裕副之。
现代文：平卢军节度使宋威任指挥诸道招讨草贼使，检校左散骑常侍曾元裕任副使。
English: The Pinglu Military Festival made Song Wei the commander of all roads to invite the draft-dodger, and Zeng Yuanyu, the left rider of the inspection team, was the deputy envoy.

古文：募能捕贼三百人者，官以将军。
现代文：招募能捕捉草贼的人三百名，授予他们将军的官职。
English: Recruit three hundred men who can catch grass thieves, and give them a military post.

古文：幽州卢龙军节度使李茂勋立其子可举为留后。
现代文：幽州卢龙军节度使李茂勋将他的儿子李可举立为留后官。
English: The festival of the Yuzhou Lulong Army made Li Maoxun raise his son Li Ke as a reserve officer.

古文：五月庚子，以旱理囚，免浙东西一岁税。
现代文：五月二十四日，因旱灾，讯察记录囚犯的罪状，免除浙东、浙西一年的赋税。
English: On May 24th, due to the drought, the crimes of prisoners were investigated and recorded, and East and West Zhejiang were exempted from paying taxes for one year.

古文：昭王汭薨。
现代文：昭王李去世。
English: Zhao Wang Li passed away.

古文：六月乙丑，雄州地震。
现代文：六月二十日，雄州发生地震。
English: On June 20, an earthquake occurred in Yungju.

古文：抚王纮为太尉。
现代文：抚王李任太尉。
English: Fowang Liren was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：七月辛巳，雄州地震。
现代文：七月初六，雄州地震。
English: On the 6th of July, there was an earthquake in Xiongzhou.

古文：镇海军节度使裴璩及王郢战，败之。
现代文：镇海军节度使裴璩与王郢交战，打败王郢。
English: The naval festival of the town made Pei Yao fight with Wang Yao and defeat Wang Yao.

古文：鄂王润薨。
现代文：鄂王李润去世。
English: King of Hubei Li Run passed away.

古文：九月乙亥朔，日有食之，避正殿。
现代文：九月初一，有日食现象，僖宗避离正殿。
English: On the first day of September, there was a solar eclipse, and Emperor Taizong had to leave the main hall.

古文：丙子，王仙芝陷汝州，执刺史王镣。
现代文：初二，王仙芝攻破汝州，俘虏了刺史王镣。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Wang Xianzhi broke through Ruzhou and captured Jishi Wang Yao.

古文：十一月，陷郢、复二州。
现代文：十一月，王仙芝攻破郢、复二州。
English: In November, Wang Xianzhi broke through the shackles and recovered two states.

古文：十二月，京师地震。
现代文：十二月，京城长安发生地震。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in Beijing's Chang'an District.

古文：王仙芝陷申、光、卢、寿、通、舒六州。
现代文：王仙芝攻破申、光、庐、寿、通、舒六个州。
English: Wang Xianzhi conquered the six provinces of Sheng, Guangxi, Yunnan, Shou, Tong and Shu.

古文：忠武军节度使崔安潜为诸道行营都统，宫苑使李琢为诸军行营招讨草贼使，右威卫上将军张自勉副之。
现代文：忠武军节度使崔安潜任诸道行营都统，宫苑使李琢任诸军行营招讨草贼使，右威卫上将军张自勉任招讨副使。
English: The festival of the loyal army made Cui An submerged as the commander of all the roads, the palace made Li Tuo as the commander of the army, and Zhang Zimin as the vice-commander of the army.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：这年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：四年正月丁丑，降死罪以下二等，流人死者听收葬。
现代文：乾符四年正月初五，对死罪以下的囚犯按原判减刑二等，流放人员中的死者允许家属收尸安葬。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the lunar calendar, the second-class sentence of prisoners with less than the death penalty was reduced according to the original sentence, and the dead among the exiles were allowed to be buried by their families.

古文：崔彦昭为司空。
现代文：崔彦昭任司空。
English: Choi Hiko Akira was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：二月，王仙芝陷鄂州。
现代文：二月，王仙芝攻破鄂州。
English: In February, Wang Xianzhi conquered Ezhou.

古文：闰月，崔彦昭罢。
现代文：闰二月，崔彦昭被免职。
English: In leap February, Cui Yan Zhao was removed from his post.

古文：昭义军乱，逐其节度使高湜。
现代文：昭义军发生骚乱，驱逐了节度使高。
English: A riot broke out among the Shōyō troops, and Setsudō Chigō was expelled.

古文：宣武军节度使王鐸检校司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：宣武军节度使王铎任检校司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the festival of the Xuanwu army, Wang Qi was appointed as the school inspector, the attendant of the disciple, and the subordinate of the disciple of the same school.

古文：三月，宛句贼黄巢陷郓、沂二州，天平军节度使薛崇死之。
现代文：三月，宛句的叛臣黄巢攻破郓、沂二州。天平军节度使薛崇殒命。
English: In March, Huang Chao, the traitor of Wanqu, conquered Shandong and Fujian Provinces. The Tianping Army killed Xue Chongyi.

古文：四月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日食现象。
English: On the first day of April, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是月，陕州军乱，逐其观察使崔碣。
现代文：本月，陕州军队发生骚乱，驱逐了观察使崔碣。
English: This month, troops in Shaanxi Province rioted and ousted the observation envoy, Cui Wei.

古文：江西贼柳彦璋陷江州，执其刺史陶祥。
现代文：江西叛臣柳彦璋攻破江州，俘虏了该州刺史陶祥。
English: Jiangxi's traitor Yanukovych invaded Jiangzhou and captured the governor of the province, Tao Xiang.

古文：高安制置使钟传陷抚州。
现代文：高安制置使钟传反叛，攻破抚州。
English: The establishment of the Gaoan System caused Zhong Chuan to rebel and invade Fuzhou.

古文：五月，有彗星，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：五月，有彗星出现，僖宗避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: In May, a comet appeared, and Emperor Taizong had to leave the main hall and reduce his diet.

古文：六月，王鐸为司徒。
现代文：六月，王铎任司徒。
English: In June, Wang Yao was appointed as a disciple.

古文：庚寅，雄州地震。
现代文：庚寅日，雄州地震。
English: On Go-in Day, the Yungju earthquake occurred.

古文：八月，黄巢陷隋州，执刺史崔休徵。
现代文：八月，黄巢攻破隋州，俘虏了刺史崔休征。
English: In August, the Yellow Nest invaded Suizhou and captured the assassin Cui Xuejun.

古文：九月，沙陀寇云、朔二州。
现代文：九月，沙陀军进犯云、朔二州。
English: In September, Shado's army invaded Yun and Shuo two states.

古文：盐州军乱，逐其刺史王承颜。
现代文：盐州军队骚乱，驱逐了刺史王承颜。
English: Yancheng troops riot, expel Wang Chengyan.

古文：十月，河中军乱，逐其节度使刘侔。
现代文：十月，河中的军队骚乱，驱逐了节度使刘侔。
English: In October, the troops in Hezhong rioted and drove out the commander of the festival, Liu Ye.

古文：十一月，尚君长降，宋威杀之。
现代文：十一月，尚君长降顺，宋威杀了他。
English: In November, Shang Junchang surrendered, and Song Wei killed him.

古文：十二月，安南戍兵乱，逐桂管观察使李瓚。
现代文：十二月，驻防安南的守边士兵骚乱，驱逐了桂管观察使李瓒。
English: In December, the garrison soldiers stationed in Annan rioted, expelling the Guizhou observation envoy Li Wei.

古文：江州刺史刘秉仁及柳彦璋战，败之。
现代文：江州刺史刘秉仁与叛军柳彦璋作战，打败柳彦璋。
English: Liu Bingren, the governor of Jiangzhou, fought against the rebel Liu Yanyuan and defeated him.

古文：五年正月丁酉，王仙芝陷江陵外郛。
现代文：乾符五年正月初一，王仙芝攻破江陵城的外围城廓。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the lunar calendar, Wang Xianzhi broke through the outer walls of Jiangling City.

古文：壬寅，曾元裕及王仙芝战于申州，败之。
现代文：初六，曾元裕与王仙芝在申州作战，打败王仙芝。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Zeng Yuanyu fought with Wang Xianzhi in Shenzhou and defeated Wang Xianzhi.

古文：元裕为诸道行营招讨草贼使，张自勉副之。
现代文：曾元裕担任诸道行营招讨草贼使，张自勉任副使。
English: Zeng Yuanyu served as the envoy of the campaign to recruit grass thieves, and Zhang Zimin served as the deputy envoy.

古文：宋威罢招讨使。
现代文：免去宋威的招讨使职务。
English: Song Wei was relieved of his duties as a recruiting officer.

古文：二月癸酉，云中守捉使李克用杀大同军防御使段文楚。
现代文：二月初七，云中守捉使李克用杀了大同军的防御使段文楚。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, Li Ke, who was caught off guard in the clouds, used the defense of the Datong army to kill Duan Wenchu.

古文：己卯，克用寇遮虏军。
现代文：十三日，李克用进犯遮虏军。
English: On the 13th, Li Ke used the attack to cover the invading army.

古文：是月，王仙芝伏诛，其将王重隐陷饶州，刺史颜标死之。
现代文：本月，王仙芝被处死，他的将领王重隐攻破饶州，刺史颜标丧命。
English: This month, Wang Xianzhi was executed, and his general, Wang Chongyin, invaded Raozhou and was killed.

古文：江西贼徐唐莒陷洪州。
现代文：江西的反叛者徐唐莒攻破洪州。
English: The rebels of Jiangxi, Xu Tangyao, invaded Hongzhou.

古文：三月，黄巢隐濮州，寇河南。
现代文：三月，黄巢攻破濮州，进犯河南。
English: In March, the Yellow Nest broke through Zhangzhou and invaded Henan.

古文：崔安潜罢都统。
现代文：崔安潜被免去诸道行营都统职务。
English: Cui Anqian was relieved of his duties as the general secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：张自勉为东西面行营招讨使。
现代文：张自勉任东西面行营招讨使。
English: Zhang Zimin served as the envoy of the east and west campaigns.

古文：湖南军乱，逐其观察使崔瑾。
现代文：湖南的军队骚乱，驱逐了观察使崔瑾。
English: Hunan's army rioted, expelling the observation envoy Cui Tong.

古文：四月，饶州将彭令璋克饶州，自称刺史，徐唐莒伏诛。
现代文：四月，饶州将领彭令璋攻克饶州，自称刺史，徐唐莒被处死。
English: In April, the general of Raozhou, Peng Lingyao, conquered Raozhou and claimed to be a historian. Xu Tangyao was executed.

古文：五月丁酉，郑畋、卢携罢。
现代文：五月初二，郑畋、卢携被免职。
English: On the second day of May, Zheng Rong and Lu Jie were removed from their posts.

古文：翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎豆卢彖为兵部侍郎，吏部侍郎崔沆为户部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎豆卢蠪任兵部侍郎，吏部侍郎崔沆任户部侍郎，二人均为同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Baccalaureate Zongzhi, Household Attendant Dou Lucheng was appointed as the Household Attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and the Household Attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs Cui Lucheng was appointed as the Household Attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. Both of them were the junior high school students of the same school.

古文：是日，雨雹，大风拔木。
现代文：这天，天降冰雹，大风拔起树木。
English: On this day, hail fell from the sky, and high winds uprooted trees.

古文：八月，大同军节度使李国昌陷岢岚军。
现代文：八月，大同军的节度使李国昌反叛，攻破岢岚军。
English: In August, the festival of Datong Army caused Li Guochang to rebel and defeat the Shao Army.

古文：黄巢陷杭州。
现代文：黄巢攻破杭州。
English: Huang Chao broke through Hangzhou.

古文：九月，李蔚罢。
现代文：九月，李蔚被免职。
English: In September, Li Wei was removed from office.

古文：吏部尚书郑从谠为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部尚书郑从谠任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Shangshu Zheng, the head of the personnel department, was appointed as the attendant of Zhongshu, and the disciple of Zhongshu, Xiaoping Zhangji.

古文：黄巢陷越州，执观察使崔琢。
现代文：黄巢攻破越州，俘虏了观察使崔琢。
English: Huang Chao broke through Yuezhou and captured the observation envoy Cui Tuo.

古文：镇海军将张潾克越州。
现代文：镇海军的将领张氵攻克越州。
English: Zhang Ye, the general of the town's navy, conquered Yuezhou.

古文：十月，昭义军节度使李钧、幽州卢龙军节度使李可举讨李国昌。
现代文：十月，昭义军节度使李钧、幽州卢龙军的节度使李可举讨伐叛臣李国昌。
English: In October, the festival of the Shouyi Army made Li Jie rise up, and the festival of the Yuzhou Lulong Army made Li able to fight the traitor Li Guochang.

古文：十一月丁未，河东宣慰使崔季康为河东节度、代北行营招讨使。
现代文：十一月十六日，河东宣慰使崔季康担任河东节度使、代北行营招讨使。
English: On November 16th, Cui Jikang was appointed as the envoy of the Hedong Festival and the envoy of the northern campaign.

古文：十二月甲戌，黄巢陷福州。
现代文：十二月十三日，黄巢攻破福州。
English: On December 13th, the Yellow Nest defeated Fuzhou.

古文：庚辰，崔季康、李钧及李克用战于洪谷，败绩。
现代文：十九日，崔季康、李钧与李克用在洪谷作战，大败。
English: On the 19th, Cui Jikang, Li Ying and Li Kegui fought in Honggu and were soundly defeated.

古文：是岁，天平军节度使张裼卒，衙将崔君裕自知州事。
现代文：这年，天平军节度使张裼去世，衙将崔君裕未经朝廷任命自己主持本州军政事务。
English: This year, the Tianping Army Festival caused Zhang Qian to die, and Qian general Cui Junyu took the lead in presiding over the military and political affairs of Honshu without being appointed by the court.

古文：六年正月，镇海军节度使高骈为诸道行营兵马都统。
现代文：乾符六年正月，镇海军节度使高骈担任诸道行营兵马都统。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Qianfu era, the town's naval festival made Gao Qi serve as the commander of all armies and horses.

古文：魏王佾薨。
现代文：魏王李佾去世。
English: The Wei King Lixuan passed away.

古文：二月，京师地震，蓝田山裂，出水。
现代文：二月，京城长安地震，蓝田山岳崩裂，地下水涌出。
English: In February, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake caused the mountains in Lantian to crack and groundwater to gush out.

古文：河东军乱，杀其节度使崔季康。
现代文：河东的军队动乱，杀了节度使崔季康。
English: The army of Hedong was in turmoil and killed the military commander, Cui Jikang.

古文：四月庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日食现象。
English: On the first day of April, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：凉王侹薨。
现代文：凉王李亻廷去世。
English: Li Yueting, the king of cool, has passed away.

古文：王鐸为荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统。
现代文：王铎担任荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统。
English: Wang Qian served as the Jingnan Festival envoy and went to the south to invite the capital.

古文：五月，泰宁军节度使李系为湖南观察使，副之。
现代文：五月，泰宁军节度使李系任湖南观察使，并南面行营招讨副都统。
English: In May, the Taining Army Festival made Li serve as the Hunan Observation Envoy, and he went to the south to invite the deputy governor.

古文：黄巢陷广州，执岭南东道节度使李迢，陷安南。
现代文：黄巢攻破广州，俘虏了岭南东道节度使李迢，又攻破安南。
English: The Yellow Nest broke through Guangzhou, captured the Lingnan host and commander Li Xi, and broke through Annan.

古文：八月甲子，东都留守李蔚为河东节度、代北行营招讨使。
现代文：八月初七，东都留守李蔚任河东节度使、代北行营招讨使。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Li Wei stayed in Dongdu to serve as the Hedong Festival envoy and the northern campaign recruiting envoy.

古文：闰十月，黄巢陷潭、澧三州，澧州刺史李绚死之。
现代文：闰十月，黄巢攻破潭州、澧州，澧州刺史李绚丧命。
English: In leap October, the Yellow Nest broke through Tanzhou and Zhangzhou, and Zhangzhou assassinated Li Hua.

古文：十一月丙辰，两日并出而斗，戊午，河东节度使康传圭为代北行营招讨使。
现代文：十一月初一，天空同时出现两个太阳，并且相互争斗。初三，河东节度使康传圭任代北行营招讨使。
English: On the first day of November, two suns appeared in the sky at the same time and fought with each other. On the third day of the first month, the Hedong Festival appointed Kang Chuan Gui as the envoy of the Northbound Campaign.

古文：辛酉，黄巢陷江陵，杀李迢。
现代文：初六，黄巢攻破江陵城，杀了李迢。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Huang Chao broke through Jiangling City and killed Li Xuan.

古文：丁丑，山南东道节度使刘巨容及黄巢战于荆门，败之。
现代文：二十二日，山南东道节度使刘巨容在荆门与黄巢作战，打败黄巢。
English: On the 22nd, the Shannan Host Festival made Liu Jirong fight with Huang Chao in Jingmen and defeat Huang Chao.

古文：十二月壬辰，克江陵。
现代文：十二月初七，刘巨容率军攻克江陵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of December, Liu Juroong led an army to conquer Jiangling.

古文：是月，贬王鐸为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：本月，将王铎贬官为太子宾客，作为朝廷分支机构官员到东都任职。
English: This month, Wang Hui was demoted from an official to a prince's guest, serving as an official of a branch of the imperial court in Dongdu.

古文：兵部尚书卢携为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部尚书卢携任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Hyobusu Sho Shuro served as a junior attendant and junior secretary of the same school.

古文：是岁，淄州刺史曹全晸克郓州，杀崔君裕。
现代文：本年，淄州刺史曹全攻克郓州，杀了崔君裕。
English: This year, Zhangzhou Sashicao made a full-scale attack on Zhangzhou and killed Cui Junyu.

古文：黄巢隐鄂、宣、歙、池四州。
现代文：黄巢攻破鄂、宣、歙、池四个州。
English: Huang Chao conquered the four provinces of Hubei, Hunan, Fujian and Sichuan.

古文：朗州贼周岳陷衡州，逐其刺史徐颢。
现代文：朗州反叛者周岳攻破衡州，驱逐了刺史徐颢。
English: Zhou Yue, a rebel from Lanzhou, broke through Hengzhou and drove out the assassin Xu Xi.

古文：荆南将雷满陷朗州，刺史崔翥死之。
现代文：荆南将领雷满反叛，攻破朗州，刺史崔翥丧命。
English: Jingnan general Lei Man rebelled, broke through Langzhou, stabbed Streisand to death.

古文：石门蛮向瑰陷澧州，权知州事吕自牧死之。
现代文：石门的蛮族人向耡攻破澧州，代理州事的吕自牧丧命。
English: The barbarians of Shimen invaded Zhangzhou from the west, and Lv Zi Mu, who was in charge of state affairs, was killed.

古文：桂阳贼陈彦谦陷郴州，刺史董岳死之。
现代文：桂阳的叛者陈彦谦攻破郴州，刺史董岳丧命。
English: Chen Yanqian, a renegade from Guiyang, invaded Zhangzhou and stabbed the historian Dong Yue to death.

古文：广明元年正月乙卯，改元。
现代文：广明元年正月初一，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Guangming, the year number was changed.

古文：免岭南、荆湖、河中、河东税赋十之四。
现代文：免除岭南、荆湖、河中、河东地区的税赋四成。
English: Lingnan, Jinghu, Hechu and Hedong regions will be exempted from the 40% tax.

古文：戊寅，荆南监军杨复光、泰宁军将段彦谟杀其守将宋浩，以常滋为节度留后。
现代文：二十四日，荆南监军杨复光、泰宁军的将领段彦谟杀了守将宋浩，推常滋为节度留后。
English: On the 24th, Yang Fuguang, the inspector of the Jingnan Army, and Duan Yanmu, the general of the Taining Army, killed the guard general Song Hao, and pushed Changzhi to stay behind for the festival.

古文：淮南将张潾及黄巢战于大云仓，败之。
现代文：淮南将领张氵与黄巢在大云仓作战，打败黄巢。
English: Zhang Ye, the general of Huainan, fought against Huang Chao in Dayun Cang, and defeated Huang Chao.

古文：二月丙戌，李国昌寇忻、代二州。
现代文：二月初二，叛臣李国昌进犯忻、代二州。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the traitor Li Guochang went into exile and became the governor of two provinces.

古文：戊戌，河东军乱，杀其节度使康传圭。
现代文：十四日，河东军队发生动乱，杀了节度使康传圭。
English: On the 14th, there was a riot in the Hedong army, and they killed the commander of the festival, Kang Chuanggui.

古文：壬子，郑从谠罢为河东节度使、代北行营招讨使。
现代文：二十八日，郑从谠被免去中书侍郎职务，任河东节度使、代北行营招讨使。
English: On the 28th, Zheng Conglu was removed from the post of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and appointed as the envoy of the Hedong Festival and the envoy of the Northern Expedition.

古文：三月辛未，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：三月十六日，僖宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On March 16th, due to the drought, Shoson had to move out of the main hall and cut back on meals.

古文：四月甲申，京师、东都、汝州雨雹，大风拔木。
现代文：四月初一，京城长安、东都、汝州，天降冰雹，大风拔起树木。
English: On the first day of April, the capital Chang'an, Dongdu, and Ruzhou were hit by hail, and trees were uprooted by high winds.

古文：丁酉，太府卿李琢为蔚、朔招讨都统。
现代文：十四日，太府卿李琢任蔚、朔招讨都统。
English: On the 14th, the Grand Mufu, Li Tuo Ren Wei, summoned Shuo to discuss the reunification of the country.

古文：壬寅，张潾克饶州。
现代文：十九日，张氵攻克饶州。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Ye defeated Raozhou.

古文：五月，汝州防御使诸葛爽为蔚、朔招讨副使。
现代文：五月，汝州防御使诸葛爽任蔚、朔招讨副使。
English: In May, the defense of Ruzhou caused Zhuge Shuang to appoint Wei and Shuo as deputy envoys.

古文：泰宁军将刘汉宏反。
现代文：泰宁军将领刘汉宏反叛。
English: General Liu Hanhong of the Taining Army rebelled.

古文：张潾及黄巢战于信州，死之。六月，巢陷睦、婺、宣三州。
现代文：张氵在信州与黄巢作战，身亡。六月，黄巢攻破睦、婺、宣三个州。
English: Zhang Ye died fighting the Yellow Nest in Shinshu. In June, the Yellow Nest invaded three prefectures: Mutsu, Handan, and Xuan.

古文：江华贼蔡结陷道州。
现代文：江华的反叛者蔡结攻破道州。
English: Jianghua's rebel, Cai Jie, broke through into Daozhou.

古文：宿州贼鲁景仁陷连州。
现代文：宿州的反叛者鲁景仁攻破连州。
English: Shukushu's rebel, Lu Jingren, defeated Lianzhou.

古文：七月，黄巢陷滁、和二州。
现代文：七月，黄巢攻破滁州、和州。
English: In July, the Yellow Nest broke through Zhangzhou and Hezhou.

古文：辛酉，天平军节度使曹全晸为东面副都统。辛未，刘汉宏降。
现代文：初九，天平军节度使曹全任东面副都统。十九日，刘汉宏降顺。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Cao Quan was appointed vice-governor of Dongmen by the Tianping Army. On the 19th day, Liu Hanhong surrendered.

古文：李可举及李国昌战于药儿岭，败之。
现代文：李可举与李国昌在药儿岭作战，打败李国昌。
English: Li Keqiang fought with Li Guochang in Yuerling and defeated Li Guochang.

古文：八月辛卯，昭义军乱，杀其节度使李钧。
现代文：八月初十，昭义军发生动乱，杀了节度使李钧。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, there was a riot in the Shouyi army, and the commander of the festival, Li Jun, was killed.

古文：癸卯，荣王忄责为司空。
现代文：二十二日，荣王李忄责任司空。
English: On the 22nd, Rongwang Li Ye, the responsible secretary, was absent.

古文：是月，忄责薨。
现代文：同月，李忄责去世。
English: In the same month, Li Xizhen passed away.

古文：九月，忠武军将周岌杀其节度使薛能。牙将秦宗权自称权知蔡州事。
现代文：九月，忠武军的将领周岌杀了节度使薛能，牙将秦宗权自称蔡州代理知州。
English: In September, Zhou, the general of the loyal army, killed Xue Neng, the commander of the Jiedu, and the commander of the Jiedu, Qin Zongquan, claimed to be the representative of Caizhou in Zhizhou.

古文：十月，黄巢陷申州。
现代文：十月，黄巢攻破申州。
English: In October, the Yellow Nest broke through Shenzhou.

古文：十一月，河中都虞候王重荣逐其节度使李都。
现代文：十一月，河中都虞候王重荣驱逐了节度使李都。
English: In November, Wang Chung Rong, the governor of Hezhongdu, expelled the regent Li Du.

古文：黄巢陷汝州。
现代文：黄巢攻破汝州。
English: Huang Chao broke through Ruzhou.

古文：壬戌，幸左神策军阅武。
现代文：十二日，僖宗亲临左神策军检阅武备、操练。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizong himself came to inspect the military equipment and drills of Zuoshensha's army.

古文：护军中尉田令孜为诸道兵马都指挥制置招讨使，忠武军监军杨复光副之。
现代文：护军中尉田令孜任诸道兵马都指挥制置招讨使，忠武军监军杨复光任其副职。
English: Tian Lingzi, a lieutenant of the escort army, was appointed as the commander of the troops and horses of all provinces, and Yang Fuguang, the supervisor of the loyal army, was appointed as his deputy.

古文：丁卯，东都留守刘允章叛附于黄巢。
现代文：十七日，东都留守刘允章叛变依附黄巢。
English: On the 17th, Liu Yunzhang, who stayed in Dongdu, rebelled and attached himself to Huang Chao.

古文：壬申，巢陷虢州。
现代文：二十二日，黄巢攻破虢州。
English: On the 22nd, the Yellow Nest broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：田令孜为汝、洛、晋、绛、同、华都统。
现代文：田令孜担任汝、洛、晋、绛、同、华诸州的都统。
English: Tian Ling Ze served as the governor of Ru, Lu, Jin, Shun, Tong, and Huazhou.

古文：十二月壬午，黄巢陷潼关。
现代文：十二月初三，黄巢攻破潼关。
English: On the third day of December, Huang Chao broke through the threshold.

古文：甲申，贬卢携为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：初五，僖宗将卢携贬官为太子宾客，作为朝廷分支机构官员派往东都任职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong sent Lu Jizhong to Dongdu as a guest of the crown prince and as an official of the branch office of the imperial court.

古文：翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞王徽为户部侍郎，翰林学士、户部侍郎裴澈为工部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞王徽任户部侍郎，翰林学士、户部侍郎裴澈任工部侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, Shangshu Zuozhe Wang Hui were appointed as household attendants, Hanlin Scholar and household attendant Pei Che were appointed as workshop attendants, together with Zhongshu disciple Xiaoping Zhangji.

古文：行在咸阳。
现代文：僖宗从长安出走逃至咸阳。
English: Gongzong ran away from Chang'an and fled to Xianyang.

古文：丙戌，左金吾卫大将军张直方率武官叛附于黄巢。
现代文：初七，左金吾卫大将军张直方率领武官叛变依附黄巢。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhang Naofang, the general of the Left King Wu Wei, led the military attaché in a mutiny to adhere to Huang Chao.

古文：巢陷京师。
现代文：黄巢攻破京都长安。
English: Huang Chao defeated Kyoto Chang'an.

古文：辛卯，次凤翔。
现代文：十二日，僖宗逃驻凤翔。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizong fled to Fengxiang.

古文：丙申，河阳节度使诸葛爽叛附于黄巢。
现代文：十七日，河阳节度使诸葛爽叛变依附黄巢。
English: On the seventeenth day of the Heyang Festival, Zhuge Shuang rebelled and attached himself to Huang Chao.

古文：丁酉，次兴元。
现代文：十八日，僖宗逃驻兴元。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong fled to Xingyuan.

古文：庚子，广德公主、豆卢琢、崔沆、尚书左仆射刘鄴、右仆射于琮、太子少师裴谂、御史中丞赵濛、刑部侍郎李溥，京兆尹李汤死于黄巢。
现代文：二十一日，广德公主、豆卢蠪、崔沆、尚书左仆射刘邺、右仆射于琮、太子少师裴谂、御史中丞赵氵蒙、刑部侍郎李溥、京兆尹李汤，被黄巢处死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Princess Guangde, Dou Lucheng, Cui Qian, Shangshu's left-hand servant Liu Qian, his right-hand servant Yu Qian, the prince's apprentice Pei Qian, the imperial historian Zhao Yimeng, the criminal department's waiter Li Qian, and Jing Zha Yin Li Tang were put to death by the Yellow Nest.

古文：是岁，雨血于靖陵。
现代文：本年，有血雨降落在靖陵。
English: This year, a bloody rain fell on Jingling.

古文：中和元年正月壬子，如成都。
现代文：中和元年正月初三，僖宗去成都。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first year of the Middle Ages and the first year of the 21st century, Shizong went to Chengdu.

古文：壬申，兵部侍郎、判度支萧遘为工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，兵部侍郎、判度支萧遘任工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twenty-third day, the attendants of the military department and the judge, Xiao Wei, were appointed as the attendants of the engineering department, and the student of the same department, He Ping, was appointed.

古文：丁丑，次成都。
现代文：二十八日，僖宗歇驻成都。
English: On the 28th, Gong Zong was stationed in Chengdu.

古文：二月己卯，赦剑南三川。
现代文：二月初一，对剑南三川施行赦免。
English: On the first day of February, an amnesty was implemented for Jianan and Sanchuan.

古文：太子少师王鐸为司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太子少师王铎任司徒，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The prince's apprentice, Wang Xuan, served as his tutor, as well as his attendant, and as his assistant in the middle school.

古文：淮南节度使高骈为京城四面都统。
现代文：淮南节度使高骈任京城四面都统。
English: The Huainan Festival made Gao Rongren unify all four sides of Beijing.

古文：邠宁节度使李存礼讨黄巢。
现代文：宁节度使李存礼讨伐黄巢。
English: Ning Jiedu led Li Cunli in a crusade against the Yellow Nest.

古文：凤翔节度使郑畋及巢战于龙尾坡，败之。
现代文：凤翔节度使郑畋在龙尾坡与黄巢作战，打败黄巢军。
English: The Fengxiang Festival made Zheng Rong fight against the Yellow Nest in Longtaipo and defeat the Yellow Nest Army.

古文：邠宁将王玫陷邠州。
现代文：宁将领王玫反叛，攻破州城。
English: Ning led the rebellion against King Mei and broke through the state capital.

古文：戊戌，清平镇使陈晟执睦州刺史韦诸，自称刺史。
现代文：二十日，清平镇使陈晟抓了睦州刺史韦诸，自称刺史。
English: On the 20th, the Qingping Town ordered Chen Yao to capture the Mutsu stabber Shi Wei Zhu, who claimed to be the stabber.

古文：三月辛亥，黄巢陷邓州，执刺史赵戎。
现代文：三月初三，黄巢攻破邓州，俘虏了刺史赵戎。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the Yellow Nest broke through Dengzhou and captured the assassin Zhao Rong.

古文：辛酉，郑畋为京城西面行营都统。
现代文：十三日，郑畋任京城西面行营都统。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Rong was appointed as the commander of the Western District of Beijing.

古文：甲子，畋及泾原节度使程宗楚、天雄军经略使仇公遇盟于凤翔。
现代文：十六日，郑畋与泾原节度使程宗楚、天雄军经略使仇公遇在凤翔誓约结盟。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Zheng and Xingyuan Jiedu sent Cheng Zongchu and Tianxiong Jun to make an alliance at Fengxiang.

古文：是月，王徽罢。
现代文：本月，王徽被免职。
English: This month, Wang Hui was removed from his post.

古文：诸葛爽以河阳降。
现代文：叛附黄巢的原河阳节度使诸葛爽献出河阳，归降朝廷。
English: Zhuge Shuang, who had rebelled against the Huang Chao-backed Yuan Heyang Sect, surrendered Heyang to the imperial court.

古文：四月戊寅，王玫伏诛。
现代文：四月初一，叛将王玫被处死。
English: On the first day of April, the traitor Wang Mei was executed.

古文：程宗楚、朔方军节度使唐弘夫及黄巢战于咸阳，败之。
现代文：泾原节度使程宗楚、朔方军节度使唐弘夫与黄巢在咸阳作战，打败黄巢军。
English: The Xingyuan Sect sent Cheng Zongchu, and the Shuo Sect sent Tang Hongfu to fight the Yellow Nest in Xianyang, defeating the Yellow Nest Army.

古文：壬午，巢遯乾灞上。
现代文：初五，黄巢逃往灞上。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Huang Chao fled to Shao Shang.

古文：丁亥，复入于京师，弘夫、宗楚死之。
现代文：初十，黄巢率军再度攻进京城长安，唐弘夫、程宗楚丧命。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Huang Chao led the army to attack the capital Chang'an again, and Tang Hongfu and Cheng Zongchu were killed.

古文：是月，赦李国昌及其子克用以讨黄巢。
现代文：本月，僖宗赦免反叛的原大同军节度使李国昌及其子李克用以讨伐黄巢。
English: This month, Emperor Taizong pardoned the rebels of the original Datong Army Festival, so that Li Guochang and his son Li Ke used it to fight the Yellow Nest.

古文：五月丙辰，克用寇太原，振武军节度使契苾璋败之。
现代文：五月初九，李克用进犯太原，振武军节度使契絆璋打败李克用。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Li Ke used to invade Taiyuan, and the Zhenwu army defeated Li Ke.

古文：辛酉，大风，雨土。
现代文：十四日，大风，天降土雨。
English: On the 14th, there was a strong wind and it rained.

古文：是月，刘巨容为南面行营招讨使。
现代文：本月，刘巨容任南面行营招讨使。
English: This month, Liu Jue Rong was appointed as a recruiting envoy for the southern campaign.

古文：杨复光克邓州。
现代文：杨复光攻克邓州。
English: Yang Fuguang conquered Dengzhou.

古文：六月，鄮贼钟季文陷明州。
现代文：六月，贸阝县的反叛者钟季文攻破明州城。
English: In June, Zhong Jiwen, a rebel from Mogao County, attacked Mingzhou City.

古文：辛卯，邠宁节度副使硃玫及黄巢战于兴平，败绩。
现代文：十五日，宁节度副使朱玫与黄巢在兴平作战，大败。
English: On the 15th, Ning Jiedu's deputy Zhu Mei fought with Huang Shao in Xingping and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：戊戌，郑畋为司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、京城四面行营都统。
现代文：二十二日，郑畋任司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事及京城四面行营都统。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Qi was appointed as the second-in-command, and also served as the attendant of the disciple, the second-in-command of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：丙午，李克用陷忻、代二州。
现代文：三十日，李克用攻破忻、代二州。
English: On the 30th, Li Ke used to break the shackles and create two states.

古文：七月丁巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：七月十一日，施行大赦，更改年号为 中和 。
English: On July 11, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed to Zhonghe.

古文：庚申，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎韦昭度同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十四日，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎韦昭度任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 14th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, and Wei Zhaodu, the attendant of the military department, were appointed to the same position as Zhongshumen Shimohei.

古文：丙寅，神策军将郭琪反，伏诛。
现代文：二十日，神策军将领郭琪反叛，被处死。
English: On the 20th, Guo Qi, the general of the Shenzhao Army, rebelled and was executed.

古文：辛未，田令孜杀左拾遗孟昭图。
现代文：二十四日，田令孜杀了左拾遗孟昭图。
English: On the 24th, Tian Lingzi killed Meng Zhaotu.

古文：义武军节度使王处存为东南面行营招讨使。
现代文：义武军节度使王处存任东南面行营招讨使。
English: On the occasion of the festival of the volunteer army, the king's office was stationed in the southeast as a recruiting envoy.

古文：八月，感化军将时溥逐其节度使支详，自称留后。
现代文：八月，感化军将领时溥驱逐了节度使支详，自称留后。
English: In August, the general of the Chinese Revolutionary Army, Shih Kui, expelled the festival envoys and supporters, claiming to stay behind.

古文：昭义军节度使高浔及黄巢战于石桥，败绩，其将成麟杀浔，入于潞州。
现代文：昭义军节度使高氵寻与黄巢在石桥作战，大败，十将成麟杀了高氵寻，进入潞州。
English: The Shao Yi Army sent Gao Yixing to fight Huang Chao in Shijiao, but he was defeated. Ten generals, including Cheng Lin, killed Gao Yixing and entered Zhangzhou.

古文：己丑，众星陨于成都。
现代文：十三日，有众多流星陨落在成都。
English: On the 13th, a large number of meteors fell on Chengdu.

古文：九月丙午，鄜延节度使李孝章、夏绥银节度使拓拔思恭及黄巢战于东渭桥，败绩。
现代文：九月初一，延节度使李孝章，夏、绥、银节度使拓拔思恭与黄巢在东渭桥作战，大败。
English: On the first day of September, Yan Jiedu sent Li Xiaozhang, Xia, Yao, and Yin Jiedu sent Tuoba Sikyong to fight with Huang Shao in Dongluo Bridge, and they were defeated.

古文：临海贼杜雄陷台州。
现代文：临海的反叛者杜雄攻破台州。
English: The rebel Du Xiong from Linhai broke through Taizhou.

古文：辛酉，封子震为建王。
现代文：十六日，僖宗封儿子李震为建王。
English: On the 16th, Li Zhen, the son of Zeng Zongfu, became the founding king.

古文：己已，昭义军戍将孟方立杀成麟，自称留后。
现代文：二十四日，昭义军戍将孟方立杀了成麟，自称留后。
English: On the 24th, Shao Yi's army killed Cheng Lin and claimed to stay behind.

古文：永嘉赋硃褒陷温州。
现代文：永嘉的反叛者朱褒攻破温州。
English: Yongjia's rebel, Zhu Bop, invaded Wenzhou.

古文：是秋，河东霜杀禾。
现代文：本年秋季，河东地区严霜毁坏了庄稼。
English: In the autumn of this year, a severe frost in the Hedong region destroyed the crops.

古文：十月，凤翔行军司马李昌言逐其节度使郑畋。
现代文：十月，凤翔行军司马李昌言驱逐了节度使郑畋。
English: In October, Fengxiang marching army secretary Ma Li Changyan expelled the festival envoy Zheng Jun.

古文：十一月，李昌言为凤翔节度行营招讨使。
现代文：十一月，李昌言任凤翔节度行营招讨使。
English: In November, Li Changyan was appointed as the envoy of Fengxiang Festival.

古文：郑畋、裴澈罢。
现代文：郑畋、裴澈被免职。
English: Zheng Rong and Pei Che were dismissed.

古文：遂昌贼卢约陷处州。
现代文：遂昌的反叛者卢约攻破处州。
English: Lu You, a rebel from Suichang, invaded Zhouzhou.

古文：十二月，安南戍将闵顼逐湖南观察使李裕，自称留后。
现代文：十二月，安南的戍将闵顼驱逐了湖南观察使李裕，自称留后。
English: In December, Annan's Xi Jinping expelled the Hunan observation envoy Li Yu, claiming to stay behind.

古文：是岁，霍丘镇使王绪陷寿、光二州。
现代文：本年，霍丘镇使王绪反叛，攻破寿、光二州。
English: This year, Huoqiu Town made Wangxu rebel and defeated Shou and Guang Erzhou.

古文：二年正月辛亥，王鐸为诸道行营都都统，承制封拜，太子少师崔安潜副之。高骈罢都统。
现代文：中和二年正月初八，王铎任诸道行营都统，秉承皇帝旨意封官授职；太子少师崔安潜任诸道行营副都统。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Middle Ages, Wang Xi was appointed as the leader of all the roads and camps, and was appointed to the post in accordance with the emperor's will; the prince's apprentice, Cui An, was appointed as the deputy leader of all the roads and camps.

古文：辛未，王处存为京城东面都统，李孝章为北面都统，拓拔思恭为南面都统。
现代文：免除高骈的都统职务。二十八日，王处存任京城东面都统，李孝章任北面都统，拓拔思恭任南面都统。
English: On the 28th, Wang Shide remained in charge of the east side of Beijing, Li Xiaozhang was in charge of the north side, and Tuoba Shigong was in charge of the south side.

古文：二月甲戌，黄巢陷同州。
现代文：二月初一，黄巢攻破同州。
English: On the first day of February, Huang Chao defeated Tongzhou.

古文：己卯，太子少傅分司东都郑畋为司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初六，太子少傅分司东都的郑畋任司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Zheng Yao, the prince's younger tutor and branch secretary of Dongdu, was appointed as the secretary of the sky, and also the waiter of the school, and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：丙戌，李昌言为京城西面都统，邠宁节度使硃玫为河南都统、诸谷防遏使。
现代文：十三日，李昌言任京城西面都统，宁节度朱玫任河南都统、诸谷防遏使。
English: On the 13th, Li Changyan was appointed to the Beijing West Side Capital, and Ning Jiedu and Zhu Mei were appointed to the Henan Capital and the valleys.

古文：三月，邛州蛮阡能叛，西川部将杨行迁讨之。
现代文：三月，邛州蛮族的阡能反叛，西川部将杨行迁奉命讨伐。
English: In March, the barbarians of Zhangzhou rebelled against Xuaneng, and the West Sichuan Department ordered Yang Xiangyan to fight against them.

古文：李克用隐蔚州。
现代文：李克用攻破蔚州。
English: Li Ke used it to break through Ulshu.

古文：六月，硃玫为京城西北面行营都统。
现代文：六月，朱玫任京城西北面行营都统。
English: In June, Zhu Mei was appointed as the governor of Xingyingdu in the northwest of Beijing.

古文：杨行迁及阡能战于乾溪，败绩。
现代文：杨行迁与阡能在乾溪作战，大败。
English: Yang Xingqian and Zou Neng fought in Qianxi and were soundly defeated.

古文：己亥，荆南监军硃敬玫杀其节度使段彦谟，少尹李燧自称留后。
现代文：二十八日，荆南监军朱敬玫杀了荆南节度使段彦谟，少尹李燧自称留后。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Jingmei, the Jingnan supervisor, killed the Jingnan festival envoy Duan Yanmu, and Shao Yin Lijun claimed to stay behind.

古文：七月，保大军节度留后东方逵为京城东面行营招讨使。
现代文：七月，保大军节度留后东方逵任京城东面行营招讨使。
English: In July, after the Baoding Grand Army Festival, Dongfang Yu was appointed as a recruiting envoy for the camp in the east of Beijing.

古文：抚州刺史钟传陷洪州，江西观察使高茂卿奔于江州。
现代文：抚州刺史钟传反叛，攻破洪州，江西观察使高茂卿奔往江州。
English: Fuzhou rebelled against Shih Zhong Chuan and defeated Hongzhou. Jiangxi Observation sent Gao Maoxing to Jiangzhou.

古文：八月丁巳，东方逵为京城东北面行营都统，拓拔思恭为京城四面都统。
现代文：八月十八日，东方逵任京城东北面行营都统，拓拔思恭任京城四面都统。
English: On August 18th, Dongfang Yao was appointed as the governor of the northeast side of Beijing, and Tuoba Shigong was appointed as the governor of the four sides of Beijing.

古文：魏博节度使韩简陷孟州。
现代文：魏博节度使韩简反叛，攻破孟州。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian rebel and invade Mengzhou.

古文：九月丙戌，黄巢将硃温以同州降。
现代文：九月十七日，黄巢的将领朱温献出同州归降。
English: On September 17th, Zhu Wen, the general of Huang Chao, surrendered to Tongzhou.

古文：己亥，温为右金吾卫大将军、河中行营招讨副使。
现代文：三十日，朱温任右金吾卫大将军、河中行营招讨副使。
English: On the 30th, Zhu Wen was appointed the grand general of King Wuwei of the Right, and the deputy envoy of the Central Military Commission.

古文：是月，太原桃李实。
现代文：本月，太原的桃树、李树结出果实。
English: This month, the peach and plum trees in Taiyuan bear fruit.

古文：岭南西道军乱，逐其节度使张从训。
现代文：岭南西道的军队发生骚乱，驱逐了本道节度使张从训。
English: Riots broke out in the army of West Lingnan Province, which expelled Zhang Zongxun, the governor of the province.

古文：平卢军将王敬武逐其节度使安师儒，自称留后。
现代文：平卢军的将领王敬武驱逐了节度使安师儒，自称为留后。
English: The general of the Pinglu army, Wang Jingwu, expelled the Shedu Emperor Anshiru and declared himself to be the successor.

古文：十月，岚州刺史汤群以沙陀反。
现代文：十月，岚州刺史汤群倚恃沙陀国反叛。
English: In October, the Jishidang group of Bozhou rebelled against the Shado state.

古文：韩简寇郓州，天平军节度使曹全晸死之，部将崔用自称留后。
现代文：韩简进犯郓州，天平军节度使曹全丧命，其部将崔用自称留后。
English: Han Jian invaded Bozhou, Cao Quan was killed by the Tianping Army, and his subordinate Cui Yong claimed to be left behind.

古文：诸葛爽陷孟州。
现代文：诸葛爽攻破孟州。
English: Zhuge broke through Mengzhou.

古文：十一月，荆南军乱，衙将陈儒自称留后丙子，汤群伏诛。
现代文：十一月，荆南的军队骚乱，衙将陈儒自称留后。初八，汤群伏法被处死。
English: In November, Jingnan's army rioted, and the commander Chen Ru claimed to stay behind. In the eighth month of the year, Tang Qunfu Fa was executed.

古文：是岁，关中大饥。
现代文：本年，关中发生大饥荒。
English: This year, a major famine occurred in Guanzhong.

古文：南城贼危全讽陷抚州，危仔倡陷信州。
现代文：南城的叛逆者危全讽攻破抚州，危仔倡攻破信州。
English: The rebels in Nancheng advocated the attack on Fuzhou, and the rebels in Jiecheng advocated the attack on Shinshu.

古文：庐州将杨行密逐其刺史郎幼复。
现代文：庐州的将领杨行密驱逐了本州刺史郎幼复。
English: Yang Xingmi, the general of Zhangzhou, drove out Shiro Yufu, the general of Honshu.

古文：和州刺史泰彦逐宣歙观察使窦潏。
现代文：和州刺史秦彦驱逐了宣歙观察使窦氵。
English: He and the prefectural governor, Qin Yan, expelled Xuanzang's observer, Dou Jun.

古文：三年正月，雁门节度使李克用为京城东北面行营都统。
现代文：中和三年正月，雁门节度使李克用任京城东北面行营都统。
English: In the first month of the middle and third years, the festival of the Wild Goose Gate made Li Ke Ying use the northeast side of Beijing to march to the capital.

古文：乙亥，王鐸罢。
现代文：初八，王铎被免职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Xi was dismissed.

古文：二月，魏博军乱，杀其节度使韩简，其将乐彦祯自称留后。
现代文：二月，魏博的军队发生动乱，杀了本镇节度使韩简，其部将乐彦祯自称留后。
English: In February, Wei Bo's army rioted, killing the town's military governor, Han Jian, while his subordinate general, Le Yan Xuan, claimed to have been left behind.

古文：己未，建王震为太保。
现代文：二十二日，建王李震担任太保。
English: On the 22nd, Jian Wang Li Zhen assumed the post of Taibo.

古文：三月。天有声于浙西。
现代文：三月，在浙西的天空发出异常声响。
English: In March, an unusual sound was emitted from the sky in western Zhejiang.

古文：壬申，李克用及黄巢战于零口，败之。
现代文：初六，李克用在零口与黄巢作战，打败黄巢。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Ke used to fight with Huang Chao at the entrance of the school and defeated Huang Chao.

古文：四月甲辰，又败之于渭桥。
现代文：四月初八，在渭桥，李克用再次打败黄巢。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the year, Li Keqiang defeated Huang Chao once again.

古文：丙午，复京师。
现代文：初十，收复京城长安。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the capital Chang'an was recaptured.

古文：五月，郑畋为司徒，东都留守、检校司空郑从谠为司空：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月，郑畋任司徒，东都留守、检校司空郑从谠任司空，二人同时任同中书门下平章事。
English: In May, Zheng Rong served as the tutor, Dongdu stayed behind, and the inspector of the school, Zheng Conglu, served as the inspector of the school, and the two of them also served as the headmaster of the middle school.

古文：淮南将张瑰陷复州。
现代文：淮南将领张耡攻破复州。
English: Zhang Ye, the general of Huainan, invaded Fuzhou.

古文：奉国军节度使秦宗权叛附于黄巢。
现代文：奉国军节度使秦宗权反叛依附黄巢。
English: The festival of the Hokkoku army caused the rebellion of Qin sovereignty to attach itself to Huang Chao.

古文：七月，宣武军节度副大使硃全忠为东北面都招讨使。
现代文：七月，宣武军节度副大使朱全忠任东北面都招讨使。
English: In July, Zhu Quanzhong, the vice-ambassador of the Xuanwu Army to the Northeast, invited envoys from all over the Northeast.

古文：郑畋罢。
现代文：郑畋被免去官职。
English: Zheng Rong was dismissed from his post.

古文：兵部尚书、判度支裴澈同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部尚书、判度支裴澈任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hyobusho Shosho, Shido Shippetsu, and Chusho Shomon Shimohei Shosho.

古文：八月，黄巢、秦宗权寇陈州。
现代文：八月，黄巢、秦宗权进犯陈州。
English: In August, Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan invaded Chenzhou.

古文：淮南将韩师德陷岳州。
现代文：淮南的叛将韩师德攻破岳州。
English: Han Shide, a renegade from Huainan, conquered Yuezhou.

古文：九月，武宁军节度使时溥为东面兵马都统。
现代文：九月，武宁军节度使时溥担任东面兵马都统。
English: In September, the festival of the Wu Ning Army made Shi Yan serve as the commander of the Eastern Terracotta Army.

古文：是秋，晋州地震。
现代文：本年秋，晋州发生地震。
English: This autumn, an earthquake occurred in Jinzhou.

古文：十月，全椒贼许勍陷滁州。
现代文：十月，全椒的反叛者许京力攻破滁州。
English: In October, the rebels of the whole pepper, Xu Jingli, broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：李克用陷潞州，刺史李殷锐死之。
现代文：李克用攻破潞州，刺史李殷锐丧命。
English: Li Ke used to break through Zhangzhou, stabbing Shi Li Yin Rui to death.

古文：十一月壬申，剑南西川行军司马高仁厚及阡能战于邛州，败之。
现代文：十一月壬申日，剑南西川行军司马高仁厚在邛州与阡能作战，打败阡能。
English: On November Jinshin Day, Sima Gao Renhou, the commander of the Jianan Nishikawa Marching Army, fought with and defeated Huaneng in Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，忠武军将鹿晏弘逐兴元节度使牛勖，自称留后。
现代文：十二月，忠武军将领鹿晏弘驱逐了兴元节度使牛勖，自称留后。
English: In December, the general of the Loyalist Army, Lu Qianhong, drove out the Xingyuan Festival to make the bull calf, claiming to stay behind.

古文：是岁，天平军将曹存实克郓州。
现代文：本年，天平军将领曹存实攻破郓州。
English: This year, Cao Cunshi, the general of the Tianping Army, broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：石镜镇将董昌逐杭州刺史路审中。
现代文：石镜镇的将领董昌驱逐了杭州刺史路审中。
English: The general of Stone Mirror Town, Dong Chang, expelled the Hangzhou stabbing road trial.

古文：四年正月，婺州将王镇执其刺史黄碣，叛附于董昌。
现代文：中和四年正月，婺州将领王镇抓了本州刺史黄歇，反叛依附董昌。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the Middle Ages, Wang Zhen, the general of Bozhou, captured Huang Xie, the leader of Bozhou, and the rebellion was led by Dong Chang.

古文：二月，镇伏诛。
现代文：二月，王镇伏法被处死。
English: In February, Wang Zhenfu was executed.

古文：浦阳将蒋瑰陷婺州。
现代文：浦阳叛将蒋耡攻破婺州。
English: Chiang Kai-shek was defeated by the Urayang rebels in Ganzhou.

古文：舒州贼吴迥逐其刺史高氵战。
现代文：舒州的反叛者吴迥驱逐了本州刺史高氵虞。
English: Wu Gan, a rebel from Shuzhou, ousted Gao Gan Yu, the head of the Shuzhou imperial court.

古文：三月甲子，剑南东川节度副大使杨师立反，西川节度使陈敬瑄为西川、东川、山南西道都指挥招讨使。
现代文：三月初三，剑南东川节度副大使杨师立反叛，西川节度使陈敬蠧担任西川、东川、山南西道都指挥招讨使。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Yang Shili, the deputy ambassador of the Jianan Dongchuan Festival, rebelled, and the West Sichuan Festival appointed Chen Jingyao as the commander of the West Sichuan, East Sichuan and West Shannan Provinces.

古文：前杭州刺史路审中陷鄂州。
现代文：前杭州刺史路审中攻破鄂州。
English: The former Hangzhou stabbed history in the road trial and defeated Ezhou.

古文：五月辛酉，硃全忠及黄巢战，败之。
现代文：五月初一，朱全忠与黄巢作战，打败黄巢。
English: On the first day of May, Zhu Quanzhong fought with Huang Chao and defeated Huang Chao.

古文：辛未，河东节度使李克用及巢战于宛句，败之。
现代文：十一日，河东节度使李克用在宛句与黄巢作战，打败黄巢。
English: On the 11th day of the Hedong Festival, Li Ke used the epitaph to fight against the Yellow Nest and defeat the Yellow Nest.

古文：癸酉，高仁厚为剑南东川节度使以讨杨师立。
现代文：十三日，高仁厚担任剑南东川节度使讨伐杨师立。
English: On the 13th, Gao Renhou served as the Jiannan Dongchuan section commander to fight against Yang Shilai.

古文：壬午，福建团练副使陈岩逐其观察使郑镒，自称观察使。
现代文：二十二日，福建团练副使陈岩驱逐了观察使郑镒，自称观察使。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Yan, vice-envoy of the Fujian Rehearsal Corps, expelled the observation envoy Zheng Qi, claiming to be the observation envoy.

古文：六月乙卯，赦剑南三川。
现代文：六月二十六日，朝廷对剑南三川施行赦免。
English: On June 26, the Imperial Court pardoned Jianan and Mikawa.

古文：瘗京畿骸骨。
现代文：掩埋京畿一带露在地面的尸骸。
English: bury the corpses exposed on the ground in the Gyeonggi area.

古文：七月辛酉，杨师立伏诛。
现代文：七月初三，杨师立伏法被处死。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Yang Shilifu was executed.

古文：壬午，黄巢伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，黄巢被处死。
English: On the 24th, Huang Xue was executed.

古文：九月，山南西道节度使鹿晏弘反。
现代文：九月，山南西道节度使鹿晏弘反叛。
English: In September, the Shannan West Road Festival made Lu Yuhong rebel.

古文：十月，萧遘为司空。
现代文：十月，萧遘任司空。
English: In October, Xiao Yao was appointed as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：十一月，鹿晏弘陷许州，杀西度使周岌，自称留后。
现代文：十一月，鹿晏弘攻破许州，杀了节度使周岌，自称留后。
English: In November, Lu Yinghong invaded Huzhou, killed Jiedu to make Zhou precarious, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：十二月甲午，荆南行军司马张瑰逐其节度使陈儒，自称留后。
现代文：十二月初八，荆南行军司马张耡驱逐了节度使陈儒，自称留后。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, the Jingnan marching army secretary Ma Zhangye expelled the festival envoy Chen Ru, claiming to stay behind.

古文：盗杀义昌军节度使王鐸。
现代文：刺客杀死了义昌军节度使王铎。
English: Assassins killed Wang Yao, the military commander of Yichang.

古文：是岁，关中大饥。
现代文：本年，关中发生大饥荒。
English: This year, a major famine occurred in Guanzhong.

古文：濮州刺史硃宣逐天平军节度使曹存实，自称留后。
现代文：濮州刺史朱宣驱逐了天平军节度使曹存实，自称留后。
English: Zhu Xuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, expelled Cao Cunshi, the commander of the Tianping Army, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：武昌军将杜洪陷岳州。
现代文：武昌军的将领杜洪攻破岳州。
English: Du Hong, the general of the Wuchang Army, invaded Yuezhou.

古文：光启元年正月庚辰，荆南军将成汭陷归州。
现代文：光启元年正月二十四日，荆南军的叛将成攻破归州。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of Guangqi in the first year of the 21st century, the rebels of the Jingnan Army made a breakthrough and returned to the state.

古文：是月，王绪陷汀、漳二州。
现代文：本月，王绪攻破汀、漳二州。
English: This month, Wang Xu conquered Ting and Shijiazhuang.

古文：南康贼卢光稠陷虔州。
现代文：南康的反叛者卢光稠攻破虔州。
English: Nankang's rebel, Lu Guangxu, invaded Qianzhou.

古文：三月丁卯，至自成都。
现代文：三月十二日，僖宗由成都返抵京都。
English: On March 12, Shinso returned to Kyoto from Chengdu.

古文：己巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：十四日，施行大赦，更改年号为 光启 。
English: On the 14th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Guangqi.

古文：时溥为蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
现代文：时溥担任蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
English: At that time, he served as the commander of all the soldiers and horses that marched in all directions in Caizhou.

古文：萧遘为司徒，韦昭度为司空。
现代文：萧遘任司徒，韦昭度任司空。
English: Xiao Yao was appointed as secretary, and Wei Zhaodu was appointed as secretary.

古文：四月，吴迥伏诛。
现代文：四月，吴迥伏法被处死。
English: In April, Wu Yifu was executed.

古文：秦宗权陷襄州，山南东道节度使刘巨容奔于成都。
现代文：秦宗权攻破襄州，山南东道节度使刘巨容逃往成都。
English: Qin Zongquan conquered Xiangzhou, Shannan hosted the festival, and Liu Juroong fled to Chengdu.

古文：武当贼冯行袭陷均州，逐其刺史吕烨。
现代文：武当的反叛者冯行袭攻破均州，驱逐了刺史吕烨。
English: Wudang's rebel Feng Xing attacked and broke through Junzhou, expelling the assassin Lv Yue.

古文：五月，群臣上尊号曰至德光烈皇帝。
现代文：五月，群臣给僖宗奉加尊号为至德光烈皇帝。
English: In May, the courtiers gave him the honorific title of Emperor Zhi De Guanglie.

古文：六月，幽州卢龙军乱，杀其节度使李可举，其将李全忠自称留后。
现代文：六月，幽州的卢龙军地区发生动乱，杀了节度使李可举，其部将李全忠自称留后。
English: In June, there was turmoil in the Lulong Army area of Yuzhou. Li Keju was killed, and his subordinate, Li Quanzhong, claimed to be left behind.

古文：壬戌，秦宗权陷东都。
现代文：初九，秦宗权攻破东都。
English: In the early 9th century, Qin Zongquan conquered the Eastern Capital.

古文：七月，义昌军乱，逐其节度使杨全玫，衙将卢彦威自称留后。
现代文：七月，义昌军发生骚乱，驱逐了节度使杨全玫，衙将卢彦威自称留后。
English: In July, riots broke out in the Yichang Army, and Yang Quanmei, the commander of the festival, was expelled. Lu Yanwei, the commander of the festival, claimed to stay behind.

古文：八月，光州贼王潮执王绪。
现代文：八月，光州的反叛者王潮抓了王绪。
English: In August, Wang Chao, a rebel from Gwangju, captured Wang Xu.

古文：甲寅，杀右补阙常浚。
现代文：初二，杀了右补阙常浚。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he killed his classmate.

古文：乐彦桢杀洺州刺史马爽。
现代文：乐彦祯杀了氵名州刺史马爽。
English: Rakuhiko killed the famous statesman Ma Shuang.

古文：九月，河中节度使王重荣反，邠宁节度使硃玫讨之。
现代文：九月，河中节度使王重荣反叛，宁节度使朱玫征讨王重荣。
English: In September, the Kechu Festival made Wang Chung-Rong rebel, and the Ning Festival made Zhu Mei conquer Wang Chung-Rong.

古文：十月癸丑，硃全忠及秦宗权战于双丘，败绩。
现代文：十月初二，朱全忠与秦宗权在双丘作战，大败。
English: On the second day of October, Zhu Quanzhong and Qin Zongquan fought in Shuangqiu and were soundly defeated.

古文：十一月，河东节度使李克用叛附于王重荣，重荣及克用寇同州，刺史郭璋死之。
现代文：十一月，河东节度使李克用反叛依附王重荣；王重荣与李克用进犯同州，刺史郭璋丧命。
English: In November, the Hedong Festival caused Li Ke to use rebellion to cling to Wang Chung Rong; Wang Chung Rong and Li Ke used to attack Tongzhou, stabbing Guo Jie to death.

古文：十二月癸酉，硃玫及王重荣、李克用战于沙苑，败绩。
现代文：十二月二十三日，朱玫与王重荣、李克用在沙宛作战，大败。
English: On December 23rd, Zhu Mei fought with Wang Chung Rong and Li Kegui in Shawan and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：乙亥，克用犯京师。
现代文：二十五日，李克用进犯京都长安。
English: On the 25th, Li Ke used his army to invade Kyoto Chang'an.

古文：丙子，如凤翔。
现代文：二十六日，僖宗出走凤翔。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong fled to Fengxiang.

古文：二年正月辛巳，镇海军将张郁陷常州。
现代文：光启二年正月初一，镇海军的将领张郁反叛，攻破常州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Guangqi, Zhang Yu, the general of the town's navy, rebelled and broke through Changzhou.

古文：戊子，如兴元。
现代文：初八，僖宗迁去兴元。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 1st year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：癸巳，硃玫叛，寇凤翔。
现代文：十三日，朱玫反叛，进犯凤翔。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Mei rebelled and attacked Fengxiang.

古文：二月，郑从谠为太傅。
现代文：二月，郑从谠任太傅。
English: In February, Zheng Conglu was appointed taifu.

古文：三月壬午，山南西道节度使石君涉奔于凤翔。
现代文：三月初三，山南西道节度使石君涉逃往凤翔。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the festival of Shannan West Road made Shi Jun wade away to Fengxiang.

古文：遂州刺史郑君雄陷汉州。
现代文：遂州刺史郑君雄反叛，攻破汉州。
English: Suizhou assassin Zheng Junxiong rebelled and invaded Hanzhou.

古文：丙申，次兴元。
现代文：十七日，僖宗停驻兴元。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizong stopped in Xingyuan.

古文：戊戌，御史大夫孔纬、翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书杜让能为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十九日，御史大夫孔纬及翰林学士承旨、兵部尚书杜让能任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 19th, Master Historian Kong Wei and Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Hyobu Shoshu Du Jian Neng was appointed as the attendant of the Hyobu, and the disciple of the same school, He Ping, was appointed.

古文：是春，成都地震，凤翔女子化为丈夫。
现代文：本年春季，成都发生地震，凤翔地区有女子变成男子。
English: In the spring of this year, an earthquake occurred in Chengdu, and a woman in Fengxiang District turned into a man.

古文：四月乙卯，硃玫以嗣襄王煴入于京师。
现代文：四月初六，朱玫凭借嗣襄王李誰进入京都。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, Zhu Mei entered Kyoto with the help of his heir, Xiang Wang Liden.

古文：五月丙戌，有星孛于箕、尾。
现代文：五月初八，有彗星在东方青龙七宿的箕、尾二星宿之间出现。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, a comet appeared between the East Dragon and the Seven Stars.

古文：武宁军将丁从实陷常州，逐其刺史张郁。
现代文：武宁军的将领丁从实反叛，攻破常州，驱逐了本州刺史张郁。
English: The general Ding Congsheng rebelled, broke through Changzhou, and drove out the Honshu assassin Zhang Yu.

古文：六月，淮西将黄皓杀钦化军节度使闵顼。
现代文：六月，淮西的将领黄皓，杀了钦化军节度使闵顼。
English: In June, Huang Qi, the general of Huaxi, killed the Jinhua Army's commander of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：衡州刺史周岳陷潭州，自称节度使。
现代文：衡州刺史周岳反叛，攻破潭州，自称节度使。
English: Hengzhou stabbed Zhou Yue in rebellion, broke through Tanzhou, and claimed to be a military commander.

古文：七月，秦宗权陷许州，忠武军节度使鹿晏弘死之。
现代文：七月，秦宗权攻破许州，忠武军节度使鹿晏弘丧命。
English: In July, Qin Zongquan broke through Huzhou, and the loyal army killed Lu Yuhong.

古文：八月，王潮陷泉州，刺史廖彦若死之。
现代文：八月，王潮攻破泉州，刺史廖彦若丧命。
English: In August, Wang Chao invaded Quanzhou, and assassinated Liao Yanru.

古文：幽州卢龙军节度使李全忠卒，其子匡威自称留后。
现代文：幽州卢龙军节度使李全忠去世。他的儿子李匡威自称留后。
English: Li Quanzhong died at the Yuzhou Long March Military Festival. His son, Li Kuangwei, claimed to be his successor.

古文：九月，有星陨于扬州，戊寅，静难军将王行瑜陷兴、凤二州。
现代文：九月，有陨星落在扬州。初二，静难军的将领王行瑜反叛，攻破兴元、凤翔二州。
English: In September, a meteorite fell in Yangzhou. On the second day of the first lunar month, Wang Xingyu, the general of the Jingnan Army, rebelled and defeated Xingyuan and Fengxiang in the two states.

古文：十月丙午，嗣襄王煴自立为皇帝，尊皇帝为太上元皇圣帝。
现代文：十月初一，嗣襄王李誰自立为皇帝，将僖宗皇帝尊奉为 太上元皇圣帝 。
English: On the first day of October, Emperor Taizong's successor, King Li, proclaimed himself emperor and revered Emperor Taizong as the former emperor.

古文：硃全忠陷滑州，执义成军节度使安师儒。
现代文：朱全忠攻破滑州，俘虏了义成军节度使安师儒。
English: Zhu Quanzhong broke through Leshou and captured the Yicheng Army's commander, Jiedu Jianshuru.

古文：丙辰，杭州刺史董昌攻越州，浙东观察使刘汉宏奔于台州。
现代文：十一日，杭州刺史董昌反叛，攻打越州，浙东观察使刘汉宏逃往台州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hangzhou stabber Dong Chang rebelled and attacked Yuezhou. The East Zhejiang Observer forced Liu Hanhong to flee to Taizhou.

古文：是月，河阳节度使诸葛爽卒，其子仲方自称留后。
现代文：本月，河阳节度使诸葛爽去世，他的儿子诸葛仲方自称留后。
English: This month, Zhuge Shuang, the ruler of Heyang, passed away, and his son Zhuge Zhongfang claimed to be his successor.

古文：神策行营先锋使满存克兴、凤二州。
现代文：神策行营先锋使满存攻克兴元、凤翔二州。
English: God's plan and the vanguard of the camp made it possible to defeat Xingyuan and Fengxiang in the two states.

古文：感义军节度使杨晟陷文州。
现代文：感义军节度使杨晟反叛，攻破文州。
English: Impressed by the self-sacrifice of the rebels, Yang Hui rebelled and invaded Wenzhou.

古文：武宁军将张雄陷苏州。
现代文：武宁军的将领张雄反叛，攻破苏州。
English: Zhang Xiong, the general of the Wu Ning Army, rebelled and broke through Suzhou.

古文：十一月庚子，秦宗权郑州。
现代文：十一月二十五日，秦宗权攻破郑州。
English: On November 25, Qin conquered Zhengzhou.

古文：十二月，魏州地震。
现代文：十二月，魏州发生地震。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in Weizhou.

古文：丙午，台州刺史杜雄执刘汉宏，降于董昌。
现代文：初二，台州刺史杜雄抓了浙东观察使刘汉宏，投降董昌。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the Taizhou thorn, Shi Duxiong, captured the East Zhejiang observation envoy, Liu Hanhong, and surrendered to Dong Chang.

古文：昌自称浙东观察使。
现代文：董昌自称浙东观察使。
English: Dong Chang called himself the East Zhejiang observation envoy.

古文：丙辰，硃玫伏诛。
现代文：十二日，叛臣朱玫伏法处死。
English: On the 12th, the traitor Zhu Meibao was executed.

古文：丁巳。煴伏诛。
现代文：十三日，自立为皇帝的李誰伏法处死。
English: On the 13th, the self-proclaimed emperor Li Denfu was put to death.

古文：秦宗权陷孟州，诸葛仲方奔于汴州。
现代文：秦宗权攻破孟州，自称河阳节度留后的诸葛仲方逃往汴州。
English: Qin Zongquan conquered Mengzhou, and Zhuge Zhongfang, who claimed to have stayed behind after the Heyang Festival, fled to Ganzhou.

古文：是岁，天平军将硃瑾逐泰宁军节度使齐克让，自称留后。
现代文：本年，天平军的将领朱瑾驱逐了泰宁军节度使齐克让，自称留后。
English: This year, Zhu Xi, the general of the Tianping Army, expelled the Taining Army's commander, Qi Kezhang, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：湘阴贼邓进思陷岳州。
现代文：湘阴的反叛者邓进思攻破岳州。
English: Deng Jinshi, a rebel from Hunan, invaded Yuezhou.

古文：杜洪陷鄂州，自称武昌军节度留后。
现代文：杜洪攻破鄂州，自称武昌军节度留后。
English: Du Hong invaded Ezhou, claiming that the Wuchang army stayed behind.

古文：三年三月癸未，萧遘、裴澈、兵部侍郎郑昌图有罪伏诛。
现代文：光启三年三月初九，萧遘、裴澈、兵部侍郎郑昌图有罪，伏法处死。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the Guangqi era, Xiao Qi, Pei Che, and Zheng Changtu, the attendant of the military department, were found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：壬辰，如凤翔。
现代文：十八日，僖宗迁往凤翔。
English: On the 18th, the Shizong moved to Fengxiang.

古文：郑从谠罢。
现代文：郑从谠被免职。
English: Zheng Conglu was removed from his post.

古文：韦昭度为司徒。
现代文：韦昭度任司徒。
English: Wei Zhao served as a disciple.

古文：癸巳，镇海军将刘浩逐其节度使周宝，度支催勘使薛朗自称知府事。
现代文：十九日，镇海军的将领刘浩驱逐其节度使周宝，度支催勘使薛朗自称知府事。
English: On the 19th, Liu Hao, the general of the town's navy, expelled Zhou Bao, the governor of the town, and Xue Lang, the governor of the town, who claimed to be the governor.

古文：四月甲辰，六合镇遏使徐约陷苏州，逐其刺史张雄。
现代文：四月初一，六合镇遏使徐约反叛，攻破苏州，驱逐了苏州刺史张雄。
English: On the first day of April, Liuhe Town suppressed the rebellion of Xu You, defeated Suzhou, and expelled the Suzhou assassin Zhang Xiong.

古文：甲子，淮南兵马使毕师鐸陷扬州，执其节度使高骈。
现代文：二十一日，淮南兵马使毕师铎反叛，攻破扬州，抓了扬州节度使高骈。
English: On the twenty-first day, Huainan soldiers and horses made Bi Shizhen rebel, broke through Yangzhou, and captured Yangzhou Jieduo Gao Jun.

古文：是月，维州山崩。
现代文：本月，维州山岳崩坍。
English: This month, Victoria's mountains caved in.

古文：五月甲戌，宣歙观察使秦彦入于扬州。
现代文：五月初一，宣歙观察使秦彦进入扬州。
English: On the first day of May, Xuan Zang's observation made Qin Yan enter Yangzhou.

古文：癸未，秦宗权陷郑州。
现代文：初十，秦宗权攻破郑州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Qin Zongquan conquered Zhengzhou.

古文：六月，陷孟州，河阳将李罕之人于孟州，张全义入于东都。
现代文：六月，秦宗权攻破孟州，河阳将领李罕之进入孟州，张全义进入东都。
English: In June, Qin Zongquan broke through Mengzhou, the general Li Hanzhi of Heyang entered Mengzhou, and Zhang Quanyi entered Dongdu.

古文：己酉，凤翔节度使李昌符反。
现代文：初七，凤翔节度使李昌符反叛。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Fengxiang Festival caused Li Changfu to rebel.

古文：庚戌，犯大安门，不克，奔于陇州。
现代文：初八，进犯大安门，未成功，奔往陇州。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, he attacked the Da'an Gate, but was not successful, and rushed to Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，武定军节度使李茂贞为陇州招讨使。
现代文：初十，武定军节度使李茂贞任陇州招讨使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Wuding Army Festival caused Li Maozhen to be appointed as a recruiting envoy to Bozhou.

古文：丁巳，护国军将常行儒杀其节度使王重荣，其兄重盈自称留后。
现代文：十五日，护国军的将领常行儒杀了节度使王重荣，其兄王重盈自称留后。
English: On the fifteenth day, the generals of the National Protection Army killed Wang Chong Rong, whose brother Wang Chong Ying claimed to stay behind.

古文：壬戌，亳州将谢殷逐其刺史宋衮。
现代文：二十日，亳州将领谢殷驱逐了本州刺史宋衮。
English: On the 20th, Xie Yin, the general of Zhangzhou, expelled Song Xuan, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：七月丁亥，降死罪以下，贞观、开元、建中、兴元功臣后予一子九品正员官，减常膳三之一，赐民九十以上粟帛。
现代文：七月十六日，僖宗下诏：对死罪以下的犯人减刑；贞观、开元、建中、兴元年间的功臣的后代，赐予其中的一个儿子九品正员官位；减少日常膳食的三分之一；赏赐给平民中九十岁以上的老人粮食布帛。
English: On July 16th, Emperor Xizong issued the following edict: to commute the sentences of prisoners with less than capital crimes; to grant one of the sons of the descendants of the heroes of the Zhenguan, Kaiyuan, Jianzhong and Xingyuan years the official rank of Jiuping; to reduce the daily diet by one-third; and to reward the old people over the age of ninety with grain cloth.

古文：七月，李昌符伏诛。
现代文：七月，反叛的原凤翔节度使李昌符伏法处死。
English: In July, the rebellious former Fengxiang Jiedu ordered Li Chang to be put to death.

古文：八月，韦昭度为太保。
现代文：八月，韦昭度任太保。
English: In August, Wei Zhaodu was appointed to the position of Taibo.

古文：壬寅，谢殷伏诛。
现代文：初一，叛将谢殷伏法处死。
English: On the first day of the new year, the traitor Xie Yinfu was put to death.

古文：硃全忠陷亳州。
现代文：朱全忠攻破亳州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，陷曹州，刺史丘弘礼死之。
现代文：十一日，又攻破曹州，刺史丘弘礼丧命。
English: On the 11th day, they broke through Caozhou again, stabbing Shi Qiu Hongli to death.

古文：九月，户部侍郎、判度支张浚为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月，户部侍郎、判度支张浚任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In September, the Household Attendant and the Judgement Officer Zhang Jun were appointed as the Household Attendant and the Junior High School Student Shimon Shimotaira was appointed as the Junior High School Student.

古文：秦彦杀高骈。
现代文：秦彦杀了高骈。
English: Qin Yan killed Gao Yao.

古文：十月丁未，硃全忠陷濮州。
现代文：十月初七，朱全忠攻破濮州。
English: On October 7, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：甲寅，封子升为益王。
现代文：十四日，僖宗封其子李升为益王。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Taizong appointed his son Li Sheng as Prince Yi.

古文：杭州刺史钱升〗陷常州。
现代文：杭州刺史钱反叛，攻破常州。
English: Hangzhou instigated the Qian Rebellion and defeated Changzhou.

古文：丁卯，升杀周宝。
现代文：二十七日，钱杀了周宝。
English: On the 27th, Qian killed Zhou Bao.

古文：是月，秦宗权将孙儒寇扬州。
现代文：本月，秦宗权的部将孙儒进犯扬州。
English: This month, Sun Ru, a general of the Qin Dynasty, invaded Yangzhou.

古文：十一月壬申，庐州刺史杨行密陷扬州，秦彦、毕师鐸奔于孙儒。
现代文：十一月初三，庐州刺史杨行密反叛，攻破扬州，秦彦、毕师铎投奔孙儒。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Yang Xingmi rebelled in Zhangzhou and defeated Yangzhou. Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan joined Sun Ru.

古文：十二月癸巳，淮西将赵德諲陷江陵，荆南节度使张瑰死之。
现代文：十二月二十五日，淮西将领赵德反叛，攻破江陵，荆南节度使张耡丧命。
English: On December 25th, Zhao De, the general of Huaxi, rebelled and broke through Jiangling. Jingnan Jiedu killed Zhang Ye.

古文：硃全忠为东南面招讨使。
现代文：朱全忠任东南面招讨使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the south-eastern recruiting envoy.

古文：饶州刺史陈儒陷衢州。
现代文：饶州刺史陈儒反叛，攻破衢州。
English: Raozhou rebelled against Chen Ru and defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：上蔡贼冯敬章陷蕲州。
现代文：上蔡的反叛者冯敬章攻破蕲州。
English: Feng Jingzhang, a rebel from Shangcai, invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：文德元年正月甲寅，孙儒杀秦彦、毕师鐸。
现代文：文德元年正月十六日，孙儒杀了秦彦、毕师铎。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the first year of the Bunde era, Sun Ju killed Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan.

古文：癸亥，硃全忠为蔡州四面行营都统。
现代文：二十五日，朱全忠任蔡州四面行营都统。
English: On the 25th, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the commander of all four sides of Caizhou.

古文：丙寅，薛朗伏诛。
现代文：二十八日，薛朗伏法处死。
English: On the 28th, Xue Lang was sentenced to death.

古文：钱升陷润州。
现代文：钱耣攻破润州。
English: Qian Sheng attacked and defeated Runzhou.

古文：二月乙亥，不豫。
现代文：二月初七，僖宗生病。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, Shizong fell ill.

古文：乙丑，至自凤翔。
现代文：二十一日，由凤翔返回京都。
English: On the 21st, he returned to Kyoto from Fengxiang.

古文：庚寅，竭于太庙。大赦，改元。
现代文：二十二日，拜谒太庙，施行大赦，更改年号为 文德 。
English: On the 22nd, the temple held a general amnesty, and the year name was changed to Wende.

古文：是月，魏博军乱，杀其节度使乐彦祯，其将罗弘信自称权知留后。
现代文：本月，魏博的军队发生动乱，杀了魏博节度使乐彦祯，其部将罗弘信自称权知留后。
English: This month, Wei Bo's army rioted, killing Wei Bo's military commander Le Yanqi, whose subordinate Luo Hongxin claimed to be the rightful heir.

古文：三月戊戌朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，日全食。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are conjoined, and there is a total solar eclipse.

古文：壬寅，疾大渐，立寿王杰为皇太弟，知军国事。
现代文：初五，僖宗病势重危，立寿王李杰为皇太弟，主持军国政务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, when Emperor Taizong was gravely ill, Emperor Taizong appointed Prince Li Jie as the emperor's younger brother to preside over military and state affairs.

古文：癸卯，皇帝崩于武德殿，年二十七。
现代文：初六，僖宗在武德殿逝世，终年二十七岁。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 1st year of his junior high school, Shizong died at Wude Hall at the age of 27.

古文：赞曰：唐自穆宗以来八世，而为宦官所立者七君。
现代文：评说：唐朝自穆宗以后的八代皇帝，被宦官立为君主的就有七人。
English: Comment: In the eight generations of emperors in the Tang Dynasty since Mu Zong, only seven were made monarchs by eunuchs.

古文：然则唐之衰亡，岂止方镇之患？
现代文：那么，唐朝的衰亡，哪里仅是藩镇酿成的祸患所致？
English: So, where did the decline and fall of the Tang Dynasty come from?

古文：盖朝廷天下之本也，人君者朝廷之本也，始即位者人君之本也。
现代文：朝廷是天下的根基，君主是朝廷的根基，起始登基就位是君主的根基。
English: The imperial court is the foundation of the world, the monarch is the foundation of the imperial court, and the beginning of the enthronement is the foundation of the monarch.

古文：其本始不正，欲以正天下，其可得乎？
现代文：根基一开始就不正，而想以这样的根基正天下，还可能吗？
English: Is it still possible that the foundation was not right from the start, and you want to rule the world with such a foundation?

古文：懿、僖当唐政之始衰，而以昏庸相继；乾符之际，岁大旱蝗，民悉盗起，其乱遂不可复支，盖亦天人之会欤！
现代文：懿宗、僖宗尚在唐朝政权刚开始衰落之际，而相继登位的皇帝却是昏聩愚昧之辈；僖宗乾符年间，连年发生严重旱、蝗灾害，黎民愁怨、盗贼蜂起，社会动乱终于再也无法排解，这大概也是天命、人事两相遇合的机运吧！
English: Shizong and Shizong were still at the beginning of the decline of the Tang Dynasty, while the emperors who successively ascended the throne were dim-witted and ignorant. During the Qianfu years of Shizong, severe droughts, locust plagues, people's grievances, and thieves' uprisings occurred year after year, and social turmoil could no longer be resolved. This is probably also the fate of heaven and the opportunity for two people to meet.

