古文：乾化二年正月，宣： 上元夜，任诸市及坊市各点彩灯，金吾不用禁夜。 
现代文：乾化二年正月，宣布诏令： 上元节夜晚，听任所有寺庙以及街市各点彩灯，金吾军不用禁夜。 
English: In the first month of the second year of the Qianhua era, the imperial decree was announced: On the evening of the Lantern Festival, all temples and street markets were allowed to light up, and the King's army did not have to ban the night.

古文：近年以来，以都下聚兵太广，未尝令坊市点灯故也。
现代文：近年以来，因为京都屯兵太多，没有让街市点灯。
English: In recent years, because there are too many soldiers in Kyoto, the street markets have not been lit.

古文：庚申，御宣威殿开宴，丞相洎文武官属咸被召列侍，竟日而罢。
现代文：太祖派丁审衢到陈州任职，而丁审衢以大量的鞍马、金银布帛作为谢恩之礼，太祖怕他盘剥人民，送回他的献礼而停止他的任职。
English: The great-grandfather sent Ding Xunyu to serve in Chenzhou, and Ding Xunyu sent a large number of pommel horses, gold and silver cloth as a thank-you gift. The great-grandfather was afraid that he would exploit the people and send back his gift, so he stopped his service.

古文：壬戌，帝将巡按北境，中外戒严，诏以河南尹、守中书令、判六军事张宗奭为大内留守。
现代文：二月十三日，太祖准备巡视按察北方边境，朝廷内外戒严，诏令河南尹、守中书令、判六军事张宗为皇宫留守。
English: On February 13, Emperor Taizu prepared to inspect the northern border, and martial law was declared inside and outside the imperial court. Emperor Taizu ordered Henan Yin, Shuzhong Shuling, and Zhanli Military Zhang Zong to stay at the imperial palace.

古文：中书门下奏，差定文武官领务尤切宜扈驾者三十八人。
现代文：中书门下报告，差派最适宜随驾的文武官员共三十八人。
English: According to the report submitted by Zhongshu, a total of thirty-eight civil and military officials who are most suitable to accompany are sent.

古文：诏工部尚书李皎、左散骑常侍孙骘、右谏议大夫张衍、兵部侍郎刘邈、兵部郎中张俊、光禄少卿卢秉彝并令扈跸。
现代文：诏令工部尚书李皎、左散骑常侍孙骘、右谏议大夫张衍、兵部侍郎刘邈、兵部郎中张亻隽、光禄少卿卢秉彝都随驾出行。
English: It was decreed that Li Qian, Shangshu of the Ministry of Works, Sun Qian, the left rider of the left, Zhang Yan, the right rider of the right, Liu Qian, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Zhang Qian, the middle son of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Lu Bingya, the Minor Lord of Guanglu, all accompanied the trip.

古文：己巳，晨发卫州，夕止淇门，内衙十将使以十指挥兵士至于行在。
现代文：十五日，从洛师出发，晚上到达河阳。十六日，到温县。十七日，到武陟。十八日，到获嘉。戊辰，驻扎在卫州的新乡。
English: On the 15th, they set out from Luoshi and arrived in Heyang in the evening. On the 16th, they went to Wen County. On the 17th, they went to Wuxi. On the 18th, they went to Hujia and Wuchen, and were stationed in Xinxiang, Weizhou.

古文：辛未，驻跸黎阳。
现代文：十九日，早晨从卫州出发，晚上住宿在淇门。二十二日，驻驾黎阳。
English: On the 19th, they left from Weizhou in the morning and stayed in Qimen in the evening. On the 22nd, they stayed in Liyang.

古文：癸酉，发自黎阳，夕次内黄。
现代文：二十四日，从黎阳出发，晚上驻驾内黄。
English: On the 24th, they set out from Liyang and stopped at Neihang in the evening.

古文：甲戌，次昌乐县。
现代文：二十五日，到乐昌县。
English: On the 25th, to Lechang County.

古文：丁丑，次于永济县。
现代文：二十八日，到永济县。
English: On the 28th, to Yongji County.

古文：青州节度使贺德伦奏，统领兵士赴历亭军前。
现代文：青州节度使贺德伦报告，统领兵士奔赴历亭军前。
English: The Qingzhou Festival made Hedren report, leading the soldiers to rush to the front of the Liting Army.

古文：戊寅，至贝州，命四丞相及学士李琪、卢文度、知制诰窦赏等十五人扈从，其左常侍韦戬等二十三人止焉。
现代文：二十九日，到贝州，命四位丞相以及学士李琪、卢文度，知制诰窦赏等十五人随驾，其他左常侍韦戬等二十三人停止随行。
English: On the 29th, when he arrived in Bozhou, he ordered the four prime ministers and 15 people, including the academicians Li Qiao, Lu Wentu, and Zhizhe Jiu Dou, to accompany him. The other 23 people, including the left attendant Wei Wei, stopped accompanying him.

古文：今后应中书用人及吏部注拟，并宜省籓身之才业，验为政之否臧，必有可观，方可任用。
现代文：三月一日，到达枣强县的西城。七日，镇定各军招讨使杨师厚报告攻下枣强县，车驾当天疾驰南还。八日，又到贝州。
English: On March 1st, he arrived at the western city of Zaoqiang County. On the 7th, Yang Shihou, who had calmed down the troops, reported that he had captured Zaoqiang County. On the same day, he drove south. On the 8th, he went to Bechu.

古文：如或尚行请说，犹假货财，其所司人吏，必当推穷，重加惩断。 
现代文：十五日，到贝州外城重门阅兵。十六日，太祖又到东外城重门检阅骑兵。二十七日，到济源县。
English: On the 15th, he went to the main gate of Beizhou Outer City for a military parade. On the 16th, he went to the main gate of East Outer City to review the cavalry. On the 27th, he went to Jiyuan County.

古文：四月己酉，幸魏州。金波亭，赐宴宰臣、文武官及六学士。
现代文：四月一日，到魏州金波亭，赐宴宰臣、文武官员及六学士。
English: On April 1, he went to Jinbo Pavilion in Weizhou to give a banquet to the vice-ministers, civil and military officials and six academicians.

古文：甲寅夕，月掩心大星。
现代文：十一日，到黎阳县。二十一日，回到东都。
English: On the 11th, he went to Liyang County. On the 21st, he returned to Dongdu.

古文：午憩任村屯，夕次孝义宫。留都文武礼部尚书孔续而下道左迎拜。
现代文：二十三日，太祖泛舟于九曲池，不慎翻了船，太祖掉进池中，宫女和侍从官员扶着他爬上岸，惊悸良久。三十日，车驾从东京出发，晚上住在中牟县。
English: On the 23rd, the great-grandfather went rafting in Jiuquan Pond and accidentally capsized the boat. The great-grandfather fell into the pond, and the palace maid and the official's attendant helped him climb ashore. He was stunned for a long time. On the 30th, he drove from Tokyo and stayed in Zhongmou County in the evening.

古文：次偃师。甲申，至都，文武臣奉迎于东郊。
现代文：五月二日，从郑州出发，到达荥阳，河南尹魏王张宗望尘迎拜，河阳留后邵赞、怀州刺史段明远等陆续前来迎接。
English: On May 2nd, they set out from Zhengzhou and arrived in Poyang. Zhang Zong, the Yin Wei King of Henan Province, came to pay homage, while Shao Zhan and Mingyuan, the head of the Ming Dynasty in Waizhou Province, came to greet them.

古文：渤海遣使朝贡。宰臣薛贻矩抱恙在假，不克扈从，宣问旁午，仍命且驻东京以俟良愈。
现代文：晚上太祖住在汜水县，太祖召魏王张宗进来问答，就在御座前赐给食物，数刻才退。五日，太祖从汜水出发。回到东都，文武臣僚到东郊奉迎。宰臣薛贻矩抱病告假，不能随从，太祖慰问再三，又命他暂驻东京以待病愈。
English: In the evening, the great-grandfather was staying in Surabaya. The great-grandfather invited the Wei king Zhang Zong to come and ask questions. He gave him food in front of the throne, and only returned a few hours later. On the fifth day, the great-grandfather set off from Surabaya. Back in Dongdu, Wenwu's ministers came to the eastern suburbs to welcome him. His vassal Xue Yucheng was on sick leave and could not accompany him. The great-grandfather repeatedly offered his condolences, and ordered him to stay in Tokyo for a while to recover.

古文：及薨，帝震悼颇久，命雒苑使曹守珰往吊祭之，又命辍六日、七日、八日朝参，丞相、文武并诣上阁门进名奉慰。
现代文：当薛贻矩去世后，太祖震惊伤悼很久，命洛苑使曹守前往吊祭他，又命停止六日、七日、八日的朝参，丞相、文武官员均到上门合门慰问。
English: After the death of Xue Bing, the great-grandfather was shocked and mourned for a long time. Luo Yuan ordered Cao Shou to go to the hanging ceremony for him, and also ordered to stop the morning visit on the 6th, 7th, and 8th. The prime minister and civil and military officials all came to the door to offer condolences.

