古文：田单将攻狄，往见鲁仲子。
现代文：田单准备攻打狄地，前去拜见鲁仲连。
English: Tian Shan prepared to attack Di Di and went to meet Lu Zhonglian.

古文：仲子曰： 将军攻狄，不能下也。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 将军攻打狄地，是不能攻克的。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: If a general attacks Di Di, he cannot be defeated.

古文：田单曰： 臣以五里之城，七里之郭，破亡余卒，破万乘之燕，复齐墟。
现代文：田单说： 我凭借五里的内城、七里的外城，率领残兵败将，打败了拥有万辆兵车的燕国，收复了齐国的失地。
English: Tian Shan said: By virtue of the five-mile inner city and the seven-mile outer city, I led the remnants of the army to defeat, defeated the Yan country with 10,000 chariots, and regained the lost land of Qi country.

古文：攻狄而不下，何也? 
现代文：攻打狄地却不能攻克，为什么？ 
English: Attacking Didi but not conquering it, why?

古文：上车弗谢而去。
现代文：田单说完上车没告辞就离开了。
English: Tian Shan said that he got on the bus and left without saying goodbye.

古文：遂攻狄，三月而不克之也。
现代文：于是就领兵攻打狄地，果然三个月都没有攻下。
English: So he led his troops to attack Didi, but they did not capture it for three months.

古文：齐婴儿谣曰： 大冠若箕，修剑拄颐，攻狄不能，下垒枯丘。 
现代文：齐囤儿童的歌谣唱道： 大帽子像簸箕，长剑支着下巴，攻狄不能下：地上枯坟垒垒。 
English: The children's song of Qiqi sings: The big hat is like a skull, the long sword supports the chin, and it is impossible to attack it: the ground is a dry grave.

古文：田单乃惧，问鲁仲子曰： 先生谓单不能下狄，请闻其说。 
现代文：田单这才感到害怕，询问鲁仲连说： 先生说我不能攻下狄地，请让我听听您的看法。 
English: That's when Tian Shan felt scared and asked Lu Zhonglian: "The teacher said I can't capture Di Di, please let me hear your opinion."

古文：鲁仲子曰： 将军之在即墨，坐而织蒉，立则丈插，为士卒倡曰： 可往矣!
现代文：鲁仲连说： 将军在即墨的时候，坐下就编织草筐，站起来就用雷挖土，对士兵鼓动说： 可以出征了！
English: Lu Zhonglian said: When the general was about to ink, he sat down to weave a straw basket, stood up to dig soil with a thunderbolt, and encouraged the soldiers by saying: You can go to war!

古文：宗庙亡矣！
现代文：宗庙灭亡魂魄飞了！
English: The soul of the ancestral temple perished and flew away!

古文：云曰尚矣！
现代文：家在何处啊？
English: Where is home?

古文：归于何党矣! 当此之时，将军有死之心，而士卒无生之气，闻若言，莫不挥泣奋臂而欲战，此所以破燕也。
现代文：正当这个时侯，将军有誓死为国的决心，士兵没有贪生的念头，听到了这样的话，没有一个不挥泪振臂而请求决一死战的，这就是打败燕国的缘故。
English: Just at this time, the general had the determination to die for the country, and the soldiers did not have the desire to live. When they heard these words, there was no one who did not shed tears and raise his arm to ask for a decisive battle. This was the reason for defeating Yan.

古文：当今将军东有夜邑之奉，西有菑上之虞，黄金横带，而驰乎淄、渑之间，有生之乐，无死之心，所以不胜者也。 
现代文：如今将军东面有封地夜邑的租赋之奉，西面有淄水上游观之乐，腰带的带钩上装饰着黄金，骑马、驾车驰骋在淄水、渑水之间，有活着的欢乐，没有赴死的心情，这就是不能取胜的原因。 
English: Today, the general has the fief of the fief and the fief of the night village in the east, the pleasure of watching the upstream of Surabaya in the west, the hook of the belt is decorated with gold, riding and driving gallop between Surabaya and Surabaya, there is the joy of living, and there is no mood to die, which is the reason for not winning.

古文：田单曰： 单有心，先生志之矣。 
现代文：田单说： 我是有决心的，先生记住我的话。 
English: Tian Shan said: I am determined, sir, remember my words.

古文：明日，乃厉气循城，立于矢石之所，乃援枹鼓之，狄人乃下。
现代文：第二天，就去勉励士气在攻城部队中巡视，站在弓箭和雷石都能打到的地方，亲自操起鼓槌击鼓，狄人这才投降。
English: The next day, he went to encourage the morale of the besieging troops, stood in a place where bows and arrows and thunderstones could be hit, and personally took up the drumstick to beat the drums. Only then did Di Ren surrender.

