古文：凡与敌对垒，胜负未决，有粮则胜。
现代文：凡是在敌我双方对垒相持，胜负未分的情况下，谁有粮食谁就能取得胜利。
English: Whenever the two sides of the enemy and us stand against each other and there is no difference between victory and defeat, whoever has grain can win.

古文：若我之粮道，必须严加守护，恐为敌人所抄。若敌人之饷道，可分锐兵以绝之。
现代文：因此，对我方的运粮道路，必须派兵严加护卫，以防敌人抄掠截断；而对敌人的粮饷运输线，则要派遣精兵加以切断。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to send troops to guard our grain transportation routes to prevent the enemy from stealing and cutting them off, and to send elite soldiers to cut off the enemy's grain transportation routes.

古文：敌既无粮，其兵必走，击之则胜。
现代文：敌人既然粮运不继，它就必定逃走；我军乘机发起攻击，就能取得胜利。
English: Since the enemy's grain shipments are not continuing, it is bound to flee; if our army takes the opportunity to launch an attack, it will be able to achieve victory.

古文：法曰： 军无粮食则亡。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 军队没有粮食，作战就要失败。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If the army has no food, the battle will be a failure.

古文：汉末，曹操与袁绍相持于官渡。
现代文：东汉末年，曹操与袁绍对峙于官渡。
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Cao Cao confronted Yuan Shao at Guandu.

古文：绍遣军运粮，使淳于琼等五人将兵万余人送之，宿绍营北四十里。
现代文：袁绍派车运粮，并令运粮使淳于琼等五人率兵万余武装护送，当晚在袁绍驻扎地区以北里处宿营。
English: Yuan Shao sent a truck to transport grain, and ordered the grain transport envoy Jun Yujiong and five other people to lead more than 10,000 armed escorts. That night, they camped a mile north of the area where Yuan Shao was stationed.

古文：绍谋臣许攸贪财，绍不能足，奔归操，因说操曰： 今袁绍有辎重万余乘，而乏严备，今以轻兵袭之，燔其积聚，不过三日，袁氏自败矣。 
现代文：袁绍的谋臣许攸非常贪财，袁绍不能满足他的私欲，便背叛了袁绍投降了曹操。许攸乘机向曹操献计说： 如今袁绍的屯粮所停放的粮食有一万余辆车，但缺乏严密守备，如果现在派兵偷袭，放火烧掉他所屯聚的粮食，用不了三天，袁绍必将大败。 
English: Xu You, Yuan Shao's adviser, was very greedy for money. Yuan Shao could not satisfy his selfish desires, so he betrayed Yuan Shao and surrendered to Cao Cao. Xu You took the opportunity to present a plan to Cao Cao, saying: Today, Yuan Shao's grain depot has more than ten thousand cars of grain, but it is not well guarded. If Yuan Shao now sends soldiers to make a surprise attack and set fire to the grain he has gathered, it will take less than three days, and Yuan Shao will surely be defeated.

古文：左右，荀攸、贾诩劝操。
现代文：听完了许攸的话后，曹操周围的人都报以怀疑的目光，但谋臣荀攸、贾诩却劝曹操按许攸的计策行事。
English: After listening to Xu Youyou's words, the people around Cao Cao looked at him with suspicion. However, the counselors Yu Youyou and Jia Yuhuang advised Cao Cao to act according to Xu Youyou's plan.

古文：乃留曹洪守，自将步骑五千人，皆用袁军旗帜，衔枚缚马口，夜从间道出，人负束薪，所历道有问者，语之曰： 袁公恐操抄掠后军，遣军益备。 
现代文：于是，曹操遂令曹洪留守营寨，自率步骑兵五千人，全部换上袁军旗号，士卒人口衔枚、马匹嘴勒绳索，乘着夜暗从小道出发，每人身背一捆柴草。行进途中遇到询查的人，就回答说： 袁公担心曹操抄掠我军后方，特派我们前往加强戒备。 
English: As a result, Cao Cao then ordered Cao Hong to remain in the camp, leading five thousand infantry and cavalry, all of which were changed to the banner of the Yuan Army, with the soldiers holding banners and the horses pulling ropes. They set out from the trail in the dark of night, each person carrying a bundle of firewood. When they encountered inquiries on the way, they replied: Yuan Gong was worried that Cao Cao would plunder the rear of our army and sent us to strengthen our vigilance.

古文：闻者信以为然，皆自若。
现代文：问者听后信以为真，全然若无其事之状。
English: The inquirer believed it to be true after hearing it, as if nothing had happened.

古文：既至，围屯，即放火，营中惊乱，大败之。
现代文：曹军顺利抵达后，立即包围其屯粮处，并放起大火。护粮袁军遭此突然袭击，顿时乱作一团，被曹军打得大败。
English: After Cao Jun's army successfully arrived, they immediately surrounded his grain storage area and set it on fire. Yuan Jun's army was suddenly attacked by Cao Jun's army, and they were immediately thrown into chaos and defeated by Cao Jun's army.

古文：绍弃甲而遁。
现代文：袁绍闻此消息后，慌忙丢弃甲仗而逃跑了。
English: After hearing this news, Yuan Shao hurriedly abandoned the battle and fled.

