古文：杨朱游于鲁，舍于孟氏。
现代文：杨朱到鲁国游历，住在孟氏家中。
English: Yang Zhu traveled to Luzhou and stayed at Meng's home.

古文：孟氏问曰： 人而已矣，奚以名为？ 
现代文：孟氏问他： 做人就是了，为什么还要名声呢？ 
English: Mr. Meng asked him: Being a person is enough, why do you need fame?

古文：曰： 以名者为富。 
现代文：杨朱回答说： 靠名声去发财。 
English: Yang Zhu replied, "Relying on fame to get rich."

古文： 既富矣，奚不已焉？ 
现代文：孟氏又问： 已经富足了，为什么还不肯罢休呢？ 
English: Mr. Meng also asked: If you are already rich, why are you still unwilling to give up?

古文：曰： 为贵。 
现代文：杨朱说： 为了获得尊贵地位。 
English: Yang Zhu said: In order to obtain a prestigious position.

古文： 既贵矣，奚不已焉？ 
现代文：孟氏又问： 已经有了尊贵地位了，为什么还不罢休呢？ 
English: Mr. Meng also asked, "You already have a prestigious position, why don't you give it up?"

古文：曰： 为死。 
现代文：杨朱说： 为了死后丧事的荣耀。 
English: Yang Zhu said: For the glory of posthumous funeral.

古文： 既死矣，奚为焉？ 
现代文：孟氏又问： 已经死了，还为什么呢？ 
English: Mr. Meng also asked, "He's already dead, what's the point?"

古文：曰： 为子孙。 
现代文：杨朱说： 为了子孙。 
English: Yang Zhu said: For the sake of our children and grandchildren.

古文： 名奚益于子孙？ 
现代文：孟氏又问： 名声对子孙有什么好处？ 
English: Meng also asked: What are the benefits of fame for one's descendants?

古文：曰： 名乃苦其身，燋其心。
现代文：杨朱说： 名声是身体辛苦、心念焦虑才能得到的。
English: Yang Zhu said, "Fame can only be achieved through hard work and anxiety.

古文：乘其名者，泽及宗族，利兼乡党；况子孙乎？ 
现代文：伴随着名声而来的，好处可以及于宗族，利益可以遍施乡里，更何况是自己的子孙后代呢？ 
English: With the fame, the benefits can be extended to the clan, the benefits can be spread all over the countryside, let alone their own descendants?

古文： 凡为名者必廉，廉斯贫；为名者必让，让斯贱。 
现代文：孟氏说： 凡是追求名声的人必须廉洁，廉洁就会贫穷；凡是追求名声的人必须谦让，谦让就会导致地位卑贱。 
English: Meng said: Anyone who pursues fame must be honest, and honesty will lead to poverty; anyone who pursues fame must be humble, and humility will lead to low status.

古文：曰： 管仲之相齐也，君淫亦淫，君奢亦奢。
现代文：杨朱说： 管仲当齐国宰相的时候，国君淫逸他也淫逸；国君奢侈，他也奢侈。
English: Yang Zhu said, "When Guan Zhong was the prime minister of Qi, the sovereign was lascivious and he was also lascivious; the sovereign was extravagant and he was also extravagant.

古文：志合言从，道行国霸。
现代文：意志与国君相合，言论被国君听从，治国之道顺利实行，齐国在诸侯中成为霸主。
English: His will coincided with the sovereign's, his words were obeyed by the sovereign, the way of governing the country was successfully implemented, and Qi became the overlord among the princes.

古文：死之后，管氏而已。
现代文：死了之后，管氏家族就没落了。
English: After his death, the Guan family fell apart.

古文：田氏之相齐也，君盈则己降，君敛则己施。
现代文：田氏当齐国宰相的时候，国君富有，他便贫苦；国君搜括，他便施舍。
English: When Tian was the prime minister of Qi, the sovereign was rich, but he was poor; the sovereign collected, but he gave alms.

古文：民皆归之，因有齐国；子孙享之，至今不绝。 
现代文：老百姓都归向于他，他因而占有了齐国，子子孙孙享受，至今没有断绝。
English: The common people all turned to him, and as a result, he took possession of Qi Province, and his children and grandchildren have enjoyed it, which has not been cut off to this day.

古文： 若实名贫，伪名富。 
现代文：像这样，真实的名声会贫穷，虚假的名声会富贵。 
English: In this way, the true reputation will be poor, and the false reputation will be rich.

古文：曰： 实无名，名无实。
现代文：杨朱又说： 有实事的没有名声，有名声的没有实事。
English: Yang Zhu also said: There is no reputation for doing things, and there is no reputation for doing things.

古文：名者，伪而已矣。
现代文：名声这东西，实际上是虚伪的。
English: The thing about fame is that it's actually phony.

古文：昔者尧舜伪以天下让许由、善卷，而不失天下，享祚百年。
现代文：过去尧舜虚伪地把天下让给许由、善卷，而实际上并没有失去天下，享受帝位达百年之久。
English: In the past, it was hypocritical to concede the world to Xu You and Zhan Zhu, but in fact, it did not lose the world and enjoyed the imperial throne for a hundred years.

古文：伯夷、叔齐实以孤竹君让而终亡其国，饿死于首阳之山。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐真实地把孤竹国君位让了出来而终于失掉了国家，饿死在首阳山上。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi truly gave up the position of the lone bamboo sovereign and finally lost the country, starving to death on Shouyang Mountain.

古文：实伪之辩，如此其省也。 
现代文：真实与虚伪的区别，就像这样明白。 
English: The difference between truth and falsehood is as clear as this.

古文：杨朱曰： 百年，寿之大齐。
现代文：杨朱说： 一百岁，是人生寿命的大限。
English: Yang Zhu said: One hundred years old is the maximum life expectancy.

古文：得百年者千无一焉。
现代文：能够活到一百岁的，一千个人里很难挑出一个。
English: It's hard to pick out one out of a thousand people who can live to be a hundred.

古文：设有一者，孩抱以逮昏老，几居其半矣。
现代文：即使有这么一个人活到一百岁，那么从孩提襁褓到衰弱老迈的阶段，几乎就占据了他生命中的一半时间。
English: Even if such a person lives to be a hundred years old, the period from infancy to frail old age occupies almost half of his life.

古文：夜眠之所弭，昼觉之所遗，又几居其半矣。
现代文：晚上睡觉所消耗的，再加上白天觉醒时所浪费的，又几乎占据了剩馀时间的一半。
English: What is consumed by sleeping at night, plus what is wasted when waking up during the day, takes up almost half of the remaining time.

古文：痛疾哀苦，亡失忧惧，又几居其半矣。
现代文：病痛哀愁劳苦，失意忧伤惊惧，又几乎占据了剩馀时间的一半。
English: Sickness, sorrow, toil, frustration, grief, and fear occupy almost half of the remaining time.

古文：量十数年之中，逌然而自得亡介焉之虑者，亦亡一时之中尔。
现代文：算起来在这剩下的十几年里，能够怡然自得，心中没有丝毫挂虑的，也不过是短暂的刹那罢了。
English: Counting up the remaining ten years, the time when you can be happy and carefree, without the slightest worry in your heart, is nothing more than a fleeting moment.

古文：则人之生也奚为哉？
现代文：那么人生一世，究竟为的是什么呢？
English: So, what is the purpose of life?

古文：奚乐哉？
现代文：究竟有什么喜乐呢？
English: What joy is there in that?

古文：为美厚尔，为声色尔。
现代文：不过是为了锦衣玉食，为了歌舞美色罢了。
English: But it's just for the sake of food, for the sake of singing and dancing.

古文：而美厚复不可常厌足，声色不可常翫闻。
现代文：然而锦衣玉食又不可能总是得到满足，歌舞美色也不可能常常得以玩赏。
English: However, it is not always possible to be satisfied with the food, and it is not always possible to enjoy the beautiful songs and dances.

古文：乃复为刑赏之所禁劝，名法之所进退；遑遑尔竞一时之虚誉，规死后之馀荣；偊偊尔顺耳目之观听，惜身意之是非；徒失当年之至乐，不能自肆于一时。
现代文：而且人生来还要受到刑罚的禁止、赏赐的诱导，名教的督促，礼法的束缚；惶惶不安地去竞得一时的虚名，还得谋算着死后留下的荣耀；在人生路上孤单审慎地观察聆听，顾惜着身心的是是非非；徒然丧失了有生之年的最大快乐，不能给自己片刻的肆意放纵。
English: Moreover, human beings are also subject to the prohibition of punishment, the inducement of reward, the supervision of famous religion, and the bondage of etiquette; they have to compete anxiously to win a temporary false name, and they have to calculate the glory left after death; they have to watch and listen carefully on their own on the road of life, and care about the rights and wrongs of body and mind; they have lost the greatest happiness of their lifetime in vain, and cannot give themselves a moment of wanton indulgence.

古文：重囚累梏，何以异哉？
现代文：这同关进深牢戴上沉重的手铐脚镣，有什么不一样呢？
English: What's the difference between this and being locked up in a dungeon and wearing heavy handcuffs and leg irons?

古文：太古之人知生之暂来，知死之暂往；故从心而动，不违自然所好；当身之娱非所去也，故不为名所劝。
现代文：远古时期的人们懂得生命不过是迅疾的到来，懂得死亡不过是迅疾的离开；所以顺从心愿行动，从来不违背自己天性的喜好；对于现世的欢愉决不放弃，因此能够不受名誉的诱惑。
English: The ancients understood that life is but a swift arrival, and death but a swift departure; so they acted according to their desires, never against their natural inclinations; they never gave up the pleasures of this world, and so they were able to resist the temptation of fame.

古文：从性而游，不逆万物所好，死后之名非所取也，故不为刑所及。
现代文：放纵天性，优游世间，不违逆万物的喜好，不追求死后的虚名，因此也不会触及刑罚。
English: Indulge nature, enjoy the world, do not go against the preferences of all things, do not pursue a false name after death, and therefore will not touch the punishment.

古文：名誉先后，年命多少，非所量也。 
现代文：名誉的先来后到，寿命的长短多少，并非是他们所思量的。 
English: Fame comes first, and the length of life is not what they think.

古文：杨朱曰： 万物所异者生也，所同者死也。
现代文：杨朱说： 万物的差异在于生命的过程，万物的共同点则在于死亡的终点。
English: Yang Zhu said: The difference of all things lies in the process of life, and the common point of all things lies in the end of death.

古文：生则有贤愚、贵贱，是所异也；死则有臭腐、消灭，是所同也。
现代文：活着的时候分作贤明和愚昧、尊贵与卑贱，这就是差异；死了以后都要腐臭、消亡，这就是相同。
English: While alive, they are divided into wise and foolish, noble and lowly, which is the difference; after death, they all stink and die, which is the same.

古文：虽然，贤愚、贵贱非所能也；臭腐、消灭亦非所能也。
现代文：即便如此，贤明愚昧、尊贵卑贱也不是自己能够做主的；同样，腐臭消亡也不是自己能够做主的。
English: Even so, the wise and the foolish, the high and the low, are not able to decide for themselves; likewise, the disappearance of rancor is not able to decide for themselves.

古文：故生非所生，死非所死；贤非所贤，愚非所愚，贵非所贵，贱非所贱。
现代文：所以生存并非是自己做主的生存，死亡也不是自己做主的死亡；贤明并非是自己做主的贤明，愚昧也不是自己做主的愚昧，尊贵并非是自己做主的尊贵，卑贱也不是自己做主的卑贱。
English: Therefore, existence is not self-determined existence, death is not self-determined death; wisdom is not self-determined wisdom, ignorance is not self-determined ignorance, nobility is not self-determined nobility, and lowliness is not self-determined lowliness.

古文：然而万物齐生齐死，齐贤齐愚，齐贵齐贱。
现代文：然而事实上，万物的生死是齐等的，贤明与愚昧是齐等的，尊贵与卑贱也是齐等的。
English: But in fact, all things are equal in life and death, wise and foolish are equal, and high and low are equal.

古文：十年亦死，百年亦死。
现代文：活十年是一死，活上一百年也是一死。
English: To live ten years is to die, to live a hundred years is also to die.

古文：仁圣亦死，凶愚亦死。
现代文：仁人圣贤会死，凶顽愚劣的人也会死。
English: The humane and the wise will die, and the vicious and the stupid will also die.

古文：生则尧舜，死则腐骨；生则桀纣，死则腐骨。
现代文：活着的时候是尧舜，死后不过是腐骨；活着的时候是桀纣，死后一样也是腐骨。
English: When you are alive, you are maggots, but when you die, you are rotten bones; when you are alive, you are maggots, but when you die, you are also rotten bones.

古文：腐骨一矣，孰知其异？
现代文：腐朽的骨殖统统一样，又有谁知道它们生前的差异呢？
English: The decayed bones are all the same, and who knows what the differences were in their lifetimes?

古文：且趣当生，奚遑死后？ 
现代文：姑且享受今生的乐趣，哪里还有空理会死后的世界？ 
English: Apart from enjoying the pleasures of this life, where is there a void or an afterlife?

古文：杨朱曰： 伯夷非亡欲，矜清之邮，以放饿死。
现代文：杨朱说： 伯夷不是没有欲望，只是过分地矜持清高，以至于最后饿死在首阳山上。
English: Yang Zhu said: Bo Yi was not without desire, but he was excessively proud of his lofty position, so much so that he eventually starved to death on Shouyang Mountain.

古文：展季非亡情，矜贞之邮，以放寡宗。
现代文：展季不是不通人情，只是过于顾惜正直的名声，以至于宗人稀少。
English: It's not that the curators are insensitive, but they are so concerned about their reputation for honesty that there are very few curators.

古文：清贞之误善之若此！ 
现代文：清白与正直的失误就像他们两人这样。 
English: Innocent and honest mistakes like the two of them.

古文：杨朱曰： 原宪窭于鲁，子贡殖于卫。
现代文：杨朱说： 原宪在鲁国十分贫穷，子贡在卫国经商发财。
English: Yang Zhu said: Yuan Xian was very poor in Lu, and Zigong made a fortune in commerce in Wei.

古文：原宪之窭损生，子贡之殖累身。 
现代文：原宪的贫穷损害了生命，子贡的经商劳累了身心。 
English: The poverty of the original constitution has damaged life, and the business of tribute has exhausted the body and mind.

古文： 然则窭亦不可，殖亦不可，其可焉在？ 
现代文： 那么贫穷也不行，经商也不行，怎样才行呢？ 
English: So it is not possible to be poor, it is not possible to do business, how can it be done?

古文：曰： 可在乐生，可在逸身。
现代文：答： 正确的办法在于使生命快乐，正确的办法在于使身体安逸。
English: A: The right way is to make one's life happy, the right way is to make one's body comfortable.

古文：故善乐生者不窭，善逸身者不殖。 
现代文：所以善于使生命快乐的人不会贫穷，善于使身心安逸的人不会为发财而累垮。 
English: Therefore, those who are good at making life happy will not be poor, and those who are good at making the body and mind comfortable will not be overwhelmed by getting rich.

古文：杨朱曰： 古语有之： 生相怜，死相捐。 
现代文：杨朱说： 古代有句话说： 活着的时候互相怜爱，死了便互相抛弃。 
English: Yang Zhu said, "In ancient times, there was a saying: When you are alive, you pity each other, but when you die, you abandon each other.

古文：此语至矣。
现代文：这句话说到底了。
English: That's all there is to it.

古文：相怜之道，非唯情也；勤能使逸，饥能使饱，寒能使温，穷能使达也。
现代文：互相怜爱的方法，不仅仅在于感情，过于勤苦的，能使他安逸，饥饿了能使他吃饱，寒冷了能使他温暖，穷困了能使他顺利。
English: The way to have compassion for each other is not only in feelings. If you are too hard-working, you can make him comfortable. If you are hungry, you can make him full. If you are cold, you can make him warm. If you are poor, you can make him prosperous.

古文：相捐之道，非不相哀也；不含珠玉，不服文锦，不陈牺牲，不设明器也。
现代文：互相抛弃的方法，并不是不互相悲哀，而是口中不含珍珠美玉，身上不穿文彩绣衣，祭奠不设牺牲食品，埋葬不摆冥间器具。
English: The method of abandoning each other is not that they do not mourn for each other, but that their mouths do not contain pearls and gems, they do not wear embroidered clothes, they do not offer sacrificial food, and they do not bury utensils.

古文：晏平仲问养生于管夷吾。
现代文：晏婴向管仲询问养生之道。管仲说： 放纵罢了，不要壅塞，不要阻挡。 
English: The infant asked Guanzhong about the way of health care. Guanzhong said: Just indulge, don't prevaricate, don't block.

古文：管夷吾曰： 肆之而已，勿壅勿阏。 
现代文：晏婴问： 具体事项是什么？ 
English: Q: What are the specifics?

古文：晏平仲曰： 其目奈何？ 夷吾曰： 恣耳之所欲听，恣目之所欲视，恣鼻之所欲向，恣口之所欲言，恣体之所欲安，恣意之所欲行。
现代文：管仲说： 耳朵想听什么就听什么，眼睛想看什么就看什么，鼻子想闻什么就闻什么，嘴巴想说什么就说什么，身体想怎么舒服就怎么舒服，意念想干什么就干什么。
English: Guanzhong said, "Ears can hear whatever they want to hear, eyes can see whatever they want to see, noses can smell whatever they want to smell, mouths can say whatever they want to say, bodies can be as comfortable as they want to be, and minds can do whatever they want to do.

古文：夫耳之所欲闻者音声，而不得听，谓之阏聪；目之所欲见者美色，而不得视，谓之阏明；鼻之所欲向者椒兰，而不得嗅，谓之阏颤；口之所欲道者是非，而不得言，谓之阏智；体之所欲安者美厚，而不得从，谓之阏适；意之所欲为者放逸，而不得行，谓之阏性。
现代文：耳朵所想听的是悦耳的声音，却听不到，就叫做阻塞耳聪；眼睛所想见的是漂亮的颜色，却看不到，就叫做阻塞目明；鼻子所想闻的是花椒与兰草，却闻不到，就叫做阻塞嗅觉；嘴巴所想说的是谁是谁非，却不能说，就叫做阻塞智慧；身体所想舒服的是美丽与厚实，却得不到，就叫做抑制舒适；意念所想做的是放纵安逸，却做不到，就叫做抑制本性。
English: What the ear wants to hear is a pleasant sound, but can't hear, it is called blocking the ear; what the eye wants to see is a beautiful color, but can't see, it is called blocking the eyesight; what the nose wants to smell is pepper and bluegrass, but can't smell, it is called blocking the sense of smell; what the mouth wants to say is who is right and who is wrong, but can't say, it is called blocking wisdom; what the body wants to feel comfortable is beautiful and thick, but can't get it, it is called inhibiting comfort; what the mind wants to do is indulge in comfort, but can't do it

古文：凡此诸阏，废虐之主。去废虐之主，熙熙然以俟死，一日、一月、一年、十年，吾所谓养。
现代文：凡此种种阻塞，都是残毁自己的根源，清除残毁自己的根源，放纵情欲一直到死，即使只有一天，一月，一年，十年，这就是我所说的养生。
English: All such blockages are the root cause of self-mutilation, remove the root cause of self-mutilation, indulge in lust until death, even if only for one day, one month, one year, ten years, this is what I call health care.

古文：拘此废虐之主，录而不舍，戚戚然以至久生，百年、千年、万年，非吾所谓养。 
现代文：留住残毁自己的根源，检束而不放弃，忧惧烦恼一直到老，即使有一百年，一千年，一万年，也不是我所说的养生。 
English: Retaining the root cause of one's self-destruction, not giving up, worrying and fretting all the way to old age, even if it is a hundred years, a thousand years, or ten thousand years, is not what I call health care.

古文：管夷吾曰： 吾既告子养生矣，送死奈何？ 
现代文：管仲又说： 我已经告诉你怎样养生了，送死又该怎样呢？ 
English: Guanzhong also said, "I have already told you how to keep fit, but what about dying?

古文：晏平仲曰： 送死略矣，将何以告焉？ 
现代文：晏婴说： 送死就简单了，我怎么跟你说呢？ 
English: The toddler said, "It's as simple as being sent to death. How can I tell you?

古文：管夷吾曰： 吾固欲闻之。 
现代文：管仲说： 我就是想听听。 
English: Guanzhong said, "I just want to listen."

古文：平仲曰： 既死，岂在我哉？
现代文：晏婴说： 已经死了，难道能由我吗？
English: The toddler said, "He's already dead, can I do it myself?"

古文：焚之亦可，沉之亦可，瘗之亦可，露之亦可，衣薪而弃诸沟壑亦可，衮衣绣裳而纳诸石椁亦可，唯所遇焉。 
现代文：烧成灰也行，沉下水也行，埋入土中也行，露在外面也行，包上柴草扔到沟壑里也行，穿上礼服绣衣放入棺椁里也行，碰上什么都行。 
English: It can be burned to ashes, it can be submerged in water, it can be buried in the ground, it can be exposed to the outside world, it can be wrapped in firewood and thrown into a ditch, it can be put on a dress and embroidered clothes and placed in a coffin, it can be anything.

古文：管夷吾顾谓鲍叔、黄子曰： 生死之道，吾二人进之矣。  
现代文：管仲回头对鲍叔黄子说： 养生与送死的方法，我们两人已经说尽了。  
English: Guan Zhong turned back to Bao Shu Huang Zi and said: We have already talked about the methods of health and death.

古文：子产相郑，专国之政；三年，善者服其化，恶者畏其禁，郑国以治。
现代文：子产担任郑国国相，独揽着国家政权；经过三年，好人服从他的教化，坏人畏惧他的禁令，郑国因此得到长治久安。
English: After three years, the good people obeyed his indoctrination, and the bad people feared his ban. As a result, Zheng Guo received long-term peace.

古文：诸侯惮之。
现代文：各国诸侯都害怕郑国的强大。
English: Princes and lords from all over the world were afraid of Zheng's power.

古文：而有兄曰公孙朝，有弟曰公孙穆。
现代文：但子产有个哥哥名叫公孙朝，有个弟弟名叫公孙穆。
English: However, she had an older brother named Gongsun Cha and a younger brother named Gongsun Mu.

古文：朝好酒，穆好色。
现代文：公孙朝偏爱喝酒，公孙穆偏爱女色。
English: Gongsun preferred drinking, Gongsun Mu preferred women.

古文：朝之室也聚酒千钟，积麹成封，望门百步，糟浆之气逆于人鼻。
现代文：公孙朝的家里藏着千钟美酒，酒曲堆放得像小土坡，离他家大门一百步，酒浆的香气就扑鼻而来。
English: There are thousands of bottles of fine wine in Gongsun's home, and the wine jars are stacked like small mounds. A hundred paces from his front door, the aroma of the wine drips from the jars.

古文：方其荒于酒也，不知世道之安危，人理之悔吝，室内之有亡，九族之亲疏，存亡之哀乐也。
现代文：当他沉迷于喝酒的时候，就不知道世道的安危，人情的厚薄，家业的有无，亲族的远近，存亡的哀乐。
English: When he indulges in drinking, he does not know the safety of the world, the thickness of human feelings, the presence or absence of family business, the proximity of relatives, and the sorrow and joy of survival.

古文：虽水火兵刃交于前，弗知也。
现代文：就算面前水火兵刃交加，也毫无知觉。
English: Even if there is fire and water in front of them, they are not aware of it.

古文：穆之后庭比房数十，皆择稚齿婑媠者以盈之。
现代文：公孙穆的后庭有几十间房屋鳞次栉比，全都住满了挑来的年轻美貌的女子。
English: There are dozens of houses in Sun Mu's backyard, all of which are filled with beautiful young women.

古文：方其耽于色也，屏亲昵，绝交游，逃于后庭，以昼足夜；三月一出，意犹未惬。
现代文：当他沉溺于女色的时候，就摒退一切亲属，断绝所有朋友交游，逃避在后庭之中，日以继夜地纵情享乐；三个月才从里头出来一次，还觉得意犹未尽，不甚惬意。
English: When he was madly in love with a woman, he abandoned all his relatives, cut off all his friends, fled to the backyard, indulged day and night, and only came out of it once every three months, still feeling unfulfilled and not very comfortable.

古文：乡有处子之娥姣者，必贿而招之，媒而挑之，弗获而后已。
现代文：但凡乡间有面目姣好的未嫁姑娘，他必定要用财物来招引，请媒人来挑诱，不弄到手绝不罢手。
English: However, if there is a good-looking unmarried girl in the countryside, he will certainly use wealth to attract her, invite a matchmaker to entice her, and never stop until he gets his hands on her.

古文：子产日夜以为戚，密造邓析而谋之，曰： 侨闻治身以及家，治家以及国，此言自于近至于远也。
现代文：子产整天整夜为这兄弟二人的行为担忧，于是私底下造访邓析，同他商量说： 我听说治理好自身才能治理好家，治理好家才能治理好国，这是说做事得按照从近到远的次序。
English: His father-in-law worried all day and all night about the behavior of the two brothers, so he privately visited Deng Xie and discussed with him: I heard that if you govern yourself well, you can govern your family well, and if you govern your family well, you can govern your country well. This means that you must do things in order from near to far.

古文：侨为国则治矣，而家则乱矣。
现代文：我对于国家可以说是治理得十分像样，可是自己家却弄得一团糟。
English: I've run the country reasonably well, but I've made a mess of my own house.

古文：其道逆邪？
现代文：这不是把修身、齐家、治国的道理颠倒了吗？
English: Isn't this a reversal of the principles of cultivating one's self-discipline, maintaining a united family, and governing the country?

古文：将奚方以救二子？
现代文：有什么办法可以挽救我这两位兄弟呢？
English: What can I do to save my two brothers?

古文：子其诏之！ 
现代文：您替我出出主意啊！ 
English: Don't make up your mind for me!

古文：邓析曰： 吾怪之久矣，未敢先言。
现代文：邓析说道： 我对这情况早就感到奇怪了，只是没敢先说罢了。
English: Deng Jun said: I have long been puzzled by this situation, but I didn't dare to say anything at first.

古文：子奚不时其治也，喻以性命之重，诱以礼义之尊乎？ 
现代文：你为什么不找个恰当的时机管教他们一下，劝谕他们认识性命的重要，启发他们明白礼义的尊贵呢？ 
English: Why don't you find the right time to discipline them, exhort them to know the importance of life, and inspire them to understand the dignity of propriety?

古文：子产用邓析之言，因间以谒其兄弟，而告之曰： 人之所以贵于禽兽者，智虑。
现代文：子产采纳了邓析的意见，找机会去见了兄弟俩，并劝告他们说： 人之所以比飞禽走兽高贵，在于人有理智和思虑。
English: The progeny adopted Deng Xiaoping's opinion, took the opportunity to meet the two brothers, and advised them: The reason why people are more noble than birds and beasts is that people have reason and consideration.

古文：智虑之所将者，礼义。
现代文：理智和思虑所依托的，便是礼义。
English: Reason and consideration are supported by courtesy.

古文：礼义成，则名位至矣。
现代文：礼义具备了，名誉地位就会随之而来。
English: When the sense of propriety is in place, the status of honor will follow.

古文：若触情而动，耽于嗜欲，则性命危矣。
现代文：如果一味地感情用事，沉溺于个人嗜好，那么性命就危险啦。
English: If you are too emotional and indulge in personal hobbies, your life will be in danger.

古文：子纳侨之言，则朝自悔而夕食禄矣。 
现代文：你们要是听从我的劝告，那早上改悔自信，到晚上就能居官吃俸禄了。 
English: If you listen to my advice and repent in the morning, you will be able to live in an official position and earn a salary in the evening.

古文：朝、穆曰： 吾知之久矣，择之亦久矣，岂待若言而后识之哉？
现代文：公孙朝和公孙穆说： 我懂得这些已经很久了，做这样的选择也已经很久了，难道要等你讲了以后我们才懂得吗？
English: Gongsun Dynasty and Gongsun Mu said: I have understood these things for a long time, and it has been a long time since I made such a choice. Do we have to wait until you tell us?

古文：凡生之难遇而死之易及。
现代文：生存难得碰上，死亡却容易到来。
English: Survival is rare, but death is easy to come by.

古文：以难遇之生，俟易及之死，可孰念哉？
现代文：以难得的生存去等待容易到来的死亡，还有什么可考虑的呢？
English: What else is there to think about when it comes to waiting for an easy death with a hard life?

古文：而欲尊礼义以夸人，矫情性以招名，吾以此为弗若死矣。
现代文：你想尊重礼义以便向人夸耀，抑制本性以招来名誉，我以为这还不如死了好。
English: I thought it would be better to die if you wanted to respect propriety in order to boast to others, and restrain your nature in order to gain honor.

古文：为欲尽一生之欢，穷当年之乐。唯患腹溢而不得恣口之饮，力惫而不得肆情于色；不遑忧名声之丑，性命之危也。
现代文：为了要享尽一生的欢娱，受尽人生的乐趣，只怕肚子破了不能放肆地去喝酒，精力疲惫了不能放肆地去淫乐，没有工夫去担忧名声的丑恶和性命的危险。
English: In order to enjoy the joys of life to the full, to suffer the joys of life to the full, just fear that the stomach is broken and can not be allowed to drink, the energy is exhausted and can not be allowed to fornicate, and there is no time to worry about the ugliness of fame and the danger of life.

古文：且若以治国之能夸物，欲以说辞乱我之心，荣禄喜我之意，不亦鄙而可怜哉？
现代文：而且你以治理国家的才能向我们夸耀，想用漂亮的词句来扰乱我们的心念，用荣华富贵来引诱我们改变意志，不也鄙陋而可怜吗？
English: Moreover, you boast to us of your ability to govern the country, want to use beautiful words to disturb our minds, and use glory and wealth to entice us to change our will. Isn't it also despicable and pathetic?

古文：我又欲与若别之。
现代文：我们又要和你辨别一下。
English: We're going to have to disagree with you again.

古文：夫善治外者，物未必治，而身交苦；善治内者，物未必乱，而性交逸。
现代文：善于治理身外之物的，外物未必能治好，而自身却有许多辛苦；善于治理身内心性的，外物未必混乱，而本性却十分安逸。
English: If you are good at controlling external things, you may not be able to cure the external things, but you will have a lot of hard work; if you are good at controlling the internal things, the external things may not be chaotic, but the nature is very comfortable.

古文：以若之治外，其法可暂行于一国，未合于人心；以我之治内，可推之于天下，君臣之道息矣。
现代文：以你对身外之物的治理，那些方法可以暂时在一个国家实行，但并不符合人的本心；以我们对身内心性的治理，这些方法可以推广到天下，君臣之道也就用不着了。
English: With your governance of external things, those methods can be temporarily implemented in a country, but they are not in line with people's true nature; with our governance of inner and outer nature, these methods can be extended to the world, and the way of monarchs and subjects is no longer necessary.

古文：吾常欲以此术而喻之，若反以彼术而教我哉？ 
现代文：我们经常想用这种办法去开导你，你却反而要用你那办法来教育我们吗？ 
English: We often want to use this method to enlighten you, but instead you want to use your method to educate us?

古文：子产忙然无以应之，他日以告邓析。
现代文：子产茫然无话可说。过了些天，他把这事告诉了邓析。
English: His son was speechless. A few days later, he told Deng Jie about it.

古文：邓析曰： 子与真人居而不知也，孰谓子智者乎？
现代文：邓析说： 你同真人住在一起却不知道他们，谁说你是聪明人啊？
English: Deng Jun said: You live with real people but you don't know them. Who says you're a smart person?

古文：郑国之治偶耳，非子之功也。 
现代文：郑国的治理不过是偶然的，并不是你的功劳。 
English: The governance of Zhengzhou is merely accidental, and is not your achievement.

古文：卫端木叔者，子贡之世也。
现代文：卫国的端木叔，是子贡的后代。
English: Uncle Hao Mu, who defended the country, was a descendant of Zigong.

古文：藉其先赀，家累万金。
现代文：凭借祖先的遗产，积累了万贯家财。
English: By virtue of the heritage of their ancestors, they have accumulated a vast family fortune.

古文：不治世故，放意所好。
现代文：不再从事世俗杂务，放纵意念去追求享受。
English: No longer engage in mundane chores, indulge in the pursuit of enjoyment.

古文：其生民之所欲为，人意之所欲玩者，无不为也，无不玩也。
现代文：凡是人们想做的，心中所想玩的，他没有不去做，没有不去玩的。
English: Whatever people want to do, whatever they want to play in their hearts, there is nothing they won't do, there is nothing they won't play.

古文：墙屋台榭，园囿池沼，饮食车服，声乐嫔御，拟齐楚之君焉。
现代文：他家的高墙大院，歌台舞榭，花园兽囿，鱼池草沼，甘饮美食，华车丽服，美声妙乐，娇妻艳妾，可以和齐楚两国的国君相媲美。
English: His family's high-walled compound, song-and-dance hall, garden zoo, fish pond, grassy swamp, sweet drinks and gourmet food, luxury cars and clothes, beautiful voices and music, beautiful wives and concubines, can be compared to the sovereigns of the two countries.

古文：至其情所欲好，耳所欲听，目所欲视，口所欲尝，虽殊方偏国，非齐土之所产育者，无不必致之；犹藩墙之物也。
现代文：至于他感情上所喜好的，耳朵所想听的，眼睛所想看的，嘴巴所想尝的，即使在遥远的地方、偏僻的国家，不是齐国本土所产育的，没有弄不到手的东西，就像拿自己围墙内的东西一样。
English: As for what he likes emotionally, what his ears want to hear, what his eyes want to see, and what his mouth wants to taste, even if it is in a distant place, in a remote country, it is not produced in Qi Province, and there is nothing he can't get his hands on, it is just like taking things within his own walls.

古文：及其游也，虽山川阻险，涂径修远，无不必之，犹人之行咫步也。
现代文：至于他出去游览，即使山河阻险，路途遥远，也一定要到达，就像一般人走几步路一样。
English: As for his outing, even if the mountains and rivers are dangerous and the road is far away, he must arrive, just like ordinary people take a few steps.

古文：宾客在庭者日百住，庖厨之下不绝烟火，堂庑之上不绝声乐。
现代文：庭院中的宾客每天以百计，厨房里的烟火一直不断，厅堂里的音乐一直不绝。
English: There are hundreds of guests in the courtyard every day, fireworks in the kitchen all the time, and music in the hall all the time.

古文：奉养之馀，先散之宗族；宗族之馀，次散之邑里；邑里之馀，乃散之一国。
现代文：自奉自养之后剩下来的东西，先施舍给本宗族的人，施舍本宗族剩下来的东西，再施舍给本邑里的人，施舍本邑里剩下来的东西，才施舍给全国的人。
English: Whatever is left over after giving alms is first given to the members of one's own family, then to the members of one's own village, and finally to the whole nation.

古文：行年六十，气干将衰，弃其家事，都散其库藏、珍宝、车服、妾媵。一年之中尽焉，不为子孙留财。
现代文：到了六十岁的时候，血气躯干都将衰弱了，于是抛弃家内杂事，把他的全部库藏及珍珠宝玉、车马衣物、少妇美女，在一年之中全部散尽，没有给子孙留一点钱财。
English: By the time he was sixty years old, his blood and body would have weakened, so he abandoned the household chores, and his entire treasury, including pearls and jewels, chariots and horses, clothing, young women and beautiful women, were all exhausted within a year, leaving no money for his children and grandchildren.

古文：及其病也，无药石之储；及其死也，无瘗埋之资。
现代文：等到他生病的时候，家中没有一点药物；等到他死亡的时候，家中没有一点埋葬用的钱财。
English: When he fell ill, there was no medicine in the house; when he died, there was no money for burial.

古文：一国之人受其施者，相与赋而藏之，反其子孙之财焉。
现代文：国内接受过他施舍的人，共同出钱埋葬了他，并把钱财都还给了他的子孙。
English: People in the country who had received alms from him paid to bury him and returned the money to his children and grandchildren.

古文：禽骨釐闻之，曰： 端木叔，狂人也，辱其祖矣。 
现代文：禽骨厘听到了这件事，说： 端木叔是个疯狂的人，简直侮辱了他的祖先了。 
English: Upon hearing this, the bird bone Li said: Uncle Hao Mu is a crazy person, he has insulted his ancestors.

古文：段干生闻之，曰： 端木叔，达人也，德过其祖矣。
现代文：段干生听到了这件事，说： 端木叔是个通达的人，德行超过他的祖先了。
English: Duan Gan Sheng heard about this and said: Uncle Hao Mu is an accomplished person, and his virtue surpasses that of his ancestors.

古文：其所行也，其所为也，众意所惊，而诚理所取。
现代文：他的所作所为，一般人都会感到很惊讶，却符合真实的情理。
English: His actions, while surprising to the average person, are in line with reality.

古文：卫之君子多以礼教自持，固未足以得此人之心也。 
现代文：卫国的君子们多以礼教自我约束，自然是不足以理解他的内心。 
English: The gentlemen who defend the country are mostly self-restrained by etiquette, which is naturally not enough to understand his heart.

古文：孟孙阳问杨子曰： 有人于此，贵生爱身，以蕲不死，可乎？ 
现代文：孟孙阳问杨朱说： 假如有这样一个人，尊贵生命，爱惜身体，以求不死，可能吗？ 
English: Meng Sunyang asked Yang Zhu: "If there is such a person who values life and cherishes his body so as not to die, is it possible?

古文：曰： 理无不死。 
现代文：杨朱说： 人没有不死的道理。 
English: Yang Zhu said: There is no reason for people not to die.

古文： 以蕲久生，可乎？ 
现代文：孟孙阳又问： 以此来祈求长寿，可能吗？ 
English: Meng Sunyang also asked: Is it possible to use this to pray for a long life?

古文：曰： 理无久生。
现代文：杨朱说： 没有长寿的道理。
English: Yang Zhu said: There is no reason for longevity.

古文：生非贵之所能存，身非爱之所能厚。
现代文：生命并不因为尊贵它就能存在，身体并不因为爱惜它就能壮实。
English: Life does not exist because it is precious, nor does the body exist because it is cherished.

古文：且久生奚为？
现代文：而且长久活着干什么呢？
English: And what is the point of living a long time?

古文：五情好恶，古犹今也；四体安危，古犹今也；世事苦乐，古犹今也；变易治乱，古犹今也。
现代文：人的情欲好恶，古代与现在一样；身体四肢的安危，古代与现在一样；人间杂事的苦乐，古代与现代一样；朝代的变迁治乱，古代与现在一样。
English: The likes and dislikes of human passions were the same in ancient times as they are now; the safety of the limbs of the body was the same in ancient times as it is now; the bitterness of human miscellaneous affairs was the same in ancient times as it is now; the changes and chaos of dynasties were the same in ancient times as they are now.

古文：既闻之矣，既见之矣，既更之矣，百年犹厌其多，况久生之苦也乎？ 
现代文：已经听到了，已经看到了，已经经历了，活一百年还嫌太多，又何况长久活着的苦恼呢？ 
English: I have heard, I have seen, I have experienced. To live for a hundred years is too much, and what about the suffering of living for a long time?

古文：孟孙阳曰： 若然，速亡愈于久生；则践锋刃，入汤火，得所志矣。 
现代文：孟孙阳说： 如果是这样的话，早点死亡就比长久活着更好，那么踩剑锋刀刃，入沸水大火，就是满足愿望了。 
English: Meng Sunyang said: If this is the case, it is better to die early than to live for a long time, then stepping on the blade of a sword and entering the fire of boiling water is to satisfy the wish.

古文：杨子曰： 不然。
现代文：杨子说： 不是这样的。
English: Yang Zi said, "It's not like that.

古文：既生，则废而任之，究其所欲，以俟于死。
现代文：已经出生了，就应当听之任之，心念想干什么就干什么，一直到死亡。
English: Once you're born, you should be allowed to do whatever you want until the day you die.

古文：将死，则废而任之，究其所之，以放于尽。
现代文：将要死亡了，就应当听之任之，尸体该放到哪里就到哪里，一直到消失。
English: When a person is about to die, they should be left alone, and the corpse should go wherever it is supposed to go, until it disappears.

古文：无不废，无不任，何遽迟速于其间乎？ 
现代文：一切都放弃努力，一切都听之任之，何必在人间考虑早死与晚死呢？ 
English: All efforts are abandoned, everything is left to chance. Why do we have to think about early death and late death on earth?

古文：杨朱曰： 伯成子高不以一毫利物，舍国而隐耕。
现代文：杨朱说： 伯成子高不肯拿出一根毫毛来施惠外物，因此舍弃王位，隐居山野，耕田度日。
English: Yang Zhu said: Ba Cheng Zi Gao was not willing to give up a single hair of his head to benefit others, so he gave up the throne and lived in seclusion in the mountains and fields.

古文：大禹不以一身自利，一体偏枯。
现代文：大禹不愿为自身谋利益，以至于劳累过度，半身不遂。
English: Dayu is unwilling to seek profit for himself, so much so that he is overworked and exhausted.

古文：古之人损一毫利天下不与也，悉天下奉一身不取也。
现代文：古代的人，对于损伤一根毫毛来施惠于天下的事，他不愿意去付出；对于把整个天下拿来奉养自身的事，他也不愿去获取。
English: The ancients were not willing to pay for the damage of a millimeter to benefit the world; they were not willing to get the whole world to support themselves.

古文：人人不损一毫，人人不利天下，天下治矣。 
现代文：如果人人都不损失一根毫毛，人人都无须有利于天下，那么天下就大治了。 
English: If everyone does not lose a single hair, everyone does not have to benefit the world, then the world will be great.

古文：禽子问杨朱曰： 去子体之一毛以济一世，汝为之乎？ 
现代文：禽骨釐问杨朱： 去掉你身上的一根毫毛来救济全社会，你干不干？ 
English: Bird's bones asked Yang Zhu: Do you want to remove a single hair from your body to help the whole society?

古文：杨子曰： 世固非一毛之所济。 
现代文：杨朱说： 全社会不是靠一根毫毛就能救济的。 
English: Yang Zhu said: The whole society cannot be relieved by a hair's breadth.

古文：禽子曰： 假济，为之乎？ 
现代文：禽骨釐又问： 假如能够救济，你愿意干吗？ 
English: The poultry bone egret asked again: If you could get relief, what would you like to do?

古文：杨子弗应。
现代文：杨朱不搭理他。
English: Yang Zhu ignored him.

古文：禽子出语孟孙阳。
现代文：禽骨釐出门将此事告诉了孟孙阳。
English: When he went out, he told Meng Sanyang about this.

古文：孟孙阳曰： 子不达夫子之心，吾请言之。
现代文：孟孙阳说： 你不能领会先生的心意，还是让我来说说看吧。
English: Meng Sunyang said, "You can't understand Mr. Corman's intentions, so let me explain.

古文：有侵若肌肤获万金者，若为之乎？ 
现代文：假设有人侵害你的肌肤而同时让你获得万金，你干不干？ 禽骨釐说： 愿意干。 
English: Suppose someone violated your skin and at the same time made you a million dollars, wouldn't you do it?

古文：曰： 为之。 孟孙阳曰： 有断若一节得一国，子为之乎？ 
现代文：孟孙阳接着说： 假如有人砍断你一段肢体而同时让你获得一个国家的补偿，你干不干？ 
English: Meng Sunyang went on to say: If someone cuts off a part of your limb and at the same time allows you to receive compensation from a country, would you do it?

古文：禽子默然有间。
现代文：禽骨釐沉默了一会，没有回答。
English: There was a moment's silence, then no answer.

古文：孟孙阳曰： 一毛微于肌肤，肌肤微于一节，省矣。
现代文：于是孟孙阳说： 一根毫毛比肌肤轻微，肌肤又比一段肢体轻微，这是明摆着的。
English: So Meng Sunyang said, "It is obvious that a single hair is lighter than the skin, and the skin is lighter than a limb.

古文：然则积一毛以成肌肤，积肌肤以成一节。
现代文：然而正是一根根毫毛累积起来，形成了肌肤；一寸寸肌肤累积起来，形成了肢体。
English: But it is the very hairs of the head that make up the skin, and the very hairs of the feet that make up the body.

古文：一毛固一体万分中之一物，奈何轻之乎？ 
现代文：一根毫毛固然只占了身体的万分之一，可又怎能轻视它呢？ 
English: Of course, a single hair only accounts for one ten-thousandth of the body, but how can we despise it?

古文：禽子曰： 吾不能所以答子。
现代文：禽骨釐说： 我没什么道理来回答你。
English: Pigeon beak said: I have no reason to answer you.

古文：然则以子之言问老聃、关尹，则子言当矣；以吾言问大禹、墨翟，则吾言当矣。 
现代文：然而拿你的话去询问老聃、关尹，那么你的话是恰当的；而拿我的话去询问大禹、墨翟，那么我的话也是恰当的。 
English: However, if you use your words to inquire about Laojun and Guan Yin, then your words are appropriate; and if you use my words to inquire about Dayu and Muxun, then my words are also appropriate.

古文：孟孙阳因顾与其徒说他事。
现代文：孟孙阳听罢，就回过头去和他的学生讲其他事情了。
English: After listening, Meng Sunyang turned around to talk to his students about other things.

古文：杨朱曰： 天下之美归之舜、禹、周、孔，天下之恶归之桀、纣。
现代文：杨朱说： 天的美名归于舜、禹、周公、孔子，天下的恶名归于夏桀、商纣。
English: Yang Zhu said: The good name of heaven belongs to Yu, Yu, Zhou, and Confucius, and the bad name of the world belongs to Xia and Shang.

古文：然而舜耕于河阳，陶于雷泽，四体不得暂安，口腹不得美厚；父母之所不爱，弟妹之所不亲。行年三十，不告而娶。
现代文：但是舜在河阳种庄稼，在雷泽烧陶器，四肢得不到片刻休息，口腹得不到美味饭菜，父母不喜欢他，弟妹不亲近他，年龄到了三十岁，才不得不先报告父母就娶妻。
English: However, Zou grew crops in Heyang, fired pottery in Leize, his limbs could not get a moment's rest, his mouth and stomach could not get delicious meals, his parents did not like him, his brothers and sisters were not close to him, and when he was thirty years old, he had to first report to his parents and marry his wife.

古文：及受尧之禅，年已长，智已衰。
现代文：等到接受尧的禅让时，年龄已经太大了，智力也衰弱了。
English: By the time he accepted the gong, he was too old and mentally weak.

古文：商钧不才，禅位于禹，戚戚然以至于死：此天人之穷毒者也。
现代文：儿子商钧又无能，只好把帝位让给禹，忧郁地一直到死。这是天子中穷困苦毒的人。
English: His son, who was mercurial and incompetent, had no choice but to cede the imperial throne to Yu, and he remained depressed until his death.

古文：鮌治水土，绩用不就，殛诸羽山。
现代文：鲧治理水土，没有取得成绩，被杀死在羽山。
English: water and soil management, did not achieve results, was killed in Hasan.

古文：禹纂业事雠，惟荒土功，子产不字，过门不入；身体偏枯，手足胼胝。
现代文：禹继承他的事业，给杀父的仇人做事，只怕荒废了治理水土的时间，儿子出生后没有时间给他起名字，路过家门也不能进去，身体惟悴，手脚都生了茧子。
English: Yu inherits his business and works for his father's killer enemy. He is afraid that he will waste the time for water and soil management. After his son was born, he did not have time to give him a name. He could not enter the house if he passed by the door. His body was emaciated and his hands and feet were lame.

古文：及受舜禅，卑宫室，美绂冕，戚戚然以至于死：此天人之忧苦者也。
现代文：等到他接受舜让给他的帝位时，把宫室盖得十分简陋，却把祭祀的礼眼做得很讲究，忧愁地一直到死。这是天子中忧愁辛苦的人。
English: When he accepted the imperial throne given to him by the Empress Dowager, he built a very simple palace, but he was very particular about the ceremonial aspect of the sacrifice, and he continued to be sad until his death.

古文：武王既终，成王幼弱，周公摄天子之政。
现代文：武王已经去世，成王还很年幼，周公行使天子的权力。
English: King Wu has passed away, King Cheng is still very young, Zhou Gong exercises the power of the son of heaven.

古文：邵公不悦，四国流言。
现代文：邵公不高兴，几个国家流传着谣言。
English: Shao Gong is not happy. Rumors are circulating in several countries.

古文：居东三年，诛兄放弟，仅免其身，戚戚然以至于死：此天人之危惧者也。
现代文：周公到东方居住了三年，杀死了哥哥，流放了弟弟，自己才保住了生命，忧愁地一直到死。这是天子中危险恐惧的人。
English: Zhou Gong lived in the East for three years. He killed his elder brother and exiled his younger brother. Only then did he save his own life, sorrowfully until his death. This was a man who feared danger.

古文：孔子明帝王之道，应时君之聘，伐树于宋，削迹于卫，穷于商周，围于陈、蔡，受屈于季氏，见辱于阳虎，戚戚然以至于死：此天民之遑遽者也。
现代文：孔子懂得帝王治国的方法，接受当时各国国君的邀请，在宋国时曾休息过的大树被人砍伐，在卫国时一度做官却又被冷落，在商周时被拘留监禁，在陈国与蔡国之间被包围绝粮，又被季氏轻视，被阳虎侮辱，忧愁地一直到死。这是有道贤人中惊惧慌张的人。
English: Confucius understood the method of imperial governance, accepted the invitation of the sovereigns of various countries at that time, was cut down by the big trees that had rested in the Song Dynasty, was once an official at the time of the defense of the country but was left out in the cold, was detained and imprisoned at the time of Shang Zhou, was surrounded and starved between Chen and Cai, and was despised by the Ji clan, insulted by the Yang tiger, and sadly died. This is a person who is frightened and panicked among the sages.

古文：凡彼四圣者，生无一日之欢，死有万世之名。
现代文：所有这四位圣人，活着的时候没有享受一天的欢乐，死了后却有流传万代的名声。
English: All four of these saints, while alive, did not enjoy a day's joy, but after death they have a reputation that has been passed down for generations.

古文：名者，固非实之所取也。虽称之弗知，虽赏之不知，与株块无以异矣。
现代文：死后的名声本来不是实际生活所需要的，即使称赞自己也不知道，即使奖赏自己也不知道，与树桩土块没有什么差别了。
English: Posthumous fame is not what real life needs, even if you praise yourself you don't know, even if you reward yourself you don't know, it's no different from a tree stump.

古文：桀藉累世之资，居南面之尊，智足以距群下，威足以震海内；恣耳目之所娱，穷意虑之所为，熙熙然以至于死：此天民之逸荡者也。
现代文：夏粱凭借历代祖先的资本，占据着天子的尊贵地位，智慧足以抗拒众臣，威势足以震动海内；放纵耳国所想要的娱乐，做尽意念想做的事情，高高兴兴地一直到死。这是天子中安逸放荡的人。
English: With the capital of the ancestors of all generations, Xia Yao occupies the noble position of the son of heaven, the wisdom is enough to resist the courtiers, the power is enough to shake the sea; indulge in the entertainment that the country wants, do what you want to do, cheerfully until death. This is the son of heaven who is comfortable and debauched.

古文：纣亦藉累世之资，居南面之尊；威无不行，志无不从；肆情于倾宫，纵欲于长夜；不以礼义自苦，熙熙然以至于诛：此天民之放纵者也。
现代文：商纣也凭借历代祖先的资本，占据着天子的尊贵地位，威势没有任何地方行不通，意志没有任何人不服从，在所有的宫殿中肆意乱，在整个黑夜里放纵情欲，不用礼义来使自己困苦，高高兴兴地一直到被杀。这是天子中放肆纵欲的人。
English: Merchants, too, by virtue of the capital of their forefathers throughout the ages, occupy the most exalted position among the sons of heaven; their might is effective nowhere, their will is not disobeyed by anyone, they run amok in all the palaces, indulge their passions throughout the night, make themselves miserable without propriety, and live happily until they are killed.

古文：彼二凶也，生有从欲之欢，死被愚暴之名。
现代文：这二个凶恶的人，活着时有放纵欲望的欢乐，死了后蒙上了愚顽暴虐的坏名声。
English: These two evil men, who in life had the pleasure of indulging their desires, died with a bad reputation for brutality and cruelty.

古文：实者，固非名之所与也。虽毁之不知，虽称之弗知，此与株块奚以异矣？
现代文：实际生活本来不是死后的名声所能相比的，即使毁谤他也不知道，即使惩罚他也不知道，这与树桩土块有什么不同呢？
English: Real life is not comparable to the reputation after death, even if he is slandered, he does not know, even if he is punished, he does not know, how is this different from the stump?

古文：彼四圣虽美之所归，苦以至终，同归于死矣。
现代文：那四位圣人虽然都得到了美名，但辛辛苦苦一直到最后，都归于死亡了。
English: Those four saints, although they all got a good name, worked hard until the end, and all died.

古文：彼二凶虽恶之所归，乐以至终，亦同归于死矣。 
现代文：那两个凶恶的人虽然都得到了恶名，但高高兴兴一直到最后，也都归于死亡了。 
English: The two villains, despite their notoriety, lived happily ever after and both died.

古文：杨朱见梁王，言治天下如运诸掌。
现代文：杨朱进见梁惠王，称自己治理天下就像在手掌上翻转东西那么容易。
English: Yang Zhujin met with Liang Hui Wang and said that governing the world is as easy as turning things over in the palm of one's hand.

古文：梁王曰： 先生有一妻一妾而不能治，三亩之园而不能芸；而言治天下如运诸掌，何也？ 
现代文：梁王说： 先生有一妻一妾都管不好，三亩大的菜园都除不净草，却说治理天下就同在手掌上玩东西一样容易，为什么呢？ 
English: Liang Wang said, "The gentleman has a wife and a concubine, but he is not good at managing them, and his three-acre vegetable garden is full of weeds. However, he said that governing the world is as easy as playing with things in the palm of one's hand. Why?

古文：对曰： 君见其牧羊者乎？
现代文：杨朱答道： 您见到过那牧羊的人吗？
English: Yang Zhu replied: Have you seen that shepherd?

古文：百羊而群，使五尺童子荷箠而随之，欲东而东，欲西而西。
现代文：成百只羊合为一群，让一个五尺高的小孩拿着鞭子跟着羊群，想叫羊向东羊就向东，想叫羊向西羊就向西。
English: Hundreds of sheep form a herd, and a five-foot-tall boy with a whip follows the flock. If the sheep want to go east, they go east; if they want to go west, they go west.

古文：使尧牵一羊，舜荷箠而随之，则不能前矣。
现代文：如果尧牵着一只羊，舜拿着鞭子踉着羊，羊就不容易往前走了。
English: If a mule is leading a sheep, and the mule is holding a whip and leading the sheep, the sheep will not easily go forward.

古文：且臣闻之：吞舟之鱼不游枝流；鸿鹄高飞，不集洿池。
现代文：而且我听说过：能吞没船只的大鱼不到支流中游玩，鸿鹊在高空飞翔不落在池塘上。
English: And I've heard: big fish that can swallow boats can't swim in tributaries, and great egrets can't fly high enough to land on ponds.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：其极远也。
现代文：它们的志向极其远大。
English: They are very ambitious.

古文：黄钟大吕不可从烦奏之舞，何则？
现代文：黄钟大吕这样的音乐不能给烦杂凑合起来的舞蹈伴奏。
English: Music like Huang Zhongda Lv's can't be used as a choreographic accompaniment.

古文：其音疏也。
现代文：为什么？它们的音律很有条理。
English: Why? Their rhythms are very structured.

古文：将治大者不治细，成大功者不成小，此之谓矣。 
现代文：准备做大事的不做小事，要成就大事的不成就小事，说的就是这个意思。 
English: To prepare for great things, do not do small things. To achieve great things, do not do small things. This is what I mean.

古文：杨朱曰： 太古之事灭矣，孰志之哉？
现代文：杨朱说： 远古的事情已经完全消灭了，谁还记得呢？
English: Yang Zhu said, "Ancient things have been completely wiped out. Who can remember them?

古文：三皇之事若存若亡，五帝之事若觉若梦，三王之事或隐或显，亿不识一。
现代文：三皇时代的事情，仿佛存在又仿佛消亡；五帝的事迹好像明白，又如同梦幻；三王时代的事或者隐没或者彰显，亿万桩事中未必能识别其一。
English: The events of the Age of the Three Emperors seem to exist and to disappear; the events of the Five Emperors seem to be clear, but also like a dream; the events of the Age of the Three Emperors either disappear or appear, and it is not possible to identify one of the hundreds of millions of events.

古文：当身之事或闻或见，万不识一。
现代文：当代的事有些听闻也有些见识，一万桩事中却未必能识别其一。
English: We have heard some things and seen some things in the contemporary world, but we may not be able to identify one out of ten thousand things.

古文：目前之事或存或废，千不识一。
现代文：眼前的事有的仍然存在有的却已废弃，千百桩事中未必能识别其一。
English: Some of the things in front of us still exist, others have been abandoned, and we may not be able to identify one of the thousands of things.

古文：太古至于今日，年数固不可胜纪。
现代文：从远古到今日，年数本已无法计算清楚。
English: From ancient times to today, the number of years cannot be calculated clearly.

古文：但伏羲已来三十馀万岁，贤愚、好丑，成败、是非，无不消灭；但迟速之间耳。
现代文：仅仅从伏羲氏到现在已经历了三十多万年，贤明的、愚蠢的，美好的、丑陋的，成功的、失败的，正确的、错误的，无不消亡湮灭；只不过或迟或早而已。
English: Just from the Fuxi Dynasty to now, more than 300,000 years have passed. The wise, the foolish, the beautiful, the ugly, the successful, the unsuccessful, the correct, the wrong, all will disappear and perish; it's just that sooner or later.

古文：矜一时之毁誉，以焦苦其神形，要死后数百年中馀名，岂足润枯骨？
现代文：挂念一时的荣誉毁谤，使身心陷于焦灼苦楚，以追求死后数百年间能够留下名声，名声又如何足以滋润枯朽的尸骨？
English: Worrying about a momentary defamation of honor, putting the body and mind in agony, in pursuit of a reputation that can be left for hundreds of years after death, and how is the reputation enough to moisten the withered bones?

古文：何生之乐哉？ 
现代文：这样活着又有什么乐趣呢？ 
English: What's the fun in living like that?

古文：杨朱曰： 人肖天地之类，怀五常之性，有生之最灵者也。
现代文：杨朱说： 人与天地近似一类，怀有木火土金水五行的本性，是所有生物中最有灵性的。
English: Yang Zhu said: Human beings are similar to heaven and earth. They have the nature of wood, fire, earth, metal and water, and are the most spiritual of all living things.

古文：人者，爪牙不足以供守卫，肌肤不足以自捍御，趋走不足以从利逃害，无毛羽以御寒暑，必将资物以为养，任智而不恃力。故智之所贵，存我为贵；力之所贱，侵物为贱。
现代文：但是人，指甲和牙齿不足以来很好的守卫自己，肌肉皮肤不足以很好地捍卫抵抗外部侵犯，快步奔跑不能很好地得到利益与逃避祸害，没有羽毛来抵抗寒冷与暑热，所以必须依靠外物来供养自身，运用智慧而不依仗力量，所以智慧之所以可贵，在于它能使我们保全自身；力量之所以低贱，在于它会使我们侵害外物。
English: But man, since his nails and teeth are not enough to defend himself well, his muscles and skin are not enough to defend himself well against external aggression, he cannot run fast enough to get benefits and escape harm, he does not have feathers to resist cold and heat, so he must rely on external things to support himself, use wisdom without relying on strength, so wisdom is valuable because it allows us to protect ourselves; strength is cheap because it allows us to infringe on external things.

古文：然身非我有也，既生，不得不全之；物非我有也，既有，不得而去之。
现代文：然而身体不是我所有的，既然出生了，便不能不保全它；外物也不是我所有的，既然存在着，便不能抛弃它。
English: However, I do not own my body, and since I was born, I cannot help but preserve it; nor do I own external things, and since they exist, I cannot abandon them.

古文：身固生之主，物亦养之主。
现代文：身体固然是生命的主要因素，但外物也是保养身体的主要因素。
English: Of course, the body is the main factor of life, but external things are also the main factors of maintaining the body.

古文：虽全生，不可有其身；虽不去物，不可有其物。
现代文：虽说要保全生命，却不可以占有自己的身体；所说不要抛弃外物，却不可以占有那些外物。
English: Although it is necessary to preserve one's life, one should not possess one's own body; although it is said that one should not abandon foreign objects, one should not possess those foreign objects.

古文：有其物，有其身，是横私天下之身，横私天下之物。
现代文：占有外物，占有身体，就是蛮横地把天下的身体占为己有，蛮横地把天下之物属于己有。
English: To take possession of a foreign object, to take possession of the body, is to arrogantly take possession of the body of the world, to arrogantly take possession of the things of the world.

古文：不横私天下之身，不横私天下物者，其唯圣人乎！
现代文：不蛮横地把天下的身体属于己有，不蛮横地把天下之物属于己有的，大概只有圣人吧！
English: It is probably only saints who arrogantly take the bodies of the world as their own and the things of the world as their own.

古文：公天下之身，公天下之物，其唯至人矣！
现代文：把天下的身体归公共所有，把天下的外物归公共所有，大概只有至人吧！
English: To make the world's body public property, to make the world's external objects public property, is probably only for the very best!

古文：此之谓至至者也。 
现代文：这就叫做最崇高最伟大的人。 
English: This is called the most sublime and greatest man.

古文：杨朱曰： 生民之不得休息，为四事故：一为寿，二为名，三为位，四为货。
现代文：杨朱说： 百姓们得不到休息，是为了四件事的缘故：一是为了长寿，二是为了名声，三是为了地位，四是为了财货。
English: Yang Zhu said: The reason why the common people cannot rest is due to four things: one is for longevity, the second is for reputation, the third is for status, and the fourth is for wealth.

古文：有此四者，畏鬼，畏人，畏威，畏刑：此谓之遁民也。
现代文：有了这四件事，便害怕鬼神、害怕人、害怕权势、害怕刑罚，这叫做逃避自然的人。
English: With these four things, they are afraid of ghosts and gods, afraid of people, afraid of authority, and afraid of punishment. This is called escaping from nature.

古文：可杀可活，制命在外。
现代文：这种人可以被杀死，可以活下去，控制生命的力量在自身之外。
English: This kind of person can be killed, can live, and the power to control life is outside of oneself.

古文：不逆命，何羡寿？
现代文：不违背天命，为什么要羡慕长寿？
English: Why envy longevity if it is not contrary to God's will?

古文：不矜贵，何羡名？
现代文：不重视尊贵，为什么要羡慕名声？
English: If you don't value nobility, why do you envy fame?

古文：不要势，何羡位？
现代文：不求取权势，为什么要羡慕地位？
English: Do not seek power, why envy status?

古文：不贪富，何羡货？
现代文：不贪求富裕，为什么要羡慕财货？
English: Do not covet wealth, why envy wealth?

古文：此之谓顺民也。
现代文：这叫做顺应自然的人。
English: It's called being a natural.

古文：天下无对，制命在内。
现代文：这种人天下没有敌手，控制生命的力量在自身之内。
English: This kind of person has no rival in the world. The power to control life lies within oneself.

古文：故语有之曰： 人不婚宦，情欲失半；人不衣食，君臣道息。 
现代文：所以俗话说： 人不结婚做官，情欲便丢掉一半；人不穿衣吃饭，君臣之道便会消失。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: If one does not marry and become an official, one will lose half of one's sexual desire; if one does not wear clothes and eat, the way of a ruler and a subject will disappear.

古文：周谚曰： 田父可坐杀。 
现代文：周都的谚语说： 老衣可以叫做坐在那里死去。 
English: Zhoudu's proverb says: "Old clothes can be called sitting there to die."

古文：晨出夜入，自以性之恒；啜菽茹藿，自以味之极；肌肉粗厚，筋节腃急，一朝处以柔毛绨幕，荐以粱肉兰橘，心靥体烦，内热生病矣。
现代文：早晨外出，夜晚回家，自己认为这是正常的本性；喝豆汁吃豆叶，自己认为这是最好的饮食；肌肉又粗又壮，筋骨关节紧缩弯曲，一旦让他穿上柔软的毛裘和光润的绸绨，吃上细粮鱼肉与香美的水果，就会心忧体烦，内热生病了。
English: He goes out in the morning and comes home at night, and considers this to be his normal nature; he drinks bean juice and eats bean leaves, and considers this to be the best diet; his muscles are thick and strong, and his muscle-bone joints are tight and curved. Once he is dressed in soft fur and glossy satin, and eats fine grain fish meat and fragrant fruits, he will be worried and upset, and become ill with internal heat.

古文：商鲁之君与田父侔地，则亦不盈一时而惫矣。
现代文：如果宋国和鲁国的国君与老农同样种地，那不到一会儿也就疲惫了。
English: If the emperors of Song and Lu had farmed the same land as the old farmers, they would have been exhausted in no time.

古文：故野人之所安，野人之所美，谓天下无过者。
现代文：所以田野里的人觉得安逸的，田野里的人觉得香美的，便说是天下没有比这更好的了。
English: That is why people in the fields feel that the cows are comfortable, and people in the fields feel that they are fragrant, and they say that there is nothing better in the world.

古文：昔者宋国有田夫，常衣缊麻贲，仅以过冬。
现代文：过去宋国有个农夫，经常穿乱麻絮的衣服，并只用它来过冬。
English: In the past, there was a farmer in the Song Dynasty who often wore clothes made of hemp and only used it to survive the winter.

古文：暨春东作，自曝于日，不知天下之有广厦隩室，绵纩狐貉。
现代文：到了春天耕种的时候，自己在太阳下曝晒，不知道天下还有大厦深宫，丝棉与狐貉皮裘。
English: When it comes to spring farming, they are exposed to the sun and do not know that there are also buildings in the world, silk wool and fox fur.

古文：顾谓其妻曰： 负日之暄，人莫知者；以献吾君，将有重赏。 
现代文：回头对他的妻子说： 晒太阳的暖和，准也不知道，把它告诉我的国君，一定会得到重赏。 
English: He turned to his wife and said, "I'm sure you don't know how warm it is in the sun, but if you tell it to my sovereign, I'm sure you'll get a reward."

古文：里之富室告之曰： 昔人有美戎菽，甘枲茎芹萍子者，对乡豪称之。乡豪取而尝之，蜇于口，惨于腹，众哂而怨之，其人大惭。子，此类也。  
现代文：乡里的富人告诉他说： 过去有以胡豆、麻杆、水芹与蒿子为甘美食物的人，对本乡富豪称赞它们，本乡富豪拿来尝了尝，就像毒虫叮刺了嘴巴，肚子也疼痛起来，大家都讥笑并埋怨那个人，那人也大为惭愧。你呀，就是这样一类人。  
English: The rich people in the countryside told him: In the past, there were people who used cowpeas, hemp stalks, cress and hazelnuts as sweet foods, and praised them to the local rich people. The local rich people tasted them, and it was like a poisonous insect stung their mouths, and their stomachs ached. Everyone mocked and complained about that person, and that person was also very ashamed. You are such a kind of person.

古文：杨朱曰： 丰屋美服，厚味姣色，有此四者，何求于外？
现代文：杨朱说： 高大的房屋，华丽的服饰，美味丰盛的食物，姣好的女色，有了这四样，又何必再追求额外的东西呢？
English: Yang Zhu said: Tall houses, gorgeous clothing, delicious and rich food, and beautiful women, with these four things, why do you need to pursue extra things?

古文：有此而求外者，无厌之性。
现代文：有了这些还要另外追求的，就是贪得无厌的缘故了。
English: With all of this, the only thing left to pursue is insatiable greed.

古文：无厌之性，阴阳之蠹也。
现代文：贪得无厌，是天下平衡的祸害。
English: Insatiable greed is a scourge to the balance of the world.

古文：忠不足以安君，适足以危身；义不足以利物，适足以害生。
现代文：忠诚不足以保卫君王，却恰恰足以危害自身；仁义并不能使别人得到利益，却恰恰足以使生命遭到损害。
English: Loyalty is not enough to protect the king, but just enough to harm oneself; benevolence does not benefit others, but just enough to damage one's life.

古文：安上不由于忠，而忠名灭焉；利物不由于义，而义名绝焉。
现代文：保卫君王不是依靠忠诚，那么忠的概念就消失了；使别人得利不来源于义，那么义的概念就断绝了。
English: If the protection of the prince does not depend on loyalty, then the concept of loyalty disappears; if the profit of others does not come from righteousness, then the concept of righteousness disappears.

古文：君臣皆安，物我兼利，古之道也。
现代文：君主与臣下都十分安逸，别人与自己都得到利益，这是古代的行为准则。
English: It was the ancient code of conduct that the monarch and his subjects should be at ease, and that both others and himself should benefit.

古文：鬻子曰： 去名者无忧。 
现代文：鬻子说： 不要名声的人没有忧愁。 
English: The cripple said, "He who has no fame has no sorrow."

古文：老子曰： 名者实之宾。 
现代文：老子说： 名声是实际的宾客。 
English: Laozi said: Fame is the real guest.

古文：而悠悠者趋名不已。名固不可去？名固不可宾邪？
现代文：但那些忧愁的人总是追求名声而不曾停止，难道名声本来就不能不要，名声本来就不能作宾客吗？
English: But those who are sad always pursue fame and never stop. Isn't it true that one can't do without fame, that one can't be a guest of fame?

古文：今有名则尊荣，亡名则卑辱。
现代文：现在有名声的人就尊贵荣耀，没有名声的人就卑贱屈辱。
English: Now the man of reputation is honored and glorified, and the man of no reputation is abased and disgraced.

古文：尊荣则逸乐，卑辱则忧苦。
现代文：尊贵荣耀便安逸快乐，卑贱屈辱便忧愁苦恼。
English: Honorable glory brings ease and happiness, and lowly humiliation brings sorrow and distress.

古文：忧苦，犯性者也；逸乐，顺性者也。
现代文：忧愁苦恼是违反本性的，安逸快乐是顺应本性的。
English: Sorrow and anguish are contrary to nature, and ease and happiness are in accordance with nature.

古文：斯实之所系矣。
现代文：这些与实际又紧密相关。
English: These are also closely related to reality.

古文：名胡可去？
现代文：名声怎么能不要？
English: How can you not want fame?

古文：名胡可宾？
现代文：名声怎么能作宾客？
English: How can a celebrity be a guest?

古文：但恶夫守名而累实。
现代文：只是担心为了坚守名声而损害了实际啊！
English: I'm just worried that in order to hold on to my reputation, I've damaged reality!

古文：守名而累实，将恤危亡之不救，岂徒逸乐忧苦之间哉？ 
现代文：坚守名声而损害了实际，所担忧的是连危险灭亡都挽救不了，难道仅仅是在安逸快乐与忧愁苦恼这二者之间吗？ 
English: Holding fast to reputation to the detriment of reality, worrying that even the danger of death cannot be saved, is it just between the two of ease and happiness and sorrow and distress?

