古文：后汉中兴初，汝南有应枢者，生四子，而尽见神光照社。
现代文：东汉中兴的初年，汝南郡有一个叫应妪的人，生了四个孩子便成了寡妇。
English: In the first year of the rise of the Eastern Han Dynasty, there was a man in Runan County named Ying Qi, who became a widow after giving birth to four children.

古文：枢见光，以问卜人。
现代文：有一天，她看见一道神光射进土地庙。应妪看见了这光，便去问占卜的人。
English: One day, the land temple was illuminated by the divine light, and when Ying Zhuo saw the divine light, he went to ask the people of the divination society.

古文：卜人曰： 此天祥也。
现代文：占卜的人说： 这是上天降下的好兆头啊。
English: The soothsayer said, "This is a good omen from heaven."

古文：子孙其兴乎！ 
现代文：你的子孙大概要兴隆了吧！ 
English: Your children and grandchildren will probably prosper!

古文：乃探得黄金。
现代文：于是她就在那神光照射处掏到了黄金。
English: The receiver then detects the gold.

古文：自是子孙宦学，并有才名。
现代文：从此以后，她的子孙做官治学，都很有才华名声。
English: Since then, her children and grandchildren have been doing government studies, and they are all very talented and famous.

古文：至玚，七世通显。
现代文：到应场的时候，前后七代人，都官位高、名声大。
English: By the time of Ying Zang, the seven generations of the Ying Zang family were all outstanding and accomplished.

古文：车骑将军巴郡冯绲，字鸿卿，初为议郎，发绶笥，有二赤蛇，可长二尺，分南北走。
现代文：车骑将军巴郡人冯绲，字鸿卿。他开始任议郎的时候，打开藏官印的箱子，看见箱内有两条赤练蛇，大约长二尺，分别向南北方游走了。
English: When he began to serve as the speaker, he opened the box with the seal of the Tibetan official and saw two red snakes, about two feet long, swimming away to the north and south.

古文：大用忧怖。
现代文：他非常担忧恐惧。
English: He's very worried and scared.

古文：许季山孙宪，字宁方，得其先人秘要，绲请使卜。
现代文：许季山的孙子许宪，字宁方，曾得到他先祖的秘诀。冯绲求他占卜。
English: Xu Qishan's grandson Xu Xian, also known as Ningfang, had once obtained his ancestor's secret recipe. Feng Xuan asked him for a divination.

古文：云： 此吉祥也。
现代文：他说： 这是吉利的征兆。
English: He said: This is a sign of good luck.

古文：君后三岁，当为边将，东北四五里，官以东为名。 
现代文：您过三年，会当上边关守将，在东北方四五千里，您的官名带有东字。 
English: In three years, you will be a border guard in the upper reaches, and in the northeast, four or five thousand miles away, your official name will have the East character.

古文：后五年，从大将军南征，居无何，拜尚书郎，辽东太守，南征将军。
现代文：过了五年，冯绲跟随大将军南征。过了没多少时候，他就任尚书郎、辽东太守、南征将军。
English: Five years later, Feng Xuan followed the general to the south. Not long after, he was appointed as Shang Shulang, the governor of Liaodong and the general of the southern expedition.

古文：常山张颢为梁州牧，天新雨后，有鸟如山鹊，飞翔入市，忽然坠地。人争取之，化为圆石。
现代文：常山郡人张颢，当了梁国的相。天刚下过雨，有一只鸟象山鹊，飞进街市，忽然落到地上，人们都争着去拾它，它却变成了圆圆的石头。
English: Zhang Qian, a resident of Changshan County, became the face of Liang Guo. It had just rained. A bird resembling a hawthorn flew into the market and suddenly fell to the ground. People were all scrambling to pick it up, but it turned into a round stone.

古文：颢椎破之，得一金印，文曰： 忠孝侯印。 
现代文：张颢用锤子把它打破了，得到一枚金印，印文是： 忠孝侯印。 
English: Zhang Yao broke it with a hammer and got a gold seal, the seal is: From the Prince of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：颢以上闻，藏之秘府。
现代文：张颢把这件事向上作了汇报，这枚金印便被收藏在保密室。
English: Zhang Qian reported the matter to the higher-ups, and the gold seal was stored in the confidential room.

古文：后议郎汝南樊衡夷上言： 尧舜时旧有此官。今天降印，宜可复置。 
现代文：后来议郎汝南郡人樊衡夷上奏说： 尧、舜时代曾经有过这种官职，现在上天降下这个官印，应该再设置这个官职。 
English: Later, Zou Hengyi, a member of the Yongnan County People's Political Consultative Conference, said: "There used to be such an official post in the Zhou and Zhou Dynasties. Now that Heaven has lowered this official seal, this official post should be re-established.

古文：颢后官至太尉。
现代文：张颢后来做官一直做到太尉。
English: Later, as an official, Zhang Ye was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：京兆长安有张氏，独处一室，有鸠自外入，止于床。
现代文：京兆长安县有个姓张的人，孤身一人住在一个房间里。有只鸠从外面飞进来，停在他的床上。
English: A man surnamed Zhang in Beijing's Chang'an County lived alone in a room. A dragonfly flew in from outside and landed on his bed.

古文：张氏祝曰： 鸠来，为我祸也，飞上承尘；为我福也，即入我怀。 
现代文：张氏祈祷说： 鸠过来听着！你如果给我带来灾祸，就飞到天花板上，你如果给我带来幸福，就飞进我的怀里。 
English: Mr. Zhang said in prayer: "Come here and listen! If you bring me disaster, fly to the ceiling. If you bring me happiness, fly into my arms."

古文：鸠飞入怀。
现代文：鸠就飞进了他的怀里。
English: The dragonfly flew into his arms.

古文：以手探之，则不知鸠之所在，而得一金钩。遂宝之。
现代文：他用手去摸取那只鸠，却不知那鸠到什么地方去了，但摸到了一只金钩，于是他就把它当作宝贝。
English: He felt with his hand for the beak, and did not know where it was, but he felt a golden hook, and he took it as a treasure.

古文：自是子孙渐富，资财万倍。
现代文：从此以后，张氏的子孙渐渐富裕，财产增加了上万倍。
English: Since then, the descendants of the Zhang family have gradually become rich, and their property has increased ten thousand times.

古文：蜀贾至长安，闻之，乃厚赂婢，婢窃钩与贾。
现代文：蜀国有个商人到长安，听见这件事以后，就重重贿赂张家的婢女，婢女就偷了金钩把它送给这商人。
English: A merchant from the State of Shu came to Chang'an. When he heard about this, he bribed the maid of the Zhang family. The maid stole the gold hook and gave it to the merchant.

古文：张氏既失钩，渐渐衰耗！
现代文：张家失去了金钩以后，财产渐渐减少。
English: After the Zhang family lost the golden hook, their property gradually decreased.

古文：而蜀贾亦数罹穷厄，不为己利。
现代文：而蜀国的商人也屡次遭到穷困，那金钩对自己并没有什么好处。
English: But the merchants of Shu were also repeatedly impoverished, and that golden hook did not do them any good.

古文：或告之曰： 天命也。不可力求。 
现代文：有人告诉他说： 这发财是上天的旨意，是不可以用人力来求得的。 
English: Someone told him: "This wealth is God's will, it cannot be obtained by human effort."

古文：于是赉钩以反张氏，张氏复昌。
现代文：于是他就把金钩送还给了张家，张家就又兴旺了。
English: So he gave the gold hook back to the Zhang family, and the Zhang family prospered again.

古文：故关西称张氏传钩云。
现代文：所以函谷关西边的人经常传颂这 张氏传金钧 的故事。
English: That's why people in the western part of the Kansai region of Hakodate often tell the story of how the Zhang family passed down the gold ingot.

古文：汉征和三年三月，天大雨，何比干在家，日中，梦贵客车骑满门。
现代文：汉征和三年三月，天上下着大雨。何比干呆在家里，中午的时候，他梦见高贵的宾客车马挤满了家门。
English: It rained heavily in Han Zheng and March of the third year. He Bigen stayed at home, and at noon, he dreamed that the noble guest coaches were crowded with families.

古文：觉，以语妻。语未巳，而门有老妪，可八十余，头白，求寄避雨，雨甚，而衣不沾渍。
现代文：醒来后他把梦告诉给妻子听，话还没有说完，却看见门口站着个老婆婆，大概八十多岁，头发全白了，来何比干家请求躲雨。雨下得很大，但她的衣服却一点也没淋湿。
English: When he woke up, he told his dream to his wife, but before he had finished, he saw an old woman standing in the doorway, probably in her eighties, with completely white hair, who had come to the house to ask for shelter from the rain. It was raining heavily, but her clothes were not wet at all.

古文：雨止，送至门，乃谓比干曰： 公有阴德，今天锡君策，以广公之子孙。 
现代文：雨停了以后，何比干送他到门口，她就对何比干说： 您暗中给人好处，所以我今天送给您一些符策，来拓宽拓宽您子孙的前途。 
English: After the rain stopped, He Bi Gan walked him to the door, and she said to He Bi Gan: You secretly give people benefits, so today I will give you some tips to broaden and broaden the future of your children and grandchildren.

古文：因出怀中符策，状如简，长九寸，凡九百九十枚，以授比干，曰： 子孙佩印绶者，当如此算。 
现代文：说完她就拿出怀中的符策，形状象竹筒，长九寸，一共有九百九十根，她把这些符策给了何比干，并对他说： 您子孙佩带官印的，会象这符策上所写的那样。 
English: When she had finished speaking, she took out the nine-hundred-and-ninety-foot-long bamboo-like symbols from her bosom, gave them to He Bi Gan, and said to him, "Your descendants will wear the official seal just as it is written on this symbol."

古文：魏舒，字阳元，任城樊人也。少孤，尝诣野王，主人妻夜产，俄而闻车马之声，相问曰： 男也？
现代文：魏舒，字阳元，任城国樊县人，从小失去了父母，有一次他到野王县去，房主的妻子正好在那天夜里分娩，一会儿他听见车马的声音，就问车里的人说： 主人的老婆生男孩呢？
English: Wei Shu, the character Yang Yuan, a resident of Rencheng County, lost his parents when he was a child. Once he went to Noowang County. The homeowner's wife had just given birth that night. After a while, he heard the sound of a carriage and asked the people in the carriage, "Is the owner's old woman having a boy?"

古文：女也？ 
现代文：还是生女孩？ 
English: Or is it a girl?

古文：曰： 男。 
现代文：那车中的人回答说： 是男孩。
English: The person in the car replied: "It's a boy."

古文：书之。 十五，以兵死。 
现代文：请你把它写下来：这孩子十五岁时死在兵器上。 
English: Please write it down: this child died at the age of fifteen from a weapon.

古文：复问： 寝者为谁？ 
现代文：魏舒又问： 睡在床上的是谁？ 
English: He also asked: Who is sleeping in the house?

古文：曰： 魏公舒， 后十五载，诣主人，问所生童何在？
现代文：车中的人回答说： 是魏公。 魏舒过了十五年，到主人家去，问生下的孩子在什么地方。
English: The people in the car replied, "It's Wei Gong." After 15 years, Wei Shu went to his master's house to ask where the child he had given birth to was.

古文：曰： 因条桑，为斧伤而死。 
现代文：主人回答说： 因为整修桑树，被斧头砍伤死了。 
English: The owner replied: "He was killed by an axe while he was pruning a mulberry tree."

古文：舒自知当为公矣。
现代文：魏舒便知道自己要当王公大人了。
English: Wei Shu knows that he will become a public figure.

古文：贾谊为长沙王太傅，四月庚子日，有鹏鸟飞入其舍，止于坐隅，良久，乃去。
现代文：贾谊做长沙王太傅，四月庚子日，有鹏鸟飞进他的住房，停在座位边上，很久才飞走。
English: Jia Yi was the Changsha King Taifu. In April, Geng Zi Day, a robin flew into his house, stopped on the edge of the seat, and flew away for a long time.

古文：谊发书占之，曰： 野鸟入室，主人将去。 
现代文：贾谊打开书来预测吉凶，书上说： 野鸟入室，主人将去。 
English: Jia Yi opened the book to predict the fortunes. The book said: "If a wild bird enters the house, the owner will leave."

古文：谊忌之，故作鵩鸟赋，齐死生而等祸福，以致命定志焉。
现代文：贾谊很忌讳这件事，所以写了《鸟赋》，把死和生、祸与福看成是同等的事，用这种观点来安排自己的生命、确定自己的志向。
English: Jia Yi is very taboo about this matter, so he wrote "Bird Fu," regarded death and life, misfortune and fortune as the same thing, and used this point of view to arrange his life and determine his aspirations.

古文：王莽居摄，东郡太守翟义，知其将篡汉，谋举义兵。
现代文：王莽暂居皇帝之位处理政务。东郡太守翟义知道他将要篡夺汉朝的大权，便策划正义的军队起义。
English: Wang Mang temporarily held the position of emperor to deal with government affairs. Dong County Daju Xinyi knew that he was going to usurp the power of the Han Dynasty, so he planned a righteous army uprising.

古文：兄宣，教授诸生，满堂。
现代文：他的哥哥翟宣，是教授，他所教的学生坐满了课堂。
English: His brother, Yu Xuan, is a professor, and his classes are filled with students.

古文：群鹅雁数十在中庭，有狗从外入，啮之，皆死。
现代文：一群鹅和雁几十只都在院子中，有条狗突然从门外进来，把它们都咬死了。
English: A group of dozens of geese and geese were in the yard when a dog suddenly came in through the door and bit them all to death.

古文：惊救之，皆断头。
现代文：翟宣慌忙去教它们，但都已经被狗咬断了头。
English: Xuan Xuan hurried to teach them, but all of them had been bitten by dogs.

古文：狗走出门，求，不知处。宣大恶之。
现代文：狗跑出了门，翟宣出去寻找，也不知道它到了什么地方，翟宣很讨厌这件事。
English: The dog ran out of the door, and Yu Xuan went out to look for it, not knowing where it was. Yu Xuan hated this.

古文：数日，莽夷其三族。
现代文：过了几天，王莽诛灭了他的父族、母族和妻族。
English: A few days later, Wang Mang annihilated his father's clan, his mother's clan and his wife's clan.

古文：魏司马太傅懿平公孙渊，斩渊父子。
现代文：魏国太傅司马鼓平定了公孙渊，杀了公孙渊父子二人。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, the Wei ruler Sima Yu subdued Gongsun Yuan and killed Gongsun Yuan and his son.

古文：先时，渊家数有怪：一犬着冠帻，绛衣，上屋。欻有一儿，蒸死甑中。
现代文：开始的时候，公孙渊家多次发生奇怪的事，一只狗戴着帽子头巾穿着红衣裳爬上了屋顶，忽然又有一个孩子在锅中被蒸死了。
English: At the beginning, strange things happened to Gongsun Yuan's family many times. A dog wearing a cap and headscarf and dressed in red clothes climbed onto the roof, and suddenly another child was steamed to death in a pot.

古文：襄平北市，生肉，长围各数尺，有头、目、口、喙，无手、足，而动摇。
现代文：襄平县北边市场上长出一块肉，长度和围圆各有几尺，有头、眼睛、嘴巴，没有手、脚却摇摇晃晃的。
English: In a market on the northern edge of Yangping County, a piece of meat has sprung up, several feet long and several feet in circumference. It has a head, eyes and mouth, but no hands or feet, but it is wobbly.

古文：占者曰： 有形不成，有体无声，其国灭亡。 
现代文：占卜的人说： 有形状而没有长成，有躯体而没有声音，发生这种怪事的国家就会灭亡。 
English: And the diviners said, There is a form, but no substance; and there is a body, but no voice: and the nation where these things are done shall be destroyed.

古文：吴诸葛恪征淮南，归，将朝会之夜，精爽扰动，通夕不寐。
现代文：吴国诸葛恪出征淮南回来，将要朝见君主的那天晚上，心烦意乱，整个晚上都没睡着。
English: Zhuge Ke of the State of Wu returned from conquering Huainan, and on the evening of the day he was to meet the monarch, he was distraught and did not sleep all night.

古文：严毕趋出，犬衔引其衣。恪曰： 犬不欲我行耶？ 
现代文：第二天，他穿戴整齐后恭敬地小步快跑出门，狗咬住他的衣服拉着不放，诸葛恪说： 狗不让我走啊。 
English: The next day, after he was neatly dressed, he respectfully ran out of the door at a small pace. The dog bit his clothes and held on to them. Zhuge Ke said, "The dog won't let me go."

古文：出，仍入坐，少顷，复起，犬又衔衣。恪令从者逐之。
现代文：出门后便又进门坐下。过了一会儿他又起身，狗又咬住他的衣服，诸葛恪叫随从赶走了狗。
English: After going out, he went back in and sat down. After a while, he got up again, the dog bit his clothes again, and Zhuge shouted to his followers to chase the dog away.

古文：及入，果被杀。
现代文：等他进宫后，果然被杀了。
English: After he entered the palace, he was killed.

古文：其妻在室，语使婢曰： 尔何故血臭？ 
现代文：他妻子在家里，问她的丫鬟说： 你为什么有血腥气？ 丫鬟说： 没有啊。 
English: When his wife was at home, she asked her maid, "Why are you so bloody-minded?"

古文：婢曰： 不也。 有顷，愈剧。又问婢曰： 汝眼目瞻视，何以不常？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，血腥气更厉害了，她又问丫鬟说： 你的眼睛向上看，为什么不同平常？ 
English: After a while, when the blood was thicker, she asked the maidservant again, "Your eyes look upwards, why are they different from usual?

古文：婢蹶然起跃，头至于栋，攘臂切齿而言曰： 诸葛公乃为孙峻所杀。 
现代文：这丫鬟突然跳起来，头一直撞到梁上，挽起臂膀咬牙切齿地说： 诸葛公竟被孙峻杀了。 
English: The servant girl suddenly jumped up, hit her head on the beam, put up her arms, gritted her teeth and said: Zhuge Gong was actually killed by Sun Jun.

古文：于是大小知恪死矣。而吏兵寻至。
现代文：于是一家老小都知道诸葛恪死了，而官兵一会儿就来了。
English: As a result, everyone in the family knew that Zhuge Ke was dead, and the officers and soldiers would come in a moment.

古文：吴戍将邓喜杀猪祠神，治毕，悬之，忽见一人头，往食肉。
现代文：吴国的守将邓喜，杀了猪来祭神，祭祀完毕后就把猪挂了起来。
English: Deng Xi, the governor of Wuxi, killed a pig to sacrifice to the gods, and after the sacrifice was over, he hung the pig up.

古文：喜引弓射中之，咋咋作声，绕屋三日。
现代文：忽然看见一个人头去吃肉，邓喜拉弓射他，把他射中了，那人头发出咋咋咋的声音，围绕邓喜的房子转了三天。
English: Suddenly, he saw a man's head going to eat meat. Deng Xilai shot him with a bow and hit him. The man's head made a whirring sound and circled around Deng Xilai's house for three days.

古文：后人白喜谋叛，合门被诛。
现代文：后来有人告发邓喜谋反，他全家都被杀了。
English: Later, someone accused Deng Xi of plotting a rebellion, and his entire family was killed.

古文：贾充伐吴时，常屯项城，军中忽失充所在。
现代文：贾充讨伐吴国的时候，曾经驻扎在项城，有一天军营中忽然不见了贾充。
English: Jia Chong was stationed in Xiangcheng when he was fighting against the Wu Kingdom. One day, Jia Chong suddenly disappeared from the military camp.

古文：充帐下都督周勤时昼寝，梦见百余人，录充引入一径。
现代文：贾充的部下都督周勤，当时在午睡，梦见一百多个人逮捕了贾充，把他带进一条小路。
English: Jia Chong's subordinate, Governor Zhou Qin, was napping at the time and dreamed that more than a hundred people had arrested Jia Chong and taken him to a small road.

古文：勤惊觉，闻失充，乃出寻索。忽睹所梦之道，遂往求之。
现代文：周勤惊醒了，听说不见了贾充，就出去寻找，忽然看见他做梦时所见到的那条路，就沿着这条路去找他，果然看见了贾充。
English: Zhou Qin woke up with a start, heard that Jia Chong was missing, went out to look for him, and suddenly saw the road he had seen in his dream. He followed this road to look for him, and finally saw Jia Chong.

古文：果见充行至一府舍，侍卫甚盛，府公南面坐，声色甚厉，谓充曰： 将乱吾家事者，必尔与荀勖。
现代文：周勤来到一所府第，只见那侍从警卫的人很多，府第的主人朝南坐着，说话的声音和容貌很严厉，对贾充说： 将扰乱我家事情的，必定是你与荀勖。
English: Zhou Qin came to a mansion, only to see that the attendants and guards were many. The owner of the mansion sat facing south, speaking with a very stern voice and face. He said to Jia Chong: "It must be you and Zou who will disturb the affairs of my family."

古文：既惑吾子，又乱吾孙，间使任恺黜汝而不去，又使庾纯詈汝而不改。
现代文：你们既迷惑了我的儿子，又搅昏了我的孙子。我暗中让任恺贬退你而你不退下去，又让庾纯责备你而你不改。
English: Ye have seduced my son, and ye have deceived my son's son: therefore will I give you over in secret, and ye shall not go back: yea, I will rebuke you in secret, and ye shall not return.

古文：今吴寇当平，汝方表斩张华。
现代文：现在吴国的敌寇要平息了，你又要上奏杀张华。
English: Now that Wu is about to be pacified, you want to go to the table and cut off Zhang Hua.

古文：汝之暗戆，皆此类也。
现代文：你的昏乱愚昧，都是属于这一类的事。
English: Your confusion and stupidity are of this kind.

古文：若不悛慎，当旦夕加诛。 
现代文：如果你还不悔改、还不谨慎，我就马上把你杀了。 
English: If you are still unrepentant and imprudent, I will kill you immediately.

古文：充叩头流血。
现代文：贾充因而不停地磕头，头上都流出血来了。
English: As a result, Jia Chong kept scratching his head, and blood began to flow from his head.

古文：府公曰： 汝所以延日月而名器若此者，是卫府之勋耳。
现代文：这府官说： 你之所以能苟延生命而有这样的名望地位，只是因为你有护卫我府第的功劳罢了。
English: The governor said, "The reason why you have been able to prolong your life and have such a prestigious position is only because you have the merit of guarding our capital.

古文：终当使系嗣死于钟虞之间，大子毙于金酒之中，小子困于枯木之下。
现代文：但最终还是要让你的继承人死在钟柱之间，让你的大孩子死在金酒之中，让你的小孩子困死在干枯的木头之下。
English: But in the end, your heirs will die between the bells, your great-grandchildren will die in the wine, and your little ones will die under the dry wood.

古文：荀勖亦宜同然。其先德小浓，故在汝后。
现代文：荀勖也应该得到同样的下场，但他祖先的德行稍微深厚一点，所以对他的处罚排在你的后面。
English: Xing deserves the same fate, but his ancestor's virtue is a little deeper, so his punishment is behind yours.

古文：数世之外，国嗣亦替。 
现代文：几代以后，他封地的继承人也要被废黜。 
English: Generations later, the heir to his fiefdom would also be dethroned.

古文：言毕命去。
现代文：府官说完就命令贾充离去。
English: Having said that, he let Jia Chong leave.

古文：充忽然得还营，颜色憔悴，性理昏错，经日乃复。
现代文：贾充忽然回到了军营，面色憔悴，神态错乱，过了几天才恢复正常。
English: Jia Chong suddenly returned to the military camp, looking haggard and disoriented. It took him a few days to return to normal.

古文：至后，谧死于钟下，贾后服金酒而死，贾午考竟用大杖终。
现代文：到后来，贾谧死在钟下，贾后饮服金酒而死，贾午被拷问而死于狱中，是用大棒打死的。
English: Later, Jia Jun died under the bell, Jia Hou died after drinking gin, Jia Wu was tortured and died in prison, he was beaten to death with a big stick.

古文：皆如所言。
现代文：这些事都象府官所说的那样。
English: It later turned out to be just as Cui Yao had said.

古文：庾亮，字文康，鄢陵人，镇荆州，豋厕，忽见厕中一物，如 方相， 两眼尽赤，身有光耀，渐渐从土中出。
现代文：庾亮，字文康，鄢陵县人。他镇守荆州的时候，有一次上厕所，忽然看见厕所中有一个怪物，形状象驱疫辟邪的神像方相，俩眼通红，身上闪烁发光，渐渐地从泥土中钻出来，还竟然捋起袖子。
English: When he was in charge of Jingzhou, he went to the toilet one day and suddenly saw a monster in the toilet. It was shaped like a square of a god who drives away evil. Its eyes were red and its body shimmered. It gradually emerged from the dirt and even rolled up its sleeves.

古文：乃攘臂，以拳击之。应手有声，缩入地。因而寝疾。
现代文：伸出胳膊，用拳头打庾亮，随着手起拳落，庾亮叫了一声，那怪物便退进泥土中去了，庾亮因此而卧病不起。
English: He stretched out his arm and punched the grasshopper with his fist. As his fist fell, the grasshopper let out a scream. The monster retreated into the dirt, and the grasshopper lay ill as a result.

古文：术士戴洋曰： 昔苏峻事公，于白石祠中祈福，许赛其牛。从来未解。故为此鬼所考，不可救也。 
现代文：方士戴洋对庾亮说， 过去苏峻起兵作乱的时候，您在白石祠中求福，答应用那牛来酬神，但您从来没有去还愿，所以被这鬼打了，您已经无法挽救了。
English: Fang Shi Dai Yang said to Yu Liang, "In the past, when Su Jun started a riot, you asked for blessings in the White Stone Shrine and promised to use the cow to reward the god, but you never went to return the wish, so you were beaten by this ghost and you can no longer be saved."

古文：明年，亮果亡。
现代文：第二年，庾亮果然死了。
English: The following year, Hao Liang died.

古文：东阳刘宠字道弘，居于湖熟，每夜，门庭自有血数升，不知所从来。
现代文：东阳郡人刘宠字道和，住在湖熟县。每天夜里，他门前的空地上总有几升血，不知道是从什么地方来的。
English: Dongyang County resident Liu Zhaoji Douwa lives in Hujiao County. Every night, there are always several liters of blood in the open space in front of his door, and he doesn't know where it came from.

古文：如此三四。
现代文：象这样的事发生了三四次。
English: This sort of thing happened three or four times.

古文：后宠为折冲将军，见遣北征，将行，而炊尽变为虫。
现代文：后来，刘宠任折冲将军，被派往北方打仗。将要出发的时候，烧的饭都变成了虫。
English: Later, Liu Ji served as General Orichong and was sent to the north to fight. When he was about to leave, all the cooked rice turned into worms.

古文：其家人蒸炒，亦变为虫。其火愈猛，其虫愈壮。
现代文：他家里的人熬煮沙糖，也都变成了虫，那火愈猛，那虫就愈壮。
English: People in his family boiled sugar cane and they all turned into worms. The hotter the fire, the stronger the worms.

古文：宠遂北征，军败于坛邱，为徐龛所杀。
现代文：刘宠就到北方去打仗了，结果部队在坛丘吃了败仗，他被徐龛杀掉了。
English: Liu Cun went to the north to fight, and as a result, the troops were defeated at the altar mound, and he was killed by Xu Xi.

