古文：嵩岳嫁女裴航
现代文：嵩岳嫁女裴航
English: Songyue's daughter-in-law Pei Hang

古文：嵩岳嫁女
现代文：嵩岳嫁女
English: Song Yue's daughter-in-law

古文：三礼田璆者，甚有文，通熟群书，与其友邓韶博学相类。
现代文：三礼田璆很有文采，精通群书，学识渊博，与其友邓韶相类似。
English: Sanre Tianjun was very literate, well versed in books, and learned a lot, similar to his friend Deng Yu.

古文：皆以人昧，不能彰其明。
现代文：都因为人太老实，不能把优点显示出来。
English: All because people are too honest to show their strengths.

古文：家于洛阳。元和癸巳岁，中秋望夕，携觞晚出建春门，期望月于韶别墅。
现代文：他家住在洛阳，元和年间癸巳那一年中秋节的晚上，田璆携带酒具，傍晚从建春门出来，准备到邓韶的别墅赴约赏月。
English: His family lived in Luoyang. On the evening of the Mid-Autumn Festival that year, between the years of the Yuan and He, Tian Yu, carrying wine, came out of the Jianchun Gate in the evening, preparing to go to Deng Yu's villa to watch the moon.

古文：行二三里，遇韶，亦携觞自东来。
现代文：走了二三里地，遇到了邓韶，邓韶也携带着酒具从东边走来。
English: After walking for two or three miles, he met Deng Yao. Deng Yao was also coming from the east with drinking utensils.

古文：驻马道周，未决所适。
现代文：两个人在道边停下马，还没有决定往哪里去。
English: Two people stop their horses on the side of the road, undecided where to go.

古文：有二书生乘骢，复出建春门。
现代文：这时又有两个书生骑着青白色的马，也从建春门出来。
English: At this time, two more students, riding a blue-and-white horse, also came out of the Jianchun Gate.

古文：揖璆、韶曰： 二君子挈榼，得非求今夕望月地乎？
现代文：他们与田璆、邓韶作揖见礼，然后说： 二位君子带着酒具，莫非是寻找今天晚上赏月的地方吗？
English: They bowed to Tian Xuan and Deng Xuan, and then said: "The two gentlemen are carrying wine utensils, are they looking for a place to watch the moon tonight?"

古文：某弊庄，水竹台榭，名闻洛下。东南去此三二里。倘能迂辔。
现代文：我有个庄园，水竹台榭在洛阳一带是出名的，往东南走离这三二里地，倘能调转马头，我希望能看到所仰慕的本分。 
English: I have a manor. Shuizhu Taiguo is famous in the Luoyang area. If you go southeast from this 32 miles, if you can turn the horse's head, I hope you can see the duty I admire.

古文：冀展倾盖之分耳。 璆、韶甚惬所望，乃从而往。
现代文：田璆、邓韶对二位书生的邀请很满意，就跟着他们前往。
English: Tian Rong and Deng Rong were very satisfied with the invitation from the two scholars, so they went with them.

古文：问其姓氏，多他语对。
现代文：问二位书生的姓名，都被他们用别的话叉开。
English: When asked the names of the two scholars, they both used different words.

古文：行数里，桂轮已升。
现代文：走了几里地，月亮已经升起来，到了一小门。
English: After walking for a few miles, the moon had risen and we arrived at a small gate.

古文：至一车门，始入甚荒凉，又行数百步，有异香迎前而来，则豁然真境矣。
现代文：刚进去时觉得很荒凉，又走了几百步，就有特别的香味迎面而来，真是到了仙境了。
English: When I first entered, I felt very desolate. After walking a few hundred steps, I was greeted by a special scent. It was truly a wonderland.

古文：泉瀑交流，松桂夹道；奇花异草，照烛如昼；好鸟腾翥，和月阕。
现代文：那里泉瀑交流，松桂夹道；奇花异草，明烛照耀如同白昼；俊鸟腾飞，应和月上宫阕。
English: Where springs and waterfalls mingle, and pine and cinnamon intertwine; where strange flowers and grasses bloom, and bright candles shine like day; where beautiful birds soar, and the moon rises over the palace.

古文：璆、韶请疾马飞觞。书生曰： 足下榼中。厥味何如？ 
现代文：田璆、邓韶要求打马快走以便传杯痛饮，书生问道： 您的酒器中酒的味道怎么样？ 
English: Tian Yao and Deng Yao asked the horse to walk fast so that they could pass the cup to drink, and the scholar asked: What is the taste of the wine in your wine container?

古文：璆、韶曰： 乾和五酘，虽上清醍醐，计不加此味也。 
现代文：田璆、邓韶回答说： 我们带的是乾和五酘。即便上清官的醍醐，估计也不比这种酒的味道好。 
English: Tian Rong and Deng Rong replied, "We brought dried and five-leaf clover. Even the Dai Rong of the Upper Qing Dynasty is not better than the taste of this kind of wine."

古文：书生曰： 某有瑞露之酒，酿于百花之中，不知与足下五酘熟愈耳。 
现代文：书生说： 我有瑞露酒，在百花之中酿成，不知与您的五酘哪个更好。 
English: The scholar said: I have Ruilu wine, brewed in a hundred flowers, I don't know which is better than your five gourds.

古文：谓小童曰： 折烛夜一花，倾与二君子尝。 
现代文：于是对小童说： 折一支烛夜花，倒给二位先生尝尝。 
English: So he said to the boy: "Fold a candle and pour it out for the two gentlemen to taste.

古文：其花四出而深红，圆如小瓶，径三寸余，绿叶形类杯，触之有余韵。
现代文：烛夜花每枝四朵，深红色，花形圆如小瓶，直径三寸多，绿叶形似酒杯，触碰它还有余香。
English: Each of the four branches of the candle night flower is crimson, the flower shape is round like a small bottle, more than three inches in diameter, the green leaves are shaped like a wine glass, and there is residual fragrance when it is touched.

古文：小童折花至，于竹叶中凡飞数巡，其味甘香，不可比状。
现代文：小童把花折来，在竹叶中一共传饮数巡。花汁味道又甜又香，不可比拟形容。
English: The children folded the flowers and passed them around in the bamboo leaves. The taste of the flower juice is sweet and fragrant, and cannot be described in words.

古文：饮讫，又东南行。数里至一门，书生揖二客下马，觞以烛夜花中之余，赍诸从者，饮一杯，皆大醉，各止于户外。
现代文：喝完了，又往东南走，过了几里来到一个门前，书生揖请二位客人下马，又用酒杯装上了烛夜花中剩下的瑞露酒，赏给从者每人一杯，都喝得大醉，各自停步于门外。
English: After drinking, he walked south-east again. After a few miles, he came to a gate. He invited two guests to dismount. He filled a wine glass with the remaining Ruilu wine from the candle night flowers, and gave each follower a cup. They were all very drunk and stopped outside the gate.

古文：乃引客入，则有鸾鹤数十，腾舞来迎。步而前，花转，酒味尤美。
现代文：于是领着二位客人入内，这时就有几十只鸾鸟仙鹤腾舞着来迎接，迈步向前走，花更多了，酒味更美了。
English: So he led the two guests inside, whereupon dozens of storks and cranes danced to greet them, striding forward, the flowers more numerous, the wine more delicious.

古文：其百花皆芳香，压枝于路傍。
现代文：那里的百花都散发着芳香，把花枝压得低垂于路旁。
English: All the flowers there are fragrant, and their branches hang low on the roadside.

古文：凡历池馆堂榭，率皆陈设盘筵，若有所待，但不留璆、韶坐。
现代文：凡是经过池馆堂榭，全都陈设着盘筵，好像等待什么人的样子，只是不留田璆、邓韶去坐。
English: When passing through the hall of the pond hall, all the seats were set up, as if they were waiting for someone, but they did not leave Tian Yao and Deng Yao to sit.

古文：璆、韶饮多、行又甚倦，请暂憩盘筵。
现代文：田璆、邓韶喝多了，走得又很疲倦，要求到盘筵暂时小憩。
English: Tian Yao and Deng Yao had drunk too much and were very tired, so they asked Pan Yao for a short break.

古文：书生曰： 坐以何难？
现代文：书生说： 坐一坐又有何难？
English: The student said, "What's so hard about sitting down for a while?

古文：但不利于君耳。 
现代文：只不过对您不利罢了。 
English: It's just bad for you.

古文：璆、韶诘其由。
现代文：田璆、邓韶讯问其中缘故。
English: Tian Rong and Deng Rong inquired about the reason.

古文：曰： 今夕中天群仙，会于兹岳，籍君神魄，不杂腥膻。请以知礼导升降。
现代文：书生说： 今天晚上，天上群仙在这座山岳聚会，借您的神魂，不与腥膻相混杂，因为您知礼仪请您引导升降。
English: The student said, "This evening, the celestial fairies are gathering in this mountain. By your spirit, do not mingle with the evil spirits, because you know the etiquette, please guide the ascending and descending.

古文：此皆神仙位坐，不宜尘触耳。 
现代文：这都是群仙的座位，尘世人不宜触动啊。 
English: These are the seats of the immortals, and should not be touched by mortals.

古文：言讫，见直北花烛亘天，箫韶沸空，驻云母双车于金堤之上，设水晶方盘于瑶幄之内。群仙方奏霓裳羽衣曲。
现代文：说完，就看见正北花烛在天空绵亘不断，仙乐使天空沸腾起来，在金堤之上停驻着云母双车，在瑶幄之内摆设着水晶方盘。群仙正演奏着霓裳羽衣曲。
English: After saying this, I saw the north flower candle in the sky continuously, the celestial music made the sky boil, the mica double car was parked on the golden dike, and the crystal square plate was set up in the cocoon. The fairies were playing the Song of Feathers.

古文：书生前进，命璆、韶拜夫人。夫人褰帷笑曰： 下域之人，而能知礼，然服食之气，犹然射人，不可近他贵婿。
现代文：书生向前走进，命田璆、邓韶给夫人行礼，夫人掀开帷幕笑着说： 下界的人却能懂得礼仪，然而衣服食物的气味还是这样射人，不可让他们靠近贵婿。
English: The scholar stepped forward and ordered Tian Xuan and Deng Xuan to salute his wife. The wife lifted the curtain and smiled and said: People from the lower world can understand etiquette, but the smell of clothes and food is still so offensive, they should not be allowed to get close to the noble son-in-law.

古文：可各赐薰髓酒一杯。 
现代文：可以各赏他们薰髓酒一杯。 
English: Let them each have a glass of eau de toilette.

古文：璆、韶饮讫，觉肌肤温润，稍异常人，呼吸皆异香气。
现代文：田璆、邓韶喝完薰髓酒，觉得肌肤温润，渐渐与平常人不同，呼吸都有异香气。
English: After Tian Yao and Deng Yao finished drinking the aromatherapy wine, they felt that their skin was warm, gradually different from ordinary people, and their breath had a different aroma.

古文：夫人问左右： 谁人召来？ 
现代文：夫人问身边侍者： 是谁把他们召来的？ 
English: She asked the waiters: "Who called them here?"

古文：曰： 卫符卿、李八百。 
现代文：回答说： 卫符卿、李八百。 
English: He answered, "Lord Wei Fu, eight hundred rupees."

古文：夫人曰： 便令此二童接待。 
现代文：夫人说： 那就令这两个童子接待。 
English: The lady said: Then let the two boys receive them.

古文：于是二童引璆、韶于神仙之后纵目。
现代文：于是二童把田璆、邓韶领到神仙之后纵目观看。
English: So the two boys led Tian Yao and Deng Yao to the immortal and watched it with their eyes wide open.

古文：璆问曰： 相者谁？ 
现代文：田璆问童子说： 主持仪式的人是谁？ 
English: Tian Qi asked the boy, "Who is the person presiding over the ceremony?"

古文：曰： 刘纲。 
现代文：童子回答说： 刘纲。 
English: The boy replied, "Liu Gang."

古文： 侍者谁？ 
现代文：田璆又问： 充当侍者的是谁？ 
English: Tian Yao also asked: Who is the waiter?

古文：曰： 茅盈。 
现代文：回答说： 茅盈。 
English: He replied, "Mao Ying."

古文：东邻女弹筝击筑者谁？ 
现代文：问： 东邻弹筝击筑的女子是谁？ 
English: Question: Who is the woman playing the kite?

古文：曰： 麻姑、谢自然。  幄中坐者谁？ 
现代文：回答说： 麻姑、陶自然 。 帷幄之中坐着的人是水？ 
English: He replied, "Magoo, pottery is natural. Is the man sitting in the middle of the curtain water?

古文：曰： 西王母。 
现代文：回答说： 西王母。 
English: And she answered, Go up to the king's mother.

古文：俄有一人驾鹤而来，王母曰： 久望。 
现代文：不一会儿，有一人驾鹤而来，王母说： 久望。 
English: After a while, a man came driving a crane, and the Queen Mother said: "Long awaited.

古文：有玉女问曰： 礼生来未？ 
现代文：有玉女问道： 赞礼的人来没来？ 
English: A lady asked, "Did anyone come to praise you?"

古文：于是引璆、韶进，立于碧玉堂下左。
现代文：于是把田璆、邓韶领进去，站在碧玉堂下左边。
English: So he led Tian Yao and Deng Yao inside and they stood on the lower left side of the jasper and jade hall.

古文：刘君笑曰： 适缘莲花峰士奏章，事须决遣，尚多未来客，何言久望乎？ 
现代文：刘君笑着说： 刚才由于莲花峰士奏章的缘故，事情必须决断处置，还有许多客人没来，怎么说久望呢？ 
English: Liu Jun said with a smile: Just now, because of the Lotus Peak Scholars' Medal, the matter must be dealt with decisively. There are still many guests who have not come. How can you say it's been a long time?

古文：王母曰： 奏章事者。有何所为？ 
现代文：王母说： 奏章言事的人所为有什么？ 
English: The Queen Mother said: "What do those who make speeches do?

古文：曰： 浮梁县令求延年矣。
现代文：刘君说： 浮梁县令祈求增长寿命。
English: Liu Jun said: "We should pray for the increase of life expectancy.

古文：以其人因贿赂履官，以苛虐为政，生情于案牍，忠恕之道蔑闻，唯锥于货财，巧为之计更作，自贻覆餗，以促余龄。
现代文：因为他这个人凭贿赂当官，苛刻残酷的办法处理政务，在案牍上生私情，没有忠恕之道，唯独在财产上拚命钻营，巧取豪夺的办法层出不穷，自己给自己留下覆灭的结果，因而折损余寿。
English: Because he is a person who bribed officials, dealt with government affairs in a harsh and cruel way, had personal feelings on the dossier, and had no way of loyalty. However, he worked hard on his property, and there were endless ways to take advantage of others. He left a ruinous result for himself, thus losing his remaining life.

古文：但以莲花峰叟，狥从于人，奏章甚恳，特纡死限，量延五年。 
现代文：但因莲花峰叟屈从于人，奏章写得很恳切，特意纡请将浮梁县令的死限延五年。 
English: However, because of Lotus Peak's submission to human beings, the report was written very earnestly, specifically requesting that the death limit of Fu Liang County be extended by five years.

古文：璆问： 刘君谁？ 
现代文：田璆问： 刘君是谁？ 
English: Tian Yu asked: Who is Liu Jun?

古文：曰： 汉朝天子。 
现代文：童子回答说： 是汉朝天子。 
English: The boy replied, "He is the emperor of the Han Dynasty."

古文：续有一人，驾黄龙，戴黄旗，道以笙歌，从以嫔嫡，及瑶幄而下。
现代文：续后有一个人驾着黄龙，带着黄色有铃铛的龙旗，以笙歌为前导，以嫔嫡为后队，到瑶幄而下。
English: After that, a person driving a yellow dragon, carrying a yellow dragon flag with a bell, with Yingge as the forerunner and Xinghe as the rear team, went down to the raft.

古文：王母复问曰： 李君来何迟？ 
现代文：王母又问道： 李君怎么来迟了？ 
English: The Queen Mother also asked: How come Li Jun is late?

古文：曰： 为敕龙神设水旱之计，作弥淮蔡，以歼妖逆。
现代文：李君回答说： 因为下令让龙神安排水旱的计划，兴雨弥满淮蔡，用以歼灭妖逆。 
English: Li Jun replied: Because he ordered the Dragon God to arrange a drought plan, the rain filled Huai Cai, used to annihilate the evil spirits.

古文：汉主曰： 奈百姓何？ 
现代文：汉帝说： 对老百姓怎么办？ 
English: Han Di said: What about the common people?

古文：曰： 上帝亦有此问，予一表断其惑矣。 
现代文：李君说： 上天也有这个疑问，我一道表章就解决他的疑感了。 
English: Li Jun said: God also has this doubt, I solved his doubt with a sign.

古文：曰： 可得闻乎？ 
现代文：汉帝说： 可以让我听一听你的表章内容吗？ 
English: Han Di said: May I listen to the contents of your watch?

古文：曰： 不能悉记，略举大纲耳。
现代文：李君说： 不能全部记住，只略举大纲吧。
English: Li Jun said: You can't remember everything, just give a brief outline.

古文：其表云： 某县某，克构丕华，德洽兆庶，临履深薄，匪敢怠荒，不劳师车。
现代文：那道表章大意是：某县某，克构丕华，德政通及千万百姓，治理百姓履行职责，该深则深，该薄则薄，不敢怠误荒废，不必劳动雨师之车。
English: The meaning of the inscription is as follows: a certain county, a certain city, a certain state, a certain country, and tens of thousands of people, to govern the people and perform their duties, the deep is deep, the thin is thin, do not dare to neglect and waste, do not need to labor the rainmaker's car.

古文：平中夏巴蜀之孽，不费天府。
现代文：平定中夏巴蜀的妖孽，不费天府。
English: It does not cost heaven and earth to quell the witchcraft of the Middle Xia Ba Shu.

古文：扫东吴上党之妖，九有已见其廓蚁犹固其封疆。
现代文：扫荡东吴上党的妖孽，已十有九成被廓清，只有一方还处在不祥的氛围中，我认为虺蜴肆毒痛于淮蔡，豺狼尚且对其口喙之物猜疑，蝼蚁尚且巩固其封疆。
English: Ninety percent of the witches who swept the East and West have been purged, and only one side is still in an ominous atmosphere. I think that the vipers are wreaking havoc on Huai Cai, the jackals are still suspicious of what they say, and the ants are still consolidating their territory.

古文：若遣时丰人安，是稔群丑。
现代文：如果让岁时丰收人心安定，这就养肥了群丑。
English: If you let the harvest stabilize the hearts of the people when they are old, this will fatten the ugly.

古文：但使年饿厉作，必摇人心。
现代文：只要庄稼欠收灾害发作，一定使人心摇动。
English: As long as crop failure disasters occur, people's hearts will be shaken.

古文：如此倒戈而攻，可以席卷。祸三州之逆党，所损至微。
现代文：如此老百姓就会倒戈而攻，可以席卷，祸及三州的逆党，所受的损害也最小。
English: In this way, the common people will turn the other way and attack, and they can sweep in and bring disaster to the anti-Party forces in the three states, and the damage they will suffer will be minimal.

古文：安六合之疾祲，其利则厚。
现代文：安定天下疾苦的百姓，其利就厚。
English: The stability of the world's suffering people is of great benefit.

古文：伏请神龙施水，厉鬼行灾，由此天诛。以资战力。 
现代文：请龙神施水，厉鬼行灾，由此天诛，以资战力。 
English: Ask the Dragon God to apply water, and the Dragon God to carry out the disaster, so that Heaven will be able to fund the war effort.

古文：汉主曰： 表至嘉，弟既允许，可矣前贺诛锄矣。 
现代文：汉帝说： 表章很好，既已允许，可以提前祝贺诛除妖孽了。 
English: Han Di said: The emblem is very good. Now that it has been approved, we can congratulate the removal of the evil spirits in advance.

古文：书生谓璆、韶： 此开元天宝太平之主也。 
现代文：书生告诉田璆、邓韶： 这个人就是开元天宝年间太平天子。 
English: The student told Tian Yao and Deng Yao: This person is Taiping Tianzi during the founding of Tianbao.

古文：未顷，闻箫韶自空而来，执绛节者前唱言： 穆天子来，奏乐！ 
现代文：不久，又听到仙乐从空中传来，手擎红色符节的人在前面大声说： 穆天子来了，奏乐！ 
English: Soon after, they heard the sound of celestial music coming from the sky. The person in front of them holding the red string said in a loud voice: Mu Tianzi is coming, play music!

古文：群仙皆起，王母避位拜迎，二主降阶，入幄环坐而饮。
现代文：群仙都站起来，王母也离开座位拜迎，两个皇帝也降阶出迎，然后一起入帷幄之中环坐而饮。
English: The immortals all stood up, the Queen Mother also left her seat to greet them, and the two emperors also stepped down to greet them, and then sat together in the middle of the curtain to drink.

古文：王母曰： 何不拉取老轩辕来？ 
现代文：王母说： 为何不把老轩辕拉来？ 
English: The Queen Mother said, "Why don't you bring old Xuan Zang here?"

古文：曰： 他今夕主张月宫之宴，非不勤请耳。 
现代文：穆天子说： 他今天晚上主持月宫的宴席，不是不勤请啊。 
English: Mu Tianzi said, "He is hosting the banquet at the Moon Palace tonight. It's not like he's not working hard.

古文：王母又曰： 瑶池一别后，陵谷几迁移，向来观洛阳东城，已丘墟矣。
现代文：王母又说： 瑶池一别之后，山谷几经变迁移动，刚才来时观看洛阳东城，已变成土丘废墟了。
English: Wang Mu also said: After leaving Dianchi, the valley has undergone several changes and movements. When I came to see Luoyang Dongcheng, it had turned into a mound of ruins.

古文：定鼎门西路，忽焉复新市朝云。
现代文：定鼎门西路，转眼间又变为新的市朝。
English: Dingdingmen West Road, in the blink of an eye, has become a new city center.

古文：名利如旧，可以悲叹耳！ 
现代文：而人们的名利思想还像旧时一样，可悲可叹哪！ 
English: And people's thoughts of fame and fortune are still the same as in the old days. How sad!

古文：穆王把酒，请王母歌。
现代文：穆王把酒，请王母唱歌。
English: King Mu took the wine and asked the Queen Mother to sing.

古文：以珊瑚钩击盘而歌曰： 劝君酒，为君悲。 
现代文：王母就用珊瑚钩敲击玉盘而唱道： 劝君酒，为君悲。 
English: The Queen Mother struck the jade plate with a coral hook and sang: "Suggest wine to you, for your sorrow."

古文：且吟曰： 自从频见市朝改，无复瑶池晏乐心。 
现代文：又吟诵说： 自从频见市朝改，无复瑶池晏乐心。 
English: He also chanted: "Since the frequent changes of government in the city, there is no going back to the past.

古文：王母持杯，穆天子歌曰： 奉君酒，休叹市朝非。
现代文：王母持杯，穆天子唱道： 奉君酒，休叹市朝非。
English: The Queen Mother is holding a cup, and Mu Tianzi is singing: "Bongjun wine, rest, sigh, morning sickness."

古文：早知无复瑶池兴，悔驾骅骝草草归。 
现代文：早知无复瑶池兴，悔驾骅骝草草归。 
English: Knowing early on that there was no going back, he regretted his decision and returned to his family.

古文：歌竟，与王母话瑶池旧事。
现代文：唱完以后，与王母谈论瑶池会时的旧事。
English: After the singing, he and the Queen Mother talked about the old days at the Tsugaike meeting.

古文：乃重歌一章云： 八马回乘汗漫风，犹思往事憩昭宫。
现代文：于是又重新歌唱一段： 八马回乘汗漫风，犹思往事憩昭宫。
English: So they sang the passage again: Eight horses ride back and forth through the sweaty wind, thinking about the past and relaxing in the palace.

古文：晏移南圃情方洽，乐奏钧天曲未终。
现代文：晏移南圃情方洽，乐奏钧天曲未终。
English: He moved to Nanpu, but the music did not end.

古文：斜汉露凝残月冷，流霞杯泛曙光红。
现代文：斜汉露凝残月冷，流霞杯泛曙光红。
English: Tilted Han dew congealed residual moon cold, and the flowing haze cup was bright red.

古文：昆仑回首不知处，疑是酒酣魂梦中。 
现代文：昆仑回首不知处，疑是酒酣魂梦中。 
English: Kunlun looked back from nowhere, probably in a drunken dream.

古文：王母酬穆天子歌曰： 一曲笙歌瑶水滨，曾留逸足驻征轮。
现代文：王母酬答穆天子唱道： 一曲笙歌瑶水滨，曾留逸足驻征轮。
English: The Queen Mother replied to Mu Tianzi, singing: A song of the waterfront, once stayed at the recruiting round.

古文：人间甲子周千岁，灵境杯觞初一巡。
现代文：人间甲子周千岁，灵境杯觞初一巡。
English: Human Jiazi Zhou is a thousand years old, and the first round of the Spirit World Cup has begun.

古文：玉兔银河终不夜，奇花好树镇长春。
现代文：玉兔银河终不夜，奇花好树镇长春。
English: Jade Rabbit Galaxy never sleeps, strange flowers and good trees make Changchun.

古文：悄知碧海饶词句，歌向俗流疑误人。 
现代文：悄知碧海饶词句，歌向俗流疑误人。 
English: Quietly knowing the words of Bihai Rao, the song is suspicious and misleading to the vulgar.

古文：酒至汉武帝，王母又歌曰： 珠露金风下界秋，汉家陵树冷翛翛。
现代文：轮到给汉武帝敬酒，王母又唱道： 珠露金风下界秋，汉家陵树冷翛翛。
English: When it was her turn to give a toast to Emperor Hanwu, the Queen Mother also sang: Pearl dew, golden wind, autumn, Han family mausoleum trees are cold.

古文：当时不得仙桃力，寻作浮尘飘陇头。 
现代文：当时不得仙桃力，寻作浮尘飘陇头。 
English: At that time, Xiantao Li was not available, and he was looking for a floating head.

古文：汉主上王母酒曰： 五十余年四海清，自亲丹灶得长生。
现代文：汉武帝给王母娘娘敬酒说： 五十余年四海清，自亲丹灶得长生。
English: Emperor Hanwu gave a toast to the Queen Mother and her daughter, saying, "For more than fifty years, the four seas have been clear, and I have been granted eternal life from my father's stove."

古文：若言尽是仙桃力，看取神仙簿上名。 
现代文：若言尽是仙桃力，看取神仙簿上名。 
English: If words are all you have, you are a fairy godmother.

古文：帝把酒曰： 吾闻丁令威能歌。 
现代文：汉武帝又说： 我听说丁令威能唱歌。 
English: Emperor Han Wu also said: I heard that Ding Lingwei can sing.

古文：命左右召来。
现代文：就命左右之人去把他召来。
English: Get someone to go and fetch him.

古文：令威至，帝又遣子晋吹笙以和，歌曰： 月照骊山露泣花，似悲仙帝早升遐。
现代文：丁令威来到，汉武帝又派子晋吹笙来伴奏，丁令威唱道： 月照骊山露泣花，似悲仙帝早升遐。
English: Ding Lingwei came, and Emperor Hanwu also sent Zi Jin to play the accompaniment. Ding Lingwei sang: "The moon shines on the mountain dew and the weeping flowers. It seems that the sad fairy emperor rose early."

古文：至今犹有长生鹿，时绕温泉望翠华。 
现代文：至今犹有长生鹿，时绕温泉望翠华。 
English: To this day, there is still a herd of elk, and you can see the green of the trees from the hot springs.

古文：帝持杯久之。
现代文：汉武帝持杯良久。
English: Emperor Hanwu held the cup for a long time.

古文：王母曰： 应须召叶静能来，唱一曲当时事。 
现代文：王母娘娘说： 应该把叶静能召来，让他唱一曲时下的事。 
English: The Queen Mother said, "We should call Ye Jingneng and have him sing a song about current affairs."

古文：静能续至，跪献帝酒，复歌曰： 幽蓟烟尘别九重，贵妃汤殿罢歌钟。
现代文：续后叶静能来到，跪着给唐玄宗敬酒，又唱道： 幽蓟烟尘别九重，贵妃汤殿罢歌钟。
English: Afterward, Ye Jingneng came, kneeling to give a toast to Tang Xuan Zong, and sang: "Don't let the smoke and dust of the night weigh you down, and don't let the bell of Guifei Tang Hall strike."

古文：中宵扈从无全仗，大驾苍黄发六龙。
现代文：中宵扈从无全仗，大驾苍黄发六龙。
English: There is never a complete battle in the middle of the night, and there are always six dragons.

古文：妆匣尚留金翡翠，暖池犹浸玉芙蓉。
现代文：妆匣尚留金翡翠，暖池犹浸玉芙蓉。
English: The make-up case is still gold and jade, and the warming basin is still steeped in jade and hibiscus.

古文：荆榛一闭朝元路，唯有悲风吹晚松。 
现代文：荆榛一闭朝元路，唯有悲风吹晚松。 
English: Once Jingyao closed the road to Chaowon, only the gloomy wind blew the late pine.

古文：歌竟，帝凄惨良久。诸仙亦惨然。
现代文：歌唱完了，唐玄宗凄惨良久，诸仙也觉得惨然。
English: After the singing was over, Tang Xuan Zong was miserable for a long time, and the immortals also felt miserable.

古文：于是黄龙持杯，亦于车前再拜祝曰： 上清神女，玉京仙郎。
现代文：于是黄龙持杯，也在车前拜了又拜致祝词说： 上清神女，玉京仙郎。
English: So Huanglong, holding a cup, also bowed in front of the car and made a congratulatory speech, saying: Shangqing Goddess, Tamagotchi Fairy.

古文：乐此今夕，和鸣凤凰。
现代文：乐此今夕，和鸣凤凰。
English: Let's enjoy this evening, together with the Phoenix.

古文：凤凰和鸣，将翱将翔。
现代文：凤凰和鸣，将翱将翔。
English: The phoenix sings, the dragonfly flies.

古文：与天齐休，庆流无央。 
现代文：与天齐休，庆流无央。 
English: As the day draws to a close, celebrations are in full swing.

古文：仙郎即以鲛绡五千疋，海人文锦三千端，琉璃琥珀器一百床，明月骊珠各十斛，赠奏乐仙女。
现代文：仙郎就用鲛绡五千疋，海人文锦三千端，琉璃琥珀器一百床，明月骊珠各十斛，赠送给奏乐的仙女。
English: Senro presented the fairies with five thousand gongs, three thousand pieces of sea brocade, one hundred beds of amber glassware, and ten gongs each of bright moon beads.

古文：乃有四鹤立于车前，载仙郎并相者侍者，兼有宝花台。
现代文：于是就有四只仙鹤立于车前，载着仙郎和相者侍者，兼有宝花台。
English: As a result, there were four cranes standing in front of the car, carrying Senro and his attendant, as well as the treasure flower stand.

古文：俄进法膳，凡数十味，亦霑及璆、韶。璆、韶饮。
现代文：一会儿，进献法膳，共几十道美味佳肴，连田璆、邓韶也借了光，田璆、邓韶饮了酒。
English: After a while, the Dharma meal was served, a total of dozens of delicious dishes, and even Tian Rong and Deng Rong borrowed the light, and Tian Rong and Deng Rong drank wine.

古文：有仙女捧玉箱，托红笺笔砚而至。请催妆诗。
现代文：这时有仙女捧着玉箱，托着红纸和笔砚而来，请写催汝诗。
English: At this time, there is a fairy holding a jade box, holding red paper and a pencil, please write your poem.

古文：于是刘纲诗曰： 玉为质兮花为颜，蝉为鬓兮云为鬟。
现代文：于是刘纲作诗写道： 玉为质兮花为颜，蝉为鬓兮云为鬟。
English: So Liu Gang wrote a poem: Jade is the quality, the flower is the face, the cicada is the cocoon, and the cloud is the cocoon.

古文：何劳傅粉兮施渥丹，早出娉婷兮缥渺间。 
现代文：何劳傅粉兮施渥丹，早出娉婷兮缥缈间。 
English: How many laborers work hard to earn a living, and go out early in the morning.

古文：于是茅盈诗云： 水晶帐开银烛明，风摇珠珮连云清。
现代文：于是茅盈作诗写道： 水晶帐开银烛明，风摇珠珮连云清。
English: As a result, Mao Ying wrote a poem: The crystal chandelier glows like a silver candle, the wind shakes the beads, and the clouds clear.

古文：休匀红粉饰花态，早驾双鸾朝玉京。 
现代文：休匀红粉饰花态，早驾双鸾朝玉京。 
English: The flowers are uniformly red-painted, and are double-flowered in the morning.

古文：巢父诗曰： 三星在天银河回，人间曙色东方来。
现代文：巢父作诗写道： 三星在天银河回，人间曙色东方来。
English: Nest father wrote a poem: Three stars in the sky, the Milky Way, the dawn of the East.

古文：玉苗琼蕊亦宜夜，莫使一花冲晓开。 
现代文：玉苗琼蕊亦宜夜，莫使一花冲晓开。 
English: Jade seedlings should also be pruned at night, so that a single flower does not bloom at dawn.

古文：诗既入，内有环珮声。
现代文：这些诗送进帷幄以后，就听里面有环珮响动的声音。
English: After these poems are sent into the curtain, listen to the sound of the ring rattling inside.

古文：即有玉女数十，引仙郎入帐。召璆、韶行礼。
现代文：于是就有几十位玉女引领仙郎入账，召田璆、邓韶去执行礼仪。
English: As a result, there were dozens of ladies who led the fairies into the ledger, summoning Tian Yao and Deng Yao to perform the ritual.

古文：礼毕，二书生复引璆、韶辞夫人。夫人曰： 非无至宝可以相赠，但尔力不任挈耳。 
现代文：礼仪完毕，两个书生又领着田璆、邓韶向夫人辞行，夫人说： 不是没有最好的宝物可以赠送给你们，只不过你们没有力量携带罢了。 
English: After the ceremony was over, the two students led Tian Qi and Deng Qi to resign to their wives. The wives said, "It's not that we don't have the best treasures to present to you, it's just that you don't have the strength to carry them."

古文：各赐延寿酒一杯，曰： 可增人间半甲子。 
现代文：于是各赏他们延寿酒一杯，说： 可以增添人间半甲子的寿命。 
English: So they awarded them each a glass of longevity wine, saying: "It can add half a year to a person's life."

古文：复命卫符卿等引还人间，无使归途寂寞。
现代文：又命卫符卿等领着他俩回人间，不要让他们归途寂寞。
English: He also ordered Wei Fuqing to lead the two of them back to the human world, so that they would not be lonely on their way back.

古文：于是二童引璆、韶而去，折花倾酒，步步惜别。
现代文：于是两个童子领着田璆、邓韶离去，一路上二童又折烛夜花给他俩倒瑞露酒，每走一步都恋恋不舍。
English: As a result, the two boys led Tian Yao and Deng Yao away. Along the way, the two boys also broke candles and night flowers to give them both Ruilu wine, and they fell in love with each step.

古文：卫君谓璆、韶曰： 夫人白日上升，骖鸾驾鹤，在积习而已。
现代文：卫符卿对田璆、邓龙说： 夫人白昼升天，让鸾鸟仙鹤驾车，在于长期积习罢了。
English: Wei Fuqing said to Tian Yao and Deng Long: My wife ascended to heaven in broad daylight, and letting the ostrich crane drive the car was just a result of long-term practice.

古文：未有积德累仁，抱才蕴学，卒不享爵禄者，吾未之信。
现代文：没有积累仁德而又胸蕴才学，始终不能享受爵禄的人，我不相信这样的事。
English: I don't believe in such a thing for those who haven't accumulated benevolence and learned from experience and still can't enjoy the peerage.

古文：倘吾子尘牢可逾，俗桎可脱，自今十五年后，待子于三十六峰，愿珍重自爱。 
现代文：倘若您能够跳出尘缘的牢笼，能够解脱世俗的桎梏，从现在开始十五年后，我在三十六峰等待您，希望您珍重自爱。 
English: If you can jump out of the dusty cage and free yourself from the shackles of the world, fifteen years from now, I will be waiting for you at the 36th peak, hoping that you will cherish your self-love.

古文：复出来时车门，握手告别。
现代文：又从来时的东门出来，双方握手告别。
English: They came out of the east gate again, and both sides shook hands and said goodbye.

古文：别讫，行四五步，杳失所在，唯有嵩山。嵯峨倚天。
现代文：分别以后，走了四五步，仙童踪迹皆无，唯有嵩山嵯峨倚天。
English: After parting, they walked four or five steps, and there was no trace of the fairy child, only the towering Mount Songshan.

古文：得樵径而归。
现代文：他们找到一条砍柴人走出的小路，沿路回来。
English: They found a path where the woodcutter had gone and followed it back.

古文：及还家，已岁余。
现代文：等到回到家里，已过去一年多了。
English: By the time I got home, more than a year had passed.

古文：室人招魂葬于北邙之原，坟草宿矣。
现代文：家里人以为他们死了，为他们招魂下葬北邙山原野之中，坟上的草已经老了。
English: The family members thought they were dead, and they were entombed in a field in Beilun Mountain. The grass on the grave was old.

古文：于是璆、韶弃家室，同入少室山。今不知所在。
现代文：于是田璆、邓韶就抛弃家室，一同进入少室山，如今不知在哪里。
English: As a result, Tian Rong and Deng Rong abandoned their home and went to Shomuro Mountain together. Now they don't know where they are.

古文：裴航
现代文：裴航
English: Pei Hang

古文：唐长庆中，有裴航秀才，因下第游于鄂渚，谒故旧友人崔相国。
现代文：唐朝长庆年间，有个秀才叫裴航，因科举考试不中到鄂渚去漫游，拜访故旧友人崔相国。
English: During the Changqing period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a talented person named Pei Hang, who couldn't pass the entrance examination, so he went to E-zhuang to roam and visit his old friend Cui Xiangguo.

古文：值相国赠钱二十万，远挈归于京，因佣巨舟，载于湘汉。
现代文：恰值崔相国赠给他二十万钱，要长途携带回到京城，因而雇大船载到湘汉。
English: Just as Cui Xiangguo gave him 200,000 yuan, he had to carry it a long way back to Beijing, so he hired a large ship to carry it to Hunan.

古文：同载有樊夫人，乃国色也。
现代文：同船有一个樊夫人，乃是国色天香的美人。
English: In the same boat, there was a lady, who was a beautiful woman with the national color.

古文：言词问接，帷帐昵洽。
现代文：言词问答交接，隔着帷帐仍觉亲近融洽。
English: Questions and answers were exchanged, and they still felt close and harmonious across the curtains.

古文：航虽亲切，无计道达而会面焉。
现代文：裴航虽感亲切，但没有办法通达心意与她会面。
English: Although Pei Hang felt friendly, there was no way to get through to meet her.

古文：因赂侍妾袅烟，而求达诗一章曰： 同为胡越犹怀想。况遇天仙隔锦屏。
现代文：于是他就贿赂樊夫人的侍妾袅烟，求她送达一首诗： 同为胡越犹怀想，况遇天仙隔锦屏。
English: So he bribed Lady Zou's servant and concubine, Zou Yan, and asked her to deliver a poem: The same is Hu Yue's longing, the same is Tian Xian's separation from Jin Ping.

古文：倘若玉京朝会去，愿随鸾鹤入青云。 
现代文：倘若玉京朝会去，愿随鸾鹤入青云。 
English: If the Jade Emperor does go, may he follow the crane into the clouds.

古文：诗往，久而无答。航数诘袅烟，烟曰： 娘子见诗若不闻，如何？ 
现代文：诗送去之后，很久没有得到答复，裴航多次讯问袅烟，袅烟说： 娘子看了诗如同没看，怎么办？ 
English: After the poem was sent, he did not get a reply for a long time. Pei Hang repeatedly interrogated Yan Yan. Yan Yan said: My daughter read the poem as if she had not seen it, what should she do?

古文：航无计。因在道求名酝珍果而献之。
现代文：裴航没有办法，于是在道途中搜求名酝珍果去送给她。
English: Pei Hang had no choice, so he searched for famous and rare fruits on the way to give them to her.

古文：夫人乃使袅烟召航相识。
现代文：樊夫人这才派袅烟去召裴航相见。
English: It was only then that Mrs. Zou sent Zou Yan to summon Pei Hang to meet her.

古文：乃褰帷，而玉莹光寒，花明丽景，云低鬟鬓，月淡修眉，举止烟霞外人，肯与尘俗为偶。
现代文：到帐帷之后，觉得玉莹光寒，花明丽景，樊夫人乌云似的鬟鬓低垂，修眉如新月淡扫，其举止就是烟霞以外的仙人，怎肯与尘俗之人为偶？
English: After reaching the curtain, feel the coldness of the Jade Yingguang, the beauty of the flowers, the cloud-like droop of the Lady Zou, the frown of the crescent moon, the behavior of the smoke and haze outside the hermit, how can it be matched with the dust of the world?

古文：航再拜揖，聐聩良久之。
现代文：裴航再拜行礼，呆愣很久。
English: Pei Hang bowed again and stood there for a long time.

古文：夫人曰： 妾有夫在汉南，将欲弃官而幽栖岩谷，召某一诀耳，深哀草扰，虑不及期，岂更有情留盼他人？
现代文：樊夫人说： 我有丈夫在汉南，将要弃官而幽居深山，召我去一次诀别罢了。深以担扰为哀，担心不能按期赶到，哪里还有心情留意顾盼他人呢？
English: Mrs. Zou said, "I have a husband in Hannan, who is about to resign his post and live in seclusion deep in the mountains, and he has only called me to say goodbye. Deeply worried and saddened, worried that I can't make it on time, where is the mood to pay attention to others?

古文：的不然耶，但喜与郎君同舟共济，无以谐谑为意耳。 
现代文：确实不能这样。只不过喜与郎君同舟共济，不要把谐谑之意放在心上。 
English: It really can't be like that. Just be glad to be in the same boat as your husband, and don't take the humorous meaning to heart.

古文：航曰： 不敢。 
现代文：裴航说： 不敢。 
English: Pei Hang said, "I don't dare."

古文：饮讫而归，操比冰霜，不可干冒。
现代文：在那里喝了酒就回来了，知道樊夫人操守如冰霜，不可冒昧相求。
English: After drinking wine there, he returned, knowing that Lady Zou's integrity was like ice cream, and that he should not dare to make demands.

古文：夫人后使袅烟持诗一章曰： 一饮琼浆百感生，玄霜捣尽见云英。
现代文：后来，樊夫人让袅烟拿一首诗送给裴航，诗中说： 一饮琼浆百感生，玄霜捣尽见云英。
English: Later, Mrs. Zou asked Zou Yan to take a poem to Pei Hang, saying in the poem: A drink of Qiong milk is full of feelings, and black frost can be seen everywhere.

古文：蓝桥便是神仙窟，何必崎岖上玉清。 
现代文：蓝桥便是神仙窟，何必崎岖上玉清。 
English: The Blue Bridge is the Immortal Grottoes, so why should it be bumpy on the way to Tamakiyo?

古文：航览之。空愧佩而已，然亦不能洞达诗之旨趣。
现代文：裴航看了这首诗，空怀感愧而已，然而也不能把诗中的旨趣全部理解透彻。
English: Pei Hang read the poem and felt ashamed. However, he could not fully understand the meaning of the poem.

古文：后更不复见，但使袅烟达寒暄而已。
现代文：后来更没有重新见面，只是让袅烟表达寒暄而已。
English: Later, they did not meet again, but just let the smoke express their coldness.

古文：遂低襄汉，与使婢挈妆奁，不告辞而去，人不能知其所造。
现代文：于是抵达襄汉，樊夫人与使婢带着妆奁，没有和裴航告辞就走了，没人能知道她到哪里去。
English: So when they arrived in Xianghan, Lady Zou and her maids carried makeup bags and left without saying goodbye to Pei Hang. No one knew where she was going.

古文：航遍求访之。灭迹匿形，竟无踪兆。
现代文：裴航到处寻访他，可是樊夫人隐迹匿形，意无踪影。
English: Pei Hang searched everywhere for him, but Mrs. Zou disappeared without a trace.

古文：遂饰妆归辇下。
现代文：裴航也就整治行装回京。
English: Pei Hang also returned to Beijing after the rectification.

古文：经蓝桥驿侧近，因渴甚，遂下道求浆而饮。
现代文：经过蓝桥驿附近，因为口渴的很，就下道找水喝。
English: After passing near the Blue Bridge, because I was very thirsty, I went down the road to find water to drink.

古文：见茅屋三四间，低而复隘，有老妪缉麻苎。
现代文：看见三四间茅屋，又低又狭窄，有个老妇人在纺麻苎。
English: I saw three or four huts, low and narrow, and an old woman spinning reeds.

古文：航揖之求浆，妪咄曰： 云英擎一瓯浆来，郎君要饮。 
现代文：裴航给她作揖讨浆水，老妇人吆喝说： 云英，擎一瓯浆水来，郎君要喝。 
English: Pei Hang gave her a bowl of water to drink. The old woman cried out, "Yun Ying, bring me a bowl of water. My husband wants to drink it."

古文：航讶之，忆樊夫人诗有云英之句，深不自会。
现代文：裴航对这句话很惊讶，回想起樊夫人诗中有云英的句子，深感自己不能领会。
English: Pei Hang was very surprised by this sentence. Recalling the sentence of Yun Ying in Mrs. Zou's poem, he deeply felt that he could not understand it.

古文：俄于苇箔之下。
现代文：不一会儿，在苇箔的下面伸出一双白玉般的手，捧着一个瓷瓯。
English: A moment later, a pair of white, jade-like hands reach out from beneath the enamel foil, holding a porcelain urn.

古文：出双玉手捧瓷，航接饮之，真玉液也，但觉异香氤郁，透于户外。
现代文：裴航接过来喝水，觉得是真正的玉液，只觉得异香浓郁，透到门外。
English: Pei Hang took a sip of the water and thought it was real jade liquid, only to find that it had a strong, pungent aroma that permeated outside the door.

古文：因还瓯，遽揭箔。睹一女子，露裛琼英，春融雪彩，脸欺腻玉，鬓若浓云。娇而掩面蔽身，虽红兰之隐幽谷，不足比其芳丽也。
现代文：于是还回了瓷瓯，突然揭开苇箔，看见一个女子，像露珠裹着的红玉，像春风融化了的雪彩，脸胜腻玉，鬓如浓云，娇滴滴地掩面遮身，即使红兰隐于幽谷，也不能和她的美丽芳容相比。
English: So he returned the porcelain bowl, suddenly opened the enamel foil, and saw a woman, like a red bead wrapped in a dewdrop, like a snowflake melted by the spring wind. Her face was more beautiful than the jade. Her face was like a thick cloud, delicately covering her face and body. Even if the red orchid was hidden in the valley, it could not compare to her beautiful appearance.

古文：航惊怛，植足而不能去。
现代文：裴航呆了，脚像扎根了似的不能走开。
English: Pei Hang froze, unable to move as if his feet were rooted to the ground.

古文：因白妪曰： 某仆马甚饥，愿憩于此，当厚答谢，幸无见阻。 
现代文：于是他对老妇人说： 我的仆人和马都饿了，希望在此休息，定当重重答谢，望您不要拒绝我们。 
English: Then he said to the old woman: "My servants and horses are hungry, and would like to rest here, and would like to thank you very much. I hope you will not refuse us."

古文：妪曰： 任郎君自便。 
现代文：老妇人说： 任从郎君自便。 
English: The old woman said, "Let my son do as he pleases.

古文：且遂饭仆秣马。
现代文：而且就让其仆吃饭喂马。
English: And he lets his servants feed the horses.

古文：良久谓妪曰： 向睹小娘子，艳丽惊人，姿容擢世，所以踌蹰而不能适，愿纳厚礼而娶之，可乎？ 
现代文：过了很久，裴航对老妇人说： 刚才看见小娘子，艳丽得使人吃惊，姿容超过当世之人，我所以徘徊不能离去，就是因为希望纳厚礼而娶她，可以吗？ 
English: After a long time, Pei Hang said to the old woman: "Just now, I saw a little girl, surprisingly beautiful, her appearance surpassing that of people in this world. That's why I can't leave, it's because I hope to receive a generous gift and marry her, is that okay?

古文：妪曰： 渠已许嫁一人，但时未就耳。
现代文：老妇人说： 她已应许嫁给一个人，只是时候没到未能成就罢了。
English: The old woman said, "She had promised to marry someone, but the time had not come for it to happen.

古文：我今老病，只有此女孙，昨有神仙，遗灵丹一刀圭，但须玉杵臼捣之百日，方可就吞，当得后天而老。
现代文：我现在年老多病，只有这个孙女，昨天有个神仙送给我灵丹一刀圭，但必须用玉杵臼捣之一百天，方能吞服，一定能比天老得还晚。
English: I am now very old and sick, and I only have this granddaughter. Yesterday, a fairy godmother gave me a magic sword, but it must be pounded with a jade pestle for one hundred days before it can be swallowed, and it must be older than the heavens.

古文：君约取此女者，得玉杵臼，吾当与之也。
现代文：您约定娶这个女孩的条件，就是得到玉杵臼，我一定把她给你。
English: You agreed to marry this girl on the condition that you get the jade mortar. I will definitely give her to you.

古文：其余金帛，吾无用处耳。 
现代文：其余金帛等物，我没有用它之处。 
English: I didn't use the rest of the gold ingots and so on.

古文：航拜谢曰： 愿以百日为期。
现代文：裴航拜谢说： 我愿意以百日为期限。
English: Pei Hang Bai Xie said: I am willing to set a deadline of 100 days.

古文：必携杵臼而至，更无他许人。 
现代文：一定带杵臼到来，再不要应许别人。 
English: Be sure to bring a pestle and mortar, and don't make promises to others.

古文：妪曰： 然。 
现代文：老妇人说： 就这样吧！ 
English: The old woman said: That's it!

古文：航恨恨而去。及至京国，殊不以举事为意，但于坊曲闹市喧衢，而高声访其玉杵臼，曾无影响。
现代文：裴航非常遗憾地离去，等到了京城，一点也不把科举的事放在心上，只是到坊曲闹市喧腾的街道去，高声打听那种玉杵臼，竟没有一点影子和回响。
English: It was with great regret that Pei Hang left. When he arrived in Beijing, he didn't pay any attention to the science education. He just went to the noisy streets of the bustling city of Fangqu and loudly inquired about the jade mortar, but there was no shadow or echo.

古文：或遇朋友，若不相识，众言为狂人。
现代文：有时遇到朋友，好像不认识似的，大家都说他是狂人。
English: Sometimes you meet a friend and it's like you don't know him. Everyone says he's crazy.

古文：数月余日，或遇一货玉老翁曰： 近得虢州药铺卞老书，云有玉杵臼货之，郎君恳求如此，此君吾当为书导达。 
现代文：数月余日，偶然遇到一个卖玉的老头说： 最近我接到了虢州药铺卞老的信，说是有玉杵臼要卖掉，郎君恳切寻求到这种程度，我当写信指引你去。 
English: A few months later, he happened to meet an old man selling jade and said, "Recently, I received a letter from the elder of the Zhangzhou Pharmacy, saying that there is a jade mortar to be sold. My husband has earnestly sought it to such an extent, I should write to guide you."

古文：航愧荷珍重，果获杵臼。
现代文：裴航含羞地背负珍重礼物，果然找到了杵臼。
English: Pei Hang was shyly carrying a precious gift on his back, and he finally found the key.

古文：卞老曰： 非二百缗不可得。 
现代文：卞老说： 除非二百串钱不能得到杵臼。 
English: The old man said, "Unless you have two hundred bundles of money, you can't get a mortar and pestle."

古文：航乃泻囊，兼货仆货马，方及其数。
现代文：裴航倾囊而出，加上卖仆人卖马的钱，才凑足那个数目。
English: Pei Hang went all out, adding money from the sale of servants and horses to make up the amount.

古文：遂步骤独挈而抵蓝桥。昔日妪大笑曰： 有如是信士乎？
现代文：于是独自一人步行奔回抵达蓝桥，昔日那个老妇人大笑着说： 有如此讲信用的人吗？
English: So he ran back alone on foot and arrived at the Blue Bridge. The old woman laughed loudly and said, "Is there such a trustworthy person?"

古文：吾岂爱惜女子，而不酬其劳哉。 
现代文：我怎能爱惜孙女而不酬谢他的功劳呢？ 
English: How can I cherish my granddaughter and not give him credit?

古文：女亦微笑曰： 虽然，更为吾捣药百日，方议姻好。 
现代文：女郎也微笑着说： 虽然这样，然而还要为我捣药一百天，才能商议婚姻之好。 
English: The girl also smiled and said, "In spite of this, it will still take me a hundred days to find a cure before we can discuss the merits of marriage."

古文：妪于襟带间解药，航即捣之，昼为而夜息，夜则妪收药臼于内室。
现代文：老妇人把药从襟带间解下来，裴航就开始捣药，白天干活晚上休息，到晚上老妇人就把药和杵臼收归内室。
English: The old woman untied the medicine from between the lanyards, and Pei Hang began to mix the medicine. She worked during the day and rested at night. At night, the old woman took the medicine and the mortar and pestle back to the inner room.

古文：航又闻捣药声，因窥之，有玉兔持杵臼，而雪光辉室，可鉴毫芒，于是航之意愈坚。
现代文：裴航又听到捣药的声音，就去偷看，看到有个白兔拿着杵臼，雪白的光芒辉映满室，可以照出细毛和芒刺，于是裴航的意志更加坚定。
English: When Pei Hang heard the sound of pounding, he peeked out and saw a white rabbit holding a mortar and pestle. A snow-white glow filled the room, illuminating the fine hairs and pimples. This made Pei Hang's determination even stronger.

古文：如此日足，妪持而吞之曰： 吾当入洞而告姻戚，为裴郎具帐帏。 
现代文：就这样日子够了，老妇人拿药吞了，说： 我当进洞去告诉亲戚，为裴郎准备帐帷。 
English: That was enough for the day. The old woman took the medicine, swallowed it, and said, "I should go into the cave to tell my relatives and prepare the curtains for Pei Lang."

古文：遂挈女入山，谓航曰： 但少留此。 
现代文：就带着女郎进了山，对裴航说： 你且留在这稍等。 
English: He took the girl into the mountains and said to Pei Hang, "Stay here for a while.

古文：逡巡车马仆隶，迎航而往。
现代文：顷刻车马仆隶迎接裴航前去。
English: In an instant, the carriage and horse servants went to meet Pei Hang.

古文：别见一大第连云。珠扉晃日，内有帐幄屏帏，珠翠珍玩，莫不臻至，愈如贵戚家焉。
现代文：又看到一个很大的府第一眼望不到头，镶珠的门扉在日光下闪动，里面有帐幄屏帷及珠翠珍玩，没有一件不尽善尽美，超过贵戚之家了。
English: I also saw a large mansion that I couldn't see the top of at first glance. The bead-encrusted doors and doors glittered in the sunlight. Inside, there were curtains, screens, and precious jewels. There was nothing that wasn't perfect, more than the home of a close relative.

古文：仙童侍女，引航入帐就礼讫，航拜妪，悲泣感荷。
现代文：仙童侍女引导裴航入帐完成礼仪之后，裴航向老妇人下拜，感激涕零。
English: After the fairy maid guided Pei Hang to complete the etiquette, Pei Hang bowed to the old woman and thanked her.

古文：妪曰： 裴郎自是清冷裴真人子孙，业当出世，不足深愧老妪也！ 
现代文：老妇人说： 裴郎本来是清冷裴真人的子孙，业当出世，不当对老妪深谢呀！ 
English: The old woman said, "Pei Lang was originally a descendant of the Qinglian Pei Zhen people. He should have been born in this world. It is not right to be so grateful to the old woman!"

古文：及引见诸宾，多神仙中人也。
现代文：到了引见诸宾，多半是神仙中人。
English: When it came to introducing the guests, most of them were immortals.

古文：后有仙女，鬟髻霓衣，云是妻之姊耳。
现代文：后有一个仙女，梳着鬟鬓穿着霓衣，说是妻子的姐姐。
English: Then there was a fairy, with a long braided hair and a long dress, who said she was the wife's sister.

古文：航拜讫，女曰： 裴郎不相识耶？ 
现代文：裴航拜完，仙女说： 裴郎不认识我了吗？ 
English: After Pei Hang bowed, the fairy said: Doesn't Pei Lang know me?

古文：航曰： 昔非姻好，不醒拜侍。 
现代文：裴航说： 从前不是姻亲，想不起来在哪儿拜识。 
English: Pei Hang said, "We weren't in-laws before, I can't remember where we met.

古文：女曰： 不忆鄂渚同舟回而抵湘汉乎？ 
现代文：仙女说： 不记得从鄂渚同船回到襄汉吗？ 
English: The fairy said, "Don't you remember returning to Xianghan from Ezhu by the same boat?

古文：航深惊怛，恳悃陈谢。
现代文：裴航很惊讶，诚恳地表示了敬意。
English: Pei Hang was very surprised and sincerely expressed his respect.

古文：后问左右，曰： 是小娘子之姊云翘夫人。刘纲仙君之妻也，已是高真，为玉皇之女吏。 
现代文：后来问左右的人，回答说： 这是小娘子的姐姐云翘夫人，仙君刘纲的妻子，已经是真人，担当玉皇大帝的女官。 
English: Later, he asked the people around and replied: This is the little girl's sister, Mrs. Wu Yunge, the wife of Emperor Liu Gang, who is already a real person and is in charge of the Jade Emperor's female officer.

古文：妪遂遣航将妻入玉峰洞中，琼楼殊室而居之。
现代文：老妇人就让裴航领妻子进入玉峰洞中，到琼楼殊室去居住。
English: The old woman then asked Pei Hang to lead his wife into the Yufeng Cave and go to live in Qionglou's special room.

古文：饵以绛雪琼英之丹。
现代文：以绛雪琼英之丹为食。
English: Feeding on snow crabs.

古文：体性清虚，毛发绀绿，神化自在，趋为上仙。
现代文：体性清虚，毛变得深青带红又转绿，神化自在之境，超升为上仙。
English: The physical nature is pure and empty, the hair becomes dark blue with red and turns green, the state of deification is free, and the transcendence is elevated to the immortals.

古文：至太和中，友人卢颢，遇之于蓝桥驿之西，因说得道之事。
现代文：到了太和年间，其友人卢颢在蓝桥驿的西边遇到他，于是说起得道之事。
English: When he reached the Taiwa era, his friend Lu Yao met him on the west side of the Blue Bridge, and the story began.

古文：遂赠蓝田美玉十斤，紫府云丹一粒，叙语永日，使达书于亲爱。
现代文：裴航就赠给卢颢蓝田美玉十斤、紫府灵丹一粒，叙话一整天，让卢颢到他亲友那里去送信。
English: Pei Hang gave Lu Yao Lan Tian Mei Yu ten catties and Zifu Lingdan one grain, narrated for a whole day, and asked Lu Yao to send it to his relatives and friends.

古文：卢颢稽颡曰： 兄既得道，如何乞一言而教授。 
现代文：卢颢磕着头说： 老兄已经得道，无论如何求您说一句话教我。 
English: Lu bowed his head and said, "My brother has already attained the Way. In any case, please say a word to teach me."

古文：航曰： 老子曰， 虚其心，实其腹。 今之人，心愈实，何由得道之理。 
现代文：裴航说： 老子说 虚其心，实其腹 ，现在的人，心越来越实怎能懂得道家之理。 
English: Pei Hang said, "Lao Tzu said, 'The heart is deceitful, but the stomach is truthful.' Today's people, with their hearts becoming more and more truthful, how can they understand the principles of Taoism?"

古文：卢子蒂懵然，而语之曰： 心多妄想，腹漏精溢，即虚实可知矣。
现代文：卢子不明白，裴航就告诉他： 心多妄想，腹漏精溢，就可以知道虚实了。
English: Lu Zi didn't understand, so Pei Hang told him: "If your heart is full of fantasies and your stomach is leaking, then you can know what's true and what's false."

古文：凡人自有不死之术，还丹之方，但子未便可教。
现代文：凡人各自有不死之木还丹之方，只是您未便可教，将来再说吧！ 
English: Every mortal has their own way of repaying the immortal tree, but you can't teach it, let's talk about it in the future!

古文：异日言之。 卢子知不可请，但终宴而去。
现代文：卢子知道不可能请求到，但还等宴席终了才离去。
English: Lu Zi knew that it was impossible to request to come, but he waited until the banquet was over before leaving.

古文：后世人莫有遇者。
现代文：后世的人没有遇见裴航的。
English: People in later generations never met Pei Hang.

