古文：三年春，王正月，叔孙得臣会晋人、宋人、陈人、卫人、郑人伐沈。
现代文：三年春季，周历正月，叔孙得臣与晋、宋、陈、卫、郑五国一同攻打沈国。
English: In the spring of the third year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Uncle Sun and Uncle Sun together with Jin, Song, Chen, Wei and Zheng attacked and conquered Shen.

古文：沈溃。
现代文：沈国百姓溃散。
English: The people of Shen have dispersed.

古文：夏五月，王子虎卒。
现代文：夏季五月，王子虎去世。
English: In the summer of May, Prince Tiger passed away.

古文：秦人伐晋。
现代文：秦国攻打晋国。
English: Qin attacked Jin.

古文：秋，楚人围江。
现代文：秋季，楚国包围江国。
English: In autumn, Chu surrounded Jiang.

古文：雨螽于宋。
现代文：宋国有大批螽斯像雨点一样落下来。
English: In the Song Dynasty, a large number of gongs fell like raindrops.

古文：冬，公如晋。
现代文：冬季，鲁文公去到晋国。
English: In winter, Lu Wen Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：十有二月己巳，公及晋侯盟。
现代文：十二月己巳日，文公与晋国结盟。
English: In December of the same year, Wengong allied with Jin.

古文：晋阳处父帅师伐楚以救江。
现代文：晋国的阳处父率领军队攻打楚国解救江国。
English: Yang Shifu of Jin Province led an army to attack Chu Province and save Jiang Province.

古文：三年春，庄叔会诸侯之师伐沈，以其服于楚也。沈溃。
现代文：三年春季，庄叔会合诸侯的军队攻打沈国，因为沈国向楚国顺服，沈国百姓溃散。
English: In the spring of the third year, Zhuang uncle gathered the armies of the princes to attack Sheng, because Sheng submitted to Chu, and the people of Sheng were dispersed.

古文：凡民逃其上曰溃，在上曰逃。
现代文：凡是百姓逃避他们上级叫做 溃 ，上级逃走叫做 逃 。
English: When the common people run away from their superiors, it is called a rout; when the superiors run away, it is called a flight.

古文：卫侯如陈，拜晋成也。
现代文：卫成公到陈国去，这是为了拜谢陈国促成的卫、晋和议。
English: Wei Chenggong went to Chen Guo, this was to thank Chen Guo for promoting the Wei and Jin wars.

古文：夏四月乙亥，王叔文公卒，来赴吊如同盟，礼也。
现代文：夏季，四月二十四日，王叔文公死，发来讣告，像对同盟国一样去吊唁，这是合于礼仪的。
English: In the summer, on April 24th, when Wang Shouwen died, he sent an obituary to express his condolences as he would to an ally, which was in accordance with etiquette.

古文：秦伯伐晋，济河焚舟，取王官，及郊。
现代文：秦穆公攻打晋国，渡过黄河，烧掉渡船，占取了王官和郊地。
English: Qin Mu Gong attacked Jin Province, crossed the Yellow River, burned the ferry, and occupied the royal officials and suburbs.

古文：晋人不出，遂自茅津济，封殽尸而还。
现代文：晋军不出战。秦军就从茅津渡黄河，在殽地为死亡的将士筑一个大坟墓，然后回国。
English: The Jin army did not fight. The Qin army crossed the Yellow River from Maojin, built a large grave for the dead soldiers in Handan, and then returned home.

古文：遂霸西戎，用孟明也。
现代文：秦穆公就此称霸于西方少数民族诸国，这是由于任用了孟明。
English: As a result, Qin Mu Gong dominated the Western ethnic minority countries, which was due to the appointment of Meng Ming.

古文：君子是以知秦穆公之为君也，举人之周也，与人之壹也；孟明之臣也，其不解也，能惧思也；子桑之忠也，其知人也，能举善也。
现代文：君子因此知道，秦穆公作为国君，提拔人才考虑全面，任用人才专一无二；孟明作为臣子，努力不懈，能够因为畏惧而思考；子桑忠诚，他了解别人，能够推举好人。
English: Therefore, the gentleman knew that Qin Mu Gong, as the sovereign, promoted talents comprehensively, and appointed talents exclusively; Meng Ming, as a vassal, worked tirelessly, and was able to think because of fear; Zi Sang was loyal, he understood others, and was able to promote good people.

古文：《诗》曰， 于以采蘩，于沼于沚，于以用之，公侯之事 ，秦穆有焉。 夙夜匪解，以事一人 ，孟明有焉。 诒厥孙谋，以燕翼子 ，子桑有焉。
现代文：《诗》说： 在哪里去采蒿子？
English: "Poem" says: Where to go to pick hazelnuts?

古文：秋，雨螽于宋，队而死也。楚师围江。晋先仆伐楚以救江。
现代文：楚国的军队包围江国，晋国的先仆攻打楚国去救援江国。
English: The army of Chu surrounded Jiang, and the vanguard of Jin attacked Chu to rescue Jiang.

古文：冬，晋以江故告于周。王叔桓公、晋阳处父伐楚以救江，门于方城，遇息公子朱而还。
现代文：冬季，晋国把江国的事情报告周襄王，王叔桓公、晋国的阳处父攻打楚国以救援江国。攻打方城山关口，并看到了楚国的息公子朱才回国。
English: In the winter, Jin Province reported the situation of Jiang Province to King Zhou Xiang, King Wang Shuguang, and King Yang of Jin Province attacked Chu Province to rescue Jiang Province, attacked Fangcheng Mountain Pass, and saw the son-in-law of Chu Province, Zhu Cai, return to China.

古文：晋人惧其无礼于公也，请改盟。
现代文：晋国人为曾经对鲁文公的失礼而感到恐惧，请求改订盟约。
English: The Jin people were afraid of Lu Wenguang's discourtesy and requested to change the contract.

古文：公如晋，及晋侯盟。
现代文：文公到了晋国，和晋襄公结盟。
English: Wen Gong arrived in Jin Province and allied with Jin Xiang Gong.

古文：晋侯飨公，赋《菁菁者莪》。
现代文：晋襄公设享礼招待文公，赋《菁菁者莪》这首诗。
English: Jinxiang public set up a ceremony to invite the literati, endowed with the poem "Jingjie Zhaojie."

古文：庄叔以公降拜，曰： 小国受命于大国，敢不慎仪？
现代文：庄叔让文公降阶下拜，说： 小国在大国接受命令，岂敢对礼仪有所不谨慎？
English: Uncle Zhuang made Wen Gong bow down and said, "A small country accepting orders from a big country, how dare they not be careful about etiquette?"

古文：君贶之以大礼，何乐如之。
现代文：君王赐我们以重大典礼，还有什么比这再高兴的呢？
English: What greater joy could there be than for the king to bestow on us a great ceremony?

古文：抑小国之乐，大国之惠也。 
现代文：小国的高兴，是大国的恩赐。 
English: The happiness of a small nation is the gift of a great nation.

古文：晋侯降辞，登，成拜。
现代文：晋襄公走下台阶辞谢，再登上台阶，完成拜礼。
English: Jinxiang walked down the steps to say thank you, and then climbed up the steps to complete the worship.

古文：公赋《嘉乐》。
现代文：文公赋《嘉乐》这首诗。
English: The poem "Jia Le" was written by Wen Gongfu.

