古文：文闵明武宣诸子文帝十三子。姚夫人生世宗，后宫生宋献公震，文元皇后生孝闵皇帝，文宣皇后叱奴氏生高祖、卫剌王直，达步干妃生齐王宪，王姬生赵僭王招，后宫生谯孝王俭、陈惑王纯、越野王盛、代奰王达、冀康公通、滕闻王逌。
现代文：文帝有十三个儿子：姚夫人生的世宗，嫔妃生的宋献公宇文震，文元皇后生的孝闵皇帝，文宣皇后叱奴氏生的高祖、卫剌王宇文直，达步干妃生的齐王字文宪，王姬生的趟僭王宇文招，嫔妃生的谯孝王宇文俭、陈惑王宇文纯、越野王字文盛、代樊王宇文达、冀康公宇文通、滕闻王宇文迪。
English: Emperor Wen had thirteen sons: Shizong, who was the son of Lady Yao; Song Xian Gongwu, who was the son of Empress Gongwu; Emperor Xiaojun, who was the son of Empress Wenyuan; Emperor Gaozu, who was the son of Empress Wenzhong; Emperor Weiwu, who was the son of Emperor Weiwu; Emperor Qi, who was the son of Empress Dabukang; Emperor Jie, who was the son of Empress Jie; Emperor Wenzhong, who was the son of Emperor Wenzhong; Emperor Xiaozhong, who was the son of Empress Jie; Emperor Chen

古文：齐炀王别有传。
现代文：齐炀王另外有传。
English: There is another legend about King Qizhi.

古文：宋献公震，字弥俄突。
现代文：宋献公宇文震，字弥俄突。
English: Song Xian Gong Yu Wen Zhen, the characters are contradictory.

古文：幼而敏达，年十岁，诵孝经、论语、毛诗。
现代文：年幼时聪敏通达，十岁时，诵读《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》。
English: When he was young, he was very intelligent, and at the age of ten, he recited "The Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects," and "Mao Poetry."

古文：后与世宗俱受礼记、尚书于卢诞。
现代文：后来和世宗一起随从卢诞学习《礼记》、《尚书》。
English: Later, together with Sejong, he studied "Li Ji" and "Shang Shu" from Lu Xing.

古文：大统十六年，封武邑公，二千户。
现代文：大统十六年，被封为武邑公，食邑二千户。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as the governor of Wuyi, and served 2,000 households in Wuyi.

古文：尚魏文帝女，其年薨。
现代文：娶魏文帝的女儿为妻，当年去世。
English: He married Emperor Wei's daughter and died that year.

古文：保定元年，追赠使持节、柱国大将军、少师、大司马、大都督、青徐等十州诸军事、青州刺史；进封宋国公，增邑并前一万户。
现代文：保定元年，被追赠为使持节、柱国大将军、少师、大司马、大都督、青徐等十州诸军事、青州刺史；进封为宋国公，增加食邑连同以前的共一万户。
English: In the first year of Baoding, it was posthumously presented to the military of ten states and the history of Qingzhou, such as the Jizhi Festival, the general of the pillar country, the young teacher, the great horse, the great governor, and the Qing Xu; it was awarded to the Song Guogong, and the total of ten thousand households were added together with the previous ones.

古文：无子，以世宗第三子寔为嗣。
现代文：他没有儿子，以世宗的第三个儿子宇文塞作为他的继嗣。
English: He had no son, and chose Sejong's third son, Uwensei, as his successor.

古文：寔字干辩，建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：宇文定字干辩，建德三年，进封为王爵。
English: Yuwen Dingzhi argued, built a virtue for three years, and was crowned as a prince.

古文：大象中，为大前疑。
现代文：大象年间，任大前疑。
English: During the Year of the Elephant, Ren Doubts the Future.

古文：寻为隋文帝所害，国除。卫剌王直，字豆罗突。
现代文：不久被隋文帝杀害，封国被撤销卫剌王字文直，字豆罗突。
English: Soon after, he was killed by the Sui Emperor Wen, and the fief of the country was revoked.

古文：魏恭帝三年，封秦郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，被封为秦郡公，食邑一千户。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was named the Qin County Governor, and he had a thousand households in his county.

古文：武成初，出镇蒲州，拜大将军，进卫国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，外出镇守蒲州，拜任大将军，升为卫国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he went out to guard the town of Puzhou, was appointed as a general, and was promoted to the position of the defender of the country.

古文：保定初，为雍州牧，寻进位柱国，转大司空，出为州总管。
现代文：保定初年，任雍州州牧，不久升任柱国，又改任大司空，外任襄州总管。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was appointed as the Yongzhou provincial governor, and soon he was promoted to the pillar state, and then he was appointed as the chief secretary of the sky, and he was appointed as the general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：天和中，陈湘州刺史华皎举州来附，诏直督绥德公陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等兵赴援，与陈将淳于量、吴明彻等战于沌口。
现代文：天和年间，陈湘州刺史茎皎率全州前来归附，高祖命宇文直督领绥德公陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等人率兵前去支援，与陈国将领淳于量、吴明彻等人在沌口交战。
English: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, Chen Xiangzhou led the whole state to annexation, and Gao Zu ordered Uwen, the direct governor, to lead the troops led by Shunde Gonglu, General Tianhong, Quan Jingxuan, and Yuan Ding to support, and fought with Chen's generals Chun Yuquan and Wu Mingcher at Chaonkou.

古文：直军不利，元定遂投江南。
现代文：宇文直的军队失利，元定于是在江南被捕。
English: After the defeat of Yu Wenzhong's army, Yuan was arrested in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：直坐免官。
现代文：字文直获罪免除了官职。
English: After being directly convicted, he was removed from his post.

古文：直高祖母弟，性浮诡，贪狠无赖。
现代文：宇文直是高祖的同母弟弟，性情虚浮狡诈，贪狠刁蛮。
English: Yu Wenzhong is Gao Zu's younger brother by the same mother. He is deceitful, cunning, greedy and brutal.

古文：以晋公护执政，遂贰于帝而昵护。
现代文：因为晋公宇文护执掌朝政，就对高祖怀有二心而亲近宇文护。
English: Due to the fact that Jin Gong Uwen Rong held great power, he distanced himself from Emperor Wu and became close to Uwen Rong.

古文：及沌口还，愠于免黜，又请帝除之，冀得其位。
现代文：到他从沌口回来后，对他被免除官职感到恼怒，又请求高祖除掉宇文护，希望得到宇文护的职位。
English: When he returned from Chaozhou, he was angry that he had been removed from his official post, and he asked Gaozu to get rid of Uwenguo, hoping to get the post of Uwenguo.

古文：帝夙有诛护之意，遂与直谋之。
现代文：高祖早就有诛杀宇文护的心意，于是和宇文直谋划此事。
English: Gao Zu had the intention of assassinating Uwen Zhou for a long time, so he and Uwen Zhou plotted the matter.

古文：及护诛，帝乃以齐王宪为大冢宰。
现代文：到宇文护被诛杀后，高祖就任命齐王宇文宪为大冢宰。
English: After Uwenro was killed, Gaozu appointed Qi Wang Uwenxian as the grand secretary.

古文：直既乖本望，又请为大司马，意欲总知戎马，得擅威权。
现代文：宇文直既已违背了自己本来的愿望，又请求担任大司马，想总领军事，得以独揽大权。
English: Having already violated his original wish, Uwen Zhi also asked to be the grand steward and wanted to lead the military, so that he could monopolize power.

古文：帝揣知其意，谓之曰： 汝兄弟长幼有序，宁可反居下列也？ 乃以直为大司徒。
现代文：高祖揣测到了他的心意，对他说： 你们兄弟长幼有一定的顺序，你怎么可以反过来排在后面呢? 就任命宇文直为大司徒。
English: Gaozu guessed his intention and said to him, "Your brothers, the eldest and the youngest, have a certain order, so how can you, in turn, be at the back of the queue?" He appointed Wu Wenzhong as the eldest disciple.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：初，高祖以直第为东宫，更使直自择所居。
现代文：当初，高祖将宇文直的府第作为东宫，重新让他自行选择住所。
English: At first, Gao Zu regarded the capital of Wu Wenzhong as the East Palace, and allowed him to choose his own residence.

古文：直历观府署，无称意者，至废陟屺佛寺，欲居之。
现代文：宇文直观看了所有的公府官署，没有一个满意的，他到废弃了的陟屺佛寺，想住在那裹。
English: Uwen Zhi looked at all the government offices, none of which were satisfactory. He went to the abandoned Zou Buddha Temple and wanted to live there.

古文：齐王宪谓直曰： 弟儿女成长，理须宽博，此寺褊小，讵是所宜。 直曰： 一身尚不自容，何论儿女！ 宪怪而疑之。
现代文：齐王字文宪对宇文直说： 你的儿女已经长大了，按理住宅必须宽敞些，这个寺院狭小，这怎么能够适用。 宇文直说： 一个人都容不下，还谈什么儿女! 宇文宪感到既奇怪又疑惑。
English: King Qi's character, Wen Xian, said to Wu Wenzhi, "Your children have grown up, your house should be more spacious, this temple is too small, how can this be applied?" Wu Wenzhi said, "I can't tolerate a single person, how can I talk about children!" Wu Wenzhi felt both strange and puzzled.

古文：直尝从帝校猎而乱行，帝怒，对众挞之。
现代文：宇文直曾经跟随高祖围猎却走乱行列，高祖大怒，当着众人的面鞭打他。
English: He once went hunting with Emperor Wu, but he did something stupid. Emperor Wu got angry and scolded him in front of everyone.

古文：自是愤怨滋甚。
现代文：从此后他更加愤恨不平。
English: Since then, he has become even angrier.

古文：及帝幸云阳宫，直在京师，举兵反，攻肃章门。
现代文：到高祖前去云阳宫时，宇文直留在京师，起兵反叛，攻打肃章门。
English: When Gao Zu went to the Yunyang Palace, Uwen stayed in the Beijing Division and rebelled, attacking Suzhangmen.

古文：司武尉迟运闭门拒守，直不得入。
现代文：司武慰鲢关闭城门拒守，室塞直无法进去。
English: Sifu comforted him by closing the gate and refusing to let him in. He couldn't get into the room.

古文：语在运传。
现代文：这件事记载在《尉迟运传》中。
English: This event is recorded in the "Legend of the Long March."

古文：直遂遁走，追至荆州，获之，免为庶人，囚于别宫。
现代文：宇文直于是逃走，朝廷军队追到荆州，将他捕获，贬为平民，囚禁在别处宫殿。
English: Yu Wenzhi then fled, and the imperial army chased him to Jingzhou, captured him, reduced him to a commoner, and imprisoned him in another palace.

古文：寻而更有异志，遂诛之，及其子贺、贡、塞、响、贾、秘、津、干理、干璪、干悰等十人，国除。赵僭王招，字豆卢突。
现代文：不久宇文直又有异心。于是诛杀了他，以及他的儿子宇文贺、宇文宾、宇塞塞、宇文响、圭塞量、室壬丛、圭壬聋、圭立整理、宇文干躁、宇文干惊等十人，封国被撤销赵僵王室玄超，字亘卢空。
English: Not long after, Uwen Zhi had a change of heart. So he killed him and his sons, Uwen He, Uwen Bin, Use Sai, Uwen Xing, Gui Se Rong, Muro Ren Cong, Gui Ren Zhen, Gui Li Zhe, Uwen Gan Mani, Uwen Gan Zhen, and ten others. Zhao Zang's imperial seal was revoked.

古文：幼聪颖，博涉群书，好属文。
现代文：他年幼时聪慧机灵，博览群书，喜欢作文章。
English: When he was young, he was clever and witty, read a lot of books, and liked to write articles.

古文：学庾信体，词多轻艳。
现代文：学习庾信的风格，词句大多轻放艳丽。
English: Studying the style of Xuan letter, most of the words are light and bright.

古文：魏恭帝三年，封正平郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：魏茎童三年，被封为巫垩郡公，食邑一千户。
English: In the third year of Wei Zhi Tong, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Wuxi County, and served a thousand households in the county.

古文：武成初，进封赵国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，进封为赵国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, it was given the title of Zhao Guogong and served 10,000 households.

古文：保定中，拜为柱国，出为益州总管。
现代文：保定年间，被拜任为柱国，出任益州总管。
English: During the Baoding years, he was appointed as a pillar country and served as the general manager of Yizhou.

古文：建德元年，授大司空，转大司马。
现代文：建德元年，任大司空。又改任大司马。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was appointed as Daishi Ku. He was also reappointed as Daishi Ma.

古文：三年，进爵为王，除雍州牧。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵，建德四年，任雍州州牧。
English: Jian De served three years and was promoted to the title of prince, Jian De served four years and was appointed as the Yongzhou prefect.

古文：四年，大军东讨，招为后三军总管。
现代文：北周大军向东讨伐北齐，宇文招任后三军总管。
English: The Northern Zhou army marched eastward to fight against the Northern Qi, and Uwen was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the three armies.

古文：五年，又从高祖东伐，率步骑一万出华谷，攻齐汾州。
现代文：建德五年，丈跟随高祖束征，率领一万步兵骑兵出兵华谷，进攻齐国的汾州。
English: In Jiande's fifth year, his father-in-law followed Gao Zu and led 10,000 infantry and cavalry troops to Huaguan to attack Zhangzhou in Qi.

古文：及并州平，进位上柱国。
现代文：到并州平定后，升任为上柱国。
English: After the annexation of the state, it was promoted to the top pillar country.

古文：东夏底定，又为行军总管，与齐王讨稽胡。
现代文：束部平定后，又任行军总管，和齐王一起讨伐稽胡。
English: After Sokube was pacified, he also served as the general manager of the march, and together with King Qi, he fought against Qi Hu.

古文：招擒贼帅刘没铎，斩之，胡寇平。
现代文：宇文招擒获贼兵主帅刘没铎，斩杀了他，胡寇平定。
English: Yuwen Zhaojun was captured by Liu Mianzhu, the commander of the bandits, and he was killed, and the bandits were subdued.

古文：宣政中，拜太师。
现代文：宣政年间，拜任太师。
English: During the years of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he was appointed Grand Master.

古文：大象元年五月，诏以洺州襄国郡邑万户为赵。
现代文：大象元年五月，朝廷下诏指定将沼州襄国郡一万人家作为赵国采邑。
English: In May of the first year of the elephant, the imperial court issued an edict designating the 10,000-person family in Nanzhou Xianguo County as the new county seat of Zhao.

古文：招出就国。
现代文：宇文招离京前往封国。
English: Umen was called away from Kyoto to a fiefdom.

古文：二年，宣帝不豫，征招及陈、越、代、滕五王赴阙。
现代文：大象二年，宣帝生病，征召宇文招和陈王、越王、代王、滕王等五位亲王入宫。
English: In the second year of the elephant, Emperor Xuan fell ill and summoned five princes including King Wu Wenzhao, King Chen, King Yue, King Dai and King Teng to the palace.

古文：比招等至而帝已崩。隋文帝辅政，加招等殊礼，入朝不趋，剑履上殿。隋文帝将迁周鼎，招密欲图之，以匡社稷。
现代文：等宇文招等到达时宣帝已经去世、隋文帝辅佐朝政时，对宇文招等人特别礼遇，上朝时不用小步疾走，可以穿履佩剑上殿隋文帝将要篡夺周政权时，宇文招在暗地裹策划杀掉他，以匡扶社稷。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong had already passed away by the time Umencho and others arrived, when Emperor Sui was an assistant to Emperor Wenzhou, Umencho and others were treated with special courtesy. When Emperor Wenzhou was about to usurp Zhou's political power, Umencho was secretly plotting to kill him in order to support Emperor Wenzhou.

古文：乃邀隋文帝至第，饮于寝室。
现代文：就邀请隋文帝到自己家中，在寝室饮宴。
English: He invited Emperor Sui to his home and held a banquet in his bedroom.

古文：招子员、贯及妃弟鲁封、所亲人史冑，皆先在左右，佩刀而立。
现代文：宇文招的儿子宇文员、宇文贯及王妃的弟弟鲁封、亲信史胄，都事先在身边，佩刀站在左右。
English: Uwenshu's sons, Uwenkan and Uwensan, as well as the empress's brother, Lu Feng, and close confidant, Shi Yan, were all there beforehand, standing with their swords at their sides.

古文：又藏兵刃于帷席之间，后院亦伏壮士。
现代文：又在帷帐坐席中暗藏兵器，在后院也埋伏了勇士。
English: They also hid weapons in the curtains and seats, and ambushed the warriors in the backyard.

古文：隋文帝从者多在合外，唯杨弘、元冑、冑弟威及陶彻坐于户侧。
现代文：隋文帝的随从都在室外，衹有杨弘、元胄、元胄的弟弟元威和陶彻坐在门边。
English: Sui Emperor Wen's entourage are all outside, including Yang Hong, Yuan Qi, Yuan Qi's brother Yuan Wei and Tao Che sitting by the door.

古文：招屡以佩刀割瓜啖隋文帝，隋文帝未之疑也。
现代文：字文招多次用佩刀切瓜送给隋文帝吃。隋文帝并没有怀疑。
English: Zhu Wenchao repeatedly used his sword to cut melons to give to the Sui Emperor to eat. The Sui Emperor did not suspect anything.

古文：元冑觉变，扣刀而入。
现代文：元胄发现情况有变，用手握住刀把进来。
English: Yuan Qi found that the situation has changed, holding the handle of the knife in his hand.

古文：招乃以大觞亲饮冑酒，又命冑向厨中取浆。
现代文：宇文招就用大酒杯亲自给元胄劝酒，又命元胄到厨房去取饮料。
English: Uwen Zhao personally used a large wine glass to persuade Yuan Qi to drink, and ordered Yuan Qi to go to the kitchen to get a drink.

古文：冑不为之动。
现代文：元胄不理。
English: Motohiro ignored it.

古文：滕王逌后至，隋文帝降阶迎之，元冑因得耳语曰： 形势大异，公宜速出。 
现代文：滕王宇文迪稍后来到，隋文帝走下台阶迎接他，元胄才得以趁机附耳密语说： 情势不对，您应当赶快离开。 
English: Teng Wang Yu Wendi arrived a little later, Sui Emperor Wen stepped down the steps to meet him, and Yuan Zang was able to take advantage of the opportunity to whisper: The situation is not right, you should leave quickly.

古文：隋文帝共逌等就坐，须臾辞出。
现代文：隋文帝和宇文迪等人一起入座，不一会儿就告辞走了。
English: Emperor Sui and Emperor Uwendi took their seats together and left soon after.

古文：后事觉，陷以谋反。
现代文：后来事情被发觉，隋文帝诬陷宇文招谋反。
English: Later, the matter was discovered, and Emperor Sui Wen accused Yuwen of inciting rebellion.

古文：其年秋，诛招及其子德广公员、永康公贯、越携公干铣、弟干铃、干铿等，国除。
现代文：当年秋天，隋文帝诛杀了宇文招和他的儿子德广公宇文员、永康公宇文贯、越搞公字文干铣、宇文干铣的弟弟宇文干铃、宇文干铿等人，封国被撤销。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Sui Emperor killed Uwen Zhao and his sons De Guang Gong U Clerk, Yong Kang Gong U Clerk, Yue Jing Gong Zi Clerk, Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk, Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother, Uwen Clerk's brother Uwen Clerk's brother

古文：招所着文集十卷，行于世。
现代文：宇文招所著的文集十卷，流传在世上。
English: The ten-volume anthology written by Uwen Zhao has been circulated around the world.

古文：谯孝王俭，字侯幼突。
现代文：谌画王室塞俭，字侯幼突。
English: The painting depicts the royal family in thrift, with the words "household" and "young" intertwined.

古文：武成初，封谯国公，邑万户。
现代文：达盛初年，被封为韪厘公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of success, it was awarded the title of Baili Gong and served ten thousand households.

古文：天和中，拜大将军，寻迁柱国，出为益州总管。
现代文：丢勉年间，任大将军，不久升任柱国，出任益州总管。
English: During the reign of Duiming, he was appointed as a general, and was soon promoted to a pillar state, serving as the general manager of Yizhou.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：五年，东伐，以本官为左一军总管，攻永固城，拔之。
现代文：建德五年，向东讨伐齐国，他以原职的身份担任左一军总管，进攻永固城，攻下了该城。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, he went to the east to fight against Qi, and he served as the commander-in-chief of the left army in his original position, attacked Yonggu City, and captured the city.

古文：进平并、邺，拜大冢宰。
现代文：进兵平定并州、邺城，拜任大冢宰。
English: He subdued the marching troops, annexed the prefecture and the city, and assumed the post of Dazai.

古文：是岁，稽胡反，诏俭为行军总管，与齐王宪讨之。
现代文：这一年，稽胡反叛，高祖下诏命宇文俭任行军总管，和齐王宇文宪一起征讨。
English: In that year, after the rebellion of Ji Hu, Gao Zu issued an edict to appoint Wu Wenzhong as the commander-in-chief of the march, and he and Qi Wang and Wu Wenzhong discussed the matter together.

古文：有胡帅自号天柱者，据守河东，俭攻破之，斩首三千级。
现代文：有位自称天柱的胡帅，据守河东，宇文俭击败了他，斩杀了三千人。
English: There was a self-proclaimed Tianzhu, Hu Shuai, who was in charge of Hedong. Wu Wenjian defeated him and killed three thousand people.

古文：宣政元年二月，薨。
现代文：宣政元年二月，去世。
English: He died in February of the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China.

古文：子干恽嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文干惮继承了他的爵位。
English: His son, Uwen Ganshuo, inherited his title.

古文：大定中，为隋文帝所害，国除。
现代文：大定年间，宇文干惮被隋文帝杀害，封国被撤销。
English: During the Dading period, Emperor Wuwenhu was killed by Emperor Suiwen, and the state was revoked.

古文：陈惑王纯，字堙智突。
现代文：陈惑王宇文纯，字堙智突。
English: Chen Zhaowang, Yu Wenzhong, and Zhao Zhizhu.

古文：武成初，封陈国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，被封为陈国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was named Chen Guogong, and served ten thousand households.

古文：保定中，除岐州刺史，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：保定年间，任岐州刺史，加授开府仪同三司。
English: During his time in Baoding, he was appointed as the historian of Qizhou, and was also awarded the Keifu ceremony and the three offices.

古文：使于突厥迎皇后，拜大将军。
现代文：出使到突厥迎接皇后，拜任大将军。
English: He was sent to Turkey to meet the Empress, and was made a general.

古文：寻进位柱国，出为秦州总管，转陕州总管，督鴈门公田弘拔齐宜阳等九城。
现代文：不久升任柱国，出任秦州总管，又改任陕州总管，督率雁门公田弘攻下齐国的宜阳等九座城池。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of pillar state, became the governor of Qin State, and then the governor of Shaanxi State, and led the Gammon Konda Hiroshi to conquer nine cities including Yiyang in Qi.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：四年，大军东伐，纯为前一军总管。
现代文：建德四年，北周大军向东讨伐北齐，宇文纯任前一军总管。
English: In the fourth year of Jiande, the Northern Zhou army went east to fight against the Northern Qi, and Yu Wenzhong became the commander of the former army.

古文：以帝寝疾，班师。
现代文：因为高祖病倒，班师。
English: Because Gao Zu fell ill, the class teacher quit.

古文：五年，大军复东讨，诏纯为前一军，率步军二万守千里径。
现代文：建德五年，大军再次向东讨伐北齐，高祖下诏命宇文纯为前一军，率步兵二万人据守千里径。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, the great army once again marched east to fight against the Northern Qi, and Gaozhu ordered Uwenchun to be the first army, leading 20,000 infantrymen to defend the thousand-mile path.

古文：并州平，进位上柱国，即拜并州总管。
现代文：并州平定后，升任上柱国，就任并州总管。
English: After the annexation of the state, he was promoted to the top pillar country and assumed the post of the annexation of the state.

古文：宣政中，除雍州牧，迁太傅。
现代文：宣政年间，任雍州州牧，升为太傅。
English: During the years of the proclamation of the Constitution, he was appointed as Yongzhou prefect and promoted to Taifu.

古文：大象元年五月，以济南郡邑万户为陈。
现代文：大象元年五月，指定济南郡一万户人家作为陈国采邑。
English: In May of the first year of the elephant, ten thousand households in Jinan County were designated as Chen Guozheyi.

古文：纯出就国。
现代文：宇文纯离京前往封国。
English: Umenchu left Kyoto to go to Hokkoku.

古文：二年，朝京师。
现代文：大象二年，到京师朝拜。
English: Two years after he went to Shandong, he went to Beijing to worship.

古文：时隋文帝专政，翦落宗枝，遂害纯，并世子谦及弟扈公让、让弟议等，国除。
现代文：当时隋文帝独揽朝政，剪除皇室子弟，于是杀害了宇文纯，和他的世子字文谦及宇文谦的弟弟扈公宇文让、宇文让的弟弟宇文议等，封国被撤销。
English: At that time, Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen took sole control of the imperial government and eliminated the younger members of the imperial family. As a result, they killed Uwenjun, his heir Ziwenqian, Uwenqian's younger brother Zangong Uwenjan, and Uwenjan's younger brother Uwenli, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：越野王盛，字立久突。
现代文：越野王宇文盛，字立久突。
English: King of cross-country skiing, Yu Wensheng, has died.

古文：武成初，封越国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，被封为越国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, it was named Yue Guoguo and served 10,000 households.

古文：天和中，进爵为王。
现代文：天和年间，升爵位为王爵。
English: In recent years, the most common title of knighthood has been the title of royal duke.

古文：四年，大军伐齐，盛为后一军总管。
现代文：建德四年，北周大军讨伐齐国，宇文盛任后一军总管。
English: In the fourth year of Jiande, the Northern Zhou Great Army fought against Qi, and Uwen Sheng was appointed as the commander of the latter army.

古文：五年，大军又东讨，盛率所领，拔齐高显等数城。
现代文：建德五年，大军又向东讨伐齐国，宇文盛率领他的部众，攻下了齐国的高显等几座城池。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, the great army went to the east to fight against Qi. Wu Wensheng led his men and captured several cities such as Gaoxian in Qi.

古文：并州平，进位上柱国。
现代文：并州平定后，升任上柱国。
English: And after the state was pacified, he was promoted to the top pillar state.

古文：从平邺，拜相州总管。
现代文：他跟随高祖平定邺城，任相州总管。
English: He followed Gaozhu to subdue Shicheng and served as the chief administrator of Xiangzhou.

古文：宣政元年，入为大冢宰。
现代文：宣政元年，召入任大冢宰。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Constitution, he was called to the post of grand steward.

古文：汾州稽胡帅刘逻干反，诏盛率诸军讨平之。
现代文：汾州稽胡首领刘受逻干反叛，朝廷下诏命宇文盛率领各军讨伐平定了他。
English: Liu, the leader of Jinghu in Zhangzhou, suffered a logical rebellion, and the imperial court ordered Wu Wensheng to lead the army to fight and subdue him.

古文：大象元年，迁大前疑，转太保。
现代文：大象元年，升任大前疑，又改任太保。
English: In the first year of the Ezo era, he was promoted to the post of Daizen suspected, and was also reassigned to Taibo.

古文：其年，诏以丰州武当、安富二郡邑万户为越。
现代文：当年，朝廷下韶指定丰州武当、董宫二郡一万户人家作为越迩采邑。
English: In that year, the imperial court designated 10,000 households in Wudang and Donggong two counties of Fengzhou as Yuexuan mining villages.

古文：盛出就国。
现代文：室塞盛离京前往封国。
English: Murose no Mori left Kyoto to go to Hokkaidō.

古文：二年，朝京师。
现代文：去叁二年，到京师朝拜。
English: Two years after he went to Shandong, he went to Beijing to worship.

古文：其秋，为隋文帝所害，并其子忱、悰、恢、懫、忻等五人，国除。
现代文：当年秋天，被堕塞童杀害，他的儿子宇文忱、圭这毖、字文恢、宇文惯、空塞近等五人和他同时被害，封国被撤销。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was killed by a child who had fallen into the ditch, and his sons, Wu Wenzhen, Gui Jiaxuan, Zhi Wenzhong, Wu Wenzhong, and Kuo Jiaxuan, and five others were killed at the same time, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：代奰王达，字度斤突。
现代文：代樊王宇文达，字度斤突。
English: Wang Yuwenda, the deputy chief editor, has a sloppy handwriting.

古文：性果决，善骑射。
现代文：他性情果断，善于骑马射箭。
English: He has a decisive temperament and is good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：武成初，封代国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，被封为代国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, he was appointed as the acting governor of the province and provided food for ten thousand households.

古文：天和元年，拜大将军、右宫伯，拜左宗卫。
现代文：天和元年，任大将军、右宫伯，又任左宗卫。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed Grand General, Ugu-haku, and Sadamune.

古文：建德初，进位柱国，出为荆淮等十四州十防诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：建德初年，升任柱国，出任荆、淮等十四州十防诸军事、荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jiande, it was promoted to the pillar state, and served as the military of the ten defenses of the fourteen states including Jing and Huai, and the leader of the history of Jingzhou.

古文：在州有政绩，高祖手敕褒美之。
现代文：在州中有政绩，高祖亲书敕令褒扬他。
English: Gaozuchin praised him for his political achievements in the state.

古文：所管沣州刺史蔡泽黩货被讼，赃状分明。
现代文：他所管辖的澧州刺史蔡泽因贪污受贿而被起诉，受贿的罪状很清楚。
English: Cai Ze, the Zhangzhou magistrate under his jurisdiction, was prosecuted for corruption and bribery. The crime of bribery is very clear.

古文：以其世着勋庸，不可加戮；若曲法贷之，又非奉上之体。
现代文：因为他的先人建立有功勋，不能施加刑戮；如果不能执法而宽免他，又不是奉侍君上的体统。
English: Because his forefathers built a meritorious castle, he cannot inflict punishment; if he cannot enforce the law and pardon him, it is not the dignity of serving the sovereign.

古文：乃令所司，精加按劾，密表奏之。
现代文：于是他命令有关官员，详细地加以审查询讯，用密表上奏此事。
English: So he ordered the relevant officials to examine the inquiry in detail and report the matter on a confidential form.

古文：事竟得释，终亦不言。
现代文：这件事最后得以宽释，最终也没有提及。
English: The matter was eventually dropped and there was no mention of it.

古文：其处事周慎如此。
现代文：他处理事情就是像这样周密谨慎。
English: That's how meticulous he is.

古文：达雅好节俭，食无兼膳，侍姬不过数人，皆衣绨衣。
现代文：宇文达一向崇尚节俭，吃饭时没有两种以上的饭菜，侍姬不超过几人，都穿着粗厚的衣服。
English: Uwenda has always advocated frugality, with no more than two kinds of dishes at meals, and no more than a few attendants, all wearing thick clothes.

古文：又不营资产，国无储积。
现代文：又不经营财物产业，封国裹也没有储积的财物。
English: It does not engage in the property industry, and there is no accumulated property around the country.

古文：左右尝以为言，达从容应之曰： 君子忧道不忧贫，何烦于此。 三年，进爵为王。
现代文：身边的人曾因此事请问他，宇文达从容地回答他们说： 君子忧虑道义而不忧虑贫困，何必为此操心。 建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: People around him once asked him about this, and he calmly answered them: "A gentleman worries about morality but not about poverty, why should he worry about it?

古文：出为益州总管。
现代文：出任益州总管。
English: Appointed as the Governor of Yishu.

古文：高祖东伐，以为右一军总管。
现代文：壶祖向东面讨伐齐国，任命他为右一军总管。
English: Juzhu went eastward to fight against Qi and appointed him as the commander-in-chief of the Right Division.

古文：齐淑妃冯氏，尤为齐后主所幸，齐平见获，帝以达不迩声色，特以冯氏赐之。
现代文：蛮埋淑妃；延，特别受到查筐王的宠爱，查厘平定后被擒获，直担因为主塞达不亲近声色，特地将冯氏赏赐给他。
English: Yan, who was especially loved by the king of Chaggar, was captured after the conquest of Chali, and because Lord Seda was not close to him, he specially rewarded him with the Feng clan.

古文：宣帝即位，进位上柱国。
现代文：宣帝即位，他升任为上柱国。
English: When Emperor Xuan came to the throne, he was promoted to the top pillar country.

古文：大象元年，拜大右弼。
现代文：大象元年，任大右弼。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was appointed to the right wing of the university.

古文：其年，诏以潞州上党郡邑万户为代。
现代文：当年，朝廷下韶指定避业上党郡一万户人家作为：回的采邑。
English: In that year, the Imperial Court issued an edict designating the 10,000 households in Shangdang County, which had been avoiding business, as "backward villages."

古文：达出就国。
现代文：圭塞达离京前往封国。
English: Guseda left Kyoto to go to Hokkaidō.

古文：二年，朝京。
现代文：大象二年，到京师朝拜。
English: In the second year of the elephant, he went to Beijing to worship.

古文：其年冬，为隋文帝所害，及其世子执、弟蕃国公转等，国除。
现代文：当年冬天，被隋文帝杀害，他的世子宇文执、宇文执的弟弟董厨公室塞转等人一同被害，封国被撤销。
English: In the winter of that year, he was killed by the Sui Emperor, and his heir, Uwen Cui, and Uwen Cui's younger brother, Dong Cuisine, were also killed, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：冀康公通，字屈率突。
现代文：冀尘公圭塞通，字屈麸。
English: 冀尘公圭塞通,字屈.

古文：武成初，封冀国公，邑万户。
现代文：亘噬初年，被封为冀国公，食邑一万户。
English: In his first year, he was awarded the title of Jiji Kokugo (Governor of Hebei Province) and served ten thousand households.

古文：天和六年十月，薨。
现代文：瑟坚六年十月，去世。
English: Su Jian passed away in October of the sixth year.

古文：子绚嗣。
现代文：他的儿子主塞锢继承他的爵位。
English: His son Lord Seti succeeded to his title.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：逊三年，王塞面升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：大象中，为隋文帝所害，国除。
现代文：左塞年间，圭塞面被鹰塞查杀害，封国被撤销。
English: During the Zuo Sai era, Gui Saimen was killed by Ying Saicha, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：滕闻王逌，字尔固突。
现代文：滕闻王宇文迪，字尔固突。
English: Teng Wen Wang Yu Wendi, the characters are jumbled.

古文：少好经史，解属文。
现代文：年少时喜爱经史书籍，通晓作文章。
English: When he was young, he liked books on history and was good at writing essays.

古文：武成初，封滕国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，被封为滕国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was made the ruler of Tengguo, with 10,000 households in the county.

古文：天和末，拜大将军。
现代文：天和末年，任大将军。
English: At the end of his life, he became a general.

古文：建德初，进位柱国。
现代文：建德初年，升任柱国。
English: In the first year of Jiande, it was promoted to a pillar state.

古文：三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, promoted to the rank of Count.

古文：六年，为行军总管，与齐王宪征稽胡。
现代文：建德六年，任行军总管，和齐王宇文宪一起征讨稽胡。
English: Jiande served for six years as the general manager of the march, and together with Qi Wang Yuwen Xian, he collected money.

古文：逌破其渠帅穆友等，斩首八千级。
现代文：宇文迪击败稽胡渠帅穆友等人，斩杀八千人。
English: Uwendi defeated Jihuqiu Shuai Muyou and others, slaughtering eight thousand people.

古文：还，除河阳总管。
现代文：回来后，任河阳总管。
English: After returning, he served as the chief administrator of Hebei Province.

古文：宣政元年，进位上柱国。
现代文：宣政元年，升任上柱国。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Constitution, it was promoted to Shangzhu Province.

古文：其年，伐陈，诏逌为元帅，节度诸军事。
现代文：当年，北周讨伐陈国，朝廷下诏命宇文迪任元帅，节度诸军事。
English: In that year, when the Northern Zhou Dynasty attacked the State of Chen, the Imperial Court issued an edict to appoint Wu Wendi as a marshal, and the military was organized.

古文：大象元年五月，诏以荆州新野郡邑万户为滕。
现代文：大象元年五月，朝廷下诏指定荆州新野郡一万户人家作为滕国采邑。
English: In May of the first year of the elephant, the imperial court issued an edict designating ten thousand households in Nino County, Jingzhou, as the largest town in Tengguo.

古文：逌出就国。
现代文：宇文迪离京前往封国。
English: Uwendi left Kyoto to go to Hokkoku.

古文：二年，朝京。
现代文：大象二年，到京师朝拜。
English: In the second year of the elephant, he went to Beijing to worship.

古文：其年冬，为隋文帝所害，并子怀德公佑、佑弟箕国公裕、弟礼禧等，国除。
现代文：当年冬天，被隋文帝杀害，他的儿子怀德公宇文佑、宇文佑的弟弟箕国公宇文裕、宇文裕的弟弟宇文礼、宇文禧等人一同被害，封国被撤销。
English: In the winter of that year, he was killed by Emperor Sui Wen, and his son Huai De Gong Yu Wenyu, Wu Wenyu's younger brother Zeng Guo Gong Yu Wenyu, and Wu Wenyu's younger brothers Wu Wenyi and Wu Wenyi were also killed, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：逌所着文章，颇行于世。
现代文：宇文迪所写的文章，在世上流传很广。
English: The articles written by Uwendi have been widely circulated in the world.

古文：孝闵帝一男。
现代文：孝闵帝有一个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun had a son.

古文：陆夫人生纪厉王康。
现代文：就是坠去人生的组区王宇文康。
English: Wang Yuwenkang, a member of the Communist Party of China Central Committee, who fell to his death.

古文：纪厉王康，字干定。
现代文：纪厉王宇文康，字干定。
English: Ji Li Wang Yu Wen Kang, the character dry set.

古文：保定初，封纪国公，邑万户。
现代文：保定初年，被封为纪国公，食邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was given the title of Ji Guogong, and served ten thousand households.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：仍出为总管利始等五州、大小剑二防诸军事、利州刺史。
现代文：接着出任总管利始等五州、大小韧二防诸军事、墨必刺史。
English: Next, he served as the general manager of Risshi and other five prefectures, the size of the defense of the military, and the history of the ink.

古文：康骄矜无轨度，信任僚佐卢奕等，遂缮修戎器，阴有异谋。
现代文：圭玄尘傲慢自负不遵循法度，亲信任用属僚卢奕等人，于是修缮武器，在暗中策谋反叛。
English: Gui Xuanqin was arrogant and did not follow the law. He trusted his subordinate Lu Yi and others, so he repaired weapons and plotted a rebellion in secret.

古文：司录裴融谏止之，康不听，乃杀融。
现代文：司录裴融劝谏制止他，宇文康不采纳，就杀了裴融。
English: Scribe Pei Rong advised him to stop him, but Wu Wenkang did not agree and killed Pei Rong.

古文：五年，诏赐康死。
现代文：惺室五年，直担下令将主塞尘赐死。
English: Five years later, the direct supervisor ordered that the main damper be put to death.

古文：子湜嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文浬继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Uwen Zang, succeeded to his title.

古文：大定中，为隋文帝所害，国除。
现代文：大定年间，宇文浞被隋文帝杀害，封国被撤销。
English: During the Dading period, Emperor Wuwenhu was killed by Emperor Suiwen, and the state was revoked.

古文：明帝三男。
现代文：旦嬷有三个儿子。
English: Dang Quan has three sons.

古文：徐妃生毕剌王贤，后宫生酆王贞、宋王寔。
现代文：他们是徐妃生的毕剌王宇文贤，嫔妃生的丰廷室这毖、塞王室这基。
English: They are the sons of the empress Dowager Xu, the sons of the empress Dowager Feng, the sons of the empress Dowager Xu, the sons of the empress Dowager Feng, and the sons of the empress Dowager Xu.

古文：毕剌王贤，字干阳。
现代文：毕剌王宇文贤，字整屋。
English: Bi Yao Wang Yu Wen Xian, a word rectification house.

古文：保定四年，封毕国公。
现代文：幢四年，被封为毕国公。
English: After four years, he was named Bi Guoguang.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：亘逊三年，升爵位为王爵。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：出为华州刺史，迁荆州总管，进位柱国。
现代文：出任华州刺史，又升任型业总管，升任柱国。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Huazhou, and was also promoted to the general manager of the type industry, and was promoted to the pillar country.

古文：宣政中，入为大司空。
现代文：宣巫年间，入任大司空。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, Daishi Ku was appointed.

古文：大象初，进位上柱国、雍州牧、太师。
现代文：大象初年，升任上柱国、雍州州牧、太师。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was promoted to Shangzhu Guo, Yongzhou Zhoumu, and Taishi.

古文：明年，宣帝崩。
现代文：第二年，宣帝去世。
English: The following year, Emperor Xuan died.

古文：荆王元，字干仪。
现代文：宇文贤性情精强干练，有庄重的举止和谋略。
English: Yu Wenxian is of a strong and capable nature, with a dignified demeanor and strategy.

古文：宣政元年，封王。元及兑、充、允等并为隋文帝所害，国除。宣帝三子。
现代文：他担心隋文帝会颠覆宗庙社稷，言辞多有泄露，不久被杀害，和他一起被害的有他的儿子宇文弘义、宇文恭道、宇文树娘等人，封国被撤销。皇区圭王堕，字皇递。开始被封为酆国公。宣帝有三个儿子。
English: He was worried that Emperor Suiwen would subvert the imperial edict of the family temple and shrine. His words were often leaked, and he was killed soon after. His sons, Uwen Hiroyoshi, Uwen Kyodo, and Uwen Shuxiong, were killed with him. The imperial edict was revoked. Emperor Gui Wang fell, and the imperial edict was delivered. He was initially made the prince of the State of Suiwen. Emperor Xuan had three sons.

古文：朱皇后生静皇帝，王姬生邺王，皇甫姬生郢王术。
现代文：他们是朱皇后生的静皇帝，王姬生的邺王宇文衍，皇甫姬生的郢王宇文街。
English: They are Zhu Qingsheng's Emperor Jing, Wang Qingsheng's Wang Yuwenyan, and Wang Qingsheng's Wang Yuwen Jie.

古文：邺王，大象二年，封王。
现代文：邺王宇文衍，大象二年，被封为王。
English: King Uwenyan, the second year of the elephant, was crowned king.

古文：郢王术，大象二年，封王。
现代文：郢王宇文术，大象二年，被封为王。
English: Wu Wenshu, a two-year-old elephant, was crowned king.

古文：与并为隋文帝所害，国除。
现代文：和宇文衍一起都被隋文帝杀害，封国被撤销。
English: He and Wu Wenyan were both killed by the Sui Emperor, and their fiefdoms were revoked.

古文：史臣曰：昔贤之议者，咸云以周建五等，历载八百；秦立郡县，二世而亡。
现代文：史臣曰：从前贤能的人议论，都说因为姬周建立五个等级的爵位，历经了八百年；秦朝设立郡县，仅传了二世就灭亡了。
English: Shichen said: In the past, people of virtue and ability used to say that it took eight hundred years for He Zhou to establish five levels of nobility; the Qin Dynasty established counties and counties, and only the second generation passed away.

古文：虽得失之迹可寻，是非之理互起，而因循莫变，复古未闻。
现代文：虽然得失成败的事迹可以探寻，是非对错的道理相互启发，但是因循旧制不加改变，却从古以来都没有听说过。
English: Although the stories of success and failure can be explored, and the principles of right and wrong inspire each other, they have not been heard of since ancient times due to the old system.

古文：良由着论者溺于贵达，司契者难于易业，详求适变之道，未穷于至当也。
现代文：实在是因为著书立说的人陷于尊贵显达，主管写作的人难以改变事业，虽详细地寻求适宜的变通方法，却没有能够探究到最恰当的办法。
English: It's really because the people who write the books are stuck in the status quo, the people in charge of writing are difficult to change the cause, and although they are looking for suitable workarounds in detail, they have not been able to explore the most appropriate way.

古文：尝试论之：夫皇王迭兴，为国之道匪一；贤圣间出，立德之指殊涂。
现代文：我尝试着评论此事：帝王更迭兴起，治理国家的方法不一样；圣贤交替出现，树立圣德旨向的道路不同。
English: I tried to comment on this matter: the rise of emperors and emperors change, and the methods of governing the country are different; sages appear alternately, and the ways of establishing the direction of sanctity are different.

古文：斯岂故为相反哉，亦云治而已矣。
现代文：遣难道是故意要相互违背吗，他们也是为了要治理好天下而已呀。
English: Is it intentional to violate each other? They also want to govern the world well.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：五等之制，行于商周之前；郡县之设，始于秦汉之后。
现代文：五等爵位的制度，在商、周之前就实行了；郡县的设立，开始于秦、汉之后。
English: The system of peerage of the fifth class was implemented before Shang and Zhou; the establishment of counties began after Qin and Han.

古文：论时则浇淳理隔，易地则用舍或殊。
现代文：议论的时候则认为二者的厚薄相差很远，不同的地方贝在使用或舍弃方面有些不同。
English: During the discussion, it was considered that the thickness of the two was very different, and different local shells were used or discarded in different ways.

古文：譬犹干戈日用，难以成垓下之业；稷嗣所述，不可施成周之朝。
现代文：譬如兵器经常使用，难以成就像汉高祖在垓下击败楚建立汉那样的大业；稷嗣君叔孙通所讲的礼法，不可以在成周这一朝施行。
English: For example, weapons are often used, and it is difficult to achieve the great cause of defeating Chu and establishing Han under the leadership of Han Gaozu; the etiquette taught by the Heir, the Uncle, and the Grandson cannot be implemented in the morning of Cheng Zhou.

古文：是知因时制宜者，为政之上务也；观民立教者，经国之长策也。
现代文：由此可知根据不同的时候制定适宜的政策，是处理政务的最大事务；观察民风教化百姓，是治理国家的长远策略。
English: From this, it can be seen that formulating appropriate policies according to different times is the biggest matter of handling government affairs; observing the people's habits and educating the people is a long-term strategy for governing the country.

古文：且夫列封疆，建侯伯，择贤能，置牧守，循名虽曰异轨，责实抑亦同归。
现代文：而且分封疆上，建立诸侯，选择贤能，设置地方长官，就其名称虽然说是不同的建制，考察实际情况也许达到了相同的目的。
English: Moreover, the division of territories into fiefdoms, the establishment of vassals, the selection of meritocracy, and the establishment of local governors, although their names are said to be different systems, may have achieved the same purpose.

古文：盛则与之共安，衰则与之共患。
现代文：兴盛的时候则和施行的政策共同安定，衰落的时候则与当时的政策共患难。
English: When it is prosperous, it is stable together with the policy being implemented, and when it is in decline, it is in trouble together with the policy at that time.

古文：共安系乎善恶，非礼义无以敦风；共患寄以存亡，非甲兵不能靖乱。
现代文：共平安维系于善恶，不遵循礼义就无法敦厚世风；共患难寄托于存亡，不使用甲兵就不能平定祸乱。
English: Common peace is maintained by good and evil, and without following the etiquette, it is impossible to maintain a good world style; common suffering is entrusted to survival, and it is impossible to quell the calamity without using armored soldiers.

古文：是以齐、晋帅礼，鼎业倾而复振；温、陶释位，王纲弛而更张。
现代文：所以齐国、晋国遵循礼义，他们的政权倾覆后又重新振兴；温崤、陶侃推让职位，王法松弛后又重新伸张。
English: Therefore, Qi and Jin followed the rules of etiquette, and after their regimes were overthrown, they were reinvigorated; Wen Xuan and Tao Kan gave up their positions, and after the relaxation of Wang Fa, they re-asserted themselves.

古文：然则周之列国，非一姓也，晋之群臣，非一族也，岂齐、晋强于列国，温、陶贤于群臣者哉，盖势重者易以立功，权轻者难以尽节故也。
现代文：然而周朝的各个诸侯国，并不是一姓，晋朝的各位大臣，也不是一族，难道是齐国、晋国比其他诸侯国强大。温崤、陶侃比其他大臣们贤能吗?大概是权势重的人容易建立功勋，权势轻的人难以竭尽操节的缘故。
English: However, the various vassal states of the Zhou Dynasty are not a family name, and the ministers of the Jin Dynasty are not a family. Is Qi and Jin more powerful than other vassal states? Are Wen Xuan and Tao Kan more capable than other ministers? It is probably because people with more power are more likely to establish merit, and people with less power are more difficult to exhaust discipline.

古文：由此言之，建侯置守，乃古今之异术；兵权势位，盖安危之所阶乎。
现代文：由此看来，建立诸侯设置牧守，是古今的不同策略；军队权力势力官位，大概是平安或危难的缘由呀。
English: From this point of view, the establishment of lords and the establishment of pastors is a different strategy from ancient times to the present; the military power, the official position, is probably the cause of peace or danger.

古文：太祖之定关右，日不暇给，既以人臣礼终，未遑藩屏之事。
现代文：太祖在平定关右的时候，每天事务繁多时间不足，既然以人臣的礼节直到最后，就来不及建立作为王室屏障的藩国。
English: When the great-grandfather was pacifying Guan Yu, there were too many things to do every day and not enough time. Since he used the etiquette of a vassal until the end, it was too late to establish a domain as a royal barrier.

古文：晋荡辅政，爰树其党，宗室长幼，并据势位，握兵权，虽海内谢隆平之风，而国家有盘石之固矣。
现代文：晋荡公宇文护辅佐朝政时，树立自己的党羽，宗室的人，都占据了高官厚位，把握兵权，虽然天下有拒绝粉饰太平的风气，而国家却像磐石那样的坚固。
English: When they were promoted to the position of court nobles, civil guards, and assistants to the imperial court, they established their own party, and the people of the family occupied high-ranking positions and seized military power. Although there was a culture of refusing to whitewash the Taiping, the country was as solid as a rock.

古文：高祖克翦芒刺，思弘政术，惩专朝之为患，忘维城之远图，外崇宠位，内结猜阻。
现代文：高祖剪除身边的威胁，想弘扬为政的方法，惩治专断朝政的祸患，忘记了连城卫国的长远策略，对外人尊崇宠位，对宗室因猜忌而产生隔阂。
English: Gaozu cut out the threats around him, wanted to promote the way of doing politics, punish the scourge of arbitrary government, forgot the long-term strategy of defending the country, respected and cherished by outsiders, and estranged from the family because of suspicion.

古文：自是配天之基，潜有朽壤之墟矣。
现代文：从这时开始以德配于天的基业，就埋藏下了腐烂的十壤。
English: From this time on, the foundation of being worthy of heaven with virtue began, and the rotten ten soils were buried.

古文：宣皇嗣位，凶暴是闻，芟刈先其本枝，削黜遍于公族。
现代文：宣帝继位后，凶恶残暴，最先剪除的是自己的同宗枝叶，被削减废黜的人遍及贵族。
English: After the proclamation of the emperor's succession, the vicious brutality began. The first to be cut off were their own branches and leaves, and those who were cut down and dethroned were all aristocrats.

古文：虽复地惟叔父，亲则同生，文能附众，武能威敌，莫不谢卿士于当年，从侯服于下国。
现代文：即使是自己的叔父，同胞的兄弟，衹要文能招附众人之心，武能威慑敌人，没有不是在当时被辞去执政的官位，按照小国封侯的。
English: Even his own uncle, the brother of his compatriot, who wanted to use literature to win the hearts of the people and military power to deter the enemy, was not dismissed from the position of the ruling official at that time, and became a feudal lord according to the small country.

古文：号为千乘，势侔匹夫。
现代文：虽然号称千乘之国，但势力却与平民相等同。
English: Although it is known as the country of thousands of horseback riders, its power is equal to that of the common people.

古文：是以权臣乘其机，谋士因其隙，迁龟鼎速于俯拾，歼王侯烈于燎原。
现代文：所以掌权专横的大臣趁此机会，谋士藉此空隙，政权的改变就像弯腰拾东西一样快，诛灭王侯就像烈火燎原一样猛烈。
English: So the imperious minister in power takes advantage of this opportunity, the strategist takes advantage of this gap, the change of power is as fast as bending down to pick up something, and the destruction of the prince is as fierce as a blazing fire.

古文：悠悠邃古，未闻斯酷。
现代文：悠悠远古，也没有听说过有这样的残酷。
English: In ancient times, no one had ever heard of such cruelty.

古文：岂非摧枯振朽，易为力乎。
现代文：这难道不是像摧枯拉朽那样，非常容易做到的吗。
English: Isn't it so easy to do, just like dragging and dropping.

古文：向使宣皇采姬、刘之制，览圣哲之术，分命贤戚，布于内外，料其轻重，间以亲疏，首尾相持，远近为用。
现代文：假如宣帝采用姬周、刘汉的制度，实行圣明帝王的统治策略，分别任命贤能的皇戚，将他们分布在朝廷内外，估料他们的轻重，权衡他们的亲疏，使他们首尾扶持，远近都为自己使用。
English: If Emperor Xuan adopted the system of Ji Zhou and Liu Han and implemented the ruling strategy of Emperor Shengming, he would separately appoint virtuous imperial relatives, distribute them inside and outside the imperial court, estimate their weight, weigh their kinship and distance, and make them support each other, and use them for themselves both far and near.

古文：使其势位也足以扶危，其权力也不能为乱。
现代文：使他们的势力地位足以扶持危亡的局面，使他们的权势力量也无法制造祸乱。
English: So that their power position is sufficient to support the perilous situation, so that their power can not create havoc.

古文：事业既定，侥幸自息。
现代文：事业既然已经安定下来了，侥幸之心就会自然平息。
English: Now that the career has settled down, the feeling of being lucky will naturally subside.

古文：虽使卧赤子，朝委裘，社稷固以久安，亿兆可以无患矣。
现代文：这样，即使是像婴儿那样安睡着，每天垂衣而治，社稷也本来会长久地安定，亿万百姓也可以没有祸患了。
English: In this way, even if you sleep peacefully like a baby and live day by day, the society would have been stable for a long time, and hundreds of millions of people could have been free from disaster.

古文：何后族之地，而势能窥其神器哉。
现代文：那些皇后家族的人，又怎么能够窥视国家政权呢。
English: How could those members of the Empress's family spy on the state power?

