古文：宋礼陈瑄周忱宋礼，字大本，河南永宁人。
现代文：宋礼，字大本，河南永宁人。
English: Song Li, a great writer, was from Yongning, Henan Province.

古文：洪武中，以国子生擢山西按察司佥事，左迁户部主事。
现代文：洪武年间，以国子监生被提升为山西按察司佥事，后降为户部主事。
English: During the Hongwu era, Guo Zi Jinsheng was promoted to Shanxi Atsukasiji, and later downgraded to the head of the household department.

古文：建文初，荐授陕西按察佥事，复坐事左迁刑部员外郎。
现代文：建文初年，受推荐授予陕西按察佥事，又因犯过失降为刑部员外郎。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, he was recommended to be awarded the title of Shaanxi according to the investigation of anecdotes, and was demoted to the position of a member of the criminal department due to his negligence.

古文：成祖即位，命署礼部事，以敏练擢礼部侍郎。
现代文：成祖即位后，命他代理礼部事务。宋礼以敏捷干练被升为礼部侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of the founder, he was appointed as the representative of the ceremonial affairs. Song Li was promoted to the attendant of the ceremonial affairs with agility and skill.

古文：永乐二年拜工部尚书。
现代文：永乐二年，他任为工部尚书。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he was appointed as the head of the engineering department.

古文：尝请给山东屯田牛种，又请犯罪无力准工者徙北京为民，并报可。
现代文：他曾请给山东的屯田发给耕牛和种子，又请将犯罪而无力负担工程的人迁到北京为民。回报都批准了。
English: He had asked for the farmland in Shandong to be given to cattle and seeds, and also asked for the criminals who could not afford the project to be moved to Beijing for the people. All returns were approved.

古文：七年丁母忧，诏留视事。
现代文：七年，母亲去世，诏令他留下继续理事。
English: Seven years later, when his mother died, he was ordered to stay on as a director.

古文：九年命开会通河。
现代文：九年，命他开凿会通河。
English: Nine years later, he was given the task of digging a tunnel that would lead to the river.

古文：会通河者，元至元中，以寿张尹韩仲晖言，自东平安民山凿河至临清，引汶绝济，属之卫河，为转漕道，名曰 会通 。
现代文：会通河在元朝至元年间，以寿张县尹韩仲晖的建议而开凿，从东平县安民山到临清，引汶水横穿济水，注入卫河，作为输运粮食的通道，名叫会通。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Huitong River was excavated at the suggestion of Yin Han Zhongyi of Shouzhang County. From Anmin Mountain of Dongping County to Linqing, the water was brought across the Jishui River and injected into the Wei River as a channel for transporting grain. It was named Huitong.

古文：然岸狭水浅，不任重载，故终元世海运为多。
现代文：但这条河河道狭窄，水又浅，不能通大船，所以终元之世，以海运为多。
English: However, this river is narrow and shallow and cannot be navigated by large ships, so in the last century, it was mostly transported by sea.

古文：明初输饷辽东、北平，亦专用海运。
现代文：明朝初年向辽东、北平输运粮饷，也专用海运。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, grain was transported to Liaodong and Beiping, and it was also transported by sea.

古文：洪武二十四年，河决原武，绝安山湖，会通遂淤。
现代文：二十四年，黄河在原武决口，穿过安山湖，会通河遂淤塞了。
English: In 1924, the Yellow River was silted up at the mouth of the Yuanwu River, where it flows through Ansan Lake.

古文：永乐初，建北京，河海兼运。
现代文：永乐初年，营建北京，河海运兼用。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Beijing was built, and it was used for river and sea transportation.

古文：海运险远多失亡，而河运则由江、淮达阳武，发山西、河南丁夫，陆輓百七十里入卫河，历八递运所，民苦其劳。
现代文：海运险远会有损失和人员死亡，而河运则由长江、淮河运到阳武，再征调山西、河南的丁夫，陆路车运一百七十里入卫河，途经八个递运所，百姓非常辛苦。
English: There will be losses and deaths in maritime transport far away, while river transport will be transported from the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River to Yangwu, and Dingfu from Shanxi and Henan will be recruited and transferred, and land vehicles will be transported 170 miles into Weihe, passing through eight transport stations, and the people are very hard.

古文：至是济宁州同知潘叔正上言： 旧会通河四百五十余里，淤者乃三之一，浚之便。 
现代文：至此济宁州同知潘叔正上书说 ：旧会通河全长四百五十余里，现淤塞了三分之一，疏浚它为便。 
English: At this point, Jining County's confidant Pan Shuzheng wrote: The total length of the former Huitong River is more than 450 miles, and now one-third of it is silted up, so it is convenient to dredge it.

古文：于是命礼及刑部侍郎金纯、都督周长往治之。
现代文：皇上于是命宋礼和刑部侍郎金纯、都督周长前往治理。
English: The emperor then ordered Song Li, the attendant of the criminal justice department, Jin Chun, and the governor, Zhou Chang, to go and administer justice.

古文：礼以会通之源，必资汶水。乃用汶上老人白英策，筑堽城及戴村坝，横亘五里，遏汶流，使无南入洸而北归海。
现代文：宋礼认为会通河的水源，必靠汶水，于是采用汶上老人白英的意见，修筑城和戴村间大坝，横亘五里，遏住汶水，使它不能南入氵光河而北归于大海。
English: Song Li believed that the water source of the Huitong River must rely on the Wen Shui, so he adopted the opinion of Bai Ying, an old man in Wen Shang, to build a dam between the city and Dai village, spanning five miles, to stop the Wen Shui, so that it could not enter the Luguang River in the south and return to the sea in the north.

古文：汇诸泉之水，尽出汶上，至南旺，中分之为二道，南流接徐、沛者十之四，北流达临清者十之六。
现代文：又汇集各泉的水流，尽引到汶上，到达南旺，再中分为两路，十分之四南流接徐州和沛县，十分之六北流达到临清。
English: In addition, the water flow of each spring was brought together and led to Wen Shang, reaching Nanwang, and then divided into two paths. Four-tenths of the south stream connected Xuzhou and Peixian, and six-tenths of the north stream reached Linqing.

古文：南旺地势高，决其水，南北皆注，所谓水脊也。
现代文：南旺地势高，在这里决水，南北皆流，这里就是所谓的水脊。
English: The Nanwang area has a high potential, the water breaks here, and the north and south flow together. This is the so-called water ridge.

古文：因相地置闸，以时蓄泄。
现代文：便审地建闸，根据季节蓄水放水。
English: The sluice gate is built at random, and water is stored and released according to the season.

古文：自分水北至临清，地降九十尺，置闸十有七，而达于卫；南至沽头，地降百十有六尺，置闸二十有一，而达于淮。
现代文：从分水北到临清，地势下降九十尺，设置十七座闸门，到达卫河；从分水南到沽头，地势下降一百一十六尺，设置二十一座闸门，到达淮河。
English: From the north of the watershed to Linqing, the terrain drops 90 feet and 17 gates are set up to reach Weihe; from the south of the watershed to Shantou, the terrain drops 116 feet and 21 gates are set up to reach Huaihe.

古文：凡发山东及徐州、应天、镇江民三十万，蠲租一百一十万石有奇，二十旬而工成。
现代文：前后共征调山东和徐州、应天、镇江民夫三十万，免除租税一百一十多万石，费时二十个月而完成。
English: A total of 300,000 people from Shandong, Xuzhou, Yingtian and Zhenjiang were recruited and transferred, and more than 1.1 million koku were exempted from tax. It took 20 months to complete.

古文：又奏浚沙河入马常泊，以益汶。
现代文：他又上奏疏浚沙河入马常泊，以增加汶水流量。
English: He also raised the issue of dredging the sand river into Ma Changbo to increase the flow of water.

古文：语详《河渠志》。
现代文：详见《河渠志》。
English: For details, see the "History of Rivers and Canals."

古文：是年，帝复用工部侍郎张信言，使兴安伯徐亨、工部侍郎蒋廷瓒会金纯，浚祥符鱼王口至中滦下，复旧黄河道，以杀水势，使河不病漕，命礼兼董之。
现代文：这一年，皇上又采纳工部侍郎张信的建议，派兴安伯徐亨、工部侍郎蒋廷瓒会同金纯，疏浚从祥符鱼王口下到中滦，恢复旧黄河道，以减少水势，使黄河不能危害漕运，还命宋礼兼管这一工程。
English: In the same year, the emperor also adopted the suggestion of Zhang Xin, the steward of the Ministry of Works, and sent Xing Anbo Xu Heng and the steward of the Ministry of Works, Jiang Tingyao, together with Jin Chun, to dredge from the mouth of Xiang Fugu Wangkou to Zhongluo to restore the old Yellow River to reduce the water potential so that the Yellow River could not harm the rowing. Song Li was also appointed to manage this project.

古文：八月还京师，论功第一，受上赏。
现代文：八月，宋礼回到京师，论功评为第一，受到上赏。
English: In August, Song Li returned to Beijing as a teacher and was awarded the first prize for his merits.

古文：潘叔正亦赐衣钞。
现代文：潘叔正也被赐给衣服钞币。
English: Uncle Pan was also given clothes and money.

古文：明年，以御史许堪言卫河水患，命礼往经画。
现代文：第二年，因御史许堪说卫河有水患，皇上命宋礼前往经划。
English: In the second year, the emperor ordered Song Li to go to Jingzha because the imperial historian Xu Kan said that there was a flood in Wei River.

古文：礼请自魏家湾开支河二，泄水入土河，复自德州西北开支河一，泄水入旧黄河，使至海丰大沽河入海。
现代文：宋礼请从魏家湾开掘两条支河，将水泄入土河；又从德州西北开一条支河，将水泄入旧黄河，使其到海丰大沽河入海。
English: Song Li requested that two tributaries be excavated from Wei Jia Bay to discharge water into the Tu River; and that a tributary be opened from northwest Texas to discharge water into the old Yellow River, so that it would flow into the sea to the Haifeng Dadu River.

古文：帝命俟秋成后为之。
现代文：皇上命待秋收之后动工。
English: The emperor ordered construction to begin after the autumn harvest.

古文：礼还言： 海运经历险阻，每岁船辄损败，有漂没者。
现代文：宋礼回来后说： 海运经历险阻，每年船只常有损坏，还有被漂没的。
English: After his return, Song Li said: "Shipping is fraught with peril. Every year, ships are often damaged, and some are lost at sea.

古文：有司修补，迫于期限，多科敛为民病，而船亦不坚。
现代文：有关官员负责修补，但迫于期限，多增加征敛，成为百姓的祸害，而船也不坚固。
English: The officials concerned were responsible for the repair, but due to the deadline, they increased the collection and became a scourge to the people, and the ship was not strong.

古文：计海船一艘，用百人而运千石，其费可办河船容二百石者二十，船用十人，可运四千石。
现代文：计算海船一艘，要用一百人才能运一千石，它的费用可以办可载二百石的二十艘的河船，每船用十人，可以运四千石。
English: Counting one sea ship, it takes one hundred people to transport one thousand stones. Its cost can handle twenty river ships that can carry two hundred stones, and each ship can carry four thousand stones with ten people.

古文：以此而论，利病较然。
现代文：这样一算，利弊已很明显。
English: In this way, the pros and cons are already obvious.

古文：请拨镇江、凤阳、淮安、扬州及衮州粮，合百万石，从河运给北京。
现代文：请拨出镇江、凤阳、淮安、扬州以及兖州的粮食从河道运去供给北京。
English: Please allocate grain from Zhenjiang, Fengyang, Huai'an, Yangzhou and Ganzhou to be transported by river to supply Beijing.

古文：其海道则三岁两运。 
现代文：至于海路，则每三年运两次。 
English: As for the sea route, it is transported twice every three years.

古文：已而平江伯陈瑄治江、淮间诸河功，亦相继告竣。
现代文：后来平江伯陈瑄治理江淮之间各河道的工程，也相继告竣。
English: Later, the projects of the administration of the rivers between the Huai River and the Pingjiang River were also successively completed.

古文：于是河运大便利，漕粟益多。
现代文：于是河运便利，运送的粮食更多。
English: As a result, river transport was convenient, and more grain was transported.

古文：十三年遂罢海运。
现代文：十三年遂停罢海运。
English: Thirteen years later, shipping was suspended.

古文：初，帝将营北京，命礼取材川蜀。
现代文：当初，皇上将营建北京，命宋礼到四川取木材。
English: At first, the emperor was going to build Beijing and ordered Song Li to go to Sichuan to get wood.

古文：礼伐山通道，奏言： 得大木数株，皆寻丈。
现代文：宋礼开山通道，上奏说： 得到几株大木，都长一丈左右。
English: When Song Li opened the mountain passage, Shang Soo said, "I got a few big trees, all of which are about a meter tall.

古文：一夕，自出谷中抵江上，声如雷，不偃一草。 
现代文：一天，从山谷中自达江上，响声如雷，而且不压坏一草。 
English: One day, from the valley of the Zida River, thunderous, and does not crush a grass.

古文：朝廷以为瑞。
现代文：朝廷以为是祥瑞之兆。
English: The court thought it was a sign of auspiciousness.

古文：及河工成，复以采木入蜀。
现代文：治河工程完工后，他又入蜀采木材。
English: After the completion of the river control project, he went back to Shu to harvest timber.

古文：十六年命治狱江西。
现代文：十六年，命他到江西治理刑狱案件。
English: Sixteen years later, he was ordered to go to Jiangxi to deal with prison cases.

古文：明年造番舟。
现代文：第三年制造出洋船只，宋礼被从四川召回。
English: In the third year, foreign ships were made, and Song Li was recalled from Sichuan.

古文：自蜀召还，以老疾免朝参，有奏事令侍郎代。
现代文：因他老病免以朝见，有事进奏令侍郎代理。
English: Because of his chronic illness, he was excused from attending the morning meeting, and in the event of an emergency, he was ordered to act as the chamberlain.

古文：二十年七月卒于官。
现代文：二十年七月，他在任上去世。
English: He died in office on 20 July.

古文：礼性刚，驭下严急，故易集事，以是亦不为人所亲。
现代文：宋礼性格刚烈，对下属约束得很严，所以很容易使事情都集到他身上，因此也不被别人所亲爱。
English: Song Li has a strong-willed personality and is very strict with his subordinates, so it's easy for things to get on top of him, so he's not loved by others.

古文：卒之日，家无余财。
现代文：他去世时，家无余财。
English: When he died, the family had no money left.

古文：洪熙改元，礼部尚书吕震请予葬祭如制。
现代文：洪熙改元后，礼部尚书吕震请求依制度给予葬祭。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty was reformed by Hong Xi, the ceremonial department of Shangshu Lvzhen requested that the funeral rites be given according to the system.

古文：有不当，辄加教诫。
现代文：弘治年间，主事王宠才请为他立祠。
English: It was during the Koji era that the head of the temple, Wang Zhaojun, invited him to build a small shrine.

古文：芳受命唯谨，由是为良吏云。陈瑄，字彦纯，合肥人。
现代文：诏令把他祭在南旺湖上，以金纯、周长配享。隆庆六年，赠予他太子太保。陈瑄，字彦纯，合肥人。
English: The imperial edict had him enshrined on Nanwang Lake, with gold, purity and girth. In the sixth year of the Longqing Festival, he was presented to the Crown Prince Taibo. Chen Zhen, Aza Hikochun, from Hefei.

古文：父闻，以义兵千户归太祖，累官都指挥同知。
现代文：父亲陈闻，以义兵千户归顺太祖，累任都指挥同知。
English: Father Chen heard that thousands of households had surrendered to the great-grandfather with the help of volunteers, and he had been commanding his friends for many years.

古文：瑄代父职。
现代文：陈瑄承袭父职。
English: Chen Yao inherited his father's position.

古文：父坐事戍辽阳，瑄伏阙请代，诏并原其父子。
现代文：父亲犯罪被遣戍辽阳，陈瑄拜伏在宫门请求替父戍守，诏令一并原谅了他们父子。
English: His father was exiled to Liaoyang for committing a crime. Chen Yibai stayed at the palace gate to plead on his father's behalf. The imperial edict pardoned both father and son.

古文：瑄少从大将军幕，以射雁见称。
现代文：陈瑄少年时随从大将军幕府，以善射雁见称。
English: As a boy, Chen Yao followed the shogun and was known for his skill at shooting geese.

古文：屡从征南番，又征越巂，讨建昌叛番月鲁帖木儿，逾梁山，平天星寨，破宁番诸蛮。
现代文：他屡次随军远征南番，又征讨越，讨伐建昌反叛的番人月鲁帖木儿，翻过梁山，讨平天星寨，攻破宁番诸蛮人。
English: He repeatedly went on expeditions to Nanban with the army. He also went to Yue, fought against the rebel watchman of Jianchang, Yue Lutie Mu'er, overcame Liangshan, fought against Tianxingzhai, and defeated the barbarians of Ningban.

古文：复征盐井，进攻卜木瓦寨。
现代文：又征讨盐井，而攻打卜水瓦寨。
English: They also requisitioned salt wells and attacked the village of Boushuiwa.

古文：贼炽甚。瑄将中军，贼围之数重。
现代文：贼人势力很盛，陈瑄率领中军，贼人把他们围了数层。
English: The bandits were very powerful. Chen Xi led the Chinese army, and the bandits surrounded them several layers deep.

古文：瑄下马射，伤足，裹创战。
现代文：陈瑄下马射敌，足部受伤，他裹伤再战。
English: Chen dismounted and shot his opponent, injuring his foot. He was bandaged and returned to the fight.

古文：自巳至酉，全师还。
现代文：从上午十点战到下午五六点，全师而还。
English: From ten o'clock in the morning until five or six in the afternoon, the entire division fought back.

古文：又从征贾哈剌，以奇兵涉打冲河，得间道，作浮梁渡军。
现代文：他又从征贾哈剌，以奇兵趟过打冲河，找到近道，做浮桥渡部队。
English: He also went from conquering Jiaxuan to wading across the Dachong River with a strange soldier, finding a shortcut and making a pontoon bridge.

古文：既渡，撤梁，示士卒不返，连战破贼。
现代文：部队过完后，他拆掉浮桥，向士兵们表示不再回头，接连作战击败了贼人。
English: After the troops left, he tore down the pontoon bridge, told the soldiers that he would not turn back, and defeated the thieves in successive battles.

古文：又会云南兵征百夷有功，迁四川行都司都指挥同知。
现代文：他又会同云南兵征讨百夷有功，升为四川都司都指挥同知。
English: He also performed well in conscripting soldiers from Yunnan to fight against hundreds of barbarians, and was promoted to be the commander of the Sichuan provincial capital.

古文：建文末，迁右军都督佥事。
现代文：建文末年，他升为右军都督佥事。
English: At the end of the Jianwen era, he was promoted to the post of right-wing military governor.

古文：燕兵逼，命总舟师防江上。
现代文：燕王部队进逼时，他受命总管舟师防卫长江。
English: When Yan Wang's troops advanced, he was ordered to defend the Yangtze River as chief boatman.

古文：燕兵至浦口，瑄以舟师迎降，成祖遂渡江。
现代文：燕王兵到浦口，陈瑄以舟师迎接并归降，成祖于是渡过了长江。
English: Yan Wangbing went to Pukou, Chen Qi met him with a boat and surrendered. Cheng Zu then crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：既即位，封平江伯，食禄一千石，赐诰券，世袭指挥使。
现代文：成祖即位后，封陈瑄为平江伯，食禄一千石，赐给诰券，世袭指挥使。
English: After Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, he appointed Chen Xi as the governor of the Pingjiang River, granted him a stipend of one thousand koku, gave him a certificate, and made him the hereditary commander.

古文：永乐元年命瑄充总兵官，总督海运，输粟四十九万余石，饷北京及辽东。遂建百万仓于直沽，城天津卫。
现代文：永乐元年，命陈瑄充任总兵官，总督海运，将四十九万多石粮食输运到北京和辽东，遂在直沽修建可容一百万石粮食的仓库，筑天津卫城。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, Chen Yucheng was appointed as the chief military officer and the governor of maritime transportation. He transported more than 490,000 kilos of grain to Beijing and Liaodong, and then built a warehouse with a capacity of one million kilos of grain in Zhaohui to build the Tianjin Acropolis.

古文：先是，漕舟行海上，岛人畏漕卒，多闭匿。
现代文：在此之前，运粮船航行海上，岛上居民害怕运粮兵，多躲藏起来。
English: Prior to this, grain ships sailed on the sea, and the island's residents were afraid of the grain carriers and mostly hid.

古文：瑄招令互市，平其直，人交便之。
现代文：陈瑄招他们出来，令互相贸易，给价公平，人民都很方便。
English: Chen Xuan called them out to make mutual trade, fair prices, and people are very convenient.

古文：运舟还，会倭寇沙门岛。瑄追击至金州白山岛，焚其舟殆尽。
现代文：运粮船回来时，正值倭寇侵犯沙门岛，陈瑄追击到金州白山岛，将他们的船只焚烧殆尽。
English: When the grain ship returned, it was at the time of the Japanese invasion of Shamen Island, and Chen Yu chased them to Jinzhou Baishan Island and burned their ships to the ground.

古文：九年命与丰城侯李彬统浙、闽兵捕海寇。
现代文：九年，命他与丰城侯李彬统领浙江、福建之兵捕捉海寇。
English: In the ninth year, he ordered him and Fengcheng marquis Li Bin to lead the soldiers of Zhejiang and Fujian to capture the sea pirates.

古文：海溢堤圮，自海门至盐城凡百三十里。
现代文：海水上涨，海堤毁坏，从海门到盐城达一百三十里。
English: The sea water rose, the seawall was destroyed, and it was a hundred and thirty miles from Haimen to Yancheng.

古文：命瑄以四十万卒筑治之，为捍潮堤万八千余丈。
现代文：陈瑄受命以四十万士卒修筑，修建了捍潮堤一万八千余丈。
English: Chen Xi was ordered to build with four hundred thousand men, and built a sea wall eighteen thousand meters high.

古文：明年，瑄言： 嘉定濒海地，江流冲会。海舟停泊于此，无高山大陵可依。
现代文：第二年，陈瑄说： 嘉定滨海之地，江河会流，海船停泊在这里，没有高山大陵可依。
English: In the second year, Chen Yao said: In the coastal area of Jiading, where rivers meet and ships are anchored, there is no high mountain mausoleum to follow.

古文：请于青浦筑土山，方百丈，高三十余丈，立堠表识。 
现代文：请在青浦筑一座土山，周长百丈，高三十余丈，在上面建望楼，作为标志。 
English: Please build a dirt hill in Qingpu with a circumference of 100 meters and a height of more than 30 meters, and build a watchtower on it as a sign.

古文：既成，赐名宝山，帝亲为文记之。
现代文：建成之后，皇上赐名为宝山，还亲自写文章以记其事。
English: After it was built, the emperor gave it the name of Baoshan, and also personally wrote an article to remember it.

古文：宋礼既治会通河成，朝廷议罢海运，仍以瑄董漕运。
现代文：宋礼治理好会通河后，朝廷建议罢海运，仍以陈瑄总管漕运。
English: After Song Li's good governance led to the opening of the canal, the imperial court suggested a ban on maritime transport, but still made Chen Xi the general manager of ro-ro transport.

古文：议造浅船二千余艘，初运二百万石，浸至五百万石，国用以饶。
现代文：他建议造浅船二千余艘，开始时运二百万石，以后逐渐增加到五百万石，国家用度因此富足。
English: He proposed to build more than two thousand shallow vessels, initially transporting two million stones, and later gradually increasing to five million stones, so that the national consumption would be sufficient.

古文：时江南漕舟抵淮安，率陆运过坝，逾淮达清河，劳费其钜。
现代文：当时江南漕船到达淮安后，都是陆运过坝，过淮河到达清河，所费劳力和财物很大。
English: At that time, after the Jiangnan rowing boat arrived in Huai'an, it was transported by land across the dam, across the Huaihe River to the Qinghe River, which required a lot of labor and property.

古文：十三年，瑄用故老言，自淮安城西管家湖，凿渠二十里，为清江浦，导湖水入淮，筑四闸以时宣泄。
现代文：十三年，陈瑄采用故老的意见，从淮安城西的管家湖，开凿二十里长的水渠，叫清江浦，引导湖水入淮河，修筑四座闸门，依时放水。
English: In the thirteenth year, Chen Zhe adopted the opinions of the ancients and dug a twenty-mile-long canal, called Qingjiangpu, from the Butler Lake in the west of Huai'an City, guided the lake water into the Huai River, built four gates, and released water according to time.

古文：又缘湖十里筑堤引舟，由是漕舟直达于河，省费不訾。
现代文：又沿湖十里筑堤来引船，这样漕船可以直达黄河，节省费用不少。
English: In addition, a dike was built along ten miles of the lake to guide the boat, so that the rowing boat could reach the Yellow River directly, saving a lot of costs.

古文：其后复浚徐州至济宁河。
现代文：后来又疏浚徐州到济宁的河道。
English: Later, the river from Xuzhou to Jining was dredged.

古文：又以吕梁洪险恶，于西别凿一渠，置二闸，蓄水通漕。
现代文：又因吕梁洪险恶，在它的西面另开一条渠道，设置两座闸门，蓄水以开通漕运。
English: In addition, due to the danger of Luliangong, another channel was opened on its west side, two gates were set up, and water was stored to open the canal.

古文：又筑沛县刁阳湖、济宁南旺湖长堤，开泰州白塔河通大江。
现代文：还修筑沛县刁阳湖、济宁南旺湖长堤，开泰州白塔河连通大江。
English: Long dikes have also been built on Poyang Lake in Pei County and Nanwang Lake in Jining, and the Baita River in Kaitai County has been connected to the Yangtze River.

古文：又筑高邮湖堤，于堤内凿渠四十里，避风涛之险。
现代文：又修筑高邮湖堤，在堤内凿渠四十里，以避免险恶的风涛。
English: He also built the embankment of Gaoyou Lake and dug a forty-mile canal in the embankment to avoid the dangerous winds and waves.

古文：又自淮至临清，相水势置闸四十有七，作常盈仓四十区于淮上，及徐州、临清、通州皆置仓，便转输。
现代文：他还从淮安到临清，根据水势设置了四十七座闸门，在淮上建造常盈仓四十区，在徐州、临清、通州也都设置了仓库，以便于转输。
English: He also set up forty-seven gates from Huai'an to Linqing according to the water potential, built forty areas of Changying warehouses on Huai'an, and set up warehouses in Xuzhou, Linqing, and Tongzhou to facilitate transfer.

古文：虑漕舟胶浅，自淮至通州置舍五百六十八，舍置卒，导舟避浅。
现代文：他又担心漕船搁浅，便从淮安到通州沿途设置了五百六十八个居住点，配给士卒，引导船只避开浅滩。
English: He was also worried that the rowing boat would run aground, so he set up 568 settlements along the way from Huai'an to Tongzhou, distributed rations to the soldiers, and guided the ship to avoid the shoal.

古文：复缘河堤凿井树木，以便行人。
现代文：又沿河堤凿井种树，以方便行人。
English: They also dug wells along the riverbank to plant trees to make it easier for pedestrians.

古文：凡所规画，精密宏远，身理漕河者三十年，举无遗策。
现代文：他的规划，都精密而有远见。他身任漕河事务三十年，殚精竭虑提出了许多建议。
English: His plans are precise and far-sighted. He has been in charge of Caohe affairs for 30 years, and has made many suggestions with great care.

古文：仁宗即位之九月，瑄上疏陈七事。一曰南京国家根本，乞严守备。二曰推举宜核实，无循资格，选朝臣公正者分巡天下。三曰天下岁运粮饷，湖广、江西、浙江及苏、松诸府并去北京远，往复逾年，上逋公租，下妨农事。
现代文：仁宗即位这年的九月，陈瑄上疏提出了七项建议：一说南京是国家根本，乞请严整守备力量；二说推举人才应进行核实，不能只论资格，选择公正的朝臣分巡天下；三说每年天下所输运的粮饷，湖广、江西、浙江以及苏州、松江等府都离北京很远，往返一次需要一年多，上欠公租，下妨农事。
English: In September of the year of Emperor Nanzong's accession to the throne, Chen Bing Shangsuo put forward seven suggestions: First, Nanjing is the foundation of the country, and it is requested to strictly maintain the preparedness; Second, the talent to be elected should be verified, not only the qualifications, but also the selection of impartial courtiers to travel around the world; Third, the grain sacks transported around the world every year, the provinces of Guangxi, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Suzhou and Songjiang are far away from Beijing, and it takes more than a year to travel back and forth, which is a burden on agriculture.

古文：乞令转至淮、徐等处，别令官军接运至京。
现代文：请求令这些地区只转运到淮安、徐州等处，再令官军接运到北京。
English: The request ordered these areas to be transported only to Huai'an, Xuzhou and other places, and then ordered the government troops to be transported to Beijing.

古文：又快船、马船所载不过五六十石，每船官军足用，有司添差军民递送，拘集听候，至有冻馁，请革罢。四曰教职多非其人，乞考不职者黜之，选俊秀补生员，而军中子弟亦令入学。五曰军伍窜亡，乞核其老疾者，以子弟代，逃亡者追补，户绝者验除。六曰开平等处，边防要地，兵食虚乏，乞选练锐士，屯守兼务。七曰漕运官军，每岁北上，归即修船，勤苦终年。该卫所又于其隙，杂役以重困之，乞加禁绝。
现代文：另外，快船、马船所载不过五六十石，每船只用官军即已足够，而有关官员又添差军民来递送，他们聚集听候，致使有的受冻挨饿，请予罢除；四说任教职的多不称职，请进行考核，将不称职者黜退，选俊秀之才补为生员，而军中的子弟也准他们入学；五说军人有逃亡，请查明老病的人，以其子弟来代替，逃亡的要追捕，绝户的验明后删除；六说开平等处是边防要地，守兵虚弱，粮食不足，请挑选并训练精锐之士，屯田和驻守兼务；七说漕运的官军，每年北上，回来后又要修船，终年劳苦，所属卫所又在他们空闲之时，派给杂役，使他们加倍受困，请加以禁止。
English: In addition, the clipper ships and horse-drawn carriages carried no more than fifty or sixty stones, each vessel was enough for the government army, and the relevant officials also sent soldiers and civilians to deliver them. They gathered to listen, causing some to suffer from cold and hunger, please be removed; four said that the number of incompetent teachers should be examined, the incompetent ones should be retired, and the talented ones should be recruited as living members, and the children in the army should be allowed to go to school; five said that the soldiers had fled, please identify the old and sick, and replace them with their children, the fugitives should be pursued, and the abandoned houses should be removed after

古文：帝览奏曰： 瑄言皆当。 
现代文：皇上看完奏章后说 ：陈瑄的建议都很对。 
English: After reading the score, the emperor said: Chen Xi's suggestions are all right.

古文：令所司速行。
现代文：下令所在部门从速实行。
English: The order will be implemented immediately in the relevant department.

古文：遂降敕奖谕，寻赐券，世袭平江伯。
现代文：皇上于是颁敕令嘉奖他，不久赐给他证券，世袭平江伯。
English: The emperor then issued an imperial edict to commend him, and soon gave him securities, the hereditary title of Pingjiangbo.

古文：宣宗即位，命守淮安，督漕运如故。
现代文：宣宗即位后，命他守淮安，仍总督漕运。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to guard Huai'an, and he was still the governor.

古文：宣德四年言： 济宁以北，自长沟至枣林淤塞，计用十二万人疏浚，半月可成。 
现代文：宣德四年，陈瑄说： 济宁以北，从长沟到枣林的河道淤塞，计用十二万人疏浚，半个月可以完成。 
English: In the fourth year of Xuande, Chen Wei said: North of Jining, from the long ditch to the jujube forest, the river channel is silted up, with a total of 120,000 people dredging, which can be completed in half a month.

古文：帝念瑄久劳，命尚书黄福往同经理。
现代文：皇上念陈瑄长年辛劳，命尚书黄福前往一同经理。
English: The emperor remembered Chen Xuan's long years of hard work, and ordered Huang Fu to go with the manager.

古文：六年，瑄言： 岁运粮用军十二万人，频年劳苦。
现代文：六年，陈瑄说： 每年运粮动用十二万军人，连年劳苦。
English: In the sixth year, Chen Zhe said: Every year, 120,000 soldiers are used to transport grain, and they have been working hard for years.

古文：乞于苏、松诸郡及江西、浙江、湖广别佥民丁，又于军多卫所佥军，通为二十四万人，分番迭运。
现代文：请在苏州、松江等府和江西、浙江、湖广另外签发民丁，另在士兵较多的卫所签发士兵，共二十四万人，分番轮流运输。
English: Please issue additional ID cards in Suzhou, Songjiang and other prefectures, as well as in Jiangxi, Zhejiang and Hubei, and issue soldiers at medical stations with a large number of soldiers. A total of 240,000 people will be transported in shifts.

古文：又江南之民，运粮赴临清、淮安、徐州，往返一年，失误农业，而湖广、江西、浙江及苏、松、安庆军士，每岁以空舟赴淮安载粮。
现代文：另外，江南的百姓，运粮到临清、淮安、徐州，往返一年，耽误农业，而湖广、江西、浙江以及苏州、松江、安庆的士兵，每年驾空船到淮安运粮。
English: In addition, the people in the south of the Yangtze River transport grain to Linqing, Huai'an and Xuzhou for one year round-trip, delaying agriculture, while soldiers from Huguang, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Suzhou, Songjiang and Anqing drive empty ships to Huai'an to transport grain every year.

古文：若令江南民拨粮与附近卫所，官军运载至京，量给耗米及道里费，则军民交便。 
现代文：如果让江南的百姓拨粮食给附近的卫所，由官军运送到北京，根据里程付费并付给耗米，这样则军民都方便。 
English: If the people in the south of the Yangtze River are allowed to allocate grain to the nearby health center, transported by the government army to Beijing, paid according to the mileage and paid for the rice consumed, this will be convenient for both the military and the people.

古文：帝命黄福及侍郎王佐议行之。
现代文：皇上命黄福和侍郎王佐讨论实行。
English: The emperor ordered Huang Fu and his attendant Wang Zu to discuss and implement it.

古文：更民运为兑运，自此始也。
现代文：改民运为兑运，就是从这里开始。
English: The change from people's transport to cash-in-transit starts here.

古文：八年十月卒于官，年六十有九。
现代文：八年十月他在任上去世，终年六十九岁。
English: He died in office in October 2008, at the age of 69.

古文：追封平江侯，赠太保，谥恭襄。
现代文：追封平江侯，赠太保、谥恭襄。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of the Prince of Pingjiang, granted the title of Taibo, and granted the title of Gong Gongxiang.

古文：得疾，束两手如高悬状，号救求解而卒。
现代文：当初，陈瑄因疏浚河道有德于民，百姓在清河县为他立祠。
English: At first, Chen Yao was popular with the people for dredging the river, and the people built a shrine for him in Qinghe County.

古文：周忱，字恂如，吉水人。
现代文：正统年间，朝廷命有关官员春秋时致祭。周忱，字恂如，吉水人。
English: During the orthodox years, the imperial court ordered the relevant officials to make offerings in the spring and autumn. Zhou Zhen, the character 如, is a person of auspicious water.

古文：永乐二年进士。选庶吉士。
现代文：永乐二年，中进士，被选为庶吉士。
English: In Yongle's second year, he was selected as a junior high school student and was elected as a junior high school student.

古文：明年，成祖择其中二十八人，令进学文渊阁。
现代文：第二年，成祖选择其中的二十八人，令他们进文渊阁学习。
English: In the second year, Cheng Zu selected 28 of them and sent them to study at Wen Yuange.

古文：忱自陈年少乞预。
现代文：周忱自述自己年轻幼小，请求加入。
English: He earnestly pleaded to be allowed to join, saying that he was too young.

古文：帝嘉其有志，许之。
现代文：皇上赞他有志气，答应了他。
English: The emperor praised him for his ambition and agreed.

古文：寻擢刑部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：不久升为刑部主事，再升为员外郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and then to a member of the Foreign Affairs Department.

古文：忱有经世才，浮沉郎署二十年，人无知者，独夏原吉奇之。
现代文：周忱有经世之才，在郎署沉浮了二十年，人们都不了解他，只有夏原吉知道他有奇才。
English: Zhou Zhen has the ability to deal with the world. He has spent twenty years in the Lang Department. People do not understand him. Only Xia Yuanji knows that he has a great talent.

古文：洪熙改元，稍迁越府长史。
现代文：洪熙改元后，他逐渐升为越王府长史。
English: After Hong Xi changed the Yuan Dynasty, he gradually rose to the position of Governor of Yuewang.

古文：宣德初，有荐为郡守者。
现代文：宣德初年，有人推荐他为知府。
English: In the first year of Xuande, someone recommended him to be the prefect.

古文：原吉曰： 此常调也，安足尽周君？ 
现代文：夏原吉说： 这不过是正常调迁，怎能尽周君之才？ 
English: "This is just a normal transfer, how can I make the most of Zhou Jun's talent?

古文：五年九月，帝以天下财赋多不理，而江南为甚，苏州一郡，积逋至八百万石，思得才力重臣往厘之。乃用大学士杨荣荐，迁忱工部右侍郎，巡抚江南诸府，总督税粮。
现代文：五年九月，皇上因天下的财赋多得不到治理，而又以江南为甚，苏州一府，拖欠的租税达八百万石，便想要找到有才干的重臣前往治理，于是由于大学士杨荣的推荐，升周忱为工部右侍巡抚江南各府，总督税粮。
English: In September of the fifth year, the emperor, due to the fact that most of the world's financial resources could not be governed, and the southern part of the Yangtze River was the worst. Suzhou, a prefecture, had tax arrears of eight million koku, and he wanted to find a talented vassal to govern. Therefore, due to the recommendation of the university scholar Yang Rong, Sheng Zhouzhen became the right-hand man of the Ministry of Industry, the inspector of the provinces in the southern part of the Yangtze River, and the governor of tax grain.

古文：始至，召父老问逋税故。皆言豪户不肯加耗，并征之细民，民贫逃亡，而税额益缺。
现代文：他刚到时，便召父老来问欠税粮的原因，他们都说豪富大户不肯加交耗米，只好一并向小民征收，人民因为贫困只好逃亡，导致税额愈缺。
English: As soon as he arrived, he called his father to ask the reason for the tax arrears of grain. They all said that the rich and large households refused to pay more rice, so they had to collect from the common people, and the people had to flee because of poverty, leading to an increasing shortage of tax.

古文：忱乃创为平米法，令出耗必均。
现代文：周忱于是创行平米法，令均摊交纳耗米。
English: Zhou Zhen then introduced the flat rice method and ordered that rice consumption be evenly distributed.

古文：又请敕工部颁铁斛，下诸县准式，革粮长之大入小出者。
现代文：他又请皇上敕令工部颁给铁斛，交给各县做为标准样式，将搞大入小出的粮长革除。
English: He also asked the emperor to issue an order to the Ministry of Industry to issue the spade and hand it over to the counties as a standard style, and to abolish the grain chiefs who were engaged in large-scale imports and small-scale exports.

古文：旧例，粮长正副三人，以七月赴南京户部领勘合。
现代文：按旧例，粮长有正副三人，每年七月赴南京户部领取勘合。
English: According to the old practice, the grain chief, who has three subordinates, goes to Nanjing in July every year to receive the reward.

古文：既毕，复赍送部。
现代文：工作完毕后，送回部里。
English: After the work is done, send it back to the ministry.

古文：往反资费，皆科敛充之。
现代文：他们往返的费用，都是征敛而来。
English: Their round-trip expenses are all collected.

古文：忱止设正副各一人，循环赴领。
现代文：周忱只设正副各一人，让他们轮流去领勘合。
English: Zhou Zhen only set up one official and one deputy each, and let them take turns to lead the reunion.

古文：讫事，有司类收上之部。
现代文：工作结束后，有关官员集中收回上交户部。
English: After the end of the work, the relevant officials concentrated on recovering the submitted accounts.

古文：民大便。
现代文：百姓大为便利。
English: It's very convenient for the people.

古文：忱见诸县收粮无团局，粮长即家贮之，曰： 此致逋之由也。 
现代文：周忱见各县收粮没有团局，粮长就在其家中贮存，便说 ：这是导致拖欠的原因。 
English: Zhou Zhenxin saw that there was no group office for grain collection in each county, and the grain chief stored it in his home, and said: This is the cause of the arrears.

古文：遂令诸县于水次置囤，囤设粮头、囤户各一人，名 辖收 。
现代文：便令各县在水边设囤，每囤设粮头、囤户各一人，称为辖收。
English: Therefore, each county was ordered to set up a granary at the water's edge, with a head of grain and one tenant per granary, which is called "jurisdictional collection."

古文：至六七万石以上，始立粮长一人总之，名 总收 。
现代文：到有六七万石以上，才设粮长一人总管，称为总收。
English: It is only when there are more than 670,000 koku that a chief grain administrator is set up, known as the general revenue.

古文：民持贴赴囤，官为监纳，粮长但奉期会而已。
现代文：人民持帖到囤交粮，官员监督他们交纳，粮长只是照日期汇总而已。
English: People come to collect grain with a postcard, officials supervise their payment, and the grain chief only summarizes it according to the date.

古文：置拨运、纲运二簿。
现代文：他还设拨运、纲运两簿。
English: He also wrote two books, "Zi Yun" and "Gang Yun."

古文：拨运记支拨起运之数，预计所运京师、通州诸仓耗，以次定支。
现代文：拨运簿记支拨起运的数量，预计所运粮食到京师、通州各粮仓的损耗，来定应支给的数量。
English: The dispatch book will record the amount of the dispatched shipment, and the loss of the transported grain to the grain silos in Beijing and Tongzhou will be estimated to determine the amount to be disbursed.

古文：纲运听其填注剥浅诸费，归以偿之。
现代文：纲运簿是由他们填写剥浅等方面的费用，回来后补偿给他们。
English: It is up to them to fill in the rough draft of the operation book, and they will be reimbursed after returning.

古文：支拨羡余，存贮在仓，曰 余米 。
现代文：应上交省库的羡余，仍存贮在仓库中，称为余米。
English: The surplus rice, which should be handed over to the provincial warehouse, is still stored in the warehouse and is called surplus rice.

古文：次年余多则加六征，又次年加五征。
现代文：第二年如果剩余多则加六征，到第三年加五征。
English: In the second year, if there are more than the required number, six are added, and in the third year, five are added.

古文：初，太祖平吴，尽籍其功臣子弟庄田入官，后恶富民豪并，坐罪没入田产，皆谓之官田。
现代文：当时，太祖平定吴地后，尽将功臣子弟的庄田抄没入官，后来又厌恶富民的兼并，他们因犯罪而被没收的田产，也都被称为官田。
English: At that time, after the Great Ancestor conquered Wu, he did his best to confiscate the lands of the meritorious sons and sons into the government, and later he abhorred the annexation of the rich people. The farmlands that were confiscated because of their crimes were also called government lands.

古文：按其家租籍征之，故苏赋比他府独重。官民田租共二百七十七万石，而官田之租乃至二百六十二万石，民不能堪。
现代文：这些官田的税粮，即按原来租簿所记的数量作为税粮来征收，所以苏州府的赋税比别的府为重，官田和民田的租总共是二百七十七万石，而官田的税额就占了二百六十二万石，人民不堪承受。
English: The tax grain of these government-owned fields is levied as tax grain according to the amount recorded in the original rent book. Therefore, the taxation of Suzhou Prefecture is heavier than that of other prefectures. The total rent of government-owned fields and private fields is 2.77 million koku, while the tax amount of government-owned fields accounts for 2.62 million koku, which is unbearable for the people.

古文：时宣宗屡下诏减官田租，忱乃与知府况锺曲算累月，减至七十二万余石，他府以次减，民始少苏。
现代文：当时宣宗屡次下诏减少官田租额，周忱于是与知府况钟经过几个月的计算，将苏州官田租税减到七十二万余石，其他府也依次减少，人民这才稍得解困。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong repeatedly issued an edict to reduce the amount of government land rent, and after several months of calculation, he and the prefectural government reduced the Suzhou government land tax to more than 720,000 koku, and other prefectures also reduced in turn, so that the people could be slightly relieved.

古文：七年，江南大稔，诏令诸府县以官钞平籴备振贷，苏州遂得米二十九万石。
现代文：七年，江南大丰收，皇上诏令各府县以官钞平价收购粮食以备赈济和借贷，苏州于是购得米二十九万石。
English: In the seventh year, there was a bumper harvest in the south of the Yangtze River. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering all prefectures and counties to purchase grain at the same price as official banknotes in order to provide relief and loans. As a result, Suzhou purchased 290,000 koku of rice.

古文：故时公侯禄米、军官月俸皆支于南户部。
现代文：所以当时公侯的禄米，军人官吏的月俸，都由南户部支给。
English: Therefore, at that time, the lumi of princes and the monthly salaries of military officials were all paid by the Southern Household Department.

古文：苏、松民转输南京者，石加费六斗。
现代文：苏州、松江百姓转输到南京的税粮，每石加收费用开支六斗。
English: The people of Suzhou and Songjiang transferred tax grain to Nanjing, and the additional cost per stone was six dou.

古文：忱奏令就各府支给，与船价米一斗，所余五斗，通计米四十万石有奇，并官钞所籴，共得米七十万余石，遂置仓贮之，名曰 济农 。
现代文：周忱上奏请令就各府支给，贴给船价米一斗，所剩的五斗，总计总数有四十多万石，再加上用官钞所购买的，一共得米七十万余石，遂设仓库贮存起来，名叫济农。
English: He earnestly submitted a request to the prefectural government to pay one bucket of rice to each prefecture and post it to the ship price. The remaining five buckets totaled more than 400,000 koku, and together with the rice purchased with official banknotes, a total of more than 700,000 koku of rice was obtained. A warehouse was set up to store the rice, and it was named Jinong.

古文：振贷之外，岁有余羡。
现代文：济农米除用于赈济和借贷之外，每年还有盈余。
English: In addition to being used for financial aid and loans, there is a surplus of agricultural rice every year.

古文：凡纲运、风漂、盗夺者，皆借给于此，秋成，抵数还官。
现代文：大凡纲运花费、风涛漂没、被盗挨抢，都可从这里借贷，待秋收之后再如数还官。
English: Anyone who has spent a lot of money on the Great March of Return, lost everything, been robbed or stolen can borrow money from here, and pay it back in full after the autumn harvest.

古文：其修圩、筑岸、开河、浚湖所支口粮，不责偿。
现代文：至于修圩、筑堤、开河、浚湖所支的口粮，则不用偿还。
English: As for the rations spent on repairing dams, building dykes, opening rivers and dredging lakes, they do not have to be repaid.

古文：耕者借贷，必验中下事力及田多寡给之，秋与粮并赋，凶岁再振。
现代文：耕种者来借贷，必先查清他家的各方面状况以及田地多寡，然后再借给，秋收后与税粮一起收回，遇到荒年再赈济。
English: When a farmer comes to borrow money, he must first find out the situation of all aspects of his family and the number of fields, and then lend it again. After the autumn harvest, it will be recovered together with the tax grain, and in the event of a lean year, it will be repaid.

古文：其奸顽不偿者，后不复给。
现代文：对奸顽不偿还的人，以后不再借给。
English: If you do not pay back the ruffian, you will not be lent to again.

古文：定为条约以闻。
现代文：他把这些都定为条例报告朝廷。
English: He reported all of this to the imperial court as a regulation.

古文：帝嘉奖之。
现代文：皇上嘉奖他。
English: The emperor commended them.

古文：终忱在任，江南数大郡，小民不知凶荒，两税未尝逋负，忱之力也。
现代文：在周忱任内，江南的几个大府，小民不知道有灾荒，夏秋两税不曾有拖欠，这都是周忱的功劳。
English: During Zhou Zhen's term of office, several large prefectures in the south of the Yangtze River, the common people did not know that there were disasters and droughts, and the summer and autumn taxes were not in arrears. These are all Zhou Zhen's achievements.

古文：时漕运，军民相半。
现代文：当时漕运粮食，军运和民运各半。
English: At that time, grain was transported by rowing, and the military movement and the people's movement were half and half.

古文：军船给之官，民则僦舟，加以杂耗，率三石致一石，往复经年失农业。
现代文：军运由国家给船，民运则是租用船只，加以杂耗，每交纳三石粮食大约要多加一石，而往返需要一年，耽误农事。
English: The military transport is provided by the state, while the civilian transport is provided by chartering ships and incurring incidental expenses. For every three kilos of grain paid, approximately one kilo is added, and the round trip takes one year, delaying agricultural work.

古文：忱与平江伯陈瑄议，民运至淮安或瓜洲水次交兑，漕军运抵通州。
现代文：周忱与平江伯陈瑄商议，决定民运到淮安或瓜洲水路边上后交兑，再由军队漕运到通州。
English: Zhou Zhen deliberated with the governor of Pingjiang Province, Chen Qi, and decided that the people's transport would go to Huai'an or Guazhou on the water side of the road, and then be transported by the army to Tongzhou.

古文：淮安石加五斗，瓜洲又益五升。
现代文：运到淮安的每石加交五斗，运到瓜洲的再加五升。
English: Each stone transported to Huai'an will add five bu, and those transported to Guazhou will add five liters.

古文：其附近并南京军未过江者，即仓交兑，加与过江米二斗。衬垫芦席，与折米五合。
现代文：运到附近以及南京的卫所而没过江的，即仓交兑，每石加交过江米二斗，衬垫芦席也折成米五合交纳。
English: Those that were transported to nearby and Nanjing's sanitarium but did not cross the river, that is, the warehouse transaction, each stone was added with two buckets of rice, and the cushion seat was also folded into five buckets of rice.

古文：兑军或后期阻风，则令州县支赢米。
现代文：由军人兑运如果遇风延期到达，则令州县支给赢米。
English: If the delivery by the military is delayed by the wind, the state and county will pay the winner.

古文：设廒于瓜洲水次，迁米贮之，量支余米给守者。
现代文：在瓜洲水边设粮仓，迁米去存贮，量支余米给守仓人。
English: Set up grain silos at the water's edge of Guazhou, transfer rice to storage, and pay the remaining rice to the warehouse keeper.

古文：由是漕费大省。
现代文：由此而漕运费用大大节省。
English: As a result, the cost of transportation is greatly reduced.

古文：民间马草岁运两京，劳费不訾。
现代文：民间每年把马草运到两京，劳费难以估算。
English: People transport horse grass to the two capitals every year, and the labor cost is difficult to estimate.

古文：忱请每束折银三分，南京则轻赍即地买纳。
现代文：周忱请每束折成白银三分，在南京则将所折的银两就地买纳。
English: Please carefully fold each bundle into silver three points, and in Nanjing, buy the folded silver two points on the spot.

古文：京师百官月俸，皆持俸帖赴领南京。
现代文：京师百官的月俸，都要持帖到南京领取。
English: The monthly salary of 100 officials in Beijing must be sent to Nanjing by registered mail.

古文：米贱时，俸贴七八石，仅易银一两。
现代文：米贱的时候，俸帖七八石，仅换得白银一两。
English: When rice was cheap, a stipend of seventy-eight koku was exchanged for only one or two pieces of silver.

古文：忱请检重额官田、极贫下户两税，准折纳金花银，每两当米四石，解京兑俸，民出甚少，而官俸常足。
现代文：周忱请检查出税重的官田、极贫的下户，准许其两税折成金花银交纳，每两抵米四石，解送往京师用来兑换俸禄，这样百姓出得很少，而官俸常足。
English: I sincerely ask you to check out the heavily taxed government-owned fields and the extremely poor lower households, and allow them to convert the two taxes into gold and silver payment, every two arrivals of rice to four stones, and send them to Beijing to exchange for salaries. In this way, the people have little to spend, but the government salaries are always enough.

古文：嘉定、昆山诸县岁纳布，疋重三斤抵粮一石。
现代文：嘉定、昆山等县每年要纳布，每匹重三斤，抵粮食一石。
English: Jiading, Kunshan and other counties require nabu every year, with each horse weighing three catties and worth one stone of grain.

古文：比解，以缕粗见斥者十八九。
现代文：到他们解送上交时，因为线粗而被退回的达十之八九。
English: By the time they are delivered, up to nine times out of ten they are returned because the thread is too thick.

古文：忱言： 布缕细必轻，然价益高。
现代文：周忱说 ：布线细则重量必轻，而价钱更高。
English: Zhou Zhen said: The weight of the wiring details must be light, but the price is higher.

古文：今既贵重，势不容细。
现代文：现在既然是论重量交纳，他们势必不会做得太细。
English: Now that it's about weight, they're not going to make it too thin.

古文：乞自今不拘轻重，务取长广如式。 
现代文：请从今以后，不论轻重，只论长短是否符合规格。 
English: From now on, regardless of weight, please only comment on whether the length meets the specifications.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：各郡驿马及一切供帐，旧皆领于马头。有耗损，则马头横科补买。
现代文：各府的驿马以及一切供应所需，原来都向马头领取，有了耗损，则马头就横征补买。
English: The steeds of all prefectures, as well as all supplies needed, were originally received from the horse heads, and if there was any wear and tear, the horse heads were recruited to make up for it.

古文：忱令田亩出米升九合，与秋粮俱征，验马上中下直给米。
现代文：周忱令每亩田出米一升九合，与秋粮同时征收，根据马的上中下价值给米。
English: Zhou Zhen ordered that the rice yield per mu of rice field should be one liter and nine cones, which should be levied at the same time as the autumn grain, and the rice should be given according to the upper, middle and lower value of the horse.

古文：正统初，淮、扬灾，盐课亏，敕忱巡视。
现代文：正统初年，淮安、扬州受灾，盐税亏损，敕令周忱去巡视。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Huai'an and Yangzhou were affected by disasters, salt tax losses, and the imperial command cordially went to inspect.

古文：奏令苏州诸府，拨余米一二万石连扬州盐场，听抵明年田租，灶户得纳盐给米。
现代文：周忱上奏令苏州等府，拨出余米一二万石运到扬州盐场，允许可以抵消明年的田租，灶户可以纳盐领取米粮。
English: Zhou enthusiastically ordered Suzhou and other prefectures to allocate the remaining 120,000 koku of rice to be transported to the Yangzhou salt field, allowing the next year's field rent to be offset, and kitchen households to receive rice grain with salt.

古文：时米贵盐贱，官得积盐，民得食米，公私大济。
现代文：当时米贵盐贱，此举使国家得盐，百姓得米，公私大利。
English: At that time, rice was expensive and salt was cheap. This move enabled the country to obtain salt, the people to obtain rice, and the public and private sectors to benefit.

古文：寻敕兼理松江盐课。
现代文：不久敕令周忱兼理松江盐税。
English: Soon after, Zhou Zhenling was appointed as the person in charge of the Songjiang Salt Tax.

古文：华亭、上海二县逋课至六十三万余引，灶丁逃亡。
现代文：华亭、上海二县拖欠的赋税达六十三万余引，灶丁逃亡。
English: The tax arrears in Huating and Shanghai Two Counties amounted to more than 630,000 yuan, and Zhao Ding fled.

古文：忱谓田赋宜养农夫，盐课宜养灶丁。因上便宜四事，命速行之。
现代文：周忱认为田赋应养农夫，盐税应养灶丁，因即上书提出四项建议。皇上命从速实行。
English: Zhou sincerely believed that the rice fields should support farmers and the salt tax should support cooks, so he submitted four proposals. The emperor's order was implemented immediately.

古文：忱为节灶户运耗，得米三万二千余石。
现代文：周忱因此减少灶户的运耗，计得米三万二千余石。
English: As a result, the operation cost of the kiln has been carefully reduced, and more than 32,000 koku of rice have been saved.

古文：亦仿济农仓法，置赡盐仓，益补逃亡缺额。
现代文：也仿济农仓的办法，设置赡盐仓，将逃亡灶户的缺额补上。
English: They also imitated the method of subsidizing farm storehouses, setting up salt storehouses to make up for the shortfall of fugitive households.

古文：由是盐课大殖。
现代文：由此盐税大增。
English: As a result, the salt tax has increased significantly.

古文：浙江当造海船五十艘，下忱计度。
现代文：浙江应当造海船五十艘，朝廷交周忱计算费用。
English: Zhejiang should build fifty seagoing ships, and the imperial court should carefully calculate the cost.

古文：忱召问都匠，言一艘须米千石。
现代文：周忱召都城工匠来问，他们说一艘需要米一千石。
English: Zhou Zhenzhen called the capital craftsmen to ask, they said that one needs a thousand stone.

古文：忱以成大事不宜惜费，第减二十石，奏于朝，竟得报可。
现代文：周忱认为要成大事不宜舍不得花费钱财，他将每艘费用减去二十石后上奏朝廷，竟得批准。
English: Zhou Zhen sincerely believed that in order to achieve great things, one should not be reluctant to spend money. He reduced the cost of each ship by 20 kilos and then appealed to the imperial court, but was approved.

古文：以九载秩满，进左侍郎。
现代文：因九年任满，他升为左侍郎。
English: When his nine-year term was up, he was promoted to Sadajiro.

古文：六年命兼理湖州、嘉兴二府税粮，又命同刑科都给事中郭瑾录南京刑狱。
现代文：六年，命他兼理湖州、嘉兴二府税粮，又命他同刑科都给事中郭瑾审理南京刑狱案件。
English: In six years, he was also ordered to deal with the taxation of grain in Huzhou and Jiaxing, and he was also ordered to work with the Criminal Investigation Department to bring Guo Gan to trial in the Nanjing prison case.

古文：忱素乐易。
现代文：周忱一向追求简易。
English: Always pursue simplicity with all my heart.

古文：先是，大理卿胡为巡抚，用法严。
现代文：先前，大理寺卿胡概为巡抚，用法严厉。
English: Previously, Daliji Lord Hu Chuan was the governor, and the usage was strict.

古文：忱一切治以简易，告讦者辄不省。
现代文：周忱一切都力求简易，来告发的人他常常不理。
English: He tried to keep everything simple, and he often ignored people who came to report him.

古文：或面讦忱： 公不及胡公。 
现代文：有人当面攻击他偏差 ：您不如胡公。 
English: Someone attacked him face to face: You are not as good as Hu Gong.

古文：忱笑曰： 胡卿敕旨，在祛除民害；朝廷命我，但云安抚军民。
现代文：周忱笑道 ：胡卿奉敕令，责任在于祛除民害。朝廷委任我，只说要安抚军民。
English: Zhou Zhen smiled and said, "Hu Xing issued the order, and the responsibility is to eliminate the harm to the people. The Imperial Court only appointed me to pacify the military and the people.

古文：委寄正不同耳。 
现代文：朝廷的授命不同而已。 
English: It's just that the order from the imperial court is different.

古文：既久任江南，与吏民相习若家人父子。
现代文：他既久在江南，与官民已非常熟悉，情若家人父子。
English: Since he has been in the south of the Yangtze River for a long time, he is very familiar with the government and the people, and is like a father and son.

古文：每行村落，屏去驺从，与农夫饷妇相对，从容问所疾苦，为之商略处置。
现代文：他每次行走村落，总是屏去侍从人员，与村夫民妇交谈，从容问他们的疾苦，为他们提意见和处理。
English: Every time he walks around the village, he always stops to talk to the attendants and villagers, asks them about their problems, and gives them advice and solutions.

古文：其驭下也，虽卑官冗吏，悉开心访纳。
现代文：他对待属下，即使是卑官冗吏，也悉心访求他们的意见。
English: He treated his subordinates, even low-ranking officials, with great care and solicited their opinions.

古文：遇长吏有能，如况锺及松江知府赵豫、常州知府莫愚、同知赵泰辈，则推心与咨画，务尽其长，故事无不举。
现代文：遇到有才能的长吏，像况钟和松江知府赵豫、常州知府莫愚、同知赵泰等人，他都推心与他们讨论筹划，务必尽其所长，所以事情无不得到实施。
English: When he met talented officials, such as Zhang Zhong and Zhao Yu of Songjiang prefecture, Mohu of Changzhou prefecture, Zhao Tai of Tongzhi prefecture and others, he was anxious to discuss and plan with them. He must do his best, so things must be implemented.

古文：常诣松江相视水利，见嘉定、上海间，沿江生茂草，多淤流，乃浚其上流，使昆山、顾浦诸所水迅流驶下，壅遂尽涤。
现代文：他常到松江视察水利，见嘉定、上海之间，沿江长满茂草，多淤塞水流，便疏浚上流，使昆山、顾浦等地河水，都迅流而下，冲开了壅塞的地方。
English: He often went to the Songjiang River to inspect the water conservancy. He saw that between Jiading and Shanghai, the riverside was covered with thick grass, and the water flow was often silted up. He dredged the upstream, so that the river water in Kunshan, Gupu and other places all flowed down rapidly, and the blocked places were washed away.

古文：暇时以匹马往来江上，见者不知其为巡抚也。
现代文：闲暇时他单枪匹马往来江上，见到的人还不知道他是巡抚。
English: In his spare time, he travels up and down the river single-handedly. People who meet him do not yet know that he is the governor.

古文：历宣德、正统二十年间，朝廷委任益专。
现代文：前后经历宣德、正统二十年，朝廷对他的委任更专。
English: After twenty years of proclamation of virtue and orthodoxy, the imperial court was more particular about his appointment.

古文：两遭亲丧，皆起复视事。
现代文：他两遭亲丧，皇上都强令他出来理事。
English: He suffered two bereavements, and the emperor forced him to step down as a director.

古文：忱以此益发舒，见利害必言，言无不听。
现代文：周忱因此更加发奋，发现利害必提出建议，而皇上对他也是言无不听。
English: As a result, Zhou Zhen became even more enthusiastic and found that it was in his interest to make suggestions, and the emperor listened to him attentively.

古文：初，欲减松江官田额，依民田起科。
现代文：当初，周忱想减少官田税额依照民田来征税。
English: At first, Zhou Zhenzhen wanted to reduce the amount of government land tax to be levied according to private land.

古文：户部郭资、胡濙奏其变乱成法，请罪之，宣宗切责资等。
现代文：户部的郭资、胡氵荧上奏他变乱成法，请求加罪于他，宣宗严厉责备郭资等人。
English: Guo Zi and Hu Zifu, the head of the household, accuse Guo Zi and others of changing the law, request that he be punished, and Xuan Zong severely reprimands Guo Zi and others.

古文：忱尝言： 吴淞江畔有沙涂柴场百五十顷，水草茂盛，虫蜢多生其中。
现代文：周忱曾说 ：吴淞江畔有沙涂柴场一百五十顷，水草茂盛，虫子蚱蜢多生长其中。
English: Zhou Zhen once said: There is a sand-coated wood yard of one hundred and fifty hectares on the banks of the Wuxi River, with lush aquatic plants and many worms.

古文：请募民开垦，可以足国课，消虫灾。 
现代文：请募民去开垦，这样可以增加国家收入，还可以消去虫灾。 
English: Please recruit people to reclaim the land. This will increase the national income and also eliminate the insect infestation.

古文：又言： 丹徒、丹阳二县田没入江者，赋尚未除。
现代文：他又说： 丹徒、丹阳二县被江水淹没的田地，赋税还没有去掉。
English: He also said: The fields inundated by river water in Dantu and Danyang counties have not been exempted from taxation.

古文：国初蠲税之家，其田多并于富室，宜征其租，没于江者除之，则额不亏而贫富均。
现代文：建国之初免税之家，他们的田地多并入富家，应该向他们征税，而被江水淹没的田地则应免除，这样税额不减而贫富又均。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, tax-free homes, whose fields were mostly incorporated into the rich, should be taxed, while the fields that were flooded by the river should be exempted, so that the tax amount would not be reduced and the rich and poor would be equal.

古文：无锡官田赋白米太重，请改征租米。 
现代文：无锡官田所征的白银太重，请改征租米。 
English: The amount of silver levied by the Wuxi government is too heavy, please change the levy to rent rice.

古文：悉报可。
现代文：回报都说可行。
English: The returns are said to be feasible.

古文：其因灾荒请蠲贷，及所陈他利病无算。小者用便宜行之，无所顾虑。
现代文：他因灾荒而请求免除租税，以及陈述其他方面的利病还不少，小的方面他便自行处理，无所顾虑。
English: He applied for tax exemption due to the disaster and stated many other advantages and disadvantages, and he handled the small aspects on his own without any concerns.

古文：久之见财赋充溢，益务广大。
现代文：到后来他见献身税充盈，更求进一步发展。
English: Later, when he saw that the offering tax was full, he wanted to develop it further.

古文：修葺廨舍学校、先贤祠墓、桥梁道路，及崇饰寺观，赠遗中朝官，资饷过客，无稍吝惜。
现代文：修葺公舍学校、先贤祠墓、桥梁道路，以及崇饰寺庙道观，馈赠朝廷官员，资助过往客人，他都毫不吝惜。
English: He spared no effort in renovating public housing schools, tombs of eminent sages, bridges and roads, as well as decorating temples with Taoism, giving gifts to court officials, and subsidizing past guests.

古文：胥吏渔蠹其中，亦不甚訾省。以故屡召人言。
现代文：下级官员从中渔利，他也不甚过问，因此屡次受别人指责。
English: Lower-level officials profited from it, and he did not ask too many questions, so he was repeatedly criticized by others.

古文：九年，给事中李素等劾忱妄意变更，专擅科敛。忱上章自诉。
现代文：九年，给事中李素等人弹劾周忱妄自更改制度，专擅科敛，周忱上书辩解。
English: Nine years ago, when Li Su and others impeached Zhou Zhengyi for changing the system, Zhou Zhengyi wrote a letter to defend himself.

古文：帝以余米既为公用，置不问。
现代文：皇上认为余米既然是公用，便不对周忱问罪。
English: The emperor thought that since the rice was for public use, Zhou Zhen should not be blamed.

古文：先是，奸民尹崇礼欲挠忱法，奏忱不当多征耗米，请究问仓库主者，忱因罢前法。
现代文：先前，奸民尹崇礼想阻挠周忱的制度，上奏周忱不应当多征耗米，请深究主管仓库的人，周忱为此废去先前的制度。
English: Previously, the villain Yin Chongli wanted to obstruct Zhou Zhen's system, insinuating that Zhou Zhen should not collect and consume more rice. Please investigate the person in charge of the warehouse. Zhou Zhen abolished the previous system for this reason.

古文：既而两税复逋，民无所赖，咸称不便。
现代文：后来两税又出现拖欠，百姓无所依赖，都说不方便。
English: Later, the two taxes were in arrears again, and the people had nothing to rely on and said it was inconvenient.

古文：忱乃奏按崇礼罪，举行前法如故。
现代文：周忱于是上奏调查尹崇礼之罪，仍实行先前的制度。
English: The previous system was still in place, with Zhou Zhisheng investigating the crimes of Yin Chongli.

古文：再以九载满，进户部尚书。
现代文：又因九年任满，升为户部尚书。
English: After nine years of service, he was promoted to the position of household secretary.

古文：寻以江西人不得官户部，乃改工部，仍巡抚。
现代文：不久因江西人不得任户部尚书，便改为工部尚书，仍任巡抚。
English: Soon, because people from Jiangxi were not allowed to hold the post of household secretary, it was changed to the post of industrial secretary, and he still held the post of governor.

古文：景泰元年，溧阳民彭守学复讦忱如崇礼言，户部遂请遣御史李鉴等往诸郡稽核。
现代文：景泰元年，溧阳百姓彭守学又像尹崇礼那样攻击周忱，户部便请派御史李鉴等人前往各府调查。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the people of Shenyang, Peng Shou Xue, attacked Zhou Zhen again like Yin Chongli, and the household department asked the imperial historian Li Jian and others to go to various prefectures to investigate.

古文：明年又以给事中金达言，召忱还朝。
现代文：第二年又因给事中金达的建议，召周忱回朝。
English: The following year, Zhou Zhengyi was summoned back to the imperial court on the advice of the middle-ranking official.

古文：忱乃自陈： 臣未任事之先，诸郡税粮无岁不逋。
现代文：周忱于是自述道： 臣还没有负责此事之前，各府的税粮没有一年不拖欠的。
English: Zhou Zhen then said to himself: Before the minister was in charge of this matter, there was not a single year that the tax grain of each prefecture was not in arrears.

古文：自臣莅任，设法刬弊，节省浮费，于是岁无逋租，更积赢羡。
现代文：自从臣到任后，制定制度，铲除弊端，节省浮费，使每年不但没有拖欠的租税，反而还有盈余。
English: Since the minister took office, a system has been developed to eliminate drawbacks and save floating expenses, so that every year there is not only no tax arrears, but also a surplus.

古文：凡向之公用所须、科取诸民者，悉于余米随时支给。
现代文：凡原来公用开支所需要和向百姓征取的杂费，现在都从余米中支给。
English: All the public expenses and miscellaneous fees collected from the people are now paid from the surplus rice.

古文：或振贷未还，遇赦宥免，或未估时值，低昂不一。
现代文：有的借贷出去还没还回来，遇到赦令就宽免了；有的没有估算当时的价值，以致高低不一。
English: Some loans have gone out and have not been returned, and when they are forgiven, they are forgiven; some did not estimate the value at the time, resulting in different levels.

古文：缘奉宣宗皇帝并太上皇敕谕，许臣便宜行事，以此支用不复具闻。
现代文：但因臣奉有宣宗皇帝和太上皇的敕谕，允许臣相机行事，所以在支用方面臣不用再报告朝廷。
English: However, since the vassal was allowed to use the vassal's camera in accordance with the edict of Emperor Xuanzong and the Empress Dowager, the vassal no longer had to report to the imperial court regarding the use of the camera.

古文：致守学讦奏，户部遣官追征，实臣出纳不谨，死有余罪。 
现代文：现在彭守学上奏揭发，户部派官员去追查，实是臣出纳不谨，死有余罪。 
English: Now that Peng Shou went to school, the report was made public, and the household department sent officials to investigate. In fact, it was the vassal who was dishonest in cashing in, and he was guilty as charged.

古文：礼部尚书杨宁言： 妄费罪乃在忱，今估计余值，悉征于民间，至有弃家逃窜者，乞将正统以前者免追。 
现代文：礼部尚书杨宁说： 胡乱开支之用在于周忱，现估计剩下的钱财，都是取之于民间，百姓因此有的弃家逃窜的。请将正统以前的免予追究。 
English: Yang Ning, a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, said: The use of reckless spending is due to thoughtfulness. It is now estimated that the remaining money and wealth are all taken from the people. As a result, some people have abandoned their homes and fled. Please exempt the previous orthodoxy from investigation.

古文：诏许之，召鉴等还。
现代文：诏令批准这一请求，并将李鉴等人召回。
English: The imperial edict approved this request and recalled Li Jian and others.

古文：既而言官犹交章劾忱，请正其罪。
现代文：后来言官还纷纷弹劾周忱，请把他正罪。
English: Later, the spokesman also impeached Zhou Zhen in succession, please make him righteous.

古文：景帝素知忱贤，大臣亦多保持之，但令致仕。
现代文：景帝一向知道周忱贤明，大臣也多保护他，便只令他退休。
English: Emperor Jing always knew that Zhou Zhen was wise, and the minister also protected him a lot, so he only retired him.

古文：然当时言理财者，无出忱右。
现代文：但当时理财的人，没人能超过周忱。
English: But at that time, no one in financial management could surpass Zhou Zhen.

古文：其治以爱民为本。
现代文：他理财以爱民为本。
English: His financial management is based on love for the people.

古文：济农仓之设也，虽与民为期约，至时多不追取。
现代文：设置济农仓时，虽然与百姓定有期限，但到时多不追取。
English: When setting up agricultural storehouses, although there is a deadline with the people, they do not pursue them.

古文：每岁征收毕，逾正月中旬，辄下檄放粮，曰： 此百姓纳与朝廷剩数，今还与百姓用之，努力种朝廷田，秋间又纳朝廷税也。 
现代文：每年征收完毕后，过了正月中旬，总是下檄文放粮，说： 这是百姓交纳给朝廷后的剩余部分，现还给百姓使用。希望你们努力种朝廷之田，秋后再纳朝廷之税。 
English: After the collection is completed every year, after the middle of the first month of the year, they always release the grain, saying: This is the remaining part that the people have paid to the court, and now it is returned to the people for use. I hope you will work hard to grow the court's fields, and then collect the court's tax after the autumn.

古文：其所弛张变通，皆可为后法。
现代文：他的张弛变通，都足可以为后人所仿效。
English: His flexibility and versatility are enough for future generations to emulate.

古文：诸府余米，数多至不可校，公私饶足，施及外郡。
现代文：各府的余米，数量多得无法统计，公私富足，还可帮助外府。
English: The amount of surplus rice in each prefecture is too large to be counted. It is a source of wealth for both the public and private sectors, and can also be used to help other prefectures.

古文：景泰初，江北大饥，都御史王竑从忱贷米三万石。
现代文：景泰初年，江北发生严重饥荒，都御史闳王向周忱借三万石粮食。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, a severe famine occurred in the northern part of the Yangtze River, and the governor of the capital, Shao Wang, borrowed 30,000 kilos of grain from Zhou Zhen.

古文：忱为计至来年麦熟，以十万石畀之。
现代文：周忱为他考虑到来年麦熟，给了他十万石。
English: She thoughtfully gave him 100,000 koku of rice in anticipation of next year's barley harvest.

古文：性机警。
现代文：周忱个性机警。
English: Li An was a quick-witted policeman.

古文：钱谷钜万，一屈指无遗算。
现代文：钱谷数万，他一屈指便可计算清楚。
English: With tens of thousands of money in his pocket, he can calculate clearly with just one finger.

古文：尝阴为册记阴晴风雨。
现代文：他曾暗中用本子记下天气的阴晴风雨。
English: He used to secretly write down the weather with a notebook.

古文：或言某日江中遇风失米，忱言是日江中无风，其人惊服。
现代文：有人说某日江中遇到大风，损失了米粮，周忱说那一天江中无风，那人惊服。
English: Some people said that one day there was a gale in the river and rice was lost. Zhou sincerely said that there was no wind in the river that day. The man was amazed.

古文：有奸民故乱其旧案尝之。忱曰： 汝以某时就我决事，我为汝断理，敢相绐耶？ 
现代文：有个奸民故意扰乱他的旧案来试试他，周忱说： 你在某时到我处办事，我为你办理，你还敢骗我吗？ 
English: A villain deliberately disturbed his old case to test him, and said earnestly: You come to my office at a certain time, I handle it for you, do you still dare to lie to me?

古文：三殿重建，诏征牛胶万斤，为彩绘用。
现代文：三殿重建时，诏令征用一万斤牛胶，做彩绘之用。
English: When the third hall was rebuilt, the emperor ordered the requisition of 10,000 cattails of cow glue to be used for painting.

古文：忱适赴京，言库贮牛皮，岁久朽腐，请出煎胶，俟归市皮偿库。
现代文：周忱正好赴京，他说库存的牛皮，岁久已经腐朽，请拿出来煎胶，等回去后再买牛皮来偿还国库。
English: Zhou Zhen just happened to go to Beijing. He said that the cowhide in stock had been rotting for a long time. Please take out the gelatin and buy cowhide to repay the treasury after returning.

古文：土木之变，当国者议，欲焚通州仓，绝寇资。
现代文：土木之变，执政的人建议要焚烧通州粮仓，断绝敌寇军资。
English: During the civil engineering reform, the people in power proposed to burn the grain silos in Tongzhou and cut off the enemy's military funds.

古文：忱适议事至，言仓米数百万，可充京军一岁饷，令自往取，则立尽，何至遂付煨烬。
现代文：周忱正好因议事到京，他说仓米有数百万，可充京师部队一年的粮饷，如令他们自己前往取回，则马上就会取光，何至于要将其烧掉。
English: Zhou Zhen just happened to be in Beijing for the meeting. He said that there were millions of rice in the warehouse, which could be used to feed the troops of the Beijing Division for a year. If they were to go and get it themselves, it would soon run out, and they would have to burn it.

古文：顷之，诏趣造盔甲数百万。
现代文：不久，诏令马上制造数百万付盔甲。
English: Soon, the Emperor ordered the immediate production of millions of suits of armor.

古文：忱计明盔浴铁工多，令且沃锡，数日毕办。
现代文：周忱算出洗铁抛光盔甲的工作量大，命令先浇锡，几天之后全部办齐了。
English: Zhou Zhenxin calculated that the workload of washing iron and polishing armor was large, ordered to pour tin first, and after a few days everything was done.

古文：忱既被劾，帝命李敏代之，敕无轻易忱法。
现代文：周忱被弹劾后，皇上命李敏取代他，敕令他不要轻易更改周忱的制度。
English: After Zhou Zhen was impeached, the emperor ordered Li Min to replace him and ordered him not to change Zhou Zhen's system easily.

古文：然自是户部括所积余米为公赋，储备萧然。
现代文：但从此以后户部将所积存的余米收为公家赋税，储备粮食萧然无存。
English: However, from then on, the Ministry of Households collected the surplus rice accumulated for public taxation, and the grain reserve disappeared.

古文：其后吴大饥，道殣相望，课逋如故矣。
现代文：后来吴地发生严重饥荒，人民道死相望，租税又依旧拖欠了。
English: Later, a severe famine occurred in Wu, the people were desperate, and taxes were still in arrears.

古文：民益思忱不已，即生祠处处祀之。
现代文：人民更加怀念周忱不已，到处建生祠祭祀他。
English: The people remembered Zhou Zhenxuan more and more, and built ancestral shrines to worship him everywhere.

古文：景泰四年十月卒。
现代文：景泰四年十月，周忱去世。
English: In October of the fourth year, Jing Tai passed away.

古文：谥文襄。
现代文：谥号文襄。
English: His nickname is Wenxiang.

