古文：杨鹤，字修龄，武陵人。
现代文：杨鹤，字修龄，武陵人。
English: Yang He, Zhaoxu Ling, Wuling Ren.

古文：万历三十二年进士。
现代文：万历三十二年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 32nd year of Wanli.

古文：授雒南知县，调长安。
现代文：初任雒南知县，后调往长安。
English: He was initially assigned to Nanji County, and later transferred to Chang'an.

古文：四十年擢御史，上疏请东宫讲学。且言： 顷者，爱女被躏于宫奴，馆甥受挞于朝市，叩阍不闻，上书不达，壅蔽极矣。 
现代文：四十年，杨鹤升任御史，上书请太子在东宫里接受教学，并且说： 近来，皇上的爱女被宫中的奴才欺负，驸马爷在街市上受人毒打，到宫中告状告不进去，上书也到不了皇上手中。
English: Forty years later, Yang He was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and wrote to the prince asking him to accept teaching in the East Palace, saying: Recently, the emperor's beloved daughter was bullied by the palace's servants, the prince was severely beaten in the street market, he could not go to the palace to file a complaint, and the letter could not reach the imperial junior high school.

古文：时寿宁主婿冉兴让为掌家宫人梁盈女、内官彭进朝等殴辱，公主三奏不达，兴让挂冠长安门去，故鹤言及之。
现代文：上下情况不通真是到了极点！ 当时寿宁公主的女婿冉兴让被掌家宫女梁盈女、宦官彭进朝等殴打、欺辱，公主多次告状告不到神宗跟前，兴让把衣冠挂在长安门上就走了，所以杨鹤提到了这件事。
English: At that time, Ran Xingzang, the son-in-law of Princess Shuning, was beaten and bullied by the lady-in-waiting of the palace, Liang Yingni, and the eunuch Peng Jinchao. The princess repeatedly complained that she could not report to Shenzong. Xingzang hung the crown on the Chang'an Gate and left, so Yang He mentioned this matter.

古文：寻出督两淮盐法，巡按贵州。
现代文：不久杨鹤外出管理两淮盐法，巡按贵州。
English: Soon after, Yang He went out to administer the two Huai salt methods and patrol Guizhou.

古文：贵州接壤乌撒，去川南叙州千里，节制难。
现代文：贵州跟乌撒接壤，乌撒距离四川南部的叙州有一千里，很难管制。
English: Guizhou borders Usa, which is a thousand miles away from Suzhou in the south of Sichuan, making it difficult to control.

古文：土官安云龙死，其族人与沾益安效良争印，构兵三十年，后竟为效良所据，其父绍庆又据沾益州，皆川、云、贵咽喉地。
现代文：土官安云龙死后，他本家的人跟沾益的安效良争夺官印，打了三十年的仗，最后被效良得到了，效良的父亲绍庆又占据着沾益州，这两处地方都是四川、云南、贵州的咽喉地。
English: After the death of local magistrate An Yunlong, members of his own family fought a thirty-year battle with Tsim Yik's An Xuliang for the official seal, which was eventually won by Tsim Yik. Tsim Yik's father, Shao Qing, also occupied Tsim Yik Prefecture, both of which are at the throat of Sichuan, Yunnan, and Guizhou.

古文：鹤请割乌撒隶贵州，地近节制便，可弭后患，朝议不决。
现代文：杨鹤奏请把乌撒割出，归入贵州，这样距离近好管一些，可以消除后患，朝廷讨论时决定不下来。
English: Yang He Zuo, please cut the Usa out and incorporate it into Guizhou, so that the distance is close and manageable, which can eliminate the after-effects. During the discussion at the imperial court, it was decided not to come down.

古文：未几，效良为乱，如其言。
现代文：不久效良起来作乱，恰如杨鹤所说的那样。
English: Soon the effect will be better to make a mess, just as Yang He said.

古文：贵州土官以百数，水西安氏最大，而土地、户口、贡赋之属，无籍可稽。
现代文：贵州的土官有上百个，水西的安氏地盘最大，但土地、户口、贡赋等都没有账目可查。
English: There are hundreds of land stewards in Guizhou, with the An family holding the largest territory in western Shuixi, but there are no records of land, household registration, tribute, etc.

古文：鹤乃檄宣慰安位尽著之籍，并首领目把主名、承袭源委，悉列上有司。
现代文：杨鹤于是传令宣慰安位把情况都登记注册，连同首领、目把、主名，承袭的源委，都上交给了有关部门。
English: Yang He then sent a message to Xuan Jiao An to register the situation, and handed it over to the relevant departments, together with the leader, the leader, the main name, and the inherited source committee.

古文：自是簿牒始明，奸弊易核。
现代文：从此以后这些地方的簿牒才明朗化，有弄虚作假的情况也容易查对了。
English: Since then, the bookkeeping of these places has become clearer, and it is easy to check the situation of fraud.

古文：事竣，不候命径归。久之，还朝。
现代文：事后，杨鹤不等朝廷批准径自回乡去了，很久以后才回朝。
English: After the incident, Yang He did not wait for the approval of the imperial court and went back to his hometown. It was a long time before he returned to the imperial court.

古文：杨镐四路师败，鹤荐熊廷弼、张鹤鸣、李长庚、薛国用、袁应泰，言： 辽事之失，不料彼己，丧师辱国，误在经略；不谙机宜，马上催战，误在辅臣；调度不闻，束手无策，误在枢部。
现代文：杨镐的四路辽东军战败后，杨鹤推荐熊廷弼、张鹤鸣、李长庚、薛国用、袁应泰说 ：辽东军事的失败，是因为没有了解到敌我双方的情况，丧师辱国误在经略；不熟悉战机，就马上催战，错误在辅臣；没有很好地加以调度，对战事束手无策，错误在于兵部。
English: After the defeat of Yang Hui's four-way Liaodong Army, Yang He recommended Xiong Tingtao, Zhang Huanming, Li Changgang, Xue Guoying, and Yuan Yingtai, saying: The military defeat in Liaodong was due to the fact that we did not understand the situation of both the enemy and ourselves, and the mistake of killing the division and humiliating the country was in the strategy; if we were not familiar with the fighter plane, we would immediately call for a war, and the mistake was in the assistant minister; if we did not make a good dispatch, we could not do anything about the war, and the mistake was in the

古文：至尊优柔不断，又至尊自误。 
现代文：皇上自己优柔不决，也是皇上自己耽误的事。 
English: The Emperor's own indecision is also the cause of his delay.

古文：当事恶其直，将假他事逐之，乃引疾去。
现代文：当权的大官讨厌他说话太直，打算借别的事把他赶走，杨鹤于是自己称病离开了。
English: The high-ranking official in power hated him for being too outspoken and planned to use other means to drive him away, so Yang He called in sick and left.

古文：丁外艰。
现代文：正好父亲死了，居家守丧。
English: When his father died, he resigned from his post and died at home.

古文：天启初，起太仆少卿，擢右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：天启初年，朝廷起用杨鹤为太仆少卿，又提升为右佥都御史，让他去巡抚南安、赣州。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the imperial court appointed Yang He as the servant of the young lord, and promoted him to the right of the imperial governor, and let him go to the governor of Nan'an and Zhangzhou.

古文：未任，丁内艰，而广宁又败。魏忠贤以鹤党护廷弼，除鹤名。
现代文：他尚未上任，母亲又死了，广宁的战事又失败了，魏忠贤因为杨鹤庇护过廷弼，把他给除了名。
English: He had not yet taken office, his mother had died, the war in Guangning had failed, and Wei Zhongxian had excommunicated him because Yang He had protected Ting Tong.

古文：崇祯元年，召拜左佥都御史，进左副都御史。
现代文：崇祯元年，朝廷召杨鹤出任左佥都御史，又提升为左副都御史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court called Yang He to serve as the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and he was promoted to the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：鹤上言： 图治之要，在培元气。
现代文：杨鹤上书说 ：谋求天下大治的要领在于培植元气。
English: Yang He wrote: The key to seeking world peace lies in cultivating vitality.

古文：自大兵大役，加派频仍，公私交罄，小民之元气伤；自辽左、黔、蜀丧师失律，暴骨成丘，封疆之元气伤；自搢绅构党，彼此相倾，逆奄乘之，诛锄善类，士大夫之元气伤。
现代文：自从进行大规模战争、兵役以来，经常不断地对下边进行加派，目前公私财力交困，百姓的元气受到了伤害。自从辽左、贵州、四川兵败失控后，暴骨成丘，封疆的元气受到了伤害。自从朝廷里缙绅结党，彼此倾轧以来，谋逆的宦官乘机出来，打击好人，士大夫的元气受到了伤害。
English: Since the large-scale war and military service were carried out, reinforcements have been constantly sent to the lower regions. At present, public and private financial resources are in short supply, and the vitality of the people has been hurt. Since the military defeats of Liao Zuo, Guizhou and Sichuan have been out of control, violent bones have been formed, and the vitality of the blockade has been hurt. Since the gentry and gentry in the imperial court have formed a party and fought each other, the rebellious eunuchs have taken the opportunity to come out and fight the good people, and the vitality of the scholars and doctors has been hurt.

古文：譬如重病初起，百脉未调，风邪易入，道在培养。 
现代文：现在的国家就如同大病初愈，身上脉络还没调养好，风邪病毒容易侵染，治理的办法在于培植元气。 
English: The current country is like a serious illness that is just beginning to heal, the body's veins have not yet been well-nourished, cold viruses are easily infected, and the way to manage it is to cultivate vitality.

古文：时以为名言。
现代文：当时人们把这些话当成了名言。
English: At the time, people took these words as a famous quote.

古文：先是，辽左用兵，逃军惮不敢归伍，相聚剽虏。
现代文：在此之前，辽左发生战争，逃兵怕被治罪不敢归队，聚到一起抢劫。
English: Before this, there was a war in Liao Zuo, and the deserters were afraid of being punished and did not dare to return to the team, so they gathered together to rob.

古文：至是，关中频岁昆，有司不恤下。
现代文：到这时，关中经常闹饥荒，地方官府不对百姓加以抚恤。
English: At this time, there were frequent famines in Guanzhong, and the local government did not provide subsidies to the people.

古文：白水王二者，鸠众，墨其面，闯入澄城，杀知县张耀采。
现代文：白水有一个叫王二的人出来纠集群众，用墨汁涂了脸，闯进澄城，杀掉了知县张耀采。
English: In Baishui, a man called Wang Er came out to gather the masses, painted his face with ink, broke into Chengcheng, and killed Zhang Yao Cai.

古文：由是府谷王嘉允、汉南王大梁、阶州周大旺群贼蜂起，三边饥军应之，流氛之始也。
现代文：从此以后府谷的王嘉胤、汉南的王大梁、阶州的周大旺等群贼蜂拥而起，三边的饥军又起来响应他们，这就成了明末流寇作乱的开端。
English: From then on, Wang Jia-yin of Fugu, Wang Daliang of Hannan, Zhou Dayang of Zhouzhou and other groups of thieves swarmed, and hungry soldiers from three sides rose up to respond to them, which became the beginning of the late Ming Dynasty banditry.

古文：当是时，承平久，卒被兵，人无固志。
现代文：那个时候，天下多年太平，现在突然发生战乱，人们缺乏坚强的思想准备。
English: At that time, the world had been at peace for many years. Now, war suddenly broke out, and people lacked strong ideological preparation.

古文：大吏恶闻贼，曰： 此饥氓，徐自定耳。 
现代文：大官僚讨厌听到有贼作乱的消息，说什么： 这只是几个饿死鬼罢了，慢慢地他就自行平息了。 
English: Big bureaucrats hate to hear the news of thieves causing trouble, saying: It's just a few starving ghosts, and slowly it will calm down on its own.

古文：明年，总督武之望死。
现代文：第二年，陕西总督武之望死掉。
English: The following year, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Wu Zhimang, died.

古文：久之，廷臣莫肯往者，群推鹤。
现代文：很长时间廷臣都没人肯去接任，大家公推杨鹤过去。
English: For a long time, none of the courtiers were willing to take over, and everyone publicly pushed Yang He to go.

古文：帝召见鹤，问方略。
现代文：庄烈帝召见杨鹤，向他询问方略。
English: Emperor Zhuang was summoned to see Yang He and asked him about the strategy.

古文：对曰： 清慎自持，抚恤将卒而已。 
现代文：杨鹤回答说： 清慎自持，抚恤将士而已。 
English: Yang He replied, "Being prudent and self-disciplined is just like raising a soldier.

古文：遂拜鹤兵部右侍郎，代之望总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：庄烈帝于是任命杨鹤为兵部右侍郎，让他接替之望总督陕西三边军务。
English: Emperor Zhuang then appointed Yang He as the right-hand man of the military department, allowing him to take over the military affairs of the three sides in Shaanxi Province from Governor Wang.

古文：至则大梁、大旺、王二已前诛灭，而继起者益众。
现代文：杨鹤到任时大梁、大旺、王二已被铲除，但是跟着起来的贼寇更多了。
English: By the time Yang He took office, Daliang, Dayang and Wang Er had been eradicated, but more bandits followed.

古文：鹤素有清望，然不知兵。
现代文：杨鹤一向有清廉的名声，但是他不懂得军事。
English: Yang He has always had a reputation for integrity, but he does not understand military affairs.

古文：其冬，京师戒严，延绥、宁夏、甘肃、固原、临洮五镇总兵官悉以勤王行。
现代文：这年冬天，京师戒严，延绥、宁夏、甘肃、固原、临洮的五位总兵官都因为勤王出兵到京师去了。
English: This winter, martial law was imposed on the Beijing Division, and the five commanders-in-chief of Yancheng, Ningxia, Gansu, Gouyuan and Linyi all sent troops to the Beijing Division because of King Gongwang.

古文：延绥兵中道逃归，甘肃兵亦哗，惧诛，并合于贼，贼益张。
现代文：延绥的部队半路上逃回来，甘肃的部队也发生哗变，他们担心被杀头，都和贼兵联合，贼寇的声势更大了。
English: Yancheng's troops fled halfway back, and Gansu's troops also mutinied. They were worried about being killed, and they all united with the bandits. The bandits became more powerful.

古文：三年正月，王左挂等攻宜川，为知县成材所却，转攻韩城。
现代文：三年正月，王左挂等攻打宜川，被知县成材打退，转攻韩城。
English: In the first month of the third year, Wang Zuogang and others attacked Yichuan, were repulsed by Zhixian Chengzai, and turned to attack Hancheng.

古文：军中无帅，鹤命参政洪承畴御之。俘斩三百余人，围解，贼走清涧。
现代文：韩城官军没有将领，杨鹤任命参政洪承畴领兵抵御，俘获、斩杀了三百多人，韩城之围解除了。贼兵开往清涧。
English: The Hancheng government army did not have a general, so Yang He appointed the politician Hong Chengzhuang to lead the troops to resist, captured and killed more than three hundred people, and the siege of Hancheng was lifted. The thief soldiers drove to Qingyuan.

古文：鹤连疏请诸将还镇，不果，起故将杜文焕任之。
现代文：杨鹤接连上书朝廷请让各位大将返回驻地，没有结果，就起用了原先的将领杜文焕出来任职。
English: Yang He successively wrote to the imperial court to ask the generals to return to their garrisons, but to no avail, the original general, Du Wenhuan, was appointed to the post.

古文：二月，延安知府张辇、都司艾穆蹙贼延川，降其魁王子顺、张述圣、姬三儿。
现代文：二月，延安知府张辇、都司艾穆在延川进逼贼兵，收降了贼首王子顺、张述圣、姬三儿。
English: In February, Zhang Ye of Yan'an Prefecture and Ai Mu, the governor of Yanchuan Province, entered Yanchuan to force the bandits to surrender, and the bandits were Prince Shun, Zhang Shusheng, and Ji Saner.

古文：别贼王嘉允掠延安、庆阳，鹤匿不奏，而给降贼王虎、小红狼、一丈青、掠地虎、混江龙等免死牒，安置延绥、河曲间。
现代文：另外的贼首王嘉胤洗掠了延安、庆阳，杨鹤隐瞒下来，没有上报，又给降贼王虎、小红狼、一丈青、掠地虎、混江龙等颁布免死文书，把他们安置在延绥、河曲一带。
English: In addition, the leader of the bandits, Wang Jia-yin, looted Yan'an and Qingyang, and Yang He concealed it and did not report it. He also issued death-free documents to the defeated bandits, Wang Hu, Xiao Honglu, Yizheng Qing, Zhouzhi Hu, and Mixed River Dragon, and placed them in the areas of Yan'an and Hequ.

古文：贼淫掠如故，有司不敢问。
现代文：这些贼兵照旧奸淫、抢掠，当地官府却不敢过问。
English: These robber soldiers continue to rape and pillage as before, but the local government does not dare to question them.

古文：寇患成于此矣。
现代文：贼寇的祸乱就这样造成了。
English: This is how the scourge of banditry came about.

古文：七月，嘉允陷黄甫、清水、木瓜，遂陷府谷，文焕击走之，贼流入山西。
现代文：七月，嘉胤打下黄甫、清水、木瓜之后，又攻占府谷，文焕将他打跑，贼寇涌进了山西。
English: In July, after Jia Yin defeated Huang Fu, Shimizu, and Papaya, he also captured Fugu. Wen Huan ran him off, and the bandits poured into Shanxi.

古文：已抚王左挂以白汝学攻绥德州，谋内应。事觉，巡按李应期与承畴计诛左挂等绥德，五十七人皆死。
现代文：已经接受招安的贼首王左挂因为白汝学来攻打绥德州，打算从中接应，阴谋暴露后，巡按李应期与承畴设计在绥德诛除左挂，派出的五十七个人都死掉了。
English: The bandit king Zuo Heng, who had accepted the invitation, was killed because Bai Ru Xue had come to attack Shunde and planned to take over from him. After the conspiracy was exposed, the patrol according to the schedule of Li Ying and the design of taking over the territory in Shunde eliminated Zuo Heng, and the fifty-seven people sent were all dead.

古文：十二月，贼神一元攻陷新安、宁塞、柳树涧等堡。
现代文：十二月，贼首神一元攻占了新安、宁塞、柳树涧等城堡。
English: In December, the Thief's Head God I Yuan captured the castles of Xin'an, Ningxia, and Yuxuan.

古文：宁塞，文焕所居，宗人多死。
现代文：宁塞是文焕的住家之处，他的族人大都被杀了。
English: Most of his people were killed in Ningsai, where Wenhuan lived.

古文：明年正月，贼弃宁塞，陷保安。
现代文：第二年正月，贼兵放弃宁塞，攻占了保安。
English: In the first month of the second year, the robber soldiers abandoned Ningxie and captured Baoxi.

古文：一元死，弟一魁围庆阳，陷合水，鹤闻，移驻宁州。
现代文：一元死后，他的弟弟一魁围攻庆阳，打下了合水。杨鹤得知后移驻宁州。
English: After the death of Yuanyuan, his younger brother Yiqui besieged Qingyang and laid siege to Heshui. After learning of this, Yang He moved to Ningzhou.

古文：一魁求抚，送还合水知县蒋应昌，别贼拓先龄、金翅鹏、过天星、田近庵、独头虎、上天龙等亦先后降。鹤设御座于城楼，贼跪拜呼万岁。
现代文：一魁请接受招安，杨鹤把他送回合水交给知县蒋应昌。其他贼首拓先龄、金翅鹏、过天星、田近庵、独头虎、上天龙等也先后归降，杨鹤在城楼上摆了一张皇上的座席，让这些贼首跪拜，口喊万岁，然后宣读皇上的指示，命令他们发下誓言，或归伍，或归农，永不做贼。
English: The first captain accepted the invitation, and Yang He sent his round of water to Jiang Yingchang of Zhixian. Other thieves, including the first to explore the world, Jin Yingpeng, the last star, Tian Jianan, the one-headed tiger, and the heavenly dragon, also surrendered successively. Yang He placed an emperor's seat on the castle tower, let these thieves kneel and shout "long live," and then read out the emperor's instructions and ordered them to swear an oath, either to join the army or to become farmers, and never to be a thief.

古文：鹤宣圣谕，令设誓，或归伍，或归农，贼佯应之，则立赦其罪，群盗自是视总督如儿戏矣。
现代文：这些贼首假意答应了，杨鹤马上就赦免了他们的罪行。于是群盗都把他这个总督看作儿戏。
English: The bandits pretended to agree, and Yang He immediately pardoned their crimes, so the bandits regarded him as a child's play.

古文：鹤又以一魁最强，致其婿帐中，同卧起，而一魁果至。数以十罪，则稽首谢。即宣诏赦之，畀以官，处其众四千余人于宁塞，使守备吴弘器护焉。
现代文：杨鹤又因为一魁的势力最强大，就把他的女婿请到军帐中，同吃同住，一魁果然来降，杨鹤列举他十大罪状，一魁就磕头请罪，杨鹤就宣读诏书赦免了他，给他封了一个官职，把他的部队四千多人安排在宁塞，派守备吴弘器防护他们。
English: Because Yang He was the most powerful, he invited his son-in-law to the military treasury, and they ate and lived together. Yang He listed his ten major offenses, and Yang He pardoned him, gave him an official post, and placed more than four thousand of his troops in Ningsai, and sent guards to protect them.

古文：文焕闻之，叹曰： 宁塞之役，贼畏我而逃。
现代文：文焕听说后感叹说： 宁塞一战，贼兵惧怕我逃走了。
English: After hearing this, Wen Huan lamented, "Ningsai was the scene of a battle, and the bandits were afraid of me and ran away.

古文：今者贼伪降，杨公信之，借名城为盗资。
现代文：现在贼兵假装投降，这位杨公就相信了，把名城给强盗当资产。
English: Now the bandits are pretending to surrender, and this Yang Gong believes them and gives the famous city to the bandits as an asset.

古文：我宗人，可与贼逼处此土乎！ 
现代文：我的族人能跟这些贼挤住在一个地方吗？ 
English: Can my people live in one place with these thieves?

古文：遂以其族行。
现代文：于是带着自己的族人离开了。
English: So he left with his people.

古文：五月，鹤移驻耀州。
现代文：五月，杨鹤移驻耀州。
English: In May, Yanghe moved to Yazhou.

古文：贼攻破金锁关，杀都司王廉。
现代文：贼兵打下金锁关，杀害了都司王廉。
English: The robber soldiers broke the golden locks and killed the governor Wang Lian.

古文：七月，别贼李老柴、独行狼攻陷中部，田近庵以六百人守马栏山应之。
现代文：七月，其他贼首李老柴、独行狼攻下了中部，田近庵率领六百人把守着马栏山呼应他们。
English: In July, other bandits led by Li Laochai and Lone Wolf captured the central region, and Tian Chian'an led 600 men to defend Mount Ma'an.

古文：而降渠一魁之党茹成名者，尤桀骜，鹤令一魁诱杀之于耀州，其党猜惧，挟一魁以叛。
现代文：降贼一魁的手下茹成名特别桀骜不驯，杨鹤命令一魁在耀州诱杀了他，他的同伙们这下犯了疑心，胁迫着一魁反叛了。
English: Ru Chengren, a subordinate of the surrendering bandit leader, was known to be particularly unruly. Yang He ordered the leader to trap him in Yaozhou. His associates became suspicious and forced the leader to rebel.

古文：御史谢三宾言： 鹤谓庆阳抚局既毕，贼散遣俱尽。
现代文：御史谢上宾上书朝廷说 ：杨鹤说庆阳一带招安的局面已经形成，贼兵都给疏散了。
English: Gu Shi Xie wrote to the imperial court, saying: Yang He said that the situation in the Qingyang area has been stabilized, and the bandits have been evacuated.

古文：中部之贼，宁自天降？ 
现代文：中部的贼兵难道是从天上掉下来的？ 
English: Did the central bandits fall from the sky?

古文：疏下巡按御史吴甡核奏，甡奏鹤主抚误国。
现代文：朝廷把他的奏疏交给巡按御史吴生生加以核对后汇报，吴生生上奏说杨鹤主张招安，误国不浅。
English: The imperial court handed his report to the inspector-general Wu Shengsheng, who checked it and reported back. Wu Shengsheng said that Yang He advocated peace, which was not a mistake.

古文：帝怒，逮鹤下狱，戍袁州。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，把杨鹤逮捕入狱，判为充军袁州。
English: Zhuang Rong was annoyed and had Yang He arrested and jailed, sentencing him to serve as a military attaché to Yuanzhou.

古文：七年秋，子嗣昌擢宣大山西总督，疏辞，言： 臣父鹤以总督蒙谴已三年，臣何心复居此职。 
现代文：七年秋天，杨鹤的儿子嗣昌被任命为宣府、大同、山西总督，嗣昌上书推辞说 ：我的父亲杨鹤因为这么个总督被充军已经三年了，我怎么有心再任这个职务。 
English: In the autumn of the seventh year, Yang He's son, Sychang, was appointed governor of Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi. Sychang wrote a letter of resignation, saying, "It has been three years since my father, Yang He, was conscripted into the army because he was such a governor, how can I have the heart to hold this position again?"

古文：帝优诏答之，而不赦鹤罪。
现代文：庄烈帝以措辞委婉的诏书回复了他，但是不肯赦免杨鹤的罪。
English: Zhuang Rong replied to him with a euphemistically worded edict, but refused to pardon Yang He's crime.

古文：八年冬，鹤卒于戍所，嗣昌请恤。帝复鹤官，而不予恤。
现代文：八年冬天，杨鹤死在充军的驻地，嗣昌请加以抚恤，庄烈帝恢复了杨鹤的官位，但不加优恤。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, Yang He died in the residence of the army, and Tsuchimasa asked for a pension. Emperor Zhuang restored Yang He's official position, but without a bonus.

古文：鹤初以尤世禄宁夏大捷功，进兵部尚书、太子少保，世荫锦衣千户。
现代文：杨鹤早先因为尤世禄在宁夏的大捷，升任兵部尚书、太子少保，荫封子孙世袭锦衣千户。
English: Because of the great victory of Yu Shilu in Ningxia, Yang He had been promoted to the top of the military department, the prince minor protector, and the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of a thousand households.

古文：十年，叙贺虎臣宁夏破贼功，追加太子少傅。
现代文：十年，朝廷评论贺虎臣在宁夏大捷的功劳时，给杨鹤追加官衔为太子少傅。
English: Ten years later, when the imperial court commented on He Huchen's great achievements in Ningxia, Yang He was given the additional title of Prince Junior Master.

古文：十三年，又以甘肃叙功，任一子官。
现代文：十三年又因为评论甘肃的战功，任命杨鹤的一个儿子入官。
English: Thirteen years later, one of Yang He's sons was appointed to an official post for commenting on Gansu's war exploits.

古文：从弟鹗，崇祯四年进士。
现代文：杨鹤的堂弟杨鹗，崇祯四年进士。
English: Yang He's cousin, Yang Hao, and Chong Hao were promoted to star for four years.

古文：官御史，有才名，擢顺天巡抚。
现代文：担任御史时，以才干出了名，升为顺天巡抚。
English: When he served as Imperial Historian, he became famous for his ability and was promoted to Suncheon Governor.

古文：京师陷，南归，福王以为兵部右侍郎，总督川、湖军务。
现代文：京师失陷后，回到南方，福王用他当兵部右侍郎，总督四川、湖北军务。
English: After the fall of Beijing, he returned to the south, and King Fu used him as the right hand man of the military department, and as the military governor of Sichuan and Hubei.

古文：陈奇瑜，字玉铉，保德州人。
现代文：陈奇瑜，字玉铉，保德州人。
English: Chen Qiyu, alias Yuyao, is from Texas.

古文：万历四十四年进士。
现代文：万历四十四年进士。
English: Forty-four years later, he became a priest.

古文：除洛阳知县。
现代文：初任洛阳知县。
English: He was first appointed to Luoyang Zhixian.

古文：天启二年，擢礼科给事中。
现代文：天启二年升任礼科给事中。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the Department of Etiquette.

古文：杨涟劾魏忠贤，奇瑜亦抗疏力诋。
现代文：杨涟弹劾魏忠贤时，奇瑜也曾上书猛烈抨击忠贤。
English: When Yang Hui impeached Wei Zhongxian, Qi Yu also wrote a letter slamming Zhongxian.

古文：六年春，由户科左给事中出为陕西副使，迁右参政，分守南阳。
现代文：六年春，奇瑜由户科左给事中出任陕西副使，又升为右参政，负责守护南阳。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Qi Yu was appointed as the deputy envoy of Shaanxi Province from the left side of the household, and was promoted to the right side of politics, responsible for guarding Nanyang.

古文：崇祯改元，加按察使职，寻历陕西左右布政使。
现代文：崇祯元年，奇瑜升为按察使，不久先后担任陕西左、右布政使。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, Qi Yu was promoted to the post of inspector, and soon served as the political envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：五年，擢右佥都御史，代张福臻巡抚延绥。
现代文：五年，升为右佥都御史，接替张福臻巡抚延绥。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the Metropolitan Historian, succeeding Zhang Fuzhen, the governor of Yancheng.

古文：时大盗神一魁、不沾泥等已歼，而余党犹众。岁大凶，民多从贼。
现代文：当时大盗神一魁、不沾泥等已被诛除，可是他们的余党还很多，当地年景不好，饥荒严重，很多百姓跟随了贼兵。
English: At that time, the bandits and thieves had been eliminated, but there were still many remnants of their party. The local situation was not good, the famine was serious, and many people followed the bandits.

古文：明年五月，奇瑜上疏，极言鄜、延达镇城千余里饥荒盗贼状，诏免延安、庆阳田租。
现代文：第二年五月，奇瑜上书极力诉说了州、延安到镇城千里之间饥荒、盗贼的严重情况，庄烈帝下诏免除了延安、庆阳地区的田租。
English: In May of the following year, Qi Yu published a letter in which she tried her best to tell of the serious situation of famine and thieves between the prefectures of Yan'an and Zhencheng, which was thousands of miles away. Zhuang Rong exempted the Yan'an and Qingyang regions from land rent.

古文：奇瑜乃遣副将卢文善讨斩截山虎、柳盗跖、金翅鹏等。
现代文：奇瑜于是派遣副将卢文善讨伐、斩杀了截山虎、柳盗跖、金翅鹏等人。
English: Qi Yu then dispatched Vice-General Lu Wenshan to fight and kill the mountain tiger, the willow thief, and Jin Yingpeng.

古文：寻遣游击常怀德斩薛仁贵，参政戴君恩斩一条龙、金刚钻、开山鹞、黑煞神、人中虎、五阎王、马上飞，都司贺思贤斩王登槐，巡检罗圣楚斩马红狼、满天飞，参政张伯鲸斩满鹅，擒黄参耀、隔沟飞，守备阎士衡斩张聪、樊登科、樊计荣、一块铁、青背狼、穿山甲、老将军、二将军、满天星、上山虎，把总白士祥斩扫地虎，守备郭金城斩扒地虎、括天飞，守备郭太斩跳山虎、新来将、就地滚、小黄莺、房日兔，游击罗世勋斩贾总管、逼上天、小红旗，他将斩草上飞、一只虎、一翅飞、云里手、四天王、薛红旗、独尾狼，诸渠魁略尽。
现代文：不久，他又派遣游击常怀德杀了薛仁贵，参政戴君恩斩了一条龙、金刚钻、开山鹞、黑煞神、人中虎、五阎王、马上飞，都司贺思贤斩了王登槐，巡检罗圣楚斩了马红狼、满天飞，参政张伯鲸斩了满鹅，活捉了黄参耀、隔沟飞，守备阎士衡斩了张聪、樊登科、樊计荣、一块铁、青背狼、穿山甲、老将军、二将军、满天星、上山虎，把总白士祥斩了扫地虎，守备郭金城斩了扒地虎、括天飞，守备郭太斩了跳山虎、新来将、就地滚、小黄莺、房日兔，游击罗世勋斩了贾总管、逼上天、小红旗，其他将领斩了草上飞、一只虎、一翅飞、云里手、四天王、薛红旗、独尾狼，各路贼首基本上斩尽了。
English: Soon after, he dispatched the guerrilla Changhuai De to kill Xue Rengui, the politician Dai Jun'en to behead a dragon, the diamond drill, the mountain harpoon, the black devil, the man-tiger, the five kings of hell, the horse fly, the general He Sixian to behead Wang Dengyao, the patrolman Luo Shengchu to behead the horse-red wolf, the man-sky fly, the politician Zhang Boqi to behead the man-goose, the Huang Zhan Yao to be captured alive, and the ditch fly, the guard Bei Yan Shiheng to behead Zhang Cong, Zou Deng

古文：奇瑜乃上疏曰： 流寇作难，始于岁饥，而成于元凶之煽诱，致两郡三路皆盗薮。
现代文：奇瑜于是上书说： 流贼作乱，根源在于年成不佳，饥荒逼人，形成于首恶的煽动、诱惑，以至于两府三路都成了强盗窝。
English: Qi Yu then wrote: The root cause of the chaos caused by the bandits lies in the poor harvest and the famine. It was formed by the instigation and temptation of the chief evil, so that the two prefectures and three roads have become a bandit's den.

古文：今未顿一兵，未绝一弦，擒斩头目百七十七人，及其党千有奇。
现代文：现在我们没有损失一个士兵，也没有拉断一根弓弦，捉斩了一百七十多个贼头及其党羽一千多人。
English: Now we have not lost a single soldier, nor have we broken a single bow string, and we have captured and killed more than 170 bandits and more than 1,000 of their followers.

古文：头目既除，余党自散，向之斩木揭竿者，今且荷锄负耒矣。 
现代文：头目除掉，余党自然就会散去。过去那些斩木揭竿起来暴乱的，现在就要背着锄头犁耙种地去了。 
English: Get rid of the ringleaders, and the rest of the party will naturally disperse. In the past, those who cut down trees and rioted will now have to carry ploughshares on their backs and plough the land.

古文：帝嘉之，令录有功将士以闻。
现代文：庄烈帝嘉奖了他，让他开列有功将士的名单报上去。
English: Emperor Zhuangde commended him and asked him to submit a list of meritorious soldiers.

古文：延绥群贼多解，独钻天哨、开山斧据永宁关。
现代文：延绥的群贼大多解体了，只有钻天哨、开山斧占据永宁关。
English: Most of the bandits in Yancheng have disintegrated. Only the drill, the weather vane and the mountain axe occupy Yongning Pass.

古文：永宁在镇城东，前阻山，下临黄河，数年不下。
现代文：永宁在镇城东部，前面有山阻隔，下面濒临黄河，几年都打它不下。
English: Yongning is in the eastern part of the town. There are mountains in front of it and the Yellow River below. For several years, it could not be beaten.

古文：奇瑜谓是不可以力取，乃阴简锐士，阳言总制檄发兵，令贺人龙将之而西，身为后劲，直抵延川。俄策马东，曰： 视吾马首所向。 
现代文：奇瑜认为这个地方不能靠硬拼攻取，就暗中挑选精锐士兵，扬言接到了总制的檄文要出兵远征，命令贺人龙率领他们向西，自己殿后，直抵延川，然后策马向东，喊道： 朝着我指的方向，前进！ 
English: Qi Yu thought that this place could not be conquered by hard fighting, so he secretly selected elite soldiers, threatened to send an expeditionary force after receiving the general's message, and ordered He Ronglong to lead them westward, after his own palace, straight to Yanchuan, and then steered his horse eastward, shouting: In the direction I point, advance!

古文：潜师疾走入山，贼不虞大兵至，惊溃。
现代文：悄悄地飞奔进山。贼兵没有料到官军到来，惊慌而逃。
English: They quietly galloped into the mountains. The bandits did not expect the arrival of the government army and fled in panic.

古文：焚其巢，斩首千六百有奇，二贼俱馘。
现代文：官军烧了他们的老窝，斩获一千六百多首级，两位贼首都被杀死。
English: The government army burned down their old home and captured more than 1,600 heads. Two of the thieves were killed.

古文：分兵击斩金翅鹏、一座城，获首五百五十。
现代文：后来又派兵进攻，杀掉了金翅鹏、一座城，斩获五百五十个首级。
English: Later, he sent soldiers to attack, killed Jin Ying Peng, a city, and obtained five hundred and fifty heads.

古文：延水群盗尽平，奇瑜威名著关陕。
现代文：延水流域的群贼这才全部剿灭了，奇瑜的声名顿起，威震关、陕。
English: It was only then that the band of thieves in the Yanshui basin were all wiped out, and Qiyu's fame soared.

古文：于是群盗尽萃于山西，流突河北、畿南。
现代文：此后群贼都集中到了山西。流窜到黄河北部、畿南地区来。
English: Since then, the bandits have concentrated in Shanxi Province and have spread to the northern part of the Yellow River and the southern part of Gyeongnam Province.

古文：冬冰坚，从渑池渡，躏河南、湖广，窥四川。
现代文：冬天冰很厚，贼寇从渑池渡过黄河，践踏了河南、湖广，又进一步窥视四川。
English: In winter, the ice is very thick, and the thieves crossed the Yellow River from Dianchi Lake, trampled on Henan and Hunan, and further peered into Sichuan.

古文：明年，廷议诸镇抚事权不一，宜设大臣统之，多推荐洪承畴。
现代文：第二年，朝廷讨论认为各镇、巡抚事权不一，应设置一名大臣统管，大多数人推荐了洪承畴。
English: In the second year, the imperial court discussed that each town and the governor had different powers, and that a minister should be set up to take charge. Most people recommended Hong Chengzheng.

古文：以承畴方督三边，不可易，乃擢奇瑜兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督陕西、山西、河南、湖广、四川军务，专办流贼。
现代文：因为承畴正督管三边军务，不能替换下来，于是朝廷提升奇瑜为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督陕西、山西、河南、湖广、四川军务，专门惩办流贼。
English: Since it was impossible to replace the military affairs of the three sides, the imperial court promoted Qiyu to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital, the governor of the military affairs of Shaanxi, Shanxi, Henan, Hunan, and Sichuan, specifically to punish the outlaws.

古文：奇瑜檄诸将会兵陕州。
现代文：奇瑜传令各地将领会师陕州。
English: Qi Yu sent messengers to all parts of the country to invite scholars to Shaanxi.

古文：先是，老回回、过天星、满天星、闯塌天、混世王五大营自楚入蜀，陷夔州。阻险，复走还楚，分为三：一犯均州，往河南；一犯郧阳，往淅川；一犯金漆坪，渡河犯商南。
现代文：在这之前，老回回、过天星、满天星、闯塌天、混世王五大营贼兵从湖北进入四川，打下了夔州，为险要地势所阻挡，又返回湖北，兵分三路：一路进犯均州，开往河南；一路进犯郧阳，开往淅川；一路进犯金漆坪，渡过黄河后进犯商南。
English: Prior to this, the five great battalions of bandits from Hubei had entered Sichuan from Hubei Province, defeated Luzhou, were blocked by the dangerous terrain, and returned to Hubei Province. The soldiers were divided into three routes: they attacked Junzhou all the way to Henan Province; they attacked Poyang all the way to Luzhou Province; they attacked Jinzhuping all the way to cross the Yellow River and then attacked Shangnan Province.

古文：奇瑜乃驰至均州，檄四巡抚会讨。
现代文：奇瑜于是骑马到均州，传令四位巡抚联合讨伐。
English: Qi Yu then rode to Junzhou and ordered the four governors to join the crusade.

古文：陕西练国事驻商南，遏其西北；郧阳卢象升驻房、竹，遏其西；河南元默驻卢氏，遏其东北；湖广唐晖驻南漳，遏其东南。
现代文：陕西的练国事驻军商南，遏止他们向西北去。郧阳的卢象升驻军房县、竹山，遏止他们西逃。河南的元默驻扎在卢氏，阻止他们逃往东北。湖广的唐晖驻军南漳，阻止他们逃向东南。
English: Lu Xiangsheng of Shenyang was stationed in the military quarters and Zhushan to stop them from fleeing to the west, Yuan Miao of Henan was stationed in Lushi to prevent them from fleeing to the northeast, and Tang Di of Guangxi was stationed in Nanlu to prevent them from fleeing to the southeast.

古文：奇瑜乃偕象升督将士由竹溪至平利之乌林关，十余战，斩贼千七百余级。
现代文：奇瑜然后同象升一起率领将士从竹奚谷到达平利的乌林关，途中十多次作战，斩获贼兵首级一千七百多。
English: Qi Yu and Xiang Sheng then led the soldiers from Zhubei Valley to Wuling Pass in Pingli, fighting more than ten times on the way and capturing more than seventeen hundred heads of bandits.

古文：越七日，大破之乜家沟，斩千八十余级，总兵邓玘功为多。
现代文：过了七天，在乜家沟大败贼军，斩获一千零八十多首级。总兵邓王己功劳最大。
English: Seven days later, he defeated the rebel army in Shijiazhuang, gaining more than 1,080 heads. General Deng Wang himself was the most meritorious.

古文：已，设伏蚋溪，连战，斩三百余级。
现代文：过后，又在竹奚谷设下埋伏，连续开战，斩获三百多首级。
English: After that, they set up an ambush in Zhubei Valley and continuously went to war, gaining more than three hundred heads.

古文：至狮子山，斩七百二十余级。
现代文：到狮子山，斩获七百二十多首级。
English: To the Lion Mountain, he won more than seven hundred and twenty first-class.

古文：别将杨化麟、杨世恩、周任凤、杨正芳等分道击杀贼，擒其魁闯王、翻山虎等。
现代文：其他将领杨化麟、杨世恩、周任凤、杨正芳等分路追杀贼兵，抓住了贼首闯王、翻山虎等人。
English: Other generals such as Yang Hualin, Yang Shien, Zhou Renfeng and Yang Zhengfang chased and killed the bandits, and caught the bandits' ringleaders and mountain-climbing tigers.

古文：奇瑜上言： 楚中屡捷，一时大盗几尽，其窜伏深山者，臣督乡兵为向道，无穴不搜，楚中渐有宁宇。 
现代文：奇瑜上书说： 湖北境内多次告捷，一时大的盗贼几乎削平了，那些逃窜到深山中去的，我带领乡兵引路把每个山洞都搜到，湖北慢慢就会得到平静的地面了。 
English: Qi Yu said in the letter: Hubei has been successful many times. The once-big thieves have almost been leveled. Those who fled to the mountains, I led the soldiers to lead the way to search every cave. Hubei will slowly get a calm ground.

古文：帝嘉劳之。
现代文：庄烈帝嘉奖并慰劳了他。
English: Zhuang Rongdei commended and consoled him.

古文：乃督副将刘迁等搜竹溪、平利贼，追至五狼河，擒其魁十二人。
现代文：奇瑜于是率领副将刘迁等人搜索竹奚谷、平利的残余骑兵，追到五狼河，抓住贼首十二个人。
English: Qi Yu then led Vice Admiral Liu Qian and others to search for the remnants of the cavalry in Zhuji Valley and Pingli, chased them to the Five Wolf River, and caught the first twelve thieves.

古文：遣参将贺人龙等追八昼夜至紫阳，贼死者万余人。
现代文：派参将贺人龙等追击了八天八夜到达紫阳，贼兵死去的人数多达一万以上。
English: He sent the general He Renlong and others to chase the dragon for eight days and eight nights to reach Ziyang, and the number of robber soldiers killed was as high as more than ten thousand.

古文：先是，贼入蜀，复自蜀入秦，由阳平关奔巩昌，承畴御之秦州。贼遂越两当，袭破凤县，分为二：一向汉中，取间道犯城固、洋县；一由凤县奔宝鸡、汧阳。
现代文：在此之前，贼兵进入四川，又从四川进入陕西，从阳平关奔向巩昌，承畴在秦州抵御，贼兵于是渡过两当，突袭占领了凤县，然后分兵两路：一路向汉中，抄小路进犯城固、洋县；一路由凤县奔向宝鸡、阳。
English: Prior to this, the bandits entered Sichuan, entered Shaanxi from Sichuan, ran from Yangping Pass to Gongchang, and resisted in Qinzhou. The bandits then crossed the two dynasties, raided and occupied Feng County, and then divided the troops into two ways: one way to Hanzhong, taking small roads to invade Chenggu and Yang County; one way from Feng County to Baoji and Yang.

古文：于是贼在平利、洵阳间者数万，自四川入西乡者二三万。
现代文：这时在平利、洵阳间的贼兵有数万人，从四川进入西乡的有二三万人。
English: At this time, there were tens of thousands of bandits between Pingli and Shenyang, and 230,000 from Sichuan entered Xixiang.

古文：犯城固、洋县者，又东下石泉、汉阴，会汉、兴，窥商、雒。
现代文：进犯城固、洋县的贼兵又向东攻占了石泉、汉阴，会集在汉中、兴安，窥视商州和雒南。
English: The raiding bandits from Chenggu and Yang County attacked and occupied Shiquan and Hanyin to the east. They gathered in Hanzhong and Xing'an, and peeped into Shangzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：当是时，奇瑜以湖广贼尽，鼓行而西，谓贼不足平也。
现代文：这个时候，奇瑜因为湖广的贼寇剿平了，就击鼓向西进军，认为剩下的贼兵不值一剿。
English: At this time, Qiyu marched west with a drum because the bandits in Hukang were defeated, and thought that the remaining bandits were not worth a cent.

古文：乃遣游击唐通防汉中，以护藩封；遣参将贺人龙、刘迁、夏镐扼略阳、沔县，防贼西遁；遣副将杨正芳、余世任扼褒城，防贼北遁；自督副将杨化麟、柳国镇等驻洋县，防贼东遁；又檄练国事、卢象升、元默各守要害，截贼奔逸。
现代文：派游击唐通防守汉中，保护藩王；派参将贺人龙、刘迁、夏镐扼守略阳、沔县，防止贼兵西逃；派遣副将杨正芳、余世任扼守襄城，防止贼兵北逃；奇瑜自己率领副将杨化麟、柳国镇等驻扎在洋县，防止贼兵东逃；又发布檄文给练国事、卢象升、元默，要求他们分别把守要害地带，截击敌人逃窜。
English: He sent the guerrilla Tang Tong to defend Hanzhong and protect the king of the domain; sent the general He Renlong, Liu Qian, and Xia Qian to hold Liaoyang and Handan County to prevent the thief soldiers from escaping to the west; sent the vice-general Yang Zhengfang and Yu Xian to hold Xiangcheng to prevent the thief soldiers from escaping to the north; Qiyu himself led the vice-general Yang Hualin and Liu Guozhen to be stationed in Yang County to prevent the thief soldiers from escaping to the east; and issued the imperial edict to Jian Guoji, Lu Xiangsheng, and Yuan Miao

古文：贼见官军四集，大惧，悉遁入兴安之车厢峡，诸渠魁李自成、张献忠等咸在焉。
现代文：贼寇见官军四面会集，十分害怕，全部逃进了兴安的车厢峡，李自成、张献忠等大头目都在里边。
English: When the bandits saw the government army gathering on all sides, they were very afraid. They all fled into Xing'an's Boxcar Gorge. Li Zicheng, Zhang Xianzhong and other big bosses were all inside.

古文：峡四山巉立，中亘四十里，易入难出。
现代文：车厢峡四面山石陡峭，中间长达四十里，易进难出。
English: The mountains and rocks on all sides of the boxcar gorge are steep, with a length of forty miles in the middle, making it difficult to get in and out.

古文：贼误入其中，山上居民下石击，或投以炬火，山口累石塞，路绝，无所得食，困甚。
现代文：贼兵误入其中，山上的居民扔下石头打击他们，有的扔下火把，山口垒起了石寨，切断了他们的通路。
English: Rogue soldiers wandered into it by mistake, and the inhabitants of the mountain threw down stones to fight them, some threw down torches, and the mountain pass erected a stone wall to cut off their access.

古文：又大雨二旬，弓矢尽脱，马乏刍，死者过半。
现代文：又下了二十天大雨，弓箭都丢失了，马没有草吃，死去的人数超过了一半。
English: It rained heavily for another twenty days, the bows and arrows were lost, the horses had no grass to eat, and more than half of the people died.

古文：当是时，官军蹙之，可尽歼，自成等见势绌，用其党顾君恩谋以重宝贿奇瑜左右及诸将帅，伪请降。
现代文：这个时候只要官军逼上去，可以全部歼灭他们。自成等看到形势逼迫，采用了他的同伙顾君恩的诡计，用重宝贿赂了奇瑜身边的人以及各位将领，假装求降。
English: At this time, as long as the government army forced them up, they could all be annihilated. Zicheng waited to see the situation forced, adopted the trick of his accomplice Gu Jun'en, used the treasure to bribe the people around Qi Yu and the generals, pretending to surrender.

古文：奇瑜无大计，遽许之，先后籍三万六千余人，悉劳遣归农。
现代文：奇瑜没有深思，就同意了，先后收编了三万六千多贼兵，全部加以慰劳，然后遣送回乡务农。
English: Without much thought, Qi Yu agreed, and successively recruited more than 36,000 thief soldiers, consoled them all, and then sent them back to the countryside to work in agriculture.

古文：每百人以安抚官一护之，檄所过州县具糗粮传送，诸将无邀挠抚事。
现代文：平均每一百人派一个安抚官护送，发布檄文要求所经过的州县拿出粮草供应他们，递接遣送他们还乡，各地将领不得拦截，以免破坏招安的事情。
English: On average, a pacification officer was sent to escort every hundred people, and a notice was issued to require the states and counties they passed through to provide them with grain and grass, and to send them back to their hometowns. The generals of various regions were not allowed to intercept them, so as not to undermine the recruitment of peace.

古文：诸贼未大创，降非实也，既出栈道，遂不受约束，尽杀安抚官五十余人，攻掠诸州县，关中大震。
现代文：这些贼兵没有遭受大的损伤，投降并非真的，走过栈道后就不接受管制了，把五十多个安抚官杀了个净，然后攻占州县，关中一带又大为震动。
English: These robber soldiers did not suffer great damage, the surrender was not real, they did not accept control after walking through the plank road, killed more than fifty pacification officers, and then captured the state and county, and the Guanzhong area was greatly shaken.

古文：奇瑜悔失计，乃委罪他人以自解。
现代文：奇瑜后悔自己失策，就把罪名推到别人身上以求卸责。
English: Qi Yu regretted her own blunder and shifted the blame to others in order to absolve herself of responsibility.

古文：贼初叛，猝至凤翔，诱开城，守城知其诈，绐以缒城上，杀其先登者三十六人，余噪而去。
现代文：贼兵刚刚反叛时来到凤翔，哄骗驻军打开城门，守城的士兵知道他们是在诈骗，就骗说用绳索拉他们上去，杀死了先上去的三十六个人，其余的贼寇一哄而走了。
English: When the robber soldiers had just rebelled, they came to Fengxiang and tricked the garrison into opening the city gate. The soldiers guarding the city knew that they were cheating, so they lied and said that they would pull them up with ropes. They killed the first thirty-six people to go up, and the rest of the robbers left in a hurry.

古文：其犯宝鸡，亦为知县李嘉彦所挫。
现代文：他们进犯宝鸡，也被知县李嘉彦挫败。
English: They attacked Baoji and were defeated by Li Jiayuan.

古文：奇瑜遂劾嘉彦及凤翔乡官孙鹏等挠抚局，抚按官亦异心。
现代文：奇瑜就弹劾嘉彦及凤翔乡官孙鹏等破坏了招安的事局，抚按官也对招安怀有二心。
English: Qi Yu's impeachment of Yoshihiko and Fengxiang township official Sun Peng destroyed the situation of recruiting security, and the officials also had two minds about recruiting security.

古文：帝怒，切责抚按，逮嘉彦、鹏及士民五十余人。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，严厉批评了抚按官，逮捕了嘉彦、孙鹏及士绅、百姓五十多人。
English: Zhuang Rong was annoyed, severely criticized the officials, and arrested Jiahang, Sun Peng, and more than 50 gentry and commoners.

古文：奇瑜又请敕陕西、郧阳、湖广、河南、山西五巡抚各守要害，有失则治诸臣罪，冀以分己过。
现代文：奇瑜又请求朝廷传令陕西、郧阳、湖广、河南、山西的五位巡抚各自把守要害地带，有失守的就治他们的罪，试图以此来为自己分担过失。
English: Qi Yu also requested the imperial court to order the five governors of Shaanxi, Fenyang, Hukang, Henan and Shanxi to each guard the key areas, and if they failed to do so, to punish them, in an attempt to share the blame.

古文：又委罪巡抚练国事，国事亦被逮。
现代文：后来他又委罪于练国事，国事也被逮捕入狱。
English: Later, he was charged with practicing state affairs, and was also arrested and imprisoned for state affairs.

古文：给事中顾国宝劾奇瑜误封疆，诏解任候勘。
现代文：给事中顾国宝弹劾奇瑜贻误封疆大事，庄烈帝下诏让奇瑜解除官职，等候调查。
English: Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu

古文：御史傅永淳复劾奇瑜解陇州围报首功不实，诏除名，锦衣官逮讯。
现代文：御史傅永淳又弹劾奇瑜解陇州之围时虚报了斩敌人数，庄烈帝就下诏把奇瑜除了名，让锦衣官把他逮捕，加以审讯。
English: Grand Historian Fu Yongchun also impeached Qi Yu for falsely reporting the number of enemies killed when he broke the siege of Zhangzhou, and Emperor Zhuangliu issued an edict to remove Qi Yu's name and let the brocade officer arrest and interrogate him.

古文：已，分为三，自颍州犯凤阳皇陵，中州所在告急。
现代文：九年六月，奇瑜被贬，充军边疆去了。当初奇瑜在南阳做官时，唐王杀了他的长子，并且想一同废除其长子的儿子聿键。
English: In June of the ninth year, Qi Yu was demoted and sent to the military frontier. When Qi Yu was working as an official in Nanyang, Tang Wang killed his eldest son and wanted to abolish his eldest son's son, Zhai Jian, together.

古文：八年夏，默被逮去。久之，得释归，八年卒。
现代文：靠了奇瑜的帮助，长孙的地位才得以保住，后来聿键在福建自立为帝，想召奇瑜去做东阁大学士，因为道路遥远，奇瑜没有收到任命令，死在了家里。
English: Relying on the help of Qi Yu, the status of the eldest grandson was able to be preserved. Later, Zou Jian established himself as an emperor in Fujian and wanted to call Qi Yu to become a Dongge University scholar. Because the road was far away, Qi Yu did not receive the appointment order and died at home.

古文：熊文灿，贵州永宁卫人。
现代文：熊文灿，贵州永宁卫人。
English: Xiong Wencang, Guizhou Yongning Guardsman.

古文：万历三十五年进士。
现代文：万历三十五年中进士。
English: In the 35th year of the Manchurian calendar, he became a junior high school graduate.

古文：授贵州推官，迁礼部主事，历郎中。
现代文：初任黄州推官，后来升为礼部主事，又做过郎中。
English: He was first appointed as the Huangzhou magistrate, and later he was promoted to the head of the ceremonial department, and he also worked as a groom.

古文：出封琉球还，擢山东左参政、山西按察使、山东右布政使。
现代文：出使琉球举行加封典礼后回来，先后升为山东左参政、山西按察使、山东右布政使。
English: He was sent to Ryukyu to hold the investiture ceremony, and when he returned, he was successively promoted to Shandong Zuo Sanzheng, Shanxi Aza Sanzheng, and Shandong Ubu Sanzheng.

古文：忧归，自是徙家蕲水。
现代文：因守丧弃官回乡，从此把家迁往蕲水去了。
English: After returning to his hometown due to the abandonment of his duties, he moved his family to Surabaya.

古文：崇祯元年，起福建左布政使。三月，就拜右佥都御史，巡抚其地。
现代文：崇祯元年，文灿起任福建布政使，未上任就在三月里改官任右佥都御史，巡抚福建。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Wen Can was appointed as the political envoy of Fujian Province. Before he took office, he was transferred to the post of the governor of Fujian Province in March.

古文：海上故多剧盗，袁进、李忠既降，杨六、杨七及郑芝龙继起。
现代文：福建沿海原本有许多大盗，从袁进、李忠投降后，杨六、杨七及郑芝龙又相继起来。
English: Originally, there were many great thieves along the coast of Fujian. After the surrender of Yuan Jin and Li Zhong, Yang Li, Yang Qi and Zheng Zhilong came up one after another.

古文：总兵官俞咨皋招六、七降，芝龙猖獗如故。
现代文：总兵官俞咨皋招降了杨六、杨七，芝龙还像原来一样猖獗。
English: Yang Li and Yang Qi were promoted and demoted to general-in-chief, and Zhilong was still as rampant as before.

古文：然芝龙常败都司洪先春，释不追；获一游击，不杀；咨皋战败，纵之走。
现代文：不过芝龙常打败都司洪先春，却放着不追；抓获官军一名游击，但不杀他；咨皋被打败后也放他逃离不追。
English: However, Zhilong often defeated the general secretary Hong Xianchun, but did not pursue him; captured a guerrilla of the government army, but did not kill him; after being defeated, he also let him escape without chasing.

古文：当事知其可抚，遣使谕降之。
现代文：当权者知道芝龙可以招安，就派使者过去劝降了他。
English: The authorities knew that Zhilong could bring peace, so they sent an envoy to persuade him to surrender.

古文：文灿至，善遇芝龙，使为己用。
现代文：文灿到来后，对芝龙很好，使他能够为自己所用。
English: After Wen Can arrived, he was very kind to Zhiron, so that he could use him for himself.

古文：其党李魁奇再降，再叛去，芝龙击擒之。
现代文：芝龙的同伙李魁奇两次投降又两次反叛，芝龙追击并活捉了他。
English: Zhilong's companion Li Kuiqi surrendered twice and rebelled twice. Zhilong chased and captured him alive.

古文：海警渐息，而钟斌又起。
现代文：海边的战事刚慢慢平息下来，而钟斌又起来作乱了。
English: The fighting on the seashore had just calmed down, but Zhongbin rose up again to cause trouble.

古文：斌初亦就抚，后复叛，寇福州。
现代文：钟斌当初也曾接受过招安，后来又反叛，攻打福州。
English: Zhong Bin initially accepted the offer, but later rebelled and attacked Fuzhou.

古文：文灿诱斌往泉州，令芝龙击败之。
现代文：文灿引诱他到泉州，命令芝龙打败了他。
English: Wen Can lured him to Quanzhou and ordered Zhiron to defeat him.

古文：既而蹙之大洋，斌投海死。
现代文：不久把他逼到大洋里，钟斌投海死了。
English: Soon he was forced into the ocean, and Zhongbin drowned.

古文：闽中屡平巨寇，皆芝龙力，文灿亦叙功增秩焉。
现代文：福建多次平息大盗都是芝龙出的力，文灿也得到记功，提升了官级。
English: Fujian many times to quell the bandits are the power of Zhilong, Wencan also get credit, promoted to the official level.

古文：五年二月，擢文灿兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督两广军务，兼巡抚广东。
现代文：五年二月，朝廷提升文灿为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督两广军务，兼巡抚广东。
English: In February of the fifth year, the imperial court promoted Wen Can to the position of the right attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital, the governor of the military affairs of the two provinces, and the governor of Guangdong.

古文：先是，海寇钟灵秀既降复叛，为芝龙所擒，其党溃入长汀，转掠江西属邑，文灿檄芝龙屡败贼。
现代文：在此之前，海盗钟凌秀投降后又反叛，被芝龙抓获，他的同伙战败后进入长汀，转移到江西所属的城镇去进行掳掠，文灿传令芝龙多次打败了他们。
English: Prior to this, the pirate Zhong Lingxiu rebelled after surrendering and was captured by Zhilong. After his defeat, his accomplices entered Changting and transferred to the towns belonging to Jiangxi to carry out plundering. Wen Can ordered Zhilong to defeat them many times.

古文：而福建有红夷之患，海盗刘香乘之，连犯闽、广沿海邑，帝以责文灿。
现代文：福建因为有红夷作乱，海盗刘香趁这个机会接连进犯福建、广东的沿海城市，庄烈帝为此批评了文灿。
English: In Fujian, due to the rebellion of the Hongyi, the pirate Liu Xiang took the opportunity to attack the coastal cities of Fujian and Guangdong one after another. Emperor Zhuang criticized Wencan for this.

古文：文灿不能讨，乃议招抚，贼佯许之。
现代文：文灿不能讨平贼兵，就打算招降它，贼兵也假装同意他的招安。
English: Unable to defeat the bandits, Wen Can planned to invite them to surrender, and the bandits pretended to agree to his invitation.

古文：参政洪云蒸，长沙人，初官广西参政，尝搜灵秀余党，斩三十余级，尽毁其巢。
现代文：参政洪云蒸，是长沙人，起初在广西做参政，曾经搜捕过凌秀的余党，斩获过三十多首级，把贼窝全部给捣毁了。
English: Hong Yunmushi, a Changsha resident, first participated in politics in Guangxi. He once searched for Ling Xiu's remaining party members, captured more than 30 heads, and destroyed all the thieves' dens.

古文：文灿乃令云蒸与副使康承祖，参将夏之本、张一杰入贼舟宣谕，俱被执。
现代文：文灿竟命令云蒸与副使康承祖，参将夏之本、张一杰进入贼船中宣布指示，结果他们都给扣作人质。
English: In the end, Wen Can ordered Yun Steam and his deputy, Kang Cheng Zu, as well as the vice-commanders, Xia Ben and Zhang Yijie, to enter the pirate ship to announce the instructions. As a result, they were all taken hostage.

古文：文灿惧罪，奏诸臣信贼自陷。
现代文：文灿怕自己获罪，上书说是这几位大臣相信贼兵的话，自投罗网。
English: Fearing that he would be incriminated, Wen Can said in his letter that these ministers believed the words of the thief-soldiers and got themselves caught in the net.

古文：给事中朱国栋劾之，诏贬秩，戴罪自效。
现代文：给事中朱国栋上书弹劾文灿，庄烈帝下诏贬了文灿的官，让他戴罪办贼，立功自赎。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhu Guodong wrote a letter to impeach Wencang, and the solemn emperor issued an edict to demote Wencang's official, let him bear the crime of being a thief, and redeem himself.

古文：八年，芝龙合广东兵击香于田尾远洋。
现代文：八年，芝龙联合广东部队在田尾岛附近的远洋中进攻刘香。
English: In 1978, Zhilong and Guangdong forces attacked Liu Xiang in the middle of the ocean near Tianwei Island.

古文：香胁云蒸止兵，云蒸大呼曰： 我矢死报国，急击勿失！ 
现代文：刘香胁持着云蒸要求官兵停止进攻，云蒸大声喊叫说： 我誓死报国，你们马上打，勿失良机！ 
English: Liu Xiangwu, holding Yun Steam, asked the officers and soldiers to stop the attack. Yun Steam shouted loudly, "I swear to defend my country to the death. You must fight immediately. Don't miss the opportunity!"

古文：遂遇害。
现代文：于是遇害了。
English: She was killed.

古文：香势蹙，自焚溺死，承祖等脱还。
现代文：刘香走投无路，引火自焚，溺死在大洋中。承祖等人逃脱回来了。
English: Liu Xiang was cornered, set himself on fire and drowned in the ocean. Cheng Zu and others escaped and returned.

古文：贼党千余人诣浙江归款，海盗尽平。
现代文：刘香的余党一千多人后来到浙江归降，海盗才全部削平了。
English: Liu Xiang's remaining party of more than a thousand people later came to Zhejiang to surrender, and the pirates were all leveled.

古文：文灿官闽、广久，积赀无算，厚以珍宝结中外权要，谋久镇岭南。
现代文：文灿在福建、广东做官多年，积聚的钱财不计其数，他用大量的珍宝结交朝廷内外的权要人物，打算长期镇守岭南。
English: Wen Can had been an official in Fujian and Guangdong for many years and had accumulated countless wealth. He used a large number of precious treasures to make friends with important figures inside and outside the imperial court, and planned to keep control of Lingnan for a long time.

古文：会帝疑刘香未死，且不识文灿为人，遣中使假广西采办名，往觇之。
现代文：恰好这时庄烈帝怀疑刘香没死，并且不了解文灿的为人，派了一名宦官借到广西采办的名义来侦察他。
English: Just at this time, Zhuang Rongdi suspected that Liu Xiang was not dead, and did not know Wen Can as a person, and sent a eunuch to Guangxi to investigate him in the name of procurement.

古文：既至，文灿盛有所赠遗，留饮十日。
现代文：这位宦官来后，文灿很送了他一些礼物，留他喝了十天酒。
English: After the eunuch came, Wen Can gave him some gifts and let him drink wine for ten days.

古文：中使喜，语及中原寇乱，文灿方中酒，击案骂曰： 诸臣误国耳。
现代文：宦官高兴之际谈到了中原地区盗贼作乱的事，文灿正值酒酣耳热，就拍案骂道 ：全是那帮大臣耽误国事。
English: When the eunuch was happy, he talked about the bandits in the Central Plains causing trouble. When Wen Can was drunk, he scolded: It's all those ministers who are delaying state affairs.

古文：若文灿往，讵令鼠辈至是哉！ 
现代文：如果是我文灿去，怎么会让这班盗贼猖狂成这样！ 
English: If I were Wen Can, how could I let this group of thieves become so rampant!

古文：中使起立曰： 吾非往广西采办也，衔上命觇公。
现代文：宦官站起来说 ：我事实上不是去广西采办，而是奉皇上的命令来侦察你的。
English: The eunuch stood up and said, "Actually, I did not go to Guangxi to procure it, but on the Emperor's orders, I came to scout you."

古文：公信有当世才，非公不足办此贼。 
现代文：先生的确有盖世之才，除了你没人能惩治中原的贼寇啊。 
English: You really have a talent for publicity. No one but you can punish the bandits in the Central Plains.

古文：文灿出不意，悔失言，随言有五难四不可。
现代文：文灿当时说话出于无意，这时后悔失言，便说办理这事有五大难、四不可。
English: At that time, Wen Can spoke unintentionally, and then regretted his slip of the tongue, and said that there were five difficulties and four impossibilities in handling this matter.

古文：中使曰： 吾见上自请之，若上无所吝，即公不得辞矣。 
现代文：宦官说： 回去见到皇上我自己替你请求，如果皇上舍得派用先生时，先生就推辞不得啦！ 
English: The eunuch said, "Go back and see the emperor. I will make a request on your behalf. If the emperor is willing to send me, I will have to refuse!"

古文：文灿辞穷，应曰 诺 。
现代文：文灿无言以对，只好说好吧。
English: Wen Can was speechless and had no choice but to say okay.

古文：中使还朝，果言之帝。
现代文：宦官回到宫中果然向庄烈帝讲了。
English: When the eunuch returned to the palace, he did indeed tell Emperor Zhuang.

古文：初，文灿徙蕲水，与邑人姚明恭为姻妮，明恭官詹事，又与杨嗣昌善。
现代文：早先文灿迁往蕲水后，与同乡人姚明恭结为亲家，明恭后来做了詹事，又跟杨嗣昌相好。
English: Earlier, after Wencan moved to Surabaya, he married fellow villager Yao Mingyong. Later, Mingyong had an affair and fell in love with Yang Shichang.

古文：嗣昌握兵柄，承帝眷，以帝急平贼，冀得一人自助，明恭因荐文灿，且曰： 此有内援可引也。 
现代文：嗣昌当时掌握着军事大权，受到庄烈帝的宠用。因为庄烈帝平贼心急，所以嗣昌希望能得到一个人帮助自己。明恭于是向他推荐了文灿，并且讲 ：这个人在宫廷中可是有关系好用的。 
English: At that time, Tsuchimasa held great military power and was favored by Emperor Zhuang. Because Emperor Zhuang was anxious, Tsuchimasa hoped to get someone to help him. Ming Gong then recommended Wencan to him and said, "This man is well connected in the court."

古文：嗣昌喜，遂荐之。
现代文：嗣昌很高兴，于是推荐了文灿。
English: Tsuchimasa was delighted and recommended Wencan.

古文：十年四月，拜文灿兵部尚书兼右副都御史，代王家祯总理南畿、河南、山西、陕西、湖广、四川军务。
现代文：十年四月，庄烈帝任命文灿为兵部尚书兼右副都御史，让他接替王家桢总理南畿、河南、山西、陕西、湖广、四川军务。
English: In April of the 10th year, Emperor Zhuangliu appointed Wencan as the head of the military department and the right vice-governor of the capital, and let him succeed Wang Jiaxuan, the prime minister of Nanki, Henan, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Hunan, and Sichuan.

古文：文灿拜命，即请左良玉所将六千人为己军，而大募粤人及乌蛮精火器者一二千人以自护，弓刀甲胄甚整。
现代文：文灿接受任命后就请把左良玉部下的六千人作为自己的部队，又大力招募了广东及乌蛮中精通火器的一两千人，调来做自己的护卫，军事装备很是齐全。
English: After accepting the appointment, Wen Can asked the six thousand soldiers under Zuo Liang Yutu to be his troops, and vigorously recruited one or two thousand people who were proficient in firearms in Guangdong and Wuman, and transferred them to be his guards. The military equipment was very complete.

古文：次庐山，谒所善僧空隐。
现代文：军队驻扎在庐山时，文灿去拜访一位要好的和尚空隐。
English: When the army was stationed in Lushan, Wen Can went to visit a good monk Kuyin.

古文：僧迎谓曰： 公误矣。 
现代文：和尚一迎出来就说 ：先生犯了大错呀！ 
English: As soon as the monk greeted him, he said, "Sir, you've made a big mistake!"

古文：文灿屏人问故，僧曰： 公自度所将兵足制贼死命乎？ 曰： 不能。 
现代文：文灿喝退左右，问他是什么原因这么讲。和尚说 ：你认为你带领的兵能制贼兵于死地吗？ 文灿说 ：不能。 
English: Wen Can shrugged his shoulders and asked him why he said that. The monk said, "Do you think that the soldiers you lead can defeat the bandits?" Wen Can said, "No."

古文：曰： 诸将有可属大事、当一面、不烦指挥而定者乎？ 
现代文：和尚又说 ：你手下的将领中间有可以托以大事，让他独当一面，不烦你指挥就能办成事的吗？ 
English: The monk also said: Are there any generals under your command who can be entrusted with important matters, who can be left alone and who can get things done without you having to direct them?

古文：曰： 未知何如也。 
现代文：文灿说 ：没有把握。 
English: Wen Can said, "I'm not sure."

古文：曰： 二者既不能当贼，上特以名使公，厚责望，一不效，诛矣。 
现代文：和尚说： 二者都架不住贼寇，皇上只是看你的名声用了你，把无限希望寄托在你身上，万一你不能成功，可就要掉脑袋了！ 
English: The monk said, "Both cannot stand the thief and the robber. The emperor just sees your reputation and uses you. He pins his infinite hopes on you. If you do not succeed, he will cut off your head!"

古文：文灿却立良久，曰： 抚之何如？ 
现代文：文灿退后几步，思索良久才问道 ：招安他们怎么样？ 
English: Wen Can took a few steps back and pondered for a long time before asking: How about recruiting them?

古文：僧曰： 吾料公必抚。然流寇非海寇比，公其慎之。 
现代文：和尚说 ：我料你一定招安，但是流寇跟海盗不同，你要慎重啊！ 
English: The monk said, "I'm sure you'll be safe, but roving bandits are different from pirates. You have to be careful!"

古文：文灿去，抵安庆，帝所遣中官刘元斌、卢九德监勇卫营军者亦至。
现代文：文灿离开庐山后进驻安庆。这时庄烈帝派领勇卫营的宦官刘元斌、卢九德也到来了。
English: After Wen Can left Shaoshan, he was stationed in Anqing. At this time, Liu Yuanbin and Lu Jiude, the eunuchs sent by Zhuo Liangdi to lead the Yongwei Camp, also arrived.

古文：良玉宿将桀骜，不受文吏节制，会其下与粤军不和，大诟。文灿不得已，遣还南兵，然良玉军实不为用。
现代文：良玉这员老将桀骜不驯，不愿接受文官的节制。恰好这时他的部下与广东军不和，大肆吵闹，文灿迫不得已，遣回了南方的军队。但是良玉的部队事实上不能为他所用。
English: Liang Yu, a veteran, was unruly and unwilling to accept the restraint of civilian officials. It was just at this time that his subordinates were at odds with the Guangdong army and made a lot of noise. Wen Can was forced to send back the southern army. However, Liang Yu's troops could not actually be used by him.

古文：嗣昌言于帝，乃以边将冯举、苗有才兵五千人隶焉。
现代文：嗣昌对庄烈帝讲了这事，庄烈帝就让边防将领冯举、苗有才的五千人隶属文灿部下。
English: Tsuchang told Emperor Zhuang of this, and Emperor Zhuang made the border guard general Feng Ju and five thousand talented seedlings subordinate to Wen Can.

古文：有才败于真阳，而京营将黄得功连破贼兵，威甚振。
现代文：有才在真阳战败，只有京营的将领黄得功连连打败贼兵，威名大振。
English: Only a few were defeated in Zhenyang. Only the general of the Beijing camp, Huang, succeeded in defeating the bandits, and his reputation was greatly enhanced.

古文：当是时，嗣昌建 四正六隅 之策，增兵饷大半，期灭贼，贼颇惧。
现代文：当时嗣昌提出了 四正六隅 的策略，增补了一大半官兵和军饷，试图一举消灭贼寇，贼兵相当害怕。
English: At that time, Tsuchimasa proposed a four-cornered and six-cornered strategy, added more than half of the officers and soldiers, and tried to eliminate the bandits at one stroke. The bandits were quite afraid.

古文：及文灿至，京军屡捷，益惧。
现代文：等文灿来后，京军多次告捷，贼兵更加害怕了。
English: After the arrival of Wen Can, the Beijing army won many victories, and the robber soldiers were even more afraid.

古文：文灿顾决计招降。
现代文：只是文灿决心已定，要招降贼兵。
English: However, Wen Can had already made up his mind that he wanted to recruit the rebel soldiers.

古文：初抵安庆，即遣人招张献忠、刘国能，二人听命。
现代文：才进驻安庆那阵，文灿就派人招降张献忠、刘国能，献忠与国能听从了招安。
English: It was only when he was stationed in Anqing that Wen Can sent people to recruit Zhang Xianzhong and Liu Guoneng, and Xianzhong and Guoneng obeyed.

古文：乃益刊招降檄，布通都。又请尽迁民与粟闭城中，贼无所掠，当自退。
现代文：文灿于是大量张贴招降的檄文，又奏请把居民和粮食全都迁入城市里关闭起来，认为贼兵没有什么东西可以掠夺就会自行让步了。
English: Therefore, Wen Can posted a large number of obituaries calling for surrender, and also called for all residents and food to be moved into the city and closed, thinking that the robber soldiers would have nothing to plunder and would give in on their own.

古文：帝怒，谯让文灿。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，把文灿训斥了一番。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was annoyed and reprimanded Wen Can.

古文：嗣昌亦心非之，既已任之，则曲为文灿解。
现代文：嗣昌心里也不赞成文灿的办法，但既然已经任用了他，就只好设法替他辩解。
English: In his heart, Tsuchimasa did not approve of Wencan's approach, but since he had already appointed him, he had no choice but to try to defend him.

古文：因其请，畀以畿辅、山西兵各三千。
现代文：根据文灿的申请，朝廷把畿辅、山西的部队各三千人拨给了他。
English: According to Wen Can's application, the imperial court assigned him three thousand troops each from Kiyosu and Shanxi.

古文：明年，国能果降，而献忠袭据谷城。
现代文：第二年，国能果然投降了，张献忠攻占了谷城。
English: In the second year, Guoneng surrendered, and Zhang Xianzhong captured Gucheng.

古文：会得功又大破贼舞阳，马士秀、杜应金夜半降信阳城下。
现代文：这时得功又在舞阳大败贼兵，马士秀、杜应金半夜里出降，信阳城拿了下来。
English: At this time, Ma Shixiu and Du Yingjin made a great achievement in defeating the bandits in the middle of the night, and took down Xinyang City.

古文：献忠为左良玉所创，几被擒，其下饥困多散去。
现代文：献忠被良玉重创，几乎被抓获，他的部下饥饿、疲惫，逃走了很多人。
English: Xian Zhong was hit hard by the good guys and was almost captured, his men were hungry and tired, and many fled.

古文：献忠穷蹙，亦因陈洪范以降。
现代文：献忠形势窘迫，也通过陈洪范投降了。
English: With the situation of loyalty in a tight spot, Chen Hongfan also surrendered.

古文：于是嗣昌议功罪，绌洪承畴、曹变蛟等，而称文灿功焉。
现代文：这时嗣昌在评定功过时，贬了洪承畴、曹变蛟等，称赞了文灿的功绩。
English: At this time, Zichang was out of date in assessing the merits, and belittled Hong Chengzhuang, Cao Zhenyao, etc., and praised Wencan's merits.

古文：已而京军解遂平围，斩获三千有奇。
现代文：后来京军解除了遂平之围，斩获了三千多贼兵首级。
English: Later, the Beijing army lifted the siege of Suiping and captured the heads of more than three thousand bandits.

古文：时文灿在裕州，马进忠、罗汝才十三家贼聚南阳，文灿下令，杀贼者偿死。贼不肯从，则赍金帛酒牢犒之，名曰 求贼 。
现代文：当时文灿在裕州，马进忠、罗汝才十三家贼兵聚结在南阳。文灿下令杀死归顺的贼兵要偿命，所以贼兵不肯听命时，官军就用金帛、酒肉犒劳他们，当时称为 求贼 。
English: At that time, Wencan was in Yuzhou, and thirteen robber soldiers, including Ma Jinzhong and Luo Ruzai, were gathered in Nanyang. Wencan ordered that the robber soldiers who surrendered should be killed, so when the robber soldiers refused to obey orders, the government army would reward them with gold ingots, wine and meat. At that time, it was called "soliciting robbers."

古文：帝诇得状，曰： 文灿大言无实。 
现代文：庄烈帝侦察到这种情况后说： 文灿说大话，并无其实。 
English: After observing this situation, Zhuang Rongdi said, "Wen Can is talking big, but it is not true.

古文：文灿恐。
现代文：文灿听说后很是害怕。
English: After hearing this, Wen Can was very scared.

古文：孙传庭出关击贼，文灿不救，而嗣昌已入政府掌中枢矣。
现代文：孙传庭出关去攻击贼兵时，文灿没有去援救，而嗣昌这时已经进入政府中掌握了中央大权。
English: When Sun Chuanting went out to attack the bandits, Wen Can did not come to his rescue, but Sychang had already entered the government and seized the central power.

古文：九月，文灿次襄阳，贼分踞郧、襄诸险。
现代文：九月，文灿驻军襄阳，贼兵分别盘踞在郧阳、襄阳一带的各处险要位置上。
English: In September, Wen Can stationed troops in Yangyang, and the bandits were entrenched in various critical positions around Shenyang and Yangyang.

古文：诸将请战，文灿议分兵。卢九德曰： 兵分则力弱，一失利，全军摇矣。莫若厚集其力而合击之。 
现代文：诸将请求出战，文灿主张兵分几路，卢九德说 ：兵力分散后力量薄弱，一处失利，全军就会动摇，不如联合各部分力量一起攻打。 
English: The generals requested to go to war, Wen Can advocated the division of troops into several routes, and Lu Jide said: After the dispersion of troops, the strength is weak, one defeat, the whole army will be shaken, it is better to unite all parts of the forces to attack together.

古文：众曰： 善。 乃以佥事张大经监大将左良玉、陈洪范军，以通判孔贞会监副将龙在田军，战于双沟，大破之，斩首二千余级。
现代文：大家都说好，于是文灿让佥事张大任监督大将左良玉、陈洪范的军队，让通判孔贞会监督副将龙在田的军队，在双沟跟贼兵开战，大败贼兵，斩获两千多首级。
English: Everyone said yes, so Wen Can asked Zhang Dairing to supervise the army of General Zuo Liangyu and Chen Hongfan, and let Tong Zhan Kong Zhengyi supervise the army of Vice-General Long Zetian, and went to war with the bandits in Shuanggou, defeated the bandits and won more than two thousand heads.

古文：罗汝才、惠登相率九营走均州，李万庆率三营走光、固。
现代文：罗汝才、惠登相率领的九营贼兵逃往均州，李万庆率领的三营逃往光山、固始去了。
English: Nine battalions of bandits led by Luo Rucai and Hui Dengxiang fled to Junzhou, and three battalions led by Li Wanqing fled to Guangshan and Gushi.

古文：十一月，京师戒严，召洪承畴、孙传庭入卫。
现代文：十一月，京师戒严，朝廷召洪承畴、孙传庭入卫京师。
English: In November, the capital was placed under martial law, and the imperial court summoned Hong Chengzhuang and Sun Chuanting to the capital.

古文：汝才等以为讨己也，惧而叩太和山提督中官，求抚于文灿，许之。
现代文：汝才等以为要讨伐自己，非常害怕，就去求见太和山提督中官，请求接受文灿的招安，文灿同意了。
English: You were so scared that you thought you would have to fight against yourself, so you went to see Vice Admiral Taewashan and asked to be recruited by Wencan. Wencan agreed.

古文：处汝才及一丈青、小秦王、一条龙四营于郧县，处登相及王国宁、常德安、杨友贤、王光恩五营于均州。
现代文：他把汝才及一丈青、小秦王、一条龙四营安置在郧县，把惠登相及王国宁、常德安、杨龙贤、王光恩五营安置在均州。
English: He placed the four battalions of Yu Cai, Ijo Qing, Xiao Qin Wang and Ichiro Ryu in Handan County, and the five battalions of Hui Deng Xiang, Wang Guoning, Chang De'an, Yang Longxian and Wang Guang'en in Junzhou.

古文：上言： 臣于李万庆、贺一龙、马光玉及顺天王主剿，他皆主抚。
现代文：然后上书说 ：我对李万庆、贺一龙、马光玉及临天王等主张剿灭，其他的都主张招安。
English: Then the petition said: I advocate the annihilation of Li Wanqing, He Yilong, Ma Guangyu and Lin Tianwang, and the others all advocate recruiting peace.

古文：请赦汝才等罪，授之官。 
现代文：我请求朝廷赦免汝才等人的罪过，授给他们一个官职。 
English: I ask the court to pardon the sins of you and others and grant them an official post.

古文：可之。
现代文：朝廷批准了。
English: The Imperial Court approved.

古文：时京军、良玉军皆以入卫行，马士秀、杜应金遂叛于许州。
现代文：当时京军、良玉的军队都因入卫京师离开了，马士秀、杜应金就在许州反叛。
English: At that time, the Beijing army and Liangyu's army all left the Beijing division due to the entry into the imperial guard, and Ma Shixiu and Du Yingjin rebelled in Huzhou.

古文：初，士秀等降，良玉以其众处许之郊外。
现代文：早先，士秀等人投降后，良玉把他们的兵力安置在许州郊外。
English: Earlier, after the surrender of Shixiu and others, Liangyu stationed their troops in the outskirts of Xuzhou.

古文：许，大州也，良玉诸将寄孥与贿焉。
现代文：许州是个大州，良玉等将领都把自己的妻子、儿女和财物寄存在那里，良玉长久出征不回。
English: Huzhou is a large province, and generals such as Liangyu have all sent their wives, children and belongings there. Liangyu will not return from the war for a long time.

古文：良玉久征不归，士秀、应金在文灿军中，伪请急，假良玉军号入城。
现代文：士秀、应金在文灿的军队里，一天假装请假，借用了良玉的旗号混进许州城。
English: Shixiu and Yingjin were in Wencan's army. They pretended to take a day off and borrowed Liangyu's banner to sneak into Xuzhou City.

古文：夜半，兵从府第出，烧城南楼，劫库，杀官吏，挈其赀投万庆。
现代文：夜半时分，贼兵从府中冲出，烧毁了城南的碉楼，抢劫了仓库，杀死官吏，带着财宝投奔了李万庆。
English: At midnight, the robbers rushed out of the capital, burned the mirage south of the city, robbed the warehouse, killed the officials, and took the treasure to Li Wanqing.

古文：万庆者，贼魁射塌天也。
现代文：万庆即贼首射塌天。
English: Wanqing is a thief's head shot into the sky.

古文：十二年三月，良玉还，破降马进忠，使刘国能击降万庆，士秀、应金亦再降。
现代文：十二年三月，良玉班师回来，打败并收降了马进忠，又派刘国能进攻并招降了李万庆，士秀、应金也再次投降了。
English: In March of the 12th year, the Liangyu squadron returned, defeated and defeated Ma Jinzhong, and sent Liu Guoneng to attack and recruit Li Wanqing. Shixiu and Yingjin also surrendered again.

古文：顺天王已前死，其党顺义王为其下所杀。
现代文：顺天王在此之前已经死去，他的同伙顺义王被部下杀死了。
English: Shun Tianwang had already died before this, and his comrade Shun Yiwang was killed by his subordinates.

古文：文灿遂上言： 臣兵威震慑，降者接踵。
现代文：文灿于是上书说 ：我的部队威震贼胆，投降过来的接连不断。
English: Wen Can then wrote: "My troops are fearless, and they have surrendered one after another.

古文：十三家之贼，惟革、左及马光玉三部尚稽天诛，可岁月平也。 
现代文：十三家贼兵中只有革里眼、左金王及马光玉三部尚未得到应有的讨伐，不过一年半载也就可以平定了。 
English: Of the Thirteen Thieves and Soldiers, only three of them have yet to be defeated, namely, Crimson Eyes, Left Gold King, and Ma Guangyu, but they can be defeated within a year and a half.

古文：帝优诏报之。
现代文：庄烈帝以赞许的口吻下诏书回答了他。
English: Emperor Taizong issued a euphemistically-worded edict in response.

古文：初，张献忠之降也，拥兵万人踞谷城，索十万人饷，文灿及中外要人曰与之。
现代文：当初，张献忠投降后拥兵万人，盘踞在谷城，却向朝廷要十万人的粮饷。文灿及朝廷内外的要人都说给他。
English: At first, after Zhang Xianzhong surrendered, he had ten thousand soldiers and was entrenched in Gucheng, but he asked the imperial court for food for one hundred thousand people. Wen Can and the dignitaries inside and outside the imperial court told him.

古文：为请官、请地、请关防矣，献忠列军状曰请备遣，既而三檄其兵不应，朝野知献忠必叛也。
现代文：在他们替献忠向皇上请求官职，请求地盘，请得关防大印以后，献忠写下状子说愿意听候调遣。后来朝廷多次传檄召他的部队，他都不理，朝廷内外都知道献忠一定会反叛的。
English: After they asked the emperor for an official post and a site for Xian Zhong, and requested the Great Seal of Defense, Xian Zhong wrote a letter saying that he was willing to be transferred. Later, the court repeatedly summoned his troops, but he ignored them. Both inside and outside the court knew that Xian Zhong would definitely rebel.

古文：其后，汝才降，不肯释甲。
现代文：以后，汝才投降了，也不肯交出武器。
English: Only after that did you surrender and refuse to hand over your weapons.

古文：及进忠、万庆等并降，文灿以为得策，谓天下且无贼也。
现代文：等到进忠、万庆等也都投降时，文灿更自以为得法，以为天下从今往后将没有贼寇了。
English: When Jinzhong, Wanqing and others also surrendered, Wen Can thought that he had won the law, and that there would be no thieves and robbers in the world from now on.

古文：五月，献忠遂反于谷城，劫汝才于房县，于是九营俱反。
现代文：五月，献忠在谷城反叛，在房县劫持汝才后，九营贼兵都反了起来。
English: In May, Xian Zhong rebelled in Gu Cheng, and after the abduction of Ru Cai in Fang County, the nine battalions of thieves all rebelled.

古文：初，均州五营惧见讨，自疑，相与歃血拒献忠，无何亦叛去。
现代文：最初，均州五营担心受到讨伐，犹豫不决，一起歃血结盟抵抗献忠，不久也反叛而去了。
English: At first, the five battalions of Junzhou were worried about being attacked, hesitated, fought together to form an alliance to resist loyalty, and soon rebelled.

古文：帝闻变，大惊，削文灿官，戴罪视事。
现代文：庄烈帝得知事变发生，大吃一惊，削去了文灿的官职，让他戴罪理事。
English: When Emperor Zhuang was surprised to learn of the incident, he stripped Wencan of his official position and made him a criminal director.

古文：七月，良玉击献忠罗英山，败绩。
现代文：七月，良玉在罗犭英山进攻献忠，被打败了。
English: In July, Liangyu attacked and defeated Xianlu in Luoqian Yingshan.

古文：帝大怒，命嗣昌来代。
现代文：庄烈帝十分恼火，命令嗣昌来取代文灿。
English: Emperor Zhuang was very angry and ordered Zichang to replace Wencan.

古文：嗣昌已至军，即遣使逮文灿下狱，坐大辟，所亲姚明恭柄国而不能救也。
现代文：嗣昌来到军队中，就派遣使者把文灿逮捕入狱，判为死刑。文灿的亲戚姚明恭掌着大权也无法救他一命。
English: When Sychang came to the army, he sent an envoy to arrest Wencan and sentence him to death. Wencan's relative Yao Mingjun, who held great power, could not save his life.

古文：并杀之。郑崇俭，字大章，宁乡人。
现代文：十三年十月，文灿终于被处死于街市之上。郑崇俭，字大章，乡宁人。
English: In October of the thirteenth year, Wencang was finally executed and died on the street market. Zheng Chongjian, a famous poet, was from the town of Ning.

古文：万历四十四年进士。
现代文：万历四十四年榜进士。
English: Forty-four years later, he became a priest.

古文：授河南府推官，历济南兵备副使。
现代文：初任河南府推官，又做过济南兵备副使。
English: He was the first governor of Henan Province, and also served as the deputy envoy of Jinan for military preparedness.

古文：崇祯初，迁陕西右参政。屡迁右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
现代文：崇祯初年升为陕西右参政，后多次升转担任了右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
English: In his first year, he was promoted to the right to participate in politics in Shaanxi Province. Later, he was promoted and transferred several times to serve as the right magistrate of the capital and governor of Ningxia.

古文：数败套寇，赉银币，世荫锦衣副千户。
现代文：在此期间，他几次打败河套的敌人，朝廷赐给他银币，荫封他的子孙为世袭锦衣副千户。
English: During this period, he defeated Hetao's enemies several times, the court gave him silver coins, and sealed his children and grandchildren as hereditary brocade deputy thousand households.

古文：十二年正月，擢兵部右侍郎，代洪承畴总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：十二年正月，崇俭升任兵部右侍郎，接替洪承畴总督陕西三边军务。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, Chong Jian was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the military department, succeeding Hong Chengjian, the governor of Shaanxi, in the trilateral military affairs.

古文：五月，张献忠反谷城，罗汝才等九营皆反，兴安告警。
现代文：五月，张献忠在谷城反叛，罗汝才等九营也都反起来，兴安发出战警。
English: In May, Zhang Xianzhong rebelled in Gucheng, and nine battalions including Luo Rucai also rebelled, and Xing'an sent out military police.

古文：总理熊文灿请敕楚抚方孔召防荆门、当阳，郧抚王鳌永防江陵、远安，陕抚丁启睿、蜀抚邵捷春各严兵于其境。
现代文：总理熊文灿请求皇上命令湖北巡抚方孔昭防守荆门、当阳，郧阳巡抚王鳌永防守江陵、远安，陕西巡抚丁启睿、四川巡抚邵捷春分别在他们的地区内严兵防守，崇俭主持提兵联合攻击。
English: Premier Xiong Wencan asked the emperor to order the Hubei governor, Fang Kong Zhao, to defend Jingmen and Dangyang, the Shenyang governor, Wang Bingyong, to defend Jiangling and Yuan'an, the Shaanxi governor, Ding Qirui, and the Sichuan governor, Shao Jichun, to defend their regions, respectively, while Chongren presided over the joint attack.

古文：而崇俭主提兵合击，时固原、临洮、宁夏三总兵左光先、曹变蛟、马科随承畴人卫，柴时华中道还甘肃，征之不应，崇俭乃檄副将贺人龙、李国奇等军发西安。
现代文：这时固原、临洮、宁夏三个总兵左光先、曹变蛟、马科跟随承畴入卫京师去了，只有柴时华中途返回甘肃，崇俭调用他而他不响应。崇俭于是传檄要副将贺人龙、李国奇等从西安出兵。
English: At this time, the three general soldiers of Guyuan, Linyi, and Ningxia, Zuo Guangxian, Cao Chenyu, and Ma Ke, followed Chengzong and went to Beijing Division. Only Chai Shihua returned to Gansu in the middle of the journey. Chongzhen called him but he did not respond. Chongzhen then sent a message to vice-commanders He Renlong and Li Guoqi to send troops from Xi'an.

古文：国奇至洛阳，卒大噪，剽瑞王租。
现代文：国奇的队伍到略阳时士兵起哄，抢劫了瑞王的田租。
English: When Guo Qi's team arrived at Liaoyang, the soldiers cheered and robbed Rui Wang's field rent.

古文：国奇已擢陕西总兵官，坐停新命，崇俭亦贬一秩。
现代文：国奇当时已提升为陕西总兵官，因此事被免除了新的职务，崇俭也被贬官一级。
English: At that time, Guoqi had been promoted to the general officer of Shaanxi, so he was relieved of his new duties, and Chongzhen was also demoted to the first level.

古文：献忠既叛，大败左良玉军于房县之罗英山，谋入陕。
现代文：献忠反叛后，在房县的罗犭英山大败左良玉的部队，策划进入陕西。
English: After the rebellion of dedication and loyalty, he defeated Zuo Liangyu's troops at Luoqi Yingshan Mountain in Fang County and planned to enter Shaanxi.

古文：崇俭率人龙、国奇军扼之兴安，贼还走兴山、太平，处楚、蜀交。
现代文：崇俭率领人龙、国奇的部队把他遏制在兴安。贼兵回奔到兴山、太平，位于湖北、四川的交界地带。
English: Chong Zhen led the troops of Renlong and Guo Qi to contain him in Xing'an. The thief soldiers ran back to Xingshan and Taiping, located at the junction of Hubei and Sichuan.

古文：是时，杨嗣昌已出师，入文灿军而代之矣。
现代文：这时，杨嗣昌已经出兵，到文灿的军中取代了他的位置。
English: At this time, Yang Shichang had already sent troops to take his place in Wen Can's army.

古文：先是，尚书傅宗龙议令崇俭兼督蜀军，而嗣昌亦檄秦军入蜀。
现代文：在此之前，尚书傅宗龙建议让崇俭兼管四川的军队，而嗣昌已经发布檄文要求陕西的军队进入四川。
English: Prior to this, Shang Shufu Zonglong suggested that Chongzhen should also be in charge of Sichuan's army, while Tsuchang had issued an imperial edict demanding that Shaanxi's army enter Sichuan.

古文：崇俭乃以十三年二月率人龙、国奇会良玉大败贼于玛瑙山，获首功千三百三十有三，降贼将二十有五人，获马骡、甲仗无算。
现代文：崇俭于是在十三年二月率领人龙、国奇会同左良玉在玛瑙山大败贼军，斩获首级一千三百三十三个，收降贼将二十五人，得到不计其数的马骡和兵器。
English: So in February of the thirteenth year, Chong Zhan led the Zhenlong, Guo Qihui and Zuo Liangyu to defeat the bandit army in Manaoshan Mountain, and gained the first rank of thirteen hundred and thirty-three, twenty-five surrendering bandits, and countless horses and weapons.

古文：是役也，崇俭身在行，而嗣昌远处襄阳。及论功，所赐半嗣昌，但增一秩，复先所降一秩而已。
现代文：这次战役，崇俭身在行伍之间，嗣昌远在襄阳，等评定功绩时，封赏的一半归嗣昌得了，崇俭只升官一级，不过是恢复以前所降的那一级罢了。
English: During this battle, while Chongzheng was in the middle of the army, Shichang was far away in Xiangyang, and when the merits were evaluated, half of the reward was awarded to Shichang. Chongzheng was only promoted one level, but it was only to restore the level that had been lowered before.

古文：献忠既败，窜柯家坪，蜀将张令追之，被围。
现代文：献忠失败后逃窜到柯家坪，四川将领张令追击他时被包围。
English: He fled to Kejiaping after his failed surrender, and was surrounded by the Sichuanese general Zhang Ling when he tried to pursue him.

古文：崇俭遣兵击走贼，人龙、国奇等复追败之寒溪寺、盐井，先后斩首千五百级，其党顺天王、一条龙、一只龙皆降。
现代文：崇俭派兵打跑贼兵，人龙、国奇等又一路追击，在寒溪寺、盐井打败了他们，先后斩获一千五百首级。献忠的同伙顺天王、一条龙、一双龙都投降了。
English: Chong Zhen sent soldiers to fight off the bandits, and Renlong, Guo Qi, etc. pursued them all the way, defeated them in Hanxi Temple and Yanjing, and successively won 1,500 heads. The loyal comrades Shun Tianwang, one dragon, and one pair of dragons all surrendered.

古文：崇俭军五日三捷，威名甚振。
现代文：崇俭的部队五天内打了三次胜仗，威名大震。
English: The thrifty troops fought three victorious battles in five days, and their prestige was shaken.

古文：以年衰乞骸骨，不许，令率总兵郑家栋还关中，留人龙、国奇讨贼。
现代文：他因为年老体衰请求辞官回家，朝廷不同意，命令他率领郑家栋回关中，留下人龙、国奇讨伐贼寇。
English: Due to his old age and failing health, he asked to be allowed to return home, but the court did not agree and ordered him to lead Zheng Jia Dong back to the middle of the pass, leaving Renlong and Guo Qi to fight the bandits.

古文：当是时，献忠窜伏兴、归山中。秦、楚师俱集于夔，诸将协心穷搜深箐，千余残寇可尽歼。
现代文：这个时候，献忠逃到兴山、归州一带的山中潜伏下来，陕西、湖北的军队都聚集在夔州，只要将领们齐心协力在深山老林中搜捕，一千多残寇就可以全部歼灭。
English: At this time, Xianzhong fled to Xingshan and Guizhou and lurked in the mountains. The armies of Shaanxi and Hubei were gathered in Zhangzhou. As long as the generals worked together to search and capture in the deep mountains and old forests, more than a thousand robbers could be completely destroyed.

古文：崇俭既去，未几，人龙军亦自开县噪而西归，楚师遂败绩于土地岭，蜀中由是大乱。
现代文：可是崇俭离开后不久，人龙的队伍也从开县哗变西归，湖北的部队在土地岭战败，四川从此大乱起来。
English: However, not long after the departure of Chong Zhen, the human-dragon team also returned from the Kai County mutiny, the Hubei troops were defeated in the land ridge, and Sichuan was in turmoil.

古文：嗣昌因言崇俭撤兵太早，致贼猖獗。
现代文：嗣昌于是说崇俭撤兵太早，导致贼兵猖獗起来。
English: Tsuchimasa then said that Chongren withdrew too early, causing the bandits to run rampant.

古文：帝初以崇俭不能驭军，不悦，及是命削籍，以启睿赴军前代理，而疑崇俭托疾，令按臣核实。
现代文：庄烈帝起初因为崇俭没能管住自己的军队就已经不高兴了，到这时就下令把他剥夺官籍，让启睿到军中接替了他；又怀疑他借病推托，让巡按官核实情况。
English: At first, Emperor Zhuang was already unhappy because Chongzhen could not control his army. At this time, he ordered him to be stripped of his official status and let Qirui replace him in the army. He also suspected that he was taking advantage of his illness and let the inspector verify the situation.

古文：明年春，献忠陷襄阳，嗣昌死，帝益恨崇俭不掎角平贼也，逮下狱，责以纵兵擅还，失误军律。不俟秋后，以五月弃市。
现代文：第二年春天，献忠打下襄阳，嗣昌死掉了，庄烈帝更加痛恨崇俭没有给嗣昌充当犄角，支持他平定贼寇，就把他逮捕下狱，责备他唆使士兵擅自返回，无视军规，不等到秋后就在五月里把他斩首街头了。
English: In the spring of the following year, Xiangyang was defeated by Xian Zhong, and Tsuchang died. Emperor Zhuang was even more disgusted with the fact that Chongzhen did not act as a shield for Tsuchang and support him in suppressing the bandits, so he arrested him and put him in prison. He accused him of inciting soldiers to return without permission, ignoring military regulations, and beheaded him in the street in May without waiting until after the autumn.

古文：帝自即位以来，诛总督七人，崇俭及袁崇焕、刘策、杨一鹏、熊文灿、范志完、赵光抃也。
现代文：庄烈帝从即位以来杀过七位总督，分别是郑崇俭、袁崇焕、刘策、杨一鹏、熊文灿、范志完、赵光扌卞。
English: Zhuge Liang killed seven governors since his accession to the throne, namely Zheng Chongzhen, Yuan Chonghuan, Liu Ce, Yang Yipeng, Xiong Wencang, Fan Zhigang and Zhao Guangyao.

古文：贼骤至，一鹏在淮安，远不及救。帝闻变大惊，素服避殿，亲祭告太庙，遂逮一鹏及巡按御史吴振缨、守陵官泽。
现代文：庄烈帝因为盗贼的势力日益壮大而气愤，运用法律更加苛刻，功罪不能互相抵销，封疆大事也随着一天天坏完了，直到最后亡国为止。福王在位时，给事中李清说： 崇俭没有丧失过一座城池或一支部队，因为他人巧言卸责被判处了死刑。
English: Zhuang Liang was angry because the power of the thieves was growing stronger and stronger. He used the law more harshly. The merits and sins could not be offset against each other. The great event of sealing the empire was ruined day by day until the country was finally destroyed. When Fu Wang was on the throne, Li Qing said about the matter: "Chong Jian did not lose a city or an army, but was sentenced to death because others abdicated their responsibilities.

古文：泽先自杀，一鹏弃市，振缨戍边。
现代文：群臣背地里都知道他的冤屈，却没有人敢出来诉说，对此我很是痛心。 
English: His grievances were known to the courtiers behind the scenes, but no one dared to speak out. I am very saddened by this.

古文：邵捷春，字肇复，侯官人。
现代文：崇俭的冤屈才得到昭雪。邵捷春，字肇复，侯官人。
English: It was only through the grievances of the thrifty that they were redressed. Shao Jiechun, also known as Zhaofu, was a magistrate.

古文：万历四十七年进士。
现代文：万历四十七年榜进士。
English: In the 47th year of Wanli, he was promoted to the top rank.

古文：累官稽勋郎中。
现代文：后来逐步做到稽勋郎中。
English: Later, he gradually became a junior high school student.

古文：崇祯二年，出为四川右参政，分守川南，抚定天全六番高、杨二氏。
现代文：崇祯二年，捷春出任四川右参政，负责把守川南。期间，他招安、平定了天全六番的高、杨二氏。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Jechun became a member of the Sichuan Right Political Party and was responsible for guarding the south of Sichuan. During this period, he recruited and pacified the sixth highest rank of Tianquan, the Yang II clan.

古文：迁浙江按察使。大计，坐贬。
现代文：后来调任浙江按察使，在大考核中因故被贬官。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of inspector general of Zhejiang Province, but was demoted for some reason in the grand examination.

古文：久之，起四川副使，以十年秋抵成都。
现代文：过了很久，他起任四川副使，在崇祯十年秋天抵达成都。
English: After a long time, he was appointed deputy envoy to Sichuan and arrived in the capital in the autumn of the 10th year of the Chongzhen Emperor.

古文：时秦贼已入蜀，巡抚王维章、总兵侯良柱悉众北拒，城中惟屯田军及蜀府护卫军，人情恇惧，捷春启门纳乡民避贼者。
现代文：当时陕西的贼寇已经打进四川，巡抚王维章、总兵侯良柱率领全部川兵向北面抵抗贼兵去了，成都城中只有屯田的士兵和蜀王府的护卫军，所以人心惶惶，不可终日。捷春打开城门接纳躲避贼兵的乡民。
English: At that time, the bandits from Shaanxi had already entered Sichuan. The governor Wang Weizhang and the general soldier Hou Liangzhu led all the Sichuan soldiers to the north to resist the bandits. There were only soldiers from Tonden and the escort army from Shu Wangfu in Chengdu city, so people were panicked and could not stay all day. Jechun opened the city gate to accept the villagers who were hiding from the bandits.

古文：中尉奉鐕勾贼抵城下，捷春与御史陈廷谟擒击奉鐕，而募市人、起废将固守。
现代文：中尉奉钅替勾结贼兵抵达城下，捷春与御史陈廷谟捉拿了奉钅替，并且招募市民，起用免了职的旧将领出来固守成都。
English: Lieutenant Feng Yueyi arrived at the foot of the city in collusion with the bandits. Jechun and Grand Historian Chen Tingmu captured Feng Yueyi and recruited citizens to use the former generals who had been relieved of their duties to defend Chengdu.

古文：贼去，蜀王疏其功。
现代文：贼兵离去后，蜀王上书讲了他的功劳。
English: After the thief-soldier left, King Shu wrote to him about his service.

古文：会维章罢，傅宗龙代，命捷春监军，偕总兵罗尚文击贼。
现代文：正好这时维章罢官，由傅宗龙接任，朝廷命令捷春担任监军，同总兵罗尚文一起攻打贼兵。
English: It was at this time that Weizhang resigned and was succeeded by Fu Zonglong. The imperial court ordered Jiechun to supervise the army and attack the bandits together with the general Luo Shangwen.

古文：明年，尚文及安锦副使吴麟征大破贼过天星等。捷春进右参政，仍监军。
现代文：第二年，尚文同安锦副使吴麟征大败贼首过天星等，捷春被提升为右参政，仍然负责监军。
English: In the second year, Shang Wen and An Jin, the vice-commanders of Wu Lin's expedition, defeated the bandits and defeated Tian Xing. Jie Chun was promoted to the right to participate in politics and was still responsible for supervising the army.

古文：十二年五月，宗龙入掌中枢，即擢捷春右佥都御史代之。
现代文：十二年五月，宗龙入朝掌管兵部，朝廷就提升捷春为右佥都御史接替他的原职。
English: In May of the twelfth year, when Zonglong entered the imperial court to take charge of the military department, the imperial court promoted Jechun to succeed him as the right-hand governor of the capital.

古文：时张献忠、罗汝才已叛，谋入秦。
现代文：此时张献忠、罗汝才已经反叛，谋划进入陕西。
English: At this time, Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai had already rebelled and planned to enter Shaanxi.

古文：秦兵扼之兴安，乃犯兴山及蜀太平，遂窥大宁。
现代文：陕西兵力在兴安阻截，他们就进犯兴山及四川的太平，然后窥视大宁。
English: Shaanxi troops intercepted in Xing'an, they attacked Xingshan and Sichuan Taiping, and then peeped into Daming.

古文：捷春遣副将王之纶、方国安分道扼之。国安连破贼，贼遂还入秦、楚。
现代文：捷春派遣副将王之纶、方国安分路扼制，国安连连打败贼兵，贼兵于是回到陕西、湖北。
English: Jiechun dispatched Vice Generals Wang Zhixuan and Fang Guoan to control the branch line, and Guoan repeatedly defeated the bandits. The bandits then returned to Shaanxi and Hubei.

古文：十月朔，杨嗣昌誓师襄阳，檄蜀军受节度。
现代文：十月初一，杨嗣昌誓师襄阳，发布檄文到四川来要求四川军接受他的节制。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Shichang, the oath master of Xiangyang, issued an imperial edict to come to Sichuan to demand that the Sichuan army accept his restraint.

古文：嗣昌以楚地广衍，贼难制，驱使入蜀，蜀险阻，贼不得逞，蹙之可全胜，又虑蜀重兵扼险，贼将还毒楚，调蜀精锐万余为己用，蜀中卒自是益疲弱不足支矣。
现代文：嗣昌认为湖北土地广阔，难以制服贼兵，驱使他们进入四川，因四川地势险峻交通不便，贼兵无法施展，官军压境就能大获全胜；又考虑四川有重兵把守险要，贼兵将返回湖北搞破坏，就调出四川的精锐兵力一万多人听自己使用。四川的军队这下软弱无力，不能抵挡贼兵了。
English: Tsuchang thought that Hubei had a vast territory and it was difficult to subdue the bandits, so he drove them into Sichuan. Due to the steep terrain of Sichuan and the inconvenience of transportation, the bandits could not exert themselves, and the government army could win a complete victory by pressing the border. Also, considering that there were heavy soldiers in Sichuan who needed to guard the border, and the bandits would return to Hubei to cause damage, he transferred more than 10,000 elite troops from Sichuan to his own use. The Sichuan army was now weak and could not resist the bandits.

古文：捷春愤曰： 令甲失一城，巡抚坐。今以蜀委贼，是督师杀我也。 
现代文：捷春愤怒地说 ：依照法令，丢失一座城，巡抚就获罪，现在要把四川让给贼兵，这岂不是督师要杀我吗？ 
English: Chechun said angrily, "According to the law, if a city is lost, the governor is guilty, and now he wants to give Sichuan to the bandits. Isn't this inspector trying to kill me?"

古文：争之，不能得。
现代文：跟嗣昌争吵又争他不过。
English: It's all right to quarrel and argue with Tsuchimasa.

古文：于是汝才、惠登相遂自兴山、远安犯大宁、大昌，献忠亦西至太平。
现代文：于是汝才、惠登相就从兴山、远安进犯大宁、大昌，张献忠也向西到了太平。
English: As a result, Youcai and Hui Dengxiang marched from Xingshan and Yuan'an to attack Danning and Dachang, and Zhang Xianzhong also marched westward to Taiping.

古文：明年二月，左良玉大破献忠玛瑙山，他将张应元、张令等复数败之。献忠乃逃兴、归山中。久之复振，由汝才入宁昌故道走而西。
现代文：第二年二月，左良玉在玛瑙山大败张献忠，其他将领张应元、张令等又几次打败他，献忠于是逃往兴山、归州一带的山中，久后又振作起来，从汝才进军宁昌的老路上向西行军。
English: In February of the following year, Zuo Liangyu defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Manaoshan, and other generals such as Zhang Yingyuan and Zhang Ling defeated him several times. Xianzhong then fled to the mountains around Xingshan and Guizhou. After a long time, he picked himself up again and marched west on the old road from Ruzai to Ningchang.

古文：初，汝才在宁昌阻江，为诸将刘贵、秦良玉、秦翼明、杨茂选等所拒，不得渡。
现代文：当初，汝才在宁昌为大江挡着，又受到刘贵、秦良玉、秦翼明、杨茂选等各位将领抵抗，无法渡江。
English: At first, Ru Cai blocked the big river in Ningchang, and was resisted by Liu Gui, Qin Liangyu, Qin Yiming, Yang Maosen and other generals, and was unable to cross the river.

古文：会献忠西，遂与合。贵等战皆却，贼乃渡江，营万顷山、苦桃湾，其别部营红茨崖、青平砦，归、巫间大震。
现代文：恰好这时张献忠西去，同他会合，刘贵等作战都败退下来，贼兵于是渡过江，在万顷山、苦桃湾扎下营寨，他们另外的部队驻扎在红茨崖、青平砦，归州、巫山一带大为震动。
English: Just at this time, Zhang Xianzhong went west and joined him, Liu Gui and other combatants were defeated and retreated, so the bandits crossed the river and camped in Wanhaoshan and Bitter Peach Bay. Their other troops were stationed in Hongzili and Qingping Fort, and the areas around Guizhou and Wushan were greatly shaken.

古文：嗣昌乃上夷陵，而檄捷春扼夔门。
现代文：嗣昌于是进驻夷陵，发出檄文要捷春扼守夔门。
English: Tsuchimasa then entered Yiling and issued an imperial edict ordering Jechun to guard the imperial gate.

古文：蜀大宁、大昌界楚竹溪、房县，有三十二隘口，嗣昌欲厚集兵力专守夔，弃宁、昌啖贼，官军环攻之。
现代文：四川的大宁、大昌毗邻湖北的竹溪、房县，有三十二道隘口。嗣昌打算调集兵力专门把守夔门，放弃大宁、大昌来引诱贼兵进去，然后官军从四周进攻它。
English: Sichuan's Daining and Dachang are adjacent to Hubei's Zhuxi and Fang counties, and there are thirty-two passes. Tsuchang intends to mobilize troops to specifically guard the gate, abandon Daining Daining and Dachang to lure the invaders in, and then the government army will attack it from all sides.

古文：捷春曰： 弃隘口不守，是延贼入户也。 
现代文：捷春说： 放弃隘口不把守，这是要引贼入户嘛。 
English: Cechun said, "If you give up the pass and don't guard it, it's like inviting a thief into your home."

古文：乃遣茂选及覃思岱等出关分守。
现代文：于是派遣茂选及覃思岱等出关，分兵把守隘口。
English: As a result, Maoxuan and Juxin were sent out of the pass, and soldiers were sent to guard the pass.

古文：二将不相得，思岱潜杀茂选，捷春令兼统其众，其众相率去。
现代文：这两员将领彼此不和。思岱进谗言杀了茂选，捷春下令思岱兼管茂选的士兵，茂选的士兵一起逃散了。
English: The two generals did not get along with each other. Siyin Jinxuan killed Maozheng, and Jechun ordered Siyin to take charge of Maozheng's soldiers, who fled together.

古文：贼入隘，守者溃，贼夜斩夔关，将士大惊溃，新宁、大竹皆陷。
现代文：贼军进入隘口，防守的官军溃散了。贼军夜间攻下了夔门关，官军将士吓得四处奔逃，新宁、大竹都失守了。
English: The thief army entered the pass, and the defending government army broke up. The thief army captured the gate at night, and the government soldiers were so scared that they fled everywhere. Shining and Datu were lost.

古文：而汝才、登相越巴雾河，陷开县，为郑嘉栋、贺人龙所破。
现代文：汝才、登相渡过巴雾河，攻占开县，被郑嘉栋、贺人龙打败。
English: Youcai and Dengsang crossed the Bayou River and captured Kai County, but were defeated by Zheng Jiadong and He Renlong.

古文：汝才乃与小秦王、混世王东奔，而登相独过开县西。
现代文：汝才于是与小秦王、混世王东奔而逃。登相独自经过开县向西去，人龙及李国奇又向西追击他。
English: You then ran away with Xiao Qin Wang and Mixed World King. Deng Xiang went west alone through Kaishan, and Renlong and Li Guoqi chased him west.

古文：人龙及李国奇又西追之，汝才等遁还兴山，屡挫。会嗣昌下招降令，小秦王、混世王皆降，惟汝才逸去。
现代文：汝才等逃回兴山，多次受到挫折。正好这时嗣昌下了招降令，小秦王、混世王都投降了，只有汝才逃走。
English: It was only then that you fled back to Xingshan, where you suffered many setbacks. It was at this time that Shichang issued a surrender order, Xiao Qin Wang and Jixi Wang both surrendered, and only then did you escape.

古文：嗣昌见楚地无贼，以八月终率师入蜀，于是群贼尽萃蜀中。
现代文：嗣昌看到湖北已经没有贼兵，就在八月底率军进入四川。这时各路贼兵全都集中在四川境内了。
English: Seeing that there were no more bandits in Hubei, Tsuchang led his army into Sichuan at the end of August. At this time, all the bandits were concentrated in Sichuan.

古文：当是时，捷春提弱卒二万守重庆，所倚惟秦良玉、张令军。
现代文：这个时候，捷春率领两万弱卒驻守重庆，能依靠的只有秦良玉、张令的部队。
English: At this time, Jiechun led 20,000 soldiers stationed in Chongqing, and could only rely on the troops of Qin Liangyu and Zhang Ling.

古文：无何，秦师噪而西归，楚将张应元等败绩于夔州之土地岭。
现代文：不久，陕西军哗变西去，湖北将领张应元又在夔州的土地岭打了败仗。
English: Soon, the Shaanxi army mutinied and went west, and the Hubei general Zhang Yingyuan fought a losing battle in the land ridge of Ganzhou.

古文：于是捷春以大昌上、中、下马渡水浅地平，难与持久，乃扼水寨观音岩为第一隘，以部将邵仲光守之。而夜叉岩、三黄岭、磨子岩、鱼河洞、下涌诸处，各分兵三四百人以守。
现代文：捷春认为大昌的上、中、下马渡水浅地平，难以跟贼兵持久，就把水寨观音岩作为第一道关口防守，让部将邵仲光驻防，而夜叉岩、三黄岭、磨子岩、渔河洞、下涌等处，各派了三四百人把守。
English: Jechun thought that the upper, middle, and lower parts of the Dashang River were shallow, and it was difficult to keep up with the bandits. He took the Guanyin Rock as the first pass to defend, and stationed the commander Shao Zhongguang, and sent three or four hundred people to guard the Yasha Rock, the Three Yellow Mountains, the Molybdenum Rock, the Yuhe Cave, and the Lower Yangtze River.

古文：万元吉以兵分力弱为忧，捷春不听。
现代文：万元吉担心兵力分散力量薄弱，捷春不听劝告。
English: Wan Yuanji was worried that the dispersion of troops was weak, and Jechun did not listen to his advice.

古文：九月，献忠突败仲光军，破上马渡。
现代文：九月，献忠突然袭击，打败了仲光的部队，占领了上马渡。
English: In September, Xianzhong made a surprise attack, defeated Zhongguang's troops and occupied Shangmadu.

古文：元吉急檄诸将分邀之，复令张奏凯屯净壁，捷春遣二将罗洪政、沈应龙为助。
现代文：元吉急忙传令各将分别阻截，又命令张奏凯驻守净壁。捷春派遣罗洪政、沈应龙二将充当援兵。
English: Motoyoshi hurriedly sent word to block the advance of each side separately, and ordered Zhang Songkai to stand guard at the net wall. Jechun dispatched Luo Hongzheng and Shen Yinglong to act as reinforcements.

古文：十月，献忠突净壁，遂陷大昌，屯开县。
现代文：十月，献忠突袭净壁，占领了大昌，驻军开县来。
English: In October, Xianzhong made a surprise attack on Jingbei, occupied Dachang, and stationed troops in Kaishan.

古文：良玉、令两军皆覆。
现代文：良玉、张令的两支部队都覆没了。
English: Liang Yu and Zhang Ling's two armies were wiped out.

古文：贼行则哨探，止则息马抄粮。
现代文：贼兵行军就派哨兵侦探，坐地休息就下马抄粮。
English: Sentinels and detectives are sent out when the bandits are marching, and when they are resting, they dismount to gather grain.

古文：关隘侦候不明，防军或远离戍所，贼乘隙而过无人之境。
现代文：关隘驻军对贼兵的动向无法侦探确实，有时又远离驻所，贼兵钻空子就通过了没人把守的地方，所以官军连连战败。
English: The movement of the Guanqiao garrison against the bandits could not be detected accurately, and sometimes they were far away from the garrison. The bandits took advantage of the loophole and passed through the unguarded area, so the government army was defeated one after another.

古文：嗣昌遂收斩仲光，上疏劾捷春失事。
现代文：嗣昌于是收斩了仲光，又上书弹劾捷春贻误军事。
English: Tsuchimasa then beheaded Zhongguang and wrote a letter to impeach Jiechun for military misconduct.

古文：捷春收兵扼梁山。
现代文：后来捷春收兵扼守梁山。
English: Later, Jiechun gathered troops to defend Liangshan.

古文：时登相已归正，而汝才复与献忠合，以梁山河深不能渡，乃自开县西走达州。
现代文：这时惠登相已经反正，归附官军。汝才又与献忠会合，因为梁山河深难渡，就从开县向西到了达州。
English: At this time, Hui Dengxiang had already joined the government army anyway. It was only then that you met with Xian Zhong, because the Liangshan River was too deep to cross, so you went west from Kai County to Dazhou.

古文：捷春退保绵州，扼涪江。
现代文：捷春退防绵州，扼守涪口。
English: Jiechun retreated to the anti-Mianzhou and kept a tight grip on Hekou.

古文：贼疾走，陷剑州，遂趋广元，将由间道入汉中，为秦兵所扼，乃复走巴西。
现代文：贼兵迅速进兵，攻占了剑州，然后挺进广元，打算抄小路进入汉中，被陕西部队挡住，又奔回巴州西部来。
English: The robber soldiers quickly marched into the army, captured Jianzhou, and then advanced into Guangyuan, intending to take a shortcut into Hanzhong. They were blocked by Shaanxi troops and rushed back to the west of Bazhou.

古文：应元诸军邀之梓潼，战小利，既而衄，蜀将曹志耀等力战却之。
现代文：应元等将的队伍在梓潼拦截他们，少有战功，后来还是被打败了。四川将领曹志耀等竭力作战，打退了他们。
English: Gen. Ying Yuan's troops intercepted them at Zizhou, with little military success, but were later defeated. Sichuan General Cao Zhiyao and others fought hard to repel them.

古文：降将张一川、张载福陷阵死，涪江师遂溃，贼屠绵州。
现代文：后来降将张一川、张载福陷阵而死，涪江的守军战败，贼兵血洗了绵州城。
English: Later, Zhang Yichuan and Zhang Zhaifu, the surrendering generals, died in the battle, the defenders of the Minjiang River were defeated, and the robber soldiers washed Mianzhou City in blood.

古文：捷春归成都，贼逼成都。
现代文：捷春回到成都，贼兵跟着逼了上来。
English: When Chechun returned to Chengdu, the bandits followed him.

古文：十一月，逮捷春使者至，遂以军事付代者廖大亨而去。
现代文：十一月，逮捕捷春的使者到来，捷春就把军事交付给接替他的廖大亨，离开了成都。
English: In November, when the envoys to arrest Jechun arrived, Jechun handed over the military to his successor, the tycoon Liao, and left Chengdu.

古文：捷春为人清谨，治蜀有惠政。
现代文：捷春为官清廉、严谨，治理四川实施了惠民政策。
English: Jechun is a clean and rigorous official, and has implemented a policy of benefiting the people in the governance of Sichuan.

古文：士民哭送者载道，舟不得行，竞逐散官旗。
现代文：他被逮捕时哭送他的队伍填塞了街道，江中的船无法开动，人们都争着跟在使者的旗帜后边。
English: When he was arrested, his weeping retinue filled the streets, the boats in the river could not move, and the people all fought to follow the flag of the messenger.

古文：蜀王为疏救，不听。
现代文：蜀王替捷春上书求救，朝廷不听。
English: Shu Wang sent a letter on behalf of Jie Chun asking for help, but the imperial court did not listen.

古文：未几，京师陷。应桂家居不出。
现代文：庄烈帝命令巡按御史派官把捷春押送到京师，打入监牢，判处死刑。
English: Emperor Zhuang ordered the inspecting magistrate to send an officer to escort Jechun to the capital, put him in prison, and sentence him to death.

古文：久之，死于难。
现代文：捷春自知难免一死，第二年八月就喝下毒药，死在了监狱中。
English: Knowing that death was inevitable, Jechun drank poison in August of the following year and died in prison.

古文：高斗枢，字象先，鄞人。
现代文：福王在位时，朝廷给捷春恢复了官籍，追赠他为兵部右侍郎。高斗枢，字象先，觐县人。
English: When King Fukuda was on the throne, the imperial court reinstated Jechun as an official, posthumously naming him the right hand man of the military.

古文：崇祯元年进士。
现代文：崇祯元年进士。
English: He became a priest in the first year of the Chongzhen era.

古文：授刑部主事。坐议巡抚耿如杞狱，与同列四人下诏狱。寻复官，进员外郎。
现代文：初任刑部主事，因为审议巡抚耿如杞一案，与四个同事一起被关进皇家监狱，不久恢复官职，又晋升为员外郎。
English: The first head of the criminal department, because of the review of the case of the inspector Geng Ruxuan, was imprisoned in the royal prison together with four colleagues. He soon resumed his official duties and was promoted to the position of foreign minister.

古文：五年，迁荆州知府。
现代文：五年，斗枢出任荆州知府。
English: In five years, Dou Zu served as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：久之，擢长沙兵备副使。
现代文：很久以后，又升为长沙兵备副使。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of Changsha.

古文：楚郡之在湖北者，尽罹贼祸，势且及湖南，临、蓝、湖、湘间土寇蜂起。
现代文：当时湖北在洞庭湖北边的府县全遭到了贼兵的破坏，势头将蔓延到湖南，临武、蓝山、洞庭湖、湘潭一带又土匪四起。
English: At that time, all the prefectures and counties in Hubei north of Dongting Lake were destroyed by bandits. The momentum would spread to Hunan, and bandits would also appear in the areas of Linwu, Lanshan, Dongting Lake, and Xiangtan.

古文：长沙止老弱卫卒五百，又遣二百戍攸县，城库雉堞尽圮。
现代文：长沙只有五百名老弱士卒，又派了二百人出去驻守攸县，城墙上的仓库、掩护墙全倒塌了。
English: Changsha had only five hundred old and weak soldiers, and another two hundred were sent out to guard You County. The warehouses and protective walls on the city wall completely collapsed.

古文：斗枢至，建飞楼四十，大修守具。
现代文：斗枢到任后，修筑了四十座飞楼，大力修造守备器械。
English: After Dou Zu arrived at the post, he built forty flying towers and vigorously repaired the defensive equipment.

古文：临、蓝贼艘二百余，由衡、湘抵城下，相拒十余日乃却去，转攻袁州。
现代文：临武、蓝山两地的二百多艘贼船经衡阳、湘潭抵达长沙城下，斗枢与他们相持抵抗了十多天，贼兵才撤离，转过去攻打袁州。
English: More than two hundred pirate ships from the two places of Linwu and Lanshan arrived at the foot of Changsha City via Hengyang and Xiangtan. The center of the battle resisted them for more than ten days, before the pirates withdrew and turned to attack Yuanzhou.

古文：遣都司陈上才蹑其后，贼亦解去。
现代文：斗枢派都司陈上才跟在贼兵后边打击它，贼兵又解围离去。
English: The anti-pivot faction, led by Chen Shangcai, followed behind the bandits and attacked them. The bandits then broke the siege and left.

古文：寻击杀乱贼刘高峰等，抚定余众。
现代文：不久斗枢袭击、打死了贼首刘高峰等，招安、平定了其余的贼寇。
English: Soon after, the center attacked and killed the head of the bandits, Liu Gao Feng, and pacified the rest of the bandits.

古文：诏录其功。
现代文：朝廷下诏记录了他的功劳。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree recording his achievements.

古文：巡抚陈睿谟大征临、蓝寇，斗枢当南面，大小十余战，贼尽平。
现代文：巡抚陈睿谟大举征讨临武、蓝山两地的贼兵时，斗枢在南面扼守，先后经过大小十多次战斗，贼兵全给剿平了。
English: When the governor Chen Ruimu launched a large-scale campaign against the bandits in Linwu and Lanshan, the center of the battle was in the south. After more than ten battles, the bandits were all defeated.

古文：诏赉银币。
现代文：朝廷下诏赐给他银币作为奖励。
English: The imperial court gave him a silver coin as a reward.

古文：十四年六月进按察使，移守郧阳。
现代文：十四年六月，斗枢晋升为按察使，移驻郧阳。
English: In June of the 14th year, Dou Zu was promoted to inspector and moved to Shenyang.

古文：郧被寇且十载，属邑有六，居民不四千，数百里荆榛。
现代文：郧阳府发生战乱将近十年了，附属的城市有六座，居民不到四千人，几百里地面荆棘丛生。
English: It has been nearly ten years since the war broke out in Poyang Prefecture. There are six affiliated cities with less than four thousand inhabitants, and there are thorns on the ground for hundreds of miles.

古文：抚治王永祚以襄阳急，移师镇之。
现代文：抚治王永祚因襄阳告急，移兵过去镇守。
English: Fuzhi Wang Yongqin was in a hurry due to Xiangyang and moved his troops to guard the town.

古文：斗枢至甫六日，张献忠自陕引而东。
现代文：斗枢到任才六天，张献忠从陕西率兵东来。
English: It had only been six days since Dou Zu was appointed, and Zhang Xianzhong had come from Shaanxi with an army.

古文：斗枢与知府徐启元遣游击王光恩及弟光兴分扼之，战频捷，贼不敢犯。
现代文：斗枢与知府徐启元派遣游击王光恩及其弟光兴分兵阻截，屡战屡胜，贼兵不敢来进犯郧阳。
English: Xu Qiyuan, the center of the struggle with the prefectural government, dispatched the guerrilla Wang Guangen and his brother Guang Xing to intercept the detachment. They won many battles, and the bandits did not dare to invade Fenyang.

古文：光恩者，均州降渠小秦王也。
现代文：王光恩就是均州投降过来的贼首小秦王。
English: Wang Guangen is the thief leader Xiao Qin Wang who surrendered to Junzhou.

古文：初与张献忠、罗汝才辈为贼，献忠、汝才降而复叛，均州五营惧见讨自疑。
现代文：当初他与张献忠、罗汝才等一同为贼，献忠、汝才投降后又反叛，均州五营因为怕被征讨，犹豫不决。
English: At the beginning, he was a thief together with Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai. Xianzhong and Rucai surrendered and then rebelled. The five battalions of Junzhou hesitated because they were afraid of being conscripted.

古文：又以献忠强，虑为所并，光恩敛众据要害以拒献忠。
现代文：又因为献忠势力强大，光恩担心被他吞并，于是约束士卒，占据要害地带防备献忠。
English: In addition, because of the strong loyalty force, Guang'en was worried about being annexed by him, so he restrained his soldiers and occupied the key area to prevent loyalty.

古文：居久之，乃有稍稍飏去者，光恩亦去，已而复降。
现代文：过了很久，他的手下有人陆续走散，光恩也反叛而去，后来又投降了。
English: After a long time, some of his men scattered one after another, and Guang En also rebelled and later surrendered.

古文：光恩善用其下，下亦乐为之用。
现代文：光恩善于任用部下，部下也乐意听他使唤。
English: Guang En is good at appointing subordinates, and his subordinates are also happy to listen to him.

古文：斗枢察其诚，招入郡守。
现代文：斗枢看到他诚心诚意，就召他进入府城中驻守。
English: Seeing his sincerity, Douhu called him to enter the capital and stay there.

古文：当是时，斗枢、启元善谋，光恩善战，郧城危而复全。
现代文：这个时候，斗枢、启元善于谋划，光恩善战，郧阳城经过一番危难之后又得以保全。
English: At this time, Du Huan and Qi Yuan were good at planning, Guang En was good at fighting, and Shenyang City was preserved after the most dangerous time.

古文：十五年冬，李自成陷襄阳、均州，攻郧阳四日而去。
现代文：十五年冬天，李自成占领了襄阳、均州，攻打郧阳城四天，然后离去了。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, Li Zicheng occupied Xiangyang and Junzhou, attacked Poyang City for four days, and then left.

古文：明年春，复来攻，十余日不克，乃退屯杨溪。
现代文：第二年春天，又来进攻，十多天仍打不下来，于是退兵驻扎到杨溪。
English: In the spring of the following year, they attacked again, but were unable to defeat the enemy for more than ten days, so they withdrew and were stationed in Yangxi.

古文：五月，斗枢召游击刘调元入城，旬日间杀贼三千余。
现代文：五月，斗枢召游击刘调元进城，十天内杀贼兵三千人。
English: In May, Liu Chaoyuan, a guerrilla fighter, entered the city and killed three thousand soldiers within ten days.

古文：自成将来攻，卒不克而去。
现代文：自成的将领来攻城，最后也没打下，就离开了。
English: Self-appointed generals came to attack the city, but in the end they did not fight and left.

古文：乃令光恩复均州，调元下光化，躬率将士复谷城。
现代文：斗枢于是命令光恩收复了均州，调元打下了光化，斗枢自己率领将士收复了谷城。
English: Du Huan then ordered Guang En to recover Junzhou, transferred Yuan to defeat Guanghua, and Du Huan himself led the generals to recover Gu Cheng.

古文：将袭襄阳，闻孙传庭败，旋师，均州复为贼有。
现代文：斗枢打算袭击襄阳，听说孙传庭战败，就班师回来。均州又被贼兵占领了。
English: Douhu planned to attack Xiangyang. Hearing of Sun Chuanting's defeat, his division returned. Junzhou was once again occupied by bandits.

古文：十七年正月，自成遣将路应标等以三万人攻郧。斗枢遣人入均州，烧其蓄积，贼乏食而退。
现代文：十七年正月，自成派遣将领路应标等率领三万人进攻郧阳，斗枢派人进入均州，烧毁了他们积蓄的粮草，贼兵因缺乏粮食而退回。
English: In the first month of the seventeenth year, Zicheng dispatched the general to lead the way to meet the standard and led 30,000 people to attack Fenyang. Douhu sent people to enter Junzhou, burned their accumulated grain and grass, and the robber soldiers returned due to lack of grain.

古文：当是时，湖南、北十四郡皆陷，独郧在。
现代文：这个时候，湖南、湖北的十四个府都被贼兵占领了，只有郧阳得以保全。
English: At this time, 14 prefectures in Hunan and Hubei were occupied by the bandits, and only Shenyang was spared.

古文：自十五年冬抚治王永祚被逮，连命李乾德、郭景昌代之，路绝不能至，中朝谓郧已陷，不复设抚治。
现代文：从十五年冬天抚治王永祚被逮捕后，朝廷接连任命李乾德、郭景昌来代替他的职务，都因为道路中断不能到位，朝廷认为郧阳已经失守，就不再设置抚治了。
English: From the winter of the 15th year, after the arrest of the governor Wang Yongzheng, the imperial court successively appointed Li Qiande and Guo Jingchang to replace him. Because the road could not be interrupted, the imperial court believed that Poyang had been lost, and the governor was no longer set up.

古文：十六年夏，斗枢上请兵疏，始知郧存，众议即任斗枢。而陈演与之有隙，乃擢启元右佥都御史任之，加斗枢太仆少卿，路阻亦不能达。
现代文：十六年夏天，斗枢上书请求增援，朝廷才知道郧阳尚存，大家主张就让斗枢担任抚治，而陈演同斗枢有矛盾，就提升丁启元为右佥都御史，担任抚治，给斗枢加官太仆少卿。因为路途阻隔任命令没有传到。
English: In the summer of the 16th year, Du Huan submitted a request for reinforcement, and it was only then that the imperial court knew that Suyang still existed. Everyone advocated that Du Huan should be appointed as governor, but Chen Yun had a conflict with Du Huan, so he promoted Ding Qiyuan to the post of governor, and gave Du Huan the post of Taibo Shaoqing. Because the road was blocked, the order was not delivered.

古文：是年二月，朝议设汉中巡抚，兼督川北军务，擢斗枢右副都御史以往，朝命亦不达。
现代文：这年二月，朝廷讨论设置汉中巡抚，兼管川北军务，就提拔斗枢为右副都御史，让他前往就任，命令又没有传到。
English: In February of that year, the imperial court discussed the establishment of a Han-Zhong governor, who would also be in charge of military affairs in northern Sichuan, and then promoted Tozhu to the position of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, and sent him to take office, but the order did not arrive.

古文：至三月始闻太仆之命，即以军事付启元。
现代文：到这年三月斗枢才收到太仆少卿的任命，就把军事移交给启元。
English: It was not until March of this year that Du Zu received the appointment of Taigu Shaoqing, and he handed over the military to Kaiyuan.

古文：七月而北都变闻，并闻汉中之命，地已失，不可往。
现代文：七月，北都失陷的消息连同汉中巡抚的任命令一同传来，但是汉中的地盘已失，斗枢不能去任职了。
English: In July, the news of the fall of the Northern Capital came together with the order to appoint the governor of Hanzhong. However, Hanzhong's territory had already been lost, and Douchuan could no longer hold the post.

古文：福王立，移斗枢巡抚湖广，代何腾蛟。复以道路不通，改用王骥，斗枢皆不闻也。
现代文：福王即位后，调斗枢去巡抚湖广，接替何腾蛟，又因道路不通，朝廷改用了王骥，斗枢都没有得到这些消息。
English: After King Fu ascended the throne, Tun Dou Zu went to patrol Hukang to take over from He Teng Qu, and because the road was impassable, the imperial court changed to Wang Qu, and Tun Dou Zu did not get any of this information.

古文：国变后数年卒。
现代文：明朝亡国后几年斗枢才去世。
English: It was only a few years after the fall of the Ming Dynasty that Dou Zuoren passed away.

古文：启元、光恩亦皆以功名终。
现代文：启元、光恩，也都在建功立名之后才死。
English: Kaiyuan and Guang'en both died after making contributions and establishing their reputations.

