古文：甫冠，补祗候郎君。未几，为宿直官。及出师伐宋，为队帅，从南府宰相耶律奴瓜、统军使萧挞览略地赵、魏，有功，加检校太师，为北院大王。
现代文：及至出师讨伐宋，任队帅，随南府宰相耶律奴瓜、统军使萧挞览在赵、魏一带攻城掠地，立有战功，加检校太师，任北院大王。攻取通利军。
English: He also led his division to fight against the Song Dynasty, and was appointed as the commander of the team. Together with the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerutungua, and the unified army, Xiao Jianchao attacked and captured the city in the Zhao and Wei regions, and achieved great military achievements. He was also promoted to the rank of inspector, and was appointed as the grand prince of the Northern Yuan Dynasty. He captured the Tongli army.

古文：攻拔通利军。宋和议成，特进门下平章事，赐推诚竭节保义功臣。
现代文：与宋之和议达成，特进为门下平章事，为推诚竭节保义功臣。
English: A peace agreement was reached with Song Zhi, and Tejin became a subordinate of Ping Zheng, and a meritorious vassal for the promotion of sincerity.

古文：以本部俸羊多阙，部人空乏，请以羸老之羊及皮毛岁易南中绢，彼此利之。
现代文：因为本部俸羊大多缺乏，部人因此穷困，室鲁请求每年能以瘦弱衰老之羊及其皮毛来换取南方的绢，彼此都获利。
English: Since most of the headquarter's sheep were in short supply, and the subordinates were impoverished as a result, Muro requested that he be able to exchange the thin and aging sheep and its fur for the southern yakitori every year, and both sides would benefit.

古文：拜北院枢密使，封韩王。
现代文：拜为北院枢密使，封为韩王。
English: Bae was appointed the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court and crowned King of Korea.

古文：自韩德让知北院，职多废旷，室鲁拜命之日，朝野相庆。
现代文：自从韩德让兼管北院后，北院之职长时旷废，室鲁受命之日，朝野都来庆贺。
English: Since Han Dejun took charge of the Northern Yuan, the position of the head of the Northern Yuan has been vacant for a long time. On the day of Muraru's appointment, the Asano all came to celebrate.

古文：欧里斯独全军还，帝嘉赏。
现代文：随从皇上出猎于平地松林，在沙岭去世，年四十四岁，赠守司徒、政事令。二子：十神奴、欧里斯。
English: He went hunting with the emperor in the pine forests of the plains and died at the age of forty-four in Saring. He was bestowed with the title of Shtu and a government decree. Two sons: Shishinnu and Euris.

古文：终西南面招讨使。王继忠，不知何郡人。
现代文：十神奴曾任南院大王。王继忠，不知何郡人士。
English: Jishinnu was once the king of the Southern Court. Wang Jizhong was from an unknown county.

古文：仕宋为郓州刺史、殿前都虞候。
现代文：曾在宋朝担任郓州刺史、殿前都虞候。
English: During the Song Dynasty, he served as the governor of Bozhou and the prefect of the capital.

古文：统和二十一年，宋遣继忠屯定之望都，以轻骑觇我军，遇南府宰相耶律奴瓜等，获之。
现代文：统和二十一年，宋派遣王继忠屯驻于定州之望都，率轻骑窥伺我军，遇到南府宰相耶律奴瓜等人，擒获之。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Unification of China, the Song Dynasty sent Wang Jizhong to stay in the capital of Dingzhou, and he rode lightly to spy on our army. He encountered and captured the chancellor of Nanfu, Yelu Nugua and others.

古文：太后知其贤，授户部使，以康默记族女女之。
现代文：太后得知他贤能，授任为户部使，将康默记的族侄女嫁给他。
English: When the empress dowager learned of his virtues, she appointed him as a household envoy and married his niece, a member of the Kangmo clan.

古文：继忠亦自激昂，事必尽力。
现代文：继忠也自我激励发奋，遇事必定尽心尽力。
English: Ji Zhong is also self-motivated and enthusiastic, and will do his best in any situation.

古文：宋以继忠先朝旧臣，每遣使，必有附赐，圣宗许受之。
现代文：宋朝因为王继忠为前朝旧臣，每次派遣使者，必定有些附带的赐物给他，圣宗准予他接受。
English: Since Wang Jizhong was a former vassal of the Song Dynasty, every time he sent an envoy, he must have received some incidental gifts, which the Holy Sect allowed him to accept.

古文：二十二年，宋使来聘，遗继忠弧矢、鞭策及求和劄子，有曰： 自临大位，爱养黎元。
现代文：二十二年，宋朝使者来访，送给继忠弓箭、马鞭以及求和的札子，上面写道： 自从登临大位，爱抚养育黎民。
English: In 1922, an emissary from the Song Dynasty visited and gave Ji Zhong Rong a bow and arrow, a horse whip, and a petition for peace, which read: "Since ascending to the throne, I have loved and nurtured Li Min.

古文：岂欲穷兵，惟思息战。
现代文：何尝想过穷兵黩武，一心惟念如何息弭战事。
English: How many of you have ever thought about fighting a war, thinking only about how to end the war.

古文：每敕边事，严谕守臣。
现代文：每每敕令言及边境之事，总是严明地晓谕边臣不得妄动。
English: Whenever the imperial edict mentioned the matter of the border, it always strictly instructed the border officials not to make any rash moves.

古文：至于北界人民，不令小有侵扰，众所具悉，尔亦备知。
现代文：至于北国的人民，不得对他们有些微的侵犯袭扰，此种情形，已是无人不知，你也全都了解。
English: As for the people of the North, they must not be disturbed by the slightest encroachment. This situation is already known to no one, and you know all about it.

古文：向以知雄州何承矩已布此恳，自后杳无所闻。
现代文：此前已通过雄州知州何承矩传达我国求和的诚心恳求，但此后再无音讯。
English: Previously, he had conveyed China's sincere appeal for peace through Xiongzhou Zhizhou He Cheng Mom, but there has been no news since then.

古文：汝可密言，如许通和，即当别使往请。 
现代文：你可暗里通言，如果答允通和，我将另派使者前往请求。 
English: You can talk in secret, and if peace is agreed, I will send another envoy to ask for it.

古文：诏继忠与宋使相见，仍许讲和。
现代文：诏令王继忠与宋国使者相见，仍旧答允讲和。
English: The emperor ordered Wang Jizhong to meet with the Song emissary, but he still agreed to make peace.

古文：以继忠家无奴隶，赐宫户三十，加左武卫上将军，摄中京留守。
现代文：因为继忠家没有奴隶，赐给他宫户三十，加封为左武卫上将军，代理中京留守。
English: Since Jitada did not have any slaves, he was given 30 miyadori, the additional title of General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and the right to stay in the capital.

古文：开泰五年，为汉人行宫都部署，封琅邪郡王。
现代文：开泰五年，任汉人行宫都部署，封琅笽郡王。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Keitai, all the Han people were deployed to the palace, and the county king was crowned.

古文：六年，进楚王，赐国姓。
现代文：六年，进封楚王，赐给国姓。
English: Six years later, he was crowned the King of Chu and given his national surname.

古文：上尝燕饮，议以萧合卓为北院枢密使，继忠曰： 合卓虽有刀笔才，暗于大体。
现代文：皇上曾经宴饮，朝议以萧合卓为北院枢密使，继忠说： 合卓虽然有文才，但对于国家大政不够了解。
English: The emperor once had a banquet, and the imperial council selected Xiao Hezhuo as the envoy to the Northern Yuan. Jitong said: Although Hezhuo has literary talent, he does not know enough about national politics.

古文：萧敌烈才行兼备，可任。 
现代文：萧敌烈才智和德行兼备，可任此职。 
English: Xiao Ji Rong has both talent and virtue, and can serve in this position.

古文：上不纳，竟用合卓。
现代文：皇上不采纳，最终还是用了萧合卓。
English: The emperor did not accept it, but eventually used Xiao He Zhuo.

古文：及遣合卓伐高丽，继忠为行军副部署，攻兴化镇，月余不下。
现代文：及至派合卓讨伐高丽，继忠任行军副部署，进攻兴化镇，一个多月还未攻下。
English: As far as dispatching a joint force to fight against Goryeo, Jizhong served as deputy commander of the marching troops and attacked Xinghua Town, which was not conquered for more than a month.

古文：师还，上谓明于知人，拜枢密使。
现代文：班师回国，皇上认为他明于知人，拜为枢密使。
English: When the inspector returned to China, the emperor considered him to be an acquaintance and treated him as a confidential envoy.

古文：太平三年致仕，卒。
现代文：太平三年离职，同年去世。
English: Taiping left office three years later and died the same year.

古文：子怀玉，仕至防御使。
现代文：子王怀玉，官至防御使。
English: Zi Wang Huaiyu, official and defense envoy.

古文：萧孝忠，字撒板，小字图古斯，志慷慨。
现代文：萧孝忠，字撒板，乳名图古斯，气度豪爽。
English: Xiao Xiaozhong, the word is scattered, the nickname is Tugus, the temperament is magnificent.

古文：开泰中，补祗候郎君，尚越国公主，拜驸马都尉，累迁殿前都点检。
现代文：开泰年间，补为祗候郎君，娶越国公主，拜为驸马都尉，累迁为殿前都点检。
English: During the reign of Emperor Keitai, he married a princess from the Kingdom of Yue, became a captain of the imperial horse, and was moved to the front of the palace.

古文：太平中，擢北府宰相。
现代文：太平年间，提升为北府宰相。
English: During the Taiping era, he was promoted to the prime minister of the North.

古文：重熙七年，为东京留守。
现代文：重熙七年，任东京留守。
English: In the seventh year of Shigehiro's reign, he was absent from Tokyo.

古文：时禁渤海人击球，孝忠言： 东京最为重镇，无从禽之地，若非球马，何以习武？
现代文：当时禁止渤海人击球，孝忠说： 东京算得上是最重要的军镇，又没有田猎的场所，如果不是有击球和赛马，用什么方式来习武呢？
English: At that time, it was forbidden for Bohai people to hit the ball, and Takatada said: Tokyo is the most important military town, and there is no place for field hunting. If there is no batting and horse racing, how can we practice martial arts?

古文：且天子以四海为家，何分彼此？
现代文：况且天子以四海为家，何必分什么彼此？
English: Moreover, since the Son of God has made the four seas his home, why should they be divided?

古文：宜弛其禁。 
现代文：应该解除这一禁令。 
English: This ban should be lifted.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二年，入朝，封楚王，拜北院枢密使。
现代文：十二年，入京朝见，封楚王，拜为北院枢密使。
English: In the twelfth year, he went to the imperial court in Beijing to see the emperor, and was appointed as the privy envoy of the Northern Court.

古文：国制，以契丹、汉人分北、南院枢密治之，孝忠奏曰： 一国二枢密，风俗所以不同。
现代文：按辽的国制，将契丹、汉人分为北、南院枢密治之，孝忠上奏说 ：一个国家设两个枢密院，这是风俗不同的原因所在。
English: According to the national system of Liao, the Khitan and Han people were divided into the North and South Privy Councils. Xiaozhong said: One country has two Privy Councils, which is the reason for the different customs.

古文：若并为一，天下幸甚。 
现代文：如果合并为一个枢密院，将是天下的大好事。 
English: It would be a great thing for the world if it were to be amalgamated into one Privy Council.

古文：事未及行，薨。
现代文：事情还未来得及采纳施行，萧孝忠就去世了。
English: Xiao Xiaozhong passed away before the matter could be adopted and implemented.

古文：追封楚国王。帝素服哭临，赦死囚数人，为孝忠荐福。
现代文：追封为楚国王，皇上身着素服临哭，赦免死囚犯数人，为孝忠祭神明求福。
English: He was enthroned as the King of Chu. The emperor, dressed in plain clothes, wept, pardoned several death-row prisoners, and asked for blessings for the deity of filial piety.

古文：葬日，亲临，赐宫户守冢。
现代文：下葬之日，皇上又亲自前往，赐予其家宫户为之守坟。
English: On the day of the burial, the Emperor went there in person and gave his family, the Miyato family, the task of guarding the grave.

古文：子阿速，终南院枢密使。
现代文：子萧阿速，官至南院枢密使。
English: His son, Xiao Azao, rose to the rank of official and became a privy councilor of the Southern Yuan.

古文：陈昭衮，小字王九，云州人。
现代文：陈昭衮，乳名王九，云州人。
English: Chen Zhaohui, also known as Wang Jiu, is from Yunnan.

古文：工译鞮，勇而善射。
现代文：精通于翻译，勇敢而擅长射箭。
English: Good at translation, brave and good at archery.

古文：统和中，补祗候郎君，为奚拽剌详稳，累迁敦睦宫太保，兼掌围场事。
现代文：统和年间，补为祗候郎君，任奚拽剌详稳，累迁至敦睦宫太保，兼掌围场事。
English: During the years of unification, he was appointed as the guardian of the imperial family, and he steadily moved to Dunmu Palace as the guardian of the imperial family, and also took charge of the court affairs.

古文：开泰五年秋，大猎，帝射虎，以马驰太速，矢不及发。
现代文：开泰五年秋，大兴田猎，皇上射虎，因为马跑得太快，箭还来不及射出。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Keitai, the emperor was hunting in the Daxingtian Mountains and shot a tiger. Because the horse was running too fast, the arrow was too late to shoot.

古文：虎怒，奋势将犯跸。左右辟易，昭衮舍马，捉虎两耳骑之。
现代文：老虎发怒，直向皇上扑来，左右均退避，昭衮弃马，翻身跃上虎背揪住虎的双耳，老虎大惊，想要逃走。
English: The tiger flew into a rage and charged straight at the emperor. Both sides retreated. Zhaozhou abandoned his horse, turned around, leapt onto the tiger's back and covered the tiger's ears. The tiger was shocked and wanted to run away.

古文：虎骇，且逸。上命卫士追射，昭衮大呼止之。
现代文：皇上命卫士追赶射击，昭衮大声呼喊加以制止。
English: The guard of the Emperor's order chased after the shooting, and Zhaojun shouted loudly to stop it.

古文：虎虽轶山，昭衮终不堕地。
现代文：老虎虽然已驮着他跑过了一座山，昭衮仍始终没有被摔到地上。
English: Although the tiger had already run over a mountain with him in its jaws, Zhaohui still did not fall to the ground.

古文：伺便，拔佩刀杀之。
现代文：并看准机会，拔出佩刀杀死老虎。
English: Seeing an opportunity, he pulled out his saber and killed the tiger.

古文：辇至上前，慰劳良久。
现代文：人们让他坐车来到皇上面前，皇上慰抚劳问他许久。
English: People let him come to the emperor by car, and the emperor comforted him for a long time.

古文：即日设燕，悉以席上金银器赐之，特加节钺，迁围场都太师，赐国姓，命张俭、吕德懋赋以美之。
现代文：当日设宴，尽数将席上的金银器皿赏赐给他。特地加给节钺，迁为围场都太师，赐给国姓，命张俭、吕德懋做赋对他加以称美。
English: A banquet was held on the same day, and as many gold and silver dishes as possible were given to him. They were specially added to the festival gong, moved to the paddock of the Grand Master, given the surname of the country, and the names of Zhang Jian and Lu Dejun were made to praise him.

古文：迁归义军节度使，同知上京留守，历西南面招讨都监，卒。
现代文：后迁为归义军节度使、同知上京留守，又任西南面招讨都监，去世。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the festival envoy of the returned rebels, and his friend stayed in Kyoto, and was also appointed as the inspector of the southwest side of the capital, and passed away.

古文：萧合卓，字合鲁隐，突吕不部人。
现代文：萧合卓，字合鲁隐，突吕不部人。
English: Xiao Hezhuo, Zhehe Luyin, Tu Lvubo.

古文：始为本部吏。
现代文：初时为本部小吏。
English: At first he was a junior clerk in the head office.

古文：统和初，以谨恪，补南院侍郎。
现代文：统和初年，因为恭敬谨慎被补为南院侍郎。
English: In the first year of unification, he was made a chamberlain of the Southern Court out of respect and caution.

古文：十八年，北院枢密使韩德让举合卓为中丞，以太后遗物使宋。
现代文：十八年，北院枢密使韩德让推举萧合卓为中丞，让他带着太后遗物出使宋国。
English: In the 18th year, the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty sent Han Dejun to nominate Xiao Hezhuo as the Vice-President, and sent him to Song with the relics of the empress dowager.

古文：还，迁北院枢密副使。
现代文：回国后，迁为北院枢密副使。
English: After returning to China, he was transferred to the position of Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

古文：开泰三年，为左夷离毕。
现代文：开泰三年，任左夷离毕。
English: Keitai for three years, Ren Zuoyi left the company.

古文：合卓久居近职，明习典故，善占对。
现代文：合卓长期担任得以亲近皇上的职位，熟悉典故，善于应对。
English: For a long time, the councilors held positions that allowed them to be close to the emperor, and they were familiar with allusions and good at dealing with them.

古文：以是尤被宠渥，升北院枢密使。
现代文：因此尤其受到皇上宠爱与恩泽，升任北院枢密使。
English: For this reason, he was especially favored by the Emperor and was promoted to the position of Privy Councilor of the Northern Court.

古文：时议以为无完行，不可大用；南院枢密使王继忠侍宴，又讥其短。帝颇不悦。
现代文：时议认为他操行不够完美，不可大用；南院枢密使王继忠在侍宴时，又讥弹其短处，惹得皇上很不高兴。
English: At the time, it was thought that his conduct was not perfect enough to be of great use; the Southern Court's confidential envoy, Wang Jitong, ridiculed his shortcomings at a banquet, which made the emperor very unhappy.

古文：六年，遣合卓伐高丽，还，时求进者多附之；然其服食、仆马不加于旧。
现代文：六年，皇上派萧合卓讨伐高丽，回国以后，一时请求进用者大多依附于他；然而其衣物食品、仆从马匹比过去并无增加。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor sent Xiao Hezhuo to fight against Goryeo, and after returning to China, most of those who asked to be used for a while adhered to him; however, his clothing, food, and servants and horses did not increase compared to the past.

古文：帝知其廉，以族属女妻其子，诏许亲友馈献，豪贵奔趋于门。
现代文：皇上知道他廉洁，将同族的女子嫁给他儿子，诏令准予亲友馈赠进献，因此豪富贵显之人均奔忙于他的门庭。
English: The emperor knew that he was incorruptible, married a woman of the same race to his son, and issued a decree to grant gifts to relatives and friends. As a result, the rich and famous were all busy in his court.

古文：太平五年，有疾，帝欲临视，合卓辞曰： 臣无状，猥蒙重任。
现代文：太平五年，萧合卓生病，皇上意欲前往探望，合卓推辞说： 我没有什么功绩，错蒙皇上委以重任。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiping era, Xiao Hezhuo was ill and the emperor wanted to visit him. Hezhuo said, "I have no merit, but I was entrusted with an important task by the emperor."

古文：今形容毁瘁，恐陛下见而动心。 
现代文：现在形容憔悴，我担心陛下见了有伤神志。 
English: Now, I'm afraid your majesty's feelings have been hurt.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的请求。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：会北府宰相萧朴问疾，合卓执其手曰： 吾死，君必为枢密使，慎勿举胜己者。 
现代文：适逢北府宰相萧朴探病，萧合卓拉着他的手说： 我死以后，你一定会担任枢密使，在任上千万不要推举强似自己的人。 
English: When the prime minister of Beifu, Xiao Pu, was visiting the sick, Xiao Hezhuo took him by the hand and said, "After my death, you will surely serve as a privy councilor. When in office, you must never promote someone who is stronger than you."

古文：朴出而鄙之。
现代文：萧朴出来后心里十分鄙视他。
English: After Xiao Pu came out, his heart despised him very much.

古文：是日卒。
现代文：就在这一天萧合卓去世。
English: It was on this day that Xiao He Zhuo passed away.

古文：子乌古，终本部节度使。
现代文：子萧乌古，官至本部节度使。
English: His son, Xiao Wugu, rose through the ranks to become the head of the festival committee.

