古文：朱异贺琛朱异，字彦和，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：朱异字彦和，是吴郡钱唐人。
English: Zhu Yixia and Yan He are Qian Tang people from Wuxi County.

古文：父巽，以义烈知名，官至齐江夏王参军、吴平令。
现代文：父亲朱巽，因忠义节烈而知名，官作到齐朝江夏王参军、吴平令。
English: His father, Zhu Xi, was famous for his loyalty and devotion to duty. He was sent to the Qi Dynasty to join the army of King Xia of Jiangxi and became Wu Pingling.

古文：异年数岁，外祖顾欢抚之，谓异祖昭之曰： 此儿非常器，当成卿门户。 
现代文：朱异年龄敷岁，外祖父颅欢抚摸着朱异对他祖父昭之说： 此儿不是平常的人，当会成就您家门户。 
English: When Zhu Yiren was in his twilight years, his maternal grandfather, Guan Huan, stroked Zhu Yiren's cranium and said to his grandfather, Zhao Zhi: "This is not an ordinary person here. This could be the gateway to your home."

古文：年十余岁，好群聚蒲博，颇为乡党所患。
现代文：年十余岁，喜好群聚赌博，极被乡党所厌恨。
English: He is more than ten years old, likes to gamble in groups, and is extremely hated by the township party.

古文：既长，乃折节从师，遍治《五经》，尤明《礼》、《易》，涉猎文史，兼通杂艺，博弈书算，皆其所长。
现代文：长大之后，便强自克制改变恶习从师学习，遍学《五经》，尤其明晓《礼》、《易》，涉猎文史，兼通杂艺，博戏、围棋、书法、算术，都是所擅长的。
English: When he grew up, he had strong self-restraint to change his bad habits and study with his teacher. He studied the Five Classics thoroughly, especially knew "Li" and "Yi," dabbled in literature and history, and also learned miscellaneous arts, games, Go, calligraphy, and arithmetic, all of which he was good at.

古文：年二十，诣都，尚书令沈约面试之，因戏异曰： 卿年少，何乃不廉？ 
现代文：年二十岁，至京城，尚书令沈约面试他，因而舆他开玩笑说： 你年轻，为什么不廉洁？ 
English: At the age of twenty, when he arrived in Beijing, Shang Shuling arranged for Shen to interview him, so he joked: You are young, why are you not honest?

古文：异逡巡未达其旨。
现代文：朱异心中迟疑没有明白此话的意思。
English: Zhu Yixing hesitantly did not understand the meaning of this.

古文：约乃曰： 天下唯有文义棋书，卿一时将去，可谓不廉也。 
现代文：沈约于是说： 天下惟有文史经义围棋书法这些技艺，你一时都拿了过去，可称作不廉洁呀。 
English: Shen Yu then said: The only skills in the world are literature, history, classics, Go, calligraphy, and you have taken all of them for a moment, which can be called dishonest.

古文：其年，上书言建康宜置狱司，比廷尉。敕付尚书详议，从之。
现代文：这年，上书言建康宜设狱司，舆廷尉品级相同，诏令交舆尚书详议，同意他的意见。
English: In the same year, Jian Kang said in the letter that it was appropriate to set up a prison warden, and the lieutenant of the court of public opinion had the same grade. He ordered to submit the letter to the court of public opinion for detailed discussion, and agreed with his opinion.

古文：旧制，年二十五方得释褐。
现代文：旧的制度，年二十五岁才能做官。
English: Under the old system, one had to be 25 years old to become an official.

古文：时异适二十一，特敕擢为扬州议曹从事史。
现代文：此时朱异二十一岁，朝廷破例下令提拔他任扬州议曹从事史。
English: At this time, Zhu Yi was twenty-one years old, and the imperial court exceptionally ordered that he be promoted to Yangzhou Councillor to engage in history.

古文：寻有诏求异能之士，《五经》博士明山宾表荐异曰： 窃见钱唐硃异，年时尚少，德备老成。在独无散逸之想，处暗有对宾之色，器宇弘深，神表峰峻。
现代文：不久有韶令寻求有特殊才能的人士，《五经》博士明山宾上表推荐朱异说： 我见到钱唐人朱异，年纪尚轻，但品德完备办事精明练达，在独处时没有散逸的想法，在没有人看见自己的时候仍然神色恭敬有如面对宾客，胸怀博大深沉，神态仪表高拔不凡。
English: Zhu Yiyi said, "I saw Qian Tang Zhu Yiyi, he was still young, but his moral character was well prepared and shrewdly practiced. When he was alone, he had no distracting thoughts. When no one saw him, he still looked respectful as if he were facing a guest. His mind was broad and deep, and his demeanor was extraordinary.

古文：金山万丈，缘陟未登；玉海千寻，窥映不测。
现代文：譬如名山高万丈，难以攀援登上巅峰；碧海深千丈，难以窥视它的深处。
English: For example, the famous mountain is so high that it is difficult to climb to the top; the deep blue sea is so deep that it is difficult to peep into its depths.

古文：加以珪璋新琢，锦组初构，触响铿锵，值采便发。
现代文：再譬如珪璋刚刚雕琢，佩带的锦组开始编织，一触动便发出很洪亮的声音，饰以文彩便会显现于世。
English: Again, for example, the gong has just been carved, the brocade group wearing it begins to weave, and a very loud sound is emitted at the touch, and it will appear in the world with decoration.

古文：观其信行，非惟十室所稀，若使负重遥途，必有千里之用。 
现代文：观察他诚信的品行，不祇十户人家所稀有，如果让他负重驰骋于远道，必有千里马的功用。 
English: It is rare for more than ten families to observe his honest behavior. If he is allowed to carry a heavy load on a long journey, he will surely be of great benefit.

古文：高祖召见，使说《孝经》、《周易》义，甚悦之，谓左右曰： 硃异实异。 
现代文：高祖召见他，让他解说《孝经》、《周易》的义理，听后极为高兴，对左右的人说： 朱异确实特异。 
English: Gao Zu summoned him and asked him to explain the principles of "The Book of Filial Piety" and "Zhou Yi." He was extremely happy after listening and said to the people around him: Zhu Yiyi is indeed special.

古文：后见明山宾，谓曰： 卿所举殊得其人。 
现代文：后来见到明山宾，对他说： 您推举的人确是极得当的人才。 
English: Afterward, he saw Mingshanbin and said to him, "The person you have chosen is indeed a very worthy person.

古文：仍召异直西省，俄兼太学博士。
现代文：于是召朱异在西省当值，不久兼太学博士。
English: As a result, Zhu Yi was summoned to be on duty in West Province, and soon became a doctor of science.

古文：其年，高祖自讲《孝经》，使异执读。
现代文：这一年，高祖亲自讲解《孝经》，让朱异执经诵读。
English: This year, Gaozu personally explained the "Filial Piety Sutra" and had Zhu Yixing recite it.

古文：迁尚书仪曹郎，入兼中书通事舍人，累迁鸿胪卿，太子右卫率，寻加员外常侍。
现代文：迁任尚书仪曹郎，入兼中书通事舍人，累经升迁任鸿胪卿，太子右卫率，不久加任员外常侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shang Shuxi Cao Lang, and became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. He was promoted to the post of Hong Yuqing, the prince's right guard, and was soon appointed to the post of non-commissioned officer.

古文：普通五年，大举北伐，魏徐州刺史元法僧遣使请举地内属，诏有司议其虚实。
现代文：普通五年，大举北伐，北魏徐州刺史元法僧遣使者请求带着土地百姓归附，韶令有司商议此事虚实。
English: In the fifth year of the Common Era, when the Northern Expedition was in full swing, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuzhou sent an envoy to the legal monk Zhi Yuan to request that he take the land to the people for annexation, and ordered the magistrate to discuss the matter.

古文：异曰： 自王师北讨，克获相继，徐州地转削弱，咸愿归罪法僧，法僧惧祸之至，其降必非伪也。 
现代文：朱异说： 自从王师北讨，不断取得胜利，徐州地方势力转而削弱，都想归罪法僧，法僧惧祸将至，他的投降必不会是假的。 
English: Zhu Ying said: Since Wang Shih's Northern Expedition, he has continuously won victories, and the local forces in Xuzhou have been weakened. They all want to blame the monk, and the monk is afraid that disaster will come. His surrender will not be fake.

古文：高祖仍遣异报法僧，并敕众军应接，受异节度。
现代文：高祖便遣朱异报告法僧，并敕令众军应接，均受朱异指挥。
English: Gaozu then sent Zhu Yixing to report the Dharma monk, and ordered the troops to respond, all under Zhu Yixing's command.

古文：既至，法僧遵承朝旨，如异策焉。
现代文：既至，法僧遵承朝廷旨意，正如朱异所预测的。
English: So far, the Dharma monks have complied with the will of the imperial court, as predicted by Zhu Yi.

古文：中大通元年，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：中大通元年，迁任散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Nakadamichi, he was transferred to the position of samurai.

古文：自周舍卒后，异代掌机谋，方镇改换，朝仪国典，诏诰敕书，并兼掌之。
现代文：自从周舍去世后，朱异代替他掌管朝廷机谋，军事长官的改换，朝仪国典，韶诰敕书起草，他一并兼管。
English: Since the death of Zhou She, Zhu Yi has replaced him in charge of the imperial machinations, the change of military commanders, the national code of the imperial ceremony, and the drafting of the imperial edict, all of which he is also responsible for.

古文：每四方表疏，当局簿领，谘询详断，填委于前。异属辞落纸，览事下议，纵横敏赡，不暂停笔，顷刻之间，诸事便了。
现代文：每当四方进呈表疏，本管职司的文簿，咨询详断，全都堆积在他面前，朱异挥笔行文，览事决议，才华奔放机敏多智，手中笔一刻不停，顷刻之间，诸事便办妥了。
English: Every time when the four parties submitted their schedules, the books of the relevant departments, and the detailed consultations were all piled up in front of him, Zhu Yixing waved his writing, reviewed the resolutions, was talented and quick-witted, and kept writing for an hour. In an instant, everything was done.

古文：大同四年，迁右卫将军。
现代文：大同四年，迁任右卫将军。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：六年，异启于仪贤堂奉述高祖《老子义》，敕许之。
现代文：六年，朱异兽奏在尽墅堂讲述产担撰著的《老子义》，敕令允许。
English: In the sixth year, Zhu Yixing told the story of "Lao Zi Yi" written by Shen Dang in the villa hall, which was allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：及就讲，朝士及道俗听者千余人，为一时之盛。
现代文：当他就席讲述时，朝士及道俗听者有千余人，成为当时的盛举。
English: When he spoke from the chair, there were more than a thousand people in the audience of morning warriors and Taoists, making it a grand occasion at the time.

古文：时城西又开士林馆以延学士，异与左丞贺琛递日述高祖《礼记中庸义》，皇太子又召异于玄圃讲《易》。
现代文：那时城西又开士林馆以引进学士，朱异舆左丞贺琛轮换讲述高祖撰著的《礼记中庸义》，皇太子又召朱异在玄圃讲述《易》。
English: At that time, the West of the city also opened the Shilin Museum to introduce the bachelor, Zhu Yi and He Yao took turns to tell Gao Zu's "Li Ji Zhong Yong Yi," and the crown prince also invited Zhu Yi to tell "Yi" in the garden.

古文：八年，改加侍中。
现代文：八年，改加任侍中。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：太清元年，迁左卫将军，领步兵。
现代文：太清元年，迁任左卫将军，领步兵。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division, leading the infantry.

古文：二年，迁中领军，舍人如故。
现代文：二年，迁任中领军，舍人照旧。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of middle army leader, but he continued to work as before.

古文：高祖梦中原平，举朝称庆，旦以语异，异对曰： 此宇内方一之征。 
现代文：高祖梦见平定了中原，举朝称赞庆贺，第二日清晨将梦告诉硃异，硃异对答说： 这是宇内四方统一的征兆。 
English: Gao Zu dreamed that he had leveled the Central Plains, and he praised and congratulated the North. In the early morning of the second day, he told the dream to many different people, and many different people replied: This is a sign of the unification of the four parts of the world.

古文：及侯景归降，敕召群臣议，尚书仆射谢举等以为不可，高祖欲纳之，未决；尝夙兴至武德阁，自言 我国家承平若此，今便受地，讵是事宜，脱致纷纭，悔无所及 。
现代文：当侯景归降，敕召群臣商议，尚书仆射谢里等认为不可以接收，高祖想接硃异，此事未决；曾在黎明时来到武擅舆，自言自语地说： 我国家如此太平，今便接受土地，如果因为这样做，万一给国家招致混乱，后悔就来不及了。 
English: When Houjing surrendered, summoned a group of courtiers to discuss, Shang Shuhou Shixie Li and others thought it was impossible to accept, Gao Zu wanted to take over, but the matter was undecided; he came to Wuhan at dawn and said to himself: My country is so peaceful, now I accept the land, if because of this, in case it causes chaos to the country, it is too late to regret.

古文：异探高祖微旨，应声答曰： 圣明御宇，上应苍玄，北土遗黎，谁不慕仰？为无机会，未达其心。
现代文：朱异探测到高祖隐微的心思，应声回答说： 圣明的皇帝统治天下，在上顺应苍天的意旨，北方亡国的百姓，谁不仰慕您，因为没有机会，未能表达他们的心愿。
English: Zhu Yixing detected Gao Zu's subtle thoughts, and replied in response: The holy emperor rules the world, and obeys the will of heaven above, and the people of the northern ruined country, who do not admire you, because they have no opportunity, have failed to express their wishes.

古文：今侯景分魏国太半，输诚送款，远归圣朝，岂非天诱其衷，人奖其计！
现代文：今侯景分割魏国大半土地，献纳诚心表示顺服，从远处来归附圣朝，岂不是上天开导他的内心，众人助成他的计谋？
English: Now that Hou Jing has divided the greater part of the land of Wei, offered up his sincerity as a token of obedience, and come from afar to join the Holy Dynasty, is it not heaven that has enlightened his heart, and the people that have assisted his stratagem?

古文：原心审事，殊有可嘉。
现代文：推究侯景的本意，审察此事，极可赞许。
English: It is highly commendable to deduce Hou Jing's original intention and examine this matter.

古文：今若不容，恐绝后来之望。
现代文：今日如果不接纳他，恐怕会使后来者绝望。
English: If we don't accept him today, I'm afraid it will make future generations despair.

古文：此诚易见，愿陛下无疑。 
现代文：这是显而易见的，愿陛下不要疑虑。 
English: It's obvious, Your Majesty, don't doubt it.

古文：高祖深纳异言，又感前梦，遂纳之。
现代文：高祖极想采纳朱异的意见，又想到前做的梦，于是接纳侯景投降。
English: Gao Zu desperately wanted to adopt Zhu Xian's opinion, and thought of the dream he had before, so he accepted Hou Jing's surrender.

古文：及贞阳败没，自魏遣使还，述魏相高澄欲更申和睦。敕有司定议，异又以和为允，高祖果从之。
现代文：贞阳侯战败被俘，从魏遣派使者回国，述说魏相高澄想再次与梁朝和睦相处，敕令有司定议，朱异又认为应同意此要求，高祖果然听从了。
English: Zhengyang Hou was defeated and captured, and sent an envoy from Wei to return to China, saying that Wei Emperor Gao Cheng wanted to once again live in harmony with the Liang Dynasty. The Emperor ordered Yuji to make a final decision, and Zhu Yi thought that he should agree to this request. Gao Zu actually obeyed.

古文：其年六月，遣建康令谢挺、通直郎徐陵使北通好。
现代文：当年六月，派遣建康令谢挺、通直郎徐陵出使北面通好。
English: In June of that year, Jiankang ordered Xie Ting and Tong Naorong Xuling to send envoys to the north.

古文：是时，侯景镇寿春，累启绝和，及请追使。
现代文：当时，侯景镇守寿春，多次启奏高祖断绝舆魏和好，并请求追回使者。
English: At that time, Houjing Town, guarding Shouchun, repeatedly appealed to Gaozu to break off the Wei and Wei reconciliation, and requested the recovery of the messenger.

古文：又致书与异，辞意甚切，异但述敕旨以报之。
现代文：又致信与朱异，辞意恳切，朱异衹是转述敕旨回答他。
English: He also sent a letter to Zhu Yixing, expressing his sincerity, and Zhu Yixing replied to him by paraphrasing his intention.

古文：八月，景遂举兵反，以讨异为名。
现代文：八月，侯景便举兵反叛，以声讨朱异为名义。
English: In August, Hou Jing raised an army to rebel, in the name of condemning Zhu Rong.

古文：募兵得三千人，及景至，仍以其众守大司马门。
现代文：朱异募兵得三千人，侯景进军到京，便用这些人把守大司马门。
English: Zhu Yixing raised three thousand soldiers, and when Hou Jing marched into Beijing, he used these people to guard the Great Horse Gate.

古文：初，景谋反，合州刺史鄱阳王范、司州刺史羊鸦仁并累有启闻，异以景孤立寄命，必不应尔，乃谓使者： 鄱阳王遂不许国家有一客！ 
现代文：初，侯景阴谋反叛，合州刺史鄱阳王萧范、司州刺史羊鸦仁并多次奏报，朱异认为侯景孤身寄命梁朝，必不会那样做，便对使者说： 鄱阳王就是不允许国家有一客人! 
English: At the beginning, Hou Jing plotted to rebel, Hezhou stabbed Shih Yang Wang Xiao Fan, Shizhou stabbed Shih Yang Ren and repeatedly reported. Zhu Ying believed that Hou Jing would not do that, and said to the messenger: King Shih Yang does not allow the country to have a guest!

古文：并抑而不奏，故朝廷不为之备。
现代文：并压下启奏不上报，所以朝廷没有对此事做防备。
English: The Imperial Court did not take precautions against this, as it did not report the incident.

古文：及寇至，城内文武咸尤之。
现代文：当侯景来侵犯，城内文武官员都责怪他。
English: When Hou Jing came to encroach, the city's civil and military officials all blamed him.

古文：皇太子又制《围城赋》，其末章云： 彼高冠及厚履，并鼎食而乘肥，升紫霄之丹地，排玉殿之金扉，陈谋谟之启沃，宣政刑之福威，四郊以之多垒，万邦以之未绥。
现代文：皇太子又写了《围城赋》，其末章说： 他戴着高冠穿着厚底鞋，并列鼎而食乘坐肥马，登上皇帝居住的宫殿，打开皇室的金门，陈述谋略辅佐君王，宣布政刑的福威，四郊因此修筑许多城垒，万邦因此不得安定。
English: The crown prince also wrote "Siege Fu," the last chapter of which said: He wore a high crown, wore thick-soled shoes, and rode a fat horse while eating, ascended the palace where the emperor lived, opened the golden door of the royal family, stated the strategy to assist the king, and announced the punishment of the government. As a result, many fortresses were built in the suburbs, and the nations were not stable.

古文：问豺狼其何者？
现代文：试问豺狼他是谁？
English: Ask the jackal who he is.

古文：访虺蜴之为谁？ 
现代文：试问虺蜴他为谁？ 
English: Ask the lizard who he is?

古文：盖以指异。
现代文：这是指朱异。
English: This refers to Zhu Rong.

古文：异因惭愤，发病卒，时年六十七。
现代文：朱异因此惭愤，发病死去，时年六十七岁。
English: As a result, Zhu Ying became very angry and died of the disease, at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：方赞朝经，永申寄任。奄先物化，恻悼兼怀。
现代文：韶令说： 故中领军朱异，胸怀博大宽广，才力优秀出众，在朝廷商议谋划策略，已有多年。正应辅助朝廷施政，长久委托他重任，忽然死去，悲伤充满我心中。
English: The imperial edict said: Therefore, the leader of the middle army, Zhu Yi, with a broad mind and outstanding talent, has been discussing and planning strategies in the imperial court for many years. He was supposed to assist the imperial court in governing, and he was entrusted with important tasks for a long time. He died suddenly, and sadness filled my heart.

古文：可赠侍中、尚书右仆射，给秘器一具。
现代文：可追赠他侍中、尚书右仆射，赐给棺材一具。
English: He may be posthumously presented with a chamberlain, a courtier's right-hand man and a coffin.

古文：凶事所须，随由资办。 
现代文：办丧事所需钱财，随由资办。 
English: The money needed to hold the funeral will be provided by the fund.

古文：旧尚书官不以为赠，及异卒，高祖惜之，方议赠事。左右有善异者，乃启曰： 异忝历虽多，然平生所怀，愿得执法。 
现代文：过去大臣故去不追赠尚书官，当朱异故去，高祖惋惜他，在商议追赠事宜时，左右有舆朱异友好的人，便启奏说： 朱异担任的职官虽多，然他平生所希望的，愿能得到执法官职。 
English: In the past, when a minister passed away, he did not posthumously bestow the title of Shang Shokan. When Zhu Yiming passed away, Gao Zu felt sorry for him. When the matter of posthumous gift was being discussed, people around him who had friendship with Zhu Yiming said: Although Zhu Yiming held many posts, what he had hoped for all his life was to be able to obtain the post of magistrate.

古文：高祖因其宿志，特有此赠焉。
现代文：高祖按照他的宿志，特有此追赠。
English: In accordance with his last will and testament, Gaozu made this special gift.

古文：异居权要三十余年，善窥人主意曲，能阿谀以承上旨，故特被宠任。
现代文：朱异身居权要三十多年，善于窥视入主内心深处的意图，能阿谀奉承顺从上旨，因此特别被宠任。
English: Zhu Yizheng has been in power for more than 30 years. He is good at peering into the innermost intentions of the Lord, and can flatter and obey the Lord's will. Therefore, he is particularly favored.

古文：历官自员外常侍至侍中，四官皆珥貂，自右卫率至领军，四职并驱卤簿，近代未之有也。
现代文：历官自员外常侍至侍中，这四职皆可在帽子上插貂尾，自右卫率至领军，这四职出行时皆有扈从仪仗队，近代未曾有这样的事情。
English: Officials from the rank of non-commissioned officer to the rank of sergeant-major, all of these four positions can put an appendix on the hat, and from the right guard leader to the leader of the army, all of these four positions have a badge from the honor guard when traveling. There has never been such a thing in modern times.

古文：异及诸子自潮沟列宅至青溪，其中有台池玩好，每暇日与宾客游焉。
现代文：朱异及诸子自潮沟建造宅室一直排到青溪，宅院裹有楼台池塘玩好，每暇曰与宾客游乐。
English: Zhu Yi and his sons have been building the house from Chaogou to Qingxi. The house is surrounded by a pond, and they enjoy playing with the guests in their free time.

古文：四方所馈，财货充积。
现代文：各方的馈赠，财物充积。
English: Gifts from all sides, accumulation of wealth.

古文：性吝啬，未尝有散施。
现代文：性情吝啬，未曾散施他人。
English: Mean-spirited, never generous to others.

古文：厨下珍羞腐烂，每月常弃十数车，虽诸子别房亦不分赡。
现代文：厨下珍馐美味腐烂，每月常丢弃十数车，虽是他的几个儿子亲戚也不分送。
English: The delicacies rotted in the kitchen, and he often threw away more than a dozen carts a month, even though several of his sons and relatives did not share them.

古文：所撰《礼》、《易》讲疏及仪注、文集百余篇，乱中多亡逸。
现代文：所撰著《礼》、《易》讲疏及仪注、文集百余篇，战乱中多散佚了。
English: He wrote more than a hundred essays, including "Rite" and "Rite of Spring," as well as commentaries and notes on etiquette, but most of them were lost during the war.

古文：长子肃，官至国子博士；次子闰，司徒掾。
现代文：长子名肃，官作到国子博士；次子名闰，任司徒掾。
English: The eldest son was named Su, and his official title was Kuniko hakase; the second son was named Yue, and he was appointed to the post of tutor.

古文：并遇乱卒。
现代文：同在战乱中死去。
English: They both died in the war.

古文：贺琛，字国宝，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：贺琛字国宝，是会稽山阴人。
English: Hera Zi, a national treasure, is a member of the Association for the Study of Shamanism.

古文：伯父蒨，步兵校尉，为世硕儒。
现代文：伯父贺场，任步兵校尉，为当世大儒家。
English: Uncle Hechang, an infantry captain, was a great contemporary Confucian.

古文：琛幼，蒨授其经业，一闻便通义理。
现代文：贺琛年幼时，贺场教授他经学，他一听便能通晓义理。
English: When He Zhen was young, He Fang taught him the classics, and he could understand the meaning of the teachings as soon as he heard them.

古文：蒨异之，常曰： 此儿当以明经致贵。 
现代文：贺埸感到很奇异，常说： 此儿当以明晓经义而致贵。 
English: He Qian felt very strange, and often said: Here, it is important to know the meaning of the sutras.

古文：蒨卒后，琛家贫，常往还诸暨，贩粟以自给。
现代文：贺场去世后，贺琛家贫，常往返诸暨，以贩粟维持生活。
English: After the death of Hefang, the Hezhen family was poor and often traveled back and forth to Zhuji to earn a living by selling poppies.

古文：闲则习业，尤精《三礼》。
现代文：闲暇时则学习经业，尤其精通《三礼》。
English: In his spare time, he studies business, and is particularly proficient in the "Three Rites."

古文：初，蒨于乡里聚徒教授，至是又依琛焉。
现代文：起初，贺疆在乡里聚徒教授经业，到这时他们又从贺琛学经业。
English: At first, He Jiang gathered students in the countryside to teach business, and by this time they had also learned business from He Yao.

古文：普通中，刺史临川王辟为祭酒从事史。
现代文：普通年间，刺史临川王征召他任祭酒从事史。
English: In ordinary years, he was conscripted by King Linchuan to be a historian.

古文：琛始出都，高祖闻其学术，召见文德殿，与语悦之，谓仆射徐勉曰： 琛殊有世业。 
现代文：贺茎开始在京城显露才华，高祖得知他有学识，就在文德殿召见他，与他谈论得很高兴，对仆射徐勉说： 贺噩的确有传世的学业。 
English: He Zi began to show his talent in Beijing. When Gaozhu learned that He Zi had knowledge, he summoned him to the Palace of Literature and Art. He was very happy to talk with him. He said to his servant Xu Mian: "He Zi indeed has a school that will be passed down to the next generation."

古文：仍补王国侍郎，俄兼太学博士，稍迁中卫参军事、尚书通事舍人，参礼仪事。
现代文：于是补任王国侍郎，不久兼任太学博士，随即迁任中卫参军事、尚书通事舍人，参礼仪事。
English: As a result, he was appointed as an attendant of the kingdom, and soon he was also appointed as a doctor of theology, and then he was transferred to the position of middle guard, military, secretary, and ceremonial.

古文：累迁通直正员郎，舍人如故。
现代文：累经升迁任通直正员郎，舍人照旧。
English: Zou Zixuan was transferred to be the younger brother of Tsunenao, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：又征西鄱阳王中录事，兼尚书左丞，满岁为真。
现代文：又任征西鄱阳王中录事，兼尚书左丞，期满实授。
English: He was also appointed to record the records of the Western Zhengyang King Junior High School, and concurrently, he was appointed to the post of Senior Lecturer of the Western Zhengyang King Middle School.

古文：诏琛撰《新谥法》，至今施用。
现代文：诏令贺琛编撰《新谧法》，至今施用。
English: He decreed that He Xizhe compile the "New Law of the People's Republic of China," which is still in use today.

古文：时皇太子议，大功之末，可以冠子嫁女。
现代文：当时皇太子建议在大功的末时，可以冠子嫁女。
English: At that time, the crown prince suggested that at the end of his great service, he could marry off his daughter.

古文：琛驳之曰：
现代文：贺琛反驳他说：
English: He Zang countered by saying:

古文：令旨以 大功之末可得冠子嫁女，不得自冠自嫁。 
现代文：令旨认为 大功的末时可以冠子嫁女，但不得自行加冠礼自行婚礼 。
English: According to the edict, a man of great merit can marry his daughter with a crown, but he is not allowed to add a crown to his own wedding.

古文：推以《记》文，窃犹致惑。
现代文：推求《礼记》文义，我对此解释还极疑惑。
English: I'm still very doubtful about this interpretation of the "Book of Rites."

古文：案嫁冠之礼，本是父之所成，无父之人，乃可自冠。故称大功小功，并以冠子嫁子为文；非关惟得为子，己身不得也。
现代文：查考嫁冠的礼仪，本是由父亲主持，无父亲的人，才可自行冠礼，故称大功小功，并以冠子嫁子为礼制；不衹说可以为子，而己身不可这样。
English: According to the etiquette of the crowning ceremony, it was originally presided over by the father, and only those without a father could crown themselves. Therefore, it was called a great achievement and a small achievement, and the crowning ceremony was a ceremonial system. It is fair to say that you can be a son, but you can't be like that.

古文：小功之末，既得自嫁娶，而亦云 冠子娶妇 ，其义益明。
现代文：小功的末时，既可得以自行嫁娶，而且也说 冠子娶妇 ，它的意思就更清楚了。
English: At the end of the small work, if you can get married on your own, and also say that the crown marries a woman, its meaning will be clearer.

古文：故先列二服，每明冠子嫁子，结于后句，方显自娶之义。
现代文：因此先列二服丧，都写明冠子嫁子，放在下句，正显明白娶的意思。
English: Therefore, the first two funerals, both written clearly crowned bride and groom, placed in the next sentence, are clearly understood to mean marriage.

古文：既明小功自娶，即知大功自冠矣，盖是约言而见旨。
现代文：既然显明小功自娶，即知大功可得自冠，这是用简略的语言表达旨意。
English: Since it is clear that small achievements are self-made, that is, knowing that great achievements can be self-crowned, this is the intention expressed in simple language.

古文：若谓缘父服大功，子服小功，小功服轻，故得为子冠嫁，大功服重，故不得自嫁自冠者，则小功之末，非明父子服殊，不应复云 冠子嫁子 也。
现代文：如果说因父服大功丧，子服小功丧，小功服丧轻，所以可得为子冠嫁，大功服丧重，所以不得自嫁自冠，那么在小功的末时，没有说明父舆子丧服的不同，就不应再说 冠子嫁子 了。
English: If it is said that because of the father's great merits and losses, the son's small merits and losses, and the small merits and losses are light, it is possible to marry the son, and the great merits and losses are heavy, so it is not allowed to marry the crown, then at the end of the small merits, without explaining the difference between the father's and the son's mourning clothes, it should no longer be said that the crown is the bride.

古文：若谓小功之文言己可娶，大功之文不言己冠，故知身有大功，不得自行嘉礼，但得为子冠嫁。
现代文：如果说小功之文已说明己可娶，大功之文不说己可冠，所以知道身服大功丧，不得自行嘉礼，但可得为子冠嫁。
English: If the text of small merit has stated that one can marry, and the text of great merit does not say that one can be crowned, so you know that you have made great achievements, you must not make a commendation on your own, but you can be crowned and married.

古文：窃谓有服不行嘉礼，本为吉凶不可相干。
现代文：我认为服丧不得行嘉礼，本是吉凶礼不可相互干犯。
English: I believe that one should not perform the funeral salute, but the auspicious and inauspicious salutes should not interfere with each other.

古文：子虽小功之末，可得行冠嫁，犹应须父得为其冠嫁。
现代文：子虽在小功的末时，可得以行冠嫁，还是应需父亲得为他们主持冠嫁。
English: Although children can be married at the end of their minor service, it is still necessary for the father to preside over the wedding.

古文：若父于大功之末可以冠子嫁子，是于吉凶礼无碍；吉凶礼无碍，岂不得自冠自嫁？
现代文：如果父亲在大功的末时可以冠子嫁子，说明吉凶礼之间无妨碍；吉凶礼之间无妨碍，怎能不得自冠自嫁？
English: If a father can marry his daughter-in-law at the end of his great exploits, it means that there is no obstacle between auspicious and inauspicious rites; if there is no obstacle between auspicious and inauspicious rites, how can he not marry himself?

古文：若自冠自嫁于事有碍，则冠子嫁子宁独可通？
现代文：如果自冠自嫁对服丧的事情有妨碍，则冠子嫁子难道独自可行？
English: If self-crowning and self-marriage are obstacles to mourning, is crowning and self-marrying feasible on their own?

古文：今许其冠子而塞其自冠，是琛之所惑也。
现代文：今允许他可冠子而不许自冠，是贺琛所疑惑的。
English: Now he is allowed to wear a crown but is not allowed to crown himself, which He Yao doubts.

古文：又令旨推 下殇小功不可娶妇，则降服大功亦不得为子冠嫁 。
现代文：又令旨推研 下殇小功不可娶妇，则降服大功亦不得为子冠嫁 。
English: It was also decreed that those with minor achievements should not marry, and those with major achievements should not marry their children.

古文：伏寻此旨，若谓降服大功不可冠子嫁子，则降服小功亦不可自冠自娶，是为凡厥降服大功小功皆不得冠娶矣。
现代文：我考索此旨，如果说降服大功不可以冠子嫁子，则降服小功也不可自冠自娶，造就是说凡是降服大功小功都不能冠娶。
English: According to my research, if it is said that one who surrenders great merits cannot marry a crowned daughter, then one who surrenders small merits cannot marry a crowned daughter, which means that one who surrenders great merits cannot marry a crowned daughter.

古文：《记》文应云降服则不可，宁得惟称下殇？
现代文：如是这样，《礼记》文应说降服则不可冠娶，岂能衹说下殇？
English: If this is the case, the "Rituals" text should say that one who surrenders should not be crowned, can it be said that one who surrenders?

古文：今不言降服，的举下殇，实有其义。
现代文：今不言降服，祇举下殇，实有它的含义。
English: Now, surrendering without a word, just raising the lower eyelid, really has its meaning.

古文：夫出嫁出后，或有再降，出后之身，于本姊妹降为大功；若是大夫服士，又以尊降，则成小功。
现代文：出嫁与过继给别人为后，或有服丧再降，遇继给别人的人，对亲姊妹降服为大功；如果是大夫为身为士的父亲服丧，又因为是以尊降服，则成为小功。
English: For a person who has been married and adopted by someone else, or who has been buried and reburied and then succeeded to someone else, it is a great merit to surrender to a sister; if it is a doctor who has been buried as a father, and because he has surrendered with respect, it becomes a small merit.

古文：其于冠嫁，义无以异。
现代文：逭对于冠嫁，意义没有差别。
English: For the bridegroom, the meaning is no different.

古文：所以然者，出嫁则有受我，出后则有传重，并欲薄于此而厚于彼，此服虽降，彼服则隆。
现代文：所以是这样，因为出嫁则有承受自我，遇继别人则得传承重责，并想薄于此而厚于彼，此服虽降，而彼服则隆。
English: So it is, for to marry is to bear oneself, to succeed another is to inherit a heavy burden, and to be thinner than the other is to be thicker than the other, and though the one is lower, the other is higher.

古文：昔实期亲，虽再降犹依小功之礼，可冠可嫁。
现代文：过去为亲戚实服期丧，虽再降服，仍依照小功的礼仪，可冠可嫁。
English: In the past, it was customary for relatives to perform a period of mourning, and although they had to perform another period of mourning, they were still allowed to marry according to the etiquette of minor achievements.

古文：若夫期降大功，大功降为小功，止是一等，降杀有伦，服末嫁冠，故无有异。
现代文：如果期服降大功，大功降为小功，祇是降一等级，降级是有规定的，而服末嫁冠，是没有差别的。
English: If a major meritorious deed is downgraded from a major meritorious deed, and a major meritorious deed is downgraded to a minor meritorious deed, it is only downgraded by one grade, and the downgrading is stipulated, but there is no difference in the dowry at the end of the service.

古文：惟下殇之服，特明不娶之义者，盖缘以幼稚之故。夭丧情深，既无受厚佗姓，又异传重彼宗，嫌其年稚服轻，顿成杀略，故特明不娶，以示本重之恩。
现代文：衹有下殇之服，特别表明不娶的意思，衹因为年幼死去的缘故，天丧情深，既没有受到他人厚待，又舆传重彼宗不同，嫌他年幼而服轻丧，顿成杀略，因此特别表明不娶，以表示本重之恩。
English: has a lower  dress, especially indicating the meaning of not marrying,  because of his young death, he is deeply saddened by nature, he has not been treated well by others, and the rumor is different, he is young and wears a light mourning, suddenly killing, so he specially indicates not marrying, to express his gratitude.

古文：是以凡厥降服，冠嫁不殊；惟在下殇，乃明不娶。
现代文：所以凡是降服，冠嫁没有不同；衹有下殇，才明示不娶。
English: Therefore, there is no difference between capitulating and marrying; it is only when the bridegroom is married that the bride explicitly refuses to marry.

古文：其义若此，则不得言大功之降服，皆不可冠嫁也。
现代文：它的意思是这样，则不得说大功的降服，皆不可以冠嫁。
English: It means that no one is allowed to make a great sacrifice, and no one is allowed to marry in the first place.

古文：且《记》云 下殇小功 ，言下殇则不得通于中上，语小功则不得兼于大功。
现代文：而且《礼记》说 下殇小功 ，是说下殇则不得通用于中舆上殇，说小功则不得兼用于大功。
English: Moreover, "Li Ji" said that the lower gong should not be used for the middle gong and the upper gong, and that the lower gong should not be used for the higher gong.

古文：若实大小功降服皆不冠嫁，上中二殇亦不冠嫁者，《记》不得直云 下殇小功则不可 。
现代文：如果实是大小功降服皆不冠嫁，上中二殇也不冠嫁，《礼记》不得衹说 下殇小功则不可 。
English: If it is true that no one is crowned for great or small deeds of obedience, and no one is crowned for the first two days of junior high school, "Li Ji" must not say that the first day of junior high school must not be crowned.

古文：恐非文意。
现代文：恐怕不是文意。
English: I'm afraid that's not the meaning of the sentence.

古文：此又琛之所疑也。
现代文：此又是贺琛所疑惑的。
English: This, again, is the source of He's doubts.

古文：遂从琛议。
现代文：便听从贺琛的议论。
English: He listened to He Zhen's argument.

古文：迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：迁任员外散骑常侍。
English: Non-commissioned officers were transferred to the rank of samurai.

古文：旧尚书南坐，无貂；貂自琛始也。
现代文：旧例尚书座位在南边，不穿貂皮衣；穿貂皮衣自贺琛开始。
English: The former Shangshu seat is on the south side, do not wear mink coats; wear mink coats from the beginning.

古文：顷之，迁御史中丞，参礼仪事如先。
现代文：不久，迁任御史中丞，参礼仪事如先前。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of goshi chujo, and attended the ceremony as before.

古文：琛家产既豊，买主第为宅，为有司所奏，坐免官。
现代文：贺琛家产既丰，就买公主的宅第为住宅，被有司劾奏，因此事被免官。
English: As his family's property was already rich, he bought the princess' house to use as a residence. He was impeached and removed from office.

古文：俄复为尚书左丞，迁给事黄门侍郎，兼国子博士，未拜，改为通直散骑常侍，领尚书左丞，并参礼仪事。
现代文：不久又任尚书左丞，迁任给事黄门侍郎，兼国子博士，未受任，改任通直散骑常侍，领尚书左丞，并参礼仪事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Shoshu Sajo, transferred to the post of Huangmen Zhi Rong, and concurrently to the post of Dr. Kuniko, but before he was appointed, he was reassigned to the post of Tsuchida Sanshiro Zenshiro, led Shoshu Sajo, and participated in ceremonial events.

古文：琛前后居职，凡郊庙诸仪，多所创定。
现代文：贺琛前后任职，凡是郊庙祭祀诸礼仪，多半由他制定。
English: He was in and out of office, and most of the rituals of the suburb temples were formulated by him.

古文：每见高祖，与语常移晷刻，故省中为之语曰： 上殿不下有贺雅。 
现代文：每见高祖，与他谈论常常时间很长，因此宫禁中人造样说： 上殿不下有贺雅。 
English: Whenever he saw Gaozu, he would often spend a long time talking to him, so during the palace ban, an artificial sample said: "There is no one like He Ya in the upper court."

古文：琛容止都雅，故时人呼之。
现代文：贺遂的容止都很文雅，所以时人造样称呼他。
English: He Sui's demeanor was very elegant, so he was called an artificial sample.

古文：迁散骑常侍，参礼仪如故。
现代文：迁任散骑常侍，参礼仪照旧。
English: He was transferred to the position of knight errant, but still attended the ceremony.

古文：是时，高祖任职者，皆缘饰奸谄，深害时政，琛遂启陈事条封奏曰：
现代文：当时，高祖任用的官员，皆缘饰奸谄，深害时政，贺堡于是启陈条例密封上奏说：
English: At that time, the officials appointed by Gao Zu were all traitors, and deeply harmed the current politics. Therefore, He Castle sealed the regulations and said:

古文：臣荷拔擢之恩，曾不能效一职；居献纳之任，又不能荐一言。
现代文：臣蒙受到了拔擢的恩典，然不能效力于一职；高祖进献忠言的重任，又不能进荐一言。
English: The vassal has received the grace of promotion, but can not serve in a post; Gaozhu has the important task of recommending loyalty, but can not recommend a word.

古文：窃闻 慈父不爱无益之子，明君不畜无益之臣 ，臣所以当食废飧，中宵而叹息也。
现代文：听说 慈父不喜爱无作为的儿子，明君不容留无才能的大臣 ，臣所以承受俸禄废寝忘食，夜半而叹息。
English: It is said that a loving father does not like a son who does nothing, and a wise ruler does not tolerate a talentless minister, so the minister receives a salary, forgets to eat and sleep, and sighs in the middle of the night.

古文：辄言时事，列之于后。
现代文：便进言时事，列之于后。
English: He then went on to speak about current affairs, which are listed below.

古文：非谓谋猷，宁云启沃。
现代文：不能称作是谋略，宁可说是竭尽忠诚。
English: It can't be called a strategy, but rather the utmost loyalty.

古文：独缄胸臆，不语妻子。
现代文：独自藏在胸中，不告诉妻子儿女。
English: Hiding alone in his chest, not telling his wife and children.

古文：辞无粉饰，削槁则焚。
现代文：言辞无粉饰，写成后将草稿烧焚。
English: The words were not whitewashed, and the draft was burned after it was written.

古文：脱得听览，试加省鉴。
现代文：或许得以听览，请试加审察。
English: You may be able to listen to it, so please check it out.

古文：如不允合，亮其戆愚。
现代文：如果不允合，原谅我的戆愚。
English: If you don't agree, forgive my stupidity.

古文：其一事曰：今北边稽服，戈甲解息，政是生聚教训之时，而天下户口减落，诚当今之急务。
现代文：其一事是：今北边束魏叩头称臣，兵器战衣已解息，正该是让百姓繁衍后代积蓄财物、教化训导他们的时候，然而天下户口减少，这的确是当今的急务。
English: One thing is: Now that the Northern Wei clique has kowtowed to the imperialists, and the weapons and uniforms have been disbanded, it is time to let the people breed offspring, accumulate wealth, and educate and train them. However, the number of household registration cards in the world is decreasing, which is indeed today's urgent task.

古文：虽是处雕流，而关外弥甚，郡不堪州之控总，县不堪郡之裒削，更相呼扰，莫得治其政术，惟以应赴征敛为事。
现代文：虽然到处衰残零落，而关外更严重，郡地忍受不了州上的纷繁迫促，县地忍受不了郡裹的搜刮，他们相继搅扰，不去实施政术，惟以应赴征敛为事务。
English: Although everywhere decaying and fragmented, and more serious outside the pass, the county cannot bear the state's hustle and bustle, and the county cannot bear the county's scrounging, they have been disturbed one after another, not to implement politics, but to collect what they should.

古文：百姓不能堪命，各事流移，或依于大姓，或聚于屯封，盖不获已而窜亡，非乐之也。
现代文：百姓不能承受命令，就各自流亡，或依附于大姓，或聚集在边界，遣都是不得已而窜亡，不是乐意这样。
English: Unable to bear the order, the people went into exile individually, or attached themselves to the feudal lords, or gathered at the border. They were sent to their deaths out of necessity, not out of choice.

古文：国家于关外赋税盖微，乃至年常租课，动致逋积，而民失安居，宁非牧守之过？
现代文：国家从关外征收赋税很轻，甚至当年正常的租课，动不动就拖欠积压，而百姓失去安居，难道不是牧守的过错？
English: The state's tax collection from outside the Guan was very light, even from the normal rent of the year, the backlog of arrears was constantly in arrears, and the people lost their safe homes. Isn't it the fault of the herdsmen?

古文：东境户口空虚，皆由使命繁数。
现代文：束境户口空虚，皆由于使命繁多。
English: People with empty hukou have a lot to do.

古文：夫犬不夜吠，故民得安居。
现代文：犬夜不吠，因此百姓得以安居。
English: Dogs do not bark at night, so people can live in peace.

古文：今大邦大县，舟舸衔命者，非惟十数；复穷幽之乡，极远之邑，亦皆必至。
现代文：今大邦大县，大船奉命而来的，不衹十敷；又穷幽的乡村。极边远的小城，也都必定到达。
English: Nowadays, in large countries and large counties, large ships that have been ordered to come do not have to travel far; and in poor and remote villages. Even small towns that are very far away are bound to arrive.

古文：每有一使，属所搔扰；况复烦扰积理，深为民害。
现代文：每来一位使者，便有所骚扰，何况是烦扰连续不断，深为民害。
English: Every time a messenger comes, there is some harassment, and what's more, the harassment is continuous, causing deep harm to the people.

古文：驽困邑宰，则拱手听其渔猎；桀黠长吏，又因之而为贪残。
现代文：才能低下疲惫的官吏，则拱手听从使者的搜刮；凶暴狡诈的官吏，又依靠使者更为贪残。
English: Tired officials, who are low on talent, lend a hand to the emissary's scrounging; violent and cunning officials, in turn, rely on the emissary to be even more greedy.

古文：纵有廉平，郡犹掣肘。
现代文：纵有廉平的官吏，郡裹官吏还要掣肘。
English: Even if there are honest officials, county-level officials will still be constrained.

古文：故邑宰怀印，类无考绩，细民弃业，流冗者多，虽年降复业之诏，屡下蠲赋之恩，而终不得反其居也。
现代文：因此邑宰怀揣大印，而类别没有考核，百姓弃业，流离失所的人很多，虽然每年下韶让他们复业，多次给以免除赋税的恩惠，而百姓终不得返回他们居住的地方。
English: As a result, the mayor of the town has a big seal, but there is no assessment of the category, the people have abandoned their jobs, and there are many displaced people. Although they are allowed to resume their jobs every year, they are repeatedly given tax exemptions, and the people are finally not allowed to return to their place of residence.

古文：其二事曰：圣主恤隐之心，纳隍之念，闻之遐迩，至于翾飞蠕动，犹且度脱，况在兆庶。
现代文：其二事是：圣主忧念百姓疾苦，出百姓于水火的迫切心情，远近都有所闻，至于那些飞行蠕动的小虫，尚且能解脱苦难，何况百姓。
English: The second thing is: the Lord is concerned about the suffering of the people, and the urgent feelings of the people have been heard from far and near. As for those small flying worms, they can still relieve suffering, let alone the people.

古文：而州郡无恤民之志，故天下颙颙，惟注仰于一人，诚所谓 爱之如父母，仰之如日月，敬之如鬼神，畏之如雷霆 。
现代文：然而州郡官吏没有忧虑百姓疾苦的情感，因此天下人的期待盼望，衹能注仰一个人，诚如所说 爱慕他如父母，仰视他如日月，敬重他如鬼神，畏惧他如雷霆 。
English: However, the state and county officials do not have the emotion of worrying about the hardships of the people. Therefore, the expectations and hopes of the people of the world can not look up to a person. As I said, I love him like a parent, look up to him like the sun and moon, respect him like a ghost, and fear him like thunder.

古文：苟须应痛逗药，岂可不治之哉？
现代文：如果能按病投药，病怎能治不好呢？
English: If you can administer medicine according to the disease, how can the disease be cured?

古文：今天下宰守所以皆尚贪残，罕有廉白者，良由风俗侈靡。使之然也。
现代文：今天下宰守所以皆追求贪残，很少有廉洁清白的，确实由于风俗侈靡，使他们这样。
English: Today's vice-governors are all greedy and corrupt, and few are clean and innocent. Indeed, it is their extravagant habits that have made them so.

古文：淫奢之弊，其事多端，粗举二条，言其尤者。
现代文：淫奢的弊端，表现在许多事情上，粗举二条，指出其中最严重的。
English: The drawbacks of lasciviousness are manifested in many things. I will give two examples, pointing out the most serious.

古文：夫食方丈于前，所甘一味。
现代文：人在僧侣那儿吃饭，所能吃到好的衹一味。
English: If you eat at a monk's house, you'll get the best eel you can get.

古文：今之燕喜，相竞夸豪，积果如山岳，列肴同绮绣，露台之产，不周一燕之资，而宾主之间，裁取满腹，未及下堂，已同臭腐。
现代文：今宴喜，竞相夸耀豪华，顿积的美果像山岳，摆列的佳肴如同绮绣，修建露台用的钱财，不足一次宴饮的费用，然而宾主之间，取舍衹是为了腹满，因此未等到他们下堂，那些食品已同臭腐被扔掉。
English: Now feasts compete to be the most sumptuous, the fruit piled up like mountains, the delicacies arrayed like embroidered tapestries, the money to build a terrace is less than the cost of a banquet, but between the guests, they take turns to fill their stomachs, so before they leave the hall, those foods have been thrown away with stench.

古文：又歌姬儛女，本有品制，二八之锡，良待和戎。
现代文：又歌姬舞女，本有等级，十六岁的年龄，应是等待成亲。
English: Also, the singer and dancer, who has a grade, sixteen years of age, should be waiting to get married.

古文：今畜妓之夫，无有等秩，虽复庶贱微人，皆盛姬姜，务在贪污，争饰罗绮。
现代文：今蓄妓的人，没有等级，虽是庶贱微小的人，却都盛纳美女姬姜，竭力贪污，争用罗绮装饰。
English: The people who keep prostitutes now have no rank, although they are lowly and small, but they all accept the beautiful woman Ji Jiang, try their best to be corrupt, and compete to decorate with worms.

古文：故为吏牧民者，竞为剥削，虽致赀巨亿，罢归之日，不支数年，便已消散。
现代文：所以任官牧民，竞相剥削百姓，虽聚资巨亿，罢官还家之后，支持不了几年，资财便花销散尽。
English: Therefore, the appointed officials and herdsmen competed to exploit the people, and although they collected huge amounts of money, after they were dismissed and returned home, they could not support it for several years, and the funds were spent and dispersed.

古文：盖由宴醑所费，既破数家之产；歌谣之具，必俟千金之资。
现代文：适是由于宴饮美酒所需费用，使许多人倾家荡产；唱歌跳舞所需用具，必用千金去买。
English: It is due to the cost of drinking fine wine that many people have lost their homes; the equipment needed for singing and dancing must be bought with a lot of money.

古文：所费事等丘山，为欢止在俄顷。
现代文：所消耗的东西舆丘山相等，而衹是为了片刻的寻欢作乐。
English: The things consumed are equal to those of Myeongguksan, and the gongs are for a moment's pleasure.

古文：乃更追恨向所取之少，今所费之多。如复傅翼，增其搏噬，一何悖哉！
现代文：便更追恨过去所掠取的太少，今费用的太多，如能再次作官，就要加倍攫取财钱，这是多么荒谬呀!
English: How absurd it is that he should be more resentful of the fact that in the past he took too little, and now the expenses are too much, and if he is able to hold office again, he will have to take twice as much money!

古文：其余淫侈，著之凡百，习以成俗，日见滋甚，欲使人守廉隅，吏尚清白，安可得邪！
现代文：其他淫侈之事，写下来会有千百条，习以成俗，日见更甚，想使人在一隅守廉，使官吏崇尚清白，哪能得到呢!
English: Other lascivious things, there will be hundreds of thousands of them written down. It has become a custom, and it is becoming more and more common. If you want to make people keep their chastity in one corner, and make officials advocate innocence, how can you get it?

古文：今诚宜严为禁制，道之以节俭，贬黜雕饰，纠奏浮华，使众皆知，变其耳目，改其好恶。
现代文：今诚宜严加禁制，教导他们要节俭，贬黜雕饰之人，纠奏浮华之事，使众人皆知，更改他们盛宴歌舞的奢靡生活，改变他们的好恶。
English: Now is the time to impose strict discipline, to teach them to be frugal, to disparage the rich, to expose the glitterati, to change their extravagant life of feasting, singing and dancing, to change their likes and dislikes.

古文：夫失节之嗟，亦民所自患，正耻不及群，故勉强而为之，苟力所不至，还受其弊矣。
现代文：失去节操，也是百姓所自患，正以不能合群而羞耻，也就勉强而为之，尽力而做不到，还要受到弊害。
English: The loss of self-discipline is also the people's own problem. They are ashamed of not being able to fit in with the crowd, so they do it reluctantly. They can't do their best, but they still suffer from the evils.

古文：今若厘其风而正其失，易于反掌。
现代文：今日如果整治风气纠正失节，易于反掌。
English: Today, if the culture of rectification corrects the incongruity, it is easy to turn back.

古文：夫论至治者，必以淳素为先，正雕流之弊，莫有过俭朴者也。
现代文：讨论完美的治理，必以淳素为首要，纠正雕饰放荡的弊端，莫有超过提倡俭朴的。
English: To discuss the perfect governance, it is necessary to take chastity as the first priority, correct the drawbacks of carving and debauchery, and promote frugality.

古文：其三事曰：圣躬荷负苍生以为任，弘济四海以为心，不惮胼胝之劳，不辞癯瘦之苦，岂止日昃忘饥，夜分废寝。
现代文：其三事是：陛下以担负百姓为己任，广济四海为心愿，不畏惧手足磨出茧子的劳苦，不推辞使身体瘦弱的辛苦，何止是日斜忘饥，夜深废寝。
English: The three things are: His Majesty takes it as his duty to bear the burden of the people, wishes to expand to the four corners of the globe, is not afraid of the toil of his hands and feet to grind out lice, does not reject the toil that weakens his body, and more than anything else, forgets hunger when the sun goes down and does not sleep at night.

古文：至于百司，莫不奏事，上息责下之嫌，下无逼上之咎，斯实道迈百王，事超千载。
现代文：至于百司，没有不向上奏事的，上面息止了责备下面的嫌疑，下面没有了逼迫上面的罪过，逭治国之道超过百王，造事情超过千年的记载。
English: As for Baishi, there is no record of not reporting to the top, the above stopped blaming the suspicion below, the below did not persecute the sins of the above, the way of governing the country exceeds a hundred kings, and the record of creating things exceeds a thousand years.

古文：但斗筲之人，藻棁之子，既得伏奏帷扆，便欲诡竞求进，不说国之大体。
现代文：但才短量小的人，富贵人家子弟，既得以在陛下面前奏事，便想以不正当的手段谋求进升，不管国家的大体。
English: But only a small number of people, the children of the rich and noble, who have been able to present their case before His Majesty, want to seek advancement by improper means, regardless of the country as a whole.

古文：不知当一官，处一职，贵使理其紊乱，匡其不及，心在明恕，事乃平章。
现代文：不知当一官，任一职，最重要的是治理紊乱，匡正不合时宜的事情，心地明恕，事情就能办得公平。
English: I don't know if it's an official or any post, but the most important thing is to manage the disorder, rectify the untimely things, and forgive with a clear mind, so that things can be done fairly.

古文：但务吹毛求疵，擘肌分理，运挈瓶之智，徼分外之求，以深刻为能，以绳逐为务，迹虽似于奉公，事更成其威福。
现代文：衹去吹毛求疵，分析精密，运用浅薄的才智，提出分外的要求，以严峻刻薄为能事，致力于纠举他人过失而将他斥逐，遣做法虽貌似奉公，事实是更成就了他们的威福。
English: go to nitpick, analyze precision, use shallow intelligence, put forward extraordinary requirements, with severe vitriol as a matter of competence, committed to punishing others for their mistakes and expelling him, although the practice of expelling seems to be public service, the fact is that they have achieved more.

古文：犯罪者多，巧避滋甚，旷官废职，长弊增奸，实由于此。
现代文：犯罪的人更多，巧妙躲避更为严重。旷废官职，滋增弊奸，确实是由于此。
English: More people are committing crimes, and more serious crimes are being cleverly evaded. It is indeed because of this that officials are leaving their posts and malfeasance is on the rise.

古文：今诚愿责其公平之效，黜其谗愚之心，则下安上谧，无侥幸之患矣。
现代文：今我诚愿实现要求他们公平处事的效益，革除他们谗愚的心愿，则下面安定上面平静，无侥幸的祸患了。
English: Now I sincerely hope to achieve the benefits of requiring them to deal with things fairly and eliminate their foolish wishes, then the bottom will be stable and the top will be calm, and there will be no misfortune.

古文：其四事曰：自征伐北境，帑藏空虚。
现代文：其四事是：自从征伐北境，国库空虚了。
English: Four things: Since the Northern Expedition, the treasury is empty.

古文：今天下无事，而犹日不暇给者，良有以也。
现代文：今天下无战事，然而还是日不暇给，确实是有原因。
English: Today, there is no war, but there is still a lot of work to do. There is indeed a reason for this.

古文：夫国弊则省其事而息其费，事省则养民，费息则财聚，止五年之中，尚于无事，必能使国豊民阜。
现代文：国家疲困时则应减少战事停止浪费，事少则能养民，停止浪费则能聚财，衹用五年，倘若没有战事，必能使国丰民富。
English: When the country is exhausted, it should reduce the war and stop the waste. If there are few things, it can feed the people. If there is no waste, it can accumulate wealth. If there is no war, it will take five years to make the country rich and the people rich.

古文：若积以岁月，斯乃范蠡灭吴之术，管仲霸齐之由。
现代文：如果积以岁月，造就是范蠡减吴国的方法，管仲让齐国称霸的途径。
English: If accumulated over the years, it would be a way for Fan Xuan to reduce the power of Wu, and a way for Guanzhong to allow Qi to dominate.

古文：今应内省职掌，各检其所部。
现代文：今应内减少职官，各检察他的所属。
English: It is now necessary to reduce the number of officials within the procuratorate, and each procuratorate should be assigned to its own department.

古文：凡京师治、署、邸、肆应所为，或十条宜省其五，或三条宜除其一；及国容、戎备，在昔应多，在今宜少。
现代文：凡在京师的治所、官署、官邸、市肆应做的事情，或有十件当省去五件，或有三条当除去一条；以及国容、戎备，在昔日应多，在今日应少。
English: Of all the things that should be done in government offices, government offices, official residences, and municipalities in Beijing, there are ten things that should be omitted and five things that should be done, or three things that should be removed and one thing that should be done; as well as the national image and military preparedness, which should be more in the past and less today.

古文：虽于后应多，即事未须，皆悉减省。
现代文：虽在以后应多，即事情未必需要，全都减省。
English: Although there should be more in the future, that is, things may not be needed, all are reduced.

古文：应四方屯、传、邸、治，或旧有，或无益，或妨民，有所宜除，除之；有所宜减，减之。
现代文：应对四方的屯戍、传驿、官署、治所，或是旧有，或无益处，或妨碍百姓，应有革除的，就革除；有应减省的，就减省。
English: As for the settlements, posts, government offices, and administrative centers in the four directions, whether they are old, useless, or harmful to the people, if they should be eliminated, they should be eliminated; if they should be reduced, they should be reduced.

古文：凡厥兴造，凡厥费财，有非急者，有役民者；又凡厥讨召，凡厥征求，虽关国计，权其事宜，皆须息费休民。
现代文：凡有兴造，凡是费钱财的，有不是急需的，有劳役百姓的；又凡是征伐招抚，凡是征收索取，虽有关国计，权衡事宜，皆须息费休民。
English: All construction projects, all projects that cost money, all projects that are not urgently needed, and all projects that require the labor of the common people, as well as all conquests, all requisitions, and all levies and requisitions, although related to the national budget and matters of trade-offs, are subject to interest and fees paid by the people.

古文：不息费，则无以聚财；不休民，则无以聚力。
现代文：不息费，则不能聚财；不休民，则不能聚民力。
English: If you don't pay interest, you can't accumulate wealth; if you don't pay people, you can't accumulate people's power.

古文：故蓄其财者，所以大用之也；息其民者，所以大役之也。
现代文：所以储蓄钱财，是为了大事用它；休养百姓，是为了大劳役用他们。
English: Wherefore lay up treasure for thyself, that thou mayest have need of it in the day of trouble: and keep the people from want, that thou mayest have need of them in the day of distress.

古文：若言小事不足害财，则终年不息矣；以小役不足妨民，则终年不止矣。
现代文：如果说小事情不会破费多少钱财，那么花费就会终年不息止；认为小劳役不会妨碍百姓，那么劳役就会终年不停止。
English: If it is said that small things do not cost much money, then the expenditure will continue all year round; if it is believed that small labor will not hinder the people, then the labor will not stop all year round.

古文：扰其民而欲求生聚殷阜，不可得矣。
现代文：骚扰其民而想求得生聚殷实，是不可得的。
English: Harassing one's own people in the hope of making a few bucks is not.

古文：耗其财而务赋敛繁兴，则奸诈盗窃弥生，是弊不息而其民不可使也，则难可以语富强而图远大矣。
现代文：消耗他们的钱财而使赋敛繁兴，则奸诈盗窃更为滋长，结果是弊病不断而百姓不可役使，则难以说国富民强图谋远大呀。
English: If the consumption of their money and wealth leads to prosperity, then treachery and theft will grow even more. As a result, the ills will continue and the people will not be able to serve. It is difficult to say that the country is rich and the people are strong.

古文：自普通以来，二十余年，刑役荐起，民力雕流。
现代文：自普通以来，二十多年，刑法舆劳役逐渐兴起，民力衰减流散。
English: In the more than 20 years since the establishment of the People's Republic of China, the Criminal Law Public Security Labor Service has gradually emerged, while the people's power has waned and dispersed.

古文：今魏氏和亲，疆埸无警，若不及于此时大息四民，使之生聚，减省国费，令府库蓄积，一旦异境有虞，关河可扫，则国弊民疲，安能振其远略？
现代文：今魏氏和亲，疆场无警报，不如趁此时好好息养国民，使他们生聚，减省国费，令府库有蓄积，一旦国外有忧患，关河都可扫荡，而国敝民疲，怎能施行深远的谋略？
English: Now that there is no warning on the battlefield for the Wei clan and their relatives, it is better to take advantage of this time to properly nurture the people, make them gather, reduce state expenses, and make the government treasury have accumulation. Once there is trouble abroad, Guanhe can be swept, and the people are tired, how can we implement far-reaching strategies?

古文：事至方图，知不及矣。
现代文：事情发生了才圆谋，知道了也来不及。
English: It's too late to plan when things happen, and too late to know.

古文：书奏，高祖大怒，召主书于前，口授敕责琛曰：
现代文：书上奏，高祖大怒，召主书上前，口授敕责问贺琛说：
English: When the book was opened, Gao Zu flew into a rage, summoned the master of the book to come forward, gave him a dictation and scolded him, saying:

古文：謇謇有闻，殊称所期。
现代文：正直的言论有所听闻，格外的称赞是你所期望的。
English: Honest statements are heard, and extra praise is expected.

古文：但朕有天下四十余年，公车谠言，见闻听览，所陈之事，与卿不异，常欲承用，无替怀抱，每苦倥偬，更增惛惑。
现代文：但朕有天下四十多年，公车署收到直言奏书，已见闻听览，他们所陈述的事情，与你的陈述没有不同，常想承用，不废弃他们的心愿，每苦于事情纷繁，更加糊涂困惑。
English: However, I have been in the world for more than forty years. The public transportation authority has received a candid report, and I have seen, heard and listened to it. The things they have stated are no different from your statement. I often want to adopt them and not abandon their wishes. Every time I suffer from the complexity of things, I am more confused.

古文：卿珥貂纡组，博问洽闻，不宜同于郤茸，止取名字，宣之行路。
现代文：卿冠上插貂尾印上佩丝带，学问渊博知识丰富，不应当与猥贱的人相同，衹为索取名声，在道路上炫耀自己。
English: A gentleman with an embroidered crown and an embroidered cape should not be the same as a vulgar person who wants to be famous and flaunt himself on the road.

古文：言 我能上事，明言得失，恨朝廷之不能用 。
现代文：说 我能向上奏事，明言政治得失，遗憾朝廷不能采用 。
English: Saying that I can report things to the higher-ups, clearly stating political gains and losses, and regretting that the imperial court cannot adopt it.

古文：或诵《离骚》 荡荡其无人，遂不御乎千里 。
现代文：或诵读《离骚》 广远呀那裹没有人，所以不能驭车马去千里之外 。
English: Or reciting "Leaving So" - "It's vast and there's no one there, so I can't drive thousands of miles away."

古文：或诵《老子》 知我者希，则我贵矣 。
现代文：或诵读《老子》 知我者少，则我就贵重了 。
English: Or reciting "Lao Zi" If few people know me, then I am valuable.

古文：如是献替，莫不能言，正旦虎樽，皆其人也。
现代文：像这样的诤言进谏，没有不会说的，在正月初一的宴会上，皆是这样的人。
English: There is no one who would not say something like this. At the banquet on the first day of the first month, everyone is like this.

古文：卿可分别言事，启乃心，沃朕心。
现代文：卿可以分类言事，启发我的心，开导我的心。
English: Sir can classify words and things, inspire my heart, enlighten my heart.

古文：卿云 今北边稽服，政是生聚教训之时，而民失安居，牧守之过 。
现代文：卿说 今北边东魏叩头称臣，正该是让百姓繁衍后代积蓄财物、教化训导他们的时候，而百姓失去安居，这是牧守的遇错 。
English: He said that now that the Eastern Wei Dynasty in the north is kowtowing to its vassals, it is time to let the people breed and accumulate wealth, educate and train them, but the people have lost their homes. This is the mistake of the herdsmen.

古文：朕无则哲之知，触向多弊，四聪不开，四明不达，内省责躬，无处逃咎。
现代文：朕没有知人的智慧，到处多弊病，不能广听四方之言，不能遍视四方之事，从内心省察责备自己，无处可逃避罪过。
English: I don't have the wisdom to know others, there are many ills everywhere, I can't listen to all sides, I can't see all sides, I can't examine and reproach myself from the heart, and there is nowhere to escape from sin.

古文：尧为圣主，四凶在朝；况乎朕也，能无恶人？
现代文：尧为圣主，然而朝廷还有四凶；何况朕呢，朝廷能无恶人？
English: Although I am a saint, the imperial court still has four villains. What's more, can the imperial court do without evil-doers?

古文：但大泽之中，有龙有蛇，纵不尽善，不容皆恶。
现代文：但大泽之中，有龙有蛇，即使不尽是善的，也不容许全是恶的。
English: However, in Osawa, there are dragons and snakes. Even if they are not all good, they are not allowed to be all evil.

古文：卿可分明显出：某刺史横暴，某太守贪残，某官长凶虐；尚书、兰台，主书、舍人，某人奸猾，某人取与，明言其事，得以黜陟。
现代文：卿可明确指出：某刺史横暴，某太守贪残，某官长凶虐；尚书、兰台，主书、舍人，某人奸猾，某人收受和给予，明言其事，得以罢免或拔擢他们。
English: Sir can clearly point out: a certain assassin is violent, a certain governor is greedy and cruel, a certain official is cruel; Shangshu, Lantai, hostess, host, someone is treacherous, someone receives and gives, speaks out, and can dismiss or promote them.

古文：向令舜但听公车上书，四凶终自不知，尧亦永为暗主。
现代文：假使让舜衹听公车上书，自己最终不会知道四凶，尧也永远成为昏庸的君主。
English: If you let the baboon listen to the public bus, he will not know the four evils in the end, and the baboon will always be a dull monarch.

古文：卿又云 东境户口空虚，良由使命繁多 ，但未知此是何使？
现代文：卿又说 束境户口空虚，皆由于奉命出使的人繁多 ，但未知这是什么使者？
English: Sir also said that the Sakukai hukou is empty, all because of the large number of people sent by order, but it is unknown what kind of messenger this is?

古文：卿云 驽困邑宰，则拱手听其渔猎；桀黠长吏，又因之而为贪残 ，并何姓名？
现代文：卿说 才能低下疲惫的官吏，则拱手听从使者的搜刮；凶暴狡诈的官吏，又依靠使者更贪残 ，他们都叫什么名字？
English: Sir, what are the names of officials who, when their strength is low and they are tired, give themselves up to the pursuit of the envoy; officials who are cruel and cunning, and who rely on the envoy to be even more cruel?

古文：廉平掣肘，复是何人？
现代文：廉平的官吏，掣肘的官吏，又是什么人？
English: Who are the honest officials, and who are the constrained officials?

古文：朝廷思贤，有如饥渴，廉平掣肘，实为异事。
现代文：朝廷思念贤人，如同饥之择食，渴之求水，廉平的官吏受到掣肘，实为奇异的事情。
English: The court's yearning for a wise man is like a hungry man's choice of food or a thirsty man's search for water. It is truly a strange thing when honest officials are constrained.

古文：宜速条闻，当更擢用。
现代文：应迅速逐条奏闻，应当加倍擢用。
English: They should quickly report the facts one by one, and they should double their efforts.

古文：凡所遣使，多由民讼，或复军粮，诸所飚急，盖不获已而遣之。
现代文：凡所遣使，多由于民讼，或又是为了军粮，这些事情如狂风般疾速，都是由于不得已而遣使。
English: As for those who were sent away, most of them were sent away because of civil disputes, or because of war provisions. These things, as swift as the wind, were sent away out of necessity.

古文：若不遣使，天下枉直云何综理？
现代文：如果不遣使，天下枉舆直的事情如何综理？
English: If you don't send an envoy, how will you sort out the things that are unfairly in the world?

古文：事实云何济办？
现代文：事情如何办理成功？
English: How can things be handled successfully?

古文：恶人日滋，善人日蔽，欲求安卧，其可得乎！
现代文：恶人日益滋长，善人日益被埋没，想求得安卧，哪能得到呢？
English: The wicked increase more and more, but the righteous are destroyed more and more. Who can find rest for the weary?

古文：不遣使而得事理，此乃佳事。
现代文：不遣使而得以治事，逭便是好事。
English: It is a good thing to be able to govern without being sent.

古文：无足而行，无翼而飞，能到在所；不威而伏，岂不幸甚。
现代文：无足而能行走，无翼而能飞翔，能到要去的地方；不施加威力而能降服人，难道不幸运得很。
English: To be able to walk without feet, to fly without wings, to be able to get where you want to go, to be able to subdue others without using force, isn't that fortunate?

古文：卿既言之，应有深见，宜陈秘术，不可怀宝迷邦。
现代文：卿既然这样说，就应有深见，应陈述秘术，不可怀才而使国家昏乱。
English: Sir, since you say so, you should have deep insight, you should expound esoteric knowledge, and you should not confuse the country by concealing your talent.

古文：卿又云：守宰贪残，皆由滋味过度。
现代文：卿又说：守宰贪残，皆由于饮食奢侈过度。
English: Sir also said: guards are greedy and cruel, all because of the extravagant diet.

古文：贪残糜费，已如前答。
现代文：官吏的贪残靡费，已如前面的回答。
English: Greed and extravagance on the part of government officials, was the answer given earlier.

古文：汉文虽爱露台之产，邓通之钱布于天下，以此而治，朕无愧焉。
现代文：漠塞童虽吝惜修建露台用的钱财，然而邓通铸造的钱布满天下，以此办法治理国家，朕没有可羞愧的。
English: Although the deserters were stingy with the money used to build terraces, the money minted by Duntong spread all over the world, and I have nothing to be ashamed of in governing the country in this way.

古文：若以下民饮食过差，亦复不然。
现代文：如果认为下民的饮食遇差，也不是这样。
English: If it is thought that the diet of the common people is poor, it is not so.

古文：天监之初，思之已甚。
现代文：初年，思之已甚。
English: In the first year, I thought about it a lot.

古文：其勤力营产，则无不富饶；惰游缓事，则家业贫窭。
现代文：他们勤力经营产业，则没有不富饶的；游手好闲不急于营产，则家业贫困。
English: If they diligently run the industry, then there is no one who is not rich; if they are idle and do not rush to produce, then the family business will be poor.

古文：勤修产业，以营盘案，自己营之，自己食之，何损于天下？
现代文：勤力置办产业，以营取盘中餐，自己经营，自己食之，此对天下有何损害？
English: What is the harm to the world of diligently purchasing and operating industries, taking advantage of business opportunities, running your own business, and eating your own food?

古文：无赖子弟，惰营产业，致于贫窭，无可施设，此何益于天下？
现代文：无赖子弟，不勤于营置产业，使自己贫困，什么事情都不做，此对天下有何益处？
English: Rogue children, not diligent in setting up industries, impoverishing themselves, doing nothing, what is the benefit of this to the world?

古文：且又意虽曰同富，富有不同：悭而富者，终不能设；奢而富者，于事何损？
现代文：而且道理上讲都称同富，但富有不同：惶吝而富有，终不能有建设；奢侈而富有，对事情有何损害？
English: And logically speaking, they are all said to be equally rich, but the rich are different: if you are miserly and rich, you can't build anything; if you are extravagant and rich, what is the harm to things?

古文：若使朝廷缓其刑，此事终不可断；若急其制，则曲屋密房之中，云何可知？
现代文：如果朝廷缓施刑罚，此事终不可断绝；如果强加禁止，则曲屋密房中的事情，如何可知？
English: If the imperial court suspends the punishment, the matter will not be cut off; if a ban is imposed, how can the things in the secret room of Quya be known?

古文：若家家搜检，其细已甚，欲使吏不呼门，其可得乎？
现代文：如果去家家搜检，做这样的事已是极细密，想使官吏不呼叫门，能可以吗？
English: If you go to a person's home to conduct a search, this is already a very sensitive matter, and you want to prevent officials from knocking on the door, is that okay?

古文：更相恐胁，以求财帛，足长祸萌，无益治道。
现代文：这样更加相互恐胁，以索求财物，足以助长祸患的萌生，对治道无益。
English: In this way, mutual intimidation and demand for property are sufficient to promote the emergence of disasters, and are not beneficial to governance.

古文：若以此指朝廷，我无此事。
现代文：如果此是指朝廷，但我无此事。
English: If this refers to the imperial court, I am not aware of it.

古文：昔之牲牢，久不宰杀，朝中会同，菜蔬而已，意粗得奢约之节。
现代文：过去祭祀用的牲畜。久已不宰杀了，朝中聚会，衹是蔬菜而已，这表明粗略懂得奢侈与节约的节度。
English: The livestock used for sacrifices in the past has not been slaughtered for a long time, the North and the South are meeting, and the lettuce is only a vegetable, which indicates a rough understanding of luxury and economy.

古文：若复减此，必有《蟋蟀》之讥。
现代文：如果再减用度，必会有《蟋蟀》中的讥讽。
English: If the degree of use is further reduced, there will inevitably be the sarcasm of "Cocoon."

古文：若以为功德事者，皆是园中之所产育。
现代文：如果以为做功德事浪费，皆是园中所出产的。
English: If you think that doing meritorious deeds is a waste, they are all produced in the garden.

古文：功德之事，亦无多费，变一瓜为数十种，食一菜为数十味，不变瓜菜，亦无多种，以变故多，何损于事，亦豪芥不关国家。
现代文：做功德的事情，也不用多破费，变一瓜为数十种，一种菜可做出十多种味道，瓜莱不变，也不用多种，因为变化种类而莱味多了，对事情有什么损害，也是丝毫与国家无关。
English: It doesn't take much effort to do something meritorious. A single melon can be transformed into dozens of varieties. A dish can be made with more than a dozen flavors. The guarai doesn't change, and it doesn't need to be made in multiple varieties. Because the varieties change, the taste of the guarai increases. Any damage to the cause has nothing to do with the country.

古文：如得财如法而用，此不愧乎人。
现代文：如果得财像这样的方法使用，遣事在人面前没有可羞愧的。
English: There is nothing to be ashamed of in the eyes of others if you have made your money in such a way.

古文：我自除公宴，不食国家之食，多历年稔，乃至宫人，亦不食国家之食，积累岁月。
现代文：我自己除去公宴，不食国家之食，已经多年了，甚至宫人，也不食国家之食，岁月也久了。
English: I myself have been avoiding public banquets and eating state food for many years, and even palace officials have not been eating state food for a long time.

古文：凡所营造，不关材官，及以国匠，皆资雇借，以成其事。
现代文：凡所营造，不经由材官，以及国匠，都是用钱雇借，把事情办成。
English: Everything that is built, without going through the quartermaster, as well as the national craftsman, is hired with money to get things done.

古文：近之得财，颇有方便，民得其利，国得其利，我得其利，营诸功德。
现代文：近之得财，极为方便，民得利，国得利，我得利，营造各种功德。
English: It is extremely convenient to get rich quickly. The people benefit, the country benefits, I benefit, and all kinds of merits are created.

古文：或以卿之心度我之心，故不能得知。
现代文：或以卿的心揣度我的心，所以不能知道这些事情。
English: or with the heart of a lord, to know my heart, so I cannot know these things.

古文：所得财用，暴于天下，不得曲辞辩论。
现代文：所得财物，在天下公开，不得用片面的言辞辩论。
English: The property obtained shall be made public to the world, and shall not be debated with one-sided words.

古文：卿又云女妓越滥，此有司之责，虽然，亦有不同：贵者多畜妓乐，至于勋附若两掖，亦复不闻家有二八，多畜女妓者。
现代文：卿又说蓄养女妓超越等级没有节制，这是有司的责任，即便如此，也有不同：富贵人家多蓄养妓乐，至于贵戚近臣及门下中书省这样的官署，并没有听闻家中有十六岁女子，多蓄养女妓的。
English: Sir also said that there is no restraint in raising prostitutes beyond the ranks, which is the responsibility of the department. Even so, there is a difference: rich and noble families often raise prostitutes. As for noble relatives, close ministers and government agencies such as the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, they have not heard that there are sixteen-year-old women in the family, who often raise prostitutes.

古文：此并宜具言其人，当令有司振其霜豪。
现代文：这些都应直言其人，该让有司整顿多年的奢侈。
English: All this should be told to the people directly, and the luxury of years of rectification should be allowed.

古文：卿又云： 乃追恨所取为少，如复傅翼，增其搏噬，一何悖哉。 
现代文：卿又说： 便更追恨向日所掠取的太少，如能再次做官，就要加倍攫取财钱，这是多么荒谬呀。 
English: Sir also said: "How absurd it is that he should be even more resentful of the little he has been able to plunder to date, and if he is able to become an official again, he will have to take twice as much money.

古文：勇怯不同，贪廉各用，勇者可使进取，怯者可使守城，贪者可使捍御，廉者可使牧民。
现代文：勇敢与怯懦的人不相同，贪婪与廉洁的人各有用处，勇敢的人可使他进取，怯懦的人可使他守城，贪婪的人可使他捍御外侵，廉洁的人可使他治理人民。
English: The brave and the cowardly are not the same, the greedy and the clean have their uses, the brave can make progress, the cowardly can defend the city, the greedy can defend foreign invasion, and the clean can govern the people.

古文：向使叔齐守于西河，岂能济事？
现代文：假若使叔齐守卫西河，难道能成功？
English: Would it be possible to succeed if the West River were to be guarded by uncles and uncles?

古文：吴起育民，必无成功。
现代文：而吴起去育民，也必不成功。
English: And Wu Zi's attempt to educate the people will not succeed.

古文：若使吴起而不重用，则西河之功废。
现代文：假若使用吴起而不重用他，他就不会在西河建立功勋。
English: If Wu Qi had been used instead of reusing him, he would not have established his merits in the West River.

古文：今之文武，亦复如此。
现代文：今日使用文武官员，也像这样。
English: Today, the use of civil and military officials is also like this.

古文：取其搏噬之用，不能得不重更任，彼亦非为朝廷为之傅翼。
现代文：取他们能攫取的作用，如若不行可不重新另加任用，他们也不是被朝廷委以权力地位而更加作恶。
English: They took the roles they could get, and if they couldn't do it, they didn't have to be reappointed. They weren't put in a position of power by the Imperial Household Agency to do even more evil.

古文：卿以朝廷为悖，乃自甘之，当思致悖所以。
现代文：卿以朝廷的做法为荒谬，甚至是心甘情愿，也应该考虑造成荒谬的原由。
English: Sir, if you think the court's action is absurd, even if you are willing to do so, you should also consider the reason for the absurdity.

古文：卿云 宜导之以节俭 。又云 至治者必以淳素为先 。
现代文：卿说 应当教导他们要节俭 ，又说 最好的治理办法一定是以淳素为首要 。
English: Sir said they should be taught to be frugal, adding that the best way of governance must be to put Junsu first.

古文：此言大善。
现代文：此言大善。
English: That's a very good point.

古文：夫子言 其身正，不令而行；其身不正，虽令不从 。
现代文：孔夫子说 当政者身正，不发命令下面就会行动；当政者身不正，虽下命令下面也不服从 。
English: Confucius said that the person in power is upright, and will act without issuing orders; the person in power is dishonest, and will not obey orders.

古文：朕绝房室三十余年，无有淫佚。
现代文：朕失去妻子婢妾已三十多年，没有贪色放荡的行为。
English: I have lost my wife, my slave and my concubine for more than thirty years. I have never been greedy or debauched.

古文：朕颇自计，不与女人同屋而寝，亦三十余年。
现代文：朕很能自忖，不与女人同屋而寝，也有三十多年。
English: I'm quite capable of not sleeping in the same house as a woman, and have been for more than thirty years.

古文：至于居处不过一床之地，雕饰之物不入于宫，此亦人所共知。
现代文：至于居处的大小不过是放一床，雕饰了的东西不许入宫中，此也是人所共知的。
English: As for the size of the dwelling, it is just a bed, and it is well known that carved objects are not allowed to enter the palace.

古文：受生不饮酒，受生不好音声，所以朝中曲宴，未尝奏乐，此群贤之所观见。
现代文：禀性不饮酒，禀性不喜好音声，所以朝廷举办宴会，不曾奏乐，此事群贤所见到的。
English: People don't like to drink, and people don't like to listen to music, so when the imperial court held a banquet, they didn't play any music. This is what the sages saw.

古文：朕三更出理事，随事多少，事少或中前得竟，或事多至日昃方得就食。
现代文：朕三更起床理事，随着事情的多少，事少或午前能处理完，事多至太阳偏西才得就食。
English: The three of us get up more and more, the director, with the number of things, the less things or can be dealt with in the morning, the more things have to eat until the sun is westward.

古文：日常一食，若昼若夜，无有定时。
现代文：经常一日吃一顿饭，或白天或夜晚，没有固定的时间。
English: Often eat one meal a day, either during the day or at night, there is no fixed time.

古文：疾苦之日，或亦再食。
现代文：患病痛苦的日子，或许吃两次。
English: On a painful day of illness, perhaps eat twice.

古文：昔要腹过于十围，今之瘦削裁二尺余，旧带犹存，非为妄说。
现代文：昔日腰腹宽过了五尺，今日瘦成二尺多，旧的腰带还保存，不是妄说。
English: In the past, the waist and abdomen were more than five feet wide, but today they have shrunk to more than two feet, and the old belts are still preserved. This is not an exaggeration.

古文：为谁为之？
现代文：为了谁这样做？
English: Who is this for?

古文：救物故也。
现代文：是为了拯救万物的缘故。
English: It is for the sake of saving all things.

古文：《书》曰： 股肱惟人，良臣惟圣。 
现代文：《书》说： 有了手足才能成为人，有了良臣能成为圣主。 
English: "The Book" says: Only with limbs can one become a human being, only with good ministers can one become a saint.

古文：向使朕有股肱，故可得中主。
现代文：向日使朕有股肱，就可得做中主。
English: If you give me a stake in the future, you can be the middle man.

古文：今乃不免居九品之下， 不令而行 ，徒虚言耳。
现代文：今仍然不免屈居九品官之下， 不令而行 ，衹是虚假的话。
English: Even now, it is still inevitable to live under the authority of the Nine Rank Officials, and to do whatever they want, even if it is false.

古文：卿今慊言，便罔知所答。
现代文：卿现在还有嫌恨不满意，便不知怎样回答了。
English: Sir, still disgusted and dissatisfied, did not know how to reply.

古文：卿又云 百司莫不奏事，诡竞求进 。
现代文：卿又说 百司没有不向上奏事的，采取不正当的手段求取进升 。
English: Sir also said that the Hundred Division did not fail to report to the top, and took improper means to seek promotion.

古文：此又是谁？
现代文：此人又是谁？
English: Who is this person?

古文：何者复是诡事？
现代文：什么又是欺诈之事？
English: What is fraud?

古文：今不使外人呈事，于义可否？
现代文：今不使外人向上呈事，从道理上讲可以这样吗？
English: If we don't promote outsiders now, can we do so rationally?

古文：无人废职，职可废乎？
现代文：没有人旷废职务，那官职可废除吗？
English: If no one resigns, can the office be abolished?

古文：职废则人乱，人乱则国安乎？
现代文：官职废除人就要作乱，人作乱则国家能安宁吗？
English: If a person abolishes an official position, it is necessary to make a disturbance. If a person makes a disturbance, can the country be at peace?

古文：以咽废飧，此之谓也。
现代文：因噎废食，就是说的这种事情。
English: Wasted food because of lameness, that is the kind of thing I am talking about.

古文：若断呈事，谁尸其任？
现代文：如果断绝呈事，谁担负这个责任？
English: Who is responsible for breaking up a fight?

古文：专委之人，云何可得？
现代文：能专门任用的人，如何可得到？
English: How can you get someone who can be specially appointed?

古文：是故古人云： 专听生奸，独任成乱。 
现代文：所以古人说： 独听一个人的意见，就会发生奸邪的事情，仅仅信用一个人，就会造成祸乱。 
English: That's why the ancients said, "If you listen to only one person's opinion, evil things will happen. If you trust only one person, it will cause disaster."

古文：犹二世之委赵高，元后之付王莽。
现代文：这如同台二世委用趟高，元后付权给王莽。
English: This is just like the Second Taiwan Committee using a high-ranking official and then giving the power to Wang Mang.

古文：呼鹿为马，卒有阎乐望夷之祸，王莽亦终移汉鼎。
现代文：呼鹿为马，终于发生了间乐在望夷宫杀二世的祸害，王莽也终于夺取了西汉的政权。
English: Calling a deer a horse, the scourge of killing the second generation in the palace of Wangyi finally occurred, and Wang Mang finally seized power in Western Han.

古文：卿云 吹毛求疵 ，复是何人所吹之疵？ 擘肌分理 ，复是何人乎？
现代文：卿说 吹毛求疵 ，又是什么人所吹之疵？ 分析精密 ，又是什么人？
English: He said, "Punctuation, who is it that punctuates? Precision of analysis, who is it?"

古文：事及 深刻  绳逐 ，并复是谁？
现代文：事情到了 严峻刻薄  纠举别人过错而斥逐之 ，并又是谁？
English: Things have come to a grim, mean-spirited, blame-the-other-guy-and-expel-him situation, and who is to blame?

古文：又云 治、署、邸、肆 ，何者宜除？
现代文：又说 治、署、邸、肆 ，哪一处应撤除？
English: He also said that the government, the police station, the residence, the hospital, which one should be removed?

古文：何者宜省？ 国容戎备 ，何者宜省？
现代文：哪一职应省去？ 国容戎备 ，哪项应省去？
English: Which post should be omitted? National defense, which item should be omitted?

古文：何者未须？ 四方屯传 ，何者无益？何者妨民？
现代文：哪项是不需要的？ 四方屯传 ，哪一个无益，哪一个妨害了百姓？
English: Which one is unnecessary, which one is useless, which one disturbs the people?

古文：何处兴造而是役民？
现代文：何处兴造是役民？
English: Where are the construction workers?

古文：何处费财而是非急？
现代文：何处费财而不是急需的？
English: What is expensive and not urgently needed?

古文：若为 讨召 ？
现代文：什么为 讨召 ？
English: What is a vocation?

古文：若为 征赋 ？
现代文：什么为 征赋 ？
English: What is conscription?

古文：朝廷从来无有此事，静息之方复何者？
现代文：朝廷从来没有此等事情，安静休养的方法又是什么？
English: The Imperial Court has never had anything like this happen, so what is the best way to rest and recuperate?

古文：宜各出其事，具以奏闻。
现代文：每件事情应举出实例，备文奏报上来。
English: Every matter should be given an example, and a report should be prepared.

古文：卿云 若不及于时大息其民，事至方图，知无及也 。
现代文：卿说 如果不趁此时好好息养国民，事情发生了才去图谋，知道也来不及了 。
English: Sir said that if we don't take advantage of this time to nurture the people, things will happen before we go to plot, and it's too late to know.

古文：如卿此言，即时便是大役其民，是何处所？
现代文：就如同卿所说，当下便是大役百姓，是什么处所？
English: As Sir said, now is the time for the people to rise up, but where?

古文：卿云 国弊民疲 ，诚如卿言，终须出其事，不得空作漫语。
现代文：卿说 国敝民疲 ，诚如卿言，终究必须举出实例，不得凭空说些不着边际的话。
English: He said that the country and the people are tired, and as he said, it is necessary to give examples after all, and not to say things that are out of bounds.

古文：夫能言之，必能行之。
现代文：能够论说，就必能实行。
English: If you can talk about it, you can do it.

古文：富国强兵之术，急民省役之宜，号令远近之法，并宜具列。
现代文：富国强兵的术略，救民急难减省劳役的事宜，指挥远近的方法，并应具体陈列。
English: The strategy of a strong army in a rich country, the urgent need to save the people and the matter of reducing the labor service, the methods of commanding far and near, and should be specifically displayed.

古文：若不具列，则是欺罔朝廷，空示颊舌。
现代文：若不陈列，则是欺罔朝廷，空示口辩才能。
English: If it is not displayed, it is seen as a way of bullying the imperial court and showing off one's debating skills.

古文：凡人有为，先须内省，惟无瑕者，可以戮人。
现代文：凡是人要有作为，必先自己省察自己，惟独没有疵病过失的人，可以责罪别人。
English: If any man would do well, he must first examine himself; and he that is without blemish or fault, let him accuse others.

古文：卿不得历诋内外，而不极言其事。
现代文：卿不得遍加蠛毁朝廷内外官员，而不直言实事。
English: Sir, you must not repeatedly slander officials both inside and outside the Imperial Court, and not tell the truth.

古文：伫闻重奏，当复省览，付之尚书，班下海内，庶乱羊永除，害马长息，惟新之美，复见今日。
现代文：期待着听到你再次上奏，当再次观览，批付给尚书省，向全国颁布，使乱羊般的灾祸永除，危害性的事物永远灭绝，希望新的美政，又出现在今。
English: I'm looking forward to hearing you play again, to seeing you again, to approving it to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and to promulgating it to the whole country, so that the scourge of rampaging sheep will be eliminated forever, and harmful things will be eliminated forever. I hope that a new US policy will appear again now.

古文：琛奉敕，但谢过而已，不敢复有指斥。
现代文：贺琛接到敕旨，衹能认错罢了，不敢再有指斥。
English: After receiving the order, He Rong could only admit his mistake and did not dare to make any more criticisms.

古文：久之，迁太府卿。
现代文：很久后，迁任太府卿。
English: A long time later, he was transferred to the post of Dafu-kyo.

古文：太清二年，迁云骑将军、中军宣城王长史。
现代文：太清二年，迁任云骑将军、中军宣城王长史。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of General Yunjie, and the Chinese army of Xuancheng Wangchangshi.

古文：侯景举兵袭京师，王移入台内，留琛与司马杨曒守东府。
现代文：侯景皋兵袭击京师，王移居台内，留下贺琛舆司马杨嗷守卫东府。
English: Hou Jingyao's soldiers attacked Beijing Division, Wang moved to Taichung, leaving He Yao's secretary Ma Yangyao to guard Dongfu.

古文：贼寻攻陷城，放兵杀害，琛被枪未至死，贼求得之，轝至阙下，求见仆射王克、领军硃异，劝开城纳贼。
现代文：贼不久攻陷都城，放任士兵进行残害，贺琛受枪击未死，贼寻找到他，用车把他载到宫殿前，让他求见仆射王克、领军朱异，劝他们开城门放贼进去。
English: The thieves soon captured the capital and allowed the soldiers to carry out the mutilations. He Yao was shot but did not die. The thieves found him and drove him to the front of the palace. They asked him to meet with the servant, Wang Ke, and the leader, Zhu Yi, and persuaded them to open the gate and let the thieves in.

古文：克等让之，涕泣而止，贼复轝送庄严寺疗治之。
现代文：王克等人责备他，他涕泣而止，贼又用车载送他到庄严寺疗治创伤。
English: Wang Ke and others scolded him, he stopped crying, and the thief drove him to a solemn temple to heal his wounds.

古文：明年，台城不守，琛逃归乡里。
现代文：第二年，台城失陷，贺琛逃归乡里。
English: The following year, Taicheng fell and He Rong fled back to his hometown.

古文：其年冬，贼进寇会稽，复执琛送出都，以为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：当年冬天，贼进兵侵犯会稽，再次执捕贺琛将他送出都城，任他为金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the winter of that year, a thief entered the army and encroached on the auditorium. He was arrested again and sent out of the capital. He was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：后遇疾卒，年六十九。
现代文：后得病去世，年六十九岁。
English: He later became ill and died at the age of 69.

古文：琛所撰《三礼讲疏》、《五经滞义》及诸仪法，凡百余篇。
现代文：贺琛编撰了礼讲疏》、五经滞义》及诸仪法，共百余篇。
English: He Qian compiled "The Book of Etiquette," "The Five Classics" and "Rites and Decrees," a total of more than one hundred articles.

古文：子诩，太清初，自仪同西昌侯掾，出为巴山太守，在郡遇乱卒。
现代文：子徐勉，太清初年，自仪同西昌侯掾出任巴山太守，在郡遇乱去世。
English: His son Xu Tsun, the first year of the Qing Dynasty, served as the governor of Bashan from the same time as Xichang Houyi, and died in the county during the turmoil.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察云：夏侯胜有言曰： 士患不明经术；经术明，取青紫如拾地芥耳。 
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察说：夏侯胜说过： 士人的忧患是他不精通经术；经术精通了，他取得高官显爵就如同拾取地上的芥菜那样容易。 
English: Shang Shiuyao, the official of the Chen Dynasty, said: Xia Hou Shenglu said: The sorrow of the scholar is that he is not proficient in the sutra; if he is proficient in the sutra, it is as easy for him to obtain a high-ranking official and knighthood as it is to pick up mustard greens on the ground.

古文：硃异、贺琛并起微贱，以经术逢时，致于贵显，符其言矣。
现代文：朱异、贺琛并出身微贱，依靠懂经术遇到时机，得到贵显，符合夏侯胜的言论。
English: Zhu Yiyi, He Xuan, both from humble origins, relied on their understanding of the scriptures to meet opportunities and gain prestige, which is in line with Xia Hou Sheng's remarks.

古文：而异遂徼宠幸，任事居权，不能以道佐君，苟取容媚。
现代文：然而朱异在得到皇帝的恩宠，任职掌权后，不能用正道辅佐君主，苟且进取，奉承谄媚。
English: However, after Zhu Rong obtained the emperor's favor and assumed power, he could not use the right way to assist the monarch. He was pushy and flattering.

古文：及延寇败国，实异之由。
现代文：以至于引敌败国，实是朱异的责任。
English: So much so that it is Zhu Xi's responsibility to lead the enemy to defeat.

古文：祸难既彰，不明其罪，至于身死，宠赠犹殊。
现代文：造成的祸难已很明显，而不表明他的罪过，到他死后，对他还有特殊的宠赠。
English: The calamity that had been wrought was already apparent, without his guilt being apparent, and after his death, there were special favors bestowed upon him.

古文：罚既弗加，赏亦斯滥，失于劝沮，何以为国？
现代文：有罪不作惩罚，奖赏又这样虚妄不实，不以理相劝加以阻止，用什么方法来治理国家？
English: How can a country be governed when the guilty go unpunished, when rewards are so illusory and unreal, and when persuasion without reason is discouraged?

古文：君子是以知太清之乱，能无及是乎。
现代文：君子所以知道太清年间的祸乱，能不与造一点有关吗。
English: Can it be that the reason why the nobles knew about the calamity during the Taiching era was not related to the construction?

