古文：齐欲攻宋，秦令起贾禁之。
现代文：齐国打算进攻宋国，秦国派起贾去阻止这件事。
English: The State of Qi planned to attack the State of Song, and the State of Qin sent Jia to stop this.

古文：齐乃捄赵以伐宋。
现代文：齐国就联合赵国一起进攻宋国。
English: Qi attacked Song in alliance with Zhao.

古文：秦王怒，属怨于赵。
现代文：秦昭王很生气，就把一腔怨恨归结到赵国方面。
English: Qin Zhao Wang was very angry, and he put all his grudges on Zhao Guo.

古文：李兑约五国以伐秦无功，留天下之兵于成皋，而阴构于秦。
现代文：赵国的李兑联合赵、韩、魏、燕、齐五国去攻打秦国，没有成功，于是就把诸侯的军队留在成皋，自己却暗中与秦国讲和。
English: Li Dui of Zhao allied with Zhao, Han, Wei, Yan and Qi to attack Qin, but without success. Therefore, he left the armies of the princes in Chengdu, while he secretly made peace with Qin.

古文：又欲与秦攻魏，以解其怨而取封焉。
现代文：同时又想和秦国联合进攻魏国，以此消除秦国对赵国的怨恨，另一方面也可以为自己取得封地。
English: At the same time, he also wanted to jointly attack Wei with Qin, so as to eliminate the resentment of Qin against Zhao, and on the other hand, he could obtain fiefs for himself.

古文：魏王不说。
现代文：魏昭王对此很不高兴。
English: Wei Zhao Wang was not happy about this.

古文：之齐，谓齐王曰： 臣为足下谓魏王曰： 三晋皆有秦患。今之攻秦也，为赵也。
现代文：苏秦就到齐国去，对齐王说： 我替您对魏王说： 赵、魏、韩三国都遭受过秦国的威胁，这次联合进攻秦国，是为了赵国。
English: Su Qin went to Qi and said to the king of Qi: I will tell the king of Wei for you: Zhao, Wei, and Han have all been threatened by Qin. This joint attack on Qin is for the sake of Zhao.

古文：五国伐赵，赵必亡矣。
现代文：如果秦、齐、燕、韩、魏五国联合进攻赵国，赵国一定会灭亡。
English: If the five countries of Qin, Qi, Yan, Han and Wei jointly attack Zhao, Zhao will certainly perish.

古文：秦逐李兑，李兑必死。
现代文：如果秦国驱逐李兑，李兑必死无疑。
English: If Qin expelled Li Dui, there was no doubt that Li Dui would die.

古文：今之伐秦也，以救李子之死也。
现代文：现在去讨伐秦国，实际上是在救李兑的性命。
English: To fight against Qin now is actually to save Li Dui's life.

古文：今赵留天下之甲于成皋，而阴鬻之于秦，已讲，则令秦攻魏以成其私封，王之事赵也何得矣？
现代文：如今赵国把诸侯联军驻留在成皋，暗中却出卖诸侯，和秦国勾结媾和，还订立和约，还想联合秦国一起来进攻魏国，图谋为李兑夺取封地，这么一来，大王您尊崇赵国究竟又得到了什么好处呢？
English: Today, the State of Zhao keeps the allied forces of the princes in Chengdu, but secretly betrays the princes, and colludes with the State of Qin to make peace, and also concludes a peace treaty, and also wants to attack the State of Wei together with the State of Qin, and plans to seize fiefs for Li Dui. In this way, great king, what benefits did you get from honoring the State of Zhao?

古文：且王尝济于漳，而身朝于邯郸，抱阴、成，负蒿、葛、薜，以为赵蔽，而赵无为王行也。
现代文：况且，大王您曾经亲自北渡漳水，去邯郸拜访赵王，献出阴、成之地，割让葛、薛，用来作为赵国的屏障，而赵国却一点不为大王效力。
English: Moreover, you, the great king, personally went to the north to cross the Yishui River, to visit the Zhao King, to offer Yin and Cheng, to cede Ge and Xue, to be used as a barrier for the Zhao Kingdom, but the Zhao Kingdom did not work for the great king at all.

古文：今又以何阳、姑密封其子，而乃令秦攻王，以便取阴。
现代文：现在又把河阳、姑密两地分给李兑的儿子，而李兑却勾结秦国来攻打魏国，想要由此来夺取陶邑。
English: Now he has given the provinces of Kheyang and Gumi to Li Dui's son. Li Dui, however, colluded with the Qin Dynasty to attack the Wei Dynasty, hoping to capture Tawu.

古文： 人比然而后知贤不，如王若用所以事赵之半收齐，天下有敢谋王者乎？
现代文： 人贤能与不贤能只有通过比较然后才能知道，如果大王有侍奉赵国的一半诚意去联合齐国，那么天下诸侯谁敢图谋大王呢？
English: It is only through comparison that one can know whether a person is capable of virtue or vice. If the great king has half the sincerity to serve Zhao and unite Qi, then who among the world's princes would dare to plot against the great king?

古文：王之事齐也，无入朝之辱，无割地之费。
现代文：大王如果帮助齐国，就不会有朝贡称臣的屈辱了，也就没有割让土地的损失了。
English: If the great king helped Qi, there would be no humiliation of paying tribute as a vassal, and there would be no loss of ceded land.

古文：齐为王之故，虚国于燕、赵之前，用兵于二千里之外，故攻城野战，未尝不为王先被矢石也。
现代文：齐国因为大王帮忙的缘故，就会在燕、赵两国出兵之前出动军队，到两千里以外的地方作战，因此无论是攻城还是野战，齐国的军队都会为大王冲锋在前。
English: Because of the great king's help, Qi will send troops to fight in a place two thousand miles away before Yan and Zhao send troops. Therefore, whether it is a siege or a field battle, the army of Qi will charge forward for the great king.

古文：得二都，割河东，尽效之于王。
现代文：攻下两座城邑，割取河东，全都拿来献给大王。
English: They captured two towns and cut off the east side of the river, all of which they dedicated to the great king.

古文：自是之后，秦攻魏，齐甲未尝不岁至于王之境也。
现代文：从此，秦兵进攻魏国，齐国的军队没有一次不会越过边境前来援救的。
English: From then on, Qin soldiers attacked Wei, and there was never a time when Qi troops would not cross the border to come to the rescue.

古文：请问王之所以报齐者可乎？
现代文：请问大王您报答齐国的做法又是什么呢？
English: Tell me, great king, what is your way of repaying Qi?

古文：韩呡处于赵，去齐三千里，王以此疑齐，曰有秦阴。
现代文：韩对于赵国来说，距离齐国有三千里，大王因此来怀疑齐国，说齐国和秦国暗地里有私交。
English: As far as Zhao was concerned, Han was 3,000 miles away from Qi. Therefore, the king suspected Qi and said that Qi and Qin secretly had a personal relationship.

古文：今王又挟故薛公以为相，善韩徐以为上交，尊虞商以为大客，王固可以反疑齐乎？ 
现代文：如今大王又扶持齐国原来的相国薛公来做相国，把赵将韩徐当作上宾，把虞商作为贵客，大王竟然可以因此怀疑齐国吗？ 
English: Now the great king is supporting Qi's former partner country Xue Gong to become a partner country, treating Zhao and Han Xu as honored guests, and treating wealthy merchants as distinguished guests. How can the great king suspect Qi for this?

古文：于魏王听此言也甚诎，其欲事王也甚循。甚怨于赵。
现代文：魏王听了这话感到自己非常理亏，所以他就很想侍奉大王，而非常怨恨赵国。
English: Hearing this, Wei Wang felt that he was very unreasonable, so he really wanted to serve the great king, and he really resented Zhao Guo.

古文：臣愿王之日闻魏而无庸见恶也，臣请为王推其怨于赵，愿王之阴重赵，而无使秦之见王之重赵也。
现代文：我希望大王逐渐地了解魏国而不要厌恶它。请让我为大王把秦国对魏国的怨恨转移到赵国去。希望大王您能在暗地里尊重赵国，并且不要让秦国知道大王您尊重赵国。
English: I hope that the king will gradually understand Wei and not hate it. Please let me transfer the resentment of Qin against Wei to Zhao for the king. I hope that the king can secretly respect Zhao and not let Qin know that the king respects Zhao.

古文：秦见之且亦重赵。齐、秦交重赵，臣必见燕与韩、魏亦且重赵也，皆且无敢与赵治。
现代文：如果秦国知道了齐国尊重赵国的话，那么我想燕、韩、魏三国也一定会尊重赵国，而且都不敢与赵国相对抗。
English: If Qin knew that Qi respected Zhao, then I think Yan, Han, and Wei would also respect Zhao, and they would not dare to oppose Zhao.

古文：五国事赵，赵从亲以合于秦，必为王高矣。
现代文：这样一来，五个国家共同来侍奉赵国，赵国又和秦国结成了联盟；赵国的地位一定会在齐国之上。
English: As a result, five countries jointly served the State of Zhao, and the State of Zhao formed an alliance with the State of Qin; the status of the State of Zhao will certainly be higher than that of the State of Qi.

古文：臣故欲王之偏劫天下，而皆私甘之也。
现代文：所以，我想让大王使诸侯之间互相冲突，然后您暗地里在中间调停。
English: Therefore, I would like the great king to set the lords in conflict with each other, and then you secretly mediate between them.

古文：王使臣以韩、魏与燕劫赵，使丹也甘之；以赵劫韩、魏，使臣也甘之；以三晋劫秦，使顺也甘之；以天下劫楚，使呡也甘之。
现代文：大王可派我使韩、魏、燕三国与赵国发生矛盾，派公玉丹暗中调解；让赵国和韩、魏两国发生矛盾，派我去从中进行调解；让韩、赵、魏三国和秦国发生矛盾，派顺子从中调解；让所有诸侯和楚国发生矛盾，派韩呡从中调解。
English: The great king can send me to cause conflicts between Han, Wei, and Yan and Zhao, and send Gong Yudan to mediate secretly; let Zhao and Han and Wei have conflicts, and send me to mediate; let Han, Zhao, Wei and Qin have conflicts, and send Junzi to mediate; let all princes and Chu have conflicts, and send Han Wei to mediate.

古文：则天下皆偪秦以事王，而不敢相私也。
现代文：这样，诸侯都会背弃秦国而来投靠大王，而且都不敢暗地里和秦国交往。
English: In this way, all the lords would betray Qin and come to the aid of the great king, and they would not dare to secretly interact with Qin.

古文：交定，然后王择焉。 
现代文：大王的邦交稳定以后，看和五国中的哪个国家关系好对大王有利，然后大王再选择。 
English: After the great king's diplomatic relations are stable, it will be beneficial for the great king to see which of the five countries he has a good relationship with, and then the great king will choose.

