古文：一曰：士不偏不党。
现代文：士容士人不偏私不结党。
English: Shi Rong Shi Rong people are not selfish and do not form a party.

古文：柔而坚，虚而实。
现代文：柔弱而又刚强，清虚而又充实。
English: Soft and strong, pure and full.

古文：其状朗然不儇，若失其一。
现代文：他们看上去光明磊落而不刁滑乖巧，好象忘记了自身的存在。
English: They look polished, not slick, as if they've forgotten they're there.

古文：傲小物而志属于大，似无勇而未可恐猲，执固横敢而不可辱害。
现代文：他们藐视琐事而专心于远大目标，似乎没有胆气却又不可恐吓威胁，坚定勇悍而不可污辱伤害。
English: They disdain trifles and concentrate on lofty goals, they seem to have no guts but cannot be intimidated or threatened, they are firm and brave but cannot be insulted or hurt.

古文：临患涉难而处义不越，南面称寡而不以侈大。
现代文：遭遇患难能够守义不失，南面称王也不傲慢恣睢。
English: When encountering difficulties, it is possible to uphold justice and not lose it, and it is not arrogant to call oneself the king of the south.

古文：今日君民而欲服海外，节物甚高而细利弗赖。
现代文：一旦君临天下就准备收服海外，行事高瞻远瞩而不热衷小利。
English: Once you are king of the world, you are ready to conquer overseas, act with foresight and are not keen on small profits.

古文：耳目遗俗而可与定世，富贵弗就而贫贱弗朅。
现代文：视听超尘绝俗可以安定社会，不追求富贵不屏弃贫贱。
English: Audio-visual super-dust and super-vulgarity can stabilize society, do not pursue wealth and do not abandon the poor.

古文：德行尊理而羞用巧卫，宽裕不訾而中心甚厉，难动以物而必不妄折。
现代文：德行尊重理义而羞于使用奸巧诈伪，胸怀宽广不诋毁他人而心志非常高远，难用外物打动而决不妄自屈节。
English: Virtue respects reason and is ashamed to use trickery and deception, broad-mindedness does not denigrate others and has a very high aspiration, difficult to impress with foreign objects and never self-defeating.

古文：此国士之容也。
现代文：这些就是国土的仪表风范。
English: These are the manners of the country.

古文：齐有善相狗者，其邻假以买取鼠之狗。
现代文：齐国有个擅长相狗的人，邻居委托他买一条捕鼠的狗。
English: There is a man in Qi Province who is good at dog breeding. A neighbor commissioned him to buy a rat-catching dog.

古文：期年乃得之，曰： 是良狗也。 
现代文：他整整一年时间才买到，对邻居说； 这是一条出色的狗啊！ 
English: It took him a whole year to buy the dog and he said to his neighbour: "This is a great dog!

古文：其邻畜之数年而不取鼠，以告相者。
现代文：他的邻居喂养了好几年，狗却不捕鼠，邻居就把这种情况告诉了相狗的人。
English: His neighbor had been feeding the dog for several years, but the dog did not catch mice, and the neighbor told the dog-lover about the situation.

古文：相者曰： 此良狗也。
现代文：相狗的人说； 这是一条出色的拘。
English: The dog's owner said: 'It's a great story.

古文：其志在獐麋豕鹿，不在鼠。
现代文：它的志向在措取獐麇猪鹿，不在捕鼠。
English: Its ambition is to capture elk, not to catch mice.

古文：欲其取鼠也则桎之。 
现代文：想让它捕鼠就要把它绊住。 
English: If you want it to catch mice, you have to trip it up.

古文：其邻桎其后足，狗乃取鼠。
现代文：邻居绊住了狗的后腿，狗这才捕鼠。
English: The neighbor tripped over the dog's hind legs, and the dog was able to catch the mouse.

古文：夫骥骜之气，鸿鹄之志，有谕乎人心者，诚也。
现代文：骥骜的气质，鸿鹄的心志，能够使人们知晓，是因为这种气质和心志确实存在。
English: It is because this temperament and aspiration really do exist that they can be made known.

古文：人亦然，诚有之则神应乎人矣，言岂足以谕之哉？
现代文：人也是如此，确实具备了，精神就能使别人感知了，言语哪能完全使人相信呢？
English: The same is true of people. If you really have it, the spirit can make others feel it. How can words fully make people believe it?

古文：此谓不言之言也。
现代文：这叫做不言之言啊！
English: It's called an understatement!

古文：客有见田骈者，被服中法，进退中度，趋翔闲雅，辞令逊敏。
现代文：有个前来拜见田骈的客人，服饰合于法式，进退合于礼仪，举止娴静文雅，言辞恭顺敏捷。
English: There was a guest who came to visit Tian Yao. He was dressed according to the French style, his movements were in accordance with the etiquette, his demeanor was quiet and elegant, and his speech was courteous and quick.

古文：田骈听之毕而辞之。
现代文：田骈刚听他说完，便谢绝了他。
English: As soon as Tian Qi finished listening to him, she turned him down.

古文：客出，田骈送之以目。
现代文：客人离去的时候，田骈一直注视着他。
English: When the guest left, Tian Xuan kept an eye on him.

古文：弟子谓田骈曰： 客士欤？ 
现代文：弟子们对田骈说； 来客是位士吧？ 
English: The disciples said to Tian Yao; The visitor is a nobleman, right?

古文：田骈曰： 殆乎非士也。
现代文：田骈说： 恐怕不是士啊！
English: Tian Yao said, "I'm afraid I'm not a scholar!"

古文：今者客所弇敛，士所术施也；士所弇敛，客所术施也。客殆乎非士也。 
现代文：刚才来客掩蔽收藏的地方，正是士申说施行的地方，而士掩蔽收藏的地方，也正是来客申说施行的地方，来客恐怕不是个士啊！ 
English: Just now, the place where the guest hides the collection is exactly the place where the judge's order is carried out, and the place where the judge hides the collection is also exactly the place where the guest's order is carried out. I'm afraid the guest is not a gentleman!

古文：故火烛一隅，则室偏无光。
现代文：所以说，火光只照一个角落，就有半间房屋没有光亮。
English: So, if the fire only shines in one corner, half of the house is dark.

古文：骨节蚤成，空窍哭历，身必不长。
现代文：骨骼过早长成，质地就疏松不实，身材一定长不高大。
English: The bones grow prematurely, the texture is loose and not solid, and the stature is certainly not tall.

古文：众无谋方，乞谨视见，多故不良。志必不公，不能立功。
现代文：常人不谋求道义，只是拘谨于外部仪表，就会巧诈多端。心志如果不正，就不能建立功业。
English: Ordinary people do not seek morality, but are only concerned with external appearance, and will be devious. If the mind is not right, it will not be able to build a career.

古文：好得恶予，国虽大不为王，祸灾日至。
现代文：喜好聚敛而不愿施舍，国家再大也不能统一天下，灾祸就会天天发生。
English: People prefer to gather rather than to give alms. No matter how big a country is, it cannot be unified overnight, and disasters will occur every day.

古文：故君子之容，纯乎其若锺山之玉，桔乎其若陵上之木；淳淳乎慎谨畏化，而不肯自足；乾乾乎取舍不侻，而心甚素朴。
现代文：所以，君子的仪容风范象昆仑山的玉石一样美好，象高山上的大树一样挺拔他们朴朴实实，言行谨慎，敬畏教令，而不敢骄傲自满；他们孜孜不倦，取舍严肃不苟，而心地非常淳朴。
English: Therefore, the gentleman's appearance and demeanor are as beautiful as the jade of Kunlun Mountain, and they are as tall as the big trees on the mountain. They are simple and down-to-earth, cautious in words and deeds, and fear edicts, but do not dare to be proud and complacent. They are tireless, serious in their choices, and very simple in their hearts.

古文：唐尚敌年为史，其故人谓唐尚愿之，以谓唐尚。
现代文：唐尚的同龄人有的做了史官，他的旧友以为他也希望这样，就把消息告诉给了唐尚。
English: Some of Tang Shang's contemporaries had become historians, and his old friend thought he would like to do the same, so he told Tang Shang the news.

古文：唐尚曰： 吾非不得为史也，羞而不为也。 
现代文：唐尚说： 我并不是没有机会做史官，而是感到羞耻不去做。 
English: Tang Shang said: It's not that I don't have the opportunity to be a historian, but I feel ashamed not to do it.

古文：其故人不信也。
现代文：他的旧友并不相信。
English: His old friend didn't believe him.

古文：及魏围邯郸，唐尚说惠王而解之围，以与伯阳，其故人乃信其羞为史也。
现代文：到了魏国围困邯郸的时候，唐尚通过劝说魏惠王解了邯郸之围，赵国就把伯阳邑给了唐尚。他的旧友这才相信他真的羞于做史官。
English: At the time of Wei's siege of Yunnan, Tang Shang persuaded Wei Hui Wang to lift the siege of Yunnan, and Zhao gave Baiyang County to Tang Shang. This made his old friends believe that he was really ashamed to be a historian.

古文：居有间，其故人为其兄请，唐尚曰： 卫君死，吾将汝兄以代之。 
现代文：过了一些日子，这个旧友又为自己的哥哥请求官职。唐尚说： 等卫国君主死了，我让你哥哥代替他。 
English: A few days later, this old friend again asked for an official post for his brother. Tang Shang said: When the Emperor dies, I will let your brother replace him.

古文：其故人反兴再拜而信之。
现代文：他的旧友起身离席，退避再拜，竟然信以为真。
English: His old friend got up and left the table, bowing his head, believing it to be true.

古文：夫可信而不信，不可信而信，此愚者之患也。
现代文：这个人对可信的不相信，对不可信的反倒相信，这是蠢人的弊病。
English: This man does not believe what is credible, but believes what is not credible. This is the disease of the stupid.

古文：知人情不能自遗，以此为君，虽有天下何益？
现代文：知道别人贪求私利，自己却不能去掉这种欲望，靠这个做君主，即使据有天下，又有什么益处？
English: Knowing that others are greedy for self-interest, but you can't get rid of this desire, what is the benefit of being a monarch by this, even if you have the whole world?

古文：故败莫大于愚。
现代文：所以没有比愚蠢再能坏事的了。
English: So there's nothing worse than stupidity.

古文：愚之患，在必自用。
现代文：愚蠢的弊病，在于师心自用。
English: The stupid malady lies in teaching oneself.

古文：自用则戆陋之人从而贺之。
现代文：师心自用，憨直无知的人就会都跑来祝贺他。
English: If a teacher uses his mind for his own purposes, all the ignorant people will come to congratulate him.

古文：有国若此，不若无有。
现代文：象这样据有国家，就不如没有。
English: A country like this is better off without it.

古文：古之与贤从此生矣。
现代文：古代让贤的事情就是由此产生的。
English: This is how the ancient story of Jang Hyon came about.

古文：非恶其子孙也，非徼而矜其名也，反其实也。
现代文：让贤的人并不是憎恶自己的子孙，并不是追求和夸耀这个名声，而是基于实际情况才这样做的。
English: It is not that people who are virtuous hate their children and grandchildren, nor do they pursue and boast of this reputation, but they do so based on the actual situation.

古文：二曰：尝试观于上志，三王之佐，其名无不荣者，其实无不安者，功大故也。
现代文：务大试看古代记载，禹，扬，文、武的辅佐之臣，名声没有不荣耀的，地位没有不安稳的，这是因为功大的缘故。
English: Let's take a look at the ancient records, Yu, Yang, Wen, and Wu's assistant vassals, the reputation is not dishonorable, the status is not unstable, this is because of the great achievements.

古文：俗主之佐，其欲名实也与三王之佐同，其名无不辱者，其实无不危者，无功故也。
现代文：平庸君主的辅佐之臣，他们希望获得荣耀的名声和安稳的地位，这和三王的辅佐之臣是相同的，但名声没有不耻辱的，地位没有不危险的，这是因为没有功劳的缘故。
English: The aides-de-camp of mediocre monarchs, who hope to gain a glorious reputation and a stable position, are the same as the aides-de-camp of the three kings, but there is no reputation that is not shameful, no position that is not dangerous, because there is no merit.

古文：皆患其身不贵于其国也，而不患其主之不贵于天下也，此所以欲荣而逾辱也，欲安而逾危也。
现代文：他们都担心自身不显贵于本国，却不担心君主不显贵干天下，这是他们希望荣耀反而更加耻辱、希望安定反而更加危险的原因。
English: They are all afraid that they will not be respected in their own country, but they are not afraid that the monarch will not be respected in the world. This is the reason why they hope for glory but more shame, and hope for stability but more danger.

古文：孔子曰： 燕爵争善处于一屋之下，母子相哺也，区区焉相乐也，自以为安矣。
现代文：孔子说： 燕雀争相在屋檐下好地方筑巢，母鸟喂养着小鸟，怡然自得地一起嬉戏，自以为很安全了。
English: Confucius said: The chaffinches vie for a good place under the eaves to build their nests. The mother bird feeds the chaffinches, and they play happily together. They think they are safe.

古文：灶突决，上栋焚，燕爵颜色不变，是何也？
现代文：即使烟囱破裂，头上的房梁燃烧起来，燕雀仍然面不改色，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Even if the chimney bursts and the beams on its head catch fire, the bird does not change its colour. Why is this?

古文：不知祸之将及之也，不亦愚乎！ 
现代文：是因为它们不知道灾祸将廷及自身啊！这不是很愚蠢的吗？
English: Is it because they don't know that disaster will befall the court and themselves? Isn't that stupid?

古文：为人臣而免于燕爵之智者寡矣。夫为人臣者，进其爵禄富贵，父子兄弟相与比周于一国，区区焉相乐也，而以危其社稷，其为灶突近矣，而终不知也，其与燕爵之智不异。
现代文：做臣子的，能够避免燕雀这种见识的人太少了，那些做臣子的人，增益他们的爵禄富贵，父子兄弟一起在国中结党营私，怡然自得地一起游乐，以此危害国家。他们离烟囱很近了，但始终也察觉不到，这同燕雀的见识恐怕没有什么区别。 
English: There are too few courtiers who are able to avoid the bird's perception. Those who are courtiers increase their peerage and wealth. Fathers and sons join forces in the country and play happily together, thus endangering the country. They are very close to the chimney, but they never notice it. I'm afraid this is no different from the bird's perception.

古文：故曰：天下大乱，无有安国；一国尽乱，无有安家；一家尽乱，无有安身。
现代文：所以说，天下大乱，就没有安定的国家，国家大乱，就没有安定的家室，家室大乱，就没有安定的个人。
English: Therefore, if the world is in turmoil, there will be no stable country; if the country is in turmoil, there will be no stable family; if the family is in turmoil, there will be no stable individual.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：这些话说的就是上述情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：故细之安必待大，大之安必待小。
现代文：所以，局部的安定，一定要靠全局的安定，全局的安定，也一定要靠局部的安定。
English: Therefore, local stability must rely on global stability, and global stability must also rely on local stability.

古文：细大贱贵交相为赞，然后皆得其所乐。
现代文：全局和局部、尊贵和卑贱互相赞助，然后才能各自都实现自己的愿望。
English: The whole and the part, the high and the low, must mutually support each other before each can realize his or her aspirations.

古文：薄疑说卫嗣君以王术，嗣君应之曰： 所有者千乘也，愿以受教。 
现代文：薄疑用统一天下的方略游说卫嗣君，卫嗣君对他说： 我拥有的只是个有着千辆兵车的小国，希望就此听取您的指教。 
English: Weizong said to him, "I only have a small country with a thousand chariots. I hope to listen to your advice."

古文：薄疑对曰： 乌获举千钧，又况一斤？ 
现代文：薄疑回答说： 假如能象乌获那样力举千钧，那么又何况一呢？ 
English: The sceptic replied: "If I can raise thousands of baht as Wu Guo did, then what's the big deal?

古文：杜赫以安天下说周昭文君，昭文君谓杜赫曰： 愿学所以安周。 
现代文：杜赫用安定天下游说周昭文君，昭文君对杜赫说； 我希望学习安定周国的方法。 
English: Duch lobbied Zhou Zhaowen with a stable world, and Zhaowen said to Duch; I hope to learn how to stabilize Zhou.

古文：杜赫对曰： 臣之所言者不可，则不能安周矣；臣之所言者可，则周自安矣。 
现代文：杜赫回答说： 我所说的如果您做不到，那么周国也就不能安定，我所说的您做到了，那么周国自然就会安定了。 
English: Duch replied: If you can't do what I said, then Zhou will not be stable. If you do what I said, then Zhou will naturally be stable.

古文：此所谓以弗安而安者也。
现代文：杜赫的这种方法，就是所谓不去安定它而使它自然得以安定啊！
English: Duch's method is not to stabilize it, but to let it stabilize naturally!

古文：郑君问于被瞻曰: 闻先生之义，不死君，不亡君，信有之乎？ 被瞻对曰： 有之。
现代文：郑君问被瞻说。 听说您的主张是不为君主而死，不为君主出亡，真的有这样的话吗？ 被瞻说： 有。
English: Zheng Jun asked the bystander, "I heard that you said that you would not die for the monarch, that you would not go into exile for the monarch, is that really true?" The bystander said, "Yes."

古文：夫言不听，道不行，则固不事君也。若言听道行，又何死亡哉？ 
现代文：如果言论不被听从，主张不被实行，那么这本来就不算侍奉君主，如果言论被听从，主张被实行，君主自然身安，又哪里用为他去死、为他出亡呢？ 
English: If one's words are not listened to and one's opinions are not put into practice, then one is not serving the monarch. If one's words are listened to and one's opinions are put into practice, then the monarch is naturally safe, and what is the use of dying for him or being exiled for him?

古文：故被瞻之不死亡也，贤乎其死亡者也。
现代文：所以，被膳不为君主死难出亡，胜过那些为君主死难出亡的人。
English: Therefore, those who die for the emperor are better than those who die for the emperor.

古文：昔者舜欲服海外而不成，既足以成帝矣。禹欲帝而不成，既足以王海内矣。汤武欲继禹而不成，既足以王通达矣。五伯欲继汤武而不成，既足以为诸侯长矣。孔墨欲行大道于世而不成，既足以成显荣矣。
现代文：从前舜想牧服海外而没有成功，但已足以成就帝业了，禹想成就帝业而没有成功，但已足以统一海内了，商汤周武想继承禹而没有成功，但已足以统一人力舟车所能到达的地区了；五霸想继承商汤周武而没有成功，但已足以做诸侯之长了，孔丘墨翟想在天下实行大道而没有成功，但己足以成为显荣之人了。
English: Once upon a time, Yu wanted to be a shepherd overseas but did not succeed, but it was enough to become emperor; Yu wanted to be an emperor but did not succeed, but it was enough to unify the inland; Shang Tang Zhou Wu wanted to succeed Yu but did not succeed, but it was enough to unify the regions that could be reached by boat; Wuba wanted to succeed Shang Tang Zhou Wu but did not succeed, but it was enough to become a prince; Confucius wanted to implement the Great Way in the world but did not succeed, but it was enough to become a famous person.

古文：夫大义之不成，既有成已，故务事大。
现代文：大事不能成功，结果还是会有所成就，所以一定要致力干大事。
English: If a big thing cannot succeed, the result will still be an achievement, so we must strive to do big things.

古文：三曰：古先圣王之所以导其民者，先务于农。
现代文：上农古代圣王引导他的百姓的方法，首先是致力于农业。
English: The way Shangnong, the ancient holy king, guided his people was, first and foremost, to devote himself to agriculture.

古文：民农非徒为地利也，贵其志也。民农则朴，朴则易用，易用则边境安，主位尊。民农则重，重则少私义，少私义则公法立，力专一。
现代文：使百姓从事农业，不仅是为了地理的出产，而且是为了陶冶他们的心志，持重就会很少私下发表议论，很少私下发表议论，国家的法制就能确立，民力就能专一。
English: Let the people engage in agriculture, not only for the sake of geographical production, but also for the purpose of cultivating their minds. If they hold it in high esteem, they will rarely make private discussions. The country's legal system will be established, and the people's power will be concentrated.

古文：民农则其产复，其产复则重徙，重徙则死其处而无二虑。
现代文：百姓从事农业家产就繁多，家产繁多就会害怕迁徙，害怕迁徙就会老死故乡而没有别的考虑。
English: There are many reasons for the people to engage in agricultural household production. If there are many households, they will be afraid to migrate. If they are afraid to migrate, they will die of old age in their hometown without any other consideration.

古文：民舍本而事末则不令，不令则不可以守，不可以战。
现代文：百姓舍弃农业而从事工商就会不昕从命令，不昕从命令就不能依靠他们防守，不能依靠他们攻战。
English: If the people abandon agriculture and engage in industry and commerce, they will not obey orders. If they do not obey orders, they cannot be relied on to defend, and they cannot be relied on to attack.

古文：民舍本而事末则其产约，其产约则轻迁徙，轻迁徙则国家有患皆有远志，无有居心。
现代文：百姓舍弃农业从事工商家产就简单，家产简单就会随意迁徙，随意迁徙，国家遭遇患难就会都想远走高飞，没有安居之心。
English: It is easy for the people to give up agriculture and engage in industrial and commercial household production. If household production is simple, they will migrate at will. If the country encounters difficulties, they will all want to go far away, and have no peace of mind.

古文：民舍本而事末则好智，好智则多诈，多诈则巧法令，以是为非，以非为是。后稷曰: 所以务耕织者，以为本教也。 
现代文：百姓舍弃农业从事工商，就会喜好耍弄智谋，喜好耍弄智谋行为就诡诈多端，行为诡诈多端就会在法令上耍机巧，把对的说成错的，把错的说成对的。后稷说； 所以要致力于耕织，是因为这是教化的根本。 
English: If the people abandon agriculture to engage in commerce and industry, they will be fond of playing tricks, and if they are fond of playing tricks, their behavior will be deceitful, and if their behavior is deceitful, they will play tricks with the laws and regulations, and they will turn right into wrong, and wrong into right. Therefore, we should devote ourselves to farming and weaving, because this is the foundation of enlightenment.

古文：是故天子亲率诸侯耕帝籍田，大夫士皆有功业。
现代文：因此天子亲自率领诸侯耕种籍田，大夫，士也都有各自的职事。
English: Therefore, the Emperor personally led the lords to cultivate their ancestral lands, and doctors and scholars also had their own duties.

古文：是故当时之务，农不见于国，以教民尊地产也。
现代文：正当农事大忙的时候，农民不得在都邑出现，以此教育他们重视田地里的生产。
English: At a time when agricultural affairs are very busy, farmers are not allowed to appear in the capital, so as to educate them to attach importance to production in the fields.

古文：后妃率九嫔蚕于郊，桑于公田，是以春秋冬夏皆有麻枲丝茧之功，以力妇教也。
现代文：后妃率领九嫔到郊外养蚕，到公田采桑，因而一年四季都有绩麻缫丝等事情要做，以此来尽力于对妇女的教化。
English: The Empress Dowager led the nine concubines to go to the countryside to raise silkworms and to go to the public fields to collect mulberry, so there are things to do all year round, such as making silk, in order to do their best to educate women.

古文：是故丈夫不织而衣，妇人不耕而食，男女贸功以长生，此圣人之制也。
现代文：所以男子不织布却有衣穿，妇女不种田却有饭吃，男女交换劳动所得以维持生活。这是圣人的法度。
English: Therefore, men do not weave cloth but have clothes to wear, women do not farm but have food to eat, and the exchange of labor between men and women can sustain life.

古文：故敬时爱日，非老不休，非疾不息，非死不舍。
现代文：所以，要慎守农时，爱惜光阴，不是年老不得停止劳作，不是患病不得休息，不到死日不得弃舍农事。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be prudent when farming and cherish time. It is not old age that cannot stop working, it is not illness that cannot rest, and it is not possible to abandon farming until the day of death.

古文：上田夫食九人，下田夫食五人，可以益，不可以损。
现代文：种上等田地，每个农夫要供养九个人，种下等田地，每个农夫要供养五个人，供养的人数只能增加，不能减少。
English: When planting the top-grade fields, each farmer must support nine people, and when planting the bottom-grade fields, each farmer must support five people. The number of people to be supported can only be increased, not reduced.

古文：一人治之，十人食之，六畜皆在其中矣。
现代文：总之，一个人种田，要供十个人消费，饲养的各种家畜都包括在这一要求之内，可以折合计算。
English: In short, one person cultivates land to provide for the consumption of ten people, and all kinds of livestock are included in this requirement and can be calculated as a whole.

古文：此大任地之道也。
现代文：这是充分利用土地的方法。
English: It's a way of making the most of the land.

古文：故当时之务，不兴土功，不作师徒，庶人不冠弁、娶妻、嫁女、享祀，不酒醴聚众；农不上闻，不敢私籍于庸：为害于时也。
现代文：所以，正当农事大忙的时候，不要大兴土木，不要进行战争。平民如果不是加冠、娶妻，嫁女，祭祀，就不得摆酒聚会。农民如果不是名字通于官府，就不得私自雇人代耕。因为这些事都妨害农时。
English: Therefore, when agricultural affairs are very busy, don't build large-scale civil engineering projects and don't go to war. Civilians are not allowed to hold drinking parties unless they are crowning, marrying a wife, marrying a daughter, or holding a religious service. Farmers are not allowed to hire people to do farming for them unless they are well-known to the government. Because these things interfere with farming time.

古文：然后制野禁。苟非同姓，农不出御，女不外嫁，以安农也。
现代文：如果不是因为同姓的缘故，男子就不得从外地娶妻，女子也不得出嫁到外地，以便使农民安居一地。
English: If it were not for the reason of the same surname, men would not be allowed to marry a wife from outside the country, and women would not be allowed to marry outside the country, so that farmers could live in one place.

古文：野禁有五：地未辟易，不操麻，不出粪；齿年未长，不敢为园囿；量力不足，不敢渠地而耕；农不敢行贾；不敢为异事：为害于时也。
现代文：然后要规定关于乡野的禁令。乡野的禁令有五条：土地尚未整治，不得绩麻，不得扫除污秽；未上年纪，不得从事园囿中的劳动；估计力量不足，不得扩大耕地，农民不得经商，不得去做其他的事情。因为这些事都妨害农时。
English: There are five prohibitions on the countryside: the land has not yet been rectified, it is not allowed to carry out the ploughing, and it is not allowed to sweep away the dirt; it is not allowed to work in the garden until it is old; it is not allowed to expand the cultivated land if it is estimated that the strength is insufficient; farmers are not allowed to do business, and they are not allowed to do other things, because these things interfere with farming time.

古文：然后制四时之禁：山不敢伐材下木，泽人不敢灰僇，繯网罝罦不敢出于门，罛不敢入于渊，泽非舟虞不敢缘名：为害其时也。
现代文：还要规定各个季节的禁令：不到适当季节，山中不得伐木取材，水泽地区不得烧灰割草，捕取鸟兽的罗网不得带出门外，鱼网不得下水，不是主管舟船的官员不得借口行船。因为这些事都妨害农时。
English: It is also necessary to stipulate prohibitions for each season: until the appropriate season, no logging is allowed in the mountains, no burning ash is allowed to cut grass in the Mizusawa area, the net for catching birds and animals must not be taken out of the door, the fish net must not be launched, and officials who are not in charge of boats must not travel by boat.

古文：若民不力田，墨乃家畜。
现代文：如果百姓不尽力于农耕，就投收他们的家产。
English: If the people do not do their best in farming, confiscate their property.

古文：国家难治，三疑乃极。
现代文：因为不这样做，农、工、商就会互相仿效，国家难予以理就会达到极点。
English: Because if this is not done, farmers, industrialists, and merchants will imitate each other, and the country's difficulty in dealing with them will reach an extreme.

古文：是谓背本反则，失毁其国。
现代文：这就叫做背离根本，违反法则，就会导致国家的丧亡毁灭。
English: This is called deviating from the fundamentals, violating the law, and will lead to the death and destruction of the country.

古文：凡民自七尺以上，属诸三官：农攻粟，工攻器，贾攻货。
现代文：凡是百姓，自成年以上，就分别归属于农，工、商三种职业。农民生产粮食，工匠制作器物，商人经营货物。
English: All the people, from the age of 18 onwards, belong to the three occupations of agriculture, industry and commerce, respectively. Farmers produce grain, craftsmen make utensils, and merchants deal in goods.

古文：时事不共，是谓大凶。
现代文：举措与农时不相适应，这叫做不祥之至。
English: The measure is not compatible with farming time, which is called ominous.

古文：夺之以土功，是谓稽，不绝忧唯，必丧其秕。夺之以水事，是谓籥，丧以继乐，四邻来虐。
现代文：以大兴土木侵夺农时，叫做 延误 ，百姓就会忧思不断，田里一定连税谷也收不到。以治理水患侵夺农时，叫做 浸泡 ，悲丧就会继欢乐之后来到，四方邻国就会来侵害。
English: When invading and seizing farmers with large-scale civil engineering, it is called "delay," the people will be constantly worried, and the fields will not even receive the tax valley. When invading and seizing farmers with flood control, it is called "soaking," sadness will come after joy, and neighboring countries will come to encroach.

古文：夺之以兵事，是谓厉，祸因胥岁，不举銍艾。
现代文：用进行战争侵夺农时，叫做 虐害 ，灾祸就会终年不断，根本不用开镰收割。
English: When war is used to invade and seize farms, it is called "miserable harm," and the disaster will continue all year round, and there is no need to cultivate and harvest at all.

古文：数夺民时，大饥乃来。
现代文：连续侵夺百姓农时，严重的饥荒就会发生。
English: When peasants and farmers are continuously invaded, serious famine will occur.

古文：野有寝耒，或谈或歌，旦则有昏，丧粟甚多。
现代文：田中到处是闲置的农具，农民有的闲谈，有的唱歌，早上看是如此，到傍晚仍照旧。
English: There are idle farm tools everywhere in Tanaka. Some farmers are chatting, others are singing. It looks like this in the morning, and it's still the same in the evening.

古文：皆知其末，莫知其本真。
现代文：农民人人无心劳动，损失的粮食必定很多。
English: All the farmers are working mindlessly, and there must be a lot of lost grain.

古文：四曰：后稷曰：子能以窐为突乎？
现代文：人们看到了这种现象，却没有谁知道重农这个根本。
English: People have seen this phenomenon, but no one knows the essence of heavy farming.

古文：子能藏其恶而揖之以阴乎？
现代文：任地后稷说： 你能把洼地改造成高地吗？
English: After being appointed to the post, Zou said: Can you transform the lowlands into highlands?

古文：子能使吾土靖而甽浴土乎？
现代文：你能把劣土除掉而代之以湿润的土吗？
English: Can you remove the bad soil and replace it with moist soil?

古文：子能使保湿安地而处乎？
现代文：你能使土地状况合宜并用垄沟排水吗？
English: Can you level the land and drain it with a culvert?

古文：子能使雚夷毋淫乎？
现代文：你能使籽种播得深浅适度并在土里保持湿润吗？
English: Can you sow the seeds evenly and keep the soil moist?

古文：子能使子之野尽为泠风乎？
现代文：你能使田里的杂草不滋长蔓延吗？
English: Can you keep the weeds in the field from growing and spreading?

古文：子能使藁数节而茎坚乎？
现代文：你能使你的田地吹遍和风吗？你能使谷物节多而茎秆坚挺吗？
English: Canst thou cause the wind to blow gently over thy land? canst thou cause the corn to sprout abundantly, and the herb to flourish?

古文：子能使穗大而坚均乎？
现代文：你能使庄稼穗大而且坚实均匀吗？
English: Canst thou cause the ear of corn to sprout large and firm and even?

古文：子能使粟圜而薄糠乎？
现代文：你能使籽粒饱满麸皮又薄吗？
English: Can you make the grain full and the skin thin?

古文：子能使米多沃而食之强乎？
现代文：你能使谷米油性大吃着有咬劲吗？
English: Can you make oily rice pudding chewy?

古文：为之若何？
现代文：这些应该怎样做到呢？
English: How should this be done?

古文：凡耕之大方：力者欲柔，柔者欲力；息者欲劳，劳者欲息；棘者欲肥，肥者欲棘；急者欲缓，缓者欲急；湿者欲燥，燥者欲湿。
现代文：耕作的大原则是：刚硬的土地要使它柔和些，柔和的土地要使它刚硬些，休闲的土地要频种，频种的土地要休耕，贫瘠的土地要使它肥沃，过肥的土地耍使它贫瘠些，坚实的土地要使它疏松些，疏松的土地要使它坚实些，过湿的土地要使它干燥些，干燥的土地要使它湿润些。
English: The great principle of cultivation is: the hard land should be made softer, the soft land should be made harder, the leisure land should be planted frequently, the frequently planted land should be left fallow, the barren land should be made fertile, the over-fertile land should be made barren, the firm land should be made loose, the loose land should be made firm, the over-wet land should be made dry, and the dry land should be made wet.

古文：上田弃亩，下田弃甽。
现代文：高处的田地，不要把庄稼种在田垄上，低洼的田地，不要把庄稼种在垄构里。
English: In high-lying fields, do not plant crops on the ridge, and in low-lying fields, do not plant crops in the ridge.

古文：五耕五耨，必审以尽。
现代文：播种之前耕五次，播种之后锄五次，一定要做得仔细彻底。
English: Before sowing, plough five times, and after sowing, hoe five times. It must be done carefully and thoroughly.

古文：其深殖之度，阴土必得。
现代文：耕种的深度，以见到湿土为准。
English: Depth of cultivation, subject to the presence of wetlands.

古文：大草不生，又无螟蜮。
现代文：这样，田垦就不生杂草，又没有各种害虫。
English: In this way, no weeds will grow in the paddy fields, and there will be no pests.

古文：今兹美禾，来兹美麦。
现代文：今年种谷子，就收好谷子，明年种麦子，就收好麦子。
English: If you plant corn this year, you will harvest corn. If you plant wheat next year, you will harvest wheat.

古文：是以六尺之耜，所以成亩也；其博八寸，所以成甽也；耨柄尺，此其度也；其博六寸，所以间稼也。
现代文：耜的长度六尺，是为了用来测定田垄的宽窄，它的刃宽八寸，是为了用来挖出标准的垄沟。锄的柄长一尺，这是作物行距的标准；它的刃宽六寸，这是为了便于间苗。土地，可以使它肥沃，也可以使它贫瘠。
English: The length of the plough is six feet, in order to measure the width and narrowness of the furrow. Its blade is eight inches wide, in order to dig a standard furrow. The handle of the plough is one foot long, which is the standard for crop spacing; its blade is six inches wide, which is to facilitate seedlings. The land can make it fertile, but it can also make it barren.

古文：地可使肥，又可使棘：人肥必以泽，使苗坚而地隙；人耨必以旱，使地肥而土缓。
现代文：耕地一定要趁混润，这样可使土中有空隙，苗根扎得牢固；锄地一定要在旱时，这样可使地表疏松，保持土壤肥力。
English: The cultivated land must be well-drained, so that there are gaps in the soil and the seedlings can be firmly rooted; the irrigated land must be dry, so that the surface can be loose and the soil fertility can be maintained.

古文：草諯大月。
现代文：草类到十月就要枯萎。
English: The grass will wither by October.

古文：冬至后五旬七日，菖始生。
现代文：冬至以看五十七天，菖蒲开始萌生。
English: Fifty-seven days after the winter solstice, irises begin to sprout.

古文：一一菖者，百草之先生者也。一一于是始耕。
现代文：菖蒲是百草中最先萌生的。这时开始耕地。
English: The iris is the first of the plants to sprout, and this is when the cultivation of the land begins.

古文：孟夏之昔，杀三叶而获大麦。
现代文：四月下旬，荠、葶苈、菥萁枯死，这时就要收获大麦。
English: In late April, the stalks, stalks, stalks wither and die, at which time the barley must be harvested.

古文：日至，苦菜死而资生，而树麻与菽。
现代文：夏至，苦菜枯死，蒺藜长出，这时就要种植麻和小豆。
English: At the summer solstice, bitter greens wither and stalks sprout. This is the time to plant hemp and soybeans.

古文：此告民地宝尽死。
现代文：这是告诉人们种地的宝贵时节已到尽头。
English: This is telling people that the precious time for farming has come to an end.

古文：凡草生藏，日中出，狶首生而麦无叶，而从事于蓄藏。
现代文：秋分，猾首生出，谷子黄熟，这时就要进行收打蓄藏。
English: At the autumnal equinox, when the crabs are born and the corn is ripe, it is time to collect and store.

古文：此告民究也。
现代文：这是告诉人们一年的农事已毕。
English: This is to tell people that a year of farming has come to an end.

古文：五时见生而树生，见死而获死。
现代文：百草的生死可作农事活动的依据。
English: The life and death of grasses can be used as a basis for agricultural activities.

古文：天下时，地生财，不与民谋。有年瘗土，无年瘗土。
现代文：一年四季，见到某种草类出生，就要种植应在选时萌生的作物，见到某种草类桔死，就要收获正当这时成熟的作物。上天降四时，土地生财富，这是自然之道，不同下民商量的。
English: Throughout the year, when a certain grass is born, it is necessary to plant crops that should germinate at the right time, and when a certain grass dies, it is necessary to harvest crops that are ripe at the right time. When the heavens fall, the land will produce wealth. This is the way of nature, which is discussed by different people.

古文：无失民时，无使之治下。
现代文：丰收要祭祀土神，欠收也要祭祀土神。不要使百姓丧失农时，不要使他们做蠢事。
English: The god of the soil should be worshipped for a good harvest, and the god of the soil should be worshipped for a bad harvest. Don't deprive the people of agricultural time, and don't make them do stupid things.

古文：知贫富利器，皆时至而作，渴时而止。
现代文：要使民众懂得致富之道，做到时令一到就行动，时令结束就停止。
English: It is necessary to make the people understand the way to get rich, so that they act as soon as the time comes, and stop when the time ends.

古文：是以老弱之力可尽起，其用日半，其功可使倍。
现代文：这样连老弱的力量都可以完垒调动起来，收到事半功倍之效。
English: In this way, even the old and weak forces can be fully mobilized and receive a multiplier effect.

古文：不知事者，时未至而逆之，时既往而慕之，当时而薄之，使其民而之。
现代文：不懂农事的人，农时未到就提前行动，农时已过思念不已，而正当农时却叉毫不在意，役使百姓而延误农时。
English: People who don't understand agricultural affairs act ahead of time before the agricultural time arrives. The agricultural time has passed and they have been thinking about it, but they don't care about the legitimate agricultural time. They serve the people and delay the agricultural time.

古文：民既，乃以良时慕，此从事之下也。
现代文：已经把百姓的农时延误了，事后却又因此对大好时光思念不已。
English: They have already delayed the people's farming time, but afterwards they miss the good times.

古文：操事则苦。
现代文：这是管理农事最愚笨的方法。
English: It's the dumbest way to run a farm.

古文：不知高下，民乃逾处。
现代文：这样就会把事情办坏。不知怎样做是高明，怎样做是愚笨，百姓就会苟且偷安。
English: In this way, things will be run badly. I don't know how to do it is clever, how to do it is stupid, the people will be cautious.

古文：种稑禾不为稑，种重禾不为重，是以粟少而失功。
现代文：种早庄稼不象个早庄稼，种晚庄稼不象个晓庄稼，因而收的粮食甚少，没有什么成效。
English: Planting early crops is not like planting early crops, and planting late crops is not like planting late crops. As a result, little grain is harvested, and there is little effect.

古文：五曰：凡耕之道，必始于垆，为其寡泽而后枯。
现代文：辩土耕地的原则是：一定要从垆土开始，因为这种土水分少，干土层厚。
English: The principle of defending arable land is: it is necessary to start with loam soil, because this soil has little moisture and a thick layer of dry soil.

古文：必厚其靹，为其唯厚而及。
现代文：一定要把柔润的地放到后面耕，因为这种土即使拖延一下也还来得及耕。
English: It is necessary to put the soft soil to the back and cultivate it, because this kind of soil can still be cultivated even if it is delayed.

古文：者之，坚者耕之，泽其靹而后之。
现代文：水分饱和的土地要缓耕，坚硬的土地要立即耕，柔润的土地要放在一边推迟耕。
English: Water-saturated land should be cultivated slowly, hard land should be cultivated immediately, and soft land should be put aside and delayed.

古文：上田则被其处，下田则尽其污。无与三盗任地。
现代文：高处的土地耕后要把地面耙平，低湿的土地首先要把积水排净。不要让 三盗 和自己一起使用土地。
English: After cultivating the land at high altitudes, the ground should be leveled, and the low-moisture land should first drain the accumulated water.Do not let the three thieves use the land together with themselves.

古文：夫四序参发，大甽小亩，为青鱼胠，苗若直猎，地窃之也。
现代文：四时依次出现，是和农事相参验的。有些人田畦做得太窄，垄沟做得太宽，田畦看上去就象一条条被困在地上的青鱼，上面的禾苗长得象兽颈上的鬃毛，这是地盗，地把苗侵吞了。
English: Some people make the ridge of the field too narrow and the furrow too wide. The ridge looks like a string of bluefish trapped on the ground, and the grass seedlings on top look like the bristles on the neck of an animal. This is land theft, and the ground has swallowed up the seedlings.

古文：既种而无行，耕而不长，则苗相窃也。
现代文：庄稼种下去却密密麻麻地没有行列，尽力耕耘也难以长大，这是苗盗，苗与苗相互侵吞了。
English: When the crops are planted, there is no line, and it is difficult to grow up. This is seedling theft. The seedlings and seedlings have devoured each other.

古文：弗除则芜，除之则虚，则草窃之也。
现代文：不除杂草地就要荒芜，清除杂草又会弄活苗根，这是草盗，草把苗侵吞了。
English: If we do not remove the weeds, the land will be deserted. Removing the weeds will revive the seedling roots. This is grass theft. The grass has devoured the seedling.

古文：故去此三盗者，而后粟可多也。
现代文：所以必须除掉这三盗，然后才能多打粮食。
English: So we must get rid of these three thieves before we can get more grain.

古文：所谓今之耕也营而无获者，其蚤者先时，晚者不及时，寒暑不节，稼乃多菑。
现代文：当今有些人从事农耕，尽力经营却没有收获，这是因为他们行动早的先于农时，行动迟的赶不上农时，四季的劳作不合时节，所以庄稼多遭灾害。
English: Today, some people are engaged in farming, trying their best to run the business but have no harvest. This is because they act earlier than the farming time, act later than the farming time, and work in four seasons is out of season, so crops are more likely to suffer disasters.

古文：实其为亩也，高而危则泽夺，陂则埒，见风则，高培则拔，寒则雕，热则脩，一时而五六死，故不能为来。
现代文：他们修治田哇，修得又高又陡，这样水分就容易散失；畦坡过于斜险，畦面就容易倾塌。庄稼种在这样的田畦上，遇风就会倒伏，培土过高就会连根拔出，天气冷一点就会凋零，天气热一点就会枯萎。同时有五六种致死的途径，所以不可能有好收成。
English: They build their rice paddies high and steep, so that water is easily lost; the slope is too steep, and the surface is easy to collapse. Crops planted on such rice paddies will fall over in the wind, the soil will be uprooted if it is too high, the weather will be cold, and the weather will wither. At the same time, there are five or six ways to die, so it is impossible to have a good harvest.

古文：不俱生而俱死，虚稼先死，众盗乃窃。
现代文：庄稼不同时出土，却同时成熟。现在根虚活的提前死掉，于是地盗、苗盗、草盗就会发生。
English: Crops are not unearthed at the same time, but they are ripe at the same time. Now the roots are dead ahead of time, so land theft, seedling theft, and grass theft will occur.

古文：望之似有余，就之则虚。
现代文：这种庄稼，远望似乎长势很旺，走近一看，原来没有什么籽实。
English: This kind of crop, Yuanwang seems to have a very strong growth potential, but when you take a closer look, it turns out that there are no seeds.

古文：农夫知其田之易也，不知其稼之疏而不适也；知其田之除也，不知其稼居地之虚也。
现代文：农夫只知道他的田地已经整过，却不知道他的庄稼过于稀疏，密度不够，只知道他的田地已经管过，却不知道他的庄稼在地里扎根不牢。
English: The farmer only knows that his fields have been tidied up, but does not know that his crops are too sparse, not dense enough, only knows that his fields have been managed, but does not know that his crops are not firmly rooted in the ground.

古文：不除则芜，除之则虚，此事之伤也。
现代文：杂草不除，土地就要荒芜；清除杂草，又会弄活苗根。
English: If weeds are not removed, the land will become barren; if weeds are removed, the seedlings and roots will be revived.

古文：故亩欲广以平，甽欲小以深，下得阴，上得阳，然后咸生。
现代文：这是农事的大害。所以，田畦应该又宽又平，垄沟应该又小又深。这样，庄稼下得水分，上得阳光，才能苗全苗壮。
English: This is a great harm to agriculture. Therefore, the ridge of the field should be wide and flat, and the ridge should be small and deep. In this way, the crops can get water and sunshine, and the seedlings can be full and strong.

古文：稼欲生于尘而殖于坚者。
现代文：庄稼应在细软的土中萌发，而在坚实的土中生长。
English: Crops should germinate in soft soil and grow in hard soil.

古文：慎其种，勿使数，亦无使疏。
现代文：播种一定要小心，不要使它过密，也不要使它过稀。
English: When sowing seeds, you must be careful not to make them too thick or too thin.

古文：于其施土，无使不足，亦无使有余。
现代文：在覆土盖种方面，不要使土不足，也不要使土过厚。
English: In terms of covering the soil with cover crops, do not make the soil insufficient and do not make the soil too thick.

古文：熟有耰也，必务其培。
现代文：这件事要仔细去做，一定要在盖种的土上多下功夫。
English: This must be done carefully, and more effort must be put into the soil on which the cuttings are sown.

古文：其耰也稹，稹者其生也必先。其施土也均，均者其生也必坚。
现代文：盖种的土要打得细碎，细碎了庄稼出苗就一定快盖种的土要撒得均匀，均匀了庄稼扎根就一定牢。
English: The soil of the cover seed should be beaten finely, and if the crops are finely crushed, the seedlings will surely emerge. The soil of the cover seed should be spread evenly, and if the crops are evenly spread, they will surely take root.

古文：是以亩广以平则不丧本。
现代文：所以，田哇又宽又平，就能使庄稼根部不受损害。
English: Therefore, if the paddy field is wide and flat, the roots of the crops will not be damaged.

古文：茎生于地者，五分之以地。
现代文：禾苗生于畦中，把田畦均分为五分。
English: The seedlings were born in the middle of the field, and the field was divided into five parts.

古文：茎生有行，故速长；弱不相害，故速大。
现代文：禾苗出土成行，所以迅速生长；小时互不妨害，所以发育很快。
English: Grass seedlings are unearthed, so they grow rapidly; hours do not harm each other, so they grow quickly.

古文：衡行必得，纵行必术。
现代文：横行一定要恰当，纵行一定要端直。
English: The horizontal movement must be proper, and the vertical movement must be straight.

古文：正其行，通其风，夬必中央，帅为泠风。
现代文：要使行列端正，和风通畅，一定注意疏通田地的中心，使田中到处吹到和风。
English: In order to make the procession orderly and the wind flow smoothly, attention must be paid to clearing the center of the field, so that the wind blows everywhere in the middle of the field.

古文：苗，其弱也欲孤，其长也欲相与居，其熟也欲相扶。
现代文：禾苗幼小时以独生为宜，长起来以后应靠拢在一起，成熟时应互相依扶。
English: When seedlings are young, it is better to have only one. When they grow up, they should be closer together, and when they mature, they should support each other.

古文：是故三以为族，乃多粟。
现代文：禾苗三四株长成一簇，就能多打粮食。
English: If three or four grass seedlings grow into a cluster, they can produce more grain.

古文：凡禾之患，不俱生而俱死。
现代文：农作物的难处，在于尽管不同时出苗，时令一到却要同时死去。
English: The difficulty with crops is that although they don't sprout at the same time, they all die at the same time when the time comes.

古文：是以先生者美米，后生者为秕。
现代文：所以先出土的结粒就好，后出土的就多是秕子。
English: Therefore, it is better to excavate the corms first, and then excavate the hazelnuts.

古文：是故其耨也，长其兄而去其弟。
现代文：因此，锄草问苗的时候，要安养先生的牡苗，去掉后生的弱苗。
English: Therefore, when weeding seedlings, we should maintain Mr. An's seedlings and remove weak seedlings.

古文：树肥无使扶疏，树墝不欲专生而族居。
现代文：在肥沃的土地上种植，不要种得过稀而使庄橡疯长；在贫瘠的土地上种植，不要种得过密而使庄稼挤在一起。
English: When planting on fertile land, don't plant too sparsely and let the acorns grow wild; when planting on poor land, don't plant too densely and let the crops crowd together.

古文：肥而扶疏则多秕，墝而专居则多死。
现代文：土地肥沃庄稼又长势过旺，秕子就会结得多，土地贫瘠庄稼叉挤在一起，禾苗就会死得多。
English: Fertile land crops grow too vigorously, and the weeds will grow more, poor land crops are crowded together, and the seedlings will die more.

古文：不知稼者，其耨也，去其兄而养其弟，不收其粟而收其秕。
现代文：不会种田的人，他们间苗时，去掉先生的壮苗而留下后生的弱苗，结果收不到粮食而只能收些秕子。
English: Those who do not know how to farm, when planting seedlings, remove the master's strong seedlings and leave behind the weak seedlings. As a result, they cannot harvest grain and can only harvest some hazelnuts.

古文：上下不安，则禾多死。
现代文：对禾苗和土地都处理不当，庄稼就会大量死亡。
English: If both the seedlings and the land are handled improperly, the crops will die in large numbers.

古文：厚土则孽不达，薄土则蕃轓而不发。
现代文：覆土过厚，萌芽就钻不出地面；覆土过薄，种子就会遭到闭锢而不能发芽。
English: If the soil cover is too thick, the sprout will not be able to drill into the ground; if the soil cover is too thin, the seed will be closed and unable to germinate.

古文：垆埴冥色，刚土柔种，免耕杀匿，使农事得。
现代文：垆土埴土颜色发暗，这些刚硬的土地要使它软熟以后再种，要勤加翻耕以消灭宿草害虫，使农事活动进行得得当。
English: These hard lands should be ploughed to make them soft and ripe for planting again, and should be ploughed diligently to eliminate weeds and pests, so that agricultural activities can be carried out properly.

古文：六曰：凡农之道，厚之为宝。
现代文：审时农作的原则，以笃守天时最为重要。
English: The principle of time-tested farming is the most important.

古文：斩木不时，不折必穗；稼就而不获，必遇天菑。
现代文：伐木不顺应天时，木材不是折断就是弯曲。庄稼熟了不及时收获，一定会遭到天灾。
English: Logging does not conform to the weather, the wood is either broken or bent. If the crops are not harvested in time, they will definitely be affected by natural disasters.

古文：夫稼，为之者人也，生之者地也，养之者天也。
现代文：庄稼，种它的是人，生它的是地，养它的是天。
English: Crops, it is people who plant them, it is the earth that gives birth to them, and it is heaven that nurtures them.

古文：是以人稼之容足，耨之容耨，据之容手。
现代文：所以播种要使田问放得下脚，锄地要使田问伸得进锄，收摘要使田间插得进手。
English: Therefore, sowing should be done so that the field can be planted, plowing should be done so that the field can be plowed, and harvesting should be done so that the field can be plowed.

古文：此之谓耕道。
现代文：这叫做耕作之道。
English: This is called the way of cultivation.

古文：是以得时之禾，长秱长穗，大本而茎杀，疏穖而穗大，其粟圆而薄糠，其米多沃而食之强。如此者不风。
现代文：因此，种得适时的谷子，穗的总梗长，穗子也长，根部发达，秸秆较矮，谷码疏落，各粒圆而皮薄，米有油性，吃着有咬共，这样的谷子，籽粒不因刮风而散落。
English: Therefore, the timely planted grains, the total stem length of the spike, the spike is also long, the root is developed, the stalk is short, the grain size is sparse, each grain is round and the skin is thin, the rice is oily, and there is a bite, such grains, the seed grains are not scattered by the wind.

古文：先时者，茎叶带芒以短衡，穗鉅而芳夺，秮米而不香。
现代文：种得过早的谷子，秸秆和叶子上布蔫细毛，穗子总梗短，穗子犬但子房脱落，米容易变味，又没有香气。
English: Early-planted millet, the stalks and leaves are covered with fine hairs, the spikes are short, the spikes are short, but the cotyledons fall off, the rice is easy to change, and there is no aroma.

古文：后时者，茎叶带芒而末衡，穗阅而青零，多秕而不满。
现代文：种得过迟的谷子，秸秆和叶子布满细毛，总梗短，谷穗尖而颜色发青，秕子多，籽粒不饱满。
English: The late-sown grains, stalks and leaves are covered with fine hairs, the total stem is short, the grain spike is pointed and the color is bluish, there are many lice, and the grain is not full.

古文：得时之黍，芒茎而徼下，穗芒以长，抟米而薄糠，舂之易，而食之不噮而香。
现代文：种得适时的黍子，秸秆布满细毛，底部不出枝权，米粒圆而外皮薄，舂起来容易，吃起来香而不腻。
English: Timely planted hazelnuts, the stalks are covered with fine hairs, the bottom does not branch right, the rice grains are round and the outer skin is thin, it is easy to pick up, and it is fragrant and not greasy to eat.

古文：如此者不饴。
现代文：这样的黍子，做出饭来不易变味。
English: It's not easy to change the taste of rice with this kind of hazelnut.

古文：先时者，大本而华，茎杀而不遂，叶膏短穗。
现代文：种得过早的黍子，根部发达，植株阔大，秸秆低矮而不荣畅，叶子肥厚，穗子短小。
English: prematurely sown hazelnuts, well-developed roots, broad plants, low-growing but not flourishing stalks, thick leaves, short spikes.

古文：后时者，小茎而麻长，短穗而厚糠，小米黚而不香。
现代文：种得过晚的黍子，茎秆又细又小，穗子短，棘皮厚，米粒小而颜色发黑，又没有香气。
English: The late-planted hazelnuts have thin and small stalks, short spikes, thick thorny skin, and small, dark-colored, and flavorless rice grains.

古文：得时之稻，大本而茎葆，长秱疏穖，穗如马尾，大粒无芒，抟米而薄糠，舂之易而食之香。
现代文：种得适时的稻子，根部发达，茎秆丛生，总梗长，谷码稀，穗子象马尾，籽粒大，稻芒少，米粒圆，糠皮薄，舂起来容易，吃起来香。
English: The rice planted at the right time, the roots are developed, the stems and stalks are clustered, the total stem is long, the grain size is thin, the spike is like a horse's tail, the seed grain is large, the rice grain is small, the rice grain is round, the bran is thin, it is easy to pick up, and it is fragrant to eat.

古文：如此者不益。
现代文：这样的稻子，吃着适口。
English: This kind of rice is delicious.

古文：先时者，本大而茎叶格对，短秱短穗，多秕厚糠，薄米多芒。
现代文：种得过早的稻子，根部发达，秸秆和叶子挤在一起，总梗和穗予短，秕子多，糠皮厚，籽粒少而稻芒多。
English: Prematurely planted rice, the roots are developed, the stalks and leaves are crowded together, the peduncle and spike are short, the stalks are more numerous, the bran is thicker, the grains are fewer, and there are more shoots.

古文：后时者，纤茎而不滋，厚糠多秕，辟米，不得待定熟，卬天而死。
现代文：种得过晚的稻子，秸秆细又不分蘖，糠皮厚，秕子多。籽粒不实，等不到成熟，就仰首朝天枯死。
English: The late-planted rice has thin stalks, thick bran, and a lot of lice. The seeds are not solid, and when they are not ripe, they wither away.

古文：得时之麻，必芒以长，疏节而色阳，小本而茎坚，厚枲以均，后熟多荣，日夜分复生。
现代文：种得适时的麻，必定带有细毛而且较长，茎节稀疏，色泽鲜亮，根部小但茎秆坚实，纤维又厚又均匀，成熟晚的开花多，到了秋分麻果累累。
English: The hemp that is sown at the right time must have fine hairs and longer shoots, sparse stem segments, bright color, small roots but firm stalks, thick and even fibers, late-maturing flowering, and full of fruits by the autumn equinox.

古文：如此者不蝗。
现代文：这样的麻不招蝗虫。
English: Such a leprosy does not attract locusts.

古文：得时之菽，长茎而短足，其荚二七以为族，多枝数节，竞叶蕃实，大菽则圆，小菽则抟以芳，称之重，食之息以香。
现代文：种得适时的豆子，分枝长而总干短，豆荚二七成为一簇。分枝多，举节密，叶子繁茂，籽实盛多，大豆籽粒滚圆，小豆籽粒鼓胀，而且有香气，称起来重，吃起来有嚼头而且很香。
English: The beans planted at the right time, the branches are long and the total length is short, and the 27 pods become a cluster. There are many branches, the joints are dense, the leaves are luxuriant, the seeds are abundant, the soybean seeds are round, the red bean seeds are bulging, and they have aroma, they are heavy, and they are chewy and very fragrant when eaten.

古文：如此者不虫。
现代文：这样的豆子不着虫。
English: Such beans do not attract insects.

古文：先时者，必长以蔓，浮叶疏节，小荚不实。
现代文：种得过早的豆子，一定长得过长而且爬蔓，叶子虚弱，茎节稀疏，豆荚小又不长粒。
English: Beans that are planted too early must grow too long and creep, the leaves are weak, the stems are sparse, and the pods are small and not long-grained.

古文：后时者，短茎疏节，本虚不实。
现代文：种得过晚的豆予，分枝短，茎节稀，根子弱，不长粒。
English: The beans planted too late have short branches, thin stems, weak roots, and short grains.

古文：得时之麦，秱长而颈黑，二七以为行，而服薄䅵而赤色，称之重，食之致香以息，使人肌泽且有力。
现代文：种得适时的小麦，总梗长，穗子深绿，麦粒二七排成一行，麦壳薄，麦粒颜色发红，称起来重，吃起来特别香而且有嚼头，使人肌肤润泽而且有力。
English: Wheat planted at the right time, the total stem is long, the spikes are dark green, the wheat grains are 27 rows in a row, the wheat shell is thin, the wheat grains are red in color, they are heavy when weighed, they are particularly fragrant and chewy when eaten, they make the skin moist and strong.

古文：如此者不蚼蛆。
现代文：这样的麦子不生蚼蛆。
English: Such wheat does not sprout.

古文：先时者，暑雨未至，胕动蚼蛆而多疾，其次羊以节。
现代文：种得过早的麦子，夏雨没到就发生病虫害，麦粒又瘦又小。
English: Wheat planted too early, summer rains did not arrive before the emergence of pests and diseases, wheat grains are thin and small.

古文：后时者，弱苗而穗苍狼，薄色而美芒。
现代文：种得太晚的麦子，麦苗弱，穗子发青，颜色暗，只是麦芒长得好。
English: If the wheat is planted too late, the seedling is weak, the spike is bluish and the color is dark, but the ergot grows well.

古文：是故得时之稼兴，失时之稼约。
现代文：所以，种植适时的庄稼就兴旺高产，种植不适时的庄稼就衰弱低产。
English: Therefore, planting crops at the right time will lead to prosperity and high yield, while planting crops at the wrong time will lead to weakness and low yield.

古文：茎相若，称之，得时者重，粟之多。
现代文：种法不同，茎秆数量相等，称一称，种植适时的分量重；脱了粒，种植适时的打粮多。
English: Different planting methods, the number of stalks and stalks is equal, weighing one, planting the right time is heavy; stripped grain, planting the right time is more grain.

古文：量粟相若而舂之，得时者多米。
现代文：同样多的粮食，舂出米来，种植适时的出米多。
English: The same amount of grain comes from rice, and more rice comes from planting at the right time.

古文：量米相若而食之，得时者忍饥。
现代文：同样多的米，做出饭来，种植适时的吃了禁饿。
English: The same amount of rice, made meals, planted in a timely manner, and ate to prevent hunger.

古文：是故得时之稼，其臭香，其味甘，其气章，百日食之，耳目聪明，心意睿智，四卫变强,气不入，身无苛殃。
现代文：所以，种植适时的庄稼，它的气昧香，它的味道美，它的咬劲大。吃上一百天，就能耳聪目明，心神清爽，四肢强健，邪气不入，不生灾病。
English: Therefore, planting crops at the right time, its aroma is fragrant, its taste is beautiful, and its bite is strong. If you eat it for a hundred days, you will be able to have clear ears and eyes, a clear mind, strong limbs, no evil spirits, and no diseases.

古文：黄帝曰: 四时之不正也，正五谷而已矣。 
现代文：黄帝说； 四时之气不正，只要使所吃五谷纯正就可以了。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The four-hour qi is not right, as long as the grain you eat is pure."

