古文：唐天宝中，南诏叛，剑南节度使鲜于仲通讨之，丧士卒六万人。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，南诏反叛，剑南节度使鲜于仲通讨之，丧失士卒有六万人之多。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Nanzhao rebelled, and the Jiannan Festival was rarely discussed with Zhongtong, resulting in the loss of as many as sixty thousand soldiers.

古文：杨国忠其掩其败状，仍叙其战功。
现代文：宰相杨国忠隐瞒战败之事，仍然给他记上战功。
English: The prime minister, Yang Guotong, concealed the fact of the defeat and still credited him with the war.

古文：时募兵击南诏，人莫肯应募，国忠遣御史分道捕人，连枷送诣军所，行者愁怨，所在哭声振野。
现代文：当时，招募士兵攻打南诏，但人们都不愿应募，杨国忠就派御史到各道去抓人，抓到后就给他们带上枷送到军中，被抓的人心中积满愁怨，所到之处哭声遍野。
English: At that time, soldiers were recruited to attack Nanzhao, but people did not want to be recruited. Yang Guozhong sent his envoys to all provinces to arrest people. After they were caught, they were sent to the army with shackles. The hearts of the arrested people were full of sorrow and resentment, and the cries were everywhere.

古文：至十三载，剑南留后李宓将兵七万往击南诏。
现代文：到了天宝十三年，剑南留后李毖率兵七万前去攻打南诏。
English: In the 13th year of Tianbao, after staying in Jiannan, Li Xi led 70,000 soldiers to attack Nanzhao.

古文：南诏诱之深入，闭壁不战，宓粮尽，士卒瘴疫及饥死什七八，乃引还。
现代文：南诏人诱敌深入，然后高垒不战，李宓久攻不下，军粮皆尽，士兵因得瘟疫和饥饿死者达十分之七八，无奈李毖才率军返回。
English: Nanzhao's men lured the enemy deeper into the city, and then the fort did not fight, Li Qiye could not take it, the army's rations were exhausted, and seven out of ten soldiers died of plague and starvation. Li Qiye reluctantly led the army back.

古文：蛮追击之，宓被擒，全军皆没。
现代文：南诏人引兵追击，李宓被擒获，这样全军覆没。
English: Nanzhao's men led the troops in pursuit, and Li Yao was captured, thus the entire army was wiped out.

古文：国忠隐其败，更以捷闻，益发兵讨之。此《通鉴》所纪。
现代文：杨国忠隐瞒其败迹，声称取胜，传来捷报，然后发更多的兵征讨南诏，这是《资治通鉴》中的记载。
English: Yang Guozhong concealed his defeat, claimed victory, received reports of success, and then sent more soldiers to recruit Nanzhao, which is recorded in "Zizhi Tongjian."

古文：《旧唐书》云： 李宓率兵击蛮于西洱河，粮尽军旋，马足陷桥，为閤罗风所擒。 
现代文：《旧唐书》中说： 李毖率军在西洱河攻击南诏人，在粮尽军回时，马足失于桥上，被南诏首领阎罗凤擒获。 
English: The "Old Tang Dynasty Book" says: Li Lan led the army to attack the Southern Zhao people in the West Minhe River, and when the army was returning from the grain, the horse's foot was lost on the bridge and was captured by the Southern Zhao leader Yan Luo Feng.

古文：《新唐书》亦去： 宓败死于西洱河。 
现代文：《新唐书》中也说： 李宓战死于西洱河。 
English: It is also said in the "New Tang Dynasty Book": Li Yanzhan died in the Xidi River.

古文：予按，高适集中有《李宓南征蛮诗》一篇，序云： 天宝十一载，有诏伐西南夷，丞相扬公兼节制之寄，乃奏前云南太守李宓涉海自交趾击之，往复数万里，十二载四月，至于长安。
现代文：我需要指出的是，其事并非如此在唐诗人高适的文集中有一篇《李宓南征蛮诗》，序中说： 天宝十一年，皇帝下诏讨伐南诏，宰相杨国忠主办此事，就上奏皇帝说前云南太守李宓渡海绕道交趾攻击南诏，来往数万里。十二年四月，李宓回到长安。
English: What I need to point out is that this is not the case. In the collection of high-quality works by Tang poets, there is an article entitled "Li Qian Nan Zheng Brute Poetry," which says in the preface: In the eleventh year of the Heavenly Treasure, when the emperor issued an edict to attack Nan Zheng, the prime minister Yang Guozhong hosted the event, and reported to the emperor that the former governor of Yunnan, Li Qian, had traveled tens of thousands of miles to attack Nan Zheng. In April of the twelfth year, Li Qian returned to Chang'an.

古文：君子是以知庙堂使能，而李公效节。予忝斯人之旧，因赋是诗。 
现代文：人们也因此而知道朝廷所使之人很有才干，而李宓也能够效忠朝廷，我作为李宓的旧友，因而写下了这首诗。 
English: Therefore, people know that the people made by the imperial court are very talented, and Li Xuan can also be loyal to the imperial court. As an old friend of Li Xuan, I wrote this poem.

古文：其略曰： 肃穆庙堂上，深沉节制雄。
现代文：他的诗这样写的： 肃穆店堂上，深沉节制雄。
English: His poem is written like this: In a solemn hall, a profound temperance prevails.

古文：遂令感激士，得建非常功。
现代文：遂令感激士，得建非常功。
English: As a result, he was made an honorary member of the Order of Gratitude.

古文：鼓行天海外，转战蛮夷中。
现代文：鼓行天海外，转战蛮夷中。
English: Drumming abroad, fighting in the middle of the barbarians.

古文：长驱大浪破，急击群山空。
现代文：长驱大浪破，急击群山空。
English: The long-drifting big waves break, and the mountains and sky are suddenly hit.

古文：饷道忽已远，县军垂欲穷。
现代文：菊道忽已远，县军垂欲穷。
English: Kikudo was suddenly far away, and the county army was desperately poor.

古文：野食掘田鼠，晡餐兼僰僮。
现代文：野食掘田鼠，哺餐兼臾筐。
English: Field mice digging for food, feeding and digging baskets.

古文：收兵到亭候，拓地弥西东。
现代文：收兵列亭侯，拓地弥西东。
English: Receiving soldiers lined up at Tinghou, and the land was reclaimed from the west to the east.

古文：泸水夜可涉，交州今始通。
现代文：沪水夜可涉，交州今始通。
English: Shanghai's water can be involved at night, and Jingzhou's is just beginning.

古文：归来长安道，召见甘泉宫。 
现代文：归来长安道，召见甘泉宫。 
English: He returned to Chang'an Road and was summoned to Ganquan Palace.

古文：其所称述如此，虽诗人之言未必皆实，然当时之人所赋，其事不应虚言，则宓盖归至长安，未尝败死，其年又非十三载也。
现代文：他是这称赞李宓的，虽然作为诗人，他的话不一定全可信。
English: He is the one who praised Li Yao, although as a poet, his words are not entirely credible.

古文：昧诗中掘鼠餐僮之语，则知粮尽危急，师非胜归明甚。
现代文：品味高适诗中所说的掘鼠餐憧的话，那么我们知道当时军粮已尽，形势危急，很明显李宓率军并非战胜而归。
English: If we listen to the words of Digging Rat Meal Longing in the poem, then we know that at that time the military food was exhausted, the situation was critical, and it was obvious that Li Qiye's army did not return victorious.

