古文：黄帝问曰：平人何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：正常人的脉象是怎样呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What is the pulse of a normal person like?

古文：岐伯对曰：人一呼脉再动，一吸脉亦再动，呼吸定息，脉五动，闰以太息，命曰平人。
现代文：岐伯答说：正常的人，一次呼气一次吸气，叫做一息，一呼气时脉跳动两次，一吸气时脉也跳动两次，另外，在呼吸之间还有一个间隙，所以共有五次脉的搏动，有时也偶尔有一次长呼吸，所以又会有多一次的脉搏跳动，这就是正常人的呼吸情况。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Normal people take one breath in and one breath out, which is called one breath. When breathing out, the pulse beats twice, and when breathing in, the pulse also beats twice. In addition, there is a gap between breaths, so there are a total of five pulse beats, and sometimes there is an occasional long breath, so there will be one more pulse beat. This is the breathing condition of a normal person.

古文：平人者，不病也。
现代文：正常的人，就是无病的人。
English: A normal person is a disease-free person.

古文：常以不病调病人，医不病，故为病人平息以调之为法。
现代文：通常是以正常人的呼吸情况，来诊断病人的脉象，医生无病，所以可以调匀自己的呼吸以诊断病人的脉搏次数，这是脉诊的基本法则。
English: Usually, the patient's pulse is diagnosed based on the breathing condition of a normal person. The doctor is not sick, so he can adjust his breathing to diagnose the patient's pulse rate. This is the basic rule of pulse diagnosis.

古文：人一呼脉一动，一吸脉一动，曰少气。
现代文：一呼气脉只一次跳动，一吸气脉也只一次跳动，这是 气虚 的现象。
English: An exhalation pulse beats only once, and an inhalation pulse also beats only once. This is the phenomenon of qi deficiency.

古文：人一呼脉三动，一吸脉三动而躁，尺热曰病温，尺不热脉滑曰病风，脉涩曰痹。
现代文：一呼气脉有三次跳动，一吸气脉也有三次跳动，并且躁动不安，尺部皮肤发热，这是 病温 ；尺肤不热，脉滑的是 风病 ，脉涩的是 痹病 。
English: An exhaled pulse has three beats, an inhaled pulse also has three beats, and it is restless and uneasy, the skin of the ulna is hot, which is fever; the skin of the ulna is not hot, the pulse is slippery is rheumatism, the vein is tight is paralytic disease.

古文：人一呼吸脉四动以上曰死，脉绝不至曰死，乍疏乍数曰死。
现代文：若人一次呼气，脉的跳动在四次以上的必死，脉的跳动中断不复至的必死，脉的跳动忽慢忽快的也是死脉。
English: If a person exhales once and the pulse beats more than four times, he will die. If the pulse is interrupted and does not return, he will die. If the pulse is too slow or too fast, he will die.

古文：平人之常气禀于胃，胃者平人之常气也，人无胃气曰逆，逆者死。
现代文：人的正常脉气是来源于胃，胃气就是正常人脉息的正常之气，人的脉息如无胃气，叫做逆象，逆象是能够致死的。
English: A person's normal pulse qi is derived from the stomach, and the stomach qi is the normal qi of a normal person's pulse breath. If a person's pulse breath does not have the stomach qi, it is called inversion, and inversion can cause death.

古文：春胃微弦曰平，弦多胃少曰肝病，但弦无胃曰死，胃而有毛曰秋病，毛甚曰今病。
现代文：春脉，弦中带有冲和的胃气，叫做平脉；弦多胃气少，就是肝病；但见弦脉胃气，就要死亡；若虽有胃气，而兼见毛脉，等到秋天就要生病；倘若脉太甚，就会立即生病。
English: The vernal vein, the string with the gastric gas, is called the flat vein; the string with more gastric gas and less, is liver disease; but if you see the string with gastric gas, you will die; if you have gastric gas, but also see the hair vein, you will get sick in the fall; if the vein is too much, you will get sick immediately.

古文：脏真散于肝，肝藏筋膜之气也。
现代文：春天是脏真之气散发于肝，肝脏是藏筋膜之气的。
English: In spring, the stench of filth emanates from the liver, and the liver harbors the stench of the fascia.

古文：夏胃微钩曰平，钩多胃少曰心病，但钩无胃曰死，胃而有石曰冬病，石甚曰今病。脏真通于心，心藏血脉之气也。
现代文：夏脉，钩中带有冲和的胃气，叫做平脉，如果钩多而胃气少，就是心脏有病；如果但见钩脉胃气，就要死亡；若虽有胃气，而兼见石脉，预测等到冬天就要生病；倘若石脉太甚，就会立即生病，夏天是脏真之气通于心，心是藏血脉之气的。
English: The summer vein is called the flat vein. If there are more hooks and less stomach gas, the heart is diseased. However, if you see the hook vein, you will die. If you have stomach gas and see the stone vein, it is predicted that you will get sick in the winter. If the stone vein is too much, you will immediately get sick. The summer is dirty, and the true breath passes through the heart. The heart is the breath of the hidden blood vein.

古文：长夏胃微软弱曰平，弱多胃少曰脾病，但代无胃曰死，软弱有石曰冬病，弱甚曰今病。
现代文：长夏脉微软弱而有胃气，叫做平脉，假如弱多而冲和的胃气少，就是脾脏有病；假如但见弱脉而无冲和的胃气，就要死亡；若软弱脉中，兼见石脉，预测到了冬天就要生病；倘若石脉太甚，就会立即生病。
English: If the long summer vein is soft and weak and has a stomach gas, it is called a flat vein. If there is a lot of weak and less flushed stomach gas, the spleen is sick; if, however, you see a weak vein and no flushed stomach gas, you will die; if you see a stone vein in a weak vein, it is predicted that you will get sick in winter; if the stone vein is too much, you will immediately get sick.

古文：脏真濡于脾，脾藏肌肉之气也。
现代文：长夏的脏真之气濡润于脾，脾是藏主肌肉之气的。
English: The summer's foul breath moistens the spleen, which is the reservoir of the master's muscular breath.

古文：秋胃微毛曰平，毛多胃少曰肺病，但毛无胃曰死。毛而有弦曰春病，弦甚曰今病。
现代文：秋脉，微毛而有冲和之象的，叫做平脉，如果毛多胃气少，主肺脏有病；假如但见毛脉而无胃气，就会死亡；若毛脉中兼见弦脉，预测等到春至就会生病；倘若弦极了，就会立即生病。
English: The autumnal vein, which is fine-haired and has the appearance of a clash, is called the flat vein. If the hair is thick and the stomach gas is low, the main lung is sick; if, however, the hair vein is seen and there is no stomach gas, it will die; if the string vein is also seen in the hair vein, it is predicted that it will get sick until the spring solstice; if the string is extreme, it will get sick immediately.

古文：脏真高于肺，以行荣卫阴阳也。
现代文：秋时脏真之气高藏于肺，肺脏是主藏皮毛之气的。
English: In autumn, the stench of filth is high in the lungs, and the lungs are the main reservoir of fur.

古文：冬胃微石曰平，石多胃少曰肾病，但石无胃曰死，石而有钩曰夏病，钩甚曰今病。
现代文：冬时的脉象，沉石而有冲和之象的，叫做平脉，如果石多而冲和的胃气少，就主肾脏有病；如果但见石脉而无胃气，就要死亡；若沉石脉中兼见钩象，预测延至夏天就要生病；倘若钩脉太甚了，就会立即生病。
English: The pulse pattern in winter, which is composed of sedimentary rocks and has the appearance of concave and convex, is called flat pulse. If there are more rocks and less concave and convex gastric gas, the main kidney will be sick; if, however, there is a stone vein but no gastric gas, it will die; if there is a hooked elephant in the sedimentary rock vein, it is predicted to be sick until summer; if the hooked vein is too much, it will get sick immediately.

古文：脏真下于肾，肾藏骨髓之气也。
现代文：冬时脏真之气下藏于肾，肾脏是主藏骨髓之气的。
English: In winter, the stale air is stored in the kidneys, which are the main reservoirs of bone marrow.

古文：胃之大络，名曰虚里，贯鬲络肺，出于左乳下，其动应衣，脉宗气也。
现代文：胃经的大络，叫做虚里。出于左乳下，贯膈而上络于肺，其脉搏动应衣，这是脉的宗气。
English: The large network of the gastric meridians is called the kyuri. It emerges from under the left breast, passes through the diaphragm and up the network to the lungs. Its pulse moves to the clothing. This is the essence of the pulse.

古文：盛喘数绝者，则病在中；结而横，有积矣；绝不至曰死。
现代文：倘若跳动极剧，并且极快，这是病在膻中的征象；若见跳动时止，位置横移的，主病有积块；倘若脉绝不至，就要死亡。
English: If the beating is very violent and very fast, it is a sign of the disease in the umbilicus; if the beating stops and the position is shifted, the main disease has a blockage; if the pulse never comes, it will die.

古文：乳之下其动应衣，宗气泄也。
现代文：如果乳下虚里处脉搏跳动剧烈振衣，是宗气外泄的现象。
English: If the pulse beats violently under the breasts or in the abdomen, it is the phenomenon of the outflow of spiritual energy.

古文：欲知寸口太过与不及，寸口之脉中手短者，曰头痛；寸口脉中手长者，曰足胫痛；寸口脉中手促上击者，曰肩背痛；寸口脉沉而坚者，曰病在中；寸口脉浮而盛者，曰病在外；寸口脉沉而弱，曰寒热及疝瘕少腹痛；寸口脉沉而横，曰胁下有积，腹中有横积痛；寸口脉沉而喘，曰寒热。
现代文：如何诊寸口的太过与不及呢？寸口脉应指而短，其病头痛。应指而长，其病足胫痛。应指短促迫疾，有上无下，主肩背痛。应指沉坚的，其病在中。应指浮盛的，其病在表。应指沉弱，主寒热及疝瘕积聚小腹痛。应指沉紧并有横斜的形状，主胁下、腹中有横积作痛。应指沉喘，病发寒热。
English: How to diagnose too much or too little cunjukou? Cunjukou pulse should be short and its disease is headache. It should be long and its disease is foot cramp. It should be short pressing disease, there is no top and bottom, main shoulder and back pain. It should be deep and its disease is in the middle. It should be buoyant and its disease is on the surface. It should be weak and its main symptom is cold and fever with accumulation of small abdominal pain. It should be tight and have a transverse shape, with pain under the main symptom and transverse accumulation in the abdomen. It should be wheezing and its disease is cold and fever.

古文：脉盛滑坚者，曰病在外。脉小实而坚者，病在内。
现代文：脉象盛滑而紧的，病是比较重了，是六腑有病；脉象小实而坚的，病是比较重了，是五脏有病。
English: If the pulse is smooth and tight, the disease is relatively severe, and the patient is sick; if the pulse is small and firm, the disease is relatively severe, and the patient is sick.

古文：脉小弱以涩，谓之久病。脉滑浮而疾者，谓之新病。
现代文：脉来小弱而涩的，主久病；脉来浮滑而疾的，主新病。
English: If the pulse is weak and astringent, it is a chronic disease; if the pulse is slippery and diseased, it is a new disease.

古文：脉急者，曰疝瘕少腹痛。
现代文：脉来绷急的，主病疝瘕小腹作痛。
English: My pulse is racing, and my main ailment is a pain in my lower abdomen.

古文：脉滑曰风。
现代文：脉来滑利，主病风证。
English: The pulse is smooth, the main disease is wind.

古文：脉涩曰痹。
现代文：脉来涩滞，主病痹证。
English: The pulse is astringent, the main disease is paralysis.

古文：缓而滑曰热中。
现代文：脉来缓滑，其病热中。
English: His pulse was slow and he was feverish.

古文：盛而紧曰胀。
现代文：脉来盛紧的，主病腹胀。
English: The main symptom is bloating.

古文：脉从阴阳，病易已；脉逆阴阳，病难已。
现代文：脉顺阴阳，病易痊愈；否则，病就不易好了。
English: If the pulse is in line with yin and yang, the disease is easy to recover; otherwise, the disease is not easy to get better.

古文：脉得四时之顺，曰病无他；脉反四时及不间脏，曰难已。
现代文：脉与四时相应为顺，即使患病，亦无其他危险；如脉与四时相反，病就难以痊愈了。
English: If the pulse is in accordance with 4 o'clock, there is no other danger even if you get sick; if the pulse is contrary to 4 o'clock, it is difficult to recover from the disease.

古文：臂多青脉，曰脱血。
现代文：尺肤缓而脉来涩，主气血不足，多为倦怠懈惰，但欲安卧。
English: The ruler's skin gradually becomes astringent, the master's energy and blood are insufficient, mostly due to fatigue and laziness, but he wants to lie down.

古文：尺脉缓涩，谓之解㑊；安卧脉盛，谓之脱血；尺涩脉滑，谓之多汗；尺寒脉细，谓之后泄；脉尺粗常热者，谓之热中。
现代文：尺肤发热而脉象盛大，是火盛于内，主大脱血。尺肤涩而脉象滑，阳气有余于内，故为多汗。尺肤寒而脉象细，阴寒之气盛于内，故为大便泄泻。脉见粗大而尺肤常热的，阳盛于内，为热中。
English: Shaku skin is hot and the pulse is large, it is hot inside, the main is large blood loss. Shaku skin is astringent and the pulse is slippery, the yang qi is more than inside, so it is sweaty. Shaku skin is cold and the pulse is thin, the cold qi is inside, so it is defecation. The pulse is large and the skin is always hot, the sun is inside, it is hot.

古文：肝见庚辛死，心见壬癸死，脾见甲乙死，肺见丙丁死，肾见戊己死。
现代文：肝之真脏脉出现，至庚辛日死；心之真脏脉出现，至壬癸日死；脾之真脏脉出现，至甲乙日死；肺之真脏脉出现，至丙丁日死；肾之真脏脉出现，至戊己日死。
English: The liver appeared on the day of death, the heart appeared on the day of death, the spleen appeared on the day of death, the lung appeared on the day of death, and the kidney appeared on the day of death.

古文：是谓真脏见，皆死。
现代文：这就是真脏脉出现，就会死亡的日期。
English: This is the date of the appearance of the umbilicus and the date of death.

古文：颈脉动喘疾咳，曰水。
现代文：颈部脉非正常搏动，并见喘咳症状，主水病。
English: Abnormal pulsation of the pulse in the neck, with symptoms of wheezing and coughing, mainly dropsy.

古文：目裹微肿如卧蚕起之状，曰水。
现代文：眼泡浮肿如蚕眠后之状，也是水病。
English: The puffiness of the eyeballs, such as after sleeping, is also a watery disease.

古文：溺黄赤安卧者，黄疸。已食如饥者，胃疸。
现代文：小便颜色黄赤，喜卧，是黄疸病；食后仍觉得饥饿，是胃疸病。
English: Urine color yellow-red, lying down, is jaundice; still feel hungry after eating, is gastritis.

古文：面肿曰风。足胫肿曰水。
现代文：面部浮肿为风，足胫肿为水。
English: Swelling of the face is wind, swelling of the feet is water.

古文：目黄者曰黄疸。
现代文：目珠发黄的，是黄疸。
English: If the eyes are yellow, it is jaundice.

古文：妇人手少阴脉动甚者，姙子也。
现代文：妇人两手少阴脉动甚的，是怀孕的表征。
English: If a woman's two hands have very few yin pulses, it is a sign of pregnancy.

古文：脉有逆从四时，未有脏形，春夏而脉瘦，秋冬而脉浮大，命曰逆四时也。
现代文：脉与四时有相适应，也有不相适应的，如果脉搏不见本脏脉的正常脉象，比如：春夏不见弦、洪，而反见沉、涩；秋冬不见毛、石，而反见浮、大，这都是与四时相反的脉象。
English: If the pulse does not show the normal pulse image of the main artery, for example: in spring and summer, it does not see the chord, the flood, but instead sees the heavy, the astringent; in autumn and winter, it does not see the hair, the stone, but instead sees the floating, the large, these are all the pulse images opposite to the four o'clock.

古文：风热而脉静，泄而脱血脉实，病在中脉虚，病在外脉涩坚者，皆难治，命曰反四时也。
现代文：风热为阳邪，脉应浮大，今反沉静；泄利脱血，津血受伤，脉应虚细，今反实大；病在内，脉应有力，乃正气尚盛足以抗邪，今反脉虚；病在外，脉应浮滑，乃邪气仍在于表，今反见脉强坚，以上各种情况都是脉证象反的，因此是难治之病，这就叫做 反四时 。
English: The wind and heat are yang and evil, the pulse should be large and buoyant, but now it is calm; the blood should be drained, the blood should be injured, the pulse should be thin and thin, but now it is large; inside the disease, the pulse should be strong, but the righteous spirit is still strong enough to resist the evil, but now the pulse is weak; outside the disease, the pulse should be slippery, but the evil spirit is still on the surface, but now the pulse is strong. All of the above are symptoms of the pulse, so it is a difficult disease to cure, which is called anti-four o'clock.

古文：人以水谷为本，故人绝水谷则死，脉无胃气亦死。
现代文：人依靠水谷的营养而生存，所以人断绝水谷后，就要死亡；胃气化生于水谷，如脉无胃气也要死亡。
English: People depend on the nutrition of the water valley to survive, so after people cut off the water valley, they will die; stomach gasification is born in the water valley, if there is no stomach gas, they will also die.

古文：所谓无胃气者，但得真脏脉不得胃气也。
现代文：所谓无胃气的脉，就是单见真脏脉，而不见柔和的胃气脉。
English: The so-called non-gastric artery, is to see only the true artery, but not the soft gastric artery.

古文：所谓脉不得胃气者，肝不弦，肾不石也。
现代文：所谓不得胃气的脉，就是肝脉见不到微弦脉，肾脉见不到微石脉。
English: The so-called non-gastric vein, that is, the liver vein can not see the microchord vein, the kidney vein can not see the microstone vein.

古文：太阳脉至，洪大以长；少阳脉至，乍数乍疏，乍短乍长；阳明脉至，浮大而短。
现代文：少阳主正月二月，这时的脉来，是乍密乍疏，乍短乍长的；阳明主三月四月，这时的脉来，是浮大而短；太阳主五月六月，这时的脉来，是洪大而长。
English: In the first month of the young sun lord, February, the pulse at this time is dense, sparse, short and long; in the third month of the sun lord, April, the pulse at this time is large and short; in the sixth month of the sun lord, May, the pulse at this time is large and long.

古文：夫平心脉来，累累如连珠，如循琅玕，曰心平。
现代文：正常心脉来时，像一颗颗珠子，连续不断地流转，又像抚摸玉珠一样的柔滑，这是心的正常脉象。
English: When the normal heart pulse comes, it is like a bead, continuously circulating, and it is as smooth as touching a jade bead. This is the normal pulse image of the heart.

古文：夏以胃气为本。
现代文：夏季以胃气为本，脉当柔和而微钩。
English: In the summer, it is based on stomach gas, and the pulse is soft and slightly hooked.

古文：病心脉来，喘喘连属，其中微曲，曰心病。
现代文：如果脉来时，喘急促，连串急数之中，带有微曲之象，这是心的病脉。
English: If, when the pulse comes, there is a shortness of breath, and in the series of rapid pulses, there is an appearance of a slight curvature, this is a disease of the heart.

古文：死心脉来，前曲后居，如操带钩，曰心死。
现代文：将死的心脉来时，脉象前面盛大高亢、后面突然停止，如摸到衣带上的弯钩一样的坚硬，全无和缓之意，这是心的死脉。
English: When the dead heart vein comes, the vein is like a grand high roller in front and suddenly stops behind. It is as hard as the hook on the belt. There is no sign of easing. This is the dead heart vein.

古文：平肺脉来，厌厌聂聂，如落榆荚，曰肺平。
现代文：正常的肺脉来时，轻虚而浮，像榆荚下落一样的轻浮和缓，这是肺的正常脉象。
English: When the normal pulmonary pulse comes, it is light and floating. It is light and slow, like the fall of a kite. This is the normal pulse of the lung.

古文：秋以胃气为本。
现代文：秋天以胃气为本，脉当柔和而微毛。
English: Autumn is based on stomach gas, and the pulse is soft and fine.

古文：病肺脉来，不上不下，如循鸡羽，曰肺病。
现代文：有病的肺脉来时，不上不下，如抚摩鸡毛一样，这是肺的病脉。
English: When the diseased pulmonary vein comes, you can't get up and down, just like stroking chicken feathers. This is the diseased pulmonary vein.

古文：死肺脉来，如物之浮，如风吹毛，曰肺死。
现代文：将死的肺脉来时，轻浮而无根，如物之漂浮，如风吹毛一样，飘忽不定，散动无根，这是肺的死脉。
English: When the dead pulmonary vein comes, it is light and rootless, floating like a thing, like the wind blowing hair, drifting erratically, spreading without roots. This is the dead vein of the lung.

古文：平肝脉来，软弱招招，如揭长竿末梢，曰肝平。
现代文：正常的肝脉来时，柔软而弦长，如长竿之末梢一样的柔软摆动，这是肝的正常脉象。
English: When the normal hepatic vein comes, it is soft and long, like the soft swinging of the ends of a long pole. This is the normal pulse of the liver.

古文：春以胃气为本。
现代文：春天以胃气为本，脉当柔和而微弦。
English: Spring is based on stomach gas, and the pulse is soft and subtle.

古文：病肝脉来，盈实而滑，如循长竿，曰肝病。
现代文：有病的肝脉来时，弦长硬满而滑利，如以手模长竿一样的长而不软，这是肝的病脉。
English: When the diseased hepatic vein comes, the string is long, hard and smooth, like the long rod of a hand model, but not soft. This is the diseased vein of the liver.

古文：死肝脉来，急益劲，如新张弓弦，曰肝死。
现代文：将死的肝脉来时，弦急而坚劲，如刚打开的弓弦一样紧绷而强劲，这是肝的死脉。
English: When the dead liver vein comes, the string is fast and strong, as tight and strong as the newly opened bowstring. This is the dead vein of the liver.

古文：平脾脉来，和柔相离，如鸡践地，曰脾平。
现代文：正常的脾脉来时，从容和缓，至数匀净分明，好像鸡足缓缓落地一样的轻缓而从容不迫，这是脾的正常脉象。
English: When the normal splenic pulse comes, it comes gently and slowly, until the number is uniformly clear and distinct, as if the chicken's feet were slowly falling to the ground. This is the normal pulse of the spleen.

古文：长夏以胃气为本。
现代文：长夏以胃气为本，脉当和缓。
English: Changxia is based on stomach gas, and the pulse should be gentle.

古文：病脾脉来，实而盈数，如鸡举足，曰脾病。
现代文：有病的脾脉来时，充实硬满而急数，如鸡举足一样急疾，这是脾的病脉。
English: When a diseased splenic vein comes, it is full, hard and rapid, like a chicken lifting its leg. This is the spleen's diseased vein.

古文：死脾脉来，锐坚如乌之喙，如鸟之距，如屋之漏，如水之流，曰脾死。
现代文：将死的脾脉来时，或锐坚而无柔和之气，如乌之嘴，鸟之爪那样坚硬而锐，或时动复止而无规律，或脉去而无不至，如屋之漏水点滴无轮，或如水之流逝，去而不返，这是脾的死脉。
English: When the splenic vein of death comes, it is either sharp and hard without softness, like the beak of a blackbird or the claw of a bird, or it is fixed and irregular, or the pulse goes away and never comes back, like the drip of a leaking roof without a wheel, or like the flow of water, it goes away and never comes back. This is the dead vein of the spleen.

古文：平肾脉来，喘喘累累，如钩，按之而坚，曰肾平。
现代文：正常的肾脉来时，沉石滑利连续不断而又有曲回之象，按之坚实，有如心之钩脉，这是肾的正常脉象。
English: When the normal renal vein comes, the sedimentary stone slides continuously and has the appearance of twisting, according to which it is solid, like the hook vein of the heart. This is the normal pulse appearance of the kidney.

古文：冬以胃气为本。
现代文：冬天以胃气为本，脉当柔软而微石。
English: Winter is based on stomach gas, and the pulse is soft and fine.

古文：病肾脉来，如引葛，按之益坚，曰肾病。
现代文：有病的肾脉来时，坚搏牵连如牵引葛藤一样，愈按愈坚硬，这是肾的病脉。
English: When a diseased kidney vein comes, it is hard to pull, like pulling a vine. The harder it is, the harder it is. This is a kidney vein.

古文：死肾脉来，发如夺索，辟辟如弹石，曰肾死。
现代文：将死的肾脉来时，像夺索一般，长而坚硬劲急，或坚实如以指弹石，这是肾的死脉。
English: When the dead kidney vein comes, it is like a rope, long and hard and strong, or solid as a finger slingshot. This is the dead vein of the kidney.

