古文：程昱字仲德，东郡东阿人也。
现代文：程昱字仲德，东郡东阿县人。
English: Cheng Zhaozhongde, Dong County, Donga County.

古文：长八尺三寸，美须髯。
现代文：身高八尺三寸，胡须长得好看。
English: He is eight feet three inches tall and has a good-looking beard.

古文：黄巾起，县丞王度反应之，烧仓库。
现代文：黄巾军起兵时，县丞王度反叛朝廷响应他们，烧毁了仓库。
English: When the Yellow Turban Army raised an army, the county magistrate Wang Du rebelled against the imperial court and responded to them by burning down the warehouse.

古文：县令逾城走，吏民负老幼东奔渠丘山。
现代文：县令翻出城墙逃走，吏役百姓们携老带幼往东逃往渠丘山。
English: The county magistrate broke out of the city wall and fled, and the officials and commoners fled eastward to Quqiu Mountain, taking their children with them.

古文：昱使人侦视度，度等得空城不能守，出城西五六里止屯。
现代文：程昱派人前去探查王度的情况，王度等人只得到一座空城，不能据守，就出到城外五六里的地方驻守。
English: Cheng Yu sent people to investigate Wang Du's situation. Wang Du and others were only given an empty city. Unable to defend it, they went to a place five or six miles outside the city.

古文：昱谓县中大姓薛房等曰： 今度等得城郭不能居，其势可知。
现代文：程昱对县里的大族薛房等说： 现在王度得到了城邑但不能安居，他的运势可想而知了。
English: Cheng Yao said to Xue Fang and other members of the large clan in the county: Now that Wang Du has obtained a city but cannot live there peacefully, his fortune can be imagined.

古文：此不过欲虏掠财物，非有坚甲利兵攻守之志也。
现代文：这不过是想抢劫掠夺财物，不是又尖锐铠甲精良的士兵然后又攻占坚守城池的志向。
English: This is just a desire to rob and plunder property, not a desire to be a sharp, well-armored soldier and then capture a fortified city.

古文：今何不相率还城而守之？
现代文：现在为什么不一起返回城中固守呢？
English: Now, why don't we return to the city together and hold fast?

古文：且城高厚，多谷米，今若还求令，共坚守，度必不能久，攻可破也。 
现代文：况且城墙高大厚实，粮食充足，现在如果回去请求县令，王度等人一定不能长久，攻打他就能获胜了。 
English: Moreover, the city walls are high and thick, and food is plentiful. Now, if you go back and request the county magistrate, Wang Du and others will not last long. If you attack him, you will win.

古文：房等以为然。
现代文：薛房等人认为他说得对。
English: Xue Fang and others think he is right.

古文：吏民不肯从，曰： 贼在西，但有东耳。 
现代文：但吏役百姓们不肯听从，说： 贼人在西面，我们只能往东走。 
English: But the officials and common people refused to listen, saying: The thieves are in the west, we can only go east.

古文：昱谓房等： 愚民不可计事。 
现代文：程昱对薛房等人说： 愚陋的百姓是不能和他们一起谋划事情的。 
English: Cheng Yao said to Xue Fang and others, "The stupid people can't plan things together with them.

古文：乃密遣数骑举幡于东山上，令房等望见，大呼言 贼已至 ，便下山趣城，吏民奔走随之，求得县令，遂共城守。
现代文：就暗中派遣数名骑兵到东山上举起旗帜，让薛房等人远远望见，大喊说 贼人已经来到了 ，就下山奔向城内，吏役百姓也慌忙奔走跟随他们，回到城中求见县令，于是一同守城。
English: He secretly sent several cavalrymen to the east hill to raise the flag, so that Xue Fang and others could see far away, shouting that the thieves had arrived, they ran down the mountain to the city, the officials and the people also hurried to follow them, returned to the city to see the county magistrate, and then guarded the city together.

古文：度等来攻城，不能下，欲去。
现代文：王度等人前来攻城，没有能攻下，想要离开。
English: Wang Du and others came to attack the city, but failed to capture it and wanted to leave.

古文：昱率吏民开城门急击之，度等破走。
现代文：程昱率领官吏百姓打开城门迅速追击，王度等人大败逃走。
English: Cheng Yu led the officials and commoners to open the city gate and quickly pursued them. Wang Du and others were defeated and fled.

古文：东阿由此得全。
现代文：东阿县城因此得以保全。
English: As a result, Toa's county seat was preserved.

古文：初平中，兖州刺史刘岱辟昱，昱不应。
现代文：初平年间，兖州刺史刘岱征召程昱，程昱没有就任。
English: During the early Heian period, Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, conscripted Cheng Ye, but Cheng Ye did not take up the post.

古文：是时岱与袁绍、公孙瓒和亲，绍令妻子居岱所，瓒亦遣从事范方将骑助岱。
现代文：这时候刘岱和袁绍、公孙瓒互相通婚，袁绍让自己的夫人孩子住在刘岱的居所，公孙瓒也派出从事范方率领骑兵援助刘岱。
English: At this time, Liu Bei and Yuan Shao and Gongsun Bei intermarried. Yuan Shao let his wife and children live in Liu Bei's residence, and Gongsun Bei also sent cavalry to aid Liu Bei.

古文：后绍与瓒有隙。
现代文：后来袁绍和公孙瓒产生了嫌隙。
English: Later, Yuan Shao and Gongsun Yao had a rift.

古文：瓒击破绍军，乃遣使语岱，令遣绍妻子，使与绍绝。
现代文：公孙瓒击败袁绍军队，然后派使者前去告诉刘岱，让他送走袁绍的妻子孩子，让他和袁绍断绝来往。
English: Gongsun Kun defeated Yuan Shao's army, and then sent an envoy to tell Liu Kun to send away Yuan Shao's wife and children, and to cut off contact with Yuan Shao Kun.

古文：别敕范方： 若岱不遣绍家，将骑还。
现代文：又另外命令范方： 如果刘岱没有送走袁绍的家属，就带骑兵回来。
English: He also gave another order to Fan Fang: If Liu Bei did not send away Yuan Shao's family members, he would return with cavalry.

古文：吾定绍，将加兵于岱。 
现代文：我平定袁绍之后，就会出兵攻打刘岱。 
English: After I pacify Yuan Shao, I will send troops to attack Liu Bei.

古文：岱议连日不决，别驾王彧白岱： 程昱有谋，能断大事。 
现代文：刘岱商议了好几天也没有决定，别驾王彧告诉刘岱： 程昱有谋略，能决断大事情。 
English: Liu Ye deliberated for several days and did not make a decision. Wang Ye told Liu Ye: Cheng Ye has a strategy and can decide big things.

古文：岱乃召见昱，问计，昱曰： 若弃绍近援而求瓒远助，此假人於越以救溺子之说也。
现代文：刘岱就召见程昱，向他询问计策，程昱说： 如果舍弃近处袁绍的援助而去寻求远处的公孙瓒的帮助，这就像是到越国找人来就溺水的孩子。
English: Liu Yao summoned Cheng Yao and asked him about the strategy. Cheng Yao said: If you abandon the assistance of nearby Yuan Shao and seek the help of distant Gongsun Yao, it is like a drowning child looking for someone in Vietnam.

古文：夫公孙瓒，非袁绍之敌也。
现代文：公孙瓒，不是袁绍的对手。
English: Gongsun Yao is not Yuan Shao's rival.

古文：今虽坏绍军，然终为绍所禽。
现代文：现在虽然打败了袁绍军队，但最终会被袁绍擒住。
English: Although they have defeated Yuan Shao's army now, they will eventually be trapped by Yuan Shao.

古文：夫趣一朝之权而不虑远计，将军终败。 
现代文：追求一时的权利而不考虑长远的发展，将军终会失败的。 
English: Pursuing momentary power without considering long-term development, the generals will eventually fail.

古文：岱从之。
现代文：刘岱听从了他的话。
English: Liu Ye obeyed his words.

古文：范方将其骑归，未至，瓒大为绍所破。
现代文：范方率领手下骑兵回去，还没回到，公孙瓒已经被袁绍攻破。
English: Fan Fang led his cavalry back, but before he could return, Gongsun Yao had already been defeated by Yuan Shao.

古文：岱表昱为骑都尉，昱辞以疾。
现代文：刘岱上表请求任命程昱为骑都尉，程昱以生病为由推辞了。
English: Liu Yao requested the appointment of Cheng Yao as a cavalry captain on the table. Cheng Yao declined on the grounds of illness.

古文：刘岱为黄巾所杀。
现代文：刘岱被黄巾军杀害。
English: Liu Wei was killed by the Yellow Turban Army.

古文：太祖临兖州，辟昱。
现代文：太祖来到衮州，征召程昱。
English: The great-grandfather came to Zhangzhou to recruit Cheng Yao.

古文：昱将行，其乡人谓曰： 何前后之相背也！ 
现代文：程昱将要前往，他家乡的人对他说： 为什么前后的做法不一样呢！ 
English: Cheng Jun is about to leave, and the people in his hometown say to him: Why is the practice different before and after?

古文：昱笑而不应。
现代文：程昱笑着没有回答。
English: Cheng Yao laughed and did not answer.

古文：太祖与语，说之，以昱守寿张令。
现代文：太祖和他交谈，很是高兴，让程昱担任寿张县令。
English: The great-grandfather talked with him and was very happy to let Cheng Yao serve as the county magistrate of Shou Zhang County.

古文：太祖征徐州，使昱与荀彧留守鄄城。
现代文：太祖征讨徐州，让程昱和荀彧留下镇守甄城。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered Xuzhou, leaving Cheng Yu and Yao as the town guards of Zhencheng.

古文：张邈等叛迎吕布，郡县响应，唯鄄城、范、东阿不动。
现代文：张邈等人反叛，转而奉迎吕布，周围的郡县都响应他们，只有甄城、范城、东阿没有行动。
English: Zhang Qian and others rebelled and turned to Feng Ying Lv, and the surrounding counties responded to them. Only Zhencheng, Fancheng and Dong'a did not act.

古文：布军降者，言陈宫欲自将兵取东阿，又使氾嶷取范，吏民皆恐。
现代文：吕布军中前来投降的人，说陈宫打算自己带兵攻取东阿，又派汜嶷进攻范县，吏役百姓们都很惊恐。
English: People from the Lvbu army who came to surrender said that Chen Gong planned to take over Dong'ao with his own troops, and also sent troops to attack Fan County. The officials and people were very frightened.

古文：彧谓昱曰： 今兖州反，唯有此三城。
现代文：荀彧对程昱说： 现在衮州反叛，只剩下这三座城。
English: Zou said to Cheng Yao: Now that Zhangzhou has rebelled, only these three cities are left.

古文：宫等以重兵临之，非有以深结其心，三城必动。
现代文：陈宫等人率重兵前来，如果不能紧密地团结百姓的心意，这三座城一定会发生变动。
English: Chen Gong and others led a heavy army to come. If they cannot closely unite the people's will, these three cities will surely change.

古文：君，民之望也，归而说之，殆可！ 
现代文：您是百姓盼望的，回去劝说他们，大概就可以了！ 
English: You are the hope of the people, go back and convince them, that's probably enough!

古文：昱乃归，过范，说其令靳允曰： 闻吕布执君母弟妻子，孝子诚不可为心！
现代文：程昱就返回城中，途中经过范县，游说范县县令靳允说： 听说吕布抓捕了您的母亲？弟弟、妻子和孩子，孝顺的人实在不能容忍！
English: Cheng Yao returned to the city, passing through Fan County on the way, and lobbied Fan County's Ling Yaoyong to say: I heard that Lv Bu arrested your mother? Brother, wife and children, filial people really cannot be tolerated!

古文：今天下大乱，英雄并起，必有命世，能息天下之乱者，此智者所详择也。
现代文：现在天下动乱，四处豪杰起兵，其中一定有有治国才能，能平息天下动乱的人，这是有智谋的人会谨慎选择的。
English: Now that the world is in turmoil, four great heroes have raised an army. Among them, there must be a person who has the ability to govern the country and can quell the turmoil in the world. This is a prudent choice for people with wisdom.

古文：得主者昌，失主者亡。
现代文：得到圣明主君的就会兴盛，失去主君的就会衰亡。
English: Those who gain a sacred master will prosper, and those who lose their master will decline.

古文：陈宫叛迎吕布而百城皆应，似能有为，然以君观之，布何如人哉！
现代文：陈宫反叛，转而奉迎吕布，很多城邑都纷纷响应，似乎能有所作为，但在您看来，吕布怎么能比得上他人呢！
English: Chen Gong rebelled and turned to Fengying Lvbu, and many cities and towns responded in succession. It seems that it can make a difference, but in your opinion, how can Lvbu be compared to others!

古文：夫布，粗中少亲，刚而无礼，匹夫之雄耳。
现代文：吕布言行粗鲁，少有亲信，刚愎自用又蛮横无理，不过是个匹夫中的英雄罢了。
English: Lv Bu was rude in word and deed, had few confidants, was stubborn and unreasonable, but he was a hero among heroes.

古文：宫等以势假合，不能相君也。
现代文：陈宫等人因为他的气势才和他合作，并不能帮助您。
English: Chen Gong and others only cooperated with him because of his influence, and cannot help you.

古文：兵虽众，终必无成。
现代文：他们人马虽多，最终一定不会成功。
English: Although there are many of them, they will not succeed in the end.

古文：曹使君智略不世出，殆天所授！
现代文：曹使君的智慧谋略在世上非常罕见，大概是上天授予的！
English: Cao Zhijun's wise strategy is very rare in the world, probably bestowed by heaven!

古文：君必固范，我守东阿，则田单之功可立也。
现代文：您一定要固守范县，我守住东阿，那就可以建立像田单收复失地那样的功劳了。
English: You must hold on to Fan County, and I will hold on to Dong'a, and then we can establish a merit like Tian Shan's recovery of lost land.

古文：孰与违忠从恶而母子俱亡乎？
现代文：谁会选择违背忠诚，投靠恶人而导致母亲孩子都丧生呢？
English: Who would choose to be disloyal and side with the wicked, resulting in the death of both mother and child?

古文：唯君详虑之！ 允流涕曰： 不敢有二心。 
现代文：希望您仔细考虑这件事！ 靳允痛哭流涕地说： 我不敢生出二心。 
English: I hope you will consider this matter carefully! Hao Yun said, weeping bitterly, "I don't dare to have two hearts.

古文：时氾嶷已在县，允乃见嶷，伏兵刺杀之，归勒兵守。
现代文：当时氾嶷已经在县中，靳允就召见他，埋伏士兵将他刺杀了，然后回去率领士兵守城。
English: At that time, Fengtao was already in the county, Yu Yun summoned him, and the ambushed soldiers stabbed him to death, and then went back to lead the soldiers to defend the city.

古文：昱又遣别骑绝仓亭津，陈宫至，不得渡。
现代文：程昱又另外派遣起兵将仓亭渡口堵住，陈宫率部来到，无法渡河。
English: Cheng Yu also dispatched another detachment of soldiers to block the Kuratei ferry port. Chen Gong and his men arrived and were unable to cross the river.

古文：昱至东阿，东阿令枣祗已率厉吏民，拒城坚守。
现代文：程昱去到东阿，东阿县令枣祗已经率领并勉励官吏百姓一起坚守城池。
English: Cheng Wei went to Dong'a, Dong'a County's leader Zaozhu Wei has led and encouraged officials and people to stick to the city together.

古文：又兖州从事薛悌与昱协谋，卒完三城，以待太祖。
现代文：又有兖州从事薛悌与程昱一同商议，最后保住了这三座城，等待太祖返回。
English: In addition, Zhangzhou engaged in negotiations with Xue and Cheng, and finally saved these three cities, waiting for Taizu to return.

古文：太祖还，执昱手曰： 微子之力，吾无所归矣。 
现代文：太祖回来后，拉着程昱的手说： 没有你的出力，我就没有地方可回了。 
English: After the great-grandfather returned, he took Cheng Yao by the hand and said, "Without your efforts, I would have no place to return to."

古文：乃表昱为东平相，屯范。
现代文：就上表让程昱担任东平相，驻守在范县。
English: According to the above table, Cheng Yu was assigned as the Dongping minister and stationed in Fan County.

古文：太祖与吕布战于濮阳，数不利。
现代文：太祖和吕布在濮阳交战，好几次都失利了。
English: Taizu and Lvbu fought in Fenyang and lost several times.

古文：蝗虫起，乃各引去。
现代文：这时发生了蝗灾，两军各自率队离开了。
English: At this time, a plague of locusts occurred, and the two armies left separately.

古文：於是袁绍使人说太祖连和，欲使太祖迁家居邺。
现代文：于是袁绍派人游说太祖两军联合，想要让太祖将家搬到邺城居住。
English: As a result, Yuan Shao sent people to lobby for the unification of the two armies of Taizu, and wanted to have Taizu move his family to live in Lucheng.

古文：太祖新失兖州，军食尽，将许之。
现代文：太祖刚刚失去了衮州，军队的粮食又吃光了，打算答应吕布。
English: The great-grandfather had just lost Zhangzhou, and the army had run out of food, so he was going to agree to Lvbu.

古文：时昱使適还，引见，因言曰： 窃闻将军欲遣家，与袁绍连和，诚有之乎？ 太祖曰： 然。 
现代文：这时候程昱出使刚好回来，太祖召见他，程昱趁机说： 我听闻将军想要将家属送到邺城，然后和袁绍联合，果真有这样的事吗？ 太祖说： 有的。 
English: At this time, Cheng Yu's envoy just happened to return, and his great-grandfather summoned him. Cheng Yu took the opportunity to say: I heard that the general wanted to send his family members to Lucheng, and then unite with Yuan Shao. Is there really such a thing? His great-grandfather said: Yes.

古文：昱曰： 意者将军殆临事而惧，不然何虑之不深也！
现代文：程昱说： 我猜测将军您大概是遇上事情而心生恐惧，不然怎么会思虑得这么不深刻呢！
English: Cheng Yao said, "I guess, General, that you are afraid when things happen to you. Otherwise, how could you not be so thoughtful!"

古文：夫袁绍据燕、赵之地，有并天下之心，而智不能济也。
现代文：袁绍占据燕赵的地区，有吞并天下的野心，但他的智谋不能达到这一程度。
English: Yuan Shao occupied the area of Yan Zhao and had the ambition of annexing the world, but his wisdom could not reach this level.

古文：将军自度能为之下乎？
现代文：将军自己估计，您能处在袁绍之下吗？
English: In the general's own estimation, can you be below Yuan Shao?

古文：将军以龙虎之威，可为韩、彭之事邪？
现代文：将军凭借龙虎一样威猛的气势，难道能做像韩信、彭越那样的事吗？
English: Can the general, with the mighty momentum of dragons and tigers, do something like Han Xin and Peng Yue?

古文：今兖州虽残，尚有三城。
现代文：现在衮州虽然残破，但还有三座城。
English: Now, although Luzhou is in ruins, there are still three cities.

古文：能战之士，不下万人。
现代文：能作战的士兵不少于一万人。
English: There are no less than ten thousand soldiers who can fight.

古文：以将军之神武，与文若、昱等，收而用之，霸王之业可成也。
现代文：以将军您的英明神武，还有荀文若和我程昱等人，召集士兵并使用他们，那称霸的伟业就可以成功了。
English: With the help of your wise and powerful generals, as well as the likes of Nie Wenru and Cheng Yu, we can gather soldiers and use them, and the great cause of hegemony will be successful.

古文：愿将军更虑之！ 
现代文：希望将军好好考虑这件事！ 
English: I hope the general will think about this!

古文：太祖乃止。
现代文：太祖才打消了和袁绍联合的念头。
English: It was only then that the great-grandfather gave up the idea of uniting with Yuan Shao.

古文：天子都许，以昱为尚书。
现代文：天子将都城迁到许县，任命程昱为尚书。
English: Tianzi moved the capital to Xu County and appointed Cheng Yu as Shangshu.

古文：兖州尚未安集，复以昱为东中郎将，领济阴太守，都督兖州事。
现代文：但衮州还没有安定，又任命程昱为东中郎将，兼任济阴太守，督领衮州事宜。
English: However, Bozhou was not yet stable, and Cheng Yu was appointed as the East Vice Admiral, concurrently serving as the governor of Jiyin and supervising the affairs of Bozhou.

古文：刘备失徐州，来归太祖。
现代文：刘备失掉徐州，前来依附太祖。
English: Liu Bei lost Xuzhou and came to attach himself to Taizu.

古文：昱说太祖杀备，太祖不听。
现代文：程昱劝说太祖将刘备杀了，太祖没有听从。
English: Cheng Yu persuaded the great-grandfather to kill Liu Bei, but the great-grandfather did not listen.

古文：语在武纪。
现代文：这件事在《武帝纪》中另有记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：后又遣备至徐州要击袁术，昱与郭嘉说太祖曰： 公前日不图备，昱等诚不及也。
现代文：后来太祖又派刘备到徐州拦截袭击袁术，程昱和郭嘉劝说太祖： 您之前没有将刘备杀掉，我们实在不如您思虑周全。
English: Later, the great-grandfather sent Liu Bei to Xuzhou to intercept the attack on Yuan Shu. Cheng Yu and Guo Jia persuaded the great-grandfather: You did not kill Liu Bei before, we are really not as thoughtful as you.

古文：今借之以兵，必有异心。 
现代文：现在将军队借给他，他一定会生出别的心思。 
English: Lend him an army now, and he'll think of something else.

古文：太祖悔，追之不及。
现代文：太祖后悔，立刻追赶敢没有追上。
English: The great-grandfather regretted that he did not catch up immediately.

古文：会术病死，备至徐州，遂杀车胄，举兵背太祖。
现代文：恰好袁术病死，刘备到了徐州，就将车胄杀了，起兵背叛太祖。
English: Just as Yuan Shuxu died of illness, Liu Bei arrived in Xuzhou, killed his chariot driver, and raised an army to betray his great-grandfather.

古文：顷之，昱迁振威将军。
现代文：不久，程昱升迁为振威将军。
English: Soon after, Cheng Rong was promoted to General Zhenwei.

古文：袁绍在黎阳，将南渡。
现代文：袁绍在黎阳，将要渡河到南边。
English: Yuan Shao is in Liyang and is going to cross the river to the south.

古文：时昱有七百兵守鄄城，太祖闻之，使人告昱，欲益二千兵。
现代文：当时程昱有七百名士兵驻守甄城，太祖得知后，派人告诉程昱说想要给他增加两千士兵。
English: At that time, Cheng Yu had seven hundred soldiers stationed in Zhencheng. After learning this, Taizu sent someone to tell Cheng Yu that he wanted to give him an additional two thousand soldiers.

古文：昱不肯，曰： 袁绍拥十万众，自以所向无前。
现代文：程昱不肯接受，说： 袁绍拥有十万士兵，自认为前进不会有阻挡。
English: Cheng Rong refused to accept, saying: Yuan Shao has 100,000 soldiers, and he thinks that there will be no obstacle to his advance.

古文：今见昱兵少，必轻易不来攻。
现代文：现在看我这里兵力少，一定不会轻易前来攻打。
English: Now that I have fewer troops here, it will not be easy for me to attack.

古文：若益昱兵，过则不可不攻，攻之必克，徒两损其势。
现代文：如果给我增加了兵力，人马多了，那就不可能不来攻打，攻打就一定能攻破，白白地损失两边的力量。
English: If I had more troops and more manpower, it would be impossible not to attack, and the attack would certainly break through, and both sides would lose their strength in vain.

古文：愿公无疑！ 
现代文：希望您不要犹疑！ 
English: I hope you will not hesitate!

古文：太祖从之。
现代文：太祖听从了他的建议。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed him.

古文：绍闻昱兵少，果不往。
现代文：袁绍听闻程昱兵力少，果然没有前去进攻。
English: Yuan Shao heard that Cheng Ho's army was small, so he did not go forward to attack.

古文：太祖谓贾诩曰： 程昱之胆，过于贲、育。 
现代文：太祖对贾诩说： 程昱的胆识，超过了孟贲和夏育。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Jia Jun: Cheng Jun's courage surpasses that of Meng Jun and Xia Yu.

古文：昱收山泽亡命，得精兵数千人，乃引军与太祖会黎阳，讨袁谭、袁尚。
现代文：程昱召集山林中的亡命之徒，得到数千精锐士兵，就率军到黎阳和太祖会合，征讨袁谭、袁尚。
English: Cheng Yu called up the outlaws in the mountains and forests, got thousands of elite soldiers, and led the army to meet Li Yang and Taizu to recruit Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang.

古文：谭、尚破走，拜昱奋武将军，封安国亭侯。
现代文：袁谭、袁尚被攻破逃走，太祖任命程昱为奋武将军，封为安国亭侯。
English: Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang were defeated and fled, and the great-great-grandfather appointed Cheng Yu as the general of Fenwu and An Guoting.

古文：太祖征荆州，刘备奔吴。
现代文：太祖征讨荆州，刘备逃奔到吴地。
English: The Great Ancestor conquered Jingzhou, and Liu Bei fled to Wudi.

古文：论者以为孙权必杀备，昱料之曰： 孙权新在位，未为海内所惮。
现代文：商讨的人认为孙权一定会杀掉刘备，程昱预料说： 孙权刚登上王位，国内还没有忌惮他。
English: The people in the discussion thought that Sun Quan would definitely kill Liu Bei, and Cheng Yao predicted: Sun Quan has just ascended the throne, and the country has not yet shunned him.

古文：曹公无敌於天下，初举荆州，威震江表，权虽有谋，不能独当也。
现代文：曹公在天下间没有敌手，刚刚攻下荆州，威势震动江南地区，孙权虽然有谋略，但不能独自抵御。
English: Cao Gong had no rival in the world. He had just conquered Jingzhou, and his might shook the south of the Yangtze River. Although Sun Quan had a strategy, he could not resist alone.

古文：刘备有英名，关羽、张飞皆万人敌也，权必资之以御我。
现代文：刘备有卓越的名声，关羽、张飞都是能对抗万人的人，孙权一定借助他们来抵御我们。
English: Liu Bei has an outstanding reputation, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei are people who can fight against ten thousand people, and Sun Quan will definitely use them to resist us.

古文：难解势分，备资以成，又不可得而杀也。 
现代文：刘备的灾祸得以化解，势力被划定，刘备凭借这些得以稳固，也不能在抓获然后杀掉他了。 
English: Liu Bei's calamity has been resolved, his forces have been demarcated, Liu Bei has been stabilized with these, and it is no longer possible to capture and kill him.

古文：权果多与备兵，以御太祖。
现代文：孙权果然给刘备增加了士兵来抵抗太祖。
English: As expected, Sun Quan gave Liu Bei more soldiers to resist his grandfather.

古文：是后中夏渐平，太祖拊昱背曰： 兖州之败，不用君言，吾何以至此？ 
现代文：这之后中原地区渐渐平定，太祖抚着程昱的后背说： 衮州的失败之后，如果没有听从您的建议，我怎么会到今天这样的地步呢？ 
English: After that, the Central Plains gradually settled down. The great-grandfather stroked Cheng Yao's back and said, "After the failure of Zhangzhou, if I hadn't followed your advice, how did I get to where I am today?"

古文：宗人奉牛酒大会，昱曰： 知足不辱，吾可以退矣。 
现代文：族中的人奉上牛酒，大会宴席，程昱说： 知道满足就不会受到侮辱，我可以告退了。 
English: People in the tribe were served cow wine at the grand banquet, and Cheng Yao said, "If I know that I will be satisfied, I will not be insulted. I can resign."

古文：乃自表归兵，阖门不出。
现代文：就自己上表归还士兵给太祖，然后闭门在家，不出来做官。
English: He returned the soldiers to his great-grandfather on his own watch, and then closed the door at home and did not come out to work as an official.

古文：昱性刚戾，与人多迕。
现代文：程昱性情刚愎暴戾，和人多次违逆。
English: Cheng Yao's character is stubborn and violent, and he has repeatedly disobeyed others.

古文：人有告昱谋反，太祖赐待益厚。
现代文：有人上告程昱密谋反叛，太祖的赏赐优待更加丰厚。
English: Some people accused Cheng Yao of plotting a rebellion, and Taizu's reward and preferential treatment became even richer.

古文：魏国既建，为卫尉，与中尉邢贞争威仪，免。
现代文：魏国建立之后，程昱担任卫尉，和中尉刑贞争论威德礼仪，被免职。
English: After the founding of the state of Wei, Cheng Yao served as a guard lieutenant, and Lieutenant Jing Zhen argued about the etiquette of Wei and was dismissed.

古文：文帝践阼，复为卫尉，进封安乡侯，增邑三百户，并前八百户。
现代文：文帝登基后，重新担任卫尉，进封为安乡侯，增加三百户食邑，加上之前的一个八百户。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he again served as a lieutenant of the imperial guard, and was assigned to Anxiang, increasing the number of households to 300, in addition to the previous 800.

古文：分封少子延及孙晓列侯。
现代文：文帝分封程昱的小儿子小儿子程延及孙子程晓为列侯。
English: Emperor Wen designated Cheng Yan's younger son Cheng Yan and Cheng Xiao's younger son Cheng Xiao as vassals.

古文：方欲以为公，会薨，帝为流涕，追赠车骑将军，谥曰肃侯。
现代文：正打算封程昱为公爵，刚好他去世了，文帝为他流泪，追赠他为车骑将军，谥号为肃侯。
English: He was planning to make Cheng Yu a duke when he died. Emperor Wen shed tears for him and posthumously made him a general of cavalry and cavalry. His posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子武嗣。
现代文：他的儿子程武承袭爵位。
English: His son Xu Wu inherited the title.

古文：武薨，子克嗣。
现代文：程武去世，儿子程克承袭爵位。
English: When Cheng Wu died, his son Cheng Ke inherited the title.

古文：克薨，子良嗣。
现代文：程克去世，他的儿子程良承袭爵位。
English: When Cheng Ke died, his son Cheng Liang inherited the title.

古文：晓，嘉平中为黄门侍郎。
现代文：程晓，嘉平年间担任黄门侍郎。
English: Cheng Xiao, served as a Yellow Gate waiter during the Jiaping era.

古文：时校事放横，晓上疏曰： 周礼云： 设官分职，以为民极。 
现代文：当时校事恣意蛮横，程晓上疏说： 《礼记》中说： 设立官职分配职位，作为民众的准则。 
English: At that time, the school affairs were arbitrary and outrageous, Cheng Xiao Shang Shou said: "The Book of Rites" said: "Establish official positions as a standard for the people."

古文：春秋传曰： 天有十日，人有十等。 
现代文：《春秋》中说： 存在用十个天干来记日的方法，人之间也存在十个等级。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: There is a method of using ten celestial stems to record the day, and there are also ten levels between people.

古文：愚不得临贤，贱不得临贵。於是并建圣哲，树之风声。
现代文：愚陋的人不能接近贤德的人，低贱的人不能接近尊贵的人，于是推崇圣德贤明的人，树立名声教化。
English: The stupid cannot approach the virtuous, and the lowly cannot approach the honorable. Therefore, the holy and the virtuous should be promoted, and the reputation of enlightenment should be established.

古文：明试以功，九载考绩。
现代文：用功绩来考验，没九年考核一次。
English: Use merit to test, not a nine-year assessment.

古文：各脩厥业，思不出位。
现代文：各自修习自己的成就，不想着越出本分。
English: Each of them is studying their own achievements, not wanting to go beyond their duties.

古文：故栾书欲拯晋侯，其子不听；死人横於街路，邴吉不问。
现代文：所以栾书想要挽救晋景公，他的儿子没有同意；去世的人暴露在街市上，邴吉没有过问。
English: Therefore, Zou Shu wanted to save Jin Jing Gong, but his son did not agree; the deceased was exposed on the street market, and Zou Ji did not ask.

古文：上不责非职之功，下不务分外之赏，吏无兼统之势，民无二事之役，斯诚为国要道，治乱所由也。
现代文：对上不求取不在职分内的功劳，对下不追求本分以外的奖赏，吏役没有总管事务的威势，民众没有被两件事情役使，这实在是治理国家的重要办法，治理混乱的缘由啊。
English: On the one hand, officials do not seek credit that is not within the scope of their duties; on the other hand, subordinates do not seek rewards beyond their duties; officials do not have the authority of the head of affairs; the people are not served by two things. This is really an important way to govern the country, and the cause of governance chaos.

古文：远览典志，近观秦汉，虽官名改易，职司不同，至于崇上抑下，显分明例，其致一也。
现代文：远的，查看古代典籍记录，近看秦汉两朝虽然官职名称改变，职务主管的事务不同，但至于尊崇上级，压制下位之人，突显职分，明确体例，所追求的是一样的。
English: Far away, check the records of ancient classics, and look closer at the Qin and Han dynasties. Although the names of official positions have changed and the duties of the supervisors are different, as far as respect for superiors, suppression of subordinates, highlighting positions, and clear style are concerned, the pursuit is the same.

古文：初无校事之官干与庶政者也。
现代文：当初没有校事官职的人干预各种政务的。
English: At the beginning, there were no school officials to interfere in various government affairs.

古文：昔武皇帝大业草创，众官未备，而军旅勤苦，民心不安，乃有小罪，不可不察，故置校事，取其一切耳，然检御有方，不至纵恣也。
现代文：从前武皇帝刚刚创立基业，各种官职还没有完备，但军队勤勉困苦，百姓心中不安，只要有小罪，不可以不明察，所以设立了校事一职，让他总管一切，但要有督察驾驭的方法，让他不至于肆意放纵。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu had just founded a foundation, and various official positions were not yet complete, but the army was diligent and hard-working, and the people were uneasy. As long as there were petty crimes, they could not be overlooked. Therefore, a position of school affairs was established, and he was put in charge of everything, but there must be an inspector to control the methods, so that he would not indulge in wanton indulgence.

古文：此霸世之权宜，非帝王之正典。
现代文：这是要称霸的时代的权益之计，不是帝王的明正典例。
English: This is a measure of the rights and interests of the era of hegemony, not a clear-cut example of the emperor.

古文：其后渐蒙见任，复为疾病，转相因仍，莫正其本。
现代文：在这之后校事渐渐蒙受宠信得到任用，又成为隐患，又沿袭之前的情况，没有人能归正其根本。
English: After this, the school affairs gradually became a favorite and got appointed, and became a hidden danger, and followed the previous situation, and no one could rectify its root.

古文：遂令上察宫庙，下摄众司，官无局业，职无分限，随意任情，唯心所適。
现代文：所以允许他们对上审察宗庙，对下统摄众多部门，官位没有局限，职分没有限制，随心所欲任意自由，只按照心中想法来处理事情。
English: Therefore, they are allowed to inspect the ancestral temple at the upper level and many departments at the lower level. There are no restrictions on the official rank, no restrictions on the position, and they are free to do as they please. They can only deal with things according to their own thoughts.

古文：法造於笔端，不依科诏；狱成於门下，不顾覆讯。
现代文：律法从他们笔端制定出来，判案不依照法令条文；案件在他们门下决断，不经过审讯。
English: The law is from their pen, and they judge not according to the precepts of the law; judgment is taken from their hand, and there is no hearing.

古文：其选官属，以谨慎为粗疏，以謥詷为贤能。
现代文：他们选拔属官，把谨慎当做粗陋，把言语夸诞当做贤能。
English: They select subordinate officials, regard caution as vulgarity, and regard verbal exaggeration as virtue.

古文：其治事，以刻暴为公严，以循理为怯弱。
现代文：他们处理事务，把刻毒暴戾当做公正严明，把遵循法理当做胆小怯懦。
English: They go about their business, treating the vitriolic and violent as if they were just and strict, and treating adherence to the law as if it were timid and cowardly.

古文：外则讬天威以为声势，内则聚群奸以为腹心。
现代文：对外就假借天子威势作为自己的声势，对内就聚集众多奸邪小人做为自己的心腹。
English: To the outside world, it pretends to use the power of the Almighty as its own voice, and to the inside world, it gathers a large number of evil villains as its confidants.

古文：大臣耻与分势，含忍而不言，小人畏其锋芒，郁结而无告。
现代文：大臣们以他们的地位权势为耻，心中隐忍而不说出口，小人们畏惧他们的气势，心中郁结无所上告。
English: The ministers are ashamed of their position and power, and suffer in their hearts without speaking out. The little people are afraid of their power, and are depressed and have nothing to appeal to.

古文：至使尹模公于目下肆其奸慝；罪恶之著，行路皆知，纤恶之过，积年不闻。
现代文：导致像尹模公那样的人在眼前放纵奸恶小人；明确的罪行，路上行人都知道，细微的过错，好几年都不为人所知。
English: This has led to people like Yin Mokong indulging in petty crimes in front of their eyes; clear crimes are known to passers-by, and minor mistakes have not been known for years.

古文：既非周礼设官之意，又非春秋十等之义也。
现代文：这既不是《礼记》中设立官职的本意，也不是《春秋》中划分十等的含义。
English: This is neither the intention of the establishment of official posts in "Li Ji" nor the meaning of the division of the tenth grade in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：今外有公卿将校总统诸署，内有侍中尚书综理万机，司隶校尉督察京辇，御史中丞董摄宫殿，皆高选贤才以充其职，申明科诏以督其违。
现代文：现在，在外有大臣将校总管统率各级官署，对内有侍中、尚书总览整理各项事务，司隶校尉监督考察国都中情况，御史中丞总管宫中事宜，都是用高标准选拔贤人来担当这些职位，郑重申明律法诏令以监督他们的违犯行为。
English: At present, there is a minister of foreign affairs in charge of the general management of officers at all levels of government offices, and there are a chamberlain and a secretary in charge of various affairs, a sergeant-major in charge of supervising and inspecting the situation of the National Capital Middle School, and a secretary-major in charge of the palace affairs, all of which are high-standard selection of wise men to take charge of these positions, and solemnly reiterate the explicit legal edict to supervise their violations.

古文：若此诸贤犹不足任，校事小吏，益不可信。
现代文：如若这些贤人还不足够圣人，那校事只不过是小吏役，更加不可信赖。
English: If these sages are not saintly enough, the schoolmasters are petty functionaries and even less trustworthy.

古文：若此诸贤各思尽忠，校事区区，亦复无益。
现代文：如果这些贤人都各自想着尽忠，那小小的校事，也没有什么用。
English: If these wise men all want to be loyal to each other, that little school thing is of no use.

古文：若更高选国士以为校事，则是中丞司隶重增一官耳。
现代文：如果以更高的标准来选拔国士担任校事，那也只是中丞司隶多增加了一个官职罢了。
English: If a higher standard is used to select national officers to serve as school officials, it is just that the junior high school secretary has added one more official position.

古文：若如旧选，尹模之奸今复发矣。
现代文：如果像以前那样选拔，尹模那样的奸人又再次出现了。
English: If the selection is the same as before, the traitors like Yin Miao will appear again.

古文：进退推算，无所用之。
现代文：往前往后推算，校事这官职已经没有什么用。
English: In hindsight, it is clear that the post of vice-chancellor is no longer useful.

古文：昔桑弘羊为汉求利，卜式以为独烹弘羊，天乃可雨。
现代文：过去桑弘羊为汉朝求取利益，卜式认为只有将桑弘羊杀掉，天才会下雨。
English: In the past, Kuang Hongyang sought profits for the Han Dynasty. Bu Shih believed that only if Kuang Hongyang was killed would it rain genius.

古文：若使政治得失必感天地，臣恐水旱之灾，未必非校事之由也。
现代文：如果让政治上的得失一定要感动天地，臣担心天下间水旱灾害，未必没有校事的缘由。
English: If the political gains and losses must move heaven and earth, and the minister is worried about floods and droughts around the world, there may not be a reason for school affairs.

古文：曹恭公远君子，近小人，国风讬以为刺。
现代文：曹恭公远离君子亲近小人，《诗经·国风》中借诗歌来讽刺。
English: Cao Gong is far away from the gentleman and close to the villain, and the poem is used to satirize in the "Book of Poems, National Style."

古文：卫献公舍大臣，与小臣谋，定姜谓之有罪。
现代文：卫献公舍弃大臣，和小臣谋划，定姜说他是有罪的。
English: Wei Xianku abandoned the minister, and schemed with the junior minister, Ding Jiang said that he was guilty.

古文：纵令校事有益於国，以礼义言之，尚伤大臣之心，况奸回暴露，而复不罢，是衮阙不补，迷而不返也。 於是遂罢校事官。
现代文：即使校事对国家是有好处的，从礼节忠义上来讲，尚且会伤害大臣的心意，更何况他们的奸恶邪僻不断暴露，如果再不罢免这个官职，那就是君王的职责有所缺失却不弥补，迷失了道路却不知道回返了。 于是就罢免了校事官职。
English: Even if the school is good for the country, it will hurt the minister's heart from the point of view of etiquette and loyalty, not to mention that their wickedness and perversion are constantly exposed. If this post is not dismissed, it is that the king's duties are missing but not compensated, and the road is lost but does not know how to return. So the school post was dismissed.

古文：晓迁汝南太守，年四十馀薨。
现代文：程晓升任汝南太守，四十多岁的时候去世。
English: Cheng Xiao was promoted to the position of Yongan Dazhong and passed away when he was in his forties.

古文：郭嘉字奉孝，颍川阳翟人也。
现代文：郭嘉字奉孝，颍川郡阳翟县人。
English: Guo Jia Zi Feng Xiao, from Yangshuo County, Fenchuan County.

古文：初，北见袁绍，谓绍谋臣辛评、郭图曰： 夫智者审于量主，故百举百全而功名可立也。
现代文：当初，郭嘉到北边去面见袁绍，对袁绍的谋臣辛评、郭图说： 有智谋的人会谨慎地衡量主君，所以提出的建议都得到周全地执行，就可以成就功名。
English: At the beginning, Guo Jia went to the north to meet with Yuan Shao, and commented on Yuan Shao's advisers, Guo Tu said: A wise man will carefully measure his master, so if the suggestions made are well implemented, they can achieve fame.

古文：袁公徒欲效周公之下士，而未知用人之机。
现代文：袁公只是想要效仿周公礼贤下士，但不知道用人的办法。
English: Yuan Gong just wanted to emulate Corporal Zhou Gong Lixian, but did not know how to employ people.

古文：多端寡要，好谋无决，欲与共济天下大难，定霸王之业，难矣！ 
现代文：思虑太多又不得要领，喜好谋划却不能决断，想要和他一起渡过现在天下的危难，奠定称王称霸的基业，很难啊！ 
English: There are too many thoughts and no essentials, he likes to plan but can't decide, it's hard to want to get through the current global crisis with him and lay the foundation for reigning supreme!

古文：於是遂去之。
现代文：于是就离开了袁绍。
English: So he left Yuan Shao.

古文：先是时，颍川戏志才，筹画士也，太祖甚器之。早卒。
现代文：在这以前，颍川郡人戏志才，是个善于出谋划策的士人，太祖很器重他，但早早就去世了。
English: Prior to this, the great-great-grandfather was a scholar who was good at making plans, but he died a long time ago.

古文：太祖与荀彧书曰： 自志才亡后，莫可与计事者。
现代文：太祖给荀彧写信说： 自从戏志才去世后，就没有人可以和他谋划大事了。
English: The great-grandfather wrote a letter to Zhai saying, "Since Zhai Zhicai passed away, no one can make big plans with him.

古文：汝、颍固多奇士，谁可以继之？ 
现代文：汝川、颍川本来就有很多奇人异士，谁能继承他呢？ 
English: There are already a lot of strange people in Ruchuan and Juchuan. Who can succeed him?

古文：彧荐嘉。
现代文：荀彧推荐郭嘉。
English: recommend Guo Jia.

古文：召见，论天下事。
现代文：太祖召见郭嘉，和他谈论天下之事。
English: The great-grandfather summoned Guo Jia to talk with him about world affairs.

古文：太祖曰： 使孤成大业者，必此人也。 
现代文：太祖说： 让我成就大业的，一定是这个人。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "This man must be the one to make my great career come true."

古文：嘉出，亦喜曰： 真吾主也。 
现代文：郭嘉退出，也欣喜地说： 真是我的主君的。 
English: Guo Jia withdrew, and also said with joy, "It's really my master's."

古文：表为司空军祭酒。
现代文：太祖上表任命郭嘉为空军祭酒。
English: Guo Jia was designated as the Air Force's "sacred liquor" by Emperor Taizu.

古文：征吕布，三战破之，布退固守。
现代文：太祖征讨吕布，三次交战，攻破了吕布，吕布撤退固守。
English: The great ancestor conquered Lvbu, fought three times, defeated Lvbu, and Lvbu retreated and held fast.

古文：时士卒疲倦，太祖欲引军还，嘉说太祖急攻之，遂禽布。
现代文：当时士兵疲惫倦怠，太祖想要率军返回，郭嘉劝说太祖加紧进攻吕布，就生擒了吕布。
English: At that time, the soldiers were tired and weary, the great-grandfather wanted to lead the army back, Guo Jia persuaded the great-grandfather to step up the attack on Lvbu, and Lvbu was captured.

古文：语在荀攸传。
现代文：这件事在《荀彧传》中另有记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：孙策转斗千里，尽有江东，闻太祖与袁绍相持於官渡，将渡江北袭许。
现代文：孙策转战千里，将江东地区都收归所有，得知太祖和袁绍在官渡对峙，相持不下，就打算渡过长江北行袭击许县。
English: Sun Ce turned to a thousand-mile war and took over the eastern region of the Yangtze River. When he learned that Taizu and Yuan Shao were in confrontation at Guandu and could not stand each other, he planned to cross the Yangtze River to the north to attack Xu County.

古文：众闻皆惧，嘉料之曰： 策新并江东，所诛皆英豪雄杰，能得人死力者也。
现代文：众人得知消息后都很恐惧，郭嘉预料说： 孙策刚刚吞并了江东地区，所诛杀的人都是英雄豪杰，他是能让人效死力的。
English: After learning the news, everyone was very afraid. Guo Jia said in anticipation: Sun Ce just annexed the eastern Jiangsu region, and the people he killed were heroes. He is able to make people use deadly force.

古文：然策轻而无备，虽有百万之众，无异於独行中原也。
现代文：但孙策轻敌又没有防备，即使有一百万的部队，也跟独自来到中原地区没有什么不同。
English: However, Sun Tse's light enemy was unprepared. Even if there were a million troops, it would be no different from coming to the Central Plains region alone.

古文：若刺客伏起，一人之敌耳。
现代文：如果有刺客埋伏并突然袭击，那就只不过是一个人的敌手而已。
English: If an ambushed assassin suddenly comes out, one man can deal with him.

古文：以吾观之，必死於匹夫之手。 
现代文：在我看来，他一定会死在普通人手中。 
English: In my opinion, he will certainly die at the hands of ordinary people.

古文：策临江未济，果为许贡客所杀。
现代文：孙策兵临江边，还没有渡江，果然被许贡派出的刺客杀了。
English: Sun Cehei was on the edge of the river, had not yet crossed the river, and was indeed killed by the assassins sent by Xu Gong.

古文：从破袁绍，绍死，又从讨谭、尚于黎阳，连战数克。
现代文：郭嘉跟随太祖攻破袁绍，袁绍去世，有随同到黎阳征讨袁谭、袁尚，接连交战都取得胜利。
English: Guo Jia followed his great-grandfather to defeat Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao died, and Guo Jia went to Liyang to fight Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang. Successive battles were won.

古文：诸将欲乘胜遂攻之，嘉曰： 袁绍爱此二子，莫適立也。
现代文：众位将领想要乘胜进行最后的攻击，郭嘉说： 袁绍宠爱这两个儿子，没有确立继承人。
English: The generals wanted to take advantage of the victory to launch a final attack, Guo Jia said: Yuan Shao loved these two sons and did not establish an heir.

古文：有郭图、逢纪为之谋臣，必交斗其间，还相离也。
现代文：有郭图、逢纪作为他们的谋臣，一定会互相争斗，互相离间。
English: With Guo Tu and Feng Ji as their advisers, they will certainly fight with each other and alienate each other.

古文：急之则相持，缓之而后争心生。
现代文：我们加紧进攻，他们就会互相扶持，我们徐缓地进攻，他们就会产生争斗的心思。
English: If we step up the attack, they will support each other, if we attack slowly, they will have a fighting spirit.

古文：不如南向荆州若征刘表者，以待其变；变成而后击之，可一举定也。 
现代文：现在不如往南向荆州行军，就像要征讨刘表的样子，等待他们的关系变化；一旦变化形成然后进攻他们，就能一举平定他们了。 
English: Now it is better to march south to Jingzhou, as if to solicit Liu Biao, and wait for their relationship to change; once the change is formed and then attack them, they can be leveled at one stroke.

古文：太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：太祖说： 说得对。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "All right.

古文：乃南征。
现代文：就率军南征。
English: He led the army to invade the south.

古文：军至西平，谭、尚果争冀州。
现代文：大军行进到西平县，袁谭、袁尚果然争夺冀州。
English: The large army marched to Xiping County, and Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang successfully competed for Jizhou.

古文：谭为尚军所败，走保平原，遣辛毗乞降。
现代文：袁谭被袁尚军队打败，逃走固守平原县，派辛毗前去请求投降。
English: Yuan Tan was defeated by Yuan Shang's army, fled and held on to Pingyuan County, and sent Xinbei to request surrender.

古文：太祖还救之，遂从定邺。
现代文：太祖率军返回救援袁谭，袁谭就跟随太祖平定了邺城。
English: Grandfather led the army back to rescue Yuan Tan, and Yuan Tan followed Grandfather to level the city.

古文：又从攻谭於南皮，冀州平。
现代文：郭嘉后来又随同太祖在南皮攻打袁谭，冀州被平定。
English: Later, Guo Jia and Taizu attacked Yuan Tan in Nanpi, and Jizhou was pacified.

古文：封嘉洧阳亭侯。
现代文：朝廷封郭嘉为洧阳亭侯。
English: Guo Jia of the Imperial Court was the lord of the Poyang Pavilion.

古文：太祖将征袁尚及三郡乌丸，诸下多惧刘表使刘备袭许以讨太祖，嘉曰： 公虽威震天下，胡恃其远，必不设备。
现代文：太祖将要征讨袁尚和辽西、上谷、右北平三郡的乌丸人，部下大多担心刘表会派刘备偷袭许县以征讨太祖，郭嘉说： 曹公虽然声威震动天下，但胡人仗着他们处在偏远之地，一定没有防备。
English: Guo Jia said, "Although Cao Gong's fame has shaken the world, the Hu people must have been caught off guard by the fact that they are in a remote area.

古文：因其无备，卒然击之，可破灭也。
现代文：趁着他们没有防备，突然间攻打他们，就能大获全胜。
English: If you take advantage of their unpreparedness and suddenly attack them, you can win a complete victory.

古文：且袁绍有恩于民夷，而尚兄弟生存。今四州之民，徒以威附，德施未加，舍而南征，尚因乌丸之资，招其死主之臣，胡人一动，民夷俱应，以生蹋顿之心，成觊觎之计，恐青、冀非己之有也。
现代文：况且袁绍对民众有恩惠，而袁尚兄弟还在，现在四州的民众，只是因为威势而依附我们，德政恩惠还没有给予他们，如果现在放弃进攻他们转而往南征讨刘表，袁尚会依靠乌丸的帮助，召集能为主君赴死的忠臣，而胡人一行动，当地的民众也会响应他们，从而助长蹋顿的野心，推动他们觊觎中原的计划，到时候恐怕青州、冀州就不是我们能拥有的了。
English: Moreover, Yuan Shao had favors for the people, while the Yuan Shang brothers are still there. Now the people of Shizhou are only attached to us because of their power. The German government has not yet given them favors. If they give up the attack now and go south to fight Liu Biao, Yuan Shang will rely on the help of Wumaru to gather loyalists who can die for their lord, and if Hu Ren takes action, the local people will also respond to them, thus fostering the ambitions of Xingtang and promoting their plan to seize Central Plains. By that time, I am afraid that Qingzhou and Jizhou will not be ours.

古文：表，坐谈客耳，自知才不足以御备，重任之则恐不能制，轻任之则备不为用，虽虚国远征，公无忧矣。 
现代文：刘表，不过是个坐着空谈的人，知道自己的才能不足以控制刘备，给予他重任又担心不能掌控他，不重用他，那刘备就不肯为他所用，现在我们虽然国内空虚，劳师远征，但您也不用担心。 
English: Liu Biao is just a person who sits and talks idly. He knows that his talent is not enough to control Liu Bei. If you give him a heavy task and worry that you can't control him, if you don't reuse him, then Liu Bei will not be willing to use him. Now, although our country is empty and we are on a training expedition, you don't have to worry.

古文：太祖遂行。
现代文：太祖就行动了。
English: The great-grandfather took action.

古文：至易，嘉言曰： 兵贵神速。
现代文：行军到易县时，郭嘉说： 用兵贵在行动特别迅速。
English: When marching to Yi County, Guo Jia said: The soldiers are moving very quickly.

古文：今千里袭人，辎重多，难以趣利，且彼闻之，必为备；不如留辎重，轻兵兼道以出，掩其不意。 
现代文：现在我们千里远行偷袭敌人，军用物资太多，难以迅速行军，况且敌人得知消息后，一定有所防备；不如将一些军用物资留下，轻装出兵，加倍赶路，趁敌人没有防备而出击。 
English: Now, we are traveling thousands of miles to sneak attack the enemy. There are too many military supplies, it is difficult to march quickly. Moreover, after the enemy learns the news, he must be prepared. It is better to leave some military supplies, lightly load the troops, double the speed, and take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to attack.

古文：太祖乃密出卢龙塞，直指单于庭。
现代文：太祖就暗中从卢龙塞出兵，直奔乌丸单于居住的地方。
English: The great-grandfather secretly dispatched soldiers from Lulongse to go straight to the place where Wu Maru lived.

古文：虏卒闻太祖至，惶怖合战。
现代文：敌人突然得知太祖军来到，仓皇震恐间召集部队作战。
English: The enemy suddenly learned that the Tai Zu Army had arrived, and in a panic they called up troops to fight.

古文：大破之，斩蹋顿及名王已下。
现代文：太祖大败乌丸军队，将蹋顿和有名的首领都斩杀了。
English: The great-great-grandfather decisively defeated the army of the Uruma clan, and killed the famous warlord and the famous leader.

古文：尚及兄熙走辽东。
现代文：袁尚和兄长袁熙逃往辽东。
English: Yuan Shang and his brother Yuan Xi fled to Liaodong.

古文：嘉深通有算略，达於事情。
现代文：郭嘉深沉通达有智谋，对事情通达明白。
English: Guo Jiashen is thoughtful, open-minded, resourceful, and has a good grasp of the situation.

古文：太祖曰： 唯奉孝为能知孤意。 
现代文：太祖说： 只有郭奉孝能了解我的心意啊。 
English: Grandfather said: Only Guo Fengxiao can understand my heart.

古文：年三十八，自柳城还，疾笃，太祖问疾者交错。
现代文：郭嘉三十八岁的时候，从柳城返回，病重，太祖派去探望的人接连不断。
English: When Guo Jia was thirty-eight years old, he returned from Liucheng, seriously ill, and the people sent by his great-grandfather to visit him kept coming.

古文：及薨，临其丧，哀甚，谓荀攸等曰： 诸君年皆孤辈也，唯奉孝最少。
现代文：等到郭嘉去世，太祖亲自去吊唁，非常哀痛，对荀彧等人说： 各位的年龄都和我是同辈，只有郭奉孝年龄最小。
English: When Guo Jia passed away, the great-grandfather went to pay his condolences in person. He was very sad and said to Guo Jia and others, "All of you are the same age as I am. Only Guo Fengxiao is the youngest.

古文：天下事竟，欲以后事属之，而中年夭折，命也夫！ 
现代文：等到天下事情安定，我想要将身后之事嘱托他，但他却中年早逝，真是命啊！ 
English: When things are stable in the world, I want to entrust my future to him, but he died at an early age, what a waste!

古文：乃表曰： 军祭酒郭嘉，自从征伐，十有一年。
现代文：就上表说： 军祭酒郭嘉，自从跟随我四处征讨，已经有十一年了。
English: Referring to the above table, he said, "It's been eleven years since I've been following Guo Jia around to collect the military festival wine.

古文：每有大议，临敌制变。
现代文：每次有大事商议，都能对敌人权衡机变。
English: Every time there is a major discussion, we can make changes to the enemy.

古文：臣策未决，嘉辄成之。
现代文：臣下的计策还没有想好，郭嘉的计策已经形成。
English: The strategies of his subordinates have not yet been thought out, but Guo Jia's strategies have been formed.

古文：平定天下，谋功为高。
现代文：现在之所以能平定天下，出谋划策的功劳是很高的。
English: The fact that we are able to pacify the world now is due in large part to the efforts of strategists.

古文：不幸短命，事业未终。
现代文：但郭嘉现在不幸短命早死，功业还没有完成。
English: But Guo Jia is now unfortunately a short-lived early death, the work has not been completed.

古文：追思嘉勋，实不可忘。
现代文：追念郭嘉的功勋，实在是不能忘记的。
English: It is impossible to forget the memory of Guo Jia's feats.

古文：可增邑八百户，并前千户。 
现代文：可以增加他八百户封邑，加上以前的一共一千户。 
English: He can increase his eight hundred fiefs, adding to the previous total of one thousand.

古文：谥曰贞侯。
现代文：谥号为贞侯。
English: His posthumous name was Zenghou.

古文：子奕嗣。
现代文：他的儿子郭奕继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Zou Yi, became his successor.

古文：后太祖征荆州还，於巴丘遇疾疫，烧船，叹曰： 郭奉孝在，不使孤至此。 
现代文：后来太祖征讨荆州回朝，在巴丘遇上瘟疫，太祖将船只烧毁，叹息着说： 郭奉孝还在的话，不会让我到这样的地步。 
English: Later, the great-great-grandfather conquered Jingzhou to return to the imperial court and encountered a plague in Bachu. The great-great-grandfather burned the ships and said with a sigh, "If Guo Fengxiao were still alive, he wouldn't let me get to this point."

古文：初，陈群非嘉不治行检，数廷诉嘉，嘉意自若。
现代文：当初，陈群非议郭嘉不注重行为的检点，多次在朝堂山说郭嘉的不是，但郭嘉一直神情自若。
English: At first, Chen Qunfei argued that Guo Jia did not pay attention to the checkpoints of behavior, and repeatedly said that Guo Jia was not in Chaodangshan, but Guo Jia has always been self-confident.

古文：太祖愈益重之，然以群能持正，亦悦焉。
现代文：太祖更加重用他，但也因为陈群持守公正，也很欣赏陈群。
English: The great-grandfather used him more, but he also appreciated Chen Qun because Chen Qun adhered to justice.

古文：奕为太子文学，早薨。
现代文：郭奕担任太子文学，早年就去世了。
English: Guo Yi served as the prince of literature and died at an early age.

古文：子深嗣。
现代文：他的儿子郭深承袭爵位。
English: His son Guo Sheng inherited the title.

古文：深薨，子猎嗣。
现代文：郭深去世后，他的儿子郭猎承袭爵位。
English: After the death of Guo Sheng, his son Guo Han inherited the title.

古文：董昭字公仁，济阴定陶人也。
现代文：董昭字公仁，济阴郡定陶县人。
English: Dong Zhaozhe Zi Gongren, from Jinyin County, Dingtao County.

古文：举孝廉，除癭陶长、柏人令，袁绍以为参军事。
现代文：被推举为孝廉，担任睰陶县县长、柏人县令，袁绍又任命他为参军事。
English: He was elected as Xiaolian, and served as the county magistrate of Zhituo County and the county magistrate of Bairen County. Yuan Shao also appointed him as the top military officer.

古文：绍逆公孙瓒于界桥，钜鹿太守李邵及郡冠盖，以瓒兵强，皆欲属瓒。
现代文：袁绍在界桥迎击公孙瓒，钜鹿太守李邵和郡中官员因为公孙瓒兵力强盛，都想要依附他。
English: Yuan Shao met Gongsun Yao at the boundary bridge, and Li Shao, the governor of Lugu, and the officials of the county wanted to attach themselves to Gongsun Yao because he had a strong army.

古文：绍闻之，使昭领钜鹿。
现代文：袁绍得知后，派董昭兼任钜鹿太守。
English: After Yuan Shao learned of this, he sent Dong Zhao to concurrently serve as the governor of Elk Province.

古文：问： 御以何术？ 
现代文：问董昭说： 用什么办法来解决呢？ 
English: Ask Dong Zhao: What should be done to solve the problem?

古文：对曰： 一人之微，不能消众谋，欲诱致其心，唱与同议，及得其情，乃当权以制之耳。计在临时，未可得言。 
现代文：董昭回答说： 我一个人的微小力量，不足以消解众人的计划，我打算通过欺骗取得信任，假装有和他们商议的内容一样的想法，等到得到了具体情况，就按照实际情况来临时改变控制他们的办法。计划是临时制定的，还不能说清楚。 
English: Dong Zhao replied: My small strength alone is not enough to dissolve the plans of many people. I plan to gain trust through deception, pretend to have the same idea as the content of their discussion, and when I get the specific situation, I will temporarily change the way to control them according to the actual situation. The plan is made temporarily, and it cannot be made clear yet.

古文：时郡右姓孙伉等数十人专为谋主，惊动吏民。
现代文：当时郡中大族孙伉等几十人是主要的策划者，动摇当地官吏百姓。
English: At that time, dozens of people in the county, such as Sun Qian, were the main planners, shaking the local officials and people.

古文：昭至郡，伪作绍檄告郡云： 得贼罗候安平张吉辞，当攻钜鹿，贼故孝廉孙伉等为应，檄到收行军法，恶止其身，妻子勿坐。 
现代文：董昭到了钜鹿郡，伪造袁绍的檄文在郡中宣告说： 得到贼人的侦察兵安平、张吉的口供，他们将要进攻钜鹿，贼人那边，原来的孝廉孙伉等人做为他们的内应。檄文发到郡里，就会将这些人收押起来以军法处置，只惩罚他们自身，不会牵连家人。 
English: When Dong Zhao arrived in Elk County, he forged Yuan Shao's letter and announced in the county: Having obtained the confessions of the bandit scouts Anping and Zhang Ji, they will attack Elk. On the other side of the bandits, the former filial piety Sun Qian and others will serve as their inner circle. When the letter is sent to the county, these people will be detained and dealt with according to military law. They will only be punished themselves, and their families will not be implicated.

古文：昭案檄告令，皆即斩之。
现代文：董昭按照檄文上的诏令，立即将孙伉等人斩杀了。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict on the imperial edict, Dong Zhao immediately killed Sun Yat-sen and others.

古文：一郡惶恐，乃以次安慰，遂皆平集。
现代文：郡中人都很仓皇惊恐，董昭就依次安慰他们，于是大家都安定下来。
English: The people in the county were very panicked and frightened. Dong Zhao consoled them in turn, so everyone settled down.

古文：事讫白绍，绍称善。
现代文：事情解决完毕，董昭将事告诉袁绍，袁绍很是赞赏。
English: After the matter was resolved, Dong Zhao told Yuan Shao about the matter. Yuan Shao was very appreciative.

古文：会魏郡太守栗攀为兵所害，绍以昭领魏郡太守。
现代文：恰好魏郡太守栗攀被士兵杀害，袁绍让董昭兼任魏郡太守。
English: It just so happened that the governor of Wei County, Li Pang, was killed by soldiers. Yuan Shao also appointed Dong Zhao as the governor of Wei County.

古文：时郡界大乱，贼以万数，遣使往来，交易市买。
现代文：当时郡中混乱，贼人有上万之数，他们派使者互相来往，进行市场交易。
English: At that time, there was chaos in the county, and there were tens of thousands of thieves. They sent emissaries to each other to conduct market transactions.

古文：昭厚待之，因用为间，乘虚掩讨，辄大克破。
现代文：董昭很注重这种情况，趁机离间他们，趁着他们力量虚弱时突然袭击，就取得巨大胜利。
English: Dong Zhao paid great attention to this situation, took advantage of the opportunity to separate them, took advantage of the sudden attack when their strength was weak, and achieved a great victory.

古文：二日之中，羽檄三至。
现代文：两天的时间，插着羽毛的军事文书就三次送到。
English: In the space of two days, military documents with feathers inserted were delivered three times.

古文：昭弟访，在张邈军中。
现代文：董昭的弟弟董访，在张邈军中供职。
English: Dong Zhao's younger brother, Dong Zhi, served in Zhang Ye's army.

古文：邈与绍有隙，绍受谗将致罪於昭。
现代文：张邈和袁绍心有怨恨，袁绍又听到谗言想要给董昭治罪。
English: Zhang Rong and Yuan Shao had resentment in their hearts. Yuan Shao also heard insults and wanted to punish Dong Zhao.

古文：昭欲诣汉献帝，至河内，为张杨所留。
现代文：董昭想要到汉献帝那里，走到河内，被张杨留下。
English: When Dong Zhao wanted to go to Emperor Han Xian, he walked to Hanoi and was left behind by Zhang Yang.

古文：因杨上还印绶，拜骑都尉。
现代文：董昭通过张杨将印信和绶带归还朝廷，朝廷任命他为骑都尉。
English: Through Zhang Yang, Dong Zhao returned the seal letter and the umbilical cord to the imperial court, which appointed him as a cavalry captain.

古文：时太祖领兖州，遣使诣杨，欲令假涂西至长安，杨不听。
现代文：当时太祖兼任衮州太守，派遣使者到张杨那里，想跟他借路通行，往西到达长安，张杨没有同意。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather concurrently served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and sent an envoy to Zhang Yang, hoping to take a detour with him and go west to Chang'an. Zhang Yang did not agree.

古文：昭说杨曰： 袁、曹虽为一家，势不久群。
现代文：董昭劝说张杨： 袁氏、曹氏现在虽然还是关系密切的一家，但势必不能长久。
English: Dong Zhao persuaded Zhang Yang: Although the Yuan and Cao clans are still a close-knit family, they will not be able to stay together for long.

古文：曹今虽弱，然实天下之英雄也，当故结之。
现代文：曹操现在虽然实力稍弱，但确实是天下间的英雄，应该和他结交。
English: Although Cao Cao's strength is a little weak now, he is truly a hero of the world, and we should make friends with him.

古文：况今有缘，宜通其上事，并表荐之；若事有成，永为深分。 
现代文：况且现在刚好有机会，应该帮助他联通朝廷，并上表推举他；如果事情能做成，那就永远是深厚的情分。 
English: Moreover, now is just the right time to help him get in touch with the imperial court and nominate him; if things can be done, it will always be a deep feeling.

古文：杨於是通太祖上事，表荐太祖。
现代文：于是张杨为太祖联通朝廷，并上表举荐他。
English: As a result, Zhang Yang became the grand ancestor of the imperial court, and he was recommended by the above table.

古文：昭为太祖作书与长安诸将李傕、郭汜等，各随轻重致殷勤。
现代文：董昭帮太祖写信给长安的李傕、郭汜等将领，分别依据他们的地位轻重表示殷勤友好。
English: Dong Zhao helped Taizu to write letters to the generals of Chang'an, such as Li Xi and Guo Xi, respectively, according to their status, to express their courtesy and friendship.

古文：杨亦遣使诣太祖。
现代文：张杨也派使者到太祖那里。
English: Zhang Yang also sent an emissary to Taizu.

古文：太祖遗杨犬马金帛，遂与西方往来。
现代文：太祖赠送张杨良狗名马、金银财帛，于是跟西面有了来往。
English: The great-grandfather gave Zhang Yangliang dogs, famous horses, gold, silver and money, so he had dealings with Xiamen.

古文：天子在安邑，昭从河内往，诏拜议郎。
现代文：天子在安邑的时候，董昭从河内前去拜见，天子下诏任命为议郎。
English: When Tianzi was in An'yun, Dong Zhao came from Hanoi to pay his respects, and Tianzi made an imperial edict to appoint him as the negotiator.

古文：建安元年，太祖定黄巾于许，遣使诣河东。
现代文：建安元年，太祖在许县平定黄巾军，派使者到河东地区。
English: In the first year of Jianan, Taizu pacified the Yellow Turban Army in Xu County and sent an envoy to the Hedong region.

古文：会天子还洛阳，韩暹、杨奉、董承及杨各违戾不和。
现代文：适逢天子返回洛阳，韩暹、杨奉、董承和张杨等人之间互相抵触，关系不好。
English: When Tianzi returned to Luoyang, Han Siem, Yang Bong, Dong Cheng and Zhang Yang were in conflict with each other, and their relationship was not good.

古文：昭以奉兵马最强而少党援，作太祖书与奉曰： 吾与将军闻名慕义，便推赤心。
现代文：董昭因为杨奉军队势力最强大同时又缺少结援相助的党羽，就以太祖的名义写信给杨奉说： 我一听闻将军的名声，仰慕您的高义，就怀着赤诚之心。
English: Because Yang Bong's army was the most powerful one, but he lacked the party members to support him, Dong Zhao wrote a letter to Yang Bong in the name of his ancestor, saying, "As soon as I heard of the general's reputation and admired your high-mindedness, I was filled with sincerity.

古文：今将军拔万乘之艰难，反之旧都，翼佐之功，超世无畴，何其休哉！
现代文：现在将军战胜巨大的困难，返回旧都，辅佐天子的功劳，世上没有能比较，多么美好啊！
English: Now the general has overcome great difficulties, returned to the old capital, and assisted the merit of the Son of Heaven. There is no comparison in the world. How wonderful it is!

古文：方今群凶猾夏，四海未宁，神器至重，事在维辅；必须众贤以清王轨，诚非一人所能独建。
现代文：现在众多奸恶之人侵扰中原，天下还没有安定，天子和朝廷是最重要的，我们该做的事就在于维护和辅助他们；一定要依靠众多贤人来肃清朝廷秩序，实在不是一个人的力量能独自建立起来的。
English: At present, many treacherous people are invading the Central Plains. The world is not yet stable. The emperor and the imperial court are the most important. What we should do is to protect and assist them. We must rely on many wise men to clean up the order of the imperial court. In fact, it is not the power of one person alone that can establish it.

古文：心腹四支，实相恃赖，一物不备，则有阙焉。
现代文：人的心腹和四肢，本来是互相依靠仰赖的，其中一部分不完备，那人就有缺损了。
English: A man's heart, stomach, and limbs depend on each other. If any part of his body is defective, he is defective.

古文：将军当为内主，吾为外援。
现代文：将军您应该作为都城里的主管，我作为外部的志愿。
English: General, you should be in charge of the capital city, while I volunteer as an outsider.

古文：今吾有粮，将军有兵，有无相通，足以相济，死生契阔，相与共之。 
现代文：现在我有粮食，将军有兵马，互相帮助，就足以相互阶级了，无论是生是死，我们都一起经受。 
English: Now I have food, the general has soldiers and horses, and helping each other is enough to make a difference. Whether it's life or death, we all go through it together.

古文：奉得书喜悦，语诸将军曰： 兖州诸军近在许耳，有兵有粮，国家所当依仰也。 
现代文：杨奉收到书信很是高兴，告诉众位将领说： 衮州的各路人马已经近在许县，有兵马有粮食，是国家应该依赖仰仗的。 
English: Yang Feng was very pleased to receive the letter, and told the generals: The soldiers and horses from all over Zhangzhou are already close to Xu County, and there are soldiers and horses and grain, which the country should rely on.

古文：遂共表太祖为镇东将军，袭父爵费亭侯；昭迁符节令。
现代文：就和众人一起上表请求任命太祖为镇东将军，承袭他父亲的爵位为费亭侯；董昭调任符节令。
English: Together with everyone else, they petitioned for the appointment of Taizu as Zhendong General, and he succeeded his father's title as Fei Ting Hou; Dong Zhao was transferred to the position of Fu Jie Ling.

古文：太祖朝天子於洛阳，引昭并坐，问曰： 今孤来此，当施何计？ 
现代文：太祖到洛阳朝见天子，拉着董昭一起就坐，问董昭说： 现在我来到这里，应该采用什么办法？ 
English: The great-grandfather went to Luoyang in the morning to see the son of heaven. He pulled Dong Zhao along and sat with him. He asked Dong Zhao, "Now that I have come here, what should I do?"

古文：昭曰： 将军兴义兵以诛暴乱，入朝天子，辅翼王室，此五伯之功也。
现代文：董昭说： 将军您发动义兵以诛杀残暴叛乱的人，入京朝见天子，辅佐护卫王室，这就是跟春秋时期的五位霸主一样的功业了。
English: Dong Zhao said: General, you have mobilized the volunteer soldiers to fight and kill the brutal rebels, entered Beijing to meet the emperor, and assisted in protecting the royal family. This is the same achievement as the five overlords in the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：此下诸将，人殊意异，未必服从，今留匡弼，事势不便，惟有移驾幸许耳。
现代文：但下面的众位将领，各有不同的想法，未必愿意服从您，现在您留在京城匡扶天子，形势会有所不便，只有将天子转移到许县了。
English: However, the following generals, each with different ideas, may not be willing to obey you. Now that you are staying in the capital to support the emperor, the situation will be inconvenient. The only solution is to move the emperor to Xu County.

古文：然朝廷播越，新还旧京，远近跂望，冀一朝获安。
现代文：但朝廷中人四处流离，刚刚返回故都，远近之人都在盼望，希望能迅速安定下来。
English: However, people in the imperial court had been displaced from place to place and had just returned to the old capital. People near and far were hoping that things would settle down quickly.

古文：今复徙驾，不厌众心。
现代文：现在又转移圣驾，就不能满足大家的心意。
English: It is not possible to satisfy everyone's wishes by transferring the patron saint now.

古文：夫行非常之事，乃有非常之功，愿将军算其多者。 
现代文：实行不同寻常的事，就会有不同凡响的功劳，希望将军选择好处多的做法。 
English: If you do something out of the ordinary, you'll get something out of the ordinary. I hope the general will choose the most beneficial way.

古文：太祖曰： 此孤本志也。
现代文：太祖说： 这就是我原来的想法。
English: The great-grandfather said, "This is what I originally thought.

古文：杨奉近在梁耳，闻其兵精，得无为孤累乎？ 
现代文：杨奉近在梁县，听说他的部队精锐，难道他不会成为我的隐患吗？ 
English: Yang Bong is close to Liang County, I heard that his troops are elite, won't he become my hidden danger?

古文：昭曰： 奉少党援，将独委质。
现代文：董昭说： 杨奉缺少党羽的援助，会独自来呈献礼物表示归顺。
English: Dong Zhao said: Yang Bongru lacked the support of party members and would come alone to present gifts to show his submission.

古文：镇东、费亭之事，皆奉所定，又闻书命申束，足以见信。
现代文：镇东、费亭的事宜，都是杨奉决定的，又听说他写信下令对士兵加以约束，足够看出他的诚意。
English: The matters of Zhendong and Fei Ting were all decided by Yang Bong, and it was also heard that he wrote a letter ordering the soldiers to be restrained, which was enough to show his sincerity.

古文：宜时遣使厚遗答谢，以安其意。
现代文：应该经常派使者带着厚重的礼物前去表示答谢，以安定他的心意。
English: He should be reassured by frequent visits from emissaries bearing heavy gifts in gratitude.

古文：说 京都无粮，欲车驾暂幸鲁阳，鲁阳近许，转运稍易，可无县乏之忧 。
现代文：就说 京城没有粮食，想要让天子暂时转移到鲁阳，鲁阳靠近许县，运输粮食比较方便，就没有严重缺乏粮食的担忧了 。
English: Just say that there is no grain in Beijing, and if you want to temporarily transfer Tianzi to Luyang, Luyang is close to Xu County, and it is more convenient to transport grain, there is no concern about a serious lack of grain.

古文：奉为人勇而寡虑，必不见疑，比使往来，足以定计。
现代文：杨奉这个人勇猛但缺少思虑，一定不会怀疑，等到两方有了使者的来往，就足够确定计策了。
English: Yang Bong, who is brave but lacks consideration, will not doubt that when the two sides have the exchange of envoys, it is enough to determine the strategy.

古文：奉何能为累！ 
现代文：杨奉怎么会成为拖累呢！ 
English: How can Yang Bong be a drag!

古文：太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：太祖说： 好的。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "All right.

古文：即遣使诣奉。
现代文：立刻派使者到杨奉那里。
English: Send an emissary to Yang Bong at once.

古文：徙大驾至许。奉由是失望，与韩暹等到定陵钞暴。
现代文：将天子迁移到许县，杨奉因此失望，和韩暹等人到定陵施暴劫掠。
English: After relocating Tianzi to Xu County, Yang Bong was disappointed, and Han Siem and others went to Dingling to carry out violent looting.

古文：太祖不应，密往攻其梁营，降诛即定。
现代文：太祖没有回应，暗中前去攻打杨奉在梁县的军营，军营中的人要么投降要么被杀，没有多久就平定了。
English: The great-grandfather did not respond and secretly went to attack Yang Bong's military camp in Liang County. The people in the military camp either surrendered or were killed, and it was soon settled.

古文：奉、暹失众，东降袁术。
现代文：杨奉、韩暹失去了部队，往东向袁术投降。
English: Yang Bong and Han Siem lost their troops and surrendered to Yuan Shu in the east.

古文：三年，昭迁河南尹。
现代文：建安三年，董昭转任河南尹。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, Dong Zhao was transferred to Henan Yin.

古文：时张杨为其将杨丑所杀，杨长史薛洪、河内太守缪尚城守待绍救。
现代文：当时张杨被手下将领杨丑杀害，张杨的长史薛洪、河内太守缪尚固守城池等待袁绍的救援。
English: At that time, Zhang Yang was killed by his subordinate general Yang Jiu. Zhang Yang's eldest son, Xue Hong, and Hanoi's de facto ruler, Mu, were still holding the city, waiting for Yuan Shao's rescue.

古文：太祖令昭单身入城，告喻洪、尚等，即日举众降。
现代文：太祖让董昭独自一人进入城中，劝告薛洪、缪尚等人，当天他们就率部投降了。
English: The great-grandfather let Dong Zhao enter the city alone, advised Xue Hong, Muxang and others, and they surrendered on the same day.

古文：以昭为冀州牧。
现代文：太祖任命董昭为冀州牧。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Dong Zhao as the pastor of Jizhou.

古文：太祖令刘备拒袁术，昭曰： 备勇而志大，关羽、张飞为之羽翼，恐备之心未可得论也！ 
现代文：太祖命令刘备抗击袁术，董昭说： 刘备勇武且志向远大，关羽、张飞作为他辅助，只怕刘备的想法说不清楚啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather ordered Liu Bei to fight against Yuan Shu, and Dong Zhao said: Liu Bei is brave and ambitious, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei are his assistants, but Liu Bei's thoughts are not clear!

古文：太祖曰： 吾已许之矣。 
现代文：太祖说： 我已经答应他了。 
English: The great-grandfather said: I have already promised him.

古文：备到下邳，杀徐州刺史车胄，反。
现代文：刘备到了下邳县，将徐州刺史车胄杀了，反叛太祖。
English: Liu Bei arrived in Jiaozuo County and killed Xuzhou Zishi Chariot, rebelling against Taizu.

古文：太祖自征备，徙昭为徐州牧。
现代文：太祖亲自率军讨伐刘备，将董昭调为徐州牧。
English: Taizu personally led the army to fight against Liu Bei and transferred Dong Zhao to Xuzhou.

古文：袁绍遣将颜良攻东郡，又徙昭为魏郡太守，从讨良。
现代文：袁绍派将领颜良攻打东郡，又将董昭调为魏郡太守，跟随自己征讨颜良。
English: Yuan Shao sent the general Yan Liang to attack Dong County, and appointed Dong Zhao as the governor of Wei County to follow him to conquer Yan Liang.

古文：良死后，进围邺城。
现代文：颜良死后，太祖发兵将邺城包围。
English: After Yan Liang's death, Taizu sent troops to encircle Shicheng.

古文：袁绍同族春卿为魏郡太守，在城中，其父元长在扬州，太祖遣人迎之。
现代文：袁绍的同族袁春卿是魏郡太守，此时就在城中，他的父亲袁元长在扬州，太祖派人将他接来。
English: Yuan Shao's compatriot Yuan Chunqing was the governor of Wei County. He was in the city at this time. His father, Yuan Yuanchang, was in Yangzhou. The great-grandfather sent someone to fetch him.

古文：昭书与春卿曰： 盖闻孝者不背亲以要利，仁者不忘君以徇私，志士不探乱以徼幸，智者不诡道以自危。
现代文：董昭写信给袁春卿说： 听说孝顺的人不会背叛亲人去求取利益，仁义的人不会忘记主君而只顾私情，有志向的士人不会趁着动乱有非分的想法，有智谋的人不会使用诡诈之术而让自己处于危险之中，确实应该这样。
English: Dong Zhao wrote to Yuan Chunqing, "I have heard that a filial person will not betray his relatives to seek benefits, a benevolent person will not forget his master and only care about personal feelings, an aspiring scholar will not take advantage of the turmoil to have wrong thoughts, and a clever person will not use trickery to put himself in danger. This is indeed the case.

古文：足下大君，昔避内难，南游百越，非疏骨肉，乐彼吴会，智者深识，独或宜然。
现代文：曹公怜悯他坚守志向，廉洁恭谨，但却脱离群体缺少同伴，所以特地派遣使者到江东，这里迎接那边遣送，现在将要到了。
English: Cao Gong took pity on him. He was steadfast in his aspiration, honest and respectful, but he was separated from the group and lacked companions. Therefore, he specially sent an envoy to the east of the Yangtze River. He was sent here to meet the other side, and now he is about to arrive.

古文：曹公愍其守志清恪，离群寡俦，故特遣使江东，或迎或送，今将至矣。就令足下处偏平之地，依德义之主，居有泰山之固，身为乔松之偶，以义言之，犹宜背彼向此，舍民趣父也。
现代文：即使您处在偏远的地方，依附仁德高义的主君，安居在像泰山那样稳固的地方，但就算身为王子乔和赤松子两位仙人那样的人，从道义的角度来讲，依然应该抛弃那边而转向我们这边，舍弃百姓而保全父亲。
English: Even if you are in a remote place, attached to a benevolent and highly righteous master, living in a stable place like Mount Tai, but even if you are like Prince Joe and Red Pine Cone, two immortals, from a moral point of view, you should still abandon that side and turn to our side, abandon the people and preserve the father.

古文：且邾仪父始与隐公盟，鲁人嘉之，而不书爵，然则王所未命，爵尊不成，春秋之义也。
现代文：况且邾仪父刚开始各鲁隐公结盟，鲁国人民都赞赏他，但没有将爵位记录下来，但君王还没有任命，爵位的尊称就没有成功，这是《春秋》的要义。
English: Moreover, Puyi's father had just begun to form an alliance with Lu Jingong, and the people of Lu appreciated him, but did not record the title of nobility, but the king had not yet appointed, and the title of nobility was not successful, which is the essence of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：况足下今日之所讬者乃危乱之国，所受者乃矫诬之命乎？
现代文：况且您现在所依托的是危险动乱的国家，所接受的是假借君命的命令吗？
English: Moreover, are you now relying on a country in a state of dangerous turmoil, and are you receiving orders under the guise of a sovereign?

古文：苟不逞之与群，而厥父之不恤，不可以言孝。
现代文：如果不努力融入群体，并且连父亲特不顾了，那这个人不能称作孝顺。
English: If you don't make an effort to integrate into the group, and even ignore your father, then this person can't be called filial.

古文：忘祖宗所居之本朝，安非正之奸职，难可以言忠。
现代文：忘掉祖宗曾任职的这个朝廷，安处在不正统的奸佞职位上，很难说是忠臣。
English: Forgetting the imperial court in which his ancestor once served, An is in the position of an unorthodox traitor, and can hardly be said to be a loyal subject.

古文：忠孝并替，难以言智。
现代文：忠诚孝顺不能两全，很难说是有智慧。
English: Loyalty and filial piety cannot be both, and it is difficult to say that they have wisdom.

古文：又足下昔日为曹公所礼辟，夫戚族人而疏所生，内所寓而外王室，怀邪禄而叛知己，远福祚而近危亡，弃明义而收大耻，不亦可惜邪！
现代文：况且您过去曾被曹公以礼征召，背叛自己的族人而疏远生父，将自己寄托的放在心上而将王室放在后面，心中想着不正当的利益而背叛知己好友，远离福气而靠近危险，抛弃明德大义而做很耻辱的事，不也是很可惜的吗！
English: Moreover, in the past, you were summoned by Cao Gong with courtesy, betrayed your own people and alienated your father, put your trust in your heart and left the royal family behind, betrayed your friends and confidants while thinking about illegitimate interests, moved away from fortune and closer to danger, abandoned morality and justice and did a very shameful thing. Isn't it a pity!

古文：若能翻然易节，奉帝养父，委身曹公，忠孝不坠，荣名彰矣。
现代文：如果能迅速改变操守，尊奉天子奉养父亲，将自己交给曹公，忠诚和孝顺不会被抛弃，美名就能彰显了。
English: If you can quickly change your ethics, honor your father, and give yourself to Cao Gong, your loyalty and filial piety will not be abandoned, and your reputation will be highlighted.

古文：宜深留计，早决良图。 邺既定，以昭为谏议大夫。
现代文：应该深入仔细地考虑，早日做出好的决断。 邺城被平定之后，太祖任命董昭为谏议大夫。
English: It is necessary to think deeply and carefully and make a good decision as soon as possible. After the city of Handan was subdued, the great-grandfather appointed Dong Zhao as the doctor of Handan.

古文：后袁尚依乌丸蹋顿，太祖将征之。
现代文：后来袁尚依附乌丸的蹋顿单于，太祖将要征讨他。
English: Later, Yuan Shang attached himself to Wu Maru's Shandong single, and the great-grandfather was going to solicit him.

古文：患军粮难致，凿平虏、泉州二渠入海通运，昭所建也。
现代文：担心军粮难以达到这个目的，就将平虏、泉州两条河渠凿开，将海水引入形成一条通道方便运粮，就是董昭建议的。
English: Fearing that it would be difficult to achieve this goal with military grain, the two canals of Pingru and Quanzhou were dug up, and seawater was introduced to form a channel to facilitate the transportation of grain, which is what Dong Zhao suggested.

古文：太祖表封千秋亭侯，转拜司空军祭酒。
现代文：太祖上表请封他为千秋亭侯，又转授司空军祭酒。
English: The great-grandfather invited him to be appointed as the prince of Qianqiu Pavilion, and also transferred the priest to the Air Force Festival.

古文：后昭建议： 宜脩古建封五等。 
现代文：后来董昭建议： 应该研究古代制度制定分封的五等爵位。 
English: Later, Dong Zhao suggested: We should study the ancient system to formulate the five-class peerage.

古文：太祖曰： 建设五等者，圣人也，又非人臣所制，吾何以堪之？ 
现代文：太祖说： 设立五等爵位的人是圣人，不是为人臣子能制定的，我怎么能担负这个责任呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "The person who established the five ranks of nobility is a saint, and it is not something that a human courtier can establish. How can I take on this responsibility?

古文：昭曰： 自古以来，人臣匡世，未有今日之功。
现代文：董昭说： 从古代以来，为人臣子匡扶天下的，没有人有像现在这样的功绩。
English: Dong Zhao said: Since ancient times, no one has made such a great achievement as being a courtier and supporting the world.

古文：有今日之功，未有久处人臣之势者也。
现代文：有现在这样功绩的，没有长久处在臣子之位上的。
English: A man of his present achievements would not have remained a courtier for long.

古文：今明公耻有惭德而未尽善，乐保名节而无大责，德美过於伊、周，此至德之所极也。然太甲、成王未必可遭，今民难化，甚於殷、周，处大臣之势，使人以大事疑己，诚不可不重虑也。
现代文：现在明公因为自己德行不够完美所以没有能做到最好而感到羞惭，为能保住名节，没有太大的责任而感到高兴，这样的德行比殷朝、周朝更美好，位于大臣的位置上，让人在大事上怀疑自己，实在不能不重新考虑啊。
English: Now Ming Gong is ashamed of not being able to do his best because his virtue is not perfect enough. He is happy that he can keep the name day and does not have too much responsibility. Such a virtue is better than Yin Dynasty and Zhou Dynasty. It is in the position of a minister, so that people doubt themselves in major events. It is really impossible not to reconsider.

古文：明公虽迈威德，明法术，而不定其基，为万世计，犹未至也。
现代文：明公的威势品德虽然超过前代，了解法度，但如果不能在这基础上奠定基业，为后世万代计划，那还是做得不够啊。
English: Although Minggong's dignity and virtue surpass the previous generation and he understands the law, if he cannot lay a foundation on this basis and plan for future generations, it is still not enough.

古文：定基之本，在地与人，宜稍建立，以自藩卫。
现代文：奠定基业的跟在，在于地盘和人民，应该在这两方面有所建树，以保障和护卫自己。
English: The success of laying the foundation lies in the site and the people, and we should do something in these two aspects to protect and defend ourselves.

古文：明公忠节颖露，天威在颜，耿弇床下之言，朱英无妄之论，不得过耳。
现代文：明公的忠诚节操已经脱颖而出，天子的威势也在脸上出现，过去耿弇在床下对光武帝说的话，朱英对春申君说的没有预期的话，没有能听到。
English: Myonggong's loyal discipline has already stood out, and the authority of the Son of Heaven has also appeared on his face. The words that Geng Pi said to Emperor Guangwu under the bed in the past, and the unexpected words that Zhu Ying said to Chunshenjun, could not be heard.

古文：昭受恩非凡，不敢不陈。 
现代文：董昭得到的不同寻常的恩惠，不敢不向您说这些话。 
English: I dare not say these words to you without mentioning the unusual favors that Dong Zhao has received.

古文：后太祖遂受魏公、魏王之号，皆昭所创。
现代文：后来太祖就接受了魏公、魏王的称号，都是从董昭的建议开始的。
English: Later, the great-grandfather accepted the title of Wei Gong and Wei Wang, all of which began with the suggestion of Dong Zhao.

古文：及关羽围曹仁於樊，孙权遣使辞以 遣兵西上，欲掩取羽。
现代文：等到关于将曹仁围困在樊城，孙权派使者跟太祖说 我打算派兵西行而上，趁关羽没有防备攻打他。
English: When it came to besieging Cao Ren in Lucheng, Sun Quan sent an envoy to tell Taizu, "I plan to send troops westward and attack Guan Yu while he is unprepared."

古文：江陵、公安累重，羽失二城，必自奔走，樊军之围，不救自解。
现代文：将领、公安两地非常重要，关羽丢失这两座城，一定会自己逃走，樊城被围困的局面，不用援救也会自己解除了。
English: The generals and the public security are very important. If Guan Yu loses these two cities, he will definitely escape on his own. The situation of Lucheng being besieged will be resolved by himself without any help.

古文：乞密不漏，令羽有备。 
现代文：希望这个秘密不要被泄露，让关羽有所防备。 
English: I hope that this secret will not be revealed, so that Guan Yu can be prepared.

古文：太祖诘群臣，群臣咸言宜当密之。
现代文：太祖询问大臣们该怎么做，大臣们都说应该保守秘密。
English: The Grandfather asked the ministers what to do, and they all said to keep it a secret.

古文：昭曰： 军事尚权，期於合宜。
现代文：董昭说： 军事事情崇尚随机应变，希望事情能合乎事宜。
English: Dong Zhao said: Military affairs advocate random contingency, and hope that things can be in line with matters.

古文：宜应权以密，而内露之。
现代文：现在应该表面上答应孙权保密，但实际上泄露这件事。
English: The time has come for Sun Quan to be ostensibly promised confidentiality, but actually divulge the matter.

古文：羽闻权上，若还自护，围则速解，便获其利。
现代文：关羽得知孙权要出兵西行，如果他返回保护自己，那困局就能迅速解除，我们获得利益就很便利。
English: Guan Yu learned that Sun Quan wanted to send troops to the west. If he returned to protect himself, the predicament could be quickly resolved, and it would be very convenient for us to make a profit.

古文：可使两贼相对衔持，坐待其弊。
现代文：可以让这两个敌人互相对峙，我们安坐等待他们疲敝的时候。
English: We can let these two enemies face each other while we sit back and wait for them to tire themselves out.

古文：秘而不露，使权得志，非计之上。
现代文：如果保密而不外泄，让孙权的计划得以实现，不是最好的计策。
English: It is not the best strategy to allow Sun Quan's plan to be realized if it is kept secret and not leaked.

古文：又，围中将吏不知有救，计粮怖惧，傥有他意，为难不小。
现代文：另外，樊城中被围困的将士官吏不知道有救援来到，计算粮食的储备，就会震惊恐惧，如果他们产生了别的想法，造成的困难也不会小。
English: In addition, the besieged officers and non-commissioned officers in Handan did not know that there was a rescue coming. When they calculated the grain reserves, they would be shocked and afraid. If they had other ideas, the difficulties caused would not be small.

古文：露之为便。
现代文：泄露孙权的计划对我们有利。
English: The plan to reveal the grandchildren's rights is to our advantage.

古文：且羽为人强梁，自恃二城守固，必不速退。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：况且关羽为人强劲勇武，仗着自己两座城的守备坚固，一定不会迅速撤退的。 太祖说： 好。 
English: Moreover, Guan Yu was a strong and brave man, and with the strong defense of his two cities, he would certainly not retreat quickly.

古文：即敕救将徐晃以权书射著围里及羽屯中，围里闻之，志气百倍。
现代文：立即敕命去援救曹仁的将领徐晃将孙权的书信射到被围的樊城中和关羽的军营里，围城中的人得知这个消息，士气大增。
English: Xu Aki, the general who immediately risked his life to rescue Cao Ren, sent Sun Quan's letter to the besieged city of Shicheng and the military camp of Guan Yu. When the people in the besieged city learned this news, their morale greatly increased.

古文：羽果犹豫。
现代文：关羽果然犹豫了。
English: Guan Yu really hesitated.

古文：权军至，得其二城，羽乃破败。
现代文：孙权的军队去到江陵、公安，将两座城都攻克了，关羽大败。
English: Sun Quan's army went to Gangneung, the public security, conquered the two cities, and defeated Guan Yu.

古文：文帝即王位，拜昭将作大匠。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，授予董昭将作大匠的职位。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei, and granted Dong Zhao the position of master craftsman.

古文：及践阼，迁大鸿胪，进封右乡侯。
现代文：等到登基之后，提升他为大鸿胪，进封为右乡侯。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of great nobleman, and he was given the title of right-ruling peasant.

古文：二年，分邑百户，赐昭弟访爵关内侯，徙昭为侍中。
现代文：黄初二年，文帝给董昭封赏食邑一百户，赐封董昭的弟弟董访为关内侯，调任董昭为侍中。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen gave Dong Zhao the title of 100 households in Guanzhong, granted the title of Guanzhong to Dong Zhao's younger brother Dong Zhao, and transferred Dong Zhao to the position of attendant.

古文：三年，征东大将军曹休临江在洞浦口，自表： 愿将锐卒虎步江南，因敌取资，事必克捷；若其无臣，不须为念。 
现代文：黄初三年，征东大将军曹休在洞浦口面对长江安营扎寨，自己上表说： 希望能率领精锐士兵像猛虎一样扑向江南，攻克敌人，取得物资，这件事一定能成功；如果臣下不幸丧命，陛下也不需要为臣挂念。 
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Xiu, a general of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, camped at the mouth of the Yangtze River in front of the Dongpu River. He said: I hope that I can lead the elite soldiers to the south of the Yangtze River like a fierce tiger, conquer the enemy, and obtain materials. This thing will surely succeed; if the vassal is killed, His Majesty does not need to worry about the vassal.

古文：帝恐休便渡江，驿马诏止。
现代文：文帝担心曹休会立刻渡江，派驿马传诏令阻止他。
English: Emperor Wen was worried that Cao Xiu would immediately cross the river and sent a messenger to stop him.

古文：时昭侍侧，因曰： 窃见陛下有忧色，独以休济江故乎？
现代文：当时董昭在身旁侍奉，就说： 臣暗中看见陛下有忧虑的神色，只是因为曹休要渡江的缘故吗？
English: At that time, Dong Zhao, who was serving at his side, said: Did the vassal secretly see His Majesty's worried look, just because Cao Xiu wanted to cross the river?

古文：今者渡江，人情所难，就休有此志，势不独行，当须诸将。
现代文：现在渡江，从人事情理的角度来看确实有困难。就算曹休有这样的想法，势必不会自己行动，还应该有众位将领的帮助。
English: Now crossing the river, from the perspective of human affairs, there are indeed difficulties. Even if Cao Xiu has such an idea, he will not act on his own, but should have the help of many generals.

古文：臧霸等既富且贵，无复他望，但欲终其天年，保守禄祚而已，何肯乘危自投死地，以求徼幸？
现代文：臧霸等人已经很富有且尊贵，没有其他的期望，只想要安养天年守住利禄福气而已，怎么会愿意在危险的时候将自己投入到必死的境地中，以求取侥幸获得的成功呢？
English: Zouba and others were already very rich and noble, and they had no other expectations. They only wanted to live a long, healthy life and keep their good fortune. How could they be willing to throw themselves into a life-and-death situation in a time of danger in order to achieve a fluke success?

古文：苟霸等不进，休意自沮。
现代文：如果臧霸等人不向前行军，曹休的想法自然会打消了。
English: If Yanba and others do not march forward, Cao Xiu's idea will naturally be dispelled.

古文：臣恐陛下虽有敕渡之诏，犹必沉吟，未便从命也。 
现代文：臣担心陛下虽然有命令他暂缓渡江的诏令，他依然还会犹豫，未必立刻听命。 
English: The vassal feared that even though His Majesty had ordered him to postpone crossing the river, he would still hesitate and not necessarily obey immediately.

古文：是后无几，暴风吹贼船，悉诣休等营下，斩首获生，贼遂迸散。
现代文：在这之后不久，狂风将敌军的船只都吹到曹休等的军营下，曹休将一部分将士斩杀，又俘获了一部分，贼人就四处溃逃。
English: Shortly after this, the fierce wind blew all the enemy ships to Cao Xiu's camp. Cao Xiu killed some of the soldiers and captured others. The thieves fled in all directions.

古文：诏敕诸军促渡。
现代文：文帝下令让各路军队赶快渡江。
English: Emperor Wen ordered all the troops to cross the river as soon as possible.

古文：军未时进，贼救船遂至。
现代文：曹休的军队没有按时行进，地方救援的船只就到了。
English: Cao Xiu's army did not march on time, and local rescue ships arrived.

古文：大驾幸宛，征南大将军夏侯尚等攻江陵，未拔。
现代文：文帝亲临宛城，征南大将军夏侯尚等人进攻江陵，没有能攻克。
English: Emperor Wen personally visited Wancheng, and General Xia Hushan and others attacked Jiangling, but failed to conquer it.

古文：时江水浅狭，尚欲乘船将步骑入渚中安屯，作浮桥，南北往来，议者多以为城必可拔。
现代文：当时长江水浅，水面狭窄，夏侯尚想要率领步兵骑兵乘船进入水中陆地安营，建造了浮桥，桥的南北可以连通，商议的人大多认为江陵城一定能被攻克。
English: At that time, the Yangtze River was shallow and the water surface was narrow. Xia Hou Shang wanted to lead the infantry and cavalry to enter the water by boat and camp on land. He built a pontoon bridge. The north and south of the bridge could be connected. Most of the negotiators thought that Gangneung City could definitely be conquered.

古文：昭上疏曰： 武皇帝智勇过人，而用兵畏敌，不敢轻之若此也。
现代文：董昭上疏说： 武皇帝智谋和勇武都超过常人，但在用兵上畏惧敌人，不敢像这样轻视。
English: Dong Zhaoxiao said: Emperor Wu's wisdom and bravery are superior to ordinary people, but he is afraid of the enemy in the use of troops and does not dare to despise them like this.

古文：夫兵好进恶退，常然之数。
现代文：用兵之道，喜欢前进厌恶后退，这是一直以来最常见的。
English: The military approach, which prefers to advance rather than retreat, has always been the most common.

古文：平地无险，犹尚艰难，就当深入，还道宜利，兵有进退，不可如意。
现代文：平坦的地方没有险要的地势，仍然按艰难的情况来考虑，就当做深入敌军，返回的道路应该会顺利，军队有进有退，是不能按我们的想法来的。
English: In a flat place, there is no critical situation. Still, we should consider it according to the difficult situation. For example, if we go deep into the enemy army, the way back should be smooth. The army has advances and retreats. It cannot come according to our idea.

古文：今屯渚中，至深也；浮桥而济，至危也；一道而行，至狭也：三者兵家所忌，而今行之。
现代文：现在驻扎在水中的陆地上，是很深入的；制造浮桥渡江，是很危险的；只有一条路能行走，是非常狭窄的：三种用兵之人忌讳的情况，现在都施行了。
English: Now it is very deep to stay on land in the water; it is very dangerous to make a pontoon bridge to cross the river; there is only one way to walk, it is very narrow: three kinds of situations that are taboo for soldiers are now implemented.

古文：贼频攻桥，误有漏失，渚中精锐，非魏之有，将转化为吴矣。
现代文：贼人频繁进攻浮桥，我们的防守如果有失误或者缺漏，那那块陆地上的精锐部队，就不是魏国拥有的，将会转成吴国所有了。
English: Thieves frequently attack the floating bridge. If there are mistakes or omissions in our defense, the elite troops on that piece of land will not be owned by Wei, but will be owned by Wu.

古文：臣私慼之，忘寝与食，而议者怡然不以为忧，岂不惑哉！
现代文：臣私下为此忧虑，废寝忘食，但商议的人却平静自然，不认为这应该担忧，难道不是很糊涂吗！
English: Privately, ministers worry about this and lose sleep over it, but the negotiators are calm and natural and don't think it's something to worry about. Isn't that very confused?

古文：加江水向长，一旦暴增，何以防御？
现代文：再加上江水向来会上涨，一旦突然水位大涨，我军靠什么来抵御呢？
English: In addition, the river water always rises. Once the water level suddenly rises, what will our army rely on to resist it?

古文：就不破贼，尚当自完。
现代文：还没有能攻破敌军，就自己先陷入绝境。
English: If you haven't been able to break through the enemy army, you'll find yourself in a desperate situation.

古文：奈何乘危，不以为惧？
现代文：为什么处在危险的地势中却不为此担忧呢？
English: Why be in a precarious situation and not worry about it?

古文：事将危矣，惟陛下察之！ 
现代文：事情将会变得很危险，希望陛下仔细考虑这件事！ 
English: Things are about to get very dangerous, I hope His Majesty will think about this carefully!

古文：帝悟昭言，即诏尚等促出。
现代文：文帝明白的董昭的话，立即下诏令夏侯尚等人迅速退出。
English: Emperor Wen, who understood Dong Zhao's words, immediately issued an edict ordering Xia Hou Shang and others to quickly withdraw.

古文：贼两头并前，官兵一道引去，不时得泄，将军石建、高迁仅得自免。
现代文：敌军兵分前后两队，一齐前进，魏军一路人马撤退离开，不时溃散，只有将军石建、高迁得以脱身。
English: The enemy soldiers were divided into two groups in front and behind, advancing together. The Wei army retreated all the way and dispersed from time to time. Only General Shi Jian and Gao Qian were able to escape.

古文：军出旬日，江水暴长。
现代文：大军撤退十几天后，江水暴涨。
English: A dozen days after the withdrawal of the large army, the river water surged.

古文：帝曰： 君论此事，何其审也！
现代文：文帝说： 您论断这件事，多么审慎啊！
English: Wen Di said: How prudent you are to judge this matter!

古文：正使张、陈当之，何以复加。 
现代文：就算张良、陈平可以相比，又怎么能超过他们。 
English: Even if Zhang Liang and Chen Ping can be compared, how can they surpass them?

古文：五年，徙封成都乡侯，拜太常。
现代文：黄初五年，朝廷转封董昭为成都乡侯，任命为太常。
English: In the 5th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the imperial court transferred Dong Zhao to the position of Chengdu Township, and he was appointed as the Grand Vizier.

古文：其年，徙光禄大夫、给事中。
现代文：这一年，又调任光禄大夫、给事中。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of Guanglu Doctor and assigned to the case.

古文：从大驾东征，七年还，拜太仆。
现代文：跟随文帝东征，黄初七年返回，被任命为太仆。
English: Following Emperor Wen's eastward expedition, he returned to China in the seventh year of the Yellow Emperor's reign and was appointed as the Great Servant.

古文：明帝即位，进爵乐平侯，邑千户，转卫尉。
现代文：明帝登基后，进封爵位为乐平侯，封邑一千户，转任卫尉。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Lord of Leping, a fief of a thousand households, and was transferred to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：分邑百户，赐一子爵关内侯。
现代文：又分封食邑一百户，赐封董昭的其中一个儿子的爵位为关内侯。
English: In addition, one hundred households in Fongshui Town were divided, and one of the sons of Fongzhao was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：太和四年，行司徒事，六年，拜真。
现代文：太和四年，董昭代理司徒的事务，太和六年，被任命为真正的司徒。
English: In the fourth year of Taihe, Dong Zhao was appointed as the acting magistrate, and in the sixth year of Taihe, he was appointed as the real magistrate.

古文：昭上疏陈末流之弊曰： 凡有天下者，莫不贵尚敦朴忠信之士，深疾虚伪不真之人者，以其毁教乱治，败俗伤化也。
现代文：董昭上疏陈述不良风气的弊端，说： 凡是拥有天下的人，没有不尊崇敦厚朴素、忠诚守信的士人，且非常痛恨那些虚伪作假，不真实的人，因为他们损害教化，毁乱政事，败坏风俗教化。
English: Dong Zhaoxiang stated the drawbacks of bad customs, saying: All those who have the world do not disrespect the dignified, simple, loyal and trustworthy scholars, and very much hate those who are hypocritical, false, and untrue, because they damage enlightenment, disrupt politics, and corrupt customs and enlightenment.

古文：近魏讽则伏诛建安之末，曹伟则斩戮黄初之始。
现代文：比较近的有魏讽在建安末年被处死，曹伟在黄初初年被斩首。
English: More recently, Wei Lian was executed at the end of Jianan, and Cao Wei was beheaded at the beginning of the first year of Huangdi.

古文：伏惟前后圣诏，深疾浮伪，欲以破散邪党，常用切齿；而执法之吏皆畏其权势，莫能纠擿，毁坏风俗，侵欲滋甚。
现代文：陛下前后颁发的诏令，都很痛恨那些虚伪，想要消除那些邪恶的帮派，经常使用很愤怒的语言；而那些执法的吏役都畏惧他们的权势，没有能检举揭发，导致毁坏风俗的情况越来越严重。
English: His Majesty's edicts, issued one after another, abhorred the hypocrisy, wanted to eliminate the evil gangs, and often used very angry language; and those law enforcement officials were afraid of their power, and failed to report and expose, leading to an increasingly serious situation of destroying customs.

古文：窃见当今年少，不复以学问为本，专更以交游为业；国士不以孝悌清脩为首，乃以趋势游利为先。
现代文：臣私下见到现在的年轻人，不再将求学审问作为根本，专门把何人结交作为本业；国家优秀的人才不把对父母兄弟孝顺恭敬、淡泊省修放在首位，竟然将趋炎附势、追名逐利作为最重要的事。
English: When the minister privately sees today's young people, they no longer regard studying and questioning as fundamental, but only consider who to make friends with as their main occupation; the country's outstanding talents do not put filial piety and respect for their parents and brothers, and lack of provincial training as the first priority, but actually regard gaining influence and chasing fame and profit as the most important thing.

古文：合党连群，互相褒叹，以毁訾为罚戮，用党誉为爵赏，附己者则叹之盈言，不附者则为作瑕衅。
现代文：他们结成朋党，连成群体，相互之间褒扬吹捧，将非议诋毁作为惩罚，将袒护称赞作为爵禄和赏赐，对于依附自己的人大加赞赏，不依附自己的就是他人的过失。
English: They form cliques and groups, praise and flatter each other, regard criticism and slander as punishment, regard protection and praise as honor and reward, and greatly admire those who depend on themselves. It is the fault of others if they do not depend on themselves.

古文：至乃相谓 今世何忧不度邪，但求人道不勤，罗之不博耳；又何患其不知己矣，但当吞之以药而柔调耳。
现代文：甚至互相说 今生还担心有什么不能度过呢，只求众人不要勤勉，了解的东西不要太广博罢了；又对人家不了解自己有什么担心的呢，只当做是吞下药物来温和地调理自己罢了。 
English: They even say to each other that they are still worried about what they can't get through in this life, just asking people not to be diligent and not to know too much; and they don't know what they are worried about, just swallowing medicine to gently adjust themselves.

古文：又闻或有使奴客名作在职家人，冒之出入，往来禁奥，交通书疏，有所探问。
现代文：又听说有人让家中奴仆或者有职务的家人冒用他的名字，假冒他的身份出入来往，在宫门禁地来去自如，相互交换书信奏章，对这些事加以打探。
English: It was also heard that some people had their servants or family members with official positions use his name, pretend to be him, go in and out, come and go freely in the restricted area of the palace, exchange letters and music, and investigate these things.

古文：凡此诸事，皆法之所不取，刑之所不赦，虽讽、伟之罪，无以加也。 
现代文：以上这些事情，都是律法不能容忍，刑罚不能赦免的，即使是魏讽、曹伟的罪行，也不会比这些更过分了。 
English: All of the above are things that the law cannot tolerate, and the punishment cannot be pardoned. Even Wei Lin and Cao Wei's crimes would not be more excessive than these.

古文：帝於是发切诏，斥免诸葛诞、邓飏等。
现代文：文帝就颁发辞令严肃的诏令，斥责并罢免了诸葛诞、邓飏等人。
English: Emperor Wen issued a sternly worded edict, reprimanding and dismissing Zhuge Zetian, Deng Xiaoping and others.

古文：昭年八十一薨，谥曰定侯。
现代文：董昭八十一岁的时候去世，谥号为定侯。
English: Dong Zhao died when he was eighty-one years old, and his posthumous name was Dinghou.

古文：子胄嗣。胄历位郡守、九卿。
现代文：他的儿子董胄承袭爵位，董胄曾担任过郡守、九卿。
English: His son, Dong Hao, inherited the title of nobility. Dong Hao had served as county governor and nine Lords.

古文：刘晔字子扬，淮南成德人，汉光武子阜陵王延后也。
现代文：刘晔字子扬，淮南郡成德县人，他是汉光武帝的儿子阜陵王刘延的后代。
English: Liu Zhi Zi Yang, a native of Chengde County, Huainan County, is a descendant of Liu Yan, the son of Emperor Han Guangwu.

古文：父普，母脩，产涣及晔。
现代文：父亲是刘普，母亲名脩，生育了刘涣和刘晔。
English: The father is Liu Pu, the mother is Mei Yao, and they gave birth to Liu Yao and Liu Yao.

古文：涣九岁，晔七岁，而母病困。
现代文：在刘涣九岁，刘晔七岁时，母亲病重。
English: When Liu Wei was nine years old and Liu Wei was seven years old, their mother fell seriously ill.

古文：临终，戒涣、晔以 普之侍人，有谄害之性。
现代文：临去世时，告诫刘涣、刘晔说 刘普的侍妾有谄谀和嫉妒的本性。
English: When he was about to die, he admonished Liu Zhen and Liu Zhen that Liu Pu's concubine had a jealous and envious nature.

古文：身死之后，惧必乱家。
现代文：我去世之后，担心她一定会将家庭弄乱。
English: After I died, I worried that she would ruin the family.

古文：汝长大能除之，则吾无恨矣。 
现代文：你们长大后能除掉她，我就没有什么遗憾了。 
English: If you can get rid of her when you grow up, I won't have any regrets.

古文：晔年十三，谓兄涣曰： 亡母之言，可以行矣。 
现代文：刘晔十三岁那年，对兄长刘涣说： 母亲的遗愿，可以实行了。 
English: When Liu Wei was 13 years old, he said to his elder brother Liu Wei: My mother's last wish can be fulfilled.

古文：涣曰： 那可尔！ 
现代文：刘涣说： 怎么能这样做！ 
English: Liu Wei said, "How can you do this!

古文：晔即入室杀侍者，径出拜墓。
现代文：刘晔立即进屋将侍妾杀了，出来后径直到母亲坟前拜祭。
English: Liu Yao immediately went into the house and killed his concubine. After he came out, he went to visit his mother's grave.

古文：舍内大惊，白普。
现代文：家里人非常震惊，告诉了刘普。
English: The family members were very shocked and told Liu Pu.

古文：普怒，遣人追晔。
现代文：刘普大怒，派人追赶刘晔。
English: Liu Pu flew into a rage and sent someone to chase Liu Yao.

古文：晔还拜谢曰： 亡母顾命之言，敢受不请擅行之罚。 
现代文：刘晔回来对父亲叩拜道歉说： 我只是执行母亲临终前交代的话，希望承受没有请示就擅自实行的惩罚。 
English: Liu Yao came back and apologized to his father, saying, "I was just carrying out my mother's dying words, and I hope to bear the punishment that I carried out without asking."

古文：普心异之，遂不责也。
现代文：刘普心中惊异，就没有责罚他。
English: Surprised, Liu Pu did not punish him.

古文：汝南许劭名知人，避地扬州，称晔有佐世之才。
现代文：汝南郡人许劭因能知人而闻名，在扬州避难，称赞刘晔有辅佐天下的才能。
English: Xu Yao, a native of Runan County, is famous for his ability to know people. He took refuge in Yangzhou and praised Liu Yao for his ability to help the world.

古文：扬士多轻侠狡桀，有郑宝、张多、许乾之属，各拥部曲。
现代文：扬州的士人大多有胆气又狡猾凶暴，像郑宝、张多、许乾这些人，都各自拥有私人部队。
English: Most of the statesmen in Yangzhou are courageous, cunning and ferocious. Like Zheng Bao, Zhang Duo and Xu Qian, they all have their own private armies.

古文：宝最骁果，才力过人，一方所惮。
现代文：郑宝是最骁勇果敢的，才能力量都超过普通人，是当地很忌惮的人。
English: Zheng Bao is the most courageous and daring, his talent and ability are more than ordinary people, and he is a very timid person in the local area.

古文：欲驱略百姓越赴江表，以晔高族名人，欲强逼晔使唱导此谋。
现代文：郑宝想要将百姓驱赶抢劫渡江到江南地区去，因为刘晔出身名门，又是知名人士，想要强迫刘晔来倡导执行这个计划。
English: Zheng Bao wanted to drive the people to rob and cross the Yangtze River to the south of the Yangtze River, because Liu Hui was from a famous family and a famous person, and wanted to force Liu Hui to advocate the implementation of this plan.

古文：晔时年二十馀，心内忧之，而未有缘。
现代文：刘晔当时二十多岁，心中忧虑这件事，但没有遇到机会。
English: Liu Wei, who was in his twenties at the time, was worried about this matter, but did not have a chance.

古文：会太祖遣使诣州，有所案问。
现代文：恰好太祖派使者搭配扬州来，对案件进行审问。
English: It just so happened that the great-grandfather sent an emissary to Yangzhou to interrogate the case.

古文：晔往见，为论事势，要将与归，驻止数日。
现代文：刘晔前去拜见使者，向他谈论当前的情势，并邀请他一同回来，在家中住了几天。
English: Liu Yao went to see the messenger, talked to him about the current situation, and invited him to come back with him. He stayed at home for a few days.

古文：宝果从数百人赍牛酒来候使，晔令家僮将其众坐中门外，为设酒饭；与宝於内宴饮。
现代文：郑宝果然带着几百人，带来了牛酒问候使者，刘晔让家中仆人带着郑宝的部众坐在中门外，为他们备办了酒宴饭食；他和郑宝在内堂设宴饮酒。
English: Zheng Bao did indeed bring several hundred people with him, and brought ox wine to greet the envoys. Liu Bei had the servants of the family sit outside the middle gate with Zheng Bao's followers, and prepared a wine banquet and meals for them; he and Zheng Bao held a banquet and drank alcohol in the inner hall.

古文：密勒健儿，令因行觞而斫宝。
现代文：刘晔还暗中安排了健壮的勇士，让他们趁着行酒的时候将郑宝杀了。
English: Liu Ye also secretly arranged for strong warriors to kill Zheng Bao while they were out drinking.

古文：宝性不甘酒，视候甚明，觞者不敢发。
现代文：但郑宝生性不喜欢喝酒，对情况观察得很清楚，行酒的人不敢发出行动的信号。
English: However, Zheng Bao does not like drinking by nature, and he observes the situation very clearly. People who drink do not dare to send out action signals.

古文：晔因自引取佩刀斫杀宝，斩其首以令其军，云： 曹公有令，敢有动者，与宝同罪。 
现代文：刘晔就自己拔出佩刀将郑宝砍杀了，并将他的首级斩下来命令郑宝的部队，说： 曹公有诏令，有胆敢乱动的，和郑宝同罪论处。 
English: Liu Bei pulled out his own sword and killed Zheng Bao, and ordered Zheng Bao's troops to cut off his head, saying: "Cao Gong has the edict, and if you dare to make a move, you will be punished the same way as Zheng Bao.

古文：众皆惊怖，走还营。
现代文：众人都惊慌恐惧，逃奔回到军营中。
English: Panicked and terrified, everyone ran back to the barracks.

古文：营有督将精兵数千，惧其为乱，晔即乘宝马，将家僮数人，诣宝营门，呼其渠帅，喻以祸福，皆叩头开门内晔。
现代文：军营中有督将和精锐士兵共几千人，刘晔担心他们会作乱，就立即骑着郑宝的马匹，带着几个家中的仆人，来到郑宝的军营前，将他们的首领叫出来，向他陈述祸福得失，军营中的人都磕头开门接纳刘晔。
English: There were several thousand generals and elite soldiers in the camp. Liu Bei was worried that they would cause a disturbance, so he immediately rode Zheng Bao's horses and brought several of the family's servants to Zheng Bao's camp, called out their leaders, and told him about their fortunes and misfortunes. Everyone in the camp opened their doors to welcome Liu Bei.

古文：晔抚慰安怀，咸悉悦服，推晔为主。
现代文：刘晔对他们加以安抚慰藉，他们都心悦诚服，共同推举刘晔为主君。
English: Liu Bei comforted and consoled them, and they were all pleased and convinced, and jointly elected Liu Bei as their lord.

古文：晔睹汉室渐微，己为支属，不欲拥兵，遂委其部曲与庐江太守刘勋。
现代文：刘晔眼看着汉王室日渐衰微，自己作为旁系部属，不想要拥兵自重，就将郑宝的部队交付给了庐江太守刘勋。
English: As Liu Xuan watched the Han royal family gradually decline, he, as a collateral subordinate, did not want to support the troops with self-respect, so he handed over Zheng Bao's troops to Liu Xun, the grand marshal of the Li River.

古文：勋怪其故，晔曰： 宝无法制，其众素以钞略为利，仆宿无资，而整齐之，必怀怨难久，故相与耳。 
现代文：刘勋对他的做法很奇怪，刘晔说： 郑宝不讲法令制度，他的部队向来都将抢劫掠夺作为利益来源，我向来没有资本，却又整顿约束他们，他们心中一定怀着怨恨，难以长久，所以托付给你罢了。 
English: Liu Xun's approach to him was very strange, Liu Wei said: Zheng Bao does not care about the legal system, his troops have always robbed and plundered as a source of profit, I have never had capital, but I have rectified and restrained them, they must have resentment in their hearts, it is difficult to last, so I just entrusted it to you.

古文：时勋兵强于江、淮之间。
现代文：当时刘勋的部队在江淮地区很强盛。
English: At that time, Liu Xun's troops were very strong in the Jianghuai region.

古文：孙策恶之，遣使卑辞厚币，以书说勋曰： 上缭宗民，数欺下国，忿之有年矣。
现代文：孙策厌恶刘勋，派遣使者带着贵重礼物，谦卑的语言，用书信劝说刘勋： 上缭的土著宗族，多次欺压我这边的人，我心中怨恨已经好几年了。
English: Sun Ce detested Liu Xun and sent an envoy with valuable gifts and humble words to persuade Liu Xun in a letter: "The arrogant aboriginal clan has repeatedly oppressed people on my side. I have held a grudge for several years.

古文：击之，路不便，愿因大国伐之。
现代文：攻打他们，道路不通便，希望能借由您这样的来征讨他们。
English: There is no easy way to attack them, so I hope you can use this to enlist them.

古文：上缭甚实，得之可以富国，请出兵为外援。 
现代文：上缭很是富裕，得到那里的地盘就能充盈国库，请求您出兵作为我的外援。 
English: Shangzhai is very rich. If I get a piece of land there, I will be able to fill the treasury. I ask you to send troops as my foreign aid.

古文：勋信之，又得策珠宝、葛越，喜悦。
现代文：刘勋相信了他的话，又得到孙策送来的珠宝葛布，心中欣喜。
English: Liu Xun believed his words and was delighted to receive the jewelry and cloths sent by Sun Ce.

古文：外内尽贺，而晔独否。
现代文：里外的官吏都前来庆贺，只有刘晔不这样。
English: Officials from home and abroad came to celebrate, but not Liu Ye.

古文：勋问其故，对曰： 上缭虽小，城坚池深，攻难守易，不可旬日而举，则兵疲於外，而国内虚。
现代文：刘勋问有什么缘由，刘晔回答说： 上缭地方虽然小，但城池坚固，护城河深不可测，进攻难但坚守很容易，不能在十天之内攻占它，那士兵在外就会疲倦，国内的防守也会空虚。
English: Liu Xun asked what the reason was, and Liu Bei replied: Although Shangzhuang is small, the city is strong, the moat is unfathomable, it is difficult to attack but easy to defend. If it cannot be captured within ten days, the soldiers will be tired outside, and the domestic defense will be empty.

古文：策乘虚而袭我，则后不能独守。
现代文：孙策乘着国中防守空出而袭击我们，那后方部队是不能独自死守的。
English: Sun Ce attacked us by taking advantage of the vacancy in the middle of the country's defense, and the rear troops could not defend themselves alone.

古文：是将军进屈於敌，退无所归。
现代文：到时候将军率军进攻，会被敌人打败，想要撤退，也没有可以回去的地方了。
English: At that time, the general led the army to attack, will be defeated by the enemy, want to retreat, and there is no place to go back.

古文：若军必出，祸今至矣。 
现代文：如果军队一定要发兵，灾祸现在就来到了。 
English: If the army must send troops, the disaster will come now.

古文：勋不从。兴兵伐上缭，策果袭其后。
现代文：刘勋没有听从他的话，发兵进攻上缭，孙策果然袭击了他的后方。
English: Liu Xun did not listen to his words and sent troops to attack, and Sun Ce attacked his rear.

古文：勋穷踧，遂奔太祖。
现代文：刘勋穷途末路，就逃奔投靠太祖。
English: At the end of his tether, Liu Xun ran away to join his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖至寿春，时庐江界有山贼陈策，众数万人，临险而守。
现代文：太祖来到寿春，当时庐山境内有山贼陈策，手下部众有几万人，依靠险要的地势坚守。
English: When the great-grandfather came to Shuchun, there were bandits scheming in Shaoshan, with tens of thousands of people under their command, and they relied on the precarious terrain to hold out.

古文：先时遣偏将致诛，莫能禽克。
现代文：太祖之前曾经派出副将前去诛杀陈策，但没有能攻下。
English: The great-grandfather had previously sent a vice-commander to fight and kill Chen Ce, but was unable to capture him.

古文：太祖问群下，可伐与不？
现代文：太祖问属下，可不可以征伐？
English: The great-grandfather asked his subordinates, is it possible to go to war?

古文：咸云： 山峻高而谿谷深隘，守易攻难；又无之不足为损，得之不足为益。 
现代文：属下都说： 那地方山势高险，山谷又窄深，防守容易但进攻困难；得不到它对我们也没有什么损失，得到它也不会增加什么好处。 
English: His subordinates all said: That place is mountainous and dangerous, the valleys are narrow and deep, it is easy to defend but difficult to attack; we have nothing to lose by not getting it, and we have nothing to gain by getting it.

古文：晔曰： 策等小竖，因乱赴险，遂相依为强耳，非有爵命威信相伏也。
现代文：刘晔说： 孙策这些小子，趁着动乱进入险境，所以相互倚仗，增强势力罢了，不是能用爵位诏令威信等让他们屈服的。
English: Liu Wei said, "These boys, Sun Ce, took advantage of the turmoil to get into a dangerous situation, so they relied on each other to strengthen their power. It was not possible to use the peerage to command prestige and make them submit.

古文：往者偏将资轻，而中国未夷，故策敢据险以守。
现代文：前去的副将资历不够，而中原地区又没有平定，所以孙策才敢倚仗险要的地势据守。
English: The vice-commander who went there did not have enough seniority, and the Central Plains region was not pacified, so Sun Ce dared to rely on the precarious situation.

古文：今天下略定，后伏先诛。
现代文：现在天下大致平定了，后面臣服的就先诛杀。
English: Now that the world has been more or less pacified, those who have been subjugated in the past will fight to the death.

古文：夫畏死趋赏，愚知所同，故广武君为韩信画策，谓其威名足以先声后实而服邻国也。
现代文：人害怕死亡，追求赏赐，无论是愚人还是智者都是一样的，所以广武君为韩信出谋划策，说韩信的威名是足够先依靠声势再依靠实力来使邻国臣服的。
English: People are afraid of death and pursue rewards, whether they are fools or wise, they are all the same, so Guangwu Jun advised Han Xin, saying that Han Xin's prestige is enough to first rely on reputation and then rely on strength to subjugate neighboring countries.

古文：岂况明公之德，东征西怨，先开赏募，大兵临之，令宣之日，军门启而虏自溃矣。 
现代文：更何况明公的德行如此，往东面征讨，西面的百姓就会埋怨没有先来解救自己，现在先悬赏招募，等到大军压境，宣发诏令的时候，陈策的军营自然就会打开大门并且督军四处溃逃了。 
English: What's more, the virtuous conduct of Mingzhao was such that if he went to the east to recruit, the people in the west would complain that he did not come to save himself first. Now, he would offer a reward for recruitment first. When the great army pressed the border and issued the edict, Chen Zhe's military camp would naturally open the door and the commander's army would flee everywhere.

古文：太祖笑曰： 卿言近之！ 
现代文：太祖笑着说： 您的话和我的想法很接近！ 
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said: Your words and my thoughts are very close!

古文：遂遣猛将在前，大军在后，至则克策，如晔所度。
现代文：于是派遣勇猛的将领在前开路，大军紧跟在后，军队一到那里就大败陈策，就像刘晔估计的那样。
English: So he sent brave generals ahead to open the way, followed by a large army. As soon as the army got there, they were defeated, just as Liu Bei had predicted.

古文：太祖还，辟晔为司空仓曹掾。
现代文：太祖率军返回，征召刘晔为司空仓曹掾。
English: The great-grandfather led the army back and conscripted Liu Ye as the secretary of Kuangcang Cao Ye.

古文：太祖征张鲁，转晔为主簿。
现代文：太祖征讨张鲁，将刘晔调任为主簿。
English: Emperor Taizong conquered Zhang Lu and appointed Liu Bei as the head of the state.

古文：既至汉中，山峻难登，军食颇乏。
现代文：大军行进到汉中，山势险峻难以攀登，军中缺乏粮食。
English: A large army marched to Hanzhong, the mountains were too steep to climb, and the army was short of grain.

古文：太祖曰： 此妖妄之国耳，何能为有无？
现代文：太祖说： 这是个怪异荒诞的小国罢了，得不得到它，又能做什么呢？
English: The great-grandfather said, "It's just a weird, absurd little country. If we don't get it, what can we do?

古文：吾军少食，不如速还。 
现代文：我的部队缺乏粮食，不如赶快返回。 
English: My troops are short of food, so I'd better get back.

古文：便自引归，令晔督后诸军，使以次出。
现代文：就自己率军回去，让刘晔在后方监督各路兵马，让他们按顺序退出。
English: He led his army back and let Liu Bei supervise all the soldiers and horses in the rear, and let them withdraw in order.

古文：晔策鲁可克，加粮道不继，虽出，军犹不能皆全，驰白太祖： 不如致攻。 遂进兵，多出弩以射其营。
现代文：刘晔估计张鲁是能攻下的，再加上运输粮食的通道不能连续，虽然撤出汉中，军队也不能完好保全，就骑马奔去告诉太祖说： 不如努力进攻。 太祖就率军进攻，用很多弓弩射向张鲁的军营。
English: Liu Bei estimated that Zhang Lu could be conquered, and the passage of grain transportation could not be continuous. Although he withdrew from Hanzhong, the army could not be completely preserved. He rode on horseback to tell Taizu: "It is better to attack hard." Taizu led the army to attack and used many bows and arrows to shoot at Zhang Lu's military camp.

古文：鲁奔走，汉中遂平。
现代文：张鲁迅速逃走，汉中就此平定了。
English: Zhang Lu quickly fled, and Hanzhong was thus pacified.

古文：晔进曰： 明公以步卒五千，将诛董卓，北破袁绍，南征刘表，九州百郡，十并其八，威震天下，势慑海外。
现代文：刘晔进言说： 明公您依靠五千步兵，诛杀董卓，往北攻破袁绍，往南征讨刘表，天下一百个州郡，十个中兼并八个，声威震动天下，威势震慑海外。
English: Liu Ye said, "Ming Gong, you relied on five thousand infantrymen to fight and kill Dong Zhuo, to the north to defeat Yuan Shao, and to the south to fight Liu Biao. There are one hundred states and counties in the world, and eight out of ten have been annexed. Your prestige has shaken the world, and your power has shocked overseas.

古文：今举汉中，蜀人望风，破胆失守，推此而前，蜀可传檄而定。
现代文：现在平定汉中，蜀人得知消息，都吓破肝胆，不断失守，将这样的气势推广并先前进，蜀国就能在传出檄文后平定了。
English: Now, in the process of pacifying Hanzhong, when the Shu people learned the news, they were terrified and constantly lost their defenses. If they could promote this momentum and advance first, Shu would be able to be pacified after the imperial edict was issued.

古文：刘备，人杰也，有度而迟，得蜀日浅，蜀人未恃也。
现代文：刘备，是人中的英杰，胸有计谋但行动迟缓，得到蜀地的时间还短，还不能完全倚仗蜀地人民。
English: Liu Bei is a hero among men. He has a plan in mind but is slow to act. The time to get Shu is still short, and he cannot fully rely on the people of Shu.

古文：太祖不从，傅子曰：居七日，蜀降者说： 蜀中一日数十惊，备虽斩之而不能安也。 
现代文：现在我们攻下汉中，蜀人震惊恐惧，他们的声势自然就会衰微。以明公您的英明神武，趁着他们声势衰弱的时候再施压，没有不能攻克的。
English: Now that we have conquered Hanzhong, the Shu people are shocked and afraid, and their momentum will naturally wane. With your wisdom and wisdom, take advantage of the time when their momentum is weak and put pressure on them, there is nothing that cannot be overcome.

古文：太祖延问晔曰： 今尚可击不？ 晔曰： 今已小定，未可击也。 
现代文：如果稍稍有些迟缓，诸葛亮善于治理政事，又担任丞相，关羽、张飞是军队中最英勇的，又担任将领，等到蜀国百姓安定下来，他们依凭险要的地势据守，那就不能进犯了。现在不攻取他们，一定会成为将来的忧虑。 
English: If you are a bit slow, Zhuge Liang is good at governing politics, and also serves as chancellor, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei are the most heroic in the army, and also serve as generals, until the people of Shu are stable, they rely on the precarious situation to defend, then they can not attack. If you do not attack them now, it will definitely become a future worry.

古文：大军遂还。
现代文：太祖没有听从的他话，大军就此返回。
English: The great-grandfather did not listen to his words, and the army returned.

古文：晔自汉中还，为行军长史，兼领军。
现代文：刘晔从汉中回来，担任行军长史，兼任领军。
English: Liu Bei returned from the Han Dynasty to serve as the commander of the march and the leader of the army.

古文：延康元年，蜀将孟达率众降。
现代文：延康元年，蜀国将领孟达率领部下投降。
English: In the first year of Yan Kang, Meng Da, the general of Shu, led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：达有容止才观，文帝甚器爱之，使达为新城太守，加散骑常侍。
现代文：孟达仪容举止、才华外表都很好，文帝很器重喜爱他，任命孟达为新城太守，加官散骑常侍。
English: Meng Da's appearance, manners, and talent were all very good. Emperor Wen loved him very much and appointed Meng Da as the governor of Xincheng, and he was also appointed as a cavalryman.

古文：晔以为 达有苟得之心，而恃才好术，必不能感恩怀义。
现代文：刘晔认为 孟达有依靠不正当手段获取利益的想法，又倚仗才能，玩弄权术，一定不会心怀感激恩义。
English: Liu Wei believes that Meng Da has the idea of relying on improper means to obtain profits, and relies on military talent, playing power games, and will not be grateful.

古文：其后孟达去刘备归文帝，论者多称有乐毅之量。
现代文：新城和吴国、蜀国都相接，若果局势出现变化，就会为国家造成祸患。 
English: Xincheng is adjacent to Wu and Shu provinces. If the situation changes, it will bring disaster to the country.

古文：晔一见讽、达而皆云必反，卒如其言。
现代文：文帝最终都么诶唷改变孟达的任命，后来孟达在叛乱失败后去世。
English: Emperor Wen eventually changed Mengda's appointment, and Mengda later died after the rebellion failed.

古文：黄初元年，以晔为侍中，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：黄初元年，文帝让刘晔担任侍中，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen made Liu Ye an aide-de-camp and gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：诏问群臣令料刘备当为关羽出报吴不。
现代文：文帝下诏询问朝臣们，让他们估计刘备会不会为关羽出兵吴国以报仇。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict asking the courtiers to estimate whether Liu Bei would take revenge for Guan Yu's dispatch of troops to Wu.

古文：众议咸云： 蜀，小国耳，名将唯羽。
现代文：大家都商议说： 蜀国，只是个小国罢了，知名的将领只有关羽一个。
English: Everyone discussed and said, "Shu is just a small country, with only one famous general, Guan Yu.

古文：羽死军破，国内忧惧，无缘复出。 
现代文：关羽战死，军队也被攻破，蜀国境内忧心恐惧，没有机会在出兵。 
English: Guan Yu was killed in the battle, the army was also defeated, and there was no opportunity to send troops because of the anxiety and fear in Shu.

古文：晔独曰： 蜀虽狭弱，而备之谋欲以威武自强，势必用众以示其有馀。
现代文：只有刘晔说： 蜀国虽然地小，势力又弱，但刘备是想要依靠威势武力自力图强的，一定会动用军队以显示他有多的力量。
English: Only Liu Bei said: Although Shu is a small country and its power is weak, Liu Bei wants to rely on the power of force to make himself strong. He will definitely use the army to show how much power he has.

古文：且关羽与备，义为君臣，恩犹父子；羽死不能为兴军报敌，於终始之分不足。 
现代文：况且关羽和刘备，名义上是君臣，但恩情却犹如父子；关羽战死，刘备却不能为他出兵报仇，这从他们一直以来的情谊上讲，是不对的。 
English: Moreover, Guan Yu and Liu Bei are nominally princes and ministers, but their affection is like that of a father and son; Guan Yu died in battle, but Liu Bei could not avenge him, which is not right from the perspective of their long-standing friendship.

古文：后备果出兵击吴。
现代文：后来刘备果然发兵进攻吴国。
English: Later, Liu Bei sent troops to attack Wu.

古文：吴悉国应之，而遣使称藩。
现代文：吴国发动全国的力量来迎战刘备，并且派遣使者到魏国自称藩属。
English: The State of Wu mobilized the forces of the whole country to fight Liu Bei, and sent emissaries to Wei who claimed to belong to the clan.

古文：朝臣皆贺，独晔曰： 吴绝在江、汉之表，无内臣之心久矣。
现代文：朝臣们都相互庆贺，只有刘晔说： 吴国和我们断绝往来，处在江汉之间的地区，没有称臣的想法已经很久了。
English: The courtiers all congratulated each other, only Liu Wei said: "Wu Guo and we have broken off contacts, we are located in the area between the Han and Jiang dynasties, and it has been a long time since we had the idea of calling ourselves courtiers.

古文：陛下虽齐德有虞，然丑虏之性，未有所感。
现代文：陛下虽然德行能和虞舜比肩，但那些丑虏的本性，还是没有被感化。
English: Although His Majesty's virtue is on a par with that of a gazelle, he has not been influenced by the nature of those ugly creatures.

古文：因难求臣，必难信也。
现代文：因为身处困境而前来称臣，一定难以守信。
English: It must be difficult to keep one's word when one is in a difficult situation and comes to praise one's superior.

古文：彼必外迫内困，然后发此使耳，可因其穷，袭而取之。
现代文：他们一定是因为外有敌军逼迫，国内又困顿，才派来这个使者罢了，可以趁着他们在困境之中，发兵袭击并攻取他们。
English: They must have sent this envoy because they were being persecuted by foreign enemy forces and were in trouble at home, and they could take advantage of their predicament to send troops to attack and capture them.

古文：夫一日纵敌，数世之患，不可不察也。 
现代文：对敌人放纵一天，就会成为好几代人的祸患，不能不考察啊。 
English: If you indulge the enemy for a day, it will become the scourge of several generations. You have to investigate.

古文：备军败退，吴礼敬转废，帝欲兴众伐之，晔以为 彼新得志，上下齐心，而阻带江湖，必难仓卒。 
现代文：刘备军队战败撤退，吴国恭敬的态度也渐渐转变，文帝打算出兵讨伐他们，刘晔认为 他们意愿刚刚得到满足，上下的人都同心协力，但我们被江湖水面阻隔，仓促将一定很难获胜。 
English: Liu Bei's army was defeated and retreated, and Wu Guo's respectful attitude gradually changed. Emperor Wen planned to send troops to fight them. Liu Bei thought that their wishes had just been satisfied. People from all walks of life worked together, but we were blocked by the surface of the river, and it would be difficult to win in a hurry.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：文帝没有听从他的话。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：五年，幸广陵泗口，命荆、扬州诸军并进。
现代文：黄初五年，文帝亲临广陵郡的泗口，下令荆州、扬州各路军队一同前进。
English: In the 5th year of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Wen personally visited the Hukou of Guangling County and ordered the armies of Jingzhou and Yangzhou to advance together.

古文：会群臣，问： 权当自来不？ 
现代文：并召集群臣，询问到： 孙权会亲自前来吗？ 
English: And he called together his ministers and asked: Will Sun Quan come in person?

古文：咸曰： 陛下亲征，权恐怖，必举国而应。
现代文：大臣们都说： 陛下您亲自出征，孙权忧心恐惧，一定会倾尽全国力量来迎战。
English: The ministers all said, "Your Majesty, you personally went to the front, Sun Quan is worried and afraid, and will definitely devote all the national strength to meet the war."

古文：又不敢以大众委之臣下，必自将而来。 
现代文：但又不敢将大军委托给臣下，一定会自己率军前来。 
English: However, he did not dare to entrust a large army to his vassals, so he would certainly lead the army himself.

古文：晔曰： 彼谓陛下欲以万乘之重牵己，而超越江湖者在於别将，必勒兵待事，未有进退也。 
现代文：刘晔说： 他认为陛下会因为天子身份而约束自己，所以率军渡江作战的会是其他的将领，他一定会指挥军队等待事情变化，不会有进退的举动。 
English: Liu Wei said: He thought that His Majesty would restrain himself because of his status as the Son of Heaven, so it would be other generals who would lead the army to cross the river. He would definitely command the army to wait for things to change, and there would be no advance or retreat.

古文：大驾停住积日，权果不至，帝乃旋师。
现代文：文帝在泗口停留的几天，孙权果然没有前来，文帝才率军回去。
English: When Emperor Wen stayed in Hekou for a few days, Sun Quan did not come, so Emperor Wen led the army back.

古文：云： 卿策之是也。
现代文：并说： 您计划的是对的。
English: And he said: What you have planned is right.

古文：当念为吾灭二贼，不可但知其情而已。 
现代文：希望计划怎么样为我消灭吴国和蜀国，不能只了解他们的情况而已。 
English: What's your plan to wipe out the states of Wu and Shu for me? You can't just learn about their situations.

古文：明帝即位，进爵东亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，进封刘晔的爵位为东亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Liu Ye's title was Dongting Hou (東亭侯), and there were three hundred households in the county.

古文：诏曰： 尊严祖考，所以崇孝表行也；追本敬始，所以笃教流化也。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 尊崇先祖父辈，是为了推崇孝道表彰孝行；追溯本源,谨慎言行，是为了坚定地推广教化。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "To venerate one's forefathers and grandfathers is to promote filial piety and commend filial piety; to trace one's origins and be prudent in words and deeds is to firmly promote enlightenment."

古文：是以成汤、文、武，实造商、周，诗、书之义，追尊稷、契，歌颂有娀、姜嫄之事，明盛德之源流，受命所由兴也。
现代文：所以成汤、周武王、周文王，造就了商朝、周朝的繁荣，《诗经》《尚书》的要义，就是追述尊崇稷、契等大臣，歌颂稷的母亲有娀、契的母亲姜嫄的事，表明盛大德行的源头，以及天子承受天命的缘由。
English: Therefore, Cheng Tang, King Zhou Wu, and King Zhou Wen created the prosperity of the Shang and Zhou Dynasties. The essence of the "Shang Shu" of the "Song of Songs" is to recount the respect and reverence for ministers such as Yao and Qi, and to sing the praises of Yao's mother, You Yao, and Qi's mother, Jiang Qi, to show the source of grand virtue and the reason why the Son of Heaven bears the fate of Heaven.

古文：自我魏室之承天序，既发迹於高皇、太皇帝，而功隆于武皇、文皇帝。
现代文：自从我魏氏承受上天安排的秩序以来，在高皇、太皇帝时期兴起，功业兴盛于武皇帝、文皇帝时期。
English: Since inheriting the order arranged by Heaven, the Wei clan has risen during the reigns of Emperor Gao and Emperor Taizong, and flourished during the reigns of Emperors Wu and Wen.

古文：至于高皇之父处士君，潜脩德让，行动神明，斯乃乾坤所福飨，光灵所从来也。
现代文：至于高皇的父亲处士君，潜心修炼德行和谦让的品德，言行举止英明神武，这是天地神明赐予的福分，光灵的由来。
English: As for Emperor Gao's father, Guanzhijun, he devoted himself to cultivating virtue and the virtue of humility, and his words and deeds were wise and godly. This is the blessing given by the gods of heaven and earth, and the origin of the light spirit.

古文：而精神幽远，号称罔记，非所谓崇孝重本也。
现代文：但他的精神已经幽深远去，没有能记录下来的称号，这不是所说的推崇孝道重视本源啊。
English: But his spirit has already gone far away, there is no title that can be recorded, this is not the so-called promotion of filial piety and respect for the source.

古文：其令公卿已下，会议号谥。 
现代文：现在下令，众位王公大臣，共同商议追赠谥号。 
English: I now give the order, Your Royal Highnesses and Ministers, to jointly discuss the posthumous conferral of the imperial title.

古文：晔议曰： 圣帝孝孙之欲褒崇先祖，诚无量已。
现代文：刘晔商议说： 圣明皇帝的孝顺子孙想要褒扬崇敬祖辈，实在是不可估量的好事。
English: Liu Ye deliberated and said: It is an immeasurable good thing that the filial children of Emperor Shengming want to praise and venerate their ancestors.

古文：然亲疏之数，远近之降，盖有礼纪，所以割断私情，克成公法，为万世式也。
现代文：但亲疏的礼数，远近的原则，都有礼法纲纪，要依靠它们隔断私心，形成公法，成为后世万代遵循的律例。
English: However, the number of proximate and remote rites, and the principles of proximity and remoteness are all part of the etiquette system. It is necessary to rely on them to cut off selfishness, form a public law, and become a law for future generations to follow.

古文：周王所以上祖后稷者，以其佐唐有功，名在祀典故也。
现代文：周王之所以追述后稷，是因为他辅佐唐尧有功绩，名字被记载在礼仪典籍上的缘故。
English: The reason why King Zhou mentioned Hou Yi is because he assisted Tang Yi with great achievements and his name was recorded in the etiquette classics.

古文：至於汉氏之初，追谥之义，不过其父。
现代文：至于汉室刚兴盛的时候，追谥先祖，也只是到了他父亲那一辈。
English: As for Hanshitsu, when he was just starting to prosper, he only traced his ancestors back to his father's generation.

古文：上比周室，则大魏发迹自高皇始；下论汉氏，则追谥之礼不及其祖。
现代文：往上和周王室相比，那大魏是从高皇帝开始奠定基业的；往下说到汉室，那些追谥的礼仪一没有涉及到祖父。
English: Compared with the Zhou royal family, the Wei dynasty started from Emperor Gao to lay the foundation; as far as the Han family is concerned, the etiquette of chasing the dragonfly did not involve the grandfather.

古文：此诚往代之成法，当今之明义也。
现代文：这实在是过去朝代既定的法条，是现在的明确的指示啊。
English: This is really the established law of the past dynasties, and it is a clear instruction for the present.

古文：陛下孝思中发，诚无已已，然君举必书，所以慎於礼制也。
现代文：陛下您的孝心从内心生发，确实没有限制，但您的援引的事例都出自经书，可见您对礼法制度使很慎重的。
English: Your Majesty, your filial piety springs from your heart and is truly unlimited, but the examples you cite are all from the scriptures, which shows that you are very careful about the etiquette system.

古文：以为追尊之义，宜齐高皇而已。 
现代文：我认为追谥加尊的要义，应该跟高皇帝那一代一样。 
English: In my opinion, the essence of the pursuit of Gong Jia Zun should be the same as that of Emperor Gao's generation.

古文：尚书卫臻与晔议同，事遂施行。
现代文：尚书卫臻和刘晔的看法一样，这件事就按照他们的意见实施。
English: Shangshu Weizhen shared the same view as Liu Tong, and the matter was implemented in accordance with their opinions.

古文：辽东太守公孙渊夺叔父位，擅自立，遣使表状。
现代文：辽东太守公孙渊夺取的叔父公孙恭的位置，擅自自立为王，并派使者上表陈述。
English: Liaodong Daju Gongsun Yuan usurped the position of his uncle Gongsun Qiong, declared himself king without authorization, and sent an envoy to make a report.

古文：晔以为公孙氏汉时所用，遂世官相承，水则由海，陆则阻山，故胡夷绝远难制，而世权日久。
现代文：刘晔认为公孙氏是在汉室是被任用的，所以官职能世代沿袭，由于山势、江水、大海的阻隔，所以外族人在偏远的地方难以控制，而他们的权位世代相承已经很久了。
English: Liu Wei believed that the Gongsun clan was appointed in the Han Dynasty, so the official functions were passed down from generation to generation. Due to the barrier of mountains, rivers and the sea, it is difficult for foreigners to control in remote places, and their power has been inherited from generation to generation for a long time.

古文：今若不诛，后必生患。
现代文：现在如果不诛除，以后一定会生出祸患。
English: If it is not eradicated now, it will surely cause trouble in the future.

古文：若怀贰阻兵，然后致诛，於事为难。
现代文：如果他们怀有二心，又倚仗地势，然后要诛杀他们，就很难成功了。
English: If they are ambivalent, and rely on the situation, and then want to fight them, it is difficult to succeed.

古文：不如因其新立，有党有仇，先其不意，以兵临之，开设赏募，可不劳师而定也。
现代文：不如趁着他刚刚上位，有自己的党羽也有仇人，在他没有防备的情况下先出兵进逼，再开出条件设立悬赏招募，那就可以不用劳师动众也能平定他了。
English: It would be better to take advantage of the fact that he has just risen to the top, has his own party and enemies, and in a situation where he is unprepared, first send troops to force him, and then set up conditions for reward recruitment. Then you can pacify him without having to motivate the crowd.

古文：后渊竟反。
现代文：后来公孙渊果然反叛了。
English: Later, Gongsun Yuan did indeed rebel.

古文：晔在朝，略不交接时人。
现代文：刘晔在朝时，从不和当时的士人交往。
English: During his time in the imperial court, Liu Bei never mingled with the aristocrats of the time.

古文：或问其故，晔答曰： 魏室即阼尚新，智者知命，俗或未咸。
现代文：有人问他是什么缘故，刘晔回答说： 魏氏登基时间还不长，智慧的人明白天命，但世俗的人还不是全都明白。
English: Someone asked him what the reason was, and Liu Ye replied: The Wei Dynasty has not been on the throne for long. Wise people understand the destiny of heaven, but worldly people still do not fully understand.

古文：仆在汉为支叶，於魏备腹心，寡偶少徒，於宜未失也。 
现代文：我在汉朝时是皇族支系，在魏朝时是重要的心腹大臣，少一些同伴门客，应该不会有什么过失。 
English: When I was in the Han Dynasty, I was a branch of the imperial family, and when I was in the Wei Dynasty, I was an important confidant minister. If I had fewer companions and customers, I would not have any mistakes.

古文：太和六年，以疾拜太中大夫。
现代文：太和六年，刘晔因为生病被任命为太中大夫。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Liu Ye was appointed as the doctor of the Empress Dowager Cixi due to his illness.

古文：有间，为大鸿胪，在位二年逊位，复为太中大夫，薨。
现代文：病情缓和期间，担任大鸿胪，在官位上两年就辞官，又担任太中大夫，后来就去世了。
English: During the period of remission of his illness, he served as the Grand Prince, resigned from his post two years after taking office, and served as the First Vice-Minister of Health, and later passed away.

古文：谥曰景侯。
现代文：谥号为景侯。
English: His posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：子宇嗣。
现代文：他的儿子刘宇承袭他的爵位。
English: His son Liu Yu succeeded to his title.

古文：少子陶，亦高才而薄行，官至平原太守。
现代文：刘晔的小儿子刘陶，也是有很高的才能，但德行浅薄，做官到平原太守。
English: Liu Tao, the youngest son of Liu Bei, was also highly talented, but his virtue was shallow, and he rose to the position of the governor of the plain.

古文：蒋济字子通，楚国平阿人也。
现代文：蒋济字子通，楚国平阿县人。
English: Jiang Jizi Zi Tong, from Ping'a County, Chu Province.

古文：仕郡计吏、州别驾。
现代文：曾担任过九州郡的计吏、扬州别驾。
English: He once served as a tax collector for Kyushu County, and Yangzhou Beidou.

古文：建安十三年，孙权率众围合肥。
现代文：建安十三年，孙权率军围攻合肥。
English: In the 13th year of Jianan, Sun Quan led an army to besiege Hefei.

古文：时大军征荆州，遇疾疫，唯遣将军张喜单将千骑，过领汝南兵以解围，颇复疾疫。
现代文：当时太祖的军队在征讨荆州，遇上瘟疫，只能派将军张喜自己率领一千骑兵，带领汝南的士兵前去结尾，但也得了疫病。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather's army was in the process of conquering Jingzhou. When they encountered the plague, they could only send General Zhang Xi himself to lead a thousand cavalry and lead the soldiers from the south of the Ryukyus to the end, but he also got the plague.

古文：济乃密白刺史伪得喜书，云步骑四万已到雩娄，遣主簿迎喜。
现代文：蒋济就暗中告诉刺史说假装得到了张喜的书信，说已经有四万步兵骑兵到了雩娄，派主簿前去迎接张喜。
English: Jiang Ji secretly told Zhishi that he pretended to have received Zhang Xi's letter, saying that forty thousand infantry and cavalry had already arrived in Handan, and sent the master book to meet Zhang Xi.

古文：三部使赍书语城中守将，一部得入城，二部为贼所得。
现代文：三名使者带着信函告诉城中驻守的将领说，一件已经传入城中，两件被敌军得到了。
English: Three messengers with letters told the generals stationed in the city that one had been brought into the city and two had been obtained by the enemy.

古文：权信之，遽烧围走，城用得全。
现代文：孙权相信了这些话，匆忙地烧毁围城的工事然后撤退了，合肥城因此得以保全。
English: Sun Quan believed these words, hastily burned down the siege works and then withdrew, so Hefei City was preserved.

古文：明年使於谯，太祖问济曰： 昔孤与袁本初对官渡，徙燕、白马民，民不得走，贼亦不敢钞。
现代文：第二年蒋济到谯县出使，太祖问蒋济说： 过去我和袁本初在官渡对峙，将燕州、白马两地的百姓迁走，无法迁走的百姓，贼军也不敢劫掠。
English: In the second year, Jiang Jie sent an envoy to Lixian County, and the great-grandfather asked Jiang Jie: In the past, I and Yuan Benchu confronted each other in Guandu, and moved the people of Yanzhou and Baima. For the people who could not move, the bandits did not dare to loot.

古文：今欲徙淮南民，何如？ 
现代文：现在想要将淮南地区的百姓迁走，怎么样呢？ 
English: Now you want to relocate the people in the Huainan region, how about that?

古文：济对曰： 是时兵弱贼强，不徙必失之。
现代文：蒋济回答说： 那时候我军兵力较弱，敌军强盛，不将百姓迁走就一定会失去他们。
English: Jiang Ji replied: At that time, our army was weak and the enemy's army was strong. If we did not move the people, we would certainly lose them.

古文：自破袁绍，北拔柳城，南向江、汉，荆州交臂，威震天下，民无他志。
现代文：自从攻破袁绍，往北攻占柳城，往南将势力延伸到江汉地区，几乎到了荆州地区，声威震动天下，百姓没有其他的想法。
English: Since breaking through Yuan Shao, conquering Liucheng to the north, and extending its influence to the Jianghan region to the south, and almost to the Jingzhou region, its prestige has shaken the world, and the people have no other idea.

古文：然百姓怀土，实不乐徙，惧必不安。 
现代文：但百信都眷恋故土，确实是不乐意迁移，担心他们会无法安定。 
English: However, all of them are attached to their homeland, and they are indeed reluctant to relocate, fearing that they will not be able to remain stable.

古文：太祖不从，而江、淮间十馀万众，皆惊走吴。
现代文：太祖没有听从他的话，导致江淮之间十多万的百姓都在惊慌中逃奔到吴国。
English: The great-grandfather did not listen to his words, resulting in more than a hundred thousand people fleeing to Wuzhong in panic.

古文：后济使诣邺，太祖迎见大笑曰： 本但欲使避贼，乃更驱尽之。 
现代文：后来蒋济出使到邺城，太祖当面召见他并大笑说： 本来只是想让他们能避开贼军，却反而将他们都驱赶走了。 
English: Later, when Jiang Jie sent an envoy to Lucheng, the great-grandfather summoned him in person and laughed loudly, saying, "Originally, I just wanted them to be able to avoid the bandits, but instead, I drove them away."

古文：拜济丹阳太守。
现代文：任命蒋济为丹阳太守。
English: Jiang Jie was appointed Danyang governor.

古文：大军南征还，以温恢为扬州刺史，济为别驾。
现代文：太祖大军南征返回，任命温恢为扬州刺史，蒋济为别驾。
English: When the great-grandfather's army returned from the Southern Expedition, they appointed Wen Weiwei as Yangzhou's chief historian, and Jiang Ji as his deputy.

古文：令曰： 季子为臣，吴宜有君。
现代文：太祖下令说： 过去季子做大臣的时候，吴国就应该有君主了。
English: The great-grandfather ordered, "When Ji Zi was minister in the past, Wu should have had a monarch.

古文：今君还州，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：现在您回到扬州，我就没有什么忧虑了。 
English: Now that you are back in Yangzhou, I have nothing to worry about.

古文：民有诬告济为谋叛主率者，太祖闻之，指前令与左将军于禁、沛相封仁等曰： 蒋济宁有此事！
现代文：有百姓诬告蒋济是密谋反叛的主要带领人，太祖听说后，指着之前的诏令对左将军于禁、沛相封仁等人说： 蒋济怎么会做这样的事！
English: Some people falsely accused Jiang Jie of being the main leader of the conspiracy to rebel. After hearing this, the great-grandfather pointed to the previous imperial edict and said to General Zuo Yu Kan, General Pei Xiang Fenren and others: "How could Jiang Jie do such a thing!

古文：有此事，吾为不知人也。
现代文：如果真有这样的事，就是我不能识人了。
English: If there is such a thing, then I can't recognize people.

古文：此必愚民乐乱，妄引之耳。 
现代文：这一定是愚陋的人想要将事情弄乱，就胡乱引导罢了。 
English: This must be the result of stupid people trying to make a mess of things and leading people astray.

古文：促理出之。
现代文：就督促审理此事的官员将事情驳回。
English: He urged the officials hearing the case to dismiss it.

古文：辟为丞相主簿西曹属。
现代文：太祖任命蒋济为丞相主簿西曹属。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Jiang Jie as the chief secretary of the Western Cao Dynasty.

古文：令曰： 舜举皋陶，不仁者远；臧否得中，望于贤属矣。 
现代文：并诏令说： 虞舜推举皋陶，不仁德的人就远离了；对人褒贬评价适宜公正，就指望您这位贤官了。 
English: And the imperial edict said: "If Gu Yao recommends and elevates Gu Tao, then those who are not benevolent will stay away; if it is appropriate and fair to praise and criticize people, then we can count on you, this wise official."

古文：关羽围樊、襄阳。
现代文：关羽围攻樊城、襄阳。
English: Guan Yu besieged Lucheng and Yangyang.

古文：太祖以汉帝在许，近贼，欲徙都。
现代文：太祖因为汉献帝这时在许县，距离敌军很近，想要迁都。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to move the capital because Han Xian Di was at that time in Xu County, very close to the enemy army.

古文：司马宣王及济说太祖曰： 于禁等为水所没，非战攻之失，於国家大计未足有损。
现代文：司马宣王和蒋济劝说太祖： 于禁等人被水淹没，不是进攻作战的过失，对国家大事的谋划来说没有什么损害。
English: Sima Xuanwang and Jiang Ji persuaded the great-grandfather: the drowning of Yu Han and others was not a mistake of offensive operations, and there was no damage to the planning of national events.

古文：刘备、孙权，外亲内疏，关羽得志，权必不愿也。
现代文：刘备、孙权两人表面上亲近实际上很疏远，关羽取得胜利，孙权一定是不乐意的。
English: On the surface, Liu Bei and Sun Quan are close to each other, but in reality, they are far apart. If Guan Yu wins, Sun Quan will not be happy.

古文：可遣人劝蹑其后，许割江南以封权，则樊围自解。 
现代文：可以派人常跟在孙权身边劝说，答应将江南之地划分出来封赏给孙权，那樊城的困局自然就能解除了。 
English: He could have sent someone to often accompany Sun Quan to persuade him, and promised to divide the land south of the Yangtze River and award it to Sun Quan, and the predicament of Nancheng would naturally be resolved.

古文：太祖如其言。
现代文：太祖按照他们所说实行。
English: The great-grandfather did as they said.

古文：权闻之，即引兵西袭公安、江陵。
现代文：孙权得知消息后，立即率军往西袭击公安、江陵。
English: After Sun Quan learned the news, he immediately led his army to the west to attack the public security and Gangneung.

古文：羽遂见禽。
现代文：关羽因此被抓获。
English: As a result, Guan Yu was arrested.

古文：文帝即王位，转为相国长史。
现代文：文帝继位为魏王，将蒋济调任为相国长史。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne as the king of Wei, and appointed Jiang Jie as the minister of state.

古文：及践阼，出为东中郎将。
现代文：等到文帝登基，出京担任山东中郎将。
English: He waited until Emperor Wen ascended to the throne and left for Beijing to serve as the Shandong Vice Admiral.

古文：济请留，诏曰： 高祖歌曰 安得猛士守四方 ！
现代文：蒋济请求留在京都，文帝诏令说： 汉高祖曾高歌说 如何能得到猛士镇守四方 ！
English: Jiang Ji requested to stay in Kyoto, and Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: Han Gao's ancestor once sang a song about how to get warriors to defend the four directions!

古文：天下未宁，要须良臣以镇边境。
现代文：现在天下还没有完全平定，一定需要好的大臣来镇守边境。
English: Now that the country has not been completely pacified, we definitely need a good minister to guard the border.

古文：如其无事，乃还鸣玉，未为后也。 
现代文：如果那边没有大事发生，再归还佩玉，也是不晚的。 
English: If nothing major happens over there, it's not too late to return the jade.

古文：济上万机论，帝善之。
现代文：蒋济呈上《万机论》文帝认为很好。
English: Jiang Jie presented "The Theory of Everything" to Emperor Wen, who thought it was very good.

古文：入为散骑常侍。
现代文：蒋济又入京担任散骑常侍。
English: He was called up to be a samurai.

古文：时有诏，诏征南将军夏侯尚曰： 卿腹心重将，特当任使。
现代文：当时文帝有诏书，诏令征南将军夏侯尚说： 您是有谋略智慧的重要将领，所以特地让您担任这个职位。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen had an imperial edict, which ordered General Xia Hushan, the general of the Southern Expedition, to say: You are an important general with strategic wisdom, so I specially let you hold this position.

古文：恩施足死，惠爱可怀。
现代文：这样施加的恩德足以让你献出生命，这样仁爱的恩惠足以让你铭记在心。
English: The bounty thus bestowed is enough to make you give up your life, the bounty of such kindness is enough to make you remember.

古文：作威作福，杀人活人。 
现代文：从此以后你就可以凭借权位滥用权力，可以杀人，也能让人保全性命。 
English: From now on, you can abuse power by virtue of your position, you can kill people, and you can let people save their lives.

古文：尚以示济。
现代文：夏侯尚将诏书给蒋济看。
English: Xia Hou Shang showed the imperial edict to Jiang Jie.

古文：济既至，帝问曰； 卿所闻见天下风教何如？ 济对曰： 未有他善，但见亡国之语耳。 
现代文：蒋济回到京城，文帝问他说： 您看到的天下间的风俗教化是怎么样的呢？ 蒋济回答说： 没有好的内容，只听见的将要亡国的言论而已。 
English: When Jiang Jie returned to Beijing, Emperor Wen asked him, "What do you think of the world's culture and civilization?" Jiang Jie replied, "There is no good content, only the rhetoric that will destroy the country."

古文：帝忿然作色而问其故，济具以答，因曰： 夫 作威作福 ，书之明诫。 天子无戏言 ，古人所慎。
现代文：文帝生气地变了脸色，问他是什么原因，蒋济都详细地回答，然后说：  作威作福 这样的话，是《尚书》中明确告诫的。 天子无戏言 ，也是古人很看重的。
English: Emperor Wen frowned angrily and asked him what the reason was, Jiang Jidu answered in detail, and then said: To be arrogant is to be blessed. Such words are clearly admonished in the "Shang Shu." The Son of Heaven has nothing to say, and it is also very important to the ancients.

古文：惟陛下察之！ 
现代文：希望陛下好好考虑这件事！ 
English: I hope His Majesty will give this matter serious consideration!

古文：於是帝意解，遣追取前诏。
现代文：文帝的怒气就渐渐消解了，派人去追回之前给夏侯尚的诏书。
English: Emperor Wen's anger gradually dissipated, and he sent someone to recover the imperial edict that had been given to Xia Hou Shang.

古文：黄初三年，与大司马曹仁征吴，济别袭羡谿。
现代文：黄初三年，蒋济与大司马曹仁征讨吴国，蒋济另外率队攻打羡谿。
English: In the first three years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Jiang Jie and his general, Ma Cao Ren, invaded the State of Wu, and Jiang Jie led another team to invade Enshi.

古文：仁欲攻濡须洲中，济曰： 贼据西岸，列船上流，而兵入洲中，是为自内地狱，危亡之道也。 
现代文：曹仁想要进攻濡须洲中，蒋济说： 贼局据守水的西边，将战船在上游排列，如果我军进入洲中，是将自己陷入地狱中，是相当危险的会灭亡的路啊。 
English: When Cao Ren wanted to attack Neusuzhong, Jiang Ji said: "The Thieves' Bureau is located on the west side of the water defense, and the warships are arranged upstream. If our army enters Neusuzhong, it will plunge itself into hell. It is a very dangerous road that will perish."

古文：仁不从，果败。
现代文：曹仁没有听他的话，果然大败。
English: Cao Ren did not listen to his words and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：仁薨，复以济为东中郎将，代领其兵。
现代文：曹仁去世，朝廷又任命蒋济为山东中郎将，代替曹仁统率军队。
English: After Cao Ren's death, the imperial court appointed Jiang Ji as Shandong Vice Admiral to lead the army in Cao Ren's stead.

古文：诏曰： 卿兼资文武，志节慷慨，常有超越江湖吞吴会之志，故复授将率之任。 
现代文：文帝下诏说： 您兼有文学和武事的才能，志向节操有慷慨轩昂，时常有跨越江湖吞并吴国都城的志向，所以再次授予您统率部队的重任。 
English: Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict saying: You have both literary and martial arts talents, you have a strong will to fight, and you often have the ambition to annex the capital city of Wu across the river and lake, so I will once again assign you the important task of leading the troops.

古文：顷之，徵为尚书。
现代文：不久，又征召蒋济为尚书。
English: Not long after, Jiang Ji was also called up to serve as Shangshu.

古文：车驾幸广陵，济表水道难通，又上三州论以讽帝。
现代文：文帝的车驾亲临广陵，蒋济上奏表表示水路难以畅通，又呈上《三州论》来讽谏文帝。
English: Emperor Wen's chauffeur came to Guangling in person, and Jiang Jie made a report saying that the waterway was difficult to clear, and also presented the "Three-State Theory" to ridicule Emperor Wen.

古文：帝不从，於是战船数千皆滞不得行。
现代文：文帝都没有听从，于是数千艘战船都被阻滞不能行进。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen, and thousands of warships were blocked from sailing.

古文：议者欲就留兵屯田，济以为东近湖，北临淮，若水盛时，贼易为寇，不可安屯。
现代文：商议的人打算将士兵留下屯田，蒋济认为此处东面靠近湖水，北面靠近淮河，如果到江水上涨的时候，最近很容易前来进犯，不能驻扎屯田。
English: The negotiators planned to leave the soldiers in Tonden. Jiang Jie thought that this place was close to the lake in the east and close to the Huaihe River in the north. If the river rose, it would be easy to come and attack recently, and they could not be stationed in Tonden.

古文：帝从之，车驾即发。
现代文：文帝听从了他的建议，车驾立即出发。
English: Emperor Wen heeded his advice and set off immediately.

古文：还到精湖，水稍尽，尽留船付济。
现代文：部队回到精湖的时候，水位渐渐下降，文帝将船只都交付给蒋济。
English: When the troops returned to Jinghu Lake, the water level gradually decreased, and Emperor Wen handed over the ships to Jiang Ji.

古文：船本历適数百里中，济更凿地作四五道，蹴船令聚；豫作土豚遏断湖水，皆引后船，一时开遏入淮中。
现代文：船只本来胡乱排列在数百里的水道中，蒋济又凿地开出四五条通道，将船只聚集到一起；预先制作了土墩来阻断湖水，将水都引导船只后方，然后将土墩掘开，让船只进入淮河中。
English: The ships were originally randomly arranged in hundreds of miles of waterways, but Jiang Ji also carved out four or five channels to gather the ships together; a mound was made in advance to block the lake water and guide the water to the rear of the ships, and then the mound was excavated to let the ships enter the Huai River.

古文：帝还洛阳，谓济曰： 事不可不晓。
现代文：文帝回到洛阳，对蒋济说： 这件事不能不让你知道。
English: Wen Di returned to Luoyang and said to Jiang Ji: "I can't let you know about this.

古文：吾前决谓分半烧船于山阳池中，卿於后致之，略与吾俱至谯。
现代文：我之前决定分出一半船只，将它们在山阳池中烧毁，后来您努力做这件事，结果和我一起来到谯县。
English: I had previously decided to separate half of the ships and burn them in the mountain pond, and then you tried to do this, and as a result, you came to Zhuoxian with me.

古文：又每得所陈，实入吾意。
现代文：还有每次看到您的陈述内容，实在都符合我的想法。
English: And every time I see your statements, they really resonate with me.

古文：自今讨贼计画，善思论之。 
现代文：从现在开始讨伐敌军的计谋，请您好好思考并商议。 
English: From now on, please think about and discuss the strategy of fighting against the enemy.

古文：明帝即位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，赐封蒋济的爵位为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wei Ming ascended to the throne, and gave Tsuchizake the title of Guanai Hou.

古文：大司马曹休帅军向皖，济表以为 深入虏地，与权精兵对，而朱然等在上流，乘休后，臣未见其利也。 
现代文：大司马曹休率军先宛城进发，蒋济上表认为 大军深入敌军的地界，和孙权的精锐士兵正面迎战，而朱然等人正在上游，在曹休的后方，臣没有看到这样做有什么益处。 
English: Major-General Ma Cao Xiu led the army to advance to Wancheng first. Jiang Jizhe thought that the large army had penetrated into the enemy's territory and met Sun Quan's elite soldiers head-on, while Zhu Ran and others were upstream. In Cao Xiu's rear, the minister did not see any benefit in doing so.

古文：军至皖，吴出兵安陆，济又上疏曰： 今贼示形於西，必欲并兵图东，宜急诏诸军往救之。 
现代文：大军行进到皖城，吴国派出军队到安陆，蒋济又上疏说： 现在敌军在西面显示他们的情况，一定是想要合军图谋东面的地区，应该迅速诏令各路军队前往援救。 
English: The large army marched to Shicheng, and the State of Wu sent troops to Anlu. Jiang Jie also went on to say: Now that the enemy army is showing their situation in the west, they must want to join forces to plot in the eastern region, and they should quickly order all the armies to go to the rescue.

古文：会休军已败，尽弃器仗辎重退还。
现代文：恰好曹休军队战败，将各种武器和军用物资全都丢弃然后后退返回。
English: Just as Cao Xiu's army was defeated, he abandoned all kinds of weapons and military supplies and then retreated back.

古文：吴欲塞夹石，遇救兵至，是以官军得不没。
现代文：吴军打算在夹石阻击曹军，遇上救援曹军的部队来到，所以曹军的将领士兵才得以没有全军覆没。
English: The Wu army planned to block Cao's army at Heishi, but Cao's troops came to the rescue, so Cao's generals and soldiers were able to defeat the whole army.

古文：迁为中护军。
现代文：蒋济被提升为中护军。
English: Jiang Ji was promoted to the rank of middle guard.

古文：时中书监、令号为专任，济上疏曰： 大臣太重者国危，左右太亲者身蔽，古之至戒也。
现代文：当时中书监、中书令两个官职名义上有专门的职责，蒋济上疏说： 大臣们权位太重，就会导致国家的危难，君主身边的侍从和君王太过亲近，就会导致君王闭塞视听，这是自古以来的告诫。
English: At that time, the two official positions of the Central Book Supervisor and the Central Book Custodian had special responsibilities. Jiang Jishangsu said: Ministers with too much power will lead to the danger of the country, and the attendants around the monarch are too close to the monarch, which will lead to the monarch's obstruction of audio-visual. This has been a warning since ancient times.

古文：往者大臣秉事，外内扇动。
现代文：过去大臣们主管事务，导致内外的人互相扇动犯下过失。
English: In the past, ministers were in charge of affairs, leading to people inside and outside instigating each other to commit wrongdoings.

古文：陛下卓然自览万机，莫不祗肃。
现代文：陛下您深有远见，自己处理各种事务，没有人不恭谨严肃的。
English: Your Majesty, you have the foresight to handle all kinds of affairs on your own. No one is not respectful and serious.

古文：夫大臣非不忠也，然威权在下，则众心慢上，势之常也。
现代文：大臣不是不忠心，但如果威势和权力在下级的人手上，那众人心中就会轻视上级，这是正常的情况。
English: The minister is not disloyal, but if the power and authority are in the hands of the subordinates, then the people will despise the superiors in their hearts, which is a normal situation.

古文：陛下既已察之於大臣，愿无忘於左右。
现代文：陛下既然已经在大臣的这些事上有所发觉，希望不要忘记对待身边侍从的方法。
English: Your Majesty, now that you have discovered these things about your ministers, I hope that you will not forget how to treat the attendants around you.

古文：左右忠正远虑，未必贤於大臣，至於便辟取合，或能工之。
现代文：身边的侍从在忠诚正直深有远虑方面，不一定能比大臣贤能，至于逢迎谄媚结党营私，也许他们会擅长。
English: The attendants around him may not necessarily be more capable than the minister in terms of loyalty, honesty and foresight, but they may be good at flattering and making friends.

古文：今外所言，辄云中书，虽使恭慎不敢外交，但有此名，犹惑世俗。
现代文：现在外面的人言谈，动不动就说到中书，虽然你让他们恭敬谨慎，他们不敢结交外面的人物，但是只要有了这样的名声，依然能迷惑世俗的人。
English: Nowadays, when people from the outside talk, they always talk about Zhongshu. Although you ask them to be respectful and cautious, they dare not make friends with people from the outside, but as long as they have such a reputation, they can still confuse worldly people.

古文：况实握事要，日在目前，傥因疲倦之间有所割制，众臣见其能推移於事，即亦因时而向之。
现代文：更何况这些人实际上掌握重要的权力，每天都出现在眼前，如果陛下因为疲惫倦怠的间隙让他们有所决断，朝臣们发现他们能推动改变事情的发展，也会趁着实际倾向他们。
English: Moreover, these people actually hold important power, they appear in front of us every day, and if His Majesty lets them make a decision because of the gap of exhaustion, the courtiers will find that they can promote the development of changing things, and will take advantage of the actual tendency to them.

古文：一有此端，因当内设自完，以此众语，私招所交，为之内援。
现代文：一旦出现了这样了开头，接下来就应该让他们内部建设自我完善，用这些众人的言论私自招揽他们所结交的人作为他们的内援。
English: Once there is such a beginning, the next step should be to let them improve their internal construction and use these people's comments to solicit their friends as their internal support.

古文：若此，臧否毁誉，必有所兴，功负赏罚，必有所易；直道而上者或壅，曲附左右者反达。
现代文：如果真是这样，褒贬评价损毁名誉，一定会兴盛，功劳过失的奖赏惩罚一定会有所改变；那些通过正常渠道进谏的人可能会被阻挡，那些阿谀依附左右侍从的人反而能顺利到达。
English: If this is the case, praise, criticism, and damage to reputation will surely flourish, and the reward and punishment of merits and faults will surely change; those who enter the palace through normal channels may be blocked, and those who are attached to the left and right attendants will be able to arrive smoothly.

古文：因微而入，缘形而出，意所狎信，不复猜觉。
现代文：他们跟随在左右，出入都不离开，陛下心中亲近信赖他们，不会再有猜忌察觉。
English: They will follow you around, they will not leave your side when you go out and come in. Your Majesty will be close to them and trust them, and there will be no more suspicion.

古文：此宜圣智所当早闻，外以经意，则形际自见。
现代文：这应该是圣明的君主应该早日得知的，注意外面发生的事，那他们的言行举止自然就会显露出来了。
English: This should be something that the holy emperors should learn early on, pay attention to what is going on outside, and then their words and actions will naturally come to light.

古文：或恐朝臣畏言不合而受左右之怨，莫適以闻。
现代文：也许是朝臣们担心因为言语不合而招致您身边侍从的怨恨，所以没有人将这些情况告诉您。
English: Perhaps courtiers did not tell you these things for fear of incurring the wrath of those around you because of a slip of the tongue.

古文：臣窃亮陛下潜神默思，公听并观，若事有未尽於理而物有未周於用，将改曲易调，远与黄、唐角功，近昭武、文之迹，岂近习而已哉！
现代文：臣私下相信陛下一定能静下心好好思考，公正地听取各方面的意见，如果发现有事情不合于常理，而事物没有完全发挥作用，就应改变原有的策略或做法，往远说可以和黄帝、唐尧比较功绩；在近处说，也可以彰显武帝、文帝的事迹，怎么会是眼前的情况而已呢！
English: Privately, the minister believes that His Majesty must be able to calm down and think well, and listen to opinions from all sides fairly. If it is found that something does not conform to common sense, and things do not fully function, it should change the original strategy or approach. In the future, it can be compared with the exploits of the Yellow Emperor and Tang Dynasty; in the near future, it can also highlight the deeds of Emperor Wu and Emperor Wen. How can it be just the current situation!

古文：然人君犹不可悉天下事以適己明，当有所付。
现代文：但作为君主，依然不能完全洞悉天下间的事以符合自己的明智，应该有所托付。
English: However, as a monarch, he still cannot fully understand the affairs of the world to suit his own wisdom, and should be entrusted with something.

古文：三官任一臣，非周公旦之忠，又非管夷吾之公，则有弄机败官之弊。
现代文：一个大臣担任三个官职，不是周公旦的忠诚，也不是管夷吾那样的公正，就会出现投机取巧败坏风气的弊端。
English: A minister holding three official positions is not loyal like Zhou Gongdan, nor is it fair like Guan Yiwu. There will be the drawback of opportunism.

古文：当今柱石之士虽少，至于行称一州，智效一官，忠信竭命，各奉其职，可并驱策，不使圣明之朝有专吏之名也。 
现代文：现在朝廷上的栋梁之才虽然比较少，但至于品行符合一州的长官，智谋足以胜任一个官职的，忠诚守信竭尽全力，各自遵循职责的人，还是有很多可以任用派遣的，也不会让朝廷有专门任用官员的声名。 
English: Although there are relatively few pillars of talent in the imperial court, there are still many people who can be appointed and dispatched, as long as their conduct is consistent with that of a prefect of a prefecture, their wisdom is sufficient to be competent for an official post, they are loyal and trustworthy, they do their best, and they each follow their duties. They will not let the imperial court have the reputation of specially appointed officials.

古文：诏曰： 夫骨鲠之臣，人主之所仗也。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 刚正忠直的官员，是君王所倚仗的。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "The king relies on officials who are upright and loyal."

古文：济才兼文武，服勤尽节，每军国大事，辄有奏议，忠诚奋发，吾甚壮之。 
现代文：蒋济文武双全，办事勤勉，竭尽忠诚，每次国家有重大事情，都会有上奏议论，忠诚正直，奋发向上，我很看重他。 
English: Jiang Ji is both literate and military, diligent in his work, loyal to the best of his ability. Every time there is a major event in the country, there will be a report and discussion. He is loyal and honest, and strives to move forward. I value him very much.

古文：就迁为护军将军，加散骑常侍
现代文：就提升蒋济为护军将军，加官散骑常侍。
English: He promoted Jiang Jie to the position of general of the escorting army, and promoted him to the position of horseback riding attendant.

古文：景初中，外勤征役，内务宫室，怨旷者多，而年谷饥俭。
现代文：景初年间，魏朝对外频繁征战，增加兵役，对内大力修建宫殿，怨恨的人很多，又遇上粮食歉收发生饥荒。
English: In the early years of the Qing Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty frequently went to war abroad, increased military service, and vigorously built palaces at home. There were many resentful people, and there was a grain harvest failure and famine.

古文：济上疏曰： 陛下方当恢崇前绪，光济遗业，诚未得高枕而治也。
现代文：蒋济上疏说： 陛下现在应该恢复推崇前代的事业，扩展广大祖先的遗业，实在还没有到可以无忧无虑治理国家的时候。
English: Jiang Jishangsu said: Your Majesty should now resume the cause of revering the previous generation and expand the legacy of your ancestors. It is not yet time to govern the country without worries.

古文：今虽有十二州，至于民数，不过汉时一大郡。
现代文：现在国家虽然有十二个州郡，至于百姓的人数，却比不上汉代时一个大郡的数量。
English: Although the country now has twelve states and counties, the number of people is less than that of a large county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：二贼未诛，宿兵边陲，且耕且战，怨旷积年。
现代文：吴国、蜀国两个敌人还没有诛除，士兵在边疆地区驻守，一边耕作一边作战，心中的怨恨已经积累了很多年。
English: The two enemies of Wu and Shu have not yet been eliminated. Soldiers are stationed in the border areas, farming and fighting at the same time. The resentment in their hearts has accumulated for many years.

古文：宗庙宫室，百事草创，农桑者少，衣食者多，今其所急，唯当息耗百姓，不至甚弊。
现代文：宗庙宫殿，各种事务都在初步创立阶段，从事农桑业的人很少，但需要穿衣吃饭的人很多，当务之急，只有停止损耗百姓，让他们不至于十分疲敝。
English: The ancestral temple and palace, all kinds of affairs are in the initial stage of creation. There are few people engaged in the agricultural mulberry industry, but there are many people who need to dress and eat. The top priority is to stop the loss of the people, so that they will not be very tired.

古文：弊攰之民，傥有水旱，百万之众，不为国用。
现代文：疲惫的百姓，如果遇上水旱灾害，那百万之数的百姓就不能被国家使用了。
English: Tired people, if there is a flood or drought, those millions of people cannot be used by the state.

古文：凡使民必须农隙，不夺其时。
现代文：凡是要动用百姓的，一定再在农忙的间隙，不要侵占他们耕种的时间。
English: Anyone who wants to make use of the people must do so during the busy farming season, and must not encroach on their farming time.

古文：夫欲大兴功之君，先料其民力而燠休之。
现代文：那些想要努力建立功业的君主，一定会先估计百姓的力量然后安抚他们的病痛。
English: Those monarchs who want to work hard to build up merit, must first estimate the strength of the people and then soothe their pain.

古文：句践养胎以待用，昭王恤病以雪仇，故能以弱燕服强齐，羸越灭劲吴。
现代文：越往勾践鼓励百姓生育以等待大用，燕昭王救援有危难的人以等待报仇雪恨，所以弱小的燕国能使强大的齐国屈服，羸弱的越国能灭掉强劲的吴国。
English: Yan Zhao Wang rescues people in danger to wait for revenge, so the weak Yan country can make the powerful Qi country succumb, and the weak Yue country can destroy the strong Wu country.

古文：今二敌不攻不灭，不事即侵，当身不除，百世之责也。
现代文：现在吴国、蜀国两个敌人，不进攻他们它们就不会消灭，不想侍奉他们就应该攻打，在您这一代没有消灭他们，将会成为以后百代子孙的责任。
English: Now, the two enemies of Wu and Shu, if you do not attack them, they will not be eliminated. If you do not want to serve them, you should attack them. If you do not eliminate them in your generation, it will become the responsibility of the next hundred generations.

古文：以陛下圣明神武之略，舍其缓者，专心讨贼，臣以为无难矣。
现代文：以陛下的英明神武的计谋，先放下那些宽松的事务，专力讨伐贼子，臣认为没有什么困难。
English: On the basis of His Majesty's wise and divine counsel, he first put aside those loose affairs and devoted himself to fighting the thieves. The vassal thought there would be no difficulty.

古文：又欢娱之耽，害于精爽；神太用则竭，形太劳则弊。
现代文：再说，沉溺于欢欣享受之中，也会对精神有所损害；神思使用得过分就会枯竭，身体太劳累就会疲倦。
English: Moreover, indulging in the enjoyment of pleasure will also damage the spirit; if the mind is used excessively, it will be exhausted, and if the body is too tired, it will be tired.

古文：愿大简贤妙，足以充 百斯男 者。
现代文：希望您努力选取那些有益，对子孙后代也有益的事情来做。
English: I hope that you will try to choose those things that are beneficial and beneficial to future generations.

古文：其冗散未齿，且悉分出，务在清静 诏曰： 微护军，吾弗闻斯言也。 
现代文：其他那些多余散杂不足挂齿的事情，先将它们划分出来，一定要保持清净。 明帝诏令说： 没有护军将军，我就听不到这样的话了。 
English: As for the other superfluous, scattered, and insufficient matters, they must first be sorted out and must be kept clean. Emperor Ming decreed: "Without the escort general, I can't hear such words.

古文：齐王即位，徙为领军将军，进爵昌陵亭侯，迁太尉。
现代文：魏齐王登基后，将蒋济调任为领军将军，进封爵位为昌陵亭侯，提升为太尉。
English: After Wei Qi Wang ascended to the throne, he appointed Jiang Jizhong as the leading general, conferred the title of Lord of Changling, and promoted him to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：初，侍中高堂隆论郊祀事，以魏为舜后，推舜配天。
现代文：当初，侍中高堂隆商讨到郊外祭祀的事情，因为魏氏是舜帝的后裔，推举舜帝在祭天时作为配祭。
English: At first, the chamberlains discussed the matter of sacrificing in the suburbs, because the Wei clan was a descendant of Emperor Xuan, and they chose Emperor Xuan to be the sacrificial accompaniment when they offered sacrifices to Heaven.

古文：济以为舜本姓妫，其苗曰田，非曹之先，著文以追诘隆。
现代文：蒋济认为舜帝原本姓妫，他的后裔为田氏，不是曹氏的先祖，就写文章追问高堂隆。
English: Jiang Jie thought that Emperor Gao's original surname was Gao, and his descendants were the Tian clan, not the ancestors of the Cao clan, so he wrote an article to question Gaodanglong.

古文：是时，曹爽专政，丁谧、邓飏等轻改法度。会有日蚀变，诏群臣问其得失，济上疏曰： 昔大舜佐治，戒在比周；周公辅政，慎于其朋；齐侯问灾，晏婴对以布惠；鲁君问异，臧孙答以缓役。
现代文：当时，曹爽专权揽政，丁谧、邓飏等人轻易就能改变律法制度，侍奉出现了日蚀变化，齐王下诏询问朝臣们为政的得失，蒋济上疏说： 过去大舜辅佐处理政事，对结党营私很是警戒；周公辅佐朝政，对结交的朋友很重视；齐景公询问灾情，晏婴以应该施加恩惠来回答；鲁僖公询问异象，臧孙认为应该减缓徭役。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang's dictatorship seized power, Ding Xi and Deng Wei could easily change the legal system, and there was a change in the eclipse of the sun. King Qi inquired about the pros and cons of the courtiers in politics, and Jiang Jishang So said: In the past, the Grand Duke's aide-de-camp handled political affairs, and was very wary of the party and the private sector; Zhou Gong's aide-de-camp, and attached great importance to the friends he made; Qi Jing Gong inquired about the disaster situation, and the infant replied that he should impose favors; Lu Xi Gong inquired about the vision,

古文：应天塞变，乃实人事。
现代文：顺应天命，阻止灾祸，实际上是人的事情。
English: In fact, it is a human affair to comply with the destiny of heaven and stop the disaster.

古文：今二贼未灭，将士暴露已数十年，男女怨旷，百姓贫苦。
现代文：现在吴国、蜀国两个贼人还没有消灭，我军的将士在外风餐露宿已经数十年，百姓长期离别，心生怨恨，百姓贫穷困苦。
English: Now, the two thieves of Wu and Shu have not yet been eliminated. Our soldiers have been camping out for decades, the people have been separated for a long time, resentment has arisen in their hearts, and the people are poor and miserable.

古文：夫为国法度，惟命世大才，乃能张其纲维以垂于后，岂中下之吏所宜改易哉？
现代文：作为国家的律法制度，只有有治国的大才能的人，才能建立纲领以流传到后世，怎么使中下层的官吏所应该改变的呢？
English: As the legal system of the country, only a person with great talent for governing the country can establish a program to be passed down to future generations. How can the middle and lower-level officials be changed?

古文：终无益于治，適足伤民，望宜使文武之臣各守其职，率以清平，则和气祥瑞可感而致也。 
现代文：最终对治理国家没有好处，也足够伤害百姓，希望您能让文武官员各自坚守职责，做出清净平和的表率，那祥和的气息和吉祥的征兆也会来到了。 
English: In the end, it is not beneficial to the governance of the country, and it is enough to hurt the people. I hope you can let the civil and military officials stick to their duties and set an example of purity and peace. That peaceful atmosphere and auspicious signs will come.

古文：以随太傅司马宣王屯洛水浮桥，诛曹爽等，进封都乡侯，邑七百户。
现代文：后来蒋济因为跟随太傅司马宣王驻扎在洛水浮桥上，诛杀了曹爽等人，被进封爵位为都乡侯，食邑七百户。
English: Later, Jiang Ji, because he was stationed on the Luoshui pontoon bridge with the Taifu Sima Xuan Wang, killed Cao Shuang and others, and was knighted as the capital township, with seven hundred households.

古文：济上疏曰： 臣忝宠上司，而爽敢苞藏祸心，此臣之无任也。
现代文：蒋济上疏说： 臣对于被上级宠信心怀愧疚，但曹爽居然胆敢怀着作乱的想法，这是臣的失职。
English: Jiang Jishang So said, "The minister feels guilty for being favored by his superiors, but Cao Shuang dared to harbor the idea of creating a disturbance. This is the minister's dereliction of duty."

古文：太傅奋独断之策，陛下明其忠节，罪人伏诛，社稷之福也。
现代文：太傅制定果断的计划，陛下了解他的忠诚节操，将有罪的人诛杀，是江山社稷的福气。
English: It is a blessing for the country and society that the Grand Master has made a resolute plan, and His Majesty understands his loyalty and discipline, and will kill the guilty.

古文：夫封宠庆赏，必加有功。
现代文：君主的封赏恩宠庆贺，一定是对有功之人。
English: The monarch's conferral of honours and patronages must be a celebration of those who have rendered distinguished service.

古文：今论谋则臣不先知，语战则非臣所率，而上失其制，下受其弊。
现代文：现在，论智谋我不能预先判断；论作战，部队也不是由我召陵，作为上级，缺乏对下级的控制，作为下级，又受到懵逼。
English: Now, in terms of strategy, I cannot prejudge; in terms of combat, the troops are not summoned by me. As a superior, I lack control over subordinates, and as a subordinate, I am forced.

古文：臣备宰司，民所具瞻，诚恐冒赏之渐自此而兴，推让之风由此而废。 
现代文：臣在处在高位，是百姓所注视的，我实在担心冒领封赏的事从我这里开始，而推辞谦让的风气从这里废弛。 
English: The minister is in a high position and is watched by the people. I am really worried that the matter of accepting the award will start from me, and the culture of refusal and humbleness will decline from here.

古文：固辞，不许。
现代文：蒋济坚决推辞，齐王没有同意。
English: Zhang Juering insisted on resigning, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：子秀嗣。秀薨，子凯嗣。
现代文：蒋济去世后，他的儿子蒋秀承袭他的爵位。蒋秀去世后，他的儿子蒋凯承袭爵位。
English: After the death of Jiang Jie, his son Jiang Xiu succeeded to his title. After the death of Jiang Xiu, his son Jiang Kai Wu succeeded to his title.

古文：咸熙中，开建五等，以济著勋前朝，改封凯为下蔡子。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立五等封爵制度，因为蒋济在前朝有很大功勋，就改封蒋凯为下蔡子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class knighthood system. Because Jiang Jie had made great contributions to the previous dynasty, he was renamed Jiang Kai as the next Cai Zi.

古文：刘放字子弃，涿郡人，汉广阳顺王子西乡侯宏后也。
现代文：刘放字子弃，涿郡人，是汉代广阳顺王的儿子西乡侯刘宏的后代。
English: Liu Fang Zi Zi Zi, a native of Jixian County, was a descendant of Liu Hong, the son of Guangyang Shun Wang in the Han Dynasty.

古文：历郡纲纪，举孝廉。
现代文：曾担任过郡中的纲纪，被推举为孝廉。
English: He once served as the county middle school's head of discipline and was promoted to the position of filial piety.

古文：遭世大乱，时渔阳王松据其土，放往依之。
现代文：遇上天下大乱，当时渔阳人王松在他的地盘上据守，刘放前往依附他。
English: When the world was in turmoil, Wang Song, a fisherman from Yangzhou, was defending his territory, and Liu Fang went to join him.

古文：太祖克冀州，放说松曰： 往者董卓作逆，英雄并起，阻兵擅命，人自封殖，惟曹公能拔拯危乱，翼戴天子，奉辞伐罪，所向必克。
现代文：太祖攻克冀州，刘放劝说王松说： 之前董卓谋逆作乱，天下英雄豪杰纷纷起兵，坐拥部队擅自发布命令，每个人都自己培植势力，只有曹公能拯救动乱的时局，他辅佐拥戴天子，奉天子诏令讨伐罪臣，所到的地方一定能攻克。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Jizhou, and Liu Fang persuaded Wang Song to take the lead, saying: "Before, Dong Zhuo plotted to rebel and create turmoil, the world's heroes and heroines raised armies one after another, issued orders without authorization, and everyone cultivated their own forces. Only Cao Gong could save the turbulent situation. He assisted and supported Tian Zi, and fought against the criminals according to Tian Zi's edict. Wherever he went, he would be able to conquer.

古文：以二袁之强，守则淮南冰消，战则官渡大败；乘胜席卷，将清河朔，威刑既合，大势以见。
现代文：以袁绍、袁术的强大，坚守淮南，淮南地区就涣散，在官渡大战，也失败而归；曹公乘着胜利进军，即将清扫河朔地区，威势和刑罚都具备了，局面的形势也就显现出来了。
English: With the strength of Yuan Shao and Yuan Shu, they held fast to Huainan, and the Huainan region was scattered. In the Guandu War, they also returned defeated. Cao Gong marched in triumph and was about to sweep the Hexuo region. The power and punishment were ready, and the situation became apparent.

古文：速至者渐福，后服者先亡，此乃不俟终日驰骛之时也。
现代文：那些先来依附的就有福分，后面来臣服的就会先被灭亡，这是不需要每天追逐奔波就能有的时机。
English: Those who cling first will be blessed, and those who surrender later will be destroyed first. This is an opportunity that does not need to be pursued every day.

古文：昔黥布弃南面之尊，仗剑归汉，诚识废兴之理，审去就之分也。
现代文：过去黔布放弃作为君主的至尊，带着佩剑归顺汉朝，实在是能了解兴衰成败的道理，懂得远离和亲近的区别。
English: In the past, when Zibo gave up its supreme position as a monarch and returned to the Han Dynasty with a sword, it was really able to understand the reason for the rise and fall of success and failure, and to know the difference between being far away and being close.

古文：将军宜投身委命，厚自结纳。 
现代文：将军您应该投身于曹公，将自己的命运交付给他，带着厚重的礼物去结交他。 
English: General, you should devote yourself to Cao Gong, entrust your fate to him, and befriend him with a heavy gift.

古文：松然之。
现代文：王松认为他说的对。
English: Wang Song thinks he is right.

古文：会太祖讨袁谭於南皮，以书招松，松举雍奴、泉州、安次以附之。
现代文：刚好太祖在南皮讨伐袁谭，用书信招揽王松，王松献出雍奴、泉州、安次三城归顺太祖。
English: It just so happened that Grandfather fought against Yuan Tan in Nanpi, and used letters to recruit Wang Song. Wang Song offered the three cities of Yongnu, Quanzhou, and Anji to Grandfather.

古文：放为松答太祖书，其文甚丽。
现代文：刘放为王松回复太祖的书信，文采很是华丽。
English: Liu Fang replies to the great-grandfather's letter for Wang Song, and the writing is very gorgeous.

古文：太祖既善之，又闻其说，由是遂辟放。
现代文：太祖很欣赏他，又得知他劝说王松的话，因此征召刘放。
English: Grandfather admired him very much, and learned that he persuaded Wang Song, so he conscripted Liu Fang.

古文：建安十年，与松俱至。
现代文：建安十年，刘放和王松一起到太祖那里。
English: In the 10th year of Jianan, Liu Fang and Wang Song went to Taizu together.

古文：太祖大悦，谓放曰： 昔班彪依窦融而有河西之功，今一何相似也！ 
现代文：太祖很是高兴，对刘放说： 过去班彪依附窦融，才有了收复河西的功劳，现在的情况和那时多相似啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather was very happy and said to Liu Fang: In the past, Ban Biao had to rely on Dou Rong to regain Hexi. How similar the current situation is to that time!

古文：乃以放参司空军事，历主簿记室，出为郃阳、祋祤、赞令。
现代文：太祖就任命刘放为参司空军事，曾担任过主簿记室，又出京担任郃阳、祋祤、赞县三县的县令。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Liu Fang as the assistant secretary of the Air Force, who once served as the chief bookkeeper, and went to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate of the three counties of Shiyang, Handan and Zan.

古文：魏国既建，与太原孙资俱为秘书郎。
现代文：魏国建立以后，刘放和太原人孙资一同担任秘书郎。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Liu Fang and Sun Zi, a Taiyuan native, worked together as secretaries.

古文：先是，资亦历县令，参丞相军事。
现代文：先前，孙资也担任过县令，参与丞相军事。
English: Previously, Sun Zi also served as a county magistrate and participated in the military of the prime minister.

古文：文帝即位，放、资转为左右丞。
现代文：文帝登基后，刘放、孙资分别被调任为左右丞。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Liu Fang and Sun Zi were respectively transferred to the posts of the left and right emperors.

古文：数月，放徙为令。
现代文：过了几个月，刘放被调任为县令。
English: A few months later, Liu Fang was transferred to the post of county magistrate.

古文：黄初初，改秘书为中书，以放为监，资为令，各加给事中；放赐爵关内侯，资为关中侯，遂掌机密。
现代文：黄初初年，朝廷将秘书改名为中丞，任命刘放为中书监，孙资为中书令，还各给他们加封给事中；刘放被赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the imperial court changed the secretary's name to Zhongzheng, appointed Liu Fang as the Central Censor and Sun Zi as the Central Censor, and each of them was awarded the title of Jizhong; Liu Fang was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：三年，放进爵魏寿亭侯，资关内侯。明帝即位，尤见宠任，同加散骑常侍；进放爵西乡侯，资乐阳亭侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，他们特别宠信重用，一同被加封为散骑常侍；进封刘放的爵位为西乡侯，孙资为乐阳亭侯。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, they were especially favored and reused, and together they were added to the crown as horseback riding attendants; Liu Fang's title was Xixianghou, and Sun Zi's was Leyangting.

古文：太和末，吴遣将周贺浮海诣辽东，招诱公孙渊。
现代文：太和末年，吴国派遣将领周贺乘船渡海到达辽东，招揽诱导公孙渊。
English: At the end of the Taihe era, the State of Wu sent the general Zhou He to cross the sea to Liaodong by ship to invite and induce Gongsun Yuan.

古文：帝欲邀讨之，朝议多以为不可。
现代文：明帝打算在半路拦截讨伐他，朝中大臣商议，大多认为不可行。
English: Emperor Ming planned to intercept and fight him in the middle of the road, and the ministers of North Korea and China discussed it, but most of them thought it was not feasible.

古文：惟资决行策，果大破之，进爵左乡侯。
现代文：只有孙资果断执行计划，果然大败周贺部队，被进封爵位左乡侯。
English: Only Sun Zi resolutely carried out the plan, defeated the Zhou He forces, and was awarded the title of Zuo Xiang Hou.

古文：放善为书檄，三祖诏命有所招喻，多放所为。
现代文：刘放善于写作信件檄文，武帝、文帝、明帝三朝时，凡是需要招抚晓谕的诏令，大多是刘放写的。
English: Liu Fang was good at writing letters and essays. During the three dynasties of Emperor Wu, Emperor Wen, and Emperor Ming, most of the edicts that needed to be explained were written by Liu Fang.

古文：青龙初，孙权与诸葛亮连和，欲俱出为寇。
现代文：青龙初年，孙权和诸葛亮联合，打算一起出兵进攻魏国。
English: In the first year of Qinglong, Sun Quan and Zhuge Liang united and planned to attack Wei together.

古文：边候得权书，放乃改易其辞，往往换其本文而傅合之，与征东将军满宠，若欲归化，封以示亮。
现代文：边界负责探查的士兵得到孙权的书信，刘放就将信件里的言辞修改了，往往换掉其中的文字，但语句也能符合，将信件送给征东将军满宠，让他做出要归顺蜀国的样子，将孙权的信件封好再展示给诸葛亮。
English: When the soldier in charge of exploring the border received Sun Quan's letter, Liu Fang modified the words in the letter, often replacing the text, but the statement could also be consistent. He gave the letter to the general of the Eastern Expedition to make him look like he wanted to submit to Shu. He sealed Sun Quan's letter and then showed it to Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮腾与吴大将步骘等，骘等以见权。
现代文：诸葛亮将信件转给吴国大将步骘等人，步骘等人将书信拿给孙权。
English: Zhuge Liang forwarded the letter to Wu Guodao, Bu Qian and others, and Bu Qian and others took the letter to Sun Quan.

古文：权惧亮自疑，深自解说。
现代文：孙权担心诸葛亮猜疑自己，努力为自己辩解。
English: Sun Quan worried that Zhuge Liang suspected him and tried to justify himself.

古文：是岁，俱加侍中、光禄大夫。
现代文：这一年，刘放、孙资两人一起被加封为侍中、光禄大夫。
English: In the same year, Liu Fang and Sun Zi were both promoted to the posts of chamberlain and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：景初二年，辽东平定，以参谋之功，各进爵，封本县，放方城侯，资中都侯。
现代文：景初二年，平定辽东后，他们二人因为参与谋划的功劳，各自进封爵位，封在本县，刘放被封为方城侯，孙资被封为中都侯。
English: In the second year of Jingchu, after the pacification of Liaodong, the two of them, because of the merit of participating in the planning, were each awarded a knighthood and sealed in this county. Liu Fang was sealed as the mayor of Fangcheng, and Sun Zi was sealed as the mayor of Zhongdu.

古文：其年，帝寝疾，欲以燕王宇为大将军，及领军将军夏侯献、武卫将军曹爽、屯骑校尉曹肇、骁骑将军秦朗共辅政。
现代文：这一年，明帝病危，想要让燕王曹宇担任大将军，和领军将军夏侯献、武卫将军曹爽、屯骑校尉曹肇、骁骑将军秦朗一起辅佐朝政。
English: In this year, Emperor Ming was critically ill and wanted to make Yan Wang Cao Yu a general, and he and the leading army general Xia Hou Xian, Wuwei general Cao Shuang, cavalry captain Cao Zhao, and cavalry general Qin Lang assisted the imperial government.

古文：宇性恭良，陈诚固辞。
现代文：曹宇性情恭敬善良，他陈述自己的诚心，坚决推辞。
English: Cao Yu's disposition is respectful and kind. He states his sincerity and resolutely refuses.

古文：帝引见放、资，入卧内，问曰： 燕王正尔为？ 
现代文：明帝将刘放、孙资两人召见到卧室内，问他们说： 燕王就是这样的吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming summoned Liu Fang and Sun Zi to his bedroom, and asked them: "Is this what Yan Wang is like?"

古文：放、资对曰： 燕王实自知不堪大任故耳。 
现代文：刘放、孙资回答说： 燕王是确实知道自己不能承担重任的缘故而已。 
English: Liu Fang and Sun Zi replied, "Yan Wang only did this because he truly knew that he could not take on the heavy responsibility.

古文：帝曰： 曹爽可代宇不？ 放、资因赞成之。
现代文：明帝说： 曹爽可以代替曹宇吗？ 刘放、孙资就很赞同。
English: Emperor Ming said: Can Cao Shuang replace Cao Yu? Liu Fang and Sun Zi agreed.

古文：又深陈宜速召太尉司马宣王，以纲维皇室。
现代文：他们又深入陈述，认为应该迅速将太尉司马宣王召回，以维系皇室安定。
English: They also made in-depth statements, arguing that the captain Sima Xuanwang should be quickly recalled in order to maintain the stability of the royal family.

古文：帝纳其言，即以黄纸授放作诏。
现代文：明帝接受了他们的建议，立即将黄色的纸张授予刘放让他写下诏书。
English: Emperor Ming accepted their suggestion and immediately gave the yellow paper to Liu Fang to write down the edict.

古文：放、资既出，帝意复变，诏止宣王勿使来。
现代文：刘放、孙资出去之后，明帝又改变了他的想法，下诏阻止司马宣王不让他返回。
English: After Liu Fang and Sun Zi left, Emperor Ming changed his mind and issued an edict to prevent Sima Xuan Wang from returning.

古文：寻更见放、资曰： 我自召太尉，而曹肇等反使吾止之，几败吾事！ 
现代文：不久又召见刘放、孙资说： 我自己召回太尉，但曹肇等人反而让我阻止他回来，几乎弄坏了我的大事！ 
English: Soon after, Liu Fang and Sun Zi were summoned, and Sun Zi said, "I summoned the captain myself, but Cao Zhao and others asked me to stop him from returning, which almost ruined my big event!"

古文：命更为诏，帝独召爽与放、资俱受诏命，遂免宇、献、肇、朗官。
现代文：命令他们再写一份诏书，明帝只召见曹爽和刘放、孙资一同接受诏书命令，然后罢免了曹宇、夏侯献、曹肇、秦朗等人的官职。
English: He ordered them to write another imperial edict. Emperor Ming only summoned Cao Shuang, Liu Fang, and Sun Zi to accept the imperial edict, and then dismissed Cao Yu, Xia Hou Xian, Cao Zhao, and Qin Lang.

古文：太尉亦至，登床受诏，然后帝崩。
现代文：这是太尉司马宣王也到了，走近明帝的床榻接受诏令，这之后明帝就驾崩了。
English: This was the time when Lieutenant Sima Xuanwang also arrived, approached Emperor Ming's bed to receive the edict, after which Emperor Ming passed away.

古文：齐王即位，以放、资决定大谋，增邑三百，放并前千一百，资千户；封爱子一人亭侯，次子骑都尉，馀子皆郎中。
现代文：期望登基，因为刘放、孙资决定了大事，给他们加封食邑三百户，刘放的食邑加上之前的一共一千一百户，孙资为一千户；又封他们的一个儿子为亭侯，封次子为骑都尉，其他的儿子都被封为郎中。
English: Expecting to ascend to the throne, because Liu Fang and Sun Zi had decided on important matters, they added three hundred households to their fiefs. Liu Fang's fiefs added a total of eleven hundred households to the previous one, and Sun Zi's were one thousand households. In addition, one of their sons was appointed as a prince, the second son was appointed as a cavalry captain, and the other sons were all appointed as retainers.

古文：正始元年，更加放左光禄大夫，资右光禄大夫，金印紫绶，仪同三司。
现代文：正始元年，齐王又加封刘放为左光禄大夫，孙资为右光禄大夫，授予他们金印，赐予绶带，所用礼节和太尉、司徒、司空三司相同。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, the king of Qi also appointed Liu Fang as the doctor of the left light, and Sun Zi as the doctor of the right light, and awarded them the golden seal and the ribbon, and the etiquette used was the same as that of the captain, the scholar, and the three magistrates.

古文：六年，放转骠骑，资卫将军，领监、令如故。
现代文：正始六年，刘放被调任为骠骑，孙资为卫将军，两人像之前一样兼任中书监、中书令。
English: At the beginning of the sixth year, Liu Fang was transferred to the post of Shaoqi, Sun Zi to the post of Wei general, and the two of them concurrently served as the chief librarian and the chief librarian as before.

古文：七年，复封子一人亭侯，各年老逊位，以列侯朝朔望，位特进。
现代文：正始七年，又各将两人的一个儿子封为亭侯，两人都因为年事已高退位，以列侯的身份在每月的第一天和最后一天入宫朝拜，赐位特进。
English: At the beginning of the seventh year, each of them made one of their sons a prince, and both of them abdicated because of their advanced age. As vassals, they entered the palace on the first and last day of each month to pay homage, and were given a special promotion.

古文：曹爽诛后，复以资为侍中，领中书令。
现代文：曹爽被诛杀后，朝廷又任命孙资为侍中，兼任中书令。
English: After Cao Shuang was beaten to death, the imperial court appointed Sun Zi as an attendant, and he also held the post of middle secretary.

古文：嘉平二年，放薨，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：嘉平二年，刘放去世，谥号为敬侯。
English: In the second year of Jiaping, Liu Fang died, and his nickname was Jinghou.

古文：子正嗣。
现代文：刘放的儿子刘正承袭他的爵位。
English: His son Cai Zheng inherited the title.

古文：资复逊位归第，就拜骠骑将军，转侍中，特进如故。
现代文：孙资又退位回家，被任命为骠骑将军，又转任侍中，想之前一样赐位特进。
English: Sun Zi also abdicated and returned home. He was appointed general of the imperial cavalry and transferred to the position of chamberlain. He wanted to be promoted to the highest position as before.

古文：三年薨，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：嘉平三年，孙资去世，谥号为贞侯。
English: In the third year of Jiaping, Sun Zi died, and his posthumous name was Zheng Hou.

古文：子宏嗣。
现代文：孙资的儿子孙宏承袭他的爵位。
English: Sun Zi's son, Sun Hong, succeeded to his title.

古文：放才计优资，而自脩不如也。
现代文：刘放才能和计谋都比孙资优秀，但在自我修养上比不上孙资。
English: Liu Fang's talent and strategy are superior to Sun Zi, but he is not as good as Sun Zi in self-cultivation.

古文：放、资既善承顺主上，又未尝显言得失，抑辛毗而助王思，以是获讥於世。
现代文：刘放、孙资既善于遵奉顺从主上的想法，又没有明显的言论讨论朝政得失，但因为他压制辛毗而帮助王思，所以被世人讥笑。
English: Liu Fang and Sun Zi were not only good at following the idea of obeying the Lord, but also had no obvious speech to discuss the gains and losses of the imperial government. However, because he suppressed Xin Pi and helped Wang Si, he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：然时因群臣谏诤，扶赞其义，并时密陈损益，不专导谀言云。
现代文：但当时他们也能顺着朝臣们的直言规劝，赞同他们的想法，并且时常暗中陈述朝政的得失，没有专门引导阿谀奉承的言论。
English: However, at that time, they could also follow the straightforward advice of the courtiers, agree with their ideas, and often secretly state the gains and losses of the imperial government, without specially guided flattery.

古文：及咸熙中，开建五等，以放、资著勋前朝，改封正方城子，宏离石子。
现代文：等到咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立五等爵位制度，因为刘放、孙资在前一朝有很大功劳，朝廷改封刘正为方城子，孙宏为离石子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class peerage system. Because Liu Fang and Sun Zi had made great contributions to the previous dynasty, the imperial court changed the titles of Liu Zheng to Fang Chengzi and Sun Hong to Li Shishi.

古文：评曰：程昱、郭嘉、董昭、刘晔、蒋济才策谋略，世之奇士，虽清治德业，殊於荀攸，而筹画所料，是其伦也。
现代文：评说：程昱、郭嘉、董昭、刘晔、蒋济等人的才能计策谋划，都是当时的奇异的人，虽然在清明政绩德行功业等方面和荀攸不一样，但他们的筹谋预料，和荀攸是一样的。
English: Comment: Cheng Yao, Guo Jia, Dong Zhao, Liu Yao, Jiang Ji and other people's talents, strategies and plans are all extraordinary people at that time. Although they are different from Yao You in terms of clear political achievements and virtuous deeds, their planning and anticipation are the same as Yao You.

古文：刘放文翰，孙资勤慎，并管喉舌，权闻当时，雅亮非体，是故讥谀之声，每过其实矣。
现代文：刘放富有才华，孙资勤勉慎重，一同掌管朝廷的重要机构，他们的权力是当时都很有名的，正直诚信不是他们的根本，所以那些非议和阿谀的言论，经常超过了实际情况。
English: Liu Fang was talented, Sun Zi was diligent and prudent, and together they controlled the important institutions of the imperial court. Their power was very famous at that time, and honesty and integrity were not their fundamental principles. Therefore, those criticisms and imam's remarks often exceeded the actual situation.

