古文：盖宽饶字次公，魏郡人也。
现代文：盖宽饶字次公，魏郡人。
English: Gaikangrao Zi Gong, from Wei County.

古文：明经为郡文学，以孝廉为郎。
现代文：因为通晓经术，而担任了郡文学，又凭孝廉的身份做了郎官。
English: Because he was familiar with the classics, he served as the county literature chief, and he also served as a vassal by virtue of his filial piety.

古文：举方正，对策高第，迁谏大夫，行郎中户将事。
现代文：他被举为方正，参加朝廷的考试取得丁优异的成绩，升为御史大夫，代理郎中户将的职务。
English: He was promoted to the position of Founder, and obtained excellent results in the imperial examinations. He was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, acting for the lord of the household.

古文：劾奏卫将军张安世子侍中阳都侯彭祖不下殿门，并连及安世居位无补。
现代文：他弹劾上奏卫将军张安世的儿子侍中阳都侯彭祖在皇宫的殿门前不下车，并涉及到安世在他的官位上没有什么政绩。
English: He impeached Zhang Anshi, the son of Shang Song Guard General Zhang Anshi, for not getting off the car in front of the palace gate, and related that Anshi had no political achievements in his official position.

古文：彭祖时实下门，宽饶坐举奏大臣非是，左迁为卫司马。
现代文：彭祖当时其实是在殿门前下了车的，宽饶犯了检举上奏大臣失实的罪，被降职为卫司马。
English: At that time, Peng Zu actually got off the car in front of the palace gate, and was demoted to the rank of Weizima.

古文：先是时，卫司马在部，见卫尉拜谒，常为卫官繇使市买。
现代文：在此以前，卫司马在官衙裹，见到卫尉要行拜谒礼，常常替卫官出去买东西。
English: Prior to this, when he was in official attire, he would often go out to buy things for the guards when he saw that the guards were about to perform the prostration.

古文：宽饶视事，案旧令，遂揖官属以下行卫者。
现代文：宽饶担任卫司马后，按照以前的制度，对担任巡视警卫工作的官员拱手行礼。
English: After serving as grand marshal, according to the previous system, he bowed to the officials who served as patrol guards.

古文：卫尉私使宽饶出，宽饶以令诣官府门上谒辞。
现代文：卫尉私下派宽饶外出，宽饶根据制度到尚书衙门呈上申请。
English: The guard privately sent Guangrao out, and according to the system, Guangrao went to Shangshu Yamen to submit an application.

古文：尚书责问卫尉，由是卫官不复私使候、司马。
现代文：尚书于是责问卫尉，从此卫官不再私自使派候和司马。
English: Shangshu then reprimanded the guard lieutenant, and from then on the guard officer no longer had to wait for Sima.

古文：候、司马不拜，出先置卫，辄上奏辞，自此正焉。
现代文：候和司马也不再行拜谒礼，皇帝出行，候和司马作为先导，就先要上奏章，从此制度化了。
English: Waiting and Sima also no longer perform the prostration, and when the emperor travels, waiting and Sima as a guide, they first have to play the music, which has been institutionalized since then.

古文：宽饶初拜为司马，未出殿门，断其禅衣，令短离地，冠大冠，带长剑，躬案行士卒庐室，视其饮食居处，有疾病者身自抚循临问，加致医药，遇之甚有恩。
现代文：宽饶被任命为司马之初，不出宫殿的门，把他的单衣剪断，使它变短可以离开地面，戴着大帽子，带着长剑，亲自走遍士兵们的住室，察看他们的饮食起居，对有疾病的士兵亲自去安慰问，并给他们药物，对待他们很有恩惠。
English: At the beginning of the appointment of Sima, he did not go out of the palace door, cut off his single garment to make it shorter so that it could leave the ground, wearing a large hat and carrying a long sword, personally walked through the soldiers' living rooms, inspected their diet and living, and personally comforted the soldiers who were ill and gave them medicine. He treated them very favorably.

古文：及岁尽交代，上临飨罢卫卒，卫卒数千人皆叩头自请，愿复留共更一年，以报宽饶厚德。
现代文：等到年终交班接替，皇上亲自犒赏退伍的士兵，士兵几千人都叩头请求再留下来服役一年，以报答宽饶的大恩。
English: By the time of the year-end rotation, the emperor himself rewarded the discharged soldiers, and thousands of soldiers bowed down and asked to stay and serve for another year to repay the generous grace.

古文：宣帝嘉之，以宽饶为太中大夫，使行风俗，多所称举贬黜，奉使称意。
现代文：宣帝表彰了宽饶，让他担任太中大夫，使他考察各地风俗，他表彰荐举贬斥废黜了好多人，完成了使命符合皇帝的心意。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan commended his clemency, allowed him to serve as the Grand Physician, allowed him to study the customs of various regions, commended and recommended, criticized and deposed many people, and completed his mission in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：擢为司隶校尉，刺举无所回避，小大辄举，所劾奏众多，廷尉处其法，半用半不用，公卿贵戚及郡国吏繇使至长安，皆恐惧莫敢犯禁，京师为清。
现代文：因此他被升任为司隶校尉，检查和揭发官员们的过失无所回避，小事大事都上奏，被弹劾的人很多，廷尉依法处置，对他的意见一半采用一半不采用，而公卿贵戚以及出使到长安的郡国官吏，都担心害怕以致不敢违背禁令，京城清平了。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel. He inspected and exposed the wrongdoings of officials in an all-round way. He reported minor and major matters. Many people were impeached. The courtier was dealt with according to the law, and half of his opinions were adopted and half were not adopted. Meanwhile, the noble relatives of court nobles and the county government officials sent to Chang'an were so worried and afraid that they dared not violate the ban. The capital was cleared.

古文：平恩侯许伯入第，丞相、御史、将军、中二千石皆贺，宽饶不行。
现代文：平恩侯许伯迁入新居，凡丞相、御史、将军、以及俸禄为中二千石的官员们都去道贺，但宽饶没去。
English: Prince Ping'en Xu Bo moved into his new residence, and all the prime ministers, ministers of history, generals, and officials with a salary of less than 2,000 koku went to congratulate him, but Guangrao did not go.

古文：许伯请之，乃往，从西阶上，东乡特坐。
现代文：许伯邀请他，他才去，从西阶上到厅堂，独自向东而坐。
English: He only went because he was invited by Huibo. He went up the west steps to the hall and sat alone facing east.

古文：许伯自酌曰： 盖君后至。 
现代文：许伯亲自给他斟酒说： 您晚到了。 
English: Huber poured him a drink himself and said: "You're late.

古文：宽饶曰： 无多酌我，我乃酒狂。 
现代文：宽饶说： 不要多给我斟酒，我酒喝多了要发狂的。 
English: Forgiveness says: Don't give me more wine, I'll go mad if I drink too much.

古文：丞相魏侯笑曰： 次公醒而狂，何必酒也？ 
现代文：丞相魏侯笑着说： 你醒着时就有些发狂，哪里一定要喝酒呢？ 
English: The chancellor Wei Hou smiled and said: When you are awake, you go a little crazy. Where do you have to drink?

古文：坐者毕属目卑下之。
现代文：在座的人都用轻视的眼光看着他。
English: Everyone here looked at him with disdain.

古文：酒酣乐作，长信少府檀长卿起舞，为沐猴与狗斗，坐皆大笑。
现代文：酒兴正浓时音乐演奏起来了，长信少府檀长卿起来跳舞，表演弥猴与狗搏斗，在座的人都大笑。
English: When the wine was getting strong, the music started to play. Changxin Shaufu Dan Changqing got up and danced, performing a monkey and dog fight. Everyone present laughed loudly.

古文：宽饶不说，卬视屋而叹曰： 美哉！
现代文：宽饶不高兴了，仰头看着屋顶叹息说： 美哉！
English: Bounteous was not happy, looked up at the roof and sighed, "Beautiful!

古文：然富贵无常，忽则易人，此如传舍，所阅多矣。
现代文：然而富贵无常，转眼之间就会物是人非，换了主人，造就好像旅店一样，我看到的多了。
English: However, wealth is fickle, and things can go wrong in the blink of an eye. When the owner changed, it looked like an inn, and I saw a lot more.

古文：唯谨慎为得久，君侯可不戒哉！ 
现代文：祇有谨慎从事才能保持长久，你们怎么可能不警戒呢？ 
English: Only by exercising caution can you maintain a long life, so how can you not be vigilant?

古文：因起趋出，劾奏长信少府以列卿而沐猴舞，失礼不敬。
现代文：于是起身快步走出，弹劾上奏长信少府以列卿的身份表演弥猴舞，失礼不敬。
English: Therefore, he got up and walked out at a brisk pace, and impeached the chief secretary, Shin Shofu, to perform the monkey dance as a peer, disrespectful.

古文：上欲罪少府，许伯为谢，良久，上乃解。
现代文：皇上想要降罪少府，许伯替他谢罪，好久，皇上才不追究了。
English: The emperor wanted to commute the sentence of Shōfū, and Hōhō apologized for him, but it took a long time for the emperor to give up the pursuit.

古文：宽饶为人刚直高节，志在奉公。
现代文：宽饶为人刚直，且有高风亮节，立志为朝廷效力。
English: He is generous and upright, and has high morals, and is determined to work for the imperial court.

古文：家贫。奉钱月数千，半以给吏民为耳目言事者。
现代文：他家境贫困，俸禄每月有几千，一半用来给替他侦察反映情况的官吏和百姓。
English: His family was poor, and his monthly salary was several thousand, half of which was used to pay officials and ordinary people who scouted for him and reported on the situation.

古文：身为司隶，子常步行自戍北边，公廉如此。
现代文：他身为司隶，儿子却曾经步行到北方边境担任守卫工作，他的公正廉明到了这样的地步。
English: He was so righteous and upright that his son used to walk to the northern border to work as a guard.

古文：然深刻喜陷害人，在位及贵戚人与为怨，又好言事刺讥，奸犯上意。
现代文：但是他为人峻刻喜欢陷害别人，当权的人和皇亲国戚都怨恨他，他又喜欢讥讽政事，冒犯皇上的旨意。
English: However, he liked to frame people, and the people in power and the emperor's relatives all resented him. He also liked to make fun of politics and offend the emperor's will.

古文：上以其儒者，优容之，然亦不得迁。
现代文：皇上因为他是个儒者，就对他优待宽容，但是他也得不到提拔。
English: Because he was a Confucian, the emperor treated him with favor and tolerance, but he was not promoted.

古文：同列后进或至九卿，宽饶自以行清能高，有益于国，而为凡庸所越，愈失意不快，数上疏谏争。
现代文：跟他职位相同或比他迟进官场的人有的已做到了九卿，宽饶自认为品行清廉能力高强，对国家有贡献，却让平凡庸碌的人超过了自己，更加感到失意，几次上奏章进行争谏。
English: Some people who are in the same position as him or who entered the officialdom later than him have already achieved the Nine Lords. They are generous and consider themselves to be of high moral integrity and ability, and have made contributions to the country. However, they let ordinary mediocre people surpass themselves, and feel more frustrated. They have fought over the composition several times.

古文：太子庶子王生高宽饶节，而非其如此，予书曰： 明主知君洁白公正，不畏强御，故命君以司察之位，擅君以奉使之权，尊官厚禄已施于君矣。
现代文：太子庶子王生认为宽饶品行高尚，但不赞成他这么做，便写信给他说： 圣明的皇上知道您清廉公正，不畏强暴，所以让您在主管检举的官位，授予您执行皇上诏令的权力，高官厚禄已经给您了。
English: The prince's illegitimate son, Wang Sheng, thought it was noble to be lenient, but he did not approve of him doing so, so he wrote to him: The holy emperor knows that you are honest and fair, and do not fear violence, so he has given you the position of the official in charge of the prosecution, granted you the power to implement the emperor's edict, and has given you the high official bonus.

古文：君宜夙夜惟思当世之务，奉法宣化，忧劳天下，虽日有益，月有功，犹未足以称职而报恩也。
现代文：您应当日夜想着当今的要务，实行法令，宣扬教化，为天下百姓分劳解忧，即使天天有贡献，月月有功劳，仍然不足以称职而报答皇上的大恩呀。
English: You should think about today's important tasks day and night, implement laws and regulations, promote enlightenment, and work hard to solve problems for the people of the world. Even if you make contributions every day and have merits every month, it is still not enough to be competent and repay the emperor's great favor.

古文：自古之治，三王之术各有制度。
现代文：自古以来治理国家，三代的治国之道各不相同。
English: Since ancient times, the country has been governed, and the way of governing the country in the three generations has been different.

古文：今君不务循职而已，乃欲以太古久远之事匡拂天子，数进不用难听之语以摩切左右，非所以扬令名全寿命者也。
现代文：如今您不力求履行自己的职责也就罢了，竟想要用上古的事例来匡正辅佐天子，几次进谏不能被采用或难以被听从的话用来跟皇上的左右磋商探讨，这不是传扬美名保全性命的方式。
English: Now you are not only not trying to fulfill your duties, but you want to use the ancient examples to rectify and assist the Son of God. Several times, the words that cannot be used or are difficult to be obeyed were used to discuss with the emperor's left and right. This is not a way to promote a good name and save lives.

古文：方今用事之人皆明习法令，言足以饰君之辞，文足以成君之过，君不惟蘧氏之高踪，而慕子胥之末行，用不訾之躯，临不测之险，窃为君痛之。
现代文：当今掌权的人都很通晓法令，他们的话足以歪曲您的言辞，文章足以形成您的过错，您不去学蘧伯玉的远见卓识，却去重蹈伍子胥的覆彻，用您的贵重无比的身躯，走近那不可测度的险境，我私下裹为您痛心。
English: The people in power today are well versed in laws and regulations. Their words are enough to distort your words, and articles are enough to form your mistakes. You do not learn the foresight and foresight of Zou Boyu, but you repeat the thoroughness of Wu Zixuan. With your precious body, you approach the immeasurable danger. I secretly wrap my heart for you.

古文：夫君子直而不挺，曲而不诎。
现代文：君子正直却不僵硬，纡曲而根本不屈挠。
English: A gentleman is honest but not rigid, flexible but not inflexible.

古文：《大雅》云： 既明且哲，以保其身。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 既明白事理又有智慧，才能保全他自身。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Only by being sensible and wise can he preserve himself.

古文：狂夫之言，圣人择焉。
现代文：狂夫说的话，圣人也可以选择采纳。
English: What the madman says, the sage can also choose to adopt.

古文：唯裁省览。 
现代文：希望您审察裁夺。 
English: I hope you will examine the cut.

古文：宽饶不纳其言。
现代文：宽饶没有采纳他的话。
English: Clemency did not accept his words.

古文：是时，上方用刑法，信任中尚书宦官，宽饶奏封事曰： 方今圣道浸废，儒术不行，以刑余为周、召，以法律为《诗》、《书》。 
现代文：这个时候皇上正以刑法治国，信任中尚书宦官，宽饶递上密封的奏章说： 如今圣人的传统逐渐废弃，儒家的学术得不到施行，把受过宫刑的闯入当作周公召公，把法律当作《诗书》。 
English: At this time, the emperor was ruling the country by punishment, trusting the eunuchs in Shangshu, and generously handed over a sealed record saying: Nowadays, the tradition of saints is gradually abandoned, Confucian scholarship cannot be implemented, and the intrusion of the palace punishment is regarded as Zhou Gong Zhao, and the law is regarded as "poem book."

古文：又引《韩氏易传》言： 五帝官天下，三王家天下，家以传子，官以传贤，若四时之运，功成者去，不得其人则不居其位。 
现代文：又引用《韩氏易传》说： 五帝以天下为公，三王以天下为家，以天下为家传给子孙，以天下为公传给贤人。就像四季的运行一样，事功已成的人就离去，不是恰当的人就不在其位。 
English: He also quoted "Han's Easy Biography" as saying: "The five emperors took the world as their public, the three kings took the world as their home, passed the world as their home to their children and grandchildren, and passed the world as their public to the sages. Just like the four seasons, those who have accomplished great things will leave, and those who are not suitable will not be in their place.

古文：书奏，上以宽饶怨谤终不改，下其书中二千石。
现代文：遣封密章上奏之后，皇上认为宽饶怨恨诽谤终究没有悔改，就把他的奏章交给中二千石。
English: After the enthronement ceremony, the emperor thought that the lenient resentment and slander had not repented after all, so he gave his medal to the middle two thousand koku.

古文：时，执金吾议，以为宽饶指意欲求禅，大逆不道。
现代文：当时执金吾评论，认为宽饶的意图是想要皇帝让位，大逆不道。
English: At that time, the Executor of the Jinwu commented that the intention of clemency was to make the emperor abdicate, which was an act of high treason.

古文：谏大夫郑昌愍伤宽饶忠直忧国，以言事不当意而为文吏所诋挫，上书颂宽饶曰： 臣闻山有猛兽，藜藿为之不采；国有忠臣，奸邪为之不起。
现代文：谏大夫郑昌怜悯宽饶忠诚正直关心国事，因为议论国事不合皇帝心意而被舞文弄墨的官吏诋毁中伤，于是上书称颂宽饶说： 我听说山中有猛兽，藜藿因而不被人摘采；国家有忠臣，奸邪之人因而不敢起来。
English: Dr. Zheng Chang, who was compassionate, generous, loyal, and honestly concerned about state affairs, was slandered and slandered by officials who made up stories because discussing state affairs was not in line with the emperor's will. Therefore, he wrote a letter praising generosity, saying: I heard that there are fierce beasts in the mountains, so the donkeys are not picked up by people; the country has loyal servants, so people who commit evil do not dare to stand up.

古文：司隶校尉宽饶居不求安，食不球饱，进有忧国之心，退有死节之义，上无许、史之属，下无金、张之托，职在司察，直道而行，多仇少与，上书陈国事，有司劾以大辟，臣幸得从大夫之后，官以谏为名，不敢不言。 
现代文：司隶校尉宽饶居住不求安逸，食不求饱，身在朝廷而有忧国之心，退居田野而有为志节舍生的义气，上不投靠许、史之家，下不接受金、张的请托，他本职在于监察，坚持正道做事，仇人多党羽少，上奏书陈述国家大事，官吏们用触犯大刑的罪名来弹劾他，我有幸得以跟随大夫的后面，担任著名为谏的官职，不敢不说。 
English: Colonel Sili lived generously without seeking comfort, ate without seeking fullness, worried about the country while he was in the imperial court, retired to the fields but had the loyalty to sacrifice his life for his ambition, did not rely on Xu and Shi's family, and did not accept money and Zhang's request. His duty was to supervise and adhere to the right way of doing things. He had few enemies and many party feathers. He submitted a report on national affairs, and officials impeached him with the crime of committing capital punishment. I was fortunate enough to follow the doctor and hold the official position called "Shan," I dare not say.

古文：上不听，遂下宽饶吏。
现代文：皇上不肯听从，便把宽饶交给狱吏。
English: The emperor did not want to obey, so he gave the clemency to the jailer.

古文：宽饶引佩刀自刭北阙下，众莫不怜之。
现代文：宽饶拔出佩刀在北阙下自刎了，人们没有不怜惜他的。
English: Guangrao pulled out his saber and hanged himself under the North Tower. People felt sorry for him.

古文：诸葛丰字少季，琅邪人也。
现代文：诸葛丰字少季，是琅邪人。
English: Zhuge Fengzi is a young man, but he is a wicked man.

古文：以明经为郡文学，名特立刚直。
现代文：因为通晓经术担任了郡的文学，以特立独行刚强正直而有名。
English: Because he was familiar with the scriptures, he served as the county's literature, and was famous for being a maverick, strong and honest.

古文：贡禹为御史大夫，除丰为属，举侍御史。
现代文：贡禹是御史大夫，任命诸葛丰担任属官，后又荐举他担任侍御史。
English: Gong Yu was the Imperial Historian, appointed Zhuge Feng as a subordinate official, and later recommended him to serve as the Imperial Historian.

古文：元帝擢为司隶校尉，刺举无所避，京师为之语曰： 间何阔，逢诸葛。 
现代文：元帝提拔他担任司隶校尉，侦察检举无所回避。京城裹的人给他编了一句辞： 为何久别不见，衹因遇上了诸葛。 
English: The Yuan Emperor promoted him to the rank of lieutenant of Sili, and there was no avoiding the investigation and prosecution. The people in Beijing made up a speech for him: Why haven't I seen you for a long time, I met Zhuge because of you.

古文：上嘉其节，加丰秩光禄大夫。
现代文：皇上嘉奖他的志节，加封光禄大夫。
English: The Emperor rewarded him for his dedication with the additional title of Doctor Guanglu.

古文：时，侍中许章以外属贵幸，奢淫不奉法度，宾客犯事，与章相连。
现代文：当时侍中许章凭着外戚的身份而获得尊贵和宠幸，奢侈淫逸不守法制，有一次他的门客犯了事，与许章有牵连。
English: At that time, the chamberlain, Xu Zhang, gained honor and favor by virtue of his status as a relative, and did not abide by the rule of law. Once, his concubine committed a crime and was implicated with Xu Zhang.

古文：丰案劾章，欲奉其事，适逢许侍中私出，丰驻车举节诏章曰： 下！ 
现代文：诸葛丰按照法令查究许章，想要把他的事上奏，恰好遇上许侍中私自外出，诸葛丰停下车子，举起手中的符节命令许章道： 下来！ 
English: Zhugefeng investigated Xu Zhang in accordance with the law, and wanted to bring his case to light. When he happened to meet Xu Zhong, Zhugefeng stopped the car, held up the symbols in his hand and ordered Xu Zhang: "Get down!

古文：欲收之。
现代文：想要逮捕他。
English: He wanted to take the sheep away.

古文：章迫窘，驰车去，丰追之。
现代文：许章很窘迫，驱车逃走，诸葛丰在后面追赶他。
English: Xu Zhang was very embarrassed and drove away. Zhugefeng chased after him.

古文：许侍中因得入宫门，自归上。
现代文：许侍中于是能够进入宫门，向皇上乞怜。
English: As a result, Xu Zhanzhong was able to enter the palace gate and beg for mercy from the emperor.

古文：丰亦上奏，于是收丰节。
现代文：诸葛丰也上了奏书，当时皇上没收了诸葛丰的符节。
English: Zhugefeng was also put on the report, when the emperor confiscated Zhugefeng's symbols.

古文：司隶去节自丰始。
现代文：司隶取消符节就是从诸葛丰开始的。
English: It was Zhuge Feng who initiated the cancellation of the festival.

古文：丰上书谢曰： 臣丰驽怯，文不足以劝善，武不足以执邪。
现代文：诸葛丰上书谢罪说： 我驽钝怯弱，文的一面不能勉励善行，武的一面又不能压制恶行。
English: Zhugefeng wrote a letter to Xie Sin saying: I am dull and timid, the literary side cannot encourage good deeds, and the military side cannot suppress evil deeds.

古文：陛下不量臣能否，拜为司隶校尉，未有以自效，复秩臣为光禄大夫，官尊责重，非臣所当处也。
现代文：陛下您没有考察我的能力，就让我担任司隶校尉，我没有作出什么贡献，您又加封我为光禄大夫，官位尊贵责任重大，这实在不是我适宜担任的。
English: Your Majesty, you didn't examine my ability, so you made me a lieutenant of the Corps of Cadets. I didn't make any contribution. You also made me a doctor of the Order of the Star. This is a high-ranking position with great responsibilities, and it's really not something I'm suited for.

古文：又迫年岁衰暮，常恐卒填沟渠，无以报厚德，使论议士讥臣无补，长获素餐之名。
现代文：而且我已接近衰暮之年，常常担心骤然离开人世，无从报答您的大德，使得人们讥笑我对国家没有贡献，永远落一个白吃饭的名声。
English: Moreover, I am nearing the end of my life, and I often worry that I will die suddenly without being able to repay your great virtue, causing people to ridicule me for not contributing to the country and forever losing the reputation of eating for free.

古文：故常愿捐一旦之命，不待时而断奸臣之首，悬于都市，编书其罪，使四方明知为恶之罚，然后却就斧钺之诛，诚臣所甘心也。夫以布衣之士，尚犹有刎颈之交，今以四海之大，曾无伏节死谊之臣，率尽苟合取容，阿党相为，念私门之利，忘国家之政。
现代文：所以我常常希望能贡献出残余的生命，随时砍下奸臣的头，悬挂在街市上，编写出他们的罪状，让四面八方的人都知道做恶的惩罚，这样以后我自己就退下来接受严厉的惩处，这确实是我所心甘情愿的，像平民身份的士人，尚且有可以共生死的朋友，如今凭四海这样的广大，竟没有徇节死义的臣子，而大都是苟且迎合，衹求勾结党羽胡作非为，衹知顾念私家的利益，忘记国家的政事。
English: Therefore, I often hope to devote the rest of my life to cutting off the heads of treacherous ministers at any time, hanging them in the street market, compiling their charges, and letting people in all directions know the punishment for doing evil, so that I myself will step down and accept severe punishment in the future. This is indeed what I am willing to do. As a commoner, I still have friends who can live and die together. Nowadays, with the vastness of the four seas, there are no ministers who are scrupulous and righteous, but most of them are pandering, seeking to collude with the party and doing illegal things, not caring about private interests, and forgetting the country's

古文：邪秽浊混之气上感于天，是以灾变数见，百姓困乏。
现代文：邪恶污秽浑浊之气触动上天，因此灾害变故多次出现，百姓困苦穷乏。
English: Evil, filth, and turbid air touched the heavens, so disasters and misfortunes occurred many times, and the people were poor and destitute.

古文：此臣下不忠之效也，臣诚耻之亡已。
现代文：这是臣下不忠诚的后果，我实在为此感到羞耻不已。
English: This is the result of the disloyalty of my subordinates, and I am truly ashamed of it.

古文：凡人情莫不欲安存而恶危亡，然忠臣直士不避患害者，诚为君也。
现代文：大抵人的常情没有不希望好好活着而讨厌危险与死亡的，但是忠义之臣正直之士不逃避患难与祸害的原因，实在是为了国君。
English: It is not in the nature of most men not to desire to live well and to hate danger and death, but it is for the sake of the sovereign that the loyal and honest man does not shrink from adversity and calamity.

古文：今陛下天覆地载，物无不容，使尚书令尧赐臣丰书曰： 夫司隶者刺举不法，善善恶恶，非得颛之也。
现代文：如今陛下您像上天覆盖万物如大地承受一切，无论什么事没有不被包容的，派遣尚书令尧赐给我的诏书说道： 司隶侦察检举不守法纪的人，表彰善行惩治恶行，不得任意专行。
English: Now, Your Majesty, just as the heavens cover all things and the earth bears all things, no matter what, there is nothing that cannot be tolerated. The imperial edict given to me said, "Shibu, investigate and prosecute those who do not abide by the law and discipline, commend good deeds and punish evil deeds, and must not act arbitrarily."

古文：勉处中和，顺经术意。 恩深德厚，臣丰顿首幸甚。
现代文：要努力履行中庸协和的原则，遵循经术中的意思来办事，您恩德深厚，我向您叩头，感到无比荣幸。
English: To work hard to fulfill the principle of harmony between moderation and moderation, to follow the meaning of the operation, you are deeply grateful, I bow to you, I feel extremely honored.

古文：臣窃不胜愤懑，愿赐清宴，唯陛下裁幸。 
现代文：我私下裹不能承受忧愤与烦闷，希望您赏赐我清闲的生活，希望您裁断。 
English: I secretly can't bear the sadness and boredom, I hope you reward me with a life of leisure, I hope you judge.

古文：上不许。
现代文：皇上没有允许。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：是后，所言益不用，丰复上书言： 臣闻伯奇孝而弃于亲，子胥忠而诛于君，隐公慈而杀于弟，叔武弟而杀于兄。
现代文：这以后他所说的话越来越不被采用，诸葛丰又上书说： 我听说伯奇孝顺却被父母遗弃，子胥忠诚却被君王诛杀，隐公仁慈却被弟弟杀害，叔武尊敬兄长却被兄长杀戮。
English: After this, his words were less and less accepted, and Zhugefeng wrote again: "I have heard that Birch was filial but abandoned by his parents, Zibo was loyal but was killed by the king, Hiding was kind but was killed by his brother, Uncle Wu respected his brother but was killed by his brother.

古文：夫以四子之行，屈平之材，然犹不能自显而被刑戮，岂不足以观哉！
现代文：有这四人的德行，屈原的才能，仍然不能让自己显明反而遭到杀戮，难道还不够引以为鉴吗？
English: With the virtues of these four people and Qu Yuan's talent, he still could not make himself clear, but was killed. Isn't that enough to learn from?

古文：使臣杀身以安国，蒙诛以显君，臣诚愿之。
现代文：假如我献出生命能够安定国家，遭到杀戮能够显扬国君，我确实愿意遣么干。
English: If I can give my life to stabilize the country, and if I can be killed to glorify the sovereign, I am indeed willing to do so.

古文：独恐未有云补，而为众邪所排，令谗夫得遂，正直之路雍塞，忠臣沮心，智士杜口，此愚臣之所惧也。 
现代文：衹恐怕对国家没有益处，却被一些邪恶势力所排挤，让那些一味背地裹说人坏话诬陷别人的家伙得逞，正直之士的道路被堵塞，忠臣寒心，智者闭口，这正是我所害怕的。 
English: I am afraid that the country will not benefit from it, but it will be ousted by some evil forces, and those who slander and frame others will succeed. The path of honest people will be blocked, the loyal will be cold, and the wise will be silent. This is exactly what I am afraid of.

古文：丰以春夏系治人，在位多言其短。
现代文：诸葛丰在春夏两季拘捕和惩治犯人，当权者中有很多人说他的坏话。
English: Zhugefeng arrested and punished criminals in the spring and summer, and many people in power spoke ill of him.

古文：上徙丰为城门校尉，丰上书告光禄勋周堪、光禄大夫张猛。
现代文：皇上调任诸葛丰担任城门校尉，诸葛丰上书控告光禄勋周堪、光禄大夫张猛。
English: The emperor transferred Zhugefeng to the post of castle gate captain, and Zhugefeng sent a letter of complaint to Guanglu Honored Worker Zhou Kan and Guanglu Doctor Zhang Meng.

古文：上不直丰，乃制诏御史： 城门校尉丰，前与光禄勋堪、光禄大夫猛在朝之时，数称言堪、猛之美。
现代文：皇上认为诸葛丰不对，就下诏书给御史说： 城门校尉诸葛丰，从前与光禄勋周堪、光禄大夫张猛在朝廷共事的时候，多次称扬周堪、张猛的优点。
English: The emperor thought that Zhugefeng was not right, so he issued an imperial decree to the imperial historian, saying: "Castle gate captain Zhugefeng, when he once worked with Guanglu medalist Zhou Kan and Guanglu doctor Zhang Meng at the imperial court, praised the merits of Zhou Kan and Zhang Meng many times.

古文：丰前为司隶校尉，不顺四时，修法度，专作苛暴，以获虚威，朕不忍下吏，以为城门校尉。
现代文：诸葛丰从前任司隶校尉，不按季节办事，不遵循法制，而专擅施行苛刻暴虐，以此获得虚假的威望，我不忍心把他交给狱吏，就让他去担任城门校尉。
English: Zhugefeng rose from the former captain of the police force. He does not act according to the season, does not follow the legal system, but is proficient in the implementation of harsh brutality, thereby gaining false prestige. I can't bear to hand him over to the prison guards, so I let him go to serve as the captain of the city gate.

古文：不内省诸己。而反怨堪、猛，以求报举，告案无证之辞，暴扬难验之罪，毁誉恣意，不顾前言，不信之大者也。
现代文：他不进行反省，却反而怨恨周堪、张猛，以图谋打击报复，定罪之词没有证据，揭露难以验证的罪行，毁谤称誉别人全凭主观愿望，不顾及自己以前说遇的话，这是严重的不讲求信用的行为。
English: Instead of self-reflection, he held grudges against Zhou Kan and Zhang Meng, plotted to retaliate, convicted people without evidence, exposed crimes that were difficult to verify, slandered and praised others based on subjective wishes, and disregarded what he had said before. This was a serious act of not seeking credibility.

古文：朕怜丰之耆老，不忍加刑，其免为庶人。 
现代文：我可怜诸葛丰已年老，不忍心施加刑罚，着令免去他的官职去当老百姓。 
English: I feel sorry for Zhugefeng, he is old and can't bear to impose punishment, so I ordered him to be removed from his official position and become a commoner.

古文：终于家。
现代文：诸葛丰老死在家。
English: He ended up staying at home.

古文：刘辅，河间宗室人也。
现代文：刘辅，是河间国的皇族人士。
English: Liu Yu is a member of the imperial family of the state of Kham.

古文：举孝廉，为襄贲令。
现代文：被举为孝廉，担任了襄贲的县令。
English: He was raised as a filial son and served as the county magistrate of Xiangfan.

古文：上书言得失，召见，上美其材，擢为谏大夫。
现代文：上奏章议论国家政事的得失，被皇上召见，皇上赏识他的才能，提拔他担任谏大夫。
English: He was summoned to see the emperor, who appreciated his talent and promoted him to the post of imperial physician.

古文：会成帝欲立赵婕妤为皇后，先下诏封婕妤父临为列侯。
现代文：正赶上成帝想要立趟健伃作皇后，先下诏书赐封使仔的父亲临为列侯。
English: Just as Emperor Cheng wanted to make Jianye the empress, he issued an imperial edict to make Jianye's father a vassal lord.

古文：辅上书言： 臣闻天之所与，必先赐以符瑞；天之所违，必先降以灾变：此神明之征应，自然之占验也。
现代文：刘辅上书说： 我听说上天如果赞同就一定会赐与吉祥的征兆，上天如果反对就一定会降下灾异和变故，这是神明的应兆，自然的预测。
English: Liu Yu said in his letter: I have heard that if Heaven approves, it will surely give auspicious signs. If Heaven disapproves, it will surely bring disasters and changes. This is the divine response and natural prediction.

古文：昔武王、周公承顺天地，以飨鱼乌之瑞，然犹君臣祗惧，动色相戒，况于季世，不蒙继嗣之福，屡受威怒之异者虖！
现代文：从前武王、周公顺承天地的旨意，因而获得了白鱼赤乌的祥瑞，然而君臣仍然忧惧，震惊警惕互相劝诫，何况处于当今末世，没有蒙受子孙繁衍的福祉，却屡次遭到上天发威震怒而降下的灾异呢？
English: In the past, King Wu and Zhou Gong obeyed the will of heaven and earth, and thus obtained the auspiciousness of the white fish and red wax. However, the monarchs and courtiers are still worried, shocked and alert to exhort each other. What's more, in today's last days, they have not received the welfare of procreation, but have repeatedly been subjected to the disaster caused by the wrath of heaven.

古文：虽夙夜自责，改过易行，畏天命，念祖业，妙选有德之世，考卜窈窕之女，以承宗庙，顺神祇心，塞天下望，子孙之详犹恐晚暮，今乃触情纵欲，倾于卑贱之女，欲以母天下，不畏于天，不愧于人，惑莫大焉。
现代文：即使每天自责，改正过错纠正行为，敬畏天命，想到祖宗的功业，好好地选择一个有德的家族，卜求一个美丽贤能的女子，以继承宗庙，顺应天神的心意，满足天下民众的愿望，繁衍子孙的吉祥尚且担心来得晚，如今却触发情意放纵欲望，倾心于这个卑贱的女子，想要把她作为天下人之母，对上天不感到敬畏，对百姓不感到惭愧，没有比这更糊涂的了。
English: Even if you reproach yourself every day, correct your mistakes and correct your behavior, fear the fate of heaven, think about the deeds of your ancestors, carefully choose a virtuous family, pray for a beautiful and virtuous woman to inherit the ancestral temple, comply with the will of the angels, meet the wishes of the people of the world, multiply the auspiciousness of offspring and worry about being late, but now it triggers the desire to indulge, fall in love with this lowly woman, want to make her the mother of the world, do not feel fear of heaven, do not feel ashamed of the people, there is nothing more confused.

古文：里语曰： 腐木不可以为柱，卑人不可以为主。 天人之所不予，必有祸而无福，市道皆共知之，朝廷莫肯一言，臣窃伤心。
现代文：俗话说： 腐朽的木材不能用来作柱子，卑贱的人不能让他作主人，上天和百姓都不赞成的，一定有祸害而没有益处，这是街市上和道路上的人都知道的道理，朝廷中却没有人肯说一句真话，我私下裹感到伤心。
English: As the saying goes, rotten wood cannot be used for pillars, the lowly cannot be allowed to be masters, heaven and the people do not approve, there must be harm and no benefit, this is a truth that everyone in the market and on the road knows, but no one in the court is willing to say a word of truth, I feel sad in private.

古文：自念得以同姓拔擢，尸禄不忠，污辱谏争之官，不敢不尽死，唯陛下深察。 
现代文：我想到因为与皇上同姓才得到提拔，光享受俸禄而不尽忠，污辱了谏诤的官职，不敢不冒死进言，希望陛下您深切地审察。 
English: When I think that I was promoted because I have the same surname as the Emperor, that I enjoyed my salary without being loyal, and that I dishonored my official position, I dare not say anything without risking my life. I hope that Your Majesty will carefully examine this.

古文：书奏，上使侍御史收缚辅，系掖庭秘狱，群臣莫知其故。
现代文：奏章上奏以后，皇上派侍御史逮捕了刘辅，把他囚禁在后宫的秘密监狱裹，大臣们都不了解其中的缘故。
English: After the opening of the musical score, the emperor sent an attendant to arrest Liu Bei and imprison him in a secret prison in the harem. The ministers did not understand the reason for this.

古文：于是中朝左将军辛庆忌、右将军廉褒、光禄勋师丹、太中大夫谷永俱上书曰： 臣闻明王垂宽容之听，崇谏争之官，广开忠直之路，不罪狂狷之言，然后百僚在位，竭忠尽谋，不惧后患，朝廷无谄谀之士，元首无失道之愆。
现代文：当时中朝左将军辛庆忌、右将军廉褒、光禄勋鳄且、太中大夫圭速都上奏说： 我们听说英明的君王广泛地听取意见，重视谏静之官，广开忠直之士的道路，对狂妄和偏急的言论也不加罪，然后群臣各守自己的职位，尽量献出自己的忠诚和智谋，朝廷无后顾之忧，朝中没有阿谀奉承的官员，君主没有背离正道的过失。
English: At that time, the left general Xin Qing Bo, the right general Ren Bo, and the honorable general Guang Lu, as well as the imperial physician Gui Hao, all went to the capital and said, "We have heard that the wise king listens to opinions widely, attaches importance to calm officials, opens the way for loyal and upright people, and does not punish arrogant and hasty remarks. Then the ministers each keep their positions and try their best to offer their loyalty and wisdom. The court has no worries, there are no flattering officials in the court, and the monarch has not deviated from the right path.

古文：窃见谏大夫刘辅，前以县令求见，擢为谏大夫，此其言必有卓诡切至，当圣心者，故得拔至于此。
现代文：我们私下看到谏大夫刘辅，以前凭县令的身份求见皇上，被提拔为谏大夫，这表明他的议论必定有卓越异常和切实确当，符合圣意的内容，所以才能够被提拔到这样的职位。
English: Privately, we saw that Dr. Liu Fu, who had previously petitioned the emperor as a county magistrate, was promoted to Dr. Fu, which indicates that his speech must be extraordinary and practical, in line with the content of the will, so that he can be promoted to such a position.

古文：旬日之间，收下秘狱，臣等愚，以为辅幸得托公族之亲，在谏臣之列，新从下土来，未知朝廷体，独触忌讳，不足深过。
现代文：可是十天之间，却被收捕囚禁在秘密监狱裹，我们愚昧无知，认为刘辅有幸得以托身为皇族的亲属，处于谏官的行列，他从下面的职位上来，不知道朝廷的体制，独自触犯忌讳，不值得深究。
English: However, within ten days, he was arrested and imprisoned in a secret prison. We were ignorant and thought that Liu Fu had the privilege of being a relative of the royal family and was in the ranks of eunuchs. He came up from a lower position, did not know the system of the imperial court, and broke taboos on his own. It was not worth investigating.

古文：小罪宜隐忍而已，如有大恶，宜暴治理官，与众共之。
现代文：小罪应当隐忍一些，如果有重大的罪恶，应该交给司法官员公开审理，让大家都知道他的罪状，共同惩罚他。
English: Minor crimes should be tolerated, and if there is a major crime, it should be submitted to judicial officials for public trial, so that everyone knows his guilt and punishes him together.

古文：昔赵简子杀其大夫鸣犊，孔子临河而还。
现代文：从前趟简子杀害他的大夫鸣犊，孔子走到黄河边又回去了。
English: Confucius walked to the edge of the Yellow River and back again after the previous time when Jianzi killed his doctor, Mingtang.

古文：今天心未豫，灾异屡降，水旱迭臻，方当隆宽广问，褒直尽下之时也。
现代文：现在上天的心意不快，灾害变异屡次降临，水灾旱灾接连不断，正是应当宽厚为怀，广泛征询意见，褒扬正直以尽量发挥百姓力量的时候。
English: Now that Heaven's will is displeased, disasters and disasters are repeatedly coming, floods and droughts are continuous, it is time to be generous, widely solicit opinions, praise honesty and give full play to the power of the people.

古文：而行惨急之诛于谏争之臣，震惊群下，失忠直心。
现代文：但是却对敢于谏静的大臣施行悲惨突然的诛杀，使大家感到震惊，使忠诚正直之士寒心。
English: However, he shocked everyone with the tragic and sudden killing of the minister who dared to keep quiet, and made loyal and honest people feel cold.

古文：假令辅不坐直言，所坐不著，天下不可户晓。
现代文：如果刘辅不是因为直言敢谏而犯罪，那么对他所犯的罪恶不公开宣布，天下人就都不能知道。
English: If Liu Wei did not commit the crime because he was outspoken, then if he did not publicly announce the crime he committed, the whole world would not know about it.

古文：同姓近臣本以言显，其于治亲养忠之义诚不宜幽囚于掖庭狱。
现代文：与皇上同姓以及亲近皇上的大臣，本来是因为敢于说真话而获得显贵，从处理亲属保护忠直之士的意义上说的确不应该将他秘密囚禁在掖庭监狱裹。
English: A minister with the same surname as the emperor and who is close to the emperor was originally distinguished for daring to speak the truth. In terms of dealing with relatives and protecting loyal people, he really should not be secretly imprisoned in Xingting Prison.

古文：公卿以下见陛下进用辅亟，而折伤之暴，人有惧心，精锐销耎，莫敢尽节正言，非所以昭有虞之听，广德美之风也。
现代文：公卿大臣及其以下的官吏看到陛下您提拔刘辅是那样急迫，而打击伤害他却又是这样粗暴，人人都怀着恐惧的心理，精进锐取的意志消失而变得软弱，不敢再尽忠职守坚持正论，这不是发扬虞舜倾听臣下的意见，弘扬品德美好风气的作法。
English: When the minister of public security and his subordinate officials saw that Your Majesty was in such a hurry to promote Liu Wei, and that the attack on him was so brutal, everyone was filled with fear, and the will to forge ahead disappeared and became weak. They no longer dared to perform their duties faithfully and adhere to the correct theory. This is not the way to carry forward the spirit of listening to the opinions of your subjects and promoting the fine morals and ethics.

古文：臣等窃深伤之，唯陛下留神省察。 
现代文：我们私下裹深深为此感到痛心，希望您留意审察。 
English: Privately, we are deeply saddened by this, and we hope you will pay attention to the review.

古文：上乃徙系辅共工狱，减死罪一等，论为鬼薪。
现代文：皇上于是将刘辅迁移囚禁到少府所管的诏狱，减死罪一等，判处给宗庙服劳役。
English: As a result, the emperor transferred Liu Shuo to the imperial prison under the jurisdiction of Shofu, commuted his death sentence to the first degree, and sentenced him to forced labor in the family temple.

古文：终于家。
现代文：他终老在家里。
English: He ended up staying at home.

古文：郑崇字子游，本高密大族，世与王家相嫁娶。
现代文：郑崇字子游，本来是高密国的大族，世代与王家通婚。
English: Zheng Chongzhi Ziyu was originally a member of the Gaomi clan, who intermarried with the royal family for generations.

古文：祖父以訾徙平陵。
现代文：祖父因为有钱迁居平陵。
English: My grandfather moved to Pingling because he had money.

古文：父宾明法令，为御史，事贡公，名公直。
现代文：父亲郑宾通晓法令，做了御史，事奉贡公，以公正刚直而闻名。
English: His father, Zheng Bin, was well-versed in laws and decrees, made imperial histories, served as a tributary, and was known for his fairness and uprightness.

古文：崇少为郡文学史，至丞相大车属。
现代文：郑崇年轻时担任郡的文学史，后做到丞相府大车御属员。
English: When he was young, Zheng Chong served as the county's literary historian, and later became a member of the cabinet of the prime minister.

古文：弟立与高武侯傅喜同门学，相友善。
现代文：弟弟郑立跟高武侯傅喜在同一个老师门下学习，互相友好。
English: His younger brother Zheng Li and Gao Wu Hou Fu Xi studied under the same teacher and were friendly with each other.

古文：喜为大司马，荐崇，哀帝擢为尚书仆射。
现代文：傅喜做了大司马，就推荐郑崇，哀帝提拔他担任尚书仆射。
English: Fu Xi recommended Zheng Chong when he became the grand steward, and Emperor Ming promoted him to the post of Shang Shu's footman.

古文：数求见谏争，上初纳用之。
现代文：他几次求见皇上进行谏诤，皇上开始还采纳他的意见。
English: He asked several times to see the emperor for an imperial edict, and the emperor initially accepted his opinion.

古文：每见曳革履，上笑曰： 我识郑尚书履声。 
现代文：每次看到他拖着生牛皮鞋，皇上都笑着说： 我能够听得出郑尚书的脚步声。 
English: Every time he saw him dragging his raw cowhide shoes, the emperor smiled and said: I can hear the footsteps of Zheng Shangshu.

古文：久之，上欲封祖母傅太后从弟商，崇谏曰： 孝成皇帝封亲舅五侯，天为赤黄昼昏，日中有黑气。
现代文：过了很久，皇上想要给祖母傅太后的堂弟傅商封爵，郑崇进谏说： 孝成皇帝封五个亲舅舅为侯，上天因此变成了红黄色，白天变得昏暗起来，太阳当中有黑气。
English: After a long time, the emperor wanted to give a title of nobility to Fu Shang, the cousin of the grandmother Fu Daiwei, and Zheng Chongjin said: Emperor Xiaocheng made five of his uncles princes. As a result, the sky turned red and yellow, the day became dark, and there was black gas in the sun.

古文：今祖母从昆弟二人已侯。
现代文：现在您的祖母的堂兄弟两人已经封了侯。
English: Now two of your grandmother's cousins are married.

古文：孔乡侯，皇后父；高武侯以三公封，尚有因缘。
现代文：孔乡侯，是皇后的父亲；高武侯凭三公的身份封了侯，这些都可说还有一定的理由。
English: Kong Xianghou is the father of the empress; Gaowu Hou sealed Hou with the identity of the three princes, these can be said to have a certain reason.

古文：今无故欲复封商，坏乱制度，逆天人之心，非傅氏之福也。
现代文：现在无缘无故地又想要给傅商封爵，造就破坏扰乱了制度。违背了天意和人心，不是傅匡的福祉。
English: Now, for no reason, they want to give Fu Shang a knighthood, creating havoc and disrupting the system. It is against the will of heaven and the people, and is not for Fu Kuang's welfare.

古文：臣闻师曰： 逆阳者厥极弱，逆阴者厥极凶短折，犯人者有乱亡之患，犯神者有疾夭之祸。 故周公著戒曰： 惟王不知艰难，唯耽乐是从，时亦罔有克寿。 故衰世之君夭折蚤没，此皆犯阴之害也。
现代文：我听老师说遇： 违背阳者其极弱，违背阴者的结果是短命夭折，侵犯别人的人有祸乱灭亡的忧患，触犯神明的人有疾病夭折的灾祸，所以周公写下诫训说： 君王不知国事的艰难，一味沉溺于娱乐之中，这也很少有能够长寿的，所以衰亡时期的国君夭折早死，遣都是违反阴之道的祸害。
English: I heard my teacher say: Those who disobey the yang are extremely weak, those who disobey the yin are short-lived, those who encroach on others are plagued by calamity, and those who offend the gods are plagued by illness and premature death. Therefore, Zhou Gong wrote down a commandment and said: The king does not know the difficulties of state affairs, and is addicted to entertainment. This is also rare to be able to live long. Therefore, the king of the decline period died prematurely, and it is the scourge of violating the yin way.

古文：臣愿以身命当国咎。 
现代文：我宁愿用自己的性命来抵挡国家的灾祸。 
English: I would rather defend my life against the scourge of the state.

古文：崇因持诏书案起。
现代文：郑崇于是捧着诏书板站了起来。
English: Zheng Chong then stood up holding the edict board.

古文：傅太后大怒曰： 何有为天子乃反为一臣所颛制邪！ 
现代文：傅太后大怒说： 哪裹有做天子的却反被一个臣子制服呢！ 
English: Empress Dowager Fu said angrily, "How can one be a son of heaven and be overpowered by a vassal?"

古文：上遂下诏曰： 朕幼而孤，皇太太后躬自养育，免于襁褓，教道以礼，至于成人，惠泽茂焉。 欲报之德，昊天罔极。 前追号皇太太后父为崇祖侯，惟念德报未殊，朕甚恧焉。
现代文：皇上便下诏令说： 我年幼时就成了孤儿，蒙皇太太后亲自言养，在婴儿时期就进行教育，用礼义教导我，一直到长大成人，恩泽深厚。 想要报答这种恩德，苍天哪，我的心意是没有穷尽的，从前追封皇太太后的父亲为崇祖侯，想到对她的恩德报答得很不够，我感到很惭愧。
English: The Emperor then issued a decree saying, "I was orphaned at a young age, raised by the Empress Dowager herself, educated from infancy, and taught manners and etiquette until I became an adult, for which I am deeply grateful. My desire to repay this kindness is, alas, inexhaustible. Once upon a time, the Empress Dowager's father was revered as a great-grandfather. I am ashamed to think that I have not sufficiently repaid her kindness.

古文：侍中光禄大夫商，皇太太后父同产子，小自保大，恩义最亲。
现代文：侍中光禄大夫傅商，是皇太太后的父亲的胞侄，皇太太后从小把他抚养长大，恩义最亲。
English: The chamberlain, Dr. Fu Shang, was a nephew of the empress dowager's father. The empress dowager raised him from a young age and was most grateful to him.

古文：其封商为汝昌侯，为崇祖侯后，更号崇祖侯为汝昌哀侯。 
现代文：着令赐封堡适为这旦堡，让他作塞主噬的后代，将塞担侯的封号改为汝吕哀侯。 
English: He issued an order to give the seal of the castle to this castle, to make him the descendant of the lord of the castle, and to change the seal of the lord of the castle to the lord of the castle.

古文：崇又以董贤贵宠过度谏，由是重得罪。
现代文：郑崇又因为董贤显贵宠幸过分而对皇上进谏，因此严重地犯了罪。
English: Zheng Chong also made a complaint against the emperor because Dong Xianxian was too favored by the emperor, and thus seriously committed a crime.

古文：数以职事见责，发疾颈痈，欲乞骸骨，不敢。
现代文：他好几次因为职任上的事务而受到谴责，颈部生了瘫疽，想要请求回乡养老，没敢上奏。
English: He was reprimanded several times because of his official duties, he developed paralysis in his neck, he wanted to ask to return to his hometown to retire, but he did not dare to play.

古文：尚书令赵昌佞谄，素害崇，知其见疏，因奏崇与宗族通，疑有奸，请治。
现代文：尚书令赵昌奸佞谄媚，向来嫉妒郑崇，知道他已被疏远，因而上奏说郑崇与皇族勾结，怀疑奸伪，请予追究。
English: Shang Shuxu had always been jealous of Zheng Chong, knowing that he had been alienated, and therefore reported that Zheng Chong had colluded with the royal family. Suspicion of treachery, please investigate.

古文：上责崇曰： 君门如市人，何以欲禁切主上？ 
现代文：皇上责备塑塞说： 你自己门庭若市，为什么要责备皇上？ 
English: The Emperor reproached the corkscrew and said, "You have a good reputation yourself, why should you reproach the Emperor?

古文：崇对曰： 臣门如市，臣心如水，愿得考覆。 
现代文：郑崇回答说： 臣虽门庭若市，但却心如止水。我愿意接受拷问和审察。 
English: Zheng Chong replied, "Although I have a loyal following, my heart is like water. I am willing to be interrogated and examined.

古文：上怒，下崇狱，穷治，死狱中。
现代文：皇上大怒，把塑塞关进监狱，彻底追究，郑崇死在监狱裹。
English: The emperor was furious, put the plastic plug in prison, thoroughly investigated, and Zheng Chong died in prison.

古文：孙宝字子严，颍川鄢陵人也，以明经为郡吏。
现代文：孙宝字子严，是题贝坚建人。因为通晓经术而担任了郡吏。
English: Sun Bao was a strict disciplinarian and the founder of Jibei Jian. He served as a county official because he was familiar with the scriptures.

古文：御史大夫张忠辟宝为属，欲令授子经，更为除舍，设储偫。
现代文：御史大夫亟盅征召逊宣作自己的下属，想要让他给儿子传授经学，另外给他安排住房，设置备用器物。
English: The chief historian urgently summoned Sun Xuan to be his subordinate, wanting him to teach his son the study of scripture, as well as arrange housing for him and set up spare utensils.

古文：宝自劾去，忠固还之，心内不平。
现代文：莲宣自己说明自己的短处要求离去，垂盅再三挽留他，内心却感到不服气。
English: Lian Xuan himself explained his shortcomings and asked to leave, coveting repeatedly to retain him, but inwardly he felt unconvinced.

古文：后署宝主簿，宝徙入舍，祭灶请比邻。
现代文：后来张忠任命孙宝代理主簿，孙实迁入新的住宅，祭祀宠神，邀请邻居。
English: Later, Zhang Zhong appointed Sun Bao as the acting master, and Sun Shih moved into a new house, worshiped his favorite god, and invited his neighbors.

古文：忠阴察，怪之，使所亲问宝： 前大夫为君设除大舍，子自劾去者，欲为高节也。
现代文：张忠暗地裹观察，对他的行动感到诧异，便派亲信去询问孙宝： 以前御史大夫替您安排宽大的住宅，您自揭短处要求离去的原因是想要表示自己的高尚节操。
English: Zhang Zhong secretly observed and was surprised by his actions, so he sent his relatives to inquire about Sun Bao: Dr. Goshi used to arrange a spacious house for you. The reason why you asked to leave was to show your noble integrity.

古文：今两府高士俗不为主簿，子既为之，徙舍甚说，何前后不相副也？ 
现代文：如今丞相、御史大夫两府的高尚之士按照惯例不肯担任主簿，而您自己担任了这个职务，迁入新宅感到很高兴，为什么前后不一致呢？ 
English: Now, the noblemen of the two prefectures, including the prime minister and the chief historian, refused to serve as the chief accountant in accordance with the usual practice, but you yourself held this position and were happy to move into the new house. Why is there a discrepancy?

古文：宝曰： 高士不为主簿，而大夫君以宝为可，一府莫言非，士安得独自高？
现代文：孙宝回答说： 高尚的人不担任主簿，而御史大夫认为我可以担任，全府的人没有说不合适的，作为一个读书人怎么能如此抬高自己呢？
English: Sun Bao replied, "A noble person does not serve as the chief accountant, but the chief historian thought I could serve, and the people of the whole province did not say it was inappropriate. As a reader, how can you elevate yourself so much?

古文：前日君男欲学文，而移宝自近。
现代文：前些时御史大夫的儿子想要学习经传，而让我搬得靠近他的住处。
English: Some time ago, Dr. Mishi's son wanted to study scripture, so he asked me to move closer to his home.

古文：礼有来学，义无往教；道不可诎，身诎何伤？
现代文：按礼法衹有学生到老师这裹来学习的，按道理没有老师到学生那裹去施教的；师道不可委屈，个人受到委屈又有什么损害？
English: According to etiquette, students should come to the teacher to learn, but according to reason, no teacher should go to the student to teach; the teacher's way cannot be wronged, and what is the damage to the individual if he is wronged?

古文：且不遭者可无不为，况主簿乎！ 
现代文：而且遭遇不好的人没有什么不可能做的，何况是做主簿呢！ 
English: And there is nothing impossible for those who have suffered a bad experience, not to mention making a home directory!

古文：忠闻之，甚惭，上书荐宝经明质直，宜备近臣。
现代文：张忠听到这些话，感到很惭愧，便上奏书推荐孙宝，说他精通经学品性正直，适合充当皇上的近臣。
English: Hearing these words, Zhang Zhong felt very ashamed, so he recommended Sun Bao in his report, saying that he was proficient in the study of the scriptures, honest, and suitable to serve as the emperor's close vassal.

古文：为议郎，迁谏大夫。
现代文：孙宝被任命为议郎，后又升任谏大夫。
English: Sun Bao was appointed as a councillor, and later he was promoted to the post of chief physician.

古文：鸿嘉中，广汉群盗起，选为益州刺史。
现代文：成帝鸿嘉年间，广汉地区盗贼纷起，孙宝被选拔为益州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hongjia, there was a rise in banditry in the Guanghan region, and Sun Bao was selected to write the history of Yizhou.

古文：广汉太守扈商者，大司马车骑将军王音姊子，软弱不任职。
现代文：广汉郡太守扈商，是大司马车骑将军王音的外甥，懦弱不能胜任其职。
English: The governor of Guanghan County, who was the nephew of Wang Yin, the general in charge of horse-drawn carriages, was too cowardly to fulfill his duties.

古文：宝到部，亲入山谷，谕告群盗，非本造意。渠率皆得悔过自出，遣归田里。
现代文：孙宝来到辖区，亲自深入山谷，告谕那些盗贼，祇要不是首倡乱谋者，即使是头领也可以自首，遣散回乡。
English: Sun Bao came to the jurisdiction area, went deep into the valley himself, and told the thieves that if they were not the instigators of the riot, even the leaders could surrender and be sent back to their hometowns.

古文：自劾矫制，奏商为乱首，《春秋》之义，诛首恶而已。
现代文：随后，孙宝自己揭发自己的错误，还控告扈商是导致叛乱的祸首，根据《春秋》大义，衹惩罚首恶。
English: Subsequently, Sun Bao himself exposed his own mistakes, and also accused the merchants of being the cause of the rebellion. According to the "Spring and Autumn" great justice, the merchants should be punished.

古文：商亦奏宝所纵或有渠率当坐者。
现代文：扈商也上奏孙宝所释放的盗贼有些是应当判罪的头目。
English: Some of the thieves released by Sun Bao were ringleaders who should have been convicted.

古文：商征下狱，宝坐失死罪免。
现代文：扈商被征召关进监狱，孙实也因放走死罪犯的罪名被免职。
English: Zou Shang was conscripted into prison, and Sun Si was also removed from office for the crime of releasing a dead criminal.

古文：益州吏民多陈宝功效，言为车骑将军所排。
现代文：益州的官吏和百姓很多陈述孙实的功绩，说他是被车骑将军所排挤。
English: Officials and people in Yizhou have made many statements about Sun Si's achievements, saying that he was ousted by the cavalry general.

古文：上复拜宝为冀州刺史，迁丞相司直。
现代文：皇上重又拜孙宝为冀州刺史，后又升任丞相司直。
English: Emperor Shige again paid homage to Sun Bao to write the history of Jizhou, and later he was promoted to the post of chancellor.

古文：时，帝舅红阳侯立使客因南郡太守李尚占垦草田数百顷，颇有民所假少府陂泽，略皆开发，上书愿以入县官。
现代文：当时皇帝的舅舅红阳侯王立派遣门客通过南郡太守李尚占据垦荒田几百顷，其中有许多是老百姓已租用的少府的山坡河泽，大都已经开发了，王立上书新垦出遣块田，愿意把它交给官府。
English: At that time, the emperor's uncle, Hongyang marquis Wang Li, dispatched his protégé to occupy hundreds of hectares of wasteland through the Nanshun governor Li Shang. Many of them were mountain slopes and rivers in Shofu that had already been rented by the common people. Most of them had already been developed. Wang Li wrote a new letter to send the land and was willing to hand it over to the government.

古文：有诏郡平田予直，钱有贵一万万以上。
现代文：皇帝下诏叫郡府照普通田价付给王立，超过时价一万万钱以上。
English: The emperor decreed that the county government should pay Wang Li the ordinary field price, which exceeded the current price by more than ten million yuan.

古文：宝闻之，遣丞相史按验，发其奸，劾奏立、尚怀奸罔上，狡猾不道。
现代文：孙宝听到这件事以后，派遣丞相史据实验证，揭发他们的奸诈，检举控告王立、李尚心怀奸诈欺君罔上，狡猾不讲道义。
English: After Sun Bao heard about this, he dispatched the chancellor and minister of history to take the experimental evidence, expose their treachery, and prosecute and accuse Wang Li and Li Shang of treachery, deception, cunning and immorality.

古文：尚下狱死。
现代文：李尚被关进监狱而死。
English: Li Shang died in prison.

古文：立虽不坐，后兄大司马卫将军商薨，次当代商，上度立而用其弟曲阳侯根为大司马票骑将军。
现代文：王立虽然没有被判罪，后来他的哥哥大司马卫将军王商去世，按次序他应当接替王商，皇上越过他而任用他的弟弟曲阳侯王根为大司马骠骑将军。
English: Although Wang Li was not convicted, his brother Wang Shang, the grand secretary of Mawei, later died. According to the order, he should succeed Wang Shang. The emperor passed him and appointed his brother Wang Gen, the prince of Quyang, as the grand secretary of Mawei.

古文：会益州蛮夷犯法，巴、蜀颇不安，上以宝著名西州，拜为广汉太守，秩中二千石，赐黄金三十斤。
现代文：当时正巧遇上益州的蛮夷骚乱，巴蜀一带很不安定，皇上认为孙实在西州地区很有声望，就拜他为广漠太守，俸禄为中二千石，赐给他黄金三十斤。
English: At that time, the barbarian riots in Yizhou happened to occur, and the Bashu area was very unstable. The emperor thought that Sun Zhengyi was very famous in the Xizhou area, and worshiped him as the governor of the vast desert. His salary was 2,000 koku, and he was given 30 jin of gold.

古文：蛮夷安辑，吏民称之。
现代文：蛮夷安定了下来，官吏和百姓都称颂他。
English: The barbarian settled down, and the officials and the people praised him.

古文：征为京兆尹。
现代文：孙实被征召为京兆尹。
English: Sun Si was conscripted as a general.

古文：故吏侯文以刚直不苟合，常称疾不肯仕，宝以恩礼请文，欲为布衣友，日设酒食，妻子相对。
现代文：以前的官吏侯文由于为人刚强正直不肯苟且迎合，常常自称有病不愿做官，孙实用恩惠和礼节邀请侯文，想要跟他结为布衣之交，每天设置酒食，妻室儿女共同陪伴。
English: The former government official Hou Wen, because of his strong and honest character, refused to be pandered to and often claimed to be ill and did not want to be an official. Sun invited Hou Wen with practical grace and etiquette, and wanted to make a cloth friend with him, setting up wine and food every day, and accompanying his wife and children together.

古文：文求受署为掾，进见如宾礼。
现代文：侯文请求接受委任担任属官，进府会见像宾客一样。
English: Hou Wen requested to accept the appointment as a subordinate official, and enter the government to meet like a guest.

古文：数月，以立秋日署文东部督邮。
现代文：过了几个月，在立秋那天孙宝委任侯文做束部督邮。
English: A few months later, on the first day of autumn, Sun Bao appointed Hou Wen as Sokube postmaster.

古文：入见，敕曰： 今日鹰隼始击，当顺天气取奸恶，以成严霜之诛，掾部渠有其人乎？ 
现代文：侯文入室见孙宝，孙宝问他道： 今天鹰隼开始搏击，应该顺应天时逮捕奸恶之人，以完成严厉打击的任务，你的辖区裹有这样的人吗？ 
English: Hou Wen went into the room to see Sun Bao. Sun Bao asked him, "Today, the eagle cormorant began to fight. It should be in accordance with the time of day to arrest the treacherous person in order to complete the task of severe crackdown. Is there such a person in your jurisdiction?"

古文：文卬曰： 无其人不敢空受职。 宝曰： 谁也？ 
现代文：侯文抬起头说： 要是没有这样的人我就不敢白白地接受你委任的职务了。 孙实说： 是谁呀？ 
English: Houwen raised his head and said, "If there were no such person, I would not have dared to accept the position you appointed me to in vain." Sun Si said, "Who was it?

古文：文曰： 霸陵杜稚季。 
现代文：侯文说： 霸陵的杜稚季。 
English: Hou Wen said: The bully Du's kindergarten season is over.

古文：宝曰： 其次？ 
现代文：孙实说： 其次还有谁？ 
English: Sun Si said: Who is next?

古文：文曰： 豺狼横道，不宜复问狐狸。 
现代文：侯文说： 豺狼当道，不宜再问狐狸。 
English: Hou Wen said: The jackal is in charge, it is not appropriate to ask the fox.

古文：宝默然。
现代文：孙宝沉默了。
English: Sun Bao fell silent.

古文：稚季者大侠，与卫尉淳于长、大鸿胪萧育等皆厚善。
现代文：稚季是一个大侠客，跟卫尉淳于长、大鸿胪萧育等都是至交。
English: Chuxi is a great knight, and he is a close friend of the guardsman Jun Yuchang and the great knight Xiao Yu.

古文：宝前失车骑将军，与红阳侯有隙，自恐见危，时淳于长方贵幸，友宝，宝亦欲附之，始视事而长以稚季托宝，故宝穷，无以复应文。
现代文：孙宝从前得罪了车骑将军，又跟红阳侯有嫌隙，自己恐怕遭受危险，当时淳于长刚得尊显宠幸，对孙宝很友好，孙实也想要依附他，才上任时淳于长就把稚季的事托付给孙宝，所以孙实陷入困境，无法答覆侯文。
English: Sun Bao had offended the general of chariots and cavalry in the past, and also had a rift with Hongyang Hou, and feared that he would be in danger. At that time, Chun Yu Changgang was favored by Sun Bao, he was very friendly to Sun Bao, and Sun Si also wanted to adhere to him. It was only when Chun Yu Chang took office that he entrusted the affairs of the kindergarten to Sun Bao, so Sun Si was in a predicament and could not answer the Houwen.

古文：文怪宝气索，知其有故，因曰： 明府素著威名，今下敢取稚季，当且阖阁，勿有所问。
现代文：侯文见孙宝意气索然，感到奇陆，知道其中一定有缘故，就说： 您素有威望，现在不敢拿下稚季，就应当暂且关闭门户，不要过问什么。
English: Hou Wen saw that Sun Bao was discouraged and felt puzzled. Knowing that there must be a reason, he said: You have prestige, and now you dare not win the junior season. You should temporarily close the portal, and do not ask anything.

古文：如此竟岁，吏民未敢诬明府也。
现代文：这样挨到年末，官吏和百姓也不敢对您有什么诽谤。
English: If you suffer like this until the end of the year, officials and people will not dare to slander you.

古文：即度稚季而谴它事，众口讠雚哗，终身自堕。 宝曰： 受教。 
现代文：如果放过稚季，另外惩处别的事，舆论就会喧腾起来，您一辈子就毁了。 孙实说： 接受指教。 
English: If you let go of the junior season and punish other things in addition, public opinion will be noisy, and your whole life will be ruined.Sun Si said: Accept advice.

古文：稚季耳目长，闻知之，杜门不通水火，穿舍后墙为小户，但持锄自治园，因文所厚自陈如此。
现代文：稚季耳目众多，听说造件事后，就关起门来不跟外面的人交往，挖穿屋子后边的围墙开一扇小门，祇是拿着锄头管理园圃，他通过与侯文有深交的人自己陈述了这些情况。
English: After hearing of the affair, Chou Ji, who had many ears and eyes, closed the door and did not interact with people outside, dug through the wall behind the house to open a small door, and only managed the garden with a hoe. He himself described these circumstances through people who had a deep friendship with Hou Wen.

古文：文曰： 我与稚季幸同土壤，素无睚，顾受将命，分当相直。
现代文：侯文说： 我和稚季有幸是同乡，平时连很小的嫌隙也没有，衹是接受了太守的命令，我的职责应当整治你。
English: Hou Wen said: I am fortunate enough to be a fellow villager with Chou Ji, and there is usually not even a small rift between us. I have accepted the order of the Emperor, and my duty is to rectify you.

古文：诚能自改，严将不治前事，即不更心，但更门户，适趣祸耳。 
现代文：如果你真正能够改正错误，我也将不再追究以前的事，如果不改变思想，仅仅更换门面，那就衹是加速祸患的到来罢了。 
English: If you can truly correct your mistakes, I will no longer pursue the previous matter. If you do not change your mind, but only change the facade, then you will only accelerate the arrival of the disaster.

古文：稚季遂不敢犯法，宝亦竟岁无所谴。
现代文：稚季终于不敢再犯法，孙宝一年到头也没有惩办他人。
English: After a while, he finally dared not to break the law again. Sun Bao did not punish anyone all year round.

古文：明年，稚季病死。
现代文：第二年，稚季生病死了。
English: The following year, Chakki fell ill and died.

古文：宝为京兆尹三岁，京师称之。
现代文：孙宝担任京兆尹三年，京城裹人们都称赞他。
English: Sun Bao served as Beijing Zhaoyun for three years, and people all over Beijing praised him.

古文：会淳于长败，宝与萧育等皆坐免官。
现代文：遇上淳于长垮台，孙宝和萧育等都受牵连而被免了官。
English: When Sun Yuchang fell, Sun Bao and Xiao Yu were implicated and removed from office.

古文：文复去吏，死于家。
现代文：侯文也再次离开了官位，死在家裹。
English: Houwen also left his post again and died at home.

古文：稚季子杜苍，字君敖，名出稚季右，在游侠中。
现代文：稚季的儿子杜苍，字君敖，在游侠中名声超过樨季。
English: Du Cang, the son of Zhuqi, known as Jun Qi, is more famous than Qi Qi among the rangers.

古文：哀帝即位，征宝为谏大夫，迁司隶。
现代文：哀帝即位，征召孙实为谏大夫，后升任司隶。
English: When Emperor Ai ascended the throne, he conscripted Sun Si to be a doctor, and later he was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：初，傅太后与中山孝王母冯太后俱事元帝，有隙，傅太后使有司考冯太后，令自杀，众庶冤之。
现代文：起初，傅太后和中山孝王的母亲冯太后一同侍奉元帝，二者有嫌隙，傅太后派主管官员拷问冯太后，迫令她自杀，百姓们都认为她冤枉。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Fu and Empress Dowager Feng, the mother of Zhongshan Takao, served Emperor Yuan together. There was a rift between the two. Empress Dowager Fu sent officials to torture Empress Dowager Feng and forced her to commit suicide. The people all thought she was innocent.

古文：宝奏请覆治，傅太后大怒，曰： 帝置司隶，主使察我。
现代文：孙宝上奏请求进行查究，傅太后大怒，说： 皇上设置司隶，并主使来审我。
English: Sun Bao appealed for an investigation, and Empress Dowager Fu was furious, saying, "The emperor has appointed a magistrate and sent an envoy to investigate me.

古文：冯氏反事明白，故欲擿觖以扬我恶。
现代文：冯氏谋反的事实是很明白的，有人故意要挑剔我的过错。
English: The fact that Mr. Feng plotted to rebel is very clear. Someone is deliberately trying to find fault with me.

古文：我当坐之。 
现代文：我要让他连坐。 
English: I'm going to sit him down.

古文：上乃顺指下宝狱。
现代文：皇上于是顺着傅太后的旨意把孙宝关进了监狱。
English: The emperor then put Sun Bao in prison in accordance with the will of Empress Dowager Fu.

古文：尚书仆射唐林争之，上以林朋党比周，左迁敦煌鱼泽障候。
现代文：尚书仆射唐林争辩了这件事，皇上认为唐林结党营私，将他贬职为敦煌鱼泽障候。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Tanglin disputed the matter, and the emperor thought that Tanglin was a partisan and demoted him to the post of Dunhuang Yuzawa.

古文：大司马傅喜、光禄大夫龚胜固争，上为言太后，出宝复官。
现代文：大司马傅喜、光禄大夫龚胜坚持力争，皇上替他们向太后说情，才放出孙宝并恢复了他的官职。
English: Daishi Ma Fuxi and Guanglu Daifu Jinsheng persisted in their struggle, and the emperor interceded on their behalf with the empress dowager, only to release Sun Bao and restore his official position.

古文：顷之，郑崇下狱，宝上书曰： 臣闻疏不图亲，外不虑内。
现代文：过了不久，郑崇被关进监狱，孙宝上书说： 我听说关系疏远的人不去干预关系近的，外人不考虑别人的家事。
English: Soon after, Zheng Chong was put in prison, and Sun Bao wrote: I heard that people with distant relations do not interfere with those with close relations, and outsiders do not consider other people's family affairs.

古文：臣幸得衔命奉使，职在刺举，不敢避贵幸之势，以塞视听之明。
现代文：我有幸能够接受使命，有检察举报之责，不敢避开权贵和受宠幸的人的势力，以阻塞皇上的视听使皇上不知道真实情况。
English: I am fortunate to be able to accept the mission, have the responsibility of inspecting and reporting, and dare not avoid the power of the powerful and the favored, to block the emperor's audio-visual so that the emperor does not know the true situation.

古文：按尚书令昌奏仆射崇，下狱复治，榜掠将死，卒无一辞，道路称冤。
现代文：尚书令昌诬告仆射郑崇，把他关进监狱进行审察追究，郑崇被严刑拷打将要死去，结果没一句口供，连路上的行人都说他冤枉。
English: Shang Shulingchang falsely accused his subordinate Zheng Chong and put him in prison for investigation. Zheng Chong was severely tortured and was about to die. As a result, there was not a single confession, and even pedestrians on the road said that he was innocent.

古文：疑昌与崇内有纤介，浸润相陷，自禁门内枢机近臣，蒙受冤谮，亏损国家，为谤不小。
现代文：我怀疑昌跟郑崇有嫌隙，谗毁逐渐增多从而陷害对方，他是皇上的近臣，遭受冤枉，损害国家，舆论非议不小。
English: I suspect that Chang had a grudge against Zheng Chong, and that he set up the other party by gradually increasing the damage. He was a close vassal of the emperor, suffered injustice, harmed the country, and was criticized by public opinion.

古文：臣请治昌，以解众心。 
现代文：我恳请惩治昌，以缓解民心。 
English: I implore you to punish Chang to ease the people's mind.

古文：书奏，天子不说，以宝名臣不忍诛，乃制诏丞相、大司空： 司隶宝奏故尚书仆射崇冤，请狱治尚书令昌。
现代文：造报告上奏之后，皇上不高兴，因为孙宝是有名望的大臣所以皇上不忍杀他，于是皇上就下令给丞相和大司空： 司隶孙实报告原尚书仆射郑崇受冤，请求将尚书令昌下狱审查。
English: After the report was made, the emperor was not happy, because Sun Bao was a famous minister, so the emperor could not bear to kill him, so the emperor ordered the prime minister and the grand secretary: Sili Sun Si reported that the former Shang Shuling's servant Zheng Chong was wronged, and requested that Shang Shuling Chang be released from prison for review.

古文：案崇近臣，罪恶暴著，而宝怀邪，附下罔上，以春月作诋欺，遂其奸心，盖国之贼也。
现代文：查郑崇是我身边的臣子，罪恶显著，而孙实心怀邪念，勾结臣下蒙蔽皇上，在春月裹说了诽谤欺骗的话，以实现他的奸恶用心。《论语》中不是说过吗？
English: Cha Zheng Chong was a courtier close to me, with obvious evil, while Sun Shizhong harbored evil thoughts, conspired with his vassals to deceive the emperor, and in the Spring Moon he said slanderous and deceitful words in order to realize his evil intentions. Wasn't it said in the Analects?

古文：传不云乎？ 恶利口之覆国家。 其免宝为庶人。 
现代文：噌恶巧言诡辩颠覆国家的人。 着令将孙宝免职为平民。 
English: A man who subverted the country with his wicked wit and sophistry, he ordered Sun Bao to be dismissed as a commoner.

古文：哀帝崩，王莽白王太后征宝以为光禄大夫，与王舜等俱迎中山王。
现代文：哀帝去世，王莽请求王太后征召孙实担任光禄大夫，和王舜等人一起去迎接中山王。
English: After the death of the Emperor, Wang Mang asked the Empress Dowager to recruit Sun Shih as the doctor of Guanglu, and went with Wang Xi and others to meet the King of Zhongshan.

古文：平帝立，宝为大司农。
现代文：平帝即位，孙宾担任大司农。
English: Emperor Ping ascended to the throne, and Sun Bin assumed the post of chief agronomist.

古文：会越巂郡上黄龙游江中，太师孔光、大司徒马宫等咸称莽功德比周公，宜告祠宗庙。
现代文：恰逢越隽郡上报有黄龙在江裹出游，太师孔光、大司徒马宫等都称颂王莽的功德可比周公，应当祭告祖庙。
English: At the same time, it was reported in Yueqi County that Huanglong went on a trip to the Yangtze River. Grand Master Kong Guang and Grand Master Tu Ma Gong praised Wang Mang's merits as comparable to that of Zhou Gong, and it should be reported to the ancestral temple.

古文：宝曰： 周公上圣，召公大贤，尚犹有不相说，著于经典，两不相损。
现代文：孙实说： 周公是大圣人，召公是大贤人。尚且有不相和睦的时候，这见于经典记载，但这对于二者都无损害。
English: Sun Si said: Zhou Gong is a great saint, Zhao Gong is a great sage. There are still times when they are not in harmony, which can be seen in the classic records, but this does not harm either of them.

古文：今风雨未时，百姓不足，每有一事，群臣同声，得无非其美者。 
现代文：如今风雨不调，百姓尚不富足，每当有一件事，臣下们都同声附和，恐怕不是很好吧。 
English: Nowadays, despite the ups and downs, the people are still not rich. Whenever there is an event, the vassals are in unison, I'm afraid it's not very good.

古文：时，大臣皆失色，侍中奉车都尉甄邯即时承制罢议者。
现代文：当时大臣们都变了脸色，侍中奉车都尉甄邯立刻奉诏命制止了议论。
English: At that time, the ministers all turned pale, and the aide-de-camp, Lieutenant Zhen Rong, immediately ordered by the emperor to stop the discussion.

古文：会宝遣吏迎母，母道病，留弟家，独遣妻子。
现代文：正好孙实派遣官吏去迎接母亲，母亲在途中生病了，便留在弟弟家裹，仅仅打发妻子和儿女来京城。
English: Just as Sun Si sent officials to meet his mother, she fell ill on the way and stayed at his brother's house, sending only his wife and children to the capital.

古文：司直陈崇以奏宝，事下三公即讯。
现代文：司直陈崇用造件事告了孙宾，皇上把这件事交给三公就地审讯。
English: The magistrate Chen Chong accused Sun Bin of fabricating the case, and the emperor handed the case over to the three princes for on-the-spot trial.

古文：宝对曰： 年七十悖眊，恩衰共养，营妻子，如章。 
现代文：孙实回答说： 我年已七十，神智昏乱，供养母亲的情意淡薄了，衹顾妻室儿女，正像奏章上说的那样。 
English: Sun Si replied, "I am seventy years old, my mind is muddled, I have lost the will to provide for my mother, and I neglect my wife and children, just as it says in the play.

古文：宝坐免，终于家。
现代文：孙宝因此被免官，终老在家裹。
English: As a result, Sun Bao was dismissed from his post and ended up staying at home.

古文：建武中，录旧德臣，以宝孙伉为诸长。
现代文：建武年间，录用以前有德行的臣子，让孙宝的孙子孙伉担任了诸县的县长。
English: During the Jianwu era, Sun Bao's previously virtuous vassals were recruited, and Sun Bao's grandson, Sun Quan, became the prefectural governor of various counties.

古文：毌将隆字君房，东海兰陵人也。
现代文：毋将隆字君房，是束海兰陵人。
English: Without a doubt, Prince Takatsuko is a person from Sokkai-Lanling.

古文：大司马车骑将军王音内领尚书，外典兵马，踵故选置从事中郎与参谋议，奏请隆为从事中郎，迁谏大夫。
现代文：大司马车骑将军王音在朝内掌管尚书事务，在朝外统率兵马，沿袭旧例挑选设置从事中郎参加讨论决策，就上奏请求让毋将隆担任从事中郎，后升任谏大夫。
English: Wang Yin, the grand secretary of the carriage and cavalry general, was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu in the imperial court, and led the soldiers and horses outside the imperial court. Following the old example of selecting and setting up the middlemen to participate in the discussion and decision-making, he requested the middlemen to serve as the middlemen, and then he was promoted to the doctor.

古文：成帝末，隆奏封事言： 古老选诸侯入为公卿，以褒功德，宜征定陶王使在国邸，以填万方。 
现代文：成帝末年，毋将隆递上密封的奏章说： 古时候选拔诸侯进入朝廷担任公卿，藉以褒扬功德，应该征召定陶王让他住在驻京公馆裹，藉以镇抚天下。 
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Chengdu, a sealed record was sent to him saying: In ancient times, princes were selected to enter the imperial court to serve as nobles. In order to praise their merits, King Ding Tao should be conscripted to live in a mansion in Beijing, in order to pacify the world.

古文：其后上竟立定陶王为太子，隆迁翼州牧、颍川太守。
现代文：那以后皇上终于立定陶王为太子，毋将隆升任冀州牧、颖川太守。
English: After that, the emperor finally established Ding Tao Wang as the prince, and he was promoted to the position of Jizhou herdsman and Yingchuan governor.

古文：哀帝即位，以高第入为京兆尹，迁执金吾。
现代文：哀帝即位后，毋将隆因为考核成绩优异而当上了京兆尹，后又提升为执金吾。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, he was awarded the title of Jingzha Yin for his outstanding performance in examinations, and was later promoted to the title of Jingwu.

古文：时，侍中董贤方贵，上使中黄门发武库兵，前后十辈，送董贤及上乳母王阿舍。
现代文：当时侍中董贤正受到宠幸，皇上派中黄门取出武库中的兵器，前后共有十批，送到董贤和皇上的乳母王阿的家裹。
English: At that time, the attendant Dong Xian was favored, and the emperor sent Zhonghuangmen to take out the weapons in the arsenal. A total of ten batches were sent to the home of Dong Xian and the emperor's wet nurse Wang Ah.

古文：隆奏曰： 武库兵器，天下公用，国家武备，缮治造作，皆度大司农钱。
现代文：毋将隆上奏章说： 武库裹的兵器，是天下公用的，是为国家武备而设，它的修理和制造，所需经费都出白大司农。
English: The preamble to the Long March reads: The weapons in the arsenal are for the common use of the whole world, and are designed for the national armament. The funds required for their repair and manufacture are provided by the White Great Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：大司农钱自乘舆不以给共养，共养劳赐，一出少府。
现代文：大司农的经费即使是皇上的车马器物也不能用作花销，皇上的供养和犒赏，都从少府支出。
English: Even the emperor's chariots and horses could not be used as expenses. The emperor's provision and reward were all spent from Shofu.

古文：盖不以本臧给末用，不以民力共浮费，别公私，示正路也。
现代文：原因就在于不能把根本性的经济储备拿来作不重要的开支，不能把百姓的财力用作浮华的花费，从而分别公和私，表示正道。
English: The reason is that it is not possible to use the fundamental economic reserves to make unimportant expenditures, and it is not possible to use the people's financial resources as flashy expenses, so as to separate public and private and show the right way.

古文：古者诸侯方伯得颛征伐，乃赐斧钺，汉家边吏，职在距寇，亦赐武库兵，皆任其事然后蒙之。
现代文：古时候诸侯方伯可以独立掌握征讨的大权，帝王才赐给斧铁。汉家边境的官吏，本职在于抵抗敌人，所以也赐给他们武库裹的兵器，都是担任这样的职守然后接受这些武器。
English: In ancient times, lords and governors could independently wield the power of requisition. It was the emperor who gave them the axe and iron. Han border officials, whose duty was to resist the enemy, were also given weapons wrapped in arsenals. They all served such a duty and then received these weapons.

古文：《春秋》之谊，家不臧甲，所以抑臣威，损私力也。
现代文：《春秋》之义，卿大夫家不许收藏钟甲，这是用来抑制臣下的威势，消减私人势力。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," it is not allowed for noble families to collect bell jars, which is used to restrain the power of their subjects and reduce private power.

古文：今贤等便僻弄臣，私恩微妾，而以天下公用给其私门，契国威器共其家备。
现代文：如今董贤等或是惯于逢迎皇上的弄臣，或是徒有私人恩惠而地位卑贱的女子，皇上您却把天下公用的东西分给他们私人，表示国家威严的器物供给他们私家备用。
English: Today, Dong Xian and others are either jesters who are accustomed to meeting the emperor, or women of lowly status who have nothing but personal favors, but you, the emperor, have allocated things that are common to the world to their private use, and have provided them with objects that represent the majesty of the state for their private use.

古文：民力分于弄臣，武兵设于微妾，建立非宜，以广骄僣，非所以示四方也。
现代文：百姓的财力分给弄臣，武器设于地位卑贱的女子家，建立的制度不符国体，以致纵容滋长骄横越礼的行为，这是不可以用来昭示天下的。
English: The financial resources of the people are allocated to jesters, weapons are placed in the homes of low-ranking women, and the system established is not in line with the national character, thus condoning and nurturing arrogant and disrespectful behavior. This should not be used to show the world.

古文：孔子曰： 奚取于三家之堂！ 
现代文：孔子说过： 天子的礼仪怎么能出现在三家大夫的厅堂之内呢！ 
English: Confucius said: How can the etiquette of the Son of Heaven appear in the halls of three doctors?

古文：臣请收还武库。 
现代文：我请求您收还武器。 
English: I'm asking you to turn in your weapons.

古文：上不说。
现代文：皇上很不高兴。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven is not satisfied with the Bo style.

古文：顷之，傅太后使谒者买诸官婢，贱取之，复取执金吾官婢八人。
现代文：不久，傅太后派谒者去买一些官用婢女，用很低的价钱买到，又买了执金吾的官用婢女八名。
English: Not long after, Empress Dowager Fu sent her courtiers to buy some official maidservants, and they were able to buy them at a very low price. She also bought eight official maidservants to serve Kingu.

古文：隆奏言贾贱，请更平直。
现代文：毋将隆上奏说价钱太低，请求改为公平的价格。
English: Rather than telling Mr. Ryu that the price was too low, the request was changed to a fair price.

古文：上于是制诏丞相、御史大夫： 交让之礼兴，则虞、芮之讼息。
现代文：皇上于是下令给丞相、御史大夫说： 互相谦让的礼节盛行，那么像虞芮两国那样的诉讼自然平息。
English: The Emperor then issued an order to the Prime Minister and the Chief Historian, saying, "If the etiquette of mutual modesty prevails, then lawsuits such as those between the two countries will naturally subside.

古文：隆位九卿，既无以匡朝廷之不逮，而反奏请与永信宫争贵贱之贾，程奏显言，众莫不闻。
现代文：毋将隆位列九卿，既没有能力匡正朝廷的处置不当之处，却反而奏请和永信宫争执买卖价钱的高低，公布上奏内容，没有人不知道了。
English: Instead of listing Rongyi as one of the nine nobles, he did not have the ability to rectify the improper disposition of the imperial court, but on the contrary, he petitioned Yongxin Palace to dispute the high and low price of the purchase and sale, and announced the content of the petition. No one did not know.

古文：举错不由谊理，争求之名自此始，无以示百僚，伤化失俗。 
现代文：他的行动举止不合义理，沽名钓誉的风气从此开始，无法昭示百官，伤风败俗。 
English: His actions and demeanor were unreasonable, and the culture of chasing fame and glory began from this point on. He was unable to show that he was a hundred officials, and his behavior was immoral.

古文：以隆前有安国之言，左迁为沛郡都尉，迁南郡太守。
现代文：因为毋将隆先前有安定国家的论策，所以仅降为沛郡都尉，后又升任南郡太守。
English: Because he had previously proposed the idea of a stable country, he was only reduced to the rank of lieutenant of Pei County, and later he was promoted to the position of governor of Minami County.

古文：王莽少时，慕与隆交，隆不甚附。
现代文：王莽年轻时，很想与毋将隆交朋友，毋将隆不怎么趋附他。
English: When Wang Meng was young, he really wanted to make friends with Zhe Long, but Zhe Long didn't really attach to him.

古文：哀帝崩，莽秉政，使大司徒孔光奏隆前为冀州牧治中山冯太后狱冤陷无辜，不宜处位在中土。
现代文：哀帝去世后，王莽当政，让大司徒孔光告发毋将隆从前担任冀州牧时处理中山冯太后的案子，冤屈和陷害了没有罪过的人，不适宜在全国的中心地区担任官职。
English: After the death of Emperor Ai, Wang Mang came to power, and had the Grand Elder Kong Guang (孔光) denounce Zhongshan Feng's empress dowager's case, which he had handled when he was the pastor of Jizhou Province. He had wronged and framed a person who had committed no crime, and was not suitable to hold an official position in the central region of the country.

古文：本中谒者令史立、侍御史丁玄自典考之，但与隆连名奏事。
现代文：其实本来是中谒者令史立、侍御史丁玄亲自考查审问那个案子的，他们仅仅曾经跟毋将隆联名上书论事。
English: In fact, it was originally the middle eunuch who ordered Shi Li and the chamberlain Shi Dingxuan to personally investigate and interrogate the case. They had only discussed the matter in writing with General Rong.

古文：史立时为中太仆，丁玄奏山太守，及尚书令赵昌谮郑崇者为河内太守，皆免官，徙合浦。
现代文：这时史立担任中太仆，丁玄担任泰山太守，还有尚书令赵昌，他曾诬陷过郑崇，这时担任河内太守，他们都被免了宫，流放到合浦。
English: At this time, Shi Li served as the central eunuch, Ding Xuan served as the governor of Taishan, and Shang Shuling Zhao Chang, who had framed Zheng Chong, served as the governor of Hanoi. They were all released from the palace and exiled to Hapu.

古文：何并字子廉，祖父以吏二千石自平舆徙平陵。
现代文：何并字子廉，祖父以二千石级官吏的身份从平舆迁到平陵。
English: His grandfather, a 2,000 koku official, moved from Pingwu to Pingling.

古文：并为郡吏，至大司空掾，事何武。
现代文：何并担任郡吏，做到大司空属官，事奉何武。
English: In addition to serving as a county official, he also served as a subordinate officer of the Air Force.

古文：武高其志节，举能治剧，为长陵令，道不拾遗。
现代文：何武认为他志向节操高尚，推崇他能处理繁重的政务，于是何并担任了长陵县令，政绩很好，以至于道不拾遣。
English: He Wu thought that his ambition was noble and respected him for being able to handle heavy government affairs, so he served as the governor of Changling County, and his performance was so good that he did not have to worry about it.

古文：初，邛成太后外家王氏贵，而侍中王林卿通轻侠，倾京师。
现代文：从前，邛成太后的外公家王氏地位显贵，侍中王林卿与江湖游侠互通声气，威震京城。
English: Once upon a time, the empress dowager's maternal grandfather, the Wang family, held a prominent position, and the chamberlain, Wang Linqing, communicated with the knight errant, shaking the capital.

古文：后坐法免，宾客愈盛，归长陵上冢，因留饮连日。
现代文：后来因犯法被免了官，宾客越来越多，他回到长陵扫墓，便和宾客们一连好多天在一起饮酒。
English: Later, he was relieved of his duties for violating the law, and the number of guests increased. He returned to the Changling Mausoleum to sweep the tomb, and then he drank alcohol with the guests for many days in a row.

古文：并恐其犯法，自造门上谒，谓林卿曰： 冢间单外，君宜以时归。 
现代文：何并恐怕他犯法，便亲自上门通名求见，对林卿说： 坟墓在外，您应当及时回家。 
English: Not at all afraid that he would break the law, he personally went to the door to ask for an audience and said to Lin Qing: The grave is outside, you should go home in time.

古文：林卿曰： 诺。 
现代文：林卿说： 好的。 
English: Lin Qing said, "All right.

古文：先是，林卿杀婢婿埋冢舍，并具知之，以非己时，又见其新免。故不发举，欲无令留界中而已，即且遣吏奉谒传送。
现代文：在此以前林卿曾杀死遇一个婢女的丈夫，把他埋在墓舍裹，何并全都知道这些情况，但认为事情不是发生在自己任职的时候，又看到他新近免去了官职，所以不想揭发检举他，衹想让他不要逗留在自己境内罢了，便派属吏拿了名片去遣送他。
English: Prior to this, Lord Lin had killed the husband of one of his maidservants and buried him in a tomb. He knew all about the circumstances, but he thought that the incident did not happen when he was in office. Seeing that he had recently been relieved of his official duties, he did not want to expose and report him, but wanted him not to stay in his own territory. So he sent a subordinate official to take his business card and send him away.

古文：林卿素骄，惭于宾客，并度其为变，储兵马以待之。
现代文：林卿一贯骄傲，不愿在宾客前丢丑，何并估计他会制造事变，于是安排了兵马对付他。
English: Lin Qing was always proud and did not want to lose face in front of the guests. He did not expect that he would create an incident, so he arranged soldiers and horses to deal with him.

古文：林卿既去，北度泾桥，令骑奴还至寺门，拔刀剥其建鼓。
现代文：林卿离开之后，向北经过泾河桥，叫一个骑马的仆人返回县衙门，抽刀砍烂了县衙门柱子上悬着的鼓。
English: After Lin Ching left, he went north across the Lugu River Bridge, called a servant on horseback to return to the county gate, and cut the drum hanging on the pillar of the county gate with a knife.

古文：并自从吏兵追林卿。
现代文：何并亲自率领官吏和士兵追赶林卿。
English: He personally led officials and soldiers to chase Lin Qing.

古文：行数十里，林卿迫窘，及令奴冠其冠被其襜褕自代，乘车从童骑，身变服从间径驰去。
现代文：走了几十里，林卿走投无路，便叫仆人戴上他的帽子披着他的短衣代替他，自己坐上车子让骑马的奴仆跟在后面，他又换掉自己的衣服从小路向前跑去。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, Lin Qing was at a loss, so he asked his servant to put on his hat and put on his short coat instead of him. He got into the car and let the servant on horseback follow behind. He changed his clothes and ran forward from the path.

古文：会日暮追及，收缚冠奴，奴曰： 我非侍中，奴耳。 
现代文：恰好在太阳下山时何并追了上来，把那戴着林卿帽子的仆人绑了起来，那人说： 我不是侍中，衹是他的仆人罢了。 
English: Just as the sun was setting, he chased and tied up the servant who was wearing Lin's hat. The man said, "I'm not a waiter, I'm just his servant."

古文：并自知已失林卿，乃曰： 王君困，自称奴，得脱死邪？ 
现代文：何并心裹自己知道林卿已经逃走了，就说： 王君被迫得没处躲了，竟自称是仆人，难道想逃脱死罪吗？ 
English: When he realized that Lin Qing had already fled, he said, "Wang Jun was forced to have nowhere to hide, and he even called himself a servant. Does he want to escape the death penalty?

古文：叱吏断头持还，县所剥鼓置都亭下，署曰； 故侍中王林卿坐杀人埋冢舍，使奴剥寺门鼓。 
现代文：于是命令手下砍下他的头颅带回来，悬挂在破烂了的鼓上，放在城裹的亭下，写道： 原侍中王林卿犯了杀人罪，他将被杀之人埋在守护坟墓的房舍内，又叫仆人砍烂了衙门前的鼓。 
English: So he ordered his men to cut off his head and bring it back, hang it on a broken drum and place it under the pavilion of the castle, and wrote: The former chamberlain Wang Lin committed murder, he buried the murdered man in the building guarding the tomb, and ordered the servants to cut down the drum in front of the gate.

古文：吏民惊骇。
现代文：官吏和百姓都很震惊害怕。
English: Officials and citizens alike were shocked and frightened.

古文：林卿因亡命，众庶讠雚哗，以为实死。
现代文：林卿于是逃命，人们议论纷纷，以为他真的死了。
English: Lin Xing then fled for his life, and people began to speculate that he was really dead.

古文：成帝太后以邛成太后爱林卿故，闻之涕泣，为言哀帝。
现代文：成帝太后因为邛成太后喜爱林卿的缘故，听到这件事后也伤心落泪，把这件事告诉了哀帝。
English: Empress Dowager Cheng, because Empress Dowager Zoucheng loved Lin Ching-wu, was also heartbroken and shed tears after hearing this, and told the sad emperor about it.

古文：哀帝问状而善之，迁并陇西太守。
现代文：哀帝询问了情况认为这件事做得很好，就升任何并为陇西太守。
English: Aidi inquired about the situation and thought that the matter was well done, so he was promoted to be the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：徙颍川太守，代陵阳严诩。
现代文：后来何并调任颖川太守，接替陵阳人严翔。
English: Later, he was appointed Yingchuan Taishu and succeeded Lingyangjin Yanxiang.

古文：诩本以孝行为官，谓掾史为师友，有过辄闭阁自责，终不大言。
现代文：严翔本来是凭孝行做官的，把下僚们看作老师朋友，有了过失就闭门自责，始终不大说话。
English: Yan Xiang originally became an official by virtue of his filial piety. He regarded his subordinates as teachers' friends. If he made a mistake, he would blame himself behind closed doors. He never said much.

古文：郡中乱，王莽遣使征诩，官属数百人为设祖道，诩据地哭。
现代文：郡里出现骚乱，王莽派人来征召严翔，官属裹几百人为他设置送行的筵宴，严翔伏在地上哭起来。
English: There was a riot in the county. Wang Mang sent someone to recruit Yan Xiang. Hundreds of officials and subordinates held a send-off banquet for him. Yan Xiang fell to the ground and began to cry.

古文：掾史曰： 明府吉征，不宜若此。 
现代文：下僚们说： 您今天受征召是一件好事，不应当家这样子。 
English: Colleagues said: "It's a good thing you've been called up today, you shouldn't be like this."

古文：诩曰： 吾哀颍川士，身岂有忧哉！我以柔弱征，必选刚猛代。
现代文：严翔说： 我是哀怜颖川的士人，我自己哪值得担忧呢：我是因为软弱被征召，朝廷必然会选择刚猛的人来接替。
English: Yan Xiang said, "I am a scholar who pities Yingchuan. I myself am not worth worrying about. I was conscripted because of my weakness. The imperial court will inevitably choose a tough person to succeed me."

古文：代到，将有僵仆者，故相吊耳。 
现代文：接替的人一到，将会有偃卧不起的人，所以难过。 
English: When the replacement arrives, there will be people who are bedridden, so it's sad.

古文：诩至，拜为美俗使者。
现代文：严翔到达后，被任命为美俗使者。
English: After Yan Xiang arrived, he was appointed as an envoy of the United States.

古文：是时，颍川钟元为尚书令，领廷尉，用事有权。
现代文：这时颖川人钟元担任尚书令，兼任廷尉，办事通权达变。
English: At this time, Yingchuan man Zhong Yuan served as Shang Shuling and concurrently as a court lieutenant, and his power to handle affairs changed.

古文：弟威为郡掾，臧千金。
现代文：他的弟弟钟威做颖川郡的属僚，非法私藏着千金。
English: His younger brother Zhong Wei, a subordinate of Yingchuan County, illegally hid thousands of dollars.

古文：并为太守，过辞钟廷尉，廷尉免冠为弟请一等之罪，愿蚤就髡钳。
现代文：何并担任太守，见到钟廷尉时就把这件事告诉了他，钟廷尉脱下帽子替弟弟请求减死罪一等，希望早些接受髡钳刑罚。
English: He did not hold the post of governor-general, and when he saw Lieutenant Zhong Ting, he told him about the incident. Lieutenant Zhong Ting took off his hat to plead for his brother to reduce the death penalty to the first degree, hoping to receive the punishment earlier.

古文：并曰： 罪在弟身与君律，不在于太守。 
现代文：何并说： 罪在你弟弟自己触犯了国君的法律，而不在于太守。 
English: Moreover, he said: The crime is that your brother himself violated the law of the sovereign, and not that of the emperor.

古文：元惧，驰遣人呼弟。
现代文：钟元害怕了，派人飞马去招呼弟弟。
English: Zhongyuan was scared and sent someone on a flying horse to call his brother.

古文：阳翟轻侠赵季、李款多畜宾客，以气力渔食闾里，至奸人妇女，持吏长短，从横郡中，闻并且至，皆亡去。
现代文：阳翟的游侠赵季、李款供养着许多宾客，凭着气力侵夺邻里，甚至奸污人家的妻女，抓着官吏们的短处，在郡裹横行霸道，听说何并将要来了，就都逃走了。
English: The impotent ranger Zhao Ji and Li Qian provided for many guests, invaded the neighborhood by force, even raped people's wives and daughters, seized the shortcomings of officials, and ran amok in the county. When they heard what was coming, they all fled.

古文：并下车求勇猛晓文法吏且十人，使文吏治三人狱，武吏往捕之，各有所部。
现代文：何并一到任就寻求勇猛而且通晓法令的官吏近十人，派文官审理三人的案件，派武官前往逮捕他们，各自有各自的安排。
English: In addition, upon taking office, he sought out nearly ten officials who were brave and knowledgeable about the law, sent civil officers to try the cases of three people, and sent military officers to arrest them, each with their own arrangements.

古文：敕曰： 三人非负太守，乃负王法，不得不治。
现代文：下令说： 这三个人不是辜负了太守，而是违反了王法，所以不得不惩治。
English: The order said: These three people did not betray the emperor, but violated the royal law, so they had to be punished.

古文：钟威所犯多在赦前，驱使入函谷关，勿令污民间；不入关，乃收之。
现代文：钟威所犯的罪许多在大赦以前，将他赶进函谷关，不让他为害民间，如果他不进关，就把他抓起来。
English: Many of the crimes committed by Zhong Wei were committed before the amnesty. He was driven into the Hanyu Pass to prevent him from harming the people. If he did not enter the pass, he would be arrested.

古文：赵、李桀恶，虽远去，当得其头，以谢百姓。 
现代文：赵、李是首恶，虽然他们逃得很远了，也应杀其头，向百姓谢罪。 
English: Zhao and Li are the chief evil, although they have fled far away, they should also kill their heads and apologize to the people.

古文：钟威负其兄，止雒阳，吏格杀之。
现代文：钟威仗着他的哥哥，停留在雒阳，追捕的官吏捕杀了他。
English: Zhong Wei stayed in Fenyang for the sake of his brother, and the pursuing officials caught and killed him.

古文：亦得赵、李它郡，持头还，并皆悬头及其具狱于市。
现代文：还在别的郡裹抓到了趟、李，取了首级回来，何并把他们的首级和他们的全部罪状都悬挂在闹市上。
English: In another county, they caught a couple of Li, took their heads back, and hung their heads and all their charges in the downtown area.

古文：郡中清静，表善好士，见纪颍川，名次黄霸。
现代文：郡裹出现了清平安静的局面，何并表彰善行尊重士人，在颖川有口皆碑，名声仅次于黄霸。
English: A clear and peaceful situation has emerged in Guwabu. In addition to commending good deeds and respecting scholars, there is a well-known monument in Yingchuan. Its reputation is second only to Huangba.

古文：性清廉，妻子不至官舍。
现代文：何并品性清廉，妻子儿女不到官衙。
English: He is also incorruptible, and his wife and children are not allowed to hold public office.

古文：数年，卒。
现代文：几年后去世。
English: He died a few years later.

古文：疾病，召丞掾作先令书，曰： 告子恢，吾生素餐日久，死虽当得法赙，勿受。
现代文：当病重时，他叫佐官写下遗书，说： 告知儿子恢，我一生白吃饭的日子很长，死后虽然会得到法定的吊唁财礼，不要领取。
English: When he was gravely ill, he asked his aide-de-camp to write a suicide note, saying: "Tell my son Osiris that I have been eating for free for a long time, and although I will receive the statutory condolence and financial gift after my death, I do not want to receive it.

古文：葬为小椁，亶容下棺。 
现代文：下葬时用小椁，衹要能放得下棺材就行了。 
English: When burying, use a small shovel. If the shovel can fit under the coffin, it's fine.

古文：恢如父言。
现代文：包拯照着父亲的话做了。
English: Bao Zheng did as his father said.

古文：王莽擢恢为关都尉。
现代文：玉菱选拔恒拯担任关都尉。
English: Yuling selected Heng Zheng to serve as Guan's lieutenant.

古文：建武中以并孙为郎。
现代文：建达年间用坦并的孙子担任郎官。
English: During the Kenda era, Tan's grandson was used as a vassal.

古文：赞曰：盖宽饶为司臣，正色立于朝，虽《诗》所谓 国之司直 无以加也。
现代文：赞曰：盖宽饶身为检察之官，一身正气立于朝廷之上，即使是《诗经》中所说的 国之司直 也不过如此。
English: Zang said: Gai Kuanra, as a procurator, is upright and stands above the imperial court, even if it is not the uprightness of the country mentioned in the "Song of Songs."

古文：若采王生之言以终其身，斯近古之贤臣矣。
现代文：如果他能采纳王生的话一直到老，他就接近古代的贤臣了。
English: If he can follow Wang Sheng's words until old age, he will be close to the wise men of ancient times.

古文：诸葛、刘、郑虽云狂瞽，有异志焉。
现代文：诸葛、刘、郑虽然说有些狂妄懵懂，但却有独特的志向。
English: Although Zhuge, Liu and Zheng are said to be somewhat arrogant and ignorant, they have unique aspirations.

古文：孔子曰： 吾未见刚者。 
现代文：孔子说： 我没有看见过刚正的人。 
English: Confucius said, "I have never seen a righteous man.

古文：以数子之名迹，然毌将污于冀州，孙宝桡于定陵，况俗人乎！
现代文：以这些人的名声和事迹，仍然有毋将隆在冀州有污点，孙宝屈服于定陵侯这样的事，何况是一般的人呢？
English: With the reputation and deeds of these people, there are still such things as Shoulong being tainted in Jizhou, Sun Bao succumbing to Dingling, and what about ordinary people?

古文：何并之节，亚尹翁归云。
现代文：何并的节操，仅次于尹翁归。
English: He is second only to Yin Wengui in his self-restraint.

