古文：黄帝曰：余闻人有精、气、津、液、血、脉，余意以为一气耳，今乃辨为六名，余不知其所以然。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说人体有精、气、津、液、血、脉的说法，我认为这些不过是一种气罢了，现在却把它分为六种，我不懂这是怎么回事。
English: Huang Di said, "I have heard that the human body has essence, qi, jin, liquid, blood, and veins. I thought that these were just one kind of qi, but now it is divided into six kinds. I don't understand what is going on.

古文：岐伯曰：两神相搏，合而成形，常先身生，是谓精。
现代文：岐伯说：男女交合之后，可以产生新的生命体，在形体出现以前，构成人体的基本物质，就叫做精。
English: Qi Bo said: After the male and female have mated, a new life form can be produced. Before the appearance of the form, the basic substance that makes up the human body is called essence.

古文：何谓气？
现代文：什么是气？
English: What is qi?

古文：岐伯曰：上焦开发，宣五谷味，熏肤、充身、泽毛，若雾露之溉，是谓气。
现代文：岐伯说：上焦把饮食精微物质宣发布散到全身，可以温煦皮肤、充实形体、滋润毛发，就像雾露灌溉各种生物一样，这就叫做气。
English: Qibo said, "Heating diffuses the dietary fine substances into the whole body, which can warm the skin, enrich the body, and moisturize the hair, just like the mist irrigation of various organisms. This is called qi.

古文：何谓津？
现代文：什么是津？
English: What is Tsumo?

古文：岐伯曰：腠理发泄，汗出溱溱，是谓津。
现代文：岐伯说：肌腠疏泄太过，汗出过多，这样的汗就叫做津。
English: Qi Bo said, "If there is too much drainage of the skin and too much perspiration, such perspiration is called "tsu."

古文：何谓液？
现代文：什么是液？
English: What is a liquid?

古文：岐伯曰：谷入气满，淖泽，注于骨，骨属屈伸，泄泽补益脑髓，皮肤润泽，是谓液。
现代文：岐伯说：饮食入胃，水谷精微充满于周身，外溢部分输注于骨髓中，使筋骨关节可以曲伸灵活，渗出的部分可以补益脑髓，散布到皮肤，保持皮肤润泽的物质，就叫做液。
English: Qi Bo said: the food goes into the stomach, the water valley is filled with fine bubbles around the body, the overflowing part is injected into the bone marrow, so that the musculoskeletal joints can be flexible, and the oozing part can supplement the brain marrow. The substance that spreads to the skin and keeps the skin moist is called liquid.

古文：何谓血？
现代文：什么是血？
English: What is blood?

古文：岐伯曰：中焦受气，取汁变化而赤，是谓血。
现代文：岐伯说：位于中焦的脾胃接纳饮食物，吸收其中的精微物质，经过气化变成红色的液体，这就叫做血。
English: Qi Bo said: The spleen and stomach located in the middle of the coke accept food, absorb the fine substances in it, and turn into a red liquid through gasification. This is called blood.

古文：何谓脉？
现代文：什么是脉？
English: What is the pulse?

古文：岐伯曰：壅遏营气，令无所避，是谓脉。
现代文：岐伯说：向隧道一样约束着营血的运行，不使它泛滥妄行，就叫做脉。
English: Qi Bo said: It is like a tunnel that restricts the flow of blood and does not allow it to run wild. It is called the pulse.

古文：黄帝曰：六气者，有余不足，气之多少，脑髓之虚实，血脉之清浊，何以知之？
现代文：黄帝问：上述精、气、津、液、血、脉六气的有余和不足各有什么表现？如何才能了解气的多少、脑髓的虚实、血脉的清浊呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What are the manifestations of excess and deficiency of the above-mentioned six qi: essence, qi, jin, liquid, blood, and vein? How can we understand the quantity of qi, the reality and falsity of the brain marrow, and the purity of the blood vein?

古文：岐伯曰：精脱者，耳聋。气脱者，目不明。津脱者，腠理开，汗大泄。液脱者，骨属屈伸不利，色夭，脑髓消，胫酸，耳数鸣。血脱者，色白，夭然不泽。其脉空虚。
现代文：岐伯说：精的大量耗损，会使人耳聋；气虚的，可使人的眼睛看不清东西；津虚的，腠理开泄，使人大量汗出；液虚的，四肢关节屈伸不利，面色枯槁没有光泽，脑髓不充满，小腿酸软，经常耳鸣；血虚的，面色苍白而不润泽；脉虚的，脉管空虚下陷。
English: Qi Bo said: A large amount of fine wear and tear will make people deaf; qi deficiency, can make people's eyes not see things clearly; jin deficiency, blood circulation, make people sweat a lot; liquid deficiency, limb joints flexion and extension are unfavorable, face dull and lack luster, brain marrow is not full, calf is sour and soft, often tinnitus; blood deficiency, face pale and not moist; vein deficiency, vascular hollow.

古文：此其候也。
现代文：从这些就可以了解六气异常的表现。
English: This is a turning point for the five elements and five elements to be able to heal.

古文：黄帝曰：六气者，贵贱何如？
现代文：黄帝问：六气对人体作用的重要性有何不同呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the difference between the importance of the six qi to the human body?

古文：岐伯曰：六气者，各有部主也，其贵贱善恶，可为常主，然五谷与胃为大海也。
现代文：岐伯说：六气，分别由各自的脏器主管，它们在人体中的重要性及功能的正常与否，可以了解这些脏器的工作状态。
English: Qi Bo said: the six qi, respectively, by their respective organs in charge, their importance in the human body and the normal function or not, you can understand the working state of these organs.

