古文：尧以天下让许由，许由不受。
现代文：尧把天下让给许由，但许由不接受。
English: He ceded the world to Xu Rong, but Xu Rong did not accept it.

古文：又让于子州支父，子州之父曰： 以我为天子，犹之可也。虽然，我适有幽忧之病，方且治之，未暇治天下也。 
现代文：又打算让给子州支父，子州支父说： 让我做天子，不是不行，不过，我刚刚患了隐忧的病，刚好在医治之中，所以没有时间来治理天下。 
English: He also planned to make Zizhou his stepfather, and Zizhou's stepfather said, "It's not impossible for me to be the son of heaven, but I have just suffered from a hidden illness, and I am just in the middle of treatment, so I don't have time to rule the world."

古文：夫天下至重也，而不以害其生，又况他物乎！
现代文：天子这个位子很重要，但子州支父不因为天子之位很重要而放弃治疗自己的疾病，其他事就更不用说了。
English: The position of the heavenly son is very important, but Zizhou Shifu did not give up treating his illness because the position of the heavenly son was important, not to mention other things.

古文：唯无以天下为者可以托天下也。
现代文：只有不把天下作为自己私利的人，才可以把治理天下的重任交给他。
English: Only a person who does not regard the world as his own selfish interest can be entrusted with the important task of governing the world.

古文：舜让天下于子州之伯，子州之伯曰： 予适有幽忧之病，方且治之，未暇治天下也。 
现代文：舜把治理天下的大任交给子州支伯。子州支伯说： 我刚刚患上隐忧的病，恰好在医治中，没有时间来治理天下。 
English: Zou entrusted the great task of governing the world to Zizhou Zhibo. Zizhou Zhibo said: I have just suffered from a hidden illness, I am just under treatment, and I do not have time to govern the world.

古文：故天下大器也，而不以易生。
现代文：天下大位是最大的名器，子州支伯却不用它来交换生命。
English: The highest rank in the world is the greatest famous instrument, but Zizhou Zhibo did not use it to exchange life.

古文：此有道者之所以异乎俗者也。
现代文：这正是有道之人和凡俗之人不同的地方。
English: This is the difference between a moral person and an ordinary person.

古文：舜以天下让善卷，善卷曰： 余立于宇宙之中，冬日衣皮毛，夏日衣葛絺。春耕种，形足以劳动；秋收敛，身足以休食。日出而作，日入而息，逍遥于天地之间，而心意自得。
现代文：舜把天下让给善卷，善卷说： 我处在宇宙之中，冬天穿皮毛，夏天穿粗布；春天耕种，形体足够劳动；秋天收获，身体足够安养了；太阳出来就去工作，太阳下山便休息，逍遥自在于天地之间而心情舒畅。
English: I am in the universe, I wear fur in winter and coarse cloth in summer; I cultivate in spring, my body is strong enough for labor; I harvest in autumn, my body is healthy enough; I go to work when the sun comes out, and I rest when the sun goes down. I am at home between heaven and earth, and my heart is at ease.

古文：吾何以天下为哉！
现代文：我还要天下的位子干什么！
English: What do I want with the world's seat!

古文：悲夫，子之不知余也。 
现代文：可悲啊！你不了解我。 
English: Pathetic! You don't know me.

古文：遂不受。
现代文：就这样善卷也没有接受。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：于是去而入深山，莫知其处。
现代文：于是他隐居到深山里，没有人知道他的居处。
English: So he went into seclusion deep in the mountains, and no one knew where he lived.

古文：舜以天下让其友石户之农。石户之农曰： 捲捲乎，后之为人，葆力之士也。 
现代文：舜把天下让给他的朋友石户农夫，石户的农夫说： 做国君辛苦呀，是劳碌的人啊！ 
English: He ceded the kingdom to his friend, a farmer from Ishido. The farmer from Ishido said, "It's hard work being the ruler of a country. You have to work hard!"

古文：以舜之德为未至也。于是夫负妻戴，携子以入于海，终身不反也。
现代文：他认为舜的德还不够，于是背着行囊，妻子头顶用具，带着子女隐居到海岛上，终生没有再回来。
English: He thought that his virtue was not enough, so he went to the island with his bag on his back, his wife with the equipment on her head, and his children. He never came back.

古文：大王亶父居豳，狄人攻之。事之以皮帛而不受，事之以犬马而不受，事之以珠玉而不受。狄人之所求者土地也。
现代文：大王亶父居住在邠地，遭遇狄人的攻打；大王亶父用曾皮财帛事奉他们，但他们不接受，用犬马畜事奉他们，也不接受，用珍珠宝玉事奉他们还是不接受，狄人想要的是土地。
English: His great-great-grandfather lived in Yunnan and was attacked by the Di people. His great-great-grandfather served them with leather and money, but they did not accept it. He served them with dogs and horses, but they did not accept it. He served them with pearls and precious stones, but they still did not accept it. What the Di people wanted was land.

古文：大王亶父曰： 与人之兄居而杀其弟，与人之父居而杀其子，吾不忍也。
现代文：大王亶父说： 和人的哥哥居住在一起而让他的弟弟去被杀害，和人的父亲居住在一起而让他的儿子去被杀害，我不忍心这么做。
English: The great king said to his father: I cannot bear to live with a man's brother and have his brother killed, or with a man's father and have his son killed.

古文：子皆勉居矣！
现代文：你们都努力求生存吧！
English: All of you, try to survive!

古文：为吾臣与为狄人臣奚以异。
现代文：做我的臣子和做狄人的臣子没有什么两样！
English: There is no difference between being my vassal and being Di's vassal!

古文：且吾闻之：不以所用养害所养。 
现代文：并且我听说，不要因为用以养人的土地而杀害所养的百姓。 
English: And I have heard it said, Thou shalt not slay thy neighbour for the land which thou shalt inherit.

古文：因杖筴而去之。
现代文：于是大王亶父拄着拐杖离开了。
English: So the great king and his father left on crutches.

古文：民相连而从之。遂成国于岐山之下。
现代文：百姓推着步挽车跟随，在岐山下成立了一个国家。
English: The people followed, pushing and pulling the cart, and a country was established at the foot of the mountain.

古文：夫大王亶父可谓能尊生矣。
现代文：这些人可以说像大王亶父那样，能够尊重生命。
English: These people can be said to have the same respect for life as their great-grandfather.

古文：能尊生者，虽贵富不以养伤身，虽贫贱不以利累形。
现代文：能够尊重生命的，并不因为富贵而伤害身体，也不因为贫贱利禄来劳累形体。
English: Those who can respect life do not harm their bodies because they are rich, nor do they wear out their bodies because they are poor.

古文：今世之人居高官尊爵者，皆重失之。见利轻亡其身，岂不惑哉！
现代文：现在的人，拥有高官厚禄的，都怕失去他们，见到有利可图，就不顾自己的性命，这不是迷惑吗？
English: Nowadays, people who have high-ranking officials and rich rewards are afraid of losing them, and when they see profit, they don't care about their lives. Isn't this confusing?

古文：越人三世弑其君，王子搜患之，逃乎丹穴，而越国无君。
现代文：越人先后三代杀掉自己的国君，王子搜对此十分忧患，逃到荒山野洞里去。
English: Three generations of Viets had killed their own sovereigns. Prince Sou was very distressed about this and fled to a cave in the wilderness.

古文：求王子搜不得，从之丹穴。
现代文：越国没有了君主，到处找寻王子搜都没能找到，便追踪来到洞穴。
English: The country of Yue had no monarch, and after searching everywhere for a prince, they couldn't find him, so they tracked him down to a cave.

古文：王子搜不肯出，越人熏之以艾。乘以王舆。
现代文：王子搜不肯出洞，越人便点燃艾草用烟薰洞，还为他准备了国王的乘舆。
English: Prince So refused to come out of the cave, so the Viets lit the cave with the smoke of wormwood, and also prepared the king's carriage for him.

古文：王子搜援绥登车，仰天而呼曰： 君乎，君乎，独不可以舍我乎！ 
现代文：王子搜拉过登车的绳索，仰天大呼说： 国君之位啊，国君之位啊，就是不能够放过我啊！ 
English: The prince tugged at the rope to board the carriage and shouted to the heavens: "Oh, the position of the sovereign, oh, the position of the sovereign, they just can't let me go!"

古文：王子搜非恶为君也，恶为君之患也。
现代文：王子搜并不是讨厌做国君，而是憎恶做了国君难免会招来杀身的祸患。
English: Prince Sou is not disgusted with being the sovereign, but is afraid of the calamity that comes with being the sovereign.

古文：若王子搜者，可谓不以国伤生矣！此固越人之所欲得为君也。
现代文：像王子搜这样的人，可说是不因为国君之位而伤害自己生命的了，这必定就是越人一心想要让他做国君的缘故。
English: It can be said that a person like Prince Sou did not harm his own life because of the position of the sovereign, which must be the reason why Yue people are bent on making him the sovereign.

古文：韩魏相与争侵地，子华子见昭僖侯，昭僖侯有忧色。
现代文：韩国和魏国互相争夺土地而战争。子华子见到昭僖侯，昭僖面有忧色。
English: Korea and Wei fought each other for land. When Zihua Zi saw Zhaohui, Zhaohui's face was sad.

古文：子华子曰： 今使天下书铭于君之前，书之言曰： 左手攫之则右手废，右手攫之则左手废。然而攫之者必有天下。 
现代文：子华子说： 现在让天下的人在你的面前写下誓约，誓约这样写： 左手夺到它就砍去右手，右手夺到它就砍去左手，然而夺到的可以得到天下。 
English: Zihua Zi said, "Now let all the people of the world write an oath in front of you. Write the oath like this: If the left hand takes it, cut off the right hand. If the right hand takes it, cut off the left hand. However, what is taken can be given to the world."

古文：君能攫之乎？ 昭僖侯曰： 寡人不攫也。 
现代文：你愿意去夺取吗？ 昭僖侯说： 我不愿意夺取。 
English: Are you willing to seize it? Zhaohui said: I am not willing to seize it.

古文：子华子曰： 甚善！自是观之，两臂重于天下也。身亦重于两臂。
现代文：子华子说： 很好，这样看来，两只手比天下重要，身体又比两臂重要。
English: Zihua Zi said, "That's good. From this perspective, two hands are more important than the world, and the body is more important than two arms.

古文：鲁君闻颜阖得道之人也，使人以币先焉。
现代文：韩国远比天下为轻，现韩魏所争夺的，又远比韩国轻。因此何必担心得不到呢？ 鲁君听说颜阖是个有道的人，派人带着币帛等礼品来慰问他。
English: Lu Guo Guojun heard that Yan Xuan was a virtuous man, and wanted to invite him to become an official, so he sent someone to greet him first with a gift.

古文：颜阖守陋闾，苴布之衣，而自饭牛。
现代文：颜阖住在一个很破的小巷子里，穿着粗布衣服在喂牛。
English: Yan Yan lives in a very run-down alley, and she is feeding the cows in her coarse clothes.

古文：鲁君之使者至，颜阖自对之。
现代文：鲁君的使者来了，颜阖亲自出来迎接。
English: Lu Jun's emissary arrived, and Yan Xun personally received him.

古文：使者曰： 此颜阖之家与？ 
现代文：使者说： 这是颜阖的家吗？ 
English: The messenger said, "Is this the house of Cain and Abel?"

古文：颜阖对曰： 此阖之家也。 
现代文：颜阖说： 这是我的家。 
English: Yan Xuan replied, "It is my home."

古文：使者致币。颜阖对曰： 恐听谬而遗使者罪，不若审之。 
现代文：使者送上礼品，颜阖说： 恐怕你听错了是否是送我的，你不如回去问个明白，以免受到国君的责备。 
English: When the messenger brought the gift, Yan Xuan said, "I'm afraid you've misheard whether it's for me. You'd better go back and find out, so as not to be reproached by the sovereign."

古文：使者还，反审之，复来求之，则不得已！
现代文：使者回去，查问清楚了，再来找颜阖，却找不到他了。
English: The messenger went back, the inquiry was clear, and he came back to look for Yan Qi, but he couldn't be found.

古文：故若颜阖者，真恶富贵也。
现代文：像颜阖这样的人，真正地厌恶富贵了。
English: People like Yan Xuan have a real aversion to wealth.

古文：故曰：道之真以治身，其绪余以为国家，其土苴以治天下。
现代文：所以说，道本来是为了修身，道的剩余用来治理国家，道德土芥来治理天下。
English: Therefore, the Tao was originally for self-cultivation, the surplus of the Tao was used to govern the country, and morality was used to govern the world.

古文：由此观之，帝王之功，圣人之余事也，非所以完身养生也。
现代文：这样看来，帝王的功业，乃是圣人余事，并不是用作全身养生的。
English: Seen in this light, the emperor's work is the work of a saint, and is not used for the health of the whole body.

古文：今世俗之君子，多危身弃生以殉物，岂不悲哉！
现代文：现在世俗的君子，多弃身去追名逐利，这岂不是可悲！
English: Isn't it sad that today's worldly gentlemen often abandon themselves to the pursuit of fame and profit?

古文：凡圣人之动作也，必察其所以之与其所以为。
现代文：凡是圣人的行为，必定省察他所追求的目标以及追求的意义。
English: When a great sage takes action, he must clearly know the goal to be achieved and the means to be used to achieve the goal.

古文：今且有人于此，以随侯之珠，弹千仞之雀，世必笑之。
现代文：现在如果有这样一个人，随便用宝珠去射千仞高的麻雀，世人必定会嘲笑他。
English: Now, if such a person were to casually shoot a thousand-feet-tall sparrow with a jeweled bead, the world would surely laugh at him.

古文：是何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：则其所用者重而所要者轻也。
现代文：乃是因为他所使用的东西实在贵重而所希望得到的东西实在微不足道。
English: It is because what he uses is so precious and what he hopes to obtain is so paltry.

古文：夫生者岂特随侯之重哉！
现代文：至于说到生命，难道只有随侯之珠那么珍贵吗！
English: As far as life is concerned, is it only the pearl of Suzhou that is so precious?

古文：子列子穷，容貌有饥色。
现代文：列子穷困，面露饥色。
English: The soldiers are poor and hungry.

古文：客有言之于郑子阳者，曰： 列御寇，盖有道之士也，居君之国而穷，君无乃为不好士乎？ 
现代文：有人告诉郑子阳说： 列御寇是有道之士，在你的国家之内却让他贫困，你这不是轻视人才吗？ 
English: Someone told Zheng Ziyang: "Lie Miko is a man of virtue, but you have impoverished him in your country. Don't you despise talent?"

古文：郑子阳即令官遗之粟。
现代文：郑子阳就派人给他送来米粟。
English: When Ziyang heard this, he immediately sent officials to bring food to Reiko.

古文：子列子见使者，再拜而辞。
现代文：列子见到使者，再三辞谢不接受。
English: When the envoys saw the envoy, they repeatedly declined to accept his thanks.

古文：使者去，子列子入，其妻望之而拊心曰： 妾闻为有道者之妻子，皆得佚乐。
现代文：使者走了，列子进到屋里，他的妻子埋怨他而抚着胸说： 我听说有道的人能够享安乐，现在你却面有饥色。
English: After the messenger left, Reiko came into the house. His wife complained about him and stroked his chest, saying, "I heard that virtuous people can enjoy peace and quiet, but now you look hungry."

古文：今有饥色，君过而遗先生食，先生不受，岂不命邪？ 
现代文：相国派人给你送粮食来，你却不接受，这难道不是我命该如此吗？ 
English: Is it not my fate that my country sends you grain and you do not accept it?

古文：子列子笑，谓之曰∶ 君非自知我也，以人之言而遗我粟；至其罪我也，又且以人之言，此吾所以不受也。 
现代文：列子笑着说： 相国他并不是自己真正了解我，而是听别人之言才来给我送米粟，将来他也有可能听别人的话而治我的罪，这就是我不接受的原因。 
English: Letson said with a smile: My partner doesn't really know me, but he listens to others to send me rice. In the future, he may also listen to others to cure my sin. That's why I don't accept it.

古文：其卒，民果作难而杀子阳。
现代文：后来，百姓果然造反而杀害了子阳。
English: Later, the people killed Ziyang instead.

古文：楚昭王失国，屠羊说走而从于昭王。
现代文：楚昭王丧失了国土。屠羊说跟着昭王出走。
English: Chu Zhao Wang lost his land. Tuyang said that he would follow Zhao Wang and run away.

古文：昭王反国，将赏从者。及屠羊说。
现代文：后来昭王返回国家，要奖赏跟随他的人，轮到屠羊说。
English: Later, King Zhao returned to the country to reward those who followed him, saying that it was their turn to slaughter the sheep.

古文：屠羊说曰： 大王失国，说失屠羊。大王反国，说亦反屠羊。
现代文：屠羊说说： 大王丧失国土。我丧失屠羊的工作；大王回国，我也回到屠羊之所。
English: The slaughterer said, "The great king has lost his land, and I have lost my job as a butcher. When the great king returns to his country, I will also return to the slaughterhouse."

古文：臣之爵禄已复矣，又何赏之有。 
现代文：我的爵禄已经恢复了，又有什么好奖赏的呢！ 
English: My knighthood has been restored, and what a reward it is!

古文：王曰： 强之。 
现代文：昭王说： 勉强地接受。 
English: King Zhao said: reluctantly accept.

古文：屠羊说曰： 大王失国，非臣之罪，故不敢伏其诛；大王反国，非臣之功，故不敢当其赏。 
现代文：屠羊说说： 大王丧失领地，不是我的过错，所以我不接受惩罚；大王收复国土，也不是我的功劳，所以我不接受奖赏。 
English: "It was not my fault that the Great King lost his territory, so I do not accept the punishment; it was not my merit that the Great King regained his territory, so I do not accept the reward.

古文：王曰： 见之。 
现代文：昭王说： 让他来见我！ 
English: Zhao Wang said: Let him come to see me!

古文：屠羊说曰： 楚国之法，必有重赏大功而后得见。今臣之知不足以存国，而勇不足以死寇。
现代文：屠羊说说： 楚国的法令，必须是有大功的人才能朝见国君，现在我的才智不足以保存国家而勇武也不足以消灭敌寇。
English: Tuyang said, "According to the laws of the State of Chu, it is necessary to be a person of great merit in order to be able to meet the sovereign. Now, my talent is not enough to preserve the country, and my bravery is not enough to destroy the enemy.

古文：吴军入郢，说畏难而避寇，非故随大王也。
现代文：吴国的军队侵入郢都，我因危难而逃避敌寇，并不是有意追随大王的。
English: The army of the State of Wu invaded the Yidu, and I fled from the enemy because of the danger. I did not intentionally follow the great king.

古文：今大王欲废法毁约而见说，此非臣之所以闻于天下也。 
现代文：现在大王要毁坏法度召见我，我并不想以此而让天下人知道。
English: Now the great king wants to destroy the Dharma and summon me. I don't want to let the world know about this.

古文：王谓司马子綦曰： 屠羊说居处卑贱而陈义甚高，子綦为我延之以三旌之位。 
现代文：昭王对司马子綦说： 屠羊说虽然处于卑贱的地位但懂得大道，你替我请他就任三公的职位。 
English: Zhao Wang said to Sima Zixuan: Tuyang said that although he was in a lowly position, he knew the way. You should invite him to take the position of the Three Princes for me.

古文：屠羊说曰： 夫三旌之位，吾知其贵于屠羊之肆也；万锺之禄，吾知其富于屠羊之利也。然岂可以贪爵禄而使吾君有妄施之名乎？
现代文：屠羊说说： 三公的职位，我知道比屠羊的职位高贵；万钟的俸禄，我知道比屠羊的利润丰厚；但是我怎么可以受爵禄而使君主受到滥施赏的声名呢！
English: The slaughterer said, "I know that the position of the three dukes is more noble than the position of the slaughterer; I know that the salary of ten thousand bells is more lucrative than the profit of the slaughterer; but how can I receive a knighthood and make the monarch famous for extravagant rewards!"

古文：说不敢当，愿复反吾屠羊之肆。 
现代文：我不敢接受，希望还是回到我屠羊的市场里。 
English: I can't accept it and hope to return to the market where I slaughter my sheep.

古文：遂不受也。
现代文：终究还是没接受。
English: In the end, they still didn't accept.

古文：原宪居鲁，环堵之室，茨以生草，蓬户不完，桑以为枢而瓮牖，二室，褐以为塞，上漏下湿，匡坐而弦歌。
现代文：原宪住在鲁国，住在一间方丈大小的小屋，茅草做房顶；蓬草编成的门四处透亮，折断桑条作为门轴，用破瓮做窗隔出两个居室，再将粗布衣堵在破瓮口上；屋子上漏下湿，而原宪却端端正正地坐着弹琴唱歌。
English: Yuan Xian lived in the State of Lu. He lived in a hut the size of an abbot. The roof was made of thatch. The door, made of puffy grass, was transparent in all directions. A broken mulberry bar was used as a door shaft. A broken lintel was used to make a window to separate the two rooms. A coarse cloth was then placed over the broken lintel. Moisture seeped into the house, but Yuan Xian sat neatly playing the piano and singing.

古文：子贡乘大马，中绀而表素，轩车不容巷，往见原宪。
现代文：子贡驾着高头大马，穿着暗红色的内衣外罩素雅的大褂，小小的巷子容不下这高大华贵的马车，前去看望原宪。
English: Zigong drove a tall horse, wearing dark red underwear and elegant overcoat. The small alley could not accommodate this tall and luxurious carriage, and went to see the original constitution.

古文：原宪华冠縰履，杖藜而应门。子贡曰： 嘻！
现代文：原宪戴着裂开口子的帽子穿着破了后跟的鞋，拄着藜杖应声开门，子贡说： 哎呀！
English: Wearing a hat with a split brim, wearing shoes with a broken heel, and holding a cane, Yuan Xian opened the door, and Zigong said, "Oh!

古文：先生何病？ 
现代文：先生得了什么病吗？ 
English: Is the teacher ill with something?

古文：原宪应之曰： 宪闻之，无财谓之贫，学而不能行谓之病。
现代文：原宪回答： 我听说，没有财物叫做贫，学习了却不能付诸实践叫做病。
English: Yuan Xian replied: I have heard that if you don't have wealth, it's called poverty, and if you study but can't put it into practice, it's called illness.

古文：今宪贫也，非病也。 
现代文：如今我原宪，是贫困，而不是生病。 
English: Now my original constitution is poverty, not illness.

古文：子贡逡巡而有愧色。
现代文：子贡听了退后数步面有羞愧之色。
English: Hearing this, Zigong took a few steps back, his face tinged with shame.

古文：原宪笑曰： 夫希世而行，比周而友，学以为人，教以为己，仁义之慝，舆马之饰，宪不忍为也。 
现代文：原宪又笑着说： 迎合世俗而行事，比附周旋而交朋结友，勤奋学习用以求取别人的夸赞，注重教诲是为了炫耀自己，用仁义作为奸恶勾当的掩护，讲求高车大马的华贵装饰，我原宪是不愿去做的。 
English: The original constitution also said with a smile: to act in accordance with the world, to make friends by comparing with others, to study diligently in order to win the praise of others, to pay attention to teaching in order to show off oneself, to use benevolence and righteousness as a cover for evil deeds, and to pay attention to the gorgeous decoration of the chariot and horse, my original constitution is not willing to do.

古文：曾子居卫，缊袍无表，颜色肿哙，手足胼胝，三日不举火，十年不制衣。正冠而缨绝，捉襟而肘见，纳屦而踵决。
现代文：曾子住在卫国，衣服破烂，面色浮肿，手足生茧。三天没有生火做饭，十年没有添置新衣了，帽子一戴帽绳就断，拉着衣襟手臂就会露出来，一穿鞋，脚跟就会露出来。
English: Zengzi lived in the old country, his clothes were tattered, his face was puffy, and his hands and feet were raw. He hadn't lit a fire to cook for three days, and hadn't bought new clothes for ten years. His hat would break as soon as he put it on, and his arms would be exposed when he pulled the collar, and his heels would be exposed as soon as he put on shoes.

古文：曳纵而歌《商颂》，声满天地，若出金石。
现代文：拖着破鞋口吟《商颂》，声音洪亮，好像金石乐器奏出来的一样。
English: Dragging his worn-out shoes, he mouthed the "Merchant's Song" in a booming voice, as if it had been played by a precious stone musical instrument.

古文：天子不得臣，诸侯不得友。
现代文：天子不能使他做臣子，诸侯不能和他结交。
English: The Son of Heaven cannot make him a vassal, and princes cannot make friends with him.

古文：故养志者忘形，养形者忘利，致道者忘心矣。
现代文：所以安养意志的人就忘记了外在的形体，安养身体的人就不受名利的干扰，求道之人就心无城府。
English: Therefore, the one who maintains the will forgets the external form, the one who maintains the body is not disturbed by fame and fortune, and the one who seeks the way has no mind.

古文：孔子谓颜回曰： 回，来！
现代文：孔子对颜回说： 颜回，你过来！
English: Confucius said to Yan Hui: Yan Hui, come here!

古文：家贫居卑，胡不仕乎？ 
现代文：你家境贫寒居处卑微，为什么不外出做官呢？ 
English: Your family is poor and your place of residence is humble. Why don't you go out and become an official?

古文：颜回对曰： 不愿仕。回有郭外之田五十亩，足以给飦粥；郭内之田十亩，足以为丝麻；鼓琴足以自娱；所学夫子之道者足以自乐也。
现代文：颜回回答说： 我无心做官，城郭之外我有五十亩地，足以供给我食粮；城郭之内我有四十亩地，足够用来种麻养蚕；拨动琴弦足以使我欢娱，学习先生所教给的道理足以使我快乐。
English: Yan Hui replied, "I have no intention of becoming an official. I have fifty mu of land outside the city walls, which is enough to provide me with food; inside the city walls, I have forty mu of land, which is enough to grow hemp and raise silkworms; playing the strings is enough to make me happy, and learning the principles taught by my teacher is enough to make me happy.

古文：回不愿仕。 
现代文：因此我不愿做官。 
English: That's why I don't want to be an official.

古文：孔子愀然变容，曰： 善哉，回之意！
现代文：孔子听了深受感动改变面容说： 实在好啊，颜回的心愿！
English: Deeply moved by what he heard, Confucius changed his face and said, "This is really good, Yan Hui's wish!

古文：丘闻之： 知足者，不以利自累也；审自得者，失之而不惧；行修于内者，无位而不怍。 
现代文：我听说： 知道满足的人不会因为利禄而使自己受到拘累，真正安闲自得的人明知失去了什么也不会畏缩焦虑，注意内心修养的人没有什么官职也不会因此惭愧。 
English: I have heard that: Those who know contentment will not be burdened by the lottery, those who are truly at ease with themselves will not shrink from anxiety when they know what they have lost, and those who pay attention to inner cultivation will not be ashamed of having no official position.

古文：丘诵之久矣，今于回而后见之，是丘之得也。 
现代文：我吟咏这样的话已经很久很久了，如今在你身上才算真正看到了它，这也是我的一点收获哩。 
English: I've been saying this for a long, long time, and now I can really see it in you, which is also a bit of a gain for me.

古文：中山公子牟谓瞻子曰： 身在江海之上，心居乎魏阙之下，奈何？ 瞻子曰： 重生。
现代文：中山公子牟对瞻子说： 我虽身居江湖之上，心思却时常留在宫廷里，怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhongshan Gongzimu said to Zhanzu: Although I live on top of the country, my mind often stays in the court. What should I do?

古文：重生则利轻。 
现代文：瞻子说： 这就需要看重生命。
English: Junko said: This requires valuing life.

古文：中山公子牟曰： 虽知之，未能自胜也。 
现代文：重视生命的存在也就会看轻名利。 中山公子牟说： 虽然我也知道这个道理，可是总不能抑制住自己的感情。 
English: If you attach importance to the existence of life, you will also look down on fame and profit.Zhongshan Gongzi Mou said: Although I also know this truth, I can't always control my feelings.

古文：瞻子曰： 不能自胜则从，神无恶乎！
现代文：瞻子说： 不能约束自己的感情也就听其自然放任不羁，这样你的心神会不厌恶对于宫廷生活的眷念吗？
English: Junko said, "If you can't control your emotions, you'll just let them run wild, so won't your soul hate the thought of palace life?"

古文：不能自胜而强不从者，此之谓重伤。
现代文：不能自己管束自己而又要勉强地管束自己，这就叫做双重损伤。
English: Not being able to control oneself and having to control oneself reluctantly, this is called double damage.

古文：重伤之人，无寿类矣！ 
现代文：心神受到双重损伤的人，就不会是寿延长久的人了。 
English: A person with double damage to the mind and spirit will not be a person with a long life.

古文：魏牟，万乘之公子也，其隐岩穴也，难为于布衣之士，虽未至乎道，可谓有其意矣！
现代文：魏牟，是大国的公子，他隐居在山岩洞穴中，比起平民百姓来这就难为得多了；虽然未能达到体悟大道的境界，也可说是有了体悟大道的心愿了。
English: Wei Mou, a prince of a great country, lived in seclusion in a mountain rock cave, which was much more difficult than ordinary people; although he could not reach the realm of the Enlightenment Road, he could be said to have the desire of the Enlightenment Road.

古文：孔子穷于陈蔡之间，七日不火食，藜羹不糁，颜色甚惫，而弦歌于室。
现代文：孔子被困于陈国蔡国之间，七天没有烧火煮饭，野菜汤里没有一粒米屑，脸色疲惫，可是还在屋里不停地弹琴唱歌。
English: Confucius was trapped between Chen Guo and Cai Guo. For seven days, there was no fire to cook rice, and there was not a grain of rice in the vegetable soup. He looked tired, but he kept playing the piano and singing in the room.

古文：颜回择菜，子路、子贡相与言曰： 夫子再逐于鲁，削迹于卫，伐树于宋，穷于商周，围于陈蔡。杀夫子者无罪，藉夫子者无禁。弦歌鼓琴，未尝绝音，君子之无耻也若此乎？ 
现代文：颜回在室外择菜，子路和子贡相互谈论： 先生两次被赶出鲁国，在卫国遭受铲削足迹的污辱，在宋国受到砍掉大树的羞辱，在商、周后裔居住的地方弄得走投无路，如今在陈、蔡之间又陷入如此困厄的境地，图谋杀害先生的没有治罪，凌辱先生的没有禁阻，可是先生还不停地弹琴吟唱，不曾中断过乐声，君子不懂得羞辱竟达到这样的地步吗？ 
English: Yan Hui was choosing vegetables outside, Zilu and Zigong were talking to each other: Mr. was twice driven out of Lu, suffered the humiliation of shoveling footprints in the motherland, suffered the humiliation of cutting down large trees in Song, and was cornered in the place where Shang and Zhou descendants lived. Now, between Chen and Cai, he has fallen into such a difficult situation. There is no crime for attempting to murder Mr. and there is no prohibition for insulting Mr. However, Mr. still plays the piano and sings, and has never interrupted the music. Don't gentlemen understand how humiliation has reached such a level?

古文：颜回无以应，入告孔子。
现代文：颜回没有办法回答，进入内室告诉给孔子。
English: Unable to answer, Yan Hui went into the inner room to tell Confucius.

古文：孔子推琴，喟然而叹曰： 由与赐，细人也。
现代文：孔子推开琴弦长长地叹息说： 子路和子贡，真是见识浅薄的人。
English: Confucius pushed back the strings and sighed for a long time, saying, "Zilu and Zigong are really shallow people.

古文：召而来，吾语之。 
现代文：叫他们进来，我有话对他们说。 
English: Tell them to come in. I have something to say to them.

古文：子路、子贡入。
现代文：子路和子贡进到屋里。
English: Zi Lu and Zi Gong entered the room.

古文：子路曰： 如此者，可谓穷矣！ 
现代文：子路说： 像现在这样的处境真可以说是走投无路了！ 
English: Zi Lu said, "A situation like this can truly be said to have reached a dead end!

古文：孔子曰： 是何言也！
现代文：孔子说： 这是什么话！
English: Confucius said, "What is this saying?

古文：君子通于道之谓通，穷于道之谓穷。
现代文：君子通达于道叫做一以贯通，不能通达于道叫做走投无路。
English: A gentleman who can reach the Tao is said to have penetrated it, and one who cannot reach the Tao is said to have no way out.

古文：今丘抱仁义之道以遭乱世之患，其何穷之为？
现代文：如今我信守仁义之道而遭逢乱世带来的祸患，怎么能说成是走投无路！
English: Now that I have been faithful to the path of benevolence and righteousness and have encountered the calamities brought by the chaotic world, how can I say that I am cornered!

古文：故内省而不穷于道，临难而不失其德。天寒既至，霜雪既降，吾是以知松柏之茂也。
现代文：所以说，善于反省就不会不通达于道，面临危难就不会丧失德行，严寒已经到来，霜雪降临大地，我这才真正看到了松柏仍是那么郁郁葱葱。
English: Therefore, if you are good at self-reflection, you will not be unable to reach the Tao, and you will not lose your virtue in the face of danger. The cold has arrived, the frost has fallen on the ground, and I really saw that the pine is still so lush.

古文：陈蔡之隘，于丘其幸乎。 
现代文：陈、蔡之间的困厄，对于我来说恐怕还是一件幸事啊！ 
English: The predicament between Chen and Cai is, I'm afraid, a blessing for me!

古文：孔子削然反琴而弦歌，子路扢然执干而舞。
现代文：孔子说完后安详地拿过琴来随着琴声阵阵歌咏，子路兴奋而又勇武地拿着盾牌跳起舞来。
English: After Confucius finished speaking, he calmly took the harp and sang along with the melody of the harp. Zilu was excited and danced with his shield.

古文：子贡曰： 吾不知天之高也，地之下也。 
现代文：子贡说： 我真不知道先生是如此高洁，而我却是那么的浅薄啊！ 
English: Zigong said, "I really don't know why my master is so noble, while I am so shallow!"

古文：古之得道者，穷亦乐，通亦乐，所乐非穷通也。
现代文：古时候得道的人，困厄的环境里也能快乐，通达的情况下也能快乐。
English: In ancient times, people who had attained the Way could be happy even in a difficult environment, and they could also be happy even if they were enlightened.

古文：道德于此，则穷通为寒暑风雨之序矣。
现代文：心境快乐的原因不在于困厄与通达，道德存留于心中，那么困厄与通达都像是寒与暑、风与雨那样有规律地变化。
English: The reason for the happiness of the state of mind does not lie in hardship and attainment. If morality remains in the heart, then hardship and attainment will change as regularly as cold and heat, wind and rain.

古文：故许由娱于颖阳，而共伯得乎丘首。
现代文：所以，许由能够在颍水的北岸求得欢娱而共伯则在共首之山优游自得地生活。
English: Therefore, Xu Yue is able to seek pleasure on the north shore of Surabaya, while his brother-in-law lives a self-sufficient life in the beautiful mountain of the same name.

古文：舜以天下让其友北人无择，北人无择曰： 异哉，后之为人也，居于畎亩之中，而游尧之门。
现代文：舜把天下让给他的朋友北人无择，北人无择说： 奇怪啊，舜的为人，处于田亩之中，而游历于尧帝之门。
English: The northerner had no choice but to say, "It is strange that a man like me, who lives in the middle of the fields, should travel to the gate of the emperor."

古文：不若是而已，又欲以其辱行漫我。
现代文：不仅是如此而已，还要用他的耻辱行为来玷污于我。
English: Not only that, but he's going to tarnish me with his disgraceful behavior.

古文：吾羞见之。 
现代文：我见到他感到羞耻。 
English: I'm ashamed to see him.

古文：因自投清泠之渊。
现代文：因而自己投入清冷之渊而死。
English: So he plunged himself into the cold abyss and died.

古文：汤将伐桀，因卞随而谋，卞随曰： 非吾事也。 
现代文：商汤要讨伐夏桀，就这件事与卞随商量，卞随说： 这不是我的事情。 
English: Shangtang wanted to fight against Xia Zhuang, and discussed the matter with Zhu Zhuang. Zhuang Zhuang said, "This is not my business.

古文：汤曰： 孰可？ 
现代文：商汤说： 跟谁说可以？ 
English: Shang Tang said: Who can I talk to?

古文：曰∶ 吾不知也。 
现代文：说： 我不知道。 
English: He said: I don't know.

古文：汤又因瞀光而谋，瞀光曰： 非吾事也。 
现代文：商汤又就此事同瞀光商量，瞀光说： 这不是我的事情。 
English: Shangtang also discussed this matter with Gongguang. Gongguang said: This is not my business.

古文：汤曰∶ 孰可？ 
现代文：商汤说： 跟谁说可以？ 
English: Shang Tang said: Who can I talk to?

古文：曰： 吾不知也。 
现代文：说： 我不知道。 
English: He said: I don't know.

古文：汤曰： 伊尹何如？ 
现代文：商汤说： 伊尹怎样？ 
English: Shangtang said: How is Yi Yin?

古文：曰： 强力忍垢，吾不知其他也。 
现代文：曰： 他能勉强己力而忍受耻辱，我不知道他别的了。 
English: "I don't know anything else about him," he said, "other than he can pull himself up by his bootstraps and bear the shame."

古文：汤遂与伊尹谋伐桀，克之。
现代文：汤就和伊尹策谋讨伐夏桀，战胜了夏桀。
English: Tang and Yi Yin plotted to fight against Xia Yao and defeated Xia Yao.

古文：以让卞随，卞随辞曰： 后之伐桀也谋乎我，必以我为贼也；胜桀而让我，必以我为贪也。
现代文：汤让位给卞随，卞随推辞说： 君主伐桀时找我谋划，一定以为我是残忍的人；战胜了夏桀而让位给我，一定认为我是个贪婪的人。
English: Tang gave up his place to Xing Zhuang, and Xing Zhuang excused himself, saying, "The monarch must have thought I was a cruel person when he asked me to make plans for the felling of poplar trees; he must have thought I was a greedy person when he defeated Xia Zhuang and gave up his place to me.

古文：吾生乎乱世，而无道之人再来漫我以其辱行，吾不忍数闻也！ 
现代文：我生活在乱世，而无道的人一再用耻辱的行为来玷污我，我不能忍受屡次的搅扰！ 
English: I live in a chaotic world, and the wicked repeatedly defile me with shameful acts. I can't bear to be disturbed again and again!

古文：乃自投椆水而死。
现代文：于是自投椆水而死。
English: So he threw himself into the water and died.

古文：汤又让瞀光，曰： 知者谋之，武者遂之，仁者居之，古之道也。
现代文：商汤又让位给瞀光，说： 有智慧的人策谋，武勇的人完成，仁义的人来就位，这是自古以来的道理。
English: Shang Tang also gave way to Yu Guang, saying: "Wise people plan, brave people complete, and benevolent people take their place. This has been the principle since ancient times.

古文：吾子胡不立乎？ 
现代文：你为什么不即位呢？ 
English: Why don't you take the throne?

古文：瞀光辞曰： 废上，非义也；杀民，非仁也；人犯其难，我享其利，非廉也。
现代文：瞀光推辞说： 废黜君上，不是义；杀害人民，不是仁；别人犯难，我享其利，不是廉。
English: Gongguang said, "To depose the emperor is not righteousness; to kill the people is not benevolence; when others are in trouble, I enjoy their benefits, not their corruption.

古文：吾闻之曰： 非其义者，不受其禄；无道之世，不践其土。 
现代文：我听说： 不合于义的，不接受它的利禄；无道的社会，不踏它的土地。 
English: I have heard it said, "The unrighteous will not inherit the land, and the wicked will not dwell in it."

古文：况尊我乎！
现代文：何况是把我尊奉君位呢！
English: What's more, you have honored me with your high rank!

古文：吾不忍久见也。 
现代文：我不忍心长久地目睹这种情况。 
English: I can't bear to see this go on much longer.

古文：乃负石而自沈于庐水。
现代文：于是背负石头而自沉于庐水。
English: So he carried a stone on his back and immersed himself in the water.

古文：昔周之兴，有士二人处于孤竹，曰伯夷、叔齐。
现代文：以前周朝兴起的时候，孤竹国有两位贤士，名叫伯夷和叔齐。
English: In the past, when the Zhou Dynasty arose, there were two sages in the Lone Bamboo State, named Bo Yi and Uncle Qi.

古文：二人相谓曰： 吾闻西方有人，似有道者，试往观焉。 
现代文：二人商量说： 听说西方有个像是得道的人，我们去看看。 
English: The two of them discussed and said, "I heard that there is a person in the West who seems to have attained the Way. Let's go and see."

古文：至于岐阳，武王闻之，使叔旦往见之。与盟曰： 加富二等，就官一列。 
现代文：他们来到岐山的南面，周武王知道了，派他的弟弟旦前去拜见，并且跟他们结下誓盟，说： 增加俸禄二等，授予一等官职。 
English: They came to the south side of Qishan. When King Zhou Wu learned of this, he sent his younger brother, Dan, to pay them a visit and made a pledge with them, saying, "Increase the second-class salary and grant them a first-class official post."

古文：血牲而埋之。
现代文：然后用牲血涂抹在盟书上埋入地下。
English: The blood was then smeared on the pact and buried underground.

古文：二人相视而笑，曰： 嘻，异哉！
现代文：伯夷叔齐二人相视而笑说： 咦，真是奇怪啊！
English: The two looked at each other and laughed, saying, "Wow, that's really strange!

古文：此非吾所谓道也。
现代文：这不是我们所谈论的道。
English: This is not the path we are talking about.

古文：昔者神农之有天下也，时祀尽敬而不祈喜；其于人也，忠信尽治而无求焉。
现代文：从前神农氏治理天下，按时祭祀竭尽虔诚而不祈求赐福；他对于百姓，忠实诚信尽心治理而不向他们索取。
English: Once upon a time, the Shennong clan ruled the world. They performed their religious rites on time without asking for blessings. They governed the people faithfully without asking for anything from them.

古文：乐与政为政，乐与治为治。不以人之坏自成也，不以人之卑自高也，不以遭时自利也。
现代文：乐于参与政事就让他们参与政事，乐于从事治理就让他们从事治理，不趁别人的危难而自取成功，不因别人地位卑下而自以为高贵，不因遭逢机遇而图谋私利。
English: If they are willing to participate in political affairs, let them participate in political affairs; if they are willing to engage in governance, let them engage in governance; do not take advantage of the difficulties of others to gain success; do not think that others are noble because of their lowly status; do not seek self-interest because of opportunities.

古文：今周见殷之乱而遽为政，上谋而下行货，阻兵而保威，割牲而盟以为信，扬行以说众，杀伐以要利。是推乱以易暴也。
现代文：如今周人看见殷商政局动荡就急速夺取统治天下的权力，崇尚谋略收买臣属，依靠武力保持威慑，宰牲结盟表示诚信，宣扬德行取悦众人，凭借征战求取私利，这是用推动祸乱的办法替代已有的暴政。
English: Nowadays, Zhou people see the turbulent political situation and quickly seize the power to rule the world. They advocate scheming to bribe their vassals, relying on force to maintain deterrence, sacrificing alliances to show good faith, promoting virtue to please everyone, and seeking self-interest by means of war. This is to replace the existing tyranny with the method of promoting disaster.

古文：吾闻古之士，遭治世不避其任，遇乱世不为苟存。
现代文：我听说上古的贤士，遭逢治世不回避责任，遇上乱世不苟且偷生。
English: I have heard that the sages of the ancients did not shirk their responsibilities when they ruled the world, and were meticulous and secretive when the world was in turmoil.

古文：今天下闇，周德衰，其并乎周以涂吾身也，不如避之，以洁吾行。 
现代文：如今天下昏暗，周人如此做法说明德行已经衰败，与其跟周人在一起而使自身受到污辱，不如逃离他们保持品行的高洁。 
English: If today is gloomy, Zhou people doing so indicates that morality has decayed. Rather than being humiliated by being with Zhou people, it is better to escape from them to maintain the purity of moral conduct.

古文：二子北至于首阳之山，遂饿而死焉。
现代文：两人向北来到了首阳山，终于不食周粟而饿死在那里。
English: The two traveled north to Shouyang Mountain, where they finally starved to death after refusing to eat cornflowers.

古文：若伯夷、叔齐者，其于富贵也，苟可得已，则必不赖高节戾行，独乐其志，不事于世。此二士之节也。
现代文：像伯夷、叔齐这样的人，他们对于富贵，假如真有机会得到，那也决不会去获取。高尚的气节和不同流俗的行为，自适自乐，而不追逐于世事，这就是二位贤士的节操。
English: For people like Bo Yi and Shu Qi, if they really had the opportunity to get rich, they would never do it. Noble temperament and different customs, self-indulgence, and not chasing the world, this is the discipline of the two sages.

