古文：十有九年春，王正月。
现代文：十九年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of nineteen, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋，公子结媵陈人之妇于鄄，遂及齐侯、宋公盟。夫人姜氏如莒。
现代文：秋季，公子结在鄄地护送陈人之妇的陪嫁去卫国。夫人姜氏去到莒国。
English: In autumn, he escorted Chen Ren's wife, accompanied by his son, to defend the country. His wife, Jiang, went to Shandong.

古文：冬，齐人、宋人、陈人伐我西鄙。
现代文：冬季，齐国、宋国、陈国一起攻打鲁国西方的边邑。
English: In winter, the states of Qi, Song and Chen jointly attacked the border towns in the west of Lu.

古文：十九年春，楚子御之，大败于津。
现代文：十九年春季，楚文王发兵抵御巴军，在津地被巴军打得大败。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, King Chuwen sent troops to resist the Pakistani army, and was defeated by the Pakistani army in Tsu.

古文：还，鬻拳弗纳。遂伐黄，败黄师于踖陵。
现代文：回国，鬻拳不开城门接纳，楚文王就转而进攻黄国，在踖陵打败了黄国的军队。
English: On his return to China, Taekwondo did not open the city gate to accept him, so King Chuwen turned to attack Huangguo and defeated Huangguo's army in Fuling.

古文：还，及湫，有疾。
现代文：楚文王回国，到达湫地时得了病。
English: When King Chu Wen returned to China, he got sick when he arrived in Handan.

古文：夏六月庚申卒。
现代文：夏季，六月十五日，楚文王死去。
English: In the summer, on June 15, King Chu Wen died.

古文：鬻拳葬诸夕室，亦自杀也，而葬于绖皇。
现代文：鬻拳把他安葬在夕室，然后自己也自杀身亡，死后被安葬在地下宫殿的前院里。
English: Taekwondo buried him in the evening room, then killed himself and was buried in the forecourt of the underground palace.

古文：初，鬻拳强谏楚子，楚子弗从，临之以兵，惧而从之。
现代文：当初，鬻拳坚决劝阻楚文王，楚文王不听从。鬻拳拿起武器对准楚文王，楚文王害怕而被迫听从。
English: At first, Shao Kuan resolutely dissuaded King Chu Wen, and King Chu Wen did not listen. Shao Kuan took up arms against King Chu Wen, and King Chu Wen was afraid and forced to obey.

古文：鬻拳曰： 吾惧君以兵，罪莫大焉。 
现代文：鬻拳说： 我用武器威胁国君，没有比这再大的罪过了。 
English: Taekwondo said: I threatened the sovereign with a weapon, there is no greater sin than this.

古文：遂自刖也。
现代文：于是就自己砍去两脚。
English: So he chopped off his own feet.

古文：楚人以为大阍，谓之大伯，使其后掌之。
现代文：楚国人让他担任卫戍楚都城门的官职，称之为太伯，并且让他的后代执掌这个官职。
English: The people of Chu let him hold the official position of the gatekeeper of the capital city of Chu, calling him "father-in-law," and let his descendants hold this official position.

古文：君子曰： 鬻拳可谓爱君矣，谏以自纳于刑，刑犹不忘纳君于善。 
现代文：君子说： 鬻拳可以说是爱护国君了，由于劝阻而自己使自己受刑，受了刑还不忘记使国君归于正道。 
English: The gentleman said, "Taekwondo can be said to be a way of protecting the sovereign. By dissuading him, I myself was punished. When I was punished, I did not forget to bring the sovereign back to the right path.

古文：初，王姚嬖于庄王，生子颓。
现代文：当初，王姚受到周庄王的宠爱，生了子穨。
English: At first, Wang Yao was favored by Zhou Zhuang Wang and gave birth to a son.

古文：子颓有宠，蒍国为之师。
现代文：子穨也受到宠爱，蒍国做他的师傅。
English: Zixuan was also favored, and Shandong was his master.

古文：及惠王即位，取蒍国之圃以为囿。
现代文：等惠王继承王位，夺取了蒍国的菜园来畜养野兽。
English: When King Hui succeeded to the throne, he seized the vegetable gardens of the State of Min to raise animals.

古文：边伯之宫近于王宫，王取之。
现代文：边伯的房子，近在王宫的旁边，蕙王也占取了。
English: The house of the bailiff, close to the royal palace, was also occupied by the king.

古文：王夺子禽、祝跪与詹父田，而收膳夫之秩，故蒍国、边伯、石速、詹父、子禽、祝跪作乱，因苏氏。
现代文：惠王又夺取了子禽祝跪和詹父的田地，收回了膳夫石速的俸禄。所以蒍国、边伯、石速、詹父、子禽祝跪发动叛乱，依靠苏氏。
English: Hui Wang also seized the fields of Zhiqiao Zhu Knee and Zhan Fader, and recovered the salary of the caterer Shi Hao. Therefore, Yan Guo, Bianbo, Shi Hao, Zhan Fader and Zhiqiao Zhu Knee launched a rebellion and relied on the Su clan.

古文：秋，五大夫奉子颓以伐王，不克，出奔温。
现代文：秋季，五位大夫拥戴子穨攻打惠王，没有得胜，逃亡到温地。
English: In the autumn, the five doctors attacked Hui Wang with tongs in their hands, but they did not win and fled to warmer climes.

古文：苏子奉子颓以奔卫。
现代文：苏子拥着子穨逃亡到卫国。
English: Su Zi embraced Zi Yao and fled to the defense of the country.

古文：卫师、燕师伐周。
现代文：卫国、燕国的军队进攻成周。
English: The armies of Wei and Yan attacked Zhou.

古文：冬，立子颓。
现代文：冬季，立王子穨为周天子。
English: In winter, Zhou Tianzi is crowned prince.

