古文：神宗钦圣宪肃向皇后，河内人，故宰相敏中曾孙也。
现代文：神宗钦圣宪肃向皇后，河内人，是前朝的宰相向敏中的曾孙女。
English: Shenzong Qin Sheng Xian Su Xiang, a native of Hanoi, is the great-granddaughter of the former prime minister Xiang Minzhong.

古文：治平三年，归于颍邸，封安国夫人。神宗即位，立为皇后。
现代文：治平三年，嫁给颍王府，被封为安国夫人，神宗即位后，立为皇后。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, she married Shinnofu and was named the wife of Ankoku. After Shinso ascended the throne, she became the empress.

古文：帝不豫，后赞宣仁后定建储之议。
现代文：神宗染病，皇后赞助宣仁太后定下建立储君的政策。
English: Emperor Jinzong fell ill, and Empress Dowager Xuanren, with the emperor's patronage, established a policy of reserving the throne for the emperor.

古文：哲宗立，尊为皇太后。宣仁命葺庆寿故宫以居后，后辞曰： 安有姑居西而妇处东，渎上下之分。 不敢徙，遂以庆寿后殿为隆祐宫居之。
现代文：哲宗即位后，尊皇后为皇太后，宣仁太皇太后命令修整庆寿宫让向太后居住，向太后谢绝说： 哪里有婆母居住西宫而媳妇居住东宫，混乱上下分别之理？ 不敢迁徙，于是以庆寿宫后殿为隆宫居住。
English: After Tetsuzong ascended the throne, His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager. Empress Dowager Xuanren ordered the Qing Shou Palace to be renovated so that the Empress Dowager could live there, but she refused, saying to the Empress Dowager: "Where would a mother-in-law live in the West Palace and a daughter-in-law live in the East Palace? Is there a reason for the confusion between the upper and lower palaces? They dare not move, so they live in the rear hall of the Qing Shou Palace as the Long Palace."

古文：帝将卜后及诸王纳妇，后敕向族勿以女置选中。
现代文：皇帝打算到向太后及诸王家纳妇，向太后敕令向族不要把女子送选。
English: The emperor planned to approach the empress dowager and the royal families to select a wife, and ordered the empress dowager not to select a woman from the Xiang people.

古文：族党有欲援例以恩换閤职，及为选人求京秩者，且言有特旨，后曰： 吾族未省用此例，何庸以私情挠公法。 一不与。
现代文：族党中有人想援引故例以后恩换取宫中职务，有人为选官请求京职，并且宣称有特旨，向太后说 ：我们家族不能延用此例，哪里能因为私情干扰公法呢？ 太后一个也不答应。
English: Some people in the clan party wanted to invoke the precedent to exchange favors for palace posts, and some people requested the Beijing post for the election of officials, and declared that they had a special purpose, saying to the empress dowager: Our family cannot continue to use this example, where can they interfere with public law because of personal feelings? The empress dowager did not agree to any of it.

古文：帝仓卒晏驾，独决策迎端王。
现代文：皇帝仓卒间去世，向太后单独定策迎立端王。
English: Emperor Cangpu passed away, leaving the empress dowager alone to decide on a strategy for welcoming Prince Duan.

古文：章惇异议，不能沮。
现代文：章表示异议，不能阻止。
English: The chapter disagrees and cannot be stopped.

古文：徽宗立，请权同处分军国事，后以长君辞。
现代文：徽宗即位后，请向太后权同处分军国事，太后以年高为辞而谢绝。
English: After Emperor Huizong ascended to the throne, he asked the Empress Dowager for the power to dispose of the military and state affairs. The Empress Dowager declined, saying that she was too old.

古文：帝泣拜，移时乃听。
现代文：皇帝泣拜，太后很久后才听从皇帝。
English: The emperor wept and bowed, and it took the empress dowager a long time to obey the emperor.

古文：凡绍圣、元符以还，惇所斥逐贤大夫士，稍稍收用之。
现代文：凡是绍圣、元符以来，遭到章斥逐的贤明大臣，太后逐渐重新收用。
English: Since the reigns of Shosheng and Yuanfu, all the wise ministers who were expelled by the emperor were gradually reinstated by the empress dowager.

古文：故事有如御正殿、避家讳、立诞节之类，皆不用。
现代文：旧制如御正殿、避家讳、立诞节之类，都废弃不用。
English: The old systems, such as the Imperial Palace, the Imperial Household Agency, and the New Year's Festival, have all been abandoned.

古文：大观元年薨，乘舆临奠，辍朝三日，谥曰惠穆。哲宗昭慈圣献孟皇后，洺州人，眉州防御使、马军都虞候、赠太尉元之孙女也。
现代文：一听说优礼召还故老贤臣、宽减徭役停止战争、爱护百姓、崇奉节俭等政举，太后就喜形于色。才过六月，太后就还政给皇帝。太后第二年正月去世，终年五十六岁。皇帝追念不已，于是再三加恩于太后的两个兄弟向宗良、向宗回，都位至开府仪同三司，封为郡王，而且从向敏中以上三代，也追列为王爵，不是常典恩宠。哲宗昭慈圣献孟皇后，洺州人，是眉州防御使、马军都虞候、赠太尉孟元的孙女。
English: The empress dowager was overjoyed when she heard that the emperor had called back the old and wise ministers, reduced the number of civil servants, stopped the war, cared for the people, and advocated frugality. It was only in June that the empress dowager returned power to the emperor. The empress dowager died in the first month of the second year, at the age of fifty-six. The emperor pined for her, and repeatedly showed his gratitude to the two brothers of the empress dowager, Xiang Zong Liang and Xiang Zong Hui, both of whom were promoted to the third rank of Kaifu Yi Tong, and were crowned as

古文：初，哲宗既长，宣仁高太后历选世家女百余入宫。
现代文：当初，哲宗成人后，宣仁高太后遍选官宦世家女儿百余人入宫。
English: At first, after Tetsuzong became an adult, more than a hundred daughters of the Xuanren High School and Grand Duchess Hen Xuan's family entered the palace.

古文：后年十六，宣仁及钦圣向太后皆爱之，教以女仪。
现代文：皇后年十六岁，宣仁高太后及钦圣向太后都喜爱她，教给她女仪。
English: When the empress was 16 years old, Empress Dowager Xuanren Gao and Empress Dowager Qin Shengxiang both loved her and taught her female etiquette.

古文：元祐七年，谕宰执： 孟氏子能执妇礼，宜正位中宫。 命学士草制。
现代文：元七年，谕令宰相 ：孟氏女能执行妇礼，应当正位中宫。 命学士拟旨。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the prime minister issued an edict: Meng women can perform the women's rite, and should be enthroned in the middle palace.

古文：又以近世礼仪简略，诏翰林、台谏、给舍与礼官议册后六礼以进。
现代文：又认为近世礼仪简略，诏令翰林、台谏、给舍与礼官商议册封皇后六礼进呈。
English: It is also believed that the etiquette of the modern world is simple, and the Emperor ordered Hanlin, Taiyu, Gishe and the etiquette officer to discuss the booklet of the Queen's Six Rites.

古文：至是，命尚书左仆射吕大防摄太尉，充奉迎使，同知枢密院韩忠彦摄司徒副之；尚书左丞苏颂摄太尉，充发策使，签书枢密院事王岩叟摄司徒副之；尚书右丞苏辙摄太尉，充告期使，皇叔祖同知大宗正事宗景摄宗正卿副之；皇伯祖判大宗正事高密郡王宗晟摄太尉，充纳成使，翰林学士范百禄摄宗正卿副之；吏部尚书王存摄太尉，充纳吉使，权户部尚书刘奉世摄宗正卿副之；翰林学士梁焘摄太尉，充纳采、问名使，御史中丞郑雍摄宗正卿副之。
现代文：于是，命尚书左仆射吕大防摄行宗正卿为副手；翰林学士梁焘摄行太尉职，充任奉迎使，同知枢密院韩忠彦摄行司徒职为副手；尚书左丞苏颂摄行太尉职，充任发策使，签书枢密院事王岩叟摄行司徒职为副手；尚书右丞苏辙摄行太尉职，充任告期使，皇叔祖同知大宗正事宗景摄行宗正卿为副手；皇伯祖判大宗正事高密郡王宗晟摄行太尉职，充任纳成使，翰林学士范百禄摄行宗正卿职为副手；吏部尚书王存摄行太尉职，充任纳吉使，权户部尚书刘奉世摄宗正卿为副手；翰林学士梁焘摄行太尉职，充任纳采、问名使，御史中丞郑雍摄行宗正卿为副手。
English: As a result, it was ordered that Shang Shul's left-hand servant, Shao Lyu of the Great Palace Guards, be appointed as the deputy of Zong Zhengqing; the scholar of Hanlin, Liang Jie, be appointed as the first lieutenant of Zong Zhengqing, and serve as the welcoming envoy; the scholar of the Privy Council, Han Tadahiko, be appointed as the deputy of Zong Zhengqing; Shang Shul's left-hand servant, Zu Rong Zhengqing, be appointed as the first lieutenant of Zong Zhengqing, and serve as the dispatching envoy of Zong Zhengqing; the scholar of the Privy

古文：帝亲御文德殿册为皇后。
现代文：皇帝亲自到文德殿册封她为皇后。
English: The emperor himself came to the Winter Palace to crown her as empress.

古文：宣仁太后语帝曰： 得贤内助，非细事也。 进后父閤门祗候在为宗仪使、荣州刺史，母王氏华原郡君。
现代文：宣仁太后对皇帝说 ：得到贤惠的内助，不是件小事。 进封皇后父亲门合门祗候孟在为崇仪使、荣州刺史，皇后母亲王氏为华原郡君。
English: Empress Dowager Xuanren said to the emperor, "It is not a small matter to receive the domestic help of the virtuous and benevolent. The queen's father, Jinfeng, waited for Meng Zai, Chongyi's envoy, and Rongzhou's historian, and the queen's mother, Wang Zi, was the governor of Hua Yuan County.

古文：久之，刘婕妤有宠。
现代文：很久以后，刘婕妤得到皇帝宠信。
English: After a long time, Liu Ye received the emperor's favoured letter.

古文：绍圣三年，后朝景灵宫，讫事，就坐，诸嫔御立侍，刘独背立帘下，后閤中陈迎儿呵之，不顾，閤中皆忿。
现代文：绍圣三年，皇后朝拜景灵宫，事情完毕后，坐下来，诸嫔御站在旁边侍奉，刘婕妤背立帘下，皇后门合中陈迎儿呵斥她，她不顾，宫中人都愤怒起来。
English: In the third year of Shaosheng, the queen paid homage to Jingling Palace. After the event was over, she sat down. Zhu Xi stood next to her and served. Liu Bei stood with his back under the curtain. Chen Ying'er shouted at her when the queen's door was closed. She ignored her, and everyone in the palace became angry.

古文：冬至日，会朝钦圣太后于隆祐宫，后御坐未髹金饰，宫中之制，惟后得之。
现代文：冬至日，正逢在隆宫朝拜钦圣太后，皇后御座朱髹金饰，按宫中制度，只有皇后才能坐这种座位。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, it was time to pay homage to Empress Dowager Qin at the Long Court Palace. The empress' throne was decorated with vermilion and gold. According to the palace system, only the empress could sit in this kind of seat.

古文：婕妤在他坐，有愠色，从者为易坐，制与后等。
现代文：刘婕妤坐在别的座位，脸有怒色，侍从为她换去座椅，制式与皇后相同。
English: Liu Ye sat in another seat, her face angry. The attendant changed the seat for her, the same format as the queen.

古文：众弗能平，因传唱曰： 皇太后出！ 后起立，刘亦起，寻各复其所，或已撤婕妤坐，遂仆于地。
现代文：大家愤愤不平，于是传喊道： 皇太后出来了！ 皇后起立，刘婕妤也起立，不久各人回到自己的座位，有人已撤掉刘婕妤的座位，刘婕妤于是仆倒在地上。
English: Everyone was indignant, so they shouted: "The Empress Dowager has come out!" The queen stood up, Liu Ye also stood up, and soon everyone returned to their seats. Someone had removed Liu Ye's seat, and Liu Ye then fell to the ground.

古文：怼不复朝，泣诉于帝。
现代文：刘婕妤愤恨不再上朝，向皇帝哭着诉说一番。
English: Outraged, Liu Bei no longer went to the imperial court, but cried to the emperor.

古文：内侍郝随谓婕妤曰： 毋以此戚戚，愿为大家早生子，此坐正当为婕妤有也。 
现代文：内侍郝随对刘婕妤说 ：不要因此而悲戚，只要为皇帝早些生儿，这个座位就应当是刘婕妤所有了。 
English: The chambermaid followed and said to Liu Bei: "Don't be sad because of this, as long as the emperor had a child earlier, this seat should be Liu Bei's.

古文：会后女福庆公主疾，后有姊颇知医，尝已后危疾，以故出入禁掖。
现代文：遇到皇后女儿福庆公主有病，皇后有个姐姐精通医术，曾经治好过皇后的重病，得以在后宫出入。
English: When the Empress's daughter, Princess Fuqing, fell ill, the Empress had a sister who was an expert in medicine. She had once cured the Empress of a serious illness and was able to enter and leave the harem.

古文：公主药弗效，持道家治病符水入治。
现代文：公主服药后没有疗效，她拿道家治病符水入宫诊治。
English: After the princess took the medicine, it had no curative effect. She took the Taoist healing water into the uterus for diagnosis and treatment.

古文：后惊曰： 姊宁知宫中禁严，与外间异邪？ 令左右藏之；俟帝至，具言其故。
现代文：皇后震惊说： 姐姐不知道宫中禁严，与外面不同吗？ 命令左右把她藏起来。等皇帝来后，皇后详细解说其中原故。
English: Shocked, the empress said, "Doesn't my sister know that the palace is off-limits, unlike outside?" She was ordered to hide. When the emperor came, the empress explained in detail why.

古文：帝曰： 此人之常情耳。 后即艺符于帝前。
现代文：皇帝说 ：这也是人之常情。 皇后就在皇帝面前烧符。
English: The emperor said, "This is also human nature," and the empress proceeded to burn the amulet in front of the emperor.

古文：宫禁相汀传，厌魅之端作矣。
现代文：后宫相传，鬼魅之事开始兴作了。
English: Rumors spread through the harem, and ghostly goings-on began.

古文：未几，后养母听宣夫人燕氏、尼法端与供奉官王坚为后祷祠。
现代文：不久，皇后养母听任宣夫人燕氏、尼姑法端与供奉官王坚替皇后祈祷。
English: Soon after, the queen's foster mother listened to Yan, the nun, and Wang Jian, the sacrificial official, to pray for the queen.

古文：事闻，诏入内押班梁从政、管当御药院苏珪，即皇城司鞫之，捕逮宦者、宫妾几三十人，搒掠备至，肢体毁折，至有断舌者。
现代文：此事被皇帝听见，诏令入内押班梁从政、管当御药院苏王圭，到皇城司查询此事，逮捕宦官、宫妾差不多三十人，拷打至极，四肢毁折，甚至有割断舌头的。
English: The matter was heard by the emperor, who ordered Su Wanggui, who had been in charge of politics and medicine at the imperial court, to go to the imperial city to investigate the matter. He arrested about thirty eunuchs and concubines, tortured them to the extreme, broke their limbs, and even cut off their tongues.

古文：狱成，命侍御史董敦逸覆录，罪人过庭下，气息仅属，无一人能出声者。
现代文：案狱已成，皇帝命侍御史董敦逸复审，罪人在庭下走过，气息奄奄，没有一人能做声说话。
English: The case has been sent to prison, the emperor has ordered the court to review the case, and the criminals walk under the court, breathing heavily, and no one can speak aloud.

古文：敦逸秉笔疑未下，郝随等以言胁之。
现代文：董敦逸疑惑持笔未下，郝随等用言语威胁他。
English: Dong Dunyi hesitated to hold the pen, and Zou threatened him verbally.

古文：敦逸畏祸及己，乃以奏牍上。
现代文：董敦逸畏惧祸害及己，于是用奏章呈上。
English: Dong Dunyi was afraid of the evil and himself, so he presented it with a musical score.

古文：诏废后，出居瑶华宫，号华阳教主、玉清妙静仙师，法名冲真。
现代文：皇帝诏令废去皇后，迁出住在瑶华宫，号为华阳教主、玉清妙静仙师，法名冲真。
English: The emperor issued a decree to abolish the empress, moved out and lived in the Summer Palace, known as the Huayang religious leader, Jade Chingmyo Jingxian Shi, and the legal name Chong Zhen.

古文：初，章惇诬宣仁后有废立计，以后逮事宣仁，惇又阴附刘贤妃，欲请建为后，遂与郝随构成是狱，天下冤之。
现代文：当初，章诬告宣仁太后有废立皇帝的计谋，因为皇后敬奉宣仁太后，章又暗地依附刘贤妃，打算请求册封她为皇后，于是与郝随共同构陷成这个案件，天下人都感到冤屈。
English: At first, Zhang falsely accused the Empress Dowager Xuanren of plotting to depose the emperor. Because the empress respected the Empress Dowager Xuanren, Zhang secretly relied on Liu Xianfei and planned to request that she be crowned as empress. Therefore, he and Zou Sui jointly framed this case, and the whole world felt wronged.

古文：敦逸奏言： 中宫之废，事有所因，情有可察。
现代文：董敦逸上奏说 ：中宫之废，事起有因，情有可察。
English: Dong Dunyat delivered a speech, saying: The abandonment of the Middle Court had a cause and a reason.

古文：诏下之日，天为之阴翳，是天不欲废后也；人为之流涕，是人不欲废后也。 且言： 尝覆录狱事，恐得罪天下后世。 帝曰： 敦逸不可更在言路。 曾布曰： 陛下本以皇城狱出于近习推治，故命敦逸录问，今乃贬录问官，何以取信中外？ 乃止。
现代文：诏令下发之日，天因此阴沉，这是上天不想废去皇后，百姓因此流涕哭泣，这是人民不想废去皇后。 并且说： 曾经复审案件，但恐得罪于天下后世。 皇帝说 ：董敦逸不可再在言路。 曾布说 ：陛下本来因为皇城之案是由近臣审理，因此命令敦逸复审，现在贬斥复审官，怎么能取信于中外呢？ 于是停止。
English: On the day the edict was issued, the sky was gloomy because the heavens did not want to abolish the empress, the people wept because the heavens did not want to abolish the empress, and the people did not want to abolish the empress. And they said: There was a review of the case, but they were afraid of offending the world and future generations. The emperor said: Dong Dunyi can no longer speak. Zeng Bu said: His Majesty originally ordered the review of the case of the imperial city because it was tried by his close vassals, so he ordered the review of Dunyi, and now he disparages the reviewers, how can he gain the trust of China and

古文：帝久亦悔之，曰： 章惇误我。 
现代文：皇帝过后也很后悔，说： 章误我。 
English: Afterward, the emperor also regretted it, saying, "I made a mistake.

古文：元符末，钦圣太后将复后位，适有布衣上书，以后为言者，即命以官；于是诏后还内，号元祐皇后，时刘号元符皇后故也。
现代文：元符末年，钦圣太后准备恢复皇后位，恰有平民上书，凡说到皇后之事的，就任命为官；于是诏令皇后还居内宫，号为元皇后，当时刘后号为元符皇后，因此这样称号。
English: At the end of the Yuanfu era, when Empress Dowager Qinsheng was preparing to resume her position as empress, a commoner wrote a letter to the effect that anyone who spoke about the empress would be appointed to an official position. Therefore, it was decreed that the empress, who was still in the Inner Palace, would be called the Yuanfu Empress. At that time, Empress Dowager Liu was called the Yuanfu Empress, hence her title.

古文：崇宁初，郝随讽蔡京再废后，昌州判官冯澥上书言后不得复。
现代文：崇宁初年，郝随劝蔡京再次废去皇后，昌州判官冯氵解上书说皇后不应复位。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Zou advised Cai Jing to depose the empress again, and the judge of Changzhou, Feng Rong, wrote a letter saying that the empress should not be reinstated.

古文：台臣钱遹、石豫、左肤等连章论韩忠彦等信一布衣狂言，复己废之后，以掠虚美，望断以大义。
现代文：台臣钱、石豫、左肤等连名上章指论韩忠彦等相信一个平民的狂言，恢复被废弃的皇后，掠取虚假的好政声，希望皇上用大义来决断此事。
English: The Taiwanese vassals Qian, Shi Yu, Zuo Quan, and so on, in the last chapter, point out that Han Tadahiko and so on believe in a folly of a commoner, restore the abandoned empress, plunder the false good political reputation, and hope that the emperor will decide the matter with great righteousness.

古文：蔡京与执政许将、温益、赵挺之、张商英皆主其说。
现代文：蔡京与执政大臣许将、温益、赵挺之、张商英等都主张这个说法。
English: Cai Jing and the ruling ministers Xu Zheng, Wen Yi, Zhao Tingzhi, Zhang Shangying and others all advocated this view.

古文：徽宗从之，诏依绍圣诏旨，复居瑶华宫，加赐希微元通知和妙静仙师。
现代文：徽宗听从了他们，诏令依照绍圣诏旨，继续住在瑶华宫，加赐号为希微元通知和妙静仙师。
English: Huizong obeyed them and continued to live in the Summer Palace in accordance with the edict of the Emperor of Shao. He was given the additional titles of Xi Wei Yuan Rong and Miaojing Xian Shi.

古文：靖康初，瑶华宫火，徙居延宁宫；又火，出居相国寺前之私第。
现代文：靖康初年，瑶华宫失火，徙居延庆宫；再次失火，迁出住在相国寺前的私宅。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the Summer Palace caught fire, and he moved to the Yanqing Palace; it caught fire again, and he moved out of his private residence in front of the Shogoku-ji Temple.

古文：金人围汴，钦宗与近臣议再复后，尊为元祐太后。
现代文：金人围攻汴京，钦宗与近臣商议再次恢复皇后，尊为元太后。
English: The goldsmiths besieged Beijing, and Qinzong and his close vassals discussed reinstating the empress, revered as the former empress dowager.

古文：诏未下而京城陷。
现代文：诏令未下而京城被攻陷。
English: Before the imperial edict was issued, the capital was captured.

古文：时六宫有位号者皆北迁，后以废独存。
现代文：当时六宫有位号者都往北迁徙，皇后因为被废而独自留下来。
English: At that time, all those who had the number in the Sixth Palace migrated to the north, and the empress was left alone because she was abolished.

古文：张邦昌僣位尊号为宋太后，迎居延福宫，受百官朝。
现代文：张邦昌称帝后，尊皇后为宋太后，迎居延福宫，接受百官朝拜。
English: Zhang Bangchang called the empress dowager, and the respected empress was the empress dowager of the Song Dynasty. She stayed at Yanfu Palace and received worship from hundreds of officials.

古文：胡舜陟、马伸又言，政事当取后旨。邦昌乃复上尊号元祐皇后，迎入禁中，垂帘听政。
现代文：胡舜陟、马伸又主张，国家政事应当按太后旨行事，张邦昌于是复上尊号元皇后，迎入后宫，垂帘听政。
English: Hu Yao and Ma Shin also advocated that the national government should act in accordance with the empress dowager's will, so Zhang Bangchang resumed the honorary title of the former empress, entered the harem, and listened to politics.

古文：后闻康王在济，遣尚书左右丞冯澥、李回及兄子忠厚持书奉迎。
现代文：皇后听说康王在济，派遣尚书左右丞冯氵解、李回及自己哥哥的儿子孟忠厚拿着诏书去迎接他。
English: When the empress heard that King Kang was in the capital, she sent Shang Shu to meet him with the imperial rescript, together with other emperors such as Feng Rongde, Li Hui, and her own brother's son, Meng Zhonghou.

古文：命副都指挥使郭仲荀将所部扈卫，又命御营前军统制张俊逆于道。
现代文：命令副都指挥使郭仲荀率领他的部队护卫，又命御营前军统制张俊在路上迎接。
English: He ordered the deputy capital commander to have Guo Zhongya lead his troops to escort, and also ordered the commander of the former army, Zhang Jun, to meet him on the road.

古文：寻降手书，播告天下。
现代文：不久颁布手书，广告天下。
English: Not long after, the handwritten book was promulgated, and advertising spread all over the world.

古文：王至南京，后遣宗室士〈亻褭〉及内侍邵成章奉圭宝、乘舆、服御迎，王即皇帝位，改元，后以是日撤帘，尊后为元祐太后。
现代文：康王到南京，皇后派宗室士砫及内侍邵成章拿着圭宝、乘舆车驾、皇帝御服迎接他，康王即皇帝位，改变纪年，皇后从这天开始撤帘，尊皇后为元太后。
English: King Kang arrived in Nanjing. The empress sent his brother-in-law and his chambermaid, Shao Chengzhang, to meet him, holding Gui Bao, riding in a carriage, and receiving the emperor's compliments. King Kang became the emperor, and the era was changed. The empress began to take off her veil from that day, and the respected empress became the empress dowager.

古文：尚书省言， 元 字犯后祖名，请易以所居宫名，遂称隆祐太后。
现代文：尚书省说， 元 字犯太后先祖的名字，请求改用她居住的宫名命名，于是称为隆太后。
English: According to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Yuan Zi, offended by the names of the empress dowager's ancestors, requested that the name be changed to the name of the palace where she lived, and was therefore called Long Dowager.

古文：上将幸扬州，命仲荀卫太后先行，驻扬州州治。
现代文：皇帝将要到扬州，命仲荀保卫太后先行，驻在扬州州治。
English: The emperor is going to Yangzhou, and he has ordered Zhongzheng to protect the empress dowager first and stay in Yangzhou to govern the state.

古文：会张浚请先定六宫所居地，遂诏忠厚奉太后幸杭州，以苗傅为扈从统制。
现代文：恰遇张浚请求先确定六宫住所，于是诏令孟忠厚保护太后到杭州，任命苗傅为扈从统制。
English: It so happened that Zhang Jun requested that the residence of Liugong be determined first, so the emperor ordered Meng Zhonghou to protect the empress dowager to Hangzhou and appointed Miao Fu as the regent.

古文：逾年，傅与刘正彦作乱，请太后听政。又请立皇子。
现代文：过一年，苗傅与刘正彦叛乱，请求太后听政，又请立皇子。
English: A year later, Miao Fu and Liu Zhengyan rebelled and asked the empress dowager to listen to the government, and also asked the crown prince to step down.

古文：太后谕之曰： 自蔡京、王黼更祖宗法，童贯起边事，致国家祸乱。
现代文：太后晓谕他们说 ：自从蔡京、王黼更改祖宗法制，童贯惹起战火，导致国家祸乱。
English: The empress dowager told them, "Since Cai Jing and Wang Xi changed the patriarchal legal system, Tong Rong started a war, leading to a national calamity.

古文：今皇帝无失德，止为黄潜善、汪伯彦所误，皆已逐矣。 傅等言必立皇太子，太后曰： 今强敌在外，我以妇人抱三岁小儿听政，将何以令天下？ 傅等泣请，太后力拒之。
现代文：现在皇帝没有失德，只是被黄潜善、汪伯彦所误，他们都被斥逐了。 苗傅等人主张一定要立皇太子，太后说 ：现在外有强敌，我一个妇人抱着三岁小儿听政，怎么能号令天下？ 苗傅等再三泣请，太后竭力拒绝。
English: Now the emperor did not lose his virtue, but he was misled by Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian, and they were all expelled. Miao Fu and others advocated that a crown prince must be appointed, and the empress dowager said: Now there are strong enemies outside, how can I, a woman, hold a three-year-old child and listen to politics, how can I order the world? Miao Fu and others repeatedly cried and begged, and the empress dowager strenuously refused.

古文：帝闻事急，诏禅位元子，太后垂帘听政。
现代文：皇帝听说事态紧急，下诏禅位于元子，太后垂帘听政。
English: When the emperor heard of the urgency of the situation, the imperial edict was issued, and the empress dowager came to listen to the government.

古文：朱胜非请令臣僚得独对论机事，仍日引傅党一人上殿，以释其疑。
现代文：朱胜非请求下令臣僚能够单独对论政事，仍然每日引苗傅同党一人上殿，让他解除猜疑。
English: Zhu Shengfei requested that the ministers be ordered to discuss political affairs alone, and still bring Miao Fu to the palace with the party every day, so that he would be relieved of suspicion.

古文：太后从之，每见傅等，曲加慰抚，傅等皆喜。
现代文：太后听从这个办法，每次与苗傅见面，多加慰抚，苗傅等人都很欢喜。
English: The empress dowager followed this method. Every time she met with Miao Fu, she comforted her more. Miao Fu and others were very happy.

古文：韩世忠妻梁氏在傅军中，胜非以计脱之，太后召见，勉令世忠速来，以清岩陛。
现代文：韩世忠的妻子梁氏在苗傅军中，朱胜非用计使她脱身，太后召见她，勉令韩世忠速来，清理朝廷。
English: Han Shizhong's wife, Liang, was in Miao Fu's army. Zhu Shengfei used a trick to get her out. The empress dowager summoned her and urged Han Shizhong to come quickly and clean up the imperial court.

古文：梁氏驰入世忠军，谕太后意。
现代文：梁氏驰入韩世忠军中，晓谕太后旨意。
English: Mr. Liang rushed into Han Shizhong's army and announced the empress dowager's will.

古文：世忠等遂引兵至，逆党惧。
现代文：韩世忠等人于是引兵前来，逆党们大恐。
English: As a result, Han Shizhong and others brought in troops, and the rebels were terrified.

古文：朱胜非等诱以复辟，命王世修草状进呈。
现代文：朱胜非等人力主皇帝复位，命王世修草拟奏章进呈。
English: Zhu Shengfei and other principal emperors were restored to power, and Wang Shixiu was ordered to draft and present the fictitious music chapter.

古文：太后喜曰： 吾责塞矣。 再以手札趣帝还宫，即欲撤帘。
现代文：太后高兴说 ：我的责任解脱了。 又用手札催促皇帝还宫，太后立即准备撤帘。
English: The empress dowager happily said, "My responsibility is relieved," and used her hand card to urge the emperor to return to the palace, and the empress dowager immediately prepared to withdraw the curtain.

古文：帝令胜非请太后一出御殿，乃命撤帘。
现代文：皇帝命朱胜非请太后出御殿，就下令撤帘。
English: The emperor ordered Zhu Shengfei to ask the empress dowager to come out of the palace, and then ordered the curtains to be drawn.

古文：是日，上皇太后尊号。
现代文：这天，上皇太后尊号。
English: On this day, the former empress dowager's honorary title came into being.

古文：太后闻张浚忠义，欲一见之，帝为召浚至禁中。
现代文：太后听说张浚忠义，想见一见他，皇帝替她召张浚到后宫。
English: The empress dowager heard of Zhang Junzhong and wanted to see him. The emperor summoned Zhang Junzhong to the harem on her behalf.

古文：承议郎冯楫尝贻书苗傅劝复辟，上未之知，太后白其事，楫得迁秩。
现代文：承议郎冯木戢曾经写信给苗傅劝皇帝复位，皇上不知此事，太后向皇帝说明此事，冯木戢得以升官。
English: Feng Muxuan, the negotiator, once wrote a letter to Miao Fu to persuade the emperor to restore the throne. The emperor did not know about this, the empress dowager explained the matter to the emperor, and Feng Muxuan was promoted.

古文：帝幸建康，命签书枢密院事郑珏卫太后继发，比至，帝率群臣迎于郊。
现代文：皇帝到建康，命签书枢密院事郑护卫太后随后出发，等到太后到来，皇帝率领群臣在郊外迎候。
English: The emperor arrived in Jiankang, signed the imperial edict of the Privy Council, and then set off to escort the empress dowager Zheng. When the empress dowager arrived, the emperor led a group of courtiers to greet her in the suburbs.

古文：会防秋迫，命刘宁止制置江、浙，卫太后往洪州，百司非预军事者悉从。
现代文：遇到秋防紧迫，命令刘宁止制置江、浙，保卫太后到洪州，各部门没有参预军事的人都跟从。
English: Faced with the urgent need of autumn defense, Liu Ning ordered to stop the system in Jijiang and Zhejiang, and to defend the Empress Dowager to Hongzhou. People from all departments who did not participate in the pre-military followed.

古文：仍命滕康、刘珏权知三省枢密院事从行，凡四方奏谳、吏部差注、举辟、功赏之类，皆隶焉。
现代文：仍命滕康、刘珏权知三省枢密院事跟从前往，凡是四方上贡、吏部差注、推荐人才、奖赏功臣之类政事，都统辖之。
English: Still alive, Tengkang, Liu Bei, and Quanzhi went to the three provincial Privy Councils, and all political affairs such as the four-party tribute, the dispatch of officials, the recommendation of talents, and the reward of meritorious subjects were all under their control.

古文：复命四厢都指挥使杨惟忠，将兵万人卫从。
现代文：又命四厢都指挥使杨惟忠，率领军队万余人护从。
English: He also ordered Yang Weizhong to command all four carriages and lead an army of more than 10,000 people to escort him.

古文：帝虑敌人来侵，密谕康、珏缓急取太后旨，便宜以行。
现代文：皇帝考虑敌人来侵，密令滕康、刘珏事急时按太后旨意，灵活处理。
English: The emperor considered the invasion of the enemy, and secretly ordered Tengkang and Liu Xuan to flexibly deal with urgent matters according to the will of the empress dowager.

古文：过落星寺，舟覆，宫人溺死者十数，惟太后舟无虞。
现代文：过落星寺时，舟船翻入水中，宫人淹死者十余人，只有太后座船安然无恙。
English: When passing through the Temple of the Shooting Star, the boat overturned into the water, drowning more than ten people in the palace. Only the Empress Dowager's boat was safe and sound.

古文：既至洪州，议者言： 金人自蕲、黄渡江，陆行二百余里，即到洪州。 帝忧之，命刘光世屯江州。
现代文：到洪州后，有人议论说： 金人从蕲、黄渡过长江，走陆路二百余里就到了洪州。 皇帝担忧，命刘光世屯兵江州。
English: After arriving in Hongzhou, some people argued that: The Jin people crossed the Yangtze River from Shandong and Huangshan and traveled more than 200 miles by land to Hongzhou. The emperor was worried and ordered Liu Guangshi to send troops to Jiangzhou.

古文：光世不为备，金人遂自大冶县径趣洪州。
现代文：刘光世不做战备，金人于是从大冶县直奔洪州。
English: Liu Guangshi did not prepare for the battle, so Jinren went straight from Daye County to Hongzhou.

古文：康、珏奉太后行，次吉州。
现代文：滕康、刘珏侍奉太后出发，到达吉州。
English: Tengkang and Liu Ye set off to serve the empress dowager and arrived in Jizhou.

古文：金人追急，太后乘舟夜行。
现代文：金人追迫很急，太后乘船夜行。
English: The pursuit of the goldsmiths was very urgent, and the empress dowager traveled by boat at night.

古文：质明，至太和县，舟人景信反，杨惟忠兵溃，失宫人一百六十，康、珏俱遁，兵卫不满百，遂往虔州。
现代文：天明，到达太和县，船夫景信反叛，杨惟忠部队溃败，丢失宫人一百六十人，滕康、刘珏都逃走，卫兵不满百人，于是前往虔州。
English: At dawn, when they arrived at Taihe County, the boatman, Kingxin, rebelled, Yang Weizhong's troops were routed, and one hundred and sixty courtiers were lost. Tengkang and Liu Ye both fled, and the guards were less than a hundred, so they went to Gyeongju.

古文：太后及潘妃以农夫肩舆而行。
现代文：太后及潘妃坐农夫抬轿而行。
English: The empress dowager and Pan Fei rode in a carriage pulled by a farmer.

古文：帝虑太后径入闽、广，遣使历询后所在，及知在虔州，遂命中书舍人李正民来朝谒。
现代文：皇帝怕太后直奔闽、广，派人到处询问太后的位置，知道在虔州后，于是命令中书舍人李正民前来朝见。
English: The emperor was afraid that the empress dowager would go straight to Shandong and Guangxi, so he sent people everywhere to inquire about the position of the empress dowager, and after knowing that she was in Qianzhou, he ordered Li Zhengmin, a middle school student, to come to see the emperor.

古文：时虔州府库皆空，卫军所给，惟得沙钱，市买不售，与百姓交斗，纵火肆掠。
现代文：当时虔州府库都空虚了，卫军得到的只有沙钱，在市场上买不到东西，卫军就与百姓争斗，纵火抢掠。
English: At that time, the treasury of Gyeongju was empty. The guards got only sand money, and they could not buy anything in the market. The guards fought with the people, set fire, and looted.

古文：土豪陈新率众围城，康、珏、惟忠弗能禁。
现代文：土豪陈新率领百姓围城，滕康、刘珏、杨惟忠不能制止。
English: Local hero Chen Xin led the people to besiege the city. Tengkang, Liu Ye, and Yang Weizhong could not be stopped.

古文：惟忠步将胡友自外引兵破新于城下，新乃去。
现代文：惟忠步将胡友从外面领兵大破陈新于城下，陈新才逃去。
English: However, he dutifully led Hu You's troops from the outside and defeated Chen Xin at the foot of the city. Only then did Chen Xin escape.

古文：帝闻，罢康、珏，命卢益、李回代之。
现代文：皇帝听见后，罢免滕康、刘珏，命卢益、李回取代他们。
English: After hearing this, the emperor dismissed Tengkang and Liu Bei and ordered Lu Yi and Li Hui to replace them.

古文：谕辅臣曰： 朕初不识太后，自迎至南京，爱朕不啻己出。
现代文：皇帝对辅臣们说： 我当初不认识太后，自从被迎到南京，太后爱护我如同亲生儿子。
English: The emperor said to his aides: I did not know the empress dowager at first, but since I was welcomed to Nanjing, the empress dowager has loved me like her own son.

古文：今在数千里外，兵马惊扰，当亟奉迎，以惬朕朝夕慕念之意。 遂遣御营司都统辛企宗、带御器械潘永思迎归。
现代文：现在在数千里外，受兵马惊扰，应当急忙迎接来，以成全我早晚慕念之意。 于是派御营司都统辛企宗，带御器械潘永思迎接太后归来。
English: Now I am thousands of miles away, being disturbed by soldiers and horses, I should hasten to meet them in order to fulfill my morning and evening longing. Therefore, I sent the imperial commanding officer of the capital, Xin Que Zong, to meet the empress dowager's return with the imperial instrument, Pan Yong Si.

古文：太后至越，帝亲迎于行宫门外，遍问所过守臣治状。
现代文：太后到越地，皇帝亲自到行宫门外迎接，遍问所过地方官吏政状。
English: When the empress dowager arrived in Yueji, the emperor himself went to meet her outside the gate of the imperial palace and inquired about the political status of local officials.

古文：入宫禁中，尝微苦风眩。
现代文：太后到后宫，曾经得了轻微的风眩病。
English: When the Empress Dowager came to the harem, she had a slight case of vertigo.

古文：有宫人自言善符咒，疾良已。
现代文：有个宫人自称擅长符咒，病过一段时间好了。
English: There was a palace official who claimed to be good at magic spells and that he felt better after being ill for a while.

古文：太后惊曰： 仁吾岂敢复闻此语耶！ 立命出之。
现代文：太后惊说 ：我怎敢再听见这种话呢？ 立即命令她出宫。
English: The Empress Dowager said in shock, "How dare I hear such words again?" and ordered her to leave the palace immediately.

古文：太后生辰，置酒宫中，从容谓帝曰： 宣仁太后之贤，古今母后未有其比。
现代文：太后生日这天，在宫中设置酒席，太后从容对皇帝说 ：宣仁太后的贤明，从古到今的母后没有能与她相比的。
English: On the day of the empress dowager's birthday, a banquet was set up in the palace, and the empress dowager calmly said to the emperor, "The wisdom of Empress Dowager Xuanren is incomparable to that of any empress dowager from ancient times to the present.

古文：昔奸臣肆为谤诬，虽尝下诏明辨，而国史尚未删定，岂足传信？
现代文：当初奸臣大肆谤诬，虽然曾经下诏辩明过，但国史还未删定，怎能传信于后？
English: At the beginning, the treacherous vassals had been slandering the peasants. Although it had been clarified in the imperial edict, the history of the country had not yet been expunged. How could the message be passed on?

古文：吾意在天之灵，不无望于帝也。 帝闻之悚然。
现代文：我想她的在天之灵，不会不寄望于皇帝啊！ 皇帝听说后很是震惊。
English: I think that she, in the spirit of heaven, would not fail to place her hopes in the emperor! The emperor was very shocked when he heard about it.

古文：后乃更修《神宗》、《哲宗实录》，始得其正，而奸臣情状益著。
现代文：后来重修《神宗实录》、《哲宗实录》，才得以正名，而奸臣情状益发显著。
English: Later, he revised "The True Record of the Shenzong" and "The True Record of the Zhezong" to clear his name, but his traitorous behavior became more and more obvious.

古文：帝事太后极孝，虽帷帐皆亲视；或得时果，必先献太后，然后敢尝。
现代文：皇帝侍奉太后极孝敬，即使是帷帐小事也都亲自检查；有时得到时新瓜果，一定先献给太后，然后敢尝。
English: The emperor served the empress dowager with great filial piety, and even inspected the curtains and curtains himself; sometimes, when he got fresh melons and fruits, he must first dedicate them to the empress dowager, and then dare to taste them.

古文：宣教郎范焘与忠厚有憾，诬与太后密养钦宗子。
现代文：宣教郎范焘与孟忠厚有仇，诬告忠厚与太后密养钦宗的儿子。
English: Fan Ye, the missionary, had a grudge against Meng Zhong Hou, and falsely accused him of being the son of Qin Zong, who was secretly raised by the empress dowager.

古文：帝曰： 朕于太后如母子，安得有此。 即治其罪。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我与太后情如母子，哪里有此事？ 就治其诬告罪。
English: The emperor said, "I and the empress dowager are like mother and son. Where did this come from? Punish her for making a false accusation."

古文：绍兴五年春，患风疾，帝旦暮不离左右，衣弗解带者连夕。
现代文：绍兴五年春天，太后染上风疾，皇帝早晚不离太后，一连几天衣带不解。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Shaoxing, the empress dyed with wind disease, the emperor sooner or later did not leave the empress dowager, and he was puzzled for several days.

古文：四月，崩于行宫之西殿，年五十九。
现代文：四月，在行宫之西殿去世，终年五十九岁。
English: In April, he passed away in the West Hall of the Imperial Palace at the age of 59.

古文：遗命择地攒殡，俟军事宁，归葬园陵。
现代文：遗命择地殡葬，等军事安宁后，归葬园陵。
English: According to his will, he chose the place of burial, and after the military peace, he was buried in the garden.

古文：帝诏曰： 朕以继体之重，当从重服，凡丧祭用母后临朝礼。 上尊号曰昭慈献烈皇太后，推恩外家凡五十人。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 我因为是继子，应当重服从丧，凡丧祭都用母后临朝礼仪。 上尊号为昭慈献烈皇太后，推加恩泽于外家一共五十人。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Since I am the stepchild, I should pay close attention to the funeral rites. All funeral rites should follow the etiquette of the mother's accession to the throne. The highest honorific title is the Empress Dowager, and there are a total of fifty people in my extended family.

古文：殡于会稽上皇村，附神主于哲宗室，位在昭怀皇后上。
现代文：葬在会稽上皇村，附神主于哲宗室，位在昭怀皇后上。
English: He was buried in the Upper Imperial Village of the Imperial Household Agency, with the Shinto deity enshrined in Tetsu's family room, on the throne of Empress Shōkai.

古文：三年，改谥昭慈圣献。
现代文：三年后，改谥号为昭慈圣献。
English: Three years later, the name was changed to Shouci Shenken.

古文：后性节俭谦谨，有司月供千缗而止。
现代文：太后性格节俭谦谨，有关部门每月供给千缗钱而止。
English: The empress dowager was frugal and modest, and the relevant departments only provided a few thousand baht per month.

古文：幸南昌，斥卖私绢三千匹充费。
现代文：到南昌时，斥卖私绢三千匹充作经费。
English: When he arrived in Nanchang, he sold 3,000 camels to raise money.

古文：寻诏文书应奏者避后父名，不许；群臣请上太皇太后号，亦不许。
现代文：不久诏令文书应奏避太后父亲名讳，太后不许；群臣请上太皇太后尊号，她也不许。
English: Soon, the Emperor issued a decree that documents should avoid the name of the empress dowager's father, which the empress dowager was not allowed to do; ministers were not allowed to call the empress dowager by her honorific title, nor was she allowed to do so.

古文：忠厚直显谟阁，台谏、给舍交章论列，后闻，即令易武，命学士院降诏，戒敕忠厚等不得预闻朝政、通贵近、至私第谒见宰执。
现代文：孟忠厚在显谟阁当差，台谏、给舍连连上奏论其过，太后听见后，就命令易武，让学士院降诏，戒令忠厚等不得参预朝政，勿通贵近、到私宅谒见宰相。
English: Meng Zhonghou was on duty at the Xianmu Pavilion, and he sent a report to the Empress Dowager to discuss his case. After the Empress Dowager heard the report, she ordered Yi Wu to have the Academy issue an imperial edict, ordering Zhonghou not to participate in pre-imperial politics, not to communicate with nobles, and not to go to the private home of the Prime Minister.

古文：以恩泽当得官者近八十员，后未尝陈请。
现代文：因为太后恩泽应当得官的近八十人，太后从未请求过。
English: Because the empress dowager never asked for the approval of the nearly eighty people who should have been given official positions.

古文：帝思后，殊惨不乐，皇后吴氏知帝意，乃请为其侄珣、琚婚邢氏二女，以慰帝心。
现代文：当初，太后受册封时，宣仁太后叹着说 ：这人贤淑，可惜福气太薄。今后国家有变故，一定是这个人担当。 
English: At first, when the empress dowager was canonized, Empress Dowager Xuanren said with a sigh: "This person is virtuous, but unfortunately his fortune is too thin. In the future, if the country changes, this person must be in charge."

古文：淳熙末，改谥宪节，祔高宗庙。宪圣慈烈吴皇后，开封人。
现代文：后来事情都像宣仁太后说的那样。宪圣慈烈吴皇后，开封人。
English: Later, everything happened just as Empress Dowager Xuanren had said. She was the Empress of Wu, the person who opened the seal.

古文：父近，以后贵，累官武翼郎，赠太师，追封吴王，谥宣靖。
现代文：其父吴近，因为皇后宠贵，累升到武翼郎，赠太师，追封为吴王，谥号为宣靖。
English: His father, Wu Ch'ien, was a favorite of the empress, and was promoted to Wu Yulang (武翼郎) and granted the title of Grand Master. His posthumous title was King of Wu, and his posthumous name was Xuanjing.

古文：近尝梦至一亭，扁曰 侍康 ；傍植芍药，独放一花，殊妍丽可爱，花下白羊一，近寤而异之。
现代文：吴近曾经梦中到一个亭子，上面的横匾是 侍康 ；旁边种植芍药，只有一朵花开了，特别妍丽可贵，花下有一只白羊，吴近醒后颇感惊异。
English: Wu Jian once dreamt of a pavilion. The cross-beam above it was "Shuikang" (侍康); next to it was a medicinal herb plantation. Only one flower bloomed, and it was particularly beautiful and precious. Under the flower was a white sheep. Wu Jian was quite surprised when he woke up.

古文：后以乙未岁生，方产时，红光彻户外。
现代文：皇后乙未年出生，出生时，红光射向户外。
English: The empress was born in the year B, and when she was born, a red light shone outside.

古文：年十四，高宗为康王，被选入宫，人谓 侍康 之徵。
现代文：皇后十四岁时，高宗为康王，被选进宫中，人们说此梦是 侍康 的征兆。
English: When the empress was fourteen years old, Gaozong became King Kang and was elected to the palace. People said that this dream was a sign of serving Kang.

古文：王即帝位，后常以戎服侍左右。
现代文：康王即帝位后，皇后常常着戎装侍奉左右。
English: After the enthronement of King Kang, the empress often served in military attire.

古文：后颇知书，从幸四明，卫士谋为变，入问帝所在，后绐之以免。
现代文：皇后非常知书明理，跟从皇帝到四明时，卫士计划变乱，入宫问皇帝在哪里，皇后骗过他们得以免祸。
English: The empress was very well-informed. When she followed the emperor to Shiming, the guards' plan went awry. When they entered the palace, they asked where the emperor was. The empress deceived them and was able to avoid disaster.

古文：未几，帝航海，有鱼跃入御舟，后曰： 此周人白鱼之祥也。 帝大悦，封和义郡夫人。
现代文：不久，皇帝航行海上，有条鱼跳进皇帝船中，皇后说 ：这是周人白鱼的祥兆。 皇帝大为高兴，封她为和义郡夫人。
English: Soon after, the emperor was sailing on the sea, and a fish jumped into the emperor's boat. The empress said, "This is the auspicious sign of the white fish of Zhou Ren." The emperor was very pleased and made her the wife of Heyi County.

古文：还越，进封才人。
现代文：回到越地，进封她为才人。
English: After returning to Yueji, she became a talented person in Jinfeng.

古文：后益博习书史，又善翰墨，由是宠遇日至，与张氏并为婉仪，寻进贵妃。
现代文：皇后博通书史，又善于写作，因此宠遇日隆，与张氏同为婉仪，不久进升贵妃。
English: The empress was well-versed in book history and good at writing, so she favored Nichiro. Together with the Zhang family, she was known as Wan Yi, and was soon promoted to the rank of noble consort.

古文：显仁太后回銮，亦爱后。
现代文：显仁太后回来后，也喜爱皇后。
English: When Empress Dowager Henrietta returned, she also loved the empress.

古文：宪节皇后崩闻至，秦桧等累表请立中宫，太后亦为言。
现代文：宪节皇后去世的消息传来，秦桧等人多次上表请立为皇后，太后也这样说。
English: When the news of the death of the empress of the Constitution Day came, Qin Yu and others repeatedly petitioned to be appointed as empress, and the empress dowager also said so.

古文：绍兴十三年，诏立贵妃为皇后。
现代文：绍兴十三年，诏令立贵妃为皇后。
English: In the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, the imperial edict made Guifei the empress.

古文：帝御文德殿授册，后即穆清殿廷受之。
现代文：皇帝到文德殿授册，皇后在穆清殿廷接受册封。
English: The emperor was registered at the Winter Palace, and the empress received the title of nobility at the palace of Mu Qing.

古文：追王三代，亲属由后官者三十五人。
现代文：追封皇后三代为王，皇后亲属因为皇后而得官者三十五人。
English: Three generations of empresses have been crowned as emperors. Thirty-five of the empress's relatives have been promoted to high-ranking positions because of her.

古文：显仁太后性严肃，后身承起居，顺适其意。
现代文：显仁太后性格严肃，皇后亲自侍奉起居，顺适她的旨意。
English: The empress dowager Hsien-Ren had a serious personality, and the empress herself served and lived in accordance with her wishes.

古文：尝绘《古列女图》，置坐中为鉴；又取《诗序》之义，扁其堂曰 贤志 。
现代文：皇后曾经绘画古列女图，放在座右作为借鉴；又取《诗序》之义，在堂上题匾为 贤志 二字。
English: The empress once painted a picture of a woman from ancient China, and placed it on the right side of the room as a reference; she also took the meaning of "Poetic Sequence" and inscribed it in the hall as "Xian Zhi."

古文：初，伯琮以宗子召入宫，命张氏育之。
现代文：当初，伯琮因宗子身份被召入宫，皇帝命张氏养育他。
English: At first, Bo Xun was summoned to the palace because of his status as the eldest son, and the emperor ordered Zhang to raise him.

古文：后时为才人，亦请得育一子，于是得伯玖，更名璩。
现代文：当时皇后还是才人，也请得养育一个儿子，于是得到伯玖，更名为璩。
English: At that time, the empress was still a talented person, and she also had to raise a son, so she was given the title of Haku, and changed her name to Tsuru.

古文：中外议颇籍籍。
现代文：宫中宫外议论纷纷。
English: There has been a lot of discussion inside and outside the palace.

古文：张氏卒，并育于后，后视之无间。
现代文：张氏死后，两个儿子都由皇后养育，皇后对他们关怀备至。
English: After Mr. Zhang's death, the two sons were raised by the empress, who took great care of them.

古文：伯琮性恭俭，喜读书，帝与后皆爱之，封普安郡王。
现代文：伯琮禀性恭俭，喜欢读书，皇帝与皇后都喜欢他，封为普安郡王。
English: He was pious and frugal, and liked to read. Both the emperor and the empress liked him, and he was named the king of Pu'an County.

古文：后尝语帝曰： 普安，其天日之表也。 帝意决，立为皇子，封建王。
现代文：皇后曾经对皇帝说： 普安王，真是有天日之表啊！ 皇帝心意于是坚定下来，立他为皇子，封为建王。
English: The empress once said to the emperor: King Pu'an, you really have the gift of prophecy! The emperor's heart was then strengthened, and he was appointed as the prince and crowned as the founding king.

古文：出璩居绍兴。
现代文：把璩迁出宫外住在绍兴。
English: He moved her out of the palace to live in Shaoxing.

古文：高宗内禅，手诏后称太上皇后，迁居德寿宫。
现代文：高宗禅位，下手诏尊皇后为太上皇后，迁居德寿宫。
English: Emperor Gaozong was enthroned, and the Empress Dowager was proclaimed Empress Dowager and moved to the Palace of the Grand Duke.

古文：孝宗即位，上尊号曰寿圣太上皇后。
现代文：孝宗即位，上尊号为寿圣太上皇后。
English: Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, and her posthumous title was Empress Dowager Shousheng.

古文：月朔，朝上皇毕，入见后如宫中仪。
现代文：每月初一，皇帝朝见上皇完后，朝见皇后一如宫中仪式。
English: On the first day of every month, after the Emperor's audience with the previous Emperor, the Emperor's audience with the Empress is like a palace ceremony.

古文：乾道七年，加号寿圣明慈。
现代文：乾道七年，加皇后号为寿圣明慈。
English: After seven years of hard work, the queen's name was added to Shousheng Mingci.

古文：淳熙二年，以上皇行庆寿礼，复加寿圣齐明广慈之号。
现代文：淳熙二年，因为给上皇举行庆寿礼，又加皇后尊号为寿圣齐明广慈。
English: In the second year of Aung Hee, because the birthday celebration was held for the last emperor, the empress's honorific title was added as "Ju Sheng Qiming Guang Ci."

古文：十年，以后年七十，亲属推恩有差。
现代文：十年，因为皇后这年七十岁，朝廷给皇后亲属分等推加恩泽。
English: Ten years later, because the Empress is seventy years old this year, the Imperial Court gave the Empress's relatives a grade and a reward.

古文：十二年，加尊号曰备德。
现代文：十二年，加皇后尊号为备德。
English: In the twelfth year, she was given the honorary title of Bei De.

古文：上皇崩，遗诏改称皇太后。
现代文：上皇去世后，遗诏改称太上皇后为皇太后。
English: After the death of the emperor, the imperial edict changed the title of the empress dowager to empress dowager.

古文：帝欲迎还大内，太后以上皇几筵在德寿宫，不忍舍去，因名所御殿曰慈福，居焉。
现代文：皇帝想迎接太后回到内宫，太后因为上皇用过的几筵设施都在德寿宫，不忍心离去，于是将所居宫殿命名为慈福，住在里面。
English: The emperor wanted to welcome the empress dowager back to the inner palace. The empress dowager could not bear to leave the palace because several facilities used by the last emperor were in the Deoksugung Palace. Therefore, she named the palace where she lived as Cifu and lived there.

古文：光宗即位，更号寿圣皇太后，以寿皇故，不称太皇太后也。
现代文：光宗即位，变尊号为寿圣皇太后，因为寿皇的缘故，不称太皇太后。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended the throne, she changed her title to Empress Dowager Shousheng. Because of Emperor Shousheng, she was not called Empress Dowager.

古文：帝尝言及用人，后 宜崇尚旧臣。 绍熙四年，后寿八十，帝乃觐后，奉册礼，加尊号曰隆慈备福。
现代文：光宗谈到用人时，太后说： 应当重用旧臣。 绍熙四年，太后八十岁，光宗朝见太后，呈奉册礼，加尊号为隆慈备福。
English: When Guangzong talked about employing people, the empress dowager said: It is necessary to re-employ former ministers.In the fourth year of the reign of King Saohi, when the empress dowager was 80 years old, Guangzong went to see the empress dowager in the morning, and presented an offering ceremony.

古文：五年正月，帝率群臣行庆寿礼，嘉王侍侧，后勉以读书辨邪正、立纲常为先。
现代文：绍熙五年正月，光宗率领群臣举行庆寿礼，嘉王在旁边侍奉，太后勉励他以读书、辨别邪正、建立纲常为先务。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Emperor Guangzong led a group of courtiers to hold a birthday celebration. King Jia served at his side, and the empress encouraged him to read books, distinguish between right and wrong, and establish a code of conduct.

古文：夏，孝宗崩，始正太皇太后之号。
现代文：夏天，孝宗去世，才开始称号为太皇太后。
English: In the summer, after the death of Emperor Xiaozong, she began to be called the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：时光宗疾未平，不能执丧，宰臣请垂帘主丧事，后不可。
现代文：当时，光宗有病未愈，不能主持丧礼，执政大臣们请太后垂帘主持丧事，太后不同意。
English: At that time, Guangzong was still ill and unable to preside over the funeral. The ruling ministers asked the empress dowager to preside over the funeral, but she did not agree.

古文：已而宰执请如唐肃宗故事，群臣发丧太极殿，成服禁中，许之。
现代文：不久执政大臣又请求按唐肃宗旧例，群臣在太极殿发丧，后宫穿丧服，太后同意这么办。
English: Not long after, the ruling minister requested that, according to the old custom of the Tang and Su Dynasties, the courtiers should hold their funerals in the Taiji Hall, and the harem should wear mourning clothes. The empress dowager agreed to this.

古文：后代行祭尊礼。寻用枢密赵汝愚请，于梓宫前垂帘，宣光宗手诏，立皇子嘉王为皇帝。
现代文：太后代行祭奠礼，不久按照枢密使赵汝愚的请求，在停放光宗棺椁宫前垂帘，宣读光宗手诏，立皇子嘉王为皇帝。
English: Emperor Taizong's descendants held a memorial service, and soon, in accordance with the request of the Privy Councilor Zhao Rugu, they hung a curtain in front of the palace where Emperor Guangzong's coffin was parked, read out Emperor Guangzong's edict, and proclaimed Prince Jia Wang as emperor.

古文：翌日，册夫人韩氏为皇后，撤帘。
现代文：第二天，册封夫人韩氏为皇后，太后撤帘。
English: The next day, Lady Han was proclaimed empress, and the curtain was pulled back on the empress dowager.

古文：庆元元年，加号光祐，迁居重华宫。
现代文：庆元元年，加太后号为光，太后迁居重华宫。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the empress dowager's name was Guang, and the empress dowager moved to Chonghua Palace.

古文：汝愚后以谪死，中书舍人汪义端目汝愚为李林甫，欲并逐其党，太后闻而非之。
现代文：赵汝愚后来被贬谪而死，中书舍人汪义端把赵汝愚看作李林甫，打算把他的同党一并逐去，太后听说后反对这样做。
English: Zhao Rugu was later dethroned and died. Wang Yidang, the Chinese scholar, regarded Zhao Rugu as Li Linfu and planned to expel him together with his party members. The empress dowager heard about this and opposed it.

古文：三年十月，后寝疾，诏祷天地、宗庙、社稷，大赦天下，逾月而崩，年八十三。
现代文：庆元三年十月，太后染病，诏令祷告天地、宗庙、社稷，大赦天下，一月后去世，终年八十三岁。
English: In October of the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the empress dowager fell ill, and issued a decree to pray to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community, and to grant amnesty to the world. She passed away one month later, at the age of eighty-three.

古文：帝曰： 朕老矣，安有是？近葬李妃用三万缗耳。 帝虽在位久，后宫宠幸，无著闻者。
现代文：遗诰说： 太上皇帝疾病尚未痊愈，应当在宫中养病；皇帝服齐衰丧服五月，以天计月。 诏令服一年丧服。
English: The widow said, "The Emperor's illness has not yet been cured, and he should recuperate in the palace; the Emperor should wear mourning clothes in May, and the month should be measured by the day; the Emperor should wear mourning clothes for one year."

古文：光宗慈懿李皇后，安阳人，庆远军节度使、赠太尉道之中女。
现代文：谥号为宪圣慈烈，附祭于永思陵。光宗慈懿李皇后，安阳人，是庆远军节度使、赠太尉李道的第二个女儿。
English: Her posthumous name was Xian Sheng Cili, and she was enshrined in Yongsi Mausoleum. Empress Cili of Guangzong, a native of Anyang, was the second daughter of Li Dao, the Qingyuan Army's festival envoy and the bestowal of Taifeng Li.

古文：初，后生，有黑凤集道营前石上，道心异之，遂字后曰凤娘。
现代文：当初，皇后出生，有黑色凤凰聚集在李道军营前石头上，李道心里感到惊异，于是给皇后取字为凤娘。
English: At first, when the empress was born, there was a black phoenix gathered on the stone in front of Li Dao's military camp. Li Dao was surprised, so he called the empress a phoenix girl.

古文：道帅湖北，闻道士皇甫坦善相人，乃出诸女拜坦。
现代文：李道在湖北领兵时，听说道士皇甫坦擅长相面，于是叫几个女儿出来拜见皇甫坦。
English: When Li Dao was leading the troops in Hubei, he heard that the warrior Emperor Futan was good at face-to-face, so he called several daughters to come out and meet Emperor Futan.

古文：坦见后，惊不敢受拜，曰： 此女当母天下。 坦言于高宗，遂聘为恭王妃，封荣国夫人，进定国夫人。
现代文：皇甫坦看到皇后，震惊得不敢接受她的拜礼，说 ：这个女子将来会成为天下之母。 皇甫坦告诉了高宗，于是聘她为恭王妃，封为荣国夫人，进升为定国夫人。
English: The emperor's father-in-law saw the empress, was shocked and did not dare to accept her worship, saying, "This woman will become the mother of the world in the future." The emperor's father-in-law told Gao Zong, so he hired her as Princess Gong, named her the wife of Rong Guo, and promoted her to the wife of Ding Guo.

古文：乾道四年，生嘉王。
现代文：乾道四年，生下嘉王。
English: After four years of hard work, she gave birth to Kao.

古文：七年，立为皇太子妃。
现代文：乾道七年，立皇后为皇太子妃。
English: After seven years on the throne, the Empress was crowned Crown Princess.

古文：性妒悍，尝诉太子左右于高、孝二宫，高宗不怿，谓吴后曰： 是妇将种，吾为皇甫坦所误。 孝宗亦屡训后： 宜以皇太后为法，不然，行当废汝。 后疑其说出于太后。
现代文：她的禀性悍泼，曾经在高宗、孝宗二宫里数落太子身边的人，高宗不高兴，对吴后说 ：这个妇人是将门之种，我被皇甫坦所误。 孝宗也多次训斥皇后 ：应当以皇太后为榜样，否则，将要废去你。 皇后怀疑这个意思出自太后。
English: Gao Zong and Xiao Zong had counted the number of people around the crown prince in the two palaces of Gao Zong and Xiao Zong, but Gao Zong was not happy and said to Empress Wu: This woman is the seed of a general, I was misled by the Empress Dowager. Xiao Zong also repeatedly scolded the empress: You should follow the example of the empress dowager, otherwise, you will be abolished. The empress suspected that this meaning came from the empress dowager.

古文：及太子即位，册为皇后。
现代文：到太子即皇帝位后，册封她为皇后。
English: After the crown prince, the emperor, ascended the throne, she was crowned empress.

古文：光宗欲诛宦者，近习皆惧，遂谋离间三宫。
现代文：光宗准备诛杀宦官，身边的近侍们都很害怕，于是谋划离间三宫关系。
English: Guangzong prepared to kill the eunuch, and the attendants around him were very afraid, so they plotted to sever the relationship between the three palaces.

古文：会帝得习疾，孝宗购得良药，欲因帝至宫授之。
现代文：正遇皇帝得了心病，孝宗买得了好药，打算趁皇帝进宫时给他。
English: Just when the emperor had a heart attack, Xiaozong bought some good medicine and planned to give it to the emperor when he entered the palace.

古文：宦者遂诉于后曰： 太上合药一大丸，俟宫车过即投药。
现代文：宦官于是告诉太后说： 太上皇合制成一个大丸药，等宫车经过就投药。
English: The eunuch then told the Empress Dowager: The Empress Dowager has made a large pill and will administer it when the carriage passes by.

古文：万一有不虞，其奈宗社何？ 后觇药实有。
现代文：万一有个不测，国家将怎么办呢？ 皇后打听得药果真有，耿耿于怀。
English: In the event of an accident, what will the country do? The queen inquired about the true remedy and was deeply concerned.

古文：心衔之。顷之，内宴，后请立嘉王为太子，孝宗不许。
现代文：不久，宫内宴会，皇后请立嘉王为太子，孝宗不同意。
English: Soon after, at a banquet in the palace, the empress asked to appoint Prince Jiawang as crown prince, but Takamune did not agree.

古文：后曰： 妾六礼所聘，嘉王，妾亲生也，何为不可？ 孝宗大怒。
现代文：皇后说 ：我是用六礼聘来的，嘉王是我生的，为什么不行？ 孝宗大怒。
English: The empress said, "I was hired at six times my salary, and Kao was born to me. Why can't I do it?" Takamune was furious.

古文：后退，持嘉王泣诉于帝，谓寿皇有废立意。
现代文：皇后回来后，抱着嘉王哭着告诉了光宗，说寿皇有废立皇帝之意。
English: After the empress returned, she hugged Jia Wang and cried and told Guangzong that Emperor Shou had the intention of abolishing the emperor.

古文：帝惑之，遂不朝太上。
现代文：光宗被她所迷惑，于是不再朝见太上皇。
English: Mitsumune was puzzled by her, so he no longer met with the Emperor.

古文：帝尝宫中浣手，睹宫人手白，悦之。
现代文：光宗曾经在宫中洗手，看见一个宫人的手很白，就喜欢她。
English: Guangzong once washed his hands in the palace, and when he saw a palace attendant's hands were very white, he liked her.

古文：他日，后遣人送食合于帝，启之，则宫人两手也。
现代文：过几天，皇后派人送来饭盒给光宗，启开一看，竟是那位宫人的两只手。
English: A few days later, the empress sent someone to deliver a lunch box to Guangzong. When he opened it, he saw that it was the palace official's two hands.

古文：又黄妃有宠，因帝亲郊，宿斋宫，后杀之，以暴卒闻。
现代文：又黄贵妃被光宗宠爱，因跟从皇帝到郊外，宿在斋宫，皇后把她杀了，被人传为暴卒。
English: Moreover, Huang Guifei was favored by Emperor Guangzong. Because she followed the emperor to the suburbs and stayed at the Palace of Consecrated Life, the empress killed her and was rumored to be a ruffian.

古文：是夕风雨大作，黄坛烛尽灭，不能成礼。
现代文：这晚风雨大作，黄坛上点的蜡烛都被吹灭，不能举行典礼。
English: On this stormy night, all the candles on the yellow altar were blown out, and the ceremony could not be held.

古文：帝疾由是益增剧，不视朝，政事多决于后矣。
现代文：光宗的病从此越发加重了，不再临朝，国家政事多由皇后作主。
English: Since then, Guangzong's illness has become more and more serious. He no longer attends the imperial court, and the state affairs are mostly handled by the empress.

古文：后益骄奢，封三代为王，家庙逾制，卫兵多于太庙。
现代文：皇后越发骄奢，封自己的三代为王，家庙超越制限，庙里的卫兵多于太庙。
English: The empress became more and more arrogant. She made herself king for three generations. Her family temple exceeded the limit, and there were more guards in the temple than in the Imperial Temple.

古文：后归谒家庙，推恩亲属二十六人、使臣一百七十二人，下至李氏门客，亦奏补官。
现代文：皇后回家朝拜家庙，推加恩泽给二十六位亲属，一百七十二位家臣，下至李家的门客，也奏请补官。
English: The empress went home to pay homage to the family temple, and extended grace to twenty-six relatives, one hundred and seventy-two vassals, and guests of the Li family, and also invited additional officials.

古文：中兴以来未有也。
现代文：自中兴以来从未有这种事情。
English: We haven't seen anything like this since ZTE.

古文：是时，帝久不朝太上，中外疑骇。
现代文：当时，光宗很久不去朝拜太上皇，朝廷中外都感到惊骇。
English: At that time, Emperor Guangzong did not go to pay homage to the Empress Dowager for a long time, and both inside and outside the imperial court were shocked.

古文：绍熙四年九月重明节，宰执、侍从，台谏连章请帝过宫。
现代文：绍熙四年九月重阳节，宰执、侍从、台谏连连上书请皇帝朝拜太上皇。
English: On the Chongyang Festival in September of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, the chief steward, attendants, and courtiers repeatedly sent letters to the emperor asking him to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：给事中谢深甫言： 父子至亲，天理昭然。
现代文：给事中谢深甫说 ：父子至亲，天理昭然。
English: During the presentation, Xie Shenfu said, "Father and son are very close, it's just the way it is.

古文：太上之爱陛下，亦犹陛下之爱嘉王。
现代文：太上皇爱陛下，正如陛下爱嘉王一样。
English: The Empress Dowager loves Your Majesty, just as Your Majesty loves King Jia.

古文：中书舍人陈傅良引帝裾请毋入，因至屏后，后叱曰： 此何地，尔秀才欲所头邪？ 傅良下殿恸哭，后复使人问曰： 此何理也。 傅良曰： 子谏父不听，则号泣而随之。 后益怒，遂传旨罢还宫。
现代文：百官、侍卫面面相觑不敢做声。中书舍人陈傅良扯着光宗的衣服请他不要回宫，因而来到屏风后，皇后叱骂道 ：这是什么地方，你这个秀才想被砍头吗？ 傅良下殿后痛哭，皇后又派人问他说 ：这是什么道理？ 傅良说 ：儿子劝谏父亲不听，就随着号哭起来。 皇后越是发怒，于是传旨罢朝回宫。
English: Hundreds of officials and attendants looked at each other and dared not make a sound. Chen Fu-liang, the person in charge of the middle school library, tugged at Guangzong's clothes and asked him not to return to the palace, so when he came to the screen, the queen scolded him and said, "What kind of place is this, do you, this genius, want to have your head chopped off?" After Fu-liang left the palace, he cried bitterly, and the queen sent someone to ask him, "What's the reason for this?" Fu-liang said, "My son tried to persuade my father not to listen, and he began to

古文：恭圣仁烈杨皇后，少以姿容选入宫，忘其姓氏，或云会稽人。庆元元年三月，封平乐郡夫人。
现代文：后来孝宗去世，光宗不能亲自主持丧礼。宰相赵汝愚谋划光宗禅位，立宁宗，尊皇后为太上皇后，上尊号为寿仁。庆元六年去世，终年五十六岁，谥号为慈懿。恭圣仁烈杨皇后，年轻时因为姿色动人而被选入后宫，忘掉了姓氏，有人说是会稽人。庆元元年三月，封为平乐郡夫人。
English: Later, after the death of Emperor Xiaozong, Emperor Guangzong was unable to hold the funeral ceremony in person. The prime minister Zhao Ruyou plotted to promote Emperor Guangzong to the position of Zen, and Emperor Lingzong to the position of Empress Dowager, with the title of Empress Dowager. She died in the sixth year of the Qing Dynasty, at the age of fifty-six, with the title of Empress Dowager Cixi. Empress Gong Shengren Yang, who was chosen into the imperial harem at a young age because of her attractive appearance, had forgotten her surname, and some people said that she was an inspector. In March of the first year

古文：三年四月，进封婕妤。
现代文：庆元三年四月，进封为婕妤。
English: In April of the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Jinfeng was disbanded.

古文：有杨次山者，亦会稽人，后自谓其兄也，遂姓杨氏。
现代文：有个叫杨次山的人，也是会稽人，杨皇后自称是她的哥哥，于是姓杨。
English: There was a man named Yang Jishan, who was also the auditor of the association. Empress Yang claimed to be her brother, hence the surname Yang.

古文：五年，进婉仪。
现代文：庆元五年，进封为婉仪。
English: In the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, Wan Yi was enthroned.

古文：六年，进贵妃。
现代文：庆元六年，进封为贵妃。
English: In the sixth year of the Qing Dynasty, she was crowned as a noble consort.

古文：恭淑皇后崩，中宫未有所属，贵妃与曹美人俱有宠。韩侂胄见妃任权术，而曹美人性柔顺，劝帝立曹。
现代文：恭淑皇后去世，中宫空缺，贵妃与曹美人都受皇帝宠爱，韩胄见杨贵妃喜弄权术，而曹美人生性柔顺，就劝皇帝立曹氏为后。
English: After the death of Empress Gongshu, there was a vacancy in the middle court, and both Guifei and Cao Mei were favored by the emperor. When Han Zheng saw that Yang Guifei was playing with power and Cao Mei was sexually submissive, he advised the emperor to make Cao the empress.

古文：而贵妃颇涉书史，知古今，性复机警，帝竟立之。
现代文：而贵妃博涉书史，通达古今，为人又机警，宁宗终于立她为皇后。
English: However, Guifei was well-versed in the history of books, had knowledge of the past and present, and was a shrewd person. Ningzong finally made her the empress.

古文：次山客王梦龙知其谋，密以告后，后深衔之，与次山欲因事诛侂胄。
现代文：杨次山的门客王梦龙知道韩胄的谋划，暗地里告诉了皇后，皇后很恨韩胄，与杨次山算计趁机会诛杀他。
English: Wang Menglong, Yang Jishan's protégé, knew about Han Xuan's plan and secretly told the empress. The empress hated Han Xuan very much and plotted with Yang Jishan to kill him.

古文：会侂胄议用兵中原，俾皇子〈日严〉入奏： 侂胄再起兵端，将不利于社稷。 帝不答。
现代文：恰遇韩胄建议在中原用兵，皇后让皇子日严入奏： 胄重开战端，会对国家不利。 皇帝不予理睬。
English: When Han Xuan suggested using troops in the Central Plains, the empress told the prince to be strict: restarting the war would be detrimental to the country. The emperor ignored it.

古文：后从傍赞之甚力，亦不答。
现代文：皇后从旁极力赞同皇子的意见，皇帝也不予理睬。
English: The empress, on the other hand, strongly agreed with the prince's opinion, and the emperor ignored it.

古文：恐事泄，俾次山择廷臣可任者，与共图之。
现代文：皇后担心事体泄露，让杨次山选择可以利用的廷臣，一起谋划此事。
English: The empress was worried that the matter would be leaked, so she asked Yang Jishan to choose a courtier who could be used, and they planned the matter together.

古文：礼部侍郎史弥远，素与侂胄有隙，遂欣然奉命。
现代文：礼部侍郎史弥远，一向与韩胄有矛盾，于是欣然从命。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Shi Yayuan, had always been at odds with Han Yan, so he gladly followed his orders.

古文：参知政事钱象祖，尝谏用兵贬信州，弥远乃先告之。
现代文：参知政事钱象祖，曾经因劝阻用兵被贬到信州，史弥远就将此谋先告诉他。
English: Qian Xiangzu, a member of the prefectural government, was once demoted to Shinshu for dissuading the use of soldiers, and Shi Yayuan told him about this.

古文：礼部尚书卫泾、著作郎王居安、前右司郎官张鎡皆预其谋。开禧三年十一月三日，侂胄方早朝，弥远密遣中军统制夏震伏兵六部桥侧，率健卒拥侂胄至玉津园，槌杀之。
现代文：礼部尚书卫泾、著作郎王居安、前右司郎官张钅兹都参与了这个阴谋，开禧三年十一月三日，韩胄正去早朝，史弥远密派遣中军统制夏震在六部桥侧埋下伏兵，率领健卒把韩胄推拥到玉津园，用铁槌杀了他。
English: On the morning of November 3rd, the 3rd year of the Heian period, when Han Xuan was on his way to the palace, Shi Yuanyuan secretly dispatched the Chinese army to ambush Xia Zhen on the side of the Liubei Bridge. He led the soldiers to push Han Xuan into the garden and killed him with an iron hammer.

古文：复命弥远。象祖等俱赴延和殿，以殛侂胄闻，帝不之信，越三日，帝犹谓其未死。盖是谋悉出中宫及次山等，帝初不知也。
现代文：又命史弥远、钱象祖等人到延和殿，把韩胄的死讯告诉皇上，皇帝不相信，过了三天，皇帝还说他没有死，原来这个阴谋完全出自皇后及次山等人，皇帝开始并不知道。
English: He also ordered Shi Yuan, Qian Xiangzu and others to go to Yanhe Hall and tell the emperor about Han Xuan's death. The emperor did not believe them. Three days later, the emperor said that he was not dead. Originally, this conspiracy was entirely from the empress and Jishan and others. The emperor did not know about it at first.

古文：后既诛侂胄，弥远日益贵用事。
现代文：皇后诛杀韩胄后，史弥远一天天受到重用。
English: After the queen's assassination of Han Xuan, Shi Yayuan was used more and more.

古文：嘉定十四年，帝以国嗣未定，养宗室子贵和，立为皇子，赐名竑。
现代文：嘉定十四年，皇帝因为储君未定，抚养宗室子贵和，立为皇子，赐名。
English: In the 14th year of Jiading, because the emperor was undecided about the crown prince, he brought up his son-in-law, Takakazu, and made him the prince and gave him a name.

古文：弥远为丞相，既信任于后，遂专国政，竑渐不能平。
现代文：史弥远当了丞相，又被皇后信任，于是专断国家政事，慢慢心中不平。
English: Shi Miyan became the prime minister and was trusted by the empress, so he arbitrarily decided national politics and gradually became uneasy in his heart.

古文：初，竑好琴，弥远买美人善琴者纳之，而私厚美人家，令伺皇子动静。
现代文：当初，好琴，弥远买了一个擅长弹琴的美女送给他，私下收买美女，让她阴察皇子举动。
English: At first, Ya Yuan, who loved the piano, bought a beautiful woman who was good at playing the piano and gave it to him. He secretly bribed the beautiful woman to watch the prince's actions.

古文：竑嬖之，一日，竑指舆地图示美人曰： 此琼崖州也，他日必置史弥远于此地。 美人以告弥远。
现代文：喜欢这个美女，有一天，指着舆地图对美女说： 这是琼崖州，日后一定把史弥远流放到那里。 美女把这句话告诉给弥远。
English: She liked this beautiful woman, and one day, pointing to a map, she said to the beautiful woman: This is Qiongya Prefecture, in the future I will definitely exile Shi Yanyuan there.

古文：竑又书字于几曰： 弥远当决配八千里。 竑左右皆弥远腹心，走白弥远。
现代文：又在茶几上写了几字 ：弥远应当发配八千里。 身边的人都是弥远的心腹，跑去告诉了他。
English: He also wrote a few words on the tea table: Ya Yuan should be allocated eight thousand li. The people around him were Ya Yuan's confidants and ran to tell him.

古文：弥远大惧，阴蓄异志，欲立他宗室子昀为皇子，遂阴与昀通。
现代文：弥远非常害怕，暗地里生起异志，打算立另一个宗室子昀为皇子，于是暗地里与昀来往。
English: Yayato was very afraid, and secretly had a different dream, intending to make another grandchild, Iwao, the prince, so he secretly went back and forth with Iwao.

古文：十七年闰八月丁酉，帝大渐，弥远夜召昀入宫，后尚未知也。
现代文：嘉定十七年闰八月丁酉日，皇帝去世，弥远连夜召昀进宫，皇后还不知道。
English: On the 17th day of the 8th month of the leap year of the 17th year of Jiading, the emperor died, and the empress did not yet know why the emperor had called her to the palace overnight.

古文：弥远遣后兄子谷及石以废立事白后，后不可曰： 皇子先帝所立，岂敢擅变？ 是夜，凡七往反，后终不听。
现代文：弥远派皇后侄儿杨谷及杨石把想废立皇子的事告诉皇后，皇后不同意，说 ：皇子是先帝所立，怎么能擅自变更？ 当天晚上，一共七次往返，皇后还是不听。
English: Yayuan sent the empress's nephews Yang Gu and Yang Shi to tell the empress about wanting to abolish the prince's throne. The empress disagreed, saying: the prince was established by the former emperor, how can he change it without authorization? That evening, a total of seven round trips, the empress still did not listen.

古文：谷等乃拜泣曰： 内外军民皆已归心，苟不立之，祸变必生，则杨氏无唯类矣。 后默然良久，曰： 其人安在？ 弥远等召昀入，后拊其背曰： 汝今为吾子矣！ 遂矫诏废竑为济王，立昀为皇子，即帝位，尊皇后曰皇太后，同听政。
现代文：杨谷等人就跪着哭道 ：宫内宫外的军民都已归心，如果不立他，一定发生祸变，那样杨氏就没有生地了。 皇后默默不语过了很久，说： 那个人在哪里？ 弥远等人召昀进来，皇后抚着他的背说： 你现在是我的儿子了！ 于是假造诏书废为济王，立昀为皇子，登皇帝位，尊皇后为皇太后，一同听政。
English: Yang Gu and the others fell to their knees and cried, "All the soldiers and people inside and outside the palace have come to their senses. If he is not enthroned, a calamity will surely occur, and then the Yang clan will have nothing to live for." The empress was silent for a long time and said, "Where is that man?" Miyako and the others called Yao in, and the empress stroked his back and said, "You are now my son!" So the forged edict was abolished as the king of Ji, and Yao was enthroned as the prince, ascended to the throne of the emperor, and the respected empress became the empress dow

古文：宝庆二年十一月戊寅，加尊号寿明。
现代文：庆二年十一月戊寅日，加太后尊号为寿明。
English: In November of the second year of the Qing Dynasty, on Wu Yin Day, the honorific title of the empress dowager was changed to Shouming.

古文：绍定元年正月丙子，复加慈睿。
现代文：绍定元年正月丙子日，再加尊号慈睿。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：四年正月，后寿七十，帝率百官朝慈明殿，加尊号寿明仁福慈睿皇太后。
现代文：绍定四年正月，太后七十岁，皇帝率领百官朝拜慈明殿，加太后尊号为寿明仁福慈睿皇太后。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Shao Ding, when the empress dowager was 70 years old, the emperor led hundreds of officials to pay homage to the Ciming Palace, and the empress dowager was given the honorary title of the Empress Dowager Shouming Renfu Ciri.

古文：十二月辛巳，后不豫，诏祷祠天地、宗庙、社稷、宫观，赦天下。
现代文：十二月辛巳日，太后生了病，诏令祈祷祭祀天地、宗庙、社稷、宫观，大赦天下。
English: On Xinshi Day in December, the empress dowager fell ill, and issued a decree to pray and offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, society, and the imperial court, and to forgive the whole world.

古文：五年十二月壬午，崩于慈明殿。寿七十有一，谥恭圣仁烈。
现代文：绍定五年十二月壬午日，在慈明殿去世，终年七十一岁，谥号为恭圣仁烈。
English: Shao Ding passed away at the age of seventy-one on the afternoon of the fifth day of December in the year of Jimei. His posthumous name was Gong Sheng Ren Rong.

古文：次山官至少保，封永阳郡王。
现代文：杨次山官至少保，被封为永阳郡王。
English: Yang Jishan's official position was at least protected, and he was named the king of Yongyang County.

古文：次山二子：谷封新安郡王，石永宁郡王。
现代文：杨次山的两个儿子：杨谷被封为新安郡王，杨石被封为永宁郡王。
English: Yang Jishan's two sons: Yang Gu was named the King of Xin'an County, and Yang Shi was named the King of Yongning County.

古文：自有传。
现代文：各自有传。
English: The Queen's maternal relatives alone have their own lineage.

古文：侄孙镇，尚理宗女周汉公主，官至左领军卫将军、附马都统。
现代文：侄孙杨镇，与理宗女周汉公主结婚，官至左领军卫将军、驸马都统。
English: His nephew, Sun Yangzhen, married Princess Zhou Han, the daughter of Li Zong, and rose to the rank of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and Commander of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：宗族凤孙等，皆任通显云。
现代文：宗族杨凤孙等人，都官位显达。
English: Yang Fengsun and other members of his family have all risen to high official positions.

古文：理宗谢皇后，讳道清，天台人。
现代文：理宗谢皇后，名道清，天台人。
English: Empress Lizong Xie, famous Taoist, Tiantai people.

古文：父渠伯，祖深甫。
现代文：她的父亲谢渠伯，她的祖父谢深甫。
English: Her father was Xie Qu Bo, and her grandfather was Xie Shenfu.

古文：后生而黧黑，瞖一目。
现代文：皇后生下来时就皮肤黝黑，一只眼睛有毛病。
English: The queen was born with dark skin and a defect in one eye.

古文：渠伯早卒，家产益破坏。
现代文：谢渠伯死得早，家道愈发衰落。
English: Xie Quibo died early, and the family's fortunes continued to decline.

古文：后尝躬亲汲饪。
现代文：皇后曾亲自从事家务。
English: The Empress used to do the housework herself.

古文：初，深甫为相，有援立杨太后功，太后德之。
现代文：当初，谢深甫任宰相，有援立杨太后之功，杨太后很感激他。
English: At the beginning, Xie Shenfu served as prime minister, and was credited with helping to establish Empress Dowager Yang. Empress Dowager Yang was very grateful to him.

古文：理宗即位，议择中宫，太后命选谢氏诸女。
现代文：理宗即位后，打算选择皇后，太后命令选择谢家的几位女儿。
English: After Risong ascended the throne, he intended to choose the empress, and the empress dowager ordered that several daughters of the Xie family be chosen.

古文：后独在室，兄弟欲纳入宫，诸父攑伯不可，曰： 即奉诏纳女，当厚奉资装，异时不过一老宫婢，事奚益？ 会元夕，县有鹊来巢灯山，众以为后妃之祥。
现代文：只有皇后未嫁在家，兄弟们想把她送进宫里。她的伯父谢扌举伯不同意说 ：如果奉诏献女，当要厚置嫁妆，今后不过是一个老宫女，有什么好处呢？ 恰遇元宵节晚上，县里有喜鹊来灯山做巢，人们认为这是有后妃的祥兆。
English: Only the empress was unmarried at home, and her brothers wanted to send her to the palace. Her uncle Xie Junzhu disagreed, saying, "If you have a daughter, you should pay a high dowry. In the future, she will just be an old palace maid. What are the benefits?" On the evening of the Lantern Festival, there were magpies in the county that came to Lushan to make a nest. People thought this was a good omen for having an empress.

古文：攑伯不能止，乃供送后就道。
现代文：谢扌举伯不能阻止，于是出资送皇后上路入宫。
English: Xie Junbo could not stop it, so he paid to send the empress on her way to the palace.

古文：后旋病疹，良已，肤蜕，莹白如玉；医又药去目瞖。
现代文：皇后不久出麻疹，过一段时间，皮肤蜕落，莹白如玉；医生又治好她的眼病。
English: The empress soon came down with measles, and after a while her skin became radiant and as white as snow; the doctors also cured her eye disease.

古文：时贾涉女有殊色，同在选中。
现代文：当时贾涉的女儿姿色绝美，也在入选之中。
English: At that time, Jia's daughter, who was extremely beautiful, was also selected.

古文：及入宫，理宗意欲立贾。
现代文：入宫后，理宗想立贾氏。
English: After entering the imperial court, Riso wanted to establish the Jia clan.

古文：太后曰： 谢女端重有福，宜正中宫。 左右亦皆窃语曰： 不立真皇后，乃立假皇后邪！ 帝不能夺，遂定立后。
现代文：太后说： 谢家女儿端重有福气，应当立为皇后。 皇帝身边的人也私下议论说： 不立真皇后，竟立假皇后吗？ 皇帝不能改变太后的主意，于是决定立谢皇后。
English: The empress dowager said, "The daughter of the Xie family is so blessed that she should be made the empress." People around the emperor also privately discussed, "If we don't make her the real empress, how can we make her a fake empress?" The emperor couldn't change the empress dowager's mind, so he decided to make her the empress.

古文：初封通义郡夫人，宝庆三年九月，进贵妃，十二月，册为皇后。
现代文：开始封为通义郡夫人，宝庆三年九月，进封为贵妃，十二月，册封为皇后。
English: At first, she was given the title of Tongyi County Lady, in September of the third year of Baoqing, she was given the title of Guifei, and in December, she was given the title of Empress.

古文：后既立，贾贵妃专宠；贵妃薨，阎贵妃又以色进。
现代文：皇后被立后，贾贵妃独得皇帝宠爱；贵妃死后，阎贵妃又以姿色得宠。
English: After the empress was established, Jia Guifei was the only one to be favored by the emperor; after the death of Guifei, Yan Guifei was favored by her appearance.

古文：后处之裕如，略不介怀。
现代文：皇后对此毫不介意，宽大为怀。
English: The Queen didn't mind at all and was very lenient.

古文：太后深贤之，而帝礼遇益加焉。
现代文：太后认为她很贤惠，而且皇帝对她也越发优待尊敬。
English: The empress dowager considered her to be very virtuous, and the emperor treated her with ever-increasing favor and respect.

古文：开庆初，大元兵渡江，理宗议迁都平江、庆元，后谏不可，恐摇动民心，乃止。
现代文：开庆初年，大元朝部队渡过长江，理宗打算迁都到平江、庆元，皇后劝谏不可迁都，深恐动摇民心，理宗才作罢。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the troops of the Yuan Dynasty crossed the Yangtze River. Li Zong planned to move the capital to Pingjiang and Qingyuan. The empress advised him not to move the capital, fearing that it would shake the people's hearts. Li Zong had to give up.

古文：理宗崩，度宗立。
现代文：理宗死后，度宗即位。
English: After the death of Risong, Wuzong ascended to the throne.

古文：咸淳三年，尊为皇太后，号寿和圣福。
现代文：咸淳三年，尊皇后为皇太后，号为寿和圣福。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, Empress Zong was appointed as the empress dowager, and was given the title of Shouwa and Shengfu.

古文：进封三代：父渠伯，魏王；祖深甫、曾祖景之，皆鲁王。
现代文：进封太后的三代：父亲谢渠伯为魏王；祖父谢深甫、曾祖父谢景之都封为鲁王。
English: The three generations of the Dowager Empress: her father, Xie Qubo, was the King of Wei; her grandfather, Xie Shenfu, and great-grandfather, Xie Jingzhi, were both crowned King of Lu.

古文：宗族男女各进秩赐封赏赉有差。
现代文：宗族男女各分等升官赐封赏赉。
English: Both men and women of the same clan can be promoted to a higher rank and given a title of honor.

古文：度宗崩，瀛国公即位，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：度宗死后，瀛国公即皇帝位，尊太后为太皇太后。
English: After the death of Du Zong, the Duke of Shandong became the emperor, and the Empress Dowager became the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后年老且疾，大臣屡请垂帘同听政，强之乃许。
现代文：太后年老而且有病，大臣们多次请她垂帘与皇帝一同听政，再三强求后太后才同意。
English: The empress dowager was old and ill, and the ministers repeatedly asked her to listen to the government together with the emperor. They repeatedly asked the empress dowager to agree.

古文：加封五代。
现代文：加封太后的五代。
English: Five generations of the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后以兵兴费繁，痛自裁节，汰慈元殿提举已下官，省泛索钱缗月万。
现代文：太后因为战争费用太多，亲自裁减节俭宫中费用，汰减慈元殿提举以下官员，省去泛索钱每月一万。
English: The empress dowager, because the war expenses were too much, personally reduced the expenses in the palace, and the following officials were appointed by Cigen, saving 10,000 yuan per month.

古文：平章贾似道兵溃，陈宜中上疏请正其罪。
现代文：平章贾似道战败兵溃，陈宜中上疏请求将他正法。
English: Pingzhang Jia Li Dao was defeated and routed, and Chen Yizhong pleaded with Shangsuo to rectify him.

古文：太后曰： 似道勤劳三朝，岂宜以一旦罪而失遇大臣礼？ 先削其官，后乃置法贬死。
现代文：太后说 ：贾似道三朝以来勤劳从政，哪能因为一旦获罪而失去优遇大臣之礼？ 先削夺他的官职，后来才依法贬死。
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Jia Linduo has been diligently engaged in politics since the Three Dynasties. How can he lose the privilege of being a minister because he was once convicted? First, he was deprived of his official position, and only later was he demoted according to the law.

古文：京朝官闻难，往往避匿遁去。
现代文：京中朝官见国家有难，往往匿名逃走。
English: When officials in Beijing and the imperial court saw that the country was in trouble, they often fled anonymously.

古文：太后命揭榜朝堂曰： 我国家三百年，待士大夫不薄。
现代文：太后命令在朝堂张榜说 ：我国家三百年来，对待士大夫不薄。
English: The empress dowager ordered a poster to be put up in the imperial hall, saying: "For three hundred years, our country has treated doctors well.

古文：吾与嗣君遭家多难，尔小大臣不能出一策以救时艰，内则畔官离次，外则委印弃城，避难偷生，尚何人为？
现代文：我与嗣皇帝遭遇国家多难，你们大小臣子们不能出一计以救时艰，京官则弃官逃走，地方官则丢印弃城，逃避艰难苟且偷生，哪里还像人的作为？
English: The emperor and I have encountered many difficulties in the country. Your ministers, big and small, are unable to come up with a plan to save time, the Beijing officials have abandoned their posts and fled, and the local officials have abandoned the city, avoiding difficulties and living secretly. Where is there anything like human actions?

古文：亦何以见先帝于地下乎？
现代文：又怎么见先帝于地下？
English: How did the former emperor end up underground?

古文：天命未改，国法尚存。
现代文：天命并未改变，国法尚还存在。
English: The Mandate of Heaven has not changed, and the country's laws still exist.

古文：凡在官守者，尚书省即与转一次；负国逃者，御史觉察以闻。 
现代文：凡在官府者，尚书省即发与一份薪水；弃国而逃者，御史台纠察上报。 
English: Those who are in government offices will be paid a salary by the Ministry of Education and Culture; those who abandon the country and flee will be picketed and reported to the History Channel.

古文：德祐元年六月朔，日食既，太后削 圣福 以应天变。
现代文：德祐元年六月初一，发生日食后，太后削去自己 圣福 的尊号来顺应天变。
English: On the first day of June in the first year of Desyu, after the occurrence of a solar eclipse, the empress dowager shaved off her honorary title of "Holy Blessing" to conform to the changes in the heavens.

古文：丞相王爚老病，陈宜中、留梦炎庸懦无所长，日坐朝堂相争戾。
现代文：丞相王飊既老且病，陈宜中、留梦炎庸碌无所长，每天在朝堂相争斗。
English: The prime minister, Wang Yao, was old and ill, and Chen Yizhong and Lu Mengyan were at loggerheads, fighting each other every day in the imperial court.

古文：而张世杰兵败于焦山，宜中弃官去。
现代文：而张世杰在焦山兵败，陈宜中弃官逃去。
English: However, Zhang Shijie was defeated at Jiaoshan, and Chen Yizhong abandoned his post and fled.

古文：太后累召不至，遗书宜中母，使勉之。
现代文：太后多次召见不来，送书信给宜中的母亲，让她劝勉宜中。
English: The empress dowager was repeatedly summoned but did not come. She sent a letter to Yizhong's mother, asking her to persuade Yizhong.

古文：十月，始还朝。
现代文：十月，才回到朝廷。
English: He did not return to the Imperial Court until October.

古文：太后又亲为书召夏贵等兵，曰： 吾母子不足念，独不报先帝德乎？ 贵等亦罕有至者。
现代文：太后又亲自写信召夏贵等人的部队说： 我们母子不足为念，难道不报答先帝的恩德吗？ 夏贵等人也少有人来。
English: The empress dowager also personally wrote a letter to summon Xia Gui and other troops, saying, "Our mother and son are not enough, so why not repay the former emperor's kindness? Xia Gui and others are also few.

古文：是月，大元兵破常州，太后遣陆秀夫等请和，不从。
现代文：这月，大元兵攻破常州，太后派陆秀夫等上前去请和，元兵不同意。
English: This month, the Great Yuan soldiers broke through Changzhou, and the Empress Dowager sent Lu Hsiu-fu and others forward to ask for peace, but the Yuan soldiers did not agree.

古文：宜中即率公卿请迁都，太后不许，宜中痛哭固请，不得已从之。
现代文：陈宜中就率领公卿大臣请求迁都，太后不允许，陈宜中痛哭着再三请求，太后不得已听从他。
English: Chen Yizhong led the nobles and ministers to request the relocation of the capital, but the empress dowager did not allow it. Chen Yizhong repeatedly begged with tears, and the empress dowager had no choice but to listen to him.

古文：明日当启行，而宜中仓卒失奏，于是宫车已驾，日且暮而宜中不至，太后怒而止。
现代文：第二天应当出发，而陈宜中却仓卒不到，于是宫车已驾好，时候将晚而陈宜中不到，太后大怒而作罢。
English: The next day it was time to set off, but Chen Yizhong was in a hurry, so the palace car was ready, but the time would be late and Chen Yizhong would not arrive, and the empress dowager was furious.

古文：明年正月，更命宜中使军中，约用臣礼。
现代文：第二年正月，又命令陈宜中出使元军军中，约议向元朝称臣。
English: In the first month of the second year, he also ordered Chen Yizhong to send an envoy to the Yuan army to discuss the appointment of a minister to the Yuan dynasty.

古文：宜中难之，太后涕泣曰： 苟存社稷，臣，非所较也。 未几，大元兵薄皋亭山，宜中宵遁，文武百官亦潜相引去。
现代文：陈宜中责难这样做，太后哭着说： 只要能保存国家，称臣不必计较。 不久，元兵进攻皋亭山，陈宜中逃走，文武百官也暗中逃走。
English: Chen Yizhong reprimanded him for doing so, and the empress dowager cried and said, "As long as we can preserve the country, we don't need to worry about it." Soon, the Yuan soldiers attacked Shanting Mountain, Chen Yizhong fled, and hundreds of civil and military officials also secretly fled.

古文：二月辛丑，大军驻钱塘，宋亡。
现代文：二月五日，元大军驻扎钱塘，宋朝灭亡。
English: On February 5, the Yuan Dynasty army stationed in Qiantang, and the Song Dynasty fell.

古文：瀛国公与全后入朝，太后以疾留杭。
现代文：瀛国公与全皇后入朝元朝，太后因病留在杭州。
English: The Duke of Shandong and all the empresses entered the Yuan Dynasty, but the empress dowager stayed in Hangzhou due to illness.

古文：是年八月，至京师，降封寿眷郡夫人。
现代文：这年八月，到京城，元朝降封她为寿春郡夫人。
English: In August of that year, when she arrived in Beijing, the Yuan Dynasty demoted her to Lady of Shuchun County.

古文：越七年终，年七十四，无子。
现代文：过七年后死去，终年七十四岁，没有子女。
English: He died seven years later, aged 74, without children.

古文：兄奕，宋时封郡王。
现代文：太后的哥哥谢奕，宋朝时封为郡王。
English: The empress dowager's brother, Xie Yi, was crowned the county king during the Song Dynasty.

古文：侄堂，两浙镇抚大使，尚荣郡公主；暨、并节度使，端平初，颇干国政云。
现代文：侄儿谢堂，任两浙镇抚大使，与荣郡公主结婚，谢埴、谢真都任节度使，端平初年，操持国政。
English: His nephew, Xie Tang, served as the ambassador of the two Zhejiang towns, and married the princess of Rong County. Xie Yao and Xie Zhen both served as festival envoys. In the first year of Dengping, he was in charge of state affairs.

古文：度宗全皇后，会稽人，理宗母慈宪夫人侄孙女也。
现代文：度宗全皇后，会稽人，是理宗的母亲慈宪夫人的侄孙女。
English: Empress Dowzong Quan, the auditor, was the granddaughter-in-law of Rizong's mother, Lady Cixian.

古文：略涉书史，幼从父昭孙知岳州。
现代文：略通书史，年幼时跟随父亲全昭孙任岳州知州。
English: Briefly through the history of books, when he was young, he followed his father, Quan Zhaosun, to Yuezhou and Chizhou.

古文：开庆初，秩满归，道潭州。
现代文：开庆初年，任期已满回朝，过潭州。
English: In the first year of the celebration, the term of office has been completed and returned to the DPRK, passing through Tanzhou.

古文：时大元兵自罗鬼入破全、衡、永、桂，围潭州，人有见神人卫城者，已而潭独不下。
现代文：当时元兵从罗鬼进入攻破全州、衡州、永州、桂州，围攻潭州，有人看见神人保卫此城，后来只有潭州未被攻下。
English: At that time, the Yuan soldiers entered from Luojin to conquer Quanzhou, Hengzhou, Yongzhou, Guizhou, and besieged Tanzhou. Some people saw the godmen defending this city. Later, only Tanzhou was not conquered.

古文：逾年事平，至临安。
现代文：一年后，战事平息，到了临安。
English: A year later, the war was over and they arrived in Lin'an.

古文：会忠王议纳妃。
现代文：正遇忠王打算纳妃。
English: Just when the loyal king was about to marry her off.

古文：初，丁大全请选知临安府顾嵓女，已致聘矣；大全败，嵓亦罢去。
现代文：当初，丁大全请求选临安府顾砮的女儿，已经举行聘礼了；丁大全事败，顾砮也被罢官。
English: At first, Ding Daquan requested the election of Gu Yao's daughter from Lin'an, and a betrothal ceremony was held; Ding Daquan was defeated, and Gu Yao was also dismissed.

古文：台臣论嵓大全党，宜别选名族以配太子。
现代文：台臣们认为顾砮是丁大全一党，应当另选名门女儿来配婚太子。
English: The Taiwanese courtiers thought that Gu Ye was a member of Ding Daquan's party, and that they should choose another famous daughter to match the prince.

古文：臣僚遂言全氏侍其父昭孙，往返江湖，备尝艰险；其处贵富，必能尽警戒相成之道。
现代文：大臣们于是说全氏侍奉其父亲全昭孙，往返江湖，备尝艰难险阻；如果身处富贵，一定能警戒事业成功之道。
English: The ministers then said that Quanzhi served his father, Quanzhaosun, and traveled back and forth between provinces and regions, preparing for hardships and dangers; if he was rich and noble, he would certainly be able to guard the way to success in his career.

古文：理宗以母慈宪故，乃诏后入宫，问曰： 尔父昭孙，昔在宝祐间没于王事，每念之，令人可哀。 后对曰： 妾父可念，淮、湖之民尤可念也。 帝深异之，诏大臣曰： 全氏女言辞甚令，宜配冢嫡，以承祭祀。 
现代文：理宗因为母亲慈宪夫人的缘故，就诏她入宫，问道： 你的父亲昭孙，过去在宝年间死于王事，每念及此，令人哀痛。 皇后回答说 ：我的父亲固然可怜，淮、湖的人民尤其可怜。 皇帝深感惊异，对大臣们说： 全氏女言语非常得体，应当配婚太子，承接祭祀。 
English: Because of his mother, Lady Cixian, Rizong gave her permission to enter the palace, and asked, "Your father, Zhaosun, died in a royal event in the treasure year, and every time I think about it, I feel sad." The empress replied, "Of course, my father is pitiful, and the people of Huai and Hu are especially pitiful." The emperor was deeply surprised and said to the ministers, "The words of the whole clan are very appropriate, and they should be matched with the prince and take over the sacrificial rites.

古文：景定二年十一月，诏封永嘉郡夫人。
现代文：景定二年十一月，诏令封为永嘉郡夫人。
English: In November of the second year of King Jingding's reign, she was given the title of Lady of Yongjia County.

古文：十二月，册为皇太子妃。
现代文：十二月，册封为皇太子妃。
English: In December, she was crowned Crown Princess.

古文：弟永坚等补承信郎、直秘阁。
现代文：其弟全永坚等人补任承信郎、直秘阁。
English: His younger brother, Quan Yongjian, and others were appointed as successor and direct secretary.

古文：度宗立，咸淳三年正月，册为皇后。
现代文：度宗立为皇帝后，咸淳三年正月，册封她为皇后。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Xianjun's reign, she was crowned empress.

古文：追赠三代，赐家庙、第宅。
现代文：追赠三代官职，赐家庙、第宅。
English: He posthumously bestowed three generations of government posts, and gave his family a temple and a mansion.

古文：弟清夫、庭辉等一十五人，各转一官。
现代文：其弟全清夫、全庭辉等一十五人，各任一官。
English: His younger brother, Quan Qingfu, Quan Wei Hui, and fifteen others, each of whom held an official post.

古文：五年三月，后归宁，推恩姻族五十六人，进一秩。
现代文：咸淳五年三月，皇后回家探亲，推加恩泽给亲戚五十六人，升官一级。
English: In March of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, the empress went home to visit relatives, and promoted 56 relatives to the first level.

古文：咸平郡夫人全氏三十二人，各特封有差。
现代文：咸平郡夫人全氏三十二人，各分等特别封赏。
English: Thirty-two ladies from Hampyeong County won special awards.

古文：后生子不育，次生瀛国公。
现代文：皇后生子不育，后又生下瀛国公。
English: The empress was infertile, and later gave birth to the prince of the country.

古文：十年，度宗崩，瀛国公立，册为皇太后。
现代文：咸淳十年，度宗死后，瀛国公立为皇帝，册封皇后为皇太后。
English: In the tenth year of Xianjun, after the death of Duzong, Zangguo Guozhong became the emperor, and the crowned queen became the empress dowager.

古文：宋亡，从瀛国公入朝于燕京。后为尼正智寺而终。
现代文：宋代灭亡，跟从瀛国公入朝元朝于燕京，后来在正智寺当尼姑而终。
English: After the Song Dynasty fell, she followed the prince of Shandong Province into the Yuan Dynasty in Yanjing, and later became a nun at Zhengzhi Temple.

