古文：起强圉作噩，尽屠维大渊献正月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起强圉作噩，尽屠维大渊献正月，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years, there are strange occurrences.

古文：宪宗昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝中之下
现代文：宪宗昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝中之下
English: An article by Jianzong Zhao about Emperor Wu Da-sheng and Emperor Sheng-xiao

古文：元和十二年丁酉，公元八一七年
现代文：唐宪宗元和十二年春季正月，甲申，宪宗将袁滋贬为抚州刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the twelfth year of the Tang Dynasty, Jian Zongyuan and Jian Zongyuan relegated Yuan Zi to Fuzhou.

古文：春，正月，甲申，贬袁滋为抚州刺史。李愬至唐州，军中承丧败之馀，士卒皆惮战，愬知之。有出迓者，愬谓之曰： 天子知愬柔懦，能忍耻，故使来拊循尔曹。
现代文：李愬来到唐州。唐州的军队在经受死丧败亡后，将士们都害怕作战，李愬也知道这种状况。有些人出来迎接李愬，李愬便对他们说： 天子知道我柔弱怯懦，能够忍受耻辱，因此让我来抚慰你们。
English: Li Hongzhi came to Tangzhou. After the Tangzhou army suffered death and defeat, the soldiers were afraid to fight, and Li Hongzhi also knew this situation. Some people came out to meet Li Hongzhi, and Li Hongzhi said to them: God knows that I am weak and cowardly, and I can bear the shame, so let me comfort you.

古文：至于战攻进取，非吾事也。 
现代文：至于采取军事行动，就不是我的事情了。 
English: As for taking military action, that is not my business.

古文：众信而安之。
现代文：大家相信了他的话，都放心了。
English: Everyone believed his words and were relieved.

古文：愬亲行视，士卒伤病者存恤之，不事威严。
现代文：李愬亲自去看望将士们，慰问抚恤受伤和生病的人，不摆威严的架子。
English: Li Wei personally visited the soldiers, and gave condolences to those who were injured and ill. He did not put on a dignified air.

古文：或以军政不肃为言，愬曰： 吾非不知也。
现代文：有人进言说军中政事不够整肃，李愬说： 我并不是不知道。
English: When someone suggested that political affairs in the military were not sufficiently purged, Li Yao said: I didn't mean that I didn't know.

古文：袁尚书专以恩惠怀贼，贼易之，闻吾至，必增备，故吾示之以不肃。
现代文：袁尚书专门以恩惠安抚敌人，敌人轻视他。现在，敌人得知我来了，肯定要增设防备。
English: Yuan Shangshu specially appeased the enemy with grace, and the enemy despised him. Now that the enemy knows that I am coming, they must increase their defenses.

古文：彼必以吾为懦而懈惰，然后可图也。 
现代文：我故意让敌人看到我军不够整肃，他们肯定以为我是懦弱而又懒惰的，此后才能够设法对付他们。 
English: I purposely let the enemy see that our army was not disciplined enough, they must have thought I was cowardly and lazy, and only then could I try to deal with them.

古文：淮西人自以尝败高、袁二帅，轻愬名位素微，遂不为备。
现代文：淮西人自认为曾经打败过高霞寓和袁滋的两个主帅，因李愬的名望与官位素来卑微而轻视他，便不再作防备。
English: The Huaxi people thought that they had defeated Gao Xiaye and Yuan Zi, two coaches, and despised Li Wei because of his humble reputation and official position, so they no longer took precautions.

古文：遣盐铁转运副使程异督财赋于江、淮。
现代文：宪宗派遣盐铁副使程异在江淮地区督理资财与赋税。
English: Jianzong dispatched Cheng Yi, a deputy envoy of Yan Tie, to supervise the management of capital and taxation in the Jianghuai region.

古文：回鹘屡请尚公主，有司计其费近五百万缗，时中原方用兵，故上未之许。
现代文：回鹘屡次求娶公主，有关部门计算所需费用将近五百万缗，而当时中原地区正在用兵打仗，所以宪宗没有答应回鹘的请求。
English: Huizong repeatedly asked to marry the princess, and the relevant departments calculated the required expenses at nearly five million baht. At that time, the Central Plains region was at war with soldiers, so the Emperor did not agree to Huizong's request.

古文：二月，辛卯朔，遣回鹘摩尼僧等归国，命宗正少卿李诚使回鹘谕意，以缓其期。
现代文：二月，辛卯朔，宪宗打发回鹘的摩尼教僧人等回国，命令宗正少卿李愬诚出使回鹘，晓示朝廷的用意，以便延缓通婚的日期。
English: In February, shortly after Xinzong sent the Manichaean monks back to China, he ordered Zongzheng Shaoqing Li Yucheng to send an envoy back to China to inform him of the imperial court's intention in order to delay the date of the marriage.

古文：李愬谋袭蔡州，表请益兵，诏以昭义、河中、鄜坊步骑二千给之。
现代文：李策划袭击蔡州，上表请求增派兵力，宪宗颁诏将昭义、河中、坊的步、骑兵两千人拨给了他。
English: Li planned an attack on Caizhou and requested more troops from the table above. The Emperor issued an edict assigning him Shao Yi, He Zhong, Fang Di Bu and two thousand cavalry.

古文：丁酉，愬遣十将马少良将十馀骑巡逻，遇吴元济捉生虞候丁士良，与战，擒之。
现代文：丁酉，李派遣十将马少良率骑兵十余人巡回侦察，遇到吴元济的捉生虞候丁士良，与他交战，将他擒获。
English: Ding Xi and Li dispatched ten generals, Ma Shao Liang and more than ten cavalry to patrol and reconnoiter. They encountered Wu Yuanji's fugitive, Ding Shiliang, fought with him and captured him.

古文：士良，元济骁将，常为东边患，众请刳其心，愬许之。
现代文：丁士良是吴元济骁勇善战的将领，经常危害东部的唐州、邓州等地。
English: Ding Shiliang was a brave and warlike general of Wuyuan Jizhong, who often harmed the eastern Tangzhou, Dengzhou and other places.

古文：既而召诘之，士良无惧色。
现代文：大家请求将丁士良的心剜出来，李答应下来。
English: Everyone requested that Ding Shiliang's heart be ripped out, and Li agreed.

古文：愬曰： 真丈夫也！ 
现代文：不久，李把丁士良叫来，当面责问他，丁士良没有一点恐惧的神色。
English: Soon, Li called Ding Shiliang and scolded him face to face. Ding Shiliang didn't look scared at all.

古文：命释其缚。
现代文：李说： 丁士良真是一位大丈夫！ 
English: Li said, "Ting Shiliang is really an all-rounder!

古文：士良乃自言： 本非淮西士，贞元中隶安州，与吴氏战，为其所擒，自分死矣。
现代文：他命令为丁士良松绑。于是，丁士良主动说： 我原来不是淮西的官吏，贞元年间我隶属安州，与吴氏作战，被吴氏擒获，自忖就要被处死了，吴氏却释放并起用了我。
English: He ordered that Ding Shiliang be released. So, Ding Shiliang took the initiative to say: I was not originally an official of Huaxi. During the Zhenyuan period, I belonged to Anzhou and fought against the Wu clan. I was captured by the Wu clan and was about to be executed. However, the Wu clan released me and employed me.

古文：吴氏释我而用之，我因吴氏而再生，故为吴氏父子竭力。
现代文：我因为吴氏而得以再次存活下来，所以我为吴氏父子尽力效命。
English: I was able to survive again because of Mr. Wu, so I tried my best to serve Mr. Wu and his son.

古文：昨日力屈，复为公所擒，亦分死矣。
现代文：昨天我力不能支，又被您所擒获，我也料想这次可要被处死了，现在您又让我存活下来。
English: Yesterday I was exhausted and you caught me again, and I thought I was going to be executed this time, and now you let me live.

古文：今公又生之，请尽死以报德！ 
现代文：请让我竭尽死力，报答您的恩德。 
English: Please let me do my best to repay your kindness.

古文：愬乃给其衣服器械，署为捉生将。
现代文：于是，李将衣服和器具又给了他，任命他为捉生将。
English: So Li gave him the clothes and tools again and appointed him as a survivalist.

古文：己亥，淮西行营奏克蔡州古葛伯城。
现代文：己亥，淮西行营奏称攻克了蔡州的古葛伯城。
English: Ji Hai and Huai Xi marched to the west and claimed to have conquered the ancient Ge Bo City in Caizhou.

古文：丁士良言于李愬曰： 吴秀琳拥三千之众，据文城栅，为贼左臂，官军不敢近者，有陈光洽为之谋主也。
现代文：丁士良向李进言说： 吴秀琳拥有三千兵马，据有文城栅，犹如敌人的左臂。官军不敢靠近他的原由，就在于有陈光洽作他的主谋。
English: Ding Shiliang said to Li Jin, "Wu Xiuling has three thousand soldiers and horses. According to Yu Wencheng, he is like the enemy's left arm. The reason why the government army dares not approach him is that Chen Guangcha is his mastermind.

古文：光洽勇而轻，好自出战，请为公先擒光洽，则秀琳自降矣。 
现代文：陈光洽勇敢善战，但是不够稳重，喜欢亲自出来接战，请让我替您首先捉住陈光洽，吴秀琳自然就会投降了。 
English: Chen Guangchao is brave and good at fighting, but he is not steady enough. He likes to fight in person. Please let me catch Chen Guangchao for you first. Wu Xiulin will naturally surrender.

古文：戊申，士良擒光洽以归。
现代文：戊申，丁士良捉获了陈光洽，带着他回来了。
English: Wushin, Ding Shiliang captured Chen Guangchao and brought him back.

古文：鄂岳观察使李道古引兵出穆陵关。甲寅，攻申州，克其外郭，进攻子城。
现代文：鄂岳观察使李道古率领兵马由穆陵关进发，甲寅，攻打申州，攻克了申州外围的城郭，又进军攻打内城。
English: The observation of Mt. E caused Li Daogu to lead the soldiers and horses from Mulingguan to attack Shenzhou, conquer the outer castle of Shenzhou, and march into and attack the inner city.

古文：城中守将夜出兵击之，道古之众惊乱，死者甚众。
现代文：在城中守卫的将领夜间派兵进击李道古，李道古的兵马惊惶散乱，死者众多。
English: The generals guarding the city sent troops to attack Li Daogu at night. Li Daogu's soldiers and horses panicked and scattered, and many died.

古文：道古，皋之子也。
现代文：李道古是李皋的儿子。
English: Li Daogu is the son of Li Yao.

古文：淮西被兵数年，竭仓廪以奉战士，民多无食，采菱芡鱼鳖鸟兽食之，亦尽，相帅归官军者前后五千馀户。
现代文：淮西一连几年遭受战火，只得竭尽粮仓的储备来奉养参战的士兵。百姓多数没有食物，便去寻找菱角、芡实、鱼鳖、鸟兽来吃，但也吃光了。百姓聚在一起归附官军的先后有五千多户。
English: Huaxi suffered from the war for several years in a row, and had to exhaust the reserves of the granary to feed the soldiers who participated in the war. Most of the people had no food, so they went to look for hawthorn, ramie, fish bait, birds and beasts to eat, but they also ran out. More than five thousand households of the people gathered together to join the government army.

古文：贼亦患其耗粮食，不复禁。
现代文：吴无济也担心百姓要消耗粮食，便不再禁止他们归降官军。
English: Wu Wuji was also worried that the people would consume grain, so he no longer forbade them to surrender to the government army.

古文：庚申，敕置行县以处之，为择县令，使之抚养，并置兵以卫之。
现代文：庚申，宪宗敕令设置行县来安顿淮西降附的百姓，为他们选择县令，让县令体恤并赡养百姓，还设置军队来保卫他们。
English: According to Genshin, Emperor Gensong's edict set up the counties to settle the people who had been annexed by Huaixi, chose the county government for them, let the county government sympathize and support the people, and also set up the army to protect them.

古文：三月，乙丑，李愬自唐州徙屯宜阳栅。
现代文：三月，乙丑，李由唐州移兵屯驻宜阳栅。
English: In March, the second Ugly, Li Yuzhong transferred troops from Tangzhou and stationed them in Yiyangzao.

古文：郗士美败于柏乡，拔营而归，士卒死者千馀人。
现代文：郗士美在柏乡战败，撤除营垒而回，死去的将士有一千多人。
English: Fong Shimei was defeated in Baoxiang, withdrew his camp and returned. More than a thousand soldiers died.

古文：戊辰，赐程执恭名权。
现代文：戊辰，宪宗赐程执恭名为程权。
English: At that time, Cheng Xingyong was given the name Cheng Quan by the Constitutionalist.

古文：戊寅，王承宗遣兵二万入东光，断白桥路。程权不能御，以众归沧州。
现代文：戊寅，王承宗派遣兵马两万人，开进东光县，切断了白桥的通路，程权不能够抵御，率领人马返回沧州。
English: Wu Yin, Wang Chengzong dispatched 20,000 soldiers and horses, drove into Dongguang County, cut off the passage of Baiqiao, Cheng Quan could not resist, and led the troops back to Cangzhou.

古文：吴秀琳以文城栅降于李愬。
现代文：吴秀琳率文城栅兵马向李投降。
English: Wu Xiulin led the Wencheng grate soldiers and horses to surrender to Li.

古文：戊子，愬引兵至文城西五里，遣唐州刺史李进诚将甲士八千至城下，召秀琳，城中矢石如雨，众不得前。
现代文：戊子，李领兵来到文城西面五里处，派遣唐州刺史李进诚率领兵士八千人来到城下，召呼吴秀琳，城中箭石密集如雨，大家无法上前。
English: Wu Zi, Li led the soldiers to the west of Wencheng, five miles from the top, and sent Tang Zhou poet Li Jincheng to lead eight thousand soldiers to the city, calling Wu Xiulin. The arrow stones in the city were as dense as rain, and everyone could not go forward.

古文：进诚还报： 贼伪降，未可信也。 
现代文：李进诚回来报告说： 敌人是假装投降，是不能够相信的。 
English: When Li Jincheng returned, he reported: The enemy is pretending to surrender, which is not believable.

古文：愬曰： 此待我至耳。 
现代文：李说： 这是等候我前去哩。 
English: Lee said, "It's waiting for me to go."

古文：即前至城下，秀琳束兵投身马足下，愬抚其背慰劳之，降其众三千人。
现代文：李当即来到城下，吴秀琳收起兵器，一头伏在李的马前，李抚摩着他的脊背，好言安慰他，收降了吴秀琳的三千人马。
English: Li immediately came to the outskirts of the city. Wu Xiuling put away her weapons and bowed down in front of Li's horse. Li rubbed his back and consoled him with kind words, winning back Wu Xiuling's three thousand horse.

古文：秀琳将李宪有材勇，愬更其名曰忠义而用之，悉迁妇女于唐州，入据其城。
现代文：吴秀琳的将领李宪既有才能，又很勇敢，李为他改名为李忠义，并且起用了他。李将文城各将领的女眷全部迁移到唐州。
English: Wu Xiulin's general Li Xian was both talented and very brave. Li changed his name to Li Zhongyi for him and appointed him. Li moved all the female relatives of the generals in Wencheng to Tangzhou.

古文：于是唐、邓军气复振，人有欲战之志。
现代文：于是，唐州与邓州军中的士气又振作起来，人人都有准备打仗的决心。
English: As a result, the morale of the Tang and Deng armies rose again, and everyone was determined to prepare for war.

古文：贼中降者相继于道，随其所便而置之。
现代文：前来投降的敌军在道路上一个接着一个，李便根据他们的具体情况，一一做出安置。
English: The enemy troops who came to surrender followed one after another on the road, and Li arranged them one by one according to their specific conditions.

古文：闻有父母者，给粟帛遣之，曰： 汝曹皆王人，勿弃亲戚。 
现代文：得知归降者家中有父母需要照料的，便发给粮食与布帛，打发他们回去，还说： 你们都是朝廷的百姓，不能丢下亲属不管。 
English: When they learned that there were parents in need of care in the returnees' homes, they gave them food and cloth and sent them back, saying, "You are all people of the imperial court, you cannot leave your relatives behind.

古文：众皆感泣。
现代文：大家都感动得哭起来。
English: Everyone was moved to tears.

古文：官军与淮西兵夹溵水而军，诸军相顾望，无敢渡溵水者。
现代文：官军与淮西军隔着水驻扎下来，官军的各支军队相互踌躇观望，没有哪支军队有胆量渡过水。
English: The official army and the Huaxi army were stationed across the water, and the various armies of the official army were watching each other. No army had the courage to cross the water.

古文：陈许兵马使王沛先引兵五千渡凉水，据要地为城，于是河阳、宣武、河东、魏博等军相继皆度，进逼郾城。
现代文：陈许兵马使王沛率领兵马五千人率先渡过水，占领要害的地点筑城。于是，河阳、宣武、河东、魏博等军队都一个接着一个地渡过水，进逼郾城。
English: Chen Xu Terracotta Army sent Wang Pei to lead five thousand soldiers and horses to cross the water first and occupy the key location to build the city. Therefore, the armies of Heyang, Xuanwu, Hedong, and Weibo all crossed the water one after another and entered the city.

古文：丁亥，李光颜败淮西兵三万于郾城，走其将张伯良，杀士卒什二三。
现代文：丁亥，李光颜在郾城打败淮西兵马三万人，赶走了该军将领张伯良，杀掉全军将士的十分之二三。
English: Dinghai, Li Guangyan defeated 30,000 soldiers and horses of Huaixi in Shicheng, drove away the general of the army, Zhang Boliang, and killed two-thirds of the soldiers of the whole army.

古文：己丑，李愬遣山河十将董少玢等分兵攻诸栅。
现代文：己丑，李派遣山河十将董少玢等人分别出兵攻打各处栅垒。
English: Li sent ten generals, including Dong Shaoqi, to attack the barricades separately.

古文：其日，少玢下马鞍山，拔路口栅。
现代文：就在当天，董少玢占领马鞍山，攻克路口栅。
English: On the very same day, Dong Shaoqi occupied Ma'anshan and overcame the roadblock.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，山河十将马少良下嵖岈山，擒淮西将柳子野。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛卯，山河十将马少良占领岈山，擒获淮西将领柳子野。
English: In the summer, in April, the Ten Generals of Mountains and Rivers, Ma Shao Liang, occupied Lushan and captured Liu Zino, the general of Huaxi.

古文：吴元济以蔡人董昌龄为郾城令，质其母杨氏。
现代文：吴元济任命蔡州人董昌龄为郾城县令，而将他的母亲杨氏当作人质。
English: Wu Yuanji appointed Dong Changling, a native of Caizhou, as the county magistrate of Lucheng County, and took his mother Yang as a hostage.

古文：杨氏谓昌龄曰： 顺死贤于逆生，汝去逆而吾死，乃孝子也；从逆而吾生，是戮吾也。 
现代文：杨氏告诉董昌龄说： 顺承朝廷而死胜于叛逆朝廷而生。你摆脱叛逆，就是我死了，你也是我孝顺的儿子；你随从叛逆，就是我活着，也等于你杀死了我。 
English: Mr. Yang told Dong Changling: "It is better to die in obedience to the imperial court than to live in rebellion against the imperial court. If you get rid of the rebellion, I will die, and you will be my dutiful son; if you follow the rebellion, I will live, and you will kill me.

古文：会官军围青陵，绝郾城归路，郾城守将邓怀金谋于昌龄，昌龄劝之归国，怀金乃请降于李光颜曰： 城人之父母妻子皆在蔡州，请公来攻城，吾举烽求救，救兵至，公逆击之，蔡兵必败，然后吾降，则父母妻子庶免矣。 
现代文：适值官军包围青陵，切断了郾城的退路，郾城守将邓怀金去找董昌龄商议，董昌龄便规劝他归顺朝廷。于是，邓怀金向李光颜请求投降说： 郾城将士的父母、妻子、儿女都住在蔡州，请您前来攻打郾城，我点燃烽火向蔡州请求援救，等援救的兵马来到郾城时，您便迎击他们，蔡州兵马必定失败。此后我再归降，郾城将士的父母、妻子、儿女大约便能够幸免于死了。 
English: At the right time, the government army encircled Qingling, cutting off the escape route of Lucheng. The Lucheng guards sent Deng Huaijin to Dong Changling for discussion, and Dong Changling advised him to surrender to the imperial court. Therefore, Deng Huaijin asked Li Guangyan to surrender, saying: The parents, wives and children of the Lucheng soldiers all live in Caizhou. Please come and attack Lucheng. I lit a bonfire to ask Caizhou for rescue. When the rescued soldiers and horses come to Lucheng, you will meet them. Caizhou soldiers and horses must fail. After that, I will surrender again. The parents, wives and

古文：光颜从之。
现代文：李光颜听从了他的主张。
English: Lee Kuan Yew followed his advice.

古文：乙未，昌龄、怀金举城降，光颜引兵入据之。
现代文：乙未，董昌龄与邓怀金率领全城归降，李光颜带领兵马占领了郾城。
English: Yi Wei, Dong Changling and Deng Huaijin led the whole city to surrender, and Li Guangyan led the soldiers and horses to occupy Lucheng.

古文：吴元济闻郾城不守，甚惧。
现代文：吴元济得知郾城失守，非常恐惧。
English: Wu Yuanji was very afraid when he learned that Lucheng was lost.

古文：时董重质将骡军守洄曲，元济悉发亲近及守城卒诣重质以拒之。
现代文：当时，董重质率领骡军在洄曲防守，吴元济将亲信将士以及守城士兵全部派往董重质处，以便抵御李光颜。
English: At that time, Dong Chong Chia led the Han army in the defense of Xingqu. Wu Yuanji sent all his trusted soldiers and the soldiers defending the city to Dong Chong Chia's place in order to resist Li Guangyan.

古文：李溵山河十将妫雅、田智荣下冶炉城。
现代文：李溵的山河十将妫雅、田智荣攻克了冶炉城。
English: Li Qian's mountain and river ten will Hanya, Tian Zhirong conquered the metallurgical furnace city.

古文：丙申，十将阎士荣下白狗、汶港二栅。
现代文：丙申，山河十将阎士荣攻克了白狗、汶港两处栅垒。
English: According to him, it was the tenth time that Yan Shirong conquered the White Dog and the two gates of Wengang.

古文：癸卯，妫雅、田智荣破西平。
现代文：癸卯，妫雅、田智荣攻破西平。
English: Zou Wu, Zou Ya and Tian Zhirong defeated Xiping.

古文：丙午，游弈兵马使王义破楚城。
现代文：丙午，游弈兵马使王义攻下楚城。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Wang Yi was able to capture the city of Chuxing.

古文：五月，辛酉，李愬遣柳子野、李忠义袭郎山，擒其守将梁希果。
现代文：五月，辛酉，李派遣柳子野和李忠义袭击朗山，擒获了守将梁希果。
English: In May, Xinzheng, Li dispatched Liu Zino and Li Zhongyi to attack Langshan, and captured the guard general Liang Xiguo.

古文：六镇讨王承宗者兵十馀万，回环数千里，既无统帅，又相去运，期约难壹，由是历二年无功，千里馈运，牛驴死者什四五。
现代文：讨伐王承宗的河东、幽州、义武、横海、魏博、昭义六藩镇，拥有兵马十多万人，辗转数千里，既设有统领各军的主帅，又相隔遥远，约定的日期难以统一，因此历时两年，毫无建树，运输物资的路程长达千里，死去的牛和驴有十分之四五。
English: The crusade against Wang Chengzong took place in the six provinces of Hedong, Yuzhou, Yiwu, Henghai, Weibo and Shouyi. It involved more than 100,000 soldiers and horses and covered thousands of miles. Even though there was a commander in chief of each army, they were far apart and the agreed date was difficult to unify. As a result, it lasted for two years without any achievements. The distance of transporting materials was thousands of miles. Forty-five percent of the cattle and donkeys died.

古文：刘总既得武强，引兵出境才五里，留屯不进，月给度支钱十五万缗。
现代文：刘总得到武强后，率领兵马走出本道疆境只有五里地，便停留下来，屯兵不肯前进，每月朝廷拨给度支掌管的钱十五万缗。
English: After Liu Zong received Wu Qiang, he led the soldiers and horses out of the territory of this province only five miles, then stopped, the soldiers refused to advance, and the court allocated 150,000 baht per month to the Doushi administration.

古文：李逢吉及朝士多言 宜并力先取淮西。俟淮西平，乘其胜势，回取恒冀，如拾芥耳！ 
现代文：李逢吉以及朝中百官往往进言： 应当首先合力攻取淮西，等候淮西平定后，乘着胜利的形势，回兵攻取恒冀，就象拾取芥子一样容易了！ 
English: Li Fengji, as well as hundreds of officials in the DPRK and China, often said: We should first work together to conquer Huaixi, wait for Huaixi to be pacified, take advantage of the victorious situation, return to conquer Hengji, it is as easy as picking up mustard seeds!

古文：上犹豫，久乃从之。
现代文：宪宗迟疑不决，过了许久，才听从了大家的建议。
English: Kenzong hesitated, and it was a long time before he followed everyone's advice.

古文：丙子，罢河北行营，各使还镇。
现代文：丙子，朝廷免除了河北行营，使六镇兵马各自返回本镇。
English: In other words, the imperial court exempted the Hebei campaign, so that the soldiers and horses of the six towns returned to their own towns.

古文：丁丑，李愬遣方城镇遏使李荣宗击青喜城，拔之。
现代文：丁丑，李派遣方城镇遏使李荣宗攻克青喜城。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Li dispatched the towns to stop Li Rongzong from conquering Qingxi City.

古文：愬每得降卒，必亲引问委曲，由是贼中险易远近虚实尽知之。
现代文：每当李得到归降的士兵，一定要亲自领来询问淮西的底细，因此他对敌方的地形和兵力分布都了解清楚了。
English: Whenever Li received the surrendered soldiers, he must personally bring them to inquire about the details of Huaxi, so he has a clear understanding of the enemy's terrain and force distribution.

古文：愬厚待吴秀琳，与之谋取蔡。
现代文：李优待吴秀琳，与他策划夺取蔡州。
English: Li Youtao treated Wu Xiulin and plotted with him to seize Caizhou.

古文：秀琳曰： 公欲取蔡，非得李祐不可，秀琳无能为也。 
现代文：吴秀琳说： 如果您打算夺取蔡州，非有李不可，我是无能为力的。 
English: Wu Xiulin said: "If you plan to seize Caizhou, you must have Li, I am powerless.

古文：祐者，淮西骑将，有勇略，守兴桥栅，常陵暴官军。
现代文：李是淮西的骑兵将领，勇敢而有谋略，防守兴桥栅，经常侵凌欺辱官军。
English: Li was the cavalry general of Huaxi, brave and resourceful, defending the Xing Bridge, often encroaching and bullying the official army.

古文：庚辰，祐帅士卒刈麦于张柴村，愬召厢虞候史用诚，戒之曰： 尔以三百骑伏彼林中，又使人摇帜于前，若将焚其麦积者。
现代文：庚辰，李率领士兵在张柴村收割麦子，李叫来厢虞候史用诚，告诫他说： 你带领骑兵三百人在那片树林中埋伏下来，再让人在前面摇动旗帜，做出将要焚烧他们的麦堆的样子。
English: At Gengchen, Li led the soldiers to harvest wheat in Zhangchai village. Li called Feng Yuexuan and warned him: You lead 300 cavalry to ambush in the woods, and then let people wave flags in front of them to make it look like they are going to burn their stacks of wheat.

古文：祐素易官军，必轻骑来逐之，尔乃发骑掩之，必擒之。 
现代文：李平时小看官军，肯定会率领轻装的骑兵前来驱逐他们。这时，你便派骑兵袭取他，肯定能够将他擒获。 
English: Li usually looked down on the government army and would certainly lead light cavalry to expel them. At this time, you will send cavalry to attack him and will definitely be able to capture him.

古文：用诚如言而往，生擒祐以归。
现代文：史用诚按照李的吩咐前往，活捉李而回。
English: Shi Yicheng followed Li's orders and went to capture Li alive.

古文：将士以祐向日多杀官军，争请杀之。
现代文：由于李往日杀害了许多官军，将士们争着请求将他杀掉。
English: Since Li had killed many government soldiers in the past, the soldiers pleaded for him to be killed.

古文：愬不许，释缚，待以客礼。
现代文：李不肯答应，给他松了绑，以宾客的礼节对待他。
English: Li refused to agree, loosened his tie, and treated him with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：时愬欲袭蔡，而更密其谋，独召祐及李忠义屏人语，或至夜分，他人莫得预闻。
现代文：当时，李准备掩袭蔡州，谋划更为隐秘。他单独叫来李和李忠义，屏退外人后才进行交谈，有时谈话一直延续到夜半，别人都不能够参与商议。
English: At that time, Li was preparing to cover up Caizhou, and the plan was more secretive. He called Li and Li Zhongyi separately, and they had a conversation only after the screen was removed. Sometimes the conversation lasted until midnight, and others were not able to participate in the discussion.

古文：诸将恐祐为变，多谏愬。愬待祐益厚。
现代文：各将领担心李制造变故，往往规劝李，而李对待李更为优厚。
English: The generals were worried that Li might change his ways, so they often tried to persuade him, but Li treated Li more generously.

古文：士卒亦不悦，诸军日有牒称祐为贼内应，且言得贼谋者具言其事。
现代文：士兵们也不高兴，各军每天都有文书声称李是淮西的内应，而且说是听敌方奸细讲的。
English: The soldiers were not happy either. Every day, each army had a document claiming that Li was Huaxi's inside man, and that he had listened to the enemy's spies.

古文：愬恐谤先达于上，己不及救，乃持祐泣曰： 岂天不欲平此贼邪！
现代文：李担心诽谤事先传到朝廷，自己来不及搭救李，便握着李的手哭泣着说： 难道是上天不愿意平定这伙贼人吗？
English: Li was worried that the slander would reach the imperial court in advance, and he had no time to save Li, so he held Li's hand and wept and said, "Is it possible that Heaven does not want to pacify this group of thieves?"

古文：何吾二人相知之深而不能胜众口也。 
现代文：为什么你我二人相互了解得如此深切，但就是不能够制服众人的议论呢？ 
English: Why is it that you and I know each other so well, but we just can't keep the chatter down?

古文：因谓众曰： 诸君既以祐为疑，请令归死于天子。 
现代文：因而，李对大家说： 既然诸位怀疑李，请大家让他到天子那里接受死刑吧！ 
English: Therefore, Li said to everyone: Since you all suspect Li, please let him go to heaven to receive the death penalty!

古文：乃械祐送京师，先密表其状，且曰： 若杀祐，则无以成功。 
现代文：于是，李给李加上枷锁，将他送往京城，事先暗中上表讲清具体情况，而且说： 如果杀了李，就无法取得成功。 
English: As a result, Li put Li in shackles and sent him to Beijing, secretly clarifying the specific situation in advance and saying: If you kill Li, you will not succeed.

古文：诏释之，以还愬。
现代文：宪宗颁诏释放李，将他还给李。
English: Emperor Xianzong issued an edict to release Li and return him to Li.

古文：愬见之喜，执其手曰： 尔之得全，社稷之灵也！ 
现代文：李见到李时，高兴地握着李的手说： 你得以保全，这是社稷的威灵有知啊！ 
English: When Li saw Li, he was happy to hold Li's hand and said, "You have been preserved, this is the wisdom of society!"

古文：乃署散兵马使，令佩刀巡警，出入帐中。
现代文：李便任命李为散兵马使，让他带着佩刀，巡视警戒，在自己的帐中往来。
English: Li then appointed Li as a scout, and let him carry a saber, patrol the vigilance, and go back and forth in his account.

古文：或与之同宿，密语不寐达曙，有窃听于帐外者，但闻祐感泣声。
现代文：有时，李与他一同就寝，秘密交谈，直到透出曙色也不入睡，有人在帐外暗中偷听，只能听到李感动的哭泣声。
English: Sometimes, Li would go to bed with him, and they would talk in secret. They would not fall asleep until dawn. Someone was eavesdropping outside the tent, and all they could hear was Li's emotional crying.

古文：时唐、随牙队三千人，号六院兵马，皆山南东道之精锐也。愬又以祐为六院兵马使。
现代文：当时，唐州、随州节度使牙卫队三千人，号称六院兵马，都是山南东道精悍勇锐的军队，李又任命李为六院兵马使。
English: At that time, Tangzhou and Suizhou made 3,000 soldiers of the Dental Guard, known as the Sixth Courtyard Soldiers and Horses, all of which were the best and bravest troops in Shannan. Li also appointed Li as the Sixth Courtyard Soldiers and Horses.

古文：旧军令，舍贼谍者屠其家。
现代文：原先的军令规定，对留宿敌方奸细的人，要屠杀他的全家。
English: The original military order stipulated that if a person harbored enemy spies, his entire family was to be slaughtered.

古文：愬除其令，使厚待之。谍反以情告愬，愬益知贼中虚实。
现代文：李除去这一军令，让人们优待敌人的奸细，奸细反而将实情报告给李，李愈发了解敌人的情况。
English: Li removed this military order and allowed people to give preferential treatment to the enemy's spies. Instead, the spies reported the truth to Li, and Li learned more and more about the situation of the enemy.

古文：乙酉，愬遣兵攻朗山，淮西兵救之，官军不利。
现代文：乙酉，李派兵攻打朗山，淮西兵前去援救，官军失利。
English: Li sent soldiers to attack Langshan, Huaxi soldiers went to the rescue, and the government army was defeated.

古文：众皆怅恨，愬独欢然曰： 此吾计也！ 
现代文：大家又惆帐，又恼恨，只有李欢快地说： 这正是我的计策啊！ 
English: Everyone was shocked and angry, but Li said cheerfully, "This is exactly my strategy!"

古文：乃募敢死士三千人，号曰突将，朝夕自教习之，使常为行备，欲以袭蔡。
现代文：于是，李募集了敢死之士三千人，号称突将，天天亲自教练他们，让他们经常做好出发的准备，李就是打算以这支军队袭击蔡州。
English: As a result, Li recruited three thousand death-defying men, known as shock troops, and personally trained them every day, so that they were always ready for departure. Li intended to use this army to attack Caizhou.

古文：会久雨，所在积水，未果。
现代文：适值多日落雨，到处积满雨水，这一计划没有实现。
English: This plan did not come to fruition due to the fact that there were many sunsets and it rained, and rainwater accumulated everywhere.

古文：闰月，己亥，程异还自江、淮，得供军钱百八十五万缗。
现代文：闰五月，己亥，程异从江淮地区回朝，得到供应军需的钱有一百八十五万缗。
English: In late May, Ji Hai and Cheng Yi returned to the DPRK from the Jianghuai region, and received 1.85 million baht for military supplies.

古文：谏议大夫韦绶兼太子侍读，每以珍膳饷太子，又悦太子以谐谑。
现代文：谏议大夫韦绶兼任太了侍读，往往拿珍贵的食品请太子吃，又说些诙谐逗趣的话取悦太子。
English: Dr. Wei Wei, who also served as an attendant, often took precious food to please the prince, and said some witty and amusing words to please the prince.

古文：上闻之，丁未，罢绶侍读，寻出为虔州刺史。
现代文：宪宗得知了这一消息，丁未，便免除了韦绶太子侍读的职务，不久，又将他斥逐为虔州刺史。
English: When Emperor Xianzong learned of this news, he relieved Prince Weizong of his duties as an attendant, and soon after, he banished him to Kenzhou.

古文：绶，京兆人也。
现代文：韦绶是京兆人。
English: Wei Wei is from Beijing.

古文：吴元济见其下数叛，兵势日蹙，六月，壬戌，上表谢罪，愿束身自归。
现代文：吴元济看到部下屡次背叛自己，军事形势日益紧迫，六月，壬戌，他上表认罪，表示愿意亲自回朝投案。
English: Wu Yuanji saw that his subordinates repeatedly betrayed him, and the military situation became increasingly urgent. In June, he confessed to the table and expressed his willingness to personally return to the North to surrender.

古文：上遣中使赐诏，许以不死，而为左右及大将董重质所制，不得出。
现代文：宪宗派遣中使向他颁赐诏书，答应可以免他一死。然而，吴元济被自己的亲信和大将董重质等人所控制，无法离开蔡州。
English: However, Wu Yuanji was unable to leave Caizhou as he was under the control of his close confidants and General Dong Chong Chia and others.

古文：秋，七月，大水，或平地二丈。
现代文：秋季七月，发生了严重的水灾，有些地区平地水深两丈。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a serious flood, and in some areas the water was as deep as two feet.

古文：初，国子祭酒孔戣为华州刺史，明州岁贡蚶、蛤、淡菜，水陆递夫劳费，戣奏疏罢之。
现代文：当初，国子祭酒孔担任华州刺史，明州每年进贡蚶子、蛤蜊、淡菜等，水陆长途转运的人夫既劳苦，又多耗费，孔奏请免除这项进贡。
English: At the beginning, the Kuniko Festival, Sake bore served as the sashimi of Huazhou, and the annual tribute of hazelnuts, clams, and light vegetables from Mingzhou. The long-distance transportation by land and water was laborious and costly. Kongso asked to be exempted from this tribute.

古文：甲辰，岭南节度使崔咏薨，宰相奏拟代咏者数人，上皆不用，曰： 顷有谏进蚶、蛤、淡菜者为谁，可求其人与之。 
现代文：甲辰，岭南节度使崔咏去世，宰相上奏了所拟定的几个代替崔咏的人选，宪宗一概不用，还说： 不久前有一个劝阻进献蚶子、哈蜊和淡菜的人是谁啊，可以找到此人，就将崔咏的职务交给他吧！ 
English: At the time of the Lingnan Festival, Cui Qi passed away. The prime minister announced several candidates to replace Cui Qi, but he did not use any of them. He also said, "Not long ago, there was a person who discouraged the offering of dumplings, dumplings and pickled vegetables. If you can find this person, give him the post of Cui Qi!"

古文：庚戌，以戣为岭南节度使。
现代文：庚戌，宪宗任命孔为岭南节度使。
English: Geng Zong and Kenzong appointed Kong as the chief envoy of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：诸军讨淮西，四年不克，馈运疲弊，民至有以驴耕者。
现代文：诸军讨伐淮西蔡州，历时四年，没有攻克，物资转运使人们疲惫不堪，以至于有些百姓只好用驴来耕种田地。
English: The armies fought against Huaxi and Caizhou for four years without conquering them, and the transportation of goods exhausted the people, so that some people had to use donkeys to cultivate the fields.

古文：上亦病之，以问宰相。
现代文：宪宗也为此忧虑，便就此事询问宰相。
English: Kenso was also worried about this and asked the prime minister about it.

古文：李逢吉等竞言师老财竭，意欲罢兵。
现代文：李逢吉等人争着说军中士气低落，财物消耗已尽，意思是打算停止用兵。
English: Li Fengji and others argued that the morale of the army sergeants was low and the consumption of property had been exhausted, meaning that they intended to stop using soldiers.

古文：裴度独无言，上问之，对曰： 臣请自往督战。 
现代文：唯独裴度一言不发，宪宗征求他的意见，他回答说： 我请求亲自前去督战。 
English: However, Pei Du did not utter a word, and when the Emperor asked him for his opinion, he replied: "I request you to go and supervise the battle in person."

古文：乙卯，上复谓度曰： 卿真能为朕行乎？ 
现代文：乙卯，宪宗又对裴度说： 你果真能够为朕去走一遭吧？ 
English: Second, Kenzong also said to Pei Du: Are you really able to walk for me?

古文：对曰： 臣誓不与此贼俱生！
现代文：裴度回答说： 我发誓不与这些贼人一起生存。
English: "I swear I will not live with these thieves," Baidu replied.

古文：臣比观吴元济表，势实窘蹙，但诸将心不壹，不并力迫之，故未降耳。
现代文：近日我看了吴元济的奏表，他面临的形势实在已经窘困紧迫，但是各将领心不齐，不能够合力紧逼他，所以他还没有降顺。
English: Recently, I read Wu Yuanji's report card. The situation he is facing is really in dire straits, but the generals are not of the same mind and cannot work together to push him, so he has not surrendered.

古文：若臣自诣行营，诸将恐臣夺其功，必争进破贼矣。 
现代文：如果我亲自前往行营，各将领惟恐我夺去他们的功劳，肯定争先进军破敌了。 
English: If I personally went to the camp, the generals would be afraid that I would take away their credit, and they would certainly fight for the first army to defeat the enemy.

古文：上悦，丙戌，以度为门下侍郎、同平章事、兼彰义节度使，仍充淮西宣慰招讨处置使。又以户部侍郎崔群为中书侍朗、同平章事。
现代文：宪宗大悦，丙戌，任命裴度为门下侍郎、同平章事、兼彰义节度使，还充任淮西宣慰招讨处置使，同时任命户部侍郎崔群为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Kenzong Daye, Heejun, appointed Pei Du as a subordinate attendant, Tongping record keeper, and also appointed as a subordinate attendant of the Spring Festival. He also served as a Huaxi consolation, invitation and disposition envoy. At the same time, he appointed the household attendant Cui Qun as a Chinese book attendant and Tongping record keeper.

古文：制下，度以韩弘已为都统，不欲更为招讨，请但称宣慰处置使，仍奏刑部侍郎马总为宣慰副使，右庶子韩愈为彰义行军司马，判官、书记皆朝廷之选，上皆从之。
现代文：制书下达后，裴度因韩弘已经出任都统，不打算再担当招讨使，请求只称宣慰处置使。他还奏请由刑部侍郎马总担任宣慰副使，右庶子韩愈担任彰义行军司马，叛官、书记等职，都由朝廷选派，宪宗全部依从了他。
English: After the document was issued, Baidu did not intend to take on the role of recruiting envoy anymore because Han Hong had already been appointed as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. He only requested to be called a consolation disposition envoy. He also requested that the head of the Criminal Investigation Department serve as a consolation deputy envoy, and that Han Yu, his son-in-law, serve as a steward of the army marching to Changyi. The positions of traitor and secretary were all selected by the imperial court, and the constitutionalists all obeyed him.

古文：度将行，言于上曰： 臣若贼灭，则朝天有期；贼在，则归阙无日。 
现代文：在将要启程时，裴度对宪宗说： 倘若贼人覆灭了，我不久就会前来朝见陛下；倘若贼人尚在，我就不会回到朝廷中来。 
English: When he was about to leave, Pei Du said to Emperor Xianzong: "If the bandits are destroyed, I will soon come to see Your Majesty; if the bandits are still there, I will not return to the imperial court."

古文：上为之流涕。
现代文：宪宗听得此言，不禁流下了眼泪。
English: Hearing this, Xianzong could not help but shed tears.

古文：八月，庚申，度赴淮西，上御通化门送之。
现代文：八月，庚申，裴度前往淮西，宪宗驾临通化门为他送行。
English: In August, Goshun and Pei Du went to Huaxi, and Gensong drove to Tonghua Gate to see him off.

古文：右神武将军张茂和，茂昭弟也，尝以胆略自衒于度。
现代文：右神武将军张茂和是张茂昭的弟弟，曾经在裴度面前夸耀自己的胆识才略，斐度上表请求任命他为都押牙。
English: Zhang Maowa, the Right Shenwu General and Zhang Maozhao's younger brother, once boasted of his courage and talent in front of Baidu, and Fidu requested to appoint him as Duasiga.

古文：度表为都押牙，茂和辞以疾，度奏请斩之。
现代文：张茂和以身染疾病推辞，裴度上奏请求将他斩杀。
English: Zhang Maohua refused, saying he was ill, and Baidu made a request to have him beheaded.

古文：上曰： 此忠顺之门，为卿远贬。 
现代文：宪宗说： 此人出于忠心顺命的人家，朕为你将他贬官到远方吧。 
English: Gensong said, "This man is a man of loyalty and obedience. I will demote him to a distant place for you."

古文：辛酉，贬茂和永州司马。以嘉王傅高承简为都押牙。
现代文：辛酉，宪宗将张茂和贬为永州司马，任命嘉王傅高承简为都押牙。
English: Sincerely speaking, Emperor Xuanzong relegated Zhang Maowa to the position of Yongzhou Sima, and appointed Jia Wang Fu Gao Jian as Dua Fang.

古文：承简，崇文之子也。
现代文：高承简是高崇文的儿子。
English: Gao Chengjian is the son of Gao Chongwen.

古文：李逢吉不欲讨蔡，翰林学士令狐楚与逢吉善，度恐其合中外之势以沮军事，乃请改制书数字，且言其草制失辞。
现代文：李逢吉不愿意讨伐蔡州，而翰林学士令狐楚与李逢吉交好。裴度担心他们二人将内廷与外朝的势力合起来阻挠战事，便请求在制书上改动了几个字，并且说令孤楚起草制书言辞失当。
English: Li Fengji did not want to fight against Caizhou, while Hanlin Scholar made a good friend with Li Fengji. Pei Du was worried that the two of them would combine the forces of the Inner Court and the Outer Court to obstruct the war, so he asked to change a few words in the book, and said that it was improper to let Kuo Chu draft the book.

古文：壬戌，罢楚为中书舍人。
现代文：壬戌，宪宗将令狐楚罢免为中书舍人。
English: At the end of the year, Emperor Xizong removed the fox from the throne and made him a layman of Chinese classics.

古文：李光颜、乌重胤与淮西战，癸亥，败于贾店。
现代文：李光颜与乌重胤与淮西交战，癸亥，二人在贾店战败。
English: Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan fought against Huaxi, and the two were defeated at Jia Dian.

古文：裴度过襄城南白草原，淮西人以骁骑七百邀之。
现代文：裴度经过襄城南面的白草原时，淮西军派出骁勇的骑兵七百人前来截击他。
English: When Pei Du was passing through the White Grassland south of Xiangcheng, the West Huai Army sent seven hundred brave cavalrymen to intercept him.

古文：镇将楚丘曹华知而为备，击却之。
现代文：镇将楚丘人曹华事先得到消息，做好了准备，便将他们击退了。
English: Cao Hua, the mayor of the town and a native of Chuqiu, received the news in advance, made preparations, and repulsed them.

古文：度虽辞招讨名，实行无帅事，以郾城为治所。
现代文：虽然裴度辞去了招讨的名称，实际上是行使元帅的职事，他选定郾城作为自己的官署。
English: Although Baidu resigned the name of solicitation, he actually exercised the duties of a marshal, and he chose Shicheng as his official office.

古文：甲申，至郾城。
现代文：甲申，裴度来到郾城。
English: Gao Shin, Pei Du came to Lucheng.

古文：先是，诸道皆有中使监陈，进退不由主将，胜则先使献捷，不利则陵挫百端。
现代文：在此之前，诸道都有中使监督战阵，军队的行动不能由主将做主。打了胜仗，中使率先使人向朝廷报捷；作战失利了，中使便对将帅百般凌辱。
English: Prior to this, all provinces had a middle envoy to supervise the battle, and the actions of the army could not be decided by the commander-in-chief. If the battle was won, the middle envoy would be the first to report the victory to the imperial court; if the battle was lost, the middle envoy would abuse the general in various ways.

古文：度悉奏去之，诸将始得专军事，战多有功。
现代文：裴度奏请将各处监督战阵的中使全部罢除，各将领这才得以专力办理军中事务，在作战中经常取胜。
English: Pei Duxiao, please remove all the envoys supervising the battlefronts. This will allow the generals to concentrate on handling the affairs of the army and often win in the battle.

古文：九月，庚子，淮西兵寇溵水镇，杀三将，焚刍藁而去。
现代文：九月，庚子，淮西兵马侵犯水镇，斩杀三员将领，烧掉喂养牲畜的干草以后便撤离了。
English: In September, Geng Zi and Huaxi soldiers and horses invaded Shuizhen, killed three generals, and burned the hay used to feed livestock before withdrawing.

古文：初，上为广陵王，布衣张宿以辩口得幸。
现代文：当初，宪宗在当广陵王时，平民张宿因能言善辩而得到宠爱。
English: At first, when Kenzong was the king of Guangling, Zhang Shuku, a commoner, was favored for his eloquence.

古文：及即位，累官至比部员外郎。
现代文：及至宪宗即位以来，张宿历经升迁，做到比部员外郎。
English: And since the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, Zhang Suberu has been promoted and has become a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee.

古文：宿招权受赂于外，门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉恶之。
现代文：张宿在外面招揽权力，收受贿赂，门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉很讨厌他。
English: Zhang Shuk was soliciting power from the outside and accepting bribes. Li Fengji, a subordinate servant and peer, hated him very much.

古文：上欲以宿为谏议大夫，逢吉曰： 谏议重任，必能可否朝政，始宜为之。
现代文：宪宗准备任命张宿为谏议大夫，李逢吉说： 谏议大夫是一个重要的职任，必须是能够裁断朝廷政务的人士，才适于担当这一职务。
English: When Emperor Gensong was about to appoint Zhang Suku as the chief adviser to the emperor, Li Fengji said: "The chief adviser to the emperor is an important post, and only a person who is able to decide on the government affairs of the imperial court is suitable for this post.

古文：宿小人，岂得窃贤者之位！
现代文：张宿是一个小人，怎么能够窃居贤能之士的官位！
English: Zhang Shuku is a villain, how can he steal the post of a man of virtue!

古文：必欲用宿，请先去臣乃可。 
现代文：如果陛下一定要任用张宿，请罢去我的职务才有可能。 
English: If Your Majesty must appoint Zhang Juku, please remove me from my post so that it is possible.

古文：上由是不悦。
现代文：宪宗因此心中不快。
English: For this reason, Kenzong was not happy.

古文：逢吉又与裴度异议，上方倚度以平蔡。
现代文：李逢吉又与裴度持有不同的意见，而宪宗正在倚靠裴度去平定蔡州。
English: Li Fengji also held a different opinion from Pei Du, and the Jianzong was relying on Pei Du to pacify Caizhou.

古文：丁未，罢逢吉为东川节度使。
现代文：丁未，宪宗将李逢吉罢免为东川节度使。
English: Ding Wei, Kenzong dismissed Li Fengji as the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：甲寅，李愬将攻吴房，诸将曰： 今日往亡。 
现代文：甲寅，李准备攻打吴房县。诸将领都说： 今天是不利前往的往亡日啊。 
English: A Yin, Li prepared to attack Wu Fang County. All generals said: Today is not a good day to go to the past.

古文：愬曰： 吾兵少，不足战，宜出其不意。
现代文：李说： 我们兵马为数较少，正面作战，兵力不够用的，适于采取出其不意的行动。
English: Li said: We have a small number of soldiers and horses, we are in a frontal battle, our troops are not enough, and we are suitable for taking unexpected actions.

古文：彼以往亡不吾虞，正可击也。 
现代文：敌人因今天是往亡日便不会戒备我们，这正是可以进击的时候。 
English: The enemy, because it is the last day of the year, will not be on the alert, and this is the time to attack.

古文：遂往，克其外城，斩首千馀级。
现代文：于是，李率军前往，攻克了吴房的外城，斩首一千余级。
English: As a result, Li led the army to conquer the outer city of Wufang and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：馀众保子城，不敢出。
现代文：剩下来的吴房兵马防守内城，不敢出战。
English: The remaining Wu Fang soldiers and horses defended the inner city and did not dare to fight.

古文：愬引兵还以诱之，淮西将孙献忠果以骁骑五百追击其背。
现代文：李率领兵马撤回，以便诱使吴房兵马出动，淮西将领孙献忠果然率领骁勇的骑兵五百人在背后追击。
English: Li led the troops and horses to withdraw in order to induce Wu Fang's soldiers and horses to move out. Sun Xianzhong, the leader of Huaxi, led 500 brave cavalrymen to pursue behind.

古文：众惊，将走，愬下马据胡床，令曰： 敢退者斩！ 
现代文：大家惊惶失措，准备逃走，李跳下马来，靠在胡床上，下达命令说： 有胆敢退却的，一概斩杀！ 
English: Everyone panicked and prepared to flee. Li jumped off his horse, leaned on the hammock, and gave the order: "If anyone dares to retreat, kill them all!"

古文：返旆力战，献忠死，淮西兵乃退。
现代文：大家回军尽力作战，孙献忠阵亡，淮西兵马这才撤退。
English: Everyone returned to the army and tried their best to fight. Sun Xianzhong was killed in the battle, and the soldiers and horses of Huaxi only retreated.

古文：或劝愬乘胜攻其子城，可拔也。
现代文：有人劝说李乘胜攻打吴房的内城，认为是能够攻克的。
English: Some people persuaded Li Yingsheng to attack the inner city of Wufang, believing that it could be conquered.

古文：愬曰： 非吾计也。 
现代文：李说： 这不是我的计策。 
English: Li said, "This is not my trick.

古文：引兵还营。
现代文：于是，李率领兵马返回营地。
English: As a result, Li led the soldiers and horses back to the camp.

古文：李祐言于李愬曰： 蔡之精兵皆在洄曲，及四境拒守，守州城者皆羸老之卒，可以乘虚直抵其城。
现代文：李向李进言说： 蔡州的精锐兵马全都被派往洄曲及四周的边境上，在那里防御守备。防守蔡州城的兵力都是老弱残兵，可以乘蔡州空虚，直接抵达蔡州城。
English: Li Xiang Li Jin said: The elite soldiers and horses of Caizhou have all been sent to Zhangye and the surrounding border to defend and guard there. The troops defending Caizhou City are old and weak remnants, and they can take advantage of the emptiness of Caizhou to directly reach Caizhou City.

古文：比贼将闻之，元济已成擒矣。 
现代文：及至敌军将领得知消息时，吴元济已经就擒了。 
English: By the time the enemy generals learned the news, Wu Yuanji had already gone to bed.

古文：愬然之。
现代文：李认为言之有理。
English: Li thinks this is reasonable.

古文：冬十月，甲子，遣掌书记郑澥至郾城，密白裴度。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲子，李派遣掌书记郑前往郾城，秘密禀报裴度。
English: In the winter, in October, Li sent his secretary Zheng to Shicheng to secretly report to Pei Du.

古文：度曰： 兵非出奇不胜，常侍良图也。 
现代文：裴度说： 用兵打仗，不出奇兵，不能取胜，李常侍提出了一个很好的计划啊。 
English: Pei Du said, "You can't win a war by using soldiers, and you can't win a war without extraordinary soldiers. Li Changzhu proposed a very good plan."

古文：上竟用张宿为谏议大夫，崔群、王涯固谏，不听；乃请以为权知谏议大夫，许之。
现代文：宪宗到底还是要任张宿为谏议大夫。崔群与王涯再三劝谏，宪宗不肯听从。他们便请求任命张宿为权知谏议大夫，宪宗答应了他们。
English: In the end, Kenzong still wanted to appoint Zhang Shuku as the magistrate. Cui Qun and Wang Ya repeatedly advised him, but Kenzong refused to listen. They then requested the appointment of Zhang Shuku as the magistrate, and Kenzong agreed.

古文：宿由是怨执政及当时端方之士，与皇甫镈相表里，谮去之。
现代文：张宿由此怨恨执掌政务的官员和品行正直的人士，并与皇甫相互勾结，诬陷这些人，使他们离位而去。
English: Zhang Shuk therefore resented the officials in charge of government affairs and people of integrity, and colluded with the emperor to frame these people and make them leave the throne.

古文：裴度帅僚佐观筑城于沱口，董重质帅骑出五沟，邀之，大呼而进，注弩挺刃，势将及度。
现代文：裴度率僚佐在沱口观看修筑城墙，董重质率领骑兵从五沟出发，前来拦击裴度，大声呼喊着向前进军，搭着弓弩，拔出兵器，兵锋将要危及裴度。
English: Pei Du and his aides-de-camp were watching the construction of the city wall at the gate. Dong Chong Chia led the cavalry from Wugou and came to stop Pei Du, shouting loudly to the advancing army, holding a bow and arrows, and pulling out weapons. The soldiers were about to endanger Pei Du.

古文：李光颜与田布力战，拒之，度仅得入城。
现代文：李光颜与田布尽力作战，抵御董重质，裴度才得以进入沱口城中。
English: Li Guangyan and Tian Bu fought as hard as they could to fend off Dong Chongye, and it was only then that Pei Du was able to enter the city of Hekou.

古文：贼退，布扼其沟中归路。贼下马逾沟，坠压死者千馀人。
现代文：敌军撤退时，田布扼守敌军在沟中的退路，敌人下马翻越沟堑，摔死压死的有一千多人。
English: When the enemy was retreating, Tabu guarded the retreat route of the enemy in the ditch. The enemy dismounted and climbed over the ditch, and more than a thousand people fell to their deaths.

古文：辛未，李愬命马步都虞候、随州刺史史旻等留镇文城，命李祐、李忠义帅突将三千为前驱，自与监军将三千人为中军，命李进诚将三千人殿其后。
现代文：辛未，李命令马步都虞候、随州刺史史留下来镇守文城，命令李与李忠义率领由敢死之士组成的突将三千人作为前导，自己与监军率领三千人作为中军，命令田进诚率领三千人居于军队的后部。
English: Soon after, Li ordered Ma Bu Du to wait and Suizhou Jian Shi Shi to stay behind to guard Wencheng, ordered Li and Li Zhongyi to lead 3,000 men composed of daredevils as the vanguard, himself and the supervisors to lead 3,000 men as the middle army, and ordered Tian Jincheng to lead 3,000 men to live in the rear of the army.

古文：军出，不知所之。
现代文：军队出发以后，还不知道是往哪里开进。
English: Once the army sets out, it doesn't know where it's going.

古文：愬曰： 但东行。 
现代文：李说； 只须向着东方行进！ 
English: Li said, "All you have to do is march towards the east!"

古文：行六十里，夜，至张柴村，尽杀其戍卒及烽子。
现代文：军队走了六十里路，夜晚来到张柴村，将屯戍村中的淮西士兵和守候烽火的人员全部杀死，占领了敌军的栅垒。
English: The army marched sixty miles and came to Zhang Chai village at night, killed all the soldiers from Huaixi and the people waiting for the bonfire in Tunlu village, and occupied the enemy's barricade.

古文：据其栅，命士卒少休，食干Я，整羁靮，留义成军五百人镇之，以断朗山救兵。
现代文：李命令将士稍作休息，吃些干饭，整顿马具，将义成军的五百人留下来镇守张柴村，以便截断洄曲与各条道路间的桥梁。
English: Li ordered the soldiers to take a short break, eat some dry rice, and tidy up the saddlery. He left the five hundred soldiers of the Yixing Army to guard Zhangchai Village in order to cut off the bridges between Xingqu and various roads.

古文：命丁士良将五百人断洄曲及诸道桥梁，复夜引兵出门。诸将请所之，愬曰： 入蔡州取吴元济！ 
现代文：李又连夜率领兵马出了张柴村的栅门，各位将领请示进军目标，李说： 到蔡州去捉拿吴元济！ 
English: Li again led the soldiers and horses out of the gate of Zhangchai village overnight. The generals asked for the target of the march. Li said: Go to Caizhou to capture Wu Yuanji!

古文：诸将皆失色。
现代文：各位将领都大惊失色。
English: The faces of the generals changed.

古文：监军哭曰： 果落李祐奸计！ 
现代文：监军哭着说； 果然中了李的奸计了！ 
English: The overseer cried and said, "Li's trick has really worked!

古文：时大风雪，旌旗裂，人马冻死者相望。
现代文：当时，风雪大作，旗帜破裂，冻死的战士与马匹到处可见。
English: At that time, there was a lot of wind and snow, flags broke, and soldiers and horses that had frozen to death could be seen everywhere.

古文：天阴黑，自张柴村以东道路，皆官军所未尝行，人人自以为必死，然畏愬，莫敢违。
现代文：加之，天色阴暗，由张柴村往东去的道路，都是官军从来没有走过的，人人都暗自以为肯定活不成了。但是，他们畏惧李，不敢违抗命令。
English: In addition, the sky was gloomy, and the road from Zhangchai Village to the east had never been traveled by the government army. Everyone secretly thought that they would definitely not survive. However, they were afraid of Li and did not dare to disobey orders.

古文：夜半，雪愈甚，行七十里，至州城。
现代文：到了半夜，雪下得更大了。官军走了七十里路，来到蔡州城下。
English: In the middle of the night, the snow became heavier. The government army marched seventy miles and arrived at the foot of the city of Caizhou.

古文：近城有鹅鸭池，愬令惊之以混军声。
现代文：靠近城边有一处喂养鹅鸭的池塘，李命令哄打鹅鸭，以便遮掩军队行走的声音。
English: Near the city there was a pond for feeding geese and ducks, and Li ordered the geese and ducks to be beaten so as to cover the sound of the army marching.

古文：自吴少诚拒命，官军不至蔡州城下三十馀年，故蔡人不为备。
现代文：自从吴少诚抗拒朝命，官军不到蔡州城下已经有三十多年，所以蔡州人没有防备。
English: Since Wu Shao-cheng resisted the imperial order, it has been more than 30 years since the imperial army came to the city of Caizhou, so the people of Caizhou were unprepared.

古文：壬申，四鼓，愬至城下，无一人知者。
现代文：壬申，四更时，李来到蔡州城下，敌军无人知晓。
English: At the time of Jinshin and the Fourth Turning, Li came to the castle town of Caizhou. No one knew about the enemy army.

古文：李愬、李忠义其城为坎以先登，壮士从之。
现代文：李和李忠义用锄头在城墙上掘出坑坎，率先登城，强壮的士兵便跟在他们身后。
English: Li and Li Zhongyi used hoes to dig a trench in the city wall and were the first to enter the city. Strong soldiers followed them.

古文：守门卒方熟寐，尽杀之，而留击柝者，使击柝如故，遂开门纳众。
现代文：看守蔡州城门的士兵正在熟睡，李等人将他们全部杀掉，只将巡夜打更的人留了下来，让他依然如故地去敲打木梆。于是，李等人打开城门，让大家进去。
English: The soldiers guarding the city gate of Caizhou were fast asleep. Li and the others killed them all, leaving only the night watchman to knock on the wooden lintel. So, Li and the others opened the city gate and let everyone in.

古文：及里城，亦然，城中皆不之觉。
现代文：来到内城时，也是采用这种办法，城中的人们都没有发觉官军。
English: When they came to the inner city, they also used this method, and the people in the city did not notice the government troops.

古文：鸡鸣，雪止，愬入居元济外宅。
现代文：鸡叫时，雪停，这时李已经进入吴元济的外宅。
English: When the rooster crows, the snow stops, by which time Li has already entered Wu Yuanji's outhouse.

古文：或告元济曰： 官军至矣！ 
现代文：有人向吴元济报告说： 官军到啦！ 
English: Someone reported to Wu Yuanji: The government army has arrived!

古文：元济尚寝，笑曰： 俘囚为盗耳！
现代文：吴元济还在躺着，笑着说： 不过是被俘的囚徒在做盗窃行径罢了！
English: Wu Yuanji was still lying down, smiling and saying, "It's just that the captured prisoners are committing theft!"

古文：晓当尽戮之。 
现代文：天亮后我会把他们都杀了。 
English: I'll kill them all after dawn.

古文：又有告者曰： 城陷矣！ 
现代文：又有前来报告的人说： 州城陷落啦！ 
English: Someone else came to report: "The state capital has fallen!"

古文：元济曰： 此必洄曲子弟就吾求寒衣也。 
现代文：吴元济说： 这肯定是洄曲的后生们到我这里来要求发放冬季服装的。 
English: Wu Yuanji said, "This must be the descendants of Gongqu coming to me to ask for winter clothing.

古文：起，听于廷，闻愬军号令曰： 常侍传语！ 
现代文：他站起身来，走到院子中向外聆听，听到李军在发布号令说： 常侍传话。 
English: He stood up, walked to the courtyard and listened outside. He heard Li Jun issuing a command: "Standing attendant, pass the word."

古文：应者近万人。
现代文：响应号令的有将近一万人。
English: Almost ten thousand people responded to the call.

古文：元济始惧，曰： 何等常侍，能至于此！ 
现代文：吴元济这才害怕地说： 这是个什么样的常侍，竟能够到此地来呢！ 
English: Wu Yuanji was afraid and said, "What kind of attendant is he that he can come here?"

古文：乃帅左右登牙城拒战。
现代文：于是，吴元济率领亲信，登上牙城，抵御官军。
English: As a result, Wu Yuanji led his cronies and ascended the citadel to resist the government army.

古文：时董重质拥精兵万馀人据洄曲。
现代文：当时，董重质拥有精锐兵马一万多人，占据着洄曲。
English: At that time, Dong Juxi had more than ten thousand elite soldiers and horses, occupying Xingqu.

古文：愬曰： 元济所望者，重质之救耳。 
现代文：李说： 吴元济盼望的事情，只是董重质前来援救而已！ 
English: Li said: What Wu Yuanji was looking forward to was just Dong Chongqing coming to the rescue!

古文：乃访重质家，厚抚之，遣其子传道持书谕重质。重质遂单骑诣愬降。
现代文：于是，李寻找到董重质的家人，深深地抚慰他们，派遣他的儿子董传道带着书信前去规劝董重质，董重质便单人匹马前往李处投降。
English: As a result, Li Xun found the family of Dong Chongqing, deeply comforted them, and sent his son Dong Chuandao with a letter to persuade Dong Chongqing. Dong Chongqing then went alone to Li's place to surrender.

古文：愬遣李进诚攻牙城，毁其外门，得甲库，取其器械。
现代文：李愬派遣李进诚攻打牙城，毁去牙城的外门，得到了兵甲仓库，取出了军用器具。
English: Li Yu sent Li Jinsheng to attack Yecheng, destroyed the outer gate of Yecheng, got the armor warehouse, and took out the military equipment.

古文：癸酉，复攻之，烧其南门，民争负薪刍助之，城上矢如胃毛。
现代文：癸酉，李进诚再次攻打牙城，火烧牙城的南门，百姓争着背来柴草帮助官军，射向城上的箭象刺猥毛一样密集。
English: Suddenly, Li Jincheng attacked Fangcheng again, the south gate of Fangcheng was set on fire, the people scrambled to bring firewood to help the government army, and the arrows shot at the city were as dense as thorns.

古文：晡时，门坏，元济于城上请罪，进诚梯而下之。
现代文：到了申时，城门毁环了，吴元济在城上请罪，李进诚用梯子将他接了下来。
English: When he arrived at Shin, the city gate was destroyed. Wu Yuanji pleaded guilty on the city, and Li Jincheng picked him up with a ladder.

古文：甲戌，愬以槛车送元济诣京师，且告于裴度。
现代文：甲戌，李用囚车将吴元济送往京城，并且向裴度作了报告。
English: Lee sent Wu Yuanji to Beijing in a prison van and reported to Pei Du.

古文：是日，申、光二州及诸镇兵二万馀人相继来降。
现代文：这一天，申、光二州以及各城镇军两万多人相继前来归降。
English: On this day, more than twenty thousand people from Shen, Guang and two states, as well as various town armies, came to surrender one after another.

古文：自元济就擒，愬不戮一人，凡元济官吏、帐下、厨厩之卒，皆复其职，使之不疑，然后屯于鞠场以待裴度。
现代文：自从吴元济被擒获后，李没有杀戮任何一人。凡是吴元济的官吏及帐下、厨房、马厩的士兵，李一概恢复他们的职事，使他们没有疑虑。然后，李便在鞠球场上驻屯兵马，等候裴度前来。
English: Since Wu Yuanji was captured, Li did not kill anyone. All the officials of Wu Yuanji and the soldiers under the account, the kitchen and the stables, Li resumed their duties, so that they had no doubts. Then, Li stationed soldiers and horses on the ball court to wait for Pei Du to come.

古文：以淮南节度使李鄘为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：宪宗任命淮南节度使李为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Xianzong appointed Huainan Jiedu to make Li a subordinate attendant and a peer.

古文：己卯，淮西行营奏获吴元济，光禄少卿杨元卿言于上曰： 淮西大有珍宝，臣能知之，往取必得。 
现代文：己卯，淮西行营奏称俘获了吴元济。光禄少卿杨元卿向宪宗进言说： 淮西有许多珍宝，我知道它们，让我前去寻取，一定能够得到。 
English: Yang Yuanqing, Guanglu Shaoqing, said to Xianzong: Huaxi has many treasures, I know them, let me go and find them, I will definitely get them.

古文：上曰： 朕讨淮西，为人除害，珍宝非所求也。
现代文：宪宗说： 朕讨伐淮西，是为民除害，朕并不要在那里寻求珍宝啊。 
English: Xianzong said, "I'm fighting against Huaxi to eliminate harm to the people. I don't want to look for treasures there.

古文：董重质之去洄曲军也，李光颜驰入其壁，悉降其众。
现代文：董重质离开洄曲军后，李光颜奔进他的营垒，将他的兵马全部招降。
English: After Dong Juxi left the Qiang Army, Li Guangyan rushed into his camp and ordered all his soldiers and horses to surrender.

古文：庚辰，裴度遣马总先入蔡州慰抚。
现代文：庚辰，裴度派遣马总率先进入蔡州抚慰将士。
English: Geng Chen and Pei Du sent General Ma to take the lead in entering Caizhou to comfort the soldiers.

古文：辛巳，度建彰义军节，将降卒万馀人入城，李愬具橐鞬出迎，拜于路左。
现代文：辛巳，裴度手执彰义军的符节，带领投降的士兵一万多人进入蔡州城，李全副武装，出来迎接，在道路左侧向裴度行礼。
English: Soon after, Pei Du held up the symbol of the rebel army and led more than 10,000 surrendered soldiers into Caizhou City. Li, fully armed, came out to greet and salute Pei Du on the left side of the road.

古文：度将避之，愬曰： 蔡人顽悖，不识上下之分，数十年矣。愿公因而示之，使知朝廷之尊。 
现代文：裴度准备避开李的拜礼，李说： 蔡州人愚妄悖逆，不懂得长官与下属的名分，已经有几十年了，希望您就此显示给他们，使他们知道朝廷的尊严。 
English: Pei Du prepared to avoid Li's prayer. Li said, "The people of Caizhou are foolish and rebellious. They do not know the difference between a superior and a subordinate. This has been going on for decades. I hope you can show them this and let them know the dignity of the imperial court."

古文：度乃受之。
现代文：于是，裴度接受了拜礼。
English: Pei Du accepted Li Yao's greeting.

古文：李愬还军文城，诸将请曰： 始公败于郎山而不忧，胜于吴房而不取，冒大风甚雪而不止，孤军深入而不惧，然卒以成功，皆众人所不谕也，敢问其故？ 
现代文：李返回文城栅驻扎。各位将领请教说： 起初，您在朗山战败了，但并不发愁；在吴房取胜了，但并不夺取吴房；冒着大风暴雪，但并不肯停止行军；带着孤立无援的军队深入敌境，但并不畏惧。然而，您终于因此获得成功，这都是大家所不明白的，请让我们冒昧地询问其中的原由。 
English: Li returned to Wenchengzha and stationed there. The generals asked: At first, you were defeated at Langshan, but you did not worry; you won at Wufang, but you did not take Wufang; you braved a big snowstorm, but you did not want to stop marching; you went deep into the enemy territory with a helpless army, but you were not afraid. However, you finally succeeded because of this, which is not understood by everyone, so please let us take the liberty to ask why.

古文：愬曰： 朗山不利，则贼轻我而不为备矣。
现代文：李说： 朗山失利，敌人便轻视我们，因而不作防备了。
English: Li said, "After the defeat of Langshan, the enemy despised us and did not take precautions.

古文：取吴房，则其众奔蔡，并力固守，故存之以分其兵。
现代文：夺取吴房，吴房的人马便要逃奔蔡州，合力坚守，所以我将吴房留下来，以便分散敌人的兵力。
English: If Wu Fang is captured, the people of Wu Fang will flee to Caizhou and work together to hold on, so I will leave Wu Fang behind in order to disperse the enemy's forces.

古文：风雪阴晦，则烽火不接，不知吾至。
现代文：急风暴雪，天色昏暗，便不能够用烽火取得联系，敌人就不会知道我们已经到来。
English: If there's a blizzard and it's dark, we won't be able to make contact with the campfire, and the enemy won't know we've arrived.

古文：孤军深入，则入皆致死，战自倍矣。
现代文：孤立无援的军队深入敌境，人们便都献身效死，打起仗来自然就会加倍出力。
English: When a lone army goes deep into the enemy's territory, people will sacrifice their lives, and when war breaks out, they will naturally redouble their efforts.

古文：夫视元者不顾近，虑大者不计细，若矜小胜，恤小败，先自挠矣，何暇立功乎！ 
现代文：一般说来，眺望远处的人不必顾及近处，计虑大事的人不必知悉细事。倘若夸耀小小的胜利，顾惜小小的失败，首先就把自己搅乱了，哪里还有余暇去建立功劳呢！ 
English: Generally speaking, those who look into the distance do not need to pay attention to the near, and those who think about the big things do not need to know the details. If you boast of small victories and cherish small failures, you will first disturb yourself, and there will be no spare time to build credit!

古文：众皆服。
现代文：大家都服气了。
English: Everyone was convinced.

古文：愬俭于奉己而丰于待士，知贤不疑，见可能断，此其所以成功也。
现代文：李生活节俭，但对将士的供养却是丰厚的；他了解到一个人是贤能的，就不对他疑心；他见到可以实行的事，便能做出决断；这就是他获得成功的原由。
English: Li lived frugally, but provided generously for his soldiers; when he knew a man was capable, he did not doubt him; when he saw something that could be done, he was able to make a decision; this was the reason for his success.

古文：裴度以蔡卒为牙兵，或谏曰： 蔡人反仄者尚多，不可不备。 
现代文：裴度任用蔡州的士卒为牙兵，有人规劝他说： 蔡州人中间反复不定的人为数还很多，不能不加以防备。 
English: Pei Du appointed a soldier from Caizhou to be his tooth soldier. Someone advised him: "There are still a lot of people in Caizhou who are uncertain, and we must be prepared.

古文：度笑曰： 吾为彰义节度使，元恶既擒，蔡人则吾人也，又何疑焉！ 
现代文：裴度笑着说： 我是彰义节度使，首恶已被擒获，蔡州人就是我的人啊，又有什么可怀疑的呢！ 
English: Pei Du said with a smile, "I am an envoy of the Zhangyi Festival, the chief villain has been captured, the people of Caizhou are my people, what is there to doubt?"

古文：蔡人闻之感泣。
现代文：蔡州人得知此言，感动得哭了。
English: When the people of Caizhou heard this, they were moved to tears.

古文：先是吴氏父子阻兵，禁人偶语于涂，夜不然烛，有以酒食相过从者罪死。
现代文：在此之前，吴少阳、吴元济父子拥兵淮西，禁止人们在道路上相对私语，不许在夜间点燃灯烛，若有人以酒饭相互往来，便要处以死罪。
English: Prior to this, Wu Shaoyang and Wu Yuanji, the father and son of Huaxi soldiers, forbade people to whisper to each other on the road, not to light candles at night, and if someone interacted with wine and rice, they would be sentenced to death.

古文：度既视事，下令惟禁盗贼斗杀，馀皆不问，往来者不限昼夜，蔡人始知有生民之乐。
现代文：裴度任职以后，下达命令，只须禁止盗窃，其余一概不加过问，人们相互往来，没有白天黑夜的限制，蔡州人初次感到了做百姓的快乐。
English: After Peidu took office, he issued an order that only the theft had to be prohibited, and the rest was not questioned at all. People interacted with each other without restrictions during the day and night. For the first time, the people of Caizhou felt the joy of being a commoner.

古文：甲申，诏韩弘、裴度条列平蔡将士功状及蔡之将士降者，皆差第以闻。
现代文：甲申，宪宗颁诏命令韩弘与裴度逐条罗列平定蔡州将士的立功情况，以及归降了的蔡州将士的情况，一概区别等级，上报朝廷。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict ordering Han Hong and Pei Du to list the achievements of the soldiers who conquered Caizhou and the soldiers who surrendered to Caizhou one by one, and report them to the imperial court according to their ranks.

古文：淮西州县百姓，给复二年；近贼四州，免来年夏税。
现代文：淮西各州县百姓，免除赋役两年。邻近淮西的陈、许、颍、唐四州，免去下一年的夏税。
English: The people of all prefectures and counties in Huaxi are exempt from forced labor for two years. The four prefectures of Chen, Xu, Handan and Tang, which are close to Huaxi, are exempt from the next year's summer tax.

古文：官军战亡者，皆为收葬，给其家衣粮五年；其因战伤残废者，勿停衣粮。
现代文：阵亡的官军，一概予以收殓安葬，向他们的家属供应五年的衣服与口粮。那些由于作战受伤而残废的官军，不可停止衣服口粮的供应。
English: The government troops killed in battle shall all be collected and buried, and their families shall be provided with five years of clothing and rations. Those government troops who are disabled due to combat injuries shall not stop the supply of clothing rations.

古文：十一月，丙戌朔，上御兴安门受俘，遂以吴元济献庙社，斩于独柳之下。
现代文：十一月，宪宗驾临兴安门，接受战俘，便以吴元济献祭宗庙社稷，将他在独柳下斩杀。
English: In November, when Emperor Xianzong arrived at the Xing'an Gate to receive prisoners of war, he used Wu Yuanji as a sacrificial offering to the patriarchal temple and shrine, and had him beheaded under the willow tree.

古文：初，淮西之人劫于李希烈、吴少诚之威虐，不能自拔，久而老者衰，幼者壮，安于悖逆，不复知有朝廷矣。
现代文：当初，淮西百姓遭受李希烈与吴少诚威压虐待，无法从中摆脱出来，时间久了，老一辈的人们衰弱下去了，少一辈的人们强壮起来了，他们在悖乱忤逆的环境中心安理得，不知道还有朝廷在上了。
English: At the beginning, the people of Huaxi were subjected to the pressure and abuse of Li Xilai and Wu Shao Cheng Wei, and they could not get out of it. After a long time, the people of the older generation weakened, and the people of the younger generation became strong. They were in the center of the turbulent and rebellious environment, and they did not know that the imperial court was on top.

古文：自少诚以来，遣诸将出兵，皆不束以法制，听各以便宜自战，故人人得尽其才。
现代文：从吴少诚以来，派遣诸将领外出打仗，一概不用法令制度约束他们，听任他们见机行事，各自为战，所以各将领得以人尽其才。
English: Since Wu Shaocheng, generals have been sent out to fight wars without being bound by the legal system. They are allowed to act as they see fit and fight independently, so that each general can do his best.

古文：韩全义之败于溵水也，于其帐中得朝贵所与问讯书，少诚束而示众曰： 此皆公卿属全义书，云破蔡州日，乞一将士妻女为婢妾。 
现代文：韩全义在水战败时，淮西军在韩全义的营帐中得到朝廷权贵写给他的相互问候的书信，吴少诚将书信捆成一束，呈示在大家面前说： 这些都是公卿们嘱托韩全义的书信，说是在打破蔡州时，要得到一位将士的妻子或女儿作为婢女姬妾。 
English: When Han Chuan-yi was defeated in the water battle, the Huaixi army received letters of greetings from the imperial dignitaries in the camp of Han Chuan-yi. Wu Shao-cheng bundled the letters into a bundle and presented them in front of everyone, saying: These are letters from the nobles entrusting Han Chuan-yi, saying that when breaking Caizhou, they want to get a soldier's wife or daughter as a maid.

古文：由是众皆愤怒，以死为贼用。
现代文：因此，大家都心怀愤怒，誓死为叛军效力。
English: As a result, everyone is furious and vows to die for the rebels.

古文：虽居中士，其风俗犷戾，过于夷貊。
现代文：虽然蔡州地居中原，但民间的风尚猛悍暴戾超过了异族。
English: Although Caizhou is located in the Central Plains, the folk style of fierce violence surpasses that of foreigners.

古文：故以三州之众，举天下之兵环而攻之，四年然后克之。
现代文：所以，吴元济凭着蔡、光、申三州人众作乱，朝廷发动全国的兵力将他包围起来，四面攻打，经过四年时间才将他制服。
English: Therefore, Wu Yuanji, with the help of Cai, Guang and Shen, caused turmoil among the people of the three states, and the imperial court launched a nationwide military force to surround him and attack him on all sides. It took four years to subdue him.

古文：官军之攻元济也，李师道募人通使于蔡，察其形势，牙前虞候刘晏平应募，出汴、宋间，潜行至蔡。
现代文：官军准备攻克吴元济时，李师道召募人员出使蔡州，察看蔡州的发展趋势，牙前虞候刘晏平响应召募，取道汴州与宋州之间，暗中来到蔡州。
English: When the government army was preparing to conquer Wuyuanji, Li Shidao sent recruiters to Caizhou to observe the development trend of Caizhou. Liu Yuping, who had been summoned by Liu Shidao, took the road between Caizhou and Songzhou and secretly came to Caizhou.

古文：元济大喜，厚礼而遣之。
现代文：吴元济非常高兴，以丰厚的礼物打发他回返郓州。
English: Wu Yuanji was very pleased and sent him back to Zhangzhou with a generous gift.

古文：晏平还至郓，师道屏人而问之，晏平曰： 元济暴兵数万于外，阽危如此，而日与仆妾游戏博奕于内，晏然曾无忧色。
现代文：刘晏平回到郓州后，李师道屏退周围的人们，向他询问蔡州的情形，刘晏平说： 吴元济将数万兵众暴露在外，面临如此危难的局面，却天天与仆从姬妾在内游戏下棋，安闲佚乐，没有一点忧愁的神色。
English: After Liu Bingping returned to Chuzhou, Li Shizhi asked him about the situation in Caizhou by way of asking the people around him. Liu Bingping said: Wu Yuanji exposed tens of thousands of soldiers to the outside world and faced such a dangerous situation, but he played chess with his servants and concubines every day. He was relaxed and happy, and did not look sad at all.

古文：以愚观之，殆必亡，不久矣！ 
现代文：在我看来，吴元济必定要灭亡，时间不会太长了！ 
English: In my opinion, Wu Yuanji must perish, the time is not too long!

古文：师道素倚淮西为援，闻之惊怒，寻诬以他过，杖杀之。
现代文：李师道平时依靠淮西作为救援的力量，听了这一席话，又吃惊，又恼怒。
English: Li Shidao usually relies on Huaxi as a rescue force. Hearing this, he was both surprised and angry.

古文：戊子，以李愬为山南东道节度使，赐爵凉国公；加韩弘兼侍中；李光颜、乌重胤等各迁官有差。
现代文：不久，李师道诬称刘晏平犯了别的过失，将他杖打而死。戊子，宪宗任命李为山南东道节度使，赐给凉国公的爵位，加封韩弘兼侍中，对李光颜、乌重胤等人也分别晋升官职各有等次。
English: Soon after, Li Shidao falsely accused Liu Yuping of committing other faults and beat him to death with a cane. In response, Emperor Xianzong appointed Li as the host of the Shannan Festival and gave him the title of Duke of Liang Province. He also appointed Han Hong as an attendant. Li Guangyan and Wu Shigetian were also promoted to different ranks.

古文：旧制，御史二人知驿。
现代文：以往的制度规定，应当以两名监察御史掌管驿站。
English: According to the previous system, two supervisors should be in charge of the station.

古文：壬辰，诏以宦者为馆驿使。
现代文：壬辰，宪宗颁诏任命宦官为馆驿使。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Gensong issued an edict appointing the eunuch as the imperial envoy.

古文：左补阙裴潾谏曰： 内臣外事，职分各殊，切在塞侵官之源，绝出位之渐。
现代文：左补阙裴进谏说： 内廷的臣属和外朝的事务，职事与名分各不相同。要紧的是应该堵塞侵犯职守的根源，杜绝越出官位的苗头。
English: Zuo Shu'an Pei Jinqi said: The duties and titles of the subjects of the Inner Court and the affairs of the Outer Court are different. What is important is to block the root cause of the violation of duties and prevent the emergence of official positions.

古文：事有不便，必戒于初；令或有妨，不必在大。 
现代文：遇有办理失宜的事情，一定要在最初便引起警惕；如果颁布的命令有所妨碍，不一定非要事关重大才予以纠正。 
English: In the case of improper handling, vigilance must be aroused at the very beginning; if there is an obstacle to the promulgation of the order, it is not necessary for the matter to be important to correct it.

古文：上不听。
现代文：宪宗不肯听从。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：甲午，恩王连薨。
现代文：甲午，恩王李连去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, King En-Wang Lilian passed away.

古文：辛丑，以唐、随兵马使李祐为神武将军，知军事。
现代文：辛丑，宪宗任唐、随兵马使李为神武将军，执掌军中事务。
English: Sin Ug, Kenzong was appointed to Tang, accompanied by soldiers and horses to make Li the general of Shenwu, in charge of the affairs of the army.

古文：裴度以马总为彰义留兵。
现代文：裴度让马总担任彰义留后。
English: Baidu let Ma Zong serve as the leader of Zhangyi.

古文：癸丑，发蔡州。
现代文：癸丑，裴度从蔡州出发。
English: 丑,裴度 departed from Caizhou.

古文：上封二剑以授梁守谦，使诛吴元济旧将。
现代文：宪宗将两把宝剑赐给梁守谦，让他去诛杀吴元济往日的将领。
English: Emperor Xianzong gave two swords to Liang Shouqian to fight and kill the former generals of Wu Yuanji.

古文：度至郾城，遇之，复与俱入蔡州，量罪施刑，不尽如诏旨，仍上疏言之。
现代文：裴度来到郾城时，遇到了梁守谦，便又与梁守谦一起进入蔡州。他酌量罪情，施以刑罚，并没有完全执行诏书的旨意，还进献奏疏陈述自己的处理意见。
English: When Baidu came to Lucheng, he met Liang Shouqian, and then went to Caizhou with Liang Shouqian. He weighed the crime, imposed a penalty, did not fully implement the will of the edict, and also submitted a report to state his handling opinions.

古文：十二月，壬戌，赐裴度爵晋国公，复入知政事。以马总为淮西节度使。
现代文：十二月，壬戌，宪宗赐给裴度晋国公的爵位，让他再入朝执掌朝廷政务，任命马总为淮西节度使。
English: In December, Emperor Xuanzong gave Pei Du Jin the title of Duke of Guozhuang, let him re-enter the imperial court to take charge of the affairs of state, and appointed Ma Chong as the Huaxi Festival envoy.

古文：初，吐突承璀方贵宠用事，为淮南监军。
现代文：当初，吐突承璀正身居显贵，得宠握权，担任了淮南监军。
English: At first, Tu Tu Chengyu was a high-ranking official who was favored with power and served as the supervisor of the South Huaihai army.

古文：李鄘为节度使，性刚严，与承璀互相敬惮，故未尝相失。
现代文：李是淮南节度使，性情刚正严峻，与吐突承璀互相敬畏，所以不曾相互失和。
English: Li was the governor of Huainan Province. He was a stern and stern character, and he and Tu Juncheng were in awe of each other, so they never lost each other.

古文：承璀归，引鄘为相。
现代文：吐突承璀回朝后，便引荐李出任宰相。
English: After he returned to the imperial court, he recommended Li Rong as prime minister.

古文：鄘耻由宦官进，及将佐出祖，乐作，鄘泣下曰： 吾老安外镇，宰相非吾任也！ 
现代文：李以通过宦官升官为耻辱，及至将领们为他饯行送别，音乐奏起时，李落着眼泪说： 我老了，已经安心在外面的军镇上任职了，宰相可不是我所能胜任的啊！ 
English: When the music started, Li shed tears and said, "I'm old, I've been reassured to serve in the military town outside, but I'm not qualified to be prime minister!"

古文：戊寅，鄘至京师，辞疾，不入见，不视事，百官到门，皆辞不见。
现代文：戊寅，李来到京城，上报有病，不去入朝晋见，不肯任职办事，百官到家中看望他，他一概推辞，不肯接见。
English: Wu Yin, Li came to Beijing, reported that he was ill, did not go to see the Emperor, refused to work, hundreds of officials came to visit him at home, he refused to see them.

古文：庚辰，贬淮西降将董重质为春州司户。
现代文：庚辰，宪宗将淮西的投诚将领董重质贬为春州司户。
English: Geng Chen and Xianzong reduced the cast-in general of Huaxi to the chancellor of Chunzhou.

古文：重质为吴元济谋主，屡破官军。上欲杀之，李愬奏先许重质以不死。
现代文：董重质是吴元济的主谋人，屡次打败官军，宪宗打算将他杀掉，李奏称他事先已经应许董重质不会将他处死。
English: Dong Chong Chieh was the mastermind of Wu Yuanji, repeatedly defeated the government army, and Emperor Xuanzong planned to kill him. Li Soo said that he had promised Dong Chong Chieh in advance that he would not be executed.

古文：元和十三年戊戌，公元八一八年
现代文：元和十三年春季正月，乙酉朔，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Yuan and the first month of the year, the general amnesty began.

古文：春，正月，乙酉朔，赦天下。初，李师道谋逆命，判官高沐与同僚郭日户、李公度屡谏之。
现代文：当初，李师道策划叛逆时，判官高沐与同僚郭、李公度屡次劝阻他。
English: At first, when Li Shidao was planning to rebel, the judge Gao Mu and his colleagues Guo and Li Gongdu repeatedly dissuaded him.

古文：判官李文会、孔目官林英素为师道所亲信，涕泣言于师道曰： 文会等尽诚为尚书忧家事，反为高沐等所疾，尚书奈何不忧十二州之土地，以成沐等之功名乎！ 
现代文：判官李文会与孔目官林英平时为李师道所亲近信任，他们哭泣着向李师道进言说： 我等竭尽心力为您操持家中事务，反而遭到高沐等人的忌恨，您怎么能够不爱惜淄青的十二州土地，反而要成就高沐等人的功劳与名声呢！ 
English: Judge Li Wenhui and Confucian official Lin Yingping used to be close to and trust Li Shidao, and they wept and said to Li Shidao: We tried our best to manage the affairs of our home for you, but were hated by Gao Mu and others. How can you not cherish the verdant land of the twelve states, but want to achieve the merits and fame of Gao Mu and others?

古文：师道由是疏沐等，出沐知莱州。
现代文：从此，李师道便疏远了高沐等人，还斥逐高沐前去代理莱州事务。
English: From then on, Li Shidao alienated Gao Mu and others, and also expelled Gao Mu to go to represent the affairs of Laizhou.

古文：会林英入奏事，令进奏吏密申师道云： 沐潜输款于朝廷。 
现代文：适值林英入朝奏报事情，便让呈进奏疏的吏人暗中报告李师道说： 高沐偷偷地向朝廷表示诚意。 
English: When Lin Ying entered the imperial court to report the matter, he had the officials who were not familiar with reporting secretly report to Li Shidao that: Gao Mu secretly expressed his sincerity to the imperial court.

古文：文会从而构之，师道杀沐，并囚郭日户，凡军中劝师道效顺者，文会皆指为高沐之党而囚之。
现代文：李文会借此设计陷害高沐，于是李师道便杀死高沐，并且囚禁了郭，凡是劝说李师道投诚的军中将领，李文会一概将他们指斥为高沐的同伙，将他们囚禁起来。
English: Li Wen would use this design to frame Gao Mu, so Li Shidao killed Gao Mu and imprisoned Guo. Any generals who persuaded Li Shidao to surrender would be denounced by Li Wen as Gao Mu's accomplices and imprisoned.

古文：及淮西平，师道忧惧，不知所为。
现代文：及至淮西平定后，李师道既担忧，又恐惧，不知道应该怎样应付。
English: After Huaxi was pacified, Li Shidao was both worried and afraid, and did not know how to deal with it.

古文：师道从之，遣使奉表，请使长子入侍，并献沂、密、海三州。
现代文：李公度以及牙将李英昙乘着李师道内心恐惧来劝说他，让他向朝廷交纳人质、进献土地，以此赎罪。
English: Li Gongdu and the chief dentist Li Yingtao took advantage of Li Shidao's inner fear to persuade him to atone for his sins by giving hostages and land to the imperial court.

古文：上许之。乙巳，遣左常侍李逊诣郓州宣慰。上命六军修麟德殿。
现代文：李师道听从了他们的意见，派遣使者上表，请求让他的长子入朝侍卫，并且献出沂、密、海三州，宪宗应允了他的请求，乙巳，宪宗派遣左常侍李逊前往郓州安抚将士。宪宗命令六军整饰麟德殿。
English: Li Shidao listened to their advice and sent an envoy to the emperor, requesting that his eldest son be allowed to join the imperial bodyguard, and to offer the three states of Qi, Mi, and Hai. Xianzong agreed to his request. At this time, Xianzong sent the left attendant Li Xun to Quzhou to pacify the soldiers. Xianzong ordered the six armies to decorate the Lin De Hall.

古文：右龙武统军张奉国、大将军李文悦以外寇初平，营缮太多，白宰相，冀有论谏。
现代文：右龙武统军张奉国与大将军李文悦认为淮西刚刚平定，修建工程太多，便禀告宰相，希望宰相能够陈论劝阻。
English: Zhang Fengguo and General Li Wenyue of the Right Dragon Military Unification Army thought that Huaixi had just been pacified and that there were too many construction projects, so they wrote to the prime minister, hoping that the prime minister could dissuade them.

古文：裴度因奏事言之。
现代文：裴度因而在奏报事情时讲到了这一问题，宪宗大怒。
English: As a result, Pei Du mentioned this problem when reporting the matter, which enraged Emperor Xianzong.

古文：上怒，二月，丁卯，以奉国为鸿胪卿，壬申，以文悦为右武卫大将军，充威远营使。
现代文：二月，丁卯，宪宗任命张奉国为鸿胪卿。壬申，任命李文悦为右武卫大将军，充任威远营使。
English: In February, Dingwu, Xianzong appointed Zhang Fengguo as Hongyuqing. In Jinshin, Li Wenyue was appointed as Ubuwei General and served as Weiyuan Envoy.

古文：于是浚龙首池，起承晖殿，土木浸兴矣。
现代文：于是，疏浚龙首池、兴建承晖殿，土木工程逐渐兴起了。
English: As a result, civil engineering projects gradually emerged, such as the dredging of Longshou Pond and the construction of Chengyuan Hall.

古文：李愬奏请判官、大将以下官凡百五十员，上不悦，谓裴度曰： 李愬诚有奇功，然奏请过多。
现代文：李愬上奏请求朝廷任命判官、大将以下的官员计有一百五十员，宪宗不甚高兴，便对裴度说： 李诚然立下了奇功，但上奏请求任命的官员太多了。
English: There were a total of one hundred and fifty officials, including judges, generals, and lower-ranking officials, who were requested to be appointed by the Imperial Court. The Constitutional Court was not very happy, and said to Pei Du: Li Cheng Rong did a wonderful job, but there were too many officials requested to be appointed by the Imperial Court.

古文：使如李晟、浑瑊，又何如哉！ 
现代文：假使他立下李晟、浑那样的功劳，又该怎么办呢！ 
English: Supposing he were to do such a great service as Li Xi and Hun, what should he do?

古文：遂留中不下。
现代文：于是，宪宗将李的奏疏留在禁中，不再下达。
English: As a result, Emperor Gensong placed Li's rendition under suspension and did not issue it again.

古文：李鄘固辞相位，戊戌，以鄘为户部尚书。以御史大夫李夷简为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：李鄘坚决推辞宰相的职位，戊戌，宪宗任命李为户部尚书，任命御史大夫李夷简为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Li Xi resolutely resigned from the post of prime minister, Wu Xi, and Xianzong appointed Li as the head of the household, and appointed the chief historian Li Yijian as a subordinate attendant and a peer.

古文：初，渤海僖王言义卒，弟简王明忠立，改元太始；一岁卒，从父仁秀立，改元建兴。
现代文：当初，渤海僖王大言义去世，他的弟弟简王大明忠即位，更改年号为太始。大明忠在位一年便去世了，他的叔父大仁秀即位，更改年号为建兴。
English: At first, King Dagonyi of the Bohai Kingdom died, and his younger brother King Damingzhong ascended the throne, changing the era name to Taizhi. Damingzhong died after one year on the throne, and his uncle King Jinxiu ascended the throne, changing the era name to Jianxing.

古文：乙巳，遣使来告丧。
现代文：乙巳，大仁秀派遣使者前来通报丧事。
English: At that moment, the emperor sent an envoy to announce the funeral.

古文：横海节度使程权自以世袭沧景，与河朔三镇无殊，内不自安。
现代文：横海节度使程权认为自己世代承袭沧景节度使的职务，与河朔三镇没有区别，内心感到不安。
English: Henghai Festival Commissioner Cheng Quan felt uneasy that he was inheriting the position of the Cangjing Festival Commissioner from generation to generation, and there was no difference between him and the three towns in Hexuo.

古文：己酉，遣使上表，请举族入朝，许之。
现代文：己酉，程权派遣使者上表，请求全家族入京朝见，宪宗答应了他的请求。
English: Ji Xuan and Cheng Quan sent an envoy to the emperor, requesting the whole family to visit the imperial court in Beijing. Emperor Xianzong agreed to his request.

古文：横海将士乐自擅，不听权去，掌书记林蕴谕以祸福，权乃得出。
现代文：横海将士喜欢自占一方，不肯让程权离去，掌书记林蕴向大家讲明祸福的道理，程权才得以离开横海。
English: The soldiers of Henghai liked to occupy their own side, and did not want to let Cheng Quan leave. The secretary Lin Yun explained the truth of misfortune and good fortune to everyone, and Cheng Quan was able to leave Henghai.

古文：诏以蕴为礼部员外郎。
现代文：宪宗颁诏任命林蕴为礼部员外郎。
English: Emperor Gensong issued an imperial edict appointing Lin Yun as a member of the ritual department.

古文：裴度之在淮西也，布衣柏耆以策干韩愈曰： 吴元济既就擒，王承宗破胆矣，愿得奉丞相书往说之，可不烦兵而服。 
现代文：裴度坐镇淮西时，平民柏耆向韩愈献计说： 吴元济被擒获后，王承宗吓破了胆。我希望携带裴丞相的书信前去劝说他，可以不用烦劳兵马便使他归服。 
English: When Pei Du was in Huaxi Town, the commoner Baojun offered a plan to Han Yu, saying: After Wu Yuanji was captured, Wang Chengzong was scared. I hope to carry the letter from Pei Du to persuade him, and I can make him submit without bothering soldiers and horses.

古文：愈白度，为书遣之。
现代文：韩愈禀告了裴度，裴度便写了书信，让他前往。
English: Han Yu denounced Pei Du, and Pei Du wrote a letter asking him to leave.

古文：承宗惧，求哀于田弘正，请以二子为质，及献德、棣二州，输租税，请官史。
现代文：王承宗害怕，向田弘正乞怜，请求以两个儿子作为人质，并将德、棣二州献给朝廷，向朝廷交纳赋税，请朝廷任命官吏。
English: Wang Chengzong was afraid and begged Tian Hongzheng for mercy, asking him to take his two sons as hostages, and offer the German and Han states to the imperial court, pay taxes to the imperial court, and ask the imperial court to appoint officials.

古文：弘正为之奏请，上初不许；弘正上表相继，上重违弘正意，乃许之。
现代文：田弘正为他上奏请求，宪宗起初不肯答应。田弘正便一次接一次地上表，宪宗不愿意违背田弘正的心意，便答应了他。
English: At first, Kenso did not want to agree to the request of Tahiromasa to play for him. Tahiromasa then made one appearance after another, and Kenso, not wanting to go against Tahiromasa's wishes, agreed to his request.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅朔，魏博遣使送承宗子知感、知信及德、棣二州图印至京师。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲寅朔，魏博派遣使者将王承宗的儿子王知感和王知信以及德、棣两州的版图与印符送到京城。
English: In the summer, in April, Wei Bo sent an envoy to bring Wang Chengzong's sons, Wang Zhixuan and Wang Zhixin, as well as the maps and seals of the German and Han states to Beijing.

古文：幽州大将谭忠说刘总曰： 自元和以来，刘辟、李锜、田季安、卢从史、吴元济，阻兵凭险，自以为深根固蒂，天下莫能危也。
现代文：幽州大将谭忠劝说刘总说： 自从元和年间以来，刘辟、李、田季安、卢从史、吴元济等人依仗着手中的军队，凭借着险要的地形，自认为根基坚牢得不可动摇，天下的兵力都不能危害他们。
English: Yuzhou General Tan Zhong persuaded Liu Zong to say: Since the Yuan and Qing dynasties, Liu Pi, Li, Tian Ji'an, Lu Congshi, Wu Yuanji and others have relied on the army in their hands, relying on the perilous terrain, believing that the foundation is solid and unshakable, and the world's military forces cannot harm them.

古文：然顾盼之间，身死家覆，皆不自知，此非人力所能及，殆天诛也。
现代文：然而，正在他们得意地左顾右盼时，却身败家亡，还全然不知道事情是怎样发生的。这不是个人的力量所能够做到的，恐怕是上天要诛戮他们吧。
English: However, just when they were looking forward with pride, they were defeated and died, not knowing at all how it happened. This is not something that can be done by personal strength, I'm afraid that the heavens are going to smite them.

古文：况今天子神圣威武，苦身焦思，缩衣节食，以养战士，此志岂须臾忘天下哉！
现代文：况且，当今的天子神圣威武，竭力操劳，忧心苦思，节俭衣食，以赡养战斗之士，有这样的志向，怎么会有片刻忘记天下呢！
English: Moreover, today's heavenly son is holy and mighty, he works hard, worries and thinks hard, thrives on food and clothing to support the fighters, with such an ambition, how can there be a moment to forget the world!

古文：今国兵骎骎北来，赵人已献城十二，忠深为公忧之。 
现代文：现在，官军迅速向北开进，王承宗已经向朝廷献上十二座城邑，我是深切地为您担忧啊。 
English: Now that the imperial army is rapidly advancing northward, and Wang Chengzong has already offered twelve cities to the imperial court, I am deeply worried about you.

古文：总泣且拜曰： 闻先生言，吾心定矣。 
现代文：刘总一边哭泣，一边行着礼说： 听了先生这一席话，我的主意已定了。 
English: Weeping and bowing, Liu Zeng said, "After listening to you, sir, my mind is made up.

古文：遂专意归朝廷。
现代文：于是，刘总一心一意地归向朝廷。
English: As a result, Liu Zong devoted himself to the imperial court.

古文：戊辰，内出废印二纽，赐左、右三军辟仗使。
现代文：戊辰，内廷拿出废置印符两方，赐给了左、右三军辟仗使。
English: At that time, the Inner Court took out the two sides of the abolition of the seal and gave the left and right three armies to send envoys.

古文：旧制，以宦官为六军辟仗使，如方镇之监军，无印。
现代文：以往的制度规定，由宦官担任六军辟仗使，作用犹如节度使的监军使，但并不发给印信。
English: According to the previous system, eunuchs served as the six military envoys, acting like the supervising envoys of the festival envoys, but they did not issue seal letters.

古文：及张奉国等得罪，至是始赐印，得纠绳军政，事任专达矣。
现代文：及至张奉国获罪后，才颁赐印信，辟仗使可以举发并惩处军政的过失，其事务可以直接向皇上奏报。
English: It was not until after Zhang Fengguo was found guilty that he was granted a seal letter, which made it possible to report and punish military and political mistakes, and his affairs could be reported directly to the emperor.

古文：庚辰，诏洗雪王承宗及成德将士，复其官爵。
现代文：庚戌，宪宗颁诏为王承宗以及成德将士平反，恢复他们的官职与爵位。
English: Geng Zong and Kenzong issued an edict to rehabilitate Wang Chengzong and Chengde generals, restoring their official posts and titles.

古文：李师道暗弱，军府大事，独与妻魏氏、奴胡惟堪、杨自温、婢蒲氏、袁氏及孔目官王再升谋之，大将及幕僚莫得预焉。
现代文：李师道愚昧而又懦弱，对于幕府中重大的事情，只与妻子魏氏、家奴胡惟堪、杨自温、婢女蒲氏和袁氏以及孔目官王再千等人谋划，大将以及幕府的僚属都不能参与。
English: Li Shidao was ignorant and cowardly. For important matters in the shogunate, he only planned with his wife Wei, his servants Hu Wei Kan, Yang Zi Wen, his maidservants Pu and Yuan, and the Confucian official Wang Zaiqi. The general and his colleagues in the shogunate were not allowed to participate.

古文：魏氏不欲其子入质，与蒲氏、袁氏言于师道曰： 自先司徒以来，有此十二州，奈何无故割而献之！
现代文：魏氏不愿意让自己的儿子入朝充当人质，便与蒲氏和袁氏向李师道进言说： 从我们已故的司徒以来，李氏便据有了这十二个州，怎么能够毫无原由地献给朝廷呢！
English: Mr. Wei did not want his son to be taken hostage by the imperial court, so he and Mr. Pu and Mr. Yuan made a suggestion to Li Shidao, saying, "Since our late Stow, the Li family has owned these twelve states, how can they give them to the imperial court without any reason?"

古文：今计境内之兵不下数十万，不献三州，不过以兵相加。
现代文：现在，算来淄青境内的兵力不少于数十万人，不进献沂、密、海三州，朝廷只不过派兵马前来讨伐。
English: Now, it is estimated that there are no less than hundreds of thousands of troops in the territory of Jiaqing. Without entering the three states of Jianye, Miyang and Hai, the imperial court just sent soldiers and horses to fight.

古文：若力战不胜，献之未晚。 
现代文：倘若尽力接战不能够取胜，那时再献上三州也不算太迟。 
English: If we do not succeed in winning the war, it will not be too late to offer the three states.

古文：师道乃大悔，欲杀李公度，幕僚贾直言谓其用事奴曰： 今大祸将至，岂非高沐冤气所为！
现代文：于是，李师道非常后悔，打算将李公度杀掉。幕府的僚属贾直言对李师道管事的家奴说： 现在大祸将要来临了，这难道不是高沐的冤气造成的吗！
English: As a result, Li Shidao regretted very much and planned to kill Li Gongduo. Jia Zhiguo, a member of the shogunate, said to Li Shidao's house slave: Now a great disaster is coming, isn't this caused by Gao Mu's anger!

古文：若又杀公度，军府其危哉！ 
现代文：如果再将李公度杀掉，恐怕幕府就危险了！ 
English: If Li Gongdu is killed again, I'm afraid the shogunate will be in danger!

古文：乃囚之。迁李英昙于莱州，未至，缢杀之。
现代文：于是，李师道便将李公度囚禁起来，将李英昙贬至莱州。李英昙还没有到任，便被勒死了。
English: As a result, Li Shidao imprisoned Li Gongdu and banished Li Yingtao to Laizhou. Li Yingtao was strangled before he could take office.

古文：李逊至郓州，师逆大阵兵迎之，逊盛气正色，为陈祸福，责其决语，欲白天子。
现代文：李逊来到郓州时，李师道布列盛大军容迎接他。李逊神色严肃，向他陈说孰祸孰福，要求他一言为定，准备禀报宪宗。
English: When Li Xun came to Zhangzhou, he was greeted by Li Shidaobule with a grand military presence. Li Xun looked serious, told him that there was no evil and no good, and asked him to make up his mind and prepare to denounce Gensong.

古文：师道退，与其党谋之，皆曰： 弟许之，他日正烦一表解纷耳。 
现代文：李师道回去后，与他的同党商议此事，同党们都说： 尽管答应他好了，以后只要麻烦一纸书表来排解纷乱罢了。 
English: After Li Shidao returned home, he discussed the matter with his fellow party members, and they all said, "Even though we promised him, in the future, we only need to trouble a piece of paper to sort out the mess."

古文：师道乃谢曰： 向以父子之私，且迫于将士之情，故迁延未遣。
现代文：于是，李师道向李逊道歉说： 以往由于父子间的私情，并且迫于将士的压力，所以把事情拖延下来，没有遣送儿子入朝。
English: As a result, Li Shidao apologized to Li Xun and said: In the past, due to the personal relationship between father and son, and under the pressure of soldiers, I delayed the matter and did not send my son to the DPRK.

古文：今重烦朝使，岂敢复有二三！ 
现代文：现在，又麻烦朝廷的使者为此奔走，怎么敢再做反复无常的事情呢！ 
English: Now, again troubling the emissaries of the court to run for this, how dare they do capricious things again!

古文：逊察师道非实诚，归，言于上曰： 师道顽愚反覆，恐必须用兵。 
现代文：李逊看出李师道没有诚意，回到朝廷后，便向宪宗进言说： 李师道顽劣愚昧，反复无常，恐怕必须用兵了。 
English: Li Xun saw that Li Shidao had no sincerity, and after returning to the imperial court, he said to Xianzong: Li Shidao is stupid and capricious, I'm afraid I have to use soldiers.

古文：既而师道表言军情，不听纳质割地，上怒，决意讨之。
现代文：不久，李师道上表陈述军中情形，说是将士们不肯让他交送人质与割让土地。宪宗大怒，决心讨伐李师道。
English: Soon, Li Shidao made a report on the situation in the army, saying that the generals refused to let him hand over hostages and cede land. Xianzong was furious and determined to fight Li Shidao.

古文：贾直言冒刃谏师道者二：舆榇谏者一，又画缚载槛车妻子系累者以献。
现代文：贾直言冒着被杀害的危险向李师道劝谏了两次，抬着棺材向李师道劝谏了一次，还画了一幅李师道被绑在囚车里、妻子儿女都被缚结着的图画献给李师道。
English: Jia bluntly advised Li Shidao twice at the risk of being killed, and once advised Li Shidao while carrying a coffin. He also drew a picture of Li Shidao tied up in a prison wagon, with his wife and children all tied up, dedicated to Li Shidao.

古文：师道怒，囚之。
现代文：李师道恼怒，便将他囚禁起来。
English: Li Shidao was so angry that he imprisoned him.

古文：五月，丙申，以忠武节度使李光颜为义成节度使，谋讨师道也。
现代文：五月，丙申，宪宗任命忠武节度使李光颜为义成节度使，谋划讨伐李师道。
English: In May, Hun Sen, the founder of the Republic of China, appointed Li Guangyan as the envoy of the Yicheng Festival, and planned to attack Li Shidao.

古文：以淮西节度使马总为忠武节度使，陈、许、溵、蔡州观察使。以申州隶鄂岳，光州隶淮南。
现代文：又任命淮西节度使马总为忠武节度使和陈、许？蔡各州观察使，将申州隶属给鄂岳，将光州隶属给淮南。
English: He also appointed Ma Zong, the delegate of Huaixi Festival, as the delegate of Zhongwu Festival, and Chen and Xu Cai as the observers of each state, and subordinated Shenzhou to Etu, and Gwangju to Huainan.

古文：辛丑，以知勃海国务大仁秀为勃海王。
现代文：辛丑，朝廷将主持勃海国事务的大仁秀封为勃海王。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, the Imperial Court crowned Oritsu Shufon, who presided over the affairs of Bokkai Province, as the King of Bokkai.

古文：以河阳都知兵马使曹华为棣州刺史，诏以河阳兵二千送至滳河。
现代文：宪宗任命河阳都知兵马使曹华为棣州刺史，降诏命令河阳兵马将他护送到棣州的河县。
English: Emperor Xianzong appointed Cao Huai, an envoy of the Hechi soldiers and horses from Hebei Province, to record the history of Luzhou, and ordered the soldiers and horses from Hebei Province to escort him to He County in Luzhou.

古文：会县为平卢兵所陷，华击却之，杀二千馀人，复其县以闻。
现代文：适逢河县被平卢李师道的兵马攻陷，曹华将平卢兵马击退，杀掉两千多人，收复了该县，上报朝廷。
English: At the same time, He County was invaded by the soldiers and horses of Pinglu Li Shidao. Cao Hua repelled the soldiers and horses of Pinglu, killed more than two thousand people, recovered the county, and reported to the imperial court.

古文：诏加横海节度副使。
现代文：宪宗颁诏加封曹华为横海节度副使。
English: Emperor Xianzong issued an edict to appoint Cao Huai as Vice-Envoy to the Henghai Festival.

古文：六月，癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，癸丑朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丁丑，复以乌重胤领怀州刺史，镇河阳。
现代文：丁丑，宪宗又任命乌重胤兼任怀州刺史，镇守河阳。
English: In addition to Ding Yuxi, Kenzong also appointed Wu Shigetian as the governor of Huai Zhou and the governor of Heyang.

古文：秋，七月，癸未朔，徙李愬为武宁节度使。
现代文：秋季七月，癸未朔，宪宗将李改任为武宁节度使。
English: In the autumn of July, shortly before the new year, Xianzong changed Li's position to that of Wu Ning's festival envoy.

古文：乙酉，下制罪状李师道，令宣武、魏博、义成、武宁、横海兵共讨之，以宣歙观察使王遂为供军使。
现代文：乙酉，宪宗颁布制书罗列李师道的罪状，命令宣武、魏博、义成、武宁、横海的兵马共同讨伐他，还任命宣歙观察使王遂为供军使。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xianzong issued a document listing Li Shidao's crimes and ordered the armies and horses of Xuanwu, Wei Bo, Yicheng, Wu Ning and Henghai to jointly fight him. He also appointed Xuanwu's observation envoy Wang Sui as the envoy.

古文：遂，方庆之孙也。
现代文：王遂是王方庆的孙子。
English: Wang Sui is the grandson of Wang Fangqing.

古文：上方委裴度以用兵，门下侍郎、同平章事李夷简自谓才不及度，求出镇。
现代文：宪宗将用兵之事委托给裴度，门下侍郎、同平章事李夷简认为自己的才能不如裴度，便要求出任节度使。
English: Kenzong entrusted the use of soldiers to Pei Du, and Li Yijian, a subordinate attendant and a peer, thought that his talent was not as good as Pei Du, so he asked to serve as a festival envoy.

古文：辛丑，以夷简同平章事，充淮南节度使。
现代文：辛丑，宪宗任命李夷简为同平章事，充任淮南节度使。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, Emperor Xianzong appointed Li Yijian as Tongping Zhengji, acting as Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：八月，壬子朔，中书侍郎、同平章事王涯罢为兵部侍郎。
现代文：八月，壬子朔，中书侍郎、同平章事王涯被罢免为兵部侍郎。
English: In August, Jinshi Shuo, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Tongping Zhangjiwang Lai were dismissed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：吴元济既平，韩弘惧；九月，自将兵击李师道，围曹州。
现代文：吴元济被平定后，韩弘心怀恐惧。九月，韩弘亲自带领兵马进击李师道，包围曹州。
English: After Wu Yuanji was subdued, Han Hong was filled with fear. In September, Han Hong personally led the troops and horses to attack Li Shidao and encircle Caozhou.

古文：淮西既平，上浸骄侈。
现代文：平定淮西后，宪宗逐渐骄傲奢侈起来。
English: After the pacification of West Huai, Xianzong gradually became proud and extravagant.

古文：户部侍郎判度支皇甫镈、卫尉卿、盐铁转运使程异晓其意，数进羡馀以供其费，由是有宠。
现代文：户部侍郎、判度支皇甫与卫尉卿、盐铁转运使程异晓得宪宗的心意，屡次进献额外税收，供给宪宗花销，因此两人都得到宪宗的宠爱。
English: As the steward of the household, the judge of the imperial court and the captain of the guards, and the salt and iron transporter, Cheng Yi knew the mind of the Emperor and repeatedly contributed extra taxes and expenses to the Emperor, so both of them were favored by the Emperor.

古文：镈又厚赂结吐突承璀。
现代文：皇甫还用大量的贿赂来交结吐突承璀。
English: The crown prince also used a large amount of bribes to make a deal with the sputniks.

古文：甲辰，镈以本官、异以工部侍郎并同平章事，判使如故。
现代文：甲辰，皇甫以本来的官职，程异以工部侍郎的职务一并同平章事，兼任使职一如既往。
English: Jia Chen, the crown prince, assumed his original official position, and Cheng Xian assumed the position of the chamberlain of the Ministry of Works together with Ping Zhangji, and concurrently served as before.

古文：制下，朝野骇愕，至于市井负贩者亦嗤之。
现代文：制书颁布后，朝廷与民间都感到惊异，连市肆中担货贩卖之人也在嗤笑他们。
English: After the publication of the book, both the imperial court and the people were surprised, and even the people who carried goods and sold them in the market were laughing at them.

古文：裴度、崔群极陈其不可，上不听。
现代文：裴度与崔群极力陈述任命二人为相是不适当的，宪宗不肯听从。
English: Pei Du and Cui Qun tried their best to argue that it was inappropriate to appoint the two as consuls, but Xianzong refused to listen.

古文：度耻与小人同列，表求自退。不许。
现代文：裴度以与小人同事为耻辱，上表请求自行引退，宪宗不肯答应。
English: Pei Du took the humiliation of working with a villainous colleague as a humiliation, and requested to retire on his own, but Xianzong refused to agree.

古文：度复上疏，以为： 镈、异皆钱谷吏，佞巧小人，陛下一旦置之相位，中外无不骇笑。
现代文：裴度又上疏认为： 皇甫与程异都是掌管钱财与谷物的官吏，是奸诈机巧的小人，陛下突然将他们安置在宰相的职位上，朝廷内外没有人不诧异、不讥笑的。
English: Pei Du and Shang Shu believed that: The emperor and Cheng Rong were both officials in charge of money and grain, and they were cunning and crafty villains. His Majesty suddenly placed them in the position of prime minister, and no one inside and outside the court was not surprised or mocked.

古文：况镈在度支，专以丰取刻与为务，凡中外仰给度支之人无不思食其肉。
现代文：何况，皇甫掌管度支，专作多取少给的事情，凡是朝廷内外需依赖度支供给的人们，无人不想吃他的肉。
English: What's more, the crown prince is in charge of the imperial household budget and is dedicated to taking more and giving less. No one in or out of the imperial court who needs to rely on the imperial household budget and supplies wants to eat his meat.

古文：比者裁损淮西粮料，军士怨怒。
现代文：近来，皇甫裁减淮西官员的禄粮，惹得将士们愤怨不满。
English: Recently, the emperor reduced the stipend of Huaxi officials, which aroused the resentment of the generals.

古文：会臣至行营晓谕慰勉，仅无溃乱。
现代文：适值我来到淮西行营开导、劝慰和勉励他们，这才没有发生溃散作乱的事情。
English: At the right time, I came to Huaxi Detention Camp to enlighten, comfort and encourage them. This is why there was no rioting.

古文：今旧将旧兵悉向淄青，闻镈入相，必尽惊忧，知无可诉之地矣。
现代文：现在，那些原来讨伐淮西的将士全部开向淄青，得知皇甫担任宰相后，肯定人人惊惶忧恐，知道自己没有可以申诉的地方了。
English: Now, all those soldiers who used to fight against Huaxi are heading to Jiaqing. After learning that the emperor has been appointed as prime minister, everyone must be panicked and worried, knowing that they have no place to appeal.

古文：程异虽人品庸下，然心事和平，可处烦剧，不宜为相。
现代文：程异虽然人品平庸低下，但是考虑事情心平气和，可以让他处理繁杂的事务，不适合出任宰相。
English: Although Cheng Yi's character is mediocre and low, considering the things he is calm and can let him deal with complicated affairs, he is not suitable to serve as prime minister.

古文：至如镈，资性狡诈，天下共知，唯能上惑圣聪，足见奸邪之极。
现代文：至于皇甫，天性狡猾诡诈，天下无人不知，唯独能够使陛下的明察善断受到迷惑，足以看出他奸佞邪恶到了极点。
English: As for the crown prince, no one in the world is unaware of his cunning and deceitful nature, which alone is capable of confusing His Majesty's clear-sightedness and good judgment, and is enough to see that he is treacherous and evil to the extreme.

古文：臣若不退，天下谓臣不知廉耻；臣若不言，天下谓臣有负恩宠。
现代文：倘若我不肯引退，天下的人们便要说我不知廉耻了；倘若我不发言，天下的人们就会说我辜负了陛下的恩宠。
English: If I did not retire, the world would say that I was dishonest; if I did not speak out, the world would say that I had betrayed His Majesty's grace.

古文：今退既不许，言又不听，臣如烈火烧心，众镝丛体。
现代文：现在，陛下既不允许我引退，又不肯听从我的意见，我感到就象烈火烧心，乱箭穿身。
English: Now that Your Majesty has neither allowed me to retire nor listened to my advice, I feel like my heart is on fire and my body is being pierced by arrows.

古文：所可惜者，淮西荡定，河北底宁，承宗敛手削地，韩弘舆疾讨贼，岂朝廷之力能制其命哉？
现代文：可惜的是，淮西荡平，河北归于安宁，王承宗拱手割让土地，韩弘抱病登车讨伐贼人，难道是朝廷的力量能够控制他们吗？
English: Unfortunately, Huaxi has been flattened, Hebei has been pacified, Wang Chengzong has ceded land, and Han Hong, who is ill, has boarded a vehicle to fight the thieves. Is it the power of the imperial court that can control them?

古文：直以处置得宜，能服其心耳。
现代文：只是因为对他们安排处理得当，能够使他们心服而已。
English: It is only because they are well treated that they can be convinced.

古文：陛下建升平之业，十已八九，何忍还自堕坏，使四方解体乎？ 
现代文：陛下建立天下太平的基业，已经达到了十分之八九，怎么能够忍心再自行毁坏，使各地心灰意冷呢！ 
English: Your Majesty's founding cause of establishing world peace has already achieved eighty-nine out of ten, how can you bear to destroy it again on your own, leaving all regions disheartened!

古文：上以度为朋党，不之省。
现代文：宪宗认为裴度属于朋党集团，对他的意见便不肯予以考虑。
English: Kenzong believed that Pei Du belonged to a group of party cronies and refused to consider his opinion.

古文：镈自知不为众所与，益为巧谄以自固，奏减内外官俸以助国用。
现代文：皇甫知道自己不被大家所赞同，愈发作巧伪阿谀的事情来巩固自己的地位，奏请削减朝廷内外官员的薪俸来资助国家的用度。
English: Knowing that he was not approved by everyone, the crown prince resorted more and more to the art of false flattery in order to consolidate his position. He asked for a reduction in the salaries of officials inside and outside the court in order to finance the expenses of the state.

古文：给事中崔植封还敕书，极论之，乃止。
现代文：给事中崔植将诏书封合退还，经过极力论说，才没有实行皇甫的建议。
English: In the middle of the matter, Cui Zhi returned the seal of the imperial edict. After strenuous discussion, he did not implement the suggestion of the emperor.

古文：植，祐甫之弟子也。
现代文：崔植是崔甫弟弟的儿子。
English: Cui Zhi is the son of Cui Fu's younger brother.

古文：时内出积年缯帛付度支令卖，镈悉以高价买之，以给边军。
现代文：当时，内廷拿出积存多年的丝帛交付度支出卖，皇甫用高价全部买下了这些丝帛，用以供给边疆的军队。
English: At that time, the Inner Court took out the silk cocoons that had accumulated for many years and sold them at cost. The Emperor bought all of these silk cocoons at a high price to supply the troops on the frontier.

古文：其缯帛朽败，随手破裂，边军聚而焚之。
现代文：那些丝帛朽蚀腐败，用手一碰，就会破裂，边疆军队将这些丝帛堆积起来烧掉了。
English: The frontier troops piled up the silk cocoons and burned them.

古文：度因奏事言之，镈于上前引其足曰： 此靴亦内库所出，臣以钱二千买之，坚完可久服。
现代文：裴度借奏报事情的机会谈到此事，皇甫在皇帝面前伸出他的脚来说： 这双靴子也是由内库中来的，我用两千钱买下了它们。这靴子坚固结实，可以穿很长时间。
English: When Pei Du took the opportunity to report on the matter, the Empress Dowager stretched out his foot in front of the emperor and said: This pair of boots also came from the treasury, I bought them with two thousand dollars. This boot is sturdy and can be worn for a long time.

古文：度言不可信。 
现代文：裴度说的话并不可信。 
English: What Pei Du said is not credible.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：宪宗认为讲得很对。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：由是镈益无所惮。
现代文：从此，皇甫更加无所忌惮了。
English: From then on, the emperor became even more unscrupulous.

古文：程异亦自知不合众心，能廉谨谦逊，为相月馀，不敢知印秉笔，故终免于祸。
现代文：程异也知道自己不得人心，但是他能够廉洁谨慎，谦逊自抑。他出任宰相一个多月，不敢掌管印信，执笔断事，所以最终得以免除祸殃。
English: Cheng Yi also knew that he was not popular, but he was able to be honest and prudent, humble and self-restrained. He served as prime minister for more than a month, did not dare to take control of the seal letter and write a verdict, so he was finally able to avoid the disaster.

古文：五坊使杨朝汶妄捕系人，迫以考捶，责其息钱，遂转相诬引，所系近千人。
现代文：五坊使杨朝汶胡乱捉拿囚禁百姓，刑讯拷打，索取利钱，使他们相互诬告牵连，被拘禁的将近一千人。
English: The five departments ordered Yang Chaowen to arbitrarily arrest and detain people, torture and extort money, and make them falsely accuse and implicate each other, resulting in the detention of nearly one thousand people.

古文：中丞萧俛劾奏其状，裴度、崔群亦以为言。
现代文：中丞萧上奏揭发这一状况，裴度与崔群也就此进言。
English: Vice-commander Xiao Shangso exposed this situation, and Pei Du and Cui Qun also spoke about this.

古文：上曰： 姑与卿论用兵事，此小事朕自处之。 
现代文：宪宗说： 朕且与你们谈论用兵的大事，这点小事由朕自己处理。 
English: Gensong said, "I'm here to talk to you about the important matter of using soldiers. I'll handle this small matter myself."

古文：度曰： 用兵事小，所忧不过山东耳。
现代文：裴度说： 用兵的事情才是小事，让人担忧的不过是崤山以东而已。
English: Pei Du said: The matter of using soldiers is a small matter. What people are worried about is east of Lushan.

古文：五坊使暴横，恐乱辇毂。 
现代文：而五坊使强暴蛮横，恐怕会扰乱京城。 
English: However, I am afraid that the violent behavior of Wubo will disturb the capital.

古文：上不悦，退，召朝汶责之曰： 以汝故，令吾羞见宰相！ 
现代文：宪宗不高兴。退朝后，宪宗传召杨朝汶，斥责他说： 由于你的原故，让我不好意思见宰相！ 
English: Kenzong was not happy. After the withdrawal, Kenzong summoned Yang Chaowen and scolded him, saying, "Because of you, I am embarrassed to meet the prime minister!

古文：冬，十月，赐朝汶死，尽释系者。
现代文：冬季，十月，宪宗赐杨朝汶自裁而死，将他囚禁的人全部释放。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Xianzong gave Yang Chaowen permission to commit suicide, and all of his prisoners were released.

古文：上晚节好神仙，诏天下求方士。
现代文：宪宗晚年喜欢神仙不老之术，颁诏在全国寻求方术之士。
English: In his later years, Gensong was fond of the Immortal Magic, and issued an edict to search for practitioners of the magic throughout the country.

古文：宗正卿李道古先为鄂岳观察使，以贪暴闻，恐终获罪，思所以自媚于上，乃因皇甫镈荐山人柳泌，云能合长生药。
现代文：宗正卿李道古先前担任鄂岳观察使，以贪婪残暴闻名，担心终究要被治罪，寻求向皇上献媚的办法，于是通过皇甫，推荐山人柳泌，说他能够制作长生的药物。
English: Zong Zhengqing Li Daogu had previously served as an observer of Mount E, known for his greed and brutality. Fearing that he would eventually be punished, he sought a way to flatter the emperor, so through the imperial father, he recommended mountain man Liu Xuan, saying that he could make a medicine for longevity.

古文：甲戌，诏泌居兴唐观炼药。
现代文：甲戌，宪宗颁诏让柳泌住在兴唐观中炼制药物。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Jiajing and Emperor Xianzong issued an edict to let Liu Xuan live in Xingtang to refine medicines.

古文：十一月，辛巳朔，盐州奏吐蕃寇河曲、夏州。灵武奏破吐蕃长乐州，克其外城。
现代文：十一月，辛巳朔，盐州奏称吐蕃侵犯河曲与夏州，灵武奏称在长乐州打败吐蕃，攻克了长乐州的外城。
English: In November, at the dawn of the new year, Yanzhou proclaimed that Tubo had invaded Hequ and Xiazhou, and Lingwu proclaimed that he had defeated Tubo in Changle and conquered the outer city of Changle.

古文：柳泌言于上曰： 天台山神仙所聚，多灵草，臣虽知之，力不能致，诚得为彼长吏，庶几可求。 
现代文：柳泌向宪宗进言说： 天台山是神仙聚集的地方，有许多灵草，虽然我能够识别，但是没有力量将它们弄到手。
English: Liu Xuan said to Xianzong: Tiantai Mountain is a place where immortals gather, there are many herbs, although I can recognize them, I have no power to get them.

古文：上信之。丁亥，以泌权知台州刺史，仍赐服金紫。
现代文：如果我能够去做那里的长官，可能会找到它们。 
English: If I could be the boss there, I might be able to find them.

古文：谏官争论奏，以为： 人主喜方士，未有使之临民赋政者。 
现代文：宪宗相信了他的话。丁亥，宪宗让柳泌权且代理台州刺史，还赐给他金鱼袋和紫色的朝服。谏官争着上奏认为： 君主喜欢方术之士，但还没有让方术之士治理百姓，处理政务的先例。 
English: Emperor Xianzong believed his words. Ding Hai, Emperor Xianzong gave Liu Xuan the right to rule and act as Taizhou's magistrate, and also gave him a goldfish bag and a purple imperial robe. The eunuchs argued: The monarch likes the magicians, but there is no precedent for letting the magicians govern the people and handle government affairs.

古文：上曰： 烦一州之力而能为人主致长生，臣子亦何爱焉！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 烦劳一个州的力量，就能够为君主带来长生，做臣子的又有什么可吝惜的呢！ 
English: Gensong said, "Exhausting the power of a state can bring longevity to a monarch, so what is there to be sorry about in being a courtier?"

古文：由是群臣莫敢言。
现代文：从此，群臣都不敢谈论此事。
English: Since then, ministers have been afraid to talk about it.

古文：甲午，盐州奏吐蕃引去。
现代文：甲午，盐州奏称吐蕃逃走。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Yanzhou reported that Tu Youyou had fled.

古文：壬寅，以河阳节度使乌重胤为横海节度使。
现代文：壬寅，宪宗任命河阳节度使乌重胤为横海节度使。
English: In Renin, the Jianzong appointed the Kheyang Festival Envoy Wu Shigetian as the Henghai Festival Envoy.

古文：丁未，以华州刺史令狐楚为河阳节度使。
现代文：丁未，任命华州刺史令狐楚为河阳节度使。
English: Ding Wei, appointed Huazhou Zhishirong Fuchu as the Kheyang Festival envoy.

古文：重胤以河阳精兵三千赴镇，河阳兵不乐去乡里，中道溃归，又不敢入城，屯于城北，将大掠。
现代文：乌重胤率领河阳精锐兵马三千人前往横海，河阳士兵不愿意离开家乡，中途溃散，返回河阳，又不敢进城，便在城北驻扎着，准备大肆抢劫。
English: Wu Chongyan led three thousand elite soldiers and horses from Kheyang to Henghai. The soldiers from Kheyang did not want to leave their hometown, broke up halfway, returned to Kheyang, and did not dare to enter the city, so they stationed themselves in the north of the city and prepared to loot.

古文：令狐楚适至，单骑出，慰抚之，与俱归。
现代文：恰好令狐楚来到河阳，便单人匹马地出了城，前去慰问安抚他们，与他们一同回城。
English: When he happened to bring the foxes to Heyang, he went out of the city single-handedly, went to comfort and pacify them, and returned to the city with them.

古文：先是，田弘正请自黎阳渡河，会义成节度使李光颜讨李师道，裴度曰： 魏博军既渡河，不可复退，立须进击，方有成功。
现代文：在此之前，田弘正请求由黎阳横渡黄河，会合义成节度使李光颜，前去讨伐李师道。裴度说： 魏博的军队渡过黄河后，就不能够再撤退回去，必须立刻进军出击，才能取得成功。
English: Prior to this, Tian Hongzheng requested to cross the Yellow River from Liyang and meet with Yicheng Jiedu to make Li Guangyan go to fight against Li Shidao. Pei Du said: After Wei Bo's army crossed the Yellow River, it could not retreat and had to attack immediately to succeed.

古文：既至滑州，即仰给度支，徒有供饷之劳，更生观望之势。
现代文：魏博的军队来到滑州后，便要依靠度支供应，朝廷空有供给军饷的烦劳，魏博军却会重新产生观望的态势。
English: After Weibo's army came to Slate, it had to rely on the imperial government for supplies. The imperial court did not have the trouble of supplying military pay, but Weibo's army would again produce a wait-and-see attitude.

古文：又或与李光颜互相疑阻，益致迁延。
现代文：田弘正或许再与李光颜互相猜疑，就益发会导致战机拖延。
English: If Tian Hongzheng and Li Guangyan are suspicious of each other again, it will lead to delays in the fighter aircraft.

古文：与其渡河而不进，不若养威于河北。
现代文：与其渡过黄河而不进军，还不如在黄河以北蓄养声威。
English: Rather than crossing the Yellow River without advancing, it is better to cultivate prestige in the north of the Yellow River.

古文：宜且使之秣马厉兵，俟霜降水落，自杨刘渡河，直指郓州，得至阳谷置营，则兵势自盛，贼众摇心矣。 
现代文：应当让田弘正暂时饱喂战马，砥砺兵器，待到霜降后河水下落时，由杨刘横渡黄河，径直奔赴郓州，可以前往阳设置营盘，军队的声势自然就会变得盛大起来，敌军便会人心动摇了。 
English: Tian Hongzheng should be allowed to temporarily feed the war horses and sharpen the weapons. When the river falls after the frost, Yang Liu should cross the Yellow River and go straight to Zhangzhou. He can go to Yang to set up a camp. The army's reputation will naturally become grand, and the enemy army will be shaken.

古文：上从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了裴度的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：是月，弘正将魏博全师自杨刘渡河，距郓州四十里筑垒。贼中大震。
现代文：就在本月，田弘正率领全军由杨刘渡过黄河，在距离郓州四十里处修筑营垒，敌军大为震惊。
English: Just this month, Tian Hongzheng led the whole army from Yang Liu to cross the Yellow River and build a camp at a distance of forty miles from Zhangzhou. The enemy army was greatly shocked.

古文：功德使上言： 凤翔法门寺塔有佛指骨，相传三十年一开，开则岁丰人安。
现代文：功德使进言说： 凤翔法门寺的塔中有释迦牟尼佛的手指骨，相传寺塔三十年开放一次，开放时就会年成丰熟，人民安宁。
English: Gongdejin Jinyan said: There is a finger bone of Shakyamuni Buddha in the pagoda of Fengxiang Famen Temple. According to legend, the pagoda of the temple is opened once every thirty years. When it is opened, the year will be ripe and the people will be peaceful.

古文：来年应开，请迎之。 
现代文：明年法门寺塔正当开放，请去迎接佛指骨。 
English: Next year, Famen Temple and Pagoda will be officially open. Please go to welcome the Buddha's phalanx.

古文：十二月，庚戌朔，上遣中使帅僧众迎之。
现代文：十二月，庚戌朔，宪宗派遣中使率领僧众迎接佛指骨。
English: In December, Geng Biao Shuo, the envoy of the Constitutional Church dispatched to lead the monks to welcome the Buddha's phalanx.

古文：戊辰，以春州司户董重质为试太子詹事，委武宁军驱使，李愬请之也。
现代文：戊辰，宪宗任命春州司户董重质为试太子詹事，将他交付武宁军驱遣，这是应李请求作出的决定。
English: In response to Li's request, Emperor Gensong appointed the Prince of Chunzhou, Dong Chongqing, as the crown prince Zhan Zhi, and sent him to be driven away by the Wu Ning army.

古文：戊寅，魏博、义成军送所获李师道都知兵马使夏侯澄等四十七人，上皆释弗诛，各付所获行营驱使，曰： 若有父母欲归者，优给遣之。
现代文：戊寅，魏博、义成两军将俘获的李师道的都知兵马使夏侯澄等四十七人送往京城，宪宗对他们一律释放不杀，分别交付俘获他们的行营以供驱遣，还说： 如果有人需要照料父母，打算回家，就从优发给盘费，打发他们回去。
English: The armies of Wu Yin, Wei Bo and Yicheng sent the forty-seven captured Tochi soldiers of Li Shiduo, including the envoy Xia Houcheng, to the capital. Kenzong released all of them without killing them, and separately delivered them to the camp where they were captured for expulsion. He also said: If someone needs to take care of his parents and plans to go home, he will pay a fee from the superior to send them back.

古文：朕所诛者，师道而已。 
现代文：朕要诛杀的人，只有李师道一人罢了。 
English: The only person I want to fight and kill is Li Shidao.

古文：于是贼中闻之，降者相继。
现代文：于是，敌军将士得知这一消息，前来投诚的人接连不断。
English: As a result, the enemy soldiers learned of this news, and the people who came to surrender kept coming.

古文：初，李文会与兄元规皆在李师古幕下。
现代文：当初，李文会与哥哥李元规都在李师古的幕府中供事。
English: At first, Li Wenhui and his brother Li Yuanfei both served in the shogunate of Li Shigu.

古文：师古薨，师道立，元规辞去，文会属师道亲党请留。
现代文：李师古去世，李师道袭位，李元规辞职离去，李文会嘱托李师道的亲信同党请求把自己留下。
English: Li Shigu passed away, Li Shidao succeeded him, Li Yuanfei resigned and left, and Li Wenhui asked Li Shidao's cronies and party members to ask him to stay.

古文：元规将行，谓文会曰： 我去，身退而安全；汝留，必骤贵而受祸。 
现代文：李元规准备启行时，对李文会说： 我离开了，便因抽身引退而获得了安全。你留下来了，肯定会因地位骤然显贵而遭受祸殃。 
English: When Li Yuanfei was preparing to set sail, he would say to Li Wenlong: I left, and I gained security by withdrawing and retiring. If you stay, you will certainly suffer from the misfortune due to your suddenly prominent position.

古文：及官军四临，平卢兵势日蹙，将士喧然，皆曰： 高沐、郭日户、李存为司空忠谋，李文会奸佞，杀沐，囚日户、存，以致此祸。 
现代文：及至官军从四面开来，平卢军队的形势日益窘迫，将士们吵吵嚷嚷，都说： 高沐、郭和李存为李司空忠心谋划，而李文会诡诈而谄谀，是他杀死高沐，囚禁郭和李存，以至招致了这一祸忠。 
English: As the government army advanced from all directions, the situation of the Pinglu army became more and more difficult. The generals clamored and said: Gao Mu, Guo and Li Cun loyally plotted for Li Shikong, while Li Wen would be cunning and crafty. It was he who killed Gao Mu, imprisoned Guo and Li Cun, and thus brought about this calamity.

古文：师道不得已，出文会摄登州刺史，召日户、存还幕府。
现代文：李师道迫不得已，将李文会斥逐为摄登州刺史，把郭和李存召回幕府。
English: Li Shidao had no choice but to banish the Li Wenhui to the annals of prefectural history and recall Guo and Li Cunxu to the shogunate.

古文：上常语宰相： 人臣当力为善，何乃好立朋党！
现代文：宪宗经常告诉宰相们说： 人臣应当努力向善，怎么能够喜欢树立朋党集团呢！
English: Kenzong often told the prime ministers, "Civil servants should strive to be good, how can they like to establish a crony group!"

古文：朕甚恶之。 
现代文：朕是非常憎恶朋党集团的。 
English: I really hate cronyism.

古文：裴度对曰： 方以类聚，物以群分。
现代文：裴度回答说： 事情的原则是以门类相聚合，事物是以群体相区分。
English: Baidu replied: The principle of things is to aggregate by categories, and things are distinguished by groups.

古文：君子、小人志趣同者，势必相合。
现代文：君子与小人各自志趣相同，从情势上说就一定各自相会。
English: A gentleman and a villain have the same interests, and from the situation, they will definitely meet each other.

古文：君子为徒，谓之同德；小人为徒，谓之朋党；外虽相似，内实悬殊，在圣主辩其所为邪正耳。 
现代文：君子们成为同一类人，叫做同德；小人们成为同一类人，叫做朋党。表面上虽然相互近似，实质上实在相差甚远。这就在于圣明的君主能够辨别他们做的事情是邪恶的，还是正直的了。 
English: The nobles become of the same kind, and are called the same virtue; the common people become of the same kind, and are called the same party. Though they are superficially similar to each other, they are far apart in essence. This is because the wise ruler can distinguish whether what they are doing is evil or righteous.

古文：武宁节度使李愬与平卢兵十一战，皆捷。
现代文：武宁节度使李与平卢兵马交战十一次，都取得了胜利。
English: The Wu Ning Festival made Li and the Pinglu soldiers and horses fight eleven times, and they all won.

古文：己卯晦，进攻金乡，克之。
现代文：己卯晦，李进军攻打并攻克了金乡。
English: At the end of the war, Li marched into and conquered Jinxiang.

古文：李师道性懦怯，自官军致讨，闻小败及失城邑，辄忧悸成疾，由是左右皆蔽匿，不以实告。
现代文：李师道生性胆小怕事，自从官军前来讨伐，只要得知有些小小的失败以及失去城镇邑落，总是忧恐惊吓得生一场病，因此他的亲信都隐瞒战况，不把实际情况禀告给他。
English: Li Shidao was naturally timid and afraid of things. Since the government army came to fight, whenever he learned of some small defeats and the loss of towns and villages, he was always worried and frightened to the point of falling ill. Therefore, his close friends concealed the state of the war and did not inform him of the actual situation.

古文：金乡，兗州之要地，既失之，其刺史遣驿骑告急，左右不为通，师道至死竟不知也。
现代文：金乡是州的险要之地，失去金乡以后，金乡刺史派遣驿站的士兵骑马前来告急，李师道的亲信不给通报，所以李师道直到死去，竟然不知道金乡的失陷。
English: Jinxiang is a critical place in the state. After the loss of Jinxiang, Jinxiang sent soldiers on horseback to report the emergency. Li Shidao's relatives did not inform him, so Li Shidao did not know about the fall of Jinxiang until he died.

古文：春，正月，辛已，韩弘拔考城，杀二千馀人。
现代文：元和十四年春季正月，辛巳，韩弘攻克考城，杀掉两千多人。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Han Hong attacked Keko Castle and killed more than two thousand people.

古文：丙戌，师道所署沐阳令梁洞以县降于楚州刺史李听。
现代文：丙戌，李师道所署任的沐阳县令梁洞率领全县向楚州刺史李听投诚。
English: Peng Yao, Li Shidao's deputy of Muyang County, Liang Dong, led the whole county to cast their votes for Li He to become the governor of Chuzhou.

古文：吐蕃遣使者论短立藏等来修好，未返，入寇河曲。
现代文：吐蕃派遣使者论短立藏等人前来与唐朝重归于好，使者还没有返回，吐蕃便前来侵犯河曲。
English: Tubo sent envoys such as Tongtangzang and others to come and make peace with the Tang Dynasty. The envoys had not yet returned, when Tubo came to invade Hequ.

古文：上曰： 其国失信，其使何罪！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 他们的国家失去信用，派来的使者有什么罪过！ 
English: Kenzong said, "Their country has lost credibility. What is the fault of the envoys sent?"

古文：庚寅，遣归国。
现代文：庚寅，宪宗打发吐蕃使者回国。
English: Gyeongin and Gyeongjong sent envoys back to Korea.

古文：壬辰，武宁节度使李愬拔鱼台。
现代文：壬辰，武宁节度使李攻克鱼台。
English: In Imjin, the Wu Ning Festival made Li conquer the fish platform.

古文：中使迎佛骨至京师，上留禁中三日，乃历送诸寺，王公士民瞻奉舍施，惟恐弗及，有竭产充施者，有然香臂顶供养者。
现代文：中使将佛骨迎接到京城，宪宗让佛骨在宫禁中停留了三天，于是遍送各寺。上自王公，下至士子与庶民，人人瞻仰供奉，施舍钱财，惟恐不能赶上。有人将全部家产充当布施，也有人在胳膊与头顶上点燃香火供养佛骨。
English: The middle envoy welcomed the Buddha's bones to the capital, and Emperor Gensong allowed the bones to stay in the palace for three days, so they were sent to all the temples. Everyone, from the king down to the priests and commoners, paid homage and gave money, fearing that they would not be able to catch up. Some people gave away their entire family property, while others lit incense on their arms and heads to support the Buddha's bones.

古文：刑部侍郎韩愈上表切谏，以为： 佛者，夷狄之一法耳。
现代文：刑部侍郎韩愈上表直言极谏，他认为： 佛，是夷狄的一种法而已。
English: Han Yu, an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was very blunt on the table, he thought: Buddha is just a kind of law of Yidi.

古文：自黄帝以至禹，汤、文、武，皆享寿考，百姓安乐，当是时，未有佛也。
现代文：由黄帝以至夏禹、商汤、周文王、周武王，都年高寿长，百姓安宁快活，那个时候，是没有佛的。
English: From the Yellow Emperor to Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen Wang, and Zhou Wu Wang, all lived long lives, and the people were peaceful and happy. At that time, there was no Buddha.

古文：明帝时，始有佛法。
现代文：东汉明帝时期，开始有了佛法。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty Ming Dynasty, Buddhism began to emerge.

古文：其后乱亡相继，运祚不长。
现代文：此后，中国变乱危亡接连不断，朝廷的命运与福气都不甚久长。
English: Since then, China has seen a succession of upheavals and crises, and the fate and fortunes of the imperial court have not been good for very long.

古文：宋、齐、梁、陈、元魏已下，事佛渐谨，年代尤促。
现代文：宋、齐、梁、陈、北魏以后，对佛的侍奉逐渐恭敬起来，而些朝代存在的年代尤其短促。
English: After the Song, Qi, Liang, Chen and Northern Wei Dynasties, the servants of the Buddha gradually became more respectful, and the existence of some dynasties was particularly short.

古文：惟梁武帝在位四十八年，前后三舍身为寺家奴，竟为侯景所逼，饿死台城，国亦寻灭。
现代文：只有梁武帝在位四十八年，他曾前后三次舍身去当寺院的家奴，最终却遭受侯景的逼迫，在台城饿死，不久以后国家也灭亡了。
English: Only Emperor Liangwu was on the throne for 48 years. He sacrificed himself three times to become a slave of the temple, but was eventually persecuted by Houjing and starved to death in Taicheng. Soon after, the country also perished.

古文：事佛求福，乃更得祸。
现代文：侍奉佛是为了祈求福缘，但梁武帝却反而招致了祸殃。
English: Reverence for the Buddha is meant to bring good fortune, but on the contrary, it brings disaster.

古文：由此观之，佛不足信亦可知矣！
现代文：由此看来，佛不值得使人相信，也是清楚可见的了！
English: From this, it is clear that the Buddha is not worthy of belief!

古文：百姓愚冥，易惑难晓，苟见陛下如此，皆云 天子大圣，犹一心敬信；百姓微贱，于佛岂可更惜身命。 
现代文：百姓愚昧无知，冥顽不化，容易受到迷感，难以晓谕开导，如果看到陛下都这样去做，都说： 天子尚且专心一意地敬佛信佛，我们老百姓低微下贱，对待佛难道还能够顾惜性命吗？ 
English: The people are stupid and ignorant, obstinate, susceptible to infatuation, and difficult to enlighten. If they see His Majesty doing this, they will all say: The Son of Heaven still devotes himself to worshipping and believing in the Buddha. Our people are lowly and inferior. Can we still treat the Buddha with respect for our lives?

古文：佛本夷狄之人，口不言先王之法言，身不服先王之法服，不知君臣之义、父子之恩。
现代文：佛本来就是夷狄人氏，口中不讲先代帝王留传下来的合乎礼法的言论，身上不穿先代帝王规定下来的标准的中国服装，不懂得君臣之间的大义，不明白父子之间的恩情。
English: The Buddha was originally from the Yidi people. He did not speak the words of etiquette passed down by the previous emperors, did not wear the standard Chinese clothing prescribed by the previous emperors, did not understand the great justice between monarchs and subjects, and did not understand the kindness between father and son.

古文：假如其身尚在，奉国命来朝京师，陛下容而接之，不过宣政一见，礼宾一设，赐衣一袭，卫而出之于境，不令惑众也。
现代文：假如佛本身尚在人世，接受本国的命令前来京城朝拜，陛下宽容地接待他，只不过在宣政殿见他一面，在礼宾院设上一宴，赐给他衣服一套，派人护卫他走出国境，是不会让他迷惑众人的。
English: If the Buddha himself were still alive and had accepted his country's order to come to the capital to worship, His Majesty would have received him with tolerance. However, he would not have allowed him to confuse everyone by merely meeting him at the Imperial Palace, holding a banquet at the Protocol House, giving him a set of clothes, and sending someone to escort him out of the country.

古文：况其身死已久，枯朽之骨，岂宜以入宫禁！
现代文：何况佛本身久已故去，剩下来的枯朽的骸骨，怎么宜于将它请进宫殿！
English: What's more, the Buddha himself has long since passed away. How appropriate to invite the remaining withered skeleton into the palace!

古文：古之诸侯得吊于国，尚令巫祝先以桃茢祓除不祥。今无故取朽秽之物亲视之，巫祝不先，桃茢不用，群臣不言其非，御史不举其罪，臣实耻之！
现代文：古代的诸侯在国内举行吊唁，还要先使巫师用桃树与苕帚去驱除不吉祥的鬼魂，现在陛下没由来地拿腐朽秽浊的东西亲自观看，事先不让巫师降神祈福，不用桃树与苕帚除凶去垢，群臣不议论这种做法的错误，御史不纠举这种做法的罪责，我实在为此感到羞耻！
English: The ancient princes held condolences in the country, but first they had to make the sorcerers use peach trees and thistles to drive away the unlucky ghosts. Now His Majesty has no reason to take the rotten and filthy things to see for himself. He did not let the sorcerers pray to God in advance, he did not use the peach trees and thistles to remove the evil scum. The courtiers did not talk about the mistakes of this practice, and the history did not point out the guilt of this practice. I am really ashamed of this!

古文：乞以此骨会有司，投诸水火，永绝要本，断天下之疑，绝后代之惑，使天下之人知大圣人之所作为，出于寻常万万也，岂不盛哉！
现代文：请求陛下将此佛骨交付给有关部门，将它丢到水里火里消灭掉，永远断绝此事的本源，切断天下的疑问，杜绝后世的迷惑，使天下的人们知道大圣人做出的事情，超过平凡人物的千万倍，这难道不是盛大的事情吗！
English: I request Your Majesty to hand over this Buddha's skeleton to the relevant departments, throw it into the water and destroy it in the fire, forever cut off the source of this matter, cut off the doubts of the world, eliminate the confusion of future generations, so that the people of the world know the things done by the great saint, more than ten million times that of ordinary people. Isn't this a grand thing!

古文：佛如有灵，能作祸福，凡有殃咎，宜加臣身。 
现代文：如果佛有灵性，能够制造祸福，一切灾殃与罪责，都加在我的身上好了。 
English: If the Buddha had a spiritual nature and was able to create misfortune and good fortune, all the calamities and blame would be placed on me.

古文：上得表，大怒，出示宰相，将加愈极刑。
现代文：宪宗得到上表，非常恼怒，拿出来给宰相们传阅，准备以最严厉的刑罚处治韩愈。
English: When Emperor Gensong received the list, he was very angry. He took it out and distributed it to the prime ministers, preparing to punish Han Yu with the most severe punishment.

古文：裴度、崔群为言： 愈虽狂，发于忠恳，宜宽容以开言路。 
现代文：裴度与崔群为韩愈进言说： 韩愈虽然狂妄，但他所言发自内心的忠诚，陛下应当对他宽容，以开通言路。 
English: Pei Du and Cui Qun made a speech for Han Yu, saying: Although Han Yu is arrogant, what he said is sincere and loyal. Your Majesty should be tolerant of him and open the way for him to speak.

古文：癸巳，贬愈为潮州刺史。
现代文：癸巳，宪宗将韩愈贬为潮州刺史。
English: On the 14th day of the first month, Han Yu was relegated to a footnote in the history of Chaozhou.

古文：自战国之世，老、庄与儒者争衡，更相是非。
现代文：自从战国时代以来，老子、庄子与儒家较量胜负，交相议论我是你非。
English: Since the Warring States period, Lao Zi, Zhuo Zi and Confucianism have been weighing the pros and cons and discussing each other.

古文：至汉末，益之以佛，然好者尚寡。
现代文：及至东汉末年，又增加了佛家，但是喜好佛家的为数尚少。
English: By the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the number of Buddhist families had increased, but the number of people who liked Buddhist families was still small.

古文：晋、宋以来，日益繁炽，自帝王至于士民，莫不尊信。
现代文：晋、宋年间以来，佛家日益繁盛，由帝王以至于士子庶民，没有不尊崇信奉佛家的。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, Buddhist families have become increasingly prosperous. From emperors to priests and commoners, there is no disrespect for those who believe in Buddhism.

古文：下者畏慕罪福，高者论难空有。
现代文：庸俗的人们害怕得罪，羡慕福缘，清高的人们谈论空泛诘难实有。
English: Vulgar people are afraid of offending, and envy good fortune. High-minded people talk about emptiness, but there is no reality.

古文：独愈恶其蠹财惑众，力排之，其言多矫激太过。
现代文：唯独韩愈憎恶佛家损耗资财，迷惑百姓，尽力排斥佛家，他的话往往过于偏激。
English: Han Yu, however, detested the Buddhists for wasting money and resources, confusing the people, and tried his best to exclude the Buddhists. His words were often too extreme.

古文：惟《送文畅师序》最得其要，曰： 夫鸟俯而啄，仰而四顾，兽深居而简出，惧物之为己害也，犹且不免焉。
现代文：只有他的《送文畅师序》论述最得要领，文章说： 大凡飞禽低下头来啄食，仰起头来四面张望，走兽在深密之处藏身，很少出来走动，这是害怕有些物种危害自己，但仍然不能幸免。
English: Only his "Letter to a Friend" is more to the point, the article said: "Most birds lower their heads to peck at food, raise their heads to look around, and animals hide in deep places and rarely come out to walk. This is because they are afraid that some species will harm themselves, but they still can't escape.

古文：弱之肉，强之食。
现代文：弱者的血肉，就是强者的食物。
English: The flesh of the weak is the food of the strong.

古文：今吾与文畅安居而暇食，优游以生死，与禽兽异者，宁可不知其所自邪！ 
现代文：现在我与文畅安心地居住着，悠闲地饮食着，从生到死都过着闲逸自得的生活，与飞禽走兽面临的境状不同，怎么能够不知道这是从哪里得来的呢！ 
English: Now I live with Wenchang in peace and quiet, eat and drink leisurely, and live a life of leisure and self-sufficiency from birth to death. Unlike the situation faced by birds and beasts, how can I not know where this comes from!

古文：丙申，田弘正奏败淄青兵于东阿，杀万馀人。
现代文：丙申，田弘正奏称在东阿打败淄青兵马，斩杀一万多人。
English: According to Tian Hongzheng, Tian Hongzheng claimed to have defeated the Qing soldiers and horses in East Asia, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：沧州刺史李宗奭与横海节度使郑权不叶，不受其节制，权奏之。
现代文：沧州刺史李宗与横海节度使郑权不和，不肯接受郑权的调度管束，郑权奏报了李宗的情况。
English: Li Zong, the chief historian of Cangzhou, and Henghai Jiedu caused discord between Zheng Quan and refused to accept Zheng Quan's scheduling control. Zheng Quan reported the situation of Li Zong.

古文：上遣中使追之，宗奭使其军中留己，表称惧乱未敢离州。
现代文：宪宗派遣中使调他回朝，李宗让军中将士挽留自己，自己上表声称害怕造成变乱，不敢离开沧州。
English: During the dispatch of Emperor Xianzong, the envoy transferred him back to the North, Li Zong let the lieutenant generals hold him back, and claimed that he was afraid of causing turmoil and did not dare to leave Cangzhou.

古文：诏以乌重胤代权，将吏惧，逐宗奭。
现代文：宪宗颁诏以乌重胤替代郑权，沧州将吏恐惧了，便驱逐了李宗，李宗只好逃奔京城。
English: Xianzong issued an edict to replace Zheng Quan with Wu Chongyin. The Cangzhou generals were afraid and expelled Li Zong. Li Zong had to flee to Beijing.

古文：宗奭奔京师，辛丑，斩于独柳之下。
现代文：辛丑，李宗被斩杀于独柳下。
English: Horrifically, Li Zong was beheaded under the willow tree.

古文：丙午，田弘正奏败平卢兵于阳谷。
现代文：丙午，田弘正奏称在阳谷打败平卢兵马。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Tian Hongzheng made a speech saying that he had defeated the Pinglu soldiers and horses in Yanggu.

