古文：周车三百五十乘，陈于牧野，帝辛从。
现代文：周人的战车三百五十辆，列阵在牧野。商王纣率兵迎战。
English: Three hundred and fifty of Zhou's chariots lined up in Makino. Shang Wang Yao led his troops into battle.

古文：武王使尚父与伯夫致师。
现代文：武王派太师姜尚率一百人挑战。
English: King Wu sent Grand Master Jiang Shang to lead a hundred men to challenge.

古文：王既誓，以虎贲、戎车驰商师，商师大崩。
现代文：武王誓师以后，用武贲勇士与装甲战车冲向商王的军队，商军溃败。
English: After King Wuchang's oath, he rushed to the merchant's army with warriors and armored chariots, and the merchant army was defeated.

古文：商纣奔内，登于鹿台之上，屏遮而自燔与火。
现代文：商王纣奔回城内，登上鹿台，穿上宝玉衣蔽体，在火中自焚。
English: The merchant king ran back to the city, climbed onto the deer platform, put on a jade robe to cover his body, and burned himself in the fire.

古文：武王乃手太白以麾诸侯，诸侯毕拜。遂揖之。
现代文：武王乃手执太自旗向诸侯挥动示意，诸侯礼拜完毕，武王于是作揖还礼。
English: King Wu waved his hand to wave his flag to the princes. After the princes had finished their prayers, King Wu then returned the salute.

古文：商庶百姓咸俟于郊。群宾佥进曰： 上天降休。 
现代文：商朝的庶民贵族都等候在郊外，周的群臣都进至王前，贺道： 上天降下的大喜事！ 
English: The common people and aristocrats of the Shang Dynasty were all waiting in the suburbs, and Zhou's courtiers all came to the king, shouting: A great joyous event descended from heaven!

古文：再拜稽首。
现代文：然后又两次行大礼。武王答拜毕，先行入城。
English: Comrade Zicheng kowtows again.

古文：武王答拜，先入适王所，乃克射之，三发，而后下车，而击之以轻吕，斩之以黄钺。折，悬诸太白。乃适二女之所，既缢，王又射之三发，乃右击之以轻吕，斩之以玄钺，县诸小白。
现代文：后下车，用轻吕剑刺纣王尸身，用黄钺大斧砍下首级，悬挂在太白旗上示众。又去往两个王妃所在的地方，她们已经自缢。武王又射了她们三箭，用轻吕箭刺向尸身，用铁质大斧砍下首级，悬挂在小白旗上示众。
English: After getting off the bus, he stabbed the king's body with a light bow and arrow, chopped off his head with a large yellow-handled axe, and hung it on a white flag to show the public. He also went to the place where the two princesses were, and they had already committed suicide. King Wu shot them three arrows, stabbed the body with a light bow and arrow, and chopped off his head with a large iron axe, and hung it on a small white flag to show the public.

古文：乃出场于厥军。
现代文：然后武王出城，派人治宫屋，回到他的军中。
English: Then King Wu went out of the city, sent someone to take care of the palace and returned to his army.

古文：及期，百夫荷素质之旗于王前，叔振奏拜假。
现代文：到约定的日子，一百人各扛一面白旗走在武王前开路，曹叔振铎奏请武王接受上天的嘉命，又陈列若干威仪车。
English: On the appointed day, a hundred people, each carrying a white flag, walked in front of King Wu to open the road. Cao Shu Zhenyu asked King Wu to accept God's blessing, and displayed a number of majestic cars.

古文：又陈常车，周公把大钺，召公把小钺，以夹王。
现代文：周公旦手持大钺，高手握小钺夹辅武王，泰颠、闳天都手持轻吕剑紧随武王。
English: Zhou Gongdan was holding a large scepter in his hand, and the expert in holding a small scepter was assisting King Wu. Tai Bing and Xuan Tian were both holding light lü sword, closely following King Wu.

古文：泰颠、闳夭，皆执轻吕以奏王，王入即位于社，太卒之左。
现代文：进入王宫，在社庙南面即天子之位。二十五名士卒左右往返，大臣们全都跟随。
English: Entering the royal palace, in the south of the shrine-temple, that is, the position of the Son of Heaven. Twenty-five courtiers go back and forth, and the ministers all follow.

古文：群臣毕从毛叔郑奉明水，卫叔傅礼。召公奭赞采，师尚父牵牲。
现代文：毛叔郑捧着明水，卫康叔榴礼，召公奭协助办事，师尚父姜尚牵着祭祀用的牛羊。
English: Mao's uncle Zheng is holding the clear water, Wei Kang's uncle the durian, calling on the public to help with the work, and Master Shang's father Jiang Shang is leading the sacrificial cattle and sheep.

古文：尹逸策曰： 殷末孙受德，迷先成汤之明，侮灭神祗不祀，昏暴商邑百姓，其章显闻于昊天上帝。 
现代文：尹逸宣读策文道； 殷人亡国之君纣，道德惑乱成汤之英明，侮慢蔑视神祗不祭祀，施狂暴予商朝贵族百姓，恶迹昭著，上天五帝也知晓。 
English: Yin Yat read out the "Culture and Literature Doctrine"; the prince of a ruined country, the wisdom of moral confusion, the contempt of the gods, the non-sacrifice, the violence to the nobles and people of the Shang Dynasty, the evil deeds are notorious, and the five emperors know it.

古文：武王再拜稽首乃出。
现代文：武王两次作揖叩头，才出了王宫。
English: King Wu made two prostrations before he left the palace.

古文：立王子武庚，命管叔相。
现代文：纣王之子武庚为段人宗主，命管叔鲜为相监视他。
English: Wu Geng, the son of the king of Qi, is the patriarch of the family, and his uncle, who is in charge of his life, watches over him.

古文：乃命召公释箕子之囚，命毕公、卫叔出百姓之囚。
现代文：又命召公奭释放被囚的箕子，命毕公高、卫叔封放出被囚的贵族。
English: He also ordered the public officials to release the prisoners, and ordered Bi Gonggao and Wei Shufu to release the imprisoned nobles.

古文：乃命南宫忽振鹿台之财、巨桥之粟；乃命南宫百达、史佚迁九鼎三巫；乃命闳夭封比干之墓；乃命祖祝崇宾飨，祷之于军。乃班。
现代文：分发巨桥的粮食。又命南宫百达和史佚迁九鼎到郏郧。又命闳夭为比于聚土为冢。
English: Distributed the grain of the huge bridge. Also ordered Nan Gong Baida and Shi Yan to relocate Jiuding to Handan. Also ordered the young people to be more diligent in gathering soil for Handan.

