古文：王僧辩王僧辩，字君才，右卫将军神念之子也。
现代文：王僧辩字君才，是右卫将军王神念的儿子。
English: Wang Monk Duan Zi Jun Cai is the son of the Right Guard General Wang Shennong.

古文：以天监中随父来奔。
现代文：天监年间王僧辩随同父亲一起来归附。
English: During the time of Tianjing, Wang Soen accompanied his father to Guizhou.

古文：起家为湘东王国左常侍。
现代文：从家中征召出来任湘东王国左常侍。
English: He was called up from his home to serve as the Left Attendant of the Shandong Kingdom.

古文：王为丹阳尹，转府行参军。
现代文：湘束王任丹阳尹，王僧辩转任府行参军。
English: Xiangzhu Wang was appointed as Danyang Yin, and Wang Sofen was transferred to join the army.

古文：王出守会稽，兼中兵参军事。
现代文：湘束王出任会稽太守，王僧辩兼中兵参军事。
English: King Xiangzhu served as the auditor-general of the association, and Wang Sofen was also a middle-ranking soldier in the military.

古文：王为荆州，仍除中兵，在限内。
现代文：湘束王任荆州刺史，王僧辩仍然任中兵参军事，在机要职位上。
English: Xiangzhu Wang was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, and Wang Sangye was still appointed as a soldier in the military, in an important position.

古文：时武宁郡反，王命僧辩讨平之。
现代文：当时武宁郡反叛，湘东王命王僧辩讨伐平定叛乱。
English: At that time, there was a rebellion in Wuming County, and the King of Shandong Province, Wang Meiwang, and his monks fought and quelled the rebellion.

古文：迁贞威将军、武宁太守。
现代文：王僧辩迁任贞威将军、武宁太守。
English: Wang Soen was transferred to the post of General Zhengyi, and Wu Ning to the post of Governor.

古文：寻迁振远将军、广平太守。
现代文：不久又迁任振远将军、广平太守。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General Zhenyuan and Governor of Guangping.

古文：秩满，还为王府中录事，参军如故。
现代文：任职期满，王僧辩回到湘束王府任王府中录事，参军之职不变。
English: At the end of his term of office, Wang Sangye returned to the Hunan Provincial Government to serve as a member of the Provincial Government, and his position as a member of the military remained unchanged.

古文：王被征为护军，僧辩兼府司马。
现代文：湘东王被征召进京任护军，王僧辩兼任府司马。
English: King Xiangdong was summoned to Beijing to serve as a military escort, and Wang Sangye concurrently served as prefectural governor.

古文：王为江州，仍除云骑将军司马，守湓城。
现代文：湘东王任江州刺史，王僧辩接着就被授任云骑将军司马，湓城太守。
English: The king of eastern Hunan was appointed the governor of Jiangzhou Province, and Wang Sangye was then appointed the general of the Yunnan cavalry, and the governor of Shicheng.

古文：俄监安陆郡，无几而还。
现代文：不久他迁任监安陆郡，没有多久就回王府。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the supervision of Anlu County, and soon returned to the royal palace.

古文：寻为新蔡太守，犹带司马，将军如故。
现代文：不久他又任新蔡太守，仍然兼任司马之职，将军之号不变。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the new Cai Taizhou, still concurrently holding the post of Sima Zang, with the title of General unchanged.

古文：王除荆州，为贞毅将军府谘议参军事，赐食千人，代柳仲礼为竟陵太守，改号雄信将军。
现代文：湘束王被授任荆州太守，王僧辩为贞毅将军府谘议参军事，赐食千人，代柳仲礼为竟陵太守，改称号为雄信将军。
English: Xiangzhu Wang was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, Wang Soen was appointed as the adviser to General Zheng Yi to participate in the military, and he gave food to thousands of people. On behalf of Liu Zhongli, he was appointed as the governor of Qingting, and his title was changed to General Xiongxin.

古文：属侯景反，王命僧辩假节，总督舟师一万，兼粮馈赴援。
现代文：正遇上侯景反叛，湘东王命王僧辩假节，总督一万水军，带着粮食给养赴援京城。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, the King of Shandong, the King of Life, the King of Monks, and the Governor of Ten Thousand Sailors, went to support Beijing with grain supplies.

古文：才至京都，宫城陷没，天子蒙尘。
现代文：王僧到都城，宫城被攻陷，天子蒙尘受辱。
English: Wang Zeng went to the capital city, Miyagi was invaded and conquered, and the heavenly son was covered with dust and humiliated.

古文：僧辩与柳仲礼兄弟及赵伯超等，先屈膝于景，然后入朝。景悉收其军实，而厚加绥抚。
现代文：王僧辩与柳仲礼兄弟以及趟伯超等人，先向侯景投降，然后入宫城朝见皇上，侯景把他们的军器和粮食全部收缴，而对他们深加抚慰。
English: Wang Sangyan, Liu Zhongli brothers, and Wabi Bo Chao and others first surrendered to Hou Jing, and then entered the imperial palace to see the emperor. Hou Jing confiscated all their military weapons and grain, and comforted them deeply.

古文：未几，遣僧辩归于竟陵，于是倍道兼行，西就世祖。
现代文：没过多久，侯景又派王僧辩回竟陵，王僧辩于是加倍赶路，日夜兼行，向西去投奔世祖。
English: It did not take long before Houjing sent Wang Sangye back to the Mausoleum. Wang Sangye then doubled the pace of his journey, traveling both day and night, heading west to join his ancestor.

古文：世祖承制，以僧辩为领军将军。
现代文：世祖秉承皇帝意旨，任命王僧辩为领军将军。
English: The founder adhered to the emperor's will and appointed Wang Sangye as the leading general.

古文：及荆、湘疑贰，军师失律，世祖又命僧辩及鲍泉统军讨之，分给兵粮，克日就道。
现代文：荆州刺史湘东王、湘州刺史河东王之间产生嫌隙，互生疑心，军队无法统一指挥，世祖又命王僧辩及鲍泉统领军队攻讨他们，拨足军粮，确定日期出发。
English: There was a rift and mutual suspicion between the King of East Shandong in Jingzhou Province and the King of East Shandong in Hunan Province, and the armies could not be unified. The founder also ordered Wang Sangye and Bao Quan to lead the army to attack them, allocate enough grain for the army, and set a date for departure.

古文：时僧辨以竟陵部下犹未尽来，意欲待集，然后上顿。
现代文：当时王僧辩因为竟陵部下没有全部到达，打算等他们全部聚齐，然后集中前行。
English: At that time, Wang Sangye, because his subordinates did not all arrive at the tomb, planned to wait until they were all gathered together, and then concentrated on moving forward.

古文：谓鲍泉曰： 我与君俱受命南讨，而军容若此，计将安之？ 
现代文：王僧辩对鲍泉说： 我舆你一同接受命令南进征讨，但军队阵营却这样不整齐，你有什么计划? 
English: Wang Sangyan said to Bao Quan: I know that you have accepted the order to march south together, but the army camp is so disorganized. What is your plan?

古文：泉曰： 既禀庙算，驱率骁勇，事等沃雪，何所多虑。 
现代文：鲍泉说： 我们既然已经领受了朝廷对战事的谋划，率领骁勇的将士驰驱杀敌，形势如同用热水浇雪，还要多担忧什么? 
English: Bao Quan said: Since we have accepted the imperial court's plan for the war, and led the brave soldiers to drive the enemy, the situation is like pouring snow with hot water, what else should we worry about?

古文：僧辩曰： 不然。
现代文：王僧辩说： 你说的不对。
English: The royal monk argued, "You are not right.

古文：君之所言故是，文士之常谈耳。
现代文：你所说的，衹不过是文士的老生常谈而已。
English: What you are saying is nothing more than the old saying of the scribes.

古文：河东少有武干，兵刃又强，新破军师，养锐待敌，自非精兵一万，不足以制之。
现代文：河东王年轻时就有用武的才略，武器装备又很强，又刚刚打败我们的军队，现正在养精蓄锐，等着我们去进攻，如果没有一万精兵，不足以战胜他们。
English: When he was young, King Hedong had a talent for military strategy, and his weapons and equipment were very strong. He had just defeated our army, and now he was gathering his strength, waiting for us to attack. If he did not have ten thousand elite soldiers, it would not be enough to defeat them.

古文：我竟陵甲士，数经行阵，已遣召之，不久当及。
现代文：我所率领的竟陵将士，屡屡经历战阵，我已经派人把他们召来，不久将要赶到。
English: I've sent someone to summon my soldiers, who have been in battle many times before, and they'll be here soon.

古文：虽期日有限，犹可重申，欲与卿共入言之，望相佐也。 
现代文：虽然确定的日期已到，但还可以延缓出发的时间，我想和你一同入朝向王爷禀告这事，希望你帮助我说话。 
English: Although the fixed date has arrived, it is still possible to postpone the time of departure. I would like to go to the Imperial Palace with you to report this to His Imperial Highness. I hope you can help me speak.

古文：泉曰： 成败之举，系此一行，迟速之宜，终当仰听。 
现代文：鲍泉说： 事情的成败，全在于这次出兵，出发是迟是早，最终应当听从王爷的命令。 
English: Bao Quan said: The success or failure of the matter lies entirely in this dispatch of troops. Whether the departure is early or late, we should ultimately obey the prince's order.

古文：世祖性严忌，微闻其言，以为迁延不肯去，稍已含怒。
现代文：世担生性苛严，又多疑忌，已经暗中得知他们的谈话，于是认为他们拖延时日，不肯出发，已渐渐有怒意。
English: The world, of a stern and suspicious nature, had been tacitly informed of their conversation, and was growing angry at their delay in setting out.

古文：及僧辩将入，谓泉曰： 我先发言，君可见系。 
现代文：王僧辩将要入朝的时候，对鲍星说： 我先开始说，你可以接着我说。 
English: When Wang Sangye was about to enter the imperial court, he said to Bao Xing: I will speak first, you can follow me.

古文：泉又许之。
现代文：鲍泉又答应了他。
English: Bao Quan agreed again.

古文：及见世祖，世祖迎问曰： 卿已办乎？
现代文：他们朝见世祖，世祖迎着他们问道： 你已经备办好了吗?
English: They saw the patriarch in the morning. The patriarch greeted them and asked, "Are you ready?"

古文：何日当发？ 
现代文：将在哪一天出发? 
English: What day will you be leaving?

古文：僧辩具对，如向所言。
现代文：王僧辩就把先前的话全向世祖说了。
English: Wang Sangye said all the previous words to the ancestor.

古文：世祖大怒，按剑厉声曰： 卿惮行邪！ 
现代文：世祖非常生气，摸着剑厉声说： 你害怕出兵吗! 
English: The ancestor was very angry, touched his sword and said sharply, "Are you afraid to send troops?"

古文：因起入内。
现代文：说着就起身进入内堂。
English: Saying this, he got up and went into the inner hall.

古文：泉震怖失色，竟不敢言。
现代文：鲍星震惊害怕，竟然不敢开口说话。
English: Shocked and afraid, Bao Xing did not dare to speak.

古文：须臾，遣左右数十人收僧辩。
现代文：一会儿，世担派了敷十名随从出来收捕王僧丰。
English: A moment later, Shitan dispatched an entourage of ten men to capture Wang Sangfeng.

古文：既至，谓曰： 卿拒命不行，是欲同贼，今唯有死耳。 
现代文：世担自己出来后，对王僧辩说： 你抗拒命令，不肯出发，造就是想要和叛贼同心，现在衹有死路一条罢了。 
English: After the sexton came out, he argued with the royal monk: You have resisted the order and refused to set out, which means that you want to be one with the traitors. Now there is only one way to die.

古文：僧辩对曰： 僧辩食禄既深，忧责实重，今日就戮，岂敢怀恨。但恨不见老母。 
现代文：王僧辩回答说： 僧辩深受朝廷俸禄，责任实在重大，今日被杀，哪敢有什么怨恨，衹是遗憾没有见到老母。 
English: Wang Sangye replied, "Sangye was well paid by the imperial court, and his responsibility was very great. He was killed today. How dare he have any grudge? It is a pity that he did not get to see his mother.

古文：世祖因斫之，中其左髀，流血至地。
现代文：世祖就用剑斫王僧辩，击中王僧辩的左髀，血一直流到地上。
English: The patriarch struck Wang Sofen with his sword, hitting Wang Sofen's left shin, and blood flowed all the way to the ground.

古文：僧辩闷绝，久之方苏。
现代文：王僧辩昏死过去，过了很久才苏醒。
English: Wang Sangye passed out and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：即送付廷尉，并收其子侄，并皆系之。
现代文：世祖就把他送交廷尉，同时也收捕王僧辩的子侄，一起都关押起来。
English: The patriarch sent him to the imperial lieutenant, and at the same time arrested Wang Sangye's nephew, and they were all imprisoned together.

古文：会岳阳王军袭江陵，人情搔扰，未知其备。世祖遣左右往狱，问计于僧辩，僧辩具陈方略，登即赦为城内都督。
现代文：正逢岳阳王的军队袭击辽堕，人心骚动不安，不知道怎么防卫，世祖派自己的侍从去狱中，向王仅还询问防守的办法，王僧峦全面陈述御敌方略，王僧辩当时就被赦免，并被任为城内都督。
English: Just as King Yueyang's army attacked Liao Pu, the people were agitated and anxious, and did not know how to defend themselves. The ancestor sent his attendants to the prison, and only asked the king for defensive measures. Wang Sangyu made a comprehensive report on the enemy's strategy. Wang Sangye was pardoned at that time and was appointed as the governor of the city.

古文：俄而岳阳奔退，而鲍泉力不能克长沙，世祖乃命僧辩代之。
现代文：不久岳阳王败退，而鲍泉围攻长沙，尽力攻打却不能攻克，世祖于是命王僧辩取代鲍泉。
English: Soon after, King Yueyang was defeated, and Bao Quan besieged Changsha. Although he tried his best to attack, he could not conquer it. The ancestor then ordered King Sofen to replace Bao Quan.

古文：数泉以十罪，遣舍人罗重欢领斋仗三百人，与僧辩俱发。
现代文：列举鲍泉的十条罪状，派舍人罗重欢率领三百名禁军中的精悍人员，与王僧辩一同出发。
English: He enumerated the ten crimes of Bao Quan, and sent Luo Chonghuan to lead three hundred brave people from the Forbidden Army to set out with Wang Sangye.

古文：既至，遣通泉云： 罗舍人被令，送王竟陵来。 
现代文：他们到达鲍星处之后，先派人通报鲍泉说： 罗舍人受王爷之命，送王竟陵来。 
English: After they arrived at Bao Xing's place, they first sent someone to inform Bao Quan, saying: "The Roshi people were ordered by the prince to send Wang Qingtong to the tomb.

古文：泉甚愕然，顾左右曰： 得王竟陵助我经略，贼不足平。 
现代文：鲍泉十分吃惊，对自己的侍从说： 得到王竟陵帮助我谋划战事，叛贼不堪一击。 
English: Bao Quan was very surprised and said to his attendant: "Getting Wang Qingting to help me plan the war, the traitor is vulnerable.

古文：俄而重欢赍令书先入，僧辩从斋仗继进，泉方拂席，坐而待之。
现代文：一会儿罗重欢拿着世祖的命令先进鲍星的营帐，王坦峦率领禁军随后而进，鲍泉才拂拭座席以示迎接，然后又坐下来等他们发话。
English: After a while, Luo Chong Huan took the order of the ancestor and advanced to Bao Xing's camp. Wang Tianzhong led the forbidden army and then entered. Bao Quan only wiped the seat to show his welcome, and then sat down to wait for them to speak.

古文：僧辩既入，背泉而坐，曰： 鲍郎，卿有罪，令旨使我鏁卿，勿以故意见待。 
现代文：王僧辩进去以后，背对着鲍泉坐下来说： 鲍鲤，你有罪，王爷命我拘捕你，你不要用以前的态度对待我。 
English: After Wang Sangye entered, he sat down with his back to Bao Quan and said: Bao Quan, you are guilty. Wang Ye ordered me to arrest you. Don't treat me with the same attitude as before.

古文：因语重欢出令，泉即下地，鏁于床侧。
现代文：他就告诉罗重欢拿出王爷的命令，鲍星就从坐榻上下来，禁军就在坐榻之侧捆绑鲍星。
English: He told Luo Zhifang to take out the prince's order, and Bao Xing got down from the couch, and the guards tied Bao Xing to the side of the couch.

古文：僧辩仍部分将帅，并力攻围，遂平湘土。
现代文：王僧辩接着部署军力，调配将帅，全军并力攻城，于是就平定了湘州。
English: Wang Sangye then deployed military forces, dispatched generals, and the whole army attacked the city together, thus leveling Hunan.

古文：还复领军将军。
现代文：回来后，王僧辩又任领军将军。
English: After his return, Wang Sangye was appointed as the leading general.

古文：侯景浮江西寇，军次夏首。
现代文：侯景率军乘船沿辽向西进犯，军队驻扎在夏首。
English: The army led by Hou Jing marched westward along the Liao River by boat, and the army was stationed in Xia Shou.

古文：僧辩为大都督，率巴州刺史淳于量、定州刺史杜龛、宜州刺史王琳、郴州刺史裴之横等，俱赴西阳。
现代文：王僧辩任大都督，率领巴州刺史淳于量、定州刺史杜龛、宜州刺史王琳、郴州刺史裴之横等人，一同赶赴西阳，军队驻扎在巴陵。
English: Wang Sangyan was appointed as the grand governor, and he led the people of Bazhou Province, Shishi Chunyu, Dingzhou Province, Shishi Du, Yizhou Province, Shishi Wanglin, Zhangzhou Province, Shishi Pei, and others to rush to Xiyang, and the army was stationed in Baling.

古文：军次巴陵，闻郢州已没，僧辩因据巴陵城。
现代文：听说郢州已被攻陷，僧辩就据守巴陵城。
English: Hearing that Zhangzhou had fallen, Sangye defended the city of Baling.

古文：世祖乃命罗州刺史徐嗣徽、武州刺史杜掞并会僧辩于巴陵。
现代文：世祖于是命罗州刺史徐嗣徽、武州刺史杜掞一起和僧辩在巴陵会合。
English: The founder then ordered Luozhou priest Xu Shihui and Wuzhou priest Du Qian to meet with the monks at Baling.

古文：景既陷郢城，兵众益广，徒党甚锐，将进寇荆州。
现代文：侯景还攻陷江西之后，兵士更加增多，士气十分旺盛，将要进犯型业。
English: After Houjing also invaded Jiangxi, the number of soldiers increased even more, morale was very strong, and there was going to be an offensive.

古文：乃使伪仪同丁和统兵五千守江夏，大将宋子仙前驱一万造巴陵，景悉凶徒水步继进。
现代文：于是他派偶官仪同丁和率领五千士兵守红星，大将宋子仙率领一万人马作前驱直赴巴陵，江西量率领全部叛军从水陆两路紧随前驱之后进军。
English: As a result, he sent the concubine and official Tong Dinghe and led five thousand soldiers to defend the Red Star, the general Song Zixian led ten thousand horses and drove straight ahead to Baling, and the governor of Jiangxi Province led the entire rebel army from the water and land to march after the advance.

古文：于是缘江戍逻，望风请服，贼拓逻至于隐矶。
现代文：于是沿辽戍守的士兵，听到风声就请求归降，叛贼把巡逻士兵直伸展到隐矶。
English: As a result, the soldiers who were guarding along the Liao River heard the wind and asked to surrender, and the traitors stretched the patrolling soldiers straight to the Hidden Rock.

古文：僧辩悉上江渚米粮，并沉公私船于水。
现代文：王僧辩把辽渚的米粮全都运上岸，并且把公私船只全部沉入水中。
English: Wang Sangyan transported all the rice grain from Liaozhu to the shore, and sank all the public and private ships into the water.

古文：及贼前锋次江口，僧辩乃分命众军，乘城固守，偃旗卧鼓，安若无人。
现代文：等到叛军前锋进驻江口，王僧辩才向众军发布命令，要他们登上城墙固守，并且偃旗息鼓，安静得像没有人一样。
English: It was not until the rebel vanguard was stationed at the mouth of the river that Wang Sangye issued an order to the troops, telling them to climb the city wall and hold fast, and to hold their banners and be as quiet as no one else.

古文：翌日，贼众济江，轻骑至城下，问： 城内是谁？ 
现代文：第二天，叛军渡江。轻骑直至城下，问守军： 城内是谁统领军队? 
English: The next day, the rebels crossed the river, rode to the foot of the city, and asked the defenders: "Who is leading the army inside the city?"

古文：答曰： 是王领军。 
现代文：守军回答说： 是王垣军。 
English: The defenders answered: It is Wangaki's army.

古文：贼曰： 语王领军，事势如此，何不早降？ 
现代文：叛军说： 告诉王领军，形势发展成这样，为什么不早点投降? 
English: The rebels said: Tell the king's leading army that the situation has developed into this, why not surrender earlier?

古文：僧辩使人答曰： 大军但向荆州，此城自当非碍。
现代文：王仅峦派人回答说： 你们大军尽管直趋荆州，遣座城自然不会成为你们的障碍。
English: Wang Yuanzhang sent a man to reply: "Even though your large army is heading straight for Jingzhou, the city of Enza will naturally not be an obstacle for you.

古文：僧辩百口在人掌握，岂得便降。 
现代文：我王僧辩家百余口在人掌握之中，哪裹能够随意投降? 
English: I have more than a hundred king-monk debaters in my possession, how can I surrender at will?

古文：贼骑既去，俄尔又来，曰： 我王已至，王领军何为不出与王相见邪？ 
现代文：叛军骑兵离开后，不久又回来说： 我们王爷已经来了，王领军为什么不出来和王爷相见呢? 
English: After the rebel cavalry had left, they soon returned and said, "Our prince has already arrived. Why doesn't the king's army come out to meet the prince?"

古文：僧辩不答。
现代文：王僧辩不回答。
English: Wang Sangyan did not answer.

古文：顷之，又执王珣等至于城下，珣为书诱说城内。
现代文：不一会儿，叛军又押着被他们拘囚的王殉等人到达城下，王殉写信劝诱城内守军投降。
English: A short while later, the rebels arrived at the foot of the city with Wang Zhidi, who was held prisoner by them. Wang Zhidi wrote a letter to persuade the defenders in the city to surrender.

古文：景帅船舰并集北寺，又分入港中，登岸治道，广设氈屋，耀军城东陇上，芟除草，开八道向城，遣五千兔头肉薄苦攻。
现代文：侯景率领船舰全都聚集在北寺，又分别驶入河汊中，军士上岸清理道路，架设了很多毡帐，并且在城束陇上炫耀军威，铲子杂草，开辟八条道路直指巴陵城，又派出五千名敢死队直逼城墙，肉搏苦攻。
English: Hou Jing led the ships all gathered in the North Temple, and separately drove into the estuary, the sergeants went ashore to clear the road, erected a lot of tents, and showed off military power on the battlements, shoveled weeds, opened up eight roads straight to Baling City, and sent five thousand death squads straight to the city wall, hand-to-hand combat.

古文：城内同时鼓噪，矢石雨下，杀贼既多，贼乃引退。世祖又命平北将军胡僧祐率兵下援僧辩。
现代文：城内守军同时击鼓呼叫，箭矢码石齐下如雨，杀伤很多叛军，叛军才退兵，世祖又命平北将军曲僧枯率兵沿江而下增援王僧辩。
English: The defenders of the city simultaneously beat drums and shouted, the arrows fell like rain, and many rebels were killed and wounded. The rebels retreated, and the ancestor ordered the Pingbei general Qu Senggui to lead the soldiers down the river to reinforce Wang Sengfei.

古文：是日，贼复攻巴陵，水步十处，鸣鼓吹脣，肉薄斫上。
现代文：这一天，叛军又进攻巴陵，水兵步兵从十处一齐进攻，敲着鼓，吹日哨，短兵肉搏，边斫边往城上街。
English: On this day, the rebels attacked Baling again. Sailors and infantry attacked from ten places at the same time, beating drums, blowing sun-sentinels, hand-to-hand combat, and marching to the streets of the city.

古文：城上放木掷火爨昚石，杀伤甚多。
现代文：城上施放滚木，投掷火爨镭石，杀伤很多叛军。
English: Rolling logs and flints were thrown at the castle, killing and wounding many of the rebels.

古文：午后贼退，乃更起长栅绕城，大列舸舰，以楼船攻水城西南角；又遣人渡洲岸，引牜羊柯推虾蟆车填緌，引障车临城，二日方止。
现代文：午后叛贼退兵，于是又另外建造长栅栏围绕巴陵城，大规模摆出战船，用楼船进攻水城的西南角；又派人渡过江中洲上岸，用系船木桩，推着虾蟆车填塞护城河，推着可以遮挡矢石的障车直逼城下，这样攻了两天才停止。
English: In the afternoon, the rebels retreated, so another long fence was built around the city of Baling, warships were deployed on a large scale, and the southwest corner of the water city was attacked with a building ship. They also sent people across the Yangtze River to the shore, using the ship's wooden piles, pushing the shrimp truck to fill the moat, and pushing the barrier car that could block the arrow stone straight under the city, so the attack stopped for two days.

古文：贼又于舰上竖木桔禋，聚茅置火，以烧水栅，风势不利，自焚而退。
现代文：叛贼又在船舰上竖起木制的桔槔，堆聚茅草放火，用以烧毁守军的水栅，但因为风向对叛军不利，反而烧坏了自己的船舰，被迫退兵。
English: The rebels also erected wooden orange stakes on the ship, piled up thatch and set fire to burn the defenders' water grate, but because the wind direction was unfavorable to the rebels, they instead burned their own ship and were forced to retreat.

古文：既频战挫衄，贼帅任约又为陆法和所擒，景乃烧营夜遁，旋军夏首。
现代文：叛军屡屡进攻，屡被挫败，叛军主将鱼垫又被陆运塑擒获，零星于是烧毁营寨在夜晚逃走，率军返回夏首。
English: The rebels repeatedly attacked and were repeatedly thwarted, and the rebels' main fish mat was again captured by the land transport, so they burned down the camp sporadically and fled at night, leading the army back to the beginning of summer.

古文：世祖策勋行赏，以僧辩为征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州策史，封长宁县公。
现代文：世祖论功行赏，命王僧辩为征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，封为长宁县公。
English: On the merits of the founder, the king ordered the monk to be awarded as the general of the East Conquest, the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and the governor of Jiangsu Province, and he was appointed as the governor of Changning County.

古文：于是世祖命僧辩即率巴陵诸军，沿流讨景。
现代文：于是世祖命王僧辩当即率领巴陵各路人马，沿江而下征讨候景量。
English: As a result, the ancestor, Wang Sangye, immediately led the people and horses from all walks of life in Baling to go down the river to collect and discuss the scenic spots.

古文：师次郢城，步攻鲁山。
现代文：军队驻扎在郢城，派出步兵攻打鲁山。
English: The army was stationed in Lucheng and sent its infantry to attack Lushan.

古文：鲁山城主支化仁，景之骑将也，率其党力战，众军大破之，化仁乃降。
现代文：鲁山守城主将支化仁，是候景手下的骑将，他率领手下党徒全力作战，但仍被王僧辩众军打得大败，支化仁于是才投降。
English: Lushan's lord of the castle, Shih Huaren, was the cavalry commander of Hou Jing's men. He led his party members to fight with all his might, but was still defeated by Wang Sangye's army. Shih Huaren then surrendered.

古文：僧辩仍督诸军渡江攻郢，即入罗城。
现代文：王僧辩接着督领各路人马渡江攻打郢，当即进入郢的外城。
English: Wang Sangyan then led all the passers-by to cross the river and attack Gan, and immediately entered the outer city of Gan.

古文：宋子仙蚁聚金城拒守，攻之未克。
现代文：宋子仙把人马都聚集在内城死守，王僧辩攻城未攻下。
English: Song Zisen gathered all the people and horses to defend the inner city, and Wang Xiang did not attack the city.

古文：子仙使其党时灵护率众三千，开门出战，僧辩又大破之，生擒灵护，斩首千级。
现代文：宋子仙派他手下瞳玺护率领三千人马，打开城门出城作战，王僧辩又大破出城叛军，活捉迪玺护，斩杀一千余人。
English: Song Zixian sent his subordinate Hitomi Yingguo to lead three thousand horses, open the city gate and fight out of the city. Wang Sangye also broke out of the rebel army, captured Di Yingguo alive, and killed more than one thousand people.

古文：子仙众退据仓门，带江阻险，众军攻之，频战不克。
现代文：塞子仙率军撤退，据守，凭藉天险，环辽而守，王遭避率领众军屡屡进攻都未攻克。
English: Cezi Sen led the army to retreat, defended, by virtue of natural hazards, surrounded Liao and defended, Wang Shouyu led the army to repeatedly attack and failed to conquer.

古文：景既闻鲁山已没，郢镇复失罗城，乃率余众倍道归建业。
现代文：侯景听到鲁山被攻克的消息，又听说郢这一重镇外城已经丢失，于是率领剩余的军众日夜兼程回建业。
English: Hou Jing heard the news that Lushan had been conquered, and also heard that the outer city of Handan, a major town, had been lost, so he led the remaining troops to travel back to Jianye both day and night.

古文：子仙等困蹙，计无所之，乞输郢城，身还就景。
现代文：宋子仙等人处境窘迫，无计可施，于是向王僧辩请求交出郢城，让自己率领人马回到侯景那儿去。
English: Song Zixian and others were in a difficult situation and had nothing to do, so they asked Wang Sofen to hand over Fucheng and let themselves lead the people back to Houjing.

古文：僧辩伪许之，命给船百艘，以老其意。
现代文：王僧辩假意答应了他们，又命令供给叛军一百余艘船只使用，藉此使叛军麻痹松懈。
English: Wang Sangye pretended to agree with them, and ordered to supply the rebels with more than a hundred ships to use, thereby paralyzing the rebels.

古文：子仙谓为信然，浮舟将发，僧辩命杜龛率精勇千人，攀堞而上，同时鼓噪，掩至仓门。
现代文：宋子仙认为王僧辩果真真心放他们走，驾船将要出发，王僧辩命杜宠率领一千名精悍勇士，攀上城墙，同时击鼓呐喊，突然攻至仓门。
English: Song Zixian thought that if Wang Sofen really let them go, the ship would set sail. Wang Sofen ordered Du Ji to lead a thousand brave warriors, climb the city wall, play drums and shout at the same time, and suddenly attack the warehouse door.

古文：水军主宋遥率楼船，暗江四面云合；子仙行战行走，至于白杨浦，乃大破之，生擒子仙送江陵。
现代文：命水军军主宋遥率领楼船，暗地在江上从四面向宋子仙的船队合围。宋子仙边战边逃，到了白杨浦，王僧辩军大破宋子仙的叛军，活捉宋子仙，送往江陵。
English: Song Zixian's fleet of ships was surrounded from four directions on the river, secretly led by the commander of the Ming Navy, Song Yao. Song Zixian fled the battle and arrived at Baiyangpu. Wang Sangye's army defeated Song Zixian's rebels, captured Song Zixian alive, and sent him to Gangneung.

古文：即率诸军进师九水。
现代文：王僧辩当即率领各路大军进军九水。
English: Wang Sangyan immediately led the army to march into Jiu Shui.

古文：贼伪仪同范希荣、卢晖略尚据湓城，及僧辩军至，希荣等因挟江州刺史临城公弃城奔走。
现代文：叛贼伪官仪同范希荣、卢晖略还占据着湓城，王僧辩率领人马来到的时候，范希荣等人就挟持江州刺史临城公弃城逃跑。
English: The renegade pseudo-officials, including Fan Xirong and Lu Xirong, still occupied Handan City. When Wang Sangye led the cavalry to arrive, Fan Xirong and others took Jiangzhou assassin Lincheng and fled the city.

古文：世祖加僧辩侍中、尚书令、征东大将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：世祖给王僧辩加赠官职为侍中、尚书令、征东大将军，并赐给鼓吹一部。
English: The ancestor gave Wang Sofen the official posts of attendant, secretary, and general of the Eastern Expedition, and gave him a part of the propaganda.

古文：仍令僧辩且顿江州，须众军齐集，得时更进。
现代文：接着命令王僧辩暂且驻军江州，等到大军全部集中，得到机会再进击。
English: Next, he ordered Wang Sangyan to temporarily station his army in Jiangzhou, and wait until the whole army was concentrated and had a chance to attack again.

古文：顷之，世祖命江州众军悉同大举，僧辩乃表皇帝凶问，告于江陵。
现代文：不久，世祖命江州各路人马一同大举进攻。王僧辩于是公布皇帝去世的噩耗，把凶讯报告在江陵的世祖。
English: Wang Sangye then announced the bad news of the emperor's death and reported the terrible news to the patriarch in Gangneung.

古文：仍率大将百余人，连名劝世祖即位；将欲进军，又重奉表。
现代文：于是率领一百余名大将，联名上书世祖，劝世祖即皇帝位；将要进军讨伐侯景的时候，又重新上表劝进。
English: Therefore, he led more than one hundred generals to jointly write to the ancestor to persuade the ancestor to become the emperor. When they were about to march to fight against Houjing, they again wrote to the emperor to persuade him to advance.

古文：虽未见从，并蒙优答。
现代文：虽然世祖没有听从，但都得到世祖的优韶答覆。
English: Although the ancestor did not obey, they all received the excellent reply from the ancestor.

古文：事见本纪。
现代文：事情记载在世祖孝元皇帝《本纪》中。
English: The event is recorded in the "Honji" (Chronicle) of the founder Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：僧辩于是发自江州，直指建业，乃先命南兗州刺史侯瑱率锐卒轻舸，袭南陵、鹊头等戍，至即克之。
现代文：王僧辩于是从江州出发，直指建业，先命令南兖州刺史侯填率领精锐士卒乘坐轻巧的快船，袭击南陵、鹊头等戍所，所到之处，随即攻克。
English: Wang Sangyan then set out from Jiangzhou and headed straight for Jianye. First, he ordered Nanxizhou Zhishi Hou to lead the elite soldiers to take a light fast boat to attack Nanling, Shantou and other places, and then conquered.

古文：先是，陈霸先率众五万，出自南江，前军五千，行至湓口。
现代文：这之前，陈霸先率领五万人马，从南江出发，派出五千人作前锋，已经到达湓口。
English: Prior to this, Chen Baxi led fifty thousand horses, starting from the Nanjiang River, and sent five thousand people to be the forwards. They have reached the mouth of the estuary.

古文：霸先倜傥多谋策，名盖僧辩，僧辩畏之。
现代文：陈霸先才能卓异，精于谋略，声名盖过王僧辩，王僧辩敬畏他。
English: Chen Baxian was an outstanding talent, skilled in strategy, and his fame surpassed that of Wang Sangyan. Wang Sangyan was in awe of him.

古文：既至湓口，与僧辩会于白茅洲，登坛盟誓。
现代文：陈霸先到达湓口后，与王僧辩在白茅洲相会，两人登坛盟誓，陈霸先撰写盟文说：
English: After Chen Baxi arrived at the gate first, he met Wang Sangyan in Baimaozhou, and the two swore an oath. Chen Baxi wrote the oath and said:

古文：霸先为其文曰： 贼臣侯景，凶羯小胡，逆天无状，构造奸恶；违背我恩义，破掠我国家，毒害我生民，移毁我社庙。
现代文：贼臣侯景，本是凶残的羯人，违背天道，不讲德行，做出种种奸恶的坏事，背弃我朝恩义，攻破掳掠我们国家，残害我们百姓，捣毁我社稷宗庙。
English: The traitorous vassal, Hou Jing, was originally a cruel barbarian. He violated the heavenly way, did not speak of virtue, committed all kinds of treacherous and evil deeds, betrayed the gratitude of my dynasty, invaded and plundered our country, brutalized our people, and destroyed our society and ancestral temple.

古文：我高祖武皇帝灵圣聪明，光宅天下，劬劳兆庶，亭育万民，如我考妣，五十所载。
现代文：我们高祖武皇帝禀受天地神灵之气，聪明睿智，广有天下，如同我们的父母，为养育亿万百姓，日夜辛劳，迄今已有五十余年。
English: Our great-great-grandfather Emperor Gao Wu was endowed with the spirit of heaven, earth, and gods. He was intelligent, wise, and widely spread throughout the world. Like our parents, he worked hard day and night to raise hundreds of millions of people. It has been more than 50 years so far.

古文：哀景以穷见归，全景将戮之首，置景要害之地，崇景非次之荣。
现代文：皇上哀怜侯景在窘迫之中来归附我朝，保全侯景本应受到刑戮的性命，把侯景安置在要害的地位，给予侯景破格的特殊荣耀。
English: The emperor took pity on Hou Jing, who came to attach himself to our dynasty in the midst of distress, preserved the life of Hou Jing, who should have been tortured, placed Hou Jing in a key position, and gave Hou Jing extraordinary special glory.

古文：我高祖于景何薄？
现代文：我高祖皇帝何曾薄待侯景?
English: Why did my great-great-grandfather, the emperor, wait for Houjing?

古文：我百姓于景何怨？
现代文：我们百姓对侯景又有什么仇怨?
English: What kind of grudge do our people have against Houjing?

古文：而景长戟强弩，陵蹙朝廷，锯牙郊甸，残食含灵。刳肝斫趾，不曈其快；曝骨焚尸，不谓为酷。
现代文：但侯景却凭藉长戟强弩，凌辱逼迫朝廷，用如锯的齿牙啮食我郊甸土地，残害我百姓，挖肝断趾，不足以满足他的害人欲望，尸体丢弃在野外乃至被焚烧，不算是最残酷的手段。
English: However, Hou Jing persecuted the imperial court by means of bullying and humiliation, gnawed my suburban land with saw-like teeth, mutilated my people, gouged out their livers and severed their toes, but it was not enough to satisfy his desire to harm people. The corpse was discarded in the wild and even burned, which is not the most cruel means.

古文：高祖菲食卑宫，春秋九十，屈志凝威，愤终贼手。
现代文：高祖皇帝九十高龄，却被迫住在卑陋的房屋，食用菲薄粗劣的食物，心志被压抑，皇威被贬损，最终含恨死在叛贼手中。
English: Emperor Gaozu was ninety years old, but he was forced to live in a humble house, eat thin and poor food, his will was suppressed, his imperial dignity was belittled, and he eventually died in the hands of traitors.

古文：大行皇帝温严恭默，丕守鸿名，于景何有，复加忍毒。
现代文：大行皇帝温厚庄敬，沉默少言，维护着圣德大名，与侯景有什么怨仇，竟然对他施加各种惨毒手段。
English: Emperor Da Xing was mild-mannered, dignified, silent and reserved, upholding the sanctity of the name of the emperor. He had a grudge against Hou Jing, and even inflicted various cruel methods on him.

古文：皇枝涘抱已上，缌功以还，穷刀极俎，既屠且会。
现代文：对襁褓之中的皇族庶子，五服之内、鳃麻大小功之内的皇室亲族，极力残害屠戮。
English: For the royal family's illegitimate children in the middle of the cocoon, the royal family's relatives in the middle of the five clothes, and the small and large cocoons, they tried their best to kill and slaughter.

古文：岂有率土之滨，谓为王臣，食人之禾，饮人之水，忍闻此痛，而不悼心？
现代文：我们生活在国家境域之内，身为朝廷的臣民，食用朝廷的俸禄，沐浴着皇上的甘露，听到这种惨痛的事实，怎能不伤心哀痛?
English: We live within the national territory, as subjects of the imperial court, eating the imperial stipend, bathing in the imperial nectar. How can we not be saddened and pained to hear this tragic fact?

古文：况臣僧辩、臣霸先等，荷称国籓湘东王臣绎泣血衔哀之寄，摩顶至足之恩，世受先朝之德，身当将帅之任；而不能沥胆抽肠，共诛奸逆，雪天地之痛，报君父之仇，则不可以禀灵含识，戴天履地！
现代文：何况臣王仅峦、臣速灵选等人，蒙受国家藩臣涸理含哀泣血的重托，对我们摩顶放踵难报答的大恩，我们又世世代代蒙受先朝的恩德，自身又担当将帅之任，如果不能披肝沥胆，共诛奸贼叛臣，洗雪皇室之怨，报君父之仇，就不能算是禀受天地的灵气，生活在天地之间的人。
English: What's more, the vassals, including the king's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-law's son-in-law, the vassal's son-in-

古文：今日相国至孝玄感，灵武斯发，已破贼徒，获其元帅，止余景身，尚在京邑。
现代文：今天相国的孝心感动上天。武勇超人的军队刚刚出发，就已经击破了叛贼的军众，擒获了叛军的元帅，衹留下侯景一人，还在京城之中。
English: Today, the filial piety of our compatriots has touched the heavens. The army of the brave supermen has just set out, and has already defeated the rebel army, captured the rebel marshal, and left Hou Jing alone, still in the capital.

古文：臣僧辩与臣霸先协和将帅，同心共契，必诛凶竖，尊奉相国，嗣膺鸿业，以主郊祭。
现代文：臣王僧辩舆臣陈霸先使将帅团结一致，齐心协力，一定要诛除凶残的叛贼，尊奉相国，让他继承国家大业，主持祭天祭祖的礼仪。
English: The king's vassals, the monks, and the public opinion leader, Chen Baxi, urged the generals to unite and make concerted efforts to eliminate the murderous traitor, respect the country, let him inherit the great cause of the country, and preside over the ritual of sacrificing to the ancestors.

古文：前途若有一功，获一赏，臣僧辩等不推己让物，先身帅众，则天地宗庙百神之灵，共诛共责。
现代文：在将来假如有一功劳，有一奖赏，臣王僧辩等人如果不能以自身为表率，推己让人，那么天地宗庙之神，各种神灵，都将会一起诛责。
English: In the future, if there is a merit, there is a reward, if the vassals, kings, monks, and others cannot take themselves as a role model and promote themselves to others, then the gods of heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and various deities will all be held accountable together.

古文：臣僧辩、臣霸先同心共事，不相欺负，若有违戾，明神殛之。 
现代文：臣王僧辩、臣速发生同心协作，不互相欺骗，假如违背了遣誓言，让天地神明惩罚我们。
English: Vassals, kings, monks and priests should debate and cooperate with each other without delay. They should not deceive each other. If they violate their oaths, let heaven and earth punish us.

古文：于是升坛歃血，共读盟文，皆泪下沾襟，辞色慷慨。
现代文：于是他们登上土坛歃血而盟，一同朗读盟文，谀盟文的时候泪如雨下，沾湿了衣襟，言辞神色都激昂慷慨。
English: So they ascended the altar of bloodshed and alliance, read the alliance text together, and when they read the alliance text, tears fell like rain, their collars got wet, and their expressions were passionate and generous.

古文：及王师次于南洲，贼帅侯子鉴等率步骑万余人于岸挑战，又以鸟了千艘并载士，两边悉八十棹，棹手皆越人，去来趣袭，捷过风电。
现代文：讨伐侯景的朝廷军队驻扎在南州的时候，叛军主将侯子鉴等人率领一万余名步兵骑兵在岸边挑战，又用一千艘捆而长的鸩灯船都装满士兵，船两边全都有八十张桨，操桨水手都是越人，船来去迅速，突然攻击，速度比疾风闪电还快。
English: When the imperial army was stationed in Nanzhou to fight against Hou Jing, the rebel commander Hou Zi Jian and others led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to challenge on the shore, and filled with soldiers with a thousand bundled lantern boats. Both sides of the boat had eighty oars, and the oarsmen were Yue people. The boat came and went quickly, suddenly attacking, faster than the wind and lightning.

古文：僧辩乃麾细船，皆令退缩，悉使大舰夹泊两岸。
现代文：王僧辩于是指挥小船，命他们全都退缩，又命令大船舰全在两边江岸停泊。
English: Wang Sangyan then commanded the small boats, ordered them all to retreat, and ordered the large ships to anchor on both sides of the river.

古文：贼谓水军欲退，争出趋之，众军乃棹大舰，截其归路，鼓噪大呼，合战中江，贼悉赴水。
现代文：叛贼认为王僧辩水军想要撤退，于是都争着出来赶去进攻，王僧辩水军于是划动大船舰，截断叛军小船的归路，击鼓并大声呐喊，与叛军小船在江中流交战，叛贼都跳水逃命。
English: The rebels thought that Wang Sangye's navy wanted to retreat, so they all rushed out to attack. Wang Sangye's navy then rowed a large ship, cut off the return route of the rebel boats, beat drums and shouted loudly. They fought with the rebel boats in the middle of the river, and the rebels all jumped into the water to escape.

古文：僧辩即督诸军沿流而下，进军于石头之斗城，作连营以逼贼。
现代文：王僧辩当即统率各路大军顺流而下，一直前进到石头之斗城，建起连营，威逼叛军。
English: Wang Sangyan immediately led all the armies down the river and advanced all the way to the Stone Battle City, built a company camp, and threatened the rebels.

古文：贼乃横岭上筑五城拒守，侯景自出，与王师大战于石头城北。
现代文：叛军于是横列岭上修筑五座城以抵御固守，侯景亲自出阵，与朝廷军在石头城北大战。
English: The rebels then built five cities across the ridge to defend themselves against the garrison, and Hou Jing himself went into battle with the imperial army in the north of Stone Town.

古文：霸先谓僧辩曰： 丑虏游魂，贯盈已稔，逋诛送死，欲为一决。我众贼寡，且分其势。 
现代文：陈霸先对王憎峦说： 遣群叛贼如同游魂，恶贯满盈，现在想要逃脱诛灭的命运，想要拼死决战，我军众，叛军少，应当使他们兵力分散，各个击破。 
English: Chen Baizhen said to Wang Huan: "Sending a group of traitors is like sending a wandering soul. The evil is rampant. Now they want to escape the fate of annihilation, they want to fight to the death. Our army, the rebels are few, should disperse their forces and defeat them one by one."

古文：即遣强弩二千张，攻贼西面两城，仍使结阵以当贼。僧辩在后麾军而进，复大破之。
现代文：他们就派出兵士带着二千张强弩进攻叛贼西面的两座城，接着命一部分军士摆出阵势迎战叛军，王仅崖在后面指挥军队进击，又大破叛军。
English: They sent soldiers with two thousand strong shields to attack the two cities west of the rebels, and then ordered a part of the sergeants to set up a position to meet the rebels. Wang Yuanyan commanded the army to attack in the back, and broke the rebels.

古文：卢晖略闻景战败，以石头城降，僧辩引军入据之。
现代文：卢晖略听说侯景战败，就率石头城投降，王僧辩带领军队占据了石头城。
English: When Lu Ziliu heard that Hou Jing was defeated, he led the stone city to surrender, and Wang Sangyan led the army to occupy the stone city.

古文：景之退也，北走硃方，于是景散兵走告僧辩，僧辩令众将入据台城。
现代文：侯景败退，向北朝朱方逃走，在当时画量手下逃散的兵士跑去把这消息报告了王僧辩，玉僧避命令手下众将领占据台垣。
English: Hou Jing was defeated and fled to the north of the Zhu side. At that time, the soldiers who fled under the command of the painter ran to report the news to Wang Sangye, and Yu Sangye ordered the generals under his command to occupy Taigaki.

古文：其夜，军人采梠失火，烧太极殿及东西堂等。
现代文：当天晚上，军士因煮食拾取的野谷而导致失火，烧毁了主捶压及东西堂等处。
English: In the evening of the same day, the sergeant caused a fire to break out due to the cooking of wild rice, which burned down the main hall and the east and west halls.

古文：时军人卤掠京邑，剥剔士庶，民为其执缚者，衵衣不免。
现代文：当时军人在京城掳掠劫夺百姓，百姓被他们抓获的，贴身内衣都免不了被剥去。
English: At that time, soldiers captured, plundered and robbed the people in Beijing. When the people were captured by them, they were inevitably stripped of their underwear.

古文：尽驱逼居民以求购赎，自石头至于东城，缘淮号叫之声，震响京邑，于是百姓失望。
现代文：他们又逼迫百姓用钱赎买，从石头至东球，沿着进丞号叫的声音，震动京城，于是百姓对朝廷军队感到失望。
English: They also forced the common people to ransom themselves with money, shaking the capital city from the stone to the east, following the sound of the imperial bugle. As a result, the common people were disappointed with the imperial army.

古文：僧辩命侯瑱、裴之横率精甲五千，东入讨景。
现代文：王僧辩命侯琐、裴之横率领五千精兵，束进征讨侯景。
English: The king and the monk agreed and ordered Hou Zuo and Pei Zhi Heng to lead five thousand soldiers to attack Houjing.

古文：僧辩收贼党王伟等二十余人，送于江陵。
现代文：王僧辩收捕叛贼党徒王伟等二十余人，押送到江陵。
English: Wang Sangye arrested more than twenty people, including the traitor Wang Wei, and sent them to Gangneung.

古文：伪行台赵伯超自吴松江降于侯瑱，瑱时送至僧辩。僧辩谓伯超曰： 赵公，卿荷国重恩，遂复同逆。
现代文：侯景伪官行台趟伯超在吴松江向堡填投降，侯填当时就把趟伯超押送到王僧辩那儿，王僧辩对趟伯超说： 赵公，你蒙受国家重恩，却又附同叛贼。
English: Hou Jing's pseudo-official, Guan Tai Bo Chao, surrendered at Wu Songjiang's fortifications. At that time, Guan Hou escorted Guan Tai Bo Chao to Wang Sofen. Wang Sofen said to Guan Tai Bo Chao: Zhao Gong, you have received the great favor of the state, but you have sided with the traitors.

古文：今日之事，将欲何如？ 
现代文：今天这形势，你将要怎么办? 
English: What are you going to do about the situation today?

古文：因命送江陵。
现代文：王僧辩就命人把赵伯超押送到。
English: Wang Sangyan ordered someone to escort Zhao Bochao to the scene.

古文：伯超既出，僧辩顾坐客曰： 朝廷昔唯知有赵伯超耳，岂识王僧辩？
现代文：瘤巡超出去之后，王坛避环顾在座的宾客说： 以前朝廷衹知道有赵伯超而已，哪裹知道王僧辩。
English: After Zhou Junchao went out, the king looked around the guests present and said: Previously, the imperial court only knew about Zhao Bochao, but did not know about Wang Sangye.

古文：社稷既倾，为我所复；人之兴废，亦复何常。 
现代文：国家已经倾覆，现在被我兴复，人的兴盛和衰败，又哪会有什么持久不变。 
English: The country has been overthrown, and now it is being restored by me. People's prosperity and decline, what will remain unchanged?

古文：宾客皆前称叹功德。
现代文：在座宾客都上前称颂赞美王僧辩的功德。
English: All the guests present came forward to praise and praise the merits of Wang Sofen.

古文：僧辩瞿然，乃谬答曰： 此乃圣上之威德，群帅之用命。
现代文：王僧辩暗暗惊喜，于是虚假地回答说： 这是因为圣上有威德、众将领按命令行事的缘故。
English: Wang Sangyan was secretly surprised, so he falsely replied, "This is because there is virtue in the sacred, and the generals act according to orders."

古文：老夫虽滥居戎首，何力之有焉？ 
现代文：老夫滥竽充数，虽然居于主帅地位，有什么功劳啊。 
English: Although the old man is in the manager's position, what credit does he have?

古文：于是逆寇悉平，京都克定。
现代文：在这时候叛贼全被平定消灭，京城也被攻克，局势安定下来了。
English: At this time, all the traitors were subdued and eliminated, the capital was also conquered, and the situation stabilized.

古文：世祖即帝位，以僧辩功，进授镇卫将军、司徒，加班剑二十人，改封永宁郡公，食邑五千户，侍中、尚书令、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：世祖登上帝位，因为王僧辩平叛的功劳，进授镇卫将军、司徒，加班剑二十人，改封为永宁郡公，食邑五千户，侍中、尚书令之职、一部鼓吹都不变。
English: The patriarch ascended to the throne of God, and because of the merits of Wang Zengren's counter-rebellion, he was promoted to the post of Zhenwei general and Sitou, and twenty people were given the sword, and he was changed to the Yongning county official, feeding five thousand households, and the posts of waiter, secretary, and a part of the propaganda did not change.

古文：是后湘州贼陆纳等攻破衡州刺史丁道贵于渌口，尽收其军实；李洪雅又自零陵率众出空灵滩，称助讨纳。
现代文：这以后湘州贼陆纳等人在渌口进攻并打败衡州刺史丁道贵，把他的武器装备全都收缴；李洪雅又从零陵率军到空灵滩，声称要帮助朝廷征讨陆纳。
English: After this, Lu Na, the thief from Hunan Province, and others attacked and defeated Ding Daogui, the assassin from Hengzhou Province, and confiscated all of his weapons and equipment. Li Hongya also led an army from Jiling to Kuolingtan, claiming that he wanted to help the imperial court to subjugate Lu Na.

古文：朝廷未达其心，深以为虑，乃遣中书舍人罗重欢征僧辩上就骠骑将军宜豊侯循南征。
现代文：朝廷不了解他的真正用心，深深为此事忧虑，于是派中书舍人罗重欢征召王僧辩顺江而上到骠骑将军宜丰侯萧循那儿，率军南征。
English: The imperial court did not understand his true intentions and was deeply worried about this matter, so it sent Luo Chonghong, a scholar, to summon Wang Soen to go up the river to the cavalry general Yi Feng Hou Xiao Qian and lead the army to the south.

古文：僧辩因督杜掞等众军，发于建业，师次巴陵。
现代文：王僧辩就督领杜勋等各路人马，从建业出发。
English: Wang Sangyan started from Jianye with the help of various people such as Du Xun.

古文：诏僧辩为都督东上诸军事，霸先为都督西上诸军事。
现代文：军队驻留巴陵，皇上下韶命王僧辩为都督束上诸军事，命陈霸先为都督西上诸军事。
English: The army was stationed in Baling, and the emperor ordered Wang Sofen to be the military governor, and ordered Chen Baxian to be the military governor in the west.

古文：先时霸先让都督于僧辩，僧辩不受，故世祖分为东西都督，而俱南讨焉。
现代文：遣以前陈霸先曾把都督之位让给王僧辩，王僧辩不接受，所以世祖分别任命两人为东西都督，而同时率军向南征讨。
English: Before he was dispatched, Chen Baxian had offered the position of governor-general to Wang Sangyan, but Wang Sangyan did not accept, so the patriarch appointed two men to be governor-general of the east and west separately, and at the same time led the army to the south to fight.

古文：时纳等下据车轮，夹岸为城，前断水势，士卒骁猛，皆百战之余。僧辩惮之，不与轻进，于是稍作连城以逼贼。
现代文：当时陆纳等人往下流前进，占据车轮，在两岸筑城，前方水势落差较大，形势险要，士卒又都骁勇善战，都曾身经百战，王僧辩对他们有所忌惮，不敢轻率进攻，于是逐步筑城，城城相连，用这种方式围困陆纳贼军。
English: At that time, Lu Na and others advanced downstream, occupied the wheel, and built a city on both sides of the river. There was a large difference in water potential ahead, and the situation was critical. The soldiers were all brave and good at war, and had been through hundreds of battles. Wang Sangye was wary of them and did not dare to attack rashly. Therefore, he gradually built a city, connected the city, and used this way to besiege the Lu Na thief army.

古文：贼见不敢交锋，并怀懈怠。
现代文：贼军见到朝廷军队不敢交战，就都怀有懈怠之心。
English: Seeing that the imperial army did not dare to fight, the Kleptocrats were slack-jawed.

古文：僧辩因其无备，命诸军水步攻之，亲执旗鼓，以诫进止。
现代文：王僧辩趁着他们没有防备，命令各路人马从水陆两路一起进攻，王僧辩亲自掌旗击鼓，指挥全军进退。
English: Wang Sangye took advantage of the fact that they were unprepared and ordered all people and horses to attack from both land and water. Wang Sangye personally held the banner and beat the drums, and commanded the entire army to retreat.

古文：于是诸军竞出，大战于车轮，与骠骑循并力苦攻，陷其二城。
现代文：于是各路人马竞相出击，和陆纳贼军在车轮大战，王僧辩和骠骑将军萧循合力苦攻，攻陷贼军两座城。
English: As a result, people from all walks of life raced to attack, and the Lu Na thief army was in a wheel war. Wang Sangyan and the cavalry general Xiao Xun worked hard together to attack and capture two cities of the thief army.

古文：贼大败，步走归保长沙，驱逼居民，入城拒守。
现代文：贼军大败，从陆路逃跑退回去守长沙，把居民都驱赶进城，据城固守。
English: The invaders were soundly defeated. They fled by land and retreated to defend Changsha. They drove the residents into the city and held on to it.

古文：僧辩追蹑，乃命筑垒围之，悉令诸军广建围栅，僧辩出坐垄上而自临视。
现代文：王僧辩跟踪追击，到达长沙，于是命军士筑垒围住长沙，又命令各军都建起长长的栅栏围住贼军，王僧辩出阵坐在土丘上亲自监督察枧。
English: Wang Sangye followed the pursuit and arrived in Changsha. He then ordered the sergeants to build a wall to surround Changsha, and ordered all the armies to build a long fence to surround the thief army. Wang Sangye sat on the mound to personally supervise the inspection.

古文：贼望，识僧辩，知不设备，贼党吴藏、李贤明等乃率锐卒千人，开门掩出，蒙楯直进，径趋僧辩。
现代文：贼军远远望见，认识是王僧辩，知道朝廷军没有预设防卫，于是贼军吴藏、李贤明等人率领一千名精锐士卒，打开城门，突然冲出，举着盾牌一直冲击，径直朝王僧辩方向冲杀过去。
English: Seeing the bandits from afar and knowing that it was Wang Sangye, and knowing that the imperial army did not have a pre-set defense, the bandits Wu Zang, Li Xianming and others, led by a thousand elite soldiers, opened the city gate, suddenly rushed out, held their shields all the way, and rushed straight in the direction of Wang Sangye.

古文：时杜掞、杜龛并侍左右，带甲卫者止百余人，因下遣人与贼交战。
现代文：当时杜则、杜龠都在王僧辩身边陪侍，武装卫士衹有一百余人，他们就下土丘派人舆贼军交战。
English: At that time, Du Ze and Du Yao were both accompanying Wang Sangye, and there were more than a hundred armed guards. They went down to the mound and sent people to fight against the invaders.

古文：李贤明乘铠马，从者十骑，大呼冲突，僧辩尚据胡床，不为之动。于是指挥勇敢，遂获贤明，因即斩之。
现代文：李贤明乘坐着身披鉴甲的战马，带领着十名骑兵，大声喊着左冲右突，王僧辩还是坐在坐榻上，并不被贼军的凶焰所惊动，在这时候仍是沉着指挥，胆气过人，最终擒获了李贤明，当即就把他斩首。
English: Li Xianming rode on a warhorse wearing a jianjia, leading ten cavalrymen, shouting loudly and rushing left and right. Wang Sangye still sat on the couch, and was not alarmed by the fierce flames of the thief army. At this time, he was still calmly commanding, and he was extremely courageous. He finally captured Li Xianming and immediately beheaded him.

古文：贼乃退归城内。
现代文：贼军于是退回城内。
English: The bandits then retreated back into the city.

古文：初，陆纳阻兵内逆，以王琳为辞，云 朝廷若放王琳，纳等自当降伏 。
现代文：当初，陆纳仗恃军队举行叛乱的时候，是以王琳为藉口，说是 朝廷假如释放王琳，陆纳等人自然会降伏 。
English: At first, when Lu Na and his troops rebelled, they used Wang Lin as an excuse, saying that if the imperial court released Wang Lin, Lu Na and others would naturally surrender.

古文：于时众军并进，未之许也。
现代文：在那时候，各路大军同时进击，所以没有答应陆纳的条件。
English: At that time, all the armies were attacking at the same time, so they did not agree to Lu Na's conditions.

古文：而武陵王拥众上流，内外骇惧，世祖乃遣琳和解之。
现代文：但是武陵王统领军队占据长江上游，朝廷内外人士都骇怕惊惧，世祖于是放出王琳，平息了陆纳的叛乱。
English: However, King Wuling led an army to occupy the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and people inside and outside the court were horrified and frightened. The ancestor then released Wang Lin and quelled Lu Na's rebellion.

古文：至是，湘州平。
现代文：到这时候湘州平定了。
English: By this time, Hunan was pacified.

古文：僧辩旋于江陵，因被诏会众军西讨，督舟师二万，舆驾出天居寺饯行。
现代文：王僧辩从江陵率领军队返回，接着接受诏命集合各路人马西进征讨，并统领二万水军，皇上亲自到天居寺为出征将士饯行。
English: Wang Sangye returned from Gangneung leading the army, and then he received the imperial command to gather all the people of the country to march to Masi and lead the twenty thousand naval troops. The emperor himself went to Tianju Temple to pay tribute to the soldiers.

古文：俄而武陵败绩，僧辩自枝江班师于江陵，旋镇建业。
现代文：不久武陵王被打败，王僧辩从枝江班师回到江陵，不久又回师镇守建业。
English: Soon after, King Wuling was defeated, and Wang Sangye returned to Gangneung from Shijiang, and soon returned to Shizhen and Jianye.

古文：是月，居少时，复回江陵。
现代文：这个月，王僧辩在建业停留了不长的时间就又回到江陵。
English: This month, Wang Sangyan returned to Jiangling after a short stay in Jianye.

古文：齐主高洋遣郭元建率众二万，大列舟舰于合肥，将谋袭建业，又遣其大将邢景远、步六汗萨、东方老等率众继之。
现代文：齐主高洋派郭元建率领二万人马，在合肥集中了很多船舰，将要图谋袭击建业，又派出他手下的大将邢景远、步大汗萨、东方老等人率领军队作郭元建的后继。
English: Guo Yuanjian, the leader of the Guozhong Gaoyang faction, led 20,000 men and concentrated many ships in Hefei. He was going to plot an attack on Jianye. He also sent his generals such as Gong Jingyuan, Bu Da Khan Sa, and Dongfang Lao to lead the army as Guo Yuanjian's successor.

古文：时陈霸先镇建康，既闻此事，驰报江陵。世祖即诏僧辩次于姑孰，即留镇焉。
现代文：当时陈霸先镇守建康，听到遣消息之后，立即派人骑马飞报江陵，世祖立即下韶命王僧辩驻军姑孰，随即留在那儿镇守。
English: At that time, Chen Baxian was the town guard of Jiankang. After hearing the news of the dispatch, he immediately sent a man on horseback to report Jiangling. The patriarch immediately ordered Wang Sangyan to stay in Guzhen, and then stayed there to guard the town.

古文：先命豫州刺史侯瑱率精甲三千人筑垒于东关，以拒北寇；征吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横会瑱于关；因与北军战，大败之，僧辩率众军振旅于建业。
现代文：先命豫州刺史侯填率三千名精兵在东关构筑堡垒，抵御北方敌人入侵，征调吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横舆侯琐在东关会集，就在那儿与齐军交战，大败齐兵，王僧辩率领各路大军整队班师到建业。
English: Yuzhou County Governor Zhang Biao and Wu Xing County Governor Peizhongyang Muzo were dispatched to Dongguan to build a fortress to resist the invasion of the northern enemy. There, they met with the Qi army and defeated the Qi army. Wang Sangye led the army to Jianye.

古文：承圣三年二月甲辰，诏曰： 赞俊遂贤，称于秦典；自上安下，闻之汉制。
现代文：承圣三年三月甲辰日，皇上下韶说：推荐俊贤之士，在秦典中已经记载；在上者安定在下的百姓，在漠制中可以了解到。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of consecration, the emperor said: "Recommending good and wise men has been recorded in the Qin Dynasty; the people who are stable in the upper class can be understood in the desert system."

古文：所以仰协台曜，俯佐弘图。
现代文：这是使朝廷大臣和协融洽、辅佐皇上、实现宏图大业的办法。
English: This is a way to make the ministers of the imperial court harmonize, assist the emperor, and realize the ambitious cause.

古文：使持节、侍中、司徒、尚书令、都督扬、南徐、东扬三州诸军事、镇卫将军、扬州刺史、永宁郡开国公僧辩，器宇凝深，风格详远，行为士则，言表身文，学贯九流，武该七略。
现代文：使持节、侍中、司徒、尚书令、都督扬南徐东扬三州诸军事、镇卫将军、扬州刺史、永宁郡开国公王僧辩，胸怀凝远，气度安详而高速，行动成为士人的典范，言论表现出自身的修养，学术精通九流，武韬包容七略。
English: Envoys from the military of the three states of Yangnan, Xudong, Yangzhou, including the commander-in-chief, Yangnan, Xudong, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yangzhou, Yang

古文：顷岁征讨，自西徂东；师不疲劳，民无怨讟；王业艰难，实兼夷险。宜其燮此中台，膺兹上将；寄之经野，匡我朝猷。
现代文：近几年他带兵征讨，从西到束，军队不疲劳，百姓无怨言。王业艰难，实兼平顺与艰险，应当让他位居中台承担协调朝中大臣的任务，担负上将的职责，把经略国事的重任托付他，帮助谋划朝廷的方略。
English: In recent years, he has led the recruitment of soldiers, from the west to the bund, the army is not fatigued, and the people have no complaints. The king's career is difficult, practical and smooth and arduous, so he should be placed in the middle to assume the task of coordinating the ministers of the DPRK and China, assume the duties of the admiral, entrust him with the important task of managing state affairs, and help plan the strategy of the imperial court.

古文：加太尉、车骑大将军，余悉如故。 
现代文：加授王僧辩为太尉、车骑大将军，其余职务全都不变。
English: Wang Sofen was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and general of cavalry and cavalry, and all other positions remained unchanged.

古文：顷之，丁母太夫人忧，世祖遣侍中谒者监护丧事，策谥曰贞敬太夫人。
现代文：不久，王僧辩遭逢母亲太夫人丧事，世祖派侍中谒者监护丧事，以策书赠谧号为贞敬太夫人。
English: Soon after, Wang Sangye was at the funeral of his mother, Lady Zhengying. The ancestor sent an attendant to supervise the funeral and gave her the posthumous name Lady Zhengying.

古文：夫人姓魏氏。
现代文：太夫人姓魏。
English: Her maiden name was Wei.

古文：神念以天监初董率徒众据东关，退保合肥漅湖西，因娶以为室，生僧辩。
现代文：王神念在天监初年率领手下士卒占据东关，退守合肥渫湖西，就在那时娶太夫人为妻，生了王僧辩。
English: In the first year of the celestial prison, Wang Shennian led his subordinates to occupy Dongguan and retreated to the west of Hefei Lake. At that time, he married the great lady and gave birth to Wang Sangfei.

古文：性甚安和，善于绥接，家门内外，莫不怀之。
现代文：太夫人生性稳重温柔，善于抚慰交往，全家内外，没有人不怀念她。
English: Mrs. Tai's personality was steady and gentle, and she was good at soothing and socializing. No one in or out of the family missed her.

古文：初，僧辩下狱，夫人流泪徒行，将入谢罪，世祖不与相见。
现代文：当初，王僧辩被收捕入狱，太夫人流着泪步行前往世祖官衙，将要进去向世祖请求恕罪，世祖不肯与她相见。
English: At first, Wang Sangye was arrested and sent to prison. The Empress Dowager walked to the ancestral hall in tears, intending to go in and ask the ancestor for forgiveness. The ancestor refused to meet with her.

古文：时贞惠世子有宠于世祖，军国大事多关领焉。
现代文：当时贞惠世子受到世祖宠爱，军国大事很多都由贞惠世子参预兼管。
English: At that time, Zhen Hui's son was favored by the patriarch, and many military affairs were presided over by Zhen Hui's son.

古文：夫人诣阁，自陈无训，涕泗呜咽，众并怜之。
现代文：太夫人到贞惠世子阁中，自己陈说缺少家教，说时涕泗齐流，呜咽不止，大家都很同情她。
English: When Mrs. Zhengyi went to the Zhengyi Heirloom Pavilion, she complained about the lack of a tutor, saying that her tears flowed at the same time and that she couldn't stop crying. Everyone felt sorry for her.

古文：及僧辩免出，夫人深相责励，辞色俱严，云： 人之事君，惟须忠烈，非但保祐当世，亦乃庆流子孙。 
现代文：到王僧辩被赦免出狱的时候，太夫人又狠狠地责备他，深切地勉励他，言辞神色都很严厉。太夫人说： 人事奉君王，就必须忠诚刚正，这不但可以保佑自己这一代人，福庆还能流布子孙后代。 
English: When Wang Sangye was pardoned and released from prison, the Empress Dowager scolded him severely and encouraged him earnestly. Her words were very harsh. The Empress Dowager said, "To serve the king, one must be loyal and upright. This can not only bless one's own generation, but also spread prosperity to future generations."

古文：及僧辩克复旧京，功盖天下，夫人恒自谦损，不以富贵骄物。朝野咸共称之，谓为明哲妇人也。
现代文：到王僧辩克复京城、功盖天下的时候，太夫人又常常谦逊退让，不凭富贵慢待人，朝野人士都一起称赞她，称她为明哲妇人。
English: By the time Wang Sangye was able to recapture the capital and conquer the world, the Empress Dowager was often humble and conceded, and did not treat people with condescension based on their wealth. People from both the imperial court and the countryside praised her and called her a wise woman.

古文：及既薨殒，甚见愍悼。
现代文：到太夫人死后，许多人都哀悼她。
English: By the time she died, she was mourned by many.

古文：且以僧辩勋业隆重，故丧礼加焉。
现代文：况且因为王僧辩功勋大，官爵高，所以太夫人的丧礼超过常礼。
English: Moreover, because Wang Sangye was highly meritorious and had a high official title, the funeral of the lady-in-waiting exceeded the usual ceremony.

古文：灵柩将归建康，又遣谒者至舟渚吊祭。
现代文：灵柩将要运回建康的时候，皇上又派遣谒者到装运灵柩的船旁江岸吊祭，命尚书左仆射王哀撰写祭文说：
English: When the coffin was about to be transported back to Jiankang, the emperor also sent an eunuch to the river bank next to the ship transporting the coffin to hang the offering. He ordered his left-hand servant, Shao Wangmo, to write an offering saying:

古文：命尚书左仆射王裒为其文曰： 维尔世基武子，族懋阳元，金相比映，玉德齐温。
现代文：你的家世奠基于王武子，家族懋盛于魏阳元，你的品质可与金相辉映，德行如同美玉那样温润。
English: Your genealogy is based on Wang Wuzi, and your family flourished in the Wei and Yang dynasties. Your qualities can shine with gold, and your virtue is as gentle as a precious jewel.

古文：既称女则，兼循妇言。
现代文：既符合妇德，又遵循妇言。
English: It is not only consistent with women's morality, but also follows women's words.

古文：书图镜览，辞章讨论。
现代文：写字画图，阅读典籍，赋诗作文，议论经义，你样样精通。
English: You are proficient in writing, drawing, reading classic books, composing poems, and discussing the meaning of scriptures.

古文：教贻俎豆，训及平原。
现代文：你用儒家的礼教诲子孙，像汉武帝的外祖母平原君那样训育后代。
English: You use Confucian etiquette to teach your children and grandchildren, like the Han Emperor Wu's grandmother, Pingyuan Jun, to train future generations.

古文：楚发将兵，孟轲成德。尽忠资敬，自家刑国。
现代文：你培养出来的孩子，有楚发带兵的本领，有孟轲那样的德行，像对待父亲那样敬重君王，竭尽忠心，事事从家中做起，推及到为国效劳献身。
English: The children you have brought up have the ability to lead soldiers, have the virtues like Meng Wei, respect the king as they did with their father, and are loyal to the best of their ability. Everything starts at home and extends to serving the country.

古文：显允其仪，惟民之则。
现代文：你是诚信的仪范，是百姓的楷模。
English: You are a model of integrity, a role model for the people.

古文：反命师旅，既修我戎；补兹衮职，奄有龟、蒙。
现代文：你的孩子统率朝廷大军，整饬国家防务；补任三公之职，占有龟、蒙之地。
English: Your child will lead the imperial army, straighten out the national defense, fill the post of the three princes, and occupy the place of tortoise and monkey.

古文：母由子贵，亶尔斯崇；嘉命允集，宠章所隆。
现代文：母亲因为儿子尊贵而尊贵，你地位一天天提高，朝廷褒奖的敕命屡屡降临，颁赐的礼服更显尊贵。
English: A mother is respected because her son is respected, and your status is improving day by day. You have received many awards from the imperial court, and the gowns you have been given are even more prestigious.

古文：居高能降，处贵思冲；庆资善始，荣兼令终。
现代文：但你身居高位能自行贬损，地处显贵也会自思谦和淡泊。家中的福庆是由善始而获得，而荣耀能保持一生，直到善终。
English: But if you are in a high position, you can belittle yourself, and if you are in a prominent position, you will be self-effacing and indifferent. The family's blessing is obtained from a good beginning, and the glory can be maintained for a lifetime until the end.

古文：崦嵫既夕，蒹葭早秋；奔驷难返，冲涛讵留。
现代文：时光虽到暮，而令人思念的母范却过早地凋谢，急驰的驷马难以使其折返，奔腾的波涛怎么能够让它停留。
English: Although the time has come to an end, the nostalgic mother Fan has prematurely faded, the galloping horse is difficult to make it turn back, how can the surging waves make it stay.

古文：背龙门而西顾，过夏首而东浮；越三宫之遐岳，经三江之派流。
现代文：我背对龙门朝西瞻望，灵柩才过夏首又转向东行，我越过三宫向深山远眺，思念之情随着三江的流水在漂浮。
English: I turned my back to the gantry and looked westward. It was only at the beginning of summer that the coffin turned to the east. I looked beyond the Three Kingdoms to the deep mountains. The feeling of longing floated with the flowing water of the Three Rivers.

古文：郁郁增岭，浮云蔽亏；滔滔江、汉，逝者如斯。
现代文：层层山岭，重重浮云挡住我的视线，衹感到逝去的人犹如滔滔不息的江、漠流水，永不复返。
English: Layers of mountains, layers of clouds blocked my view, and I felt that the people who had passed away were like a never-ending river, flowing water in the desert, never to return.

古文：铭旌故旐，宇毁遗碑。
现代文：铭旌上要书写你的荣耀业绩，天下要为你树碑取代古碑。
English: Write your glorious achievements on the tablet, and the world will replace the ancient monument with a monument for you.

古文：即虚舟而设奠，想徂魂之有知。
现代文：我面对空船设酒祭奠。希望远去的游魂能知道我这番心意。
English: Facing the empty boat, I made a wine offering, hoping that the far-away wandering spirits would know my intention.

古文：呜呼哀哉！ 
现代文：呜呼哀哉!
English: Alas, alas!

古文：其年十月，西魏相宇文黑泰遣兵及岳阳王众合五万，将袭江陵。世祖遣主书李膺征僧辩于建业，为大都督、荆州刺史。
现代文：那年十月，西魏丞相宇文黑泰派兵和岳阳王的军队会合，共计五万人，将要袭击江陵，世祖派主书李膺到建业征召王僧辩，任命他为大都督、荆州刺史。
English: In October of that year, the Western Wei chancellor, Uwen Hetai, sent a total of fifty thousand soldiers to join the army of King Yueyang, who was about to attack Jiangling. The ancestor sent the main secretary, Li Qian, to Jianye to recruit Wang Sangfen and appoint him as the grand governor and Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：别敕僧辩云： 黑泰背盟，忽便举斧。
现代文：世祖又另外下命令告诫王僧辩说： 宇文黑泰背弃盟约，突然间举起刀斧前来进犯。
English: The patriarch also issued another order to admonish the royal monk, saying: "Uwen Heitai reneged on the covenant and suddenly raised his sword and axe to attack.

古文：国家猛将，多在下流；荆陕之众，悉非劲勇。
现代文：国家的猛将，多在江之下游，荆陕的军队，都不是精锐的部队。
English: The country's fierce generals are mostly in the lower reaches of the river, and the army of Jing and Shaanxi is not an elite force.

古文：公宜率貔虎，星言就路，倍道兼行，赴倒悬也。 
现代文：你应当率领勇如貔虎的精锐部队，星夜出发，日夜兼程，奔赴江陵，以解救倒悬般的危急。 
English: You should lead the elite troops, who are as brave as tigers, and go to Gangneung by night and day to relieve the critical situation.

古文：僧辩因命豫州刺史侯瑱等为前军，兗州刺史杜僧明等为后军。
现代文：王僧辩就命令豫州刺史侯填等人为前锋部队，兖州刺史杜僧明等为后续部队。
English: Wang Sangyan ordered the troops of Yuzhou Zhishi Houfu and others to be the vanguard and the troops of Zhangzhou Zhishi Du Sangming and others to be the follow-up troops.

古文：处分既毕，乃谓膺云： 泰兵骁猛，难与争锐，众军若集，吾便直指汉江，截其后路。
现代文：安排完毕之后，王僧辩就对李膺说： 宇文黑泰的兵士骁勇凶猛，我们很难与他们争强斗胜。各路军马假如会集，我就率军直指漠江，截断他们的退路。
English: After the arrangement was completed, Wang Sangye said to Li Yong: The soldiers of Uwen Hetao are brave and fierce, and it is difficult for us to compete with them. If the armies of all directions meet, I will lead the army straight to the desert river and cut off their escape route.

古文：凡千里馈粮，尚有饥色，况贼越数千里者乎？
现代文：凡是作战，从千里远处运送粮食，士卒会因吃不饱而面露饥色；何况贼军这样越过敷千里来进攻我们呢?
English: Whenever there is a battle and grain is transported from thousands of miles away, the soldiers will show their faces with hunger because they have not had enough to eat; how much more so when a bandit army crosses thousands of miles to attack us?

古文：此孙膑克庞涓时也。 
现代文：现在正和孙膑战胜庞涓的时机相同。 
English: Now is the same time as Sun Yat-sen's victory over Pang Yong.

古文：俄而京城陷没，宫车晏驾。
现代文：不久京城就被攻陷，皇上驾崩。
English: Soon after, the capital was captured and the emperor died.

古文：及敬帝初即梁主位，僧辩预树立之功，承制进骠骑大将军、中书监、都督中外诸军事、录尚书，与陈霸先参谋讨伐。
现代文：墼帝继位，王僧辩因为参预树立新君而有功，还未举行登基大典的敬帝以皇命命王僧辩进为骠骑大将军、中书监、都督中外诸军事、录尚书，与陈霸先共同商议讨伐之事。
English: Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, and Wang Soen played a role in helping to establish the new emperor. Emperor Kei, who had not yet held the enthronement ceremony, ordered Wang Soen to serve as the grand general, the chief librarian, the military governor of China and other countries, and the recorder of the imperial records, and to discuss the campaign with Chen Baxian.

古文：时齐主高洋又欲纳贞阳侯渊明以为梁嗣，因与僧辩书曰： 梁国不造，祸难相仍，侯景倾荡建业，武陵弯弓巴、汉。
现代文：当时齐国君主高洋又想要梁国接纳贞阳侯萧渊明作梁国的继位君主，就写信给王僧辩说：梁国不幸，祸难频频发生。侯景使建业沦亡，武陵王在巴、汉起兵。
English: At that time, Gao Yang, the monarch of Qi, wanted Liang Guo to accept Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming as the successor monarch of Liang Guo, so he wrote a letter to Wang Xiang arguing: Liang Guo is unfortunate, disasters occur frequently. Hou Jing caused Jianye to fall, and King Wuling raised an army in Ba and Han.

古文：卿志格玄穹，精贯白日，戮力齐心，芟夷逆丑。
现代文：你们的志向感动上天，精诚感动白日，戮力同心，扫平了叛乱，消灭了叛贼。
English: Your aspiration has moved heaven, your dedication has moved the world, and your concerted efforts have swept away the rebellion and eliminated the traitors.

古文：凡在有情，莫不嗟尚；况我邻国，缉事言前。
现代文：凡是有情感的人，没有谁不为此称叹赞美；何况我们邻国，事前就希望局势和协干稳。
English: There is no one with any emotion who does not praise and praise this; not to mention our neighbors, who hope in advance that the situation will be harmonious and stable.

古文：而西寇承间，复相掩袭。梁主不能固守江陵，殒身宗祐。王师未及，便已降败；士民小大，皆毕寇虏。
现代文：而西魏寇虏，又趁机突然袭击，梁主不能固守江陵，以致为宗庙国家而殒身，朝廷军队还未到，便已失败投降，士人百姓，无论长幼，全都成为西魏的俘虏。
English: However, the Western Wei invaders took the opportunity to launch a surprise attack. Liang Shuzhong was unable to hold on to Jiangling, so he fled for the sake of the ancestral temple state. The imperial army had not yet arrived, but had already failed and surrendered. The people, both young and old, all became prisoners of the Western Wei.

古文：乃眷南顾，愤叹盈怀。卿臣子之情，念当鲠裂。
现代文：向南看到这种情景，我们满怀感叹和不平；你为臣为子，感情更深，想到这些，将会有心碎骨裂的痛苦。
English: Looking south at this scene, we are full of regrets and grievances; if you are a vassal, your feelings are deeper, and thinking about these will have the pain of heartbreak.

古文：如闻权立枝子，号令江阴，年甫十余，极为冲藐；梁衅未已，负荷谅难。
现代文：现在听说你们立皇族支子为帝，在江阴号令全国，他年纪刚刚十余岁，极其幼小，梁国的祸难还未止息，他要承担国家重任实在很困难。
English: Now I have heard that you have set up a member of the imperial family as emperor, who will rule the whole country from the Yangtze River. He is just over ten years old, extremely young, and the calamity of Liang Province has not yet ended. It is really very difficult for him to undertake the important task of the country.

古文：祭则卫君，政由甯氏；干弱枝强，终古所忌。
现代文：祭祀宗庙则由卫君主祭，国家政事则由宁氏掌握。卫国这种主干弱枝条强的局面，自古以来为人们所禁忌。
English: The Emperor's Day festival is held to worship the family temple, while the state affairs are controlled by the Ning clan. The situation of a weak backbone and strong branches in the defense of the country has been a taboo for people since ancient times.

古文：朕以天下为家，大道济物。
现代文：我以天下为家，以大道济助万民。
English: I take the whole world as my home, and use the highways to help the people.

古文：以梁国沦灭，有怀旧好，存亡拯坠，义在今辰，扶危嗣事，非长伊德。
现代文：因为梁国沦亡，我怀念以前的友好感情，拯救危亡的国家，这种义举今天就可做；扶助危坠的王朝，扶立继位的君主，不是为了作人的君长，而是为了坚持道义。
English: Because of the fall of Liang Guo, I miss the previous friendly feelings, save the dying country, this kind of act of righteousness can be done today; support the dying dynasty, support the succeeding monarch, not to be a human ruler, but to uphold morality.

古文：彼贞阳侯，梁武犹子，长沙之胤，以年以望，堪保金陵，故置为梁主，纳于彼国。
现代文：贞阳侯是梁武帝的侄子，长沙王的后代，凭年资，凭声望，他能够保住金陵，所以可以立为梁主，现在让你们接纳他。
English: Zhengyang Hou is the nephew of Emperor Liangwu and the descendant of the King of Changsha. By virtue of his years of service and reputation, he is able to keep Jinling, so he can become the ruler of Liangwu. Now let you accept him.

古文：便诏上党王涣总摄群将，扶送江表，雷动风驰，助扫冤逆。
现代文：我下韶命上党王高涣总领众将，扶持贞阳侯，把他送往江南，大军声势如雷，迅疾如风，帮助你们扫清叛逆。
English: I hereby order the Party King Gao Jiong, the commander-in-chief, to support Zhengyang Hou and send him to the south of the Yangtze River. The army's roar is thunderous and the wind is swift to help you sweep away the rebels.

古文：清河王岳，前救荆城，军度安陆，既不相及，愤惋良深。
现代文：清河王高岳，曾经前往救援荆城，军队已经过了安陆，可还没有赶到，荆城已被攻破，我们深深感到怅恨惋惜。
English: Gao Yue, the king of Qinghe, once went to rescue Jingcheng. The army has passed the settlement, but has not yet arrived. Jingcheng has been broken. We deeply feel hatred and regret.

古文：恐及西寇乘流，复蹑江左。今转次汉口，与陆居士相会。
现代文：恐怕西魏寇虏又顺江而下，再跟随我们到江左，现在转而取道汉口，舆陆居士相会。
English: I am afraid that the West Wei invaders will go down the river again, then follow us to the left of the river, and now turn to the Hankou road.

古文：卿宜协我良规，厉彼群帅，部分舟舻，迎接今王，鸠勒劲勇，并心一力。
现代文：你们应当协助我完成这个好的计划，激励你们将帅的斗志，调动船舰，迎接贞阳侯来作君王。聚集部署你们的精良士卒，齐心合力。
English: You should help me to complete this good plan, inspire the fighting spirit of your generals, mobilize the ships, and welcome Zhengyang Hou as the king. Gather and deploy your elite soldiers, and work together.

古文：西羌乌合，本非勍寇，直是湘东怯弱，致此沦胥。
现代文：西羌衹是乌合之众，本来就不是强劲的敌寇，衹不过湘束王胆怯懦弱，才招致国家沦丧。
English: Xidi was a rabble, and was not originally a strong enemy. However, it was Hunan's cowardice that led to the country's downfall.

古文：今者之师，何往不克，善建良图，副朕所望也。 
现代文：现在我们派出的军队，什么堡垒不能攻克!希望你们好好确定你们的计划，和我的希望相符合。
English: The army we are sending now is an impregnable fortress. I hope you will make sure that your plans are in line with my wishes.

古文：贞阳承齐遣送，将届寿阳。
现代文：贞阳侯被齐派兵护送，将至寿阳。
English: Zhengyang Hou was escorted by Qi soldiers and will go to Shouyang.

古文：贞阳前后频与僧辩书，论还国继统之意，僧辩不纳。
现代文：贞阳侯动身前后屡次写信给王僧辩，谈及回国继承帝位的心意，王僧辩不肯接纳。
English: Before and after his departure, Prince Zhengyang repeatedly wrote to Wang Sofen about his intention to return to China to inherit the imperial throne, but Wang Sofen refused to accept.

古文：及贞阳、高涣至于东关，散骑常侍裴之横率众拒战，败绩，僧辩因遂谋纳贞阳，仍定君臣之礼。
现代文：等到贞阳侯、高涣到束关的时候，散骑常侍裴之横率军抵御，交战后大败，王僧辩于是就筹划接纳贞阳侯之事，就这样确定了君臣关系。
English: When Prince Zhengyang and Gao Yao arrived at Sokuan, Zangjizhong, accompanied by Baizhang, led the army to resist. After the battle, they were defeated. Wang Sangye then planned to accept Prince Zhengyang, thus establishing the relationship between the prince and the vassal.

古文：启曰： 自秦兵寇陕，臣便营赴援，才及下船，荆城陷没，即遣刘周入国，具表丹诚，左右勋豪，初并同契。
现代文：王僧辩上表启奏说：在秦地贼寇进犯陕时，我就营办率军赴援之事，刚刚上船出发，荆城就被攻陷，我当即派刘周去齐国，上表表明我的诚心，当时我身旁的功臣大族，全都同心协力，愿意效忠。
English: Wang Sangyan said at the opening of the table: "When the Qin bandits invaded Shaanxi, I led the army to go to the rescue. As soon as I boarded the ship, Jingcheng was invaded. I immediately sent Liu Zhou to Qi. The table above shows my sincerity. At that time, the heroes around me were all united and willing to be loyal.

古文：周既多时不还，人情疑阻；比册降中使，复遣诸处询谋，物论参差，未甚决定。
现代文：刘周很长时间没有回来，人心疑惑，顿生隔阂；等到下诏派来朝廷的使者，我又派人到各处咨询商议，但人们议论各有不同，不便立即作出决定。
English: Liu Zhou did not return for a long time, and people were puzzled and suddenly estranged. When the imperial envoy was sent to the imperial court, I sent people to consult and discuss everywhere, but people had different discussions, and it was inconvenient to make a decision immediately.

古文：始得侯瑱信，示西寇权景宣书，令以真迹上呈。
现代文：刚刚见到侯填派来的使者，把西边敌寇权景宣的信给我看，现在叫人把原信上呈。
English: I have just seen the envoy sent by Hou Jian, show me the letter from the western enemy, the pirate, Quan Jingxuan, and now ask someone to present the original letter.

古文：观视将帅，恣欲同泰，若一朝仰违大国，臣不辞灰粉，悲梁祚永绝中兴。
现代文：看看遣裹的将帅，都愿意与大齐同享安泰，假若我们违背大齐的意愿，我即使烧成灰、碎成粉也在所不辞，也将会为梁的帝业永远失去中兴的机遇而悲伤。
English: Looking at the generals and admirals, they are all willing to share peace and security with Dai Qi. If we violate the wishes of Dai Qi, I will not hesitate to burn them to ashes and pulverize them. I will also be sad that Liang's empire will forever lose the opportunity of ZTE.

古文：伏愿陛下便事济江，仰藉皇齐之威，凭陛下至圣之略，树君以长，雪报可期，社稷再辉，死且非吝。
现代文：希望陛下乘便渡江，上藉大齐的威望，凭藉陛下最为圣明的韬略，树立成年的国君，报仇雪耻指日可待，国家重新振兴，即使我死了也无所吝惜。
English: I hope that His Majesty will take advantage of the opportunity to cross the river, take advantage of the great prestige, and take advantage of His Majesty's most sacred strategy to establish a mature monarch, revenge can be expected, and the country will be revitalized. Even if I die, I will not regret it.

古文：请押别使曹冲驰表齐都，续启事以闻，伏迟拜奉在促。 
现代文：现请押别使曹冲驰马赶往蛮国都城，呈送表章，把事情经过向陛下启奏，我匆促之中伏首拜送。
English: Now, please do not send Cao to rush to the capital of the barbarian country, present the badge, and explain the matter to His Majesty. I bowed my head in haste.

古文：贞阳答曰： 姜皓至，枉示具公忠义之怀。
现代文：贞阳侯回覆说：姜嵩来了，承他向我表白你的忠义胸怀。
English: Zhengyang replied: "Jiang Song is here. Let him tell me about your loyalty.

古文：家国丧乱，于今积年。
现代文：家族国家都遇上祸乱，到现在已经多年。
English: Family states have been plagued for years now.

古文：三后蒙尘，四海腾沸。
现代文：三位君王蒙受耻辱，四海百姓受水火煎熬。
English: The three kings suffered humiliation, and the people of the four seas were tormented by water and fire.

古文：天命元辅，匡救本朝。弘济艰难，建武宗祏。
现代文：皇天命你这国家重臣，振兴辅佐我们朝廷，大力救助朝廷的艰难局面，重建朝廷宗庙神主。
English: It is the emperor's destiny that you, the chief vassal of the state, should revitalize and assist our imperial court, vigorously rescue the difficult situation of the imperial court, and rebuild the imperial family temple.

古文：至于丘园板筑，尚想来仪；公室皇枝，岂不虚迟。
现代文：至于在乡间从事板筑的百姓，也希望国家有 凤凰来仪 的祥瑞，那些公卿大臣，皇室亲族，怎不会虚席以待?
English: As for the people engaged in board building in the countryside, they also hope that the country will have the auspiciousness of the phoenix coming to the ceremony. Those noblemen and ministers, royal relatives, how will they not wait in vain?

古文：闻孤还国，理会高怀，但近再命行人，或不宣具。
现代文：听到我要回京城的消息，按道理自会以高尚的情怀相迎，衹是近来两次派出使臣，都没有广为宣布我回朝的消息。
English: Upon hearing the news that I would be returning to the capital, it was only logical that I would be greeted with high-minded sentiments. I have sent envoys twice recently, but the news of my return to the North has not been widely announced.

古文：公既询谋卿士，访逮籓维，沿溯往来，理淹旬月，使乎届止，殊副所期。
现代文：你既然与公卿大夫商量谋议，向藩国大臣咨询，上游下游来来往往，按理需要耗费十天半月的时间，使臣停留在你那儿，正和我的愿望相符。
English: Since you have consulted with the noble doctor and consulted with the minister of the state, the upstream and downstream come and go, and it is reasonable to spend ten days and a half months, the envoy staying with you is in line with my wishes.

古文：便是再立我萧宗，重兴我梁国。
现代文：遣正是再立我们萧氏宗庙，重新振兴我们梁国的壮举。
English: It is a great feat to re-establish our Xiao ancestral temple and revitalize our Liangguo.

古文：亿兆黎庶，咸蒙此恩；社稷宗祧，曾不相愧。
现代文：亿万黎民百姓，全都蒙受这恩泽，我们也就不会再愧对社稷宗庙。
English: Hundreds of millions of Lebanese people have all received this grace, and we will no longer be ashamed of the Sheshan ancestral temple.

古文：近军次东关，频遣信裴之横处，示其可否。
现代文：最近军队驻扎东关，我频频派出使者到裴之横那儿，把事情告诉他让他作出决断。
English: Recently, the army was stationed in Dongguan, and I frequently sent emissaries to Pei's side to tell him about the situation and let him make a decision.

古文：答对骄凶，殊骇闻瞩。
现代文：裴之横回答骄横凶暴，看到听到，令人吃惊。
English: Pei Zhi replied arrogantly and ferociously, which was surprising to see and hear.

古文：上党王陈兵见卫，欲叙安危，无识之徒，忽然逆战。前旌未举，即自披猖，惊悼之情，弥以伤恻。
现代文：上党王派出军队保卫我，我想要和他叙谈国家安危之计，一些没有见识的家伙，忽然迎上来交战，前锋的旗帜还未举起来，他们就自己溃败了，惊骇伤悼之情，更让我感到哀怜。
English: The last emperor sent an army to defend me, and I wanted to talk to him about the national security strategy. Some unsuspecting guys suddenly came to fight, and before the flag of the vanguard was raised, they were defeated by themselves. I was shocked, saddened, and even more pitiful.

古文：上党王深自矜嗟，不传首级，更蒙封树，饰棺厚殡，务从优礼。齐朝大德，信感神民。
现代文：上党王也深深感到哀怜，为之叹息，不把裴之横的首级传送京城，更蒙他以礼相待，棺椁加以装盛，殡殓丰厚，堆坟植树，丧礼优厚，齐朝的大德实在感动了神明和百姓。
English: Shangdang Wang also deeply felt pity and sighed for it. He did not send the head of Pei Zhiyong to Beijing. Moreover, he was treated with courtesy, the coffin was decorated, the funeral wreath was rich, the grave was planted with trees, and the funeral was rich. The great virtue of the Qi Dynasty really moved the gods and the people.

古文：方仰藉皇威，敬凭元宰，讨逆贼于咸阳，诛叛子于云梦，同心协力，克定邦家。
现代文：我们将要仰仗前代圣皇的神威，凭藉朝廷大臣的辅佐，讨伐在咸阳的逆贼，诛除在云梦的叛子，同心协力，安定邦家。
English: We will have to rely on the authority of the former Holy Emperor, with the assistance of the Minister of the Imperial Court, to fight the traitors in Xianyang, eliminate the traitors in Yunmeng, and work together to stabilize the state.

古文：览所示权景宣书，上流诸将，本有忠略，弃亲向仇，庶当不尔，防奸定乱，终在于公。
现代文：见了你给我看的权景宣的信，镇守江上游的诸位将领，本有忠心，又有谋略，现在背弃亲人，投向寇仇，也许是为形势所迫，不得不这样，制止奸谋，平定祸乱，最终在于王公你一人。
English: When I saw the letter from Quan Jingxuan that you showed me, all the generals in the upstream of the Zhengu River, who were originally loyal and had a strategy, now turned their backs on their relatives and turned to revenge. Perhaps they were forced by the situation and had to do so. To stop the treachery and quell the calamity, it is ultimately up to you alone.

古文：今且顿东关，更待来信，未知水陆何处见迎。
现代文：现在我暂且停留在东关，再等你派遣使者，告诉我从水路陆路、在什么地方迎接我。
English: Now I will stay in Dongguan for the time being, and then wait for you to send a messenger to tell me where to meet me by land or by sea.

古文：夫建国立君，布在方策，入盟出质，有自来矣。
现代文：建立国家，扶立君主，要入城订盟，送出入质，逭事记载在典籍中，由来已久。
English: It has been a long time since the establishment of a country, the establishment of a monarch, the need to enter the city to sign an alliance, and the sending of entry and exit certificates, anecdotes recorded in classics.

古文：若公之忠节，上感苍旻；群帅同谋，必匪携贰。则齐师反璟，义不陵江，如致爽言，誓以无克。韬旗侧席，迟复行人。曹冲奉表齐都，即押送也。
现代文：假如你忠贞不二，感动上天，众将领合力同谋，不存二心，那么齐国军队就会返回本国，遵守道义决不过江；如果你们违背前言，我发誓就不能卷旗回师了，我暂不归去，将侧席以等待贤者，以行人身份拜奉表章去齐国都城的曹冲，就会成为被押送的对象。
English: If you are loyal, moved by heaven, and the generals work together and conspire without hesitation, then the Qi army will return to their home country, and they will never go against morality. If you violate the preface, I swear that I will not be able to return to the division. I will not return for the time being, and I will go to Cao Chong in the capital of Qi to wait for the wise and worship the badge as a pedestrian. I will become the object of escort.

古文：渭桥之下，惟迟叙言；汜水之阳，预有号惧。 
现代文：我将在长安渭桥之下，等着你的解释；汜水之北，将会有号呼痛哭之声。
English: I will be under the Chang'an bridge, waiting for your explanation; north of Surabaya, there will be the sound of wailing.

古文：僧辩又重启曰： 员外常侍姜皓还，奉敕伏具动止。
现代文：王僧辩又重新上表启奏说：员外常侍姜嵩返回来，接受敕命要我们陈述具体行动安排。
English: Wang Sangye replayed the opening speech and said, "Outsider and regular attendant Jiang Song has returned, and he has ordered us to state the specific action plan.

古文：大齐仁义之风，曲被邻国，恤灾救难，申此大猷。皇家枝戚，莫不荣荷；江东冠冕，俱知凭赖。
现代文：大齐讲求仁义的教化，使邻国广受滋润，现在他们同情我们的灾祸，救助我们的危难，推行这样一个大的计划，皇族的支派亲戚，没有谁不受恩承惠，仕宦之家，也都得到了依靠。
English: The edification of universal benevolence has greatly nourished the neighboring countries. Now they sympathize with our calamity, help us in our peril, and carry out such a big plan. The royal family's tribal relatives, no one is not favored, and the official's family, have also been relied on.

古文：今歃不忘信，信实由衷，谨遣臣第七息显，显所生刘并弟子世珍，往彼充质；仍遣左民尚书周弘正至历阳奉迎。
现代文：现在歃血为盟不忘诚信，诚信确是出自内心，谨派我的第七个儿子王显，王颢的生母刘氏和我弟弟的儿子王世珍，去那儿充当人质；还派左民尚书周弘正到历阳迎接。
English: Now, I am determined not to forget my sincerity, for sincerity truly comes from the heart. I have sent my seventh son Wang Xian, Wang Yao's birth mother Liu, and my brother's son Wang Shizhen there to serve as hostages. I have also sent the leftist scholar Zhou Hongzheng to Liyang to greet them.

古文：舻舳浮江，俟一龙之渡；清宫丹陛，候六传之入。
现代文：船艋停泊在江上，等待一龙南渡；清理宫室、台阶，等候皇子的六乘传车进宫。
English: The raft is anchored on the river, waiting for the dragon to cross to the south; the palace rooms and steps are cleaned, waiting for the prince's six-seater carriage to enter the palace.

古文：万国倾心，同荣晋文之反；三善克宣，方流宋昌之议。
现代文：天下百姓都仰慕陛下的归来，以此为荣，如同晋国百姓仰慕晋文公的返国；臣事君、子事父、幼事长的三种善德能够得以宣扬，宋昌劝文帝由代王入京为帝的议论才得以流布。
English: The people all over the world admired the return of His Majesty and were proud of it, just as the people of Jin admired the return of Jin Wenguang; the three virtues of a minister, a father, and a head of a family could be propagated, and the argument that Song Chang advised Emperor Wenguang to become emperor by representing the king in Beijing was able to spread.

古文：国祚既隆，社稷有奉。则群臣竭节，报厚施于大齐；戮力展愚，效忠诚于陛下。
现代文：国运已经兴隆，社稷有人祭祀，那么群臣就会竭力尽忠，回报查固大的恩施，同心协力施展才能，为陛下贡献诚心。
English: The national movement has flourished, and there are people who offer sacrifices, so the courtiers will try their best to be loyal, repay the great kindness of the emperor, work together to display their talents, and contribute their sincerity to his majesty.

古文：今遣吏部尚书王通奉启以闻。 
现代文：现在派遣吏部尚书王通带着表章启奏。
English: Now dispatch the head of the personnel department, Shang Shu Wang Tong, to lead the opening ceremony with a badge.

古文：僧辩因求以敬帝为皇太子。
现代文：王仅峦就便请求以塑童为皇太子。
English: The king only wanted the plastic boy to be crown prince.

古文：贞阳又答曰： 王尚书通至，复枉示，知欲遣贤弟世珍以表诚质，具悉忧国之怀。
现代文：贞疆堡又回覆说：王尚书通来了，又蒙你启奏，知道你想派贤弟王世珍为质以表诚心，也全都知道了你为国忧虑的胸怀。
English: Zhenjiang Fort also replied, "Wang Shangshu passed through, and was inspired by you, knowing that you wanted to send your wise brother Wang Shizhen as a pledge to show sincerity, and all knew your concern for the country.

古文：复以庭中玉树，掌内明珠，无累胸怀，志在匡救，岂非劬劳我社稷，弘济我邦家？
现代文：又以美如庭中玉树的贤弟，视作掌上明珠的儿子为质，心中不以为负累，一心在于匡扶朝廷、挽救危难，难道这不是为我们社稷、为救助我们国家日夜效劳?
English: And with the virtuous younger brother of the beautiful jade tree in the courtyard, regarded as the son of the pearl in the palm of the hand, as a pledge, he did not think of it as a burden in his heart, and was only concerned with supporting the imperial court and saving the danger. Isn't this a day and night service for our society and for the rescue of our country?

古文：惭叹之怀，用忘兴寝。
现代文：我为此感叹，内心有愧，因此而辗转难眠。
English: I lament about this, feeling guilty inside, so I can't sleep.

古文：晋安王东京贻厥之重，西都继体之贤，嗣守皇家，宁非民望。
现代文：晋安王是束京武帝的孙儿，地位尊贵，又是西都元帝的继位贤君，他继承皇位，保有天下，难道不是百姓的愿望。
English: King Jinan is the grandson of Emperor Shokingei, he is of high status, and he is also the successor of Emperor Xituyuan. Isn't it the people's wish that he succeed to the throne and rule the world?

古文：但世道丧乱，宜立长君，以其蒙孽，难可承业。
现代文：但世间出现祸乱，应当扶立成年君主，因为他蒙受灾难，难以继承皇业。
English: However, if there is a calamity in the world, an adult monarch should be appointed, because he has suffered a disaster and it is difficult for him to succeed to the throne.

古文：成、昭之德，自古希俦；冲、质之危，何代无此。
现代文：漠成帝、汉昭帝幼年继位，成就美政，自古罕舆伦比；汉冲、幼年为帝，被弑而夭折，哪个朝代没有这种危险?
English: Emperor Hanzhong and Emperor Han Zhao succeeded to the throne at a young age and achieved great achievements in politics, which has been unparalleled since ancient times; Emperor Han Chong was an emperor at a young age and died prematurely, which dynasty does not have this kind of danger?

古文：孤身当否运，志不图生。
现代文：我遭遇厄运，心中并不贪图苟且活命。
English: I've had bad luck and I don't want to live.

古文：忽荷不世之恩，仍致非常之举。
现代文：突然问蒙受了世上罕见的恩惠，于是才有送我归国为帝的不平凡的行动。
English: Suddenly, I received a rare favor in the world, which led to the extraordinary action of sending me back to my country as emperor.

古文：自惟虚薄，兢惧已深。
现代文：想到自己浮浅而没有根基，就感到深深地惶恐和戒惧。
English: There is a deep sense of trepidation and dread at the thought of being shallow and rootless.

古文：若建承华，本归皇胄；心口相誓，惟拟晋安。
现代文：假如要立太子，太子之位本来就应当归于皇上之子，我心中、口头都发下誓愿，这个位置祇确定给晋安王。
English: If a crown prince is to be established, the crown prince's position should originally belong to the emperor's son. I made a vow in my heart and verbally, and this position was only determined for King Jinan.

古文：如或虚言，神明所殛。
现代文：假如遣衹是说假话，就让神明来惩罚我。
English: If it is a lie, then let the gods punish me.

古文：览今所示，深遂本怀。
现代文：看了你现在送来的表章，和我本来的想法完全相符。
English: After looking at the watch you sent me, it's exactly what I had in mind.

古文：戢慰之情，无寄言象。
现代文：宽慰安定的感情，无法用语言来表露。
English: The feelings of relief and stability cannot be expressed in words.

古文：但公忧劳之重，既禀齐恩；忠义之情，复及梁贰。
现代文：祇是王公你为国忧劳，身负重任，已经回报了齐国的恩惠；你忠贞诚挚的情怀，又施及梁国的继位君主。
English: It is only you, Wang Gu, who have worked hard for the country and shouldered heavy responsibilities, who have returned the favor of Qi country; your loyalty and sincere feelings have also been extended to the successor monarch of Liang country.

古文：华夷兆庶，岂不怀风？
现代文：天下华族夷族的百姓，难道不会顺服归附?
English: Won't the Chinese and barbarian people of the world submit to it?

古文：宗庙明灵，岂不相感？
现代文：宗庙神灵，难道不感激你?
English: Gods of the ancestral temple, aren't they grateful to you?

古文：正尔回璟，仍向历阳。
现代文：扭转准备回师的军队，继续向历阳前进。
English: Turn around the army preparing to return to the division and continue to advance towards Liyang.

古文：所期质累，便望来彼。
现代文：原先约定为质的人员，也希望来到那地方。
English: Qualified personnel, who were originally contracted, also hope to come to that place.

古文：众军不渡，已著盟书。
现代文：齐国大军不渡江，这已在盟书中写明白。
English: It has been clearly written in the alliance document that the great army of Qi will not cross the river.

古文：斯则大齐圣主之恩规，上党英王之然诺，得原失信，终不为也。
现代文：这正是大查圣明君主对我们特别宽容的安排，德才超群的上党王已经许诺，为获取原而失去信用，晋文公不作这种蠢事，齐国最终也不会这样干。
English: This is precisely the arrangement that the great King Cha Shengming is particularly tolerant of us. The highly moral and talented Shang Dang Wang has already promised to lose credibility in order to obtain the original. Jinwen Gong will not do such a stupid thing, and Qi Guo will not do so in the end.

古文：惟迟相见，使在不赊。
现代文：祇等着和你相见，为时不远。
English: I'm just waiting to meet you, it's not far.

古文：乡国非遥，触目号咽。 
现代文：家乡距离很近，触景生情，更令人悲泣。
English: The distance to my hometown is very close, the scenery is vivid, and it is even sadder.

古文：僧辩使送质于鄴。
现代文：王僧辩派使者把为质的人员送到邺。
English: Wang Sangye sent an emissary to take the hostages to the capital.

古文：贞阳求渡卫士三千，僧辩虑其为变，止受散卒千人而已，并遣龙舟法驾往迎。
现代文：贞阳侯渡辽时要求带着三千名卫士，王僧辩担心他们策动变乱，衹肯接受一千名散卒而已，并且派出龙舟，带着皇上用的銮驾去迎接。
English: When Zhengyang marched to Liao, he asked to bring three thousand guards with him. Wang Sangyan was worried that they would instigate turmoil, and would only accept one thousand foot soldiers. He also sent a dragon boat to meet them, bringing the imperial carriage.

古文：贞阳济江之日，僧辩拥楫中流，不敢就岸。后乃同会于江宁浦。
现代文：贞阳侯渡江那一天，王仅还坐船停在辽中心，不敢靠岸，后来才和贞阳侯同在江宁浦相会。
English: On the day of Zhengyang Hou's crossing of the Yangtze River, Wang only stopped in the center of Liao and did not dare to dock. Only later did he meet Zhengyang Hou and Jiangningpu.

古文：贞阳既践伪位，仍授僧辩大司马，领太子太傅、扬州牧，余悉如故。
现代文：贞阳侯登上伪帝之位，于是授任王僧辩为大司马，领太子太傅、扬州牧，其余官爵都不变。
English: Zhengyang marquis ascended to the throne of the pseudo-emperor, so he appointed Wang Sangye as the grand steward, led the crown prince Taifu, Yangzhou Maki, and the rest of the officials and nobles remained unchanged.

古文：陈霸先时为司空、南徐州刺史，恶其翻覆，与诸将议，因自京口举兵十万，水陆俱至，袭于建康。
现代文：速玺先当时任司空、南徐州刺史，他痛恨王世丰反覆无常，就和众将商议，从京口发兵十万，水陆并进，袭击建康。
English: He hated Wang Shifeng's capriciousness, so he discussed with the generals and sent 100,000 soldiers from Beijing to attack Jiankang, marching by land and sea.

古文：于是水军到，僧辩常处于石头城，是日正视事，军人已逾城北而入，南门又驰白有兵来。
现代文：于是水军先到，王僧辩常常居住在石头城，逭一天正在处理政事，军人已经翻越城北的城墙攻进来，南门又有人骑马赶来报告说是有军队来进攻。
English: As a result, the navy arrived first. Wang Sangye often lived in Stone Town, and on one day he was dealing with political affairs. Soldiers had already climbed over the north wall of the city to break in, and someone on horseback came to the south gate to report that there were troops coming to attack.

古文：僧辩与其子頠遽走出阁，左右心腹尚数十人。
现代文：王僧辩和他儿子王俯急忙跑出官府，左右心腹还有几十人跟随。
English: Wang Sangye and his son Wang Qian hurriedly ran out of the government office, followed by dozens of right and left confidants.

古文：众军悉至，僧辩计无所出，乃据南门楼乞命拜请。
现代文：陈霸先派出的各路人马都已赶到，王僧辩无计可施，于是据守南门楼，向陵霸先拜请宽宥性命。
English: All the people and horses sent by Chen Baxian had arrived, and Wang Sangyan had nothing to do, so he guarded the south gate tower and asked Ling Baxian for forgiveness for his life.

古文：霸先因命纵火焚之，方共頠下就执。
现代文：陈霸先就命令放火焚烧南门楼，王僧辩才和王颔一起下楼被擒。
English: Chen Baxian gave the order to set fire to the South Gate Building, and Wang Sangyan and Wang Yao went downstairs together to be arrested.

古文：霸先曰： 我有何辜，公欲与齐师赐讨？ 
现代文：速灵先说： 我有什么罪，你想和齐军一起讨伐我? 
English: Su Ling said first: What is my sin, do you want to fight me with the Qi army?

古文：又曰： 何意全无防备？ 
现代文：又说： 为什么全无防备? 
English: He also said: Why is there no defence?

古文：僧辩曰： 委公北门，何谓无备。 
现代文：王僧辩说： 把北门交给你，怎么算是没有防备? 
English: Wang Xiang argued: How can the north gate be handed over to you without any protection?

古文：尔夜斩之。
现代文：那一夜陈霸先就把王僧辩杀了。
English: That night, Chen Baxian killed Wang Sangye.

古文：长子，承圣初历官至侍中。
现代文：王僧辩长子王颤，承圣初由历任官职升至侍中。
English: Wang Chuan, the eldest son of Wang Sheng, was promoted to attendant at the beginning of his ordination from his previous posts.

古文：初，僧辩平建业，遣霸先守京口，都无备防。屡以为言，僧辩不听，竟及于祸。
现代文：当初，王僧辩平定建业后，派陈霸先镇守京口，而对他毫无防范，王颉屡屡对遣事提出进谏，王僧辩不听从，最终陷于祸乱之中。
English: At first, Wang Sangye did not listen to Wang Sangye when he sent Chen Baxian to guard Jingkou after the settlement of Jianye, and did not take any precautions against him. Wang Yao repeatedly made suggestions to Wang Sangye, but Wang Sangye did not listen, and eventually fell into trouble.

古文：西魏寇江陵，世祖遣督城内诸军事。
现代文：西魏进犯江陵，世祖派王颉督城内诸军事。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty invaded Jiangling, and the forefathers sent Wang Bingguo to lead the military in the city.

古文：荆城陷，随王琳入齐，为竟陵郡守。
现代文：荆城被攻陷，王颉随同王琳到了齐国，担任竟陵郡郡守。
English: After the fall of Jingcheng, Wang Xi accompanied Wang Lin to Qi Province, where he served as the county governor of Qiongling County.

古文：齐遣琳镇寿春，将图江左。及陈平淮南，执琳杀之。
现代文：齐派王琳镇守寿春，将要谋划进占江左之事，陈平定淮南之后，抓住王琳把他杀了。
English: Qi sent Wang Lin to guard Shouchun, and he was going to plot to occupy the left bank of the Yangtze River. After Chen had settled Huainan, he caught Wang Lin and killed him.

古文：闻琳死，乃出郡城南，登高冢上号哭，一恸而绝。
现代文：王颢听到王琳的死讯，于是到郡城南边，登上高山顶峰号呼痛哭，因极度悲哀而死去。
English: Upon hearing the news of Wang Lin's death, Wang Hui went to the southern edge of the county seat, climbed to the peak of a high mountain, cried bitterly, and died of extreme grief.

古文：弟颁，少有志节，恒随从世祖。及荆城陷覆，没于西魏。
现代文：王颢之弟王颁，从小就有志向，有节操，常常跟随世祖，到荆城被攻陷的时候，王颁被西魏俘获。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Zai, had ambition and self-restraint since childhood, and often followed his ancestor. When Jingcheng was invaded, Wang Zai was captured by the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：史臣曰：自侯景寇逆，世祖据有上游，以全楚之兵委僧辩将率之任。及克平祸乱，功亦著焉，在乎策勋，当上台之赏。
现代文：史臣曰：在侯景叛逆的时候，世祖据有江上游，他委任王僧辩担任主帅，把全楚之兵都交给王僧避，到平定祸乱之后，王僧辩的功劳已经昭着于世，朝廷策书记下他的功勋，受到位至三公宰辅的赏赐。
English: The historian said: At the time of the rebellion of Hou Jing, the ancestor was believed to be in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. He appointed Wang Sangye as the commander and gave all the Chu soldiers to Wang Sangye. After the calamity was settled, Wang Sangye's merits have been made known to the world. He was rewarded with the title of Three Princes' Vice-Regent under the imperial policy secretary.

古文：敬帝以高祖贻厥之重，世祖继体之尊，洎渚宫沦覆，理膺宝祚。
现代文：敬帝凭藉是高祖的孙儿、又是世祖的继位储君的尊贵身份，在江陵被攻陷之后，理应继承帝位。
English: Emperor Gaozu, by virtue of being the grandson of Emperor Gaozu and the heir to the throne of Emperor Gaozu, should have succeeded to the throne after the fall of Jiangling.

古文：僧辩位当将相，义存伊、霍，乃受胁齐师，傍立支庶。
现代文：王僧辩地位兼为将相，应当有伊尹、霍光辅佐幼主的忠义；但竟然受齐国军队胁迫，另立皇族旁支庶子为帝。
English: Wang Soenbo's position was also that of commander-in-chief, so he should have the loyalty of Yi Yin and Huo Guangfu's son-in-law; however, he was actually coerced by the Qi army to set up an illegitimate son of a minor member of the imperial family as emperor.

古文：苟欲行夫忠义，何忠义之远矣？
现代文：如果想要履行忠义，怎么又远离忠义了呢?
English: If you want to be loyal, why are you so far from being loyal?

古文：树国之道既亏，谋身之计不足，自致歼灭，悲矣！
现代文：建国立君的道义已有欠缺，为自身安全谋划又考虑不周，自己导致被消灭，可悲啊!
English: The morality of the nation-building monarch has been deficient, and his security planning has been ill-considered, leading to his own annihilation. How sad!

