古文：惠公既即位，乃背秦赂。
现代文：晋惠公继承君位后，就违背了给秦国赂地的诺言。
English: After Prince Jin Hui succeeded to the throne, he reneged on his promise to give land to Qin.

古文：使丕郑聘于秦，且谢之。
现代文：他派丕郑到秦国访问，向秦君致歉。
English: He sent Yu Zheng to visit Qin to apologize to Qin.

古文：而杀里克，曰： 子杀二君与一大夫，为子君者，不亦难乎？ 
现代文：同时他又杀了里克，说： 你杀了两个国君和一个大夫，做你的国君，不是太难吗？ 
English: At the same time he killed Rick, saying: You killed two kings and a doctor, isn't it too difficult to be your king?

古文：丕郑如秦谢缓赂，乃谓穆公曰： 君厚问以召吕甥、郤称、冀芮而止之，以师奉公子重耳，臣之属内作，晋君必出。 
现代文：丕郑到秦国对不能如期奉上城邑表示歉意，然后对穆公说： 您派人用厚礼把吕甥、郤称、冀芮骗到秦国拘留起来。然后派军队护送公子重耳回晋国，我们的人在国内举事策应，这样晋君必定会逃出晋国。 
English: Zhai Zheng went to Qin to apologize for not being able to send him to Shangcheng as scheduled, and then said to Mu Gong: You sent someone to use a generous gift to deceive Lu Nephew, Zou Zhan, and Ji Zhan into being detained in Qin. Then you sent an army to escort Xiong Jie to return to Jin. Our people will work out a solution in the country, so that Jin will definitely escape from Jin.

古文：穆公使泠至报问，且召三大夫。
现代文：穆公于是派泠至回访晋国，同时召请吕甥、郤称和冀芮三位大夫。
English: Mu Gong then sent his emissaries to pay a return visit to Jin Province, and at the same time summoned the three doctors, Lü Nefu, Xiang Zhan and Ji Jun.

古文：郑也与客将行事，冀芮曰： 郑之使薄而报厚，其言我与秦也，必使诱我。
现代文：丕郑和泠至将要按计划行动，冀芮对惠公说： 丕郑出使秦国时带去的礼品菲薄，可是秦国回赠的礼品却很丰厚，大概他在秦国说了我们什么，一定是让秦国来引诱我们。
English: When Yao Zheng and Yao Yao were about to act according to the plan, Ji Yao said to Huigong: The gifts that Yao Zheng brought with him when he sent an envoy to Qin were meager, but the gifts that Qin gave back were very rich. Probably what he said to us in Qin was to let Qin lure us.

古文：弗杀，必作难。 
现代文：不杀丕郑，肯定会发难。 
English: If you don't kill Yu Zheng, you'll definitely get into trouble.

古文：是故杀丕郑及七舆大夫：共华、贾华、叔坚、骓歂、纍虎、特宫、山祁，皆里、丕之党也。
现代文：所以就杀了丕郑和七舆大夫，他们是共华、贾华、叔坚、骓歂、纍虎、特宫、山祁。这些人都是和里克、丕郑一党的。
English: Therefore, they killed Gong Zheng and the seven doctors of public opinion, namely, Gong Hua, Jia Hua, Shujian, Zhai, Zhaohu, Tegong, and Shanzhang. These people were of the same party as Li Ke and Gong Zheng.

古文：丕豹出奔秦。
现代文：丕郑的儿子丕豹出逃到秦国。
English: Yao Zheng's son, Yao Bao, fled to Qin.

古文：丕郑之自秦反也，闻里克死，见共华曰： 可以入乎？ 
现代文：丕郑从秦国回来的途中，听说里克被杀，见到共华问他说： 我可以回国吗？ 
English: On his way back from Qin, Zhai Zheng heard that Rick had been killed. When he saw Gonghua, he asked, "Can I go back to China?"

古文：共华曰： 二三子皆在而不及，子使于秦，可哉！ 
现代文：共华说： 我们几个在国内都没有被株连，你是出使秦国的，可以回来。 
English: Gonghua said, "Several of us have not been arrested in China. You are an envoy of Qin, you can come back.

古文：丕郑入，君杀之。
现代文：丕郑回国后，惠公杀了他。
English: After Zhai Zheng returned to China, Huigong killed him.

古文：共赐谓共华曰： 子行乎？
现代文：共赐对共华说： 你逃走吗？
English: Co-Giver said to Co-Bearer: Are you running away?

古文：其及也！ 
现代文：快要轮到你了！ 
English: It's almost your turn!

古文：共华曰： 夫子之入，吾谋也，将待也。 
现代文：共华说： 丕郑回来，是我的主意，我将等待遭难。 
English: He said: "It was my idea for Zhai Zheng to come back. I will wait for the calamity.

古文：赐曰： 孰知之？ 
现代文：共赐说： 有谁知道这是你的主意？ 
English: Co-Giver: Does anyone know if this was your idea?

古文：共华曰： 不可。
现代文：共华说： 那也不行。
English: He said, "That's not good either."

古文：知而背之不信，谋而困人不智，困而不死无勇。
现代文：自己知道内疚却昧着良心是不信，为人谋划却使人遭了厄难是不智，害了别人自己却怕死是不勇。
English: To know one's guilt but not to have a clear conscience is unbelief. It is unwise to plot against others and cause them to suffer misfortune. It is not brave to harm others while being afraid of death.

古文：任大恶三，行将安入？
现代文：我背着这三项恶名，又有什么地方可去？
English: With these three bad names on my back, where can I go?

古文：子其行矣，我姑待死。 
现代文：你走吧，我姑且在这里等待死亡。 
English: You go ahead. I'll just wait here and die.

古文：丕郑之子曰豹，出奔秦，谓穆公曰： 晋君大失其众，背君赂，杀里克，而忌处者，众固不说。
现代文：丕郑的儿子叫豹，出逃到了秦国，对秦穆公说： 晋国的国君大失民心了。他背信不给你城邑，杀死里克，忌恨周围的人，大家本来就不满意。
English: Yao Zheng's son, named Leopard, fled to Qin and said to Qin Mu Gong: "The ruler of Jin has lost the hearts of the people. He betrayed his trust, refused to give you towns, killed Rick, and hated the people around him. Everyone was not satisfied.

古文：今又杀臣之父及七舆大夫，此其党半国矣。
现代文：如今他又杀死我的父亲和七舆大夫，他的支持者在国内只剩一半了。
English: Now he has killed my father and seven public doctors, and only half of his supporters are left in the country.

古文：君若伐之，其君必出。 
现代文：您如果讨伐他，他必定会被驱逐出晋国。 
English: If you persecute him, he will definitely be expelled from Jin.

古文：穆公曰： 失众安能杀人？
现代文：穆公说： 失掉民众怎么还能杀这么多人？
English: Mukong said: "How can they kill so many people when they have lost the people?"

古文：且夫祸唯无毙，足者不处，处者不足，胜败若化。
现代文：况且他的罪还不到死的地步，民众就不会造反。罪足以死的人，不会留在晋国。
English: Moreover, his crime was not so serious as to be punishable by death, so the people would not revolt. A person whose crime is serious enough to be punishable by death would not stay in Jin.

古文：以祸为违，孰能出君？
现代文：留在晋国的人，罪还不足死。
English: For those who remain in Jin, the punishment is worse than death.

古文：尔俟我！ 
现代文：你还是等我从长计议吧！ 
English: Why don't you wait for me to make a long-term decision?

