古文：因祗国葛由鲁般弓人燕巧人云明台淫渊浦新丰张衡王肃凌云台陈思王吴夫人区纯水芝欹器兰陵王僧灵昭七宝镜台
现代文：因祗国葛由鲁般弓人燕巧人云明台淫渊浦新丰张衡王肃凌云台陈思王吴夫人区纯水芝欹器兰陵王僧灵昭七宝镜台
English: By virtue of  Guo Ge, Yu Lu, bowman, Yan Qiao, Yunming Tai, Zhen Yuan, Pu Xin Feng, Zhang Heng, Wang Su Ling, Yuntai, Chen Si, Wang Wu, Lady District, Pure Water, Zhi Xuan, Lan Ling, Wang Sang, Ling Zhao, Qibao Mirror Stand

古文：因祗国
现代文：因祗国
English: Incheon Province

古文：周成王五年，有因祗国去王都九万里，来献女功一人。
现代文：周成王五年时，离京城九万里，有一个因祗国，进献来一位做女红的人。
English: When King Zhoucheng was five years old, he was ninety thousand miles away from the capital city. One day, a woman who was a redhead came from the country of Yunnan.

古文：善工巧，体貌轻洁。
现代文：她不仅手巧，擅长女红，而且体态轻盈，相貌皎洁。
English: She is not only deft with her hands and good at being a redhead, but also has a light body and a beautiful face.

古文：披纤罗绣縠之衣，长袖脩裾，风至则结其衿带，恐飘摇不能自止也。
现代文：她身着细薄透气绣花绉纱的、长袖的宽大衣服，清风拂来衣襟飘带飘拽缠绕，飘飘然让人担心她会站立不住。
English: She was dressed in a long-sleeved, voluminous dress of thin, breathable embroidered embroidered crepe, and the wind blew the lapel streamers and tugged them around, making people worry that she would not be able to stand.

古文：其人善织，以五色丝内口中，引而结之，则成文锦。
现代文：她特别擅长纺织，把五色丝放在口中，拉引出来便织成有花纹的彩锦。
English: She is particularly good at weaving. She puts the five-coloured thread in her mouth, pulls it out and weaves it into a patterned brocade.

古文：其国人又献云昆锦，文似云从山岳中出也；有列堞锦，文似云霞覆城雉楼堞也。有杂珠锦，文似贯珮珠也；有篆文锦，文似大篆之文也；有列明锦，文似罗列灯烛也；幅皆广三尺。
现代文：因祗国人还进献了云昆锦，花纹好象彩云从山岳中飘飘而出；有列堞锦，图案有如云霞飘浮在城墙上；有杂珠锦，图纹有如一串串珍珠；有篆文锦，纹形象大篆文字；有列明锦，锦上的花纹象排列的烛灯。这些锦，幅宽全都是三尺。
English: Because of this, the people of Yunnan also presented Yunkun brocade, with patterns like colored clouds floating out of the mountains; there are rows of embroidered brocade, with patterns like clouds floating on the city wall; there are mixed pearl brocade, with patterns like a string of pearls; there are embroidered brocade, with patterns like large characters; there are rows of bright brocade, with patterns on the brocade like arranged candle lights. These brocades are all three feet wide.

古文：其国丈夫，皆勤于耕稼。一日锄十顷之地。
现代文：因祗国的男人，全都辛勤地在田野里耕做庄稼，一天能锄十顷地。
English: Thanks to the men of Shan State, they all work hard in the fields to grow crops, and can cultivate ten hectares of land a day.

古文：故时俗四言诗曰：力耕十顷。能致嘉颖。
现代文：因祗国还进献了生长得特别茁壮的庄稼，一株能装满一车。所以民间流传一首诗说：努力耕田十顷，长出硕大的谷穗！
English: Because Min Province also donated crops that grow particularly vigorously, one plant can fill a car. Therefore, a poem circulated among the people said: work hard to cultivate ten hectares of land, grow huge ears of corn!

古文：葛由
现代文：葛由
English: Ge Yu said.

古文：葛由，蜀羌人。
现代文：葛由，蜀地羌族人。
English: Ge Yu, a member of the Shu Di Yi ethnic group.

古文：能刻木为羊卖之。
现代文：能用木头刻制成羊，到集市上去卖。
English: You can carve a sheep out of wood and sell it at the fair.

古文：一旦乘羊入蜀城，蜀之豪贵，或随之上绥山。绥山高峻，在峨眉之西。
现代文：一天，葛由驾着木羊进入蜀城，城里的豪门贵族中有的人跟随葛由上了绥山，绥山高大险峻，在峨眉山的西边。
English: One day, GeYu drove a wooden goat into Shu City. Some of the city's wealthy aristocrats followed GeYu up Lushan, a tall and precipitous mountain on the west side of Mount Emei.

古文：随者皆得道，不复还。
现代文：跟随葛由上绥山的人，全都得道成仙，不再回来。
English: The people who followed GeYu up Mount Lushan all became immortals and never came back.

古文：故里语曰：得绥山一桃，虽不能仙，亦足以豪。
现代文：所以俚语说：得到绥山一挑，虽不能成仙，也完全可以成为富豪！
English: Therefore, the slang says: if you get one pick of Lushan, although you can't become a immortal, you can completely become a rich man!

古文：山下多立祠焉。
现代文：绥山下边，修建了许多祠庙。
English: At the bottom of Lushan Mountain, many ancestral temples have been built.

古文：鲁般
现代文：鲁般
English: Roohan

古文：鲁般，敦煌人，莫详年代。
现代文：鲁般，敦煌人，生死的年代不祥。
English: Lu Hun, Dunhuang people, the era of life and death is ominous.

古文：巧侔造化。
现代文：他心思精巧，善于创造。
English: He is creative and resourceful.

古文：於凉州造浮图，作木鸢，每击楔三下，乘之以归。
现代文：他在凉州建造佛塔时，造了一只木鸢，敲击机关三下，木鸢就可以飞动，他就乘着木鸢飞回家。
English: When he was building a pagoda in Liangzhou, he made a raft. With three strokes of the hammer, the raft could fly, and he flew home on the raft.

古文：无何。
现代文：没有人知道这件事。
English: No one knows anything about it.

古文：其妻有妊，父母诘之，妻具说其故。
现代文：直到他的妻子怀孕，父母再三追问，他的妻子才说了这一切。
English: It wasn't until his wife became pregnant and his parents kept asking questions that his wife told him everything.

古文：其父后伺得鸢，楔十余下，乘之，遂至吴会。
现代文：后来，他的父亲窥探到木鸢的秘密，敲击机关十多下，乘上它，一直飞到了吴地的会稽。
English: Later, his father spied the secret of the raft, tapped the organ more than ten times, took it, and flew all the way to the audition in Wudi.

古文：吴人以为妖，遂杀之，般又为木鸢乘之。遂获父尸。
现代文：吴人以为鲁般的父亲是妖怪，就杀了他。鲁般重又造一只木鸢，乘上它飞到吴地，找到了父亲的尸体。
English: The people of Wu thought that Lu's father was a monster, so they killed him. Lu made a raft and flew to Wu, where he found his father's body.

古文：怨吴人杀其父，于肃州城南，作一木仙人，举手指东南，吴地大旱三年。
现代文：鲁般怨恨吴人杀了他的父亲，回来后在肃州城南，造了一个木仙人，让他的手指指东南吴地方向。于是，吴地大旱三年。
English: Lu Ban resented the Wu people for killing his father. After he returned, he built a wooden fairy in the south of Suzhou, and had his finger point to the southeast of Wu. As a result, there was a drought in Wu for three years.

古文：卜曰，般所为也。
现代文：吴地的一位占卜术士，占卜后说：吴地大旱，是鲁般干的呵。
English: A fortuneteller in Wu, after divination, said: "The drought in Wu is very severe.

古文：赍物巨千谢之。
现代文：于是吴人带着许许多多的物品来向鲁般谢罪。
English: As a result, the people of Wu brought a lot of goods to offer thanks to Lu.

古文：般为断其一手，其月吴中大雨。
现代文：鲁般断去木仙人一指，这个月吴地就下了大雨。
English: Lu Pan cut off the finger of the wood fairy, and this month, there was heavy rain in Wudi.

古文：国初，土人尚祈祷其木仙，六国时。
现代文：建国初期，当地人还祈祷过这个木仙人。
English: In the early days of the founding of the country, local people also prayed to this tree fairy.

古文：公输班亦为木鸢，以窥宋城。
现代文：战国时期，公输班也造过木鸢，用它来探视宋国的情况。
English: During the Warring States period, the public transport class also built a raft and used it to visit the Song Dynasty.

古文：弓人
现代文：弓人
English: The Bowman

古文：宋景公造弓，九年乃成而进之。
现代文：宋景公让一位弓人造弓，九年才造成。
English: Song Jing Gong had an archer make an artificial bow, which took nine years to create.

古文：弓人归家，三日而卒。
现代文：造成后这位弓人将弓进献给景公，回到家里三天后就死了。
English: After the battle, the archer presented the bow to King Gyeongbokgol and died three days after returning home.

古文：盖匠者心力尽于此弓矣。
现代文：唉，这是造弓人的心与力全都用在弓上了！
English: Alas, it is the bow maker's heart and strength all used up on the bow!

古文：后公登兽圈之台，用此弓射之，矢越西霸之山，彭城之东，余劲中石饮羽焉。
现代文：后来，宋景公登上兽圈台，用这张弓射兽。弓矢穿过西霸山，一直飞到彭城的东部，剩下的余力射中石头，箭身没入石中，连箭尾的羽毛都隐没不见了。
English: Later, Song Jing Gong boarded the animal circle platform and used this bow to shoot the beast. The bow and arrow passed through Xiba Mountain and flew all the way to the east of Pengcheng. The remaining effort hit the stone, the arrow body sank into the stone, and even the feathers at the end of the arrow disappeared.

古文：燕巧人
现代文：燕巧人
English: Yan Qiao Ren

古文：燕王征巧术人，请以棘之端为沐母猴。
现代文：燕王征召有技艺的术士，让他用棘刺的尖端做沐浴的母猴。
English: The king of the swallows calls for a skilled sorcerer and has him use the tip of a thorn to make a bathing marmoset.

古文：母猴成，巧人曰：人主欲观之，必半岁不入宫，不饮酒食肉。
现代文：母猴做成了，艺人说：大王要看沐浴的母猴，必须半年不到后工区。
English: When the female monkey was finished, the artist said, "If the emperor wants to see the bathing female monkey, he must spend half a year in the post-production area."

古文：而霁曰出，视之宴阴之间，而棘刺之母猴，乃可见矣。
现代文：不能饮酒，不许吃肉，而且要在雨后太阳出来时，寻找没有阳光的地方，才可以看见棘刺做成的母猴。燕王不能看到那母猴，就把艺人很好地供养着。
English: He is not allowed to drink alcohol or eat meat, and when the sun comes out after the rain, he has to look for a place where there is no sunlight so that he can see the mother monkey made of thorns. If he cannot see the mother monkey, Yan Wang will provide for the artist well.

古文：云明台
现代文：云明台
English: Yunming Tower

古文：始皇起云明台，穷四方之珍木，天下巧工。
现代文：奏始皇建造云明台，用尽了四方珍贵的木材、天下的能工巧匠。
English: Emperor Soze's construction of Yunmyeongdae used up precious timber from all over the country, as well as skilled craftsmen from all over the world.

古文：南得烟丘碧树，郦水燃沙，贲都朱泥，云冈素竹；东得葱峦锦柏，缥檖龙杉，寒河星柘，岏山云梓；西得漏海浮金，浪渊羽璧，条章霞桑，沈唐员筹；北得冥阜乾漆，阴坂文梓，褰流黑魄，暗海香琼。
现代文：从南方运来烟丘的碧树、郦水的燃沙、贲都的朱泥、云冈的素竹；从东部伐得葱峦锦柏、缥檖龙杉、寒河星柘、岏山云梓；从西部采到漏海的浮金、浪渊的羽璧、条章的霞桑、沈唐的员筹，从北方运进冥阜的干漆、阴坂的文梓、褰流的黑魄、暗海的香琼。
English: From the south, the smokestack's cypress, the water-logged sand, the vermilion of the capital, and the bamboo of the Yungang were transported; from the east, the green cypress, the dragon cedar, the cold river star, and the mountain cloud were cut down; from the west, the floating gold of the sea leak, the feather of the abyss, the blue mulberry of the bar, and the staff of the Shen Tang were collected; from the north, the dry paint of the Gudufu, the wanzi of the gloomy hill, the blackness of the turbulent flow, and the fragrance of the dark sea were transported

古文：珍异是集。
现代文：将普天下的珍奇异宝，都集中在了这里。
English: The treasures of the whole world are concentrated here.

古文：有二人皆虚腾椽木，运斤斧于云中。
现代文：在建造云明台时，只见有两个人悬空在椽木上边，在云中挥舞着板斧做工。
English: During the construction of Yunming Tower, I saw two people suspended above the elm tree, working in the clouds with a wooden axe.

古文：子时起功，至午时已毕。
现代文：从半夜起开始干。到第二天中午就完工了。
English: Work started at midnight and was completed by noon the next day.

古文：秦人皆言之子午台也，亦言于子午之地。各起一台。
现代文：所以秦人都把这座台子叫子午台。也有的说，是在子与午两个地方各建造一座台子。
English: Therefore, the Qin people called this platform the Zi Baotai. Some also said that a platform was built in each of the two places of Zi and Baotai.

古文：二说有疑。
现代文：这两种说法都不可信。
English: Neither of these accounts is credible.

古文：淫渊浦
现代文：淫渊浦
English: Wuyuanpu River

古文：日南之南，有淫泉之浦。
现代文：日南郡的南边，有淫泉水流入河中。
English: On the south side of Nichinan County, there is a spring that flows into the river.

古文：言其水浸淫从地而出，以成渊，故曰淫泉也。
现代文：说是淫泉的水是从地里浸淫出来，聚集在一块儿形成一眼泉，所以叫淫泉。
English: The water that is said to be the lewd spring leaches out of the ground and gathers together to form a single spring, which is why it is called the lewd spring.

古文：或言此泉甘软，男女饮之则淫。
现代文：也有的说，这泉水水质甜软，男人与女人喝了就淫乱。
English: Some also say that the water quality of this spring is sweet and soft, and that men and women drink it and have sexual intercourse.

古文：其水小处可滥觞褰涉，大处可方舟沿泝，随流屈直。
现代文：淫泉的发源地，水少又浅，撩起衣服就可以趟过去。水大的地方可以两条船并排而行，忽而弯曲，忽而笔直，顺流而下。
English: At the source of the erotic spring, the water is small and shallow, so you can walk there with your clothes on. Where the water is large, two boats can walk side by side, suddenly bending, suddenly straight, down the river.

古文：其水激石之声，似人之歌笑，闻者令人淫动，故俗为之淫泉。
现代文：泉水拍激石头声音，仿佛人在唱歌，在欢笑。听到这种声音的人心旌荡漾，顿生淫乱的欲望，所以民间叫它淫泉。
English: The water of the spring makes the stone sound as if people are singing and laughing. When people hear this sound, their hearts are stirred and they suddenly have lustful desires, which is why people call it a lewd spring.

古文：时有凫雁，色如金，群飞戏于沙濑。罗者得之，乃真金凫也。
现代文：当时有一群群金色的野鸭、大雁在淫泉的沙滩上或水中嬉戏着，有人用捕鸟的网捕获到了野鸭，竟然是真金的。
English: At that time, there was a flock of golden wild ducks and geese playing on the beach or in the water of the dirty spring. Someone caught a wild duck with a bird net, and it turned out to be real gold.

古文：昔秦破郦山之坟，行野者见金凫向南面，飞至淫泉。
现代文：秦末农民起义毁坏郦山陵墓，有人在野外行走，看见金野鸭向南面飞去，一直飞到了淫泉。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, the peasants' uprising destroyed the Lushan Mausoleum. Someone was walking in the field and saw the golden mallard flying south, all the way to the Lushan Spring.

古文：宝鼎元年，张善为日南太守。
现代文：吴末帝宝鼎元年，张善做日南郡的太守。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Baoding, Zhang Shan became the governor of Nichinan County.

古文：郡民有得金凫，以献太守张善。
现代文：当时有郡民得到金野鸭，献给了太守张善。
English: At that time, a county resident received a golden wild duck and dedicated it to the governor Zhang Zhen.

古文：善博识多通，考其年月，既是秦始皇墓金凫也。
现代文：张善知道得多，懂得的广，考证制做它的年月，正是秦始皇墓的金野鸭。
English: Zhang Shan knows more, understands more, and the examination system has been doing it for years. It is the golden wild duck of the tomb of Qin Shi Huangdi.

古文：昔始皇为冢，敛天下瑰异，生殉工人。
现代文：当年秦始皇为自己修建郦山陵墓，聚敛天下奇瑰异宝。
English: In that year, the First Emperor of Qin built the Lushan Mausoleum for himself, gathering the world's treasures.

古文：倾远方奇宝于冢中。
现代文：陵墓建成以后，建造陵墓的工人活着就被埋进里面，做了他的殉葬品。
English: After the completion of the mausoleum, the workers who built the mausoleum were buried alive and made his funeral gifts.

古文：为江海川渎及列山岳之形。
现代文：秦始皇陵中埋藏着所有从远方运来的奇珍异宝。
English: All the rare treasures brought from far away are buried in the tomb of Qin Shi Huangdi.

古文：以沙棠沉檀为舟楫，金银为凫雁，以琉璃杂宝为龟鱼。
现代文：墓中修造了江、海、川、沟渠并且错落建造了一些假山。水中的船只是用沙棠沉檀木做成的，用金、银做野鸭大雁，用各种琉璃宝石做成龟、鱼。
English: In the tomb, rivers, seas, rivers, and ditches were built, and some rock gardens were built at random. The boats in the water were made of sandalwood, the wild ducks and geese were made of gold and silver, and the turtles and fish were made of various glass gems.

古文：又于海中作玉象黥鱼衔火珠为星，以代膏烛。
现代文：又在海中做玉象，黥鱼口里衔着火齐珠当作星辰，用来代替蜡烛。
English: He also made a jade elephant in the sea, and a jade pearl with fire in its mouth as a star, which was used to replace candles.

古文：光出冢间，精灵之伟也。
现代文：光芒四射，满冢生辉，精灵之气宏伟壮观。
English: Radiant, full of radiance, the spirit of the elves is magnificent.

古文：皆生埋巧匠于冢里。
现代文：建造陵墓的能工巧匠都被活埋在里面。
English: The skilled craftsmen who built the mausoleum were all buried alive inside.

古文：又列灯烛如皎日焉。
现代文：墓中还排列着许多灯烛，光芒耀眼，仿佛明亮的太阳一般。
English: The tombs are also lined with many candles, the light is dazzling, like a bright sun.

古文：先所埋工匠于冢内，至被开时皆不死。
现代文：先前埋在墓内的工匠，到墓被打开时全都没有死。
English: None of the craftsmen previously buried in the tomb were dead when the tomb was opened.

古文：巧人于冢里，琢石为龙凤仙人之像，及作碑辞赞。
现代文：这些能工巧匠们，在墓内把石头雕琢成龙凤仙人的象，并作辞刻碑以告后人。
English: These skilled craftsmen carved the stone in the tomb into a dragon and phoenix fairy elephant, and made an inscription to tell future generations.

古文：汉初发此冢，验诸史传，皆无列仙龙凤之制，则知生埋匠者之所作也。
现代文：汉朝初年发掘这个陵墓时，查验各种史与传，全都没有龙凤仙人守丧的记载，就知道是被活埋在里面的匠人所做的，后人又将这些事情写成碑文刻在碑上。
English: When the mausoleum was excavated in the first year of the Han Dynasty, after checking various histories and legends, there were no records of dragons, phoenixes and immortals holding funerals. It was known that it was done by craftsmen who were buried alive inside, and later generations wrote these things into inscriptions and engraved them on the monument.

古文：后人更写此碑文，而辞多怨酷之言，乃谓怨碑。
现代文：而且文辞多是憎怨始皇残酷的话语，就称作怨碑。
English: Moreover, most of the words are cruel words of hatred against the first emperor, so they are called grudge monuments.

古文：史记略而不录矣。
现代文：司马迁写《史记》时，把这一段省略去，没有记录在里面。
English: When Sima Qian wrote "History," he omitted this paragraph and did not record it.

古文：新丰
现代文：新丰
English: Xinfeng

古文：高祖既作新丰，并移旧社。
现代文：新城的大街小巷，房屋建筑，各色什物都和原来丰县的一样。
English: The streets and alleys of Xincheng, the buildings, and all kinds of things are the same as those in Fengxian.

古文：街巷栋宇，物色如旧。士女老幼，相携路首，各知其室。
现代文：男女老少，手拉着手相搀扶着聚集路边，他们一看便各自认出了自家的房子。
English: Men and women, young and old, holding hands and supporting each other, gathered on the roadside. At a glance, they each recognized their own house.

古文：放犬羊鸡鸭于通衢望途，亦竟识其家。
现代文：把狗羊鸡鸭放在四通八达的大道上，它们也都争抢着往自己的家里跑。
English: Put dogs, sheep, chickens and ducks on a busy road and they will all scramble to get to their homes.

古文：匠人朝宽所为也。
现代文：这一切都是匠人朝宽仿效丰县建造的。
English: All of this was built by craftsmen in imitation of Feng County.

古文：移者皆喜其似而怜之，故竞加赏赠，月余致累百金。
现代文：这里的一切都和丰县一样，从丰乡移居到这里的人非常高兴，并且很爱惜这里的一切。所以大家都比赛着加倍赏赐或赠送礼物给朝宽。一个多月，朝宽便收到了价值百金的礼物。
English: Everything here is the same as in Fengxian. The people who moved here from Fengxiang are very happy and cherish everything here. So everyone competed to double the reward or give gifts to Asahiro. More than a month later, Asahiro received a gift worth one hundred gold.

古文：张衡
现代文：张衡
English: Zhang Heng

古文：后汉张衡字平子，造候风地动仪。
现代文：后汉人张衡，字平子。他制造了一台候风地动仪。
English: Zhang Heng, later known as Ping Zi, was a Han Chinese. He made a weather vane.

古文：以精铜铸之，圆径八尺，盖合隆起，形如酒樽，饰以篆文及山龟鸟兽之状。
现代文：地动仪是用精炼的铜铸成的。圆径八尺，盖合高隆起来，形状像个大的酒杯。上面绘制有篆文、山龟、鸟兽等图案作为装饰。
English: The seismometer is made of refined copper. It has a diameter of eight feet, the lid is high, and it is shaped like a large wine glass. It is decorated with patterns such as swastikas, mountain turtles, and birds and beasts.

古文：中有都柱，傍行八道，施关发机。
现代文：中间有一根总柱和周围八根分柱用机关相连接。
English: In the middle, there is a main column and eight surrounding sub-columns connected by a crane.

古文：外八龙首，各衔铜丸，下有蟾蜍，张口承之。
现代文：外有八个龙头。每头龙口中含一枚铜丸，下面有蹲伏着的蟾蜍，张口接着。
English: Outside, there are eight spigots. Each spigot contains a copper ball, with a crouching dragonfly below, and a gaping mouth next to it.

古文：其牙机巧制，皆隐在樽中，覆盖周密无际。
现代文：它的小机关制作精巧，都藏在樽的里面，盖上盖后，非常严密没有一点缝隙。
English: Its small organs are elaborately crafted, all hidden inside the barrel, covered and covered, very tightly without a single gap.

古文：如有地震，则樽动机发，龙吐丸而蟾蜍衔之。
现代文：如果发生地震，就引起樽动，牵引里面机关启动，龙吐铜丸，落在蟾蜍口中。
English: If an earthquake occurs, it will cause the barrel to move, the internal traction device will start, the dragon will spit out the copper ball, and it will land in the mouth of the bucket.

古文：震动激扬，伺者因此觉知。
现代文：震动激烈，观察它的人就知道又情况了。
English: The shaking was intense, and anyone who observed it knew what was going on.

古文：一龙发机，而七首不动，寻其方面，乃知震动之所在。
现代文：一头龙的机关发动，而另外七头不动，找出它的方向，就知道了地震发生在哪里。
English: One of the dragon's organs starts, while the other seven do not move. Find out its direction and you will know where the earthquake occurred.

古文：仪之合契若神，自书典所记，未之有也。
现代文：曾经有一次，有一头龙的机关发动了，而它所指方向的地方没有发生地震。
English: Once upon a time, a dragon's organ was activated, but no earthquake occurred in the direction it was pointing.

古文：曾一龙发机而地不动。
现代文：当时，京城中的学者们，一开始都责怪地动仪测出的结果不准确。
English: At that time, scholars in Beijing initially blamed the inaccuracy of the results measured by the seismometer.

古文：京师学者，初咸怪其无征。数日驿至，果地动。
现代文：几天后，驿吏来报，那个地方果然发生了地震。
English: A few days later, officials came to report that there had indeed been an earthquake in that area.

古文：于是皆服其神妙。
现代文：于是人们都信服地动仪的神妙！
English: As a result, people are convinced of the magic of the dance!

古文：王肃
现代文：王肃
English: Wang Su

古文：王肃造逐鼠丸。以铜为之，昼夜自转。
现代文：王肃造驱鼠丸，用铜做成的，白天黑夜不停地自己转动。
English: Wang Su built a rodent repellent ball, made of copper, which constantly rotates by itself day and night.

古文：云台
现代文：云台
English: Yuntai

古文：凌云台楼观极精巧。
现代文：凌云台建造的非常精巧。
English: Lingyuntai was built with great skill.

古文：先称平众材，轻重当宜，然后造构。
现代文：在建造这座楼台时，先把所有的材料，都称量平衡好，使它们轻重得当，然后再开始建造。这样。
English: In the construction of this tower, all the materials are weighed and balanced so that they have the right weight, and then construction begins.

古文：乃无锱铢相负揭。
现代文：相互之间就连极轻微重量的负担都没有。
English: There is not even the slightest weight burden between them.

古文：台虽高峻，恒随风摇动，而终无崩殒。
现代文：凌云台虽然高峻，却常常随风摇动，而且竟然没有塌陷。
English: Although Lingyuntai is high and steep, it often shakes with the wind, and it has not collapsed.

古文：魏明帝登台，惧其势危，别以大材扶持之，楼即便颓坏。
现代文：魏明帝曹叡要登凌云台，却惧怕它那高耸入云，随风摇动欲倒的样子，就让另用大材支撑住它。不料这时，楼台却立刻倒塌毁坏了。
English: Wei Ming Emperor Cao E wanted to climb Lingyuntai, but he was afraid of its towering into the clouds and swaying with the wind, so he had it supported by another large piece of timber. Unexpectedly, the platform immediately collapsed and was destroyed.

古文：论者谓轻重力偏故也。
现代文：当时有人评论这件事说：这是轻重力量不平衡造成的啊！
English: At the time, some people commented on the incident, saying: "This is caused by the imbalance of weight and weight!"

古文：陈思王
现代文：陈思王
English: Chen Siwang

古文：魏陈思王有神思，为鸭头构浮于九曲酒池。王意有所劝，鸭头则回向之。
现代文：魏人陈思王常常有奇想，他制做了一柄鸭头形状的杓子，把它放在九曲酒池里，陈思王心里想让谁喝酒，鸭头就旋转到那个人的方向。
English: Chen Si Wang, a Wei man, often had whimsical ideas. He made a pair of pliers in the shape of a duck's head and placed it in a nine-curve wine pool. Chen Si Wang would spin the duck's head in the direction of the person he wanted to make drink.

古文：又为鹊尾杓，柄长而直，王意有所到处，于樽上镟之，鹊则指之。
现代文：陈思王还制做了一柄鹊尾形状的杓子，它的把又长又直。陈思王心中想到哪里，在酒杯上旋转杓子，鹊尾就指向哪里。
English: Chen Si Wang also made a pair of tweezers in the shape of an appendix. Its handle is long and straight. Chen Si Wang spins the tweezers on the wine glass wherever he wants, and the appendix points to where he wants.

古文：吴夫人
现代文：吴夫人
English: Mrs. Wu

古文：吴主赵夫人，赵达之妹也。
现代文：吴主孙权的一位夫人赵氏，是赵达的妹妹，擅长绘画。
English: Mr. Zhao, one of the wives of Sun Quan, the ruler of Wu, was Zhao Da's younger sister. She was good at painting.

古文：善画，巧妙无双。
现代文：她的画精湛美妙，没有第二个人可以达到她的水平。
English: Her paintings are exquisitely beautiful, and no second person can reach her level.

古文：能于指间，以彩丝织为云龙虬凤之锦。大则盈尺，小则方寸，宫中谓之机绝。
现代文：赵夫人能在手指中间，用菜丝织成云龙、虬凤图案的锦，大的一尺多，小的见方只有一寸，宫中称为机绝。
English: Mrs. Zhao can weave dragon and phoenix patterns with vegetable silk in the middle of her fingers. The large one is more than a foot, and the small one is only one inch. The palace is known as a machine.

古文：孙权常叹魏蜀未夷，军旅之隙，思得善画者，使图作山川地势军阵之像。达乃进其妹。
现代文：孙权常常慨叹没能铲除魏、蜀两国，在行军打仗的空闲时间里，很想得到一位擅长绘画的人，能绘制出一幅有山川地貌，供行军布阵用的图像来，赵达就把他的妹妹进献给孙权做了夫人。
English: Sun Quan often lamented his failure to eradicate the states of Wei and Shu. During his free time while marching and fighting, he was very eager to get a person who was good at painting and could draw a picture of a landscape with mountains and rivers for use in the marching formation. Zhao Da presented his sister to Sun Quan as his wife.

古文：权使写九州江湖方岳之势，夫人曰：丹青之色，甚易歇灭，不可久宝。妾能刺乡。
现代文：孙权让她绘制全国江湖、四方山岳的形势图，夫人说：丹青的颜色，很容易退掉，不可能长久保存，我能刺绣。
English: Sun Quan asked her to draw a map of the situation of the country's rivers, lakes, and mountains in all directions. The lady said, "I can embroider. It's a beautiful color. It's easy to discard and can't be kept for a long time."

古文：列万国于方帛之上，写以五岳河海城邑行阵之形，乃进于吴主。
现代文：于是，赵夫人把所有国家都绣在一块帛上，上面还绣着五岳、河海、城市及行军布阵的图案，然后把它献给了孙权。
English: As a result, Madame Zhao embroidered all the countries on a piece of brocade, embroidered with the five mountains, rivers and seas, cities and marching formations, and then dedicated it to Sun Quan.

古文：时人谓之针绝。
现代文：当时的人称它为针绝。
English: People at the time called it a needle.

古文：虽棘刺木猴，云梯飞鸢，无过此丽也。
现代文：虽然有用棘刺木刻的木猴、有公输班造云梯，制作精美的风筝，但是没有比它更珍稀瑰丽的。
English: Although it is useful to carve wooden monkeys with thorns, build cloud ladders with public transportation, and make exquisite kites, there is nothing more rare and magnificent than it.

古文：权居昭阳宫，倦暑，乃褰紫绡之帷。夫人曰：此不足贵也。
现代文：孙权住在昭阳宫，忍受不了夏天的炎热，就卷起了紫绡幔帐，赵夫人看见后，说：这还不够宝贵的。
English: Sun Quan lived in the Zhoyang Palace. Unable to bear the summer heat, he rolled up the purple satin curtain. When Lady Zhao saw it, she said, "This is not precious enough."

古文：权使夫人指其意思焉，答曰：妾欲穷虑尽思，能使下绢帷而清风自入，视外无有蔽碍。列侍者飘然自凉。若驭风而行也。
现代文：孙权让夫人说明是什么意思，赵夫人回答说：我要绞尽脑汁想出个好办法，让帷幔放下来时，清风也能吹进去，从外面看并没有什么遮挡、障碍，各位侍者也感到很凉爽，飘飘然仿佛驾御着轻风一路行走一般。
English: Sun Quan asked Mrs. Zhao to explain what she meant, and Mrs. Zhao replied: "I want to rack my brains to come up with a good solution. When the curtains are lowered, the breeze can also blow in. From the outside, there is no obstruction or obstacle. The waiters also feel very cool, as if they are walking against the breeze.

古文：权称善。
现代文：孙权说很好。
English: Sun Quan said it very well.

古文：夫人乃析发，以神胶续之。
现代文：于是赵夫人剖开发丝，然后用神胶把它们粘接起来。
English: So Mrs. Zhao cut the filaments and then glued them together with super glue.

古文：神胶出郁夷国，接弓弩之断弦者。百断百续，乃织为罗縠。
现代文：神胶出产在郁夷国，是用来粘接弓弩断弦的，不论断成多少段用神胶都能把它接上，特别有神效。
English: God glue, produced in Ikui Province, is used to glue the broken strings of the bowstring. No matter how many segments are broken, it can be connected with God glue, which is particularly effective.

古文：累月而成，裁之为幔。
现代文：赵夫人就用这经过剖制、粘接起的发丝织成绉纱。几个月后完工，裁剪缝制成帷幔。
English: Mrs. Zhao used this hair yarn, which had been cut and glued together, to weave a crepe, which was completed a few months later, and the cut seams were made into curtains.

古文：内外视之，飘飘如烟气轻动，而房内自凉。
现代文：无论是从里、还是从外面看它，都象烟气似的轻轻飘动，而且房间里自然变得清幽凉爽。
English: Whether you look at it from inside or outside, it gently wafts like smoke, and the room naturally becomes clear and cool.

古文：时权尚在军旅，常以此幔自随，以为征幕。
现代文：当时，孙权还亲自带兵行军打仗，常把这幅帷幔带在身边，做为行军的幕帐。
English: At that time, Sun Quan also personally led the troops to march to fight, and often carried this curtain around with him as a marching curtain.

古文：舒之则广纵数丈，卷之则可内于枕中。
现代文：这幅帷幔舒展开时长宽好几丈，卷起来可以放在枕头里面。
English: The length and width of this curtain is several feet when it is unfolded, and it can be rolled up and placed inside a pillow.

古文：时人谓之丝绝。
现代文：这时人称它做丝绝。
English: At this time, it is said to be made of silk.

古文：故吴有三绝，四海无俦其妙。
现代文：所以吴有三绝。四海之内再没有第二种同它们一样绝妙的稀世珍宝了。
English: Therefore, Wu has three rarities. In the four seas, there is no other rare treasure that is as wonderful as them.

古文：后有贪宠求媚者，言夫人多耀于人主，因而致退黜。
现代文：后来有为求受到宠幸而谄媚的人，诬谄她说，赵夫人总爱在大王面前炫耀自己。因而招到祸患被废除。
English: Later, in order to be favored and flattered, some people falsely accused her, saying that Lady Zhao always liked to show off in front of the great king. Thus, the evil was abolished.

古文：虽见疑坠，犹存录其巧工。及吴亡，不知所在。
现代文：赵氏虽然因被怀疑，而失去了人主夫人的地位，但是做为技艺高超的工匠，她被载录在史书上，流芳千古。东吴灭亡时，不知她在什么地方。
English: Although the Zhao family lost the status of mistress due to suspicion, as a highly skilled craftsman, she was recorded in the history books and passed down for thousands of years. When the Eastern Wu Dynasty fell, I don't know where she was.

古文：区纯
现代文：区纯
English: 区纯

古文：大兴中，衡阳区纯作鼠市。
现代文：晋元帝大兴年间，衡阳的区纯做了一个饲养老鼠的游戏器具。
English: During the great prosperity of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, Gu Chun of Hengyang made a game device for raising mice.

古文：四方丈余，开四门，门有木人。
现代文：它四周长有一丈多，开四个门，每个门前有一个小木人。
English: It is more than a foot long on all sides, opens four doors, and in front of each door there is a little wooden man.

古文：纵四五鼠于中，欲出门，木人辄以椎椎之。
现代文：里面放进四、五只老鼠，老鼠要出门，木人用槌槌老鼠。
English: Four or five mice are put inside, the mice want to go out, and the woodcutter hammers the mice.

古文：水芝欹器
现代文：水芝欹器
English: Water strainer

古文：西魏文帝造二欹器。其一为二仙人，共持一钵，同处一盘。
现代文：北朝时，西魏文帝造了两个欹器，其中一个是，两个仙人共拿一个钵，同在一个盘中。
English: During the Northern Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty made two bowls, one of which was a bowl in which two immortals shared a bowl.

古文：盖有山，山有香气。
现代文：盘中有山，山散发着香气。
English: There is a mountain on the plate, and the mountain exudes aroma.

古文：别有一仙人持一金瓶，以临器上，以水灌山。则出于瓶而注于器，烟气通发山中，谓之仙人欹器也。
现代文：另有个仙人手中拿着一只金瓶，站在欹器上居高临下，用水浇山，水从瓶中流出，注入器内，烟气布满山中，称为仙人欹器。
English: On the other hand, there is a hermit holding a golden bottle in his hand, standing on the bowl and standing tall, pouring water on the mountain, the water flows out of the bottle, and in the injector, the smoke spreads all over the mountain, known as the hermit's bowl.

古文：其一为二荷，同处一盘，相去盈尺。中有芙蓉，下垂器上，以水注芙蓉而盈于器。
现代文：另一个是两朵荷花同在一个盘中，相距一尺多远，中间有芙蓉，往下垂落到欹器上，把水灌进芙蓉里而流满欹器。
English: The other is two lotus flowers together in a dish, about a foot apart, with hibiscus in the middle, hanging down to the bowl, pouring water into the hibiscus and filling the bowl.

古文：又为凫雁蟾蜍以饰之，谓之水芝欹器。
现代文：又用野鸭、大雁、蟾蜍图案作为装饰，叫它做水芝欹器。
English: It is also decorated with wild duck, wild goose, and dragonfly patterns, and is called a water zhi bowl.

古文：二盘各有一床一钵，钵圆而床方。中有人焉，言三才之象也。
现代文：二盘中各有一床，一钵。钵是圆形的，床是方形的，中间有人，说是天才、地才、人才的象征。
English: Each of the two trays has a bed and a basket. The basket is round, the bed is square, and there is a person in the middle, which is said to be a symbol of genius, local talent, and talent.

古文：器如觥形，满则平。溢则倾。
现代文：欹器形状象装酒的觥，装满水时呈水平状态，水溢出来时就倾斜。
English: The decanter is shaped like a wine decanter. When filled with water, it is horizontal, but tilts when the water overflows.

古文：置之前殿，以警满盈焉。
现代文：把它放在宫中的前殿，用它来警示满与盈。
English: Place it in the vestibule of the palace and use it as a warning against drunkenness.

古文：兰陵王
现代文：兰陵王
English: The King of Lanling

古文：北齐兰陵王有巧思，为舞胡子。
现代文：北齐的兰陵王有奇巧的构思，制做了跳舞的胡人男子。
English: Lanling Wang of North Qi had an ingenious idea and made dancing Hu men.

古文：王意欲所劝，胡子则捧盏以揖之。
现代文：兰陵王心中想要劝谁喝酒，胡人男子就捧着酒杯向他作揖。
English: Lanling Wang in his heart wants to persuade anyone to drink, Hu men holding a glass of wine to him.

古文：人莫知其所由也。
现代文：人们不知道这里面的道理。
English: People don't know the reason for this.

古文：僧灵昭
现代文：僧灵昭
English: Sang Ling Zhao

古文：北齐有沙门灵昭甚有巧思，武成帝令于山亭造流杯池。
现代文：北齐有位叫灵昭的僧人，很有巧妙的构思，奉武成帝的命令在假山亭上建造流杯池。
English: In Northern Qi, there was a monk named Ling Zhao, who had a very ingenious idea to build a flowing cup pool on the rooftop pavilion by order of Emperor Wu Cheng.

古文：船每至帝前，引手取杯，船即自住。
现代文：流杯池建成后。武成帝在池边宴饮。
English: Emperor Wucheng feasting at the edge of the pond after the construction of the flowing cup pool.

古文：上有木小儿抚掌，遂于丝竹相应。饮讫放杯，便有木人刺还。
现代文：池中放置制做精巧别致的小船。小船每次行到武成帝面前，武成帝伸手拿取小船上的酒杯，小船就自己停住，上面有一木制小人一拍手，于是丝竹乐声伴奏。饮完之后放下酒杯，就有木制小人捧着酒杯回去。
English: In the middle of the pond, there is a small boat made of exquisite craftsmanship. Every time the boat comes in front of Emperor Wu Chengdi, Emperor Wu Chengdi reaches out to take the wine glass on the boat, the boat stops by itself, and a wooden dwarf claps his hands, so the sound of silk bamboo music accompanies. After drinking, put down the wine glass, and there is a wooden dwarf holding the wine glass to go back.

古文：上饮若不尽，船终不去。
现代文：武成帝如果不饮完杯中酒，小船就一直不离去。
English: If Emperor Wucheng did not finish his glass of wine, the boat would not leave.

古文：未几，灵昭忽拊心，疑有刀刺，须臾吐血而终。
现代文：不久，灵昭和尚忽然抚摸着胸口，估计是被刀刺了，不一会儿就吐血而死。
English: Soon after, Ling Showa suddenly stroked his chest. It is estimated that he was stabbed with a knife, and soon vomited blood and died.

古文：七宝镜台
现代文：七宝镜台
English: Seven Treasures Mirror Stand

古文：胡太后使灵昭造七宝镜台。
现代文：胡太后派灵昭建造七宝镜台。
English: Empress Dowager Hu sent Ling Zhao to build the Cloisonne Mirror.

古文：合有三十六室，别有一妇人，手各执锁。
现代文：镜台共有三十六个室，另有一个妇人，两只手各拿着一把钥匙。
English: There are thirty-six rooms in the house, and there is a woman with a key in each hand.

古文：才下一关，三十六户一时自闭。
现代文：只要旋转一个机关，三十六个室的门同时关闭。
English: Just turn a switch and the doors of thirty-six rooms close at the same time.

古文：若抽此关，诸门咸启，妇人各出户前。
现代文：如果将钥匙从这个机关里抽出来，各个门全都开启，妇人的影象出现在各个室前的镜子里。
English: If you pull the key out of this mechanism, all the doors open and the woman's image appears in the mirrors in front of each room.

