古文：○高丽高丽本箕子所封之地，又扶余别种尝居之。
现代文：高丽本是箕子所封之地，扶余人的一支曾住在这里。
English: Goryeo used to be a land ruled by the Shansi, and a branch of the Fuyu people once lived here.

古文：其地东至新罗，南至百济，皆跨大海，西北度辽水接营州，而靺鞨在其北。
现代文：高丽东至新罗，南至百济，都要跨大海。西北渡过辽河与营州相接，北方有存在。
English: Koryo East to Silla, South to Baekje, all have to cross the sea. Northwest across the Liao River and Yingzhou are connected, and there is a mountain in the north.

古文：其国都曰平壤城，即汉乐浪郡。
现代文：高丽的国都平壤城，是汉朝乐浪郡。
English: Pyongyang, the capital of Goryeo, was called Lelang County in the Han Dynasty.

古文：水有出靺鞨之白山者，号鸭渌江，而平壤在其东南，因恃以为险。
现代文：有水流经之白山，名为鸭绿江。平壤在鸭绿江东，因而有险可恃。
English: There is water flowing through Baishan, called the Yalu River. Pyongyang is east of the Yalu River, so it is dangerous.

古文：后辟地益广，并古新罗、百济、高句丽三国而为一。
现代文：后来兼并古新罗、百济、高句丽三国为一国，后辟地益广。
English: Later, the three countries of ancient Silla, Baekje, and Goguryeo were merged into one country, and later expanded.

古文：其主姓高氏，自初立国至唐乾封初而国亡。
现代文：高丽之主姓高氏，自开始立国至唐高宗乾封初年国亡。
English: The main family name of Goryeo was Gao, from the beginning of the founding of the country to the death of Tang Gao Zong in the first year of Qianfeng.

古文：垂拱以来，子孙复封其地，后稍能自立。
现代文：唐武则天皇帝垂拱以来，子孙复封其地，后稍能自立。
English: After Emperor Zetian of the Tang Dynasty was dethroned, his descendants re-captured the land and were later able to stand on their own.

古文：至五代时，代主其国迁都松岳者，姓王氏，名建。
现代文：到五代时，取代高氏成为高丽国王的是王氏，首代国王名建，迁都于松岳。
English: By the time of the fifth generation, it was the Wang clan that replaced the Gao clan to become the king of Korea. The first king, King Myeongjong, moved the capital to Sungak.

古文：自建至焘凡二十七王，历四百余年未始易姓。
现代文：自王建至王焘，有二十七代，经历四百年，国王没有改姓。
English: From Wang Jian to Wang Xi, there were 27 generations, and after 400 years, the king did not change his surname.

古文：入元，太祖十一年，契丹人金山、元帅六哥等领众九万余窜入其国。
现代文：太祖十一年，契丹人金山，元帅六哥等领兵九万余，进入高丽。十二年九月，攻占江东城。
English: In the eleventh year of King Taejo, the Khitan Jinshan, Marshal Six Brothers and other leaders led more than 90,000 soldiers into Korea. In September of the twelfth year, they captured the East River City.

古文：十三年，帝遣哈只吉、札剌等领兵征之。
现代文：十三年，太祖遣哈只吉、答刂剌等领蒙兵征讨契丹人。
English: In the thirteenth year, the great ancestor sent Mongolian soldiers led by Hadyakhi and Dangye to recruit Khitan.

古文：国人洪大宣诣军中降，与哈只吉等同攻围之。
现代文：属契丹统治下的高丽人洪大宣投降蒙军，与哈只吉等同攻契丹。
English: Hong Da Xuan, a Koryo under Khitan rule, surrendered to the Mongolian army and, together with Khadyakhi, attacked Khitan.

古文：高丽王奉牛酒出迎王师，且遣其枢密院使、吏部尚书、上将军、翰林学士承旨赵冲共讨灭六哥。
现代文：高丽王王奉牛酒出迎蒙军，还派遣高丽的枢密院使、吏部尚书、上将军、翰林学士承旨赵冲共讨灭六哥。
English: The king of Goryeo welcomed the Mongolian army with cow wine, and also sent the envoy of the Privy Council of Goryeo, the official Shang Shu, the superior general, and the Hanlin scholar Zhao Chong to destroy the sixth brother.

古文：札剌与冲约为兄弟。冲请岁输贡赋，札剌曰： 尔国道远，难于往来，每岁可遣使十人入贡。 
现代文：答刂剌还和赵冲结为兄弟，冲答应每年向蒙古输送贡赋，答刂剌说： 从高丽到蒙古国道路太远，难于往来，每年输送贡赋不易，只派十个使者入贡就可以了。 
English: Atsushi was also a brother of Zhao Chongjie. Chong promised to send tribute to Mongolia every year. Atsushi said: The road from Goryeo to Mongolia is too far and it is difficult to travel. It is not easy to send tribute every year. It is enough to send ten envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十二月，札剌移文取兵粮，送米一千斛。
现代文：十二月，答刂剌致文送些军粮来，高丽便送米一千斛给蒙军。
English: In December, Goryeo sent 1,000 baht worth of rice to the Mongolian army in response to a request for military food.

古文：十四年正月，遣其权知阁门祗候尹公就、中书注书崔逸以结和牒文送札剌行营，札剌遣使报之。高丽王以其侍御史朴时允为接伴使迎之。
现代文：十四年正月，高丽又派出权知门祗候尹公就、中书注书崔逸将议和的公文送给答刂剌。答刂剌也向高丽派去使者，高丽王派他的御史朴时允为使者欢迎答刂剌派来的人。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Joseon Dynasty, Goryeo also sent an envoy to receive the official document of the peace treaty from Yin Gongjun and Choe Iat, who were sent by Choe Iat. Choe Iat also sent an envoy to Goryeo, and the King of Goryeo sent his envoy, Mishi Pak Siong, to welcome the envoy sent by Choe Iat.

古文：帝又遣蒲里岱也持诏往谕之，高丽王迎拜设宴。
现代文：太祖又派蒲里代巾也给高丽王送去诏书。高丽王设宴接待蒙使。
English: The great-grandfather also sent an imperial edict to the King of Goryeo, who held a banquet to receive the envoy.

古文：九月，皇太弟、国王及元帅合臣、副元帅札剌等各以书遣宣差大使庆都忽思等十人趣其入贡，寻以方物进。
现代文：九月，皇太弟、国王及元帅合臣、副元帅答刂剌等各以书信致宣差大使庆都忽思等十人，催促高丽入贡。
English: In September, the Crown Prince's younger brother, the King, the Marshal's aide-de-camp, the Vice-Marshal's aide-de-camp, and ten others each sent a letter to the envoy sent by the Emperor, Gyeongdu Khushi, urging Korea to pay tribute.

古文：十五年九月，大头领官堪古苦、首古欤等复以皇太弟、国王书趣之，仍进方物。
现代文：不久，高丽进贡了方物。十五年九月，大头领官堪古苦、着古欤等又送皇太弟、国王的书信催促高丽，高丽仍进贡方物。
English: Soon after, Goryeo paid tribute. In September 15th, the grand marshal Kang Guk-soo sent letters to the crown prince and the king, urging Goryeo to pay tribute. Goryeo still paid tribute.

古文：十六年七月，有旨，谕以伐女直事，始奉表陈贺。
现代文：十六年七月，太祖有旨，告知蒙古攻打女真的事，高丽始送表祝贺。
English: In July of the 16th year, the great ancestor had a purpose to inform Mongolia about the attack on Jurchen, and Goryeo began to send congratulations.

古文：八月，着古欤使其国。
现代文：八月，着古欤使高丽。
English: In August, he visited Goryeo wearing an ancient skullcap.

古文：十月，喜速不瓜等继使焉。
现代文：十月，喜剌不瓜等继续使高丽。
English: In October, magpies and melons continued to make Korea famous.

古文：十七年十月，诏遣着古欤等十二人至其国，察其纳款之实。
现代文：十七年十月，蒙帝遣着古欤等十二人至高丽，考察高丽对纳贡一事的实际态度。
English: In October of the seventeenth year, Emperor Monti sent twelve people, including Gu Xuan, to Goryeo to investigate Goryeo's actual attitude toward the tribute.

古文：十八年八月，宣差山朮等十二人复以皇太弟、国王书趣其贡献。
现代文：十八年八月，又派宣差山等十二人以皇太弟、国王的书信催促高丽纳贡。
English: In August 18th, twelve people including Xuan Shashan were sent to urge Korea to pay tribute with a letter from the emperor's brother, the king.

古文：十九年二月，着古欤等复使其国；十二月，又使焉，盗杀之于途，自是连七岁绝信使矣。
现代文：十九年二月，着古欤等复使高丽。十二月，又使高丽，在路上遇盗被杀。自此以后，有七年没有信使往来。
English: In February, 1919, he again sent a messenger to Goryeo in the guzheng and so on. In December, he sent another messenger to Goryeo, but he was robbed and killed on the road. Since then, there has been no messenger contact for seven years.

古文：太宗三年八月，命撒礼塔征其国，国人洪福源迎降于军，得福源所率编民千五百户，旁近州郡亦有来师者。
现代文：太宗三年八月，命撒礼塔征讨高丽，高丽人洪福源投降蒙军，得到福源所领的编民一千五百户。福源辖地附近的州郡，也有来向蒙军投降的。
English: In August of the third year of Taizong's reign, he ordered the conquest of Koryo, and the Koryo people, led by Hong Fuyuan, surrendered to the Mongolian army, gaining 1,500 households under Fuyuan's leadership. The states and counties near Fuyuan's jurisdiction also came to surrender to the Mongolian army.

古文：撒礼塔即与福源攻未附州郡，又使阿儿秃与福源抵王京，招其主王皞，皞遣其弟怀安公王侹请和，许之。置京、府、县达鲁花赤七十二人监之，遂班师。
现代文：撒礼塔与福源进攻未投降蒙军的高丽州郡。还派遣阿儿秃与福源到高丽首都，招高丽王降。高丽王乃遣其弟淮安公王亻廷请和，蒙古许其求和，并同意撤军，但要在高丽的京城及府、县等地方统治机构内设置由蒙人担任的达鲁花赤七十二人，对整个高丽国实行监督。
English: Zareta and Fuyuan attacked Goryeo County, which did not surrender to the Mongolian army. They also sent Al-Balad and Fuyuan to the capital of Goryeo to invite the Goryeo king to surrender. The Goryeo king sent his brother, Prince Huai'an, to ask for peace, and Mongolia agreed to withdraw its troops, but to set up seventy-two Daruhana Reds, who were Mongolians, in the capital of Goryeo and in local governing bodies such as prefectures and counties, to supervise the entire Goryeo country.

古文：十一月，元帅蒲桃、迪巨、唐古等领兵至其王京，皞遣使奉牛酒迎之。
现代文：十一月，蒙古元帅蒲桃、迪巨、唐古等带兵至高丽京城，高丽王派使者带牛酒前往迎接。
English: In November, Mongolian marshals such as Putao, Diyu and Tanggu led their troops to the capital of Goryeo, and the king of Goryeo sent an envoy to meet them with cow wine.

古文：十二月一日，复遣使劳元帅于行营。
现代文：十二月一日，又派出使者到蒙军元帅的营地犒赏蒙军。
English: On December 1, an envoy was sent to the camp of the Mongolian marshal to reward the Mongolian army.

古文：明日，其使人与元帅所遣人四十余辈入王城，付文牒。
现代文：二日，高丽使者与蒙军四十余人进入高丽王城递交蒙古国文书。
English: On the second day, the Goryeo envoy and more than forty Mongolian soldiers entered the Goryeo royal city to submit Mongolia's documents.

古文：又明日，皞遣王侹等诣撒礼塔屯所犒师。
现代文：三日，高丽王使自己的弟弟王亻廷等再到蒙军营地犒赏蒙军。
English: On the third day, King Goryeo sent his younger brother, Wang Bingting, to the Mongolian army camp to reward the Mongolian army.

古文：四年正月，帝遣使以玺书谕皞。
现代文：四年正月，太宗遣使向高丽送出玺书。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to Goryeo.

古文：三月，皞遣中郎将池义源，录事洪巨源、金谦等赍国赆牒文送撒礼塔屯所。
现代文：三月，高丽王派遣中郎将池义深，录事洪巨源、金谦等带着礼物和文书到蒙军驻地。
English: In March, the King of Goryeo dispatched the middle-ranked general, Chie Yoshihisa, to record the records of Hong Jueyuan, Jin Qian, etc. and bring gifts and documents to the Mongolian army's garrison.

古文：四月，皞遣其将军赵叔昌、御史薛慎等奉表入朝。
现代文：四月，高丽王又遣上将军赵叔昌、侍御史薛慎等奉表入蒙。
English: In April, King Goryeo also sent the general Zhao Shuchang and the attendant Shi Xueshen to Mongolia.

古文：五月，复下诏谕之。
现代文：五月，蒙又给高丽送去诏书。
English: In May, the Mongolian emperor also issued an imperial edict to the King of Goryeo.

古文：六月，皞尽杀朝廷所置达鲁花赤七十二人以叛，遂率王京及诸州县民窜海岛。
现代文：六月，高丽王尽杀蒙古设置的达鲁花赤七十二人，举起反蒙旗帜，率领首都及诸州县的部分百姓，移驻海岛。
English: In June, King Goryeo made every effort to kill the 72 Mongol-appointed Darukha Red Guards, raised an anti-Mongolian banner, and led some people from the capital and Zhouzhou County to move to the island.

古文：洪福源集余民保聚，以俟大兵。
现代文：高丽降将洪福源则聚集余民，等待蒙古大军。
English: After the fall of Goryeo, Hong Fuyuan gathered the remaining people and waited for the Mongolian army to arrive.

古文：八月，复遣撒礼塔领兵讨之，至王京南，攻其处仁城，中流矢卒。
现代文：八月，蒙军撒礼塔部至高丽首都南部，在攻打处仁城时，中箭身死。
English: In August, the Mongolian army's Saray Pagoda Division marched to the south of the capital of Korea and was killed by an arrow while attacking the city of Jeonnam.

古文：别将铁哥以军还。其已降之人，令福源领之。
现代文：别将铁哥除命福源继续统辖已降的高丽人外，自己被迫带蒙军退出高丽。
English: Don't get rid of the iron brother, but let Fuyuan continue to govern the Koryo people who have fallen. He was forced to withdraw from Koryo with the Mongolian army.

古文：十月，皞遣其将军金宝鼎、郎中赵瑞章上表陈情。
现代文：十月，高丽国王派将军金宝鼎、郎中赵瑞章向蒙古皇帝上表说明高丽情况。
English: In October, the King of Goryeo sent General Jin Baoding and his son-in-law Zhao Ruizhang to brief the Mongolian Emperor on the situation in Goryeo.

古文：五年四月，诏谕皞悔过来朝，且数其五罪： 自平契丹贼、杀札剌之后，未尝遣一介赴阙，罪一也。命使赍训言省谕，辄敢射回，罪二也。尔等谋害着古欤，乃称万奴民户杀之，罪三也。命汝进军，仍令汝弼入朝，尔敢抗拒，窜诸海岛，罪四也。汝等民户不拘集见数，辄敢妄奏，罪五也。 
现代文：五年四月，太宗诏令高丽王自己悔过，并到蒙古朝觐，还宣布了高丽王有五大罪状，说： 自平定契丹、杀死答刂剌后，没有派过一个使臣来蒙古国，是罪之一；蒙古皇帝命使者带训言来高丽时，经常被箭射回，是罪之二；高丽政府谋害着古欤，却说是万奴民户杀的，是罪之三；蒙古朝要求高丽进军，命令汝弼入朝，高丽国王敢于抗拒，并将政府迁到有险可守的海岛，是罪之四；没有收集高丽民户的实际数目，经常向蒙古谎报民户数，是罪之五。 
English: In April of the fifth year, Emperor Taizong ordered King Goryeo to repent and make a pilgrimage to Mongolia. He also announced that King Goryeo had five major sins, saying: Since the suppression of Khitan and the killing of Baekje, he had not sent a single envoy to Mongolia, which was one of the sins; when the envoy of the Mongolian emperor came to Goryeo with an edict, he was often shot back by arrows, which was the second sin; the Goryeo government plotted to kill Goryeo, but said that they killed the people of Vanu, which was the third sin; the Mongolian dynasty demanded that Goryeo march into the

古文：十月，皞复遣兵攻陷已附西京等处降民，劫洪福源家。
现代文：十月，高丽王又遣兵收复被蒙军沦陷的西京许多地方，还劫夺了卖国求荣的洪福源家。
English: In October, King Goryeo also sent troops to recover many parts of Saikyo, which had fallen to the Mongol army, and also robbed the Hong Fuyuan family, who had betrayed the country to seek glory.

古文：六年，福源得请，领其降民迁居东京，赐佩金符。
现代文：六年，福源获准率领降民迁居东京，蒙太宗还赐福源佩金符的荣誉，希望扩大他的影响。
English: In the sixth year, Fuyuan was allowed to move to Tokyo with his followers, and the Montais also gave Fuyuan the honor of a gold medal, hoping to expand his influence.

古文：七年，命唐古与洪福源领兵征之。
现代文：七年，命唐古与洪福源领兵攻打高丽王。
English: In the seventh year, he ordered Tanggu and Hong Fuyuan to lead an army to attack King Goryeo.

古文：九年，拔其龙冈、咸从等十余城。
现代文：九年，攻下高丽政府管辖的龙冈、咸从等十余城。
English: Nine years later, it captured more than ten cities, including Yonggang and Hamjong, which were under the jurisdiction of the Korean government.

古文：十年五月，其国人赵玄习、李元祐等率二千人迎降，命居东京，受洪福源节制，且赐御前银符，使玄习等佩之，以招未降民户。
现代文：十年五月，高丽人赵玄习、李元等率二千人迎降，蒙军令他们住在东京，受洪福源节制。又赐他们御前银符，使他们招未降民户。
English: In May of the tenth year, the Koryo people Zhao Xuanxi, Li Yuan and others led 2,000 people to surrender. The Mongolian army ordered them to live in Tokyo and be controlled by Hong Fuyuan. They also gave them imperial silver coins so that they would not surrender to the people.

古文：又李君式等十二人来降，待之如玄习焉。
现代文：又有李君式等十二人降蒙古军，蒙军像对待玄习那样对待他们。
English: There were also twelve people, including Li Junshih, who surrendered to the Mongolian army, and the Mongolian army treated them as if they were Xuanxi.

古文：十二月，皞遣其将军金宝鼎、御史宋彦琦等奉表入朝。
现代文：十二月，高丽王王派出征的将军金宝鼎、御史宋彦琦等奉表朝拜蒙古皇帝。
English: In December, the king of Goryeo dispatched the general Jin Baoding and the imperial historian Song Yanxuan to pay homage to the Mongolian emperor.

古文：十一年五月，诏征皞入朝，皞以母丧辞。
现代文：十一年五月，太宗下诏要求高丽国王王自己入朝，王以母亲去世为借口婉言拒绝。
English: In May of the eleventh year, Emperor Taizong issued an edict demanding that the King of Goryeo, Wang himself, enter the imperial court. Wang refused, using his mother's death as an excuse.

古文：六月，乃遣其礼宾卿卢演、礼宾少卿金谦充进奉使、副，奉表入朝。
现代文：六月，派遣其礼宾卿卢演、礼宾少卿金谦担任进奉使和副使，奉表入朝。
English: In June, he dispatched his chief of protocol, Lu Yuan, and his junior secretary of protocol, Jin Qian, to serve as envoys and deputy envoys, and they were sent to the DPRK.

古文：十月，有旨谕皞，征其亲朝于明年。
现代文：十月，蒙古皇帝有诏书给王，征求他明年能否亲自来朝的意见。
English: In October, the Mongolian emperor sent an imperial decree to the king to solicit his opinion on whether he could come to the DPRK in person next year.

古文：十二月，皞遣其新安公王佺与宝鼎、彦琦等百四十八人奉表入贡。
现代文：十二月，派新安公王亻全与宝鼎、彦琦等一百四十八人奉表入朝。
English: In December, one hundred and forty-eight people, including the Prince of Xin'an, Yu Quan, Baoding, and Hikone, were sent to the imperial court.

古文：十二年三月，又遣其右谏议大夫赵修、阁门祗候金成宝等奉表入贡。
现代文：十二年三月，又遣右谏议大夫赵修、门祗候金成宝等向蒙古纳贡。
English: In March of the 12th year, he also sent Zhao Xiu, the right-hand man, and Jin Chengbao, the gatekeeper, to pay tribute to Mongolia.

古文：五月，复下诏谕之。
现代文：五月，蒙古皇帝又给诏书与高丽王。
English: In May, the Mongolian emperor also issued an imperial edict to the King of Goryeo.

古文：十二月，皞遣其礼宾少卿宋彦琦、侍御史权韪充行李使入贡。
现代文：十二月，高丽王遣礼宾少卿宋彦琦、侍御史权韪为行李使入贡。
English: In December, the King of Goryeo sent the concierge, Song Yanyan, and the attendant, Guanjun, to pay tribute for the baggage.

古文：是岁，攻拔昌、朔等州。
现代文：这一年，蒙军攻占昌、朔等州。
English: In the same year, the Mongolian army conquered the provinces of Chang and Shuo.

古文：十三年秋，皞以族子綧为己子人质。
现代文：十三年秋，高丽王以族子王纟享作为自己儿子入蒙古为人质。
English: In the autumn of the thirteenth year, the king of Goryeo took his son, the prince of the clan, into Mongolia as a hostage.

古文：当定宗、宪宗之世，岁贡不入，故自定宗二年至宪宗八年，凡四命将征之，凡拔其城十有四。
现代文：当定宗、宪宗时，高丽没有向蒙古纳年贡，故自定宗二年至宪宗八年，四次派大将出征高丽，占领了高丽十四座城。
English: When Goryeo was under Jingsong and Kenzong, it did not pay annual tribute to Mongolia. Therefore, from the second year of Jingsong to the eighth year of Kenzong, four generals were sent to fight in Goryeo and occupied fourteen cities in Goryeo.

古文：宪宗末，皞遣其世子倎入朝。
现代文：宪宗末年，高丽王才遣世子亻典入朝。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Gensong, King Goryeo sent his heir, Emperor Gensen, to the imperial court.

古文：世祖中统元年三月，皞卒，命倎归国为高丽国王，以兵卫送之，仍赦其境内。
现代文：世祖中统元年三月，高丽王逝世，蒙古命当作人质的王亻典回国即高丽王位，并派蒙军护送，在高丽境内还实行大赦。其文告说：
English: In March of the first year of King Sejong the Great's reign, King Goryeo died, and King Goryeo, who had been held hostage by the Mongols, returned to Korea, to the throne of Goryeo, and was escorted by the Mongolian army. An amnesty was also implemented in the territory of Goryeo. His message said:

古文：制曰：我太祖皇帝肇开大业，圣圣相承，代有鸿勋，芟夷群雄，奄有四海，未尝专嗜杀也。凡属国列侯，分茅锡土，传祚子孙者，不啻万里，孰非向之勍敌哉。
现代文： 我太祖肇开大业以来，世世出现英明的皇帝，代代都有能干的臣子。于是，扫荡群雄，国土扩及四海。但是，我们并没有专好杀人，凡是我的属国，都要裂土分封，让他们传之子孙的地方，何止万里。其实这一些人，哪一个又不是我们过去的劲敌呢？
English: Since my great-grandfather began his great career, wise emperors have appeared throughout the ages, and there have been capable courtiers from generation to generation. As a result, the heroes were swept away, and the land expanded to the four seas. However, we did not specialize in killing people. All of my vassal countries have to split the land and divide it, so that they can pass it on to their children and grandchildren, thousands of miles away. In fact, which of these people is not our past rival?

古文：观乎此，则祖宗之法不待言而章章矣。
现代文：这一点，在我祖宗的法规中是清清楚楚的。
English: This was made very clear in the laws of my ancestors.

古文：今也，普天之下未臣服者，惟尔国与宋耳。
现代文：现在，普天之下，还没有臣服我国的，只有你们高丽和宋朝而已。
English: Now, in the whole world, only you, Korea, and the Song Dynasty have not yet submitted to our country.

古文：宋所恃者长江，而长江失险；所藉者川、广，而川、广不支。
现代文：宋朝所恃的是长江，而长江之险失去后，又借四川和广东来维持，而四川广东又不能支持，于是自己撤除边防。
English: What the Song Dynasty coveted was the Yangtze River, and after the danger of the Yangtze River was lost, it borrowed Sichuan and Guangdong to maintain it, but Sichuan and Guangdong could not support it, so they removed the border defense.

古文：边戍自彻其藩篱，大军已驻乎心腹，鼎鱼幕燕，亡在旦夕。
现代文：我蒙古大军已驻入其心脏地带，有如鼎中之鱼，幕下之燕，已亡在旦夕了。
English: Our Mongolian army has been stationed in its heartland, like a fish in the middle of the sea, a swallow under the curtain, and has died in the twilight.

古文：尔初以世子奉币纳款，束身归朝，含哀请命，良可矜悯，故遣归国，完复旧疆，安尔田畴，保尔室家，弘好生之大德，捐宿构之细故也。
现代文： 你们当初以世子奉币纳贡时，缚身来朝，哀求饶恕，实在可怜，故放他回国，恢复疆土，保全家室，以发扬好生之德、捐弃旧嫌。
English: It was really pitiful of you to tie him up and bring him to the DPRK to beg for forgiveness when you were paying tribute with coins. Therefore, let him return to his country, restore the territory, preserve his family, and promote the virtue of a good life and abandon old grudges.

古文：用是已尝戒敕边将，敛兵待命，东方既定，则将回戈于钱塘。
现代文：所以，我们曾经告诫边将，收兵待命，只要东方一安定，就会回师钱塘。
English: Therefore, we once warned the border generals to be on standby, and as long as the East was stable, we would return to Qiantang.

古文：迨余半载，乃知尔国内乱渝盟，边将复请戒严，此何故也？
现代文：但是，等了半年多，才知道你们国家发生内乱，破坏了两国的盟约，我国边将只好再次请求做好战备。这是什么缘故呢？
English: However, after waiting for more than half a year, we learned that a civil war had broken out in your country, destroying the treaty between the two countries, and our border guard had no choice but to once again request combat readiness. What was the reason for this?

古文：以谓果内乱耶，权臣何不自立，而立世孙？
现代文：如果说这真的是内乱，权臣为何不自立而立世孙？
English: If this really was a civil war, why didn't the powerful vassals stand up for themselves and establish their descendants?

古文：以谓传闻之误耶，世子何不之国而盘桓于境上也？
现代文：如果这只是传闻之误，世子为何不直奔国内而盘桓于边界之上呢？
English: If it's just a rumor, why doesn't the crown prince go straight to the country and hover over the border?

古文：岂以世子之归愆期，而左右自相猜疑，私忧过计而然耶？
现代文：难道是因为世子的回归误期，引起左右自相猜疑，自己担心太多而造成这种情况？
English: Is it because of the delay in the return of the world's son, causing mutual suspicion between the left and the right, and causing this situation by worrying too much?

古文：重念岛屿残民，久罹涂炭，穷兵极讨，殆非本心。
现代文：我们念你们是岛屿残民，长期处于灾难的境地，想和强国动武，大概不是出于本意。
English: We read that you are an island remnant, long in a disastrous situation, and want to use force with a powerful country, probably not out of intention.

古文：且御失其道，则天下狙诈咸作敌；推赤心置人腹中，则反侧之辈自安矣。
现代文：如果我们对属国关系处理失当，那么，天下就会有许多人和我们为敌；如果我们推心置腹地待人，则反复无常的人也会稳定下来。
English: If we mishandle our relations with our neighbors, there will be many enemies in the world; if we treat others with sincerity, the fickle people will also be stabilized.

古文：悠悠之言，又何足校。
现代文：对那些荒谬的话，又何必计较。
English: Don't pay any attention to those absurd words.

古文：申命边阃，断自予衷，无以逋逃间执政，无以飞语乱定盟。
现代文：所以，我命令边将，要根据我们自己的想法判断事物，不要依靠逃亡的坏人当权，不要因无根据的传闻搞乱了和同盟者的关系。
English: Therefore, I ordered the border guards to judge things according to our own ideas, not to rely on fugitive villains in power, and not to disrupt relations with allies due to unfounded rumors.

古文：惟事推诚，一切勿问。
现代文：事事只讲诚意，其他都不过问。
English: All that matters is sincerity, nothing else matters.

古文：宜施旷荡之恩，一新遐迩之化。
现代文：宜施浩荡之皇恩，使远近之间的教化为之一新。
English: The magnanimous grace of the emperor has made the enlightenment between far and near become a new one.

古文：自尚书金仁隽以次，中外枝党、官吏、军民，圣旨到日已前，或有首谋内乱，旅拒王师，已降附而还叛，因仇雠而擅杀，无所归而背主亡命，不得已而随众胁从，应据国人但曾犯法，罪无轻重咸赦除之。
现代文：为此，我们宣布：自尚书金仁隽以下，不问是朝野的何派何党，不问是官吏是军民，在皇帝的圣旨下达之前，无论首谋内乱，抗拒蒙军；或是降附而后反叛；或因仇恨而擅杀；或无所归而背主逃亡；或不得已而随众起哄，罪无轻重，都予以赦免。
English: To this end, we declare: From the time of Shangshu Jin Rensheng onward, no matter what faction or party in the court or the field, no matter whether officials or the military and the people, before the emperor's edict is issued, whether they masterminded civil unrest and resisted the Mongolian army; or surrendered and then rebelled; or killed arbitrarily because of hatred; or fled without returning; or were forced to follow the crowd, their crimes are all pardoned.

古文：缅惟疮痍之民，正在抚绥之日，出彼沧溟，宅于平壤。卖刀剑而买牛犊，舍干戈而操耒耜，凡可援济，毋惮勤劳。
现代文：至于世子，应迅速回国掌权。对有仇的人宽大，对百姓施恩。使灾难深重的民众受到抚绥，离开大海，迁居平原，卖刀剑而买牛犊，舍干戈而执农具。凡需帮助的，不怕疲劳。
English: As for the heir, he should quickly return to the country to take power. He should be lenient to those who have enemies and be kind to the people. The people who have suffered great disasters should be petted, leave the sea, move to the plains, sell swords and buy oxen, and keep farm tools. If you need help, do not be afraid of fatigue.

古文：苟富庶之有征，冀礼义之可复，亟正疆界，以定民心，我师不得逾限矣。
现代文：只要有富庶的前景，便有恢复礼义的希望。应尽早确定疆界，以定民心，我们的军队也就不会再越过界限了。
English: As long as there is a prospect of prosperity, there is hope for the restoration of civility. The borders should be determined as soon as possible to settle the people's minds, and our army will not cross the line again.

古文：大号一出，朕不食言。
现代文：如今号令一出，朕决不食言。
English: Now, as soon as the order is given, I will never go back on my word.

古文：复有敢踵乱犯上者，非干尔主，乃乱我典刑，国有常宪，人得诛之。
现代文：如果还有犯上作乱的人，和你国王无干。那都是些乱我典刑的人，国有常法，人人得而诛之。
English: If there are still people who are guilty of disorderly conduct, they have nothing to do with your king. They are all people who have disrupted our sentencing. The country has a common law, and everyone can be punished.

古文：於戏！世子其王矣，往钦哉，恭承丕训，永为东藩，以扬我休命。
现代文：你照我的伟大训示去做吧！永远成为我东方的藩属，以弘扬我美好的旨令。 
English: You shall do as I have greatly commanded you; you shall be my vassal in the East forever, and you shall carry out my good pleasure.

古文：四月，复降旨谕倎曰： 朕祗若天命，获承祖宗休烈，仰惟覆焘，一视同仁，无遐迩小大之间也。
现代文：四月，又降旨告谕王亻典说： 我敬顺天命，得承祖宗的福禄和功业，只希望荫护臣民，对他们不分远近大小，一视同仁。
English: In April, he also sent a message to Wang Xuanwen, saying: "I respect the fate of the heavens, and I have received the blessings and merits of my ancestors. I only hope to protect my subjects. I do not care about whether they are near or far, and I treat them equally.

古文：以尔归款，既册为王还国，今得尔与边将之书，因知其上下之情，朕甚悯焉。 
现代文：因为你归顺我朝，已被册封为王而回高丽。今得到你与我蒙军边将的信，已了解你们上下的情况，我很怜惜你们。 
English: Because you surrendered to me, you have been crowned king and returned to Koryo. Now that I have received your letter and that of my Mongolian military commander, I have come to understand the circumstances of your upbringing, and I feel sorry for you.

古文：倎求出水就陆，免军马侵扰，还被虏及逃民，皆从之。
现代文：王亻典要求让百姓离海岛回陆地；要求保证百姓不受蒙军兵马的侵扰；要求送回掳掠的和逃往蒙军的高丽人。皆从之。
English: Wang Shendi demanded that the people should be allowed to return to the land from the islands; he demanded that the people should be protected from the intrusion of the Mongolian soldiers and horses; he demanded the return of the captives and the Koryo people who had fled to the Mongolian army. All of them complied.

古文：诏班师，乃赦其境内。
现代文：并下诏撤退蒙军，并在高丽境内实行大赦。
English: It also ordered the withdrawal of the Mongolian army and implemented an amnesty in the territory of Korea.

古文：六月，倎遣其子永安公僖、判司宰事韩即入贺即位，以国王封册、王印及虎符赐之。
现代文：六月，亻典遣其子永安公王亻喜、判司宰事韩即入贺即位，世祖封亻典为高丽国王，赐亻典王印及虎符。
English: In June, Emperor Goryeo sent his son Yongan Prince Yeonggi and the chief judge Han Choejo to accede to the throne. The emperor designated Emperor Goryeo as the king of Goryeo and gave Emperor Goryeo the royal seal and the tiger emblem.

古文：是月，又下诏抚谕之。
现代文：此月，又下诏抚慰高丽。
English: This month, another imperial edict was issued to appease Korea.

古文：二年三月，遣使入贡，四月，倎入朝。
现代文：二年三月，高丽遣使向朝廷进贡。四月，王亻典亲自朝拜世祖。
English: In March of the following year, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, and in April, Wang Xuan himself paid homage to his ancestor.

古文：六月，倎更名禃，遣其世子愖奉表以闻。
现代文：六月，王亻典更名为礻直，遣世子忄甚奉表向世祖说明他改了名字。
English: In June, Wang Shuxian changed his name to Shizhi, and sent his son Shizhi to the ancestor to explain that he had changed his name.

古文：八月，赐禃玉带一，遣侍卫将军孛里察、礼国郎中高逸民护愖还国。
现代文：八月，帝赐礻直玉带一条，又遣侍卫将军孛里察、礼部郎中高逸民护送忄甚回高丽。
English: In August, Emperor Taejong gave him a piece of jade, and sent the general of the palace guards, Tae Ri Cha, and the vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Gao Yimin, to escort him back to Goryeo.

古文：九月，禃遣其侍御史张镒奉表入谢。
现代文：九月，礻直遣高丽侍御史张镒奉表向皇帝致谢。
English: In September, Emperor Gaozhong sent the Koryo courtier Zhang Ye to present a thank-you gift to the emperor.

古文：十月，帝遣阿的迷失、焦天翼持诏，谕以开榷场事。
现代文：十月皇帝遣阿的迷失、焦天翼奉诏书告谕关于开辟两国边境贸易场所事。
English: In October, the emperor sent an imperial edict to open a border trade site between the two countries.

古文：三年正月，罢互市。
现代文：三年正月，撤消互市。
English: In the first month of the third year, the mutual market was revoked.

古文：诸王塔察儿请置铁冶，从之。
现代文：诸王塔察儿请设置铁冶机构，从之。
English: Kings and emperors, please set up an iron and steel organization and follow it.

古文：请立互市，不从。
现代文：请立互市，不从。
English: Please set up a mutual market, do not follow.

古文：四月，禃遣其左谏议大夫朴伦、郎将辛洪成等奉表入朝。
现代文：赐礻直历，后来每年都赐。四月，礻直遣左谏议大夫朴伦、郎将辛洪成等奉表入朝。
English: In April, Emperor Gaozhong sent Zuo Jianli Doctor Pak Lun, his son-in-law Xin Hongcheng and others to the imperial court.

古文：六月，遣使入贡。
现代文：六月，又遣使入贡。
English: In June, tributes were also sent.

古文：八月，朴伦等还，赐西锦三段、间金熟绫六段。
现代文：八月，朴伦等回高丽，帝赐西锦三段，间金熟绫六段。
English: In August, when Pak Lun and others returned to Goryeo, the emperor gave three pieces of Western brocade and six pieces of Chinese brocade.

古文：十月，诏谕禃籍编民，出师旅，输粮饷，助军储。
现代文：十月，帝下诏书要求王礻直调查登记户口，派出军队；调拨粮饷以充蒙军储备粮。
English: In October, the imperial edict required Wang Xizhi to investigate and register the household registration, send troops, and allocate grain to replenish the reserve grain of the Mongolian army.

古文：是月，禃遣使入贡。
现代文：此月，礻直又遣使入贡。
English: This month, Xizhi also sent tributes.

古文：四年二月，以禃不答诏书，诘其使者。
现代文：四年二月，因礻直没有对蒙古皇帝诏书做出回答，朝廷质问高丽使者。
English: In February of the fourth year, the imperial court questioned the emissary of Goryeo because he did not answer the Mongolian emperor's edict.

古文：禃表乞俟民生稍集，然后惟命。
现代文：礻直乃上表乞求准予在民众生活稍好转后再派兵输粮。
English: Yan Nao begged at the top table for permission to send soldiers to deliver grain after the people's lives improved slightly.

古文：帝以其辞意恳实，允之。朝贡物数，亦命称其力焉。
现代文：帝认为王礻直的乞求恳切实在，便同意缓派、缓输，并表示朝贡的物资，也可量力而行。
English: The emperor thought that Wang Xizhi's entreaty was sincere, so he agreed to postpone the dispatch and delivery, and said that the materials of the tribute could also be made as much as possible.

古文：自三月至于六月，禃凡三遣使入贡，赐禃羊五百。
现代文：自三月至六月，礻直已三次遣使入贡，帝乃赐礻直羊五百只。
English: From March to June, he sent tribute three times, and the emperor gave him 500 rams.

古文：十一月，禃以免置驿籍民等事，遣其翰林学士韩就奉表入谢。
现代文：十一月，礻直就蒙古皇帝免除高丽交出户籍和设置驿站事，遣翰林学士韩就奉表向朝廷致谢。
English: In November, Gong Zhi asked the Mongolian emperor to exempt Koryo from handing over her household registration and setting up a post, and sent Han Lin, a bachelor, to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：五年正月丁丑朔，禃遣使奉表入贺，谕还使，令禃亲朝京师。
现代文：五年正月，王礻直遣使奉表入贺，帝通知高丽使者回国，令王礻直亲自来京朝贺。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Wang Xizhi sent an envoy to present a congratulatory letter, and the emperor notified the Korean envoy to return to the country, ordering Wang Xizhi to come to Beijing in person to congratulate.

古文：四月，以西北诸王率众款附，拟今岁朝王公群牧于上都，又遣必阇赤古乙独征禃入朝，修世见之礼。
现代文：四月，帝因西北诸王率众归附，便准备此年在上都会见王公大臣。为此，又遣必赤古乙独召王礻直亲自来京朝拜。
English: In April, as the emperor was preparing to meet with Wang Gongdian in the previous year because of the accession of the kings of Northwest China, he sent Bi Chigu Yi to personally summon Wang Xizhi to come to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：五月，禃遣其借国子祭酒张镒从古乙独入见，六月乃亲朝。
现代文：五月，礻直遣国子祭酒张镒随古乙独入朝拜见皇帝。六月，礻直亲自朝拜皇帝。
English: In May, Gong Zhi sent the national son's festival wine, Zhang Xuan, along with Gu Yidong, into the court to worship the emperor. In June, Gong Zhi personally worshiped the emperor.

古文：九月，帝以改中统五年为至元元年，遣郎中路得成持赦令，与禃郎将康允绍颁其国。
现代文：九月，世祖因改中统五年为至元元年，遣郎中路得成与高丽郎将康允绍到高丽颁布大赦令。
English: In September, as the fifth year of the reign of King Sejong was changed to the first year of the reign of King Goryeo, the envoys Zhonglu Decheng and Goryeong Rong took Kang Yunshao to Goryeong to issue an amnesty.

古文：十月，禃入朝。
现代文：十月，王礻直又入朝拜见皇帝。
English: In October, Wang Xizhi again went to the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：十二月，遣禃还国。
现代文：十二月，遣王礻直回国。
English: In December, Wang Xizhi returned to China.

古文：是年春，禃遣使入贡。
现代文：此年春，礻直遣使入贡。
English: In the spring of this year, Xizhong sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：自是终世祖三十一年，其国入贡者凡三十有六。
现代文：自此时起到世祖三十一年止，高丽向蒙古入贡三十六次。
English: From this time until the 31st year of King Sejong's reign, Korea paid tribute to Mongolia 36 times.

古文：至元三年二月，立沈州，以处高丽降民。
现代文：至元三年二月，设沈州，以安置高丽降民。
English: In February of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shenzhou was set up to resettle Koreans.

古文：帝欲通好日本，以高丽与日本邻国，可为乡导，八月，遣国信使兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘、计议官伯德孝先等使日本，先至高丽谕旨。
现代文：世祖以高丽与日本国为邻，要求高丽充当向导以通日本。八月，帝遣国信使兵部侍郎黑的、礼部侍郎殷弘、计议官伯德孝先等使日本，先至高丽宣读皇帝圣旨。
English: In August, imperial couriers, such as Heibu-sajiro Kurotani, Reiibu-sajiro Inhiro, and Keisho-kan (counselor) Baude Kosen, sent from Japan to Korea to read out the emperor's edict.

古文：五年正月，禃遣其弟淐入朝。帝以禃见欺，于淐面数其事切责之，特遣北京路总管兼大定府尹于也孙脱、礼部郎中孟甲持诏谕禃，其略曰： 向请撤兵，则已撤之矣。
现代文：十二月，王礻直遣其枢密院副使宋君斐、借礼部侍郎金赞等作为向导，陪同黑的、殷弘等前往日本，但没有到达日本便回来了。四年正月，王礻直派遣其弟王氵昌入朝，蒙帝认为王氵昌欺负王礻直，便当面列举事实狠狠指责王氵昌，特遣北京路总管兼大定府尹于也孙脱、礼部郎中孟甲持诏书见王礻直，诏书说 ：以前你请求撤兵，我便撤了。
English: In December, Wang Xizhi sent his vice-envoy of the Privy Council, Song Junfei, and borrowed the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Jin Zan, as a guide, accompanied by Hei, Yin Hong, and others to Japan, but returned without arriving in Japan. In the first month of the fourth year, Wang Xizhi sent his brother, Wang Xichang, to the Imperial Court. Emperor Meng believed that Wang Xichang bullied Wang Xichang, so he listed the facts and severely criticized Wang Xichang in person. The special envoy, Yin Yuya Suntu, the general manager of Beijing Road and Dadingfu, and Meng Jia

古文：三年当去水就陆，而前言无征也。
现代文：三年内高丽人当离开海岛到陆上定居，这话没有做到。
English: Within three years, the Koreans were supposed to leave the island and settle on land, but this did not happen.

古文：又太祖法制，凡内属之国，纳质、助军、输粮、设驿、编户籍、置长官，已尝明谕之，而稽延至今，终无成言。
现代文：我太祖法制，凡内属之国，关于派人质、出军队、纳粮饷、设驿站、编户籍、置长官，这些都早已明确告诉你了。你们执行得如何？
English: My great-great-grandfather's legal system, concerning the sending of hostages, the sending of troops, the giving of food rations, the setting up of stations, the compiling of household registers, and the setting up of magistrates, all of these have long been clearly told to you. How have you carried them out?

古文：在太宗时，王綧等已入质，驿传亦粗立，余率未奉行。
现代文：迟至今日，始终没有奏报。在太宗时，王纟享等已入朝为人质，驿站也正初立，其余的都未实行。
English: To this day, there has never been a report. At the time of Emperor Taizong, Wang Shanyuan and others had already entered the imperial court as hostages, the post station was just being built, and the rest had not been implemented.

古文：今将问罪于宋，其所助士卒舟舰几何？
现代文：现在，我们将兴师讨宋，你们助战的军队有多少士兵，多少舟舰？
English: Now, we will raise an army to fight Song. How many soldiers and how many ships are in your army?

古文：输粮则就为储积，至若设官及户版事，其意谓何？
现代文：输粮的事要就地储积，至于设置官吏和户籍版图的事，到底有何打算？
English: The matter of grain delivery should be stored locally. As for the establishment of officials and household registration maps, what exactly is the plan?

古文：故以问之。 
现代文：故遣使询问。 
English: So he sent an envoy to inquire.

古文：三月，于也孙脱等至其国。
现代文：三月，于也孙脱到达高丽。
English: In March, Yu Yasunto arrived in Korea.

古文：四月，禃遣其门下侍郎李藏用奉表与也孙脱等入朝。
现代文：四月，礻直派遣门下侍郎李藏用奉表与于也孙脱等入朝。
English: In April, Gan Zhi sent his chamberlain, Li Zang, to the imperial court along with Yu Yatong and others.

古文：五月，帝敕藏用曰： 往谕尔主，速以军数实奏，将遣人督之。
现代文：五月，帝旨令藏用说： 回去告诉你国王，快将军队数目如实上报，我们将要派人前往监督。
English: In May, Emperor Zang En said: "Go back and tell your king, quickly report the number of troops truthfully, we will send someone to supervise."

古文：今出军，尔等必疑将出何地，或欲南宋，或欲日本，尔主当造舟一千艘，能涉大海可载四千石者。 
现代文：现在出兵，你们必定怀疑进攻何处，是打南宋还是打日本？你们国应当造舟一千艘，要能涉大海的，要可载四千石的。 
English: If you send out troops now, you must be wondering where to attack, whether to fight the Southern Song Dynasty or Japan. Your country should build a thousand boats. If you want to be able to go to sea, you should be able to carry four thousand stones.

古文：藏用曰： 舟舰之事即当应命，但人民残少，恐不及期。
现代文：藏用说 ：舟舰之事将应命，但人民凋残，数量少，恐不能按期望办到。
English: Zangong said, "The matter of the ships will be carried out according to the order, but the people are withered and the number is small, so it may not be done as expected."

古文：往者臣国有军四万，三十余年间死于兵疫，今止有牌子头、五十户、百户、千户之类虚名，而无军卒。 
现代文：过去我们高丽有军四万，三十余年间不少死于兵役，现在只有牌子头、五十户、百户、千户之类的虚名而无兵卒。 
English: In the past, we had 40,000 soldiers in Korea, and many of them died in military service over the past 30 years. Now, there are only fake names such as the head of the brand, 50 households, 100 households, and 1,000 households, but no soldiers.

古文：帝曰： 死者有之，生者亦有之。 
现代文：帝说 ：死人的事是有，但也有生人的事嘛！ 
English: The emperor said, "There is the matter of the dead, but there is also the matter of the living!"

古文：藏用曰： 赖圣德，自撤兵以来，有生长者仅十岁耳。 
现代文：藏用说： 托您的福，自朝廷撤兵以来，是有生人的事，但这些人仅十岁而已。 
English: Zangyong said: With your blessing, since the withdrawal of the imperial army, there have been survivors, but these people are only ten years old.

古文：帝又曰： 自尔来者言，海中之事，于宋得便风可三日而至，日本则朝发而夕至。
现代文：帝又说： 从你们来的人说，海中行军，至宋，得顺风，三日才到；至日本，则朝发而夕至。
English: The emperor also said, "Those who come from you say, 'When marching in the sea, if the wind is favorable in the Song Dynasty, it takes three days to arrive; when marching to Japan, it starts in the morning and ends in the evening.'

古文：舟中载米，海中捕鱼而食之，则岂不可行乎？ 
现代文：如舟中载米，海中捕鱼而食，难道行不通吗？ 
English: If you carry rice in a boat and catch fish in the sea to eat, will it not work?

古文：又敕藏用曰： 归可以此言谕尔主。 
现代文：又叮嘱藏用说： 你回国后，可将我们这些话转告你国王。 
English: And he charged Zacchaeus, saying, When thou comest into thy kingdom, tell these words unto thy king.

古文：七月，诏都统领脱朵儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰等使其国，与其来朝者大将军崔东秀偕行。
现代文：七月，皇帝下诏令都统领脱朵儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰等使高丽，与高丽来朝的大将军崔东秀同行。
English: In July, the emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering General Tudor, General Wu De, General Wang Guochang, and General Wu Liang, Deputy Commander Liu Jie, to accompany General Cui Dongxiu to Korea.

古文：八月，至其国，禃出升天府迎之，盖谕以阅军造船也。
现代文：八月，至高丽，王礻直出升天府迎接，因为已告谕高丽，朝廷使臣将要检查军队和造船的情况。
English: In August, Wang Jianzhong went to Goryeo to welcome him at the Ascended Master's Palace, because it had been announced to Goryeo that the imperial envoys would inspect the situation of the army and shipbuilding.

古文：九月，以禃表奏潘阜等奉使无功而还，复遣黑的等使日本，诏禃遣重臣导送。
现代文：九月，因王礻直上书说潘阜等赴日本无功而返，于是再遣黑的等使日本，并诏嘱礻直遣重臣导送。
English: In September, because Wang Xizhi sent a letter saying that Panfu and others had returned to Japan without success, he then sent a black envoy to Japan, and ordered Xizhi to send a senior minister to escort him.

古文：十二月，禃遣其知门下省事申思全、礼部侍郎陈井、起居舍人潘阜等从国信使黑的等赴日本，借礼部侍郎张镒奉表从脱朵儿入朝。
现代文：十二月，礻直遣知门下省事申思亻全、礼部侍郎陈井、起居舍人潘阜等随从国信使黑的等赴日本，借礼部侍郎张镒奉表随同脱朵儿入朝。
English: In December, Zou Zhi directly sent his subordinates Shen Shizhongquan, Chen Jing, the chamberlain of the ceremonial department, and Pan Fu, the housekeeper, to Japan with the messenger of the country, Hei, and borrowed the chamberlain of the ceremonial department, Zhang Xifeng, to accompany Tudor to the imperial court.

古文：六年正月，禃遣其大将军康允绍奉表奏诛权臣金俊等。
现代文：六年正月，礻直遣大将军康允绍奉表向世祖报告处死权臣金俊事。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the general Kang Yunshao, sent by Zou Zhizhong, reported to the ancestor that the powerful vassal Kim Junji had been executed.

古文：三月，禃复遣申思佺奉表从黑的入朝。
现代文：三月，礻直又遣申思亻全奉表随黑的入朝。
English: In March, Emperor Jianzhong also sent Emperor Shenshi and Emperor Jianzhong to the court.

古文：六月，禃遣其世子愖入朝。赐禃玉带一，愖金五十两，从官银币有差。
现代文：六月，礻直遣世子忄甚入朝，帝赐礻直玉带一条，赐忄甚金五十两，赐随从官员银币若干。
English: In June, Emperor Zizhi sent his son, Zizhi Jiao, to the imperial court. The emperor gave Zizhi Jiao a jade belt, Zizhi Jiao fifty taels of gold, and a number of silver coins to the officials accompanying him.

古文：七月，帝遣明威将军都统领脱朵儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰相视耽罗等处道路，诏禃选官引达，以人言耽罗海道往南宋、日本甚易故也。八月，世子愖至朝，奏本国臣下擅废禃立其弟安庆公淐事。
现代文：七月，有人说利用耽罗海道到南宋、日本都甚容易，于是世祖遣明威将军都统领脱朵儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰视察耽罗等处道路，并诏令礻直派人引路。八月，世子忄甚来朝见世祖，奏高丽臣下擅自废礻直立其弟安庆公王氵昌事。
English: In July, some people said that it was very easy to use the Tanro Expressway to travel to the Southern Song Dynasty and Japan, so the patriarch sent General Mingwei Du Du to lead Doduo, General Wu De to lead Wang Guochang, and General Wu Li to lead Liu Jie to inspect the roads in Tanro and other places, and issued a decree to send a person to lead the way. In August, the son of the Tang Dynasty, Zang Jin, came to see the patriarch, and asked the Korean vassal to arbitrarily depose and erect his brother, King Anqing.

古文：诏遣使臣斡朵思不花、李谔等至其国详问之。
现代文：朝廷遣使臣斡朵思不花、李谔等至高丽，详问这次废立的原委。
English: The imperial court sent envoys to Goryeo, including Dou Shifuhua and Li Jie, to inquire in detail about the original committee that was abolished.

古文：九月，其枢密院副使金方庆奉表从斡朵思不花等入朝。
现代文：九月，高丽枢密院副使金方庆奉表随斡朵思不花来朝。
English: In September, Vice-Envoy of the Koryo Privy Council Kim Fang Ching-bong came to the DPRK with the good offices of the DPRK.

古文：枢密院御史台奏，世子愖言： 朝廷若出征，能办军三千，备粮五月，如官军入境，臣宜同往，庶不惊扰。 
现代文：枢密院及御史台奏，高丽世子忄甚说： 朝廷若出征高丽，助臣平定内乱，臣能拨出军队三千，备粮五月，如官军入高丽境，臣宜同往，以免百姓惊惧。 
English: The Privy Council and the Imperial Historian, the heir of Goryeo, said: If the imperial court goes to Goryeo to help the vassals to quell the civil strife, the vassals can allocate three thousand troops and prepare grain in May. If the government troops enter the territory of Goryeo, the vassals should go with them, so as not to frighten the people.

古文：帝然之。诏授世子愖特进、上柱国，敕愖率兵三千赴其国难。
现代文：世祖同意他的请求，下诏书授王礻直特进、上柱国，命抄不花往征高丽，忄甚率兵三千同官军一道平定王氵昌的篡位夺权的内乱。
English: The ancestor agreed to his request, and issued an imperial edict to Wang Xizhong to make a special advance to Shangzhu Province, and ordered him to go to Korea without spending money. He even led three thousand soldiers together with the government army to quell the civil unrest caused by Wang Xichang's usurpation of power.

古文：命抄不花往征其国，以病不果行，诏遣蒙哥都代之。
现代文：因抄不花病，改派蒙哥都。
English: Due to illness, Meng Guodu was reassigned.

古文：十月，帝以禃、淐废置乃林衍所为，遣中宪大夫兵部侍郎黑的、淄莱路总管府判官徐世雄诏禃、淐、衍等以十二月同诣阙下，面陈情实，听其是非。
现代文：十月，世祖知礻直、氵昌的废置乃是林衍所为，遣中宪大夫、兵部侍郎黑的、淄莱路总管府判官徐世雄诏告礻直、氵昌、衍等在十二月同到蒙京面陈实情，听其是非。
English: In October, Shizhu knew that Lin Yan was responsible for the abolition of Shun Zhi and Shun Chang. He sent Zhong Xian Daifu, Heibin Zhi Lang Hei, and Xu Shixiong, the judge of the General Administration Office of Shulai Road, to inform Shun Zhi, Shun Zhi, and Shun Yan to go to Beijing in December to present the facts and listen to their opinions.

古文：又遣国王头辇哥等率兵压境，如逾期不至，即当穷治首恶，进兵剿戮。
现代文：又遣国王头辇哥等率兵屯于中国与高丽边境，他们如逾期不至，即当重治首恶，进兵剿戮。
English: He also sent the king's head eunuch and other soldiers to camp on the border between China and Korea. If they did not arrive on time, they should be punished severely and go into battle.

古文：命赵璧行中书省于东京，仍诏谕高丽国军民。
现代文：令赵璧在东京设立行中书省，以便随时诏告高丽国军民。
English: Zhao Bi was ordered to set up a book ministry in Tokyo in order to inform the military and civilians of Korea at any time.

古文：十一月，高丽都统领崔坦等以林衍作乱，挈西京五十余城入附。
现代文：十一月，高丽都统领崔坦等因林衍作乱，以西京五十余城归附元朝。
English: In November, as a result of Lin Yan's rebellion, the leader of Goryeo, Choi Tan, annexed more than 50 cities to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：遣断事官别同瓦驰驿于王綧、洪茶丘所管实科差户内签军至东京，付枢密院，得三千三百人。
现代文：朝廷遣断事官别同瓦驰驿于王纟享、洪茶丘所管的实科差户内，签发三千三百人至东京，交给枢密院。
English: The Imperial Court sent 3,300 people to Tokyo to be handed over to the Privy Council.

古文：高丽西京都统李延龄乞益兵，遣忙哥都率兵二千赴之。
现代文：高丽西京都统李延龄要求增兵，遣忙哥都率兵二千人前往。
English: Goryeo's Western General Ri Yanling requested more troops, and the imperial court dispatched Bushy Goto and two thousand dignitaries to reinforce.

古文：枢密院臣议征高丽事。
现代文：枢密院讨论征高丽事。
English: Privy Council discusses the Korean War.

古文：初，马亨以为： 高丽者，本箕子所封之地，汉、晋皆为郡县。今虽来朝，其心难测。莫若严兵假道，以取日本为名，乘势可袭其国，定为郡县。 
现代文：起初，马亨认为 ：高丽者，本箕子之封地，汉晋皆为郡县，今虽来朝，其心难测，不如派出精兵以取日本为名，假道高丽国乘机袭击取之，改为郡县。 
English: At first, Mahen thought that: the Koryo people, the fiefdoms of the Genghis Khan, and the Han Dynasty were all counties, but now that they have come to Korea, their hearts are hard to fathom, so it would be better to send out elite soldiers in the name of taking Japan, take the opportunity to attack and take the Koryo country, and change it to counties.

古文：亨又言： 今既有衅端，不宜遣兵伐之。万一不胜，上损国威，下损士卒。
现代文：亨又说： 现在其内部争权夺位，朝廷不宜遣兵征讨，万一不胜，上损国威，下损士卒。
English: Heng also said: Now that there is an internal struggle for power and position, it is not appropriate for the imperial court to send soldiers to fight. In case of defeat, the national prestige will be damaged and the soldiers will be lost.

古文：彼或上表言情，宜赦其罪戾，减其贡献，以安抚其民，庶几感慕圣化。
现代文：如高丽人上表说情，宜赦免他们的罪，减他们的贡纳，以安抚高丽百姓，或可使他们感慕教化。
English: If the Goryeo people publicly intercede, it is appropriate to pardon their sins and reduce their tribute in order to appease the Goryeo people, or to make them feel enlightened.

古文：俟南宋已平，彼有他志，回兵诛之，亦未晚也。 
现代文：等到了南宋征服之后，高丽如还有异心，再回兵剿戮，为时不晚。 
English: After the conquest of the Southern Song Dynasty, it was not too late for Goryeo to return to war if there was still hostility.

古文：前枢密院经历马希骥亦言： 今之高丽，乃古新罗、百济、高句丽三国并而为一。
现代文：前枢密院经历马希骥说： 今之高丽，乃古之新罗、百济、高句丽三国合并而成。
English: Former Privy Council member Ma Hsiu said, "The present Koryo is the result of the merger of the three ancient kingdoms of Silla, Baekje, and Goguryeo.

古文：大抵藩镇权分则易制，诸侯强盛则难臣。
现代文：一般来说，藩镇权分则易制服，诸侯强盛则难臣服。
English: Generally speaking, it is easy to subdue the power of the domain and the town, but it is difficult to subdue the powerful lords.

古文：验彼州城军民多寡，离而为二，分治其国，使权侔势等，自相维制，则徐议良图，亦易为区处耳。 
现代文：应检查高丽州城军民的多寡，分离为二，分治其国，使其旗鼓相当，互相牵制，这样，然后慢慢筹划良策，也就比较容易处置了。 
English: It is necessary to check the number of soldiers and citizens in the city of Goryeo, separate into two, divide the country, make it equal, and restrain each other. In this way, it is easier to dispose of it by slowly planning a good strategy.

古文：黑的等至其国，禃受诏复位，遣借礼部侍郎朴杰从黑的等奉表入朝。
现代文：黑的等至高丽，礻直受诏恢复王位，遣借礼部侍郎朴休灬，随同黑的等奉表入朝。
English: Kuroda was appointed to the throne of Goryeo, and Gendai was restored to the throne by imperial edict. He sent his etiquette attendant, Park Hyuk-soo, with Kuroda and others to the imperial court.

古文：十二月，乃亲朝京师。
现代文：十二月，王礻直又亲至京师朝拜世祖。
English: In December, Wang Xizhi went to Beijing to pay homage to his ancestor.

古文：七年正月，遣使言： 比奉诏，臣已复位，令从七百人入觐。 
现代文：七年正月，王礻直遣使说： 臣近已奉诏复位，准备率七百人来朝拜蒙古皇帝。 
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Wang Xizhi sent an envoy to say: "The vassal has been restored by imperial edict, prepare to lead seven hundred people to pay homage to the Mongolian emperor."

古文：诏令从四百人来，余留之西京。
现代文：朝廷只令他率四百人，其余留在西京。
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering him to bring four hundred people with him, and the rest to stay in the beautiful city of Saikyo.

古文：诏西京内属，改东宁府，画慈悲岭为界，以忙哥都为安抚使，佩虎符，率兵戍其西境。
现代文：又诏令将归属中国的西京改称东宁府，以慈悲岭为界，以忙哥都为安抚使，佩虎符，率兵守戍高丽西境。
English: In addition, the edict changed the name of Xijing, which belonged to China, to Dongningfu, with Qizhenling as the boundary, Busy Brother as the pacifying envoy, wearing a tiger emblem, and leading troops to guard the western border of Goryeo.

古文：诏谕其国僚属军民以讨林衍之故，其略曰： 朕即位以来，闵尔国久罹兵乱，册定尔主，撤还兵戍，十年之间，其所以抚护安全者，靡所不至。
现代文：朝廷下诏告谕高丽官吏军民，讨伐林衍。诏书中说 ：朕即位以来，怜悯高丽久遭兵乱，于是册封你们的国王，撤兵回国。十年之间，只要是能安抚、保护你们安全的事，没有不做的。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to the Koryo officials, soldiers, and people, ordering them to fight Lin Yan. In the edict, it said, "Since I ascended the throne, I have felt sorry for the Koryo people, who have been suffering from war for a long time. Therefore, I proclaimed myself your king and withdrew my troops back to my country. In the past ten years, I have not failed to do anything that would pacify and protect your safety.

古文：不图逆臣林衍自作弗靖，擅废易国王禃，胁立安庆公淐，诏令赴阙，复稽延不出，岂可释而不诛。
现代文：不料，逆贼林衍自行作乱，擅自废国王王礻直，强迫安庆公王氵昌为国王，朝廷下诏令二人来蒙京，又拖延不至，如此等等，岂可释而不诛。
English: Unexpectedly, the rebel thief Lin Yan caused a disturbance on his own, arbitrarily dethroned King Wang Xizhi, forced Prince Anqing Yuchang to become king, and the imperial court ordered the two to come to Mengjing, but they could not delay, and so on.

古文：已遣行省率兵东下，惟林衍一身是讨。
现代文：因此，已派遣行省率兵东下，只讨伐林衍一人。
English: As a result, the province has dispatched troops to the east, and only one person has been sent to fight deforestation.

古文：其安庆公淐本非得已，在所宽宥。
现代文：安庆公王氵昌是在不得已的情况下当上国王的，应该宽宥。
English: Prince Anqing Binchang became king in a desperate situation, and should be pardoned.

古文：自余胁从诖误，一无所问。 
现代文：其余的胁从人员，是受连累的，一律不问。 
English: The rest of the intimidating subordinates were not questioned at all, even though they were implicated.

古文：二月，遣军送禃就国，诏谕高丽国官吏军民曰； 朕惟臣之事君，有死无二，不意尔国权臣，辄敢擅废国主。
现代文：二月，派军送礻直回国。又诏告高丽国官吏军民说 ：朕认为臣侍奉君王，只能以死报效，无有二心。想不到你们国家的权臣林衍，敢于动辄擅废国主。
English: In February, he sent an army to escort Ye straight back to his country. He also issued an edict to the officials, soldiers and people of Goryeo, saying, "I believe that if you serve the king, you can only be rewarded with death, and I have no second thoughts. It is inconceivable that Lin Yan, a powerful minister of your country, would dare to arbitrarily depose the sovereign.

古文：彼既驱率兵众，将致尔众危扰不安，以汝黎庶之故，特遣兵护送国王禃还国，奠居旧京，命达鲁花赤同往镇抚，以靖尔邦。
现代文：林衍驱率兵众，已使你们国家处于危亡，百姓受到侵扰。为了你们这些百姓，特遣兵护送国王礻直回国，定居旧京。朝廷派达鲁花赤同往镇抚，以便安定你们国家。
English: Lin Yan's expulsion of the soldiers has put your country in danger, and the people have been disturbed. For the sake of you, the people, the special soldiers escorted the king to return to the country and settle in the old Beijing. The court sent Daruhana to pacify your country in order to stabilize your country.

古文：惟尔东土之人，不知为汝之故，必生疑惧，尔众咸当无畏，按堵如故。
现代文：你们东土之人，并不了解朝廷的用意，必然产生疑惧。你们大家不要骇怕，应当和平时一样安静下来。
English: You people of the East do not understand the intentions of the imperial court, and doubt is bound to arise. Don't be frightened, all of you. You should calm down as usual.

古文：已别敕将帅，严戒兵士勿令侵犯。
现代文：朝廷已令进入高丽的蒙军将帅，严戒士兵，不得侵犯。
English: The imperial court has ordered the general of the Mongolian army to enter Goryeo, and soldiers are strictly prohibited from encroaching.

古文：汝或妄动，汝妻子及汝身当致俘略，宜审思之。 
现代文：但是，如果你们轻举妄动，你们自身及妻室儿女都会成为俘虏，因此要谨慎。 
English: However, if you act rashly, you and your wives and children will become captives, so be careful.

古文：初，有旨令头辇哥行省驻西京，而以忙哥都、赵良弼充安抚使，与禃俱入其京；既而复令行省入其王京，而以脱朵儿充其国达鲁花赤，罢安抚司。
现代文：原先，有旨令头辇哥为行省丞相，驻西京。以忙哥都、赵良弼为安抚使，与王礻直同进高丽京城。接着，又令行省进驻王宫，以脱朵儿任高丽国达鲁花赤，撤消安抚司。
English: Originally, there was a plan to appoint the head of the province as the provincial chancellor, stationed in West Beijing. With Busy Brother and Zhao Liangyao as the pacification envoy, he went directly to the capital of Korea with Wang Yao. Next, he also ordered the province to be stationed in the royal palace, and appointed Doduo as the Korean state of Daruhana, and revoked the pacification department.

古文：四月，东京行尚书省军近西京，遣彻彻都等同禃之臣郑子玙等持省札召高丽国令公林衍。
现代文：四月，东京行尚书省军接近西京时，遣彻彻都等同礻直的臣子郑子等为使，持尚书省的文书，召见高丽国令公林衍。
English: In April, when the Shoshu troops marched from Tokyo to approach Saikyo, Choe Chul-Do, together with Jeongjong's vassal Jeongjo, sent envoys bearing the documents of the Shoshu to summon the Goryeo governor, Goryeongjin.

古文：使还，言： 衍已死，子惟茂袭令公位。
现代文：使者回来说： 衍已死，其子惟茂继承令公位。
English: The messenger came back and said, "Yan has died, and his son, Koremo, has succeeded to the throne."

古文：其国侍郎洪文系、尚书宋宗礼，杀惟茂及衍婿崔宗绍。惟茂弟惟栶自刭。
现代文：后来，高丽的侍郎洪文系、尚书宋宗礼杀惟茂及衍婿崔宗绍，惟茂之弟惟木因自刭。
English: Later, Koryo's attendant, Hong Wenshie, and Shangshu Song Zongli killed Woemo and his son-in-law, Cui Zongsha, and Woemo's younger brother, Woemo, committed suicide.

古文：衍党裴仲孙等复集余众，立禃庶族承化侯为王，窜入珍岛。 
现代文：衍党裴仲孙等复集众立王礻直的庶族承化侯为王，逃到珍岛。 
English: Lin Yan's henchman Pei Zhongsun and others re-gathered the rest of the party, supported Wang Xizhi's clan to succeed Huo as king, and fled to Jindo Island.

古文：大军次王京西关城，遣人收系林衍妻子。
现代文：蒙古大军到王京西关城，派人逮捕了林衍的妻子。
English: The Mongolian army arrived at Wangjing West Guancheng and arrested Lin Yan's wife.

古文：行省与禃议迁江华岛居民于王京，仍宣诏抚绥之，禃弗从，至入居其旧京，始从行省之议。
现代文：行省与王礻直商议，拟将江华岛居民迁入王京，并加以抚慰，礻直不从。直到他已住入旧京，才同意行省的意见。
English: The province and Wang Xizhi discussed the idea of moving the residents of Jianghua Island into Wangjing and comforting them, but Wang Xizhi refused to comply. He did not agree to the province's opinion until he had already lived in the old Beijing.

古文：六月，禃遣人报有朝廷逃军与承化侯者以三别抄军叛。
现代文：六月，王礻直派人向世祖报告，说，有朝廷逃军勾结承化侯者以三别抄军反叛。
English: In June, Wang Xizhong sent a person to report to Shizu, saying that there were imperial court escapees who had colluded with the emperors to rebel with three non-military forces.

古文：世子愖复言： 叛兵据江华岛，宜率军水陆进击之。 
现代文：世子忄甚报告说： 叛军据江华岛，宜率水兵登陆进击。 
English: He Zi Xun reported: The rebel army has arrived at Jianghua Island, it is appropriate to lead the sailors to land and attack.

古文：禃复报叛兵悉遁去。世子愖言： 叛兵劫府库，烧图籍，逃入海中。 
现代文：又说 ：叛军劫府库，烧图籍，逃入海中。 
English: He also said that the rebels looted the government treasury, burned documents, and fled into the sea.

古文：行省使人觇江华岛中百姓皆空，岛之东南，相距约四十里，叛兵乘船候风，势欲遁。
现代文：行省派人前往侦察，只见江华岛上，百姓皆空。岛之东南，相距约五十里，叛兵乘船候风，看样子想逃走。
English: The governor sent someone to investigate, only to find the island empty of civilians. In the southeast of the island, about fifty miles away, the rebels were waiting for the wind in a boat, looking like they wanted to escape.

古文：于是即命乃颜率众追击之。
现代文：于是，立即命乃颜追击。
English: As a result, she immediately gave chase.

古文：七月，丞相安童等言，头辇哥等遣大托、忙古来言，令阿海领军一千五百，屯王京伺察其国中。
现代文：七月，丞相安童等言、头辇哥等派大托、忙古来建议，令阿海领兵一千五百，屯于王京，监视高丽。
English: In July, the prime minister, Andong, and other ministers, as well as the head of the Korean People's Army, sent a large delegation to Hegu to suggest that Ahai lead 1,500 soldiers to stay in Wangjing to monitor Korea.

古文：遂以阿海为安抚使。
现代文：于是，就任命阿海为安抚使。
English: As a result, Akai was appointed as a pacifying envoy.

古文：十一月，中书省臣言于高丽设置屯田经略司。以忻都、史枢为凤州等处经略使，佩虎符，领军五千屯田于金州；又令洪茶丘以旧领民二千屯田，阿剌帖木儿为副经略司，总辖之，而罢阿海军。
现代文：十一月，中书省臣僚建议，在高丽设屯田经略使，以忻都、史枢为凤州等处的经略使，佩虎符，领军五千屯在金州，又令洪茶丘依旧领民二千屯田。阿剌帖木儿为副经略使，总辖各地军民，解散阿海军。
English: In November, the ministers of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy proposed to set up a military attaché in Goryeo, a military attaché in places such as Pengzhou, with its capital and historical center, and a military attaché in Pegu, leading an army of five thousand military attachés in Jinzhou, and letting Hong Cha Kuo still have a population of two thousand military attachés. Ah Yat Mu'er was the deputy military attaché, with overall jurisdiction over the military and the people of various regions, and to disband the Afghan Navy.

古文：闰十一月，世子愖还。有诏谕禃以其陪臣元傅等妄奏头辇哥国王为头行省官员数事，及其国私与南宋、日本交通，又往年所言括兵造船至今未有成效，且谓自此以往或先有事南宋，或先有事日本，兵马、船舰、资粮，早宜措置。
现代文：闰十一月，朝廷诏告王礻直，指责其陪臣元傅等妄奏头辇哥国王为首的行省长官们的数件事及高丽私下和南宋、日本交往事；还指责高丽往年所说的征兵、造船的事而至今未有成效。告谕王礻直，无论是征讨南宋，还是征讨日本，都要及早准备兵马、船舰、资粮。
English: In late November, the imperial court issued an edict to Wang Xizhi, accusing Wang Xizhi's vassal Yuan Fu and other vassals of misleading the provincial governors led by the king, and accusing Goryeo of having private dealings with the Southern Song Dynasty and Japan. It also accused Goryeo of recruiting soldiers and building ships, which had not been effective in previous years. Wang Xizhi was told to prepare soldiers, horses, ships, and supplies as early as possible, whether it was to recruit the Southern Song Dynasty or to recruit Japan.

古文：是月，又诏禃曰： 向尝遣信使通问日本，不谓执迷固难以善言开谕，此卿所知。
现代文：此月，帝又诏谕王礻直： 以前曾派信使去日本通问，想不到日本执迷不误，很难以善言结好，这是你王礻直所深知的。
English: This month, the emperor also issued an edict to Wang Xizhi: In the past, he had sent a messenger to Japan to ask questions. He could not have imagined that Japan would be so obstinate, and it would be difficult to make amends with kind words. Wang Xizhi was well aware of this.

古文：将经略于彼，敕有司发卒屯田，为进取之计，庶免尔国他日转输之劳。
现代文：我们行将经略日本，望你下令有司发卒屯田，做进军的打算，以免你国他日劳于运输。
English: As we are about to leave for Japan, I hope you will order a division to leave Tonden and make plans to march, so that your country will not have to spend the rest of the day transporting goods.

古文：仍遣使持书，先示招怀。
现代文：现仍派使者持书信到日本，先示招抚之意。
English: Even now, envoys are sent to Japan with letters, as a sign of encouragement.

古文：卿其悉心尽虑，俾赞方略，期于有成，以称朕意。 
现代文：你应悉心考虑，以便有助于此方略，并能做出成效，以称朕意。 
English: You should consider carefully so that you can contribute to this strategy and be able to produce results, in my opinion.

古文：初，林衍之变，百姓惊扰，至是下诏抚慰之。
现代文：以前，林衍事变，百姓惊扰，至此，帝下诏抚慰。
English: In the past, Lin Yan's change of government had alarmed the people, but now the emperor has issued an edict to appease them.

古文：十二月，诏谕禃送使通好日本，曰： 朕惟日本自昔通好中国，实相密迩，故尝诏卿导达去使，讲信修睦，为其疆吏所梗，竟不获明谕朕心。
现代文：十二月，朝廷诏告王礻直送使通好日本。诏书说： 朕认为日本自昔通好中国，与高丽地域接近，故曾下诏令卿引导朝廷使臣去到日本，以讲信修睦。但为日本地方官所阻，致日本不明朕的心意。
English: In December, the imperial court issued an imperial edict telling Wang Jing to send an envoy directly to Japan. The imperial edict said: "I believe that Japan has always been friendly to China and is close to the Goryeo region. Therefore, I issued an imperial edict to guide the imperial envoys to Japan in order to mend fences. However, I was blocked by local Japanese officials, which made my intentions unclear to Japan."

古文：后以林衍之乱，故不暇及。
现代文：后来，因林衍之乱，无暇顾及此事。
English: Later, due to the Lin Yan Rebellion, there was no time to take care of this matter.

古文：今既辑宁尔家，遣少中大夫、秘书监赵良弼充国信使，期于必达。
现代文：现在，你们国家已经安宁，再遣少中大夫、秘书监赵良弼充国信使，希望一定能到达。
English: Now, your country has been pacified, and you have sent Junior Middle Doctor and Secretary Supervisor Zhao Liangyao to serve as a national messenger. I hope he will definitely arrive.

古文：仍以忽林赤、王国昌、洪茶丘将兵送抵海上。
现代文：你应仍以忽林赤、王国昌、洪茶丘带兵送到海上。
English: You should still send your soldiers to the sea with Ku Linhak, Guo Guochang and Hong Cha Kou.

古文：比国信使还，姑令金州等处屯驻。
现代文：为等国信使还，暂令屯驻金州等处。
English: As a messenger of other countries, he was temporarily stationed in Jinzhou and other places.

古文：所需粮饷，卿专委官赴彼，逐近供给，并鸠集金州旁左船舰，于金州需待，无致稽缓匮乏。 
现代文：所需粮饷，你应专门委官到那里去，就近供给。并搜集金州附近船舰，到金州待命。这样就不致拖延、匮缺。 
English: If you need grain, you should send a special envoy there and supply it nearby. And gather ships near Jinzhou and stand by in Jinzhou. In this way, there will be no delay or shortage.

古文：八年正月，禃遣其枢密使金炼奉表入见，请结婚。
现代文：八年正月，王礻直遣枢密使金钅柬奉表朝见世祖，请求结成婚姻关系。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, Wang Qian directly sent the envoy of the Privy Council, Jin Yongkang, to the emperor to meet the patriarch and ask for a marriage relationship.

古文：安抚使阿海略地珍岛，与逆党遇，多所亡失。
现代文：安抚使阿海占领珍岛与反王礻直者交战，损失很大。
English: The pacification caused Ahai to occupy Jindo Island and fight against the anti-Wang Xizhong, with great losses.

古文：中书省臣言谍知珍岛余粮将竭，宜乘弱攻之，诏不许。
现代文：中书省臣说，探知珍岛余粮将竭，宜乘弱进攻，帝不许。
English: The minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture said that the detection of surplus grain in Jindo will be exhausted, it is appropriate to take advantage of the weak attack, the emperor is not allowed.

古文：二月，命忽都答儿持诏谕裴仲孙。
现代文：二月，命忽都答儿持诏书告谕裴仲孙。
English: In February, he issued an imperial edict to Baizhongsun.

古文：三月，仲孙乞诸军退屯，然后内附，忻都未从其请，有诏谕之。
现代文：三月，仲孙乞求诸军退出屯田，然后归附。忻都未答应他的请求，帝有诏给仲孙。
English: In March, Nakasone begged the troops to withdraw from Tonden, and then to return to it. Shodo did not agree to his request, and the emperor issued an edict to Nakasone.

古文：四月，忻都言仲孙稽留诏使，负固不服，乞与虎林赤、王国昌分道进讨，从之。
现代文：四月，忻都说仲孙扣押朝廷使臣，坚守不屈，请与忽林赤、王国昌分路进剿，帝从之。
English: In April, Emperor Xizong said that Emperor Zhongsun had detained the imperial envoys, and that Emperor Zhongsun would not give in. Emperor Zhongsun asked Emperor Zhongsun to go into exile with Emperor Ku-lin and Emperor Guo-chang. Emperor Zhongsun agreed.

古文：以讨珍岛谕禃。
现代文：并将出兵珍岛事告诉王礻直。
English: He also told Wang Xizhi about the dispatch of troops to Jindo Island.

古文：五月，忻都与史枢、洪茶丘大败珍岛贼，获承化侯斩之，其党金通精走耽罗。
现代文：五月，忻都与史枢、洪茶丘打败珍岛的反王礻直势力，捕承化侯，后处死。承化侯同党金通精逃往耽罗。
English: In May, Xindu, together with Shizhu and Hong Chaqiu, defeated the anti-Wang Xizhi forces in Jindo, captured Chenghua Hou, and later executed him. Chenghua Hou and his party member Jintong Jing fled to Tanluo.

古文：七月，禃遣其上将军郑子玙奉表谢平珍岛。
现代文：七月，王礻直遣上将军郑子奉表入朝，对蒙军平服珍岛表示感激。
English: In July, Wang Xizhong sent General Zheng Zi to the DPRK, expressing his gratitude to the Mongolian army for their service to Jindo.

古文：世子愖率其尚书右丞宋玢、军器监薛公俭等衣冠胤胄二十八人入侍。
现代文：世子忄甚率尚书右丞宋玢、军器监薛公俭等贵族子弟二十八人入朝。
English: Twenty-eight sons and daughters of aristocrats, such as His Imperial Highness the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen, His Imperial Highness the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen, and His Imperial Highness the Right Reverend Xue Gongjian, entered the imperial court.

古文：八月，忽林赤赴镇边合浦县屯所。
现代文：八月，忽林赤赴镇边合浦县屯所。
English: In August, Ku Lin Chia went to the township of Bianhepu County.

古文：九月，禃遣其通事别将徐称导送宣抚赵良弼使日本。
现代文：九月，礻直遣通事别将徐翶导送宣抚使赵良弼使日本。
English: In September, Zhai sent a message directly to Zhao Liangyao, telling him not to send Xu Yao to Japan.

古文：帝遣愖还国。
现代文：帝送王忄甚回高丽。
English: The emperor sent Wang Ye back to Korea.

古文：十一月，禃遣其同知枢密院事李昌庆奉表谢许婚事。
现代文：十一月，王礻直遣同知枢密院事李昌庆奉表谢大元皇帝许联姻之事。
English: In November, Wang Zhi directly sent Li Changqing, a member of the Privy Council, to express his gratitude to the emperor for the marriage.

古文：九年正月，禃遣其别将白琚偕张铎等十二人奉表入见。
现代文：九年正月，礻直遣别将白琚偕张铎等十二人奉表来元朝。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, Zou Zhizhong sent twelve people, including Bai Xuan and Zhang Xuan, to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：世子愖以其国尚书右丞宋玢、玢父上将军宗礼讨林惟茂状，言其功于中书省。
现代文：高丽国尚书右丞相宋玢及宋玢之父上将军宗礼父子讨伐林惟茂有功，世子忄甚以状言于元中书省。
English: Song Jeong, the Minister of Education and Culture of Goryeo, and Song Jeong's father, the former General Jeong Ryong, have made great achievements in their father and son's campaign against logging, and their son Jeong even made an appeal to the Ministry of Education and Culture in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：遣郎中不花、马璘使高丽，谕以供战船输军粮事。
现代文：元帝遣郎中不花、马王使高丽，通知高丽要准备供战船和输军粮之事。
English: The former emperor did not send a messenger, but Ma Wang sent an envoy to Goryeo, informing Goryeo to prepare for the supply of warships and the delivery of military grain.

古文：二月，禃致书日本，使通好于朝。
现代文：二月王礻直致书日本，使与中国元朝通好。
English: In February, Wang Xizhong sent a letter to Japan to make peace with the Chinese Yuan Dynasty.

古文：六月，遣西京属城诸达鲁花赤及质子金镒等归国。
现代文：六月，遣西京属城诸达鲁花赤及高丽质子金镒等归高丽。
English: In June, the capital's subordinate cities, including Daruhana and Goryeo Proton, were returned to Goryeo.

古文：十年正月，禃遣其世子愖入朝。
现代文：十年正月，王礻直遣世子忄甚入朝。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, Wang Xizhong sent his son, Xizhi, to the imperial court.

古文：四月，经略使忻都同洪茶丘领兵入海，攻拔耽罗城，禽金通精等，奉诏诛之。
现代文：四月，经略使忻都同洪茶丘领兵由海道攻拔耽罗城，擒金通精等，奉诏处死。
English: In April, the warlord ordered Xindu and Hong Chaqiu to lead an army by sea to attack the city of Tanla, steal money, and so on, and they were sentenced to death.

古文：六月，禃遣其大将军金忻表奏攻破济州。
现代文：六月，王礻直遣大将军金忻上表朝廷，报告已攻破济州。
English: In June, Wang Pi directly dispatched General Jin Qi to report to the imperial court that he had broken through Jeju.

古文：九月，禃屡言： 小国地狭，比岁荒歉，其生券军乞驻东京。 
现代文：九月，礻直一再说 ：国小地狭，连年荒歉，请求将其生券军移驻东京。 
English: In September, Shizuna repeatedly said, "Kokucho is too small, I've been apologizing for years, and I'm asking for the transfer of my student army to Tokyo."

古文：诏令营北京界，仍敕东京路运米二万石赈之。
现代文：帝诏令扎营北京边界，仍令东京路运米二万石前往救济。
English: The emperor ordered the camp to be set up on the Beijing border, but Tokyo Road Transport still sent 20,000 koku of rice for relief.

古文：达鲁花赤焦天翼还朝。
现代文：达鲁花赤焦天翼回朝。
English: Daru flower red scorched sky wing back to the morning.

古文：十一年正月己卯朔，宫阙告成，帝始御正殿，受皇太子诸王百官朝贺。禃遣其少卿李义孙等入贺。
现代文：十一年正月己卯朔，宫殿落成，世祖始在正殿受皇太子及诸王百官朝拜，王礻直遣少卿李义孙入朝致贺。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year, the palace was completed, and the ancestors of the world began to be worshiped by the crown prince and hundreds of officials in the main hall. Wang Xizhong sent the young secretary Li Yisun to the imperial court to congratulate him.

古文：三月，遣木速塔八、撒本合持诏使高丽签军五千六百人助征日本。
现代文：三月，帝遣木速塔八、撒木合持诏书使高丽，征高丽丁壮五千六百人助攻日本。
English: In March, Emperor Junmu and Empress Sakaki jointly issued an imperial edict to dispatch 5,600 troops to Korea to assist in the invasion of Japan.

古文：五月，皇女忽都鲁揭里迷失下嫁于世子愖。
现代文：五月，皇女忽都鲁揭里迷失下嫁于高丽世子忄甚。
English: In May, the princess lost her way and married the heir to the throne of Goryeo.

古文：七月，其枢密院副使奇蕴奉表告王禃薨，命世子愖袭爵，诏谕高丽国王宗族及大小官员百姓人等，其略曰： 国王禃存日，屡言世子愖可为继嗣。今令愖袭爵为王。
现代文：七月，高丽枢密院副使奇蕴奉表报告：高丽国王王礻直已去世。帝命世子忄甚即位，并诏告高丽国王宗族及大小官员百姓人等 ：国王王礻直活着的时候，曾多次说世子忄甚可以继承王位，现在，令忄甚袭爵为王。
English: In July, the deputy envoy of the Koryo Privy Council, Kikyun, reported to the table that the Koryo King, Wang Jianzhong, had died. The emperor ordered the heir of the Koryo King, Jianzhong, to ascend to the throne, and announced to the Koryo King's clan, officials and ordinary people: When King Wang Jianzhong was alive, he had repeatedly said that the heir of the Koryo King, Jianzhong, could inherit the throne. Now, Jianzhong is the king.

古文：凡在所属，并听节制。 
现代文：凡高丽国人臣，都应听新王的节制。 
English: All Koryo courtiers should listen to the new king's restraint.

古文：八月，世子愖还至其国袭位。
现代文：八月，世子忄甚回国袭位。
English: In August, the heir presumptive returned to Japan to succeed to the throne.

古文：九月，遣其齐安侯王淑上表谢恩。
现代文：九月，王忄甚遣齐安侯王淑上表谢恩。
English: In September, Wang Xizhi sent a letter of thanks to Wang Shu, the lord of Qi'an.

古文：十一月，皇女入京城。
现代文：十一月，皇女入高丽京城。
English: In November, the princess entered the capital of Korea.

古文：愖复遣其判阁门事李信孙等奉表入谢。
现代文：忄甚又遣判门事李信孙等奉表入元谢恩。
English: In addition, Li Xinsun and others who were sentenced to house arrest received a letter of thanks.

古文：十二月，以黑的为高丽达鲁花赤，李益受代还。
现代文：十二月，以黑的为高丽达鲁花赤，李益受代还。
English: In December, the black one was the red of the Korean Dahlia, and Li Yi accepted it on his behalf.

古文：十二年七月，黑的还朝。
现代文：十二年七月，黑的还朝。
English: In July of the twelfth year, the black morning came.

古文：十一月，遣使谕愖改官职名号，愖遣其带方侯王澄率衣冠子弟二十人入侍。
现代文：十一月，帝遣使告谕高丽王忄甚改变官职名号。忄甚遣带方侯王贗率贵族子弟二十人入侍。
English: In November, the emperor sent an envoy to tell the Goryeo king Gojun to change his official title. Gojun brought the prince Gojun and twenty aristocrats to serve as attendants.

古文：以石抹天衢充副达鲁花赤。
现代文：朝廷以石抹天衢为副达鲁花赤。
English: The imperial court used stone-plastered celadon as a substitute for the red of the dahlia.

古文：十三年七月，愖遣其佥议中赞金方庆奉表贺平宋。
现代文：十三年七月，高丽王忄甚遣其佥议中赞金方庆奉表祝贺平宋。
English: In July 13th, the King of Goryeo sent a congratulatory letter to the Ping Song Dynasty.

古文：十一月，愖遣其判秘书寺事朱悦奉表，奏改名賰。
现代文：十一月，忄甚遣判秘书寺事朱悦奉表，奏改名为贝春。
English: In November, he sent his secretary for temple affairs, Zhu Yue, to serve as a judge, and changed his name to Beichun.

古文：十四年正月，金方庆等为乱，命愖治之，仍命忻都、洪茶丘饬兵御备。
现代文：十四年正月，金方庆等为乱，命忄甚治之，并命忻都、洪茶丘整兵防御。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, Jin Fangqing and others were in turmoil, and it was ordered to suppress them, and it was also ordered to defend the capital and Hongcha Hill.

古文：十五年一月，賰以达鲁花赤石抹天衢秩满未代，请复留三年，从之。
现代文：十五年一月，王贝春以达鲁花赤石抹天衢任期已满，请复留任三年，帝从之。
English: In January of the fifteenth year, Wang Bechun sent a letter to the emperor, saying, "Your term of office has expired. Please stay in office for another three years. The emperor agrees."

古文：东征元帅府上言： 以高丽侍中金方庆与其子忄受、愃、恂，婿赵卞等，阴养死士四百人，匿铠仗器械，造战舰，积粮饷，欲谋作乱，捕方庆等按验得实，已流诸海岛。
现代文：东征元帅府上书说 ：以高丽侍中金方庆与其子金方忄受、忄宣、恂、还有婿赵扌卞等，暗中收养亡命之徒四百人，藏匿铠仗器械，造战舰，积粮饷，阴谋作乱。后来抓了金方庆，经审查，知其真相，已流放于诸海岛。
English: A letter from the Eastern Expeditionary Field Marshal's Office said: Kim Fang Ching, who served as an aide-de-camp of Goryeo, together with his sons Kim Fang Jie, Kim Chun, Kim Jong Il, and his son-in-law Cho Yong, secretly adopted 400 exiles, hid war equipment, built warships, hoarded grain, and plotted to create turmoil. Later, Kim Fang Ching was arrested, and after examination, knowing the truth, he was exiled to Zhuhai Island.

古文：然高丽初附，民心未安，可发征日本还卒二千七百人，置长吏，屯忠清、全罗诸处，镇抚外夷，以安其民；复令士卒备牛畜耒耜，为来岁屯田之计。 
现代文：然高丽初附，民心未定，可将从征日本回来的士卒二千七百人，置长吏，在忠清、全罗诸处屯驻，一方面镇抚外夷，以安民心；一方面令备牛畜来耕，为来年屯田打算。 
English: However, at the time of the first annexation of Korea, the people's minds were still undecided. Therefore, 2,700 soldiers who had returned from the Japanese Conquest could be stationed in various places in Chungcheong and Jeolla. On the one hand, they were sent to subdue the barbarians in order to pacify the people's minds; on the other hand, they were ordered to prepare cattle and other animals for ploughing in order to prepare the fields for the next year.

古文：七月，改铸驸马高丽王印赐賰。
现代文：七月，改铸驸马高丽王印赐与王贝春。
English: In July, the role of Wang Ying Zi and Wang Bei Chun was recast.

古文：十六年正月，敕其国置大灰艾州、东京、柳石、孛落四驿。
现代文：十六年正月，令高丽国置大灰艾州、东京、柳石、孛落四个驿站。
English: On the first day of the 16th year of the lunar calendar, Goryeo established four major trading posts in Gyeongju, Tokyo, Ryukyu, and Gyeonggi.

古文：十七年五月，賰以民饥，乞贷粮万石，从之。
现代文：十七年五月，高丽发生饥荒，王贝春乞贷粮万石，世祖应允。
English: In May 17th, a famine occurred in Korea. Wang Bechun begged for a loan of grain, and the patriarch agreed.

古文：七月，以其国初置驿站，民乏食，命给粮一岁，仍禁使臣往来勿求索饮食。
现代文：七月，因高丽初置驿站，百姓缺吃，帝令给粮一年，并禁使臣往来求索饮食。
English: In July, when Goryeo first set up a trading post, the people were short of food, so the emperor gave them grain for a year and forbade the envoys to come and go in search of food.

古文：十月，加賰开府仪同三司、中书左丞相、行中书省事。
现代文：十月，加高丽王贝春为开府仪同三司、中书左丞相、行中书省事。
English: In October, King Baechun of Gaoli was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, the third secretary of the Central Secretariat of the CPC, and the third secretary of the Central Secretariat of the CPC.

古文：十八年二月，賰言本国必阇赤不谙行移文字，请除郎中员外各一员以为参佐。
现代文：十八年二月，高丽王贝春奏称，本国必赤不熟悉翻译文字，请授郎中、员外各一名以为参佐。
English: In February 18th, King Baechun of Goryeo said that his country was not familiar with the translation of the text, and asked that one member of the family and one member from outside the family be considered as a senator.

古文：賰又请易宣命职衔，增驸马字，从之。
现代文：贝春又请求改变职衔，增 驸马 字样，帝从之。
English: Beichun also requested to change the title of the post and add the word "Horse" to it, and the emperor agreed.

古文：六月，賰言本国置驿四十，民畜凋弊。敕并为二十站，仍给马价八百锭。
现代文：六月，贝春又奏，高丽设置四十驿，民畜都已凋疲，请下命并为二十站，再给马价八百锭。
English: In June, Baichun played again, Goryeo set up forty stations, the people and animals were exhausted, please order and make twenty stations, and then give the horse price eight hundred baht.

古文：八月，升其佥议府为从三品。
现代文：八月，提升高丽的佥议府的级别为从三品。
English: In August, Koryo was promoted to the third grade of the House of Councillors.

古文：十一月，金州等处置镇边万户府，以控制日本。
现代文：十一月，在金州等处设置镇边万户府，以控制日本。
English: In November, townships were set up in Jinzhou and other places to control Japan.

古文：十九年正月，賰以日本寇其边海郡邑，烧居室掠子女而去，请发阇里帖木儿麾下蒙古军五百人戍金州，又从之。
现代文：十九年正月，贝春以倭寇骚扰沿海郡邑，动辄房屋被烧，子女被掳掠。请调动里帖木儿麾下蒙古兵五百人戍守金州，帝允准。
English: In the first month of the 19th year, Beichun harassed the coastal counties with wako, houses were burned, and children were abducted. Please mobilize five hundred Mongolian soldiers under the command of Ritemur to defend Jinzhou. The emperor consented.

古文：二十年五月，立征东行中书省，以高丽国王与阿塔海共事。
现代文：二十年五月，成立征东行中书省，以高丽国王贝春及阿塔海共主其事。
English: In May of the 20th year, the Ministry of Calligraphy of the Expedition to the East was established, with King Baechun of Korea and Atahai as co-chairmen.

古文：二十八年五月，以賰子謜为世子，授特进、上柱国，赐银印。
现代文：二十八年五月，以贝春子讠原为世子，授特进、上柱国，赐银印。
English: In May of the 28th year, with Beichun Zi Yingyuan as the heir, he was given special advancement, Shangzhuan country, and silver seal.

古文：十月，以其国饥，给以米二十万斛。
现代文：十月，高丽国闹饥荒，朝廷给米二十万斛。
English: In October, famine broke out in Korea, and the imperial court gave 200,000 baht worth of rice.

古文：三十年二月，賰遣使入奏，复更名昛，及乞功臣号。
现代文：三十年二月，贝春遣使奏请改名为日巨，还要求元朝赐以功臣号。
English: In February of the thirtieth year, Bei Chun sent an envoy to Cangzhou to ask it to change its name to Nichijo, and also asked the Yuan Dynasty to grant it the title of meritorious subject.

古文：制曰： 特进、上柱国、开府仪同三司、征东行中书省左丞相、驸马高丽王昛，世守王爵，选尚我家。载旌藩屏之功，宜示褒嘉之宠。
现代文：帝诏令说 ：特进、上柱国、开府仪同三司、征东行中书省左丞相、驸马王日巨，世守王爵，选为我皇家驸马，有东面屏障之功，宜给予褒嘉。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "Special advance, Shangzhu Province, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Campaign to the East, Minister of the Left of the Ministry of Education, King Nichijo of the Horse Guards, and the world's guardian prince, have been selected as my royal horse guards. They have contributed to the eastern barrier, and it is appropriate to give them commendations."

古文：可赐号推忠宣力定远功臣，余如故。
现代文：可赐号推忠宣力定远功臣，其余官职照旧。
English: He was awarded the title of "Promoter of Loyalty, Promoter of Determination, and Distinguished Meritorious Servant," and his other official posts remained unchanged.

古文：益懋厥勋，对扬休命。 
现代文：今后，应更加多立功勋，发扬美德。 
English: In the future, we should do more meritorious deeds and promote virtue.

古文：十一月，昛入朝。
现代文：十一月，日巨入朝拜谢。
English: In November, the sun rises in the morning.

古文：成宗元贞二年七月，升其佥议司为二品。
现代文：成宗元贞二年，升高丽佥议司为二品。
English: In the second year of Chengzong Yuanzhen, she was elevated to the second grade.

古文：大德元年十一月，封昛为逸寿王，以世子謜为高丽王，从所请也。
现代文：大德元年十一月，应高丽的请求，封高丽王日巨为逸寿王，以世子讠原为高丽王。
English: In November of the first year of the Taejo era, at the request of Goryeo, King Nichijo of Goryeo was named King Yitsujo, and his son, Seongwon, was named King of Goryeo.

古文：二年七月，中书省臣奏謜有罪当废，复以其父昛为王。
现代文：二年七月，中书省臣奏高丽王讠原有罪当废，又以其父日巨为王。
English: In July of the second year, the vassal of the Ministry of Literature of the People's Republic of China, King Goryeo, was found guilty and dethroned, and his father, King Nichigyo, became king.

古文：三年正月，昛遣使入贡。
现代文：三年正月，王日巨遣使入贡。
English: In the first month of the third year, the king sent a huge amount of tribute.

古文：丞相完泽等言： 世祖时，或言高丽僣设省、院、台，有旨罢之，其国遂改立佥议府、密直司、监察司。
现代文：丞相完泽等说 ：世祖时，有人报告说，高丽私自设立省、院、台，朝廷便下令撤消这些机构。高丽便改为佥议府、密直司、监察司。
English: "At the time of the founder of the Korean nation, it was reported that when Goryeo established its own provinces, In, and Tae, the imperial court ordered the abolition of these institutions. Goryeo then changed them into the House of Councillors, the Office of the Privy Council, and the Office of the Supervisor.

古文：今謜加其臣赵仁规司徒、司空、侍中之职。
现代文：今王讠原加封其臣赵仁规为司徒、司空、侍中等职。
English: The present King Min Yuan appointed his vassal, Zhao Rengui, to the posts of tutor, tutor, and attendant.

古文：又昛给仁规赦九死奖谕文书。
现代文：王日巨还给仁规赦其九死的文书。
English: Wang Rijiao returned the document that pardoned him for his nine deaths.

古文：又擅写皇朝帝系，及自造历，加其女为令妃。
现代文：又擅自写皇朝帝系及自造历书，加封其女为令妃。
English: He also wrote the imperial line of the imperial dynasty and a self-made calendar book without authorization, adding his daughter as the princess.

古文：又立资政院，以崔冲绍为兴禄大夫。
现代文：又立资政院，以崔冲绍为兴禄大夫。
English: It also set up the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, with Cui Chongshao as the doctor of Xinglu.

古文：又尝奉太后旨，公主与謜两位下怯薛合并为一。謜不奉旨。
现代文：太后曾旨令公主与讠原两位下怯薛合并为一，而讠原不奉旨。
English: The empress dowager had ordered that the princess and the two subordinates of Shibahara be merged into one, but Shibahara did not follow the order.

古文：謜又擅杀千户金吕而以其金符给宦者术合儿。
现代文：讠原又擅杀千户金吕而以金吕的金符赐给宦官合儿。
English: Suhara also arbitrarily killed a thousand households of Jinlu and gave the eunuchs to the eunuchs with the golden charm of Jinlu.

古文：又仁规进女侍謜，有巫蛊事。
现代文：又仁规将女送进宫侍候王讠原，常搞巫蛊之事。
English: In addition, Jinbi sent a woman to the palace to wait for Wang Qianyuan, and often engaged in witchcraft.

古文：今乞将仁规、冲绍发付京兆、巩昌两路安置，不得他适。
现代文：今请将仁规、冲绍发配到京兆、巩昌两路安置，不得迁往他处。
English: Now, please send Ren Gui and Chong Shao to resettle in Jingzhao and Gongchang, and they are not allowed to move to other places.

古文：昛行事不法，謜年少妄杀无辜，乞降诏戒饬。 
现代文：王日巨行事不遵法度，王讠原年少妄杀无辜，请下诏书警告。 
English: Wang Rijiao did not follow the law, and Wang Xuan was too young to kill innocent people. Please issue an edict to warn him.

古文：帝命杖仁规、冲绍而遣之。
现代文：成宗乃下令将仁规、冲绍施杖刑后赶出京城，在外地安置。
English: Chengzong ordered to expel Renbi and Chongsha from the capital and resettle them in other places.

古文：二月，诏谕昛并阖境臣民： 自今以始，勉遵守国之规，益谨畏天之戒。
现代文：二月，帝又诏告王日巨及全高丽臣民： 自今日始，国王要勉力遵从国家固有法规，要更加谨慎。
English: In February, the emperor also issued an edict to King Nichijo and all Korean subjects: From today onwards, the king should strive to comply with the country's inherent laws and regulations, and should be more cautious.

古文：凡在官者，各勤乃事，协力匡赞，毋蹈前非，自干刑宪。
现代文：凡在官职的人，要各勤其事，协力辅助国王，不要再蹈仁规等人的前非，自触刑律。
English: All those who are in official positions should be diligent in their duties, work together to assist the king, and no longer follow the rules of benevolence and others, and touch the law of punishment.

古文：缁黄士庶，各安其业。 
现代文：至于僧俗士庶，要各安其业。 
English: As for monks, laymen and laywomen, they should all do well in their careers.

古文：五月，哈散使高丽还，言昛不能服其众，朝廷宜遣官共理之。
现代文：五月，哈散使高丽，回朝奏称王日巨没有威望，不能服众，朝廷应派遣官员去高丽与日巨共同治理。
English: In May, Hasan sent Koryo to report back to the Imperial Court that King Nichijo had no prestige and could not serve the public, and that the Imperial Court should send officials to Koryo to govern jointly with Nichijo.

古文：遂复立征东行省，命阔里吉思为高丽行省平章政事。
现代文：于是，又恢复征东行省，任命阔里吉思为高丽行省平章政事。
English: As a result, the Eastern Expedition was resumed, and Kuo Li Jisi was appointed as the Governor of Goryeo.

古文：九月，昛遣使入贡，以朝廷增置行省，上表陈情，其略言： 累世有勤王之功，凡八十余年，岁修职贡。
现代文：九月，王日巨遣使入贡。因朝廷在高丽增置行省而上表自白 ：臣世代对元朝有勤王之功，八十多年来年年交纳赋税、贡物。
English: In September, King Nichigo sent an envoy to pay tribute. Because the imperial court had increased the number of provinces in Goryeo, a confession was made: the vassal generation had served the Yuan Dynasty diligently, and had paid taxes and tributes for more than eighty years.

古文：尝以世子入侍，得联婚帝室，遂为甥舅，实感至恩。
现代文：曾以世子入侍，得与帝室联姻，遂成甥舅，实感至恩。
English: He once served as a courtier with the title of heir apparent, and was able to marry into the imperial family, thus becoming a nephew. I am truly grateful for this.

古文：使小国不替祖风，永修侯职，是所望也。 
现代文：如能使小国保持祖先传统，永远尽一个小国应尽之责，这就是臣的愿望。 
English: If a small country can maintain the ancestral tradition and always fulfill the responsibilities of a small country, this is the minister's wish.

古文：四年二月，征东行省平章阔里吉思言： 高丽国王自署官府三百五十八所，官四千五十五员，衣食皆取之民，复苛征之。
现代文：四年二月，征东行省平章阔里吉思奏称 ：高丽国王自己部署官府三百五十八所，官员四千零五十五人，衣食皆取于民，又苛征于民。
English: In February of the fourth year, the governor of the province of the eastward expedition, Pingzhang Kuo Lijis, said in a report: King Goryeo himself deployed 358 government offices and 4055 officials, all of which took food and clothing from the people, and also severely levied on the people.

古文：又其大会，王曲盖、龙扆、警跸，诸臣舞蹈山呼，一如朝仪，僣拟过甚。 
现代文：在开大会时，国王身后，有华盖，绘龙屏风。国王经过的道路严加戒备，断绝行人。诸臣一见国王，都要舞蹈呼万岁，一如向帝王朝拜的仪式，违反臣属国应有的制度。 
English: At the opening of the meeting, behind the king, there is a flower cover, a screen painted with dragons. The road through which the king passes is strictly guarded, cutting off pedestrians. Upon seeing the king, all the courtiers must dance and shout "long live the king," just like the ritual of worshiping the imperial dynasty, violating the system that a vassal state should have.

古文：遣山东宣尉使塔察儿、刑部尚书王泰亨赍诏谕之，使厘正以闻。
现代文：帝遣山东宣慰使塔察儿、刑部尚书王泰亨持诏书去告谕高丽并要他们改正。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Shandong Xuancheng to have Tacharo and the Minister of Justice, Shoshu Wang Taiheng, go to Goryeo with an imperial edict to tell them to make amends.

古文：三月，阔里吉思复上言： 佥议司官不肯供报民户版籍、州县疆界。
现代文：三月，阔里吉思又向皇帝报告： 高丽国的佥议司官员，不肯向元朝提供民户籍册和州县疆界。
English: In March, Kuo Li Jisi also reported to the emperor: The officials of the Koryo State's Bureau of Deliberation refused to provide the people's household register and the state and county borders to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：本国横科暴敛，民少官多，刑罚不一，若止依本俗行事，实难抚治。 
现代文：他们在本国横征暴敛，民少官多，刑罚不一。我们若只能按该国原来俗例行事，实难抚治。 
English: In their own country, they have rampant embezzlement, few people, many officials, and different punishments. If we can only act according to the original customs of the country, it is really difficult to govern.

古文：五年二月，为昛罢行省官，有诏谕昛。
现代文：五年二月，因王的请求，撤销行省官，诏告王。
English: In February of the fifth year, at the request of the king, the provincial officials were revoked and the king was told.

古文：秋七月，昛上表言： 昔居海岛时，尝用山呼，后改呼千秋。
现代文：秋七月，上表说 ：昔居海岛时，曾用山呼万岁，后改呼千秋。
English: In the autumn and July, the table above says: In the past, when I lived on the island, I used to call the mountains "long live," but later I changed it to "long live the autumn."

古文：今既奉明诏，一切皆罢。
现代文：今既奉明诏，一切朝仪都不举行。
English: Now that the edict has been issued, all morning ceremonies will not be held.

古文：又革官府九十余所，汰官吏二百七十余员。
现代文：又革除官府九十余所，淘汰多余官吏二百七十余人。
English: In addition, more than 90 government offices were purged, and more than 270 redundant officials were eliminated.

古文：他如杂徭病民、驿骑烦扰驿传者，亦皆省之。 
现代文：其他如使百姓困苦的杂役、动用驿站专用车马影响驿传的事，亦皆省去。 
English: Other things, such as the fact that the people were made to suffer because of the lack of servants, and the use of special carriages and horses for the post office, which affected the transmission of the gospel, were also omitted.

古文：诏曰： 卿其谕朕意，所言当始终行之，或有不然，宁不羞惧？ 
现代文：帝诏告说 ：你深知朕意，所说到的，应始终实行。或有不然，岂不使人感到羞惧！ 
English: The emperor said, "You know very well what I mean. What I have said should always be carried out. Whether it is or is not, it will not make people feel ashamed!"

古文：昛自大德二年复位，八年而薨。子謜复袭王位。
现代文：自大德二年复位，八年后死，子王讠原再次继承王位。
English: Zi Daede was restored to the throne two years later, and eight years after his death, his son, Wang Xuan Yuan, once again succeeded to the throne.

古文：成宗初年，尚宝塔实怜公主。
现代文：成宗初年，讠原娶宝塔实怜公主。
English: In the first year of his reign, Shihara married the princess of the pagoda, Shirei.

古文：十一年，进爵沈阳王，继袭位高丽国王，生子焘。
现代文：大德十一年进爵为沈阳王，继续承袭高丽王位。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Daede was ennobled as the King of Shenyang and continued to inherit the throne of Korea.

古文：焘受逊位，以仁宗皇庆二年四月封高丽国王。
现代文：讠原生子焘，讠原退位传与其子焘。仁宗皇庆二年四月，封焘为高丽国王。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Nijong's reign, he was crowned King of Goryeo.

古文：是年，其弟暠立为世子，以其父沈阳王请于朝故也。
现代文：此年，焘弟日高立为世子，这是应其父沈阳王的要求。
English: In the same year, his younger brother, Hidaka, became heir to the throne, at the request of his father, the King of Shenyang.

古文：自皞传其子禃，禃传其子昛，昛传其子謜，謜传其子焘，焘传其弟暠。
现代文：自王传其子礻直、礻直传其子、传其子讠原、讠原传其子焘、焘传其弟日高。
English: From Wang, it was passed down to his son Jianzhong, from Jianzhong to his son, from Jianzhong to his son Xuan Yuan, from Xuan Yuan to his son Yao, and from Jianzhong to his brother Hidaka.

古文：世祖既臣服高丽，以耽罗为南宋、日本冲要，亦注意焉。
现代文：礻直初名亻典，初名忄甚，又名贝春，后乃名。讠原则更名为璋。耽罗，高丽之邻国。世祖征服高丽后，因耽罗是去南宋、日本的要冲，也加以注意。
English: 直, originally named 典, first name 甚, also known as 貝春, later 乃名. 原則 was renamed. 丹羅, a neighbor of Goryeo. After the ancestors conquered Goryeo, they also paid attention to, because 羅 was an important place to go to in the Southern Song Dynasty and Japan.

古文：至元六年七月，遣明威将军都统领脱脱儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰往视耽罗等处道路，诏高丽国王王禃选官导送。
现代文：至元六年七月，遣明威将军都统领脱脱儿、武德将军统领王国昌、武略将军副统领刘杰视察通往耽罗等处的道路，诏告高丽国王派官引导护送。
English: In July of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, General Mingwei Du, General Wu De, General Wang Guochang, and Vice-Commander Liu Jie of General Wu Liang inspected the roads leading to Thang Lo and other places, and ordered the King of Goryeo to send officers to escort them.

古文：时高丽叛贼林衍者，有余党金通精遁入耽罗。
现代文：这时，高丽反元势力林衍的余党金通精逃至耽罗。
English: At this time, the remnants of the Koryo anti-Yuan forces led by Lin Yan fled to Tanra.

古文：九年，中书省臣及枢密院臣议曰： 若先有事日本，未见其逆顺之情。
现代文：九年中书省臣及枢密院臣议论说： 若先打日本，因不知日本对元朝是顺是逆，恐会留下话柄。
English: In the middle of the ninth year, the Minister of Letters and the Privy Councillor argued, "If we attack Japan first, because we don't know whether Japan is favorable or unfavorable to the Yuan Dynasty, we may leave a stumbling block.

古文：恐有后辞，可先平耽罗，然后观日本后否，徐议其事。
现代文：不如先征服耽罗，然后观察日本对我朝是否顺从，从长计议。
English: It would be better to conquer Tamro first, and then observe whether Japan is obedient to the DPRK, and make a long-term plan.

古文：且耽罗国王尝来朝觐，今叛贼逐其主，据其城以乱，举兵讨之，义所先也。 
现代文：且耽罗曾来朝拜，今其国内的反叛者赶走了国王，据城作乱，我元朝举兵讨逆，也是义不容辞的事。 
English: Moreover, Thang Lo once came to pay homage to the emperor, but now the rebels in his country have driven out the king and are wreaking havoc in the city, and it is imperative for the Yuan Dynasty to raise an army to fight back.

古文：十年正月，命经略使忻都、史枢及洪茶丘等率捕船大小百有八艘，讨耽罗贼党。
现代文：十年正月，命经略使忻都、史枢及洪茶丘等率兵船大小百有八艘，讨伐耽罗的叛逆。
English: In the first month of the 10th year, the imperial edict ordered Xindu, Shizhu and Hongchaoka to lead a hundred and eight warships to fight against the rebellion of Tanluo.

古文：六月，平之，于其地立耽罗国招讨司，屯镇边军千七百人。
现代文：六月，征服耽罗，于其地立耽罗国招讨司，屯驻镇边军一千七百人。
English: In June, he conquered Tanro, set up the Tanro State Recruiting and Deploying Division, and stationed 1,700 border troops in the town.

古文：其贡赋岁进毛施布百匹。
现代文：其贡赋岁进毛施布百匹。
English: Its tribute to the Year of the Goat is 100 pieces of wool and cloth.

古文：招讨司后改为军民都达鲁花赤总管府，又改为军民安抚司。
现代文：后来，招讨司改为军民都达鲁花赤总管府，又改为军民安抚司。
English: Later, the Invitation Division was changed to the Military and Civil Affairs Headquarters of the Red Army, and then to the Military and Civilian Pacification Division.

古文：三十一年，高丽王上言，耽罗之地，自祖宗以来臣属其国；林衍逆党既平之后，尹邦宝充招讨副使，以计求径隶朝廷，乞仍旧。
现代文：三十一年，高丽王上书言： 耽罗之地，自祖宗以来，是高丽属国，林衍之乱既平，尹邦宝充招讨副使，以计求直属朝廷，但高丽仍希望照旧归属高丽。 
English: In the 31st year of King Goryeo's reign, he wrote: "The land of Thanglo has belonged to Goryeo since the time of our ancestors. The Lin-yan War has been settled, and Yim Bang Pao-chong has invited a vice-envoy with the intention of directly belonging to the imperial court. However, Goryeo still hopes to belong to Goryeo as before.

古文：帝曰： 此小事，可使还属高丽。 
现代文：帝说： 这是小事，可使归属高丽。 
English: The emperor said, "This is a small matter, but it can be attributed to Goryeo.

古文：自是遂复隶高丽。
现代文：自此后，耽罗便再次隶属于高丽了。
English: Since then, Tamro has once again been affiliated with Goryeo.

古文：日本日本国在东海之东，古称倭奴国，或云恶其旧名，故改名日本，以其国近日所出也。
现代文：日本国在东海之东，古称倭奴国。有人说，因讨厌旧名，又因该国靠近日出之处，便改名为日本国。
English: The country of Japan is located east of the East Sea, and was formerly known as Wano. Some say that it changed its name to Japan because it disliked the old name and because the country is close to the sunrise.

古文：其土疆所至与国王世系及物产风俗，见《宋史》本传。
现代文：日本国疆土所至与国王世系乃至物产风俗，见《宋史》之《日本传》。
English: For the history of Japan, including the history of Japan's territory, the history of its soil, the history of its kings, and even the history of its products and customs, see "History of Japan" in "Song History."

古文：日本为国，去中土殊远，又隔大海，自后汉历魏、晋、宋、隋皆来贡。
现代文：日本国去中国很远，又隔大海，自后汉历魏、晋、宋、隋皆来朝贡。
English: Japan was far away from China and across the sea, and since the Han Dynasty, Wei, Jin, Song, and Sui all came to pay tribute.

古文：唐永徽、显庆、长安、开元、天宝、上元、贞元、元和、开成中，并遣使入朝。
现代文：唐代永徽、显庆、长安、开元、天宝、上元、贞元、元和、开成各代都曾遣使入朝。
English: The Yonghui, Xianqing, Chang'an, Kaiyuan, Tianbao, Shangyuan, Zhenyuan, Yuanhe and Kaicheng dynasties of the Tang Dynasty sent envoys to the imperial court.

古文：宋雍熙元年，日本僧暐然与其徒五六人浮海而至，奉职贡，并献铜器十余事。暐然善隶书，不通华言。
现代文：宋雍熙元年，日本僧大周然与其徒五、六人浮海而至，奉赋纳贡，并献铜器十余件，大周然会写隶书，但不懂华语，询问他故乡的情况，只能用笔写字回答。
English: In the first year of Song and Yonghei, the Japanese monk Dai Zhou Ran and his five or six followers floated to the sea, paid tribute, and donated more than ten pieces of bronze ware. Dai Zhou Ran could write letters, but he did not know Chinese. When asked about the situation in his hometown, he could only write with a pen.

古文：问其风土，但书以对，云其国中有五经书及佛经、《白居易集》七十卷。
现代文：说他的国家内也有五经书及佛经，还有《白居易集》七十卷。
English: He said that his country also has the Five Classics and Buddhist scriptures, as well as 70 volumes of the Bai Juyi Collection.

古文：暐然还后，以国人来者曰滕木吉，以僧来者曰寂照。
现代文：大周然回国后，又有以百姓身份来的人叫滕木吉，以和尚身份来的人叫寂照。
English: After Da Zhou Ran returned to China, there were people who came as commoners called Teng Muji, and people who came as monks called Shazhao.

古文：寂照识文字，缮写甚妙。
现代文：寂照通文墨，写一手好字。
English: He is good at writing, and his handwriting is good.

古文：至熙宁以后，连贡方物，其来者皆僧也。
现代文：至熙宁以后，连年贡纳方物，来的人皆是和尚。
English: After the arrival of Xi'ning, people who came were all monks.

古文：元世祖之至元二年，以高丽人赵彝等言日本国可通，择可奉使者。
现代文：世祖至元二年，因高丽人赵彝等说可通日本国，便开始挑选可担任使者的人。
English: In the 2nd year of the 1st century BC, because the Korean Zhao Ye and others said that they could pass through Japan, they began to select people who could serve as emissaries.

古文：三年八月，命兵部侍郎黑的，给虎符，充国信使，礼部侍郎殷弘给金符，充国信副使，持国书使日本。
现代文：三年八月，命兵部侍郎黑的，给虎符，使任国信使，礼部侍郎殷弘给金符，使任国信副使，持国书赴日。
English: In August of the third year, he ordered the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Kuro, to give a tiger token, to be appointed as the messenger of the country, and the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Yasuhiro, to give a gold token, to be appointed as the deputy messenger of the country, and to go to Japan with the national letter.

古文：书曰：
现代文：国书说：
English: The letter reads:

古文：大蒙古国皇帝奉书日本国王：朕惟自古小国之君，境土相接，尚务讲信修睦。
现代文： 大蒙古国皇帝奉书日本国王。朕认为，自古小国之君，领土相接，尚且讲信修睦，况我祖宗，上受天命，拥有中国。
English: The Emperor of Great Mongolia is the King of Japan. I believe that since ancient times, kings of small countries, whose territories are contiguous, have been faithful to each other. Moreover, my ancestors, by God's command, owned China.

古文：况我祖宗，受天明命，奄有区夏，遐方异域，畏威怀德者，不可悉数。
现代文：在远方异域的人，对我畏威怀德者，不可胜数。
English: I can't count the number of people in faraway, foreign lands who are intimidated by me.

古文：计王之君臣亦已知之。高丽，朕之东藩也。
现代文：朕自即位之初，因同情高丽无辜之民久经战乱，故令我将士停止征讨，归还高丽的疆域，退回他们的仪仗。
English: From the beginning of my accession to the throne, out of sympathy for the innocent people of Korea who have suffered from the war, I ordered my soldiers to stop the requisition, return the territory of Korea, and return to their honorable war.

古文：日本密迩高丽，开国以来，亦时通中国，至于朕躬，而无一乘之使以通和好。
现代文：高丽君臣感德来朝，名义上虽是君臣，感情上却若父子。我想你们君臣大概也已经知道了。高丽为中国之东藩，日本紧靠高丽，不时和中国有信使往来。但到朕即位以来，竟无一使乘船来朝廷通好。
English: Goryeo lords and vassals feel virtuous when they come to the DPRK. Although they are lords and vassals in name, they are like father and son in feeling. I think you lords and vassals probably already know this. Goryeo is an eastern province of China, and Japan is close to Goryeo. From time to time, messengers come and go between Korea and China. However, since I came to the throne, no one has come to the imperial court by ship to make amends.

古文：尚恐王国知之未审，故特遣使持书，布告朕志，冀自今以往，通问结好，以相亲睦。
现代文：可能是国王还未深知，故特遣使持书，说明朕的意向，希望自今以后，友好往来，相亲相睦。
English: It may be that the king was not yet fully aware of this, so he sent a special envoy with a letter to explain his intentions, hoping that from now on, there would be friendly exchanges and mutual amity.

古文：且圣人以四海为家，不相通好，岂一家之理哉。
现代文：圣人以四海为家，不相通好，哪能算是一家呢？
English: The saints call the four seas their home, but they do not communicate well with each other. How can they be considered a family?

古文：以至用兵，夫孰所好，王其图之。
现代文：至于用兵，还不知是谁所好，请国王斟酌。 
English: As for using soldiers to fight, who is happy about that? Let the king figure it out!

古文：黑的等道由高丽，高丽国王王禃以帝命遣其枢密院副使宋君斐、借礼部侍郎金赞等导诏使黑的等往日本，不至而还。
现代文：黑的等道经高丽，高丽国王王礻直因受世祖之命，派其枢密院副使宋君斐、借礼部侍郎金赞等引导护送黑的等赴日本。
English: The Black Prince's route passed through Korea, and the King of Korea, Wang Jianzhong, was ordered by his ancestor to send his vice-envoy to the Privy Council, Song Junfei, and the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Jin Zan, to guide and escort the Black Prince to Japan.

古文：四年六月，帝谓王禃以辞为解，令去使徒还，复遣黑的等至高丽谕禃，委以日本事，以必得其要领为期。
现代文：但未到达日本便回来了。四年六月，世祖认为王礻直是托辞令其遣日本使中途折返，故又派黑的等至高丽，告诉王礻直，要他如期引导蒙古使臣到达日本。
English: However, he returned before reaching Japan. In June of the fourth year, the ancestor thought that Wang Xuan Zhi was a pretext to order him to send the Japanese envoy halfway back, so he also sent the black one to Goryeo to tell Wang Xuan Zhi to guide the Mongolian envoy to Japan as scheduled.

古文：禃以为海道险阻，不可辱天使，九月，遣其起居舍人潘阜等持书往日本。留六月，亦不得其要领而归。
现代文：王礻直认为海道险阻，不可使天朝使臣再受无功而返之辱，乃于九月，派自己的起居舍人潘阜等持书赴日，在日停留六个月，仍不得要领而归。
English: Wang Xizhi believed that the sea route was dangerous and that the envoys of the Heavenly Court should not be humiliated by returning without any achievements. Therefore, in September, he sent his servants, Pan Fu and others, to Japan with letters. They stayed in Japan for six months, but were still unable to return.

古文：五年九月，命黑的、弘复持书往，至对马岛，日本人拒而不纳，执其塔二郎、弥二郎二人而还。
现代文：五年九月，黑的、殷弘等再次奉诏持国书往日本，至对马岛，日本人拒而不纳，乃执其塔二郎、弥二郎二人而还。
English: In September of the fifth year, Kuroda, Inhiro and others went to Japan again with the imperial edict to hold the country, to Tsushima, the Japanese refused to accept, but two of them, Tajiro and Yajiro, returned.

古文：六年六月，命高丽金有成送还执者，俾中书省牒其国，亦不报。
现代文：六年六月，命高丽金有成送塔二郎、弥二郎回日本，以便中书省能乘机探察这个国家，但也没有回报。
English: In June of the sixth year, Koryo Kim Youseong was ordered to send Tajiro and Yajiro back to Japan so that the Ministry of Education and Culture could take the opportunity to explore the country, but there was no return.

古文：有成留其太宰府守护所者久之。
现代文：有成滞留在日本太宰府的守护所很久。
English: Arushige stayed at the guardian center in Dazaifu, Japan, for a long time.

古文：十二月，又命秘书监赵良弼往使。
现代文：十二月，又命秘书监赵良弼使日，带去的国书说： 听说一个真正的王者是不见外于人的。
English: In December, Zhao Liangyao, the secretary-in-charge, sent an envoy with the following message: "I have heard that a true king is no stranger to outsiders.

古文：书曰： 盖闻王者无外，高丽与朕既为一家，王国实为邻境，故尝驰信使修好，为疆埸之吏抑而弗通。
现代文：高丽与朕既为一家，日本实际上也就是朕的邻境。
English: Goryeo and I are one family, and Japan is actually our neighborhood.

古文：所获二人，敕有司慰抚，俾赍牒以还，遂复寂无所闻。
现代文：所以，曾派使修好。但为你们的边吏阻止而不得通行。我们曾抓获你们两个人，朕令有关官府对他们进行抚慰，托他们带信给你国王，但也复寂然无闻。
English: Therefore, an envoy was sent to repair the road, but was prevented from passing by your border officials. We had captured two of you, and I ordered the relevant authorities to comfort them and ask them to bring a letter to your king, but they also returned unheard.

古文：继欲通问，属高丽权臣林衍构乱，坐是弗果。
现代文：后来又想继续通好，但因属国高丽权臣林衍作乱，因而不能实现。
English: Later, he wanted to continue the friendship, but it could not be realized because the subordinate country, Goryeo, was in turmoil.

古文：岂王亦因此辍不遣使，或已遣而中路梗塞，皆不可知。
现代文：日本国王是否也因为林衍之阻而停止派出使者呢？或者已派出使者中途又因道路阻塞而退回了呢？到底怎样皆不可知。
English: Did the Japanese king also stop sending envoys because of Lin Yan's obstruction? Or did he send envoys halfway and then return because the road was blocked? No one knows for sure.

古文：不然，日本素号知礼之国，王之君臣宁肯漫为弗思之事乎。
现代文：如果不是这些原因，那么，日本素来号称知礼之国，难道国王君臣肯随便地做出这种不加深思的事吗？
English: If it were not for these reasons, then, Japan has always been known as a country of courtesy, would the king, the monarch and the minister be willing to do such a thoughtless thing?

古文：近已灭林衍，复旧王位，安集其民，特命少中大夫秘书监赵良弼充国信使，持书以往。
现代文：近来林衍已灭亡，王位已恢复，正在使其民众安居乐业，所以，在这个时候，特命少中大夫秘书监赵良弼充当国信使，持书赴日。
English: Recently, Lin Yan has died, the throne has been restored, and is making its people live and work in peace. Therefore, at this time, Zhao Liangyao, the special envoy, acted as a national messenger and went to Japan with a letter.

古文：如即发使与之偕来，亲仁善邻，国之美事。其或犹豫以至用兵，夫谁所乐为也，王其审图之。 
现代文：如你们立即派使者随赵前来，则友好往来是两国的好事，如或犹豫，以致用兵，那么，到底谁乐于这样做，望国王三思。 
English: If you immediately send an envoy to accompany Zhao, then the friendly exchange is a good thing for the two countries. If you hesitate to use troops, then whoever is willing to do so should think twice about the king.

古文：良弼将往，乞定与其王相见之仪。廷议与其国上下之分未定，无礼数可言。
现代文：良弼将动身赴日时，请求确定与日本国王见面时的礼仪的等级，经过朝廷商议，认为日本与我国上下名分未定，没有君臣礼仪可言。
English: When Yoshitaka left for Japan, he requested to determine the level of etiquette when meeting with the Japanese king. After deliberation by the Imperial Court, he believed that Japan and China were undecided and there was no monarch-subject etiquette to speak of.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：世祖同意这个意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：七年十二月，诏谕高丽王禃送国信使赵良弼通好日本，期于必达。
现代文：七年十二月，世祖诏告高丽王礻直送国信使赵良弼通好日本，希望这一次一定到达日本。
English: In December of the seventh year, King Sejong told the messenger Zhao Liangye, who was sent directly by the King of Goryeo to the country, that he liked Japan and hoped that this time he would definitely reach Japan.

古文：仍以忽林失、王国昌、洪茶丘将兵送抵海上，比国信使还，姑令金州等处屯驻。
现代文：高丽王仍以忽林失、王国昌、洪茶丘带兵送良弼于海上，为了国信使返回，令忽林失等暂驻金州等处。
English: The King of Goryeo still sent good omens to the sea with troops led by Hulun Lin, Wang Guochang, and Hong Cha Kuo, and temporarily stationed Hulun Lin and others in Jinzhou and other places for the sake of the return of the national messenger.

古文：八年六月，日本通事曹介升等上言： 高丽迂路导引国使，外有捷径，倘得便风，半日可到。
现代文：八年元月，日本通事曹介升等上言： 高丽绕弯路导引国使，但此路之外，还有捷径。倘得顺风，半日可到。
English: In January of the eighth year, the Japanese envoy Cao Jie Sheng and others made the following comment: Goryeo guides the envoy around the bend, but there are shortcuts besides this road. If the wind is favorable, it can be reached in half a day.

古文：若使臣去，则不敢同往；若大军进征，则愿为乡导。 
现代文：若只派使臣，我不敢同往；若派大军进攻，我愿当向导。 
English: If he sends a messenger, I will not go with him; if he sends a great army, I will go only as a guide.

古文：帝曰： 如此则当思之。 
现代文：世祖说 ：这要好好想一想。 
English: The patriarch said, "Think about it.

古文：九月，高丽王禃遣其通事别将徐称导送良弼使日本，日本始遣弥四郎者入朝，帝宴劳遣之。
现代文：九月，高丽王礻直遣其通事别将徐翶导送良弼赴日，日本始遣弥四郎入朝，世祖设宴慰劳后送他回国。
English: In September, the King of Goryeo, Goryeo Wangye, directly sent his general to Japan, and sent Yashiro to Japan for the first time. The founder of Goryeo set up a banquet to send him back to Japan.

古文：九年二月，枢密院臣言： 奉使日本赵良弼遣书状官张铎来言，去岁九月，与日本国人弥四郎等至太宰府西守护所。
现代文：九年二月，枢密院臣说： 奉命赴日的赵良弼派书状官张铎来说，去年九月，和日本人弥四郎等至太宰府西守护所。
English: In February of the ninth year, the privy councilor said: Zhao Liangyao, who was ordered to go to Japan, sent the letter officer Zhang Yao to say that last September, and the Japanese Yashiro waited at the Dazaifu West Guardian Center.

古文：守者云，曩为高丽所绐，屡言上国来伐；岂期皇帝好生恶杀，先遣行人下示玺书。
现代文：守护所的人说，过去为高丽所骗，高丽一再说元朝要来打日本，谁知元朝皇帝是一位好生、恶杀的人，先派遣人来送国书。
English: The person from the Guardian Office said that they had been deceived by Goryeo in the past. Goryeo had repeatedly said that the Yuan Dynasty was going to attack Japan. Who knew that the Emperor of the Yuan Dynasty was a man who loved life and killed viciously. He first sent someone to deliver the national anthem.

古文：然王京去此尚远，愿先遣人从奉使回报。 
现代文：本来我守护应该往元朝见皇帝，但王京去此尚远，故愿先遣人随从来日使臣到元朝回报。 
English: Originally, my guardian was supposed to go to the Yuan Dynasty to see the emperor, but Wang Jing is still far away, so I would like to send someone ahead to return to the Yuan Dynasty with the envoys from the previous day.

古文：良弼乃遣铎同其使二十六人至京师求见。
现代文：良弼乃遣铎及日使二十六人至京师求见。
English: Yoshitaka sent twenty-six envoys to Kyoto to ask for advice.

古文：帝疑其国主使之来，云守护所者诈也。
现代文：世祖疑是国王派这些人来的，说是守护所的人派的，可能是一诈称。
English: The ancestor suspected that the king had sent these people, and said that they had been sent by the guardian, which may have been a false claim.

古文：诏翰林承旨和礼霍孙以问姚枢、许衡等，皆对曰： 诚如圣算。彼惧我加兵，故发此辈伺吾强弱耳。
现代文：于是要翰林承旨和礼霍孙去询问姚枢、许衡等。他们都回答说： 诚如您皇上推想的，日本人怕我们加兵于彼，故派这些人来窥察我国的强弱。
English: He then asked Hanlin Chengzhi and Li Huosun to interrogate Yao Zu and Xu Heng. They all replied: "As your emperor inferred, the Japanese are afraid that we will send more soldiers to him, so they sent these people to spy on our country's strength and weakness."

古文：宜示之宽仁，且不宜听其入见。 
现代文：因此，宜示之以宽仁，但不要让他们随便进见皇上。 
English: Therefore, it is appropriate to show leniency, but do not allow them to see the emperor at will.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖听从他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：是月，高丽王禃致书日本。
现代文：此月，高丽王致书日本。
English: This month, King Goryeo sent a letter to Japan.

古文：五月，又以书往，令必通好大朝，皆不报。
现代文：五月，又以书信往，令日本一定和元朝通好。
English: In May, he wrote to the emperor again, so that Japan would definitely be on good terms with the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：十年六月，赵良弼复使日本，至太宰府而还。
现代文：但都没有回答。十年六月，赵良弼再使日本，到太宰府而还。
English: However, they did not reply. In June of the 10th, Zhao Liangyao sent another envoy to Japan, but he returned to Dazaifu.

古文：十一年三月，命凤州经略使忻都、高丽军民总管洪茶丘，以千料舟、拔都鲁轻疾舟、汲水小舟各三百，共九百艘，载士卒一万五千，期以七月征日本。
现代文：十一年三月，命凤州经略使忻都、高丽军民总管洪茶丘以千料舟、拔都鲁轻快舟、汲水小舟各三百，共九百艘，载士卒一万五千，准备七月征日本。
English: In March of the 11th year, he ordered Hong Cha-koo, the military and civil administrator of Goryeo, to prepare to invade Japan in July, with a total of nine hundred vessels, including three hundred thousand rice boats, three hundred light and fast rice boats, and three hundred small water-drawing boats, carrying fifteen thousand soldiers.

古文：冬十月，入其国，败之。
现代文：冬十月，进入日本国，打败了日本人。
English: In the winter of October, they entered Japan and defeated the Japanese.

古文：而官军不整，又矢尽，惟虏掠四境而归。
现代文：由于官兵不整，又矢尽，只到处掳掠一通便回国了。
English: Due to the irregularity of officers and soldiers, and the exhaustion of arrows, they only plundered and pillaged everywhere, and then returned to China.

古文：十二年二月，遣礼部侍郎杜世忠、兵部侍郎何文著、计议官撒都鲁丁往使，复致书，亦不报。
现代文：十二年二月，遣礼部侍郎杜世忠、兵部侍郎何文著、计议官撒都鲁丁使日，又给国书，也无回答。
English: In February of the twelfth year, Du Shizhong, the attendant of the ceremonial department, Ho Wen, the attendant of the military department, and Sadurudin, the councillor, sent envoys, and also sent a national letter, but there was no answer.

古文：十四年，日本遣商人持金来易铜钱，许之。
现代文：十四年，日本遣商人持金来调换铜钱，得到元朝允许。
English: In the 14th year, Japanese merchants sent money to exchange copper money, which was permitted by the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：十七年二月，日本杀国使杜世忠等。
现代文：十七年二月，日本杀中国使臣杜世忠等。
English: In February 1917, Japan killed the Chinese envoy Du Shizhong and others.

古文：征东元帅忻都、洪茶丘请自率兵往讨，廷议姑少缓之。
现代文：征东元帅忻都、洪茶丘请自率兵往征讨。廷臣商议后，决定稍缓进行。
English: The marshals of the Eastern Expedition, Xindu and Hongchaoka, invited their soldiers to go and fight. After deliberation by the courtiers, it was decided to proceed slowly.

古文：五月，召范文虎，议征日本。
现代文：五月，世祖召见范文虎，商议东征日本的事。
English: In May, Shizu summoned Fan Wenhu to discuss the Eastern Expedition to Japan.

古文：八月，诏募征日本士卒。
现代文：八月下诏书，征兵东征日本。
English: In August, an imperial edict was issued calling for conscription for the Eastern Expedition to Japan.

古文：十八年正月，命日本行省右丞相阿剌罕、右丞范文虎及忻都、洪茶丘等率十万人征日本。
现代文：十八年正月，命日本行省右丞相阿剌罕、右丞范文虎及忻都、洪茶丘等率十万人征日本。
English: In the first month of the 18th year, with the order to march to Japan, the right-hand minister of the province, Ah Nhan, the right-hand minister, Fan Wenhu, and the provincial governors, Hong Cha Kuo, and others led 100,000 people to march to Japan.

古文：二月，诸将陛辞。帝敕曰： 始因彼国使来，故朝廷亦遣使往，彼遂留我使不还，故使卿辈为此行。
现代文：二月，诸将向皇帝辞行，世祖叮嘱说： 开始因为日本使臣来，故我国也遣使前往。现在，他扣留我使臣，不让回国，所以要你们此次出征。
English: In February, all of them resigned to the emperor, and the patriarch admonished them: "At first, because Japanese envoys came, our country also sent envoys. Now, he is detaining my envoys and not allowing them to return to the country, so he wants you to go to war this time.

古文：朕闻汉人言，取人家国，欲得百姓土地，若尽杀百姓，徒得地何用。
现代文：我听汉人说，取人家国，就是要获得百姓、土地。若尽杀百姓，只得到土地有什么用？
English: I have heard the Chinese say that to take someone's homeland is to gain people and land. If you kill all the people, what is the use of gaining only land?

古文：又有一事，朕实忧之，恐卿辈不和耳。
现代文：又有一件我实在担心的事，就是怕你们几个人不团结。
English: Another thing I'm really worried about is that some of you won't stick together.

古文：假若彼国人至，与卿辈有所议，当同心协谋，如出一口答之。 
现代文：假若日本人来，与你们有事商讨，你们当同心协谋，意见统一，有如一个人在说话。 
English: When the Japanese come to you to consult, come together as one man, and speak as one man.

古文：五月，日本行省参议裴国佐等言： 本省右丞相阿剌罕、范右丞、李左丞先与忻都、茶丘入朝。时同院官议定，领舟师至高丽金州，与忻都、茶丘军会，然后入征日本。
现代文：五月，日本行省参议裴国佐等说： 本省右丞相阿剌罕、范右丞、李左丞先与忻都、茶丘入朝时，同院官议定，领水军至高丽金州，与忻都、茶丘会师，然后出征日本。
English: In May, Bae Kwok-so, the provincial councilor of the Japanese government, said: When the provincial ministers of the right, Ah Nhan, Fan Yu-chung, and Li Zu-chung, first entered the imperial court with Baekdu and Cha-koo, the officials of the imperial court agreed that the territorial navy would go to Jinju, Korea, meet with Baekdu and Cha-koo, and then go to Japan.

古文：又为风水不便，再议定会于一岐岛。
现代文：后又因风向与水流不便，再议定在一岐岛会师。
English: Later, due to the inconvenience of wind direction and water flow, it was agreed to meet again on the island of Ichiki.

古文：今年三月，有日本船为风水漂至者，令其水工画地图，因见近太宰府西有平户岛者，周围皆水，可屯军船。
现代文：今年三月，有日本船被风吹水流而漂至，令其水手画地图，因见靠近太宰府西方有平户岛，周围皆水，可集中停泊军船。
English: In March this year, a Japanese ship was blown by the wind and the current and drifted to the island, prompting its sailors to draw a map. As they saw, there was Hirado Island to the west of Dazaifu, surrounded by water, where warships could be concentrated.

古文：此岛非其所防，若径往据此岛，使人乘船往一岐，呼忻都、茶丘来会，进讨为利。 
现代文：这个岛并非日人防务的重点，若径直占据平户，使人乘船往一岐，约忻都、茶丘来会师，再进军日本九州，最为有利。 
English: This island was not the focus of the Japanese defense. It would have been most advantageous to occupy Hirado directly, send people by ship to Iki, have them come to join the army around Hakodate and Chaoka, and then advance into Kyushu, Japan.

古文：帝曰： 此间不悉彼中事宜，阿剌罕辈必知，令其自处之。 
现代文：世祖说 ：这里不了解日本的情况，阿剌罕等人应该知道，要他自己作决定。 
English: The patriarch said, "They don't know about the situation in Japan. The imam and others should know, and let him make his own decision."

古文：六月，阿剌罕以病不能行，命阿塔海代总军事。
现代文：六月，阿剌罕因病不能行，命阿塔海代总军事。
English: In June, Ayhan was unable to travel due to illness, and was ordered to become the military commander of Atahaydai.

古文：八月，诸将未见敌，丧全师以还，乃言： 至日本，欲攻太宰府，暴风破舟，犹欲议战，万户厉德彪、招讨王国佐、水手总管陆文政等不听节制，辄逃去。
现代文：八月，诸军未见敌，全军覆没。阿塔海等回国报告说 ：至日本时，欲攻太宰府，恰逢暴风，军船大量破损。本来还想商量再打一下，但万户厉德彪、招讨王国佐、水手总管陆文政等不听节制，擅自逃走。
English: In August, the troops did not see the enemy, and the entire army was wiped out. Atahai and others reported back home that when they arrived in Japan, they wanted to attack Dazaifu, but a storm coincided, and the warships were heavily damaged. Originally, they wanted to discuss another attack, but Wanyu Lide Biao, Zhaotao Wanguo Zuo, and Lu Wensheng, the head of the sailors, did not listen to restraint and fled without permission.

古文：本省载余军至合浦，散遣还乡里。 
现代文：本省只好载残部至合浦，遣散他们回故里。 
English: The province had no choice but to transport the remaining members to Hapu and send them back to their hometowns.

古文：未几，败卒于阊脱归，言： 官军六月入海，七月至平壶岛，移五龙山。
现代文：不久，败卒于阊脱身归来报告说： 官军六月下海，七月至平户岛，移驻五龙山。
English: Not long after, the defeated soldiers returned from the battle and reported: The government army went to sea in June, and in July they went to Hirado Island and moved to Mt. Wulong.

古文：八月一日，风破舟。
现代文：八月一日，暴风破舟。
English: On August 1, a storm broke the boat.

古文：五日，文虎等诸将各自择坚好船乘之，弃士卒十余万于山下。
现代文：五日，文虎等诸将各自选乘坚固的好船，弃士卒十余万于山下。
English: On the fifth day, Wenhu and others will each choose a sturdy good ship, abandoning more than one hundred thousand soldiers at the foot of the mountain.

古文：众议推张百户者为主帅，号之曰张总管，听其约束。
现代文：众议推张百户为主帅，号之为张总管，听总管的约束。
English: The public recommended that Zhang Hyakuko be appointed as the head coach, with the title of General Manager Zhang, subject to the restrictions of the General Manager.

古文：方伐木作舟欲还，七日，日本人来战，尽死。
现代文：正在伐木造船准备回师。七日，日本人来战，除大批被杀死者外，还掳走了二三万人。
English: On the 7th, the Japanese came to fight, and in addition to the large number of people killed, they also took away twenty to thirty thousand people.

古文：余二三万为其虏去。九日，至八角岛，尽杀蒙古、高丽、汉人，谓新附军为唐人，不杀而奴之。阊辈是也。 
现代文：九日，至八角岛，尽杀蒙古人、高丽人及汉人。将新降者称为唐人，不杀他们，而收他们做奴隶，于阊便是这一类人。 
English: On the 9th, he went to the Octagon Island and killed all the Mongols, Koreans and Han Chinese. He called the newly conquered people "Tang people," and instead of killing them, he took them as slaves. This was the type of person Yu Xun was.

古文：盖行省官议事不相下，故皆弃军归。
现代文：因为行省官员议事时不能协调一致，故皆弃军回国。
English: Because the provincial officials could not coordinate their deliberations, they all abandoned the army and returned home.

古文：久之，莫青与吴万五者亦逃还，十万之众，得还者三人耳。
现代文：许久以后，又有莫青及吴万五也逃回，十万之众得回者仅三人而已。
English: After a long time, Mo Qing and Wu Wan Wu also fled back, and only three people out of 100,000 were able to return.

古文：二十年，命阿塔海为日本省丞相，与彻里帖木儿右丞、刘二拔都儿左丞募兵造舟，欲复征日本。
现代文：二十年，命阿塔海为日本省丞相，与彻里帖木儿右丞、刘二拔都儿左丞募兵造船，准备再征日本。
English: For twenty years, he ordered Atahai to serve as Japan's Minister of War, and together with Cheri Timur Ujo and Liu Erbatul Zuo, to recruit soldiers and build ships in preparation for the re-enlistment of Japan.

古文：淮西宣慰使昂吉儿上言民劳，乞寝兵。
现代文：淮西宣慰使昂吉儿上言，人民不胜劳苦，请求不要出兵。
English: Huaxi's consolation made Angier say that the people are hard-working and asked not to send troops.

古文：二十一年，又以其俗尚佛，遣王积翁与补陀僧如智往使。
现代文：二十一年，又因日本推崇佛教，故派王积翁与补陀僧如智往使。
English: In 1921, due to Japan's reverence for Buddhism, Wang Zhiweng was sent on a mission to visit the Buddhist monk Ru Zhi.

古文：舟中有不愿行者，共谋杀积翁，不果至。
现代文：舟中有不愿去日的人共同谋杀积翁，这次使日未能成功。
English: There were people on the boat who did not want to go to Japan, and they worked together to murder Jiwon. This time, they did not succeed in making it happen.

古文：二十三年，帝曰： 日本未尝相侵，今交趾犯边，宜置日本，专事交趾。 
现代文：二十三年，世祖说： 日本未曾来侵犯我们，今交趾犯我边界，宜放下日本，专门攻打交趾。 
English: In 233, the founder said: Japan has never invaded us, but now they are encroaching on our borders. It is appropriate to abandon Japan and focus on attacking the encroachers.

古文：成宗大德二年，江浙省平章政事也速答儿乞用兵日本。帝曰： 今非其时，朕徐思之。 
现代文：成宗大德二年，江浙省平章政事也速答儿乞用兵征日本，帝说： 今非其时，容朕慢慢想想再说。 
English: In the second year of Emperor Chengzong's reign, the political affairs of Pingzhang, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, also quickly responded to the request to conscript Japan. The emperor said: Now is not the time, let me think about it slowly.

古文：三年，遣僧宁一山者，加妙慈弘济大师，附商舶往使日本，而日本人竟不至。
现代文：三年，僧人宁一山，加封为妙慈弘济大师，委任他为元朝遣日使，附于商船前往日本，但日本人没有派使臣来中国。
English: In the third year, the monk Ning Yishan, also known as Master Myo Ci Hong Ji, appointed him as the Japanese envoy to the Yuan Dynasty and accompanied him on a merchant ship to Japan, but the Japanese did not send an envoy to China.

