古文：罗隐，《唐才子传》：隐字昭谏。余杭人。
现代文：罗隐，余杭人。
English: Luo Yin, Yu Hangren.

古文：诗名于天下，尤长于咏史，然多所讥讽，以故不中第，大为唐宰相郑畋、李蔚所知。
现代文：以诗歌闻名于天下，特别擅长于歌咏史事，但做诗大多寓含讥刺嘲讽，因此不被科举录取，却大为唐朝宰相郑畋、李蔚所赏识。
English: He is world-famous for his poetry and is particularly good at reciting historical events. However, most of his poems contain sarcasm and mockery, so he was not admitted to the imperial examinations, but he was greatly appreciated by the prime ministers of the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Qi and Li Wei.

古文：隐虽负文称，然貌古而陋。
现代文：罗隐虽然负有文才盛名，但是形貌古朴而丑陋。
English: Although Luoyin is famous for its literary talent, its appearance is simple and ugly.

古文：畋女幼有文性，尝览隐诗卷，讽诵不已，畋疑其女有慕才之意。
现代文：郑畋的女儿小时就有文才，曾经披阅罗隐的诗卷，朗诵不停，郑畋猜想他女儿爱慕罗隐的文才。
English: As a child, Zheng Yao's daughter had a talent for literature. She used to read the poems of Luo Yin and recite them incessantly. Zheng Yao guessed that his daughter loved Luo Yin's literary talent.

古文：一日，隐至第，郑女垂帘而窥之，自是绝不咏其诗。
现代文：一天，罗隐来到郑畋家里，郑畋的女儿放下门帘在后面偷看罗隐，从此就完全不再诵读罗隐的诗歌。
English: One day, Luo Ying came to Zheng Yao's house. Zheng Yao's daughter put down the door curtain and peeked at Luo Ying from behind. From then on, she completely stopped reading Luo Ying's poems.

古文：唐广明中，因乱归乡里，节度使钱镠辟为从事。
现代文：唐广明年间，罗隐因战乱回到故乡，节度使钱任命他为从事。
English: In the middle of Tang Guangya year, Luo Ying returned to his hometown due to the war, and the festival made money to appoint him as the leader.

古文：于是拥旆郊迎，一见即拜，隐亦不让。及将行，绍威赠以百万，他物称是，仍致书于镠谓叔父，镠首用之。
现代文：开平初年，梁太祖征召他为右谏议大夫，罗隐不就任，魏博节度使罗绍威暗中上表推荐，于是授予他给事中官职。生年八十多岁，死在钱塘。
English: In the first year of Kaiping, Liang Taizu conscripted him as a doctor of right-hand speech, Luo Yin did not take office, Wei Bo Jiedu made Luo Shao Wei secretly recommend the above table, and then awarded him the official post in the matter. Born in his eighties, died in Qiantang.

古文：仇殷，不知何郡人也。
现代文：有文集多卷流行于世。仇殷，不知是哪一州郡的人。
English: There is a multi-volume anthology popular in the world. Qiu Yin, I don't know which state or county he is from.

古文：开平中，仕至钦天监，明于象纬历数，艺术精密，近无其比。
现代文：梁太祖开平年间，官至钦天监，明晓星相、图纬、历法、方术，技艺方法精确缜密，近代没有人能与他相比。
English: During the time of Liang Taizhu Kaiping, he was the highest-ranking official of the Qin Heavenly Supervisor. He knew the constellations, latitude and longitude, the calendar, the methods of calculation, and the precise and meticulous techniques. No one in modern times can compare with him.

古文：光化中，太祖在滑，遣密王友伦以兵三万御幽州之师十余万，深虑其不敌，召殷问曰： 阵可行乎？ 
现代文：光化年间，太祖在滑州时，派遣密王朱友伦率领三万军队抵御幽州十多万大军，非常担心密王抵挡不住，传召仇殷问他说： 出兵吉利吗？ 
English: During the Gwanghwa era, when Taejo was in Gwangju, he dispatched the king of Myeongdong, Zhu Youlun, to lead a 30,000-strong army to resist the more than 100,000-strong army of Yuzhou. He was very worried that the king of Myeongdong would not be able to resist, and summoned his enemy to ask him: "Is it good luck to send troops?

古文：曰： 其十四日过禺中乎！ 
现代文：仇殷说 ：大概十四日巳时以后吧！ 
English: Qiu Yan said, "Let's do it after the 14th lunar day!"

古文：又问之，曰： 贼败涂地。 
现代文：再问他，说： 贼寇将一败涂地。 
English: Ask him again, and he will say: Thieves and robbers will be utterly defeated.

古文：又曰： 既望，当见捷书。 
现代文：又说： 十六日，将看到捷报。 
English: He also said: "On the 16th, we will see a successful report.

古文：果如其言，不失晷刻。
现代文：果然像他所说的一样，不差片刻。
English: It was exactly as he said, not a moment too soon.

古文：太祖之在长芦也，诸将请攻壁，号令军中，人负藁二围，置千积，俄而云集。
现代文：太祖在长芦，诸位将领请求攻城，传令军中，每人背两捆稻草，安置一千人积聚，片刻间稻草像云一样集中在一起。
English: The great-grandfather was in Changlu, the generals requested to attack the city, and the army was ordered to carry two bundles of straw per person, and a thousand people were gathered, and the straw was concentrated like a cloud for a moment.

古文：殷曰： 何用？ 
现代文：仇殷说 ：做什么用处？ 
English: Qiu Yin said: What is the use of it?

古文：或以所谋告之，殷曰： 我占矣，不见攻壁象，无乃自退乎！ 
现代文：有人将使用稻草的计划告诉他，仇殷说： 我占卜过，没有见到能进攻城池的迹象，恐怕将自行撤退呢！ 
English: Someone told him about the plan to use straw, and Qiu Yin said, "I have divined, and I have seen no signs that we can attack the city. I'm afraid we will have to withdraw on our own!"

古文：翼日，有骑驰报丁会以潞州叛，太祖令尽焚其藁而还，不克攻。
现代文：第二天，有骑兵奔告丁会凭借潞州反叛，太祖命令全部烧掉稻草而回师，不能攻城。
English: The next day, some cavalrymen went to tell Ding Hui to rebel by relying on Zhangzhou. Grandfather ordered all the straw to be burned and returned to the division, unable to attack the city.

古文：开平中，殷一日朝罢，过崇政院，使敬翔直阁，翔问之曰： 月犯房次星，其逼若缀，是何祥也？ 
现代文：开平年间，仇殷有一天朝拜完后，经过崇政院，到敬翔的官署，敬翔问他说： 月亮侵犯房次星，逼近得就像连在一起，这是什么征兆？ 
English: During the Kaiping era, one day after the worship of Qiu Yin, after passing through the Supreme People's Court, he went to the government office of Qixiang. Qixiang asked him: The moon encroaches on the house of the second star, approaching as if it were connected. What is this sign?

古文：曰： 常度耳。 
现代文：仇殷说 ：这是正常现象。 
English: Qiu Yin said: This is a normal phenomenon.

古文：殷欲不言，既过数步，自度不可默，乃反言曰： 三两日当有不顺语至，无或骤恐，宜先白上知。 
现代文：仇殷不想说出来，已经走开几步，自己又推度不应该隐瞒，就走回来说： 两三天内将有不利的消息来到，为免猛然受到惊吓，应该先告诉皇上让他知道。 
English: Qiu Yin did not want to speak out, he had already walked a few steps away, and he should not conceal himself, so he walked back and said: In two or three days, there will be unfavorable news. In order to avoid being suddenly frightened, you should first tell the emperor and let him know.

古文：既二日，陕府奏同州刘知俊闭关作叛。
现代文：过了两天，陕州官府报告同州刘知俊封锁关口反叛。
English: Two days later, the government of Shaanxi Province reported that Liu Zhijun, the governor of the same province, had blocked the border and rebelled.

古文：初，王景仁之出师也。殷上言： 太阴亏，不利深入。 
现代文：当初王景仁率师出征时，仇殷向皇上禀告说 ：太阴亏缺，不利于深入敌阵。 
English: At the beginning, when Wang Jingren led his division on a campaign, Qiu Yin reported to the emperor that he was too short of yin, which was not conducive to going deep into the enemy's lines.

古文：太祖遽遣使止之，已败于柏乡矣。
现代文：太祖立即派人阻止王景仁前进，但王景仁已经在柏乡战败了。
English: The great-grandfather immediately sent someone to stop Wang Jingren from advancing, but Wang Jingren had already been defeated in Baoxiang.

古文：殷所见触类如是，不可备录。
现代文：仇殷以所见天相推断人事都像这一类，不能全部记录。
English: Qiu Yin deduced from the appearance of the sky that the personnel were all like this, and could not record all of them.

古文：然而畏慎特甚，居常寝默，未尝敢显言。
现代文：但仇殷特别小心谨慎，平常总是沉默不语，从不敢直言直语，畅所欲言。
English: But Qiu Yin is particularly cautious, usually always silent, never dare to speak frankly, speak freely.

古文：纵言事迹，惟其语音，不可尽晓，以故屡贻责罚。
现代文：特别是他的语音，很难听懂，因此常常招致责备处罚。
English: His voice, in particular, is hard to understand and often draws reprimands.

古文：后卒于官。
现代文：后来在官府去世。
English: He later died in government custody.

古文：段深，不知何许人。
现代文：段深，不知是哪处人氏。
English: It's a bit deep, I don't know who it's from.

古文：开平中，以善医待诏于翰林。
现代文：开平年间，因为精于医术而在翰林听候皇帝诏召。
English: During the Kaiping era, because he was good at medicine, he waited for the emperor's summons in Hanlin.

古文：时太祖抱疾久之，其溲甚浊，僧晓微侍药有征，赐紫衣师号，锡赉甚厚。
现代文：当时梁太祖身患疾病很久，小便很浑浊，僧人晓微奉侍医药，略有起色，太祖就赐给晓微紫衣和大师的称号，赏赐财物非常优厚。
English: At that time, Liang Taizu had been suffering from illness for a long time, his urine was very cloudy, and the monk Xiao Wei served medicine, and he had a slight improvement. The great ancestor gave Xiao Wei a purple robe and the title of master, and rewarded him with very generous wealth.

古文：顷之疾发，晓微剥服色，去师号。
现代文：不久太祖旧病又复发，晓微被剥夺了所赐紫衣，去掉了大师的称号。
English: Not long after, his grandfather's old illness recurred, and Xiao Wei was deprived of the purple robe he had been given, and the title of master was taken away.

古文：因召深问曰： 疾愈复作，草药不足恃也，我左右粒石而效者众矣，服之如何？ 
现代文：于是召来段深询问他说 ：我的病已经痊愈然而又发作，草药不足以依靠了。我身边的人服用药石而获效的人很多，我服用药石怎么样？ 
English: So he summoned Duan Sheng and asked him, "My illness has been cured, but it has flared up again, and herbal medicine is no longer enough to rely on. Many people around me have benefited from taking medicinal stones, how about me taking medicinal stones?"

古文：深对曰： 臣尝奉诏诊切，陛下积忧勤，失调护，脉代芤而心益虚。
现代文：段深回答说 ：我曾经奉诏为陛下听诊切脉，陛下积忧勤劳，失去调理保护，脉相不调而心力更加虚弱。
English: Duan Sheng replied, "I once had the honor of cutting the pulse for His Majesty's outpatient consultation. His Majesty was worried and hardworking, lost his conditioning protection, his pulse was out of phase, and his heart was even weaker.

古文：臣以为宜先治心，心和平而溲变清，当进饮剂，而不当粒石也。臣谨案，《太仓公传》曰： 中热不溲者不可服石，石性精悍，有大毒。 
现代文：我认为应该服汤剂，而不应服用药石。我细心考虑，《太仓公传》说： 体内燥热，小便不畅者不可服用药石，药石的药性猛烈，有很大毒性。 
English: I think that you should take the decoction, but you should not take the medicinal stone. I carefully considered, "Taicang Public Biography" said: Those who have dry heat in the body and have difficulty urinating should not take the medicinal stone. The medicinal properties of the medicinal stone are strong and very toxic.

古文：凡饵毒药如甲兵，不得已而用之，非有危殆，不可服也。 
现代文：凡服食药石就像动用战甲兵器，在不得已的情况下才使用它，不到病情十分危险时，不能服用。 
English: Taking any medicinal stone is like using a battle armour weapon. It should only be used as a last resort, and should not be taken unless the condition is very dangerous.

古文：太祖善之，令进饮剂，疾稍愈，乃以币帛赐之。
现代文：太祖认为他说得对，让他进上汤剂，疾病慢慢痊愈，于是赏赐给他钱财布帛。
English: The great-grandfather thought that he was right, let him drink the decoction, and the disease slowly healed, so he rewarded him with money and cloth.

