古文：文宣显祖文宣皇帝，讳洋，字子进，高祖第二子，世宗之母弟。
现代文：显祖文宣皇帝名洋，字子进，是高祖的第二个儿子，世宗的同母弟弟。
English: Emperor Xianzu Wenxuan was the second son of Emperor Gaozu and the younger half-brother of Emperor Shizong.

古文：后初孕，每夜有赤光照室，后私尝怪之。
现代文：皇后怀孕时，每天晚上有红光照在屋子襄，皇后私下裹感到奇怪。
English: When the queen was pregnant, a red light shone in the room every evening, which the queen privately found strange.

古文：初，高祖之归尔朱荣，时经危乱，家徒壁立，后与亲姻相对，共忧寒馁。
现代文：起初，高祖归附氽朱荣，当时正经历战乱，家裹穷得衹有直立的墙壁，皇后和亲戚们相对而坐，一同担忧挨冻受饿。
English: At first, Gao Zu was attached to Zou Zhu Rong. At that time, the war was raging. The family was so poor that there were upright walls. The queen and her relatives sat opposite each other, worried about freezing and starving.

古文：帝时尚未能言，欻然应曰 得活 ，太后及左右大惊而不敢言。
现代文：文宣帝当时还不会说话，突然应声说道： 能活。 太后和身边的人大吃一惊而不敢说什么。
English: At that time, Emperor Wenxuan could not yet speak, but he suddenly replied, "I can live." The empress dowager and the people around her were so surprised that they did not dare to say anything.

古文：及长，黑色，大颊兑下，鳞身重踝。不好戏弄，深沉有大度。
现代文：身上有鳞片状的皮肤，长着双重的足踝，不喜好玩游戏，性格沉着持重有大度。
English: He has scaly skin, long double ankles, does not like to play games, and has a calm and dignified personality.

古文：晋阳曾有沙门，乍愚乍智，时人不测，呼为阿秃师。
现代文：晋阳曾经有个和尚，一会儿愚蠢一会儿聪明，当时的人猜不透他是个什么人，把他叫做阿秃师。
English: There was once a monk in Jinyang who was at one time stupid and at another time clever. People at the time could not figure out who he was, and called him Ah Gao Shi.

古文：帝曾与诸童共见之，历问禄位，至帝，举手再三指天而已，口无所言。
现代文：文宣帝曾经和孩子们一起去见他，一一询问将来自己的俸禄地位，轮到文宣帝时，阿秃师衹是举起手再三指着天而已，嘴上没说什么。
English: Emperor Wenzhong once went to see him with his children, one by one inquiring about his future salary status. When it was Emperor Wenzhong's turn, Ah Chien only raised his hand and repeatedly pointed to the sky, but did not say anything.

古文：见者异之。
现代文：看到的人都感到惊讶。
English: Everyone who saw it was surprised.

古文：高祖尝试观诸子意识，各使治乱丝，帝独抽刀斩之，曰： 乱者须斩。 
现代文：高祖曾经试着观察儿子们的见识，让他们各自整理紊乱的蚕丝，衹有文宣帝拔出刀来砍断了乱丝，说： 乱的东西必须砍断。 
English: Gaozu once tried to observe his sons' insights and let them sort out the disordered silk. Emperor Wenzhong pulled out a knife to cut the tangled silk, saying: "The disordered things must be cut."

古文：高祖是之。
现代文：高祖认为他做得对。
English: Gaozu thinks he did the right thing.

古文：又各配兵四出，而使甲骑伪攻之。
现代文：又各自配给士兵从四面出去，派带甲的骑兵假装攻击他们。
English: And they went out every man with his band on every side, and made the horsemen to come upon them with their chariots.

古文：世宗等怖挠，帝乃勒众与彭乐敌，乐免胄言情，犹擒之以献。
现代文：世宗等人感到恐惧，文宣帝就指挥士兵和彭乐相斗，彭乐脱下锾甲说出真情，还是抓了去献给高祖。
English: Shizong and others were afraid, and Emperor Wenzhong commanded soldiers to fight with Peng Le. Peng Le took off his armor to tell the truth, but he still went to offer it to Gaozhu.

古文：后从世宗行过辽阳山，独见天门开，余人无见者。
现代文：后来跟随世宗巡视经过辽阳山，惟独他看到了天门打开，其余的人没有见到的。
English: Later, he followed Shizong on a tour of Liaoyang Mountain. Only he saw the Heaven's Gate open, the rest of the people did not.

古文：内虽明敏，貌若不足，世宗每嗤之，云： 此人亦得富贵，相法亦何由可解。 
现代文：内心虽然聪明，相貌好像不够好，世宗常常嗤笑他，说： 这样的人也得到富贵，相面的方法从哪裹可以解释。 
English: Although he was clever at heart, his appearance did not seem to be good enough. Shizong often laughed at him, saying, "Such a person also gets rich, how can the method of facial expression be explained?"

古文：唯高祖异之，谓薛琡曰： 此儿意识过吾。 
现代文：衹有苞担认为他舆众不同，对薛墩说： 造孩子的见识超过我。 
English: Zou Yuxuan thought that he was different from the general public, and said to Xue Yao: I have more insight into making children than I do.

古文：幼时师事范阳卢景裕，默识过人，景裕不能测也。
现代文：小时候拜范阳人卢景裕做老师，记忆力超过常人，卢景裕没有预料到。
English: When he was a child, Lu Jingyu, a follower of Fan Yang, was his teacher. Lu Jingyu's memory exceeded that of an ordinary person, which Lu Jingyu did not expect.

古文：天平二年，授散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫、太原郡开国公。
现代文：天平二年，授予散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫、太原郡开国公。
English: In the second year of the Tenpyo era, it was awarded to the horseback riding attendant, the cavalry general, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the doctor of the left light, and the founding father of Taiyuan County.

古文：武定元年，加侍中。
现代文：武定元年，加授侍中。
English: In the first year of Wuding, he was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：二年，转尚书左仆射、领军将军。
现代文：武定二年，转任尚书左仆射、领军将军。
English: In the second year of Wuding, he was transferred to the position of Shangshu Zuopuzha, the leading general.

古文：五年，授尚书令、中书监、京畿大都督。
现代文：武定五年，授予尚书令、中书监、京畿大都督。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuling, the title of Central Book Supervisor, and the title of Gyeonggi Governor.

古文：武定七年八月，世宗遇害，事出仓卒，内外震骇。
现代文：武定七年八月，世宗遇害，事情突然，内外震惊。
English: In August of the seventh year of Wuding, Shizong was killed. The incident was sudden and shocked people both at home and abroad.

古文：帝神色不变，指麾部分，自脔斩群贼而漆其头，徐宣言曰： 奴反，大将军被伤，无大苦也。 
现代文：文宣帝神色不变，指挥处置，亲自用刀剐了盗贼们并将他们的头涂上漆，慢慢放出话说： 奴才造反，大将军受了伤，没有大的痛苦。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan looked unchanged, commanded and disposed of, personally stabbed the thieves with a knife and painted their heads, and slowly said: The slaves rebelled, the general was injured, and there was no great pain.

古文：当时内外莫不惊异焉。
现代文：当时内外无不感到惊讶。
English: At the time, everyone inside and outside the country was surprised.

古文：乃赴晋阳，亲总庶政，务从宽厚，事有不便者咸蠲省焉。
现代文：于是赶赴晋阳，亲自统领政务，务求从宽办理，事情有不方便的全都免省。
English: As a result, he rushed to Jinyang to take charge of government affairs in person, in order to deal with things in a broad-minded manner. All inconvenient matters were exempted from the province.

古文：冬十月癸未朔，以咸阳王坦为太傅，潘相乐为司空。
现代文：冬十月癸未初一，任命咸阳王元坦为太傅，潘相乐为司空。
English: On the first day of winter in October, Xianyang Wangyuan Tan was appointed as Taifu, and Pan Xiangle as Sikuo.

古文：十一月戊午，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月戊午，吐谷潭国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: At noon of November, the State of Tuyetan sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：梁齐州刺史茅灵斌、德州刺史刘领队、南豫州刺史皇甫慎等并以州内属。
现代文：梁国齐州刺史茅灵斌、德州刺史刘领队、南豫州刺史皇甫音等都率本州归附魏国。
English: Liang Guozhou, Qizhou, Shishi Maolingbin, Texas, Shishi Liu, the leader of the team, and South Yuzhou, Shishi Huangfuyin, all led the state to be annexed to Wei.

古文：十二月己酉，以并州刺史彭乐为司徒，太保贺拔仁为并州刺史。
现代文：十二月己酉，任命并州刺史彭乐为司徒，太保贺拔仁为并州刺史。
English: In December of the same year, he appointed the county magistrate, Spen Le, as the magistrate, and the county magistrate, He Baren, as the county magistrate.

古文：八年春正月庚申，梁楚州刺史宋安顾以州内属。
现代文：武定八年春正月庚申，梁国楚州刺史宋安顾率本州归附魏国。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Wuding, Liang's state of Chuzhou was annexed to Wei.

古文：辛酉，魏帝为世宗举哀于东堂。
现代文：辛酉，魏帝在东堂为世宗举行哀悼仪式。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wei held a mourning ceremony for Shizong in the East Hall.

古文：梁定州刺史田聪能、洪州刺史张显等以州内属。
现代文：梁国定州刺史田聪能、洪州刺史退题等率本州归附丝厘。
English: Liang Guo, Dingzhou, Dingzhou, Tiancuneng, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Tiancuneng, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Dingzhou, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Tiancuneng, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Dingzhou, Hongzhou, Dingzhou, Tiancuneng, Hongzhou, Dingzhou,

古文：戊辰，魏诏进帝位使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，食邑一万户。
现代文：戊辰，丝童下韶书晋升文宣帝为使持节、丞相、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王，食邑一万户。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was promoted to the position of envoy, chancellor, military governor of foreign countries, secretary of state, governor of Taigongdae, king of Qi County, and ruler of ten thousand households.

古文：甲戌，地豆于国遣使朝贡。
现代文：甲戌，地豆于国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: Armor, ground beans in the country to send envoys to pay tribute.

古文：三月辛酉，又进封齐王，食冀州之渤海长乐安德武邑、瀛州之河间五郡，邑十万户。
现代文：三月辛酉，又进封为齐王，享用冀州的渤海长乐安德武邑、瀛州的河间五个郡，食邑十万户。
English: In March, Hsinchu and Jinfeng were crowned as the kings of Qi, and enjoyed by 100,000 households in Bohai Changle and Wuyue in Jizhou, and five counties in Hema in Ganzhou.

古文：自居晋阳，寝室夜有光如昼。
现代文：自己居住在晋阳，卧室裹夜间有亮光就和白天一样。
English: He lives in Jinyang. When there is light in his bedroom at night, it is just like the daytime.

古文：既为王，梦人以笔点己额。
现代文：已经成为王，梦见有人用笔在自己的额头上点了一下。
English: After he was crowned king, he dreamt that someone had marked a spot on his forehead with a pen.

古文：旦以告馆客王昙哲曰： 吾其退乎？ 
现代文：天亮后把这梦告诉了门客王昙哲说： 我要引退吗? 
English: After dawn, he told the dream to his doorman, Wang Xizhe, saying: "Do I want to retire?

古文：昙哲再拜贺曰： 王上加点，便成主字，乃当进也。 
现代文：王昙哲拜了两拜祝贺道： 王字上加一点，就成了主字，应当进取。 
English: Wang Zhezhe bowed twice and congratulated: "If you add one point to the word Wang, it becomes the main word, and you should be enterprising."

古文：夏五月辛亥，帝如邺。
现代文：夏五月辛亥，文宣帝到邺城。
English: In the summer and May of Xinhai, Emperor Wenxuan came to Lucheng.

古文：甲寅，进相国，总百揆，封冀州之渤海长乐安德武邑、瀛州之河间高阳章武、定州之中山常山博陵十郡，邑二十万户，加九锡，殊礼，齐王如故。
现代文：甲寅，进升为相国，统领百官，封给冀州的渤海长乐安德武邑、瀛州的河间高阳章武、定州的中山常山博堕十个郡，食邑二十万户，加九锡的仪仗，特殊礼遇，齐王的爵位照旧。
English: Jia Yin was promoted to a peer of the state and became the leader of a hundred officials. He was awarded the titles of Bohai, Changle, and Dengwu in Jizhou, Hema, Gaoyang, and Zhangwu in Ganzhou, and Zhongshan, Changshan, and Bogu in Dingzhou, with ten counties, two hundred thousand households in food villages, the honor of Jiuxi and special courtesy, and the title of King of Qi as before.

古文：魏帝遣兼太尉彭城王韶、司空潘相乐册命曰：
现代文：魏帝派遣兼太尉彭城王元韶、司空潘相乐宣布册封的韶令说：呜呼，敬听朕的命令!
English: Emperor Wei dispatched Pengcheng Wangyuanqian, also known as Taifeng Pengcheng, and Siku Pan Xiangle to announce the royal decree and said: "Wow, listen to my order!

古文：於戏！敬听朕命：夫惟天为大，列晷宿而垂象；谓地盖厚，疏川岳以阜物。
现代文：祇有天是博大的，排列日月星辰而显示天象；地是广厚的，疏导大高山而盛产万物。
English: Only the sky is vast, and the sun, moon, and stars are arranged to show the celestial bodies; the earth is vast, and is dotted with high mountains, and abounds in all things.

古文：所以四时代序，万类骈罗，庶品得性，群形不夭。
现代文：所以四季更迭交替，万物排比罗列，各种物体得其本性，各种形象不致消灭。
English: Therefore, the four seasons alternate, all things are in a row, all kinds of objects have their own nature, and all kinds of images will not be destroyed.

古文：然则皇王统历，深视高居，拱默垂衣，寄成师相，此则夏伯、殷尹竭其股肱，周成、汉昭无为而治。
现代文：既然如此，那么王朝的统治时期，眼观深处安居宫内，拱手沉默无所作为，把成功托付给国师丞相，造就是夏伯、殷尹竭尽辅佐之力，周成王、漠昭帝无须作为而国家得到了治理。
English: If this is so, then during the reign of the dynasty, the eyes of the dynasties were deep in the palace, the hands were silent and did nothing, and the success was entrusted to the minister of state, so that Xia Bo and Yin Yin did their best to assist, and King Zhou Cheng and Emperor Mo Zhao did not have to do anything and the country was governed.

古文：顷者天下多难，国命如旒，则我建国之业将坠于地。
现代文：近来天下多难，国家的命运就像冠冕悬挂的玉串那样不牢靠，而我们建国的基业将坠毁在地。
English: The world is so difficult these days. The fate of the country is as precarious as the jade string hanging from the crown, and the foundation of our country will crash to the ground.

古文：齐献武王奋迅风云，大济艰危，爰翼朕躬，国为再造，经营庶土，以至勤忧。
现代文：齐献武王在动乱的风云中迅速奋起，极力拯救艰难危亡，辅助朕身，国家等于是重建，治理国家，以致积劳成疾而逝。
English: King Qi Xianwu quickly rose up in the turbulent storm, tried his best to save the hardships and dangers, assisted the country, rebuilt the country, and governed the country, so that he died of accumulated labor.

古文：及文襄承构，愈广前业，康邦夷难，道格穹苍。
现代文：等到文襄继承基业，更加扩大了前人的业绩，使国家安康危难平定，道义达到了上天。
English: By the time Wen Xiang succeeded to the inheritance, he had further expanded the achievements of his predecessors, stabilized the country's health and welfare, and raised morality to the highest level.

古文：王纵德应期，千龄一出，惟几惟深，乃神乃圣，大崇霸德，实广相猷。
现代文：王施行仁德应运而生，一千年才出一个，既看到事物的隐微之处又看到事物的精深之处，既有奇特的才能又有最高的智慧和道德，极力推崇霸道，施行丞相的谋略。
English: The king of benevolence came into being at the right time. It took a thousand years to produce a king who could see both the subtleties and the depths of things. He had both extraordinary talent and the highest wisdom and morality. He tried his best to promote tyranny and implement the strategy of the prime minister.

古文：虽冥功妙实，藐绝言象，标声示迹，典礼宜宣。
现代文：虽然神灵的力量精妙真实，轻视弃绝言辞留下的迹象，用声音标明显示事迹，制度礼仪应该公布。
English: Although the power of the gods is subtle and real, despise the signs left by the words of renunciation, show the deeds with the voice, and the system of etiquette should be announced.

古文：今申后命，其敬虚受。
现代文：现在申明后发的命令，敬请虚心接受。
English: I now declare this to be a late order, which I humbly request you to accept.

古文：王抟风初举，建旟上地，庇民立政，时雨滂流，下识廉耻，仁加水陆，移风易俗，自齐变鲁，此王之功也。
现代文：王初出乘风直上，在上党之地竖立旗帜，庇护百姓处理政事，应时的雨水汹涌流出，百姓懂得廉耻，仁爱施加万物，移风易俗，由强悍的齐国转变为讲究礼仪的鲁国，这是王的功劳啊。
English: It is to Wang's credit that he rose to the occasion at the beginning of his reign, erected a banner in the land of the upper party, sheltered the people to deal with political affairs, and the rain at the right time surged out. The people knew how to be shameless, imposed everything with benevolence, changed customs, and transformed from a strong Qi country into a Lu country that paid attention to etiquette.

古文：仍摄天台，总参戎律，策出若神，威行朔土，引弓窜迹，松塞无烟，此又王之功也。
现代文：接替代领尚书，统管军机大事，谋略制出如同神人，威名传扬北方大地，拉开弓弩敌人就逃窜无踪，边塞上不再升起报警的狼烟，逭又是王的功劳啊。
English: He took over the command of the army and navy, managed the affairs of war, devised strategies like a god and man, and spread the fame of the northern land. When he opened his bow and arrow, the enemy fled without a trace, and there was no longer any smoke from the alarm on the border fort. This was the king's achievement.

古文：逮光统前绪，持衡匡合，华戎混一，风海调夷，日月光华，天地清晏，声接响随，无思不偃，此又王之功也。
现代文：等到总管前人的基业，保持稳定统一国家，华夏民族和西方民族融为一体，风向和海潮谐调子和，日月光芒照耀，天地清明宁静，如同声音一响回音随之而起，没有不想归附的，逭又是王的功劳啊。
English: Wait until the foundation of the predecessor of the general manager, maintain a stable and unified country, the Chinese nation and the Western nation are integrated, the wind direction and the sea tide are in harmony, the sun and the moon shine, the sky and the earth are clear and quiet, as if a sound echoes, there is nothing that does not want to attach, and it is the king's merit.

古文：逖矣炎方，逋违正朔，怀文曜武，授略申规，淮楚连城，漼然桑落，此又王之功也。
现代文：遥远啊炎热的南方，违背我朝制订的历法，王既安抚笼络人心又炫耀武力，授予谋略申明法度，淮楚一带相连的城池，像桑叶凋落一样瓦解，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: In the distant, hot south, contrary to the calendar established by our dynasty, the king not only appeased the hearts of the people but also flaunted force, granted strategies and affirmed laws, and the connected cities around Huaichu disintegrated like the fall of mulberry leaves. This is again the king's merit.

古文：关、岘衿带，跨蹑萧条，肠胃之地，岳立鸱跱，偏师才指，涣同冰散，此又王之功也。晋熙之所，险薄江雷，迥隔声教，迷方未改，命将鞠旅，覆其巢穴，威略风腾，倾慑南海，此又王之功也。
现代文：潼关、岘山如衣带环绕相连，跨越人烟稀少的地方，像肠胃一样迂回曲折，像山岳耸立鸱鸟对峙，侧翼的军队方才出动，就像冰块消散一样崩溃，这又是王的功劳啊晋熙逭块地方，地势脸要接近长江，远隔声威教化，迷失方向不能改变，命令将领带领军队，摧毁他们的巢穴，威势谋略像大风腾起，压倒慑服南海，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: Shaoguan and Shaoshan are connected like a girdle, crossing the sparsely populated places, winding like a stomach, confronting like a mountain-towering ostrich, the flanking army has just been dispatched, and collapses like an ice cube dissipating, which is the king's merit, ah, Jinxi, a land where the face is close to the Yangtze River, far away from the sound of authority, and the direction of disorientation cannot be changed, ordered the general to lead the army and destroy their nests, and the power strategy is like a gale, overwhelming the South China Sea, which is the king's merit.

古文：群蛮跋扈，世绝南疆，摇荡边垂，亟为尘梗，怀德畏威，向风请顺，倾陬尽落，其至如云，此又王之功也。
现代文：各蛮族狂妄放肆，在南部边疆与世隔绝，扰乱动荡边境，屡次造成祸害，他们感受恩德畏惧威势，仰慕请求归顺，所有的村寨和聚落，他们的到来如同云彩堆涌，遣又是王的功劳啊。
English: The barbarians, insolent and intemperate, cut themselves off from the rest of the world on the southern frontier, disturbed the turbulent frontier, and repeatedly caused mischief. They felt the grace, feared the power, admired and asked for submission. All the villages and settlements, their arrival was like a cloud of clouds. It was the king's merit to send them.

古文：胡人别种，延蔓山谷，酋渠万族，广袤千里，凭险不恭，恣其桀黠，有乐淳风，相携叩款，粟帛之调，王府充积，此又王之功也。
现代文：胡人的另一种族，在山谷中繁衍发展，首领统辖上万个部落，占据的地方有千里之广，凭藉着险要不肯归附，肆意表现他们的凶悍狡猾，现在他们乐于接受淳朴的风俗，手拉手前来叩拜朝见，粮食布帛的调运，堆满了王家的府库，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: The Hu people, another race, multiplied and developed in the valley. The chiefs ruled over tens of thousands of tribes and occupied thousands of miles of territory. They freely showed their fierce cunning by risking or refusing to join. Now they are happy to accept the simple customs. They come hand in hand to worship the Imperial Court. The transportation of grain bales has filled the royal treasury. This is the king's merit.

古文：茫茫涉海，世敌诸华，风行鸟逝，倏来忽往，既饮醇醪，附同胶漆，毛裘委仞，奇兽衔尾，此又王之功也。
现代文：进入茫茫的大海，世代与华夏为敌，像风一样飘行像乌一样飞逝，一会儿来一会儿往，现在喝着浓浓的美酒，像胶和漆一样归附，皮毛制的衣服堆积如山，珍奇的野兽首尾相连，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: Entering the vast sea, generations are enemies of China, drifting like the wind, flying like dust, coming and going for a while, now drinking strong wine, adhering like glue and paint, fur-made clothes piled up like a mountain, rare beasts are connected end to end, this is the king's merit.

古文：秦川尚阻，作我仇雠，爰挹椒兰，飞书请好，天动其衷，辞卑礼厚，区宇乂宁，遐迩毕至，此又王之功也。
现代文：秦地的河流还阻隔不通，成为我们的仇敌，现在带着美好的椒和兰，传来书信请求和好，上天被他们的诚意所感动，言辞谦卑礼物丰厚，天下安宁，远方近处都来归附，遣又是王的功劳啊。
English: The rivers of Qin were still impassable and had become our enemies. Now, with the beautiful peppers and orchids, came letters requesting reconciliation. Heaven was moved by their sincerity. Humble words and rich gifts abounded. The world was at peace. People from near and far came to join us. It was the king's merit to send them.

古文：江阴告祸，民无适归，萧宗子弟，尚相投庇，如鸟还山，犹川赴海，荆江十部，俄而献割，乘此会也，将混朱方，此又王之功也。
现代文：长江以南报告了灾祸，老百姓没有合适的依靠，萧氏家族的子弟，尚且前来投靠请求庇护，像飞鸟返回大山，像河流奔向大海，荆、江一带十州，不久献出划归，乘这个机会，将要统一南方，遣又是王的功劳啊。
English: South of the Yangtze River, a calamity has been reported, and the people have no proper support. The sons of the Xiao family have come to seek refuge and ask for asylum. Like birds returning to the mountains, like rivers rushing to the sea, the ten prefectures along the Yangtze and Yangtze rivers will soon return. Taking this opportunity, the south will be unified. It is the king's merit to send them.

古文：天平地成，率土咸茂，祯符显见，史不停笔，既连百木，兼呈九尾，素过秦雀，苍比周乌，此又王之功也。
现代文：万事妥帖，天下太平，国家兴旺，吉祥的事物到处显现，史官不停笔地记录下来，已经有了相连的百棵树木，又出现了九尾的鸟，白超过了秦国的雀，黑超过了周朝的乌，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: Everything is in order, the world is at peace, the country is flourishing, auspicious things are appearing everywhere. Historians are constantly recording them. There are already hundreds of connected trees, and birds with nine tails have appeared. White has surpassed the sparrow of Qin, and black has surpassed the owl of Zhou. This is again the king's merit.

古文：搜扬管库，衣冠获序，礼云乐云，销沉俱振，轻徭彻赋，矜狱宽刑，大信外彰，深仁远洽，此又王之功也。
现代文：搜求发扬库中的旧物，礼制教化恢复了秩序，礼怎么说乐怎么说，过去消亡沉寂的都振兴起来，减轻徭役撤销赋税，同情狱犯宽缓刑罚，真诚的信义彰扬在外，深切的仁爱广施远方，这又是王的功劳啊。
English: The search for and development of old things in the library, the re-education of the etiquette system restored order, how to say how to say how to say how to say, the dead and silent in the past have been revitalized, the bailiff has been relieved and the tax has been revoked, the prisoner has been pardoned, the sincere faith has been promoted outside, and the deep benevolence has been spread far and wide. This is the king's merit.

古文：王有安日下之大勋，加以表光明之盛德，宣赞洪猷，以左右朕言。
现代文：王有安定天下的伟大功勋，加上表现了光明磊落的盛大美德，弘扬参与了宏大的谋略，来辅佐朕。
English: Wang You has the great merit of stabilizing the world, as well as the great virtue of being honest and upright, and has participated in the grand strategy to assist us.

古文：昔旦、奭外分，毛、毕入佐，出内之任，王宜总之。
现代文：过去周公旦、召公奭得到外任的职分，毛公、毕公进入朝廷辅佐，朝廷内外的职任，王应该统领。
English: In the past, Zhou Gongdan and Zhao Gongjun were promoted to outside positions, Mao Gong and Bi Gong entered the imperial court as assistants, and the king should be in charge of positions inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：人谋鬼谋，两仪协契，锡命之行，义申公道。
现代文：人的谋略与占卜吉凶，天地协调一致，施行天子赐予的诏命，意义在于申明公道。
English: The significance of affirming justice lies in the fact that man's strategy and divination are in harmony, heaven and earth are in harmony, and the imperial edict given by the Son of Heaven is carried out.

古文：以王践律蹈礼，轨物苍生，圆首安志，率心归道，是以锡王大路、戎路各一，玄牡二驷。
现代文：因为王履行法令遵循礼制，给百姓制订准则，人人安心，尽心归附正道，所以赐给王玉辂车、兵车各一辆，黑色公马八匹。
English: Because the king followed the rules of etiquette in carrying out his decrees, and set standards for the people, so that everyone could feel at ease and wholeheartedly adhere to the right path, the king was given a jade chariot, a chariot, and eight black stallions.

古文：王深重民天，唯本是务，衣食之用，荣辱所由，是用锡王衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：王十分重视民以食为天的道理，致力于农桑的根本，衣食的效用，是荣耀与耻辱的根由，所以赐给王上公的礼服和礼帽，配上红色的鞋子。
English: The king attaches great importance to the principle that food is the people's heaven, and is committed to the root of the agricultural mulberry, the utility of clothing and food, is the root of glory and shame, so he gave the prince a dress and a hat, with red shoes.

古文：王深广惠和，易调风化，神祗且格，功德可象，是用锡王轩悬之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：王极力推广仁爱和顺，改变调节风俗教化，触动了天地之神，功德可以效仿，所以赐给王轩悬的乐器，六佾的舞蹈。
English: Wang vigorously promoted benevolence and harmony, changed and adjusted customs and education, touched the gods of heaven and earth, and his merits can be emulated, so he gave Wang Xuan a suspended musical instrument and a six-stringed dance.

古文：王风声振赫，九域咸绥，远人率俾，奔走委赆，是用锡王朱户以居。
现代文：王的声威远播显赫，中央和八方地带全都安宁，远方的人相继来使，在路上奔走送来进贡的礼物，所以赐给王朱户居住。
English: The king's fame spread far and wide. The central and eastern regions were all peaceful. People from far away came one after another to send tribute gifts. Therefore, King Zhu was given a house to live in.

古文：王求贤选众，草莱以尽，陈力就列，罔非其人，是用锡王纳陛以登。
现代文：王渴求贤才广选于众人，民间的人才已经挑尽，施展才力排在职官行列中的，没有不是这样的人才，所以赐给王 纳陛 上殿的礼遇。
English: The king yearns for talented people to be chosen from the masses. He has exhausted the talent of the people, and there is no talent that is not in the ranks of officials, so he gave His Majesty Wang Na the courtesy of the upper hall.

古文：王英图猛概，抑扬千品，毅然之节，肃是非违，是用锡王武贲之士三百人。
现代文：王英明的谋略和勇猛的气概，贬斥奖掖百官，以刚毅果断的气节，敬重对的责难错的，所以赐给王护卫勇士三百人。
English: Because of Wang Yingming's cunning strategy and courageous spirit, and because of Wang Yingming's awarding of prizes to hundreds of officials, and because of Wang Yingming's determination and resolute spirit, and because of Wang Yingming's respect for those who could not be blamed for mistakes, 300 warriors were given to Wang Yingming.

古文：王兴亡所系，制极幽显，纠行天讨，罪人咸得，是用锡王鈇钺各一。
现代文：王关系到国家的兴亡，制定了阴间和阳问的标准，督察施行上天的惩罚，有罪的人都得到了处理，所以赐给王鈇和钹各一件。
English: The king was related to the rise and fall of the country, he set the standard for the underworld and the sun, the inspector carried out the punishment of heaven, and the guilty were dealt with, so he gave one to the king and one to the eunuch.

古文：王鹰扬豹变，实扶下土，狼顾鸱张，罔不弹射，是用锡王彤弓一、彤矢百、卢弓十、卢矢千。
现代文：王扬威应变，扶助天下，凶暴嚣张的人，没有不镇压的，所以赐给王红色的弓一张，红色的箭百支，黑色的弓十张，黑色的箭千支。
English: There is no violent and arrogant person who does not suppress, so give the king a red bow, a hundred red arrows, ten black bows, and a thousand black arrows.

古文：王孝悌之至，通于神明，率民兴行，感达区宇，是用锡王秬鬯一卣，珪瓒副焉。
现代文：王十分孝敬父母友爱兄弟，感动了神灵，带领百姓推广实行，感化达到整个天下，所以赐给王香酒一樽，配上玉制的酒杓。
English: Wang was very filial to his parents, loved his brothers and sisters, moved the gods, led the people to promote and implement, and influenced the whole world, so he gave Wang Xiangwu a barrel, complete with a golden goblet.

古文：往钦哉。
现代文：回去后恭敬地执行韶命吧。
English: Go back and respectfully carry out your orders.

古文：其祗顺往册，保弼皇家，用终尔休德，对扬我太祖之显命。
现代文：要恭敬地顺从以往的册命，保卫辅佐皇家，最终完成你的大德，报答称扬我太祖的美好命令。
English: You must respectfully obey the previous orders, protect and assist the royal family, finally complete your great virtue, and reward and praise my great-grandfather's beautiful order.

古文：魏帝以天人之望有归，丙辰，下诏曰：三才剖判，百王代兴，治天静地，和神敬鬼，庇民造物，咸自灵符，非一人之大宝，实有道之神器。
现代文：魏帝因上天和人心的希望有所归依，丙辰，下韶书说：天地人三才的开辟，历代帝王的更迭兴起，治理上天安定大地，对鬼神和睦恭敬，保护百姓造化万物，都来自上天的符命，并不是一个人的帝位，而实在是有道之人的神物。
English: Emperor Wei was converted due to the hope of heaven and people's hearts, and the next imperial edict said: the opening up of heaven and earth, the rise of successive emperors, the governance of heaven and earth, the harmony and respect for ghosts and gods, the protection of the people and the creation of all things, all come from the fate of heaven. It is not a person's imperial throne, but it is really the god of the people with the way.

古文：昔我宗祖应运，奄一区宇，历圣重光，暨于九叶。
现代文：以前我的先祖顺应天命，统一天下，历代为帝光辉相承，到现在已有九代。
English: In the past, my ancestors obeyed the destiny of heaven, unified the country, and passed down the imperial glory from generation to generation. Now, there have been nine generations.

古文：德之不嗣，仍离屯圮，盗名字者遍于九服，擅制命者非止三公，主杀朝危，人神靡系，天下之大，将非魏有。
现代文：德行不能承袭，一再遭受灾祸，欺世盗名的人遍布全国各地，擅自制定王命的不止是三公，君主被杀朝廷危亡，凡人和神灵都没有了依靠，天下的广大，将不再归魏所有。
English: Virtue cannot be inherited, it has repeatedly suffered disasters, people who cheat the world and steal names are all over the country, it is not only the Three Princes who set the king's order without authorization, the monarch was killed and the court was in danger of dying, mortals and gods have no support, and the vastness of the world will no longer belong to Wei.

古文：赖齐献武王奋扬灵武，克剪多难，重悬日月，更缀参辰，庙以扫除，国由再造，鸿勋巨业，无德而称。
现代文：幸亏齐献武王奋起发扬神奇的武略，平定剪除许多危难，重新悬挂日月，再次联缀星辰，宗庙得以清除，国家由此重建，伟大的功勋宏伟的事业，其德行之高是无法称说的。
English: Fortunately, Qi Xianwu Wang rose up to carry out the magical military strategy, pacified and eliminated many dangers, re-suspended the sun and moon, re-attached the stars, the ancestral temple was cleared, and the country was rebuilt. Great merit and magnificent cause, its high virtue is beyond description.

古文：逮文襄承构，世业逾广，迩安远服，海内晏如，国命已康，生生得性。
现代文：到了文襄王继承基业，先人的事业更加扩展，近处安宁远方归顺，天下太平，国家的命运已经康复，人民繁衍不息。
English: By the time King Wenxiang succeeded to the inheritance, the cause of the ancestors had been further expanded, the nearby areas were peaceful, the distant areas were submissive, the world was peaceful, the country's fate had been restored, and the people continued to multiply.

古文：迄相国齐王，纬文经武，统兹大业，尽睿穷几，研深测化，思随冥运，智与神行，恩比春天，威同夏日，坦至心于万物，被大道于八方，故百僚师师，朝无秕政，网疏泽洽，率土归心。
现代文：到了相国齐王，文才武略兼备，统领这宏大的事业，竭尽智慧洞察隐微，研习精深预测变化，思绪随着鬼魂转动，智谋伴同神灵运行，恩德好像春天威武如同夏日，为万物敞开至诚的心，给八方普施大道，所以百官相互师法，朝廷没有不好的治理措施，法网宽疏恩泽滋润，天下诚心归附。
English: When he came to his fatherland, King Qi, he was a man of great literary and military ability, and he led this great cause. He made every effort to gain wisdom and insight into subtleties, studied hard to predict changes, his thoughts turned with ghosts, and his wisdom and strategy ran with the gods. He was generous like spring, powerful like summer, and he opened his sincere heart to all things, and gave the road to all directions. Therefore, all officials taught each other the law, there were no bad governance measures in the imperial court, the legal network was broad, grace was moist, and the whole world was sincerely attached.

古文：外尽江淮，风靡屈膝，辟地怀人，百城奔走，关陇慕义而请好，瀚漠仰德而致诚。伊所谓命世应期，实抚千载。
现代文：外面直到江淮一带，响应屈服，开辟疆土安抚人心，上百座城奔走回归，关陇一带敬慕大义而请求和好，瀚漠仰望美德而表达诚意，逭就是所谓的享誉当世应运而生，安抚千年。
English: Outwardly, as far as the Huai River and the Yangtze River, the response is to yield, open up the territory to appease the hearts of the people, hundreds of cities are rushing to return, the Guanzhong area respects the great righteousness and requests reconciliation, the vastness looks up to virtue and expresses sincerity, and the so-called reputation comes into being in response to the times, and appeases the millennium.

古文：祯符杂遝，异物同途，讴颂填委，殊方一致，代终之迹斯表，人灵之契已合，天道不远，我不独知。
现代文：吉祥的征兆杂沓而来，不同的事物表达共同的意向，讽歌赞颂纷纷汇集，朝代终结的迹象已经表露，世人和神灵的默契已经相合，上天的旨命已经不远了。这不衹是我所知道的了。
English: The auspicious signs are mixed, different things express a common intention, sarcastic songs and praises are gathered, the signs of the end of the dynasty have been revealed, the tacit understanding between the world and the gods has been matched, and the will of heaven is not far away. This is what I know.

古文：朕入纂鸿休，将承世祀，籍援立之厚，延宗社之算，静言大运，欣于避贤，远惟唐、虞禅代之典，近想魏、晋揖让之风，其可昧兴替之礼，稽神祇之望？
现代文：朕继承帝业，将要承袭世代的祭祀，凭藉辅助扶立的厚实基础，延续宗庙和社稷的谋划。静静地思考上天的旨意，乐意退让给贤人，遥思唐尧、虞舜禅位的故事，近想魏、晋礼让的风气，大概可以领会兴衰更迭的礼制，同神灵的愿望相合?
English: I inherit the imperial heritage, will inherit the sacrificial rites of generations, and with the help of the thick foundation of the supporting pillars, continue the planning of the ancestral temple and the shrine. Quietly thinking about the will of heaven, willing to concede to the sages, thinking about the story of Tang Xuan and Gu Yao's Zen, and thinking about the Wei and Jin eras, I can probably understand the rise and fall of the ritual system, which is in line with the wishes of the gods?

古文：今便逊于别宫，归帝位于齐国，推圣与能，眇符前轨。
现代文：现在就退位到另外的宫殿，把帝位归给齐国，稍稍符合前人的制度。
English: Now abdicate to another palace and give the throne to Qi, a little bit in line with the previous system.

古文：主者宣布天下，以时施行。
现代文：主事的人向天下宣布，及时施行。
English: The person in charge of the matter shall announce it to the world and implement it in a timely manner.

古文：又使兼太尉彭城王韶、兼司空敬显俊奉册曰：咨尔相国齐王：夫气分形化，物系君长，皇王递兴，人非一姓。
现代文：又派遣兼太尉彭城王元韶、兼司空敬显俊手捧诏书说：啊，相国齐王：大气的划分和形状的变化，事物都关联到君主，帝王交替兴盛，做皇帝的人不是一个姓氏。
English: He also dispatched Wang Yuanjun, who was also the first lieutenant of Pengcheng, and Jing Xianjun, who was also the second-in-command of the air force, to hold up the imperial edict and said: Ah, King Qi of the same country: the division of the atmosphere and the change of shape, things are all related to the monarch, the emperor alternately flourishes, and the person who is the emperor is not a surname.

古文：昔放勋驭世，沉璧属子；重华握历，持衡拥璇。
现代文：以前放勋驾御天下，在河裹沉下玉璧嘱托儿子；重华手握历法，执掌权柄。
English: In the past, Zhuang Xun ruled the world, and after he was drowned in a river, he entrusted his son to Jade Bi; Chonghua held the calendar in his hand and held power.

古文：所以英贤茂实，昭晰千古，岂盛衰有运，兴废在时，知命不得不授，畏天不可不受。
现代文：所以才德出众的人取得丰硕的成果，千年名声显扬，难道繁荣衰亡都有定数，兴盛废黜都在时机，知道天命不得不授予，畏惧天命不得不接受。
English: Therefore, people with outstanding talents have achieved fruitful results, and their reputation has been prominent for thousands of years. Isn't it true that prosperity and decline have a fixed number, and prosperity and decline are all opportune? They know that the fate of heaven has to be granted, and fearing the fate of heaven has to be accepted.

古文：是故汉刘告否，当涂顺民，曹历不永，金行纳禅，此皆重规袭矩，率由旧章者也。
现代文：因此汉朝告谕困厄，魏朝顺应了民意，曹氏的年代不能长久，晋朝接受了惮让，这都是循规蹈矩，沿用旧的制度啊。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty announced that it was in trouble, the Wei Dynasty conformed to the will of the people, the Cao Dynasty could not last long, and the Jin Dynasty accepted concessions. All of this was according to the rules and followed the old system.

古文：我祖宗光宅，混一万宇。
现代文：我的祖先据有帝位，统一天下。
English: My ancestors had the imperial throne and unified the country.

古文：迄于正光之末，奸孽乘权，厥政多僻，九域离荡。
现代文：到了正光末年，奸邪的人篡夺了权力，治政措施多邪恶不正，国家动荡不安。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, evil people usurped power, the governance measures were mostly evil and unfair, and the country was unstable.

古文：永安运穷，人灵殄瘁，群逆滔天，割裂四海，国土臣民，行非魏有。
现代文：永安年间运数窘迫，百姓陷入困苦，反叛者罪恶滔天，割据分裂国家，国家的领土和臣子百姓，将不再归魏国所有。
English: During the Yongan period, the number of troops was in distress, the people were in distress, the rebels were guilty of heinous crimes, and the country was divided. The country's territory and the people of the vassals would no longer belong to Wei.

古文：齐献武王应期授手，凤举龙骧，举废极以立天，扶倾柱而镇地，剪灭黎毒，匡我坠历，有大德于魏室，被博利于苍生。
现代文：齐献武王顺应时运伸手救援，像凤一样飘然高举像龙一样昂然腾跃，举起废弃的大梁来支撑上天，扶起倾倒的柱子来稳定大地，扫除带给百姓的祸害，匡扶被毁坏的帝业，对魏朝有极大的功德，给百姓施予博厚的利益。
English: Qi Xianwu, the King of Wu, in accordance with the time, stretched out his hand for rescue, soared like a phoenix, leapt like a dragon, lifted up the abandoned girders to support the sky, lifted up the fallen pillars to stabilize the earth, swept away the scourge brought to the people, and supported the destroyed imperial cause. He had great merits for the Wei Dynasty and gave generous benefits to the people.

古文：及文襄继轨，诞光前业，内剿凶权，外摧侵叛，遐迩肃晏，功格上玄。
现代文：等到文襄继承传统，发扬光大前人的业绩，对内剿灭弄权的奸臣，对外摧毁侵略作乱的敌人，远近整肃安宁，功劳达到了上天。
English: By the time Wen Xiang inherited the tradition and carried forward the achievements of his illustrious predecessors, destroyed the treacherous vassals who tried to usurp power from within, destroyed the enemies who invaded and caused turmoil from the outside, and rectified the peace and tranquility from near and far, his achievements had reached the heavens.

古文：王神祇协德，舟梁一世，体文昭武，追变穷微。
现代文：王德行和神灵相合，像舟梁一样引导一代，实行文治显扬武功，追究变化穷尽精微。
English: Wang Dexing and the gods coincide, guiding a generation like a boat beam, practicing the rule of law, showing martial arts, and investigating changes to the finest detail.

古文：自举迹藩旟，颂歌总集，入统机衡，风猷弘远。
现代文：自从开始统领一方，称颂的歌声汇总相集，进入朝廷总管朝政，风教德化更加深远。
English: Since he began to preside over the party, the songs of praise have been compiled and collected, and he has entered the imperial court as the head of the imperial government, and the moralization of the culture has become more profound.

古文：及大承世业，扶国昌家，相德日跻，霸风愈邈，威灵斯畅，则荒远奔驰，声略所播，而邻敌顺款。
现代文：等到全面继承父兄的事业，扶助国家繁荣家族，感恩的心意一天天上升，圆霸的影响更加深远，神威畅通则荒僻遥远的人奔跑着前来投靠，声誉传扬则邻近的敌人归顺臣服。
English: Wait until you fully inherit the cause of your father and brother, support the country's prosperity and family, and the spirit of gratitude will rise day by day, the influence of the Round Tower will be more far-reaching, the power will be smooth, the remote and distant people will run to come and take refuge, and the reputation will be spread, and the nearby enemies will be obedient and submissive.

古文：以富有之资，运英特之气，顾眄之间，无思不服。
现代文：以富有的天资，运用超群不凡的才智，转眼看去的时候，没有不想服从的。
English: With a rich talent, using extraordinary talent, when you look around, there is no one who does not want to obey.

古文：图谍潜蕴，千祀彰明，嘉祯幽秘，一朝纷委，以表代德之期，用启兴邦之迹，苍苍在上，照临不远。
现代文：图籍表册无形中蕴含，千年传播显扬，吉祥征兆隐藏不露，一时间纷纷显现，以表现德行更替的时期，来显示国家兴旺的迹象，苍天在上，光辉的照耀不会速了。
English: The picture album is contained in the invisible, the millennium is spreading, the auspicious signs are hidden and not revealed, and they appear one after another, to show the period of moral change, to show the signs of the country's prosperity, the sky is up, and the brilliance will not be fast.

古文：朕以虚昧，犹未逡巡，静言愧之，坐而待旦。
现代文：朕因为空虚愚昧，还没有犹豫不定，静静地感到自己惭愧，坐下来等待天明。
English: I did not hesitate because of the emptiness and stupidity, quietly felt ashamed of myself, sat down and waited for the dawn.

古文：且时来运往，妫舜不暇以当阳，世革命改，伯禹不容于北面，况于寡薄，而可踟蹰。
现代文：况且时命运敷有来也有去，妈舜没有空闲登临帝位，世事变更命运改定，伯禹不能接受面北称帝，何况我这样德行寡薄的人，还可以犹豫彷徨。
English: Moreover, fate comes and goes all the time. Mazu had no time to ascend to the throne. When the world changes, fate changes. Bo Yu can't accept Mian Bei as emperor. Moreover, I, a person with little virtue, can still hesitate.

古文：是以仰协穹昊，俯从百姓，敬以帝位式授于王。
现代文：因此上符合上天的意旨，下服从百姓的意愿，恭敬地将帝位授给王。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the will of heaven above, and in obedience to the will of the people below, he respectfully bestowed the throne to the king.

古文：天禄永终，大命格矣。
现代文：天赐的福禄永远终结，魏朝的命敷已经到了。
English: The blessing of heaven has ended forever, and the doom of the Wei Dynasty has arrived.

古文：于戏！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：其祗承历数，允执其中，对扬天休，斯年千万，岂不盛欤！
现代文：望尊敬地接受上天赐给的运数，公允地掌握中正之道，称扬报答上天的美意，千年万年，难道会不兴盛吗!
English: Hoping to respectfully accept the number of operations given by God, fairly grasp the middle and correct way, praise and reward the goodwill of God, for thousands of years, will it not prosper?

古文：又致玺书于帝，遣兼太保彭城王韶、兼司空敬显俊奉皇帝玺绶，禅代之礼一依唐虞、汉魏故事。
现代文：又送给文宣帝韶书，派遣兼太保彭城王元韵、兼司空敬显俊手捧皇帝的印玺，惮让的礼仪一律依照卢虞、汉魏的旧例。
English: He also sent an imperial edict to Emperor Wenzhong, and dispatched concurrently the imperial bodyguard Pengcheng Wangyuan Rong and concurrently the imperial secretary Kong Jingxianjun to hold the emperor's seal. The etiquette of the handing over of the imperial seal was in accordance with the old example of Lu Yu, Han Dynasty and Wei Dynasty.

古文：又尚书令高隆之率百僚劝进。
现代文：又尚书令高隆之率领百官劝登帝位。
English: He also ordered Gao Long to lead hundreds of officials to persuade him to ascend to the throne.

古文：戊午，乃即皇帝位于南郊，升坛柴燎告天曰：皇帝臣洋敢用玄牡昭告于皇皇后帝：否泰相沿，废兴迭用，至道无亲，应运斯辅。
现代文：戊午，于是在南郊登皇帝位，登上高台烧柴祭祀祷告上天说：皇帝臣高洋胆敢使用黑色的公牛，明确告知天帝：运敷的好坏相互承接，国家的衰亡兴旺交互更替，上天的规律是不问亲近。衹帮助顺应运敷的人。
English: In the afternoon, he ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs, and ascended to the high ground to burn firewood and offer sacrifices and pray to heaven, saying: Emperor Gaoyang dared to use a black bull, and clearly told the Heavenly Emperor: the good and bad luck of fortune-telling succeed each other, the decline and prosperity of the country alternate with each other, and the rule of heaven is not to ask for closeness.

古文：上览唐、虞，下稽魏、晋，莫不先天揖让，考历终归。
现代文：上观览唐、虞，下考察魏、晋，没有不是先于天时禅让帝位，考虑天命授位的时间归于终结。
English: If we look at the Tang and Yu Dynasties on the one hand, and the Wei and Jin Dynasties on the other hand, we can see that it was not the time for Zen to abdicate the throne before the time of heaven, and that the time for conferring the throne according to the will of heaven was over.

古文：魏氏多难，年将三十，孝昌已后，内外去之。
现代文：魏国多难。已将近三十年，孝昌帝以后，朝廷内外离心离德。
English: It has been nearly thirty years since Emperor Xiaochang, and the imperial court and beyond have been drifting away from Germany.

古文：世道横流，苍生涂炭。
现代文：社会动荡不安，百姓陷入困境。
English: The society is in turmoil and the people are in a difficult situation.

古文：赖我献武，拯其将溺，三建元首，再立宗祧，扫绝群凶，芟夷奸宄。德被黔黎，勋光宇宙。
现代文：幸亏我齐献武王，从将要溺死时拯救了他们，三次扶立皇帝，重新建立宗庙，扫荡消灭了凶恶的人，铲除平定了奸贼，恩德施予百姓，功勋照耀宇宙。
English: Fortunately, I devoted myself to King Wu, saved them from drowning, helped to establish the emperor three times, re-established the ancestral temple, swept away and eliminated the evil people, eliminated and leveled the traitors, bestowed grace on the people, and shined the universe.

古文：文襄嗣武，克构鸿基，功浃寰宇，威陵海外，穷发怀音，西寇纳款，青丘保候，丹穴来庭，扶翼危机，重匡颓运，是则有大造于魏室也。
现代文：齐文襄王继承武功，建立了宏大的基业，功绩遍于天下，威风越过边外，北方的不毛之地感激恩德，西边的贼寇降伏归顺，青丘国保证听候命令，丹穴之地前来朝见进贡，在危急关头给予扶助，改变了衰亡的命运，这对魏朝有了极大的功劳。
English: King Qibin Xiang inherited military exploits and established a grand foundation. His exploits spread all over the world, and his prestige went beyond the borders. The barren land in the north was grateful to Germany, the thieves and robbers in the west surrendered, the Qingqiu country promised to obey orders, and the Danhua country came to pay tribute to the imperial court, provided assistance at a critical moment, and changed the fate of decline and death. This was a great service to the Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏帝以卜世告终，上灵厌德，钦若昊天，允归大命，以禅于臣洋。
现代文：魏帝因预料国运将宣告终绪，天帝厌恶魏朝的德行，恭敬地顺从上天的旨意，真诚地归依天命，将帝位禅让给臣高洋。
English: In anticipation of the end of the National Movement, Emperor Wei, disgusted by the virtuous behavior of the Wei Dynasty, respectfully obeyed the will of Heaven, sincerely submitted to the will of Heaven, and ceded the imperial throne to his vassal Gaoyang.

古文：夫四海至公，天下为一，总民宰世，树之以君，既川岳启符，人神效祉，群公卿士，八方兆庶，佥曰皇极乃顾于上，魏朝推进于下，天位不可以暂虚。
现代文：四海归于国家，天下合为一统，总领百姓主宰世界，将君主树立起来。既然山川显示吉祥的征兆，入神呈现幸福的气象，众多的官员，八方的百姓，都说天帝在上期盼着，魏朝在下推动促成，帝位不能够一时空虚。
English: The four seas belong to the country, the whole world is unified, the general people dominate the world, and the monarch is established. Since the mountains and rivers show auspicious signs, and the weather is blissfully happy, many officials and people in all directions say that the Heavenly Emperor is looking forward to it, and the Wei Dynasty is promoting it, and the throne cannot be empty for a while.

古文：遂逼群议，恭膺大典。
现代文：于是被大家的建议所逼迫，恭敬地服从盛大的典礼。
English: So he was forced by everyone's suggestion to respectfully submit to the grand ceremony.

古文：猥以寡薄，托于兆民之上，虽天威在颜，咫尺无远，循躬自省，实怀祗惕。
现代文：我以寡薄的德行，托付在百姓之上，上天的威严显现在脸上，近在咫尺，躬身反省自己，实在是心怀敬畏。
English: I entrust myself to the people with a meager virtue, the majesty of heaven appears on my face, close at hand, I bow down and reflect on myself, I am truly awestruck.

古文：敬简元辰，升坛受禅，肆类上帝，以答万国之心，永隆嘉祉，保祐有齐，以被于无穷之祚。
现代文：恭敬地选择良辰吉，登上高台接受禅位，给上天举行祭天之礼，以报答天下人的心意，使幸福长久兴盛，保佑齐朝，给以享受无穷无尽的福运。
English: Respectfully choose good fortune, climb to the top of the platform to accept the zen position, and hold a sacrifice to the heavens to repay the hearts of the people of the world, so that happiness can flourish for a long time, bless the Qi Dynasty, and enjoy endless good fortune.

古文：是日，京师获赤雀，献于南郊。
现代文：逭一天，京城捕获红色的雀鸟，在南郊献祭宗庙。
English: One day, the capital captured a red bird and sacrificed it in the southern suburb of the ancestral temple.

古文：事毕，还宫，御太极前殿。诏曰： 无德而称，代刑以礼，不言而信，先春后秋。
现代文：事情完毕后，回到宫中，来到太极前殿下诏书说：没有德行而称帝，用礼节代替刑罚，不用言语而取得信义，像先有春天后有秋天那样井然有序。
English: After the matter was over, he returned to the palace and came to the front of the Taiji Hall. His imperial edict said, "Praise the emperor without virtue, use etiquette instead of punishment, gain loyalty without words, and be as orderly as there is a spring and an autumn."

古文：故知恻隐之化，天人一揆，弘宥之道，今古同风。
现代文：所以知道怜悯同情的教化，上天人间同一个道理，宽宏大量的方式，今古同一种风尚。
English: Therefore, knowing the enlightenment of compassion and sympathy, the same principle of heaven and earth, the way of magnanimity, and the same style in ancient times.

古文：朕以虚薄，功业无纪。
现代文：朕因为空虚浅薄，没有立下什么功业。
English: Because I am empty and shallow, I have not made any achievements.

古文：昔先献武王值魏世不造，九鼎行出，乃驱御侯伯，大号燕、赵，拯厥颠坠，俾亡则存。
现代文：以前已故的齐献武王正逢魏朝不幸，国家大权旁落，于是驱使控制诸侯，在燕、赵之地大发号令，拯救了毁灭的国家，使衰亡的保存下来。
English: In the past, the late King Qi Xianwu was in the midst of the misfortunes of the Wei Dynasty, when the power of the state fell by the wayside, so he drove the control of the princes, issued a decree in Yan and Zhao, saved the ruined country, and preserved the decline.

古文：文襄王外挺武功，内资明德，纂戎先业，辟土服远。
现代文：文襄王对外显示作战的功縯，对内凭藉贤明的道德，继承光大前人的事业，开辟疆土使远方归服。
English: To the outside world, King Wenxiang displayed his military prowess. To the inside world, he relied on his wise morality, inherited the cause of his illustrious predecessors, and opened up the territory to make the distant lands submit.

古文：年逾二纪，世历两都，狱讼有适，讴歌斯在。
现代文：时间超过了两纪，世间经历了两朝，诉讼案件判决适当，处处都有称颂的歌声。
English: Time has exceeded two eras, the world has experienced two dynasties, litigation cases have been adjudicated appropriately, and there are songs of praise everywhere.

古文：故魏帝俯遵历数，爰念褰裳，远取唐、虞，终同脱屣。
现代文：前魏帝恭敬地遵守国家的命敷，于是想到让出帝位，效法远古的唐、虞，结局如同脱去鞋子一样容易。
English: The former Wei emperor respectfully abided by the state's mission, so he thought of giving up the imperial throne, following the example of the ancient Tang and Yu, and the outcome was as easy as taking off his shoes.

古文：实幽忧未已，志在阳城，而群公卿士，诚守愈切，遂属代终，居于民上，如涉深水，有眷终朝。
现代文：实在是深重的忧虑不能停息，志向在于夺取阳城，而众官员真诚守候更加恳切，于是接受禅位，处在百姓之上，如同趟入深水，终日回首反顾。
English: It was really a deep anxiety that could not be quenched. Their ambition was to capture Yangcheng, and the officials sincerely waited more earnestly. Therefore, they accepted the position of Zen and stood above the people, as if wading into deep water, looking back all day.

古文：始发晋阳，九尾呈瑞，外坛告天，赤雀效祉。
现代文：从晋阳开始出发，九尾鸟呈现祥瑞，到郊外的高台祭告上天，红色的鸟雀显示福运。
English: Starting from Jinyang, the nine-tailed bird is auspicious, and the red bird finch shows good luck.

古文：惟尔文武不贰心之臣，股肱爪牙之将，左右先王，克隆大业，永言诚节，共斯休祉。
现代文：想到文武无贰心的官员，亲信得力的将领，辅佐先王，昌盛了宏大的事业，忠诚的节操长久不衰，共同享有幸福。
English: When I think of the fearless officers of the army and navy, the trustworthy and capable generals who assisted the former king, the grand cause flourished, the loyal discipline continued for a long time, and we all enjoyed happiness.

古文：思与亿兆，同始兹日，其大赦天下。
现代文：愿意和百姓在这一天共同开始，命令大赦天下。
English: I am willing to start with the people on this day and order a general amnesty.

古文：改武定八年为天保元年。
现代文：将武定八年改为天保元年。
English: The eighth year of Wuding was changed to the first year of Tianbao.

古文：其百官进阶，男子赐爵，鳏寡六疾，义夫节妇，旌赏各有差。 
现代文：给百官提升官级，男子赐给爵位，鳏夫寡妇各类病人有义气的男子守贞节的妇人赏赐各有差别。
English: There are differences in the promotion of officials to higher ranks, men to knighthoods, widows and widowers to various types of patients, men with integrity and women who keep their chastity.

古文：己未，诏封魏帝为中山王，食邑万户；上书不称臣，答不称诏，载天子旌旗，行魏正朔，乘五时副车；封王诸子为县公，邑一千户；奉绢万匹，钱千万，粟二万石，奴婢二百人，水碾一具，田百顷，园一所。
现代文：己未，下诏书封魏帝为中山王，食邑一万户；呈上书信不自称臣子，答覆不宣称韶书，树立天子的旗帜，实行魏朝的历法，乘坐五个时令不同的跟从车辆；封中山王的各个儿子为县公，食邑一千产；奉送丝绢一万匹，钱一千万，粟米二万石，奴婢二百人，水碾一具，田地一百顷，园苑一所。
English: At that time, the imperial edict was issued to designate Emperor Wei as the King of Zhongshan, with 10,000 households in the food village; the letter presented did not claim to be a vassal, the reply did not claim to be an imperial edict, the flag of the son of heaven was set up, the calendar of the Wei Dynasty was implemented, and five different vehicles were used; the sons of the King of Zhongshan were appointed as county officials, the food village produced 1,000 products; 10,000 silk reeds, 10 million money, 20,000 kilos of corn, 200 slaves and maidservants, one water mill, 100 hectares of fields, and one garden were sent.

古文：诏追尊皇祖文穆王为文穆皇帝，妣为文穆皇后，皇考献武王为献武皇帝，皇兄文襄王为文襄皇帝，祖宗之称，付外速议以闻。
现代文：下韶追尊皇祖父文穆王为文穆皇帝，祖母为文穆皇后，父亲变麸亘坚为麸茎皇童，哥哥文襄王为文襄皇帝，祖宗的称号，交给朝廷外尽快商议奏上。
English: His grandfather, King Wenmu, was named Emperor Wenmu, his grandmother, Empress Wenmu, his father, Emperor Wenjun, was named Prince Wenjun, and his brother, Emperor Wenxiang, was named Emperor Wenxiang. The titles of the ancestors were handed over to the outside of the imperial court for discussion as soon as possible.

古文：辛酉，尊王太后为皇太后。
现代文：辛酉，尊封王太后为皇太后。
English: On the 13th, the Queen Mother was enthroned as the Empress Dowager.

古文：乙丑，诏降魏朝封爵各有差。
现代文：乙丑，下诏书封赏投降魏朝的人爵位各有差别。
English: There is a difference between the second ugliness and the next imperial edict awarding the title of nobility to those who surrendered to the Wei Dynasty.

古文：其信都从义及宣力霸朝者，及西来人并武定六年以来南来投化者，不在降限。
现代文：在值都归顺大义和为丝塑圆霸效力的人，以及从西麸来的人连同亘迈六年以来从南边投顺归化的人，不在投降者的范围之内。
English: Those who have surrendered to the Great Righteousness and worked for the Silk Road, as well as those who have come from Xidi, together with those who have naturalized from the south over the past six years, are not included in the scope of the surrenderers.

古文：辛未，遣大使于四方，观察风俗，问民疾苦，严勒长吏，厉以廉平，兴利除害，务存安静。
现代文：辛未，派遣担任使命的官员到四方，观察风尚习俗，慰问百姓疾苦，严格管理地方官员，厉行廉洁公正，兴利除害，务求保持安宁。
English: In hard times, officials on mission were dispatched to the four directions to observe the customs and habits, sympathize with the sufferings of the people, strictly manage local officials, enforce integrity and fairness, and eliminate harms in order to maintain tranquility.

古文：若法有不便于时，政有未尽于事者，具条得失，还以闻奏。
现代文：如果法令有不适合当时情况的，治政措施有对办理事物不周到的，详细地说明得失，返回时上奏。
English: If there are laws and regulations that are not suitable for the current situation, or administrative measures that are not thorough in handling things, explain the gains and losses in detail, and report back when returning.

古文：甲戌，迁神主于太庙。
现代文：甲戌，将祖宗的灵位迁移到太庙。
English: On the 26th, the deity was moved to the main temple.

古文：六月己卯，高丽遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月己卯，台丽派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In June, Taili sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，诏曰： 顷者风俗流宕，浮竞日滋，家有吉凶，务求胜异。
现代文：辛巳，下诏书说： 近来风俗放荡，浮华攀比日益滋长，家裹有吉凶的事，务求争胜奇特。
English: Sincerely, the following edict said: Recently, dissolute customs are on the rise, pompous comparisons are increasingly growing, and families are wrapped in auspicious and inauspicious things in order to compete with each other.

古文：婚姻丧葬之费，车服饮食之华，动竭岁资，以营日富。
现代文：婚姻丧葬的费用，车辆服饰饮食的奢华，动不动就耗尽一年所得的资用，来谋求一天的富裕。
English: The cost of marriage and funeral, the luxury of vehicles, clothing and food, all of which can easily deplete a year's income to seek wealth for a day.

古文：又奴仆带金玉，婢妾衣罗绮，始以创出为奇，后以过前为丽，上下贵贱，无复等差。
现代文：又有奴仆佩带金玉，婢妾穿着丝绸，开始以首创为珍奇，后来以超过先前的为华丽，上下贵贱，不再有等级差别。
English: There were also servants wearing gold and jewels, and maidservants and concubines wearing silk. At first, the first creation was considered rare, and later it was considered more magnificent than the previous ones. There was no longer a difference in rank between the upper and lower classes.

古文：今运属惟新，思蠲往弊，反朴还淳，纳民轨物。
现代文：现在国运正是求新的时候，想要除掉以往的弊端，返到质朴回归真淳，将百姓纳入正确的准则。
English: Now is the time for the National Movement to seek something new. It wants to get rid of the drawbacks of the past, return to simplicity, return to honesty, and incorporate the people into the correct principles.

古文：可量事具立条式，使俭而获中。 
现代文：可以衡量事物详细订立条文法规，使得节俭得到适中的程度。 
English: It is possible to measure things in detail and make provisions and regulations, so that the degree of frugality is moderate.

古文：又诏封崇圣侯邑一百户，以奉孔子之祀，并下鲁郡以时修治庙宇，务尽褒崇之至。
现代文：又下诏书封给崇圣侯食邑一百户，以奉养壬迂的祭祀，并要求鲁郡按时修理庙宇，一定尽到褒扬尊崇的极限。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to give a hundred households in the food village of Chong Sheng Hou to worship the sacrificial rites, and required Lu County to repair the temple on time, and must do the utmost to praise and respect.

古文：诏分遣使人致祭于五岳四渎，其尧祠舜庙，下及孔父、老君等载于祀典者，咸秩罔遗。
现代文：下韶书分别派遣使者到五岳四河祭祀，尧祠舜庙。以下到孔父、老君等载入祭祀典制的，全都按次序而没有遗漏。
English: In the lower part of the imperial edict, emissaries were sent to the Five Mountains and Four Rivers for sacrifice, and to the Ancestral Hall and the Temple, and then to Confucius, Laojun, and so on, which were included in the sacrificial ceremony system, all in order and without omission.

古文：诏曰： 冀州之渤海、长乐二郡，先帝始封之国，义旗初起之地。
现代文：下诏书说： 冀州的渤海、长乐二郡，是先帝最初被封的国土，是起义大旗开始升起的地方。
English: The next edict said: The Bohai and Changle two counties in Jizhou are the land that was first sealed by the former emperor, and the place where the uprising flag began to rise.

古文：并州之太原、青州之齐郡，霸业所在，王命是基。
现代文：并州的太原、青州的齐郡，是圆霸基业的所在，帝王命数的根基。
English: Taiyuan of Yingzhou and Qi County of Qingzhou are the locations of Yuanba's foundation, the foundation of the emperor's destiny.

古文：君子有作，贵不忘本，思申恩洽，蠲复田租。
现代文：君子有所作为，贵在不忘根本，想到恩惠普施，免除田租。
English: A gentleman has made some achievements. You should not forget the fundamentals, think of kindness and generosity, and waive the field rent.

古文：齐郡、渤海可并复一年，长乐复二年，太原复三年。 
现代文：齐郡、渤海可一同免除赋税一年，长乐免除赋税二年，太原免除赋税三年。 
English: Qi County and Bohai can be exempt from tax for one year, Changle can be exempt from tax for two years, and Taiyuan can be exempt from tax for three years.

古文：诏故太傅孙腾、故太保尉景、故大司马娄昭、故司徒高昂、故尚书左仆射慕容绍宗、故领军万俟干、故定州刺史段荣、故御史中尉刘贵、故御史中尉窦泰、故殷州刺史刘丰、故济州刺史蔡俊等并左右先帝，经赞皇基，或不幸早徂，或殒身王事，可遣使者就墓致祭，并抚问妻子，慰逮存亡。
现代文：下诏书已故太傅孔腾、已故太保尉景、已故大司马娄昭、已故司徒高昂、已故尚书左仆射慕容绍宗、已故领军万俟干、已故定州刺史段荣、已故御史中尉刘贵、已故御史中尉宝泰、已故殷州刺史刘丰、已故济州刺史蔡俊等人都辅佐先帝，协助治理皇家的基业，有的不幸早年去世，有的以身殉职，可派遣使者到墓地举行祭奠，并安抚问候他们的妻子儿女，安慰兼及活着或死去的人。
English: According to the following imperial rescript, the late Taifu Kongteng, the late Taibao Lt. Jing, the late Daishi Ma Yingzhao, the late Shituko Gaoang, the late Shoshu's left-hand man Sho Murong Shaosong, the late leader of the army Wanzhang, the late Jingshou's Lt. Liu Gui, the late Jingshou's Lt. Baotai, the late Yinzhou's Lt. Liu Feng, the late Jeju's Lt. Cai Jun, and others all assisted the former emperor and helped to manage the royal family's inheritance. Some unfortunately died early in life,

古文：又诏封宗室高岳为清河王，高隆之为平原王，高归彦为平秦王，高思宗为上洛王，高长弼为广武王，高普为武兴王，高子瑗为平昌王，高显国为襄乐王，高睿为赵郡王，高孝绪为脩城王。
现代文：又下韶书封宗室高岳为清河王，高隆之为平原王，高归彦为平秦王，高思宗为上洛王，高长弼为广武王，高普为武兴王，高子瑗为平昌王，高颢国为襄乐王，高散为趟郡王。高孝绪为脩城王。
English: In addition, the lower seal of the imperial residences of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong

古文：又诏封功臣厍狄干为章武王，斛律金为咸阳王，贺拔仁为安定王，韩轨为安德王，可朱浑道元为扶风王，彭乐为陈留王，潘相乐为河东王。
现代文：又下韶书封功臣库狄干为章武王，斛律金为咸阳王，贺拔仁为安定王，韩轨为安德王，可朱浑道元为扶风王，彭乐为陈留王，潘相乐为河东王。
English: In addition, Ku Dickan, a meritorious subject of the Lower Han Dynasty, was named as the King of Zhangwu, Yu Li Jin was named as the King of Xianyang, He Bairen was named as the King of Stability, Han Rao was named as the King of Andean, Ke Zhuhundo Yuan was named as the King of Fu Feng, Peng Le was named as the King of Chen Liu, and Pan Sang Le was named as the King of Hedong.

古文：癸未，诏封诸弟青州刺史浚为永安王，尚书左仆射淹为平阳王，定州刺史浟为彭城王，仪同三司演为常山王，冀州刺史涣为上党王，仪同三司氵肓为襄城王，仪同三司湛为长广王，湝为任城王，湜为高阳王，济为博陵王，凝为新平王，润为冯翊王，洽为汉阳王。
现代文：癸未，下韶书封各弟青州刺史高浚为永安王，尚书左仆射高淹为平阳王，定州刺史高澈为彭城王，仪同三司高演为常山王，冀州刺史高涣为上党王，仪同三司高清为襄城王，仪同三司高湛为长广王，高潸为任城王，高浞为高阳王，高济为博陵王，高凝为新平王，高润为冯翊王，高洽为汉阳王。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, the brothers of Qingzhou Shishi Gao Jun, the lower seal of the seal, were Yongan King, Shangshu's left-hand servant Sho Gao Yan was Pingyang King, Dingzhou Shishi Gao Che was Pengcheng King, Yidong Shishi Gao Ren was Changshan King, Jizhou Shishi Gao Jie was Shangdang King, Yidong Shishi Gao Qing was Xiangcheng King, Yidong Shishi Gao Jian was Changguang King, Gao Jie was Rencheng King, Gao Jie was Gaoyang King, Gaoji was Boling King,

古文：丁亥，诏立王子殷为皇太子，王后李氏为皇后。
现代文：丁亥，下诏书立王子遍壁为皇太子，王后奎氐为皇后。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that Prince Yin would be crown prince and Queen Li would be empress.

古文：庚寅，诏以太师厍狄干为太宰，司徒彭乐为太尉，司空潘相乐为司徒，开府仪同三司司马子如为司空。
现代文：庚寅，下诏书任命太师库狄干为太宰，司徒发銮为太尉，司空荡翅銮为司徒，开府仪同三司司马子如为司空。
English: Geng Yin, the next imperial edict appointed Grand Master Kudikan as Dazai, Sito Hatsuhiro as Taifu, Sikuo Ryohei as Sito, and Kaifu Yi and Sansei Mazi as Sikuo.

古文：辛卯，以前太尉、清河王岳为使持节、骠骑大将军、司州牧。
现代文：辛卯，任命前太尉、清河王高岳为使持节、骠骑大将军、司州牧。
English: Xinwu, appointed the former captain, Qinghe Wang Gao Yue as the envoy, the cavalry general, and the provincial governor.

古文：壬辰，诏曰： 自今已后，诸有文启论事并陈要密，有司悉为奏闻。 
现代文：壬辰，下诏书说： 从今以后，凡有论述政事并且陈说重要机密的文书，有关部门都要详细上奏。 
English: From now on, all documents that discuss political affairs and disclose important secrets must be reported in detail by the relevant departments.

古文：己亥，以皇太子初入东宫，赦畿内及并州死罪已下，余州死降，徒流已下一皆原免。
现代文：己亥，因皇太子刚刚进入束宫，赦免京城辖区以内以及并州判死刑以下的人，其余各州判死刑缓期、流放以下全都宽恕免刑。
English: At the same time, since the crown prince had just entered the imperial palace, he pardoned those within the jurisdiction of the capital and those who were sentenced to death by the state, and the remaining states suspended the death penalty, pardoned and pardoned all those who were sentenced to exile.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏尊文襄妃元氏为文襄皇后，宫曰静德。
现代文：秋七月辛亥，下诏书尊封文襄皇帝妃元氏为文襄皇后，所居宫名叫静德。
English: In the autumn and July of Xinhai, Emperor Wenxiang's wife Yuan was named the Empress of Wenxiang, and her palace was named Jingde.

古文：又诏封文襄皇帝子孝琬为河间王，孝瑜为河南王。
现代文：又下韶书封文襄皇帝的儿子高孝琬为河间王，高孝瑜为河南王。
English: In addition, Emperor Wenxiang's son Gao Xiaojuan was crowned King of Kawama, and Gao Xiaoyu was crowned King of Henan.

古文：乙卯，以尚书令、平原王隆之录尚书事，尚书左仆射、平阳王淹为尚书令。
现代文：乙卯，任命尚书令、平原王高隆之录尚书事，尚书左仆射、干阳王高淹为尚书令。
English: Second, he appointed Shang Shuling, Pingyuan Wang Gaolong as Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling Zuofu, and Ganyang Wang Gaozhong as Shang Shuling.

古文：又诏曰： 古人鹿皮为衣，书囊成帐，有怀盛德，风流可想。
现代文：又下韶书说： 古人用鹿皮作衣裳，用装书籍的袋子作帷帐，怀念这些值得称美的事情，它的流风余韵可以追想。
English: He also said, "The ancients used deerskin for clothing and bags of books for curtains. I miss these praiseworthy things, and I can recall its flow and aftertaste.

古文：其魏御府所有珍奇杂彩常所不给人者，徒为蓄积，命宜悉出，送内后园，以供七日宴赐。 
现代文：魏朝皇宫府库裹所有平常不给外人的珍奇彩色丝帛，衹是白白地储藏，命令全都拿出，送到宫内的后园裹，以供应七天的宴饮赐赏。 
English: The imperial palace treasury of the Wei Dynasty wrapped all the rare and colorful silk cocoons, which were usually not given to outsiders. The cocoons were stored in vain, and the order was given to take them all out and send them to the back garden of the palace, and reward them with a seven-day banquet.

古文：八月，诏郡国修立黉序，广延髦俊，敦述儒风。
现代文：八月，下韶书各郡国修建学校，广泛延请杰出人才，尊崇依循儒家的风范。
English: In August, he ordered the construction of schools in various counties and provinces to widely recruit talented people in order to promote and carry forward the Confucian school style.

古文：其国子学生亦仰依旧铨补，服膺师说，研习《礼经》。
现代文：国立学校的学生也依靠旧的注释补充，服从老师的学说，研究讲习《礼经》。
English: National school students also rely on the old commentary supplement, obey the teacher's doctrine, and study the sutra.

古文：往者文襄皇帝所运蔡邕石经五十二枚，即宜移置学馆，依次修立。
现代文：以前文襄皇帝运来的蔡邕五十二枚石经，应该立即移送放置在学馆裹，按顺序修建树立起来。
English: The fifty-two stone sutras of Cai Xuan, which were previously transported by the Emperor Wenxiang, should be immediately transferred and placed in the school building, and built and erected in order.

古文：又诏曰： 有能直言正谏，不避罪辜，謇謇若朱云，谔谔若周舍，开朕意，沃朕心，弼于一人，利兼百姓者，必当宠以荣禄，待以不次。 
现代文：又下韶书说： 有能够直言规劝，不避开罪罚，忠诚正直像朱云，直言进谏像周舍，启发朕的思想，丰富朕的头脑，对我一人有帮助，效益兼及百姓的，一定要用荣誉俸禄加以恩宠，不依常规对待。 
English: In addition, the next imperial edict said: If there is anyone who can speak plainly and give advice, who does not avoid crime and punishment, who is loyal and honest like Zhu Yun and straight-talking and persistent like Zhou She, who can enlighten my thoughts and enrich my mind, and who is helpful to me alone and beneficial to the people, he must be favored with an honorable salary and not treated according to the usual practice.

古文：又曰： 诸牧民之官，仰专意农桑，勤心劝课，广收天地之利，以备水旱之灾。 
现代文：又说： 各管理百姓的官员，切望专心务农植桑的事情，尽心鼓励督促，广泛获取天地的利益，以防备水旱的灾患。 
English: He also said: All the officials who manage the people are eager to concentrate on the business of farming and planting mulberry trees, encourage and urge, and widely obtain the benefits of heaven and earth to prevent the disaster of floods and droughts.

古文：庚寅，诏曰： 朕以虚寡，嗣弘王业，思所以赞扬盛绩，播之万古。
现代文：庚寅，下诏书说： 朕因空虚浅薄，继承扩展帝王的事业，想因此赞扬伟大的功绩，流传到万年。
English: Geng Yin, the next imperial edict said: "I, because of emptiness and shallowness, inherit the expansion of the emperor's career, and therefore want to praise the great achievements, spread to ten thousand years.

古文：虽史官执笔，有闻无坠，犹恐绪言遗美，时或未书。在位王公文武大小，降及民庶，爰至僧徒，或亲奉音旨，或承传傍说，凡可载之文籍，悉宜条录封上。 
现代文：虽然史官执笔，凡是听到的绝不遗漏，还是担心有未尽的言论或遣漏美好的事物，有时没有记载下来，在位的王公贵族和大小文武官员，下至平民百姓，以至僧侣，或者亲自表达自己的意旨，或者接受传下来的其他学说，凡是可以记载在书籍中的，都应该依次记录下来保存。 
English: Although historians write, they never omit anything they hear, or they worry that there are unfinished words or omit good things, sometimes they do not record them. Reigning princes and nobles and great and small civil and military officials, down to the common people, and even monks, either express their will in person, or accept other teachings that have been passed down. Anything that can be recorded in books should be recorded and preserved in turn.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 魏世议定《麟趾格》，遂为通制，官司施用，犹未尽善。
现代文：甲午，下韶书说： 魏代讨论确定《麟趾格》，于是成为通行的制度，在官署中实施使用，还是不够完善。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said: "The Lin Zi Ge" agreed upon by the Wei Dynasty, which was later made into a universal system and implemented by the government, has not yet been perfected.

古文：可令群官更加论究。
现代文：可下令官员们进一步讨论研究。
English: Officials could be ordered to discuss the study further.

古文：适治之方，先尽要切。引纲理目，必使无遗。 
现代文：适合治理的方法，首先都要切中要害，提起总纲理出捆目，一定使不要遗漏。 
English: Appropriate methods of governance, first of all, must hit the nail on the head, raise the general outline of the bundle, and must not be omitted.

古文：九月癸丑，以散骑常侍、车骑将军、领东夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高丽王成为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、领护东夷校尉，王、公如故。
现代文：九月癸丑，任命散骑常侍、车骑将军、领束夷校尉、辽东郡开国公、高丽王高成为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、领护东夷校尉，高丽王、开国公的爵位如同以往。
English: In September, Wang Gao of Goryeo was appointed as the knight-errant, knight-errant, general of chariots and cavalry, lieutenant of Sokgyi, the founding father of Liaodong County, and the prince of Goryeo was appointed as the envoy of the festival, chamberlain, general of cavalry, lieutenant of Dongyi, the king of Goryeo and the founding father of the country, as in the past.

古文：诏梁侍中、使持节、假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、大将军、承制、邵陵王萧纶为梁王。
现代文：下诏书封梁国侍中、使持节、假黄绒、都督中外诸军事、大将军、承制、邵陵王萧纶为梁王。
English: In the following edict, Liang Guozhizhong (梁国侍中), Zhi Jizhong (使持节), Guozhuang (假黄绒), Dadu (都督中外诸军事), Da Gen (大将军), Zheng Shi (承制) and Shaoling Wang (邵陵王) were named as Liang kings.

古文：庚午，帝如晋阳，拜辞山陵。
现代文：庚午，皇帝到晋阳，拜谒辞别先祖的陵墓。
English: At noon, the emperor went to Jinyang to visit the mausoleum of his ancestors.

古文：是日皇太子入居凉风堂，监总国事。
现代文：这一天皇太子住进凉风堂，监督总管国家事务。
English: On this day, the crown prince stayed in the cool breeze hall to supervise the general manager of state affairs.

古文：冬十月己卯，备法驾，御金辂，入晋阳宫，朝皇太后于内殿。
现代文：冬十月己卯，准备法驾仪仗，驾御金辂车，进入晋阳宫，在内殿朝拜皇太后。
English: In the winter and October, he prepared for the ceremonial drive, drove the golden carriage, entered the Jinyang Palace, and worshiped the empress dowager in the inner hall.

古文：辛巳，曲赦并州太原郡晋阳县及相国府四狱囚。
现代文：辛巳，特赦并州、太原郡、晋阳县以及相国府四狱之囚犯。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, prisoners from four prisons in Nianzhou, Taiyuan County, Jinyang County and Xiangguo Prefecture were pardoned.

古文：癸未，茹茹国遣使朝贡。
现代文：癸未，茹茹国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the following day, Zhu Ru sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，以特进元韶为尚书左仆射，并州刺史段韶为尚书右仆射。
现代文：乙酉，任命特进五超为尚书左仆射，莲业刺史昼超为尚书右仆射。
English: Acetylene, the appointment of a special five-super forward for the left-hand shooting of the book, the lotus industry stabbing history of the day super for the right-hand shooting of the book.

古文：丙戌，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：丙戌，吐谷浑国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In response, the Kingdom of Tugu sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，罢相国府，留骑兵、外兵曹，各立一省，别掌机密。
现代文：壬辰，撤销相国府，保留骑兵曹、外兵曹，各自建立一省，分别掌管机密。
English: On the 16th, the provincial government was abolished, leaving the cavalry and foreign petty officers, each of which became a province, in charge of confidential and important matters.

古文：十一月，周文帝率众至陕城，分骑北渡，至建州。
现代文：十一月，周文帝率领军队到陕城，分派骑兵向北渡河，到达建州。
English: In November, Zhou Wendi led the army to Shaanxi City and dispatched cavalry to cross the river to the north and reach Jianzhou.

古文：甲寅，梁湘东王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：甲寅，梁国湘束王萧绎派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, King Xiaoyan of the Eastern Hunan of the Liang Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，帝亲戎出次城东。
现代文：丙寅，皇帝亲自出征在城束驻扎。
English: Hsin-Yin, the emperor himself went on a campaign and stationed himself in Chengzhuang.

古文：周文帝闻帝军容严盛，叹曰： 高欢不死矣。 
现代文：旦塞童听说皇帝的军容严整盛大，感叹地说： 直巫没有死啊。 
English: When Dansedong heard that the emperor's army was large and well-groomed, he said with a sigh, "Zhongwu is not dead."

古文：遂退师。
现代文：于是撤军。
English: As a result, the troops withdrew.

古文：庚午，还宫。
现代文：庚午，返回宫中。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十二月丁丑，茹茹、库莫奚国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月丁丑，茹茹国、库莫奚国都派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In December Dingwuxi, Zhu Ru and Cuomo sent envoys to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：辛丑，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: Sin ugly, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：二年春正月丁未，梁湘东王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：天保二年春正月丁未，梁国湘束王萧绎派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, Liang Dynasty's East Hunan King Xiao Yu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，有事于圆丘，以神武皇帝配。
现代文：辛亥，在圆丘举行祭祀，用神武皇童配祭。
English: In Xinhai, a ritual was held at the round mound, with the divine emperor's son performing the ritual.

古文：癸亥，亲耕籍田于东郊。
现代文：癸亥，在束郊亲自耕种籍田。
English: 亥, personally cultivates his family farm in Sokou suburb.

古文：乙酉，前黄门侍郎元世宝、通直散骑侍郎彭贵平谋逆，免死配边。
现代文：乙酉，前黄门侍郎元世宝、通直散骑侍郎彭贵平谋反，免除死罪发配边疆。
English: Acetylene, the former Huangmen waiter Yuan Shibao, and the Tsunzhi Sanzhiyi waiter Peng Gui plotted a rebellion and were exempted from the death penalty.

古文：有事于太庙。
现代文：在太庙举行祭祀。
English: A ritual is being held at Taimyo.

古文：甲戌，帝泛舟于城东。
现代文：甲戌，皇帝在城东乘船而行。
English: Armour-plated, the emperor rode a boat east of the city.

古文：二月壬辰，太尉彭乐谋反，伏诛。
现代文：二月壬辰，太尉彭乐谋反，被杀。
English: On February 18th, Lieutenant Peng Le led a rebellion and was killed.

古文：壬寅，茹茹国遣使朝贡。
现代文：壬寅，茹茹国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: Jinyin, Zhu Ru sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：三月丙午，襄城王氵肓薨。
现代文：三月丙午，襄城王高清薨。
English: On the afternoon of March 3rd, Xiangcheng Wang High-definition Television was launched.

古文：己未，诏梁承制湘东王绎为梁使持节、假黄钺、相国，建梁台，总百揆，承制。
现代文：己未，下诏书任命凿迩承制迩塞王芦理为銮使持节、假黄饿、相国，建立銮台，统领百官，承制。
English: Before long, the next imperial edict appointed King Luli, the heir to the throne, as the envoy to hold the festival, prevent famine, and establish a friendly country, establish a military base, lead hundreds of officials, and assume the throne.

古文：梁交州刺史李景盛、梁州刺史马嵩仁、义州刺史夏侯珍洽、新州刺史李汉等并率州内附。
现代文：凿迩交业刺史李景盛、銮丛刺史马嵩仁、羞业刺史夏堡壁捡、堑业刺史奎墨等都率领本州归附。
English: Li Jingsheng, the chisel-sharpener, Ma Songren, the chisel-thrower, Xia Burg, the wall-picker, and Kui Mo, the chisel-thrower, all led to the annexation of Honshu.

古文：庚申，司空司马子如坐事免。
现代文：庚申，司空司马子如囚犯罪被免职。
English: On the 16th, Sifu Sima Ziru was removed from his post due to the incident.

古文：夏四月壬辰，梁王萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月壬辰，凿王董赶派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In the summer of April, Liang Wang Xiaoyu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：闰月乙丑，室韦国遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰四月乙丑，室韦鱼派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In the leap month of April, the second month of the year, Shuwaibyo sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：五月丙戌，合州刺史斛斯显攻克梁历阳镇。
现代文：五月丙戌，金业刺史魁逝堡攻克銮鱼历量鑪。
English: In May, the gold industry made history by conquering the sturgeon.

古文：丁亥，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：丁亥，产玺固派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: Dinghai sent an envoy to Tanggu to pay tribute.

古文：是月，侯景废梁简文，立萧栋为主。
现代文：这一月，逊废掉銮赞壬堕，立芦掳为君主。
English: In this month, Sun abolished Xuan Zhan Renpo, and established Lu as the monarch.

古文：六月庚午，以前司空司马子如为太尉。
现代文：六月庚午，任命前司空司马子如为太尉。
English: On June 28th, he appointed the former Sifu Sima Ziru as the first lieutenant.

古文：七月壬申，茹茹遣使朝贡。
现代文：七月壬申，兹王蝈派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In July, the king sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，行台郎邢景远破梁龙安戍，获镇城李洛文。
现代文：癸酉，行台郎邢景远攻下凿固龙安戍，俘虏镇守城的将领李洛文。
English: ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

古文：己卯，改显阳殿为昭阳殿。
现代文：己卯，改题堡毖为照旦噬。
English: So, I changed the title from "Fortress" to "Sunshine."

古文：九月壬申，诏免诸伎作、屯、牧、杂色役隶之徒为白户。
现代文：九月壬申，下韶书赦免各伎作、屯、牧、各色服役的奴隶为平民户。
English: In September of Jinshin, the imperial edict pardoned all the slaves who had served in military works, military camps, herdsmen and so on to become commoners.

古文：癸巳，帝如赵、定二州，因如晋阳。
现代文：癸巳，皇帝到趟、定二州，于是到达晋阳。
English: As soon as the emperor arrived, he set out for the two states and arrived in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月戊申，起宣光、建始、嘉福、仁寿诸殿。
现代文：冬十月戊申，建起宣光、建始、嘉福、仁寿各宫殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the construction of Xuanguang, Jianzhi, Jiafu and Renshou halls began.

古文：庚申，萧绎遣使朝贡。
现代文：庚申，萧绎派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Xiao Yu sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，文襄皇帝神主入于庙。
现代文：丁卯，文襄皇帝的灵位迁入宗庙。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Wenxiang's patron saint was sent to the Imperial Temple.

古文：十一月，侯景废梁主，僭即伪位于建邺，自称曰汉。
现代文：十一月，侯景废掉梁主，在建邺僭越登上伪帝位，自称国号为汉。
English: In November, Hou Jing abolished Liang Shuzhong, ascended the pseudo-imperial throne in Jianwen Yue, and began to call himself Han.

古文：十二月，中山王殂。
现代文：十二月，中山王去世。
English: In December, King Zhongshan passed away.

古文：三年春正月丙申，帝亲讨库莫奚于代郡，大破之，获杂畜十余万，分赉将士各有差。
现代文：天保三年春正月丙申，皇帝亲自到伐型征讨尘墓圣，把他打得大败，俘获各种牲畜十余万头，分别赏赐将士各有差别。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Tianbao, the emperor personally went to Fahui to solicit the Holy Sepulchre, defeated him, captured more than 100,000 heads of various livestock, and separately rewarded the soldiers with differences.

古文：以奚口付山东为民。
现代文：将库莫奚的人交付山东为老百姓。
English: The people of Cuomo will be delivered to Shandong for the common people.

古文：二月，茹茹主阿那瑰为突厥虏所破，瑰自杀，其太子庵罗辰及瑰从弟登注俟利发、注子库提并拥众来奔。
现代文：二月，茹茹国君主阿那瓖被突厥打败，阿那瓖自杀。他的太子庵罗辰以及阿那瓖的堂弟登注俟利发、王逛的儿子尘墨一同聚众前来投奔。
English: In February, Anaxagoras, the ruler of the kingdom of Rur, was defeated by the Turks, and Anaxagoras committed suicide. His son Anaxagoras, along with Anaxagoras's cousin Denchulifat, and Anaxagoras's son Dymo, gathered together to flee.

古文：茹茹余众立注次子铁伐为主。
现代文：蓝茹国残余的人立登注的次子铁伐为君主。
English: The remnants of the Lan Ryu Kingdom installed Deng Zi's second son Tie Va as the monarch.

古文：辛丑，契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：辛丑，契丹派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the third day, Khitan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月戊子，以司州牧清河王岳为使持节、南道大都督，司徒潘相乐为使持节、东南道大都督，及行台辛术率众南伐。
现代文：三月戊子，任命司州牧清河王高岳为使持节、南道大都督，司徒潘相乐为使持节、东南道大都督，以及行台辛术率领军队南伐。
English: In March, Empress Dowager Cixi appointed Wang Gao Yue of Sizhou, Muxing and Qinghe Provinces as Emissary and Grand Governor of the Southern Provinces, and appointed Stub Pan Sang Lok as Emissary and Grand Governor of the Southeastern Provinces, and sent troops to the Southern Expedition led by Emperor Taishin.

古文：癸巳，诏进梁王萧绎为梁主。
现代文：癸巳，下韶书进升梁王萧绎为梁主。
English: On the 25th, Liang Wang Xiaoyan was enthroned as the Prince of Liang Province.

古文：夏四月壬申，东南道行台辛术于广陵送传国玺。
现代文：夏四月壬申，东南道行台圭组在卢建送来传国玺。
English: In the summer of April in Jinshin, the Southeast Road Gangtai Gui Group sent the National Emblem to Lujian.

古文：甲申，以吏部尚书杨愔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲申，任命吏部尚书圭啦为尚书右仆射。
English: Gao Shen, appointed the official Shang Shuxu Yang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：丙申，室韦国遣使朝贡。
现代文：丙申，室韦国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In response, the State of Muroto dispatched an envoy to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：六月乙亥，清河王岳等班师。
现代文：六月乙亥，清河王高岳等人撤回军队。
English: In June, the Qing King Gao Yue and others withdrew their troops.

古文：丁未，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：丁未，皇帝自置腥到达京城。
English: Ding Wei, the self-proclaimed emperor, arrived in Beijing.

古文：乙卯，帝如晋阳。
现代文：乙卯，皇帝到置墨。
English: One by one, the emperors arrived for the inking ceremony.

古文：九月辛卯，帝自并州幸离石。
现代文：九月辛卯，皇帝从并州到达离石。
English: In September of Xinwu, the emperor arrived in Shishi from Bianzhou.

古文：冬十月乙未，至黄栌岭，仍起长城，北至社干戍四百余里，立三十六戍。
现代文：冬十月乙未，皇帝到黄檀岭，于是修起长城，北面到社干戍四百余里，建起三十六座边防营垒。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor went to Huangdangling, so the Great Wall was built. It was more than 400 miles north of Shikanling, and 36 border fortifications were built.

古文：十一月辛巳，梁王萧绎即帝位于江陵，是为元帝，遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月辛巳，梁王萧绎在江陵登上帝位，这就是梁元帝，派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In November, King Liang Xiaoyan ascended to the throne in Jiangling. This was Emperor Liang Yuan sending an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：十二月壬子，帝还宫。
现代文：十二月壬子，皇帝返回宫中。
English: In December, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：戊午，帝如晋阳。
现代文：戊午，皇帝到晋阳。
English: At noon, the emperor arrived in Jinyang.

古文：四年春正月丙子，山胡围离石。
现代文：天保四年春正月丙子，山胡围攻离石。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Tenpo era, Mt.

古文：戊寅，帝讨之，未至，胡已逃窜，因巡三堆戍，大狩而归。
现代文：戊寅，皇帝讨伐他们，还没到，山胡已经逃窜，于是巡视三：堕处，大规模狩猎后返回。
English: Wu Yin, the emperor to crack down on them, has not yet arrived, the beech has fled, so the inspection three: the fallen place, returned after a large-scale hunting.

古文：戊寅，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：戊寅，尘墓奚派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the 15th, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，改铸新钱，文曰 常平五铢 。
现代文：己丑，改铸新钱，其正面的文字为 常平五铢 。
English: It was ugly, and it was recast as new money, with the characters "常平五" on the obverse.

古文：二月，送茹茹主铁伐父登注及子库提还北。
现代文：二月，护送茹茹国君主铁伐的父亲登注以及儿子库提返回北方。
English: In February, Deng Zhu, the father of Zhu Ru's ruler Tie Va, and his son Cuti were escorted back to the north.

古文：铁伐寻为契丹所杀，国人复立登注为主，仍为其大人阿富提等所杀，国人复立库提为主。
现代文：铁伐不久被契丹杀死，本国的人又立登注为君主，又被他们的大人阿富提等人杀死，本国的人又立库提为君主。
English: Tieba was soon killed by the Khitans, and the people of their own country installed Dengzhu as the monarch. They were also killed by their adults, such as Afuti, and the people of their own country installed Kuti as the monarch.

古文：夏四月戊戌，帝还宫。
现代文：夏四月戊戌，皇帝返回宫中。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：戊午，西南有大声如雷。
现代文：戊午，西南方有大的响声如同雷声。
English: On the 26th, there was a huge sound like thunder in the southwest.

古文：五月庚午，帝校猎于林虑山。
现代文：五月庚午，皇帝在林虑山打猎。
English: In the late afternoon of May, the emperor went hunting in Linxi Mountain.

古文：戊子，还宫。
现代文：戊子，返回宫中。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：九月，契丹犯塞。
现代文：九月，契丹进犯边塞。
English: In September, the Khitans stormed the border post.

古文：壬午，帝北巡冀、定、幽、安，仍北讨契丹。
现代文：壬午，皇帝到北方巡视冀州、定州、幽州、安州，又向北征讨契丹。
English: At noon, the emperor went to the north to inspect Jizhou, Dingzhou, Yuzhou and Anzhou, and then went to the north to fight the Khitan.

古文：冬十月丁酉，帝至平州，遂从西道趣长堑。
现代文：冬十月丁酉，皇帝到达平州，于是从西面取道奔赴长堑。
English: In winter and October, the emperor arrived in Pingzhou, so he took the road from the west to Chang'an.

古文：诏司徒潘相乐率精骑五千自东道趣青山。
现代文：下诏书命令司徒潘相乐率领精锐骑兵五千从东面取道奔赴青山。
English: The next imperial edict ordered the scholar Pan Sang Lok to lead five thousand elite cavalry from the east to Aoyama.

古文：辛丑，至白狼城。
现代文：辛丑，到达白狼城。
English: Sin Ugly, arriving at White Wolf City.

古文：壬寅，经昌黎城。
现代文：壬寅，经过昌黎城。
English: Ren Yin, passing Chang Licheng.

古文：复诏安德王韩轨率精骑四千东趣，断契丹走路。
现代文：又下诏书命令安德王韩轨率领精锐骑兵四千人奔赴束面，截断契丹逃跑的退路。
English: He also issued an imperial edict ordering King Ando Hanrao to lead 4,000 elite cavalrymen to rush to Sokmen and cut off Khitan's escape route.

古文：癸卯，至阳师水，倍道兼行，掩袭契丹。
现代文：癸卯，到达阳师水，加倍兼行，突袭契丹。
English: At dusk, they arrived at Yangshisui. Along the way, they doubled their speed, traveling both day and night to attack Khitan.

古文：甲辰，帝亲逾山岭，为士卒先，指麾奋击，大破之，虏获十万余口、杂畜数十万头。
现代文：甲辰，皇帝亲自翻过山岭，走在士兵的前面，指挥军队奋勇攻击，把契丹打得大败，俘虏十万多人、各种牲畜几十万头。
English: At that time, the emperor personally climbed over the mountains, walked in front of the soldiers, commanded the army to attack bravely, defeated the Khitan, captured more than 100,000 people and hundreds of thousands of livestock of all kinds.

古文：乐又于青山大破契丹别部。
现代文：潘相乐又在青山把契丹另一部落打得大败。
English: Pan Sang Lok defeated another Khitan tribe in Aoyama.

古文：所虏生口皆分置诸州。
现代文：所俘虏的人口都分别安置在各州。
English: The captives were resettled in different states.

古文：是行也，帝露头袒膊，昼夜不息，行千余里，唯食肉饮水，壮气弥厉。
现代文：这次行军，皇帝露着头光着膀子，夜不停，行军一千多里，衹是吃肉喝水，豪壮的士气更加高涨。
English: This time, the emperor marched bare-headed and bare-armed, without stopping at night, marching more than a thousand miles. He ate meat and drank water, and his heroic morale was even higher.

古文：丁未，至营州。
现代文：丁未，到达营州。
English: Ding Wei arrived in Yingzhou.

古文：丁巳，登碣石山，临沧海。
现代文：丁巳，登上碣石山，临近大海。
English: On the 28th, I climbed Mount Zhishi and gazed at the Canghai Sea.

古文：十一月己未，帝自平州，遂如晋阳。
现代文：十一月己未，皇帝自乎州，于是到达晋阳。
English: In November, the emperor left Huzhou and arrived in Jinyang.

古文：闰月壬寅，梁帝遣使来聘。
现代文：闰月壬寅，梁帝派遣使者前来问候。
English: In the intercalary month of Ren Yin, Emperor Liang sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：十二月己未，突厥复攻茹茹，茹茹举国南奔。
现代文：十二月己未，突厥又攻打茹茹国，茹茹国全国的人向南逃奔。
English: Before December was out, the Turks attacked Jura again, and the entire population of Jura fled south.

古文：癸亥，帝自晋阳北讨突厥，迎纳茹茹。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝从晋阳向北讨伐突厥，接纳茹茹。
English: In the year of the boar, the emperor marched from Jinyang to the north to fight the Turks, and accepted Zhu Ru.

古文：乃废其主库提，立阿那瑰子庵罗辰为主，置之马邑川，给其禀饩缯帛。
现代文：于是废掉他们的君主库提，立阿那瓖的儿子庵罗辰为君主，安置在马邑川，供给他们粮食丝帛。
English: So they dethroned their king Kuti, and made Ananias's son Amrothin king, and he settled them in the Mayu River and provided them with grain and silk.

古文：亲追突厥于朔州，突厥请降，许之而还。
现代文：亲自追击突厥到朔州，突厥请求投降，答应了他们而返回。
English: He personally chased the Turks to Shuozhou. The Turks asked to surrender, he agreed and returned.

古文：于是贡献相继。
现代文：这时进贡的物品相继而来。
English: At this time, the tribute items came one after another.

古文：五年春正月癸巳，帝讨山胡，从离石道。
现代文：天保五年春正月癸巳，皇帝讨伐山胡，从离石取道。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the Tenpo era, the emperor had a go at felling a beech tree and took a path from the rock.

古文：遣太师、咸阳王斛律金从显州道，常山王演从晋州道，掎角夹攻，大破之，斩首数万，获杂畜十余万，遂平石楼。
现代文：派遣太师、咸阳王斛律金从显州取道。常山王高演从晋州取道，三面夹攻，把山胡打得大败，斩首几万人，俘获各种牲畜十余万，于是平定石楼。
English: He dispatched the grandmaster, Xianyang Wang Xilujin to take the road from Hsienzhou. Changshan Wang Gaoyuan took the road from Jinzhou, attacked on three sides, defeated Shanhu, beheaded tens of thousands of people, captured more than 100,000 livestock, and then leveled Shilou.

古文：石楼绝险，自魏世所不能至。
现代文：石楼十分险要，自魏代以来不能到达。
English: The stone tower is so important that it has not been accessible since the Wei Dynasty.

古文：于是远近山胡莫不慑服。
现代文：这时远近山胡没有不畏惧服从的。
English: At this time, there was no one near or far who would not fearlessly obey.

古文：是月周文帝废西魏主，立齐王廓，是为恭帝。
现代文：这个月周文帝废掉西魏主，立齐王元廓，造就是西魏恭帝。
English: This month, Emperor Zhou Enlai abolished the Lord of the Western Wei Dynasty and established the Qi Wangyuan Guo, creating the Western Wei Dynasty Emperor Gong.

古文：三月，茹茹庵罗辰叛，帝亲讨，大破之，辰父子北遁。
现代文：三月，茹茹国庵罗辰反叛，皇帝亲自征讨，把他们打得大败，庵罗辰父子向北逃跑。
English: In March, Ru Ru Ru's state hermit Luo Chen rebelled, and the emperor personally led a campaign to defeat them. Luo Chen and his son fled to the north.

古文：太保贺拔仁坐违节度除名。
现代文：太保贺拔仁因违背指挥调度被除名。
English: Taiho He Bajin was removed from his post for disobeying the command schedule.

古文：夏四月，茹茹寇肆州。
现代文：夏四月，茹茹进犯肆州。
English: In the summer of April, Zhu Ru entered the state of Zhou.

古文：丁巳，帝自晋阳讨之，至恒州黄瓜堆，虏骑走。
现代文：丁巳，皇帝从晋阳讨伐他们，到达恒州黄瓜堆，敌人的骑兵逃走。
English: In no time, the emperor from Jinyang to fight them, arrived in Hengzhou cucumber heap, the enemy cavalry fled.

古文：时大军已还，帝率麾下千余骑，遇茹茹别部数万，四面围逼。
现代文：当时大军已经返回，皇帝亲自率领部下一千多骑兵，遇到茹茹另一支部队几万人，四面围攻进逼。
English: At that time, the great army had already returned, and the emperor personally led more than a thousand cavalrymen under Zhu Zhu, and encountered another force of tens of thousands of people, besieging and advancing on all sides.

古文：帝神色自若，指画形势，虏众披靡，遂纵兵溃围而出。
现代文：皇帝神色自若，指挥部队，敌人溃散，于是统率部队冲出包围。
English: Emperor Wenxuan looked at ease, pointed out the situation, the enemy panicked and fell like the wind, so he drove the soldiers out of the encirclement.

古文：虏乃退走，追击之，伏尸二十里，获庵罗辰妻子及生口三万余人。
现代文：敌人就退走了，追击他们，沿途二十里都是倒伏的死尸，俘获庵罗辰妻子儿女以及人口三万多。
English: The enemy retreated and chased them. Along the twenty-mile route, there were dead bodies lying on the ground. An Luo-chen's wife, children, and more than thirty thousand people were captured.

古文：五月丁亥，地豆干、契丹等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：五月丁亥，地豆干、契丹等国都派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In May, Dinghai, Jiuquan, Khitan and other countries sent envoys to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，北讨茹茹，大破之。
现代文：丁未，向北征讨茹茹，把他们打得大败。
English: Ding Wei went to the north to fight Zhu Rong and defeated them.

古文：六月，茹茹率部众东徙，将南侵。
现代文：六月，茹茹带领部落的人向东迁移，将要南下进犯。
English: In June, Zhu Ru led the tribesmen to migrate to the east, intending to invade the south.

古文：帝率轻骑于金山下邀击之，茹茹闻而远遁。
现代文：皇帝率领轻骑在金山下截击他们，茹茹听说后远远逃走。
English: The emperor led the cavalry to intercept them at the foot of the mountain, and Zhu Ru heard about it and fled far away.

古文：秋七月戊子，肃慎遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋七月戊子，肃慎派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Sozen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，降罪人。
现代文：壬辰，给罪人减轻刑罚。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, criminals will have their sentences reduced.

古文：庚戌，帝至自北伐。
现代文：庚戌，皇帝向北方征伐。
English: Genghis Khan, the emperor, led a campaign to the north.

古文：八月丁巳，突厥遣使朝贡。
现代文：八月丁巳，突厥派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In August, the Turks sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，以司州牧、清河王岳为太保，司空尉粲为司徒，太子太师侯莫陈相为司空，尚书令、平阳王淹录尚书事，常山王演为尚书令，中书令、上党王涣为尚书左仆射。
现代文：庚子，任命司州牧、清河王高岳为太保，司空尉粲为司徒，太子太师侯莫陈相为司空，尚书令、平阳王高淹绿尚书事，常山王高演为尚书令，中书令、上党王高涣为尚书左仆射。
English: Geng Zi appointed Shizhou Maki and Qinghe Wang Gao Yue as Tai Bo, Shikong Liang as Shitou, Prince Daishi Hou Mo Chen Xiang as Shikong, Shang Shuling, Pingyang Wang Gao Dunluang as Shang Shuling, Changshan Wang Gao Yuan as Shang Shuling, Zhong Shuling and Shang Dang Wang Gao Yao as Shang Shuling Zuo Shu.

古文：乙亥，仪同三司元旭以罪赐死。
现代文：乙亥，仪同三司元旭因罪赐死。
English: Yi Hai, Yi Tong and San Si Yuan Xu were sentenced to death.

古文：丁丑，帝幸晋阳。
现代文：丁丑，皇帝到达晋阳。
English: Ding Xi, the emperor arrived in Jinyang.

古文：己卯，开府仪同三司、录尚书事、平原王高隆之薨。
现代文：己卯，开府仪同三司、绿尚书事、平原王高隆之薨。
English: In addition, Kaifu Yi, Tong Sanji, Lv Shang Shujie, and Pingyuan Wang Gaolong are included.

古文：是月，诏常山王演、上党王涣、清河王岳、平原王段韶等率众于洛阳西南筑伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城。
现代文：这一月，下诏书命令常山王高演、上党王高涣遣延直至、垩逛星韶等人率领军队在盗屋西南修筑伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城。
English: In this month, the next imperial edict ordered Changshan King Gao Rong and Shangdang King Gao Jiong to be exiled to the south, while Zhaozhang Xingjian and others led the army to build Fahuicheng, Xincheng, Yancheng and Henancheng in the southwest of Tiya.

古文：九月，帝亲自临幸，欲以致周师。周师不出，乃如晋阳。
现代文：九月，皇帝亲临，想向周国军队挑战，周国军队不出战，于是到达晋阳。
English: In September, the emperor came in person to challenge the Zhou army, but the Zhou army did not fight, so he arrived in Jinyang.

古文：冬十月，西魏伐梁元帝于江陵。
现代文：冬十月，西魏到江陵讨伐梁元帝。
English: In the winter of October, the Western Wei Dynasty went to Jiangling to fight Emperor Liang Yuan.

古文：诏清河王岳、河东王潘相乐、平原王段韶等率众救之，未至而江陵陷，梁元帝为西魏将于谨所杀。
现代文：下韶书命令清河王直至、河东王潘相乐、垩愿王垦超等人率领军队救援，还没到江陵已被攻陷，梁元帝被酉垫将领王谨杀死。
English: The imperial edict ordered the king of Qinghe to rescue the troops led by Wang Pan Xiangle, the king of Hedong, Wang Bingchao and others, but they had not yet reached Gangneung, which had already been conquered, and Emperor Liang Yuan was killed by the general Wang Ji.

古文：梁将王僧辩在建康，共推晋安王萧方智为太宰、都督中外诸军，承制置百官。
现代文：姻将领玉僧攫在墟，共同推举置玄王芦立贺为太宰、都督诸军，按照制度设置百官。
English: The general-in-law, the leader of the Jade Monks, was in the market, and together they elected the army to appoint King Xuanzang as the Dazai and the governor of the capital, and set up 100 officials according to the system.

古文：十二月庚申，帝北巡至达速岭，览山川险要，将起长城。
现代文：十二月庚申，皇帝向北巡视到达速岭，观察山川的险要地方，将要修起长城。
English: In December of the Year of the Goat, the emperor went on a tour to the north and arrived at Suo-ling, observing the dangerous places of the mountains and rivers. The Great Wall was about to be built.

古文：六年春正月壬寅，清河王岳以众军渡江，克夏首。
现代文：天保六年春壬寅，清河王高岳带领军队渡过昼丝，攻克夏直。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Tenpo era, Renin, the king of Qinghe, Gao Yue, led the army across the daylight and conquered Xia Zhi.

古文：送梁郢州刺史陆法和。
现代文：送走捆逊刺史壁迭劲。
English: Send away a bunch of underachievers.

古文：诏以梁散骑常侍、贞阳侯萧明为梁主，遣尚书左仆射、上党王涣率众送之。
现代文：下诏书任命凿国散骑常侍、贞垦龌芦塱为凿主，派遣尚书左仆射、上党王高涣带领众人送走他。
English: The following imperial edict appointed the chiseling country straggler, Zhengyu Lvong, as the chiseling master, dispatched Shangshu Zuofu, and the upper party king Gao Qi led the people to send him away.

古文：二月甲子，以陆法和为使持节、都督荆雍江巴梁益湘万交广十州诸军事、太尉公、大都督、西南道大行台，梁镇北将军、侍中、荆州刺史宋蒨为使持节、骠骑大将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：二月甲子，任命陆法和为使持节，都督荆、雍、丝、旦、銮、益、捆、万、变、庐十州诸军事，太尉公，大都督，西南道大行台，梁国镇北将军、侍中、型刺史塞茎为使持节、骠骑大将军、竖州刺史。
English: In February, Emperor Gaozong appointed Lu Fa and the military commanders of ten states, including Jing, Yong, Silk, Tang, Xing, Yi, Bale, Wan, Zheng, and Jiaozhou, as well as the lieutenant-governor, the grand governor, the governor of Southwest China, the general of Liang Guozhen North, the attendant, and the cutter of the cutter of the cutter of the cutter of the cutter.

古文：甲戌，上党王涣克谯郡。
现代文：甲戌，上党王高涣攻克谯郡。
English: Gao Yu, the king of the Shang Dynasty, invaded Keju County.

古文：三月丙戌，上党王涣克东关，斩梁将裴之横，俘斩数千。
现代文：三月丙戌，上超产一逸攻克墓翅，杀了望国将领裴之横，俘虏杀死几千人。
English: In March of the same year, he attacked the Tomb Wing, killing the general of Wanguo, Pei Zhi Heng, and several thousand prisoners.

古文：丙申，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：丙申，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: Bishen, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：封世宗二子孝珩为广宁王，延宗为安德王。
现代文：封世宗的第二个儿子高孝珩为广宁王，高延宗为安德王。
English: The second son of Fonseong, Gao Xiaojun, became the King of Guangning, and Gao Yanzong became the King of Ande.

古文：戊戌，帝临昭阳殿听狱决讼。
现代文：戊戌，皇帝到昭阳殿听取审理判决案件。
English: The emperor went to the Zhoyang Palace to listen to the court's verdict.

古文：夏四月庚申，帝如晋阳。
现代文：夏四月庚申，皇帝到晋阳。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor went to Jinyang.

古文：丁卯，仪同萧轨克梁晋熙城，以为江州。
现代文：丁卯，仪同萧轨攻克梁国晋熙城，改为江州。
English: Dingwu, Yitong and Xiao Lu conquered Jinxi City in Liang Province and changed it to Jiangzhou.

古文：戊寅，突厥遣使朝贡。
现代文：戊寅，突厥派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In response, the Turks sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：梁反人李山花自号天子，逼鲁山城。
现代文：梁国谋反的人李山花自己号称天子，进逼鲁山城。
English: Li Shanhua, the rebel of Liang Guo, called himself the son of heaven, and forced his way into Lushan City.

古文：五月乙酉，镇城李仲侃击斩之。
现代文：五月乙酉，镇守城的李仲侃攻打杀丫李山花。
English: In May, Li Zhongkan, the town's garrison, attacked and killed Yali Shanhua.

古文：庚寅，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：庚寅，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: Emperor Go-In arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：萧明入于建邺。
现代文：萧明进入建邺。
English: Xiao Ming enters Jianye.

古文：丁未，茹茹遣使朝贡。
现代文：丁未，茹茹派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: Ding Wei, Zhu Ru sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：六月壬子，诏曰： 梁国遘祸，主丧臣离，逷彼炎方，尽生荆棘。
现代文：六月壬子，下韶书说： 梁国造成灾祸，君主丧命臣子流离，在那远远的南方，到处生长着荆棘。
English: In June, the imperial edict said: Liang's country caused a disaster, the monarch lost his life and his vassals were displaced. In the far south, thorns grew everywhere.

古文：兴亡继绝，义在于我，纳以长君，拯其危弊，比送梁主，已入金陵。
现代文：复兴灭亡的国家接继绝代的皇室，大义在于我方，收纳他们的君主，拯救他们的危难，护送梁主，已进入金陵。
English: The revival of the perished country to succeed the extinct royal family, the great justice lies in our side, to receive their monarch, to save their peril, to escort the beam, has entered Jinling.

古文：藩礼既修，分义方笃。
现代文：藩国的礼节已经举行，情义更加深厚。
English: The etiquette of the domain has been held, and the situation is more profound.

古文：越鸟之思，岂忘南枝，凡是梁民，宜听反国，以礼发遣。 
现代文：越地之乌的思念，难道忘记朝南的树枝，凡是梁国的百姓，应该听任返回本国，以礼节遣送。 
English: The people of Liang Province should be allowed to return to their home country and be sent back with courtesy.

古文：丁卯，帝如晋阳。
现代文：丁卯，皇帝到晋阳。
English: Dingwu, the emperor went to Jinyang.

古文：壬申，亲讨茹茹。
现代文：壬申，亲自讨伐茹茹。
English: Jinshin, personally fight against Juru.

古文：甲戌，诸军大会于祁连池。
现代文：甲戌，各军在祁连池集结。
English: Armor-plated, the armies assembled at Qilian Pond.

古文：乙亥，出塞，至厍狄谷，百余里内无水泉，六军渴乏，俄而大雨。
现代文：乙亥，走出边塞，到达库狄谷，一百多里以内没有泉水，六军又渴又累，不久降了大雨。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, after leaving the border fortress and reaching the Cudi Valley, there was no spring water within more than a hundred miles. The six armies were thirsty and tired, and heavy rain soon fell.

古文：戊寅，梁主萧明遣其子章、兼侍中袁泌、兼散骑常侍杨裕奉表朝贡。
现代文：戊寅，梁主萧明派遣他的儿子萧章、兼侍中袁泌、兼散骑常侍杨裕捧着表章朝见进贡。
English: In Wu Yin, Liang Lord Xiao Ming sent his son Xiao Zhang, concurrently the chamberlain Yuan Xiu, concurrently the equestrian attendant Yang Yu, bearing the morning watch tribute.

古文：秋七月己卯，帝顿白道，留辎重，亲率轻骑五千追茹茹。
现代文：秋七月己卯，皇帝在白道停宿，留下辎重，亲自率领轻装骑兵五千人追击茹茹。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor stopped at Baidoa, leaving the heavy baggage behind, and personally led five thousand light cavalry to pursue Zhu Ru.

古文：壬午，及于怀朔镇。
现代文：壬午，到达怀朔镇。
English: At noon, we arrived at Wai Shuo Town.

古文：帝躬当矢石，频大破之，遂至沃野，获其俟利蔼焉力娄阿帝、吐头发郁久闾状延等，并口二万余，牛羊数十万头。
现代文：皇帝亲自冒着箭和石头，一再把他们打得大败，于是到达沃野，俘获他们的俟利蔼焉力娄阿帝、吐头发郁久间状延等，加上人口二万多，牛羊数十万头。
English: The emperor himself braved arrows and stones and repeatedly defeated them, so he arrived at the Wonsan and captured their emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor, emperor.

古文：茹茹俟利郁久闾李家提率部人数百降。
现代文：茹茹俟利郁久闾李家提带领部下几百人投降。
English: Zhu Rongli, Yu Jiuquan and Li Jia Ti led hundreds of subordinates to surrender.

古文：壬辰，帝还晋阳。
现代文：壬辰，皇帝返回晋阳。
English: In Imjin, the emperor returned to Jinyang.

古文：九月乙卯，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：九月乙卯，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: In September, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：冬十月，梁将陈霸先袭王僧辩，杀之，废萧明，复立萧方智为主。
现代文：冬十月，梁国的将领陈霸先袭击王僧辩，杀了他，废掉萧明，又立萧方智为君主。
English: In the winter of October, Liang's general Chen Baxian attacked Wang Sofen, killed him, deposed Xiao Ming, and installed Xiao Fangzhi as the monarch.

古文：辛亥，帝如晋阳。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝到达晋阳。
English: In Xinhai, the emperor arrived in Jinyang.

古文：十一月丙戌，高丽遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月丙戌，高丽派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In November, Goryeo sent an envoy to the DPRK to pay tribute.

古文：梁秦州刺史徐嗣辉、南豫州刺史任约等袭据石头城，并以州内附。
现代文：梁国奎蛆刺史遥鱼乸、尘邃州刺史任鲍等偷袭占据五头城，并率本州归附。
English: Liang Guo-kui (梁国奎) stabbed Shi Yao-fu () and Dangshanzhou stabbed Shi Ren-bao (尘州刺史任鲍) and other raiders occupied Wuzhong City, and led Honshu to annexation.

古文：壬辰，大都督萧轨率众至江，遣都督柳达摩等渡江镇石头。
现代文：壬辰，大都督萧轨带领军队到达长江，派遣都督柳达摩等人渡过长江镇守石头。
English: In Imjin, the great governor Xiao Liao led the army to the Yangtze River and sent the governor Liu Damo and others across the Yangtze River to guard the stone.

古文：东南道行台赵彦深获秦郡等五城，户二万余，所在安辑之。
现代文：东南道行台赵彦深获得秦郡等五座城，二万多户，所到之处安抚他们。
English: Zhao Yanshen, the governor of Dongnan Dao, won five cities including Qin County and more than 20,000 households, and pacified them everywhere he went.

古文：己亥，太保、司州牧、清河王岳薨。
现代文：己亥，太保、业牧、渣延直岳薨。
English: Ji Hai, Tai Bao, Yemoku, Jian Yan Zhi Yue.

古文：是月，柳达摩为霸先攻逼，以石头降。
现代文：这一月，柳达摩被陈霸先攻打威逼，献出石头投降。
English: This month, Liu Damo was first attacked and intimidated by Chen Baxi, and surrendered with a stone.

古文：十二月戊申，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月戊申，库莫奚派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In December, Cuomo sent an envoy to see the tribute.

古文：是年，发夫一百八十万人筑长城，自幽州北夏口至恒州九百余里。
现代文：这一年，征发役夫一百八十万人修筑长城，从幽州以北的夏口到恒州九百多里。
English: In that year, 1.8 million people were conscripted to build the Great Wall, stretching more than 900 miles from Xiakou, north of Yuzhou, to Hengzhou.

古文：七年春正月甲辰，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：天保七年春正月甲辰，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Tianbao, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：于邺城西马射，大集众庶而观之。
现代文：在邺城西面骑马射箭，集中许多平民百姓来观看。
English: Riding horses and shooting arrows on the west side of Lucheng, many common people gathered to watch.

古文：二月辛未，诏常山王演等于凉风堂读尚书奏按，论定得失，帝亲决之。
现代文：二月辛未，下诏书命令常山王高演等人在凉风堂宣读尚书的奏文，议论确定得失，皇帝亲自作出决断。
English: In late February, the next imperial edict ordered Changshan Wang Gao Rong and others to read out the proclamation of the imperial edict in Liangfeng Hall, discuss and determine the gains and losses, and the emperor personally made a decision.

古文：三月丁酉，大都督萧轨等率众济江。
现代文：三月丁酉，大都督萧轨等人率领军队渡过长辽。
English: In March, Ding Xi, the great governor Xiao Lu and others led the army across the Changliao River.

古文：夏四月乙丑，仪同娄睿率众讨鲁阳蛮，大破之。
现代文：夏四月乙丑，仪同娄散率领军队讨伐鲁阳蛮，把他们打得大败。
English: In the second month of the fourth month of the summer, Yi Tong and Xuan San led the army to fight against Lu Yang and the barbarians, and they were defeated.

古文：丁卯，诏造金华殿。
现代文：丁卯，下韶书建造金华殿。
English: Dingwu, the construction of Jinhua Hall began.

古文：五月丙申，汉阳王洽薨。
现代文：五月丙申，汉阳王高洽薨。
English: In May, Hanyang King Gaochao died.

古文：是月，帝以肉为断慈，遂不得食。
现代文：这一月，皇帝认为肉是断掉仁慈，于是不再吃。
English: This month, the emperor stopped eating meat, believing it to be a violation of benevolence.

古文：六月乙卯，萧轨等与梁师战于钟山之西，遇霖雨，失利，轨及都督李希光、王敬宝、东方老、军司裴英起并没，土卒散还者十二三。
现代文：六月乙卯，萧轨等人同梁国军队在钟山西面交战，遇上连绵大雨，作战失败，萧轨以及都督李希光、王敬实、东方老、军司裴英起均战死，士兵逃散返回的衹有十分之二三。
English: In June, Xiao Liao and others fought with Liang's army on the west side of Zhongshan Mountain. They encountered continuous heavy rain and lost the battle. Xiao Liao, as well as the governor Li Xiguang, Wang Jingshi, Dongfanglao, and the military secretary Pei Yingqi, all died in the battle. The number of soldiers who fled and returned was 23 out of 10.

古文：乙丑，梁湘州刺史王琳献驯象。
现代文：乙丑，梁国湘州刺史王琳献上驯象。
English: On the 22nd, Liang Zhaozhou invited Wang Lin to present a tamed elephant.

古文：是年，修广三台宫殿。
现代文：这一年，修建扩充三台的宫殿。
English: In the same year, the construction and expansion of three palaces began.

古文：秋七月己亥，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月己亥，大赦天下。
English: In autumn and July, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：八月庚申，帝如晋阳。
现代文：八月庚申，皇帝到达晋阳。
English: In August, Emperor Gaoshen arrived in Jinyang.

古文：九月甲辰，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：九月甲辰，库莫奚派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: At the first hour of September, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月丙戌，契丹遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月丙戌，契丹派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In the winter of October, the Khitan sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：是月，发山东寡妇二千六百人以配军士，有夫而滥夺者五分之一。
现代文：这一月，征发山东寡妇二千六百人配给军士，已有丈夫而胡乱抢去的占五分之一。
English: This month, 2,600 widows in Shandong were requisitioned and sent to be assigned to soldiers. One-fifth of the widows were already married when they were arbitrarily taken.

古文：是月，周文帝殂。
现代文：遣一月，周文帝死。
English: In January, Emperor Zhouwen died.

古文：十一月壬子，诏曰：昆山作镇，厥号神州；瀛海为池，是称赤县。
现代文：十一月壬子，下韶书说：崑山作镇物，它的称号叫神州；瀛海作水池，这个称做赤县。
English: In November of the same year, the next imperial edict said: "Lushan is a township, and its name is Shenzhou; Erhai is a pond, and this is called Aka County."

古文：蒸民乃粒，司牧存焉。
现代文：百姓以谷米为食，管理的官员就存在了。
English: The people live on grain and rice, and the bureaucrats exist to administer it.

古文：王者之制，沿革迭起，方割成灾，肇分十二，水土既平，还复九州。
现代文：帝王的制度，发展变化不断兴起，正当割裂形成灾祸，开始划分为十二份，水土已经平定，又恢复为九州。
English: The system of emperors, development and change have been on the rise, legitimate division has become a scourge, and it began to be divided into twelve parts. The land and water have been leveled and restored to Kyushu.

古文：道或繁简，义在通时，殷因于夏，元所改作。
现代文：方法有的繁琐有的简便，道理在于各时通行，殷代从夏代继承而来，没什么改动。
English: Some methods are cumbersome and some are simple, the reason is that they are common at all times. The Yin Dynasty inherited from the Xia Dynasty, and there is no change.

古文：然则日月缠于天次，王公国于地野，皆所以上叶玄仪，下符川岳。
现代文：既然如此那么日月在天空有序地运行，王公在大地的原野上建立国家，都是为了上同天象相协调，下和山相符合。
English: Since this is the case, the sun and the moon move in an orderly manner in the sky, and the prince established a country in the fields of the earth, all in order to coordinate the top with the celestial bodies, and the bottom with the mountains.

古文：逮于秦政，鞭挞区宇，罢侯置守，天下为家。
现代文：到了秦始皇，对天下实行暴力，废除封侯设置郡守，天下成为家天下。
English: When Qin Shihuang came to power, he imposed violence on the whole country, abolished the fief and set up county governors, and the whole country became a household.

古文：洎两汉承基，曹、马属统，其间损益，难以胜言。
现代文：到两汉继承基业，曹魏、司马氏承袭帝统，其中的减损增益，难以说得清楚。
English: When the Han Dynasty and the Northern Han Dynasty succeeded to the inheritance, and the Cao Wei and Sima Dynasties succeeded to the imperial throne, it is difficult to clearly state the gains and losses.

古文：魏自孝昌之季，数钟浇否，禄去公室，政出多门，衣冠道尽，黔首涂炭。
现代文：魏朝自从孝昌末年以来，数次出现世风衰颓，福运离开皇室，政事出自多门，礼仪全都丧失，百姓陷入困境。
English: Since the end of the Xiaochang era, the Wei Dynasty has seen several ups and downs in the world, with fortune leaving the imperial family, political affairs coming from many sources, etiquette completely lost, and the people in a predicament.

古文：铜马、铁胫之徒。黑山、青犊之侣，枭张晋、赵，豕突燕、秦，纲纪从兹而颓，彝章因此而紊。
现代文：铜马、铁胆的徒党，黑山、青犊的同伙，在晋、赵张牙舞爪，在燕、秦横冲直撞，法度从此衰败，典章从此紊乱。
English: The clique of the bronze horse and the iron gallant, the accomplice of the black mountain and the green grasshopper, in Jin and Zhao, the teeth and claws dance, in Yan and Qin, they rampage, the law has since decayed, and the regulations have since been disordered.

古文：是使豪家大族，鸠率乡部，托迹勤王，规自署置。
现代文：这使有权势的人家，纠集率领下级官吏，表面上是救援受难的君王，法度都是自己部署设置。
English: This has enabled powerful families to gather and lead lower-level officials, ostensibly to rescue the suffering king, and to set up their own regulations.

古文：或外家公主，女谒内成，昧利纳财，启立州郡。
现代文：或外戚公主，请托宫内受宠的女子在内部成事，贪图私利收纳钱财，启用确定州郡。
English: or a maternal relative of the princess, please entrust the favored woman in the palace to do things internally, covet personal gain, collect money, and determine the county.

古文：离大合小，本逐时宜，部竹分符，盖不获已，牧守令长，虚增其数，求功录实，谅足为烦，损害公私，为弊殊久，既乖为政之礼，徒有驱羊之费。
现代文：分离大的合并小的，将根本去追逐一时的需要，剖开竹子分成符信，大概是不能的。州郡县的长官，虚增数量，访求功行、记录劳绩，的确是很烦琐。损害公私的利益，成为弊病已经很久了，既违背执政的礼制，又白花费了官员的俸禄。
English: It is probably impossible to separate the large and merge the small, to pursue the needs of the moment, and to cut the bamboo into letters. It is indeed very troublesome for the prefect of the state, county and county to increase the number, to visit the merits, and to record the performance. It has been a long time since it has become a disease to damage the interests of the public and private. It is not only against the ruling etiquette, but also wasted the salary of the official.

古文：自尔因循，未遑删改。
现代文：从那时就沿袭下来，没有时间删除改正。
English: It's been downhill ever since, and there's no time to delete the correction.

古文：朕寅膺宝历，恭临八荒，建国经野，务存简易。
现代文：朕恭敬地服从帝王的命数，面临八方，建立国家经营疆土，务求简单易行。
English: I respectfully obey the emperor's command, face the eight directions, establish a national management of the territory, and strive to be simple and easy to implement.

古文：将欲镇躁归静，反薄还淳，苟失其中，理从刊正。
现代文：打算要抑制浮躁归于安静，背离浇薄回到淳朴，如果失掉了适中，道理上要随着改正。
English: The intention is to suppress impetuousness and return to quietness, to deviate from watering thinly and return to simplicity, and if moderate is lost, it is reasonable to correct it.

古文：傍观旧史，逖听前言，周曰成、康，汉称文、景，编户之多，古今为最。
现代文：旁观旧时的历史，远听前人的言语，周代叫做成、尘，选伐称为塞、量，编入户籍的数量之多，从古到今是最高的。
English: Watching the history of the old days, listening to the words of the predecessors, Zhou Dynasty is called "Cheng" and "Dust," and "Selection" is called "Ce" and "Quantity." There are so many people who have been incorporated into the household register, which is the highest from ancient times to the present.

古文：而丁口灭于畴日，守令倍于昔辰，非所以驭俗调风，示民轨物。
现代文：却人口比过去减少，郡县长官比以往加倍，遣不是用来驾驭习俗调节风尚，显示给百姓的准则。
English: However, the population is less than in the past, the county magistrates are twice as many as before, and they are not used to control customs, regulate fashions, and show the people the rules.

古文：且五岭内宾，三江乃化，拓土开疆，利穷南海。
现代文：况且五岭归附称臣，三江返回教化，拓展领土开辟边疆，获得的利益穷尽南海。
English: Moreover, the Wuling Mountains were annexed to the Ming Dynasty, the Sanjiang River was returned to the Qing Dynasty, the territory was expanded and the frontier was opened, and the benefits gained were exhausted in the South China Sea.

古文：但要荒之所，旧多浮伪，百室之邑，便立州名，三户之民，空张郡目。
现代文：但在边远荒僻的地方，过去多有虚浮伪造，百户人家的聚落，就立起一个州的名字，三户百姓，就空挂起一个郡的名目。
English: However, in remote and desolate places, in the past, there were many falsehoods and forgeries. A settlement of a hundred households would establish the name of a state, and three households would set up the name of a county.

古文：譬诸木犬，犹彼泥龙，循名督实，事归乌有。
现代文：比如是木雕的狗，好像那泥塑的龙，顺著名目督察事实，事情就化为乌有。
English: For example, the dog carved in wood, like the dragon made of mud, according to the famous eye inspector facts, things come to naught.

古文：今所并省，一依别制。
现代文：现在合并裁减，一切按照另外的制度。
English: Now, mergers and reductions, everything is done according to a different system.

古文：于是并省三州、一百五十三郡、五百八十九县、二镇二十六戍。
现代文：于是合并裁减三个州、一百五十三个郡、五百八十九个县、二镇二十六戍。
English: As a result, the combined reduction of three states, one hundred and fifty-three counties, five hundred and eighty-nine counties, and two towns amounted to twenty-six baht.

古文：又制刺史令尽行兼，不给干物。
现代文：又规定刺史让他们都任兼职，不供给俸禄。
English: In addition, it was stipulated that they should all work part-time, and no salary would be provided.

古文：十二月，西魏相宇文觉受魏禅。
现代文：十二月，西魏相宇文觉接受西魏的禅位。
English: In December, the Western Wei Emperor Xiang Yuwen Jue accepted the Western Wei Emperor's position of Zen.

古文：先是，自西河总秦戍筑长城东至于海，前后所筑东西凡三千余里，率十里一戍，其要害置州镇，凡二十五所。
现代文：在遣之前，从西河总秦戍修筑长城束到大海，前后所修筑的东西共三千余里，大致上十里一座堡垒，在要害的地方设置州镇，一共二十五处。
English: Prior to the expedition, the Great Wall was built from the head of the West River, Qin Hui, all the way to the sea, with a total of more than three thousand miles built before and after, a fortress about ten miles away, and a total of twenty-five prefectures and towns set up in key areas.

古文：八年春三月，大热，人或暍死。
现代文：天保八年春三月，天气十分炎热，有人中暑而死。
English: In March of the eighth year of Tianbao, the weather was very hot, and some people died of heatstroke.

古文：夏四月庚午，诏诸取虾蟹蚬蛤之类，悉令停断，唯听捕鱼。
现代文：夏四月庚午，下诏书各捕捉虾蟹蚬蛤之类的，命令一律停止，衹听任捕鱼。
English: On the afternoon of the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, the following edict ordered that all fishing for shrimp, crabs, clams and the like should be stopped, and that fishing should be allowed.

古文：乙酉，诏公私鹰鹞俱亦禁绝。
现代文：乙酉，下韶书公家和私人的鹰鹞也一同禁止。
English: The acetylene torch, the public torch and the private eagle torch are also prohibited.

古文：以太师、咸阳王斛律金为右丞相，前大将军、扶风王可朱浑道元为太傅，开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令、常山王演为司空、录尚书事，长广王湛为尚书令，尚书右仆射杨愔为尚书左仆射，以并省尚书右仆射崔暹为尚书右仆射，上党王涣录尚书事。
现代文：任命太师、咸阳王斛律金为右丞相，前大将军、扶风王可朱浑道元为太傅，开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令、常山王高演为司空、绿尚书事，长广王高湛为尚书令，尚书右仆射杨情为尚书左仆射，以差省尚书右仆射昼逞为尚书右仆射，上旦旺台逸录尚书事。
English: He appointed the Grand Master, Xianyang Wang Shilujin as the Minister of the Right, the former Grand General, Fu Feng Wang Ke Zhuhun Dogen as the Grand Master, Kaifu Yi and the three departments He Bajin as the Grand Master, Shang Shuling, Changshan Wang Gao Ren as the Secretary of the Sky, Green Shang Shuling, Changguang Wang Gaotan as the Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling Right Servant Sho Yang Jie as the Shang Shuling Left Servant Sho, To Shibao Shang Shuling Right Servant Sho Niang Gang as the Shang Shuling Right Servant Sho, Shangtang Wang Tai

古文：是月，帝在城东马射，敕京师妇女悉赴观，不赴者罪以军法，七日乃止。
现代文：这一月，皇帝在城东骑马射箭，下令京城妇女都来观看，不来的按军法治罪，七天才停!
English: This month, the emperor went horseback archery in the east of the city, and ordered the women of the capital to come and watch. If they did not come, they would be punished by the military and would not be allowed to play for seven days!

古文：五月辛酉，冀州民刘向于京师谋逆，党与皆伏诛。
现代文：五月辛酉，冀州百姓刘向在京城谋反，同党全都被杀。
English: At the end of May, the people of Jizhou rebelled against Liu Xiang in Beijing, and all members of the same party were killed.

古文：秋八月己巳，库莫奚遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋八月己巳，库莫奚派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In autumn, on the third day of the first month of August, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，诏丘、郊、禘、祫、时祀，皆仰市取，少牢不得剖割，有司监视，必令丰备；农社先蚕，酒肉而已；雩、禖、风、雨、司民、司禄、灵星、杂祀，果饼酒脯。
现代文：庚辰，下韶书举行丘、郊、柿、拾、时的祭祀，都要依靠集市取得，少牢不得剖开分割，有关官员监督检查，一定要让祭品丰盛备足；在农社祭祀先蚕，酒肉就可以了；雩、梅、风、雨、司民、司禄、灵星、杂祀的祭祀，用果饼酒脯。
English: At the time of the Geng Chen, the sacrifices of the hills, suburbs, persimmons, gleanings, and times held in the Lower Yunnan Book of Records should be obtained from the bazaar, and the lesser dungeons should not be opened and divided, and the relevant officials should supervise and inspect, and the offerings must be prepared in abundance; in the agricultural society, the first silkworm can be sacrificed, and the wine and meat can be used; the sacrifices of the dragonfly, plum, wind, rain, the chief priest, the chief priest, the spiritual star, and miscellaneous sacrifices, should be made with fruit cake and wine.

古文：唯当务尽诚敬，义同如在。
现代文：衹是应当竭尽诚心敬意，意义就同真在一样。
English: We must do our best to be sincere, respectful, and reverent, just like all the sacrifices under God's command.

古文：自夏至九月，河北六州、河南十二州、畿内八郡大蝗。
现代文：从夏天到九月，黄河以北六州、黄河以南十二州、京城附近八郡发生大蝗灾。
English: From summer to September, large locust plagues occurred in six prefectures north of the Yellow River, twelve prefectures south of the Yellow River, and eight counties near Beijing.

古文：是月，飞至京师，蔽日，声如风雨。
现代文：这一月，蝗虫飞到京城，遮蔽了太阳，声音如同风雨声。
English: This month, the locusts flew to the capital, obscured the sun, and the sound was like the sound of wind and rain.

古文：甲辰，诏今年遭蝗之处免租。
现代文：甲辰，下诏书今年遭蝗灾的地方免除租税。
English: Jia Chen, the next edict exempts the tax from the locusts this year.

古文：是月，周冢宰宇文护杀其主闵帝而立帝弟毓，是为明帝。
现代文：逭一月，周国冢宰宇文护杀死他的君主闵帝而立闵帝的弟弟宇文毓，造就是明帝。
English: In January, Zhou Guo's vassal, Uwenfo, killed his overlord, Emperor Qian, and installed Emperor Qian's younger brother, Uwenfo, who became Emperor Ming.

古文：冬十月乙亥，陈霸先弑其主方智自立，是为陈武帝，遣使称藩朝贡。
现代文：冬十月乙亥，陈霸先杀死他的君主萧方智自己立为皇帝，造就是陈武帝，派遣使者自称藩臣朝见进贡。
English: In the winter of October in the Year of the Fire Rooster, Xiao Fangzhi, the monarch whom Chen Bastian killed, made himself emperor, creating Chen Wudi, and sent an envoy claiming to be a vassal of the domain to pay tribute.

古文：是年，于长城内筑重城，自库洛拔而东至于坞纥戍，凡四百余里。
现代文：造一年，在长城内又修筑一道城墙，从库洛拔往东到坞纥戍，共四百余里。
English: After one year of construction, another city wall was built within the Great Wall, stretching from Kulobat to Dongduk, a total of more than four hundred miles.

古文：九年春二月丁亥，降罪人。
现代文：天保九年春二月丁亥，减轻罪犯刑罚。
English: On February 24th, the spring of the ninth year, the sentence was reduced.

古文：己丑，诏限仲冬一月燎野，不得他时行火，损昆虫草木。
现代文：己丑，下诏书限定仲冬一个月火烧荒野，不许在其他时间用火，损害昆虫草木。
English: The next edict limits the burning of the wilderness to one month in mid-winter, and prohibits the use of fire at other times to harm insects and plants.

古文：三月丁酉，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：三月丁酉，皇帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: In March of Ding Dynasty, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：夏四月辛巳，大赦。
现代文：夏四月辛巳，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：是夏，大旱。
现代文：这年夏天，发生大旱灾。
English: This summer, there was a severe drought.

古文：帝以祈雨不应，毁西门豹祠，掘其冢。
现代文：皇帝因祈祷降雨没有应验，毁掉西门豹的祠堂，挖开他的坟墓。
English: Because the emperor's prayer for rain did not come true, he destroyed Ximenpao's ancestral hall and dug up his grave.

古文：山东大蝗，差夫役捕而坑之。
现代文：山束发生大蝗灾，派服劳役的人捕捉并挖坑埋掉。
English: A great plague of locusts occurred in the mountains, and laborers were sent to catch them and dig a pit to bury them.

古文：是月，北豫州刺史司马消难以城叛，入于周。
现代文：逭一月，北豫州刺史司马消难率城叛变，进入周国。
English: In January, the Northern Henan clique led by Sima Qidong led a mutiny in the city and entered Zhou.

古文：五月辛丑，尚书令、长广王湛录尚书事，骠骑大将军、平秦王归彦为尚书左仆射。
现代文：五月辛丑，尚书令、长广王高湛录尚书事，骠骑大将军、平秦王高归彦为尚书左仆射。
English: The month of May was harsh and ugly. Shang Shuling and Chang Guang Wang Gao Zhan recorded Shang Shuling, and the general of the imperial cavalry, Ping Qin Wang Gao Guihang, was Shang Shuling's left-hand man.

古文：甲辰，以前尚书左仆射杨愔为尚书令。
现代文：甲辰，任命前尚书左仆射杨情为尚书令。
English: Jia Chen, the left-hand servant of Shang Shu before his appointment, shoots Yang Jie for Shang Shu's order.

古文：六月乙丑，帝自晋阳北巡。
现代文：六月乙丑，皇帝从晋阳向北巡视。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, the emperor set out from Jinyang on a northern inspection tour.

古文：己巳，至祁连池。
现代文：己巳，到达祁连池。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they arrived at Qilian Pond.

古文：戊寅，还晋阳。
现代文：戊寅，返回晋阳。
English: On the 16th, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：秋七月辛丑，给京畿老人刘奴等九百四十三人版职及杖帽各有差。
现代文：秋七月辛丑，给京城及周围地区老人刘奴等九百四十三人授与称号以及手杖帽子各有差别。
English: In autumn and July, nine hundred and forty-three people, including Liu Nu, an elderly man from Beijing and the surrounding areas, were awarded different titles and cane hats.

古文：戊申，诏赵、燕、瀛、定、南营五州及司州广平、清河二郡去年螽涝损田，兼春夏少雨，苗稼薄者，免今年租赋。
现代文：戊申，下韶书赵、燕、瀛、定、南营五州及司州广平、清河二郡因去年蝗灾水灾毁坏了田地，加上春夏雨水少，庄稼苗长得稀少，免掉当年的租赋。
English: The five counties of Wushin, Zhao, Yan, Fan, Ding, and Nanying of the Lower Yunnan Province, and the two counties of Sizhou, Guangping, and Qinghe of the Southern Yunnan Province, were exempted from the rent subsidy that year because the locusts and floods destroyed the fields last year, and the spring and summer rains were few, and the crop seedlings were scarce.

古文：八月乙丑，至自晋阳。
现代文：八月乙丑，皇帝从晋阳到京城。
English: In the second month of August, the emperor moved from Jinyang to Beijing.

古文：甲戌，帝如晋阳。
现代文：甲戌，皇帝到晋阳。
English: The emperor went to Jinyang.

古文：是月，陈江州刺史沈泰以三千人内附。
现代文：这一月，陈国江州刺史沈泰带领三千人归附。
English: In this month, Chen Guozhou, Jiangzhou and Shen Tai led 3,000 people to join.

古文：先是，发丁匠三十余万营三台于邺下，因其旧基而高博之，大起宫室及游豫园。
现代文：在遣之前，征发壮丁工匠三十多万人在邺下修筑三台，在它旧的地基上加高扩充，建起很多宫室以及游豫园。
English: Before the capital was transferred, more than 300,000 young craftsmen were conscripted and sent to build three palaces under the command of the emperor. On its old foundation, it was raised and expanded, and many palaces and Yuyuan Garden were built.

古文：至是，三台成，改铜爵曰金凤，金兽曰圣应，冰井曰崇光。
现代文：至此，三台落成，改铜爵台为金凤台，金兽台为圣应台，冰井台为崇光台。
English: So far, three stations have been completed, and the Bronze Knight Station has been changed to the Golden Phoenix Station, the Golden Beast Station has been changed to the Saint Ying Station, and the Ice Well Station has been changed to the Soaring Station.

古文：十一月甲午，帝至自晋阳，登三台，御乾象殿，朝宴群臣，并命赋诗。
现代文：十一月甲午，皇帝从晋阳到达京城，登上三台，来到干象殿，会见宴请大臣们，并且命令赋诗。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Jinyang, boarded the San Tai, came to the Gan Xiang Hall, met with ministers for a banquet, and ordered to compose a poem.

古文：以新宫成，丁酉，大赦，内外文武并进一大阶。
现代文：因新的宫殿落成，丁酉，大赦天下，朝廷内外文武官员普遍升一大阶。
English: Due to the completion of the new palace, Ding Xuan was pardoned by the emperor, and the civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court generally rose to a higher level.

古文：丁巳，梁湘州刺史王琳遣使请立萧庄为梁主，仍以江州内属，令庄居之。
现代文：丁巳，梁国湘州刺史王琳派遣使者请求立萧庄为梁主，仍然将江州归附，让萧庄居住。
English: On the 28th, the Hunan governor of the Liang Dynasty sent an envoy to request that Xiao Zhuang be made the sovereign of the Liang Dynasty, and that Jiangzhou still be annexed to Qi, and Xiao Zhuang be allowed to live in Jiangzhou.

古文：十二月癸酉，诏梁王萧庄为梁主，进居九派。
现代文：十二月癸酉，下韶书受王芦蓝为銮主，居住在丸遂。
English: At the end of December, Wang Lulan was appointed as the head of the Lower Han Dynasty and lived in Marusui.

古文：戊寅，以太傅可朱浑道元为太师，司徒尉粲为太尉，冀州刺史段韶为司空，录尚书事、常山王演为大司马，录尚书事、长广王湛为司徒。
现代文：戊寅，任命太傅可朱浑道元为太师，司徒盥凿为太尉，冀业刺史更幽为司空，录尚书事、常山王直远为大司马，录尚书事、长广王产进为司徒。
English: In Wu Yin, Zhu Hun Dao Yuan was appointed Taifu as Taishi, Jie Ya Zhishi was appointed Taifu, Jie Ya Zhishi was appointed Siku, Luo Shang Shujie, Changshan Wang Zhiyuan was appointed Da Sima, Luo Shang Shujie, Changguang Wang Zhijin was appointed Sito.

古文：是月，起大庄严寺。
现代文：这一月，建起大庄严寺。
English: This month, the Great Solemn Temple was built.

古文：是年，杀永安王浚、上党王涣。
现代文：这一年，杀了永安王高浚、上党王高涣。
English: That year, he killed Yongan King Gaozhun and Shangdang King Gaozhong.

古文：十年春正月戊戌，以司空侯莫陈相为大将军。
现代文：天保十年春正月戊戌，任命司空侯莫陈相为大将军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, he appointed Siku Hou Mo Chen Xiang as the general.

古文：甲寅，帝如辽阳甘露寺。
现代文：甲寅，皇帝到辽阳甘露寺。
English: Jia Yin, the emperor went to Liaoyang Kanlu Temple.

古文：乙卯，诏于麻城置卫州。
现代文：乙卯，下诏书在麻城设置衡州。
English: Second, the next imperial edict set up Hengzhou in Macheng.

古文：二月丙戌，帝于甘露寺禅居深观，唯军国大政奏闻。
现代文：二月丙戌，皇帝在甘露寺僧人居住的地方细加观察，衹有军国大事上奏。
English: On February 28th, the emperor stayed in the meditation room of Kanro-ji Temple to meditate. Only the military government could enter the room to meditate.

古文：三月戊戌，以侍中高德政为尚书右仆射。
现代文：三月戊戌，任命侍中高德政为尚书右仆射。
English: In March, he appointed Gao Desheng, a chamberlain, as his right-hand man.

古文：丙辰，帝至自辽阳。
现代文：丙辰，皇帝从辽阳到达京城。
English: Emperor Xianchen arrived in Beijing from Liaoyang.

古文：是月，梁主萧庄至郢州，遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一月，梁主萧庄到达郢州，派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In the same month, Liang Guo Guo Jun Xiaozhuang arrived in Zhangzhou and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：闰四月丁酉，以司州牧、彭城王浟为司空，侍中、高阳王湜为尚书右仆射。
现代文：闰四月丁酉，任命司州牧、彭城王高澈为司空，侍中、高阳王高浞为尚书右仆射。
English: In April, Ding Jun, he appointed Shizhou Mu and Pengcheng Wang Gaochu as Siku, and the attendant, Gaoyang Wang Gaochu, as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：乙巳，以司空、彭城王浟兼太尉，封皇子绍廉为长乐郡王。
现代文：乙巳，任命司空、彭城王高澈兼太尉，封皇子高绍廉为长乐郡王。
English: At this time, he appointed Siku, Pengcheng Wang Gao Chek and Taifu, and the prince Gao Shao Liang as the king of Changle County.

古文：五月癸未，诛始平公元世、东平公元景式等二十五家，特进元韶等十九家并令禁止。
现代文：五月癸未，杀了始平公元世、东平公元景式等二十五家，特进元韶等十九家一同命令囚禁。
English: At the end of May, he killed twenty-five families, including the Shihei family and the Dongping family, and ordered nineteen families, including the Tokujin family, to be imprisoned.

古文：六月，陈武帝殂，兄子蒨立，是为文帝。
现代文：六月，陈武帝殂，侄子陈蓓立为皇帝，造就是陈文帝。
English: In June, Emperor Chen Wudi and his nephew Emperor Chen Rong were enthroned, creating Emperor Chen Wen.

古文：秋八月戊戌，封皇子绍义为广阳郡王，以尚书右仆射、河间王孝琬为尚书左仆射。
现代文：秋八月戊戌，封皇子高绍义为广阳郡王，任命尚书右仆射、河阎王高孝琬为尚书左仆射。
English: In the autumn and August, Gao Shao Yi, the crown prince, was appointed the king of Guangyang County, and Gao Xiaojuan, the prince of Heyan, was appointed the right-hand man of Shangshu and the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：癸卯，诏诸军民或有父祖改姓冒入元氏，或假托携认，忘称姓元者，不问世数远近，悉听改复本姓。
现代文：癸卯，下韶书各军人百姓有的是父亲祖父改掉本姓冒姓元氏的，有的是假托提携相认，妄称姓元的，不问相隔的辈数远还是近，都让改换恢复本姓。
English: At the same time, according to the latest report, some soldiers and civilians whose fathers and grandfathers changed their surnames to fake the surname Yuan, and some who pretended to be affiliated with each other and pretended to be surnamed Yuan, regardless of the number of generations far or near, all changed their surnames to restore their original surnames.

古文：九月己巳，帝如晋阳。
现代文：九月己巳，皇帝到晋阳。
English: In September, the emperor arrived in Jinyang.

古文：是月，使郦怀则、陆仁惠使于萧庄。
现代文：逭一月，派遣郦怀则、陆仁惠出使到萧庄
English: In January, sent envoys to Xiaozhuang led by Zhou Huai Ze and Lu Ren Hui

古文：冬十月甲午，帝暴崩于晋阳宫德阳堂，时年三十一。
现代文：冬十月甲午，皇帝在晋阳宫德阳堂突然驾崩，当时三十一岁。
English: On the 10th day of winter in October, Emperor Xuan suddenly passed away in the Deyang Hall of the Jinyang Palace at the age of 31.

古文：遗诏： 凡诸凶事一依俭约。
现代文：遗诏说： 凡是丧事一律依照节俭的原则。
English: The will said: All funerals should be conducted according to the principle of frugality.

古文：三年之丧，虽曰达礼，汉文革创，通行自昔，义有存焉，同之可也，丧月之断限以三十六日。
现代文：三年的服丧，虽然说达到了礼节，汉文帝改革创新，从过去就广为实行，有保留的道理，同样办理是可以的，丧月的期限为三十六天。
English: Although the three-year mourning period is said to have reached the etiquette, the reform and innovation of the Han Dynasty has been widely implemented in the past. There is a reason for reservation, and the same procedure is possible. The mourning period is 36 days.

古文：嗣主、百僚、内外遐迩奉制割情，悉从公除。 
现代文：继承人、百官、朝廷内外远近奉行制度割舍情意，一律服从公事除丧。 
English: Heirs, dignitaries, and people both inside and outside the imperial court all follow the system of giving up and giving up, and are all subject to public affairs and mourning.

古文：癸卯，发丧，敛于宣德殿。
现代文：癸卯，宣布皇帝的死讯，在宣德殿装殓。
English: Yu Yu, announcing the emperor's death, decorates the walls of the Xuande Hall.

古文：十一月辛未，梓宫还京师。
现代文：十一月辛未，皇帝的棺椁送回京城。
English: In late November, the emperor's coffin was sent back to the capital.

古文：十二月乙酉，殡于太极前殿。
现代文：十二月乙酉，灵柩停放在太极前殿。
English: On December 2nd, the casket was placed in the front hall of the Taiji Temple.

古文：乾明元年二月丙申，葬于武宁陵，谥曰文宣皇帝，庙号威宗。
现代文：干明元年二月丙申，安葬在武宁陵，谧号叫文宣皇帝，庙号威宗。
English: In February of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Bishen was buried in the Tomb of Wu Ning. His posthumous name was Emperor Wenxuan, and his temple name was Wei Zong.

古文：武平初，又改为文宣，庙号显祖。
现代文：武平初年，又改谧号为文宣，庙号显祖。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he changed his surname to Wenxuan and his temple name to Xianzu.

古文：帝少有大度，志识沉敏，外柔内刚，果敢能断。
现代文：皇帝年轻时就有宽宏大量的胸怀，见识聪敏而不显露在外，外表温柔而内心刚烈，果敢能作出决断。
English: When he was young, the emperor had a broad-mindedness. He was intelligent without showing it. He was gentle on the outside but tough on the inside. He had the courage to make decisions.

古文：雅好吏事，测始知终，理剧处繁，终日不倦。
现代文：平素喜爱处理政事，观察开始推知结局，处理复杂繁难的事务，整天不感到疲倦。
English: He always likes to deal with political affairs, observe the beginning to predict the outcome, deal with complex and difficult matters, and do not feel tired all day.

古文：初践大位，留心政术，以法驭下，公道为先。
现代文：开始登上帝位，留心执政的方法，用法度驾驭下属，把公道放在首位。
English: Begin to ascend to the throne, pay attention to the method of governing, use the law to control subordinates, and put justice first.

古文：或有违犯宪章，虽密戚旧勋，必无容舍，内外清靖，莫不祗肃。
现代文：有的人违犯法律，即使是关系密切的亲戚和过去有功勋的人，一定不宽容放过，朝廷内外清平安宁，没有不恭谨严肃的。
English: Some people violate the law, even if they are close relatives and people who have meritorious deeds in the past, they must not be tolerated. There is peace and tranquility inside and outside the imperial court, and no one is disrespectful and serious.

古文：至于军国几策，独决怀抱，规模宏远，有人君大略。
现代文：至于军队和国家的机要谋略，在心中独自决断，气势宏远，有帝王的远大谋略。
English: As for the strategic plans of the army and the country, they are independently determined in their hearts, and they are far-reaching, with the emperor's far-reaching strategy.

古文：又以三方鼎跱，诸夷未宾，修缮甲兵，简练士卒，左右宿卫置百保军士。
现代文：又因三方鼎立相持，各边远部族没有归附，修理镜甲兵器，选拔训练士兵，身边值宿警卫设置百保军士。
English: Also, because of the three-party standoff, the outlying tribes did not attach, repair mirror armor weapons, select and train soldiers, and set up guards on duty around them.

古文：每临行阵，亲当矢石，锋刃交接，唯恐前敌之不多，屡犯艰危，常致克捷。
现代文：每当亲临指挥布阵时，亲自迎着箭镞和石头，刀剑相拼，衹担心前面的敌人不多，屡次冒着艰难危险，往往导致胜利。
English: Whenever he personally commanded the formation, he personally faced arrows and stones, fought with swords and swords, worried that there were not many enemies in front of him, and repeatedly braved difficulties and dangers, often leading to victory.

古文：尝于东山游宴，以关陇未平，投杯震怒，召魏收于御前，立为诏书，宣示远近，将事西伐。
现代文：曾经在束山游赏宴饮，因关陇未能平定，扔掉酒杯十分愤怒，把魏收召到面前，写下韶书，向远近宣告，将要向西征伐。
English: Once he was enjoying a banquet in Soksan, but he threw away his wine glass in anger because he couldn't settle the border dispute. He summoned Wei to his presence, wrote down a letter, and announced to those near and far that he was going to conquer the West.

古文：是岁，周文帝殂，西人震恐，常为度陇之计。
现代文：这一年，周文帝殂，西边的人震惊恐惧，经常筹划越过陇地的计策。
English: In that year, Zhou Wendi had just died, and the West Wei people were very panicked and often planned to move to Handan.

古文：既征伐四克，威振戎夏，六七年后，以功业自矜，遂留连耽湎，肆行淫暴。
现代文：征伐已四次成功，威震西戎华夏，六七年以后，以功劳自傲，于是留连沉湎，任意妄为荒淫残暴。
English: The conquest has been successful four times, and it has shaken West Rift Valley and Huaxia. After 1967, they were proud of their achievements, so they stayed and suffered, and arbitrarily became barbaric and cruel.

古文：或躬自鼓舞，歌讴不息，从旦通宵，以夜继昼。
现代文：有时亲自击鼓起舞，歌唱不停，从早到晚，夜以继。
English: Sometimes I personally beat the drums and dance, singing non-stop, from morning to night, night after night.

古文：或袒露形体，涂傅粉黛，散发胡服，杂衣锦彩。
现代文：有时裸露身体，涂抹粉黛，披散着头发穿上胡人的服装，衣服是各种颜色的锦缎丝绸。
English: Sometimes they bare their bodies, apply powder, wear their hair loose and put on a beard costume, the clothes are various colors of brocade silk.

古文：拔刃张弓，游于市肆，勋戚之第，朝夕临幸。
现代文：拔出刀拉开弓，在街市上游荡，有功之臣和皇亲国戚的住宅，时时前去。
English: Pulling out his sword and drawing his bow, he roamed the streets and marketplaces, constantly going to the residences of meritorious courtiers and the emperor's relatives.

古文：时乘馲驼牛驴，不施鞍勒，盛暑炎赫，隆冬酷寒，或日中暴身，去衣驰骋，从者不堪，帝居之自若。
现代文：有时乘着骆驼牛驴，不加鞍辔，盛夏炎热，深冬寒冷，有时在太阳下暴露身体，脱去衣服快马奔驰，跟随的人不能忍受，而皇帝处之自若。
English: Sometimes riding camels, oxen and donkeys, without saddles, hot in midsummer, cold in late winter, sometimes exposing his body in the sun, stripping off his clothes, speeding horses, his followers can't stand it, and the emperor is at ease.

古文：亲戚贵臣，左右近习，侍从错杂，无复差等。
现代文：皇亲国戚权贵大臣，身边的亲信，混杂在一起侍奉跟从，不再有等级差别。
English: Relatives, dignitaries, close attendants, attendants, etc. are intertwined and mixed, regardless of rank.

古文：征集淫妪，分付从官，朝夕临视，以为娱乐。
现代文：征集淫荡的妇人，分别交给随从近臣，时时前去观看，以此取乐。
English: He collected lewd women and gave them separately to his attendants and courtiers, who would watch them from time to time for their own amusement.

古文：凡诸杀害，多令支解，或焚之于火，或投之于河。
现代文：凡是被他杀害的人，大多下令肢解，有的放在火上焚烧，有的投到河裹。
English: Most of the people he killed he ordered to be dismembered, some of them were set on fire, others were thrown into the river.

古文：沉酗既久，弥以狂惑，至于末年，每言见诸鬼物，亦云闻异音声。
现代文：沉湎于酗酒已经很久，又加上精神错乱，以至于到了末年，常说看到了鬼怪，又说听到了怪异的声音。
English: He had been addicted to alcohol for a long time, coupled with insanity, so that at the end of his life, he often said that he saw ghosts and heard strange sounds.

古文：情有蒂芥，必在诛戮，诸元宗室咸加屠剿，永安、上党并致冤酷，高隆之、高德政、杜弼、王元景、李蒨之等皆以非罪加害。
现代文：心襄对人有了嫌隙，必定要杀掉，各元氏宗室都被屠杀，永安王、上党王都遭致冤杀，高隆之、高德政、杜弼、王元景、李蓓之等人都因无罪而被杀害。
English: Xiangxiang had a grudge against someone and was bound to kill him. All the Yuan family members were slaughtered. King Yongan and Shangdang Wang were unjustly killed. Gao Longzhi, Gao Desheng, Du Xi, Wang Yuanjing, Li Xi and others were all killed for no reason.

古文：尝在晋阳以槊戏刺都督尉子耀，应手即殒。
现代文：曾经在晋阳开玩笑用长矛去刺都督尉子耀，随手就杀了他。
English: He once joked in Jinyang that he would use a spear to stab the city's governor, Lieutenant Zi Yao, and then killed him.

古文：又在三台大光殿上，以锯锯都督穆嵩，遂至于死。
现代文：又在三台大光殿上，用锯子锯都督穆嵩，直到死去。
English: In addition, he used a saw to saw the governor, Mutsung, on the three daikodens until his death.

古文：又尝幸开府暴显家，有都督韩悊无罪，忽于众中唤出斩之。
现代文：又曾经到开府暴显家，有个都督韩愆没有罪过，忽然从众人中叫出来杀了他。
English: He also once went to Kaifu to attack a prominent person. There was a governor, Han Ye, who had committed no crime, but he was suddenly called out from the crowd and killed.

古文：自余酷滥，不可胜纪。
现代文：其余的滥杀无辜，多得记不下来。
English: The rest of the indiscriminate killing of innocents is too numerous to remember.

古文：朝野惨憎，各怀怨毒。
现代文：朝廷民间忧伤憎恶，各自怀有怨恨。
English: The people of the court were saddened and disgusted, each harboring their own grudges.

古文：而素以严断临下，加之默识强记，百僚战栗，不敢为非，文武近臣，朝不谋夕。
现代文：而且向来对下属严厉断处，加上记忆力强，百官害怕得发抖，不敢做不利于他的事，身边的文武官员早上不知能否活到晚上。
English: Moreover, he has always been strict with his subordinates, and with a strong memory, the officials are trembling with fear and dare not do things that are unfavorable to him. The civil and military officials around him do not know whether they can survive until the evening in the morning.

古文：又多所营缮，百役繁兴，举国骚扰，公私劳弊。
现代文：又搞了很多修建，各种工程兴起，全国骚扰不安，公私劳累疲敝。
English: There was also a lot of construction, various projects arose, the whole country was disturbed and uneasy, and the public and private sectors were exhausted.

古文：凡诸赏赉，无复节限，府藏之积，遂至空虚。
现代文：凡赏赐的东西，不再有节制，府库储藏的积累，逐渐空虚。
English: There is no longer any restraint on what is rewarded, and the accumulation of government treasuries and reserves is gradually becoming empty.

古文：自皇太后诸王及内外勋旧，愁惧危悚，计无所出。
现代文：从皇太后各王到朝廷内外有功勋的旧臣，感到忧愁恐惧危急，拿不出什么对策。
English: From the empress dowager all the kings to the meritorious old vassals inside and outside the imperial court, they felt sad, fearful and critical, and could not come up with any countermeasures.

古文：暨于末年，不能进食，唯数饮酒，曲蘖成灾，因而致毙。
现代文：到了末年，已不能进食，衹是饮几次酒，酒毒成灾，于是导致送了命。
English: At the end of his life, he was no longer able to eat. He drank alcohol several times, which led to alcohol poisoning, which led to his death.

古文：论曰：高祖平定四胡，威权延世。
现代文：谕曰：高祖平定四周的胡人，威严的权势传续了几代。
English: The edict said: Gaozhu subdued the Hu people around him, and the majestic power was passed down for several generations.

古文：迁邺之后，虽主器有人，号令所加，政皆自出。
现代文：迁都到邺城以后，虽然有人主持国家的权柄，但发号施令，政事都由自己决定。
English: After the capital was moved to Handan, although some people presided over the power of the country, they issued orders, and the government affairs were decided by themselves.

古文：显祖因循鸿业，内外协从，自朝及野，群心属望。
现代文：显祖继承宏大的基业，内外协力跟随，从朝廷到民间，人心所望。
English: Xianzu inherits a grand foundation, and is followed by domestic and foreign cooperation, from the imperial court to the people, and is desired by the people.

古文：东魏之地，举世乐推，曾未期月，玄运集己。
现代文：束魏的地方，天下乐意推举，不到一个月，帝王的运数就降临到头上。
English: In less than a month, the emperor's luck would come to a head.

古文：始则存心政事，风化肃然，数年之间，翕斯致治。
现代文：开始时有心政事，良好的社会风尚井然有序，几年的时间，很快达到了治理。
English: At the beginning, there was a political spirit, a good social style and good order. After a few years, governance was quickly achieved.

古文：其后纵酒肆欲，事极猖狂，昏邪残暴，近世未有。
现代文：他后来放纵饮酒肆意纵欲，猖狂到了极点，昏昧邪恶残忍凶暴，是近代以来没有遇的。
English: Later, he indulged in drinking, indulged in wanton indulgence, rampant to the extreme, dim-witted, evil, cruel and ferocious, which has not been encountered since modern times.

古文：飨国弗永，实由斯疾，胤嗣殄绝，固亦余殃者也。
现代文：享有国家不能长久，实际上是由于他的疾病，后嗣断绝，本来也是留下的灾祸啊。
English: He could not enjoy the country for a long time, in fact, due to his illness, heirs were cut off, which was also a disaster left behind.

古文：赞曰：天保定位，受终攸属。
现代文：赞曰：天保确定帝位，接受禅让有所归属。
English: Zang said: Tianbao determined the imperial throne, and accepted the transfer of ownership.

古文：奄宅区夏，爰膺帝箓。
现代文：安抚平定天下，承担上天赐予的帝王符命。
English: To pacify and pacify the world, to bear the emperor's mission given by God.

古文：势叶讴歌，情毁龟玉。
现代文：形势舆歌颂的相一致，情欲毁掉了龟玉这样的国家重器。
English: The situation is in line with public opinion, and lust has destroyed such a national heavy weapon as the turtle bead.

古文：始存政术，闻斯德音。
现代文：开始有心执政的方法，听到对他赞美的声音。
English: He began to govern in a thoughtful way, and voices of praise were heard for him.

古文：罔遵克念，乃肆其心。
现代文：不能遵循自己的意念，就放纵自己的心思。
English: If you can't follow your own ideas, indulge your own thoughts.

古文：穷理残虐，尽性荒淫。
现代文：想尽法子残暴虐杀，由着性子荒淫无度。
English: Wanting to kill as brutally and cruelly as possible, he is driven by a wild and unrestrained nature.

