古文：起阏逢摄提格，尽强圉大荒落，凡四年。
现代文：起阏逢摄提格，尽强圉大荒落，一共四年。
English: For a total of four years, the city of Tigre was ravaged and devastated as much as possible.

古文：丁巳，御太和殿见近臣，然神识耗减，不能复故。
现代文：唐文宗太和八年春季，正月，唐文宗的病情稍有好转，丁巳，亲临太和殿，接见左右亲近的臣僚。然而精神萎靡不振，远不如从前。
English: In the spring and the first month of the eighth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Tang Wenzong, Tang Wenzong's condition improved slightly. Ding Xi personally visited the Palace of the Empress Dowager and met with close ministers on both sides. However, his spirits were weak, far worse than before.

古文：二月，壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，壬午朔，出现日食。
English: In February, at the stroke of noon, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏，六月，丙戌，莒王纾薨。
现代文：夏季六曰，丙戌，莒王李纾去世。
English: On the 6th day of the summer, the king of Baekje, Baekje, Baekje, Baekje, passed away.

古文：上以久旱，诏求致雨之方。
现代文：文宗鉴于天气大旱很久，下诏征求能够下雨的方法。
English: In view of the fact that the weather has been very dry for a long time, the next order is to find a way to make it rain.

古文：司门员外郎李中敏上表，以为： 仍岁大旱，非圣德不至，直以宋申锡之冤滥，郑注之奸邪。
现代文：司门员外郎李中敏上表认为： 现在连年大旱，并非陛下的品德不高，而是由于前宰相宋申锡被贬的案件太冤，郑注的行为奸邪不轨。
English: The gatekeeper's son-in-law, Li Zhongmin, opined on the table: The drought that has been going on for several years now is not because His Majesty's moral character is not high, but because the case of former Prime Minister Song Shengxi being demoted was too unjust, and Zheng Zhu's behavior was improper.

古文：今致雨之方，莫若斩注而雪申锡。 
现代文：因此，现在求雨的最好方法，莫过于处死郑注而为宋申锡平反。 
English: Therefore, the best way to pray for rain now is to execute Zheng Zhu and rehabilitate Song Shensi.

古文：表留中。中敏谢病归东都。
现代文：李中敏的奏章被留在宫中，没有答复。于是，李中敏以身体有病为由，辞职回到东都洛阳。
English: Li Zhongmin's report was left in the palace, and there was no reply. Therefore, Li Zhongmin resigned and returned to Luoyang, the eastern capital, on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：郯王经薨。
现代文：郯王李经去世。
English: Gong Wang Lijing passed away.

古文：初，李仲言流象州，遇赦，还东都。
现代文：当初，李仲言被流放到象州，后来，由于朝廷大赦，回到东都洛阳。
English: At first, Li Zhongyan was exiled to Xiangzhou, and later, due to the amnesty of the imperial court, he returned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：会留守李逢吉思复入相，仲言自言与郑注善，逢吉使仲言厚赂之。
现代文：这时，东都留守李逢吉正想再入朝担任宰相。李仲言自称和郑注关系密切，于是，李逢吉派李仲言用重金向郑注行贿。
English: At this time, Li Fangji, who was left behind in Dongdu, was trying to re-enter the North to serve as prime minister. Li Zhongyan claimed to have a close relationship with Zheng Shou, so Li Fengji sent Li Zhongyan to bribe Zheng Shou with heavy money.

古文：注引仲言见王守澄，守澄荐于上，云仲言善《易》，上召见之。
现代文：郑注引李仲言拜见右神策军护军中尉王守澄，王守澄又把李仲言推荐给文宗，声称李仲言精通《周易》。于是，文宗召见李仲言。
English: Zheng Zhu introduced Li Zhongyan to Wang Shoucheng, a lieutenant of the Right Divine Protection Army, and Wang Shoucheng recommended Li Zhongyan to Wenzong, claiming that Li Zhongyan was proficient in "Zhou Yi." Therefore, Wenzong summoned Li Zhongyan.

古文：时仲言有母服，难入禁中，乃使衣民服，号王山人。
现代文：这时，李仲言正在为母亲服丧，身着丧服，不便进入宫中，文宗便让他穿上民服，号为王山人。
English: At this time, Li Zhongyan was in mourning for his mother. Wearing mourning clothes, it was inconvenient to enter the palace, so Wenzong made him wear civilian clothes and call himself Wang Shanren.

古文：仲言仪状秀伟，倜傥尚气，颇工文辞，有口辩，多权数。
现代文：李仲言身材魁梧，潇洒豪爽，擅长文辞，而且口才好，足智多谋。
English: Li Zhongyan is a burly man with a dashing appearance. He is good at writing, eloquent and resourceful.

古文：上见之，大悦，以为奇士，待遇日隆。
现代文：文宗召见后，十分高兴，认为他是一个奇才，因而对他的待遇日益隆重。
English: After Wen Zong was summoned, he was very happy and thought that he was a genius, so he was treated more and more grandly.

古文：仲言既除服，秋，八月，辛卯，上欲以仲言为谏言，置之翰林。
现代文：李仲言已经为母亲服丧期满。秋季，八月，辛卯，文宗想任命他为谏官，安置在翰林院。
English: Li Zhongyan had already completed the mourning period for his mother. In the autumn, August, Xinwu, Wenzong wanted to appoint him as a eunuch and place him in Hanlin Academy.

古文：李德裕曰： 仲言向所为，计陛下必尽知之，岂宜置之近侍？ 
现代文：宰相李德裕说： 李仲言过去的所作所为，我想陛下都知道，这种人怎么能安排到您的身旁作为侍从呢？ 
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu said: I think your majesty is aware of what Li Zhongyan did in the past. How can such a person be placed next to you as an attendant?

古文：上曰： 然岂不容其改过？ 
现代文：文宗说： 难道不允许他改正错误？ 
English: Wenzong said: Isn't he allowed to correct his mistakes?

古文：对曰： 臣闻惟颜回能不贰过。
现代文：李德裕回答说： 我听说只有孔子的弟子颜回能不犯相同的第二次错误。
English: Li Deyu replied: I heard that only Yan Hui, a disciple of Confucius, can avoid making the same mistake a second time.

古文：彼圣贤之过，但思虑不至，或失中道耳。
现代文：颜回犯的错误，是圣贤一时对问题考虑不周，偏离了中庸之道所犯的错误。
English: The mistake made by Yan Hui is the mistake made by the sages who did not consider the problem for a while and deviated from the middle way.

古文：至于仲言之恶，著于心本，安能悛改邪！ 
现代文：而李仲言的过错，则是出自内心，怎能能改得了！ 
English: But Li Zhongyan's fault is from the heart, how can it be changed!

古文：上曰： 李逢吉荐之，朕不欲食言。 
现代文：文宗说： 李逢吉推荐李仲言，朕不愿食言。 
English: Wen Zong said: Li Fangji recommended Li Zhongyan, I do not want to go back on my word.

古文：对曰： 逢吉身为宰相，乃荐奸邪以误国，亦罪人也。 
现代文：李德裕说： 李逢吉身为宰相，却不负责任地推荐李仲言这种奸人，以达到他危害国家的目的，所以，他也是罪人。 
English: Li Deyu said: Li Fengji, as the prime minister, irresponsibly recommended Li Zhongyan, a traitor, to achieve his goal of endangering the country, so he is also a criminal.

古文：上曰： 然则别除一官。 
现代文：文宗说： 那么，就另外授任他一个职务。 
English: Wenzong said: Well, let's give him another position.

古文：对曰： 亦不可。 
现代文：李德裕说： 那也不行。 
English: Li Deyu said, "That's not good either.

古文：上顾王涯，涯对曰： 可。 
现代文：文宗回头看着宰相王涯，王涯赶快回答说： 可以。 
English: Wenzong looked back at Prime Minister Wang Ya, and Wang Ya quickly replied, "Yes."

古文：德裕挥手止之，上回顾适见，色殊不怿而罢。
现代文：李德裕连连挥手阻止他，被文宗回头看见，文宗很不高兴，宣布结束商议。
English: Li Deyu repeatedly waved his hand to stop him, and was seen by Wenzong looking back. Wenzong was very unhappy and announced the end of the discussion.

古文：始，涯闻上欲用仲言，草谏疏极愤激；既而见上意坚，且畏其党盛，遂中变。
现代文：在这以前，王涯听说文宗打算任用李仲言，急忙起草了一篇劝阻的上疏，措辞十分激烈。后来，他看文宗任用李仲言的态度很坚决，并且畏惧李逢吉的党羽势力强盛，于是，在文宗召集宰相讨论时临时变卦。
English: Prior to this, Wang Ya heard that Wenzong planned to appoint Li Zhongyan, and he hastily drafted a dissuasive epistle, the wording of which was very fierce. Later, he saw that Wenzong's appointment of Li Zhongyan was very resolute, and he was afraid of Li Fengji's strong party power, so he temporarily changed his mind when Wenzong convened the prime minister to discuss.

古文：寻以仲言为四门助教，给事中郑肃、韩佽封还敕书。
现代文：不久，朝廷任命李仲言为四门助教，给事中郑肃、韩封还任命敕书，打算驳回对李仲言的任命。
English: Soon, the imperial court appointed Li Zhongyan as a four-door assistant professor, and in the process, Zheng Su and Han Feng also appointed Zang Shu, intending to reject the appointment of Li Zhongyan.

古文：德裕将出中书，谓涯曰： 且喜给事中封敕！ 
现代文：这时，李德裕刚要从政事堂出门，对王涯说： 给事中封还敕书，真值得高兴！ 
English: At this time, Li Deyu was just about to leave the hall of government, and said to Wang Ya: "It's really worth being happy to return the sealed letter!"

古文：涯即召肃、佽谓曰： 李公适留语，令二阁老不用封敕。 
现代文：王涯听后，随即召来郑肃和韩说： 李德裕刚才留话说，让二位不要封还敕书。 
English: After listening to Wang Ya, he immediately summoned Zheng Su and Han and said: Li Deyu just left a message, let the two of you not return the letter.

古文：二人即行下，明日，以白德裕，德裕惊曰： 德裕不欲封还，当面闻，何必使人传言！
现代文：于是，二人署名通过。第二天，将此事告诉李德裕，李德裕大吃一惊，说： 我如果不同意你们二人封还敕书，肯定会当面对你们说，何必叫别人转达！
English: The next day, he told Li Deyu about the matter. Li Deyu was taken aback and said, "If I don't agree with you two returning the signed letter, I will certainly say to you face to face, why ask someone else to convey it!

古文：且有司封驳，岂复禀宰相意邪！ 
现代文：况且给事中行使封驳权，难道还要秉承宰相的意图！ 
English: Moreover, given the exercise of the right to block in the matter, is it necessary to adhere to the Prime Minister's intention?

古文：二人怅恨而去。
现代文：二人这才明白被王涯欺骗，于是，懊恨而去。
English: Only then did the two of them understand that they had been deceived by Wang Ya, and they left in remorse.

古文：九月，辛亥，征昭义节度副使郑注至京师。
现代文：九月，辛亥，文宗命昭义节度副使郑注来京城。
English: In September, Xinhai, Wen Zongmei and Zheng Jian, the deputy envoy of Zhao Yi, came to Beijing.

古文：王守澄、李仲言、郑注皆恶李德裕，以山南西道节度使李宗闵与德裕不相悦，引宗闵以敌之。
现代文：王守澄、李仲言、郑注都憎恨李德裕，鉴于山南西道节度使李宗闵和李德裕有矛盾，于是，向文宗推荐李宗闵，以便排挤李德裕。
English: Wang Shoucheng, Li Zhongyan, and Zheng Zhu all hated Li Deyu. In view of the contradiction between Li Zongyao and Li Deyu caused by the Shannan West Road Festival, they recommended Li Zongyao to Wenzong in order to oust Li Deyu.

古文：壬戌，诏征宗闵于兴元。
现代文：壬戌，文宗下诏，命李宗闵从山南西道的治所兴元来京城。
English: According to the edict issued by Emperor Wenzong of Jin Dynasty, Li Zongya was ordered to come to Beijing from Xingyuan, the administrative center of West Shannan Province.

古文：冬，十月，辛巳，幽州军乱，逐节度使杨志诚及监军李怀仵，推兵马使史元忠主留务。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛巳，幽州军队内乱，将士驱逐节度使杨志诚和监军李怀仵，推举兵马使史元忠主持留守事务。
English: In the winter, October, Xin Si, Yuzhou army civil unrest, the expulsion of soldiers from the festival caused Yang Zhicheng and the supervisor of the army Li Huaiyao, and the promotion of soldiers and horses caused Shi Yuanzhong to preside over the affairs left behind.

古文：庚寅，以李宗闵为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：庚寅，唐文宗任命李宗闵为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Emperor Go-In and Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Zongyao as the secretary of the Central Committee, and Tongping as the secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：甲午，以中书侍郎、同平章事李德裕同平章事，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：甲午，任命中书侍郎、同平章事李德裕以同平章事头衔，充任山南西道节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Li Deyu, the secretary of Zhongshu and Tongping, was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road with the title of Tongping.

古文：是日，以李仲言为翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：同日，任命李仲言为翰林侍讲学士。
English: On the same day, Li Zhongyan was appointed as Hanlin's assistant lecturer.

古文：给事中高铢、郑肃、韩佽、谏议大夫郭承嘏、中书舍人权璩等争之，不能得。承嘏，晞之孙；璩，德舆之子也。
现代文：给事中高铢、郑肃、翰，谏议大夫郭承嘏，中书舍人权璩等人争辩，认为不可，但他们的意见不被文宗采纳。
English: Gao Wei, Zheng Su, Han Zheng, Guo Chengyu, the doctor of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, and the human rights scholar of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences argued that it was impossible, but their opinions were not adopted by Wenzong.

古文：乙巳，贡院奏进士复试诗赋，从之。
现代文：郭承嘏是郭的孙子。权璩是权德舆的儿子。乙巳，礼部贡院奏请进士科考试仍然加试诗赋，文宗批准。
English: Guo Chengyao is Guo's grandson. Quan Guo is the son of Quan Deyu. At this time, the Ministry of Ceremonies requested that the entrance examination still include a poetry test, and the literature test was approved.

古文：李德裕见上自陈，请留京师。
现代文：李德裕面见文宗，表示不愿出任山南西道节度使，请求留在京城任职。
English: When Li Deyu saw Wenzong, he expressed his unwillingness to serve as the envoy of the Shannan West Road Festival, and requested to stay in Beijing.

古文：丙午，以德裕为兵部尚书。
现代文：丙午，文宗任命他为兵部尚书。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Wenzong appointed him as the secretary of the Military Department.

古文：杨志诚过太原，李载义自殴击，欲杀之，幕僚谏救得免，杀其妻子及从行将卒。
现代文：杨志诚被将士从幽州驱逐后，路过太原，河东节度使李载义亲自动手殴打杨志诚，并想把他杀死。李载义的幕僚极力劝阻，杨志诚才得以免死。李载义于是杀杨志诚的妻子和随从将士。
English: After Yang Zhicheng was expelled from Yuzhou by the generals, he passed through Taiyuan, and the Hedong Festival made Li Zaiyi personally beat Yang Zhicheng and wanted to kill him. Li Zaiyi's staff tried their best to dissuade Yang Zhicheng, and Yang Zhicheng was able to avoid death. Li Zaiyi then killed Yang Zhicheng's wife and his attendant generals.

古文：朝廷以载义有功，不问。
现代文：朝廷鉴于李载义曾参予平定横海李同捷叛乱有功，因而不加责问。
English: In view of the fact that Li Zaiyi had participated in the suppression of the cross-sea Li Tong Jie rebellion, the imperial court did not question him.

古文：载义母兄葬幽州，志诚发取其财。
现代文：此前，李载义的母亲和兄弟去世后埋葬在幽州，杨志诚发掘他们的坟墓，掠取墓中的陪葬财物。
English: Previously, after the death of Li Zaiyi's mother and brother, who were buried in Yuzhou, Yang Zhicheng excavated their graves and plundered the grave goods.

古文：载义奏乞取志诚心以祭母，不许。
现代文：李载义奏请挖杨志诚的心用来祭祀他的母亲，文宗不许。
English: Li Zaiyiso, please dig up Yang Zhicheng's heart and use it to worship his mother, and do not allow Wenzong to do so.

古文：十一月，成德节度使王庭凑薨，军中奉其子都知兵马使元逵知留后。
现代文：十一月，成德节度使王庭凑去世。军中将士推举他的儿子都知兵马使王元逵暂为留后。
English: In November, the Chengde Festival led to the death of Wang Tianzhong. His son, Du Zhi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, was elected by the lieutenant generals to temporarily stay behind.

古文：元逵改父所为，事朝廷礼甚谨。
现代文：王元逵改变父亲骄横跋扈的行为，对朝廷十分恭敬。
English: Wang Yuanxuan changed his father's arrogant behavior and was very respectful to the imperial court.

古文：史元忠献杨志诚所造衮衣及诸僭物。
现代文：史元忠把杨志诚擅自织造的皇帝兖衣和其他超越自己名份的器物奉献朝廷。
English: Shi Yuanzhong donated to the imperial court the emperor's imperial embroidered clothes and other items that surpassed his name, which were woven by Yang Zhicheng without authorization.

古文：丁卯，流志诚于岭南，道杀之。
现代文：丁卯，唐文宗下令把杨志诚流放到岭南。杨志诚走到半路，被朝廷派人杀死。
English: However, Tang Wenzong ordered Yang Zhicheng to be exiled to Lingnan. Yang Zhicheng walked halfway and was killed by the imperial court.

古文：李宗闵言李德裕制命已行，不宜自便。
现代文：宰相李宗闵上言说，朝廷任命李德裕为山南西道的制书已经下达，不应当由于他自己不愿上任就中途改变。
English: Premier Li Zongyao said at the beginning that the imperial court's appointment of Li Deyu to the Shannan West Road had already been issued, and it should not be changed midway due to his own unwillingness to take office.

古文：乙亥，复以德裕为镇海节度使，不复兼平章事。
现代文：乙亥，唐文宗任命李德裕为镇海节度使，不再兼任同平章事的头衔。
English: Yi Hai, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Deyu as Zhenhai Festival envoy, no longer concurrently holding the title of Tongping.

古文：时德裕、宗闵各有朋党，互相挤援。
现代文：这时，李德裕和李宗闵各有自己的党羽，相互之间极力排挤对方，声援同党。
English: At this time, Li Deyu and Li Zongyao each had their own party wings, and they tried their best to exclude each other and support the same party.

古文：上患之，每叹曰： 去河北贼易，去朝中朋党难！ 
现代文：文宗对此十分忧虑，经常感叹地说： 诛除河北三镇的叛贼容易，但去除朝廷的朋党实在太难！ 
English: Wenzong was very worried about this, and often said with regret: It is easy to get rid of the traitors in the three towns in Hebei, but it is very difficult to get rid of the friends of the imperial court!

古文：臣光曰： 夫君子小人之不相容，犹水炭之不可同器而处也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：君子和小人之间不能相容，就像冰和炭火不能放在同一个器具中相处一样。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "A gentleman and a villain are incompatible, just as ice and charcoal cannot coexist in the same utensil.

古文：故君子得位则斥小人，小人得势则排君子，此自然之理也。
现代文：所以，如果君子执政，就排斥小人；小人得势，就排斥君子，这是很自然的道理。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman is in power, he excludes the villain; if a villain gains power, he excludes the gentleman. This is a very natural reason.

古文：然君子进贤退不肖，其处心也公，其指事也实；小人誉其所好，毁其所恶，其处心也私，其指事也诬。
现代文：然而，君子提拔德才兼备的人，撤免庸俗无能的人，办事出于公心，实事求是；而小人则阿谀奉迎，投其所好，毁其所恶，办事出于私心，捏造事实。
English: However, a gentleman promotes those who are both virtuous and talented, dismisses those who are vulgar and incompetent, and acts out of public spirit, seeking truth from facts; while a villain is a flatterer, votes for what he likes, destroys what he dislikes, acts out of selfishness, and fabricates facts.

古文：公且实者谓之正直，私且诬者谓之朋党，在人主所以辨之耳。
现代文：办事出于公心，实事求是的人被称为正直的君子；而办事出于私心，捏造事实的人则被称为朋党。究竟是正直的君子还是朋党，关键在于君主认真辨别。
English: A person who acts out of a sense of public duty and seeks truth from facts is called an honest gentleman; while a person who acts out of selfishness and fabricates facts is called a partisan. Whether it is an honest gentleman or a partisan, the key lies in the careful discernment of the monarch.

古文：是以明主在上，度德而叙位，量能而授官；有功者赏，有罪者刑；奸不能惑，佞不能移。夫如是，则朋党何自而生哉！
现代文：所以，凡是英明的君主执政，根据国家的需要而设置不同的职位，根据官员的才能大小授予他们不同的职务。对于有突出政绩的官员，加以提拔赏赐；有严重罪行者，则撤免惩罚。既不被奸臣的谗言所迷惑，也不因他们的花言巧语而改变自己的主见，如能这样做，朋党又怎么能够产生呢？
English: Therefore, all wise monarchs in power set up different positions according to the needs of the country and assign different positions according to the talents of officials. For officials with outstanding achievements, they are promoted and rewarded; for those with serious crimes, they are exempted from punishment. They are neither confused by the insults of treacherous ministers, nor do they change their opinions due to their rhetoric. If they can do this, how can the party be created?

古文：彼昏主则不然，明不能烛，强不能断；邪正并进，毁誉交至；取舍不在于己，威福潜移于人。
现代文：凡是昏庸的君主执政，则恰恰相反。他们既不能明辨是非，处理问题又优柔寡断，以致奸邪小人和正人君子都被任用。朝廷的大政方针自己不能作主，决策权渐渐移到他人手中。
English: On the contrary, all monarchs who are dim-witted are in power. They are unable to distinguish between right and wrong, deal with problems and are indecisive, so that traitors and honest people are appointed. The general policy of the imperial court cannot be determined by themselves, and the decision-making power is gradually transferred to others.

古文：于是谗慝得志，而朋党之议兴矣。
现代文：于是，奸邪小人得志猖狂，朝廷中必然出现朋党。
English: As a result, traitors and villains became rampant, and cronies inevitably appeared in the imperial court.

古文：夫木腐而蠹生，醯酸而蚋集，故朝廷有朋党，则人主当自咎，而不当以咎群臣也。
现代文：如果他们的言行实事求是，荐举的官员德才兼备，办事出于公心，那么，他们就一定是君子，朝廷不但应当采纳这些人的意见，而且应当提拔他们。
English: If their words and deeds seek truth from facts, if the officials recommending them are both virtuous and capable, and if they act out of public-spiritedness, then they must be gentlemen, and the Imperial Court should not only adopt the opinions of these people, but should also promote them.

古文：文宗苟患群臣之朋党，何不察其所毁誉者为实，为诬；所进退者为贤，为不肖；其心为公，为私；其人为君子，为小人！苟实也，贤也，公也，君子也，匪徒用其言，又当进之；诬也，不肖也，私也，小人也，匪徒弃其言，又当刑之。
现代文：如果他们捏造事实，荐举的官员庸俗无能，办事出于私心，那么，他们就一定是小人，朝廷不但应当拒绝这些人的意见，而且应当惩罚他们。如果唐文宗能够这样去做，那么，就是命令百官结党营私，也肯定没有人胆敢那样去干！
English: If they fabricate facts, if the officials recommending them are vulgar and incompetent, and if they act out of self-interest, then they must be villains, and the imperial court should not only reject the opinions of these people, but should also punish them. If Tang Wenzong can do this, then he is ordering a hundred officials to be partisan, and surely no one would dare to do that!

古文：如是，虽使之为朋党，孰敢哉！释是不为，乃怨群臣之难治，是犹不种不芸而怨田之芜也。
现代文：唐文宗不去这样做，反而埋怨群臣百官难以驾驭，这就好像一个农夫，自己不种田也不锄草，反而抱怨田地荒芜一样。
English: Tang Wenzong did not do this, but instead complained that the hundreds of officials were difficult to control. This is like a farmer who does not grow or weed his own fields, but complains that the fields are barren.

古文：朝中之党且不能去，况河北贼乎！
现代文：唐文宗对朝廷中的朋党尚且不能铲除，何况对于河北三镇的叛贼呢！
English: Tang Wenzong could not eradicate the cronies in the imperial court, let alone the traitors in the three towns in Hebei!

古文：丙子，李仲言请改名训。
现代文：丙子，李仲言奏请改名为李训。
English: Son of a bitch, Li Zhongyan Song, please change your name to Li Xun.

古文：幽州奏莫州军乱，刺史张元泛不知所在。
现代文：幽州奏报，莫州发生军队变乱，刺史张元去向不明。
English: According to the Yuzhou report, there was an army mutiny in Mozhou, and the whereabouts of Zhangyuan are unknown.

古文：十二月，乙卯，以昭义节度副使郑注为太仆卿。
现代文：十二月，己卯，唐文宗任命昭义节度副使郑注为太仆卿。
English: In December, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Zheng Zhu, the deputy envoy of Zhao Yi Jiedu, as the servant of the emperor.

古文：郭承嘏累上疏言其不可，上不听。
现代文：谏议大夫郭承嘏多次上疏认为不可，文宗不听。
English: Wen Zong did not listen to the advice of the doctor Guo Chengyao, who repeatedly told him that it was impossible.

古文：于是注诈上表固辞，上遣中使再以告身赐之，不受。
现代文：于是，郑注上表，虚假地一再表示不能接受任命。
English: As a result, Zheng, as noted above, repeatedly falsely stated that he could not accept the appointment.

古文：癸未，以史元忠为卢龙留后。
现代文：文宗又派宦官把任命书授予郑注，郑注仍然不接受。癸未，唐文宗任命史元忠为幽州留后。
English: Wenzong also sent an eunuch to grant the letter of appointment to Zhengzhu, but Zhengzhu still did not accept it. Soon after, Tang Wenzong appointed Shi Yuanzhong to stay in Yuzhou.

古文：初，宋申锡与御史中丞宇文鼎受密诏诛郑注，使京兆尹王璠掩捕之。
现代文：当初，宋申锡和御史中丞宇文鼎一同接受文宗下达的诛除郑注的密诏，二人派京兆尹王去逮捕郑注。
English: At the beginning, Song Shensi and the Grand Historian Chuzhongzheng Yu Wending jointly accepted the secret edict issued by Wenzong to expel Zheng Zu, and the two sent Jing Zhaoyin Wang to arrest Zheng Zu.

古文：璠密以堂帖示王守澄，注由是得免，深德璠。
现代文：王把逮捕令秘密地告诉王守澄。于是，郑注得以逃脱，因而他十分感激王。
English: Wang secretly told Wang Shoucheng about the arrest warrant, and Zheng Zhu was able to escape, for which he was very grateful to Wang.

古文：璠又与李训善，于是训、注共荐之，自浙西观察使征为尚书左丞。
现代文：王又和李训关系密切，于是郑注和李训一起向文宗推荐王，王因此从浙西道观察使被召入京城，任命为尚书左丞。
English: Wang also had a close relationship with Li Xun, so Zheng Zhan and Li Xun together recommended Wang to Wenzong. As a result, Wang was summoned to Beijing from the Western Zhejiang Province to observe and was appointed as Shang Shuzojo.

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝中太和九年春，正月，乙卯，以王元逵为成德节度使。巢公凑薨，追赠齐王。
现代文：太和九年春季正月，乙卯，唐文宗任命王元逵为成德节度使。巢公李凑去世，朝廷追赠为齐王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year of the Taihe era, Wang Yuanzong was appointed by Tang Wenzong as the Chengde Festival envoy. Neogong Liqin died, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of King Qi.

古文：郑注上言秦地有灾，宜兴役以禳之。
现代文：郑注上言朝廷，声称关中发生灾害，应当征发劳役，以便消灾。
English: Zheng Zhu appealed to the imperial court, claiming that if a disaster occurred in Guanzhong, labor service should be conscripted in order to eliminate the disaster.

古文：辛卯，发左、右神策千五百人浚曲江及昆明池。
现代文：辛卯，唐文宗征发左、右神策军一千五百人疏浚曲江池和昆明池。
English: In Xinwu, the Tang and Wenzong dredged the Qujiang and Kunming ponds with 1,500 soldiers of the Left and Right Divisions.

古文：三月，冀王絿薨。
现代文：三月，冀王李去世。
English: In March, Ji Wang Li passed away.

古文：丙辰，以史元忠为卢龙节度使。
现代文：丙辰，唐文宗任命史元忠为幽州节度使。
English: Xing Chen, Tang Wenzong appointed Shi Yuanzhong as Yuzhou Festival envoy.

古文：初，李德裕为浙西观察使，漳王傅母杜仲阳坐宋申锡事放归金陵，诏德裕存处之。
现代文：当初，李德裕担任浙西道观察使时，漳王李凑的女师杜仲阳由于宋申锡案件的牵连，被流放到金陵。文宗诏命李德裕予以关照。
English: At the beginning, when Li Deyu served as the observer of the Western Zhejiang Province, Du Zhongyang, the female teacher of Wang Liqin, was exiled to Jinling due to the implication of the Song Shensi case. Emperor Wenzong ordered Li Deyu to take care of her.

古文：会德裕已离浙西，牒留后李蟾使如诏旨。
现代文：正好李德裕此时已奉命调离浙江西道，于是，命留后李蟾按文宗诏令办理。
English: Just at that time, Li Deyu was ordered to be transferred out of West Zhejiang Province. Therefore, after his life was spared, Li Gan followed the edict of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：至是，左承王璠、户部侍郎李汉奏德裕厚赂仲阳，阴结漳王，图为不轨。
现代文：这时，尚书左丞王和户部侍郎李汉上奏，说李德裕优厚地贿赂杜仲阳，秘密地和漳王交结，企图谋反。
English: At this time, King Shangshu Zuo Rong and Household Attendant Li Han made a report, saying that Li Deyu had generously bribed Du Zhongyang, secretly made contact with King Yao, and attempted to rebel.

古文：上怒甚，召宰相及璠、汉、郑注等面质之。
现代文：文宗大怒，召集宰相及王、李汉、郑注等人当面询问。
English: Wenzong was furious and summoned the prime minister and Wang, Li Han, Zheng Zhu and others to face-to-face interrogation.

古文：璠、汉等极口诬之，路隋曰： 德裕不至有此。果如所言，臣亦应得罪！ 
现代文：王、李汉等人众口一辞，诬陷李德裕。宰相路隋说： 李德裕不至于这样，如果真象他们说的那样的话，我也应当有罪了！ 
English: Wang, Li Han, and others all spoke at once to frame Li Deyu. Prime Minister Lu Sui said: Li Deyu is not like that, if it is true what they said, I should be guilty!

古文：言者稍息。
现代文：于是，王等人这才不再说了。
English: As a result, Wang and the others stopped talking.

古文：夏，四月，以德裕为宾客分司。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐文宗任命李德裕为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Li Deyu as the crown prince's guest and the deputy governor of Dongdu.

古文：癸巳，以郑注守太仆卿，兼御史大夫，注始受之，仍举仓部员外郎李款自代曰： 加臣之罪，虽于理而无辜；在款之诚，乃事君而尽节。 
现代文：癸巳，唐文宗任命郑注为太仆卿，兼御史大夫。郑注这才接受任命，同时推荐仓部员外郎李款代替自己原来的职务，他说： 李款以前虽然无辜地弹劾过我，但是，他这样做也是对皇上尽忠。 
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Zheng Zhu to be the Grand Secretary of the Imperial Household and also the Grand Historian. Zheng Zhu accepted the appointment, and at the same time recommended the warehouse clerk, Li Jian, to replace his original position. He said: Although Li Jian had previously impeached me innocently, he was also loyal to the emperor.

古文：时人皆哂之。
现代文：当时人都耻笑他假装宽宏大度。
English: At the time, people laughed at his feigned magnanimity.

古文：丙申，以门下侍郎、同平章事路隋同平章事，充镇海节度使，趣之赴镇，不得面辞。
现代文：丙申，唐文宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事路隋为镇海节度使，同时命他尽快离京上任，不得向自己当面告辞。
English: According to him, Tang Wenzong appointed his servant Tongping Zhangzhi Lu Sui as the envoy of the Zhenhai Festival, and ordered him to leave Beijing as soon as possible and not to say goodbye to him in person.

古文：坐救李德裕故也。
现代文：这是由于前此在王等人诬告李德裕时，他出面为李德裕辩解的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that he came forward to defend Li Deyu when Wang and others falsely accused Li Deyu.

古文：初，京兆尹河南贾餗，性褊躁轻率，与李德裕有隙，而善于李宗闵、郑注。
现代文：当初，京兆尹、河南人贾性情急躁轻率。他和李德裕有矛盾，和李宗闵、郑注关系亲近。
English: At first, Jing Zhaoyun and Jia, a native of Henan Province, were impatient and imprudent. He had conflicts with Li Deyu, and was close to Li Zongyao and Zheng Zhu.

古文：上巳，赐百官宴于曲江，故事，尹于外门下马，揖御史。
现代文：上巳，唐文宗在曲江举行宴会，招待百官。按照以往惯例，京兆尹应当在门外下马，向御史台官员行礼，然后进门。
English: In the past, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty held a banquet in Qujiang and invited hundreds of officials. According to past practice, Jing Zhaoyun should dismount outside the door, bow to the officials of the Imperial Historian, and then enter the door.

古文：餗恃其贵势，乘马直入，殿中侍御史杨俭、苏特与之争，餗骂曰： 黄面儿敢尔！ 
现代文：贾依恃他的地位和权势，乘马直接入门。殿中侍御史杨俭、苏特和他争论起来，贾破口大骂，说： 你们这些黄脸儿怎么敢挡我！ 
English: Jia took advantage of his status and power and rode a horse directly to the gate. The palace attendants Shi Yang Jian and Su Te got into an argument with him, and Jia burst into a tirade of abuse, saying: "How dare you yellow-faced people block me!

古文：坐罚俸。
现代文：于是，因罪而被罚俸禄。
English: As a result, he was fined for the crime.

古文：餗耻之，求出，诏以为浙西观察使。
现代文：贾觉得十分耻辱，请求出任藩镇职务。文宗下诏，任命他为浙西道观察使。
English: Jia felt so humiliated that he asked to be appointed to the position of the township. Wenzong issued an edict to appoint him as the observer of the West Zhejiang Province.

古文：尚未行，戊戌，以餗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：尚未成行，戊戌，唐文宗任命他为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: He had not yet entered the priesthood when Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty appointed him as the second secretary of the Central Committee and the first secretary of Tongping.

古文：庚子，制以曏日上初得疾，王涯呼李德裕奔问起居，德裕竟不至。
现代文：庚子，朝廷下制，鉴于文宗前不久刚刚患病时，王涯招呼李德裕去看望文宗病情，李德裕竟然不去。
English: Geng Zi, under the control of the imperial court, in view of the fact that Wang Lai invited Li Deyu to visit Wenzong's illness shortly before Wenzong fell ill, Li Deyu actually did not go.

古文：又在西蜀征逋悬钱三十万缗，百姓愁困。
现代文：同时，李德裕担任剑南西川节度使时，曾经征收百姓的赋税欠款三十万缗，导致百姓穷困。
English: At the same time, when Li Deyu served as the chief envoy of the Jian'nan Xichuan Festival, he once collected 300,000 baht of people's tax arrears, leading to people's poverty.

古文：贬德裕袁州长史。
现代文：因此，贬李德裕为袁州长史。
English: Therefore, the dethronement of Li Deyu as the head of the Yuan Dynasty is a historical fact.

古文：初，宋申锡获罪，宦官益横。
现代文：当初，宋申锡被判罪贬官后，宦官更加骄横。
English: At first, after Song Shenxi was convicted and demoted, eunuchs became even more arrogant.

古文：上外虽包容，内不能堪。
现代文：文宗虽然外表不露声色，内心却不能容忍。
English: Although Wen Zong does not show his true colors on the outside, he cannot tolerate it on the inside.

古文：李训、郑注既得幸，揣知上意，训因进讲，数以微言动上。
现代文：李训、郑注得到文宗信用后，揣摸了解了文宗的心思。于是，李训在给文宗讲读经典时，多次暗示文宗。
English: After Li Xun and Zheng Zhu gained Wenzong's trust, they tried to understand Wenzong's thoughts. Therefore, when Li Xun read classics to Wenzong, he repeatedly hinted at Wenzong.

古文：上见其才辩，意训可与谋大事，且以训、注皆因王守澄以进，冀宦官不之疑，遂密以诚告之。
现代文：文宗觉得李训很有才能，能言善辩，认为可以和他商议诛除宦官。同时考虑到李训和郑注都是宦官王守澄推荐的，估计和二人商议，宦官不会疑心，于是，把自己的意图秘密地告诉了二人。
English: Wenzong felt that Li Xun was very talented and eloquent, and thought that he could discuss the removal of eunuchs with him. At the same time, considering that Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were both recommended by eunuch Wang Shoucheng, he estimated that the eunuch would not be suspicious after discussing with the two, so he told the two of his intentions in secret.

古文：训、注遂以诛宦官为己任，二人相挟，朝夕计议，所言于上无不从，声势炟赫。
现代文：李训、郑注因此以诛除宦官为己任。二人相互依赖，昼夜商议对策，凡给文宗的建议，文宗无不采纳，声势喧赫。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu therefore made it their mission to remove the eunuchs. The two men relied on each other and discussed countermeasures day and night. Any suggestion given to Wenzong would be accepted by Wenzong, and the situation was noisy.

古文：注多在禁中，或时休沐，宾客填门，赂遗山积。
现代文：郑注经常待在宫中，有时休假在家，要求拜见他的人站满他的门前，贿赂他的财物堆积如山。
English: Zheng Zhu often stayed in the palace, and sometimes took a vacation at home. People who asked to see him stood in front of his door, and bribes piled up in front of him.

古文：外人但知训、注倚宦官擅作威福，不知其与上有密谋也。
现代文：外面人只知道李训和郑注依靠宦官的权势擅自作威作福，却不知道他们二人和文宗密谋诛除宦官。
English: Outsiders only know that Li Xun and Zheng Zhu relied on the power of eunuchs to arbitrarily use their power for their own benefit, but they did not know that the two of them and Wenzong conspired to eliminate eunuchs.

古文：上之立也，右领军将军兴宁仇士良有功。
现代文：当初文宗被拥立为皇帝时，右领军将军、循州兴宁县人仇士良曾经有很大的功劳。
English: When Emperor Wenzong was enthroned, the right-hand leading general, Qu Shiliang of Xingning County in Zhouzhou, had great merits.

古文：王守澄抑之，由是有隙。
现代文：但他受到王守澄的压制，于是，二人产生了矛盾。
English: But he was suppressed by Wang Shoucheng, and the two came into conflict.

古文：训、注为上谋，进擢士良以分守澄之权。
现代文：这时，李训、郑注向文宗建议，提拔仇士良以便分割王守澄的权力。
English: At this time, Li Xun and Zheng Zhu suggested to Wenzong to promote Qiu Shiliang in order to divide Wang Shuzhen's power.

古文：五月，乙丑，以士良为左神策中尉，守澄不悦。
现代文：五月，乙丑，文宗任命仇士良为左神策军护军中尉，王守澄得知后很不高兴。
English: In May, the second month of the year, Wenzong appointed Qiu Shiliang as a lieutenant of the Left Divine Defense Force, and Wang Shuzhen was very unhappy when he learned of this.

古文：戊辰，以左丞王璠为户部尚书、判度支。
现代文：戊辰，唐文宗任命尚书左丞王为户部尚书、判度支。
English: In the Wu Dynasty, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Shangshu Zuo Wang as the head of the Shangshu and Shandong branch of the household.

古文：京城讹言郑注为上合金丹，须小儿心肝，民间惊惧，上闻而恶之。
现代文：京城长安盛传谣言，说郑注为皇上合制金丹，必须用小孩的心肝入药，百姓为此而惊扰惧怕。
English: The mayor of the capital, An Sheng, spread a rumor that Zheng Zhu was the emperor's confectioner and had to use the heart and liver of a child to make the medicine. The people were alarmed and afraid.

古文：郑注素恶京兆尹杨虞卿，与李训共构之，云此语出于虞卿家人。
现代文：文宗得知后十分恼恨。郑注向来憎恶京兆尹杨虞卿，于是，他和李训一起诬陷杨虞卿，说谣言出于虞卿的家属。
English: After learning of this, Wenzong was very angry. Zheng Zhu had always hated Jing Zhao Yin Yang Yuqing, so he and Li Xun together framed Yang Yuqing, saying that the rumor came from Yuqing's family members.

古文：上怒，六月，下虞卿御史狱。
现代文：文宗大怒，六月，下令将杨虞卿逮捕，押在御史台狱中。
English: Enraged, Emperor Wenzong ordered Yang Yuqing to be arrested in June and detained in Goshidai Prison.

古文：注求为两省官，中书侍郎、同平章事李宗闵不许，注毁之于上。
现代文：此前，郑注曾经求做中书、门下两省的官员，中书侍郎、同平章事李宗闵不许，郑注因此在文宗面前诽谤李宗闵。
English: Prior to this, Zheng Zhu had asked Li Zongyao not to allow him to be the official of Zhongshu and the two provinces under him, the attendant of Zhongshu and the same rank as Li Zongyao. Therefore, Zheng Zhuo slandered Li Zongyao in front of Wen Zong.

古文：会宗闵救杨虞卿，上怒，叱出之。
现代文：这时，正好李宗闵为杨虞卿辩解，文宗大怒，呵斥李宗闵出宫。
English: At this time, just as Li Zongyao was defending Yang Yuqing, Wenzong flew into a rage and chased Li Zongyao out of the palace.

古文：壬寅，贬明州刺史。
现代文：壬寅，贬李宗闵为明州刺史。
English: In Renin, Li Zongyao was relegated to the annals of Ming history.

古文：左神策中尉韦元素、枢密使杨承和、王践言久居中用事，与王守澄争权不叶，李训、郑注因之出承和于西川，元素于淮南，践言于河东，皆为监军。
现代文：左神策护军中尉韦元素、枢密使杨承和、王践言在宫中当权，与王守澄争权不和。李训和郑注乘机劝文宗任命杨承和为剑南西川监军，韦元素为淮南监军，王践言为河东监军。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu took the opportunity to persuade Emperor Wenzong to appoint Yang Chenghe as the inspector of the Jiannan West River, Wei Ermeng as the inspector of the Huainan River, and Wang Jianyan as the inspector of the Hedong River.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰朔，贬杨虞卿虔州司马。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲辰朔，唐文宗贬杨虞卿为虔州司马。
English: In the autumn, July, Jia Chen Shuo, Tang Wenzong dethroned Yang Yuqing as Qianzhou Sima.

古文：庚戌，作紫云楼于曲江。
现代文：庚戌，唐文宗下令在曲江修筑紫云楼。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Wenzong ordered the construction of Ziyun Building in Qujiang.

古文：辛亥，以御史大夫李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：辛亥，唐文宗任命御史大夫李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Xinhai, Tang Wenzong appointed goshi daibu Li Guyan as a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：李训、郑注为上画太平之策，以为当先除宦官，次复河、湟，次清河北，开陈方略，如指诸掌。
现代文：李训、郑注为文宗谋划革除朝廷弊政，收复失地，达到天下大治太平的策略，认为应当首先诛除宦官，其次出兵收复河、湟地区，最后平定河北三镇。二人开陈方略，了如指掌。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu, who planned a strategy for Wenzong to overthrow the evil government of the imperial court, recover the lost territories, and achieve world peace, believed that the eunuchs should be eliminated first, then the troops should be sent to recover the Hehe and Handan regions, and finally the three towns in Hebei should be pacified. The two men were familiar with the strategy.

古文：上以为信然，宠任日隆。
现代文：文宗认为言之有理，宠信日益隆重。
English: Wen Zong thought that what he said was reasonable, and the pet letters became more and more grand.

古文：初，李宗闵为吏部侍郎，因附马都尉沈结女学士宋若宪、知枢密杨承和得为相。
现代文：当初，李宗闵担任吏部侍郎时，曾通过驸马都尉沈交结宫中女学士宋若宪和知枢密杨承和，因而被任命为宰相。
English: At the beginning, when Li Zongya served as the steward of the cadre department, he was appointed as the prime minister through the intermarriage of Song Ruo Xian, a female bachelor in the palace, and Yang Chenghe, a close confidant of the emperor.

古文：及贬明州，郑注发其事，壬子，再贬处州长史。
现代文：等到李宗闵被贬为明州刺史时，郑注向文宗揭发了这件事。壬子，文宗再贬李宗闵为处州长史。
English: When Li Zongyao was relegated to the history of Ming State, Zheng Zhu revealed the matter to Wenzong. After that, Wenzong relegated Li Zongyao to the history of the governor.

古文：著作郎、分司舒元舆与李训善，训用事，召为右司郎中，兼侍御史知杂，鞫杨虞卿狱。
现代文：著作郎、分司东都舒元舆和李训关系亲近，李训掌权后，推荐舒元舆为右司郎中，兼侍御史知杂，负责审问杨虞卿的案件。
English: After Li Xun came to power, he recommended Shu Yuanwu to be his right-hand man and attendant, and he was in charge of interrogating the case of Yang Yuqing.

古文：癸丑，擢为御史中丞。
现代文：癸丑，舒元舆被擢拔为御史中丞。
English: As a result, Shu Yuanwu was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：元舆，元褒之兄也。
现代文：舒元舆是补阙舒元褒的哥哥。
English: Shu Yuanwu is the elder brother of Shu Yuanbo.

古文：贬吏部侍郎李汉为汾州刺史，刑部侍郎萧浣为遂州刺史，皆坐李宗闵之党。
现代文：唐文宗贬吏部侍郎李汉为汾州刺史，刑部侍郎萧浣为遂州刺史。二人都是由于李宗闵的同党而被贬。
English: Li Han, the attendant of Tang Wenzong's demoralization department, was the instigator of Zhangzhou, and Xiao Yao, the attendant of the punishment department, was the instigator of Suizhou. Both were demoted because they were the same party as Li Zongyao.

古文：是时李训、郑注连逐三相，威震天下，于是平生丝恩发怨无不报者。
现代文：这时，李训、郑注接连诬陷贬逐李德裕、路隋、李宗闵三位宰相，权势威震天下。于是，凡是过去对自己稍有恩德的人无不提拔，和自己稍有怨恨的人无不报复。
English: At this time, Li Hun and Zheng Zhu successively framed and disparaged the three prime ministers Li Deyu, Lu Sui, and Li Zongyao, and their power shook the world. As a result, those who had been a little benevolent to themselves in the past were promoted, and those who had a little resentment were retaliated against.

古文：李训奏僧尼猥多，耗蠹公私。
现代文：李训奏称，现今僧尼太多，虚耗国家和百姓的财产。
English: Li Xunso said that there are too many monks and nuns nowadays, wasting the property of the country and the people.

古文：丁巳，诏所在试僧尼诵经不中格者，皆勒归俗。
现代文：丁巳，文宗下诏，命各地测试僧尼，凡读经不合格者，一律遣归还俗。
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict ordering all regions to test monks and nuns, and anyone who failed to pass the test would be sent back to the secular world.

古文：禁置寺及私度人。
现代文：同时禁止再修建新的寺院和私自剃度百姓为僧尼。
English: At the same time, it is forbidden to build new temples and to force people to become monks and nuns.

古文：时人皆言郑注朝夕且为相，侍御史李甘扬言于朝曰： 白麻出，我必坏之于庭！ 
现代文：这时，人们都认为郑注很快会被任命为宰相，侍御史李甘在朝廷扬言说： 如果皇上任命郑注为宰相的白麻诏书颁布，我一定要在这里当众予以弹劾驳回！ 
English: At this time, people all thought that Zheng Zhu would soon be appointed prime minister. The attendant Shi Li Gang threatened at the imperial court: "If the emperor issues the Bai Ma's edict appointing Zheng Zhu as prime minister, I must publicly impeach and reject it here!"

古文：癸亥，贬甘封州司马。
现代文：癸亥，李甘被贬为封州司马。
English: At the end of the year, Li Gan was demoted to the position of Fuzhou Sima.

古文：然李训亦忌注，不欲使为相，事竟寝。
现代文：不过，这时李训也妒忌郑注，不愿让他担任宰相，所以，这件事就被搁置下来。
English: However, at this time, Li Xun was also jealous of Zheng Zhu and did not want him to serve as prime minister, so the matter was shelved.

古文：甲子，以国子博士李训为兵部郎中、知制诰，依前侍讲学士。
现代文：甲子，唐文宗任命国子博士李训为兵部郎中、知制诰，并仍为翰林侍讲学士。
English: At the same time, Tang Wenzong appointed Dr. Li Xun, the son of a provincial official, as the vice-minister of the military department, and he was still the assistant lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：贬左金吾大将军沈为邵州刺史。
现代文：唐文宗贬左金吾大将军沈为邵州刺史。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty dethroned the Great General Jingu, and Shen became the history of Shaozhou.

古文：八月，丙子，又贬李宗闵潮州司户，赐宋若宪死。
现代文：八月，丙子，又贬李宗闵为潮州司户。命女学士宋若宪自尽。
English: In August, his illegitimate son, Li Zongyao, was also demoted to the position of Chaozhou steward. Song Ruo Xian, a female bachelor, committed suicide.

古文：丁丑，以太仆卿郑注为工部尚书，充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：丁丑，唐文宗任命太仆寺卿郑注为工部尚书，充任翰林侍讲学士。
English: According to Ding Yuxiu, Tang Wenzong appointed Zheng Zhu, the deacon of the temple, as the secretary of the engineering department, and he served as the assistant lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：注好服鹿裘，以隐沦自处，上以师友待之。
现代文：郑注喜好穿鹿皮缝制的衣服，平日隐居，行踪诡秘，文宗把他作为老师、朋友看待。
English: Zheng Zhu likes to wear clothes sewn from deerskin, lives in seclusion on weekdays, and his whereabouts are mysterious. Wenzong regards him as a teacher and friend.

古文：注之初得幸，上尝问翰林学士、户部侍郎李珏曰： 卿有郑注乎？
现代文：郑注最初得到文宗信用的时候，一次，文宗问翰林学士、户部侍郎李珏说： 你知道郑注这个人吗？
English: When Zhengzhu first gained the trust of Wenzong, Wenzong once asked the scholar of Hanlin and the head waiter of the household, Li Jun, saying: Do you know this person, Zhengzhu?

古文：亦尝与之言乎？ 
现代文：过去曾经和他谈过话吗？ 
English: Have you spoken to him in the past?

古文：对曰： 臣岂特知其姓名，兼深知其为人。
现代文：李珏回答说： 我不仅知道他的姓名，而且深知他的为人。
English: Li Wei replied: I not only know his name, but also know him as a person.

古文：其人奸邪，陛下宠之，恐无益圣德。
现代文：郑注是一个奸邪小人，陛下宠信他，恐怕很不适当。
English: Zheng Zhu is a treacherous villain, and I'm afraid it's inappropriate for His Majesty to trust him.

古文：臣忝在近密，安敢与此人交通！ 
现代文：我作为陛下的亲信臣僚，怎么敢和这种人交结！ 
English: How dare I, as a trusted minister of His Majesty, associate with such a person!

古文：戊寅，贬珏江州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，文宗贬李珏为江州刺史。
English: Wu Yin, Wenzong denigrated Li Xi as the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：再贬沈柳州司户。
现代文：再贬沈为柳州司户。
English: He was relegated to the position of Liuzhou steward.

古文：丙申，诏以杨承和庇护宋申易，韦元素、王践言与李宗闵、李德裕中外连结，受其赂遗。
现代文：丙申，唐文宗下诏，鉴于剑南西川监军杨承和当年曾袒护宋申锡的罪行，淮南监军韦元素、河东监军王践言和前宰相李宗闵、李德裕在朝廷内外相互勾结，接受他们的贿赂。
English: Jinshen, Tang Wenzong issued a decree that, in view of the crimes of Yang Cheng, the inspector of the Jiannan West River Army, and Song Shenxi, who had been appointed to protect Song Shenxi that year, Wei Er, the inspector of the Huainan Army, Wang Jianyan, the inspector of the Hedong Army, and the former prime ministers Li Zongyao and Li Deyu colluded with each other inside and outside the imperial court and accepted their bribes.

古文：承和可驩州安置，元素可象州安置，践言可恩州安置，令所在锢送。
现代文：因此，免去三人的职务，把他们分别发放到边远的州、象州、恩州监管，命令西川、淮南和河东分别派人把他们枷锢押送到监管地区。
English: Therefore, the three people were relieved of their duties, and they were sent to the remote provinces of Zhou, Xiangzhou, and Enzhou for supervision, and ordered Xichuan, Huainan, and Hedong to send people to escort them to the supervision area.

古文：杨虞卿、李汉、萧浣为朋党之首，贬虞卿虔州司户，汉汾州司马，浣遂州司马。
现代文：杨虞卿、李汉、萧浣都是朋党的首领，贬杨虞卿为虔州司户，李汉为汾州司马、萧浣为遂州司马。
English: Yang Yuqing, Li Han, and Xiao Yao were all leaders of the Friends Party. Yang Yuqing was referred to as the secretary of Qianzhou, Li Han as the secretary of Zhangzhou, and Xiao Yao as the secretary of Suizhou.

古文：寻遣使追赐承和、元素、践言死。
现代文：不久，又派人追命杨承和、韦元素、王践言自尽。
English: Soon after, they also sent people to chase after Yang Chenghe, Wei Ye, and Wang Jianyan to commit suicide.

古文：时崔潭峻已卒，亦剖棺鞭尸。
现代文：这时，前枢密使崔潭峻已经去世，文宗命把他剖棺鞭尸。
English: At this time, the former Privy Councilor Cui Tanjun had already passed away, and Emperor Wenzong ordered his coffin to be opened and his body to be flogged.

古文：己亥，以前庐州刺史罗立言为司农少卿。
现代文：己亥，唐文宗任命前庐州刺史罗立言为司农寺少卿。
English: Ji Hai, Tang Wenzong appointed the former Zhangzhou priest Shi Luo Lixian as the Junior Secretary of the Sino-Mongolian Temple.

古文：立言赃吏，以赂结郑注而得之。
现代文：罗立言是一个贪官污吏，他是通过贿赂郑注才得到任命的。
English: Luo Lijian is a corrupt official who was appointed through bribing Zheng Zhu.

古文：郑注之入翰林也，中书舍人高元裕草制，言以医药奉君亲，注衔之。
现代文：郑注在此前被任命为翰林侍讲学士时，是由中书舍人高元裕起草的任命制书，制书说郑注曾以医术侍奉皇上。
English: Previously, when Zheng Zhu was appointed as Hanlin's attendant lecturer, the appointment book was drafted by Gao Yuanyu, a Chinese calligrapher. The book said that Zheng Zhu had served the emperor with medical skills.

古文：奏元裕尝出郊送李宗闵，壬寅，贬元裕阆州刺史。
现代文：郑注于是十分痛恨高元裕，向文宗奏称，李宗闵被贬时，高元裕曾出城到郊外送他。壬寅，唐文宗贬高元裕为阆州刺史。
English: Therefore, Zheng Shun hated Gao Yuan Yu very much, and told Wen Zonglu that when Li Zongtao was dethroned, Gao Yuan Yu went out of the city to see him off to the suburbs. In other words, Tang Wenzong dethroned Gao Yuan Yu as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：元裕，士廉之六世孙也。时注与李训所恶朝士，皆指目为二李之党，贬逐无虚日，班列殆空，廷中恟恟，上亦知之。
现代文：这时，郑注和李训对他们所厌恶的朝官，都指斥为李德裕和李宗闵的党羽，每天都有人被贬逐。上朝时，百官的班列为之一空，朝廷上下人心恐惧。文宗也得知这种情况。
English: At this time, both Zheng Zhu and Li Xun denounced the imperial officials they disliked as the followers of Li Deyu and Li Zongyao, and people were expelled every day. When the emperor ascended to the throne, the ranks of the hundred officials were empty, and the people in the imperial court were afraid. Wenzong also learned about this situation.

古文：训、注恐为人所摇，九月，癸卯朔，劝上下诏： 应与德裕、宗闵亲旧及门生故吏，今日以前贬黜之外，馀皆不问。 
现代文：郑注和李训担心被人控告，动摇自己的地位，于是，九月，癸卯朔，二人劝文宗下诏： 凡是李德裕、李宗闵的亲戚朋友，以及他们的学生弟子和原来的部下，除今日以前贬黜的以外，其余一律不再追究。 
English: Zheng Zhu and Li Xun were worried that they would be sued and their position would be shaken, so in September, at the end of the month, the two of them persuaded Wenzong to issue an edict: All the relatives and friends of Li Deyu and Li Zongyao, as well as their students and former subordinates, would no longer be investigated, except for those who had been demeaned before today.

古文：人情稍安。
现代文：于是，人心逐渐安定。
English: As a result, people's hearts have gradually become more stable.

古文：盐铁使王涯奏改江淮、岭南茶法，增其税。
现代文：盐铁使王涯奏请改革江淮、岭南地区的茶叶税收办法，增加茶税。
English: Yan Tie asked Wang Yao to reform the tea tax measures in the Jianghuai and Lingnan regions and increase the tea tax.

古文：庚申，以凤翔节度使李听为忠武节度使，代杜悰。
现代文：庚申，唐文宗任命凤翔节度使李听为忠武节度使，代替杜。
English: Goshun, Tang Wenzong appointed Fengxiang Jiedu so that Li He listened to as Zhongwu Jiedu so, replacing Du.

古文：宪宗之崩也，人皆言宦官陈弘志所为。
现代文：当年唐宪宗去世，宫中侍从都说是被宦官陈弘志所暗害的。
English: When Emperor Xianzong of Tang died that year, the palace attendants all said that he was assassinated by the eunuch Chen Hongzhi.

古文：时弘志为山南东道监军，李训为上谋召之，至青泥驿，癸亥，封杖杀之。
现代文：这时，陈弘志担任山南东道监军，李训建议文宗召陈弘志来京。陈弘志走到青泥驿，癸亥，被朝廷派人杖杀。
English: At this time, Chen Hongzhi served as the host supervisor of Shannan, and Li Xun suggested that Wenzong call Chen Hongzhi to come to Beijing. Chen Hongzhi went to Qingdao and was killed by the imperial court.

古文：郑注求为凤翔节度使，门下侍郎、同平章事李固言不可。
现代文：郑注请求担任凤翔节度使，门下侍郎、同平章事李固言认为不可。
English: Zheng Zhu asked Li Guyan to serve as Feng Xiang's delegate to the festival, and Li Guyan thought it was impossible.

古文：丁卯，以固言为山南西道节度使、注为凤翔节度使。
现代文：丁卯，唐文宗任命李固言为山南西道节度使，郑注为凤翔节度使。
English: Ding Yu, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Guyan as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, and Zheng Zhu as the festival envoy of Fengxiang.

古文：李训虽因注得进，及势位俱盛，心颇忌注。
现代文：李训虽然是通过郑注推荐而被提拔的，但当他的职务和权势都已达到顶点时，心中十分妒忌郑注。
English: Although Li Xun was promoted through Zheng Zhu's recommendation, when he reached the peak of his position and power, he was very jealous of Zheng Zhu.

古文：谋欲中外协势以诛宦官，故出注于凤翔。
现代文：他密谋在朝廷里应外合诛除宦官，所以建议郑注担任凤翔节度使。
English: He plotted to remove eunuchs from the imperial court, so he suggested that Zheng Zhu serve as Fengxiang's envoy.

古文：其实俟既诛宦官，并图注也。
现代文：其实，是想等诛除宦官后，连同郑注也一同除掉。
English: In fact, they wanted to wait until after the eunuchs were removed, and then remove Cang together with Zheng Zhu.

古文：注欲取名家才望之士为参佐，请礼部员外郎韦温为副使，温不可。
现代文：郑注想征召朝廷中出于名门世家并有威望的官员作为自己的僚佐，以便壮大声势。于是，邀请礼部员外郎韦温为节度副使，韦温不同意。
English: Zheng Shun wanted to recruit a prestigious official from the imperial court with a distinguished family as his aide-de-camp in order to strengthen his influence. Therefore, he invited his brother-in-law Wei Wen, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, to be the deputy envoy of discipline. Wei Wen did not agree.

古文：或曰： 拒之必为患。 
现代文：有人对韦温说： 您拒绝他的邀请，将来肯定要被诬陷。 
English: Someone said to Wei Wen: If you refuse his invitation, you will definitely be framed in the future.

古文：温曰： 择祸莫若轻。拒之止于远贬，从之有不测之祸。 
现代文：韦温说： 如果做两件事同样都不可避免地遭受灾难的话，那么，就应当选择较轻一点的灾难。现在，我拒绝郑注的邀请，最多被他诬陷贬逐到边远的地方，但如果同意而跟随他，恐怕有难以预测的更大灾难。 
English: Wei Wen said: If doing two things is equally unavoidable disaster, then you should choose a lighter disaster. Now, I refuse Zheng Zhu's invitation, at most he will frame me and banish me to a remote place, but if I agree and follow him, I am afraid there will be a greater disaster that is difficult to predict.

古文：卒辞之。
现代文：最后，还是拒绝了。
English: In the end, he still refused.

古文：戊辰，以右神策中尉、行右卫上将军、知内侍省事王守澄为左、右神策观军容使，兼十二卫统军。
现代文：戊辰，唐文宗任命右神策军护军中尉、行右卫上将军、知内侍省事王守澄为左、右神策军观军容使，兼十二卫统军。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Lieutenant of the Right Divine Defense Force, General of the Right Guard, and Minister of the Interior Wang Shuzhen as the left, and the Right Divine Defense Force as the right, and also the 12th Guards United Army.

古文：李训、郑注为上谋，以虚名尊守澄，实夺之权也。
现代文：李训、郑注为文宗策划，擢拔王守澄担任荣誉性的最高级军职，以表示对他的尊崇，实际上削除他的兵权。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu planned for Wenzong to promote Wang Shoucheng to the highest military post as an honor, to show his respect, and actually remove his military power.

古文：己巳，以御史中丞兼刑部侍郎舒元舆为刑部侍郎，兵部郎中知制诰、充翰林侍讲学士李训为礼部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：己巳，唐文宗任命御史中丞兼刑部侍郎舒元舆为刑部侍郎，兵部郎中知制诰、充翰林侍讲学士李训为礼部侍郎，二人并为同平章事。
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Shu Yuanwu, the Vice-Minister of History and the Attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, as the Attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, the Vice-Minister of the Department of Military Law, Chizhe Xieqi, the Vice-Minister of the Department of Military Law, and the Vice-Minister of the Department of Civil Law, Li Xun, as the Attendant of the Department of Ceremonial Law, and the two were the same rank.

古文：仍命训三二日一入翰林讲《易》。元舆为中丞，凡训、注所恶者，则为之弹击，由是得为相。
现代文：同时，命李训仍然三天或两天到翰林院一次，为文宗讲解《周易》，舒元舆担任御史中丞时，对于李训、郑注所厌恶的朝官，一律进行弹劾，因此，被任命为宰相。
English: At the same time, Li Xun was still ordered to come to Hanlin Academy once every three days or two days to explain "Zhou Yi" to Wenzong. When Shu Yuanwu served as the imperial historian, he impeached all the imperial officials who were disliked by Li Xun and Zheng Zhu, and was therefore appointed prime minister.

古文：又上惩李宗闵、李德裕多朋党，以贾餗及元舆皆孤寒新进，故擢为相，庶其无党耳。
现代文：同时，文宗也鉴于以前李宗闵、李德裕担任宰相时朋比为党，认为贾和舒元舆都是家世寒微而刚刚考中进士不久的朝官，所以擢任为宰相，希望他们不致朋比为党。
English: At the same time, in view of the fact that in the past, when Li Zongyao and Li Deyu served as prime ministers, Pengpi was the party, Wenzong also believed that Jia and Shu Yuanwu were both imperial officials with a short family history who had just entered the middle school examination, so they were appointed as prime ministers, hoping that they would not become the party of Pengpi.

古文：训起流人，期年致位宰相，天子倾意任之。训或在中书，或在翰林，天下事皆决于训。
现代文：李训由被流放的罪人而重新起用，刚刚一年就被任命为宰相，得到文宗全心全意地重用，李训有时在中书门下办公，有时在翰林院办公，朝廷的大政方针都由他决断。
English: Li Xun was reappointed from an exiled criminal, and just a year later he was appointed prime minister. He was reappointed wholeheartedly by Wenzong. Li Xun sometimes worked under Zhongshumen, and sometimes at Hanlin Academy. He decided the major policies of the imperial court.

古文：而涯辈承顺其风旨，惟恐不逮。
现代文：宰相王涯等人对他阿谀奉迎，惟恐有所违背。
English: Prime Minister Wang Lai and others pandered to him out of fear of offending him.

古文：自中尉、枢密、禁卫诸将，见训皆震慴，迎拜叩首。
现代文：从神策军护军中尉、枢密使以至禁军诸将，见到李训无不震惊恐惧，迎拜叩首。
English: Li Xun was greeted with shock and fear by all the generals of the Shenzhao Army, including the lieutenant of the escort, the confidential envoy, and even the forbidden army.

古文：壬申，以刑部郎中兼御史知杂李孝本权知御史中丞。
现代文：壬申，唐文宗任命刑部郎中兼御史知杂李孝本暂时代理御史中丞。
English: According to Jinshin, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed the vice-minister of the Department of Justice and the vice-minister of history, Li Xiaobeng.

古文：孝本，宗室之子，依训、注得进。
现代文：李孝本是皇室的后代，依附李训、郑注，因而得到提拔。
English: Li Xiaofeng was originally a descendant of the imperial family, adhering to Li Xun and Zheng Zhu, and thus was promoted.

古文：李听自恃勋旧，不礼于郑注。
现代文：李听自恃自己是对朝廷立有大功的老臣，对郑注不大礼貌。
English: Li listened to himself saying that he was a veteran minister who had made great contributions to the establishment of the imperial court, but he was not very polite to Zheng Zhu.

古文：注代听镇凤翔，先遣牙将丹骏至军中慰劳，诬奏听在镇贪虐。
现代文：这时，郑注被任命为凤翔节度使，代替李听的职务，于是，先派牙将丹骏到凤翔慰问将士，随后，诬奏李听在担任凤翔节度使时贪污暴虐。
English: At this time, Zheng Zhu was appointed as Fengxiang's festival envoy to replace Li He's duties. Therefore, he first sent Tusk to Fengxiang to console the soldiers, and then falsely accused Li He of corruption and brutality when he served as Fengxiang's festival envoy.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，以听为太子太保、分司，复以杜悰为忠武节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙亥，唐文宗任命李听为太子太保，分司东都。同时，任命杜为忠武节度使，代替李听。
English: In the winter, in October, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Xun as the Crown Prince and Deputy Governor of the Eastern Capital. At the same time, he appointed Du as the Minister of Loyalty and Military Affairs to replace Li Xun.

古文：郑注每自负经济之略，上问以富人之术，注无以对，乃请榷茶。
现代文：郑注常常自负有治理国家才智方略，文宗向他咨询能够使百姓富裕的方法，郑注无言以对，于是，请求实行茶叶专卖制度。
English: Zheng Zhu often boasted that he had the wisdom and strategy to govern the country. Wen Zong asked him for advice on how to make the people rich. Zheng Zhu was speechless, so he requested the implementation of the tea monopoly system.

古文：于是以王涯兼榷茶使，涯知不可而不敢违，人甚苦之。
现代文：文宗于是任命王涯兼任榷茶使，王涯自知茶叶专卖不妥，但又不敢违背，百姓因此大受其苦。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wenzong appointed Wang Lai to serve as tea steward. Wang Lai knew that tea monopoly was not right, but he did not dare to go against it. As a result, the people suffered greatly.

古文：郑注欲收僧尼之誉，固请罢沙汰，从之。
现代文：郑注想得到僧尼的支持和赞誉，于是，再三请求文宗停止继续淘汰僧尼，文宗批准。
English: Zheng Shun wanted to get the support and praise of the monks and nuns, so he repeatedly asked Wenzong to stop the continued elimination of monks and nuns, and Wenzong approved.

古文：李训、郑注密言于上，请除王守澄。
现代文：李训、郑注秘密地向文宗建议，请求诛杀王守澄。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu secretly proposed to Wenzong and asked him to kill Wang Shuzhen.

古文：辛巳，遣中使李好古就第赐鸩，杀之，赠扬州大都督。
现代文：辛巳，文宗派遣宦官李好古前往王守澄的住宅，赐王守澄毒酒，把他杀死。随后，追赠王守澄为扬州大都督。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wenzong sent eunuch Li Haogu to Wang Shoucheng's residence, gave him poisoned wine, and killed him. Wang Shoucheng was later posthumously awarded the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：训、注本因守澄进，卒谋而杀之，人皆快守澄之受佞而疾训、注之阴狡，于是元和之逆党略尽矣。
现代文：李训、郑注本来是通过王守澄的推荐才被提拔的，但最后却密谋把他杀死。所以，百官都为王守澄国奸佞被杀而拍手称快，同时厌恶李训、郑注的阴险狡诈。这样，元和末年暗害唐宪宗的叛贼逆党几乎被诛除干净。
English: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were originally promoted through the recommendation of Wang Shoucheng, but in the end they plotted to kill him. Therefore, all the officials applauded the killing of Wang Shoucheng, the traitor, and loathed the insidious cunning of Li Xun and Zheng Zhu. In this way, the traitors and rebels who plotted against Tang Xianzong in the Yuan Dynasty and the last years of the Tang Dynasty were almost completely eliminated.

古文：乙酉，郑注赴镇。
现代文：乙酉，郑注前往凤翔上任。
English: Acetylene, Zhengchu went to Fengxiang to take office.

古文：庚子，以东都留守、司徒兼侍中裴度兼中书令，馀如故。
现代文：庚子，唐文宗任命东都留守、司徒兼侍中裴度兼中书令，其他职务仍旧不变。
English: Geng Zi, Tang Wenzong appointed Dong Du to stay behind, Sito and Waizhong Pei Du and Zhong Shuling, and other positions remained unchanged.

古文：李训所奖拔，率皆狂险之士，然亦时取天下重望认顺人心，如裴度、令狐楚、郑覃皆累朝耆俊，久为当路所轧，置之散地，训皆引居崇秩。
现代文：这时，李训所推荐提拔的官员，大多是狂妄阴险之徒。然而，他们有时也任命个别在朝廷内外有崇高威望的人，如裴度、令狐楚、郑覃，都是几朝德高望重的老臣，但很久以来，被当朝权贵所倾轧，仅仅担任散官而无所事事。
English: At this time, the officials recommended for promotion by the Li Xun Institute were mostly arrogant and sinister. However, they sometimes appointed individuals who had high prestige both inside and outside the imperial court, such as Pei Du, Ling Fuchu, and Zheng Qi, all of whom were highly respected old ministers of several dynasties. However, for a long time, they had been lured by the dignitaries of the dynasty, and had only served as non-officials and had nothing to do.

古文：由是士大夫亦有望其真能致太平者，不惟天子惑之也。
现代文：现在，都被李训推荐担任要职。于是，不仅文宗受到他的花言巧语迷惑，而且士大夫也有不少人希望他真的能够辅佐皇上达到天下太平。
English: Now, they are all recommended by Li Xun to hold important positions. As a result, not only is Wenzong confused by his rhetoric, but there are also many people who hope that he can really assist the emperor to achieve world peace.

古文：然识者见其横甚，知将败矣。
现代文：然而一些具有远见卓识的官员看他那么骄横，预料他肯定会失败。
English: But some far-sighted officials saw him as so arrogant that they expected him to fail.

古文：十一月，丙午，以大理卿郭行馀为邠宁节度使。
现代文：十一月，丙午，唐文宗任命大理卿郭行余为宁节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 11th month, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Daliqing Guo Xingyu as the Ning Festival envoy.

古文：癸丑，以河东节度使、同平章事李载义兼侍中。
现代文：癸丑，任命河东节度使、同平章事李载义兼侍中。
English: He appointed Tongping Zhang Zhi Li Zaiyi as the Hedong Festival Envoy, and Tongping Zhang Zi Li Zaiyi as a chamberlain.

古文：丁巳，以户部尚书、判度支王璠为河东节度使。
现代文：丁巳，任命户部尚书、判度支王为河东节度使。
English: Ding Si, appointed the head of the household, Shang Shu, and the judge, Zhiguang, as the Hedong Festival envoys.

古文：戊午，以京兆尹李石为户部侍郎、判度支；以京兆少尹罗立言权知府事。
现代文：戊午，任命京兆尹李石为户部侍郎、判度支，京兆少尹罗立言暂时处理京兆府的政务。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Jing Zhao appointed Yin Lishi as the head of the Household Department and the Judiciary Branch, and Jing Zhao's younger brother, Yin Luo, proposed to temporarily handle the government affairs of Jing Zhao Prefecture.

古文：石，神符之五世孙也。
现代文：李石是李神符的第五代子孙。
English: Li Shi is the fifth generation descendant of Li Shenfu.

古文：己未，以太府卿韩约为左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：己未，任命太府卿韩约为左金吾卫大将军。
English: On the 18th, Han Yu, the former Dafu-ch'ing (Grand Steward of the Grand Palace) sent the general Jin Wuwei.

古文：始，郑注与李训谋，至镇，选壮士数百，皆持白棓，怀其斧，以为亲兵。
现代文：最初，郑注和李训商议，待郑注到风翔上任后，挑选几百名壮士，每人携带一根白色棍棒，怀揣一把利斧，作为亲兵。
English: At first, Zheng Zhu and Li Xun discussed, and after Zheng Zhu took office in Fengxiang, he selected several hundred strong men, each carrying a white club and carrying a sharp axe, as his own soldiers.

古文：是月，戊辰，王守澄葬于浐水，注奏请入护葬事，因以亲兵自随。
现代文：二人约定，本月戊辰，朝廷在河旁埋葬王守澄时，由郑注奏请文宗批准率兵护卫葬礼，于是便可带亲兵随从前往。
English: The two agreed that when Wang Shoucheng was buried by the river by the imperial court in Wucheng this month, Zheng Shuxiao would ask Wenzong for approval to lead soldiers to escort the funeral, so he could bring his own soldiers to accompany him.

古文：仍奏令内臣中尉以下尽集浐水送葬，注因阖门，令亲兵斧之，使无遗类。
现代文：同时奏请文宗，命神策军护军中尉以下所有宦官都到河旁为王守澄送葬。届时，郑注下令关闭墓门，命亲兵用利斧砍杀宦官，全部诛除。
English: At the same time, he asked Wenzong to order all eunuchs below the rank of lieutenant of the Divine Providence Protection Army to go to the riverside to bury Wang Shoucheng. At that time, Zheng Zhu ordered the tomb door to be closed and the eunuchs to be killed with a sharp axe and all of them to be eliminated.

古文：约既定，训与其党谋： 如此事成，则注专有其功，不若使行馀、璠以赴镇为名，多募壮士为部曲，并用金吾、台府吏卒，先期诛宦者，已而并注去之。 
现代文：计划已经约好，李训又和他的同党密谋说： 如果这个计划成功，那么，诛除宦官的功劳就全部归于郑注，不如让郭行余和王以赴宁、河东上任为名，多招募一些壮士，作为私兵，同时调动韩约统领的金吾兵和御史台、京兆府官吏和士卒，先于郑注一步，在京城诛除宦官，随后，把郑注除掉。 
English: The plan had already been agreed upon, and Li Xun and his co-partisans conspired to say: If this plan succeeds, then the credit for removing the eunuchs will all go to Zheng Zhu. It would be better to let Guo Xingyu and Wang Yi go to Ning and Hedong in the name of taking office, recruit more strong men as private soldiers, and at the same time mobilize the Jinwu soldiers and the Imperial Historian's Office under the command of Han Yu, and the officials and soldiers of the Beijing-Shanghai Government, and remove the eunuchs in Beijing one step ahead of Zheng Zhu, and then remove Zheng Zhu.

古文：行馀、璠、立言、约及中丞李孝本，皆训素所厚也，故列置要地，独与是数人及舒元舆谋之，它人皆莫之知也。
现代文：宁节度使郭行余、河东节度使王、左金吾卫大将军韩约、京兆少尹罗立言和御史中丞李孝本，都是李训所信用的官员，所以，任命他们担任要职，李训只和这几个人以及宰相舒元舆密谋，其他朝廷百官都一概不知。
English: Guo Xingyu, the commander of the Ning Festival, Guo Xingyu, the commander of the Hedong Festival, Zuo Jinwu, Han You, Jing Zhaoshao, Yin Luo Lixin, and Li Xiaobeng, the vice-chancellor of history, were all officials trusted by Li Xun. Therefore, when appointing them to important positions, Li Xun only conspired with these few people and the prime minister, Shu Yuanmou, and did not know any other officials of the imperial court.

古文：壬戌，上御紫宸殿。
现代文：壬戌，唐文宗御临紫宸殿。
English: The Tang and Manchu dynasties came to Shijiazhuang.

古文：百官班定，韩约不报平安，奏称： 左金吾听事后石榴夜有甘露，臣递门奏讫。 
现代文：百官列班站定后，左金吾卫大将军韩约不按规定报告平安，奏称： 左金吾衙门后院的石榴树上，昨晚发现有甘露降临，这是祥瑞的征兆，昨晚我已通过守卫宫门的宦官向皇上报告。 
English: After the hundreds of officials had stood in formation, General Han Yu of ZuoJingWuWei did not report peace according to regulations, but made a report: Last night, I found that there was nectar on the pomegranate tree in the backyard of ZuoJingWuWei Gate, which is a sign of auspiciousness. Last night, I reported to the emperor through the eunuch guarding the palace gate.

古文：因蹈舞再拜，宰相亦帅百官称贺。
现代文：于是，行舞蹈礼，再次下拜称贺，宰相也率领百官向文宗祝贺。
English: As a result, they performed a dance ceremony, bowed down again to express their congratulations, and the prime minister also led hundreds of officials to congratulate Wenzong.

古文：训、元舆劝上亲往观之，以承天贶，上许之。
现代文：李训、舒元舆乘机劝文宗亲自前往观看，以便承受上天赐予的祥瑞。
English: Li Xun and Shu Yuanmei took the opportunity to persuade Wenzong to go and watch in person, so that he could receive the auspicious blessing from heaven.

古文：百官退，班于含元殿。
现代文：文宗表示同意。接着，百官退下，列班于含元殿。
English: Wenzong agreed. Next, the hundred officials retreated and formed a line at the Hall of Han Yuan.

古文：日加辰，上乘软舆出紫宸门，升含元殿。先命宰相及两省官诣左仗视之，良久而还。
现代文：辰时刚过，文宗乘软轿出紫宸门，到含元殿升朝，先命宰相和中书、门下两省的官员到左金吾后院察看甘露，过了很久才回来。
English: Just after the hour, Wenzong took a soft sedan out of the Shishimen Gate and went to the Han Yuan Palace to ascend to the throne. First, he ordered the Prime Minister, the Chinese envoy, and the officials of the two provinces under his command to go to Zuo Kingu's backyard to inspect the nectar. It took him a long time to return.

古文：训奏： 臣与众人验之，殆非真甘露，未可遽宣布，恐天下称贺。 
现代文：李训奏报说： 我和众人去检查过了，不象是真正的甘露，不可匆忙向全国宣布，否则，全国各地就会向陛下祝贺。 
English: Li Xunso Newspaper said: I went to check with everyone, it is not like real nectar, you should not rush to announce it to the whole country, otherwise, all over the country will congratulate His Majesty.

古文：上曰： 岂有是邪！ 
现代文：文宗说： 难道还有这种事！ 
English: Wenzong said, "Is there really such a thing?"

古文：顾左、右中尉仇士良、鱼志弘帅诸宦者往视之。
现代文：随即命左、右神策军护军中尉仇士良、鱼弘志率领诸位宦官再次前往左金吾后院察看。
English: The eunuchs left and right were immediately ordered to go to Zuo Kingu's backyard for inspection, led by Lieutenants Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi of the Divine Protection Force.

古文：宦者既去，训遽召郭行馀、王璠曰： 来受敕旨！ 
现代文：宦官走后，李训急忙召集郭行余、王，说： 快来接受皇上的圣旨！ 
English: After the eunuch left, Li Xun hurriedly summoned Guo Xingyu and Wang, saying: Come and accept the emperor's edict!

古文：璠股栗不敢前，独行馀拜殿下。
现代文：王紧张得两腿发抖，不敢前去，只有郭行余一人拜倒在含元殿下接旨。
English: The king was so nervous that his legs were shaking and he did not dare to go forward. Only Guo Xingyu bowed down to receive the imperial edict from His Imperial Highness Han Yuan.

古文：时二人部曲数百，皆执兵立丹凤门外，训已先使人召之，令人受敕。
现代文：这时，二人招募的私兵几百人都手执兵器，立在丹凤门外等待命令。李训已经先派人去叫他们来含元殿前，接受文宗下达的诛除宦官的命令。
English: At this time, several hundred private soldiers recruited by the two men were standing outside the Danfeng Gate with weapons in hand, waiting for orders. Li Xun had already sent someone to call them to come to the front of the Han Yuan Hall to accept the order to eliminate eunuchs issued by Wenzong.

古文：独东兵入，邠宁兵竟不至。
现代文：结果，只有郭行余率领的河东兵来了，王率领的宁兵竟没有来。
English: As a result, only the Hedong soldiers led by Guo Xingyun came, but the Ning soldiers led by Wang did not come.

古文：仇士良等至左仗视甘露，韩约变色流汗。
现代文：仇士良率领宦官到左金吾后院去察看甘露，韩约紧张得浑身流汗，脸色十分难看。
English: Qiu Shiliang led the eunuchs to Zuo Kingu's backyard to inspect the nectar. Han You was so nervous that he was sweating all over and his face was very ugly.

古文：士良怪之曰： 将军何为如是？ 
现代文：仇士良觉得很奇怪，问： 将军为什么这样？ 
English: Qiu Shiliang felt very strange and asked, "General, why is this happening?"

古文：俄风吹幕起，见执兵者甚众，又闻兵仗声，士良等惊骇走出。门者欲闭之，士良叱之，关不得上。
现代文：过了一会儿，一阵风把院中的帐幕吹起来，仇士良发现很多手执兵器的士卒，又听到兵器的碰撞声音。仇士良等人大惊，急忙往外跑，守门的士卒正想关门，被仇士良大声呵叱，门闩没有关上。
English: After a while, a gust of wind blew up the tent in the courtyard, Qiu Shiliang found many soldiers holding weapons, and heard the sound of weapons colliding. Qiu Shiliang and others were shocked and hurriedly ran outside. The gatekeeper was trying to close the door, and was loudly scolded by Qiu Shiliang. The latch was not closed.

古文：士良等奔诣上告变。
现代文：仇士良等人急奔含元殿，向文宗报告发生兵变，被李训看见。
English: Qiu Shiliang and others rushed to Han Yuan's palace to report the mutiny to Wenzong, who was seen by Li Xun.

古文：训见之，遽呼金吾卫士曰： 来上殿卫乘舆者，人赏钱百缗！ 
现代文：李训急呼金吾士卒说： 快来上殿保护皇上，每人赏钱百缗！ 
English: Li Xun hurriedly called out to Jin Wushi and said, "Come to the palace to protect the emperor. Each of you will be rewarded with one hundred taels of gold!

古文：宦官曰： 事急矣，请陛下还宫！ 
现代文：宦官对文宗说： 事情紧急，请陛下赶快回宫！ 
English: The eunuch said to Wenzong, "The matter is urgent, please hurry back to the palace!"

古文：即举软舆，迎上扶升舆，决殿后罘罳，疾趋北出。
现代文：随即抬来软轿，迎上前去搀扶文宗上轿，冲断殿后面的丝网，向北急奔而去。
English: Then, a soft sedan was brought in, and the Emperor's carriage was ushered forward, breaking through the silk screen behind the hall and rushing north.

古文：训攀舆呼曰： 臣奏事未竟，陛下不可入宫！ 
现代文：李训拉住文宗的软轿大声说： 我奏请朝政还没有完，陛下不可回宫！ 
English: Li Xun grabbed hold of Wenzong's limousine and said loudly: "I have not yet finished playing the role of the ruler of the dynasty. Your Majesty must not return to the palace!"

古文：金吾兵已登殿。
现代文：这时，金吾兵已经登上含元殿。
English: By this time, Kingo's soldiers had already ascended the main hall.

古文：罗立言帅京兆逻卒三百馀自东来，李孝本帅御史台从人二百馀自西来，皆登殿纵击，宦官流血呼冤，死伤者十馀人，乘舆迤逦入宣政门，训攀舆呼益急，上叱之，宦者郗志荣奋拳殴其胸，偃于地。
现代文：同时，罗立言率领京兆府担负巡逻任务的士卒三百多人从东边冲来，李孝本率领御史台随从二百多人从西边冲来，一齐登上含元殿，击杀宦官。宦官血流如注，大声喊冤，死伤十几个人。文宗的软轿一路向北进入宣政门，李训拉住软轿不放，呼喊更加急迫。文宗呵斥李训，宦官郗志荣乘机挥拳奋击李训的胸部，李训被打倒在地。
English: At the same time, Luo Lijian led more than 300 soldiers of Jingzhao Prefecture to charge the patrol mission from the east, and Li Xiaobon led the Imperial Guard with more than 200 people from the west, and they all boarded the Han Yuan Hall to kill the eunuch. The eunuch's blood flowed like a note, shouted loudly, and killed and injured more than a dozen people. Wenzong's soft sedan went all the way north to enter the Xuancheng Gate, Li Xun pulled the soft sedan and did not let go, shouting more urgently. Wenzong shouted at Li Xun, eunuch Yan Zhirong took the

古文：乘舆即入，门随阖，宦者皆呼万岁，百官骇散出。
现代文：文宗的软轿进入宣政门后，大门随即关上，宦官都大呼万岁。这时，正在含元殿上朝的百官都大吃一惊，四散而走。
English: After Wenzong's limousine entered the Xuanzheng Gate, the gate was immediately closed, and the eunuchs all shouted "long live." At this time, the hundreds of officials who were in the Han Yuan Hall were taken aback and dispersed.

古文：训知事不济，脱从吏绿衫衣之，走马而出，扬言于道曰： 我何罪而窜谪！ 
现代文：李训见文宗已入后宫，知道大事不好，于是，换上随从官吏的绿色官服，骑马而逃。一路上大声扬言说： 我有什么罪而被贬逐！ 
English: When Li Xun saw that Wenzong had entered the harem, he knew that things were not good, so he changed into the green official uniform that followed the officials and fled on horseback. Along the way, he loudly threatened, "What crime have I committed to be banished!"

古文：人不之疑。
现代文：因而，人们也不怀疑。
English: Therefore, people do not doubt.

古文：王涯、贾餗、舒元舆还中书，相谓曰： 上且开延英，召吾属议之。 
现代文：宰相王涯、贾、舒元舆回到政事堂，相互商议说： 皇上过一会儿就会开延英殿，召集我们商议朝政。 
English: The prime ministers Wang Ya, Jia, and Shu Yuanwu returned to the government hall and discussed with each other, saying, "In a little while, the emperor will open the Yan Ying Hall and convene us to discuss the government."

古文：两省官诣宰相请其故，皆曰： 不知何事，诸公各自便！ 
现代文：中书、门下两省的官员来问王涯三人，到底发生了什么事？三人都说： 我们也不知怎么回事，诸位各自随便先去吧！ 
English: Officials from Zhongshu and two provinces under Wang Ya's command came to ask the three Wang Ya's what had happened. All three said, "We don't know what's going on, you can go ahead as you please!"

古文：士良等知上豫其谋，怨愤，出不逊语，上惭惧不复言。
现代文：仇士良等宦官知道文宗参予了李训的密谋，十分愤恨，在文宗面前出语不逊。文宗羞愧惧怕，不再作声。
English: Knowing that Wenzong had participated in Li Xun's plot, the eunuchs such as Qiu Shiliang were very angry and spoke harshly in front of Wenzong. Embarrassed and afraid, Wenzong no longer made a sound.

古文：士良等命左、右神策副使刘泰伦、魏仲卿等各帅禁兵五百人，露刃出阁门讨贼。
现代文：仇士良等人命令左、右神策军副使刘泰伦、魏仲卿等各率禁兵五百人，持刀露刃从紫宸殿冲出讨伐贼党。
English: Qiu Shiliang and others ordered Liu Tielun, the deputy envoy of the Left and Right Divine Providence Army, Wei Zhongqing and other five hundred soldiers to rush out from the Courtyard of the Empress Dowager with their swords drawn.

古文：王涯等将会食，吏白： 有兵自内出，逢人辄杀！ 
现代文：这时，王涯等宰相在政事堂正要吃饭，忽然有官吏报告说： 有一大群士兵从宫中冲出，逢人就杀！ 
English: At this time, Wang Ya and other chancellors were about to have dinner in the government building, when suddenly an official reported: A large group of soldiers rushed out of the palace, killing everyone!

古文：涯等狼狈步走，两省及金吾吏卒千馀人填门争出。
现代文：王涯等人狼狈逃奔。中书、门下两省和金吾卫的士卒和官吏一千多人争着向门外逃跑。
English: Wang Ya and others fled in disarray. More than a thousand soldiers and officials from Zhongshu, the two provinces under his command, and Jinwuwei scrambled to escape.

古文：门寻阖，其不得出者六百馀人皆死。
现代文：不一会儿，大门被关上，尚未逃出的六百多人全被杀死。
English: Soon, the gates were closed, and all of the more than six hundred people who had not yet escaped were killed.

古文：士良等分兵闭宫门，索诸司，讨贼党。
现代文：仇士良下令分兵关闭各个宫门，搜查南衙各司衙门，逮捕贼党。
English: Qiu Shiliang ordered the detachment to close all the palace gates, search all the priests' gates in Nanlu, and arrest the thieves.

古文：诸司吏卒及民酤贩在中者皆死，死者又千馀人，横尸流血，狼籍涂地，诸司印及图籍、帷幕、器皿俱尽。
现代文：各司的官吏和担负警卫的士卒，以及正在里面卖酒的百姓和商人一千多人全部被杀，尸体狼藉，流血遍地。各司的大印、地图和户籍档案、衙门的帷幕和办公用具被捣毁、抄掠一空。
English: More than a thousand people were killed, including officials and policemen on guard duty in each division, as well as commoners and merchants who were selling liquor inside. Bodies were scattered everywhere, and blood flowed everywhere. The seals, maps, and household registration files of each division, the curtain of the gate, and office equipment were destroyed and plundered.

古文：又遣骑各千馀出城追亡者，又遣兵大索城中。
现代文：仇士良等人又命左、右神策军各出动骑兵一千多人出城追击逃亡的贼党，同时派兵在京城大搜捕。
English: Qiu Shiliang and others ordered more than a thousand cavalrymen from the Left and Right Divisions to leave the city to pursue the fleeing bandits, and at the same time sent soldiers to search and arrest them in Beijing.

古文：舒元舆易服单骑出安化门，禁兵追擒之。
现代文：舒元舆换上民服后，一人骑马从安化门逃出，被骑兵追上逮捕。
English: After Shu Yuanmou changed into civilian clothes, he escaped on horseback from Anhua Gate and was caught and arrested by the cavalry.

古文：王涯徒步至永昌里茶肆，禁兵擒入左军。
现代文：王涯步行到永昌里的一个茶馆，被禁兵逮捕，押送到左神策军中。
English: Wang Ya walked to a teahouse in Yongchang-ri, was arrested by the forbidden soldiers, and was sent to Zuo Sheng Chaojun.

古文：涯时年七十馀，被以桎梏，掠治不胜苦，自诬服，称与李训谋行大逆，尊立郑注。
现代文：王涯这时年迈已七十多岁，被戴上脚镣手铐，遭受毒打，无法忍受，因而，违心地承认和李训一起谋反，企图拥立郑注为皇帝。
English: At this time, Wang Ya, who was more than seventy years old, was shackled with leg irons and handcuffs, and suffered severe beatings, which was unbearable. Therefore, he reluctantly admitted to conspiring with Li Xun to attempt to establish Zheng Zhou as emperor.

古文：王璠归长兴坊私第，闭门，以其兵自防。
现代文：王回到长兴里家中后，闭门不出，用招募的私兵防卫。
English: After Wang returned to his home in Changxingli, he did not go out behind closed doors, but used recruited private soldiers to defend himself.

古文：神策将至门，呼曰： 王涯等谋反，欲起尚书为相，鱼护军令致意！ 
现代文：神策将前来搜捕，到他的门口时，大声喊道： 王涯等人谋反，朝廷打算任命您为宰相，护军中尉鱼弘志派我们来向您致意！ 
English: Shinsaku will come to search and arrest, and when he arrives at his door, he will shout loudly: Wang Ya and others are plotting a rebellion, the court intends to appoint you as prime minister, and the escort lieutenant Yu Hongzhi sent us to greet you!

古文：璠喜，出见之。
现代文：王大喜，马上出来相见。
English: Wang Daxi, I'll see you soon.

古文：将趋贺再三，璠知见绐，涕泣而行，至左军，见王涯曰： 二十兄自反，胡为见引？ 
现代文：神策将再三祝贺他升迁，王发现被骗，流着眼泪跟随神策将而去。到了左神策军中，见到王涯，王说： 你参予谋反，为什么要牵连我？ 
English: Shenze repeatedly congratulated him on his promotion. Wang found out that he had been deceived and left with tears streaming down his face. When he got to Zuo Shenze's army and saw Wang Ya, Wang said, "You are involved in plotting a rebellion, why should I be involved?"

古文：涯曰： 五弟昔为京兆尹，不漏言于王守澄，岂有今日邪！ 
现代文：王涯说： 你过去担任京兆尹时，如果不把宋申锡诛除宦官的计划透露给王守澄，哪里会发生今天的事！ 
English: Wang Ya said: If you did not reveal to Wang Shoucheng the plan of removing eunuchs by Song Shensi when you were Jing Zhaoyun in the past, what would have happened today!

古文：璠俯首不言。
现代文：王自知理亏，低头不语。
English: Wang Zizhi reasoned, bowed his head and did not speak.

古文：又收罗立言于太平里，及涯等亲属奴婢，皆入两军系之。
现代文：神策军又在太平里逮捕了罗立言，以及王涯的亲属奴婢，都关押在左、右神策军中。
English: In Taiping, Luo Liyan and Wang Ya's relatives and servants were arrested by the Divine Providence Army and detained in the Left and Right Divisions of the Divine Providence Army.

古文：户部员外郎李元皋，训之再从弟也，训实与之无恩，亦执而杀之。
现代文：户部员外郎李元皋是李训的远房表弟，其实李训并没有提拔重用他，也被逮捕杀死。
English: His distant cousin, Li Yuanjun, was a member of the household department. In fact, Li Xun did not promote him, and he was also arrested and killed.

古文：故岭南节度使胡证，家巨富，禁兵利其财，托以搜贾餗入其家，执其子溵，杀之。
现代文：前岭南节度使胡证是京城的巨富，禁军士卒想掠夺他的财物，借口说贾藏在他家，进行搜查，把他的儿子胡抓住杀死。
English: At the time of the Lingnan Festival, Hu Zhen was a very rich man in Beijing. The soldiers wanted to plunder his property, and on the pretext that Jia was hiding in his house, they conducted a search and caught his son Hu and killed him.

古文：又入左常侍罗让、詹事浑钅岁、翰林学士黎埴等家，掠其赀财，扫地无遗。
现代文：禁军又到左常侍罗让、詹事浑、翰林学士黎埴等人的家中掠夺财产，扫地无遗。
English: The forbidden army also went to the homes of Zuo's regular attendants, Luo Zhang, Zhan Zhihong, and Hanlin's scholar, Lihong, to loot property and sweep the ground.

古文：钅岁，瑊之子也，坊市恶少年因之报私仇，杀人，剽掠百货。互相攻劫，尘埃蔽天。
现代文：浑是中唐名将浑的儿子。这时，京城的恶少年也乘机报平日的私仇，随意杀人，剽掠商人和百姓的财物，甚至相互攻打，以致尘埃四起，漫天蔽日。
English: Hun was the son of the famous general Hun in the Middle Tang Dynasty. At this time, the evil boys in Beijing also took the opportunity to report their usual personal vendettas, killing at will, plundering the property of merchants and the people, and even attacking each other, so that the dust rose everywhere and covered the sky.

古文：癸亥，百官入朝，日出，始开建福门，惟听以从者一人自随，禁兵露刃夹道。
现代文：癸亥，百官开始上朝。直到太阳已经出来时，大明宫右侧的建福门才刚刚打开。宫中传话说，百官每人只准带一名随从进门。里面禁军手持刀枪，夹道防卫。
English: In the year of the boar, hundreds of officials began to visit the emperor. It was not until the sun had risen that the Jianfu Gate on the right side of the Daming Palace was just opened. A message from the palace said that each of the hundreds of officials was allowed to enter the door with only one follower. Inside, the forbidden soldiers were armed with knives and guns and defended themselves.

古文：至宣政门，尚未开。
现代文：到宣政门时，大门尚未打开。
English: At the time of the proclamation of the government, the gate had not yet been opened.

古文：时无宰相御史知班，百官无复班列。
现代文：这时，由于没有宰相和御史大夫率领，百官队伍混乱，不成班列。
English: At this time, since there was no prime minister and chief historian leading the procession, the procession of hundreds of officials was disorganized and did not form a line.

古文：上御紫宸殿，问： 宰相何为不来？ 
现代文：唐文宗亲临紫宸殿，问： 宰相怎么没有来？ 
English: Tang Wenzong visited Shijiazhuang Palace in person and asked: Why didn't the prime minister come?

古文：仇士良曰： 王涯等谋反系狱。 
现代文：仇士良回答： 王涯等人谋反，已经被逮捕入狱。 
English: Qiu Shiliang replied: Wang Ya and others plotted to rebel and have been arrested and imprisoned.

古文：因以涯手状呈上，召左仆射令狐楚、右仆射郑覃等升殿示之。
现代文：接着，把王涯的供词递呈文宗，文宗召左仆射令狐楚、右仆射郑覃上前，让他们观看王涯的供词。
English: Next, he presented Wang Ya's confession to Wenzong. Wenzong called his left servant, Shao Ling Fuchu, and his right servant, Shao Zheng Qi, forward, and asked them to watch Wang Ya's confession.

古文：上悲愤不自胜，谓楚等曰： 是涯手书乎？ 
现代文：文宗既悲伤又气愤，几乎难以自持，问令狐楚和郑覃： 是不是王涯的笔迹？ 二人回答说： 是！ 
English: Both sad and angry, almost unable to contain himself, Wenzong asked the fox and Zheng Qi: Is it Wang Ya's handwriting? The two replied: Yes!

古文：对曰： 是也！  诚如此，罪不容诛！ 
现代文：文宗说： 如果真的这样，那就罪不容诛！ 
English: Wen Zong said: If this is really the case, then the crime is intolerable!

古文：因命楚、覃留宿中书，参决机务。
现代文：于是，命令二人留在政事堂，参予决策朝廷大政方针。
English: As a result, the two were ordered to stay in the government hall and participate in the decision-making of the imperial court's major policies.

古文：使楚草制宣告中外。
现代文：同时，又命令狐楚起草制书，将平定李训、王涯等人叛乱宣告朝廷内外。
English: At the same time, he also ordered the fox to draft a document to declare the suppression of the rebellion of Li Xun, Wang Ya and others inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：楚叙王涯、贾餗反事浮泛，仇士良等不悦，由是不得为相。
现代文：令狐楚在制书中叙述王涯、贾谋反的事实时，浮泛而不切要害，仇士良等人对此很不满，由此令狐楚未能被擢拔为宰相。
English: When Ling Xuchu described the facts of Wang Ya and Jia's rebellion in the book, it was vague and not crucial. Qiu Shiliang and others were very dissatisfied with this, and thus Ling Xuchu could not be promoted to prime minister.

古文：时坊市剽掠者犹未止，命左、右神策将杨镇、靳遂良等各将五百人分屯通衢，击鼓以警之，斩十馀人，然后定。
现代文：这时，京城街坊和集市中的剽掠仍未停止。朝廷命左、右神策军将领杨镇、靳遂良等人各率五百人分别把守街道的主要路口，敲击街鼓加以警告，同时斩首十几个罪犯，这才安定下来。
English: At this time, the looting of the streets and markets in the capital had not yet stopped. The imperial court ordered five hundred people each to guard the main intersections of the streets, beating street drums to warn and beheading more than a dozen criminals at the same time. Only then did the situation settle down.

古文：贾餗变服潜民间经宿，自知无所逃，素服乘驴诣兴安门，自言： 我宰相贾餗也，为奸人所污，可送我诣两军！ 
现代文：贾换了官服以后，潜藏在百姓家里。过了一夜，感到实在无法逃脱，于是，换上丧服，骑驴到兴安门，说： 我是宰相贾，被奸人所污蔑，你们把我抓起来送到左、右神策军去吧！ 
English: After Jia changed his official uniform, he hid in people's homes. After one night, he felt that he really could not escape, so he changed into mourning clothes and rode a donkey to Xing'an Gate, saying, "I am Prime Minister Jia, who has been slandered by traitors. Arrest me and send me to the Left and Right Divination Armies!"

古文：门者执送西军。
现代文：守门人随即把他押送到右神策军中。
English: The gatekeeper then escorted him to the Right Divine Policy Army.

古文：李孝本改衣绿，犹服金带，以帽鄣面，单骑奔凤翔，至咸阳西，追擒之。
现代文：李孝本改换六品、七品官员穿的绿色官服，但仍旧系着只有五品以上官员才能穿戴的金带，用帽子摭住脸，一个人骑着马直奔凤翔，打算投靠郑注。到了咸阳城西，被追兵逮捕。
English: Li Xiaobun changed the green official uniforms worn by officials of the sixth and seventh grade, but still wore a gold belt that only officials of the fifth grade and above could wear, covered his face with a hat, and rode a horse straight to Fengxiang, intending to support Zhengzhu. When he reached the west of Xianyang City, he was arrested by pursuing soldiers.

古文：甲子，以右仆射郑覃同平章事。
现代文：甲子，唐文宗任命右仆射郑覃为同平章事。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed his right-hand man, Zheng Yao, as Tongping.

古文：李训素与终南僧宗密善，往投之。
现代文：李训向来和终南山的僧人宗密关系亲近，于是，前往投奔。
English: Li Xun had always been close to the monks in Nanshan, so he went to join them.

古文：宗密欲剃其发而匿之，其徒不可。
现代文：宗密想为李训剃发，装扮成僧人，然后藏在寺院中。
English: Zongmi wanted to shave off Li Xun's hair, dress up as a monk, and then hide in the temple.

古文：训出山，将奔凤翔，为盩厔镇遏使宋楚所擒，械送京师。
现代文：他的徒弟们都认为不妥。李训只好出山，打算前往凤翔投靠郑注，被周至镇遏使宋楚逮捕，戴上脚镣手铐，押送到京城。
English: His disciples all thought it was wrong. Li Xun had no choice but to leave the mountain, intending to go to Fengxiang to support Zhengzhu. He was arrested by Zhou Zhizhen, put on leg irons and handcuffs, and was escorted to Beijing.

古文：至昆明池，训恐至军中更受酷辱，谓送者曰： 得我者则富贵矣！
现代文：走到昆明池，李训恐怕到神策军后被毒打污辱，便对押送他的人说： 无论谁抓住我都能得到重赏而富贵！
English: When he walked to Kunming Pool, Li Xun feared that he would be severely beaten and humiliated after being taken to the Shenshe Army, so he said to the person escorting him: Whoever catches me can get a reward and be rich!

古文：闻禁兵所在搜捕，汝必为所夺，不若取我首送之！ 
现代文：听说禁军到处搜捕，他们肯定会把我夺走。不如把我杀了，拿我的首级送到京城！ 
English: I've heard that the forbidden army is searching everywhere, and they will definitely take me away. It's better to kill me and take my head to the capital!

古文：送者从之，斩其首以来。
现代文：押送他的人表示同意，于是，割下李训的头送往京城。
English: The person escorting him agreed, so he cut off Li Xun's head and sent it to Beijing.

古文：乙丑，以户部侍郎、判度支李石同平章事，仍判度支。
现代文：乙丑，唐文宗任命户部侍郎、判度支李石为同平章事，仍兼判度支。
English: Second, the Tang Dynasty Emperor Wenzong appointed the household attendant and the judge Li Shi to be the same rank, and he was still the judge.

古文：前河东节度使李载义复旧任。
现代文：命前河东节度使李载义官复原职。
English: Before his death, Hedong Jiedu reinstated Li Zaiyi as an official.

古文：左神策出兵三百人，以李训首引王涯、王璠、罗立言、郭行馀；右神策出兵三百人，拥贾餗、舒元舆、李孝本献于庙社，徇于两市。
现代文：左神策军出兵三百人，以李训的首级引导王涯、王、罗立言和郭行余，右神策军出兵三百人，押贾、舒元舆和李孝本，献祭太庙和太社，接着，在东、西两市游街示众，命百官前往观看。
English: Three hundred soldiers from the Left Divine Providence Army led Wang Ya, Wang, Luo Lijian and Guo Xingyu at the head of Li Xun, and three hundred soldiers from the Right Divine Providence Army led Oujia, Shu Yuanwu and Li Xiaobeng to offer sacrifices at the Great Temple and the Great Shrine, and then toured the streets of the east and west cities to show the public, and ordered hundreds of officials to go and watch.

古文：命百官临视，腰斩于独柳之下，枭其首于兴安门外。
现代文：在京城独柳树下把他们腰斩，首级挂在兴安门外示众。
English: They were beheaded under a willow tree in the capital, and their heads were displayed outside the Xing'an Gate.

古文：亲属无问亲疏皆死，孩稚无遗，妻女不死者没为官婢。
现代文：李训等人的亲属不管亲疏老幼，全部被杀。妻子女儿没有死的，没收为官奴婢。
English: The relatives of Li Xun and others, regardless of whether they were relatives or strangers, old or young, were all killed. His wife and daughter, who did not die, were confiscated as official slaves.

古文：百姓观者怨王涯榷茶，或诟詈，或投砾击之。
现代文：观看的百姓都怨恨王涯主持茶叶专卖，有的人大声怒骂，有的人拿瓦块往他身上打。
English: The people watching all resented Wang Ya for presiding over the tea monopoly, some people shouted abuse, some people took tiles and beat him.

古文：臣光曰： 论者皆谓涯、餗有文学名声，初不知训、注之谋，横罹覆族之祸，愤叹其冤。
现代文：臣司马光曰：凡是谈论甘露之变的人都认为，王涯、贾在文学方面享有声誉，他们开始并不知道李训、郑注企图诛除宦官的密谋，但最后却意外地惨遭灭族的灾难。
English: The subject Sima Guang said: Everyone who talks about the change of the nectar believes that Wang Ya and Jia enjoy a reputation in literature. At first, they did not know that Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were plotting to get rid of the eunuch, but in the end, they unexpectedly suffered the disaster of extermination.

古文：臣独以为不然。
现代文：我却不以为然。
English: I don't think so.

古文：夫颠危不扶，焉用彼相！
现代文：作为宰相，当国家出现危机的时候，不能奋起而救危扶难，还要宰相有什么用呢？
English: As the prime minister, when the country is in a crisis, you can't rise up and save the day. What's the use of being the prime minister?

古文：涯、餗安高位，饱重禄；训、注小人，穷奸究险，力取将相。
现代文：王涯、贾安然居于朝廷的崇高职位，领取优厚的俸禄。而李训、郑注都是小人，依靠施展奸邪和阴险的才能，才窃取节度使和宰相职务的。
English: Wang Ya and Jia An held high-ranking positions in the imperial court and received generous salaries, while Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were villains who relied on their ability to commit treachery and insidiousness to steal the posts of the regent and the prime minister.

古文：涯、餗与之比肩，不以为耻；国家危殆，不以为忧。
现代文：王涯、贾和他们一起共事，不以为耻；国家危难，不以为忧；苟且偷安，一天接着一天。
English: Wang Ya and Jia are not ashamed to work with them; they are not worried about the national crisis; they are determined to steal peace, day after day.

古文：偷合苟容，日复一日，自谓得保身之良策，莫我如也。
现代文：自以为获得保护自己的万全良策，没有人能和自己相比。
English: They think they have a foolproof way to protect themselves, that no one can compare to them.

古文：若使人人如此而无祸，则奸臣孰不愿之哉！
现代文：如要百官人人都像他们这样尸位素餐，而不遭受灾祸，那么，奸臣谁不愿意如此呢！
English: If all the officials had to eat like them and not suffer misfortune, then who among the traitors would not be willing to do so?

古文：一旦祸生不虞，足折刑剭，盖天诛之也，士良安能族之哉！
现代文：然而，一旦发生意想不到的灾难，就不免家破人亡。我认为，他们是被上天所诛杀，仇士良怎么能够轻易族灭他们全家呢！
English: However, in the event of an unexpected disaster, it is inevitable that the family will be destroyed. I think that they were killed by heaven, how could the enemy easily destroy their whole family!

古文：王涯有再从弟沐，家于江南，老且贫。
现代文：王涯有一个远房弟弟名叫王沐，家住江南，年老而且贫穷。
English: Wang Ya has a distant younger brother named Wang Mu, who lives in the south of the Yangtze River. He is old and poor.

古文：闻涯为相，跨驴诣之，欲求一簿、尉。
现代文：在这以前，当他听说王涯担任了宰相，于是骑着毛驴来京城求见王涯，想求得主薄或县尉一类的小官。
English: Before that, when he heard that Wang Ya served as prime minister, he rode a donkey to the capital to see Wang Ya, hoping to get a minor official such as chief or county lieutenant.

古文：留长安二岁馀，始得一见，涯待之殊落莫。
现代文：王沐抵达长安后两年多，才见到王涯。王涯对他十分冷落。
English: It took Wang Mu more than two years after arriving in Chang'an to meet Wang Yao. Wang Yao was very cold to him.

古文：久之，沐因嬖奴以道所欲，涯许以微官，自是旦夕造涯之门以俟命；及涯家被收，沐适在其第，与涯俱腰斩。
现代文：过了很久，王沐通过王涯的亲信家奴再次转达了自己的请求，王涯同意授予他一个小官。从此以后，王沐经常到王涯的家中等待消息。等到王涯的家被抄时，他正好在王涯的家中，于是和王涯一起被腰斩。
English: After a long time, Wang Mu relayed his request again through Wang Ya's trusted manservant, and Wang Ya agreed to grant him a minor official. From then on, Wang Mu often went to Wang Ya's home to wait for news. When Wang Ya's home was raided, he happened to be in Wang Ya's home, so he was beheaded together with Wang Ya.

古文：舒元舆有族子守谦，愿而敏，元舆爱之，从元舆者十年，一旦忽以非罪怒之，日加谴责，奴婢亦薄之。
现代文：舒元舆有一个侄子名叫舒守谦，性情既老实而又聪敏，舒元舆十分喜爱。舒守谦跟随舒元舆十年，有一天，忽然被舒元舆无端怪罪，成天受到谴责，舒元舆的奴婢们也鄙薄他。
English: Shu Yuanwu had a nephew named Shu Shouqian, who was honest and intelligent, and whom Shu Yuanwu loved very much. Shu Shouqian had followed Shu Yuanwu for ten years. One day, he was suddenly blamed by Shu Yuanwu without any reason. He was condemned all day long, and the slaves of Shu Yuanwu also despised him.

古文：守谦不自安，求归江南，元舆亦不留，守谦悲叹而去。
现代文：舒守谦内心十分不安，请求回江南。舒元舆也不挽留，舒守谦悲伤感叹离去。
English: Shu Shouqian was very uneasy in his heart and asked to return to the south of the Yangtze River. Shu Yuanwu did not stay, and Shu Shouqian left with a sad sigh.

古文：夕，至昭应，闻元舆收族，守谦独免。
现代文：当天晚上，舒守谦走到昭应县，听到舒元舆被灭族的消息。
English: In the evening of the same day, Shu Shouqian walked to Zhaoying County and heard the news that Shu Yuanmei had been exterminated.

古文：是日，以令狐楚为盐铁转运使，左散骑常侍张仲方权知京兆尹。
现代文：舒元舆全家只有舒守谦一人逃脱。同日，唐文宗任命令狐楚为盐铁转运使，左散骑常侍张仲方暂时代理京兆尹。
English: Only Shu Shouqian of the whole family of Shu Yuanming escaped. On the same day, Tang Wenzong ordered Fox Chu to be the salt and iron transport envoy, and Zhang Zhongfang, the left rider, to be the temporary leader of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：时数日之间，杀生除拜，皆决于两中尉，上不豫知。
现代文：这时，在几天之内，朝廷的大政方针，包括处决罪犯和任免官员，都由左、右神策军护军中尉决定，文宗事前全然不知。
English: At this time, within a few days, the major policies of the imperial court, including the execution of criminals and the appointment and removal of officials, were all decided by the left and right lieutenants of the Divine Providence Army, and Wenzong did not know in advance.

古文：初，王守澄恶官者田全操、刘行深、周元稹、薛士幹、似先义逸、刘英誗等，李训、郑注因之遣分诣盐州、灵武、泾原、夏州、振武、凤翔巡边，命翰林学士顾师邕为诏书赐六道，使杀之。
现代文：当初，王守澄厌恶宦官田全操、刘行深、周元稹、薛士、似先义逸、刘英等人。李训、郑注乘机建议文宗派遣他们分别到盐州、灵武、泾原、夏州、振武、凤翔去巡视边防，同时，命翰林学士顾师邕起草诏书，下令盐州等六道杀掉田全操等六人。
English: At first, Wang Shoucheng disliked the eunuchs Tian Quanqiao, Liu Xingzhen, Zhou Yuanqi, Xue Shi, Nixian Yi Yi Yi, Liu Ying and others. Li Xun and Zheng Zhu took the opportunity to suggest that Wenzong send them to patrol the border defense in Yanzhou, Lingwu, Yuyuan, Xizhou, Zhenwu and Fengxiang, respectively. At the same time, he ordered the scholar Lin Shiqi to draft an edict and ordered Yanzhou and other six provinces to kill six people such as Tian Quanqiao.

古文：会训败，六道得诏，皆废不行。
现代文：这时，恰好李训失败，六道接到诏书后，都未执行。
English: At this time, Li Xun happened to fail, and after receiving the edict, all six provinces did not implement it.

古文：丙寅，以师邕为矫诏，下御史狱。
现代文：丙寅，仇士良等人认为顾师邕伪造诏书，把他逮捕，押到御史台监狱。
English: Hsin Yin, Qiu Shiliang and others believed that Gu Shijun forged the imperial edict, arrested him, and sent him to the Gushidai Prison.

古文：先是，郑注将亲兵五百，已发凤翔，至扶风。
现代文：此前，郑注按照事先和李训的约定，率亲兵五百人已经从凤翔出发，到达扶凤县。
English: Previously, Zheng Zhu, in accordance with the prior agreement with Li Xun, led 500 soldiers from Fengxiang to arrive in Fufeng County.

古文：扶风令韩辽知其谋，不供具，携印及吏卒奔武功。
现代文：扶凤县令韩辽知道他和李训的密谋，因此，不加接待，携带县印和下属胥吏、士卒逃往武功。
English: The governor of Fu Feng County, Han Liao, knew that he and Li Xun were plotting, so he fled to Wugong without being received, carrying the county seal and subordinate officials and soldiers.

古文：注知训已败，复还凤翔。
现代文：这时，郑注得到李训失败的消息，于是，又返回凤翔。
English: At this time, Zheng Zhu got the news of Li Xun's failure, so he returned to Fengxiang.

古文：仇士良等使人赍密敕授凤翔监军张仲清令取注，仲清惶惑，不知所为。
现代文：仇士良等人派人携带文宗的密敕授予凤翔监军张仲清，命令他诛除郑注。张仲清疑惧不知所措。
English: Qiu Shiliang and others sent someone to carry the secret scepter of Wenzong to Fengxiang supervisor Zhang Zhongqing and ordered him to remove Zhengzhu. Zhang Zhongqing was at a loss.

古文：押牙李叔说仲清曰： 叔和为公以好召注，屏其从兵，于坐取之，事立定矣！ 
现代文：押牙李叔和劝张仲清说： 我以您的名义用好言好语召来郑注，然后设计退下他的亲兵，在坐席把他杀死，叛乱即刻就可平定！ 
English: Uncle Li and Zhang Zhongqing said, "In your name, I use kind words to call Zheng Zhu, and then I plan to withdraw his own soldiers and kill him at the table. The rebellion can be quelled immediately!"

古文：仲清从之，伏甲以待注。
现代文：张仲清同意，于是，设下伏兵等待郑注。
English: Zhang Zhongqing agreed, so he set up an ambush and waited for Zheng Zhu.

古文：注恃其兵卫，遂诣仲清。
现代文：郑注依恃他的亲兵，因而也不怀疑，径直进入凤翔城来见张仲清。
English: Zheng Zhun leaned on his soldiers, and therefore did not doubt, went straight into Fengxiang City to see Zhang Zhongqing.

古文：叔和稍引其从兵，享之于外，注独与数人入。
现代文：李叔和把郑注的亲兵引到门外予以款待，只有郑注和几个随从进入监军使院。
English: Li Shuhe led Zheng Zhu's soldiers out of the gate to entertain them, and only Zheng Zhu and a few attendants entered the military commissariat.

古文：既啜茶，叔和抽刀斩注，因闭外门，悉诛其亲兵。
现代文：郑注刚刚喝完茶，被李叔和抽刀斩首。随即关闭外门，全部诛杀郑注的亲兵。
English: Zheng Zhu had just finished drinking tea when he was beheaded by Li Shuhe with a sword. He then closed the outer gate and killed all of Zheng Zhu's soldiers.

古文：乃出密赦，宣示将士，遂灭注家，并杀副使钱可复、节度判官卢简能、观察判官萧杰、掌书记卢弘茂等及其枝党，死者千馀人。
现代文：于是，张仲清出示文宗的密敕，向将士宣布。接着，杀死郑注的家眷，以及节度副使钱可复、节度判官卢简能、观察判官萧杰、掌书记卢弘茂等人和他们的同党，总共一千多人。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhongqing showed the secret plan of Wenzong and announced it to the soldiers. Next, he killed the family members of Zheng Zhu, as well as the deputy of the festival, Qian Kofu, the festival judge Lu Jianneng, the observation judge Xiao Jie, the secretary Lu Hongmao and others and their party members, a total of more than one thousand people.

古文：可复，徽之子；简能，纶之子；亻桀，俛之弟也。
现代文：钱可复是钱徽的儿子；卢简能是卢纶的儿子；萧杰是萧的弟弟。
English: Qian Canfu is Qian Hui's son; Lu Jian Neng is Lu Yao's son; Xiao Jie is Xiao's younger brother.

古文：朝廷未知注死，丁卯，诏削夺注官爵，令邻道案兵观变。
现代文：这时，朝廷还不知道郑注已经被杀，丁卯，文宗下诏，免去郑注的职务和爵位，命令与凤翔邻近的藩镇按兵不动，观察凤翔城中的动静。
English: At this time, the imperial court did not know that Zhengzhu had been killed. Ding Wu and Wenzong issued an edict, exempting Zhengzhu from his post and peerage, and ordered the towns neighboring Fengxiang to keep their soldiers still and observe the movement in Fengxiang.

古文：以左神策大将军陈君弈为凤翔节度使。
现代文：同时，任命左神策大将军陈君奕为凤翔节度使。
English: At the same time, Chen Junyi, General of the Left Divine Policy, was appointed as Fengxiang's delegate to the festival.

古文：戊辰夜，张仲清遣李叔和等以注首入献，枭于兴安门，人情稍安，京师诸军始各还营。
现代文：戊辰夜晚，张仲清派李叔和等人前往京城献上郑注的首级，朝廷命挂在兴安门上示众。于是，京城的人心逐渐安定，禁军诸军开始各回军营。
English: On the evening of the 1st day of the 1st month, Zhang Zhongqing sent Li Shuhe and others to the capital to present the head of Zheng Zhu, and the imperial command was hung on the Xing'an Gate for the public to see. As a result, the people's hearts in the capital gradually stabilized, and the imperial troops began to return to their barracks.

古文：诏将士讨贼有功及娖队者，官爵赐赉各有差。
现代文：唐文宗下诏，凡讨伐贼党有功的禁军将士以及追捕逃亡贼党有功者，各根据功劳大小授予官爵和赏赐财物。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang issued an edict that all the soldiers of the Forbidden Army who had distinguished themselves in the fight against the Kuomintang and those who had distinguished themselves in the pursuit of the fugitive Kuomintang would each be awarded a title of nobility and a reward of property according to the size of their service.

古文：右神策军获韩约于崇义坊，己巳，斩之。
现代文：右神策军在崇义坊抓获韩约，己巳，把他斩首。
English: The Right Divine Providence Army captured Han You at Sooyibo, seized him, and beheaded him.

古文：仇士良等各进阶迁官有差。
现代文：文宗又下令，仇士良等有功的宦官，各根据功劳大小迁升阶品和职位。
English: Emperor Wenzong also ordered that meritorious eunuchs such as Qiu Shiliang should be promoted according to their merits.

古文：自是天下事皆决于北司，宰相行文书而已。
现代文：从此以后，凡朝政大事都由北司的宦官决定，宰相仅仅奉命下达文书而已。
English: From then on, all important matters of state were decided by the eunuchs of the Northern Division, and the prime minister was merely ordered to issue a document.

古文：宦官气益盛，迫胁天子，下视宰相，陵暴朝士如草芥。
现代文：宦官的气焰更加嚣张，逼迫威胁皇上，鄙视宰相，凌辱百官如同草芥。
English: The eunuchs became even more arrogant, threatening the emperor with persecution, despising the prime minister, and insulting all the officials.

古文：每延英议事，士良等动引训、注折宰相。
现代文：每逢延英殿商议朝政，仇士良等人动不动就拿李训、郑注谋反的事折辱宰相。
English: Whenever the court of Yan Ying-den deliberated on the government of the dynasty, Qiu Shiliang and others would always take Li Xun and Zheng Zhizhu's plotting to rebel as an opportunity to insult the prime minister.

古文：郑覃、李石曰： 训、注诚为乱首，但不知训、注始因何人得进？ 
现代文：郑覃、李石说： 李训、郑注的确是谋反的为首者，但究竟他们是由谁推荐提拔的呢？ 
English: Zheng Qi and Li Shi said: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu are indeed the ringleaders of the rebellion, but who recommended their promotion?

古文：宦者稍屈，缙绅赖之。
现代文：宦官理屈词穷，嚣张气焰逐渐有所收敛。
English: The eunuchs' logic and rhetoric are poor, and their arrogance is gradually abating.

古文：时中书惟有空垣破屋，百物皆阙。
现代文：百官由此都倚敕郑覃和李石。这时，政事堂只有空房破屋，办公用具荡然无存。
English: As a result, all the officials relied on Zheng Rong and Li Shi. At this time, the government building was nothing but an empty, broken building, and all the office equipment was gone.

古文：江西、湖南献衣粮百二十分，充宰相召募从人。
现代文：江西、湖南两道奉献一百二十个人的衣粮，让宰相招募随从警卫。
English: Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province will donate food and clothing for 120 people, and the prime minister will recruit guards to accompany them.

古文：辛未，李石上言： 宰相若忠正无邪，神灵所祐，纵遇盗贼，亦不能伤。
现代文：辛未，李石上言说： 如果宰相忠正无邪，那么，神灵就会保佑他们的安全，即使遇到盗贼，也不可能受到伤害。
English: Xinwei, Li Shi said: If the prime minister is loyal and innocent, then the gods will bless their safety, even if they encounter thieves, they cannot be harmed.

古文：若内怀奸罔，虽兵卫甚设，鬼得而诛之。
现代文：但如果宰相心术不正，即使警卫严密，也会被鬼神诛杀。
English: But if the prime minister's mind is not right, even if the security is tight, he will be killed by ghosts and gods.

古文：臣愿竭赤心以报国，止循故事，以金吾卒导从足矣。
现代文：我愿意竭尽忠心报效国家，因此，请求按照过去的惯例，由金吾士卒作为导从也就足够了。
English: I am willing to do my best to serve the country loyally, so it is enough to ask for the guidance of King Woshu in accordance with past practice.

古文：其两道所献衣粮，并乞停寝。 
现代文：对于江西和湖南两道奉献的衣粮，请求停罢退回。 
English: For the clothing and grain donated by Jiangxi and Hunan provinces, please stop and return.

古文：从之。
现代文：文宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二月，壬申朔，顾师邕流儋州，至商山，赐死。
现代文：十二月，壬申朔，文宗下令，把翰林学士顾师邕流放到儋州。师邕走到商州，被赐其自尽。
English: In December of the same year, Emperor Wenzong ordered Hanlin Scholar Gu Shizhen to be exiled to Zhangzhou. Shizhen went to Shangzhou and was allowed to commit suicide.

古文：榷茶使令狐楚奏罢榷茶，从之。
现代文：榷茶使令狐楚奏请停罢茶叶专卖，文宗批准。
English: Please stop the tea monopoly, approved by the Emperor.

古文：度支奏籍郑注家赀，得绢百馀万匹，他物称是。
现代文：度支上奏，没收郑注的家产，总共得到绢一百万匹，其它财物还有许多。
English: Zheng Zhu's family property was confiscated, and a total of one million yakitori was confiscated, along with many other belongings.

古文：庚辰，上问宰相： 坊市安未？ 
现代文：庚辰，唐文宗问宰相： 京城街坊和集市安定了没有？ 
English: Geng Chen, Tang Wenzong asked the Prime Minister: Are the streets and markets in Beijing stable?

古文：李石对曰： 渐安。
现代文：李石回答说： 逐渐安定了。
English: Li Shishi replied, "It has gradually stabilized."

古文：然比日寒冽特甚，盖刑杀太过所致。 
现代文：不过，近日天气特别寒冷，恐怕是杀人太多的缘故。 
English: However, the weather has been particularly cold recently, probably due to too many murders.

古文：郑覃曰： 罪人周亲前已皆死，其馀殆不足问。 
现代文：郑覃说： 犯人的直系亲属都已被杀，其余恐怕不值得再问罪了。 
English: Zheng Wei said: The immediate relatives of the criminal have all been killed, and the rest are probably not worthy of further questioning.

古文：时宦官深怨李训等，凡与之有瓜葛亲，或暂蒙奖引者，诛贬不已，故二相言之。
现代文：这时，由于宦官十分痛恨李训等人，凡是和李训稍有关系的亲友，或者一时被他们所推荐提拔过的人，仍不断地被诛杀贬逐。所以，两位宰相向文宗言及此事。
English: At this time, because the eunuchs hated Li Xun and others very much, all relatives and friends who had a slight relationship with Li Xun, or who had been recommended and promoted by them for a while, were still constantly killed and expelled. Therefore, the two prime ministers mentioned the matter to Wenzong.

古文：李训、郑注既诛，召六道巡边使。
现代文：李训、郑注被杀以后，朝廷下令召回盐州等六道的巡边使。
English: After Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were killed, the imperial court ordered the recall of the patrol envoys of six provinces, including Yanzhou.

古文：田全操追忿训、注之谋，在道杨言： 我入城，凡儒服者，无贵贱当尽杀之！ 
现代文：田全操追究李训、郑注企图诛杀自己的阴谋，在回京途中扬言说： 等我到京城后，凡是看到穿读书人衣服的，不管贵贱，都全部杀死！ 
English: On his way back to Beijing, he threatened: "When I get to Beijing, I will kill everyone I see wearing scholar's clothes, no matter how high or low they are!"

古文：癸未，全操等乘驿疾驱入金光门，京城讹言有寇至，士民惊噪纵横走，尘埃四起。
现代文：癸未，全操等人乘驿马急速驰入京城西北的金光门。京城有谣言说盗贼攻进城中，官吏和百姓惊扰喧哗，到处奔逃，尘埃四起。
English: A short time later, Zeng Fu and others rode their horses at high speed into the Golden Gate in the northwest of Beijing. There were rumors in Beijing that thieves had invaded the city. Officials and citizens were alarmed by the noise and fled in all directions. Dust was flying everywhere.

古文：两省诸司官闻之，皆奔散，有不及束带袜而乘马者。
现代文：中书、门下两省各司的官员听到谣言后，也都四散奔逃，有人甚至在乘马逃跑时都来不及系上带袜。
English: After hearing the rumor, officials from various departments of the People's Republic of China and the two provinces also scattered and fled. Some even ran away on horseback before they had time to tie their socks.

古文：郑覃、李石在中书，顾吏卒稍稍逃去。覃谓石曰： 耳目颇异，宜且出避之！ 
现代文：这时，郑覃和李石正在政事堂办公，看到手下的官吏和士卒渐渐逃去，郑覃对李石说： 现在很乱，人心难测，最好暂且出去躲避一会儿！ 
English: At this time, Zheng Rong and Li Shih were working in the government office. Seeing the officials and soldiers under their command gradually fleeing, Zheng Rong said to Li Shih: It's very chaotic now, people's minds are unpredictable, it's best to go out and hide for a while!

古文：石曰： 宰相位尊望重，人心所属，不可轻也！
现代文：李石说： 宰相的职位崇高，责任重大，一举一动，都为天下人所瞩目，不可轻动！
English: Li Shishi said: The position of the prime minister is lofty, the responsibility is great, and every move attracts the attention of the world. Do not move lightly!

古文：今事虚实未可知，坚坐镇之，庶几可定。
现代文：现在，事情的虚实还不知道，如果静坐而镇守于此，也许很快可以安定。
English: Right now, we don't know the truth of the matter, but if we meditate and stay calm, we may soon be able to stabilize the situation.

古文：若宰相亦走，则中外乱矣。
现代文：相反，如果宰相也跟着逃走，那么，朝廷内外就会大乱。
English: On the other hand, if the prime minister also ran away, there would be chaos both inside and outside the court.

古文：且果有祸乱，避亦不免！ 
现代文：况且真的发生灾祸，就是逃避也难免受害！ 
English: Moreover, if a disaster really happens, even if you escape, you will inevitably be harmed!

古文：覃然之。
现代文：郑覃表示同意。
English: Zheng Yao agreed.

古文：石坐视文案，沛然自若。
现代文：李石继续坐在那里审阅公文，神情自若。
English: Li Shih continued to sit there, reading the official documents with an air of self-confidence.

古文：敕使相继传呼： 闭皇城诸司门！ 
现代文：这时，朝廷的敕使不断传达命令说： 请关皇城诸司门！ 
English: At this time, the imperial envoy kept sending orders saying: Please close all the gates of the imperial city!

古文：左金吾大将军陈君赏帅其众立望仙门下，谓敕使曰： 贼至，闭门未晚，请徐观其变，不宜示弱！ 
现代文：左金吾大将军陈君赏率领士卒站在大明宫南面的望仙门下，对敕使说： 如果盗贼来临，关门也不晚。请求先慢慢地观察情况的变化，不要现在马上关门，对盗贼表示出朝廷的软弱！ 
English: General of the Left Kingu, Chen Jun, standing at the foot of the Wangxian Gate on the south side of the Daming Palace, said to the envoy: "If the thieves come, it's not too late to close the door. Please slowly observe the changes in the situation, don't close the door right now, it shows the weakness of the imperial court to the thieves!"

古文：至晡后乃定。
现代文：结果，一直到黄昏时，京城才安定下来。
English: As a result, the capital did not settle down until dusk.

古文：是日，坊市恶少年皆衣绯皁，持弓刀北望，见皇城门闭，即欲剽掠，非石与君赏镇之，京城几再乱矣。
现代文：当天，街坊和集市中的恶少年都穿着大红色和黑色的衣服，手拿弓箭、刀枪向北眺望，一旦皇城门关闭，就要开始剽掠。如果不是李石和陈君赏镇定自若，京城几乎再次大乱。
English: On that day, the evil boys in the neighborhoods and markets were all dressed in bright red and black clothes, looking north with bows and arrows, knives and guns. As soon as the imperial gate was closed, they would start looting. If Li Shi and Chen Jun were not calm and self-possessed, Beijing would almost be in chaos again.

古文：时两省官应入直者，皆与其家人辞诀。
现代文：当时中书、门下两省值班的官员，都认为不可能再回来了，离开家时和亲属诀别。
English: At that time, the officials on duty in Zhongshu and the two provinces under his supervision all believed that it was impossible to return, and they said goodbye to their relatives when they left home.

古文：甲申，敕罢修曲江亭馆。
现代文：甲申，文宗下敕，罢修曲江的亭榭楼馆。
English: Jiaxun, Wenzong, Jiaxuan, and Qujiang's pavilions and mansions.

古文：丁亥，诏： 逆人亲党，自非前已就戮及指名收捕者，馀一切不问。
现代文：丁亥，文宗下诏： 凡李训等叛逆人的亲属党羽，除此前已经被杀和朝廷指名逮捕的，其余一概不予追究。
English: Dinghai, Wenzong issued the following edict: All the relatives and followers of Li Xun and other traitors, except those who had been killed and arrested by the imperial court, would not be investigated.

古文：诸司官吏虽为所胁从，涉于诖误，皆赦之。
现代文：南衙各司的官员，虽然被迫跟随了李训遭受牵连，一律予以赦免。
English: The officials of the various departments of the Southern Wei, although they were forced to follow Li Xun and were implicated, were all pardoned.

古文：他人毋得妄相告言及相恐惕。
现代文：其他人不得再进行揭发控告，或者加以恐吓。
English: Others may no longer expose, accuse, or intimidate.

古文：见亡匿者，勿复追捕，三日内各听自归本司。 
现代文：已经逃亡躲藏的官员，不再追寻逮捕，必须在三天内各回本司。 
English: Officials who have fled and gone into hiding, and no longer seek arrest, must return to this division within three days.

古文：时禁军暴横，京兆尹张仲方不敢诘，宰相以其不胜任，出为华州刺史，以司农卿薛元赏代之。
现代文：这时，禁军暴虐骄横，无视法律。京兆尹张仲方不敢依法查办，宰相鉴于他不称职，任命他出任华州刺史，以司农卿薛元赏代任。
English: At this time, the Forbidden Army was tyrannical and arrogant, ignoring the law. Jing Zhao Yin Zhang Zhongfang did not dare to investigate according to the law. In view of his incompetence, the prime minister appointed him to serve as the governor of Huazhou, and replaced him with the secretary of agriculture, Xue Yuanbo.

古文：元赏常诣李石第，闻石方坐听事与一人争辩甚喧，元赏使觇之，云有神策军将诉事。
现代文：一次，薛元赏到李石的家中，听到李石正坐在厅中和一人大声争论。薛元赏派人窥测，报告说有一个神策军将正向李石上诉事情。
English: Once, Xue Yuan Rong went to Li Shi's home and heard Li Shi was sitting in the hall and arguing loudly with someone. Xue Yuan Rong sent someone to spy on the situation and reported that a military strategist was appealing to Li Shi.

古文：元赏趋入，责石曰： 相公辅佐天子，纪纲四海。今近不能制一军将，使无礼如此，何以镇服四夷！ 
现代文：薛元赏急忙走到厅中，责备李石说： 您作为宰相辅佐皇上，治理天下，但现在却不能在眼前制服一个军将，使他对您这样无礼，那么，还凭什么去镇服周边的夷戎族呢！ 
English: Xue Yuan Rong hurried to the hall and scolded Li Shizhong, saying, "You, as the prime minister and assistant to the emperor, rule the world, but now you can't subdue a general in front of your eyes, making him so rude to you, so why should you subdue the surrounding Yi Rong people!

古文：即趋出上马，命左右擒军将，俟于下马桥，元赏至，则已解衣跽之矣。
现代文：随即又匆匆出来上马，命左右侍从擒拿军将，到下马桥待命。等到薛元赏来到时，军将已被解掉衣服，跪在那里。
English: He then hurriedly got back on his horse and ordered his attendants to take the general off the horse and wait for him at the foot of the bridge. By the time Xue Yuan Rong arrived, the general had already undressed and was kneeling there.

古文：其党诉于仇士良，士良遣宦者召之曰： 中尉屈大尹。 
现代文：军将的同党向仇士良报告，仇士良派宦官召薛元赏，说： 中尉叫你屈驾前去。 
English: The general's comrades-in-arms reported to Qiu Shiliang, and Qiu Shiliang sent a eunuch to summon Xue Yuan Rong, saying: "The lieutenant told you to bow down and go forward.

古文：元赏曰： 属有公事，行当继至。 
现代文：薛元赏说： 我这里正有公事，等办完后马上就去。 
English: Xue Yuanbo said, "I'm here on business, and I'll go as soon as I'm finished.

古文：遂杖杀之。
现代文：于是，把军将用刑杖打死。
English: As a result, the commander was beaten to death with a cane.

古文：乃白服见士良，士良曰： 痴书生何敢杖杀禁军大将！ 
现代文：接着，穿上待罪的白衣，去见仇士良。仇士良说： 你这个傻书生，怎么敢仗杀禁军的大将！ 
English: Next, he put on the white robe of a criminal and went to see Qiu Shiliang. Qiu Shiliang said: You stupid scholar, how dare you fight and kill the general of the forbidden army!

古文：元赏曰： 中尉大臣也，宰相亦大臣也，宰相之人若无礼于中尉，如之何？
现代文：薛元赏回答说： 中尉是大臣，宰相也是大臣。如果宰相的部下对您无礼，该怎么惩处呢？
English: Xue Yuan Rong replied: The lieutenant is a minister, and the prime minister is also a minister. If the prime minister's subordinates are rude to you, how should you punish them?

古文：中尉之人无礼于宰相，庸可恕乎！
现代文：您的部下对宰相无礼，难道可以宽恕吗？
English: Your subordinates were rude to the Prime Minister, is that forgivable?

古文：中尉与国同体，当为国惜法，元赏已囚服而来，惟中尉死生之！ 
现代文：您和朝廷的关系，如同手足一体，应当珍惜朝廷的法律。现在，我已经穿着罪犯的囚衣而来，是死是生，由您决定！ 
English: Your relationship with the imperial court is like that of a brother and a sister, and you should cherish the laws of the imperial court. Now, I have come wearing the prison clothes of a criminal. Whether I live or die is up to you to decide!

古文：士良知军将已死，无可如何，乃呼酒与元赏欢饮而罢。
现代文：仇士良得知军将已死，也无可奈何，于是，叫人端酒，和薛元赏一起高高兴兴地对饮，然后作罢。
English: When Qiu Shiliang learned that the general was dead, there was nothing he could do, so he asked someone to bring him some wine. He and Xue Yuan Rong happily drank it together, and then they parted ways.

古文：初，武元衡之死，诏出内库弓矢、陌刀给金吾仗，使卫从宰相，至建福门而退。
现代文：当初，宰相武元衡被刺客暗杀后，唐宪宗下诏，命从内库调出弓箭、长刀给金吾兵，护送宰相上朝，到建福门而退。
English: At first, after the assassination of the Prime Minister, Takemotohei, by the Assassins, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, ordering that bows and arrows and long swords be transferred from the treasury to the Jin soldiers, who escorted the Prime Minister to Shang Dynasty and retreated to Jianfu Gate.

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝中开成元年
现代文：李训等人被杀后，全部停罢。开成元年
English: After Li Xun and others were killed, everything stopped.

古文：春，正月，辛丑朔，上御宣政殿，赦天下，改元。
现代文：春季正月，辛丑朔，唐文宗御临宣政殿，大赦天下，改年号为开成。
English: In the first month of spring, the Tang Dynasty Emperor Xuan Zheng of the Tang Dynasty Wenzong was enthroned in the Great Hall of the People, and the year name was changed to Kaicheng.

古文：仇士良请以神策仗卫殿门，谏议大夫冯定言其不可，乃止。
现代文：仇士良请求调神策军代替金吾兵护卫殿门，谏议大夫冯定上言，认为不妥，于是才作罢。
English: Qiu Shiliang requested that the Divine Providence Army be transferred to guard the palace gate in place of the King's soldiers, and Dr. Feng Ding's suggestion was considered inappropriate, so it was abandoned.

古文：定，宿之弟也。
现代文：冯定是冯宿的弟弟。
English: Feng Ding is the younger brother of Feng Shuang.

古文：二月，癸未，上与宰相语，患四方表奏华而不典，李石对曰： 古人因事为文，今人以文害事。 
现代文：二月，癸未，唐文宗和宰相商议朝政时，对百官和藩镇给朝廷的上奏文字华而不实表示担忧，李石回答说： 古人写文章时，总是根据事情的不同情况来决定文章的体裁和用语，现在的人则只顾语言华丽，不惜妨碍对事实的表述。 
English: In February, when Tang Wenzong and the prime minister were discussing the policy of the dynasty, they expressed concern about the gaudy and insincere words of hundreds of officials and towns to the imperial court. Li Shi replied: When the ancients wrote articles, they always decided the genre and language of the article according to the different circumstances of the matter. Nowadays, people only care about the gorgeous language and do not hesitate to hinder the expression of the facts.

古文：昭义节度使刘从谏上表请王涯等罪名，且言： 涯等儒生，荷国荣庞，咸欲保身全族，安肯构逆！
现代文：昭义节度使刘从谏上表朝廷，请问宰相王涯等人被杀的罪名，说： 王涯等人都是读书人出身，享受国家的荣华恩宠，谁不愿意保全自己的身家性命，怎么能够谋反呢！
English: The Shouyi Festival made Liu Zongcheng appear before the imperial court, and he asked the prime minister Wang Ya and others about the crime of being killed, saying: Wang Ya and others are from a reading background and enjoy the grace of the country. Who does not want to protect his own life, how can he rebel?

古文：训等实欲讨除内臣，两中尉自为救死之谋，遂致相杀，诬以反逆，诚恐非辜。
现代文：李训等人实际上是想诛讨宦官，左、右神策军护军中尉是为自身性命考虑，因而把他们杀掉。但是，却诬陷说他们要谋反。我认为，他们实在都是无辜的。
English: Li Xun and the others actually wanted to persecute the eunuchs, but Lieutenants of the Left and Right Divisions of the Divine Protection Army killed them because they were concerned about their own lives. However, they were framed and accused of plotting a rebellion. I think they are all innocent.

古文：设右宰相实有异图，当委之有司，正其刑典，岂有内臣擅领甲兵，恣行剽劫，延及士庶，横被杀伤！
现代文：假如宰相真是想谋反，那也应当交给御史台等有关部门，根据国家法律治罪。怎么能够由宦官擅自率领兵马，恣意剽掠杀戮，以致士大夫和百姓都遭到伤亡！
English: If the prime minister really wanted to plot a rebellion, it should also be handed over to the relevant departments such as the Imperial Historical Records Office, and punished according to national laws. How can eunuchs lead soldiers and horses without authorization, arbitrarily plunder and kill, so that both officers and people are injured and killed!

古文：流血千门，僵尸万计，搜罗枝蔓，中外恫疑。
现代文：宫门附近流血遍地，尸体达万人之多。接着，又以搜捕同党为名，牵连亲朋好友。朝廷内外，人人自危。
English: There was bloodshed all over the place near the palace gate, with as many as ten thousand bodies. Then, in the name of a search for party members, relatives and friends were implicated. Both inside and outside the court, everyone was at risk.

古文：臣欲身诣阙庭，面陈臧否，恐并陷孥戮，事亦无成。
现代文：我本想前往京城，向陛下当面陈述我对朝政得失的看法，但又恐怕连我也被诬陷杀害，以致于事无成。
English: I had intended to go to the capital to present my views on the merits and demerits of the imperial government to His Majesty in person, but I am afraid that even I was framed and killed, so that nothing was accomplished.

古文：谨当修饰封疆，训练士卒，内为陛下心腹，外为陛下籓垣。
现代文：因此，我想最好还是恪守自己的职位，训练士卒，在朝廷内部，充当陛下的心腹，在朝廷外部，则充当捍卫陛下的疆吏。
English: Therefore, I think it's best to stick to my position, to train soldiers, to act as His Majesty's confidant inside the court, and to act as a border guard to protect His Majesty outside the court.

古文：如奸臣难制，誓以死清君侧！ 
现代文：如果朝廷中的奸臣确实骄横难以控制的话，我向陛下保证，誓死出兵以清君侧！ 
English: If the treacherous vassals in the imperial court are indeed arrogant and difficult to control, I assure Your Majesty that I will fight to the death to clear your side!

古文：丙申，加从谏检校司徒。
现代文：丙申，唐文宗任命刘从谏为检校司徒。
English: According to Yi Shen, Tang Wenzong appointed Liu Conglu as the inspector of the school.

古文：天德军奏吐谷浑三千帐诣丰州降。
现代文：天德军奏报：吐谷浑族三千帐人马来丰州投降。
English: Tian Dejun Sono Bao: Three thousand members of the Hun ethnic group in Tugu surrendered in Malay Pengzhou.

古文：三月，壬寅，以袁州长史李德裕为氵除州刺史。
现代文：三月，壬寅，唐文宗任命袁州长史李德裕为滁州刺史。
English: In March, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Yuan governor Shi Li Deyu as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：左仆射令狐楚从容奏： 王涯等既伏辜，其家夷灭，遗骸弃捐。
现代文：左仆射令狐楚从容不迫地上奏说： 王涯等人既然已经被杀，他们的家眷也都被诛连灭绝，遗体丢弃在野外。
English: Zuo Shuai ordered Xuchu to calmly play on the ground and said: Since Wang Ya and others have been killed, their families have also been exterminated, and their remains have been discarded in the wild.

古文：请官为收瘗，以顺阳和之气。 
现代文：我请求朝廷派人予以埋葬，以便顺和春天温暖的气候。 
English: I asked the Imperial Court to send someone to bury it, so that the warm spring weather would be pleasant.

古文：上惨然久之，命京兆收葬涯等十一人于城西，各赐衣一袭。
现代文：文宗听后，不免悲伤很久，命京兆府派人收集王涯等十一个人的尸体，埋葬在京城的西郊，同时，每人各赐予葬服一套。
English: After listening to Wenzong, he was sad for a long time. He ordered the Beijing Municipal Government to send someone to collect the bodies of eleven people, including Wang Ya, and bury them in the western suburbs of Beijing. At the same time, each person was given a set of funeral clothes.

古文：仇士良潜使人发之，弃骨于渭水。
现代文：随后，仇士良秘密地派人发掘王涯等十一人的坟墓，把他们的尸骨都丢到渭河里。
English: Subsequently, Qiu Shiliang secretly sent someone to excavate the graves of Wang Ya and the other eleven people, and threw their bones into the Minhe River.

古文：丁未，皇城留守郭皎奏： 诸司仪仗有锋刃者，请皆输军器使，遇立仗别给仪刀！ 
现代文：丁未，皇城留守郭皎上奏说： 南衙各司的仪仗队中，如果有锋利的刀枪，请求一律上交军器库使。以后，凡是仪仗队在列队的时候，另外给予用木头做成的仪刀！ 
English: Ding Wei, the imperial city left guard of Guojun, said: If there are sharp knives and guns in the guard of honor of each division of Nanlu, request that they all be handed over to the military arsenal. Later, whenever the guard of honor is in the procession, they will also be given knives made of wood!

古文：从之。刘从谏复遣牙将焦楚长上表让官，称：臣之所陈，系国大体。
现代文：上表说： 我在这以前上奏朝廷的意见，都是关系到国家前途命运的大事。
English: The above table said: The opinions of the Imperial Court that I have reported before this are all important matters that are related to the future and fate of the country.

古文：可听则涯等宜蒙湔洗，不可听则赏典不宜妄加！
现代文：如果朝廷采纳，那么，就应当为王涯等人平反昭雪；如果不予采纳，那么，也不应当随便给我升迁。
English: If the imperial court accepts it, then it should be vindicated for Wang Ya and others; if it is not accepted, then it should not be promoted arbitrarily.

古文：安有死冤不申而生者荷禄！ 
现代文：现在，怎么能不去为王涯等含冤而死的官员申冤平反，反而为我们这些活着的人升官加赏呢？ 
English: Now, how can we not seek redress for Wang Ya and other officials who died unjustly, but instead reward those of us who are still alive with promotion?

古文：因暴扬仇士良等罪恶。
现代文：于是，他大肆抨击仇士良等人的罪恶。
English: As a result, he lashed out at the evils of Qiu Shiliang and others.

古文：辛酉，上召见楚长，慰谕遣之。
现代文：辛酉，文宗召见焦楚长，好言安抚，然后命他返回。
English: Sin Yan, Wenzong summoned Jiao Chulang, spoke kindly to him, and then ordered him to return.

古文：时士良等恣横，朝臣日忧破家。
现代文：这时，仇士良等人骄横跋扈，百官人人自危，每天都担心会家破人亡。
English: At this time, Qiu Shiliang and others were arrogant and arrogant, and all the officials were in danger of their own lives. They were worried every day that their families would be destroyed.

古文：及从谏表至，士良等惮之。
现代文：等到刘从谏的上奏送达朝廷后，仇士良等人畏惧。
English: After Liu Conglu's report was delivered to the imperial court, Qiu Shiliang and others were afraid.

古文：由是郑覃、李石粗能秉政，天子倚之亦差以自强。
现代文：由此宰相郑覃、李石开始能够主持朝政，文宗也倚赖从刘从谏而得以自强。
English: As a result, the prime ministers Zheng Rong and Li Shih were able to preside over the imperial government, and Emperor Wenzong was able to strengthen himself by relying on Liu Congkun.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，以潮州司户李宗闵为衡州司马。
现代文：夏季，四月，己卯，唐文宗任命潮州司户李宗闵为衡州司马。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Zongya, the steward of Chaozhou, as the steward of Hengzhou.

古文：凡李训所指为李德裕、宗闵党者，稍收复之。
现代文：凡是当初李训指斥为李德裕、李宗闵同党的官员，逐渐迁升复职。
English: All the officials who were initially criticized by Li Xun as being from the same party as Li Deyu and Li Zongyao were gradually promoted and reinstated.

古文：淄王协薨。
现代文：淄王李协去世。
English: Gong Wang Lixie passed away.

古文：甲午，以山南西道节度使李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事，以左仆射令狐楚代之。
现代文：甲午，唐文宗任命山南西道节度使李固言为门下侍郎、同平章事，任命左仆射令狐楚为山南西道节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Guyan as his attendant and Tongping as the delegate to the Shannan West Road Festival, and appointed his left-hand man, Xiling Xuchu, as the delegate to the Shannan West Road Festival.

古文：戊戌，上与宰相从容论诗之工拙，郑覃曰： 诗之工者，无若三百篇，皆国人作之以刺美时政，王者采之以观风俗耳，不闻王者为诗也。
现代文：戊戌，唐文宗和宰相一起从容不迫地谈论历代诗作的优劣，郑覃说： 历代的优秀诗作，没有能够和《诗经》相媲美的。《诗经》三百篇，都是当时的国人讽刺或赞美朝政得失的作品。君主派人把这些诗篇收集起来，以便了解民间的风俗和对朝政的意见，君主自己并不写诗。
English: Wuzhen, Tang Wenzong and the prime minister talked about the merits and demerits of the poems of the past generations together. Zheng Wei said: There are no excellent poems in the past that can be compared with the "Book of Songs." The 300 poems in the "Book of Songs" were all works of the people of the time, satirizing or praising the gains and losses of the government. The monarch sent people to collect these poems in order to understand the folk customs and opinions on the government of the dynasty. The monarch himself did not write poems.

古文：后代辞人之诗，华而不实，无补于事。
现代文：《诗经》以后诗人的作品，大都华而不实，对改善朝政无所助益。
English: The works of poets after the "Book of Songs" were mostly flashy and insubstantial, and did nothing to improve imperial politics.

古文：陈后主、隋炀帝皆工于诗，不免亡国，陛下何取焉！ 
现代文：陈后主、隋炀帝都擅长作诗，却不免亡国。对于他们，陛下有什么值得效法的呢！ 
English: Empress Chen and Emperor Sui are both good at writing poetry, but they are doomed to fail. For them, what is worth emulating, Your Majesty?

古文：覃笃于经术，上甚重之。
现代文：郑覃精通经学，文宗十分器重他。
English: Zheng Qi was well versed in the study of classics, and literature was very important to him.

古文：己酉，上御紫宸殿，宰相因奏事拜谢，外间因讹言： 天子欲令宰相掌禁兵，已拜恩矣。 
现代文：己酉，唐文宗御临紫宸殿。宰相上奏朝政后下拜辞谢，于是，宫外有人乘机造谣，说： 皇上要下令由宰相统辖禁军，宰相已向皇上下拜谢恩了。 
English: After the enthronement of the Tang Emperor, Emperor Wenzong came to Shijiazhuang Palace. The prime minister bowed to the emperor and thanked him. As a result, some people outside the palace took the opportunity to spread rumors, saying, "The emperor wants to order the prime minister to take control of the imperial army. The prime minister has bowed to the emperor and thanked him."

古文：由是中外复有猜阻，人情恟恟，士民不敢解衣寝者数日。
现代文：由此朝廷内外又相互出现猜忌，人心喧扰不安，士大夫和百姓好几天都不敢脱衣而睡。
English: As a result, there was mutual suspicion both inside and outside the imperial court, people were disturbed and uneasy, and scholars and commoners did not dare to undress and sleep for several days.

古文：乙丑，李石奏请召仇士良等面释其疑。
现代文：乙丑，宰相李石奏请文宗召见仇士良等人，当面消除他们的疑忌。
English: Second, Prime Minister Li Shisuo asked Wenzong to summon Qiu Shiliang and others to dispel their suspicions in person.

古文：上为召士良等出，上及石等共谕释之，使毋疑惧，然后事解。
现代文：文宗于是派人召见仇士良等人，和李石等人一起解释事情的经过，让他不要轻信谣言，猜疑恐惧。这件事因此得以平息。
English: Wen Zong then sent someone to summon Qiu Shiliang and others, and Li Shi and others to explain the course of events, so that he would not believe in rumors, suspicion and fear. The matter was thus calmed down.

古文：闰月，乙酉，以太子太保、分司李听为河中节度使。
现代文：闰五月，乙酉，唐文宗任命太子太保、分司东都李听为河中节度使。
English: In late May, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Prince Taibo and the sub-governor of Dongdu, Li He, as the envoy to the Mid-Heaven Festival.

古文：上常叹曰： 付之兵不疑，置之散地不怨，惟听为可以然。 
现代文：文宗曾感慨地说： 交付兵权而不必猜疑，任命为散官而毫无怨恨，只有李听才能做到这些。 
English: Wen Zong once said with emotion: "To be given military power without suspicion, to be appointed as a non-commissioned officer without resentment, only Li He can do these things.

古文：乙未，李固言荐崔球为起居舍人，郑覃再三以为不可，上曰： 公事勿相违！ 
现代文：乙未，宰相李固言推荐崔球为起居舍人，郑覃再三反对，认为不妥。文宗说： 对于朝廷的公事，宰相之间不要矛盾重重！ 
English: In the second half of the year, Prime Minister Li Guojin recommended Cui Qiu as his successor, but Zheng Rong repeatedly objected, saying that it was not appropriate. Wenzong said: For the official business of the imperial court, there should be no contradictions between the prime ministers!

古文：覃曰： 若宰相尽同，则事必有欺陛下者矣！ 
现代文：郑覃说： 如果宰相的意见都一致，那么，肯定有人欺骗陛下！ 
English: Zheng Yao said: If the opinions of the Prime Minister are all the same, then someone must have deceived His Majesty!

古文：李孝本二女配没右军，上取之入宫。
现代文：前御史中丞李孝本因参予李训诛杀宦官的密谋，他的两个女儿被诛连籍没，分配给右神策军。文宗把二人调到宫中。
English: Former Imperial Historian Li Xiaobun's two daughters were assigned to the Right Divine Providence Army by Emperor Wenzong, who transferred them to the imperial court, because they had participated in Li Xun's conspiracy to kill eunuchs.

古文：秋，七月，右拾遗魏谟上疏，以为： 陛下不迩声色，屡出宫女以配鳏夫。
现代文：秋季，七月，右拾遗魏上疏，认为： 陛下以往不近声色，多次把宫女放出，让她们和鳏夫配婚。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Right Revival Wei Shangzhu, thought: His Majesty has not been close to the tone in the past, and has repeatedly released the maids of honor and let them marry the widower.

古文：窃闻数月以来，教坊选试以百数，庄宅收市犹未已；又召李孝本女入宫，不避宗姓，大兴物论，臣窃惜之。
现代文：但近几个月以来，我听说教坊使已经测试挑选了一百多个擅长乐舞的宫女，庄宅使至今仍在挑选。现在，又把李孝本的女儿召入宫中，连同宗同姓都不加回避，以致议论纷纷，我为您感到痛惜。
English: However, in recent months, I have heard that more than a hundred maids of honor who are good at music and dance have been tested and selected by the village officials, and the village officials are still selecting them. Now, Li Xiaobeng's daughter has been invited to the palace, and she has not shied away from her family name, so that there is a lot of discussion. I feel sorry for you.

古文：昔汉光武一顾列女屏风，宋弘犹正色抗言，光武即撤之。
现代文：过去，汉光武帝在一次宴会上，多次回头观看画在屏风上的侍女像，大司空宋弘严肃地提出批评，光武帝随即下令撤去屏风。
English: In the past, during a banquet, Emperor Han Guangwu repeatedly looked back at the portrait of a lady's maid painted on the screen. Grand Secretary Ku Songhong seriously criticized it, and Emperor Guangwu immediately ordered the removal of the screen.

古文：陛下岂可不思宋弘之言，欲居光武之下乎！ 
现代文：陛下怎能不记取宋弘的批评，难道甘居于光武帝之下吗！ 
English: How can His Majesty not remember Song Hong's criticism and be content to live under Emperor Guangwu?

古文：上即出孝本女。
现代文：文宗当即下令放出李孝本的两个女儿。
English: Wenzong immediately ordered the release of Li Xiaobeng's two daughters.

古文：擢谟为补阙，曰： 朕选市女子，以赐诸王耳。
现代文：同时，擢拔魏为补阙。文宗说： 我挑选女子，是打算赐给各位王。
English: At the same time, Wei was promoted to fill the position. Wenzong said, "I chose a woman to give to the kings.

古文：怜孝本女宗枝髫龀孤露，故收养宫中。
现代文：至于李孝本的两个女儿，我是可怜她们年幼孤独，所以想收养在宫中。
English: As for Li Xiaobeng's two daughters, I feel sorry for their loneliness at such a young age, so I want to adopt them in the palace.

古文：谟于疑似之间皆能尽言，可谓爱我，不忝厥祖矣！ 
现代文：魏对这件事虽然不清楚，但却能直言尽忠，可见他爱我之至，无愧于他的祖先！ 
English: Although Wei is not clear about this matter, he can be honest and loyal, which shows that he loves me very much, worthy of his ancestors!

古文：命中书优为制辞以赏之。
现代文：于是，命中书省起草制书，褒奖魏。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Education was given the task of drafting the book, and Wei was commended.

古文：谟，征之五世孙也。
现代文：魏是魏徵的第五代子孙。
English: Wei is the fifth generation descendant of Wei Zheng.

古文：鄜坊节度使萧洪诈称太后弟，事觉。八月，甲辰，流驩州，于道赐死。
现代文：坊节度使萧洪诈称为萧太后弟弟的事情败露，八月，甲辰，萧洪被流放到州，走到半路，被赐自尽。
English: Fang Jiedu exposed Xiao Hong's deception that he was the younger brother of Empress Dowager Xiao. In August, Jiachen, Xiao Hong was exiled to the prefecture, walked halfway, and was given the choice to commit suicide.

古文：赵缜、吕璋等皆流岭南。
现代文：赵缜、吕璋等人因推荐萧洪，都被流放到岭南。
English: Zhao Wei, Lyu Wei and others were exiled to Lingnan for recommending Xiao Hong.

古文：初，李训知洪之诈，洪惧，辟训兄仲京置幕府。
现代文：当初，李训知道萧洪是在诈骗，萧洪恐惧，把李训哥哥李仲京召入自己的幕府。
English: At first, Li Xun knew that Xiao Hong was cheating, and Xiao Hong was afraid and called Li Xun's brother Li Zhongjing into his own shogunate.

古文：先是，自神策军出为节度使者，军中皆资其行装，至镇，三倍偿之。
现代文：在此以前，凡神策军将出任藩镇节度使，军中都为他们准备行装。军将上任以后，再用三倍的财物偿还。
English: Prior to this, whenever a military commander assumed the post of the festival envoy of a domain or town, the army would prepare for them to march. After the military commander assumed the post, he would use three times the amount of property to repay.

古文：有自左军出镇鄜坊未偿而死者，军中征之于洪，洪恃训之势，不与。
现代文：有一个左神策军将曾出任坊节度使，还未偿还完军中为他准备的行装就去世了。后来，萧洪继任坊节度使，左神策军向萧洪索债，萧洪依恃李训的权势，拒不还给。
English: There was a Zuo Sheng Chaojun who once served as a Fang Jiedu envoy, but he died before he could repay the outfit prepared for him in the army. Later, when Xiao Hong succeeded him as a Fang Jiedu envoy, Zuo Sheng Chaojun asked Xiao Hong for debts, and Xiao Hong, relying on the power of Li Xun, refused to return them.

古文：又征于死者之子，洪教其子遮宰相自言，训判绝之。
现代文：左神策军又向已死军将的儿子索债，萧洪教这个军将的儿子在半路上拦住宰相进行申诉。李训判定不再偿还。
English: Zuo Sheng Cao's army also demanded a debt from the son of a dead general. Xiao Hong instructed the general's son to stop the prime minister in the middle of the road to make a complaint. Li Xun decided not to repay.

古文：仇士良由是恨洪。
现代文：于是，左神策军护军中尉仇士良因此而痛恨萧洪。
English: As a result, Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Zuo Sheng Army hated Xiao Hong because of this.

古文：太后有异母弟在闽中，孱弱不能自达。
现代文：萧太后有一个同父异母的弟弟在福建，性情懦弱，一直没有向官府申报自己和萧太后的姐弟关系。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao has a half-brother in Fujian. He is cowardly and has not declared his relationship with Empress Dowager Xiao to the government.

古文：有闽人萧本从之得其内外族讳，因士良进达于上，且发洪之诈，洪由是得罪。
现代文：有一个福建人名叫萧本，跟随萧太后的弟弟，得知他家族内外的亲属姓名，于是，通过仇士良向文宗上奏，声称自己是萧太后的弟弟，同时揭发萧洪的诈骗行为。萧洪因此而被判罪。
English: A Fujianese named Xiao Ben, who followed the younger brother of Empress Dowager Xiao, learned the names of his relatives both inside and outside the family. Therefore, he reported to Emperor Wenzong through Qiu Shiliang, claiming to be the younger brother of Empress Dowager Xiao, and at the same time exposing Xiao Hong's fraud. Xiao Hong was convicted for this.

古文：上以本为真太后弟，戊申，擢为右赞善大夫。
现代文：文宗认为萧本是萧太后真正的弟弟，戊申，擢拔他为右赞善大夫。
English: Emperor Wenzong considered Xiao Ben to be Empress Dowager Xiao's real younger brother, Wu Shen, and promoted him to the position of Zuo Zanshen Doctor.

古文：九月，丁丑，李石为上言宋申锡忠直，为谗人所诬，窜死遐荒，未蒙昭雪。
现代文：九月，丁丑，宰相李石上言文宗，认为前宰相宋申锡忠厚正直，被奸臣诬陷，贬逐死在荒远的地方，至今未蒙昭雪平反。
English: In September, Dingwuxi, the Prime Minister Li Shishang said that the former Prime Minister Song Shengxi was loyal and honest, was framed by traitors, and died in a desolate place, and has not yet been rehabilitated.

古文：上俯首久之，既而流涕泫然曰： 兹事朕久知其误，奸人逼我，以社稷大计，兄弟几不能保，况申锡，仅全腰领耳。
现代文：文宗听后低头无言，过了很久，忽然满面泪流，说： 这件事我很早就知道申锡冤枉。当时奸臣逼迫我，我从国家利益的大局出发，连自己的兄弟漳王几乎都不能保护，何况申锡呢。最后，也就仅仅保全他的性命而已。
English: After listening to him, Wenzong bowed his head and was speechless. After a long time, he suddenly burst into tears and said, "I knew very early on that Shen Xi was innocent. At that time, my traitorous vassal was persecuting me. Based on the overall situation of national interests, I could hardly protect my own brother, Shao Wang, let alone Shen Xi. In the end, I only saved his life.

古文：非独内臣，外廷亦有助之者。
现代文：当时，不光宦官诬陷宋申锡，百官也有人帮助他们。
English: At that time, not only eunuchs framed Song Shenxi, but also hundreds of officials helped them.

古文：皆由朕之不明，向使遇汉昭帝，必无此冤矣！ 
现代文：这件事都是由于朕不贤明，假如申锡遇到汉昭帝，肯定不会如此冤死！ 
English: This matter is all due to my lack of wisdom. If Shen Xi had met Han Zhao Di, he certainly would not have died so unjustly!

古文：郑覃、李固言亦共言其冤，上深痛恨，有惭色。
现代文：郑覃、李固言也一同称宋申锡冤枉，文宗感到十分痛心，脸上有惭愧的面色。
English: Zheng Rong and Li Guyan also jointly said that Song Shensi was wronged, and Wenzong felt very sad and had a ashamed look on his face.

古文：庚辰，诏悉复申锡官爵，以其子慎微为成固尉。
现代文：庚辰，下诏恢复宋申锡的所有官爵，任命他的儿子为成固县尉。
English: Geng Chen issued an edict to restore all titles of nobility to Song Shensi, and appointed his son as the county official of Chenggu County.

古文：李石用金部员外郎韩益判度支，案益坐赃三千馀缗，系狱。
现代文：李石任用金部员外郎韩益兼管度支的文案工作，韩益乘机贪污三千多缗钱币，被逮捕入狱。
English: Li Shih appointed his son-in-law Han Yi, a member of the Ministry of Finance, to work as a copywriter, and Han Yi took the opportunity to embezzle more than 3,000 baht and was arrested and jailed.

古文：石曰： 臣始以益颇晓钱谷，故用之，不知其贪乃如是！ 
现代文：李石说： 我原来认为韩益通晓财务，所以任用他，却没想到他如此贪心！ 
English: Li Shi said: I originally thought that Han Yi was familiar with finance, so I appointed him, but I didn't expect him to be so greedy!

古文：上曰： 宰相但知人则用，有过则惩，如此则人易得。
现代文：文宗说： 宰相只要认为一个人真正有才能，就应当任用他；发现他有过失，则加以惩罚。这样，人才就容易获得。
English: Wen Zong said: The prime minister should only appoint a person if he believes that he has real talent; if he is found to be at fault, he should be punished. In this way, talent is easy to obtain.

古文：卿所用人不掩其恶，可谓至公。
现代文：你对自己所任用的人不掩饰他的过失，可以说是一心为公。
English: You are, so to speak, acting in good faith when you do not conceal the faults of the person you have appointed.

古文：从前宰相用人好曲蔽其过，不欲人弹劾，此大病也。 
现代文：以前，宰相对自己任用的官员，喜好掩饰他们的过失，不愿让别人弹劾，这实在是朝廷的一大弊端！ 
English: In the past, the emperor liked to cover up the faults of the officials he appointed, and did not want others to impeach them. This was really a major drawback of the imperial court!

古文：冬，十一月，丁巳，贬益梧州司户。
现代文：冬季，十一月，丁巳，朝廷贬韩益为梧州司户。
English: In winter, in November, the imperial court relegated Han Yi to the position of Wuzhou steward.

古文：上自甘露之变，意忽忽不乐，两军球鞠之会什减六七，虽宴享音伎杂遝盈庭，未尝解颜。
现代文：唐文宗自从甘露之变以后，常常显出闷闷不乐的样子，左、右神策军踢球的集会也因此而十减六七。即使在出席宴会时，奏乐的伎工遍布庭院，也无法解除文宗的苦闷。
English: Tang Wenzong, since the change of the nectar, often showed a sullen and unhappy appearance. As a result, the gatherings of the Left and Right Divisions playing football were reduced by ten to sixty-seven. Even when attending a banquet, the tricks of playing music were all over the courtyard, which could not relieve Wenzong's distress.

古文：闲居或徘徊眺望，或独语叹息。
现代文：文宗在退朝后闲暇的时候，有时徘徊眺望，有时一个人自言自语地叹息。
English: When Wenzong was at leisure after retiring, he would sometimes wander around and look around, and sometimes he would sigh to himself.

古文：壬午，上于延英谓宰相曰： 朕每与卿等论天下事，则不免愁。 
现代文：壬午，文宗在延英殿对宰相说： 朕每次和你们商议天下大事，就不免发愁。 
English: In the morning of the third day, Wenzong said to the prime minister in the Yan Ying Palace: "Every time I discuss the world's major events with you, I cannot help but worry.

古文：对曰： 为理者不可以速成。 
现代文：宰相说： 治理天下不可能速成。 
English: The Prime Minister said: "It is impossible to govern the country quickly.

古文：上曰： 联每读书，耻为凡主。 
现代文：文宗说： 朕每次读书，看到古往今来的君臣事迹，耻为碌碌无为的平凡君主。 
English: Wenzong said: Every time I read, I see the deeds of kings and ministers from ancient times to the present. I am ashamed to be an ordinary monarch who does nothing.

古文：李石曰： 方今内外之臣，其间小人尚多疑阻，愿陛下更以宽御之，彼有公清奉法如刘弘逸、薛季稜者，陛下亦宜褒赏以劝为善。 
现代文：李石说： 现今南衙和北司的臣僚中，有些小人对陛下还有很多的不满，但愿陛下以宽容的态度对待他们。如果他们中间有人能像刘弘逸、薛季棱那样奉公守法，就应当加以表彰，以便提倡官员们都奉公守法。 
English: Li Shih said, "Among the current ministers of Nanzhang and Beisi, there are some villains who still have a lot of dissatisfaction with His Majesty. I hope that His Majesty will treat them with tolerance. If there is someone among them who can abide by the law like Liu Hongyi and Xue Jiren, they should be commended in order to promote officials to abide by the law."

古文：甲申，上复谓宰相曰： 我与卿等论天下事，有势未得行者，退但饮醇酒求醉耳！ 
现代文：甲申，文宗又对宰相说： 我和你们商议天下大事后，有些被奸臣所迫而无法实行，只好退朝后喝醇酒，以便大醉，借酒浇愁罢了！ 
English: Ka-shin, Wenzong also said to the prime minister: After I discussed the world's major events with you, some of them were forced by treacherous vassals and could not be implemented, so I had to drink alcohol after retiring, so that I could get drunk and use alcohol to drown my sorrows!

古文：对曰： 此皆臣等之罪也。 
现代文：宰相说： 这都是我们失职的罪责。 
English: The Prime Minister said: "We are all guilty of dereliction of duty.

古文：有司以左藏积弊日久，请行检勘，且言官典罪在赦前者，请宥之，上许之。
现代文：有关部门考虑到左藏库在管理方面的弊端由来已久，请求朝廷批准，对库中的财物进行一次检查核对。同时上言说，如果掌管库房的官员有罪，但是在朝廷大赦以前所犯的，请求宽宥。文宗同意。
English: Taking into account the long history of malpractices in the management of the Zuozang Library, the relevant departments requested the approval of the Imperial Court to conduct an inspection and verification of the property in the library. At the same time, they said that if the officials in charge of the library were guilty, but committed before the amnesty of the Imperial Court, they would ask for forgiveness. The Emperor agreed.

古文：既而果得缯帛妄称渍污者，敕赦之。
现代文：检查后，果然发现掌管库房的官员虚报库中的丝织品受潮腐烂，而乘机贪污。文宗下敕赦免。
English: After the inspection, it was found that the official in charge of the warehouse falsely reported that the silk fabrics in the warehouse had rotted due to moisture, and took the opportunity to commit corruption.

古文：给事中狄兼谟封还敕书曰： 官典犯赃，理不可赦！ 
现代文：给事中狄兼封还敕书，说： 掌管库房的官员贪污，根据法律，不可赦免！ 
English: In response, Di Canfeng wrote back, saying: "According to the law, the official in charge of the treasury cannot be pardoned for corruption!

古文：上谕之曰： 有司请检之初，联既许之矣。
现代文：文宗对他解释说： 有关部门奏请检查的时候，朕已经同意不予追究。
English: Wenzong explained to him: When the relevant department requested an inspection, I had already agreed not to be investigated.

古文：与其失信，宁失罪人。
现代文：与其让朕失信，不如赦免罪人。
English: It is better to pardon a sinner than to break faith with him.

古文：卿能奉职，朕甚嘉之！ 
现代文：你能尽职守责，朕十分赞赏！ 
English: You are able to fulfill your duties and responsibilities, which I very much appreciate!

古文：十二月，庚戌，以华州刺史卢钧为岭南节度使。
现代文：十二月，庚戌，唐文宗任命华州刺史卢钧为岭南节度使。
English: In December, Emperor Genghis Khan and Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Hua Zhou to be the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：李石言于上曰： 卢钧除岭南，朝士皆相贺。以为岭南富饶之地，近岁皆厚赂北司而得之；今北司不挠朝权，陛下宜有以褒之。
现代文：宰相李石对文宗说： 卢钧被授予岭南节度使，百官都相互庆贺，认为岭南是个富饶的地方，近年来，谁想担任此职，都必须用重金贿赂北司的当权宦官，才能如愿以偿。
English: The prime minister, Li Shih, said to Wenzong: "Lulong was awarded the post of Lingnan Festival Envoy. All the officials congratulated each other, thinking that Lingnan was a rich place. In recent years, anyone who wanted to hold this post had to bribe the eunuchs in power in the Northern Division with heavy money in order to get what they wanted.

古文：庶几内外奉法，此致理之本也。 
现代文：现在，北司不再干扰朝政，陛下也应表彰他们，以便南衙、北司的官员都能守法。这是治理朝政的根本途径。 
English: Now that the Northern Division is no longer interfering with the government, His Majesty should also commend them, so that the officials of the Southern Division and the Northern Division can abide by the law. This is the fundamental way to govern the government.

古文：上从之。
现代文：文宗采纳了李石的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：钧至镇，以清惠著名。
现代文：卢钧上任以后，以清廉宽惠而著名。
English: After Lu Wei took office, he was known for his clemency and generosity.

古文：己未，淑王纵薨。
现代文：己未，淑王李纵去世。
English: Before I knew it, Shu Wang Lixong passed away.

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝中开成二年春，二月，己未，上谓宰相： 荐人勿问亲疏，朕闻窦易直为相，未尝用亲故。
现代文：开成二年春季，二月，己未，文宗对宰相说： 你们向朝廷推荐官员时，不要考虑是否对自己亲近还是疏远。我听说窦易直担任宰相时，未曾任用过自己的亲戚朋友。
English: In the spring of the second year, in February, Wen Zong said to the prime minister: When you recommend officials to the imperial court, do not consider whether you are close or distant. I heard that Dou Yizhi did not appoint his relatives and friends when he served as prime minister.

古文：若亲故果才，避嫌而弃之，是亦不为至公也。 
现代文：如果自己的亲戚朋友真有才能，为了避嫌，弃而不用，也不算是真正的公正。
English: If one's relatives and friends are really talented, it is not really fair to shun and abandon them.

古文：均王纬薨。
现代文：均王李纬去世。
English: Junwang Li Wei passed away.

古文：三月，有慧星出于张，长八丈馀。
现代文：三月，有彗星出自张宿，达八丈多长。
English: In March, there was a comet from Zhangshu, which was as long as eight meters.

古文：壬申，诏撤乐减膳，以一日之分充十日。
现代文：壬申，文宗下诏，撤除乐舞，减少用餐，把自己一天的御膳分充十天食用。
English: Jinshin, Wenzong issued a decree to abolish music and dance, reduce meals, and divide one day's meal into ten days.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，上对中书舍人、翰林学士兼侍书柳公权等于便殿，上举衫袖示之曰： 此衣已三浣矣！ 
现代文：夏季四月，甲辰，文宗在一座别殿召见中书舍人、翰林学士兼侍书柳公权。文宗举起自己穿的衣服说： 这件衣服已经洗过三次了！ 
English: In the summer of April, at the time of Jia Chen, Wenzong was summoned to a separate hall to meet with the Chinese scholar, the scholar Han Lin and the attendant scholar Liu Gongquan. Wenzong held up the clothes he was wearing and said: This dress has been washed three times!

古文：众皆美上之俭德，公权独无言。
现代文：众人都称誉文宗节俭的美德，只有柳公权默不作声，文宗问他是什么缘故。
English: Everyone praised the virtue of Wenzong's frugality, but Liu Gongquan remained silent. Wenzong asked him why.

古文：上问其故，对曰： 陛下贵为天子，富有四海，当进贤退不肖，纳谏诤，明赏罚，乃可以致雍熙。
现代文：柳公权回答说： 陛下尊贵而为天子，富裕而有四海，应当提拔贤才，撤免庸才，听取百官的规劝，赏罚分明，这样，才能够达到天下太平。
English: Liu Gongquan replied, "Your Majesty is noble and the son of heaven, rich and has four seas. You should promote the wise, remove the mediocre, listen to the advice of the hundred officials, and reward and punish clearly. In this way, you can achieve world peace.

古文：服浣濯之农，乃末节耳。 
现代文：至于穿洗过的衣裳，不过是小节罢了。 
English: As for wearing clean clothes, it's just a detail.

古文：上曰： 朕知舍人不应复为谏议，以卿有诤臣风采，须屈卿为之。 
现代文：文宗说： 朕知道中书舍人不应当越职规劝，鉴于你有谏臣的风采，所以，要让你屈尊担任谏官。 
English: Wenzong said, "I know that people who refuse to read Chinese books should not be admonished beyond the call of duty. Since you have the demeanor of a vassal, I want you to deign to serve as a eunuch.

古文：乙巳，以公权为谏议大夫，馀如故。
现代文：乙巳，任命柳公权为谏议大夫，仍兼任其他职务。
English: At the same time, Liu Gongquan was appointed as the chairman of the National People's Congress, and still held other positions.

古文：戊戌，以翰林学士、工部侍郎陈夷行同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，唐文宗任命翰林学士、工部侍郎陈夷行为同平章事。
English: Wu Xi, Tang Wenzong appointed Han Lin, a bachelor, and Chen Yi, a chamberlain of the engineering department, to act as equals.

古文：六月，河阳军乱，节度使李泳奔怀州。
现代文：六月，河阳发生军队叛乱，节度使李泳逃奔怀州。
English: In June, there was a mutiny in the Hebei army, which forced Li Yong to flee to Huai Zhou.

古文：军士焚腐署，杀泳二子，大掠数日方止。
现代文：军士焚烧节度使官署，杀死李泳的两个儿子，大肆掠夺几天后才停止。
English: The sergeant burned the government office of the Minister of Public Security, killed Li Yong's two sons, and plundered extensively for a few days before stopping.

古文：泳，长安市人，寓籍禁军，以赂得方镇。所至恃所交结，贪残不法，其不下堪命，故作乱。
现代文：李泳是长安的市民，在禁军中取得兵籍，然后，贿赂当朝权贵，被任命为河阳节度使。
English: Li Yong is a citizen of Chang'an. He obtained his military registration in the forbidden army, and then, after bribing the dignitaries of the time, he was appointed as an envoy to the Kheyang Festival.

古文：丁未，贬泳澧州长史。
现代文：丁未，唐文宗贬李泳为澧州长史。
English: Ding Wei and Tang Wenzong relegated Li Yong to the position of prefect.

古文：戊申，以左金吾将军李执方为河阳节度使。
现代文：戊申，任命左金吾将军李执方为河阳节度使。
English: Wushin, appointed General Li Rongfang of the Left Jingu as the chief envoy of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：秋，七月，癸亥，振武奏党项三百馀帐剽掠逃去。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸亥，振武奏报：党项族三百多帐人马剽掠后逃走。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the middle of the Year of the Horse and the Year of the Dragon, the Zhenwu Report was published: more than three hundred members of the Dangxiang family fled after they had plundered Ma'an.

古文：给事中韦温为太子侍读，晨诣东宫，日中乃得见。温谏曰： 太子当鸡鸣而起，问安视膳，不宜专事宴安！ 
现代文：给事中韦温担任太子侍读，每天早晨到达东宫，一直到中午才能见到太子，韦温规劝太子说： 作为皇太子，应当在鸡鸣就起床，然后向皇上问安，检查皇上的餐食是否正常，而不应当整天游乐饮宴！ 
English: In this matter, Wei Wen served as the prince's attendant. He arrived at the East Palace every morning and could not see the prince until noon. Wei Wen advised the prince to say: As a crown prince, you should get up when the rooster crows, then say hello to the emperor and check whether the emperor's meal is normal, instead of enjoying the banquet all day!

古文：太子不能用其言，温乃辞侍读。
现代文：太子不采纳他的意见。于是，韦温请求辞职。
English: The crown prince did not accept his opinion, so Wei Wen asked for his resignation.

古文：辛未，罢守本官。
现代文：辛未，被免去太子侍读的职务，仍为给事中。
English: Xin Wei, who was removed from the post of the prince's attendant, is still under investigation.

古文：振武突厥百五十帐叛，剽掠营田。
现代文：振武的一百五十帐突厥族叛乱，剽掠边防的营田。
English: Zhenwu's 150 strong Turkic rebels plundered the border camps.

古文：戊寅，节度使刘沔击破之。
现代文：戊寅，振武节度使刘沔率兵击败突厥。
English: Wu Yin and Zhenwu Jiedu led Liu Bei's army to defeat the Turks.

古文：八月，庚戌，以昭仪王氏为德妃，昭容杨氏为贤妃。
现代文：八月，庚戌，唐文宗册封昭仪王氏为德妃，昭容杨氏为贤妃。
English: In August, Geng Zang, the Tang Dynasty's imperial anthology, designated the Shou Yi Wang clan as the German empress and the Shou Yong Yang clan as the virtuous empress.

古文：立敬宗之子休复为梁王，执中为襄王，言杨为杞王，成美为成王。
现代文：立唐敬宗的儿子李休复为梁王，李执中为襄王，李言杨为杞王，李成美为陈王。
English: Li Xiufu, the son of the Tang Dynasty Emperor Jingzong, was the King of Liang, Li Xizhong was the King of Xiang, Li Yan Yang was the King of Shao, and Li Chengmei was the King of Chen.

古文：癸丑，立皇子宗俭为蒋王。
现代文：癸丑，立儿子李宗俭为蒋王。
English: Emperor Qianwu appointed his son Li Zongjian as King Jiang.

古文：河阳军士既逐李泳，日相扇，欲为乱。
现代文：河阳的军士驱逐节度使李泳以后，每天相互煽动，准备叛乱。
English: After the expulsion of Heyang's sergeants from the festival, Li Yong instigated each other every day to prepare for the rebellion.

古文：九月，李执方索得首乱者七十馀人，悉斩之，馀党分隶外镇，然后定。
现代文：九月，新任节度使李执方抓到叛乱的为首者七十多人，全部斩首。接着，把他们的余党分遣外镇，然后得以安定。
English: In September, the newly appointed governor led the Li government to capture more than 70 leaders of the rebellion, behead them all, and then send the rest of their party out of town, and then they were able to stabilize.

古文：冬，十月，国子监《石经》成。
现代文：冬季，十月，国子监《石经》刻成。
English: In the winter, in October, the "Stone Sutra" was engraved by the State Children's Supervisor.

古文：福建奏晋江百姓萧弘称太后族人，诏御史台案之。
现代文：福建上奏：本道晋江县百姓萧弘自称是萧太后的同族亲属。文宗下诏，命御史台核实。
English: Prelude from Fujian: Xiao Hong, a villager from Jinjiang County, claimed to be a relative of Empress Dowager Xiao's from the same ethnic group. The document was authenticated by the History Channel.

古文：戊申，以门下侍郎、同平章事李固言同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：戊申，唐文宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事李固言以同平章事的头衔，充任剑南西川节度使。
English: Wu Shen, Tang Wenzong appointed his servant, Tongping Zhangji Li Guyan, as Tongping Zhangji's title, and served as Jian'nan Nishikawa Setsudoshi.

古文：甲寅，御史台奏萧弘诈妄。
现代文：甲寅，御史台奏报：萧弘虚妄欺诈朝廷。
English: Aoyama, the Gistai report: Xiao Hong is a delusional fraud to the imperial court.

古文：诏递归乡里，不之罪，冀得其真。
现代文：文宗下诏，命将萧弘送回原乡，并由沿途驿站供给食宿，不加判罪，希望以后能寻到萧太后的真正亲属。
English: Emperor Wenzong issued an edict ordering Xiao Hong to be sent back to his hometown, and to be provided with food and lodging by stations along the way, without being convicted, hoping to find the real relatives of Empress Xiao in the future.

