古文：凡与敌战，三军必要得其地利，则可以寡敌众，以弱胜强。
现代文：凡是与敌人作战，军队必须占据有利地形条件，这样就可以用较少的兵力抗击兵力众多的敌人，用力量弱小的部队战胜力量强大的敌人。
English: Whenever fighting with the enemy, the army must occupy favorable terrain conditions, so that it can use fewer troops to resist the enemy with a large number of troops, and use weak troops to defeat strong enemies.

古文：所谓知敌之可击，知吾卒之可以击，而不知地利，胜之半也。
现代文：人们通常所说的，知道敌人可以攻打，也知道了自己部队能够打，但不知道利用有利地形条件，胜利的把握就只有一半。
English: What people usually say is that knowing that the enemy can attack and knowing that one's own troops can fight, but not knowing how to take advantage of favorable terrain conditions, the certainty of victory is only half.

古文：此言既知彼又知己，但不得地利之助，则亦不全胜。
现代文：此话也就是说，既知道了敌方情况，又知道了自己这方的情况，但不知道借助于有利地形条件，那么，也就不能取得全胜的战果。
English: That is to say, if you know both the enemy's situation and your own situation, but do not know how to take advantage of favorable terrain conditions, then you cannot achieve a complete victory.

古文：法曰： 天时不如地利。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 天候气象虽然有利，但不如地形条件有利。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Although the weather is favorable, it is not as favorable as the terrain conditions.

古文：宋武帝讨南燕。
现代文：东晋安帝派遣大将刘裕率军攻打南燕。
English: Emperor An of the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent General Liu Yu and his army to attack Nanyan.

古文：慕容超召群臣议拒晋师。公孙五楼曰： 晋师劲果，所利在速战，初锋勇锐，不可击也。
现代文：南燕皇帝慕容超召集群臣研究抵抗晋军之策，征虏将军公孙五楼献计说： 晋军强大，利于速战速决，他们初来锋锐气盛，不适宜立即迎击。
English: Emperor Murong Chao of the Southern Yan convened a group of courtiers to study the strategy of resisting the Jin army, and the conscript general Gongsun Fifth Floor proposed a plan: The Jin army is strong, which is conducive to quick battle and quick decision, and they are fresh and vigorous, and are not suitable for immediate counterattack.

古文：宜据大岘，使不得入。旷日延时，沮其锐气。
现代文：应当据守大岘山险，阻截晋军使其不得深入我境，以旷日持久的战法，来消磨晋军的锐气。
English: It is necessary to guard against the dangers of the Lushan Mountains, intercept the Jin army so that it cannot penetrate into our territory, and use protracted warfare to wear down the spirit of the Jin army.

古文：可徐拣精兵二千骑，循海而南，绝其粮道；别遣段晖率诸州之军，缘山东下。腹背击之，此上策也。
现代文：我们可以从容不迫地选拔精锐骑兵二千人，沿大岘山向南，切断晋军的粮道；再派左将军段晖率领大军，顺大岘山东进，从而对晋军形成前后夹击之势，这是上策。
English: We can calmly select two thousand elite cavalrymen and march south along Dalatang Mountain to cut off the Jin army's food supply; and then send the left general Duan Yu to lead a large army and march east along Dalatang Mountain, thus forming a pincer attack against the Jin army. This is the best strategy.

古文：各命守宰依险自固，较其资储之外，余悉焚荡，芟除粟苗，使敌来无所资，坚壁清野，以待其衅，中策也。
现代文：命令各地将吏凭险固守，计点军资仓储而留足所需物资之外，其余的一律焚毁，铲除田间禾苗，使敌人来了得不到可以利用的东西，以坚壁清野的办法，来等待敌人可能出现的破绽，这是中策。
English: It is a middle-of-the-road strategy to order all regions to keep their officials in place by taking advantage of the danger, to count the points of military equipment storage and keep enough of the required materials, and the rest will be burned, to eradicate the fields of crops and seedlings, to make the enemy come and not get something that can be used, and to wait for the enemy's possible flaws by means of a solid wall.

古文：纵贼入岘，出城迎战，下策也。 
现代文：放纵敌人越过大岘山，我们再出城迎战，这是下策。 
English: The next step is to let the enemy cross the Dafeng Mountain and then go out to fight.

古文：超曰： 京都富盛，户口众多，非可以一时入守。青苗布野，非可以猝芟。设使芟苗守城，以全性命，朕所不能。
现代文：慕容超听后说： 我们京都地区繁荣昌盛，人口众多，不可能一下子都把他们迁入城内固守；青苗已布满田野，也不可能全都铲除，假如说采用此种铲苗守城的办法，可以保全性命的话，我也不能同意这样干。
English: After listening, Murong Chao said, "Our Kyoto area is prosperous and has a large population, so it is impossible to move them all into the city at once and keep them there. The young seedlings have spread all over the fields, and it is impossible to eradicate them all. If I were to say that using such a method of protecting the city with seedlings could save lives, I would not agree to do so.

古文：据五州之强，带山河之固，战车万乘，铁马万群，纵令过岘，至于平地，徐以精骑蹂之，必成擒也。 
现代文：我们现在是据有五州地盘的强国，山河环绕而地形险固，战车万辆，战马万群，即便让敌人越过大岘山而进到平原地区，再从容不迫地用精锐部队袭击它，敌人则必为我们所擒获。 
English: We are now a powerful country with a five-state territory, surrounded by mountains and rivers and with a rugged terrain, tens of thousands of chariots, and tens of thousands of horses. Even if we let the enemy cross the Dafeng Mountains and enter the plain area, and then attack it with elite troops, the enemy will be captured for us.

古文：慕容镇曰： 若如圣旨，必须平原十里而军，军垒成，用马为便宜，出岘逆战而不胜，犹可退守。
现代文：尚书令慕容镇则建议说： 倘若依照陛下的旨意去做，也必须是在平原地区每十里处驻扎一支部队，构筑好工事，以便利于使用骑兵为条件，因此，我们应当越出大岘山去迎战敌人，而一旦迎战不胜，还可以退守大岘山。
English: Shang Shuling of Murong Town suggested: "If it is to be done according to your majesty's will, it is also necessary to station a troop every ten miles in the plain area and construct good works to facilitate the use of cavalry as a condition. Therefore, we should go beyond Dafu Mountain to meet the enemy, and if we are defeated, we can retreat to Dafu Mountain.

古文：不宜纵敌人岘，自贻窘迫。
现代文：不应当放纵敌人进入大岘山以里，而给自己造成被动挨打的困难局面。
English: We should not allow the enemy to enter into the mountains of Dalian and create a difficult situation for ourselves in which we are passively beaten.

古文：昔成安君不守井陉之险，终屈于韩信；诸葛瞻不守剑阁之险，卒擒于邓艾。
现代文：从前成安君陈馀不坚守井陉之险关，终于被韩信所打败；诸葛瞻放弃马阁山险不守，最后为邓艾所擒杀。
English: Once upon a time, Cheng Anjun Chen Yu did not stick to the dangerous pass of Jingshan, and was finally defeated by Han Xin; Zhuge Zhan abandoned the dangerous pass of Magong Mountain, and was finally killed by Deng Ai.

古文：臣以天时不如地利也，阻守大岘，策之上也。 
现代文：我认为天时不如地利，扼守大岘山以阻截敌人，是诸种对策中最好的对策。 
English: I think that the weather is not as good as the location, and the best of all countermeasures is to block the enemy by guarding Mount Daxi.

古文：超又不从。而摄莒、梁父二戍，修城隍，拣士马，蓄锐以待之。
现代文：慕容超听后还是不予采纳，只是命令驻莒、梁父二地的部队，整修护城墙，选练兵马，养精蓄锐以等待晋军的到来。
English: After listening to Murong Chao, it was still not adopted, but he ordered the troops stationed in Kunming and Liangzhu to renovate and protect the city walls, select and train soldiers and horses, and keep their spirits up to wait for the arrival of the Jin army.

古文：其夏，晋师已次，超遣其左军段晖等步骑五万，进据临朐。
现代文：这年夏天，晋军已进至东莞，慕容超派遣左将军段晖等率领步骑兵五万人，进据临朐。
English: In the summer of that year, the Jin army had already entered Dongguan, and Murong Chao dispatched General Duan Jun and others to lead 50,000 infantry and cavalry into Linyi.

古文：俄而，晋师渡岘，慕容超惧，率兵四万就段晖等于临朐，战败，超奔广固，数日而拔，燕地悉平。
现代文：不久，晋军顺利越过大岘山。慕容超这时才害怕起来，于是急忙率兵四万奔赴临朐与段晖等合兵一处。晋军来攻，燕军一战大败，慕容超逃回京都广固。数日后，广固也被攻克，南燕土地全部沦陷。
English: Soon after, the Jin army successfully crossed the Dafeng Mountain. It was only then that Murong Chao became afraid, so he hurriedly led 40,000 soldiers to Linyi to join forces with Duan Yu and others. The Jin army attacked, the Yan army was defeated in the first battle, and Murong Chao fled back to Kyoto Guanggu. A few days later, Guanggu was also conquered, and all the land of Nanyan fell.

