古文：孟子曰： 事孰为大？
现代文：孟子说： 侍奉之事，什么最大？
English: Mencius said: In the matter of service, what is the most important?

古文：事亲为大；守孰为大？
现代文：侍奉父母最大。操守之事，什么为最大？
English: Serving one's parents is the greatest. What is the greatest virtue?

古文：守身为大。
现代文：守住自身最大。
English: Protect yourself as much as possible.

古文：不失其身而能事其亲者，吾闻之矣；失其身而能事其亲者，吾未之闻也。
现代文：没有丧失操守又能很好侍奉父母的人，我听说过。丧失了自身操守又能很好地侍奉父母亲的，我没有听过。
English: I have heard of people who have not lost their integrity and can serve their parents well. I have not heard of people who have lost their integrity and can serve their parents well.

古文：孰不为事？
现代文：谁不做侍奉人的事呢？
English: For who has not been a bondservant?

古文：事亲，事之本也；孰不为守？守身，守之本也。
现代文：侍奉父母，是侍奉之事的根本；守住自身，是操守之事的根本。
English: To serve one's parents is the essence of service; to keep oneself is the essence of conduct.

古文：曾子养曾皙，必有酒肉。将彻，必请所与。
现代文：曾子奉养他的父亲曾皙，每餐一定有酒有肉，撤走饭菜的时候，一定请示 把剩下的饭菜送给谁？ 
English: Zeng Zi was raised by his father, Zeng Yao. There must be wine and meat at every meal. When the meal is taken away, he must ask who to give the rest of the meal to.

古文：问有余，必曰 有 。
现代文：曾皙如果问 还有没有剩余？ 必然回答说 有。 
English: If Zeng Wei asked, "Is there anything left over?" he would certainly answer, "Yes."

古文：曾皙死，曾元养曾子，必有酒肉。将彻，不请所与。
现代文：曾皙去世以后，曾元奉养曾子，每餐也一定有酒有肉，但饭后撤走饭菜的时候，不请示 把剩下的饭菜送给谁？ 
English: After Zeng Yao's death, Zeng Yuan raised Zeng Zi, and there must be wine and meat at every meal, but when removing the meal after the meal, he did not ask who to give the rest of the meal to?

古文：问有余，曰： 亡矣 。
现代文：如果曾子问 还有没有剩余？ 
English: If Zeng Zi asked, "Is there anything left over?"

古文：将以复进也。
现代文：必然回答说 没有了。 
English: The inevitable answer was no.

古文：此所谓养口体者也。
现代文：是为了将剩下的饭菜下次再给曾子吃。
English: It was to save the rest of the meal for Zengzi's next meal.

古文：若曾子，则可谓养志也。
现代文：这就是人们所说的仅仅是供养父母的身体。像曾子那样，才可称为奉养父母的意愿亲情。
English: This is what people call merely providing for the body of the parents. Like the great-grandson, it can only be called the will of the parents.

古文：事亲若曾子者，可也。 
现代文：侍奉父母做到曾子那样，才算可以。 
English: It is only acceptable to serve one's parents as a great-grandchild.

