古文：王都中王都中，字元俞，福之福宁州人。
现代文：王都中字元俞，福建福宁州人。
English: Wang Duzhong, a native of Fujian's Funing Prefecture.

古文：父积翁，仕宋为宝章阁学士、福建制置使。
现代文：父名王积翁，曾任宋朝宝章阁学士、福建制置使。
English: His father's name was Wang Jie Weng, and he was once a Song Dynasty Treasure Academy Scholar and an envoy to Fujian Province.

古文：至元十三年，宋主纳土，乃以全闽八郡图籍来，入觐世祖于上京，降金虎符，授中奉大夫、刑部尚书、福建道宣慰使，兼提刑按察使，寻除参知政事，行省江西。
现代文：至元十三年，宋朝皇帝以福建八郡图籍献与元朝，积翁因而在上京拜见世祖。世祖赐给他金虎符，授予中奉大夫、刑部尚书、福建道宣慰使、兼提刑按察使，不久，又转任江西参知政事，又任国信使，到日本去宣谕。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Emperor of the Song Dynasty presented the eight counties of Fujian to the Yuan Dynasty. As a result, Ji Weng went to Beijing to pay homage to his ancestor. The ancestor gave him the golden tiger emblem, awarded him the title of middle-ranked doctor, the title of senior official of the Ministry of Justice, the title of Fujian Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Envoy, and the title of Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Envoy. Soon, he was transferred to the post of Jiangxi Sanzhizhi, and also served as a messenger of the country to go to Japan to proclaim.

古文：俄以为国信使，宣谕日本，至其境，遇害于海上。都中生三岁，即以恩授从仕郎、南剑路顺昌县尹。
现代文：入境后在海上遇害。都中三岁时，即因恩荫授与从仕郎、南剑路顺昌县尹。
English: He was killed at sea after entering the country. When he was three years old in junior high school, he was awarded the title of Zongshiro, Nanjian Road, Shunchang County, because of his kindness.

古文：七岁，从其母叶诉阙下，世祖闵焉，给驿券，俾南还，赐平江田八千亩、宅一区。
现代文：七岁，随其母到朝廷陈述其父往日本在海上遇害之事，世祖非常同情，给旅费使他们回南方，并赐平江田八千亩、住宅一幢。
English: At the age of seven, he accompanied his mother to the imperial court to report that his father had been killed at sea on his way to Japan. The patriarch was very sympathetic and gave them travel expenses to return to the south. He also gave them eight thousand mu of rice fields and a house.

古文：已而世祖追念其父功不置，特授都中少中大夫、平江路总管府治中，时年甫十七。
现代文：后来世祖又念其父功绩，特授都中少中大夫、平江路总管府治中，此时都中年仅十七岁。
English: Later, the ancestor also remembered his father's achievements, and was specially awarded the title of junior high school junior high school doctor and the general manager of Pingjiang Road. At this time, he was only seventeen years old.

古文：僚吏见其年少，颇易视之。
现代文：同僚中因他年轻，都轻视他。
English: Colleagues looked down on him because he was young.

古文：都中遇事剖析，动中肯綮，皆〈目咢〉眙不敢欺。
现代文：都中遇到事情都进行分析，抓住要害，因此，僚属都不敢欺他。
English: When things happen in the capital, he analyzes and grasps the crux of the matter. Therefore, his colleagues do not dare to deceive him.

古文：昆山有诡易官田者，事觉，而八年不决，都中为披故牍，洞见底里，其人乃伏辜。
现代文：昆山有用诡计买卖官田的，事情暴露八年未得到解决。都中为此阅读以往文书档案，真相大白，其人乃服。
English: In Kunshan, there was a scheme to buy and sell government-owned land, but the matter remained unresolved for eight years. To this end, the central government read previous documents and files. The truth was revealed, but no one was held accountable.

古文：吴江有违拒有司筑堤护田之令而归过于众人者，都中询知其故，皆置不问，其人乃无所逃罪。
现代文：吴江有人违抗官府筑堤护田的命令而将过失推给众人，都中查知其中缘故，对众人都置之不问，而抗拒命令者，无所逃脱罪责。
English: In Wujiang, some people disobeyed the government's order to build a dike to protect farmland and blamed everyone else. When the central government found out the reason, they did not question anyone, and those who resisted the order could not escape criminal responsibility.

古文：学舍久坏不治，而郡守缺，都中曰： 圣人之道，人所共由，何独守得为乎？ 
现代文：学校房屋破败很久未修理，而郡守缺任，都中说： 圣人之道，大家遵守，为何只有一个郡守能做？ 
English: The school buildings have been in ruins for a long time and have not been repaired, and the county governor is not in office, they all said: the way of the saints, everyone should abide by it, why can only one county governor do it?

古文：乃首募大家，合钱新其礼殿。
现代文：于是带头募捐，新修了典礼殿堂。
English: He then took the lead in soliciting donations to renovate the ceremonial hall.

古文：秩满，除浙东道宣慰副使。
现代文：任期满后，拜为浙东道宣慰副使。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, Bai became the vice envoy of condolence for the host of Zhejiang.

古文：金华有殴杀人者，吏受赇，以为病死。
现代文：金华有人被殴打致死，因吏受贿，作为病死。
English: In Jinhua, a person was beaten to death for taking bribes from officials and died of illness.

古文：都中捕系之，痛绳以法。
现代文：都中指使下属复核，获得真情，判凶手死罪，县令长以下的官吏因受贿撤职。
English: The central government ordered subordinates to review and obtain the truth, the murderer was sentenced to death, and officials below the county magistrate were removed from their posts for accepting bribes.

古文：迁荆湖北道宣慰副使。适岁昆，都中躬履山谷，以拯其饥，民赖以全活者数十万。
现代文：余姚有个豪民叫张甲，住在海滨，行为不法，擅霸一方，无一吏敢到那里去，都中逮捕了他，并绳之以法。调任荆湖北道宣慰副使，时值荒年，都中亲至山谷，以救饥民。民得活命者数十万。
English: In Yuyao, there was a great man named Zhang Jia, who lived on the seashore. He acted illegally and arrogantly, and no one dared to go there. The central government arrested him and brought him to justice. He was appointed as the vice-envoy of propaganda and consolation of North Jinghu Province. In a time of famine, the central government went to the valley to save the starving people. Hundreds of thousands of people were saved.

古文：武宗诏更钞法，行铜钱，以都中为通才，除江淮泉货监。
现代文：武宗下诏，改革钞币，使用铜钱，因都中学识广博，拜为江淮造币监督。
English: Emperor Wuzong issued an edict to reform banknotes and use copper money. Because of the extensive knowledge of the Capital Middle School, he became the supervisor of the Jianghuai mint.

古文：凡天下为监者六，惟江淮所铸钱号最精。
现代文：全国任监督的有六人，只有江淮造的钱最精致。
English: There are six national supervisors, and only the money made by Jianghuai is the most exquisite.

古文：改郴州路总管。
现代文：后改任郴州路总管。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general manager of Zhangzhou Road.

古文：郴居楚上流，溪洞徭獠往来民间，惮其强猾，莫敢与相贸易。都中煦之以恩，慑之以威，乃皆悦服。
现代文：郴州位于楚之上流，奚谷洞徭獠往来于民间，怕其强悍、狡猾，不敢与他们进行贸易，都中予以恩泽，施以威严，于是大家都心悦诚服。
English: Luzhou is located upstream of Chu, and people come and go from Shugu Cave to Shugu Cave. People are afraid of their strength and cunning, and do not dare to trade with them. The capital gives them grace and majesty, so everyone is pleased and convinced.

古文：郴民染于蛮俗，喜斗争，都中乃大治学舍，作笾豆簠簋、笙磬琴瑟之属，使其民识先王礼乐之器，延宿儒教学其中，以义理开晓之，俗为之变。
现代文：郴州百姓受蛮人风俗影响，喜争斗，都中大办学校，教民学习古代先王的礼乐，并请儒学教师进行教育，以义理开导他们，终于使他们的风俗有了改变。
English: The people of Zhangzhou were influenced by barbarian customs and liked to fight, so they set up a school at the Central University of China to teach the people to learn the ritual music of the ancient kings, and invited Confucian teachers to educate them and enlighten them with the principles of righteousness. Finally, their customs have changed.

古文：邻州茶陵富民覃乙死，无子，惟一小妻，及其赘婿，妻诬其婿拜尸成婚，藏隐玉杯夜明珠，株连八百余人，奉使宣抚移其狱，诿之都中，穷治，悉得其情，而正其罪。
现代文：邻州茶陵富民覃乙死了，无子，只一年轻的妻子和招来的女婿，妻诬蔑其婿拜尸成婚，隐藏了玉杯、夜明珠。此案株连八百多人，奉使宣抚将她关进监狱，请都中究问，弄清了案情，判了罪。
English: In the neighboring prefecture of Chaling, Fumin Shouyi died, without a son, leaving only a young wife and a son-in-law. The wife slandered her son-in-law, worshipped the corpse and married him, and hid the jade cup and the pearl necklace. The case involved more than 800 people, and she was sent to prison by the procuratorate. The central government was asked to investigate, the case was clarified, and she was convicted.

古文：州长吏而下，计其赃至十一万五千余缗，人以为神明。
现代文：州长吏以下，共受贿十一万五千缗，人们视他为神明。
English: He received a total of 115,000 baht in bribes from prefectural officials and below, and people regarded him as a god.

古文：迁饶州路总管。
现代文：调任饶州路总管。
English: He was transferred to the post of Raozhou Road General Manager.

古文：年饥，米价翔踊，都中以官仓之米，定其价为三等，言于行省，以为须粜以下等价，民乃可得食，未报。
现代文：遇饥荒，米价飞涨，都中以官仓之米，分三等价，告知行省，必须以下等价出售，百姓才买得起。他这意见未上报。
English: In the event of a famine, rice prices soared. The central government divided the rice in government warehouses into three equal prices and informed the provinces that it must be sold at the lowest price so that the people could afford it. His opinion was not reported.

古文：又于下等价减十之二，使民就籴。
现代文：又将下等米价减十分之二，使老百姓能买。
English: It also reduced the price of inferior rice by two-tenths, so that the common people could buy it.

古文：时宰怒其专擅，都中曰： 饶去杭几二千里，比议定往还，非半月不可。
现代文：当时宰相怒他专权，都中说： 饶州距杭州二千里远，等到议定价回来，往返至少半个月。
English: At that time, the prime minister was angry with his exclusive power and said in the capital: Raozhou is two thousand miles away from Hangzhou, and when the agreed price comes back, the round trip will take at least half a month.

古文：人七日不食则死，安能忍死以待乎！ 
现代文：人七天不食就饿死，能忍心以死等待么？ 
English: People starve to death after seven days without food. Can you bear to wait until you die?

古文：其民亦相与言曰： 公为我辈减米价，公果得罪，我辈当鬻妻子以代公偿。 
现代文：老百姓也说 ：您为我们减低米价，如果您真获罪，我们卖妻子代您还公债。 
English: The common people also said: You lower the price of rice for us, and if you are really found guilty, we will sell our wives to pay off your public debt.

古文：时宰闻之乃罢。
现代文：宰相听到这些后也就作罢。
English: On hearing this, the Prime Minister gave up.

古文：郡岁贡金，而金户贫富不常，都中考得其实，乃更定之。
现代文：郡每年纳贡金，而纳金之户贫富不等，都中了解了实情后，就做了变动。
English: The county levies a fee every year, and the fee varies between rich and poor households. After learning the facts, changes were made.

古文：包银之法，户不过二两，而州县征之加十倍，都中责之，一以诏书从事。
现代文：征收包银按规定每户不过二两，而州县则加十倍征收，都中批评，坚持按诏书办事。
English: According to the regulations, the levy of bagged silver is only two rupees per household, while the state and county levy is ten times more. The central government criticized this and insisted on operating according to the edict.

古文：父老或以两岐之麦、六穗之禾为献，都中曰： 此圣主之嘉瑞，非臣下所敢当。 
现代文：父老们或以两穗的麦子、六穗的稻子献与他，都中说 ：这是圣主的福兆，我不敢当。 
English: Fathers and grandfathers would offer him two ears of wheat or six ears of rice, saying, "This is a sign from the Lord. I dare not do it."

古文：遂以闻于朝。
现代文：就将此事奏于朝廷。
English: He reported the matter to the Imperial Court.

古文：以内忧去郡，民生为立祠。
现代文：因母丧离职，百姓为他立生祠纪念。
English: Due to his mother's death, he left his job, and the people set up a shrine in his memory.

古文：服阕，除两浙都转运盐使，未上，擢海北海南道肃政廉访使。
现代文：服丧期满，官拜两浙都转运盐使，还未上任，又提升为海北海南道肃政廉访使。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was officially appointed as the envoy of salt transshipment for both Zhejiang Provinces, but before taking office, he was promoted to the envoy of political corruption in Hainan Province.

古文：中书省臣奏国计莫重于盐策。
现代文：中书省臣上奏国民生计莫重于盐。
English: A subject from the Ministry of Education and Culture said that the people's livelihood is more important than salt.

古文：乃如前除盐亭灶户，三年一比附推排，世祖旧制也。
现代文：于是按照旧制设盐亭灶户，三年比一次，排定名次，这是世祖时的旧制。
English: As a result, according to the old system, the salt pavilion kitchen was set up, and the ranking was scheduled once every three years, which was the old system at the time of the ancestors.

古文：任事者恐敛怨，久不举行。
现代文：担任此事的人怕遭怨，很久都未进行。
English: The person in charge of this matter has not carried it out for a long time for fear of reproach.

古文：都中曰： 为臣子者，使皆避谪，何以集事？ 
现代文：都中说： 当臣子的，假如都怕被谪，怎能做成一件事情。 
English: It was said in the capital, "When you are a courtier, if you are afraid of being captured, how can you accomplish anything?"

古文：乃请于行省，遍历三十四场，验其物力高下以损益之。
现代文：于是请示行省，走遍了三十四个盐场，检查其生产条件之高低而予以增减。
English: So he asked the Ministry of Commerce and Industry for guidance, and walked through thirty-four salt farms to check the level of their production conditions and increase or decrease them.

古文：役既平而课亦足，公私便之。
现代文：既完成了任务，课税也丰富了，公私都得利。
English: The task has been accomplished, the taxation has been enriched, and both the public and private sectors have benefited.

古文：擢福建闽海道肃政廉访使，俄迁福建道宣慰使都元帅，又改浙东道宣慰使都元帅。
现代文：提升都中为福建闽海道肃政廉访使，不久调任福建道宣慰使都元帅，又任浙东道宣慰使都元帅。
English: He was promoted to Fujian Provincial Political Corruption Prevention Envoy for the Fujian-Shanghai Highway, and was soon transferred to the post of Fujian Provincial Propaganda Envoy for the Fujian-Shanghai Highway and the post of Zhejiang Provincial Propaganda Envoy for the Fujian-Shanghai Highway.

古文：天历初，被省檄，整点七路军马，境内晏然。
现代文：天历初年，奉檄整点七路军马，因此境内秩序安定。
English: In the first year of the calendar, seven armies and horses marched at the same time, so the order in the territory was stable.

古文：徙广东道宣慰使都元帅，三易镇，皆佩元降金虎符。
现代文：调任广东道宣慰使都元帅，换了三处镇守的地方，都佩元降金虎符。
English: He was transferred to the position of the general marshal of Guangdong Province, and the three town guards were changed, and all of them received gold tiger pennants.

古文：元统初，朝廷以两淮盐法久坏，诏命都中以正奉大夫、行户部尚书、两淮都转运盐使，仍赐袭衣法酒。
现代文：元统初年，朝廷因两淮盐法破坏已久，皇帝下诏命都中为正奉大夫、行户部尚书、两淮都转运盐使，仍然赠给衣一套，并赐宴。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court, because the two Huai salt method had been destroyed for a long time, the emperor issued an edict ordering the capital to be the official doctor, the household department to be written, and the two Huai to transport salt. He still gave a set of clothes and gave a banquet.

古文：都中既至，参酌前所行于两浙者，次第施行之，盐法遂修。
现代文：都中既就任，参照以往施行于两浙的改革，分期推行，盐政就整顿好了。
English: As soon as the Tokyo Metropolitan Government took office, the reforms implemented in the past in Zhejiang and Zhejiang were carried out in phases, and the salt policy was rectified.

古文：寻拜河南行省参知政事，中道以疾作南归。
现代文：不久拜为河南行省参知政事，中途因身体有疾而南归。
English: Soon after, he went to Henan Province to participate in the political affairs of the prefectural government. However, he had to return to the south due to illness.

古文：于是天子闵其老，诏即其家拜江浙行省参知政事。
现代文：天子同情他年老，将诏下到他的家中拜为江浙行省参知政事。
English: Tianzi sympathized with his old age, and sent an imperial edict to his home to pray for Jiangsu and Zhejiang to carry out the political affairs of the governor.

古文：至正元年卒。
现代文：至正元年逝世。
English: He died in the first year of Zheng He.

古文：赠昭文馆大学士，谥清献。
现代文：追赠昭文馆大学士，谥号清献。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shobunkwan University Scholar.

古文：都中历仕四十余年，所至政誉辄暴著，而治郡之绩，虽古循吏无以尚之。
现代文：都中任官职四十余年，所到之处，政治上的荣誉都极显著，而治理郡县之业绩，即使是古代遵守理法的官吏也没有比他更好的。
English: He has been in office for more than forty years in the capital, and wherever he has been, his political honor has been very significant, and the performance of governing counties and counties, even the ancient officials who abide by the laws of reason, are no better than him.

古文：当世南人以政事之名闻天下，而位登省宪者，惟都中而已。
现代文：当时南人以政事之名而传天下，而地位在行省最高长官之上的，只有都中一人。
English: At that time, Nanren was known to the world in the name of politics, and there was only one person in the capital with a position above the highest governor of the province.

古文：又其清白之操，得于家传，所赐田宅之外，不增一疃，不易一椽，廪禄悉以给族姻之贫者，人尤以是多之。
现代文：而他清白的情操，则是得自家传，除皇帝所赐予的田产和住宅外，宅外未增一块地，宅内未换一椽。政府分给的粮食和俸禄全都分给同族和亲戚中贫困的人。
English: However, his pure sentiments were passed down in his family. In addition to the land and house given by the emperor, he did not add a piece of land outside the house and did not change a single baht inside the house. All the grain and salary distributed by the government were distributed to the poor among his relatives and relatives.

古文：幼留京师，及拜许衡，即知所趋向。
现代文：幼年留于京师，待到拜许衡为师，已知道自己的发展前程。
English: As a child, he stayed in Beijing as a teacher, and stayed until he became a teacher in Baixu Heng. He already knew his future development.

古文：中年尤致力于根本之学，自号曰本斋。
现代文：中年时期，更致力于根本之学。自号本斋。
English: In middle age, he devoted himself even more to fundamental studies, calling himself Honzai.

古文：有诗集三卷。
现代文：著有诗集三卷。
English: He is the author of three volumes of poetry.

古文：王克敬王克敬，字叔能，大宁人。
现代文：王克敬字叔能，大宁人。
English: Wang Kejing, also known as Uncle Neng, is from Daming.

古文：幼奇颖，尝戏道旁，丞相完泽见之，谓左右曰： 是儿资貌秀伟，异日必令器也。 
现代文：幼年特别聪颖，在路旁游戏时，丞相完泽见到，对身旁的人说： 这个儿童聪明秀丽，他日必然是重要之才。 
English: He was particularly bright at a young age. When he was playing on the roadside, he saw the prime minister, Kanazawa, and said to the people around him: This child is smart and beautiful, and he will certainly be an important talent one day.

古文：大宁朔土，习尚少文，而克敬独孜孜为儒者事。
现代文：大宁地处北方，习俗很少崇尚于文，而克敬独孜孜于儒学。
English: Danyang is located in the north, and customs are rarely advocated in literature, while reverence for Confucianism prevails.

古文：既仕，累迁江浙行省照磨，寻升检校。
现代文：出仕任江浙行省照磨，不久升为检校。
English: He served as the provincial inspector of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and was soon promoted to inspector of schools.

古文：徽州民汪俊上变，诬富人反，省臣遣克敬往验之。克敬察其言不实，中道数为开陈祸福，俊悔，将对簿，竟仰药以死。
现代文：徽州百姓汪俊诬富人谋反。省臣派克敬前往查证，克敬发现他的话不可靠，多次对汪俊开导，说明利害关系，俊后悔，将对证时，竟服药自杀。
English: The people of Huizhou, Wang Jun, accused the rich of plotting a rebellion. The provincial vassal sent Kejing to investigate. Kejing found his words unreliable and repeatedly enlightened Wang Jun, explaining the interests. Jun regretted and, when confronted with the evidence, actually took medicine and committed suicide.

古文：调奉议大夫、知顺州，以内外艰不上。
现代文：调任奉议大夫、顺州知事，因双亲丧事未赴任。
English: He was transferred to the post of doctor of medicine and governor of Shun State, but did not take up the post due to the death of his parents.

古文：除江浙行省左右司都事。
现代文：任命江浙行省左右司都事。
English: Appointment of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Left and Right Departments.

古文：延祐四年，往四明监倭人互市。
现代文：延四年，前往四明监察与日本人的贸易。
English: Four years later, he went to Shimei to monitor trade with the Japanese.

古文：先是，往监者惧外夷情叵测，必严兵自卫，如待大敌。克敬至，悉去之，抚以恩意，皆帖然无敢哗。
现代文：开始时，前往监察的人害怕外夷情况难测，必须以强大的军兵自卫，如对大敌那样，克敬到了那里，撤去大兵，以恩意抚慰，日本人都很服帖，无人敢于作乱。
English: At the beginning, the people who went to the inspection were afraid of the unpredictable situation of the outside world, and had to defend themselves with strong soldiers. As if they were against a great enemy, when they got there, they withdrew the soldiers and consoled them with gratitude. The Japanese were very obedient, and no one dared to make trouble.

古文：有吴人从军征日本陷于倭者，至是从至中国，诉于克敬，愿还本乡。
现代文：有吴人从军征日本而沦落于倭，到这时回到了中国，告诉克敬，愿意回到本乡去，又恐怕引来祸害。
English: A Wu man, who had fallen in Wa after the Japanese invasion, returned to China at this time and told Ke Jing that he was willing to return to his hometown, but feared that it would bring disaster.

古文：或恐为祸阶，克敬曰： 岂有军士怀恩德来归而不之纳邪！脱有衅，吾当坐。 
现代文：克敬说 ：哪有军士怀念恩德来归而不接纳呢，如发生事端，我承担责任。 
English: Kegui said, "If there is a sergeant who misses Nde and does not accept him, I will take responsibility if something happens."

古文：事闻，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：朝廷听到这件事后，给予赞许。
English: When the court heard about this, they gave their approval.

古文：番阳大饥，总管王都中出廪粟赈之，行省欲罪其擅发，克敬曰： 番阳距此千里，比待命，民且死，彼为仁，而吾属顾为不仁乎！ 
现代文：鄱阳饥馑，总管王都中开仓放粮赈济，行省要办他擅自发粮的罪，克敬说： 鄱阳距此千里之远，待等到命令，民已饿死，他为仁德，而我则愿为不仁么！ 
English: Poyang is starving, the governor of the capital has opened a warehouse to distribute grain to save money, and the province is going to deal with him for the crime of distributing grain without authorization, Ke Jing said: Poyang is thousands of miles away, wait until the order, the people have starved to death, he is benevolent, and I would like to be unkind!

古文：都中因得免。
现代文：都中因而免罪。
English: As a result, he was exonerated.

古文：拜监察御史，用故事监吏部选。有履历当升者，吏故抑之，问故，吏曰： 有过。 
现代文：拜监察御史，官吏升迁依据惯例由吏部推举，有人按履历应当升迁，吏部官吏故意压抑。问其缘故，吏说： 有过。 
English: According to the history of supervision, the promotion of officials is usually recommended by the personnel department. Some people should be promoted according to their resumes, but the officials of the personnel department deliberately suppressed them. When asked why, the officials said: Yes.

古文：克敬曰： 法，笞四十七以上不升，今不至是。 
现代文：克敬说 ：法律规定，被鞭笞四十七板以上的不能升，现在此人不是这样。 
English: Kegui said, "According to the law, a person who has been whipped cannot be promoted higher than forty-seven boards, but that is not the case with this person now."

古文：吏曰： 责轻罪重。 
现代文：吏说： 责轻罪重。 
English: The magistrate said, "The lesser the punishment, the greater the crime."

古文：曰： 失出在刑部，铨曹安知其罪重！ 
现代文：克敬说： 此人过失出在刑部，吏部官员怎么知道他的罪重！ 
English: Kegui said, "This person's fault was found in the criminal investigation department, how could the officials of the criminal investigation department know the severity of his crime!"

古文：卒升之。
现代文：于是就提升了。
English: So it's gone up.

古文：治书侍御史张伯高曰： 往者监选以减驳为能，今王御史乃论增品级，可为世道贺矣。 
现代文：治书侍御史张伯高说： 以往，监选人才以降级为能事，而今王御史论履历增加品级，可为世道祝贺。 
English: Zhang Bogao, the secretary of the history, said: In the past, supervising the selection of talents and downgrading was a good thing, but now Wang Yushi's curriculum vitae has increased the grade, which can be congratulated by the world.

古文：寻迁左司都事。
现代文：不久迁职左司都事。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Left Division Chief.

古文：时英宗厉精图治，丞相拜住请更前政不便者，会议中书堂，克敬首言： 江南包银，民贫有不能输者，有司以责之役户，甚无谓也，当罢之。
现代文：当时英宗励精图治，丞相拜住请求改变以前政治上不好的方面，中书堂会议上，克敬首先说 ：江南的包银，百姓中的贫困户有不能缴纳的，有司则罚为役户，很没意思，应撤消。
English: At that time, Emperor Yingzong made strenuous efforts to govern, and the prime minister Baju requested to change the previously bad aspects of politics. At the meeting of the Central Library, Kegui first said: In the south of the Yangtze River, there are poor households that cannot pay, and there are officials who are punished as officials. It is not interesting and should be revoked.

古文：两浙煎盐户牢盆之役，其重者尤害民，当免其它役。 
现代文：两浙煎盐户服煮盐的劳役，其中重者更为害民，应免其他徭役。 
English: The two salt-making households of Zhejiang Province shall be exempted from the labor service of boiling salt, and the heavier one shall be exempted from the other labor service.

古文：议定以闻，悉从之。
现代文：议定后上报皇上，皆被采纳。
English: After the agreement was reached, it was reported to the emperor, and all of them were accepted.

古文：泰定初，出为绍兴路总管，郡中计口受盐，民困于诛求，乃上言乞减盐五千引。运司弗从，因叹曰： 使我为运使，当令越民少苏矣。 
现代文：泰定初年，出任绍兴路总管，郡中按人口购盐，对百姓进行搜刮不堪承受，克敬请求朝廷减盐五千引，转运司不同意，因此叹息说： 假如我当转运使，老百姓可以减轻负担。 
English: In the first year of his appointment as the general manager of Shaoxing Road, the county purchased salt according to the population, and it was unbearable to search for the people. He respectfully requested the court to reduce the salt by five thousand. The transportation department did not agree, so he sighed and said: If I were the transportation envoy, the people could reduce the burden.

古文：行省檄克敬抽分舶货，拗蕃者例籍其货，商人以风水为解，有司不听。
现代文：行省令克敬对海外运来的货物征税，违抗者按例没收其货。商人以风水为由辩解，官府不听。
English: A provincial order was issued to impose taxes on goods shipped from overseas, and those who defied the order had their goods confiscated as usual. Merchants defended themselves on the grounds of feng shui, but the government did not listen.

古文：克敬曰： 某货出某国，地有远近，货有轻重，冒重险，出万死，舍近而趋远，弃重而取轻，岂人情邪！ 
现代文：克敬说 ：某货出自某国，地有远近，货有轻重，冒重险，出万死，舍近求远，弃重取轻，岂是人们所情愿！ 
English: Ke Jing said: A certain product comes from a certain country, the land is far and near, the goods are light and heavy, risking heavy risks, risking death, sacrificing the near and seeking the far, abandoning the heavy and taking the light, is that what people want!

古文：具以上闻，众不能夺，商人德之。
现代文：他将此事报呈朝廷，众人不能否定，商人对他感恩戴德。
English: He reported the matter to the imperial court, which everyone could not deny, and the merchant was very grateful to him.

古文：擢江西道廉访司副使，转两浙盐运司使，首减绍兴民食盐五千引。
现代文：提拔为江西道廉访副使，转任两浙盐运司使，首先减少百姓五千引食盐税的负担。
English: He was promoted to the deputy envoy of Jiangxi Province, and transferred to the envoy of the two Zhejiang Salt Transportation Departments. First of all, he reduced the burden of salt tax on the people by five thousand yuan.

古文：温州逮犯私盐者，以一妇人至，怒曰： 岂有逮妇人千百里外，与吏卒杂处者，污教甚矣！自今毋得逮妇人。 
现代文：温州逮捕贩私盐的人，抓了一个妇女，克敬愤怒地说： 哪有在千里之外逮一个妇女，让她与卒吏杂处，太玷污圣人的教化，今后不得逮妇人。 
English: Wenzhou arrested a salt smuggler and arrested a woman. He said angrily, "How dare they arrest a woman thousands of miles away, let her mingle with the officials, too tarnish the enlightenment of the saints, they must not arrest women in the future."

古文：建议著为令。
现代文：这个建议以法令形式规定下来。
English: The proposal has now been enshrined in law.

古文：明年，擢湖南道廉访使，调海道都漕运万户。
现代文：第二年，提升为湖南道廉访使，调海道都漕运万户。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the unlicensed envoy of Hunan Province, and he was the first to transport 10,000 households by canal.

古文：是岁，当天历之变，海漕舟有后至直沽者，不果输，复漕而南还，行省欲坐罪督运者，勒其还趋直沽。克敬以谓： 脱其常年而往返若是，信可罪。
现代文：这一年，正当 天历之变 ，海漕舟中有后到直沽的，未运到就南还，行省要办督运官的罪，让他回到直沽，克敬对他说： 如果他常年都是这么做，应该办罪。
English: This year, due to the change of the calendar, some of the sea rowing boats came to Naosuke later, but they were not transported to the south, and the province wanted to deal with the crime of the transport officer and let him return to Naosuke. Kejing said to him: If he does this all year round, he should be dealt with.

古文：今蹈万死，完所漕而还，岂得已哉！ 
现代文：今冒万死，完成运输任务就返回，这是不得已才这样！ 
English: To take the risk of death and return after completing the transport mission, this is the last resort!

古文：乃请令其计石数，附次年所漕舟达京师，省臣从之。
现代文：于是请发令计其担数，次年补足所缺运达京师，省臣同意这个意见了。
English: Therefore, I requested that an order be issued to calculate the number of people to be responsible for it, and the following year to make up for the lack of transportation to Beijing. The provincial minister agreed with this opinion.

古文：召为参议中书省事。
现代文：召入朝参议中书省事。
English: Summoned to the Council of Elders to mediate.

古文：有以飞语中大臣者，下其事，克敬持古八议之法，谓勋贵可以不议，且罪状不明而轻罪大臣，何以白天下。
现代文：有流言蜚语中伤大臣，查其事，克敬执行审议对八种人实行减刑免刑的所谓 八议之法 ，认为功勋显贵者可以不议，而且罪状不明白而给大臣问罪，怎么向天下人说清楚。
English: There are rumors and gossip that slander the minister, investigate the matter, respectfully implement and review the so-called eight-sentence law that commutes and pardons eight kinds of people, and consider that those with distinguished service can not be questioned, and the charges are not clear and the minister is questioned, how to make it clear to the world.

古文：宰相传旨大长公主为皇外姑，赐钱若干；平云南军还，赐钱若干；英后入觐，赐钱若干。
现代文：宰相传旨：大长公主为皇外姑，应赐予多少钱；平定云南的军队回来后，应赐钱多少；英后入朝拜见皇帝，赐钱多少。
English: The chancellor sent a message: how much money should be given to the eldest princess for being the emperor's aunt; how much money should be given after the return of the army to pacify Yunnan; how much money should be given after the British queen entered the court to worship the emperor.

古文：克敬乞覆奏，宰相怒曰： 参议乃敢格诏命邪！ 
现代文：克敬请求再奏请皇上斟酌，宰相愤怒地说： 参议敢于改变皇上的命令么？ 
English: Kegui asked the emperor to reconsider, and the prime minister angrily said, "How dare the councillors change the emperor's order?

古文：克敬曰： 用财宜有道，大长公主供馈素优，今赐钱出无名，不当也。
现代文：克敬说： 用财应有道理，大长公主供养向来优厚，今赐钱没有名，不当。
English: Kegui said, "The use of money should be reasonable. The provisioning of the eldest princess has always been generous. Giving money now without a name is improper.

古文：自诸军征讨以来，赏格未下，平云南省独先受赏，是不均也。
现代文：自从诸军征讨以来，奖赏的规格未定，现在唯独平云南的军兵要先受赏，是不公平的。
English: It is unfair that the specifications of the reward have not been decided since the army began to recruit. Now, only the soldiers in Pingyunnan should receive the reward first.

古文：英后远还，徒御众多，非大锡赉，恩意不能洽，今赐物鲜少，是不周也。 
现代文：英后从远地回还，随从众多，必须赏赐大量的钱，否则与恩意不相符。现在赐物很少，是不周到的。 
English: When a queen returns from a distant land with a large retinue, it is necessary to reward her with a large amount of money, otherwise it would not be in keeping with her graciousness. Nowadays, gifts are few and inconsiderate.

古文：宰相以闻，帝可其议。
现代文：宰相奏与皇上，帝同意他的说法。
English: The prime minister played with the emperor, and the emperor agreed with him.

古文：拜中奉大夫、参知政事，行省辽阳。
现代文：授中奉大夫、参知政事，行省辽阳。
English: He was awarded the title of junior high school teacher, served as a doctor, and participated in government affairs. He governed Liaoyang Province.

古文：俄除江南行台治书侍御史，又迁淮东廉访使，以正纲纪为己任，不纵贪墨，不阿宗戚，声誉益著。入为吏部尚书，乘传至淮安，坠马，居吴中养疾。
现代文：不久转任江南行台治书侍御史，又转任淮东廉访使，他以整顿朝纲政纪为己任，不受贿赂，不受亲朋的阿谀奉承，声誉更高，进京任吏部尚书，乘马至奉安时，摔于马下，于是住吴中养病。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of the governor of the Southern Yangtze River, and then to the post of the envoy of the Huai-Dong Liang. He took it as his duty to rectify the political system and discipline of the dynasty. He did not accept bribes or flattery from relatives and friends, and his reputation was higher. He went to Beijing as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. When he rode a horse to Feng'an, he fell under the horse, so he lived in Wuzhong to recover.

古文：元统初，起为江浙行省参知政事，请罢富民承佃江淮田，从之。
现代文：元统初年，起用为江浙行省参知政事，请求取消富民承租江淮田的决定，朝廷同意。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the political advisor to the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and requested the cancellation of Fumin's decision to lease Jianghuai Tian. The imperial court agreed.

古文：松江大姓，有岁漕米万石献京师者，其人既死，子孙贫且行乞，有司仍岁征，弗足则杂置松江田赋中，令民包纳。
现代文：松江大户，有人每年向京献米万担运到京师，其人已死，子孙贫困行乞，官府每年还要征收，收不够时混杂于松江田赋中，要求老百姓来承担。
English: In the large households of Matsue, some people donate rice to Beijing every year and carry it to Beijing, but they are dead, their children and grandchildren are poor and begging, the government has to collect it every year, and when the collection is not enough, it is mixed in the Matsue rice fields, and the people are asked to bear the burden.

古文：克敬曰： 匹夫妄献米，徼名爵以荣一身，今身死家破，又已夺其爵，不可使一郡之人均受其害，国用宁乏此耶！ 
现代文：克敬说 ：一个平民献米，贪图荣誉于一身，现在人死家败，且已剥夺他的爵位，不可使一郡人都受其害，国家就缺这点么？ 
English: Kegui said, "A commoner offered rice, craving for honor, and now he has been defeated, and has been deprived of his peerage. A whole county should not be victimized by him. Is this what the country lacks?"

古文：具论免之。江浙大旱，诸民田减租，唯长宁寺田不减，遂移牍中书，以谓不可忽天变而毒疲民。
现代文：江浙大旱，民田都减租，只有长宁寺的田不减，就行文给中书，指出不可忽视天灾而使百姓受害。
English: Due to the drought in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, the rent of people's fields has been reduced. Only the fields of Changning Temple have not been reduced. Therefore, a letter was sent to the Chinese government, pointing out that it is impossible to ignore natural disasters and make the people suffer.

古文：岭海徭贼窃发，朝廷调戍兵之在行省者往讨之，会提调军马官缺，故事，汉人不得与军政，众莫知所为，克敬抗言： 行省任方面之寄，假令万一有重于此者，亦将拘法坐视邪！ 
现代文：岭南徭人造反，朝廷调行省的卫戍军兵前往征讨，恰好当时缺少提调军马官。按照规定，汉人不能参与军政，众人不知该如何办，克敬对上直率地说： 行省被寄托一方面的任务，假如万一有比这个更重要的任务，也拘守于法而坐着等么？ 
English: In Lingnan Province, there was a rebellion, and the imperial court transferred the provincial garrison soldiers to go and fight. It just so happened that there was a shortage of military officers at that time. According to regulations, Han people could not participate in military and political affairs, and people did not know what to do. Ke Jian said to him bluntly: The province was entrusted with one aspect of the task. If there were a more important task than this, would you also abide by the law and sit and wait?

古文：故其历官所至，俱有政绩可纪，时称名卿。
现代文：于是调兵前往剿捕，并供给军粮，朝廷得知此事，就令江西、湖广二省供应军粮。任职五个月，请告老还乡，时年五十九岁。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched to Yangtze River to capture and supply military rations. When the imperial court learned of this, it ordered the two provinces of Jiangxi and Hubei to supply military rations. After serving for five months, he returned to his hometown, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：克敬喜读书，其有所得者，辄抄为书。
现代文：克敬喜读书，有所心得，就写成书。
English: KJ enjoys reading, and when he has something to say, he writes a book.

古文：又有所著诗文奏议传于世。
现代文：著有诗、文章和奏议传于世。
English: His poems, essays and speeches have been passed down to the present day.

古文：元统三年卒，年六十一。
现代文：元统三年逝世，终年六十一岁。
English: Mototsune died three years later at the age of sixty-one.

古文：任速哥任速哥，渤海人。
现代文：赠中奉大夫、陕西等处参知政事，追封梁郡公，谥号文肃。任速哥，渤海人。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhong Bong Dafu, the title of Shaanxi governor, the title of Liang Guncong, and the honorary title of Wenshu. He was a member of the Sino-Japanese Friendship Association, and a native of Bohai.

古文：自幼事父母以孝称。
现代文：自幼以孝顺父母闻名。
English: He has been known for his filial piety since childhood.

古文：性倜傥，尤峭直，疏财而尚气，不尚势利。义之所在，必亟为之，有古侠士风。
现代文：性格潇洒、刚直，仗义疏财，不依靠势利，凡与义有关的事，必定尽力去做，具有古侠之风度。
English: He has a dashing and upright personality. He does not rely on snobbery, but tries his best to do everything related to righteousness. He has the demeanor of an ancient knight.

古文：而家居恂恂，儒者不能过。
现代文：在家中诚实、恭敬，即使是儒家学者也不能超过他。
English: Honest and respectful at home, even Confucian scholars cannot surpass him.

古文：初袭父官，为右卫千户。公卿以其贤，荐于朝。
现代文：最初世袭父亲右卫千户之官，公卿们以他贤德而推荐于朝廷。
English: At first, his father, Ue no Chika, was a hereditary official, and nobles recommended him to the Imperial Court for his virtue.

古文：英宗召见，与语奇之。由是出入禁闼，待以心腹，将择重职处之。
现代文：英宗召见，见他谈吐不凡，器重他，认为心腹，准备任命重要官职。
English: Emperor Yingzong summoned him, saw his extraordinary speech, valued him, considered him a confidant, and prepared to appoint him to an important official post.

古文：未几，铁失与倒剌沙构谋，英宗遇弑，遂引去。
现代文：不久，铁失与倒剌沙合谋，英宗被弑，他就引退了，从此不再出任官职。
English: Soon after, the iron loss conspired with the bad luck sand, and Yingzong was arrested. He retired and no longer held any official position.

古文：自是不复出仕，居常扼腕，或醉归，恸哭过市，时人目以为狂，莫知其意也。
现代文：居家期间，有时很激动，有时大醉而归，有时痛哭过市，当时人们认为他是个疯子，不知道他内心痛苦。
English: At home, he was sometimes agitated, sometimes drunk, sometimes crying, when people thought he was crazy and did not know his inner pain.

古文：泰定中，倒剌沙用事，天变数见。
现代文：泰定中，倒剌沙当权，多次出现天变现象。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiding, the evil Basha was in power, and the phenomenon of natural change occurred many times.

古文：速哥乃密与平章政事速速谋曰： 先帝之仇，孤臣朝夕痛心而不能报者，以未有善策也。
现代文：速哥秘密地对平章政事速速说： 先帝之仇，为臣朝夕痛心而不能报，是因为没有找到好计策。
English: Hayao secretly said to Pingzhang Shijihaku: The vengeance of the former emperor is painful for the vassal morning and evening, and he cannot report it because he has not found a good strategy.

古文：今吾思之，武宗有子二人，长子周王，正统所属，然远居朔方，难以达意。
现代文：现在我考虑武宗有二子，长子名周王，属于正统，然而远在北方，难以通达消息。
English: Now I consider that Wuzong has two sons, the eldest son named Zhou Wang, who is orthodox, but far away in the north, it is difficult to get information.

古文：次子怀王，人望所归，而近在金陵，易于传命。
现代文：次子怀王，众望所归，而且近在金陵，易于传达命令。
English: The second son, King Huai, is highly regarded, and is close to Jinling, making it easy to convey orders.

古文：若能同心推戴，以图大计，则先帝之仇可雪也。 
现代文：如能同心拥护他以成大业，先帝之仇即可报了。 
English: If we can all support him to become a great cause, the revenge of the former emperor can be reported.

古文：速速深然之。
现代文：速速完全同意。
English: I wholeheartedly agree.

古文：时燕帖木儿方佥枢密院事，实握兵柄，二人深结纳之。
现代文：当时燕帖木儿刚刚任枢密院佥事，掌握着兵权，二人与他深交。
English: At that time, Yan Timur had just been appointed Privy Councillor and held military power, and the two had a deep friendship with him.

古文：冬，乃告以所谋，燕帖木儿初闻之矍然。
现代文：是年冬把他们的打算告诉燕帖木儿，燕帖木儿一听感到吃惊。
English: It was in the winter of last year that they told Yanzhimuer of their plans, and Yanzhimuer was surprised when he heard about it.

古文：因徐说之曰： 天下之事，惟顺逆两途，以顺讨逆，何患不克。
现代文：因而慢慢地说 ：天下之事，只有顺与逆两条路，以顺讨逆，不怕不胜。
English: Therefore, he said slowly: In the world, there are only two ways, forward and backward, and it is better to go forward than backward.

古文：况公国家世臣，与国同休戚，今国难不恤，他日有先我而谋者，祸必及矣。 
现代文：何况您是国家世臣，与国休戚相关，今天不为国难忧虑，有一天有人在我们之先动手，大祸就降临了。 
English: What's more, you are a national statesman, you are closely related to the country, and today you are not worried about the difficulties of the country. One day, someone will make a move before us, and a great disaster will come.

古文：于是燕帖木儿许之。
现代文：于是燕帖木儿同意他们的谋划。
English: So Yentemur agreed to their plan.

古文：致和元年，怀王自金陵迁江陵，俄而泰定帝崩，倒剌沙逾月不立君，物情汹汹，速哥乃与速速从燕帖木儿奉豫王令，率诸豪杰，乘时奋义，以八月四日执居守省臣，发兵塞居庸诸关，召文武百僚集阙下，谕以翊戴大义，遣使迎怀王于江陵。
现代文：致和元年，怀王自金陵迁江陵，不久泰定帝崩，倒剌沙过了一个多月还不立新帝，形势紧迫，速哥与速速从燕帖木儿奉豫王之令，率领各位豪杰，及时起义，于八月四日，逮捕省臣，发兵占据居庸等关口，召集文武百官于皇宫，说明辅佐拥戴大义，派遣使臣赴江陵迎接怀王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, King Huai moved from Jinling to Gangneung. Soon after, Emperor Taiding passed away. After more than a month of bad weather, a new emperor was not established. The situation was urgent. On the orders of King Hui, Emperor Huai and Emperor Yan of Yan Timur led all the heroes in a timely uprising. On August 4, they arrested provincial ministers, sent troops to occupy Juyong and other gates, and gathered hundreds of civil and military officials in the imperial palace to show that the vice-regent supported the great cause and sent envoys to Gangneung to welcome King Huai.

古文：怀王至京师，群臣请正大统，遂即皇帝位，是为文宗。
现代文：怀王至京师，群臣请他即帝位，这就是文帝。
English: When Emperor Huai went to Beijing, the courtiers invited him to ascend the throne. This is Emperor Wen.

古文：论功行赏，擢速哥为礼部尚书，速哥辞曰： 臣曩备宿卫，南坡之变，不能勇效一死，以报国士之知。今日之举，皆诸将相之力，在臣未足赎罪，又曷敢言功乎！ 
现代文：论功行赏，提升速哥为礼部尚书，速哥推辞说： 我以往负保卫之职，在南坡之变中，我不能效勇于一死，以报朝廷，今日的行动，是各位将相之力，对我来说，还不足以赎罪，又怎敢说有功！ 
English: On the merits and performance award, the promotion of the fast brother to the ceremonial department was written, and the fast brother said: I used to be responsible for the protection, in the Nanpo change, I can not be brave enough to die, to repay the court, today's action is the strength of the generals, for me, it is not enough to atone, and how dare I say that it is meritorious!

古文：文宗慰勉之，乃拜命。
现代文：文宗予以劝勉，于是拜任。
English: Wenzong encouraged him, and he accepted the post.

古文：而其他赏赉，一无所受。
现代文：其他赏赐，一概未受。
English: He did not receive any other awards.

古文：寻迁长宁寺卿，继出为安丰路总管，又入为寿福府总管，又为都水使者，居官恂恂，无几微自伐之意。人或询以翊戴之事，往往逊谢，终无所言，君子尤以是多之。
现代文：不久转任长宁寺卿，既而又出任安丰路总管、又进宫任寿福府总管，都水使者，居官恭敬，从不居功自傲，人们偶尔问以拥立新君之事，常常是谦逊不语，君子更因此而称赞他。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Choninji-kyo, and at the same time, he served as the head of Anfeng Road, and also entered the palace to serve as the head of Shufu Prefecture, the capital water envoy. He was respectful to officials, and never took pride in his achievements. People occasionally asked him about supporting the new emperor, and he was often modest and silent. Gentlemen even praised him for this.

古文：陈思谦陈思谦，字景让，其家世见祖祐传中。
现代文：陈思谦字景让，家世见其祖父陈传。
English: Chen Shih-hsien spells his name as Jing-jang, and his grandfather Chen Chuan is said to be the patriarch of the family.

古文：思谦少孤，警敏好学，凡名物度数、纲纪本末，考订详究，尤深于邵子《皇极经世书》。
现代文：思谦少年时期丧父，他机警聪明好学，对事物的名称、数量、法制的始末都有详尽的研究，对邵子《皇极经世书》研究尤深。
English: Si Qian lost his father when he was a boy. He was alert, clever and eager to learn. He made exhaustive studies of the names, quantities and legal system of things. He was particularly deep in the study of Shao Zi's "The Book of Kings."

古文：文宗天历初政，收揽贤能，丞相高昌王亦都护举思谦，时年四十矣。
现代文：文宗天历初年问政，朝廷征集贤能，丞相高昌王亦都护推举思谦，当时他已四十岁。
English: In the first year of Wenzong Tianli's political career, the imperial court called for talents, and the prime minister Gaochang Wang also recommended Shichian, who was already forty years old at the time.

古文：召见兴圣宫。明年二月，授典宝监经历。
现代文：天子在兴圣宫召见他，第二年二月，授任典宝监经历。
English: The Son of Heaven summoned him to the Xing Sheng Palace, and in February of the following year, he was awarded the title of Grand Treasurer.

古文：十一月，改礼部主事，首言： 教坊、仪凤二司，请并入宣徽，以清礼部之选。
现代文：十一月，改任礼部主事，他首先说： 教坊、仪凤二司，请并入宣徽院，以便礼部的选贤。
English: In November, when he was appointed as the head of the ceremonial department, he first said: "Please merge the classroom and the two departments of ceremony and phoenix into Xuanhui Academy, so that the selection of the ceremonial department will be better."

古文：其官属不当与文武臣并列朝会，宜置百官之后、大乐之前。 
现代文：它所属的官员不应与文、武百官并列朝会，应在百官之后，大乐之前。 
English: The officials to whom it belongs should not be ranked alongside the civil and military officials in the imperial court, but should come after the officials and before the great music.

古文：诏从之。而二司隶礼部如故。
现代文：帝同意思谦的意见，但仍将二司隶属于礼部。
English: The emperor agreed with Shih Chien's opinion, but still subordinated the Second Division to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：至顺元年，拜西行台监察御史，建明八事：一曰正君道，二曰结人心，三曰崇礼让，四曰正纲纪，五曰审铨衡，六曰励孝行，七曰纾民力，八曰修军政。
现代文：至顺元年，拜西行台监察御史，他提出了八条建议： 一、端正君道；二、团结人心；三、崇尚礼让；四、整顿纲纪；五、审查官吏推举制度；六、鼓励孝行；七、减轻百姓负担；八、修整军政。
English: In the first year of Shun, he went to the west and surveyed the history of Taiwan, and he put forward eight suggestions: First, rectify the monarch's way; Second, unite the people; Third, advocate courtesy; Fourth, rectify discipline; Fifth, review the official nomination system; Sixth, encourage filial piety; Seventh, reduce the burden on the people; Eighth, reform the military and government.

古文：先是，关陕大饥，民多鬻产流徙，及来归，皆无地可耕，思谦言： 听民倍直赎之，使富者收兼入之利，贫者获已弃之业。 
现代文：在此以前，关陕饥荒，百姓卖地逃亡，回来后，都无地可耕。思谦说： 让百姓以加倍的价值赎回卖去的地，使富人收双倍的利，穷人获得已抛弃的产业。 
English: Prior to this, there was a famine in Kansai, and the people sold their land and fled, and when they returned, they had no land to farm. Sihian said: Let the people redeem the land they sold at double the value, so that the rich can receive double the profit, and the poor can obtain the abandoned property.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听取了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：监察御史李扩行部甘肃，金州民刘海延都，其男元元，自称流民王延禄，非海延都之子，告海延都掠其财。扩听之，以酷法抑其父。思谦劾扩逆父子之天，坏朝廷之法，遂抵扩罪。
现代文：监察御史李扩巡视甘肃，金州百姓刘海延都之子元元，自称是流民王延禄，不是海延都的儿子，控告海延都掠夺他的财产，李扩信以为真，对其父施重刑，思谦弹劾他违反父子之天伦，破坏朝廷之法纪，办了他的罪。
English: The inspector of imperial history, Li Zhan, inspected Gansu. Yuan Yuan, the son of Liu Hai Yandu, a citizen of Jinzhou, claimed to be the exile Wang Yanlu, not the son of Hai Yandu, and accused Hai Yandu of plundering his property. Li Zhanxin believed it to be true and imposed a heavy sentence on his father. Xi Qian impeached him for violating the father-son relationship and undermining the court's legal discipline, and dealt with his crime.

古文：明年二月，迁太禧宗禋院都事。
现代文：至顺二年二月，迁职太禧宗院都事。
English: By February of the second year of Shun, the relocation of Taixi's ancestral home was complete.

古文：九月，拜监察御史，首陈四事，言： 上有宗庙社稷之重，下有四海烝民之生，前有祖宗垂创之艰，后有子孙长久之计。
现代文：九月，拜授监察御史，他首先陈奏了四件事，他说： 上有祖宗宗庙，国家之重任，下有四海百姓之生存，前有祖宗创业之艰难，后有子孙长久之计谋。
English: In September, he was awarded the title of "Supervisor of Imperial History," and he first listed four things. He said: On the top, there is the ancestral temple, the important task of the country, on the bottom, there is the survival of the people of the four seas, on the front, there is the hardship of the ancestors' entrepreneurship, and on the back, there is the long-term strategy of the descendants.

古文：中论秦、汉以来，上下三千余年，天直一统者，六百余年而已。
现代文：就中而论，自秦、汉以来，上下三千余年，天下得以统一的，仅六百多年。
English: As far as China is concerned, since the Qin and Han dynasties, there have been more than 3,000 years of ups and downs, and the world has only been unified for more than 600 years.

古文：我朝开国，百有余年，混一六十余年，土宇人民，三代、汉、唐所未有也。
现代文：我朝开国一百多年，统一天下六十多年，人民的富裕，三代、汉、唐都未曾有过。
English: It has been more than 100 years since the founding of our country, and more than 60 years since unification. The people of the three dynasties, Han and Tang, have never been so wealthy.

古文：民有千金之产，犹谨守之，以为先人所营，况君临天下，承祖宗艰难之业，而传祚万世者乎！
现代文：民有千金的产业，还谨慎地守住它，认为是祖先创立的。何况皇上拥有天下，继承祖宗艰难之业，而传国万世！
English: The people have a valuable industry, but they guard it carefully, believing that it was created by their ancestors. What's more, the emperor owns the whole country, inheriting the difficult business of his ancestors, and passing on the country forever!

古文：臣愚以兴亡恳恳言者，诚以皇上有元之圣主，今日乃皇上盛时图治之机，兹不可失也。 
现代文：愚臣之所以恳切地谈论兴亡之事，实在是以为皇帝是元朝的圣主，今天是皇上盛世图谋治理之时，机不可失。 
English: The reason why the foolish minister earnestly talked about the rise and fall of things is that he really thought that the emperor is the patron saint of the Yuan Dynasty, and today is the time when the emperor is trying to govern. The opportunity must not be lost.

古文：又言： 户部赐田，诸怯薛支请，海青狮豹肉食，及局院工粮，好事布施，一切泛支，以至元三十年以前较之，动增数十倍。至顺经费，缺二百三十九万余锭。
现代文：他指出，如今朝廷开支，比至元三十年以前增加数十倍，至顺年间经费，缺二百三十九万余锭。
English: He pointed out that nowadays, the expenses of the imperial court have increased by dozens of times compared to 30 years ago, and the funds for the year of Shun are short of more than 2.39 million baht.

古文：宜节无益不急之费，以备军国之用，苟能三分损一以惠民，夫岂小哉！ 
现代文：应节省无益和不急的费用，以备军国之需。若能节省三分之一，对人民就是很大的恩惠了。
English: Unnecessary and unnecessary expenses should be saved to meet the needs of the military. If we can save one-third, it will be a great boon to the people.

古文：又言： 军站消乏，签补则无殷实之户，接济则无羡余之财，倘有征行，必括民间之马，苟能修马政，亦其一助也。
现代文：又说 ：军站削减了，签补已无殷实富户，救济已无积余之财，假如有出征打仗之事，必然要搜括民间马匹，如果修订马政，也是一种帮助。
English: He also said: the number of military stations has been reduced, there are no rich and affluent households to sign up, and there is no surplus wealth for relief. If there is a matter of going to war, it is inevitable to collect folk horses. If the horse policy is revised, it will also be a help.

古文：方今西越流沙，北际沙漠，东及辽海，地气高寒，水甘草美，无非牧养之地，宜设置群牧使司，统领十监，专治马政，并畜牛羊，数年之后，马实蕃盛，或给军以收兵威，或给站以优民力，牛羊之富，又足以给国用，非小补也。 
现代文：现在西部北部到沙漠的边际，东到辽海，地势高寒，水甜草美，是牧养牛马之地，应设置群牧使司，统领十监，专管马政，并养畜牛羊，数年之后，马匹繁盛肥壮，或者给军队以助军威，或者给军站以优民力，牛羊多了，又足够国家之用，这并非是小小的补助。 
English: Now, from the northern part of the west to the edge of the desert, and from the east to the Liao Sea, the terrain is high and cold, the water is sweet and the grass is beautiful. It is a place for herding cattle and horses. A herding envoy should be set up, leading ten supervisors, specializing in horse politics, and raising livestock cattle and sheep. After a few years, horses will be prosperous and strong, either to help the army with military prestige, or to give the military station with good civilian power. There are more cattle and sheep, and they are enough for the state. This is not a small subsidy.

古文：又言： 铨衡之弊，入仕之门太多，黜陟之法太简，州郡之任太淹，朝省之除太速，欲设三策，以救四弊。
现代文：又说 ：推举制度的弊端，做官之门太多，官员升降之法太简，州郡之官的任命太多，朝、省官员的晋升太快，需设立三项政策，以补救四种弊端。
English: He also said: the drawbacks of the election system, there are too many doors to officials, the method of promotion and demotion of officials is too simple, there are too many appointments of state and county officials, and the promotion of government and provincial officials is too fast, it is necessary to establish three policies to remedy four drawbacks.

古文：一曰，至元三十年以后增设衙门，冗滥不急者，从实减并，其外有选法者，并入中书。二曰，宜参酌古制，设辟举之科，令三品以下，各举所知，得才则受赏，失实则受罚。
现代文：一是，至元以后增设的衙门过多，不急需的应根据实际裁减合并；二是，应参照古代制度设立推举科，令三品以下官员，各举所知，获得有才能之人则受奖，失实则受罚。
English: First, there are too many government posts that were added after the Yuan Dynasty, and those that are not urgently needed should be reduced and merged according to the actual situation; second, the election department should be set up according to the ancient system, so that officials below the third grade should be known in each case, and those who are talented should receive awards, and those who are untruthful should be punished.

古文：三曰，古者刺史入为三公，郎官出宰百里，盖使外职识朝廷治体，内官知民间利病。
现代文：三是，古时刺史进宫官为三公，郎官出京管辖百里之地，目的是使地方官吏了解朝廷体制，朝廷官员了解民间利病。
English: The third is that in ancient times, officials entering the palace were the three princes, and officials leaving the capital governed a hundred miles of land. The purpose was to enable local officials to understand the imperial system, and imperial officials to understand the interests of the people.

古文：今后历县尹有能声善政者受郎官御史，历郡守有奇才异绩者任宪使尚书，其余各验资品通迁，在内者不得三考连任京官，在外者须历两任，乃迁内职。绩非出类、守不败官者，则循以年劳，处以常调。
现代文：今后县尹一级官员政绩不是显著的享受郎官御史待遇，郡守中有奇才异绩的进京则任宪史尚书，其他官员都根据其资历、品德迁升，在京官员不得三考连任京官，地方官员须历两任，始能升任宫廷官职，政绩不是出类拔萃、又无失误之官，则按年资，给以升迁。
English: In the future, county officials of Yin I rank and above will enjoy the treatment of court officials if their political achievements are not remarkable, and officials of county governors with extraordinary achievements who enter Beijing will be appointed as constitutional historians. Other officials will be promoted according to their qualifications and moral character. Officials in Beijing are not allowed to be reappointed as Beijing officials for three times, and local officials must serve two terms before they can be promoted to palace officials. Officials whose political achievements are not outstanding and have no mistakes will be promoted according to seniority.

古文：凡朝缺官员，须二十月之上，方许迁除。 
现代文：凡朝廷缺官员，须二十月以上，才能升迁。 
English: Where there is a shortage of officials in the imperial court, it takes more than 20 months to be promoted.

古文：帝可其奏，命中书议行之。
现代文：帝许其奏，命中书议定执行。
English: The emperor consented, and the order was carried out.

古文：时有官居丧者，往往夺情起复，思谦言： 三年之丧，谓之达礼，自非金革，不可从权。 
现代文：当时官员因父或母去世而辞去职务在家中守孝，但往往守孝期未满就被起用。思谦说 ：三年之丧，叫做达礼，若非战争时期，是不可随意改变的。 
English: At that time, officials resigned from their posts due to the death of their father or mother and performed filial piety at home, but they were often appointed before the period of filial piety expired. Si Qian said: the three-year mourning period is called Darley, and if it is not a time of war, it cannot be changed at will.

古文：遂著于令。
现代文：于是形成命令。
English: After that, write down this order in writing.

古文：有诏起报严寺。
现代文：皇帝下诏，修建报严寺。
English: The emperor issued an edict to build the Houyan Temple.

古文：思谦曰： 兵荒之余，当罢土木，以纾民力。 
现代文：思谦说 ：兵荒之后，应停止土木建设，以宽舒民力。 
English: Si Qian said: After the war, civil engineering construction should be stopped to ease the people's power.

古文：帝嘉之曰： 此正得祖宗立台宪之意。
现代文：帝称赞说 ：这正是祖宗建立台宪的用意。
English: The emperor praised and said: This is exactly the intention of the ancestors to establish the Taiwan Constitution.

古文：继此事有当言者，无隐。 
现代文：对这件事还有什么建议，可提出来，不要隐瞒。 
English: If you have any suggestions on this matter, please come forward and don't hold back.

古文：赐缣绮旌之。
现代文：赐予缣绮嘉奖他。
English: And bestow on him the highest praise.

古文：未几，迁右司都事。
现代文：不久，升任右司都事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of the Right Secretary of the Central Government.

古文：因奸杀夫，所奸妻妾同罪，律有明文，今止坐所犯，似失推明。 
现代文：元统二年五月，调任兵部郎中，十一月改任御史台都事。至元元年五月，出任淮西道廉访副使，至淮未满一月，因病归故里。
English: In May of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the middle of the military department, and in November he was reassigned to the History Department. In May of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the deputy envoy of the West Huai Province, and in January of the Huai Dynasty, he returned home due to illness.

古文：遂令法曹议，著为定制。
现代文：六月召为中书省员外郎，上书对现行刑法提出修改意见得到朝廷的认可。
English: In June, he was appointed as a member of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China, and submitted a petition to amend the current criminal law, which was approved by the Imperial Court.

古文：至正元年，转兵部侍郎。
现代文：至正元年，调任兵部侍郎。
English: In 1867, he was transferred to the post of Hyobushojiro.

古文：俄丁内艰，服除，召为右司郎中。
现代文：不久因母丧守孝。孝期满，召为右司郎中。
English: Due to his mother's death, he soon lost his position of filial piety. At the end of his term of filial piety, he was called to the position of Utsushiro junior high school.

古文：岁凶，盗贼蜂起，剽掠州邑，思谦力言于执政，当竭府库以赈贫民，分兵镇抚中夏，以防后患。
现代文：荒年，盗贼四起，劫掠州邑，思谦向执政者建议，应尽国库之力赈济贫民，分兵镇守抚慰中原地区，以防后患。
English: In the year of famine, thieves were on the rampage, pillaging the prefectures. Si Qian suggested to the government that the national treasury should do its best to help the poor, and that troops should be sent to the Central Plains region to prevent future disasters.

古文：五年，参议中书省事。
现代文：五年，任中书省参事。
English: For five years, he served as a councillor of the Ministry of Education.

古文：转刑部尚书，改湖南廉访使。
现代文：调任刑部尚书，改任湖南廉访使。
English: He was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department of Shangshu, and was appointed as the Hunan Liancheng Envoy.

古文：八年，迁淮东宣慰司都元帅。
现代文：八年，迁调淮东宣慰司都元帅。
English: Eight years later, he was transferred to Huadong Xuanjiao Division as a field marshal.

古文：九年，迁浙西廉访使、湖广行中书省参知政事，辞。
现代文：九年迁职浙西廉访使、湖广行中书省参知政事，未就职。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred to the post of Zhe Xi Lian envoy, and Huguangxing became the chief adviser of the Ministry of Education, but he did not take office.

古文：十一年，改淮西廉访使。
现代文：十一年改任淮西廉访使。
English: Eleven years later, he was reappointed as the Huaixi Lianyong envoy.

古文：庐州盗起，思谦亟命庐州路总管杭州不花领弓兵捕之，而贼已不可扑灭矣。
现代文：庐州人民起兵反元，思谦急命庐州路总管杭州不花领弓兵捕捉，但起义势力已经不可扑灭。
English: The people of Zhangzhou raised an army against the Yuan Dynasty, and the general manager of Zhangzhou Road, Hangzhou, rushed to catch the archers, but the insurgent forces could not be extinguished.

古文：言于宣让王帖木儿不花曰： 承平日久，民不知兵，王以帝室之胄，镇抚淮甸，岂得坐视！
现代文：思谦对宣让王帖木儿不花说 ：太平的日子久了，百姓不知有战争，王作为皇室的后代，镇守淮甸，怎能坐视不理？
English: Si Qian said to Xuanzang Wang Timur: The days of peace have long passed, the people do not know there is a war, how can the king, as a descendant of the royal family, the town guard of Huai Dian, sit idly by?

古文：思谦愿与王戮力殄灭。
现代文：思谦愿与王合力惩讨灭除盗匪。
English: Si Xian is willing to work with Wang to punish and eliminate bandits.

古文：且王府属怯薛人等，数亦不少，必有能摧锋陷阵者，惟王图之。 
现代文：况且王府武将番值宿卫人不少，一定有能冲锋陷阵的人，只要你谋划。 
English: Moreover, there are a lot of palace guards on duty, and there must be people who can charge into battle, as long as you plan.

古文：王曰： 此吾责也，但鞍马器械未备，何能御敌？ 
现代文：王说： 这是我的职责，但鞍马兵器不足，怎能抵御敌人？ 
English: The king said, "This is my duty, but the pommel horse weapons are insufficient, how can I resist the enemy?"

古文：思谦括官民马，置兵甲，不日而集，分道并进，遂禽渠贼，庐州平。
现代文：思谦收集官民马匹、置备兵器、盔甲，分路并进，于是擒获了匪首，庐州之盗被平定。
English: Si Qian collected the horses of the officials and the people, equipped them with weapons and armor, and marched side by side. As a result, he captured the head of the bandits, and the theft of Zhangzhou was put down.

古文：既而颍寇将渡淮，又言于王曰： 颍寇东侵，亟调芍陂屯卒用之。 
现代文：后来，颍州起义人民即将渡淮河，思谦又对王说： 颍寇东侵，急调芍陂屯兵。 
English: Later, when the people of the Zhangzhou Uprising were about to cross the Huaihe River, Si Qian said to Wang: "Let the invaders invade the east, and quickly dispatch the garrison."

古文：王曰： 非奉诏，不敢调。 
现代文：王说： 非有圣诏不敢调。 
English: The king said, "If there is no edict, I dare not change it."

古文：思谦言： 非常之变，理宜从权，擅发之罪，思谦坐之。 
现代文：思谦说： 非常之变，应采用变通的手段，擅自调兵之罪，由思谦承当。 
English: Si Qian said: It's a big change, we should adopt flexible means, the crime of transferring troops without authorization should be borne by Si Qian.

古文：王感其言，从之。
现代文：王被其言所感动，照他的建议做了。
English: The king was moved by his words and did as he suggested.

古文：其侄立本为屯田万户，召语曰： 吾祖宗以忠义传家，汝之职，乃我先人力战所致，今国家有难，汝当身先士卒，以图报效，庶无负朝廷也。 
现代文：他的侄儿立本为万户屯田官，他唤侄儿说： 我们的祖宗以忠义传家，你的官职，是我们祖先奋力征战得来，当今国家有难，你应身先士卒，以图报效，才不辜负朝廷。 
English: He summoned his nephew, who had been appointed as the official of 10,000 households, and said, "Our ancestors passed down their families with loyalty. Your official position is what our ancestors fought hard for. Today's country is in a difficult situation. You should be the first in line to do your best to live up to the expectations of the imperial court."

古文：寻召入，为集贤侍讲学士，修定国律。
现代文：不久，被召回京城，任集贤侍讲学士，修定国家法律。
English: Soon after, he was called back to Beijing to serve as a lecturer at the Confucius Institute and revise national laws.

古文：十二年，拜治书侍御史。
现代文：十二年，拜授治书侍御史。
English: In the twelfth year, he was conferred the title of Jisho-zamurai-goshi.

古文：明年，升中丞，年近七十，上章乞老，不允，特旨进一品，授荣禄大夫，仍御史中丞。
现代文：第二年，晋升中丞。年近七十，上书乞讨告老，未得允准，皇上特为降旨，进一品官阶，授荣禄大夫，仍任御史中丞。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to junior middle officer. At the age of nearly seventy, he wrote to the emperor, begging for permission to retire. However, the emperor did not grant permission, so he was demoted one rank and given the title of honorable doctor, but he remained junior middle officer.

古文：入谢，感疾，及命下，强拜受命，明日卒。
现代文：入宫拜谢皇帝，感染疾病，待命下，勉强拜谢受命，次日即逝。
English: Entered the palace, bowed to the emperor, contracted a disease, was on standby, reluctantly bowed to the emperor, and died the next day.

古文：赠宣猷秉宪佐治功臣、翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封鲁国公，谥通敏。
现代文：皇上赠宣献秉宪佐治功臣、翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫、柱国，追封鲁国公，谥号通敏。
English: The Emperor presented the following to the Emperor as a gift: George the Hero, Hanlin the Scholar, Ronglu the Physician, Zhu Guo, Tsui Huan Lu Guo Guo, surnamed Tong Min.

古文：韩元善韩元善，字大雅，汴梁之太康人。
现代文：韩元善字大雅，汴梁太康人。
English: Han Won is a good and elegant writer, while Hao Liang is a well-off person.

古文：唐检校司空赠司徒充，以宣武军节度使兼统义成军，留镇汴，子孙遂为太康韩氏。
现代文：先祖唐检校司空赠司徒充，以宣武军节度使兼义成军统帅，留守汴梁，子孙就成为太康韩氏。
English: The ancestors of Tang's inspection school, Siku, gave the gift of Sittuchon. With the proclamation of the armed forces festival, he also made Yixing the commander of the army. He stayed in Yiliang, and his descendants became the Taikang Han clan.

古文：父克昌，至大间仕为监察御史，以论事有名声。
现代文：父亲克昌，至大年间官为监察御史，以论事而扬名。
English: His father, Kechang, was an inspector of imperial history at the time of the Meiji Restoration, and became famous for his polemics.

古文：元善由国子监生积分中程，释褐，除新州判官，累擢江南行台监察御史，历中书左司郎中、吏部侍郎、吏部尚书、佥枢密院事。
现代文：元善由国子监的学生，科考及格，进入仕途，授新州判官，后又接连提升为江南行台监察御史，历任中书左司郎中、吏部侍郎、吏部尚书、枢密院佥事。
English: Yuan Zhen was a student of the State Children's Supervisor, passed the science examination, entered the career, was awarded the Xinzhou Judge, and then successively promoted to the Jiangnan Gangtai Supervisor, and successively served as the Middle Secretary of the Central Secretariat, the Secretary of the Central Secretariat, the Secretary of the Central Secretariat, the Secretary of the Central Secretariat and the Privy Council.

古文：至正三年，拜中书参知政事。
现代文：至正三年，拜中书参知政事。
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, Beizhongshu became the political leader.

古文：五年，迁大司农卿，寻出为江南行御史台中丞、燕南肃政廉访使。
现代文：五年，调任大司农卿，不久又出任江南行御史台中丞、燕南肃政廉访使。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the post of Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, and soon after that, he served as the Vice-Commander of the Jiangnan Expeditionary Historical Station and the Visiting Envoy of Yan Nan Sui Zheng.

古文：九年，召拜中书左丞、同知经筵事。
现代文：九年，召拜中书左丞、同知经筵事。
English: In the ninth year, he was summoned to Chushizojo and Tongchikyo.

古文：十一年，丞相脱脱奏事内廷，以事关兵机，而元善及参知政事韩镛皆汉人，使退避，勿与俱，由是遂与右丞玉枢虎儿吐华同分省彰德以给馈饷。
现代文：十一年，丞相脱脱，启奏皇上，因事关军机，而元善及参知政事韩镛等为汉人，应使他们退避，不要参与。于是元善与右丞玉枢虎儿吐华一同巡察彰德，供应粮饷。
English: In the eleventh year, the chancellor broke away and appealed to the emperor, because the matter concerned military aircraft, and Yuan Zhen and the co-chancellor and political advisor Han Xuan were Han people, so they should retreat and not participate. Therefore, Yuan Zhen and the right chancellor and political advisor Tu Hua together inspected Changde and supplied grain.

古文：十二年，御史大夫也先帖木儿总兵讨汝宁，元善至卫辉，以病卒。
现代文：十二年，御史大夫也先帖木儿总兵征讨汝宁，元善至卫辉，因病而逝。
English: In the twelfth year, Dr. Mishi was also the first of Timur's generals to conscript Yuning, and Yuan Sheng Zi Wei Hui died of illness.

古文：元善性纯正，明达政体，扬历台阁三十余年，遂跻丞辖，以文学治才，羽翼庙谟，论议之际，秉义陈法，不偭乡上官，国是所在，倚之以为重。
现代文：元善性格纯朴、正直，熟知政治体制，经历台阁三十余年，跻身中丞，以其文学治理之才，辅佐朝廷决策，议论之时，仗义陈词，但不得罪上官，国家大政方针的制定要倚重于他。
English: Genzen is a simple and honest person. He is familiar with the political system. He has been a member of the cabinet for more than 30 years. He has been promoted to middle-ranking officer. With his talent for literary governance, he assists the imperial court in decision-making. When discussing, he makes righteous statements, but he must not offend superiors. The formulation of national major policies should rely on him.

古文：尝以谒告侍亲居家，效范文正公遗规，置田百亩为义庄，以周贫族。
现代文：他曾告假归家侍奉双亲，仿效范文正公的遗规，购置百亩义田，用于接济贫困乡族。
English: He once took a leave of absence to return home to serve his parents and, following the example of Fan Wenzheng, purchased a hundred mu of yitian to help the poor villagers.

古文：至正交钞初行，赐近臣各三百锭，元善复以买田六百亩，为义塾，延名士，以教族人子弟云。
现代文：至正时始用钞票，赐予朝廷亲近之臣各三百锭，元善以此买田六百亩，办义塾，聘请有名的士人，来教授族人的子弟。
English: At the right time, he began to use banknotes to give 300 baht to each of the courtiers close to the imperial court. With this money, Yuan Zhen bought 600 mu of land, ran a charity school, and hired famous scholars to teach the children of the tribesmen.

古文：崔敬崔敬，字伯恭，大宁之惠州人。
现代文：崔敬字伯恭，大宁惠州人。
English: Cui Jing is a native of Huizhou, Daming.

古文：通刑名法律之学。
现代文：精通刑名法律之学。
English: He is well versed in criminal law.

古文：淮东、山南廉访司皆辟书吏。
现代文：淮东、山南廉访司都召聘他为书吏。
English: Huadong and Shannan Lianhuizi both recruited him as a clerk.

古文：天历初，辟御史台察院书吏，历刑部令史、徽政院掾史，遂升中书掾。
现代文：天历初年，朝廷征召为御史台察院书吏，后历任刑部令史、徽政院掾史，晋升中书掾。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he was conscripted by the imperial court to be a clerk of the Imperial Historical Research Institute, and later successively served as the Minister of Justice, the Vice-Minister of Justice of the State Council, and the Vice-Minister of Justice of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：至元五年，用累考及格，授刑部主事。
现代文：后至元五年经考试及格，授刑部主事。
English: After passing the examination, he was put in charge of the Sentencing Department in 1865.

古文：六年，迁枢密院都事，拜监察御史。
现代文：六年，升枢密院都事，拜监察御史。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to Privy Councillor of the Imperial Capital, and became the Inspector-General of History.

古文：时既毁文宗庙主，削文宗后皇太后之号，徙东安州，而皇弟燕帖古思，文宗子也，又放之高丽。
现代文：当时文宗神位被毁，削去文宗后皇太后之号，迁居于东安州，而皇弟燕帖古思即文宗之子又流放到高丽。
English: At that time, the throne of Emperor Wenzong was destroyed, the title of Empress Dowager Wenzong was removed, and she moved to Dong'an Province, while her younger brother, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's brother, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenzong's son, Emperor Wenz

古文：敬上疏，略曰： 文皇获不轨之愆，已彻庙祀；叔母有阶祸之罪，亦削洪名。
现代文：敬上疏皇帝说 ：文皇蒙不轨之罪，已撤其在宗庙之祀，叔母也因此招祸获罪，削去尊号。
English: Respecting the Emperor Joso, he said: Emperor Wen has been guilty of misconduct and has withdrawn his worship at the ancestral temple. His aunt has also been guilty of causing trouble and has had her honorary title removed.

古文：尽孝正名，斯亦足矣。
现代文：尽孝正名，这样做就足够了。
English: To live up to the name of filial piety, this is enough.

古文：惟念皇弟燕帖古思太子，年方在幼，罹此播迁，天理人情，有所不忍。
现代文：但是念皇弟燕帖古思太子，年龄幼小，遭此流离迁徙之罪，天理人情，有所不忍。
English: However, Prince Nian's younger brother, Prince Yan Zhe Gu Si, who is very young, cannot bear to suffer this crime of displacement and migration.

古文：明皇当上宾之日，太子在襁褓之间，尚未有知，义当矜悯。
现代文：明皇当上宾的时候，太子还在襁褓之中，还不懂事，理当怜悯。
English: When the Ming Emperor was the guest of honor, the prince was still in his infancy, still did not know what to do, and should be pitied.

古文：盖武宗视明、文二帝，皆亲子也，陛下与太子，皆嫡孙也。
现代文：总之，武宗视明、文二帝，都是亲生之子，陛下与太子，都是嫡孙。
English: In short, Emperor Wuzong and Emperor Wen are their own sons, and His Majesty and the Crown Prince are their legitimate grandsons.

古文：以武皇之心为心，则皆子孙，固无亲疏；以陛下之心为心，未免有彼此之论。
现代文：若以武皇之心为己心，都是子孙，本无亲疏之别；而以陛下之心为心，不免有彼此之分。
English: If you have the heart of the Emperor Wu as your heart, you are all descendants, and there is no difference between relatives; but if you have the heart of His Majesty, you will inevitably have differences.

古文：臣请以世俗喻之：常人有百金之产，尚置义田，宗族困厄者，为之教养，不使失所。
现代文：臣请求以世俗作比喻：普通百姓有百金的产业，还要购置义田，家族中困难者，为之教养，不使他们流离失所。
English: The minister asked for a secular analogy: ordinary people have a hundred-dollar industry, but they also have to buy yida, and those who are in difficulty in the family should be educated, so that they are not displaced.

古文：况皇上贵为天子，富有四海，子育黎元，当使一夫一妇无不得其所，今乃以同气之人，置之度外，适足贻笑边邦，取辱外国。
现代文：何况皇上贵为天子，富有四海，全国黎民都是您抚育的子民，应使每一夫、一妇无一不得安居，今天则以兄弟置之不管，这样会取笑于邻邦，耻辱于外国。
English: Moreover, Your Imperial Majesty is the son of heaven, rich in the four seas, and the people of the whole country are Your fostered people. You should make every husband and wife live in peace. Today, however, brothers are left unattended. This will be ridiculed by neighboring countries and humiliated by foreign countries.

古文：况蛮夷之心，不可测度，倘生他变，关系非轻。
现代文：何况蛮夷之心，不可猜测，假如发生其他变故，关系非轻。
English: Not to mention the barbarian heart, it is impossible to guess, if other changes occur, the relationship is not light.

古文：兴言至此，良为寒心！
现代文：有感而言至此，甚为心寒！
English: In a way, it's heartbreaking!

古文：臣愿杀身以赎太子之罪，望陛下遣近臣迎归太后、太子，以全母子之情，尽骨肉之义，天意回，人心悦，则宗社幸甚！ 
现代文：臣愿杀身以赎太子之罪，望陛下派遣亲近之臣接回太后、太子，以成全母子之情，尽骨肉之义，回天意，悦人心，则祖宗、国家幸甚！ 
English: If a vassal is willing to kill himself to atone for the sin of the crown prince, and hopes that His Majesty will send a close vassal to retrieve the empress dowager and the crown prince, in order to fulfill the feelings of mother and son, fulfill the righteousness of the flesh and blood, return to the will of heaven, and be pleasing to the people, then the ancestors and the country will be very fortunate!

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：又上疏，谏天子巡幸上都，宜御内殿。
现代文：崔敬又一次上疏，劝谏天子巡幸上都，应整治内殿。
English: Once again, Cui Jing went up to the dzong and advised the emperor to visit the dzong and rectify the inner hall.

古文：其略曰： 世祖以上都为清暑之地，车驾行幸，岁以为常，阁有大安，殿有鸿禧、睿思，所以保养圣躬，适起居之宜，存畏敬之心也。
现代文：其简要内容是：世祖以上都为避暑之地，车驾前往，每年如常，宫内有大安阁、鸿禧殿和睿思殿，可以保养皇上的圣体，适宜于起居，对祖宗怀敬畏之心情。
English: Its brief content is as follows: it has been a summer resort for emperors and emperors above, and is visited by car, as usual every year. There are Da'ankaku, Hongji-den and Ruisi-den in the palace, which can maintain the emperor's holy body, and is suitable for living, with a feeling of awe for the ancestors.

古文：今失剌斡耳朵思，乃先皇所以备宴游，非常时临御之所。
现代文：现在失剌斡尔朵思，是先皇在准备欢宴游乐之用，并非经常居住之地。
English: Now, the former emperor's residence is used for preparing banquets and entertainment, and is not his regular place of residence.

古文：今陛下方以孝治天下，屡降德音，祗行宗庙亲祀之礼，虽动植无知，罔不欢悦，而国家多故，天道变更，臣备员风纪，以言为职，愿大驾还大内，居深宫，严宿卫，与宰臣谋治道。万机之暇，则命经筵进讲，究古今盛衰之由，缉熙圣学，乃宗社之福也。 
现代文：今天陛下正以孝道治理天下，常常给百姓下降道德之音，亲临宗庙行祭祀之礼，即使动植物无知，也无不欢喜。而国家多事故，天道变化无常，臣作为风纪官以劝谏为己职，愿御驾还大内，居深宫，严格直宿宫禁，与宰相大臣共谋治国之道，在日理万机的闲暇时刻，则命经筵讲学，研究古今盛衰的原由，继承光耀圣人之学，此是宗庙和国家之福。
English: Today, His Majesty is governing the world with filial piety, often lowering the moral tone to the people, personally attending the ancestral temple to perform the ritual, even if the animals and plants are ignorant, there is nothing but joy. And the country has many accidents, the heavenly way is changeable, and the vassal, as the etiquette officer, takes the advice of the eunuch as his own duty. May he return to the university, stay in the deep palace, strictly prohibit the direct stay in the palace, and work with the prime minister to govern the country. In the leisure time of Japan, he ordered the eunuch to lecture, study the reasons for the rise and fall of

古文：时帝数以历代珍宝分赐近侍，敬又上疏曰： 臣闻世皇时，大臣有功，所赐不过槃革，重惜天物，为后世虑至远也。
现代文：当时皇帝数次以历代珍宝分赠给近臣，敬又具文上疏说： 臣听说世皇时代，大臣有功，所赐不过是木盘、甲胄，珍惜天物，为后世考虑更远的未来。
English: At that time, the emperor several times gave precious treasures from past generations to his close vassals, and respectfully wrote: "The vassal heard that in the era of the emperor, the minister had merit, but the gift was only a wooden plate, armor, cherish the heavenly objects, and consider a more distant future for future generations.

古文：今山东大饥，燕南亢旱，海潮为灾，天文示儆，地道失宁，京畿南北，蝗飞蔽天，正当圣主恤民之日。
现代文：今山东饥荒，燕南干旱，海潮成灾，上天显示儆戒，地道失宁，京畿南北，蝗灾严重，正是圣主怜恤黎民之日。
English: Right now, Shandong is suffering from famine, Yan'nan is suffering from drought, the sea tides have become a disaster, the heavens have shown the precepts, the earth has lost its tranquility, Gyeonggi and South Korea are suffering from severe locust plagues, and it is the day of the Lord's mercy for the people of Limin.

古文：近侍之臣，不知虑此，奏禀承请，殆无虚日，甚至以府库百年所积之宝物，遍赐仆御阍寺之流、乳稚童孩之子。帑藏或空，万一国有大事，人有大功，又将何以为赐乎！
现代文：近侍大臣，不知道为此而虑，只知奏禀皇上请赐珠宝，每日不断，甚至以府库中百年所积存的宝物，遍赐御仆和守门之人以及乳童稚子，若国库空虚，万一国家遇到大事，有人立了大功，又拿什么去赏赐呢？
English: The Minister of the Privy Council, not knowing what to think of this, only knew that the Emperor's request to bestow jewels was repeated every day, even with the treasures that had been stored in the treasury for hundreds of years, bestowed on servants and gatekeepers and infants. If the treasury is empty, in the event that the country encounters a major event, someone has done a great service, what should be rewarded?

古文：乞追回所赐，以示恩不可滥，庶允公论。 
现代文：请求追回所赐之物，以示不可滥于施恩，以得公论。 
English: Ask for the return of what you have been given, to show that you should not be too generous in order to win public opinion.

古文：是年，出佥山北廉访司事，按部全宁。
现代文：这一年，出任山北廉访司事，巡查全宁。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as the visiting secretary of Shanbei Lian and inspected Quanling.

古文：狱有李秀，以坐造伪钞，连数十人，而皆与秀不相识，敬疑而谳之。
现代文：狱中李秀，因造伪钞获罪，株连数十人，他们皆与秀并不相识。敬对此案怀疑，进一步审问。
English: In prison, Li Xiu was found guilty of counterfeiting banknotes, and there were dozens of shareholders, all of whom did not know Xiu. He was suspicious of this case and further interrogated.

古文：秀曰： 吾以训童子为业，居村落间，有司至秀舍，谓秀为伪造钞者，捶楚之下，不敢不诬服耳。 
现代文：李秀说： 我以教馆为业，居住乡村，官府到秀家中，说我是伪钞的制造者，棍杖之下，不敢不承认。 
English: Li Xiu said: I live in a village and run a teaching center. The government came to my home and said I was a counterfeiter, and I didn't dare to deny it.

古文：敬询知始谋者，乃大同王浊，十余年事不泄，而有司误以李秀为王浊也。
现代文：敬问知首谋之人，是大同王浊，十多年事情都未泄露，而官府误以李秀就是王浊。
English: Respectfully ask the person who knows the mastermind, it is Datong Wang Yao. For more than ten years, the matter has not been leaked, and the government has mistaken Li Xiu for Wang Yao.

古文：移文至大同，果得王浊为真造伪钞者。
现代文：行文至大同，果然抓获王浊为真正的伪钞制造者。
English: Wang Yao was caught red-handed as the real counterfeiter.

古文：至正初，迁河南，又迁江东。
现代文：至正初年，调河南，又调江东。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, it was moved to Henan Province and then to the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：所至抑豪强，惠下穷，洗冤滞，兴学劝农，百废具举。
现代文：所到之处，压抑豪强，恩惠穷人，洗雪冤案，兴学劝农，百废俱兴。
English: Wherever he goes, he suppresses the brave and strong, favors the poor, clears up the wrongdoings, encourages farmers to go to school, and encourages wasteful spending.

古文：除江西行省左右司郎中，入为诸路宝钞提举，改工部侍郎。
现代文：拜授江西行省左右司郎中，进京任诸路宝钞提举，改任工部侍郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Jiangxi Provincial Right and Left Secretary, and was promoted to the title of Beijing Provincial Treasurer, and was reappointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十一年，迁同知大都路总管府事。
现代文：十一年，调任大都路总管府知事。
English: Eleven years later, he was transferred to the governor of Datu Road.

古文：直沽河淤数年，中书省委敬浚治之，给钞数万锭，募工万人，不三月告成，咸服其能。
现代文：直沽河淤塞数年，中书省委托崔敬疏通治理，给钞数万锭，募工万人，未及三月完工，大家都佩服其能干。
English: After several years of silting up of the Zhouzhuang River, the Ministry of Education and Culture commissioned Cui Jing to manage the dredging, giving tens of thousands of baht in banknotes and recruiting tens of thousands of workers. It was completed before March, and everyone admired his ability.

古文：除刑部侍郎，迁中书左司郎中。
现代文：拜任刑部侍郎，转任中书左司郎中。
English: He was appointed to the post of the attendant of the criminal investigation department, and was transferred to the post of the junior assistant of the left assistant secretary of the middle school.

古文：十二年，历兵部尚书，为枢密院判官。
现代文：十二年，历任兵部尚书，枢密院判官。
English: In the twelfth year, successive members of the Ministry of Military Affairs, judges of the Privy Council.

古文：十四年，迁刑部尚书。
现代文：十四年，调任刑部尚书。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：广东府宪仇杀，以沙加班处大逆，敬详宪府以私相害，致有是变，杀人者自有典章，得坐一人，大逆非谋反，则不科得坐一家，敬立论舍重而就轻，朝廷咸以为然。
现代文：广东府长官被仇人所杀，对沙加班处以大逆之罪，敬弄清了宪府是因私仇相害，因而出现此案，杀人者当然应按法论处，只惩罚一人，大逆并非谋反，不应惩罚一家。敬的意见得到朝廷批准。
English: The governor of Guangdong was killed by an enemy, and the crime of high treason was imposed on Shaka Ban. Jing made it clear that the Constitutional Government was harmed because of personal enmity, which led to this case. The murderer should of course be dealt with according to the law, and only one person should be punished. High treason is not plotting a rebellion, and one family should not be punished. Jing's opinion was approved by the Imperial Court.

古文：十五年，复为枢密院判官，寻拜参知政事，行省河南，复为兵部尚书，兼济宁军民屯田使。朝廷给以钞十万锭，散于有司，招致居民、军士，立营屯种，岁收得百万斛，以给边防。居岁余，其法井井。
现代文：十五年，再次任枢密院判官，不久又拜为参知政事，行省河南，再任兵部尚书，兼济宁军民屯田使，朝廷给予十万锭，分给有司，招来民工、军士，立下营屯种粮食，每年收成百万斛，供给边防，任职一年多，其治理井然有序。
English: In 15 years, he was appointed judge of the Privy Council for the second time, and soon he was appointed to be a member of the Council of Elders, and he served as the governor of Henan Province. He was also appointed as the secretary of the military department, and the Jining military and people's field marshal. He was given 100,000 baht by the imperial court, distributed to the officials, invited the migrant workers and non-commissioned officers, set up a camp to grow grain, harvested one million baht every year, and supplied the border defense. He served for more than one year, and his governance was well-ordered.

古文：十有七年，召为大司农少卿，遂拜中书参知政事。
现代文：十七年召任大司农少卿，拜为中书参知政事。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was appointed to the position of Daisho (Senior Secretary) and Shosho (Junior Secretary) of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：盗据齐鲁，敬与平章政事答兰、参知政事俺普，分省陵州。
现代文：山东地方人民掀起反元斗争，敬与平章政事答兰、参知政事俺普，分别视察陵州。
English: The local people of Shandong launched an anti-Yuan struggle, and Kei and Pingzhang answered questions on political affairs, and Sangzhi answered questions on political affairs, and inspected Lingzhou separately.

古文：陵州乃南北要冲，无城郭，而居民散处，敬兼领兵、刑、户、工四部事，供给诸军，事无不集。
现代文：陵州是南北要冲，没有城郭，居民散居各地，敬兼领兵、刑、户、工四个部的事务，供给各路军需，没有一件事情不能完成。
English: Lingshou is a strategic point between the north and the south. It has no city walls, and its residents are scattered all over the country. It is responsible for the four departments of leading soldiers, punishment, households, and workers, and supplying military supplies to all directions. There is no task that cannot be completed.

古文：丞相以其能上闻，赐之上尊，仍命其便宜行事。
现代文：丞相以他的能干报告皇帝，赐给上尊美酒，仍命他灵活行事。
English: The chancellor reported his ability to the emperor, gave him the precious wine, and still ordered him to act flexibly.

古文：敬与俺普密议曰： 我军强且胜，彼将败而降，如得仗义之士，直抵其巢穴而招安之，亦方面之幸也。 
现代文：敬与俺普密商说： 我军强且胜，彼军败而降，如能有仗义之人士，直接去其军营进行劝降，也是一方面的幸运。 
English: "Our army is strong and victorious, but the other army was defeated and surrendered. If someone who has the courage to fight can go directly to their military camp to persuade them to surrender, it is also a stroke of luck.

古文：有国子生王恪等，愿请往，敬以便宜授以官，俾之行，至郓城，见李秉彝、田丰等，谕以逆顺祸福之理，丰与秉彝皆悔过自新。
现代文：有国子生名王恪等，愿意请命前往，敬便授予官职，令他前往，到郓城，见到李秉彝、田丰等，给他们说明逆顺祸福的道理，丰与秉彝都悔过自新。
English: There was a native son named Wang Ke, who was willing to ask for an order to go, so he was given an official post. He was ordered to go to Licheng, where he met Li Bingyao, Tian Feng, and others, and explained to them the principle of reversing misfortune and fortune. Feng and Bingyao both repented and reformed.

古文：山东郡邑之复，敬之策居多。
现代文：山东郡邑的收复，主要是敬的策略。
English: The recovery of Shandong County is mainly a strategy of respect.

古文：敬以军马供给浩繁，而民力日疲，乃请行纳粟补官之令，中书以其言闻，诏从之。
现代文：敬以为军马的供给太多、太繁重，而百姓则日益疲劳，于是请命实行纳票补官之令。中书将他的意见呈奉圣上，皇上下诏采纳。
English: Respectfully, he thought that the supply of war horses was too much and too burdensome, and that the people were growing tired, so he asked for an order to implement the order to pay additional officials. In the letter, he presented his opinion to the emperor, and the imperial edict was adopted.

古文：河北燕南士民踵蹑而至，积粟百万石、绮段万匹，用以给军费，民获少苏。
现代文：河北燕南士民接踵而来，积粟百万石，绮缎万匹，用于军费，百姓负担稍稍减轻。
English: The people of Yan'an, Hebei Province, came one after another, accumulating millions of stones and tens of thousands of poppies, which were used for military expenses, and the burden on the people was slightly reduced.

古文：十八年，除山东行枢密院副使，俄迁江浙行省左丞。
现代文：十八年，授任山东行枢密院副使，不久调任江浙行省左丞。
English: In 18th year, he was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council to Shandong Province, and was soon transferred to the position of the left assistant governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：赠资善大夫，江浙行省左丞如故，谥曰忠敏。
现代文：赠与资善大夫、江浙行省左丞，谥号忠敏。
English: He was given the title of Dr. Zhisheng, and the title of Zhengzhou and Jiangsu Provincial Secretary, with the surname of Zhongmin.

