古文：太公《六韬》，有天陈、地陈、人陈、云鸟之陈。
现代文：姜太公的《六韬》里，说到天陈、地陈、人陈、云鸟之陈。
English: In Jiang Taigong's "Six Degrees of Separation," it talks about the separation of heaven and earth, man and woman, and cloud and bird.

古文：《论语》曰： 卫灵公问陈於孔子。 
现代文：《论语·卫灵公》里说； 卫灵公问陈於孔子。 
English: "The Analects of Confucius and Wei Ling Gong" says; Wei Ling Gong asked Chen about Confucius.

古文：《左传》： 为鱼丽之陈。 
现代文：《左传·桓公五年》里有 为鱼丽之陈 的话。
English: In "The Legend of King Kan" there is a story about a fish named Chen.

古文：俗本多作 阜 旁车乘之 车 。
现代文：一般的流传俗本大多数是将以上几个 陈 字，写作 β 偏旁加上 车乘 的 车 即 阵 字。
English: Most of the popular folklore books combine the above-mentioned characters, writing β sideways and adding the characters "車乘" and "車即阵."

古文：案诸陈队，并作陈、郑之 陈 。
现代文：据考查，表示各种军队陈列队伍的 陈 ，都写作 陈、郑 的 陈 字。
English: According to the investigation, Chen, which means various military display teams, is written Chen, Zheng's Chen.

古文：河北经传，悉略此字。
现代文：所以叫行陈，是取义於陈列，将 陈 写作 阵 ，这在六书中属於假借法。
English: Therefore, the name "Chen" is derived from the meaning of "exhibition," and "Chen" is written as "battalion," which is a fake borrowing method in the six books.

古文：其间字有不可得无者。
现代文：《仓颉篇》、《尔雅》和近代的字书， 陈 都没有写成别的字。
English: Chen did not write any other characters in "Canglu," "Lya" and modern Chinese calligraphy books.

古文：至如 伯也执殳 ， 於旅也语 ， 回也屡空 心， 风，风也，教也 ，及《诗传》云 不戢，我也；不傩，傩也 ， 不多，多也 如斯之类，傥削此文，颇成废阙。
现代文： 也 字是用在语句末尾做语气词或在句中做助词，文章典籍常用这个字。北方的经书传本中大都省略 也 字，而其中有的 也 字是不能省略的，比如像 伯也执殳 ， 於旅也语 ， 回也屡空 ， 风，风也，教也， 以及《毛诗传》说： 不戢，戢也；不傩，傩也。  不多，多也。 诸如此类的句子，倘若省略了 也 字，就成了废文缺文了。
English: The word "also" is used as a mood word at the end of a sentence or as an auxiliary word in a sentence, and it is commonly used in textbooks. Most of the northern textbooks omit the word "also," and some of them cannot be omitted. For example, such as "Bo also" (伯也执), "Utabi also" (於旅也语), "Huai also" (回也反复空), "Wind, wind also" (风,风也), "Teach also" (教也), and "Mao Shi Chuan" (毛詩传) says: "不,也"; "不,也"; "不多,多

古文：《诗》言： 青青子衿 ，《传》曰： 青衿，青领也，学子之服。 
现代文：《诗·郑风·子衿》有 青青子衿 之句，《毛诗传》解释说： 青衿，青领也，学子之服。 
English: "Poetry, Zheng Feng, Zixuan" has the phrase of Qing Qing Zixuan, and "Mao Shi Chuan" explains: Qing Qing, Qing collar, is also the clothing of students.

古文：按古者斜领下连於衿，故谓领为衿，孙炎、郭璞注《尔雅》，曹大家注《列女传》，并云： 衿，交领也。 
现代文：据考证：在古代，斜的领子下面连著衣襟，所以将领子称作 衿 。孙炎、郭璞注解《尔雅》、曹大家班昭注解《列女传》，都说： 衿，交领也。 
English: According to the research, in ancient times, a collar was attached to the underside of a slanting collar, so the collar was called. Sun Yan, Guo Yu annotation of "Lya," Cao Daba Ban Zhao annotation of "The Legend of Women," all said:, cross-collar is also.

古文：邺下《诗》本既无 也 字，群儒固谬说云： 青衿、青领，是衣两处之名，皆以青为饰。 
现代文：邺下的《诗经》传本，就没有 也 字，许多儒生因而错误地认为 青衿，育领，是指衣服的两个部分的名称，都用 青 字来形容。 
English: Many Confucians mistakenly believe that "Qingyao" (青) and "Yu Lian" (育领) refer to the names of two parts of clothing, both of which are described by the word "Qingyao."

古文：用释 青青 二字，其失大矣。
现代文：这样理解 青青 两个字，实际上是大错特错。
English: To understand the two words "Qingqing" in this way is actually a big mistake.

古文：又有俗学，闻经、传中时须 也 字，辄以意加之，每不得所，益成可笑。
现代文：还有一些平庸的学子，听说《诗经》传注中常要补上 也 字，就随意添补，常常补充的不是地方，实在是可笑。
English: There are also some mediocre students who, hearing that the "Book of Songs" often needs to be supplemented with the word "also," add it at will. What is often added is not the place, which is really ridiculous.

古文：《后汉书》： 酷吏樊晔为天水太守，凉州为之歌曰： 宁见乳虎穴，不入冀府寺， 而江南书本 穴 皆误作 六 ，学士因循，迷而不寐。
现代文：《后汉书·酷吏传》记载： 酷吏樊晔为天水郡太守，凉州人给他编了首歌说： 宁见乳虎穴，不入冀府寺。  江南的《后汉书》底本和副本，都将 穴 字误写成 六 字，有些学者沿袭了这个错误，而不觉察。
English: "Post-Han Shu: The Biography of Ku Rong" records: Ku Rong was the governor of Tianshui County, and the people of Liangzhou composed a song for him, saying: "It is better to see the milk tiger's den than to enter the Jiefu Temple." The original and copy of "Post-Han Shu" in Jiangnan mistakenly wrote the word "hole" into six characters, and some scholars followed this mistake without noticing it.

古文：夫虎豹穴居，事之较者，所以班超云： 不探虎穴，安得虎子？ 
现代文：其实，虎豹住在洞穴中，这是很明显的事情，所以班超说： 不探虎穴，安得虎子？ 
English: In fact, tigers and leopards live in caves, which is an obvious thing, so Ban Chao said: Do not explore the tiger's den, and get a tiger cub?

古文：宁当论其六七耶？
现代文：怎么会去计量乳虎是六个还是七个呢？
English: How can you measure whether a tigress is six or seven?

古文：客有难主人曰： 今之经典，子皆谓非，《说文》所言，子皆云是，然则许慎胜孔子乎？ 
现代文：有位客人责难我说： 现在经典中对文字的解释，你认为有很多错误，而《说文解字》对文字的解释，你认为都是正确的，这样的话，那么许慎比孔子高明吗？ 
English: A guest reproached me, saying, "You think there are many mistakes in the interpretation of the characters in the current classics, but you think the interpretation of the characters in "Saying the Words" is all correct. In that case, is Xu Sheng better than Confucius?"

古文：主人拊掌大笑，应之曰： 今之经典，皆孔子手迹耶？ 
现代文：我拍掌大笑，回答说： 现在的经典都是孔子的手迹吗？ 
English: I clapped my hands and laughed, and replied, "Are all the classics written by Confucius nowadays?

古文：客曰： 今之《说文》，皆许慎手迹乎？ 
现代文：客人反问道； 现在的《说文解字》都是许慎的手迹吗？ 
English: The guest asked back, "Are all of today's "Saying and Interpreting Chinese Characters" the handwriting of Xu Sheng?"

古文：答曰： 许慎检以六文，贯以部分，使不得误，误则觉之。
现代文：我回答说； 许慎根据六书来分析字形解释字义，将文字控部首分类，使文字的形、音、义准确无误，即使错了的，也能准确发现错在何处。
English: I replied: Xu Shen analyzed the glyphs according to the six books to explain the meaning of the characters, and classified the initials of the characters, so that the shape, sound and meaning of the characters were accurate. Even if they were wrong, they could find out exactly where the mistake was.

古文：孔子存其义而不论其文也。
现代文：孔子校订经书，只保存经文的大义宗旨，而不推究文字。
English: Confucius edited the scriptures, preserving only the righteous purpose of the scriptures, without investigating the words.

古文：先儒尚得改文从意，何况书写流传邓？
现代文：以前的学者尚且还用改变字形的办法来附会文意，至於流传抄写过程中的错误就更多了。
English: Earlier scholars also used the method of changing the font to add meaning to the text, and there are even more errors in the transcription process.

古文：必如《左传》止戈为武，反正为乏，虫为蛊，亥有二首六身之类，后人自不得辄改也，安敢以《说文》校其是非哉？
现代文：除非像《左传》中认为武字是由 止  戈 组成， 正 字反过来就是 乏 ， 蛊 字是由 皿  虫 组成， 亥 字是由 二 和 六 组成，像这样对文字的分析解释，后人已无法随意改变，又怎么敢用《说文解字》去考订这种说法的是非呢？
English: Unless, as in "Zo Zhuan," it is believed that the Chinese character for "martial" is composed of 止, the Chinese character for "correct" is 乏, the Chinese character for  is composed of 皿, and the Chinese character for 亥 is composed of 二 and 六, the analysis and interpretation of the characters in this way can no longer be changed at will by future generations. How dare they use "Saying and Interpreting Chinese Characters" to test the truth or falsity of this statement?

古文：且馀亦不专以《说文》为是也，其有援引经传，与今乖者，未之敢从。
现代文：同时，我也不认为《说文解字》是完全正确的，书中引用的典籍原文，如果与现在通行的典籍有出入，我也不敢盲从。
English: At the same time, I don't think that "Saying Chinese" is completely correct. If the original text of the classics quoted in the book is different from the current classics, I wouldn't dare to follow it blindly.

古文：又相如《封禅书》曰： 导一茎六穗于扈，牺双解共抵之兽，此导训择，光武诏云： 非徒有豫养导择之劳，是也。
现代文：例如：司马相如的《封禅书》说： 导一茎六穗於皰，牺双角共抵之兽。 这句话中的 导 是选择的意思，光武帝下诏书说： 非徒有豫养导泽之劳。 
English: For example: Sima Xiangru's "Zen Book" says: "Guide one stem and six spikes to the gourd, sacrifice the beast with two horns." The "guide" in this sentence means "choice." Emperor Guangwu's edict said: "It is not easy to nurture and guide the beast."

古文：而《说文》云： 道是禾名。 
现代文：其中的 导 字也是选择的意思。而《说文解字》却解释说： 是禾名 。
English: Among them, the leading character caro also means to choose. However, "Saying and Deciphering Chinese Characters" explains that it is the name of a grain.

古文：引《封禅书》为证；无妨自当有禾名道，非相如所用也。 禾一茎六穗于扈， 岂成文乎？
现代文：并且引用了《封禅书》作为例证；也许有一种谷物名叫 道，但并不是司马相如《封禅书》中的 导 字。如果按照许慎的理解， 禾一茎六穗於皰 难道还成为一句话吗？
English: He also cited "Fu Zenshu" as an example; there may be a kind of grain called "Do," but it is not "Sima" as in the introduction of "Fu Zenshu." According to Xu Shen's understanding, would "one stalk, six ears of wheat" still be a sentence?

古文：纵使相如天才鄙拙，强为此语，则下句当云 麟双角共抵之兽， 不得云牺也。
现代文：即使司马相如天生愚蠢，生硬地写出这句话，那么下句就不应该是 牺双角共抵之兽 ，而应该是 麟双角共抵之兽 ，以此求得上下名词义、词性的对应。
English: Even if Sima Xiang was born stupid and wrote this sentence bluntly, then the next sentence should not be  Opfer双角共抵之獣, but should be 麟双角共抵之獣, in order to find the correspondence between the upper and lower noun meanings and parts of speech.

古文：吾尝笑许纯儒，不达文章之体，如此之流，不足凭信，大抵服其为书，隐括有条例，剖析穷根源，郑玄注书，往往引以为证；若不信其说，则冥冥不知一点一画，有何意焉。 
现代文：我大致信服《说文解字》对文字的解说。书中将文字按部首排列，分析字的形体，探求字的本义，郑玄注释经书，常常引证《说文解字》作为论据；如果不相信许慎的学说，就稀里糊涂，不知道一点一划有什么意义。 
English: In the book, the characters are arranged by chapter, the shape of the characters is analyzed, and the original meaning of the characters is explored. Zheng Xuan's commentary on the scriptures often cites "Saying Words" as an argument. If you do not believe in Xu Shen's theory, you will be confused and do not know the meaning of each point.

