古文：李允则，字垂范，济州团练使谦溥子也。
现代文：李允则，字垂范，济州团练使李谦溥的儿子。
English: Li Yunzhe, the son of Li Xuanfan, the son of Li Qianyao, the regimental drill sergeant of Jeju.

古文：少以材略闻，荫补衙内指挥使，改左班殿直。
现代文：小的时候因其才华出众而闻名，后来以祖荫补为衙内指挥使，改左班殿直。
English: When he was a child, he was famous for his outstanding talent. Later, he changed his position from the left to the right, with Zuyin Zhi as the commander.

古文：太平兴国七年，幽蓟还师，始置榷场于静戎军，允则典其事。
现代文：太平兴国七年，幽蓟撤兵，才开始在静戎军设置榷场，任李允则掌管榷场之事。
English: In the seventh year of the Taiping Xingguo, after the withdrawal of soldiers, the Jing Rong Army began to set up a battlefield, and Ren Li Yun was in charge of the battlefield.

古文：还，使河东路决系囚，原治逋欠。
现代文：回京后，又出使河东路，审判刑狱案件，这些都是原来未能解决的案件。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was sent to Hedong Road to judge the prison cases. These were all cases that could not be resolved.

古文：又使荆湖察官吏，与转运使检视钱帛、器甲、刑狱，遂擢阁门祗候。
现代文：又出使荆湖路，考察官吏之政绩，与转运使一同检查钱帛、器甲、刑狱之事，之后被提升为门祗候。
English: He was also sent to Jinghu Road to inspect the political performance of officials, and together with the transfer envoy, he inspected the matter of money, armor, and prison. After that, he was promoted to the position of gatekeeper.

古文：浚治京师诸河，创水门，郑州水硙。
现代文：负责治理、疏通京师附近各河道，首创了水门和郑州水磨。
English: He was responsible for the management and dredging of rivers near Beijing Division, and pioneered the Water Gate and Zhengzhou Water Mill.

古文：西川贼刘旰平，上官正议修城未决，命允则与王承衎、阎承翰往视。
现代文：西川盗贼刘旰被平定后，上官正上书要求在西川修筑城墙，皇上一时决定不下来，即派李允则与王承絗、阎承翰一起前往察勘。
English: After Liu Bei, the thief of the West River, was subdued, the superior officer was in the process of writing a letter requesting the construction of a city wall in the West River. The emperor decided not to come down at the time, that is, he sent Li Yun and Wang Chengyi and Yan Chenghan together to inspect.

古文：还，言西川以无城难守，宜如正议。
现代文：他们回京后，向皇上汇报说西川没有城的话，确实难以防守，最好还是按照上官正的意见修筑城墙。
English: After they returned to Kyoto, they reported to the emperor that if Saikawa did not have a castle, it would indeed be difficult to defend, and it would be best to build a city wall in accordance with the opinion of the superior officer.

古文：又言兵分则缓急不为用，请亻并屯要害，以便馈饷。
现代文：李允则等又上书说，如果部队分散了则势力被削弱，战事发生时无法调度应急，请将军队集结起来，驻扎在关键、险要之地，这也便于军事物质的供给。
English: Li Yunzhe and others also wrote that if the troops are dispersed, the forces will be weakened, and it will be impossible to dispatch emergency response in the event of a war. Please gather the troops and station them in key and critical locations, which will also facilitate the supply of military materials.

古文：高溪州蛮田彦伊入寇，遣诣辰州，与转运使张素、荆南刘昌言计事。
现代文：高溪州蛮田彦伊入侵，皇上派李允则到辰州，与转运使张素、荆南刘昌言一起讨论拒敌的方略。
English: The emperor sent Li Yun Zi to Chenzhou to discuss the strategy of repelling the enemy together with the envoy Zhang Su and Jingnan Liu Changyan.

古文：允则以蛮徼不足加兵，悉招辑之。
现代文：李允则认为蛮族边界不足以用兵，就把他们都招降了。
English: Li Yun, on the other hand, thought that the barbarian border was not enough to use soldiers, so he invited them all to surrender.

古文：累迁供备库副使、知潭州。
现代文：累迁供备库副使、知潭州。
English: Deputy Minister of Relocation and Storage, Zhitangzhou.

古文：将行，真宗谓曰： 朕在南衙，毕士安尝道卿家世，今以湖南属卿。 初，马氏暴敛，州人出绢，谓之地税。
现代文：准备赴任时，真宗对李允则说： 我在南京时，毕士安曾对我说起你的家世，所以现在把湖南交给你去掌管。 当初，马氏横征暴敛，要潭州人纳绢，叫作地税。
English: When he was preparing to take office, Zhenzong said to Li Yunzu: When I was in Nanjing, Bei Shian told me about your family history, so now I will put Hunan under your control.At first, the Ma clan levied exorbitant taxes on the people of Tanzhou, called land tax.

古文：潘美定湖南，计屋输绢，谓之屋税。
现代文：潘美统治湖南时，要百姓按房屋纳绢，叫作屋税。
English: When Pan Mei ruled Hunan, he asked the people to pay taxes according to their houses, which was called the house tax.

古文：营田户给牛，岁输米四斛，牛死犹输，谓之枯骨税。
现代文：营田户养牛要交纳牛钱，每年交纳米四斛，牛死以后还要照交不误，叫作枯骨税。
English: Yingtan households raising cattle must pay cattle money, pay nano four baht every year, and pay after the death of the cow, called the dead bone tax.

古文：民输茶，初以九斤为一大斤，后益至三十五斤。
现代文：百姓交纳茶叶，开始以九斤为一大斤，后来增加到三十五斤为一大斤。
English: The people began to pay nine jin for a large jin of tea, and later increased it to thirty-five jin for a large jin.

古文：允则请除三税，茶以十三斤半为定制，民皆便之。
现代文：李允则上书请求废除这三种税，茶叶规定以十三斤半为定制，这样百姓负担减轻多了。
English: Li Yunzhe petitioned for the abolition of these three taxes, and the tea requirement was set at thirteen and a half catties, thus reducing the burden on the people.

古文：湖湘多山田，可以艺粟，而民惰不耕。
现代文：湖南大多是山田，可以种植粟，但这里的人都很懒惰，不愿耕种。
English: Most of Hunan is mountainous and can grow millet, but people here are lazy and don't want to farm.

古文：乃下令月所给马刍，皆输本色，繇是山田悉垦。
现代文：于是李允则下令农户每月要交纳马草，且只准交马草，不准用其他的代替，这样山田都得到了开垦。
English: As a result, Li Yun ordered farmers to pay horse straw every month, and they were only allowed to pay horse straw, and were not allowed to use other substitutes, so that all of Yamada was reclaimed.

古文：湖南饥，欲发官廪先赈而后奏，转运使执不可，允则曰： 须报逾月，则饥者无及矣。 明年荐饥，复欲先赈，转运使又执不可，允则请以家资为质，乃得发廪贱粜。
现代文：湖南发生饥荒，李允则想先将官仓的粮食发放赈济饥民后再向朝廷奏报，转运使坚决不同意。李允则说： 如果先奏报，等朝廷批准后再发放粮食，要一个多月的时间，这样饥民都要被饿死了。 第二年又要开仓放粮赈济饥民，转运使又不同意，李允则就要求以他家里的财产作抵押，这样才得到转运使批准开仓贱价卖粮赈济饥民。
English: When a famine occurred in Hunan, Li Yun wanted to distribute the grain from the official warehouse to the starving people first, and then report to the imperial court. The transporter firmly disagreed. Li Yun said: If the report is submitted first, and then the grain is distributed after the approval of the imperial court, it will take more than a month, so the starving people will be starved to death. The next year, he wanted to open the warehouse to distribute grain to the starving people. The transporter did not agree, and Li Yun demanded that his family's property be used as collateral. This was the only way to get the transporter's approval to open the warehouse and sell grain

古文：因募饥民堪役者隶军籍，得万人。
现代文：招募饥民中能够服役的人去服兵役，共计得一万人。
English: Those who were able to serve in the army were recruited from among the starving people, bringing the total to 10,000.

古文：转运使请发所募兵御邵州蛮，允则曰： 今蛮不搅，无名益戍，是长边患也。
现代文：转运使要求将招募的这些兵员派去防御邵州蛮，李允则说： 现在蛮族并没有发兵捣乱，而要兴无名之师，则只会增加边境祸患。
English: The transshipment agent demanded that these recruited soldiers be sent to defend the Shaozhou barbarians, and Li Yun said: Now the barbarians have not sent troops to cause trouble, but to arouse the nameless division will only increase the border disaster.

古文：且兵皆新募，饥瘠未任出戍。 乃奏罢之。
现代文：再说这些兵士都是新招募来的，他们遭受饥饿，身体羸弱不堪，故不便让他们去戍守。 于是上奏要求停罢此事。
English: Moreover, these soldiers were new recruits, and they were suffering from hunger and were too weak to defend themselves, so it was inconvenient for them to go and defend themselves.

古文：陈尧叟安抚湖南，民列允则治状请留，尧叟以闻。
现代文：陈尧叟任湖南安抚使，百姓将李允则的政绩一一列举上报，要求他留下来，陈尧叟将此事上奏朝廷。
English: Chen Xi served as the pacification envoy of Hunan. The people reported Li Yunze's political achievements one by one and asked him to stay. Chen Xi reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：召还，连对三日，帝曰： 毕士安不谬知人者。 
现代文：皇上将李允则召回京师，与他接连讨论了三天，最后说 ：毕士安真没有看错人哪。 
English: Li Yun, the imperial admiral, was called back to the Beijing division, and they discussed with him for three days in a row, and finally said: Bei Shi An really did not see the wrong person.

古文：迁洛苑副使、知沧州。
现代文：迁任洛苑副使、知沧州。
English: He was transferred to the post of vice-envoy of Luoyuan and Zhichang Prefecture.

古文：允则巡视州境，浚浮阳湖，葺营垒，官舍间穿井。
现代文：李允则在州内到处巡视，又整治、疏通浮阳湖，修葺营垒，开挖水井。
English: Li Yun, on the other hand, inspected everywhere in the state, and carried out the rectification and dredging of the Floating Lake, the repair of the camp, and the excavation of wells.

古文：未几，契丹来攻，老幼皆入保而水不乏，斫冰代炮，契丹遂解去。
现代文：不久，契丹兴兵来犯，老少之人都入住营垒而用水却不缺乏，又凿冰代炮，攻击敌人，契丹只好撤退了。
English: Soon, the Khitan soldiers arrived, and the young and old people moved into the camp, but there was no shortage of water, and they used ice cannons to attack the enemy. The Khitan had to retreat.

古文：真宗复召谓曰： 顷有言卿浚井葺屋为劳民者，及契丹至，始见善为备也。 转西上阁门副使、镇定高阳三路行营兵马都监，押大阵东面。
现代文：真宗又召李允则回京，对他说： 以前有人说你凿井修屋是劳民伤财，等到现在契丹来侵犯时，才知道你这乃是防患于未然哪。 转任西上门副使和镇、定、高阳三路行营兵马都监，镇守东部边境。
English: Zhen Zong also summoned Li Yun Zi back to Beijing and said to him: In the past, some people said that you chiseled wells and repaired houses as a labor and financial loss, but now when the Khitan invade, you know that this is a precautionary measure. He was transferred to the position of deputy envoy of the West Shangmen and the commander of the troops and horses of the town, Ding and Gaoyang three-way camp, guarding the eastern border.

古文：请对，自陈武艺非所长，不可以当边剧。
现代文：请求面见皇上时，他说领兵打仗非其所长，无法担任边防之重任。
English: When he asked to see the emperor, he said that leading soldiers into battle was not his job, and that he could not take on the important task of border defense.

古文：帝曰： 卿为我运筹策，不必当矢石也。 赐白金二千两，副以帏幄、什器，凡下诸路宣敕，必先属允则省而后行。
现代文：真宗说 ：你只要为我策划谋略就行了，不必亲自带兵上阵。 赐给他白金二千两，以及帏幄、什器等等，并规定凡是下达到各路的宣敕诏令，一定要经过李允则审定同意后才能执行。
English: Zhenzong said, "All you have to do is to plan a strategy for me, and you don't have to personally lead soldiers into battle." He gave him two thousand taels of platinum, as well as money, utensils, and so on, and stipulated that any edict of proclamation that reached all directions must be approved and approved by Li Yunze before it could be implemented.

古文：及王超败，人心震摇，允则劝超衰绖向师哭，以解众忿。
现代文：王超大败，人心震动，李允则即劝王超着丧服向死去的士兵哀悼，以消除众怒。
English: Wang Chao suffered a crushing defeat and his heart was shaken. Li Yun then advised Wang Chao to wear mourning clothes to mourn the dead soldiers in order to dispel the public anger.

古文：真宗知允则始屡趣超进兵，手诏褒厉。
现代文：真宗了解到李允则开始时屡次要王超出兵，尽管打败了，但仍然亲自草书诏令褒扬勉励他。
English: Zhenzong learned that Li Yunzhe repeatedly asked Wang to exceed the number of soldiers at the beginning, and although he was defeated, he still personally praised and encouraged him with a cursive edict.

古文：契丹通好，徙知瀛州，上言： 朝廷已许契丹和议，但择边将，谨誓约，有言和好非利者，请一切斥去。 真宗曰： 兹朕意也。 迁西上阁门副使。
现代文：与契丹停罢战争，两相修好，李允则即调任知瀛州，他上书说： 朝廷已同意与契丹议和，即要选择好镇守边关的将领，谨守盟约，对于那些认为不应当与契丹议和的人，请都罢去。 真宗说： 这也是我的意思。 迁任西上门副使。
English: The war with the Khitans was halted and the two sides made peace, and Li Yunzhe was transferred to Zhiyang Prefecture, and he wrote: The imperial court has agreed to negotiate peace with the Khitans, that is, to choose a good general to guard the border, to abide by the covenant, and for those who think that peace should not be negotiated with the Khitans, please leave.

古文：何承矩为河北缘边安抚、提点榷场，及承矩疾，诏自择代，乃请允则知雄州。
现代文：何承矩任河北缘边安抚、提点榷场，在他病时，皇上令他自己择人代理公务，他上书请让李允则知雄州。
English: He was appointed by the emperor to pacify the periphery of Hebei Province and to promote peace. When he was ill, the emperor ordered him to choose someone to act as his official representative. He sent a letter asking Li Yunzhe to visit Xiongzhou.

古文：初，禁榷场通异物，而逻者得所易珉玉带。
现代文：开初，政府禁止榷场买卖珍奇物品，而边境的人可以交易王民玉带。
English: At the beginning of the year, the government banned the sale and purchase of rare items in the market, but people at the border could trade Wang Min's jade belt.

古文：允则曰： 此以我无用易彼有用也，纵不治。 迁东上阁门使、奖州刺史。
现代文：李允则说： 这是用我们没用的东西交换别人有用的东西，可以不要管。 迁任东上门使、奖州刺史。
English: Li Yun said, "This is exchanging our useless things for other people's useful things, you can leave it alone.

古文：河北既罢兵，允则治城垒不辍，契丹主曰； 南朝尚修城备，得无违誓约乎？ 其相张俭曰； 李雄州为安抚使，其人长者，不足疑。 既而有诏诘之，允则奏曰： 初通好不即完治，恐他日颓圮因此废守，边患不可测也。 帝以为然。
现代文：河北已经停止战争，李允则仍然不断地修筑城堡，契丹首领说： 宋朝还在修城池，加强战备，他们不会违背和约吗？ 契丹宰相张俭说： 李雄州任安抚使，他是个忠厚长者，不必怀疑他。 不久皇上下诏询问这件事，李允则上奏说： 当初双方签订停战盟约时，城堡营垒还只修了一半，工事没有完成，我担心就此放弃不修，这些都会完全荒废；再说边境战事变化很大，是无法预测的。 
English: Hebei has stopped the war, but Li Yunzhe is still constantly building castles. The Khitan leader said: The Song Dynasty is still building castles and strengthening combat readiness, won't they violate the peace treaty? The Khitan Prime Minister Zhang Jian said: Li Xiongzhou is the pacifying envoy, he is a loyal elder, don't doubt him. Soon after, the emperor inquired about this matter, Li Yunzhe reported: When the two sides signed the armistice treaty, the castle camp was only half built, the construction was not completed, I was worried about giving up and not repairing it, these would be completely abandoned; moreover, the border war has changed a

古文：城北旧有彻城，允则欲合大城为一。
现代文：皇上同意他的意见。城北面有用作防御的旧的瓮城，李允则想将它改建，与大城合为一体。
English: The emperor agreed with him. To the north of the city, there was an old fortified city, but Li Yun wanted to rebuild it and merge it with the big city.

古文：先建东岳祠，出黄金百两为供器，道以鼓吹，居人争献金银。
现代文：于是他就首先建造了东岳祠，拿出百两黄金做成供奉的器物，并到处宣扬，当地的居民也争相献出金银器物。
English: Therefore, he first built the Dongyue Ancestral Hall, took out one hundred and two gold coins to make offerings, and promoted it everywhere. Local residents also scrambled to donate gold and silver items.

古文：久之，密自彻去，声言盗自北至，遂下令捕盗，三移文北界，乃兴版筑，扬言以护祠。
现代文：过了一段时间，李允则秘密地将这些器物撤走了，对外却声称从北面来了盗匪，于是多次下令在城北抓捕盗匪，并修筑城墙，扬言说是要保护东岳祠。
English: After a period of time, Li Yun secretly removed these objects, but claimed to the outside world that robbers had come from the north, so he repeatedly ordered the arrest of robbers in the north of the city and the construction of city walls, threatening to protect Dongyue Ancestral Hall.

古文：而卒就关城浚壕，起月堤，自此彻城之人，悉内城中。
现代文：最后关闭城门，开挖壕沟，修建月堤，终于把瓮城里的人全都纳入了城中。
English: Finally, the city gate was closed, a trench was dug, a mound was built, and finally all the people in Lucheng were included in the city.

古文：始，州民多以草覆屋，允则取材木西山，大为仓廪营舍。
现代文：雄州的百姓原来大多用草盖屋，李允则派人从西山采来木材，大量修建仓库营房。
English: Most of the people in Xiongzhou originally used grass-covered houses, but Li Yun sent people to collect wood from the West Mountain and built a large number of warehouse barracks.

古文：始教民陶瓦甓，标里闬，置廊市、邸舍、水硙。
现代文：他还教给当地人烧陶制砖瓦，修里门干，建廊市、邸舍、水磨。
English: He also taught the local people how to make bricks and tiles from fired pottery, how to repair doors, and how to build galleries, residences, and watermills.

古文：城上悉累甓，下环以沟堑，莳麻植榆柳。
现代文：城上都用砖垒砌，下面则开挖壕沟，种麻植柳。
English: The walls of the city are made of bricks, while below trenches are dug and willows are planted.

古文：广阎承翰所修屯田，架石桥，构亭榭，列堤道，以通安肃、广信、顺安军。
现代文：扩大阎承翰所修的屯田，架设石桥，构筑亭榭，建堤修路，以整治与安肃、广信、顺安军之间的交通。
English: He expanded the military camps built by Yan Chenghan, erected stone bridges, built pavilions, and built roads to rectify the traffic between the Ansu, Guangxin, and Shunan armies.

古文：岁修禊事，召界河战棹为竞渡，纵北人游观，潜寓水战。
现代文：为了举办祭祀活动，李允则召集界河的战船进行竞渡比赛活动，让当地人游览观看，同时将有关水战的事暗寓其中以教导人们。
English: In order to hold sacrificial activities, Li Yun called up the warships of the Boundary River to carry out the race to cross the competition, let the local people visit and watch, and at the same time secretly teach the people about the water war.

古文：州北旧多设陷马坑，城上起楼为斥堠，望十里；自罢兵，人莫敢登。
现代文：雄州北面过去因为打仗挖了很多陷马坑，城上则修楼，用以观察敌情，可以看到十里以内的情况；自从战争停止后，人们都不敢登城楼。
English: In the north of Xiongzhou, many pitfalls were dug in the past because of the war, and a tower was built on the city to observe the enemy situation and see the situation within ten miles; since the war stopped, people have been afraid to climb the city tower.

古文：允则曰： 南北既讲和矣，安用此为？ 命彻楼夷坑，为诸军蔬圃，浚井疏洫，列畦陇，筑短垣，纵横其中，植以荆棘，而其地益阻隘。
现代文：李允则说 ：既然与契丹讲和了，还要这些干什么？ 因此派人撤掉了城楼，填平了陷马坑，让各部队在上面种植蔬菜，挖井开沟，拓垦田土，种植树木荆棘，这样这些地方就自然设置了障碍。
English: Li Yun said, "Since we have made peace with the Khitan, what do we need these for? Therefore, we sent people to remove the city tower, fill the horse pit, and let the troops plant vegetables on it, dig wells, open ditches, reclaim fields, and plant trees and thorns, so these places naturally set up obstacles.

古文：因治坊巷，徙浮图北原上，州民旦夕登望三十里，下令安抚司，所治境有隙地悉种榆，久之榆满塞下。
现代文：他又命令整治街巷，修建佛塔，人们可以登高望远，三十里以内一目了然。又下令给安抚司，规定在所辖的境内凡有空隙的地方，都种上榆树。一段时期后，榆树布满了塞下。
English: He also ordered the rectification of streets and alleys, the construction of a stupa, people can climb high and far, within thirty miles at a glance. He also ordered the pacification department to stipulate that wherever there is a gap in the territory under its jurisdiction, eucalyptus trees are planted. After a period of time, eucalyptus trees are covered with cork.

古文：顾谓僚佐曰： 此步兵之地，不利骑战，岂独资屋材耶？ 
现代文：这时李允则对左右官员说 ：现在到处布满了树林荆棘，是步兵作战的好地方，而不利于骑兵作战，这些树难道只能用来建造房屋吗？ 
English: At this time, Li Yun said to the left and right officials: Now there are thorns everywhere, it is a good place for infantry to fight, but it is not good for cavalry to fight, can these trees only be used to build houses?

古文：上元旧不燃灯，允则结彩山，聚优乐，使民夜纵游。
现代文：雄州一带过去在上元节时都不燃灯赏玩，李允则在山上张灯结彩，派伶官表演歌舞，让人们彻夜游玩。
English: In the past, the Xiongzhou area did not light lanterns to enjoy the Lantern Festival, but Li Yun lit lanterns on the mountain, sent eunuchs to perform songs and dances, and let people play all night.

古文：明日，侦知北酋欲间入城中观，允则与同僚伺郊外。
现代文：第二天，探子报告说契丹一首领想偷偷入城观看。李允则与同僚一起躲在郊外观察，果然有穿紫色衣服的人入城了。
English: The next day, the scout reported that the Khitan leader wanted to sneak into the city to watch. Li Yun, together with his colleagues, hid in the suburbs to observe. As it turned out, a person wearing purple clothes entered the city.

古文：果有紫衣人至，遂与俱入传舍，不交一言，出奴女罗侍左右，剧饮而罢。且置其所乘骡庑下，使遁去，即幽州统军也。
现代文：李允则等人即与来人一起到了一家旅舍，都没有说一句话。李允则派女奴去服侍那紫衣人，让他喝得酩酊大醉，又把他所骑的骡子放在廊屋下，让他走了。这个紫衣人是契丹在幽州的统军。
English: Li Yunzhe and the others arrived at a hostel with the visitor and did not say a word. Li Yunzhe sent a female slave to serve the man in purple, got him very drunk, put the mule he was riding under the porch and let him go. The man in purple was the Qidan's leading army in Yuzhou.

古文：后数日，为契丹所诛。
现代文：几天后，这个统军被契丹诛杀了。
English: A few days later, this united army was killed by the Khitans.

古文：尝宴军中，而甲仗库火。
现代文：有一次李允则设宴于军中，这时部队军械库着了火。
English: On one occasion, while Li Yun was giving a banquet for the army, the army armoury caught fire.

古文：允则作乐行酒不辍，副使请救，不答。
现代文：李允则仍然不停地喝酒作乐，副使请求去救火，他不回答。
English: Li Yun, on the other hand, continued to drink and make merry. The vice-envoy asked him to put out the fire, but he did not answer.

古文：少顷火熄，命悉瘗所焚物，密遣吏持檄瀛州，以茗笼运器甲。
现代文：不久火熄了，下令将所焚烧的东西都埋掉，又暗地里派人拿着檄文到瀛州，用装茶叶的笼子运来武器甲胄。
English: Soon after, the fire was extinguished, and he ordered that everything that had been burned be buried. He also secretly sent people to Zhangzhou with money to buy weapons and armor in cages filled with tea leaves.

古文：不浃旬，兵数已完，人无知者。
现代文：不到十天，兵械都已如数运完，没有人知道这件事。
English: In less than ten days, all the weapons had been shipped out, and no one knew about it.

古文：枢密院请劾不救火状，真宗曰： 允则必有谓，姑诘之。 对曰： 兵械所藏，儆火甚严，方宴而焚，必奸人所为。
现代文：枢密院要求弹劾李允则不救火的罪状，真宗说 ：允则对这件事一定有什么话要说，让我们先问一问他。 李允则对皇上说 ：兵械库一向戒备森严，为什么刚好在宴会时烧起来了呢？
English: The Privy Council demanded that Li Yunze be impeached on the charge of not putting out the fire. Zhenzong said: "Yunze must have something to say about this matter, let's ask him first." Li Yunze said to the emperor: "The armory has always been well guarded, why did it just happen to catch fire during the banquet?"

古文：舍宴而救，事或不测。 
现代文：这一定是奸人有意干的。这时如果我离开宴席去救火，说不定会发生不测之事。 
English: It must have been done on purpose. If I had left the party to put out the fire, something might have happened.

古文：又得谍，释缚厚遇之，谍言燕京大王遣来，因出所刺缘边金谷、兵马之数。
现代文：捕获了敌人的一个间谍，李允则令放开他，并给予很好的招待。间谍说他是燕京大王派来的，还拿出了他刺探的宋朝沿边钱粮、兵马的数量。
English: After capturing one of the enemy's spies, Li Yun ordered to release him and gave him a good invitation. The spy said that he was sent by the King of Yanjing, and also brought out the amount of money, grain and soldiers and horses along the border of the Song Dynasty that he spied.

古文：允则曰： 若所得谬矣。 呼主吏按籍书实数与之。
现代文：李允则说： 你所得到的这些情报都是错的。 他叫主管官员将钱粮、兵马的实际数字抄给了那个间谍。
English: Li Yunzhe said, "All the information you have obtained is wrong," and he ordered the responsible official to copy the actual figures of money, grain, soldiers and horses to the spy.

古文：谍请加缄印，因厚赐以金，纵还。
现代文：间谍要求在情报的封口处加了钤印，李允则给了他很多金银，然后把他放了。
English: The spy asked for the seal of the information to be stamped, and Li Yun gave him a lot of gold and silver, and then released him.

古文：未几，谍遽至，还所与数，缄印如故，反出彼中兵马、财力、地里委曲以为报。
现代文：不久，那个间谍又来了，归还了原来给他的情报，情报原封未动，而且他反而还供出了他们军队的数量、钱粮情况、军队分布情况等。
English: Not long after, the spy came again and returned the information he had originally given him, the information intact, and on the contrary, he also provided the number of their troops, the situation of money and grain, the distribution of troops, etc.

古文：一日，民有诉为契丹民殴伤而遁者。
现代文：一天，有人诉告说被契丹人打伤了，要求官府追究。
English: One day, someone complained that he had been injured by the Khitan and asked the authorities to investigate.

古文：允则不治，与伤者钱二千，众以为怯。
现代文：李允则没有予以追查，只是给了被打伤的人二千钱，众人都认为他害怕了。
English: On the other hand, Li Yun did not pursue the matter, but just gave the injured person two thousand yuan. Everyone thought he was scared.

古文：逾月，幽州以其事来诘，答以无有。
现代文：一个多月后，幽州方面派人来质询这件事，李允则回答说没有发生这件事。
English: More than a month later, Yuzhou sent someone to inquire about the matter, and Li Yun replied that it did not happen.

古文：盖他谍欲以殴人为质验，比得报，以为妄，乃杀谍。
现代文：这都是他们的间谍想以打人这件事为据作文章，等到了解这件事是妄报的以后，他们就把间谍杀了。
English: It was all their spies trying to use the beating incident as a basis for an article. When they realized that the incident was a false report, they killed the spy.

古文：云翼卒亡入契丹，允则移文督还，契丹报以不知所在。
现代文：云翼的戍守士兵逃到契丹，李允则去文要契丹方面督促逃兵回来，契丹说不知道逃兵在什么地方。
English: Yun Ying's soldiers fled to Khitan, and Li Yun wrote to Khitan to urge the deserters to return. Khitan said that he did not know where the deserters were.

古文：允则曰： 在某所。 契丹骇，不敢隐，既归卒，乃斩以徇。
现代文：李允则说： 在某个地方。 契丹人很惊讶，不敢再隐瞒，只好遣返了逃兵，李允则即将逃兵斩首了。
English: Li Yunzhe said: "Somewhere." The Khitan were surprised and no longer dared to hide, so they had to repatriate the deserter. Li Yunzhe was about to behead the deserter.

古文：历四方馆引进使、高州团练使。
现代文：历任四方馆引进使、高州团练使。
English: Successive Shifang Museum introduction envoys, Gaozhou group training envoys.

古文：天禧二年，以客省使知镇州，徙潞州。
现代文：天禧二年，以客省使身份知镇州，又迁任知潞州。
English: In the second year of Tianhui, he was appointed as the guest provincial envoy to Zhenzhou, and then moved to Zhisheng.

古文：仁宗即位，领康州防御使。
现代文：仁宗即位，领康州防御使。
English: Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, and appointed Kangzhou Defense Minister.

古文：天圣六年，卒。
现代文：天圣六年去世。
English: Tensho died six years later.

古文：允则不事威仪，间或步出，遇民可语者，延坐与语，以是洞知人情。
现代文：李允则没有什么官架子，间或出外走一走，遇到可以交谈的人就坐下来聊天，用这种方法了解民情。
English: Li Yun, on the other hand, has no official airs. He occasionally goes out for a walk, and when he meets someone he can talk to, he sits down and chats, using this method to understand the people's feelings.

古文：讼至，无大小面讯立断。
现代文：有诉讼的案子，无论大小他都亲自审讯，当场断决。
English: In the case of litigation, no matter how big or small, he personally tried the case and made a decision on the spot.

古文：善抚士卒，皆得其用。
现代文：他很善于安抚士兵，使他们很好地发挥作用。
English: He's very good at calming soldiers and getting them to function well.

古文：盗发辄获，人亦莫知所由。
现代文：一旦有盗匪，他马上就能够抓获，人们都不知道他为什么这么厉害。
English: If there is a bandit, he can catch him immediately. People don't know why he is so powerful.

古文：身无兼衣，食无重羞，不畜资财。
现代文：他衣着朴素，饮食简便，从不蓄积财产。
English: He dressed plainly, ate simple food, and never accumulated wealth.

古文：在河北二十余年，事功最多，其方略设施，虽寓于游观、亭传间，后人亦莫敢隳。
现代文：在河北做官二十多年，政绩非常突出，他的施政方略设施虽然都隐寓于游乐、亭榭之间，后人却都不敢毁坏、更改。
English: He has been an official in Hebei for more than 20 years, and his political achievements are very outstanding. Although his policy-making facilities are hidden among amusement and pavilions, future generations are afraid to destroy and change them.

古文：至于国信往来，费用仪式，多所裁定。
现代文：至于国家间使者来往的费用、仪式等，他大多裁定了。
English: As for the expenses, ceremonies, etc. of emissaries between countries, he mostly ruled.

古文：晚年居京师，有自契丹亡归者，皆命舍允则家。
现代文：晚年定居京师，有从契丹逃回的人，都让他们住在允则家里。
English: People who settled in Beijing in their later years, and those who fled from Khitan, all let them live in Yun Ze's home.

古文：允则死，始寓枢密院大程官营。
现代文：李允则死后，才让他们住到枢密院大程官营里。
English: It was only after Li Yunze's death that they were allowed to live in the official residence of the Privy Council.

