古文：李淳风，岐州雍人。
现代文：李淳风，岐州雍县人。
English: Li Junfeng, from Yong County, Qizhou.

古文：父播，仕隋高唐尉，弃官为道士，号黄冠子，以论譔自见。
现代文：父李播，在隋朝做官任高唐县尉，后弃官为道士，号黄冠子，以写作明志。
English: His father, Li Han, was an official in the Sui Dynasty, serving as a Gaotang County Lieutenant, and later resigned as a Taoist, called Huang Guanzi, in order to write his memoirs.

古文：淳风幼爽秀，通群书，明步天历算。
现代文：李淳风小时候聪明清秀，通晓群书，擅长推算天文历法之学。
English: When he was a child, Li Junfeng was smart and handsome. He knew a lot of books and was good at calculating the astronomical calendar.

古文：贞观初，与傅仁均争历法，议者多附淳风，故以将仁郎直太史局。
现代文：贞观初年，与傅仁均在历法上有争论，议者多附和淳风，因而以将仕郎职务在太史局工作。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he and Fu Ren both had a dispute over the calendar, and most of the discussants supported He Junfeng. Therefore, he worked at the Taihistory Bureau as a general servant.

古文：制浑得仪，诋摭前世失，著《法象书》七篇上之。
现代文：制作浑天仪，评论前代天文历法方面的得失，著《法象书》七篇上呈皇帝。
English: He made the armillary sphere, commented on the gains and losses of the previous generation of astronomical calendars, and wrote "The Book of Laws" in seven parts.

古文：擢承务郎，迁太常博士，改太史丞，与诸儒修书，迁为令。
现代文：升为承务郎，又升任太常博士，改任太史丞，与诸位儒学家一起著书，升为太史令。
English: He was promoted to jongyuro, promoted to taichō hakase, reassigned to taishijo, wrote books with various Confucian scholars, and was promoted to taishiryo.

古文：太宗得秘谶，言 唐中弱，有女武代王 。
现代文：太宗得到一个秘密谶文，预言： 唐代中道衰弱，有武氏女子代唐为王。 
English: Emperor Taizong obtained a secret prophecy, which predicted that the middle of the Tang Dynasty would be weak, and that a woman from the Wu Dynasty would reign over the Tang Dynasty.

古文：以问淳风，对曰： 其兆既成，已在宫中。
现代文：拿着去问李淳风，李淳风回答说 ：这种征兆已经形成，已在宫中。
English: He took it to ask Li Chunfeng. Li Chunfeng replied, "This sign has already been formed, it is already in the palace."

古文：又四十年而王，王而夷唐子孙且尽。 
现代文：再过四十年为王，称王后屠杀唐朝子孙将尽。 
English: After another forty years as king, he said that the queen's massacre of the Tang dynasty's descendants would be complete.

古文：帝曰： 我求而杀之，奈何？ 
现代文：太宗说： 我查出来杀掉她，如何？ 
English: Taizong said: How about I find out and kill her?

古文：对曰： 天之所命，不可去也，而王者果不死，徒使疑似之戳淫及无辜。
现代文：淳风说 ：这是天命，不能除掉，如搜杀的结果王者不死，徒然造成无确证地滥杀无辜。
English: Junfeng said: This is the fate of heaven, it cannot be eliminated, if the king does not die as a result of the search and killing, it is in vain to cause the indiscriminate killing of innocents without conclusive evidence.

古文：且陛下所亲爱，四十年而老，老则仁，虽受终易姓，而不能绝唐。
现代文：而且陛下所亲爱的人，四十年后就老了，老了就会有仁爱之心，虽然承受了帝位，江山改了姓，但不能灭绝唐室。
English: Moreover, His Majesty's beloved people will grow old in forty years, and when they are old, they will have a benevolent heart. Although they have inherited the throne and the country has changed its surname, they cannot exterminate the Tang family.

古文：若杀之，复生壮者，多杀而逞，则陛下子孙无遗种矣！ 
现代文：如果杀了她，又产生出一个更少壮的，肆意多杀，那么陛下的子孙就没有幸存的了！ 
English: If you kill her, and another, less strong, more wanton killer is born, then none of your majesty's descendants will survive!

古文：帝采其言，止。
现代文：太宗采纳了他的意见，没有追查。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted his opinion and did not investigate.

古文：淳风于占候吉凶，若节契然，当世术家意有鬼神相之，非学习可致，终不能测也。
现代文：李淳风对于观察天象变化以测吉凶，就像符节、契约的符合那样准确，当时研究律历的术家们认为有鬼神相助，不是学习可以达到的，终不能测其高深。
English: Li Chunfeng's observation of the changes in celestial phenomena to measure good and bad luck was just as accurate as the matching of symbols and contracts. At that time, scholars who studied the lunar calendar believed that ghosts and gods would help. This was not something that could be achieved through study, and ultimately it was not possible to measure its depth.

古文：以劳封昌乐县男。
现代文：由于功绩封为昌乐县男爵。
English: He was made a baron of Changle County for his achievements.

古文：奉诏与算博士梁述、助教王真儒等是正《五曹》、《孙子》等书，刊定注解，立于学官。
现代文：奉命与算博士梁述、助教王真儒等审定《五曹》、《孙子》等书，作为定本，加以注解，置于官学。
English: He was ordered to verify the books such as "Wu Cao" and "Sun Tzu" with Liang Shu, a doctor of mathematics, and Wang Zhenru, an assistant teacher, as the final version, to annotate them, and to place them in the official study.

古文：撰《麟德历》代《戊寅历》，候者推最密。
现代文：著《麟德历》代替《戊寅历》，星象家们推崇它最严密。
English: He published the "Linde Calendar" to replace the "Wu Yin Calendar," and astrologers hold it in the highest esteem.

古文：自秘阁郎中复为太史令，卒。
现代文：从秘阁郎中又再任太史令，不久逝世。
English: He was reappointed to Taishi-Ryo from Hikkaku-ro and died soon after.

古文：所撰《典章文物志》、《乙巳占》等书传於世。
现代文：所撰著的《典章文物志》、《乙巳占》等书流传于世。
English: His books such as "Dignity Cultural Relics History" and "The Emperor and the Empress" have been passed down to the world.

古文：子该，孙仙宗，并擢太史令。
现代文：其子李该、孙李仙宗，一同升为太史令。
English: His son, Li Jia, and his grandson, Sun Li Xianzong, were both promoted to Tai Shi Ling.

古文：唐初言历者惟傅仁均。
现代文：唐初谈历法的只有傅仁均。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, only Fu Renjun talked about the calendar.

古文：仁均，滑州人，终太史令。
现代文：他是滑州人，官至太史令。
English: He is a native of the city of Slum, and has served as a high-ranking official.

古文：袁天纲，益州成都人。
现代文：袁天纲，益州成都人。
English: Yuan Tiangang, a native of Chengdu, Yizhou.

古文：在洛阳，与杜淹、王珪、韦挺游，天纲谓淹曰： 公兰台、学堂全且博，将以文章显。 
现代文：隋时任盐官令。在洛阳，与杜淹、王王圭、韦挺交游。天纲对杜淹说 ：公鼻子两边直至耳朵饱满宽广，将来会以文章闻名。 
English: At the time of the Sui Dynasty, he was a salt official. In Luoyang, he traveled with Du Yun, Wang Wang Gui, and Wei Ting. Tianzang said to Du Yun: "The two sides of your nose are full and wide until your ears are full. In the future, you will be famous for your articles."

古文：谓珪 法令成，天地相临，不十年官五品 ；谓挺 面如虎，当以武处官 ； 然三君久皆得谴，吾且见之 。
现代文：说王王圭： 朝中法令制成后，天地相临，不出十年将官至五品。 说韦挺： 面如虎，将以武功为官。 又说 ：不过您三人为官久后均将遭贬斥。
English: Said Wang Wang Gui: After the Korean-Chinese decree is made, heaven and earth will meet, and no more than ten years will be promoted to the fifth grade. Said Wei Ting: Face like a tiger, will be promoted with martial arts. Also said: However, all three of you will be disparaged after a long time as officials.

古文：淹以侍御史入天策为学士，珪太子中允，挺善隐太子，荐为左卫率。武德中，俱以事流隽州，见天纲，曰： 公等终且贵。杜位三品，难与言寿，王、韦亦三品，后於杜而寿过之，但晚节皆困。 
现代文：得官较杜晚，但寿则较长。但晚节均受困。 
English: He was promoted later than Du, but his life expectancy was longer. However, they were all trapped in the late period.

古文：见窦轨曰： 君伏犀贯玉枕，辅角完起，十年且显，立功其在梁、益间邪！ 
现代文：见到窦轨说： 君的伏犀骨直通玉枕，辅角上翘。十年将贵显，可能在梁益之间立功劳。 
English: When he saw Dou Liao, he said, "Your pharyngeal bone goes straight through the jade pillow, and the ancillary angle is upturned. Ten years will be valuable, and it may be possible to make a contribution between the beams.

古文：轨后为益州行台仆射，天纲复曰： 赤脉干瞳，方语而浮赤入大宅，公为将必多杀，愿自戒。 
现代文：轨后来任益州行台仆射。天纲又说 ：赤脉犯瞳，说话间浮赤入面。公为将军必多杀伐，望能自我约束。 
English: Later, he was appointed as a foot soldier of the Ikshu line. Tenzan also said, "I have red veins in my eyes, and I blush when I speak. As a general, I must kill more, and I hope I can restrain myself."

古文：轨果坐事见召。
现代文：轨果然因犯过被召。
English: He was called up for the offense.

古文：天纲曰： 公毋忧，右辅泽而动，不久必还。 
现代文：天纲说 ：别担心。您右面颊光泽灵活，不久即会回来。 
English: Heavenly Guan said, "Don't worry, your right cheek is shiny and supple, it will come back soon."

古文：果还为都督。
现代文：果然回来仍为都督。
English: He did indeed return and still became the governor.

古文：贞观初，太宗召见曰： 古有君平，朕今得尔，何如？ 
现代文：贞观初年，太宗召见他说： 古代有君平，我今日有了你，如何？ 
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong summoned him and said, "In ancient times, there was Junping. Today, I have you. How is it?

古文：对曰： 彼不逢时，臣固胜之。 
现代文：回答说 ：他生不逢时，臣胜过了他。 
English: He replied, "He was born at the wrong time, and his vassal beat him."

古文：武后之幼，天纲见其母曰： 夫人法生贵子。 
现代文：武后幼年时，天纲见到她母亲，说： 夫人当生贵子。 
English: When Wu Hou was a child, Tian Gang met her mother and said, "Your wife should have a son.

古文：乃见二子元庆、元爽，曰： 官三品，保家主也。 
现代文：于是叫儿子元庆、元爽来见他。说： 将来官至三品，是保家的主宰。 
English: So he called his sons, Yuan Qing and Yuan Shuang, to come and see him, and said, "In the future, there will be three ranks of officials, and you will be the head of the Bao family."

古文：见韩国夫人，曰： 此女贵而不利夫。 
现代文：见到韩国夫人，说： 此女贵相，但与夫不利。 
English: When he saw the Korean lady, he said, "This lady has a noble face, but she is not good for her husband.

古文：后最幼，姆抱以见，绐以男，天纲视其步与目，惊曰： 龙瞳凤颈，极贵验也；若为女，当作天子。 
现代文：武后最小，保姆抱出来见天纲，骗说是男孩。天纲仔细打量后大惊： 龙瞳凤颈，是极贵之相。如果是女孩，当做天子。 
English: Wu Guo was the youngest, and the nanny took her out to see Tian Gang, and falsely said that it was a boy. Tian Gang was shocked after carefully looking around: Long eyes and phoenix neck are extremely valuable features. If it's a girl, it's a son of heaven.

古文：帝在九成宫，令视岑文本，曰： 学堂莹夷，眉过目，故文章振天下。
现代文：皇帝在九成宫，要他为岑文本看相。袁说： 鼻准两边有光泽，眉长过目，所以文章名振天下。
English: Yuan said: "His nose is shiny on both sides, and his eyebrows are long, so the article is famous all over the world.

古文：首生骨未成，自前而视，法三品。肉不称骨，非寿兆也。 
现代文：头生骨而未成，从前面看，该当三品；但肉不附骨，不是长寿的征兆。 
English: From the front, it should be three dishes, but the meat is not attached to the bone, which is not a sign of longevity.

古文：张行成、马周见，曰： 马君伏犀贯脑，背若有负，贵验也。
现代文：张行成、马周来请见，天纲说 ：马君伏犀骨直贯脑门，背上像有所负，是贵相。
English: Zhang Xingcheng and Ma Zhoulai came to see him. Tian Gang said, "Ma Jun's hairline runs straight through the front of his head, and there seems to be a burden on his back. He is a noble person."

古文：近古君臣相遇未有及公者。
现代文：近古君臣相处没有比得上您的。
English: In recent times, there has been no better example of a prince and a courtier getting along than yours truly.

古文：然面泽赤而耳无根，后骨不隆，寿不长也。张晚得官，终位宰相。 其术精类如此。
现代文：但面红而耳无根，后骨不隆，寿不长。张晚得官，终位宰相。 天纲相术之精如此。
English: However, his face was red and his ears had no roots, his back bones were not tall, and his life was not long. Zhang Late became an official, and eventually became the prime minister. This is the essence of Tianzhang's physiognomy.

古文：高士廉曰： 君终作何官？ 
现代文：高士廉说： 君终将做何官？ 
English: Gao Shillian said: How many posts will you eventually hold?

古文：谢曰： 仆及夏四月，数既尽。 
现代文：天纲告诉他说： 我到夏四月寿数就完了。 
English: Tianzang told him, "I will reach the end of my life in summer and April.

古文：如期以火山令卒。
现代文：到时候，以火山令之职去世。
English: At that time, he died in his position as a volcano warden.

古文：以火山令卒，按《旧书》卷一九一《袁天纲传》、《册府》卷八六○均谓武德初授火井令， 火山 疑是 火井 之讹。子客师，亦传其术，为廪牺令。
现代文：其子客师，也传习相术，任廪牺令。
English: His son, a guest teacher, also taught the art, and the order was carried out.

古文：高宗置一鼠於奁，令术家射，皆曰鼠。
现代文：高宗把一只老鼠放进盒里，叫术家们猜。大家都说是老鼠。
English: Gao Zong put a mouse in a box and asked the surgeons to guess. Everyone said it was a mouse.

古文：客师独曰： 强实鼠，然入则一，出则四。 
现代文：独客师说 ：虽然确实是老鼠。不过，进去是一个，出来是四个。 
English: The tutor said, "Although it is indeed a mouse, one went in and four came out."

古文：发之，鼠生三子。
现代文：打开盒子，老鼠生了三个幼仔。
English: Opening the box, the mouse gave birth to three cubs.

古文：尝度江，叩舟而还，左右请故，曰： 舟中人鼻下气皆墨，不可以济。 俄有一男子，跛而负，直就舟，客师曰： 贵人在，吾可以济。 
现代文：一次渡江，客师拉住船要回去。
English: Once across the river, the guest master pulled the boat to go back.

古文：固丐为道士，帝为筑观九山，号曰： 紫府 ，拜赜太中大夫，往居之。即祠建清台，候辰次灾祥以闻，所上与太史李淳风合。
现代文：别人问他为什么。他说： 船中人鼻下都有黑气，不可以渡河。 一会儿有个男子，跛脚背着东西，直奔船上来。客师说： 有贵人在，我们可以渡河了。 
English: Someone asked him why. He said: People in the boat have black gas under their noses, so they can't cross the river. After a while, a man, lame and carrying something, came straight to the boat. The guest teacher said: There is a noble person, we can cross the river.

古文：数岁卒。
现代文：江中忽然起风，好几次几乎翻船。
English: The wind suddenly picked up in the middle of the river, and the boat almost capsized several times.

古文：高宗时，又有叶法善者，括州括苍人。
现代文：原来那跛男子是娄师德。高宗时，又有个叫叶法善的，括州括苍人。
English: It turned out that the man was Zou Shide. When Gaozong was in high school, there was also a man named Ye Fao Zhen, who was from Bozhou.

古文：世为道士，传阴阳、占繇、符架之术，能厌劾怪鬼。
现代文：世代为道士，传阴阳、占卜、符咒之术，能镇邪驱鬼。
English: Generations of Taoists have passed down Yin and Yang, divination, magic spells, and the ability to ward off evil and drive away ghosts.

古文：帝闻之，召诣京师，欲宠以官，不拜。留内斋场，礼赐殊缛。
现代文：皇帝听说了，召他去京师，想授他官以示宠，法善辞不受，于是留他在宫内斋场，礼赐优厚。
English: The emperor heard of this and summoned him to the capital to be his teacher. He wanted to bestow him with an official position as a sign of favour, but he did not accept the kind words, so he kept him at the palace's place of worship, which was a generous gift.

古文：时帝悉召方士，化黄金治丹，法善上言： 丹不可遽就，徒费财与日，请核真伪。 
现代文：当时皇帝遍召方士化黄金炼丹。法善进言 ：丹不可能短时间炼就，白费钱财时日。请先验核方士的真伪。 
English: At that time, the emperor was calling in all sorts of magicians to turn gold into gold and refine it. Fa Sheng said to the magicians: It is impossible to refine gold in a short time, it would be a waste of time and money. Please verify the authenticity of the magicians first.

古文：帝许之，凡百馀人皆罢。
现代文：皇帝同意，罢黜了一百多人。
English: The emperor agreed and dismissed more than a hundred people.

古文：尝在东都凌空祠为坛以祭，都人悉往观，有数十人自奔火中，众大惊，救而免。
现代文：曾在洛阳凌空祠设坛祭祀，城里人都去观看。有几十个人自己往火里奔，众人大惊，赶快去救。
English: In Luoyang, an altar was set up for a dragon sacrifice at the Flying Dragon Shrine, and everyone in the city went to watch. Dozens of people ran into the fire on their own. Everyone was shocked and rushed to help.

古文：法善笑曰： 此为魅所冯，吾以法摄之耳。 
现代文：法善笑说： 这些人被鬼缠住了。我在用法术拘鬼。 
English: "These people are haunted. I'm using spells to keep the ghosts away," said Hozen, laughing.

古文：问而信，病亦皆已。
现代文：问这些人，果然如此，他们的病也都好了。
English: Ask these people, and sure enough, they're all better.

古文：其谲幻类若此。
现代文：法善的奇特莫测多类似于此。
English: The vagaries of dharma-goodness are much like this.

古文：历高、中二宗朝五十年，往来山中，时时召入禁内。
现代文：法善历高宗、中宗二朝五十年，往来山中，常被召入宫内。
English: He spent 50 years in the two dynasties of Gaozong and Zhongzong, and often went to the mountains. He was often called to the palace.

古文：雅不喜浮屠法，常力诋毁，议者浅其好习，然发卫高，卒叵之测。
现代文：他向来不喜欢佛法，总是极力排挤诋毁。评论者认为他缺乏涵养。然而由于他法术高明，终难测其深浅。
English: He has always disliked Buddhism, always trying to push it aside and denigrate it. Critics say he lacks discipline, but because of his skill at magic, it is difficult to gauge his depth.

古文：睿宗立，或言阴有助力。
现代文：睿宗立，有人说他有冥助之力。
English: Ruizong Li, some people say that he has the power to meditate.

古文：无天中，拜鸿庐卿，员外置，封越国公，舍景龙观，追赠其父歙州刺史，宠映当世。
现代文：先天年，授职鸿胪卿，安置为员外，封为越国公，住在景龙观。且追赠其父为歙州刺史。法善所遇恩宠盖世。
English: In the year before yesterday, he was awarded the post of Hong Xuanqing, placed as a non-member, named Yue Guogong, and lived in Jinglongguan. He also posthumously awarded his father the title of Zhangzhou Jishi. The grace of Fa-zen has spread all over the world.

古文：开元八年卒。
现代文：开元八年谢世。
English: He passed away in the eighth year of the Heian period.

古文：迂水衡都尉，谓曰： 水生金，卿无忧。 
现代文：有人说他是隋朝大业丙子年生的，死于开元庚子年，共一百零七岁。
English: Some people say that he was born in the year of Daye Cixi in the Sui Dynasty and died in the year of Geng Zi in the first century, making him 107 years old.

古文：至秋卒，后嗟异，复以浑仪监为太史局云。严善思名譔，同州朝邑人，以字行。
现代文：玄宗下诏褒奖悼念，追赠越州都督衔。严善思名譔，同州朝邑人，以表字闻名于世。
English: Xuanzong issued a proclamation to commend and mourn, and posthumously awarded the title of governor of Yuezhou. Yan Shan Shimin, a native of Chaoyang, Yuezhou, was famous in the world for his calligraphy.

古文：父延，与河东裴玄证、陇西李贞蔡静皆通儒术，该晓图识。
现代文：父严延，与河东裴玄证、陇西李真、蔡静等人都通儒术，通晓图谶。
English: His father Yan Yan, along with Hedong Pei Xuan Zhen, Shaanxi Li Zhen, Cai Jing and others, were all well versed in Confucianism.

古文：善思传延业，褚遂良、上官仪等奇其能。
现代文：善思继承了严延的学术。褚遂良、上官仪等惊异其才能。
English: Shansi inherited Yan Yan's scholarship, and his talents as a scholar, statesman, and official surprised everyone.

古文：高宗封泰山，举销声幽薮科及第，调襄阳尉。
现代文：高宗封泰山，善思参加销声幽薮科考试得中，派任襄阳尉。
English: Gao Zong was assigned to Mount Tai, and Shan Si was assigned to Xiangyang as a lieutenant.

古文：居亲丧，庐墓，因隐居十年。
现代文：因上人去世，住在墓边，就此隐居十年。
English: Due to the death of the guru, he lived next to the grave and thus remained in seclusion for ten years.

古文：武后时擢监察御史，兼右拾遗内供奉，数言天下事。
现代文：武后时升为监察御史，兼右拾遗内供奉，多次谈天下大事。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Shisheng was the supervisor of imperial history, and also the right to collect and enshrine relics, and repeatedly talked about the world's major events.

古文：方酷吏构大狱，以善思为详审使，平活八百馀人，原千馀姓。
现代文：当时正遇酷吏构陷大案，派善思为详审使，平冤救活了八百多人，使一千多家免受牵连。
English: At that time, he was facing a big case that was framed by cruel officials, and he sent Shan Si as a detailed trial envoy to rescue more than 800 people and save more than 1,000 people from being implicated.

古文：长寿中，按囚司刑寺，罢疑不实者百人。
现代文：长寿年间，考察囚司刑寺，将不称职者罢黜了上百人。
English: During his long life, he inspected the Penitentiary Temple and dismissed hundreds of incompetents.

古文：来俊臣等疾之，诬以罪，适交趾，五岁得还。
现代文：来俊臣等人忌恨他，诬他犯罪，被流放到交趾，五年后回来。
English: Lai Junchen and others hated him, accused him of committing a crime, and he was exiled to Kotaibi, returning five years later.

古文：是时李淳风死，候家皆不效，乃诏善思以著作佐郎兼太史令。
现代文：这时李淳风已死，各占候者的占卜都不灵验，于是诏聘善思为著作郎兼太史令。
English: At this time, Li Chunfeng had already died, and the diviners' divinations had all failed, so Zhao hired Zenshi as his literary assistant and official historian.

古文：圣历二年，荧惑入舆鬼，后问其占，对曰： 大臣当之。 
现代文：圣历二年，火星窜入舆鬼五星之间，武后问他吉凶，他答 ：大臣承当此凶。 
English: In the second year of the sacred calendar, Mars entered between the five stars and the five evil spirits. Wu Hou asked him about the fortunes and misfortunes, and he answered: "The minister is responsible for this misfortune."

古文：是年王及善卒。
现代文：这年王及善去世。
English: This was the year that Wang Jizhen passed away.

古文：长安中，荧惑入月，镇犯天关，善思曰： 法当乱臣伏罪，而有下谋上之象。 
现代文：长安年间荧惑星入月，土星冲犯天关星。善思说 ：天象主乱臣伏罪，但有下臣谋犯上的征兆。 
English: During the Chang'an period, the planet Jupiter entered the moon, and Saturn collided with the celestial body.Shanshi said, "The celestial body is like a master who has misled a subordinate into committing a crime, but there are signs that the subordinate is plotting to commit a crime."

古文：岁馀，张柬之等起兵诛二张。
现代文：一年多后，张柬之等起兵诛杀张易之二人。
English: More than a year later, Zhang Khamzhi and others started a fight and killed Zhang Yi's two men.

古文：迁给事中。
现代文：升善思为给事中。
English: Sheng Shanshui is in the middle of something.

古文：后崩，将合葬乾陵，善思建言： 尊者先葬，卑者不得入。
现代文：武后崩，将合葬乾陵。善思进谏： 尊者先葬，卑者不可入。
English: When Wu Hou died, they would be buried together in the Qianling Mausoleum. Shan Si Jin Qi: The venerable should be buried first, and the lowly should not be allowed to enter.

古文：今启乾陵，是以卑动尊，术家所忌。
现代文：如今若开启乾陵，是以卑动尊，是风水所忌。
English: Nowadays, if you open a dry mausoleum, it is based on humility and respect, which is a taboo in feng shui.

古文：且玄关石门，冶金锢隙，非攻鉴不能开，神道幽静，多所惊黩。
现代文：何况墓门石砌，又熔铁锢缝，非攻凿不能开。神道幽静，此举会惊动亵渎了神主。
English: What's more, the tomb gate is made of stone and welded with molten iron, so it can't be opened without a chisel. Shinto is quiet, and this move will disturb and blaspheme the god.

古文：若别攻隧以入其中，即往昔葬时神位前定，更且有害。
现代文：假若从旁边打隧道进去，则往日葬时神位已定，今若更改为害更深。
English: If a tunnel is dug from the side, the position of the deity was already determined at the time of burial in the past, and it would be even more harmful to change it now.

古文：曩营乾陵，国有大难，易姓建国二十馀年，今又营之，难且复生。
现代文：以当日修筑乾陵，国有大难，改姓建国二十多年。如今再修，又将生难。
English: On the day of the construction of the Qianling Mausoleum, the country was in great difficulty, and it took more than 20 years to change the surname of the founding of the country. Now, it will be difficult to rebuild it.

古文：合葬非古也，况事有不安，岂足循据？
现代文：合葬非古制，何况有诸多不安，哪有什么依循凭据？
English: Joint burial is not an ancient system, not to mention there are many anxieties, where is the evidence?

古文：汉世皇后别起陵墓，魏、晋始合葬。
现代文：汉代皇后另筑陵墓，魏、晋始合葬。
English: Empresses of the Han Dynasty built a separate mausoleum, and Wei and Jin were buried together.

古文：汉积祀四百，魏、晋祚率不长，亦其验也。
现代文：汉国运四百年，魏、晋国统均不长，此亦证验。
English: The Han Dynasty lasted for 400 years, while the Wei and Jin Dynasties did not last long at all, which is also a proof.

古文：今若更择吉地，附近乾陵，取从葬之义。
现代文：现在如另择吉地，靠近乾陵，取从葬之义。
English: Now it's like choosing a lucky place, close to the Qianling Mausoleum, to get the meaning of burial.

古文：使神有知，无所不通；若其无知，合亦何益？
现代文：若神道有知，则无处不可通达；若死者无知，合葬又有何益？
English: If there is knowledge in Shinto, there is nowhere that cannot be reached; if the dead are ignorant, what is the benefit of a joint burial?

古文：山川精气，上为列星。葬得其所，则神安而后嗣昌；失其宜，则神危而后嗣损。
现代文：山川精气，上为众星，葬得其所，则神安而后裔昌盛；若葬得不宜，则神不安而后裔阴损。
English: The essence of mountains and rivers is superior to that of the stars. If it is buried in the right place, the gods will be safe and the descendants will prosper. If it is not buried in the right place, the gods will be uneasy and the descendants will suffer.

古文：愿割私爱，使社稷长久。 
现代文：望能割弃私情而使社稷长久。 
English: I hope to be able to give up my personal feelings and make society last longer.

古文：中宗不纳。
现代文：中宗不采纳。
English: It was not adopted by the Chinese.

古文：善思奏曰： 乐者气化，所以感天地、调五行。
现代文：神龙年间，武后丧除服。太常要求演习音乐，以供郊祭飨庙所需。
English: In the years of the Dragon God, the Empress Dowager was deprived of her clothes, and it was often necessary to practice music for the suburban festival and temple.

古文：汉、魏丧礼，以日易月，盖三年不为礼，礼必坏，三年不为乐，乐必崩。
现代文：皇帝不许。善思上奏 ：乐，是无形之力，可以感动天地，调和五行；汉、魏的丧礼，以日代月。因为若三年不行礼，礼必会废；三年不习乐，乐必会崩。
English: The emperor did not allow it. Good thoughts on playing: Music is an invisible force that can move heaven and earth and harmonize the five elements; Han and Wei funerals take days and months. Because if you don't do it for three years, the ceremony will be invalid; if you don't learn music for three years, the music will be invalid.

古文：礼，阴也；乐，阳也。
现代文：礼，是阴；乐，是阳。
English: Salute is yin; music is yang.

古文：乐崩阳伏，礼废阴愆，故变以适时，孝道之大。
现代文：乐崩则阳遭偃伏，礼废则阴有差错。所以变通以应时，是孝道的极至。
English: If pleasure is lost, the yang will be suppressed, and if courtesy is lost, the yin will be erroneous. Therefore, it is the height of filial piety to be flexible and responsive.

古文：安人神，公也；茹哀戚，私也。
现代文：安人神，是公；表哀戚，是私。
English: To appease the gods is a duty; to express sorrow is my duty.

古文：王者不以私害公，请如太常奏。 
现代文：为王者不应以私害公。请批准太常的奏请。 
English: The king should not harm the public with his private life. Please approve my request.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：升善思为礼部侍郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Reibu Jiro.

古文：表皇后擅政，为社稷忧，求汝州刺史。
现代文：又上表说皇后擅政，为国事担忧，求为汝州刺史。
English: It was also said that the empress was good at politics, worried about national affairs, and sought to make history for Ruzhou.

古文：尝语姚崇曰： 韦氏祸且涂地，相王所居有华盖紫气，必位九五，公善护之。 
现代文：他曾对姚崇说 ：韦氏祸即将平定，相王住处有华盖紫色，必登帝位，公要善加护卫。 
English: He once said to Yao Chong: the calamity of Wei is about to be calmed down, the residence of the king is covered with purple, he will ascend to the throne, and he must be well guarded.

古文：及睿宗立，崇以语闻，召拜右散骑常侍。
现代文：到睿宗李旦登基，崇将此话告诉皇帝，委任善思为右散骑常侍。
English: When Li Dan of the Ruizong Dynasty ascended to the throne, Chong told this to the emperor and appointed Zenshi as the right rider.

古文：初，谯王重福徙均州，过汝，善思为刺史。
现代文：当初，谯王重福贬均州，经过汝州，善思其时为刺史。
English: At first, Shao Wang Chifu went to Junzhou and passed through Ruzhou, and Shanxi was at that time a piece of history.

古文：及谋反，伪除礼部尚书。
现代文：及谯王谋反，任善思为伪礼部尚书。
English: When the king of the Jurchens plotted a rebellion, Ren Shanshi became the head of the pseudo-ritual department.

古文：重福败，坐关通论死，吏部尚书宋璟、户部郎中李邕薄其罪，给事中韩思复固请，乃流静州。
现代文：重福事败，判善思关通罪，当死。吏部尚书宋瞡、户部郎中李邕设法为之减罪，给事中韩思复再三请免，于是流放静州。
English: The heavy blessing was defeated, and the virtuous thinker was found guilty of conspiracy and was sentenced to death. The head of the personnel department, Shangshu Song, and the head of the household department, Langzhong Li, tried to reduce the crime, and repeatedly asked Han Si Fu to be excused, so he was exiled to Jingzhou.

古文：始，善思为御史，中书舍人刘允济为酷吏所陷，且死，善思力讼其冤，得免。
现代文：当初，善思为御史，中书舍人刘允济遭酷吏诬陷，将处死，善思竭力申辩其冤屈，得免死。
English: At first, Shanshi was the king of history. Liu Yunji, a Chinese scholar, was framed by cruel officials and would be put to death. Shanshi tried his best to defend his grievances and was spared death.

古文：户部尚书王本立见之，曰： 祁奚之救叔向，严公有之。 
现代文：户部尚书王本立见到他，说： 以前祁奚拼死救叔向，严公您也有此心。 
English: When the head of the household, Wang Benli, saw him, he said, "In the past, you fought to the death to save your uncle. Yan Gong, you also have this heart.

古文：后见允济，语未尝及之。
现代文：后来见到允济，善思未说自己为之出力的事。
English: Later, when he saw Yunji, he did not think about what he had done for him.

古文：思复之解善思也，亦不自德，时称长者之报。
现代文：思复为善思说情，也不自居恩德。时人称之为长者所得回报。
English: Reflection is good thinking and intercession, and it is not self-congratulatory. At that time, people called it the reward received by the elderly.

古文：后遇赦还。
现代文：后遇赦回来。
English: He was later pardoned and returned.

古文：张果者，晦乡里世系以自神，隐中条山，往来汾、晋间，世传数百岁人。
现代文：开元十六年谢世。儿子名向，乾元年间任凤翔尹。他家三代均享年八十五岁。张果，不让人知道他是何方人氏而显示自己神异。隐居在中条山，往来汾、晋之间，世人传说他是几百岁的人。
English: He died in the 16th year of the first century. His son, Niang Xiang, became Feng Xiang Yin in the first year of the second century. All three generations of his family died at the age of eighty-five. Zhang Guo, who did not let people know who he was, showed himself to be extraordinary. He lived in seclusion in Zhongjia Mountain, traveling between Jiu and Jin. People around the world said that he was hundreds of years old.

古文：武后时，遣使召之，即死，后人复见居恒州山中。
现代文：武后时，派使臣召他，他当即死去，后来有人又看见他住在恒州的山里。
English: When she was Empress Dowager Wu, she sent an envoy to summon him, and he died immediately. Later, he was seen living in the mountains of Hengzhou.

古文：开元二十一年，刺史韦济以闻。
现代文：开元二十一年，刺史韦济把他的事报告皇帝。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Shishi Weizi reported his case to the emperor.

古文：玄宗令通事舍人裴晤往迎，见晤辄气绝仆，久乃苏。
现代文：玄宗命通事舍人裴晤去接他。张果一见裴晤就气绝倒地，很久才醒。
English: Xuanzong gave up his life to send Pei Mei to pick him up. Zhang Guo collapsed at the sight of Pei Mei and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：晤不敢逼，驰白状。
现代文：裴晤不敢逼他，跑回来说明情况。
English: Pei Heme did not dare to force him and ran back to explain the situation.

古文：帝更遣中书舍人徐峤赍玺书邀礼，乃至东都，舍集贤院，肩舆入宫。
现代文：皇帝改派中书舍人徐峤带了盖有御章的信以礼邀请，他这才到了洛阳，住在集贤院，乘轿入宫。
English: The emperor reassigned the middle school librarian, Xu Xi, to Luoyang, where he lived in Jixianyuan and entered the palace by car. He brought a letter with an imperial seal and a courtesy invitation.

古文：帝亲问治道神仙事，语秘不传。
现代文：皇帝亲自询问修道及神仙等事，答语诡秘，不传道法。
English: The emperor personally inquired about things such as monasticism and immortals, and his answers were mysterious, and he did not preach the Dharma.

古文：果善息气，能累日不食，数御美酒。
现代文：张果善于屏气，能几天不进食，只饮美酒。
English: Zhang Guo is good at holding his breath. He can go for days without eating, drinking only wine.

古文：尝云： 我生尧丙子岁，位侍中。 
现代文：曾说： 我生于尧时丙子年，位居侍中。 
English: He once said, "I was born in the third year of the third month of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year

古文：其貌实年六七十。
现代文：其相貌看来有六七十岁。
English: He looks to be in his sixties or seventies.

古文：时有邢和璞者，善知人夭寿。师夜光者，善视鬼。
现代文：当时有个邢和璞，善算人寿命长短，有个师夜光，善看鬼。
English: At that time, there was a  and, good at calculating the length of human life, and there was a 師夜光, good at seeing ghosts.

古文：帝令和璞推果生死，懵然莫知其端。
现代文：皇帝命邢和璞推算张果的生死，茫茫然推不出来。
English: The emperor's life and death of Zhang Guo could not be deduced.

古文：帝召果密坐，使夜光视之，不见果所住。
现代文：皇帝召张果坐在密室里，要师夜光看，也看不见果在何处。
English: The emperor summoned Zhang Guo to sit in a secret room, and asked him to look at the night light, but he could not see where Guo was.

古文：帝谓高力士曰： 吾闻饮堇无苦者，奇士也。 
现代文：皇帝对高力士说 ：我听说喝堇汁而不觉得苦的，是奇人。 
English: The emperor said to Colossus, "I have heard that it is a rare person who drinks gourd juice and does not feel bitter.

古文：时天寒，因取以饮果，三进，颓然曰： 非佳酒也。 
现代文：当时正天寒，取堇汁给张果饮，喝了三杯，醺醺然说 ：不是好酒。 就睡了。
English: At that time, it was cold in the middle of the day, so he took ginger juice and gave it to Zhang Guo for a drink. Zhang Guo drank three cups and said, "This is not good wine." He fell asleep.

古文：乃寝。顷视齿燋缩，顾左右取铁如意击堕之，藏带中，更出药傅其断，良久，齿已生，粲然骈絜。
现代文：不一会儿，见他的牙齿全都又焦又黑。他看看左右，叫拿来铁如意把牙齿都敲掉了，藏在带子里，拿出药来敷在断牙上，过了些时，牙生长出来，又整齐又洁白。
English: After a while, he saw that all his teeth were charred and black. He looked to his right and to his left, and asked for an iron so that he could knock out all his teeth, hide them in a belt, and take out medicine to apply to the broken teeth. After a while, the teeth grew out, neat and white.

古文：帝益神之。
现代文：皇帝更惊叹不已。
English: The emperor was even more amazed.

古文：欲以玉真公主降果，未言也。
现代文：皇帝想把玉真公主嫁给他，尚未说明。
English: The Emperor wants to marry Princess Tamasena to him, but has not yet said so.

古文：果忽谓秘书少监王迥质、太常少卿萧华曰： 谚谓娶妇得公主，平地生公府，可畏也。 
现代文：张果忽然对秘书少监王迥质、太常少卿萧华说 ：俗话说娶个老婆是公主，平地就会添公府，可怕啊。 
English: Zhang Guo suddenly said to Xiao Hua, the secretary of Wang Jixing, a minor supervisor, and Xiao Hua, a minor secretary, "As the saying goes, if you marry a wife, you will become a princess. If you marry a commoner, you will become a commoner. It's terrible."

古文：二人怪语不伦。
现代文：两人奇怪他说话不伦不类。
English: The two were surprised at his incoherent speech.

古文：俄有使至，传诏曰： 玉真公主欲降先生。 
现代文：一会儿有使者来到，传帝诏书说 ：玉真公主准备下嫁先生。 
English: A short while later, a messenger arrived with an imperial edict saying: Princess Tamasena is preparing to marry her husband.

古文：果笑，固不奉诏。
现代文：张果笑起来，坚持不遵旨。
English: Zhang Guo laughed and insisted on disobeying the order.

古文：有诏图形集贤院，恳辞还山，诏可。
现代文：又下诏要画他的像放在集贤院，张果恳请让他回山，得批准。
English: He also issued an edict to have his portrait painted and placed in Shixian Academy. Zhang Guo earnestly requested that he be allowed to return to the mountain, which was approved.

古文：擢银青光禄大夫，号通玄先生，赐帛三百匹，给扶侍二人。
现代文：升任银青光禄大夫，号通玄先生，赐帛三百匹，给服侍二人。
English: He was promoted to silver Qing Guanglu doctor, called Mr. Tong Xuan, and was given three hundred yakitori to serve two people.

古文：至恒山蒲吾县，未几卒，或言尸解。
现代文：到恒山蒲吾县，不久谢世，有人说成仙了。
English: He went to Pugu County, Hengshan, and died soon after. Some people said that he had become an immortal.

古文：帝为立栖霞观其所。
现代文：皇帝在其住处为之立栖霞观。
English: The emperor built a pavilion for it in his residence.

