古文：○唐临孙绍张文瓘兄文琮从弟文收
现代文：唐临，是京都长安人，是北周内史唐瑾的孙子。
English: Tang Lin, a native of Chang'an, Kyoto, was the grandson of the Northern Zhou Dynasty's Tang Xuan.

古文：伯父令则，开皇末为左庶子，坐谄事太子勇诛死。临少与兄皎俱有令名。
现代文：他的先辈人是从河北迁到关中的。唐临少年时代，与他的兄长唐皎都聪明过人，很是有名。
English: His ancestors moved to Guanzhong from Hebei Province. When he was a boy, Tang Lin and his older brother, Tang Yao, were both very clever and famous.

古文：武德初，隐太子总兵东征，临诣军献平王世充之策，太子引直典书坊，寻授右卫率府铠曹参军。
现代文：武德年初，隐太子统领军队东征，唐临到军中献策，平定了王世充，因而被隐太子赏识，推荐他代理掌管书坊。不久，授右卫率府铠曹参军。
English: At the beginning of the Wu De era, Prince Yin led the army in the eastward march, Tang Lin came to the army to offer suggestions, and Wang Shichong was pacified. Therefore, he was appreciated by Prince Yin and recommended him to be the acting manager of the bookstore. Soon, he was awarded the title of Right Guard and led the prefectural government to join the army.

古文：宫殿废，出为万泉丞。
现代文：后外任万泉县丞。
English: Later, he was appointed Banquan County magistrate.

古文：县有轻囚十数人，会春暮时雨，临白令请出之，令不许。
现代文：当时，县狱中拘禁了十多个轻罪的犯人，正是农忙季节，碰上了春暮的时雨。唐临见此情况，告诉县令，请放这些轻罪囚犯归家抢种。
English: At that time, more than a dozen misdemeanor prisoners were detained in the county jail. It was the busy farming season, and it was raining in the late spring. Tang Lin saw this situation and told the county magistrate, please let these misdemeanor prisoners go home to rob seeds.

古文：临曰： 明公若有所疑，临请自当其罪。 
现代文：县令不允许，唐临说： 明公如有所疑虑，我愿自己一人承担责任。 
English: The county ordinance does not allow it, Tang Lin said: If Ming Gong has any doubts, I am willing to take the responsibility myself.

古文：令因请假，临召囚悉令归家耕种，与之约，令归系所。
现代文：于是他给予这些轻囚农忙假。唐临召集这些囚犯并放他们归家抢种，明确规定回监狱的时间。
English: So he gave these light-prisoner farmers a busy holiday. Tang Lin called up these prisoners and let them go home to rob seeds, clearly stipulating the time for them to return to prison.

古文：囚等皆感恩贷，至时毕集诣狱，临因是知名。
现代文：囚犯们都很是感激唐临宽厚的仁德，在限时之内，全都回狱。唐临因此而知名。
English: The prisoners were very grateful to Tang Lin's generous benevolence, and all of them returned to prison within the time limit. Tang Lin is famous for this.

古文：再迁侍御史，奉使岭外，按交州刺史李道彦等申叩冤系三千余人。
现代文：不久，他又升迁侍御使，奉使命出使岭外。他在考查交州刺史李道彦的政绩时，亲自审理查问冤案所关联的三千余人。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of an envoy and sent to Lingwai on a mission. When he examined the political performance of Li Daohan, the secretary of the Jiaozhou Provincial Party Committee, he personally interrogated more than three thousand people involved in the case.

古文：累转黄门侍郎，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：随后，他又调任黄门侍郎，并加荣誉官职银青光禄大夫。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, and was given the honorary position of silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：俭薄寡欲，不治第宅，服用简素，宽于待物。
现代文：唐临家不富裕但他清心寡欲，既不大兴土木建宅第，服用也极为简朴，并且宽于待人处事。
English: Tang Lin's family was not rich, but he had a pure heart and little desire. He did not want to build houses, and he was very simple and easy to deal with.

古文：尝欲吊丧，令家童自归家取白衫，家僮误将余衣，惧未敢进。
现代文：曾经有一次，他要去吊丧，叫家僮归家取白衫，家僮误将别的衣服拿来，很是惧怕，不敢进见。
English: Once upon a time, he was going to a funeral and asked his housekeeper to fetch his white shirt. The housekeeper brought other clothes by mistake. He was very afraid and did not dare to go in.

古文：临察知之，使召谓曰： 今日气逆，不宜哀泣，向取白衫，且止之也。 
现代文：唐临得知实情，便把家僮叫来，对他说 ：今天天气反常，不宜哀哭，原叫你取的白衫，现在暂时不用拿了。 
English: When Tang Lin learned the truth, he called his wife and said to him, "Today's weather is abnormal, it is not appropriate to weep. The white shirt you were told to take is not needed for the time being."

古文：又尝令人煮药，失制。
现代文：还有一次，唐临病了，叫人煮药，煮药的人未按医嘱烹煮。
English: On another occasion, when Tang Lin fell ill, he asked someone to boil medicine. The person who boiled the medicine did not do so according to the doctor's instructions.

古文：潜知其故，谓曰： 阴暗不宜服药，宜即弃之。 
现代文：唐临知此情况后，并未指责，反而说 ：气候不好，不宜服药，应马上倒掉。 
English: After Tang Lin learned of this situation, he did not criticize, but said: the weather is not good, it is not appropriate to take medicine, and it should be thrown away immediately.

古文：竟不扬言其过，其宽恕如此。
现代文：意在不扬言煮药者的过失，其性情宽恕达到了如此的地步。
English: Intending not to expose the culpability of the cook, his forgiving nature reached such a point.

古文：高宗即位，检校吏部侍郎。
现代文：高宗登帝位，唐临被任命检校吏部侍郎。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and Tang Lin was appointed as the attendant of the inspection department.

古文：其年，迁大理卿。
现代文：这一年，他又升迁大理卿。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to Daricheng.

古文：高宗尝问临在狱系囚之数，临对诏称旨。帝喜曰： 朕昔在东宫，卿已事朕，朕承大位，卿又居近职，以畴昔相委，故授卿此任。
现代文：高宗曾问在狱的囚犯数目，唐临回答得一清二楚，高宗很是高兴，对他说 ：朕过去在东宫做太子的时候，卿就侍奉我，现在朕承帝位，卿又在我身边任官职，因为过去我就很信任你，所以才授给你这一重任。
English: Gao Zong had asked the number of prisoners in the prison. Tang Lin answered clearly. Gao Zong was very happy and said to him, "In the past, when I was the crown prince in the East Palace, you served me. Now, I have succeeded to the throne, and you are serving alongside me. Because I trusted you so much in the past, I gave you this important task.

古文：然为国之要，在于刑法，法急则人残，法宽则失罪，务令折中，称朕意焉。 
现代文：治国之要，在于刑法，法过于严酷则人残，法过于宽松则失罪，卿一定要适情折中，称朕的心意。 
English: The key to governing the country lies in the criminal law. If the law is too harsh, it is inhumane. If the law is too lenient, it is a misdemeanor. Sir, you must find a compromise that suits the situation and expresses my heart.

古文：高宗又尝亲录死囚，前卿所断者号叫称冤，临所入者独无言。
现代文：高宗曾经亲自审察死囚，发现唐临以前的负责人所断的案有号叫称冤的，而唐临负责断案，却独无人叫冤。
English: Gao Zong once personally examined death row prisoners and found that the cases decided by Tang Lin, who was previously in charge of the case, had many people calling for justice, while Tang Lin was responsible for deciding the case, but no one called for justice.

古文：帝怪问状，囚曰： 罪实自犯，唐卿所断，既非冤滥，所以绝意耳。 
现代文：高宗怪而问囚犯是什么原故，囚犯说 ：罪确实是自己犯的，长官断案，并不冤枉滥用刑，所以自己也觉得自己该死。 
English: Gao Zongkai asked the prisoner what the reason was, and the prisoner said: "The crime was indeed committed by myself, the chief adjudicated the case, and did not abuse the punishment unjustly, so I also feel that I deserve to die."

古文：帝叹息良久曰： 为狱者不当如此耶！ 
现代文：高宗叹息良久，说： 治理狱案的人应当这样就太好了！ 
English: Gao Zong sighed for a long time and said, "It's great that the person who manages the prison case should be like this!"

古文：永徽元年，为御史大夫。
现代文：永徽元年，唐临为御史大夫。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Tang Lin was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：明年，华州刺史萧龄之以前任广州都督赃事发，制付群官集议。
现代文：第二年，华州刺史肖龄之在以往任广州都督时的贪污案被揭发，高宗命令交付群官集议。
English: The following year, the corruption case of the former governor of Guangzhou, Gaozong Gaozong, was exposed, and Gaozong ordered that the case be submitted to a group of officials for discussion.

古文：及议奏，帝怒，令于朝堂处置。
现代文：在上奏议论时，高宗很是恼火，命令当即在朝堂处置。
English: During the discussion on the imperial edict, Emperor Gaozong was very angry and ordered that it be dealt with immediately in the imperial hall.

古文：临奏曰：
现代文：唐临上奏道：
English: Tang Linjie recited:

古文：臣闻国家大典，在于赏刑，古先圣王，惟刑是衅。
现代文： 臣听说国家大典，在于赏罚上，古代的圣王，以怜悯之心对待刑罚。
English: The minister heard that the great ceremony of the state is to reward and punish, and the ancient holy king treated the punishment with compassion.

古文：《虞书》曰： 罪疑惟轻，功疑惟重，与其杀弗辜，宁失弗经。 
现代文：《虞书》就说 在罪上疑虑这不算什么，在功上疑虑就很严重了，与其无不辜，宁可不按法则 。
English: "The Book of Fortunes" says that doubting one's guilt is nothing, but doubting one's merits is very serious. Rather than being innocent, it is better not to follow the rules.

古文：《周礼》： 刑平国用中典，刑乱国用重典。 
现代文：《周礼》也载： 刑法平稳，国用中法；刑法混乱，国用重法。 
English: "Zhou Li" also contains: the criminal law is stable, and the state uses the middle law; the criminal law is chaotic, and the state uses the heavy law.

古文：天下太平，应用尧、舜之典。
现代文：天下太平，应当用尧、舜的法典。
English: The world is at peace, so we should use the legal codes of  and.

古文：比来有司多行重法，叙勋必须刻削，论罪务从重科，非是憎恶前人，止欲自为身计。
现代文：近来，执法部门多用重法，按功行赏升职很是刻薄；按罪行罚又极为严酷。这并不是厌恶前人，而是想为自身打算。
English: Recently, the law enforcement departments have been using more and more severe laws. It is very mean to reward and promote people according to their merits; and it is extremely harsh to punish people according to their crimes. This is not to hate their predecessors, but to think about themselves.

古文：今议萧龄之事，有轻有重，重者流死，轻者请除名。
现代文：今议肖龄之的案件，处罚可轻可重，重的流放处死，轻的除职免官。
English: Xiao Ling's case is now being deliberated, and the punishment can be light or heavy, with the heaviest being banishment to death and the lightest being removal from office.

古文：以龄之受委大籓，赃罪狼籍，原情取事，死有余辜。
现代文：以肖龄之受任到广州，赃罪事发，名声极败坏，按情处理，死有余辜。
English: Xiao Lingzhi was appointed to Guangzhou, the crime occurred, the reputation was extremely corrupt, the case was handled according to the circumstances, and the death was more than justified.

古文：礼：王族刑于隐者，所以议亲；刑不上大夫，所以议贵。
现代文：然而，既要群臣详议其罪，毕竟要处理合法。我私下认为：议事群官，并不是全都认识了议刑的本意。
English: However, even though it is necessary for the ministers to discuss his crime in detail, after all, it must be dealt with legally. I privately believe that not all of the councilors understood the intention of discussing the punishment.

古文：知重其亲贵，议欲缓刑，非为嫉其贤能，谋致深法。
现代文：周代就律定了减轻刑罚的八种条件，并且依据《周礼》旧文，慎重对待自己不同于群臣的意见，所以特制议法。
English: The Zhou Dynasty stipulated eight conditions for reducing the punishment, and according to the old text of "Zhou Li," they carefully treated their own opinions different from those of the courtiers, so they made a special law.

古文：今既许议，而加重刑，是与尧、舜相反，不可为万代法。
现代文：今既然已同意议法，却仍旧施加重刑，这是与尧、舜的主张相违背的，不可以众人之偏见代法。 
English: Now that the law has been approved, it still imposes a heavy penalty, which is contrary to the opinions of Yu and Zou. The prejudices of all people should not be used as a substitute for the law.

古文：高宗从其奏，龄之竟得流于岭外。
现代文：高宗同意他的意见，肖龄之被减罪流放岭外。
English: Gao Zong agreed with him, and Xiao Ling's sentence was commuted to banishment outside of Ling.

古文：寻迁刑部尚书，加金紫光禄大夫，复历兵部、度支、吏部三尚书。
现代文：不久，唐临又升迁刑部尚书，加金紫光禄大夫职务。后又历任兵部、度支、吏部三尚书。
English: Soon after, Tang Lin was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, and was given the position of the doctor of the Department of Gold and Purple. Later, he was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Department of Military Law, the Department of Civil Affairs, and the Department of Personnel.

古文：时人既痛惜绍，而深咎于邈。
现代文：显庆四年，唐临因事获罪，贬为潮州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Xianqing, Tang Lin was found guilty for the incident and was relegated to the history of Chaozhou.

古文：寻有敕罢邈官，遂摈废终其身。张文瓘，贝州武城人。
现代文：在潮州任职期间去世，享年六十岁。张文瓘，贝州武城人。
English: He died at the age of sixty while serving in Chaozhou. Zhang Wenyi, a native of Wucheng, Beizhou.

古文：大业末徙家魏州之昌乐。
现代文：隋炀帝大业末年，他家由魏州搬迁到昌乐。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Sui, his family moved from Weizhou to Changle.

古文：瓘幼孤，事母兄以孝友闻。
现代文：张文瓘幼年丧父，因孝顺母亲敬爱兄长而闻名。
English: Zhang Wenyu lost his father at an early age and was known for his filial piety and respect for his elder brother.

古文：贞观初，举明经，补并州参军。
现代文：贞观初年，以通晓经传而中明经举，补并州参军之空缺。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, the vacancy of the state joining the army was filled with the passing of the scripture and the teaching of the scripture.

古文：时英国公李勣为长史，深礼之。
现代文：当时，英国公李责力是并州长史，对张文瓘很是器重而以礼相待。
English: At that time, the British public responsibility was the highest in history, and the governor treated Zhang Wenyi very seriously and with courtesy.

古文：累迁水部员外郎。
现代文：他又被升迁水部员外郎。
English: He was also promoted to the position of water department member.

古文：时兄文琮为户部侍郎，旧制兄弟不许并居台阁，遂出为云阳令。
现代文：当时，他的兄长张文琮为户部侍郎，旧制规定，兄弟不允许一同在内阁任职，于是外调为云阳县令。
English: At that time, his elder brother Zhang Wenyi was a household attendant. According to the old system, brothers were not allowed to serve in the cabinet together, so he was transferred to Yunyang County.

古文：龙朔年，累授东西台舍人、参知政事。寻迁东台侍郎、同东西台三品，兼知左史事。
现代文：龙朔年间，又授东西台舍人，主持政事不久又迁东台侍郎、同东西台三品并兼主管左史职事。
English: During the Long Shuo period, he was also awarded the title of East-West Taiwanese, presided over political affairs, and soon moved to the East Taiwan Chamberlain, and the East-West Taiwan Three Awards, and was also in charge of the left history position.

古文：时初造蓬莱、上阳、合璧等宫，又征讨四夷，厩马有万匹，仓库渐虚。
现代文：当时，正开始修建蓬莱、上阳、合璧等宫，又加上征讨边境的少数民族，仅马厩里的马就有万匹，因此府库渐以空虚。
English: At that time, the construction of palaces such as Penglai, Shangyang, and Hebei was just beginning, and the ethnic minorities on the border were also being recruited. There were 10,000 horses in the stables alone, so the prefectural treasury was gradually empty.

古文：文瓘因进谏曰： 人力不可不惜，百姓不可不养，养之逸则富以康，使之劳则怨以叛。
现代文：张文瓘见此状况便向皇上进言说 ：人力不可不惜，百姓不可不养，以安居乐业来养他们，就富而康；以劳役公差来累他们，就怨而叛。
English: Seeing this situation, Zhang Wenyi made a suggestion to the emperor, saying, "Manpower must not be spared, and the people must not be neglected. If you feed them with a peaceful life, they will be rich and healthy; if you burden them with labor service, they will rebel against you."

古文：秦皇、汉武，广事四夷，多造宫室，使士崩瓦解，户口减半。
现代文：秦皇汉武，扩展四疆领土，多多建造宫室，因而造成土崩瓦解，户口减半的困境。
English: Qin Emperor Hanwu expanded the territory of Sijian and built many palaces, which led to the collapse of the land and the dilemma of halving the hukou.

古文：臣闻制化于未乱，保邦于未危，人罔常怀，怀于有仁。陛下不制于未乱之前，安能救于既危之后？
现代文：臣闻，在未乱之时治理，才能保邦于未危。人无常怀，怀于有仁心的国君，陛下不在未乱之前控制，怎么能在已经危险之后挽救呢？
English: It is said by courtiers that a country can be saved from danger only if it is governed before it is in a state of turmoil. With impermanence in mind, and with a benevolent sovereign, if His Majesty does not control the country before it is in a state of turmoil, how can He save it after it is already in a state of danger?

古文：百姓不堪其弊，必构祸难，殷鉴不远，近在隋朝。
现代文：百姓不堪劳役赋税之扰，必然会构成祸难。殷鉴不远，近在隋朝。
English: If the people are unable to bear the disturbance of labor service and taxation, it will inevitably constitute a calamity. Yin Jian is not far away, it is close to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：臣愿稍安抚之，无使生怨。 
现代文：臣希望对百姓稍加安抚，使无生怨。 
English: The minister hopes to appease the people a little so that there will be no resentment.

古文：上深纳其言，于是节减厩马数千匹，赐文瓘缯锦百段。
现代文：高宗很同意这一意见，加以采纳，于是节减厩马数千匹，并赐张文瓘丝绸锦缎百段。
English: Gao Zong agreed with this opinion and adopted it, so he reduced the number of horses in the stable by several thousand and gave Zhang Wenjun a hundred-dan silk brocade.

古文：咸亨三年，官名复旧，改授黄门侍郎，兼太子左庶子。
现代文：咸亨三年，官名又复旧，张文瓘改授黄门侍郎，兼太子右庶子。
English: In the third year of Xianheng, the official name was restored to the old one, and Zhang Wenyi was awarded the title of Yellow Gate Chamberlain, as well as the Prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：俄迁大理卿，依旧知政事。
现代文：不久，又迁大理卿，依旧主持政事。
English: Soon after, Lord Dali moved again and continued to preside over government affairs.

古文：文瓘至官旬日，决遣疑事四百余条，无不允当，自是人有抵罪者，皆无怨言。
现代文：张文瓘到任不到十天，处理遗难之事四百余条，无不妥当。从此，抵偿罪责的人，皆无怨言。
English: Zhang Wenyi has been in office for less than ten days, and has dealt with more than four hundred articles of the disaster, all of which are appropriate. From now on, those who have compensated for their culpability have no complaints.

古文：文瓘常有疾，系囚相与斋祷，愿其视事。
现代文：张文瓘曾由于生病，牢中的囚犯参与斋祷，愿他早日病愈能来处理他们的事。
English: Zhang Wenyi was once sick, and the prisoners in the prison participated in the prayer. May he be able to deal with their affairs as soon as possible.

古文：当时咸称其执法平恕，以比戴胄。
现代文：当时的人都称他执法公平体谅实情，把他比为戴胄。
English: At that time, people said that he was fair in law enforcement and considerate of the truth, and compared him to wearing a shackle.

古文：上元二年，拜侍中，兼太子宾客。
现代文：上元二年，张文瓘拜授侍中，兼太子宾客。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Wenyi was a courtier and a guest of the crown prince.

古文：大理诸囚闻文瓘改官，一时恸哭，其感人心如此。
现代文：大理寺牢中的囚犯听说张文瓘改官，一时齐哭，张文瓘的治理能感人之心达到如此地步。
English: When the prisoners in Dali Temple Prison heard of Zhang Wenyi's change of officials, they all cried at once. Zhang Wenyi's governance can touch people's hearts to such an extent.

古文：文瓘性严正，诸司奏议，多所纠驳，高宗甚委之。
现代文：张文瓘性情严正，诸司的奏议，多有被纠正或驳回的，高宗很是信任他。
English: Zhang Wenzhong was a stern character, and Gaozong trusted him very much, even though many of his proposals were corrected or rejected.

古文：或时卧疾在家，朝廷每有大事，上必问诸宰臣曰： 与文瓘议未？ 
现代文：他有时卧病在家，朝廷每有大事，高宗必问诸宰相 ：与文瓘讨论研究过吗？ 
English: He sometimes lay ill at home, and whenever there was a major event in the imperial court, Gao Zong would ask the prime ministers: Have you discussed and studied with Wen Jiabao?

古文：奏云未者，则遣共筹之。奏云已议者，皆报可从之。
现代文：奏说没有的，就要去与文瓘共同筹划；如果说已议过，都依从文瓘的意见。
English: If there is no report, it is necessary to jointly plan with Wen Jiabao; if it has been discussed, it will follow Wen Jiabao's opinion.

古文：其后，新罗外叛，高宗将发兵讨除。
现代文：那以后，新罗外叛，高宗准备调兵讨伐。
English: After that, Gaozong, the Silla renegade, prepared to mobilize troops for a crusade.

古文：时文瓘疾病在家，乃舆疾请见，奏曰： 比为吐蕃犯边，兵屯寇境，新罗虽未即顺，师不内侵。
现代文：当时，张文瓘病在家中，便带病乘车请求皇上接见，他向高宗奏道 ：近来，吐蕃犯境，我们的军队屯驻寇境；新罗虽然没有马上归顺，但师不内侵。
English: At that time, Zhang Wenyi was ill at home, so he took a sick ride to request an audience with the emperor. He said to Gao Zongsuo: Recently, when Tibet invaded China, our army was stationed in China; although Silla did not immediately surrender, the division did not invade.

古文：若东西俱事征讨，臣恐百姓不堪其弊。
现代文：如果我们东西同时出兵征讨，臣恐百姓负担不了。
English: If we were to send soldiers to collect conscription at the same time, the government would not be able to afford it.

古文：请息兵修德以安百姓。 
现代文：请求陛下能息兵修德来安定百姓。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to calm down the soldiers and cultivate virtue to stabilize the people.

古文：高宗从之。
现代文：高宗听从了他的意见。
English: Gaozong followed his advice.

古文：咸亨元年，迁太子率更令，卒官。
现代文：仪凤二年，张文瓘病卒，享年七十三岁，赠幽州都督，谥号为懿。
English: In the second year of Yi Feng, Zhang Wenyi died of illness at the age of seventy-three. He was given the title of Yuzhou Governor, and his posthumous name was Ruan.

古文：撰《新乐书》十二卷。
现代文：因为他在孝敬皇帝时就在朝廷侍奉，特敕在恭陵陪葬。
English: Because he served in the imperial court when he was a filial to the emperor, he was buried with the emperor in Gongling.

古文：徐有功，国子博士文远孙也。
现代文：徐有功，是国子博士徐义远的孙子。
English: Xu Yougong is the grandson of Dr. Xu Yiyuan.

古文：举明经，累转蒲州司法参军，绍封东莞男。
现代文：他以明经科中举，调任蒲州司法参军，袭受封爵为东莞男。
English: He was promoted to the middle rank of Ming School of Economics, transferred to the Puzhou Judiciary to join the army, and was knighted as the man of Dongguan.

古文：为政宽仁，不行杖罚。吏人感其恩信，递相约曰： 若犯徐司法杖者，众必斥罚之。 
现代文：他为政宽厚仁慈，吏人都感受到他的恩德，便互相约定： 如犯了徐司法杖刑的，大家都要斥责惩罚这种人。 
English: He was a lenient and benevolent politician, and the officials all felt his benevolence, so they agreed with each other: If someone is punished with the judicial cane, everyone should reprimand and punish such a person.

古文：由是人争用命，终于代满，不戮一人。
现代文：由此，人争着为他效命。他任司法参军，从开始到结尾，没有杀一人。
English: Therefore they were all the more eager to serve him, because he had been a judge and a soldier, and from first to last he had killed no one.

古文：载初元年，累迁司刑丞。
现代文：载初元年，连任司刑丞。
English: In 1981, he was reappointed to the post of chief magistrate.

古文：时酷吏周兴、来俊臣、丘神勣、王弘义等构陷无辜，皆抵极法，公卿震恐，莫敢正言。
现代文：当时，酷吏周兴、来俊臣、丘神责力、王弘义等陷害无辜，很多人受到了极刑。公卿也因此震惊恐惧，没有谁敢讲真话。
English: At that time, cruel officials such as Zhou Xing, Lai Junin, Qiu Shen Rongli, and Wang Hongyi framed innocent people, and many people were sentenced to capital punishment. The nobles were also shocked and afraid, and no one dared to tell the truth.

古文：有功独存平恕，诏下大理者，有功皆议出之，前后济活数十百家。
现代文：徐有功却能一人坚持公平宽恕的原则，凡是奉诏被抓到大理寺审讯的，徐有功都秉公决断而去掉不实的罪名，前前后后，挽救了数百家人的性命。
English: Xu Yougong was the only one who could uphold the principle of fairness and forgiveness. Whenever anyone was arrested and taken to Dali Temple for interrogation, Xu Yougong made a fair decision and removed the false charges, saving the lives of hundreds of families.

古文：常于殿庭论奏曲直，则天厉色诘之，左右莫不悚栗，有功神色不挠，争之弥切。
现代文：他经常在殿上论奏案件的是非曲直，武则天厉色责问他，左右的臣子无不胆颤心惊，惟独徐有功神态自然，争论得更加带劲。
English: He often discussed the merits and demerits of the case in the palace, and Wu Zetian severely reprimanded him. The courtiers on both sides were trembling with fear, but Xu Yougong's demeanor was natural, and the debate was more vigorous.

古文：寻转秋官员外郎，转郎中。
现代文：不久，他调任秋官员外郎，又转调郎中。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the post of the second-in-command of the autumn officials, and then to the post of the second-in-command.

古文：俄而凤阁侍郎任知古、冬官尚书裴行本等七人被构陷当死，则天谓公卿曰： 古人以杀止杀，我今以恩止杀。就群公乞知古等，赐以再生，各授以官，伫申来效。 
现代文：不久，凤阁侍郎任知古、冬官尚书裴行本等七人，被酷吏构罪陷害，按罪名当处死刑。武则天对公卿说 ：古人以杀止杀，我今以恩止杀，各位公卿为知古等求情，我赐他们第二次生命，各自都授予官职，等他们明白而为朝廷效力。 
English: Soon, seven people, including Fengge's chamberlain, Ren Zhi Gu, and Dongguan's official, Shang Shu Pei Xing Ben, were framed by cruel officials and sentenced to death according to the charges. Wu Zetian said to the nobles: The ancients used to kill to stop killing, now I use grace to stop killing. The nobles pleaded for Zhi Gu and others, I gave them a second life, and each of them was given an official post, so that they would understand and serve the imperial court.

古文：俊臣、张知默等又抗表请申大法，则天不许之。俊臣乃独引行本，重验前罪，奏曰： 行本潜行悖逆，告张知蹇与庐陵王反不实，罪当处斩。 
现代文：来俊臣、张知默等又不听从，请求以大法加罪，武则天不同意，来俊臣就单对裴行本，复查他以前的罪证，上奏道： 行本私下干着叛逆勾当，告张知謇与庐陵王谋反一事不实，罪当处斩。 
English: Lai Junchen and Zhang Zhiming did not listen, and requested that Zhang Zhisheng be punished by the Great Law. Wu Zetian did not agree. Lai Junchen alone confronted Bae Xingben, reviewed his previous criminal evidence, and issued a report: Xingben was secretly engaged in treasonous activities, and accused Zhang Zhisheng of plotting a rebellion with the King of Fuling. This was untrue, and the crime should be punished.

古文：有功驳奏曰： 俊臣乖明主再生之赐，亏圣人恩信之道。
现代文：徐有功反驳来俊臣上奏道 ：俊臣违背明主的再生之赐，损害了圣人的恩信之道。
English: Xu Yougong rebutted, leading Junshen to reply: Junshen violated the Lord's gift of rebirth and damaged the saint's path of faith.

古文：秋官侍郎周兴奏有功曰： 臣闻两汉故事，附下罔上者腰斩，面欺者亦斩。又《礼》云：析言破律者杀。
现代文：作为臣子虽然应当嫉恶，但是事奉君主一定要顺应君主的美好愿望。 行本因徐有功的力辩而免死。道州刺史李仁褒及他的弟弟李榆次做长沙县令，被唐奉一所构罪诬陷，徐有功又坚持为他争辩，未能起作用，反而被秋官侍郎周兴向武则天参奏 ：臣听说两汉的法律，附下瞒上的腰斩，当面骗君的人也斩。《礼》经上明文规定：断章取义破坏歪曲法律的人杀。
English: As a vassal, he should be jealous, but as a servant of the monarch, he must comply with the monarch's good wishes. The author was spared death because of Xu Youguo's strong argument. The governor of the province, Li Renbo, and his brother, Li Yanzhi, were framed by Tang Feng for a constitutive crime. Xu Youguo insisted on arguing for him, but it did not work. On the contrary, he was advised by Zhou Xing, the attendant of the autumn official, to Wu Zetian: The minister heard about the laws of the two Han dynasties, attached a concealed waist cut, and also cut those who cheated

古文：有功故出反囚，罪当不赦，请推按其罪。 
现代文：徐有功故意为反叛者开脱罪名，按罪行徐有功应当不能赦免，请圣上按其罪判刑。 
English: Xu Yougong deliberately exonerated the rebels. According to the crime, Xu Yougong should not be pardoned. I ask the Holy Father to sentence him according to his crime.

古文：则天虽不许系问，然竟坐免官。
现代文：武则天虽然没有同意拘捕问罪，但是终究因此事而免官。
English: Although Wu Zetian did not agree to be arrested and questioned, he was eventually removed from office.

古文：久之，起为左台侍御史，则天特褒异之。
现代文：过了一段时间，又起用徐有功为左台侍御史，武则天特别褒扬而特殊相待。
English: After a period of time, Emperor Wu Zetian again appointed Xu Yougong as the left attendant of history, and gave him special praise and special treatment.

古文：时远近闻有功授职，皆欣然相贺。
现代文：当时远近之人听到徐有功又授职，皆欣然相贺。
English: At that time, people near and far heard that Xu Yougong was awarded the post again, and everyone was happy to congratulate each other.

古文：有功尝上疏论天官、秋官及朝堂三司理匭使愆失，其略曰： 陛下即位已来，海内职员一定，而天下选人渐多。掌选之曹用舍不平，补拟乖次，嘱请公行，颜面罔惧。遂使嚣谤满路，怨讟盈朝，浸以为常，殊无愧惮。又往属唐朝季年，时多逆节，鞫讯结断，刑狱至严。革命以来，载祀遽积，余风未殄，用法犹深。
现代文：徐有功曾经上疏论冢宰、刑部及朝三司执法官的过失，其大意是： 陛下即位以来，中央地方的官员都已稳定，但天下用人才渐多，而掌握选拔人才的部门取舍不平等，选派任职失次，要求他们公平无私，他们却言行不一，遂使怨声载道，指责盈朝，但他们习以为常，一点畏惧惭愧的感觉都没有，又加之前朝经常不按法行事，审讯定案，刑狱至严，陛下革新旧制以来，积年旧习，余风未绝，用法还是过于严酷失当。
English: Xu Yougong once went on a rant about the faults of the eunuch, the criminal investigation department and the three departments of the imperial court, to the effect that: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, the officials in the central region have all been stable, but the world has gradually increased the number of talents, and the departments that control the selection of talents are unequal in their choices, the selection and appointment are inferior, and they are required to be fair and selfless. However, their words and deeds are inconsistent, so they complain and blame the Ying Dynasty, but they are accustomed to it and have no sense of fear or shame. In addition, the previous dynasty often did not act according to

古文：今推鞫者犹行酷法，妄劾断。臣即按验，奏而劾之，获其枉状，请即付法断罪，亦夺禄贬考，以惭其德。
现代文：现在审讯官员行酷法，妄加断案，臣去检查，按罪而论，发现有的是冤案，请依法处理，夺禄贬官，来使其有愧于自己的德行。
English: Now, the interrogation officers are acting cruelly, arbitrarily deciding cases, the ministers go to check, judge according to the crime, find that some are unjust cases, please deal with them according to the law, take the reward and demote the officials, so that they are worthy of their own virtue.

古文：其三司受表及理匭申冤使，不速与夺，致令拥塞，有理不为申者，亦望准前弹奏，贬考夺禄。
现代文：但三司受理，不迅速定夺，致使案件拥塞，有理不能申诉的人，也盼望速裁决，进行处理。
English: However, the Third Division does not make a quick decision when accepting a case, resulting in congestion of cases. People who cannot reasonably appeal are also looking forward to a quick ruling and handling.

古文：臣昔处法司，缘蒙擢用，臣无以上答至造，愿以执法酬恩。
现代文：臣过去在法司任职，蒙圣上提拔任用，臣无以报答圣上，只愿以公正执法来酬圣上的知遇之恩。
English: In the past, the minister served in the Department of Law and was promoted and appointed by the Holy Father. The minister has nothing to repay the Holy Father, but is only willing to repay the grace of the Holy Father by enforcing the law fairly.

古文：无纵诡随，不避强御，猛噬鸷击，是臣之分。如蒙允纳，请降敕施行，庶不越旬时，亦可以除残革弊，刑措不用，天下幸甚。 
现代文：决不做放纵不顾是非，妄自随人的人，也决不做回避强暴凌人的人，一定狠狠打击枉法的奸妄之人，这是臣的本分，如蒙陛下准允降旨施行，要不了多久，就可以除残革弊，刑法就可以放着不用，如能这样，天下百姓就太幸福了。 
English: It is the duty of a minister never to be a person who indulges without regard for right and wrong, who arrogantly follows others, and never to be a person who avoids violence and abuse. It is the duty of a minister to severely crack down on those who abuse the law. If His Majesty approves the execution of the order, it will not be long before the evil of the remnants of the revolution can be eliminated and the criminal law can be put to use. If this can be done, the people of the world will be too happy.

古文：后润州刺史窦孝谌妻庞氏为奴诬告，云夜解祈福，则天令给事中薛季昶鞫之。
现代文：后，润州刺史窦孝谌妻庞氏被仆奴诬告，说她夜起小解祈福。武则天命令给事中薛季昶审讯，薛罗织罪状，陷庞氏死罪。
English: Later, the wife of the Rongzhou assassin, Dou Xiaolong, was falsely accused by a servant, saying that she got up at night to pray for good luck. Wu Zetian ordered the trial of Xue Jizhe in the matter, Xue Luo to fabricate charges, and Pang to be sentenced to death.

古文：季昶锻练成其罪，庞氏当坐斩。
现代文：当时只有徐有功知庞氏无罪，为之申辩。
English: At that time, only Xu Yougong knew that Pang was not guilty and pleaded for it.

古文：有功独明其无罪。而季昶等返陷有功党援恶逆，奏付法，法司结刑当弃市。
现代文：而薛季昶等反陷徐有功为庞同党援救叛逆，并上奏将徐有功法办，法司判决徐当死刑。
English: On the other hand, Xue Jizhe and others accused Xu Yougong of being a traitor to the Pan-Dong Party, and brought Xu Yougong to the legal department, and the legal department sentenced Xu to death.

古文：有功方视事，令史垂泣以告，有功曰： 岂吾独死，而诸人长不死耶？ 
现代文：徐有功正在处理政事，令史流着泪把判决告诉他。徐有功道： 难道我独死，而那些人长不死吗？ 
English: Xu Yougong was dealing with political affairs, and Shi told him the verdict with tears. Xu Yougong said: Do I have to die alone, and those people will not die?

古文：乃徐起而归。
现代文：乃慢慢地站起来归家。
English: But he slowly got up and went home.

古文：则天览奏，召有功诘之曰： 卿比断狱，失出何多？ 
现代文：武则天看了处决徐有功的奏章，召徐有功问道： 卿对于断案，重罪轻罚的人为什么多？ 
English: Wu Zetian looked at the transcript of the execution of Xu Yougong, summoned Xu Yougong and asked: Sir, why are there so many people who have been convicted and punished for minor crimes?

古文：对曰： 失出，臣下之小过；好生，圣人之大德。
现代文：徐有功答道： 重罪轻罚是臣下的小过；好生，是圣上的大德。
English: Xu Yougong replied: Committing a serious crime and being lightly punished is a minor offense for a vassal; leading a good life is a sacred virtue.

古文：愿陛下弘大德，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：愿陛下弘扬好生的大德，则天下幸甚。 
English: May His Majesty propagate the virtue of a good life, then the world will be a happier place.

古文：则天默然。于是庞氏减死，流于岭表，有功除名为庶人。
现代文：武则天默然，后来庞氏减刑免死，流放到岭表，徐有功除名为庶人。
English: Wu Zetian remained silent. Later, Pang was pardoned and exiled to Ling table. Xu Yugang was stripped of his title as a commoner.

古文：寻起为左司郎中，累迁司刑少卿。
现代文：不久，徐有功又被起用为左司郎中，又升迁予刑少卿。
English: Soon after, Xu Yougong was appointed as a junior secretary of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and was promoted to the position of a junior secretary of the Inner Palace Guards.

古文：有功谓所亲曰： 今身为大理，人命所悬，必不能顺旨诡辞以求苟免。 
现代文：徐有功对他的亲友说 ：今身为司法之官，人命所悬，一定不能一味顺从，不实事求是，来求得自身的安全。 
English: Xu Yougong said to his relatives and friends: "Now that I am a judicial officer and people's lives are at stake, I must not blindly obey and seek truth from facts to seek my own safety.

古文：故前后为狱官，以谏奏枉诛者，三经断死，而执志不渝，酷吏由是少衰，时人比汉之于、张焉。
现代文：所以前前后后做狱官，因为谏奏冤枉受刑的事，而三次断死刑，但他执志不渝，酷吏因此势稍衰。当时的人把他比作汉代执法公正的于定国、张释之。
English: Therefore, he was a prison officer before and after, and he was sentenced to death three times because he lied about being wrongfully sentenced. However, he kept his determination, and the cruel official slightly declined. People at the time compared him to Yu Dingguo and Zhang Xizhi, who were fair in law enforcement during the Han Dynasty.

古文：或曰： 若狱官皆然，刑措何远。 
现代文：有的说： 若狱官都是这样，用不上刑法的日子怎么会远呢？ 
English: Some said: If all prison officers are like this, how can the day when criminal law is no longer needed be so far away?

古文：久之，转司仆少卿子。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，徐有功调任司仆少卿。
English: After a long period of time, Xu Yougong was transferred to the position of the servant of the young lord.

古文：长安二年卒，年六十二，赠司刑卿。
现代文：长安三年卒，享年六十二岁，赠予刑卿。
English: Chang'an three-year-old, who died at the age of sixty-two, was presented to the Minister of Justice.

古文：可赠越州刺史，仍遣使就家吊祭，赐物百段，授一子官。 
现代文：唐中宗即位，表彰徐有功执法敬慎，虽死不移，无屈挠之心，有出死之议。赠徐有功大理卿、越州刺史，并派使者前往吊祭，赐物百段授一子官。
English: When Emperor Tang Zhongzong ascended the throne, he commended Xu Youguo for his dedication to law enforcement and prudence, although he was steadfast and unyielding, and there was talk of his death. He presented Xu Youguo with the titles of Daliqing and Yuezhou Zhishi, and sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony to present him with a gift of one hundred dan and an official position.

古文：今上践祚，窦孝谌之子希瑊等请以身之官爵让有功子惀，以报旧恩。
现代文：窦孝谌之子窦希蠨等请求以自身的官爵让给徐有功之子徐忄仑，来报旧恩。
English: Dou Xizhe, the son of Dou Xiaohui, and others requested that their titles be transferred to Xu Yulun, the son of Xu Yougong, to repay the old favor.

