古文：国朝会要，自元丰三百卷之后，至崇宁、政和间，复置局修纂。
现代文：本朝会要，自神宗元丰年间的三百卷之后，直到徽宗崇宁、政和年间，才又设置机构编纂。
English: According to this association, it was not until after the 300-volume compilation during the reign of Emperor Jinzong and Emperor Yuanfeng, and during the reigns of Emperor Huizong, Emperor Chongning, and Emperor Zheng He, that an institutional compilation was set up.

古文：宣和初，王黼秉政，罢修书五十八所。
现代文：宣和初年，王黼就任宰相主持政务，撤销五十八所修书机构。
English: In the first year of the declaration of peace, Wang Xi assumed the post of prime minister and presided over government affairs, revoking fifty-eight book revision institutions.

古文：时会要已进一百十卷，余四百卷亦成，但局中欲节次觊赏，故未及上。
现代文：当时会要已进呈朝廷一百一十卷，其余四百卷也已完成，但会要所企图多次呈上以求多次得赏，所以没有全部进呈。
English: At that time, 110 volumes had to be submitted to the Imperial Court, and the remaining 400 volumes had to be completed. However, since it was necessary to submit everything multiple times in order to win the award multiple times, not everything was submitted.

古文：既有是命，局官以谓若朝廷许立限了毕，不过三两月可以投进。
现代文：撤消会要所的命令下达之后，主管官吏又说如果朝廷允许定下期限了结，不超过三两个月便呈献。
English: After the order to revoke the important position of the association was issued, the competent official also said that if the court allowed the deadline to be set, it would be submitted within three months.

古文：两黼务悉娇蔡京所为，故一切罢之，官吏既散，文书皆为弃物矣。
现代文：可是王黼力求全盘纠正蔡京所作之事，所以一切统统撤消，官吏遣散之后，文书全成了丢弃之物。
English: However, Wang Hui tried to rectify what Cai Jing had done in an all-round way, so everything was cancelled. After the officials were dismissed, the documents were completely discarded.

古文：建炎三年，外舅张渊道为太常博士，时礼寺典籍散佚亡几，而京师未陷，公为宰相言： 宜遣官往访故府，取见存图籍，悉辇而来，以备掌故。 
现代文：建炎三年，高宗岳父张渊道任太常博士，当时礼寺所存黄册图籍，散佚不多，而且京师尚未陷落，张渊道向宰相建议： 应派专人前往京师藏书旧址寻访，取出现存图书典籍，全部装车运来，以备查询掌故。 
English: Three years into the construction, Gaozong's father-in-law, Zhang Yuandao, was appointed as Dr. Taizhong. At that time, there were not many copies of the Yellow Book in the temple, and Beijing Division had not yet fallen. Zhang Yuandao suggested to the prime minister: A special person should be sent to the former site of the Beijing Division's collection to search for books, retrieve existing books and classics, and all of them should be transported by truck to prepare for the inquiry.

古文：此若缓而甚急者也。
现代文：这是一件看似平常却又亟待解决的事。
English: This is a seemingly ordinary but urgent matter to be resolved.

古文：宰相不能用，其后逆豫窃据，鞠为煨烬。
现代文：宰相不予采纳，后来被伪齐刘豫窃据，多被烧成灰烬。
English: The prime minister was not accepted, and was later stolen by the pseudo-Qi Liu Yu, and was mostly burned to ashes.

古文：吁，可惜哉！
现代文：唉，可惜啊！
English: What a shame!

