古文：凡与敌战，若敌众我寡，敌强我弱，须多设旌旗，倍增火灶，示强于敌，使彼莫能测我众寡、强弱之形，则敌必不轻与我战。我可速去，则全军远害。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果处于敌众我寡、敌强我弱的形势时，必须多设旗帜，加倍增筑锅灶，伪装成强大之势来迷惑敌人，使它无法摸清我军多少、强弱之实情，敌人就必定不敢轻易向我进攻，我便可以迅速撤离，使全军摆脱危险境地。
English: Whenever fighting against the enemy, if we are in a situation where the enemy is few and far between, and the enemy is strong and weak, we must set up more flags, double the number of pots and pans, and disguise ourselves as a strong force to confuse the enemy, so that it cannot figure out the number of our army and the truth of our strength and weakness. The enemy will certainly not dare to attack me easily, and I can quickly withdraw, so that the whole army can get out of the dangerous situation.

古文：法曰： 强弱，形也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 兵力的强弱，是可以用 示形 之法伪装的。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: The strength or weakness of an army can be disguised by means of a demonstration.

古文：后汉，羌胡反，寇武都。
现代文：东汉安帝时期，地处西北的羌族举兵反叛，寇掠武都郡。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty, the Yi people, who lived in the northwest, raised an army to rebel and plundered Wudu County.

古文：邓太后以虞诩有将帅之略，迁武都太守。
现代文：临朝执政的邓太后认为虞诩有大将谋略，升任他为武都太守而令其率兵西行平叛。
English: The Empress Dowager Deng, who was in power at the time, thought that Gu Yao was plotting, and promoted him to the position of military governor of the capital and ordered him to lead his troops westward to quell the rebellion.

古文：羌乃率众数千，遮诩于陈仓、崤谷。
现代文：羌人首领率众数千人，阻截虞诩于陈仓、崤谷一带；虞诩立即命令部队停止前进。
English: The leader of the Xiongnu people led thousands of people to intercept the Yuyu in the areas of Chencang and Shugu; the Yuyu immediately ordered the troops to stop advancing.

古文：诩即停军不进，而宣言上书请兵，须到当发。
现代文：为了麻痹羌人，虞诩扬言他已上书皇帝请求援兵，等待援军到来再走。
English: In order to paralyze the people, the elder statesman threatened that he had written to the emperor to request reinforcements, and that he would wait for reinforcements to arrive before leaving.

古文：羌闻之，乃分抄傍县。
现代文：羌人听到这个消息后，便分兵到附近各县进行抢掠。
English: After the people of He heard this news, the soldiers went to the nearby counties to loot.

古文：诩因其兵散，日夜倍道兼行，日行百余里。令吏士各作两灶，日增倍之，羌不敢逼。
现代文：虞诩乘其兵力分散的有利时机，率兵疾速西进，日夜兼程赶路，一昼夜行进二百里，并命令部队官兵每人各造两个锅灶，每天增灶一倍；羌兵见此情形而不敢逼近虞诩部队。
English: Taking advantage of the favorable opportunity of the dispersion of his forces, Yuxuan marched westward at high speed with his troops, speeding along the road day and night, marching two hundred miles in one day and night, and ordered the troops to build two pot stoves each, doubling the number of stoves every day. Seeing this, Yuxuan's soldiers did not dare to approach Yuxuan's troops.

古文：或问曰： 孙膑减灶而君增之。兵法：日行不过三十里，而今日且行百里，何也？ 
现代文：有人问道： 孙膑围魏救赵时是采用逐日减灶之法欺骗魏军的，而您却是用的逐日增灶之法；兵法上讲一日行军不得超过三十里，以防不测，而今我们却走了二百多里。这是为什么？ 
English: Someone asked: When Sun Yat-sen was besieging Wei and saving Zhao, he used the method of decreasing the distance day by day to deceive the Wei army, but you are using the method of increasing the distance day by day; according to military law, a day's march must not exceed thirty miles to prevent accidents, but now we have walked more than two hundred miles. Why is this?

古文：诩曰： 虏众多，吾今兵少。吾之增灶，使敌必谓郡兵来迎。众多行速，必惮追我。
现代文：虞诩回答说： 敌人众多，我军兵少；敌见我炉灶增多，必定认为武都已派兵前来接应；人多势众而行动迅速，因而敌人不敢追击。
English: Gu Yao replied, "The enemy is numerous, but our army is small; when the enemy sees that my troops have increased, they must think that the capital has sent troops to meet them; there are many people and they act quickly, so the enemy does not dare to chase them.

古文：孙膑见弱，吾今示强，势有不同故也。 
现代文：古人孙膑故意显示软弱，我则伪装强大，这是由于态势不同的原因啊！ 
English: Sun Yat-sen pretended to be weak, I am now pretending to be strong, it is because of the different situation.

