古文：蔡谟诸葛恢周顗韩博习凿齿孙盛祖纳郝隆罗友张融何承天王绚
现代文：蔡谟诸葛恢周顗韩博习凿齿孙盛祖纳郝隆罗友张融何承天王绚
English: Zhai Mu, Zhuge, Zhou, Han Bo, Xi Zhen, Sun Sheng, Sun Zu, Na Zi, Long Luo, You Zhang Rong, He Zheng, Tian Wang Hua

古文：何勖谢灵运刘绘徐孝嗣沈文季沈昭略胡谐之梁武柳信言徐摛徐陵
现代文：何勖谢灵运刘绘徐孝嗣沈文季沈昭略胡谐之梁武柳信言徐摛徐陵
English: He Zhenxie, Xie Lingyun, Liu Peng, Xu Xiaozhe, Shen Wenzhou, Shen Zhao, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuzhong, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuzhong, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling, Liang Wuling

古文：李谐周舍王琳
现代文：李谐周舍王琳
English: Li Jing, Zhou She, Wang Lin

古文：蔡谟
现代文：蔡谟
English: Cai Mow

古文：晋王导妻妒，导有众妾在别馆，妻知之，持食刀将住。公遽命驾，患牛迟，手捉尘尾，以柄助打牛。
现代文：王导知道后急忙让家中仆人驾好牛车去追赶妻子。王导嫌牛车走得太慢，手里倒握着拂尘，用拂尘把击打牛屁股，让牛快走。
English: After learning of this, Wang Du hurriedly asked the servants in his family to drive a good ox cart to catch up with his wife. Wang Du did not like the ox cart to go too slowly. He held the whisk upside down in his hand, and used the whisk to beat the cow's butt, so that the cow could go faster.

古文：蔡谟闻之，后诣王谓曰：朝廷欲加公九锡。
现代文：蔡谟听说这件事情后，来看王导说：朝廷想赏赐你九种礼品，这可是最高的礼遇啊！
English: After Cai Mu heard about this, he came to see Wang Du and said, "The imperial court wants to give you nine kinds of gifts. This is the highest courtesy!"

古文：王自叙谦志，蔡曰：不闻余物，唯闻短辕犊车，长柄尘尾。
现代文：王导听了后，谦让他说自己无功无德，不应得到这么高的赏赐。蔡谟说：不说别的，单单听说你乘坐短辕牛车，用长把拂尘鞭牛。
English: After listening to Wang Du, he humbly asked him to say that he had no merit and did not deserve such a high reward.Chaimou said: Without saying anything else, I just heard that you took a short yakitori cart and whipped cows with a long whisk.

古文：导大惭。
现代文：这件事就足够赏赐的了。
English: That's reward enough.

古文：诸葛恢
现代文：王导听了后，羞愧无比。
English: After listening to Wang Du, he was extremely ashamed.

古文：晋诸葛恢与丞相王导，共争姓族先后。
现代文：诸葛恢晋朝的诸葛恢与丞相王导，二人因为族姓排列的先后顺序而发生争吵。
English: Zhuge Gao of the Jin Dynasty quarreled with the chancellor Wang Du because of the order of their surnames.

古文：王曰：何以不言葛王，而言王葛。
现代文：王导说：为什么不可以称葛王，而非得称王葛呢？
English: Wang Du said, "Why can't we call Ge Wang, instead of Wang Ge?"

古文：答曰，譬如言驴马，驴宁胜马也。
现代文：诸葛恢回答说：譬如称驴马吧，这样称呼的意思难道是说驴就胜过马了吗？
English: Zhuge Wei replied: For example, let's call a donkey a horse. Does this mean that a donkey is better than a horse?

古文：周顗
现代文：周顗
English: Zhou Ying

古文：晋庾亮造周顗。
现代文：晋朝时，庾亮去拜访周顗。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, Yao Liang went to visit Zhou Ye.

古文：顗曰：君何忻悦而忽肥。
现代文：周顗问：你近来有什么高兴愉快的事情忽然肥胖起来了？
English: Zhou Wei asked: What happy and pleasant things have you done recently to suddenly become obese?

古文：庾曰：君何忧惨而瘦。
现代文：庾亮反问道：您怎么忧伤愁惨得忽然瘦了呢？
English: Hao Liang asked: How did you become so sad and miserable that you suddenly lost weight?

古文：周曰：吾无所忧，直是清虚日来，秽滓日去。
现代文：周顗说：我没有什么忧伤愁惨的事情，只不过是天天吃些蔬菜使胃肠清洁虚空，那么，那些污浊的废弃物也就一天天减少了。
English: Zhou Wei said: I don't have any sad or miserable things. I just eat some vegetables every day to clean my stomach and intestines. Then, those filthy wastes will also decrease day by day.

古文：韩博
现代文：韩博
English: Han Bo

古文：晋张天锡从事中郎韩博，奉表并送盟文。
现代文：东晋时，张天锡的僚属中郎韩博，前往建康向东晋上表与送盟文。
English: At the time of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Zhang Tianxi's colleague was the middle brother Han Bo, who went to Jiankang to present the table to the Eastern Jin Dynasty and send the alliance document.

古文：博有口才，桓温甚称之。
现代文：韩博能言善辩，很有口才，东晋执掌朝政的大司马桓温很是赞赏他。
English: Han Bo could speak well and was very eloquent. The East Jin Dynasty's Grand Secretary Ma Kuanwen, who was in charge of the government, highly appreciated him.

古文：尝大会，温使司马刁彝谓博曰：卿是韩卢后。
现代文：一次盛大的聚会上，桓温暗中指使司马刁彝问韩博：你是韩卢后吗？
English: At a grand gathering, Kuan Wen secretly instructed Sima Yi to ask Han Bo: Are you the Queen of Han Lu?

古文：博曰：卿是韩卢后。
现代文：韩博回答说：您是韩卢后。
English: Han Bo replied, "You are the queen of Han Lu."

古文：温笑曰：刁以君姓韩，固相问耳。
现代文：桓温笑着说：刁司马因为你姓韩，因此这样相问那。
English: Kuan Wen said with a smile: "Because your surname is Han, you ask questions like that.

古文：他人自姓刁，那得是韩卢后。
现代文：刁司马自然是姓刁了，哪能是韩卢后呢。
English: It's natural that Han Sima's surname is Han, but how can it be Han Lu's?

古文：博曰：明公未之思尔，短尾者则为刁。
现代文：韩博回答说：大人您没有很好地思考啊，短尾则为刁黄，因此是韩卢 后 哇！
English: Han Bo replied, "My lord, you didn't think about it well. The short tail is yellow, so it's Han Lu's hindquarters. Wow!

古文：阖坐雅叹焉。
现代文：在坐的人，都赞叹韩博的高雅与善辩。
English: Those who were present were full of praise for Han Bo's elegance and eloquence.

古文：习凿齿
现代文：习凿齿
English: Learning chisel teeth

古文：秦苻坚克襄阳，获习凿齿、释道安。
现代文：东晋时，前秦苻坚攻占襄阳，虏获习凿齿、释道安。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the former Qin Shujian conquered and occupied Xiangyang, and captured Xi Zhizhen and Xie Daoan.

古文：时凿齿足疾，坚见之，与语大悦。
现代文：当时，习凿齿正患脚病，瘸着走路。
English: At the time, he was suffering from a foot ailment and walked with a limp.

古文：叹曰：昔晋平吴，利在二陆；今破南土，获士一人有半。
现代文：苻坚接见他，跟他谈了一会儿话，非常高兴，慨叹地说：当年晋人平定东吴，得利于东吴的两名水军将领陆抗、陆景。我现在攻克襄阳，得到一个半人啊！
English: Hao Jian received him and talked with him for a while. He was very happy and said with a sigh, "When the Jin conquered the Eastern Wu, the two naval generals, Lu Bei and Lu Jie, benefited from the Eastern Wu. Now I have conquered Xiangyang and gained one and a half men!"

古文：盖刺其蹇也。初凿齿尝造道安谭论，自赞曰：四海习凿齿。
现代文：苻坚这样说，是讽刺戏谑当时习凿齿患脚疾瘸着走路。当初，习凿齿一次跟释道安闲谈，自我夸赞说：四海之内习凿齿。
English: Xuan Jian said this was a satirical joke. At that time, Xi Jizhen suffered from a foot disease and walked with a limp. At first, Xi Jizhen once chatted with the interpreter Dao An and praised himself saying: "In the four seas, Xi Jizhen."

古文：安应声曰：弥天释道安。
现代文：释道安应声说：普天之下释道安。
English: In response, Shidao An said, "Peace be upon Shidao An throughout the world."

古文：咸以为清对。
现代文：都认为这两句话是一付清对。
English: Both think that these two sentences are perfectly correct.

古文：孙盛
现代文：孙盛
English: Sun Sheng

古文：晋孙盛与殷浩谈论，往反精苦。
现代文：晋朝人孙盛与殷浩互相辩论，你来我往，不辞辛苦。
English: Sun Sheng, a member of the Jin Dynasty, and Yin Hao debated with each other. You came to me and went to great lengths.

古文：客主无间，左右进食，冷而复暖者数四。
现代文：不论是客是主，都不得闻。家人仆夫往来上菜上饭，凉了再热，热了又凉，再三再四。
English: Whether it is the guest or the host, it is unheard of. The servants of the family go back and forth to serve the dishes. When it is cold, it is hot again, when it is hot, it is cold again, and so on.

古文：彼我奋掷尘尾，毛悉脱落，满餐饭中。
现代文：辩论到激烈时，彼此用拂尘击打。拂尘上的毛都脱落下来，弄得满桌都是，饭里菜里都有。
English: When the debate gets heated, they hit each other with a whisk, and the hairs on the whisk fall off, covering the table and the food.

古文：宾主遂至暮忘食。
现代文：宾主一直到了旁晚都忘了吃饭。
English: The guest forgot to eat until the evening.

古文：殷乃语孙曰：莫作强口马，我当捩卿鼻。
现代文：殷浩对孙盛说：你莫作强嘴的马，我应当拧住你的鼻子。
English: Yin Hao said to Sun Sheng, "Don't be a horse with a strong mouth. I should hold your nose."

古文：孙曰：卿不见决鼻牛，人当劳卿颈。
现代文：孙盛对殷浩说：你没有见到被拽豁鼻子的牛吗，我让人按你的脖颈。
English: Sun Sheng said to Yin Hao, "Didn't you see the cow whose nose was torn off? I had someone press on your neck.

古文：祖纳
现代文：祖纳
English: Zuna

古文：东晋光禄祖纳少孤苦，性至孝，常自为母炊爨作食。
现代文：东晋光禄大夫祖纳少年时孤苦伶仃，但是非常孝顺，经常亲自为母亲烧火作饭。
English: Eastern Jin Guanglu doctor Zuna was a lonely boy, but he was very filial, often cooking for his mother by himself.

古文：王平闻其佳名，知其常亲供养，乃以二婢饷之，因以为吏。
现代文：王平听说他的美名后，得知他亲自服侍供养母亲，就送给他二名女仆，并推荐他担任官职。
English: After Wang Ping heard of his reputation, and learned that he personally served and supported his mother, he gave him two maids and recommended him for an official position.

古文：人有戏之者，奴价倍于婢。
现代文：有人戏谑祖纳说：你这个奴隶的价格比婢女高一倍呀！
English: Someone joked with Zuna: "The price of your slave is twice as high as that of a maid!"

古文：祖答曰：百里奚亦何必轻于五羖之皮耶。
现代文：祖纳回答说：身为秦穆公宰相的百里奚为什么必得比五张公羊皮还轻贱呢。
English: Zuna replied, "Why should Bai Lijuan, who is the prime minister of Qin Mu, be worth less than five ram skins?"

古文：郝隆
现代文：郝隆
English: Yulong

古文：晋郝隆为南蛮参军。
现代文：晋时人郝隆被授予南蛮参军。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Gong Long was awarded the Southern Barbarian to join the army.

古文：三月三日作诗曰：娵隅跃清池。
现代文：他在三月三日这天作诗一首，其中一句是娵隅跃清池。
English: On the day of March 3rd, he wrote a poem, one of which is called "隅跃清池."

古文：桓温问何物，答曰：蛮名鱼为娵隅。
现代文：执掌朝政的大司马桓温听了问：娵隅是什么东西？郝隆回答说：南蛮人管鱼叫娵隅。
English: Ma Kan-Wen, the grand secretary in charge of the imperial government, listened and asked: "What is an eel fish?" Hao Long replied: "The southern barbarian cannibal fish is called eel fish.

古文：桓曰：何为作蛮语。
现代文：桓温问：你为什么用蛮语？
English: Kan-Wen asked: Why did you use a barbaric language?

古文：隆曰：千里投公，始得一蛮府参军，那得不作蛮语。
现代文：郝隆回答说：我千里迢迢地来投奔大司马您，才得到一个蛮府参军的官职，怎么能不用蛮语呢？
English: Chulong replied, "I came all the way to the capital to join you, and only then did I get an official position to join the army. How can I not use the barbarian language?"

古文：罗友
现代文：罗友
English: Luo You

古文：晋罗友家贫，乞禄于桓温。
现代文：晋朝时，有个叫罗友的人，家里很贫穷，投奔到大司马桓温手下找口饭吃。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Luo You, whose family was very poor, and he ran to seek a meal under the command of Grand Master Ma Huanwen.

古文：虽以才学遇之，而谓其诞肆，非治民才，许而不用。
现代文：罗友虽然是因为有才学而得到桓温的赏识，但是由于他平素生性放诞不受管束，桓温认为他不适合担任官职治理百姓。因此，只赏识赞许他而不使用。
English: Although Luo You was appreciated by Kuan Wen because of his talent in learning, Kuan Wen thought that he was not suitable to serve as an official to govern the people because of his unrestrained sexual debauchery. Therefore, he only appreciated him and did not use him.

古文：后同府人有得郡者，温为坐饮叙别。友亦被命，至尤迟晚。
现代文：后来，同为幕僚的一位同事被任命为郡守，桓温为他设宴话别，罗友也被邀请参加。
English: Later, a colleague who was also a staff member was appointed as the county governor, and Kan On held a farewell banquet for him. Luo You was also invited to attend.

古文：温问之，答曰：臣昨奉教旨出门，于中路见鬼椰榆云： 我只见汝送人上郡，何不见人送汝上郡。
现代文：桓温问罗友：你怎么来的这么晚啊？罗友回答：我昨天奉您的指示外出，在路上遇到一个鬼嘲笑我说： 我只见你送别人出任郡守，为什么不见别人送你出任郡守呢？ 
English: Kanwen asked Luo You: How did you come so late? Luo You replied: I went out yesterday according to your instructions. On the road, I met a ghost who laughed at me and said: I only saw you send someone else to be the county magistrate. Why didn't you see someone else send you to be the county magistrate?

古文：友始终惭，回以还解。不觉成淹缓之罪。
现代文：我听了后始终感到羞愧，回来后还再三思悟这件事，不知不觉就延缓了赴宴的时间，真是罪过。
English: I always felt ashamed after listening to it, and thought about it again and again after I came back, unconsciously delaying the time to go to the banquet. It was really a sin.

古文：温笑其滑稽，而颇愧焉。
现代文：桓温听了后一方面感到罗友说的滑稽可笑，一方面也感到惭愧。
English: After listening to Luo Yu's speech, Kanwen felt both amused and ashamed.

古文：后以为襄阳太守。
现代文：这之后，桓温任命罗友为襄阳太守。
English: After this, Kuan Wen appointed Luo You as the Yangyang governor.

古文：张融
现代文：张融
English: Zhang Rong

古文：宋张融尝乞假还，帝问所居。
现代文：南北朝时期，南朝宋张融有一次请假回家。皇上问他家住在哪里？
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Song Zhang Rong of the Southern Dynasty once went home on leave. The emperor asked him where his family lived.

古文：答曰：臣陆居非屋，舟居非水。
现代文：张融回答说：我住在陆地上但不是房屋，住在船上但不在水上。
English: Zhang Rong replied: I live on land but not in a house, I live on a boat but not on the water.

古文：上未解，问张绪。
现代文：皇上不明白这是怎么一回事，问张绪。
English: The emperor didn't understand what was going on and asked Zhang Xu.

古文：绪曰：融近东山，未有居止。
现代文：张绪告诉皇上说：张融家住在东山附近，没有固定的住处。
English: Zhang Xu told the emperor that Zhang Rong's family lived near Dongshan and had no fixed abode.

古文：权牵小船上岸，住在其间。
现代文：暂且将一只小船牵上岸边，全家人住在里面。
English: For the time being, a small boat was brought to the shore, and the whole family lived in it.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上听了大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：太祖尝面许融为司徒长史，敕竟不出。
现代文：齐太祖肖道成曾当面答应授任张融为司徒长史，然而竟然不见太祖下任命令。
English: Emperor Qizong's ancestor, Xiao Daocheng, had promised in person to appoint Zhang Rong as the Grand Historian, but there was no order for him to do so.

古文：融乘一马甚瘦，太祖曰：卿马何瘦，给粟多少。
现代文：张融骑着一匹瘦得可怜的马上下朝，太祖看见了问张融：你的这匹马怎么这么瘦啊？给它多少料粟？
English: In the morning, Zhang Rong rode a thin horse and rode down. The ancestor saw him and asked Zhang Rong: "How come your horse is so thin? How much millet should I give it?"

古文：融曰：日给一石。
现代文：张融回答说：每天喂它一石粟。
English: Zhang Rong replied, "Feed it a pebble of millet every day."

古文：帝曰：何瘦如此。
现代文：太祖问：那为什么还这么瘦？
English: The great-grandfather asked, "Then why are you still so thin?"

古文：融曰：臣许而不与。
现代文：张融说：我答应喂它一石粟，可是我并没有实际给它呢。
English: Zhang Rong said: I promised to feed it a pebble, but I didn't actually give it to it.

古文：明日，即除司徒长史。
现代文：第二天，太祖即下任命令授任张融为司徒长史。
English: The next day, Zhang Rong was appointed as the chief historian by the next order of the great ancestor.

古文：融与谢宝积俱谒太祖，融于御前放气。宝积起谢曰：臣兄触忤宸扆。
现代文：张融与宝积谢一块儿拜见太祖。张融在皇上面前放了一个屁，宝积谢起身谢罪说：我的这位兄弟泄气污染了皇上的圣殿。
English: Zhang Rong and Bao Jixie paid a visit to the great ancestor together. Zhang Rong farted in front of the emperor, and Bao Jixie stood up to apologize, saying, "My discouraged brother has polluted the emperor's holy temple."

古文：上笑而不问。
现代文：太祖只是笑笑，没有说什么。
English: The great-grandfather just smiled and did not say anything.

古文：须臾食至，融排宝积，不与同食。
现代文：过了一会儿，摆上酒宴，张融排斥宝积谢，不让他上桌。
English: After a while, the wine banquet was set up, and Zhang Rong rejected Bao Jie Xie and did not allow him to go to the table.

古文：上曰：何不与贤弟同食。
现代文：太祖问：为什么不跟你的这位贤弟同桌吃饭？
English: The great-grandfather asked, "Why don't you eat at the same table with this wise brother of yours?"

古文：融曰：臣不能与谢气之口同盘。
现代文：张融说：我不能跟谢气的嘴同餐。
English: Zhang Rong said: I can't have dinner with Xie Qi's mouth.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：太祖听后大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：何承天
现代文：何承天
English: Ho Chung-tin

古文：宋东海何承天，徐广之甥也。除著作佐郎，年已迈。
现代文：南宋东海人何承天，是徐广的外甥，官任著作佐郎，年岁已经很大了，其他的著作佐郎都是显赫人家的年轻子弟。
English: He Chengtian, a man from the East China Sea in the Southern Song Dynasty, was the nephew of Xu Guang. He was already very old when he was appointed to the post of official, and the other officials were the young sons of prominent families.

古文：诸佐郎并名家少年，颍川荀伯子嘲之，当呼为奶母。承天曰：卿当知凤凰将九子，奶母何言耶。
现代文：颖川人荀伯子嘲笑他，称他为奶母。何承天说：你应当知道凤凰带领着九只小凤凰崽，你称我为 奶母 是什么意思呢？
English: He Chengtian said: "You should know that the phoenix is leading nine little phoenixes. What do you mean by calling me a wet nurse?

古文：王绚
现代文：王绚
English: Wang Hualing

古文：晋王绚，彧之子。
现代文：晋朝人王绚，是王彧的儿子。
English: Wang Hua, a member of the Jin Dynasty, was the son of Wang Yao.

古文：六岁，外祖何尚之，特加赏异。
现代文：年仅六岁，外祖父何尚之，非常赏识他的聪慧异禀，教授他读《论语》。
English: When he was only six years old, his maternal grandfather, He Shangzhi, was very appreciative of his intelligence and taught him to read the Analects.

古文：受《论语》，至郁郁乎文哉。尚之戏曰：可改为 耶耶乎文哉。绚捧手对曰：尊者之名，安得为戏，亦可道草翁之风必舅。
现代文：教到郁郁乎文哉这一句时，何尚之戏谑地说：这句可以读成 耶耶乎文哉 王绚捧着两只小手回答说：长辈的称呼，怎么可以戏谑呢？草上之风必偃，也可以读成 草翁之风必舅 吗？
English: When he was taught the sentence, "Yuyuhuhumenya," he jokingly said, "This sentence can be read as "Yeyyuhumenya,"" Wang Hua replied, holding out his two small hands, "How can you joke about the name of elders? The wind on the grass must be wind, can it also be read as the wind of the grass must be uncle?

古文：何勖
现代文：何勖
English: What's up?

古文：宋江夏王义恭性爱古物，常遍就朝士求之。
现代文：南宋江夏人王义恭生性爱好古物，经常向所有在朝为官的人搜求。
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, Wang Yigong, a native of Jiangxia, had an affinity for antiquities and often searched for them from all officials in the court.

古文：侍中何勖已有所送，而王征索不已。
现代文：侍中何勖已经送给他一些古物了，但是王义恭还是向他不断地索要。
English: Waiter He Jun had already given him some antiques, but Wang Yikong kept asking him for more.

古文：何甚不平。
现代文：何勖感到很生气，对王义恭非常不满。
English: He Rong felt very angry and was very dissatisfied with Wang Yikong.

古文：尝出行，于道中见狗枷犊鼻。
现代文：一次，何勖外出，见道边有一只狗枷和一只牛鼻具丢弃在那儿。
English: Once, when he was out and about, he saw a dog leash and a cow's muzzle discarded on the side of the road.

古文：乃命左右取之还。
现代文：于是，让随行人员将这两件废弃物收起来。
English: So, he asked his entourage to collect the two pieces of waste.

古文：以箱擎送之。笺曰：承复须古物，今奉李斯狗枷，相如犊鼻。
现代文：回到京城后，何勖让人将这两件东西盛在一只箱子里，用手擎着送给王义恭，并写一便笺说：承你还须要古物，今奉上李斯狗枷、司马相如牛鼻具各一只，望收讫。
English: After returning to Beijing, he had someone put the two items in a box and hand-carried them to Wang Yigong, and wrote a note saying: "Since you still need antiques, I am now presenting you with a Li Si dog collar and a Sima Xiang cattle truncheon, and I hope you will accept them."

古文：谢灵运
现代文：谢灵运
English: Xie Lingyun

古文：宋会稽太守孟顗事佛精恳，谢灵运轻之。
现代文：南宋会稽郡太守孟顗供奉佛祖非常精诚恳切，谢灵运很是轻蔑他这样做。
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, Meng Qian, the county magistrate of the Southern Song Dynasty, was very sincere in offering Buddha, but Xie Lingyun despised him for doing so.

古文：谓顗曰：得道应须慧业，丈人生天当在灵运前，成佛必在灵运后。
现代文：对孟顗说：要修心得道，必须天生具备智慧的业缘。老太守升天当在灵运前边，修成佛一定在我灵运后边。
English: He said to Meng Xuan, "To cultivate a virtuous heart, you must be born with the karmic condition of wisdom. The old lady's ascension to heaven should be in front of my spiritual fortune, and cultivating into a Buddha must be behind my spiritual fortune.

古文：顗深恨之。
现代文：孟顗非常记恨谢灵运。
English: Meng Rong remembered Xie Lingyun very fondly.

古文：刘绘
现代文：刘绘
English: Liu Peng

古文：齐刘绘为南康郡，郡人郅类所居，名秽里。
现代文：南齐人刘绘，官为南康郡太守。郡里有个人叫郅类，他家住的地方叫秽里。
English: Liu Bing, a native of Nanqi, is the governor of Nankang County. There is a man in the county named Xingrui, and the place where he lives is called Zhuozhili.

古文：绘戏之曰：君有何秽，而居秽里。
现代文：刘绘戏谑地说：你有什么污秽，而居住在秽里？
English: Liu Ying said playfully: What filth do you have, while living in filth?

古文：答曰：未审孔丘何阙，而居阙里。
现代文：郅类反问道：我不知道孔老夫子缺少什么，而居阙里。
English: "I don't know what Kong Lao Fuzi is lacking, but I'm happy here.

古文：绘叹其辩答。
现代文：刘绘听了后，非常叹服郅类的辩才。
English: After listening to Liu Peng, he was very impressed with Zou's ability to argue.

古文：徐孝嗣
现代文：徐孝嗣
English: Xu Xiaoji

古文：齐仆射东海徐孝嗣修辑高座寺，多在彼宴息。
现代文：南齐仆射东海人徐孝嗣，出资重新整修了高座寺，多数时间吃住都在这座寺里。
English: Xu Xiaozhi, a native of Nanqi in the East China Sea, funded the renovation of Koza Temple, and spent most of his time eating and living in this temple.

古文：法云师亦萧寺日夕各游，二寺邻接，而不相往来。
现代文：法云禅师是萧寺的僧人。每天从早到晚，两人各自干自己的事情，两座寺院紧挨着，却互相不往来。
English: Every day from morning to night, the two of them do their own thing. The two temples are right next to each other, but they don't visit each other.

古文：孝嗣尝问法云曰：法师尝在高座，而不游高座寺。
现代文：一次徐孝嗣对法云禅帅说：法师您即然身在高座，为什么不来高座寺呢？
English: Once, Xu Xiaozhi said to Fa Yun Zenshuai: Master, since you are in Koza, why don't you come to Koza Temple?

古文：答曰：檀越既事萧门，何不至萧寺。
现代文：法云禅师回答说：施主既然在萧家，为什么不到萧寺来呢？
English: Fa Yun replied, "Since the benefactor is in the Xiao family, why doesn't he come to Xiao Temple?

古文：沈文季
现代文：沈文季
English: Shen Wenzhou

古文：齐太祖之为齐王也，置酒为乐。
现代文：南齐太祖萧道成被封为齐王时，摆设酒宴宴请群臣共同庆祝。
English: When Xiao Daocheng, the great ancestor of the Southern Qi Dynasty, was crowned as the king of Qi, he held a wine banquet and invited his ministers to celebrate together.

古文：清河崔思祖侍宴，谓侍中沈文季曰：羹脍为南北所推。
现代文：酒宴上，清河人崔思祖负责整个酒宴的安排布置。崔思祖问侍中沈文季：羹汤与鱼脍是南北都推重的佳肴吧？
English: At the wine banquet, Cui Szu, a Qinghe man, was responsible for the arrangement of the entire wine banquet. Cui Szu asked the waiter, Shen Wenzhi: Is the soup and fish stew a delicacy that is favored by both North and South?

古文：文季答曰：羹脍中乃是吴食，非卿所知。
现代文：沈文季回答说：羹汤与鱼脍都是吴地的菜肴，你不懂行。
English: Shen Wenzhi replied, "The soup and fish stew are both Wu dishes. You don't understand.

古文：思祖曰：炰鳖脍鲤，似非句吴之诗。
现代文：崔思祖说：蒸煮甲鱼脍制鲤鱼，好象不是吴人的诗句吧？
English: Cui Szu said, "Steamed turtle fish and pickled eel, it's like a poem from the Wu people, right?"

古文：文季曰：千里莼羹，岂关鲁卫之士。
现代文：沈文季回答说：莼羹是我们吴中千里地方的名菜，这跟你这个北边鲁、卫地方的人有什么关系？
English: Shen Wenzhi replied, "Yakitori soup is a famous dish in our region of Wuzhong and Qianli. What does this have to do with you, a person from the northern border regions of Lu and Wei?

古文：帝称美曰：莼羹颇须归沈。
现代文：齐太祖赞美说：莼羹这道名菜特别须要由沈侍中来安排啦！
English: Qi Taizu said in praise: "This famous dish of bean jelly must be specially arranged by Shen Zhanzhong!

古文：沈昭略
现代文：沈昭略
English: Shen Zhaoli

古文：齐黄门郎吴兴沈昭略，侍中文叔之子。
现代文：南齐黄门郎沈昭略，吴兴人，是侍中沈文叔的儿子。
English: Nanqi Huangmen Lang Shen Zhaoli, Wu Xingren, is the son of the chamberlain Shen Wenzhuo.

古文：性狂俊，使酒任气，朝士常惮而容之。
现代文：沈昭略为人狂放英武，在酒桌上往往随着兴志行事，不加约束自己，朝中的同事们常常都因畏惧而容忍他。
English: Shen Zhaoyu is a man of great courage. At the wine table, he often acts according to his interests and does not restrain himself. His colleagues in the imperial court often tolerate him out of fear.

古文：尝醉，负杖至芜湖苑，遇瑯玡王约。张目视之曰：汝王约耶，何肥而痴。
现代文：一次，沈昭略又喝醉了酒，手执一棍来到芜湘园林，遇见瑯玡人王约，瞪着眼睛盯盯地看着王约，说：你是王约吗？
English: Once, Shen Zhaoyu was drunk again, and he came to the Xiangyuan Garden with a stick in his hand. He met the Xiangyuan man Wang Yao. He stared at Wang Yao and said, "Are you Wang Yao?"

古文：约曰：汝是沈昭略耶，何瘦而狂。
现代文：为什么这么胖而又呆啊？王约回答说：你是沈昭略吗？为什么这么瘦而狂啊？
English: Why are you so fat and stupid? Wang You replied: Are you Shen Zhaoyuan? Why are you so thin and crazy?

古文：昭略抚掌大笑曰：瘦已胜肥，狂又胜痴。
现代文：沈昭略听了拍着手掌大笑，说：瘦比胖好，狂比呆好！
English: Shen Zhaoyu listened to the clapping of hands and laughed loudly, saying: "Thin is better than fat, crazy is better than stupid!"

古文：约，景文之子。
现代文：王约，王景文的儿子。
English: Wang Yao, the son of Wang Jingwen.

古文：胡谐之
现代文：胡谐之
English: by Hu谐之

古文：齐豫章胡谐之初为江州治中，太祖委任之。
现代文：南齐时，豫章人胡谐之刚任江州治中时，是齐太祖萧道成委任他这个官职的。
English: In the time of Nanqi, when Yu Zhangren Hu Junzhi was newly appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province, it was the great ancestor of Qi Xiao Daocheng who appointed him to this post.

古文：以其家人语傒，语音不正，乃遣宫内数人，至谐之家，教其子女。
现代文：齐太祖认为他的家人说九江、豫章一带的傒语，发音不正，于是派遣几个宫人到胡家教他的子女矫正口音。
English: Qi Taizu thought that his family spoke Jiujiang and Yuzhang slang, and the pronunciation was incorrect, so he sent several courtiers to the Hu family to teach his children to correct the accent.

古文：二年，上问之：卿家语音正未。
现代文：二年后，齐太祖问胡谐之：你家子女的口音矫正过来没有啊？
English: Two years later, Qi Taizu asked Hu Junzhi: Have your children's accents been corrected?

古文：答曰：宫人少，臣家人多。非惟不能正音，遂使宫人顿傒语。
现代文：胡谐之回答说：宫里去的人少，我家人多，不但没有矫正过来我家里人的口音，还使皇上派去的宫人都染上了傒语呢！
English: Hujin replied, "Few people go to the Imperial Palace, but my family members do. Not only did they not correct the accents of my family members, but they also caused the people from the Imperial Palace sent by the Emperor to be infected with slang!

古文：上大笑；遍向朝臣说之。
现代文：齐太祖听了哈哈大笑，见着上朝的大臣就讲这件事。
English: Qi Taizu laughed out loud when he heard this, and when he saw the minister from the previous dynasty, he told him about it.

古文：谐之历位度支尚书预州刺史。
现代文：胡谐之历任掌管国家财政的宰相，预州刺史等职。
English: Hu Harmonie's successive chancellors in charge of national finance, prefectural governor and other posts.

古文：梁武
现代文：梁武
English: Liang Wu

古文：梁高祖尝作五字垒韵曰：后牖有榴柳。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍有一次作五字叠韵，即说出的一句话，必须是五个字，而且用同一韵母，还要有明确的含义。梁为帝先得一句是：后牖有榴柳。
English: Liangwu Emperor Xiaoyan once made a five-character compound rhyme, that is, a sentence must be five words, and with the same rhyme, it must also have a clear meaning.

古文：命朝士并作。
现代文：之后，让殿上的群臣跟他一块作。
English: After that, he asked the courtiers in the palace to work with him.

古文：刘孝绰曰：梁王长康强。
现代文：刘孝绰作的是： 梁王长康强。
English: Liu Xiao's best work is: "Liang Wang Chang Kang Qiang."

古文：沈约曰：偏眠船舷边。
现代文：沈约作的是：偏眠船舷边。
English: What Shen agreed to do is: move the sleeping ship's side.

古文：庾肩吾曰：载七每碍埭。
现代文：庾肩吾作的是：载七每碍埭。
English: What I've done is: I've done everything.

古文：徐摛曰：臣昨祭禹庙，残六斛熟鹿肉。
现代文：徐摛作的是： 臣昨祭禹庙， 残六斛熟鹿肉。
English: Xu Yao's creations are: Yesterday's offerings to Yu Miao, and the remaining six pieces of cooked venison.

古文：何逊用曹瞒故事曰：暯苏姑枯卢。
现代文：何逊用曹瞒的典故，作的是： 暯苏姑枯庐。 
English: Using an allusion from Cao Zhe, he wrote: 苏姑枯.

古文：吴均沈思良久，竟无所言。
现代文：挨到吴均作了，他沉思了好长时间，也没有作出来。
English: When Wu Jun was asked to do it, he pondered for a long time, but was unable to do it.

古文：高祖愀然不悦，俄有诏曰：吴均不均，何逊不逊，宜付廷尉。
现代文：梁武帝闷闷不乐，不一会儿，下达指示说：吴均不均，何逊不逊，适宜交付廷尉治罪。
English: Emperor Liangwu was sullen and unhappy. Soon, he issued an instruction saying, "Wu Jun is not equal, he is not inferior, it is appropriate to hand him over to a courtier for punishment."

古文：柳信言
现代文：柳信言
English: Nobuchika Yanagi

古文：梁安城王萧佽博学，善属文。天保之朝，为一代文宗，专掌词令沈博。
现代文：南梁安城人王萧佽知识渊博，擅长写文章，孝文帝天保年间，在朝中为一代文章泰斗，专门从事诗词写作。
English: Wang Xiaohui, a native of Nanliang'an City, was very knowledgeable and good at writing articles. During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he was one of the most prolific writers in the dynasty, specializing in poetry.

古文：历侍中仆射尚书令，有集三十卷，著梁史百卷。
现代文：他的文章、诗词、渊深广博。王萧佽官任侍中仆射尚书令，出有文集三十卷，另外撰写梁史一百卷。
English: His articles and poems are profound and wide-ranging. Wang Xiao, who served as an attendant to the eunuch, wrote 30 volumes of anthologies and another 100 volumes of Liang Shi.

古文：初佽以文词擅名，所敌拟者，唯河东柳信言。
现代文：王萧佽刚刚闻名于文坛时，能够跟他匹敌的人，只有河东柳信言。
English: When Wang Xiaohui was just famous in the literary world, the only person who could match him was Hedong Liu Xunyan.

古文：然柳内虽不伏，而莫与抗。
现代文：然而，柳信言虽然内心不服气，却不敢跟王萧佽相抗衡。
English: However, although Liu Xunyan was not convinced, he did not dare to compete with Wang Xiaohui.

古文：及闻佽卒，时为吏部尚书。宾客候之，见其屈一脚跳，连称曰：独步来，独步来。
现代文：等到听到王萧佽死讯时，已任吏部尚书的柳信言，赶到灵堂，蜷屈着一条腿，一只脚蹦跳着闯进来，在众多的宾客面前连连呼喊着：独一无二来！独一无二来！
English: When he heard the news of Wang Xiaohui's death, Liu Xinyan, who had been appointed as the head of the cadre department of Shangshu, rushed to the chapel, curled up on one leg, jumped on one foot to break in, and shouted in front of many guests: Come unique! Come unique!

古文：众宾皆舞，以为笑乐。
现代文：众位宾客都学着柳信言的样子，一起拍手跳跃，以此来嬉闹玩乐。
English: The guests all clapped their hands and jumped up and down together, imitating Liu Xunyan's movements.

古文：徐摛
现代文：徐摛
English: Xu Jun

古文：梁侍中东海徐摛，散骑常侍超之子也。
现代文：南梁侍中徐摛，东海郡人，散骑常侍徐超的儿子。
English: Nanliang attendant Xu Yao, from Donghai County, is the son of straggler attendant Xu Chao.

古文：博学多才，好为新变，不拘旧体。
现代文：徐摛多才多艺、知识渊博，喜爱独出新彩，不拘泥于原有的体例、样子。
English: Xu Wei is multi-talented, knowledgeable, likes unique new colors, and does not stick to the original style and appearance.

古文：常体一人病痈曰：朱血夜流，黄脓昼泻。斜看紫肺，正视红肝。
现代文：一次，徐摛看到一个人长痈，说：红血夜间流淌，黄脓白天泄出，斜着看是紫色的肺子，正面看是红色的肝。
English: Once, Xu Yao saw a man with a long beard and said: red blood flows at night, jaundice leaks out during the day, purple lungs are seen obliquely, and red liver is seen frontally.

古文：又曰：户上悬帘，明知是箔。
现代文：又说：门上挂着帘子，明知道那是苇杆编的么。
English: He also said: There is a curtain hanging on the door, do you know that it is made of rattan?

古文：鱼游畏网，判是见罾。
现代文：鱼在水中游，最怕遇到网，断定见到的是用竹竿撑起来的罾。
English: The fish swam in the water, most afraid of encountering the net, and concluded that what they saw was a cormorant propped up with a bamboo pole.

古文：又曰：状非快马，蹋脚相连。席异儒生，带经长卧。
现代文：又说：看那样子不是快马，前后蹄子踏动相连，躺在席上的不是读书人，是带着四书五经长卧在那儿的人。
English: He also said, "Look, that's not a fast horse. The hooves of the front and back are connected. It's not a reader lying on the seat. It's a person lying there with four books and five scriptures.

古文：摛子陵，通直散骑常侍。
现代文：徐摛的另一个儿子徐陵，跟徐摛同任散骑常侍。
English: Xu Rong's other son, Xu Ling, served as a straggler with Xu Rong.

古文：聘魏。
现代文：徐陵被北魏聘请去。
English: Xu Ling was hired by the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏主客魏收曰：今日之热，当犹徐常侍来。
现代文：北魏的主客官魏收说：今天天气特别热，当是徐常侍从南边带来的啊！
English: Wei Rui, chief guest officer of the Northern Wei Dynasty, said: "Today's weather is particularly hot. It must have been brought by Xu Changzhu from the south!"

古文：陵答曰：昔王肃至此，为魏始制礼仪。
现代文：徐陵回答说：从前王肃到这儿来为你们魏国首次制定了礼仪。
English: Xuling replied, "Before Wang Su came here, he established the etiquette for you for the first time in Wei.

古文：今我来聘，使卿复知寒暑。
现代文：今天，你们请我来，就是让我使你们知道寒暑。
English: Today, you have invited me here so that I can tell you about the cold and the heat.

古文：收不能对。
现代文：魏收对答上不上来。
English: Wei Jie did not come up with the answer.

古文：徐陵
现代文：徐陵
English: Xuling

古文：北齐使来聘梁。
现代文：北齐派使臣来南梁出访。
English: Northern Qi sent envoys to visit Nanliang.

古文：访东河徐陵春，和者曰：小如来五岁，大孔子三年，谓七十五也。
现代文：来使查访东海人徐陵春，回答他的人说：你问徐陵春啊，他比如来佛小五岁，比孔子早生三年，大概七十五岁了吧。
English: The person who answered him said, "Ask Xu Lingchun, he is five years younger than Confucius, was born three years earlier than Confucius, and is about seventy-five years old.

古文：李谐
现代文：李谐
English: Li Jing

古文：梁陆晏子聘魏，魏遣李谐效劳。
现代文：南梁派陆晏子出访北魏，北魏派遣大臣李谐到郊外来迎接、慰劳他。
English: Nan Liang sent Lu Xunzi to visit the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Minister Li Jing to the suburbs to meet and comfort him.

古文：过朝歌城，晏子曰：殷之余人，正应在此。
现代文：走过殷旧都朝歌城时，陆晏子说：殷朝的遗民，正应当在这儿。
English: When he walked through the ancient Yin Dynasty Song City, Lu Xunzi said: The remnants of the Yin Dynasty should be here.

古文：谐曰：永嘉南度，尽在江外。
现代文：李谐反唇相讥道：永嘉之乱晋朝迁都江南后，殷朝的遗民都随着迁到江南去了。
English: Li Jing retorted with sarcasm: After the Yongjia Rebellion, the Jin Dynasty moved its capital to the south of the Yangtze River, and the remnants of the Yin Dynasty moved to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：周舍
现代文：周舍
English: Zhou She

古文：梁汝南周舍少好学，有才辩。
现代文：南梁时，汝南人周舍小时候就刻苦好学，赋有才辩。
English: When he was a child in Nanliang, Zhou She, a native of Yunnan, was eager to learn and gifted at debate.

古文：顾谐被使高丽，以海路艰，问于舍。
现代文：顾谐被派往出使高丽国，他认为海路难走，于是向周舍请教。
English: Gu Hani was sent as an envoy to Korea. He thought the sea route was difficult, so he asked Zhou She for advice.

古文：舍曰：昼则揆日而行，夜则考星而泊。
现代文：周舍说：白天测量太阳，晚上考核北斗星的位置来行船。
English: Zhou She said: "Measure the sun during the day, and check the position of the Big Dipper at night to sail.

古文：海大便是安流，从风不足为远。
现代文：海大都是平稳的水流，只要随着风向航行，到达高丽国的路程并不算太遥远。
English: Most of the sea is a smooth current, so as long as you sail with the wind, the journey to Korea is not too far away.

古文：河东裴子野在晏筵，谓宾僚曰：后事未尝姜食。
现代文：河东人裴子野也在宴席上，对同席的宾客、同事们说：后果未尝怎么样呢。
English: At the banquet, Peizhino, a person from the east of the river, also said to the guests and colleagues at the same table: What are the consequences?

古文：舍曰：孔称不彻，裴曰未尝。
现代文：周舍说：孔子说不撤，裴子野说未尝啊！
English: Zhou She said, "Confucius said not to retreat, Peizhino said not to retreat!"

古文：一座皆笑。
现代文：满座人都笑了。
English: The entire auditorium burst into laughter.

古文：舍学通内外，兼有口才。
现代文：周舍有学识，通晓佛经和佛经以外的典籍，还能言善辩很有口才。
English: Zhou She has knowledge, is familiar with Buddhist scriptures and other classics, and can also speak well and is very eloquent.

古文：谓沙门法云师曰：孔子不饮盗泉之水。法师何以捉鍮石香炉？
现代文：一次，周舍戏谑僧人法云禅师说：孔夫子不喝盗泉里的水，法师为是着一只鍮石香炉？
English: On one occasion, Zhou Xie made fun of the monk Fa Yun, saying: Confucius did not drink the water from the stolen spring. Was the master holding a brass and stone incense burner?

古文：答曰：檀越既能戴纛，贫道何为不执鍮。
现代文：法云禅师回答道：施主既然能举着大纛，贫僧为什么不能执鍮呢？
English: Fa Yun replied, "Since the benefactor can hold the gong, why can't the poor monk hold the brass?"

古文：王琳
现代文：王琳
English: Wang Lin

古文：后梁王琳，明帝时为中书舍人。
现代文：南朝后梁王琳，在明帝时官任中书舍人。
English: After the Southern Dynasty, Liang Wanglin was appointed as the official in charge of the book collection in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：博学，有才藻，好臧否人物，众畏其口，常拟孔稚珪。
现代文：王琳知识渊博，赋有才华文采，尤其愿意品评、褒贬人物，满朝文武官员都畏惧他那张嘴，常常将他比作南齐的孔稚珪。
English: Wang Lin was very knowledgeable and gifted in literature. He was especially willing to comment on and praise and criticize figures. Throughout the dynasties, literary and military officials were afraid of his mouth, often comparing him to Confucius of the Southern Qi Dynasty.

古文：又为《鮔表》，以讬刺当时。
现代文：王琳又曾撰写过《鮔表》，借以讽刺当时的时弊。
English: Wang Lin had also written "The Clock" to satirize the contemporary ills.

古文：其词曰：臣鳀言，伏见除书，以臣为糁蒸将军，油蒸校尉，臞州刺史。
现代文：《鮔表》是这样写的：臣鮔鱼说：今见到陛下签发的任命令，授我为朱羹将军，油蒸校尉、肉羹刺史。
English: "Cormorant Table" is written like this: Minister Cormorant said: "I have just seen the appointment order issued by His Majesty, awarding me the title of Zhuyun general, oil steaming lieutenant, and meat stew stabbing history.

古文：脯腊如故者，肃承明命，灰身屏息，凭临鼎镬，俯仰兢惧。
现代文：和从前一样，将我制做成干肉。我恭敬地接受陛下的任命，忍含着沮丧，屏住呼吸，任凭你们将我放在笼屉上蒸，或者放在鼎镬里煮，每时每刻都胆战心惊啊！
English: I humbly accept Your Majesty's appointment, holding my breath in frustration, letting you steam me on a cage drawer, or boil me in a pot, and trembling with fear every moment!

古文：臣闻高沙走姬，非有意于绮罗。白鮹女儿，岂期心于珠翠。
现代文：我听说高秀湖中的美人鱼们，并不想得到陛下赏赐给她们绫罗绸锦；鱿河里的白鮹女儿们，怎么能期望得到珍珠翠玉呢？
English: I've heard that the mermaids in Gaoxiu Lake don't want to receive the pearls that His Majesty bestows on them; how can the egrets' daughters in the Fen River expect to receive the jade pearls?

古文：臣美愧夏鳣，味惭冬鲤。
现代文：比肥美，我愧对夏天里的鲟鱼；论味鲜，我羞见冬季里的鲤鱼。
English: Compared with the fat and beautiful, I am ashamed of the carp in the summer; on the delicious, I am ashamed of the carp in the winter.

古文：常恐鲐腹之讥，惧贻鳖岩之谓。
现代文：我常常恐惧鲐腹的讽刺，时时畏怕鳖岩的讥诮。
English: I often fear the sarcasm of the scoffers, and always dread the mockery of the scoffers.

古文：是以漱流湖底，枕石泥中。
现代文：因此，我吮吸湖底的流沙为食，枕着石泥睡眠。
English: Therefore, I suck the quicksand at the bottom of the lake for food and sleep with a pillow of stone mud.

古文：不意高赏殊宏，曲蒙钧拔，遂得起升绮席，忝预玉盘。
现代文：不料，崇高的奖赏光临我的头顶，承蒙提拔，于是高升到美席华宴上，羞愧地躺在玉盘中。
English: Unexpectedly, a lofty reward came to my head, I was promoted, and then I was elevated to the beautiful banquet, lying shamefully in the jade plate.

古文：爰厕玳筵，猥烦象筋。泽覃紫腴，恩加黄腹。
现代文：于是，摆放在华贵的筵席上，有劳象筷大人，将我们送入每一张肥大的嘴中，进入布满黄油的肚子里。
English: And so, placed on a sumptuous banquet table, the laborious adults, like chopsticks, send us into every fat mouth, into a belly full of butter.

古文：方当鸣姜动桂，纡苏佩檔。
现代文：刚刚放上姜末桂皮，再置入紫苏桂皮。
English: Just put the ginger foam cinnamon rind, and then put in the purple jujube.

古文：轻瓢才动，则枢槊如云。浓汁暂停，则兰膏成列。
现代文：轻便的葫瓢刚动，则枢盘如云一样地聚来；浓浓的汤汁才停止沸腾，一排排的兰膏油灯就点燃起来。
English: As soon as the light crucible moves, the central disc gathers like a cloud; only then does the thick soup stop boiling and the rows of lanterns are lit.

古文：婉转绿齑之中，逍遥朱唇之内。
现代文：于是，我们周旋在绿色的腌菜之间，逍遥于红色的口唇之内。
English: Thus, we circled among the green leeks, lingering in the red lips.

古文：衔恩噬泽，九殒弗辞。
现代文：含着你们的恩惠，噬啮你们的德泽，虽然九死而不辞。
English: Carrying your bounty, eating your bounty, even if they die, they will not give up.

古文：不任屏营之至，谨到铜铛门奉表以闻。
现代文：没有感到任何彷徨、惶恐，只是谨慎小心地走入铜釜之门，奉上此表以致谢意。
English: I didn't feel any hesitation or fear, I just cautiously and carefully walked into the door of the copper kettle and presented this watch to express my gratitude.

古文：诏答曰：省表是公。
现代文：陛下回书答道：奉上的表章，我已全部读过。
English: In reply, His Majesty replied: "I have read all the inscriptions.

古文：卿池沼缙绅，波渠后又。
现代文：爱卿乃是池沼中的晋绅，岸渠里的俊杰。
English: Aicheng is the gentleman in the pond and the young man in the canal.

古文：穿蒲入符，肥滑系彰。
现代文：你穿行于蒲荇之间，以肥嫩滑腻而闻名于人世。
English: You walk among the cattails and are famous for being a fat, slippery cucumber.

古文：正膺兹选，无劳谢也。
现代文：正应当接受我们人的挑选，请不用表示谢意。
English: You should accept our choice, and please don't thank us.

古文：时恶之，或以讥诮闻，孝明亦弗之罪也。
现代文：当时的达官贵人们，都非常厌恶王琳写这篇《鮔表》。有人相互边讥讽这篇《鮔表》边传播议论。
English: The high-ranking officials and dignitaries at that time were very disgusted with Wang Lin's writing of this "Diamond Table." Some people ridiculed this "Diamond Table" while spreading the discussion.

古文：其文传于江表。
现代文：这篇《鮔表》，在江南一带广为流传。
English: This copy of the "Diamond Watch" has been widely circulated in the south of the Yangtze River.

