古文：黄宗载，一名垕，字厚夫，丰城人。
现代文：黄宗载，一名篨，字厚夫，丰城人。
English: Huang Zongzai, a middle-aged man, surnamed Houfu, from Fengcheng.

古文：洪武三十年进士。授行人。
现代文：洪武三十年，中进士，后被授予行人。
English: Hongwu thirty years, junior high school graduate, was later awarded a pedestrian.

古文：奉使四方，未尝受馈遗，累迁司正。
现代文：他奉命出使四方时，从没有接受馈赠，累升为司正。
English: When he was ordered to dispatch the Quartet, he never accepted gifts, and he was promoted to the position of secretary-general.

古文：永乐初，以荐为湖广按察司佥事。
现代文：永乐初年，他被推荐任为湖广按察司佥事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was recommended to be appointed as the inspector of Hukang.

古文：巨奸宿猾多谪戍铜鼓、五开间，阴持官吏短长。
现代文：巨奸宿猾之徒，多被贬戍到铜鼓、五开之间，暗中把持官吏生杀之权。
English: The most treacherous and cunning criminals were usually relegated to the bronze drum or the fifth rank, and secretly held the power to kill or spare the lives of officials.

古文：宗载榜数其罪，曰： 不改，必置之法。 
现代文：宗载放榜历数他们的罪行，说： 如果不改，一定要依法处治。 
English: "If they don't change, they must be dealt with according to the law," he said, listing their crimes.

古文：众莫敢犯。
现代文：众人不敢违抗。
English: No one dared to resist.

古文：武陵多戎籍，民家虑与为婚姻徭赋将累己。男女至年四十尚不婚。
现代文：武陵多军籍，百姓家庭担心与他们联姻，徭役赋税将转到自己身上，所以男女到了四十岁还不婚嫁。
English: Wuling has a large number of military personnel, and people's families are worried about marrying them, and the tax on military service will be transferred to themselves, so men and women are still not married at the age of forty.

古文：宗载以理谕之，皆解悟，一时婚者三百余家。
现代文：宗载以理劝说他们，他们都领悟了，一时结婚的有三百余家。
English: Zong Zai Er persuaded them, and they all understood that there were more than three hundred families who got married at the same time.

古文：邻邑效之，其俗遂变。
现代文：邻县也仿效，风俗遂变。
English: Neighbouring counties also followed suit, and the custom eventually changed.

古文：征诣文渊阁修《永乐大典》。
现代文：皇上征他到文渊阁修《永乐大典》。
English: He was summoned by the emperor to go to Wenyuan Pavilion to revise the "Perpetual Great Music."

古文：书成，受赐还任。
现代文：书成之后，他得到赏赐，回到任上。
English: After the book was completed, he was rewarded and returned to his post.

古文：董造海运巨舰数十艘，事办而民不扰。
现代文：后来他总管制造海运巨舰数十艘，事情办成了而百姓并没有受到骚扰。
English: Later, he oversaw the construction of dozens of huge ocean-going ships, and the work was completed without the people being harassed.

古文：车驾北征，征兵湖广，使者贪暴失期。
现代文：皇上车驾北征时，向湖广征兵，使者因贪婪凶暴而误了期限。
English: When the emperor was driving north to recruit soldiers for the Hukang Expedition, the emissary missed the deadline due to greed and violence.

古文：宗载坐不举劾，谪杨青驿驿夫。
现代文：宗载因不弹劾，被贬为扬青驿驿夫。
English: For not impeaching Zongzai, he was relegated to the role of Yang Qing's widower.

古文：寻起御史，出按交阯。
现代文：不久起用他为御史，出去按察交趾。
English: He soon began to use him as his historian and went out to investigate.

古文：时交阯新定，州县官多用两广、云南举人及岁贡生员之愿仕远方者，皆不善抚字。
现代文：当时交趾刚被平定，州县官员多用两广、云南的举人以及愿意往远方任官的岁贡生员，他们都不善于安抚。
English: At that time, the Jiaozi had just been pacified, and the state and county officials mostly used people from the two Guangxi provinces and Yunnan, as well as the year-old tributary students who were willing to serve as officials in distant places. They were not good at appeasing.

古文：宗载因言： 有司率不称职。
现代文：宗载于是说： 有关官员都不称职。
English: Zongzai then said: The officials involved are incompetent.

古文：若俟九年黜陟，恐益废弛。
现代文：如果等九年以后再废黜，恐怕政治会更加废弛。
English: If he waits nine years before stepping down, I'm afraid politics will become even more boring.

古文：请任二年以上者，巡按御史及两司核实举按以闻。 
现代文：请求对任职二年以上者，巡按御史和布政、按察二司调查核实上报。 
English: Requested that those who have been in office for more than two years should be investigated, verified and reported to the Inspector-General of History and Government, and the Second Division of the Inspectorate.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：皇上赞同他的意见。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：及归，行李萧然，不携交阯一物。
现代文：他回来后，行李萧然，不带交趾一物。
English: When he returned, his luggage was empty and he had nothing with him.

古文：尚书黄福语人曰： 吾居此久，所接御史多矣，惟宗载知大体。 
现代文：尚书黄福对人说 ：我在这住了那么久，所接的御史多了，只有宗载识大体。 
English: Shangshu Huangfu said to people: I have lived here for so long, I have received a lot of history, but I only have a general knowledge of history.

古文：丁祖母忧，起复，改詹事府丞。
现代文：遭祖母丧，他被召回任事，改为詹事府丞。
English: After his grandmother's death, he was recalled to his post and changed his title to Zhan Shifu Zheng.

古文：洪熙元年擢行在吏部侍郎。
现代文：洪熙元年，他升为行在吏部侍郎。
English: In the first year of Hong Hei, he was promoted to the rank of attendant in the cadre department.

古文：少师蹇义领部事，宗载一辅以正。
现代文：少师蹇义管吏部事，宗载都公正地辅助他。
English: The junior master, Zou Yi, was in charge of the administrative department, and Zong Zai assisted him impartially.

古文：宣德元年奉命清军浙江。
现代文：宣德元年，他奉命到浙江清军。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, he was ordered to join the Qing army in Zhejiang.

古文：三年督采木湖湘。
现代文：三年，他到湖南总督采木。
English: Three years later, he went to the Governor of Hunan Province to collect wood.

古文：英宗初，以侍郎罗汝敬巡抚陕西，坐事戴罪办事。
现代文：英宗初年，侍郎罗汝敬巡抚陕西，犯有过失戴罪办事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Luo Rujing, the governor of Shaanxi Province, was found guilty of negligence.

古文：汝敬妄引诏书复职，而吏部不言，为御史所劾，宗载及尚书郭琎俱下狱。
现代文：罗汝敬妄引诏书内容而复职，吏部却不指出，被御史弹劾，宗载和尚书郭都被投进监狱。
English: Luo Ru Jing was reinstated for arrogantly quoting the content of the edict, but the cadre department did not point out that he was impeached by the imperial historian, and all the monks and priests were thrown into prison.

古文：未几，得释，迁南京吏部尚书。
现代文：不久，获释，升为南京吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was released and promoted to the post of Nanjing Librarian.

古文：居九年，乞休，章四上，乃许。
现代文：过了九年，他请求退休。他上了四篇奏章，才被批准。
English: After nine years, he asked to retire, and it took him four symphonies before he was allowed to.

古文：九年七月卒于家，年七十九。
现代文：九年七月，他于家中去世，终年七十九岁。
English: In July 1997, he passed away at home, at the age of 79.

古文：宗载持廉守正，不矫不随，学问文章俱负时望。
现代文：宗载持廉守正，不假托不顺从，学问和文章都负时望。
English: Zongzai upholds honesty and integrity, does not pretend and does not obey, and his scholarship and articles are in line with the times.

古文：公卿大夫齿德之盛，推宗载云。
现代文：公卿大夫谈到盛德之人时，都推崇宗载。
English: When the noble doctor talked about the people of Shengde, they all respected Zongzai.

古文：顾佐，字礼卿，太康人。
现代文：顾佐，字礼卿，太康人。
English: Gu Zi, Zi Li Jing, Tai Kang Ren.

古文：建文二年进士。
现代文：建文二年，中进士。
English: Jianwen 2nd year, junior high school graduate.

古文：除庄浪知县。
现代文：被授予庄浪知县。
English: It was awarded to Zhuanglang County.

古文：端阳日，守将集官僚校射。以佐文士，难之。
现代文：端午之日，守将集合官僚校尉，因顾佐是文士，便故意为难他。
English: On the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, the shogun gathered the bureaucratic school lieutenants, and because Guzo was a scribe, he deliberately embarrassed him.

古文：持弓矢一发而中，守将大服。
现代文：顾佐拿起弓箭一发中的，守将大服。
English: Guza picked up his bow and arrow and fired a single shot. The guard was in full dress.

古文：永乐初，入为御史。
现代文：永乐初年，他入京任御史。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he went to Beijing to serve as imperial historian.

古文：七年，成祖在北京，命吏部选御史之才者赴行在，佐预焉。
现代文：七年，成祖在北京，命吏部选有才华的御史赴行在所，顾佐被选上了。
English: In the seventh year, when Cheng Zu was in Beijing, the Ministry of Justice selected a talented historian to travel to the institute, and Gu Zuo was selected.

古文：奉命招庆远蛮。督采木四川。从北征，巡视关隘。
现代文：他奉命招抚庆远府蛮人，到四川总督采运木材，随从北征，巡视关隘。
English: He was ordered to appease the barbarians in Qingyuan, to collect and transport timber to the governor of Sichuan, to follow the Northern Expedition, and to inspect Guanxi.

古文：迁江西按察副使，召为应天尹。
现代文：升为江西按察副使，又被召回任应天府尹。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of the Jiangxi Provincial Party Committee, and was recalled to Yingtianfu Yin.

古文：刚直不挠，吏民畏服，人比之包孝肃。
现代文：他刚直不挠，吏民敬畏而服从，把他比作包孝肃。
English: He is upright and tenacious, and the officials and the people fear and obey him. He is likened to Bao Xiaoshu.

古文：北京建，改尹顺天。
现代文：定都北京后，他改任顺天府尹。
English: After Beijing was designated as the capital, he changed his post to Shun Tianfu Yin.

古文：权贵人多不便之，出为贵州按察使。
现代文：权贵人物觉得他在任不方便，命他出任贵州按察使。
English: An influential person found it inconvenient for him to remain in office and ordered him to serve as Guizhou's deputy inspector general.

古文：洪熙元年召为通政使。
现代文：洪熙元年，他被召回任通政使。
English: In the first year of Hong Hei, he was recalled to serve as the chief political envoy.

古文：宣德三年，都御史刘观以贪被黜，大学士杨士奇、杨荣荐佐公廉有威，历官并著风采，为京尹，政清弊革。
现代文：宣德三年，都御史刘观因贪污被撤职，大学士杨士奇、杨荣推荐顾佐，说他公正廉洁而有威望，所任过的官都有风采，任京尹时，政治清明，弊病尽革。
English: In the third year of Xuande, Liu Guan, the governor of the capital, was removed from office for corruption. Yang Shichi and Yang Rong, university scholars, recommended Gu Zuo, saying that he was fair and honest and had prestige. The officials he had appointed had style. When he was appointed as Beijing Yin, his politics were clear and his ills were completely cured.

古文：帝喜，立擢右都御史，赐敕奖勉。命察诸御史不称者黜之，御史有缺，举送吏部补选。
现代文：皇上很高兴，立即升他为右都御史，并赐给敕书奖励劝勉，命他考察各个御史，有不称职的将其撤职，如果御史出缺，他可保举人员送吏部补选。
English: The emperor was very pleased and immediately promoted him to the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and gave him a letter of encouragement and exhortation. He ordered him to inspect each Imperial Historian and remove those who were incompetent. If there was a vacancy in the Imperial Historian's post, he could guarantee that the person would be sent to the Personnel Department for by-election.

古文：佐视事，即奏黜严暟、杨居正等二十人，谪辽东各卫为吏，降八人，罢三人；而举进士邓棨、国子生程富、谒选知县孔文英、教官方瑞等四十余人堪任御史。
现代文：顾佐刚上任，即上奏废黜了严日岂、杨居正等二十人，把他们贬到辽东各卫为吏，还有八人被降职，三人被罢免；然后他推举可以担任御史的进士邓荣、国子生程富、在京候选的知县孔文英、教官方瑞等四十余人。
English: As soon as Gu Zuo took office, he dismissed twenty people including Yan Rong, Yang Jizheng and others, and demoted them to the Liaodong Guards as officials. Eight people were demoted, and three people were dismissed. Then, he selected more than forty people including Jin Shi Deng Rong, Guo Zi Sheng Fu, Zhixian Kong Wen Ying and Jiaojing Rui, who could serve as imperial historian, and Zhixian Kong Wen Ying and Jiaojing Rui, who were candidates in Beijing.

古文：帝使历政三月而后任之。
现代文：皇上让他们先干三个月然后再任用他们。
English: The emperor asked them to work for three months before appointing them.

古文：居正等六人辨诉。
现代文：杨居正等六人上书辩诉。
English: Yang Ju Zheng and six others filed a written appeal.

古文：帝怒，并诸为吏者悉戍之。
现代文：皇上大怒，将那些被贬为吏的人一并发去戍边。
English: The emperor flew into a rage and sent all those who had been reduced to officials to the countryside.

古文：既而暟自戍所潜还京，胁他贿，为佐所奏，且言暟谋害己。
现代文：后来严日岂从戍守之地偷偷跑回京师，以别的贿赂相威胁，被顾佐上奏揭发，并说严日岂图谋陷害他。
English: Later, Yan Rong secretly ran back to Beijing Division from the garrison and threatened with another bribe, which was exposed by Gu Zhaoxiao and said that Yan Rong was plotting to frame him.

古文：诏戮暟于市。
现代文：诏令将严日岂押到市场诛杀。
English: The imperial edict urged the soldiers to go to the market and fight.

古文：帝北巡，命偕尚书张本等居守。
现代文：皇上北巡时，命顾佐偕同尚书张本等人留守。
English: When the emperor was on a tour of the north, Mokuku Sasaki, Shojo Zhangmoto and others stayed behind.

古文：还复赐敕。令约束诸御史。
现代文：皇上回来后又赐给他敕书，令他约束各个御史。
English: After the emperor's return, he also gave him an imperial edict, ordering him to restrict all imperial histories.

古文：于是纠黜贪纵，朝纲肃然。
现代文：于是他纠察罢黜贪婪骄纵之徒，朝纲肃然。
English: As a result, he picketed and ousted the greedy and self-indulgent people, and the choshanga was stunned.

古文：居岁余，奸吏奏佐受隶金，私遣归。
现代文：过了一年多，奸吏上奏顾佐接受隶役金钱，私自将其遣送回去。
English: After more than a year, the ruffian sent Gu Zuo back to China after accepting money for his services.

古文：帝密示士奇曰： 尔不尝举佐廉乎？ 
现代文：皇上偷偷把这奏章命给杨士奇看，说： 你不是曾经保举顾佐廉洁吗？ 
English: The emperor secretly showed the piece to Yang Shiqui and said, "Didn't you once protect Gu Zuoren?

古文：对曰： 中朝官俸薄，仆马薪刍资之隶，遣隶半使出资免役。
现代文：杨士奇说 ：中朝官俸禄微薄，童仆马匹薪炭草料，都由隶役供给，所以送一半隶役，让他们出资免役，这样隶役得以回去耕作，官家得资费。
English: Yang Shichi said: The official salaries of the Chinese and Korean dynasties were meager, and the servants, horses, salaries, charcoal and grass were all supplied by the subordinates, so they sent half to the subordinates and let them invest and be exempted from service. In this way, the subordinates could go back to farming, and the officials could earn money.

古文：隶得归耕，官得资费，中朝官皆然，臣亦然。先帝知之，故增中朝官俸。 
现代文：中朝官都这么做，臣也是。先帝知道这一点，所以增加了中朝官俸禄。 
English: Chinese and Korean officials did the same, and so did vassals. The former emperor knew this, so he increased the salary of Chinese and Korean officials.

古文：帝叹曰： 朝臣贫如此。 
现代文：皇上叹道 ：朝臣竟这么贫穷。 
English: The Emperor sighed, "A courtier is so poor.

古文：因怒诉者曰： 朕方用佐，小人敢诬之，必下法司治！ 
现代文：便怒叱投诉的人说 ：我正任用顾佐，小人敢诬陷他，一定要交给法司治罪。 
English: He then angrily scolded the complainant, saying, "I am appointing Gu Zuo. If a villain dares to frame him, he must be handed over to the chief justice to be punished."

古文：士奇对曰： 细事不足干上怒。 
现代文：杨士奇说 ：小事不足以让皇上动怒。 
English: Yang Shichi said, "Small things are not enough to make the emperor angry."

古文：帝乃以吏状付佐曰： 汝自治之。 
现代文：皇上于是把该官吏的奏章交给顾佐，说： 你自己处治。 
English: The emperor then handed the official's report to Gu Zuo and said, "You deal with it yourself."

古文：佐顿首谢，召吏言： 上命我治汝，汝改行，吾当贷汝。 
现代文：顾佐叩头致谢。他把那位官员召来说 ：皇上命我处治你，汝改掉品行，我就宽贷你。 
English: Gu Zuo bowed his head in thanks. He summoned the official and said, "The emperor has ordered me to deal with you. If you change your behavior, I will give you a lenient loan."

古文：帝闻之益喜，谓佐得大体。
现代文：皇上听说后更加高兴，觉得顾佐得大体。
English: The Emperor was even more pleased when he heard about this, and felt that Guzade was generally a good person.

古文：或告佐不理冤诉。
现代文：有人告顾佐不处理冤诉。
English: Some people have accused Gu Zuo of not handling grievances.

古文：帝曰： 此必重囚教之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：这一定是犯了重罪的人教他这么干。 
English: The emperor said, "This must have been taught to him by someone who has committed a serious crime."

古文：命法司会鞫，果千户臧清杀无罪三人当死，使人诬佐。
现代文：命法司会审，果然是千户臧清，他杀死三个无罪的人，应被处死，便派人诬陷顾佐。
English: The magistrate ordered the case to be tried, and sure enough it was Chihuko Shikiyo. He killed three innocent people and should be put to death, so he sent someone to frame Gu Zuo.

古文：帝曰： 不诛清，则佐法不行。 
现代文：皇上说： 不诛臧清，则顾佐的办法无法执行。 
English: The emperor said, "If it is not cleared up, then Gu Zuo's plan cannot be carried out."

古文：磔清于市。
现代文：将臧清押到市场肢解。
English: The egrets are pushed to the market to be dismembered.

古文：八年秋，佐有疾，乞归。
现代文：八年秋，顾佐有病，请求归家。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, Gu Sa fell ill and asked to return home.

古文：不许。以南京右都御史熊概代理其事。
现代文：皇上不许，以南京右都御史熊概代理他的职事。
English: The emperor would not allow it, so the governor of Nanking, Xiong Xiu, took over his duties.

古文：逾年而概卒。
现代文：过了一年熊概去世。
English: One year later, Kumakita passed away.

古文：佐疾良已，入见。
现代文：顾佐病已痊愈，入宫朝见。
English: Gu Sa's illness has been cured, and he will see her in the morning when she enters the palace.

古文：帝慰劳之，令免朝贺，视事如故。
现代文：皇上慰劳他，令他免朝贺，仍在原职办事。
English: The emperor consoled him, exempted him from the imperial salute, and allowed him to continue working in his original position.

古文：正统初考察御史不称者十五人，降黜之。
现代文：正统初年，顾佐考察不称职的御史十五人，将他们或降职或罢免。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Gu Zuo examined 15 incompetent imperial historians and either demoted or dismissed them.

古文：邵宗九载满，吏部已考称，亦与焉。
现代文：邵宗九年任满，吏部已考核通过，他也在这十五人之中。
English: Shao Zong has been in office for nine years. He has passed the assessment of the cadre department, and he is also among these fifteen people.

古文：宗奏辨，尚书郭琎亦言宗不应与在任者同考。
现代文：邵宗上书申辩，尚书郭王进也说邵宗不应与在任者同考。
English: Shao Zong submitted a written plea, and Guo Wangjin also said that Shao Zong should not take the same examination as the incumbent.

古文：帝遂责佐。
现代文：皇上于是责备顾佐。
English: The emperor then rebuked Gu Zuo.

古文：而御史张鹏等复劾宗微过。
现代文：而御史张鹏等人又弹劾邵宗有小过。
English: However, the Minister of History Zhang Peng and others impeached Shao Zong for minor offenses.

古文：帝以鹏朋欺，并切责佐。
现代文：皇上以张鹏朋比相欺，严厉斥责他和顾佐。
English: The emperor considered Zhang Pengpeng to be a traitor and severely reprimanded him and Gu Zuo.

古文：佐上章致仕去。
现代文：顾佐上书求退休而去。
English: Gusa wrote a letter asking for retirement and left.

古文：赐敕奖慰，赉钞五十贯，命户部复其家。
现代文：皇上赐给敕书奖励安慰，赏给钞币五十贯，命户部免除他家的赋税徭役。
English: The emperor rewarded and consoled Zou Shu, awarded him with 50 yuan in banknotes, and ordered the household department to exempt his family from paying taxes.

古文：十一年九月卒。
现代文：十一年九月，他去世。
English: He died on September 11.

古文：佐孝友，操履清白，性严毅。
现代文：顾佐有孝友的品行，品德清白，性格严肃刚毅。
English: Gu Sa has the behavior of a filial friend, a pure moral character, and a serious and strong character.

古文：每旦趋朝，小外庐，立双藤户外。
现代文：每天早上趋朝，他在外庐稍息，在门外挂有双藤。
English: Every morning, he wakes up, he takes a short break outside, and there is a pair of wisteria outside his door.

古文：调南京佥都御史，与玘同心治事。
现代文：百官经过的，都绕道避开。入内廷办公，他独处一间小夹室，不是议政不与官员们群坐。人们称他为 顾独坐 。
English: When he entered the office of the Inner Court, he was alone in a small room. He did not discuss politics and did not sit with officials. People called him "Gudosetsu."

古文：刚果自信，尝著《神羊赋》以见志焉。段民，字时举，武进人。
现代文：但他持法过严，议论者认为这是个弊病。段民，字时举，武进人。
English: But he held the law too strictly, and the commentators thought that this was a malady.

古文：永乐二年进士。选庶吉士。
现代文：永乐二年，中进士，被选为庶吉士。
English: In Yongle's second year, he was selected as a junior high school student and was elected as a junior high school student.

古文：与章敞、吾绅辈俱读书文渊阁，又俱授刑部主事。
现代文：与章敞、吾绅等人入文渊阁读书，又一起被授予刑部主事。
English: He was assigned to study at Wen Yuange together with Zhang Zhan and Wosheng, and was also assigned to be the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：民旋进郎中。
现代文：段民旋即升为郎中。
English: Duan Minxuan was immediately promoted to a junior vassal.

古文：山东妖妇唐赛儿作乱，三司官坐纵寇诛，擢民左参政。
现代文：山东妖妇唐赛儿作乱，三司官员犯纵寇为乱之罪被诛，段民升为左参政。
English: Shandong fairy godmother Tang Xie Er caused a riot, officials from three departments were arrested for the crime of inciting a riot, and Duan Min Rong became a left-wing politician.

古文：当是时索赛儿急，尽逮山东、北京尼及天下出家妇女，先后几万人。
现代文：当时朝廷索拿唐赛儿很急，一律逮捕山东、北京的尼姑和全国出家的妇女，先后达几万人。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in a hurry to arrest Tang Xie Er, and arrested all the nuns in Shandong and Beijing, as well as all the ordained women in the country, amounting to tens of thousands.

古文：民力为矜宥，人情始安。
现代文：段民怜悯她们，极力进行宽宥，人心这才安定下来。
English: The people of Duan took pity on them and tried their best to forgive them, and only then did their hearts settle down.

古文：车驾北征，饷舟由济宁达潞河，陆挽出居庸至塞外。
现代文：皇上车驾北征时，运饷的船只由济宁到达潞河，再陆路车运到居庸关出塞外。
English: When the emperor was on the Northern Expedition by car, the ships that transported the imperial treasure arrived at the Minhe River from Jining, and then the land vehicles were transported to Juyongguan.

古文：民深计曲算，下不扰而事集。
现代文：段民精加计算，使百姓不受骚扰而办好事情。
English: Duan Min carefully calculated so that the people would not be harassed and get things done.

古文：既还，敕与巡按御史考所过府县吏廉墨以闻。
现代文：回来后，敕令他与巡按御史考察所经过府县的官员，将他们廉洁或贪污的情况上报。
English: After his return, the emperor ordered him and the officials from the prefectures and counties that the historical research institute had passed through to report on their probity or corruption.

古文：宣德三年召入京，命署南京户部右侍郎，逾年实授。
现代文：宣德三年，把他召入京，命他代理南京户部右侍郎，过了一年实授他为右侍郎。
English: In the third year of Xuan De's reign, he was summoned to Beijing and ordered to act as the Right Attendant of the Nanking Household. One year later, he was officially appointed as the Right Attendant.

古文：又明年改刑部。
现代文：又过了一年把他改到刑部。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：初，二部皆以不治闻。
现代文：当初，两部都以事务得不到治理闻名。
English: At first, both departments were notorious for mismanagement.

古文：民至，纪纲修举，宿弊以革。
现代文：段民到后，纪纲修整，宿弊得到革除。
English: After the arrival of Duan Min, the discipline syllabus was revised, and the inherent defects were eliminated.

古文：上元人有为侄殴者，愤甚，诣通政司告。
现代文：上元有个人被侄儿殴打，非常愤怒，到通政司告状。
English: In Shangyuan, a man who was beaten by his nephew was very angry and filed a complaint with the Secretary of State for Economic Affairs.

古文：时方令纳米赎罪，而越诉禁甚严，犯者戍辽东。
现代文：当时正令纳米赎罪，而越级申诉的禁令很严，违犯的要被遣戍辽东。
English: At that time, nano was being ordered to atone for sins, and the ban on out-of-class complaints was very strict, and violators were to be deported to Liaodong.

古文：民上言： 依定例，卑幼之罪得赎，而尊长反远窜，揆于理有未安，请更拟。 
现代文：段民上书说： 依照现在的定例，卑幼之罪可得赎回，而尊长之罪却反而被远戍。以理来衡量，实有不安。请改拟。 
English: Duan Min wrote: According to the current rules, the sins of the lowly can be redeemed, but the sins of the high and mighty are far away. Measured by reason, there is real anxiety. Please rewrite.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：皇上赞同了。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：帝以民廉介端谨，特赐敕，令考察南京百官。
现代文：皇上因段民廉洁端谨，特别赐给敕书，命他考察南京百官。
English: The emperor, because of Duan Min's honesty and integrity, gave him a special letter and ordered him to inspect 100 officials in Nanjing.

古文：八年，诏书罪囚自十恶外并减一等。
现代文：八年，诏令他抄录罪犯除十恶之外，并得减罪一等。
English: In the eighth year, he was ordered by the emperor to transcribe the criminals in addition to the ten evils, and was given a reduction of the first degree.

古文：有重囚三十余人，例不得赦，民亦减其罪。
现代文：有三十余名重犯，依例不得赦，段民也给他们减了罪。
English: There are more than 30 repeat offenders who cannot be pardoned according to the regulations, and Duan Min has also reduced their crimes.

古文：后有旨报决，乃复追还，而逃已数人。
现代文：后来有圣旨要判决这些人，便又将他们追回，但已逃了几个。
English: Later, there was a decree to judge these people, and they were brought back, but several had already escaped.

古文：民自陈状，给事中年富等劾民。帝知民贤，不问。
现代文：段民上书自陈罪状，给事中年富等人也弹劾他，皇上知道段民贤，不问。
English: Duan Min submitted a letter of self-incrimination, and the middle-aged rich and others also impeached him. The emperor knew Duan Minxian and did not ask.

古文：九年二月卒于官，年五十九。
现代文：九年二月，他在任上去世，终年五十九岁。
English: He died in office in February 1997, at the age of 59.

古文：贫不能殓，都御史吴讷裞以衣衾。
现代文：因贫不能装殓，都御史吴讷赠给他衣被。
English: Unable to decorate because of poverty, the Grand Duchess Wu Ne presented him with a quilt.

古文：至是中为治棺衾，乃克殡。
现代文：皇上听说后，命有关官员为他营葬。成化年间，叶盛请褒奖并抚恤他，没能办成。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he ordered the relevant officials to hold a funeral for him. During the Chenghua years, Ye Sheng asked for a reward and a pension for him, but was unable to do so.

古文：子崇志，历官应天尹，廉直有父风。耿九畴，字禹范，卢氏人。永乐末进士。
现代文：一百多年后，才给他追谥襄介。耿九畴，字禹范，卢氏人。永乐末年中进士。
English: More than a hundred years later, he was given the title of Xiangsuke. Geng Jiuzhong, also known as Yu Fan, was from the Lu clan. He became a scholar in the middle of the Yongle period.

古文：宣德六年授礼科给事中。
现代文：宣德六年，被授予礼科给事中。
English: Xuande six years, was awarded the etiquette in the middle.

古文：议论持大体，有清望。
现代文：他议论持大体，有清正的名望。
English: He speaks in generalities and has a reputation for being clean and upright.

古文：正统初，大臣言两淮盐政久坏，宜得重名检者治之，于是推择为盐运司同知。
现代文：正统初年，大臣说两淮盐政久坏，应得重名节的人去治理，于是推选九畴为盐运司同知。
English: In the first year of the orthodoxy, the minister said that the two Huai and Yan governments had been bad for a long time and should be governed by people with important names, so the nine domains were selected as the same as the salt transportation department.

古文：痛革宿弊，条奏便宜五事，著为令。
现代文：他痛革宿弊，向朝廷提出了五项建议，皇上把它们定为法令。
English: He put forward five proposals to the imperial court, and the emperor made them into laws.

古文：母丧去官，场民数千人诣阙乞留。
现代文：母亲去世，他辞官，盐场百姓数千人上朝廷请求把他留下。
English: When his mother died and he resigned from his post, thousands of people from the salt mine petitioned the imperial court to let him stay.

古文：十年正月起为都转运使。
现代文：十年正月，起用他为都转运使。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, he was appointed as the capital transfer envoy.

古文：节俭无他好，公退焚香读书，廉名益振，妇孺皆知其名。
现代文：九畴节俭而没有别的爱好，公事完后便焚香读书，廉洁的名声因此更响，连妇孺都知道他的名字。
English: He was frugal and had no other hobbies. After work, he would burn incense and read books. His reputation for being incorruptible was even stronger because of this. Even his wife and children knew his name.

古文：以事见诬，逮下吏，已，得白，即留为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：因事受到诬陷，他被逮捕审问，后来得洗清罪名，即留他为刑部右侍郎。
English: He was framed for the crime, arrested and interrogated, and later cleared of the charges, leaving him as the right-hand man of the criminal investigation department.

古文：屡辨疑狱，无所挠屈。
现代文：他屡次辨办疑案，不屈不挠。
English: He repeatedly refused to deal with suspicious cases and was unyielding.

古文：礼部侍郎章瑾下狱，九畴及江渊等议贬其官。
现代文：礼部侍郎章瑾被捕入狱，九畴和江渊等人建议将他贬官。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Zhang Jun, was arrested and imprisoned, and Jiuzang and Jiang Yuan and others suggested that he be demoted.

古文：瑾婿给事中王汝霖衔之，与同官叶盛、张固、林聪等论刑部不公。
现代文：章瑾的女婿给事中王汝霖很恨他，与同官叶盛、张固、林聪等人弹劾刑部不公。
English: Wang Rulin, the son-in-law of Zhang Ye, hated him very much, and he and his colleagues Ye Sheng, Zhang Gu, Lin Cong and others impeached the criminal justice department for unfairness.

古文：九畴、渊遂劾盛等，且言汝霖父永和死土木，嬉笑自如，不宜居职。
现代文：九畴、江渊于是也弹劾叶盛等人，并说王汝霖的父亲王永和死于土木堡，他还嬉笑自如，这种人不应任官。
English: Jiuzhen and Jiangyuan then also impeached Ye Sheng and others, and said that Wang Rulin's father, Wang Yonghe, died in an earthen fort, and he still laughed freely, such a person should not hold office.

古文：时景帝新立，急于用人，置汝霖等不问，瑾如奏。
现代文：当时景帝新立，急于用人，便置王汝霖等人不问，章瑾则照所奏请处治。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing was newly established and in a hurry to employ people, so he did not ask Wang Rulin and others, but Zhang Ye did as he requested.

古文：凤阳岁凶，盗且起，敕往巡视招抚。
现代文：凤阳岁荒，盗贼将要起事，皇上敕令他前往巡视招抚。
English: Fengyang yearning, thieves will rise, the emperor ordered him to go on a tour.

古文：奏留英武、飞熊诸卫军耕守，招来流民七万户，境内以安。
现代文：九畴上奏留下英武、飞熊等护卫军边耕边守，招来流民七万户，境内因此得到安宁。
English: In nine provinces, Yingwu, Flying Bear and other escorting troops were left behind to cultivate and guard the land, and 70,000 displaced households were brought in. As a result, the territory was pacified.

古文：两淮自九畴去，盐政复弛。
现代文：两淮自从九畴走后，盐政又坏。
English: After the two Huai since the nine regions, the salt policy is bad.

古文：景泰元年仍命兼理。
现代文：景泰元年，仍任命他兼理。
English: In the first year of King Tae's reign, he was still appointed as acting prime minister.

古文：寻敕录诸府重囚，多所平反。
现代文：不久敕令他审理各府的重犯，他平反了许多人。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered him to try repeat offenders from all prefectures, and he rehabilitated many people.

古文：十月命兼抚江北诸府。
现代文：十月，命他兼巡抚江北各府。
English: In October, he was appointed as the governor of the provinces in the northern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：三年三月代陈镒镇陕西。
现代文：三年三月，他取代陈镒镇守陕西。
English: In March of the same year, he replaced Chen Yuzhen as governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：都指挥杨得青等私役操卒，九畴劾之。
现代文：都指挥杨得青等人私自役使操卒，九畴弹劾他们。
English: Yang Dezhong and other self-serving pawns were all commanded to impeach them.

古文：诏按治，且命诸边如得青者，具劾以闻。
现代文：诏令调查处治，并且命令各边镇，有像杨得青这样的人的，都报告上来。
English: He issued an order to investigate and deal with the case, and ordered all border towns to report people like Yang Deqing.

古文：边将请增临洮诸卫戍，九畴言： 边城士卒非乏。
现代文：边将请增加临洮等卫的戍卒。九畴说 ：边城的士卒并不缺。
English: The governor asked the governor to increase the number of guards in Linyi. Jiuzang said: There is no shortage of guards in the border city.

古文：将帅能严纪律，赏罚明信，则人人自奋。
现代文：将帅如果能够严申纪律，赏罚分明，则人人自奋。
English: If the commander-in-chief can strictly enforce discipline and clearly define rewards and punishments, then everyone will work hard.

古文：不然，徒冗食耳。 
现代文：否则的话，徒然浪费粮食而已。 
English: Otherwise, it's just a waste of food.

古文：乃不增戍。
现代文：于是不增戍卒。
English: So there will be no increase.

古文：边民春夏出作田，秋冬辄徙入塞。
现代文：边境百姓春夏出塞耕田，到了秋冬常迁入塞内。
English: In spring and summer, people from the border areas go to work in the fields in Sèn, and in autumn and winter, they often move to Sèn.

古文：九畴言： 边将所以御寇，卫民也。今使民避寇失业，安用将帅？ 
现代文：九畴说 ：设边将就是为了御寇卫民的，现在让百姓因躲避敌寇而失业，用将帅干什么？ 
English: Jiuzang said, "The frontier generals were set up to guard against invaders and protect the people. Now the people are unemployed because they are hiding from invaders. What is the use of generals?"

古文：因禁民入徙。有被寇者，治守帅罪。
现代文：便禁止百姓迁入塞内，如有遭贼寇侵扰的，便治守将之罪。
English: People were prohibited from moving into Senai, and if they were disturbed by robbers, the warden was punished.

古文：四年，布政使许资言： 侍郎出镇，与巡按御史不相统，事多拘滞，请改授宪职便。 
现代文：四年，布政使许资说： 侍郎出任镇守官，与巡按御史不相统辖，事情多有滞留，请改授予他宪职为便。 
English: In the fourth year, the political appointee, Xu Zi, said: "Since the chamberlain has been appointed as the town warden and has the same jurisdiction as the inspector, and many things have been delayed, please grant him the constitutional post for convenience.

古文：乃转右副都御史。
现代文：于是九畴转为左副都御史。
English: As a result, Jiuzangang was transferred to the left vice-governor.

古文：大臣镇守、巡抚皆授都御史，自九畴始。
现代文：大臣出去镇守或者巡抚，都授予都御史之衔，即从九畴开始。
English: When the minister went out to the town guard or the governor, they all awarded the title of the capital's history, that is, starting from nine domains.

古文：有旨市羊角为灯，九畴引宋苏轼谏神宗买浙灯事，事乃寝。
现代文：有圣旨要买羊角为灯。九畴引用宋代苏轼谏阻神宗买浙灯的事，这事遂罢了。
English: There is a sacred edict to buy a ram's horn for a lamp. Nine dynasties quote the Song Dynasty Su Shi Dang Shen Zong to buy a Zhejiang lamp, and that's about it.

古文：灾异求言，请帝延儒硕，公赏罚，择守令，简将帅。
现代文：皇上因有灾异而求意见，九畴请皇上延揽硕儒，公平赏罚，慎择守令，选拔将帅。
English: The emperor asked for advice due to disasters, and in nine areas, he asked the emperor to procure strong men, fair rewards and punishments, prudent selection of orders, and selection of generals.

古文：优诏报焉。
现代文：皇上优诏答复他。
English: The Emperor replied to him.

古文：天顺初，议事京师。
现代文：天顺初年，他入京师议事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he entered the Beijing division.

古文：帝顾侍臣曰： 九畴，廉正人也。 
现代文：皇上对侍臣说 ：九畴是廉正之人。 
English: The Emperor said to his courtiers, "A person of integrity is the best."

古文：留为右都御史。
现代文：把他留下任右都御史。
English: Let him remain as Utsunomiya's governor.

古文：罪人系都察院狱者不给米。
现代文：关在都察院监狱的罪人官家不供给粮食。
English: The officials do not provide food to the criminals locked up in the Dukha-in prison.

古文：九畴为言，乃日给一升，遂为令。
现代文：九畴提出此事，于是每天供给一升，并定为法令。
English: Nine provinces raised the matter, so one liter per day was provided and made into a law.

古文：已，上疏陈崇廉耻、清刑狱、劝农桑、节军赏、重台宪五事。
现代文：后来，他上书请崇尚廉耻、清理刑狱、劝课农桑、节俭军赏、重视台宪官员的作用五项事情。
English: Later, he wrote a letter asking for five things: advocating shamelessness, cleaning up prisons, exhorting farmers and mulberry trees, rewarding thrifty soldiers, and attaching importance to the role of Taiwan's constitutional officials.

古文：帝皆嘉纳。
现代文：皇上都嘉许采纳了。
English: The Emperor accepted it with appreciation.

古文：是年六月，御史张鹏等劾石亨、曹吉祥。
现代文：这年六月，御史张鹏等人弹劾石亨、曹吉祥。
English: In June of that year, the historian Zhang Peng and others impeached Shi Heng and Cao Jixiang.

古文：亨等谓九畴实使之，遂并下狱。谪江西布政使，寻调四川。
现代文：石亨等人认为九畴实是主使者，便把他也投进监狱，贬为江西布政使，不久调到四川。
English: Shi Heng and others believed that Jiuzangang was actually the main emissary, so they also threw him into prison, demoted him to Jiangxi cloth envoy, and soon transferred him to Sichuan.

古文：明年，礼部缺尚书。
现代文：第二年，礼部缺尚书。
English: In the second year, the etiquette department ran out of books.

古文：帝问李贤。贤曰： 老成清介，无如九畴。 
现代文：皇上问李贤，李贤说： 论老成而清廉，莫如九畴。 
English: The emperor asked Li Xian, Li Xian said: On the old and clean, there are nine domains.

古文：乃召还。
现代文：于是把他召回。
English: So they called him back.

古文：既至，怜其老，改南京刑部尚书。
现代文：九畴到后，皇上可惜他老了，改为南京刑部尚书。
English: After the arrival of the nine provinces, the emperor regretted that he was old and changed it to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：四年卒。
现代文：四年，他去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：谥清惠。
现代文：谥清惠。
English: 清惠.

古文：子裕，自有传。轩輗，字惟行，鹿邑人。
现代文：轩輗，字惟行，鹿邑人。
English: Xuan Xuan, the words are perfect, Lu's people.

古文：永乐末年进士。
现代文：永乐末年中进士。
English: Yongle at the end of the year.

古文：授行人司副。
现代文：后被授予行人司副。
English: He was later promoted to deputy chief of the Pedestrian Division.

古文：宣德六年用荐改御史。
现代文：宣德六年，受推荐改任为御史。
English: After six years of proclamation, he was recommended to be appointed as Imperial Historian.

古文：按福建，剔蠹锄奸，风采甚峻。
现代文：按察福建时，他剔蠹除奸，风采高峻。
English: When he inspected Fujian Province, he eliminated the traitors and adulterers and had a dignified demeanor.

古文：正统元年清军浙江，劾不职官四十余人。
现代文：正统元年，他到浙江清军，弹劾不称职官员四十余人。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he went to Zhejiang Qing Army and impeached more than forty incompetent officials.

古文：五年言： 祖宗设御史官，为职綦重。
现代文：五年，他说： 祖宗设立御史官，职责极重。
English: In the fifth year, he said, "My ancestors set up an official historian, and his duties are extremely heavy.

古文：今内外诸司有事，多擅遣御史，非制，请禁之。 
现代文：现在内外各部门有什么事，都专遣御史去处理，这不合制度，请禁止。 
English: At present, all departments at home and abroad have to send special envoys to the Imperial Household Agency to deal with any matters. This is not in accordance with the system. Please prohibit it.

古文：立报可。
现代文：立见回报说可。
English: Let's see what happens in return.

古文：是年，超擢浙江按察使。
现代文：这一年，他超升为浙江按察使。
English: This year, he was promoted to the post of inspector general of Zhejiang Province.

古文：前使奢汰，輗力矫之。
现代文：前任按察使奢侈，轩輗努力矫正。
English: His predecessor was accused of indulging in extravagance, which he worked hard to rectify.

古文：寒暑一青布袍，补缀殆遍，居常蔬食，妻子亲操井臼。
现代文：不论寒暑他都只是那件青布袍，上面布满补丁，居家常吃蔬菜，妻儿亲自舂米打水。
English: No matter whether it's hot or cold, he just wears that blue cloth robe, which is covered with patches. He often eats vegetables at home, and his wife and children personally water the rice.

古文：与僚属约：三日出俸钱市肉，不得过一斤。
现代文：他与同僚属官相约，每三天拿出俸禄钱来买肉，每次不得超过一斤。
English: He agreed with his fellow subordinate officers to take out his salary money every three days to buy meat, each time not exceeding one kilogram.

古文：僚属多不能堪。
现代文：同僚属官都不堪忍受。
English: Colleagues and subordinates are unbearable.

古文：故旧至，食惟一豆。或具鸡黍，则人惊以为异。
现代文：有故人来，所吃不过是一碗豆，偶尔有鸡和黍米，人们就会很惊奇。
English: When the deceased comes and eats nothing more than a bowl of beans, with the occasional chicken and sticky rice, people are surprised.

古文：时镇守内臣阮随、布政使孙原贞、杭州知府陈复、仁和知县许璞居官皆廉，一方大治。
现代文：当时镇守宦官阮随、布政使孙原贞、杭州知府陈复、仁和知县许璞，为官都很廉洁，一方大治。
English: At that time, the town guard eunuch Ruan Zu, the political envoy Sun Yuanzhen, the governor of Hangzhou Chen Fu, and the governor of Renhe County Xu Wei, were all very clean officials, but they had a great deal of power.

古文：温、处有银场，洪武间岁课仅二千八百余两。永乐时增至八万二千两，民不堪命。
现代文：温州、处州有银场，洪武年间，每年的税收仅二千八百余两，永乐时期增到八万二千两，百姓不堪忍受。
English: Wenzhou and Wenzhou have silver fields. During the Hongwu era, the annual tax revenue was only 2,800,000 taels. During the Yongle era, it increased to 82,000 taels, which was unbearable for the people.

古文：帝即位，以大臣议罢之。
现代文：英宗即位后，因大臣的建议停罢银场。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, the mint went out of business at the suggestion of the minister.

古文：至是参政俞士悦请复开，谓利归于上，则矿盗自绝。
现代文：至此参政俞士悦请重开，说如果利归于上，则矿盗自然绝迹。
English: At this point, please reopen your participation in politics, saying that if the profits go to the top, the miners will naturally disappear.

古文：下三司议，輗力持不可，乃止。
现代文：皇上交三司讨论，轩輗坚决反对，这才罢了。
English: It was just that the Emperor had the Three Departments of the Imperial Diplomatic Corps discuss it, and Xuanzang resolutely opposed it.

古文：既而给事中陈傅复请，朝廷遽从之，遂致叶宗留之变。
现代文：后来给事中陈傅又请，朝廷马上批准了，遂导致了叶宗留之变。
English: Later, Chen Fu was also invited to the event, and the Imperial Court immediately approved, which led to Ye Zongru's change.

古文：会稽赵伯泰，宋苗裔也。奏孝宗、理宗及福王陵墓，俱为豪民侵夺。
现代文：会稽赵伯泰，是宋朝宗室后裔，他上奏说宋孝宗、理宗和福王的陵墓都被豪民所侵夺。
English: Zhao Bo-tai, a descendant of the Song Dynasty's imperial family, reported that the mausoleums of Song Xiaozong, Li Zong, and Fu Wang had all been seized by the powerful.

古文：御史王琳谓福王降于元，北去，山阴安得墓？伯泰不平，复诉。
现代文：御史王琳说福王投降元朝而北去，山阴怎么有他的坟墓，赵伯泰不服，又上诉。
English: Wang Lin said that Fu Wang surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty and went to the north, how could Shanyin have his grave? Zhao Bo Tai was not satisfied and appealed again.

古文：帝命輗及巡按御史欧阳澄覆按。
现代文：皇上命轩輗和巡按御史欧阳澄复查。
English: Emperor's order of Xuan Zhen and inspection by the inspector general of history Ouyang Cheng.

古文：輗言福王盖衣冠之藏，伯泰言非诬。
现代文：轩輗说福王是衣冠冢，赵伯泰所言不假。
English: Xuanzang said that Fu Wang is a crown prince, and Zhao Bo Tai's words are not false.

古文：诏戍豪民于边，停琳等俸。
现代文：诏令把豪民戍边，停支王琳等人的俸禄。
English: The edict sidelined the wealthy and cut off the salaries of Wang Lin and others.

古文：遭亲丧，起复。
现代文：轩輗遭亲丧，被召回任事。
English: Xuanzang suffered a bereavement and was recalled to duty.

古文：十三年奏陈四事，俱切时弊，帝悉从之。
现代文：十三年，他上书提出四项事情，都切中时弊，皇上都听从了。
English: In the thirteenth year, he put forward four things in a letter, all of which were timely and correct, and the emperor listened to them all.

古文：景帝立，以右副都御史镇守浙江。
现代文：景帝即位后，他以右副都御史之衔镇守浙江。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, he guarded Zhejiang with the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：景泰元年命兼理两浙盐课。
现代文：景泰元年，命他兼理两浙盐税。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he was also in charge of the two Zhejiang salt taxes.

古文：闽贼吴金八等流劫青田诸县，輗与原贞讨平之。
现代文：闽贼吴金八等人流劫青田等县，轩輗与孙原贞讨平了他们。
English: The bandits Wu Jinpachi and others went on a rampage in Aotian and other counties, and Xuan Zhen and Sun Yuanzhen fought them to a standstill.

古文：贼首罗丕、廖宁八复自闽抵浙。輗等防遏有功，进秩一等。
现代文：贼首罗丕、廖宁八又从福建抵达浙江，轩輗等人防御有功，得进升一级。
English: Thieves Luo Yao and Liao Ningbai also arrived in Zhejiang from Fujian. Xuan Yao and others have made great achievements in defense and have been promoted to the first level.

古文：明年改督南京粮储。
现代文：第二年他改总督南京粮储。
English: The following year, he became the governor of the Nanjing Grain Reserve.

古文：五年复改左副都御史，掌南院事。
现代文：五年，又改任左副都御史，掌南都察院事务。
English: Five years later, he was reappointed to the post of Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian, in charge of the affairs of the Southern Metropolitan Government.

古文：考黜御史不职者数人。
现代文：他考察并罢免了几个不称职的御史。
English: He investigated and dismissed several incompetent magistrates.

古文：天顺元年二月召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：天顺元年二月，他被召回任刑部尚书。
English: In February of the first year of Tianshun, he was recalled to the position of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：数月，引疾乞归。
现代文：数月之后，他称病请求归家。
English: A few months later, he called in sick.

古文：帝召见，问曰： 昔浙江廉使考满归，行李仅一簏，乃卿耶？ 
现代文：皇上召见他，问道： 以前浙江按察使任满后回去，行李仅一只竹箱，那是说你吗？ 
English: The emperor summoned him and asked: In the past, when the inspector general of Zhejiang Province returned after his term of office, his luggage was only a bamboo box. Does that mean you?

古文：輗顿首谢。
现代文：轩輗叩头致谢。
English: Xuanzang bowed his head in thanks.

古文：赐白金慰遣之。
现代文：皇上赐给白金安慰他，遣他回去。
English: The emperor consoled him with the gift of platinum and sent him back.

古文：明年，南京督理粮储缺官，帝问李贤，大臣中谁曾居此职者。
现代文：第二年，南京督理粮储缺官，皇上问李贤，大臣中谁曾任过这个职务。
English: In the second year, when the post of the Nanking Superintendent of Grain Reserves was vacant, the emperor asked Li Xian who among the ministers had held this post.

古文：贤以輗对，且称其廉。乃命以左都御史往。
现代文：李贤说有轩輗，并称赞他很廉洁，于是命轩輗以左都御史之衔前往。
English: Li Xian said that there was Xuan Xuan, and praised him for being very clean, so he ordered Xuan Xuan to go to the capital with the title of Zuo Gu Shi.

古文：八年夏以老乞骸骨，不待报径归。
现代文：八年夏，轩輗又因年老请求退休，不等回报便径自回去了。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, Xuan Xuan again requested retirement due to old age, and did not wait for a return, so he went back.

古文：抵家趣具浴，欠伸而卒。
现代文：到家后马上洗澡，然后伸一伸腰腿便死了。
English: After arriving home, he immediately took a shower, then stretched his legs and died.

古文：輗孤峭，遇人无贤否，拒不与接。
现代文：轩輗性格孤傲，待人不论贤否，拒不接交。
English: Xuan Xuan's character is lonely and proud, he treats people regardless of whether they are talented or not, and refuses to make friends.

古文：为按察使，尝饮同僚家，归抚其腹曰： 此中有赃物也。 
现代文：他做按察使时，曾到同僚家饮酒，回来后摸着肚子说 ：这里面有脏物啊！ 
English: When he was an inspector, he once went to a colleague's house to drink alcohol. After returning, he felt his stomach and said, "There's something dirty in here!"

古文：在南都，都御史张纯置酒延客。輗恶其汰，不往。
现代文：在南都，都御史张纯设酒请客，轩輗讨厌他过于奢侈，不去。
English: In the southern capital, the governor of the capital, Zhang Jun, invited guests to drink wine. Xuan Qi hated that he was too extravagant and would not go.

古文：彻馔遗之，亦不纳。
现代文：人家撤下食物送来，他也不收。
English: He doesn't accept food that's been taken off the table and brought to him.

古文：岁时诣礼部拜表庆贺，屏居一室，撤烛端坐，事竣竟归，未尝与僚友一语。
现代文：过年过节到礼部送表庆贺，他总是独处一室，撤去灯烛端坐其中，事情办完即回去，不曾与同僚朋友说一句话。
English: During the New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, he was always alone in a room, removing the lights and candles and sitting in the middle. He would go back as soon as things were done, and never said a word to his colleagues and friends.

古文：僚友闻其来，亦辄避去，不乐与之处。
现代文：僚友听说他来，也总是避开，不愿与他相处。
English: When his colleagues heard that he was coming, they always avoided him and did not want to get along with him.

古文：量颇遍隘。
现代文：他气量颇为偏狭。
English: He's rather narrow-minded.

古文：御史有讦人阴私者，辄奖其能。
现代文：御史有揭发他人阴私的，他总是嘉奖其能干。
English: He has a history of rewarding those who expose the venality of others.

古文：尝令御史劾南京祭酒吴节，节亦发輗私事，众颇不直輗。
现代文：他曾令御史弹劾南京祭酒吴节，吴节也揭发轩輗的私事，大家颇不倾向轩輗。
English: He once ordered the imperial historian to impeach the Nanjing Festival liquor Wu Jie, and Wu Jie also exposed Xuan Xuan's private affairs. Everyone is quite not inclined to Xuan Xuan.

古文：然清操闻天下，与耿九畴齐名，语廉吏必曰轩、耿。
现代文：但他清廉之品德却闻名天下，与耿九畴齐名，谈到清廉的官员必说轩、耿。
English: However, his clean moral character is famous all over the world, and is on a par with Geng Jiuzhou. When it comes to clean officials, it is necessary to say Xuan and Geng.

