古文：物莫非指，而指非指。天下无指，物无可以谓物。
现代文：物无一不是由物的属性来表现的，但是由物的属性所表现的物，并不等同于物本身。
English: There are no things that are not represented by the properties of things, but the things represented by the properties of things are not the same as the things themselves.

古文：非指者天下，而物可谓指乎？
现代文：如果世界上没有物的属性，物便无从表现起为物。
English: If there are no properties of things in the world, things cannot manifest themselves as things.

古文：指也者，天下之所无也；物也者，天下之所有也。
现代文：物的属性之所以区别于物，是因为如果世界上没有物，哪还有什么物的属性呢？
English: The reason why properties of things are different from things is that if there are no things in the world, what properties of things are there?

古文：以天下之所有，为天下之所无，未可。天下无指,而物不可谓指也。
现代文：物的属性并不是世界上独立存在的东西，而物却是世界上客观实在的东西。
English: The attribute of a thing is not a thing that exists independently in the world, but a thing is an objectively real thing in the world.

古文：不可谓指者，非指也？非指者，物莫非指也。
现代文：把不是独立存在的物的属性当作就是客观实在的物，是不对的。
English: It is wrong to regard the attributes of a thing that does not exist independently as an objective reality.

古文：天下无指而物不可谓指者，非有非指也。
现代文：世界上如果没有物的属性，那么，物便无从表现，而物无从表现，便不能被认识。
English: If there are no attributes of things in the world, then things cannot be expressed, and things that cannot be expressed cannot be known.

古文：非有非指者，物莫非指也。物莫非指者，而指非指也。
现代文：既然没有物的属性而物就不能被认识，那么，物就无一不是由物的属性来表现而被认识的。
English: Since things cannot be known without their properties, nothing can be known without its properties.

古文：天下无指者，生于物之各有名，不为指也。不为指而谓之指，是无部为指。
现代文：既然世界上没有物的属性，物便无从表现，那么世界上也就没有不被物的属性所表现的物，那么物就无一不由物的属性所表现的了。
English: Since there are no properties of things in the world, things cannot be expressed, so there are no things in the world that are not expressed by the properties of things, so there are no things that are not expressed by the properties of things.

古文：以有不为指之无不为指，未可。
现代文：由此可见，物无一不是由物的属性来表现的物，并不等同于被表现的物本身。
English: From this, it can be seen that there is no thing that is not represented by the attribute of the thing, and is not equivalent to the thing itself that is being represented.

古文：以 指者天下之所无 。天下无指者，物不可谓无指也；不可谓无指者。
现代文：世界上之所以没有独立存在的物的属性，是因为物有各自的名称，而物的名称并不反映物的具体属性。
English: The reason why there are no independently existing properties of things in the world is because things have their own names, and the names of things do not reflect the specific properties of things.

古文：非有非指也；非有非指者，物莫非指、指非非指也，指与物非指也。使天下无物指，谁径谓非指？天下无物，谁径谓指？天下有指无物指，谁径谓非指、径谓无物非指？
现代文：物的名称虽不反映物的个性，但却反映物的特定本质。物的共性并不等于物的个性，所以反映物之共性的名称并不等于物的个性，因此，以只反映物的共性之 名 当作就是物本身是不对的。 指 是世界上各种事物兼而有之的共性。
English: Although the name of a thing does not reflect the individuality of the thing, it does reflect the specific essence of the thing. The commonality of a thing is not equal to the individuality of a thing, so the name that reflects the commonality of a thing is not equal to the individuality of a thing. Therefore, it is wrong to regard the name that only reflects the commonality of a thing as the thing itself. It refers to the commonality of various things in the world.

古文：且夫指固自为非指，奚待于物而乃与为指？
现代文：世界上虽然没有离开物而独立存在的共性，但物不能说没有共性。
English: Although there is no commonality that exists independently of things in the world, things cannot be said to have no commonality.

