古文：初三日饭勾漏，即东北行。
现代文：初三日在勾漏庵吃饭后，立即往东北行。
English: On the third day of the first day, after having a meal at Koko-ro Iori, he immediately went to the northeast.

古文：由营房转山之东南角，过透石东出之泉，径草坡而行。
现代文：由营房转过山的东南角，走过渗过岩石向东流出的泉水，经满是荒草的山坡向前行。
English: From the barracks, turn around the southeast corner of the mountain, walk through the spring water that seeps through the rocks to the east, and go forward through the hillside full of weeds.

古文：五里，越一坡，有塘衍水环浸山谷。
现代文：五里，越过一道坡，有个浩渺的水塘环绕浸泡着山谷。
English: Five miles away, across a slope, there is a vast pond surrounded by a soaking valley.

古文：渡桥，又二里，堰塘愈大，石峰至此东尽，其北有尖峰兀立若独秀焉。
现代文：走过桥，又行二里，堤坝拦住的水塘更大，石峰到此向东到了尽头，水塘北面有座尖峰直立如独秀峰一样。
English: After walking over the bridge, it is another two miles. The pond blocked by the dam is bigger. The stone peak has reached its end to the east. There is a spike standing upright on the north side of the pond, just like Duxiu Peak.

古文：山北隙中露大容，蜿蜒若列屏。
现代文：山北的空隙中露出大容山，蜿蜿蜒蜒似屏风排列。
English: In the gap in the northern part of the mountain, the Dairong Mountain is exposed, and the meanders are arranged like a screen.

古文：又东十里，有水自西北容山来，东南入绣江，为容、郁分界，名洛桑渡。
现代文：又向东十里，有水流从西北的大容山流来，往东南注入绣江，是容县、郁林州的分界，名叫洛桑渡。
English: Another ten miles to the east, there is a stream of water flowing from the northwest of Dalong Mountain to the southeast into the Yuxi River, which is the boundary between Rong County and Yulin State. It is called Loushangu.

古文：其水颇急，以藤跨水横系两涯之上，而系舟于藤，令渡者缘藤引舟，不用篙楫。
现代文：那水流十分湍急，有藤条横拉在水流两岸，再把船系在藤条上，渡水的人乘在船上手拉藤条，不用竹嵩和船桨。
English: The current was very swift, and there were rattan canes strung across both banks of the current. The boat was then tethered to the rattan canes, and the people crossing the water pulled the rattan canes with their hands, without using bamboo poles or oars.

古文：桃叶渡江，不若藤枝更妙矣。
现代文：用如桃叶的船渡江，不如用藤条拉更妙的了。
English: It is better to cross the river in a boat shaped like a peach leaf than to pull a rope with rattan.

古文：又东五里为西山墟，有公馆，客之所庭也。
现代文：又往东走五里是西山墟，有客馆，是旅客停住的处所。
English: Another five miles to the east is Xishan Hui, which has a guesthouse and is a place for tourists to stay.

古文：东南由岭上行，已下渡小桥，共五里矣。
现代文：往东南由岭上行，不久下岭越过小桥，共有五里了。
English: To the southeast, we went up the ridge, and soon crossed a small bridge down the ridge, a total of five miles.

古文：又东出山十里，有荒铺，有板桥。
现代文：又向东出山走十里，有个荒铺，有处板桥。
English: Another ten miles to the east out of the mountains, there is a barren store, there is a board bridge.

古文：又东五里为清景新桥，则大容东峰，巍然北临。
现代文：又向东五里是清景新桥，就见大容山的东峰，在北边巍然下临好像屏风矗立。
English: Another five miles to the east is Qingjing New Bridge, where you can see the eastern peak of Dalong Mountain, standing like a screen on the north side.

古文：又东五里，入容县西外门。
现代文：又往东五里，走入容县的西外门。
English: Another five miles to the east, into the west gate of Rong County.

古文：又一里，入城西门，经县治前，即南转出城南门。
现代文：又一里，进入县城西门，经过县衙前，立即向南转出了县城南门。
English: Another mile, enter the west gate of the county seat, pass in front of the county gate, and immediately turn south out of the south gate of the county seat.

古文：门外江水自西而东，即绣江。
现代文：门外江水自西流向东，就是绣江。
English: Outside the gate, the water of the Yangtze River flows from west to east, which is the source of the Yuxi River.

古文：自高州北经北流，又东合洛桑、渭龙二水，绕城南而东北，由藤县入大江者也。
现代文：是从高州府往北流经北流县，又向东汇合洛桑水、渭龙河两条河流，绕过城南流往东北，由藤县注入大江的河流。
English: It is a river that flows from Gaozhou to the north through Beiliu County, and then eastward to the confluence of the Lausanne Water and the Qilong River, bypassing the south of the city to the northeast, and flowing into the big river from Fujian County.

古文：渡江而南，炊于肆。又南二里，逾冈坂，误入东麓。
现代文：渭龙河源出于天塘山，向北流经石寨村，这才流入绣江。
English: The source of the Yulong River comes from the Tiantang Mountain and flows northward through Shizhai Village before flowing into the Xujiang River.

古文：二里，仍转西向，又二里而得大道。
现代文：渡江往南走，在店铺中吃了饭。又向南二里，越过山冈上的山坡，误走入东麓。二里，仍转向西，又走二里才遇上大道。
English: I walked south to cross the river and ate lunch in a shop. I walked two miles south again, crossed the hillside on the mountain, and mistakenly walked into the eastern foot. Two miles, I still turned to the west, and walked another two miles before I met the avenue.

古文：西南行，又五里，宿于古楼村。
现代文：向西南行，又是五里，住在古楼村。
English: Heading southwest, it's another five miles, and you'll find yourself living in the village of ancient buildings.

古文：一村皆李姓。
现代文：一村都姓李。
English: The whole village is surnamed Li.

古文：初四日饭于古楼村。
现代文：初四日在古楼村吃了饭。
English: On the fourth day of the first day, I had a meal in the ancient building village.

古文：仍西南随大路盘都峤而过。
现代文：仍向西南顺大道绕着都娇山走过。
English: He still walked towards the Southwest Shun Avenue around the Du Jiao Mountain.

古文：先是，余按《志》言： 都峤在城南二十里。 
现代文：这以前，我据志书所说： 都娇山在城南二十里处。 
English: Before that, according to my autobiography, I said: "Du Jiao Mountain is twenty miles south of the city."

古文：自城问之，皆曰： 南山去城七八里。 
现代文：在城中问路，都说： 南山离城七八里。 
English: When asking for directions in the city, they all said: Nanshan is seven or eight miles away from the city.

古文：故余喜其近，出南门渡江，即望山而趋，而不意其误也。
现代文：故而我因它近而高兴，出南门渡江后，立即望着山赶去，却想不到错了。
English: Therefore, I was happy because it was close. After leaving the south gate and crossing the river, I immediately looked at the mountain and hurried, but I couldn't think of a mistake.

古文：盖都峤即南山，其北俱削崖悬亘，无级可阶，必绕出其南，始可北向而登。
现代文：原来都娇山就是南山，山北面全是陡削的山崖悬亘着，无石阶可登，必得绕到山南，才可向北上登。
English: Originally, Dujiao Mountain is the South Mountain. The north side of the mountain is covered with steep cliffs. There are no stone steps to climb. You have to go around to the south of the mountain before you can climb northward.

古文：其曰七八里，乃北面抵山之数，而二十里者，并从南陟山而言也。
现代文：他们说七八里，是指从北面走到山的里数，而说二十里的，是连同从南面登山而言的。
English: They say that "seven or eight miles" refers to the number of miles from the north to the mountain, while "twenty miles" refers to the distance from the south to the mountain.

古文：共五里，过石寨村。
现代文：共走五里，经过石寨村。
English: We walked a total of five miles, passing through the village of Shizhai.

古文：又一里，抵石嘴铺。
现代文：又行一里，抵达石嘴铺。
English: Another mile and we arrived at Shizuku.

古文：东渡一桥，始从岐北向上山。
现代文：铺东南八里处有个黄土岩，来不及登。向东越过一桥，开始从岔道向北上山。
English: There was an ocher rock eight miles southeast of the hut, and I didn't have time to climb it. I crossed a bridge to the east and started to climb the mountain from the side road.

古文：登山东转，遂由山峡北向五里，抵南山寺，古所称灵景寺也。
现代文：登山后往东转，便经山峡向北走五里，到达南山寺，就是古时候所称的灵景寺了。
English: After climbing the mountain, turn east, then walk five miles north through the mountain gorge to reach Nanshan Temple, which was called Lingjing Temple in ancient times.

古文：大岩倚东崖，其门西向，中无覆架，而外有高垣，设莲座于中，明敞平豁，虽云 寺 ，实岩也。
现代文：大岩洞背靠东面的山崖，洞口向西，洞中没有下覆的屋顶和屋架，可外边有高墙，中央设了莲座，明亮宽敞，平整开阔，虽说是 寺 ，实际是岩洞。
English: The large rock cave backs up against the cliff to the east, with the mouth of the cave to the west. There is no roof or roof frame in the cave, but there are high walls on the outside, with a lotus seat in the center. It is bright, spacious, flat and open. Although it is a temple, it is actually a rock cave.

古文：盖都峤之形，其峰北穹高顶，南分两腋，如垂臂直下，下兜成坞，而清塘一方当其中焉。
现代文：大致上都娇山的山势，主峰在北面高高隆起顶住天空，南边分出两座侧峰，如下垂的手臂笔直下插，下方翻卷成山坞，而一池清塘正当两峰之中。
English: The main peak rises high in the north to hold up the sky, and two side peaks stand out on the south side. They are inserted straight down from the lower arm, and rolled up into a dock below. A clear pond is right in the middle of the two peaks.

古文：两腋石崖，皆重叠回亘，上飞下嵌，若张吻裂唇。
现代文：两侧的石崖，全都重重叠叠回绕绵亘，上边飞空下面深嵌，好像张裂开的嘴唇。
English: The stone cliffs on both sides, all overlapping and circling back and forth, are deep-set, like open lips.

古文：一岩甫断，复开一岩，层穴之巅，复环层穴，外有多门，中无旁窦，求如白石下岩所云 潜通勾漏 者，无可托矣，总而披之，灵景为东腋之首，岩最高而大，其北有三岩，皆西向而差小，亦有环堵为门者，皆读书者所托，而今无人焉。
现代文：一个岩洞刚断，重又裂开一洞，层层洞穴的顶端，又环绕着层层洞穴，外边有多处洞口，里面无旁洞，寻找如白石山下洞所谓的 潜通勾漏山 的地方，无处可依托了。总括起来分析它，灵景寺是东侧的第一个岩洞，洞最高最大，高三丈五尺，深五丈，横处宽十多丈，两头稍低，中间隆起如半个月亮。它北面有三个岩洞，都是向西而略小，也有墙环绕着作为门户，都是读书人寄身之处，可今天无人在里边。
English: A rock cave has just been broken, and a hole has been cracked again. The top of the cave has been surrounded by more caves. There are many openings on the outside, and there are no holes on the inside. There is no place to look for the so-called "sneak through the mountain," such as the lower cave of Shiroishi Mountain. In summary, Lingjing Temple is the first rock cave on the east side. The cave is the highest and largest, three feet high, five feet deep, more than ten feet wide, slightly lower at both ends, and the middle rises like a half moon. It has three rock caves in the north, all of which are slightly smaller to the west

古文：三清当分腋之兜，岩最正而洁，其东有二室，皆南向，亦有环堵倚之，与西向三岩易隅而齐列。
现代文：三清岩正当两座侧峰分开向上翻卷之处，洞最正而且整洁，高处深处横处宽处与灵景寺相同。它东边有两个石室，都向南，也有环绕的墙紧靠它们，与向西的三个岩洞换了方位却平齐地排列着。
English: At the place where the two side peaks of Sanqing Rock are separated and rolled up, the cave is most upright and tidy. The height, depth, width and width are the same as Lingjing Temple. It has two stone chambers on the east side, both facing south, and there are also surrounding walls close to them. It has changed its orientation with the three caves to the west, but they are aligned evenly.

古文：其西有飞崖，则南转东向，为西腋之户。
现代文：那西边有飞空的山崖，便由南转向东，是西面侧峰的门户。
English: On the western side, there are soaring cliffs, which turn from south to east and are the gateway to the side peaks on the western side.

古文：高穹虚敞，第内不甚深，然迤逦而南，与灵景分门对峙，若两庑ǔ廊屋焉。此下层也。
现代文：高大弯隆，空旷宽敞，只是洞内不怎么深，然而向南通巡延伸，与灵景寺分为两个洞口对峙，好似两侧的厢房。这是下层。
English: It is tall, curved, and spacious, but the cave is not very deep. However, it extends to the south, and it is divided into two cave entrances facing Lingjing Temple, similar to the rooms on either side. This is the lower level.

古文：三清之上，又列重门为中层，其上又启一岩为上层，是名宝盖。
现代文：三清岩之上，又排列着重重洞口是中层，无向上攀登的路。它上边又开启一个岩洞是上层，此洞名叫宝盖岩。
English: On top of the Sanqing Rock, there are many caves. The mouth of the cave is the middle layer, and there is no way to climb up. Above it, another cave opens, which is the upper layer. This cave is called Baogai Rock.

古文：盖是岩不以灵巧见奇，而以回叠取胜，故舍其北峭，就其南嵔山高低盘曲的样子，信列仙望衡对宇之区矣。
现代文：高十五尺，深二丈，宽五六丈，后面背靠峰顶，地势愈加高高在上，独自正当中峰主干之上，水平地面临两座侧峰峰顶。再上去，就是中盘顶。原来这里的岩洞不以灵巧见奇，而是以环绕重叠取胜，所以放弃它陡峭的北面，赶去它高低盘曲的南面，实在是众仙楼阁相望殿宇相对的地方呀！
English: Fifteen feet high, two feet deep, five or six feet wide, with its back to the peak, the terrain is getting higher and higher, alone on the main trunk of the middle peak, horizontally facing the tops of the two side peaks. Further up, it is the mid-plate top. Originally, the cave here is not surprising with dexterity, but with the surrounding overlap, so give up its steep north side and catch up with the south side of its high and low plate curve, it is really a place where all the fairy towers look at each other.

古文：时日已中，灵景僧留饭，见佛座下唐碑一通、宋幢一柱刻着佛号或经咒的石柱，刻镌甚古，就僧觅纸，僧仅以黄色者应。
现代文：上午，最先到达灵景寺，门外竹林阳光在旁映衬着，岩洞中高挂着云霞般的筛幌，心里喜爱它的幽静空旷。此时太阳己到正中，灵景寺僧人挽留吃饭。见佛座下有一块唐碑，一柱宋代的经幢，凿刻得十分古朴，找僧人要纸，僧人仅拿出黄纸应付。
English: In the morning, the first to arrive was Lingjing Temple. Outside the gate, the sunlight was reflected by the bamboo forest. A cloud-like screen hung high in the cave, and I loved its quiet emptiness. At this time, the sun had reached the middle of the day, and the monks of Lingjing Temple stayed to eat. See a Tang monument under the Buddha's seat, a pillar of the Song Dynasty, chiseled very quaintly, looking for a monk to ask for paper, the monk only took out yellow paper to deal with.

古文：遂磨墨沛于石，取拓月拓碑的工具于抽，以钟敲为锤，以裹足为毡，洗碑而敲拓之。
现代文：于是在石上磨墨汁，撕衣袖为拓肉，用钟锤作为锤子，拿裹脚布当做毛毡，刷了碑就敲打着拓碑。
English: So he rubbed the ink on the stone, tore his sleeve for the rubbing, used a hammer as a hammer, took a foot wrap as a blanket, brushed the monument and beat the rubbing stone.

古文：各完两通，而日色已暮。
现代文：各拓完两通，而天色已晚。
English: They each completed two passes, but it was too late.

古文：问三清观，道者他出，空寂无人，竟止岩中。
现代文：访问三清观，道士出门到别的地方去了，空荡荡寂静无人，最终停宿在岩洞中。
English: Visiting Sanqingyuan, the Taoist went out to another place, empty and silent, and finally stayed in a rock cave.

古文：初五日早饭于灵景。
现代文：初五日在灵景寺吃早饭。
English: I had breakfast at Lingjing Temple on the fifth day of the first month.

古文：由岩右北行，历西向三岩，又盘磴而上，入南向二岩，共里许，然后抵三清岩。
现代文：由洞右往北行，经过向西的三个岩洞，又绕着石瞪上走，进人向南的两个岩洞，共走一里左右，然后抵达三清岩。
English: Walk north from the right side of the cave, go through the three caves to the west, walk around the crag, enter the two caves to the south, walk for about one mile, and then arrive at Sanqing Rock.

古文：岩空境寂，甚堪憩足。
现代文：岩洞空旷地方寂静，树枝在明亮的空中拂动，真值得歇歇脚。
English: The silence of the open space of the cave, the branches of the trees fluttering in the bright air, is really worth resting your feet.

古文：又西历东向虚岩，乃仍从来路一里，返三岩之间，取道之上，下视中岩嵌入足底，而下岩三清，树杪衍翠铺云，若浮空而载之者。
现代文：又往西经过向东的虚岩，于是仍沿来时的路走一里，返回到三个岩洞之间，选择向北的路走。又走一里多，沿山崖边登上山顶，便到了玉帝殿，就是宝盖岩了。原来已爬到重重山崖之上，往下俯视，中层岩洞嵌入脚底，而下层的三清岩，树梢如散开的翠玉平铺的云彩，好像浮在空中载着它的样子。
English: I went west again, passing through the boulders to the east, so I still walked one mile along the road, returned to the three caves, and chose to go north. I walked more than one mile, climbed to the top of the mountain along the edge of the cliff, and arrived at the Jade Emperor's Palace, which is the Baogai Rock. Originally, I had climbed to the top of the cliff, looking down, the middle-level cave was embedded in the soles of my feet, while the lower-level Sanqing Rock, the treetops like scattered clouds of jade tiles, seemed to float in the air carrying it.

古文：由岩左循崖跻石，其上层石回亘，如盘髻上突，而俱不中空，邑峭削无容足之级，而崖端子石嵌突，与白石之顶同一升法。
现代文：由洞左沿山崖登上石崖，那上层的石崖回绕横亘，如盘绕的发髻上突，但中间都不空，虽陡削无容足之处，可石崖之间嵌入的石子突出来，用与在白石山山顶的同一种方法上登。
English: From the cave, climb up the cliff along the cliff on the left. The upper cliff stretches out like a coiled bun, but it is not empty in the middle. Although there is no room for steep cuts, the stones embedded between the cliffs protrude and are climbed in the same way as the top of Mount Shiroishi.

古文：约一里，遂凌峰顶。
现代文：很久，就从原路下山，三里，来到灵景岩取了行李。
English: After a long time, I walked three miles down the mountain from the original road and came to Lingjing Rock to pick up my luggage.

古文：其间横突之崖，旁插之峰，与夫环涧之田，傍溪之室，遐览近观，俱无非异境。
现代文：又走五里，向南下到山麓，向西越过一座桥，在石嘴铺吃了饭。转向北行一里，路过石寨村。
English: Walked another five miles, went south to the foot of the mountain, crossed a bridge to the west, ate a meal at a stone pavement. Turned northbound one mile, passed Shizhai Village.

古文：久之，乃从旧道下，三里，村。东望峡门深窈，冀一入探，而从夫阻梗不前；眺峡右有岩岈然，强其姑往探，此夫倔强如故。
现代文：往东望去峡口深远，希望进去探一探，但随行的脚夫从中作梗不肯前走；眺望峡右有个岩洞十分深邃，强逼他姑且前去探一探，这个脚夫倔强如故。
English: He looked eastward to the mouth of a deep gorge, hoping to go in and explore it, but the porter who accompanied him did not want to go forward; there was a rock cave on the right side of the gorge that was very deep, forcing him to go ahead and explore it. This porter was stubborn as ever.

古文：有土人见而问之，余以情告。
现代文：有个当地人见了便询间缘故，我把情况告诉他。
English: A local man saw me and, out of curiosity, I told him the situation.

古文：土人曰： 此岩甚浅，不足入其内。
现代文：当地人说： 此洞很浅，不值得进去。
English: Locals said: 'This hole is very shallow, it's not worth going in.

古文：山半有竹简岩，山北之岩，惟此可入而游也。 
现代文：这里面山腰有个竹简岩，山北面的岩洞只有此洞可以进去游一游。 
English: There is a bamboo rock on the mountainside here, and the cave on the north side of the mountain is the only one you can swim in.

古文：夫乃俯首从命。
现代文：脚夫这才俯首听命。
English: Only then did the porter bow his head and obey.

古文：遂东向峡门入，过峡北，岩果浅，而中北不堪置足。一里，西抵一高峰东麓，见危崖独展，内环成峡。
现代文：当门的屏风下，它的南面裂开垂直的缝隙，削为三道悬崖；西面下边却连着北面卫兵样的山峰，与它并排耸起；东面高险的山崖独自展开，与西面高峰的山麓相对形成峡谷。
English: Under the screen of the gate, its south side is split by a vertical gap and cut into three cliffs; on the west side, the lower side is connected to the guard-like peaks on the north side, rising side by side with it; on the east side, the high-risk cliffs spread out independently, forming a canyon opposite the foot of the peak on the west side.

古文：峡南堰水成塘，塘上一家结茅而居，环户以竹，甚有幽致。
现代文：峡谷南段筑堤积水成为水塘，环绕着积在南面裂缝的三道悬崖下，西面附属的小峰，就是像锥子一样立在南边。水塘上有一户人家建了茅屋住在这里，用竹丛环绕着屋门，十分幽静雅致。
English: In the southern section of the canyon, the dammed water has become a pond, surrounded by three cliffs under the cracks on the south side. The small peak attached to the west side stands like a cone on the south side. A family built a hut on the pond to live here, with bamboo bushes surrounding the door, very quiet and elegant.

古文：由此渡峡，转上西峰北麓。
现代文：由此渡过峡谷，转上西峰的北麓。
English: From there, it crosses the canyon and climbs to the northern foot of the west peak.

古文：又一里，越岭稍下，其处又成峡焉。
现代文：又走一里，越过岭稍稍下走，此处又形成峡谷了。
English: Walk another mile, cross the ridge and go down a little, and here the canyon is formed again.

古文：细流南向。余乃溯流北入，涧壁阴森，藤竹交荫，涧石磊落，菖蒲茸之，嵌水践绿，足之所履，知菖蒲不知其为石也。
现代文：细细的水流向南流去，一直坠到像锥子样竖立的小峰侧旁。我于是溯流往北深入，山涧的石壁阴森森的，藤条翠竹交织成荫，涧石众多杂沓，营蒲毛茸茸的，嵌入水中踩着绿草，脚所踩之处，只知有营蒲不知它是岩石了。
English: The thin stream of water flowed to the south, until it fell to the side of a small peak that stood like a cone. I then traced the flow further north, the stone walls of the mountains were gloomy, the rattan and bamboo interwoven into the shade, the flints were numerous, the camphor was furry, embedded in the water with green grass, and where my feet stepped, I only knew there was camphor, but I didn't know it was rock.

古文：缘涧东上，复东南跻岭，共一里，有飞石二丈当道，缘梯而上，则竹简岩在其左夹。
现代文：沿山涧往东上走，再向东南登岭，共行一里，有块二丈高的飞石挡住道路，沿石梯往上走，就见竹简岩在飞石左侧的夹缝中。
English: Walk eastward along the ridge, and then southeastward to Dengling, a total of one mile. There is a two-foot-high flying stone blocking the road. Walk up the stone staircase, and you will see Zhu Jane Rock in the gap on the left side of the flying stone.

古文：两岩并列，门俱西北向，虽不甚深，高爽殊甚，南有飞泉外坠，北则燥洁中虚，有僧新结庐其间，故其道开辟。
现代文：两个岩洞并列，洞口都是朝向西北，虽不十分深，特别高敞明亮，南面有飞泉坠到洞外，北面则干燥整洁中间空阔，有僧人在洞中新建了房屋，所以这里的路开阔。
English: The two caves are side-by-side, with their openings facing northwest. Although they are not very deep, they are particularly spacious and bright. On the south side, there is a flying spring that falls outside the cave, while on the north side, there is a dry, clean space in the middle. A monk has built a new house in the cave, so the road here is wide open.

古文：既而下二里，仍至环塘结茅处，见东麓有径北倚危崖，款茅而问罅并起，界崖为三，俱危悬绝峭。
现代文：洞下山崖直达涧底。估计洞后就是西面高峰的绝顶，应当与三清岩腹背相对，如果由这里设置了石瞪，可首先登上峰顶，依次下到各个岩洞了。随后下行二里，仍来到水塘环绕建有茅屋之处，去探测南面的裂缝。裂缝相距五尺，两条裂缝并排升起，把山崖分隔成三段，全是高险悬绝的峭壁。
English: After the cave, the cliff reaches the bottom of the ravine. It is estimated that the top of the west peak is behind the cave, and it should be opposite the belly of the Sanqing Rock. If a stone tower is set up from here, you can first climb to the top of the peak and go down to each cave in turn. Then go down two miles, and still come to the pond surrounded by huts, to detect the cracks on the south side. The cracks are five feet apart, and two cracks rise side by side, separating the cliff into three sections, all of which are high-risk cliffs.

古文：见东麓有径北倚危崖，款茅而问之，其人方牧，指曰： 此石背村路也。 
现代文：望见东麓有条小径紧靠北面的危崖，敲茅屋的门问路，那人正在放牧，指点说： 这是去石背村的路。 
English: He knocked on the door of a thatched cottage to ask for directions. The man, who was grazing, pointed and said, "This is the way to Shibe Village."

古文：先是，偕从夫循危崖北行，夹径藤树密荫，深绿空濛，径东涧声唧唧，如寒蛩私语；径西飞崖千尺，轰影流空，隔绝天地。
现代文：这之前，偕同随行的脚夫沿危崖往北行，小径两旁满是藤枝树丛，树荫浓密，一片深绿空壕嚎的，小径东侧的山涧水声哪卿，如深秋的蟋蟀在窃窃私语；小径西面飞崖千尺，崩裂的山影流下天空，隔绝天地。
English: Before this, the toad, accompanied by the porter, walked along the dangerous cliff to the north. Both sides of the path were full of wisteria bushes. The shade of the trees was dense, and a deep green trench was formed. The sound of the mountain stream on the east side of the path was like a toad whispering in the late autumn. The west side of the path was a thousand feet from the cliff, and the broken mountain shadow flowed down to the sky, separating heaven and earth.

古文：若不有此行，只谓都峤南魁北峭，一览可尽，而谁觉其幽悄至此哉！
现代文：如果没有此行，只认为都娇山南面高大北面陡峭，可一眼览尽，而谁又会察觉到它幽深寂静如此呢！
English: Without this trip, I would only think that Du Jiao Mountain is tall in the south and steep in the north, which can be seen at a glance, but who would notice its deep silence!

古文：时已下午，从夫顿捐除去倔强之色，并忘跋履之劳。
现代文：此时已是下午，随行的脚夫顿时消除了倔强的神色，并忘了跋涉的疲劳。
English: By this time it was already afternoon, and the porter accompanying them suddenly lost his stubborn look and forgot the fatigue of the trek.

古文：二里，危崖北穷，与坞西转，路乃东向，截坞登岭。
现代文：行二里，危崖在北面到了头，随山坞向西转，就是挡住门屏风的北麓了，与南麓三道裂开的悬崖相比它陡峻的程度稍逊色一些，也环绕绵亘成山坞。路于是向东走，横越山坞登岭。
English: After two miles, the cliff came to a head in the north, and as the dock turned to the west, it was the northern foot of the screen that blocked the door. Compared with the cliff that split three ways at the southern foot, it was a little less steep, and it was also surrounded by a dock. The road then went east, crossing the dock to climb the mountain.

古文：逾岭，其坞自北而南。复开南北坞。
现代文：此岭是西面高峰往东北延伸的支脉，向北延伸连接到北面卫兵样的山峰。越过岭，那里的山坞自北延向南。
English: This ridge is a branch of the west peak extending to the northeast, extending northward to connect to the north guard-like peak. Across the ridge, the dock there extends from north to south.

古文：坞东乃中高盘亘，上亦有岩悬缀。下与西高夹为此坞，北更有重崖间之，南则湾环以出，不知所极。
现代文：山坞东面是中央的高峰盘踞横亘着，上边也有岩洞悬挂着，下面与西面的高峰夹成此坞，北边另有重重山崖隔断了山坞，南面则弯弯转转地出去，不知它的尽头。
English: On the east side of the dock, the central peak stretches across, and there is also a rock cave hanging on the upper side. The peak below and the one on the west are sandwiched into this dock. On the north side, there are other mountains and cliffs separating the dock. On the south side, it curves around and around, and I don't know where it ends.

古文：既而南见两三家倚西峰北麓而居，亟趋而问之，即石背村也。
现代文：随即见南面有两三家人背靠西峰的北麓居住，急忙赶过去问路，就是石背村了。
English: Then I saw that there were two or three families living at the northern foot of the west peak in the south, and I hurried to ask for directions. It was Shibei Village.

古文：余既得石背，因忆宝盖道者所云： 山北有岩与之相近。 
现代文：我找到石背村后，因而想起宝盖岩道士说的话： 山北有洞与它相接近。 
English: After I found Ishibe Village, I remembered what Bao Gaiyan Taoist said: There is a cave in the north of the mountain that is close to it.

古文：更详询其所在。
现代文：再详细询问岩洞所在之处。
English: Ask again in detail where the cave is.

古文：村人曰： 此处东有婆婆岩，岩高路绝，可望而不可到；西有新岩，其岩新辟，有径可别下石寨。 
现代文：村里人说： 此处东边有个婆婆岩，洞高路断，可望而不可及；西面有个新的岩洞，那个洞新近开辟，有小径可另外下到石寨村。 
English: The villagers said: There is a rock on the east side of this place, and the road is broken, and it is difficult to reach; there is a new rock cave on the west side, and that cave has been newly opened, and there are paths that can be used to go down to Shizhai Village.

古文：乃引余从屋右小径，指而望之，即竹简岩也。
现代文：于是领我从屋右的小径走，指着望过去，就是竹简岩了。
English: So he led me down the path to the right of the house, pointed and looked over, and there was the Bamboo Cutter Rock.

古文：盖北山之洞即为竹简。
现代文：原来北山的洞就是竹简岩。
English: Originally, the cave in the North Mountain was the Bamboo Cutter Rock.

古文：此中岩名、村界，询之则彼此多错，陟之则脉络递现，山灵与杖屦辐辏聚集，其无幽不抉如此！
现代文：问起这一带的岩洞名、村庄的地界，彼此大多错乱，走到那里却脉络依次显现出来，山间的灵气与手杖鞋底聚在一起，那没有什么幽深之处不被如此挖掘出来！
English: When asked about the names of the caves in this area, the boundaries of the villages, they are mostly confused with each other. But when you go there, the veins appear in turn. The aura of the mountains and the soles of the canes come together. There is no depth that is not excavated in this way!

古文：时日已下迫，问抵县城尚二十里，亟逾岭，循危崖而行。
现代文：此时落日已下垂，问知走到县城还有二十里，连忙越过山岭，沿危崖而行。
English: At this time, the setting sun had already set. I asked if there were still twenty miles to the county seat. I hurriedly crossed the mountains and walked along the cliff.

古文：三里，未至石寨，见有路北去，遂随之。
现代文：三里，未到石寨村，见有路向北去，便顺着它走。
English: Three miles before reaching Shizhai Village, I saw a road heading north, so I followed it.

古文：盘一岭，路渐微，问之樵者，曰： 误矣！ 
现代文：绕过一岭，路渐渐变小，向樵夫问路，说： 错了！ 
English: After going around a ridge, the road gradually became smaller. He asked the woodcutter for directions and said, "Wrong!

古文：指从苍莽中横去，曰 从此西南，可得大道。 
现代文：指点从苍茫的原野中横过去，说： 从此往西南走，可走上大道。 
English: The guide pointed across the vast field and said, "From here, walk to the southwest and you will reach the main road."

古文：从之，路益荒棘。
现代文：按他的话走，路越加荒芜满是荆棘。
English: According to his words, the road is full of thorns.

古文：久之，得微径向西南，约共误三四里，仍出石寨傍南来大道，日已逼虞渊矣。
现代文：很久之后，看到小径通向西南，约一共错走了三四里路，仍出来到石寨村傍南来的大道上，落日已逼近西山了。
English: After a long time, I saw that the trail led to the southwest, and I walked a total of three or four miles by mistake. I still came out on the road to the south of Shizhai Village, and the sunset was approaching the West Mountain.

古文：始北转向大道行，五里，过古楼村西，已昏黑。
现代文：这才转向北沿大道行，五里，走过古楼村西头，天已昏黑。
English: Only then did I turn north along the boulevard, five miles, passing the west end of the ancient tower village. It was already dark.

古文：念前所投宿处，酬钱不受，难再入，入他家又昏暮不便，从暗中历大道北向而驰。
现代文：考虑先前投宿之处，酬谢他钱不接受，难以再进去，进别的人家又昏黑不便，从黑暗中经大道向北疾行。
English: Considering the previous place of lodging, he did not accept money as a reward, it was difficult to re-enter, it was dark and inconvenient to enter other people's homes, and he sped north from the darkness along the avenue.

古文：四里，越一隘，又二里，转一岣，复下一坡，渡一涧，共二里而抵绣江，则街鼓击鼓报时既动，宿肆俱寂。
现代文：四里，越过一个隘口，又走二里，转过一座山，又下了一道坡，渡过一条山涧，共二里后抵达绣江，就听街上更鼓已敲响，住宿的旅店全都沉寂了。
English: Four miles, over a pass, another two miles, around a mountain, down a slope, across a ridge, after a total of two miles, we arrived in Xujiang. We heard the drums beating in the streets, and the hotels where we were staying were all silent.

古文：乃叩南涯之肆，入炊而宿焉。
现代文：只好敲开了南岸的旅店门，进去煮饭吃了便睡下。
English: I had to knock on the door of an inn on the south bank, go in, cook dinner, eat, and then go to sleep.

古文：即昨来炊饭家，故闻声而即启也。
现代文：这就是昨天来时烧饭的那一家，所以他们听见声音就立刻开门了。
English: This is the family that was cooking when we arrived yesterday, so they heard the noise and immediately opened the door.

古文：初六日早，北渡江入南门，出西门，饭于肆，即从外垣墙内北向行。
现代文：初六日清早，向北渡江进入南门，出了西门，在店铺中吃了饭，立即从外郭内向北行。
English: In the early morning of the 6th day of the first month, he walked northward across the river, entered the south gate, went out of the west gate, ate a meal in a shop, and immediately walked northward from the outer ward.

古文：经演武场，有大塘潴水甚富，堤行其间。
现代文：途经演武场，有大水塘蓄水非常宽广，堤坝伸向塘中。
English: Passing through the martial arts arena, there is a large pond with a very wide water storage, and the dam extends into the pond.

古文：堤北出古城门，此古州北城遗址也。
现代文：从堤北走出古城门，这是古州城北面的遗址了。
English: Walking out of the ancient city gate from the north of the embankment, this is the northern site of the ancient city of Guzhou.

古文：有碑言： 天顺间郑果、嘉靖间吴显宗二寇为乱，皆因改州为县，城失其险。
现代文：有碑说：天顺年间郑果、嘉靖年间吴显宗两起盗贼作乱，都是因为把州改为县，城失去它的险要地位。
English: There is a monument saying: Zheng Guo in the Tianshun period and Wu Xianzong in the Jiajing period were two cases of thieves causing disturbances, both because the state was changed to a county, and the city lost its important position.

古文：故崇祯初复门旧基为外护 云。
现代文：所以崇祯初年在旧基上恢复城门作为外围的屏障 等等。
English: Therefore, in the first year of Chongzhen, the city gate was restored on the old foundation as an outer barrier, and so on.

古文：余疑改州为县，因人散城缩，非改县而后失险也。
现代文：我怀疑把州改为县，是因为人口散去城市萎缩，不是改县后才失去险要之势。
English: I suspect that the state was changed to a county because the population was dispersed and the city shrank, not because the county was changed and the city lost its importance.

古文：出门即西行，已而北转，循大容东麓十里，有水自西北来，乃连渡其右，复渡其左，三渡遂循溪溯流而上，行夹谷间五里，为石头铺。
现代文：出了容县北门立即往西行。不久转向北，沿大容山东麓走十里，有溪流自西北流来，向东流入绣江。于是接连渡过溪右，又渡到溪左，渡了三次就沿溪水溯流而上，行走在夹谷间五里，是石头铺。
English: After leaving the north gate of Rong County, I immediately headed west. Soon, I turned north and walked for ten miles along the eastern foot of Mt. Dalong. A stream flowed from the northwest and flowed east into the Xujiang River. So I successively crossed the stream to the right, then to the left of the stream, and after crossing it three times, I followed the stream upstream. I walked five miles between valleys, and it was a stone pavement.

古文：于是复乱流涉水，水势愈缩，山势愈夹。
现代文：从这里又涉过乱流的溪水，水势越加缩拢，山势越加狭窄。
English: From here, we waded through the turbulent stream, the water was getting closer and closer, and the mountain was getting narrower.

古文：西折入山峡行，透峡共五里，山势复开，是为李村。
现代文：向西折入山峡中前行，穿过山峡共走五里，山势重又开阔起来，这是李村。
English: Turning west into the middle of the gorge, we walked five miles through the gorge. The mountain was heavy and opened up. This was Li Cun.

古文：已渡一桥，复渐入幽阻，盘旋山峡同，见溪流壑底，树蔓空中，五里，跻岭，复盘旋其上峡。
现代文：随即越过一座桥，又渐渐步入幽深险阻之地，盘旋在山峡间，只见溪水流在壑谷底，树枝蔓延在空中，藤葛竹林深沉荫蔽，抬头不见天日。五里，登岭，又盘旋在岭上的峡谷中。
English: Then he immediately crossed a bridge and gradually entered the land of deep and dangerous obstacles, hovering between the mountain gorges, only to see the stream flow at the bottom of the valley, the branches spread in the air, the rhododendron bamboo forest was deeply shaded, and he could not see the sun. After five miles, he climbed the ridge and hovered in the canyon on the ridge.

古文：又五里，忽山回谷转，潴水满陂，环浸山麓，开处如湖，夹处如涧，皆平溢不流，左右回错，上下幌漾，真深山中异境也。
现代文：又走五里，忽然山回谷转，积水满池，环绕浸润着山麓，开阔处如湖水，狭窄处如山涧，都平静溢满不流动，左右回绕交错，上下荡漾，真是深山中的奇异之境。
English: I walked another five miles, and suddenly the mountain turned into a valley. The pond was full of standing water, and the foothills were saturated all around. The open areas were like lakes, and the narrow areas were like mountain ridges. Everything was calm and overflowing, but there was no flow. The left and right circuits were interlaced, and the water rippled up and down. It was truly a strange situation in the deep mountains.

古文：已而路向南山，水连东坞，乃筑堤界其间，以通行者。
现代文：不久沿路走向南山，水连接到东面的山坞，就筑了堤隔在山坞中，以便走路的人通行。
English: Soon, along the road to Nanshan, the water was connected to the dock on the east, and a dike was built in the dock to allow pedestrians to pass.

古文：再南山峡，水遂西流，是为水源，盖大容北下之脉所盘夹而成者。
现代文：再向南出峡，水便往西流，这里是水源，大概是大容山向北下延的山脉盘结相夹形成的。
English: Further south out of the gorge, the water flows to the west. Here is the source of water, probably formed by the intertwining of the mountains of the Great Yung Mountain extending to the north.

古文：于是水分东西，夹路随水西北出山。
现代文：从这里起水流分为东西两股夹在路两旁，顺水流向西北出山。
English: From here, the water flow is divided into east and west two strands sandwiched on both sides of the road, and the water flows to the northwest of the mountain.

古文：二里为同山墟，山乃大开，原田每每，村落高下。
现代文：二里路是同山墟，山体从此开阔起来，原野中田地肥沃，村落高高低低。
English: Erli Road is the same mountain massif, the mountain body has since opened up, the fields in the wilderness are fertile, and the villages are high and low.

古文：转而西行，仍南见大容西峰巍然颖出也。
现代文：转向西行，仍望得见大容山的西峰巍然突出。
English: Turning to the west, the west peak of the Dalong Mountain can still be seen.

古文：五里，有大溪自南，小溪自西，二溪会而东来之溪相并北去。
现代文：五里，有条大溪自南边，小溪自西面流来，两溪相会后与东面流来的溪水互相并行向北流去。
English: For five miles, a large stream flows from the south, a small stream from the west, and after the two streams meet, they flow parallel to each other to the north with the streams flowing from the east.

古文：乃涉南溪，溯西溪，北循岭过鸡黍山，有村落在路左。
现代文：于是涉过南来的大溪，溯西来的小溪走，向北沿着山岭过了鸡黍山，有村落在路左。
English: So I waded through the large stream coming from the south and the small stream coming from the west, walked north along the mountains and passed the Jixian Mountain, and there was a village on the left side of the road.

古文：左右俱有峡，通狭径，两三家当阜而居，径分其前，溪合其下。
现代文：越过溪流往北走，落日还有余辉，路上的人说，从此将向北进入深山峡谷之中，无人居住，便在秦窑停下了。
English: Crossing the stream to the north, with the setting sun and the afterglow, the people on the road said that from now on they would go north into the deep mountain canyon, uninhabited, and stopped at Qinyao.

古文：主人方裂竹为构屋具，取大竹椎扁裂之，片太尺许，而长竟其节，以覆屋兼椽瓦之用。迎客有山家风味，不若他方避客如虎也。
现代文：秦窑这地方，是鸡黍山北面山坞中高悬的一座小土山。左右两侧都有峡谷，通着一条狭窄的小径，有两三家人在土山上居住，小径在它前面分岔，溪水在它下方合流。主人正在剖竹为建房做准备，迎接客人有山村人家的风味，不像其他地方躲避客人如避猛虎一样了。
English: This place, Qinyao, is a small hill in the middle of the dock on the north side of Jishan Mountain. There are canyons on both sides, and a narrow path leads to it. Two or three families live on the hill. The path splits in front of it, and the stream merges below it. The owner is cutting bamboo to prepare for building a house, and welcomes guests with the flavor of a mountain village. Unlike other places, avoiding guests is like avoiding a tiger.

古文：初七日晨餐毕，从秦窑北行。
现代文：初七日早餐完后，从秦窑往北行。
English: After breakfast on the seventh day of the first lunar month, I drove north from Qinyao.

古文：透峡二里，山复环而成坞，有聚落焉，是为卢绿塘。
现代文：穿越山峡二里，山又环绕成山坞，有村落在其中，这里是卢绿塘。
English: Two miles across the gorge, the mountain is surrounded by a dock, with a village in the middle. This is Lu Lu Tong.

古文：从此循壑西北行，山谷愈幽，径路愈塞，山俱丛茅荒棘，求如水源一带高树深林，无复可得。
现代文：从此处沿壑谷往西北行，山谷愈加幽深，道路愈加阻塞，山上全是丛聚的茅草荒芜的荆棘，再也找不到如像水源一带那样的高树深林了。
English: From here, we travel northwest along the valley of the reeds. The valley becomes deeper and deeper, the roads become more and more blocked, and the mountains are full of clumps of thatch and thorns. We can no longer find a deep forest of tall trees like the one around the water source.

古文：况草茅高者没顶，不辨其上之或东或西，短者翳胸，不见其下之为平为坎。
现代文：何况茅草高的没过头顶，辨不清头上边是东还是西；短些的遮过胸脯，看不见脚下是平坦还是坎坷。
English: Moreover, the tall thatch does not exceed the top of the head, and it is not clear whether the edge of the head is east or west; the shorter one covers the chest, and it is not possible to see whether it is flat or rough underfoot.

古文：如是者三里，过大虫塘。
现代文：这样的路走了三里，路过大虫塘。
English: I walked three miles on this road, passing through a large insect pond.

古文：又二里逾长岭顶，始北望白石山在重峰之外。
现代文：又行二里越过长岭顶，这才望见北面的白石山在重重山峰之外。
English: After another two-mile walk over the top of the Changling, I could see Mount Shiraishi in the north beyond the mountains.

古文：于是西北从岭头下二里，又从坑中下一里，为石潭村。
现代文：于是向西北从岭头下走二里，又从坑谷中下走一里，是石潭村。
English: So I walked two miles northwest from the foot of the ridge and one mile down from the middle of the valley. It was Shitan Village.

古文：村北逾小桥，从东岐行五里，山坞大开，有江自南而东北注，是为西罗江，乃发源大容西北，而东至头家寨入绣江者。
现代文：从村北越过小桥，沿东面的岔道行五里，山坞十分开阔，有江水自南往东北流注，这是西罗江，是发源于大容山西北麓，到此才能承载船只，而后向东在头家寨流入绣江的江流。
English: From the north of the village, cross the small bridge and walk five miles along the east side of the causeway. The dock is very open, and there is river water flowing from the south to the northeast. This is the Silo River, which originates from the northwest foot of the Dalong Mountain. It is only here that it can carry ships, and then flows eastward into the Yuxi River at Toujiazhai.

古文：其流颇大，绝流而渡，没股焉。
现代文：江流很大，横截江流而渡，水没过大腿。
English: The river flow is very large, the river flows across the river, and the water has not passed the thigh.

古文：北岸为平地墟，有舟下达绣江。
现代文：北岸是平地墟，有船下行到绣江。
English: The north bank is a flatland market, with boats going down to the Yuxiang River.

古文：由其埠西上岭，二里，人一坞，为板洞，聚落亦盛。
现代文：由江边码头向西上岭，二里，走入一个山坞，是板洞，村落十分兴盛。
English: From the riverside wharf to the west of Shangling, two miles, walk into a dock, is a board hole, the village is very prosperous.

古文：由洞后西上岭，平行岭半二里，转而北，复平行岭半二里，乃下。
现代文：由板洞后向西上岭，平缓行走在山岭半腰上二里，转向北，再平缓行走在山腰上二里，这才下山。
English: After leaving the cave, head west to Shangling. Walk gently for two miles halfway up the mountain, turn north, and walk gently for two miles up the mountainside before descending.

古文：旋东北上跻，遂逾岭头，南望大容东西诸峰无不毕献，惟北瞻白石，为北峰所掩。
现代文：随即往东北上登，终于越过岭头，向南望去大容山东西两面的群峰无不全部呈现出来，唯独向北远望白石山，被北峰遮住了。
English: Then I climbed up to the northeast, and finally crossed the ridge, looking south to the east and west of Dalong Mountain, all the peaks on both sides appeared, except that I looked north to Mount Shiraishi, which was covered by the north peak.

古文：复平行岭上，一里而下岭北，其水犹东行。
现代文：再平缓行走在岭上，一里后下岭往北走，这里的水流仍然往东流。
English: Then walk gently on the ridge, and after one mile walk down the ridge to the north. The water here still flows eastward.

古文：度峡西，稍逾一坳，水始分东西焉：东水俱入西罗江，属梧；西水俱入大水河，属浔，是为分界。
现代文：越到峡谷西面，慢慢越过一个山坳，水流这才分为东西两道：东面的水流全部流入西罗江，属于梧州府；西面的水流全部流入大水河，属于得州府，这里是分界处。
English: After reaching the western side of the canyon and slowly crossing a mountain ridge, the water flow is divided into east and west: the eastern water flow all flows into the Silo River, belonging to Wuzhou; the western water flow all flows into the Great Water River, belonging to Dezhou, here is the demarcation point.

古文：一里出坞，为上周冲，山始开。
现代文：一里走出山坞，是上周冲，山体这才开阔起来。
English: One mile out of the dock, it was last week's rush, and the mountain only opened up.

古文：五里抵罗秀，山乃大开。
现代文：行五里抵达罗秀，山体变得十分开阔。
English: After traveling five miles to reach Luoxiu, the mountain became very open.

古文：饭于肆。
现代文：在店铺中吃了饭。
English: We had lunch in the store.

古文：由罗秀北行三里，为卢塘。
现代文：由罗秀往北行三里，是卢塘。
English: Three miles north of Laxiu is Lutang.

古文：四山开绕，千室鳞次，倚山为塘，堤分坡叠，亦山居之再盛者也。
现代文：四围群山开阔缭绕，千家万户鳞次栉比，靠山筑塘，堤坝将池塘分成重叠的，也是山中村居又一处兴盛的地方。
English: Surrounded by wide-open mountains, with thousands of families living side by side, and backed by mountains and ponds, with dams dividing the ponds into overlapping areas, it is also another prosperous place for villages in the mountains.

古文：罗秀、卢塘之中，道旁有空树一圆，出地尺五，围大五尺，中贮水一泓，水面上盈树围者五六寸，下浮出地面者几及尺焉。
现代文：罗秀、卢塘之间，路旁有一棵空心树，高出地面一尺五，圆周大五尺，树洞中贮了一塘水，水面离树洞口有五六寸，下面浮出地面几乎一尺。
English: Between Luoxiu and Lutang, there is a hollow tree by the roadside, one foot five above the ground, with a circumference of five feet. A pond of water is stored in the tree hole. The water surface is five or six inches from the tree hole, and the ground is almost one foot below.

古文：树若井栏，或人之剜空而植之地中者。
现代文：水深碧澄澈晶莹，用手杖探测，深不可测，而珍珠似的水泡泊泊向上溢出。
English: The depth of the water is crystal clear, can be detected with a cane, unfathomable, and the pearl-like bubbles spill upwards.

古文：但水之浮地为可异耳。卢塘北五里，过卢忘村，登一岭夹。
现代文：空心树虽然高于地面，但如果树中有水，只可能与地面相平，这是因为树下左右两边都有溪流，而贮在这树中的水独独比地面高，不溢出不减少，这是谁在舀水灌在其中的呢？
English: Although the hollow tree is higher than the ground, if there is water in the tree, it can only be level with the ground. This is because there are streams on both sides under the tree, and the water stored in this tree is only higher than the ground, does not overflow and does not decrease. Who is pouring water into it?

古文：下而复上，又二里，循山半行，始望白石双尖如觌相见面。
现代文：由卢塘向北走五里，经过卢忘村，登上一条岭上的峡谷。下岭后又上山，又走二里，沿山腰行，这才望见白石山的一对山尖好像脸对脸的样子。
English: I walked five miles north from Lutang, passed Lu Bo Village, and ascended a canyon on a ridge. After descending the ridge, I went up the mountain, walked another two miles, and walked along the mountainside. It was only then that I saw a pair of peaks of Shiraishi Mountain as if face to face.

古文：其岭东西两界夹持，而北下成深坑，布禾满底坑。
现代文：此岭分为东西两列对峙相夹，而北面的下方形成深坑，坑底满布着稻禾。
English: This ridge is divided into two opposing east-west lines, while a deep pit forms below the north face, the bottom of which is covered with rice straw.

古文：一里，辄有过脊横断两崖间，凡渡三脊，约循崖上者共六里焉。
现代文：一里，总有延伸而过的山脊横断在两面山崖间，共越过三条山脊，大约沿山崖向上延伸了六里。
English: For a mile, there was always an extended ridge to cross between the cliffs on both sides. In total, three ridges were crossed, extending upwards along the cliff for about six miles.

古文：俯瞰坑中，或旁通，或中岐，所谓 十二岔塘 者是矣。
现代文：俯瞰深坑中，有的地方通往旁边，有的在中间岔开，所谓的 十二岔塘 的地方就是这里了。
English: Overlooking the deep pit, some places lead to the side, some are split in the middle, the so-called "Twelve Pond" is here.

古文：渡脊后，遂西北逾岭，一里稍下，复东度一脊，乃北向大路，直望白石山麓。
现代文：翻过山脊后，就向西北越岭，一里后稍稍下来，又向东越过一条山脊，于是向北沿着大路，径直望着白石山山麓走去。
English: After turning over the ridge, I walked northwest over the ridge, a mile later I came down a little, and then east over a ridge, so I walked north along the highway and looked straight at the foot of Shiroishi Mountain.

古文：北下一里，又随夹西转一里，下至坑底，即逾小岭。
现代文：往北下行一里，又随着夹谷向西转一里，下到坑底，立即越过小岭。
English: Go north down one mile, turn west along the valley for one mile, go down to the bottom of the pit, and immediately cross the ridge.

古文：一里西下，则大水河从南北注。
现代文：一里路向西下走，就见大水河从南往北流注。
English: One mile to the west, you can see the Dashui River flowing from south to north.

古文：随之北下，又一里，水转东折，又有一小水北自白石来，合并东向。
现代文：顺着河水向北下行，又一里，河水转向东折去，又有一条小河自北面的白石山流来，合流后向东流去。
English: Following the river down to the north, another mile, the river turns to the east and turns away, and another small river flows from Shiroishi Mountain in the north, merging and flowing to the east.

古文：乃既渡其大，复渡其小，上东北涯，已暮色逼人，投宿于岭上之陈村。
现代文：于是渡过那条大河后，又渡过那小河，上到东北岸，已经暮色逼人，投宿在岭上的陈村。
English: So after crossing the big river, they crossed the small river again, and went up to the northeast shore. It was already dusk, and they stayed in the village of Chen on the ridge.

古文：大水河者，自同冲、罗秀北流过此，下流至武林入浔江。
现代文：大水河，自同冲、罗秀向北流过此地，下流到武林流入得江。
English: The Dashui River, from Tongchong and Luoshu, flows northward through this place and flows down to Wulin and flows into the Dejiang River.

古文：三里出罗捷，或作 插 ，有村落在山半。仍与北来小水遇，溯之行，始得大道。
现代文：初八日自大水河登上后山进入得州府境内，路应该从山左沿小河往北行，我错从山右的大水河向北走去。一里，大水河折向东去，我于是向西越岭。三里路到罗捷，仍与北来的小河相遇，逆水行，这才走上大道。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, I entered the territory of the prefecture of Texas from the back of the mountain after the Dashui River ascended. The road should go north from the left side of the mountain along the small river. I mistakenly went north from the Dashui River on the right side of the mountain. One mile, the Dashui River turned east, so I crossed the ridge to the west. Three miles to Luojie, I still met the small river coming from the north, went against the water, and then I walked on the avenue.

古文：又二里，复逾水上岭，从岭上行二里，西瞻独秀而行。
现代文：又行二里，又渡过河水上岭，从岭上行二里，望着西面的独秀峰而行。
English: I walked another two miles and crossed the river to Shangling. I walked another two miles up the ridge and looked at Duxiu Peak in the west.

古文：下山二里，为陈冲，已出独秀东北，复见白石矣。
现代文：下山二里，是陈冲，已走到独秀峰东北麓，重新见到白石山了。
English: Two miles down the mountain, it is Chen Chong, who has walked to the northeast foot of Duxiu Peak, and has seen Shiraishi Mountain again.

古文：自陈冲循坞中小水东北行，至是又以潘观山为西瞻矣。
现代文：自陈冲沿山坞中的小河往东北行，走到这里又把潘观山作为西望的对象了。
English: From Chenchong, I followed the small river in the dockyard to the northeast, and when I got here, I took Pan Guan Mountain as the object of my westward gaze.

古文：潘观山与东界山排闼而北。
现代文：潘观山与东面一列山似门扇一样排列而北。
English: Pan Guan Mountain and a line of mountains to the east line up to the north like a doorway.

古文：十里，复西北陟冈，盘西界中垂之嘴，于是复循冈陇行。
现代文：十里，又向西北登上山冈，绕过西面一列山从中下垂的山嘴，于是又沿着山冈土陇行走。
English: Ten miles later, I climbed a mountain to the northwest, skirted the western ridge of a line of mountains, and then walked along the ridge of the mountain.

古文：共十里，逾一岭而下，是为油麻墟。
现代文：共走十里，越过一座岭下山，这是油麻墟。
English: A total of ten miles, over a ridge down the mountain, this is the Yau Ma Hui.

古文：时值墟期，饭而后行。
现代文：此时正逢赶集日，吃了饭后上路。
English: At this time, it was market day, and after eating, I was on my way.

古文：十里，连渡二桥，桥北为周村，水北绕而去，路陟西岭。
现代文：十里，一连走过两座桥，桥北是周村，河水向北绕着流去，沿路上登西岭。
English: For ten miles, I walked across two bridges in a row. To the north of the bridge is Zhoucun. The river flows around it to the north, and climbs along the road to Xiling.

古文：五里；过上合村。
现代文：五里，过了上合村。
English: Five miles, past the village of Kamiai.

古文：又谓之麻合，居民二三家在岭内。
现代文：又走十里，到达陈坊。
English: Walked another ten miles and arrived at Chen Fang.

古文：又十里，抵陈坊，陈坊之南，自周村来，山不甚高，水不成溪，然犹冈岭间叠，陂陀盘绕；陈坊之北，则平野旷然，西山在望，聚落成市，始不作空山寂寞观矣。
现代文：陈坊以南，自周村以来，山不十分高，水流不成溪，然而仍冈峦山岭各自间隔，层层叠叠，山坡回绕；陈坊以北，便是平坦空旷的原野，西山在望，村落聚成街市，这才不再显出空旷山野冷清寂静的景观了。
English: To the south of Chenfang, since Zhoucun, the mountains are not very high, and the water flow does not form a stream, but the hills and ridges are still separated from each other, layer upon layer, and the slopes are winding; to the north of Chenfang, it is a flat and open field, the West Mountain is in sight, and the villages are gathered into streets, which no longer shows the cold and quiet landscape of the open mountains.

古文：初九日，自陈坊墟西行荒野之中，中洼如岩，岩中突石，盘错蹲踞，但下无深坠之隙，中无渊涵之水，与前所过石桥村南洼陂突石无以异也。
现代文：初九日从陈坊的集市向西行走在荒野之中，中央下洼如像岩洞，洞中突起岩石，环结交错地盘踞着，但下边没有深坠的裂隙，里面没有深奥的积水，与从前走过的石桥村南面洼塘中突起的岩石没有不同之处。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, I walked westward from the market of Chenfang in the wilderness. The central depression was like a rock cave. Rocks protruded in the cave, and interlaced rings were intertwined. However, there was no deep fissure at the bottom, there was no deep water inside, and there was no difference from the protruding rocks in the pond south of Shihqiao Village that I had walked before.

古文：西行十里，直逼思灵山下，则郁江自西南环城东北，而隔江山光雉堞，恍然在望矣。
现代文：往西行十里，一直逼近思灵山下，就见郁江自西南方环绕府城流向东北，而隔江处山光城池，恍惚在望了。
English: Ten miles to the west, approaching the foot of Shiling Mountain, I saw the Iku River flow from the southwest around Fucheng to the northeast, and the river was at Shanguangcheng Lake. I was in a trance.

古文：之境，得名岩四，而三为洞天：白石名秀乐长真第二十一洞天，勾漏名玉阙宝圭第二十二洞天，都峤名大上宝玄第二十洞天。
现代文：渡过江，抵达府城东南角，前往南门，来到释站前，返回得州府的寓所中，就见两个病人比以前稍有起色。打听去横州的渡船，是明天一大早出发，就带上行李下船等待。这次出行，为时十六天，经过四个县、一个州的境内，找到四个著名岩洞，而三处是道教所称的洞天：白石山名叫秀乐长真第二十一洞天，勾漏山名叫玉网宝圭第二十二洞天，都娇山名、叫大上宝玄第二十洞天。
English: Crossed the river, arrived at the southeast corner of the prefectural capital, went to Nanmen, came to the release station, returned to the apartment in Dezhou, and saw two patients slightly better than before. Inquire about the ferry to Hengzhou, it will depart early tomorrow morning, take your luggage and disembark. This trip took 16 days, passed through four counties and one state, and found four famous rock caves, and three are known as cave heavens in Taoism: Shiroishi Mountain is named Xiu Le Chang Zhen Twenty-first Cave Heaven, Hakuo Mountain is named Yuzhong Bao Gui Twenty-second Cave Heaven, Du Jiao Mountain is named, called D

古文：惟水月洞不在洞天之列，而实容山之正脉。
现代文：只有水月洞不在洞天之列，可实际上是大容山的主脉。
English: Only Shuiyue Cave is not included in the list of cave heavens, but it is actually the main vein of Dalong Mountain.

古文：盖余所历，俱四面环容山之麓。
现代文：大体上我所经历之处，都是西面环绕着大容山的山麓。
English: For the most part, the places I have experienced have been in the foothills of Mt.

古文：盖大脊西南自钦州、灵山，东北经兴业，由平山墟度脉而东，即高峙为大容。
现代文：大略主脊起自西南的钦州、灵山县，向东北经过兴业县，由平山墟山脉往东延伸，就高耸成大容山。
English: The main ridge rises from Qinzhou and Lingshan counties in the southwest, passes through Xingye County to the northeast, and extends eastward from the Pingshanhu Mountains, towering into Dalong Mountain.

古文：其北出之支，发为白石，而山脉尽焉；其南出之支，经北流县东分为勾漏，而山脉亦尽，南行正脉，自鬼门关又南为水月洞，又南经高州、西宁之境，散为粤东南界之脉，而北转者始自罗面而北，结为都峤。
现代文：它往北分出的支脉，突起成为白石山，而山脉在此到了头；它向南分出的支脉，经过北流县向东分支成为勾漏山，而山脉也到了头；往南延伸的主脉，自鬼门关又往南成为水月洞，又向南经过高州府、西宁县境内，散开成为广东东南部的山脉，而向北转去的山脉自罗俪开始往北，盘结为都娇山。
English: Its branch to the north protruded into Baishi Mountain, and the mountain range came to an end here; its branch to the south branched eastward through Beilu County to become Hakuo Mountain, and the mountain range also came to an end; the main vein extending southward, from the Ghost Gate, and southward into the Water Moon Cave, and southward through the territory of Gaozhou Prefecture and Xining County, spread into the mountains of southeastern Guangdong, and the mountains turning northward began in Liaocheng and moved northward, coalescing into Dujiao Mountain.

古文：是白石、勾漏、水月皆容山嫡冢，而都峤则云礽矣。
现代文：这样白石山、勾漏山、水月洞都是大 容山的正宗嫡系，而都娇山却可说是要排在子孙辈之后了。
English: In this way, Shiroishi Mountain, Gokuro Mountain, and Suigetsudong are all the legitimate lineage of Dairong Mountain, while Jiao Mountain can be said to be behind the descendants.

古文：世谓容州三洞天俱潜穴相通，非也。
现代文：世人认为大容山各州县的三个洞天都有暗洞相通，不是的。
English: The world believes that the three cave heavens of each prefecture and county of the Dayong Mountain are all connected by dark holes, but this is not true.

古文：白石之通于勾漏者，直指其山脉联属，而何必窍穴之相彻；都峤之通于勾漏者，第泥其地界之接轸，而岂知脉络之已分。
现代文：说白石山通到勾漏山，只是指它们的山脉相连接，而何必要洞穴相通呢；说都娇山通到勾漏山，仅只是拘泥于它们的地界相接壤，却哪里知道它们的脉络已经分开。
English: To say that Shiraishiyama leads to Mt. Goko only means that their mountains are connected, but why do caves need to be connected? To say that both Mt. Goko and Mt. Goko lead to Mt. Goko is only to adhere to their land border, but no one knows that their veins have been separated.

古文：故余于都峤而知迹之易混，于水月而知近之易遗也。
现代文：所以我在都娇山才知道外表的迹象容易混淆，在水月洞才知道近似的东西容易遗漏。
English: That's why I learned in Dujiaoshan that outward signs are easily confused, and I learned in Shuiyue Cave that things that are similar are easily missed.

古文：鬼门关在北流西十里，当横林之北，望之石峰排列，东与勾漏并矣。
现代文：鬼门关在北流县城西十里，正当横林的北面，远望它石峰排列，东面与勾漏山并立。
English: Ghost Gate is located ten miles west of the city in Beilu County, just north of Henglin. From a distance, you can see its stone peaks lined up, and to the east, it stands side-by-side with Mt.

古文：北流而县中峙，乃东者名仙区，西者称鬼域，何耶？
现代文：北流县城屹立在中间，可东面的山名为仙境，西面的山称作鬼域，为什么呢？
English: The city of Beilu County stands in the middle, but the mountain in the east is called Fairyland, and the mountain in the west is called Ghostland. Why?

古文：余初是横林北望，心异山境，及抵北流而后知其为 鬼门 ，悔不能行其中，一破仙、鬼之关也。
现代文：我起初在横林向北望，心里感到山境奇特，等到达北流后才知它是 鬼门 ，后悔没能在其中行走，一举攻破这仙、鬼之关。
English: At first, I looked northward in the cross-forest, and felt that the mountainous terrain was strange in my heart. It was only after I reached the north stream that I learned that it was a ghost gate. I regretted not being able to walk through it, and break through this fairy and ghost gate at one stroke.

