古文：班彪字叔皮，扶风安陵人也。
现代文：◆班彪传，班彪，字叔皮，扶风安陵人。
English: ◆Ban Biao Chuan, Ban Biao, Zhe Shuxi, Fu Feng Anling Ren.

古文：祖况，成帝时为越骑校尉。
现代文：祖父班况，成帝时做过越骑校尉。
English: His grandfather was a captain in the imperial cavalry during the reign of Emperor Chengdu.

古文：父稚，哀帝时为广平太守。
现代文：父亲班稚，哀帝时做过广平太守。
English: His father was a schoolboy, and when he was mourning the emperor, he served as Guangping's governor-general.

古文：彪性沈重好古。
现代文：班彪性格沉重，喜好古代文化。
English: Ban Biao has a heavy personality and likes ancient culture.

古文：年二十馀，更始败，三辅大乱。
现代文：二十多岁时，正值更始败逃，京城附近大乱。
English: When he was in his twenties, there was a riot near the capital.

古文：时隗嚣拥众天水，彪乃避难从之。
现代文：当时，隗嚣带领众人在天水起事，班彪跟着他避难。
English: At that time, Ganran led many people in the Tianshui Uprising, and Ban Biao followed him to take refuge.

古文：嚣问彪曰 往者周亡，战国并争，天下分裂，数世然后定。
现代文：有一次，隗嚣问班彪道： 从前周朝灭亡，战国纷争，天下四分五裂，经过好几代才得安定。
English: On one occasion, Yan Hanren asked Ban Biao: Since the Zhou Dynasty's downfall and the Warring States Dispute, the world has been torn apart, and it has taken several generations to achieve stability.

古文：意者从横之事复起于今乎。将承运迭兴，在于一人也。
现代文：是合纵连横的事又将出现在今天呢，还是承受天命，在某一个人身上呢？
English: Will the same thing happen again today, or will it be one person's fate?

古文：愿生试论之 对曰 周之废兴，与汉殊异。
现代文：望先生谈谈看法。 班彪答道： 周朝的废兴，与汉朝不同。
English: Mr. Wang would like to share his views.Ban Biao replied: The Zhou Dynasty's Abolition and Rejuvenation is different from the Han Dynasty.

古文：昔周爵五等，诸侯从政，本根既微，枝叶强大，故其末流有从横之事，势数然也。
现代文：从前周朝分爵为公、侯、伯、子、男五等，诸侯掌握自己的领地各自为政，正像一棵大树，本根很弱小，枝叶很茂盛，所以到了后来，出现合纵连横的事，是形势促使它那样。
English: Before the Zhou Dynasty, there were five kinds of vassals: princes, vassals, nobles, sons, and men. The vassals controlled their own territories independently, just like a big tree. The root was very weak, and the branches and leaves were very luxuriant. Therefore, later, the situation was the reason for the succession of vassals.

古文：汉承秦制，改立郡县，主有专已之威，臣无百年之柄。
现代文：汉朝继承秦朝的制度，改封建为郡县制，国君有专制的权威，臣下无百年的大柄。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the system of the Qin Dynasty, and changed the feudal system to the county system. The sovereign had autocratic authority, and no vassal was allowed to rule for more than one hundred years.

古文：至于成帝，假借外家，哀、平短祚，国嗣三绝，故王氏擅朝，因窃号位。
现代文：到了成帝，假借外戚的势力，哀帝、平帝在位时间很短，三帝无子，所以王莽篡位，窃取国位年号。
English: When Emperor Cheng came to power, he took advantage of the influence of his foreign relatives. Empress Pao and Emperor Ping reigned for a short time. The three emperors had no children, so Wang Mang usurped the throne and stole the era name of the country.

古文：危自上起，伤不及下，是以即真之后，天下莫不引领而叹。
现代文：危险来自上边，伤害不及下面，因此，王莽真正篡位之后，天下人没有不伸着脖子在叹息。
English: The danger comes from above, and the damage is not as bad as below. Therefore, after Wang Mang really usurped the throne, people all over the world were sighing with their necks stretched.

古文：十馀年间，中外搔扰，远近俱发，假号云合，咸称刘氏，不谋同辞。
现代文：十多年间，中外发生搔扰，远近都在行动，各自打着刘氏的旗号，会合响应，众口一词，不谋而同。
English: For more than a decade, there have been disturbances in China and abroad, and both far and near are in action, each under the banner of Liu, meeting and responding, and speaking the same language.

古文：方今雄桀带州域者，皆无七国世业之资，而百姓讴吟，思仰汉德，已可知矣 嚣曰 生言周、汉之势可也。至于但见愚人习识刘氏姓号之故，而谓汉家复兴，疏矣。
现代文：现在英雄豪杰统治各州县的，都没有像七国传统的资本，可百姓却异口同声，想念汉朝的恩德，发展趋势已经可想而知了。 隗嚣道 ：先生分析周朝与汉朝的形势是对的；至于只看到愚蠢的百姓习惯刘氏姓号的缘故，而说汉家一定复兴，这就不见得了。
English: Now the heroes and heroines who rule the states and counties are not like the traditional capital of the seven countries, but the people are in unison, miss the grace of the Han Dynasty, and the development trend can already be imagined. 嚣道: Mr. analysis of the situation between the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty is correct; as for only seeing the stupid people's habit of Liu surname, and saying that the Han Dynasty must be revived, this is not possible.

古文：昔秦失其鹿，刘季逐而羁之，时人复知汉乎 
现代文：从前秦朝失去天下，好比一只鹿逃走了，刘邦追鹿到了手，当时人又谁知有什么汉朝么？ 
English: When the former Qin Dynasty lost the world, it was as if a deer ran away, and Liu Bang chased the deer and caught it. At that time, who knew what the Han Dynasty was?

古文：彪既疾嚣言，又伤时方限，乃著《王命论》，以为汉德承尧，有灵命之符，王者兴祚，非诈力所致，欲以感之，而嚣终不寤，遂避地河西。
现代文：班彪一方面痛恨隗嚣的狂言，一方面又感叹时局艰难，于是著一篇《王命论》，认为汉德是继承唐尧，有灵验的王符作证，王者登上宝座，不是凭欺诈能成功，想用这来感动隗嚣，可是隗嚣始终不觉悟，于是避走河西。
English: On the one hand, Ban Biao hated the clamor of the Kyogen, on the other hand, he also lamented the difficult situation, so he wrote an article "The Theory of the King's Life," which believed that Hande was the successor of Tang Xuan, and that there was an effective king's sign to testify that the king could not succeed on the throne by fraud. He wanted to use this to move the clamor, but the clamor was never aware of it, so he avoided Hexi.

古文：及融征还京师，光武问曰 所上章奏，谁与参之 融对曰 皆从事班彪所为 帝雅闻彪才，因召入见，举司隶茂才，拜徐令，以病免。
现代文：河西大将军窦融用他作从事，十分恭敬地待他，用师友之道接待。班彪就替窦融出谋划策，敬事汉朝，总领西河一带来抗拒隗嚣。后来窦融奉诏回京师，光武帝问道： 你所上的奏章，是谁和你参谋？ 窦融答道 ：都是我的从事班彪做的。 皇帝一向听到班彪很有才干，于是召见班彪，举他作司隶茂才，叫他作徐州令，因病没有就位。
English: Dou Rong, the general of the Western Han Dynasty, used him as an advisor, treated him with great respect, and received him as a teacher and friend. Ban Biao then made a plan for Dou Rong, respected the Han Dynasty, and brought the general of the Western Han Dynasty to resist the clamor. Later, Dou Rong returned to Beijing as an advisor, and Emperor Guangwu asked: Who are your advisors? Dou Rong replied: It was all done by my advisor, Ban Biao. The emperor had always heard that Ban Biao was very talented, so he summoned Ban Biao, promoted him to the position of Sifu Maocai, and called him to the position of X

古文：后数应三公之命，辄去。
现代文：后来几次应三公的命令，就去了。
English: Later, he went several times in response to the orders of the Three Sovereigns.

古文：彪既才高而好述作，遂专心史籍之间。
现代文：班彪既有高才又好写作，于是专心在史籍方面下功夫。
English: Ban Biao was both talented and good at writing, so he concentrated his efforts on historical records.

古文：武帝时，司马迁著《史记》，自太初以后，阙而不录，后好事者颇或缀集时事，然多鄙俗，不足以踵继其书。
现代文：武帝时，司马迁著了《史记》，从太初年间以后，缺了没写，后来有些好事者把当时的事迹连缀起来，但是文笔鄙俗，不配为《史记》的后续之作。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, Sima moved the "Histories." From the earliest years, there was a lack of writing. Later, some do-gooders linked the events of the time, but the writing was vulgar and not worthy of being a follow-up work of the "Histories."

古文：彪乃继采前史遗事，傍贯异闻，作后传数十篇，因斟酌前史而讥正得失。
现代文：班彪于是继续采集前朝历史遗事，还从旁贯穿一些异闻，写下后传数十篇，参照前面的历史而评论得失。
English: Ban Biao then continued to collect historical relics of the former dynasty, and also went through some anecdotes from the side, wrote down dozens of stories, and commented on the gains and losses with reference to the previous history.

古文：其略论曰：唐、虞三代，《诗》、《书》所及，世有史官，以司典籍，暨于诸侯，国自有史，故《孟子》曰 楚之《梼杌》，晋之《乘》，鲁之《春秋》，其事一也 定、哀之间，鲁君子左丘明论集其文，作《左氏传》三十篇，又撰异同，号曰《国语》，二十一篇，由是《乘》、《梼杌》之事遂暗，而《左氏》、《国语》独章。
现代文：其略论写道： 唐虞三代，据《诗经》、《书经》的记载，每代均有史官，管理经典著作，到了诸侯各国，每国均有历史，所以《孟子》上说 楚国的历史叫《木寿杌》，晋国的历史叫 乘 ，鲁国的历史叫《春秋》，他们记载历史都是一回事 。鲁定公、哀公的年代，鲁国君子左丘明收集当时的历史，作《左氏传》三十篇，又根据各种不同的材料，写成《国语》二十一篇，从此《乘》和《木寿杌》的事就不行于时，而《左氏》、《国语》就得到人们的重视传习。
English: According to the summary, the third generation of Tang Yu, according to the records of the "Shijing" and "Shujing," each generation had a historian to manage classic works. When they went to the various states, each country had a history. Therefore, "Mencius" said that the history of Chu was called "Muju," the history of Jin was called "Jian," and the history of Lu was called "Spring and Autumn." They all recorded history as one thing. In the age of Ruding and Aigong, the Lu country gentleman Zuo Quming collected the history of the time, wrote 30 "Zao's Biography," and based on various materials, wrote 21 "National Language." From

古文：又有记录黄帝以来至春秋时帝王公侯卿大夫，号曰《世本》，一十五篇。
现代文：又有记录黄帝以来至春秋时代帝王公侯卿大夫事迹的书，叫做《世本》，共一十五篇。
English: There is also a book that records the deeds of emperors, princes and doctors from the time of the Yellow Emperor to the Spring and Autumn Period, called "World Book," with a total of fifteen articles.

古文：春秋之后，七国并争，秦并诸侯，则有《战国策》三十三篇。
现代文：春秋之后，七国纷争，秦国吞并诸侯，就有《战国策》三十三篇问世。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period, when the Seven Kingdoms were in conflict and the State of Qin annexed the principalities, the thirty-three articles of "Strategy of Warring States" were published.

古文：汉兴定天下，太中大夫陆贾记录时功，作《楚汉春秋》九篇。
现代文：汉朝兴起，平定天下，太中大夫陆贾记录当时情况，作《楚汉春秋》九篇。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty and the pacification of the world, Taichung Doctor Lu Jia recorded the situation at that time and wrote "Chu Han Spring and Autumn" nine articles.

古文：孝武之世，太史令司马迁采《左氏》、《国语》，删《世本》、《战国策》，据楚、汉列国时事，上自黄帝，下讫获麟，作本纪、世家、列传、书、表百三十篇，而十篇缺焉。迁之所记，从汉元至武以绝，则其功也。
现代文：孝武皇帝的年代，太史令司马迁采集《左氏》、《国语》，删削《世本》、《战国策》，根据楚、汉列国时事，上自黄帝起，下至太始二年获应为止，作本纪、世家、列传、书、表共一百三十篇，而有十篇缺了，司马迁所记，从汉朝开国至武帝时绝笔，这是它的功绩。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, the Taishi ordered Sima Qian to collect "The Zuo Clan" and "The National Language," and to delete "The World Book" and "The Warring States Strategy." According to the current affairs of Chu and Han countries, from the Yellow Emperor onward, down to the second year of the Taishi Emperor, a total of one hundred and thirty articles were compiled, and ten articles were missing. Sima Qian's record, from the founding of the Han Dynasty to the time of Emperor Wu, is a masterpiece.

古文：至于采经摭传，分散百家之事，甚多疏略，不如其本，务欲以多闻广载为功，论议浅而不笃。
现代文：至于采取经传，搜罗分散于百家的材料，很多粗疏简略之处，不如原来的真实详细，它是以多闻广载见长，论议肤浅而不厚实。
English: As for taking the materials of the sutras and collecting them from hundreds of sources, many of them are crude and abbreviated, which is not as detailed as the original truth. It is based on a lot of hearsay, and the discussion is superficial and not solid.

古文：其论术学，则崇黄老而薄《五经》。序货殖，则轻仁义而羞贫穷。道游侠，则贱守节而贵俗功：此其大敝伤道，所以遇极刑之咎也。
现代文：他论学术就推崇黄帝、老子而轻视《五经》；写货殖传，就轻仁义而以贫穷为耻；写游侠之士，就轻视那些节烈的人而推崇世俗建功之士。这就是大毛病，有伤正道，所以遭到腐刑的缘故。
English: On the subject of learning, he praised the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, but despised the Five Classics; on the subject of writing about the propagation of goods, he despised benevolence and righteousness, and was ashamed of poverty; on the subject of writing about the knights errant, he despised those who were strong-willed, but praised those who made contributions to the world. This was a serious fault, and it was the cause of his being punished for corruption, as he had damaged the righteous path.

古文：然善述序事理，辩而不华，质而不野，文质相称，盖良史之才也。
现代文：但是他善于叙述事理，文笔畅达而不华丽，质朴而不粗野，文质相称，不愧为良史之才。
English: However, he is good at narrating the facts, the writing is smooth but not gorgeous, simple but not rough, the literary quality is commensurate, and he is truly a talent for good history.

古文：诚令迁依《五经》之法言，同圣人之是非，意亦庶几矣。夫百家之书，犹可法也。
现代文：如果让他遵照《五经》的礼法之言，符合圣人的是非标准，那就差不多了。 那些百家的历史书籍，都有可取之处。
English: If he is made to follow the words of etiquette in the Five Classics and meet the standards of a saint, then that's pretty much it. Those hundreds of history books all have their merits.

古文：若《左氏》、《国语》、《世本》、《战国策》、《楚汉春秋》、《太史公书》，今之所以知古，后之所由观前，圣人之耳目也。
现代文：如《左氏》、《国语》、《世本》、《战国策》、《楚汉春秋》、《太史公书》，读了之后，今天的人能够知道古代历史，后世的人可以知道前代的事，实在是圣人的耳目呀。
English: For example, after reading "The Zuo Clan," "The Chinese Language," "The World Book," "The Warring States," "The Spring and Autumn of Chu and Han Dynasties" and "The Book of Cosmic History," today's people can know ancient history, and future generations can know the things of previous generations. It is truly the eyes and ears of a sage.

古文：司马迁序帝王则曰本纪，公侯传国则曰世家，卿士特起则曰列传。
现代文：司马迁替帝王作传就称为本纪，写公侯传国就称为世家，写卿士特起就称为列传。
English: The biography written by Sima Qian on behalf of the emperor is called the original biography, the biography written by the princes to pass on the country is called the family biography, and the biography written by the noblemen is called the series biography.

古文：又进项羽、陈涉而黜淮南、衡山，细意委曲，条例不经。
现代文：他把项羽、陈涉列入本纪和世家，而淮南王、衡山王降为列传，写得细致委婉，很有条理。
English: He included Xiang Yu and Chen Zuo in this chronicle and family, while Huainan Wang and Hengshan Wang were reduced to a series of biographies. His writing was meticulous, tactful, and very organized.

古文：若迁之著作，采获古今，贯穿经传，至广博也。
现代文：司马迁的著作，采自古今的轶闻，贯穿经传的史料，实在广博得很。
English: Sima Qian's works, taken from ancient and modern anecdotes, run through historical materials, are very extensive.

古文：一人之精，文重思烦，故其书刊落不尽，尚有盈辞，多不齐一。
现代文：凭一个人的精力，内容复杂而繁重，所以他的收删削繁芜之处还不太够，有些多余的语言，不够整齐划一。
English: With one person's energy, the content is complex and heavy, so his cutting and pasting is not enough, some redundant language, not neat and uniform.

古文：若序司马相如，举郡县，著其字，至萧、曹、陈平之属，及董仲舒并时之人，不记其字，或县而不郡者，盖不暇也。
现代文：例如写司马相如，举出郡县，写出他的表字，至于写到萧何、曹参、陈平等人，以及董仲舒同时的人，就不记载他们的表字，有些只写了县而不写郡，可能是没有顾及到吧。
English: For example, when writing about Sima Xiangru, he listed the counties and counties and wrote his name. As for the people who wrote about Xiao He, Cao Zhan, Chen Tongren, and Dong Zhongshu at the same time, they did not record their names. Some people only wrote the counties and did not write the counties. Perhaps they did not take it into account.

古文：今此后篇，慎核其事，整齐其文，不为世家，惟纪、传而已。
现代文：今后写历史，必须严格核对事实，修饰文字，统一体例，写世家，只要纪、传就够了。
English: In the future, to write history, it is necessary to strictly check the facts, embellish the text, unify the style, write the family history, as long as discipline and transmission are enough.

古文：传曰 杀史见极，平易正直，《春秋》之义也 
现代文：古书上说： 杀虫见极按：此四字不好理解。 杀 ，作 杀青 讲，引申为 写历史 。 极 可作 标准 讲，译为 写历史是为了使人们见到一些标准 。
English: An ancient book said: "It is difficult to understand these four words: kill, kill young, kill, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young, kill young,

古文：彪复辟司徒玉况府。
现代文：解释很勉强，供参考。平易正直，是《春秋》的本义。  
English: The explanation is very reluctant, for reference. Plain and honest is the true meaning of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：时，东宫初建，诸王国并开，而官属未备，师保多阙。
现代文：班彪又调升到司徒玉况府。当时太子的东宫刚建立，诸王国同时开辟，而官吏没有配齐，师保齐缺。
English: At that time, the East Palace of the prince had just been built, and the kingdoms were opening up at the same time, but there were not enough officials and teachers.

古文：彪上言曰：
现代文：班彪又上言道： 孔子说： 人们的天性是差不多的，而习俗的影响就差得很远。 
English: Ban Biao went on to say: Confucius said: People's natures are almost the same, but the influence of customs is very different.

古文：孔子称 性相近，习相远也 贾谊以为 习为善人居，不能无为善，犹生长于齐，不能无齐言也。
现代文：贾谊认为： 经常与善人打交道，不能不做好事，犹如生长在齐国，不能不说齐国话。经常与恶人接触，不能不做坏事，犹如生长在楚国，不能不说楚国话。 
English: Jia Yiyi believed that: if you often deal with good people, you must do good things, just as if you grew up in Qi, you must speak the language of Qi. If you often come into contact with evil people, you must do bad things, just as if you grew up in Chu, you must speak the language of Chu.

古文：习与恶人居，不能无为恶，犹生长于楚，不能无楚言也 是以圣人审所与居，而戒慎所习。昔成王之为孺子，出则周公，邵公、太史佚，入则大颠、闳夭、南宫括、散宜生，左右前后，礼无违者，故成王一日即位，天下旷然太平。
现代文：因此圣人严格选择邻居，特别注意环境的影响。从前周成王做孺子时出外就由周公、邵公、太史佚等人辅佐他；在朝内就大颠、闳夭、南宫适、散宜生等人辅佐，他的左右前后，没有违背礼节之义，所在成王一登上王位，天下空前的太平。
English: Therefore, the sage strictly chose his neighbors, paying special attention to the influence of the environment. From the time when Zhou Cheng Wang was a mule, he was assisted by Zhou Gong, Shao Gong, Taishi Yan and others when he went out; in the court, he was assisted by Dabou, Gao Yao, Nan Gong Shi, and San Yisheng and others. His left and right sides did not violate the principles of etiquette. Once Cheng Wang ascended the throne, the world was unprecedentedly peaceful.

古文：是以《春秋》 爱子教以义方，不纳于邪。
现代文：因此《春秋》提出 ：爱儿子应该教育他走正路，不走邪门歪道。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" put forward: love son should educate him to take the right path, do not take the wrong path.

古文：骄奢浮佚，所自邪也 。
现代文：骄傲奢侈，淫逸懒惰，邪门歪道的根源。 
English: Pride, luxury, lasciviousness, and idleness are the root causes of evil.

古文：《诗》云 诒厥孙谋，以宴翼子 言武王之谋遗子孙也。
现代文：《诗经》上说 ：留给孙子的好主意，就是安敬之道。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "A good idea left to a grandchild is the way of peace and respect."

古文：汉兴，太宗使晁错导太子以法术，贾谊教梁王以《诗》、《书》。及至中宗，亦令刘向、王褒、萧望之、周堪之徒，以文章儒学保训东宫以下，莫不崇简其人，就成德器。
现代文：就是指周武王留给成王的宝贵遗产。 汉朝兴起后，太宗派晁错用法术教育太子，贾谊用《诗经》、《书经》教育梁王，到了中宗，也使刘向、王褒、萧望之、周堪等人用文章儒学教育东宫以下的人员，没有不选择合适的人，促成他们的品德和才具。
English: It refers to the precious legacy left by King Zhou Wu to King Cheng. After the rise of the Han Dynasty, the Taizhong sect taught the prince with magic, and Jia Yi taught King Liang with the "Book of Poetry" and "Book of Books." In the Chinese sect, Liu Xiang, Wang Bao, Xiao Wangzhi, Zhou Kan and others also used articles of Confucianism to educate people below the Eastern Palace. They did not choose the right people and promoted their virtues and talents.

古文：今皇太子诸王，虽结发学问，修习礼乐，而傅相未值贤才，官属多阙旧典。
现代文：现在皇太子诸王子，虽然年轻时就在学习，修习了礼乐，但是做太傅的尚未遇到贤才，官属很少熟悉旧典。
English: Now, although the crown princes have studied and practiced the ritual music when they were young, they have not yet met a genius to be the Taifu, and the officials are rarely familiar with the old classics.

古文：宜博选名儒有威重明通政事者，以为太子太傅，东宫及诸王国，备置官属。
现代文：应该广泛挑选有威望、懂政事的名儒，用他们做太子太傅，东宫和诸王国，官属应该配齐。
English: There should be a wide selection of prestigious and politically-savvy famous Confucians, and they should be used as the Crown Prince, the Eastern Palace and the kingdoms, and the officials should be aligned.

古文：又旧制，太子食汤沐十县，设周卫交戟，五日一朝，因坐东箱，省视膳食，其非朝日，使仆、中允旦旦请问而已，明不媟黩，广其敬也。
现代文：按旧规定，太子有十县作汤沐邑，设保卫人员，五天一朝见，坐在车厢，检查膳食，不是朝见的日子，使仆、中允每天问安罢了，表明举动不随便，处处讲究恭敬哩。 
English: According to the old regulations, the prince has ten counties to make soup and soup, set up security personnel, five days see each other in the morning, sit in the car, check the meal, not the day of seeing each other in the morning, let the servant and Zhongyong say hello every day, show that the behavior is not casual, and pay attention to respect everywhere.

古文：书奏，帝纳之。
现代文：书奏上后，皇帝采纳了。
English: The calligraphy was played, and the emperor accepted it.

古文：后察司徒廉为望都长，吏民爱之。
现代文：后来选司徒廉作望都长，得到官吏百姓的爱戴。
English: Later, he selected Sutulian to be the mayor of the capital, and was loved by the officials and the people.

古文：建武三十年，年五十二，卒官。
现代文：建武三十年，班彪年五十二，死在官位上。
English: Jianwu was thirty years old, Ban Biao was fifty-two years old, and died in office.

古文：所著赋、论、书、记、奏事合九篇。
现代文：他所著的赋、论、书、记、奏事共九篇。
English: He wrote a total of nine articles on fu, ontology, books, records, and reports.

