古文：公羊传李文礼殷安姓房人元宗逵独孤守忠王熊曲崇裕梁士会张怀庆
现代文：公羊传李文礼殷安姓房人元宗逵独孤守忠王熊曲崇裕梁士会张怀庆
English: Ram legend Li Wenli, Yin An, Fang people, Yuan Zong, the sole guardian, the loyal king, Xiong Qu, the revered Liang Society, Zhang Huaiqing

古文：康聓征君李佐元载常衮崔阡黎干崔叔清常愿刘士荣袁德师蒋乂崔损
现代文：康聓征君李佐元载常衮崔阡黎干崔叔清常愿刘士荣袁德师蒋乂崔损
English: Kangxi Conqueror, Li Zuyuan, Zhao Zang, Liu Shirong, Yuan De, Jiangxi Conqueror, Jiangxi Conqueror, Liu Shirong,

古文：公羊传
现代文：公羊传
English: Ram's Tale

古文：有甲欲谒见邑宰，问左右曰：令何所好？
现代文：有一个人想要去拜访县令，问手下的人道：县官有什么喜好？
English: There is a person who wants to visit the county magistrate and ask his subordinates about humanity: What are the county magistrate's preferences?

古文：或语曰：好《公羊传》。
现代文：有一个人答道：喜欢《公羊传》这部书。
English: One person replied: "Love the Ramses book.

古文：后入见，令问：君读何书？答曰：唯业《公羊传》。
现代文：后来去拜见时，县令问他读过什么书，他答道：唯独研读过《公羊传》。
English: Later, when he went to see him, the county magistrate asked him what books he had read, and he replied that he had only studied "The Story of the Ram."

古文：试问：谁杀陈他者？
现代文：县令又问：请问是谁杀的陈他？
English: The county magistrate also asked: Who killed Chen Rong?

古文：甲良久对曰：平生实不杀陈他。
现代文：那个人良久才答道：我平生实在未曾杀死陈他。
English: It took a long time for the man to answer: I never killed him in my life.

古文：令察谬误，因复戏之曰：君不杀陈他，请是谁杀？
现代文：请你查清错误。县令索性再戏弄他道：你没杀陈他，请问是谁杀的？
English: Please find out the mistake. The county magistrate then teased him: You didn't kill Chen, who did?

古文：于是太怖，徒跣走出，人问其故，乃大语曰：见明府，便以死事见访，后直不敢复来，遇赦当出耳。
现代文：于是那人十分恐惧，光着脚丫子便走了出来。有人问他什么缘故，他大声说道：一见县令，便拿杀人的事来追问我，以后可不敢再来了，遇到赦免当然就赶紧出来了。
English: So the man was very frightened and walked out barefoot. When someone asked him why, he said loudly, "When I saw the county magistrate, I asked him about the killing. I didn't dare to come back later. Of course, when I was pardoned, I hurried out."

古文：李文礼
现代文：李文礼
English: Li Wenli

古文：唐李文礼，顿丘人也，好学有文华，累迁至扬州司马，而质性迟缓，不甚精审。
现代文：唐朝人李文礼，是顿丘人，好学而有文彩，官至扬州司马。此人性情迟钝，对什么事都不太精细审慎。
English: Li Wenli of the Tang Dynasty was a Dongqiu man, studious and literate, and rose to the rank of Yangzhou Sima. He had a dull personality and was not very careful about anything.

古文：时在扬州。有吏自京还，得长史家书，云姊亡，请择日发之。
现代文：有一回，他在扬州，有一个官吏从京城回来，给长史捎来一封家信，说姐姐亡故，让他选个日子启程回去。
English: Once, when he was in Yangzhou, a government official came back from Beijing and brought a letter to his family, saying that his sister had passed away, and asked him to choose a day to go back.

古文：文礼忽闻姊亡，乃大号恸。
现代文：文礼忽然听说姐姐亡故，便号啕恸哭起来。
English: Wenli suddenly heard of her sister's death and burst into tears.

古文：吏伺其便，复白曰：是长史姊。
现代文：那官吏一直等候到他安静下来时，才又告诉他：是长史的姐姐。
English: The official waited until he had calmed down before telling him that she was Nagashi's sister.

古文：文礼久而徐问曰：是长史姊耶？
现代文：文礼过了一会儿才慢慢问道：是长史的姐姐？
English: After a while, Wenli slowly asked, "Is she Changshi's sister?"

古文：吏曰：是。
现代文：那官吏说：是。
English: The official said, "Yes."

古文：文礼曰：我无姊，向亦怪矣。
现代文：文礼道：我没有姐姐，先前就感到奇怪了。
English: Wenli: I don't have a sister, so I felt strange before.

古文：殷安
现代文：殷安
English: Yin'an

古文：唐逸士殷安，冀州信都人。
现代文：唐代有个逸士叫殷安，冀州信都人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a great scholar named Yin An, a native of Xindu, Jizhou.

古文：谓薛黄门曰：自古圣贤，数不过五人。
现代文：他对薛黄门说：自古以来，称得上圣贤的超不过五个人。
English: He said to Xue Huangmen, "Since ancient times, there are only five people who can be called sages.

古文：伏羲八卦，穷天地之旨。
现代文：伏羲始创八卦，穷尽了天地的旨意，这是一。
English: It is one thing for Fuxi to have created eight sagas and exhausted the will of heaven and earth.

古文：一也。
现代文：于是屈下一指。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：乃屈一指。神农植百谷，济万人之命。二也。
现代文：神农始种百谷，救济了万人性命。这是二。
English: Shennong was the first to plant a hundred grains of rice, and he saved the lives of tens of thousands of people.

古文：乃屈二指。
现代文：屈下第二个手指。
English: Bend down the second finger.

古文：周公制礼作乐，百代常行。
现代文：周公制订了礼乐，世代相传。
English: Zhou Gong formulated the ritual music, which has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：三也。
现代文：这是三。
English: That's three.

古文：乃屈三指。
现代文：屈下第三个手指。
English: Bend down the third finger.

古文：孔子前知无穷，却知无极。
现代文：孔子的先知是无穷的，后知更是没有终极的，是出类拔萃的人物。
English: The prophecies of Confucius are infinite, and his wisdom is even more infinite. He is an outstanding person.

古文：乃屈四指。
现代文：这是四。屈下第四个手指。
English: This is four. Bend down the fourth finger.

古文：自此之后，无屈得指者。
现代文：从这以后，没有人能够得上屈手指的。
English: Since then, no one has been able to lay a finger on him.

古文：良久乃曰：并我五也。
现代文：过了一会儿才说：加上我是五个。
English: After a while, he said, "If you add me, it's five."

古文：遂屈五指。
现代文：于是屈下了第五个手指。
English: So the fifth finger came down.

古文：而疏籍卿相，男征谏曰：卿相尊重，大人稍敬之。
现代文：殷安疏远、轻视高官卿相，男征劝道：卿相是值得尊重的，大人也该稍尊敬他们。
English: Yin'an alienated and despised high-ranking officials and nobles, and the man advised: nobles are worthy of respect, and adults should also respect them a little.

古文：安曰：汝亦堪为宰相。
现代文：殷安道你也可以做宰相。
English: Yin'an Road, you can also be the prime minister.

古文：征曰：小子何敢。
现代文：男征道：我哪里敢当。
English: Male solicitor: How dare I.

古文：安曰：汝肥头大面，不识今古，噇食无意智，不作宰相而何？
现代文：殷安道：看你肥头大脸，不懂今古，只知道狂吃狂喝而没有才智，不作宰相作什么？
English: Yin An said: Look at your fat head and big face. You don't understand the present and the past. You only know how to eat and drink like crazy, but you don't have any talent. What would you do if you weren't the prime minister?

古文：其轻物也皆此类。
现代文：那些轻世傲物的人都是这一类的人。
English: Those who are worldly-wise are of this class.

古文：姓房人
现代文：姓房人
English: Surname Fongren

古文：唐有姓房人，好矜门地，但有姓房为官，必认云亲属。
现代文：唐朝时，有个姓房的人很喜欢炫耀自己的门第，只要有姓房的当官，他必定说是自己的亲属。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, people with surnames like to show off their lineage. As long as there were officials with surnames, they would say they were their relatives.

古文：知识疾其如此，乃谓之曰：丰邑公相，是君何亲？
现代文：有人了解他有这个毛病，就对他说：丰邑坊的方相是你的什么亲戚？
English: When someone found out that he had this problem, they said to him: "What is your relation to the Fangyi Fang?"

古文：曰：是某乙再从伯父。
现代文：那姓房的人说：是我的再从伯父。
English: The man, surnamed Fang, said, "I am from my uncle."

古文：人大笑曰：君既是方相侄儿，只堪吓鬼。
现代文：问话的人大笑，道：你既然是方相的侄儿，只能去做吓唬鬼的事了。
English: The questioner laughed loudly and said, "Since you are Fang Xiang's nephew, you can only scare ghosts."

古文：元宗逵
现代文：元宗逵
English: Yuan Zongqi

古文：唐元宗逵为果州司马，有婢死，处分直典云：逵家老婢死，驱使来久，为觅一棺木殡之。
现代文：唐朝时，元宗逵任果州司马，他家的奴婢死了，安排直典道：我家的老佣人死了，在我家听使唤多少年了，应该为她找一口棺材葬了。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Yuan Zongjun was appointed as the Guozhou Sima and his family's slave died, he arranged for Zhi Dian to say, "My old servant has died. I've had her for many years. I should find a coffin to bury her."

古文：逵初到家贫，不能买得新者，但得一经用者，充事即得。
现代文：可是我刚刚来到这里，家中贫困，不能买新的，只要个已经用过的，能将就办了事就行。
English: But I just got here, and my family is poor, so I can't buy a new one. As long as I have a used one, I can get things done.

古文：亦不须道逵买，云君家自有须。
现代文：也不要说是我买，就说是你家自己需用。
English: And don't say I bought it, just say your family needs it.

古文：直典出门说之，一州以为口实。
现代文：直典出门就把此事说出去了，一州的人都把此事作为谈论的话题。
English: Right away, he went out and talked about it, and people all over the state made it a topic of conversation.

古文：独孤守忠
现代文：独孤守忠
English: Alone, guarding loyalty

古文：唐杭州参军独孤守忠领租船赴都，夜半，急追集船人，更无他语，乃曰：逆风必不得张帆。
现代文：唐朝时，杭州参军独孤守忠领押送租的船队去京城，到了半夜，把掌船人紧急集合起来，别的话没说，只说道：逆风一定不能张帆。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Hangzhou joined the army, it was left alone to guard and lead the fleet of ships escorting the rent to Beijing. At midnight, the captains of the ships were urgently assembled. They did not say anything else, but only said: the headwind must not sail.

古文：众大哂焉。
现代文：众人大笑。
English: The crowd roars with laughter.

古文：王熊
现代文：王熊
English: Wang Xiong

古文：唐王熊为泽州都督。
现代文：唐朝时，王熊曾任泽州都督。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wang Xiong served as the governor of Zhezhou.

古文：府法曹断略粮贼，惟各决杖一百，通判，熊曰：总略几人？
现代文：都督府的法曹审判抢掠粮食的盗贼，每个人各判杖挞一百，向他通告判罪情况，他问道：总共行抢的几个人？
English: The magistrate of the governor's office tried the thieves who robbed the grain, each of whom was sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane, and informed him of the conviction. He asked: How many robbers were there in total?

古文：法曹曰：略七人。
现代文：法曹回答：行抢的七人。
English: The magistrate replied: "The seven robbers."

古文：熊曰：略七人合决七百。
现代文：他说：行抢的七人合起来应判钱七百。
English: He said: "The seven robbers should be fined a total of seven hundred.

古文：法曹曲断，府司科罪。时人哂之。
现代文：法曹只好依照他的不正确的说法改判，府司便依此给他们七人量刑。
English: The judicial officer had to change the verdict according to his incorrect statement, and the prefectural governor sentenced seven of them accordingly.

古文：前尹正义为都督，公平，后熊来替。
现代文：当时人们都嗤笑这件事。以前尹正义曾任泽州都督，他是很公平的，后来王熊被派来接替了他。
English: At the time, people laughed at the incident. Previously, Yin Zhengyi had been the governor of Zezhou, and he was very fair. Later, Wang Xiong was sent to replace him.

古文：百姓歌曰：前得尹佛子，后得王癞獭。
现代文：百姓们编出歌谣咏道：前得尹佛子，后得王癞獭。
English: The common people made up a song and danced: the first was Yin Fozi, and the second was Wang Yao.

古文：判事驴咬瓜，唤人牛嚼铁。
现代文：判事驴咬瓜，唤人牛嚼铁。
English: The judge is a donkey biting a melon, and the judge is a cow chewing an iron.

古文：见钱满面喜，无镪从头喝。
现代文：见钱满面喜，无镪从头喝。
English: When they see the money, they are overjoyed and start drinking from scratch.

古文：常逢饿夜叉，百姓不可活。
现代文：常逢饿夜叉，百姓不可活。
English: There are frequent famines, and the people cannot survive.

古文：曲崇裕
现代文：曲崇裕
English: Qu Chongyu

古文：唐冀州参军曲崇裕《送司功入京》诗曰：崇裕有幸会，得遇明流行。
现代文：唐朝时，冀州参军曲崇裕写一首《送司功入京》诗，他写道：崇裕有幸会，得遇名流行。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Jizhou military commander Qu Chongyu wrote a poem "Sending a soldier to the capital," in which he wrote: "It was my good fortune to meet Chongyu, and he became famous and popular.

古文：司士向京去，旷野哭声哀。
现代文：司士向京去，旷野哭声哀。
English: The magistrate went to the capital, and there was weeping in the wilderness.

古文：司功曰：大才士，先生其谁？
现代文：司功问道：大学士，教你写诗的先生是谁？
English: Shigong asked, "College graduate, who is the teacher who taught you to write poetry?

古文：曰：吴儿博士，教此声韵。
现代文：曲崇裕说：一位吴地的少年博士，教我这样押韵。
English: Qu Chongyu said: A young doctor from Wuxi taught me to rhyme like this.

古文：司功曰：师明弟子哲。
现代文：司功道真是老师高明，学生就有智慧啊！
English: Sikyong is a great teacher, and his students are very smart!

古文：梁士会
现代文：梁士会
English: Liang Shikai

古文：唐滑州灵昌尉梁士会，官科乌翎，里正不送。举牒判曰：官唤乌翎，何物里正，不送乌翎。
现代文：唐朝时，滑州灵昌县尉梁士会，是乌翎科中举后授的官，里正没有给他送来乌鸦羽翎，便在公文簿上写道：官叫做乌翎，是哪个里正，不送来乌翎？
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Liangzhi Association of Lingshang County, Lishu, was the second-highest-ranking official in the Wuyuan Science. When Li Zheng did not send him the raven feathers, he wrote in the official document book: The official is called Wuyuan. Which Li Zheng did not send Wuyuan?

古文：佐使曰：公大好判，乌翎太多。
现代文：佐使道：你这件事太好解决，乌鸦羽毛太多了。
English: SAJID: You are too good at solving this matter, you have too many crows' feathers.

古文：会索笔曰：官唤乌翎，何物里正，不送雁翅。
现代文：于是梁士会提笔写道：官科叫乌翎，是哪个里正不送来雁翅。
English: So Liang Shikai would take up his pen and write: The official science is called wuxia, which village is not sending goose wings.

古文：有识之士，闻而笑之。
现代文：真有识之士，听到这件事都嗤笑他。
English: He's such a smart guy, everyone laughs at him when they hear about it.

古文：张怀庆
现代文：张怀庆
English: Zhang Huaiqing

古文：唐李义府尝赋诗曰：镂月成歌扇，裁云作舞衣。
现代文：唐朝时，李义府曾写过一道诗：镂月成歌扇，裁云作舞衣。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Li Yifu once wrote a poem: The moon is a fan for singing, and the clouds are for dancing.

古文：自怜回雪影，好取洛川归。
现代文：自怜回雪影，好取洛川归。
English: Self-pity returns to the snow shadow, and it is good to return to Luochuan.

古文：有枣强尉张怀庆好偷名士文章，乃为诗曰：生情镂月为歌扇，出意裁云作舞衣。
现代文：有一个枣强县尉张怀庆好偷名家的文章，他也写诗道：生情镂月为歌扇，出意裁云作舞衣。
English: There is an article about Zhang Huaiqing, a lieutenant of Zaoqiang County, who likes to steal famous houses. He also wrote a poem: "I was born with the moon as a song fan, and I deliberately made clouds as a dance dress."

古文：照镜自怜回雪影，来时好取洛川归。
现代文：照镜自怜回雪影，来时好取洛川归。
English: Looking at the mirror, I feel sorry for the snow shadow, and it is good to go back to Luochuan when I come.

古文：时人谓之语曰：活剥王昌龄，生吞郭正一。
现代文：当人们说他道：活剥王昌龄，生吞郭正一。
English: When people say of him: "He skinned Wang Changling alive, he swallowed Guo Zhengyi alive."

古文：康聓
现代文：康聓
English: Kangxi

古文：唐玄宗既用牛仙客为相，颇忧时议不叶，因访于高力士：用仙客相，外议以为如何？
现代文：唐玄宗决定要启用牛仙客作宰相，很担心与人们的议论不相符合，因而询问高力士道：任命仙客为宰相，你以为外面的议论会如何？
English: Tang Xuan Zong decided to appoint Niu Xian Ke as prime minister. He was very worried that the appointment would not be in line with people's discussions, so he asked Gao Lixi Dao: Appointing Xian Ke as prime minister, what do you think the outside discussions will be like?

古文：力士曰：仙客出于胥吏，非宰相器。
现代文：高力士道：仙客出自于小官吏，不是宰相的材料。
English: Goliath Road: Immortals come from petty officials, not prime minister material.

古文：上大怒曰：即当用康聓。
现代文：玄宗大怒，那就该用康聓！
English: If Emperor Xuanzong is furious, then it's time to use Kangxi!

古文：盖上一时恚怒之词，举其极不可者。
现代文：这本来是玄宗一时愤怒说的话，是举了一个最不可用的人。
English: This was originally a statement made by Xuanzong in a moment of anger. He was holding up a most useless person.

古文：或有窃报聓，以为上之于君，恩渥颇深，行当为相矣。
现代文：可是被人听到并偷偷告诉了康聓。他还以为玄宗对康聓恩泽很深，真的要举他为宰相了。
English: However, someone overheard and secretly told Kangxi. He also thought that Xuanzong was very grateful to Kangxi and really wanted to promote him to prime minister.

古文：聓闻之，以为信然。
现代文：康聓听说后，也信以为真。
English: After hearing about it, Kang Ye also believed it to be true.

古文：翌日，盛服趋朝，既就列，延颈北望，冀有成命。
现代文：第二天便换上一套好衣服去上朝，站在班列里，他一直伸着脖子向北坐的皇上张望，希望看到已经写好的诏命。
English: The next day, he put on a good suit of clothes and went to the imperial court. Standing in the procession, he kept craning his neck to look at the emperor, who was sitting to the north, hoping to see the imperial edict that had already been written.

古文：观之者无不掩口。
现代文：见到的人无不掩口讥笑。
English: Everyone who saw it sneered.

古文：然时论亦以长者目焉。
现代文：然而当时的舆论也都是以长者来看待他。
English: However, the public opinion at that time regarded him as an old man.

古文：聓为将作大匠，多巧思，尤能知地。
现代文：康聓认为自己将成为大器，有许多奇巧的心思，尤其能预测地形风水。
English: Kang Jun thought that he would become a great instrument. He had many ingenious thoughts, especially being able to predict the topography of feng shui.

古文：尝谓人曰：我居是宅中，不为宰相耶？
现代文：他曾对人讲：我居住的是一片宅第的中央，还能不当宰相？
English: He used to say to people: I live in the middle of a block of flats, how can I be prime minister?

古文：闻之者益为嗤笑。
现代文：听到的人越发讥笑他。
English: And all who heard it made fun of him even more.

古文：征君
现代文：征君
English: "Seikun"

古文：唐肃宗之代，争于贤良，下诏搜山林草泽，有怀才抱德及匡时霸国者，皆可爵而任之。
现代文：唐肃宗时期，急需贤良人材，皇帝下诏搜寻山林草泽，凡有怀才抱德以及挽救危难时局而使国家称霸于世的人，都可以授予爵位并任命官职。
English: During the Tang and Su Zong dynasties, there was an urgent need for virtuous people. The emperor issued an edict to search the mountains and forests for them. Anyone who had the ability and morality to save the country from a dangerous situation and make the country dominate the world could be awarded a title and appointed to an official post.

古文：有征君自灵武，衣草衣，蹑芒跔，诣于国门。
现代文：有一个征君，穿草衣，登草鞋，从灵武来到京都朝堂。
English: There was a crown prince, dressed in a straw coat and sandals, who came from Lingwu to the Kyoto Imperial Palace.

古文：肃宗闻之喜曰：果有贤士应募矣。
现代文：肃宗听说后高兴地说：果然有贤士响应招募啊！
English: After hearing the news, Su Zong said happily, "Indeed, there are sages who have responded to the recruitment!"

古文：遂召对，访时事得失，卒无一辞。
现代文：于是召见他来回答问题，肃宗询问他时事得失，直到最后也未回答一句话。
English: So he was summoned to answer questions, Su Zong asked him about the merits and demerits of the current situation, and did not answer a word until the end.

古文：但再三瞻望圣颜而奏曰：微臣有所见，陛下知之乎？
现代文：只是一次又一次地观望肃宗的脸并奏道：微臣有个发现，陛下知道吗？
English: He just looked at Su Zong's face over and over again and said, "We have made a discovery, Your Majesty, do you know?"

古文：对曰：不知。
现代文：肃宗道：不知道。
English: Susondo: I don't know.

古文：奏曰：臣见陛下圣颜，瘦于在灵武时。
现代文：征君接着道：臣看出陛下的脸，是在灵武时消瘦的。
English: Seigun continued, "The vassal saw that His Majesty's face was thin when he was at Lingwu.

古文：帝曰：宵旰所劳，以至于是。
现代文：肃宗道：天不亮就穿衣，天黑才吃饭，每天这样操劳，以至于此。
English: Su Zongdao: I get dressed before dawn and eat before dark. I work so hard every day that I've come to this.

古文：侍臣有匿笑不禁者。
现代文：左右官员有忍俊不禁的。
English: Officials on both sides couldn't help but laugh.

古文：及退，更无他言。
现代文：直到他从朝堂中退出来。再没说别的话。
English: He didn't say anything else until he left the courtroom.

古文：帝知其妄人也，恐闭将来贤路，黾勉除授一邑宰。
现代文：皇帝知道这是个无知妄为的人，可是怕封闭以后有贤良应招之路，为勉力他而授予他县令之职。
English: The emperor knew that he was an ignorant and reckless person, but he was afraid that there would be a virtuous path after the closure, so he gave him the post of county magistrate in order to force him.

古文：洎将寒食，京兆司逐县索杏仁，以备贡奉。
现代文：将要到寒食节的时候，京兆司到各县去搜集杏仁，以准备向皇帝贡奉食用。
English: During the upcoming Cold Food Festival, Jing Zhaosi went to various counties to collect almonds in preparation for donating them to the emperor.

古文：闻之，大为不可，独力抗之，遂诣阙请对。京兆司亦慎此征君必有异见，将奈之何。
现代文：征君听说此事。说大为不可，极力抗拒，于是又要到朝堂请求与皇上对话，京兆司也怕此人一定有什么不同寻常的见解，也拿他没办法。
English: When Seijun heard about this, he said it was impossible and tried his best to resist, so he had to go to the imperial court to request a dialogue with the emperor. Kyoshoji was also afraid that this person must have some unusual opinions, and there was nothing he could do about it.

古文：及召对，奏曰：陛下要寒节杏仁，今臣敲将来，乌复进浑杏仁。
现代文：到了召他去答对时，他奏道：陛下要寒食节用的杏仁，今天臣就是来敲打敲打的，不要再吃那些个浑杏仁了。
English: When he was called to answer correctly, he played: "Your Majesty wants almonds for the cold food festival. Today, the minister is here to beat the almonds. Don't eat those dirty almonds anymore."

古文：上咍而遣之，竟不置其罪。
现代文：皇上只咳嗽一声把他送走，终究没有把他治罪。
English: The emperor only sent him away with a cough, but ultimately did not punish him.

古文：李佐
现代文：李佐
English: Li Zuo

古文：唐李佐，山东名族。
现代文：唐朝人李佐，是山东的豪门势族。
English: Li Zuo of the Tang Dynasty was a member of a powerful family in Shandong.

古文：少时因安史之乱，失其父。
现代文：少年时因安史之乱，他的父亲与家人失散。
English: When he was a boy, his father was separated from his family due to the Anshi Rebellion.

古文：后佐进士擢第，有令名，官为京兆少尹。
现代文：李佐后来考中了进士，有美名，官授京兆少尹。
English: Li Zuo later passed the entrance examination and was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar." He had a good reputation and was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar of Beijing."

古文：阴求其父。
现代文：他私下寻找父亲。
English: He went to look for his father in private.

古文：有识者告后，往迎之于鬻凶器家，归而奉养。
现代文：有知道的人告诉他后，便到一家卖棺材和陪葬物的铺子去把父亲接回来奉养。
English: After someone who knew told him, he went to a shop that sold coffins and funeral paraphernalia to get his father back and take care of him.

古文：如是累月。
现代文：这样过几个月。
English: This went on for months.

古文：一旦，父召佐谓曰：汝孝行绝世，然吾三十年在此党中，昨从汝来，未与流辈谢绝。
现代文：有一天，父亲把他叫过来对他说：你孝敬老人是世上没有可比的，但是我三十年一直在那伙人中间，前些日子我跟你回来，也没有与那些人道谢告别一下。
English: One day, his father called him over and said to him: "Your respect for the elderly is unparalleled in the world, but I have been among that group of people for thirty years. When I came back with you the other day, I didn't even say goodbye to those people.

古文：汝可具大猪五头，白醪数斛，蒜韭数瓮，薄饼十拌，开设中堂，吾与群党一酬申款，则无恨矣。
现代文：你可以准备肥猪五头，白酒数斛，蒜苗韭菜等数瓮，薄饼十盘，把宴席设在庭院，我好酬谢众人并一诉衷肠，这样也就没有遗憾了。
English: You can prepare five fat pigs, a few jars of white wine, a few jars of garlic and pickled vegetables, ten plates of pancakes, and set the banquet in the courtyard. I am good at rewarding and thanking people and appealing to the heart, so there is no regret.

古文：父散召两市善薤歌者百人至，初即列坐堂中。久乃杂讴。及暮皆醉。
现代文：李佐恭敬地接受了父亲的指教，数日后一切准备就绪，他父召集来东西二京善唱挽歌的上百人，一开始还只是安坐在庭院中，过了些时便杂乱地唱起来，到了晚上大家全醉了。
English: Li Zuo respectfully accepted his father's advice. A few days later, everything was ready. His father gathered hundreds of elegiac singers from the east, west and Beijing. At first, they just sat in the courtyard. After a while, they began to sing randomly. By the evening, everyone was drunk.

古文：众扶佐父登榻。而薤歌一声。凡百齐和。俄然相扶父出，不知所在。
现代文：众人扶李佐父亲站在床上，他唱了一声挽歌，所有人便一起合唱起来，接着人们扶着他父亲走出庭院，不知去向。
English: They helped Father Liza to his bed, he sang a dirge, everyone joined in the chorus, and then they helped him out of the courtyard, I don't know where he went.

古文：行路观者亿万。
现代文：一路上有亿万人观看。
English: Along the way, hundreds of millions of people watched.

古文：明日，佐弃家人入山，数日而卒。
现代文：第二天，李佐丢下家人进入大山里，数日后死去。
English: The next day, Li Zuo left his family and went into the mountains, where he died a few days later.

古文：元载常衮
现代文：元载常衮
English: "Manzo Jozankei"

古文：唐代宗以庶务毕委宰相，而元载专政，益乱国典。
现代文：唐代宗把国家的各种政务完全委托给宰相去办理，而宰相元载专权，使国家的典章制度越来越混乱。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the emperor completely entrusted the various government affairs of the country to the prime minister to handle, and the prime minister had absolute power, making the country's award system more and more chaotic.

古文：非良金重宝，趑趄左道，不得出入于朝廷。
现代文：不送良金重宝。不是大力行贿或不搞邪门歪道的人，是不能出入于朝廷的。
English: Those who do not send good money and valuables, those who do not vigorously offer bribes, and those who do not engage in corrupt practices cannot enter or leave the imperial court.

古文：及常兖为相，虽贿赂不行，而介僻自专，失于分别，故升陟多失。
现代文：到常兖任宰相时，虽然他不受贿赂，但是他孤僻而独断专行。由于他不能分别好坏，所以在提拔选用人材上多有失误。
English: When Tsuneyoshi was appointed prime minister, although he did not accept bribes, he was solitary and arbitrary. Because he could not distinguish between good and bad, there were many mistakes in the promotion and selection of personnel.

古文：或同列进拟稍繁，别谓之沓伯。
现代文：有的同僚找他商量事稍稍频繁了些，就称人家是冗沓的人。
English: Some colleagues consult him a little more frequently and call him a verbose person.

古文：是时京师语曰：常无分别元好钱，贤者愚，愚者贤。
现代文：当时京城里舆论说：常无分别元好钱。贤人是愚人，愚人也会被看作贤人。
English: At that time, public opinion in the capital said: There is always good money for nothing. Wise men are fools, and fools are also regarded as wise men.

古文：崔祐甫素公直，因众中唱言：朝廷上下相蒙，善恶同致。
现代文：崔祐甫一向公道正直，因而他众人中大声说道：朝廷中上下昏昧，善恶不分。
English: Cui Youfu had always been fair and honest, so he said loudly among the crowd: The imperial court is confused, and there is no distinction between good and evil.

古文：清曹峻府，为鼠辈养资考，岂裨皇化耶？
现代文：本来是清廉严峻的官府，如今变成了鼠辈们养尊处优之地，这怎么能有助于皇上的教化呢？
English: Originally, it was a clean and austere government office, but now it has turned into a place of indulgence for the rat generation. How can this help the emperor's enlightenment?

古文：崔阡
现代文：崔阡
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐顺宗在东宫，韦渠荐崔阡。
现代文：唐顺宗在东宫为太子时，韦渠向他推荐了崔阡。
English: When Tang Shunzong was crown prince in the East Palace, Wei Qu recommended Cui Yao to him.

古文：拜谕德，为侍书。
现代文：于是任命他为谕德，后又为侍书。
English: Therefore, he was appointed as a chancellor and later as a chancellor's secretary.

古文：阡触事面墙，对东宫曰：臣山野鄙人，不识朝典，见陛下合称臣否？
现代文：崔阡不学无术，对太子说：臣是山野鄙人，不懂得朝廷的典章规矩，见到陛下时我是不是应当称臣呢？
English: Uneducated and unskilled, Cui Wei said to the prince: "The minister is a commoner, and does not understand the rules and regulations of the imperial court. When I see your majesty, should I call him a minister?"

古文：东宫曰：卿是宫僚，自合知也。
现代文：太子说：你是宫中的官员，自己应该知道。
English: The prince said: You are an official in the palace, you should know.

古文：黎干
现代文：黎干
English: Leganes

古文：唐代宗朝，京兆尹黎干以久旱，祈雨于朱雀门街。
现代文：唐代宗朝时，久旱无雨，京兆尹黎干便在朱雀街让求雨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong in the Tang Dynasty, when there was no rain for a long time, Emperor Jingzhao and Empress Dowager Yin Li went to Suzaku Street to ask for rain.

古文：造土龙，悉召城中巫觋，舞于龙所。干与巫觋更舞，观者骇笑。
现代文：他建造了一条土龙，召集来城里所有的巫师，舞于建土龙的地方，黎干比巫师们舞得更欢。围观的人又惊又笑。
English: He built a clay dragon and gathered all the wizards in the city to dance in the place where the dragon was built. Li Gan danced better than the wizards. The onlookers were surprised and laughed.

古文：弥月不雨，又请祷于文宣王庙。
现代文：可是整整一个月也没下雨，于是又祈祷于文宣王庙。
English: However, it didn't rain for a whole month, so they prayed again at the King Wenxuan Temple.

古文：上闻之曰：丘之祷久矣。
现代文：代宗听说后说道：祈祷孔丘的时间更长了。
English: After hearing this, Daizong said, "I've been praying to Confucius longer."

古文：命毁土龙，罢祈雨，减膳节用，以听天命。
现代文：于是下令毁掉土龙，停止求雨，节用膳食，听从天命。
English: So he gave orders to destroy the tulong, to stop praying for rain, to eat sparingly, and to obey the will of heaven.

古文：及是甘泽乃足。
现代文：这样做了之后，反倒甘雨足降。
English: After doing this, however, the rain subsided.

古文：崔叔清
现代文：崔叔清
English: Cui Shuqing

古文：唐杜佑镇淮南，进崔叔清诗百篇。
现代文：唐德宗朝时，杜佑为淮南节度使，他向皇帝进献了一百篇崔叔清写的诗。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty, Du You was the envoy of Huainan Festival. He presented a hundred poems written by Cui Shuqing to the emperor.

古文：德宗谓使者：此恶诗，焉用进。
现代文：德宗对来送诗的人说；这种恶劣的诗，哪里还用得着进献！
English: Dezong said to the person who brought the poem, "This kind of bad poem, where is the need for a donation!

古文：时人呼为准敕恶诗。
现代文：当时的人都把崔叔清的诗称为准敕恶诗。
English: At that time, people called Cui Shuqing's poems quasi-evil poems.

古文：常愿
现代文：常愿
English: Always

古文：唐刘禹锡云：贞元中，武臣常愿，好作本色语。曾谓余曰：昔在奉天，为行营都虞候。
现代文：唐朝时，刘禹锡说过这样一件事：贞元年间，有个武将叫常愿，喜欢说些本行的行话，他曾对我说：以前在奉天，任行营都虞候。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Liu Yuxi said something like this: In the Zhenyuan era, there was a military commander named Changzheng, who liked to speak some of the jargon of the trade. He once said to me: "In the past, in Fengtian, all trades and camps were waiting.

古文：圣人门，都有几个贤郎。
现代文：圣人门，都有几个贤郎。
English: There are several sages at the saint's gate.

古文：他悉如此。
现代文：他的话都是这样。
English: That's what he always says.

古文：且曰：奉天城斗许大，更被朱泚吃兵马楦，危如累鸡子。今抛向南衙，被公措大伟。
现代文：还说：奉天城象斗那么大，被朱泚的兵马弄得满满的，就象累在一起的鸡蛋，如今抛向南衙，被公当成措大了。
English: He also said, "Bong Tiancheng is as big as an elephant's trunk, which was filled by Zhu Xi's soldiers and horses, just like eggs that are piled up together. Now, it is thrown to Nanluo, and it is considered to be too big.

古文：龁邓。
现代文：咬邓。
English: Bite Deng.

古文：邓把将他官职去。至永贞初，禹锡为御史监察，见常愿摄事在焉，因谓之曰：更敢道纥邓否？
现代文：邓把他官职夺去，到永贞初年，禹锡对御史监察，见常愿在那里管事，对他说道：还敢说咬邓么？
English: Deng deprived him of his official position. In the first year of Yongzheng, Yuxi, the inspector of the imperial history, often wanted to be in charge there, and said to him: Do you dare to bite Deng?

古文：曰：死罪死罪。
现代文：回答说： 我实在是死罪、死罪！
English: He answered, "Truly I am guilty of death, guilty of death!"

古文：刘士荣
现代文：刘士荣
English: Liu Shirong

古文：唐于頔之镇襄阳也。
现代文：唐朝时，于頔之镇守襄阳。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the town of Yuqi guarded Xiangyang.

古文：朝廷姑息，除其子方为太常丞。
现代文：朝廷对他很宽容优待，任命他的儿子于方为太常丞。
English: The imperial court treated him very leniently and appointed his son Yu Fang as Tai Changzheng.

古文：頔让之，表曰：刘元佐儿士荣以佐之功，先朝为太常丞。
现代文：于頔之推让，上表道：刘元佐的儿子刘士荣是因为他父亲有功，先朝授予他太常丞一职。
English: At the urging of Yu Qi, the above statement said: Liu Shirong, the son of Liu Yuanzuo, was awarded the post of Tai Chang Rong by the previous dynasty because of his father's merits.

古文：时臣与士荣同登朝列，见其凡劣，实鄙之。
现代文：当时我与士荣曾一起在登朝的队列，看见他很凡劣，实在令人鄙视。
English: At that time, I was with Shirong in the queue to ascend the throne, and I saw that he was very ordinary, which was really despicable.

古文：今臣功名不如元佐，男某凡劣，不若士荣。若授此爵，更为叨忝。
现代文：如今我的功名不如刘元佐，儿子也很平庸低劣，还不如刘士荣，若授此官，更觉得是叨扰而有愧。
English: Nowadays, my achievements are not as good as Liu Yuanzuo, my son is also mediocre and inferior, and I am not as good as Liu Shirong. If I were to be awarded this post, I would feel even more guilty for being a nuisance.

古文：德宗令将其表宣示百僚。
现代文：德宗下令将他的表公布于百官。
English: Dezong ordered his watch to be made public to all officials.

古文：时士荣为南衙将军，目睹其表。
现代文：当时刘士荣任南衙将军，亲眼目睹过此表。
English: At that time, Liu Shirong was a general of the Southern Song Dynasty and witnessed this watch.

古文：有浑鐻者，锡之客也。时镐宴客饮酒，更为令曰：征近日凡劣，不得即雨。
现代文：有个叫浑鐻的人，是锡的客人，有一天镐宴请客人，饮酒时出酒令道：近日的天气预兆凡劣，不可能立即下雨。
English: There was a man called Muddy, who was a guest of Tin. One day, he was giving a banquet to his guests. While drinking, he ordered his guests to drink wine. He said, "The weather forecast for the next few days is very bad. It is impossible for it to rain immediately."

古文：鐻曰：刘士荣。
现代文：鐻猜道：刘士荣。
English: Gong Chai said, "Liu Shirong."

古文：镐曰：于方。
现代文：锡猜道：于方。
English: Xichai Road: Yifang.

古文：镐谓席人曰：诸公并须精除。
现代文：镐对在座的客人说道：各位一定能够高升。
English: Zou said to the guests present: You will surely be able to rise higher.

古文：袁德师
现代文：袁德师
English: Yuan De

古文：唐窦群与袁德师同在浙西幕，窦群知尉。
现代文：唐朝时，窦群与袁德师一起在浙西幕府，窦群兼任县尉。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Dou Qun was with Yuan De Shi in the West Zhejiang Shogunate, Dou Qun also served as a county lieutenant.

古文：尝嗔堂子曰： 须送伯禽。 
现代文：有一次责怪堂子说：须送 伯禽 ！
English: Once he reproached his son and said, "You must send poultry!"

古文：问德师曰： 会否？ 
现代文：问袁德师道：明白不明白？
English: Ask Yuan De: Do you understand?

古文：曰： 某乙亦不到如此，也还曾把书读，何乃相轻。 
现代文：袁德师道：我还不至如此，也还曾读过书吧，干么这样轻视人！
English: Yuan De Shi said: I'm not like that, I've even read books, why do you despise people like that!

古文：诘之： 且伯禽何人？ 
现代文：窦群又追问：那么伯禽是何人呢？
English: Dou Qun also asked: So, how many people are birders?

古文：德师曰： 只是古之堂子也。 
现代文：袁德师道：伯禽不过是古代的堂子。
English: Yuan De Shidao: Bo Jiao is nothing more than a son of ancient times.

古文：满座人哂。
现代文：在座的人无不讥笑他的。
English: Everyone in the room laughed at him.

古文：蒋乂
现代文：蒋乂
English: Jiang Yu

古文：唐蒋乂撰宰臣录，每拜一相，旬月必献传卷故为物议所嗤。
现代文：唐朝时，蒋乂为宰相们作传，每拜访一个宰相，十日之内献上传文，所以被众人议论和嘲笑。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Chiang Kai-shek wrote biographies of the chancellors, and every time he visited a chancellor, he presented a written report within ten days, so he was discussed and ridiculed by everyone.

古文：崔损
现代文：崔损
English: Cui Zai

古文：唐崔损，性极谨慎。
现代文：唐代人崔损，性情极为谨慎。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, people were very cautious.

古文：每奏对，不敢有所发扬。
现代文：每次在朝堂奏答，不敢有一点儿发挥。
English: Every time I give a recital in the morning hall, I don't dare to show off a little.

古文：两省清要，皆历践之，在位无称于人。
现代文：中书省、门下省这两处清贵显要之地，他都登临过，可是没有什么值得人们称道的。
English: He has been to the provinces of Zhongshu and Mengshu, both of which are noble and important places, but there is nothing worthy of praise.

古文：身居宰相。母野殡，不言展墓，不议迁袝姊为尼，没于近寺，终丧不临。
现代文：身居宰相之位，母亲死后葬于荒野，从不说到墓地去看，也不议论迁殡合葬的事。姐姐出家为尼。死于附近的寺院，一直到办完丧事他也没去看看。
English: When he was prime minister, his mother was buried in the wilderness after her death, and he never went to the cemetery to see it, nor did he discuss the matter of moving the funeral and burial. His sister became a nun. She died in a nearby temple, and he did not go to see it until after the funeral.

古文：士君子罪之，过为恭逊，不止于容身，而卒用此中上意。
现代文：许多正人君子都怪罪他，认为他过份地谦恭，不止是为了安身，而是想以此来让皇上中意。
English: Many respectable people accused him of being too modest, not only for his own sake, but to please the emperor.

古文：窃大位者八年，上知物议不叶，然怜而厚之。
现代文：窃居高位八年，皇上知众人议论他行止不端，但还是由于怜爱而厚待他。
English: After eight years in high office, the emperor knew that everyone was talking about his misconduct, but he still treated him well out of pity.

