古文：杨大眼，武都氐难当之孙也。
现代文：杨大眼，武都氐族杨难当的孙子。
English: Yang Dajian, the grandson of Yang Nandu, a member of the Wudu Yi ethnic group.

古文：少骁捷，跳走如飞。
现代文：少年时即骁勇迅捷，走路跳跃如飞。
English: When he was a boy, he was so brave and quick, he could walk and jump like a bird.

古文：然庶孽，不为宗亲顾待，不免饥寒。
现代文：然而，因为他是父亲的小妾生的孩子，因而不被宗亲们看重，不免常常忍受饥寒。
English: However, because he was the child of his father's concubine, he was not valued by his relatives and often suffered from hunger and cold.

古文：太和中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：太和年间，初出仕被任为奉朝请。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was appointed to serve the Emperor for the first time.

古文：时将南伐，尚书李冲典选征官，大眼往求焉，冲弗许。
现代文：孝文帝将要向南讨伐，尚书李冲选拔能征善战的将官，杨大眼请求入选，李冲不同意。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was going to invade the south, Shangshu Li Chong selected generals who could fight well, Yang Dajian requested to be selected, Li Chong disagreed.

古文：大眼曰： 尚书不见知，听下官出一技。 
现代文：杨大眼说： 尚书您不了解我，请允许我献上一种技艺。 
English: Yang Dajian said: Shang Shu, you don't know me, please allow me to offer a skill.

古文：便出长绳三丈许，系髻而走，绳直如矢，马驰不及。
现代文：便拿一根三丈来长的绳子，系在自己的发髻上迅速奔走，绳子直得就像箭杆一样，马跑都追不上。
English: Then he took a three-meter-long rope and tied it to his hair, and ran fast. The rope was as straight as an arrow shaft, and he couldn't even catch up with the horse.

古文：见者无不惊叹。
现代文：旁观的人无不惊叹。
English: The onlookers were all amazed.

古文：冲因曰： 千载以来，未有逸材若此者也。 
现代文：李冲因而说 ：千百年来，没有见到过这样杰出的人才。 
English: Li Chong said: "For thousands of years, we have not seen such an outstanding talent.

古文：遂用为军主。
现代文：便任命他为军主。
English: appointed him commander of the army.

古文：大眼顾谓同寮曰： 吾之今日，所谓蛟龙得水之秋。
现代文：杨大眼对同僚们说 ：今天正是所说的蛟龙得水的时候。
English: Yang Dajian said to his colleagues: Today is exactly the time when the so-called dragon gets water.

古文：自此一举，不复与诸君齐列矣。 
现代文：自从这次举动，我就不再与诸位同列共事了。 
English: As a result of this action, I will no longer be working alongside you.

古文：未几，迁统军，从车驾征宛、叶、穰、邓、九江、钟离之间，所经战阵，莫不勇冠六军。
现代文：不久，迁任统军，跟随孝文帝征讨宛、叶、穰、邓、九江、钟离等地，每次战斗，无不勇冠全军。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the unified army and followed Emperor Xiaowen to fight in Wan, Ye, Handan, Deng, Jiujiang, Zhongli and other places. Every time he fought, he invariably won the whole army.

古文：宣武初，裴叔业以寿春内附，大眼与奚康生等率众先入，以功封安成县子。
现代文：宣武帝初年，南朝官员裴叔业献出寿春向北魏投降，杨大眼与奚康生等率领军队首先驻进寿春，因军功被封为安成县子。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu, the Southern Dynasties official Pei Shuhei led the troops into Shuchun to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Yang Dajian and Zou Kangsheng led the troops into Shuchun first, and were awarded the title of Ancheng County because of their military service.

古文：除直阁将军，出为东荆州刺史。
现代文：任直阁将军，出任为东荆州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Zhougu, and served as the chief historian of East Jingzhou.

古文：时蛮酋樊秀安等反，诏大眼为别将，隶都督李崇讨平之，大眼功尤多。
现代文：此时，蛮人首领樊秀安等人反叛，朝廷命杨大眼为别将，隶属都督李崇讨平了叛乱，他在征讨时立功最多。
English: At this time, the leader of the barbarians, Gong Xiu'an, and others rebelled, and the imperial court appointed Yang Dajian as the other general, subordinate to the governor Li Chong, to quell the rebellion. He made the most contributions during the campaign.

古文：妻潘氏，善骑射，自诣军省大眼。至攻战游猎之际，潘亦戎装，齐镳并驱。
现代文：他的妻子潘氏也善于骑马射箭，亲自到军中探视大眼，打仗和游猎时，她也穿上戎装，与丈夫并马齐驱。
English: His wife, Pan, is also good at horseback archery, and when she visits the army in person, she also puts on a military uniform and goes with her husband when fighting and hunting.

古文：及至还营，同坐幕下，对诸寮佐，言笑自得。
现代文：回营后，也同丈夫一起坐在军帐中，对着各位同僚和部下，谈笑风生，怡然自得。
English: After returning to the camp, she and her husband also sat together in the military accounts, facing their colleagues and subordinates, talking and laughing, happy and contented.

古文：大眼时指谓诸人曰： 此潘将军也。 
现代文：杨大眼不断指着妻子对大家说 ：这是潘将军呀。 
English: Yang Dajian kept pointing to his wife and saying, "This is General Pan."

古文：梁武遣其将张惠绍总率众军，窃据宿豫。
现代文：南朝梁武帝派他的将领张惠绍率领军队占据了宿豫。
English: Emperor Liangwu of the Southern Dynasty sent his general Zhang Huishao to lead the army to occupy Suyuan.

古文：又假大眼平东将军为别将，与都督邢峦讨破之。
现代文：朝廷又任杨大眼为平东将军，作为别将，与都督邢峦打败了南梁军队。
English: The imperial court also appointed Yang Dagan as the general of Pingdong. As the second-in-command, he defeated the Nanliang army with the support of the governor.

古文：遂与中山王英同围钟离。
现代文：又与中山王元英一起围攻钟离。
English: He also besieged Zhongli with Zhongshan Wang Yuanying.

古文：大眼军城东，守淮桥东西道。
现代文：杨大眼率军驻扎在城东，把守淮水上的桥梁，控制东西两边的道路。
English: Yang Dajian's army was stationed in the east of the city, guarding the bridges over the Huai River and controlling the roads on both sides.

古文：属水泛长，大眼所绾统军刘神符、公孙祉两军夜中争桥奔退，大眼不能禁，相寻而走。
现代文：正值河水泛滥暴涨，他统率的刘神符、公孙祉两支军队夜晚争着过桥奔逃，大眼无法禁止，部队相继逃散。
English: At a time when the river was flooding and surging, the two armies under his command, Liu Shenfu and Gongsun Zhi, fought to cross the bridge and flee at night. The Great Eye could not stop them, and the troops fled one after another.

古文：坐徙营州为兵。
现代文：他因此坐罪，降职到营州当普通的士兵。
English: As a result, he committed a crime and was demoted to the rank of ordinary soldier in Yingzhou.

古文：永平中，追其前勋，起为试守中山内史。
现代文：永平年间，朝廷追念他过去的功勋，起用他为中山内史以试用。
English: During the Yongping era, the imperial court remembered his past merits and appointed him as the chief historian of Zhongshan for trial use.

古文：时高肇征蜀，宣武虑梁人侵轶，乃征大眼为太尉长史、持节、假平南将军、东征别将，隶都督元遥，遏御淮、肥。
现代文：这时，高肇奉命征蜀，宣武帝担心南梁的军队会乘虚进犯，便征用杨大眼为太尉长史、持节、假平南将军、东征别将，隶属于都督元遥指挥，在淮河、肥水设防御敌。
English: At this time, Gao Zhao was ordered to recruit Shu, and Emperor Xuanwu was worried that Nan Liang's army would take advantage of the false attack, so he conscripted Yang Dajian as the lieutenant of Changshi, Jizhe, the false general of Pingnan, the general of the eastward expedition, under the command of the governor Yuan Yao, and set up a defensive enemy in Huaihe and Feishui.

古文：大眼至京师，时人思其雄勇，喜于更用，台省门巷，观者如市。
现代文：他回到京师，人们思念他的英雄骁勇，为他的重新被起用高兴，所以，宫廷衙门，大街小巷，来看他的人就像集市那样热闹。
English: He returned to the Beijing division, people miss his hero Yan Yong, and are happy for his re-appointment, so the palace gates, streets and alleys, people who come to see him are as lively as the market.

古文：后梁将康绚于浮山遏淮，规浸寿春。
现代文：后来，梁将康绚在浮山把守淮河防线，想侵犯寿春。
English: Later, Liang put Kang Hua in Fushan to guard the Huaihe River defense line and wanted to invade Shuchun.

古文：明帝加大眼光禄大夫，率诸军镇荆山，复其封邑。
现代文：魏孝明帝加封大眼为光禄大夫，率领军队镇守荆山，又恢复了他的封地。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaoming appointed Daigan as the doctor of Guanglu, led the army to defend Jingshan, and restored his fief.

古文：后与萧宝夤俱征淮堰，不能克，遂于堰上流凿渠决水而还。
现代文：后来，他与萧宝夤一起攻打淮堰的南军，不能攻克，便在淮水上游开挖渠道，放淮水以阻止敌军，然后退兵。
English: Later, together with Xiao Baojun, he attacked the Southern Army in Huaiyan. Unable to defeat them, he dug a channel in the upper reaches of Huai Shui, released Huai Shui to stop the enemy army, and then withdrew.

古文：加平东将军。
现代文：被加封为平东将军。
English: He was given the additional title of General Pingdong.

古文：大眼抚循士卒，呼为兒子，及见伤痍，为之流泣。
现代文：杨大眼安抚士兵，称他们为儿子。看见他们身上的创伤和疮痍，便心痛得流泪哭泣。
English: Yang Dajian soothed the soldiers and called them his sons. When he saw the wounds and bruises on their bodies, he was moved to tears.

古文：自为将帅，恆身先兵士，当其锋者，莫不摧拉。
现代文：自己虽身为将帅，逢战常身先士卒，冲锋在前。前来抵挡的敌人，没有不被他摧垮的。
English: Although he is a general, he is always the first to charge into battle. There is no enemy that he cannot defeat.

古文：南贼所遣督将，皆怀畏惧。
现代文：南军派来的将领，对他都很畏惧。
English: The Confederate generals were afraid of him.

古文：时传言淮、泗、荆、沔之间童兒啼者，恐之云 杨大眼至 ，无不即止。
现代文：当时，传说在淮河、泗水、荆河、沔水之间小孩啼哭，大人便恐吓说 ：杨大眼来啦！ 没有不止住的。
English: At that time, there was a legend that a child was crying between the Huai River, Surabaya, Jing River, and Surabaya, and the adults threatened and said: Yang Dajian has come!

古文：王肃弟康之初归国也，谓大眼曰： 在南闻君之名，以为眼如车轮。
现代文：王肃的弟弟王康刚归顺北魏，对大眼说： 在南朝听说您的名字，以为眼像车轮那样大。
English: Wang Kangang, the younger brother of Wang Su, who returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty, said to the big eye: I heard your name in the Southern Dynasty, and thought the eye was as big as a wheel.

古文：及见，乃不异于人。 
现代文：现在看见你，并不异于常人。 
English: Now I see you, you are no different from ordinary people.

古文：大眼曰： 旗鼓相望，瞋眸奋发，足使君目不能视，何必大如车轮。 
现代文：大眼说 ：两军对阵，旗鼓相望，怒眼圆睁，意气奋发，足可以使你的眼睛不敢看我，何必像车轮那样大？ 
English: Big Eyes said: The two armies are facing each other, facing each other, angry eyes wide open, spirited, feet can make your eyes dare not look at me, why do you have to be as big as a wheel?

古文：当世推其骁果，以为关、张弗之过也。
现代文：当时人们称他的骁勇果敢，比作关羽、张飞也并不过分。
English: At that time, people said that he was brave and courageous, and it was not too much to compare him to Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.

古文：然征淮堰之役，喜怒无常，捶挞过度，军士颇憾焉。
现代文：然而，进攻淮堰时他却喜怒无常，对士兵鞭打过度，将士颇有怨言。
English: However, when attacking Huaiyan, he was moody, whipped the soldiers excessively, and the soldiers complained a lot.

古文：识者以为性移所致。
现代文：了解他的人认为是他性情改变所引起的。
English: Those who know him say it is the result of a change in his personality.

古文：又为荆州刺史，常缚藁为人，衣以青布而射之。
现代文：又出任荆州刺史，常常捆扎草人，给它们穿上青布衣裳用箭射穿。
English: He also served as the Jingzhou stabbing historian, often tying up grass people, putting them in blue cloth clothes and shooting them with arrows.

古文：召诸蛮渠，指示之曰： 卿等若作贼，吾政如此相杀也。 
现代文：他召来各蛮族首领，指着草人说： 你们如果要做贼寇，我就像这样将你们杀死。 
English: He summoned the chiefs of the barbarians and said to them, pointing to the men of straw: "If you try to become robbers, I will kill you just like this.

古文：又北淯郡尝有虎害，大眼搏而获之，斩其头县于穰市。
现代文：北氵育郡曾有虎为害，杨大眼将它捕获，砍下它的头悬挂在穰城街头。
English: There used to be a tiger in Beilun Yucun County. Yang Dajian captured it, cut off its head and hung it in the streets of Lucheng.

古文：自是荆蛮相谓曰： 杨公恶人，常作我蛮形以射之。
现代文：从此，荆州一带的蛮族互相传告说： 杨公十分凶恶，常常将草人做成蛮人的形状用箭射穿。
English: From then on, the barbarians in the Jingzhou area told each other: Yang Gong was very vicious and often made straw men into the shape of barbarians and shot them with arrows.

古文：又深山之虎，尚所不免。 
现代文：深山里的猛虎也不能幸免于死。 
English: Deep in the mountains, tigers are not immune to death.

古文：遂不敢复为寇盗。
现代文：便不敢再为盗贼。
English: He no longer dared to be a thief.

古文：在州二年，卒。
现代文：在荆州任上二年死去。
English: He died two years after taking office in Jingzhou.

古文：大眼虽不学，恆遣人读书而坐听之，悉皆记识。
现代文：杨大眼虽然没读过书，却常叫人读书，他坐在旁边听，都能够记住和理解。
English: Although Yang Dayan has never read a book, he often asks people to read, and he can remember and understand everything when he sits next to them and listens.

古文：令作露布，皆口授之，而竟不多识字也。
现代文：所作的文告，都由他口授，而他始终没有认识多少字。
English: He dictated all the communiques he wrote, and he never knew many words.

