古文：起旃蒙协洽，尽柔兆敦牂，凡十二年。
现代文：起，止，一共十二年。汉昭帝始元元年
English: a total of twelve years. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Han Zhao

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元元年
现代文：夏季，益州所属二十四个夷人村寨三万余人全部背叛汉朝。
English: In the summer, more than 30,000 people from twenty-four villages belonging to Yizhou rebelled against the Han Dynasty.

古文：夏，益州夷二十四邑、三万馀人皆反。遣水衡都尉吕辟胡募吏民及发犍为、蜀郡奔命往击，大破之。秋，七月，赦天下。
现代文：汉朝廷派水衡都尉吕破胡招募官吏和百姓从军，又征调犍为、蜀郡的武勇精壮之人前往征讨，大破叛军。秋季，七月，大赦天下。
English: The Han court sent Captain Lü Bahu to recruit officials and commoners to join the army. He was also conscripted and transferred to Shu County to fight against the rebels. In the autumn, in July, there was a general amnesty.

古文：大雨，至于十月，渭桥绝。
现代文：天降大雨，一直持续到十月，渭桥被大水冲断。
English: It rained heavily until October, and the bridge was washed away.

古文：武帝初崩，赐诸侯王玺书。
现代文：汉武帝去世时，朝廷以印有皇帝玉玺的正式诏书通知各诸侯王。
English: When Emperor Hanwu died, the imperial court informed all the princes with an official imperial edict stamped with the emperor's imperial seal.

古文：燕王旦得书不肯哭，曰： 玺书封小，京师疑有变。 
现代文：燕王刘旦见到诏书后不肯哭泣，说道： 诏书的印封过小，我怀疑京师已发生变故。 
English: Yan Wang Liu Dan refused to cry after seeing the imperial edict, saying: The seal of the imperial edict is too small, I suspect that the Beijing division has changed.

古文：遣幸臣寿西长、孙纵之、王孺等之长安，以问礼仪为名，阴刺候朝廷事。
现代文：于是派他宠信的臣僚寿西长、孙纵之、王孺等前往长安，以询问祭悼汉武帝的礼仪为借口，暗中刺探朝廷动态。
English: Therefore, he sent his trusted vassals Shuxi Chang, Sun Zongzhi, Wang Qi and others to Chang'an to secretly probe the dynamics of the imperial court under the pretext of inquiring about the etiquette of honoring and mourning Emperor Han.

古文：及有诏褒赐旦钱三十万，益封万三千户，旦怒曰： 我当为帝，何赐也！ 
现代文：及至汉昭帝下诏奖赏刘旦钱三十万，增加其封国人口一万三千户时，刘旦生气地说： 本来就应当由我作皇帝，用不着谁来赏赐我！ 
English: When Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict to reward Liu Dan with 300,000 yuan and increase the population of his fief by 13,000 households, Liu Dan angrily said: I should have been the emperor, I don't need anyone to reward me!

古文：遂与宗室中山哀王子长、齐孝王孙泽等结谋，诈言以武帝时受诏，得职吏事，修武备，备非常。
现代文：于是与皇室成员中山哀王之子刘长、齐孝王之孙刘泽等密谋共同反叛朝廷，还伪称在汉武帝生前曾得到诏书，允许他掌握其封国内各级官吏的任免权，整顿封国的军队，防备非常事变。
English: As a result, he conspired with members of the imperial family, such as Liu Chang, the son of King Zhongshan, and Liu Ze, the grandson of King Qi Xiaoguang, to jointly rebel against the imperial court. He also falsely claimed that he had received an imperial edict before Emperor Hanwu's death, allowing him to control the appointment and removal of officials at all levels in his fiefdom, to rectify the army of the fiefdom, and to guard against unforeseen events.

古文：郎中成轸谓旦曰： 大王失职，独可起而索，不可坐而得也。
现代文：郎中成轸对刘旦说： 大王失去皇位继承权，只能起来索取，坐着不动是得不到的。
English: Brother-in-law Cheng Yao said to Liu Dan: Great King, you have lost the status you should have obtained. Now you can get up and ask for it. Don't just sit and wait.

古文：大王壹起，国中虽女子皆奋臂随大王。 
现代文：大王一旦起兵，燕国之内，既使是妇女也都会奋臂追随大王。 
English: Once the great king raised an army, even women in Yan's country would follow the great king with all their might.

古文：旦即与泽谋，为奸书，言： 少帝非武帝子，大臣所共立；天下宜共伐之！ 
现代文：于是刘旦与刘泽密商，编制造谣文书，宣称： 如今的小皇帝并非武帝之子，而是由朝中大臣共同拥立的，天下应当共同讨伐！ 
English: As a result, Liu Dan and Liu Ze Mishang, who compiled a rumor document, declared: Today's little emperor is not the son of Emperor Wu, but is jointly supported by the ministers of the DPRK and China, and the whole world should fight together!

古文：使人传行郡国以摇动百姓。
现代文：派人到各郡国广为传发，以动摇百姓之心。
English: They sent people to every county in the country to spread the news in order to sway the hearts of the people.

古文：泽谋归发兵临菑，杀青州刺史隽不疑。
现代文：刘泽计划返回齐国后从临发兵，杀死青州刺史隽不疑。
English: After returning to Qi, Liu Ze planned to send soldiers from Lin to kill the Qingzhou thorn.

古文：旦招来郡国奸人，赋敛铜铁作甲兵，数阅其车骑、材官卒，发民大猎以讲士马，须期日。
现代文：刘旦在燕国招揽各地奸邪之徒，征敛民间铜铁来制造铠甲武器，又多次检阅燕国的车骑、材官等各类军队，征调百姓进行大规模行围打猎活动，以训练将士、马匹的作战能力，等待与刘泽约定的日期一到，共同举兵叛乱。
English: In Yan, Liu Dan recruited traitors from all over the country, solicited copper and iron from the people to make armor-piercing weapons, and repeatedly inspected all kinds of armies such as the cavalry and cavalry of Yan, conscripted the people to carry out large-scale encirclement and hunting activities to train the combat ability of soldiers and horses, and waited for the date agreed with Liu Ze to arrive, and jointly raised an army to rebel.

古文：郎中韩义等数谏旦，旦杀义等凡十五人。
现代文：郎中韩义等多次劝阻刘旦，刘旦将韩义等共十五名官员处死。
English: Brother-in-law Han Yi and others repeatedly obstructed Liu Dan, and Liu Dan killed Han Yi and 15 others.

古文：会缾侯成知泽等谋，以告隽不疑。
现代文：就在此时，瓶侯刘成得到刘泽谋反计划，便通知了隽不疑。
English: It was at this time that Liu Cheng, the master of the bottle, learned of Liu Ze's counter-plot, and he immediately notified Zou.

古文：八月，不疑收捕泽等以闻。
现代文：八月，隽不疑逮捕了刘泽等人，并奏闻朝廷。
English: In August, Zou arrested Liu Ze and others without hesitation, and reported this to the imperial court.

古文：天子遣大鸿胪丞治，连引燕王。
现代文：汉昭帝王派大鸿胪丞负责处理此事。
English: The emperor sent Daihong Zhenzhen to investigate the matter, implicating and leading out Yan Wang.

古文：有诏，以燕王至亲，勿治；而泽等皆伏诛。
现代文：审讯中，燕王刘旦被供出。汉昭帝下诏，以燕王为至亲，下令不许追究，而将刘泽等全部处死。
English: During the trial, Yan Wang Liu Dan was presented. Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict that Yan Wang was his closest relative and ordered that he should not be investigated, and Liu Ze and all others were put to death.

古文：迁隽不疑为京兆尹。
现代文：隽不疑调任京兆尹。
English: He was undoubtedly transferred to the post of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：不疑为京兆尹，吏民敬其威信。
现代文：隽不疑担任京兆尹，官吏和百姓对他的威信都很敬服。
English: He undoubtedly served as the Beijing Zhaoyun, and the officials and the people were very respectful of his prestige.

古文：每行县、录囚徒还，其母辄问不疑： 有所平反？
现代文：每当他巡视各县，审查囚徒的判处情况归来，他的母亲总要问他： 给受冤屈的人平反了吗？
English: Whenever he returned from visiting various counties to review the sentencing of prisoners, his mother would always ask him, "Have you rehabilitated those who have been wronged?"

古文：活几何人？ 
现代文：救活了多少人？ 
English: How many people were saved?

古文：即不疑多有所平反，母喜笑异于他时；或无所出，母怒，为不食。
现代文：如隽不疑为很多受冤屈的人平了反，其母便比平时高兴；如没有平反之事，其母便生气得不肯吃饭。
English: If there is no doubt that she has made amends to many people who have been wronged, her mother will be happier than usual; if there is no amends, her mother will be so angry that she will not eat.

古文：故不疑为吏，严而不残。
现代文：因此，隽不疑为官，虽然执法严格，却并不残忍。
English: Therefore, he is undoubtedly an official, dignified but not cruel.

古文：九月，丙子，秺敬侯金日磾薨。
现代文：九月丙子，侯金日去世。
English: In September, Hou Jin died.

古文：初，武帝病，有遗诏，封金日磾为秺侯，上官桀为安阳侯，霍光为博陆侯；皆以前捕反者马何罗等功封。
现代文：当初汉武帝病危时，曾留下遗诏，封金日为侯，上官桀为安阳侯，霍光为博陆侯，都是因为先前逮捕叛逆者马何罗等人之功而赐与封爵。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was critically ill, he left a last will and testament, appointing Kim Il-sung as marquess, Shangguan Yong as marquess of Anyang, and Huo Guang as marquess of Bolu, all of whom were knighted for their work in arresting the traitor Ma He Luo and others.

古文：日磾以帝少，不受封，光等亦不敢受。
现代文：金日以新皇帝年纪幼小为理由，不肯接受封爵，霍光等也不敢接受。
English: Kim Il-sung refused to accept a knighthood on the grounds that the new emperor was too young, and Ho Kwong did not dare to accept it.

古文：及日磾病困，光白封，日磾卧受印绶；一日薨。
现代文：等到金日病重时，霍光才将武帝临终时封他们三人为侯的事报告汉昭帝，于是金日躺在病床上接受了侯的印信和绶带，一天后去世。
English: It was not until Kim Il-sung was gravely ill that Ho Kwong reported to Emperor Han Zhao that Emperor Wu had placed the three of them under house arrest on his deathbed. Kim Il-sung accepted the house arrest's seal letter and umbilical cord while lying in his hospital bed, and died a day later.

古文：日磾两子赏、建俱侍中，与帝略同年，共卧起。
现代文：金日的两个儿子金赏、金建都担任侍中，与汉昭帝年龄差不多一般大小，起床、睡觉都在一起。
English: Kim Il-sung's two sons, Kim Bong and Kim Jong-il, both served as chamberlains. They were about the same age as Emperor Han Zhaotong, and they got up and went to bed together.

古文：赏为奉车，建驸马都尉。
现代文：金赏的官职是奉车都尉，金建是驸马都尉。
English: Jin Jian was awarded the title of Feng Che Duifeng, and Jin Jian was awarded the title of Xi Ma Duifeng.

古文：及赏嗣侯，佩两绶，上谓霍将军曰： 金氏兄弟两人，不可使俱两绶邪？ 
现代文：后来金赏继承了父亲金日的侯爵，佩戴两种绶带，汉昭帝便对霍光说道： 金氏兄弟二人，不能让他们都佩戴两种绶带吗？ 
English: Later, the Marquis Jin Rong, who inherited the gold award from his father Kim Il Sung, wore two kinds of ribbons. Han Zhao Di then said to Huo Guang: The two Kim brothers, can't they both wear two kinds of ribbons?

古文：对曰： 赏自嗣父为侯耳。 
现代文：霍光回答说： 只能由金赏一人继承他父亲的侯爵。 
English: Huo Guang replied, "Only one man can succeed his father as marquis.

古文：上笑曰： 侯不在我与将军乎？ 
现代文：汉昭帝笑着说： 封侯不是由我和将军决定吗？ 
English: Zhao Di said with a smile, "Isn't it just me and the general who are to be enthroned?"

古文：对曰： 先帝之约，有功乃得封侯。 
现代文：霍光说： 根据先皇的约定，对国家有功的人才能封侯。 
English: Huo Guang said: According to the agreement of the former emperor, only those who have made contributions to the country can be knighted.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是汉昭帝作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：闰月，遣故廷尉王平等五人持节行郡国，举贤良，问民疾苦、冤、失职者。
现代文：闰十月，汉昭帝派前任廷尉王平等五人携带皇帝符节巡视各郡、国，举荐贤良人士，察问民间疾苦、冤屈和地方官是否有失职行为。
English: In leap October, Emperor Han Zhao sent the former courtier Wang Pingliang and five men to carry the emperor's insignia to inspect all counties and countries, recommend virtuous people, and inquire into people's sufferings, grievances, and whether local officials had failed in their duties.

古文：冬，无冰。
现代文：冬季，气候温暖，不结冰。
English: The winter was warm and did not freeze.

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元二年
现代文：始元二年
English: In the second year of the Heian period

古文：春，正月，封大将军光为博陆侯，左将军桀为安阳侯。
现代文：春季，正月，汉昭帝封大将军霍光为博陆侯，左将军上官桀为安阳侯。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Han Zhao appointed General Huo Guang as Bo Lu Hou, and promoted General Zuo to the post of Anyang Hou.

古文：或说霍光曰： 将军不见诸吕之事乎？
现代文：有人劝霍光说： 将军没有看到当初吕氏家族覆亡的教训吗？
English: Someone advised Huo Guang: Didn't the general see the lesson of the overthrow of the Lv family?

古文：处伊尹、周公之位，摄政擅权，而背宗室，不与共职，是以天下不信，卒至于灭亡。
现代文：吕氏身处伊尹、周公的地位，主持朝政，专擅大权，却疏远皇族成员，不与他们共享朝权，因此失去了天下人的信任，最后终于灭亡。
English: The Lü clan, in the position of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, presided over the imperial court and wielded great power. However, it alienated members of the imperial family and did not share imperial power with them. As a result, it lost the trust of the people of the world and finally perished.

古文：今将军当盛位，帝春秋富，宜纳宗室，又多与大臣共事，反诸吕道。
现代文：如今将军身居高位，皇上年幼，应当纳用皇族成员，并多与大臣共商政事，与吕氏家族的作法相反。
English: Now that the generals are in high positions and the emperor is young, members of the royal family should be used, and they should do business and politics with the ministers, contrary to the practice of the Lyu family.

古文：如是，则可以免患。 
现代文：如果这样，便可以免除祸患。 
English: If so, you may be spared.

古文：光然之，乃择宗室可用者，遂拜楚元王孙辟强及宗室刘长乐皆为光禄大夫，辟强守长乐卫尉。
现代文：霍光认为有道理，便在皇室成员中选择可以担任官职的人才，任命楚元王之孙刘辟疆和皇室成员刘长乐都为光禄大夫，刘辟疆还兼任长乐宫卫尉。
English: Huo Guang thought it was reasonable, so he chose talents who could hold official positions from among the members of the royal family, and appointed Liu Bijian, the grandson of King Chu Yuan, and Liu Changle, a member of the royal family, as Guanglu doctors, and Liu Bijian also served as the guard of Changle Palace.

古文：三月，遣使者振贷贫民无种、食者。
现代文：三月，汉昭帝派使者向缺乏种子、口粮的贫苦农民发放赈贷。
English: In March, Emperor Han Zhao sent an envoy to distribute loans to poor farmers who lacked seeds and rations.

古文：秋，八月，诏曰： 往年灾害多，今年蚕、麦伤，所振贷种、食勿收责，毋令民出今年田租。 
现代文：秋季，八月，汉昭帝颁布诏书说： 往年灾害多有发生，今年的蚕桑、小麦也受到伤害。因此，朝廷赈贷给农民的种子和口粮都不必归还，并免除农民今年的田赋。 
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict saying: In previous years, many disasters occurred, and this year's silkworms and wheat were also harmed. Therefore, the seeds and rations lent to farmers by the imperial court did not have to be returned, and farmers were exempted from this year's rice field subsidy.

古文：初，武帝征伐匈奴，深入穷追，二十馀年，匈奴马畜孕重堕殰，罢极，苦之。常有欲和亲意，未能得。
现代文：当初，汉武帝派兵征伐匈奴，深入腹地，穷追猛打，前后二十余年，使匈奴的马匹牲畜不能正常孕育繁殖，受到严重消耗，百姓贫苦疲惫到了极点，常常希望与汉朝恢复和亲关系，但却一直未能实现。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Hanwu sent troops to conquer the Xiongnu, went deep into the hinterland, and pursued them relentlessly. For more than 20 years, the horses and livestock of the Xiongnu could not breed normally, and were severely depleted. The people were poor and exhausted to the extreme. They often hoped to restore friendly relations with the Han Dynasty, but they have not been able to achieve it.

古文：狐鹿孤单于有异母弟为左大都尉，贤，国人乡之，母阏氏恐单于不立子而立左大都尉也，乃私使杀之。
现代文：匈奴狐鹿孤单于有一个同父异母的弟弟，担任匈奴左大都尉，很是贤明，民心归附于他。单于的母亲怕单于不立儿子为继承人而传位给弟弟左大都尉，便私自派人将左大都尉杀死。
English: The Xiongnu Fox Deer was lonely because he had a half-brother, who served as the Xiongnu Captain of the Left Division. He was very wise, and the people's hearts were attached to him. The mother of the lonely was afraid that she would not appoint her son as the heir and pass the position to her brother Captain of the Left Division, so she sent someone to kill Captain of the Left Division.

古文：左大都尉同母兄怨，遂不肯复会单于庭。
现代文：此事引起左大都尉的同母哥哥的怨恨，从此不再去单于王庭。
English: Captain Zuo's brother resented this so much that he no longer wanted to attend the imperial court alone.

古文：是岁，单于病且死，谓诸贵人： 我子少，不能治国，立弟右谷蠡王。 
现代文：这一年，单于病重不起，临死前，对贵族们说： 我的儿子年纪幼小，不能治理国家，我决定将单于之位传给弟弟右谷蠡王。 
English: In that year, before his death, he said to the nobles, "My son is too young to rule the country. I have decided to pass on the throne to my younger brother, King Uguisu."

古文：及单于死，卫律等与颛渠阏氏谋，匿其丧，矫单于令，更立子左谷蠡王为壶衍鞮单于。
现代文：单于死后，卫律等人与单于的正室夫人颛渠阏氏密谋、隐瞒了单于去世的消息，并伪造单于命令，改立单于的儿子左谷蠡王为壶衍单于。
English: After Zhan Yu's death, Wei Lu and others conspired with Zhan Quan's, Zhan Yu's legal wife, to conceal the news of Zhan Yu's death, and forged Zhan Yu's order to change Zhan Yu's son, Zuo Gu Zhen Wang, into Zhan Yu's son.

古文：左贤王、右谷蠡王怨望，率其众欲南归汉，恐不能自致，即胁卢屠王，欲与西降乌孙。
现代文：左贤王、右谷蠡王心怀不满，打算率领部众向南归附汉朝，又怕自己的力量单薄，难以实现，于是胁迫卢屠王，打算与卢屠王一起向西归降乌孙。
English: King Zuoxian and King Yuyao were dissatisfied and planned to lead their subordinates to the south to join the Han Dynasty. They were afraid that their strength was too weak to achieve this, so they coerced King Lu Tuo and planned to return to the west together with King Lu Tuo to surrender Wusun.

古文：卢屠王告之单于，使人验问，右谷蠡王不服，反以其罪罪卢屠王，国人皆冤之。
现代文：卢屠王将此事向壶衍单于告发，壶衍单于派人前去查问，右谷蠡王不肯承认，反将阴谋背叛之事推到卢屠王身上，匈奴人都认为卢屠王冤枉。
English: Lu Tu Wang reported the matter to Jujuan alone, Jujuan alone sent people to investigate, Yuyao Shao Wang refused to admit, but pushed the conspiracy and betrayal onto Lu Tu Wang. The Huns all believed that Lu Tu Wang was innocent.

古文：于是二王去居其所，不复肯会龙城，匈奴始衰。
现代文：于是左贤王和右谷蠡王离去，留居在自己的辖地，不肯再参与每年一次的龙城祭祀大典，匈奴从此衰落。
English: As a result, Zuoxian Wang and Yuya Xuan Wang left and stayed in their own territory, refusing to participate in the annual Longcheng Festival, and the Xiongnu fell into decline.

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元三年
现代文：始元三年
English: In the third year of the Heian period

古文：春，二月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：春季，二月，西北方向出现异星。
English: In spring, in February, a strange star appears in the northwest direction.

古文：冬，十一月，壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十一月壬辰朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in November, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：初，霍光与上官桀相亲善。光每休沐出，桀常代光入决事。
现代文：当初，霍光与上官桀关系亲密，每当霍光休假离朝，上官桀常代替霍光入朝裁决政事。
English: At first, Huo Guang and Shangguan Zang had a close relationship. Whenever Huo Guang took a vacation and left the court, Shangguan Zang often replaced Huo Guang to enter the court to adjudicate political affairs.

古文：光女为桀子安妻，生女，年甫五岁，安欲因光内之宫中；光以为尚幼，不听。
现代文：霍光的女儿是上官桀之子上官安的妻子，生下一个女儿，只有五岁，上官安想通过霍光的关系使女儿进入后宫，霍光认为外孙女年纪还小，不肯答应。
English: Huo Guang's daughter was the wife of Shangguan Yan's son Shangguan An. She gave birth to a daughter, only five years old. Shangguan An wanted to bring her daughter into the harem through Huo Guang's relationship. Huo Guang thought that her granddaughter was still young and refused to agree.

古文：盖长公主私近子客河间丁外人，安素与外人善，说外人曰： 安子容貌端正，诚因长主时得入为后，以臣父子在朝而有椒房之重，成之在于足下。
现代文：汉昭帝的姐姐盖长公主与她儿子的门客河间人丁外人私通，上官安平时与丁外人关系很好，便对丁外人说： 我女儿容貌端正，如能得到长公主的帮助，入宫成为皇后，我与我父亲在朝为官就有皇后作为依靠，此事的成败全都在您。
English: Emperor Han Zhao's sister, the eldest princess Gai, had an illicit affair with her son's concubine, Ding Xiangren. Shangguan Anping had a good relationship with Ding Xiangren. He said to Ding Xiangren: My daughter is beautiful. If I can get the help of the eldest princess to enter the palace and become the empress, I and my father will have the empress to rely on in the government. The success or failure of this matter is all up to you.

古文：汉家故事，常以列侯尚主，足下何忧不封侯乎！ 
现代文：按汉朝的惯例，公主常常嫁给列侯，您又何愁不能封侯呢！ 
English: According to the practice of the Han Dynasty, princesses often married lords, so why worry if you can't be a lord!

古文：外人喜，言于长主。长主以为然，诏召安女入为婕妤，安为骑都尉。
现代文：丁外人非常高兴，便将此事告诉长公主，长公主表示赞同，于是让汉昭帝颁布诏书，将上官安的女儿召入宫中，封为，并任命上官安为骑都尉。
English: Ding Gaozhong was very happy and told the princess about this. The princess thought it was very reasonable, so she agreed to let Shangguan An's daughter enter the palace as an envoy, and Shangguan An was made a cavalry captain.

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元四年
现代文：始元四年
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period

古文：春，三月，甲寅，立皇后上官氏，赦天下。
现代文：春季，三月甲寅，汉昭帝颁布诏书，立上官氏为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict to establish Shangguan as empress and grant amnesty to the world.

古文：西南夷姑缯、叶榆复反，遣水衡都尉吕辟胡将益州兵击之。
现代文：西南夷姑缯、叶榆两部族再次背叛汉朝，汉朝廷派水衡都尉吕辟胡率领益州军队前往征讨。
English: The two tribes of Southwest Yigu and Ye betrayed the Han Dynasty again, and the Han Dynasty sent Captain Lu Bihu, who was in charge of the Yizhou army, to invade.

古文：辟胡不进，蛮夷遂杀益州太守，乘胜与辟胡战，士战及溺死者四千馀人。
现代文：吕辟胡屯兵不前，致使叛乱的蛮夷杀死益州太守，并乘胜与吕辟胡所部汉军交战，汉军战死及溺水而死的士卒达四千余人。
English: Lv Pi Hu's garrison did not advance, causing the rebellious barbarians to kill the governor of Yizhou, and fought with the Chinese army under Lv Pi Hu's command. More than four thousand soldiers of the Chinese army died in battle or from drowning.

古文：冬，遣大鸿胪田广明击之。
现代文：冬季，汉朝廷派大鸿胪田广明率兵前往征讨。
English: In the winter, the Han court sent the great giant, Putian Guangming, to lead an army to collect.

古文：廷尉李种坐故纵死罪弃市。
现代文：廷尉李种因被指控故意为犯有死罪的人开脱罪名，被当众斩首。
English: Lieutenant Li Zheng was executed for the crime of deliberately conniving.

古文：是岁，上官安为车骑将军。
现代文：这一年，上官安被任命为车骑将军。
English: In the same year, Shangguan An was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元五年
现代文：始元五年
English: In the first five years of the

古文：春，正月，追尊帝外祖赵父为顺成侯。
现代文：春季，正月，汉昭帝追尊外祖父赵父为顺成侯。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Han Zhao sent his maternal grandfather Zhao Biao to Shuncheng.

古文：顺成侯有姊君姁，赐钱二百万、奴婢、第宅以充实焉。
现代文：顺成侯有位姐姐名叫赵君，汉昭帝赐给她钱二百万以及奴婢、住宅等，以充实她的财产。
English: Shuncheng Hou had a sister named Zhao Jun. Emperor Han Zhao gave her two million yuan in money, as well as slaves, houses, etc. to enrich her property.

古文：诸昆弟各以亲疏受赏赐，无在位者。
现代文：兄弟们也都按着血缘的亲疏得到赏赐，但没有授予封爵、官职的。
English: The brothers were also rewarded according to their blood relationship, but they were not given knighthoods or official positions.

古文：有男子乘黄犊车诣北阙，自谓卫太子；公车以闻。
现代文：有一位男子，乘坐黄牛犊车来到未央宫北门，自称他是汉武帝的卫太子刘据，公车官将此事奏闻朝廷。
English: There was a man who came to the north gate of the Weiyang Palace in a rickshaw, claiming that he was Liu Bei, the crown prince of Emperor Hanwu. The bus officer reported this to the imperial court.

古文：诏使公、卿、将军、中二千石杂识视。
现代文：汉昭帝下诏书命三公、九卿、将军、中二千石官等一同前往辨认。
English: Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict ordering three princes, nine nobles, a general, and a middle-ranking official of 2,000 koku to go together to identify it.

古文：长安中吏民聚观者数万人。
现代文：长安城中的一般官吏和百姓前去围观的达数万人。
English: In Chang'an, there were tens of thousands of officials and ordinary people in the crowd.

古文：右将军勒兵阙下以备非常。
现代文：右将军为防止发生不测之事，率兵守在宫门前面。
English: In order to prevent anything untoward from happening, the right general and his soldiers stood guard in front of the palace gate.

古文：丞相、御史、中二千石至者并莫敢发言。
现代文：前往辨认的丞相、御史、中二千石官等，谁也不敢发言。
English: The officials who came to identify the 2,000-koku chancellor were afraid to make a statement.

古文：京兆尹不疑后到，叱从吏收缚。
现代文：京兆尹隽不疑最后赶到，命手下官吏将该男子逮捕。
English: When he arrived, he immediately ordered his subordinates to arrest the person.

古文：或曰： 是非未可知，且安之。 
现代文：有人劝他说： 是否真是前太子还不能确定，暂且不要处理！ 
English: Someone advised him, "It's still unclear whether this person is the crown prince, so let's wait and see."

古文：不疑曰： 诸君何患于卫太子！
现代文：隽不疑说道： 各位又何必怕他是卫太子！
English: He said without hesitation, "Why should you all be afraid of the crown prince?"

古文：昔蒯聩违命出奔，辄距而不纳，《春秋》是之。
现代文：春秋时期，卫国太子卫蒯聩因违抗卫灵公之命出逃，后其子卫辄继位，拒不接纳其父回国，此事得到《春秋》的肯定。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the Prince of the Great Patriotic War, Wei Wei, ran away because he disobeyed the order of Emperor Wei Ling. Later, his son Wei Wei succeeded to the throne and refused to accept his father's return to the country. This was confirmed by "Spring and Autumn."

古文：卫太子得罪先帝，亡不即死，今来自诣，此罪人也！ 
现代文：卫太子得罪了先帝，逃亡在外，当时没死，如今自己又回来了，也是国家的罪人。 
English: Wei Taizi offended the former emperor, fled abroad, did not die at that time, and now he has returned, he is also a national sinner.

古文：遂送诏狱。
现代文：于是将该男子押送到诏狱。
English: So they sent this man to the royal prison.

古文：天子与大将军霍光闻而嘉之曰： 公卿大臣当用有经术、明于大谊者。 
现代文：汉昭帝与大将军霍光听说后，称赞隽不疑说： 公卿大臣就应当由这种精通经典、明白大义的人来担任。 
English: After hearing that Emperor Han Zhao and General Huo Guang were leaving, he praised Zou and said without a doubt: the post of minister of public security should be held by a person who is well versed in the classics and understands the great justice.

古文：繇是不疑名声重于朝廷，在位者皆自以为不及也。
现代文：于是隽不疑在朝中名重一时，其他身居高位的人都自认为比不上他。
English: As a result, Zou undoubtedly became famous in the court, and other people in high positions thought that they were not as good as him.

古文：廷尉验治何人，竟得奸诈，本夏阳人，姓成，名方遂，居湖，以卜筮为事。
现代文：后经廷尉审讯核问那个人，竟然发现是一骗案。那位自称是卫太子的人本是夏阳人，姓成，名方遂，住在湖县，以占卜为职业。
English: The man who claimed to be Wei Taizi was originally from Xiayang, his family name was Cheng, his given name was Fang Sui, he lived in Huxian, and his occupation was divination.

古文：有故太子舍人尝从方遂卜，谓曰： 子状貌甚似卫太子。 
现代文：卫太子的一位侍从曾经请他占卜，并对他说： 您的身材相貌都很像卫太子。 
English: A member of the entourage of the former crown prince once asked Fang Sui for advice. After seeing him, he said, "Your appearance is very similar to that of the crown prince."

古文：方遂心利其言，冀得以富贵。
现代文：成方遂听到此言之后颇为动心，希望借此取得富贵。
English: After hearing this, Cheng Fang was quite moved and hoped to become rich and famous.

古文：坐诬罔不道，要斩。
现代文：成方遂被定以诬罔不道之罪，腰斩。
English: Cheng Fang was sentenced to be beheaded for the crime of false accusation.

古文：夏，六月，封上官安为桑乐侯。
现代文：夏季，六月，汉昭帝封上官安为桑乐侯。
English: In the summer, in June, Emperor Han Zhao made Guan'an the first Sun Le Hou.

古文：安日以骄淫，受赐殿中，对宾客言： 与我婿饮，大乐！
现代文：上官安日益骄纵乱，汉昭帝赐他在宫中饮宴，他回家后，对门客说： 与我女婿一起喝酒，非常高兴。 
English: Shangguan An became increasingly arrogant and indulgent. Emperor Han Zhao gave him a banquet in the palace. After he returned home, he said to his guests: "I am very happy to drink with my son-in-law."

古文：见其服饰，使人归欲自烧物！ 
现代文：看见汉昭帝的服饰，便派人回家，要将自己的东西烧掉。
English: When he saw Emperor Han Zhao's clothes, he sent someone home to burn his things.

古文：子病死，仰而骂天。
现代文：儿子因病去世，上官安竟仰面骂天。
English: When his son died of illness, he fell on his face and cursed the heavens.

古文：其顽悖如此。
现代文：其顽劣狂悖到了如此地步。
English: It's bad enough that it's gotten to this point.

古文：罢儋耳、真番郡。
现代文：汉朝撤销儋耳、真番二郡。
English: Two counties of Min'er and Zhenban were revoked.

古文：秋，大鸿胪广明、军正王平击益州，斩首、捕虏三万馀人，获畜产五万馀头。
现代文：秋季，大鸿胪田广明、军正王平率兵征讨在益州叛乱的西南夷姑缯、叶榆两部族，共斩杀、捕获叛乱者三万余人，缴获牲畜五万余头。
English: In autumn, Guangming Putian, the great general, and Wang Ping, the military commander, led the troops to recruit the two tribes of the Southwest Yigu and Yehu, who rebelled in Yizhou, and killed and captured more than 30,000 rebels and seized more than 50,000 head of livestock.

古文：谏大夫杜延年见国家承武帝奢侈、师旅之后，数为大将军光言： 年岁比不登，流民未尽还，宜修孝文时政，示以俭约、宽和，顺天心，说民意，年岁宜应。 
现代文：谏大夫杜延年看到汉武帝的奢侈和屡次兴兵出征给国家留下的困难，多次对大将军霍光说： 连年收成不好，离乡背井的百姓还没有全部回到自己的家园，应当恢复孝文皇帝时的治国方针，提倡节俭，为政宽和，顺从天意，取悦民心，年景就会跟着好转。 
English: Seeing the extravagance of Emperor Hanwu and the difficulties left by the repeated dispatch of soldiers to the country, Dr. Du Yanren repeatedly said to General Huo Guang: The harvest has been bad for years, and the people who have left their hometowns have not all returned to their homes. It is necessary to restore the policy of governing the country at the time of Emperor Xiaowen, advocate frugality, be tolerant of politics, obey the will of heaven, and please the people. The situation will improve.

古文：光纳其言。
现代文：霍光采纳了他的建议。
English: Huo Guang accepted his suggestion.

古文：延年，故御史大夫周之子也。
现代文：杜延年是前御史大夫杜周的儿子。
English: Du Yan Nian is the son of the former imperial historian Du Zhou.

古文：孝昭皇帝上始元六年
现代文：始元六年
English: Six years have passed since the beginning of the year.

古文：春，二月，诏有司问郡国所举贤良、文学，民所疾苦、教化之要，皆对： 愿罢盐、铁、酒榷、均输官，毋与天下争利，示以俭节，然后教化可兴。 
现代文：春季，二月，汉昭帝下诏命有关官员向各郡、国举荐的贤良、文学询问，了解民间疾苦和教化百姓的要点，大家都建议： 希望取消盐、铁、酒类的专卖制度，罢黜均输官，不要与天下人争利，向百姓表示节俭，然后才可以振兴、教化。 
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict to the relevant officials to inquire about the wise men and literature recommended by the counties and the country, to understand the main points of the people's suffering and enlighten the people. Everyone suggested: It is hoped that the monopoly system of salt, iron and alcohol will be abolished, all officials will be dismissed, do not compete with the people of the world, and show frugality to the people, and then they can be revitalized and enlightened.

古文：桑弘羊难，以为： 此国家大业，所以制四夷，安边足用之本，不可废也。 
现代文：但桑弘羊表示反对，他认为： 盐、铁、酒类的专卖制度和均输措施等，都是国家赖以控制四夷、保卫边疆，使财用充足的根本大业，不能废除。 
English: However, Kuang Hongyang expressed his opposition. He believed that: The salt, iron and liquor monopoly system and the equalization of export measures are all fundamental undertakings that the country relies on to control Shiyi, defend the border and make sufficient financial use, and cannot be abolished.

古文：于是盐铁之议起焉。
现代文：于是，一场关于盐铁专卖等问题的辩论开始了。
English: As a result, a debate on issues such as the salt and iron monopoly began.

古文：初，苏武既徙北海上，禀食不至，掘野鼠去草实而食之。
现代文：当初，苏武被匈奴放逐到北海边以后，得不到粮食供应，便挖掘野鼠，吃鼠洞中的草籽。
English: At first, after Su Wu was banished to the North Sea by the Xiongnu, unable to obtain food supplies, he dug up field mice and ate the grass seeds in the mouse hole.

古文：杖汉节牧羊，卧起操持，节旄尽落。
现代文：他手持汉朝的符节牧羊，无论睡卧还是起身都带着它，以致节杖上的毛缨全部脱落了。
English: Shepherds carry the Han Dynasty Festival with them and carry it with them all the time. As a result, the bumps on the festival have fallen off.

古文：武在汉，与李陵俱为侍中；陵降匈奴，不敢求武。
现代文：苏武在汉朝时，与李陵同为侍中，李陵投降匈奴后，不敢求见苏武。
English: When Su Wu was in the Han Dynasty, he was an equerry with Li Ling. After Li Ling surrendered to the Xiongnu, he did not dare to ask to see Su Wu.

古文：久之，单于使陵至海上，为武置酒设乐，因谓武曰： 单于闻陵与子卿素厚，故使来说足下，虚心欲相待，终不得归汉，空自苦；亡人之地，信义安所见乎！
现代文：过了很长时间，单于派李陵来到北海边，为苏武摆下酒筵，并以乐队助兴。李陵对苏武说： 单于听说我与你一向情谊深厚，所以派我来劝你，单于愿意对你虚心相待。你终究不能再回汉朝，自己白白受苦在这荒无人烟的地方，你的信义节操，又有谁看到呢！
English: After a long time had passed, Jian Yu sent Li Ling to come to the North Sea to serve Su Wu with wine and to entertain him with a band. Li Ling said to Su Wu: "Just because I heard that I have always had a deep friendship with you, so I sent you to advise you, just because I am willing to treat you humbly. After all, you can't go back to the Han Dynasty, you are suffering in vain in this desolate and uninhabited place, and who can see your loyalty and integrity?

古文：足下兄弟二人，前皆坐事自杀；来时，太夫人已不幸；子卿妇年少，闻已更嫁矣；独有女弟二人、两女、一男，今复十馀年，存亡不可知。
现代文：你的两个兄弟，先前已都因罪自杀；我来此时，你母亲也已不幸去世；你的夫人年轻，听说已经改嫁别人了；只剩下两个妹妹、两个女儿、一个儿子，如今又过了十几年，是否还在人世，不得而知。
English: Your two brothers had both previously committed suicide for their sins; I come at this time, and your mother has also tragically passed away; your wife was young, and I heard that she has remarried; only two sisters, two daughters, and one son remain, and now, more than ten years later, it is unknown whether they are still alive.

古文：人生如朝露，何久自苦如此！
现代文：人的一生，就像早晨的露水一般短暂，你又何必长久地如此自苦！
English: Life is as short as the morning dew, why torture yourself for a long time!

古文：陵始降时，忽忽如狂，自痛负汉，加以老母系保宫。
现代文：我刚投降匈奴时，精神恍惚，像要发疯，恨自己辜负汉朝，还连累老母被拘禁牢狱。
English: When I had just surrendered to the Xiongnu, I was in a trance, as if I was going mad, hating myself for failing the Han Dynasty, and my mother was detained and imprisoned.

古文：子卿不欲降，何以过陵！
现代文：你不愿归降匈奴的心情，怎么会超过我！
English: Your unwillingness to surrender to the Huns is beyond me!

古文：且陛下春秋高，法令无常，大臣无罪夷灭者数十家。安危不可知，子卿尚复谁为乎！ 
现代文：况且皇上年事已高，法令变化无常，大臣无罪而被抄杀满门的达数十家，安危不可知，你还要为谁这样做呢！ 
English: Moreover, the emperor is very old, the laws and regulations are changeable, and there are dozens of ministers who are innocent and have been copied and killed, and their safety is unknown. Who else would you do this for?

古文：武曰： 武父子无功德，皆为陛下所成就，位列将，爵通侯，兄弟亲近，常愿肝脑涂地。
现代文：苏武说： 我父子本无才德功绩，全靠皇上栽培，才得以身居高位，与列侯、将军并列，且使我们兄弟得以亲近皇上，所以我常常希望能够肝脑涂地，报答皇上的大恩。
English: Su Wu said: My father and son had no talent or merit to begin with, and it was entirely thanks to the Emperor's cultivation that they were able to hold high positions, rank alongside vassals and generals, and allow our brothers to be close to the Emperor. Therefore, I often hope that I will be able to repay the Emperor's great kindness.

古文：今得杀身自效，虽斧钺、汤镬，诚甘乐之！
现代文：如今得以杀身报效皇上，既使是斧钺加身，汤锅烹煮，我也心甘情愿！
English: Now that I have been able to kill myself to repay the emperor's kindness, I am willing to do anything, even if it is axe-chopping, adding body and cooking in a soup pot!

古文：臣事君，犹子事父也。子为父死，无所恨。
现代文：为臣的侍奉君王，就如同儿子侍奉父亲一般，儿子为父亲而死，没有遗憾。
English: A subject serves his sovereign as a son serves his father, and a son dies for his father without regret.

古文：愿勿复再言！ 
现代文：希望你不要再说了。 
English: I wish you'd stop saying that.

古文：陵与武饮数日，复曰： 子卿壹听陵言！ 
现代文：李陵与苏武一连饮酒数日，又劝道： 子卿你再听我一句话。 
English: Li Ling and Su Wu had been drinking for several days in a row, and he advised, "Son, listen to me one more time.

古文：武曰： 自分已死久矣，王必欲降武，请毕今日之欢，效死于前！ 
现代文：苏武说： 我自己料想必死已经很久了，大王你一定要我苏武投降，就请结束今日的欢聚，让我死在你的面前！ 
English: Suwu said, "I've been expecting to die for a long time. Your Majesty, you must make me surrender, so please end today's reunion and let me die in front of you!"

古文：陵见其至诚，喟然叹曰： 嗟乎，义士！
现代文：李陵见苏武一片至诚，长叹道： 唉！你真是义士！
English: Li Ling saw that he was so loyal to the Han Dynasty, sighed and said: Alas, what a righteous man!

古文：陵与卫律之罪上通于天！ 
现代文：我与卫律的罪过上通于天！ 
English: My transgressions against the sacred law have reached up to the heavens!

古文：因泣下沾衿，与武决去。
现代文：不觉泪湿衣衿，与苏武告别而去。
English: With that, tears fell like rain, his clothes got wet, and he bade farewell to Su Wu.

古文：赐武牛羊数十头。
现代文：赐给苏武牛羊数十头。
English: Dozens of head of cattle and sheep were given to Suwu.

古文：后陵复至北海上，语武以武帝崩。
现代文：后来，李陵又来到北海边，告诉苏武汉武帝已然去世。
English: Later, Li Ling came to the North Sea and told Su Wuhan that Emperor Wu had passed away.

古文：武南乡号哭欧血，旦夕临，数月。
现代文：苏武一连数月，每天早晚面对南方号啕痛哭，甚至吐血。
English: For several months in a row, Su Wu cried bitterly every morning and evening in the face of the Southern trumpet and even vomited blood.

古文：及壶衍鞮单于立，母阏氏不正，国内乖离，常恐汉兵袭之，于是卫律为单于谋，与汉和亲。
现代文：壶衍单于即位后，其母阏氏行为不正，国内分崩离析，常常害怕汉军前来袭击，于是卫律为单于定计，要求与汉朝和亲。
English: After Jue Yan's ascension to the throne, his mother Yan's behavior was improper, the country was falling apart, and she was often afraid of the Chinese army coming to attack. Therefore, Wei Ritsu was determined to be alone and demanded to be reconciled with the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉使至，求苏武等，匈奴诡言武死。
现代文：汉使来到匈奴，要求放苏武等人回国，匈奴假称苏武已死。
English: Han envoys came to the Xiongnu and demanded that Su Wu and others be allowed to return to China. The Xiongnu pretended that Su Wu was dead.

古文：后汉使复至匈奴，常惠私见汉使，教使者谓单于，言： 天子射上林中，得雁，足有系帛书，言武等在某泽中。 
现代文：后来汉使又来到匈奴，常惠暗中面见汉使，教使者对单于说： 汉天子在上林苑射猎，射下一只大雁，雁脚上系着一块写字的绸缎，上面说苏武等人在某湖泽之地。 
English: Later, the Han envoy came to the Xiongnu again. Chang Hui met the Han envoy in the dark, and told the envoy to say to Shan Yu: Han Tianzi went hunting in Shanglinyuan, and shot down a goose. The goose's foot was tied with a piece of writing silk ribbon, which said that Su Wu and others were in a certain lake.

古文：使者大喜，如惠语以让单于。
现代文：使者大喜，按常惠之言责问单于。
English: The Chinese envoy was very pleased and complied with Chang Hui's request.

古文：单于视左右而惊，谢汉使曰： 武等实在。 
现代文：单于环视左右侍从，大吃一惊，然后向汉使道歉说： 苏武确实还活着。 
English: Looking around, he was taken aback and had to apologize to the Chinese envoy, saying: Su Wu is indeed alive.

古文：乃归武及马宏等。
现代文：这才将苏武及马宏等人放还。
English: It was only then that Su Wu and Mahong and others were released.

古文：马宏者，前副光禄大夫王忠使西国，为匈奴所遮；忠战死，马宏生得，亦不肯降。
现代文：马宏先前是汉朝派往西域各国的使者，光禄大夫王忠的副使，因受到匈奴军队的拦截，王忠战死，马宏被俘，也不肯投降匈奴。
English: Previously, Mahon was the envoy of the Han Dynasty to the western countries, the deputy envoy of the Guanglu doctor Wang Zhong. Due to being intercepted by the Hun army, Wang Zhong died in battle, Mahon was captured, and he refused to surrender to the Hun.

古文：故匈奴归此二人，欲以通善意。
现代文：所以匈奴这次将苏武、马宏二人放回，是想向汉朝表示他们的善意。
English: So the Xiongnu released the two men back to the Han Dynasty, wanting them to bring the goodwill of reconciliation to the Xiongnu.

古文：于是李陵置酒贺武曰： 今足下还归，扬名于匈奴，功显于汉室，虽古竹帛所载，丹青所画，何以过子卿！
现代文：于是，李陵摆设酒筵祝贺苏武说： 如今你返回祖国，名声传遍匈奴，功劳显扬于汉朝，既使是史籍所记载、丹青所描画的人物，又怎能超过你！
English: At this time, Li Ling set up a wine banquet to celebrate Su Wu and said: You go back today, your reputation is extolled by the Xiongnu, your merits are prominent in the Han Dynasty, even if it is contained in ancient history books and depicted in pictures, who can beat you!

古文：陵虽驽怯，令汉贳陵罪，全其老母，使得奋大辱之积志，庶几乎曹柯之盟，此陵宿昔之所不忘也。
现代文：我虽然愚笨怯懦，假如当年汉朝能宽恕我的罪过，保全我的老母，使我能够忍辱负重，春秋时曹刿劫持齐桓公于柯盟的壮举正是我当时念念不忘的志向。
English: Although I am stupid and cowardly, if the Han Dynasty could have forgiven my sins, protected my mother, and enabled me to bear the burden of humiliation, the feat of Cao Pi's kidnapping of Prince Qi Huan in the Spring and Autumn Period was exactly what I aspired to at the time.

古文：收族陵家，为世大戮，陵尚复何顾乎！
现代文：谁知汉朝竟将我满门抄斩，这是当世最残酷的杀戮，我还能再顾念什么呢！
English: Who knew that the Han Dynasty would behead me wholesale, this is the most cruel killing in the world, what else can I think about!

古文：已矣，令子卿知吾心耳！ 
现代文：如今一切都已过去，现在不过是想让你知道我的心罢了！ 
English: Now it's all over, now I just want you to know my heart!

古文：陵泣下数行，因与武决。
现代文：李陵泪流满面，便与苏武告别。
English: Li Ling exchanged tears and said goodbye to Su Wu.

古文：单于召会武官属，前已降及物故，凡随武还者九人。
现代文：单于召集当年随苏武前来的汉朝官员及随从，除先前已归降匈奴和去世的以外，共有九人与苏武一同回到汉朝。
English: Just by gathering the Han Dynasty officials and followers who came with Su Wu that year, in addition to those who had previously surrendered to the Xiongnu and died, a total of nine people returned to the Han Dynasty with Su Wu.

古文：既至京师，诏武奉一太牢谒武帝园庙，拜为典属国，秩中二千石，赐钱二百万，公田二顷，宅一区。
现代文：苏武一行来到长安后，汉昭帝诏令苏武用牛、羊、猪各一头，以最隆重的仪式祭拜汉武帝的陵庙，封苏武为典属国，品秩为中二千石，并赏赐苏武钱二百万、公田二顷、住宅一所。
English: After Su Wu and his party came to Chang'an, Emperor Han Zhao ordered Su Wu to use one head of cattle, one head of sheep, and one head of pig to worship Emperor Han Wu's mausoleum with the grandest ceremony, to make Su Wu a vassal state, and to award him 2,000,000 koku in cash, two hectares of public land, and a house.

古文：武留匈奴凡十九岁，始以强壮出，及还，须发尽白。
现代文：苏武被扣留匈奴共十九年，去时正当壮年，归来时头发、胡须全都白了。
English: Su Wu was detained in Xiongnu for nineteen years. He was rich and strong when he was sent out, and by the time he returned, he had already lost all his hair.

古文：霍光、上官桀与李陵素善，遣陵故人陇西任立政等三人俱至匈奴招之。
现代文：霍光、上官桀一向都和李陵关系很好，所以特派李陵的旧友陇西人任立政等三人一同前往匈奴劝说李陵回国。
English: Huo Guang and Shangguan Zou had always had a good relationship with Li Ling, so they sent Li Ling's old friend, the Westerner Ren Licheng, to the Xiongnu to persuade Li Ling to return to China.

古文：陵曰： 归易耳，丈夫不能再辱！ 
现代文：李陵对他们说： 回去容易，但大丈夫不能两次受辱！ 
English: Li Ling said to them: It's easy to go back, but it's okay not to be humiliated twice!

古文：遂死于匈奴。
现代文：于是老死于匈奴。
English: As a result, Lao died at the hands of the Xiongnu.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏季，干旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：秋，七月，罢榷酤官，从贤良、文学之议也。
现代文：秋季，七月，汉昭帝接受贤良、文学们的建议，撤销负责酒类专卖的官员。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Han Zhao accepted the suggestions of the wise and the literati and revoked the officials in charge of the liquor monopoly.

古文：武帝之末，海内虚耗，户口减半，霍光知时务之要，轻徭薄赋，与民休息。
现代文：汉武帝末年，国家财力虚耗，户口减少了一半。霍光了解当时的要务，减轻赋税和徭役，使百姓得到休息。
English: In the last years of Emperor Hanwu, the country's financial resources were wasted, and the household registration was reduced by half. Huo Guang understood the important tasks at that time, reduced taxes and forced labor, and gave the people a rest.

古文：至是匈奴和亲，百姓充实，稍复文、景之业焉。
现代文：如今与匈奴恢复和亲，百姓生活充实，渐渐恢复了汉文帝、汉景帝时期的定安、繁荣局面。
English: Now that the Huns have been reconciled and the people's lives have been enriched, the stability and prosperity of the Han Dynasty and Han Dynasty have been gradually restored.

古文：诏以钩町侯毋波率其邑君长、人民击反者有功，立以为钩町王。
现代文：汉昭帝颁布诏书，因町侯毋波率领其所属部落的头人和部众镇压叛乱者有功，将毋波封为町王。
English: Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict that because the town lord Bepo had led the leaders and subordinates of the tribe he belonged to to suppress the rebels, Bepo would be made the town king.

古文：赐田广明爵关内侯。
现代文：赐田广明关内侯爵位。
English: He was given the title of Marquis of Kansai.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤元年
现代文：元凤元年辛丑，公元前年
English: The first year of the phoenix, the first year of the phoenix, the first year of the phoenix

古文：春，武都氐人反，遣执金吾马适建、龙頟侯韩增、大鸿胪田广明将三辅、太常徒，皆免刑，击之。
现代文：春季，武都郡氐族人造反，汉昭帝派执金吾马适建、龙侯韩增、大鸿胪田广明率领三辅地区及太常所属的刑徒，一律免其刑罚，前往镇压。
English: In the spring, when the Yi people of Wudu County staged a rebellion, Emperor Han Zhao sent the executioners Jinwuma Shijian, Longhou Han Zeng, and Taihong Putian Guangming to lead the convicts from the Sanfu area and Taizhong to suppress the rebellion. All of them were exempted from punishment.

古文：夏，六月，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，六月，大赦天下。
English: In summer, in June, there is a general amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥晦，日有食之，既。八月，改元。
现代文：秋季，七月乙亥，出现日全食。八月，改年号为元凤元年。
English: In autumn, in July, a total solar eclipse occurs. In August, the year is changed to the first year of the phoenix.

古文：上官桀父子既尊，盛德长公主，欲为丁外人求封侯，霍光不许。
现代文：上官桀父子的地位既已尊贵，对长公主非常感恩，便想为丁外人谋求封侯，但霍光不许。
English: Since Shangguan Zou's father and son had already achieved a high status and were very grateful to the eldest princess, they wanted to seek a title of nobility for Ding Gaozhong, but Huo Guang would not allow it.

古文：又为外人求光禄大夫，欲令得召见，又不许。
现代文：上官桀父子又请求任命丁外人为光禄大夫，想使其取得受皇帝召见的资格，霍光仍然不许。
English: They also sought the post of Guanglu doctor for Ding Gaozhong, with a view to being summoned by Emperor Zhao, and were once again rejected by Huo Guang.

古文：长主大以是怨光，而桀、安数为外人求官爵弗能得，亦惭。
现代文：长公主因此怨恨霍光，而上官桀、上官安几次为丁外人谋求官爵都未能实现，也觉脸上无光。
English: As a result, the eldest princess resented Huo Guang, while Shangguan Zhao and Shangguan An failed to achieve the rank of nobility several times for Ding Gaozhong, and also felt that their faces were dull.

古文：又桀妻父所幸充国为太医监，阑入殿中，下狱当死；冬月且尽，盖主为充国入马二十匹赎罪，乃得减死论。
现代文：上官桀的岳父所宠爱的一个叫充国的人，担任太医监，因私自闯入宫殿，被逮捕下狱，定为死罪。当时，处决犯人的冬季即将过去，长公主为充国交纳二十匹马赎罪，使其被免除死刑。
English: A favorite of Shangguan Zhai's father-in-law, a man named Zongguo, who served as the grand medical superintendent, was arrested and sentenced to death for breaking into the palace. At that time, the winter of the execution of the prisoner was about to pass, and the eldest princess paid twenty horses for Zongguo to atone for his sin, so that he was exempted from the death penalty.

古文：于是桀、安父子深怨光而重德盖主。
现代文：于是，上官桀、上官安父子深怨霍光而更加感激长公主。
English: Therefore, Shangguan Ren and Shangguan An, father and son, deeply resented Huo Guang, but were grateful for the princess' kindness.

古文：自先帝时，桀已为九卿，位在光右，及父子并为将军，皇后亲安女，光乃其外祖，而顾专制朝事，由是与光争权。
现代文：自从汉武帝时，上官桀已位列九卿，地位高于霍光，及至上官桀父子同为将军，皇后又是上官安的亲女儿，而霍光只是皇后的外祖父，却反而专制朝政，因此上官安父子与霍光争权。
English: Since the time of Emperor Hanwu, Shangguan Xuan has been ranked among the nine nobles, with a higher status than Huo Guang. In addition, Shangguan Xuan's father and son were both generals, and the queen was Shangguan An's own daughter. However, Huo Guang was only the queen's grandfather, but on the contrary, he ruled the imperial court. Therefore, Shangguan An's father and son competed for power with Huo Guang.

古文：燕王旦自以帝兄不得立，常怀怨望。
现代文：燕王刘旦觉得自己是汉昭帝的兄长，未能继承皇位，所以常常心怀怨恨。
English: Yan Wang Liu Dan felt that he was the elder brother of Emperor Han Zhao and failed to inherit the throne, so he often harbored resentment.

古文：及御史大夫桑弘羊建造酒榷、盐、铁，为国兴利，伐其功，欲为子弟得官，亦怨恨光。
现代文：御史大夫桑弘羊创立盐、铁、酒类专卖制度，为国兴利，自认为于国有功，想为其子弟求取官职，遭到霍光拒绝，因而也怨恨霍光。
English: Grand Historian Kuang Hongyang founded the salt, iron and liquor monopoly system, benefiting the country. He considered himself to be a national hero. He wanted to seek a government post for his son, but was rejected by Huo Guang, and thus also resented Huo Guang.

古文：于是盖主、桀、安、弘羊皆与旦通谋。
现代文：于是，盖长公主、上官桀、上官安、桑弘羊都与刘旦串通一气，密谋除掉霍光。
English: As a result, Princess Gaichang, Shangguan Yu, Shangguan An, and Kuang Hongyang all colluded with Liu Dan and plotted to get rid of Huo Guang.

古文：旦遣孙纵之等前后十馀辈，多赍金宝、走马赂遗盖主、桀、弘羊等。
现代文：刘旦派遣孙纵之等人前后十余批，携带大批金银、珠宝、快马等前往长安，贿赂盖长公主、上官桀、桑弘羊等人。
English: Liu Dan dispatched Sun Zongzhi and others in more than ten batches, carrying a large amount of gold and silver, jewelry, fast horses, etc. to Chang'an to bribe Princess Gaichang, Shangguan Xuan, Kuang Hongyang and others.

古文：桀等又诈令人为燕王上书，言光出都肄郎、羽林，道上称跸，太官先置。
现代文：上官桀等又命人伪造燕王上书，言称： 霍光出外校阅郎官及羽林军时，就仿佛皇上出巡一般，命人清道，驱赶行人，派太官为其预先安排饮食。 
English: Shangguan Yu and others also ordered people to forge Yan Wang's letter, saying: When Huo Guang went out of the school to read to his vassals and the Ulin army, it was as if the emperor was on a general tour, ordering people to clear the road, drive away pedestrians, and sending eunuchs to arrange meals for them in advance.

古文：又引 苏武使匈奴二十年不降，乃为典属国；大将军长史敞无功，为搜粟都尉；又擅调益莫府校尉。
现代文：又称： 苏武出使匈奴，被扣留二十年而不肯投降，回朝后只不过给了个典属国的官职；而大将军长史杨敞并无功劳，却被任命为搜粟都尉；另外，霍光还擅自增选大将军府的校尉。
English: Also known as: Su Wu sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, was detained for twenty years and refused to surrender, after returning to the DPRK, he was only given an official post of a subordinate country; and the general commander Shi Yangchan had no merit, but was appointed as the captain of the Sogou; In addition, Huo Guang also arbitrarily elected the captain of the general's office.

古文：光专权自恣，疑有非常。
现代文：霍光独揽大权，为所欲为，是否会做出不利于朝廷的非常之举，令人怀疑。
English: I'm afraid he has bad intentions.

古文：臣旦愿归符玺，入宿卫，察奸臣变。 
现代文：因此，我愿意交还燕王的印玺，进入宫廷，侍卫在皇上左右，监督奸臣的行动，以防有变。 
English: The vassal Liu Dan is willing to return the seal of the Rune Festival of King Yan, enter the imperial guard, and investigate the conspiracy of the treacherous vassal.

古文：候司光出沐日奏之，桀欲从中下其事，弘羊当与诸大臣共执退光。
现代文：等到霍光休假不在朝中时奏闻汉昭帝。上官桀本打算从朝廷中交给有关官员去查办，由桑弘羊与各大臣一起逮捕霍光，撤销其职。
English: It was reported to Emperor Han Zhao when Huo Guang was away from the imperial court on vacation. The superior officer planned to send the relevant officials from the imperial court to investigate, and Kuang Hongyang would arrest Huo Guang together with the ministers and revoke his position.

古文：书奏，帝不肯下。
现代文：但上奏后，汉昭帝却扣留不发。
English: After the report was handed over, Emperor Zhao kept the report and refused to issue it.

古文：明旦，光闻之，止画室中不入。
现代文：第二天早晨，霍光入朝，听说此事后，停在画室中不敢贸然进殿。
English: The next morning, when Huo Guang heard about this, he stayed in the studio in front of the temple and did not go in to worship.

古文：上问： 大将军安在？ 
现代文：汉昭帝问： 大将军在什么地方？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Where is the great general?"

古文：左将军桀对曰： 以燕王告其罪，故不敢入。 
现代文：左将军上官桀回答说： 因燕王控告大将军的罪行，所以他不敢进殿。 
English: General Zuo's superior officer replied, "He did not dare to enter the palace because King Yan had accused him of a crime.

古文：有诏： 召大将军。 
现代文：汉昭帝下诏： 召大将军进来。 
English: Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict: Call the general in.

古文：光入，免冠、顿首谢。
现代文：霍光进殿后，脱下官帽，叩头请罪。
English: After entering the hall, Huo Guang took off his official cap and bowed down to plead guilty.

古文：上曰： 将军冠！
现代文：汉昭帝说道： 将军请戴上帽子。
English: Han Zhao Di said: General, please put on your hat.

古文：朕知是书诈也，将军无罪。 
现代文：朕知道这道奏章是假的，将军并没有罪。 
English: I know that this report is false. The general is not guilty.

古文：光曰： 陛下何以知之？ 
现代文：霍光说： 陛下是怎么知道的呢？ 
English: Huo Guang asked: How does His Majesty know that I am not guilty?

古文：上曰： 将军之广明都郎，近耳；调校尉以来，未能十日，燕王何以得知之！
现代文：汉昭帝说： 将军去广明校阅郎官，是最近的事，选调校尉以来，也还不到十天，燕王怎么能知道这些事呢！
English: Han Zhao Di said: The general's visit to Guangming School to read the names of his successors is a recent event. It has been less than ten days since the election of the captain. How could Yan Wang know these things?

古文：且将军为非，不须校尉。 
现代文：况且将军如要谋反，也用不着选调校尉。 
English: Besides, it doesn't take a captain for a general to do something illegal.

古文：是时帝年十四，尚书、左右皆惊。
现代文：此时汉昭帝年仅十四岁，尚书及左右官员全都震惊了。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Zhao was only fourteen years old. Shang Shu and the officials around him were all shocked.

古文：而上书者果亡，捕之甚急。
现代文：后发现呈递这奏章的人果然逃亡，汉昭帝下令紧急追捕。
English: Later, it was discovered that the person who submitted the score had indeed fled, and Emperor Han Zhao ordered an urgent pursuit.

古文：桀等惧，白上： 小事不足遂。 上不听。
现代文：上官桀等人心中害怕，便对汉昭帝说： 区区小事，用不着穷追不放。 
English: Shangguan Zou and the others were afraid in their hearts, so they said to Han Zhao Di: There is no need to go after every little thing.

古文：后桀党与有谮光者，上辄怒曰： 大将军忠臣，先帝所属以辅朕身，敢有毁者坐之！ 
现代文：汉昭帝不听。后上官桀的同党中崐有人说霍光的坏话，汉昭帝立即怒斥道： 大将军是忠臣，先帝托付他辅佐我，谁再胆敢诬蔑大将军，就问他的罪！ 
English: Emperor Han Zhao didn't listen. Later, one of Emperor Gaozong's fellow party members said something bad about Huo Guang, and Emperor Han Zhao immediately rebuked: The general is a loyal subject, the former emperor entrusted him to assist me, and anyone who dares to slander the general is guilty!

古文：自是桀等不敢复言。
现代文：从此，上官桀等不敢再攻击霍光。
English: From then on, the superior officers did not dare to attack Huo Guang again.

古文：李德裕论曰：人君之德，莫大于至明，明以照奸，则百邪不能蔽矣。汉昭帝是也。
现代文：李德裕论曰：君主最大的德，莫过于明察秋毫，明察可以洞悉奸诈，那么任何邪恶就都无法将其蒙蔽，汉昭帝就是这样。
English: Li Deyu said: The greatest virtue of a monarch is to be able to see through the shadows. Seeing through the shadows can reveal treachery, so no evil can blind him. This was the case with Emperor Han Zhao.

古文：周成王有惭德矣；高祖、文、景俱不如也。
现代文：这一点，不仅周成王应当惭愧，汉高祖、汉文帝、汉景帝也都不如。
English: This is something that not only Zhou Cheng Wang should be ashamed of, but also the Han Emperor Gaozu, Han Emperor Wen and Han Emperor Jing.

古文：成王闻管、蔡流言，遂使周公狼跋而东。
现代文：周成王听信了管叔、蔡叔的流言，致使周公进退两难，只好东征。
English: Zhou Chengwang believed the rumors of Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, which led Zhou Gong into a dilemma and had no choice but to march east.

古文：汉高闻陈平去魏背楚，欲舍腹心臣。
现代文：汉高祖听说陈平离开魏国，又背叛了西楚，便要舍弃这位心腹之臣。
English: When Han Gaozu heard that Chen Ping had left Wei and betrayed Western Chu, he had to give up this loyal vassal.

古文：汉文惑季布使酒难近，罢归股肱郡；疑贾生擅权纷乱，复疏贤士。
现代文：汉文帝误认为季布爱发酒疯，难作天子近臣，便将其放回地方作郡太守；又怀疑贾谊专擅权柄，可能造成混乱，便又疏远了这位贤士。
English: Emperor Hanwen mistakenly thought that Ji Bu was a drunkard and not fit to be a close vassal of the emperor, so he sent him back to the provinces to serve as a county governor; he also suspected that Jia Yi's exclusive power could cause chaos, so he alienated the sage.

古文：景帝信诛晁错兵解，遂戮三公。
现代文：汉景帝相信杀死晁错能结束七国之乱，便将位列三公的晁错杀死。
English: Emperor Han Jing believed that the killing of Xuan Er could end the Seven Kingdoms War, so he killed Xuan Er, who was one of the Three Princes.

古文：所谓 执狐疑之心，来谗贼之口 。
现代文：正所谓： 先有怀疑的心思，才召来奸贼的谗言。 
English: As the saying goes, it takes a suspicious mind to conjure up the words of a traitor.

古文：使昭帝得伊、吕之佐，则成、康不足侔矣。
现代文：假使汉昭帝能得到伊尹、吕尚的辅佐，那么周成王、周康王都不足以与之相比。
English: If Emperor Han Zhao could have been assisted by Yi Yin and Lü Shang, then neither Zhou Cheng Wang nor Zhou Kang Wang would have been enough to compare with them.

古文：桀等谋令长公主置酒请光，伏兵格杀之，因废帝，迎立燕王为天子。
现代文：上官桀等密谋由长公主设酒宴邀请霍光，埋伏武士将霍光杀死，然后乘机废掉汉昭帝，迎立燕王刘旦为皇帝。
English: Shangguan Zhai and others conspired to invite Huo Guang to a banquet hosted by the eldest princess, ambush the samurai to kill Huo Guang, and then take the opportunity to abolish Han Zhao and welcome Yan Wang Liu Dan as emperor.

古文：旦置驿书往来相报，许立桀为王，外连郡国豪桀以千数。
现代文：刘旦设置驿马传书，往来递送消息，许诺事成后封上官桀为王，并对外联络了数以千计的各郡、国的豪杰之士。
English: Liu Dan set up a courier service to deliver messages back and forth, promising to be crowned king after the event, and contacted thousands of heroes from various counties and countries.

古文：旦以语相平，平曰： 大王前与刘泽结谋，事未成而发觉者，以刘泽素夸，好侵陵也。
现代文：刘旦将这一计划告诉燕国丞相，这位名叫平的燕国丞相说道： 大王以前与刘泽合谋，事情还未成功，消息已然走漏，是因为刘泽平时性情浮夸，好欺凌属下。
English: Liu Dan told these things to Yan Xiangping. Ping said: The great king had previously conspired with Liu Ze, and when things did not work out, it was discovered, because Liu Ze was always boastful, loved to abuse others, and stirred up trouble.

古文：平闻左将军素轻易，车骑将军少而骄，臣恐其如刘泽时不能成，又恐既成反大王也。 
现代文：我听说左将军一向办事不稳重，车骑将军又年轻骄横，我担心他们与刘泽那时一样成不了事，又担心他们事成之后背叛大王。 
English: I heard that General Zuo had always been unstable in his work, and that the general of the cavalry was young and arrogant. I was worried that they would not be able to achieve the same results as Liu Ze at that time, and that they would betray the great king after their success.

古文：旦曰： 前日一男子诣阙，自谓故太子，长安中民趣乡之，正讠雚不可止。
现代文：刘旦说： 前些日子，有一男子到皇宫门前，自称是前太子，长安城中的百姓纷纷上前，喧哗不绝。
English: Liu Dan said: A few days ago, a man appeared in front of the Imperial Palace claiming to be the former crown prince. People in Chang'an City rushed forward, making a lot of noise.

古文：大将军恐，出兵陈之，以自备耳。
现代文：大将军感到害怕，派出军队，为的是保护自己。
English: The general got scared and sent troops to protect himself.

古文：我，帝长子，天下所信，何忧见反！ 
现代文：我本先帝长子，天下信任，还怕被人反对吗！ 
English: I am the eldest son of the former emperor, trusted by the whole world, and I am still afraid of being opposed!

古文：后谓群臣： 盖主报言，独患大将军与右将军王莽。
现代文：后又对其臣下说： 盖长公主告诉我，只是担心大将军霍光与右将军王莽。
English: Later, he said to his courtiers, "Princess Gayo sent me a letter saying, 'Don't be afraid of the great general and the right-hand general Wang Mang.

古文：今右将军物故，丞相病，幸事必成，征不久。 
现代文：如今右将军去世，丞相又有病，大事必然成功，不久就可证实。 
English: Now that the Right General is dead and the Prime Minister is ill, the good things will surely succeed and will be realized soon.

古文：令群臣皆装。
现代文：命臣下一律整治行装，随时准备出发。
English: He ordered his courtiers to be ready for action.

古文：安又谋诱燕王至而诛之，因废帝而立桀。
现代文：上官安又密谋将燕王刘旦引诱前来杀死，然后再废掉汉昭帝，拥立其父上官桀为皇帝。
English: Shangguan An also plotted to lure Yan Wang Liu Dan to come and kill him, and then abolish Han Zhao Emperor and establish his father Shangguan Zang as emperor.

古文：或曰： 当如皇后何？ 
现代文：有人问他： 对皇后又当如何？ 
English: Some people say: What can the empress do?

古文：安曰： 逐麋之狗，当顾菟邪！
现代文：上官安说： 追逐大鹿的猎狗，会顾及兔子吗！
English: Shangguan'an said, "Can a hunting dog that chases a badger still care about a small rabbit?"

古文：且用皇后为尊，一旦人主意有所移，虽欲为家人亦不可得。
现代文：况且因皇后而获得尊贵的地位，一旦皇上移情别爱，即使想作一名普通老百姓，也不可能了。
English: Moreover, because of the empress's noble status, once the emperor is moved, even if you want to be an ordinary citizen, it is impossible.

古文：此百世之一时也！ 
现代文：这是百世难逢一时的好机会！ 
English: This is a once in a lifetime opportunity!

古文：会盖主舍人父稻田使者燕仓知其谋，以告大司农杨敞。
现代文：恰巧盖长公主一位舍人的父亲、担任稻田使者的燕仓了解到上官桀等人的阴谋，将此事告诉了大司农杨敞。
English: Yan Cang, who happened to be the father of the eldest princess and a rice field messenger, learned of the conspiracy of Shangguan Yao and others, and told the matter to Yang Chang, the chief farmer.

古文：敞素谨，畏事，不敢言，乃移病卧，以告谏大夫杜延年；延年以闻。
现代文：杨敞平时为人谨慎怕事，不敢奏报朝廷，便上书称病，卧居在家，同时将此事告知谏大夫杜延年。杜延年将此事奏闻朝廷。
English: Yang Chang, who is usually cautious and afraid of things, did not dare to report to the imperial court, so he wrote a letter saying that he was ill and stayed at home. At the same time, he informed Dr. Du Yannian of the matter. Du Yannian reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：九月，诏丞相部中二千石逐捕孙纵之及桀、安、弘羊、外人等，并宗族悉诛之；盖主自杀。
现代文：九月，汉昭帝下诏命丞相率领中二千石大臣缉捕孙纵之及上官桀、上官安、桑弘羊、丁外人等人，连同他们的宗族，全部诛杀。盖长公主自杀。
English: In September, Emperor Han Zhao issued an edict ordering the prime minister, led by a middle-ranking minister of 2,000 koku, to arrest and arrest Sun Zhengzhi, Shangguan Zheng, Shangguan An, Sanguang Yang, Ding Gaozhong and others, together with their families, and kill them all. Princess Gaichang committed suicide.

古文：燕王旦闻之，召相平曰： 事败，遂发兵乎？ 
现代文：燕王刘旦得到消息后崐，召燕国丞相平前来商议道： 事已败露，是否应随即发兵造反？ 
English: After receiving the news, Yan King Liu Dan summoned Yan Guozheng to come and discuss with him, saying: The matter has been revealed, should we immediately send troops to rebel?

古文：平曰： 左将军已死，百姓皆知之，不可发也。 
现代文：平说： 左将军已被处死，老百姓都已知晓，不可发兵！ 
English: Ping said: General Zuo has been executed, the people all know the truth of the matter, and it is no longer possible to send troops.

古文：王忧懑，置酒与群臣、妃妾别。
现代文：刘旦忧愤懊恼，摆设酒筵，与臣子和妻妾诀别。
English: Liu Dan was saddened and chagrined. He set out the wine goblets and bade farewell to his vassal and his wife and concubine.

古文：会天子以玺书让旦，旦以绶自绞死，后、夫人随旦自杀者二十馀人。
现代文：正好汉昭帝下达正式诏书责问刘旦，刘旦便用王印的绶带将自己绞死，刘旦的王后、夫人等二十余人也随其一起自杀。
English: Just as Emperor Han Zhao issued an official edict to reprimand Liu Dan, Liu Dan hanged himself with an umbilical cord with the royal seal. Liu Dan's queen, wife and more than 20 others also committed suicide with him.

古文：天子加恩，赦王太子建为庶人，赐量谥曰刺王。
现代文：汉昭帝加恩，赦免燕王太子刘建死罪，废为平民，赐刘旦谥号 刺王 。
English: Han Zhao, the emperor, pardoned Yan Wang's prince Liu Jian for the death penalty, abolished him as a commoner, and gave Liu Danzhong the title of King of Thorns.

古文：皇后以年少，不与谋，亦霍光外孙，故得不废。
现代文：上官皇后因年纪幼小，未曾参与政变阴谋，又是霍光的外孙女，所以未被废黜。
English: Due to her young age, the Shangguan Empress had not participated in the coup plot, and she was Huo Guang's granddaughter, so she was not deposed.

古文：庚午，右扶风王为御史大夫。
现代文：庚午，右扶风王被任命为御史大夫。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Zuo Fu Feng Wang was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：冬，十月，封杜延年为建平侯；燕仓为宜城侯；故丞相征事任宫捕得桀，为弋阳侯；丞相少史王山寿诱安入府，为商利侯。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉昭帝封杜延年为建平侯，燕仓为宜城侯，原任丞相征事任宫捕获上官桀，被封为弋阳侯，丞相少史王山寿引诱上官安进入丞相府，被封为商利侯。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Han Zhao made Du Yanling the Jianping marquis, Yan Cang the Yicheng marquis, the former prime minister Zhengji Ren Gu captured the Shangguan marquis and was named the Zhenyang marquis, and the junior prime minister Wang Shan Shou lured the Shangguan marquis into the prime minister's office and was named the Shangli marquis.

古文：久之，文学济阴魏相对策，以为： 日者燕王为无道，韩义出身强谏，为王所杀。
现代文：过了很久，文学济阴人魏相在回答昭帝的策问时，认为： 先前燕王刘旦大逆不道，韩义挺身而出，强行劝阻，被燕王所杀。
English: After a long time, Wei Xiang, a literary Jiyin, answered Zhao Di's question, saying: Previously, Yan Wang Liu Dan was a traitor, Han Yi stood up, forcibly dissuaded him, and was killed by Yan Wang.

古文：义无比干之亲而蹈比干之节，宜显赏其子以示天下，明为人臣之义。 乃擢义子延寿为谏大夫。
现代文：韩义不像商朝比干那样与纣王有亲属关系，但却有比干劝谏纣王一样的节义，应在天下人面前公开奖励韩义的儿子，以明确为臣的大义。 于是，汉昭帝擢升韩义之子韩延寿为谏大夫。
English: Han Yi did not have the same kinship with Shao Wang as Shang Dynasty Bi Gan, but Bi Gan advised that Han Yi's son should be publicly rewarded in front of the whole world, so that Han Yi's son would be clearly recognized as a vassal of the emperor.

古文：大将军光以朝无旧臣，光禄勋张安世自先帝时为尚书令，志行纯笃，乃白用安世为右将军兼光禄勋以自副焉。
现代文：大将军霍光因为朝廷中缺少旧臣，而光禄勋张安世在汉武帝时就担任尚书令，心地纯正真诚，便奏请汉昭帝任命张安世为右将军兼光禄勋，作为自己的副手。
English: General Huo Guang, due to the lack of former ministers in the imperial court, and the fact that the leader of the Guanglu Order, Zhang Anshi, had served as Shang Shuling during the reign of Emperor Hanwu, with a pure and sincere heart, asked Emperor Han Zhao to appoint Zhang Anshi as the Right General and Guanglu Order, as his deputy.

古文：安世，故御史大夫汤之子也。
现代文：张安世为前御史大夫张汤的儿子。
English: Zhang Anshi is the son of the former imperial historian Zhang Tang.

古文：光又以杜延年有忠节，擢为太仆、右曹、给事中。
现代文：霍光又因杜延年志节忠诚，特擢升其为太仆、右曹、给事中。
English: In addition, because Du Yan was loyal to the New Year's Day, Huo Guang was specially promoted to the position of eunuch, right-hand man, and attendant.

古文：光持刑罚严，延年常辅之以宽。
现代文：霍光执法严厉，杜延年则常常以宽厚辅之。
English: Huo Guang was strict in enforcing the law, while Du Yan Nian was often lenient.

古文：吏民上书言便宜，辄下延年平处复奏。
现代文：每当官吏或百姓上书朝廷有所建议，总是先交杜延年研究其是否当行，再上奏汉昭帝。
English: Whenever an official or a commoner submitted a proposal to the imperial court, it was always first submitted to Du Yan Nian to study whether it was appropriate, and then submitted to Han Zhao Di.

古文：言可官试者，至为县令；或丞相、御史除用，满岁，以状闻；或抵其罪法。
现代文：凡参加朝廷考试合格的人，或派到地方，最高为县令，或交丞相、御史任用，一年后将其为官情况奏闻朝廷，有罪者依法惩治。
English: All those who passed the imperial examination were either sent to a local area, up to the rank of county magistrate, or appointed as chancellor or imperial historian, and their official status was reported to the imperial court one year later. Those found guilty were punished according to the law.

古文：是岁匈奴发左、右部二万骑为四队，并入边为寇。
现代文：这一年，匈奴派左、右两部骑兵二万人，分为四队，同时侵入汉朝边境进行袭扰。
English: That year, the Xiongnu dispatched 20,000 cavalrymen to the left and right, divided into four teams, and invaded the Han Dynasty border to harass.

古文：汉兵追之，斩首、获虏九千人，生得瓯脱王；汉无所失亡。
现代文：汉朝派兵追杀，斩杀、俘获匈奴兵九千人，生擒匈奴瓯脱王，汉军则没有什么伤亡。
English: The Han Dynasty sent soldiers to chase, kill, and capture nine thousand Hun soldiers, and the Huns captured the king alive, while the Han Army suffered no casualties.

古文：匈奴见瓯脱王在汉，恐，以为道击之，即西北远去，不敢南逐水草；发人民屯瓯脱。
现代文：匈奴见瓯脱王为汉所擒，感到害怕，认为他将引导汉军袭击己方，便向西北方向远远退去，不敢再南下寻觅水草。汉朝征发百姓屯戍瓯脱地区。
English: When the Xiongnu saw that the Han had captured the Xiongdu King, they were afraid, thinking that he would lead the Chinese army to attack their own side. They retreated far to the northwest, not daring to go further south to look for water plants. The Han Dynasty conscripted people to settle in the Xiongdu area.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤二年
现代文：元凤二年壬寅，公元前年
English: The second year of Yuan Feng, the year of Ren Yin, the year B.C.

古文：夏，四月，上自建章宫徙未央宫。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉昭帝从建章宫迁居到未央宫。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Han Zhao moved from Jianshang Palace to Weiyang Palace.

古文：六月，赦天下。
现代文：六月，大赦天下。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty.

古文：是岁，匈奴复遣九千骑屯受降城以备汉，北桥余吾水，令可度，以备奔走；欲求和亲，而恐汉不听，故不肯先言，常使左右风汉使者。
现代文：这一年，匈奴又派遣九千骑兵屯驻于受降城，以防备汉朝袭击，又在受降城以北的余吾水上架设桥梁，使军队能够渡河，准备一旦失败时迅速奔逃。匈奴单于打算请求与汉朝和亲，而怕汉朝不肯答应，所以不愿先提出，而是常常命其左右官员向汉朝派往匈奴的使节暗示。
English: In the same year, the Huns also sent nine thousand cavalrymen to be stationed in the surrendered city of Tong to guard against Han Dynasty attacks, and also built bridges on the Yugo water north of the surrendered city to enable the army to cross the river and prepare for a quick escape in case of failure. The Huns only intended to request peace with the Han Dynasty, but they were afraid that the Han Dynasty would not agree, so they did not want to propose it first, but often ordered their officials to send envoys to the Huns to the Han Dynasty.

古文：然其侵盗益希，遇汉使愈厚，欲以渐致和亲。
现代文：不过，匈奴对汉朝的侵扰掳掠已越来越少，对汉朝使节越来越优待，希望通过这样的办法来逐渐达到和亲的目的。
English: However, the intrusion and plundering of the Han Dynasty by the Huns has become less and less, and the envoys of the Han Dynasty have been treated more and more favorably, hoping to gradually achieve the goal of reconciliation through this method.

古文：汉亦羁縻之。
现代文：汉朝也对匈奴采取笼络的态度。
English: The Han Dynasty also adopted a conciliatory attitude towards the Xiongnu.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤三年
现代文：元凤三年
English: Yuan Feng three years old

古文：春，正月，泰山有大石自起立；上林有柳树枯僵自起生；有虫食其叶成文，曰 公孙病已立 。
现代文：春季，正月，泰山上有一块大石自己立了起来；上林苑中有一棵枯死倒地的柳树自己立起复活，又有虫子在其树叶上啃咬出 公孙病已立 的字样。
English: In the spring, in the first month, a large stone on Mount Tai stood up by itself; in the Shanglin Garden, a willow tree that had fallen to the ground and died stood up and revived itself, and worms gnawed on its leaves to reveal the words "the grandchild is ill."

古文：符节令鲁国眭弘上书，言： 大石自立，僵柳复起，当有匹庶为天子者。
现代文：担任符节令的鲁国人眭弘，上书说： 大石自己站立，枯倒柳树复起，当有一位平民百姓成为天子。
English: Lu Guozhihong, who was in charge of the festival, wrote: "When the great stone stands on its own, and the withered willow tree revives, then a commoner will become the son of heaven."

古文：枯树复生，故废之家公孙氏当复兴乎？
现代文：枯树复活，是不是预示着以前被废黜的公孙氏家族应当复兴呢？
English: Does the revival of the dead tree indicate that the Gongsun family, which was previously deposed, should be revived?

古文：汉家承尧之后，有传国之运，当求贤人禅帝位，退自封百里，以顺天命。 
现代文：汉天子为帝尧的后代，有将国家传给别人的命运，应当访求贤明的人，将帝位禅让给他，自己退下，做一个拥有一百里封地的列侯，以顺应天命。 
English: Han Tianzi is a descendant of Emperor Qian, and has the destiny of passing the country to others. He should visit a wise person, concede the imperial throne to him, step down himself, and become a feudal lord with a hundred-mile fief, in order to comply with the heavenly destiny.

古文：弘坐设妖言惑众伏诛。
现代文：眭弘以制造妖言、蛊惑人心的罪名被处死。
English: Yan Hong was executed on charges of fabricating witchcraft and demagoguery.

古文：匈奴单于使犁汙王窥边，言酒泉、张掖兵益弱，出兵试击，冀可复得其地。
现代文：匈奴单于派犁污王刺探汉朝边防情况。犁污王回报说，酒泉、张掖一带的汉朝兵力日益衰弱，如果派兵作试探性攻击，有希望收复旧有地区。
English: The Xiongnu alone sent Wang Zigao to probe the situation of the Han Dynasty's border defense. Wang Zigao replied that the Han Dynasty's military strength in the Jiuquan and Zhangye areas was weakening day by day, and if the troops were sent to make exploratory attacks, there was hope to recover the old areas.

古文：时汉先得降者，闻其计，天子诏边警备。
现代文：此时，汉朝已先从归降的匈奴人口中听到这个计谋，汉昭帝便下诏命边塞地区加强戒备。
English: At that time, the Han Dynasty first got the surrender of the people, knew the plot of the Xiongnu, and the Han Dynasty issued a decree ordering the Muslim army on the border to guard against the invasion of the Xiongnu.

古文：后无几，右贤王、犁汙王四千骑分三队，入日勒、屋兰、番和。
现代文：没过多久，匈奴右贤王、犁污王率领骑兵四千分为三队，侵入日勒、屋兰、番和三县。
English: Shortly afterwards, the Huns Uxian Wang and Zhiguo Wang led four thousand cavalry divided into three teams and invaded Zhailu, Yalan, and Banhe.

古文：张掖太守、属国都尉发兵击，大破之，得脱者数百人。属国义渠王射杀犁汙王，赐黄金二百斤，马二百匹，因封为犁汙王。
现代文：汉朝张掖太守、属国都尉发兵反击，匈奴军大败，仅数百人逃脱，属国的义渠部落王将匈奴犁污王射死，汉朝赏赐给他黄金二百斤，马二百匹，并因此封他为犁污王。
English: Zhang Ye, the Han dynasty's grand vizier and the provincial governor, launched a counterattack. The Xiongnu army was soundly defeated, and only a few hundred people escaped. The tribal king of Yichuan, a tributary of the Han dynasty, shot the Xiongnu slander king to death. The Han dynasty rewarded him with two hundred kilos of gold and two hundred horses, and thus named him the slander king.

古文：自是后，匈奴不敢入张掖。
现代文：从此以后，匈奴不敢侵犯张掖。
English: From then on, the Huns did not dare to invade Zhangye.

古文：燕、盖之乱，桑弘羊子迁亡，过父故吏侯史吴，后迁捕得，伏法。
现代文：燕王刘旦和盖长公主等人谋反时，桑弘羊之子桑迁出逃，曾投靠过桑弘羊从前的部下侯史吴。后桑迁被逮捕处死。
English: When Yan Wang Liu Dan and Guichang Princess and others plotted a rebellion, Kuang Hongyang's son, Kuang Qian, fled. He had once relied on Kuang Hongyang's former subordinate, Prince Shi Wu. Later, Kuang Qian was arrested and executed.

古文：会赦，侯史吴自出系狱。
现代文：时逢大赦，侯史吴投案自首囚禁在监狱。
English: At the time of the amnesty, Hou Shih Wu surrendered and was imprisoned in prison.

古文：廷尉王平与少府徐仁杂治反事，皆以为 桑迁坐父谋反而侯史吴臧之，非匿反者，乃匿为随者也 ，即以赦令除吴罪。
现代文：廷尉王平、少府徐仁共同负责审理谋反案件，都认为 桑迁受其父谋反的牵连，侯史吴窝藏他，并不是窝藏谋反者，而是窝藏连坐者 ，于是按大赦令赦免了侯史吴之罪。
English: The imperial lieutenant Wang Ping and the minor prefect Xu Ren, who were jointly responsible for the trial of the conspiracy case, both believed that Sangqian was implicated in his father's conspiracy and that Hou Shiu was harboring him, not harboring the conspirator, but harboring the liaison, and then pardoned Hou Shiu's crime according to the amnesty order.

古文：后侍御史治实，以 桑迁通经术，知父谋反而不谏争，与反者身无异。
现代文：后侍御史重新查处此事，认为 桑迁精通经典，明知其父背叛朝廷，却不加劝阻抗争，本身与谋反者并无两样。
English: Later, the Imperial Household Agency re-investigated the matter and concluded that Sangqian was well versed in the classics, knew that his father had betrayed the imperial court, but did not dissuade him from protesting, and was no different from a rebel.

古文：侯史吴故三百石吏，首匿迁，不与庶人匿随从者等，吴不得赦。 
现代文：侯史吴原为三百石官吏，主谋窝藏桑迁，与一般百姓窝藏连坐者不同，侯史吴不能赦免。 
English: Hou Shi Wu was originally a three-hundred-stone official, the mastermind of hiding the Mulberry Relocation. Unlike ordinary people who hide and sit together, Hou Shi Wu cannot be pardoned.

古文：奏请覆治，劾廷尉、少府纵反者。
现代文：奏请朝廷重新处治侯史吴之罪，并弹劾廷尉、少府开脱谋反者。
English: He petitioned the imperial court to re-execute the crime of Hou Shi Wu, and impeach the courtier and the minor prefect who had been involved in the rebellion.

古文：少府徐仁，即丞相车千秋女婿也，故千秋数为侯史吴言；恐大将军光不听，千秋即召中二千石、博士会公车门，议问吴法。
现代文：少府徐仁是丞相田千秋的女婿，所以田千秋几次为侯史吴说情，他怕大将军霍光不听，便在公车门召集中二千石官及博士官，商议应按法律判侯史吴什么罪名。
English: Xiaofu Xu Ren was the son-in-law of the Minister of Justice, Tian Qianqiu. Therefore, Tian Qianqiu pleaded for Hou Shiu several times. He was afraid that General Huo Guang would not listen, so he called together two thousand stone officials and doctoral officials at the door of the bus to discuss what crime Hou Shiu should be convicted of according to the law.

古文：议者知大将军指，皆执吴为不道。
现代文：参与商议的人知道大将军的意向，所以一致指控侯史吴为大逆不道。
English: The legislators all knew the general's intention, and they all insisted that Hou Shiu Wu was illegal.

古文：明日，千秋封上众议。
现代文：第二天，田千秋将众人的意见上奏朝廷。
English: The next day, Tian Chiqiu reported everyone's opinions to the imperial court.

古文：光于是以千秋擅召中二千石以下，外内异言，遂下廷尉平、少府仁狱。
现代文：于是霍光因田千秋擅自召集中二千石及以下官员，朝内、朝外言论不一，将廷尉王平、少府徐仁逮捕入狱。
English: As a result, Huo Guang arbitrarily summoned the officials of 2,000 koku and below from Tian Qianqiu, and there was discord within and outside the imperial court, and he arrested and imprisoned the courtier Wang Ping and the minor prefect Xu Ren.

古文：朝廷皆恐丞相坐之。
现代文：朝廷上下都恐怕丞相会受到牵连。
English: Everyone in the Imperial Court was implicated.

古文：太仆杜延年奏记光曰： 吏纵罪人，有常法。
现代文：太仆杜延年致书霍光说： 官吏放纵罪人，有通常的处罚方法。
English: The eunuch Du Yannian wrote a letter to Huo Guang, saying, "Officials indulge criminals, and there is the usual method of punishment.

古文：今更诋吴为不道，恐于法深。
现代文：如今进而诋毁侯史吴为大逆不道，只怕从法律上说是太过分了。
English: Now, to further denigrate Hou Shiu as a traitor is too much, even if legally speaking.

古文：又，丞相素无所守持而为好言于下，尽其素行也。至擅召中二千石，甚无状。
现代文：再说，丞相崐平日并没有什么成见，而是一向爱为下面的人说情；至于擅自召集中二千石官员，则十分不对。
English: Moreover, there are no prejudices in the daily life of the prime minister, but he has always loved to intercede for the people below; as for the unauthorized summoning of officials with a total of two thousand koku, it is very wrong.

古文：延年愚以为丞相久故及先帝用事，非有大故，不可弃也。
现代文：但我觉得丞相在位已久，又是先帝任用的人，除非有什么重大过失，否则不可废弃。
English: However, I feel that a chancellor who has been on the throne for a long time, and who was appointed by the previous emperor, should not be discarded unless there is some major fault.

古文：间者民颇言狱深，吏为峻诋；今丞相所议，又狱事也，如是以及丞相，恐不合众心，群下讙哗，庶人私议，流言四布。
现代文：近来，不少百姓们说刑罚过重，官吏们执法苛刻，罗织罪名。而今丞相商议的又是有关刑罚之事，如果因此案而连累丞相，恐怕与民心相背，势必造成属下喧哗，小民私议，流言四布。
English: Recently, many people have said that the punishment is too heavy, the officials are harsh in enforcing the law, and they are fabricating charges. And now the prime minister is discussing the matter of punishment. If the prime minister is re-elected because of this case, I am afraid that it will be contrary to the people's hearts, and it is bound to cause noise among subordinates, petty private discussions, and rumors everywhere.

古文：延年窃重将军失此名于天下也。 
现代文：我怕将军因此事而在天下人面前名声受损。 
English: I'm afraid the general's reputation will be tarnished in the eyes of the world because of this.

古文：光以廷尉、少府弄法轻重，卒下之狱。
现代文：霍光认为廷尉、少府玩弄法律，终于还是将他们下狱治罪。
English: Huo Guang believed that Tingfu and Shofu were playing with the law, and finally sentenced them to prison.

古文：夏，四月，仁自杀，平与左冯翊贾胜胡皆要斩。
现代文：夏季，四月，徐仁在狱中自杀，王平与左冯翊贾胜胡都被腰斩。
English: In the summer, in April, Xu Ren committed suicide in prison, and Wang Ping and Zuo Fengyao Jia Shenghu were both beheaded.

古文：而不以及丞相，终与相竟。
现代文：丞相田千秋则未受牵连，终于与霍光共事到底。
English: The Minister of Justice, Chiharu Tanada, was not implicated and eventually worked with Ho Guang to the end.

古文：延年论议持平，合和朝廷，皆此类也。
现代文：杜延年议论公平，使朝廷合睦，其所作所为，都类似于此。
English: This is the way to keep the discussion on the extension of the year flat, and to make the imperial court harmonious.

古文：冬，辽东乌桓反。
现代文：冬季，辽东乌桓部落反叛。
English: In winter, the Wuhuan tribe in Liaodong rebelled.

古文：初，冒顿破东胡，东胡馀众散保乌桓及鲜卑山为二族，世役属匈奴。
现代文：当初，匈奴冒顿单于击败东胡族，东胡残余部众分别占据乌桓及鲜卑山，形成了两个部族，世代臣服于匈奴。
English: At first, the Xiongnu took it upon themselves to defeat the Eastern Hu, and the remnants of the Eastern Hu occupied Wuhuan and Xianbei Mountains, forming two tribes that were subject to the Xiongnu for generations.

古文：武帝出破匈奴左地，因徙乌桓于上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽东塞外，为汉侦察匈奴动静。
现代文：汉武帝击破匈奴左翼地区，将乌桓迁徙到上谷、渔阳、右北平和辽东的塞外地区，令其为汉朝侦察匈奴动静。
English: Emperor Hanwu defeated the left-wing areas of the Huns, and moved Wu Huan to Shanggu, Yuyang, North Hebei, and Liaodong regions outside of Tibet to spy on the Huns for the Han Dynasty.

古文：置护乌桓校尉监领之，使不得与匈奴交通。
现代文：汉朝还设置了护乌桓校尉一官，负责对乌桓人的监督和管辖，使他们不能与匈奴建立联系。
English: The Han Dynasty also set up a Wuhuan protection officer, who was responsible for supervising and governing the Wuhuan people, so that they could not establish contact with the Xiongnu.

古文：至是，部众渐强，遂反。
现代文：至此，乌桓势力逐渐强大起来，于是起兵反叛汉朝。
English: At this point, the Wuhuan forces gradually became stronger, and they rebelled against the Han Dynasty.

古文：先是，匈奴三千馀骑入五原，杀略数千人；后数万骑南旁塞猎，行攻塞外亭障，略取吏民去。
现代文：先前，匈奴骑兵三千余人侵入五原，杀掠数千人；后又派骑兵数万南下，沿着汉朝边塞移动，一路进攻汉朝设于塞外的堡垒，掳掠边塞官吏和百姓而去。
English: Previously, more than three thousand Hun cavalrymen invaded the Five Plains and killed and plundered thousands of people. Later, they sent tens of thousands of cavalrymen to the south, moving along the Han Dynasty border fortress, attacking the fortress set up by the Han Dynasty outside the fortress, and abducting and plundering border officials and people.

古文：是时汉边郡烽火候望精明，匈奴为边寇者少利，希复犯塞。
现代文：当时，汉朝边疆各郡的烽火报警设施严密，匈奴扰边没有什么收获，所以很少再来侵犯。
English: At that time, the campfire alarm facilities in the counties of the Han Dynasty frontier were strict, and the Xiongnu had little to gain from disturbing the border, so they rarely invaded again.

古文：汉复得匈奴降者，言乌桓尝发先单于冢，匈奴怨之，方发二万骑击乌桓。
现代文：后汉朝又获得归降的匈奴人，得知乌桓人曾经挖掘单于祖先的坟墓，引起匈奴的怨恨，正派出二万骑兵袭击乌桓。
English: The Han Dynasty also obtained the surrender of the Huns, saying that Wuhuan had once dug the grave of the deceased Hun, Shan Yu. The Huns resented Wuhuan, and now they were sending twenty thousand cavalry to attack Wuhuan.

古文：霍光欲发兵邀击之，以问护军都尉赵充国，充国以为： 乌桓间数犯塞，今匈奴击之，于汉便。
现代文：霍光打算发兵迎击匈奴军队，便询问护军都尉赵充国的意见。赵充国认为： 乌桓连续几次进犯边塞，如今匈奴袭击他们，对我们很有利。
English: Huo Guang planned to send troops to meet the Hun army, so he asked the opinion of the escort captain Zhao Chongguo. Zhao Chongguo believed: Wuhuan attacked the border fortress several times in a row, and now the Huns attacked them, which is very beneficial to us.

古文：又匈奴希寇盗，北边幸无事，蛮夷自相攻击而发兵要之，招寇生事，非计也。 
现代文：再者匈奴很少前来侵扰，我国北部边疆所幸无事。蛮夷之族自相攻击，而我们却发兵迎战，招他们前来生事，这不是好计策！ 
English: Moreover, the Xiongnu rarely come to invade, and our northern border is fortunately trouble-free. Barbarian tribes attack each other, but we send troops to meet them and invite them to come and cause trouble. This is not a good strategy!

古文：光更问中郎将范明友，明友言可击，于是拜明友为度辽将军，将二万骑出辽东。
现代文：霍光又向中郎将范明友询问，范明友说可以迎击，于是任命范明友为度辽将军，率领骑兵二万从辽东出塞，迎击匈奴军。
English: Huo Guang also inquired about Fan Mingyou from Zhong Lang. Fan Mingyou said that he could counterattack, so he appointed Fan Mingyou as General Du Liao and led twenty thousand cavalry out of Liaodong to meet the Xiongnu army.

古文：匈奴闻汉兵至，引去。
现代文：匈奴得到汉军出塞的消息后，撤退而去。
English: When the Xiongnu heard that the Chinese army had arrived, they retreated.

古文：初，光诫明友： 兵不空出；即后匈奴，遂击乌桓。 
现代文：当初，霍光曾告诫范明友说： 大军不可空手而还，如落在匈奴军队后面，便袭击乌桓。 
English: At the beginning, Huo Guang had warned Fan Mingyou: "The great army must not return empty-handed. If it falls behind the Xiongnu army, it will attack Wuhuan."

古文：乌桓时新中匈奴兵，明友既后匈奴，因乘乌桓敝，击之，斩首六千馀级，获三王首。
现代文：乌桓当时刚刚受到匈奴军的打击，范明友既然没能追上匈奴，便乘乌桓疲惫之机发动攻击，斩杀六千余人，取得乌桓三名首领的人头。
English: At that time, Wuhuan had just been attacked by the Xiongnu army. Since Fan Mingyou could not catch up with the Xiongnu, he took advantage of Wuhuan's exhaustion to launch an attack, slaughtered more than six thousand people, and captured the heads of three leaders of Wuhuan.

古文：匈奴由是恐，不能复出兵。
现代文：匈奴从此大为惊恐，不能再向汉朝出兵。
English: From then on, the Huns were greatly alarmed and could no longer send troops to the Han Dynasty.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤四年
现代文：元凤四年
English: Yuan Feng, four years old

古文：春，正月，丁亥，帝加元服。
现代文：春季，正月丁亥，汉昭帝举行加冠典礼。
English: In the spring, the first month of Dinghai, Emperor Han Zhao held a crowning ceremony.

古文：甲戌，富民定侯田千秋薨。
现代文：甲戌，富民侯田千秋去世。
English: Armor-plated, rich people Houda Chiaki passed away.

古文：时政事壹决大将军光；千秋居丞相位，谨厚自守而已。
现代文：当时的国家政事全部由霍光一个人决定，田千秋身居丞相之位，只是谨慎稳重，自我保全而已。
English: At that time, all national affairs were decided by Huo Guang alone, and Tian Qianqiu held the position of prime minister, but he was cautious and steady, and only self-preservation.

古文：夏，五月，丁丑，孝文庙正殿火。
现代文：夏季，五月丁丑，汉文帝祭庙正殿失火。
English: In the summer, in the month of May, the main hall of the Han Emperor Festival Temple caught fire.

古文：上及群臣皆素服，发中二千石将五校作治，六日，成。
现代文：汉昭帝与群臣一律身穿素服，并派中二千石官员率领左、右、前、后、中五校令所属工匠修复，崐六天后修复完毕。
English: Emperor Han Zhao and his courtiers all wore plain clothes, and sent middle school officials of 2,000 koku to lead the left, right, front, back, and middle school to order craftsmen to repair, and the repair was completed six days later.

古文：太常及庙令丞、郎、吏，皆劾大不敬；会赦，太常轑阳侯德免为庶人。
现代文：太常以及负责管理、守卫祭庙的令丞、郎及所属官吏等全部因此而被以大不敬的罪名遭到参劾。正巧遇到大赦，太常、阳侯德被免除官爵，贬为平民。
English: As a result, Taejon, his son-in-law, son-in-law, and all the officials in charge of managing and guarding the temple were all impeached on charges of great disrespect. Coincidentally, an amnesty was granted, and Taejon and Yang Houde were stripped of their titles and demoted to commoners.

古文：初，杅冞遣太子赖丹为质于龟兹；贰师击大宛还，将赖丹入至京师。
现代文：当初，国派太子赖丹到龟兹国去作人质，贰师将军李广利攻击大宛回朝时，将赖丹带到京城长安。
English: At first, the state sent the crown prince Lai Dan to Kuez to serve as a hostage. When the general Li Guangli attacked Dawan to return to the North, he brought Lai Dan to the capital Chang'an.

古文：霍光用桑弘羊前议，以赖丹为校尉，将军田轮台。
现代文：霍光采用桑弘羊以前的建议，任命赖丹为校尉，率领军队前往轮台屯田。
English: Adopting Kuang Hongyang's previous suggestion, Huo Guang appointed Lai Dan as a lieutenant and led the army to the roundhouse in Tongtian.

古文：龟兹贵人姑翼谓其王曰： 赖丹本臣属吾国，今佩汉印绶来，迫吾国而田，必为害。 
现代文：龟兹贵族姑翼对龟兹国王说： 赖丹本来是我国的臣属，如今却佩戴汉朝的印信、绶带前来，在逼近我国边境的地方屯垦，必将给我国造成危害。 
English: Kamezi's noble aunt Tsubasa said to Kamezi's king: Raidan originally belonged to our country, today he came with Han's seal, close to our country's military cantonment, it will be harmful to our country.

古文：王即杀赖丹而上书谢汉。
现代文：于是龟兹王派人杀死赖丹，然后上书汉朝谢罪。
English: As a result, the King of Kamezi sent someone to kill Raidan, and then sent a letter to the Han Dynasty to apologize.

古文：楼兰王死，匈奴先闻之，遣其质子安归归，得立为王。
现代文：楼兰国王去世，匈奴最先听到这一消息，便将在匈奴充当人质的楼兰国王子安归护送回国，安归得以当上楼兰国王。
English: When King Loulan died, the Huns were the first to hear the news, and they escorted the son of King Loulan, An Gui, who had been held hostage by the Huns, back to China. An Gui was able to become King of Loulan.

古文：汉遣使诏新王令入朝，王辞不至。
现代文：汉朝派使臣前往楼兰国传达汉昭帝的诏令，命新即位的楼兰王来长安朝见，楼兰王推辞不来。
English: The Han Dynasty sent envoys to the State of Loulan to convey Emperor Han Zhao's edict. The newly enthroned King of Loulan was ordered to come to Chang'an to meet the Emperor, but he refused.

古文：楼兰国最在东垂，近汉，当白龙堆，乏水草，常主发导，负水担粮，送迎汉使；又数为官吏卒所寇，惩艾，不便与汉通。
现代文：楼兰国位于西域的最东部，靠近汉朝，中间隔着白龙堆沙漠。此地缺乏水源、牧草，以往楼兰国经常负责派出向导，命人背水担粮，迎送汉朝派往西域各国的使者。因多次受到汉朝官吏和兵卒的欺扰，楼兰国逐渐对汉朝产生了戒惧，不愿再与汉朝来往。
English: Loulan State is located in the easternmost part of the Western Regions, close to the Han Dynasty, separated by the White Dragon Mound desert. This place lacks water and pasture. In the past, Loulan State was often responsible for sending out guides, ordering people to carry water and grain, and welcoming envoys sent by the Han Dynasty to countries in the Western Regions. Due to repeated harassment by officials and soldiers of the Han Dynasty, Loulan State gradually became wary of the Han Dynasty and did not want to deal with the Han Dynasty anymore.

古文：后复为匈奴反间，数遮杀汉使。
现代文：后来，又受了匈奴的离间，多次拦杀汉朝使臣。
English: Later, he was once again driven away by the Xiongnu and repeatedly stopped and killed Han dynasty envoys.

古文：其弟尉屠耆降汉，具言状。
现代文：楼兰王安归的弟弟尉屠耆归降汉朝，将内情一一报告汉朝。
English: Later, King Loulan's younger brother, Lieutenant Tu Youyou, surrendered to the Han Dynasty and told everyone about the situation.

古文：骏马监北地傅介子使大宛，诏因令责楼兰、龟兹。
现代文：担任骏马监的北地人傅介子出使大宛，汉昭帝下诏命其顺路去责问楼兰、龟兹两国。
English: Fu Kaizi, a Hokkien who served as a horse inspector, was dispatched to Dawan, and Emperor Han Zhao ordered him to go all the way to question Loulan and Kezi.

古文：介子至楼兰、龟兹，责其王，皆谢服。
现代文：傅介子来到楼兰和龟兹，责问两国国王为何背叛汉朝，两国都表示道歉服罪。
English: Fu Kaizi came to Loulan and Gezi and asked the kings of the two countries why they betrayed the Han Dynasty. Both countries apologized and admitted their guilt.

古文：介子从大宛还，到龟兹，会匈奴使从乌孙还，在龟兹，介子因率其吏士共诛斩匈奴使者。
现代文：傅介子从大宛回来，又到龟兹，正好匈奴使臣从乌孙返回，正在龟兹，于是傅介子率其随从官兵一同将匈奴使臣杀死。
English: Fu Kaizi returned from Dayuan and went to Kuez, just as the Hun envoy was returning from Usun and was in Kuez, so Fu Kaizi and his soldiers killed the Hun envoy.

古文：还，奏事，诏拜介子为中郎，迁平乐监。
现代文：回国后，傅介子向朝廷报告了此事，汉昭帝诏封傅介子为中郎，改任平乐监。
English: After returning to China, Fu Kaizi reported the matter to the imperial court, and Emperor Han Zhao made Fu Kaizi a middle-ranking official and appointed him as the supervisor of the Heian period.

古文：介子谓大将军霍光曰： 楼兰、龟兹数反覆，而不诛，无所惩艾。
现代文：傅介子对大将军霍光说： 楼兰、龟兹两国多次反复，不诛杀，就无所惩戒。
English: Fu Kaizi said to the general Huo Guang: Loulan and Kuez repeated the two countries many times. If they did not fight, there would be no punishment.

古文：介子过龟兹时，其王近就人，易得也；愿往刺之以威示诸国。 
现代文：我经过龟兹时，发现龟兹王接近外人，对付他容易得手。我愿意去刺杀他，以此向西域各国显示汉朝之威。 
English: When I passed Kuez, I found that the king of Kuez was close to foreigners, and it was easy to deal with him. I am willing to assassinate him, in order to show the power of the Han Dynasty to the countries in the western region.

古文：大将军曰： 龟兹道远，且验之于楼兰。 
现代文：大将军说道： 龟兹路远，且先到楼兰去试试。 
English: The general said, "The turtle is a long way from home, let's go to Loulan to test this method."

古文：于是白遣之。
现代文：于是禀告汉昭帝，派傅介子前去刺杀楼兰国王。
English: So he told the emperor to send him on his way.

古文：介子与士卒俱赍金币，扬言以赐外国为名，至楼兰。
现代文：傅介子率领卫士，携带金银财物，宣称要赏赐外国，借此名义来到楼兰。
English: Fu Kaizi led the guards, carrying gold, silver and property, declaring that he wanted to reward foreign countries, and came to Loulan in this name.

古文：楼兰王意不亲介子，介子阳引去，至其西界，使译谓曰： 汉使者持黄金、锦绣行赐诸国。王不来受，我去之西国矣。 
现代文：楼兰王不愿亲近傅介子，傅介子便假装离去，到达楼兰西部边界时，让翻译人员对楼兰国王说： 汉朝使者携带黄金、绸缎等一路对各国进行赏赐，大王如不来接受，我就离开这里到西边国家去了。 
English: King Loulan did not want to be close to Fu Kaizi, so Fu Kaizi pretended to leave. When he reached the western border of Loulan, he asked the translator to say to King Loulan: The Han Dynasty emissaries carried gold, silk and silk all the way to reward the countries. If the great king does not accept, I will leave here and go to the western countries.

古文：即出金、币以示译。
现代文：随即拿出黄金、财宝等给翻译看。
English: He then took out gold, treasure, etc. to show the translator.

古文：译还报王，王贪汉物，来见使者。
现代文：翻译回去向楼兰王报告，楼兰王贪图汉朝财物，便前来面见汉使。
English: When the translator returned, he reported the situation to King Loulan. King Loulan, who was greedy for Han Dynasty wealth, came to meet the envoy.

古文：介子与坐饮，陈物示之，饮酒皆醉。
现代文：傅介子与其共坐饮酒，故意将金宝等陈列显示。
English: Fu Kaizi sat drinking with him and deliberately displayed the gold and other treasures.

古文：介子谓王曰： 天子使我私报王。 
现代文：一直喝到大家都醉了，傅介子对楼兰王说： 汉朝天子让我秘密报告大王。 
English: After drinking until everyone was drunk, Fu Kaizi said to Loulan Wang, "Heavenly Father of the Han Dynasty has asked me to secretly report to the Great King.

古文：王起，随介子入帐中屏语，壮士二人从后刺之，刃交匈，立死；其贵人、左右皆散走。
现代文：于是楼兰王起身随傅介子进入后帐，屏退侍从人员密谈。突然崐，两名壮士从背后刺向楼兰王，利刃穿胸相交，楼兰王立即死亡。楼兰国的贵族大臣、侍从人员等四散逃亡。
English: As a result, King Loulan got up and followed Fu Kaizi into the back office, where the attendants were having a secret discussion. Suddenly, two strong men stabbed King Loulan from behind, and the sharp blades pierced his chest and intersected. King Loulan died immediately. The aristocratic ministers and attendants of the State of Loulan fled in all directions.

古文：介子告谕以王负汉罪， 天子遣我诛王，当更立王弟尉屠耆在汉者。
现代文：傅介子宣告楼兰王背叛汉朝之罪，说道： 天子派我诛杀楼兰王，应改立在汉朝的王弟尉屠耆为王。
English: Fu Kaizi declared that King Loulan was guilty of betraying the Han Dynasty, saying: The Son of Heaven sent me to kill King Loulan. He should be replaced by the Han Dynasty's Prince Tu Youyou.

古文：汉兵方至，毋敢动，自令灭国矣！ 
现代文：汉军立即就到，不要轻举妄动，否则将自己招来灭国之祸！ 
English: The Chinese soldiers are about to arrive. Don't make any moves, or you will perish!

古文：介子遂斩王安归首，驰传诣阙，县首北阙下。
现代文：傅介子于是将楼兰王安归的人头割下，用驿马快速送到皇宫，悬于未央宫北门之外。
English: Fu Kaizi then cut off the head of Wang Anqi of Loulan and quickly sent it to the imperial palace on a pack horse, where it hung outside the north gate of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：乃立尉屠耆为王，更名其国为鄯善，为刻印章；赐以宫女为夫人，备车骑、辎重。丞相率百官送至横门外，祖而遣之。
现代文：汉朝立尉屠耆为楼兰王，改国名为鄯善，并颁刻印章，赐给尉屠耆宫女做夫人，又为他准备了车马、辎重，由丞相率领文武百官送至长安横门之外，祭祀路神，置酒饯行，然后送其回国。
English: The Han Dynasty established Lieutenant Tu Youyou as the King of Loulan, changed the country's name to Shanshan, and issued an engraved seal, gave Lieutenant Tu Youyou's concubine as a wife, and prepared a chariot, horse, and baggage for him. He was led by the prime minister and hundreds of officials to the Chang'an side gate, where they offered sacrifices to the Road God, drank wine, and then sent him back to China.

古文：王自请天子曰： 身在汉久，今归单弱，而前王有子在，恐为所杀。
现代文：尉屠耆自己向汉昭帝请求说： 我久居汉朝，如今回国后势单力弱，况且前王之子尚在，恐怕被其报复杀害。
English: Lieutenant Tu Youyou himself pleaded with Emperor Han Zhao, saying: I have lived in the Han Dynasty for a long time, and now I am weak after returning to China. Moreover, the former king's son is still alive, and I am afraid that he will be killed by his revenge.

古文：国中有伊循城，其地肥美，愿汉遣一将屯田积谷，令臣得依其威重。 
现代文：我国有一处地方叫作伊循城，土地肥沃，希望汉朝能派一位将军，在伊循城一带屯田，聚积粮食，使我能够借重汉朝的兵威。 
English: There is an Ixu city in China, the land is fertile, I hope the Han Dynasty will send a general there to occupy Tun Tian Jie Gu, so that I can rely on it.

古文：于是汉遣司马一人、吏士四十人田伊循以填抚之。
现代文：于是汉朝派司马一名、部属四十人到伊循城屯田，以镇抚鄯善国。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent one Sima and forty subordinates to the Ixian City Tunden to help the good country with the help of the town.

古文：秋，七月，乙巳，封范明友为平陵侯，傅介子为义阳侯。
现代文：秋季，七月乙巳，汉昭帝封范明友为平陵侯，傅介子为义阳侯。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Han Zhao appointed Fan Mingyou as the Prince of Pingling and Fu Yizi as the Prince of Yiyang.

古文：臣光曰：王者之于戎狄，叛则讨之，服则舍之。
现代文：臣司马光曰：圣明的君王，对待戎狄外族的态度应当是：如果背叛，就发兵征讨；如果臣服，就不再追究。
English: His vassal Sima Guang said: "As the king of Shengming, the attitude towards foreign troops should be: if you betray, you will be conscripted; if you surrender, you will no longer be investigated."

古文：今楼兰王既服其罪，又从而诛之，后有叛者，不可得而怀矣。
现代文：如今楼兰王既已服罪，却又加以诛杀，则以后再有背叛者，就不能使他们归附了。
English: Now that King Loulan has confessed his sins and has been killed, there will be no traitors in the future, and they will not be able to return.

古文：必以为有罪而讨之，则宜陈师鞠旅，明致其罚。
现代文：如果认为楼兰王有罪，一定要征讨，也应堂堂正正地派遣军队，公开地施行惩罚。
English: If Loulan Wang is found guilty, he must be punished, and the army should be sent to punish him openly.

古文：今乃遣使者诱以金币而杀之，后有奉使诸国者，复可信乎！
现代文：而今竟派使臣用金宝财物进行引诱，然后乘机将其杀死，以后再有奉命出使各国的使者，还能再让人信任吗！
English: And now they have actually sent envoys to lure him with gold, treasure, and property, and then take the opportunity to kill him. In the future, will there be envoys from various countries sent by order, and can they be trusted again?

古文：且以大汉之强而为盗贼之谋于蛮夷，不亦可羞哉！
现代文：况且以大汉朝的强盛，竟然用盗贼的诡计来对付蛮夷外族，实在令人羞耻！
English: Moreover, it is shameful that the Han Dynasty, with all its power, should use the trickery of thieves to deal with barbarian foreigners!

古文：论者或美介子以为奇功，过矣！
现代文：有人评论此事，赞美傅介子立了一件奇功，未免太过分了。
English: Some people commented on this matter, praising Fu Kaizi for having accomplished a miraculous feat, but it was too much.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤五年夏，大旱。
现代文：元凤五年乙巳，公元前年夏季，大旱。
English: In the fifth year of Yuan Feng, the summer of the year BC, there was a great drought.

古文：秋，罢象郡，分属郁林、牂柯。
现代文：秋季，撤除象郡，将其地分别归属郁林、柯二郡。
English: In autumn, Xiang County was revoked and divided into Yulin County and Shenke County.

古文：冬，十一月，大雷。
现代文：冬季，十一月，大雷。
English: Winter, November, thunder.

古文：十二月，庚戌，宜春敬侯王诉薨。
现代文：十二月庚戌，宜春侯王去世。元凤六年
English: In December, Geng Yao and Yichun Hou Wang passed away. Yuan Feng passed away six years later.

古文：孝昭皇帝上元凤六年春，正月，募郡国徒筑辽东、玄菟城。
现代文：春季，正月，募集各郡、国服劳役的人修筑辽东、玄菟二城。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, people from all counties and national service laborers were recruited to build the two cities of Liaodong and Xuanzang.

古文：夏，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，大赦天下。
English: In summer, there is a general amnesty.

古文：乌桓复犯塞，遣度辽将军范明友击之。
现代文：乌桓再次侵犯边塞，汉朝派度辽将军范明友率兵出击。
English: Wu Huan once again invaded the border fortress and sent Liao general Fan Mingyou to lead the troops in pursuit.

古文：冬，十一月，乙丑，以杨敞为丞相，少府河内蔡义为御史大夫。
现代文：冬季，十一月乙丑，汉昭帝任命杨敞为丞相，少府、河内人蔡义为御史大夫。
English: In the winter, at the beginning of November, Emperor Han Zhao appointed Yang Chang as chancellor, and Shofu, Cai Yi, a native of Hanoi, as imperial secretary.

