古文：元年春，王正月。
现代文：元年春季，周历正月。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：齐人救邢。
现代文：齐国援救邢国。
English: Qi Province came to the rescue of Min Province.

古文：夏六月辛酉，葬我君庄公。
现代文：夏季六月辛酉日，安葬我国国君鲁庄公。
English: On a hot summer's day in June, our country's sovereign, Prince Lu Zhuang, was laid to rest.

古文：秋八月，公及齐侯盟于落姑。
现代文：秋季八月，闵公在落姑与齐侯结盟。
English: In the autumn of August, Shao Gong allied with Qi Hou in Luogu.

古文：季子来归。
现代文：季友从陈国回到鲁国。
English: Ji You returned to Lu from Chen.

古文：冬，齐仲孙来。
现代文：冬季，齐国的仲孙湫前来。
English: In winter, the middle grandson of Qi came to visit.

古文：元年春，不书即位，乱故也。
现代文：元年春季，《春秋》没有记载即位，是由于动乱不能举行即位仪式。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, "Spring and Autumn" did not record the enthronement, and the enthronement ceremony could not be held due to the turmoil.

古文：狄人伐邢。
现代文：狄人进攻邢国。
English: The Di people attacked Min Province.

古文：管敬仲言于齐侯曰： 戎狄豺狼，不可厌也。诸夏亲暱，不可弃也。
现代文：管仲对齐桓公说： 戎狄好像豺狼，是不会满足的；中原各国互相亲近，是不能抛弃的。
English: Guan Zhong said to Qi Kuan Gong: The army is like a wolf, it will not be satisfied; the Central Plains countries are close to each other and cannot be abandoned.

古文：宴安酖毒，不可怀也。
现代文：安逸等于毒药，是不能怀恋的。
English: Ease equals poison, and cannot be cherished.

古文：《诗》云： 岂不怀归，畏此简书。 
现代文：《诗》说： 难道不想着回去，怕的是这个竹简上的军事文字。 
English: "Poem" said: Don't you want to go back? What you're afraid of is the military writing on this bamboo stick.

古文：简书，同恶相恤之谓也。请救邢以从简书。 齐人救邢。
现代文：竹简上的军事文字，就是同仇敌忾而忧患与共的意思，所以请按照简书而救援邢国。 于是齐国人出兵救援邢国。
English: The military characters on the bamboo strips mean "suffering with the enemy" and "suffering together," so please follow the instructions to save the country.

古文：夏六月，葬庄公，乱故，是以缓。
现代文：夏季，六月，安葬庄公。由于发生动乱，所以推迟了，过了十一个月才安葬。
English: In the summer, in June, Zhuang Gong was buried. Due to the turmoil, it was delayed, and it took eleven months to bury him.

古文：秋八月，公及齐侯盟于落姑，请复季友也。
现代文：秋季，八月，闵公和齐桓公在落姑结盟，请求齐桓公帮助季友回国。
English: In the autumn, in August, Shao Gong and Qi Huan Gong made an alliance in Luogu and asked Qi Huan Gong to help Ji You return to China.

古文：齐侯许之，使召诸陈，公次于郎以待之。
现代文：齐桓公同意，派人从陈国召回季友，闵公住在郎地等候他。
English: Qi Kuan agreed and sent someone to call Ji You back from Chen Province. Shao Gong stayed in the countryside to wait for him.

古文：季子来归，嘉之也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 季子来归 ，这是赞美季友。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Ji Zi came back, which is a praise to Ji You.

古文：冬，齐仲孙湫来省难。书曰 仲孙 ，亦嘉之也。
现代文：冬季，齐国的仲孙湫前来对祸难表示慰问，《春秋》称之为 仲孙 ，也是赞美他。
English: In winter, the middle grandson of Qi came to express his condolences for the calamity. "Spring and Autumn" called him the middle grandson, and also praised him.

古文：仲孙归曰： 不去庆父，鲁难未已。 
现代文：仲孙回国说： 不除掉庆父，鲁国的祸难没完没了。 
English: After returning to his country, Zhongsun said, "If we don't get rid of Qingfu, the calamity of Lu will never end."

古文：公曰： 若之何而去之？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 怎么样才能除掉他？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: How can we get rid of him?

古文：对曰： 难不已，将自毙，君其待之。 
现代文：仲孙回答说： 祸难不止，将会自取灭亡，您就等着吧！ 
English: Zhongsun replied, "The calamity will not stop, it will self-destruct, just wait!

古文：公曰： 鲁可取乎？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 鲁国可以取得吗？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: Can the State of Lu obtain the crown?

古文：对曰： 不可，犹秉周礼。
现代文：仲孙说： 不行。他们还遵行周礼。
English: Nakasone said, "No, they still observe the weekly rites."

古文：周礼，所以本也。
现代文：周礼，是立国的根本。
English: Zhouli is the foundation of the founding of the country.

古文：臣闻之，国将亡，本必先颠而后枝叶从之。
现代文：下臣听说： 国家将要灭亡，如同大树，躯干必然先行仆倒，然后枝叶随着落下。 
English: The vassal heard: The country will perish, like a tree, the trunk will inevitably fall first, and then the branches and leaves will fall with it.

古文：鲁不弃周礼，未可动也。
现代文：鲁国不抛弃周礼，是不能动它的。
English: If Russia doesn't abandon the weekly ritual, it can't move it.

古文：君其务宁鲁难而亲之，亲有礼，因重固，间携贰，覆昏乱，霸王之器也。 
现代文：您应当从事于安定鲁国的祸难并且亲近它。亲近有礼仪的国家，依靠稳定坚固的国家，离间内部涣散的国家，灭亡昏暗动乱的国家，这是称霸称王的方法。 
English: You should be engaged in the calamity of a stable country and be close to it. To be close to a country with etiquette, to rely on a stable and solid country, to split a scattered country, to perish in a dark and turbulent country, this is the way to dominate and be king.

古文：晋侯作二军，公将上军，大子申生将下军。
现代文：晋献公建立两个军，自己率领上军，太子申生率领下军。
English: Jin Xian Gong established two armies, he led the upper army, and Prince Shen Sheng led the lower army.

古文：赵夙御戎，毕万为右，以灭耿、灭霍、灭魏。
现代文：赵夙为晋献公驾御战车，毕万作为车右。出兵灭掉耿国、灭掉霍国、灭掉魏国。
English: Zhao Jun drove a chariot for the imperial court, and Bi Wan rode on the right side of the chariot. He dispatched troops to wipe out Geng, Huo, and Wei.

古文：还，为大子城曲沃。赐赵夙耿，赐毕万魏，以为大夫。
现代文：回国来，晋献公为太子在曲沃建造城墙，把耿地赐给赵夙，把魏地赐给毕万，派他们做大夫。
English: On his return to China, Emperor Jinxian built a city wall for the prince in Quwoc. He gave Geng Di to Zhao Zhen and Wei Di to Bi Wan, and appointed them as doctors.

古文：士蒍曰： 大子不得立矣，分之都城而位以卿，先为之极，又焉得立。
现代文：士蒍说： 太子不能做继承者了，把都城分给他，而给他以卿的地位，先让他达到顶点，又哪里能够立为国君？
English: The scholar said, "The prince cannot be the successor. Give him the capital city, and give him the status of a lord. Let him reach the top first. How can he become the sovereign?

古文：不如逃之，无使罪至。
现代文：与其得到罪过，不如逃走，不要让罪过到来。
English: The prince might as well run away, lest a great disaster befall him.

古文：为吴大伯，不亦可乎？
现代文：做一个吴太伯，不也是可以的吗？
English: Isn't it possible to be a Wu Tai Bo?

古文：犹有令名，与其及也。且谚曰： 心苟无瑕，何恤乎无家。 
现代文：这样还可以保有好名声。而且俗话说： 心里如果没有毛病，又何必担心没有家？ 
English: And, as the saying goes, if there's nothing wrong with you, why worry about not having a home?

古文：天若祚大子，其无晋乎？ 
现代文：上天如果保佑您，您就不要在晋国了吧！ 
English: If God blesses you, you don't want to be in Jin!

古文：卜偃曰： 毕万之后必大。
现代文：卜偃说： 毕万的后代必定昌大。
English: Guo Jun, the doctor in charge of the project, said: Bi Wan's offspring will surely have great development.

古文：万，盈数也，魏，大名也，以是始赏，天启之矣。
现代文：万，是满数；魏，是巍巍高大的名称。开始赏赐就这样，上天已经启示了。
English: Wan, is a perfect number; Wei, is the name of the lofty. This is how the reward began, and it was revealed from heaven.

古文：天子曰兆民，诸侯曰万民，今名之大，以从盈数，其必有众。 
现代文：天子统治兆民，所以称为 兆民 ，诸侯统治万民，所以称为 万民 。现在名称的高大跟着满数，他就必然会得到群众。 
English: The Heavenly Son rules over trillions of people, so he is called Trillions of People, and the princes rule over all people, so they are called all people. Now the height of the name follows the full number, and he will inevitably get the masses.

古文：初，毕万筮仕于晋，遇《屯》之《比》。
现代文：当初，毕万占卜在晋国做官的吉凶，得到《屯》卦变成《比》卦。
English: At first, Bi Wan divined the fortunes of officials in Jin Province, and obtained the "Tun" Gua to become the "Bi" Gua.

古文：辛廖占之，曰： 吉。
现代文：辛廖预测说： 吉利。
English: Xin Liao deduced: Geely.

古文：《屯》固《比》入，吉孰大焉，其必蕃昌。
现代文：《屯》坚固，《比》进入，还有比这更大的吉利吗？
English: "Tun" is solid, "Bi" is entering, is there a greater good luck than this?

古文：《震》为土，车从马，足居之，兄长之，母覆之，众归之，六体不易，合而能固，安而能杀，公侯之卦也。
现代文：所以他必定蕃衍昌盛。《震》卦变成了土，车跟随着马，两脚踏在这里，哥哥抚育他，母亲保护他，群众归附他，这六条不变，集合而能坚固，安定而有威武，这是公侯的封象。
English: Therefore, he is sure to prosper. "Earthquake" Gua turned into soil, the cart followed the horse, the two feet stepped on here, the brother nurtured him, the mother protected him, the masses attached to him, these six unchanging, the collection can be strong, stable and powerful, this is the seal of the prince.

古文：公侯之子孙，必复其始。 
现代文：公侯的子孙，必定能回复到他开始的地位。 
English: The prince's descendant will certainly be able to return to his original position.

