古文：齐悼惠王刘肥者，高祖长庶男也。
现代文：齐悼惠王刘肥，是高祖的庶出长子。
English: Tributes were paid to Hui Wang Liu Hui, Gao Zu's eldest illegitimate son.

古文：其母外妇也，曰曹氏。
现代文：他的母亲是高祖从前的情妇，姓曹氏。
English: His mother was Gao Zu's former mistress, surnamed Cao.

古文：高祖六年，立肥为齐王，食七十城，诸民能齐言者皆予齐王。
现代文：高祖六年前，封刘肥为齐王，封地七十座城，百姓凡是说齐语的都归属齐王。
English: Six years before Gaozu, Liu Fei was named the King of Qi, with 70 cities as fiefs, and all people who spoke Qi belonged to the King of Qi.

古文：齐王，孝惠帝兄也。
现代文：齐王是孝惠帝的哥哥。
English: King Qi was the elder brother of Emperor Xiao Hui.

古文：孝惠帝二年，齐王入朝。
现代文：孝惠帝二年，刘王入京朝见皇帝。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiao Hui's reign, Liu Wang went to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：惠帝与齐王燕饮，亢礼如家人。
现代文：惠帝与齐王饮宴，二人行平等礼节如同家人兄弟的礼节一样。
English: Hui Di and Qi Wang had a banquet, and the two of them had equal etiquette, just like the etiquette of family brothers.

古文：吕太后怒，且诛齐王。
现代文：吕太后为此发怒，将要诛杀齐王。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was angry about this and was going to kill King Qi.

古文：齐王惧不得脱，乃用其内史勋计，献城阳郡，以为鲁元公主汤沐邑。
现代文：齐王害怕不能免祸，就采用他的内史勋的计策，把城阳郡献出，做为鲁元公主的汤沐邑。
English: King Qi was afraid that he would not be able to avoid the disaster, so he used the strategy of his Inner Historian to present Chengyang County as the Tang Muyun of Luyuan Princess.

古文：吕太后喜，乃得辞就国。
现代文：吕太后很高兴，齐王才得以辞朝回到齐国。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was very happy that King Qi was able to resign and return to Qi.

古文：悼惠王即位十三年，以惠帝六年卒。
现代文：悼惠王即位十三年，在惠帝六去世。
English: King Hui, who had been on the throne for 13 years, passed away on the 6th day of the 6th month.

古文：子襄立，是为哀王。
现代文：他的儿子刘襄即位，这就是哀王。
English: His son Liu Xiang ascended to the throne, which is the king of mourning.

古文：哀王元年，孝惠帝崩，吕太后称制，天下事皆决於高后。
现代文：哀王元年，孝惠帝去世，吕太后开始执掌朝政，天下事都由吕后决断。
English: In the first year of King Lê's reign, Emperor Xiao Hui passed away, and Empress Dowager Lv began to take charge of the imperial government. Everything in the world was decided by Empress Lv.

古文：二年，高后立其兄子郦侯吕台为吕王，割齐之济南郡为吕王奉邑。
现代文：二年，高后把她哥哥的儿子郦侯吕台封为吕王，分出齐国的济南郡做为吕王的封地。
English: In the second year, Gao Guo made her brother's son, Su Hou Lüdai, the King of Lüdai, and set aside Jinan County in Qi Province as Lüdai's fief.

古文：哀王三年，其弟章入宿卫於汉，吕太后封为硃虚侯，以吕禄女妻之。
现代文：哀王三年，他的弟弟刘章进入汉宫值宿护卫，吕太后封他为朱虚侯，把吕禄的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: In the third year of King Lê's reign, his younger brother Liu Zhang entered the Han Palace as a guard on duty, and Empress Lý later made him Zhu Hu and married him to Lý Lu's daughter.

古文：後四年，封章弟兴居为东牟侯，皆宿卫长安中。
现代文：四年之后，吕太后又封刘章的弟弟兴居为东牟侯，二人都在长安宫中值宿护卫。
English: Four years later, Empress Dowager Lyu also appointed Liu Zhang's younger brother Xingju as Dongmoo, and both of them were on duty as guards at Chang'an Palace.

古文：哀王八年，高后割齐琅邪郡立营陵侯刘泽为琅邪王。
现代文：哀王八年，高后分割齐国的琅邪郡把营陵侯刘泽封为琅邪王。
English: In the eighth year of the king's lamentation, Liu Zefeng, the lord of Yingling, was crowned the king of Yingying County after the division of Qi.

古文：其明年，赵王友入朝，幽死于邸。
现代文：第二年，赵王刘友入朝，最后在他的府邸被幽禁而死。
English: In the following year, Zhao Wang Liuyou entered the imperial court, and was eventually confined to his mansion, where he died.

古文：三赵王皆废。
现代文：三个赵王先后都被废黜。
English: All three Zhao kings were successively deposed.

古文：高后立诸吕诸吕为三王，擅权用事。
现代文：高后封吕氏宗族的子弟为燕王、赵王、梁王，独揽大权，专断朝政。
English: The sons of Gao Guofonglu's clan were Yan Wang, Zhao Wang, and Liang Wang, who monopolized power and arbitrarily ruled the imperial court.

古文：硃虚侯年二十，有气力，忿刘氏不得职。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章二十岁时，为人有气概又勇武多力，因刘氏得不到职位而忿忿不平。
English: At the age of twenty, Liu Zhang, a man of courage and bravery, was angry because Mr. Liu did not get a position.

古文：尝入待高后燕饮，高后令硃虚侯刘章为酒吏。
现代文：他曾侍奉高后宴，高后令朱虚侯刘章当酒吏。
English: He once served at a high-class after-dinner party, and the high-class after-dinner party ordered Zhu Xuchang Liu Zhang to be the bartender.

古文：章自请曰： 臣，将种也，请得以军法行酒。 高后曰： 可。 
现代文：刘章亲自请求说： 臣是武将的后代，请允许我按军法监督酒席上的行为。 高后说： 可以。 
English: Liu Zhang personally requested, "I am a descendant of a military commander, please allow me to supervise the behavior at the banquet according to military law."

古文：酒酣，章进饮歌舞。
现代文：到酒兴正浓的时候，刘章献上助兴的歌舞。
English: When the wine was getting strong, Liu Zhang presented songs and dances to add to the fun.

古文：已而曰： 请为太后言耕田歌。 
现代文：然后又说： 请让我为太后唱耕田歌。 
English: Then he said, "Please let me sing a farm song for the Empress Dowager."

古文：高后兒子畜之，笑曰： 顾而父知田耳。若生而为王子，安知田乎？ 章曰： 臣知之。 
现代文：高后把他当作孩子看待，笑着说： 想来你的父亲知道种田的事，你生下来就是王子，怎么会知道种田的事呢？ 刘章说： 臣知道。 
English: After high school, he regarded him as a child and said with a smile: I thought your father knew about farming, you were born a prince, how could you know about farming? Liu Zhang said: The vassal knows.

古文：太后曰： 试为我言田。 
现代文：太后说： 试着给我说说种田的事。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Try to tell me about farming.

古文：章曰： 深耕穊种，立苗欲疏，非其种者，鉏而去之。 
现代文：刘章说： 深耕密种，留苗稀疏，不是同类，坚决铲锄。 
English: Liu Zhang said: Deep ploughing and dense planting, sparse remaining seedlings, not the same species, resolute shoveling.

古文：吕后默然。
现代文：吕后听了默默不语。
English: Lv Hou listened in silence.

古文：顷之，诸吕有一人醉，亡酒，章追，拔剑斩之，而还报曰： 有亡酒一人，臣谨行法斩之。 
现代文：过了一会儿，吕氏族人中有一人喝醉了，逃离了酒席，刘章追过去，拔剑把他斩杀了，然后回来禀报说： 有一个人逃离酒席，臣谨按军法把他斩了。 
English: After a while, one of the Lu clan got drunk and ran away from the banquet. Liu Zhang chased him, drew his sword and killed him. Then he came back and reported, "There was a man who ran away from the banquet, and the minister chopped him according to military law."

古文：太后左右皆大惊。业已许其军法，无以罪也。
现代文：太后和左右都大为吃惊，既然已经准许他按军法行事，也就无法治他的罪。
English: The empress dowager and all those around her were astonished. Since he had been allowed to act in accordance with military law, there was no way to punish him.

古文：因罢。
现代文：饮宴也因而结束。
English: And with that, the banquet was over.

古文：自是之後，诸吕惮硃虚侯，虽大臣皆依硃虚侯，刘氏为益彊。
现代文：从此以后，吕氏家族的人都惧怕朱虚侯，即使是大臣也都依从朱虚侯。刘氏的声势又渐渐强盛起来。
English: From then on, the Lu family feared Zhu Xuhong, and even ministers obeyed Zhu Xuhong. The influence of the Liu family gradually grew stronger.

古文：其明年，高后崩。
现代文：第二年，高后去世。
English: The following year, Gao Po passed away.

古文：赵王吕禄为上将军，吕王产为相国，皆居长安中，聚兵以威大臣，欲为乱。
现代文：赵王吕禄任上将军，吕王吕产任相国，两人都居住在长安城中，他们聚集军队威胁大臣，想发动叛乱。
English: Zhao Wang Lulu was appointed as a general, and Lu Wang Lussang was appointed as a minister of state. Both of them lived in Chang'an City. They gathered an army to threaten the minister and wanted to start a rebellion.

古文：硃虚侯章以吕禄女为妇，知其谋，乃使人阴出告其兄齐王，欲令发兵西，硃虚侯、东牟侯为内应，以诛诸吕，因立齐王为帝。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章由于妻子是吕禄的女儿，所以知道了他们的阴谋，于是派人偷出长安报告他的哥哥齐王，想让他发兵西征，朱虚侯、东牟侯做内应，以便诛杀吕氏族人，趁机立齐王为皇帝。
English: Because his wife was a daughter of Lu Lu, Liu Zhang, the Prince of Zhu Xiu, knew about their plot, so he sent someone to sneak out of Chang'an to report to his brother, King Qi, and wanted him to send troops to the west, and Zhu Xiu and Dong Mou to do the inner work, so that they could kill the people of the Lu clan, and take the opportunity to make King Qi the emperor.

古文：齐王既闻此计，乃与其舅父驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃阴谋发兵。
现代文：齐王听到这个计策之后，就和他的舅父驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃暗中谋划出兵。
English: After hearing this scheme, King Qi secretly planned to send troops with his uncle Zhai, his brother-in-law Zhu Miao, and his lieutenant Wei Bo.

古文：齐相召平闻之，乃发卒卫王宫。
现代文：齐国相召平听到了这件事，就发兵护卫王宫。
English: When he heard about this, he sent soldiers to guard the royal palace.

古文：魏勃绐召平曰： 王欲发兵，非有汉虎符验也。
现代文：魏勃骗召平说： 大王想发兵，可是并没有朝廷的虎符验证。
English: Wei Bo lied to Ping Zhao and said: The great king wants to send troops, but there is no imperial tiger symbol verification.

古文：而相君围王，固善。
现代文：现在相君围住了王宫，这本来就是好事。
English: Now the crown prince has surrounded the royal palace, which is actually a good thing.

古文：勃请为君将兵卫卫王。 
现代文：我请求替您领兵护卫齐王。 
English: I request you to lead an army to escort King Qi.

古文：召平信之，乃使魏勃将兵围王宫。
现代文：召平相信了他的话，就让魏勃领兵围住王宫。
English: Zhao Ping believed his words and let Wei Bo lead the troops to surround the royal palace.

古文：勃既将兵，使围相府。
现代文：魏勃领兵以后，竟派兵包围了相府。
English: After Wei Bo led an army, he actually sent an army to surround Sangfu.

古文：召平曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：召平说： 唉！
English: Zhao Ping said: Alas!

古文：道家之言 当断不断，反受其乱 ，乃是也。 遂自杀。
现代文：道家的话 当断不断，反受其乱 ，正是如此呀。  终于自杀而死。
English: That's what it's like when a Taoist is constantly being judged and rebuffed, until he finally commits suicide.

古文：於是齐王以驷钧为相，魏勃为将军，祝午为内史，悉发国中兵。
现代文：当时齐王让驷君做国相，魏勃任将军，祝午任内史，把国中的兵力全部发出。
English: At that time, the king of Qi made Zhai Jun the minister of state, Wei Bo the general, Zhu Bao the secretary of internal affairs, and sent all the troops in the country.

古文：使祝午东诈琅邪王曰： 吕氏作乱，齐王发兵欲西诛之。
现代文：派祝午到东边去诈骗琅邪王说： 吕氏族人叛乱，齐王发兵想西进诛杀他们。
English: He sent Zhu Yu to the east to deceive the evil king, saying, "The people of the Lv clan rebelled, and the king of Qi sent soldiers to the west to fight and kill them.

古文：齐王自以兒子，年少，不习兵革之事，原举国委大王。
现代文：齐王认为自己是晚辈，年纪轻，不熟悉征战之事，愿把整个封国的军队托付给大王。
English: King Qi thought that he was a younger generation, young, and unfamiliar with the war, and was willing to entrust the entire national army to the great king.

古文：大王自高帝将也，习战事。
现代文：大王从高帝那时起就是将军，熟悉战事。
English: The great king was a general from the time of Emperor Gao, and was familiar with warfare.

古文：齐王不敢离兵，使臣请大王幸之临菑见齐王计事，并将齐兵以西平关中之乱。 
现代文：齐王不敢离开军队，就派臣请大王到临淄去会见齐王商议大事，一起领兵西进平定关中之乱。 
English: King Qi did not dare to leave the army, so he sent a vassal to invite the great king to Linyi to meet with King Qi to discuss important matters, and together lead the troops westward to quell the Guanzhong Rebellion.

古文：琅邪王信之，以为然，驰见齐王。
现代文：琅邪王相信了，认为很对，就飞驰去见齐王。
English: The Evil King believed him and thought he was right, so he flew to see the Good King.

古文：齐王与魏勃等因留琅邪王，而使祝午尽发琅邪国而并将其兵。
现代文：齐王与魏勃等趁机扣留了琅邪王。派祝午把琅邪国的军队全部发出并且统领这些军队。
English: King Qi and Wei Bo took advantage of the opportunity to detain the evil king, and sent Zhu Miao to send out the entire army of the evil kingdom and command these armies.

古文：琅邪王刘泽既见欺，不得反国，乃说齐王曰： 齐悼惠王高皇帝长子，推本言之，而大王高皇帝適长孙也，当立。
现代文：琅邪王刘泽被骗之后，不能返回封国，于是就哄劝齐王说： 齐悼惠王是高皇帝的长子，推求本源来说，大王正是高皇帝的嫡长孙，应当继承皇位。
English: After the evil king Liu Ze was deceived, he could not return to the feudal state, so he coaxed and persuaded King Qi to say: King Qi is the eldest son of Emperor Gao. According to the source, the great king is the eldest grandson of Emperor Gao and should inherit the throne.

古文：今诸大臣狐疑未有所定，而泽於刘氏最为长年，大臣固待泽决计。
现代文：如今大臣们还在犹不定，而我在刘氏中是最年长的，大臣本就是等待我去决定大计的。
English: Now the ministers are still undecided, and I am the oldest member of the Liu clan. The minister is just waiting for me to make a decision.

古文：今大王留臣无为也，不如使我入关计事。 
现代文：如今大王把我扣留在这里，我也就不能有什么作为了，不如让我入关计议拥立新帝的大事。 
English: Now that the great king has detained me here, I can't do anything, so it's better to let me enter the customs to discuss the important matter of establishing a new emperor.

古文：齐王以为然，乃益具车送琅邪王。
现代文：齐王认为很对，就准备了许多车送琅邪王入朝。
English: King Qi thought it was right and prepared many cars to take the evil king to the imperial court.

古文：琅邪王既行，齐遂举兵西攻吕国之济南。
现代文：琅邪王走了以后，齐王就起兵向西进攻吕国的济南。
English: After the Evil King Xie had left, King Qi raised an army to attack Jinan in Lv Province to the west.

古文：於是齐哀王遗诸侯王书曰： 高帝平定天下，王诸子弟，悼惠王於齐。
现代文：这时刘哀王给诸侯王发出书信说： 高祖平定天下之后，封子弟们为王，悼惠王封在齐国。
English: At this time, Liu Ai Wang sent a letter to Prince Wang saying: After Gaozhu had pacified the world, Fong's sons became kings, and Miao Hui Wang was enthroned in Qi.

古文：悼惠王薨，惠帝使留侯张良立臣为齐王。
现代文：悼惠王去世后，惠帝派留侯张良来立臣为齐王。
English: After mourning the death of King Hui, Emperor Hui sent Zhang Liang, a retainer, to install a vassal as King Qi.

古文：惠帝崩，高后用事，春秋高，听诸吕擅废高帝所立，又杀三赵王，灭梁、燕、赵以王诸吕，分齐国为四。
现代文：惠帝去世，高后专政，她年纪已老，听任诸吕擅自废黜高帝所封诸王，又杀害了三位赵王，灭了梁、燕、赵三国，让吕氏族人去为王，还把齐国分为四国。
English: After Emperor Hui passed away, Gao Gao's dictatorship, she was already old, allowed Zhu Lyu to arbitrarily depose the kings appointed by Emperor Gao, killed three Zhao kings, destroyed Liang, Yan and Zhao three countries, let the Lu clan become king, and divided Qi into four countries.

古文：忠臣进谏，上惑乱不听。
现代文：忠臣们进谏，主上昏乱不听。
English: The loyal vassals enter the castle, the lord is in a daze and does not listen.

古文：今高后崩，皇帝春秋富，未能治天下，固恃大臣诸。
现代文：如今高后去世，皇帝年少，还不能治理天下，当然要依仗大臣和诸侯。
English: Now that Gao Hou has passed away, the emperor is still young and cannot rule the world. Of course, he has to rely on ministers and princes.

古文：今诸吕又擅自尊官，聚兵严威，劫列侯忠臣，矫制以令天下，宗庙所以危。
现代文：现在诸吕又擅自尊为高官，聚集军队耀武扬威，胁迫诸侯和忠臣，假传圣旨来号令天下，汉家朝廷因而十分危急。
English: Now, the Han imperial court is in a very critical situation, as the lords of Lù have arrogated themselves as high-ranking officials, gathered an army to show off their military prowess, coerced the lords and loyal subjects, and falsely preached the sacred edict to order the world.

古文：今寡人率兵入诛不当为王者。 
现代文：如今寡人率领军队入关就是要诛杀那些不应为王的人。 
English: Today, the only reason to lead an army into the pass is to fight and kill those who should not be king.

古文：汉闻齐发兵而西，相国吕产乃遣大将军灌婴东击之。
现代文：朝廷听说齐王发兵西进，相国吕产就派大将军灌婴带兵东进拦击齐兵。
English: When the imperial court heard that King Qi had sent his army westward, the neighboring country of Liusan sent the great general Guan Yu and his soldiers eastward to intercept the Qi army.

古文：灌婴至荥阳，乃谋曰： 诸吕将兵居关中，欲危刘氏而自立。
现代文：灌婴到了荥阳，心中考虑道： 诸吕领兵聚集关中，想要危害刘氏而自立为皇帝。
English: When Guan Yu arrived in Fenyang, he pondered in his heart, "The leaders of Zhulu gathered in Guanzhong, and they wanted to harm the Liu clan and make themselves emperor.

古文：我今破齐还报，是益吕氏资也。 
现代文：我现在如果打败了齐国回朝报捷，这就等于为吕氏增加本钱了。 
English: If I now defeat Qi and return to the imperial court to report my success, it will be tantamount to increasing the capital for Lü.

古文：乃留兵屯荥阳，使使喻齐王及诸侯，与连和，以待吕氏之变而共诛之。
现代文：于是就让军队停下来驻扎荥阳，派出使者通告齐王和诸侯，愿互相联合，等待吕氏一叛乱就共同诛杀他们。
English: Therefore, he ordered the army to stop and station in Fenyang, and sent an envoy to inform the king of Qi and the princes that they were willing to unite with each other and wait for the rebellion of the Lü Dynasty to fight and kill them together.

古文：齐王闻之，乃西取其故济南郡，亦屯兵於齐西界以待约。
现代文：齐王听说此事后，就向西进兵夺回他们的故地济南郡，并在齐国西界驻军来等待履行盟约。
English: After King Qi heard about this, he marched west to recapture their hometown of Jinan County, and stationed troops on the western border of Qi to wait for the fulfillment of the covenant.

古文：吕禄、吕产欲作乱关中，硃虚侯与太尉勃、丞相平等诛之。
现代文：吕禄、吕产要在关中叛乱，朱虚侯刘章与太尉周勃、丞相陈平等诛杀了他们。
English: Lu Lu and Lu Zhanzhong wanted to rebel in Guanzhong. Zhu Xuchang, Liu Zhang, Lieutenant Zhou Bo, and Prime Minister Chen Pingli fought and killed them.

古文：硃虚侯首先斩吕产，於是太尉勃等乃得尽诛诸吕。
现代文：朱虚侯首先斩杀了吕产，于是太尉周勃等才能全部诛杀吕氏族人。
English: Zhu Huxu first killed the Lyu clan, and then Second Lieutenant Zhou Bo and others were able to kill all the Lyu clansmen.

古文：而琅邪王亦从齐至长安。
现代文：琅邪王也恰好从齐国来到长安。
English: The Evil King also happened to come to Chang'an from Qi.

古文：大臣议欲立齐王，而琅邪王及大臣曰： 齐王母家驷钧，恶戾，虎而冠者也。
现代文：大臣商议要让齐王继皇帝位，可是琅邪王和一些大臣说： 齐王的母舅驷钧，凶恶残暴，像一只戴上帽子的老虎。
English: The ministers discussed to let King Qi succeed to the throne, but the wicked king and some ministers said: King Qi's maternal uncle, the wicked and cruel, is like a tiger wearing a hat.

古文：方以吕氏故几乱天下，今又立齐王，是欲复为吕氏也。
现代文：我们刚刚因为吕氏的缘故几乎使天下大乱，现在又要立齐王，是想要再出现一个吕氏呀。
English: We have just almost caused chaos in the world because of the Lv clan, and now we want to set up a king, because we want another Lv clan to appear.

古文：代王母家薄氏，君子长者；且代王又亲高帝子，於今见在，且最为长。
现代文：代王的母家薄氏，正直忠厚，况且代王又是高帝的亲生儿子，如今依然健在，并且最年长。
English: The acting king's mother's family, the Bo clan, was honest and loyal. Moreover, the acting king was the biological son of Emperor Gao, who is still alive today and is the oldest.

古文：以子则顺，以善人则大臣安。 
现代文：以亲子来说，名正言顺；以善良人家来说，大臣们都会放心。 
English: In the case of parents and children, the name is justified; in the case of good people, the ministers will be relieved.

古文：於是大臣乃谋迎立代王，而遣硃虚侯以诛吕氏事告齐王，令罢兵。
现代文：于是大臣们就计划迎立王为帝，并派朱虚侯把已经诛杀诸吕的事告诉齐王，让他收兵。
English: As a result, the ministers planned to make Wang emperor, and sent Zhu Huhou to tell King Qi that they had already killed Zhu Lyu, and asked him to withdraw his troops.

古文：灌婴在荥阳，闻魏勃本教齐王反，既诛吕氏，罢齐兵，使使召责问魏勃。
现代文：灌婴在荥阳，听说魏勃本来是教唆齐王反叛的，诛灭吕氏之后，齐国也收了兵，灌婴派人召来魏勃责问他。
English: Guan Yu was in Shenyang. He had heard that Wei Bo had instigated the rebellion against King Qi. After the destruction of the Lv clan, the State of Qi had also conscripted soldiers. Guan Yu sent someone to summon Wei Bo and interrogate him.

古文：勃曰： 失火之家，岂暇先言大人而後救火乎！ 
现代文：魏勃说： 失火的人家，哪里有空先告诉家长然后才去救火呢？ 
English: Wei Bo said: People who have lost a fire, where is the time to first tell their parents and then go to fight the fire?

古文：因退立，股战而栗，恐不能言者，终无他语。
现代文：说完就退立一旁，两腿发抖，像是吓得说不出话的样子，一直到最后也没有说出其他的话。
English: When he had finished, he stood aside, his legs trembling, as if speechless with fright, and said nothing else until the very end.

古文：灌将军熟视笑曰： 人谓魏勃勇，妄庸人耳，何能为乎！ 
现代文：灌将军看了他半天，笑着说： 人们都说魏勃很勇敢，其实是个平庸无能的人罢了，哪会有什么作为呢！ 
English: General Gan looked at him for a long time and said with a smile: People say that Wei Bo is very brave, but in fact he is just a mediocre and incompetent person. What can he do?

古文：乃罢魏勃。
现代文：于是免了他的职而不治罪。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his duties without being charged with a crime.

古文：魏勃父以善鼓琴见秦皇帝。
现代文：魏勃的父亲因善于弹琴而见过秦皇帝。
English: Wei Bo's father met the Qin Emperor because he was good at playing the piano.

古文：及魏勃少时，欲求见齐相曹参，家贫无以自通，乃常独早夜埽齐相舍人门外。
现代文：魏勃在年少时，想求见齐相曹参，由于家贫没有财力亲自去疏通关系，就常常一个人半夜里到齐相的随身侍从门外去打扫。
English: When Wei Bo was young, he wanted to meet Qi Xiang Cao San. Since his family was poor and did not have the financial resources to smooth out the relationship in person, he often went to Qi Xiang's attendant in the middle of the night to clean the outside of the door.

古文：相舍人怪之，以为物，而伺之，得勃。
现代文：这位侍从很奇怪，以为是什么怪物，就暗中等待，结果捉到了魏勃。
English: The servant was very strange, he thought it was a monster, he waited in secret, and as a result he caught Wei Bo.

古文：勃曰： 原见相君，无因，故为子埽，欲以求见。 
现代文：魏勃说： 我想拜见相君，没有门路，所以来给您打扫，想借此来求见。 
English: Wei Bo said, "I want to see you, but there's no way, so I've come to clean for you. I want to use this as an opportunity to see you."

古文：於是舍人见勃曹参，因以为舍人。
现代文：于是这位侍从就带领魏勃去拜见曹参，曹参因而让他也做侍从。
English: So the attendant led Wei Bo to meet Cao San, and Cao San asked him to be an attendant as well.

古文：一为参御，言事，参以为贤，言之齐悼惠王。
现代文：一次他给曹参驾车，说到对一些事情的意见，曹参认为他有才干，就向齐悼惠王推荐他。
English: Once he gave Cao San a ride in his car, and when it came to his opinion on some things, Cao San thought he was talented and recommended him to Qi Yi Hui Wang.

古文：悼惠王召见，则拜为内史。
现代文：悼惠王召见魏勃，任命他为内史。
English: In mourning, Hui Wang summoned Wei Bo and appointed him as the internal historian.

古文：始，悼惠王得自置二千石。
现代文：起初，悼惠王有权自己任命二千石俸禄的官吏。
English: At first, King Mui Hui had the right to appoint his own officials with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：及悼惠王卒而哀王立，勃用事，重於齐相。
现代文：到悼惠王去世，哀王即位以后，魏勃专断政事，权力比齐相还大。
English: After the death of King Hui and the enthronement of King Mu, Wei Bo arbitrarily decided political affairs and had more power than Qi Xiang.

古文：王既罢兵归，而代王来立，是为孝文帝。
现代文：齐王收兵回国之后，代王来到长安即皇帝位，这就是孝文帝。
English: After King Qi withdrew his troops and returned to China, the acting king came to Chang'an, that is, the emperor's throne. This is Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：孝文帝元年，尽以高后时所割齐之城阳、琅邪、济南郡复与齐，而徙琅邪王王燕，益封硃虚侯、东牟侯各二千户。
现代文：孝文帝元年，把高后时从齐国分割出去的城阳、琅邪和济南郡全部归还齐国，琅邪王改封为燕王，朱虚侯、东牟侯加封领地各二千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the counties of Chengyang, Zhangye and Jinan, which had been separated from Qi Guo at the time of Gao Guo, were all returned to Qi Guo. Zhangye Wang was renamed Yan Wang, and Zhuyuhou and Dongmuhou were each given 2,000 households.

古文：是岁，齐哀王卒，太子立，是为文王。
现代文：这一年，齐哀王去世，太子刘则即位，这就是齐文王。
English: In this year, King Qi Aye passed away, and Prince Liu took the throne. This was the beginning of King Qi Wen.

古文：齐文王元年，汉以齐之城阳郡立硃虚侯为城阳王，以齐济北郡立东牟侯为济北王。
现代文：齐文王元年，朝廷把齐国的城阳郡封给朱虚侯刘章，立他为城阳王；把齐国的济北郡封给东牟刘兴居，立他为济北王。
English: In the first year of King Qibun's reign, the imperial court assigned Qin's Chengyang County to Zhu Xuchang Liu Zhang and made him the King of Chengyang; it assigned Qin's Jibei County to Dongmou Liu Xingju and made him the King of Jibei.

古文：二年，济北王反，汉诛杀之，地入于汉。
现代文：齐文王二年，济北王反叛，朝廷派兵把他诛杀了，他的封地归入朝廷。
English: In the second year of King Chifeng's reign, King Jibei rebelled, the imperial court sent soldiers to kill him, and his fief was incorporated into the imperial court.

古文：後二年，孝文帝尽封齐悼惠王子罢军等七人皆为列侯。
现代文：又过两年，孝文帝把齐悼惠王的儿子罢ｐí军等七人全部封为列侯。
English: Two years later, Emperor Xiaowen made all seven of them, including the son of King Hui who was killed in the battle, princes.

古文：齐文王立十四年卒，无子，国除，地入于汉。
现代文：齐文王即位十四年去世，没有儿子，国号废除，封地归入朝廷。
English: King Qifeng died in the fourteenth year of his reign, without a son, the country name was abolished, and the fief was transferred to the imperial court.

古文：後一岁，孝文帝以所封悼惠王子分齐为王，齐孝王将闾以悼惠王子杨虚侯为齐王。
现代文：一年以后，孝文帝分割齐国土地使原来所封的悼惠王的几个儿子为王。齐孝王将闾是以悼惠王的儿子杨虚侯的身份晋升为齐王的。
English: A year later, Emperor Xiaowen divided the land of Qi and made several sons of the originally appointed King Miao Hui become kings. King Miao Hui was promoted to King of Qi as Yang Hui, the son of King Miao Hui.

古文：故齐别郡尽以王悼惠王子：子志为济北王，子辟光为济南王，子贤为菑川王，子卬为胶西王，子雄渠为胶东王，与城阳、齐凡七王。
现代文：原来齐国的其他郡县全部分封给悼惠王的儿子为王：刘志为济北王，刘辟光为济南王，刘贤为菑川王，刘卬áｎｇ为胶西王，刘雄渠为胶东王，与城阳王、齐王共为七王。
English: Originally, all of the other counties and counties in Qi were assigned to the sons of King Miao Hui as kings: Liu Zhi was the king of North Ji, Liu Biguang was the king of South Ji, Liu Xian was the king of Sichuan, Liu Xiangg was the king of West Jia, Liu Xiongqu was the king of East Jia, and together with King Chengyang and King Qi, they were seven kings.

古文：齐孝王十一年，吴王濞、楚王戊反，兴兵西，告诸侯曰 将诛汉贼臣晁错以安宗庙 。
现代文：齐孝王十一年，吴王刘濞、楚王刘戊谋反，起兵西进，遍告诸侯说： 我们将去诛杀汉朝的贼臣晁错以使国家安定。 
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of King Qi Xiao, King Liu Bei of the State of Wu and King Liu Wu of the State of Chu plotted a rebellion, marched westward with an army, and announced to all the princes: "We will go and kill the Han Dynasty's treacherous vassals in order to stabilize the country."

古文：胶西、胶东、菑川、济南皆擅发兵应吴楚。
现代文：胶西王、胶东王、菑川王、济南王都擅自发兵响应吴王和楚王的举动。
English: King Jiaoxi, King Jiaodong, King Liuchuan and King Jinan all sent troops without authorization in response to the actions of King Wu and King Chu.

古文：欲与齐，齐孝王狐疑，城守不听，三国兵共围齐。
现代文：还想联合齐国，齐孝王犹豫不定，始终坚守城池没有听信他们。三国军队共同包围齐国。
English: They also wanted to unite Qi, but King Qi Xiao hesitated and did not listen to them. The armies of the three countries jointly encircled Qi.

古文：齐王使路中大夫告於天子。天子复令路中大夫还告齐王： 善坚守，吾兵今破吴楚矣。 
现代文：齐王派路中大夫去向天子报告，天子又让路中大夫回去告知齐王： 好好坚守，我派的军队现在已经打败吴、楚了。 
English: King Qi sent Dr. Lu to report to the heavenly son, and the heavenly son asked Dr. Lu to go back and tell King Qi: Hold fast, the army I sent has now defeated Wu and Chu.

古文：路中大夫至，三国兵围临菑数重，无从入。
现代文：路中大夫回到齐国。三国军队把临淄重重包围，路中大夫没有办法入城。
English: Dr. Lu Zhongfu returned to Qi. The troops of the three countries surrounded Linyi, and Dr. Lu Zhongfu was unable to enter the city.

古文：三国将劫与路中大夫盟，曰： 若反言汉已破矣，齐趣下三国，不且见屠。 
现代文：三国的将领劫持路中大夫并与他订立盟约，说： 你反过来说汉朝廷已被攻破，齐国应赶快向三国投降，否则将被屠城。 
English: The generals of the three countries kidnapped Dr. Lu Zhongtang and made a pact with him, saying: If you, on the other hand, say that the Han Dynasty has been defeated, Qi should quickly surrender to the three countries, otherwise it will be slaughtered.

古文：路中大夫既许之，至城下，望见齐王，曰： 汉已发兵百万，使太尉周亚夫击破吴楚，方引兵救齐，齐必坚守无下！ 
现代文：路中大夫只好答应他们，来到城下，远远看见齐王，说： 朝廷已经发兵百万，派太尉周亚夫把吴楚叛军打败了，正领兵来救援齐国，齐国一定要坚守，不要投降！ 
English: The middle-of-the-road doctor had no choice but to agree with them. When he arrived at the foot of the city, he saw King Qi in the distance and said, "The imperial court has dispatched a million soldiers and sent Lieutenant Zhou Yaf to defeat the Wu Chu rebels. He is leading the troops to rescue Qi. Qi must stand firm and not surrender!"

古文：三国将诛路中大夫。
现代文：三国将领杀死了路中大夫。
English: The generals of the three countries killed Dr. Tong.

古文：齐初围急，阴与三国通谋，约未定，会闻路中大夫从汉来，喜，及其大臣乃复劝王毋下三国。
现代文：齐国起初被围困到危急之时，曾暗中与三国联系，盟约还没有议定，正好听说路中大夫从朝廷回来，齐王非常高兴，大臣们就再次劝谏齐王不要投降三国。
English: At the beginning, when Qi was besieged to the point of crisis, he had secretly contacted the three countries. The alliance had not yet been agreed upon. Just as he heard that Lu Zhongtao had returned from the imperial court, King Qi was very happy. The ministers once again advised King Qi not to surrender the three countries.

古文：居无何，汉将栾布、平阳侯等兵至齐，击破三国兵，解齐围。
现代文：过了不久，汉将栾市、平阳侯曹奇等率领的军队来到齐国，打败了三国军队，解除了对齐国的包围。
English: Not long after, the Han Dynasty brought troops led by Zou Shi and Pingyang Hou Caoqi to Qi, defeated the armies of the three countries, and lifted the siege of Qi.

古文：已而复闻齐初与三国有谋，将欲移兵伐齐。
现代文：不久，皇帝又听说齐国起初曾与三国有过共谋，又要移兵攻打齐国。
English: Soon, the emperor also heard that Qi had initially conspired with the three countries, and he wanted to move troops to attack Qi.

古文：齐孝王惧，乃饮药自杀。
现代文：齐孝王惧怕，就服毒自杀了。
English: Qi Xiaowang was afraid and took poison to commit suicide.

古文：景帝闻之，以为齐首善，以迫劫有谋，非其罪也，乃立孝王太子寿为齐王，是为懿王，续齐後。
现代文：景帝听说后，认为齐国是最好的，由于受到逼迫威胁才与三国有共谋，这并不是他的过错。于是立孝王的太子刘寿为齐王，这就是懿王，延续了齐王的后代。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Jing thought that Qi was the best, and it was not his fault that he was forced to conspire with the three countries due to the threat of persecution. Therefore, Liu Shou, the prince of Prince Xiao, was appointed as the King of Qi. This was the King of Gong, who continued the descendants of the King of Qi.

古文：而胶西、胶东、济南、菑川王咸诛灭，地入于汉。
现代文：而胶西王、胶东王、济南王和菑川王都被诛灭了，他们的领地都归入汉朝廷。
English: However, the kings of Jiaoxi, Jiaodong, Jinan and Beichuan were all destroyed, and their territories were all incorporated into the Han imperial court.

古文：徙济北王王菑川。
现代文：把济北王迁到菑川为王。
English: He moved the king of Jibei to Shukawa to be the king.

古文：齐懿王立二十二年卒，子次景立，是为厉王。
现代文：齐懿王在位二十二年世，他的儿子次景即位，这就是厉王。
English: In the 22nd year of the reign of King Qizhi, his son, King Suiqing, came to the throne. This was King Li.

古文：齐厉王，其母曰纪太后。
现代文：齐厉王，他的母亲是纪太后。
English: King Qi Li, his mother was Empress Dowager Ji.

古文：太后取其弟纪氏女为厉王后。王不爱纪氏女。
现代文：太后把她弟弟纪氏的女儿嫁给成厉王为后，厉王不喜欢纪氏的女儿。
English: After the Empress Dowager married the daughter of her brother Ji Ji to Cheng Li Wang, King Li did not like Ji Ji's daughter.

古文：太后欲其家重宠，令其长女纪翁主入王宫，正其後宫，毋令得近王，欲令爱纪氏女。
现代文：太后想让纪氏家族世世受宠，就让她的长女纪翁主进入王宫，整顿后宫的秩序，不准宫女接近齐王，想让厉王喜欢纪氏的女儿。
English: The empress dowager wanted the Ji family to be favored from generation to generation, so she let her eldest daughter Ji Wenshu enter the royal palace, rectified the order of the harem, and did not allow the courtesan to approach King Qi. She wanted King Li to like Ji's daughter.

古文：王因与其姊翁主奸。
现代文：厉王却趁机和他的姐姐翁主通奸。
English: King Li, however, took the opportunity to commit adultery with his sister.

古文：齐有宦者徐甲，入事汉皇太后。
现代文：齐国有个宦官徐甲，入朝侍奉汉皇太后。
English: There was a eunuch named Xu Jia in the State of Qi who entered the imperial court to serve the Empress Dowager of Han.

古文：皇太后有爱女曰脩成君，脩成君非刘氏，太后怜之。
现代文：皇太后有爱女，称号是修成君，修成君不是出于刘氏，太后怜爱她。
English: The empress dowager had a beloved daughter, the title of whom was Xiu Chengjun. Xiu Chengjun was not from the Liu clan, and the empress dowager pitied her.

古文：脩成君有女名娥，太后欲嫁之於诸侯，宦者甲乃请使齐，必令王上书请娥。
现代文：修成君有个女儿名叫娥，太后想把她嫁给诸侯，宦官徐甲就请求出使齐国，说一定让齐王上书求取娥为王后。
English: Emperor Xiu Chengjun had a daughter named E, and the empress dowager wanted to marry her off to a prince. The eunuch Xu Jia asked the king of Qi to send an envoy, saying that he must have the king of Qi write to ask for E as his queen.

古文：皇太后喜，使甲之齐。
现代文：皇太后很高兴，就派徐甲前往齐国。
English: The empress dowager was very pleased and sent Xu Jia to Qi Province.

古文：是时齐人主父偃知甲之使齐以取后事，亦因谓甲： 即事成，幸言偃女原得充王後宫。 
现代文：当时齐国人主父偃知道徐甲出使齐国是为了娶王后的事，也趁机对徐甲说： 如果事情成功了，希望你能跟上头说一说我的女儿愿在齐王后宫服侍。 
English: At that time, the father of the people of Qi, Yao, knew that Xu Jia had sent an envoy to Qi to marry the queen, and he also took the opportunity to say to Xu Jia: If the matter is successful, I hope you can follow up and say that my daughter is willing to serve in the harem of King Qi.

古文：甲既至齐，风以此事。
现代文：徐甲到齐国之后，先把此事暗中传出。
English: After Xu Jia arrived in Qi, he first spread the news secretly.

古文：纪太后大怒，曰： 王有后，後宫具备。
现代文：纪太后听到后大怒，说： 齐王已有王后，后宫嫔妃也都齐备。
English: Hearing of the queen's great anger, Empress Dowager Ji said: King Qi already has a queen, and the concubines in the harem are all ready.

古文：且甲，齐贫人，急乃为宦者，入事汉，无补益，乃欲乱吾王家！
现代文：况且徐甲原是齐国的贫民，穷困已极才去做宦官，入朝侍奉汉宫，没得到什么好处，又想来扰乱我们齐国王室！
English: Moreover, Xu Jiayuan was a poor man in Qi. He had to be extremely poor to become a eunuch and enter the court to serve the Han Palace. He did not get any benefits, and he wanted to disturb our Qi royal family!

古文：且主父偃何为者？
现代文：至于主父偃算什么人？
English: As for the main father, what kind of person is he?

古文：乃欲以女充後宫！ 
现代文：竟然也想让女儿进入后宫！ 
English: He even wants his daughter to enter the harem!

古文：徐甲大穷，还报皇太后曰： 王已原尚娥，然有一害，恐如燕王。 
现代文：徐甲非常尴尬，回朝禀报皇太后说： 齐王已经愿意娶娥为后，但是有一种后患，恐怕像燕王一样。 
English: Xu Jia was very embarrassed, and reported to the Empress Dowager through the Imperial Courier: "King Qi is already willing to marry Queen E, but there is an aftereffect, I'm afraid, like King Yan.

古文：燕王者，与其子昆弟奸，新坐以死，亡国，故以燕感太后。
现代文：燕王就是由于和他的女儿姐妹们通奸，刚刚论罪处死，封国灭亡，所以徐甲故意用燕王的事触动太后。
English: King Yan had just been sentenced to death for committing adultery with his daughters and sisters, and his kingdom was doomed, so Xu Jia deliberately used the matter of King Yan to touch the empress dowager.

古文：太后曰： 无复言嫁女齐事。 
现代文：太后说： 不准再说嫁孙女到齐国的事了。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Don't talk about your granddaughter's wedding in Qi any more.

古文：事浸浔闻於天子。
现代文：事情渐渐传天子耳中。
English: The matter was gradually brought to the emperor's attention.

古文：主父偃由此亦与齐有卻。
现代文：主父偃从此也与齐王产生了隔阂。
English: From then on, the main father, Zou, also had a rift with King Qi.

古文：主父偃方幸於天子，用事，因言： 齐临菑十万户，市租千金，人众殷富，巨於长安，此非天子亲弟爱子不得王此。
现代文：主父偃正受到天子的宠信，专断政事，趁机对天子说： 齐国的临淄有十万户，贸易租税每天达千金，人口多而且富足，甚至超过了长安，这种地方如果不是天子的亲兄弟或爱子不应在此为王。
English: The main father, Yao, was being favored by the heavenly son, dictating political affairs, and took the opportunity to say to the heavenly son: Linyi in Qi has 100,000 households, trade taxes amount to thousands of dollars every day, the population is large and rich, even exceeding Chang'an, such a place should not be the king if it is not the brother or beloved son of the heavenly son.

古文：今齐王於亲属益疏。 
现代文：如今齐王和皇室亲属的关系日益疏远了。 
English: Now, the relationship between King Qi and the royal relatives has become increasingly estranged.

古文：乃从容言： 吕太后时齐欲反，吴楚时孝王几为乱。
现代文：接着又不慌不忙地说： 吕太后的时候齐国就想反叛，吴楚七国之乱的时候孝王几乎参与叛乱。
English: Then he said unhurriedly, "When Empress Lyu ascended the throne, the State of Qi wanted to rebel, and when the Seven Kingdoms War broke out in Wuchu, Prince Xiaowang almost participated in the rebellion.

古文：今闻齐王与其姊乱。 
现代文：现在又听说齐和他的姐姐有伦的事。 
English: Now we hear that Qi and his sister are having an affair.

古文：於是天子乃拜主父偃为齐相，且正其事。
现代文：于是天子就任命主父偃为齐丞相，并且要查办这件事。
English: As a result, the heavenly son appointed the main father Zou as the prime minister of Qi, and wanted to investigate the matter.

古文：主父偃既至齐，乃急治王後宫宦者为王通於姊翁主所者，令其辞证皆引王。
现代文：主父偃来到齐国之后，就加紧审问齐王后宫的宦官中帮助齐王到达他姐姐翁主住所的人，命令他们在供词和旁证中都牵涉到齐王。
English: After Master Zhai came to Qi, he intensified the interrogation of the eunuchs in the palace of King Qi who helped King Qi reach the residence of his sister's husband, ordering them to implicate King Qi in their confessions and circumstantial evidence.

古文：王年少，惧大罪为吏所执诛，乃饮药自杀。
现代文：齐王年少，害怕因大罪被官吏拘捕诛杀，就饮毒药自杀了。
English: When King Qi was young, he was afraid of being arrested and killed by officials for a serious crime, so he drank poison and committed suicide.

古文：绝无後。
现代文：他子嗣断绝没有后。
English: He never had any children.

古文：是时赵王惧主父偃一出废齐，恐其渐疏骨肉，乃上书言偃受金及轻重之短。
现代文：当时赵王害怕主父偃一出任齐相就废除了齐国，恐怕他要离间汉家骨肉，于是就给天子上书告发主父偃受贿以及因挟怨而对齐国说长道短。
English: At that time, King Zhao was afraid that his father, Zhai, would abolish the State of Qi as soon as he assumed the post of Qi Xiang, and he was afraid that he would split the Han family, so he wrote a letter to Heaven to denounce his father, Zhai, for accepting bribes and for quarreling with the State of Qi.

古文：天子亦既囚偃。
现代文：天子也就借此囚禁了主父偃。
English: The Son of Heaven also used this to imprison his master, Yao.

古文：公孙弘言： 齐王以忧死毋後，国入汉，非诛偃无以塞天下之望。 
现代文：公孙弘说： 齐王因忧郁而死，没有后代，国土已归入朝廷，不诛杀主父偃无法杜绝天下人的怨恨。 
English: Gongsun Hong said: King Qi died of melancholy, there are no descendants, the country has been incorporated into the imperial court, and it is impossible to eliminate the resentment of the world without killing the father.

古文：遂诛偃。
现代文：终于诛杀了主父偃。
English: He finally killed his father.

古文：齐厉王立五年死，毋後，国入于汉。
现代文：齐厉王在位五年去世，没有后代，封地归入汉朝廷。
English: King Qili died five years into his reign, leaving no descendants, and the fief was transferred to the Han Dynasty.

古文：齐悼惠王後尚有二国，城阳及菑川。
现代文：齐悼惠王的后代还领有两国，即城阳和菑川。
English: The descendants of King Hui also inherited two countries, namely Chengyang and Beichuan.

古文：菑川地比齐。
现代文：菑川土地紧靠齐国。
English: The land of Li River is close to Qi Province.

古文：天子怜齐，为悼惠王冢园在郡，割临菑东环悼惠王冢园邑尽以予菑川，以奉悼惠王祭祀。
现代文：天子怜悯齐国，因为悼惠王的墓园在郡城，就把临淄以东环绕悼惠王墓园的城邑全部划给菑川国，以便供奉悼惠王的祭祀。
English: The Son of Heaven had mercy on Qi Province. Since the cemetery to mourn King Hui was in the county seat, He assigned all the cities and towns east of Linyi that surrounded the cemetery to mourn King Hui to Shichuan Province, so that they could offer sacrifices to mourn King Hui.

古文：城阳景王章，齐悼惠王子，以硃虚侯与大臣共诛诸吕，而章身首先斩相国吕王产於未央宫。
现代文：城阳景王刘章，悼惠王的儿子，他凭借朱虚侯的身份与大臣共同诛灭诸吕，而刘章亲身在未央宫首先斩了相国吕王产。
English: Liu Zhang, the king of the city of Yangjing, mourned the son of Hui Wang. By virtue of his status as Zhu Hulong, he and the minister jointly annihilated Zhu Lv, and Liu Zhang himself was the first to cut off the Lv property of his country at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：孝文帝既立，益封章二千户，赐金千斤。
现代文：孝文帝即位后，加封刘章领地二千户，赏赐黄金千斤。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, he sealed 2,000 households in Liu Zhang's territory and rewarded them with one thousand jin of gold.

古文：孝文二年，以齐之城阳郡立章为城阳王。
现代文：文帝二年，以齐国的城阳郡封立刘章为城阳王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wen, Liu Zhang was enthroned as the King of Chengyang in Chengyang County, Qi Province.

古文：立二年卒，子喜立，是为共王。
现代文：齐章在位二年去世，他的儿子刘喜即位，这就是共王。
English: Qi Zhang died two years into his reign, and his son Liu Xi ascended to the throne. This is a co-king.

古文：共王八年，徙王淮南。
现代文：共王八年，改封为淮南王。
English: Eight years later, he was given the title of King of Huainan.

古文：四年，复还王城阳。
现代文：四年以后，又回来做城阳王。
English: Four years later, he came back to be the king of the city.

古文：凡三十三年卒，子延立，是为顷王。
现代文：在位共三十三年去世，他的儿子刘延即位，这就是顷王。
English: He died after reigning for a total of thirty-three years, and his son Liu Yan ascended to the throne. This is King He.

古文：顷王二十年卒，子义立，是为敬王。
现代文：顷王在位二十六年去世，儿子刘义即位，这就是敬王。
English: He Wang died in the 26th year of his reign, and his son Liu Yi ascended to the throne. This was the beginning of Wang Jing.

古文：敬王九年卒，子武立，是为惠王。
现代文：敬王在位九年去世，儿子刘武即位，这就是惠王。
English: King Kei died nine years into his reign, and his son Liu Wu ascended the throne. This is King Hui.

古文：惠王十一年卒，子顺立，是为荒王。
现代文：惠王在位十一年去世，儿子刘顺即位，这就是荒王。
English: Hui Wang died in the eleventh year of his reign, and his son Liu Shun ascended to the throne. This is the king of chaos.

古文：荒王四十六年卒，子恢立，是为戴王。
现代文：荒王在位四十六年去世，儿子刘恢即位，这就是戴王。
English: King Ara died in the 46th year of his reign, and his son Liu Hui ascended to the throne. This is King Dai.

古文：戴王八年卒，子景立，至建始三年，十五岁，卒。
现代文：戴王在位八年去世，儿子刘景即位，到建始三年，十五岁去世。
English: King Dai died eight years into his reign, and his son Liu Jing ascended to the throne. He died at the age of fifteen, three years after the founding of the dynasty.

古文：济北王兴居，齐悼惠王子，以东牟侯助大臣诛诸吕，功少。
现代文：济北王刘兴居，齐悼惠王的儿子，他以东牟侯的身份协助大臣诛灭诸吕，功劳不大。
English: Liu Xingju, the king of Jibei, mourned Hui Wang's son, who, in his capacity as Dong Mou Hou, assisted the minister in eliminating Zhu Lyu, with little merit.

古文：及文帝从代来，兴居曰： 请与太仆婴入清宫。 
现代文：等文帝从代国来到长安，兴居说： 请让我和太仆夏侯婴入宫清除余患。 
English: When Emperor Wen came to Chang'an from the representing country, Xingju said, "Please let me and my servant Xia Houyi enter the palace to remove the remaining troubles."

古文：废少帝，共与大臣尊立孝文帝。
现代文：接着废黜少帝刘弘，与大共同尊立孝文帝。
English: Then, Emperor Liu Hong was deposed and Emperor Xiaowen was enthroned.

古文：孝文帝二年，以齐之济北郡立兴居为济北王，与城阳王俱立。
现代文：孝文帝二年，以齐国的济北郡封立兴居为济北王，与城阳王同时受封。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Xingju of Jibei County, Qi Province, was given the title of King of Jibei, at the same time as King of Chengyang.

古文：立二年，反。
现代文：受封两年后，刘兴居反叛。
English: Two years after receiving the title, Liu Xingju rebelled.

古文：始大臣诛吕氏时，硃虚侯功尤大，许尽以赵地王硃虚侯，尽以梁地王东牟侯。
现代文：起初大臣诛灭吕氏的时候，朱虚侯的功劳最大，曾答应把赵地全部封给朱虚侯为王，把梁地全部封给东牟侯为王。
English: At the beginning, when Minister Zou annihilated the Lü clan, Zhu Xuhong's greatest contribution was the crown. He had promised to make Zhu Xuhong the king of all of Zhao and Dong Mou the king of all of Liang.

古文：及孝文帝立，闻硃虚、东牟之初欲立齐王，故绌其功。
现代文：到孝文即位后，听说朱虚侯、东牟侯起初想立齐王为帝，所以削减了他们的功劳。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, it was said that Zhu Xuhong and Dong Mouhou initially wanted to make King Qi the emperor, so their merits were reduced.

古文：及二年，王诸子，乃割齐二郡以王章、兴居。
现代文：到文帝二年，孝文帝分封自己的儿子们为王，才划出齐国的两个郡封刘章、齐兴居为王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wen, Emperor Xiaowen made his sons the kings of the two counties of Qi, Liu Zhang and Qi Xingju.

古文：章、兴居自以失职夺功。
现代文：刘章、刘兴居认为失去了应得的赵王、梁王之位，剥夺了他们的功劳。
English: Liu Zhang and Liu Xingju believe that they have lost the deserved throne of Zhao Wang and Liang Wang, and have been deprived of their merits.

古文：章死，而兴居闻匈奴大入汉，汉多发兵，使丞相灌婴击之，文帝亲幸太原，以为天子自击胡，遂发兵反於济北。
现代文：刘章死后，刘兴居听说匈奴大举侵汉，汉朝大量发兵，派丞相灌婴领兵反击，文帝亲自到太原，兴居以为天子亲自领兵反击匈奴，于是就起兵在济北反叛。
English: After Liu Zhang's death, Liu Xingju heard that the Xiongnu had invaded Han in a big way, the Han Dynasty had sent a large number of troops, and Emperor Wen personally went to Taiyuan to lead the counterattack. Xingju thought that the Son of Heaven personally led the counterattack against the Xiongnu, so he rebelled in Jibei.

古文：天子闻之，罢丞相及行兵，皆归长安。
现代文：天子听说后，立即下令丞相所率军队和已经出发的军队停止前进，让他们都回长安。
English: After hearing this, the emperor immediately ordered the army led by the prime minister and the army that had already set out to stop advancing and let them all return to Chang'an.

古文：使棘蒲侯柴将军击破虏济北王，王自杀，地入于汉，为郡。
现代文：派棘蒲侯柴将军打败并俘虏了济北王，济北王自杀，封地归入朝廷，改为郡。
English: General Pu Houchai defeated and captured the King of Jibei, the King of Jibei committed suicide, and the fief was incorporated into the imperial court and changed to a county.

古文：後十年，文帝十六年，复以齐悼惠王子安都侯志为济北王。
现代文：十三年以后，文帝十六年，又封齐悼惠王的儿子安都侯刘志为济北王。
English: Thirteen years later, in the 16th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Liu Zhi, the son of Anduk, was named the king of Jibei.

古文：十一年，吴楚反时，志坚守，不与诸侯合谋。
现代文：过了十一年，吴、楚谋反的时候，刘志始终坚守城池，不与七国诸侯合谋作乱。
English: Eleven years later, when Wu and Chu plotted a rebellion, Liu Zhi always stood firm and did not conspire with the princes of the Seven Kingdoms.

古文：吴楚已平，徙志王菑川。
现代文：吴、楚叛乱平定以后，天子改封刘志为菑川王。
English: After the Wu and Chu rebellions were quelled, Tianzi changed his name to Liu Zhi and became the king of the Li River.

古文：济南王辟光，齐悼惠王子，以勒侯孝文十六年为济南王。
现代文：济南王刘辟光，齐悼惠王的儿子，以勒侯的身份在孝文帝十六年被封为济南王。
English: Liu Biguang, the king of Jinan, mourns the death of Hui Wang's son, who was crowned the king of Jinan in the sixteenth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：十一年，与吴楚反。
现代文：十一年后，与吴王、楚王一同叛乱。
English: Eleven years later, he rebelled together with King Wu and King Chu.

古文：汉击破，杀辟光，以济南为郡，地入于汉。
现代文：汉军打败叛军，杀死刘辟光，把济南设为郡，封地归入汉朝廷。
English: The Han army defeated the rebels, killed Liu Biguang, set up Jinan as a county, and incorporated the fief into the Han court.

古文：菑川王贤，齐悼惠王子，以武城侯文帝十六年为菑川王。
现代文：菑川王刘贤，齐悼惠王的儿子，文帝十六年，由武城侯晋封为菑川王。
English: Liu Xian, the king of Hechuan, mourned the death of his son Hui Wang. In the 16th year of Emperor Wen's reign, he was crowned king of Hechuan by the prince of Wucheng.

古文：十一年，与吴楚反，汉击破，杀贤。
现代文：十一年后，与吴王、楚王一同反叛。汉军打败叛军，杀死了刘贤。
English: Eleven years later, he rebelled together with King Wu and King Chu. The Han army defeated the rebels and killed Liu Xian.

古文：天子因徙济北王志王菑川。
现代文：天子因而徙封济北王刘志为菑川王。
English: As a result, Heaven's Son transferred Liu Zhi, the Northern King of Jiefu, to be the King of Shichuan.

古文：志亦齐悼惠王子，以安都侯王济北。
现代文：刘志也是齐悼惠王的儿子，天子将他由安都侯晋封为济北王。
English: Liu Zhi was also the son of Qiye Hui Wang, who was promoted by Heaven's Son from the Marquis of Andu to the King of Jibei.

古文：菑川王反，毋後，乃徙济北王王菑川。
现代文：菑川王刘贤叛乱，没有后代，就把济北王改封为菑川王。
English: When Liu Xian, the King of Hechuan rebelled and had no descendants, he changed the title of King of Jibei to King of Hechuan.

古文：凡立三十五年卒，谥为懿王。
现代文：菑川王共在位三十五年去世，谥号是懿王。
English: King Hezekiah reigned for thirty-five years before he died, and his nickname was King Hezekiah.

古文：子建代立，是为靖王。
现代文：他的儿子刘建继承王位，这就是靖王。
English: His son Liu Jian succeeded to the throne, and this is the Jingwang.

古文：二十年卒，子遗代立，是为顷王。
现代文：靖王在位二十年去世，他的儿子刘遗继承王位，这就是顷王。
English: King Jing died after twenty years on the throne, and his son Liu He succeeded to the throne. This is King He.

古文：三十六年卒，子终古立，是为思王。
现代文：顷王在位三十六年去世，他的儿子刘终古即位，这就是思王。
English: He Wang died in the thirty-sixth year of his reign, and his son Liu Zenggu ascended to the throne. This is Si Wang.

古文：二十八年卒，子尚立，是为孝王。
现代文：思王在位二十八年去世，他的儿子刘尚即位，这就是孝王。
English: King Si died in the 28th year of his reign, and his son Liu Shang ascended to the throne. This is King Xiaowang.

古文：五年卒，子横立，至建始三年，十一岁，卒。
现代文：孝王在位五年去世，他的儿子刘横即位，到建始三年，在位十一年去世。
English: Prince Xiaowang died five years into his reign, and his son Liu Yang ascended the throne. He died three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China and eleven years into his reign.

古文：胶西王卬，齐悼惠王子，以昌平侯文帝十六年为胶西王。
现代文：胶西王刘卬，齐悼惠王的儿子，文帝十六年，由昌平侯晋封为胶西王。
English: Liu Ye, the King of Jiaoxi, mourns the death of Hui Wang's son, who was crowned King of Jiaoxi by Prince Changping in the 16th year of Emperor Wen's reign.

古文：十一年，与吴楚反。
现代文：十一年后，与吴王、楚王一同反叛。
English: Eleven years later, he rebelled together with King Wu and King Chu.

古文：汉击破，杀卬，地入于汉，为胶西郡。
现代文：汉军打败叛军，杀死刘卬，封地归入汉朝廷，改为胶西郡。
English: The Han army defeated the rebels, killed Liu Bei, and the fief was incorporated into the Han imperial court and changed to Jiaoxi County.

古文：胶东王雄渠，齐悼惠王子，以白石侯文帝十六年为胶东王。
现代文：胶东王刘雄渠，齐悼惠王的儿子，文帝十六年，由白石侯晋封为胶东王。
English: Liu Xiongqiu, the King of Jiaodong, was crowned King of Jiaodong by Prince Shiraishi in the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Wen, the son of King Hui.

古文：十一年，与吴楚反，汉击破，杀雄渠，地入于汉，为胶东郡。
现代文：十一年后，与吴王、楚王一同反叛，汉军打败叛军，杀死雄渠，封地归入汉朝廷，改为胶东郡。
English: Eleven years later, he rebelled together with King Wu and King Chu. The Han army defeated the rebels, killed Xiong Qu, and the fief was incorporated into the Han imperial court and changed to Jiaodong County.

古文：太史公曰：诸侯大国无过齐悼惠王。
现代文：太史公曰：诸侯中的大国没有超过齐悼惠王的。
English: Prince Taishi said, "Among the princes, no great power has ever mourned Hui Wang in greater numbers."

古文：以海内初定，子弟少，激秦之无尺土封，故大封同姓，以填万民之心。
现代文：由于天下刚刚平定，刘氏子弟较少，汉天子感于秦朝对宗亲没有封给尺寸土地，所以就大封同姓族人，以此来镇抚万民之心。
English: As the country had just been pacified, there were fewer sons and daughters of the Liu clan, and the Han Emperor felt that the Qin Dynasty did not grant land to the patriarchs, so he granted land to people of the same surname, in order to appease the hearts of the people.

古文：及後分裂，固其理也。
现代文：到后来被分裂为几国，本来也是理所当然的。
English: The fact that it was later divided into several countries was also a matter of course.

