古文：柳泽，蒲州解人。
现代文：柳泽，蒲州解县人。
English: Yanagisawa, a native of Puzhou County.

古文：曾祖亨，字嘉礼，隋大业末，为王屋长，陷李密，已而归京师。
现代文：曾祖父名亨，别名嘉礼，隋炀帝大业末年，在王屋县任长，县城被李密攻陷，事后投奔长安。
English: The great-grandfather Mengheng, alias Jiali, served as the governor of Wangya County in the last years of the Sui and Qian Dynasties. The county seat was captured by Li Mi, and he later fled to Chang'an.

古文：姿貌魁异，高祖奇之，以外孙窦妻之。
现代文：柳亨仪态容貌魁梧特别，高祖李渊认为他是优异人才，把外孙女窦氏嫁给他为妻。
English: Liu Heng's manner and appearance were particularly burly. The great-grandfather Li Yuan considered him to be an outstanding talent and married his granddaughter Dou to him.

古文：三迁左卫中郎将，寿陵县男。
现代文：连提三次任左卫中郎将，封寿陵县男。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left Division of Middle Palace Guards for the third time in succession, and became the man of Shurei County.

古文：以罪贬邛州刺史，进散骑常侍。
现代文：因获罪贬为邛州刺史，又升任散骑常侍。
English: As a result of his conviction, he was demoted to the status of a provincial official and promoted to the rank of samurai.

古文：代还，数年不得调。
现代文：被别人接替回家后，几年不被任用。
English: After being replaced by someone else and returning home, he was not appointed for several years.

古文：持兄丧，方葬，会太宗幸南山，因得召见，哀之。
现代文：主持哥哥的丧事，正安葬时，碰上太宗李世民巡视终南山，因而得到召见，太宗怜悯他。
English: Presiding over his brother's funeral, when he was being buried, he came across the Taizong Li Shimin inspecting the final Nanshan, and thus was summoned to see him. The Taizong pitied him.

古文：数日，入对北门，拜光禄少卿。
现代文：几天后，到禁军中进行了复查，授予他光禄少卿头衔。
English: A few days later, a re-examination was carried out in the forbidden army, and he was awarded the title of Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：亨射猎无检，帝谓曰： 卿于朕旧且亲，然多交游，自今宜少戒。 
现代文：柳亨骑射打猎没个限度，太宗说道： 你和我既是朋友又是亲戚，但你交朋结友太多了，从今以后应当稍微克制。 
English: "You and I are both friends and relatives, but you have made too many friends. From now on, you should exercise a little restraint."

古文：亨由是痛饬厉，谢宾客，身安静素，力吏事。
现代文：柳亨从此极为警觉努力，不会宾客，生活宁静简朴，尽力办好公务。
English: Since then, Liu Heng has been extremely vigilant and diligent, not accepting guests, living a quiet and simple life, and doing his best to do a good job.

古文：终检校岐州刺史，赠礼部尚书、幽州都督，谥曰恭。
现代文：在检校岐州刺史任上去世，追认为礼部尚书、幽州都督，谥号为 恭 。
English: He died at the post of inspector of schools in Qizhou, and was posthumously regarded as a scholar of etiquette, governor of Yuzhou, and his nickname was Yuanzhong.

古文：泽耿介少言笑，风度方严。
现代文：柳泽光明正大不苟言笑，仪容气度方正严肃。
English: Yanagisawa Komyosho is very serious and his demeanor is serious.

古文：景云中，为右率府铠曹参军，四岁不迁。
现代文：睿宗景云年间，任右率府铠曹参军，四年没有提拔。
English: During the years of Ruizong Jingyun, he was appointed to the right to lead the government to join the army, and he was not promoted for four years.

古文：先是，中宗时，长宁、宜城、定安诸公主及后女弟、昭容上官与其母郑、尚宫柴、陇西夫人赵及姻联数十族，皆能降墨敕授官，号斜封。
现代文：在此之前，中宗李显在位期间，长宁公主、宜城公主、定安公主等以及韦皇后的妹妹絣国夫人、昭容上官婉儿和她的母亲郑氏、尚宫柴氏、陇西夫人赵氏以及姻亲几十个家族，都能要中宗亲笔书写诏令直接授予官职，称为斜封。
English: Prior to this, during the reign of Chuzong Li Xian, Princess Changning, Princess Yicheng and Princess Ding'an, as well as Queen Wei's younger sister Lady Zeng Guo, Zhaoyong Shangguan Wan'er and her mother Zheng, Shangguang Chai, Lady Zhao of Shaanxi, and dozens of in-law families, were able to have Chuzong personally write the imperial decree to directly grant official positions, known as oblique seals.

古文：及姚元崇、宋璟辅政，白罢斜封官数千员。
现代文：到姚崇、宋瞡辅佐朝政时，征得睿宗同意，罢免了斜封的官员几千名。
English: By the time of Yao Chong and Song Bingfu, assistants to the imperial court, they had obtained the consent of Emperor Ruizong and dismissed several thousand officials who had oblique seals.

古文：元崇等罢去，太平公主尽奏复之。
现代文：姚崇等人罢官离开朝廷后，太平公主奏请又将斜封官员全部复职。
English: After Yao Chong and others were dismissed from the imperial court, Princess Taiping requested that all officials with oblique seals be reinstated.

古文：泽诣阙上疏曰：臣闻药不毒不可以蠲疾，词不切不可以补过。
现代文：柳泽进宫呈递奏疏说： 我听说药剂不毒就不能消除疾病，话不急切就不能补救过失。
English: Yanagisawa entered the palace and presented his report, saying, "I have heard that if the medicine is not poisonous, the disease cannot be eliminated, and if the words are not urgent, the fault cannot be remedied.

古文：故习甘旨者，非摄养之方；迩谀佞者，非治安之宜。
现代文：所以讲究美味佳肴，不是保养身体的办法；愿听阿谀奉承，与政治清明国家安定不合适。
English: Therefore, being particular about delicious food is not a way to maintain one's health; being willing to listen to flattery is not compatible with a politically clean and stable country.

古文：臣窃见神龙以来，纲纪大坏，内宠专命，外嬖制权，因贵凭势，卖官鬻爵。
现代文：我私下看到中宗神龙以来，法纪遭到严重破坏，受宠的妃嫔为所欲为，受宠的臣子把持权柄，倚仗地位权势，出售官职爵位。
English: Privately, I have seen that since the rise of the Chinese Dragon God, legal discipline has been seriously undermined, favored concubines do whatever they want, favored courtiers hold power, rely on status and power, and sell official posts and titles.

古文：妃主之门同商贾然，举选之署若阛阓然，屠贩者由邪忝官，废黜者因奸冒进。
现代文：妃嫔公主如同商人，吏部衙门好像商店，屠户商贩经由邪门歪道混到官职，罢官免职的人凭借倒行逆施抬高名声。
English: The concubine princess is like a merchant, the gate of the cadre department is like a shop, the butcher's shop is a crooked way to get into the official position, and the person who is dismissed from the official position has a high reputation by virtue of going backwards.

古文：天下溷乱，几危社稷，赖陛下聪明神武，拯溺举坠。
现代文：天下混乱，差点儿使国家政权蒙受危害，靠着陛下聪颖明察神圣威严，拯救水深火热之中的百姓，撑起行将崩塌的局面。
English: With the world in turmoil, the national regime was on the verge of peril. With the help of His Majesty's wisdom and divine majesty, he saved the people in the midst of the turmoil and propped up the situation that was about to collapse.

古文：耳目所亲，岂可忘鉴诫哉？
现代文：这些都是陛下亲自见到听到的，怎能忘掉教训呢？
English: His Majesty has seen and heard all this for himself. How could he forget the lesson?

古文：且斜封官者，皆仆妾私谒，迷谬先帝，岂尽先帝意邪？
现代文：再说斜封官吏这种事情，都是奴婢妃嫔私下请求嘱托，迷惑先帝，哪里都是先帝的本意呢？
English: Furthermore, the oblique seal of officials and such things are all slaves and concubines secretly asking for entrustment, confusing the former emperor, where is the original intention of the former emperor?

古文：陛下即位之初，用元崇等计，悉以停废，今又收用之。
现代文：陛下刚登帝位时，采纳姚崇等人的意见，全部废止了，现在又起用他们。
English: When His Majesty ascended the throne, he adopted the opinions of Yao Chong and others and abolished all of them. Now he is using them again.

古文：若斜封之人不可弃邪，韦月将、燕钦融不应褒赠，李多祚、郑克义不容荡雪也。
现代文：如果斜封的官吏不能抛弃，那么韦月将、燕钦融就不应该表彰追封，李多祚、郑克耣就不允许平反昭雪。
English: If officials with oblique seals cannot be discarded, then Wei Yue Zheng and Yan Qin Rong should not be awarded the seal, and Li Duoxuan and Zheng Keqian should not be allowed to rehabilitate Zhao Xue.

古文：陛下何不能忍于此而能忍于彼，使善恶混并，反覆相攻，道人以非，劝人以僻。
现代文：陛下为何对这些人不能容忍而对那些人又能容忍？使得善恶混淆，变动无常互相指责，用错误引导人们，用偏邪鼓励人们。
English: Why does Your Majesty not tolerate these people, but tolerates those who confuse good with evil, accuse each other of being fickle, lead people astray, and encourage them with their perversions?

古文：今天下咸称太平公主与胡僧慧范以此误陛下，故语曰： 姚、宋为相，邪不如正；太平用事，正不如邪。 
现代文：现在全国臣民都说太平公主同胡人和尚慧范在这个方面贻误了陛下，所以有顺口溜说 ：姚崇、宋瞡当宰相，邪气不如正气旺；太平公主掌权柄，正气不如邪气强。 
English: Now the subjects of the whole country are saying that Princess Taiping, Tong Hu and Shang Hui Fan have all failed His Majesty in this respect, so there is a running joke: When Yao Chong and Song Tao are prime ministers, the evil spirit is not as strong as the righteous spirit; when Princess Taiping is in power, the righteous spirit is not as strong as the evil spirit.

古文：臣恐流近致远，积小为大，轻微成高。
现代文：我担心谬误越传越远，祸患越积越大，危险越累越高。
English: I am afraid that the fallacy will spread farther and farther, the disaster will accumulate more and more, and the danger will become more and more serious.

古文：勿谓何伤，其祸将长；勿谓何害，其祸将大。
现代文：别说没什么损伤，它的祸患将会增长；别说没什么可怕，它的祸患将会增大。 
English: Let it not be said that there is no hurt, but its woe will increase; let it not be said that there is no fear, but its woe will increase.

古文：又言：尚医奉御彭君庆以巫觋小伎超授三品，奈何轻用名器，加非其人？
现代文：又说： 尚医奉御彭君庆凭着求神治病的小小技艺，破格授予三品高官，怎能轻率地把声望名位授予不该授予的人？
English: He also said: Doctor Shang Bongyu Peng Junqing, with his small skill of seeking God to cure diseases, awarded three prizes to high-ranking officials in an unprecedented way. How can he carelessly award a prestigious title to someone who should not be awarded?

古文：臣闻赏一人而千万人悦者，赏之；罚一人而千万人劝者，罚之。
现代文：我听说奖励一个人能使千万人高兴，就奖励；处罚一个人能使千万人警醒，就处罚。
English: I heard that if a person can make thousands of people happy, he should be rewarded; if a person can make thousands of people alert, he should be punished.

古文：惟陛下裁察。
现代文：请陛下裁断明察。 
English: Your Majesty, please make a clear judgment.

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏呈递上去后，没有答复。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：泽入调，会有诏选者得言事。
现代文：柳泽调进了朝廷，碰上诏令候选官员必须谈论朝政。
English: Yanagisawa was transferred to the imperial court, and when confronted with the imperial edict, candidate officials had to talk about imperial politics.

古文：乃上书曰：顷者韦氏蛊乱，奸臣同恶，政以贿成，官以宠进，言正者获戾，行殊者见疑，海内寒心，人用不保。
现代文：就上书说： 不久前韦氏迷惑君主扰乱朝政，奸臣狼狈为奸，政务靠贿赂办理，官职靠宠幸提拔，刚正直言的遭处罚，操行卓越的被忌恨，天下臣民都心惊胆颤，人人感到生命没有保障。
English: Regarding the petition, it said: Not long ago, the Wei clan confused the monarch and disrupted the government, the treacherous vassals were dismayed, the government affairs were handled by bribery, the official positions were promoted by favor, the honest ones were punished, the excellent ones were hated, the subjects all over the world were terrified, and everyone felt that their lives were not guaranteed.

古文：陛下神圣勇智，安宗社于已危，振黎苗之将溺。
现代文：陛下圣明威严智慧，使摇摇欲坠的江山安全稳定，使水深火热的民众得到拯救。
English: His majesty's sacred majesty and wisdom made the crumbling country safe and stable, and saved the people who were in deep water.

古文：乃今蠲烦省徭，法明德举，万邦恺乐，室家胥欢。
现代文：如今免除耗费减省劳役，严明法纪普施恩德，万国和乐，家家欢快。
English: Today, we are exempt from consumption, reduce consumption, save labor, strictly enforce laws, promote charity, make the world a better place, and make everyone happy.

古文：《诗》曰： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 无不有个好的开头，很少能有好的结尾。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Everyone has a good beginning, but few have a good ending.

古文：惟陛下慎厥初，脩其终。
现代文：希望陛下开头慎重，结尾圆满。
English: I hope His Majesty will begin with caution and end with success.

古文：《书》曰： 惟德罔小，万邦惟庆；惟不德罔大，坠厥宗。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 只要施予恩德不分大小，万国都会喜庆；只要道德败坏不分轻重，都会丧失江山。 
English: "Shangshu" said: As long as there is benevolence regardless of size, all countries will celebrate; as long as there is moral corruption regardless of severity, all countries will be lost.

古文：甚可惧也。
现代文：很是值得警惕的。
English: It's something to be wary of.

古文：夫骄奢起于亲贵，纲纪乱于宠幸。
现代文： 骄横奢侈是从皇亲贵戚滋长的，国法政纪是被宠妃幸臣破坏的。
English: Arrogance and extravagance are bred from the emperor's relatives, and the country's laws and regulations are destroyed by the favorite of the empress.

古文：禁之于亲贵，则天下从；制之于宠幸，则天下畏。
现代文：禁止皇亲贵戚骄横奢侈，那么天下臣民就会追随；制裁宠妃幸臣破坏法纪，那么天下臣民就会敬重。
English: If imperial relatives and relatives are prohibited from arrogance and extravagance, then the world's subjects will follow suit; if a favorite princess is sanctioned for breaking the law, then the world's subjects will respect her.

古文：亲贵为而不禁，宠幸挠而不制，故政不常，令不一，则奸诈起而暴乱生焉，虽朝施暮戮，而法不行矣。
现代文：皇亲贵戚滋长骄横奢侈却不禁止，宠妃幸臣破坏法纪却不制裁，所以政治措施不能坚持，行政法令不能统一，那么奸诈就会滋长，暴乱就会产生，即使从早到晚地惩治，但法纪还是不能推行了。
English: Imperial relatives and dignitaries breed arrogance and extravagance, but do not prohibit them, and favorite princesses and ministers destroy laws and regulations, but do not impose sanctions. Therefore, political measures cannot be upheld, and administrative decrees cannot be unified. Then, treachery will grow, and riots will occur. Even if punishments are carried out from morning to night, laws and regulations still cannot be enforced.

古文：陛下欲亲与爱，莫若安之福之。
现代文：陛下想要亲近喜爱他们，不如使他们安全幸福。
English: If your majesty would have them near and dear, let them be safe and happy.

古文：夫宠禄之过，罪之阶也，谓安之邪？
现代文：恩宠利禄过分了，是为他们走向犯罪提供阶台，能说是为他们保障安全吗？
English: Is it too much to say that it provides a stepping-stone for them to commit crimes, can it be said that it ensures their safety?

古文：骄奢之淫，危之梯也，谓福之邪？
现代文：骄纵奢侈过分了，是为他们陷入危险提供梯子，能说是为他们创造幸福吗？
English: Is it too much of an extravagance to offer them a ladder out of danger, say, and into happiness?

古文：前事不忘，后之师也。
现代文：历史教训没有忘记，就是现在待人处事的借鉴。
English: If we do not forget the lessons of history, we can learn from them in dealing with others.

古文：陛下敷求俊哲，使朝夕纳诲。
现代文：陛下广泛地寻找德才杰出的人，让他们成天提供指导意见。
English: His Majesty searches far and wide for the best and brightest to guide him on a daily basis.

古文：其有逆于耳、谬于心者，无速罚，姑求之道；顺于耳、便于身者，无急赏，姑求之非道。
现代文：其中有些不顺耳、不合意的意见，不要立即处罚，暂且从中吸取正确的方面，有些听着舒服、有利于自己的话，不要立即奖赏，暂且考虑不正确的方面。
English: Some of them are not pleasing to the ear, do not agree with the opinions, do not immediately punish, temporarily absorb the correct aspects from them, some are comfortable to listen to, beneficial to their own words, do not immediately reward, temporarily consider the incorrect aspects.

古文：羞淫巧者拒之，则淫巧息；进忠谠者赏之，则忠谠进。
现代文：对进献过度奇巧技艺的予以拒绝，那么过度奇巧的技艺就会停息；对进献忠诚正直意见的予以奖赏，那么忠诚正直的意见就会奉献。
English: Reject the offering of extravagant skill, and extravagant skill will cease; reward the offering of loyal and honest opinion, and loyal and honest opinion will cease.

古文：臣闻生于富者骄，生于贵者傲。
现代文： 我听说生长于富豪人家的子弟骄纵，生长于显贵人家的子弟傲慢。
English: I've heard it said that children born into wealthy families are arrogant, and children born into aristocratic families are arrogant.

古文：《书》曰： 罔淫于逸，罔游于乐。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 不要过分安逸，不要过度欢乐。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Don't be too comfortable, don't be too happy.

古文：今储宫肇建，王府复启，愿采温良、博闻、恭俭、忠鲠者为之僚友，仍请东宫置拾遗、补阙，使朝夕讲论，出入侍从，授以训诰，交修不逮。臣又闻 驰骋畋猎，令人发狂 。
现代文：现在皇太子刚刚册立，各亲王也定了名位，希望选择温和善良、见多识广、恭敬谦逊、忠诚耿直的人跟他们当幕僚朋友，还希望在东宫委任拾遗、补阙官吏，让他们早晚讲解论述，进出侍奉陪伴，教授有关训诰文书的知识，一起研习不懂的学问。 我还看到《老子》里说： 捕兽打猎，使人发疯。 
English: Now that the crown prince has just been enthroned, and the princes have also set their ranks, I hope to choose people who are gentle, kind, knowledgeable, respectful, humble, and loyal to be their staff and friends. I also hope to appoint officials in the East Palace to collect relics and replenish the coffers, so that they can explain the exposition in the morning and evening, accompany the servants in and out, teach the knowledge of the training and training documents, and study the unknown knowledge together. I also saw that "Lao Zi" said: "Beast hunting makes people crazy."

古文：今贵戚打球击鼓，飞鹰奔犬，狎比宵人，盘游薮泽。《书》曰： 内作色荒，外作禽荒。 
现代文：现在权贵外戚打球敲鼓，唤鹰叱狗，跟小人一起嬉戏，在沼泽留连娱乐，正如《尚书》所说： 在宫内迷乱于女色，在宫外沉迷于畋猎。 
English: Now the powerful relatives of the nobility are playing ball, beating drums, calling eagles to scold dogs, playing with villains, and staying in the swamp for entertainment. As "Shang Shu" said: In the palace, they are confused by women's beauty, and outside the palace, they are addicted to hunting.

古文：惟陛下诞降谋训，劝以学业，示之以好恶，陈之以成败，则长享福禄矣。
现代文：希望陛下亲自教导，鼓励他们好好学习，向他们讲明爱憎的界线，论述成败的原因，那么就能永远享有福份禄位了。
English: I hope that His Majesty will personally teach them, encourage them to study hard, teach them the boundaries of love and hate, and discuss the reasons for success and failure, so that they can always enjoy the blessing.

古文：臣闻 富不与骄期而骄自至，骄不与罪期而罪自至，罪不与死期而死自至 。
现代文： 我听说 富贵的人并没刻意骄纵而骄纵自然形成，骄纵的人没有想到犯罪而罪过自然产生，犯罪的人并不希望死亡而死亡自然到来 。
English: I have heard it said that the rich are not deliberately arrogant, but that their arrogance comes naturally; that the arrogant do not think of committing crimes, but that their crimes come naturally; and that the criminals do not want to die, but that death comes naturally.

古文：顷韦庶人、安乐公主、武延秀等可谓贵且宠矣，权侔人主，威震天下。
现代文：不久前韦庶人、安乐公主、武延秀等人可以说是又尊贵又荣耀了，权势等同国君，威风震撼天下。
English: Not long ago, Wei Shizhen, Anle Princess, Wu Yanxiu and others could be said to be both noble and glorious, with power equal to that of the sovereign, and their power shook the world.

古文：然怙侈灭德，神怒人弃，岂不谓爱之太极、富之太多乎？ 殷鉴不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：但仗势骄纵丧失德性，神灵恼怒人民唾弃，岂不是宠爱、恩赐得太过分吗？商朝的鉴戒并不遥远，就在夏桀的灭亡。
English: But isn't it too much to be loved and favored, to be arrogant and lose one's virtue, to anger the gods and be spurned by the people? The admonition of the Shang Dynasty is not far away, it is in the destruction of the Xia dynasty.

古文：今陛下何劝？
现代文：现在陛下提倡什么？
English: What is His Majesty advocating now?

古文：其皇祖谋训之则乎！
现代文：大概是皇祖唐尧建立教导的法则吧！
English: It was probably Emperor Tang Xuan who established the rules for teaching!

古文：陛下何惩？
现代文：陛下反对什么？
English: What does Your Majesty object to?

古文：其孝和宠任之失乎！
现代文：大概是孝和皇帝宠信奸佞的失误吧！
English: It was probably a mistake on the part of the emperor's favorite and trusted son-in-law.

古文：故爱而知其恶，憎而知其善。
现代文：所以对喜爱的人要了解他的毛病，对厌恶的人要了解他的优点。
English: Therefore, we should understand the faults of those we like and the merits of those we dislike.

古文：夫宠爱之心未有能免，要去其太甚，闲之以礼，则可矣。
现代文：宠爱亲信的心理还没有人能够避免，关键是要避免过分，用礼仪进行制约，那就行了。
English: No one has yet been able to avoid the psychology of pampering relatives. The key is to avoid excesses and use etiquette to exercise restraint. That will do.

古文：诸王、公主、驸马，陛下之所亲爱也，矫枉监戒，宜在厥初，使居宠思危，观过务善。
现代文：各位亲王、公主、驸马，是陛下的亲人，纠正错误严加教育，应该从头做起，让他们身处尊荣警惕危险，检查过失致力于行善。
English: Princes, princesses, and equerries, who are your majesty's relatives, should correct their mistakes and be strictly educated. They should start from scratch, let them live in honor, be alert to danger, check their mistakes, and devote themselves to doing good.

古文：《书》曰： 三风十愆，卿士有一于身，家必丧，邦君有一于身，国心亡。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 在喜爱舞蹈、歌唱的巫风，贪求财物、女色、游乐、畋猎的淫风，轻慢圣贤的教诲、违背忠正的准则、疏远德高望重的老者、亲近愚昧无知的小人的乱风这三类歪风十种恶习当中，公卿大夫染上一种，家族必然衰败，国家君主染上一种，江山必然丧失。 
English: "Shangshu" said: "Among the three types of ten vices, the witch wind of liking dancing and singing, the lust wind of coveting wealth, womanizing, amusement, and hunting, the teachings of the saints and sages, the principles of loyalty, the alienation of the elderly with high moral values, and the close proximity of the foolish and ignorant, the noble doctor is infected with one, the family is bound to decline, the country's monarch is infected with one, and the country is bound to lose.

古文：惟陛下黜奢僭骄怠，进朴素行业，以勖其非心。
现代文：希望陛下清除奢侈越权骄横懈怠，奖励俭朴节约德行功业，以便勉励他们洗心革面。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will eliminate extravagance, arrogance and laziness, and reward thrift and frugality, so as to encourage them to change their ways.

古文：臣闻 常厥德，保厥位；厥德匪常，九有以亡 。
现代文： 我听说 只有坚持德行，才能保全地位；德行不能坚持，十有八九会因此灭亡 。
English: I heard that only by adhering to virtue can one maintain one's position; if one cannot adhere to virtue, then in all likelihood one will perish.

古文：愿陛下不作无益，不启私门，不差刑，不滥赏，则惟德是辅，惟人之怀，天禄永终矣。
现代文：希望陛下别做对朝廷无益的事，不要打开行私请托的门路，刑罚不要出错，奖赏不要失当，那就做到了一心扶持德行，一心关怀百姓，天赐的福份禄位就永久无疆了。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not do anything that is not beneficial to the imperial court, will not open the door to favoritism, will not make mistakes in punishment, and will not reward inappropriately. Then you will have achieved the goal of supporting virtue and caring for the people, and the blessing of heaven will be forever boundless.

古文：睿宗善之，拜监察御史。
现代文：睿宗李旦认为奏疏很好，任命他为监察御史。
English: Ruizong Li Dan thought it was a good idea, and appointed him as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：开元中，转殿中侍御史，监岭南选。
现代文：玄宗开元中叶，柳泽改任殿中侍御中，到岭南监察选才任官的事。
English: In the middle of the first century of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Yanagisawa was reassigned to the position of a palace attendant, and went to Lingnan to supervise the appointment of officials.

古文：时市舶使、右威卫中郎将周庆立造奇器以进，泽上书曰：  不见可欲，使心不乱 ，是知见可欲而心必乱矣。
现代文：当时市舶使、右威卫中郎将周庆立制造奇特的器物进献玄宗，柳泽上书说：  不见迎合贪欲的东西，使得心性不被扰乱 ，这就可知看见迎合贪欲的东西心性必然混乱了。
English: At that time, the city's shipping envoy, Yu Wei Zhongro, presented Zhou Qingli's manufacturing of strange objects to the Xuanzong, and Yanuzawa wrote: There is nothing that caters to greed, so that the mind is not disturbed. This shows that when you see something that caters to greed, the mind is inevitably confused.

古文：庆立雕制诡物，造作奇器，用浮巧为珍玩，以谲怪为异宝，乃治国之巨蠹，明王所宜严罚者也。
现代文：周庆立雕刻怪异的东西，制造奇特的器物，把浮华工艺作为珍贵器玩，把怪诞异物作为稀世宝贝，这才是治理国家的大害，圣明的君主应当严厉惩罚的。
English: Zhou Qingli carves strange things, makes strange utensils, plays with flashy craftsmanship as a precious tool, and treats bizarre foreign objects as rare treasures. This is the great harm of governing the country, and the holy monarch should be severely punished.

古文：昔露台无费，明君不忍；象箸非大，忠臣愤叹。
现代文：西汉建筑露台需要一百金费用，圣明的文帝不忍心动工；商纣王用象牙筷子的事情并不大，忠臣箕子愤慨悲叹。
English: In Western Han Dynasty, the construction of a terrace required one hundred gold coins. The holy Emperor Wen could not bear to start the construction. The merchant King Yao used ivory chopsticks, which was not a big deal. The loyal vassal Yao Zi was indignant and lamented.

古文：庆立求媚圣意，摇荡上心。
现代文：周庆立希望讨得皇上欢心，扰乱皇上的心灵。
English: Zhou Qingli hoped to win the emperor's favor and disturb the emperor's mind.

古文：陛下信而使之乎，是宣淫于天下；庆立矫而为之乎，是禁典之所无赦。
现代文：是陛下授意让他制作的吗？这就是在天下臣民面前显露奢侈；是周庆立假托诏令制作的吗？这就是国家禁令不能赦免的了。
English: Was it His Majesty who ordered him to make it? This is a display of extravagance in front of the world's subjects; was it Zhou Qing who issued a fake edict? This is a state ban that cannot be pardoned.

古文：陛下新即位，固宜昭宣菲薄，广示节俭，岂可以怪好示四方哉！ 
现代文：陛下刚刚登位，本来应当鲜明地诏令简朴，广泛地显示节俭，怎能向天下表明怪癖的嗜好呢？ 
English: His Majesty has just ascended the throne, and he should have clearly decreed simplicity and widely displayed thrift. How can he show the world his eccentric hobbies?

古文：书奏，玄宗称善。
现代文：书函呈递上去，玄宗李隆基称赞说好。
English: The letter was submitted and praised by Xuanzong Li Longji.

古文：历迁太子右庶子。
现代文：升任太子右庶子。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：为郑州刺史，未行，卒，赠兵部侍郎。
现代文：被任命为郑州刺史，还没有动身，就去世了，追认为兵部侍郎。
English: He was appointed as Zhengzhou's chief historian, but died before he could leave, and was posthumously recognized as an attendant of the military department.

古文：泽从祖范、奭。
现代文：柳泽的伯叔祖父一位名范，一位名。
English: Yanagisawa's great-uncle's grandfather was a famous person.

古文：范，贞观中为侍御史，时吴王恪好田猎，范弹治之。
现代文：柳范，太宗贞观中叶任侍御史，当时吴王李恪喜爱打猎，柳范用弹压手段制止了他。
English: In the middle of the reign of Liu Fan and Taizong Zhenguan, when Wu Wang Li Ke was fond of hunting, Liu Fan restrained him by means of spring pressure.

古文：太宗曰： 权万纪不能辅道恪，罪当死。 
现代文：太宗说 ：权万纪不能辅助引导恪，应当处死。 
English: Taizong said: Guanmanji cannot help guide you, you should be put to death.

古文：范进曰： 房玄龄事陛下，犹不能谏止畋猎，岂宜独罪万纪？ 
现代文：柳范进言说： 房玄龄侍奉陛下，还不能谏止陛下打猎，哪能只给权万纪判罪？ 
English: Liu Fan Jinyan said, "Fang Xuanling served His Majesty, yet he could not stop His Majesty from hunting. How can he only condemn Guan Wanji?

古文：帝怒，拂衣起。
现代文：太宗发怒了，抖抖衣裳激动地站了起来。
English: Taizong was furious and stood up, his clothes shaking with emotion.

古文：顷之，召谓曰： 何廷折我？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，喊他来说道 ：怎么当众驳斥我？ 
English: After a while, he called him and said, "How can you refute me in public?"

古文：范谢曰： 主圣则臣直，陛下仁明，臣敢不尽愚？ 
现代文：柳范回答说 ：君主圣明臣子才会直言劝谏，陛下仁慈明智，我哪敢不和盘托出愚笨的想法？ 
English: Liu Fan replied, "It takes a monarch's saintly and wise minister to speak out, Your Majesty is kind and wise. How dare I not share my foolish thoughts with you?"

古文：帝乃解。
现代文：太宗这才消气。
English: That's when Taizong lost his temper.

古文：高宗时，历尚书右丞、扬州大都督府长史。
现代文：高宗李治时，他历任尚书右丞、扬州大都督府长史。
English: During the reign of Gaozong Li Zhi, he successively held the posts of Shang Shuxu Rongzheng and Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：奭字子邵。
现代文：柳别名子邵。
English: Liu alias Shao.

古文：以父隋时使高丽卒焉，故往迎丧，号踊尽哀，为夷人所慕。
现代文：因为父亲在隋朝时出使高丽死在那里，所以到高丽去接回灵柩，痛哭顿足极度悲痛，被高丽人仰慕。
English: Because her father sent her to Korea to die there during the Sui Dynasty, she went to Korea to pick up the coffin, wept bitterly and was greatly grieved, and was admired by the Korean people.

古文：贞观中，累迁中书舍人。
现代文：太宗贞观中叶，一直升任到中书舍人。
English: In the middle of Taizong Zhenguan, he was promoted to the position of the secretary.

古文：外孙为皇后，迁中书侍郎，进中书令。
现代文：外孙女当了皇后，他升任中书侍郎，又提拔为中书令。
English: When his granddaughter became the empress, he was promoted to the position of chushushijiro (chushijiro) and then to chushirei (chushirei).

古文：皇后挟媚道觉，罢为吏部尚书。
现代文：皇后暗用巫术骗取皇上欢心被发觉了，他被免职后又任吏部尚书。
English: It was discovered that the empress had secretly used witchcraft to deceive the emperor into her favor. After he was dismissed from his post, he was reappointed to the position of secretary.

古文：后废，贬爱州刺史。
现代文：皇后被废以后，他被贬为爱州刺史。
English: After the empress was dethroned, he was relegated to the role of the crown prince of Aizhou.

古文：许敬宗等构奭通宫掖，谋行鸩毒，与褚遂良朋党，罪大逆。
现代文：许敬宗等人捏造罪名诬陷柳跟妃嫔宫女私通，阴谋毒害皇帝，与褚遂良是同伙，定为大逆不道的罪行。
English: Xu Jingzong and others fabricated charges to falsely accuse Liu of having an affair with a concubine, plotted to poison the emperor, and was an accomplice of Zou Suiliang, making it a crime of high treason.

古文：遣使杀之，没其家，期以上亲并流岭表，奭房隶桂州为奴婢。
现代文：高宗派人杀死了他，没收了他的家人财产，按照礼仪规定凡是应为他服丧一年以上的亲属都一起流放到岭南，房族中柳的分支隶属桂州当奴仆婢女。
English: The Gaozong faction killed him, confiscated his family's property, and in accordance with the rules of etiquette, all the relatives who should have mourned for him for more than a year were exiled to Lingnan. The branch of the Fang family, Zhongliu, belonged to Guizhou as slaves.

古文：神龙初，乃复官爵，子孙亲属缘坐者悉免。
现代文：中宗神龙初年，才恢复柳的官职爵位，牵连判罪的子孙亲属全部免除处罚。
English: In the first year of Zhongzong Shenlong, Liu's official position and title were restored, and all of his descendants and relatives who were implicated and convicted were exempted from punishment.

古文：开元初，泽兄涣为中书舍人，上言： 臣从伯祖奭，去显庆三年与褚遂良等五门同被谴戮，虽被原雪，而子孙殆尽，唯曾孙无忝客籍龚州。
现代文：玄宗开元初年，柳泽的哥哥柳涣任中书舍人，禀奏说： 我的伯叔祖父柳，在显庆三年，和褚遂良等五个家族同被贬谪杀戮，后来虽然被宽恕昭雪，但子孙几乎灭绝，只有曾孙柳无忝客居龚州。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, Liu Ze's brother, Liu Zhe, was appointed as the person in charge of the middle school library. Zhao Zhao said, "My great-uncle, grandfather Liu, and five other families, including Yan Suiliang, were all killed in the three years of Xianqing. Later, although they were pardoned by Zhao Xue, their descendants were almost exterminated. Only the great-grandson, Liu Wuzhong, lived in Zhangzhou.

古文：陛下先天后诏书，尝任宰相家并录其后。
现代文：陛下先天年后颁布诏书，曾经担任过宰相的家庭都一样登记他们的后代。
English: His Majesty issued an imperial edict the day before yesterday and the day after yesterday, and the families who had served as prime ministers all registered their offspring in the same way.

古文：况臣之伯祖无辜被诛，今藁窆未还，后嗣侨处，愿许伯祖归葬，孤孙北迁。 
现代文：更何况我的伯叔祖父无罪被杀，草草埋葬的棺木至今还没有迁回家族坟地，后代寄居外乡，请允许我的伯叔祖父迁回故乡安葬，他惟一的曾孙迁回故乡居住。 
English: What's more, my great-uncle was killed without any guilt. The hastily buried coffin has not yet been moved back to the family cemetery. His descendants live abroad. Please allow my great-uncle to move back to his hometown for burial, and his only great-grandson to move back to his hometown to live.

古文：于是诏无忝护奭柩归乡里，官给丧事。
现代文：于是诏令柳无忝护送柳的灵柩回归故乡，官府出钱办理丧事。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Liu Muxuan to escort Liu's coffin back to his hometown, and the government paid for the funeral.

古文：无忝后历潭州都督。
现代文：柳无忝后来官至潭州都督。
English: Liu Muxuan later rose through the ranks to become the governor of Tanzhou.

