古文：庄辛谓楚襄王曰： 君王左州侯，右夏侯，辇从鄢陵君与寿陵君，专淫逸侈靡，不顾国政，郢都必危矣。 
现代文：庄辛对楚襄王说： 君王左有州侯右有夏侯，鄢陵君和寿陵君在车后跟从，生活淫逸奢侈、毫无节制，不理国家朝政，这样下去会使郢都变得很危险。 
English: Zhuang Xin said to King Chu Xiang: The monarch has the statesmen on his left and the summer princes on his right, and Gong Lingjun and Shulingjun follow behind in the car. They live a life of debauchery and luxury, without restraint, and ignore the national government. If this continues, it will make the capital very dangerous.

古文：襄王曰： 先生老悖乎?
现代文：楚襄王说： 先生老糊涂了？
English: Chu Xiang Wang said: Is the teacher confused?

古文：将以为楚国祅祥乎？ 
现代文：还是认为楚国将遇到不祥呢？ 
English: Or do you still think that Chu will face an ominous future?

古文：庄辛曰： 臣诚见其必然者也，非敢以为国祅祥也。
现代文：庄辛说： 臣当然是看到了您这样下去的必然后果，而不敢认为国家会遇到不祥。
English: Zhuang Xin said: Of course, the minister saw the inevitable consequences of you going on like this, and did not dare to think that the country would encounter bad luck.

古文：君王卒幸四子者不衰，楚国必亡矣。
现代文：如果大王始终宠幸这四个人，不稍加收敛的话，那楚国一定会因此而灭亡。
English: If the great king always favored these four people and did not restrain himself, the Chu Kingdom would surely perish.

古文：臣请辟于赵，淹留以观之。 
现代文：请大王准许臣到赵国避难，在那里来静观楚国的变化。 
English: He asked the king to allow him to take refuge in Zhao, where he could observe the changes in Chu.

古文：庄辛去之赵。留五月，秦果举鄢、郢、巫、上蔡、陈之地，襄王流揜于城阳。
现代文：庄辛离开楚国到了赵国，他在赵国待了五个月，秦国果然发兵攻占了鄢、郢、巫、上蔡、陈这些地方，楚襄王也流亡到城阳。
English: Zhuang Xin left the State of Chu to the State of Zhao. He stayed in the State of Zhao for five months. The State of Qin sent an army to conquer the places of Yao, Yao, Wu, Shang Cai, and Chen. The King of Chu Xiang also exiled to Chengyang.

古文：于是使人发驺，征庄辛于赵。
现代文：到了这样的境地楚襄王才派人到赵国召请庄辛。庄辛说： 好。 
English: It was in this situation that the King of Chu Xiang sent someone to Zhao to summon Zhuang Xin. Zhuang Xin said, "Good.

古文：庄辛曰： 诺。 庄辛至，襄王曰： 寡人不能用先生之言，今事至于此，为之奈何? 
现代文：庄辛到了城阳，楚襄王说： 我当初不听先生的话，如今事情发展到这地步，该怎么办呢？ 
English: When Zhuang Xin arrived in Chengyang, Chu Xiang Wang said: I did not listen to my teacher at first, but now things have developed to this point, what should I do?

古文：庄辛对曰： 臣闻鄙语曰： 见兔而顾犬，未为晚也；亡羊而补牢，未为迟也。 
现代文：庄辛回答说： 我知道一句俗语： 见到兔子以后再放出猎犬去追并不算晚，羊丢失以后再去修补羊圈还不算迟。 
English: Zhuang Xin replied, "I know a saying: It's not too late to see the rabbit and then let the hounds chase it, and it's not too late to mend the sheep pen after the sheep is lost.

古文：臣闻昔汤、武以百里昌，桀、纣以天下亡。
现代文：我听说过去商汤王和周武王，依靠方圆百里的土地，就使天下昌盛，而夏桀王和殷纣王，虽然拥有天下，到头来也不免身死国亡。
English: I heard that in the past, Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang, relying on a hundred-mile-square land, made the world prosperous, while Xia Yao Wang and Yin Yao Wang, although they owned the world, in the end did not escape death.

古文：今楚国虽小，绝长续短，犹以数千里，岂特百里哉?
现代文：现在楚国的土地虽然狭小，然而如果取长补短，还能有方圆几千里，岂止百里啊？
English: Although the land of Chu is narrow and small now, if we complement each other's strengths and weaknesses, we can still have a radius of several thousand miles, isn't that more than a hundred miles?

古文： 王独不见夫蜻蛉乎？
现代文：大王难道没有见过蜻蜓吗？
English: Hasn't the Great King seen a cormorant?

古文：六足四翼，飞翔乎天地之间，俯啄蚊虻而食之，仰承甘露而饮之，自以为无患，与人无争也。
现代文：蜻蜓长着六只脚和四只翅膀，在天地之间飞翔，低下头来啄食蚊虫，抬头起来喝甘美的露水，自以为无忧无患，又和人没有争执。
English: The dragonfly has six legs and four wings. It flies between heaven and earth. It lowers its head to nibble on mosquitoes, and raises its head to drink sweet dew. It thinks it is safe and sound, and has no quarrels with people.

古文：不知五尺童子，方将调铅膠丝，加己乎四仞之上，而下为蝼蚁食也。
现代文：岂不知那几岁的孩子，正在调糖稀涂在丝网上，将要在高空之上粘住它，它的下场将是被蚂蚁吃掉。
English: Don't they know that a child of a few years old, who is spreading sugar on a silk net, will stick it high in the sky, and it will end up being eaten by ants.

古文：蜻蛉其小者也，黄雀因是以。
现代文：蜻蜓的事可能是小事，其实黄雀也是如此。
English: The matter of the stork may be a small matter, but so is that of the yellow finch.

古文：俯噣白粒，仰栖茂树，鼓翅奋翼，自以为无患，与人无争也。不知夫公子王孙，左挟弹，右摄丸，将加己乎十仞之上，以其类为招。
现代文：它俯下身去啄，仰起身来栖息在茂密的树丛中，鼓动着它的翅膀奋力高翔，自己满以为没有祸患，和人没有争执，却不知那公子王孙左手拿着弹弓，右手按上弹丸，将要向尺高空以黄雀的脖子为射击目标。
English: It bent down to peck, raised itself up to perch in the thick trees, beating its wings to fly high. It thought that there was no disaster, and there was no dispute with people, but it did not know that the boy Wang Sun was holding a slingshot in his left hand and a projectile in his right hand, and was going to shoot the neck of the yellow finch into the sky.

古文：昼游乎茂树，夕调乎酸碱，倏忽之间，坠于公子之手。
现代文：黄雀白天还在茂密的树丛中游玩，晚上就成了桌上的佳肴，转眼之间落入王孙公子之口。
English: During the day, the yellow finch was still playing in the dense bushes. In the evening, it became a delicacy on the table and fell into Wang Sun's mouth in the blink of an eye.

古文：夫黄雀其小者也，黄鹄因是以。
现代文：黄雀的事情可能是小事情，其实黄鹄也是如此。
English: The matter of the yellow finch may be a small matter, but so is that of the yellow warbler.

古文：游于江海，淹乎大沼，俯噣鳝鲤，仰啮菱衡，奋其六翮，而凌清风飘摇乎高翔，自以为无患，与人无争也，不知夫射者，方将修其碆卢，治其缯缴，将加己乎百仞之上。
现代文：黄鹄在江海上翱游，停留在大沼泽旁边，低下头吞食黄鳝和鲤鱼，抬起头来吃菱角和水草，振动它的翅膀而凌驾清风，飘飘摇摇在高空飞翔，自认为不会有祸患，又与人无争。然而他们却不知那射箭的人，已准备好箭和弓，将向尺的高空射击它。
English: The peregrine falcon migrates along the river and stays near the Great Swamp. It lowers its head to devour peregrine falcons and eels. It raises its head to eat caltrops and aquatic plants. It shakes its wings to fly above the wind. It soars high in the sky, thinking that there will be no harm and no conflict with people. However, they do not know that the archer has prepared arrows and bows to shoot it into the sky.

古文：被礛磻，引微缴，折清风而抎矣，故昼游乎江河，夕调乎鼎鼐。
现代文：它将带着箭，拖着细微的箭绳，从清风中坠落下来，掉在地上。黄鹄白天还在湖里游泳，晚上就成了锅中的清炖美味。
English: It will carry arrows, dragging a fine arrow rope, fall down from the breeze and fall to the ground. Huang Qi still swims in the lake during the day, and at night it becomes a delicious dish in the pot.

古文： 夫黄鹄，其小者也，蔡圣侯之事因是以。
现代文：黄鹄的事可能是小事，而蔡圣侯的事也是这样的。
English: Huang Qi's matter may be a small matter, but so is the matter of Cai Sheng Hou.

古文：南游乎高陂，北陵乎巫山，饮茹溪之流，食湘波之鱼，左抱幼妾，右拥嬖女，与之驰骋乎高蔡之中，而不以国家为事。
现代文：他向南游玩到高陂，往北到巫山，饮茹溪里的水，吃湘江里的鱼；左手抱着年轻貌美的侍妾，右手搂着如花似玉的宠妃，和这些人同车驰骋在高蔡城中，而不把国家朝政当回事。
English: He traveled south to Gaocheng, north to Wushan, drank water from the Ru Creek, and ate fish from the Hunan River. He held a young and beautiful concubine in his left hand, and a pet princess resembling a flower in his right hand. He rode with these people in the city of Gao Cai, and did not take the national government seriously.

古文：不知夫子发方受命乎灵王，系己以朱丝而见之也。
现代文：他不知道子发正在接受宣王的进攻命令，他将要成为阶下囚。
English: He did not know that Zi Fa was receiving attack orders from King Xuan, and that he was about to become a prisoner.

古文： 蔡圣侯之事其小者也，君王之事因是以。
现代文：蔡灵侯的事只是当中的小事，其实君王您的事也是如此。
English: Cai Ling Hou's matter is just a small matter among them, in fact, so is your matter.

古文：左州侯，右夏侯，辇从鄢陵君与寿陵君，饭封禄之粟，而载方府之金，与之驰骋乎云梦之中，而不以天下国家为事，不知夫穰侯方受命乎秦王，填黾塞之内，而投己乎黾塞之外。 
现代文：君王左边是州侯，右边是夏侯，鄢陵君和寿陵君始终随着君王的车辆，驰骋在云梦地区，根本不把国家的事情放在心上。然而君王却没料到，穰侯魏冉已经奉秦王命令，在黾塞之南布满军队，州侯等却把君王抛弃在黾塞以北。 
English: On the monarch's left is the prefect of the state, and on the right is the summer prefect. Gong Lingjun and Shulingjun always follow the monarch's vehicle, galloping in the Yunmeng area, and do not pay attention to the affairs of the country at all. However, the monarch did not expect that Wei Ran, the prefect of the state, had been ordered by the king of Qin to fill the south of Fuxi with troops, but the prefect of the state and others abandoned the monarch to the north of Fuxi.

古文：襄王闻之，颜色变作，身体战栗。
现代文：楚襄王听了庄辛这番话之后，脸色大变，全身战栗。
English: After listening to Zhuangxin's words, King Chu Xiang's face changed dramatically and his whole body trembled.

古文：于是乃以执珪而授之为阳陵君，与淮北之地也。
现代文：在这时才把执?的爵位送给庄辛，封他为阳陵君，不久庄辛帮助楚王收复了淮北的土地。
English: It was at this time that Zhuang Xin was given the honorary title of Yangling Jun, and soon Zhuang Xin helped King Chu recover the land of Huaibei.

