古文：德辉天性孝悌，操履清慎，既就外傅，嗜读书，束于贫，无以自资，乃辍业。
现代文：李德辉，字仲实，通州潞县人。五岁时父亲去世，家境贫寒，母亲舂稗子煮野菜度日。
English: Li Dehui (Chinese: 李德辉; pinyin: Zhongshi) was born in Tongzhou County, Shandong Province. His father died when he was five years old. His family was poor, and his mother spent her days cooking vegetables with hazelnuts.

古文：年十六，监酒丰州，禄食充足，甘旨有余，则市笔札录书，夜诵不休。
现代文：德辉天性孝顺，好读书，但家贫只得辍学。十六岁为丰州监酒，其俸禄先孝敬母亲，有余则买些书籍，夜间诵读不休。
English: De Hui was naturally filial and good at reading, but his family was so poor that he had to drop out of school. At the age of sixteen, he was put in charge of liquor control in Fengzhou. He spent his salary on his mother, and bought some books to read at night.

古文：已乃厌糟曲，叹曰： 志士顾安此耶！仕不足以匡君福民，隐不足以悦亲善身，天地之间，人寿几何，恶可无闻，同腐草木也！ 
现代文：他不愿再做监酒，叹息道： 志士怎能干这事；做官不能辅助君王，不能造福万民，不做官也不能使亲欢悦，不能自我修养。天地之间，人生几何，岂可默默无闻，同腐草一般！ 
English: He didn't want to be a cupbearer anymore, and sighed, "How can a man of high ideals do this? Being an official can't help the king, can't benefit the people, can't make his relatives happy, and can't cultivate himself. Between heaven and earth, what is the geometry of life, can it be unknown, the same as rotten grass!

古文：乃谢绝所与游少年，求先生长者讲学，以卒其业。时世祖在潜藩，用刘秉忠荐，使侍裕宗讲读，乃与窦默等皆就辟。
现代文：于是谢绝与一般少年交游，去向老师求教。世祖为太子时，由于刘秉忠的推荐，德辉得以与窦默一同征召入朝，侍裕宗讲读。
English: As a result, he refused to mingle with ordinary boys and went to ask his teacher for advice. When the patriarch was crown prince, thanks to Liu Bingzhong's recommendation, De Hui was able to be conscripted into the imperial court together with Dou Mei to attend Yu Zong's lectures.

古文：癸丑，宪宗封宗亲，割京兆隶世祖潜藩，择廷臣能理财赋者俾调军食，立从宜府，以德辉与孛得乃为使。
现代文：宪宗三年，帝封宗亲为王，将京兆地方分封给世祖，要选派廷臣中能理财的人去负责军粮的供给。德辉与孛得乃二人当选。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Xianzong was the king, and he assigned the Keizhao region to his ancestor. He had to choose a member of the court who was able to manage finances to be responsible for the supply of grain for the army. De Hui and Xun De were the two chosen.

古文：时汪世显宿兵利州，扼四川衿喉，以规进取，数万之师仰哺德辉。
现代文：汪德臣屯兵于利州，扼四川咽喉，规划进取四川，其数万军队食粮靠德辉调度供给。
English: Wang Deqin garrisoned troops in Lishu, choking the throat of Sichuan, planning to advance into Sichuan, and his tens of thousands of troops were supplied with grain by Dehui.

古文：乃募民入粟绵竹，散钱币，给盐券为直，陆挽兴元，水漕嘉陵，未期年而军储充羡，取蜀之本基于此矣。
现代文：德辉号召百姓把粮食送到绵竹，他用钱币和盐券来偿还粮食的价格，然后由陆路运到兴元，水路由嘉陵江下运。不到一年军备充足，为日后取蜀奠定了基础。
English: De Hui called on the people to send grain to Mianzhu. He used coins and salt coupons to repay the price of grain, and then transported it by land to Xingyuan, and transported it down the Jialing River by water. Within a year, there was sufficient armament, laying the foundation for the future collection of Shu.

古文：中统元年，为燕京宣抚使。
现代文：中统元年，任德辉为燕京宣抚使。
English: In the first year of the unification of China, De Hui was appointed as the envoy of Yanjing.

古文：燕多剧贼，造伪钞，结死党杀人。
现代文：燕地多大盗，造伪钞，结死党杀人。
English: Yan Di was a big thief, forged banknotes, and killed people.

古文：德辉悉捕诛之，令行禁止。
现代文：德辉全部捕杀，以后令行禁止。
English: De Hui caught and killed all of them, and later banned the practice.

古文：然事多不白中书，由是忤平章王文统意，去位。
现代文：他在做这些事时并未报告中书省，因此得罪了平章王文统而被撤职。
English: When he did these things, he did not report to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and therefore offended Pingzhang Wang Wenzhong and was removed from his post.

古文：三年，文统以反诛，德辉遂起为山西宣慰使。
现代文：中统三年，王文统谋反伏诛，因而德辉被起用为山西宣慰使。
English: Three years after the unification of China, Wang Wenzhong plotted a counter-coup, and De Hui was appointed as the Shanxi propaganda envoy.

古文：权势之家籍民为奴者，咸按而免之，复业近千人。
现代文：他在山西，将被权势之家抑为奴隶的平民，一律释放为民，因此而复业者近千人。
English: In Shanxi Province, all the commoners who had been enslaved by the powerful family were released as commoners. As a result, nearly a thousand people were reinstated.

古文：时潜藩故傅相无有出为二千石者，帝以太原难治，故以德辉为守。至郡，崇学校，表孝节，劝耕桑，立社仓，一权度，凡可以阜民者无不为之。嘉禾瑞麦，六出其境。
现代文：至元元年，撤销山西宣慰司，授德辉为太原路总管。德辉在太原兴办学校，旌表节孝，鼓励农业，设立社仓，统一度量衡，总之，凡对民有利的事无不为之，连续六年都出现嘉禾瑞麦这种显示吉祥的兆征。
English: By the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Shanxi Propaganda and Consolation Department was abolished, and De Hui was appointed as the head of Taiyuan Road. De Hui started a school in Taiyuan, encouraged filial piety, encouraged agriculture, set up warehouses, and unified measurement. In short, for six consecutive years, Jiahe Ruimai, a sign of auspiciousness, appeared in everything that was beneficial to the people.

古文：五年，征为右三部尚书。
现代文：至元五年，召回朝任右三部尚书。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the right three parts of the imperial rescript were recalled.

古文：人有讼财而失其兄子者，德辉曰： 此叔杀之无疑。 
现代文：有人因争财产，其兄之子被杀，诉讼于官府，德辉判定是死者叔父所杀。
English: A man sued the government over a property dispute in which his brother's son was killed. Dehui ruled that the deceased's uncle had killed him.

古文：遂竟其狱。权贵人为请者甚众，德辉不应，罪状既明，请者乃惭服。
现代文：许多人请权贵人说情，德辉不答应，告诉他们罪证确凿，说情者无话可说。
English: Many people ask the authority to intercede, but De Hui does not agree, telling them that the evidence is conclusive, and the intercessor has nothing to say.

古文：七年，帝以蝗旱为忧，命德辉录囚山西、河东。
现代文：七年，世祖以蝗灾旱灾为忧，德辉奉命去山西、河东复查囚徒的罪状，借以消除灾害。
English: In the seventh year, the ancestor was worried about the locusts and drought. De Hui was ordered to go to Shanxi and Hedong to review the crimes of the prisoners in order to eliminate the disasters.

古文：行至怀仁，民有魏氏发得木偶，持告其妻挟左道为厌胜，谋不利于己。
现代文：行至怀仁，有个姓魏百姓发现一个木偶，拿去官府告他妻子以左道旁门之术来害他。
English: When he went to Huairen, a commoner surnamed Wei found a puppet, took it to the government office and accused his wife of using a trick to harm him.

古文：移数狱，词皆具。
现代文：审理多次，供词俱在。
English: There have been several trials, and confessions have been made.

古文：德辉察其冤，知其有爱妾，疑妾所为，将构陷其妻也。
现代文：德辉察觉其中有冤情，又知道此控告者有爱妾，因而怀疑是妾所为，借以陷害其妻。
English: De Hui noticed that there was a grievance, and knew that the accuser had a mistress, so he suspected that the mistress had done it to frame his wife.

古文：召妾鞫之，不移时而服，遂杖其夫而论妾以死。
现代文：提妾审讯，不久妾供认了，于是对其夫判处杖刑，论妾死罪。
English: The concubine was brought to trial and soon confessed. The husband was sentenced to the cane and the concubine to death.

古文：皇子安西王镇关中，奏以德辉为辅，遂改安西王相。
现代文：皇子安西王镇守关中，奏请以德辉为辅臣，朝廷任德辉为安西王之相。
English: When Prince Anxi Wangzhen was in the middle of guarding the pass, he requested that De Hui be appointed as an assistant vassal, and the imperial court appointed De Hui as the official of King Anxi.

古文：至则视濒泾营牧故地，可得数千顷，起庐舍，疏沟浍，假牛、种、田具与贫民二千家，屯田其中，岁得粟麦刍藁万计。
现代文：德辉到任后，视察沿泾河的牧地，见可开垦成田的有数千顷。便在那里建房屋、疏沟渠，迁贫民二千家在此屯田，借给他们耕牛、种子、农具。这样，每年得粟、麦、草料数以万计。
English: After arriving in office, De Hui inspected the pastures along the Min River and saw that there were thousands of hectares of Narita that could be reclaimed. He built houses there, cleared ditches and canals, moved two thousand poor families to this farmland, and lent them cattle, seeds, and farm tools. In this way, tens of thousands of millet, wheat, and forage were obtained every year.

古文：十二年，诏以王相抚蜀。
现代文：至元十二年，朝廷诏令德辉以王相之职去安抚四川。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court ordered De Hui to appease Sichuan as the king's minister.

古文：时重庆犹城守不下，朝廷各置行枢密院于东、西川，合兵万人围之。
现代文：当时，重庆为宋军所据，元军久攻不下，朝廷于东川、西川各设立行枢密院，会集万人兵力围攻重庆。
English: At that time, Chongqing was the base of the Song army, and the Yuan army could not attack it for a long time. The Imperial Court set up the Privy Council in Dongchuan and Xichuan, and gathered ten thousand soldiers to besiege Chongqing.

古文：德辉至成都，两府争遣使咨受兵食方略，德辉戒之曰： 宋已亡矣，重庆以弹丸之地，不降何归？
现代文：德辉到达成都，东西两川行枢密院都派人来向他咨询得筹军粮的方略。德辉告诫他们说： 宋朝已亡，重庆这个弹丸之地，不降又能怎样。
English: When Dehui reached the capital, the Privy Council sent people to consult him on the strategy of collecting military rations from both the east and the west. Dehui warned them: The Song Dynasty has passed away, Chongqing, the land of the projectile, what can it do if it does not fall?

古文：中使不谕诈计，竟以不奉明诏复命。
现代文：但公等好剽劫杀戮，百姓害怕，不来归顺。
English: However, the government is fond of looting and killing, and the people are afraid and do not come to submit.

古文：如是者，非玩寇而何！况复军政不一，相訾纷纷，朝夕败矣，岂能成功哉！ 
现代文：过去，尚未开战，朝廷派太监奉诏书来宣布赦令，公等不能将朝廷赦令向百姓宣布，以等待百姓归顺，而是做了些使百姓惧怕的事，所以尽管我水陆两军擂鼓进攻，而仍然不能攻下重庆。而且军政不是一条心，相互攻击，这样下去早晚是要失败的，岂能成功！ 
English: In the past, before the war broke out, the imperial court sent eunuchs to announce the pardon to the people with an imperial edict. The officials could not announce the imperial pardon to the people to wait for the people to submit, but they did something to make the people afraid. Therefore, although our army and navy attacked, they still could not capture Chongqing. Moreover, the military and the government are not of one mind and attack each other. If we continue like this, sooner or later we will fail, but will we succeed?

古文：德辉出，未至秦，泸州叛，而重庆围果溃，再退守泸州。
现代文：德辉走后，还未至秦，泸州反叛，重庆围城之军遭到失败，退守泸州。
English: After Dehui left, before reaching Qin, Bozhou rebelled, and the army besieging Chongqing was defeated and retreated to Bozhou.

古文：十四年，诏以德辉为西川行枢密院副使，仍兼王相。
现代文：至元十四年，朝廷任命德辉为西川行枢密院副使，仍兼王相，留成都负责军粮的供应。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court appointed De Hui as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council to the Western River, and he was still the king's minister, leaving Chengdu to be responsible for the supply of military grain.

古文：诸军既发，德辉留成都给军食。
现代文：这年又收复泸州。十五年，再围重庆，费时一个多月才攻克。
English: This year, they recaptured Bozhou. Fifteen years later, they encircled Chongqing again, and it took more than a month to conquer it.

古文：是年，复泸州。十五年，再围重庆，逾月拔之，绍庆、南平、夔、施、思、播诸山壁水栅皆下。
现代文：接着又攻下绍庆、南平、夔州、施州、思州、播州诸山寨。
English: Next, they captured Shaoqing, Nanping, Zhangzhou, Shizhou, Shizhou, and Banzhou.

古文：而东川枢府，犹故将也，惩前与西川相观望致败，恶相属，愿独军围合州。
现代文：东川枢府仍是原来的将官，鉴于前与西川相观望导致失败，不肯共同行动，愿单独围攻合州。
English: Higashikawa's headquarters was still that of the original general, and in view of the failure caused by the previous wait-and-see with Nishikawa, he did not want to act together, and was willing to besiege Hezhou alone.

古文：德辉乃出合俘系顺庆狱者纵之，使归语州将张珏，以天子威德远著，宋室既亡，三宫皆北，我朝含弘，录功忘过，能早自归，必取将相，与夏、吕比。
现代文：德辉释放了关押在顺庆狱中的合州宋军俘虏，要他们回去对宋守将张珏说，大元天子威德远扬，宋朝已经灭亡，皇帝、皇后和太后都到了燕京，元朝气量宽大，有功记功，不记前过，若能早日归顺，必授以将相之职位，与夏、吕一样。
English: De Hui released the prisoners of the Hezhou Song Army who were held in Shunqing Prison, and asked them to go back and tell the Song governor Zhang Qian that the Great Yuan Emperor is far away, the Song Dynasty has perished, the emperor, the empress and the empress dowager have all arrived in Yanjing, the Yuan Dynasty is generous, has merits, and does not remember the past. If they can submit as soon as possible, they will be awarded the position of commander-in-chief, the same as Xia and Lv.

古文：又为书，以礼义祸福反复譬解之，以为： 汝之为臣，不亲于宋之子孙，合之为州，不大于宋之天下，彼子孙已举天下而归我，汝犹偃然负阻穷山，而曰吾忠于所事，不亦惑哉！
现代文：还写了封信，反复说明礼义祸福，其中说： 你虽为宋朝臣子，但不会比宋朝皇室子孙更亲，合州也不会比宋朝的江山大，而宋室子孙也将其天下归我大元朝，你却还在恃山水之险进行抵抗，认为是在尽忠，是多么糊涂！
English: He also wrote a letter, repeatedly explaining the etiquette, blessings and misfortunes, which said: Although you are a Song courtier, you will not be closer to the Song dynasty than the descendants of the imperial family, and Heshou will not be closer to the Song dynasty than the Jiangshan Mountains, and the descendants of the Song dynasty will also belong to my great Yuan dynasty, but you are still resisting the danger of the mountains and rivers, and think that you are being loyal, how confused!

古文：且昔此州之人不自为谋者，以国有主，耻被不义之名，故尔得制其死命。
现代文：过去此州百姓不归附元朝，是因为宋朝皇帝尚在，怕蒙受不义之名，故你还可以掌握他们生死命运。
English: In the past, the people of this state did not belong to the Yuan Dynasty, because the Emperor of the Song Dynasty was still there, afraid of suffering the name of injustice, so you can also control their fate of life and death.

古文：主今亡矣，犹欲以是行之，则戏下盗遇君，窃君首以徼福一旦，不难也。 
现代文：如今皇帝没有了，而你还要像以往那样，有一天你部下的坏人会将你的头取去换得他们的幸福。 
English: Now the emperor is no more, and you have to go on as before, for one day the villains under your command will take your head in exchange for their happiness.

古文：珏未及报，而德辉还王邸。
现代文：还未等到张珏的回信，德辉就回成都王府去了。
English: Before waiting for Zhang Ye's reply, De Hui went back to the Chengdu Royal Palace.

古文：既而合州遣李兴、张郃十二人诇事成都，皆获之，释不杀，复为书纵归，使谕其将王立如谕珏者，而辞益剀切。
现代文：合州宋军守将派李兴、张等十二人去侦察成都的动向，都被捕。德辉没有杀他们，而是全部释放，让他们带信给合州宋将王立，信的内容与前致张珏的一样，只是言辞更诚恳些。
English: De Hui did not kill them, but released all of them, and let them take a letter to the Song general Wang Li in Hezhou. The content of the letter was the same as the previous one to Zhang Ye, but the words were more sincere.

古文：立亦计夙与东府有深怨，惧诛，即使兴等导帅干杨獬怀蜡书，间至成都降。
现代文：王立过去与东川枢府有深怨，怕投降后被杀，便派李兴等引导帅府中一个能干人杨獬，怀着秘密书信由小道至成都求降。
English: In the past, Wang Li had a deep grudge against the Dongchuan Central Government, and fearing that he would be killed after surrendering, he sent Li Xing and others to guide a capable person in the Central Government, Yang Jie, with a secret letter from the trail to Chengdu to seek surrender.

古文：德辉从兵才数百人，赴之。
现代文：德辉只带数百兵率去合州。
English: De Hui only took a few hundred soldiers with him to Hezhou.

古文：东府害其来，皆曰： 公昔为书招珏，诚亦极矣，竟无功而还。
现代文：东川枢府怕德辉来争功，对他说： 往日公写信给张珏投降，极其诚恳，但终无功而还。
English: The Central Government of the East River was afraid that De Hui would come to claim the credit, and said to him: In the past, you wrote a letter to Zhang Ye to surrender. You were very sincere, but in the end, you did not succeed.

古文：今立，珏牙校也，习狙诈不信，特以计致公来。使与吾争垂成之功，延命晷刻耳，未必诚降。 
现代文：今王立只不过是张珏部下一位校官，为人狡诈不可信，特用计把公引来，企图让你与我们争功，而他们可苟延残喘，未必是真降。 
English: Right now, Wang Li is just a school official under Zhang Ye. He is devious and untrustworthy. He is using special tricks to lure the public in an attempt to make you compete with us. While they may survive, it may not be a true surrender.

古文：德辉曰： 昔合以重庆存，故力可以同恶，今已孤绝，穷而来归，亦其势然。
现代文：德辉说 ：过去合州是因为重庆还未被攻下，他们可以共同抵抗。如今重庆已下，他孤立无援，走投无路而来归降，是形势所迫。
English: Dehui said: in the past, Hezhou was because Chongqing had not yet been conquered, they could resist together. Today, Chongqing has fallen, he is alone and helpless, he came to a dead end and surrendered, he was forced by the situation.

古文：吾非攘人之功者，诚惧公等愤其后服，诬以尝抗跸先朝，利其剽夺，而快心于屠城也。吾为国活此民，岂计汝嫌怒为哉！ 
现代文：我来并非要夺你们的功劳，是怕你们恼怒他们直到现在投降，进行大屠杀。我是为拯救合州人民生命而来，岂计较你们的嫌恶！ 
English: I'm not here to take credit for your work, I'm here to save the lives of the people of the United States, and I don't care if you don't like it.

古文：即单舸济江，薄城下，呼立出降。
现代文：便单身渡江到合州城下，呼王立出降，安抚百姓，废除原宋朝的官吏。
English: He then crossed the river single-handedly to the city of Hezhou, called for the king to surrender, pacified the people, and abolished the officials of the original Song Dynasty.

古文：安集其民，而罢置其吏，合人自立而下，家绘事之。川蜀平，复以王相还邸。
现代文：合州人自王立以下，家家画他的像敬仰他。四川平定后，德辉作为王相仍回王府。
English: The people of Hezhou, from Wang Li on down, admired him and his portrait was painted by every family. After Sichuan was pacified, De Hui, as the king's minister, still returned to the royal palace.

古文：十七年，置行中书省，以德辉为安西行省左丞。
现代文：十七年，设置行中书省，以德辉为安西行省参知政事。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Ministry of Education and Culture was set up, with De Hui as the governor of Anxi Province.

古文：是年，西南夷罗施鬼国既降复叛，诏云南、湖广、四川合兵三万人讨之。
现代文：这年，西南少数民族的罗施鬼国降而复叛。朝廷命云南、湖广、四川合兵三万征讨。
English: In that year, the southwestern ethnic minority of Luo Shi ghost country surrendered and rebelled. The imperial court ordered Yunnan, Hunan, and Sichuan to recruit 30,000 soldiers.

古文：兵且压境，德辉适被命在播，乃遣安圭驰驿止三道兵勿进，复遣张孝思谕鬼国趣降。
现代文：元已大兵压境，这时德辉正在播州，忙派安王圭去阻止三路兵马勿进，又遣张孝思去鬼国劝降。
English: At that time, De Hui was in Banzhou, and he was busy sending An Wang Gui to stop the three armies from entering, and he also sent Zhang Xiaosi to the ghost country to persuade them to surrender.

古文：其酋阿察熟德辉名，曰： 是活合州李公耶，其言明信可恃。 
现代文：鬼国酋长阿察闻德辉之名，说道： 是拯救合州人性命的李公吗？其言可信。 
English: The chief of the ghost country, Acha, heard the name of De Hui and said: Is it Li Gong who saved the lives of people in Hezhou? His words are credible.

古文：即身至播州，泣且告曰： 吾属百万人，微公来，死且不降，今得所归，蔑有二矣。 
现代文：立即亲去播州对德辉说： 我国百万人，若不是公来，宁死也不投降。今得归顺，决无二心。 
English: He immediately went to Banzhou in person and said to De Hui, "There are a million people in our country who would rather die than surrender if they are not brought to the public. They have no second thoughts about surrendering.

古文：德辉以其言上闻，乃改鬼国为顺元路，以其酋为宣抚使。
现代文：德辉将阿察的一番诚意上报朝廷，于是改鬼国为顺元路，以其酋长为宣抚使。
English: De Hui reported the sincerity of Acha to the imperial court, so he changed the ghost country to Shun Yuan Road, and used his chief as a messenger.

古文：其后有以受鬼国马千数谮德辉于朝者，帝曰： 是人朕所素知，虽一羊不妄受，宁有是耶！ 
现代文：其后有人向朝廷诬告德辉受鬼国千匹马的贿赂，世祖说： 此人朕所素知，虽一羊也不随便接收，哪有受鬼国贿赂的事！ 
English: Later, someone falsely accused De Hui of being bribed with a thousand horses from the land of ghosts to the imperial court. Shizu said, "I know this man, even though he would not accept a single sheep, there is no such thing as being bribed by the land of ghosts!

古文：德辉卒年六十三，蛮夷闻讣，哭之哀如私亲，为位而祭者动辄千百人。
现代文：德辉六十三岁而卒，蛮夷闻讣，哀恸如丧亲属，立位祭奠之人动辄千百。
English: De Hui died at the age of sixty-three, and his death was heard far and wide, with mourning resembling that of a bereaved relative. Thousands of people gathered to pay their respects.

古文：合州安抚使王立，衰绖率吏民拜哭，声震山谷，为发百人护丧兴元。
现代文：合州安抚使王立，着孝服率吏民哭拜，声震山谷，发百人护灵柩回兴元。
English: The pacification of Hezhou made Wang Li, wearing filial piety, lead the officials and people to weep and worship, the sound of the valley, and sent hundreds of people to protect the coffin to return to the Xingyuan.

古文：金人疑之，罢其兵柄，徙居许州。
现代文：播州安抚使奏请立庙祭祀。张雄飞，字鹏举，琅笽临沂人。父张琮，曾在金朝做官，守盱眙。
English: Zhang Xiongfei, also known as Penghu, was born in Linyi. His father, Zhang Ye, was an official in the Jin Dynasty and guarded Linyi.

古文：寻复命守河阴，仍留家人于许。
现代文：金人怀疑他，罢其兵权，徙居许州。
English: The goldsmith suspected him, renounced his military rights, and moved to Huzhou.

古文：雄飞幼失母，琮妾李氏养之。
现代文：雄飞自幼失母，由琮妾李氏抚养。
English: Xiongfei lost his mother at a young age and was raised by his concubine, Li Zeng.

古文：国兵屠许，惟工匠得免。
现代文：蒙古兵屠杀许州百姓，只有工匠幸免。
English: Mongolian soldiers massacred the people of Khoshu, sparing only the artisans.

古文：有田姓者，琮故吏也，自称能为弓，且诈以雄飞及李氏为家人，由是获全，遂徙朔方，雄飞时方十岁。
现代文：有个姓田的人，原为张琮的部属，自称能制弓，且伪称雄飞及李氏为其家人，因此雄飞一家人也得以免遭屠杀，迁居北方，这时雄飞才十岁。
English: A man surnamed Tian, who was originally a subordinate of Zhang Ye, claimed to be able to make a bow, and falsely claimed that Xiong Fei and the Li family were his family. Therefore, Xiong Fei's family was also able to avoid the massacre and moved to the north. At that time, Xiong Fei was only ten years old.

古文：至霍州，李欲逃，恐其累己，雄飞知之，顷刻不去左右，李乃变服与俱还，寓潞州。雄飞既长，往师前进士王宝英于赵城。
现代文：到了霍州，李氏想逃走，雄飞知道后时刻不离开她，李氏这才回来，住在潞州。雄飞长大成人，于赵城拜进士王宝英为师。
English: When she arrived in Huzhou, Li wanted to run away, but Xiongfei knew that she would always stay with her. It was only then that Li came back to live in Ganzhou. Xiongfei grew up and studied under the scholar Wang Baoying in Zhaocheng.

古文：金亡，雄飞不知父所在，往来泽、潞，求之十余年，常客食僧舍。
现代文：金朝亡，雄飞不知父亲下落，在泽州、潞州间来回寻找，长达十年之久，常寄住在寺庙中。
English: After the death of the Jin Dynasty, Xiongfei did not know the whereabouts of his father. He searched back and forth between Zhezhou and Zhangzhou for ten years, often staying in temples.

古文：已而入关陕，历怀、孟、潼、华，终求其父弗得，遂入燕。
现代文：其后入关陕，历经怀、孟、潼、华，始终没有寻到父亲，于是入燕。
English: After that, he entered Guanzhen, and after going through Huai, Meng, Zou, and Hua, he still did not find his father, so he entered Yan.

古文：居数岁，尽通国言及诸部语。
现代文：在那里住了几年，学会了蒙语及诸部语言。
English: He lived there for several years and learned Mongolian and other languages.

古文：至元二年，廉希宪荐之于世祖，召见，陈当世之务，世祖大悦。
现代文：至元二年，廉希宪将雄飞举荐于世祖。雄飞被召见，陈奏他对当时政务的一些意见。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lian Xixian recommended Xiongfei to Shizu. Xiongfei was summoned to present some of his opinions on the government affairs at that time.

古文：授同知平阳路转运司事，搜抉蠹弊，悉除之。
现代文：世祖大喜，授同知平阳路转运司事。他在那里查出并清除了一些弊政。
English: He was awarded the title of Tongzhi Pingyang Road Transportation Secretary, where he detected and eliminated some maladministration.

古文：帝问处士罗英，谁可大用者，对曰： 张雄飞真公辅器。 
现代文：世祖问处士罗英，谁可重用。罗英回答说 ：张雄飞是真正相材。 
English: The ancestor asked the clerk Luo Ying who could be reused. Luo Ying replied: Zhang Xiongfei is a true face material.

古文：帝然之，命驿召雄飞至。
现代文：世祖点头称是，召雄飞回朝，问他当今所急需办的事是什么。
English: The ancestor nodded and said yes, calling the young man to fly back to the morning and asking him what he urgently needed to do today.

古文：问以方今所急，对曰： 太子天下本，愿早定以系人心。
现代文：雄飞说 ：太子为天下之根本，愿早立太子以系人心。
English: Xiongfei said, "The crown prince is the foundation of the world. I hope that the crown prince will be enthroned as soon as possible."

古文：闾阎小人有升斗之储，尚知付托，天下至大，社稷至重，不早建储贰，非至计也。
现代文：街巷的百姓只有升斗食粮的家产，还晓得要有继承人。天下之大，社稷之重，若不早立太子则不是正确国策。
English: The people in the streets and alleys only have enough food to feed their families, and they know that they must have heirs. The country is big, the society is heavy, and if the crown prince is not established early, it is not a correct national policy.

古文：向使先帝知此，陛下能有今日乎？ 
现代文：如果先帝也早立太子，陛下能有今日？ 
English: If the previous emperor had also appointed a crown prince, would His Majesty be able to do so today?

古文：帝方卧，矍然起，称善者久之。
现代文：世祖原是躺着听他陈奏的，听完了他的话，突然起来连声说好。
English: The ancestor had been lying down listening to him play for a long time. After listening to his words, he suddenly stood up and said hello.

古文：他日，与江孝卿召见，帝曰： 今任职者多非材，政事废弛，譬之大厦将倾，非良工不能扶，卿辈能任此乎？ 
现代文：有天，世祖召见他与江孝卿，问道： 今任职官员多非才干之人，以致政事没有办好，如大厦将倒，非能工巧匠不足以扶正，你们能胜任否？ 
English: One day, the ancestor summoned him and Jiang Xiaojing and asked: The officials currently in office are not talented people, so that the government affairs have not been done well. If the building is about to fall, if the skilled craftsmen are not able to restore it, can you be competent?

古文：孝卿谢不敢当。
现代文：孝卿忙表示不敢当此重任，辞谢。
English: Xiaoqing Busy said that he did not dare to take on such a heavy responsibility and resigned.

古文：帝顾雄飞，雄飞对曰： 古有御史台，为天子耳目，凡政事得失，民间疾苦，皆得言；百官奸邪贪秽不职者，即纠劾之。
现代文：皇帝看看雄飞，雄飞回答说 ：古代有御史台，为天子耳目，凡政事得失，民间疾苦，都要陈奏；百官中有贪婪不称职的，立即纠劾。
English: The emperor looked at Xiongfei, and Xiongfei replied, "In ancient times, there was an imperial history table, which was the eyes and ears of the heavenly son. All political gains and losses, as well as the sufferings of the people, had to be recorded. If there were greedy and incompetent officials among the hundreds of officials, they should be punished immediately.

古文：如此，则纪纲举、天下治矣。 
现代文：如此，则纪纲整肃，天下大治。 
English: If this is the case, discipline will be rectified and the country will be governed well.

古文：帝曰： 善。 乃立御史台，以前丞相塔察儿为御史大夫，雄飞为侍御史，且戒之曰： 卿等既为台官，职在直言，朕为汝君，苟所行未善，亦当极谏，况百官乎！
现代文：世祖认为他的意见很好，立即设立御史台，任前丞相塔察儿为御史大夫，雄飞为侍御史，而且告诫说： 卿等既为台官，职责就是直言规劝。朕是你们的皇帝，如果所行不善，也应当进谏，何况对于百官！
English: The patriarch thought his advice was good, and immediately set up the Imperial Historian's Office, appointing the former prime minister, Tacharo, as the Imperial Historian, and Xiong Fei as the Imperial Historian's Attendant, and warned, "Your Excellency, since you are an official of the Imperial Historian's Office, your duty is to give forthright advice. I am your emperor, and if you do something bad, you should be punished, even more so for a hundred officials!

古文：汝宜知朕意。
现代文：你们应体会朕的意图。
English: You should understand my intention.

古文：人虽嫉妒汝，朕能为汝地也。 
现代文：若有人嫉妒你们，朕也是支持你们的。 
English: If anyone is jealous of you, I support you.

古文：雄飞益自感励，知无不言。
现代文：雄飞更加感动不已，勉励自己知无不言。
English: Xiongfei was even more moved and encouraged himself to say what he knew.

古文：参议枢密院事费正寅素憸狡，有告其罪者，诏丞相線真等与雄飞杂治之。
现代文：参议枢密院事费正寅，是个奸佞狡猾之徒，有人指控其罪行，朝廷诏丞相纟泉真等与雄飞共同审理。
English: The Councilor of the Privy Council, Ji Fei Zheng Yin, was a treacherous and cunning person. Some people accused him of crimes, and the Imperial Court's Minister of Justice, Yu Quanzhen, and Xiong Fei jointly tried him.

古文：请托交至，雄飞无所顾，尽得其罪状以闻，正寅与其党管如仁等皆伏诛。
现代文：不少人相继来为费正寅说情，雄飞一概拒绝，查明其全部罪状，奏报朝廷，将费正寅与其党管如仁等一起处决。
English: Many people came one after another to intercede for Fei Zhengyin, but Xiongfei refused all of them, found out all of his crimes, reported to the imperial court, and executed Fei Zhengyin together with his party leader Ru Ren and others.

古文：会议立尚书省，雄飞力争于帝前，忤旨，左迁同知京兆总管府事。
现代文：朝廷要设立尚书省，雄飞向皇帝极力提出反对意见，违背了世祖的旨意，被调为同知京兆总管府事。
English: The imperial court wanted to establish Shangshu Province, and Xiongfei strenuously raised objections to the emperor. He violated the will of the patriarch and was transferred to Tongzhi Jingzhao as the head of government affairs.

古文：宗室公主有家奴逃渭南民间为赘婿。主适过临潼，识之，捕其奴与妻及妻之父母，皆械系之，尽没其家赀。
现代文：京兆宗室公主家有个家奴逃到渭南一户百姓家做上门女婿，主人过临潼时发现了，捕其奴与其妻及妻之父母，投入监狱，没其家产。
English: A slave belonging to the family of the princess of the imperial family of Jingzhao fled to a commoner's house in the south of Linyi to become the son-in-law. When the master came to Linyi, he found that his slave, his wife and his wife's parents had been arrested, thrown into prison and lost their family property.

古文：雄飞与主争辨，辞色俱厉。
现代文：雄飞与这家宗室争辩，辞色俱厉。
English: Xiongfei argued with the family and became increasingly belligerent.

古文：主不得已，以奴妻及妻之父母、家赀还之，惟挟其奴以去。
现代文：主人不得已，释放奴之妻及其父母，还其家产，只是把那个家奴带走了。
English: As a last resort, the master released the slave's wife, his parents, and returned his property, but took the slave away.

古文：入为兵部尚书。
现代文：雄飞入朝为兵部尚书。
English: Xiongfei flew into the morning for the military department Shangshu.

古文：平章阿合马在制国用司时，与亦麻都丁有隙，至是，罗织其罪，同僚争相附会，雄飞不可曰： 所犯在制国用时，平章独不预耶？ 
现代文：平章阿合马在负责制国用司时，与亦麻都丁不和，罗织罪名，而同僚争相作证。雄飞问这些人 ：这些罪过都发生在阿合马负责制国用司之时，难道与他无关？ 
English: When he was in charge of the Office of the Chief of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, Pingzhang Ahamah was at odds with Yimadudin and fabricated charges, while his colleagues vied to testify. Xiongfei asked these people: "These crimes all occurred when Ahamah was in charge of the Office of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, isn't he involved?"

古文：众无以答。
现代文：这些人无言对答。
English: The men were speechless.

古文：秦长卿、刘仲泽亦以忤阿合马，皆下吏，欲杀之，雄飞亦持不可。
现代文：秦长卿、刘仲泽都因为得罪了阿合马，被交有关部门处置，定死罪。雄飞持反对意见。
English: Qin Changqing and Liu Zhongze were both sentenced to death by the relevant departments for offending Ahma. Xiong Fei held an opposing opinion.

古文：阿合马使人啖之，曰： 诚能杀此三人，当以参政相处。 雄飞曰： 杀无罪以求大官，吾不为也。 
现代文：阿合马派人去对雄飞说： 若同意杀亦麻都丁、秦长卿、刘仲泽三人，可任你为参政。 雄飞说： 杀无罪来换取大官，我不为也。 
English: Ahama sent someone to Xiongfei and said, "If you agree to kill the three men, Yimadudin, Qin Changqing, and Liu Zhongze, you can be allowed to participate in politics."

古文：阿合马怒，奏出雄飞为澧州安抚使，而三人竟死狱中。
现代文：阿合马恼羞成怒，奏请将雄飞调出京任澧州安抚使。上述三人终死于狱中。
English: Irritated and angry, Ahama asked for Xiongfei to be transferred out of Beijing to serve as an envoy to pacify Zhangzhou. The above-mentioned three people eventually died in prison.

古文：时澧州初下，民怀反侧，雄飞至，布宣德教以抚绥之，民遂安。
现代文：时澧州初为元军占领，百姓有反元之心。雄飞到任后，宣布皇帝恩德，进行安抚，百姓心平气和。
English: When Ganzhou was first occupied by the Yuan army, the people had anti-Yuan hearts. After Xiongfei took office, he announced the emperor's benevolence and appeasement, and the people were calm.

古文：有巨商二人犯匿税及殴人事，僚佐受赂，欲宽其罪，雄飞绳之益急。
现代文：有两个大商犯逃税及打人罪，官吏受贿，欲宽大处理。雄飞则严厉地绳之以法。
English: There are two big businessmen guilty of tax evasion and beating people, officials accept bribes and want to be treated leniently. Xiongfei is severely brought to justice.

古文：或曰： 此细事，何执之坚？ 
现代文：有人劝他说 ：这是小罪，何必那么坚持。 
English: Someone advised him: "This is a petty crime, why are you so insistent?"

古文：雄飞曰： 吾非治匿税殴人者，欲改宋弊政，惩不畏法者尔。 
现代文：雄飞说： 我主要不是要治这逃税打人罪的商人，而是要改变宋朝留下的弊政，惩那些不畏法的人。 
English: Xiongfei said, "I don't mainly want to punish the businessman who committed the crime of tax evasion and beating people, but I want to change the bad politics left behind by the Song Dynasty and punish those who don't fear the law."

古文：细民以乏食，群聚发富家廪，所司欲论以强盗，雄飞曰： 此盗食，欲救死，非强也。 
现代文：贫民缺粮，聚众打开富家粮仓，当地官府对他们要以强盗论处。雄飞说： 他们只是为了活命而偷盗粮食，不是强盗。 
English: When the poor were short of grain, a crowd gathered to open the granaries of the rich, and the local government wanted to punish them as robbers. Xiong Fei said: They only stole grain to survive, they were not robbers.

古文：宽其狱，全活者百余人。
现代文：对他们加以宽大，免于死刑的有千余人。
English: More than a thousand people were granted clemency and spared the death penalty.

古文：澧西南接溪洞，徭人乘间抄掠居民，雄飞遣杨应申等往谕以威德，诸徭悉感服。
现代文：澧州西南连接溪洞，瑶族人不时抢掠居民，雄飞派杨应申宣布朝廷威德，瑶民都受感动，表示顺服。
English: In the southwest of Luzhou, connecting Xidong, the Yao people from time to time robbed and plundered the residents. Xiongfei sent Yang Yingshen to announce the imperial edict, and the people of Luzhou were moved and expressed their obedience.

古文：十四年，改安抚司为总管府，命雄飞为达鲁花赤，迁荆湖北道宣慰使。
现代文：至元十四年，改安抚司为总管府，命雄飞为达鲁花赤，后调为荆湖北道宣慰使。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Department of Pacification was changed to the General Administration Office, and Meixiongfei was changed to Daruhana Chia, and later he was transferred to the Jinghu North Road Consolation Envoy.

古文：有告常德富民十余家与德山寺僧将为乱，众议以兵讨之。
现代文：有人告发常德富民十余家与德山寺的和尚共谋作乱。官府打算派兵讨伐。
English: Some people reported that more than ten families of rich people from Changde were conspiring with the monks of Desan Temple to start a riot. The government planned to send troops to fight them.

古文：雄飞曰： 告者必其仇也。
现代文：雄飞说 ：告发者必与被告者有仇，而且对于新归附的百姓，要保持和平，不可随意用兵。
English: Xiongfei said: The whistleblower must have a grudge against the accused, and for the newly annexed people, it is necessary to maintain peace and not use soldiers at will.

古文：且新附之民，当以静镇之，兵不可遽用，苟有他，吾自任其责。 
现代文：如果有什么事发生，由我负责。 
English: If anything happens, I'm responsible.

古文：遂止，徐察之，果如所言。
现代文：后经访察，果如雄飞所言。
English: After the visit, the results were as Xiongfei said.

古文：先是，荆湖行省阿里海牙以降民三千八百户没入为家奴，自置吏治之，岁责其租赋，有司莫敢言。
现代文：早先，荆湖行省阿里海牙将降民三千八百户没为家奴，自设官统治，每年责令他们交纳租赋，官府不敢过问。
English: Earlier, Ali Haiga, the governor of Jinghu Province, reduced 3,800 households to domestic servitude and set up his own officials to rule. He ordered them to pay rent every year, and the government did not dare to ask.

古文：雄飞言于阿里海牙，请归其民于有司，不从。
现代文：雄飞先去劝阿里海牙把他没为家奴的降民归于官府。
English: Xiongfei went ahead to persuade Ali Hague to return to the government the people he did not enslave.

古文：雄飞入朝奏其事，诏还籍为民。
现代文：阿里海牙不肯，雄飞入朝奏报皇帝，皇帝诏令阿里海牙把没为奴隶的降民释放为民。
English: Ali Hague refused to do so, and flew into the morning to report to the emperor. The emperor ordered Ali Hague to free the people who had not been enslaved.

古文：十六年，拜御史中丞，行御史台事。
现代文：至元十六年，拜御史中丞，行御史台事。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he became the middle-ranking official of the imperial court.

古文：阿合马以子忽辛为中书右丞，行省江淮，恐不为所容，奏留雄飞不遣，改陕西汉中道提刑按察使。
现代文：阿合马之子忽辛为中书右丞，巡视江淮，但恐不为雄飞所容，奏请改雄飞为陕西汉中道提刑按察使。
English: Ahama's son, Ku Xin, was the official in charge of the inspection of the Yangtze River and the Huai River. However, he was afraid that he would not be accepted by Xiong Fei, so he requested that Xiong Fei be changed to the inspector of Shaanxi Hanzhong Road.

古文：未行，阿合马死，朝臣皆以罪去。拜参知政事。
现代文：尚未启程，阿合马被杀，朝臣中与阿合马有牵连者都因罪免职，雄飞拜为参知政事。
English: Before he left, Ahama was killed, and all the courtiers who were involved with Ahama were removed from office for their crimes, and Xiongfeibai was appointed to the post of prefect.

古文：阿合马用事日久，卖官鬻狱，纪纲大坏，雄飞乃先自降一阶，于是侥幸超躐者皆降之。
现代文：阿合马执政日久，卖官鬻狱，纪纲大坏。雄飞先自降一级，于是那些侥幸越级提拔的人也都降官一级。
English: Ahama had been in power for a long time, selling officials and imprisoning them, and the discipline was very bad. Xiongfei was the first to lower himself by one level, so those who were lucky enough to pass the promotion were also demoted by one level.

古文：忽辛有罪，敕中贵人及中书杂问，忽辛历指宰执曰： 汝曾使我家钱物，何得问我！ 
现代文：忽辛有罪，皇帝令有权势的宦官及中书省共同审理，忽辛指着一个审问他的官员说 ：你们曾用过我家的钱物，有什么资格审问我？ 
English: Guo Xin was found guilty, and the emperor ordered the powerful eunuchs and the People's Commissariat of Literature to be tried together. Guo Xin pointed to an official who was interrogating him and said, "You have used my family's money and property. What qualifications do you have to interrogate me?"

古文：雄飞曰： 我曾受汝家钱物否？ 
现代文：雄飞说： 我曾接受你家钱物没有？ 
English: Xiongfei said: Did I ever accept your family's money and property?

古文：曰： 惟公独否。 
现代文：忽辛说： 只有公没有。 
English: Kuo Xin said: Only the public has no voice.

古文：雄飞曰： 如是，则我当问汝矣。 
现代文：雄飞说： 这样说来，我应该审问你了。 
English: Xiongfei said, "In that case, I should interrogate you."

古文：忽辛遂伏辜。
现代文：忽辛伏罪。
English: The crime of absconding.

古文：二十一年春，册上尊号，议大赦天下，雄飞谏曰： 古人言：无赦之国，其刑必平。
现代文：二十一年春，为世祖上尊号，准备大赦天下。雄飞进谏说 ：古人有言，无赦之国，其刑必平。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, preparations were made to grant a general amnesty to the world in honor of the world's ancestor. Xiongfei said: The ancients said, "In a country where there is no forgiveness, the punishment will be equal."

古文：故赦者，不平之政也。圣明在上，岂宜数赦！ 
现代文：也就是说，大赦是因为有不平之政，今皇上圣明，岂可一赦再赦。 
English: That is to say, the amnesty is because there is an unfair government, and now that the emperor is a saint, can there be one amnesty after another?

古文：帝嘉纳之，语雄飞曰： 大猎而后见善射，集议而后知能言，汝所言者是，朕今从汝。 
现代文：世宗很称赞，对雄飞说 ：大猎而后见善射，集议而后知能言，你所说是正确的，朕今听从你的。 
English: Shizong was very praiseworthy, and said to Xiongfei, "Great hunting is followed by good shooting, collective discussion is followed by wise speech. What you said is correct, I will listen to you now."

古文：遂降轻刑之诏。
现代文：于是停止颁发轻刑之诏。
English: As a result, the issuing of light sentences was stopped.

古文：雄飞刚直廉慎，始终不易其节。
现代文：雄飞为人刚直，廉洁谨慎，始终不变节。
English: Xiongfei is an upright, honest and prudent person, and he always keeps his word.

古文：尝坐省中，诏趣召之，见于便殿，谓雄飞曰： 若卿可谓真廉者矣。
现代文：有天在中书省，世祖下诏召他至便殿，对他说： 卿可说是真正廉洁的人。
English: One day at the Central Calligraphy Department, the patriarch summoned him to the hall and said to him, "Your Excellency is a truly incorruptible person.

古文：闻卿贫甚，今特赐卿银二千五百两、钞二千五百贯。 
现代文：听说卿甚贫，今特赐银二千五百两，钞二千五百贯。 
English: I've heard that you are very poor, so I'm giving you 2,500 taels of silver and 2,500 kan bills.

古文：雄飞拜谢，将出，又诏加赐金五十两及金酒器。
现代文：雄飞拜谢，正要退出，又诏加赐金五十两及金酒器。
English: Xiongfei bowed in thanks, and as he was about to withdraw, he also gave him fifty taels of gold and a golden wine vessel.

古文：雄飞受赐，封识藏于家。
现代文：雄飞将受赐金银封藏于家中。
English: Xiongfei sealed the gold and silver he was given at home.

古文：后阿合马之党以雄飞罢政，诣省乞追夺赐物，裕宗在东宫闻之，命参政温迪罕谕丞相安童曰： 上所以赐张雄飞者，旌其廉也，汝岂不知耶？
现代文：后来阿合马的党徒见雄飞辞官，到中书省去要求追夺雄飞受赐之物。裕宗在东宫闻知，命参政温迪罕告诉丞相安童： 皇上之所以赐雄飞，是表扬他的廉洁，你岂能不知？
English: Later, when Ahama's party members saw that Xiongfei had been appointed to the post, they went to the Chinese Academy of Letters to demand the return of what Xiongfei had been given. Yu Zong heard about it in the East Palace, and Wendi Han, who was to take part in politics, told the chancellor Ando: The reason why the emperor gave Xiongfei the post was to praise his integrity. Can't you see that?

古文：毋为小人所诈。 
现代文：不要为小人所欺诈。 
English: Don't be fooled by the villain.

古文：塔即古阿散请检核前省钱谷，复用阿合马之党，竟矫诏追夺之。
现代文：塔即古阿散请查核前中书省之钱谷，复用阿合马党羽，竟假传圣旨追夺了张雄飞所受赐的财物。
English: That is to say, the ancient A-san asked the Qiangu of the Chinese Ministry of Education to investigate and double-use the A-hama Party members, who actually falsely preached the holy will and seized the property given to Zhang Xiongfei.

古文：塔即古阿散等俄以罪诛，帝虑校核失当，命近臣伯颜阅之。
现代文：不久，塔即古阿散等因罪伏诛。皇帝怕清查中书省钱粮不当，命近臣伯颜监督。
English: Not long after, Tazhugu Ahsan and others were executed for their crimes. The emperor was afraid that the investigation would reveal that the book was improperly written to save money and grain, so he ordered his close vassal Boyan to supervise the investigation.

古文：中书左丞耶律老哥劝雄飞诣伯颜自辨，雄飞曰： 上以老臣廉，故赐臣，然臣未尝敢轻用，而封识以俟者，政虞今日耳，又可自辨乎？ 
现代文：中书左丞耶律老哥劝雄飞去向伯颜辩白。雄飞说： 皇上认为老臣廉洁，故赐臣钱财，然臣未曾敢轻用，一直封存，正是考虑到会有今日，又有什么可以辩白的？ 
English: The elder brother of Ye Lu, the left-hand man of the middle school, advised Xiong Fei to argue with Bo Yan. Xiong Fei said: The emperor thought that the old minister was incorruptible, so he gave the money to the minister, but the minister did not dare to use it lightly and kept it sealed. It was precisely in consideration of today, and what could be argued?

古文：二十一年，卢世荣以言利进用，雄飞与诸执政同日皆罢。
现代文：二十一年，卢世荣因自称能为朝廷谋利，得到重用，雄飞与其他执政大臣皆同日罢官。
English: In 1921, Lu Shirong was promoted because he claimed to be able to benefit the imperial court. Xiong Fei and the other ruling ministers resigned on the same day.

古文：二十三年，起为燕南河北道宣慰使，决壅滞，黜奸贪，政化大行。
现代文：二十三年，起任燕南、河北道宣慰使，他疏通河道，清除奸贪，政治清明。
English: In the 23rd year, he was appointed as the propaganda and consolation envoy of Yan'nan and Hebei provinces. He dredged rivers, eliminated corruption, and made politics clear.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：卒于任。
English: He died in office.

古文：子五人：师野，师谔，师白，师俨，师约。
现代文：有子五人：师野、师谔、师白、师俨、师约。
English: There are five children: Shino, Shizuku, Shihaku, Shizuku, and Shiyo.

古文：师野宿卫东宫时，荆湖行省平章政事阿里海牙入觐，言之宰相，欲白皇太子，请以师野为荆南总管，雄飞固止之。
现代文：师野为皇子宿卫。阿里海牙曾奏请师野为荆南总管，雄飞制止，回家对师野说 ：你本当应该为官，但我方为执政，天下人必认为是我徇私。
English: Shino is the prince's bodyguard. Ali Hague once asked Shino to be the general manager of Jingnan. Xiongfei stopped him and went home and said to Shino, "You really should be an official, but we are in power. People around the world will think that I am selfish."

古文：归谓师野曰： 今日欲有官汝者，汝宿卫日久，固应得官，然我方为执政，天下必我私汝，我一日不去此位，汝辈勿望有官也。 其介慎如此。
现代文：我一日不去此位，你们就不要指望当官。 
English: If I don't become president one day, don't expect me to become president.

古文：张德辉
现代文：其操行谨慎于此可见。
English: This shows that they are exercising caution.

古文：张德辉，字耀卿，冀宁交城人。
现代文：张德辉，字耀卿，冀宁交城人。
English: Zhang Dehui, Zi Yaoqing, Ji Ning Jiaocheng.

古文：少力学，数举于乡。
现代文：年少时勤学，乡试中举。
English: When he was young, he studied hard and passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：金贞祐间兵兴，家业殆尽。
现代文：金贞年间曾向御史台谋求一官半职。
English: During the years of Kim Jong-il, he sought a position on the Imperial History Channel.

古文：试掾史台，会盗杀卜者，有司纵迹之，获僧匿一妇人，搒掠诬服，狱具，德辉疑其冤，其后果得盗。
现代文：当时有盗杀一算命先生，官府追索，捕获某僧人藏一妇人，认为该僧为杀人犯，屈打成招。德辉怀疑这是桩冤案，后来果捕获那真正杀人的盗贼。
English: At that time, there was a theft and murder of a fortune teller, the government pursued the case, captured a certain monk and hid a woman, considered the monk to be a murderer, and beat him to death. Dehui suspected that this was a case of injustice, and later caught the thief who really killed people.

古文：岁乙未，从天泽南征，筹画调发，多出德辉。天泽将诛逃兵，德辉救止，配令穴城。
现代文：赵秉文、杨忄造都器重其材。金亡后，德辉渡黄河去北方，史天泽在真定召他任经历官。太宗七年，随军南征，为天泽出谋划策。天泽要诛杀逃兵，德辉劝止。
English: After the death of Jin, De Hui crossed the Yellow River to the north, and Shi Tianze called him to serve as a probation officer in Zhending. In the seventh year of Taizong, he followed the army to the south and made a plan for Tian Ze. Tian Ze wanted to kill deserters, and De Hui advised him to stop.

古文：光州荜山农民为寨以自固，天泽议攻之，德辉请招之降，全活甚众。
现代文：光州荜山农民建寨自卫，天泽要攻取，德辉建议招降，使寨中农民免兵刀之灾。
English: The farmers of Lushan in Gwangju built a walled village to defend themselves. Tianze wanted to attack, and De Hui proposed to invite them to surrender so that the farmers in the walled village would be spared the scourge of the sword.

古文：岁丁未，世祖在潜邸，召见，问曰： 孔子殁已久，今其性安在？ 
现代文：定宗二年，世祖在王府召见德辉，问他： 孔子去世已久，如今他所说的性在哪里？ 
English: Two years after the enthronement, the patriarch summoned De Hui to the royal palace and asked him: Confucius has been dead for a long time, where is the sex he spoke of now?

古文：对曰： 圣人与天地终始，无往不在。
现代文：回答说 ：圣人与天地共始终，无处不在。
English: He answered: The sage is always and everywhere with heaven and earth.

古文：宰执中虽用一二儒臣，余皆武弁世爵，及论军国大事，又不使预闻，大抵以儒进者三十之一，国之存亡，自有任其责者，儒何咎焉！ 
现代文：殿下能行圣人之道，孔子的性也就在这里。 又问： 有人说，辽因为信佛而亡，金因为好儒学而亡，有这话吗？ 回答说： 辽朝的事臣未能全知，金朝则是亲眼所见，宰臣中虽用一二儒臣，而其余都是世袭的武将，军国大事又不让儒臣参与。以儒生而进为宰臣的，大抵只占三十分之一。金国之存亡，自有人应负责任，儒臣有何过错？ 
English: His Imperial Highness can walk the path of a sage, and this is the nature of Confucius. Also asked: Some people say that Liao died because of his belief in Buddha, and Jin died because of his good Confucianism, is this true? Answered: The officials of the Liao Dynasty did not know everything, but the Kim Dynasty saw it with their own eyes. Although one or two Confucianists were used among the vice-ministers, the rest were hereditary generals, and they did not allow Confucianists to participate in military affairs. Those who advanced as vice-ministers with Confucianism usually accounted for only one-thirtieth. The survival of the Kim

古文：世祖然之。因问德辉曰： 祖宗法度具在，而未尽设施者甚多，将如之何？ 
现代文：世祖点头称是，又问德辉： 祖宗的法度俱在，而许多未能付诸实施，该如何是好？ 
English: The ancestor nodded and said yes, and then asked De Hui: The ancestor's laws are everywhere, and many have not been implemented, what should we do?

古文：德辉指银盘，喻曰： 创业之主，如制此器，精选白金良匠，规而成之，畀付后人，传之无穷。
现代文：德辉指着银盘比喻说： 开创国家大业者，如制造这银器，要精选白金良匠，按一定规矩制作而成，交给后人，传之无穷。
English: Pointing to the silver plate, De Hui said, by way of analogy, "If you want to create a great national industry, such as the manufacture of this silverware, you must carefully select a good platinum craftsman, make it according to certain rules, pass it on to future generations, and pass it on to infinity.

古文：当求谨厚者司掌，乃永为宝用。
现代文：但应交给谨慎厚道的人掌管，才永为珍宝。
English: However, it should be handed over to a prudent and benevolent person to be in charge, so that it will always be a treasure.

古文：否则不惟缺坏，亦恐有窃而去之者矣。 
现代文：否则不仅会损坏，而且恐有被偷去的危险。 
English: Otherwise, not only will it be damaged, but there is also a risk of it being stolen.

古文：世祖良久曰： 此正吾心所不忘也。 
现代文：世祖沉思了好久说道 ：这是我所不能忘怀的。 
English: The patriarch thought for a long time and said, "This is something I cannot forget."

古文：又访中国人材，德辉举魏璠、元裕、李冶等二十余人。
现代文：又询问中原人材，德辉举出魏、元裕、李冶等二十余人。
English: He also inquired about talent in Central Plains, and Dehui listed more than 20 people, including Wei, Yuan Yu, and Li Ye.

古文：又问： 农家作劳，何衣食之不赡？ 
现代文：又问 ：农家辛苦劳动，为何还衣食不足？ 
English: Another question: Why is there a shortage of food and clothing when farmers work so hard?

古文：德辉对曰： 农桑天下之本，衣食之所从出者也。男耕女织，终岁勤苦，择其精者输之官，余粗恶者将以仰事俯育。
现代文：德辉回答说： 农桑为天下之本，衣食之源。农民男耕女织，终年勤苦，而将其最好的交纳于官，剩下粗恶者用以上养父母，下育儿女。
English: De Hui replied: Agricultural mulberry trees are the foundation of the world and the source of food and clothing. Peasant men and women weave, work hard all year round, and pay their best to officials. The rest of the coarse and vicious people use the above to raise their parents and raise their children.

古文：而亲民之吏复横敛以尽之，则民鲜有不冻馁者矣。 
现代文：而地方官吏又横征暴敛，搜刮一空，人民哪有不受冻挨饿的？ 
English: But the local officials have been raiding and scrounging, and the people are starving from the cold.

古文：对曰： 孔子为万代王者师，有国者尊之，则严其庙貌，修其时祀，其崇与否，于圣人无所损益，但以此见时君崇儒重道之意何如耳。 世祖曰： 今而后，此礼勿废。 
现代文：定宗三年春，行祭奠孔子之礼。世祖问德辉 ：为何要对孔子行祭奠礼？ 回答说 ：孔子为万代主宰天下者之师，所以历代君主都尊敬他。把他的庙修建得十分庄严肃穆，按时祭祀。崇敬他与否，对圣人无利也无害，但可以见君王崇儒重道之意如何。 世祖说： 从今以后，此礼勿废。 
English: In the spring of the third year of the Jodo sect's reign, a Confucius memorial service was held. The patriarch asked De Hui, "Why do you want to hold a memorial service for Confucius?" The patriarch replied, "Confucius is the teacher of the one who will rule the world for all generations, so all monarchs throughout the ages have respected him. He built his temple very solemnly and solemnly, and offered sacrifices on time. Whether you revere him or not is neither beneficial nor harmful to the saint, but you can see what the king's intention of revering Confucius is. The patriarch said, "From now on, don't waste this ceremony."

古文：世祖又问： 典兵与宰民者，为害孰甚？ 
现代文：又问： 领兵与治民，哪个最危害百姓？ 
English: He also asked: Which is the most harmful to the people, leading soldiers or governing the people?

古文：对曰： 军无纪律，纵使残暴，害固非轻；若宰民者，头会箕敛以毒天下，使祖宗之民如蹈水火，为害尤甚。 
现代文：回答说 ：军无纪律，任其残暴，为害固然不轻；但是，治民之官，对人民横征暴敛，毒害天下，使祖宗之民如在水火之中，为害尤甚。 
English: He replied, "The army is undisciplined and is allowed to be brutal, which is certainly not a minor harm; however, it is especially harmful for the people's government officials to impose arbitrary taxes on the people, poison the world, and make the people of their ancestors suffer.

古文：世祖默然，曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：世祖沉默无言，过了一会儿又问： 那怎么办？ 
English: The patriarch was speechless, and after a while he asked again, "Then what should we do?"

古文：对曰： 莫若更遣族人之贤如口温不花者，使掌兵权，勋旧则如忽都虎者，使主民政，若此，则天下均受赐矣。 
现代文：德辉回答道： 莫若派遣皇族中之贤者如口温不花这样的人，执掌兵权；旧日勋臣如忽都虎这样的人，使他主管民政，这样，则天下均受到皇上的恩赐了。 
English: De Hui replied, "If we were to send a wise man from the imperial family, such as someone who is warm-hearted and easy-going, to take charge of the military; or if we were to send a former courtier, such as Hu Duhu, to be in charge of civil affairs, then the whole world would be blessed by the emperor.

古文：是年夏，德辉得告，将还，更荐白文举、郑显之、赵元德、李进之、高鸣、李盘、李涛数人。
现代文：是年夏，德辉告假还家，临行前又举荐白文举、郑显之、赵元德、李进之、高鸣、李般木、李涛等数人。
English: In the summer of last year, De Hui returned home after vacation. Before leaving, he recommended several people, including Bai Wenju, Zheng Xianzhi, Zhao Yuande, Li Jinzhi, Gao Ming, Li Bangmu and Li Tao.

古文：陛辞，又陈先务七事：敦孝友，择人才，察下情，贵兼听，亲君子，信赏罚，节财用。
现代文：辞别皇帝时，又奏陈首先要办的七事：提倡孝友，选择人才，体察民情，重视听取各种意见，亲近君子，信赏必罚，节省财用。
English: When bidding farewell to the emperor, he also listed seven things that Chen should do first: promote filial piety, select talents, consider the people's feelings, listen to various opinions, be close to gentlemen, reward and punish, and save money.

古文：世祖以字呼之，赐坐，锡赉优渥。
现代文：世祖对张德辉不呼其名而呼其字，赐坐，赏赐优厚。
English: The patriarch did not call Zhang Dehui by his name, but by his word. He gave him a seat and rewarded him generously.

古文：有顷，奉旨教胄子孛罗等。
现代文：不久，德辉奉旨教育贵族子弟孛罗等。
English: Soon, De Hui was ordered to educate the aristocrat's son, Jiao Luo.

古文：壬子，德辉与元裕北觐，请世祖为儒教大宗师，世祖悦而受之。
现代文：宪宗二年，德辉与元裕在北方朝见皇帝，请世祖为儒教的大宗师，世祖高兴地接受了。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, De Hui and Yuan Yu went to see the emperor in the north and asked the patriarch to be the great founder of Confucianism. The patriarch gladly accepted.

古文：因启： 累朝有旨蠲儒户兵赋，乞令有司遵行。 
现代文：德辉等就此进一步启奏： 历朝有旨免除儒户的兵赋义务，乞下令有关政府部门遵行。 
English: De Hui and others further commented on this: All dynasties have had the intention of exempting Confucians from military service, so please order the relevant government departments to comply.

古文：从之。仍命德辉提调真定学校。
现代文：世祖同意，命德辉领导和管理真定学校事务。
English: The patriarch agreed and ordered De Hui to lead and manage the affairs of the Jinding School.

古文：世祖即位，起德辉为河东南北路宣抚使，下车，击豪强，黜赃吏，均赋役。
现代文：世祖即位，起任德辉为河东南北路宣抚使。他下车伊始，便打击豪强，罢黜贪官污吏，平均赋役负担。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, De Hui was appointed as the special envoy of the North-South Road of Hedong Province. From the beginning of his service, he cracked down on the arrogant and powerful, ousted corrupt officials, and imposed an average service burden.

古文：耆耋不远数千里来见，曰： 六十年不复见此太平官府矣。 
现代文：七八十岁的老人不远数百里来看他，说道： 六十年来也没有见到像今天这样太平的官府了。 
English: An elderly man in his 70s or 80s, who had come hundreds of miles to see him, said: "In 60 years, I have never seen the government as peaceful as it is today.

古文：戴之若神明。
现代文：把德辉奉若神明。
English: They worship De Hui as if he were a god.

古文：西川帅纽邻重取兵千余人，守吏畏其威，莫敢申理，隶凤翔屯田者八百余人，屯罢，兵不归籍；会签防戍兵，河中浮梁故有守卒，不以充数。悉条奏之，帝可其请。兵后孱民多依庇豪右，及有以身佣藉衣食，岁久掩为家奴，悉遣还之为民。二年，考绩为十路最。
现代文：战乱后一些贫弱小民多依托于豪强的庇护，有的为人帮工来谋衣食，日子一长，他们被抑为奴隶。
English: After the war, some poor and weak people mostly relied on the protection of the brave and the strong, and some helped people to find food and clothing. As time went on, they were kept as slaves.

古文：陛见，帝劳之，命疏所急务，条四事：一曰严保举以取人材；二曰给俸禄以养廉能；三曰易世官而迁都邑；四曰正刑罚而勿屡赦。
现代文：德辉把他们都释放回家为民。至元二年，考核地方官吏政绩，德辉为十路之最。朝见皇帝时，帝慰劳他，命他疏陈当前所应办的急务，他条陈四事：一、严格保举制以取人才；二、给俸禄以保持官吏的廉洁，发挥他们的才能；三、改变官职的世袭制，并把他们迁到别的都城；四、刑罚公正而不要多次实行大赦。
English: De Hui released them all to return home to the people. In the first year of the 21st century, when the performance of local officials was evaluated, De Hui was the best of the ten. When he met with the emperor, the emperor consoled him and ordered him to give up the urgent tasks he should do at the moment. He listed four things: First, strictly guarantee the promotion system to recruit talents; Second, give salaries to keep officials clean and give play to their talents; Third, change the hereditary system of official positions and relocate them to other capital cities; Fourth, make punishments fair and do not repeatedly grant amnesty.

古文：宝合丁议赋茧丝，令民税而后输。
现代文：帝称赞并加采纳。调任东平路宣慰使。东平赋重，诉讼多，比河东多一至五倍，一遇赃官，更加紧搜括，毫不宽容。
English: He was commended and accepted by the emperor. He was transferred to the post of Tongping Road Propaganda and Consolation Envoy. In Dongping, there were more lawsuits, one to five times more than in Hedong, and in the case of eunuchs, they were more tightly searched and had no tolerance.

古文：德辉曰： 是诬上以毒下也，且后期之责孰任之！ 遂罢其事。
现代文：德辉奏请免除百姓向远处交纳豆粟二十万斛，而由政府向民间征购粟十万斛抵其数。
English: De Hui requested that the people be exempted from paying 200,000 catties of soybean poppy to distant places, and that the government purchase 100,000 catties of poppy from the people to make up the number.

古文：孀妇马氏，将鬻其女以代纳逋赋，分己俸代偿之，仍蠲其额。
现代文：寡妇马氏要把自己女儿卖掉以交纳所欠赋税，德辉用自己的薪俸代她交纳，而且免除今后赋税。
English: Mr. Ma, a widow, wanted to sell his daughter to pay the tax arrears. De Hui used his salary to pay for her and was exempted from future taxes.

古文：至元三年秋，参议中书省事。
现代文：至元三年秋，德辉参议中书省事。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dehui became a councillor.

古文：五年春，擢侍御史，辞不拜。
现代文：五年春，升为侍御史，德辉辞谢。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain, and De Hui resigned.

古文：有言沿边将校冒代军士、虚糜廪币者，敕按之，奏曰： 在昔将校，备尝艰阻，与士卒同甘苦，今年少子弟袭爵，或以微劳进用，岂知军旅之事乎！
现代文：有人奏报沿途将校冒领军士粮饷，世祖下令审查，德辉奏道： 过去将校与士卒同甘共苦，如今少年子弟或是袭父兄爵位，或是只做点事就升职任用，他们哪知军旅之事，致使朝廷要遣使去审查。
English: Some people reported that along the way, the officers took the soldiers' rations, and the patriarch ordered a review. De Hui said: In the past, the officers and soldiers shared the same joys and sorrows. Nowadays, the young children either inherit their father's and brother's titles, or they are promoted by doing something. They don't know about the military journey, so the court has to send an envoy to review.

古文：致使朝廷遣使覆按，此省院素失约束耳。
现代文：这是省院失于约束。但若严厉地绳之以法，则人人自危。
English: It is the provincial government that has lost control, but if it is severely punished, everyone will be in danger.

古文：痛绳之则人不自安，第易其部署，选武毅才略者任之，庶使军政自新。
现代文：只有改变部署，选勇武刚强有才略的任将校，这样可使军政改过自新。
English: Only by changing the deployment and selecting brave, strong and talented officers can the military and government be reformed.

古文：又时委司宪者体究，庶革其弊。 
现代文：又时常委任监察官，可革除其弊端。 
English: It also appoints ombudsmen from time to time, which can eliminate its drawbacks.

古文：有旨命德辉议御史台条例，德辉奏曰： 御史，执法官。
现代文：朝廷旨令德辉拟定御史台条例，德辉奏道： 御史是执法官。
English: The Imperial Court ordered De Hui to draw up regulations for the Imperial Historian's Office, and De Hui replied: The Imperial Historian is the magistrate.

古文：今法令未明，何据而行？
现代文：今法令不明，根据什么来执法？
English: Now that the law is unclear, what is the basis for enforcing the law?

古文：此事行之不易，陛下宜慎思之。 
现代文：此事行之不易，陛下应慎思考虑。 
English: This is not an easy thing to do, and His Majesty should think about it carefully.

古文：有顷，复召曰： 朕虑之熟矣，卿当力行之。 
现代文：不久，复召德辉入宫，对他说 ：朕已考虑成熟，卿当尽力行之。 
English: Not long after, he recalled De Hui to the palace and said to him, "I have considered maturity, and you should do your best."

古文：对曰： 必欲行之，乞立宗正府以正皇族，外戚得以纠弹，女谒毋令奏事，诸局承应人皆得究治。 
现代文：德辉说： 如果一定要我执行，那就请求设立宗正府以纠正皇族的违法行为，外戚可以受到弹劾。女眷不准来奏事，否则，诸局承办人都得追究查办。 
English: De Hui said: "If I must carry it out, then I will request the establishment of the Zongzheng Prefecture to correct the illegal actions of the imperial family. The maternal relatives can be impeached. The female relatives are not allowed to report the matter, otherwise, the contractors of the various bureaus will have to investigate and investigate.

古文：帝良久曰： 其徐行之。 
现代文：世祖沉默了许久才说 ：这事慢慢实行。 
English: The patriarch was silent for a long time before he said, "Let's do this slowly."

古文：德辉请老，命举任风宪者，疏乌古伦贞等二十人以闻。
现代文：德辉以年老请求辞让。皇帝命他举荐堪任监察官的人。他推举了乌古伦贞等二十人。
English: De Hui asked to resign because of his old age. The emperor ordered him to recommend people who could serve as overseers. He recommended twenty people, including Ugur Renzhen.

古文：初，河东歉，请于朝，发常平贷之，并减其秋租有差。
现代文：原先，河东歉收，德辉请示朝廷，开常平仓贷粮与民，并减秋税。
English: Originally, due to the poor harvest in Hedong, De Hui asked the imperial court to open regular grain storage and loan to the people and reduce the autumn tax.

古文：赋役不均，官吏并缘为奸，赋一征十年，不胜其困苦，民率流亡。
现代文：该地区赋役不均，官吏相互为奸，赋税一征十年，民不堪其苦，相率逃亡。
English: In this region, there was unequal distribution of labor, officials were in cahoots with each other, taxes were levied every ten years, and the people were so miserable that they were more likely to flee.

古文：德辉阅实户编，均其等第，出纳有法，数十年之弊一旦革去。
现代文：德辉核实户口，均其赋役，钱粮出纳有定规，数十年之弊一旦革除。
English: De Hui verifies the household registration, all of them are assigned to work, there are fixed rules for cashing the money and grain, and the disadvantages of decades will be eliminated.

古文：德辉天资刚直，博学有经济器，毅然不可犯，望之知为端人，然性不喜嬉笑。
现代文：德辉禀性刚直，博学，有经邦济世之才，一看就知道他是端正人。但不喜嬉笑。
English: De Hui is upright, erudite, and a scholar. You can tell at a glance that he is an upright person. But he doesn't like to laugh.

古文：与元裕、李冶游封龙山，时人号为龙山三老云。
现代文：与元裕、李冶同游于封龙山，当时人号为 龙山三老 。
English: He swam with Yuan Yu and Li Ye in Fenglongshan. At that time, he was known as the "Three Elders of Longshan."

古文：卒年八十。
现代文：享年八十岁而终。
English: He died at the age of eighty.

古文：马亨马亨，字大用，邢州南和人。
现代文：马亨，字大用，邢州南和人。
English: Ma Heng, a big character, is from the south of Luzhou.

古文：世业农，以赀雄乡里。
现代文：家世代务农，为乡里的财主。
English: His family has been farming for generations and is the village's wealthiest family.

古文：亨少孤，事母孝，金季习为吏。
现代文：亨少失父，非常孝敬母亲。金代末年学习做官。
English: Heng Shao lost his father and was very respectful to his mother. He studied to become an official in the last years of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：庚寅，太宗始建十路征收课税使，河北东西路使王晋辟亨为掾，以才干称。
现代文：太宗二年，始建十路征收课税使，河北东西路使王晋召马亨为部属，亨以才干称著。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Wang Jin appointed Ma Heng as the tax collector for the construction of the 10th Road and the East-West Road in Hebei Province. Ma Heng was known for his talent.

古文：甲午，晋荐于中书令耶律楚材，授转运司知事，寻升经历，擢转运司副使。
现代文：太宗六年，王晋把马亨荐与中书令耶律楚材，授转运司知事，不久升经历，又升转运司副使。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Wang Jin recommended Ma Heng to the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Yerut Chozai, and appointed him as the governor of the Transportation Department. He was promoted to vice-envoy of the Transportation Department soon after.

古文：庚戌，太保刘秉忠荐亨于世祖，召见潜邸，甚器之。
现代文：定宗皇后二年，太保刘秉忠把马亨推荐与世祖，世祖召见，甚是器重。
English: In the second year of Empress Dingzong, the eunuch Liu Bingzhong recommended Ma Heng to the ancestor, the ancestor summoned him, which was very important.

古文：既而籍诸路户口，以亨副八春、忙哥抚谕西京、太原、平阳及陕西五路，俾民弗扰。
现代文：其后登记诸路户口时，派亨去辅助八春、忙哥等抚慰西京、太原、平阳及陕西五路，使民安居乐业。
English: After that, when registering household registration, Heng was sent to assist Hachun, Busy Brother and others to soothe the five districts of Xijing, Taiyuan, Pingyang and Shaanxi, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：既还，图山川形势以献，余使者多以贿败，惟亨等各赐衣九袭。
现代文：回朝，将那里的山川形势绘图献与朝廷。其他使臣差不多都因受贿而罢官，只有亨等各受赐衣九套。
English: He returned to the imperial court and presented a map of the mountain and river situation there to the imperial court. Almost all other envoys were dismissed for accepting bribes, with only Hen and others receiving nine sets of clothes each.

古文：癸丑，从世祖征云南，留亨为京兆榷课所长官。
现代文：宪宗三年，世祖征云南，留亨为京兆榷课所长官。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the ancestors conquered Yunnan, and Ru Heng became the director of the Beijing Zhaojun School.

古文：京兆，藩邸分地也，亨以宽简治之，不事掊克，凡五年，民安而课裕。
现代文：京兆是世祖的封藩地，亨简政宽刑，不横征暴敛，经过五年，人民安居乐业，赋税充足。
English: Jingzhao was the ancestor's fiefdom. Hen Jian Zheng lenient punishment, no arbitrary collection, after five years, the people live and work in peace, and the taxes are sufficient.

古文：丁巳，宪宗遣阿蓝答儿等核藩府钱谷，亨时辇岁办课银五百铤，输之藩府，道出平阳，适与之遇。
现代文：宪宗七年，朝廷遣阿蓝答儿等核实世祖藩府的钱谷，亨当时正把去年所办课银五万铤运送到藩府，经过平阳与阿蓝答儿相遇。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the imperial court sent Alan Diao and others to Qiangu, the ancestral capital of the domain, for verification. At that time, Heng was transporting the last year's course silver of fifty thousand baht to the domain capital, and met Alan Diao through Pingyang.

古文：亨策曰： 见之则银必拘留，不见则必以罪加我，与其银弗达王府，宁获罪焉。 
现代文：亨内心盘算 ：让他们看见了，必然会把所征课银拿去；不让他们看见，则必以罪加我。与其不能把银运送到王府，勿宁我自己获罪。 
English: He thought to himself, "If they see me, they will take the tax money; but if they do not see me, I will be punished. I would rather be punished than not be able to take the money to the king's palace."

古文：避而过之，阿蓝答儿果怒，遣使逮之王府。
现代文：于是回避了阿蓝答儿。阿蓝答儿知道后果然大怒，派人去王府逮捕马亨。
English: Therefore, he avoided Alaungdare. Alaungdare knew the consequences and was furious, so he sent someone to the royal palace to arrest Ma Heng.

古文：世祖询亨曰： 汝往，得无摭汝罪耶？ 
现代文：世祖问亨 ：你去不是会数你的罪状吗？ 
English: The ancestor asked Heng, "If you go, won't you count your crimes?"

古文：对曰： 无害，愿一行。 
现代文：回答说： 不要紧，我愿一行。 
English: He replied, "It doesn't matter, I'll go with you."

古文：乃慰遣亨。
现代文：世祖安慰他一番。
English: The patriarch comforted him the most.

古文：既至，拘系之，穷治百端，竟无所得，惟以支竹课分例钱充公用，及僦公廨辇运脚价为不应，勒偿其直而已。
现代文：到了阿蓝答儿那里，对他进行百般审讯，始终一无所得，只是将竹课分例钱充作公用以及赏付租赁官署和运输费而已。
English: When they got to Alan's place, they interrogated him in all sorts of ways, but they never got anything. All they did was to use the money for public use and to pay the leasing office and transportation costs.

古文：世祖知其诬，更赐银三十二铤。
现代文：世祖知道是冤枉了马亨，赐银三十二铤。
English: The patriarch knew that he had wronged Mahen and gave him thirty-two talents of silver.

古文：己未，从世祖攻鄂州，洎北还，遣亨驰驿往西京等处罢所签军，并抚谕山西、河东、陕右、汉中。
现代文：宪宗九年，随世祖攻鄂州。世祖北还燕京，派亨驰往西京停止征兵，并安抚山西、河东、陕右、汉中。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, he followed his ancestor to attack Huzhou. The northern ancestor returned to Yanjing and sent Hengqi to West Beijing to stop conscription and pacify Shanxi, Hedong, Shaanxi, and Hanzhong.

古文：既还，复遣转饷江上军实。
现代文：回来后又为江南元军运送粮饷。
English: After returning, he transported grain for the Yuan Army in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，陕西、四川立宣抚司，诏亨议陕西宣抚司事。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，设立陕西、四川宣抚司，诏令马亨参与陕西宣抚司事。
English: In the first year of the unification of China, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, established the Shaanxi and Sichuan Procuratorate, and ordered Ma Heng to participate in the Shaanxi Procuratorate.

古文：寻赐金符，迁陕西四川规措军储转运使。
现代文：不久，赐金符，调为陕西四川规措军储转运使。
English: Soon after, he was awarded a gold medal and transferred to the Shaanxi-Sichuan Guizhou Military Reserve Transfer Envoy.

古文：时阿蓝答儿等叛，亨与宣抚使廉希宪、商挺合谋，诛刘太平等，悉定关辅。
现代文：阿蓝答儿等反叛，亨与宣抚使廉希宪、商挺合谋，诛刘太平等，平定关辅。
English: A-Lan-Tae-Er and others rebelled, Heng conspired with the procuratorate to make Lian Xixian and Shang Tu-Ting equal, and subdued Guan Yu.

古文：寻建行省，命亨兼陕西行省左右司郎中。
现代文：不久建行省，命亨兼陕西行省左右司郎中。
English: Soon after the establishment of Xingxing Province, he was appointed to the post of deputy governor of Shaanxi Xingxing Province.

古文：时兴元畜粮五万石，欲转饷大安军，计佣直万缗，众推亨往，时丁内艰，以摄省府事强起之。
现代文：当时，兴元储粮五万石，欲转输大安军为军饷，计运输力役费万缗，推亨督运。亨母亲去世，服丧期未满即被起复为摄省府事。
English: At that time, Xingyuan had a grain reserve of 50,000 koku, and he wanted to transfer it to the Da'an Army as war bounty. He calculated the transportation service fee of 10,000 koku, and pushed Heng to supervise the transportation. Heng's mother died, and before the mourning period was over, he was reinstated as a provincial governor.

古文：至则以兵官丁产均其役，不阅月而事集，无劳民伤财之叹。
现代文：亨到任则按兵官丁户均其劳役，不到一月就把这件事办完，不劳民伤财。
English: When Heng arrived at the post, he was assigned to the labor service according to the number of military officers per household, and the matter was completed in less than a month, saving the people's labor and money.

古文：兴元判官费正寅狡悍不法，莫有能治之者。
现代文：兴元判官费寅，为人狡猾强悍不法。无人能管辖他。
English: Fei Yin, the judge of Xingyuan, is a cunning, strong and lawless person. No one can control him.

古文：亨白省府，欲以法绳之，反诬构行省前保关中有异谋，诏右丞粘合圭谳之，亨力辨之，冤构释然。
现代文：亨请求省府对他绳之以法，他竟反诬行省在关中有异谋，朝廷诏令右丞粘合王圭审问，亨极力辩白，才弄清这桩冤情。
English: Heng asked the provincial government to bring him to justice. He was actually against the false actions of the provincial government in Guanzhong. The court ordered the right to interrogate Wang Gui, and Heng tried his best to clear up this grievance.

古文：四年，迁陕西五路西蜀四川廉访都转运使。
现代文：中统四年，调亨为陕西五路西蜀四川廉访都转运使。
English: In the fourth year of China's reunification, Chaofeng became the envoy of the Fifth Route of Shaanxi Province, West Shuxi Province, Sichuan Province.

古文：未几，朝廷以考课檄诸路转运司，至则并转运司入总管府，咸夺其制书，授亨工部侍郎、解盐副使。
现代文：不久，朝廷令诸路转运司至京进行成绩考核，到京则将转运使并入总管府，收回原来的任命书，同时授亨为工部侍郎、解盐副使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court ordered ZhuLu Transshipment Division to come to Beijing for performance appraisal. Upon arrival in Beijing, Transshipment Division was merged into the General Administration Office, and the original appointment letter was withdrawn. At the same time, Heng was awarded the title of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and Deputy Minister of Desalination.

古文：亨乃上言： 以考课定赏罚，其人甫集，而一切罢之，则是非安在？
现代文：亨上书问： 以考课定赏罚，而诸转运使来又罢他们的官，像这样，是非安在？
English: Heng wrote a letter asking: Is it right and proper to reward and punish officials based on their examination results, while transferring them and then firing them?

古文：宜还其命书，俾仕者有所劝勉。 
现代文：应还给他们的任命书，使为官者有所勉励。 
English: Their letters of appointment should be returned to them so that the officials will be encouraged.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷依从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：亨复上便宜六事： 一曰东宫保傅当用正人，以固国本；二曰中书大政，择任儒臣，以立朝纲；三曰任相惟贤，官不必备，今宰相至十七员，宜加裁汰；四曰左右郎署毗赞大政，今用豪贵子弟，岂能赞襄；五曰六曹之职分理万机，今止设左右二部，事何由办；六曰建元以来，便民条画已多，有司往往视为文具，宜令宪司纠举，务在必行。 
现代文：亨又上言六事：一、太子的太保太傅应用正人，以固国本；二、中书省的执政大臣，须择任儒臣，以确立朝纲；三、任相惟贤，官不必多，今宰相多至十七人，应加裁汰；四、左右郎参助大政，而今用豪贵子弟，岂能有所赞助；五、六部各有其职，分理万机，今只设左右两部，事情如何办理；六、建元以来，有关便民措施也多有规划，而官府往往视为空文，应令监察部门纠劾，务在必行。
English: Heng also mentioned six things: First, the prince's Taibo Taifu should use the righteous person to strengthen the national foundation; second, the ruling minister of the Central Book Ministry must choose a Confucian to establish the imperial program; third, there should not be many officials, but there are as many as seventeen prime ministers now, and they should be cut off; fourth, the right and left lords and ladies should help the government, but now they are using the brave and noble sons and daughters, can they be sponsored; fifth, the six departments each have their own duties, and there are many ways to divide them, but now there are only two left and right departments, how to handle things; sixth

古文：疏闻，帝即召见，有旨： 卿比安在，胡不早言？ 
现代文：世祖看到奏章后，召问他 ：卿近来在哪里，何不早言？ 
English: After the patriarch saw the score, he called out to him, "Where has your lord been lately? Why didn't you tell me sooner?"

古文：亨对曰： 新自陕西来觐。 
现代文：亨答： 新近自陕西来朝见陛下。 
English: Heng A: I have just come from Shaanxi Province to see Your Majesty.

古文：帝谕曰： 卿久著忠勤，自今不令卿远出矣。 
现代文：帝告谕： 卿久以忠心勤谨称著，自今以后不令卿远行。 
English: Emperor's announcement: Your Excellency has long been praised for his loyalty and diligence. From now on, your Excellency is not allowed to travel far.

古文：至元三年，进嘉议大夫、左三部尚书，寻改户部尚书，金谷出纳，有条不紊。
现代文：至元三年，亨进升嘉议大夫、左三部尚书，不久改为户部尚书，钱粮出入皆有条不紊。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Heng Jin Sheng Jiayuan became a doctor, and the three departments on the left were called Shangshu (尚書), which was soon changed to Hubei Shangshu (户部尚書). Money and grain were coming and going in an orderly manner.

古文：时有贾胡，恃制国用使阿合马，欲贸交钞本，私平准之利，以增岁课为辞。
现代文：有西域商人，恃制国用使阿合马之势，以增加每年课税为名，欲买下交钞发行权，私夺政府管制物价之利。
English: There is a merchant in the western region who, in the name of increasing the annual tax levy, wants to buy the right to issue banknotes and take advantage of the government's price control.

古文：帝以问亨，对曰： 交钞可以权万货者，法使然也。
现代文：帝将此事问亨，亨说： 交钞之可以交易万货，这是法律的力量。
English: The emperor asked Heng about this, and Heng said, "If you hand over money, you can trade all kinds of goods. This is the power of the law."

古文：法者，主上之柄，今使一贾擅之，废法从私，将何以令天下？ 
现代文：法者，是皇上的权力，今让一商人去操纵，废法徇私，将如何行令于天下？ 
English: The lawmaker is the power of the emperor, now let a businessman to manipulate, abolish the law and selfishness, how will the order be issued to the world?

古文：事遂寝。亨又建言立常平、义仓，谓备荒之具，宜及举行。而时以财用不足，止设义仓。
现代文：于是使那个西域商人的意图未能实现。亨又建议设立常平仓、义仓，作为备荒之用。终因财力不足只设义仓。
English: As a result, the intention of the merchant in the western region did not come to fruition. Heng also proposed the establishment of a standing warehouse and a storage warehouse as a means of preparing for a famine. In the end, only a storage warehouse was set up due to insufficient financial resources.

古文：七年，立尚书省，仍以亨为尚书，领左部。
现代文：七年，设立尚书省，以马亨为尚书，领左部。
English: Seven years later, the Ministry of Calligraphy was established, with Mahen as the calligrapher, leading the left section.

古文：亨上言： 尚书省专领金谷百工之事，其铨选宜归中书，以示无滥。 
现代文：亨上书说 ：尚书省专管钱谷及百工之事，官吏的选拔任命应归中书省，这样才有章无滥。 
English: Heng Shangshu said: Shangshu Province is in charge of Qiantu and Baekgong affairs, and the selection and appointment of officials should belong to the Central Ministry of Education and Culture, so that there will be no abuse.

古文：寻为平章阿合马所忌，以诬免官。
现代文：不久，因受平章阿合马的忌刻，被诬告免官。
English: Not long after, he was dismissed from his post on the basis of a false accusation, as a result of receiving a death sentence from the Taira clan.

古文：卒，年六十二，谥敬肃。乌古孙泽乌古孙泽，字润甫，临潢人。其先女真乌古部，因以为氏。
现代文：时逢元军围襄樊，朝廷决定由河南行省调发军饷，诏令阿里为河南行省右丞，姚枢为左丞，亨为佥省任其事。军饷水陆供应，不曾中断，其中亨出力最多。至元十年，还至京师，世祖方欲授权重用，突然四肢瘫痪。至元十四年卒，年七十一岁。乌古孙泽，字润甫，临潢人。其祖先为女真乌古部，因以乌古为姓。
English: At the time of the Yuan army's siege of Xiangfan, the imperial court decided to transfer the military pay from Henan Province to Henan Province, and ordered Ali to be Henan Province's right-hand man, Yao Zu to be the left-hand man, and Heng to be the left-hand man. The supply of military pay by land and water was not interrupted, of which Heng contributed the most. In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was transferred to Beijing, and the patriarch wanted to authorize reuse, and suddenly his four limbs were paralyzed. He died in the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of 71. Ugusunze, surnamed Run

古文：祖璧，仕金为明威将军、资用库使，从金主迁汴。
现代文：祖父名璧，为金朝明威将军、资用库使，随金朝皇帝迁到汴京。
English: His grandfather, Mingwei, was a general and treasury envoy of the Kim dynasty, and moved to Beijing with the emperor of the Kim dynasty.

古文：泽性刚毅，读书举大略，一切求诸己，不事章句，才干过人。
现代文：汴京陷落，迁居大名。父名仲，豪爽，洒脱不拘，但教其子孙泽却特严。孙泽天性刚毅，读书只理解其大略，不拘泥于词句，才干过人。
English: After the fall of Beijing, he moved to a daimyo (feudal lord). His father was well-known, bold, and free-wheeling, but he was very strict in teaching his children and grandchildren. Sun Ze was a strong-willed person by nature, and only had a general understanding of reading. He did not stick rigidly to words and sentences, and he was an exceptional talent.

古文：世祖将取江南，泽以选输钞至淮南饷军，丞相阿术见而奇之，补淮东大都督府掾。
现代文：世祖准备进取江南，选派泽送钞到淮南作为军饷，丞相阿术一见就认为他有奇才，任他为淮东大都督府的属官。
English: The ancestor of the world was preparing to enter the south of the Yangtze River. He chose to send Zhe to send money to Huainan as a military eunuch. At first sight, the prime minister Ah Shu thought he was a genius, and appointed him as a subordinate official of the Huaidong Provincial Government.

古文：至元十四年，元帅唆都下兵闽、越，见泽，与语而合，即辟元帅府提控案牍。
现代文：至元十四年，元帅唆都进军闽、越，见孙泽，与他交谈，很合得来，便留元帅府管理文书档案。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the marshal of the Sui Dynasty marched into Yunnan and Yue, he saw Sun Ze and had a conversation with him. They got along very well, so he left the marshal's office to manage the documents and archives.

古文：时宋广王据福州，改元炎兴，度我军且至，遂入于海，复聚兵甲子门。
现代文：这时，宋广王占据福州，改元炎兴，预料元军将至，逃入海中，聚兵于甲子门。
English: At this time, King Song Guang occupied Fuzhou, the Yuan Dynasty was in full swing, the Yuan Army was expected to arrive, he fled into the sea, and gathered his troops at Koshimen.

古文：其将张世杰攻泉州，兴化守臣陈瓒举郡应之。
现代文：其将张世杰攻泉州，兴化守臣陈瓒响应。
English: He ordered Zhang Shijie to attack Quanzhou, and the Xinghua governor Chen Xi responded.

古文：文天祥置都督府于南剑州，守臣张清行都督府事，谋复建宁。
现代文：文天祥置都督府于南剑州，守臣张清行都督府事，图谋收复建宁。
English: Wen Tianxiang set up the governor's office in South Jianzhou, and his vassal Zhang Qing was in charge of the governor's office and plotted to recover Jianning.

古文：闽中郡县往往复从宋，江东大扰。
现代文：闽中郡县往往又顺从宋军，江东很不安宁。
English: The counties in the middle of the Yunnan Province often obeyed the Song Army, and the Jiangdong Province was very restless.

古文：唆都时军浙东，建、信告急，唆都谋于众曰： 我军当何先？ 
现代文：这时唆都正在浙东，建宁、信州告急。唆都与将商议： 我军当以何为先？ 
English: At this time, the commanders-in-chief were in eastern Zhejiang, and Jianning and Shinshu were in a hurry. The commanders-in-chief discussed with the commanders-in-chief: What should our army do first?

古文：泽曰： 彼据闽、广，而我往浙右，非策之善。
现代文：孙泽曰 ：彼占据闽、广，而我住浙右，此非良策。
English: Sun Tse said, "He lives in Shandong and Guangxi, while I live in Zhejiang and Zhuhai. This is not a good policy."

古文：譬之伐木，务除其根，当先向南。 
现代文：比如伐木，务除其根，当先向南。 
English: For example, when felling trees, be sure to remove their roots and head south first.

古文：会行省檄唆都，与左丞塔出会兵甲子门，遂度兵闽关，八战而至南剑，杀其守臣张清，宋师遂退。
现代文：这时行省令唆都与左丞塔出会兵于甲子门，越过闽关，历经八战而至南剑，杀守臣张清，宋军退却。
English: At this time, the provincial commanding officer and Zuo Juntao met the soldiers at Koshimen, crossed the pass, went through eight battles and reached Nanjian, killed the guard Zhang Qing, and the Song army retreated.

古文：冬十月，收福州，进攻兴化，拔之。
现代文：冬十月，元军收复福州，攻下兴化。
English: In the winter of October, the Yuan army recovered Fuzhou and conquered Xinghua.

古文：唆都怒其民反覆，下令屠城，泽屡谏不听，复前说曰： 世杰不虞我军遽至，方急攻泉州，谋固其植。
现代文：唆都恼怒兴化民反复无常，下令进行大屠杀。孙泽屡谏不听，最后又劝道： 世杰不顾我军会突然到来，正急攻泉州，企图在这里站稳脚根。
English: Sun Tse repeatedly refused to listen, and finally advised: Despite the sudden arrival of our army, Sejie is rushing to attack Quanzhou in an attempt to gain a foothold here.

古文：我新得泉州，民志未固，旦暮且失守。
现代文：我军新得泉州，民心未定，早晚都可能失守。
English: Our army is new to Quanzhou, the people's hearts are undecided, and sooner or later it may be lost.

古文：比我定兴化，整兵而南，彼树植将日固矣。
现代文：近来我军占领兴化，整兵向南，他们的根基将日益稳固。
English: Recently, our army has been occupied and revitalized, and the army has been reorganized to the south, and their foundation will be increasingly stable.

古文：莫若开其遗民，使走泉南扇动之，世杰将胆落而走。是我不战而完泉州，捷于吾兵之驰救也。 
现代文：不如释放百姓，让他们到泉南进行煽动，世杰将害怕而逃走，我军不战而夺取了泉州，这比我们派兵去援救要快得多。 
English: It would be better to release the people and let them carry out incitement in Quanzhou. Shijie would be scared and run away. Our army took Quanzhou without a fight, which is much faster than sending troops to rescue.

古文：唆都喜，开南门纵民去，因得脱死者甚众。
现代文：唆都乐意，开南门放百姓出去，从而免遭屠杀。
English: They were all willing to open the south gate to let the people out, thus avoiding the massacre.

古文：世杰得逃民，知兴化已破，乃解泉州围去。
现代文：他们逃到泉州，世杰知兴化已失，便解泉州之围而去。
English: They fled to Quanzhou. Shijie Zhi Xinghua was already lost, so they left Quanzhou.

古文：唆都至泉州，部署别将，装大舰趣甲子门，自将下漳州，军于海丰，引精骑与塔出会。
现代文：唆都至泉州，安排其他军将卒乘坐大舰直趋甲子门，自己领兵下漳州，屯兵海丰，引精骑与塔出会合。
English: He moved the capital to Quanzhou, arranged for other generals to take the big ship and head straight for the Jiazi Gate, led his own troops down to Zhangzhou, stationed soldiers in Haifeng, and led the elite cavalry to meet the tower.

古文：十二月，入广州。
现代文：十二月进入广州。
English: It entered Guangzhou in December.

古文：十五年春正月，还击潮州，守将马发备御甚固，泽曰： 潮人所以城守不下者，以外多壁垒，为之援应也。第翦其外应，潮必覆矣。 
现代文：十五年春日，元军回师攻潮州，宋军守将马发防守坚固，孙泽认为： 潮州宋军坚守，我们久攻不下，是因为城外多壁垒为应援，逐一除掉这些外应，潮州城必被攻克。 
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, the Yuan army returned to the division to attack Chaozhou, and the Song army kept the horse and defended it firmly. Sun Ze believed that: the Chaozhou Song army stood firm, and we could not attack for a long time, because there were many barriers outside the city for support. If these external supports were removed one by one, Chaozhou city would be conquered.

古文：乃分兵攻其一大垒，破之，余垒尽散走，二旬而潮拔，马发死焉。
现代文：于是以一支兵马攻其一大垒，其他堡垒的宋军逃走，经二十天战斗，攻下潮州，马发战死。
English: As a result, the Song army attacked its main base with a troop of soldiers and horses, and the other fortresses fled. After twenty days of fighting, they captured Chaozhou, and Ma Fa died in battle.

古文：既而文天祥军溃于江西，广王暨张世杰死于海中，唆都还军福建。
现代文：其后，文天祥军又在江西被打败，广王赵籨及张世杰投海而死。唆都率军回到福建。
English: Later, Wen Tianxiang's army was defeated again in Jiangxi, and Guang Wang Zhao Jun and Zhang Shijie died at sea. Wu Duong led the army back to Fujian.

古文：夏五月，诏立行中书省于福建，以唆都行参知政事，泽行省都事，从朝京师，命知兴化军，赐金织衣，赏其善谋也。
现代文：同年夏五月，诏立福建行中书省，以唆都为行参知政事，孙泽行省都事。二人入京师朝见世祖，世祖又命孙泽知兴化军，赐金织衣，以嘉奖他善于出谋划策。
English: In the summer and May of the same year, he set up Fujian Province as the Central Province of Calligraphy, and appointed Sun Zetou as the Governor of Fujian Province, and Sun Zetou as the Governor of Fujian Province. The two of them went to Beijing to see their ancestor. The ancestor also ordered Sun Zetou to join the Xinghua Army, and gave him a gold knitted garment as a reward for his ability to come up with strategies.

古文：继改兴化军为路，授泽行总管府事，民歌舞迎候于道曰： 是吾民复生之父母也。 
现代文：其后改兴化军为兴化路，授孙泽行总管府事。当地百姓称他为 再生之父母 。孙泽下令掩埋在战争中死亡士兵的尸骨，赈救流离失所的贫民，设立慈幼官，专收养被遗弃的孤儿。
English: After that, the Xinghua Army was changed to Xinghua Road, and Sun Zexing was given the post of general manager of government affairs. Local people called him the "regenerated parent." Sun Ze ordered to bury the bones of soldiers who died in the war, rescue the displaced poor, set up a child welfare officer, and adopt abandoned orphans.

古文：喜极而继以泣。郡新残于兵，白骨在野，首下令掩埋之；又衣食其流离之民，有弃子于道者，置慈幼曹籍而抚育之。郡中恶年少喜为不义，以资求窜名卒伍，冀后得计功版授。官吏恐激变，不敢诘，泽悉追毁所授，诛其尤无良者，贪暴始戢。
现代文：郡中一些恶少好干不义之事，用钱来取得兵籍，希望日后能论功授官。官吏怕激起他们反抗，不敢查究。
English: Some villains in the county are eager to commit injustice, use money to obtain military registration, and hope to be awarded meritorious officers in the future. Officials are afraid to investigate for fear of arousing their resistance.

古文：始陈瓒以郡应张世杰，民多战死者，至是，吏援例将籍其产，泽语吏曰： 国家至仁，诛止陈瓒，从瓒者犹蒙宥，民奈何连坐！ 
现代文：孙泽取消他们的军籍，诛杀最不安分守己的人，他们的贪暴行为才有所收敛。原先陈瓒据兴化郡响应张世杰，该郡百姓多有战死者，如今，地方官吏按例要没收死亡百姓的家产。孙泽对这些官吏说 ：国家最讲仁慈，只杀陈瓒，那些随从瓒的人还蒙赦宥，为何要牵连百姓！ 
English: Sun Ze cancelled their military registration and killed the most insecure and self-serving people, and only then did their corrupt behavior abate somewhat. Originally, Chen Rong was based in Xinghua County in response to Zhang Shijie, and many people in the county died in the war. Nowadays, local officials routinely confiscate the family property of dead people. Sun Ze said to these officials: The state is the most merciful, only killing Chen Rong, and those who follow Rong are still forgiven, why involve the people!

古文：亟为令曰： 民不幸诖误从陈瓒诛，及斗死无后者，其田庐赀产并给其族姻，有司无所与。 
现代文：立即下令： 民不幸误随陈瓒被诛，及战死无后者，其田产房屋都给其同族或亲戚，官府不得没收。 
English: He immediately ordered: "Unfortunately, the people were mistakenly captured along with Chen Qi, and no one was killed in the battle. Their farmland and houses were all given to their relatives or relatives. The government should not confiscate them."

古文：吏不能逆，乃止。
现代文：当时江南未定，到处都有盗贼出没，百姓自己组织起来保卫乡里。
English: At that time, the south of the Yangtze River was undecided, thieves were everywhere, and the people organized themselves to defend the countryside.

古文：当江南未定，盗贼所在有之，民自相什伍，保卫乡里。
现代文：后来渐渐太平无事，行省决定将组织起来的百姓征为兵卒。上下议论纷纷。
English: Later, as the situation gradually calmed down, the provincial government decided to conscript the people who had organized themselves into the army.

古文：及时平，行省议籍为兵，上下汹汹，泽白行省曰： 国兵非少，今籍民以示少，非所以安反侧也。
现代文：孙泽对行省说： 国家的兵本不少，现在又将百姓征为兵卒，反而使人们认为国家兵不足，这不能安抚人们反抗之心。
English: Sun Ze said to the province: The country's military budget has increased a lot, and now the people are being conscripted as soldiers. On the contrary, it makes people think that the national soldiers are insufficient. This cannot appease people's resistance.

古文：且当籍者众，民或有他心。 
现代文：而被征为兵的人很多，会使百姓起来反抗朝廷。 
English: However, many people were conscripted into the army, which caused the people to rise up against the imperial court.

古文：议遂格。
现代文：于是取消这个决议。
English: The resolution was therefore cancelled.

古文：泽又兴学校，召长老及诸生讲肄经义，行乡饮酒礼，旁郡闻而慕之。
现代文：孙泽又兴办学校，召集长老及诸生讲解经义，行乡饮酒礼。邻郡闻知羡慕不已。
English: Sun Ze also established a school, convened elders and sentient beings to explain the sutras, and held a village drinking ceremony. Neighbouring counties were envious.

古文：兴化故号多士，士咸知向慕，以泽与常衮、方仪并肖像祠于学官。
现代文：兴化原称多士之乡，儒士都知向慕贤能，他们把孙泽与常衮、方仪画像供奉于学馆。
English: Originally, Xinghua was known as a town of many scholars, and the Confucianists all knew about Xiang Mu Xian Neng, and they dedicated the images of Sun Tse, Chang Kui, and Fang Yi to the school.

古文：至元二十一年，调永州路判官。
现代文：至元二十一年，孙泽调任永州路判官。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sun Ze was transferred to the post of Yongzhou Road magistrate.

古文：湖广平章政事要束木贪纵淫虐，诛求无厌。
现代文：湖广平章政事要束木贪赃纵淫，诛求无厌。
English: Hukangpingzhang's political affairs should be free from corruption and sexual misconduct, and he is insatiable.

古文：或妄言初归附时，州县长吏及吏胥富人比屋敛银，将输之官，银已具而事遂中止。
现代文：有人妄言平定湖广之初，州县长官及下属吏员、富人，要挨家征银交纳于官。百姓把银子已准备好了而没有来得及交纳。
English: Some people falsely said that at the beginning of the pacification of Hukang, the prefectural and county governors and their subordinate officials, as well as the rich, had to go from house to house to collect silver and pay it to the officials. The people had already prepared the silver but did not have time to pay it.

古文：要束木即下令，责民自实，使者旁午，随地置狱，株连蔓引，备极惨酷，民以考掠瘐死者载道，所获不赀，要束木尽掩有之。
现代文：要束木立即下令，强迫百姓自报已准备了多少银两，派人搜取，到处设置监狱，以极为惨酷的刑罚迫使百姓交出来，严刑致死者众多，且株连了许多人。要束木是要用此办法把搜刮来的钱财据为己有。
English: To Sokoku immediately gave an order, forced the people to report how much silver they had prepared, sent people to search, set up prisons everywhere, forced the people to hand it over with extremely cruel punishments, severely punished many people, and kept many people. To Sokoku was to use this method to take possession of the money and property that had been collected.

古文：有使至永，泽戒吏美供帐，丰酒食，务顺适其意。
现代文：他派人到永州来，孙泽嘱咐下属官吏对来使好好招待，务必顺他的意。
English: He sent someone to Yongzhou, and Sun Ze ordered his subordinate officials to make a good invitation, and be sure to follow his wishes.

古文：使者感愧，无所发其毒，因间以利害晓之，一郡由是获安，是岁，盗起宝庆、武岗，皆永旁郡也。
现代文：这位使者受到感动，没有在永州为非作歹。孙泽不时对他讲明利害，这样才使永州没有受到要束木的骚扰。这年，宝庆、武冈的百姓反叛，而永州则安然无事。
English: The envoy was so moved that he did not do anything wrong in Yongzhou. From time to time, Sun Zhe made his interests clear to him, so that Yongzhou did not have to be harassed. This year, the people of Baoqing and Wukan rebelled, but Yongzhou was safe and sound.

古文：行省遣泽讨平之，俘获五百余人，简出其诖误者百有五十人，上书言状，诛其首恶者三十一人，余得减死。
现代文：行省派孙泽去镇压反叛的百姓，俘获五百余人，把其中受连累的一百五十人释放，诛杀为首者三十一人，其余免死。
English: The governor sent Sun Ze to suppress the rebellious people, captured more than five hundred people, released one hundred and fifty of them who were tied up, killed thirty-one of the leaders, and spared the rest.

古文：二十六年，丞相桑哥建议考校钱谷，天下骚动。泽叹曰： 民不堪命矣。 
现代文：二十六年，丞相桑哥建议查核各地官府所存钱粮，于是天下骚动不安，孙泽叹息道 ：百姓又要遭殃了！ 
English: In 1926, Prime Minister Sango proposed to check the amount of money and grain stored by government offices around the country. As a result, the world was in turmoil. Sunze sighed, "The people are going to suffer again!"

古文：即自上计行省。
现代文：立即自报本路钱粮数目。
English: Immediately self-report the amount of money and grain.

古文：要束木怒曰： 郡国钱粮无不增羡，永州何为独不然！
现代文：要束木大怒 ：各郡钱粮无不增加，永州为何不增？
English: To Sokki's fury: Every county has increased its grain and money supply, so why hasn't Yongzhou?

古文：此直孙府判倚其才辨慢我，亟拘系之，非死不释也。 
现代文：这是孙府判在欺骗我，立即把他关押起来，至死不放。 
English: This was the Sun government's judgment that he was deceiving me, and they immediately imprisoned him and would not let him go until his death.

古文：明年，桑哥败，要束木伏诛，泽始得释。
现代文：第二年，桑哥倒台，要束木伏诛，孙泽才被释放出来。
English: The following year, Sango fell from power, and Sun Tse was released from prison.

古文：二十九年，湖广平章政事阔里吉思荐泽才堪将帅，以行省员外郎从征海南黎。
现代文：二十九年，湖广平章政事阔里吉思向朝廷举荐，说孙泽有将帅之才，于是命他以行省员外郎之职随征海南黎族。
English: In the 29th year, Hukangpingzhang, a political officer, recommended Kuo Lijis to the imperial court, saying that Sun Ze had the ability to be a great general, so he ordered him to serve as a provincial official to accompany the conquest of the Li people in Hainan.

古文：黎人平，军还，上功，授广南西道宣慰副使。
现代文：平黎之后，孙泽因功授广南西道宣慰副使。
English: After Pingli, Sun Zhe was awarded the title of Vice-Envoy of Xuancheng, West Guangnan Province.

古文：秋七月，并左右两江道归广西宣慰司，置都元帅府，泽为广西两江道宣慰副使、佥都元帅府事。
现代文：元贞元年七月，将左右两江道划归广西宣慰司，置都元帅府，孙泽为广西两江道宣慰副使、佥都元帅府事。
English: In July of the first year of the Yuan Zhen, the left and right two rivers were assigned to the Guangxi Consolation Division, and the capital was placed in the Marshal's Office. Sun Ze was the vice-envoy of consolation in the Guangxi two rivers and the marshal of the capital.

古文：两江荒远瘴疠，与百夷接，不知礼法，泽作《司规》三十有二章，以渐为教，其民至今遵守之。
现代文：两江地方遥远，与百夷连接，不知礼法，孙泽做《司规》三十二章，进行教育，其民一直遵守。
English: The Liangjiang region is far away, connected to Baiyi, and does not know the etiquette. Sun Tse made 32 chapters of the "Administrative Rules" to carry out education, and his people have always complied.

古文：又省厩置二十二所，以纾民力。
现代文：他又削减驿站二十二所以减轻人民负担。
English: He also reduced the number of post stations to twenty-two so as to lighten the burden on the people.

古文：岁饥，上言蠲其田租，发象州、贺州官粟三千五百石以赈饥者，既发，乃上其事。
现代文：年成不好，奏请免除当年田租，并发放象州、贺州官粟三千五百石赈济饥民，然后再上报行省。
English: If the year is not a good one, please submit a request to waive the field rent for the year, and distribute 3,500 koku of official millet in Xiangzhou and Hezhou to help the hungry, and then submit it to the newspaper and the province.

古文：时行省平章哈剌哈孙察其心诚爱民，不以专擅罪之。
现代文：当时行省平章哈剌哈孙察知孙泽是诚心爱民，不以专擅之罪论处。
English: At that time, the governor of the province, Pingzhang Hanzhaxun, noticed that Sun Zhe was a sincere lover of the people and would not be punished for the crime of being an expert.

古文：邕管徼外蛮数为寇，泽循行并徼，得厄塞处，布画远迩，募民伉健者四千六百余户，置雷留那扶十屯，列营堡以守之。
现代文：邕州境外蛮夷多次寇边，孙泽巡视边境，在远近险要地方，募强壮之民四千六百户，置雷留那扶十屯，让他们在这些地方建立营堡，屯田守边。
English: The barbarians beyond the borders of Zhangzhou repeatedly encroached on the border. Sun Ze inspected the border and recruited 4,600 strong people from near and far, and set up ten military camps in remote and dangerous places, allowing them to build camp forts in these places and guard the border.

古文：陂水垦田，筑八堨以节潴泄，得稻田若干亩，岁收谷若干石为军储，边民赖之。
现代文：这些屯民开垦田地，修建水渠，得稻田若干亩，每年收谷若干石，作为军粮，边民也赖此为生。
English: These villagers reclaimed fields, built canals, acquired several mu of rice fields, and collected several stones from the valley each year, which was used as war food. The border residents also depended on this for their livelihood.

古文：海北元帅薛赤干赃利事觉，行省檄泽验治。
现代文：海北元帅薛赤干贪赃事被揭发，行省令孙泽查处。
English: The North China Sea Marshal Xue Chakgan's corruption was exposed, and he was investigated by the provincial commander Sun Ze.

古文：泽驰至雷州，尽发其奸赃，纵所掠男女四百八十二口、牛数千头，金银器物称是，海北之民欣忭相庆。
现代文：孙泽至雷州，查获其全部贪赃枉法及为非作歹的事，释放被掠男女四百八十二口、牛数千头、金银器物若干，海北百姓为此欢欣鼓舞，相互庆贺。
English: Sun Ze went to Leizhou, and all of his corrupt practices and evil deeds were discovered. He released 482 abducted men and women, thousands of cattle, and a number of gold and silver objects. The people of Hebei rejoiced and congratulated each other.

古文：故例，圭田至秋乃入租，后遂计月受之，泽视事三月，民输租计米五百石，泽曰： 夫子有言，事君者先其事，后其食。
现代文：御史台奏称： 乌古孙泽奉使识大体，如汲长孺一样；为将计策周到，如赵充国一样，可委以重任。 于是诏升孙泽为海北海南廉访使。按旧例，作为地方长官的祭田，到秋季才收租，后来却计月征收。孙泽到任三月，民输纳给他的租米计五百石。孙泽说： 孔子教导说，为君主效力的人，首先是要办好事，然后才领取俸禄。
English: The Imperial Historian's report said: "In ancient times, Sun Tse had the general wisdom, like Kui Changyu; in order to be well-planned, like Zhao Chongguo, he could be entrusted with important tasks. Therefore, Sun Tse was promoted to the North Sea, South Sea and the North Sea. According to the old example, as a local governor of the sacrificial field, he did not collect rent until the autumn, but later he collected it monthly. When Sun Tse took office in March, the people paid him a rent of 500 koku. Sun Tse said: Confucius taught that those who work for the monarch should first do good deeds, and then receive

古文：吾莅政日浅，而受禄四倍，非情所安。 
现代文：我来此视事时间不久，而禄四倍，于情不安。 
English: I've only been here a short time and I'm on four times the salary, so I'm a bit nervous.

古文：量食而入，余悉委学官，给诸生以劝业。
现代文：量其所需而领取，其余的交给学校以鼓励学生努力学习。
English: They receive what they need, and the rest is given to the school to encourage students to study hard.

古文：常曰： 士非俭无以养廉，非廉无以养德。 
现代文：他常说 ：做官的若不俭朴则不能养廉，不养廉则不能养德。 
English: He often said: if officials are not frugal, they cannot cultivate corruption, and if they do not cultivate corruption, they cannot cultivate virtue.

古文：身一布袍数年，妻子朴素无华，人皆言之，泽不以为意也。
现代文：他一件布袍穿了数年，妻子朴素无华，人们说这样不体面，而孙泽全不在意。
English: He wore a robe for several years, and his wife was plain and unadorned. People said this was unseemly, but Sun Ze didn't care at all.

古文：雷州地近海，潮汐啮其东南，陂塘碱，农病焉。
现代文：雷州地近大海，潮汐冲击东南地区，陂塘多为盐碱，为害农业。
English: Leizhou is close to the sea, the tides hit the southeastern region, and Qutang is mostly saline, which is harmful to agriculture.

古文：民歌之曰： 舄卤为田兮，孙父之教。
现代文：百姓做歌称颂 ：把盐碱地变为良田啊，为孙父所教导。
English: The people sing a song in praise of him: He turned the salt and alkali land into good farmland, which was taught by his grandson.

古文：渠之泱泱兮，长我粳稻。
现代文：渠水哗哗地流啊，长我田中水稻。
English: Drain water clatter ground flow, long my rice in the rice field.

古文：自今有年兮，无旱无涝。 
现代文：从今年开始啊，无旱无涝。 
English: Starting this year, there will be no drought.

古文：至大元年，改福建廉访使。
现代文：至大元年，改任福建廉访使。
English: In the first year of the Great Leap Forward, he was appointed as a low-level envoy to Fujian.

古文：泽宿有德于闽，闽人安之。
现代文：孙泽曾有恩德于闽，故闽人安居乐业。
English: Sun Tse had been kind to Yao, so Yao people live and work in peace.

古文：有芝五色产于宪司之澄清堂，士民以为泽之所致。
现代文：有五色芝兰生长于廉访司之 澄清堂 ，士民认为是孙泽恩德的表现。
English: There are five-colored geraniums growing in the Clarification Hall of the Lying and Cheating Investigation Division, which the scholars and the people think is a manifestation of Sun Ze Nde.

古文：以母年逾八十，求归养长沙。
现代文：因母已年过八十，孙泽请求回长沙奉养。
English: Since his mother was over eighty, Sun Ze asked her to come back to Changsha to take care of him.

古文：子良祯，仕至中书右丞，以功名终。
现代文：一年后母亲去世，孙泽悲伤过度而卒。
English: A year later, his mother passed away, and Sunze passed away from excessive grief.

古文：赵炳赵炳，字彦明，惠州滦阳人。
现代文：孙泽为官自承直郎直至中大夫。谥 正宪 。赵炳字彦明，惠州滦阳人。
English: Sun Ze was the official Zizheng Naorong until he became a junior doctor. Zou Zhengxian. Zhao Zi Zi Yanming, Huizhou Ziyang people.

古文：父弘，有勇略，国初为征行兵马都元帅，积阶奉国上将军。
现代文：父赵弘，有勇有谋，元初为征行兵马都元帅，官阶至奉国上将军。
English: His father, Zhao Hong, was brave and resourceful. In the early days, he was a marshal of soldiers and horses for conscription, and rose to the rank of general in the service of the country.

古文：炳幼失怙恃，鞠于从兄。
现代文：炳自幼失父母，由堂兄抚育。
English: He lost his parents at a young age and was raised by his cousin.

古文：岁饥，往平州就食，遇盗，欲杀之，兄解衣就缚。
现代文：十二岁那年，因饥荒往平州去投亲靠友，途中遇盗，兄将被杀，炳哭着请求代兄死。
English: At the age of twelve, due to famine, he went to Pingzhou to visit relatives and friends. On the way, he was robbed and his brother was killed. He cried and begged for his brother's death.

古文：炳年十二，泣请代兄，盗惊异，舍之而去。甫弱冠，以勋阀之子，侍世祖于潜邸，恪勤不怠，遂蒙眷遇。
现代文：盗很惊异，也很感动，把他们都放走了。刚二十岁，因为是勋臣之子，侍奉世祖于王府，勤谨不懈，蒙世祖钟爱。
English: The thief was very surprised and moved, and let them all go. He was just twenty years old, because he was the son of a courtier, served his grandfather in the royal palace, was diligent and tireless, and was loved by his grandfather.

古文：世祖次桓、抚间，以炳为抚州长，城邑规制，为之一新。
现代文：世祖至桓州、抚州间，以炳为抚州长官。炳就任后，进行整顿，城邑为之一新。
English: Between Shizu and Kanshu and Fuzhou, Shizuku served as governor of Fuzhou. After Shizuku took office, he carried out a rectification, and the town became one of the new ones.

古文：己未，王师伐宋。
现代文：宪宗九年，蒙古大军伐宋。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Mongolian army invaded Song.

古文：未几，北方有警，括兵敛财，燕蓟骚动。
现代文：不久北方有警，官府征兵及搜括民间财物，使燕、蓟骚动。
English: Soon there were police in the north, and the government conscripted soldiers and collected people's property, which caused unrest in Yan and Handan.

古文：王师北还，炳远迓中途，具以事闻，追所括兵及横敛财物，悉归于民，世祖嘉其忠。
现代文：蒙古军北还，炳在中途迎接圣驾，把北方所发生的事一一向世祖报告，并受命去追查所征兵卒，将搜括的民财都归原主，世祖嘉奖其忠诚。
English: The Mongolian army was also sent to the north, and  met the holy driver halfway, reported everything that happened in the north to the patriarch, and was ordered to track down the conscripted soldiers, return the collected wealth to the original owner, and the patriarch commended his loyalty.

古文：中统元年，命判北京宣抚司事。
现代文：中统元年，命炳去兼管北京宣抚司事。
English: In the first year of China's reunification, he was appointed to be in charge of the Beijing Publicity Secretary.

古文：北京控制辽东，番夷杂处，号称难治。
现代文：北京控制辽东，该地区民族复杂，号称难治之地。
English: Beijing controls Liaodong, an ethnically complex region known as a difficult place to govern.

古文：时参知政事杨果为宣抚使，闻炳至，喜曰： 吾属无忧矣。 
现代文：当时，参知政事杨果为宣抚使，闻炳至，高兴地说 ：我们无忧了。 
English: At that time, Yang Guo, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, was the envoy, and when he heard the news, he said happily, "We are free from worry."

古文：三年，括北京鹰坊等户丁为兵，蠲其赋，令炳总之。
现代文：中统三年，征北京鹰坊等户丁为兵，免其赋税，令炳总管其事。
English: In the third year of the unification of China, Beijing Yingfang and other households were enlisted as soldiers, exempted from taxes, and ordered to be in charge of their affairs.

古文：时李璮叛，据济南，炳请讨之。
现代文：李王反叛，占据济南，炳请领兵征讨。
English: King Li rebelled, occupied Jinan, and called for conscription.

古文：时有携妓登龙舟者，即按之以法，未几，其人死，其子犯跸诉冤，诏让之，炳曰： 臣执法尊君，职当为也。 
现代文：官军围城，炳领兵千人独当北面，将所俘叛军立即释放回去，对他们说： 你们是胁从，不治罪。 济南李王反叛平息，炳入朝任刑部侍郎兼中书省断事官。
English: When the government army besieged the city, he led a thousand soldiers to the north and immediately released the captured rebels, saying to them, "You are cowards and will not be punished." King Li of Jinan quelled the rebellion and entered the imperial court as an attendant of the criminal department and adjudicator of the Central Literature Department.

古文：帝怒，命之出，既而谓侍臣曰： 炳用法太峻，然非循情者。 
现代文：有人携带妓女登龙舟游玩，炳按法处治。不久，这个人死了，其子乘皇帝出行时，拦车诉冤。世祖谴责赵炳，炳说： 臣执法以尊君，职务应当如此。 帝怒，命他出去。其后对侍臣说 ：炳用法太严，然不是徇私情的人。 
English: Someone was carrying a prostitute on a dragon boat for pleasure, and the emperor punished him according to the law. Soon, this person died, and when his son was traveling with the emperor, he stopped the car to complain about the injustice. The ancestor condemned Zhao Zhen, and Zhen said: The minister enforces the law with respect to the prince, the duties should be so. The emperor was angry and ordered him to go out. Then he said to the courtier: The use of the law is too strict, but it is not a person who is selfish.

古文：改枢密院断事官。
现代文：改他为枢密院断事官。
English: He was made a Privy Councillor.

古文：济南妖民作乱，赐金虎符，加昭勇大将军、济南路总管。
现代文：济南妖民作乱，命炳去镇压，赐金虎符，加昭勇大将军、济南路总管之职。
English: The evil people of Jinan made a riot, he was ordered to suppress them, he was given the Golden Tiger Badge, promoted to General Zhaoyong, and became the head of Jinan Road.

古文：炳至，止罪首恶，余党解散。
现代文：炳至济南，只惩办首恶，其余全予释放。
English: In Jinan, only the worst offenders were punished, while the rest were released.

古文：岁凶，发廪赈民，而后以闻，朝廷不之罪也。
现代文：年成欠收，炳发官仓粮食赈济，而后再奏报朝廷，朝廷也不认为他有罪过。
English: If there is a poor harvest in a year, he will send grain from the official storehouse to help the poor, and then report it to the court. The court does not think he is guilty.

古文：迁辽东提刑按察使，辽东闻其来，豪猾屏迹。
现代文：调辽东提刑按察使，辽东闻炳来，豪强奸猾之徒再不敢胡作非为了。
English: Liaodong changed the sentence according to the inspector, Liaodong heard the news, and the arrogant rapist did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：至元九年，帝念关中重地，风俗强悍，思得刚鲠旧臣以临之，授炳京兆路总管，兼府尹。
现代文：至元九年，帝念关中重地，风俗强悍，想找一个刚毅耿直的老臣去管理，因而授炳为京兆路总管兼府尹。
English: In the 9th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Nian wanted to find a tough and straightforward old minister to manage the center of gravity, and the customs were strong. Therefore, he was awarded the title of the general manager of Jingzhao Road and the prefect of Yin.

古文：皇子安西王开府于秦，诏治宫室，悉听炳裁制。
现代文：皇子安西王开府于秦，皇帝诏建宫室，一切由炳裁决。
English: The prince Anxi Wang built a palace in Qin, the emperor Zhao built a palace, and everything was decided by the magistrate.

古文：王府吏卒横暴扰民者，即建白，绳以法。
现代文：王府吏卒横暴扰民者，炳即向上级陈述自己意见，对违法者加以惩处。
English: If an official of the Royal Palace is violent and disturbs the people, he shall immediately report his opinion to his superiors and the violator shall be punished.

古文：王命之曰： 后有犯者，勿复启，请若自处之。 
现代文：安西王说： 今后有犯法者，不必禀告，可自行处治。 
English: Anxi Wang said: In the future, anyone who violates the law does not have to report it, but can deal with it on their own.

古文：自是豪猾敛戢，秦民以安。
现代文：从此以后，豪猾之徒收敛了许多，秦地百姓才得安宁。
English: Since then, the daredevils have become more restrained, and the people of Qin have been able to live in peace.

古文：有旨以解州盐赋给王府经费，岁久，积逋二十余万缗，有司追理，仅获三之一，民已不堪。
现代文：朝廷决定，将解州的盐课作为王府经费。年深月久，拖欠二十余万缗，官府追征，仅收三分之一，民已负担不了。
English: The imperial court decided that the salt tax for the liberation of the state would be used as the royal government's funds. After many years, the arrears of more than 200,000 baht had increased, and the government was pursuing the conscription. Only one-third was collected, and the people could no longer afford it.

古文：炳密启王曰： 十年之逋，责偿一日，其孰能堪！
现代文：炳私下对王说 ：十年所欠之课，责令一日还清，谁能做得到？
English: Zou privately said to Wang, "If you were ordered to pay off ten years of debt in one day, who could do it?

古文：与其裒敛病民，孰若惠泽加于民乎！ 
现代文：与其催征使民困苦，不若施恩惠于民。 
English: Instead of urging conscription to make the people suffer, it is better to do favors to the people.

古文：王善其言，遽命免征。
现代文：王认为此话有理，立即下令免征。
English: The king thought this was reasonable and immediately ordered that he be exempted from conscription.

古文：会王北伐，诏以京兆一年之赋充军资，炳复请曰： 所征逋课，足佐军用，可贷岁赋，以苏民力。 
现代文：王奉诏北伐，且令以京兆一年的赋税充作军费。炳又请示道 ：征收往年所欠的赋税，足以用为军费，今年的赋税可免征，以减轻百姓负担。 
English: The king ordered the Northern Expedition, and decreed that a year's worth of taxes be used for military expenses. He also requested that the taxes owed in previous years be collected and used for military expenses, and that this year's taxes be exempted in order to reduce the burden on the people.

古文：令下，秦民大悦。
现代文：王同意，下令免征，秦地百姓皆大欢喜。
English: The king agreed and ordered the exemption. The people of Qin were overjoyed.

古文：十四年，加镇国上将军、安西王相。
现代文：至元十四年，加镇国上将军、安西王相。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Anxi Wangxiang, a high-ranking general of the state, was appointed.

古文：王府冬居京兆，夏徙六盘山，岁以为常。
现代文：安西王冬季居京兆，夏季住在六盘山，年年如此。
English: Anxi Wang lives in Jingzhao in winter and in Liupanshan in summer, every year.

古文：王既北伐，六盘守者构乱，炳自京兆率兵往捕，甫及再旬，元恶授首。
现代文：王已北伐，六盘山守者作乱，炳自京兆率兵去镇压，两旬之内捕杀首恶。
English: The king has left for the north, the defenders of the Liupanshan Mountain have caused a disturbance, and he has sent troops from Beijing to suppress them. Within two weeks, they have caught and killed the chief villain.

古文：十五年春，六盘再乱，复讨平之。
现代文：十五年春，六盘山再度作乱，他又去讨平。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Liupanshan again caused a disturbance, and he went to settle the dispute.

古文：王还自北，嘉赏战功，赉赐有加。是岁十一月，王薨。
现代文：王自北边回来，嘉赏炳的战功。是年十一月，安西王去世。
English: The king returned from the north side to commend the war exploits. It was in November of the same year that the king of Anxi died.

古文：十六年秋，被旨入见便殿，帝劳之曰： 卿去数载，衰白若此，关中事烦可知已。 
现代文：十六年秋，炳奉旨入京，于便殿拜见皇帝，帝慰劳他，颇有感慨地说 ：卿去了几年，头发斑白，衰老至如此，关中之事，其烦多可知。 
English: In the autumn of the sixteenth year of the Heian period, Zou was ordered to go to the capital, and he went to see the emperor in the hall. The emperor consoled him, and said with great emotion, "Sir, you have been gone for several years, your hair is gray, and you have aged so much. You know how troublesome it is to be in the middle of things.

古文：改中奉大夫、安西王相，兼陕西五路西蜀四川课程屯田事，余职如故，即令乘传偕敕使数人往按琮等。
现代文：问及民间情形，炳一一陈奏，指出在王去世后，运使郭琮、郎中郭叔云盗窃权力，为非作歹。世祖原是躺着的，听了赵炳的陈奏，立即起身，对他表示非常满意，赐他白马奶，改任中奉大夫、安西王相兼陕西五路西蜀四川课程屯田事，并立即派人去审查郭琮等罪行。
English: When asked about the situation of the people, he pointed out that after the death of the king, it was wrong to use Guo Gan and Guo Shuyun to steal power. The ancestor was lying down, listened to Zhao Gan's recitation, immediately got up, expressed great satisfaction to him, gave him white horse milk, and was reassigned as Zhongfeng doctor, Anxi minister and Shaanxi five-way West Shu Sichuan course, and immediately sent someone to investigate Guo Gan and other crimes.

古文：至则琮假嗣王旨，入炳罪，收炳妻孥囚之。时嗣王之六盘，徙炳等于平凉北崆峒山，囚闭益严。
现代文：琮则假造安西王旨令，诬告赵炳，将炳及其妻室儿女囚禁起来，把炳等迁移到平凉北之崆峒山，囚禁更严。
English: Zou, on the other hand, forged the Anxi King's decree, falsely accused Zhao Zou, imprisoned Zou and his wife and children, and moved Zou and the others to Lushan in the north of Pingliang, where the imprisonment was even stricter.

古文：炳子仁荣诉于上，即诏近侍二人驰驿而西，脱炳，且械琮党偕来。
现代文：炳之子仁荣向朝廷申诉，朝廷诏令近侍二人去把炳解救出来，逮捕琮党。
English: Yan's son, Yan Rong, appealed to the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered two courtiers to rescue Yan and arrest Yan's followers.

古文：琮等留使者，醉以酒，先遣人毒炳于平凉狱中。
现代文：琮等把朝廷使臣灌醉，用药毒死炳于平凉狱中，时炳年五十九岁。
English: He was fifty-nine years old when he drugged and poisoned imperial envoys to death and was imprisoned in Pingliang Prison.

古文：国朝旧制，无赙臣下礼，盖殊恩也。
现代文：这是十七年三月的事。帝闻知叹息道 ：失我良臣！ 将琮等百余逮捕至京，世祖亲自审问，处死。
English: This happened in March of the seventeenth year. Tei Wanchi sighed and said, "My good vassal is lost!" He arrested more than a hundred of them, including Shun, and brought them to Kyoto. Shizuo personally interrogated them and executed them.

古文：六月，诏雪炳冤，特赠中书左丞，谥忠愍。
现代文：十七年六月，炳的冤情得到昭雪。特赠中书左丞，谥 忠愍 。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, Zou's grievances were redressed, and he was given a special gift of a Chinese book, Zojo, by Zou Zhongyao.

