古文：凡出军行师，或遇沮泽、圮毁之地，宜倍道兼行速过，不可稽留也。
现代文：凡是行军作战，当遇到沼泽地域或被水冲毁的坍塌地域时，应当加速前进，尽快通过，不能在这些地方停留。
English: Whenever marching in battle, when encountering swampy areas or collapsed areas washed away by water, they should speed up and pass through as soon as possible, and cannot stay in these places.

古文：若不得已，与不能出其地，道远日暮，宿师于其中，必就地形之环龟，其中高，四下为圆营，四面当敌。
现代文：如果迫不得已，或因路途遥远，或因夜幕降临，实在无法离开此地，那么，宿营时必须选择四周低而中间高的 环龟 之地，并根据此地形特点布列成圆阵，以便于四面迎击敌人的进攻。
English: If you have no choice, or because of the distance, or because of nightfall, it is really impossible to leave this place, then, when camping, you must choose a "ring turtle" place that is low on all sides and high in the middle, and arrange it into a circle according to this topographical feature, in order to meet the enemy's attack on all sides.

古文：一则防水潦之厄，一则备四围之寇。
现代文：此种宿营布阵的好处，一是可以防止洪水淹没，一是可以防备周围的敌人突袭。
English: The advantages of this kind of camp layout are, on the one hand, it can prevent flooding, and on the other hand, it can prevent the enemy from swooping around.

古文：法曰： 历沛历圮，坚舍环龟。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 行军经过沼泽、水毁地域而一旦宿营于此时，应当坚守在形似龟背的高冈之处。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: When marching through a swamp or flooded area, if you camp at this time, you should stick to a high hill shaped like a turtle's back.

古文：唐，调露元年，突厥阿史德温傅反。诏礼部尚书、检校右卫大将军裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管讨之。
现代文：唐高宗调露元年，东突厥首领阿史德温傅起兵反唐，高宗命以礼部尚书兼检校右卫大将军裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管率兵北上讨伐。
English: In the first year of Tang Gaozong's reign, the East Turk leader Ashide Wenfu started an anti-Tang army. Gaozong ordered the general of the right guard, Pei Xingjian, who was also the inspector of the ceremonial department, to lead the army northward.

古文：军次单于界北，暮，已立营，堑壕既周，行俭更命徙营高冈。
现代文：当唐军进入突厥境内的单于都护府北界时，夜幕已经降临，部队安营扎寨、挖掘堑壕已经完全就绪后，裴行俭突然改令部队立即迁到高冈为营。
English: When the Tang army entered the northern border of Shuangyu Duguofu in the Turkish territory, night had already fallen, and after the troops were fully prepared to camp and dig trenches, Pei Xingjian suddenly ordered the troops to immediately move to Gaogang as a camp.

古文：吏曰： 吏士安堵，不可扰。 
现代文：有的将领报告说： 将士们刚刚安睡，不可再惊动他们了。 
English: Some generals reported: "The soldiers have just fallen asleep, we must not wake them up again."

古文：不听，徙之。
现代文：裴行俭执意不从，执意命令部队移往高冈处安营。
English: Pei Xingjian stubbornly refused to obey, and ordered the troops to move to Gaokao to set up camp.

古文：比夜，风雨雷霆暴至，前设营所，水深丈余，众莫不骇叹，因问何以知其有风雨也，行俭笑曰： 自今但依我节制，勿问我所由知也。 
现代文：等到深夜，风雨雷霆突然大作，唐军原来设营地方，顷刻间便是一片汪洋，水深竟有一丈有余。众将士亲眼目睹此种惊涛骇浪的突变情景，无不惊叹侥幸。因此问裴行俭怎么知道天要刮风下雨，行俭只是笑着说： 从今以后你们只听我指挥就行了，不必问我为什么要这样做。 
English: In the middle of the night, there was a sudden storm. The place where the Tang army had originally set up camp was suddenly a vast ocean, and the water depth was more than a meter deep. The generals witnessed this sudden scene of stormy waves with their own eyes, and were all amazed at the fluke. Therefore, when they asked Bae Gangjun how he knew that it was going to be windy and rainy, Gangjun just smiled and said: From now on, you only need to listen to my command, you don't need to ask me why I want to do this.

