古文：何栗，字文緽，仙井人。
现代文：何栗字文缜，仙井人。
English: Ho-kuri-ji monjo, Senjinjin (仙井人).

古文：政和五年进士第一，擢秘书省校书郎。
现代文：政和元年考中进士第一名，被任命为秘书省校书郎。
English: He won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination in the first year of the Meiji era, and was appointed as the secretary of the provincial school.

古文：逾年，提举京畿学事，召为主客员外郎、起居舍人，迁中书舍人兼侍讲。
现代文：过了一年，提举京畿学事，受召入朝任主客员外郎、起居舍人，升任中书舍人兼侍讲。
English: A year later, he was promoted to Gyeonggi academic affairs, and was called to the imperial court to serve as chief guest attendant, foreign guest attendant, and resident attendant, and was promoted to junior high school student attendant and assistant lecturer.

古文：徽宗数从咨访，欲付以言责。
现代文：徽宗多次咨访他，打算让他担负谏官的责任。
English: Huizong visited him many times, intending to have him assume the responsibilities of eunuch.

古文：或论栗与苏轼乡党，宗其曲学，出知遂宁府。
现代文：有人指责何栗与苏轼是乡党，宗其曲学，出任栗为遂宁知府。
English: Some people accused He Kuri and So Yeon of being the township party, living in their music school, and serving as the chifu of Suining.

古文：已而留为御史中丞，论王黼奸邪专横十五罪，黼既抗章请去，而尤豫未决。
现代文：不久留京任御史中丞，指责王黼奸邪专横等十五条罪状，王黼抗章请去后，皇上犹豫未决。
English: He soon stayed in Beijing as the Imperial Historian, accusing Wang Xi of treachery, tyranny and other 15 crimes. After Wang Xi was invited to go, the emperor hesitated.

古文：栗继上七章，黼及其党胡松年、胡益等皆罢，栗亦以徽猷阁待制知泰州。
现代文：栗接着七次上章，王黼及其朋党胡松年、胡益等人都被罢职，栗也以徽猷阁待制兼任知秦州。
English: Chestnut followed seven times in the previous chapter, Wang Xi and his friends Hu Songnian, Hu Yi and others were dismissed, and Chestnut also served as the governor of Qin with the title of Hui Xingge.

古文：钦宗立，复以中丞召。
现代文：钦宗即位后，又以御史中丞职召用他。
English: After Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, he was also appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：阅月，为翰林学士，进尚书右丞、中书侍郎。
现代文：过了一月，任翰林学士，升为尚书右丞、中书侍郎。
English: After one month, he was appointed as Hanlin Baccalaureate, and was promoted to Shang Shuyujo and Zhongshu Jirong.

古文：会王云使金帅斡离不军还，言金人怒割三镇缓，却礼币弗纳曰，兼旬使不至，则再举兵。
现代文：正好王云出使金兵元帅斡离不军中回来，说金人对割取三镇迟缓发怒，打算不收礼币，扬言说二十日内使者不到，就再次举兵进攻。
English: Just as Wang Yun's envoy, the Gold Soldier Marshal, returned from the non-army, he said that the gold people were angry at the delay in cutting off the three towns, intended not to collect the gift coins, and threatened that if the envoy did not arrive within 20 days, they would again raise troops to attack.

古文：于是百官议从其请。
现代文：于是百官商议听从他的要求。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials listened to his request.

古文：栗曰： 三镇，国之根本，奈何一旦弃之。
现代文：栗说 ：三镇是国家的根本，为什么一朝放弃？
English: Chestnut said: the three towns are the foundation of the country, why give up everything at once?

古文：况金人变诈罔测，安能保必信？
现代文：何况金人变诈不测，怎能保证他们一定守信？
English: What's more, people with money can change their minds at any time, so how can you be sure that they will keep their word?

古文：割亦来，不割亦来。 宰相主割议，栗论辨不已，曰： 河北之民，皆吾赤子。弃地则并其民弃之，岂为父母意哉？ 帝颇悟。
现代文：割地金兵要来攻，不割地金兵也要来攻。 宰相主张割地让和，栗争辩不已，说 ：河北的百姓，都是我的儿子，放弃领地则连同百姓一并放弃了，哪里是做父母的心意？ 皇上大悟。
English: The prime minister advocated the cession of land for peace, and the chestnut tree argued endlessly, saying: The people of Hebei are all my sons, but I gave up the territory together with the people, so what is the intention of being a parent? The emperor understood.

古文：栗请建四道总管，使统兵入援，以胡直孺、王襄、赵野、张叔夜领之。
现代文：栗请求设立四道总管，让他们率兵入援，以胡直孺、王襄、赵野、张叔夜统领。
English: Chestnut requested the establishment of a four-way general management, let them lead troops to assist, with Hu Zhaohui, Wang Xiang, Zhao Ye, Zhang Shuya as leaders.

古文：兵既响应，而唐恪、耿南仲、聂昌信和议，相与谋曰： 方继好息民而调发不已，使金人闻之，奈何？ 亟檄止之。
现代文：军队已经响应，而唐恪、耿南仲、聂昌相信议和，互相计谋说 ：正要使百姓休息而调发不已，让金人知道了，怎么办？ 
English: The army had already responded, and Tang Jia, Geng Nanzhong, and Hunchang believed in discussing peace and plotted with each other, saying, "What should we do if we are just about to give the people a rest, but keep sending troops, and let the Chinese know about it?"

古文：栗解政事，俄以资政殿大学士领开封尹。
现代文：急忙下令制止。栗被解去政事，不久以资政殿大学士兼任开封府尹。
English: He hastily ordered to stop it. Kuri was dismissed from the government, and soon he assumed the post of Kazuchika-dono Daigaku Daigaku Shoshi as well as the post of Kaifeng-fu Yin.

古文：金兵长驱傅城下，帝罢恪相，而拜栗为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，始复三省旧制。
现代文：金兵长驱逼近城下，皇上罢去唐恪的宰相，而授任栗为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，恢复三省旧制。
English: The gold commander drove them closer to the city, and the emperor dismissed Tang Quan's prime minister, and appointed Li to be Shang Shuxu's right-hand man as well as Zhong Shuxu's attendant, restoring the old system of three provinces.

古文：时康王在河北，信使不通，栗建议请以为元帅，密草诏稿上之。
现代文：当时康王在河北，信使不通，栗建议让康王任元帅，秘密草拟诏稿交给皇帝。
English: At that time, King Kang was in Hebei, and the messenger could not get through. Chestnut suggested that King Kang be appointed as a marshal, and secretly drafted the imperial edict and handed it to the emperor.

古文：乃以康王充天下兵马大元帅，陈遘充兵马元帅，宗泽、汪伯彦充副元帅。
现代文：于是皇上任命康王为天下兵马大元帅，陈遘为兵马元帅，宗泽、汪伯彦为副元帅。
English: As a result, the emperor appointed Kang Wang as the grand marshal of the world's horses and chariots, Chen Hao as the marshal of the horses and chariots, and Soze and Wang Bohian as the deputy marshals.

古文：京城失守，从幸金帅营，遂留不返。
现代文：京城失守，栗跟随皇帝到金兵元帅营中，于是被留住不能回来。
English: The capital was lost, and Kuri followed the emperor to the camp of the Golden General, where he was detained and unable to return.

古文：既而议立异姓，金人曰： 唯何栗、李若水毋得预议。 既陷朔庭，栗仰天大恸，不食而死，年三十九。
现代文：不久金人商议扶立异姓皇帝，金人说： 只有何栗、李若水不得参与。 既然落在敌人手中，栗仰天大哭，绝食而死，终年三十九岁。
English: Not long after, the goldsmiths discussed the matter of elevating an emperor with a different surname. The goldsmiths said, "Only He Li and Li Ruoshui are not allowed to participate. Since they fell into the hands of the enemy, Li wept loudly, and died of starvation at the age of thirty-nine.

古文：建炎初，诏以为观文殿大学士、提举玉局观使，禄其家。
现代文：建炎初期，诏令任他为观文殿大学士、提举玉局观使，供养他家。
English: At the beginning of his career, he was appointed by imperial decree as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and promoted to the post of the Grand Council of Confucianism, to support his family.

古文：讣闻，赠开府仪同三司，议者指其误国，不行。
现代文：死讯传来，追赠他为开府仪同三司，有人议论指责他误国，追赠令不得下发。
English: When the news of his death came, he was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji. Some people argued and accused him of betraying the country, and the posthumous award could not be issued.

古文：秦桧自北还，具道其死时状，乃改赠大学士，官其家七人。
现代文：秦桧从北边归来，详细述说他死时的情状，于是改赠大学士，录用他家七人为官。
English: Qin Hui returned from the north and described in detail the circumstances of his death, so he was awarded a university degree and seven members of his family were hired as officials.

古文：孙傅，字伯野，海州人。
现代文：孙傅字伯野，海州人。
English: Sun Fu, also known as Bo Ye, was a native of Haizhou.

古文：登进士第，中词学兼茂科，为秘书省正字、校书郎、监察御史、礼部员外郎。
现代文：考中进士，又考取词学兼茂科，任秘书省正字、校书郎、监察御史、礼部员外郎。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and also passed the entrance examination of Ciology and Shigeru Science, and was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the school librarian, the inspector of history, and the member of the Recreation Department.

古文：时蔡翛为尚书，傅为言天下事，劝其亟有所建，不然必败。
现代文：当时蔡袺任尚书，孙傅向他陈述天下政事，劝他早点做些更改，否则一定失败。
English: At that time, Cai Xuan was still a scholar. Sun Fu told him about the world's political affairs and advised him to make some changes as soon as possible, otherwise he would surely fail.

古文：翛不能用。
现代文：蔡袺不听。
English: Cai Ye didn't listen.

古文：迁秘书少监，至中书舍人。
现代文：升任秘书少监，又升至中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to secretary and junior superintendent, and then promoted to junior secretary.

古文：宣和末，高丽入贡，使者所过，调夫治舟，骚然烦费。
现代文：宣和末期，高丽入贡，使者所过之处，调发民夫修船，引起骚动，用度又颇多。
English: At the end of the declaration of peace, Goryeo paid tribute, and dispatched people to repair the ships in the places where the envoys passed, causing turmoil and a lot of effort.

古文：傅言： 索民力以妨农功，而于中国无丝毫之益。 宰相谓其所论同苏轼，奏贬蕲州安置。
现代文：孙傅说： 滥用民力妨碍农事，而对于中国没有丝毫好处。 宰相认为他的言论与苏轼相同，上奏降贬他在蕲州安置。
English: Sun Fu said: "Abuse of people's power hinders agricultural affairs and does not benefit China in the slightest." The prime minister thought that his remarks were the same as Su Shi, and demoted him to Zhangzhou.

古文：给事中许翰以为傅论议虽偶与轼合，意亦亡他，以职论事而责之过矣，翰亦罢去。
现代文：给事中许翰认为孙傅议论虽然偶然与苏轼相同，但没有他意，以职论事而受到指责实在过分了。
English: During the incident, Xu Han thought that although Sun Fu's speech was coincidentally the same as Su Shi's, there was no other intention, and it was really excessive to be accused of speaking out of duty.

古文：靖康元年，召为给事中，进兵部尚书。
现代文：许翰也被罢贬，靖康元年，受召入京任给事中，升任兵部尚书。
English: Xu Han was also demoted, and in the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was called to Beijing and promoted to the military department of Shangshu.

古文：上章乞复祖宗法度，钦宗问之，傅曰： 祖宗法惠民，熙、丰法惠国，崇、观法惠奸。 时谓名言。
现代文：上章请求恢复祖宗法度，钦宗问他，孙傅说： 祖宗法度有利于百姓，熙宁元丰法度有利于国家，崇宁、大观间法度有利于奸臣。 当时认为是名言。
English: In the last chapter, he asked for the restoration of the Ancestor's Code. Qin Zong asked him, and Sun Fu said: The Ancestor's Code is beneficial to the people, the Xining Yuanfeng Code is beneficial to the country, and the laws between Chongning and Daguan are beneficial to traitors. At that time, it was considered to be a famous saying.

古文：十一月，拜尚书右丞，俄改同知枢密院。
现代文：十一月，授任尚书右丞，不久改任同知枢密院。
English: In November, he was given the post of Shang Shuxu Rongcheng, and was soon transferred to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：金人围都城，傅日夜亲当矢石。
现代文：金人围攻都城，孙傅日夜亲自督战。
English: The Jin people besieged the capital, and Sun Fu personally supervised the battle day and night.

古文：读丘浚《感事诗》，有 郭京杨适刘无忌 之语，于市人中访得无忌，龙卫兵中得京。
现代文：读到丘浚的《感事诗》时，有句 郭京杨适刘无忌 ，在市民中访得无忌，在龙卫兵中访得郭京。
English: When I read Yujun's "Sentimental Poem," there was a sentence: "There is no shame in visiting Guo Jing Yangshu Liu," "There is no shame in visiting Guo Jing among the citizens," and "There is no shame in visiting Guo Jing among the dragon guards."

古文：好事者言京能施六甲法，可以生擒二将而扫荡无余，其法用七千七百七十七人。
现代文：好事者说京能施六甲法，可以生擒二将而将金人扫荡无余，其法要用七千七百七十七人。
English: Good-doers say that Beijing can use the six-point method, and can make two generals and sweep away the golden man. Its method requires seven thousand seven hundred seventy-seven people.

古文：朝廷深信不疑，命以官，赐金帛数万，使自募兵，无问技艺能否，但择其年命合六甲者。
现代文：朝廷深信不疑，任命他为官，赐给他数万金帛，让他自己招募兵士，不问兵士的技艺如何，只选择那些年命合六甲的人。
English: The imperial court was so convinced that they appointed him as an official, gave him tens of thousands of gold ingots, and let him recruit soldiers on his own. No matter how skilled the soldiers were, they only chose those who had a life expectancy of six years.

古文：所得皆市井游惰，旬日而足。
现代文：招募到的都是些市井中游手好闲的无赖，十天后招足人数。
English: The recruits were all idle ruffians from the middle of the city, and after ten days the number of recruits was sufficient.

古文：有武臣欲为偏裨，京不许，曰： 君虽材勇，然明年正月当死，恐为吾累。 其诞妄类此。
现代文：有些武臣想任偏将，郭京不同意，说： 你虽然有才有勇，但明年正月会死，恐怕连累我。 他的妄诞就像这样。
English: Guo Jing disagreed, saying, "Although you have talent and courage, you will die in the first month of next year, and I'm afraid you will drag me down with you.

古文：敌攻益急，京谈笑自如，云： 择日出兵三百，可致太平，直袭击至阴山乃止。 傅与何栗尤尊信，倾心待之。
现代文：敌人围攻越发急迫，京谈笑自如说： 择日出兵三百，可以得到太平，直至袭击到阴山方停止。 孙傅与何尤其尊信，倾心等待。
English: As the enemy's siege became more and more urgent, Beijing chatted and laughed as if to say: If you choose the day to send out 300 soldiers, you can get peace until the attack stops in the shadow of the mountains. Sun Fu was especially respectful and waited with all his heart.

古文：或上书见傅曰： 自古未闻以此成功者。
现代文：有人上书给孙傅说： 自古从未听说像这样成功了的。
English: Someone sent a letter to Sun Fu saying: "Since ancient times, I have never heard of anything as successful as this.

古文：正或听之，姑少信以兵，俟有尺寸功，乃稍进任。
现代文：如果要听从他，暂且少给些兵士验证，等有些功劳，才稍稍升迁。
English: If you want to listen to him, for the time being, give some soldiers a little validation, wait for some credit, and then promote them a little.

古文：今委之太过，惧必为国家羞。 傅怒曰： 京殆为时而生，敌中琐微无不知者。
现代文：现在对他委任太过份，恐怕一定会导致国家的耻辱。 孙傅怒道 ：京几乎是应时而生，战争细节无不通晓。
English: Now his appointment is too excessive, and I'm afraid it will definitely lead to national humiliation.Sun Fu fumed, "Beijing almost came into being at the right time, and the details of the war are well known.

古文：幸君与傅言，若告他人，将坐沮师之罪。 揖使出。
现代文：幸好你是对我讲这些话，如果告诉别人，会落个动摇军心之罪。 作揖让他出去。
English: Fortunately, you are telling me these things, but if you tell others, you will be guilty of shaking the morale of the army.

古文：又有称 六丁力士 、 天关大将 、 北斗神兵 者，大率皆效京所为，识者危之。
现代文：又有人自称 六丁力士 、 天关大将 、 北斗神兵 ，大都仿效郭京的做法，有识之士深感危险。
English: There are also people who claim to be Six Ding wrestlers, Tian Guan generals, and Big Dipper soldiers. Most of them imitate Guo Jing's practice. People with insight are deeply aware of the danger.

古文：京曰： 非至危急，吾师不出。 栗数趣之，徙期再三，乃启宣化门出，戒守陴者悉下城，无得窃觇。
现代文：郭京说： 不到危急时，我军不得出战。 何几次催促他，他再三延期，才打开宣化门出兵，戒令守城墙的人都下去，不得偷看。
English: Guo Jing said, "Unless there is a critical situation, our army is not allowed to go to war." He urged him several times, and he repeatedly postponed, until he opened the Xuanhua Gate to send troops, and ordered the people guarding the city wall to go down and not peep.

古文：京与张叔夜坐城楼上。
现代文：郭京与张叔夜坐在城楼上。
English: Guo Jing and Uncle Zhang sit on the castle tower at night.

古文：金兵分四翼噪而前，京兵败退，堕于护龙河，填尸皆满，城门急闭。
现代文：金兵分从四面鼓噪而攻，郭京军败退，掉进护龙河，护龙河被尸体填满，城门急忙关闭了。
English: Guo Jing's army was defeated and fell into the Dragon River. The Dragon River was filled with corpses, and the city gate was hastily closed.

古文：京遽白叔夜曰： 须自下作法。 因下城，引余众南遁。
现代文：郭京急忙跟张叔夜说 ：必须亲自下去作法。 于是下城，带领残兵向南方逃走。
English: Guo Jing hurriedly said to Zhang Shuya, "You must personally go down and do the exercises," so he went down to the city and led the remaining soldiers to flee to the south.

古文：是日，金人遂登城。
现代文：当天，金兵攻进城里。
English: On the same day, the gold soldiers entered the city.

古文：二年正月，钦宗诣金帅营，以傅辅太子留守，仍兼少傅。
现代文：靖康二年正月，钦宗到金兵元帅营中，任命孙傅辅助太子留守京城，仍然兼任少傅。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jingkang, Qinzong went to the camp of the Gold Field Marshal and appointed Sun Fu as an assistant prince to stay in Beijing, still concurrently serving as a junior prince.

古文：帝兼旬不返，傅屡贻书请之。
现代文：钦宗十多天还不回来，孙傅多次寄信给金营乞请放回钦宗。
English: Qinzong did not return for more than ten days. Sun Fu repeatedly sent letters to Jin Ying to beg for Qinzong's return.

古文：及废立檄至，傅大恸曰： 吾惟知吾君可帝中国尔，苟立异姓，吾当死之。 金人来索太上、帝后、诸王、妃主，傅留太子不遣。
现代文：废立皇帝的檄书传来，孙傅大哭道： 我只知道我们君主可以统治中国，如果立异姓为帝，我就死去。 金人来索要太上皇、皇后、诸王、妃子公主，孙傅留住太子不放行。
English: When the imperial edict to abolish the emperor came, Sun Fu burst into tears and said, "I only know that our monarch can rule China, but if I choose a different surname for the emperor, I will die. The money men came to demand the emperor, the empress, the kings, and the princesses, but Sun Fu kept the prince and would not let him go.

古文：密谋匿之民间，别求状类宦者二人杀之，并斩十数死囚，持首送之，绐金人曰： 宦者欲窃太子出，都人争斗杀之，误伤太子。
现代文：秘密谋划把他藏在民间，另外找两个像宦官的人杀死，并杀死十几个囚犯，把他们的头送给金人，欺骗金人说： 宦官打算把太子秘密送出，京城人争相斗杀宦官，误伤了太子。
English: They secretly planned to hide him among the common people. They also found two people who looked like eunuchs and killed them. They also killed more than a dozen prisoners and gave their heads to Jinren. They tricked Jinren into saying, "The eunuchs planned to send the prince out secretly. People in Beijing fought to kill the eunuchs and accidentally injured the prince."

古文：因帅兵讨定，斩其为乱者以献。
现代文：于是太子率兵讨伐平定，杀死作乱的人献过来。
English: As a result, the prince led an army to fight and pacify, and killed the rioters.

古文：苟不已，则以死继之。 越五日，无肯承其事者。
现代文：如果不停止索求，太子就会自杀。 过了五天，没有人肯承担这件事。
English: If he didn't stop asking, the prince would kill himself, and after five days, no one would take the case.

古文：傅曰： 吾为太子傅，当同生死。
现代文：孙傅说 ：我是太子的师傅，应当与太子同生死。
English: Sun Fu said, "I am the prince's teacher, and I should live and die with the prince."

古文：金人虽不吾索，吾当与之俱行，求见二酋面责之，庶或万一可济。 傅寓直皇城司，其子来省，叱之曰： 使汝勿来，而竟来邪！
现代文：金人虽然不求索我，我应当与太子同行，求见两位敌帅当面责斥他们，也许万一可以成功。 孙傅住在皇城司值班，他的儿子来看望他，他叱骂他的儿子道： 让你不要来，却竟然来了！
English: Although the goldsmith did not ask for me, I should walk with the prince and ask to see the two enemy commanders and scold them face to face, perhaps if I can succeed.Sun Fu lived in the imperial city department on duty, his son came to visit him, he scolded his son, saying: Don't let you come, but he actually came!

古文：吾已分死国，虽汝百辈来何益！ 挥使速去。
现代文：我已经决心为国殉难，即使你们来一百个人又有什么改变！ 
English: I have already resolved to die a martyr for my country, and even if a hundred of you come, nothing will change!

古文：子亦泣曰： 大人以身徇国，儿尚何言。 遂以留守事付王时雍而从太子出。
现代文：挥手让他赶快离开。他的儿子也哭着说： 大人以身殉国，儿还有什么说的。 孙傅于是把留守事托付给王时雍而跟从太子出城。
English: He waved his hand for him to hurry up and leave. His son also cried and said, "The adult has martyred himself for the country, what else can the child say." Sun Fu then entrusted the remaining affairs to Wang Shiyong and followed the prince out of the city.

古文：及城陷，过庭亦行，金人拘之军中，因留不得还。
现代文：到南薰门时，范琼极力劝阻他，守城门的金兵说： 金人想要的是太子，留守何必参预？ 孙傅说： 我是宋朝大臣，而且是太子的师傅，应当死从。 
English: When he arrived at the South Gate, Fan Qiong tried his best to dissuade him. The gold soldier guarding the gate said, "What the gold man wants is the prince, why should he stay behind and wait?" Sun Fu said, "I am a minister of the Song Dynasty, and I am the prince's teacher, I should follow him to the death."

古文：建炎四年，卒于燕山，年六十，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰忠肃。
现代文：当晚，住在城门下，第二天，金人召他前去。第二年二月，死在北方金人朝廷。绍兴年间，被追赠为开府仪同三司，赠谥号为忠定。
English: That night, he lived under the city gate, and the next day, he was summoned by the Jin people. In February of the following year, he died in the Northern Jin people's court. During the Shaoxing period, he was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and the posthumous title of Zhongding.

古文：张叔夜，字嵇仲，侍中耆孙也。
现代文：张叔夜字嵇仲，是侍中张耆的孙子。
English: Zhang Shuyanzhong is the grandson of Zhang Xuan, a chamberlain.

古文：少喜言兵，以荫为兰州录事参军。
现代文：年轻时喜欢谈论兵法，因父荫被任命为兰州录事参军。
English: When he was young, he liked to talk about military tactics, because his father was appointed to join the army in Lanzhou.

古文：州本汉金城郡，地最极边，恃河为固，每岁河冰合，必严兵以备，士不释甲者累月。
现代文：兰州本来是汉代金城郡，属地在最边缘的地方，依靠黄河自固，每年黄河冰期，一定整军以备，士卒几个月不离武器。
English: Lanzhou was originally the Han Dynasty's Jincheng County. It was located at the very edge of the country, relying on the Yellow River for self-sufficiency. Every year, when the Yellow River froze over, it was necessary to prepare the army, and the soldiers did not leave their weapons for several months.

古文：叔夜曰： 此非计也。
现代文：叔夜说： 这不是上策。
English: Uncle night said: This is not the best policy.

古文：不求要地守之，而使敌迫河，则吾既殆矣。 有地曰大都者，介五路间，羌人入寇，必先至彼点集，然后议所向，每一至则五路皆竦。
现代文：不找险要地势防守，却让敌人逼近黄河，我方就危险了。 有个叫天都的地方，介于五路之间，羌人侵犯内地，一定先到那个地点集中，然后商议侵犯的方向，每次一集中五路所达之地都受到震惊。
English: There is a place called Tiandu, which is located between the five roads. If someone wants to invade the inland, he must first gather at that place, and then discuss the direction of invasion. Each time, the place reached by the five roads is shocked.

古文：叔夜按其形势，画攻取之策，讫得之，建为西安州，自是兰无羌患。
现代文：叔夜巡视那里的地形，谋划攻取之策，最后夺到了，设为西安州，从此兰州没有羌人之患。
English: Uncle night patrols the terrain there, plans to capture the strategy, and finally won, set as Xi'an Province, from now on, Lanzhou is free from the plague of invaders.

古文：知襄城、陈留县，蒋之奇荐之，易礼宾副使、通事舍人、知安肃军，言者谓太优，还故官。
现代文：任知襄城、陈留县，是蒋之奇推荐的，改任礼宾副使、通事舍人、知安肃军，舆论认为朝廷对他待遇太优厚，还任旧职。
English: Ren Zhi Xiangcheng, Chen Liu County, was recommended by Jiang Zhijiu, and was reappointed as deputy protocol envoy, secretary, and deputy commander of the Zhian Sui Army. Public opinion believed that the imperial court treated him too well, and he still held his old position.

古文：献所为文，知舒、海、泰三州。
现代文：向朝廷献上自己的文章，被授任知舒、海、泰三州。
English: He presented his article to the imperial court and was awarded the posts of Zhishu, Hai and Tai.

古文：大观中，为库部员外郎、开封少尹。
现代文：大观年间，任库部员外郎，开封少尹。
English: During the Taikan era, he was assigned to the treasury department as Wai Ro and Kaifeng as Shao Yin.

古文：复献文，召试制诰，赐进士出身，迁右司员外郎。
现代文：再次献文章，朝廷召他考试制诰，赐他为进士出身，升任右司员外郎。
English: He submitted his essay again, and the imperial court summoned him to take the examination and gave him a promotion to the post of right secretary.

古文：使辽，宴射，首中的。
现代文：出使辽国，在宴射中，首先射中目标。
English: The envoy from Liaoning Province was the first to hit the target in the banquet shooting.

古文：辽人叹诧，求观所引弓，以无故事，拒不与。
现代文：辽人惊叹诧异，要求看他用的弓，因为没有前例，他拒绝了。
English: Liao Ren was astonished and asked to see the bow he used, but he refused because there was no precedent.

古文：还，图其山川、城郭、服器、仪范为五篇，上之。
现代文：回国后，他画出辽国的山川、城郭、服器、仪范共五篇，上奏给朝廷。
English: After returning to China, he drew the mountains and rivers, castles, clothing, and etiquette of Liao in a total of five articles, which were submitted to the imperial court.

古文：从弟克公弹蔡京，京迁怒叔夜，摭司存微过，贬监西安草场。
现代文：他的堂弟张克公弹劾蔡京，蔡京迁怒于张叔夜，抚司找出他的小过错，把他贬任为监西安草场。
English: His cousin Zhang Kekong impeached Cai Jing, Cai Jing was angry with Uncle Zhang, Fusi found out his minor fault and relegated him to supervising the Xi'an pasture.

古文：久之，召为秘书少监，擢中书舍人、给事中。
现代文：很久以后，被召任为秘书少监，提升为中书舍人、给事中。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the secretary of the junior superintendent, and promoted to the middle school teacher and the assistant teacher.

古文：时吏惰不虔，凡命令之出于门下者，预列衔，使书名而徐填其事，谓之： 空黄 。
现代文：当时官吏惰坏不忠诚，凡是出自门下省的命令，预先列出官衔，让人写上名字然后慢慢填写政事，称为 空黄 。
English: At that time, officials were lazy and disloyal. Any order from a subordinate province that listed the official title in advance, asked people to write their names and then slowly fill in the government affairs was called empty yellow.

古文：叔夜极陈革其弊。
现代文：叔夜极力要求革去这种弊端。
English: Uncle night strongly requested the leather to get rid of this drawback.

古文：进礼部侍郎，又为京所忌，以徽猷阁待制再知海州。
现代文：升任礼部侍郎，又被蔡京忌恨，以徽猷阁待制身份再次出任海州知州。
English: He was promoted to the position of the attendant of the ceremonial club, and was also hated by Cai Jing, and once again served as the attendant of Haishu Zhizhou with the status of the attendant of Huizhongge.

古文：宋江起河朔，转略十郡，官军莫敢婴其锋。
现代文：宋江在河朔起事，转战十郡，官军不敢触其锋芒。
English: Songjiang revolted in Hexuo and fought in ten counties, the government army did not dare to touch its edge.

古文：声言将至，叔夜使间者觇所向，贼径趋海濒，劫钜舟十余，载卤获。
现代文：宋江军队将到海州，叔夜派侦探侦知他们的去向，宋江军队直接到海边，抢走大船十多艘，运载战利品。
English: The Songjiang army will go to Haizhou, Uncle Night will send detectives to detect their whereabouts, the Songjiang army will go directly to the seaside, snatch more than ten large ships, and carry trophies.

古文：于是募死士得千人，设伏近城，而出轻兵距海，诱之战。
现代文：张叔夜于是招募死士得到一千人，在城边设伏，而让轻兵在海边抵抗，引诱宋江军队作战。
English: Zhang Shuya then recruited a thousand dead soldiers, set up a camp on the edge of the city, and let the light soldiers resist on the seashore, luring the Songjiang army to fight.

古文：先匿壮卒海旁，伺兵合，举火焚其舟。
现代文：先把壮卒埋伏在海旁，等两军作战时，用火烧掉宋江军队的船只。
English: First, he had his soldiers lie in ambush on the seashore and wait for the two armies to fight, and then use fire to burn the ships of the Songjiang army.

古文：贼闻之，皆无斗志，伏兵乘之，擒其副贼，江乃降。
现代文：宋江军队听说船被烧，都没有斗志，伏兵乘机攻击，活捉宋江军队的副首领，宋江才投降。
English: When the Songjiang army heard that the ship was burned, they had no fighting spirit. The ambush took the opportunity to attack, and the deputy leader of the Songjiang army was captured alive. Only then did Songjiang surrender.

古文：加直学士，徙济南府。
现代文：加任直学士，改任知济南府。
English: He was additionally appointed as a direct bachelor and was reassigned to Ji'nan Prefecture.

古文：山东群盗猝至，叔夜度力不敌，谓僚吏曰： 若束手以俟援兵，民无噍类，当以计缓之。
现代文：山东各地盗贼突然到来，叔夜估计无力抵挡，对僚佐们说： 如果束手等待援兵，百姓将没有一个活下来，应当用计拖延。
English: Thieves from all over Shandong suddenly arrived, and Shuya, estimating that he was powerless to resist, said to his colleagues: If we wait for reinforcements, none of the people will survive, and we should delay.

古文：使延三日，吾事济矣。 乃取旧赦贼文，俾邮卒传至郡，盗闻，果小懈。
现代文：如果能拖延三天，我的大事就能成功。 于是拿出原来用过的赦免盗贼的文书，让邮卒送到郡里，盗贼们听说，果然稍稍松懈。
English: If I can postpone it for three days, my great undertaking will be successful. So I took out the document that had been used to pardon the thieves and asked the postman to deliver it to the county. When the thieves heard that, they relaxed a little.

古文：叔夜会饮谯门，示以闲暇，遣吏谕以恩旨。
现代文：叔夜在谯门会饮，显示自己的闲暇，派官员把恩旨告诉盗贼。
English: Uncle night drinking at the gate, showing his leisure, sent officials to tell the thieves.

古文：盗狐疑相持，至暮未决。
现代文：盗贼猜疑不止，到晚上还未做出决断。
English: The thieves remained suspicious and undecided into the evening.

古文：叔夜发卒五千人，乘其惰击之，盗奔溃，追斩数千级。
现代文：叔夜调派五千士卒，趁盗贼松懈时加以攻击，盗贼们溃逃了，追杀数千人。
English: Uncle Night dispatched five thousand soldiers to attack the thieves when they were slack, and the thieves fled, chasing thousands of people.

古文：以功进龙图阁直学士、知青州。
现代文：因战功升任龙图阁直学士、知青州。
English: Due to his war service, he was promoted to the rank of Longtuge Direct Bachelor, Zhicheng.

古文：靖康改元，金人南下，叔夜再上章乞假骑兵，与诸将并力断其归路，不报。
现代文：靖康改元，金兵南下，叔夜再次上章请求拨给骑兵，与诸将并力截断敌人归路，奏章未上报。
English: When the era of Jing and Kang was changed to the Yuan Dynasty, Jin soldiers went to the south, and Zhu Ya once again requested the last chapter to be assigned to cavalry, and worked with the generals to cut off the enemy's return route. The report was not reported.

古文：徙邓州。
现代文：改任知邓州。
English: He was transferred to Zhi Dengzhou.

古文：四道置帅，叔夜领南道都总管。
现代文：四道设置元帅，叔夜兼任南道都总管。
English: He was appointed marshal of the four provinces, and concurrently served as the chief administrator of the southern provinces.

古文：金兵再至，钦宗手札趣入卫。
现代文：金兵再次攻到，钦宗下手令催他入京保卫。
English: Jin soldiers attacked again, and Emperor Qin ordered him to enter Beijing to defend it.

古文：即自将中军，子伯奋将前军，仲熊将后军，合三万人，翌日上道。
现代文：立即自己统率中军，他的儿子伯奋率领前军，仲熊率领后军，共三万人。第二天出发。
English: He immediately took command of the Chinese army, his son Bo Tian led the front army, and Zhong Xiong led the rear army, a total of thirty thousand people. The next day they set off.

古文：至尉氏，与金游兵遇，转战而前。
现代文：到了尉氏，与金人游兵相遇，转战前进。
English: When he got to the captain, he met the Jinren Rangers and turned to advance.

古文：十一月晦，至都，帝御南薰门见之，军容甚整。
现代文：十一月十五日，到达京都，皇帝到南薰门接见他们，军容非常整齐。
English: On November 15, when they arrived in Kyoto, the emperor met them at Nanko-mon Gate. The soldiers were very neat.

古文：入对，言贼锋方锐，愿如唐明皇之避禄山，暂诣襄阳以图幸雍。
现代文：入宫谈话，张叔夜认为敌人兵锋锐利，希望像唐明皇避安禄山之乱那样，暂时到襄阳然后再准备到雍。
English: When talking about entering the palace, Zhang Shuya thought that the enemy soldiers were sharp, and hoped to temporarily go to Yangyang and then prepare to go to Yong, just as the Tang Emperor avoided the Anlu Mountains.

古文：帝颔之。
现代文：皇帝点头同意。
English: The emperor nodded yes.

古文：加延康殿学士。
现代文：加任他为延康殿学士。
English: He was also appointed as a graduate of Yan Kang-den.

古文：闰月，帝登城，叔夜陈兵玉津园，铠甲光明，拜舞城下。
现代文：闰月，皇帝登上城楼，叔夜在玉津园排列军队，铠甲放光，在城下拜舞。
English: During the leap month, the emperor ascended the castle tower, and in the evening, the troops were lined up in the Jade Garden. The armor glowed and people danced under the castle.

古文：帝益喜，进资政殿学士，令以兵入城，俄签书枢密院。
现代文：皇帝越发高兴，升任他为资政殿学士，令他带兵入城，不久任签书枢密院。
English: The emperor became more and more pleased. He promoted him to the rank of scholar of the Imperial Palace, ordered him to lead troops into the city, and soon appointed him to the Privy Council.

古文：连四日，与金人大战，斩其金环贵将二人。
现代文：接连四天，与金兵大战，斩杀金兵金环贵将二人。
English: For four days in a row, he fought with the gold soldiers and killed two of them.

古文：帝遣使赍蜡书，以褒宠叔夜之事檄告诸道，然迄无赴者。
现代文：皇帝派使者送去蜡书，把褒扬宠任张叔夜的事情传告各地，但仍没有军队开来。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to send wax books to spread the praise of Zhang Shuyuan to all parts of the country, but still no troops came.

古文：城陷，叔夜被创，犹父子力战。
现代文：城陷后，叔夜受伤，父子仍竭力作战。
English: After the fall of the city, Uncle Night was injured, and father and son still fought hard.

古文：车驾再出郊，叔夜因起居叩马而谏，帝曰： 朕为生灵之故，不得不亲往。 叔夜号恸再拜，众皆哭。
现代文：皇帝再次驾车出城，叔夜因此叩马而谏，皇帝说： 我为了百姓的缘故，不得不亲自前往。 叔夜痛哭着再次跪拜，人们都哭了起来。
English: The emperor drove out of the city again, which made Tsuya beat his horse and whimper. The emperor said, "For the sake of the people, I have to go there in person." Tsuya cried bitterly and bowed down again, and the people began to cry.

古文：帝回首字之曰： 嵇仲努力！ 
现代文：皇帝回头喊着他的字说 ：嵇仲努力吧！ 
English: The emperor shouted back his words and said, "Let's make an effort to get along!"

古文：金人议立异姓，叔夜谓孙傅曰： 今日之事，有死而已。 移书二帅，请立太子以从民望。
现代文：金人打算另立异姓为帝，叔夜对孙傅说： 现在的事态，只有一死而已。 写信给金兵两位元帅，请求立太子为帝以符民望。
English: Jinren planned to set up another emperor with a different surname, and Uncle Night said to Sun Fu, "The current state of affairs, there is only one death.Write a letter to the two marshals of Jinren and ask them to set up the crown prince as emperor to meet the people's expectations.

古文：二帅怒，追赴军中，至则抗请如初，遂从以北。
现代文：两位元帅大怒，追到军中，到了后来叔夜仍然抗请如初，于是跟着皇帝到北方金国去。
English: The two marshals were furious and chased him into the army. Later, Uncle Night still resisted as before, so he followed the emperor to the northern kingdom of Jin.

古文：道中不食粟，唯时饮汤。
现代文：途中不吃饭，只不过不时喝些汤而已。
English: I didn't eat on the way, just drank some soup from time to time.

古文：既次白沟，驭者曰： 过界河矣。 叔夜乃矍然起，仰天大呼，遂不复语。
现代文：到达白沟时，车夫说： 过了界河了。 叔夜就突然惊起，仰天大呼，于是不再说话。
English: When they reached the White Ditch, the coachman said, "We have crossed the Boundary River," and Uncle Night suddenly became alarmed, shouted at the sky, and stopped talking.

古文：明日，卒，年六十三。
现代文：第二天，去世，终年六十三岁。
English: He died the next day, aged 63.

古文：讣闻，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰忠文。
现代文：死讯传来，朝廷追赠他为开府仪同三司，谥号为忠文。
English: When news of his death came, the Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and his posthumous name was Zhongwen.

古文：聂昌，字幸远，抚州临川人。
现代文：聂昌字贲远，抚州临川人。
English: A native of Linchuan, Fuzhou.

古文：始繇太学上舍释褐，为相州教授。
现代文：由太学上舍身份开始做官，任相州教授。
English: He started working as a government official when he was still a high school student, and was appointed as a professor in Sangju.

古文：用蔡攸荐，召除秘书郎，擢右司员外郎。
现代文：因为蔡攸的推荐，被授命为秘书郎，提升为右司员外郎。
English: Because of Cai You's recommendation, he was appointed secretary and promoted to right secretary.

古文：时三省大吏阶官视卿监者，立都司上，昌以名分未正，极论之。
现代文：当时三省大员官阶与卿、监相同的人，都站在都司的上面，聂昌认为名分不正，极力争论。
English: At that time, the three provincial grand commissioners and officials of the same rank as the secretary and the inspector were all standing on top of the director of the capital, and Yuchang thought that the title was unfair and argued vigorously.

古文：诏自今至朝请大夫止。
现代文：诏令从今以后立于都司之上者到朝请大夫为止。
English: From now on, the Emperor's edict states that anyone who becomes the head of the prefectural governor's office must consult a doctor in the morning.

古文：以直龙图阁为湖南转运使，还为太府卿、户部侍郎，改开封尹，复为户部。
现代文：以直龙图阁身份任湖南转运使，回到京师任太府卿、户部侍郎，改任开封尹，又重任户部侍郎。
English: He was appointed as the envoy to Hunan Province in the capacity of Zhilong Tu Ge, and returned to Beijing to be appointed as Dafuqing (Grand Prefect) and Hubei Chamberlain, and was reappointed as Kaifeng Yin and reappointed as Hubei Chamberlain.

古文：昌本厚王黼，既而从蔡京，为黼所中，罢知德安府。
现代文：聂昌本来与王黼感情很好，后来随从蔡京，被王黼中伤，罢去前职任德安知府。
English: Yu Chang originally had a very good relationship with Wang Hui. Later, he followed Cai Jing, was slandered by Wang Hui, and was dismissed from his previous position as the governor of De'an.

古文：又以乡人讼，谪崇信军节度副使，安置衡州。
现代文：又因为与同乡人发争诉讼，被贬为崇信军节度副使，安置在衡州。
English: Also, because of litigation with fellow villagers, he was demoted to vice-envoy of the Chongxin Army and placed in Hengzhou.

古文：钦宗立，吴敏用事，以昌猛厉径行为可助己，自散地授显谟阁直学士、知开德府，道拜兵部侍郎，进户部尚书，领开封府。
现代文：钦宗即位后，吴敏执政，认为聂昌行事猛厉可以有助自己，在他闲居时任命他为显谟阁直学士、知开封府，在上任途中任命他为兵部侍郎，升任户部尚书，兼任知开封府。
English: After Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, Wu Min took over the government, and thought that it would be helpful for him to act more vigorously. When he was idle, he appointed him as a direct scholar of the Xianmu Cabinet and Chikaifu, and on the way to his post, he appointed him as the attendant of the military department, and was promoted to the household secretary and concurrently served as the Chikaifu.

古文：昌遇事奋然不顾，敢诛杀。
现代文：聂昌遇事奋然不顾，敢于诛杀。
English: In the face of adversity, Yuchang bravely defied the odds and dared to fight.

古文：敏度不为用，始惮之，引唐恪、徐处仁共政，独遗昌。
现代文：吴敏料想他不为己用，开始忌惮他，荐引唐恪、徐处仁等人共同执政，只不用聂昌。
English: Wu Min initially thought that he was not for his own use, and began to fear him. He recommended that Tang Ke and Xu Shandren should be brought in to govern together, but not Yu Chang.

古文：李纲之罢，太学生陈东及士庶十余万人，挝鼓伏阙下，经日不退，遇内侍辄杀之，府尹王时雍麾之不去。
现代文：李纲被罢免，太学生陈东及士大夫、庶民百姓十几万人，在皇宫外面跪伏着，整日不退，遇到内侍就杀死，府尹王时雍赶不走人群。
English: Li Gang was ousted, and more than 100,000 people, including the scholar Chen Dong, scholars and doctors, and ordinary people, knelt outside the imperial palace and did not retreat for the whole day. When they met the palace attendants, they killed them, and the governor Yin Wang Shiyong did not drive away the crowd.

古文：帝顾昌俾出谕旨，即相率听命。
现代文：皇帝让聂昌出宫去宣谕旨意，人们相继听命。
English: The emperor asked Yuchang to leave the palace to proclaim his will, and people followed his orders one after another.

古文：王时雍欲置东等狱，昌力言不可，乃止。
现代文：王时雍打算把陈东等人关进牢狱，聂昌极力坚持不同意，才停止此议。
English: Wang Shiyong planned to put Chen Dong and others in prison, but Yu Chang strongly disagreed and stopped the discussion.

古文：昌再尹京，恶少年怙乱，昼为盗，入官民家攘金帛；且去，辄自缚党中三两辈，声言擒盗，持仗部走委巷，乃释缚，分所掠而去。
现代文：聂昌再次出任京尹，有些坏少年作乱，白天做强盗，进入官吏百姓家抢金帛，离开时，把两三个自己同党绑起来，声称捉贼，手持兵器穿街过巷，于是解绑，把掠来的财物分光离去。
English: Some bad boys made a ruckus, robbed during the day, entered the homes of officials and commoners to snatch gold ingots. When they left, they tied up two or three of their own party members, claimed to be catching thieves, and walked through the streets with weapons in their hands. They then untied them and dispersed the stolen property.

古文：人不奠居。
现代文：人民不得安居乐业。
English: People are not allowed to live and work in peace.

古文：昌悉弹治正法，而纵博弈不之问，或谓令所禁，昌曰： 姑从所嗜，以懈其谋，是正所以禁其为非尔。 昌旧名山，至是，帝谓其有周昌抗节之义，乃命之曰 昌 。
现代文：聂昌把他们全部正法，却放纵赌博不问，有人认为这是官府应禁止的，聂昌说： 姑且随他们的爱好，来减弱他们谋乱，这正是禁止他们为非作歹啊。 聂昌原名山，到这时，皇帝认为他有周昌抗节之义，于是命名他为 昌 。
English: Some people thought that this should be prohibited by the government, and Yu Chang said: Let's follow their hobbies to weaken them from plotting chaos, which is exactly what they are prohibited from doing. Yu Chang was a famous mountain, and at this time, the emperor thought that he had the meaning of Zhou Chang's anti-festival, so he named him "Chang."

古文：京师复戒严，拜同知枢密院。
现代文：京城又宣布戒严，朝廷任命他为同知枢密院。
English: The capital also declared martial law, and the imperial court appointed him to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：入谢，即陈捍敌之策，曰： 三关四镇，国家藩篱也，闻欲以畀敌，一朝渝盟，何以制之？
现代文：入宫谢恩时，就陈述抗敌之策说 ：三关两镇，是国家的藩卫，听说要将它们割给金人，如果金人一旦背弃盟约，那我们凭什么来抵御他们呢？
English: When Shien entered the palace, he stated the strategy for resisting the enemy, saying, "Three passes and two towns are the country's border guards. I heard that they were to be assigned to the Jin people. If the Jin people once reneged on the treaty, what would we rely on to resist them?

古文：愿勿轻与，而檄天下兵集都畿，坚城守以遏其冲，简禁旅以备出击，壅河流以断归路。
现代文：希望不要轻易将三关两镇割给金人，只能檄令天下军队集结在京城四郊，坚固城守来遏止敌人的攻击，挑选劲旅以备出击，堵塞黄河以断敌归路。
English: It is hoped that the Sankuan and Two Towns will not be easily ceded to the Jin people, but that the world's armies will be concentrated in the four suburbs of Beijing, the city's defense will be strengthened to deter the enemy's attack, the strong brigade will be selected to prepare for the attack, and the Yellow River will be blocked to cut off the enemy's way back.

古文：前有坚城，后有大河，劲兵四面而至，彼或南下，堕吾网中矣。
现代文：前面有坚守之城，后面有大河，精锐部队四面而至，敌人如果南下，就会掉入我的陷网中了。
English: With the fortified city in front, the great river behind, and the elite troops coming from all directions, if the enemy goes south, he will fall into my trap.

古文：臣愿激合勇义之士，设伏开关，出不意扫其营以报。 帝壮之，命提举守御，得以便宜行事。
现代文：我希望纠集勇义之士，设下埋伏开关迎敌，出其不意攻击敌营来报答皇上。 皇帝认为是壮举，命令他统管守御，可以见机行事。
English: I hope to gather brave and righteous men, set up an ambush switch to meet the enemy, and attack the enemy camp by surprise to repay the emperor. The emperor thinks it is a feat and orders him to supervise and guard, and can act at his own discretion.

古文：会金人再议和，割两河，须大臣报聘。
现代文：遇到金人再次议和，割让两河，必须由大臣出使报聘。
English: In the event that the goldsmith again negotiates peace and cedes the two rivers, the minister must send an envoy to report.

古文：诏耿南仲及昌往，昌言： 两河之人忠议勇劲，万一不从，必为所执，死不瞑目矣。
现代文：诏令让耿南仲及聂昌前往，聂昌说： 两河民众忠义勇劲，万一不服从，一定被他们捉拿不放，我是死不瞑目啊。
English: The imperial decree ordered Geng Nanzhong and Yu Chang to go. Yu Chang said: The people of the two rivers are loyal and brave. If they disobey, they will certainly be caught and held. I am desperate.

古文：傥和议不遂，臣当分遣官属，促勤王之师入卫。 许之。
现代文：如果和议不成，我就分遣属官，督促勤王之师入京护卫。 
English: If the peace talks fail, I will dispatch subordinate officers to urge the king's teachers to enter the capital as guards.

古文：行次永安，与金将黏罕遇，其从者称閤门舍人，止昌彻伞，令用榜子赞名引见，昌不可，争辨移时，卒以客礼见。
现代文：皇帝同意了。走到永安时，与金将粘罕相遇，他的随从自称门舍人，阻止聂昌相见，命令用牍子赞名相见，聂昌不同意，争辩多时，最终以客礼相见。
English: The emperor agreed. When he came to Yong'an, he met Kim Jong-Mukhan. His attendant, who claimed to be a disciple, stopped Kim Chang-Gol from seeing him and ordered him to meet with Kim Chang-Gol. Kim Chang-Gol disagreed, argued for a long time, and finally met with Kim Chang-Gol as a guest.

古文：昌往河东，至绛，绛人闭壁拒之。
现代文：聂昌前往河东，到了绛城，绛城人闭城拒其入内。
English: He went to Hedong and arrived in Handan. The people of Handan closed the city and refused to let him in.

古文：昌持诏抵城下，缒而登。
现代文：聂昌手持诏令到了城下，用绳索攀登上城。
English: Holding the imperial edict in his hand, Yuchang went to the foot of the castle and climbed up to the top of the castle with a rope.

古文：州钤辖赵子清麾众害昌，抉其目而脔之，年四十九。
现代文：绛州兵马钤辖赵子清指挥士兵杀害聂昌，挖出他的眼睛切成碎块，终年四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine years old when soldiers under the command of Zhao Ziqing of the Bozhou Terracotta Army killed him, cut out his eyes and chopped them into pieces.

古文：建炎四年，始赠观文殿大学士，谥曰忠愍。
现代文：建炎四年，才追赠为观文殿大学士，谥号为忠愍。
English: It took four years for Jian Yan to be posthumously awarded the title of a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and his posthumous name was Zhong Xi.

古文：父用之，年九十，以忧死。
现代文：其父聂用之，九十岁时，以忧死。
English: His father, at the age of ninety, died of grief.

古文：昌为人疏隽，喜周人之急，然恩怨太明，睚眦必报。
现代文：聂昌为人疏隽，喜欢救人急难，但是恩怨太分明，睚眦必报。
English: Yuchang is a shy person, likes to save people in distress, but the grudge is too clear, and the grudge must be paid.

古文：王黼之死，昌实遣客刺之，弃尸道旁。
现代文：王黼的死，其实是聂昌派人刺杀的，把尸体丢弃在路旁。
English: Wang Yao's death, in fact, was assassinated by people sent by Fuchang, who dumped the body on the side of the road.

古文：遂附耿南仲取显位，左右其说以误国，卒至祸变，而身亦不免焉。
现代文：于是投附耿南仲谋取显位，左右其说以误国，终于导致祸变，而自身也不免于难。
English: As a result, he attached himself to Geng Nanzhong in an attempt to gain prominence and misled the country, which eventually led to disaster, and he himself was not immune to difficulties.

