古文：起强圉阏八月，尽重光协洽，凡四年有奇。
现代文：起强圉阏八月，尽重光协洽，凡四年有奇。
English: In the month of August, when the sun rises strongly, it will try its best to cooperate with the moon.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝八
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝八
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Shenwen the Eighth

古文：贞元三年丁卯，公元七八七年
现代文：唐德宗贞元三年八月，辛巳朔，出现日食。
English: In August of the third year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：八月，辛巳朔，日有食之。吐蕃尚结赞遣五骑送崔汉衡归，且上表求和。至潘原，李观语之以 有诏不纳吐蕃使者 ，受其表而却其人。
现代文：吐蕃尚结赞派遣骑兵五人护送崔汉衡回国，并且上表请求和好。到达潘原时，李观对他们讲 圣上颁诏命令不许接待吐蕃使者 ，接受了他们的表章，但拒绝接待他们这一行人。
English: When they arrived at Panyuan, Li Guan told them that the Holy Emperor had issued an order not to receive the emissaries from Tubo. He accepted their badges, but refused to receive them.

古文：初，兵部侍郎、同平章事柳浑与张延赏俱为相，浑议事数异同，延赏使所亲谓曰： 相公旧德，但节言于庙堂，则重位可久。 
现代文：当初，兵部侍郎、同平章事柳浑与张延赏一起出任宰相，柳浑在计议事情时，屡次与张延赏发生意见分歧。张延赏让亲近的人对柳浑说： 相公是有德望的老臣，只要在朝堂上少说话，宰相这一重要的职位便可保长久了。 
English: At the beginning, the attendant of the military department, Tongping Zhi Liuhun, served as prime minister together with Zhang Yanbo. When discussing matters, Liuhun repeatedly had differences of opinion with Zhang Yanbo. Zhang Yanbo had people close to him say to Liuhun: Zi Gong is a respected veteran minister, as long as he speaks less in the court, the important position of prime minister can be preserved for a long time.

古文：浑曰： 为吾谢张公，柳浑头可断，舌不可禁！ 
现代文：柳浑说： 你替我向张公道歉吧，我柳浑的头可以被砍下，舌头讲话却是不能够禁止的！ 
English: Liu Hun said, "You should apologize to Zhang Gong for me. My Liu Hun's head can be chopped off, but speaking in tongues cannot be banned!"

古文：由是交恶。
现代文：自此以后，两人便结仇了。
English: The two have been feuding ever since.

古文：上好文雅缊藉，而浑质直轻侻，无威仪，于上前时发俚语。
现代文：德宗喜欢斯文儒雅，不露锋芒，但柳浑朴实而正直，轻率而简易，不讲究庄严的举止，在德宗面前时常还说方言俗语，德宗心中不快，打算将他贬黜为王府长史。
English: Dezong liked Su-wen, who was gentle and did not show any sharpness, but Liu Rong was simple and honest, frivolous and simple, and did not pay attention to solemn manners. He often spoke dialect slang in front of Dezong. Dezong was not happy and planned to demean him as the chief historian of the royal court.

古文：上不悦，欲黜为王府长史，李泌言： 浑褊直无他。
现代文：李泌说： 柳浑气量较小，但是心地正直，没有二心。
English: Li Rui said: Liu Hun has a small amount of qi, but he is honest and has no double-mindedness.

古文：故事，罢相无为长史者。 
现代文：依照旧日制度，宰相被罢免后，没有担任长史的。 
English: According to the old system, after the prime minister was dismissed, there was no long-term prime minister.

古文：又欲以为王傅，泌请以为常侍，上曰： 苟得罢之，无不可者。 
现代文：德宗又打算任命他为诸王的师傅，李泌请求任命他为常侍，德宗说： 只要能罢免他的相职，无论任命他什么官职都是可以的。 
English: Dezong also planned to appoint him as the king's teacher, while Li Xiu requested that he be appointed as the king's attendant. Dezong said, "As long as I can remove him from his post, I can appoint him to any post."

古文：己丑，浑罢为左散骑常侍。
现代文：己初，柳浑被罢黜为左散骑常侍。
English: For the first time, Liu Hun was ousted as the left rider.

古文：初，郜国大长公主适驸马都尉萧升。
现代文：当初，郜国大长公主嫁驸马都尉萧升。
English: At the beginning, the eldest princess of the country married the lieutenant of the horse, Xiao Sheng.

古文：升，复之从兄弟也。
现代文：萧升是萧复的堂兄弟。
English: Xiao Sheng is the cousin of Xiao Fu.

古文：公主不谨，詹事李升、蜀州别驾萧鼎、彭州司马李万、丰阳令韦恪，皆出入主第。
现代文：公主的行为不够检点，詹事李升、蜀州别驾萧鼎、彭州司马李万、丰阳县令韦恪，都出入公主的府第。
English: The behavior of the princess is not enough checkpoints, Zhan Zhi Li Sheng, Shuzhou Beidou Xiao Ding, Pengzhou Sima Li Wan, Fengyang County Ling Wei Ke, all enter and leave the princess's residence.

古文：主女为太子妃，始者上恩礼甚厚，主常直乘肩舆抵东宫。宗戚皆疾之。
现代文：公主的女儿作了太子的妃子，开始时，德宗对公主所施的恩典与礼数甚是优厚，公主经常直接乘着肩舆到太子的东宫去，宗室亲戚都嫉妒她。
English: The princess's daughter became the prince's concubine. At the beginning, the grace and courtesy given by Emperor Dezong to the princess was very generous. The princess often rode directly on his shoulders to the East Palace of the prince, and the family relatives were jealous of her.

古文：或告主淫乱，且为厌祷。
现代文：有人告发公主行为放荡淫秽，而且为太子作过以诅咒制胜的祈祷。
English: The princess was accused of debauchery and obscenity, and of praying for the prince's victory with a curse.

古文：上大怒，幽主于禁中，切责太子。
现代文：德宗大怒，将公主拘禁在宫中，严辞斥责太子。
English: Outraged, Emperor Dezong detained the princess in the palace and severely reprimanded the prince.

古文：太子不知所对，请与萧妃离婚。
现代文：太子不知道如何回答是好，便请求与萧妃离婚。
English: The prince did not know how to respond, so he asked for a divorce from Xiaofei.

古文：上召李泌告之，且曰： 舒王近已长立，孝友温仁。 
现代文：德宗传召李泌，将此事告诉了他，而且说： 近来舒王已经成年，可以册立，他性情是孝敬友爱，温和仁厚的。 
English: Dezong summoned Li Xiu and told him about the matter, saying, "Recently, King Shu has come of age and can be registered. His disposition is one of filial piety, friendship, gentleness and benevolence.

古文：泌曰： 何至于是！
现代文：李泌说： 哪至于这样做呢！
English: Li Zuo said: What about doing this?

古文：陛下惟有一子，奈何一旦疑之，欲废之而立侄，得无失计乎！ 
现代文：陛下只有一个儿子，怎么能够一时对他有了疑心，便打算将他废掉，而去册立侄子，这不是失策吗！ 
English: Your Majesty has only one son, how can you have suspicions about him for a moment, and then plan to abolish him and register a nephew, isn't that a mistake!

古文：上勃然怒曰： 卿何得间人父子！
现代文：德宗勃然大怒，说： 你怎么能够离间人家的父子关系！
English: De Jong flew into a rage and said, "How can you break up a father-son relationship!

古文：谁语卿舒王为侄者？ 
现代文：谁告诉你舒王是我的侄子？ 
English: Who told you that Shu Wang is my nephew?

古文：对曰： 陛下自言之。
现代文：李泌回答说： 陛下自己讲的。
English: Lirong replied, "Your Majesty said it himself.

古文：大历初，陛下语臣， 今日得数子 。
现代文：那是在大历初年，陛下告诉我： 今天我得到好几个儿子。 
English: It was in the first year of the Gregorian calendar, and His Majesty told me: Today I have several sons.

古文：臣请其故，陛下言 昭靖诸子，主上令吾子之。 
现代文：我问其中的原故，陛下说 皇上让我将昭靖太子的几个儿子认作我的儿子。 
English: When I asked the reason for this, His Majesty said, "The Emperor asked me to recognize several sons of Prince Shōjing as my sons."

古文：今陛下所生之子犹疑之，何有于侄！
现代文：如今陛下对自己亲生的儿子尚且起疑心，对侄子又会怎样！
English: Now that His Majesty is suspicious of his own son, what will happen to his nephew?

古文：舒王虽孝，自今陛下宜努力，勿复望其孝矣！ 
现代文：虽然舒王是孝敬陛下的，但若将他立为太子，从今以后，陛下最好还是勉力而为吧，不要再指望他的孝敬了！ 
English: Although King Shu is filial to His Majesty, but if he is appointed as the crown prince, from now on, His Majesty had better do his best, and stop expecting his filial piety!

古文：上曰： 卿不爱家族乎？ 
现代文：德宗说： 你不爱护自己的家族吗？ 
English: Dezong said, "Don't you love your family?"

古文：对曰： 臣惟爱家族，故不敢不尽言。
现代文：李泌回答说： 正因为我爱护自己的家族，所以才不敢不把话说尽。
English: Li Xiu replied, "It is precisely because I love my family that I dare not not say everything.

古文：若畏陛下盛怒而为曲从，陛下明日悔之，必尤臣云： 吾独任汝为相，不力谏，使至此，必复杀而子。 
现代文：如果我怕将陛下惹怒，便委曲从命，以后陛下后悔了，必定责怪我说： 我专门任命你担任宰相，你却不能极力劝谏，使我落到这般地步，我一定要也把你的儿子杀掉。 
English: If I had been afraid of angering His Majesty, I would have resigned myself to my fate. Later, when His Majesty regretted it, he would have blamed me for saying, "I specifically appointed you as prime minister, but you couldn't persuade him to let me get to this point. I must also kill your son."

古文：臣老矣，馀年不足惜，若冤杀臣子，使臣以侄为嗣，臣未知得歆其祀乎！ 
现代文：我老了，晚年的岁月没有什么可顾惜的，如果陛下冤枉地杀掉我的儿子，使我将侄子立为后嗣，我真不知道将来是否能享受他的祭祀哩！ 
English: I am old, I have nothing to regret in my old age, and if Your Majesty unjustly kills my son so that I can have my nephew as my heir, I really don't know if I will be able to enjoy his sacrifice in the future!

古文：因呜咽流涕。上亦泣曰： 事已如此，使朕如何而可？ 
现代文：于是他鸣鸣咽咽地流下了眼泪，德宗也哭泣着说： 事情已经闹成这个样子，让朕怎么办才好呢？ 
English: As a result, he choked back tears, and Dezong also cried and said, "Things have become this way, what should I do?

古文：对曰： 此大事，愿陛下审图之。
现代文：李泌回答说： 这是一件大事，希望陛下审慎地设法应付吧。
English: Li Xun replied, "This is a big event, I hope your majesty can handle it prudently."

古文：臣始谓陛下圣德，当使海外蛮夷皆戴之如父母，岂谓自有子而疑之至此乎！
现代文：我最初以为陛下圣明仁德，会使大唐以外的蛮夷之人都尊奉陛下有如自己的父母，哪想到陛下连自己的儿子都怀疑到这般地步了呢！
English: At first, I thought that Your Majesty's saintly benevolence would make all barbarians, except for the Datang, respect Your Majesty as if they were their own parents. Who would have thought that Your Majesty would doubt even his own son to such an extent!

古文：臣今尽言，不敢避忌讳。
现代文：如今我已把话说尽了，不敢避开陛下忌讳的事。
English: Now that I have said all I have to say, I dare not evade His Majesty's taboo.

古文：自古父子相疑，未有不亡国覆家者。
现代文：自古以来，父子相互猜疑，没有不使国家灭亡、家族倾覆的。
English: Since ancient times, father and son have been suspicious of each other, and there is nothing that will not cause the country to perish and the family to be overthrown.

古文：陛下记昔在彭原，建宁何故而诛？ 
现代文：陛下还记得以前在彭原时，建宁王是什么原因被诛杀的吗？ 
English: Your Majesty, do you remember the reason why King Jianning was killed when he was in Pengyuan?

古文：上曰： 建宁叔实冤，肃宗性急，谮之者深耳！ 
现代文：德宗说： 建宁王叔叔实际是冤枉的，肃宗性子急躁，而诬陷他的人们又深于计虑罢了。 
English: Dezong said, "Uncle Jianning Wang is actually a wrongdoer. He is a stern and impatient person, and the people who framed him are more than just deliberate.

古文：泌曰： 臣昔以建宁之故，固辞官爵，誓不近天子左右。不幸今日复为陛下相，又睹兹事。
现代文：李泌说： 过去，由于建宁王的原故，我坚决辞去了官职爵位，发誓不再靠近天子的身边，不幸的是今天又当了陛下的宰相，又目睹了这种事情。
English: Li Xiu said, "In the past, due to the reason of King Jianning's ascension, I resolutely resigned my official position and title, and vowed not to be close to the Son of Heaven's side. Unfortunately, today I became His Majesty's prime minister and witnessed such a thing again.

古文：臣在彭原，承恩无比，竟不敢言建宁之冤，及临辞乃言之，肃宗亦悔而泣。
现代文：我在彭原时，承蒙肃宗皇帝无可比拟的恩典，但终究不敢说出建宁王是冤屈的，直到临辞行时，我才说了出来，肃宗也后悔地哭了。
English: When I was in Pengyuan, I received the incomparable grace of Emperor Su Zong, but in the end I did not dare to say that King Jianning was wronged. I did not speak out until I was about to resign. Su Zong also cried with regret.

古文：先帝自建宁之死，常怀危惧，臣亦为先帝诵《黄台瓜辞》以防谗构之端。 
现代文：自从建宁王去世后，先帝常常心怀畏惧，我也曾经给先帝诵读《黄台瓜辞》，以防备谗言构陷的苗头。 
English: Since the death of King Jianning, the former emperor was often fearful. I once recited the "Cucumber Speech" to the former emperor to prevent the seeds of gossip.

古文：上曰： 朕固知之。 
现代文：德宗说： 联本来知道这些事情。 
English: Dezong said: The federation knew about these things.

古文：意色稍解，乃曰： 贞观、开元皆易太子，何故不亡？ 
现代文：他的态度和脸色稍微缓和了一些，于是说： 贞观、开元年间都曾改立太子，为什么没有亡国之祸呢？ 
English: His attitude and countenance softened a little, so he said: Zhenguan and the first year of the new year both had crown princes, so why wasn't there a national catastrophe?

古文：对曰： 臣方欲言之。
现代文：李泌回答说： 我正想谈这个问题。
English: Li Jie replied: I just want to talk about this issue.

古文：昔承乾屡尝监国，托附者众，东宫甲士甚多，与宰相侯君集谋反，事觉，太宗使其舅长孙无忌与朝臣数十人鞫之，事状显白，然后集百官而议之。当时言者犹云： 愿陛下不失为慈父，使太子得终天年。 
现代文：过去李承乾曾经屡次在皇上外出时代行处理国政，依托归附他的人很多，他居住的东宫所拥有的士兵又特别多。他与宰相侯君集图谋造反，事情被发觉后，太宗让他的舅舅长孙无忌与大臣几十人审讯他，将事情的原委都查问得一清二楚，然后太宗才召集百官来评议此事，当时的进言人尚且说： 希望陛下不要失去作为慈父的本色，让太子能够活完他自然的寿命吧。 
English: In the past, Li Chengqian had repeatedly handled state affairs when the emperor was out of town. There were many people who depended on him, and the East Palace where he lived had a particularly large number of soldiers. He and the prime minister, Hou Jun, plotted a rebellion. After the matter was discovered, the emperor asked his uncle, the eldest grandson, and dozens of ministers to interrogate him and investigate the original commission of the matter. Only then did the emperor convene hundreds of officials to discuss the matter. At that time, the spokesman still said: I hope that His Majesty will not lose his fatherly nature, and let the prince live out his natural life.

古文：太宗从之，并废魏王泰。
现代文：太宗听从了这一建议，便将他连同魏王李泰一齐废黜了。
English: Emperor Taizong listened to this suggestion and deposed him together with Wei King Li Tai.

古文：陛下既知肃宗性急，以建宁为冤，臣不胜庆幸。
现代文：既然陛下知道肃宗性情急躁，认为建宁王是冤枉的，我真是万分庆幸。
English: Since Your Majesty knows that Su Zong is quick-tempered and thinks that King Jianning was wronged, I am really very happy.

古文：愿陛下戒覆车之失，从容三日，究其端绪而思之，陛下必释然知太子之无它矣。
现代文：希望陛下能够将失败的教训引以为警戒，安闲地过上三天，推究此事的头绪，并将它们思考清楚，陛下一定会毫无疑虑地认定太子是没有二心的了。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will take the lesson of failure as a warning, spend three days at leisure, investigate the clues of this matter, and think about them clearly. Your Majesty will have no doubt that the prince has no second thoughts.

古文：若果有其迹，当召大臣知义理者二十人与臣鞫其左右，必有实状，愿陛下如贞观之法行之，并废舒王而立皇孙，则百代之后，有天下者犹陛下子孙也。
现代文：如果确有迹象，应当召集通晓义理的大臣二十人与我去审讯他的亲信，假如确有实在的情状，希望陛下实行贞观年间采用的办法，连同舒王一起废置而册立皇孙，那么，在百世以后，君临天下的人仍然是陛下的子孙后代啊。
English: If the signs are true, then twenty ministers who are well versed in the principles of justice should be summoned to me to interrogate his close confidants. If the situation is true, I hope that Your Majesty will implement the method adopted during the years of chastity, together with King Shu, to abolish and register the imperial grandchildren. Then, after a hundred lifetimes, the people who reign over the world will still be Your Majesty's descendants.

古文：至于开元之时，武惠妃谮太子瑛兄弟杀之，海内冤愤，此乃百代所当戒，又可法乎！
现代文：至于开元末年，武惠妃诬陷太子李瑛兄弟，杀了他们，全国的人都为他们的冤屈感到怨愤，这正是连百世以下都应当引以为教训的，难道还可以效法吗！
English: As for the end of the first year of the year, Princess Wu Hui framed Prince Li Ying's brothers and killed them. People all over the country felt resentment for their grievances. This is exactly what should be a lesson for the next hundred generations. Is it possible to follow suit?

古文：且陛下昔尝令太子见臣于蓬莱池，观其容表，非有蜂目豺声商臣之相也，正恐失于柔仁耳。
现代文：而且，陛下过去曾经让太子在蓬莱池见过我，我看他的仪容外表，没有楚成王太子商臣那种蜂眼突出、声似豺狼的凶悍状貌，让我担心的正是太子会失之优柔仁厚哩。
English: Moreover, in the past, His Majesty had asked the Crown Prince to meet me at Penglai Pond. Judging from his appearance, he did not have the fierce appearance of Prince Chuseong's merchant minister, who had protruding beady eyes and sounded like a jackal. What worried me was that the Crown Prince would lose his kindness and gentleness.

古文：又，太子自贞元以来常居少阳院，在寝殿之侧，未尝接外人，预外事，安有异谋乎！
现代文：再者，自从贞元年间以来，太子经常住在少阳院，就在陛下下榻的宫殿旁边。他不曾接触外人，参予外界的事情，哪里会有作乱的图谋呢！
English: Furthermore, since the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, the prince has often lived in Shaoyang Courtyard, right next to the palace where his majesty is staying. He has never had contact with outsiders, participated in external affairs, where would there be any attempt to make trouble!

古文：彼谮人者巧诈百端，虽有手书如晋愍怀，衷甲如太子瑛，犹未可信，况但以妻母有罪为累乎！
现代文：那些蓄意诬陷的人机巧奸诈，手段变化多端，即使象西晋愍怀太子有亲手所写的反书，象开元年间太子李瑛有身披铠甲入宫的行动，尚且不可信是要谋反，何况太子仅仅是因为岳母犯了罪过而遭受连累的呢！
English: Those who deliberately frame people are cunning and treacherous, and their methods vary widely. Even if, for example, the Western Jin Dynasty's Empress Dowager had a rebuttal letter written by her own hand, or Prince Li Ying entered the palace in a suit of armor in the early 1900s, it is still not credible that they were plotting a rebellion. What's more, the prince was only punished because his mother-in-law had committed a crime!

古文：幸陛下语臣，臣敢以家族保太子必不知谋。
现代文：幸亏陛下对我说了，我敢用我的家族来担保太子肯定不知道有此类策谋。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty told me, and I dare to use my family to guarantee that the Crown Prince definitely did not know about such a plot.

古文：曏使杨素、许敬宗、李林甫之徒承此旨，已就舒王图定策之功矣！ 
现代文：假如让杨素、许敬宗、李林甫一类人逢迎陛下改立的意旨，他们现在已经到舒王那里图谋拥立新太子的功劳去了！ 
English: If Yang Su, Xu Jingzong, Li Linfu and the like had been allowed to succeed in changing the will of His Majesty, they would have gone to King Shu to seek the merit of supporting the new crown prince!

古文：上曰： 此朕家事，何豫于卿，而力争如此？ 
现代文：德宗说： 这是朕的家事，与你有什么关系，而你为什么这样极力谏诤呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "This is my family's business. What does it have to do with you, and why are you making such a fuss?

古文：对曰： 天子以四海为家。
现代文：李泌回答说： 天子以四海为家。
English: Li Xiu replied: The Son of Heaven is at home in the four seas.

古文：臣今独任宰相之重，四海之内，一物失所，责归于臣。
现代文：如今我独力支承着宰相的重任，在四海之内，有一件事情处理失当，都是我没有尽到责任。
English: Now I am single-handedly supporting the important task of the prime minister. In all four seas, there is one thing that was mishandled, and that is that I did not fulfill my responsibilities.

古文：况坐视太子冤横而不言，臣罪大矣！ 
现代文：何况眼巴巴地看着太子遭到冤屈而不发言，我的罪过就太大了！ 
English: Not to mention the fact that I watched helplessly as the crown prince was wronged and did not speak out, my sin was too great!

古文：上曰： 为卿迁延至明日思之。 
现代文：德宗说： 朕为你推迟到明天考虑此事。 
English: Dezong said, "For your sake, I will postpone the matter until tomorrow.

古文：泌抽笏叩头而泣曰： 如此，臣知陛下父子慈孝如初矣！
现代文：李泌抽出朝笏，向德宗叩头，还哭泣着说： 这样做，我知道陛下父慈子孝一如既往了！
English: Li Xiu pulled out the hajj, kowtowed to Dezong, and said with tears: "By doing this, I know that Your Majesty is as compassionate and filial as ever!"

古文：然陛下还宫，当自审思，勿露此意于左右；露之，则彼皆欲树功于舒王，太子危矣！ 
现代文：然而，陛下回宫后，应当自己审慎地考虑，别把这一意图透露给周围的人。如果透露出去，那些人都想为舒王建树功勋，太子便危险了！ 
English: However, after His Majesty returns to the palace, he should carefully consider his own actions and not reveal this intention to the people around him. If it were to be revealed, those people would all want to create merit for King Shu, and the prince would be in danger!

古文：上曰： 具晓卿意。 
现代文：德宗说： 朕完全明白你的意思。 
English: Dezong said, "I completely understand what you mean.

古文：泌归，谓子弟曰： 吾本不乐富贵，而命与愿违，今累汝曹矣。 
现代文：李泌回家后，对子弟说： 我本来并不愿意享受富贵，但是命运与心愿背道而驰，现在连累你们了。 
English: After Li Jie returned home, he said to his son: I originally did not want to enjoy wealth and luxury, but fate ran counter to my wishes, and now I am a burden to you.

古文：太子遣人谢泌曰： 若必不可救，欲先自仰药，何如？ 
现代文：太子派人向李泌致谢说： 如果事情肯定不可挽回，我打算事先吞服毒药，你看怎么样呢？ 
English: The crown prince sent someone to Li Xuan to thank him, saying, "If the matter is definitely irreparable and I plan to swallow poison beforehand, what do you think?

古文：泌曰： 必无此虑。
现代文：李泌说： 肯定不必为此挂虑。
English: Li Jie said: There is definitely no need to worry about this.

古文：愿太子起敬起孝。
现代文：希望太子奉行孝敬之道。
English: It is hoped that the Crown Prince will follow the path of filial piety.

古文：苟泌身不存，则事不可知耳。 
现代文：如果我不在了，那倒是不知道事情会是什么样子了。 
English: If I wasn't here, I don't know what would have happened.

古文：间一日，上开延英殿独召泌，流涕阑干，抚其背曰： 非卿切言，朕今日悔无及矣！皆如卿言，太子仁孝，实无他也。
现代文：隔了一天，德宗单独传召李泌来延英殿议事。德宗泪水纵横地哭着，抚摩着李泌脊背说： 若不是你极力进言，如今朕后悔也来不及了，一切都象你说的那样，太子仁厚孝敬，确实没有二心。
English: One day later, Dezong summoned Li Xiu to the Yan Ying Palace alone for a meeting. Dezong cried with tears, stroked Li Xiu's back and said, "If it wasn't for your hard work, I wouldn't have had time to regret it now. Everything is just as you said. The prince is kind and respectful. He truly has no second thoughts."

古文：自今军国及朕家事，皆当谋于卿矣。 
现代文：从现在起，军务、国政以及朕的家事，朕都与你商量。 
English: From now on, military affairs, national affairs and my family affairs, I will discuss with you.

古文：泌拜贺，因曰： 陛下圣明，察太子无罪，臣报国毕矣。
现代文：李泌跪拜道贺，趁机说： 陛下神圣英明，明察太子无罪，我报效国家就到此为止了。
English: Li Jie knelt down to offer congratulations, and took the opportunity to say: "Your Majesty is holy and wise, the crown prince is innocent, and my service to the country ends here.

古文：九月，丁卯，遣神策将石季章戍武功，决胜军使唐良臣戍百里城。
现代文：前天，我心跳加快，魂不守舍，不能再办理政务了。希望准许我退职。 
English: The day before yesterday, my heartbeat quickened, my spirit was restless, and I could no longer handle government affairs. I hope to be allowed to retire.

古文：丁巳，吐蕃大掠汧阳、吴山、华亭，老弱者杀之，或断手凿目，弃之而去，驱丁壮万馀悉送安化峡西，将分隶羌、浑，乃告之曰： 听尔东向哭辞乡国。 
现代文：德宗说： 朕父子依仗着你的帮助才得以保全，朕正要把子孙后代嘱托给你，使你世世代代得享富贵，以报答你的恩德，你怎么说出这样的话来了呢！ 
English: Dezong said, "My father and son were saved thanks to your help. I am entrusting you with my children and grandchildren, so that you can enjoy wealth and dignity for generations to come in return for your kindness. How can you say such a thing?

古文：众大哭，赴崖谷死伤者千馀人。
现代文：甲午，德宗颁诏说李万不晓得回避同宗，应该受杖刑而死。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Dezong issued an edict saying that Li Wan did not know how to avoid the same sect, and should be punished with a cane and die.

古文：未几，吐蕃之众复至，围陇州，刺史韩清沔与神策副将苏太平夜出兵击却之。上谓李泌曰： 每岁诸道贡献，共直钱五十万缗，今岁仅得三十万缗。
现代文：李升等人及公主的五个儿子，一概流放到岭南或边远的州去。戊申，吐蕃率领羌族、浑族的人马侵犯陇州，营地连绵几上谓李泌曰： 每岁诸道贡献，共直钱五十万缗，今岁仅得三十万缗。
English: Li Sheng and others, as well as the princess's five sons, were all exiled to Lingnan or outlying prefectures. In Buxin, Tu Wei led the Yi and Hun people to invade Bozhou, and camps were set up in several places. Li Xiu said: "Every year, all the provinces contribute a total of 500,000 baht in direct money, but this year I only got 300,000 baht.

古文：言此诚知失体，然宫中用度殊不足。 
现代文：言此诚知失体，然宫中用度殊不足。 
English: This sincerity is lost, but it is not used enough in the palace.

古文：泌曰： 古者天子不私求财，今请岁供宫中钱百万缗，愿陛下不受诸道贡献及罢宣索。
现代文：泌曰： 古者天子不私求财，今请岁供宫中钱百万缗，愿陛下不受诸道贡献及罢宣索。
English: Confucius said, "In ancient times, the Son of Heaven did not seek wealth for his own sake. Today, I ask you to provide millions of yuans of money for the palace. May His Majesty not be solicited for contributions from all walks of life.

古文：必有所须，请降敕折税，不使奸吏因缘诛剥。 
现代文：必有所须，请降敕折税，不使奸吏因缘诛剥。 
English: There must be a need, please reduce the tax, do not let the crooks get away with it.

古文：上从之。
现代文：上从之。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：回纥合骨咄禄可汗屡求和亲，且请婚。
现代文：回纥合骨咄禄可汗屡次谋求通好，而且请求通婚，德宗没有应允。
English: Although the Khan repeatedly sought reconciliation and requested intermarriage, Dezong did not agree.

古文：上未之许。会边将告乏马，无以给之，李泌言于上曰： 陛下诚用臣策，数年之后，马贱于今十倍矣。 
现代文：适逢边疆的将领报告缺少马匹，朝廷拨不出马匹来供给他们，李泌便对德宗说： 陛下果真能够采用我的策略，几年以后，马匹的价格便只是现在的十分之一了！ 
English: When the frontier generals reported a shortage of horses, and the imperial court could not allocate horses to supply them, Li Xiu said to Dezong: Your Majesty can really adopt my strategy, and in a few years, the price of horses will be only one-tenth of what it is now!

古文：上曰： 何故？ 
现代文：德宗说： 这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 愿陛下推至公之心，屈己徇人，为社稷大计，臣乃敢言。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 希望陛下能够用极为公正的态度对待此事，委屈自己，顺从别人，为国家的重大谋略着想，我才敢说出来。 
English: Li Xiu replied: I hope that Your Majesty can treat this matter with a very fair attitude, wronging yourself, obeying others, and thinking about the country's major strategy, before I dare to speak out.

古文：上曰： 卿何自疑若是！ 
现代文：德宗说： 你怎么如此疑虑！ 
English: Dezong said, "Why are you so doubtful?

古文：对曰： 臣愿陛下北和回纥，南通云南，西结大食、天竺，如此，则吐蕃自困，马亦易致矣！ 
现代文：李泌回答说： 我希望陛下在北面与回纥和好，在南面与云南交往，在西面与大食和天竺结交。如果能够做到这些，吐蕃便会自然困难起来，马匹也容易得到了。 
English: Li Xiu replied: "I hope that Your Majesty will make peace with the Uygur in the north, interact with the Yunnan in the south, and make friends with the Taekwondo and Tianyao in the west. If you can do these things, it will naturally be difficult to get to Tibet, and it will be easy to get horses.

古文：上曰： 三国当如卿言，至于回纥则不可。 
现代文：德宗说： 对于云南、大食、天竺三国，就按你说的办吧，至于回纥，那是不行的！ 
English: Dezong said, "For the three countries of Yunnan, Taekwondo, and Tianzhu, do as you say, but for Huizhou, that's not possible!"

古文：泌曰： 臣固知陛下如此，所以不敢早言。
现代文：李泌说： 我本来就知道陛下是持此态度的，所以不敢及早说出来。
English: Li Zuo said: I already knew that His Majesty had this attitude, so I didn't dare to speak out too early.

古文：为今之计，当以回纥为先，三国差缓耳。 
现代文：为当前考虑，应当将回纥排在首位，其余三国还可以略微往后排些哩。 
English: For the time being, Hubei should be at the top of the list, and the other three countries can be ranked slightly lower.

古文：上曰： 唯回纥卿勿言。 
现代文：德宗说： 只有回纥你不要谈。 
English: Desong said, "You don't have to talk about it.

古文：泌曰： 臣备位宰相，事有可否在陛下，何至不许臣言！ 
现代文：李泌说： 我占着宰相的职位，裁定事情的可行与不可行，取决于陛下，但是哪至于不允许我讲话呢！ 
English: "I hold the position of prime minister, and it is up to His Majesty to decide whether or not something is feasible, but why is it that I am not allowed to speak?

古文：上曰： 朕于卿言皆听之矣，至于和回纥，宜待子孙；于朕之时，则固不可！ 
现代文：德宗说： 对于你所说的话，朕完全听从了。至于回纥，最好等待朕的子孙去解决。在朕在位时期，那是肯定不行！ 
English: Dezong said, "As for what you said, I completely obeyed. As for the issue of the imperial edict, it is best to wait for my descendants to solve it. During my reign, that is definitely not possible!

古文：泌曰： 岂非以陕州之耻邪！ 
现代文：李泌说： 莫不是由于陛下在陕州受到的耻辱吧！ 
English: Li Rui said: It is not because of the disgrace that His Majesty received in Shaanxi!

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：德宗说： 是啊。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：韦少华等以朕之故受辱而死，朕岂能忘之！
现代文：韦少华等人由于朕的原故蒙受羞辱而死，朕怎么会忘记那些事情！
English: Wei Shaohua and others suffered humiliation and died because of me, how could I forget those things!

古文：属国家多难，未暇报之，和则决不可。
现代文：那时适值国家多难，没有余暇来报复他们，至于通好，那是断然不行的。
English: At that time, many countries were in difficulties, and there was no time to take revenge on them. As for amicable relations, that was absolutely not possible.

古文：卿勿更言！ 
现代文：你不用再说了！ 
English: You don't have to say any more!

古文：泌曰： 害少华者乃牟羽可汗，陛下即位，举兵入寇，未出其境，今合骨咄禄可汗杀之。
现代文：李泌说： 残害韦少华的是牟羽可汗。陛下即位后，他发兵前来侵犯，还没有走出国境，现在的合骨咄禄可汗便将他杀了。
English: Li Xiu said: It was Muwa Khan who killed Wei Shaohua. After His Majesty ascended the throne, he sent troops to invade, and before he had left the country, the current Huigulu Khan killed him.

古文：然则今可汗乃有功于陛下，宜受封赏，又何怨邪！
现代文：这样说来，现在的可汗对陛下是有功劳的，应当受到封拜赏赐，又哪里有什么怨恨呢！
English: Thus, the present khan is a credit to His Majesty and should be rewarded with a title of nobility, but where is the grudge!

古文：其后张光晟杀突董等九百馀人，合骨咄禄竟不敢杀朝廷使者，然则合骨咄禄固无罪矣。 
现代文：此后，张光晟杀了突董等九百多人，合骨咄禄还是不敢诛杀朝廷的使者，这样说来，合骨咄禄当然是没有罪过的了。 
English: After that, Zhang Guangyi killed more than nine hundred people such as Zhi Dong, but He Binlu still did not dare to kill the imperial envoy. In this way, He Binlu certainly did not commit a crime.

古文：上曰： 卿以和回纥为是，则朕固非邪？ 
现代文：德宗说： 你认为与回纥和好是对的，那朕当然是不对的了？ 
English: Dezong said, "You think it's right to make peace with the Uighurs, but of course I'm wrong?

古文：对曰： 臣为社稷而言，若苛合取容，何以见肃宗、代宗于天上！ 
现代文：李泌回答说： 我是为国家讲这番话的。倘若我去迎合陛下，以求容身，让我怎么到天上去见肃宗和代宗呢！ 德宗说： 让我慢慢想一想吧。 
English: Lirong replied, "I am saying this for the sake of the country. If I pander to Your Majesty to gain favor, how can I go to heaven to meet Sojong and Daejong?" Dejong said, "Let me think about it for a while."

古文：上曰： 容朕徐思之。 自是泌凡十五馀对，未尝不论回纥事，上终不许。
现代文：自此以后，李泌大约奏对了十五次以上，没有一次不谈论有关回纥的事情，但德宗始终不肯答应下来。
English: Since then, Li Xiu has played more than fifteen times, and not once did he not talk about the matter of Hui Xuan, but Dezong has always refused to agree.

古文：泌曰： 陛下既不许回纥和亲，愿赐臣骸骨。 
现代文：李泌说： 既然陛下不肯答应与回纥和好，希望准许我退职。 
English: Li Zuo said: Since His Majesty would not agree to make peace with Hui Xuan, I hope to be allowed to retire.

古文：上曰： 朕非拒谏，但欲与卿较理耳，何至遽欲去朕邪！ 
现代文：德宗说： 不是朕不接受规劝，只是朕想与你比较其中道理罢了，你怎么至于马上就要离开朕呢！ 
English: Dezong said, "It's not that I don't accept the exhortation, it's just that I want to compare the reason with you. Why do you want to leave me immediately?"

古文：对曰： 陛下许臣言理，此固天下之福也。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 陛下允许我讲清道理，这当然是国家的福气啊。 
English: Li Xiu replied, "Your Majesty allowed me to clarify the truth, which is, of course, a blessing for the country."

古文：上曰： 朕不惜屈己与之和，但不能负少华辈。 
现代文：德宗说： 朕并不顾惜委屈自己去与回纥和好，但朕不能够辜负了韦少华这些人。 
English: Dezong said, "I do not spare myself to make peace with Hui Zong, despite my grievances, but I cannot live up to Wei Shaohua and these people.

古文：对曰： 以臣观之，少华辈负陛下，非陛下负之也。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 在我看来，是韦少华这些人辜负了陛下，而不是陛下辜负了他们啊。 
English: Li Xuan replied: In my opinion, it was Wei Shaohua and these people who failed His Majesty, not His Majesty who failed them.

古文：上曰： 何故？ 
现代文：德宗说： 为什么这样说呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 昔回纥叶护将兵助讨安庆绪，肃宗但令臣宴劳之于元帅府，先帝未尝见也。
现代文：李泌回答说： 过去，回纥叶护领兵帮助朝廷讨伐安庆绪时，肃宗仅仅让我在元帅府设宴慰劳他们，先帝并不曾接见他们。
English: Li Xiu replied: In the past, when Hui Ye Gu led the soldiers to help the imperial court to fight against An Qingxu, Su Zong only asked me to hold a banquet at the marshal's palace to comfort them. The former emperor did not receive them.

古文：叶护固邀臣至其营，肃宗犹不许。
现代文：就是叶护坚持邀请我到他的营垒去，肃宗仍然不肯答应。
English: Even though Ye Gu insisted on inviting me to his camp, Su Zong still refused to agree.

古文：及大军将发，先帝始与相见。
现代文：及至大批的军队将要出发时，先帝才与他们见面。
English: When a large number of troops were about to leave, the former emperor met them.

古文：所以然者，彼戒狄豺狼也，举兵入中国之腹，不得不过为之防也。
现代文：这样做的原因在于，回纥是戎狄，豺狼成性，他们发兵进入中原腹地，我们不能不特别小心防备他们。
English: The reason for this is that the Uighurs are ruthless, they are a pack of wolves. They have sent troops into the heart of the Central Plains, and we must be especially careful to guard against them.

古文：陛下在陕，富于春秋，少华辈不能深虑，以万乘元子径造其营，又不先与之议相见之仪，使彼得肆其桀骜，岂非少华辈负陛下邪？
现代文：陛下在陕州时，还很年轻，韦少华这些人不能周密计虑，引着万乘之主的长子径直前往回纥营垒，而且事先没有与回纥议定相见的礼仪，致使他们得以肆意凶暴，这难道不是韦少华这些人辜负了陛下吗？
English: When Your Majesty was still very young in Shaanxi Province, Wei Shaohua and his people failed Your Majesty by not being able to think things through, leading the eldest son of the Lord of the World to go straight to the camp of the Uighurs, and not having agreed in advance with the Uighurs on the etiquette of meeting, which allowed them to be wantonly violent. Is this not Wei Shaohua and his people failing Your Majesty?

古文：死不足偿责矣。
现代文：就是他们死了，也是不能够偿清罪责的。
English: Even if they are dead, they cannot atone for their crimes.

古文：且香积之捷，叶护欲引兵入长安，先帝亲拜之于马前以止之，叶护遂不敢入城。
现代文：而且，香积寺获胜时，叶护准备领兵开进长安，先帝亲自在他马前施礼来制止他，于是叶护便不敢开进长安城了。
English: Moreover, when Xiangji Temple won, Ye You was preparing to lead the troops into Chang'an. The former emperor personally bowed before his horse to stop him, so Ye You did not dare to enter Chang'an City.

古文：当时观者十万馀人，皆叹息曰： 广平王真华、夷主也！ 
现代文：当时，看到这一情景的有十万多人，他们都叹息着说： 广平王真是华夏与蛮夷的共主啊！ 
English: At that time, there were more than one hundred thousand people who saw this scene, and they all sighed and said: King Guangping is really the co-owner of China and barbarians!

古文：然则先帝所屈者少，所伸者多矣。
现代文：这样说来，先帝对人屈尊时较少，而向人伸展抱负时却较多。
English: In this way, the former emperor was less likely to condescend to others, but more likely to extend his ambitions to others.

古文：叶护乃牟羽之叔父也。
现代文：叶护便是牟羽的叔父。
English: Yegor is Muwa's uncle.

古文：牟羽身为可汗，举全国之兵赴中原之难，故其志气骄矜，敢责礼于陛下。陛下天资神武，不为之屈。
现代文：牟羽身为可汗，率领着全国兵马奔赴中原的祸难，所以他的心志与气度是傲慢自负的，是敢于向陛下要求礼遇的，而陛下天赋的资质是神明威武的，并没有被他所屈服。
English: As a khan, Muwa led the country's soldiers and horses to the calamity of the Central Plains, so his spirit and temperament were arrogant, and he dared to ask for courtesy from His Majesty. His Majesty's natural ability was divine and powerful, and he did not yield to him.

古文：当是之时，臣不敢言其它，若可汗留陛下于营中，欢饮十日，天下岂得不寒心哉！
现代文：在那个时刻，我不敢说别的，若是牟羽可汗将陛下留在营中，欢饮十天酒，天下百姓难道能不感到痛心吗？
English: At that moment, I dared not say anything else. If Muwa Khan kept His Majesty in the camp and drank wine for ten days, would the people of the world not feel sad?

古文：而天威所临，豺狼驯扰，可汗母捧陛下于貂裘，叱退左右，亲送陛下乘马而归。
现代文：然而，陛下如天的威严所到之处，连豺狼也驯顺起来了，可汗的母亲向陛下双手献上貂皮衣服，喝退周围的人，并亲自送陛下乘马而归。
English: However, wherever His Majesty's heavenly majesty went, even the jackals were tamed, and the Khan's mother presented the sable clothes to His Majesty with both hands, rebuffed the people around him, and personally sent His Majesty home on horseback.

古文：陛下以香积之事观之，则屈己为是乎？不屈为是乎？
现代文：陛下以香积寺的事情来看，说成委屈了陛下是对的呢，还是说成没有委屈陛下是对的呢？
English: Looking at the Kojoji Temple incident, was His Majesty right to say that He was wronged, or was He right to say that He was not wronged?

古文：陛下屈于牟羽乎？牟羽屈于陛下乎？ 
现代文：这是陛下向牟羽屈服了呢，还是牟羽向陛下屈服了呢？ 
English: Did His Majesty submit to Muwa, or did Muwa submit to His Majesty?

古文：上谓李晟、马燧曰： 故旧不宜相逢。
现代文：德宗对李晟和马燧说： 故人最好别再见面。
English: Dezong said to Li Yao and Ma Yao: It's best not to see each other again.

古文：朕素怨回纥，今闻泌言香积之事，朕自觉少理。卿二人以为何如？ 
现代文：朕素来怨恨回纥，现在听李泌说了香积寺的事情，朕觉着自己少理，你们二人有什么看法？ 
English: I've always resented Hui Xuan. Now that I've heard what Li Xuan said about Xiangji Temple, I feel like I'm being unreasonable. What do you two think?

古文：对曰： 果如泌所言，则回纥似可恕。 
现代文：二人回答说： 果真象李泌讲的那样，回纥似乎可以宽恕。 
English: The two replied, "If it is as Li Xiu said, it seems that Hui Xuan can be forgiven.

古文：上曰： 卿二人复不与朕，朕当奈何！ 
现代文：德宗说： 你们二人也不赞成朕的做法，朕应当怎么去做呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "You two don't approve of what I'm doing, so what should I do?"

古文：泌曰： 臣以为回纥不足怨，曏来宰相乃可怨耳。
现代文：李泌说： 我认为没有足够的理由去怨恨回纥，近年以来的宰相才是应当怨恨的。
English: Li Jie said: I don't think there are enough reasons to resent Hui Xuan. The prime ministers in recent years are the ones who should be resented.

古文：今回纥可汗杀牟羽，其国人有再复京城之勋，夫何罪乎！
现代文：如今回纥可汗诛杀了牟羽，而回纥人又立下两次收复京城的功勋，有什么罪过呢！
English: Now the Uighur khan killed Muwa, and the Uighurs have twice won the honor of recapturing the capital, what is the sin!

古文：吐蕃幸国之灾，陷河、陇数千里之地又引兵入京城，使先帝蒙尘于陕，此乃百代必报之仇，况其赞普至今尚存，宰相不为陛下别白言此，乃欲和吐蕃以攻回纥，此为可怨耳。 
现代文：而吐蕃庆幸我国发生灾祸，攻陷了河陇地区几千里地，还领兵进入京城，致使先帝流亡陕州，这才是一定要报的仇怨，何况当时的赞普尚且在位呢！宰相不向陛下将这件事情分辨明白，就准备与吐蕃和好，以便进攻回纥，这才是应当怨恨的啊。 
English: However, Tubo was glad that a calamity occurred in our country, invaded thousands of miles in the Hebei region, and also led troops into the capital, causing the former emperor to flee to Shaanxi. This is the grudge that must be reported. What's more, Zampu was still in power at that time! The prime minister did not make this matter clear to His Majesty, and prepared to make peace with Tubo in order to attack Hebei. This is what should be resented.

古文：上曰： 朕与之为怨已久，又闻吐蕃劫盟，今往与之和，得无复拒我，为夷狄之笑乎？ 
现代文：德宗说： 朕与回纥结下的怨仇为时已久，他们又听说吐蕃在会盟时作乱，现在前往与他们通和，不是要再次拒绝我们，惹来夷狄之人的耻笑吗！ 
English: Dezong said, "The enmity between me and Hui Zong has lasted for a long time. They also heard that Tu Zong made a disturbance at the time of the alliance, and now they are going to make peace with them. Isn't it to reject us again and provoke the ridicule of the Yidi people!

古文：对曰： 不然。
现代文：李泌回答说： 不是这样。
English: Chikoku also said, "That's not right."

古文：臣曩在彭原，今可汗为胡禄都督，与今国相白婆帝皆从听护而来，臣待之颇亲厚，故闻臣为相求和，安有复相拒乎！
现代文：往日我在彭原时，现在的可汗当时担任胡禄都督，他与现在的国相白婆帝一起跟随叶护前来，我接待他们，颇为亲善优厚，所以，他们听说我出任宰相，便向我们请求和好，怎么会再次拒绝我们呢！
English: In the past, when I was in Pengyuan, the current khan was the governor of Hulunbuir at the time. He came with the current state minister, Bai Baidi, to follow Ye Guo. I received them, and they were quite friendly and generous. Therefore, when they heard that I was the prime minister, they asked us to make peace. How could they refuse us again?

古文：臣今请以书与之约：称臣，为陛下子，每使来不过二百人，印马不过千匹，无得携中国人及商胡出塞。
现代文：现在请让我写一封书信与他们约定，让可汗称臣，做陛下的儿子，每次前来的使者，随员不能超过二百人，互市的马匹不能超过一千匹，不允许携带汉人以及胡族商人到塞外去。
English: Now, please let me write a letter to make an appointment with them, so that the Khan can be a minister, a son of His Majesty, and an envoy every time he comes, with no more than two hundred attendants, no more than one thousand horses, and no Chinese or Hu merchants are allowed to be taken out of the country.

古文：五者皆能如约，则主上必许和亲。
现代文：如果回纥能够遵守五条约定，那么，陛下就一定要答应与他们和好。
English: If the Uighurs can abide by the Five-Point Agreement, then His Majesty must agree to make peace with them.

古文：如此，威加北荒，旁詟吐蕃，足以快陛下平昔之心矣 上曰： 自至德以来，与为兄弟之国，今一旦欲臣之，彼安肯和乎？ 
现代文：这样，陛下的声威可以延展到北部荒远的地方，从侧面震慑吐蕃，这也足以使陛下平素的志向为之一快。 德宗说： 自从至德年间以来，我们与回纥两国结成兄弟关系，现在一下子打算让他们做臣属，他们怎么肯和好呢？ 
English: In this way, His Majesty's voice can be extended to the desolate places in the north, and deterring Tibetans from the side, which is also enough to make His Majesty's ordinary aspiration become faster.De Zong said: We have formed a brotherly relationship with the two countries of Uighurs since the 1950s, and now we suddenly plan to make them subordinates, how can they reconcile?

古文：对曰： 彼思与中国和亲久矣，其可汗、国相素信臣言，若其未谐，但应再发一书耳。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 他们想与大唐和好已经有很长时间了。他们的可汗、国相素来相信我的话，如果一封信还不能把事情处理妥善的话，只需要再发一封书信就可以了。 
English: Li Xiu replied: They have been trying to make peace with Datang for a long time. Their khan and minister of state have always believed in my words. If a letter cannot handle the matter properly, it is only necessary to send another letter.

古文：上从之。
现代文：德宗听从了李泌的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：既而回纥可汗遣使上表称儿及臣，凡泌所与约五事，一皆听命。
现代文：不久，回纥可汗派遣使者上表自称儿臣，凡是李泌与他们约定的五件事情，全部听从命令。
English: Soon, the Hui Khan sent an envoy to the table claiming to be a vassal, and all the five things that Li Xiu agreed with them were all in accordance with the order.

古文：上大喜，谓泌曰： 回纥何畏服卿如此！ 
现代文：德宗非常高兴，他对李泌说： 怎么回纥这样畏惧并折服于你呢！ 
English: Dezong was very happy. He said to Li Xuan, "How could Hui Xuan be so afraid and give in to you?"

古文：对曰： 此乃陛下威灵，臣何力焉！ 
现代文：李泌回答说： 这是陛下的声威与福气所致，我有什么力量！ 
English: Lirong replied, "This is the result of your majesty's authority and good fortune. What power do I have!

古文：上曰： 回纥则既和矣，所以招云南、大食、天竺奈何！ 
现代文：德宗说： 回纥已经通和了，又应当怎样招抚云南、大食和天竺呢？ 
English: Dezong said, "We have already reconciled Yunnan Province, and how should we reconcile Yunnan Province, Daegu Province and Tianjin Province?"

古文：对曰： 回纥和，则吐蕃已不敢轻犯塞矣。
现代文：李泌回答说： 与回纥和好了，吐蕃便已经不敢轻易侵犯边界了。
English: Li Zuo replied, "After making peace with the Uighurs, the Tibetans no longer dare to encroach on the border.

古文：次招云南，则是断吐蕃之右臂也。
现代文：接下来招抚云南，就是砍断吐蕃右边的臂膀。
English: The next step in appeasing Yunnan is to cut off the right arm of Tujuan.

古文：云南自汉以臣属中国，杨国忠无故扰之使叛，臣于吐蕃，苦于吐蕃赋役重，未尝一日不思复为唐臣也。
现代文：自汉朝以来，云南都是中国的臣属。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, Yunnan has been a vassal of China.

古文：大食在西域为最强，自葱岭尽西海，地几半天下，与天竺皆慕中国，代与吐蕃为仇，臣故知其可招也。 
现代文：杨国忠没缘由地搅扰他们，使他们背叛朝廷，臣服于吐蕃。他们被吐蕃的繁重赋役搅犹得困苦不堪，没有一天不想再做唐朝的臣属啊。大食在西域各国中最为强盛，由葱岭起，直抵西海边，地域几占天下的一半。大食与天竺都仰慕中国，而又世代与吐蕃结下怨仇，所以我知道他们是可以招抚的。 
English: Yang Guozhong disturbed them for no reason, causing them to betray the imperial court and submit to the Tuyun. They were disturbed by the heavy labor of the Tuyun and were so distressed that they did not want to be a subject of the Tang Dynasty for a single day. Daegu is the most powerful of the countries in the western region, from the Qixiling Mountains to the West Coast, and the region accounts for almost half of the world. Daegu and Tianyao both admire China, and have been feuding with the Tuyun for generations, so I know they can be appeased.

古文：癸亥，遣回纥使者合阙将军归，许以咸安公主妻可汗，归其马价绢五万匹。
现代文：癸亥，德宗打发回纥使者合阙将军回国，答应将咸安公主嫁给可汗，还以绢五万匹偿还他们的马价。
English: At the end of the year, Emperor Dezong sent an envoy back to the Han Dynasty, General Gaozong to return to the country, and promised to marry Princess Haman to the Khan, and also repaid the price of their horses with 50,000 horses.

古文：吐蕃寇华亭及连云堡，皆陷之。
现代文：吐蕃侵犯华亭以及连云堡，将两处都攻陷了。
English: Tubo invaded Huating and Lianyungang, capturing both places.

古文：甲戌，吐蕃驱二城之民数千人及邠、泾人畜万计而去，置之弹筝峡西。
现代文：甲戌，吐蕃人驱赶着华亭、连云堡二城的几千百姓和数以万计的州、泾州人和牲畜离去，将人和牲畜安置在弹筝峡的后面。
English: The Jiajing and Tubo people drove away several thousand people and tens of thousands of people and livestock from Huating and Lianyungang Second City, and placed the people and livestock behind the Kite Flying Gorge.

古文：泾州恃连云为斥候，连云既陷，西门不开，门外皆为虏境，樵采路绝。
现代文：泾州倚靠连云堡作为前哨，连云堡失陷后，西城大门难以开放，城门外都成了吐蕃的地盘，打柴的道路都被切断。
English: Zhangzhou relied on Lianyungang as an outpost. After the fall of Lianyungang, it was difficult to open the West Gate, and the area outside the city gate became the territory of Tubo, and the roads for firewood were cut off.

古文：每收获，必陈兵以扞之，多失时，得空穗而已。
现代文：每当收获时，必须布置军队来保卫庄稼，人们经常不能按时收获，仅得到无籽粒的禾穗罢了。
English: Whenever there is a harvest, the army has to be deployed to protect the crops, and people often fail to harvest on time, only to get seedless ears of grain.

古文：由是泾州常苦乏食。
现代文：自此以后，泾州常常因缺少粮食而困苦不堪。
English: Since then, Zhangzhou has often been plagued by food shortages.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，吐蕃寇丰义城，前锋至大回原，邠宁节度使韩游瑰击却之。
现代文：冬季十月，甲申，吐蕃侵犯丰义城，前锋来到大回原，宁节度使韩游击退了他们。
English: In the winter of October, Jiaxun and Tubo invaded Fengyi City. The forwards came to the Great Plains, and Ning Jiedu made the Korean guerrillas repel them.

古文：乙酉，复寇长武城，又城故原州而屯之。
现代文：乙酉，吐蕃又去侵犯长武城，并修筑原州的故城，以屯驻兵马。
English: Yitu and Tubo also invaded Changwu City, and built the old city of Wonju to garrison soldiers and horses.

古文：妖僧李软奴自言： 本皇族，见岳、渎神命己为天子。 
现代文：邪恶的僧人李软奴自称： 我本是皇族，现在五岳四渎的神灵命令我作天子。 
English: The evil monk Li Fongnu said to himself, "I used to be a member of the royal family, but now the gods of the five mountains and four deserts have ordered me to become the son of heaven.

古文：结殿前射生将韩钦绪等谋作乱。
现代文：他结交殿前射生将韩钦绪等人图谋发起变乱。
English: He befriended Han Qingsu, a former student of the palace, and others in an attempt to start a riot.

古文：丙戌，其党告之，上命捕送内侍省推之。
现代文：丙戌，他的同伙告发了他，德宗命令逮捕他，送交内侍省追究其事。
English: His accomplices denounced him, and Emperor Dezong ordered that he be arrested and sent to the Ministry of the Interior for investigation.

古文：李晟闻之，遽仆于地曰： 晟族灭矣！ 
现代文：李晟听到这个消息后，骤然仆倒在地上说： 我的家族要覆灭了！ 
English: After hearing the news, Li Yao suddenly fell to the ground and said, "My family will be destroyed!"

古文：李泌问其故，晟曰： 晟新罹谤毁，中外有家人千馀，若有一人在其党中，则兄亦不能救矣。 
现代文：李泌询问其中的原故，李晟说： 我新近才遭受了诽谤。在朝廷内外，我家族的人有一千多，倘若有一个人是他的同党，连你也不能挽救我了。 
English: When Li Xiu asked the reason for this, Li Yao said: I have only recently been subjected to slander. There are more than a thousand members of my family both inside and outside the imperial court. If one of them were a member of his party, even you would not be able to save me.

古文：泌乃奏： 大狱一起，所连引必多，外间人情忄凶惧，请出付台推。 
现代文：于是，李泌秘密上奏说： 大案一旦发生，牵连的人一定很多，外边人们的情绪震恐不安，请将此案由内侍省交付御史台审讯。 
English: As a result, Li Xiu secretly said: Once a major case occurs, there must be a lot of people involved, and the emotions of people outside are trembling and uneasy. Please submit this case from the Ministry of the Interior to the History Channel for trial.

古文：上从之。
现代文：德宗同意了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：钦绪，游瑰之子也，亡抵邠州。游瑰出屯长武城，留后械送京师。壬辰，腰斩钦奴等八人，北军之士坐死者八百馀人，而朝廷之臣无连及者。
现代文：韩钦绪是韩游儿子，他逃亡到州，正值韩游出兵屯驻长武城，留后给他上了枷锁，送往京城，壬辰，韩廷将李软奴等八人腰斩，北军将士犯罪至死的有八百多人。然而，朝廷中的臣僚没有受到牵连。
English: Han Qinxu was the son of Han Yu. He fled to Shizhou at the same time as Han Yu sent troops to garrison Changwu City. He was shackled and sent to Beijing. In Renchen, Han Ting beheaded eight people, including Li Fuguo. More than 800 soldiers of the Northern Army committed crimes and died. However, the courtiers in the imperial court were not implicated.

古文：韩游瑰委军诣阙谢，上遣使止之，委任如初。
现代文：韩游留下军队，自己前往朝廷谢罪，德宗派遣使者制止了他，对他的任用一如既往。
English: Han Yu left the army and went to the imperial court to apologize. Emperor Dezong sent an envoy to stop him, and his appointment continued as before.

古文：游瑰又械送钦绪二子，上亦宥之。
现代文：韩游又将韩钦绪的两个儿子带上枷锁押送到朝廷来，德宗也宽宥了他们。
English: Han Yu also brought Han Qinshu's two sons to the court in chains, and Emperor Dezong also pardoned them.

古文：吐蕃以苦寒不入寇，而粮运不继。
现代文：吐蕃苦于天气严寒，不曾前来侵犯，然而官军的粮食运输也难以接济。
English: Tubo suffered from the severe cold weather and did not come to invade, however, the official army's grain transportation was also difficult to help.

古文：十一月，诏浑瑊归河中，李元谅归华州，刘昌分其众五千归汴州，自馀防秋兵退屯凤翔、京兆诸县以就食。
现代文：十一月，德宗颁诏，命令浑回河中，李元谅回华州，刘昌分出部分人马回汴州，其余防御吐蕃的兵马撤退到凤翔、京兆各县驻扎，以便就地取得粮食供给。
English: In November, Emperor Dezong issued an edict, ordering Hun to return to Hechu, Li Yuanpeng to return to Huazhou, Liu Chang to send some men and horses back to Bozhou, and the rest of the soldiers and horses defending Tubo to retreat to Fengxiang and Jingzhao counties in order to obtain grain supplies locally.

古文：十二月，韩游瑰入朝。
现代文：十二月，韩游入京朝见。
English: In December, Han Yu arrived in Beijing.

古文：自兴元以来，至是岁最为丰稔，米斗直钱百五十、粟八十，诏所在和籴。
现代文：自从兴元年间以来，这一年的年景最丰熟，米一斗值一百五十钱。粟一半值八十钱，德宗颁诏命令在丰收的地区由官府和籴。
English: Since the first year of the Heian period, this year's harvest was the most bountiful. A barrel of rice was worth 150 yuan, and a half-crop of millet was worth 80 yuan. Emperor Dezong issued an edict that in areas with a good harvest, the government and peasants should share the bounty.

古文：庚辰，上畋于新店，入民赵光奇家，问： 百姓乐乎？ 
现代文：庚辰，德宗在新店打猎，来到农民赵光奇的家中。德宗问： 老百姓高兴吗？ 
English: Geng Chen and Dezong hunted in Xindian and came to the home of farmer Zhao Guangqi. Dezong asked: Are the people happy?

古文：对曰： 不乐。 
现代文：赵光奇回答说： 不高兴。 
English: Zhao Guangqi replied: I am not happy.

古文：上曰： 今岁颇稔，何为不乐？ 
现代文：德宗说： 今年庄稼颇获丰收，为什么不高兴？ 
English: Dezong said, "This year's harvest is quite good, why aren't you happy?"

古文：对曰： 诏令不信。
现代文：赵光奇回答说： 诏令没有信用。
English: Zhao Guangqi replied: The edict has no credibility.

古文：前云两税之外悉无它徭，今非税而诛求者殆过于税。
现代文：以前说是两税以外全没有其他徭役，现在不属于两税的搜刮大约比两税还多。
English: In the past, it was said that there were no other tax collectors except for the two taxes. Now, there are more tax collectors who do not belong to the two taxes than the two taxes.

古文：后又云和籴，而实强取之，曾不识一钱。
现代文：以后又说是和籴，但实际是强行夺取粮食，还不曾见过一个钱。
English: Later, they said it was peaceful, but it was actually a forcible seizure of grain, and they had not seen a single penny.

古文：始云所籴粟麦纳于道次，今则遣致京西行营，动数百里，车摧牛毙，破产不能支。
现代文：开始时说官府买进的谷子和麦子只须在道旁交纳，现在却让送往京西行营，动不动就是几百里地，车坏马死，人破产，难以支撑下去了。
English: At the beginning, it was said that the grain and wheat bought by the government only had to be paid at the roadside, but now they are sent to the west of Beijing, which is hundreds of miles away, the car is bad, the horse is dead, the person is bankrupt, it is difficult to support it.

古文：愁苦如此，何乐之有！
现代文：百姓这般忧愁困苦，有什么可高兴的！
English: The people are so sad and miserable, what is there to be happy about!

古文：每有诏书优恤，徒空文耳！
现代文：每次颁发诏书都说优待并体恤百姓，只是一纸空文而已！
English: Every time an imperial edict is issued, it says that the people will be treated favorably and sympathetically. It's just a piece of paper!

古文：恐圣主深居九重，皆未知之也！ 
现代文：恐怕圣明的主上深居在九重皇宫里面，对这些是全然不曾知晓的吧！ 
English: I'm afraid that the Lord of the Sacred Light dwells deep within the Nine-storied Imperial Palace, and is completely unaware of these things!

古文：上命复其家。
现代文：德宗命令免除他家的赋税和徭役。
English: Emperor Dezong ordered that his family be exempted from taxes and corvée.

古文：臣光曰：甚矣唐德宗之难寤也！
现代文：臣司马光曰：唐德宗真是太难以醒悟了！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said, "Tang Dezong is really too difficult to wake up!

古文：自古所患者，人君之泽壅而不下达，小民之情郁而不上通；故君勤恤于上而民不怀，民愁怨于下而君不知，以至于离叛危亡，凡以此也。
现代文：自古以来，人们所担忧的，是君主的恩泽壅塞着，不能传达到下面去，小民的情绪郁结着，不能通报到上边来。所以，君主在上面忧心怜恤，但百姓并不归向；百姓在下面忧愁怨苦，但君主并不晓得，终于导致百姓流离反叛，国家倾危败亡，大约道理就在于此。
English: Since ancient times, people have been worried about the fact that the monarch's benevolence is blocked and cannot reach below, and the people's emotions are depressed and cannot be communicated to the top. Therefore, the monarch is worried and compassionate above, but the people do not return; the people are sad and resentful below, but the monarch does not know, finally leading to the people's displacement and rebellion, and the country's peril and defeat. This is probably the reason.

古文：德宗幸以游猎得至民家，值光奇敢言而知民疾苦，此乃千载之遇也。
现代文：幸亏德宗因打猎得以来到百姓家中，正赶上赵光奇敢进直言，又了解民间的疾苦，这真是千载难逢的际遇啊。
English: Fortunately, Dezong came to the people's home because of hunting, catching up with Zhao Guangqi's courage to speak out and understand the people's suffering. This is really a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：固当按有司之废格诏书，残虐下民，横增赋敛，盗匿公财，及左右谄谀日称民间丰乐者而诛之。然后洗心易虑，一新其政，屏浮饰，废虚文，谨号令，敦诚信，察真伪，辨忠邪，矜困穷，伸冤滞，则太平之业可致矣。
现代文：唐德宗本来应当查处有关部门搁置诏书，残酷地侵害百姓，横暴地增加赋税，盗窃和隐没公家资财的情况，以及自己周围那些天天称道民间丰熟喜乐的阿谀奉承之徒，将他们诛而杀之；然后洗除杂念，改变计虑，刷新朝政，摒弃浮华的装饰，废除空洞的具文，谨饬号令，勉励诚信，审察真伪，辨别忠奸，哀怜困穷，昭雪冤屈，天下太平的业绩便可以实现了。
English: Tang Dezong should have investigated and dealt with the situation of relevant departments shelving the imperial edict, cruelly infringing on the people, violently increasing taxes, stealing and concealing public assets, and the flatterers around him who praised the richness and joy of the people every day, and killed them; then remove the distractions, change the plans, refresh the court politics, abandon the flashy decoration, abolish the empty documents, respect the orders, encourage honesty, examine the authenticity, distinguish the traitors, pity the poor, and clarify the grievances, and the performance of world peace can be achieved.

古文：释此不为，乃复光奇之家。
现代文：然而，唐德宗丢开这些不肯去做，却去免除赵光奇一家的赋役。
English: However, Tang Dezong did not want to do this, but he exempted the Zhao Guangqi family from the forced labor.

古文：夫以四海之广，兆民之众，又安得人人自言于天子而户户复其徭赋乎！
现代文：然而，四海广大，百姓众多，又怎能人人都亲自向天子讲明情况，户户都得以免除徭役与赋税呢！
English: However, the vastness of the four seas and the multitude of people, how can everyone personally explain the situation to the Son of Heaven, and how can every household be exempted from taxes and taxes!

古文：李泌以李软奴之党犹有在北军未发者，请大郝以安之。
现代文：李泌因李软奴的同伙还有在北军任职而未曾被揭发的人，便请求皇帝实行大赦，以使他们安定下来。
English: Li Xiu asked the emperor to grant an amnesty to Li Weixun's associates and those who had served in the Northern Army and had not been exposed, so that they could settle down.

古文：贞元四年戊辰，公元七八八年
现代文：贞元四年春季，正月，庚戌朔，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Zhengyuan, the first month of the year, Geng Xinshuo, the general amnesty.

古文：春，正月，庚戌朔，赦天下，诏两税等第，自今三年一定。
现代文：皇帝颁诏命令：从今以后，两税的等次每三年重定一次。
English: The emperor issued an imperial decree: From now on, the order of the two taxes will be re-determined every three years.

古文：李泌奏京官俸太薄，请自三师以下悉倍其俸。
现代文：李泌奏称在京官员的薪俸过于菲薄，请求自三师以下的官员全部加倍发给薪俸，德宗照准。
English: Li Xulong said that the salaries of officials in Beijing were too meager, and requested that all officials from the Third Division and below be paid double salaries. De Zong agreed.

古文：从之。壬申，以宣武行营节度使刘昌为泾原节度使。甲戌，以镇国节度使李元谅为陇右节度使。
现代文：壬申，德宗任命宣武行营节度使刘昌为泾原节度使；甲戌，任命镇国节度使李元谅为陇右节度使。
English: In Jinshin, Dezong appointed the Xuanwu Xingying Festival to make Liu Chang the first festival envoy; in Jiaxuan, he appointed the Zhenguo Festival to make Li Yuanren the second festival envoy.

古文：昌、元谅，皆帅卒力田，数年，军食充羡，泾、陇稍安。
现代文：刘昌与李元谅都率领士兵努力种田，几年以后，军中粮食充足，有了盈余，泾州和陇州逐渐安定下来。
English: Liu Chang and Li Yuanpeng both led soldiers to work hard in farming. A few years later, there was enough grain in the army and there was a surplus. Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou gradually settled down.

古文：韩游瑰之入朝也，军中以为必不返，饯送甚薄。
现代文：韩游入京朝见时，军中将士认为他肯定一去难返，为他饯别送行，备办得甚为菲薄。
English: When Han Yu entered Beijing to meet with the Emperor, the lieutenant-general of the army thought that he would definitely be gone forever and sent him away, and the preparation was very poor.

古文：游环见上，盛陈筑丰义城可以制吐蕃；上悦，遣还镇。
现代文：韩游见到德宗后，极力陈述修筑丰义城可以控制吐蕃，德宗闻言大悦，便打发他返回本镇。
English: After Han Yu saw Dezong, he tried his best to explain that the construction of Fengyi City could control Tuyun. Dezong was very pleased to hear this and sent him back to the town.

古文：军中忧惧者众，游环忌都虞候虞乡范希朝有功名，得众心，求其罪，将杀之。
现代文：很多军中将士忧虑恐惧。韩游嫉妒都虞候虞乡人范希朝有功绩和名声，得到大家的拥护，便寻找他的罪过，准备杀掉他。
English: Many lieutenant generals are worried and afraid. Han Yu is jealous of the countryman Fan Xichang, who has achievements and fame and is supported by everyone. He is looking for his sins and is ready to kill him.

古文：希朝奔凤翔，上召之，置于左神策军。
现代文：范希朝逃奔凤翔，德宗召他回京，在左神策军中安置下来。
English: Fan Xichang fled to Fengxiang, but Dezong called him back to Beijing and placed him in Zuoshenchao's army.

古文：游环帅众筑丰义城，二版而溃。
现代文：韩游率领部众修筑丰义城，只修筑了四尺高，便塌落下来了。
English: Han Yu led the crowd to build Fengyi City. It was only four feet high when it was built, but it collapsed.

古文：二月，元友直运淮南钱帛二十万至长安，李泌悉输之大盈库。
现代文：二月，元友直将淮南的二十万钱帛运送到长安，李泌将它们悉数送到大盈内库。
English: In February, Yuan Youzhi transported the 200,000 banknotes from Huainan to Chang'an, while Li Xiu sent them all to the inner bank of Daying.

古文：然上犹数有宣索，乃敕诸道勿令宰相知。泌闻之，惆怅而不敢言。
现代文：然而，德宗仍然屡次传旨向地方索取财物，还命令各道不要让宰相知道，李泌听说后，心中懊恼而不敢直言。
English: However, Emperor Dezong still repeatedly sent orders to the provinces to collect property, and also ordered the provinces not to let the prime minister know. After Li Xiu heard this, he was annoyed and did not dare to speak out.

古文：臣光曰：王者以天下为家，天下之财皆其有也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：君主把整个天下当作自己的家，天下的资财都是他所拥有的。
English: The vassal Sima Guang said: The monarch regards the whole world as his home, and all the wealth under the sun is owned by him.

古文：阜天下之财以养天下之民，己必豫焉。
现代文：使天下的资财繁盛起来，以赡养天下的百姓，自己也一定是快乐的。
English: To make the world's wealth flourish, to support the people of the world, you must be happy.

古文：或乃更为私藏，此匹夫之鄙志也。
现代文：有的君主竟然还要经营私人储藏，这是凡夫的鄙下的志趣。
English: Some monarchs even run private storage facilities, which is a despicable hobby for ordinary people.

古文：古人有言曰：贫不学俭。
现代文：古人说过：贫穷的人不用学节俭而节俭的品德自然具备。
English: The ancients said: poor people do not need to learn thrift, but they naturally have the virtue of thrift.

古文：夫多财者，奢欲之所自来也。
现代文：一般说来，富有资财，是产生奢侈的欲望的根源。
English: Generally speaking, wealth is the root of the desire for luxury.

古文：李泌欲弭德宗之欲而丰其私财，财丰则欲滋矣。
现代文：李泌打算消弭德宗的欲望而充实他的私人资财，资财充实了，欲望便也滋长起来了。
English: Li Xiu intended to quench the desires of the Jurchen Emperor and enrich his private wealth. As his wealth increased, so did his desires.

古文：财不称欲，能无求乎！
现代文：资财不能满足欲望，怎么能够没有需索呢！
English: Wealth cannot satisfy desire, so how can there be no need for it!

古文：是犹启其门而禁其出也！
现代文：这就象打开大门而禁止出行一样啊！
English: It's like opening the gates and banning travel!

古文：虽德宗之多僻，亦泌所以相之者非其道故也。
现代文：虽然说德宗是有许多偏执之处的，但也由于李泌出任他的宰相所做的事情并不符合正道的原故啊。
English: Although it is said that Dezong had a lot of bigotry, it was also because the things that Li Xiu did as his prime minister were not in line with the true path.

古文：咸阳人或上言： 臣见白起，令臣奏云： 请为国家擀御西陲。
现代文：咸阳居民中有人进言说： 我看见白起了，他让我上奏说： 请让我为国家捍卫西部边疆。
English: A resident of Xianyang chimed in: "I saw a white light, and he asked me to recite: Please let me defend the western border for the country."

古文：正月，吐蕃必大下，当为朝廷破之以取信。  
现代文：正月，吐蕃一定会大规模入侵，我自当为朝廷打败他们，以便取得信用。  
English: In the first month of the year, there will definitely be a large-scale invasion by the Tuifang. I will defeat them for the imperial court in order to gain credibility.

古文：既而吐蕃入寇，边将败之，不能深入。
现代文：不久，吐蕃前来侵犯，边疆将领打败了他们，使他们未能深入。
English: Before long, the Tubo came to invade, and the frontier generals defeated them and prevented them from going deeper.

古文：上以为信然，欲于京城立庙，赠司徒，李泌曰： 臣闻 国将兴，听于人。 
现代文：德宗认为事有效验，准备在京城建立祠庙，追封白起为司徒。李泌说： 我听说： 国家将要兴起时，要听取人民的呼声。 
English: Dezong believed that the matter was valid, and prepared to build an ancestral temple in Beijing and become a monk. Li Xiu said: I heard: When the country is about to rise, it is necessary to listen to the voices of the people.

古文：今将帅立功而陛下褒赏白起，臣恐边臣解体矣！
现代文：现在将帅立下功勋，陛下反而追封白起，我恐怕边疆的臣下就要人心离散了！
English: Now he will be honored for his bravery, but his majesty will be purged. I'm afraid that the vassals of the frontier will be scattered!

古文：若立庙京城，盛为祈祷，流闻四方，将长巫风。
现代文：如果在京城建立祠庙，大事祈祷，在各地传播开来，将会助长相信巫祝的风气。
English: If temples and shrines are built in Beijing and the practice of praying for important events spreads throughout the country, it will encourage the belief in witches and fortune-telling.

古文：今杜邮有旧祠，请敕府县葺之，则不至惊人耳目矣。
现代文：如今杜邮有白起的故祠，请敕所在府县修葺祠堂，便不至于使人们的视听受到惊动了。
English: Nowadays, Du Po has a white-washed ancestral shrine. If you ask your prefecture to repair the ancestral hall, it will not cause people's audio-visual to be shocked.

古文：且白起列国之将，赠三公太重，请赠兵部尚书可矣。 
现代文：而且，白起是诸侯国中的将领，追封为三公，地位过高，请追封他为兵部尚书就可以了。 
English: Moreover, Baiqi is the highest-ranking general in the principality. He is too high-ranking to be posthumously awarded the title of Sankong. Please just award him the title of Heibu Shangshu.

古文：上笑曰： 卿于白起亦惜官乎！ 
现代文：德宗笑着说： 你对白起也吝惜官位吗！ 
English: Dezong smiled and said, "Do you also begrudge the official position to Baiqi!"

古文：对曰： 人神一也。
现代文：李泌回答说： 人和神是一致的。
English: Li Xuan replied: "Man and God are one and the same.

古文：陛下倘不之惜，则神亦不以为荣矣。 
现代文：倘若陛下不珍惜官位，神也就不认为追封官位是荣耀的了。 
English: If Your Majesty does not value the official position, God will not think it is glorious to pursue the official position.

古文：上从之。
现代文：德宗听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：泌自陈衰老，独任宰相，精力耗竭，既未听其去，乞更除一相。
现代文：李泌上言说自己年老体弱，独自担任宰相的职务，精神气力消耗殆尽，既然不能听凭他离开相位，请求再任命一位宰相。
English: Li Jie said that he was old and weak, and that he had served as prime minister alone, and his mental strength had been exhausted. Since he could not leave the position, he asked for another prime minister to be appointed.

古文：上曰： 朕深知卿劳苦，但未得其人耳。 
现代文：德宗说： 朕深深了解你的劳碌，只是没有找到合适的人选罢了。 
English: Dezong said: I deeply understand your hard work, but I just haven't found the right person.

古文：上从容与泌论即位以来宰相，曰： 卢杞忠清强介，人言杞奸邪，朕殊不觉其然。 
现代文：德宗不慌不忙地与李泌谈论自己即位以来的宰相说： 卢杞忠实而清廉，强干而耿直，人们说卢杞邪恶，朕觉得他实在不是这个样子。 
English: Desong talked with Li Xiu unhurriedly about the chancellor since his accession to the throne and said: Lu Xun is faithful and incorruptible, strong and upright, people say that Lu Xun is evil, I think he is really not like this.

古文：泌曰： 人言杞奸邪而陛下独不觉其奸邪，此乃杞之所以为奸邪也。
现代文：李泌说： 人们都说卢杞是邪恶的，唯独陛下不能觉察他的邪恶，这正是卢杞堪称邪恶的道理所在啊。
English: Li Xiu said: People say that Lu Xun is evil, but Your Majesty can't detect his evil, which is exactly why Lu Xun is evil.

古文：倘陛下觉之，岂有建中之乱乎！
现代文：倘若陛下觉察了他的邪恶，难道会发生建中年间的变乱吗？
English: If His Majesty were to become aware of his evil, would the turmoil of the Jianzhong years occur?

古文：杞以私隙杀杨炎，挤颜真卿于死地，激李怀光使叛，赖陛下圣明窜逐之，人心顿喜，天亦悔祸。
现代文：卢杞因私人的嫌隙而杀了杨炎，将颜真卿排挤到必死之地，激怒李怀光，使他背叛了朝廷，全仗着陛下神圣英明，将他流放了，人们的心情顿时高兴起来，上天也追悔所造成的灾祸。
English: Lu Wei killed Yang Yan due to a personal grudge, pushed Yan Zhenqing to the brink of death, infuriated Li Huaguang, made him betray the imperial court, and exiled him with the help of His Majesty's sacred wisdom. People's moods suddenly became happy, and Heaven also repented of the disaster caused.

古文：不然，乱何由弭！ 
现代文：否则，变乱怎么能够消弭呢！ 
English: Otherwise, how can the turmoil be eliminated!

古文：上曰： 杨炎以童子视朕，每论事，朕可其奏则悦，与之往复问难，即怒而辞位，观其意以朕为不足与言故也。
现代文：德宗说： 杨炎把朕看作小孩子，每当议论事情时，朕赞成他的奏陈，他就高兴，朕与他反复辩论诘难，他便气冲冲地要求辞去相位，朕看他的本意，是认为不值得与朕交谈吧。
English: Dezong said, "Yang Yan regards me as a child. Whenever we discuss things, I agree with him and he is happy. When I repeatedly argue with him, he angrily asks me to resign. I think his intention is that it is not worth talking to me.

古文：以是交不可忍，非由杞也。
现代文：由于这个原因，朕与他相互不能容忍，这并不是由于卢杞啊。
English: For this reason, he and I cannot tolerate each other, and it is not because of Lu Yao.

古文：建中之乱，术士豫请城奉天，此盖天命，非杞所能致也！ 
现代文：建中年间的变乱，道术之士预先便建议修筑奉天城，这恐怕是天命如此，而不是卢杞能够招致的！ 
English: During the turmoil in the middle of the Jianming period, Taoist scholars suggested the construction of the Bongtiancheng in advance, which is probably the fate of heaven, and not the result of Lu Wei!

古文：泌曰： 天命，他人皆可以言之，惟君相不可言。盖君相所以造命也。
现代文：李泌说： 天命，别人都可以谈论它，只有君王和宰相不能谈论，因为君王和宰相就是制造命运的人物。
English: Li Xiu said, "Other people can talk about the Mandate of Heaven, but only the king and the prime minister cannot talk about it, because the king and the prime minister are the people who create destiny."

古文：若言命，则礼乐刑政皆无所用矣。
现代文：如若谈论命运，礼乐刑政便全然没有用场了。
English: If we are talking about fate, there is no use at all for ceremonial punishment.

古文：纣曰： 我生不有命在天！ 
现代文：殷纣王说： 我生来不就是由天命决定的吗！ 
English: King Yin Yao said, "I was born, isn't it just the fate of the world that I am like this?"

古文：此商之所以亡也！ 
现代文：这正是商朝来灭亡的原因啊！ 
English: This is exactly the reason why the Shang Dynasty came to an end!

古文：上曰： 朕好与人较量理体：崔祐甫性褊躁，朕难之，则应对失次，朕常知其短而护之。
现代文：德宗说： 朕喜欢跟别人比较治国的经验。崔甫性情狭隘急躁，朕诘问他，他回答得语无伦次，朕知道他的短处，便经常维护他。
English: Desong said: I like to compare the experience of governing the country with others. Cui Fu's temperament is narrow and impetuous. When I questioned him, he answered incoherently. I knew his shortcomings and often defended him.

古文：杨炎论事亦有可采，而气色粗傲，难之辄勃然怒，无复君臣之礼，所以每见令人忿发。馀人则不敢复言。
现代文：杨炎议论事情，还是有可以采纳的意见的，但是他态度粗率狂傲，朕诘问他，他动不动就勃然大怒，毫不顾及君臣的礼节。所以一看到他，就叫人生气，其余的人则不敢再说话了。
English: Yang Yan still has acceptable opinions when discussing things, but his attitude is rude and arrogant. When I questioned him, he flew into a rage at every turn, with no regard for the etiquette of a monarch. So the sight of him made people angry, and the rest of them dared not speak again.

古文：卢杞小心，朕所言无不从。又无学，不能与朕往复，故朕所怀常不尽也。 
现代文：卢杞小心谨慎，凡是朕所说的，他没有不听从的，加上他没有学识，不能与朕反复争论，所以朕想要说的话经常是没有穷尽的。 
English: Lu Xun is careful and cautious. He does not disobey anything I say. In addition, he has no knowledge and cannot argue with me repeatedly. Therefore, what I want to say is often inexhaustible.

古文：对曰： 杞言无不从，岂忠臣乎！
现代文：李泌回答说： 卢杞对陛下的话无不听从，难道就是忠臣吗！ 我讲的话，是没有人敢于违背的。 
English: Li Xiu replied, "Lu Yao is a loyal subject who listens to what your majesty says. No one dares to go against what I say.

古文：夫 言而莫予违 ，此孔子所谓 一言丧邦 者也！ 
现代文：这正是孔子所说的 一句话讲出来可以使国丧失掉 的意思啊！ 
English: This is exactly what Confucius meant when he said that a single word can cause a country to be lost!

古文：上曰：  惟卿则异彼三人者。
现代文：德宗说： 只有你与他们三人是不同的。
English: Dezong said: Only you are different from the three of them.

古文：朕言当，卿有喜色；不当，常有忧色。
现代文：朕讲得妥当，你的脸上是喜气洋洋的，朕讲得不妥当，你的脸上便常常要显出忧愁的样子。
English: When I speak properly, your face is beaming, but when I speak improperly, your face often shows a sad look.

古文：虽时有逆耳之言，如曏来纣及丧邦之类。朕细思之，皆卿先事而言，如此则理安，如彼则危乱，言虽深切而气色和顺，无杨炎之陵傲。
现代文：虽然你时而会说出刺耳的话来，就如刚才你谈到商纣王以及使国家丧失掉这一类话一样，但是，朕仔细琢磨过你讲的话，全是你在事情发生以前所做的忠告，按照这些话去做，就会政治清明，国家安定，而按照朕原来那些想法去做，就会招致危机，引发变乱。虽然你说的话深深切中朕的缺失，但是面色和蔼温顺，不象杨炎那样傲气凌人。
English: Although you sometimes say harsh words, as you just said about the merchant king and the loss of the country, I have carefully considered what you said, it is all the advice you gave before the incident. If you follow these words, the politics will be clear and the country will be stable, and if you follow my original ideas, it will lead to crisis and chaos. Although your words are deeply concerned with my shortcomings, you are kind and gentle, not arrogant and domineering like Yang Yan.

古文：朕问难往复，卿辞理不屈，又无好胜之志，直使朕中怀已尽屈服而不能不从，此朕新以私喜于得卿也。 
现代文：朕反复对你诘责，你在言辞和道理上并不屈从，但又没有逞强好胜的意图，直至使朕内心已经完全屈服，因而不能不听从你的意见。这便是朕为得到你而自己高兴的原因啊。 
English: I have rebuked you again and again, and you have not yielded in words and reason, but you have not had the courage to win, until my heart has completely yielded, so I can not disobey your opinion. This is the reason why I am happy to get you.

古文：泌曰： 陛下能用相尚多，今皆不论，何也？ 
现代文：李泌说： 陛下任用的宰相还多着哩，如今一概不加评论，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Li Zuo said, "There are still many prime ministers appointed by His Majesty, but no one comments on them now. Why is that?

古文：上曰： 彼皆非所谓相也。
现代文：德宗说： 他们都不是人们所说的宰相啊。
English: Desong said: They are not what people call prime ministers.

古文：凡相者，必委以政事，如玄宗时牛仙客、陈希烈，可以谓之相乎！
现代文：凡是出任宰相的，就一定要把行政事务交给他们。比如玄宗时期的牛仙客、阵希烈，能够把他们称作宰相吗？
English: Anyone who serves as prime minister must hand over the administrative affairs to them. For example, in the period of Emperor Xuanzong, could Niu Xianke and Jian Xilai be called prime ministers?

古文：如肃宗、代宗之任卿，虽不受其名，乃真相耳。
现代文：又如肃宗、代宗任用你，虽然你没有得到宰相的名称，但这就是真正的宰相了。
English: For example, Su Zong and Daizong appointed you, although you did not get the title of prime minister, but this is the real prime minister.

古文：必以官至平章事为相，则王武俊之徒皆相也。 
现代文：如果一定认为官职达到平章事才是宰相，那么，王武俊这一类人便都是宰相了。
English: If it is considered that a person who has reached the rank of Taijosho is the prime minister, then Wang Wujun and people like him are prime ministers.

古文：刘昌复筑连云堡。
现代文：刘昌重新修筑连云堡。
English: Liu Chang rebuilds Lianyungang Fortress.

古文：夏，四月，乙未，更命殿前左、右射生曰神威军，与左、右羽林、龙武、神武、神策号曰十军。
现代文：夏季四月，乙未，德宗又将殿前左、右射生军改名为左、右神威军，与左右羽林、龙武、神武、神策各军合起来号称十军。
English: In the summer of April, the left and right archery troops in front of the hall were renamed the left and right Shenwei troops, and together with the left and right Hulin, Longwu, Shenwu and Shenze armies, they became known as the Ten Armies.

古文：神策尤盛，多戍京西，散屯畿甸。
现代文：其中神策军尤其强盛，他们多数戍守京西，零散地驻扎在京城地区。
English: Among them, Shinsaku's army was particularly strong. Most of them guarded west Beijing and were stationed in scattered locations in the capital area.

古文：福建观察使吴诜，轻其军士脆弱，苦役之。
现代文：福建观察使吴诜因部下将士怯懦软弱而轻视他们，极力役使他们。
English: The observation of Fujian made Wu Gan despise his subordinates because of their cowardice and weakness, and he tried his best to serve them.

古文：军士作乱，杀诜腹心十馀人，逼诜牒大将郝诫溢掌留务。
现代文：将士发起变乱，杀掉了吴诜的亲信十多个人，逼迫吴诜写文书召大将郝诫溢掌管留后事务。
English: The generals initiated a mutiny, killed more than ten of Wu Gan's close confidants, and forced Wu Gan to write a document to summon the general to take charge of the remaining affairs.

古文：诫溢上表请罪，上遣中使就赦以安之。
现代文：郝诫溢上表请求治罪，德宗派遣中使就地赦免，使他安下心来。
English: The exhortation overflows with a request for punishment on the table, and the local pardon is made in the dispatch of Dezong, so that he can calm down.

古文：乙未，陇右节度使李元谅筑良原故城而镇之。
现代文：乙未，陇右节度使李元谅将良原旧有的城池修筑起来，并镇守在那里。
English: In the second year of his reign, Li Yuanpeng built the old castle in Liangyuan and started to keep watch there.

古文：云南王异牟寻欲内附，未敢自遣使，先遣其东蛮鬼主骠旁、苴梦冲、苴乌星入见。
现代文：云南王异牟寻打算归附朝廷，但不敢自行派遣使者，首先派遣他的东蛮鬼主骠旁、苴梦冲、苴乌星入京朝见。
English: King Yimou of Yunnan intended to attach himself to the imperial court, but he did not dare to send an envoy of his own accord. He first sent his Eastern Barbarian ghost masters, Xing Bei, Xing Mengchong, and Xing Wuxing to meet the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：五月，乙卯，宴之于麟德殿，赐赉甚厚，封王给印而遣之。
现代文：五月，乙卯，德宗在麟德殿设宴款待他们，对他们的赏赐甚为丰厚，还封他们为王，发给印绶，然后打发他们回去。
English: In May, Emperor Dezong hosted a banquet for them at the Lin De Hall, and rewarded them very generously. He also made them kings and sent them to India, and then sent them back.

古文：辛未，以太子宾客吴凑为福建观察使，贬吴诜为涪州刺史。
现代文：辛未，德宗任命太子宾客吴凑为福建观察使，将吴诜贬黜为涪州剌史。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Dezong appointed the prince's guest Wu Qian as the Fujian Observer, and relegated Wu Yao to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：吐蕃三万馀骑寇泾、邠、宁、庆、鄜等州。
现代文：吐蕃三万多骑兵侵犯泾？宁、庆、等州。
English: More than 30,000 cavalrymen from Tubo invaded Fanning, Qing, and other prefectures.

古文：先是，吐蕃常以秋冬入寇，及春多病疫退。
现代文：在此之前，吐蕃经常选择秋天和冬天前来侵犯，及至春天，往往因染上瘟疫而退却。
English: Prior to this, the pied flycatcher often chose the autumn and winter to invade, and in the spring, it often retreated because of the plague.

古文：至是，得唐人，质其妻子，遣其将将之，盛夏入寇。诸州皆城守，无敢与战者，吐蕃俘掠人畜万计而去。
现代文：至此，吐蕃得到唐朝的百姓后，将他们的妻子儿女留作人质，派遣吐蕃将领带领着这些百姓，在夏天最热时前来侵犯，各州都据城守备，没有人敢同他们交战，吐蕃俘获虏掠了数以万计的人丁与牲畜，便离去了。
English: At this point, after Tu Wei had captured the people of the Tang Dynasty, he kept their wives and children as hostages. He sent Tu Wei generals to lead these people to invade in the hottest time of the summer. All the states were guarded by the city, and no one dared to fight them. Tu Wei captured and plundered tens of thousands of people and livestock, and then left.

古文：夏县人阳城以学行著闻，隐居柳谷之北，李泌荐之。六月征拜谏议大夫。
现代文：夏县人阳城以学问与品行著称于世，他在柳谷北面隐居，李泌推荐他；六月，他被征召任命为谏议大夫。
English: Ren Yangcheng of Xia County is famous for his learning and character in the world. He lived in seclusion in the north side of Liugui. Li Xiu recommended him. In June, he was called up to be appointed as a doctor of consultation.

古文：韩游瑰以吐蕃犯塞，自戍宁州。病，求代归。
现代文：由于吐蕃侵犯边塞，韩游亲自戍守宁州，但他得了病，请求派人将自己替代回去。
English: As a result of Tubo's invasion of the border fortress, Han Yu personally guarded Ningzhou, but he fell ill and requested that someone be sent back to replace him.

古文：秋，七月，庚戌，加浑瑊邠宁副元帅，以左金吾将军张献甫为邠宁节度使，陈许兵马使韩全义为长武城行营节度使。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚戌，德宗加封浑为宁副无帅，任命左金吾将军张献甫为宁节度使，任命陈许兵马使韩全义为长武城行营节度使。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Zong appointed Dezong Jiafeng as vice marshal of Ning, appointed Zuo Kingu General Zhang Xianfu as festival envoy of Ning, and appointed Chen Xu Terracotta Warriors and Horses as Han Quan Yi as festival envoy of Changwu City.

古文：献甫未至，壬子夜，游瑰不告于众，轻骑归朝。
现代文：在张献甫没有到职之前，壬子夜里，韩游没有告诉众人，便轻装骑马回朝廷去了。
English: Before Zhang Xianfu arrived at work, in the middle of the night, Han You did not tell anyone and rode lightly back to the imperial court.

古文：戍卒裴满等惮献甫之严，乘无帅之际，癸丑，帅其徒作乱，曰： 张公不出本军，我必拒之。 
现代文：戍卒裴满等人害怕张献甫的严厉，便乘着没有主帅的时机，在癸丑率领他的同伙发起变乱。他说： 张公本不出于本军，我一定要抗拒他。 
English: His subordinate Pei Man and others were afraid of Zhang Xianfu's severity, so they took advantage of the lack of a commander to lead his comrades in a mutiny in Gongxiu. He said: Zhang Gong is not from our army, I must resist him.

古文：因剽掠城市，围监军杨明义所居，使奏请范希朝为节度使。
现代文：于是，他们到市肆去抢劫，还包围了监军杨明义的住所，让他上奏请求任命范希朝为本镇节度使。
English: As a result, they went to the city hall to rob it. They also surrounded the residence of Yang Mingyi, the supervisor of the troops, and asked him to petition for the appointment of Fan Xichang as the town's festival envoy.

古文：都虞侯杨朝晟避乱出城，闻之，复入，曰： 所请甚契我心，我来贺也！ 
现代文：都虞候杨朝晟躲避变乱，逃出城来，听说要请范希朝出任节度使，便又进入城中，他说： 你们所请求的，很合我的心意，我是来庆贺的呢！ 
English: Yang Zhaohui, the prefectural governor, fled the city to escape the turmoil. He heard that Fan Xichang was to be invited to serve as the festival's envoy, so he entered the city again. He said: "What you have requested is very much to my liking. I have come to celebrate!

古文：乱卒稍安。
现代文：作乱的士兵稍微安定了一些。
English: The rioting soldiers have calmed down a bit.

古文：朝晟潜与诸将谋，晨勒兵，如乱卒谓曰： 所请不行，张公已至邠州，汝曹作乱当死，不可尽杀，宜自推列唱帅者。 
现代文：杨朝晟暗中与各将领计议了一番，早晨率领着兵马，召集作乱的士兵，对他们说： 你们所要求的事情难以实现了。张公已经来到州，你们发动变乱，应当处死，但不会将你们都杀了，你们最好自己推举出带头的人来。 
English: Yang Zhaohui secretly discussed the plan with the generals. In the morning, he led the troops and horses and gathered the soldiers who had caused the disturbance. He said to them, "It is difficult to achieve what you have demanded. Zhang Gong has come to the state. If you start a disturbance, you should be put to death. However, he will not kill all of you. You had better nominate the person who will take the lead.

古文：遂斩二百馀人，帅众迎献甫。
现代文：于是他斩杀了二百余人，率领大家迎接张献甫。
English: So he killed more than two hundred people and led everyone to meet Zhang Xianfu.

古文：上闻军众欲得范希朝，将授之。
现代文：德宗听说军中人众愿意让范希朝统领，便准备授给他一职务。
English: When Dezong heard that the people in the army were willing to let Fan Xichang lead the country, he was ready to give him a post.

古文：希朝辞曰： 臣畏游瑰之祸而来，今往代之，非所以防窥觎，安反仄也。 
现代文：范希朝推辞说： 我是因畏忌韩游的迫害才回来的，如今前去替代他的职务，这可不是防范阴谋、安定动荡局面的办法啊。 
English: Fan Xichang said, "I only came back because I was afraid of the persecution in South Korea. To go to replace him now is not the way to prevent conspiracies and stabilize the turbulent situation."

古文：上嘉之，擢为宁州刺史，以副献甫。
现代文：德宗嘉许他，将他提升为宁州刺史，作为张献甫的副手。
English: Dezong praised him and promoted him to the position of Ningzhou chief historian, as Zhang Xianfu's deputy.

古文：游瑰至京师，除右龙武统军。
现代文：韩游来到京城后，被任命为右龙武统军。
English: After Han Yu came to Beijing, he was appointed to the Right Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：振武节度使唐朝臣不严斥候，己未，奚、室韦寇振武，执宣慰中使二人，大掠人畜而去。
现代文：由于振武节度使唐朝臣未能严密侦察敌情，己未，奚人和室韦人侵犯振武，捉住前来安抚军心的中使二人，在大量掳掠人口和牲畜以后，便离去了。
English: Because of the Zhenwu Festival, the Tang courtiers were not able to closely investigate the enemy situation. However, the Xing and Muxi people invaded Zhenwu, captured the two middle envoys who came to appease the military, and left after a large number of plundered people and livestock.

古文：时回纥之众逆公主者在振武，朝臣遣七百骑与回纥数百骑追之，回纥使者为奚、室韦所杀。
现代文：当时，迎接公主的回纥人众正在振武，唐朝臣派遣骑兵七百人与回纥骑兵数百人追击他们，回纥的使者被奚人、室韦人杀掉了。
English: At that time, the Uighur people who were welcoming the princess were mobilizing. The Tang court sent seven hundred cavalry and hundreds of Uighur cavalry to chase them. The Uighur envoys were killed by the Xiongnu and the Shumway people.

古文：九月，庚申，吐蕃尚志董星寇宁州，张献甫击却之。
现代文：九月，庚申，吐蕃尚悉董星侵犯宁州，张献甫击退了他们。
English: In September, when Gongshen and Tubo learned that Dong Xing had invaded Ningzhou, Zhang Xianfu repulsed them.

古文：吐蕃转掠鄜、坊而去。
现代文：吐蕃转而在州和坊州掳掠了一番，便离去了。
English: He then went to Zhuzhou and Fangzhou, where he looted and plundered a great deal, and then left.

古文：元友直句检诸道税外物，悉输户部，遂为定制，岁于税外输百馀万缗、斛，民不堪命。
现代文：元友直检查各道在税收以外加征的财物，并将它们全部上缴户部。以后这种做法便成了固定的制度，每年要在税收以外缴纳一百余万缗、斛，百姓难以忍受这种索求。
English: Yuan Youzhi inspected the property that each province levied in addition to taxes, and submitted them all to the Ministry of Households. Later, this practice became a fixed system. Every year, more than one million bahts and bahts had to be paid in addition to taxes. The people could not bear this demand.

古文：诸道多自诉于上，上意寤，诏： 今年已入在官者输京师，未入者悉以与民；明年以后，悉免之。 
现代文：各道经常向德宗反映这种情况，德宗心中理解了他们的疾苦，于是颁诏： 今年已经收入官府的税收以外的财物可以运往京城，还没有收入官府的，全部交还给百姓。从明年起，悉数免除。 
English: The provinces often reported this situation to Dezong, who understood their plight and issued an edict: This year, all property other than the taxes collected by the government can be sent to the capital, and all that has not been collected by the government will be returned to the people. From next year, all of it will be exempted.

古文：于是东南之民复安其业。
现代文：于是，东南地区的百姓又安心从事他们的本业了。
English: As a result, people in the southeastern region can once again do their jobs with peace of mind.

古文：回纥合骨咄禄可汗得唐许婚，甚喜，遣其妹骨咄禄毘伽公主及大臣妻并国相、趺跌都督以下千馀人来迎可敦，辞礼甚恭，曰： 昔为兄弟，今为子婿，半子也。
现代文：回纥合骨咄禄可汗得到唐朝允许通婚的消息后，非常高兴，便派出他的妹妹骨咄禄毗伽公主以及大臣的妻子，连同国相、跌都督以下一千多人，前来迎接可汗的妻子阿敦，措辞与执礼都很恭敬。他们说： 往日两国结为兄弟，如今可汗是皇上的女婿，是皇上的半个儿子了。
English: After receiving the news that the Tang Dynasty had allowed intermarriage, Hui Hui Keng Luk Khan was very happy and sent his sister Princess Keng Luk Viga and the minister's wife, along with more than a thousand people from the Minister of State to the Governor, to meet Khan's wife, Atun. The wording and the ceremony were very respectful. They said: In the past, the two countries were brothers. Today, Khan is the emperor's son-in-law and the emperor's half son.

古文：若吐蕃为患，子当为父除之！ 
现代文：如果吐蕃危害朝廷，儿子自当为父亲除去他们。 
English: If they endanger the imperial court, the son should remove them as a father.

古文：因詈辱吐蕃使者以绝之。
现代文：于是回纥责骂、侮辱了吐蕃的使者，与吐蕃断绝了往来。
English: As a result, Hui Xuan scolded and insulted the emissary of Tubo, and cut off contacts with Tubo.

古文：冬，十月，戊子，回纥至长安，可汗仍表请改回纥为回鹘，许之。
现代文：冬委，十月，戊子，回纥使者来到长安，可汗上表请求将回纥改称为回鹘，德宗答应了。
English: Winter Committee, October, Wu Zi, Hui Zong's emissary came to Chang'an, the khan made a request to change Hui Zong to Hui Zong, and Dezong agreed.

古文：吐蕃发兵十万将寇西川，亦发云南兵。
现代文：吐蕃征发十万兵马，准备侵犯西川，同时也征发云南兵马。
English: Tubo dispatched 100,000 soldiers and horses in preparation for invading the West River, and also dispatched soldiers and horses from Yunnan.

古文：云南内虽附唐，外未敢叛吐蕃，亦发兵数万屯于泸北。
现代文：云南虽然暗中已经归附唐朝，但表面上还不敢背叛吐蕃，因而也派出数万兵马在泸水北岸驻扎。
English: Although Yunnan had already been secretly annexed to the Tang Dynasty, it did not dare to betray Tubo on the surface, so it also sent tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to be stationed on the north shore of Surabaya.

古文：韦皋知云南计方犹豫，乃为书遗云南王，叙其叛吐蕃归化之诚，贮以银函，使东蛮转致吐蕃。
现代文：韦皋了解到云南王还在拿不定主意，便写了一封给云南王的书信，在信中陈述了云南王叛离吐蕃，归于王化的诚意，装在银盒子中，让东蛮转交吐蕃。
English: After learning that the king of Yunnan was still undecided, Wei Wei wrote a letter to the king of Yunnan, in which he stated the sincerity of the king of Yunnan to betray Tubo and return to Wanghua. The letter was placed in a silver box and allowed Dongban to transfer Tubo.

古文：吐蕃始疑云南，遣兵二万屯会川，以塞云南趣蜀之路。
现代文：吐蕃开始怀疑云南王，便派兵两万在会川驻扎，以便堵住云南前往蜀中的通路。
English: When Tubo began to suspect the king of Yunnan, he stationed 20,000 soldiers in Huichuan in order to block the passage of Yunnan to Shuzhong.

古文：云南怒，引兵归国。
现代文：云南王大怒，领兵回国去了。
English: The king of Yunnan flew into a rage and led his soldiers back to his country.

古文：由是云南与吐蕃相猜阻，归唐之志益坚。吐蕃失云南之助，兵势始弱矣。
现代文：自此以来，云南与吐蕃互相猜疑，云南归顺唐朝的意图愈发坚定，而吐蕃失去云南的帮助，军队的声势便开始削弱了。
English: Since then, Yunnan and Tubo have been suspicious of each other, Yunnan's intention to submit to the Tang Dynasty has become more and more firm, and Tubo has lost Yunnan's help, and the army's momentum has begun to weaken.

古文：然吐蕃业已入寇，遂分兵四万攻两林骠旁，三万攻东蛮，七千寇清溪关，五千寇铜山。
现代文：然而，吐蕃已经出兵，于是分出四万兵马攻打两林，骠旁，三万兵马攻打东蛮，七千兵马侵犯清溪关，五千兵马侵犯铜山。
English: However, Tubo had already dispatched troops, so 40,000 soldiers and horses were dispatched to attack the Two Forests, and next to Tubo, 30,000 soldiers and horses attacked the Eastern Barbarians, 7,000 soldiers and horses invaded the Clear Creek Pass, and 5,000 soldiers and horses invaded the Copper Mountain.

古文：皋遣黎州刺史韦晋等与东蛮连兵御之，破吐蕃于清溪关外。
现代文：韦派遣黎州刺史韦晋等人与东蛮联合兵马，抵御吐蕃，在清溪关外面打败了他们。
English: Wei dispatched Li Zhou, Zhi Shi, Wei Jin and other people to join with the East and West combined troops and horses to resist the Tu Wei, and defeated them outside the Qingxi Pass.

古文：庚子，册命咸安公主，加回鹘可汗号长寿天亲可汗。
现代文：庚子，德宗册封咸安公主，加封回鹘可汗为长寿天亲可汗。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Dezong inscribed Princess Xian'an on his tombstone, and added Hui Khan on his tombstone as the Long-Lived Heavenly Parent Khan.

古文：十一月，以刑部尚书关播为送咸安公主兼册回鹘可汗使。
现代文：十一月，任命刑部尚书关播为护送咸安公主兼册回鹘可汗使。
English: In November, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuxuanbo, was appointed as the escort of Princess Haman and the envoy of the Khan of Guizhou.

古文：吐蕃耻前日之败，复以众二万寇清溪关，一万攻东蛮。韦皋命韦晋镇要冲城，督诸军以御之。巂州经略使刘朝彩等出关连战，自乙卯至癸亥，大破之。
现代文：吐蕃以不久前遭受的失败为耻辱，又派兵马二万侵犯清溪关，派兵马一万进攻东蛮，韦皋命令韦晋镇守要冲城，监督各军抵御吐蕃，州经略使刘朝彩出关连续接战，从乙卯到癸亥，大破吐蕃。
English: Taking the recent defeat as a disgrace, Tubo sent another twenty thousand soldiers and horses to invade Qingxi Pass, and sent ten thousand soldiers and horses to attack the Eastern Barbarians. Wei Wei ordered the Wei Jin Town Guard to storm the city and supervise all the troops to resist Tubo. The State Economic Delegate sent Liu Chaocai out of the pass to continuously engage in battle, from Etu to Yinghai, and broke Tubo.

古文：李泌言于上曰： 江、淮漕运，自淮入汴，以甬桥为咽喉，地属徐州，邻于李纳，刺史高明应年少不习事，若李纳一旦复有异图，窃据徐州，是失江、淮也，国用何从而致！
现代文：李泌对德宗说： 甬桥是江准地区漕运的要冲，此地归徐州管辖，与李纳相邻，刺史高明应年纪轻，不晓事，如果李纳有一天又有了背叛朝廷的意图，偷偷占领了徐州，这就等于把江准地区失掉了，国家的用度将从哪里得来呢！
English: Li Xiu said to Dezong, "Fengqiao is the hub of river transport in the Jiangzhun region. This place is under the jurisdiction of Xuzhou and is adjacent to Li Na. Gao Ming should be young and unaware. If Li Na one day has the intention of betraying the imperial court and secretly occupies Xuzhou, this is tantamount to losing the Jiangzhun region. Where will the country's needs come from?

古文：请徙寿、庐、濠都团练使张建封镇徐州，割濠、泗以隶之。复以庐、寿归淮南，则淄青惕息而运路常通，江、淮安矣。
现代文：请改任寿、庐、濠三州都团练使张建封镇守徐州，分割出濠州、泗州来隶属于他，再将庐州、寿州划归准南，那么淄青就会恐惧收敛，运输通道就会保持畅通无阻，江准地区便安定了。
English: Please change the names of Shou, Handan, and Handan to the three states to make Zhang Jianfeng the town guard of Xuzhou, split out Handan and Handan to be subordinate to him, and then assign Handan and Handan to the south, then Handan will fear convergence, transportation channels will remain unimpeded, and the Jianjiang region will be stable.

古文：及今明应幼騃可代，宜征为金吾将军。
现代文：趁着现在高明应年幼无知，可以替代，最好将他征召为金吾将军。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that Gao Ming should be young and ignorant now, he can be replaced, and it is best to conscript him as General Kingo.

古文：万一使它人得之，则不可复制矣。 
现代文：万一让别人得到徐州，便不能够重加控制了。 
English: If someone else gets Xuzhou, they will not be able to regain control.

古文：上从之。以建封为徐、泗、濠节度使。
现代文：德宗听从了这一建议，任命张建封为徐、泗、濠节度使。
English: Dezong listened to this suggestion and appointed Zhang Jianfeng as the imperial envoy of Xu, Zhai and Zhai.

古文：建封为政宽厚而有纲纪，不贷人以法，故其下无不畏而悦之。
现代文：张建封办理政务宽容仁厚而又深明法度，严格执法，所以，他的部下没有人不畏惧他，但又悦服他。
English: Zhang Jianfeng was a tolerant and benevolent ruler, but he also had a deep understanding of the law and strictly enforced the law. Therefore, none of his subordinates were not afraid of him, but they were also pleased with him.

古文：横海节度使程日华薨，子怀直自知留后。
现代文：横海节度使程日华去世，他的儿子程怀直自行执掌留后事务。
English: Henghai Jiedu caused the death of Cheng Rihwa, and his son, Cheng Huai Zhi, took charge of the succession affairs on his own.

古文：吐蕃屡遣人诱胁云南。
现代文：吐蕃屡次派人引诱、威胁云南。
English: Tubo repeatedly sent people to lure and threaten Yunnan.

古文：贞元五年己巳，公元七八九年
现代文：贞元五年
English: The 5th year of Zhenyuan

古文：春，二月，丁亥，韦皋遗异牟寻书，称： 回鹘屡请佐天子共灭吐蕃，王不早定计，一旦为回鹘所先，则王累代功名虚弃矣。
现代文：春季二月，丁亥，韦皋给异牟寻写去一封书信，内称： 回鹘屡次请求帮助皇上一同消灭吐蕃，如果大王还不及早确定谋略，有朝一日被回鹘赶在前头，大王世代相沿的功劳与名声便白白丢弃掉了。
English: In the spring of February, Dinghai, Wei Zheng wrote a letter to Yimuhang, which said: Hui Zheng repeatedly requested to help the emperor to eliminate Tu Zheng together. If the great king did not determine the strategy early, and was one day driven by Hui Zheng, the great king's generation-long merit and reputation would be discarded in vain.

古文：且云南久为吐蕃屈辱，今不乘此时依大国之势以复怨雪耻，后悔无及矣。 
现代文：而且，云南长期遭受吐蕃欺压的屈辱，如今若还不乘这一时机，依靠大国的力量，来报复怨仇，洗雪耻辱，后悔也来不及了。 
English: Moreover, if Yunnan does not take advantage of this opportunity and rely on the power of a big country to avenge the resentment and wash away the shame, it is too late to regret.

古文：戊戌，以横海留后程怀直为沧州观察使。
现代文：戊戌，德宗任命横海留后程怀直为沧州观察使。
English: Wuzhong, Dezong appointed Henghailu Houcheng as Cangzhou observation envoy.

古文：怀直请分景城、弓高为景州，仍请朝廷除刺史。
现代文：程怀直请求在所辖地区内将弓高、景城分割出来，设置景州，还要求朝廷任命刺史。
English: Cheng Huai Zhi requested that the provinces of Yugang and Jingcheng be divided within the area under his jurisdiction, and that Jingzhou be established. He also requested that the imperial court appoint Shishi.

古文：上喜曰： 三十年无此事矣！ 
现代文：德宗高兴地说： 三十年以来，没有过这类事情了！ 
English: Dezong said happily, "In the past 30 years, nothing like this has ever happened!"

古文：乃以员外郎徐伸为景州刺史。
现代文：于是，任命员外郎徐伸为景州刺史。
English: As a result, the appointee, Wairo Xu Shin, became the history of Jingzhou.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事李泌屡乞更命相。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事李泌屡次请求再任命宰相。
English: Zhongshu's attendant and Tongping's subordinate, Li Xiu, repeatedly requested that the prime minister be reappointed.

古文：上欲用户部侍郎班宏，泌言宏虽清强而性多凝滞，乃荐窦参通敏，可兼度支盐铁；董晋方正，可处门下。上皆以为不可。
现代文：德宗打算起用户部侍郎班宏，李泌说班宏虽然清廉强干，但生性拘泥粘滞，于是荐举说窦参通达敏捷，可以兼任度支盐铁事务，又荐举说董晋端平正直，可以任职于门下省，皇上都认为不行。
English: Dezong planned to appoint Banhong, the server of the user department. Li Xiu said that although Banhong was clean and strong, he was sticky by nature. Therefore, he recommended that Dou Shantong was agile and could also serve as the vice-minister of salt and iron affairs. He also recommended that Dong Jin Duanping was honest and could serve in his province. The emperor did not think it was possible.

古文：参，诞之玄孙也，时为御史中丞兼户部侍郎；晋为太常卿。
现代文：窦参是窦诞的玄孙，当时正担任御史中丞兼户部侍郎；董晋当时正担任太常卿。
English: Dou San was the great-great-grandson of Dou Guo, and at that time he was serving as Goshi Chujo and household attendant; Dong Jin was serving as Taizhongqing at that time.

古文：至是泌疾甚，复荐二人。
现代文：至此，李泌的病情已经极为严重，他再次推荐二人。
English: At this point, Li Xiu's condition had become extremely serious, and he once again recommended two people.

古文：庚子，以董晋为门下侍郎，窦参为中书侍郎兼度支转运使，并同平章事。以班宏为尚书，依前度支转运副使。
现代文：庚子，德宗任命董晋为门下侍郎，任命窦参为中书侍郎兼度支转运使，二人均同平章事，还任命班宏为户部尚书，依然如前担任度支转运副使。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Dezong appointed Dong Jin as a subordinate attendant, appointed Dou Zhan as a chancellery attendant and transportation and logistics envoy, both of whom were equally appointed, and also appointed Ban Hong as a household secretary, still serving as deputy transportation and logistics envoy.

古文：参为人刚果峭刻，无学术，多权数，每奏事，诸相出，参独居后，以奏度支事为辞，实专大政，多引亲党置要地，使为耳目。
现代文：窦参为人刚强果断，严厉苛刻，没有学问，多有权术。每当上奏事情时，各位宰相一齐出来，惟独窦参留在后面，借口奏报度支事宜，实际是要独揽朝中重大的政务。
English: Dou Zhan was a strong and resolute person, stern and harsh, uneducated, and had many powers. Whenever a matter was brought up, all the prime ministers came out together, but Dou Zhan remained behind, under the pretext of reporting the matter to the provincial government, but in fact he wanted to monopolize the important government affairs of the dynasty.

古文：董晋充位而已。然晋为人重慎，所言于上前者未尝泄于人，子弟或问之，晋曰： 欲知宰相能否，视天下安危。
现代文：他还大量延引亲友同党，将他们安插在重要的部门中，让他们刺探消息，董晋只是填补相位的空缺罢了。然而，董晋为人端重谨慎，他在皇上面前所说的话，从不向别人泄露出去，有时他的子弟询问他，董晋说： 要想知道一个宰相是否有才能，就去看国家是安定还是危殆。
English: He also brought in a large number of relatives, friends and party members, placed them in important departments, and let them spy on the news. Dong Jin was just filling a vacancy. However, Dong Jin was very cautious. He never revealed to others what he said in front of the emperor. Sometimes his son asked him. Dong Jin said: To know whether a prime minister is talented, look at whether the country is stable or in danger.

古文：所谋议于上前者，不足道也。 三月，甲辰，李泌薨。
现代文：我在皇上面前策划计议的事情，是不值一提的。 三月，甲辰，李泌去世。
English: It is not worth mentioning that I planned and discussed the matter in front of the emperor.In March, Jia Chen, Li Xiu passed away.

古文：泌有谋略而好谈神仙诡诞，故为世所轻。
现代文：李泌有计谋韬略，但是喜欢谈论神仙诡异怪诞之事，所以被世人轻视。
English: Li Xiu has a cunning plan, but he likes to talk about supernatural and weird things, so he is despised by the world.

古文：初，上思李怀光之功，欲宥其一子，而子孙皆已伏诛。
现代文：当初，德宗想起李怀光立下的功劳，打算宽宥他的一个儿子，但是，李怀光的子孙后代已经全部被处死了。
English: At first, Dezong thought of Li Huai Guang's achievements and planned to pardon one of his sons, but Li Huai Guang's descendants had all been executed.

古文：戊辰，诏以怀光外孙燕八八为怀光后，赐姓名李承绪，除左卫率胄曹参军，赐钱千缗，使养怀光妻王氏及守其基祀。
现代文：戊辰，德宗颁诏命令以李怀光的外孙燕八八作为李怀光的继承人，赐给姓氏名字，叫李承绪，任命他为左卫率胄曹参军，赐钱一千缗，让他供养李怀光的妻子王氏，以及为李怀光扫墓祭祀。
English: In Wucheng, Emperor Dezong issued an edict to make Li Huai Guang's grandson Yan 88, as Li Huai Guang's heir, gave him the surname and name Li Chengxu, appointed him to join the army as the left guard, and gave him a thousand baht to support Li Huai Guang's wife Wang, as well as to sweep Li Huai Guang's grave.

古文：冬，十月，韦皋遣其将王有道将兵与东蛮、两林蛮及吐蕃青海、腊城二节度战于巂州台登谷，大破之，斩首二千级，投崖及溺死者不可胜数，杀其大兵马使乞藏遮遮。
现代文：冬季十月，韦皋派遣他的将领曹有道领兵与东蛮、两林蛮以及吐蕃的青海、腊城两节度在州台登谷交战，大破敌军，斩首两千级，敌兵跳下山崖和落入水中而死的人多得无法计算，还杀掉了敌军的大兵马使乞藏遮遮。
English: In the winter of October, Wei Zheng sent his general Cao Youdao to lead his soldiers to fight against the Eastern Barbarians, the Two-Forest Barbarians, and the Qinghai and Lacheng of Tubo in the Zhudaidian Valley. He defeated the enemy army, beheaded two thousand people, and the number of people who died when the enemy soldiers jumped off the cliff and fell into the water was too many to count. He also killed the enemy's soldiers.

古文：乞藏遮遮，虏之骁将也，既死，皋所攻城栅无不下。数年，尽复巂州之境。
现代文：乞藏遮遮是敌军中骁勇的将领，在他死去后，韦皋所攻打的城池寨栅无不陷落，经过数年，完全收复了州全境。
English: Qizang Zhaihai was a courageous general in the enemy army. After his death, the cities and towns attacked by Wei Wei all fell, and after several years, the entire territory of the state was completely recovered.

古文：易定节度使张孝忠兴兵袭蔚州，驱掠人畜。诏书责之，逾旬还镇。
现代文：易定节度使张孝忠起兵袭击蔚州，驱赶并掳掠人丁与牲畜，德宗颁诏书责备他，他在十几天后返回本镇。
English: Yi Ding Jie Du made Zhang Xiaozhong attack Ulshu with an army, and drove away and plundered people and livestock. Dezong issued an edict to reprimand him, and he returned to the town ten days later.

古文：琼州自乾封中为山贼所陷，至是，岭南节度使李复遣判官姜孟京与崖州刺史张少迁攻拔之。
现代文：琼州自从乾封年间便被山中的黎人所攻陷，至此，岭南节度使李复派遣判官姜孟京与崖州刺史张少迁攻下了琼州。
English: Qiongzhou had been conquered by the Li people in the mountains since the Qianfeng years. At this time, the Lingnan Festival made Li Fu dispatch the judge Jiang Mengjing and the cliff-dweller Zhang Shaoqian to conquer Qiongzhou.

古文：十二月，庚午，闻回鹘天亲可汗薨，戊寅，遣鸿胪卿郭锋册命其子为登里罗没密施俱禄忠贞毘伽可汗。
现代文：十二月，庚午，德宗听说回鹘天亲可汗去世，戊寅，派遣鸿胪卿郭锋册封他的儿子为登里罗没密施俱录忠贞毗伽可汗。
English: In the afternoon of December, when Dezong heard that Hu Yaotian's khan had passed away, Wu Yin sent Hongyao Guo Feng to anoint his son as Denri Luo's khan.

古文：先是，安西、北庭皆假道于回鹘以奏事，故与之连和。
现代文：在此之前，安西、北庭都向回鹘借道，以便向朝廷奏报事情，所以与回鹘联合。
English: Prior to this, Anxi and Beiting had both borrowed the road from Huizhou in order to report the matter to the imperial court, so they united with Huizhou.

古文：北庭去回鹘犹近，回鹘诛求无厌，又有沙陀六千馀帐与北庭相依。
现代文：北庭距离回鹘尤其近，回鹘对他的需索毫无止境。又有沙陀六千多帐与北庭相互依存。
English: Beiting is especially close to Huizhou, and Huizhou's demand for it is endless. In addition, more than six thousand accounts of Sadu are interdependent with Beiting.

古文：及三葛禄、白服突厥皆附于回鹘，回鹘数侵掠之。
现代文：还有三葛禄部和白服突厥，都依附于回鹘，而回鹘屡次侵扰劫掠他们。
English: There were also the Three Gorges Locals and the White-Clothed Turks, both of whom were attached to the Uighurs, who repeatedly invaded and plundered them.

古文：吐蕃因葛禄、白服之众以攻北庭，回鹘大相颉干迦斯将兵救之。
现代文：于是，吐蕃利用葛禄和白服突厥的人众前去攻打北庭，回鹘的大相颉干迦期领兵援救他们。
English: As a result, Tubo took advantage of Gulu and the white-clothed Turkic people to attack the Northern Court, and the returnee, Gankas, led the troops to rescue them.

古文：云南虽贰于吐蕃，亦未敢显与之绝。
现代文：虽然云南对吐蕃怀有二心，但也不敢公开与吐蕃断交。
English: Although Yunnan is ambivalent about Tubo, it does not dare to openly sever relations with Tubo.

古文：壬辰，韦皋复以书招谕之。
现代文：壬辰，韦皋再次写书信劝诱开导他们归附朝廷。
English: Im Chen and Wei Wei again wrote letters to persuade and enlighten them to join the imperial court.

古文：贞元六年庚午，公元七九零年
现代文：贞元六年
English: Zhenyuan six years old

古文：春，诏出岐山无忧王寺佛指骨迎置禁中，又送诸寺以示众，倾都瞻礼，施财巨万；二月，乙亥，遣中使复葬故处。
现代文：春季，德宗颁诏命令取出岐山县无忧王寺中佛的手指骨，迎接并安置在宫廷中，然后又送到各个寺院中去，以便让大家观看。全京城的人都前去瞻仰礼拜，布施的钱财数额异常巨大。二月，乙亥，德宗派遣中使将佛的手指骨重新安葬到原处。
English: In the spring, Emperor Dezong issued an imperial order to take out the finger bones of the Buddha from the Guzhuang Temple in Qishan County, welcome them and place them in the court, and then send them to various temples for everyone to see. People from all over Beijing went to observe the worship, and the amount of money and wealth donated was extremely huge. In February, the Emperor Dezong sent the finger bones of the Buddha to be reburied in their original place.

古文：初，硃滔败于贝州，其棣州刺史赵镐以州降于王武俊，既而得罪于武俊，召之不至。
现代文：当初，朱滔在贝州被打败时，他的棣州刺史赵镐率本州向王武俊投降。不久，他冒犯了王武俊，王武俊传召他，他不肯前去。
English: At first, when Zhu Tao was defeated in Bozhou, his Bozhou acolyte Zhao Jun led his Bozhou to surrender to Wang Wujun. Soon, he offended Wang Wujun, Wang Wujun summoned him, and he refused to go.

古文：田绪残忍，其兄朝，仕李纳为齐州刺史。
现代文：田绪生性残忍，他的哥哥田朝在李纳处做官，担任齐州刺史。
English: Tian Xu was born with a cruel nature. His older brother, Tian Cha, worked as an official in the Li Na office and served as the chief historian of Qi Province.

古文：或言纳欲纳朝于魏，绪惧；判官孙光佐等为绪谋，厚赂纳，且说纳招赵镐取棣州以悦之，因请送朝于京师。
现代文：有人说李纳打算将田朝交回魏州，田绪恐惧。判官孙光佐等人为田绪策划：以丰厚的赠物品给李纳，并且劝说李纳招引赵镐，以获取棣州，用这个方式取悦李纳，并乘机请求李纳将田朝送往京城。
English: Some people said that Li Na planned to return Tian Cha to Weizhou, which made Tian Xu afraid. The judge Sun Guangza and others planned for Tian Xu: they gave Li Na a generous gift, and persuaded Li Na to attract Zhao Yao to obtain Ganzhou, using this way to please Li Na, and took the opportunity to request Li Na to send Tian Cha to Beijing.

古文：纳从之。
现代文：李纳听从了田绪的建议。
English: Li Na listened to Tian Xu's suggestion.

古文：丁酉，镐以棣州降于纳。
现代文：丁酉，赵镐率棣州归降了李纳。
English: Ding Rong and Zhao Rong led Zhangzhou to surrender to Li Na.

古文：三月，武俊使其子士真击之，不克。
现代文：三月，王武俊让他的儿子王士真进击赵镐，未能取胜。
English: In March, Wang Wujun let his son Wang Shizhen attack Zhao Ye, but failed to win.

古文：回鹘忠贞可汗之弟弑忠贞而自立，其大相颉干迦斯西击吐蕃未还，夏，四月，次相帅国人杀篡者而立忠贞之子阿啜为可汗，年十五。
现代文：回鹘忠贞可汗的弟弟杀了忠贞可汗而自立为可汗，回鹘的大相颉干迦斯向西进击吐蕃还没回来。夏季，四月，回鹘次相率领国中百姓杀了篡位者而拥立忠贞可汗的儿子阿啜为可汗，阿啜十五岁。
English: In the summer, in the month of April, the people of the country, under the leadership of Ugyen's second-in-command, killed the usurper and made Ugyen's 15-year-old son, Aso, the new khan.

古文：五月，王武俊屯冀州，将击赵镐，镐帅其属奔郓州。李纳分兵据之。
现代文：五月，王武俊在冀州驻扎，准备进击赵镐，赵镐率领他的部下逃奔郓州，李纳分出一支兵马占据了棣州。
English: In May, Wang Wujun was stationed in Jizhou, preparing to attack Zhao Jun. Zhao Jun led his men to flee to Ganzhou, and Li Na detached a troop of soldiers to occupy Ganzhou.

古文：田绪使孙光佐如郓州，矫诏以棣州隶纳。武俊怒，遣其子士清伐贝州，取经城等四县。
现代文：田绪让孙光佐前往郓州，诈称有诏书命令将棣州隶属于李纳，王武俊恼怒了，便派遣他的儿子王士清讨伐贝州，夺取了经城等四个县。
English: Tianxu asked Sun Guangza to go to Ganzhou, falsely claiming that there was an imperial decree ordering Ganzhou to be subordinated to Lin. Wang Wujun was angry, and sent his son Wang Shiching to fight against Zhabaizhou, seizing Jingcheng and four other counties.

古文：回鹘颉干迦斯与吐蕃战不利，吐蕃急攻北庭。
现代文：回鹘颉干迦斯与吐蕃交战不利，吐蕃急切地进攻北庭。
English: Uighur Gankas was at a disadvantage in the war with Tubo, and Tubo eagerly attacked Beiting.

古文：北庭人苦于回鹘诛求，与沙陀酋长硃邪尽忠皆降于吐蕃。节度使杨袭古帅麾下二千人奔西州。
现代文：北庭人苦于回鹘的搜刮，便与沙陀的酋长朱邪尽忠一起向吐蕃投降，北庭节度使杨袭古率领部下二千人逃奔西州。
English: The Beiting people suffered from the scrounging of the Uygur, so they surrendered to the Tubo together with the chief of the Shado, Zhu Yizhenzhong. The Beiting festival made Yang Heiguo lead two thousand of his subordinates to flee to Xizhou.

古文：六月，颉干迦斯引兵还国，次相恐其有废立，与可汗皆出郊迎，俯伏自陈擅立之状，曰： 今日惟大相死生之。 
现代文：六月，颉干迦斯领兵回国，次相惟恐他另有废立，便与可汗一同前往立郊外迎接，跪在地上陈述自己擅自扶立的情况，还说： 我的生死，今天只有让大相来决定了。 
English: In June, Ganjas led his troops back to the country, and the next day, fearing that he would be overthrown, he went with the khan to the outskirts of the city to greet them, kneeled on the ground to state the situation of his unauthorized rise, and said: My life and death, today, can only be decided by the emperor.

古文：盛陈郭锋所赍国信，悉以遗之。
现代文：他郑重地摆出郭锋带来的传国印信，全部交给了颉干迦期。
English: He solemnly displayed the imperial seal brought by Guo Feng and handed it all over to Ganja.

古文：可汗拜且泣曰： 儿愚幼，若幸而得立，惟仰食于阿多，国政不敢豫也。 
现代文：可汗一边跪拜，一边哭泣着说： 我年幼无知，如果有幸被立为可汗，惟有依赖阿爹过活，不敢过问国家政事。 
English: Khan, while kneeling, wept and said: I am young and ignorant, if I am fortunate enough to be appointed as Khan, I can only rely on my father to live, I dare not ask about national politics.

古文：虏谓父为阿多，颉干迦斯感其卑屈，持之而哭，遂执臣礼，悉以所遗颁从行者，己无所受。
现代文：回鹘人将父亲称作阿多。颉干迦斯被他卑躬屈己打动了，也扶着他哭了。于是，颉干迦斯以为臣的礼节对待可汗，将可汗交给他的物品全部发给随行的人们，自己一点也没有接受。
English: The Uighurs called their father Ado. Uighurs were moved by his groveling, and they also helped him to cry. So, Uighurs treated the khan with the courtesy of a vassal, and distributed all the goods that the khan had given him to the people who accompanied him, but they did not accept them at all.

古文：国中由是稍安。
现代文：于是，回鹘国内渐渐安定下来。
English: As a result, the situation in the country gradually stabilized.

古文：秋，颉干迦斯悉举国兵数万，召杨袭古，将复北庭，又为吐蕃所败，死者大半。
现代文：秋季，颉干迦斯率领全国兵马数万人准备收复北庭，又一次被吐蕃打败，死去的人马有一多半。
English: In the autumn, Qian Qias led tens of thousands of soldiers and horses across the country to prepare for the recovery of Beiting, and was once again defeated by Tubo. More than half of the soldiers and horses died.

古文：袭古收馀众数百，将还西州，颉干迦斯绐之曰： 且与我同至牙帐，当送君还朝。 既而留不遣，竟杀之。
现代文：杨袭古收拾残余兵马数百人，准备返回西州，颉干迦斯欺骗他说： 姑且和我一起到牙帐。 接着，颉干迦斯将他扣留，不让他回去，最后将他杀死。
English: Yang Xiguo gathered up the remaining hundreds of soldiers and horses and prepared to return to Xizhou, but Yinggan Jias deceived him and said, "Let me come with you to the dental office." Next, Yinggan Jias detained him and would not let him return, and finally killed him.

古文：安西由是遂绝，莫知存亡，而西州犹为唐固守。
现代文：由此，安西与朝廷的联系便断绝了，也不知安西是存是亡。然而，西州仍然在为唐朝固守。
English: As a result, the connection between Anxi and the imperial court was severed, and it is not known whether Anxi exists or not. However, Xizhou still adheres to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：葛禄乘胜取回鹘之浮图川，回鹘震恐，悉迁西北部落于牙帐之南以避之。
现代文：葛禄部乘胜攻取回鹘的浮图川，回鹘震惊恐惧，将西北方面的部落全部迁徙到牙帐的南面来，以便躲避葛禄部。
English: The Guluks took advantage of the victory to capture the Ulu River in Ulu, and the Ulu, shocked and afraid, moved all the tribes in the northwest to the south of the Taba, in order to avoid the Guluks.

古文：遣达北特勒梅录随郭锋偕来，告忠贞可汗之丧，且求册命。
现代文：回鹘派遣达北特勒梅录跟随郭锋一道来唐朝，上报忠贞可汗的丧事，而且请求封立新可汗。
English: Guo Feng sent Dahubei Tremei Luo to Tang Dynasty together with Guo Feng to report the death of the loyal khan and to request the establishment of a new khan.

古文：先是，回鹘使者入中国，礼容骄慢，刺史皆与之钧礼。
现代文：以前，回鹘的使者来到大唐时，礼节和容色骄横傲慢，刺史都与他们平礼相待。
English: In the past, when the envoys of the Uighurs came to the Great Tang Dynasty, their etiquette and appearance were arrogant and haughty, and the sages treated them with courtesy.

古文：梅录至丰州，刺史李景略欲以气加之，谓梅录曰： 闻可汗新没，欲申吊礼。 
现代文：现在梅录来到丰州，该州刺史李景略打算在气概上压倒他，便对梅录说： 听说可汗新近去世，我要向你表示哀悼的礼节。 
English: Now that Mei Luo has come to Fuzhou, the governor of Fuzhou, Li Jingluo, who intends to overwhelm him in courage, said to Mei Luo: I heard that Khan has recently died, I would like to express my condolences to you.

古文：景略先据高垄而坐，梅录俯偻前哭。
现代文：于是，李景略首先靠着高的土埂坐了下来，梅录在他前面低头曲背地哭泣着。
English: As a result, Li Jingliao first sat down against the high mound, and Mei Luo bent down in front of him and wept.

古文：景略抚之曰： 可汗弃代，助尔哀慕。 
现代文：李景略安慰他说： 可汗离开人世，我与你一样悲哀地怀念他。 
English: Li Jingliao comforted him and said, "Khan passed away, I miss him as much as you do.

古文：梅录骄容猛气索然俱尽。
现代文：梅录骄横的容色和凶猛的气势索然尽失了。
English: Mei Luo's haughty countenance and ferocious strength were completely gone.

古文：自是回鹘使至，皆拜景略于庭，威名闻塞外。
现代文：自此以后，回鹘使者前来，都要在庭中礼拜李景略，李景略的威望与名声传播到边塞以外。
English: From then on, emissaries of the Hui Dynasty came to pay homage to Li Jingliao in the courtyard. Li Jingliao's prestige and fame spread beyond the border fortress.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，郭锋始自回鹘还。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，郭锋开始从回鹘返回。
English: In winter, October, Xinhai, Guo Feng began to return from Hubei.

古文：十一月，庚午，上祀圆丘。
现代文：十一月，庚午，德宗祭礼圜丘。
English: In the late afternoon of November, the Tokugawa Shogunate's festival is held in Shizuoka.

古文：上屡诏李纳以棣州归王武俊，纳百方迁延，请以海州易之于朝廷。上不许。
现代文：德宗屡次颁诏，命令李纳将棣州归还王武俊，李纳千方百计地拖延，还请求用海州与朝廷换取棣州，德宗不肯答应。
English: Dezong repeatedly issued an edict, ordering Li Na to return Zhangzhou to Wang Wujun. Li Na did his best to delay, and also requested to exchange Hai Zhou with the imperial court for Zhangzhou. Dezong refused to agree.

古文：乃请诏武俊先归田绪四县，上从之。
现代文：于是他又请颁诏命令王武俊首先将经城等四县归还田绪，德宗听从了他的建议。
English: Therefore, he also asked Wang Wujun to issue an edict ordering him to first return Jingcheng and other four counties to Tianxu, and Dezong followed his suggestion.

古文：十二月，纳始以棣州归武俊。
现代文：十二月，李纳将棣州归还王武俊。
English: In December, Li Na returned Zhangzhou to Wang Wujun.

古文：贞元七年辛未，公元七九一年
现代文：贞元七年春季正月，己巳，襄王李去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the seventh year of Zhen Yuan, Xiang Wang Li passed away.

古文：春，正月，己巳，襄王僙薨。二月，癸卯，遣鸿胪少卿庾铤册回鹘奉诚可汗。
现代文：二月，癸卯，德宗派遣鸿胪少卿庾铤册立回鹘奉诚可汗。
English: In February, Emperor Dezong dispatched Hongtao Shaoqing to install Hui Fengcheng Khan.

古文：戊戌，诏泾原节度使刘昌筑平凉故城，以扼弹筝峡口。
现代文：戊戌，德宗颁诏命令泾原节度使刘昌修筑平凉旧城，以便扼制弹筝峡的出口。
English: Emperor Dezong issued an imperial edict ordering Liu Chang to build the Pingliang Old Town in order to control the exit of the Koto Gorge.

古文：浃辰而毕，分兵戍之。
现代文：刘昌只用了十二天时间便修筑告竣，分出兵马，前去戍守。
English: Liu Chang took only twelve days to complete the construction, dispatched soldiers and horses, and went to defend the castle.

古文：昌又筑朝谷堡。
现代文：刘昌又修筑了朝谷堡。
English: Liu Chang also built Asagaya Castle.

古文：甲子，诏名其堡曰彰信，泾原稍安。
现代文：甲子，德宗颁诏给该堡命名为彰信堡。泾原逐渐安定下来。
English: In the 6th century, Emperor Dezong issued an edict naming the castle Shoshin Castle. The Hahara region gradually settled down.

古文：初，上还长安，以神策等军有卫从之劳，皆赐名兴元元从奉天定难功臣，以官领之，抚恤优厚。
现代文：当初，德宗回到长安，因神策等军有护卫侍从的功劳，一律赐名为兴元元从奉天定难功臣，委任官员统领各军，对各军的抚慰和体恤都很优厚。
English: At first, when Dezong returned to Chang'an, because of the merits of the guards and attendants of Shinshe and other armies, they were all given the names of Xingyuan and Yuan, and appointed officials to lead the armies. The consolation and sympathy for each army were very good.

古文：禁军恃恩骄横，侵暴百姓，陵忽府县，至诟辱官吏，毁裂案牍。
现代文：禁军仗恃着恩宠而骄傲专横，欺凌百姓，凌驾于府县之上，以至于辱骂官吏，撕毁官府文书。
English: He was arrogant and domineering, bullying the people and overriding the prefectures and counties, to the extent that he abused officials and tore up official documents.

古文：府县官有不胜忿而刑之者，朝笞一人，夕贬万里，由是府县虽有公严之官，莫得举其职。
现代文：府县官吏中有人愤怒难忍而对他们用刑，但早晨拷打了一个禁军人员，晚上便被贬黜到万里之外。因此，虽然府县也有公正严明的官员，但无法将自己的职事办好。
English: Some of the prefectural and county officials were so angry that they tortured them, but in the morning they tortured a member of the forbidden army, and in the evening they were banished thousands of miles away. Therefore, although the prefectures also have officials who are fair and strict, they are unable to do their jobs well.

古文：市井富民，往往行赂寄名军籍，则府县不能制。
现代文：商市中的富人，往往通过行贿而在军人名册上挂名，于是府县便不能控制他们了。
English: Wealthy people in the business community often bribe their way onto the military register, so prefectures and counties can't control them.

古文：辛巳，诏：神威、六军吏士与百姓讼者，委之府县，小事牒本军，大事奏闻。
现代文：辛巳，诏书说：神威军与六军将士与百姓打官司的，要将诉讼案件交给府县办理，小事发文书通报本军，大事上奏朝廷闻知。
English: Sincerely, the edict said: If the Shenwei Army and the Six Army soldiers and the people sue, the litigation case should be handed over to the prefecture for handling, the minor incident should be reported to the army, and the major event should be reported to the court.

古文：若军士陵忽府县，禁身以闻，委御史台推覆。
现代文：如果军中将士凌驾于府县之上，应当囚禁其人，上报知闻，交付御史台审问核查。
English: If a lieutenant general overrides the prefectures and counties, he should be imprisoned, report what he knows, and submit to the Interrogation and Verification of the History Channel.

古文：县吏辄敢笞辱，必从贬谪。
现代文：如果县中官吏竟敢拷打侮辱将士，一定要按降职远谪论处。
English: If county officials dare to torture and insult soldiers, they must be punished by demotion.

古文：癸未，易定节度使张孝忠薨。
现代文：癸未，易定节度使张孝忠去世。
English: Not long after, Zhang Xiaozhong passed away at the Yi Ding Festival.

古文：安南都护高正平重赋敛，夏，四月，群蛮酋长杜英翰等起兵围都护府，正平以忧死。群蛮闻之皆降。
现代文：由于安南都护高正平征收赋税繁重，夏季，四月，群蛮的酋长杜英翰等人起事，发兵围困都护府，高正平因忧虑而死，群蛮听说这一消息后，全归降了。
English: Due to the heavy taxation levied by Annan's tutelary Gao Zhengping, in the summer of April, the barbarian chiefs Du Yinghan and others rose up and sent troops to besiege the tutelary capital. Gao Zhengping died of anxiety. After the barbarians heard this news, they all surrendered.

古文：五月，辛巳，置柔远军于安南。
现代文：五月，辛巳，朝廷在安南设置柔远军。端王李遇去世。
English: In May, shortly after, the imperial court set up the Zhuoyuan army in Annan. Then King Li Yu passed away.

古文：端王遇薨。韦皋比年致书招云南王异牟寻，终未获报。
现代文：近年以来，韦皋发信招抚云南王异牟寻，始终没有得到回报。
English: In recent years, Wei Wei sent a letter to Yunnan Wang Yimou, but never received a return.

古文：然吐蕃每发云南兵，云南与之益少。
现代文：然而，每当吐蕃向云南征发兵员时，云南发给吐蕃的兵员却越来越少。
English: However, every time that Tubo sent soldiers to Yunnan, Yunnan sent fewer and fewer soldiers to Tubo.

古文：皋知异牟寻心附于唐，讨击副使段忠义，本阁罗凤使者也。六月，丙申，皋遣忠义还云南，并致书敦谕之。
现代文：由此，韦皋知道异牟寻本心是归附唐朝的。讨击副使段忠义，原来是罗凤的使者，六月，丙申，韦皋派遣段忠义返回云南，并且给异牟寻写去书信，劝导他归顺朝廷。
English: From this, Wei Xuan knew that Yimouxing was really a vassal of the Tang Dynasty. In June, Wei Xun sent Duan Zhongyi, the deputy envoy to fight against Duan Zhongyi, who was originally a messenger of Luo Feng, back to Yunnan, and wrote a letter to Yimouxing to persuade him to submit to the imperial court.

古文：秋，七月，戊寅，以定州刺史张升云为义武留后。
现代文：秋季七月，戊寅，德宗任命定州刺史张升云为义武留后。
English: In the autumn of July, after Wu Yin, Dezong appointed Zhang Shengyun, the chief historian of Dingzhou, as the governor of Yiwu.

古文：庚辰，以虔州刺史赵昌为安南都护，群蛮遂安。
现代文：庚辰，德宗任命虔州刺史赵昌为安南都护，于是群蛮安定下来了。
English: Geng Chen and Dezong appointed Qianzhou's magistrate Zhao Chang as the guardian of the capital of Annam, and the barbarian hordes settled down.

古文：八月，丙午，以翰林学士陆贽为兵部侍朗，馀职皆解。窦参恶之也。
现代文：八月，丙午，德宗任命翰林学士陆贽为兵部侍郎，其他职务一概解除，这是由于窦参嫌恶他的原故。
English: In August, on the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Dezong appointed Hanlin Scholar Lu Yao as the attendant of the military department, and dismissed all other positions, which was due to Dou Sang's dislike of him.

古文：吐蕃攻灵州，为回鹘所败，夜遁。
现代文：吐蕃攻打灵州，被回鹘击败，便连夜逃走了。
English: Tubo attacked Lingzhou, was defeated by Hui, and then fled overnight.

古文：九月，回鹘遣使来献俘。
现代文：九月，回鹘派遗使者前来进献俘虏。
English: In September, the Uighurs sent emissaries to present the captives.

古文：冬，十二月，甲午，又遣使献所获吐蕃酋长尚结心。
现代文：冬季，十二月，甲午，回鹘又派遣使者进献所俘获的吐蕃酋长尚结心。
English: In winter, in December, in the afternoon of the 1st, and in the afternoon of the 2nd, envoys were sent to present the captured chiefs of Tubo.

古文：福建观察使吴凑，为治有声，窦参以私憾毁之，且言其病风。
现代文：由于福建观察使吴凑有善于处理政务的名声，窦参因私人的怨恨而诋毁他，而且说他患了风痹。
English: Because the Fujian Observer gave Wu Bin a reputation for being good at handling government affairs, Dou Sang slandered him because of personal grudges and said that he suffered from demoralization.

古文：上召至京师，使之步以察之，知参之诬，由是始恶参。
现代文：德宗将吴凑传召到京城，让他迈步行走，以便从中察看，结果知道窦参是骗人的，因此，开始憎恶窦参。
English: Dezong summoned Wu Qian to the capital and asked him to walk on foot so that he could inspect it. As a result, he knew that Dou Zhan was a fraud, so he began to hate Dou Zhan.

古文：丁酉，以凑为陕虢观察使以代参党李翼。
现代文：丁酉，德宗任命吴凑为陕虢观察使，借以取带窦参的同伙李翼。
English: Ding Zhen, Dezong appointed Wu Qian as the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian to recruit Li Ying, an accomplice of Dou Zhan.

古文：睦王述薨。
现代文：睦王李述去世。
English: King Mutsuhito passed away.

古文：吐蕃知韦皋使者在云南，遣使让之。
现代文：吐蕃了解到韦皋的使者在云南后，便派遣使者责备云南。
English: When Tubo learned that Wei's envoy was in Yunnan, he sent an envoy to reprimand Yunnan.

古文：云南王异牟寻绐之曰： 唐使，本蛮也，皋听其归耳，无它谋也。 
现代文：云南王异牟寻欺骗来使说： 唐朝的使者，本来便是蛮人，韦皋听任他回来，并没有别的图谋。 
English: Wang Yimou of Yunnan used deception to make his point: The emissary of the Tang Dynasty was originally a barbarian, Wei Xuan allowed him to return, and had no other plans.

古文：因执以送吐蕃。
现代文：于是便将韦皋的使者抓起来，送交给吐蕃。
English: As a result, they arrested Wei Xuan's envoy and handed him over to Tu Wei.

古文：吐蕃多取其大臣之子为质，云南愈怨。
现代文：吐蕃带走许多云南大臣的儿子作为人质，云南愈发怨恨吐蕃了。
English: Yunnan has grown increasingly resentful of Tubo, who has taken many of the sons of Yunnan ministers as hostages.

古文：勿邓酋长苴梦冲，潜通吐蕃，扇诱群蛮，隔绝云南使者。韦皋遣三部落总管苏峞将兵至琵琶川。
现代文：勿邓部落的酋长苴梦冲，暗中勾结吐蕃，煽动诱惑群蛮，隔断云南使者与唐朝的往来，韦皋派遣两林、勿邓、丰琶三部落的总管苏领兵来到琵琶川。
English: Zhu Mengchong, the chieftain of the Bedouin tribe, secretly colluded with Tubo, incited and tempted the barbarians, cut off the Yunnan envoys from the Tang Dynasty, and Wei Tong sent the Soviet leaders of the two Lin, Bedouin, and Fengwa tribes to the Biwa River.

