古文：淮南厉王长者，高祖少子也，其母故赵王张敖美人。
现代文：淮南厉王刘长，是汉高祖的小儿子。他母亲是原赵王张敖的妃嫔。
English: Liu Chang, the king of Li in Huainan, was the youngest son of Emperor Gaozu. His mother was the concubine of the former King Zhao Zhangye.

古文：高祖八年，从东垣过赵，赵王献之美人。
现代文：高祖八年，高皇帝从东垣县经过赵国，赵王把厉王的母亲献给他。
English: In the eighth year of Gaozu's reign, Emperor Gao passed through Zhao Province from Dongyuan County. Zhao Wang dedicated the mother of Li Wang to him.

古文：厉王母得幸焉，有身。
现代文：她受到皇上宠幸，有了身孕。
English: She was favored by the emperor and became pregnant.

古文：赵王敖弗敢内宫，为筑外宫而舍之。
现代文：从此赵王张敖不敢让她住在宫内，为她另建宫室居住。
English: Since then, Zhao Wang Zhangye did not dare to let her live in the palace, so he built another palace for her to live in.

古文：及贯高等谋反柏人事发觉，并逮治王，尽收捕王母兄弟美人，系之河内。
现代文：次年赵相贯高等人在柏人县谋弑高祖的事情被朝廷发觉，赵王也一并被捕获罪，他的母亲、兄弟和妃嫔悉遭拘捕，囚入河内郡官府。
English: The following year, the imperial court discovered that Zhao Xiangran was plotting to kill Gao Zu in Bairen County. Zhao Wang was also arrested and convicted. His mother, brother and wife were all arrested and imprisoned in the government office of Hanoi County.

古文：厉王母亦系，告吏曰： 得幸上，有身。 
现代文：厉王母亲在囚禁中对狱吏说： 我受到皇上宠幸，已有身孕。 
English: Li Wang's mother said to the prison guard during her imprisonment: I have been favored by the emperor and I am pregnant.

古文：吏以闻上，上方怒赵王，未理厉王母。
现代文：狱吏如实禀报，皇上正因赵王的事气恼，没有理会厉王母亲的申诉。
English: The warden truthfully reported that the emperor was angry about Zhao Wang's case and did not pay attention to the complaint of Li Wang's mother.

古文：厉王母弟赵兼因辟阳侯言吕后，吕后妒，弗肯白，辟阳侯不彊争。
现代文：厉王母亲的弟弟赵兼拜托辟阳侯审食其告知吕后，吕后妒嫉，不肯向皇上进言求情，辟阳侯便不再尽力相劝。
English: Li Wang's mother's younger brother, Zhao Jian, begged the Yang marquis to reconsider his decision to inform Lü Biao, but Lü Biao was jealous and refused to speak to the emperor and plead for mercy, so the Yang marquis no longer tried his best to persuade him.

古文：及厉王母已生厉王，恚，即自杀。
现代文：厉王母亲生下厉王后，心中怨恨，就自杀了。
English: When King Li's mother gave birth to Queen Li, she killed herself out of resentment.

古文：吏奉厉王诣上，上悔，令吕后母之，而葬厉王母真定。
现代文：狱吏抱着厉王送到皇上面前，皇上后悔莫及，下令吕后抚养他，并在真定县安葬了厉王的母亲。
English: The warden held Li Wang in his arms and brought him to the emperor. The emperor was filled with remorse and ordered Queen Lyu to raise him. Li Wang's mother was buried in Zhending County.

古文：真定，厉王母之家在焉，父世县也。
现代文：真定是厉王母亲的故乡，她的祖辈就居住在那里。
English: It must be the hometown of Li Wang's mother, her ancestors lived there.

古文：高祖十一年月，淮南王黥布反，立子长为淮南王，王黥布故地，凡四郡。
现代文：高祖十一年七月，淮南王黥布谋反，皇上遂立儿子刘长为淮南王，让他掌管昔日黥布领属的四郡封地。
English: In July of the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, the king of Huainan, Zibo, plotted a rebellion, and the emperor made his son, Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, and put him in charge of the four county fiefdoms that had once belonged to Zibo.

古文：上自将兵击灭布，厉王遂即位。
现代文：皇上亲自率军出征，剿灭了黥布，于是厉王即淮南王位。
English: The emperor personally led the army to go to war, annihilated Zibo, and thus Li Wang, the throne of Huainan, came into being.

古文：厉王蚤失母，常附吕后，孝惠、吕后时以故得幸无患害，而常心怨辟阳侯，弗敢发。
现代文：厉王自幼丧母，一直依附吕后长大，因此孝惠帝和吕后当政时期他得以免遭政治祸患。但是，他心中一直怨恨辟阳侯而不敢发作。
English: Li Wang lost his mother at a young age, and grew up always clinging to Empress Lyu. As a result, he was able to avoid political disasters during the reigns of Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Lyu. However, he always harbored a grudge against Emperor Biyang and did not dare to act.

古文：及孝文帝初即位，淮南王自以为最亲，骄蹇，数不奉法。
现代文：至孝文帝即位，淮南王自认为与皇上最亲，骄横不逊，一再违法乱纪。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne, King Huainan considered himself to be the closest relative to the emperor. He was arrogant and repeatedly broke the law and violated discipline.

古文：上以亲故，常宽赦之。
现代文：皇上念及手足亲情，时常宽容赦免他的过失。
English: The emperor, mindful of the kinship between brother and sister, often forgave and pardoned his faults.

古文：三年，入朝。甚横。
现代文：孝文帝三年，淮南王自封国入朝，态度甚为傲慢。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, King Huainan entered the imperial court as a self-proclaimed sovereign. His attitude was very arrogant.

古文：从上入苑囿猎，与上同车，常谓上 大兄 。
现代文：他跟随皇上到御苑打猎，和皇上同乘一辆车驾，还常常称呼皇上为 大哥 。
English: He followed the Emperor to hunt in the Imperial Garden, rode in the same carriage as the Emperor, and often called the Emperor his elder brother.

古文：厉王有材力，力能扛鼎，乃往请辟阳侯。
现代文：厉王有才智和勇力，能奋力举起重鼎，于是前往辟阳侯府上求见。
English: Li Wang had the talent and courage to lift the heavy tripod, so he went to the Biyang Hofu to see it.

古文：辟阳侯出见之，即自袖铁椎椎辟阳侯，令从者魏敬刭之。
现代文：辟阳侯出来见他，他就从袖中抽出铁槌槌击辟阳侯，又命随从魏敬割下辟阳侯的头。
English: When Wei Yang Hou came out to see him, he pulled out a mallet from his sleeve to hit Wei Yang Hou, and ordered Wei Jing to cut off Wei Yang Hou's head.

古文：厉王乃驰走阙下，肉袒谢曰： 臣母不当坐赵事，其时辟阳侯力能得之吕后，弗争，罪一也。赵王如意子母无罪，吕后杀之，辟阳侯弗争，罪二也。吕后王诸吕，欲以危刘氏，辟阳侯弗争，罪三也。
现代文：事后厉王驰马奔至宫中，向皇上袒身谢罪道：我母亲本不该因赵国谋反事获罪，那时辟阳侯若肯竭力相救就能得到吕后的帮助，但他不力争，这是第一桩罪；赵王如意母子无罪，吕后蓄意杀害他们，而辟阳侯不尽力劝阻，这是第二桩罪；吕后封吕家亲戚为王，意欲危夺刘氏天下，辟阳侯不挺身抗争，这是第三桩罪。
English: After the incident, Li Wang galloped to the palace and prostrated himself before the emperor, saying, "My mother should not have been punished for Zhao Guo's treachery. At that time, if Zhao Guo had tried his best to save her, he would have been able to get the help of Lü Guo, but he did not try. This is the first crime. Zhao Guo wanted his mother and son to be innocent. Lü Guo deliberately killed them, but Zhao Guo did not try his best to dissuade them. This is the second crime. Lü Guo made relatives of the Lü family kings and wanted to take over the Liu family. Zhao Guo

古文：臣谨为天下诛贼臣辟阳侯，报母之仇，谨伏阙下请罪。 
现代文：我为天下人杀死危害社稷的奸臣辟阳侯，为母亲报了仇，特来朝中跪伏请罪。 
English: I killed the treacherous vassal Biyang Hou, who endangered the social order, for the sake of the world. I took revenge for my mother, and came to the court to kneel down and plead guilty.

古文：孝文伤其志，为亲故，弗治，赦厉王。
现代文：皇上哀悯厉王的心愿，出于手足亲情，不予治罪，赦免了他。
English: The emperor took pity on Li Wang and, according to his heart's desire, pardoned him out of brotherly and sisterly love.

古文：当是时，薄太后及太子诸大臣皆惮厉王，厉王以此归国益骄恣，不用汉法，出入称警跸，称制，自为法令，拟於天子。
现代文：这一时期，薄太后和太子以及列位大臣都惧怕厉王，因此厉王返国后越发骄纵肆志，不依朝廷法令行事，出入宫中皆号令警戒清道，还称自己发布的命令为 制 ，自己制定法令，模拟天子。
English: During this period, the Empress Dowager Bo, the Crown Prince, and the ministers were all afraid of King Liguo. As a result, King Liguo became more and more arrogant after his return to China. He did not act in accordance with the imperial decrees, and everyone in and out of the palace was ordered to be on the alert. He also claimed that the orders he issued were the rules, and that he made his own decrees to imitate the emperor.

古文：六年，令男子但等七十人与棘蒲侯柴武太子奇谋，以輂车四十乘反谷口，令人使闽越、匈奴。
现代文：孝文帝六年，厉王让无官爵的男子组成七十人和棘蒲侯柴武之子柴奇商议，策划用四十辆大货车在谷口县谋反起事，并派出使者前往闽越、匈奴各处联络。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, King Li asked seventy men without official titles to consult with Zhai Qi, the son of Zhai Wu, Count of Thorn, and planned to use forty large trucks to plot a rebellion in Taniguchi County, and sent envoys to Sheng Yue and Xiongnu to liaise.

古文：事觉，治之，使使召淮南王。淮南王至长安。
现代文：朝廷发觉此事，治罪谋反者，派使臣召淮南王入京，淮南王来到长安。
English: When the imperial court discovered this, it sent an envoy to summon Huainan Wang to Beijing, and Huainan Wang came to Chang'an.

古文： 丞相臣张仓、典客臣冯敬、行御史大夫事宗正臣逸、廷尉臣贺、备盗贼中尉臣福昧死言：淮南王长废先帝法，不听天子诏，居处无度，为黄屋盖乘舆，出入拟於天子，擅为法令，不用汉法。
现代文： 丞相臣张包、典客臣冯敬、行御史大夫事宗正臣逸、廷尉臣贺、备盗贼中尉臣福冒死罪启奏：淮南王刘长废弃先帝文法，不服从天子诏令，起居从事不遵法度，自制天子所乘张黄缎伞盖的车驾，出入模仿天子声威，擅为法令，不实行汉家王法。
English: Emperor's minister Zhang Bao, courtier Feng Jing, imperial secretary Ji Zong Zheng Zhen Yi, courtier Zhen He, and thief-in-waiting Lieutenant Zhen Fu, have committed the crime of death. The following is an introduction: King Liu Chang of Huainan abrogated the emperor's grammar, disobeyed the emperor's edict, lived in a lawless society, drove a car made by the emperor himself with a Zhang Huang Di umbrella cover, went in and out imitating the emperor's voice, arbitrarily issued decrees, and did not implement the Han royal law.

古文：及所置吏，以其郎中春为丞相，聚收汉诸侯人及有罪亡者，匿与居，为治家室，赐其财物爵禄田宅，爵或至关内侯，奉以二千石，所不当得，欲以有为。
现代文：他擅自委任官吏，让手下的郎中春任国相，网罗收纳各郡县和诸侯国的人以及负罪逃亡者，把他们藏匿起来安置住处，安顿家人，赐给钱财、物资、爵位、俸禄和田宅，有的人爵位竟封至关内侯，享受二千石的优宠。淮南王给予他们不应得到的这一切，是想图谋不轨。
English: He appointed officials without authorization, let his subordinate, Langzhongchun, become the minister of state, collected people from all counties and principalities as well as those who had committed crimes and fled, hid them, resettled them, settled their families, and gave them money, materials, titles, salaries, and farmhouses. Some people were even given the title of Guanzhong, enjoying the favor of two thousand stone. King Huainan gave them all that they did not deserve, in order to plot.

古文：大夫但、士五开章等七十人与棘蒲侯太子奇谋反，欲以危宗庙社稷。
现代文：大夫但与有罪失官的开章等七十人，伙同棘蒲侯柴武之子柴奇谋反，意欲危害宗庙社稷。
English: Seventy people, including Dr. Dan and the guilty and disgraced Kaizhang, together with the son of the thorn-burrow lord Chaiwu, Chai Qi, plotted a rebellion, intending to endanger the family temple and shrine.

古文：使开章阴告长，与谋使闽越及匈奴发其兵。
现代文：他们让开章去密报刘长，商议使人联络闽越和匈奴发兵响应。
English: They let the opening chapter go to the secret newspaper Liu Chang, and discussed how to get people to contact Xuan Yue and the Xiongnu to send troops in response.

古文：开章之淮南见长，长数与坐语饮食，为家室娶妇，以二千石俸奉之。
现代文：开章赴淮南见到刘长，刘长多次与他晤谈宴饮，还为他成家娶妻，供给二千石的薪俸。
English: At the beginning, he went to Huainan to see Liu Chang. Liu Chang met and dined with him many times, and also provided him with a salary of two thousand koku for starting a family and marrying a wife.

古文：开章使人告但，已言之王。
现代文：开章教人报告大夫但，诸事已与淮南王谈妥。
English: At the beginning of the chapter, the teacher reported to Dr. Dan that everything had been negotiated with Huainan Wang.

古文：春使使报但等。
现代文：国相春也遣使向但通报。
English: Minister of State Haru also sent an envoy to brief Dan.

古文：吏觉知，使长安尉奇等往捕开章。
现代文：朝中官吏发觉此事后，派长安县县尉奇等前去拘捕开章。
English: After the officials of the Central Government of the DPRK found out about this, they sent Chang'an County Lieutenant Qi and others to arrest and open the chapter.

古文：长匿不予，与故中尉蕑忌谋，杀以闭口。
现代文：刘长藏人不交，和原中尉忌密议，杀死开章灭口。
English: Liu Chang did not have any dealings with the Tibetans, and had a secret discussion with Lieutenant Yiyi, and killed him.

古文：为棺椁衣衾，葬之肥陵邑，谩吏曰 不知安在 。
现代文：他们置办棺椁、丧衣、包被，葬开章于肥陵邑，而欺骗办案的官员说 不知道开章在哪里 。
English: They purchased coffins, burial clothes, and quilts, and buried the headstones in Huling County, while deceiving the officials handling the case by saying that they did not know where the headstones were.

古文：又详聚土，树表其上，曰 开章死，埋此下 。
现代文：后来又伪造坟冢，在坟上树立标记，说 开章尸首埋在这里 。
English: Later, they forged a grave marker and put a sign on the grave saying that the body of Kaizhang was buried here.

古文：及长身自贼杀无罪者一人；令吏论杀无罪者六人；为亡命弃市罪诈捕命者以除罪；擅罪人，罪人无告劾，系治城旦舂以上十四人；赦免罪人，死罪十八人，城旦舂以下五十八人；赐人爵关内侯以下九十四人。
现代文：刘长还亲自杀过无罪者一人；命令官吏论罪杀死无辜者六人；藏匿逃亡在外的死刑犯，并抓捕未逃亡的犯人为他们顶罪；他任意加人罪名，使受害者无处申冤，被判罪四年劳役以上，如此者十四人；又擅自赦免罪人，免除死罪者十八人。服四年劳役以下者五十八人；还赐爵关内侯以下者九十四人。
English: Liu Chang also personally killed one person who was not guilty; ordered officials to kill six innocent people; hid fugitive death-row prisoners and arrested those who did not escape to punish them; he arbitrarily added charges, so that the victims had nowhere to appeal, and was sentenced to four years of labor service or more, such as fourteen people; and pardoned criminals without authorization, exempting eighteen people from the death penalty. There were fifty-eight people who served four years of labor service or less; and ninety-four people were given the title of Duke of Guanai.

古文：前日长病，陛下忧苦之，使使者赐书、枣脯。
现代文：前些时刘长患重病，陛下为他忧烦，遣使臣赐赠信函、枣脯。
English: Some time ago, Liu Chang was seriously ill, and His Majesty was worried about him, and sent an envoy to present him with a letter and jujube.

古文：长不欲受赐，不肯见拜使者。
现代文：刘长不想接受赐赠，便不肯接见使臣。
English: Liu Chang did not want to accept the gift, so he refused to receive the envoy.

古文：南海民处庐江界中者反，淮南吏卒击之。
现代文：住在庐江郡内的南海民造反，淮南郡的官兵奉旨征讨。
English: The Nanhai people living in Minjiang County rebelled, and the officers and soldiers of Huainan County were ordered to investigate.

古文：陛下以淮南民贫苦，遣使者赐长帛五千匹，以赐吏卒劳苦者。
现代文：陛下体恤淮南民贫苦，派使臣赐赠刘长布帛五千匹，令转发出征官兵中的辛劳穷苦之人。
English: In sympathy with the poverty of the people of Huainan, His Majesty sent envoys to present Liu Changbo with five thousand horses, and ordered the transfer of the hard-working poor among the conscripted officers and soldiers.

古文：长不欲受赐，谩言曰 无劳苦者 。
现代文：刘长不想接受，谎称 军中无劳苦者 。
English: Liu Chang did not want to accept it, and falsely claimed that there was no hardship in the army.

古文：南海民王织上书献璧皇帝，忌擅燔其书，不以闻。
现代文：南海人王织上书向皇帝敬献玉璧，忌烧了信，不予上奏。
English: The king of the Nankai people wove a letter to the emperor to pay tribute to Jade Bi, but he burned the letter and did not play it.

古文：吏请召治忌，长不遣，谩言曰 忌病 。
现代文：朝中官员请求传唤忌论罪，刘长拒不下令，谎称 忌有病 。
English: Officials from North Korea and China requested that he be summoned to discuss the crime, but Liu Chang refused to give the order, falsely claiming that he was ill.

古文：春又请长，原入见，长怒曰 女欲离我自附汉 。
现代文：国相春又请求刘长准许自己，刘长大怒，说 你想背叛我去投汉廷 ，遂判处春死罪。
English: Minister of State Chun also asked Liu Chang for permission, and Liu Chang got angry and said, "You want to betray me to go to the Han Dynasty," and sentenced Chun to death.

古文：长当弃市，臣请论如法。 
现代文：臣等请求陛下将刘长依法治罪。 
English: The ministers requested His Majesty to punish Liu Chang according to the law.

古文：制曰： 朕不忍致法於王，其与列侯二千石议。 
现代文：皇上下诏说： 我不忍心依法制裁淮南王，交列侯与二千石官商议吧。 
English: The imperial edict said: I cannot bear to sanction King Huainan in accordance with the law, so let the feudal lords and officials of 2,000 koku discuss it.

古文： 臣仓、臣敬、臣逸、臣福、臣贺昧死言：臣谨与列侯吏二千石臣婴等四十三人议，皆曰 长不奉法度，不听天子诏，乃阴聚徒党及谋反者，厚养亡命，欲以有为 。
现代文： 臣仓、臣敬、臣逸、臣福、臣贺冒死罪启奏：臣等已与列侯和二千石官吏臣婴等四十三人论议，大家都说 刘长不遵从法度，不听从天子诏命，竟然暗中网罗党徒和谋反者，厚待负罪逃亡之人，是想图谋不轨 。
English: An explanation of the crime of risking death by vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassalage, vassal

古文：臣等议论如法。 
现代文：臣等议决应当依法制裁刘长。 
English: Liu Chang should be sanctioned according to law by the decision of the ministers.

古文：制曰： 朕不忍致法於王，其赦长死罪，废勿王。 
现代文：皇上批示说： 我不忍心依法惩处淮南王，赦免他的死罪，废掉他的王位吧。 
English: The emperor ordered: I can't bear to punish King Huainan according to the law, so let's pardon his capital crime and abolish his throne.

古文： 臣仓等昧死言：长有大死罪，陛下不忍致法，幸赦，废勿王。
现代文： 臣仓等冒死罪启奏：刘长犯有大死之罪，陛下不忍心依法惩治，施恩赦免，废其王位。
English: The death-defying crime of vassalage and so on begins: Liu Chang is guilty of the crime of great death, and His Majesty cannot bear to punish him according to the law, grant him a pardon, and abolish his throne.

古文：臣请处蜀郡严道邛邮，遣其子母从居，县为筑盖家室，皆廪食给薪菜盐豉炊食器席蓐。
现代文：臣等请求将刘长遣往蜀郡严道县邛崃山邮亭，令其妾媵有生养子女者随行同居，由县署为他们新建屋舍，供给粮食、柴草、蔬菜、食盐、豆豉、炊具食具和席蓐。
English: The minister and others requested that Liu Chang be sent to the Lushan Post Office in Yandao County, Shu County, and that his concubine and those who have children live with him, and that the county office build a new house for them and supply them with grain, firewood, vegetables, salt, soybean meal, cooking utensils and tablecloths.

古文：臣等昧死请，请布告天下。 
现代文：臣等冒死罪请求，把这件事布告天下。 
English: At the request of his ministers, who risked the death penalty, he announced this to the world.

古文：制曰： 计食长给肉日五斤，酒二斗。
现代文：皇上颁旨说： 准请供给刘长每日食肉五斤，酒二斗。
English: The emperor issued a decree saying: Please supply Liu Chang with five catties of meat and two barrels of wine every day.

古文：令故美人才人得幸者十人从居。他可。 
现代文：命令昔日受过宠幸的妃嫔十人随往蜀郡同住。其他皆准奏。 
English: He ordered ten of the once-favored concubines to go and live with him in Shuxi County. The others all complied.

古文：尽诛所与谋者。於是乃遣淮南王，载以辎车，令县以次传。
现代文：朝廷诛杀了全部参与谋反的人，于是命淮南王启程，一路用辎车囚载，命令沿途各县依次接送。
English: The imperial court killed all the people involved in the rebellion, so they ordered Huainan Wang to set off, and he was carried all the way by a cart, and ordered to be taken to each county along the way.

古文：是时袁盎谏上曰： 上素骄淮南王，弗为置严傅相，以故至此。
现代文：当时袁盎权谏皇上说： 皇上一向骄宠淮南王，不为他安排严正的太傅和国相去劝导，才使他落到如此境地。
English: At that time, Yuan Angquan said to the emperor: The emperor had always been proud of the king of Huainan, and it was only because he did not arrange for him a strict Taifu and the Minister of State to persuade him that he ended up in this situation.

古文：且淮南王为人刚，今暴摧折之。臣恐卒逢雾露病死。
现代文：再说淮南王性情刚烈，现在粗暴地摧折他，臣很担忧他会突然在途中身染风寒患病而死。
English: Moreover, King Huainan was of a strong nature, and now he was roughly crushing him. The minister was very worried that he would suddenly catch a cold and die on the way.

古文：陛下为有杀弟之名，柰何！ 
现代文：陛下若落得杀弟的恶名如何是好！ 
English: How good it would be if His Majesty were to get the notoriety of killing his brother!

古文：上曰： 吾特苦之耳，今复之。 
现代文：皇上说： 我只是让他尝尝苦头罢了，就会让他回来的。 
English: The emperor said, "I'm just giving him a taste of hardship, and he'll come back."

古文：县传淮南王者皆不敢发车封。淮南王乃谓侍者曰： 谁谓乃公勇者？
现代文：沿途各县送押淮南王的人都不敢打开囚车的封门，于是淮南王对仆人说： 谁说你老子我是勇猛的人？
English: The people who escorted Huainan Wang from all the counties along the way did not dare to open the sealed door of the prison car, so Huainan Wang said to his servant: Who told you that I am a brave man?

古文：吾安能勇！
现代文：我哪里还能勇猛！
English: Where else can I be so brave!

古文：吾以骄故不闻吾过至此。人生一世间，安能邑邑如此！ 
现代文：我因为骄纵听不到自己的过失终于陷入这种困境。人生在世，怎能忍受如此郁闷！ 
English: I finally fell into this predicament because of my arrogance and inability to hear my own faults. How can I bear such depression when I am alive!

古文：乃不食死。
现代文：于是绝食身亡。
English: So he went on a hunger strike and died.

古文：至雍，雍令发封，以死闻。
现代文：囚车行至雍县，县令打开封门，把刘长的死讯上报天子。
English: The prisoner train went to Yong County. The county magistrate opened the sealed door and reported Liu Chang's death to Tianzi.

古文：上哭甚悲，谓袁盎曰： 吾不听公言，卒亡淮南王。 
现代文：皇上哭得很伤心，对袁盎说： 我不听你的劝告，终至淮南王身死。 
English: The emperor cried very sadly and said to Yuan Ang, "I didn't listen to your advice and ended up killing King Huainan."

古文：盎曰： 不可柰何，原陛下自宽。 
现代文：袁盎说： 事已无可奈何，望陛下好自宽解。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "There is nothing I can do. I hope His Majesty will have mercy on himself."

古文：上曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：皇上说： 怎么办好呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "What should we do?

古文：盎曰： 独斩丞相、御史以谢天下乃可。 
现代文：袁盎回答： 只有斩丞相、御史来向天下人谢罪就行了。 
English: Yuan Ang replied, "Only if you behead the prime minister and the minister of history will you be able to apologize to the world."

古文：上即令丞相、御史逮考诸县传送淮南王不发封餽侍者，皆弃市。
现代文：于是皇上命令丞相、御史收捕拷问各县押送淮南王而不予开封进食者，一律弃市问斩。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the prime minister and the minister of history to arrest and interrogate those who escorted King Huainan to various counties without opening the seal and eating, and they were all asked to leave the city.

古文：乃以列侯葬淮南王於雍，守冢三十户。
现代文：然后按照列侯的礼仪在雍县安葬了淮南王，并安置三十户人家守冢祭祀。
English: Then, in accordance with the etiquette of the feudal lords, King Huainan was buried in Yong County, and thirty households were placed to keep the funeral rites.

古文：孝文八年，上怜淮南王，淮南王有子四人，皆七八岁，乃封子安为阜陵侯，子勃为安阳侯，子赐为阳周侯，子良为东成侯。
现代文：孝文帝八年，皇上怜悯淮南王，淮南王有是个儿子，年龄都是七、八岁，于是封其子刘安为阜陵侯，其子刘勃为安阳侯，其子刘赐为阳周侯，其子刘良为东城侯。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, the emperor took pity on King Huainan. King Huainan had a son who was seven or eight years old, so he made his son Liu An the Prince of Fulin, his son Liu Bo the Prince of Anyang, his son Liu Jie the Prince of Yang Zhou, and his son Liu Liang the Prince of Dongcheng.

古文：孝文十二年，民有作歌歌淮南厉王曰： 一尺布，尚可缝；一斗粟，尚可舂。
现代文：孝文帝十二年，有百姓作歌歌唱淮南厉王的遭遇说： 一尺麻布，尚可缝；一斗谷子，尚可舂。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, there was a folk song about the fate of Huainan Li Wang: "A foot of linen can still be sewn; a barrel of grain can still be threshed."

古文：兄弟二人不能相容。 
现代文：兄弟二人不能相容。 
English: The two brothers are incompatible.

古文：上闻之，乃叹曰： 尧舜放逐骨肉，周公杀管蔡，天下称圣。
现代文：皇上听到后，就叹息说： 尧舜放逐自己的家人，周公杀死管叔蔡叔，天下人称赞他们贤明。
English: When the emperor heard this, he sighed and said: "You banished your own family, Zhou Gong killed Guan Uncle Cai Uncle, and the whole world praised their wisdom.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不以私害公。
现代文：因为他们不因私情而损害公义。
English: for they do not pervert justice for the sake of gain.

古文：天下岂以我为贪淮南王地邪？ 
现代文：天下人难道认为我是贪图淮南王的封地吗？ 
English: Do people around the world think that I covet the fiefdom of King Huainan?

古文：乃徙城阳王王淮南故地，而追尊谥淮南王为厉王，置园复如诸侯仪。
现代文：于是徙封城阳王刘喜去统领淮南王原来的封地，而谥封已故淮南王为厉王，并按诸侯仪制为他建造了陵园。
English: As a result, Liu Xi, the King of Chengyang, was exiled to rule the original fief of King Huainan, while the late King Huainan was exiled to Li, and a cemetery was built for him according to the imperial ritual system.

古文：孝文十六年，徙淮南王喜复故城阳。
现代文：孝文帝十六年，皇上迁淮南王刘喜复返城阳故地。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Xiaowen, Liu Xifu, King of Huainan, who had been exiled by the emperor, returned to his hometown of Chengyang.

古文：上怜淮南厉王废法不轨，自使失国蚤死，乃立其三子：阜陵侯安为淮南王，安阳侯勃为衡山王，阳周侯赐为庐江王，皆复得厉王时地，参分之。
现代文：皇上哀怜淮南厉王因废弃王法图谋不轨，而自惹祸患失国早死，便封立他三个儿子：阜陵侯刘安为淮南王，安阳侯刘勃为衡山王，阳周侯刘赐为庐江王，他们都重获厉王时封地，三分共享。
English: The emperor felt sorry for King Li of Huainan for abandoning the king's law and scheming to go astray, and for causing misfortune and losing the country and dying early. He appointed his three sons: Liu An, the lord of Fuling, as the king of Huainan, Liu Bo, the lord of Anyang, as the king of Hengshan, and Liu Zhou, the lord of Yangzhou, as the king of the Li River. They all regained the fief of King Li and shared it equally.

古文：东城侯良前薨，无後也。
现代文：东城侯刘良此前已死，没有后代。
English: Liu Liang, the lord of Dongcheng, had already died and had no descendants.

古文：孝景三年，吴楚七国反，吴使者至淮南，淮南王欲发兵应之。
现代文：孝景帝三年，吴楚七国举兵反叛，吴国使者到淮南联络，淮南王意想发兵响应。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu raised their armies and rebelled. The emissaries of the kingdom of Wu contacted Huainan, and the king of Huainan wanted to send troops in response.

古文：其相曰： 大王必欲发兵应吴，臣原为将。 
现代文：淮南国相说： 大王如果非要发兵响应吴王，臣愿为统军将领。 
English: Huainan Minister of State said: If the great king has to send troops to respond to King Wu, the vassal is willing to be the general of the unified army.

古文：王乃属相兵。
现代文：淮南王就把军队交给了他。
English: King Huainan gave him the army.

古文：淮南相已将兵，因城守，不听王而为汉；汉亦使曲城侯将兵救淮南：淮南以故得完。
现代文：淮南国相得到兵权后，指挥军队据城防守叛军，不听淮南王的命令而为朝廷效劳；朝廷也派出曲城侯蛊捷率军援救淮南：淮南国因此得以保全。
English: After the Minister of State of Huainan obtained the military power, he commanded the army to defend the rebels according to the city, and did not listen to the order of the King of Huainan to serve the imperial court; the imperial court also sent the army led by Qu Cheng Hou Rongjie to rescue Huainan: Huainan was thus preserved.

古文：吴使者至庐江，庐江王弗应，而往来使越。
现代文：吴国使者来到庐江，庐江王不肯响应，而派人与越国联络。
English: An envoy from the State of Wu came to the Li River, but the King of the Li River refused to respond and sent someone to contact the State of Yue.

古文：吴使者至衡山，衡山王坚守无二心。
现代文：吴国使者往衡山，衡山王效忠朝廷，坚守城池毫无二心。
English: The emissaries of the State of Wu went to Hengshan. The King of Hengshan was loyal to the imperial court and had no second thoughts about holding on to the city.

古文：孝景四年，吴楚已破，衡山王朝，上以为贞信，乃劳苦之曰： 南方卑湿。 
现代文：孝景帝四年，吴楚叛军已被打败，衡山王入京朝见，皇上认为他忠贞守信，便慰劳他说： 南方之地低洼潮湿。 
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, the Wu Chu rebels had been defeated. Hengshan Wang went to Beijing to meet with the imperial court. The emperor thought that he was loyal and trustworthy, so he consoled him by saying: The land of the south is low-lying and humid.

古文：徙衡山王王济北，所以襃之。
现代文：改任衡山王掌管济水以北的地区，以此作为褒奖。
English: As a reward, Hengshan Wang was put in charge of the area north of Jishui.

古文：及薨，遂赐谥为贞王。
现代文：他去世后便赐封为贞王。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Zhenwang.

古文：庐江王边越，数使使相交，故徙为衡山王，王江北。
现代文：庐江王的封地邻近越国，屡次派遣使臣与之结交，因此被北迁为衡山王，统管长江以北地区。
English: The Lijiang King's fiefdom was close to Yue, and he repeatedly sent envoys to make friends with it. As a result, he was moved north to become the King of Hengshan, in charge of the area north of the Yangtze River.

古文：淮南王如故。
现代文：淮南王和以前一样。
English: Huainan Wang is the same as before.

古文：淮南王安为人好读书鼓琴，不喜弋猎狗马驰骋，亦欲以行阴德拊循百姓，流誉天下。
现代文：淮南王刘安喜好读书弹琴，不爱射猎放狗跑马，他也想暗中做好事来安抚百姓，传播美名于天下。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, liked to read and play the piano. He did not like shooting or letting dogs run. He also wanted to do good things secretly to appease the people and spread his good name to the world.

古文：时时怨望厉王死，时欲畔逆，未有因也。
现代文：他时常抱怨厉王之死，常想反叛朝廷，但是没有机会。
English: He often complained about the death of King Li, and often wanted to rebel against the imperial court, but there was no chance.

古文：及建元二年，淮南王入朝。
现代文：到了孝武帝建元二年，淮南王入京朝见皇上。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, King Huainan came to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：素善武安侯，武安侯时为太尉，乃逆王霸上，与王语曰： 方今上无太子，大王亲高皇帝孙，行仁义，天下莫不闻。
现代文：与他一向交好的武安侯田蚡，当时做太尉。田蚡在霸上迎侯淮南王，告诉他说： 现今皇上没有太子，大王您是高皇帝的亲孙，施行仁义，天下无人不知。
English: He had always been friends with the Wu'an Hou Tian Xuan, who was a captain at the time. Tian Xuan greeted the Hou Huainan Wang in the hegemony and told him: Now the emperor has no prince, great king, you are the grandchild of Emperor Gao, and you are known for your benevolence and righteousness.

古文：即宫车一日晏驾，非大王当谁立者！ 
现代文：假如有一天皇上去世，不是您又该谁继位呢！ 
English: If one day the Emperor dies, it is not you who should succeed him!

古文：淮南王大喜，厚遗武安侯金财物。
现代文：淮南王十分高兴，厚赠武安侯金银钱财物品。
English: King Huainan was very pleased and generously gave Wu'an gold, silver, money and other goods.

古文：阴结宾客，拊循百姓，为畔逆事。
现代文：淮南王暗中结交宾客，安抚百姓，谋划叛逆之事。
English: King Huainan secretly made guests, appeased the people, and plotted treason.

古文：建元六年，彗星见，淮南王心怪之。
现代文：建元六年，慧星出现，淮南王心生怪异。
English: In the sixth year of Jianyuan, a comet appeared, and the king of Huainan had a strange feeling.

古文：或说王曰： 先吴军起时，彗星出长数尺，然尚流血千里。
现代文：有人劝说淮南王道： 以前吴军起兵时，慧星出现仅长数尺，而兵战仍然血流千里。
English: Someone persuaded Huainan Wang Dao: In the past, when the Wu army raised an army, the comet appeared only a few feet long, but the war was still bloody.

古文：今彗星长竟天，天下兵当大起。 
现代文：现在慧星长至满天，天下兵战应当大兴。 
English: Now that the comet has grown to the full sky, the world war should be a great success.

古文：王心以为上无太子，天下有变，诸侯并争，愈益治器械攻战具，积金钱赂遗郡国诸侯游士奇材。
现代文：淮南王心想皇上没有太子，若天下发生变故，诸侯王将一齐争夺皇位，便更加加紧整治兵器和攻战器械，积聚黄金钱财贿赠郡守、诸侯王、说客和有奇才的人。
English: King Huainan thought that the emperor did not have a prince, and if there was a change in the world, the princes would all compete for the throne, so he intensified the rectification of weapons and offensive equipment, accumulated gold, money and wealth, and bribed county governors, princes, lobbyists and wizards.

古文：诸辨士为方略者，妄作妖言，谄谀王，王喜，多赐金钱，而谋反滋甚。
现代文：各位能言巧辩的人为淮南王出谋划策，都胡乱编造荒诞的邪说，阿谀逢迎淮南王。淮南王心中十分欢喜，赏他们很多钱财，而谋反之心更甚。
English: All of you eloquent people who have made suggestions for King Huainan have made up absurd heresies to welcome King Huainan. King Huainan was very pleased and rewarded them with a lot of money, but his rebelliousness was even greater.

古文：淮南王有女陵，慧，有口辩。
现代文：淮南王有女儿名刘陵，她聪敏，有口才。
English: King Huainan had a daughter named Liu Ling. She was intelligent and eloquent.

古文：王爱陵，常多予金钱，为中诇长安，约结上左右。
现代文：淮南王喜爱刘陵，经常多给她钱财，让她在长安刺探朝中内情，结交皇上亲近的人。
English: King Huainan loved Liu Ling, and often gave her more money so that she could spy on the North Korean government in Chang'an and make friends with people close to the emperor.

古文：元朔三年，上赐淮南王几杖，不朝。
现代文：元朔三年，皇上赏赐淮南王几案手杖，恩准他不必入京朝见。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Shuo era, the emperor rewarded King Huainan with several canes, allowing him to visit the imperial court without having to go to Beijing.

古文：淮南王王后荼，王爱幸之。
现代文：淮南王王后名荼，淮南王很宠幸她。
English: The Queen of Huainan is famous. The King of Huainan is very fond of her.

古文：王后生太子迁，迁取王皇太后外孙修成君女为妃。
现代文：王后生太子刘迁，刘迁娶王皇太后外孙修成君的女儿做妃子。
English: The Empress Dowager gave birth to Prince Liu Qian, and Liu Qian married the daughter of the Empress Dowager's grandchild, Prince Xiucheng, to become his concubine.

古文：王谋为反具，畏太子妃知而内泄事，乃与太子谋，令诈弗爱，三月不同席。
现代文：淮南王策划制造谋反的器具，害怕太子的妃子知道后向朝中泄露机密，就和太子策划，让他假装不爱妃子，三个月不和她同席共寝。
English: King Huainan planned to make a device for plotting a rebellion. Fearing that the prince's concubine would leak the secret to the central government, he plotted with the prince to pretend that he did not love the concubine and would not sleep with her for three months.

古文：王乃详为怒太子，闭太子使与妃同内三月，太子终不近妃。
现代文：于是淮南王佯装恼怒太子，把他关起来，让他和妃子同居一室三月，而太子始终不亲近她。
English: So King Huainan pretended to be angry with the prince, locked him up, and made him and his concubine live in the same room for three months, but the prince never got close to her.

古文：妃求去，王乃上书谢归去之。
现代文：妃子请求离去，淮南王便上奏朝廷致歉，把她送回娘家。
English: When the concubine asked to leave, King Huainan apologized to the imperial court and sent her back to her daughter's home.

古文：王后荼、太子迁及女陵得爱幸王，擅国权，侵夺民田宅，妄致系人。
现代文：王后荼、太子刘迁和女儿刘陵受淮南王宠爱，专擅国权，侵夺百姓田地房宅，任意加罪拘捕无辜之人。
English: The Queen Dowager, the Prince Liu Qian and the daughter Liu Ling were favored by the King of Huainan. They monopolized the power of the state, invaded the fields and houses of the people, and arbitrarily arrested innocent people.

古文：元朔五年，太子学用剑，自以为人莫及，闻郎中雷被巧，乃召与戏。
现代文：元朔五年，太子学习使剑，自以为剑术高超，无人可比。听说郎中雷被剑艺精湛，便召他前来比试。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo era, the prince learned to use the sword, and thought that he was a superb swordsman, incomparable to anyone else. Hearing that Langzhonglei was skilled in swordsmanship, he called him to come and compete.

古文：被一再辞让，误中太子。
现代文：雷被一再退让，后来误伤了太子。
English: Lei was repeatedly conceded, and later accidentally injured the crown prince.

古文：太子怒，被恐。
现代文：太子动怒，雷被恐惧。
English: The prince is enraged and Lei is terrified.

古文：此时有欲从军者辄诣京师，被即原奋击匈奴。
现代文：这时凡想从军的人马上就被送往京城，雷被当即决定去参军奋击匈奴。
English: At this time, anyone who wanted to join the army was immediately sent to the capital, and Lei was immediately decided to join the army to fight the Xiongnu.

古文：太子迁数恶被於王，王使郎中令斥免，欲以禁後，被遂亡至长安，上书自明。
现代文：太子刘迁屡次向淮南王说雷被的坏话，淮南王就让郎中令斥退罢免了他的官职，以此儆示后人。于是雷被逃到长安，向朝廷上书申诉冤屈。
English: Prince Liu Qian repeatedly spoke ill of Lei Bei to King Huainan, and King Huainan ordered his second-in-command to dismiss him from his official post as a warning to future generations. As a result, Lei Bei fled to Chang'an and sent a complaint to the imperial court.

古文：诏下其事廷尉、河南。
现代文：皇上诏令廷尉、河南郡审理此事。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the Imperial Lieutenant and Henan County to investigate the matter.

古文：河南治，逮淮南太子，王、王后计欲无遣太子，遂发兵反，计犹豫，十馀日未定。
现代文：河南郡议决，逮捕淮南太子，淮南王、王后打算不遣送太子，趁机发兵反叛。可是反复谋划犹豫，十几天未能定夺。
English: Henan County passed a resolution to arrest the Prince of Huainan. The King and Queen of Huainan planned not to deport the Prince and took advantage of the opportunity to rebel. However, they repeatedly hesitated in their planning and were unable to make a decision for more than ten days.

古文：会有诏，即讯太子。
现代文：适逢朝中又有诏令下达，让就地传讯太子。
English: At the right time, the imperial edict was issued again, ordering the crown prince to be summoned on the spot.

古文：当是时，淮南相怒寿春丞留太子逮不遣，劾不敬。
现代文：就在这时，淮南国相恼怒寿春县丞将逮捕太子的命令扣下不发，控告他犯有 不敬 之罪。
English: Just at this time, the Huainan Guozhong was annoyed and angry that Shuchun County did not issue an order to arrest the prince and accused him of committing the crime of disrespect.

古文：王以请相，相弗听。
现代文：淮南王请求国相不追究此事，国相不听。
English: King Huainan asked the Minister of State not to investigate the matter, but the Minister of State did not listen.

古文：王使人上书告相，事下廷尉治。
现代文：淮南王便派人上书控告国相，皇上将此事交付廷尉审理。
English: King Huainan then sent someone to lodge a complaint against the minister of state, and the emperor handed the matter over to a courtier for trial.

古文：踪迹连王，王使人候伺汉公卿，公卿请逮捕治王。
现代文：办案中有线索牵连到淮南王，淮南王派人暗中打探朝中公卿大臣的意见，公卿大臣请求逮捕淮南王治罪。
English: There were clues implicating King Huainan in the handling of the case. King Huainan sent someone to secretly investigate the opinions of the Minister of the Court of the Middle Kingdom, and the Minister of the Court of the Middle Kingdom requested the arrest of King Huainan.

古文：王恐事发，太子迁谋曰： 汉使即逮王，王令人衣卫士衣，持戟居庭中，王旁有非是，则刺杀之，臣亦使人刺杀淮南中尉，乃举兵，未晚。 
现代文：淮南王害怕事发，太子刘迁献策说： 如果朝廷使臣来逮捕父王，父王可叫人身穿卫士衣裳，持戟站立庭院之中，父王身边一有不测发生，就刺杀他，我也派人刺死淮南国中尉，就此举兵起事，尚不为迟。 
English: King Huainan was afraid of an incident, and Prince Liu Qianxue said: "If the imperial envoys come to arrest my father, my father can have them wear the clothes of guards and stand in the courtyard with shields. If anything happens around my father, I will stab him to death. I also sent someone to stab Lieutenant Huainan to death, and it is not too late to raise an army.

古文：是时上不许公卿请，而遣汉中尉宏即讯验王。
现代文：这时皇上不批准公卿大臣的奏请，而改派朝中中尉殷宏赴淮南国就地向淮南王询问查证案情。
English: At this time, the emperor did not approve the request of the noble minister, and reassigned Lieutenant Yin Hong to go to Huainan to inquire about the case from the king of Huainan.

古文：王闻汉使来，即如太子谋计。
现代文：淮南王闻讯朝中使臣前来，立即按太子的计谋做了准备。
English: When King Huainan heard that the Chinese envoys had arrived, he immediately made preparations according to the prince's plan.

古文：汉中尉至，王视其颜色和，讯王以斥雷被事耳，王自度无何，不发。
现代文：朝廷中尉到达后，淮南王看他态度温和，只询问自己罢免雷被的因由，揣度不会定什么罪，就没有发作。
English: After the court lieutenant arrived, Huainan Wang saw his attitude as mild, only inquired about the reason for his removal of the lightning quilt, guessed what crime would not be convicted, and there was no attack.

古文：中尉还，以闻。
现代文：中尉还朝，把查询的情况上奏。
English: The lieutenant returned in the morning to report on the status of the inquiry.

古文：公卿治者曰： 淮南王安拥阏奋击匈奴者雷被等，废格明诏，当弃市。 
现代文：公卿大臣中负责办案的人说： 淮南王刘安阻挠雷被从军奋击匈奴等行径，破坏了执行天子明确下达的诏令，应判处弃市死罪。 
English: The person in charge of handling the case among the ministers of justice said: Liu An, the king of Huainan, obstructed the army from fighting against the Xiongnu and other actions, undermined the implementation of the imperial edict clearly issued by the Son of Heaven, and should be sentenced to death for abandoning the city.

古文：诏弗许。
现代文：皇上诏令不许。
English: The Emperor's edict forbids it.

古文：公卿请废勿王，诏弗许。
现代文：公卿大臣请求废其王位，皇上诏令不许。
English: The Kugyo-daijin requested the abdication of his throne, but the Emperor's edict forbade it.

古文：公卿请削五县，诏削二县。
现代文：公卿大臣请求削夺其五县封地，皇上诏令削夺二县。
English: The Minister of Justice requested the seizure of his five-county fief, and the Emperor decreed the seizure of two counties.

古文：使中尉宏赦淮南王罪，罚以削地。
现代文：朝廷派中尉殷宏去宣布赦免淮南王的罪过，用削地以示惩罚。
English: The imperial court sent Lieutenant Yin Hong to announce the pardon of King Huainan's crime, and indicated the punishment by cutting the ground.

古文：中尉入淮南界，宣言赦王。
现代文：中尉进入淮南国境，宣布赦免淮南王。
English: The lieutenant entered the Huainan border and announced the pardon of Huainan Wang.

古文：王初闻汉公卿请诛之，未知得削地，闻汉使来，恐其捕之，乃与太子谋刺之如前计。
现代文：淮南王起初听说朝中公卿大臣请求杀死自己，并不知道获得宽赦削地，他听说朝廷使臣已动身前来，害怕自己被捕，就和太子按先前的计谋准备刺杀他。
English: At first, King Huainan heard that a high-ranking court noble and minister had requested to kill himself. He did not know that he had been pardoned and given land. When he heard that the court envoys had come, he was afraid of being arrested, and he and the prince prepared to assassinate him according to the previous plan.

古文：及中尉至，即贺王，王以故不发。
现代文：待到中尉已至，立即祝贺淮南王获赦，淮南王因此没有起事。
English: When the lieutenant arrived, he immediately congratulated Huainan Wang on being pardoned, so Huainan Wang did not get into trouble.

古文：其後自伤曰： 吾行仁义见削，甚耻之。 
现代文：事后他哀伤自己说： 我行仁义之事却被削地，这太耻辱了。 
English: Afterwards, he felt sorry for himself and said, "It's such a shame that I've been cut down for doing something good and righteous.

古文：然淮南王削地之後，其为反谋益甚。
现代文：然而淮南王削地之后，策划反叛的阴谋更为加剧。
English: However, after Huainan Wang reduced the land, the conspiracy to plan the rebellion intensified.

古文：诸使道从长安来，为妄妖言，言上无男，汉不治，即喜；即言汉廷治，有男，王怒，以为妄言，非也。
现代文：诸位使者从长安来，制造荒诞骗人的邪说，凡声称皇上无儿，汉家天下不太平的，淮南王闻之即喜；如果说汉王朝太平，皇上有儿，淮南王就恼怒，认为是胡言乱语，不可信。
English: The emissaries came from Chang'an and fabricated absurd and deceitful heresies. Anyone who claimed that the emperor had no son and that the Han dynasty was not peaceful was immediately welcomed by King Huainan; if he said that the Han dynasty was peaceful and that the emperor had a son, King Huainan was angry and thought it was nonsense and could not be believed.

古文：王日夜与伍被、左吴等案舆地图，部署兵所从入。
现代文：淮南王日夜和伍被、左吴等察看地图，部署进军的路线。
English: Huainan Wang and Wu Xuan, Zuo Wu, etc. inspected the map day and night, and deployed the route of the march.

古文：王曰： 上无太子，宫车即晏驾，廷臣必徵胶东王，不即常山王，诸侯并争，吾可以无备乎！
现代文：淮南王说： 皇上没有太子，一旦驾崩，朝廷大臣一定征召胶东王，要不就是常山王，诸侯王一齐争夺皇位，我能够不准备么！
English: Huainan Wang said: The emperor has no prince, once he dies, the minister of the imperial court will certainly conscript Jiaodong Wang, or it will be the king of Changshan and the princes competing for the throne, I can't help but prepare!

古文：且吾高祖孙，亲行仁义，陛下遇我厚，吾能忍之；万世之後，吾宁能北面臣事竖子乎！ 
现代文：况且我是高祖的亲孙，亲行仁义之道，陛下待我恩厚，我能忍受他的统治；陛下万世之后，我岂能事奉小儿北向称臣呢！ 
English: Moreover, I am the grandchild of Gao Zu, and I personally practice the way of benevolence and righteousness. Your Majesty treats me kindly, and I can endure his rule. Your Majesty, after all eternity, will I be able to serve as a child of the North and become a minister?

古文：王坐东宫，召伍被与谋，曰： 将军上。 
现代文：淮南王坐在东宫，召见伍被一起议事，招呼他说： 将军上殿。 
English: King Huainan was sitting in the East Palace. He summoned Wu to a meeting and said, "General, come to the palace."

古文：被怅然曰： 上宽赦大王，王复安得此亡国之语乎！
现代文：伍被不高兴地说： 皇上刚刚宽恕赦免了大王，又怎么能说这亡国的话呢！
English: Wu was displeased and said, "The emperor has just pardoned and pardoned the great king, so how can you talk about ruining the country!"

古文：臣闻子胥谏吴王，吴王不用，乃曰 臣今见麋鹿游姑苏之台也 。
现代文：臣听说伍子胥劝谏吴王，吴王不用其言，于是伍子胥说 臣即将看见麋鹿在姑苏台上出入游荡了 。
English: The minister heard that Wu Zixuan advised the king of Wu, and the king of Wu did not need his words, so Wu Zixuan said that the minister was about to see the elk wandering in and out of the gusudai.

古文：今臣亦见宫中生荆棘，露霑衣也。 
现代文：现在臣也将看到宫中遍生荆棘，露水沾湿衣裳了。 
English: Now the vassal will also see thorns growing everywhere in the palace, and the dew will wet his clothes.

古文：王怒，系伍被父母，囚之三月。
现代文：淮南王大怒，囚禁起伍被的父母，关押了三个月。
English: Huainan Wang flew into a rage and imprisoned the parents of the riot victims for three months.

古文：复召曰： 将军许寡人乎？ 
现代文：然后淮南王又把伍被召来问道： 将军答应寡人吗？ 
English: Then King Huainan summoned Wu again and asked, "Did the general agree to take so many people?"

古文：被曰： 不，直来为大王画耳。
现代文：伍被回答： 不，我只是来为大王筹划而已。
English: Wu was answered: No, I'm just here to plan for the great king.

古文：臣闻聪者听於无声，明者见於未形，故圣人万举万全。
现代文：臣听说听力好的人能在无声时听出动静，视力好的人能在未成形前看出征兆，所以最智慧、最道德的圣人做事总是万无一失。
English: It is said that those with good hearing can hear movement in silence, and those with good eyesight can see signs before they are formed. Therefore, the wisest and most moral saints always do things without fail.

古文：昔文王一动而功显于千世，列为三代，此所谓因天心以动作者也，故海内不期而随。
现代文：从前周文王为灭商纣率周族东进，一行动就功显千代，使周朝继夏、商之后，列入 三代 ，这就是所谓顺从天意而行动的结果，因此四海之内的人都不约而同地追随响应他。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wen led the Zhou people eastward in order to exterminate the merchants, and his one action brought success to thousands of generations, making the Zhou Dynasty the third generation after the Xia Dynasty and the merchants. This is the result of the so-called action of obeying the will of heaven, so people in the four seas unanimously followed and responded to him.

古文：此千岁之可见者。
现代文：这是千年前可以看见的史实。
English: This is a historical fact that could be seen a thousand years ago.

古文：夫百年之秦，近世之吴楚，亦足以喻国家之存亡矣。
现代文：至于百年前的秦王朝，近代的吴楚两国，也足以说明国家存亡的道理。
English: As for the Qin Dynasty a hundred years ago, the modern Wu-Chu two countries are also sufficient to explain the reason for the country's survival.

古文：臣不敢避子胥之诛，原大王毋为吴王之听。
现代文：臣不敢逃避伍子胥被杀害的厄运，希望大王不要重蹈吴王不听忠谏的覆辙。
English: The vassal did not dare to escape the bad luck of Wu Zixuan being killed, and hoped that the great king would not repeat the mistake of King Wu not listening to Zhongyao.

古文：昔秦绝圣人之道，杀术士，燔诗书，弃礼义，尚诈力，任刑罚，转负海之粟致之西河。
现代文：过去秦朝弃绝圣人之道，坑杀儒生，焚烧《》《书》，抛弃礼义，崇尚伪诈和暴力，凭借刑罚，强迫百姓把海滨的谷子运送到西河。
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty abandoned the path of sages, killed Confucian scholars, burned books, abandoned etiquette, advocated fraud and violence, and forced people to transport grain from the seashore to the West River by means of punishment.

古文：当是之时，男子疾耕不足於糟，女子纺绩不足於盖形。
现代文：在那个时候，男子奋力耕作却吃不饱糟糠，女子织布绩麻却衣不蔽体。
English: At that time, men worked hard but were not well fed, and women wove cloth but did not wear clothes.

古文：遣蒙恬筑长城，东西数千里，暴兵露师常数十万，死者不可胜数，僵尸千里，流血顷亩，百姓力竭，欲为乱者十家而五。
现代文：秦皇派蒙恬修筑长城，东西绵延数千里，长年戍边、风餐露宿的士兵常常有数十万人，死者不可胜数，僵尸暴野千里，流血遍及百亩，百姓气力耗尽，想造反的十家有五。
English: Emperor Qin sent Meng Rong to build the Great Wall. It stretches for thousands of miles from east to west. There are often hundreds of thousands of soldiers who have been living and eating on the edge of the Great Wall for many years. The dead are countless. There are thousands of zombies in the wilderness. Bloodshed covers hundreds of mu. The people are exhausted. There are five families out of ten who want to rebel.

古文：又使徐福入海求神异物，还为伪辞曰： 臣见海中大神，言曰： 汝西皇之使邪？ 
现代文：秦皇帝又派徐福入东海访求神仙和珍奇异物，徐福归来编造假话说： 臣见到海中大神，他问道： 你是西土皇帝的使臣吗？ 
English: Emperor Qin also sent Xu Fu into the East Sea to visit the immortals and rare and strange objects. Xu Fu returned and made up a fake saying: "A minister saw a great god in the sea. He asked: Are you an envoy of the Emperor of the West?

古文：臣答曰： 然。 
现代文：臣答道： 是的。 
English: The vassal replied: Yes.

古文： 汝何求？ 
现代文： 你来寻求何物？ 
English: What are you looking for?

古文：曰： 原请延年益寿药。 
现代文：臣答： 希望求得延年益寿的仙药。 
English: Questioner: I hope to obtain the elixir of longevity.

古文：神曰： 汝秦王之礼薄，得观而不得取。 
现代文：海神说： 你们秦王礼品菲薄，仙药可以观赏却不能拿取。 
English: The sea god said, "Your gifts from the Qin King are too thin. You can look at the elixir, but you cannot take it.

古文：即从臣东南至蓬莱山，见芝成宫阙，有使者铜色而龙形，光上照天。
现代文：当即海神随臣向东南行至蓬莱山，看到了用灵芝草筑成的宫殿，有使者肤色如铜身形似龙，光辉上射映照天宇。
English: Immediately, the god of the sea and his attendants traveled southeast to Penglai Mountain, where they saw a palace built of reishi grass, with a messenger with a skin color like copper and a body shaped like a dragon, shining upwards to reflect the sky.

古文：於是臣再拜问曰： 宜何资以献？ 
现代文：于是臣两拜而问，说： 应该拿什么礼物来奉献？ 
English: So the minister bowed twice and asked, "What gift should I bring for the offering?"

古文：海神曰： 以令名男子若振女与百工之事，即得之矣。  
现代文：海神说： 献上良家男童和女童以及百工的技艺，就可以得到仙药了。  
English: The sea god said, "If you present a boy and a girl from a good family and the skills of a hundred craftsmen, you can get the elixir."

古文：秦皇帝大说，遣振男女三千人，资之五穀种种百工而行。
现代文：皇帝大喜，遣发童男童女三千人，并供给海神五谷种籽和各种工匠前往东海。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and sent 3,000 boys and girls to the East Sea, as well as providing the god of the sea with grain seeds and various craftsmen.

古文：徐福得平原广泽，止王不来。
现代文：途中徐福觅得一片辽阔的原野和湖泽，便留居那里自立为王不再回朝。
English: On the way, Xu Fu found a vast plain and lake, and stayed there to establish himself as king and not return to the imperial court.

古文：於是百姓悲痛相思，欲为乱者十家而六。
现代文：于是百姓悲痛思念亲人，想造反的十家有六。
English: As a result, the people grieved and missed their relatives, and six out of ten families wanted to rebel.

古文：又使尉佗逾五岭攻百越。
现代文：秦皇帝又派南海郡尉赵佗越过五岭攻打百越。
English: Emperor Qin also sent Nanhai County Lieutenant Zhao Jun across the Wuling Mountains to attack Baiyue.

古文：尉佗知中国劳极，止王不来，使人上书，求女无夫家者三万人，以为士卒衣补。
现代文：赵佗知道中原疲敝已极，就留居南越称王不归，并派人上书，要求朝廷征集无婆家的妇女三万人，来替士兵缝补衣裳。
English: Knowing that the Central Plains were exhausted, Zhao Wei stayed in South Vietnam, saying that the king would not return, and sent a letter requesting the court to recruit 30,000 homeless women to sew clothes for the soldiers.

古文：秦皇帝可其万五千人。
现代文：秦皇帝同意给他一万五千人。
English: Emperor Qin agreed to give him 15,000 men.

古文：於是百姓离心瓦解，欲为乱者十家而七。
现代文：于是百姓人心离散犹如土崩瓦解，想造反的十家有七。
English: As a result, the hearts and minds of the common people were scattered and disintegrated, and seven out of ten families wanted to rebel.

古文：客谓高皇帝曰： 时可矣。 
现代文：宾客对高皇帝说： 时机到了。 
English: The guest said to Emperor Gao: The time has come.

古文：高皇帝曰： 待之，圣人当起东南间。 
现代文：高皇帝说： 等等看，当有圣人起事于东南方。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Wait and see, when a sage rises in the southeast.

古文：不一年，陈胜吴广发矣。
现代文：不到一年，陈胜吴广揭竿造反了。
English: Less than a year later, Chen Sheng and Wu Guang rebelled.

古文：高皇始於丰沛，一倡天下不期而响应者不可胜数也。
现代文：高皇帝自丰邑沛县起事，一发倡议全天下不约而同的响应者便不可胜数。
English: Emperor Gao rose up from Fengyupei County, and once the initiative was launched, there were countless responders all over the world.

古文：此所谓蹈瑕候间，因秦之亡而动者也。
现代文：这就是所谓踏到了缝隙窥伺到时机，借秦朝的危亡而举事。
English: This is the so-called stepping into the gap, spying the opportunity, and taking advantage of the death of the Qin Dynasty to stir up trouble.

古文：百姓原之，若旱之望雨，故起於行陈之中而立为天子，功高三王，德传无穷。
现代文：百姓期望他，犹如干旱盼雨水，所以他能起于军伍而被拥立为天子，功业高于夏禹、商汤和周文王，恩德流被后世无穷无尽。
English: The people expect him, just as the drought expects rain, so he can rise from the army and be upheld as the son of heaven, his achievements are higher than Xia Yu, Shang Tang and Zhou Wen Wang, and the flow of grace is endless by future generations.

古文：今大王见高皇帝得天下之易也，独不观近世之吴楚乎？
现代文：如今大王看到了高皇帝得天下的容易，却偏偏看不到近代吴楚的覆亡么？
English: Now, the great king sees Emperor Gao getting the world easily, but he can't see the downfall of modern Wu Chu?

古文：夫吴王赐号为刘氏祭酒，复不朝，王四郡之众，地方数千里，内铸消铜以为钱，东煮海水以为盐，上取江陵木以为船，一船之载当中国数十两车，国富民众。
现代文：那吴王被赐号为刘氏祭酒，颇受尊宠，又被恩准不必依例入京朝见，他掌管着四郡的民众，地域广至方圆数千里，在国内可自行冶铜铸造钱币，在东方可烧煮海水贩卖食盐，溯江而上能采江陵木材建造大船，一船所载抵得上中原数十辆车的容量，国家殷富百姓众多。
English: That Wu Wang was given the name of Liu's sacrificial wine, quite respected and favored, and was granted the privilege of not having to go to Beijing to see the imperial court as usual. He controls the people of four counties, covering an area of thousands of miles. In China, he can smelt copper and mint coins on his own. In the East, he can boil seawater and sell salt. Upstream, he can harvest wood from the Ganges and build large ships. One ship can carry the capacity of dozens of cars to the Central Plains. The country has many rich people.

古文：行珠玉金帛赂诸侯宗室大臣，独窦氏不与。
现代文：吴王拿珠玉金帛贿赂诸侯王、宗室贵族和朝中大臣，唯独不给皇戚窦氏。
English: King Wu bribed princes, aristocrats and middle-ranking ministers with jewels and gold ingots, but refused to give them to the imperial relatives, the Dou clan.

古文：计定谋成，举兵而西。
现代文：反叛之计谋划已成，吴王便发兵西进。
English: After the rebellion was planned, King Wu sent troops to the west.

古文：破於大梁，败於狐父，奔走而东，至於丹徒，越人禽之，身死绝祀，为天下笑。
现代文：但吴军在大梁被攻克，在狐父被击败，吴王逃奔东归，行至丹徒，让越人俘获，身死绝国，令天下人耻笑。
English: However, the Wu army was conquered in Dalian and defeated in Foxtrot. The King of Wu fled eastward and went to Dantu, where he was captured by the Viets and died, leaving the country a laughing stock.

古文：夫以吴越之众不能成功者何？
现代文：为什么吴楚有那样众多的军队都不能成就功业？
English: Why couldn't Wu Chu accomplish his mission with such a large number of troops?

古文：诚逆天道而不知时也。
现代文：实在是违背了天道而不识时势的缘故。
English: It's really because they've gone against the grain and don't understand the times.

古文：方今大王之兵众不能十分吴楚之一，天下安宁有万倍於秦之时，原大王从臣之计。
现代文：如今大王兵力不及吴楚的十分之一，天下安宁却比秦皇帝时代好万倍，希望大王听从臣下的意见。
English: Today, the Great King's military strength is less than one-tenth of that of Wu Chu, but the world is a thousand times more peaceful than in the time of Emperor Qin. I hope that the Great King will listen to the opinions of his subjects.

古文：大王不从臣之计，今见大王事必不成而语先泄也。
现代文：若大王不听臣的劝告，势必眼见大事不成言语却已先自泄露天机。
English: If the great king does not listen to the advice of his vassals, he is bound to see great things without words, but he has already revealed the divine plan.

古文：臣闻微子过故国而悲，於是作麦秀之歌，是痛纣之不用王子比干也。
现代文：臣听说箕子路过殷朝故都时心中很悲伤，于是作 麦秀之歌 ，这首歌就是哀痛纣王不听从王子比干的劝谏而亡国。
English: The vassal heard that Zizi was very sad when he passed through the former capital of the Yin Dynasty, so he composed the Song of the Wheat Show, which is a song of sorrow that the king did not listen to the advice of the prince Bi Gan and lost the country.

古文：故孟子曰 纣贵为天子，死曾不若匹夫 。
现代文：所以《孟子》说 纣王贵为天子，死时竟不及平民 。
English: That is why "Mencius" said that King Zhai was a son of heaven, but he died less than a commoner.

古文：是纣先自绝於天下久矣，非死之日而天下去之。
现代文：这是因为纣王生前早已自绝于天下人，而不是死到临头天下人才背弃他。
English: This is because the Dragon King had already renounced the world in his lifetime, and it was not until his death that the world turned its back on him.

古文：今臣亦窃悲大王弃千乘之君，必且赐绝命之书，为群臣先，死於东宫也。 
现代文：现在臣也暗自悲哀大王若抛弃了诸侯国君的尊贵，朝廷必将赐给绝命之书，令大王身先群臣，死于东宫。 
English: Now, the vassals are also secretly grieving. If the great king abandons the dignity of the princes and sovereigns, the court will surely give him a death sentence, and the great king will die in the East Palace ahead of the vassals.

古文：於是气怨结而不扬，涕满匡而横流，即起，历阶而去。
现代文：于是，伍被怨哀之气郁结胸中而神色黯然，泪水盈眶而满面流淌，即刻站起身，一级级走下台阶离去了。
English: As a result, Wu was overcome with a gloomy mood, with tears streaming down his face. He immediately stood up and walked down the steps to leave.

古文：王有孽子不害，最长，王弗爱，王、王后、太子皆不以为子兄数。
现代文：淮南王有个庶出的儿子名叫刘不害，年纪最大，淮南王不喜欢他，王后和太子也都不把他视为儿子或兄长。
English: King Huainan had an illegitimate son named Liu Fushong, who was the oldest. King Huainan did not like him, and neither the queen nor the prince regarded him as a son or elder brother.

古文：不害有子建，材高有气，常怨望太子不省其父；又怨时诸侯皆得分子弟为侯，而淮南独二子，一为太子，建父独不得为侯。
现代文：刘不害有儿子名叫刘建，他才高负气，时常怨恨太子不来问候自己的父亲；又埋怨当时诸侯王都可以分封子弟为诸侯，而淮南王只有两个儿子，一个当了太子，唯独刘建父亲不得封侯。
English: Liu did not have a son named Liu Jian, he was arrogant and often resented that the prince did not come to greet his father. He also complained that at that time all princes could appoint their sons as princes, but the King of Huainan had only two sons, one became the prince, but Liu Jian's father was not allowed to appoint princes.

古文：建阴结交，欲告败太子，以其父代之。
现代文：刘建暗中结交人，想要告发击败太子，让他的父亲取而代之。
English: Liu Jian secretly made friends and wanted to denounce the defeated prince and have his father take his place.

古文：太子知之，数捕系而榜笞建。
现代文：太子知悉此事，多次拘囚并拷打刘建。
English: When the crown prince learned of this, he arrested and tortured Liu Jian several times.

古文：建具知太子之谋欲杀汉中尉，即使所善寿春庄芷以元朔六年上书於天子曰： 毒药苦於口利於病，忠言逆於耳利於行。
现代文：刘建尽知太子意欲杀害朝廷中尉的阴谋，就让和自己私交很好的寿春县人庄芷在元朔六年向天子上书说： 毒药苦口利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。
English: Liu Jian was fully aware of the prince's intention to kill the imperial lieutenant's plot, so he had Zhuang Zheng, a person from Shuchun County with whom he had a good personal relationship, write a letter to the heavens in the sixth year of the Yuan Shuo, saying: "The bitter taste of poison is good for illness, and the contrary ear of honest advice is good for action."

古文：今淮南王孙建，材能高，淮南王王后荼、荼子太子迁常疾害建。
现代文：如今淮南王的孙子刘建才能高，淮南王后荼和荼的儿子太子刘迁常常妒忌迫害他。
English: Nowadays, Liu Jian, the grandson of the King of Huainan, is very talented. The Prince Liu Qian, the son of the Queen of Huainan and his wife, is often jealous and persecutes him.

古文：建父不害无罪，擅数捕系，欲杀之。
现代文：刘建父亲刘不害无罪，他们多次拘囚想杀害他。
English: Liu Jian's father, Liu Nuxin, is innocent. They have tried to kill him many times.

古文：今建在，可徵问，具知淮南阴事。 
现代文：今有刘建人在，可召来问讯，他尽知淮南王的隐秘。 
English: Now that Liu Jian is here, he can be summoned for questioning. He knows all the secrets of King Huainan.

古文：书闻，上以其事下廷尉，廷尉下河南治。
现代文：书奏上达，皇上将此事交付廷尉，廷尉又下达河南郡府审理。
English: A report was submitted, and the emperor referred the matter to the imperial lieutenant, who in turn sent it to the Henan county government for trial.

古文：是时故辟阳侯孙审卿善丞相公孙弘，怨淮南厉王杀其大父，乃深购淮南事於弘，弘乃疑淮南有畔逆计谋，深穷治其狱。
现代文：这时，原辟阳侯的孙子审卿与丞相公孙弘交好，他仇恨淮南厉王杀死自己的祖父，就极力向公孙弘构陷淮南王的罪状，于是公孙弘怀疑淮南王有叛逆的阴谋，决意深入追究查办此案。
English: At this time, the grandson of the former Yang governor, the Procurator-General, was on good terms with the prime minister, Gongsun Hong. He hated Huainan Li Wang for killing his grandfather, and tried his best to frame King Huainan. Therefore, Gongsun Hong suspected that King Huainan had a traitorous plot, and decided to investigate the case thoroughly.

古文：河南治建，辞引淮南太子及党与。
现代文：河南郡府审问刘建，他供出了淮南王太子及其朋党。
English: The Henan County Government interrogated Liu Jian, and he provided information about the Crown Prince of Huainan and his cronies.

古文：淮南王患之，欲发，问伍被曰： 汉廷治乱？ 
现代文：淮南王担忧事态严重，意欲举兵反叛，就向伍被问道： 汉朝的天下太平不太平？ 
English: King Huainan was worried about the serious state of affairs and wanted to raise an army to rebel, so he asked Xiangwu: Is the world of the Han Dynasty peaceful?

古文：伍被曰： 天下治。 
现代文：伍被回答： 天下太平。 
English: Wu was answered: The world is at peace.

古文：王意不说，谓伍被曰： 公何以言天下治也？ 
现代文：淮南王心里不高兴，对伍被说： 您根据什么说天下太平呢？ 
English: Huainan Wang was not happy in his heart, and said to Wu: On what basis do you say that the world is at peace?

古文：被曰： 被窃观朝廷之政，君臣之义，父子之亲，夫妇之别，长幼之序，皆得其理，上之举错遵古之道，风俗纪纲未有所缺也。
现代文：伍被回答： 臣私下观察朝政，君臣间的礼义，父子间的亲情，夫妻间的区别，长幼间的秩序，都合乎应有的原则，皇上施政遵循古代的治国之道，风俗和法度都没有缺失。
English: Wu was answered: The courtier privately observes the court politics, the courtesy between monarchs and subjects, the affection between father and son, the difference between husband and wife, and the order between elders and children, according to the proper principles, the emperor's administration follows the ancient way of governing the country, and there is no lack of customs and laws.

古文：重装富贾，周流天下，道无不通，故交易之道行。
现代文：满载货物的富商周行天下，道路无处不畅通，因此贸易之事盛行。
English: Wealthy merchants loaded with goods travel around the world, and the roads are not smooth everywhere, so trade is prevalent.

古文：南越宾服，羌僰入献，东瓯入降，广长榆，开朔方，匈奴折翅伤翼，失援不振。
现代文：南越称臣归服，羌僰进献物产，东瓯内迁降汉，朝廷拓广长榆塞，开辟朔方郡，使匈奴折翅伤翼，失去援助而萎靡不振。
English: South Vietnam claimed that its vassals had submitted to it, and advanced with the donation of goods. East Vietnam moved to the Han Dynasty, and the imperial court expanded its territory and opened up the Shuofang County, which made the Xiongnu lose their wings and suffer from the loss of aid.

古文：虽未及古太平之时，然犹为治也。 
现代文：这虽然还不赶不上古代的太平盛世，但也算是天下安定了。 
English: Although this is still not enough to catch up with the ancient Taiping prosperity, it is also considered to be a stable world.

古文：王怒，被谢死罪。
现代文：淮南王大怒，伍被连忙告谢死罪。
English: King Huainan flew into a rage, and Wu was promptly sentenced to death.

古文：王又谓被曰： 山东即有兵，汉必使大将军将而制山东，公以为大将军何如人也？ 
现代文：淮南王又对伍被说： 崤山以东若发生兵战，朝廷必使大将军卫青来统兵镇压，您认为大将军时怎样一个人呢？ 
English: Huainan Wang also said to Wu: If there is a military battle east of Lushan, the imperial court will certainly make General Wei Qing come to suppress the troops. What do you think of the general?

古文：被曰： 被所善者黄义，从大将军击匈奴，还，告被曰： 大将军遇士大夫有礼，於士卒有恩，众皆乐为之用。
现代文：伍被说： 我的好朋友黄义，曾跟随大将军攻打匈奴，归来告诉我说： 大将军对待士大夫有礼貌，对士卒有恩德，众人都乐意为他效劳。
English: Wu was told: My good friend Huang Yi, who once followed the general to attack the Huns, came back to tell me: The general treats the officers with courtesy, is kind to the soldiers, and everyone is happy to serve him.

古文：骑上下山若蜚，材幹绝人。 
现代文：大将军骑马上下山冈疾驶如飞，才能出众过人。 
English: A general riding a horse down a mountain and galloping like a bird can be outstanding.

古文：被以为材能如此，数将习兵，未易当也。
现代文：我认为他武艺这般高强，屡次率兵征战通晓军事，不容易抵挡。
English: I think his martial arts skills are so strong, he has repeatedly led soldiers to war and is familiar with military affairs, it is not easy to resist.

古文：及谒者曹梁使长安来，言大将军号令明，当敌勇敢，常为士卒先。
现代文：又谒者曹梁出使长安归来，说大将军号令严明，对敌作战勇敢，时常身先士卒。
English: Cao Liang, who sent the envoy to Chang'an, also returned, saying that the general's orders were clear, he fought bravely against the enemy, and he was always the first.

古文：休舍，穿井未通，须士卒尽得水，乃敢饮。
现代文：安营扎寨休息，井未凿通时，必须士兵人人喝上水，他才肯饮。
English: When setting up camp and resting, and the well has not been dug, every soldier must drink water before he is willing to drink.

古文：军罢，卒尽已度河，乃度。
现代文：军队出征归来，士兵渡河已毕，他才过河。
English: When the army returned from the war, the soldiers had already crossed the river, and he had just crossed the river.

古文：皇太后所赐金帛，尽以赐军吏。
现代文：皇太后赏给的钱财丝帛，他都转赐手下的军官。
English: All the money and riches that the Empress Dowager gave him, he gave to his officers.

古文：虽古名将弗过也。 
现代文：即使古代名将也无人比得过他。 
English: Even the great players of ancient times were no match for him.

古文：王默然。
现代文：淮南王听后沉默无语。
English: Huainan Wang was speechless after listening.

古文：淮南王见建已徵治，恐国阴事且觉，欲发，被又以为难，乃复问被曰： 公以为吴兴兵是邪非也？ 
现代文：淮南王眼看刘建被召受审，害怕国中密谋造反之事败露，想抢先起兵，但是伍被认为难以成事，于是淮南王再问他道： 您认为当年吴王兴兵造反是对还是错？ 
English: Seeing Liu Jian being summoned for trial, King Huainan was afraid that the plot to rebel in the country would be exposed and wanted to take the lead in starting the army, but Wu was considered difficult to accomplish, so King Huainan asked him again: Do you think that Wu Wangxing's rebellion was right or wrong?

古文：被曰： 以为非也。
现代文：伍被说： 我认为错了。
English: "I think it's wrong," Wu was quoted as saying.

古文：吴王至富贵也，举事不当，身死丹徒，头足异处，子孙无遗类。
现代文：吴王富贵已极，却做错了事，身死丹徒，头足分家，殃及子孙无人幸存。
English: Wu Wang was extremely wealthy, but he did the wrong thing. He died a pauper, his family was divided, and none of his children or grandchildren survived.

古文：臣闻吴王悔之甚。
现代文：臣听说吴王后悔异常。
English: The vassal heard that King Wu was extremely remorseful.

古文：原王孰虑之，无为吴王之所悔。 
现代文：希望大王仔细考虑这件事，不要再有吴王那样的悔恨。 
English: It is hoped that the king will carefully consider this matter and will not have the same remorse as King Wu.

古文：王曰： 男子之所死者一言耳。
现代文：淮南王说： 男子汉可以为了自己说出的一句话去死。
English: Huainan Wang said: A man can die for a word he says.

古文：且吴何知反，汉将一日过成皋者四十馀人。
现代文：况且吴王哪里懂得造反，竟让汉将一日之内有四十多人闯过了成皋关隘。
English: Moreover, the king of Wu, who knew how to rebel, allowed more than forty Han generals to break through Chengyu Pass in a single day.

古文：今我令楼缓先要成皋之口，周被下颍川兵塞轘辕、伊阙之道，陈定发南阳兵守武关。
现代文：现在我令楼缓首先扼住成皋关口，令周被攻下颖川郡率兵堵住轘辕关、伊阙关的道路，令陈定率南阳郡的军队把守武关。
English: Now, I ordered Lou Ye first to choke off Chengyu Pass, ordered Zhou Cao to block the roads of Yingchuan County and Yili Pass, and ordered the army of Nanyang County to guard Wuguan Pass.

古文：河南太守独有雒阳耳，何足忧。
现代文：河南郡太守只剩有洛阳罢了，有什么值得忧虑的。
English: The governor of Henan County only has Luoyang left, so there is nothing to worry about.

古文：然此北尚有临晋关、河东、上党与河内、赵国。
现代文：不过，这北面还有临晋关、河东郡、上党郡和河内郡、赵国。
English: However, there are also Linjin Pass, Hedong County, Shangdang County, Hanoi County and Zhao Province to the north.

古文：人言曰 绝成皋之口，天下不通 。
现代文：人们说 扼断成皋关口，天下就不能通行了 。
English: People say, "If you cut off the gateway to the world, the world will not be able to pass."

古文：据三川之险，招山东之兵，举事如此，公以为何如？ 
现代文：我们凭借雄据三川之地的成皋险关，招集崤山之东各郡国的军队响应，这样起事，您认为怎么样？ 
English: By virtue of our stronghold in the land of Mikawa, we have entered the dangerous pass of Chengyi, and called in the armies of the counties east of Lushan to respond. What do you think of such an uprising?

古文：被曰： 臣见其祸，未见其福也。 
现代文：伍被答道： 臣看到它的灾祸，看不见它的福运。 
English: Wu was answered: The vassal sees his misfortune, but does not see his good fortune.

古文：王曰： 左吴、赵贤、硃骄如皆以为有福，什事九成，公独以为有祸无福，何也？ 
现代文：淮南王说： 左吴、赵贤、朱骄如都认为有福运，十之有九会成功。您偏偏认为有祸无福，为什么呢？ 
English: Huainan Wang said: Zuo Wu, Zhao Xian, Zhu Ronglu all believe that there is good fortune, and nine out of ten will succeed. You just think that there is misfortune, why?

古文：被曰： 大王之群臣近幸素能使众者，皆前系诏狱，馀无可用者。 
现代文：伍被说： 受大王宠信的群臣中平素能号令众人的，都在前次皇上诏办的罪案中被拘囚了，余下的人没有可以重用的。 
English: Wu was told, "Among the courtiers who were favored by the great king, all of those who were able to give orders were taken prisoner in the previous imperial edict, and there are no others who can be reused.

古文：王曰： 陈胜、吴广无立锥之地，千人之聚，起於大泽，奋臂大呼而天下响应，西至於戏而兵百二十万。
现代文：淮南王说： 陈胜、吴广身无立锥之地，聚集起一千人，在大泽乡起事，奋臂大呼造反，天下就群起响应，他们西行到达戏水时已有一百二十万人相随。
English: Huainan Wang said: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang had no place to stand. They gathered a thousand people to rise up in Dazawa Township and shouted loudly for rebellion. The whole world responded in droves. By the time they reached the west coast, 1.2 million people were already following them.

古文：今吾国虽小，然而胜兵者可得十馀万，非直適戍之众，釠凿棘矜也，公何以言有祸无福？ 
现代文：现今我国虽小，可是胜任作战的壮士就有十多万，他们绝非被迫戍边的乌合之众，所持也不是木弩和戟柄，您为什么说有灾祸而没有福运呢？ 
English: Today, although our country is small, there are more than one hundred thousand able-bodied men capable of fighting. They are by no means a rabble forced to fight, nor do they carry wooden ploughs and pickaxes. Why do you say that there is disaster but no good fortune?

古文：被曰： 往者秦为无道，残贼天下。
现代文：伍被说： 从前秦王朝暴虐无道，残害天下百姓。
English: Wu was told: From before the Qin Dynasty, the tyranny was ruthless and brutalized the people of the world.

古文：兴万乘之驾，作阿房之宫，收太半之赋，发闾左之戍，父不宁子，兄不便弟，政苛刑峻，天下熬然若焦，民皆引领而望，倾耳而听，悲号仰天，叩心而怨上，故陈胜大呼，天下响应。
现代文：朝廷征发民间万辆车驾，营建阿房宫，收取百姓大半的收入作为赋税，还征调家居闾左在贫民去远戌边疆，弄得父亲无法保护儿子平安，哥哥不能让弟弟过上安逸生活，政令苛严刑法峻急，天下人忍受百般熬煎几近枯焦。百姓都伸长脖子盼望，侧耳倾听，仰首向天悲呼，捶胸怨恨皇上，因而陈胜大呼造反，天下人立刻响应。
English: The imperial court requisitioned and distributed tens of thousands of private cars, built the Afang Palace, collected the majority of the people's income as taxes, and also levied and transferred households from the poor to the far-away frontier, making the father unable to protect his son's safety, the brother unable to let his brother live a comfortable life, the government decree was harsh and the criminal law was severe, and the people of the world endured various kinds of boiling, almost withered. The people all stretched their necks in hope, listened with their ears, raised their heads to the sky to mourn, and beat their chests to resent the emperor. As a result, Chen Shengda called for

古文：当今陛下临制天下，一齐海内，汎爱蒸庶，布德施惠。
现代文：如今皇上临朝治理天下，统一海内四方，泛爱普天黎民，广施德政恩惠。
English: Today, the Emperor Lin reigns over the world, unifies the four quarters of the country, loves all the people, and bestows great political favors.

古文：口虽未言，声疾雷霆，令虽未出，化驰如神，心有所怀，威动万里，下之应上，犹影响也。
现代文：他即使不开口讲话，声音传播也如雷霆般迅疾；诏令即使不颁布，而教化的飞速推广也似有神力；他心有所想，便威动万里，下民响应主上，就好比影之随形、响之应声一般。
English: Even if he does not speak, the sound propagation is as rapid as thunder; even if the edict is not promulgated, the rapid promotion of enlightenment seems to have divine power; if he has a thought, he will move thousands of miles, and the people respond to the Lord, it is like the shadow of the shadow and the sound of the echo.

古文：而大将军材能不特章邯、杨熊也。
现代文：而且大将军卫青的才能不是秦将章邯、杨熊可比的。
English: Moreover, the talent of General Wei Qing is not comparable to that of Qin General Zhang Ye and Yang Xiong.

古文：大王以陈胜、吴广谕之，被以为过矣。 
现代文：因此，大王您以陈胜、吴广反秦来自喻，我认为不当。 
English: Therefore, I think it is inappropriate for you to use Chen Sheng and Wu Guang as anti-Qin metaphors.

古文：王曰： 苟如公言，不可徼幸邪？ 
现代文：淮南王说： 假如真像你说的那样，不可以侥幸成功吗？ 
English: Huainan Wang said: If it's really like you said, can't it be a fluke success?

古文：被曰： 被有愚计。 
现代文：伍被说： 我倒有一条愚蠢的计策。 
English: Wo was told: I have a stupid plan.

古文：王曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：淮南王说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Huainan Wang said: What should we do?

古文：被曰： 当今诸侯无异心，百姓无怨气。
现代文：伍被答道： 当今诸侯对朝廷没有二心，百姓对朝廷没有怨气。
English: Wu Xuan replied: Today's lords have no ill will toward the imperial court, and the people have no grudge against the imperial court.

古文：朔方之郡田地广，水草美，民徙者不足以实其地。
现代文：但朔方郡田地广阔，水草丰美，已迁徙的百姓还不足以充实开发那个地区。
English: But the fields of Shuofang County are vast, the aquatic plants are abundant, and the people who have migrated are not enough to fully develop the area.

古文：臣之愚计，可伪为丞相御史请书，徙郡国豪桀任侠及有耐罪以上，赦令除其罪，产五十万以上者，皆徙其家属朔方之郡，益发甲卒，急其会日。
现代文：臣的愚计是，可以伪造丞相、御史写给皇上的奏章，请求再迁徙各郡国的豪强、义士和处以耏罪以上的刑徒充边，下诏赦免犯人的刑罪，凡家产在五十万钱以上的人，都携同家属迁往朔方郡，而且更多调发一些士兵监督，催迫他们如期到达。
English: The minister's foolish scheme was that he could forge the report written to the emperor by the prime minister and the minister of history, and request that the brave and the strong, the righteous, and the convicts who had been sentenced to more than a fine should be resettled in each county and country, and that the criminal offenses of the convicts should be pardoned, and that all people with a family income of more than five hundred thousand yuan should move to Shuofang County with their families, and that more soldiers should be dispatched to supervise and urge them to arrive on schedule.

古文：又伪为左右都司空上林中都官诏狱书，诸侯太子幸臣。
现代文：再伪造宗正府左右都司空、上林苑和京师各官府下达的皇上亲发的办案文书，去逮捕诸侯的太子和宠幸之臣。
English: He also forged the case-handling documents issued by the emperor himself, which were issued by various government offices, such as Sikyo, Shanglin Court, and Beijing Division, all of which were located in and around Soseifu, in order to arrest the princes and favored vassals of the lords.

古文：如此则民怨，诸侯惧，即使辩武随而说之，傥可徼幸什得一乎？ 
现代文：如此一来就会民怨四起，诸侯恐惧，紧接着让摇唇鼓舌的说客去鼓动说服他们造反，或许可以侥幸得到十分之一的成功把握吧！ 
English: In this way, there will be popular resentment, the fear of the princes, and then let the lip-smacking lobbyists to encourage and persuade them to rebel, perhaps they can get a tenth of success by chance!

古文：王曰： 此可也。
现代文：淮南王说： 此计可行。
English: Huainan Wang said: This is feasible.

古文：虽然，吾以为不至若此。 
现代文：虽然你的多虑有道理，但我以为成就此事并不至于难到如此程度。 
English: Although your misgivings are justified, I don't think it will be that difficult to achieve.

古文：於是王乃令官奴入宫，作皇帝玺，丞相、御史、大将军、军吏、中二千石、都官令、丞印，及旁近郡太守、都尉印，汉使节法冠，欲如伍被计。
现代文：于是淮南王命令官奴入宫，伪造皇上印玺，丞相、御史、大将军、军史、中二千石、京师各官府令和县丞的官印，邻近郡国的太守和都尉的官印，以及朝廷使臣和法官所戴的官帽，打算一切按伍被的计策行事。
English: As a result, King Huainan ordered the official slaves to enter the palace and forge the imperial seal, the seal of the prime minister, the minister of history, the general, the military history, the middle two thousand stones, the official seal of the government officials and the county officials, the official seal of the governor and the captain of the neighboring county, and the official cap worn by the court envoys and judges, intending to do everything according to the plan.

古文：使人伪得罪而西，事大将军、丞相；一日发兵，使人即刺杀大将军青，而说丞相下之，如发蒙耳。
现代文：淮南王还派人假装获罪后逃出淮南国而西入长安，给大将军和丞相供事，意欲一旦发兵起事，就让他们立即刺杀大将军卫青，然后再说服丞相屈从臣服，便如同揭去一块盖布那么轻而易举了。
English: King Huainan also sent someone to pretend to be guilty and escape from Huainan to the west and enter Chang'an, to serve the general and the prime minister. If he wanted to attack, he would have them immediately assassinate the general Wei Qing, and then persuade the prime minister to submit. It was as easy as removing a piece of cloth.

古文：王欲发国中兵，恐其相、二千石不听。
现代文：淮南王想要发动国中的军队，又担心自己的国相和大臣们不听命。
English: King Huainan wanted to mobilize the troops in the country, and he was worried that his ministers and ministers would not follow his orders.

古文：王乃与伍被谋，先杀相、二千石；伪失火宫中，相、二千石救火，至即杀之。
现代文：他就和伍被密谋先杀死国相与二千石大臣，为此假装宫中失火，国相、二千石大臣必来救火，人一到就杀死他们。
English: He and Wu were conspired to kill the minister of state and the minister of two thousand koku first, for which they pretended that there was a fire in the palace, the minister of state and the minister of two thousand koku would come to put out the fire and kill them as soon as they arrived.

古文：计未决，又欲令人衣求盗衣，持羽檄，从东方来，呼曰 南越兵入界 ，欲因以发兵。
现代文：谋议未定，又计划派人身穿抓捕盗贼的兵卒的衣服，手持羽檄，从南方驰来，大呼 南越兵入界了 ，以借机发兵进军。
English: The plan was not finalized, and it was planned to send a person dressed as a soldier to catch thieves, holding a feather duster, coming from the south, shouting that the South Vietnamese soldiers had entered the border, and taking the opportunity to send troops to march.

古文：乃使人至庐江、会稽为求盗，未发。
现代文：于是他们派人到庐江郡、会稽郡实施冒充追捕盗贼的计策，没有立即发兵。
English: As a result, they sent people to Minjiang County and Huiqi County to implement the strategy of pretending to pursue the thieves, but did not immediately send troops.

古文：王问伍被曰： 吾举兵西乡，诸侯必有应我者；即无应，柰何？ 
现代文：淮南王问伍被说： 我率兵向西挺进，诸侯一定该有响应的人；要是没人响应怎么办？ 
English: Huainan Wang asked Wu was told: I led the troops to advance to the west, the princes must have a response person; if no one responds, what should I do?

古文：被曰： 南收衡山以击庐江，有寻阳之船，守下雉之城，结九江之浦，绝豫章之口，彊弩临江而守，以禁南郡之下，东收江都、会稽，南通劲越，屈彊江淮间，犹可得延岁月之寿。 
现代文：伍被回答说： 可向南夺取衡山国来攻打庐江郡，占有寻阳的战船，守住下雉的城池，扼住九江江口，阻断豫章河水北入长江的彭蠡湖口这条通道，以强弓劲弩临江设防，来禁止南郡军队沿江而下；再东进攻占江都国、会稽郡，和南方强有力的越国结交，这样在长江淮水之间屈伸自如，犹可拖延一些时日。 
English: Wu was answered: It is possible to seize Hengshan Province to the south to attack Minjiang County, occupy the warships of Xuanyang, hold the city of Jiaozuo, hold the mouth of the Jiujiang River, block the passage of the Yuzhang River to the north into the Yangtze River at the mouth of Penghu Lake, and set up fortifications with a strong bow to prohibit the Nan County army from going down the river; attack further east to occupy Jiangdu Province and Huiqi County, and establish diplomatic relations with the powerful Vietnam in the south, so that it can stretch freely between the Yangtze River and the Huai River, and delay some time.

古文：王曰： 善，无以易此。
现代文：淮南王说： 很好，没有更好的计策了。
English: Huainan Wang said: Very good, there is no better strategy.

古文：急则走越耳。 
现代文：要是事态危急就奔往越国吧。 
English: If the situation is critical, go to Vietnam.

古文：於是廷尉以王孙建辞连淮南王太子迁闻。
现代文：于是廷尉把淮南王孙刘建供词中牵连出淮南王太子刘迁的事呈报了皇上。
English: Therefore, the courtier reported to the emperor the matter of Liu Qian, the crown prince of Huainan, who was implicated in the confession of Liu Jian, the king of Huainan.

古文：上遣廷尉监因拜淮南中尉，逮捕太子。
现代文：皇上派廷尉临趁前去拜见淮南国中尉的机会，逮捕太子。
English: The emperor sent the courtier Jin Jin to seize the opportunity to visit the lieutenant of Huainan Province and arrest the prince.

古文：至淮南，淮南王闻，与太子谋召相、二千石，欲杀而发兵。
现代文：廷尉临来到淮南国，淮南王得知，和太子谋划，打算召国相和二千石大臣前来，杀死他们就发兵。
English: When the courtier came to Huainan, the king of Huainan learned that he was plotting with the prince and planned to call the minister of state and the minister of 2,000 koku to come and kill them.

古文：召相，相至；内史以出为解。
现代文：召国相入宫，国相来了；内史因外出得以脱身。
English: Invited to the imperial court, the imperial court official came; Naishi was able to escape because he went out.

古文：中尉曰： 臣受诏使，不得见王。 
现代文：中尉则说： 臣在迎接皇上派来的使臣，不能前来见王。 
English: The lieutenant said: "The vassal is receiving an envoy sent by the emperor and cannot come to see the king.

古文：王念独杀相而内史中尉不来，无益也，即罢相。
现代文：淮南王心想只杀死国相一人而内史、中尉不肯前来，没有什么益处，就罢手放走了国相。
English: Huainan Wang wanted to kill only the minister of state, but the secretary and lieutenant did not want to come, there was no benefit, so he let go of the minister of state.

古文：王犹豫，计未决。
现代文：他再三犹豫，定不下行动的计策。
English: He hesitated again and again, unable to decide on a course of action.

古文：太子念所坐者谋刺汉中尉，所与谋者已死，以为口绝，乃谓王曰： 群臣可用者皆前系，今无足与举事者。
现代文：太子想到自己所犯的是阴谋刺杀朝廷中尉的罪，而参与密谋的人已死，便以为活口都堵住断绝，就对父王说： 群臣中可依靠的先前都拘捕了，现今已没有可以倚重举事的人。
English: The prince thought that what he had committed was the crime of plotting to assassinate a court lieutenant, and that those who had participated in the conspiracy were dead. He thought that all living mouths had been cut off, and he said to his father: Those who could be relied on among the courtiers had all been arrested before, and now there is no one who can be relied on.

古文：王以非时发，恐无功，臣原会逮。 
现代文：您在时机不成熟时发兵，恐怕不会成功，臣甘愿前往廷尉处受捕。 
English: I am afraid that you will not succeed in sending troops when the time is not ripe. My vassal is willing to go to the palace to be arrested.

古文：王亦偷欲休，即许太子。
现代文：淮南王心中也暗想罢手，就答应了太子的请求。
English: King Huainan also secretly wanted to give up, so he agreed to the prince's request.

古文：太子即自刭，不殊。
现代文：于是太子刎颈自杀，却未能丧命。
English: As a result, the prince strangled himself, but he did not die.

古文：伍被自诣吏，因告与淮南王谋反，反踪迹具如此。
现代文：伍被独自往见执法官吏，告发了自己参与淮南王谋反的事情，将谋反的详情全盘供了出来。
English: Wu was allowed to see the law enforcement officials on his own and denounced his participation in Huainan Wang's rebellion, and provided all the details of the rebellion.

古文：吏因捕太子、王后，围王宫，尽求捕王所与谋反宾客在国中者，索得反具以闻。
现代文：法吏因而逮捕了太子、王后，包围了王宫，将国中参与谋反的淮南王的宾客全部搜查抓捕起来，还搜出了谋反的器具，然后书奏向上呈报。
English: As a result, the legal officials arrested the prince and the queen, surrounded the royal palace, searched and arrested all the guests of King Huainan who were involved in the rebellion, and also found the equipment for the rebellion, and then reported the incident to the emperor.

古文：上下公卿治，所连引与淮南王谋反列侯二千石豪杰数千人，皆以罪轻重受诛。
现代文：皇上将此案交给公卿大臣审理，案中牵连出与淮南王一同谋反的列侯、二千石、地方豪强有几千人，一律按罪刑轻重处以死刑。
English: The emperor referred the case to the court noble and minister for trial. The case implicated the feudal lords who plotted the rebellion with King Huainan, as well as 2,000 koku and several thousand local powerful people. All of them were sentenced to death according to the severity of the crime.

古文：衡山王赐，淮南王弟也，当坐收，有司请逮捕衡山王。
现代文：衡山王刘赐，是淮南王的弟弟，被判同罪应予收捕，负责办案的官员请求逮捕衡山王。
English: Hengshan King Liu Qi, the younger brother of Huainan King, was convicted of the same crime and should be arrested. The official in charge of the case requested the arrest of Hengshan King.

古文：天子曰： 诸侯各以其国为本，不当相坐。
现代文：天子说： 侯王各以自己的封国为立身之本，不应彼此牵连。
English: The heavenly son said: Each lord should base himself on his own fiefdom, and they should not be entangled with each other.

古文：与诸侯王列侯会肄丞相诸侯议。 
现代文：你们与诸侯王、列侯一道去跟丞相会集商议吧。 
English: You, together with the princes and vassals, should go and consult with the Council of Elders.

古文：赵王彭祖、列侯臣让等四十三人议，皆曰： 淮南王安甚大逆无道，谋反明白，当伏诛。 
现代文：赵王彭祖、列侯曹襄等四十三人商议后，都说： 淮南王刘安极其大逆无道，谋反之罪明白无疑，应当诛杀不赦。 
English: After the forty-three people, including Zhao Wang, Peng Zu, and the vassal Cao Xiang, had a discussion, they all said: Liu An, the king of Huainan, was extremely rebellious and had no morals. The crime of conspiring to rebel was clear and beyond doubt, and he should be killed without mercy.

古文：胶西王臣端议曰： 淮南王安废法行邪，怀诈伪心，以乱天下，荧惑百姓，倍畔宗庙，妄作妖言。
现代文：胶西王刘端发表意见说： 淮南王刘安无视王法肆行邪恶之事，心怀欺诈，扰乱天下，迷惑百姓，背叛祖宗，妄生邪说。
English: Jiaoxi King Liu Duan expressed his opinion, saying: Huainan King Liu An disregarded the royal law and carried out evil things, harboring fraud, disturbing the world, confusing the people, betraying the ancestors, and giving birth to evil theories.

古文：春秋曰 臣无将，将而诛 。
现代文：《春秋》曾说 臣子不可率众作乱，率众作乱就应诛杀 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" once said that a vassal should not lead the crowd to make a disturbance, but should lead the crowd to make a disturbance and be killed.

古文：安罪重於将，谋反形已定。
现代文：刘安的罪行比率众作乱更严重，其谋反态势已成定局。
English: Liu An's crime rate is more serious than that of the rioters, and his rebellion has become a foregone conclusion.

古文：臣端所见其书节印图及他逆无道事验明白，甚大逆无道，当伏其法。
现代文：臣所见他伪造的文书、符节、印墨、地图以及其它大逆无道的事实都有明白的证据，其罪极其大逆无道，理应依法处死。
English: The documents, symbols, ink, maps, and other evidence of high treason and villainy that his subjects saw him forge are clear evidence that his crime was extremely high treason and villainy, and he should have been executed according to the law.

古文：而论国吏二百石以上及比者，宗室近幸臣不在法中者，不能相教，当皆免官削爵为士伍，毋得宦为吏。
现代文：至于淮南国中官秩二百石以上和比二百石少的官吏，宗室的宠幸之臣中未触犯法律的人，他们不能尽责匡正阻止淮南王的谋反，也都应当免官削夺爵位贬为士兵，今后不许再当官为吏。
English: As for the middle-ranking officials of Huainan with a rank of more than 200 koku and those with a rank of less than 200 koku, as well as the favored vassals of the royal family who did not violate the law, if they could not do their duty to prevent the rebellion of the king of Huainan, they should also be removed from office, stripped of their titles and demoted to soldiers, and should not be allowed to serve as officials in the future.

古文：其非吏，他赎死金二斤八两。
现代文：那些并非官吏的其它罪犯，可用二斤八两黄金抵偿死罪。
English: Other criminals, who were not government officials, could be compensated for the death penalty with two pounds eight ounces of gold.

古文：以章臣安之罪，使天下明知臣子之道，毋敢复有邪僻倍畔之意。 
现代文：朝廷应公开揭露刘安的罪恶，好让天下人都清楚地懂得为臣之道，不敢再有邪恶的背叛皇上的野心。 
English: The imperial court should publicly expose Liu An's crimes, so that the people of the world can clearly understand the way to be a vassal and no longer dare to have evil ambitions to betray the emperor.

古文：丞相弘、廷尉汤等以闻，天子使宗正以符节治王。
现代文：丞相公孙弘、廷尉张汤等把大家的议论上奏，天子便派宗正手持符节去审判淮南王。
English: The prime minister, Sun Hong, and the courtier, Zhang Tang, listened to everyone's arguments, and the emperor sent Zong Zheng to judge the king of Huainan, holding a rune in his hand.

古文：未至，淮南王安自刭杀。
现代文：宗正还未行至淮南国，淮南王刘安已提前自刎而死。
English: Zong Zheng had not yet traveled to Huainan, and Liu An, the king of Huainan, had already committed suicide.

古文：王后荼、太子迁诸所与谋反者皆族。
现代文：王后荼、太子刘迁和所有共同谋反的人都被满门杀尽。
English: Wang Houyi, Prince Liu Qian, and all those who plotted the rebellion together were all killed.

古文：天子以伍被雅辞多引汉之美，欲勿诛。
现代文：天子因为伍被劝阻淮南王刘安谋反时言词雅正，说了很多称美朝政的话，想不杀他。
English: Because Wu was dissuaded by Tianzi, Liu An, the king of Huainan, plotted against the times and spoke words of righteousness. He said a lot of words praising the U.S. and North Korea, and he did not want to kill him.

古文：廷尉汤曰： 被首为王画反谋，被罪无赦。 
现代文：廷尉张汤说： 伍被最先为淮南王策划反叛的计谋，他的罪不可赦免。 
English: Zhang Tang, a courtier, said, "Wu was the first to plot rebellion for King Huainan. His crime cannot be pardoned.

古文：遂诛被。
现代文：于是杀了伍被。
English: So he killed Wu Quan.

古文：国除为九江郡。
现代文：淮南国被废为九江郡。
English: Huainan Province was abolished and became Jiujiang County.

古文：衡山王赐，王后乘舒生子三人，长男爽为太子，次男孝，次女无采。
现代文：衡山王名刘赐，王后乘舒生了三个孩子，长男刘爽立为太子，二儿刘孝，三女刘无采。
English: The king of Hengshan was named Liu Zhi, and his queen, Jingshu, gave birth to three children. The eldest son, Liu Shuangliu, became the crown prince, the second son, Liu Xiao, and the third daughter, Liu Muchei.

古文：又姬徐来生子男女四人，美人厥姬生子二人。
现代文：又有姬妾徐来生儿女四人，妃嫔厥姬生儿女二人。
English: There were also four children born to her concubine, Xu Lai, and two children born to her concubine, Jue Ji.

古文：衡山王、淮南王兄弟相责望礼节，间不相能。
现代文：衡山王和淮南王两兄弟在礼节上相互责怪抱怨，关系疏远，不相和睦。
English: The two brothers, Hengshan Wang and Huainan Wang, blamed and complained to each other in etiquette, alienated each other, and did not get along.

古文：衡山王闻淮南王作为畔逆反具，亦心结宾客以应之，恐为所并。
现代文：衡山王闻知淮南王制造用于叛逆谋反的器具，也倾心结交宾客来防范他，深恐被他吞并。
English: The King of Hengshan heard that the King of Huainan had made tools for rebellion and plotted against him. He also made friends with guests to guard against him. He was deeply afraid of being swallowed up by him.

古文：元光六年，衡山王入朝，其谒者卫庆有方术，欲上书事天子，王怒，故劾庆死罪，彊榜服之。
现代文：元光六年，衡山王入京朝见，他的谒者卫庆懂方术，想上书请术事奉天子。衡山王很恼怒，故意告发卫庆犯下死罪，用严刑拷打逼他认可。
English: In the sixth year of Yuan Guang's reign, Hengshan Wang went to the imperial court in Beijing to see the emperor. His eunuch Wei Qing, who understood the art of the square, wanted to write a letter asking Wei Qing to serve the emperor. Hengshan Wang was very angry and deliberately accused Wei Qing of committing a capital crime, forcing him to admit it with severe torture.

古文：衡山内史以为非是，卻其狱。
现代文：衡山国内史认为不对，不肯审理此案。
English: Hengshan Domestic History thought it was wrong and refused to hear the case.

古文：王使人上书告内史，内史治，言王不直。
现代文：衡山王便指使人上书控告内史，内史被迫办案，但直言衡山王理屈。
English: Hengshan Wang then ordered people to write a complaint against Inner History, Inner History was forced to handle the case, but Hengshan Wang's logic was blunt.

古文：王又数侵夺人田，坏人冢以为田。
现代文：衡山王又多次侵夺他人田产，毁坏他人坟墓辟为田地。
English: Hengshan Wang also repeatedly seized other people's farmlands, destroyed other people's graves and turned them into fields.

古文：有司请逮治衡山王。天子不许，为置吏二百石以上。
现代文：有关部门长官请求逮捕并追究衡山王的罪责，天子不同意，只收回他原先可以自行委任本国官秩二百石以上的官吏的权力，改为由天子任命。
English: The head of the relevant department requested the arrest and prosecution of Hengshan Wang. Tianzi did not agree, but only withdrew his power to appoint officials of more than 200 koku of national official rank, and changed it to be appointed by Tianzi.

古文：衡山王以此恚，与奚慈、张广昌谋，求能为兵法候星气者，日夜从容王密谋反事。
现代文：衡山王因此心怀愤恨，和奚慈、张广昌谋划，四处访求谙熟兵法和会观测星象以占卜吉凶的人，他们日夜鼓动衡山王密谋反叛之事。
English: As a result, Hengshan Wang harbored resentment, plotted with Gong Ci and Zhang Guangchang, and visited everywhere to find people who were familiar with warfare and could observe the stars to divine good and evil. They encouraged Hengshan Wang to conspire to rebel day and night.

古文：王后乘舒死，立徐来为王后。
现代文：王后乘舒死了，衡山王立徐来为王后。
English: Queen Jingshu died, and Hengshan King appointed Xu Lai as his queen.

古文：厥姬俱幸。
现代文：厥姬也同时得到宠幸。
English: Jue Ji was also favored at the same time.

古文：两人相妒，厥姬乃恶王后徐来於太子曰： 徐来使婢蛊道杀太子母。 
现代文：两人互相嫉妒，厥姬就向太子说王后徐来的坏话。她说： 徐来指使婢女用诬蛊邪术杀害了太子的母亲。 
English: The two were jealous of each other, and Jue Ji spoke ill of Queen Xu Lai to the prince. She said: "Xu Lai ordered her maid to kill the prince's mother with black magic.

古文：太子心怨徐来。
现代文：从此太子心中怨恨徐来。
English: From then on, resentment slowly grew in the prince's heart.

古文：徐来兄至衡山，太子与饮，以刃刺伤王后兄。
现代文：徐来的哥哥来到衡山国，太子与他饮酒，席间用刀刺伤了王后的哥哥。
English: Xu Lai's brother came to Hengshan Province. The prince drank alcohol with him and stabbed the queen's brother with a knife.

古文：王后怨怒，数毁恶太子於王。
现代文：王后怨恨恼怒，屡次向衡山王诋毁太子。
English: The queen was resentful and angry, and repeatedly slandered the prince to Hengshan Wang.

古文：太子女弟无采，嫁弃归，与奴奸，又与客奸。
现代文：太子的妹妹刘无采出嫁后被休归娘家，就和奴仆通奸，又和宾客通奸。
English: The prince's sister, Liu Muchei, after she was married off and returned to her family, committed adultery with a servant and with a guest.

古文：太子数让无采，无采怒，不与太子通。
现代文：太子屡次责备刘无采，无采很恼火，不再和太子来往。
English: The prince repeatedly scolded Liu Mutei, and Mutei was very angry and no longer went out with the prince.

古文：王后闻之，即善遇无采。
现代文：王后得知此事，就殷勤关怀无采。
English: When the Queen heard of this, she was not amused.

古文：无采及中兄孝少失母，附王后，王后以计爱之，与共毁太子，王以故数击笞太子。
现代文：无采和二哥刘孝因年少便失去母亲，不免依附王后徐来，她就巧施心计爱护他们，让他们一起毁谤太子，因此衡山王多次毒打太子。
English: Wuzhong and his second brother Liu Xiaotang lost their mother at a young age, so they had to rely on Queen Xu Lai. She took great care of them and let them slander the prince together. Therefore, King Hengshan repeatedly beat the prince.

古文：元朔四年中，人有贼伤王后假母者，王疑太子使人伤之，笞太子。
现代文：元朔四年中，有人杀伤王后的继母，衡山王怀疑是太子指使人所为，就用竹板毒打太子。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Shuo era, someone killed the queen's stepmother. King Hengshan suspected that the act was instigated by the prince and severely beat the prince with a bamboo board.

古文：後王病，太子时称病不侍。
现代文：后来衡山王病了，太子经常声称有病不去服侍。
English: Later, Prince Hengshan fell ill, and the prince often claimed that he was too ill to serve.

古文：孝、王后、无采恶太子： 太子实不病，自言病，有喜色。 
现代文：刘孝、王后、刘无采都说他的坏话： 太子其实没病，而自称有病，脸上还带有喜色。 
English: Liu Xiao, the queen, and Liu Muzhe all said bad things about him: The prince is actually not sick, but he claims to be sick, and his face is full of joy.

古文：王大怒，欲废太子，立其弟孝。
现代文：衡山王大怒，想废掉他的太子名份，改立其弟刘孝。
English: Hengshan Wang was furious and wanted to abolish his title of crown prince and replace it with his brother Liu Xiao.

古文：王后知王决废太子，又欲并废孝。
现代文：王后知道衡山王已决意废除太子，就又想一并也废除刘孝。
English: The queen knew that King Hengshan had decided to abolish the prince, so she also wanted to abolish Liu Xiao.

古文：王后有侍者，善舞，王幸之，王后欲令侍者与孝乱以汙之，欲并废兄弟而立其子广代太子。
现代文：王后有一个女婢善于跳舞，衡山王宠爱她，王后打算让女仆和刘孝私通来沾污陷害他，好一起废掉太子兄弟而把自己的儿子刘广立为太子。
English: The queen had a maidservant who was good at dancing. King Hengshan loved her very much. The queen planned to have the maid and Liu Xiaozhong work together to frame him, so that together they could depose the prince's brothers and install their son Liu Guang as prince.

古文：太子爽知之，念后数恶己无已时，欲与乱以止其口。
现代文：太子刘爽知道了王后的诡计，心想王后屡次诽谤自己不肯罢休，就算计与她发生奸情来堵她的口。
English: Prince Liu Shuang knew the queen's trick, and thought that the queen had repeatedly slandered herself and refused to give up. He even planned to have an affair with her to gag her.

古文：王后饮，太子前为寿，因据王后股，求与王后卧。
现代文：一次王后饮酒，太子上前敬酒祝寿，趁势坐在了王后的大腿上，要求与她同宿。
English: Once when the queen was drinking, the prince came forward to make a toast to celebrate his birthday. He took advantage of the situation to sit on the queen's lap and asked to stay with her.

古文：王后怒，以告王。
现代文：王后很生气，把此事告诉了衡山王。
English: The queen was very angry and told King Hengshan about this.

古文：王乃召，欲缚而笞之。
现代文：于是衡山王召太子来，打算把他捆起来毒打。
English: Therefore, King Hengshan summoned the prince and planned to tie him up and beat him severely.

古文：太子知王常欲废己立其弟孝，乃谓王曰： 孝与王御者奸，无采与奴奸，王彊食，请上书。 
现代文：太子知道父王常想废掉自己而立弟弟刘孝，就对他说： 刘孝和父王宠幸的女婢通奸，无采和奴仆通奸，父王努力加餐吧，我请求给朝廷上书。 
English: The crown prince knew that his father often wanted to abolish himself and set up his younger brother Liu Xiao, so he said to him: Liu Xiao and his father's favorite female servant committed adultery, Muzhe and the servant committed adultery, father should try to increase the meal, I request to write to the court.

古文：即倍王去。
现代文：说罢背向衡山王离去了。
English: He turned his back on Hengshan Wang and left.

古文：王使人止之，莫能禁，乃自驾追捕太子。
现代文：衡山王派人去阻止他，不能奏效，就亲自驾车去追捕太子。
English: Hengshan Wang sent someone to stop him, but when that didn't work, he drove himself to hunt down the prince.

古文：太子妄恶言，王械系太子宫中。
现代文：太子乱说话，衡山王便用镣铐把他囚禁在宫中。
English: When the prince spoke out of turn, King Hengshan imprisoned him in the palace with a shackle.

古文：孝日益亲幸。
现代文：刘孝越来越受到衡山王的亲近和宠幸。
English: Liu Xiao became more and more close to and favored by Hengshan Wang.

古文：王奇孝材能，乃佩之王印，号曰将军，令居外宅，多给金钱，招致宾客。
现代文：衡山王很惊异刘孝的才能，就给他佩上王印，号称将军，让他住在宫外的府第中，给他很多钱财，用以招揽宾客。
English: King Hengshan was very surprised by Liu Xiao's talent, so he put the royal seal on him, called him a general, let him live in the capital outside the palace, and gave him a lot of money to attract guests.

古文：宾客来者，微知淮南、衡山有逆计，日夜从容劝之。
现代文：登门投靠的宾客，暗中知道淮南王、衡山王都有背叛朝廷的谋划，就日夜奉迎鼓励衡山王。
English: The guests who came to visit secretly knew that King Huainan and King Hengshan were plotting to betray the imperial court, and they welcomed and encouraged King Hengshan day and night.

古文：王乃使孝客江都人救赫、陈喜作輣车镞矢，刻天子玺，将相军吏印。
现代文：于是衡山王指派刘孝的宾客江都人救赫、陈喜制造战车和箭支，刻天子印玺和将相军吏的官印。
English: Therefore, the King of Hengshan assigned Liu Xiao's guests, the people of Jiangdu, Fu He and Chen Xi, to make chariots and arrow shafts, and to engrave the seal of the Son of Heaven and the official seal of the commander-in-chief.

古文：王日夜求壮士如周丘等，数称引吴楚反时计画，以约束。
现代文：衡山王日夜访求像周丘一样的壮士，多次称赞和例举吴楚反叛时的谋略，用它规范自己的谋反计划。
English: Hengshan Wang visited Zhouqiu day and night, praising and giving examples of Wu Chu's rebellion strategy, and using it to standardize his own rebellion plan.

古文：衡山王非敢效淮南王求即天子位，畏淮南起并其国，以为淮南已西，发兵定江淮之间而有之，望如是。
现代文：衡山王不敢仿效淮南王希冀篡夺天子之位，他害怕淮南王起事吞并自己的国家，认为等待淮南王西进之后，自己可乘虚发兵平定并占有长江和淮水之间的领地，他期望能够如愿。
English: King Hengshan did not dare to follow the example of King Huainan in his hope to usurp the throne of heaven. He was afraid that King Huainan would rise up and annex his country. He thought that after waiting for King Huainan to advance westward, he could use the fake soldiers to pacify and occupy the territory between the Yangtze River and Huai Shui. He hoped to be able to fulfill his wish.

古文：元朔五年秋，衡山王当朝，过淮南，淮南王乃昆弟语，除前卻，约束反具。
现代文：元朔五年秋，衡山王将入京朝见天子。经过淮南国时，淮南王竟说了些兄弟情谊的话，消除了从前的嫌隙，彼此约定共同制造谋反的器具。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo, King Hengshan will enter Beijing to meet the emperor. When passing through Huainan Province, King Huainan actually said some words of brotherhood, eliminated the previous rift, and agreed to jointly manufacture the equipment for rebellion.

古文：衡山王即上书谢病，上赐书不朝。
现代文：衡山王便上书推说身体有病，皇上赐书准许他不入朝。
English: King Hengshan then wrote a letter saying that he was ill, and the emperor gave him permission not to enter the imperial court.

古文：元朔六年中，衡山王使人上书请废太子爽，立孝为太子。
现代文：元朔六年中，衡山王指使人上书皇上请求废掉太子刘爽，改立刘孝为太子。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Shuo, Hengshan Wang instructed people to submit a letter to the emperor requesting the abolition of Prince Liu Shuang and the re-establishment of Liu Xiao as the prince.

古文：爽闻，即使所善白嬴之长安上书，言孝作輣车镞矢，与王御者奸，欲以败孝。
现代文：刘爽闻讯，就派和自己很要好的白嬴前往长安上书，控告刘孝私造战车箭支，还和淮南王的女侍通奸，意欲以此挫败刘孝。
English: When Liu Shuang heard the news, he and his very good friend Paige sent a letter to Chang'an, accusing Liu Xiao of building a private chariot, the Arrow Branch, and committing adultery with the lady's maid of King Huainan, intending to use this to defeat Liu Xiao.

古文：白嬴至长安，未及上书，吏捕嬴，以淮南事系。
现代文：白嬴来到长安，还没来得及上书，官吏就逮捕了他，因他与淮南王谋反事有牵连予以囚禁。
English: Bai Xuan came to Chang'an, but before he could submit his letter, officials arrested him and imprisoned him because he was implicated in conspiring with Huainan Wang.

古文：王闻爽使白嬴上书，恐言国阴事，即上书反告太子爽所为不道弃市罪事。事下沛郡治。
现代文：衡山王听说刘爽派白嬴去上书，害怕他讲出国中不可告人的隐秘，就上书反告太子刘爽干了大逆不道的事应处死罪，朝廷将此事下交沛郡审理。
English: King Hengshan heard that Liu Shuang had sent Paige to submit a letter, fearing that he would tell the country's secrets. He submitted a letter to counter-sue Prince Liu Shuang for committing treason and should be sentenced to death. The court sent the matter to Pei County for trial.

古文：元年冬，有司公卿下沛郡求捕所与淮南谋反者未得，得陈喜於衡山王子孝家。
现代文：元狩元年冬，负责办案的公卿大臣下至沛郡搜捕与淮南王共同谋反的罪犯，没有捕到，却在衡山王儿子刘孝家抓住了陈喜。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the minister of the court noble responsible for handling the case went down to Pei County to search for and arrest the criminals who conspired with Huainan Wang. They did not catch them, but they caught Chen Xi in Hengshan Wang's son Liu Xiao's house.

古文：吏劾孝首匿喜。
现代文：官吏控告刘孝带头藏匿陈喜。
English: Officials accused Liu Xiao of leading the effort to hide Chen Xi.

古文：孝以为陈喜雅数与王计谋反，恐其发之，闻律先自告除其罪，又疑太子使白嬴上书发其事，即先自告，告所与谋反者救赫、陈喜等。
现代文：刘孝以为陈喜平素屡次和衡山王计议谋反，很害怕他会供出此事。他听说律令规定事先自首者可免除其罪责，又怀疑太子指使白嬴上书将告发谋反之事，就抢先自首，控告救赫、陈喜等人参与谋反。
English: Liu Xiao thought that Chen Xipingsu had repeatedly plotted with Hengshan Wang to rebel, and was very afraid that he would expose the matter. He heard that the law stipulated that those who surrendered in advance could be exempted from their criminal responsibility, and suspected that the prince would order Bai Xuan to send a letter to report the rebellion, so he surrendered first and accused Fuhe, Chen Xi and others of participating in the rebellion.

古文：廷尉治验，公卿请逮捕衡山王治之。天子曰： 勿捕。 
现代文：廷尉审讯验证属实，公卿大臣便请求逮捕审讯衡山王。天子说： 不要逮捕。 
English: The courtier's interrogation proved to be true, and the Minister of the Court requested the arrest and interrogation of Hengshan Wang. Tianzi said: Do not arrest.

古文：遣中尉安、大行息即问王，王具以情实对。
现代文：他派遣中尉司马安、大行令李息赴衡山国就地查问衡山王，衡山王一一据实做了回答。
English: He dispatched Lieutenant Sima An and Grand Marshal Li Xi to Hengshan Province to inquire about Hengshan Wang on the spot, and Hengshan Wang answered truthfully.

古文：吏皆围王宫而守之。
现代文：官吏把王宫都包围起来严加看守。
English: Officials surrounded the royal palace and guarded it closely.

古文：中尉大行还，以闻，公卿请遣宗正、大行与沛郡杂治王。
现代文：中尉、大行还朝，将情况上奏，公卿大臣请求派宗正、大行和沛郡府联合审判衡山王。
English: Lieutenant and Daigyo returned to court, reported the situation, and the Minister of Kugyo requested to send Muneyoshi, Daigyo and Pae County to jointly try Hengshan Wang.

古文：王闻，即自刭杀。
现代文：衡山王闻讯便刎颈自杀。
English: Hengshan Wang committed suicide after hearing the news.

古文：孝先自告反，除其罪；坐与王御婢奸，弃市。
现代文：刘孝因主动自首谋反之事，被免罪；但他犯下与衡山王女侍通奸之罪，仍处死弃市。
English: Liu Xiao was exonerated for taking the initiative to conspire against the government; however, he was still sentenced to death and banished from the city for committing the crime of adultery with Princess Hengshan's maid.

古文：王后徐来亦坐蛊杀前王后乘舒，及太子爽坐王告不孝，皆弃市。
现代文：王后徐来也犯有以诬蛊谋杀前王后乘舒罪，连同太子刘爽犯了被衡山王控告不孝的罪，都被处死弃市。
English: Queen Xu Lai was also guilty of murdering the former Queen Rongshu with false accusations. Together with Prince Liu Shuang, he committed the crime of being accused of being unfilial by King Hengshan. They were both executed and banished from the city.

古文：诸与衡山王谋反者皆族。
现代文：所有参与衡山王谋反事的罪犯一概满门杀尽。
English: All the criminals who took part in Hengshan Wang's treachery were executed.

古文：国除为衡山郡。
现代文：衡山国废为衡山郡。
English: Hengshan County replaced Hengshan Province.

古文：太史公曰：诗之所谓 戎狄是膺，荆舒是惩 ，信哉是言也。
现代文：太史公说：《诗经》上说 抗击戎狄，惩治楚人 ，此话不假啊！
English: Taishikong said, "The Book of Songs says, 'Fight against the army of Di and punish the Chu people,' and this is not a lie!"

古文：淮南、衡山亲为骨肉，疆土千里，列为诸侯，不务遵蕃臣职以承辅天子，而专挟邪僻之计，谋为畔逆，仍父子再亡国，各不终其身，为天下笑。
现代文：淮南王、衡山王虽是骨肉至亲，拥有千里疆土，封为诸侯，但是不致力于遵守藩臣的职责去辅助天子，反而一味心怀邪恶之计，图谋叛逆，致使父子相继二次亡国，人人都不得尽享天年，而受到天下人耻笑。
English: Although King Huainan and King Hengshan were blood relatives, possessed thousands of miles of territory, and were appointed as princes, they were not committed to abiding by the duties of the vassals to assist the heavenly son. Instead, they were bent on evil schemes and plotting rebellion. As a result, father and son lost their country for the second time in a row. Everyone was not allowed to enjoy the heavenly year, and they were ridiculed by the world.

古文：此非独王过也，亦其俗薄，臣下渐靡使然也。
现代文：这不只是他们的过错，也是当地习俗浇薄和居下位的臣子影响不良的结果。
English: This is not only their fault, but also the result of local customs and the bad influence of inferior courtiers.

古文：夫荆楚僄勇轻悍，好作乱，乃自古记之矣。
现代文：楚国人轻捷勇猛凶悍，喜好作乱，这是早自古代就记载于书的了。
English: It has been recorded in books since ancient times that the people of Chu are nimble, brave, fierce and violent, and like to make trouble.

