古文：礼器是故大备。大备，盛德也。
现代文：礼的功用充分发展，礼才能至于完备；而礼的完备，正是德行完善的表现。
English: The function of etiquette is fully developed, and etiquette can be perfected; and the perfection of etiquette is the manifestation of the perfection of virtue.

古文：礼释回，增美质；措则正，施则行。
现代文：礼可以去除邪恶，增进人的本质之美；用之于身，可以使人正直；运用于事，则无所不达。
English: Etiquette can remove evil and enhance the beauty of human nature; when applied to the body, it can make people honest; when applied to things, it can achieve anything.

古文：其在人也，如竹箭之有筠也；如松柏之有心也。
现代文：礼对于人来说，好比竹箭有了皮，可以修饰其外；又好比松柏有了心，可以坚固其内。
English: For people, etiquette is like a bamboo arrow with a skin, which can be decorated on the outside; and like a conifer with a heart, which can be strengthened on the inside.

古文：二者居天下之大端矣。
现代文：这外内两个方面，正是天下万物的大本。
English: These two aspects, external and internal, are the foundation of all things in the world.

古文：故贯四时而不改柯易叶。
现代文：有了大本，所以就能历经春夏秋冬而不改变其枝叶的茂盛。
English: With a large trunk, it can go through spring, summer, autumn and winter without changing the luxuriance of its branches and leaves.

古文：故君子有礼，则外谐而内无怨，故物无不怀仁，鬼神飨德。
现代文：君子如果有了礼，就能与外界和谐相处，而内心也无所怨恨。于是天下万物都把仁爱之名赠送给他，连鬼神也来歆享他的美德。
English: If a gentleman has the etiquette, he can live in harmony with the outside world, and there is no resentment in his heart. Therefore, everything in the world gives him the name of benevolence, and even ghosts and gods come to enjoy his virtue.

古文：先王之立礼也，有本有文。
现代文：先王制定的礼，既有内在的实质，又有外在的形式。
English: The etiquette established by the former king has both internal substance and external form.

古文：忠信，礼之本也；义理，礼之文也。
现代文：忠信是礼的内在实质，得理合宜是礼的外在形式。
English: Faithfulness is the inner essence of etiquette, and reasonableness is the outward form of etiquette.

古文：无本不正，无文不行。
现代文：没有内在的实质，礼就不能成立；没有外在的形式，礼就无法施行。
English: Without the inner substance, the ritual cannot be established; without the external form, the ritual cannot be performed.

古文：礼也者，合于天时，设于地财，顺于鬼神，合于人心，理万物者也。
现代文：礼应该是上合天时，下合地利，顺于鬼神，合于人心，顺于万物的一种东西。
English: Etiquette should be a kind of thing that conforms to heaven above, earth below, ghosts and gods, people, and all things.

古文：是故天时有生也，地理有宜也，人官有能也，物曲有利也。
现代文：四时各有不同的生物，土地各有不同的出产，五官各有不同的功能，万物各有不同的用途。
English: The four seasons have different creatures, the land has different products, the five senses have different functions, and all things have different uses.

古文：故天不生，地不养，君子不以为礼，鬼神弗飨也。
现代文：所以，不到节令的动植物，不是当地的土特产，君子是木拿来作为祭品的，即令拿来，鬼神也是拒绝享用的。
English: Therefore, the animals and plants that are not available at the festival are not local specialties. The gentleman brings wood as a sacrifice, and even if he does, the ghosts and gods refuse to enjoy it.

古文：居山以鱼鳖为礼，居泽以鹿豕为礼，君子谓之不知礼。
现代文：住在山里，却以水里产的鱼鳖作为礼品；住在水边，却以山里产的鹿永作为礼品。这样的作法，君子认为是不懂礼。
English: If you live in the mountains, but give a gift of a fishhook caught in the water, or if you live by the water, but give a gift of a deer's roe caught in the mountains, a gentleman will think this is rude.

古文：故必举其定国之数，以为礼之大经，礼之大伦。以地广狭，礼之薄厚，与年之上下。
现代文：所以，一定要按照本国物产的多少，来确定其行礼用财的基本原则。礼品的多少，要看国土的大小；礼品的厚薄，要看年成的好坏。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to determine the basic principles for the use of gifts according to the amount of domestic products. The amount of gifts depends on the size of the country; the thickness of gifts depends on the year.

古文：是故年虽大杀，众不匡惧。则上之制礼也节矣。
现代文：所以即令遇到灾荒之年，民众也不恐惧，究其原因，就是由于君上在制丰时是很有分寸的。
English: Therefore, even in the year of disaster and famine, the people are not afraid. The reason for this is that the ruler is very measured when making wealth.

古文：礼，时为大，顺次之，体次之，宜次之，称次之。
现代文：先王在制礼的时候，首先考虑的是要合乎时代环境，其次是合乎伦理，再其次是区别对象而不同对待，再其次是合乎人情，最后是要与身份相称。
English: When the late king was making etiquette, the first thing he considered was to be in line with the times and environment, the second was to be in line with ethics, the third was to treat different objects differently, the fourth was to be in line with human feelings, and the last was to be commensurate with one's status.

古文：尧授舜，舜授禹；汤放桀，武王伐纣，时也。
现代文：举例来说，尧传位给舜，舜传位给禹，那是禅让的时代；而商汤放逐夏柴，周武王讨伐殷封王，那是革命的时代。
English: For example, the time when Zhou passed the throne to Zhou, and Zhou passed the throne to Yu, was the era of Zen Zhen; while the time when Shang Tang exiled Xia Zhai, and King Zhou Wu fought against King Yin Fu, was the era of revolution.

古文：《诗》云： 匪革其犹，聿追来孝。 
现代文：这就是时代环境问题。《诗经》上说： 周文王兴建丰邑，并非急于实现自己的愿望，而是追念祖先的功业，显示自己的孝心。 
English: This is the problem of the times and the environment. "The Book of Songs" says: King Zhou Wen began to build Fengyi, not in a hurry to realize his own wishes, but to remember the deeds of his ancestors and show his filial piety.

古文：天地之祭，宗庙之事，父子之道，君臣之义，伦也。
现代文：意思是说，迫于形势，不得不这样做。对天神地祗的祭祀，对列祖列宗的祭祀，其中体现有父父子子之道和君君臣臣之义。这就是个顺的问题。 
English: That is to say, under the pressure of the situation, we have to do this. The worship of the angels and the earth, the worship of the ancestors and the ancestors, which embodies the way of the father and the son and the righteousness of the prince and the minister. This is a smooth problem.

古文：社稷山川之事，鬼神之祭，体也。
现代文：社樱之祭，山川之祭，鬼神之祭，祭的对象不同，礼数也随之不同。
English: The Shasakura Festival, the Yamakawa Festival, and the Ghost Festival differ in the object of the festival, and the number of ceremonies is also different.

古文：丧祭之用，宾客之交，义也。
现代文：这就是个体的问题。
English: This is the problem of the individual.

古文：天子之豆二十有六，诸公十有六，诸侯十有二，上大夫八，下大夫六。
现代文：又如，天子的饭食可以有二十六道菜，公爵则只有十六道，诸侯则只有十二道，上大夫八道，下大夫六道。
English: Another example is that the emperor's meal can have up to twenty-six dishes, the duke's only sixteen, the vassal's only twelve, the senior doctor's eight and the junior doctor's six.

古文：诸侯七介七牢，大夫五介五牢。天子之席五重，诸侯之席三重，大夫再重。
现代文：又如，诸侯亲自出访，可以带七个随从，主国馈赠的奢汽多达七牢；而诸侯的卿出访，只可以带五个随从，主国馈赠的警汽只有五牢。又如，天子的坐垫是五层，而诸侯只是三层，大夫只是两层。
English: Another example is that princes can take seven attendants with them when they visit foreign countries, and the luxury cars donated by the host country can take them to as many as seven prisons; while the lords of princes can only take five attendants with them when they visit foreign countries, and the police cars donated by the host country can only take them to five prisons. Another example is that the cushion of the heavenly son is five layers, while the lords are only three layers, and the doctor is only two layers.

古文：天子崩，七月而葬，五重八翣；诸侯五月而葬，三重六翣；大夫三月而葬，再重四翣。
现代文：又如，天子去世，七个月以后才下葬，葬时，茵和抗木各用五重，霎用八个；而诸侯则五个月以后即下葬，葬时，茵和抗木各用三重，婴用六个；大夫则三月而葬，茵和抗木各用两重，婴用四个。
English: Another example is that when the heavenly son died, he was buried seven months later, and when he was buried, five layers of wood were used for the mortar and pestle, and eight layers for the pestle; while the princes were buried five months later, and when they were buried, three layers of wood were used for the mortar and pestle, and six layers for the baby; the doctors were buried in March, and two layers of wood were used for the mortar and pestle, and four layers for the baby.

古文：此以多为贵也。
现代文：这都是以多为贵的例子。
English: It's a case of more is more.

古文：有以少为贵者：天子无介；祭天特牲；天子适诸侯，诸侯膳以犊；诸侯相朝，灌用郁鬯，无笾豆之荐；大夫聘礼以脯醢；天子一食，诸侯再，大夫、士三，食力无数；大路繁缨一就，次路繁缨七就；圭璋特，琥璜爵；鬼神之祭单席。诸侯视朝，大夫特，士旅之。
现代文：又如，天子祭天所用的大格，只用一圈繁缨作为马饰，而干一般事的次格，就用五圈繁缨作为马饰。又如，圭璋是最贵重的玉，可以单独作为礼品进献；而唬横是次于圭璋的玉，不可以单独作为礼品进献，而必须在以酒酬宾时附带进献。鬼神比人尊贵，但祭祀时却只使用一层席子。又如诸侯临朝，大夫人数少，国君就逐个地与之行礼作揖，而士的人数众多，国君就对他们集体作一个揖就算了事。
English: Another example is that the large scale used for the divine sacrifice of the heavenly son uses only one ring of filigree as a horse ornament, while the second scale for doing ordinary things uses five rings of filigree as a horse ornament. Another example is that the Guizhou jade is the most valuable jade and can be presented as a gift alone; while the Guiyang jade, which is second to the Guizhou jade, cannot be presented as a gift alone, but must be accompanied by a gift when the guests are rewarded with wine. Ghosts and gods are more noble than people, but only one layer of mats is used for sacrifice. Also, if the princes visit the emperor, the number

古文：此以少为贵也。
现代文：这都是以少为贵的例子。
English: It's all a case of less is more.

古文：有以大为贵者：宫室之量，器皿之度，棺椁之厚，丘封之大。此以大为贵也。
现代文：礼在有的时候是以大为贵。例如宫室的规模，器皿的尺寸，棺撑的厚薄，坟头的大小，这些都是大者为贵。
English: For example, the size of the palace room, the size of the utensils, the thickness of the coffin support, the size of the grave, these are all expensive.

古文：有以小为贵者：宗庙之祭，贵者献以爵，贱者献以散，尊者举觯，卑者举角；五献之尊，门外缶，门内壶，君尊瓦甒。
现代文：但是，礼在某些时候又是以小为贵。例如宗庙之祭，尊者献尸用较小的爵，贱者献尸用较大的散；尸入之后，尸尊，举起奠解；主人卑，举起角杯而饮。
English: However, at certain times, the rite is valued for its smallness. For example, at the ancestral temple's sacrifice, the venerable one offers the corpse with a smaller girdle, and the lowly one offers the corpse with a larger scatter; after the corpse is buried, the corpse is honored by raising the offering; the lowly one is honored by raising the horn cup and drinking from it.

古文：此以小为贵也。有以高为贵者：天子之堂九尺，诸侯七尺，大夫五尺，士三尺；天子、诸侯台门。
现代文：诸侯中的子爵男爵在宴饮宾客时，击是最大的酒器却放在门外，壶是较大的酒器就放在门内，瓦俪最小，是国君和客人酬醉所用，就放在堂上。
English: When the Viscount Baron of the Princes is entertaining guests, the largest wine vessel is placed outside the door, the larger wine vessel is placed inside the door, and the smallest corrugated iron, which is used by the sovereign and guests to get drunk, is placed in the hall.

古文：此以高为贵也。
现代文：这都是以小为贵的例子。
English: These are all examples of small being expensive.

古文：有以下为贵者：至敬不坛，扫地而祭。天子诸侯之尊废禁，大夫、士棜禁。
现代文：礼在有的时候是以高为贵。例如，天子的堂高九尺，诸侯七尺，大夫五尺，士三尺。又如，只有天子、诸侯的大门是高大的宫网，大夫、士则绝对不可。
English: For example, the hall of the heavenly sons is nine feet high, that of the lords seven feet, that of the doctors five feet, and that of the magistrates three feet. For another example, only the gates of the heavenly sons and lords are tall palace nets, but those of the doctors and magistrates are absolutely forbidden.

古文：此以下为贵也。
现代文：这是以低为贵的例子。
English: This is an example of taking the low for the high.

古文：礼有以文为贵者：天子龙衮，诸侯黼，大夫黻，士玄衣纁裳；天子之冕，朱绿藻十有二旒，诸侯九，上大夫七，下大夫五，士三。
现代文：礼在有的时候是以文饰为贵。例如，天子穿的龙袍有九种图案，诸侯的祭服只能有七种、五种或三种图案，大夫只能有一种黑青相间的张形图案，至于士穿的衣服，没有任何图案，只是上身玄衣，下身浅绛色之裳而已。又如，天子头戴的冕，有用朱、绿二色编织的丝绳用来穿玉，垂旎十二条，而诸侯之冕仅垂旎九条，上大夫七条，下大夫五条，士三条。
English: For example, the dragon robe worn by the son of heaven has nine patterns, the sacrificial robe of the princes can only have seven, five or three patterns, and the doctor can only have a black-and-blue splay pattern. As for the clothes worn by the priests, there is no pattern, only the upper body of the black robe and the lower body of the light indigo color. For example, the crown worn by the son of heaven has twelve strings of vermilion and green woven silk to wear beads, while the crown of the princes has only nine strings, seven for the upper doctor, five for the lower doctor and three for the judge.

古文：此以文为贵也。
现代文：这是以文饰为贵的例子。
English: This is an example of an expensive ornament.

古文：有以素为贵者：至敬无文，父党无容，大圭不琢，大羹不和，大路素而越席，牺尊疏布幂，樿杓。
现代文：礼在有的时候又是以朴素为贵。例如，祭天时天子所穿的大裘不叫露出来，在父亲的面前不须装模作样，天子所用的大圭不加任何雕琢，作为上等祭品的肉汁不加任何调料，祭天用的大格朴素无华，上面只铺一层蒲席，牛形的酒尊是用粗布覆盖，勺子也只用本色的木头来做。
English: For example, the robe worn by the heavenly son at the time of the sacrifice is not revealed, and there is no need to pretend in front of the father. The robe used by the heavenly son does not add any carving, and the gravy used as a superior sacrifice does not add any seasoning. The robe used for the sacrifice is simple and unadorned, with only a layer of cushions on top. The ox-shaped wine holder is covered with coarse cloth, and the spoon is made only of natural wood.

古文：此以素为贵也。
现代文：这是以朴素为贵的例子。
English: It's an example of simplicity at a premium.

古文：孔子曰： 礼，不可不省也。 
现代文：孔子说： 礼，不可以不加以审察。
English: Confucius said, "Rituals should not be made without examination."

古文：礼不同，不丰、不杀，此之谓也。
现代文：礼有种种不同，该减少的不能增加，该增加的也不能减少。 
English: There are all kinds of differences in etiquette. What should be reduced cannot be increased, and what should be increased cannot be reduced.

古文：盖言称也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思：礼要注意相称。
English: That's what it means: be sure to give the appropriate amount of courtesy.

古文：礼之以多为贵者，以其外心者也；德发扬，诩万物，大理物博，如此，则得不以多为贵乎？
现代文：礼之所以有以多、大、高？
English: Why are there more, bigger and higher bows?

古文：故君子乐其发也。
现代文：文为贵者，原因就在于它是存心向外界炫耀的。
English: The reason why literature is valuable is that it is deliberately flaunted to the outside world.

古文：礼之以少为贵者，以其内心者也。
现代文：王者的道德发扬，普及万物，统领的事情又千头万绪，无所不包，像这样，能不以多、大、高、文为贵吗？
English: The morality of the king is to promote, to popularize all things, to control all things, and to be all-encompassing. In this way, can we not cherish the many, the great, the high, and the literate?

古文：德产之致也精微，观天子之物无可以称其德者，如此则得不以少为贵乎？
现代文：所以君子就乐于向外界炫耀。礼之所以有以少、小、下、素为贵者，原因就在于它是存心表示内在之德的。内在之德所具有的密致精微程度，遍观天下所有之物，没有一件可以与之匹配的，这样的话，能不以少、小、下、素为贵吗？
English: That is why a gentleman is happy to show off to the outside world. The reason why etiquette is distinguished by less, smaller, lower, and first is because it is a deliberate expression of inner virtue. The degree of density and refinement possessed by inner virtue, looking at all things in the world, there is nothing that can match it. In this case, can it be distinguished by less, smaller, lower, and first?

古文：是故君子慎其独也。
现代文：所以君子就格外注意内心的修养。
English: Therefore, the gentleman pays special attention to the cultivation of the heart.

古文：古之圣人，内之为尊，外之为乐，少之为贵，多之为美。
现代文：古代的圣人，既注重内心的修养，也乐于对外的炫耀，有时候以少、小、下、素为贵，有时候又以多、大、高、文为贵。
English: Ancient sages not only paid attention to the cultivation of the heart, but were also happy to show off to the outside world. Sometimes they valued less, smaller, lower, and elementary, and sometimes they valued more, larger, higher, and literary.

古文：是故先生之制礼也，不可多也，不可寡也，唯其称也。
现代文：所以先王在制礼时，该少的不能让多，该多的不能让少，追求的目标就在于一个相称。
English: Therefore, when the first king was making the ritual, the less could not be given more, the more could not be given less, and the goal to pursue was to be proportionate.

古文：是故，君子大牢而祭，谓之礼；匹士大牢而祭，谓之攘。
现代文：由此看来，大夫以上的贵族用太牢作为祭品，与身份相称，这就叫合礼；士用太牢作为祭品，与身份不相称，这就叫盗窃。
English: From this point of view, aristocrats above the rank of doctor who use Taiji as a sacrifice, which is commensurate with their status, are said to have performed the rite; while aristocrats who use Taiji as a sacrifice, which is not commensurate with their status, are said to have stolen.

古文：管仲镂簋朱纮，山节藻棁，君子以为滥矣。
现代文：管仲身为大夫，却使用镂花镶玉的篡，系着朱红的帽带，住室斗拱上雕刻着山形图案，梁上的短柱刻着水草，君子认为这是过分，膺用了天子诸侯之礼。
English: Although he was a doctor, Guanzhong used an embroidered jade bracelet, wore a red cap, carved a mountain pattern on the arch of the living room, and carved aquatic plants on the short column on the beam. The gentleman thought this was excessive, and used the courtesy of the princes.

古文：晏平仲祀其先人，豚肩不揜豆；浣衣濯冠以朝，君子以为隘矣。
现代文：齐国的晏子也是大夫，他祭祀祖先时用的猪蹄膀太小，连一平碗也不到，穿戴着洗过的旧衣帽就去朝君，君子认为这是小气，不合乎大夫的身份。
English: The mule of Qi was also a doctor. The pig's trotter he used to sacrifice his ancestors was too small, not even a flat bowl, and he went to the emperor wearing a washed old cap. The gentleman thought this was stingy and not in keeping with the doctor's status.

古文：是故君子之行礼也，不可不慎也；众之纪也，纪散而众乱。
现代文：由此看来，君子行礼，不可不慎。因为礼是规范人们生活的纲纪，如果纲纪散乱，那么人们的生活也就乱套了。
English: From this point of view, a gentleman should not be careless when performing etiquette. Because etiquette is the discipline that regulates people's lives, if the discipline is scattered, then people's lives will be out of order.

古文：孔子曰： 我战则克，祭则受福。 
现代文：孔子说： 作为一个知礼的人，打仗则必胜，祭祀则必定得到保佑。 
English: Confucius said, "As a person who knows etiquette, he is sure to win in war, and he is sure to be blessed in sacrifice."

古文：盖得其道矣。
现代文：就是因为他深刻领会了卒要相称的道理。 
English: It is precisely because he has deeply understood the principle that the degree should be commensurate.

古文：君子曰：祭祀不祈，不麾蚤，不乐葆大，不善嘉事，牲不及肥大，荐不美多品。
现代文：君子说： 祭祀的本意在于思亲，不在于祈福；祭祀都有一定的时间，不能说提前举行就好；祭祀用的礼器玉帛都有一定的规格，不能一味追求高大；举行冠礼、婚礼，察告祖先是应该的，但也不须为此而另行祭祀；祭祀所用的牺牲不可全都追求肥大，供品也不可全都追求数量。 
English: The nobles said: The original intention of the sacrifice is to think of relatives, not to pray for good fortune; the sacrifices all have a certain time, it cannot be said that it is good to hold them in advance; the ceremonial utensils used for the sacrifice have a certain specification, and they cannot pursue greatness; it is proper to hold a crown ceremony, a wedding, and to accuse ancestors, but there is no need to make a separate sacrifice for this; the sacrifices used for the sacrifice cannot all pursue greatness, and the offerings cannot all pursue quantity.

古文：孔子曰： 臧文仲安知礼！
现代文：孔子说： 臧文仲哪里懂得礼啊？
English: Confucius said, "Where does Yu Wenzhong know how to be polite?"

古文：夏父弗綦逆祀，而弗止也。
现代文：夏父弗纂颠倒了祭祀的顺序，他也不制止。
English: Xia's father, Fuzang, reversed the order of the sacrifices, and he did not stop it.

古文：燔柴于奥，夫奥者，老妇之祭也，盛于盆，尊于瓶。
现代文：而且在灶神面前举行播柴之祭也是驴唇不对马嘴。
English: Moreover, holding a firewood-spreading festival in front of the god of the hearth is also a donkey's lip not a horse's mouth.

古文：礼也者，犹体也。体不备，君子谓之不成人。
现代文：须知灶神是一位发明了炊器的老妇，在祭灶神的时候，只要把供品放在盆里，用瓶子来盛酒就可以了。 所谓礼，就好比是人的身体。
English: It should be noted that the god of the hearth is an old woman who invented the cooker, and when worshipping the god of the hearth, it is enough to place the offering in a basin and use a bottle to hold the wine.

古文：设之不当，犹不备也。 
现代文：如果身体有缺陷，君子就称之为不完备的人。礼如果安排得不恰当，就与不完备的人一样。
English: If there is a defect in the body, the gentleman calls it an imperfect person. If the etiquette is not properly arranged, it is the same as an imperfect person.

古文：礼有大有小，有显有微。
现代文：礼有时以大、以多为贵，有时以小、以少为贵，有时以高、以文为贵，有时以素、以下为贵。
English: Rites are sometimes valued according to whether they are large or many, sometimes valued according to whether they are small or few, sometimes valued according to whether they are high or few, sometimes valued according to whether they are simple or less.

古文：大者不可损，小者不可益，显者不可掩，微者不可大也。
现代文：以大、以多为贵者就不可随便减少，以小、以少为贵者就不可随便增加，以高、以文为贵者就不可随便遮掩，以素、 以下为贵者就不可随便装饰和加高。
English: Those who value big and many should not be arbitrarily reduced, those who value small and few should not be arbitrarily increased, those who value high and few should not be arbitrarily covered, and those who value plain and less should not be arbitrarily decorated and increased.

古文：故《经礼》三百，《曲礼》三千，其致一也。
现代文：所以，虽然礼的纲要有三百条，礼的细则有三千款，但它们追求的都是一个诚字。
English: Therefore, although the outline of the etiquette has three hundred articles and the details of the etiquette have three thousand articles, they all pursue a sincere word.

古文：未有入室而不由户者。
现代文：这就像人要进屋，没有不是从门而入一样。
English: It's like trying to get into a house without going through the door.

古文：君子之于礼也，有所竭情尽慎，致其敬而诚若，有美而文而诚若。
现代文：君子对于礼的态度，有时候是通过贵少、贵小、贵下、贵素而表达其诚，有时候是通过贵多、贵大、贵高、贵文而表达其诚。
English: A gentleman's attitude toward etiquette sometimes expresses his sincerity through precious few, precious small, precious lower, and precious essence, and sometimes expresses his sincerity through precious many, precious large, precious high, and precious text.

古文：君子之于礼也，有直而行也，有曲而杀也，有经而等也，有顺而讨也，有摭而播也，有推而进也，有放而文也，有放而不致也，有顺而摭也。三代之礼一也，民共由之。
现代文：君子在具体行礼的时候，有时是放任感情毫不掩饰，有时是情感服从理智，有时是不分贵贱，上下一样，有时是按顺序递减礼数，有时是取物于上而普施于下，有时是根据推理而提高规格，有时是效法天地而文饰至极，有时是效法天地而文饰有限，有时是卑贱者袭用高贵者之礼也不犯忌讳。夏商周三代的礼都贯穿着一个诚字，民众共同遵循。
English: When a gentleman performs a specific salute, sometimes he lets his emotions run wild, sometimes he lets his emotions follow his reason, sometimes he does not distinguish between high and low and treats everyone the same, sometimes he reduces the number of salutes in order, sometimes he takes something from above and gives it to everyone below, sometimes he raises the specifications based on his reasoning, sometimes he follows heaven and earth and goes to the extreme in decorating, sometimes he follows heaven and earth and goes to the limit in decorating, and sometimes it is not taboo for a lowly person to use the salute of a high-ranking person.

古文：或素或青，夏造殷因。
现代文：从形式上看，有的尚黑，有的尚白，夏代开始创立，殷代有所因循。
English: From the formal point of view, some are still black, some are still white, the Xia Dynasty began to create, and the Yin Dynasty followed.

古文：周坐尸，诏侑武方；其礼亦然，其道一也；夏立尸而卒祭；殷坐尸。周旅酬六尸，曾子曰： 周礼其犹醵与！ 
现代文：例如，在祭祀过程中，在夏代尸始终是立着的，在殷代则始终是坐着的，周代的尸也是始终坐着，而且凡助祭者都可以告诉尸如何保持威仪和劝尸饮食，并无固定的人选，这种礼数是从殷代学来的，其至诚之道是一样的。
English: For example, in the process of sacrifice, in the Xia Dynasty, the corpse was always standing, in the Yin Dynasty, it was always sitting, and in the Zhou Dynasty, the corpse was always sitting. Moreover, any assistant priest can tell the corpse how to maintain dignity and persuade the corpse to eat. There is no fixed candidate. This number of etiquette is learned from the Yin Dynasty, and its sincerity is the same.

古文：君子曰：礼之近人情者，非其至者也。
现代文：不过，周代有六尸依次互相劝酒的仪式这是殷代所没有的。所以曾子说： 周礼的六尸互相劝酒，就好像众人凑钱喝酒一样。 
English: However, in the Zhou Dynasty, there was a ritual of six corpses in succession persuading each other to drink alcohol, which was not found in the Yin Dynasty. Therefore, Zeng Zi said: The six corpses of the Zhou Dynasty persuaded each other to drink alcohol, just as if everyone pooled money to drink alcohol.

古文：郊血，大飨腥，三献爓，一献孰。
现代文：君子认为：礼仪中与现在人情相近的内容，并非最高贵的祭品。
English: Nobles believed that the content of the ritual, which was similar to the current human condition, was not the most precious offering.

古文：是故君子之于礼也，非作而致其情也，此有由始也。
现代文：比如祭祀至高无上的天是用牲血为祭品，大飨用生肉， 三献 是用半生不熟的肉，祭祀小的神鬼才用熟肉。
English: For example, the supreme god of sacrifice uses animal blood as a sacrifice, the great god uses raw meat, the third god uses half-baked meat, and the small god of sacrifice uses cooked meat.

古文：是故七介以相见也，不然则已悫。三辞三让而至，不然则已蹙。
现代文：所以君子对于礼，并不只是为了表达情感的需要而随意创作，而是从古代有所继承的。诸侯相见，一定要有七名 介 来协助宾方行礼，不这样就显得太简单直率了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman's etiquette is not just a random creation to express emotional needs, but has been inherited from ancient times. When princes meet, there must be seven intermediaries to assist the guests in performing the etiquette, otherwise it will seem too simple and straightforward.

古文：故鲁人将有事于上帝，必先有事于頖宫；晋人将有事于河，必先有事于恶池；齐人将有事于泰山，必先有事于配林。
现代文：相见时，主客要三请三让，然后才进入府中，不这样就显得太急迫了。所以鲁国人将要祭上帝，一定先在泮宫里禀告；晋国人将要祭黄河，必定先祭较小的滹沱河；齐国人将要祭泰山，必定先祭较小的配林。
English: When meeting, the host and guest should make three requests and three concessions before entering the palace, otherwise it will seem too urgent. Therefore, the people of Lu will sacrifice God, and must first announce it in the Palace; the people of Jin will sacrifice the Yellow River, and must first sacrifice the smaller Wei River; the people of Qi will sacrifice Mount Tai, and must first sacrifice the smaller forest.

古文：三月系，七日戒，三日宿，慎之至也。
现代文：祭祀前三个月，就要把牲畜系在牢中做好准备，前七天便开始半斋戒状态，前三天实行严格斋戒。
English: Three months before the sacrifice, it is necessary to prepare the livestock in the dungeon. The first seven days will begin with a semi-fasting state, and the first three days will be a strict fast.

古文：故礼有摈诏，乐有相步，温之至也。
现代文：真是极其谨慎啊!行礼必须有司仪，乐师必须有人扶持引路，真是极其温文尔雅、从容不迫啊!
English: What extreme caution! There must be a master of ceremonies to perform the ceremony, and the musician must be supported by someone to guide the way. It's really extremely gentle and unhurried!

古文：礼也者，反本修古，不忘其初者也。
现代文：所谓礼，是要使人回归本心，追念远古，不忘自己的祖先。
English: The so-called ritual is to make people return to their original hearts, remember the ancient times, and not forget their ancestors.

古文：故凶事不诏，朝事以乐。醴酒之用，玄酒之尚。
现代文：例如，凶丧之事，用不着谁来教导，人们自然会悲痛；朝廷宴飨群臣，钟鸣鼎食，人们自然会欢乐。
English: For example, no one needs to be taught how to grieve, and people will naturally grieve; the imperial court will host a banquet for the courtiers, the bells will ring, and people will naturally rejoice.

古文：割刀之用，鸾刀之贵。
现代文：这是回归天性的例子。
English: It's an example of getting back to nature.

古文：莞簟之安，而稿鞂之设。是故，先王之制礼也，必有主也，故可述而多学也。
现代文：又如，现在的人们都把饮用甜酒作为美妙的享受，但在祭神时却以清水一杯为贵；今人使用的快刀非常适用，但在分割牲体时偏要用迟钝的莺刀；今人的坐垫，下面一层蒲席，上面再加一层竹席，坐着多么舒服，而祭天时却仅仅铺上一层庄稼秆就当席子。这就是追念远古。
English: Another example is that people today regard drinking sweet wine as a wonderful enjoyment, but a glass of water is more expensive when offering a sacrifice to the gods; the fast knife used by modern people is very suitable, but when dividing animals, a dull scythe should be used; the cushion of modern people, a layer of cushion below, and a layer of bamboo seat above, how comfortable it is to sit, but when offering sacrifices to the gods, only a layer of straw is used as a mat. This is the memory of ancient times.

古文：君子曰：无节于内者，观物弗之察矣。
现代文：所以先王在制礼的时候，一定是考虑到了人的回归本性和遵循传统这两个因素，所以后人才可以效法和便于学习。
English: Therefore, the first king must have taken into account the two factors of people's return to nature and following tradition when making etiquette, so later talents can follow suit and make it easier to learn.

古文：欲察物而不由礼，弗之得矣。
现代文：君子说： 如果内心没有礼的标准，观察事物就不明了。观察事物不通过礼是不行的，不可能达到目的。 
English: The gentleman said: If there is no standard of etiquette in the heart, observing things will be unclear. It is not possible to observe things without etiquette, and it is impossible to achieve the goal.

古文：故作事不以礼，弗之敬矣。出言不以礼，弗之信矣。
现代文：所以，不按礼来办事，就不能赢得人们的尊敬；不按礼说话，就不能取得人们的信任。
English: Therefore, if you don't act according to etiquette, you can't win people's respect; if you don't speak according to etiquette, you can't gain people's trust.

古文：故曰： 礼也者，物之致也。 
现代文：一所以有这么一句老话：礼是一切事物的准则。
English: That's why there's an old saying: courtesy is the basis of everything.

古文：是故昔先王之制礼也，因其财物而致其义焉尔。
现代文：所以从前的先王在制礼时，就依据事物固有的特性而赋以意义。
English: Therefore, in the past, emperors assigned meaning to things based on their inherent characteristics.

古文：故作大事，必顺天时，为朝夕必放于日月，为高必因丘陵，为下必因川泽。
现代文：举行祭祀一定符合天时；举行朝日、夕月之祭，必定根据日月的运行；祭天是至高无上之祭，那就必定凭借本来就高的圆丘；祭地是至卑无二之祭，那就必定凭借本来就低的方泽。
English: The holding of the ritual must be in accordance with the celestial time; the holding of the festival of the rising sun and the setting moon must be in accordance with the movement of the sun and the moon; the festival of heaven is the supreme festival, then it must rely on the originally high round mound; the festival site is the inferior festival, then it must rely on the originally low square.

古文：是故天时雨泽，君子达亹亹焉。
现代文：所以就风调雨顺，君子也就更加勤勉。
English: Therefore, if the weather is good, the gentleman will be more diligent.

古文：是故昔先王尚有德、尊有道、任有能；举贤而置之，聚众而誓之。
现代文：所以过去先王崇尚有德的人，尊敬有道的人，任用有才能的人，选拔这些贤人放到助祭的位置上，斋戒之前还要聚众宣誓，以诫不恭。
English: Therefore, in the past, the former king advocated virtuous people, respected virtuous people, appointed talented people, selected these wise men and placed them in the position of assistant priests. Before fasting, he also had to gather the people to swear an oath and to be disobedient.

古文：是故因天事天，因地事地，因名山升中于天，因吉土以飨帝于郊。
现代文：于是借天生之物以祭天，借地产之物以祭地，登上名山，举行封禅之礼，选择吉地祭祀天帝。
English: As a result, they used natural objects to offer sacrifices to the gods, and objects made of real estate to offer sacrifices to the gods. They climbed famous mountains, held a ceremony of sealing the Zen, and chose auspicious places to offer sacrifices to the gods.

古文：升中于天，而凤凰降、龟龙假；飨帝于郊，而风雨节、寒暑时。
现代文：登山封禅，于是凤凰来仪，龟龙皆至；祭祀天帝，于是风调雨顺，寒暑得时。
English: The phoenix and the tortoise and the dragon come when the mountain climbers are meditating; the wind and rain come when the celestial emperor is worshipped, and the cold and heat come when it is time.

古文：是故圣人南面而立，而天下大治。
现代文：这样，圣人只要在临朝时南面而立，天下也就太平了。
English: In this way, as long as the saint stands facing south during the coronation, the world will be peaceful.

古文：天道至教，圣人至德。
现代文：天道是礼教的最高法则，圣人则是具有最高的德行。
English: The heavenly way is the highest principle of the ritual, and the saint is the one with the highest virtue.

古文：庙堂之上，罍尊在阼，牺尊在西。庙堂之下，县鼓在西，应鼓在东。
现代文：庙堂之上，罍尊陈设在东阶，牺尊、象尊陈设在西阶；庙堂之下，悬鼓设在两阶之间的西边，应鼓设在东边。
English: On top of the temple hall, the god of thunder is displayed on the east step, the god of sacrifice and the god of elephant are displayed on the west step; under the temple hall, the hanging drum is displayed on the west side between the two steps, and the drum is displayed on the east side.

古文：君在阼，夫人在房。
现代文：国君站在东阶上，夫人立在西房。
English: The sovereign stands on the east steps, while his wife stands in the west room.

古文：大明生于东，月生于西，此阴阳之分、夫妇之位也。
现代文：这就象征着太阳从东方升起，新月在西方出现。这便是阴阳的区别，夫妇的位置。
English: This symbolizes the sun rising from the east and the new moon appearing in the west. This is the difference between yin and yang, the position of the couple.

古文：君西酌牺象，夫人东酌罍尊。
现代文：国君从东阶走到西阶用牺尊、象尊酌酒，其夫人则从西房走到东阶用罄尊酌酒。
English: When the sovereign walked from the east to the west steps, he used the sacrificial offering and the elephant offering to drink wine, while his wife walked from the west room to the east steps and used the entire offering to drink wine.

古文：礼交动乎上，乐交应乎下，和之至也。
现代文：堂上的礼仪象征着阴阳交互的时候，堂下的鼓乐也交相呼应，这真是和谐到极点啊！
English: When the etiquette of the hall symbolizes the interaction of yin and yang, the drum music of the hall also echoes each other, which is really harmonious to the extreme!

古文：礼也者，反其所自生；乐也者，乐其所自成。
现代文：礼是追溯事物本始的产物，乐则是表达对礼教完成的喜悦。
English: Etiquette is a product of tracing the origin of things, while music expresses the joy of completing etiquette.

古文：是故先王之制礼也以节事，修乐以道志。
现代文：因此，先王通过制礼以体验前事，通过作乐以陶冶情趣。
English: Therefore, the first king experienced the past through ceremonial, and cultivated taste through music.

古文：故观其礼乐，而治乱可知也。
现代文：由于礼乐有这等来历，所以观察一个国家的礼乐就可以了解到这个国家的治乱。
English: Since the ritual music has such origins, observing the ritual music of a country can be used to understand the governance of this country.

古文：蘧伯玉曰： 君子之人达，故观其器，而知其工之巧；观其发，而知其人之知。 
现代文：蓬伯玉说： 君子一类的人都很明达。 他们只要观察到了器物，就可以推知工匠的巧拙；只要观察到了人的外部表现，就可以推知它的愚智。
English: Pangboyu said: People of the noble class are very knowledgeable; as long as they observe the utensil, they can infer the skill of the craftsman; as long as they observe the external performance of the person, they can infer its stupidity.

古文：故曰： 君子慎其所以与人者。 
现代文：所以说：君子对于用来与人交往的礼乐是无不谨慎的。
English: Therefore, it is said that a gentleman should be very careful about the music he uses to communicate with others.

古文：太庙之内敬矣！
现代文：太庙之内的祭礼是多么恭敬啊！
English: How reverent is the ceremony inside the Great Temple!

古文：君亲牵牲，大夫赞币而从。
现代文：首先，国君亲自把牺牲牵入太庙，大夫协助拿着杀牲告神的玉帛紧跟其后。
English: First of all, the sovereign himself led the sacrifice into the imperial temple, followed closely by the doctor, who assisted in carrying the sacrificial offering to the gods.

古文：君亲制祭，夫人荐盎。
现代文：接着，国君又亲自制祭，夫人献上盎齐之酒。
English: Next, the sovereign himself made the offering, and his wife presented an ounce of wine.

古文：君亲割牲，夫人荐酒。
现代文：接着，国君又亲自馈熟，夫人再次献酒。
English: Next, the sovereign himself served the wine, and his wife offered wine again.

古文：卿、大夫从君，命妇从夫人。洞洞乎其敬也，属属乎其忠也，勿勿乎其欲其飨之也。
现代文：在这个行礼过程中，卿大夫们跟随着国君，命妇们跟随着夫人，诚心又恭敬，专心又忠诚，十分勤勉的一献再献，是那样迫不及待地想让祖先享用供品。
English: In this process of saluting, the noble doctors followed the king, and the holy women followed the lady, sincere and respectful, dedicated and loyal, very diligent and diligent, so eager to let the ancestors enjoy the offerings.

古文：纳牲诏于庭，血毛诏于室，羹定诏于堂，三诏皆不同位，盖道求而未之得也。
现代文：牵牲入庙时，先在庭中告祭于神；进献生血生肉时，又在室中告祭于神；进献熟肉的时候，又在堂上告祭于神。三次告祭都不在同一地方，这就意味着求神而又不知神所在的确切位置。
English: When a sacrificial animal is brought into the temple, it is first offered to the gods in the courtyard; when blood and flesh are offered, it is offered to the gods in the room; when cooked meat is offered, it is offered to the gods in the hall. The three times of offering sacrifices are not in the same place, which means asking the gods and not knowing the exact location of the gods.

古文：设祭于堂，为祊乎外，故曰： 于彼乎？
现代文：先设正祭于堂，又设祭于庙门之外，就好像是在询问： 神是在那边呢？
English: First, the main altar was set up in the church, and then the altar was set up outside the temple gate, as if to ask: Is God over there?

古文：于此乎？ 
现代文：还是在这边呢？ 
English: To offer sacrifices in so many places: from the inner room to the outer court, from the outer court to the inner court, from the inner court to the outer court, is because they do not know where God is. Is it over there? Or is it over here?

古文：一献质，三献文，五献察，七献神。
现代文：一献之礼是不够讲究的，三献之礼就有点看头了，五献之礼就礼数更加详备，至于七献之礼，那真是神乎其神了。
English: One offering is not elaborate enough, three offerings are a bit over the top, five offerings are more elaborate, and seven offerings are truly divine.

古文：大飨其王事与！三牲鱼腊，四海九州岛之美味也；笾豆之荐，四时之和气也。
现代文：大飨的祭品是那样的丰盛，贡品是那样的众多，恐怕只有天子才能有那样的排场吧！牛肉、羊肉、猪肉、鱼肉、干肉，包罗了普天之下的美味佳肴；篷豆中盛放的祭品，山珍海味，瓜果李枣，都是四季风调雨顺的产物。
English: The offerings of Daju are so rich, the tributes are so numerous, I'm afraid only the son of heaven can have such a parade! Beef, mutton, pork, fish, and dried meat include the most delicious delicacies under the sun; the offerings in the taro, mountain and sea delicacies, melons, fruits, and dates are all products of the four seasons.

古文：内金，示和也。束帛加璧，尊德也。
现代文：四方诸侯的贡金，表示他们的服从天子；诸侯给天子的见面礼，是束帛加璧，表示他们对天子美德的尊敬。
English: The tribute of the princes of the four quarters shows their obedience to the Son of Heaven; the welcome gift of the princes to the Son of Heaven is a bundle of money, showing their respect for the virtues of the Son of Heaven.

古文：龟为前列，先知也。
现代文：诸侯贡品的排列，宝龟放在前列，因为龟能预知未来。
English: When the tributes of the lords were arranged, the treasure turtle was placed in the front, because the turtle could predict the future.

古文：金次之，见情也。
现代文：其次是黄金，因为它能照见人情。
English: The second is gold, because it reflects the human condition.

古文：丹漆丝纩竹箭，与众共财也。其余无常货，各以其国之所有，则致远物也。
现代文：其次是丹砂、油漆、蚕丝、棉絮、大竹、小竹这些日常用品，这表示普天之下的物产都是供给天子使用的。
English: Next are daily necessities such as red sand, paint, silk, cotton lint, large bamboo and small bamboo, which means that the products of the whole world are used to supply the heavenly beings.

古文：其出也，肆夏而送之，盖重礼也。
现代文：其余的贡品没有固定的品种，原则上是你这个诸侯国有什么土特产你就贡献什么，这表示再遥远的东西天子也能得到。
English: The rest of the tributes do not have a fixed variety. In principle, you contribute whatever local products you have in your vassal state, which means that even the most distant things can be obtained by the Son of Heaven.

古文：祀帝于郊，敬之至也。
现代文：大飨礼毕，来宾走出庙门时，奏起送宾的乐曲《陕夏》，以显示礼数的隆重。
English: After the grand salute, when the guests walked out of the temple gate, they played the send-off music "Shaanxi Summer" to show the grandeur of the number of salutes.

古文：宗庙之祭，仁之至也。
现代文：天子亲自在南郊祭天，这是无比的尊敬。宗庙之祭，视死如生，这是无比的仁爱。
English: The Son of Heaven himself sacrificed Heaven in Nanjiao, which is incomparable respect. The ancestral temple's sacrifice, treating death as if it were life, is incomparable benevolence.

古文：丧礼，忠之至也。
现代文：丧礼，孝子哭天号地，痛不欲生，一切发自内心，这是无比的真诚。
English: Funerals, filial sons crying uncontrollably, longing for life, all from the heart, this is incomparably sincere.

古文：备服器，仁之至也。宾客之用币，义之至也。
现代文：为死者准备服装，明器，虽然明知无济于事，但也仍然尽力准备，这也表现了莫大的爱心。
English: Preparing clothes and utensils for the deceased, even though he knew it would not help, he still tried his best to prepare, which also showed great love.

古文：故君子欲观仁义之道，礼其本也。君子曰：甘受和，白受采；忠信之人，可以学礼。
现代文：白色是五色的根本，在此基础上可以绘出五彩。这个道理明白了，你就知道忠信是礼的根本，只有忠信之人，才可以学礼。
English: White is the basis of the five colors, and on this basis, five colors can be drawn. Once you understand this principle, you will know that loyalty is the basis of etiquette, and only loyal people can learn etiquette.

古文：茍无忠信之人，则礼不虚道。
现代文：如果不是忠信之人，礼也不会跟着你瞎跑。
English: If you're not a loyal person, Rei won't follow you blindly.

古文：是以得其人之为贵也。
现代文：由此看来，礼固然重要，而得到忠信之人更重要。 
English: From this point of view, the ceremony is important, but the person who receives the allegiance is more important.

古文：孔子曰： 诵《诗》三百，不足以一献。一献之礼，不足以大飨。
现代文：孔子说： 即令把《诗经》三百篇背得滚瓜烂熟，如果没有学过礼，就连简单的一献之礼也承担不了。
English: Confucius said, "Even if you memorize the 300 chapters of the Book of Songs perfectly, if you haven't learned the etiquette, you won't be able to make even a simple offering."

古文：大飨之礼，不足以大旅。
现代文：懂得了一献之礼，如果不进一步学习，就未必能承担大飨之礼。
English: If you don't learn further, you may not be able to bear the heavy responsibility.

古文：大旅具矣，不足以飨帝。 毋轻议礼！
现代文：懂得了大飨之礼，如果不再继续学习，就未必能承担大旅之礼。
English: If you do not continue to study, you may not be able to undertake the great journey.

古文：子路为季氏宰。
现代文：懂得了大旅之礼，未必就能担当祭天之礼。
English: If you understand the ceremony of the great journey, you may not be able to perform the ceremony of the festival.

古文：季氏祭，逮暗而祭，日不足，继之以烛。
现代文：不要轻率地议论礼。 子路当季桓子家的总管。过去季氏举行岁时的祭祖，总是天不亮就开始，忙活一天还没完，天色已黑，还得点起火把继续干。
English: Don't be hasty in discussing the rites. Zilu was the head of the Ji Huan Zi family. In the past, when the Ji family held the ancestor's festival, it always started before dawn, the busy day was not over, the sky was dark, and they had to light torches to continue working.

古文：虽有强力之容、肃敬之心，皆倦怠矣。
现代文：因为拖的时间太长，即令是身体强壮、敬心十足的人，也被搞得疲惫不堪。
English: Because of the long delay, even those who are physically strong and full of respect are exhausted.

古文：有司跛倚以临祭，其为不敬大矣。
现代文：因此，许多执事的人都东倒西歪、左倚右靠地来应付差使，这实在是对祖先的大不恭敬。
English: As a result, many of the deacons were bent over backwards, leaning to the right and to the left to deal with the envoys, which was really a great disrespect to their ancestors.

古文：他日祭，子路与，室事交乎户，堂事交乎阶，质明而始行事，晏朝而退。孔子闻之曰： 谁谓由也而不知礼乎？
现代文：后来有一天，子路参与季氏祭祖，举行室内正祭时，室内室外的人在门口交接祭品；举行堂上侯尸时，堂上堂下的人在阶前交接撰具。天亮开始祭祀，到了傍晚就行礼完毕。孔子听说了这件事，说： 谁能说子路只是有勇而不懂得礼呢！ 
English: Later, one day, Zilu took part in the Ji's ancestor festival. When the indoor main festival was held, the people inside and outside the room handed over the offerings at the door; when the corpse was held in the hall, the people in the hall handed over the preparation tools in front of the steps. The sacrifice began at dawn, and the ceremony was completed in the evening. Confucius heard about this and said: Who can say that Zilu is just brave and does not know the ceremony!

