古文：公子过郑，郑文公亦不礼焉。
现代文：重耳经过郑国，郑文公也不加礼遇。
English: After passing through Zheng Guo, Zheng Wenguang did not add any courtesy.

古文：叔詹谏曰： 臣闻之：亲有天，用前训，礼兄弟，资穷困，天所福也。
现代文：叔詹劝谏说： 我听说，亲近上天，遵循先君的教诲，对兄弟以礼相待，资助穷困的人，上天是会保佑他的。
English: Uncle Zhan advised him, "I have heard that if you draw close to heaven, follow the teachings of your forefathers, treat your brothers with courtesy, and help the poor, heaven will bless you.

古文：今晋公子有三祚焉，天将启之。
现代文：如今晋公子有三种天意的吉兆，该是上天要赞助他吧。
English: Today, there are three auspicious signs of God's providence for Jin Gongzi. It must be God's will to support him.

古文：同姓不婚，恶不殖也。
现代文：同姓的男女不结婚，怕的是子孙不会昌盛。
English: Men and women with the same surname do not marry, fearing that their children and grandchildren will not prosper.

古文：狐氏出自唐叔。狐姬，伯行之子也，实生重耳。
现代文：狐氏是唐叔的后代，狐姬是伯行的女儿，生了重耳。
English: Mr. Fox is a descendant of Uncle Tang, and Ms. Fox is the daughter of a priest, and she was born with heavy ears.

古文：成而隽才，离违而得所，久约而无衅，一也。
现代文：重耳长大成人，才能出众，虽然逃难离国，但举动得体，长久处于穷困而没有什么毛病，这是一。
English: It is one thing to grow up to be an adult, to be able to excel, to behave properly despite having fled the country, and to live in poverty for a long time without any problems.

古文：同出九人，唯重耳在，离外之患，而晋国不靖，二也。
现代文：同生的九个兄弟中，现在只有重耳还活着，虽然遭到陷害而流亡在外，而晋国国内却一直不安定，这是二。
English: Of the nine brothers who were born at the same time, only Jie Er is still alive. Although he was framed and went into exile, Jin has always been unstable, and this is the second.

古文：晋侯日载其怨，外内弃之；重耳日载其德，狐、赵谋之，三也。
现代文：百姓对晋侯怨声载道，日甚一日，国内外都抛弃了他；重耳则天天注重提高品德，有狐偃、赵衰等为他出谋划策，这是三。
English: The people complained loudly about Jin Hou. With each passing day, both at home and abroad abandoned him. Chong Er paid attention to improving his moral character every day, and Fox Fang, Zhao Zhen and others made suggestions for him. This is the third.

古文：在《周颂》曰： 天作高山，大王荒之。 
现代文：《周颂》上说： 上天生成了岐山，太王大大拓展了它。 
English: "Zhou Song" said: God was born as a mountain, and the great king greatly expanded it.

古文：荒，大之也。
现代文：荒，就是扩大的意思。
English: "Ara" means expansion.

古文：大天所作，可谓亲有天矣。
现代文：扩大上天所生成的，可以称得上是亲近上天了。
English: What is created by expanding heaven can be said to be close to heaven.

古文：晋、郑兄弟也，吾先君武公与晋文侯戮力一心，股肱周室，夹辅平王，平王劳而德之，而赐之盟质，曰： 世相起也。 
现代文：晋、郑两国是兄弟之国，我国的先王郑武公和晋文侯曾同心协力，捍卫周王室，辅佐周平王，平王感激他们，赐给他们盟信，说： 世世代代互相扶持。 
English: The two countries of Jin and Zheng are brotherly countries. The first king of our country, Zheng Wukong, and the prince of Jin Wenhou worked together to defend the Zhou royal family and assisted King Zhou Ping. King Ping was grateful to them and gave them a letter of alliance, saying: "Support each other for generations to come."

古文：若亲有天，获三祚者，可谓大天。
现代文：如果说亲近上天的话，获得三种吉兆的人，可以称得上是得天助了。
English: If we talk about being close to heaven, people who receive the three kinds of auspicious signs can be said to have received help from heaven.

古文：若用前训，文侯之功，武公之业，可谓前训。
现代文：如果说遵循先王的训诲，晋文侯的功劳，郑武公的业绩，可称得上是前训。
English: If we say that we follow the teachings of the former king, the merits of Jin Wenhou, and the performance of Zheng Wuchong, it can be said to be the previous teachings.

古文：若礼兄弟，晋、郑之亲，王之遗命，可谓兄弟。
现代文：如果说对兄弟要以礼相待，晋、郑两国同姓相亲，又有周平王的遗命，可称得上是兄弟。
English: If it is said that brothers should be treated with courtesy, Jin and Zheng, who have the same surname and are related to each other, and the last will and testament of King Zhou Ping, can be said to be brothers.

古文：若资穷困，亡在长幼，还轸诸侯，可谓穷困。
现代文：如果说要资助贫困，公子从小到大流亡在外，乘车周历各诸侯国，可称得上穷困。
English: If we talk about financing poverty, the fact that the prince lived in exile from childhood to adulthood, traveling by car to visit all the principalities, can be called poverty.

古文：弃此四者，以徼天祸，无乃不可乎？
现代文：抛弃了这四种美德，会招致天祸，恐怕不行吧！
English: Abandoning these four virtues will bring about a natural disaster, I'm afraid not!

古文：君其图之。 
现代文：请君王好好地想一想。 
English: Think about it carefully!

古文：弗听。
现代文：郑文公没有听从这番劝告。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：叔詹曰： 若不礼焉，则请杀之。
现代文：叔詹又说： 君王如果不能以礼相待，那么就请杀了他。
English: Uncle Zhan also said, "If the king cannot treat you with courtesy, then please kill him."

古文：谚曰： 黍稷无成，不能为荣。
现代文：有一句谚语说： 黍稷如果不长，就不能开花。
English: There is a saying: If the stem is not long, it will not bloom.

古文：黍不为黍，不能蕃庑。
现代文：黍不能长成黍，就不能茂盛。
English: If the reed cannot grow into a bramble, it cannot flourish.

古文：稷不为稷，不能蕃殖。
现代文：稷不能长成稷，就不能繁育。
English: If tadpoles can't grow into tadpoles, they can't reproduce.

古文：所生不疑，唯德之基。  
现代文：种什么得什么，这是没有疑问的，只有立德才是它的根基。  
English: There is no doubt that what you sow is what you reap. Only morality is its foundation.

古文：公弗听。
现代文：郑文公还是不听。
English: Zhuang didn't listen.

