古文：李广以私忿杀霸陵尉，上书自陈谢罪。
现代文：李广因个人怨恨杀了霸陵尉，上书给皇帝自己表明情况承认罪过。
English: Li Guang killed the tyrannical lieutenant because of personal grudge, and sent a letter to the emperor himself to show the situation and admit his guilt.

古文：武帝报之曰： 报忿除害，朕之所图于将军也。
现代文：汉武帝回复他说： 报复怨恨、剪除祸害，这正是对将军你的期望。
English: Emperor Hanwu replied to him, "To avenge grudges and eliminate evil, this is exactly what you expect from a general.

古文：若乃免冠徒跣，稽颡请罪，岂朕之指哉！ 
现代文：至于摘帽赤肋、叩头请罪，这难道是我的意图吗？ 
English: As for taking off my hat and bowing down, is that my intention?

古文：张敞杀絮舜，上书曰： 臣侍罪京兆，絮舜本臣素所厚吏，以臣有章劾当免，受记考事，谓臣 五日京兆 ，背恩忘义。臣窃以舜无状，枉法以诛之。
现代文：张敞杀了絮舜，上书说道： 臣下任职京兆尹，絮舜本来是我一向看重的官吏，因为有奏章弹劾我应当免职，接受罢免文书，审查被检举的事实，他对我说 你只能当五天京兆尹了 ，拒绝执行命令，这是忘恩负义，我私下认为絮舜的罪过不可用言语描述，违背法律把他杀了。
English: Zhang Zhan killed Xu Rong, saying in the letter: He was a subordinate official of Jing Zhaoyun, and Xu Rong was an official I had always valued. Because there was a petition to impeach me, I should be removed from office, accept the removal document, and review the fact that I was reported. He said to me, "You can only be Jing Zhaoyun for five days," and refused to carry out the order, which was ungrateful. I privately thought that Xu Rong's crime could not be described in words, and killed him in violation of the law.

古文：臣贼杀不辜，鞫狱故不直，死无所恨。 
现代文：我杀害了没有判罪的人，审定案件当然不正直，死了也没有什么抱憾。 
English: I killed a person who had not been convicted of a crime. Of course, it was dishonest to try the case, and I have no regrets about my death.

古文：宣帝引拜为刺史。
现代文：汉宣帝提拔了张敞，授予他刺史之职。
English: Emperor Han Xuan promoted Zhang Zhang and gave him the post of chief historian.

古文：汉世法令，最恶诞谩罔上。
现代文：汉代的法令，最厌恶应诞欺诈蒙骗主上。
English: The laws of the Han Dynasty, the most disgusted with the Christmas fraud.

古文：广、敞虽妄杀人，一语陈情，则赦之不问，所以开臣下不敢为欺之路也。
现代文：李广、张敞虽然妄自杀人，一番话陈述了真实情况，就被赦免不加追究，这是开辟臣下不敢进行欺君的道路所用的策略。
English: Although Li Guang and Zhang Zhang committed suicide, they were pardoned without being investigated after telling the truth. This was a strategy used to open the way for subjects not to dare to bully the emperor.

古文：武帝待张汤非不厚，及问鲁谒居事，谓其怀诈面欺，杀之不贷，真得御臣之法。
现代文：汉武帝对张汤并不是不重用，等到问到鲁谒居的事，认为他心怀诡诈面带欺满，杀了他毫不宽怒，这真是掌握了控制臣下的方法了。
English: Emperor Hanwu was not ungrateful to Zhang Tang. When he asked about Lu Xunju, he thought that he was deceitful and deceptive, and killed him without remorse. This was really a way to control his subjects.

