古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝，其父臬捩鸡，本出于西夷，自硃邪归唐，从硃邪入居阴山。
现代文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝，他的父亲皋捩鸡，本来是西夷人，自从朱邪归唐，跟随朱邪到阴山居住。
English: Gao Zu Sheng's article, Emperor Wu Ming and De Xiao, his father, Zou Ji, was originally a Westerner. Since Zhu Ya returned to Tang, he followed Zhu Ya to live in Yinshan.

古文：其后，晋王李克用起于云、朔之间，臬捩鸡以善骑射，常从晋王征伐有功，官至洺州刺史。
现代文：后来晋王李克用的势力在云、朔地区发展起来，皋捩鸡善骑射，常跟着晋王作战立功，官至洛州刺史。
English: Later, the power of the Jin king Li Ke used to develop in the Yun and Shuo regions, and the Qin chicken was good at riding and shooting, and often followed the Jin king to fight and make contributions, and the official went to the history of Luozhou.

古文：臬捩鸡生敬瑭，其姓石氏，不知其得姓之始也。
现代文：皋捩鸡生敬瑭，改姓名，不知他的姓开始是根据什么改的。
English: I don't know why he changed his surname in the first place.

古文：敬瑭为人沈厚寡言，明宗爱之，妻以女，是为永宁公主，由是常隶明宗帐下，号左射军。
现代文：敬瑭为人沉着寡言，明宗喜欢他，把女儿永宁公主嫁给他为妻，常在明宗帐下，号左射军。
English: He was a quiet and reserved person. Mingzong liked him and married his daughter, Princess Yongning, to him. He was often under the control of Mingzong and was known as the left archer.

古文：庄宗已得魏，梁将刘掞急攻清平，庄宗驰救之。兵未及阵，为掞所掩，敬瑭以十余骑横槊驰击，取之以旋。
现代文：庄宗已经攻占魏州，梁将刘寻阝急攻清平，庄宗去救，尚未立阵，就被刘寻阝包围，敬瑭率十数骑横拿长矛奔驰着攻击敌军，帮助庄宗突围回师。
English: Zhuang Zong had already captured Weizhou. Liang led Liu Xun to attack Qingping in haste. Zhuang Zong went to rescue Liu Xun, but he was surrounded by Liu Xun before he could set up a line of battle. More than a dozen of Zhuang Zong's followers, riding side by side and carrying spears, raced to attack the enemy army and help Zhuang Zong break through the encirclement and return to his division.

古文：庄宗拊其背而壮之，手啗以酥，啗酥，夷狄所重，由是名动军中。
现代文：庄宗拍着他的背感谢他，手拿乳酪给他吃，送乳酪，是少数民族的重礼，因此名震全军。
English: Zhuang Zong patted him on the back and thanked him. He took the cheese in his hand and gave it to him to eat. Giving cheese is a heavy gift for ethnic minorities, so the whole army was shocked.

古文：十五年，庄宗战于胡柳，前锋周德威战死，敬瑭以左射军从明宗复击败梁兵。
现代文：天十五年，庄宗在胡柳作战，前锋周德威战死，敬瑭用左射军跟随明宗击败梁兵。
English: In the fifteenth year of heaven, Zhuangzong fought in Hu Liu, the forward Zhou Dewei died in the battle, and Jingyao used the left archer to follow Mingzong and defeat Liang soldiers.

古文：明宗战胡卢套、杨村，为梁兵所败，敬瑭常脱明宗于危。
现代文：明宗在胡卢套、杨村被梁兵打败，敬瑭常把明宗救出重围。
English: In Hulutai and Yangcun, Mingzong was defeated by Liang soldiers, but Jingwu often rescued Mingzong from heavy siege.

古文：赵在礼之乱，明宗讨之，至魏而兵变，明宗初欲自归于天子，明己所以不反者。
现代文：赵在礼反叛，明宗去讨伐，至魏也发生兵变，明宗起初想自己回去向天子说明自己没有反叛。
English: Zhao rebelled at the ceremony, Mingzong went to the crusade, and there was also a mutiny in Wei. At first, Mingzong wanted to go back and explain to Tianzi that he did not rebel.

古文：敬瑭献计曰： 岂有军变于外，上将独无事者乎？
现代文：敬瑭献计说 ：哪有在外发生兵变，上将独自没有责任的事呢？
English: Jingyao Jianke said, "Is there any case of a mutiny outside the country for which the general is not solely responsible?"

古文：且犹豫者兵家大忌，不如速行。
现代文：而犹豫不决是兵家之大忌，应该立即进兵。
English: Hesitancy is a big no-no for soldiers, and they should enlist immediately.

古文：愿得骑兵三百先攻汴州，夷门天下之要害也，得之可以成事。 
现代文：我愿率三百骑兵先攻汴州，夷门是天下的要害，得到就可以成功。 
English: I am willing to lead three hundred cavalry to attack Bozhou first. Yimen is the key to the world. If we can get there, we will succeed.

古文：明宗然之，与之骁骑三百，渡黎阳为前锋，明宗遂入汴。
现代文：明宗同意了，给他三百骁骑，渡黎阳做前锋，明宗果然顺利攻占汴州。
English: Mingzong agreed, gave him three hundred mule riders, and went to Liyang to be a striker. Mingzong successfully conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：庄宗自洛后至，不得入，而兵皆溃去。
现代文：庄宗从洛阳来迟一步不得入，大军都溃散了。
English: Zhuangzong arrived from Luoyang one step too late and was unable to enter, and his large army was dispersed.

古文：庄宗西还，明宗以敬瑭为前锋趣汜水，且收其散卒。
现代文：庄宗回到洛阳，明宗用敬瑭为前锋进军汜水，并收集散卒。
English: Zhuangzong returned to Luoyang, and Mingzong marched into Lishui with Jingye as the vanguard and collected the scattered soldiers.

古文：庄宗遇弑，明宗入立，拜敬瑭保义军节度使，赐号 竭忠建策兴复功臣 ，兼六军诸卫副使。
现代文：庄宗被弑，明宗入京称帝，升敬瑭为保义军节度使，赐号 竭忠建策兴复功臣 ，兼六军诸卫副使。
English: Zhuangzong was beheaded, Mingzong entered Beijing and was proclaimed emperor, and Xingjing was promoted to be the festival envoy of the Guoying Army, and was given the title of 竭忠建策兴复功臣, as well as the deputy envoy of the Six Armies and the Guards.

古文：在陕为政以廉闻。
现代文：在陕州因为政廉洁而闻名。
English: In Shaanxi Province, it is famous for its political integrity.

古文：是时，诸侯多不奉法，邓州陶、亳州李鄴皆以赃污论死，明宗下诏书褒廉吏普州安崇阮、洺州张万进、耀州孙岳等以讽天下，而以敬瑭为首。
现代文：那时诸侯多不守法，邓州陶王巳、亳州李邺都因贪污被处死，明宗下诏书褒奖廉吏普州安崇阮、氵名州张万进、耀州孙岳等人以宣示天下，而以敬瑭为第一。
English: At that time, many feudal lords did not abide by the law. Tang Zhou Tao Wang Si and Zhang Zhou Li Xi were both executed for corruption. Under the Ming Dynasty, the imperial edict rewarded corrupt officials such as Pu Zhou An Chong Ruan, Zhang Wan Jin of Zhang Ming Zhou, and Sun Yue of Yaozhou with the title of "proclaiming to the world," with Jing Yi as the first.

古文：天成二年十月，从幸汴州，为御营使，拜宣武军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，六军副使如故，改赐 耀忠匡定保节功臣。 
现代文：天成二年十月，跟随明宗到汴州，为御营使，升宣武军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，仍任六军副使；改赐 耀忠匡定保节功臣 。
English: In October of the 2nd year of Tiancheng, he followed Mingzong to Zhangzhou as the imperial envoy, and was promoted to the imperial envoy of the Xuanwu army, the imperial envoy of the festival, and the commanding envoy of the guards of the pro-army horse-marching army, and still served as the deputy envoy of the Sixth Army; he was renamed Yaozhong Qianding Festival Hero.

古文：三年四月，徙镇天雄，拜同中书门下平章事、兴唐尹。
现代文：天成三年四月，移镇天雄，升同中书门下平章事、兴唐尹。
English: In April of the third year of Tiancheng, he moved to the town of Tianxiong, and was promoted to the position of Zhongshumen under Ping Zhangji and Xing Tangyin.

古文：五月，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：五月，授给驸马都尉。
English: In May, he was awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：董璋反东川，为行营都招讨使，不克而还。
现代文：董璋在东川反叛，石敬瑭任行营都招讨使，未攻下而回。
English: Dong Xuan rebelled in the East River, and Shi Jingxuan, who was in charge of the camp, invited envoys, but did not attack and returned.

古文：复兼六军诸卫副使。
现代文：再兼六军诸卫副使。
English: He was also the vice-envoy of the Six Army Guards.

古文：徙镇河阳三城，未行，而契丹、吐浑、突厥皆入寇，是时，秦王从荣统六军，敬瑭疑其必及祸，不欲为其副，乃自请行。及制出，不落副使，辄复辞行。
现代文：移镇河阳三城，未行，契丹、吐浑、突厥都进犯边境，那时秦王从荣统率六军，敬瑭怀疑他必然生出祸端，不愿当他的副手，就自己请求出镇御敌，谁知制书出，没有免去副使之职，又再去请求辞职出镇。
English: Before moving to the three cities of Heyang, the Khitan, the Tuhun, and the Turks all invaded the border. At that time, King Qin led the six armies from Rongtong, and Jingyu suspected that he would inevitably cause a disaster. He did not want to be his deputy, so he asked to leave the town to fight the enemy. Who knows if he made a written request, did not remove the deputy from his post, and then asked to resign and leave the town.

古文：明宗数责大臣问谁可行者，范延光、赵延寿等卒以敬瑭为请，乃拜河东节度使、大同彰国振武威塞等军蕃汉马步军总管，落六军副使，乃行。
现代文：明宗几次要大臣讨论谁能出镇防边，范延光、赵延寿等人都推荐敬瑭，于是任命他为河东节度使，大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军蕃汉马步军总管，免去六军副使，才出镇。
English: Mingzong several times asked the minister to discuss who could leave the town to defend the border. Fan Yanguang, Zhao Yanshou and others all recommended Jingwu, so he appointed him as the commander of the Hedong Festival, the general manager of the Han horse-marching army of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu and Wessai, and the deputy commander of the Sixth Army, before leaving the town.

古文：明年，明宗崩，愍帝即位，加中书令。
现代文：长兴四年，明宗去世，愍帝即位，加中书令。
English: In the fourth year of Changxing, Emperor Mingzong died, Emperor Xu ascended to the throne, and the imperial edict was issued.

古文：三月，徙镇成德。
现代文：三月，移镇成德。
English: In March, moved to Chengde.

古文：清泰元年五月，复镇太原，来朝京师。
现代文：清泰元年五月，再镇太原，到京城朝拜。
English: In May of the first year of the Qing dynasty, he returned to Taiyuan and went to worship in Beijing.

古文：潞王从珂反于凤翔，愍帝出奔，遇敬瑭于道。敬瑭杀帝从者百余人，幽帝于卫州而去。废帝即位，疑敬瑭必反。
现代文：潞王从珂在凤翔造反，愍帝出逃在路上遇见敬瑭，敬瑭杀帝从者一百多人，把帝幽禁在卫州而去，废帝即位，怀疑敬瑭必反叛。
English: King Yao rebelled from Ke in Fengxiang, Emperor Yao fled and met King Jing on the road, King Jing killed more than a hundred of the emperor's followers, imprisoned the emperor in Weizhou, dethroned the emperor, and suspected that King Jing would rebel.

古文：天福元年五月，徙镇天平，敬瑭果不受命，谓其属曰： 先帝授吾太原使老焉，今无故而迁，是疑吾反也。
现代文：天福元年，移镇天平，敬瑭果然不接受命令，对部下说： 先帝任命我镇守太原，是叫我养老，现在无故迁徙，是怀疑我造反呀。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, when he moved to the town of Tianping, Jing Yao did not accept the order and said to his subordinates: The former emperor appointed me to be the town guard of Taiyuan because he wanted me to retire, but now I am migrating for no reason because he suspects me of rebelling.

古文：且太原地险而粟多，吾当内檄诸镇，外求援于契丹，可乎？ 
现代文：而且太原地险粮多，我如果传檄诸镇，外求援于契丹，能成功吗？ 
English: Moreover, there are many food banks in Taiyuan. If I spread the word to the towns and ask for help from the Khitan, will I be successful?

古文：桑维翰、刘知远等共以为然。
现代文：桑维翰、刘知远等都认为可以成功。
English: Sang Weihan, Liu Zhiyuan and others all believe that it can be successful.

古文：乃上表论废帝不当立，请立许王从益为明宗嗣。
现代文：于是上表说废帝不应该当皇帝，请求立许王益为帝。
English: As a result, the above table said that the deposed emperor should not be emperor, and requested that Xu Wangyi be made emperor.

古文：废帝下诏削夺敬瑭官爵，命张敬达等讨之，敬瑭求援于契丹。
现代文：废帝下诏削夺敬瑭官爵，命张敬达等人去讨伐，敬瑭向契丹求援。
English: Under the deposed emperor, Zhao cut off the official title of Jing Yi, ordered Zhang Jingda and others to go to the crusade, and Jing Yi appealed to Khitan for help.

古文：九月，契丹耶律德光入自雁门，与唐兵战，敬达大败。
现代文：九月，契丹耶律德光率军入雁门关，与唐兵交战，敬达大败。
English: In September, the army led by Qidan Yerudong entered the Wild Goose Pass and fought with the Tang soldiers, resulting in a crushing defeat for Jingda.

古文：敬瑭夜出北门见耶律德光，约为父子。
现代文：敬瑭夜出北门见耶律德光，约为父子。
English: In the evening of the 7th day of the 7th month, he went out of the north gate to see the light of Yelu Deguang. It was about father and son.

古文：十一月丁酉，皇帝即位，国号晋。
现代文：十一月十二日，即帝位，国号晋。
English: On November 12, the emperor ascended to the throne, and the country was renamed Jin.

古文：以幽、涿、蓟、檀、顺、瀛、莫、蔚、朔、云、应、新、妫、儒、武、寰州入于契丹。
现代文：把幽、涿、蓟、檀、顺、瀛、莫、蔚、朔、云、应、新、妫、儒、武、寰十六州割让给契丹。
English: He ceded 16 provinces to Khitan, including Yu, Zhou, Zhou, Tan, Shun, Zhou, Mo, Wei, Shuo, Yun, Ying, Xin, Zhou, Confucius, Wu and Zhou.

古文：己亥，大赦，改元。
现代文：十四日，大赦，改元天福。
English: On the 14th, there was a general amnesty and the era was changed to Tenpu.

古文：掌书记桑维翰为翰林学士、尚书礼部侍郎，知枢密使事。
现代文：任掌书记桑维翰为翰林学士、尚书礼部侍郎，管枢密使事。
English: The secretary-in-charge, Sang Weihan, was a scholar of Hanlin, the attendant of the Shoshu etiquette department, and in charge of the imperial envoys.

古文：闰月丙寅，翰林学士承旨、尚书户部侍郎赵莹为门下侍郎，桑维翰为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事，兼枢密使。
现代文：闰十一月十一日，任翰林学士承旨、尚书户部侍郎赵莹为门下侍郎，桑维翰为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，兼枢密使。
English: On the 11th day of the 11th month, Zhao Ying, who was appointed as Hanlin's bachelor's successor and Shangshu's household attendant, was the attendant, Sang Weihan was the junior attendant of the middle school, the junior subordinate of the middle school, and also a confidential envoy.

古文：甲戌，赵德钧及其子延寿叛于唐来降，契丹锁之以归。
现代文：十九日，赵德钧及其子延寿叛唐来归降，契丹给他们戴上枷锁随同北归。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Deyu and his son Yan Shou defected to the Tang Dynasty and surrendered. Khitan put shackles on them and they returned to the north.

古文：己卯，次河阳，节度使苌从简叛于唐来降。
现代文：二十四日，到河阳，节度使苌从简叛唐来归降。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he went to Heyang, and the festival made him surrender from Jianren Tang.

古文：辛巳，至自太原。
现代文：二十六日，从太原到达洛阳。
English: On the 26th, from Taiyuan to Luoyang.

古文：卢文纪、姚顗罢。
现代文：卢文纪、姚岂页罢相。
English: Lu Wenji and Yao Jizhe retired from the stage.

古文：甲申，大赦，杀张延朗、刘延朗，赦房暠。
现代文：二十九日，大赦，杀张延朗、刘延朗，赦房詗。
English: On the 29th, there was an amnesty for the killing of Zhang Yanlang, Liu Yanlang, and the pardoning of Fang Jun.

古文：十二月乙酉，如河阳。
现代文：十二月一日，前往河阳。
English: On December 1st, he went to Hayao.

古文：追降王从珂为庶人。
现代文：追降潞王从珂为庶人。
English: He chased down and dethroned Shao Wang and became a commoner.

古文：丁亥，司空冯道兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三日，任司空冯道兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the third day, he was appointed as the attendant of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：己丑，曹州指挥使石重立杀其刺史郑玩。
现代文：五日，曹州指挥使石重立杀其刺史郑玩。
English: On the fifth day, the commander of Caozhou ordered Shi Chongli to kill his assassin, Zheng Yu.

古文：辛卯，御札求直言。
现代文：七日，下御札要求群臣敢于直言。
English: On the seventh day, the lower court demanded that the ministers dare to speak out.

古文：癸巳，镇州牙内都虞候秘琼逐其节度副使李彦琦。
现代文：九日，镇州牙内都虞候秘琼驱逐其节度副使李彦琦。
English: On the 9th, Zhenzhou's Inner Capital, Hechong, expelled his deputy envoy Li Yanqi.

古文：同州裨将门鐸杀其将杨汉宾。
现代文：同州裨将门铎杀其将杨汉宾。
English: The same state will help the door knock to kill its will Yang Hanbin.

古文：庚子，天平军节度使王建立杀其副使李彦赟。
现代文：十六日，天平军节度使王建立杀其副使李彦斌贝。
English: On the 16th, the Tianping Army Festival made Wang Jianli kill his deputy envoy Li Yanbin Bei.

古文：旱。
现代文：旱灾。
English: Drought.

古文：二年春正月癸亥，安远军节度使卢文进叛降于吴。
现代文：天福二年正月十日，安远军节度使卢文进叛变投降吴。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the second year of Tianfu, the Anyuan Army's festival made Lu Wenjin mutiny and surrender to Wu.

古文：丁卯，天雄军节度使范延光杀齐州防御使秘琼。
现代文：十四日，天雄军节度使范延光杀齐州防御使秘琼。
English: On the 14th, Fan Yanguang, the commander of the Tianxiong Army, killed Hui Qiong, the commander of the defense of Qizhou.

古文：戊寅，兵部侍郎李崧为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，枢密使。
现代文：二十五日，任兵部侍郎李菘为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、枢密使。
English: On the 25th, Li Xi, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the subordinate of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the confidential envoy.

古文：封唐宗室子为公，及隋酅公为二王后，以周介公备三恪。二月丁西，契丹使太子解里来。
现代文：封唐宗室子为公，对唐天子的子孙礼之如宾客。二月十四日，契丹使者皇太子解里来。
English: On February 14th, the emissary of the Khitan Empire, the crown prince, arrived.

古文：三月庚辰，如汴州。
现代文：三月二十七日，前往汴州。
English: On March 27th, he went to Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月丁亥，赦囚，蠲民租赋。
现代文：四月五日，大赦囚犯，免除当年租赋。
English: On April 5, the prisoners were amnestied and exempted from the rent of the year.

古文：赵莹使于契丹。
现代文：派赵莹出使契丹。
English: He sent Zhao Yingying as an envoy to Khitan.

古文：辛卯，宣武军节度使杨光远进助国钱。
现代文：九日，宣武军节度使杨光远进助国钱。
English: On the 9th, the Xuanwu Army Festival made Yang Guang go far to help the country.

古文：契丹使宫苑使李可兴来。
现代文：契丹派宫苑使李可兴来。
English: The palace of the Khitan faction made Li Ke rise.

古文：五月壬戌，御札求直言。
现代文：五月十一日，御札求直言。
English: On May 11th, Mifuda asked for a straight answer.

古文：丁丑，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖璟谥曰孝安，庙号靖祖，祖妣秦氏谥曰孝安元；曾祖彬谥曰孝简，庙号肃祖，祖妣安氏谥曰孝简恭；祖昱谥曰孝平，庙号睿祖，祖妣来氏谥曰孝平献；考绍雍谥曰孝元，庙号献祖，妣何氏谥曰孝元懿。
现代文：二十六日，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖王景谥曰孝安，庙号靖祖，祖妣秦氏谥曰孝安元；曾祖郴谥曰孝简，庙号肃祖，祖妣安氏谥曰孝简恭；祖昱谥曰孝平，庙号睿祖，祖妣来氏谥曰孝平献；考绍雍谥曰孝元，庙号献祖，妣何氏谥曰孝元懿。
English: On the 26th, the emperor and empress were named after the revered ancestors: the great-great-grandfather Wang Jingyu was named Xiao'an, the temple was named Jingzu, the ancestor of the Qin Dynasty was named Xiao'an Yuan; the great-great-grandfather Zeng Zuyu was named Xiao'an Jian, the temple was named Suzu, the ancestor of the An Dynasty was named Xiao'an Jian; the ancestor Zhouyu was named Xiao'ping, the temple was named Rui Zu, and the ancestor of the Lai Dynasty was named Xiao'ping Xian; the great-great-great-grand

古文：六月癸未，契丹使夷离毕来。
现代文：六月二日，契丹使者夷离毕来。
English: On June 2, the Khitan emissaries left.

古文：天雄军节度使范延光反。
现代文：天雄军节度使范延光反叛。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled against the Tianxiong Army.

古文：丁酉，传箭于义成军节度使符彦饶。
现代文：十六日，赐箭给义成军节度使符彦饶。
English: On the sixteenth day, he gave arrows to the Yicheng Army to celebrate the festival, so that Fuhiko would be spared.

古文：丁未，杨光远为魏府四面行营都部署。
现代文：二十六日，任杨光远为魏府四面行营都部署。
English: On the 26th, Yang Guangyuan was deployed to all four sides of Weifu.

古文：东都巡检张从宾反，留守判官李遐死之，奉国都指挥使侯益、护圣都指挥使杜重威讨之。
现代文：东都巡检张从宾反叛，留守判官李遐死，派奉国都指挥使侯益、护圣都指挥使杜重威去讨伐。
English: Zhang Congbin, the inspector of Dongdu, rebelled, and the judge who stayed behind, Li Xioming, died. He sent Hou Yi, the commanding officer of Fengguodu, and Du Chongwei, the commanding officer of Xuchangdu, to fight.

古文：从宾寇河阳，杀皇子重乂；寇河南，杀皇子重信。
现代文：从宾进犯河阳，杀皇子重信；进犯河南，杀皇子重繧。
English: From Bin, they invaded Heyang and killed Prince Shigenobu; they invaded Henan and killed Prince Shigenobu.

古文：秋七月，从宾陷汜水关，杀巡检使宋廷浩。
现代文：七月，从宾攻占汜水关，杀巡检使宋廷浩。
English: In July, he captured Suishuiguan from the guests and killed the inspector Song Tinghao.

古文：壬子，右卫大将军尹晖叛奔于吴，不克，伏诛。
现代文：右卫大将军尹晕叛逃淮南，在路上被杀。
English: Right Guard General Yin Huan defected to Huainan and was killed on the road.

古文：右监门卫大将军娄继英叛降于张从宾。
现代文：右监门卫大将军娄继英叛变投降张从宾。
English: Zhang Congbin, the Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General, led the mutiny and surrender of Zou Jiying.

古文：义成军乱，杀戍将侍卫马步军都指挥使白奉进。
现代文：义成军内乱，杀戍将侍卫马步军都指挥使白奉进。
English: When the Yicheng Army was in a state of civil disorder, the general who had killed the eunuch commanded the guards and horse infantry to march into the city.

古文：甲寅，戍将奉国指挥使马万执符彦饶归于京师，命杀之于赤冈。
现代文：四日，戍将奉国指挥使马万捉住符彦饶送往京城，诏命在赤冈杀掉。
English: On the fourth day of the year, Gong ordered Ma Wan to capture Fuhiko Rao and send him to the capital, ordering him to be killed in Akaoka.

古文：乙卯，杨光远为魏府行营都招讨使。
现代文：五日，任光远为魏府行营都招讨使。
English: On the fifth day, Ren Guangyuan invited envoys from Wei Prefecture.

古文：辛酉，杜重威克汜水关。
现代文：十一日，杜重威攻克汜水关，张从宾投河死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Du Chongwei conquered Shanshui Pass and Zhang Congbin died in the river.

古文：壬申，杨光远克博州。
现代文：二十二日，杨光远攻克博州。
English: On the 22nd, Yang Guangyuan invaded Kebo Prefecture.

古文：丙子，安州屯防指挥使王晖杀其节度使周瑰，右卫上将军李金全讨之。
现代文：二十六日，安州屯防指挥使王晖杀其节度使周瑰，派右卫大将军李金全去讨伐。
English: On the 26th, the commander of the Anzhou garrison ordered Wang Xizhi to kill his commander Zhou Gui and sent the right guard general Li Jinquan to fight.

古文：八月丙申，静难军节度使安叔千进添都马。
现代文：八月二十六日，靖难军节度使安叔千进添都马。
English: On August 26th, the Jingnan Army Festival brought thousands of Anshu into the capital.

古文：乙巳，赦非死罪囚及张从宾、符彦饶、王晖余党。
现代文：二十五日，赦非死罪囚及张从宾、符彦饶、王晖余党。
English: On the 25th, he pardoned non-death-row prisoners, including Zhang Congbin, Fu Yanrao, and Wang Xuan.

古文：九月，杨光远进粟。
现代文：九月，杨光远进粟。
English: In September, Yang Guang fell into a coma.

古文：冬十月辛巳，禁造甲兵。
现代文：十月二日，禁造甲兵。
English: On October 2, the ban on armored soldiers was lifted.

古文：三年春二月戊戌，诸镇皆进物以助国。
现代文：天福三年二月二十一日，诸镇都进献物资帮助国家。
English: On February 21st, the third year of Tianfu, all towns donated materials to help the country.

古文：三月壬戌，回鹘可汗王仁美使翟全福来。丁丑，禁私造铜器。
现代文：三月十五日，回鹘可汗派翟全福来。三十日，禁止私造铜器。
English: On the 15th of March, the Hui Khan sent Gao Quanfu here. On the 30th, it was forbidden to make copperware without permission.

古文：秋七月辛酉，以皇业钱作受命宝。
现代文：七月十六日，用皇帝私钱做受命宝。
English: On July 16th, he used the emperor's private money to make the ordered treasure.

古文：八月戊寅，冯道及左仆射刘昫为契丹册礼使。
现代文：八月四日，派冯道及左仆射刘日句为契丹册礼使。
English: On August 4th, he sent Feng Dao and his left-hand man Liu Rixuan as envoys to the Khitan capital.

古文：壬午，澶州刺史冯晖降。
现代文：八日，澶州刺史冯晖降晋。
English: On the 8th, Zhangzhou's top official, Feng Yu, was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：丙戌，许御署官选。
现代文：十二日，许御署官选。
English: On the 12th, the election of Xu Mi Detachment officials began.

古文：己丑，蠲水旱民税。
现代文：十五日，免去当年水旱灾区农民租税。
English: On the 15th, farmers in flood and drought-stricken areas were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：辛丑，归伶官于契丹。
现代文：二十七日，把伶官送给契丹。
English: On the 27th, the eunuch was given to Khitan.

古文：九月己酉，赦范延光。
现代文：九月五日，赦范延光。
English: On September 5, Fan Yanguang was pardoned.

古文：己未，归静鞭官刘守威，金吾勘契官王殷、司天鸡叫学生殷晖于契丹。
现代文：十五日，送静鞭官刘守威、金吾勘契官王殷、司天鸡叫学生殷晖给契丹。
English: On the fifteenth day, Liu Shouwei, the official who sent Jing whip, Wang Yin, the official of Jingu Kankei, and Siti Tianqi called the student Yin Qi to Qidan.

古文：于阗使马继荣来，回鹘使李万金来。
现代文：于田使者马继荣来。回鹘使者李万金来。
English: Yu Tian's emissary Ma Jirong came. Hui Xuan's emissary Li Wanjin came.

古文：己巳，赦魏州，蠲民税。
现代文：二十五日，赦魏州，免当年农民租税。
English: On the 25th, Wei Zhou was pardoned, and the farmers were exempted from the tax of that year.

古文：是月，宣徽南院使刘处让为枢密使。
现代文：同月，任宣徽南院使刘处让为枢密使。
English: In the same month, he was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui Province, and Liu was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：冬十月戊寅，契丹使中书令韩频来奉册曰英武明义皇帝。
现代文：十月五日，契丹使者中书令韩颊来奉册曰英武明义皇帝。
English: On October 5th, the Khitan envoy sent a letter to Han Jian to be registered as Emperor Yingwu Mingyi.

古文：庚辰，升汴州为东京，以洛阳为西京，雍州为晋昌军。
现代文：七日，升汴州为东京，以洛阳为西京，雍州为晋昌军。
English: On the 7th, Shengzhu became Tokyo, Luoyang became West Beijing, and Yongzhou became Jinchang.

古文：戊子，右金吾卫大将军马从斌使于契丹。
现代文：十五日，派右金吾卫大将军马从斌出使契丹。
English: On the 15th, he sent Maj. Gen. Ma Congbin as an envoy to Khitan.

古文：己未，契丹使梅里来。
现代文：二十二日，契丹使者梅里来。
English: On the 22nd, the Khitan envoy Meri arrived.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：二十五日，大赦。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：庚子，封李圣天为大宝于阗国王。
现代文：二十七日，封李圣天为大宝于田国王。
English: On the 27th, Li Shengtian was crowned the king of Yutian.

古文：十一月辛亥，升广晋府为鄴都。
现代文：十一月八日，升广晋府为邺都。
English: On November 8th, Jingu Prefecture was promoted to the capital.

古文：壬戌，除铸钱令。
现代文：十九日，公布铸钱的诏令。
English: On the 19th, the edict of minting money was issued.

古文：十二月丙子，封子重贵为郑王。
现代文：十二月三日，封子从贵为郑王。
English: On December 3, the seal was changed from Gui to Zheng Wang.

古文：四年春正月，盗发唐愍皇帝墓。
现代文：天福四年正月，盗发掘唐愍帝墓。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Tianfu, the tomb of the Tang Dynasty was excavated.

古文：辛亥，澶州防御使张从恩为枢密副使。
现代文：九日，澶州防御使张从恩为枢密副使。
English: On the 9th, the defense of Zhangzhou promoted Zhang Cong'en to Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：旌表深州民李自伦门闾。
现代文：旌表深州民李自伦门闾。
English: On the other hand, Li Zilun, a resident of Shenzhou, was the most popular.

古文：三月乙巳，回鹘使其都督拽里敦来。
现代文：三月三日，回鹘使者都督拽里敦来。
English: On March 3rd, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty, Tudu, dragged Ritun here.

古文：丙辰，颁《调元历》。
现代文：十四日，颁布《调元历》。
English: On the 14th, the Revised Chinese Calendar was promulgated.

古文：灵州戍将王彦忠以怀远城反。
现代文：灵州戍将王彦忠在怀远城反叛。
English: Lingshou commander Wang Yanzhong rebelled in Huaiyuan City.

古文：己未，彦忠降，供奉官齐延祚杀之。
现代文：十七日彦忠降，供奉官齐延祚杀掉他。
English: On the seventeenth day of Hikotada's abdication, the vassals gathered and killed him.

古文：夏四月辛巳，封回鹘可汗王仁美为奉化可汗。
现代文：四月十日，封回鹘可汗王仁美为奉化可汗。
English: On April 10th, Wang Renmei, the second Khan, was enthroned as the Fenghua Khan.

古文：甲申，废枢密使。
现代文：十三日，废枢密使。
English: On the 13th, the Privy Council was abolished.

古文：秋七月丙辰，复禁铸钱。
现代文：七月十七日，又禁止铸钱。
English: On July 17th, the minting of money was also prohibited.

古文：闰月壬申，桑维翰罢。
现代文：闰七月三日，桑维翰罢相。
English: On 3 July, Sanveighan retired from the stage.

古文：八月己亥朔，河决博平。
现代文：八月一日，黄河在博平决堤。
English: On August 1, the Yellow River burst its banks in Boping.

古文：西戎寇泾州，彰义军节度使张彦泽败之，执其首领野离罗虾独。
现代文：西戎进犯泾州，彰义军节度使张彦泽打败西戎，捉住其首领野离罗虾独。
English: Xi Rong invaded Bozhou, and Zhang Yanze defeated Xi Rong and captured his leader, Noryang Rongdol.

古文：九月丁丑，契丹使粘木孤来。
现代文：九月九日，契丹使者粘木孤来。
English: On September 9th, the Khitan envoy, Mu Mu, arrived.

古文：癸未，封李从益为郇国公以奉唐后。
现代文：十五日，封李从益为郇国公以做唐后嗣。
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Congyi was named the prince of the State of Qi and became the Tang's heir.

古文：丙戌，高丽王建使其广评侍郎邢顺来。
现代文：十八日，高丽王建派使者广评侍郎邢顺来。
English: On the 18th, King Jian of Goryeo sent an envoy, the general courtier Jangshun, to Korea.

古文：冬十一月乙亥，立唐高祖、太宗、庄宗、明宗、愍帝庙于西京。
现代文：十一月八日，立唐高祖、太宗、庄宗、明宗、愍帝庙于西京。
English: On November 8th, the Tang Gaozu, Taizong, Zhuozong, Mingzong, and Qiandi temples were established in West Beijing.

古文：戊子，契丹使遥折来，吐蕃罢延族来附。
现代文：二十一日，契丹使者遥折来，吐蕃罢延族来归附。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Khitan envoys came from afar, and the Yan people came from Tubo to join them.

古文：五年春正月丁卯朔，德音除民公私债。
现代文：天福五年正月一日，下诏免去民众公私债务。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Tianfu, the following edict exempted the public from public and private debts.

古文：己丑，回鹘使石海金来。
现代文：二十三日，回鹘使者石海金来。
English: On the 23rd, the envoy of the Hui Dynasty, Shihai Jin, came.

古文：夏四月甲子，契丹兴化王来。
现代文：四月二十九日，契丹兴化王来。
English: On April 29, Khitan Emperor Xinghua came.

古文：五月丙戌，安远军节度使李金全叛附于唐。
现代文：五月二十一日，安远军节度使李金全叛变归附南唐。
English: On the 21st of May, the Anyuan army staged a mutiny and made Li Jinquan surrender to Southern Tang.

古文：六月癸卯，李昪遣其将李承裕入于安州，金全奔于唐，安远军节度使马全节及承裕战，败之。丁巳，克安州，承裕奔于云梦，全节执而杀之。
现代文：六月九日，李繮派李承裕率军入安州，金全逃归南唐，安远军节度使马全节战败承裕。二十三日，攻克安州，承裕逃到云梦，被全节捉住杀掉了。
English: On June 9, Li Yu sent Li Chengyu to lead the army into Anzhou, Jin Quan fled to South Tang, and the Anyuan army defeated and killed Chengyu. On the 23rd, after conquering Anzhou, Chengyu fled to Yunmeng, where he was captured and killed by the Anyuan army.

古文：秋八月丁酉，阅稼于西郊。
现代文：八月四日，在西郊视察农民庄稼。
English: On August 4, he inspected farmers' crops in the western suburbs.

古文：己未，西京留守杨光远杀太子太师范延光。
现代文：二十六日，西京留守杨光远杀太子太师范延光。
English: On the 26th, Yang Guangyuan, who stayed behind in West Beijing, killed Prince and Grand Master Fan Yanguang.

古文：九月丁卯，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月五日，任翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 5th, Hanlin B.C. was appointed as Jongji, Hube Jiro, Chusho Jiro, and Shimohei Jiro, Chusho Mon.

古文：辛巳，阅稼于沙台。
现代文：十九日，在沙台视察农民庄稼。
English: On the 19th, he inspected farmers' crops in Shatai.

古文：冬十月丁未，契丹使舍利来。
现代文：十月十五日，契丹使者舍利来。
English: On October 15, the Khitan envoy, Sheri, arrived.

古文：十一月丙子，冬至，始用二舞。
现代文：十一月十五日，冬至，开始用二舞。
English: On November 15th, the winter solstice, it begins with two dances.

古文：六年春正月戊寅，封唐叔虞为兴安王，台骀为昌宁公。
现代文：天福六年正月十八日，封唐叔虞为兴安王，台骀为昌宁公。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the sixth year of Tianfu, Tang Shugu was named the King of Xing'an, and Taiyu was named the Prince of Changning.

古文：二月戊申，停买宴钱。
现代文：二月十八日，停止买宴钱。
English: On February 18th, it stopped buying banquet money.

古文：三月，除民二年至四年以前税。
现代文：三月，免去农民二年至四年以前的税。
English: In March, farmers were exempted from paying taxes for two to four years.

古文：夏四月己未，契丹使述括来。
现代文：四月三十日，契丹使者述括来。
English: On April 30th, the Khitan envoy summed up.

古文：五月，吐浑首领白承福来。
现代文：五月，吐浑首领白承福来。
English: In May, the leader of the Tuhun tribe, Bai Chengfu, came to visit.

古文：秋七月壬午，突厥使薛同海来。
现代文：七月二十四日，突厥使者薛同海来。
English: On July 24th, the Turkish envoy Xue Tonghai arrived.

古文：八月壬辰，如鄴都，开封尹郑王重贵留守东京，宣徽南院使张从恩东京内外兵马都监。
现代文：八月五日，前往邺都，开封尹郑王重贵留守东京，宣徽南院使张从恩为东京内外兵马都监。
English: On August 5th, he went to the capital, Kaifeng, leaving Yin Zheng Wang Chonggui to stay in Tokyo, and Zhang Cong'en, an envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council of Hunan Province, to be the inspector of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses in and around Tokyo.

古文：壬寅，大赦。
现代文：十五日，大赦。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：甲寅，光禄卿张澄使于契丹。
现代文：二十七日，派光禄卿张澄出使契丹。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Guanglu sent Zhang Cheng to send an envoy to Khitan.

古文：九月乙亥，前安国军节度使杨彦询使于契丹。
现代文：九月十八日，派前安国军节度使杨彦询出使契丹。
English: On September 18th, Yang Yan was sent to inquire about the envoy of Khitan.

古文：丁丑，吐浑使白可久来。
现代文：二十日，吐浑使者白可久来。
English: On the 20th, the emissaries from Tuban arrived.

古文：河决中都，入于沓河。
现代文：黄河在中都决堤，水流入沓河。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks in Zhongdu, and the water flowed into the Fen River.

古文：冬十月，河决滑、濮、郓、澶州。
现代文：十月，黄河在滑、濮、郓、澶州决堤。
English: In October, the Yellow River burst its banks in the cities of Nanning, Handan, Handan and Handan.

古文：山南东道节度使安从进反。
现代文：山南东道节度使安从进反叛。
English: Shannan, the host of the festival, caused An to rebel.

古文：十一月丁丑，西京留守高行周为南面军前都部署以讨之。
现代文：十一月二十一日，派西京留守高行周为南面军前都部署去讨伐。
English: On November 21st, Gao Xing Zhou, who was stationed in West Beijing, was sent to the southern front to fight.

古文：十二月丙戌朔，郑王重贵为广晋尹，徙封齐王。
现代文：十二月一日，郑王重贵为广晋尹，徙封齐王。
English: On December 1, Zheng Wang Ronggui became Guang Jin Yin, King of Qi.

古文：先锋都指挥使郭金海及安从进战于唐州，败之。
现代文：先锋都指挥使郭金海在唐州战败安从进。成德军节度使安重荣反。
English: Guo Jinhai defeated An Zongjin in Tangzhou by commanding the vanguard, and the German army defeated An Chong Rongjun.

古文：成德军节度使安重荣反。天平节度使杜重威为镇州行营招讨使。
现代文：派天平节度使杜重威为镇州行营招讨使。
English: He sent Tianping Jiedu to persuade Du Chongwei to go to Zhenzhou as an envoy.

古文：丙申，契丹遣使者来。
现代文：十一日，契丹派使者来。
English: On the eleventh day, Khitan sent an envoy.

古文：戊戌，杜重威及安重荣战于宗城，败之。七年春正月丁巳，克镇州，安重荣伏诛，赦广晋。
现代文：十三日，杜重威在宗城战败安重荣。天福七年正月二日，攻克镇州，安重荣处死，赦免广晋吏民。
English: On the 13th, Du Chongwei defeated An Chongrong in Zongcheng. On the 2nd day of the first month of the seventh year of Tianfu, he conquered Zhenzhou, executed An Chongrong, and pardoned the officials and people of Guangjin.

古文：庚午，契丹使达剌来。
现代文：十五日，契丹使者达剌来。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Khitan envoy, Daju, arrived.

古文：三月，归德军节度使安彦威塞决河于滑州。
现代文：三月，归德军节度使安彦威在滑州堵塞黄河缺口。
English: In March, the return of the German army caused An Yanwei to block the Yellow River gap in Luzhou.

古文：闰月，天兴蝗食麦。
现代文：闰三月，天兴县蝗虫吃麦苗。
English: In leap March, locusts in Tianxing County eat wheat seedlings.

古文：夏五月乙巳，尊皇太妃刘氏为太后。
现代文：五月二十二日，尊皇太妃刘氏为太后。
English: On May 22nd, Her Imperial Highness the Dowager Empress Liu became empress dowager.

古文：六月丙辰，吐浑使念丑汉来。
现代文：六月四日，吐浑使者念丑汉来。
English: On the 4th of June, the emissaries of Tuban read "Ugly Han."

古文：乙丑，皇帝崩于保昌殿。
现代文：十三日，皇帝死于保昌殿。
English: On the 13th, the emperor died in the Baochang Palace.

