古文：盖天地之所覆载，至大矣；日月之所临照，至广矣。
现代文：天地所覆盖与承载的，是最大的了；月所临照的地方，是最广阔的了。
English: What heaven and earth cover and support is the largest; the place where the moon shines is the widest.

古文：然则万物之内，民人寡而禽兽多；两仪之间，中土局而庶俗旷。
现代文：但是在万物之中，人的数量少而禽兽多；天地之间，中原狭小而庶俗广旷。
English: However, among all things, the number of people is small and the number of animals is large; between heaven and earth, the Central Plains are narrow and broad.

古文：求之邹说，诡怪之迹实繁；考之山经，奇谲之词匪一。
现代文：寻求邹卫的说法，诡怪的方面十分繁杂；考察《山海经》，奇谲之词各不相同。
English: Looking for the words of the guardian, the strange aspects are very complicated; examining the "Mountain and Sea Sutra," the strange words are different.

古文：周、孔存而不论，是非纷而莫辩。
现代文：周公、孔子，都是存而不评定，是非纷乱难以辨明。
English: Zhou Gong and Confucius both exist without evaluation, and it is difficult to distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：秦皇鞭笞天下，黩武于遐方；汉武士马强盛，肆志于远略。
现代文：秦始皇鞭笞天下，在远方滥用武力；汉武帝兵马强盛，纵情开拓疆土。
English: Qin Shihuang whipped the world and abused force in faraway places; Han Emperor Wu had a strong army and cavalry and indulged in territorial expansion.

古文：匈奴既却，其国已虚；犬马既来，其民亦困。
现代文：匈奴失败后，国家实力已虚弱；天马到来时，人民已经穷困。
English: After the defeat of the Xiongnu, the strength of the country was weak; when Tianma arrived, the people were already poor.

古文：是知鴈海龙堆，天所以绝夷夏也；炎方朔漠，地所以限内外也。
现代文：由此可知雁海龙堆，是上天用以隔绝夷夏的；南方炎炎之地与北方大漠，是地以此分隔内外的。
English: From this, it can be seen that the Wild Goose Sea Dragon Mound was used by the heavens to isolate Yixia; the southern land of flame and the northern desert were separated from each other by this.

古文：况乎时非秦、汉，志甚嬴、刘，违天道以求其功，殚民力而从所欲，颠坠之衅，固不旋踵。
现代文：何况时代并非秦、汉，志好又超过秦皇、汉武，违背天道以求取功劳，竭尽民力来实现欲望，覆灭的祸害，转眼就到。
English: What's more, this is not the Qin and Han dynasties. People are more ambitious than the Qin and Han emperors. They go against the heavenly way to seek merit, and they exhaust their people's strength to realize their desires. The calamity of destruction will come in the blink of an eye.

古文：是以先王设教，内诸夏而外夷狄；往哲垂范，美树德而鄙广地。
现代文：所以先王实行教化，先重视诸夏而后夷狄；往昔的贤哲垂示典范，赞美树立仁德而轻视拓广土地。
English: Therefore, the former king carried out enlightenment, first attaching importance to Zhu Xia and then to Yidi; the sages of the past set an example, praising the establishment of benevolence and despising the expansion of land.

古文：虽禹迹之东渐西被，不过海及流沙；王制之自北徂南，裁称穴居交趾。
现代文：虽然禹的行迹束行西进，也没有越过海和流沙；王朝的制度从北到南，衹称说于穴居交趾。
English: Although Yu's footsteps were bound westward, he did not cross the sea and the quicksand; the dynastic system from north to south is said to be in a cave.

古文：岂非道贯三古，义高百代者乎。
现代文：这不就是道贯于三古，义高于百代吗。
English: Isn't this what the Tao has been doing for three thousand years, and is more righteous than a hundred generations?

古文：有周承丧乱之后，属战争之日，定四表以武功，安三边以权道。
现代文：有周承接动乱的局势，一直处于战争之中，用武功平定四方，用权道安抚边境。
English: Zhou inherited the situation of turmoil and has been in the midst of war, using martial arts to pacify the four sides and using power to pacify the border.

古文：赵、魏尚梗，则结姻于北狄；厩库未实，则通好于西戎。
现代文：赵、魏有梗阻，就与北狄结姻；国库不充实，就与西戎通好。
English: If Zhao and Wei had any obstacles, they would form a marriage with Bei Di; if the state treasury was not full, they would make common cause with Xi Rong.

古文：由是德刑具举，声名遐洎。
现代文：因而仁德和刑罚都得以推广，声名远播。
English: As a result, both benevolence and punishment were promoted and became famous.

古文：卉服毡裘，辐协于属国；商胡贩客，填委于旗亭。
现代文：绵葛衣服、毛皮衣服，从各地属国聚集而来；各国来的商买，住满了酒楼。
English: Cotton-wool clothes and fur clothes came from all over the vassal states; merchants from all over the world came to buy, and the restaurants were full of them.

古文：虽东略漏三吴之地，南巡阻百越之境，而国威之所肃服，风化之所覃被，亦足为弘矣。
现代文：虽然束部治理不包括三呈之地，南方巡视不能达于百越，但是国威远扬，教化广及，也算是很宏大的了。
English: Although the administration of Sokube does not include the three provinces, and the inspection of the south cannot reach more than a hundred provinces, the national prestige is far-reaching, the education is extensive, and it is also very ambitious.

古文：其四夷来朝聘者，今并纪之于后。
现代文：四方民族按期来朝见的，现在都记录于后。
English: The peoples of the four directions have come to the DPRK as scheduled, and now they are all recorded later.

古文：至于道路远近，物产风俗，详诸前史，或有不同。
现代文：至于道路远近，物产风俗，前史记载很详细，可能有不同的地方。
English: As far as the roads are far and near, the products and customs, and the historical records are very detailed, there may be different places.

古文：斯皆录其当时所记，以备遗阙云尔。
现代文：这都是抄录当时的记载，以防有所阙失。
English: This is all a transcript of the records at the time, in case anything is lost.

古文：高丽者，其先出于夫余。
现代文：高丽，其先人出于夫余。
English: Goryeo, whose forefathers came from Fuyu.

古文：自言始祖曰朱蒙，河伯女感日影所孕也。
现代文：他们自称始祖叫朱蒙，是河伯之女被日影触动而怀孕生下来的。
English: They claim that their ancestor was called Zhu Meng, and that she was the daughter of Hebe, who was touched by the sun's shadow and became pregnant.

古文：朱蒙长而有材略，夫余人恶而逐之。
现代文：朱蒙长大后有才能谋略，夫余人不喜欢他而将他驱逐。
English: When Zhu Meng grew up, he had the ability to strategize. The rest of his husband did not like him and expelled him.

古文：土于纥斗骨城，自号曰高句丽，仍以高为氏。
现代文：于纥斗骨城居住，自称为高句丽，因而以高为姓。
English: He lived in Shantou Jiancheng and called himself Goguryeo, hence the surname Gao.

古文：其孙莫来渐盛，击夫余而臣之。
现代文：到其孙莫来时势力逐渐强盛，击败夫余并统治他们。
English: By the time of his son Moru, the forces had gradually become strong, defeating the husbands and ruling them.

古文：莫来裔孙琏，始通使于后魏。
现代文：莫来裔孙高琏，开始与后魏通使。
English: Sun Gaoqi, who was of Mola ethnicity, began to work with the post-Wei envoys.

古文：其地，东至新罗，西渡辽水二千里，南接百济，北邻靺鞨千余里。
现代文：其地，束边到新罗，西渡辽水二千里，南边与百济相接，北邻朱辐千余里。
English: In its place, Sokubei to Silla, west to Liaoshui two thousand miles, south to Baekje, north to Zhuhui more than a thousand miles.

古文：治平壤城。
现代文：都城在平壤。
English: The capital is in Pyongyang.

古文：其城，东西六里，南临浿水。
现代文：其城，东西六里，南面是湏水。
English: The city is six miles long from east to west, and Surabaya is to the south.

古文：城内唯积仓储器备，寇贼至日，方入固守。
现代文：在城中衹是积储粮食器械，寇贼来攻打时，方才入城固守。
English: In the city, only warehouses are piled up to store weapons and equipment. When thieves come, they only enter the city to hold out.

古文：王则别为宅于其侧，不常居之。
现代文：其王则于城侧另立住宅，不经常居住。
English: Its king, on the other hand, built a separate residence on the city side and did not live there very often.

古文：其外有国内城及汉城，亦别都也，复有辽东、玄菟等数十城，皆置官司，以相统摄。
现代文：其外有国内城及汉城，亦是别都，另有辽东、玄菟等数十城，都设置官署，加以统一管理。
English: In addition, there are domestic cities and Seoul, as well as Beidou, and dozens of cities such as Liaodong and Xuanwu, all of which have set up government offices for unified management.

古文：大官有大对卢，次有太大兄、大兄、小兄、意俟奢、乌拙、太大使者、大使者、小使者、褥奢、翳属、仙人并褥萨凡十三等，分掌内外事焉。
现代文：大官有大对卢，其次为太大兄、大兄、小兄、意俟奢、乌拙、太大使者、大使者、小使者、褥奢、翳属、仙人并褥萨共十三等，分别掌管内外事务。
English: There are thirteen major officials in Lu, followed by the great elder brother, the great elder brother, the small elder brother, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-

古文：其大对卢，则以强弱相陵，夺而自为之，不由王之署置也。
现代文：大对卢一职，是相互间以强凌弱，争夺自任的，不是由王所封立的。
English: The position of the Grand Prince of Lu is a self-appointed one, not a royal one, and they compete with each other to be the strongest.

古文：其刑法：谋反及叛者，先以火焚爇，然后斩首，籍没其家。盗者，十余倍征赃。若贫不能备，及负公私债者，皆听评其子女为奴婢以偿之。
现代文：其刑法：谋反及反叛的人，先以火焚烧，然后斩首，其家被籍没；偷盗者，罚十余倍的财物；如果贫困者不能缴纳，及欠公私债务的，可以以其子女为奴婢来抵偿。
English: Its criminal law: those who conspire and rebel are first burned with fire, then beheaded, and their homes are confiscated; those who steal are fined more than ten times their property; if the poor cannot pay, and those who owe public and private debts, they can use their children as slaves to compensate.

古文：丈夫衣同袖衫、大口裤、白韦带、黄革履。
现代文：男子所穿为同袖衫、大口裤、白韦带、黄革履。
English: Men wear the same-sleeved shirt, wide-legged trousers, white loincloth and yellow leather shoes.

古文：其冠曰骨苏，多以紫罗为之，杂以金银为饰。
现代文：所戴帽子称为骨苏，大多以紫罗制成，加杂金银为装饰。
English: The hats they wear are called ossuaries, mostly made of violet and decorated with gold and silver.

古文：其有官品者，又插二鸟羽于其上，以显异之。
现代文：凡是有官品的，在帽上插二根鸟雀羽毛，以显示与民不同。
English: Anyone with official attire should put two bird feathers on his cap to show that he is different from the common people.

古文：妇人服裙襦，裾袖皆为袂。
现代文：妇女穿裙襦，裙裾衣袖比较窄。
English: Women wear skirts with crotches, and the skirts have narrow sleeves.

古文：书籍有五经、三史、三国志、晋阳秋。
现代文：书籍有《五经》、《三史》、《三国志》、《晋阳秋》。
English: His books include "Five Classics," "Three Histories," "Three Kingdoms" and "Jinyang Autumn."

古文：兵器有甲弩弓箭戟捎矛鋋。
现代文：兵器有甲弩弓箭戟稍矛蜒。
English: Weapons include armor, bows and arrows, and a slightly curved spear.

古文：赋税则绢布及粟，随其所有，量贫富差等输之。
现代文：赋税收绢布及粮食，随从其所有，根据贫富的差别来收取。
English: The tax levied on cloth and grain, along with everything else, was levied according to the difference between the rich and the poor.

古文：土田塉薄，居处节俭。
现代文：土地贫瘠，生活节俭。
English: The land is barren, and life is frugal.

古文：然尚容止。
现代文：但是讲究仪容举止。
English: But he is very particular about his manners.

古文：多诈伪，言辞鄙秽，不简亲疏，乃至同川而浴，共室而寝。
现代文：行为多诈伪，说话粗鲁，不论亲疏，都在一条川溪中洗浴，同一间房屋中睡觉。
English: Their behavior is often deceitful, their speech is rude, and no matter how close they are, they all bathe in the same stream and sleep in the same house.

古文：风俗好淫，不以为愧。
现代文：风俗淫乱，男女之事认为很正常。
English: The customs are lewd, and affairs between men and women are considered normal.

古文：有游女者，夫无常人。
现代文：有些游女，没有固定的丈夫。
English: Some are vagabonds, without a permanent husband.

古文：婚娶之礼，略无财币，若受财者，谓之卖婢，俗甚耻之。
现代文：婚嫁娶亲的礼物，财物不多，如果接受财物，就被称为是卖婢，风俗认为是耻辱。
English: The gifts of marriage are few, and if they are accepted, it is called "selling a handmaid," which is considered a disgrace by custom.

古文：父母及夫丧，其服制同于华夏。
现代文：父母及丈夫去世，服制礼仪同于华夏。
English: After the death of her parents and husband, the dress code and etiquette remained the same in China.

古文：兄弟则限以三月。
现代文：兄弟之间限以三个月。
English: Three months between brothers.

古文：敬信佛法，尤好淫祀。
现代文：对佛教信仰敬重，尤其喜好不合礼制的祭祀。
English: He respects the Buddhist faith, and especially likes the rituals that are not ritualistic.

古文：又有神庙二所：一曰夫余神，刻木作妇人之象；一曰登高神，云是其始祖夫余神之子。
现代文：又有二所神庙：一是夫余神，用木雕刻为妇人的形象；二是登高神，说是他们始祖夫余神之子。
English: There are also two shrines: the first is that of Yu Yu, a woman's image carved from wood; the second is that of Deng Gao, who is said to be the son of Yu Yu, their ancestor.

古文：并置官司，遣人守护。
现代文：都设置管理机构，派人守护。
English: All of them have set up management agencies and sent people to guard them.

古文：盖河伯女与朱蒙云。
现代文：神是河伯女和朱蒙。
English: The gods are Hebe and Zhu Meng.

古文：琏五世孙成，大统十二年，遣使献其方物。
现代文：直堕第五世孙直盛，在太铲十二年，派遣使者贡献土产。
English: Sun Nao-sheng, the fifth generation of the direct descendant, sent an envoy to contribute to local production in the twelfth year of Taishao.

古文：成死，子汤立。
现代文：直盛死后，其子直荡嗣立。
English: After the death of Cheng, his son Tang ascended to the throne.

古文：建德六年，汤又遣使来贡。
现代文：塑六年。直荡又派遣使者来朝贡。
English: It's been six years since then, and Chiharu has sent an emissary to pay tribute.

古文：高祖拜汤为上开府仪同大将军、辽东郡开国公、辽东王。
现代文：直担授予壶荡为上开府仪同大将军、辽塞娶开国公、辽塞王。
English: Directly responsible for awarding the jujube is the Shang Kaifu ceremony with the general, Liao Sai married the founding father, King Liao Sai.

古文：百济者，其先盖马韩之属国，夫余之别种。有仇台者，始国于带方。
现代文：百济原来是马韩的属国，是夫余的分支。有名为仇台的，开始于带方立国。
English: Baekje was originally a vassal state of Mahan, a branch of Fuyu. Famous as a vassal state, it began with the founding of the state.

古文：故其地界东极新罗，北接高句丽，西南俱限大海。
现代文：所以其地界束面到新罗，北面接高句丽，西南面则是大海。
English: Therefore, its geographical boundaries extend to Silla in the north, Goguryeo in the north, and the sea in the southwest.

古文：东西四百五十里，南北九百余里。
现代文：东西有四百五十里宽，南北有九百余里长。
English: It is 450 miles wide from east to west and more than 900 miles long from north to south.

古文：治固麻城。
现代文：都城在固麻城。
English: The capital is in Gomashiro.

古文：其外更有五方：中方曰古沙城，东方曰得安城，南方曰久知下城，西方曰刀先城，北方曰熊津城。
现代文：另外还有五方：中方称为古沙城，东方称为得安城，南方称为久知下城，西方称为刀先城，北方称为熊津城。
English: In addition, there are five sides: the Chinese side is called the ancient sand city, the east is called the De'an city, the south is called the Kuchishimo city, the west is called the sword city, and the north is called the Kumatsu city.

古文：王姓夫余氏，号于罗瑕，民呼为鞬吉支，夏言并王也。
现代文：王族的姓氏是夫余氏，号于罗瑕，民众称呼为鞑吉支，都是华夏语言中王的意思。
English: The surname of the royal family is Fu Yu, the family name is Yu Luo Gui, and the people call it Yan Jizhi, all of which mean the king in the Chinese language.

古文：妻号于陆，夏言妃也。
现代文：妻子称于陆，即华夏语言中的妃子。
English: The wife is called Yu Lu, that is, the concubine in the Chinese language.

古文：官有十六品。
现代文：设立的官有十六品。
English: There are sixteen grades of officials.

古文：左平五人，一品；达率三十人，二品；恩率三品；德率四品；扞率五品；柰率六品。
现代文：左平五人，一品；达率三十人，二品；恩率三品；德率四品；捍率五品；柰率六品。
English: Zuo Ping five people, one dish; Up to 30 people, two dishes; Grace rate three dishes; Virtue rate four dishes; Defiance rate five dishes; Hatred rate six dishes.

古文：六品已上，冠饰银华。将德七品，紫带；施德八品，皂带；固德九品，赤带；德十品，青带；对德十一品，文督十二品，皆黄带；武督十三品，佐军十四品，振武十五品，克虞十六品，皆白带。
现代文：六品以上，冠帽饰以银华将德七品，紫带；施德八品，电带；固德九品，赤带；季德十品，青带；对德十一品，文督十：二品，部是黄带；武督十三品，佐军十四品，振武十五品，克虞十六品，都是白带。
English: Above the sixth grade, the crown cap is decorated with silverware, the seventh grade of the German, the purple belt; the eighth grade of the German, the electric belt; the ninth grade of the German, the red belt; the tenth grade of the German, the blue belt; the eleventh grade of the German, the tenth grade of the German: the second grade, the yellow belt; the thirteenth grade of the German, the fourteenth grade of the German, the fifteenth grade of the German, and the sixteenth grade of the German, are all white belts.

古文：自恩率以下，官无常员，各有部司，分掌众务。
现代文：自恩率往下，没有固定的员额，各自有官署，分别掌管各种事务。
English: There are no fixed posts, each has its own government office, and they are in charge of various affairs.

古文：内官有前内部、谷部、肉部、内掠部、外掠部、马部、刀部、功德部、药部、木部、法部、后官部。
现代文：内官有前内部、谷部、肉部、内掠部、外掠部、马部、刀部、功德部、药部、木部、法部、后官部。
English: The inner offices include the front office, the valley office, the meat office, the inner office, the outer office, the horse office, the sword office, the merit office, the medicine office, the wood office, the law office, and the back office.

古文：外官有司军部、司徒部、司空部、司寇部、点口部、客部、外舍部、绸部、日官部、都市部。
现代文：外官有司军部、司徒部、司空部、司寇部、点口部、客部、外舍部、绸部、曰官部、都市部。
English: Foreign ministries include the Ministry of the Army, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Space, the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of Urban Affairs.

古文：都下有万家，分为五部，曰上部、前部、中部、下部、后部，统兵五百人。
现代文：都城有万户居民，分为五部，称为上部、前部、中部、下部、后部，每部统兵五百人。
English: The capital city has 10,000 residents and is divided into five parts, called the upper, front, middle, lower and back parts, with 500 soldiers in each part.

古文：五方各有方领一人，以达率为之；郡将三人，以德率为之。
现代文：五方各有一名方领，以达率担任；任命郡将三人，以德率任之。
English: Each of the five parties shall have one party leader, who shall serve at the rate of achievement; three county generals shall be appointed, who shall serve at the rate of virtue.

古文：方统兵一千二百人以下，七百人以上。
现代文：每方统兵为一千二百人以下，七百人以上。
English: Each side has a total of less than twelve hundred soldiers and more than seven hundred.

古文：城之内外民庶及余小城，咸分焉。
现代文：城内外的人民和各小城，全都隶属于这一编制中。
English: The people inside and outside the city, as well as the small towns, all belong to this organization.

古文：其衣服，男子略同于高丽。
现代文：穿着的衣服，男子基本上与高丽相同。
English: In terms of clothing, men are basically the same as Goryeo.

古文：若朝拜祭祀，其冠两厢加翅，戎事则不。
现代文：如果是朝拜祭祀，在帽子两边加翅，与军事有关就不加。
English: If it is a worship ritual, add wings on both sides of the hat, but not if it is related to the military.

古文：拜谒之礼，以两手据地为敬。
现代文：拜谒的礼仪，以两手接触地面为敬。
English: The etiquette of prostration is to bow with both hands touching the ground.

古文：妇人衣袍，而袖微大。
现代文：妇女衣服似袍子，衣袖略微大些。
English: A woman's dress resembles a robe, with slightly larger sleeves.

古文：在室者，编发盘于首，后垂一道为饰；出嫁者，乃分为两道焉。
现代文：在家中的，将头发编起来盘在头顶，后面垂下一道为装饰；出嫁的人，就分为两道。
English: At home, the hair is braided and placed on the top of the head, with one strand hanging down at the back for decoration; for those getting married, it is divided into two strands.

古文：兵有弓箭刀矛。
现代文：兵器有弓箭刀稍。
English: Weapons include a bow and arrow and a knife.

古文：俗重骑射，兼爱坟史。
现代文：风俗看重骑马射箭，兼爱典籍史书。
English: The custom attaches importance to horse riding and archery, and also loves classics and history books.

古文：其秀异者，颇解属文。
现代文：其中的优秀人物，颇懂得读书撰文。
English: The best of them know how to read and write.

古文：又解阴阳五行。
现代文：又懂得阴阳五行。
English: They also know the yin and yang of the five elements.

古文：用宋元嘉历，以建寅月为岁首。
现代文：使用宋国的《元嘉历》，以建寅月作为每年的元月。
English: The "Yuan Jia Calendar" of the Song Dynasty was used, with Jian Yin Month as the first month of each year.

古文：亦解医药卜筮占相之术。
现代文：亦懂得医药卜筮占相之术。
English: He also understands the art of divination in medicine.

古文：有投壶、樗蒲等杂戏，然尤尚奕棋。
现代文：杂戏有投壶、樗蒲等，但是崇尚下棋。
English: Miscellaneous plays include throwing pots and shovels, but he is a big fan of playing chess.

古文：僧尼寺塔甚多，而无道士。
现代文：有很多僧尼寺塔，而没有道士。
English: There are many monks and nuns, but no Taoists.

古文：赋税以布绢丝麻及米等，量岁丰俭，差等输之。
现代文：赋税收取布绢丝麻及米等物，以年成丰俭程度，分等级收取。
English: The tax is levied on cloth, silk, flax and rice, and is levied according to the degree of annual income.

古文：其刑罚：反叛、退军及杀人者，斩；盗者，流，其赃两倍征之；妇人犯奸者，没入夫家为婢。
现代文：其刑罚是：反叛、临阵脱逃及杀人者，斩首；偷盗者，流放，罚其赃物的两倍；妇人犯有奸情的，籍没于夫家做婢女。
English: The punishments were as follows: rebels, escapees and murderers were to be beheaded; thieves were to be exiled and fined twice the value of the stolen goods; a woman was guilty of adultery and was not allowed to be a servant in her husband's house.

古文：婚娶之礼，略同华俗。
现代文：婚娶礼仪，与中原风俗基本相同。
English: Marriage etiquette is basically the same as that of the Central Plains.

古文：父母及夫死者，三年治服；余亲，则葬讫除之。
现代文：父母及丈夫死去，服丧三年；其他亲人去世，安葬后则不必服丧。
English: For the death of parents and husband, the mourning period is three years; for the death of other relatives, there is no need to mourn after burial.

古文：土田下湿，气候温暖。
现代文：土地低洼湿润，气候温暖。
English: The land is low-lying and wet, and the climate is warm.

古文：五谷杂果菜蔬及酒醴肴馔药品之属，多同于内地。
现代文：五谷杂果菜蔬及酒醴肴馔药品之类，大都与内地相同。
English: Groceries, fruits, vegetables, wines, dishes, medicines, etc. are mostly the same as in the mainland.

古文：唯无驼驴骡羊鹅鸭等。
现代文：衹是没有驼驴骡羊鹅鸭等。
English: There are no camels, donkeys, sheep, geese, ducks, etc.

古文：其王以四仲之月，祭天及五帝之神。
现代文：其王以每季的仲月，祭祀天地及五帝之神。
English: Its king makes a sacrifice to the gods of heaven and earth and the five emperors with the mid-month of each season.

古文：又每岁四祠其始祖仇台之庙。
现代文：又每年四次拜祀其始祖仇台的庙宇。
English: Four times a year, they also visit the temple that enshrines their ancestor, Qutai.

古文：自晋、宋、齐、梁据江左，后魏宅中原，并遣使称藩，兼受封拜。
现代文：自从置、塞、蛮、凿占据辽左，篷魏占据中原，亘渣都派遣使臣称藩，接受封拜。
English: Ever since Jie, Jie, Man and He occupied Liao Zuo, and Tong Wei occupied Zhongyuan, both sent envoys to claim the domain and receive homage.

古文：齐氏擅东夏，其王隆亦通使焉。
现代文：壹压据有束夏，其王夫余隆也派遣使臣前往。
English: According to one pressure, Prince Yulong also sent an envoy to Sokha.

古文：隆死，子昌立。
现代文：去锤死后，其子夫余昌立。
English: After she died, her son-in-law, Yu Changli, took over.

古文：建德六年，齐灭，昌始遣使献方物。
现代文：建垄六年，变厘灭亡，去盘旦方派遣使者来献方物。
English: It took six years to build the ridge, and when the ridge was destroyed, envoys were sent to the Pantan side to offer gifts.

古文：宣政元年，又遣使来献。
现代文：宣政元年，又遣使来献方物。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he also sent an envoy to present gifts.

古文：蛮者，盘瓠之后。
现代文：蛮，是盘趣的后代。
English: Yes, it's a descendant of the discus.

古文：族类衍，散处江、淮之间，汝、豫之郡。
现代文：族类繁衍，散居于江、淮之间，在汝、豫各郡。
English: Tribes proliferated and dispersed between the Jiang and Huai, in the counties of Ru and Henan.

古文：凭险作梗，世为寇乱。
现代文：凭据险要地势作梗，世代都成为寇贼作乱。
English: With the evidence of the impending situation to obstruct, generations have become robbers to make trouble.

古文：逮魏人失驭，其暴滋甚。
现代文：魏人无法控驭，更加猖狂。
English: The Wei people could not be controlled and became even more rampant.

古文：有冉氏、向氏、田氏者，陬落尤盛。
现代文：其中有冉氏、向氏、田氏，部族尤其兴盛。
English: Among them are the Ran clan, the Xiang clan, and the Tian clan, and the Gang tribe is particularly prosperous.

古文：余则大者万家，小者千户。
现代文：其他大的有万家，小的也有千户。
English: There are tens of thousands of other large families, and thousands of small families.

古文：更相崇树，僭称王侯，屯据三峡，断遏水路，荆、蜀行人，至有假道者。
现代文：相互推崇，自称王侯，占据三峡，控制水路，荆、蜀的行人，往往从其他道路行走。
English: Mutual admiration, self-proclaimed princes, occupy the Three Gorges, control waterways, pedestrians in Jing and Shu, often walk from other roads.

古文：太祖略定伊、瀍，声教南被，诸蛮畏威，靡然向风矣。
现代文：太祖平定了伊、泸，声势往南传播，诸蛮害怕其威力，都表示归附。
English: The great ancestor had pacified Iraq and Afghanistan, and word of this had spread to the south. The various states, fearing his power, all declared their allegiance.

古文：大统五年，蔡阳蛮王鲁超明内属，以为南雍州刺史，仍世袭焉。
现代文：大统五年，蔡阳蛮王鲁超明归属，任为南雍州刺史，并世代相袭。
English: In the fifth year of the Great Reunification, Cai Yang, the barbarian king, belonged to Lu Chaoming and was appointed as the historian of Nanyang Prefecture, and the generations followed suit.

古文：十一年，蛮首梅勒特来贡其方物。
现代文：十一年，蛮族首领梅勒特前来贡献方物。
English: In the eleventh year, the leader of the barbarians, Mellet, came to make a contribution.

古文：寻而蛮帅田杜清及沔、汉诸蛮扰动，大将军杨忠击破之。
现代文：不久蛮族首领田杜清及沔、漠诸蛮扰动，大将军杨忠将其击破。
English: Not long after, the barbarian leader Tian Duqing and the barbarian disturbances in Yunnan and Shanxi were defeated by the great general Yang Zhong.

古文：其后蛮帅杜青和自称巴州刺史，以州入附。
现代文：其后蛮族首领杜青和自称为巴州刺史，以州归附。
English: Later, the leader of the barbarians, Du Qinghe, and the self-proclaimed Ba Zhou Jishi, annexed the state.

古文：朝廷因其所称而授之。
现代文：朝廷便以其称号授予他。
English: The Imperial Court then awarded him his title.

古文：青和后遂反，攻围东梁州。
现代文：青和后来反叛，攻围东梁州。
English: Qinghe later rebelled and besieged Dongliangzhou.

古文：其唐州蛮田鲁嘉亦叛，自号豫州伯。
现代文：唐州蛮人田鲁嘉亦反叛，自称为豫州伯。
English: Tangzhou barbarian Tian Lu Jia also rebelled, calling himself Yu Zhou Bo.

古文：王雄、权景宣等前后讨平之。
现代文：王雄、权景宣等人前后将他们讨伐平定。
English: Wang Xiong, Quan Jingxuan and others fought them back and forth until they were subdued.

古文：语在泉仲遵及景宣传。
现代文：事情记载在泉仲遵及景宣的传中。
English: The incident was recorded in the reports of Quan Zhong Zun and Jingsuan.

古文：魏废帝初，蛮酋樊舍举落内附，以为淮北三州诸军事、淮州刺史、淮安郡公。
现代文：魏废帝初年，蛮族酋长樊舍率领部落归附，任为淮北三州诸军事、淮州刺史、淮安郡公。
English: In the first year of the abolition of the Wei Dynasty, the barbarian chieftain Zou Xie led the tribe to annexation, and was appointed as the military commander of the three states of Huaibei, the chief historian of Huaizhou and the governor of Huai'an County.

古文：于谨等平江陵，诸蛮骚动，诏豆卢宁、蔡佑等讨破之。
现代文：于谴等人平定江陵，诸蛮骚动，诏令豆卢宁、蔡佑等人征讨平定。
English: In order to pacify Gangneung after the condemnation and other violent agitations, the Emperor ordered Doushuning, Cai You and others to fight and pacify it.

古文：魏恭帝二年，蛮酋宜民王田兴彦、北荆州刺史梅季昌等相继款附。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，蛮族酋长宜民王田兴彦、北荆州刺史梅季昌等人相继归附。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, the barbarian chieftains Yimin Wang Tian Xingyan, Bei Jing Zhou Jishi Mei Jichang and others were successively annexed.

古文：以兴彦、季昌并为开府仪同三司，加季昌洛州刺史，赐爵石台县公。
现代文：兴彦、季昌都任为开府仪同三司，季昌加授洛州刺史，赐石台县公爵位。
English: Both Xingyan and Qichang were appointed to the three departments of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, and Qichang was also awarded the title of Duke of Shitai County.

古文：其后巴西人谯淹扇动群蛮，以附于梁。
现代文：其后巴西人谯淹煽动群蛮，归附于梁朝。
English: After that, the Brazilians instigated a mob and annexed it to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：蛮帅向镇侯、向彪等应之。
现代文：蛮族首领向镇侯、向白彪等人附和。
English: The leader of the barbarians agreed with Zhenhou, Bai Biao and others.

古文：向五子王又攻陷信州。
现代文：向五子王又攻陷信州。
English: Xiang Wuzi Wang invaded Shinshu again.

古文：田乌度、田都唐等抄断江路。
现代文：田乌度、田都唐等人抄断江路。
English: Tian Wudu, Tian Du Tang and others cut off the river road.

古文：文子荣复据荆州之汶阳郡，自称仁州刺史。
现代文：文子茔又占据趔蛆的这垦翅，自称仁业刺史。
English: Wen Zi Yao also occupies this cocoon wing of the cocoon, claiming to be benevolent.

古文：并邻州刺史蒲微亦举兵逆命。
现代文：同时整业刺史渣邀也举兵反叛。
English: At the same time, the scum of the rectification industry also raised an army to rebel.

古文：诏田弘、贺若敦、潘招、李迁哲讨破之。
现代文：诏令旦弘、贺羞錾、遥翅、奎迁蜇征讨平定。
English: The edict ordered the subjugation of Tanhong, He Xinyi, Yao Ying, and Quijian.

古文：语在敦及迁哲、雄等传。
现代文：事情记载在贺羞敦及李迁哲、阳雄等的传记之中。
English: The incident is recorded in the biographies of He Shidong, Li Qianzhe and Yang Xiong.

古文：武成初，文州蛮叛，州选军讨定之。
现代文：亘逝初年，塞泌銮反叛，州选定军队征讨平定。
English: In the first year after his death, Sejongyeon rebelled, and the state selected an army to subdue it.

古文：寻而冉令贤、向五子王等又攻陷白帝，杀开府杨长华，遂相率作乱。
现代文：不久冉令贤、向五子王等又攻陷皇童，杀害开府杨长华，接着共同叛乱。
English: Soon after, Ran Lingxian, Xiang Wuzi Wang, and others attacked Wang Tong again, killed Yang Changhua of Kaifu, and then jointly rebelled.

古文：前后遣开府元契、赵刚等总兵出讨，虽颇剪其族类，而元恶未除。
现代文：前后派遣开府元望、赵刚等率军征讨，虽然剪除了其不少族类，但是未能除去其首恶。
English: The army led by Kaifu Yuanwang, Zhao Gang and others was dispatched to investigate, and although many of their tribes were eliminated, they were unable to eliminate their chief evil.

古文：天和元年，诏开府陆腾督王亮、司马裔等讨之。
现代文：天和元年，诏令开府陆腾督领王亮、司马裔等征讨。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict to summon the governor of Lufu, Lu Teng, the leader Wang Liang, and the Sima descendants.

古文：腾水陆俱进，次于汤口，先遣喻之。
现代文：陆腾水陆一起行进，驻扎在汤口，先派遣使者告谕。
English: Land, water and air marched together, stationed in Tanggu, and first sent an envoy to announce the arrival.

古文：而令贤方增浚城池，严设扞御。
现代文：但是令贤整修城池，严加防御。
English: However, Lingxian renovated the castle and strengthened its defenses.

古文：遣其长子西黎、次子南王领其支属，于江南险要之地置立十城，远结涔阳蛮为其声援。
现代文：派遣其长子西黎、次子南王率领其分支部众，于江南险要地方置立十座城，远远联合涔阳蛮作为其声援。
English: He dispatched his eldest son Xili and his second son Nanwang to lead his branch followers to build ten cities in the southern part of the Yangtze River, far away from the city, and united with Fenyangman as his solidarity.

古文：令贤率其精卒，固守水逻城。
现代文：令贤率领其精锐士卒，固守水逻城。
English: Lingxian led his elite soldiers to defend Shuiluo City.

古文：腾乃总集将帅，谋其进趣。
现代文：陆腾乃集合将帅讨论，策划进攻计策。
English: Lu Tengnai gathered the team captains to discuss and plan the offensive strategy.

古文：咸欲先取水逻，然后经略江南。
现代文：都认为先攻取水逻，然后谋取江南地区。
English: They all believed that they should first capture Shuiluo, and then seek to capture the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：腾言于众曰： 令贤内恃水逻金汤之险，外托涔阳辅车之援，兼复资粮充实，器械精新。
现代文：陆腾对众人说： 令贤在内仰仗水迟的金汤之险，在外依靠涔阳的支援，加上物资粮食充实，兵器精良。
English: Lu Teng said to the crowd: Lingxian relies on the risk of delayed gold and soup within, and relies on the support of Shenyang outside. In addition, the material and grain are abundant, and the weapons are sophisticated.

古文：以我悬军攻其严垒，脱一战不克，更成其气。
现代文：以我们没有基地的军队攻打他们严守的堡垒，一旦失败不能攻克，更加助长其气势。
English: Attacking their well-defended fortress with our army without a base, once the defeat cannot be overcome, further boosts their momentum.

古文：不如顿军汤口，先取江南，剪其羽毛，然后进军水逻。
现代文：不如在汤驻屯，先取江南，剪其羽毛，然后再进攻水逻。
English: It would be better to set up a garrison in Tang, take the south of the Yangtze River first, cut its feathers, and then attack Shuiluo.

古文：此制胜之计也。 众皆然之。
现代文：这是制胜的计策。 众人都认为很对。
English: It's a winning strategy, and everyone agrees it's the right one.

古文：乃遣开府王亮率众渡江，旬日攻拔其八城，凶党奔散。
现代文：乃派遣开府王亮率众渡江，十天之内便攻拔了八座城，凶党都逃奔了。
English: Instead, he dispatched Kaifu Wang Liang and his troops to cross the river. Within ten days, they attacked eight cities, and the criminals all fled.

古文：获贼帅冉承公并生口三千人，降其部众一千户。
现代文：擒获贼帅冉承公及俘虏三千人，其部众一千户投降。
English: Ran Chenggong, the leader of the bandits, was captured, along with three thousand prisoners, and a thousand of his subordinates surrendered.

古文：遂简募骁勇，数道入攻水逻。
现代文：因而选拔骁勇将士，从数路进攻水逻。
English: As a result, the brave soldiers were selected to attack the waterlogged area from several directions.

古文：路经石壁城。
现代文：经过石壁城。
English: After passing the stone wall of the city.

古文：此城峻崄，四面壁立，故以名焉。
现代文：此城险峻，四面都如同墙壁，所以有造一名称。
English: The city is precipitous, with walls on all four sides, hence its nickname.

古文：唯有一小路，缘梯而上。
现代文：衹有一条小路，顺梯而上。
English: There is a path leading up the stairs.

古文：蛮蜑以为峭绝，非兵众所行。
现代文：蛮蛋认为是绝壁，不是兵众可以走过的。
English: The barbarian thought it was a precipice, not something soldiers could walk over.

古文：腾被甲先登，众军继进，备经危阻，累月乃得旧路。
现代文：陆腾穿着甲衣率先攀登而上，众军继进，经历了很多危险阻碍，很长时间方才找到旧路。
English: Lu Teng took the lead in climbing up, wearing a suit of armor, followed by the army, experienced many dangerous obstacles, and it took a long time to find the old road.

古文：且腾先任隆州总管，雅知蛮帅冉伯犁、冉安西与令贤有隙。
现代文：陆腾原先任隆州总管，早知道蛮族酋长冉伯犁、冉安西与令贤有矛盾。
English: Lu Teng, the former governor of Longzhou, knew early on that the barbarian chieftains, Ran Bo Xie and Ran Anxi, had conflicts with Ling Xian.

古文：腾乃招诱伯犁等，结为父子，又多遗其金帛。
现代文：陆腾因而招诱伯犁等人，结为父子，又多送给他们金银布帛。
English: Lu Teng therefore lured Bo Xuan and others, married them as father and son, and gave them more gold, silver and cloth.

古文：伯犁等悦，遂为乡导。
现代文：伯犁等人很高兴，因此作为向导。
English: Haku and the others were delighted, so they agreed to act as guides.

古文：水逻侧又有石胜城者，亦是险要。
现代文：水逻侧面又有石胜城，亦是险要之处。
English: On the water logistic side, there is also Shisheng City, which is also a critical point.

古文：令贤使兄子龙真据之。
现代文：令贤派遣其兄之子龙真据守。
English: Lingxian sent his brother's son Long Zhen to defend the castle.

古文：腾又密诱龙真云，若平水逻，使其代令贤处。
现代文：陆腾又秘密招诱龙真说，如果平定了水逻，就以他代替令贤。
English: Lu Teng also secretly lured Long Zhen to say that if the water dispute was settled, he would replace Ling Xian.

古文：龙真大悦，密遣其子诣腾。
现代文：龙真很高兴，秘密派遣其子去见陆腾。
English: Delighted, Long Zhen secretly sent his son to meet Lu Teng.

古文：腾乃厚加礼接，赐以金帛。
现代文：陆腾接待礼仪很隆重，赐给金银布帛。
English: Lu Teng received a grand reception and was presented with gold and silver cloth bags.

古文：蛮贪利既深，仍请立效。
现代文：蛮人十分贪图利益，因此请求报效立功。
English: Savages are very greedy for profit, so they ask for rewards.

古文：乃谓腾曰： 欲翻所据城，恐人力寡少。 腾许以三百兵助之。
现代文：于是对陆腾说： 想以所据守之城谋反，祇是恐怕人力不足。 陆腾答应给其三百兵为援助。
English: So he said to Lu Teng: "If you want to rebel with the city you are defending, I'm afraid you don't have enough manpower." Lu Teng promised to give him three hundred soldiers as assistance.

古文：既而遣二千人衔枚夜进。
现代文：不久派遣二干人于夜晚不准出声前往。
English: Soon, two goons were dispatched to go there at night without being allowed to speak out.

古文：龙真力不能御，遂平石胜城。
现代文：龙真无力抵抗，石胜城被平定。
English: Long Zhen was powerless to resist, and Shisheng City was subdued.

古文：晨至水逻，蛮众大溃，斩首万余级，虏获一万口。
现代文：早晨到达水迟，蛮众溃败，被杀一万多人，擒获一万人。
English: Arriving late in the morning, the barbarians were defeated, more than ten thousand people were killed, and ten thousand people were captured.

古文：令贤遁走，追而获之，并其子弟等皆斩之。
现代文：令贤逃跑，被追获，与其子弟等全部被斩首。
English: Lingxian ran away, was caught, and was beheaded along with all of his children.

古文：司马裔又别下其二十余城，获蛮帅冉三公等。
现代文：司马裔也攻下二十余座城，擒获蛮族酋长冉三公等人。
English: The Sima people also conquered more than twenty cities and captured the barbarian chieftain Ran San Gong and others.

古文：腾乃积其骸骨于水逻城侧，为京观。
现代文：陆腾乃将其骸骨都堆积于水逻城的侧面，作为京观。
English: Lu Teng piled up his skeletons on the side of the waterlogged city as a view of Beijing.

古文：后蛮蜑望见，辄大号哭。
现代文：后来蛮蛋望见，都大声号哭。
English: Later, when they saw the egg, they all cried loudly.

古文：自此狼戾之心辍矣。
现代文：自此以后渐渐消除狼戾之心。
English: Since then, the heartache has gradually faded away.

古文：时向五子王据石默城，令其子宝胜据双城。
现代文：当时向五子王占据石默城，令其子实胜据守双城。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu Zi Wang occupied Shimo City and ordered his son, Emperor Jian Sheng, to defend the two cities.

古文：水逻平后，频遣喻之，而五子王犹不从命。
现代文：水逻平定后，多次告谕，而五子王都不从命。
English: After the waterlogging was calmed down, he issued several proclamations, but the five sons did not follow his orders.

古文：腾又遣王亮屯牢坪，司马裔屯双城以图之。
现代文：陆腾又令王亮于牢坪屯守，司马裔在双城屯守以便图之。
English: Lu Teng also ordered Wang Liang to stay in the dungeon, and Sima people to stay in Shuangcheng in order to plan it.

古文：腾虑双城孤峭，攻未易拔。
现代文：陆腾考虑到双城险要，进攻不容易拔取。
English: Lu Teng took into account that Shuangcheng was precarious, and the attack was not easy to pull out.

古文：贼若委城奔散，又难追讨。
现代文：贼如果放弃该城逃散，又难追讨。
English: If the thief abandons the city and runs away, it will be difficult to track him down.

古文：乃令诸军周回立栅，遏其走路。
现代文：因此令诸军在城周围都树立栅栏，堵住其逃走之路。
English: Therefore, he ordered the troops to build a fence around the city to block their escape route.

古文：贼乃大骇。
现代文：贼十分害怕。
English: Thieves are very scared.

古文：于是纵兵击破之，擒五子王于石默，获宝胜于双城，悉斩诸向首领，生擒万余口。
现代文：于是纵兵将其击破，擒获五子王于石默，于双城擒获宝胜，将向氏的首领都斩首，生擒了一万多人。
English: As a result, the soldiers broke it, captured the five sons of the king in Shimo, won a victory in Shuangcheng, beheaded the leaders of the clan, and captured more than 10,000 people alive.

古文：信州旧治白帝。
现代文：信州州城原来在白帝。
English: Shinshu Shucheng was originally in Baidi.

古文：腾更于刘备故宫城南，八阵之北，临江岸筑城，移置信州。
现代文：陆腾又于刘备故宫城南，八阵之北，临江岸修筑城池，将信州治所移往此处。
English: Lu Teng also built a castle pond on the river bank in the south of Liu Bei Forbidden City, north of Hachien, and moved the Shinshu Government Office to this place.

古文：又以巫县、信陵、秭归并是硖中要险，于是筑城置防，以为襟带焉。
现代文：又以巫县、信陵、秭归都是峡中的险要之地，于是筑城设置驻防军队，以山为屏障。
English: Moreover, Wuxian, Xinying, and Xigui were all critical places in the gorge, so the army stationed in the city was set up, and the mountain was used as a barrier.

古文：天和六年，蛮渠冉祖喜、冉龙骧又反，诏大将军赵誾讨平之。
现代文：天和六年，蛮族渠帅冉祖喜、冉龙骧又反叛，诏令大将军赵间征讨平定。
English: In the sixth year of the Heian period, the barbarian generals Ran Zuki and Ran Ronglu rebelled again and ordered the general Zhao to subdue them.

古文：自此群蛮慑息，不复为寇矣。
现代文：自此群蛮安定，不复为寇。
English: Since then, the group has been very stable and no longer acts as an invader.

古文：獠者，盖南蛮之别种，自汉中达于邛、笮，川洞之间，在所皆有之。
现代文：僚，是南蛮的分支，自汉中至印、笮，平川与山洞之间，都有分布。
English: It is a branch of Nanban, and is distributed from Hanzhong to Indochina, Laos, and between the Hirakawa River and mountain caves.

古文：俗多不辨姓氏，又无名字，所生男女，唯以长幼次第呼之。
现代文：风俗没有姓氏，也没有名字，所生的孩子，衹是以长幼而称呼。
English: The custom does not have a surname, nor a first name, and the children born are called by their first and last names.

古文：其丈夫称阿謨、阿段，妇人阿夷、阿第之类，皆其语之次第称谓也。
现代文：男人称为阿谟、阿段，妇女称为阿夷、阿等之类，都是他们语言中次序的称呼。
English: Men are called Amu, Adan, women are called Ai, A, and so on, all of which are the order of their language.

古文：喜则群聚，怒则相杀，虽父子兄弟，亦手刃之。
现代文：高兴的时候聚在一起，发怒的时候相互斩杀，就是父子兄弟，也亲手杀害。
English: When they are happy, they get together, and when they are angry, they kill each other, even brothers and sisters, with their own hands.

古文：递相掠卖，不避亲戚。
现代文：相互间劫掠贩卖人口，连亲戚也不放过。
English: They robbed and sold people to each other, and even relatives were not spared.

古文：被卖者号叫不服，逃窜避之，乃将买人指撝捕逐，若追亡叛，获便缚之。
现代文：被卖的人号叫不服，逃走之后，乃将买人者捕捉，像是追拿叛亡之人，擒获后便缚住。
English: The person who was sold was not satisfied, and after escaping, he caught the buyer, like a traitor, and tied him up after capturing him.

古文：但经被缚者，即服为贱隶，不敢更称良矣。
现代文：凡是被缚之人，便顺从为贱隶，不敢再称为良民。
English: All those who are chained are obediently treated as lowly subordinates, and dare not be called good people.

古文：俗畏鬼神，尤尚淫祀巫祝，至有卖其昆季妻孥尽者，乃自卖以祭祀焉。
现代文：风俗害怕鬼神，特别崇尚淫祀巫祝，以至于有人卖掉其兄弟妻子儿女，甚至于白卖而供祭祀。
English: The custom is afraid of ghosts and gods, and especially advocates the sexual worship of witches and witches, so that some people sell their brothers, wives and children, and even sell them for sacrifice.

古文：往往推一酋帅为王，亦不能远相统摄。
现代文：往往推举一位酋帅为王，但不能够统摄更远的地区。
English: A chieftain is often chosen as king, but he is not able to rule over more distant regions.

古文：自江左及中州递有巴、蜀，多恃险不宾。
现代文：自江左及中州及巴、蜀，多依恃险要不归顺。
English: From the left bank of the Yangtze River to Zhongzhou, and from Ba to Shou, it is necessary to rely more on the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River.

古文：太祖平梁、益之后，令所在抚慰。
现代文：太祖平定梁、益之后，下令所在地方加以安抚。
English: After pacifying Liang and Yi, the great-grandfather ordered the local area to be pacified.

古文：其与华民杂居者，亦颇从赋役。
现代文：其中与汉人杂居的，也要缴纳赋税服徭役。
English: Among them, those who live with Han Chinese will also have to pay taxes and serve as eunuchs.

古文：然天性暴乱，旋至扰动。
现代文：然而僚人天性好暴乱，随即侵扰暴动。
English: However, my colleague is a riot-prone person, and he immediately started a riot.

古文：每岁命随近州镇出兵讨之，获其口以充贱隶，谓之为压獠焉。
现代文：每年都下令附近的州镇出兵征讨，所擒获的人口充为贱隶，称之为压僚。
English: Every year, the nearby prefectures and towns were ordered to send out troops for conscription, and the captured population were regarded as low-ranking subordinates, and were referred to as "suppressive officers."

古文：后有商旅往来者，亦资以为货，公卿逮于民庶之家，有獠口者多矣。
现代文：以后商旅往来的人，亦以他们作为货物，从公卿到普通百姓家中，很多都有僚民奴婢。
English: Later, people who traveled on business also used them as goods, from nobles to ordinary people's homes, many of whom had fellow slaves.

古文：魏恭帝三年，陵州木笼獠反，诏开府陆腾讨破之，俘斩万五千人。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，陵州木笼僚造反，诏令开府陆腾征讨平定，俘虏斩杀共一万五千人。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei of the State of Guizhou, there was a rebellion by the Mokeng people of the State of Lingzhou, who were ordered by the Emperor to be subdued by conquering and subduing Luten, and a total of fifteen thousand prisoners were killed.

古文：保定二年，铁山獠又反，抄断江路。
现代文：保定二年，铁山僚又反叛，抄断江路。
English: In the second year of Baoding, the iron miners rebelled again and cut off the river.

古文：陆腾复攻拔其三城，虏获三千人，降其种三万落。
现代文：陆腾又攻拔了其三座城，掳获了三千人，有三万户投降。
English: Lu Teng attacked three more cities, captured three thousand people, and thirty thousand households surrendered.

古文：语在腾传。
现代文：此事记载在《陆腾传》中。
English: This event is recorded in "Lu Teng Chuan."

古文：天和三年，梁州恒棱獠叛，总管长史赵文表讨之。
现代文：天和三年，梁州恒棱僚反叛，总管长史赵文表征讨。
English: In the third year of Tianhe, Liangzhou Hengren's colleagues rebelled, and the general manager Shi Zhaowen led the protest.

古文：军次巴州，文表欲率众径进。
现代文：军队到达巴州，文表想直接进军。
English: When the army arrived in Baju, Wenbiao wanted to march straight in.

古文：军吏等曰： 此獠旅拒日久，部众甚强。
现代文：军吏等人说： 此时僚军拒守时间长久，部族兵众很强盛。
English: Military officials and others said: At this time, the allied forces refused to stay for a long time, and the tribal soldiers were very strong.

古文：讨之者皆四面攻之，以分其势。
现代文：征讨便四面而攻，以此分散其势力。
English: In order to disperse their forces, the raiders attacked from all directions.

古文：今若大军直进，不遣奇兵，恐并力于我，未可制胜。 文表曰： 往者既不能制之，今须别为进趣。
现代文：现在如果大军直进，不遣奇兵，恐怕与我们力战，不一定能取胜。 文表说： 以前未能制服，如今要另外进攻。
English: Now, if a large army marches straight ahead without dispatching a miracle soldier, I am afraid that it will fight against us and may not win.The document said: "Before, we could not subdue them, but now we must attack them separately.

古文：若四面遣兵，则獠降走路绝，理当相率以死拒战。
现代文：如果四面遣兵，则僚投降逃跑都已无路，就会以死拒战。
English: If troops are sent in all directions, then there is no way for colleagues to surrender and escape, and they will refuse to fight to the death.

古文：如从一道，则吾得示威恩，分遣使人以理晓谕。
现代文：如放其一条生路，我们就可以显示恩威，分别遣人去晓之以理。
English: If we give him a way out, we can show our benevolence and send people to reason with him.

古文：为恶者讨之，归善者抚之。
现代文：为恶的就讨伐，归善的就安抚。
English: Fight for the evil, appease the good.

古文：善恶既分，易为经略。
现代文：善恶分开后，就容易谋取了。
English: When good and evil are separated, it's easy to get what you want.

古文：事有变通，奈何欲遵前辙也。 文表遂以此意遍令军中。
现代文：凡事要有变通，为什么遵照前人所为。 文表便以此意下令全军。
English: Why should we do as our predecessors have done, ordering the entire army to do the same?

古文：时有从军熟獠，多与恒棱亲识，即以实报之。
现代文：当时有从军的归顺僚人，很多与恒棱僚认识亲近，将实情相报。
English: At that time, there were colleagues who had returned from the army, many of whom were close to Heng Renshi and reported the truth to him.

古文：恒棱獠相与聚议，犹豫之间，文表军已至其界。
现代文：恒棱僚相互之间商议，正在犹豫的时候，文表军队已经来到。
English: While Hengren's colleagues were deliberating among themselves and hesitating, the army of paper forms had already arrived.

古文：獠中先有二路，一路稍平，一路极险。
现代文：僚居住的地方有两条路，一条路比较平坦，另一条路非常险要。
English: Where my colleague lives, there are two roads, one is relatively flat and the other is very dangerous.

古文：俄有生獠酋帅数人来见文表曰： 我恐官军不悉山川，请为乡导。 文表谓之曰： 此路宽平，不须导引，卿但先去，好慰谕子弟也。 乃遣之。
现代文：不久有未定居的僚酋帅多人来见文表说： 我们恐怕官军不熟悉山川地势，愿意作为向导。 文表说： 此路很好走，不需要导引，你们先回去，好好地慰谕子弟。 将他们遣回。
English: Before long, a number of unsettled warlords, chiefs and generals came to see the document and said: We are afraid that the government troops are not familiar with the terrain of the mountains and rivers, and would like to serve as guides.The document said: This road is good to go, you don't need a guide, you go back first, comfort your children well, and send them back.

古文：文表谓其众曰： 向者，獠帅语吾从宽路而行，必当设伏要我。
现代文：文表对他的部下说： 以前，僚帅告诉我从宽路行军，必定有埋伏截击我军。
English: The document said to his subordinates: In the past, the wing commander told me to march from the wide road, there must be an ambush to intercept our army.

古文：若从险路，出其不虞，獠众自离散矣。 于是勒兵从险道进，其有不通之处，随即治之。
现代文：如果从险路行军，出其不意，僚众自然离散。 于是率兵由险道进军，其中有不通的地方，马上开通。
English: If one marches along a dangerous road and is taken by surprise, his comrades will naturally disperse, so when he leads an army along a dangerous road, and there is a place that is impassable, he will open it immediately.

古文：乘高而望，果见其伏兵。
现代文：在高处了望，果然有伏兵。
English: I looked up at the top of the hill and sure enough, there was an ambush.

古文：獠既失计，争携妻子，退保险要。
现代文：僚的计策失败，争相携带妻子儿女，退到安全的地方。
English: Colleagues scrambled to carry their wives and children to safety as their strategy failed.

古文：文表顿军大蓬山下，示以祸福，遂相率来降。
现代文：文表在大蓬山下驻军，示以祸福，僚人都争相来归降。
English: The envoys stationed their troops at the foot of Dapeng Mountain, indicating that it would be a blessing or a curse, and their colleagues all scrambled to surrender.

古文：文表皆慰抚之，仍征其税租，无敢动者。
现代文：文表全都加以抚慰，从而征收其租税，无人敢反抗。
English: No one dares to resist, because they are soothed by all the documents and forms, and their taxes are collected.

古文：后除文表为蓬州刺史，又大得獠和。
现代文：此后任命文表为蓬州刺史，又与僚人得以和平相处。
English: After that, he appointed Wenchao as the governor of Pengzhou, and he and his colleagues were able to live in peace.

古文：建德初，李晖为梁州总管，诸獠亦并从附。
现代文：建擅初年，垄肿任銮州总管，诸速都附从。
English: In the first year of construction, Renwu served as the general manager of Ganzhou, and all the express trains followed.

古文：然其种类滋蔓，保据岩壑，依林走险，若履平地，虽屡加兵，弗可穷讨。
现代文：然而其种类滋蔓，固据险要之地，在山林险要之地行走，如同走在平地一样，虽然不停地出兵征讨，也不能完全讨平。
English: However, its kind is growing, it is firmly established in critical areas, and walking in critical areas of mountains and forests is the same as walking on flat land. Although soldiers are constantly sent to collect, they can not completely level.

古文：性又无知，殆同禽兽，诸夷之中，最难以道义招怀者也。
现代文：又没有什么知识，像禽兽一样，在各少数民族之中，最难以道义来招降安抚。
English: And there is no knowledge, like animals, among the ethnic minorities, it is the most difficult to persuade and pacify.

古文：宕昌羌者，其先盖三苗之胤。
现代文：宕吕羌，先族是三苗的后代。
English: According to Lyu Wei, the ancestors are the descendants of the three seedlings.

古文：周时与庸、蜀、微、卢等八国从武王灭商。
现代文：周代时与庸、蜀、微、卢等八国随从武王灭亡商朝。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, eight countries including Yong, Shu, We and Lu followed King Wu to overthrow the Shang Dynasty.

古文：汉有先零、烧当等，世为边患。
现代文：汉朝时有先零、蝗鲎等部落，世代都成为边境的祸患。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there were tribes such as the First Zero and the Locust, and they became a scourge on the border for generations.

古文：其地，东接中华，西通西域，南北数千里。
现代文：其地方，束方与中原相接，西方与西域连通，南北有数千里。
English: In its place, Sokata is connected to the Central Plains, the west is connected to the western region, and there are thousands of miles from north to south.

古文：姓别自为部落，各立酋帅，皆有地分，不相统摄。
现代文：以姓氏分为部落，各自立有酋帅，都有一定的地域，相互间不加统率。
English: They are divided into tribes according to their surnames, each of which has its own chieftain, and each of which has a certain region, with no hierarchy between them.

古文：宕昌即其一也。俗皆土著，居有栋宇。
现代文：宕昌是其中的一个部落，世代常居于此，居住有房屋。
English: One of these tribes is the Tangchang, who have lived here for generations and still have houses.

古文：其屋织牦牛尾及羖羊毛覆之。
现代文：其屋用牦牛尾和羊毛所织的毡覆盖。
English: Its roof is covered with yakitori and woollen rugs.

古文：国无法令，又无徭赋。
现代文：国内没有法令，也没有徭役赋税。
English: There are no laws and regulations in the country, and there are no taxes.

古文：唯征伐之时，乃相屯聚；不然，则各事生业，不相往来。
现代文：衹是在征伐的时候，方才屯聚在一起。无战事时，则各自从事自己的生产，相互间不来往。
English: When there is no war, they each engage in their own production and do not interact with each other.

古文：皆衣裘褐，牧养牦牛羊豕，以供其食。
现代文：所穿衣服为皮革粗布制成，放牧畜养牛、羊、猪，作为食物。
English: The clothes they wear are made from coarse leather cloth, and they raise cattle, sheep, and pigs for food.

古文：父子伯叔兄弟死者，即以其继母、世叔母、及嫂等为妻。俗无文字，但候草木荣落，以记岁时。
现代文：父子伯叔兄弟去世后，即以其继母、世叔母、以及嫂及弟妇等作为妻子他们没有文字，衹是以草木的繁荣和枯败，来记住时间。
English: After the death of a parent, child, uncle, or sibling, they take their stepmother, great-aunt, sister-in-law, and younger brothers and sisters as their wives. They have no written language, but remember time by the flourishing and withering of plants and trees.

古文：三年一相聚，杀牛羊以祭天。
现代文：三年相聚一次，宰杀牛羊祭祀上天。
English: They gather once every three years to slaughter and sacrifice cattle and sheep to the heavens.

古文：有梁者，世为酋帅，得羌豪心，乃自称王焉。
现代文：有叫梁勤的，世代都是酋帅，得到羌族豪杰的支持，乃自称为王。
English: There is a man named Liang Qin, who has been a chieftain for generations. He is supported by the heroes of the Dong ethnic group, but he calls himself a king.

古文：其界自仇池以西，东西千里，水以南，南北八百里。
现代文：其境地界自仇池以西，东西千里，席水以南，南北八百里。
English: Its territory extends from west of Qiuchi, east to west, a thousand miles, south of Qishui, and north to south, eight hundred miles.

古文：地多山阜，部众二万余落。
现代文：其地多山丘，部众有二莴余落。
English: There are many hills in the area, and there are only two villages left in the village.

古文：勤孙弥忽，始通使于后魏。
现代文：凿勤的孙于弥忽，开始与后魏通使。
English: The diligent Sun Yumi suddenly began to communicate with the post-Wei envoys.

古文：太武因其所称而授之。
现代文：太武帝因而就以其称呼而授给他。
English: Emperor Taibu therefore bestowed upon him the title.

古文：自弥忽至仚定九世，每修职贡不绝。
现代文：弥忽到命定九世，一直都没有停止朝贡。
English: Until the ninth generation was appointed, they never stopped paying tribute.

古文：后见两魏分隔，遂怀背诞。
现代文：后来见两魏分隔，因而心怀反叛。
English: Later, seeing the separation of the two Wei dynasties, he became a rebel.

古文：永熙末，仚定乃引吐谷浑寇金城。
现代文：永熙末年。企室乃引吐主涟寇犯全球。
English: In the last years of the Yongxi Dynasty, the imperial court was the instigator of global piracy.

古文：大统初，又率其种人入寇。
现代文：去筮初年，又率领部众入侵。
English: In the first year after he left the capital, he led his followers in an invasion.

古文：诏行台赵贵督仪同侯莫陈顺等击破之。
现代文：诏令行台赵贵督率仪同侯莫陈顺等人征讨击败他们。
English: Zhao Guizhou led by Zhao Guizhou and his son Mo Chen Shun and others to fight and defeat them.

古文：仚定惧，称藩请罪。
现代文：企定惧怕，自称藩属请罪。
English: Intent on fear, he pleaded guilty, claiming to be a member of the clan.

古文：太祖舍之，拜抚军将军。
现代文：太祖放过了他，任为抚军将军。
English: The great-grandfather let him go and appointed him as the general of the army.

古文：四年，以仚定为南洮州刺史、要安蕃王。
现代文：四年，任命命定为南洮州刺史、要安蕃王。
English: In four years, he was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou Province and the king of Anhui Province.

古文：后改洮州为岷州，仍以仚定为刺史。
现代文：后来将塑咖改为蛆业，仍以企宣为刺史。
English: Later, he changed the name of the company from "plastic coffee" to "cocoa industry" and continued to write about business promotion.

古文：是岁，秦州浊水羌反，州军讨平之。
现代文：这一年，秦州浊水羌人反叛，州军征讨平定。
English: In the same year, the people of Qin State's Lishui County rebelled and were subdued by the state army.

古文：七年，仚定又举兵入寇。
现代文：七年，命定又举兵寇犯。
English: Seven years later, he was ordered to raise an army again.

古文：独孤信时镇陇右，诏信率众便讨之。
现代文：独孤信此时镇守胧右，诏令独孤信率众征讨。
English: At this time, Du Guoxin was on the defensive, and the imperial edict ordered Du Guoxin to lead a public discussion.

古文：军未至而仚定为其下所杀。
现代文：军队未至而企定被他的部下所杀。
English: He was killed by his own men before the army arrived.

古文：信进兵破其余党。
现代文：独孤信进兵攻破其余党。
English: Dokukosen entered the army to defeat the rest of the party.

古文：朝廷方欲招怀殊俗，乃更以其弟弥定为宕昌王。
现代文：朝廷正想招怀各方民族，乃将其弟弥定立为宕昌王。
English: The imperial court was trying to attract people from all over the world, but decided to make his younger brother, Ya, the king of Takemasa.

古文：十六年，弥定宗人獠甘袭夺其位，弥定来奔。
现代文：十六年，弥定同宗人獠甘袭击夺其王位，弥定逃奔而来。
English: Sixteen years later, Igan, a member of the same clan as Mijin, attacked and seized his throne, and Mijin fled.

古文：先是，羌酋傍乞铁匆等因仚定反叛之际，遂拥众据渠林川，与渭州民郑五丑扇动诸羌，阻兵逆命。
现代文：原先，羌族酋长傍乞铁忽等人在命定反叛时，率领部众占据渠林川，与渭州民郑五丑煽动诸羌民，依仗兵力不听从朝命。
English: Originally, when the Yao chieftain Bei Bei Tiehu and others were ordered to rebel, they led the troops to occupy QuLinChuan and incited the Yao people with the Yao state citizen Zheng WuXiu, relying on military strength to disobey the imperial order.

古文：至是诏大将军宇文贵、豆卢宁、凉州刺史史宁等率兵讨獠甘等，并擒斩之，纳弥定而还。
现代文：到此时诏令大将军宇文贵、豆卢宁、凉州刺史史宁等人率兵征讨獠甘等人，全都擒获斩首，弥定回复其位。
English: At this time, the general Yu Wengui, Doushuning, Liangzhou Zhishi Shining and other generals were ordered to lead the troops to recruit Hegang and others. All of them were beheaded, and Yading was restored to his position.

古文：语在贵等传。
现代文：事情记载在宇文贵等人传中。
English: The incident is recorded in the legend of Uwengui and others.

古文：其后羌酋东念姐、巩廉俱和等反，大将军豆卢宁、王勇等前后讨平之。
现代文：其后羌族酋长束念姐、巩廉俱和等人反叛，大将军豆卢宁、王勇等人前后讨伐平定。
English: Later, the Shan chieftains Sok Nien Nga, Gong Lian Gwo and others rebelled, and the great generals Dou Luning, Wang Yong and others fought back and forth to pacify the situation.

古文：保定初，弥定遣使献方物。
现代文：保定初年，弥定遣使臣贡献方物。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the envoys from Yading made contributions.

古文：三年，又遣使献生猛兽。
现代文：三年，又遣使臣贡献猛兽。
English: Three years later, he sent an envoy to bring back the beast.

古文：四年，弥定寇洮州，总管李贤击走之。
现代文：四年，弥定寇犯洮州，总管李宣将其击走。
English: In the fourth year, the head of the Yiding Cossacks, Li Xuan, drove them out of Bozhou.

古文：是岁，弥定又引吐谷浑寇石门戍，贤复破之。
现代文：这一年，迩宣又招引吐谷浑寇犯互至巡，又被奎置击破。
English: In the same year, Xu Xuan also invited the criminals of the Tugu Hunko to visit each other, and was defeated by Kui Jie.

古文：高祖怒，诏大将军田弘讨灭之，以其地为宕州。
现代文：直担大怒，诏令大将军旦弘征讨消灭，以其地置为昼州。
English: Directly responsible for the great anger, he ordered the general Tan Hong to collect and destroy, and set it up as a daytime state.

古文：邓至羌者，羌之别种也。
现代文：邓至羌，是羌的分支。
English: Deng Zi Zi, is a branch of Zi Zi.

古文：有像舒治者，世为白水酋帅，自称王焉。
现代文：有一个叫像舒治的人，世代都做白水酋帅，自称为王。
English: There is a man named Shu Zhi, who has been a white water chieftain for generations and calls himself a king.

古文：其地北与宕昌相接，风俗物产亦与宕昌略同。
现代文：其居地北面与宕昌相接，风俗物产亦与宕昌基本相同。
English: Its residential area is in the north, adjacent to that of Tagacho, and its customs and products are basically the same as those of Tagacho.

古文：自舒治至檐桁十一世。
现代文：自舒治至檐桁共有十一世。
English: There have been eleven generations of singers from Shu Zhi to Jia Jia.

古文：魏恭帝元年，檐桁失国来奔，太祖令章武公导率兵送复之。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，檐桁失去国家而逃奔来朝，太祖下令章武公宇文导率兵送他回去复位
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei of the Gyeonggi Dynasty, Emperor Gongzang lost his country and fled to the North. Emperor Taizu ordered Zhang Wukong and Uwen to lead the soldiers to send him back and restore him to power.

古文：白兰者，羌之别种也。
现代文：旦菌，是差的分支。
English: Streptococcus, is a poor offshoot of worms.

古文：其地东北接吐谷浑，西北至利模徒，南界那鄂，风俗物产与宕昌略同。
现代文：所据之地东北接于些釜运，西北至利模徒，南方与婴垫交界，风俗物产与宣旦基本相同。
English: The place where it is based is bordered in the northeast by the Kamaun, in the northwest by the Limoges, and in the south by the Infant Mat, and its customs and products are basically the same as those of Sendan.

古文：保定元年，遣使献犀甲铁铠。
现代文：惺室元年，派遣使者贡献犀甲铁错。
English: In the first year of the Edo period, it was a mistake to send an envoy to contribute armor.

古文：氐者，西夷之别种。
现代文：氐，是西夷的分支。
English: Cormorant, is a branch of the Western Cormorant.

古文：三代之际，盖自有君长，而世一朝见。
现代文：三代的时候，有自己的君长，不经常朝见。
English: When there are three generations, they have their own sovereigns and do not often see each other at court.

古文：故诗称 自彼氐、羌，莫敢不来王 也。
现代文：所以《诗经》中称 自彼氐、羌，莫敢不来王 。
English: Therefore, in the "Song of Songs," it is said that one should not dare not to come to the king.

古文：汉武帝灭之，以其地为武都郡。
现代文：漠武帝灭之，将其地设置为武都郡。
English: After the death of Emperor Mowu, his land was set aside as Wudu County.

古文：自汧、渭抵于巴、蜀，种类实繁。
现代文：自汫、渭至于巴、蜀，有很多他们的族类。
English: There are many clans of Zizhi, Zou, Ba and Shu.

古文：汉末，有氐帅杨驹，始据仇池百顷，最为强族。
现代文：在漠末，有氏帅杨驹，占据仇池百顷之地，是最强盛的氏族。
English: At the end of the desert, there is a powerful clan, the Yang family, which occupies a hundred hectares of land.

古文：其后渐盛，乃自称王。
现代文：其后更加强盛，因而自称为王。
English: Then he became more powerful and called himself king.

古文：至裔孙纂，为坚所灭。
现代文：至裔孙杨纂的时候，被苻坚所灭。
English: When Sun Yangzhuang, the last descendant of the Sun Dynasty, was assassinated, he was killed by Zou Jian.

古文：坚败，其族人定又自称王。
现代文：苻坚败亡，其族人杨定又自称为王。
English: Zou Jian was defeated and killed, and Yang Ding, a member of his clan, declared himself king.

古文：定为乞伏干归所杀。
现代文：杨定为乞伏干归所杀。
English: Yang was killed while he was begging for help.

古文：定从弟盛，代有其国。
现代文：杨定的堂弟杨盛，接替国政为国主。
English: Yang Ding's cousin, Yang Sheng, succeeded him as the head of state.

古文：世受魏氏封拜，亦通使于江左。
现代文：世代受魏氏的封赏任命，亦与江左通使。
English: He was appointed by the Wei clan as a reward for generations, and also communicated with Jiang Zuo.

古文：然其种落分散，叛服不恒，陇、汉之间，屡被其害。
现代文：然而其种落分散，反叛和服从经常反覆，陇、汉之间，经常受害。
English: However, their settlements are scattered, rebellion and obedience are often repeated, and they are often victimized between Han and Han.

古文：盛之苗裔曰集始，魏封为武兴王。
现代文：杨盛的后人称为集始，魏封为武兴王。
English: Yang Sheng's descendants were called Ji Shi, and Wei Feng was called Wu Xing Wang.

古文：集始死，子绍先立，遂僭称大号。
现代文：集始死，其于绍先立，僭称帝号。
English: Seti died and was succeeded by Shao, who was nicknamed Emperor.

古文：魏将傅竖眼灭之，执绍先归诸京师，以其地为武兴镇。
现代文：魏将傅竖眼将其攻灭，擒获绍先至京师，将其地置立武兴镇。
English: Wei general Fu Zhizhen attacked and destroyed it, captured Shao first to Beijing division, and set up Wuxing Town.

古文：魏氏洛京未定，天下乱，绍先奔还武兴，复自立为王。
现代文：魏氏洛京不安定，天下混乱，绍先奔逃回到武兴，又自立为王。
English: The Wei dynasty was unstable in Luojing and the country was in chaos. Shao fled back to Wuxing and became king.

古文：太祖定秦、陇，绍先称藩，送妻子为质。
现代文：太祖平定秦、陇地区，绍先称藩，送妻子儿女作为人质。
English: The great-grandfather subdued the Qin and Min regions, which Shaoshan called the Han, and sent his wife and children as hostages.

古文：大统元年，绍先请其妻女，太祖奏魏帝还之。
现代文：大统元年，绍先请求归还妻子女儿，太祖奏请魏帝而放还。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, Shao Xian requested the return of his wife and daughter, and the great-grandfather asked Emperor Wei to return them.

古文：绍先死，子辟邪立。
现代文：绍先死，其子辟邪立。
English: Shaoxing died first, and his son took over.

古文：四年，南岐州氐苻安寿反，攻陷武都，自号太白王。
现代文：四年，南岐州氐苻安寿反叛，攻陷武都，自称太白王。
English: In the fourth year, Nanqi Zhou and Anshou rebelled, invaded Wudu, and claimed to be the White King.

古文：诏大都督侯莫陈顺与渭州刺史长孙澄讨破之。
现代文：韶令大都督侯莫陈顺与渭州刺史长孙澄征讨平定。
English: The grand governor Hou Mo Chen Shun and the chief historian of Zhangzhou, Sun Cheng Zheng, discussed and settled the dispute.

古文：安寿以其众降。
现代文：安寿率众投降。
English: Anshou led the crowd to surrender.

古文：九年，清水氐酋李鼠仁据险作乱，氐帅梁道显叛攻南由，太祖遣典签赵昶慰谕之，鼠仁等相继归附。
现代文：九年，清水氐酋长李鼠二占据险地作乱，氐帅梁道显反叛攻打南由，太祖派遣典签赵昶安抚告谕，鼠仁等人相继归附。
English: In the ninth year, Li Rui II, the chieftain of Qingshui County, occupied a dangerous place and caused turmoil. The commander of Qingshui County, Liang Daoxian, rebelled and attacked Nanyu. The great-grandfather sent a copy of Zhao Yu's pacification proclamation, and Rui Ren and others successively adhered to it.

古文：语在昶传。
现代文：事情记载在《赵昶传》。
English: The incident is recorded in "Zhao Bingzhuang."

古文：十一年，于武兴置东益州，以辟邪为刺史。
现代文：十一年，于武兴置立束益州，任命辟邪为刺史。
English: In the eleventh year, Dongyizhou was set up in Wuxing to make history.

古文：十五年，安夷氐复叛，赵昶时为郡守，收其首逆者二十余人斩之，余众乃定。
现代文：十五年，安夷氐又反叛，趟昶此时为郡守，擒获斩杀二十余名首逆，余众乃平定下来。
English: In the fifteenth year, An Yixuan rebelled again. At this time, Wanzhong was the county governor. He was able to kill more than 20 rebel leaders, and the rest were subdued.

古文：于是以昶行南秦州事。
现代文：于足以趟昶代理南秦州军政事务。
English: Therefore, he asked Zhao Wei to represent the affairs of South Qin.

古文：氐帅盖闹等相率作乱，闹据北谷，其党覃洛聚洮中，杨兴德、苻双围平氐城，姜樊哙乱武阶，西结宕昌羌獠甘，共推盖闹为主。
现代文：氐帅盖闹等人相率叛乱，盖闹占据北爸，其党羽垩盗聚集于逃空，扬兴德、登双包围了平氏城，差垒娘于娄膛作乱，向西联合宣旦差辽旦，共同推举盖题为主。
English: Gao Shuai, Gao Huan, and others revolted at the same time. Gao Huan occupied Beiba, his followers gathered at Fugu, Yang Xingde and Deng Shuang encircled Ping's City, and his subordinates rioted at Shanzhao. They jointly proclaimed to the West that Liaodan was inferior to Liaodan, and jointly nominated Gao Huan as the lord.

古文：昶分道遣使宣示祸福，然后出兵讨之，擒盖闹，散其余党。
现代文：蠢邀分道派遣使者宣示祸福，然后出兵征讨，擒获盖闸，余党都被遣散。
English: Stupidly invited to send an envoy to declare the good and bad, and then sent troops to collect, captured the gate, and the rest of the party were dismissed.

古文：兴州叛氐复侵逼南岐州，刺史叱罗协遣使告急，昶率兵赴救，又大破之。
现代文：兴业反叛的氐人又逼攻直些丛，刺史生逻坦遣使告急，趟昶率兵救援，又大破氐人。
English: The insurgents of Xingye again forced their way into some bushes, stabbed Shisheng Luotan, sent an urgent envoy, led the soldiers to rescue, and destroyed the villagers.

古文：先是，氐首杨法深据阴平自称，亦盛之苗裔也。
现代文：原先，氐人首领扰逮遝占据堕垩自称为王，也是扰盛的后人。
English: Originally, the leader of the Jurchens, Zhaozheng, claimed to be the king of the fallen Jurchens. He was also a descendant of Zhaosheng.

古文：魏孝昌中，举众内附。
现代文：魏圣昌年中，率领部众归附。
English: In the middle of Wei Shengchang, he led the troops to annexation.

古文：自是职贡不绝。
现代文：自此一直有贡奉。
English: There has been a tribute ever since.

古文：废帝元年，以法深为黎州刺史。
现代文：废帝元年，以法深为黎州刺史。
English: In the first year of the dethroned emperor, the history of Lishu was written by Faxian.

古文：二年，杨辟邪据州反，群氐复与同逆。
现代文：二年，彊壁邪据州反叛，群氐都随同叛逆。
English: In the second year, Yang Bijie rebelled to occupy the prefecture and county, and Gunchu rebelled together with Yang Bijie.

古文：诏叱罗协与赵昶讨平之。
现代文：诏令吐罗翅与圭皂趟征讨平定。
English: The imperial edict ordered Luo Xie and Zhao Jun to subjugate and suppress the rebellion.

古文：太祖乃以大将军宇文贵为大都督、六州诸军事、兴州刺史。
现代文：太祖乃任命大将军圭塞宣为大都督、六州诸军事、兴州刺史。
English: The great-great-grandfather appointed the general Guisei Xuan as the grand governor, the military of the six states, and the history of Xingzhou.

古文：贵威名先着，群氐颇畏服之。
现代文：宇文贵很早就有威名。群氐都畏服他。
English: Wu Wengui had a reputation for a long time. He was feared by everyone.

古文：是岁，杨法深从尉迟迥平蜀，军回，法深旋镇。
现代文：这一年，杨法迳随从挝迳回平定蜀地，回军后，法深回镇。
English: In this year, Yang Fahui returned from Laos to Pingding Shudi. After returning to the army, Fashin returned to the town.

古文：寻与其种人杨崇集、杨陈侳各拥其众，递相攻讨。
现代文：不久与其同族的粮岂墓、损速挫各自率领徒众，相互攻讨。
English: Soon, he and his compatriots, Grain Tomb and Loss and Quick Defeat, each led a group of disciples to attack each other.

古文：赵昶时督成武沙三州诸军事、成州刺史，遣使和解之。
现代文：趟超此时任督成武沙三州诸军事、成州刺史，派遣使者去和解。
English: At this time, the military of the three states of Chengwusha and Chengzhou sent envoys to reconcile.

古文：法深等从命。
现代文：送遝等人服从。
English: Zhaojun and others obeyed.

古文：乃分其部落，更置州郡以处之。
现代文：于是分其部落，另外设置、郡安置他们。
English: As a result, they were divided into tribes, set up separately, and resettled in counties.

古文：魏恭帝末，武兴氐反，围利州。
现代文：魏恭帝末年，武兴氐反叛，围攻利州。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wei Gong, Wu Xingyi rebelled and besieged Lishu.

古文：凤州固道氐魏天王等亦聚众响应。
现代文：凤州固道氏魏天王等人也聚众响应。
English: Fengzhou Guoduo's Wei Tianwang and others also gathered to respond.

古文：大将军豆卢宁等讨平之。
现代文：大将军豆卢宁等人征讨平定。
English: General Doushuning and others led the conquest and subjugation.

古文：世宗时，兴州人咤及下辩、柏树二县民反，相率破兰皋戍。
现代文：世宗时，兴州人段吒及下辩、柏树二县民反叛，相率攻破兰皋戍。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, the people of Xingzhou rebelled in Duanzhang and Hefei, and the people of two counties rebelled in Baoshu, and succeeded in defeating Lanluan.

古文：氐酋姜多复率厨中氐、蜀攻陷落丛郡以应之。
现代文：氏族酋长姜多又率领厨中氐、蜀攻陷落丛郡以响应。
English: In response, the clan chieftain Jiang Duo led the cuisines of Zhongzheng and Shu to attack and capture Cong County.

古文：赵昶率众讨平二县，并斩段咤。
现代文：赵昶率众平定二县，将段吒斩首。
English: Zhao Hong led the crowd to subdue two counties and beheaded Duan Hong.

古文：而阴平、卢北二郡氐复往往屯聚，与厨中相应。
现代文：而阴平、卢北二郡的氐人又常常屯聚在一起，与厨中相应。
English: However, people from Yinping and the two counties in the north of Luhansk often gather together, corresponding to the kitchen.

古文：昶乃简择精骑，出其不意，径入厨中。
现代文：赵昶于是选出精骑，出其不意，直接攻入厨中。
English: Zhao Wei then chose to ride a horse, and unexpectedly, he went directly into the kitchen.

古文：至大竹坪，连破七栅，诛其渠率，二郡并降。
现代文：至大竹坪，接连攻破七个寨，诛杀其首领，二郡都投降了。
English: As far as Dazhuping, they successively broke through seven villages, killed their leaders, and two counties surrendered.

古文：及昶还，厨中主氐复为寇掠。
现代文：赵昶返回后，厨中氐人又行寇掠。
English: After Zhao Yao returned, the ruffians in the kitchen went on a looting spree.

古文：昶又遣仪同刘崇义、宇文琦率兵入厨中讨之，大破氐众，斩姜多及苻肆王等。
现代文：赵昶又遣仪同刘崇义、宇文琦等人率兵进入厨中征讨，大破氐众，将姜多及苻肆王等人斩首。
English: Zhao Jun also sent soldiers led by Yi, Liu Chongyi, Yu Wenjun and others to enter the kitchen for a discussion, broke through the crowd, and beheaded Jiangduo and Gongzhu Wang and others.

古文：于是群氐并平。
现代文：于是群氐都被平定了。
English: As a result, the swarms were all quelled.

古文：及王谦举兵，沙州氐帅开府杨永安又据州应谦，大将军达奚儒讨平之。
现代文：直到王谦举兵，沙州氐帅开府杨永安又以州响应王谦，大将军达奚儒征讨平定
English: When Wang Qian raised an army, Yang Yong'an, the marshal of Shazhou and the governor of Kaifu, occupied Shuzhou County in response to Wang Qian, and the great general Dazhong Ru fought and leveled them.

古文：稽胡一曰步落稽，盖匈奴别种，刘元海五部之苗裔也。
现代文：稽胡又称为步落稽，是匈奴的分支，刘元海五部的后人。
English: Jihu, also known as Bu Luo Ji, is a branch of Xiongnu, the descendant of Liu Yuanhai Wuzhong.

古文：或云山戎赤狄之后。
现代文：又称是山戎赤狄的后人。
English: They are also said to be the descendants of Yamashiro Chidi.

古文：自离石以西，安定以东，方七八百里，居山谷间，种落繁炽。
现代文：自离石以西，安定以东，方圆七八百里，居住于山谷之间，种族部落很多。
English: From Liaoshi in the west to Ding'an in the east, the area is seven or eight hundred miles in circumference. People live between the valleys, and there are many ethnic tribes.

古文：其俗土著，亦知种田。
现代文：世代定居于此，也知道农耕。
English: Generations have settled here and know farming.

古文：地少桑蚕，多麻布。
现代文：其地很少蚕桑，麻布比较多。
English: There are few silkworms in the area, but there is a lot of hemp.

古文：其丈夫衣服及死亡殡葬，与中夏略同。
现代文：男子的服装及死亡殡葬的礼仪，基本上与中原相同。
English: Men's clothing and funeral etiquette are basically the same as in Central Plains.

古文：妇人则多贯蜃贝以为耳及颈饰。
现代文：妇女则用贝壳穿起来作为耳饰及项饰。
English: Women wore shells as earrings and necklaces.

古文：又与华民错居，其渠帅颇识文字。
现代文：与汉人共同居住，其首领认识文字。
English: They live together with the Chinese, and their leader knows the alphabet.

古文：然语类夷狄，因译乃通。
现代文：然而语言类似于夷狄，要翻译才能相通。
English: However, the language is similar to Yidi and needs to be translated in order to communicate.

古文：蹲踞无礼，贪而忍害。
现代文：不讲伦理礼仪，贪心残忍。
English: No ethics or manners, just greed and cruelty.

古文：俗好淫秽，处女尤甚。
现代文：风俗淫乱，处女更加突出。
English: The customs are lewd, and the virgins are more prominent.

古文：将嫁之夕，方与淫者叙离，夫氏闻之，以多为贵。
现代文：将要出嫁的前夕，方舆情人告别，夫家听说妻子有情人，以多为贵。
English: On the eve of getting married, Fang Ying's lover bids farewell. The husband's family has heard that his wife has a lover.

古文：既嫁之后，颇亦防闲，有犯奸者，随事惩罚。
现代文：出嫁之后，要特别防范，有犯奸情的，以事论以惩罚。
English: After marriage, special precautions should be taken, and those who commit adultery should be punished.

古文：又兄弟死，皆纳其妻。
现代文：兄弟死后，纳其妻为妻妾。
English: After his brother's death, Naqi's wife became his concubine.

古文：虽分统郡县，列于编户，然轻其徭赋，有异齐民。
现代文：虽然分别由郡县统领，列于编入户籍之民，然而徭役赋税都比较轻，与一般齐民百姓不同。
English: Although they are separately led by counties and counties and listed in the people who are registered for household registration, their taxes are relatively light, which is different from the general Qimin people.

古文：山谷阻深者，又未尽役属。
现代文：居住在深险的山谷中的人，很多未曾服役。
English: Many of those who live in the dangerous valley have never served in the military.

古文：而凶悍恃险，数为寇乱。
现代文：而恃险要和性情凶悍，经常寇犯作乱。
English: However, he is dangerous and has a fierce temper, often causing trouble as a thief.

古文：魏孝昌中，有刘蠡升者，居云阳谷，自称天子，立年号，署百官。
现代文：魏孝昌年中，有刘蚕升，在云阳谷居住，自称为天子，建立年号，设置百官。
English: In the middle of the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, there was Liu Jiasheng, who lived in Yunyang Valley, called himself the son of heaven, established the era name, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：属魏氏政乱，力不能讨。
现代文：此时魏氏政乱，没有能力征讨。
English: At this time, the Wei Dynasty was in political turmoil, and there was no ability to collect taxes.

古文：蠡升遂分遣部众，抄掠居民，汾、晋之间，略无宁岁。
现代文：蚕升于是分别派遣部下兵士，抄掠居民，汾、晋地区，长期不得安宁。
English: Silkworm Sheng then separately dispatched his subordinate soldiers to loot residents in the Min and Jin regions, and there was no peace for a long time.

古文：齐神武迁邺后，始密图之。
现代文：齐神武迢至邺之后，开始秘密图谋。
English: After Qi Shenwu's death, the secret plot began.

古文：伪许以女妻蠡升太子，蠡升信之，遂遣其子诣邺。
现代文：假装同意将女儿嫁给蚕升的太子，蚕升相信了，因而遣其子至邺。
English: The prince pretended to agree to marry his daughter to Silkworm Seung, but Silkworm Seung believed him and sent his son to Earth.

古文：齐神武厚为之礼，缓以婚期。
现代文：齐神武接待礼仪很隆重，婚期则暂缓。
English: In Qishenwu, the reception etiquette is very grand, and the wedding period is delayed.

古文：蠡升既恃和亲，不为之备。
现代文：蚕升自恃足和亲，不加防备。
English: Silkworms rise from their cocoons and nest, unguarded.

古文：大统元年三月，齐神武潜师袭之。
现代文：大统元年三月，齐神武秘密派遣军队进攻。
English: In March of the first year of the Great Reunification, Qi Shenwu secretly sent troops to attack.

古文：蠡升率轻骑出外征兵，为其北部王所杀，斩首送于齐神武。
现代文：蚕升率领轻骑出外召集兵马，被其北部王杀死，斩首送给齐神武。
English: Led by Silkworm Sheng, he rode out to gather soldiers and horses. He was killed by his northern king, and his head was sent to Qi Shenwu.

古文：其众复立蠡升第三子南海王为主，率兵拒战。
现代文：其部众又立蚕升的第三子南海王为主，率兵抵抗。
English: His subordinates, led by his third son, Nanhai Wang, led the resistance.

古文：齐神武击灭之，获其伪主，及其弟西海王，并皇后夫人王公以下四百余人，归于邺。
现代文：齐神武将其击灭，擒获伪主，及其弟西海王。以及皇后夫人王公以下四百余人，送归于邺。
English: Qi Shenwu defeated and captured the false lord, his brother Xi Hai Wang, as well as more than four hundred people from the queen's husband Wang Gong, and sent them back to Qi.

古文：居河西者，多恃险不宾。
现代文：居住在河西的部族，大多依仗险要而不顺服。
English: Most of the tribes living in the west of the river depended on their own interests and did not obey.

古文：时方与齐神武争衡，未遑经略。
现代文：当时正与齐神武抗争，未来得及治理。
English: At that time, he was fighting against Qi Shenwu, and the future was not yet governed.

古文：太祖乃遣黄门郎杨就安抚之。
现代文：太祖就派遣黄门郎杨树去安抚。
English: The great-grandfather sent Huangmen Lang and Yangshuo to appease them.

古文：五年，黑水部众先叛。
现代文：五年，黑水部众率先反叛。
English: Five years later, members of the Blackwater unit were the first to rebel.

古文：七年，别帅夏州刺史刘平伏又据上郡反。
现代文：七年，别帅夏州刺史刘平伏又占据上郡反叛。
English: In the seventh year, Liu Pingfu, the most powerful man in Xiazhou, rebelled and occupied the upper county.

古文：自是北山诸部，连岁寇暴。
现代文：从此后北山各部，连年寇犯。
English: From then on, he committed robbery in various parts of Kitayama for years on end.

古文：太祖前后遣李远、于谨、侯莫陈崇、李弼等相继讨平之。
现代文：太祖前后派遣李远、于谨、侯莫陈崇、李弼等将领相继征讨平定。
English: Around the time of the great ancestor, Li Yuan, Yu Zhen, Hou Mo Chen Chong, Li Zhe and other generals were successively dispatched to subjugate.

古文：武成初，延州稽胡郝阿保、郝狼皮率其种人附于齐氏。
现代文：逮成初年，延州稽胡郝阿保、郝狼皮率领族人归附齐氏。
English: In the first year after the arrest, the Yanzhou chief Hu Yabao and the head of the wolf skin led the tribesmen to join the Qi clan.

古文：阿保自署丞相，狼皮自署柱国，并与其别部刘桑德共为影响。
现代文：阿保自称丞相，狼皮自称柱国，都与其分支刘桑德相呼应。
English: The self-proclaimed chancellor Abo and the self-proclaimed pillar state Wolfskin both echo their offshoot Liu Sand.

古文：柱国豆卢宁督诸军与延州刺史高琳击破之。
现代文：柱国豆卢宁督率诸军与延州刺史壶逊将其击破。
English: Zhu Luning, the governor of Zhili Province, led the troops and defeated it with the help of Jucson, the governor of Yanzhou.

古文：二年，狼皮等余党复叛。诏大将军韩讨之，俘斩甚众。
现代文：二年，狼皮的余党又反叛，诏令大将军韩果征讨，俘虏斩杀很多反叛之人
English: Two years later, Wolfskin's remaining faction rebelled again, and General Han Kuo was ordered to round up and execute many of the rebels

古文：保定中，离石生胡数寇汾北，勋州刺史韦孝宽于险要筑城，置兵粮，以遏其路。
现代文：堡童年间，整互未定居胡人多次寇犯汾北，勤州刺史韦孝宽于险要处建筑城池，安置军队粮食，阻遏其道路。
English: During the years of the Fort Boy, the Hu people who did not settle in the rectification area repeatedly robbed and plundered the north of Shandong, and the Qinzhou general Wei Xiaokuan built a castle at a critical point, placed grain for the army, and blocked its road.

古文：及杨忠与突厥伐齐，稽胡等复怀旅拒，不供粮饩。
现代文：直到杨忠与突厥征伐齐朝，稽翅等又想反叛，不供给粮食。
English: It wasn't until Yang Zhong and the Turks conquered Qi Dynasty that the Qianling and others wanted to rebel again and refused to supply grain.

古文：忠乃诈其酋帅，云与突厥欲回兵讨之。
现代文：杨忠于是骗他们的酋帅，说与窒厥准备回兵征讨。
English: Yang Zhong then lied to their chieftain, saying that he was preparing to return to the army for conscription.

古文：酋帅等惧，乃相率供馈焉。
现代文：酋帅等人惧怕，就相随供应军粮。
English: The chieftain and others were afraid, so they supplied the army with grain.

古文：语在忠传。
现代文：此事记载在《杨忠传》。
English: This event is recorded in the "Yang Zhong Biography."

古文：其后丹州、绥州、银州等部内诸胡，与蒲川别帅郝三郎等又频年逆命。
现代文：其后且州、蟹业、银州等地的胡人，与渣川别帅郝三郎等人又连年反叛。
English: After that, the Hu people in Zhoushu, Crab Industry, Yinzhou and other places rebelled against Jiechuan Biechuai Zhusaburo and others for years.

古文：复诏达奚震、辛威、于寔等前后穷讨，散其种落。
现代文：又下韶令达奚震、辛威、于塞等人前后穷追猛打，打散他们各个部落。
English: He also ordered Dazhen, Xinwei, Yusei and others to chase and beat them back and forth to disperse their various tribes.

古文：天和二年，延州总管宇文盛率众城银州，稽胡白郁久同、乔是罗等欲邀袭盛军，盛并讨斩之。
现代文：天和二年，延州总管宇文盛率众修建银州城，稽胡白郁久同、叠是罗等人想袭击圭塞盛的军队，被王塞盛都讨平斩首。
English: In the 2nd year of Tianhe, Yanzhou Governor Yu Wensheng led the crowd to build Yinzhou City. Hu Bai Yudong, Ju Zhe Luo and others wanted to attack Gui Xesheng's army, but they were defeated and beheaded by Wang Xesheng.

古文：又破其别帅乔三勿同等。五年，开府刘雄出绥州，巡检北边，川路稽胡帅乔白郎、乔素勿同等度河逆战，雄复破之。
现代文：又攻破其别帅乔三勿同等人五年，开府刘雄出绥州，巡检北边川路，稽胡酋帅蚕直邬、乔素勿同等渡回迎战，刘壁又将他们击破，
English: Five years later, Liu Xiong, the governor of Kaifu, went out of Bozhou to inspect the Beibei River Road. He also defeated the other great generals, Qiao Sanbei and Qiao SuBei, who went back to fight against him. Liu Bei defeated them again.

古文：建德五年，高祖败齐师于晋州，乘胜逐北，齐人所弃甲仗，未暇收敛，稽胡乘闲窃出，并盗而有之。
现代文：建德五年，高祖于晋州打败齐国军队，乘胜追击，齐人所弃的兵器，未来得及收捡，稽胡乘机出动，全都盗取而得。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, Gaozhu defeated the Qi army in Jinzhou and took advantage of the victory to pursue. The weapons abandoned by the Qi people could not be collected in time, and Qihu took the opportunity to move out. All of them were stolen.

古文：乃立蠡升孙没铎为主，号圣武皇帝，年曰石平。
现代文：乃立螯升孙子没铎为主，号称为圣武皇帝，年号称为石平。
English: He was the grandson of Emperor Noryo, and his title was Emperor Shomu, and his era name was Shihei.

古文：六年，高祖定东夏，将讨之，议欲穷其巢穴。
现代文：六年，高祖平定束夏，将要征讨，议论要穷攻其巢穴。
English: In six years, Gaozhu Pingding Zucchia will be solicited, and discussions will be made to attack his nest.

古文：齐王宪以为种类既多，又山谷阻绝，王师一举，未可尽除。
现代文：齐王字文宪认为部落太多，又山谷阻绝，出动王师，不能全都除灭。
English: Qi Wangzhe Wenxian thought that there were too many tribes, and the valley was blocked, so he dispatched Wang Shi, but he could not eliminate them all.

古文：且当剪其魁首，余加慰抚。
现代文：最好是剪除其魁首，其他的加以安抚。
English: It is best to cut off the head and pacify the rest.

古文：高祖然之，乃以宪为行军元帅，督行军总管赵王招、谯王俭、滕王逌等讨之。
现代文：高祖认为有理，乃以宇文宪为行军元帅，督率行军总管趟王宇文招、谯王宇文俭、滕王宇文迪等人征讨。
English: Gao Zu thought it was reasonable to appoint Uwen Xian as the marshal of the march, and led the chief marshal of the march, Wang Uwen Zhao, Wang Uwen Jian, and Teng Wang Uwen Di to solicit.

古文：宪军次马邑，乃分道俱进。
现代文：宇文宪军队至于马邑时，乃分道俱进。
English: As far as Ma'ei was concerned, the Uwen army marched in different directions.

古文：没铎遣其党天柱守河东，又遣其大帅穆支据河西，规欲分守险要，掎角宪军。
现代文：没铎派遣其党徒天柱据守河东，又派遣其大帅穆支据守河西，想分守险要之处，对宇塞塞军钳击。
English: He sent his party member Tianzhu to defend the east of the river, and sent his general Mu Zhixin to defend the west of the river. He wanted to defend the critical points and strike at the U.S.S.R. army.

古文：宪命谯王俭攻天柱，滕王逌击穆支，并破之，斩首万余级。
现代文：宇文宪命令盏眶室塞俭攻打型主，坠王宇文迪攻打!蛆，都击破了，斩首万余级。
English: Uwen Xian ordered Zhan Qishu Sejian to attack the type master, and the fallen king Uwendi to attack!, both were broken, and more than 10,000 heads were beheaded.

古文：赵王招又擒没铎，余众尽降。
现代文：趟王宇文招又擒获了没铎，其他人都投降了。
English: Wang Yuwenzhu was captured again, and the others all surrendered.

古文：宣政元年，汾州稽胡帅刘受罗千复反，越王盛督诸军讨擒之。
现代文：宣政元年，逊厘塱酋帅刘受罗千又反叛，产坦室塞盛督率诸军征讨擒获。
English: In the first year of the promulgation of the Constitution, Sun Liqin's commander Liu Shouluo rebelled again, and the troops led by the commander of the Tang Dynasty, Cai Sheng, were recruited and captured.

古文：自是寇盗颇息。
现代文：从此以后寇盗渐渐平息。
English: Since then, the banditry has gradually subsided.

古文：库莫奚，鲜卑之别种也。
现代文：库莫奚，是鲑卑的分支。
English: Cuomo clams are a subspecies of salmon clams.

古文：其先为慕容晃所破，窜于松漠之间。
现代文：其先人为慕容晃所破，逃窜于松漠之间。
English: His ancestors were defeated by Murong Ao and fled into the pine forest.

古文：后种类渐多，分为五部：一曰辱纥主，二曰莫贺弗，三曰契个，四曰木昆，五曰室得。
现代文：后来部落渐多，分为五部：一称为辱纥主，二称为莫贺弗，三称为契个，四称为立垦，五称为室彊。
English: Later, the tribes gradually multiplied and were divided into five parts: one was called the Insulted Lord, the second was called Mogaofu, the third was called Kichi, the fourth was called Lixing, and the fifth was called Murofu.

古文：每部置俟一人。
现代文：每部设置一人为俟斤。
English: One person from each unit is designated as the leader.

古文：有阿会氏者，最为豪帅，五部皆受其节度。
现代文：有阿会氏，十分豪强，五部都接受其指挥。
English: There is the A-hui clan, which is very powerful, and all five divisions are under its command.

古文：役属于突厥，而数与契丹相攻。
现代文：为窒厥所控制，经常与契丹相互攻击。
English: Controlled by the Khmer Rouge, they often attack each other with the Khitan.

古文：虏获财畜，因而行赏。
现代文：所掳获财物牲畜，用以赏赐。
English: The captured property and livestock will be used as a reward.

古文：死者则以苇薄裹尸，悬之树上。
现代文：死者用苇席裹住尸首，悬挂在树上。
English: The corpse was wrapped in a shroud and hung from a tree.

古文：大统五年，遣使献其方物。
现代文：大统五年，派遣使者贡献方物。
English: In the fifth year of unification, envoys were sent to make contributions.

古文：史臣曰：凡民肖形天地，禀灵阴阳，愚智本于自然，刚柔系于水土。
现代文：史臣曰：人类仿形天地，领受阴阳灵气，愚笨与聪明是天生的，刚与柔在于水土。
English: Shichen said: human beings imitate heaven and earth, receive yin and yang spirit, stupidity and cleverness are innate, and stiffness and softness lie in water and soil.

古文：故雨露所会，风流所通，九川为纪，五岳作镇，此之谓诸夏。
现代文：所以雨露相汇，风云流动，九川为纪，五岳为群山之首，这就称为诸夏。
English: Therefore, the rain and dew meet, the wind and clouds flow, the nine rivers are the discipline, and the five mountains are the heads of the mountains, which is called the summer.

古文：生其地者，则仁义出焉。
现代文：在其地生活的士民，讲求仁义。
English: The scholar-citizens who live in the area should seek benevolence and righteousness.

古文：昧谷、嵎夷、孤竹、北户，限以丹徼紫塞，隔以沧海交河，此之谓荒裔。
现代文：昧谷、埚夷、孤竹、北户，限制以丹徼紫塞，隔绝于沧海交河，造就是所说的边远地区。
English: Maiduguri, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do,

古文：感其气者，则凶德成焉。
现代文：因感受其气，所以就多有违背仁德之行。
English: As a result of feeling its breath, there are many actions that violate benevolence.

古文：若夫九夷八狄，种落繁炽；七戎六蛮，充牣边鄙。
现代文：如同九夷八狄，种族部落很繁盛；七戎六蛮，边疆地区很多。
English: Just as there are nine Yi and eight Di, the ethnic tribes are very prosperous; there are seven Rong and six Man, and there are many border areas.

古文：虽风土殊俗，嗜欲不同，至于贪而无厌，狠而好乱，强则旅拒，弱则稽服，其揆一也。
现代文：风俗不同，嗜好和欲望不同，以至于贪得无厌，性情恶狠喜好作乱，部族强大则抗拒，弱小则归顺，道理是一样的。
English: The customs are different, the tastes and desires are different, so that the greed is insatiable, the temperament is cruel and likes to make trouble, the tribe is strong and resists, and the weak are submissive. The reason is the same.

古文：斯盖天之所命，使其然乎。
现代文：这也是上天确定的，使其命运如此。
English: This is also determined by heaven, making its fate so.

