古文：文成皇帝七男，孝元皇后生献文皇帝。
现代文：文成皇帝有七个儿子。孝元皇后生献文皇壶。
English: Emperor Wencheng had seven sons. Empress Xiaoyuan's son presented the imperial jug to the emperor.

古文：李夫人生安乐厉王长乐。
现代文：奎去人生安乐厉王五屋些。
English: It is better to have five houses than to live a life of ease.

古文：曹夫人生广川庄王略。
现代文：曹夫人生广川庄王略。
English: The life of Mrs. Cao is sketched by Guangchuan Zhuo Wang.

古文：沮渠夫人生齐郡顺王简。
现代文：沮渠夫人生齐郡顺王五个。
English: There are five Shunwangs in Qi County.

古文：乙夫人生河间孝王若。
现代文：乙夫人生河间孝王互羞。
English: In the life of Mrs. B, Kawama Takao and Wang were ashamed of each other.

古文：悦夫人生安丰匡王猛。
现代文：悦夫人生安丰匡王元猛。
English: Mrs. Yue's life is safe, prosperous, virtuous and vigorous.

古文：玄夫人生韩哀王安平，王早薨，无传。
现代文：宝去人生韩哀王元安平，王逝世早，没有传记。
English: The precious life of Han Ai Wang Yuan Anping, Wang died early, there is no biography.

古文：安乐王长乐，皇兴四年封建昌王，后改封安乐王。
现代文：安乐王元长乐，皇兴四年封为建昌王，后来改封安乐王。
English: Anle Wang Yuan Changle, Wang Xing was named Jianchang Wang for four years, and later changed his name to Anle Wang.

古文：长乐性凝重，显祖器爱之。
现代文：长乐性格端庄，显祖器重喜爱他。
English: Changle has a dignified personality, and his ancestors loved him very much.

古文：承明元年拜太尉，出为定州刺史。
现代文：承明元年被任命为太尉，外出任定州刺史。
English: In the first year of the next year, he was appointed as a captain, and went out to be appointed as the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：鞭挞豪右，顿辱衣冠，多不奉法，为人所患。
现代文：鞭挞豪强，羞辱士人，多不奉行法度，为人们所厌恶。
English: The whipping of the brave, the humiliation of the scholars, and the non-observance of the law are abhorred by the people.

古文：百姓诣阙讼其过。高祖罚杖三十。
现代文：百姓前往朝廷控告他的罪过，高祖处罚责打长乐三十棒。
English: The people went to the imperial court to accuse him of the crime, and Gaozu was punished by being beaten with 30 sticks of Changle.

古文：贪暴弥甚，以罪徵诣京师。
现代文：长乐贪婪暴虐更为严重，因有罪被征召到京城。
English: Changle's greed and brutality were even more serious, and he was conscripted to the capital for his crimes.

古文：后与内行长乙肆虎谋为不轨，事发，赐死于家。
现代文：后来和内行长乙肆虎谋划作乱，事情败露，被赐令在家中自杀。
English: Later, he plotted with the head of the Ministry of the Interior, Etsuhotora, to start a riot, but the plot failed, and he was ordered to commit suicide at home.

古文：葬以王礼，谥曰厉。
现代文：用王的礼仪安葬，谧号为厉。
English: He was buried with the king's etiquette.

古文：子诠，字搜贤，袭。
现代文：儿子元诠，字搜贤，继承爵位。
English: His son Yuan Yan, surnamed Sohu Xian, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：世宗初，为凉州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，担任凉州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he served as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：在州贪秽，政以贿成。
现代文：在州中贪婪污浊，政事以贿赂而办成。
English: In the state of greed and corruption, politics is run by bribery.

古文：后除定州刺史。
现代文：后来授任定州刺史。
English: Later, Yang Tsubaki was also appointed as the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：及京兆王愉之反，诈言国变。
现代文：等到京兆王元愉谋反，假称国家有变乱。
English: Wait until Jingzhao Wangyuan is happy to plot a rebellion and pretend that the country is in turmoil.

古文：在北州镇，咸疑朝廷有衅，遣使观诠动静。
现代文：在北方的州镇，都怀疑朝廷有嫌隙，派遣使者观察元诠的行动。
English: In the northern prefectures and towns, all suspected that the imperial court had a grudge, and sent emissaries to observe Yuan Yuan's actions.

古文：诠具以状告，州镇帖然。
现代文：元诠把情况全部报告朝廷，州镇安定。
English: Yuan Yan reported the entire situation to the imperial court, and the state was stabilized.

古文：愉奔信都，诠与李平、高殖等四面攻烧，愉突门而出。
现代文：元愉逃往信都，元诠和李平、高植等人四面包围放火，元愉冲开城门而逃出。
English: Yuan You fled to Xindu. Yuan You and Li Ping, Gao Zhi and others set fire to the surrounding buildings. Yuan You rushed to open the city gate and escaped.

古文：寻除侍中，兼以首告之功，除尚书左仆射。
现代文：不久授任元诠为侍中，加上首先报告的功劳，授任尚书左仆射。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a courtier, and in addition to the merit of being the first to report, he was awarded the title of Shoshu Zuopuzha.

古文：薨，谥曰武康。
现代文：逝世，谧号为武康。
English: After his death, his nickname was Wu Kang.

古文：子鉴，字长文，袭。
现代文：儿子元鉴，字长文，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Jian (元鉴), was called Changwen (长文) and succeeded to the peerage.

古文：后除相州刺史、北讨大都督，讨葛荣。
现代文：后来授任相州刺史、北讨大都督，讨伐葛荣。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou, the governor of the North, and the governor of Ge Rong.

古文：仍兼尚书右仆射、北道行台尚书令，与都督裴衍共救信都。
现代文：随之兼任尚书右仆射、北道行台尚书令，和都督裴衍共同援救信都。
English: As a result, he concurrently served as Shoshu's right-hand man, Shoshu's governor of Hokkedo, and Shoshu's governor of Hokkedo, and he and the governor Peiyan jointly rescued Shintō.

古文：鉴既庸才，诸弟粗暴，见天下多事，遂谋反，降附葛荣。
现代文：元鉴是个平庸的人，几个弟弟粗鲁暴躁，看到天下多事，就谋图反叛，投降依附葛荣。
English: Yuan Jian was a mediocre person. Several younger brothers were rude and irritable. When they saw the world was in turmoil, they plotted to rebel and surrender to Ge Rong.

古文：都督源子邕与裴衍合围鉴，斩首传洛，诏改其元氏。
现代文：都督源子邕和裴衍共同包围元鉴，斩下他的首级传送到洛阳，诏令改变他的元姓。
English: The local governors, Yuan Zixuan and Pei Yan, jointly surrounded Yuan Jian, cut off his head and sent it to Luoyang, and issued an edict to change his surname.

古文：庄帝初，许复本族，又特复鉴王爵，赠司空。
现代文：庄帝初年，准许恢复本来的族姓，又特地恢复元鉴的王爵，追赠司空。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he permitted the restoration of the original family name, and specially restored the royal title of the Yuan Dynasty, and posthumously awarded it to Sikuo.

古文：鉴弟斌之，字子爽。
现代文：元鉴的弟弟斌之，字子爽。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Jian, Bin Zhi, has a cool way with words.

古文：性险无行，及与鉴反，败，遂奔葛荣。
现代文：邪恶没有操行，等到和互鉴反叛，失败，就投奔：壹莹。
English: Evil does not practice, wait until and learn from each other, rebel, fail, then run: Yingying.

古文：荣灭，得还。
现代文：蔓莹灭亡，得以返回。
English: After the death of the crane, it was able to return.

古文：出帝时，封颍川郡王，委以腹心之任。
现代文：出帝时，被封为颖川郡王，委托给心腹的职责。
English: When he became emperor, he was named the king of Yingchuan County and entrusted the duties to his confidant.

古文：帝入关，斌之奔萧衍，后还长安。
现代文：皇帝进入函谷关，遮之投奔盖扭，后来回到一巨玄。
English: The emperor entered into the Hakodate pass, and then went back to Ichigugen.

古文：广川王略，延兴二年封。
现代文：广川王元略，延兴二年封。
English: Guangchuan Wang Yuanliu, Yanxing two years later.

古文：位中都大官，性明敏，鞫狱称平。
现代文：担任中都大官，聪明敏捷，判案公平。
English: He is a senior official of the Central Government, intelligent and quick, and judges cases fairly.

古文：太和四年薨，谥曰庄。
现代文：太和四年逝世，谧号为莲。
English: Taiwa died four years later, and his nickname became Ren.

古文：子谐，字仲和，袭。
现代文：儿子元谐，字仲和，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Huan, surnamed Zhonghe, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：十九年薨。
现代文：十九年逝世。
English: He died nineteen years later.

古文：诏曰： 朕宗室多故，从弟谐丧逝，悲痛摧割，不能已已。
现代文：诏令说： 我的宗室多难，堂弟元谐逝世，悲痛如刀切割，不能停止。
English: The imperial edict said: My ancestral home is in a difficult situation. My cousin, Yuan Jun, passed away. My grief is like a knife cutting. I can't stop.

古文：古者，大臣之丧，有三临之礼，此盖三公已上。
现代文：在古代，大臣的丧事，有三次前往的礼仪，这大概是三公以上的官员。
English: In ancient times, the minister's funeral, there are three visits to the etiquette, which is probably more than three officials.

古文：至于卿司已下，故应囗。
现代文：至于卿大夫以下，故应。
English: As for those below the rank of doctor, they should step down.

古文：自汉已降，多无此礼。
现代文：阙从汉朝以后，大都没有这种礼仪。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, there has been no such etiquette.

古文：朕欲遵古典，哀感从情，虽以尊降伏，私痛宁爽？
现代文：我想遵循古代典章，哀伤的表现依据情怀，虽然以尊贵的身份降临，私下的悲痛得以平伏。
English: I want to follow the ancient rules, the expression of grief is based on feelings, although it comes as a dignitary, the private grief can be subdued.

古文：欲令诸王有期亲者为之三临，大功之亲者为之再临，小功缌麻为之一临。
现代文：想要使各王有服丧一年的亲属者为之前去三次，大功的亲属为之前去两次，小功鳃麻的亲属为之前去一次。
English: If you want to make the relatives of kings who have a year of mourning, go to the top three times, the relatives of great achievements go to the top twice, and the relatives of small achievements go to the top once.

古文：广川王于朕大功，必欲再临。
现代文：广川王在我属大功亲属，一定要两次前往。
English: King Hirokawa is a great relative of mine, so I have to go there twice.

古文：再临者，欲于大殓之日，为亲临尽哀，成服之后，缌衰而吊。
现代文：两次前往，要在尸体入棺的日子，亲自前往尽情表达哀伤，穿丧服以后，以细麻布衣服前往吊祭。
English: After two visits, on the day the body is placed in the coffin, the mourners should go there in person to express their grief to the best of their ability. After wearing the mourning clothes, they should go to the hanging ceremony in fine linen clothes.

古文：既殡之缌麻，理在无疑，大殓之临，当否如何？
现代文：出殡后的细麻布，按道理是没疑问的，入棺时前往，应当怎样呢?
English: After the funeral, there is no doubt that the linen will be torn, but what should be done when entering the coffin?

古文：为须抚柩于始丧，为应尽哀于阖棺？早晚之宜，择其厥中。 
现代文：是应在开始丧事时抚棺痛哭，还是在盖上棺材时尽情哀悼呢?早晚的适宜时间，选择适中者。 
English: Should you cry when the funeral begins, or should you mourn when the coffin is closed? Choose the appropriate time, morning or evening.

古文：黄门侍郎崔光、宋弁，通直常侍刘芳，典命下大夫李元凯，中书侍郎高聪等议曰： 三临之事，乃自古礼，爰及汉魏，行之者稀。
现代文：黄门侍郎崔光、塞全，通直常侍塑堕，典命下大夫奎互凯，中书侍郎直堕等人议论说： 三次前往的事情，是出自古代礼仪，到了漠魏时期，实行的人稀少。
English: Huangmen chamberlains Cui Guang, Jie Quan, and Tong Zhi often attended Shouping, and Dr. Qui Wu Kai, who was under the order, and Zhongshu chamberlain Zhi Zhi, and others discussed and said: The matter of the three visits is from ancient etiquette. By the time of the Wei Dynasty, there were few people practicing it.

古文：陛下至圣慈仁，方遵前轨，志必哀丧，虑同宁戚。
现代文：陛下至高的圣明慈爱仁厚，正遵循前代轨迹，心意一定要表达哀伤，思虑要和守丧的亲属共同悲痛。
English: His Majesty, the Most Exalted, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate, is following in the footsteps of his predecessors. His heart must express sorrow, and his thoughts must grieve with the bereaved relatives.

古文：臣等以为若期亲三临，大功宜再。
现代文：臣下等人以为如果服一年丧期者三次前往，大功的亲属应前去两次。
English: Subordinates and others thought that if those who had served a one-year mourning period went three times, relatives of those who had made great contributions should go twice.

古文：始丧之初，哀之至极，既以情降，宜从始丧。
现代文：办丧事的开头，哀伤到了极点，既是因情感降临，应在办丧事的开始。
English: The beginning of the funeral, grief to the extreme, both because of emotion, should be the beginning of the funeral.

古文：大殓之临，伏如圣旨。 
现代文：入棺时前往，当如圣旨所言。 
English: When entering the coffin, go there, and do as the holy will says.

古文：诏曰： 魏晋已来，亲临多阙，至于戚臣，必于东堂哭之。
现代文：诏令说： 魏晋以来，亲自前往的礼仪大都缺略，至于亲戚中的大臣，必定在东堂哭吊他。
English: The edict said: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the etiquette of visiting in person has mostly been omitted. As for a minister who is a relative, he must be hanged in the East Hall.

古文：顷大司马、安定王薨，朕既临之后，复更受慰于东堂。今日之事，应更哭否？ 
现代文：不久前大司马、安定王逝世，我在前往以后，又再在束堂慰问，现在的事情，应该再哭吊吗? 
English: Not long ago, the grand steward of the horse, Wang Anning passed away. After I went there, I once again offered my condolences at the bundling hall. As for the current situation, should I cry again?

古文：光等议曰： 东堂之哭，盖以不临之故。
现代文：崔光等人议论说： 束堂的哭吊，大概是因不前往的缘故。
English: Cui Guang and others commented: The crying and hanging of the bund hall is probably due to the reason of not going.

古文：今陛下躬亲抚视，群臣从驾，臣等参议，以为不宜复哭。 
现代文：现在陛下亲自安抚看望，群臣随从，臣下等人商议，以为不应该再哭吊。 
English: Now, His Majesty personally calms down the visitors, and the attendants and subordinates of the courtiers discuss, thinking that there should be no more crying and hanging.

古文：诏曰： 若大司马戚尊位重，必哭于东堂，而广川既是诸王之子，又年位尚幼，卿等议之，朕无异焉。 
现代文：诏令说： 像大司马服属尊贵地位重要，必定在束堂哭吊，而广川王是始封王的儿子，又年岁地位还轻，你们议论这件事，我没有不同意见。 
English: The edict said, "As Daishi Umafuku is of high status and importance, he must be weeping and hanging in the Shokudo, and King Hirokawa is the son of the first emperor, and his status is still young, I have no disagreement with your discussion of this matter.

古文：谐将大殓，高祖素服深衣哭之，入室，哀恸，抚尸而出。
现代文：元谐将要入棺，高祖穿素色的礼服哭吊他，进入房屋，哀伤至极，抚摸尸体后出来。
English: The original harmony is about to go into the coffin, Gao Zu, wearing a plain dress, cries and hangs him, enters the house, sad to the extreme, stroking the corpse and comes out.

古文：有司奏，广川王妃薨于代京，未审以新尊从于卑旧，为宜卑旧来就新尊？
现代文：有关官员上奏，广川王的妃子在代京逝世，不明白是以新近的尊贵随从旧日的卑微，还是旧曰的卑微前来依从新近的尊贵。
English: Relevant officials reported that the concubine of King Hirokawa died in Daikyo. It is not clear whether the new nobility followed the old lowliness, or the old lowliness followed the new nobility.

古文：诏曰： 迁洛之人，自兹厥后，悉可归骸邙岭，皆不得就茔恆代。
现代文：韶令说： 迁到洛阳的人，从此以后，都可埋葬在邙岭，全不能接近于恒山代京的坟墓。
English: The imperial edict said: From now on, people who have moved to Luoyang can be buried in Jialing, and none of them can approach the tomb of Hengshan Daijing.

古文：其有夫先葬在北，妇今丧在南，妇人从夫，宜还代葬；若欲移父就母，亦得任之。
现代文：凡是丈夫先埋葬在北方，妻子现在在南方死去，妻子随从丈夫，应运回代京埋葬；如果要运父亲尸体去接近母亲坟墓，也可准许他们。
English: If the husband was buried in the north and the wife died in the south, the wife should follow the husband and be buried in the capital. If the father's body is to be moved to be closer to the mother's grave, they may also be allowed to do so.

古文：其有妻坟于恆代，夫死于洛，不得以尊就卑；欲移母就父，宜亦从之；若异葬亦从之。
现代文：凡是妻子埋葬在恒山代京，丈夫死在洛阳，不能以尊贵去接近卑微；如果要运母亲尸体去接近父亲坟墓，也应准许他们；如果不葬在一起也准许他们。
English: If a wife is buried in Hengshan Daikyo and her husband died in Luoyang, they cannot use their dignity to approach the humble. If they want to transport their mother's body to approach their father's grave, they should be allowed to do so. If they are not buried together, they should be allowed to do so.

古文：若不在葬限，身在代丧，葬之彼此，皆得任之。
现代文：如果不在埋葬限制之内，本人在代京死去，埋葬在那裹遣裹，都可听凭他们。
English: If it is not within the burial restrictions, I can die in Daikyo and be buried there in a shroud, all at their discretion.

古文：其户属恆燕，身官京洛，去留之宜，亦从所择。
现代文：凡是户口属于恒燕地区，本人在洛阳为官，去留何者为宜，也依从他们的选择。
English: All the hukou belong to the Hengyan area, and I am an official in Luoyang. It is up to them to choose who should stay.

古文：其属诸州者，各得任意。 
现代文：凡属于各州的人，各自可听凭本人意愿。 
English: All persons belonging to the several States, to each according to his inclination.

古文：诏赠谐武卫将军，谥曰刚。
现代文：下韶追赠元谐为武卫将军，谧号为刚。
English: His posthumous name was Gen. Wuwei, and his nickname was Gang.

古文：及葬，高祖亲临送之。
现代文：等到安葬，高祖亲自前往送葬。
English: After the burial, Gao Zu went to the funeral in person.

古文：子灵道，袭。
现代文：儿子灵道，继承爵位。
English: His son, Lingdao, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：卒，谥悼王。
现代文：去世，谧号为悼王。
English: He died, and his nickname was "Mourning King."

古文：齐郡王简，字叔亮。
现代文：齐郡王五个，字走睦。
English: There are five kings in Qi County, and they are all good friends.

古文：太和五年封，位中都大官。
现代文：叁和五年封，担任中都大官。
English: He served as a high-ranking official in the capital for five years.

古文：简母，沮渠牧犍女也。
现代文：五个的母亲，是沮渠牧犍的女儿。
English: The mother of five is the daughter of a frustrated shepherd.

古文：简性貌特类外祖。
现代文：五个的性格外貌特别像外祖父。
English: Five of the characters bear a particular resemblance to their grandfather.

古文：后为内都大官。
现代文：后来担任内都大官。
English: Later, he served as the inner city's top official.

古文：高祖尝与简俱朝文明太后于皇信堂，简居帝之右，行家人礼。
现代文：产担曾经和五个在皇信堂一起朝见塞旦哒后，五个位在皇帝的右边，施行家人的礼节。
English: Once upon a time, the midwife and five attendants would meet the emperor in the hall of the emperor's residence, and the five would stand on the right side of the emperor to carry out the family's etiquette.

古文：迁太保。
现代文：升为太保。
English: He was promoted to Taiho.

古文：高祖仁孝，以诸父零落，存者唯简。每见，立以待之，俟坐，致敬问起居，停简拜伏。
现代文：高祖仁慈孝顺，因伯父叔父死丧，活着的仅有元简，每次会见，站着等待他，等他坐下了，致以礼敬询问起居，制止元简叩拜伏地。
English: Gao Zu is benevolent and filial, due to the death of his uncle, only Yuan Jian is alive. Every time he meets him, he stands and waits for him, waits for him to sit down, asks him politely to get up and stop Yuan Jian from kneeling.

古文：简性好酒，不能理公私之事。
现代文：元简生性喜爱喝酒，不能处理官府和私人的事情。
English: Yuan Jiansheng likes to drink, and cannot deal with government and private affairs.

古文：妻常氏，燕郡公常喜女也，文明太后以赐简。
现代文：妻子常氏，是燕郡公常喜的女儿，文明太后把她赐给元简。
English: His wife, Ms. Chang, was the daughter of Yan County's Prince Changxi, and was given to Yuan Jian by the Empress Dowager.

古文：性干综家事，颇节断简酒，乃至盗窃，求乞婢侍，卒不能禁。
现代文：她料理家务麻利干练，较多地节制禁止元简饮酒，以致元简偷酒喝，乞求婢女侍从，最终不能禁止。
English: She is good at doing housework, and forbids Yuan Jian from drinking alcohol with more restraint, so that Yuan Jian steals alcohol, begs the maid to serve, and ultimately cannot be banned.

古文：二十三年薨。
现代文：二十三年逝世。
English: Jian'an died 23 years ago.

古文：时高祖不豫，诏曰： 叔父薨背，痛慕摧绝，不自胜任，但虚顿床枕，未堪奉赴，当力疾发哀。 
现代文：当时高祖病重，下诏说： 叔父逝世，悲痛思念摧折内心，不能忍受，衹因卧病在床，不能前往，将带病发布丧事。 
English: At that time, Gao Zu was seriously ill, and he said in his last will and testament: My uncle passed away, my heart is broken with grief and sorrow, I can't bear it, I'm sick in bed, I can't go, I'm going to make a funeral announcement.

古文：谥曰灵王。
现代文：谧号为灵王。
English: His nickname was "Ling Wang."

古文：世宗时，改谥曰顺。
现代文：世宗时，改谧号为顺。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, the family name was changed to Shun.

古文：子祐，字伯授，袭。
现代文：儿子元佑，字伯授，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan You, who was given the title of Buju, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：母常氏，高祖以纳不以礼，不许其为妃。
现代文：母亲常氏，高祖因不以礼仪嫁娶，不准许她为妃。
English: Her mother was a member of the Jang clan, but Gao Zu did not allow her to become a princess because she did not marry according to the etiquette.

古文：世宗以母从子贵，诏特拜为齐国太妃。
现代文：世宗因母亲由儿子得立而尊贵，下诏特地封为齐国太妃。
English: Because Sejong's mother was chosen by her son, she was given the special title of Queen of Qi.

古文：祐位泾州刺史。
现代文：元佑担任泾州刺史。
English: Yuan You served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：薨，谥曰敬。
现代文：逝世，谧号为敬。
English: He died, and his nickname was "Kyo."

古文：河间王若，字叔儒。
现代文：河间王亘羞，字拯僵。
English: The king of Kawama, Watashii, is called Zosetsu.

古文：年十六，未封而薨，追封河间，谥曰孝。
现代文：十六岁时，没获封爵而逝世，追封回塱王，谧号为耋。
English: At the age of sixteen, he died without being knighted, and was restored to the title of Shao Wang, with the posthumous title of Shao.

古文：诏京兆康王子太安为后。
现代文：诏令直旦遮王的儿子太安为他的后嗣。
English: Emperor Taizong decreed that King Taizong's son Taian Rong would be his heir.

古文：太安于若为从弟，非相后之义，废之，以齐郡王子琛继。
现代文：太安对元若来说是堂弟，不合乎做后嗣的道理，废黜了他，以变虽王的儿子五茎继承亘羞的爵位。
English: For Yuanrao, Taian was a cousin, which was not in line with the principle of being an heir, and he dethroned him, so that the five sons of the king would inherit the shameful title.

古文：琛字昙宝，幼而敏慧，高祖爱之。
现代文：元琛字昙宝，年幼时机敏聪慧，高祖喜爱他。
English: He was a bright and clever child, and Gao Zu loved him.

古文：世宗时，拜定州刺史。
现代文：世宗时，任命他为定州刺史。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：琛妃，世宗舅女，高皇后妹。
现代文：元琛的妃子，是世宗舅父的女儿，高皇后的妹妹。
English: The concubine of Yuan Zong was the daughter of Uncle Sejong and the younger sister of Empress Gao.

古文：琛凭恃内外，多所受纳，贪惏之极。
现代文：元琛仗恃内亲外戚，收受贿赂很多，贪婪到了极点。
English: They are all related to each other, they take a lot of bribes, and they are extremely greedy.

古文：及还朝，灵太后诏曰： 琛在定州，惟不将中山宫来，自余无所不致，何可更复叙用？ 
现代文：等回到朝廷，灵太后下诏说： 元琛在定州，仅仅没有把中山宫带回来，其余的没有什么不罗致，怎么能再加任用呢? 
English: After returning to the imperial court, the Empress Dowager Ling issued an edict saying: Yuan Xuan was in Dingzhou, and he only failed to bring back Zhongshan Palace. The rest was nothing special. How could he be reappointed?

古文：由是遂废于家。
现代文：因此就被废黜在家中。
English: As a result, he was deposed in his home.

古文：琛以肃宗始学，献金字《孝经》。
现代文：元琛因肃宗开始求学，献上涂金粉字的《孝经》。
English: As a result of Su Zong, Yuan Hui began to study, and presented him with a copy of the "Book of Filial Piety" with gold-painted characters.

古文：又无方自达，乃与刘腾为养息，赂腾金宝巨万计。
现代文：又没有办法自求显达，就与刘腾交往做他的养子，贿赂型胆的金银财宝以万万计数。
English: He had no way to express his wishes to the imperial court, so he adopted Liu Teng as his son and gave Liu Teng a huge amount of gold and treasure.

古文：腾屡为之言，乃得兼都官尚书，出为秦州刺史。
现代文：刘腾多次为他说话，才得以兼任都官尚书，外出任秦州刺史。
English: Liu Teng spoke for him many times before he was able to concurrently serve as the official of the capital, Shangshu, and go out to serve as the official of Qinzhou.

古文：在州聚敛，百姓吁嗟。
现代文：在州中聚敛财富，百姓哀叹。
English: People bemoan the accumulation of wealth in the state.

古文：属东益、南秦二州氐反，诏琛为行台，仍充都督，还摄州事。
现代文：遇束益、南秦二州氐人反叛，诏令元琛担任行台，不久充当都督，返回代行州中事务。
English: In the event of the rebellion of the Southern Qin and Southern Qin's two states, Zhao ordered Yuan Qi to serve as the governor, and soon he served as the governor, returning to the central state affairs.

古文：琛性贪暴，既总军省，求欲无厌，百姓患害，有甚狼虎。
现代文：元琛性格贪婪暴虐，统领军队行台后，贪求欲念没有满足，对百姓的祸害，比虎狼更厉害。
English: The character of Yuan Shao was greedy and tyrannical. After he led the army to take power, his greed and desire were not satisfied. He was more of a scourge to the people than tigers and wolves.

古文：进讨氐羌，大被摧破，士卒死者千数，率众走还。
现代文：进军讨伐氐人羌人，大受摧折，士兵死亡的以千计数，率领部众逃回。
English: He marched out to fight the barbarians, suffered great defeat, with thousands of soldiers killed, and led his troops back to safety.

古文：内恃刘腾，无所畏惮，为中尉纠弹，会赦，除名为民。
现代文：在朝中仗恃型腾，对谁也不畏惧，被中尉纠察弹劾，遇上大赦，除去名籍成为平民。
English: He fought bravely in the Korean War, feared no one, was picketed and impeached by a lieutenant, received amnesty, and was stripped of his citizenship to become a civilian.

古文：寻复王爵，后讨鲜于脩礼，败，免官爵。
现代文：不久恢复王爵，后来讨伐鲜于脩礼，失败，免除宫职爵位。
English: He was soon restored to the title of prince, and later he unsuccessfully campaigned for the title of crown prince, and was exempted from the title of prince.

古文：后讨汾晋胡、蜀，卒于军，追复王爵。
现代文：后来讨伐进置地区的翅人、蜀人，在军队中去世，追复王爵。
English: Later, he led a crusade against the Wing Men and Shu Men of the occupied regions, died in the army, and recovered the crown.

古文：安丰王猛，字季烈。
现代文：安丰王元猛，字季烈。
English: Anfeng Wang Yuanmeng, the character of the season.

古文：太和五年封，加侍中。出为和龙镇都大将、营州刺史。
现代文：太和五年封，加授侍中外出任和龙镇部大将、营州刺史。
English: He was given the rank of Taihei 5th grade, and was additionally awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Middle Officer, General of Longzhen Department, and Yingzhou Sashishi.

古文：猛宽仁雄毅，甚有威略，戎夷畏爱之。
现代文：元猛宽厚仁慈英勇刚毅，十分有威望谋略，戎族人畏惧喜爱他。
English: Later, he also conscripted the Hu people and Shu people of the Jin Dynasty, died in the army, and was restored to the throne.

古文：薨于州。
现代文：在州中逝世。
English: Died in Xiangzhou

古文：赠太尉，谥曰匡。
现代文：追赠他为太尉，谧号为匡。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and his posthumous name was Tsuru.

古文：子延明，袭。
现代文：儿子延明，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yanming, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：世宗时，授太中大夫。
现代文：世宗时，授任太中大夫。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was awarded the title of Grand Physician.

古文：延昌初，岁大饥，延明乃灭家财，以拯宾客数十人，并赡其家。
现代文：延昌初年，年成大饥荒，延明于是减省家中财产，来拯救宾客几十人，并且供养他们的家庭。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, there was a great famine, so Yanming reduced his family's property to save dozens of guests and support their families.

古文：至肃宗初，为豫州刺史，甚有政绩，累迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：到肃宗初年，担任豫州刺史，十分有政绩，屡经升迁到给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he served as the Henan Provincial Historian. He was very successful in politics, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：延明既博极群书，兼有文藻，鸠集图籍万有余卷。性清俭，不营产业。
现代文：延明博览群书，加上有文才，搜集图书一万多卷，性格清廉节俭，不经营家产。
English: Yanming is well-versed in books and has literary talent. He has collected more than 10,000 volumes of books. He is honest and frugal, and does not run a household.

古文：与中山王熙及弟临淮王彧等，并以才学令望有名于世。
现代文：和中山王元熙以及弟弟临淮王元或等人，都以才学声望闻名于当代。
English: And Zhongshan Wang Yuanxi and his brother Lin Huai Wang Yuan or others, are famous for their academic reputation in the contemporary world.

古文：虽风流造次不及熙、彧，而稽古淳笃过之。
现代文：虽然风度霞敏赶不卜元熙、元或，而研习古事淳朴笃实超过他们。
English: Although Xia Min's demeanor can't catch up with that of Yuan Xi and Yuan Li, her study of ancient history surpasses them in simplicity and sincerity.

古文：寻迁侍中。
现代文：不久升为侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：诏与侍中崔光撰定服制。
现代文：诏令他和侍中崔光撰作服饰车马制度。
English: He and Choe Kwang, the chamberlain, were ordered to draw up a dress code.

古文：后兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：后来兼任尚书右仆射。
English: Later, he also served as Shoshu Umenosuke.

古文：以延明博识多闻，敕监金石事。
现代文：因延明学识广见闻多，命令他监察钟鼎碑碣事务。
English: Since Yuan Yanming was knowledgeable and well-informed, the imperial court appointed him to supervise the affairs related to precious stones.

古文：及元法僧反，诏为东道行台、徐州大都督，节度诸军事，与都督临淮王彧、尚书李宪等讨法僧。
现代文：等到元法僧反叛，诏令延明担任束道行台、徐州大都督，指挥各军事务，和都督临淮王元或、尚书李宪等人讨伐法僧。
English: When the former monks rebelled, the emperor ordered Yanming to serve as the grand governor of Sokudo, Xuzhou, and Xingtai, commanding the affairs of each army, and to fight the monks with the governor Lin Huai Wangyuan or Shangshu Li Xian.

古文：萧衍遣其豫章王综镇徐州。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的豫章干萧综镇守徐州。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his Yuzhang Gan to Xiaoshu Town to guard Xuzhou.

古文：延明先牧徐方，甚得民誉，招怀旧土，远近归之。
现代文：延明原来在徐州为刺史，很得民众拥戴，招集怀柔旧辖地，远近的人归附他。
English: Yanming was originally a pretender in Xuzhou, and was well supported by the people. He summoned the old jurisdiction of Huairou, and people near and far joined him.

古文：综既降，因以军乘之，复东南之境，至宿豫而还。
现代文：萧综投降后，延明就率军队乘胜出击，收复东南的疆域，到达宿豫而返回。
English: After the surrender of Xiao Zomei, Yanming led the army to take advantage of the victory to attack, recover the southeastern territory, reach Suyuan and return.

古文：迁都督、徐州刺史。
现代文：调任都督、徐州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of the governor of Xuzhou Province.

古文：频经师旅，人物凋弊，延明招携新故，人悉安业，百姓咸附。
现代文：徐州接连经受战事，人口稀少，延明招集新旧民众，人们都安居乐业，百姓都归附。
English: Xuzhou has suffered from successive wars and is sparsely populated. Yanming has called up new and old people. People are living and working in peace, and the people are attached.

古文：庄帝时，兼尚书令、大司马。
现代文：庄帝时，延明任兼尚书令、大司马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhuang, Yan Ming also served as Shang Shuling and Da Sima.

古文：及元颢入洛，延明受颢委寄，率众守河桥。
现代文：等到元颢进入洛阳，延明接受元颢的委任，率领军队守卫河桥。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Yanming accepted Yuan Shao's appointment and led the army to guard the river bridge.

古文：颢败，遂将妻子奔萧衍，死于江南。
现代文：元颢失败，延明于是带领妻子儿女投奔萧衍，死在长江以南。
English: Yuancheng failed, so Yanming led his wife and children to go to Xiaoyan and died in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：庄帝末，丧还。
现代文：庄帝末年，灵柩被运回。
English: In the last years of Emperor Zhuang, he returned to the north after his death.

古文：出帝初，赠太保，王如故，谥曰文宣。
现代文：出帝初年，追赠延明为太保，王爵照旧，谧号为文宣。
English: In the first year after his accession to the throne, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taiho from Yanming and the title of Wangzhu as before. His posthumous name was Wenxuan.

古文：所著诗赋赞颂铭诔三百余篇，又撰《五经宗略》、《诗礼别义》，注《帝王世纪》及《列仙传》。
现代文：延明所写作的诗赋赞颂碑铭谏文有三百多篇，又撰写《五经宗略》、《诗礼别义》，注释《帝王世纪》和《列仙传》。
English: Yan Ming wrote more than three hundred poems to praise the inscriptions on monuments, as well as the "Five-scripture Outline," "Poetic Etiquette," the commentary "The Century of Emperors" and "The Legend of the Immortals."

古文：又以河间人信都芳工算术，引之在馆。
现代文：又因河间人信都芳盖精于计算方法，招他在馆舍中。
English: In addition, because the people of Kawama believed that Fang Gai was good at calculating methods, he invited him to the library.

古文：其撰《古今乐事》，《九章》十二图，又集《器准》九篇，芳别为之注，皆行于世。
现代文：呈缨所撰写的古今音乐之事，《九章算术》十二图解，又收集《器准》九篇，信都芳另外为它们作注，都流传于世间。
English: The things about ancient and modern music written by Cheng Yu, the twelve diagrams of "Nine Chapters of Arithmetic," and the nine collected "Equipment Standards," which were also annotated by Xindu Fang, have all been passed down to the world.

