古文：张晋亨张晋亨，字进卿，冀州南宫人也。
现代文：张晋亨，字进卿，冀州南宫人。
English: Zhang Jinheng, also known as Jinqing, was from the Southern Palace in Jizhou.

古文：其兄同知安武军节度使事、领枣强令颢，以冀州数道之众，附严实于青崖，后从实来归，进颢安武军节度使，西征，战没。岁戊寅，太师、国王木华黎承制署晋亨袭颢爵。
现代文：其兄张颢率领冀州数道之兵马于青崖投向严实，后随严实一道归降蒙古，张颢升为安武军节度使，在西征中战死。太祖十三年，太师、国王木华黎奉命让晋亨承继其兄颢的官爵。
English: In the 13th year of King Taizu's reign, Grand Master and King Mu Huali was ordered to let Jin Heng succeed to his brother's title.

古文：晋亨涉猎书史，小心畏慎，临事周密，实器之，以女妻焉。
现代文：晋亨广读书史，为人小心谨慎，办事周密，受严实器重，以其女配晋亨为妻。
English: Jin Heng has a wide reading history, is careful and prudent, works carefully, is subject to strict discipline, and is married to his female partner, Jin Heng.

古文：实征泽、潞，偏将李信、晁海相继降于宋，晋亨跋涉险阻，昼伏夜行，仅免于难。
现代文：严实征讨泽州、潞州时，偏将李信、晁海相继降宋，情况危急，晋亨跋山涉水，昼伏夜行，才免于难。
English: When the strict and effective enlistment of Zezhou and Zhangzhou was carried out, Li Xin and Bohai were forced to surrender to Song successively. The situation was critical, and Jin Heng had to wade through the mountains and walk day and night to avoid difficulties.

古文：实遣子忠贞入质，命晋亨与俱。
现代文：严实遣其子忠贞于蒙古朝为人质，命晋亨同去。
English: Yan solidly sent his son Loyalty to the Mongol Empire as a hostage, and ordered Jin Heng to go with him.

古文：丁亥，从国王孛罗征益都，以功迁昭毅大将军，领恩州刺史，兼行台马步军都总领，再迁镇国大将军。
现代文：太祖二十二年，晋亨随从国王孛罗征伐益都，因有功升昭毅大将军，领恩州刺史，兼行台马步军都总领，后又升为镇国大将军。
English: In the 22nd year of King Taizu's reign, Jinheng followed King Zhao Luo in conquering, cutting down and profiting from the capital, and was promoted to General Zhaoyi for his meritorious service. He was also awarded the title of "Leader of the History of Lian'an County" and was also the commander-in-chief of the Taima Infantry Corps. Later, he was promoted to "General of Zhenguo."

古文：实征淮楚、河南，晋亨皆从。
现代文：严实征淮楚、河南时，晋亨始终随从。
English: When Yan Shizheng conquered Huaichu and Henan, Jinheng always followed him.

古文：甲午，从实入觐，命为东平路行军千户。
现代文：太宗六年，随严实入朝拜见皇帝，命他为东平路行军千户。
English: In the sixth year of Taizong's reign, he followed Yan Shih into the court to pay homage to the emperor, and ordered him to march a thousand households along Dongping Road.

古文：围安庆，其守将走，邀击之，斩首百级，俘获无算。
现代文：在围攻安庆时，宋守将弃城而逃，晋亨截击，斩首百余，俘获无数。
English: During the siege of Anqing, Song Shou will abandon the city and flee, Jinheng interception, beheading more than a hundred, captured countless.

古文：攻光之定城，俘其将士十有五人。
现代文：攻光州之定城，晋亨俘宋军将士十五人。
English: Attacking Dingcheng in Guangzhou, Jin Heng captured fifteen Song soldiers.

古文：略信阳，执复州将金之才。
现代文：攻信阳，俘复州将金之才。
English: He attacked Xinyang and captured the Fuzhou general Jin Zhucai.

古文：攻六安，拔之。大小数十战，策功居多。
现代文：又攻克六安。大小数十战，晋亨战功累累。
English: He also conquered Liuan. He fought dozens of battles, large and small, and achieved great success.

古文：实卒，其子忠济奏晋亨权知东平府事。
现代文：严实卒，其子忠济奏荐晋亨暂知东平府事。
English: After the death of Yan Shih, his son Zhong Jie recommended that Jin Heng temporarily learn about Dongping prefecture.

古文：东平贡赋率倍他道，迎送供亿，簿书狱讼，日不暇给，历七年，吏畏而民安之。
现代文：东平的贡赋比其他道多一倍，他迎送供给，处理日常公务和诉讼，天天忙碌。在东平七年，官吏怕他，而百姓安居乐业。
English: Dongping's tribute was twice as much as that of other provinces. He received supplies, handled daily duties and lawsuits, and was busy every day. In Dongping for seven years, officials were afraid of him, while the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：辛亥，宪宗即位，从忠济入觐。
现代文：宪宗即位，晋亨随忠济入见皇帝。
English: Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Jingu followed Emperor Tadatsugu to the throne.

古文：时包银制行，朝议户赋银六两，诸道长吏有辄请试行于民者，晋亨面责之曰： 诸君职在亲民，民之利病，且不知乎？
现代文：当时实行包银制，朝廷决定每户征银六两。各道官吏中有人请求立即试行者，晋亨当面斥责道： 诸君之职在于爱护百姓，百姓疾苦你不知道吗？
English: At that time, a cash-in-transit system was in effect, and the imperial court decided to levy silver at the rate of six taels per household. When some officials from various provinces asked for an immediate trial, Jin Heng rebuked them in person, saying, "Your duty is to love and care for the people. Don't you know that the people are suffering?

古文：今天颜咫尺，知而不言，罪也。
现代文：在皇帝面前，你们知而不言，是有罪的。
English: It is an offence for you not to speak what you know before the emperor.

古文：承命而归，事不克济，罪当何如！
现代文：你们奉命回去行包银制，如果办得不好，又当何罪？
English: You have been ordered to go back to the gold standard. If it is not done well, what is the crime?

古文：且五方土产各异，随其产为赋，则民便而易足，必责输银，虽破民之产，有不能办者。 
现代文：且各地土产不同，随所产定赋税，则官民两便，若一定要输纳银两，百姓固然破产，而且也办不到。 
English: Moreover, as the local production varies from place to place, the tax will be set according to the production, and the government and the people will both benefit. If the government and the people must both lose money, the people will certainly go bankrupt, and it can't be done.

古文：大臣以闻，明日召见，如其言以对。帝是之，乃得蠲户额三之一，仍听民输他物，遂为定制。
现代文：大臣将此言报告世祖，第二天世祖召见他，他还是这样说，世祖认为他言之有理，每户减包银三分之一，且听民输纳土产，成为定制。
English: The minister reported this to the patriarch, and the next day the patriarch summoned him, and he said the same thing. The patriarch thought his words were reasonable, and each household reduced the amount of silver by one-third, and asked the people to accept local products, which became a custom.

古文：欲赐晋亨金虎符，辞曰： 虎符，国之名器，长一道者所佩，臣隶忠济麾下，复佩虎符，非制也。臣不敢受。 
现代文：帝欲赐晋亨金虎符，他辞谢道： 虎符是国家贵重之物，一道之长官应当佩戴，臣隶属于忠济麾下，再佩虎符，违背制度，臣不敢接受。 
English: The emperor wanted to give Jinheng the golden tiger charm, but he declined and said: The tiger charm is a precious national treasure. A high-ranking official should wear it. The vassal is subordinate to Zhongji. If the vassal were to wear the tiger charm again, it would violate the system, and the vassal would not dare to accept it.

古文：帝益喜，改赐玺书、金符，恩州管民万户。
现代文：帝更高兴，改赐玺书、金符，任命他为恩州管民万户。
English: The emperor was even more pleased, bestowing the imperial edict and golden charms, and appointing him as the steward of all households in Enzhou.

古文：中统三年，李璮叛，晋亨从严忠范战于遥墙泺，胜之，改本道奥鲁万户。
现代文：中统三年，李王反叛，晋亨随严忠范在遥墙泺战胜了李王，于是改晋亨为本道奥鲁万户。
English: Three years after the unification of China, Li Wang rebelled, and Jin Heng, following Yan Zhong Fan, defeated Li Wang at the Distant Wall. Therefore, Jin Heng was changed to the main road of Oulu.

古文：四年，授金虎符，分将本道兵，充万户，戍宿州。
现代文：四年，授金虎符，为万户，统领本道兵戍守宿州。
English: In the fourth year, he was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge for 10,000 households, and became the leader of the local military garrison in Sapporo.

古文：首言： 汴堤南北，沃壤闲旷，宜屯田以资军食。 
现代文：他首先提出 ：汴堤南北，肥沃土地闲着未耕种，宜在那里屯田以充实军粮。 
English: First of all, he proposed: from the north to the south of the dike, fertile land is idle and uncultivated, and it is appropriate to fill up the military grain with farmland there.

古文：乃分兵列营，以时种艺，选千夫长督劝之，事成，期年皆获其利。
现代文：于是分兵立营，按时耕种，选千夫长以督劝农事，一年即大有收获。
English: As a result, soldiers were divided into battalions, farming was carried out on time, and a commander of a thousand was elected to supervise and advise on agricultural matters. In one year, there was a great harvest.

古文：至元八年，改怀远大将军、淄莱路总管，寻兼军事。
现代文：至元八年，改为怀远大将军、淄莱路总管，不久又兼领军事。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was changed to General Huaiyuan, the head of the Bailai Road, and soon he was also in charge of the military.

古文：十一年，诏伐宋，晋亨在选中，闻命就道，曰： 此报效之秋也。 
现代文：十一年，诏令伐宋。晋亨闻命立即起程，认为这正是报效国家之时，分道由安庆渡江。
English: In the eleventh year of the Emperor's reign, he issued an order to attack the Song Dynasty. Hearing the order, Jinheng immediately set out, believing that this was the time to serve the country, and split from Anqing to cross the river.

古文：分道由安庆渡江，丞相伯颜留之戍镇江，兼与民政，壹以镇静为务，战焦山、瓜洲，皆有功。
现代文：丞相伯颜留他戍守镇江，兼管民政。
English: The chancellor, Boyan, left him in charge of Zhenjiang, and also in charge of civil affairs.

古文：十三年，卒于官。
现代文：在焦山、瓜洲的战斗中，他都建立功勋。至元十三年卒。
English: He distinguished himself in the battles of Jiaoshan and Guazhou. He died at the age of 13.

古文：子好古。
现代文：张好古，字信甫，晋亨之子。
English: Zhang Haogu, surnamed Xinfu, son of Jin Heng.

古文：时晋亨在济南军中，闻之，哭曰： 吾儿死得其所矣。 
现代文：中统元年回宿州，兼恩州刺史。
English: In the first year of centralization, he went back to Shukushu, and also visited Enshu.

古文：弟好义袭，下江淮有功。王珍王珍，字国宝，大名南乐人，世为农家。
现代文：不久移防蕲县。济南李王叛元，宋军攻蕲县，好古迎战阵亡。王珍，字国宝，大名南乐人，世为农家。
English: Wang Zhen, known as a national treasure, was a famous South Korean musician and a farmer.

古文：珍慷慨有大志。
现代文：珍胸怀大志，意气昂扬。
English: They are ambitious and high-spirited.

古文：金末丧乱，所在盗起，南乐人杨铁枪聚众保乡里。
现代文：金末战乱不安，南乐人杨铁枪聚众保护乡里。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, the war was unsettled, and the Nanle people and Yang Tiegun gathered to protect the countryside.

古文：太祖遣兵攻破河朔，铁枪以兵应之，行营帅按只署珍军前都弹压。
现代文：太祖遣兵攻破河朔，铁枪举兵响应，行营帅按只任王珍为军前都弹压。
English: The great-grandfather sent soldiers to break through the river, the iron gun raised troops in response, and the battalion commander pressured Wang Zhen to take the lead in the front.

古文：铁枪与金军战死，众推苏椿代领其众。
现代文：铁枪与金军战死，大家推苏椿继续领导。
English: Tiegun died in battle with the Golden Army, and everyone pushed Su Tsubaki to continue to lead.

古文：宋将彭义斌帅师侵大名，椿战不利，降之，义斌遂据大名。
现代文：宋将彭义斌率军进攻大名，苏椿战斗失利，投降宋军，义斌据大名。
English: Song general Peng Yibin led an army to attack Daimyo, Su Tsubaki lost the battle and surrendered to the Song army, and Yibin surrendered to Daimyo.

古文：珍弃其家，间道走还军中，按只嘉其诚，待遇益厚，以为假子。
现代文：珍弃其家，从小路回到军营，按只嘉奖其忠诚，待遇更厚，收为义子。
English: Zhen abandoned his home, returned to the military camp from the path, only to be rewarded for his loyalty, treated more generously, and adopted as a foster child.

古文：复从速鲁忽击走义斌，苏椿以大名降，珍妻子故在，珍语之曰： 吾非弃汝辈，诚不以私爱夺吾报国之心耳。 
现代文：珍又随从速鲁忽赶走了义斌，苏椿献大名投降，而珍之妻子在大名安然无事。珍对她说： 并非我要抛弃你们，实在不能因私爱而夺我报国之心。 
English: Zhen also followed the swift-footed Lu to drive away Yibin, Su Qin surrendered to Daimyo, and Zhen's wife was safe and sound in Daimyo. Zhen said to her: "It's not that I want to abandon you, I really can't take away my love for my country out of selfishness."

古文：闻者称叹。授镇国上将军、大名路治中、军前行元帅府事。
现代文：授他为镇国上将军、大名路治中、军前行元帅府事等职。
English: He was awarded the posts of Zhenguo Shangzheng, Daimyo Luzhizhong, and Junzengong Marshal.

古文：俄以取宁海、胙城功，迁辅国上将军，复授统摄开曹滑浚等处行元帅府事，兼大名路安抚使。
现代文：不久，又因取宁海、胙城有功而升为辅国上将军，又授统摄开、曹、滑、浚等处行元帅府事，兼大名路安抚使。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the rank of assistant admiral for his distinguished service in capturing Ninghai and Lucheng, and was also awarded the titles of General of the Army, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Infantry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, and General of the Armies.

古文：苏椿复欲叛归金，珍觉之，与元帅梁仲先发兵攻椿，椿开南门而遁。
现代文：苏椿又要反叛蒙古归顺金朝，王珍发觉，与元帅梁仲先发制人，发兵进攻，椿开南门逃遁。
English: Su Tsubaki also wanted to rebel against Mongolia and submit to the Kim dynasty. Wang Zhen discovered this, and he and Marshal Liang Zhong launched a preemptive attack, sent troops to attack, and Tsubaki opened the south gate to escape.

古文：国王斡真授仲行省，珍骠骑卫上将军、同知大名府事、兼兵马都元帅。
现代文：国王斡真授梁仲行省，授王珍骠骑卫上将军、同知大名府事，兼兵马都元帅。
English: The king awarded Liang Zhongxing with the title of provincial governor, Wang Zhenya with the title of cavalry general, Tongzhi Daimyo with the title of prefectural governor, and Marshal of the Terracotta Army.

古文：从速不台经略河南，破金将武仙于郑州，复与金人战于萧县，斩其将。
现代文：王珍随从速不台征讨河南，破金将武仙于郑州，在萧县与金人接战，斩其将。
English: Wang Zhen promptly went to conquer Henan, broke the gold of Wuxian in Zhengzhou, and fought the gold of Jin in Xiao County.

古文：顷之，仲死，国王命仲妻冉守真权行省事，珍为大名路尚书省下都元帅，将其军。国用安据徐、邳，珍从太赤及阿术鲁攻拔之，授同佥大名行省事。
现代文：不久，梁仲死，国王命仲妻冉守真暂代理行省事，以王珍为大名路尚书省下都元帅，领梁仲之军，随太赤及阿术鲁攻克国用安所占据的徐州和邳州，因功授同佥大名行省事。
English: Soon after, Liang Zhong died, and the king appointed Liang Zhong's wife Ran Shuzhen to temporarily act as the provincial governor, with Wang Zhen as the grand marshal of Lu Shangshu Province, leading Liang Zhong's army to conquer Xuzhou and Zhangzhou occupied by Taigao and Ashuru, and to be awarded the title of grand marshal of the province for his services.

古文：从军伐宋，破光州、枣阳、庐、寿、滁州，珍常身先诸将，屡有功。
现代文：从大军伐宋，在攻破光州、枣阳、庐州、寿春、滁州的战役中，珍常身先诸将，屡立战功。
English: From the great army of the Song Dynasty, in the campaigns to break through Gwangju, Zaoyang, Bozhou, Shuchun, and Bozhou, Zenzhong was always the first, and repeatedly made war exploits.

古文：宋城五河口，珍帅死士二十人夺之，宋人遁，乘胜进师，连破濠、泗、涡口。
现代文：宋军筑城五河口，珍率二十勇士夺取，宋军逃遁，珍等乘胜进军，连破濠州、泗州、涡口。
English: The Song Army built the city of Wuhekou, with 20 warriors capturing it, the Song Army fled, and Zhen and others marched into the army, defeating Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Turbulent Bay.

古文：岁庚子，入见太宗，授总帅本路军马管民次官，佩金符。
现代文：太宗十二年，王珍入见皇帝，授总率本路军马管民次官，佩金符。
English: In the 12th year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Wang Zhen was presented to the emperor and given the title of vice-minister of military and people's affairs in charge of this road.

古文：珍言于帝曰： 大名困于赋调，贷借西域贾人银八十铤，及逋粮五万斛，若复征之，民无生者矣。 
现代文：珍上书道 ：大名百姓为赋税所困，向西域商人借钱八十铤，欠官粮五万斛，若再征收，民无生路了。 
English: Zhen Shang Shodo: The daimyo people are trapped by taxation. They borrow 80 baht from merchants in the western region and owe 50,000 baht in official grain. If the tax is imposed again, the people will have no way out.

古文：诏官偿所借银，复尽蠲其逋粮。
现代文：诏令官府偿还所借银两，免其所欠官粮。
English: The edict ordered the government to repay the two silver coins it had borrowed and to waive the official grain it owed.

古文：已而朝廷议分蒙古、汉军戍河南，以珍戍睢州，修城隍，明斥候，宋兵不敢犯。
现代文：不久，朝廷分蒙古、汉军戍守河南，命王珍戍守睢州，修城池，派斥候，宋军不敢进犯。
English: Soon, the imperial court divided Mongolia, the Han army garrisoned Henan, and the king ordered Zhen to garrison Bozhou, rebuild the city, and send scouts, but the Song army did not dare to attack.

古文：杨杰只哥，燕京宝坻人，家世业农。
现代文：后进升本路征行万户，加金虎符。在睢州镇守九年而卒，年六十五岁。杨杰只哥，燕京宝坻人，世代务农。
English: Afterward, he marched up the main road to collect ten thousand households, adding gold and tiger charms. He served as a town guard in Zhangzhou for nine years and died at the age of sixty-five. Yang Jie only brother, Yanjing Baozhen people, has been farming for generations.

古文：杰只哥少有勇略，太祖略地燕、赵，率族属降附。
现代文：杰只哥年少就有勇有谋。太祖征伐燕、赵，杰只哥率族归附。
English: At a young age, Jie Zhiqiao was brave and resourceful. The great ancestors conquered Yan and Zhao, and Jie Zhiqiao led the clan to annexation.

古文：从攻辽左，及从元帅阿术鲁定西夏诸部，有功。
现代文：随大军攻辽左，随元帅阿术鲁平定西夏诸部，均立战功。
English: With the large army attacking Liao Zuo, and with the marshal Ah Shulu, the various parts of Western Xia were leveled, and the war was a success.

古文：己丑，睿宗赐以金币，命从阿术鲁攻信安。阿术鲁知其材略出诸将右，命裁决军务。
现代文：太宗元年，睿宗赐他彩缎，命随阿术鲁攻信安，阿术鲁知他才略在诸将之上，命他裁决军务。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Ruizong gave him the title of Caiyu, and ordered him to follow Ah Shulu to attack Xin'an. Ah Shulu knew that he was superior to all generals, and ordered him to adjudicate military affairs.

古文：信安城四面阻水，其帅张进数月不降，杰只哥曰： 彼恃巨浸，我师进不得利，退不得归，不若往说之。 
现代文：信安城西面环水，其帅张进数月不降。杰只哥建议 ：信安城凭借四面有大河，我军进不得，退不得，不若去说降。 
English: The west side of Xin'an City is surrounded by water, and its commander Zhang Jin did not retreat for several months. Brother Jie suggested: With the large rivers on all sides of Xin'an City, our army cannot advance, retreat, or surrender.

古文：进见其来，怒曰： 吾已斩二使，汝不惧死耶？ 
现代文：张进见杰只哥来，怒斥道： 吾已斩二使，你不怕死？ 
English: Zhang Jin saw Jie's younger brother coming and angrily rebuked him, "I've already killed two envoys. Aren't you afraid of death?

古文：杰只哥无惧色，从容言曰： 今齐、鲁、燕、赵，地方数千里，郡邑闻风纳降，独君恃此一城，内无军储，外无兵援，亡可立待。
现代文：杰只哥毫无惧色，从容说道： 今齐、鲁、燕、赵，地方数千里，郡县都相继投降，唯君凭恃此一孤城，内无粮储，外无援军，灭亡指日可待。
English: Without any fear, Brother Jie calmly said, "Now Qi, Lu, Yan, Zhao, thousands of provinces, counties and counties have surrendered one after another, but you are relying on this one lonely city, with no grain reserves inside and no reinforcements outside, and your demise is just around the corner."

古文：为君计者，不如请降，可以保富贵而免死亡。 
现代文：为君着想，不如投降，可保你富贵而免于死亡。 
English: For your sake, it is better to surrender, which will keep you rich and save you from death.

古文：进默然曰： 姑待之。 
现代文：张进沉默了一会儿说： 暂且等等。 
English: Zhang Jin was silent for a moment and said: Let's wait.

古文：凡三往，乃降。
现代文：杰只哥往返三次，张进终于投降。
English: Jie brother went back and forth three times, Zhang Jin finally surrendered.

古文：辛卯，大名守苏椿叛，讨获之，众议屠城，杰只哥曰： 怒一人而族万家，非招来之道也。 
现代文：太宗三年，大名太守苏椿反叛，蒙古军讨平，生擒苏椿。诸将要屠杀全城，杰只哥曰： 恨一人而杀万家，这不是安抚百姓之道。 
English: In the third year of Taizong, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo, the daimyo

古文：众是其言。
现代文：众以为是。
English: That's what everyone thinks.

古文：由是滑、浚等州，闻风纳款。
现代文：从此，滑、浚等州相继投诚。
English: Since then, states such as Nanning and Danzhou have successively joined the party.

古文：壬辰，师次徐州，阻河不得济。
现代文：四年，蒙军进攻徐州，但不能渡过黄河。
English: In four years, the Mongolian army attacked Xuzhou, but could not cross the Yellow River.

古文：杰只哥探知有贼兵操舟楫伏草泽中，率劲卒数人，凭河击之，悉夺舟楫，众遂得渡，获河南诸郡降人三万余户。
现代文：杰只哥探知有敌军驾船伏于草泽中，自率劲卒数人袭击，夺取舟船，大军得以渡过黄河，河南诸郡三万户投降。
English: Jie Zhang detected that there was an enemy army driving a boat and lying in the grass. He led several people to attack and capture the boat. The large army was able to cross the Yellow River, and 30,000 households in Henan counties surrendered.

古文：进攻徐州，金将国用安拒战，杰只哥率百余骑突入阵中，迎击于后，大败之，擒一将而还。
现代文：进攻徐州，金将国用安抵御，杰只哥率百余骑冲入敌阵中，大败敌军，擒一将而还。
English: In the attack on Xuzhou, Kim took the lead in using the country to defend itself, and Jie Diao led more than a hundred horsemen to rush into the enemy lines, defeated the enemy army, and fought back.

古文：皇太弟国王驻兵河上，见之，赐名拔都，授金符，命总管新附军民。
现代文：当时，皇太弟国王驻兵河上，见杰只哥如此英雄，赐名 拔都 ，授金符，命总管新附军民。
English: At that time, the Emperor's younger brother, the King, was stationed on the river. Seeing Jie as such a hero, he was given the name "Batu," a gold medallion, and made the commander-in-chief of the newly annexed soldiers and civilians.

古文：乙未，太宗特赐杰只哥种田民户租赋。
现代文：太宗七年，特赐杰只哥种田民户租赋。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Jie brother was specially granted the farmland rent.

古文：刘通刘通，字仲达，东平齐河人也。初从严实来归，继从收濮、曹、相、潞、定陶、楚丘。
现代文：此后又攻占五州十县四堡二寨。十一年，宋军进攻归德，为杰只哥击败。杰只哥率水军追击，转战中流，不幸溺死。年四十岁。刘通，字仲达，东平齐河人。初随严实归附于蒙古，随后又随大军征服濮、曹、相、潞、定陶、楚丘等地。
English: In the eleventh year, the Song army attacked and returned to Germany, defeated by Jie Jiao. Jie Jiao led the navy to pursue, turned to the middle of the war, and unfortunately drowned. He was forty years old. Liu Tong, Zi Zhongda, Dongping Qihe people. At first, he was attached to Mongolia with Yan Shih, and then conquered places such as Zou, Cao, So, Zou, Ding Tao, and Chu Qiu with a large army.

古文：实荐于太师木华黎，以通为齐河总管，寻授镇国上将军、左副都元帅、济南知府、德州总管、行军千户。
现代文：严实把他荐举给太师木华黎，任齐河总管，不久授镇国上将军、左副都元帅、济南知府、德州总管、行军千户。
English: Yan solidly recommended him to the Grand Master Mu Huali, appointed him as the chief administrator of Qihe, and soon promoted him to the general of the town, the left deputy marshal of the capital, the governor of Jinan, the chief administrator of Texas, and the marching thousand households.

古文：岁丙辰卒。
现代文：太宗赐他金符，升上千户。
English: Emperor Taizong gave him a gold medal, and he was promoted to a thousand households.

古文：子复亨，袭为行军千户，从严实略安丰、通、泰、淮、濠、泗、蕲、黄、安庆诸州。
现代文：宋将彭义斌攻齐河城，被刘通杀得大败，溺死者甚众。第二天又围攻，又被击败，彭义斌仅率数骑逃脱。太宗九年，调任德州等处二万户军民总管。宪宗六年卒。刘复亨，刘通之子，袭父职为行军千户，随严实攻占安丰、通、泰、淮、濠、泗、蕲、黄、安庆诸州。
English: Song sent Peng Yibin to attack Qihe City, but he was defeated and drowned by Liu Tong. The next day, he was besieged and defeated again, and Peng Yibin escaped with only a few horsemen. In the ninth year of Taizong, he was transferred to be the chief administrator of 20,000 military and civilian households in Texas and other places. In the sixth year of Xianzong, Liu Fuheng, the son of Liu Tong, followed his father's duty and marched to thousands of households, and occupied the provinces of Anfeng, Tong, Tai, Huai, Nanzhu, Nanzhu, Nanzhu, Huang, and Anqing.

古文：宪宗西征，复亨摄万户，统东平军马攻钓鱼山苦竹寨，有功，师还，兼德州军民总管。
现代文：宪宗西征，复亨兼为万户，统领东平军马攻钓鱼山苦竹寨，有功。后又兼为德州军民总管。
English: Gensong led the westward expedition, Fuheng was also the leader of ten thousand households, and led the Dongping army to attack the Diaoyu Mountain and the Bitter Bamboo Village, which was a great achievement. Later, he also served as the general manager of the military and civilian affairs of Texas.

古文：中统元年，奉旨戍和林，还，授虎符，进武卫军副都指挥使。
现代文：中统元年奉旨戍守和林，回师授虎符，晋升为武卫军副都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the Centralized Government, he was ordered to guard the province of Hualin, and was promoted to vice-commander of the military garrison.

古文：李璮叛，遣使招复亨，复亨立斩之。
现代文：李王反叛，遣使招复亨，复亨斩来使。
English: King Li rebelled, sent an envoy to summon Fuheng, and Fuheng sent an envoy.

古文：时遣兵讨贼，集济南，乏食，复亨尽出其私蓄以济师，世祖嘉之，赐白金五千两，复亨固辞。
现代文：蒙军集于济南，军粮不足，复亨将自己财产来接济讨李王蒙古军。至元二年，升左翼侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: The Mongolian army gathered in Jinan. There was a shortage of food for the troops, and Fuheng used his own wealth to support the Mongolian army of King Li. By the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he had risen to the position of commander and envoy of the left wing guards.

古文：至元二年，进左翼侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：四年，转为右翼侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the right wing of the bodyguard and commanded the troops.

古文：四年，迁右翼。九年，加昭勇大将军、凤州等处经略使。
现代文：九年，加昭勇大将军、凤州等处经略使。
English: In the ninth year, General Ga Zhaoyong, Fengzhou and other departments were sent as envoys.

古文：十年，迁征东左副都元帅，统军四万、战船九百，征日本，与倭兵十万遇，战败之。
现代文：十年，升征东左副都元帅，统军四万，战舰九百，征讨日本，遇倭兵十万，击败之。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the East Vice-Marshal of the Left, unified 40,000 troops, 900 warships, conquered Japan, and defeated 100,000 Japanese soldiers.

古文：还，招降淮南诸郡邑。
现代文：回国后招降淮南诸郡邑。
English: After returning to China, he was transferred to Huainan County.

古文：十二年，授昭信路总管。
现代文：十二年，授昭信路总管。
English: In 2012, he was awarded the post of chief superintendent of Zhaoxin Road.

古文：澧，知长宁州。
现代文：十四年，调任黄州宣慰使。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the post of Huangzhou Xuanliao envoy.

古文：俱蚤卒。渊，至元十一年，佩金符，授进义副尉，为徐、邳屯田总管下丁庄千户。
现代文：十五年，改太平路总管，不久授镇国上将军，为淮西道宣慰使都元帅。二十年，加奉国上将军，是年三月卒。刘渊，刘复亨之子。至元十一年，佩金符，授进义副尉，为徐州、邳州屯田总管下丁壮千户。
English: In the fifteenth year, he was promoted to the chief steward of Taiping Road, and was soon promoted to the general of the town and the marshal of Xuancheng for Huaixi Road. In the twentieth year, he was promoted to the general of the country. He was born in March. Liu Yuan, the son of Liu Fuheng. In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the Jinyi Vice-Lieutenant, and was the chief steward of Xuzhou and Luzhou Tunden.

古文：九月，领兵巡逻泗州，至淮河九里湾，遇宋军，战胜，夺其船三十余艘。
现代文：九月，领兵巡逻泗州，至淮河九里湾遇宋军，战胜，夺其战船三十余艘。
English: In September, he led his troops on a patrol to Luzhou, where they encountered the Song Army at Jiuli Bay on the Huai River and defeated it, capturing more than 30 of its warships.

古文：十二年三月，与宋安抚朱焕战于清河，败之，擒十四人，夺其辎重。九月，从右丞别乞里迷失攻淮安。
现代文：十二年三月，在清河战败宋安抚朱焕，擒敌十四人，夺其辎重。九月，随右丞别乞里迷失攻淮安。
English: In March of the 12th year, after defeating Song Anfu Zhu Huan in Qinghe, he defeated fourteen enemies and won their heavy burdens. In September, he attacked Huai'an with U.

古文：十三年，与宋人战昭信军南靖平山。俱有功。
现代文：十三年，与宋军战于昭信军南之靖平山，均立战功。
English: In the thirteenth year, he fought against the Song army in Jingping Mountain, south of the Zhaoxin army, and was equally distinguished in battle.

古文：十四年，北觐，进武略将军、管军总管。
现代文：十四年，至大都朝见世祖，晋升武略将军、管军总管。
English: In the 14th year, he was promoted to General Wu Liang and Chief of the General Staff.

古文：十五年，从元帅张弘范征闽、广、漳、韶诸州，以功授武德将军。
现代文：十五年，随元帅张弘范征讨闽、广、漳、韶诸州，因功授武德将军。
English: In the fifteenth year, he accompanied Marshal Zhang Hongfan to conquer the provinces of Anhui, Guangxi, Fujian and Fujian, and was awarded the title of General of Martial Arts.

古文：十六年，从攻崖山，弘范命渊领后翼军，水战有功。
现代文：十六年，进攻崖山，张弘范命渊领后翼军，水战有功。
English: In the 16th year, Zhang Hongfan led the rear-wing army in the attack on the cliff mountain, and achieved great success in the water battle.

古文：十七年，进安远大将军，为副招讨。
现代文：十七年，晋升安远大将军，为副招讨。
English: Seventeen years later, he was promoted to General Anyuan and became vice-invitation.

古文：二十一年，迁颍州副万户。
现代文：二十一年，调任颍州副万户。
English: In 2001, he was transferred to the post of Vice Governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：二十四年，从征交趾，镇南王脱欢命领水步军二万攻万劫江，擒十六人。
现代文：二十四年，征交趾，镇南王脱欢命他领水步军二万，攻万劫江，擒十六人。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, Zhenan Wang De Huan ordered his territorial water marching army of twenty thousand to attack the Yangtze River, with thirty-six soldiers.

古文：至大二年，卒于建康，年七十二。
现代文：接着攻灵山城，胜利班师。二十八年，捕浙东寇，获其酋长三人。
English: Next, they attacked Lingling Mountain City, and the division was victorious. In the 28th year, they captured the Eastern Zhejiang Cossacks and captured three of their chiefs.

古文：子果，会昌州同知。
现代文：三十一年，兼领绍兴浙江五翼军，守杭州，因病辞去。
English: In the 31st year, he also led the Shaoxing Zhejiang Five-Wing Army to defend Hangzhou, but resigned due to illness.

古文：张子良懋
现代文：大德十一年卒。
English: Eleven years have passed since the death of Dade.

古文：张子良，字汉臣，涿州范阳人。
现代文：张子良，字汉臣，涿州范阳人。
English: Zhang Ziliang, known as Han Zhen, was born in Fanyang, Ganzhou.

古文：金末四方兵起，所在募兵自保。
现代文：金末四方战乱不靖，各处都在募兵保护乡里。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, war raged on four sides, and everywhere soldiers were recruited to protect the countryside.

古文：子良率千余人入燕、蓟间，耕稼已绝，遂聚州人，阻水，治舟筏，取蒲鱼自给，从之者众，至不能容。
现代文：张子良率千余人至燕蓟之间。这地方农业遭到破坏，子良召聚州里百姓拦水治舟，取蒲、鱼以自给，于是许多人都到他这里来，多得容纳不下。
English: Zhang Ziliang has a population of more than a thousand people, ranging from terns to cormorants. This is a place where agriculture has been destroyed. Ziliang called together the people of the state to block the water and manage the boat, to take cormorants and fish for self-sufficiency. As a result, many people came to him, too many to accommodate.

古文：子良部勒定兴、新城数万口，就食东平，东平守纳之。
现代文：子良统领定兴、新城数万口去东平谋食，东平收容了。
English: Tens of thousands of children from Dingxing and Xincheng went to Dongping to find food, and Dongping took them in.

古文：久之，守弃东平还汴，檄子良南屯宿州，又南屯寿州。
现代文：很久以后，守臣弃东平还汴京，令子良屯驻宿州，以后又屯驻寿州。
English: After a long time, Shuzen abandoned Dongping and went back to Beijing. His son Ryotun stayed in Suzhou, and later in Shoushu.

古文：夏全劫其民出鸡口，李敏据州。
现代文：夏全劫掠寿州之民出鸡口，李敏占据寿州。
English: Xia Quan robbed the people of Shoushou, and Li Min occupied Shoushou.

古文：子良率麾下造敏，敏欲害之，走归宿，因以宿帅之众夺全所劫老幼数万以还。
现代文：子良率部下投奔李敏，敏欲杀害他们，子良又回到宿州，夺回夏全所劫掠的人口。
English: Zi Liang's subordinates rushed to Li Min, who wanted to kill them, and Zi Liang returned to Suzhou to recapture the population that Xia Quanlu had plundered.

古文：全怒，连徐、邳之军来攻。子良与宿帅斫其营，全失其军符，走死扬州。
现代文：夏全怒，联合徐、邳之军来攻打宿州，为子良与宿州军元帅所败，夏全失其军符，逃往扬州。
English: Enraged, Xia Quan joined forces with the armies of Xu and Yao to attack Shuzhou. They were defeated by Ziliang and the marshal of the Shuzhou army. Xia Quan lost his military insignia and fled to Yangzhou.

古文：时金受重围于汴，声援尽绝，有国用安者，图以涟水之众人援，道阻，游兵不能进。
现代文：金朝都城汴京受蒙古军重重包围，国用安企图率涟水军援救，因道路不通，不能前进。
English: The capital city of the Kim dynasty, Suqin, was surrounded by the Mongolian army. Guoyuan tried to lead the Suqin army to rescue, but could not advance because the road was impassable.

古文：当是时，令已不行于陕，而用安亦卒不得志。
现代文：子良与一偏将昼伏夜行，进入汴京，传达用安来援救的打算，金朝君臣以为他们是自天而降，将徐州、宿州交子良把守。
English: Ziliang and one of his generals would travel day and night, entering Beijing and conveying the plan to use An to rescue. The Kim dynasty thought that they were descending from the sky to protect Xuzhou and Suzhou from Ziliang.

古文：徐、宿之间，民无食者，出城拾穞穟以食，子良严兵护之，以防钞掠。
现代文：第二年，子良输米五百石于汴京，因授他为荣禄大夫，总管陕西东路兵马。当时，金朝之令已不行于陕西。徐、宿之间，百姓缺食，出城拾野生谷穗度日，子良派兵保护，以防被抢劫。
English: In the second year, Ziliang exported 500 koku of rice to Beijing. He was awarded the title of honorary doctor and the chief of the East Shaanxi Road Troops and Horses. At that time, the order of the Jin Dynasty was no longer valid in Shaanxi. Between Xu and Shuku, the people were short of food and went out of the city to pick up wild ears of corn to spend the day. Ziliang sent soldiers to protect them to prevent them from being robbed.

古文：猝遇敌，子良被重伤，乃率其众就食泗州。
现代文：突然遇敌，子良受重伤，率领大家去泗州求食。
English: Suddenly encountering the enemy, Zira was seriously injured and led everyone to Zhangzhou to look for food.

古文：泗守阅兵，将图之，子良与麾下十数人即军中生缚其守。
现代文：正逢泗州守将阅兵，子良与所部十数人逮捕了守臣，占据泗州。
English: At the same time, the governor of Zhangzhou was holding a military parade. Ziliang and more than a dozen people from the headquarters arrested the governor and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：民不欲北归者，欲走傍郡，子良资以舟楫，无敢掠其财物。岁戊戌，率泗州西城二十五县、军民十万八千余口，因元帅阿术来归。
现代文：太宗十年，张子良率泗州西城二十五县、军民十万八千口归顺蒙古。
English: In the tenth year of Taizong, Zhang Ziliang led the twenty-five counties of Xicheng, Luzhou, and 108,000 soldiers and civilians to Mongolia.

古文：太宗命为东路都总帅，授银青荣禄大夫，升京东路行尚书省兼都总帅，管领元附军民，进金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：太宗命子良为东路都总帅，授银青荣禄大夫，升京东路行尚书省兼都总帅，管领原来归顺的军民，又进金紫光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son, Emperor Taizong's son

古文：庚子，赐金符。
现代文：十二年，授金符。
English: In the twelfth year, the award certificate was issued.

古文：自兵兴以来，子良转徙南北，依之以全活者，不可胜计。
现代文：自金末战乱以来，子良辗转南北。百姓依附于他而能活下来的，不可胜计。
English: Since the end of the Jin Dynasty and the Warring States period, Ziliang has turned north and south. The people can only survive by clinging to him.

古文：癸丑，宪宗命为归德府总管，管领元附军民。
现代文：宪宗三年，宪宗命子良为归德府总管，管领原依附于他的军民。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Kenzong, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son, Emperor Kenzong's son,

古文：中统二年夏四月，世祖命为归德、泗州总管，降虎符，仍管领泗州军民总管。
现代文：中统二年四月，世祖任命他为归德、泗州总管，佩虎符，仍管领泗州军民总管。
English: In April of the second year of the unification of China, the founder of the Chinese nation appointed him as the general manager of Guizhou and Ganzhou, wearing a tiger badge, and still in charge of the general manager of the military and civilian affairs of Ganzhou.

古文：七年，罢元管户，隶诸郡县，改授昭勇大将军、大名路总管，兼府尹。
现代文：至元七年，将子良原管户隶于郡县，改授他为昭勇大将军、大名路总管兼府尹。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ziliangyuan's stewardship was subordinated to counties and counties, and he was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong, the head steward of Daming Road and the prefectural governor.

古文：懋字之美，未弱冠，已有父风。
现代文：至元八年卒，年七十八岁。赠昭勇大将军、佥枢密院事、上轻车都尉，追封清河郡侯，谥翼敏。
English: He was seventy-eight years old when he died in the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty. He was given the titles of General Zhaoyong, Secretary of the Privy Council, Lieutenant of the Light Cavalry, and Prince of Qinghe County.

古文：侍子良官京东，故懋领其众，从丞相阿术军，立归德府，以其军镇之。
现代文：张懋，字之美，张子良之长子，不到二十岁就有其父亲风度。父亲去京东为官，由他管领父亲的部属，归附于丞相阿术军。朝廷设立归德府，张懋率其军镇守。
English: Zhang Ziliang, the eldest son of Zhang Ziliang, was less than twenty years old when he took on his father's role. His father went to Jingdong to work as an official, and he took charge of his father's subordinates and attached them to the imperial army. The imperial court was established in the German capital, and Zhang Ziliang led his army to guard the town.

古文：移镇下邳，知归德府事。
现代文：移镇下邳，但仍知归德府事。
English: The town was moved to Shimodate, but it is still known to be under the administration of the German government.

古文：李璮叛济南，以其兵戍蔡州。
现代文：李王在济南反叛时，懋率其军镇戍蔡州。
English: When King Li rebelled in Jinan, he led his army to the town of Caizhou.

古文：中统元年，宣授泗州军总把，佩金符。
现代文：至元元年，授泗州军总把，佩金符。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of the Yunnan Provincial Army.

古文：至元七年，擢济南诸路新军千户。
现代文：至元七年，升张懋为济南诸路新军千户。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhangye was promoted to Jinan Zhuolu New Army Thousand Households.

古文：九年，从破襄樊有功。
现代文：九年，随大军攻破襄、樊有功。
English: In the ninth year, with a large army, he defeated Xiang, and achieved great success.

古文：十一年，丞相伯颜南征，其行阵以铧车弩为先，而众军继之。
现代文：十一年，丞相伯颜南征，其行军阵势是：以铧车、弓箭手为先锋，其他军继后。
English: In the eleventh year of the Joseon Dynasty, the Minister of War, Boyan, set out on the Southern Expedition. His marching formation was as follows: with a cart and an archer as the vanguard, followed by other troops.

古文：驻瓜洲，伯颜命懋往谕淮西夏贵，副以两介，将骑士直趋合肥。贵出迎，设宾礼。懋示以逆顺祸福，辞旨雄厉，贵受命顿首，上地图、降书。驰还报，伯颜大喜。
现代文：蒙军驻瓜洲，伯颜命懋去淮西说降夏贵。懋至合肥，夏贵出迎，以礼相待，懋对贵讲明降与不降的利害祸福，夏贵表示投降，奉上地图和降书，伯颜大喜。
English: When the Mongolian army was stationed in Guazhou, Bo Yan was ordered to go to Huaxi to tell Xia Gui to surrender. When he arrived in Hefei, Xia Gui welcomed him and treated him with courtesy. He explained to Xia Gui the advantages and disadvantages of surrendering and not surrendering. Xia Gui expressed his surrender and presented him with a map and a letter of surrender. Bo Yan was overjoyed.

古文：复令行徇镇巢、安丰、寿春、怀远、淮安、濠等州郡，皆下。复使之遍谕列城军民，使知帝之德意。
现代文：又令懋攻占镇巢、安丰、寿春、怀远、淮安、濠州等州郡，遍谕各城军民，使他们知道皇帝之恩德。
English: He also ordered Xing to occupy Zhenxu, Anfeng, Shuchun, Huaiyuan, Huai'an, Zhangzhou and other counties and prefectures, and to preach to the soldiers and people in every city, so that they would know the grace of the emperor.

古文：十三年，懋驰驿至上都，伯颜上其功，宣授懋明威将军、泗州安抚司达鲁花赤。
现代文：十三年，懋至上都，因伯颜上报其功，授为明威将军、泗州安抚司达鲁花赤。
English: In the thirteenth year of his reign, he was awarded the title of Mingwei General and the title of Siddhartha Red, the pacifier of Zhangzhou.

古文：十四年，改安抚司为总管府，置宣慰使以统之，拜同知淮西道宣慰司事。
现代文：十四年，朝廷改安抚司为总管府，置宣慰使来统领，拜懋为同知淮西道宣慰司事。
English: In the 14th year, the Imperial Court changed the Pacification Department to the General Administration Department, and appointed the Propaganda and Consolation Envoy to be in charge, and Baizhen to be the propaganda and consolation secretary of Tongzhi Huaixi Road.

古文：十六年，改授怀远大将军、吉州路总管。
现代文：十六年，改授怀远大将军、吉州路总管。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to General Huaiyuan and appointed as the general manager of Jizhou Road.

古文：乃上其实于宪府，尽诛十虎者，夺良虎符而黜之，民大悦。
现代文：懋生活俭朴，用刑谨慎，政治清明，办事公道，新建府治衙门，设立义仓，就是能干的官员也超不过他，雷厉风行惩治豪强，使他们不敢轻举妄动。
English: He lived a frugal life, used punishment prudently, was politically clear, and did things fairly. He built a new government office and set up a charity warehouse. Even the most capable officials could not surpass him. He punished the brave and the strong with great severity, so that they would not dare to act rashly.

古文：夜半，令兵入馆舍，杀庆及其弟山禄、兴禄并从行者十七人。
现代文：郡中万户苏良，恃势横暴，为他助虐的有 十虎 ，百姓苦不堪言。懋将实情报告上级，诛此 十虎 ，夺苏良的虎符，贬他的官，人民大喜。盗贼白昼入城抢劫，懋亲率兵捣其巢穴，逮捕为首者入狱。
English: In the county of 10,000 households, Su Liang was a tyrannical tyrant, and there were ten tigers assisting him in the abuse, and the people were miserable. He reported the truth to his superiors, so the ten tigers captured Su Liang's tiger emblem, demoted his officials, and the people were overjoyed. Thieves entered the city in the daytime to rob, and his relatives and soldiers raided his lair, and arrested the leader and put him in prison.

古文：既灭金，购求庆尸不得，厚恤其家，赐金五十斤，诏官其子，仍计其家人口，给粮以养焉。齐荣显齐荣显，字仁卿，聊城人。
现代文：人民建生祠为他祈祷。至元十七年二月卒，年六十三岁。赠昭勇大将军、龙兴路总管、上轻车都尉，追封清河侯，谥宣敏。齐荣显，字仁卿，聊城人。
English: The people of Jiansheng Shrine prayed for him. By February 17th, he was 63 years old. He was given the titles of General Zhaoyong, General Manager of Longxing Road, Lieutenant of the Upper Light Truck, Chieftain of the Qing River, Zhai Xuanmin, Qi Rongxian, Zhe Renqing, and a Liaocheng citizen.

古文：兵趋五河口，抵大堤，荣显偕数骑前行觇敌，值逻骑数十，从者将退走，荣显曰： 彼众我寡，若示以怯，必为所乘。 
现代文：父齐旺，为金朝同知山东西路兵马都总管。荣显自幼聪明，童年时与一些儿童游戏，划地为战场，他端坐指挥，各按阵式行动。九岁，代父为千户，佩金符，随其舅严实归顺蒙古，屡立战功。攻濠州时，荣显直逼城下，所向披靡，主帅察罕十分称赞，赐马铠银器。大军至五河口，荣显同数骑先行以观察敌情，与敌巡逻兵数十骑相遇，随从的人想退走，荣显说： 彼众我寡，若我们退走，显得胆怯，必受敌人攻击。 
English: His father, Qi Wang, was the general manager of the military and equestrian centers of the east and west roads in Zhishan for the Kim dynasty. Rong Xian was clever from a young age. In his childhood, he played games with some children and marked the ground as a battlefield. He sat at the command and acted in accordance with the formation. At the age of nine, his father-in-law was a thousand households, Pei Jinfu. He followed his uncle Yan Shun to Mongolia and repeatedly made war exploits. When attacking Bozhou, Rong Xian drove straight under the city and was invincible. The coach was very praised and gave silverware to the horse. The

古文：援弓策马，射杀两人，乃还。
现代文：他策马援弓，射杀两人而还。
English: He drew his horse's bow and shot two people, but survived.

古文：进拔五河口，升权行军万户，守宿州。
现代文：攻下五河口，升为权行军万户，戍守宿州。
English: He captured Wuhekou, and was promoted to the rank of "power marching army of ten thousand households," and became the guardian of Shuzhou.

古文：堕马伤股，不能复从军，改提领本路课税，又改本路诸军镇抚，兼提控经历司。
现代文：因落马受伤，不能再提兵打仗，改为提领本路课税，又改本路诸军镇抚，兼提控经历司。
English: Because he was injured in a fall from his horse, he was no longer able to lead troops into battle. Instead, he took the lead in levying taxes, and he also took the lead in pacifying the troops, and he was also in charge of raising and controlling troops.

古文：值断事官钩校诸路积逋，官吏往往遭诟辱，荣显从容办理，悉为蠲贷。
现代文：断事官追索各路所欠官府钱粮，官吏往往受他们的辱骂，荣显从容办理，将所欠钱粮全都免除。
English: The adjudicator recovered the money and grain owed to the government from all parties. The officials were often insulted by them, and they handled the matter with great calmness, and all the money and grain owed were exempted.

古文：从实入朝，授东平路总管府参议，兼领博州防御使。
现代文：随严实入朝，朝廷授他为东平路总管府参议，兼领博州防御使。
English: With Yan Shizhi's accession to the imperial court, the imperial court awarded him the post of Dongping Road General Administration Office Councillor, as well as the post of Bo Prefecture Defense Envoy.

古文：时十投下议各分所属，不隶东平，荣显力辩于朝，遂止。
现代文：当时十投下要将东平所属各地进行分治，荣显极力向朝廷争辩，这才了事。
English: At that time, the Tenth Emperor wanted to divide and rule the various regions belonging to Dongping, and Rongxian tried his best to argue with the imperial court, but that was all.

古文：及攻淮南，道出东平，民间供给，费银二万锭，荣显诣断事官酝之，得折充赋税，民赖以不困。
现代文：蒙军为攻淮南，经过东平，除赋税外，另要百姓供给银二万锭，荣显到断事官处去申诉困难，允许将此银折纳作为赋税，减轻百姓困苦。
English: In order to attack Huainan, the Mongolian army passed through Dongping, and in addition to the tax, the people were required to provide 20,000 baht of silver. It was difficult to go to the adjudicator's office to complain, and it was allowed to accept this silver as a tax, alleviating the hardships of the people.

古文：中统元年，谒告侍亲，闲居十年，卒。
现代文：中统元年，请求辞官侍奉双亲，闲居十年而卒。
English: In the first year of the unified China, he asked a dictionary to serve his parents, and lived idly for ten years.

古文：石天禄石天禄，父珪，山东诸路都元帅，陷金，死节，见《忠义传》。
现代文：石天禄，其父石皀，曾任山东诸路元帅，为金军所俘被杀，见《忠义传》。
English: Shi Tianlu, whose father, Shi Yao, was once the marshal of Shandong provinces, was captured and killed by the Golden Army, see "The Legend of Loyalty."

古文：天禄袭爵，孛鲁承制授龙虎卫上将军、东平路元帅，佩金虎符。
现代文：禄承袭父亲官爵，孛鲁奉诏授他为龙虎卫上将军、东平路元帅，佩金虎符。
English: Lu inherited his father's title, and he was awarded the title of General of the Dragon and Tiger Guards, Marshal of Dongping Road, and the Golden Tiger Badge.

古文：时宋将彭义斌取大名及中山，天禄与孛里海率兵败之，获义斌。
现代文：宋将彭义斌攻取大名及中山，天禄与孛里海率兵击败宋军，生擒彭义斌。
English: Song sent Peng Yibin to conquer Daimyo and Zhongshan, Tianlu and Balikai led troops to defeat the Song army, and Peng Yibin was born.

古文：又败金将武仙，屡立战功。
现代文：又击败金将武仙，屡立战功。
English: He also defeated the golden general, Wuxian, and repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：丙戌，孛鲁以功奏，迁金紫光禄大夫、都元帅，镇戍边隅，数与金人战，未尝败北。
现代文：太祖二十一年，孛鲁上报其功，升天禄为金紫光禄大夫、都元帅，镇守边疆，多次与金人交战，从未败过。
English: In the twenty-first year of the great-grandfather, Jialu reported his achievement, ascended to the heavenly lotus as the golden purple light lotus doctor, the capital marshal, the town guarding the frontier, and repeatedly fought with the gold people, and never lost.

古文：壬辰，皇太弟拖雷南渡河，天禄为前锋，战退金兵，夺战船数艘。
现代文：太宗四年，皇太弟拖雷南渡黄河，天禄为前锋，战退金兵，夺获战船数艘。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong's younger brother dragged Lei south to cross the Yellow River, with Tianlu as the vanguard, fought back the Golden Army, and captured several warships.

古文：夜至归德城下，袭其营，杀三百余人。
现代文：乘夜至归德城下，偷袭敌营，杀敌三百余人。
English: He rode through the night to the outskirts of the city of Guide, raided the enemy camp, and killed more than three hundred people.

古文：金将陈防御出兵追围天禄，天禄溃围复战，金兵退走。
现代文：金将陈防御出兵追围天禄，天禄突围复战，金兵退走。
English: Jin put Chen on the defensive and sent troops to besiege Tianlu. Tianlu broke out of the siege and returned to battle, and the Jin soldiers retreated.

古文：提兵掠亳及徐，所过望风附降。
现代文：天禄提兵进攻亳州及徐州，所过都闻风归降。
English: Tianlu took troops to attack Zhangzhou and Xuzhou, but all of them were defeated.

古文：癸巳秋九月，破考城，复围归德。冬十二月，归德降。
现代文：太宗五年九月，天禄攻破考城，再围归德，至十二月，归德降。
English: In September of the fifth year of Taizong, Tianlu broke through Kaocheng, then returned to Germany, and in December, returned to Germany.

古文：甲午，入觐，改授征行千户，济、兖、单三州管民总管。
现代文：六年，入朝拜见皇帝，改授征行千户及济、兖、单三州管民总管。
English: In the sixth year, he went to the imperial court to see the emperor, and was re-assigned to be the chief administrator of the people of the three states of Qi, Qi, and Shan.

古文：乙未，从紥剌温火儿赤渡淮，攻随州，至襄阳夹河寨，战退宋兵，紥剌温火儿赤赏以战马。
现代文：七年，随从扎剌温火儿赤渡过淮河，攻随州，至襄阳，在夹河寨战退宋兵，扎剌温火儿赤赏他战马。
English: In the seventh year, he followed Zhaozhou Wenfei's red horse across the Huai River, attacked Suizhou, and went to Xiangyang. He fought back Song soldiers at Jiahezhai, and Zhaozhou Wenfei's red horse rewarded him.

古文：又从攻蕲、黄，功居其首。
现代文：又随大军攻蕲州、黄州，天禄功居第一位。
English: In addition, with the large army attacking Bozhou and Huangzhou, Tianlu ranked first.

古文：子库禄满袭职，从攻襄樊，与从弟度剌立云梯冲其堞，度剌死焉。
现代文：朝廷诏令天禄清查东平户口，军民赋税都依据天禄所清查和登记的户口征收赋税。
English: The Imperial Court ordered Tianlu to investigate Dongping's household, and the military and the people were taxed according to the household that was investigated and registered by Tianlu.

古文：中统三年，库禄满从征李璮，先登，飞矢中额而卒。刘斌刘斌，济南历城县人。少孤，鞠于大父。
现代文：天禄因病不能任职，由子兴祖继承其官爵。第二年，天禄卒，年五十四岁。刘斌，济南历城县人，年少丧父，由祖父抚养成人。
English: Due to illness, Tianlu was unable to hold office, and his son Xingzu inherited his title. The following year, Tianlu died at the age of 54. Liu Bin, from Licheng County, Jinan Province, lost his father at a young age, and was raised by his grandfather.

古文：有勇力，从济南张荣起兵，为管军千户。
现代文：斌有勇力，随从济南张荣起兵，为管军千户。
English: Bin had the courage to follow Zhang Rong of Jinan in raising an army, and he was in charge of a thousand households.

古文：岁壬辰，攻河南，以功授中翼都统。
现代文：太宗四年，大军攻河南，刘斌战斗有功授中翼都统。
English: In Taizong's fourth year, a large army invaded Henan Province, and Liu Bin was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his actions in the battle.

古文：攻睢阳军，军杏堆，距陈州七十里。闻陈整军于近郊，斌率众夜破之。
现代文：攻睢阳郡，屯驻杏堆，距陈州七十里，探知陈州正在近郊整顿军队，刘斌乘夜率众击破。
English: Liu Bin attacked Fenyang County, stationed in Xingdui, 70 miles away from Chenzhou, and detected that Chenzhou was reorganizing the army in the suburbs. Liu Bin took advantage of the night to defeat the crowd.

古文：又击走太康守兵，擒其将，三日，太康陷。
现代文：又战败太康守兵，擒获其将领，经三日攻陷太康。
English: He also defeated the defenders of Taikang and captured its general. After three days, Taikang was captured.

古文：荣言于帅阿术鲁曰： 太康之平，摧其锋者，斌也。 
现代文：张荣对主帅阿术鲁说 ：平定太康，挫败敌军都是刘斌之力。 
English: Zhang Rong said to the coach Ah Shulu: Pacifying Taikang and defeating the enemy are all the power of Liu Bin.

古文：移屯襄阳，军乏食，斌知青陵多积谷，前阻大泽，水深不可涉，陈可取状。
现代文：蒙军移驻襄阳，军粮不足，斌知青陵多有积谷，但前有大泽，水深不能涉过。
English: The Mongolian army moved to Xiangyang, and there was a shortage of military food. Binzhiqingling mostly had valleys, but there was Osawa in front, and the water depth could not be touched.

古文：众难之，斌叱之曰： 彼恃险，不我虞，取可必也。 
现代文：刘斌提出可过泽的办法。
English: Liu Bin proposed a workable solution.

古文：乃率百骑夜发，获敌人，使道之前。
现代文：所部将士感到为难。斌斥责道： 敌人恃有大泽之险，对我们不戒备，我们必定可以攻取！ 
English: The officers of the headquarters were perplexed. Bin scolded: "The enemy has the danger of Osawa, they are not wary of us, we can surely capture it!"

古文：行污泽中五十余里，遇敌兵，斌舍马挥槊突敌，败之，得其粮数千斛。
现代文：于是率领百骑乘夜间出发，途中捕获一敌人，令他带路，在污秽泽沼中走了五十余里，遇见敌军，斌下马挥槊，发起突然攻击，打败叛军，得粮数千斛。
English: So he led a hundred horsemen to set out at night, captured an enemy on the way, made him lead the way, walked more than fifty miles in the filthy swamp, met the enemy army, dismounted, launched a sudden attack, defeated the rebels, and gained thousands of baht in grain.

古文：迁官知中外诸军事，从攻六安，先登，破其城。
现代文：因功升官爵，使他管中外诸军的事务。攻六安，斌首先登城，攻克六安。
English: As a result of his achievements, he was promoted to the rank of official, and he was put in charge of the affairs of the armies at home and abroad.

古文：癸卯，擢济南推官。
现代文：太宗皇后二年，晋升为济南推官。
English: In the second year of Empress Taizong's reign, she was promoted to Jinan magistrate.

古文：辛亥，授本道左副元帅。
现代文：宪宗元年，授济南左副元帅。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, he was given the title of Vice-Marshal of Jinan Province.

古文：乙卯，升济南新旧军万户，移镇邳州，宋将惮之。
现代文：宪宗五年，升济南新旧军万户，移镇邳州，宋将对他感到恐惧。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, thousands of new and old military families in Jinan were promoted and moved to Zhangzhou. Song Zhou was afraid of him.

古文：己未，病，谓其子曰： 居官当廉正自守，毋黩货以丧身败家。 
现代文：九年，病中对其子说： 居官当廉洁正直，不要贪图钱财以丧身败家。 
English: In the ninth year, during his illness, he said to his son: officials should be honest and honest, do not covet money to lose their lives and homes.

古文：语毕而逝，年六十有二。赠中奉大夫、参知政事、护军、彭城郡公，谥武庄。
现代文：说毕就长逝了，享年六十有二岁，赠中奉大夫、参知政事、护军、彭城郡公，谥武庄。
English: Bi passed away at the age of sixty-two, and was presented with the titles of Zhong Bong Dafu, Sanzhi Zhengji, Tongjun, Pengcheng Guo, and Xiongwuzhuang.

古文：子思敬。思敬，赐名哈八儿都，袭父职，为征行千户。
现代文：刘思敬，刘斌之子，赐名哈八儿都，承袭父亲官职，为征行千户。
English: Liu Sijing, son of Liu Bin, was given the name of Habaretsu, inherited his father's official position, and led thousands of households to march.

古文：世祖南征，从董文炳攻台山寨，先登，中流矢，伤甚，帝亲劳赐酒，易金符。
现代文：世祖南征，思敬在董文炳指挥下攻击台山寨，受重伤，世祖亲赐酒慰劳，令佩金符。
English: The ancestor of the Southern Expedition, Sijing attacked the Taiwanese cottage under the command of Dong Wenjun, and was seriously injured. The ancestor gave him wine as a consolation, and made him a gold badge.

古文：中统二年，授武卫军千户。
现代文：中统二年，授武卫军千户。
English: In the second year of unification, a thousand households were awarded military guards.

古文：从讨李璮，赐银六十锭。
现代文：讨李王有功，赐银六十锭。
English: Li Wang was awarded 60 silver coins for meritorious service.

古文：四年，授济南武卫军总管，捕盗有功，又赐银千两。
现代文：四年，授济南武卫军总管，因捕盗有功，又赐银千两。
English: In the fourth year, he was awarded the post of the head of the Jinan Military Guard, and was also given a thousand taels of silver for his achievements in catching thieves.

古文：至元三年，授怀远大将军、侍卫亲军左翼副都指挥使。
现代文：至元三年，授怀远大将军、侍卫亲军左翼副都指挥。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of General Huaiyuan and Deputy Commander of the left wing of the pro-army guards.

古文：四年，命筑京城。
现代文：四年，奉命筑京城。
English: Four years later, he was ordered to build the capital city.

古文：八年，授广威将军、西川副统军，佩金虎符。
现代文：八年，授广威将军、西川副统军，佩金虎符。
English: In the eighth year, he was awarded the Guangwei General, the West River Deputy United Army, and the gold tiger emblem.

古文：泸、叙、忠、涪诸部，及巴县筹胜、龟云、石笋等寨十九族，及西南夷五十六部，悉来降。十三年，围重庆，败宋将张万，得其舟百余。
现代文：九年，宋嘉定守臣昝万寿乘虚进攻成都，为哈八儿都击败。又大战于青城，宋军大败，哈八儿都夺回被俘二千人。十二年，转任同佥行枢密院事，攻克嘉定。十三年围攻重庆，战败宋将张万，缴获舟船百余艘。
English: In the ninth year, Song Jia Ding's vassal Zou Wan Shou took advantage of the situation to attack Chengdu and defeated it for Habara. There was also a big battle in Qingcheng, the Song army was defeated, and Habara recaptured two thousand prisoners. In the twelfth year, he was transferred to the peerage of the Privy Council to conquer Jia Ding. In the thirteenth year, he besieged Chongqing, defeated Song general Zhang Wan, and captured more than a hundred boats.

古文：六月，泸州复叛，哈八儿都妻子没焉。乃率兵讨擒其将任庆，攻破盘山寨，俘九千余户，又获其将刘雄及王世昌等。
现代文：六月，泸州守将叛元，哈八儿都妻子被叛军杀害，哈八儿都率兵讨伐，擒守将任庆，攻破盘山寨，俘守将刘雄及王世昌，并寨民九千余户。
English: In June, the governor of Zhangzhou rebelled against the Yuan Dynasty. The wife of the governor of Zhangzhou was killed by the rebels. The governor of Zhangzhou led an army to fight against the rebels. The governor of Zhangzhou, Renqing, defeated the Pan village, captured the governor of Zhangzhou, Liu Xiong and Wang Shichang, and besieged more than 9,000 households.

古文：夜入东门，巷战，杀王安抚等，遂克泸州。
现代文：夜间从泸州东门突入城内，杀王安抚，占领泸州。
English: At night, they rushed into the city from the east gate of Zhangzhou, killed and pacified Wang, and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：复攻重庆，其将赵牛子降，禽守臣张珏。
现代文：再攻重庆，宋守将赵牛子降，守臣张珏被擒。
English: Chongqing was attacked again, Song Shou demoted Zhao Niu Zi, and Shou's vassal Zhang Ye was executed.

古文：十六年，蜀平，拜中奉大夫、四川行省参知政事。
现代文：十六年，平蜀，拜中奉大夫、四川行省参知政事。
English: In the 16th year of his life, Bai Zhongfeng became a doctor in Pingshu, and he also became the governor of Sichuan Province.

古文：行省罢，改四川北道宣慰使。
现代文：行省废除后，哈八儿都改任四川北道宣慰使。
English: After the abolition of the province, Habara was reappointed as the propaganda envoy of the North Sichuan Province.

古文：十七年，授正奉大夫、江西行省参知政事，治吉、赣盗，民赖以安。
现代文：至元十七年，授正奉大夫、江西行省参知政事，平息吉安、赣州盗贼，使百姓安居乐业。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of doctor of medicine and the title of governor of Jiangxi Province, pacified the robbers in Ji'an and Zhangzhou, and enabled the people to live and work in peace.

古文：二十年卒，年五十三。
现代文：至元二十年卒，年五十三岁。
English: He was 53 years old at the time of his death.

古文：赠推忠宣力果毅功臣、平章政事、柱国，封滨国公，谥忠肃。
现代文：赠推忠宣力果毅功臣、平章政事、柱国，封滨国公，谥忠肃。
English: He was awarded the title of "Loyal, Promising, Determined, and Valiant Hero and Vassal," "Heavenly Medal for Political Affairs," "Pillar of the State," "Crown Prince of the Province," and "Honest and Loyal."

