古文：管仲会国用，三分二在宾客，其一在国，管仲惧而复之。
现代文：管仲计算国家的开支，其中三分之二用于接待别国的宾客，用于国内的仅占三分之一。
English: Guanzhong calculates the country's expenditure, of which two-thirds is spent on receiving guests from other countries, and only one-third is spent on domestic guests.

古文：公曰： 吾子犹如是乎？
现代文：管仲惶恐地把这个情况禀报给桓公。桓公说： 您还至于这样么？
English: Panicked, Guan Zhong relayed the situation to King Kan. King Kan said, "What about you?

古文：四邻宾客，入者说，出者誉，光名满天下。入者不说，出者不誉，污名满天下。
现代文：四方邻国的宾客，来者满意，出者称赞，好名声就布满天下；来者不满意，出者不称赞，坏的名声就布满天下。
English: For guests from neighboring countries in the four directions, if those who come are satisfied and those who leave are praised, their good reputation will spread all over the world; if those who come are not satisfied and those who leave are not praised, their bad reputation will spread all over the world.

古文：壤可以为粟，木可以为货。
现代文：土地可以种植粮食，林木可以为财货。
English: Land can be used to grow food, and trees can be used to grow goods.

古文：粟尽则有生，货散则有聚。
现代文：粮食用尽可以再生产，商品卖完可以再买进。
English: Grain can be re-produced when exhausted, and goods can be re-purchased when sold.

古文：君人者，名之为贵，财安可有？ 
现代文：治理国家的君主，名声是最为贵重的。钱财何必在意呢？ 
English: The reputation of the monarch, who governs the country, is the most valuable. Why should we care about money?

古文：管仲曰： 此君之明也。 
现代文：管仲说： 这实在是您的明鉴。 
English: Guanzhong said: This is really a clear example for you.

古文：公曰： 民办军事矣，则可乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 百姓已致力于军事了，我想要诛伐无道的大国，可以么？回答说： 不可以。
English: Prince Kan said, "The people have already devoted themselves to the military. I want to invade a ruthless big country. Can I do that?" He replied, "No."

古文：对曰： 不可，甲兵未足也。请薄刑罚，以厚甲兵。 
现代文：因为盔甲兵器还不够用，请减少刑罚来增多盔甲兵器。 
English: Because armor weapons are not enough, please reduce the penalty to increase armor weapons.

古文：于是死罪不杀，刑罪不罚，使以甲兵赎。
现代文：于是，规定死罪不杀，刑罪不罚，让犯人用盔甲兵器来赎罪。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that the death penalty does not kill, the crime is not punished, and the prisoner is allowed to use armored weapons to atone for the crime.

古文：死罪以犀甲一戟，刑罚以胁盾一戟，过罚以金军，无所计而讼者，成以束矢。
现代文：死罪用犀牛皮的甲加上一支戟来赎，刑罪用护胁的盾牌加上一支戟来赎，犯过失者罚以金属一钧，没有什么冤屈而轻自诉讼的，罚一束箭了事。
English: The death penalty is redeemed with a rhinoceros hide armor plus a shovel, the criminal offense is redeemed with a protective shield plus a shovel, and the offender is punished with a metal shovel. If there is no grievance but it is easy to litigate, it is punished with a bunch of arrows.

古文：公曰： 甲兵既足矣，吾欲诛大国之不道者，可乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 盔甲兵器已经够用了，我想要诛伐无道的大国，可以了吗？ 
English: Huan Gong said, "The armor and weapons are already enough. I want to defeat the ruthless big country. Is that okay?"

古文：对曰： 爱四封之内，而后可以恶竟外之不善者；安卿大夫之家，而后可以危救敌之国；赐小国地，而后可以诛大国之不道者；举贤良，而后可以废慢法鄙贱之民。
现代文：管仲回答说： 首先施爱于国内，然后才能排斥国外的不善者；先安定卿大夫的家，然后才能危害仇敌之国；先赐予小国土地，然后才能诛伐无道的大国；先举用贤良的人才，然后才能取缔慢法鄙贱的人们。
English: Guanzhong replied, "First love at home, then expel the bad people from abroad; first stabilize the family of the Lord and Doctor, then harm the enemy's country; first give land to small countries, then defeat the ruthless big countries; first use good talents, then ban the people who are slow and despicable.

古文：是故先王必有置也，而后必有废也；必有利也，而后必有害也。 
现代文：因此，先王必先有所设置，然后有所废除；必先有所利，然后才有所害。 
English: Therefore, the first king must first establish something, and then abolish something; there must first be something beneficial, and then something harmful.

古文：桓公曰： 昔三王者，既弑其君，今言仁义，则必以三王为法度，不识其故何也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 从前夏禹、商汤、周武王，既然杀了国君，现在谈仁义的，却一定要以三王为典范，不知是什么原故？ 
English: King Kuan said: In the past, King Xia Yu, King Shang Tang, and King Zhou Wu, since they killed the sovereign, now, when it comes to benevolence and righteousness, they must take the three kings as a model. I don't know why.

古文：对曰： 昔者禹平治天下，及桀而乱之，汤放桀，以定禹功也。汤平治天下，及纣而乱之，武王伐纣，以定汤功也。
现代文：回答说： 从前，禹平定天下，到夏桀就乱了，汤放桀，是安定了禹的功业；汤平定天下，到商纣就乱了，周武王伐纣，是安定了汤的功业。
English: He replied, "Once upon a time, Yu Pingding ruled the world, but when it came to the summer solstice, there was chaos. It was Tang Fangluo who stabilized Yu's work; Yu Pingding ruled the world when it came to the summer solstice, there was chaos; and Zhou Wu Wang Fahui who stabilized Tang's work.

古文：且善之伐不善也，自古至今，未有改之。君何疑焉？ 
现代文：况且善的征伐不善的，自古及今，从无改变，您何必有所怀疑呢？ 
English: Besides, good conquests and bad ones have never changed since ancient times, so why should you have any doubts?

古文：公又问曰： 古之亡国其何失？ 
现代文：桓公又问： 古之亡国者，都有什么过失？ 
English: Prince Kan also asked: What were the mistakes of those who lost their country in the past?

古文：对曰： 计得地与宝，而不计失诸侯；计得财委，而不计失百姓；计见亲，而不计见弃。
现代文：回答说： 只考虑取得土地与财宝而不考虑脱离诸侯，只考虑财物的积累而不考虑脱离百姓，只考虑所亲而不考虑所弃。
English: He replied, "They only think about acquiring land and wealth without considering seceding from the princes, only think about accumulating wealth without considering seceding from the people, and only think about relatives without considering abandoning them.

古文：三者之属一，足以削；遍而有者，亡矣。
现代文：以上三条有一条，就足以削弱；全都具有，就灭亡了。
English: But if any one of these three things is lacking, that one thing is lacking; but if all three are present, then that one thing is lacking.

古文：古之隳国家，陨社稷者，非故且为之也，必少有乐焉，不知其陷于恶也。 
现代文：古代败坏国家伤害社程的，都不是专门故意去做的，必然是少有暂时的欢乐，而不知不觉陷入罪恶的深渊。 
English: In ancient times, those who corrupted the country and harmed the social order did not do it intentionally. They must have had a little temporary joy, but unknowingly fell into the abyss of evil.

古文：桓公谓管仲曰： 请致仲父。 
现代文：桓公对管仲说： 请仲父来饮宴。 
English: Lord Kan said to Guanzhong, "Invite Guanzhong to come to the banquet."

古文：公与管仲父而将饮之，掘新井而柴焉。
现代文：桓公预定了宴请管仲的日期，挖了一口新井，用柴草覆盖着。
English: Prince Kan set a date for the banquet, dug a new well, and covered it with brushwood.

古文：十日斋戒，召管仲。
现代文：斋戒十天，召见管仲。
English: He fasted for ten days and summoned his steward.

古文：管仲至，公执爵，夫人执尊，觞三行，管仲趋出。
现代文：管仲到了以后，桓公拿着酒爵，夫人拿着酒杯敬酒。但酒过三觞之后，管仲就快步离去了。
English: After Guanzhong arrived, Kan Gong toasted with a bottle of wine and his wife toasted with a glass of wine. However, after three glasses of wine, Guanzhong left at a fast pace.

古文：公怒曰： 寡人斋戒十日而饮仲父，寡人自以为修矣。
现代文：桓公发怒说： 我斋戎十天来晏请仲父，自以为算是礼节备至了。
English: Prince Kan said angrily, "I waited for ten days to invite my stepfather. I thought I was ready for the ceremony.

古文：仲父不告寡人而出，其故何也？ 
现代文：仲父却不辞而出，是什么原因呢？ 
English: What is the reason for the stepfather's refusal to resign?

古文：鲍叔、隰朋趋而出，及管仲于途，曰： 公怒。 
现代文：鲍叔与隰朋小炮出来，追管仲于途中说： 桓公发怒了。 
English: Uncle Bao came out with his small cannon and chased after Guanzhong, saying on the way: "Kuan Gong is angry."

古文：管仲反，入，倍屏而立，公不与言。少进中庭，公不与言。少进傅堂，公曰： 寡人斋戒十日而饮仲父，自以为脱于罪矣。
现代文：管仲回来，进院中，背靠屏风而立，桓公不同他讲话；再往前进到中庭，桓公还不同他讲话；再往前走，接近堂屋，桓公说： 我斋戒十天而晏请仲父，自认为没有得罪的地方。
English: When Guanzhong came back and entered the hospital, he stood with his back against the screen, and Master Kuan did not want him to speak; when he went further into the courtyard, Master Kuan still did not want him to speak; when he went further and approached the hall, Master Kuan said, "I have fasted for ten days, and I invite Master Kuan to a place where I do not feel offended."

古文：仲父不告寡人而出，未知其故也。 
现代文：您不和我告辞就离开，不知是什么原因？ 
English: You left without saying goodbye to me. I don't know why?

古文：对曰： 臣闻之，沉于乐者洽于忧，厚于味者薄于行，慢于朝者缓于政，害于国家者危于社稷，臣是以敢出也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 沉溺于曼乐的就沾染忧患，厚于口味的就薄于德行，怠慢于听朝的缓于政事，有害于国家的危于社稷，我就是因为这些而敢于走出的。 
English: Guanzhong replied: "Those who indulge in manly pleasures are tainted with sorrow, those who are thicker than taste are thinner than virtue, those who neglect to listen to the government are lax in politics, and those who are harmful to the country are dangerous to the society. It is because of these reasons that I dare to step out.

古文：公遽下堂曰： 寡人非敢自为修也，仲父年长，虽寡人亦衰矣，吾愿一朝安仲父也。 
现代文：桓公立刻下堂说： 我非敢自为苟安，仲父年长，我也衰老了，我希望安慰一下您。 
English: Prince Kan immediately went down to the hall and said, "I can't bring myself to comfort you. Your stepfather is elderly, and I'm also getting old. I hope to comfort you."

古文：对曰： 臣闻壮者无怠，老者无偷，顺天之道，必以善终者也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 我听说壮年人不懈怠，老年人不苟安，顺天道办事，一定有好结果。
English: Guanzhong replied, "I have heard that the middle-aged people do not slack off, the elderly people are meticulous, and they do things according to the heavenly way, so there must be good results.

古文：三王失之也，非一朝之萃，君奈何其偷乎？ 
现代文：夏桀、商纣、周幽三王之所失，并不是一个早上淬然而到的，您为什么有所苟安呢？ 
English: The loss of the three kings, Xia Yu, Shang Yu and Zhou Yu, did not happen overnight. Why are you worried about it?

古文：管仲走出，君以宾客之礼再拜送之。
现代文：管仲走出，这回桓公是以宾客之礼再拜而送出的。
English: After Guanzhong left, this time Huan Gong was sent out with a bow from the guests.

古文：明日，管仲朝，公曰： 寡人愿闻国君之信。 
现代文：第二天，管仲上朝，桓公说； 我想听一听建立国君威信的问题。 
English: The next day, when Guanzhong ascended to the throne, Emperor Kan said, "I want to hear about the issue of establishing the prestige of the sovereign."

古文：对曰： 民爱之，邻国亲之，天下信之，此国君之信。 
现代文：回答说： 百姓爱戴，邻国亲睦，天下信任，就是国君威信。 
English: He replied: The people's love, the neighbor's amity, the world's trust, is the sovereign's prestige.

古文：公曰： 善。
现代文：桓公说： 好。
English: Ruding said: Well said!

古文：请间信安始而可？ 
现代文：请问怎样才能建立威信？ 
English: How can you build credibility?

古文：对曰： 始于为身，中于为国，成于为天下。 
现代文：回答说： 开始在治身，其次在治国，最终在治天下。 
English: He replied, "First in governing the body, then in governing the country, and finally in governing the world."

古文：公曰： 请问为身。 
现代文：桓公说： 请问治身。 
English: Kanko said, "Could you please prepare jishin?"

古文：对曰： 道血气，以求长年、长心、长德。
现代文：回答说： 导治血气，以求得寿命长、谋虑远和施德广、这就是治身。 
English: He replied, "To cure the flesh and spirit in order to obtain a long life, a far-sightedness, and a broad virtue, is to cure the body."

古文：此为身也。 
现代文：桓公说： 请问治国。 
English: Lord Kan said, "I would like to ask you to govern the country."

古文：公曰： 请问为国。 对曰： 远举贤人，慈爱百姓，外存亡国，继绝世，起诸孤；薄税敛，轻刑罚，此为国之大礼也。 
现代文：回答说： 充分举用贤人并慈爱百姓，对外保全灭亡了的国家，接续断绝了的世家，起用死于王事者的子孙；薄收税敛，减轻刑罚，这就是治国的大礼。 
English: He answered: "To make full use of wise men and to love the people, to preserve a ruined country for the outside world, to continue a broken lineage, to employ the descendants of those who died in the service of the king; to collect taxes sparingly, to reduce punishments, this is the great gift of governing the country.

古文：公曰： 请问为天下。 
现代文：桓公说： 请问治理天下。 
English: Kan said, "Please govern the world."

古文：对曰： 法行而不苛，刑廉而不赦，有司宽而不凌；菀浊困滞，皆法度不亡，往行不来，而民游世矣，此为天下也。 
现代文：回答说： 法令能够推行而不苛刻，刑罚精简而不妄赦罪人，官吏宽厚而不迟慢拖拉，屈辱困窘的人们，法度也能加以保护，往者来者都无所约束，而百姓和乐，这就是治理天下
English: He replied: Laws can be enforced without being harsh, punishments can be simplified without being too lenient, officials can be lenient without being too slow, humiliated and embarrassed people can be protected by laws, newcomers can be unrestrained, and the people can be happy. This is the way to govern the world

