古文：十有四年春，意如至自晋。
现代文：十四年春季，季孙意如从晋国回来。
English: In the spring of 1914, Ji Sun Yiru returned from Jin.

古文：三月，曹伯滕卒。
现代文：三月，曹伯去世。
English: In March, Cao Bo passed away.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋，葬曹武公。
现代文：秋季，安葬曹武公。
English: In autumn, Cao Wu Gong was buried.

古文：八月，莒子去疾卒。
现代文：八月，莒国国君去世。
English: In August, Shikoku Kunkun passed away.

古文：冬，莒杀其公子意恢。
现代文：冬季，莒国杀掉自己国家的公子意恢
English: In the winter, the Chinese kill their own countrymen at will.

古文：十四年春，意如至自晋，尊晋罪己也。
现代文：十四年春季，季孙意如从晋国回来，《春秋》这样记载，是尊重晋国而归罪于我国。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, when Ji Sunyi returned from Jin, "Spring and Autumn" recorded that he respected Jin and blamed it on our country.

古文：尊晋罪己，礼也。
现代文：尊重晋国而归罪于我国，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper to respect Jin and blame our country.

古文：南蒯之将叛也，盟费人。
现代文：南蒯将要叛变的时候，和费地人结盟。
English: When Nan Xuan was about to rebel, he allied with the Feidians.

古文：司徒老祁、虑癸伪废疾，使请于南蒯曰： 臣愿受盟而疾兴，若以君灵不死，请待间而盟。 
现代文：司徒老祁、虑癸假装发病，派人请求南蒯说： 下臣愿意接受盟约，然而疾病发作。如果托您的福而不死，请等病稍稍好一点再和您结盟。 
English: Pretending to be ill, the two emperors sent a request to Nan Xun, saying, "Your vassal is willing to accept the covenant, but he has fallen ill. If, with your blessing, he does not die, please wait for the illness to get a little better before making an alliance with you."

古文：许之。
现代文：南蒯答应了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：二子因民之欲叛也，请朝众而盟。
现代文：这两个人依靠百姓想要背叛南蒯，就要求集合百姓一起结盟。
English: These two men wanted to betray Nanlu by relying on the people, so they asked to gather the people together to form an alliance.

古文：遂劫南蒯曰： 群臣不忘其君，畏子以及今，三年听命矣。
现代文：于是就劫持南蒯说： 下臣没有忘记他们的君主，但是害怕您直到现在，服从您的命令三年了。
English: So he kidnapped Nan Xuan and said: "Your vassals have not forgotten their sovereign, but they have been afraid of you until now, and have obeyed your orders for three years.

古文：子若弗图，费人不忍其君，将不能畏子矣。
现代文：您如果不考虑，费地的人由于不能对君主狠心，将要不再害怕您了。
English: If you do not think about it, the landowners will no longer be afraid of you because they cannot be cruel to the monarch.

古文：子何所不逞欲？
现代文：您在哪里不能满足愿望？
English: Where do you fall short of your aspirations?

古文：请送子。 
现代文：请让我们把您送走吧！ 
English: Please let us see you off!

古文：请期五日。
现代文：南蒯请求等待五天。
English: Nanlu requested a five-day waiting period.

古文：遂奔齐。
现代文：到时就逃亡到齐国。
English: At that time, he fled to Qi.

古文：侍饮酒于景公。
现代文：侍奉齐景公喝酒，齐景公说 叛徒！ 
English: Servants of Lord Qi Jing drank wine, Lord Qi Jing said, "Traitor!

古文：公曰： 叛夫！ 对曰： 臣欲张公室也。 
现代文：南蒯回答说： 下臣是为了想要公室强大。 
English: Nanko replied: The vassal wanted the government to be strong.

古文：子韩晳曰： 家臣而欲张公室，罪莫大焉。 
现代文：子韩皙说： 家臣想要使公室强大，没有比这再大的罪过了。 
English: His son, Han Zheng, said: "There is no greater sin than a vassal trying to make the government powerful.

古文：司徒老祁、虑癸来归费。齐侯使鲍文子致之。
现代文：司徒老祁、虑癸前来收回费地，齐景公也派鲍文子来送还费地。
English: Szeto Lao Zi and Xian Zi came to recover the fiefs, and Lord Qi Jing also sent Bao Wenzi to return the fiefs.

古文：夏，楚子使然丹简上国之兵于宗丘，且抚其民。
现代文：夏季，楚平王派然丹在宗丘选拔检阅西部的军队，并且安抚当地的百姓。
English: In the summer, King Chuping sent Ran Dan to inspect the troops in the west at the Zongqiu selection and pacify the local people.

古文：分贫振穷，长孤幼，养老疾，收介特，救灾患，宥孤寡，赦罪戾，诘奸慝，举淹滞。
现代文：施舍贫贱，救济穷困，抚育年幼的孤儿，奉养有病的老人，收容单身汉，救济灾难，宽免孤儿寡妇的赋税，赦免有罪的人。禁治奸邪，提拔被埋没的贤才。
English: To give alms to the poor, to relieve the distressed, to bring up the young orphans, to care for the sick old men, to shelter the bachelors, to relieve the calamities, to remit the taxes of the orphans and widows, to pardon the guilty, to forbid adultery, and to promote the hidden talents.

古文：礼新叙旧，禄勋合亲，任良物官。
现代文：以礼接待新人，交往旧人，奖赏功勋，和睦亲族，任用贤良，物色官吏。
English: To receive newcomers with courtesy, to associate with old people, to reward meritorious service, to reconcile relatives, to appoint the virtuous, and to search for officials.

古文：使屈罢简东国之兵于召陵，亦如之。
现代文：派屈罢在召陵选拔检阅东部地区的武装，也和西部一样。
English: The faction stopped at the tomb to select and review the armed forces in the eastern region, just like in the west.

古文：好于边疆，息民五年，而后用师，礼也。
现代文：和四边的邻国友好，让百姓休养生息五年，然后用兵，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper to be friendly with the neighbors on all sides, let the people rest and recuperate for five years, and then use the army.

古文：秋八月，莒著丘公卒，郊公不慼。
现代文：秋季，八月，莒国国君著丘公死了，郊公不悲哀。
English: In the autumn, in August, the prince of the country died, and the country was not sad.

古文：国人弗顺，欲立著丘公之弟庚舆。
现代文：国内的人们不服从他，想要立著丘公的兄弟庚舆。
English: People in the country do not obey him and want to stand up to Yau's brother, Geng Myo.

古文：蒲馀侯恶公子意恢而善于庚舆，郊公恶公子铎而善于意恢。
现代文：蒲馀侯讨厌公子意恢而和庚舆要好。郊公讨厌公子铎而和意恢要好。
English: Suburban lords hate it when their lords are boisterous, but it's better to be friendly. Suburban lords hate it when their lords are boisterous, but it's better to be friendly.

古文：公子铎因蒲馀侯而与之谋曰： 尔杀意恢，我出君而纳庚舆。 
现代文：公子铎依靠蒲馀侯并且和他商量，说： 你去杀死意恢，我赶走国君而接纳庚舆。 
English: He relied on Po Yu Hou and discussed with him, saying, "You go and kill Yiwu, I will drive away the sovereign and accept Geng Yu."

古文：许之。
现代文：蒲馀侯答应了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：楚令尹子旗有德于王，不知度。与养氏比，而求无厌。
现代文：楚国的令尹子旗对楚平王有过功劳，但自己却不知道节制，和养氏勾结，贪得无厌。
English: Yin Ziqi, the ruler of the State of Chu, had made contributions to King Chuping, but he did not know how to restrain himself, colluded with the Yao clan, and was insatiably greedy.

古文：王患之。
现代文：楚平王很担心。
English: King Chu Ping was very worried.

古文：九月甲午，楚子杀鬥成然，而灭养氏之族。
现代文：九月初三日，楚平王杀了鬬成然，灭掉养氏这一家族。
English: On the third day of early September, King Chuping killed Zou Chengran and wiped out the Yao family.

古文：使鬥辛居郧，以无忘旧勋。
现代文：让鬬辛住在郧地，以此表示不忘过去的功勋。
English: Let Yu Xin live in Handan, in order to show that the past achievements are not forgotten.

古文：冬十二月，蒲馀侯兹夫杀莒公子意恢，郊公奔齐。
现代文：冬季，十二月，蒲馀侯兹夫杀死了莒国的公子意恢。郊公逃亡到齐国。
English: In the winter, in December, Puyang Houzhu killed the prince of Qin, Yiwu, and the prince of the countryside fled to Qi.

古文：公子铎逆庚舆于齐。齐隰党、公子鉏送之，有赂田。
现代文：公子铎在齐国迎接庚舆，齐国的隰党、公子鉏送行，莒国向齐国贿赂土田。
English: Gongzihong met Geng Myo in Qi Province, Qi Province's Gong Party and Gongzihong saw him off, and Qi Province bribed Tsuchida to Qi Province.

古文：晋邢侯与雍子争鄐田，久而无成。
现代文：晋国的邢侯和雍子争夺鄐地的土田，很长时间也没有调解成功。
English: For a long time, there was no success in mediating between the princes of Jin and the emperors of Yangtze in their competition for the land of Shansi.

古文：士景伯如楚，叔鱼摄理。
现代文：士景伯去楚国，叔鱼代理他的职务。
English: Shijing Bo went to Chu, and Shuguo acted as his deputy.

古文：韩宣子命断旧狱，罪在雍子。
现代文：韩宣子命令他判处旧案，罪过在于雍子。
English: Han Xuan Zi ordered him to sentence him to the old case. The crime was committed by Yong Zi.

古文：雍子纳其女于叔鱼，叔鱼蔽罪邢侯。
现代文：雍子把女儿嫁给叔鱼，叔鱼宣判邢侯有罪。
English: Yasuko married her daughter to her uncle Yu, and the uncle Yu pronounced her guilty.

古文：邢侯怒，杀叔鱼与雍子于朝。
现代文：邢侯发怒，在朝廷上杀了叔鱼和雍子。
English: Enraged, Yan Hou killed Shou Yu and Yong Zi at the court.

古文：宣子问其罪于叔向。
现代文：韩宣子向叔向询问怎样治他们的罪。
English: Han Xuan Zi asked his uncle how to deal with them.

古文：叔向曰： 三人同罪，施生戮死可也。
现代文：叔向说： 三个人罪状相同，杀了活着的人示众、暴露死者的尸体就可以了。
English: Uncle Xiang said, "Three people are guilty of the same crime. It is enough to kill the living and expose the dead body to the public.

古文：雍子自知其罪而赂以买直，鲋也鬻狱，邢侯专杀，其罪一也。
现代文：雍子知道自己的罪过，而用他女儿作为贿赂来取得胜诉；鲋出卖法律，邢侯擅自杀人，他们的罪状相同。
English: Yongzi knew his guilt, and used his daughter as a bribe to win the case; they are guilty of the same crime of betraying the law and committing suicide.

古文：己恶而掠美为昏，贪以败官为墨，杀人不忌为贼。
现代文：自己有罪恶而掠取别人的美名就是昏，贪婪而败坏职责就是不干净，杀人而没有顾忌就是贼。
English: To take the good name of another for one's own sin is folly, to be greedy and corrupt one's duty is unclean, to kill without scruple is theft.

古文：《夏书》曰： 昏、墨、贼，杀。 皋陶之刑也。请从之。 
现代文：《夏书》说， 昏、墨、贼，处死 ，这是皋陶的刑法，请照办。 
English: "Summer Book" said, "Drowsiness, ink, thieves, death penalty, this is the criminal law of Jintao, please follow it."

古文：乃施邢侯而尸雍子与叔鱼于市。
现代文：于是就杀了邢侯陈尸示众，并且把雍子和叔鱼的尸体摆在市上示众。
English: So he killed the body of Chen, the steward, and displayed it to the public. He also put the bodies of Yongzi and Shuyu on display in the market.

古文：仲尼曰： 叔向，古之遗直也。
现代文：孔子说： 叔向，他有着古代流传下来的正直作风。
English: Confucius said, "Uncle Xiang, he has the honest work style handed down from ancient times.

古文：治国制刑，不隐于亲，三数叔鱼之恶，不为末減。
现代文：治理国家大事使用刑法，不包庇亲人。三次指出叔鱼的罪恶，不给他减轻。
English: Use criminal law to manage national affairs, and do not shield relatives. Point out the uncle's sins three times, and do not give him relief.

古文：曰义也夫，可谓直矣。
现代文：做事合于道义啊，可以说得上正直了！
English: It's the moral thing to do, to be honest!

古文：平丘之会，数其贿也，以宽卫国，晋不为暴。
现代文：平丘的盟会，责备他贪财，以宽免卫国，晋国就做到了不凶暴。
English: Pingqiu's alliance accused him of being greedy for money, but he was pardoned and allowed to defend the country, and Jin did not become violent.

古文：归鲁季孙，称其诈也，以宽鲁国，晋不为虐。
现代文：让鲁国季孙回去，称道他的欺诈，以宽免鲁国，晋国就做到了不凌虐。
English: Let Qisun of the State of Lu go back, praise his fraud, pardon the State of Lu, and the State of Jin will be able to do it without abuse.

古文：邢侯之狱，言其贪也，以正刑书，晋不为颇。
现代文：邢侯这次案件，说明他的贪婪，以执行法律，晋国就做到了不偏颇。
English: Zhou Hou's case this time shows his greed to enforce the law, and Jin Guo has done so impartially.

古文：三言而除三恶，加三利，杀亲益荣，犹义也夫？ 
现代文：三次说话而除掉三次罪恶，加上三种利益。杀死了亲人而名声更加显著，这也是合乎道义的吧！ 
English: It is moral to speak three times to get rid of three evils and gain three benefits, and to kill one's relatives to gain a more prominent reputation.

