古文：案：《晋宗室列传》，《永乐大典》仅存四篇，余多残阙。广王敬威，字奉信，高祖之从父弟也。
现代文：广王石敬威，字奉信，是高祖的堂弟。
English: Guangwang Shi Jingwei, also known as Fengxin, is Gao Zu's cousin.

古文：父万诠，赠太尉，追封赵王。
现代文：他的父亲石万诠，赠太尉，追封为赵王。
English: His father, Shi Wanyan, gave him the title of captain and crowned him King Zhao.

古文：敬威少善骑射，事后唐庄宗，以从战有功，累历军职。
现代文：石敬威小时就擅长骑马射箭，事奉后唐庄宗，因随从作战有功，多次担任军职。
English: Shi Jingwei was good at horse riding and archery when he was a child. After serving Tangzhuangzong, he served in the military several times due to his meritorious service in the war.

古文：明宗即位，擢为奉圣指挥使。
现代文：唐明宗继承皇位后，提拔为奉圣指挥使。
English: After Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty succeeded to the throne, he was promoted to the post of commander of consecration.

古文：天成、应顺中，凡十改军额，累官至检校工部尚书，赐忠顺保义功臣。
现代文：天成、应顺年间，一共十来次改任军职，累官至检校工部尚书，赐封忠顺保义功臣。
English: During the years of Tiancheng and Yingshun, a total of more than ten times he was reassigned to the military post, he was appointed to the inspection department of the school, and he was awarded the title of loyal and loyal hero.

古文：清泰中，加兵部尚书、彰圣都指挥使，遥领常州刺史。
现代文：清泰年间，加任兵部尚书、彰圣军总指挥使，遥任常州刺史。
English: During the Qing and Tai Dynasties, he was appointed as the chief commander of the Shangshu and Zhang Sheng armies of the military department, and was also appointed as the Changzhou chief historian.

古文：及高祖建义于太原，敬威时在洛下，知祸必及，召所亲谓曰： 夫人生而有死，理之常也。
现代文：到高祖在太原称帝，石敬威当时在洛阳，知道祸患必及己身，召唤他的亲信说： 人有生就有死，这是常理。
English: When Gao Zu was crowned emperor in Taiyuan, Shi Jingwei was in Luoyang at the time. He knew that the calamity would befall him, and summoned his relatives to say: "It is common sense that if you live, you will die.

古文：我兄方图大举，余固不可偷生待辱，取笑一时。 
现代文：我的兄长正图大事，我本来就不可苟且偷生等待受辱，被当世取笑。 
English: My brother was in the middle of something big, and I was just waiting to be humiliated, to be made fun of.

古文：楚王重信，字守孚，高祖第二子，后唐明宗之外孙也。
现代文：便在私邸自杀身亡，人们都认为很是悲壮。天福二年，册命追赠太傅，安葬在河南县。六年，追封为广王。楚王石重信，字守孚，是高祖的第二个儿子，也就是后唐明宗的外孙。
English: He then committed suicide at his private residence, which was considered very tragic. In the second year of Tianfu, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu and buried in Henan County. Six years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Guangwang. King of Chu Shi Shigenobu, also known as Shufu, was the second son of Gaozu, that is, the grandson of Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：少敏悟，有智思。
现代文：小时就聪慧颖悟，有机智谋略。
English: An hour will make you wise and clever, and you will have a good strategy.

古文：天成中，始授银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍，俄加检校刑部尚书，守相州长史。未几，迁金紫光禄大夫，超拜检校司徒，守左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：天成年间，始任银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍，不久加任检校刑部尚书、守相州长史，不多时，又升任金紫光禄大夫，越级拜为检校司徒、守左金吾卫大将军。
English: When he was ten years old, he was first appointed as the doctor of the Silver Qing Guanglu, the attendant of the left horseback of the inspection of the school, and soon he was appointed as the inspector of the criminal department, the governor of the governor's history, and not long after that, he was promoted to the doctor of the Golden Purple Guanglu, and he was promoted to the inspector of the school and the general of the left guard.

古文：重信历事唐明宗及闵帝、末帝，不恃贵戚，能克己复礼，常恂恂如也，甚为时论所称。
现代文：石重信历事唐明宗以及闵帝、末帝，不依仗显贵的亲戚，能克守自己恢复礼制，通常都显示出恭敬谨慎的样子，很是被当时人所称道。
English: Throughout history, Shi Chongxin of the Tang and Ming dynasties, as well as Emperor Zhao and the last emperor, did not rely on prominent relatives, and was able to restrain himself from restoring the etiquette. He usually showed a respectful and cautious appearance, which was highly praised by people at the time.

古文：高祖即位，出镇孟津，到任逾月，去民病十余事，朝廷有诏褒之。
现代文：高祖登上皇位后，石重信出镇孟津，上任仅一个半月，就除去有害老百姓的弊政十多件，朝廷发文加以褒奖。
English: After Gao Zu ascended the throne, Shi Shigenobu left the town of Mengjin. Just one and a half months after taking office, he removed more than ten cases of maladministration harmful to the common people, and the imperial court issued a document to praise him.

古文：是岁，范延光叛命于鄴，诏遣前灵武节度使张从宾发河桥屯兵数千人，东讨延光。
现代文：这一年，范延光在邺都反叛朝廷，高祖下诏派原灵武节度使张从宾率河桥驻军几千人，向东讨伐范延光。
English: In that year, Fan Yanguang rebelled against the imperial court in Shudu. Gaozhu sent the former Lingwu Jiedu to make Zhang Zibing garrison several thousand troops in Heqiao to fight against Fan Yanguang in the east.

古文：既而从宾与延光合谋为乱，遂害重信于理所，时年二十。远近闻者，为之叹惜。诏赠太尉。
现代文：不久张从宾与范延光合谋叛乱，便在治所杀害了石重信，当时，他仅二十岁，远近听说的人，都为他感叹惋惜，下诏追赠太尉。
English: Not long after, Zhang Congbin conspired with Fan Yanguang to rebel, and then killed Shi Shigenobu in the detention center. At that time, he was only twenty years old, and everyone who heard about him, both near and far, felt sorry for him, and he was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：时执事奏曰： 两汉子弟，生死无历三公位者。 
现代文：当时主事官上奏： 两汉子弟，无论是活着的，还是死去的，都没有登上三公职位的。 
English: At that time, the presiding officer said: The two sons of Han, whether alive or dead, have not ascended to the three public positions.

古文：高祖曰： 此兒为善被祸，予甚愍之，自我作古，宁有例乎。 
现代文：高祖说 ：这孩子行善遭祸，我很是哀怜他，从我以后，就有例了！ 
English: Gaozu said, "This child has been afflicted for doing good. I feel very sorry for him. There will be an example after me!"

古文：遂行册命。
现代文：于是举行册封礼仪。
English: As a result, the enthronement ceremony was held.

古文：以其年十月，葬河南万安山。
现代文：这年十月，安葬在河南万安山。
English: In October of this year, he was buried in Wan'an Mountain, Henan Province.

古文：天福七年，追封沂王，少帝嗣位，改封楚王。妃南阳白氏，昭信军节度使奉进之女也。
现代文：天福七年，追封为沂王。少帝继承皇位，改封为楚王，他的妃子南阳白氏，是昭信军节度使白奉进的女儿。
English: In the seventh year of Tianfu, he was given the posthumous title of Shao Wang. The young emperor succeeded to the throne and was given the title of Chu Wang. His concubine, Nanyang Bai, was the daughter of the military commander of the Shoxin Army, Baibongjin.

古文：重信有子二人，皆幼，长于公宫，及少帝北迁，不知其所终。
现代文：石重信有两个孩子，都年幼，在皇宫中长大，到少帝向北迁徙后，不知他们所终。
English: Shi Shigenobu had two children, both young, who grew up in the imperial palace. When the young emperor moved north, he did not know where they would end up.

古文：寿王重乂，字宏理，高祖第三子也。
现代文：寿王石重繧，字宏理，是高祖的第三个儿子。
English: Shouwang Shigeyong, also known as Hongli, was the third son of Gaozu.

古文：幼岐嶷，好儒书，亦通兵法，高祖素所钟爱。及即位，自北京皇城使拜左骁卫大将军。
现代文：小时候就很聪慧，喜好儒家经典，也精通兵法。高祖一向就很喜欢他，到登上皇位，把他从北京皇城使提升为左骁卫大将军。
English: He was very intelligent as a child, liked Confucian classics, and was also proficient in the art of war. Gaozu always liked him very much, and when he ascended the throne, he promoted him from Beijing Imperial City to General Zuo Wei.

古文：车驾幸浚郊，加检校司空，权东都留守。
现代文：高祖驾临浚郊，加官检校司空，暂任东都留守。
English: Gao Zu drove to the outskirts of Dungun, added the inspector of the school to the sky, and temporarily left Dongdu.

古文：未几，鄴都范延光叛，遣杨光远讨之，诏前灵武节度使、洛都巡检使张从宾发盟津屯兵赴鄴下。
现代文：不久，邺都范延光反叛，朝廷派杨光远讨伐，诏命原灵武节度使、洛都巡检使张从宾调拨盟津守军奔赴邺下。
English: Soon after, the capital Fan Yanguang rebelled, and the imperial court sent Yang Guangyuan to lead the crusade, and ordered the former Lingwu Jiedu envoy and the Lodu patrol envoy Zhang Congbin to dispatch the allied Tianjin defenders to rush to the capital.

古文：会从宾密通延光，与娄继英等先劫河桥，次乱洛邑，因害重乂于河南府，时年十九。
现代文：张从宾暗地勾结范延光，与娄继英等先洗劫河桥，接着便扰乱洛邑，因此在河南府杀害了石重繧，当时，仅十九岁。
English: Zhang Congbin secretly colluded with Fan Yanguang, first ransacked the river bridge with Zou Jieying and others, and then disturbed Luoyang, so he killed Shi Jiuyong in Henan Province. At that time, he was only 19 years old.

古文：从宾败，高祖发哀于便殿，辍视朝三日，诏赠太傅。
现代文：张从宾战败后，高祖在便殿发丧，停止上朝三天，下诏追赠太傅。
English: After Zhang Congbin's defeat, Gao Zu held a funeral in the hall, stopping for three days, and then posthumously awarded Taifu.

古文：是岁冬十月，诏遣庄宅使张颖监护丧事，葬于河南府万安山。
现代文：这年冬天的十月，下诏派庄宅使张颖监护丧事，葬在河南府万安山。
English: In October of this winter, Zhang Ying, the guardian of the manor house, was sent to the funeral and buried in Wanyan Mountain, Henan Province.

古文：天福中，追封寿王。
现代文：天福年间，追封为寿王。
English: During the Tenpu era, he was given the posthumous title of Shouwang.

古文：妃李氏，汾州刺史之女也。
现代文：他的妃子李氏，是汾州刺史李王己的女儿。
English: His concubine, Ms. Li, is the daughter of Li Wangqi, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：重乂无子，妃后落发为尼，开运中，卒于京师。
现代文：石重繧没有孩子，他的妃子后来落发做了尼姑，开运年间，死在京师。
English: Shi Jiuyong had no children. His concubine, who later became a nun, died in Beijing during the early years of the movement.

