古文：郑太字公业，河南开封人，司农众之曾孙也。
现代文：◆郑太传，郑太字公业，河南开封人。司农郑众的曾孙。
English: ◆ Zheng Taizhong, also known as Zheng Taizhong, was born in Kaifeng, Henan Province. He was the great-grandson of Zheng Zong, a farmer.

古文：少有少略。灵帝末，知天下将乱，阴交结豪杰。
现代文：年轻时有才略，灵帝末年，郑太知道天下会乱起来，暗暗地交结豪杰。
English: When he was young, he had talent. At the end of Lingdi's life, Zheng Ta knew that the world would be in turmoil, and secretly befriended a hero.

古文：家富于财，有田四百顷，而食常不足，名闻山东。
现代文：家里很富有，有田四百顷，但是经常还没有饭吃，名声很大，山东一带都知道他。
English: His family is very rich, with 400 hectares of farmland, but they often do not have enough to eat. He has a great reputation and is known all over Shandong.

古文：初，举孝廉，三府辟，公车征，皆不就。
现代文：开始举为孝廉，三府征召，公车征，都不就。
English: At first, it was not enough to be raised as a filial piety, to be conscripted by the three prefectures, or to be conscripted by bus.

古文：及大将军何进辅政，征用名士，以公业为尚书待郎，迁待御史。
现代文：大将军何进辅政后，征用名士，任郑公业为尚书侍郎，升侍御史。
English: After the great general He Jin assisted the government, he requisitioned celebrities, appointed Zheng Gongye as Shang Shushijiro, and promoted him to the position of Zushi.

古文：进将诛阉官，欲召并州牧董卓为助。
现代文：何进准备诛杀宦官，想召并州牧董卓为帮手。
English: He Jin is preparing to fight and kill the eunuch, and wants to call and state herdsman Dong Zhuo as a helper.

古文：公业谓进曰： 董卓强忍寡义，志欲无厌。
现代文：郑公业对何进道： 董卓强暴残忍，不讲义气，他的野心很大。
English: Zheng Gongye said of He Jindao: "Dong Zhuo is violent and cruel, he does not have a sense of righteousness, and his ambition is great.

古文：若借之朝政，授以大事。将恣凶欲，必危朝廷。
现代文：如果把朝政借予他，授予他大事，会大逞凶欲，危害朝廷。
English: If the imperial government were to be lent to him, if he were to be given important responsibilities, he would become violent and dangerous to the imperial court.

古文：明公以亲德之重，据阿衡之权，秉意独断，诛除有罪，诚不宜假卓以为资援也。
现代文：您以亲德的重位，有辅导帝王主持国政的权威。承意独断，诛除有罪，真不应假董卓的力量作为后援啊。
English: As a pro-German, you have the authority to advise the emperor to preside over state affairs. You should not rely on the strength of Dong Zhuo as a backup.

古文：且事留变生，殷鉴不远。 
现代文：并且事久变生，殷鉴不远。 
English: And things have changed over time, and the changes are not far away.

古文：又为陈时务之所急数事。
现代文：又为何进陈当务之急的几件事。
English: So why not get on with the urgent business at hand.

古文：进不能用，乃弃官去。
现代文：何进不能用，于是弃官走了。
English: He couldn't use it, so he resigned and left.

古文：谓颍川人旬攸曰： 何公未易辅也。 
现代文：对颍川人荀攸说 ：何公不好辅佐啊。 
English: He said to Hijikawa Hitoyasu: "What a bad assistant.

古文：进寻见害，卓果作乱。
现代文：何进不久被杀害，董卓果然作乱。
English: He Jin was killed soon after, and Dong Zhuo did indeed start a riot.

古文：公业等与侍中伍琼、卓长史何颙共说卓，以袁绍为勃海太守，以发山东之谋。
现代文：郑公业等与侍中伍琼、董卓长史何共同说董卓，以袁绍为勃海太守，以发山东之谋。
English: Zheng Gongye and others, together with Wu Qiong and Dong Zhuo Changshi, jointly said that Dong Zhuo, with Yuan Shao as the governor of Bohai, was the mastermind of Shandong.

古文：及义兵起，卓乃会公卿议，大发卒讨之，群僚莫敢忤旨。
现代文：义兵兴起，董卓召集公卿讨论，发大兵讨伐义兵，百官不敢违反董卓的意旨。
English: With the rise of the volunteer soldiers, Dong Zhuo convened the nobles to discuss, and sent soldiers to fight the volunteer soldiers. The officials did not dare to violate the intention of Dong Zhuo.

古文：公业恐其众多益横，凶强难制，独曰： 夫政在德，不在众也。 
现代文：郑公业担心董卓兵多了，就会更加骄横，凶恶不易控制，独说： 治国在有德，不在于兵多。 
English: Zheng Gongye was worried that if Dong Zhuo had more soldiers, he would become more arrogant, and his viciousness would not be easy to control. He said, "Governing a country is about having virtue, not about having more soldiers."

古文：卓不悦，曰： 如卿此言，兵为无用邪？ 
现代文：董卓不高兴，说 ：照你这样说，兵没有用吗？ 
English: Dong Zhuo was not happy and said: According to you, soldiers are useless?

古文：公业惧，乃诡词更对曰：非谓无用，以为山东不足加大兵耳。
现代文：郑公业害怕起来，于是言不由衷地编了一套假话，对董卓说 ：我不是说兵没有用，是说山东不足以用大兵而已。
English: Zheng Gongye was afraid, so he made up a set of lies and said to Dong Zhuo: I am not saying that soldiers are useless, I am saying that Shandong is not enough to use soldiers.

古文：如有不信，试为明公略陈其要。
现代文：如果不相信，可以为您大概说一说。
English: If you don't believe me, I can give you a rough idea.

古文：今山东合谋，州郡连结，人庶相动，非不强盛，然光武以来，中国无警，百姓优逸，忘战日久。
现代文：现在山东合谋，州郡连结，百姓团结一致，不可说不强盛。然而自从光武以来，国家平安无事，老百姓生活富裕，对于战争久已淡忘了。
English: Now Shandong conspires, states and counties are linked, and the people are united, which can not be said to be strong. However, since Guangwu, the country has been safe and sound, and the people have a rich life. They have long forgotten about the war.

古文：仲尼有言： 不教人战，是谓弃之。 
现代文：孔子说道： 不教育人民战争，而使他们去战，这是抛弃人民。 
English: Confucius said: Not to educate the people in war, but to make them fight, is to abandon the people.

古文：其众虽多，不能为害。
现代文：所以他们的人虽然多，不足以为害，这是一。
English: So although there are more of them, they are not enough to cause harm, that's one thing.

古文：袁本初公卿子弟，生处京师。
现代文：您出身西州，年轻即为国家的将帅，熟习军事，多次参加战斗，名震当世，人人害怕您，服从您，这是二。
English: You are from Xizhou, you are a young general of the country, you are familiar with military affairs, you have participated in battles many times, you are famous, everyone is afraid of you and obeys you, this is two.

古文：张孟卓东平长者，坐不窥堂。
现代文：张孟卓是东平的忠厚长者，眼睛也不乱看一眼。
English: Zhang Mengzhuo is a loyal elder of Dongping, and his eyes do not look out of place.

古文：孔公绪清谈高论，嘘枯吹生。
现代文：孔公绪清谈高论，不偏不倚。
English: Kong Gongxu talks about high-level theories and is impartial.

古文：并无军旅之才，执锐之干，临锋决敌，非公之俦。
现代文：这些人都没有军事才能、打仗的经验，临阵决战，不是您的敌手。这是三。
English: These people have no military ability, no combat experience, and are not your opponents in a decisive battle.

古文：三也。
现代文：山东的人才，从来不勇敢。
English: That's three.

古文：山东之士，素乏精悍。未有勇贲之勇，庆忌之捷，聊城之守，良、平之谋，可任以偏师，责以成功。
现代文：没有孟贲那样的勇敢，庆忌那样的敏捷，没有聊城那样坚固的防守，张良、陈平那样的谋略，不可任以偏师，要求成功。
English: Without the bravery of Meng Xi, the agility of Qing Bo, the solid defense of Liaocheng, and the strategy of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping, it is impossible to be biased and demand success.

古文：四也。
现代文：这是四。
English: Four, too.

古文：就有其人，而尊卑无序，王爵不如，若恃众怙力，将各棋峙，以观成败，不肯同心共胆，与齐进退。
现代文：即使有可任用的人，也是尊卑不分，国家的爵位不给他们，他们依恃人多，依恃力量，会各自独立不前，坐观成败，不肯同心协力，一起同进同退。
English: Even if there are people who can be appointed, there is no distinction between the superior and the inferior. The state does not give them the title of nobility. They cling to many people and cling to power. They will not move forward independently, sit and watch success or failure, and refuse to work together. They will advance and retreat together.

古文：五也。
现代文：这是五。
English: That's five.

古文：关西诸郡，颇习兵事，自顷以来，数与羌战，妇女犹戴戟操矛，挟弓负矢，况其壮勇之士，以当妄战之人乎！
现代文：关西各郡，大都熟习军事，近年以来，多次与羌作战，妇女还戴戟持矛，带弓负矢，何况以壮勇的军士，抵挡没有受过训练的人呢！
English: Most of the counties in Kansai are familiar with military affairs. In recent years, they have repeatedly fought with swords. Women also wear swords, carry spears, and carry bows and arrows. What's more, they use their bravery to resist untrained people!

古文：其胜可必。
现代文：胜利是必然的。
English: Victory is inevitable.

古文：六也，且天下强勇，百姓所畏者，有并、凉之人，及匈奴、屠各、湟中义从、西羌八种，而明公拥之，以为爪牙，譬驱虎兕以赴犬羊。
现代文：这是六。并且天下的强勇，老百姓所怕的，有并、凉人，及匈奴、屠各、湟中义从、西羌八种，您拥有他们，作为爪牙，有如驱虎兕以赴犬羊，所向无敌。
English: This is the sixth, and the world's strong and brave, the people are afraid of, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and.

古文：七也。
现代文：这是七。
English: This is seven.

古文：又明公将帅，皆中表腹心，周旅日久，恩信淳著，忠诚可任，智谋可恃。
现代文：又您的将帅都是中表亲戚，是您的心腹，跟随很久，有恩有信，忠诚可任，智谋可恃。
English: In addition, your generals and admirals are all middle table relatives, they are your confidants, follow you for a long time, have gratitude and trust, can be loyal, and can be clever.

古文：以胶固之众，当解合之势，犹以烈风扫彼枯叶。
现代文：以团结一致的部队，当散乱之敌，正如猛风扫枯叶。
English: With a united force, when the scattered enemy, like a strong wind sweeping the dead leaves.

古文：八也。
现代文：这是八。
English: That's eight.

古文：夫战有三亡，以乱攻理者亡，以邪攻正者亡，以逆攻顺者亡。
现代文：我们知道战争有三亡，用乱攻理的亡，用邪攻正的亡，用逆攻顺的亡。
English: We know that there are three deaths in war, the death of attacking the truth with chaos, the death of attacking the truth with evil, and the death of attacking the truth with the opposite.

古文：今明公秉国平正，讨灭宦竖，忠义克立。
现代文：现在您治国平正，讨灭宦官，忠义已立。
English: Now you are governing the country in a peaceful manner, eliminating eunuchs, and loyalty has been established.

古文：以此三德，待彼三亡，奉辞伐罪，谁敢御之！
现代文：用此三德，对彼三亡，奉朝廷之命，讨伐有罪，哪一个胆敢抵御！
English: With this three virtues, three deaths against him, by order of the court, crusade guilty, which one dares to resist!

古文：九也。
现代文：这是九。
English: That's nine.

古文：东州郑玄学该古今，北海邴原清高直亮，皆儒生所仰，群士楷式。
现代文：东州郑玄学问包括今古，北海邴原清廉正直，都是儒生所宗仰的，群士的楷模。
English: Dongzhou Zhengxuan's culture includes the ancient times, and Beihai Yibuan is clean and honest, both of which are admired by Confucians and are models for the masses.

古文：彼诸将若询其计画，足知强弱。
现代文：他们的各将，如果向郑玄、邴原询问计划，就能够知道哪个强，哪个弱。
English: If you ask Zheng Xuan and Hao Yuan about their plans, you will know which one is strong and which one is weak.

古文：且燕、赵、齐、梁非不盛也，终灭于泰；吴、楚七国非不众也，卒败荥阳。
现代文：从前燕、赵、齐、梁不是不强盛，终究被秦国灭亡；吴、楚七国不是兵不多，终究在荥阳被周亚夫打败。
English: In the past, Yan, Zhao, Qi and Liang were not weak, but were eventually defeated by Qin; Wu and Chu were not weak, but were eventually defeated by Zhou Yafu in Fenyang.

古文：况今德政赫赫，股肱惟衣，彼岂赞成其谋，造乱长寇哉？
现代文：何况现在德政昭彰，辅佐贤良，郑玄、邴原难道会赞成他们的谋划，制造叛乱，助长寇害吗？
English: What's more, will the present-day Akira Decheng, Zheng Xuan, and Hao Yuan approve of their plan, create a rebellion, and encourage the banditry?

古文：其不然。
现代文：一定不会的。
English: Definitely not.

古文：十也，若其所陈少有可采，无事征兵以惊天下，使患役之民相聚为非，弃德恃众，自亏威重。
现代文：这是十。如果我所说的，有一点点可以采纳，就是不征兵以惊扰天下，使害怕征役的老百姓集合一起为非作歹。不弃德恃众，自己亏损威重。 
English: This is ten. If what I have said can be accepted, it is that not conscripting will alarm the world and make the people who are afraid of conscription gather together to do evil. If you do not abandon the people, you will lose your dignity.

古文：卓乃悦，以公业为将军，使统诸军讨击关东。
现代文：董卓才高兴了。以郑公业为将军，使他统率各军讨击关东。
English: Dong Zhuocai was delighted. With Zheng Gongye as his general, he ordered him to lead the armies to attack Kanto.

古文：或说卓曰： 郑公业智略过人，而结谋外寇，今资之士马，就其党与，窃为明公惧之。 
现代文：有人对董卓说 ：郑公业智谋才略过人又与外寇结谋，现在给他军队，就是帮助了他的党羽，我认为是可怕的。 
English: Some people said to Dong Zhuo: Zheng Gongye was clever enough to outwit people and conspire with foreign invaders, and now he has given him an army, which is to help his party. I think it is terrible.

古文：卓乃收还其兵，留拜议郎。
现代文：董卓于是收还了给郑公业的军队，任他为议郎。
English: Dong Zhuo then returned the army to Zheng Gongye and appointed him as a mediator.

古文：卓既迁都长安，天下饥乱，士大夫多不得其命。
现代文：董卓迁都长安，天下饥荒动乱，士大夫多不得活命。
English: Dong Zhuo moved the capital to Chang'an, the world was in famine and turmoil, and many scholars and scholars were not allowed to live.

古文：而公业家有余资，日引宾客高会倡乐，所赡救者甚众。
现代文：但郑公业家里有余财，天天招引宾客大会作乐，他所救活的人很多。
English: But Zheng Gongye's family has extra money, and every day he invites guests to perform music, and he has saved many lives.

古文：乃与何颙、荀攸共谋杀卓。
现代文：他与何、荀攸共同谋划诛杀董卓。
English: He plotted with He and Zou You to kill Dong Zhuo.

古文：事泄，颙等被执，公业脱身自武关走，东归袁术。
现代文：事情泄漏出去，何等人被捕，郑公业则脱身自武关逃走，东归袁术。
English: The matter leaked out, several people were arrested, Zheng Gongye escaped from Wugang and fled, and Yuan Shu returned to the East.

古文：术上以为杨州刺。
现代文：袁术上奏任他为扬州刺史。
English: Yuan Shuxiang appointed him as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：未至官，道卒，年四十一。
现代文：没有到任，在路上死了，年四十一。
English: He did not take up the post and died on the way, aged 41.

古文：孔融字文举，鲁国人，孔子二十世孙也。
现代文：◆孔融传，孔融字文举，鲁国人，孔子二十世孙。
English: ◆Kong Rong Chuan, Kong Rong Zi Wenqiu, Lu Guo Ren, the 20th generation grandson of Confucius.

古文：七世祖霸，为元帝师，位至侍中。
现代文：七世祖孔霸，为汉元帝师，官至侍中。
English: Kongba, the seventh generation ancestor, was the Han Emperor's teacher, and rose to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：父宙，太山都尉。
现代文：父亲孔宙，太山都尉。
English: His father, Kong Chao, was the captain of Taishan.

古文：融幼有异才。
现代文：孔融小时候就有特异的才能。
English: Kong Rong had a special talent as a child.

古文：年十岁，随父诣京师。
现代文：十岁，跟父亲至京师。
English: At the age of ten, he moved to Beijing with his father.

古文：时，河南尹李膺以简重自居，不妄接士宾客，敕外自非当世名人及与通家，皆不得白。
现代文：当时河南尹李膺自守简慢严整，不随便接见士大夫及宾客，告诉门者，不是当代名人及世代有交谊之家都不得告知。
English: At that time, Yin Lijuan of Henan Province kept himself simple, slow and strict. He did not casually receive scholars and guests, and told the door that he was not allowed to inform contemporary celebrities and families with generations of friends.

古文：融欲观其人，故造膺门。语门者曰： 我是李君通家子弟。 
现代文：孔融想看看李膺是怎样一个人，有意去李膺家敲门，对门者说 ：我是李君通家子弟。 
English: Kong Rong wanted to see what kind of person Li Juntong was. He deliberately knocked on the door of Li Juntong's house and said to the person at the door, "I am the son of Li Juntong's family."

古文：门者言之。
现代文：守门的人告诉李膺，李膺请孔融相见。
English: The gatekeeper told Li Yao, and Li Yao asked Kong Rong to meet him.

古文：膺请融，问曰： 高明祖父尝与仆有恩旧乎？ 融曰： 然。
现代文：问道： 高明祖父曾经与我有交情吗？ 孔融说： 是的。
English: Asked: Did Gao Ming Grandfather ever have a friendship with me? Kong Rong said: Yes.

古文：先君孔子与君先人李老君同德比义，而相师友，则融与君累世通家。 
现代文：先人孔子与您先人李老君同德同义，又为师友关系。那么，我孔融与您为累世通家。 
English: Ancestor Confucius and your ancestor Li Laojun are synonymous with the same virtue, and they are also teachers and friends. So, I, Kong Rong, am a family member with you.

古文：众坐莫不叹息。
现代文：在坐的人，无不为之赞叹。
English: Those who were sitting there couldn't help but marvel.

古文：太中大夫陈炜后至，坐中以告炜。
现代文：太中大夫陈炜后到，在坐的人把这告诉了陈炜。
English: The person who was sitting there told Chen Yao about this.

古文：炜曰： 夫人小而聪了，大未必奇。 
现代文：陈炜说 ：噢，人小的时候聪明，长大了未必有大用。 
English: Chen Yao said, "Oh, people are smart when they are young, but it may not be of much use when they grow up."

古文：融应声曰： 观君所言，将不早惠乎？ 膺大笑曰： 高明必为伟器。 
现代文：孔融接着他的话说 ：照您这么说，莫非您小时也挺聪明的吗？ 李膺大笑说： 你将来一定会大有出息的。 
English: Kong Rong went on to say, "According to what you said, weren't you quite smart when you were young?" Li Yao laughed loudly and said, "You will surely be very successful in the future."

古文：年十三，丧父，哀悴过毁，扶而后起，州里归其孝。
现代文：孔融十三岁时，死了父亲，悲痛过度，要人扶了才能站起来，州里称赞他的孝行。
English: When Kong Rong was 13 years old, his father died. He was in great grief and had to be helped to stand up. The county praised his filial piety.

古文：性好学，博涉多该览。
现代文：天性好学习，博览群书。
English: Good at studying by nature, well-read.

古文：亡抵于褒，不遇。时融年二六，俭少之而不告。
现代文：山阳张俭为中常侍侯览所恨，侯览隐匿告人姓名把奏章下达州郡，捉拿张俭。张俭与孔融的哥哥孔褒是朋友，逃到孔褒家中，孔褒不在。
English: Sanyang Zhang Jian was hated by the middle attendant Hou Xuan. Hou Xuan concealed the name of the informant and sent the report to Dazhou County to capture Zhang Jian. Zhang Jian and Kong Rong's brother Kong Bo were friends. They fled to Kong Bo's home, but Kong Bo was not there.

古文：融见其有窘色，谓曰： 兄虽在外，吾独不能为君主邪？ 
现代文：这时孔融十六岁，张俭认为孔融年轻，没有告诉他。孔融看见张俭窘迫的样子，对张俭说： 哥哥虽然在外未归，我难道不能为您的东道主吗？ 
English: At this time, Kong Rong was sixteen years old. Zhang Jian thought that Kong Rong was young and did not tell him. Kong Rong saw Zhang Jian's distressed appearance and said to Zhang Jian: Although my brother has not returned, can I not be your host?

古文：因留舍之。
现代文：因此留张俭住在他家。
English: Therefore, Zhang Jian stayed at his home.

古文：后事泄，国相以下，密就掩捕，俭得脱走，遂并收褒、融送狱。
现代文：后来事情泄漏出去，国相以下，秘密捕捉，张俭得以跑掉。于是逮捕孔褒、孔融送入监狱。
English: Later, the matter leaked out, and Zhang Jian, who was below the minister of state, was secretly caught and was able to run away. Therefore, Kong Bo and Kong Rong were arrested and sent to prison.

古文：二人未知所坐。
现代文：不知他们二个人是谁获罪。
English: It is not known which of the two was convicted.

古文：融曰： 保纳舍藏者，融也，当坐之。 
现代文：孔融说 ：收容隐藏张俭的是我，有罪归我。 
English: Kong Rong said: I am the one who sheltered and hid Zhang Rong, and I am to blame.

古文：褒曰： 彼来求我，非弟之过，请甘其罪。 
现代文：孔褒说 ：张俭来找我，不是弟弟的罪过，罪在我，心甘情愿。 
English: Kong Bo said: Zhang Jian came to me, not because of his brother's sin, but because of my sin, willingly.

古文：吏问其母，母曰： 家事任长，妾当其辜。 
现代文：吏问他们的母亲，母亲说： 长者担任家事，罪责在我。 
English: The officers questioned their mother, who said: "The elders are in charge of the household, and I am to blame.

古文：一门争死，郡县疑不能决，乃上谳之。
现代文：一门争死，郡县疑不能决断，于是向朝廷请示。
English: One side was fighting to the death, and the county dispute could not be resolved, so they petitioned the imperial court.

古文：诏书竟坐褒焉。
现代文：诏书最后定了孔褒的罪。
English: The imperial edict finally convicted Kong Bo.

古文：融由是显名，与平原陶丘洪、陈留边让齐声称。州郡礼命，皆不就。
现代文：孔融因此著名，与平原陶丘洪、陈留边让齐名，州郡以礼任命，都不就。
English: As a result, Kong Rong is famous. He is on a par with Pingyuan Tao Chuhong and Chen Rubeijang. He was appointed by the state and county with great courtesy.

古文：辟司徒杨赐府。
现代文：征召司徒杨赐府。
English: Conscripted the scholar Yang Jifu.

古文：时，隐核官僚之贪浊者，将加贬黜，融多举中官亲族。
现代文：当时暗暗地察访官僚中的贪污分子，准备予以贬谪罢免，孔融检举多为宦官的亲族。
English: At that time, he secretly inspected corrupt elements in the bureaucracy, preparing to demote and dismiss them. Most of the people he investigated were relatives of eunuchs.

古文：尚书畏迫内宠，召掾属诘责之。融陈对罪恶，言无阿挠。
现代文：尚书害怕得罪皇帝的宠信，召属官诘问斥责，孔融陈述他们的罪恶，毫不隐讳。
English: Shangshu was afraid of offending the emperor's favorite, summoned subordinate officials for questioning and reprimanding, and openly stated their sins, without any concealment.

古文：河南尹何进当迁为大将军，杨赐遣融奉谒贺进，不时通，融即夺谒还府，投劾而去。
现代文：河南尹何进当升为大将军，杨赐派孔融拿着名片去祝贺何进，没有及时通报，孔融就把谒夺回归府，引罪自责回去了。
English: When Yin Hejin of Henan Province was promoted to general, Yang Zi sent Kong Rong to congratulate He Jin with a business card. Without timely notification, Kong Rong returned the plunder to the capital and blamed himself.

古文：河南官属耻之，私遣剑客欲追杀融。客有言于进曰： 孔文举有重名，将军若造怨此人，则四方之士引领而去矣。
现代文：河南尹官属认为丢了面子，私派剑客想追杀孔融，有客对何进说： 孔文举有重名，将军如与他结怨，四方之士就会相率而去了。
English: Yin's officials in Henan thought that he had lost face, and privately sent swordsmen to chase and kill Kong Rong. A guest said to He Jin: Kong Wenzhuo has a double name. If the general quarrels with him, the people of the four directions will leave at the same time.

古文：不如因而礼之，可以示广于天下。 
现代文：不如以礼待他，使天下人都知道将军胸怀广大。 
English: It is better to treat him with courtesy, so that the whole world knows that the general has a broad mind.

古文：进然之，既拜而辟融，举高第，为侍御史。
现代文：何进以为对，任命为大将军之后，征孔融，举高第，为侍御史。
English: He Jin thought it was right, and after he was appointed as a general, he sought out and promoted Kong Rong to the highest rank, and he became an attendant to the emperor.

古文：与中丞赵舍不同，托病归家。
现代文：因为与中丞赵舍不和，托病归家。
English: Because of discord with Chujo Zhao She, he returned home on sick leave.

古文：后辟司空掾，拜中军候。
现代文：后来被征为司空掾，授中军候。
English: Later, he was conscripted into the Air Force and was awarded the rank of lieutenant colonel.

古文：在职三日，迁虎贲中郎将。
现代文：在职三天，升虎贲中郎将。
English: After three days on the job, he was promoted to vice-commander.

古文：会董卓废立，融每因对答，辄有匡正之言。以忤卓旨，转为议郎。
现代文：遇董卓废少帝立献帝，孔融每因回答所问常有纠正他不对的地方，因此触犯了董卓的意旨，调任议郎。
English: In the case of Dong Zhuo's abolition of the young emperor and the establishment of the emperor, Kong Rong often corrected him for answering the questions, so he violated Dong Zhuo's intention and was transferred to Heiro.

古文：时黄巾寇数州，而北海最为贼冲，卓乃讽三府同举融为北海相。
现代文：当时黄巾侵犯好几个州，北海最为贼冲击的地方。董卓于是示意三府同举孔融做北海相。
English: At that time, the yellow scarf invaded several states, the place where the North Sea was most affected by thieves. Dong Zhuo then indicated that the three provinces should work together to form the North Sea.

古文：融到郡，收合士民，起兵讲武，驰檄飞翰，引谋州郡。
现代文：孔融到郡，召集士民，起兵讲武，既下檄文，又亲写书札，与州郡通声气，共同谋划。
English: Kong Rong went to the county, summoned the scholars and the people, raised an army to speak of martial arts, not only issued a written document, but also personally wrote a bookmark, communicated with the state and county, and jointly planned.

古文：贼张饶等群辈二十万众从冀州还，融逆击，为饶所败，乃收散兵保朱虚县。
现代文：贼张饶等二十万众从冀州返，孔融迎战，被张饶打败。于是收集散兵保卫朱虚县。
English: Zhang Rao, the thief, and other 200,000 people returned from Jizhou, and Kong Rong went to war and was defeated by Zhang Rao. Therefore, they gathered scattered soldiers to defend Zhuxu County.

古文：稍复鸠集吏民为黄巾所误者男女四万余人，更置城邑，立学校，表显儒术，荐举贤良郑玄、彭璆、邴原等。
现代文：又慢慢集结官吏百姓被黄巾所误的男女四万多人，再设置城邑，立学校，表扬儒术，推荐贤良郑玄、彭趚、邴原等人。
English: He also slowly gathered more than 40,000 men and women who were mistaken for officials and commoners by the yellow scarf, and then set up townships, established schools, praised Confucianism, and recommended the virtuous Zheng Xuan, Peng Yao, Xuan Yuan and others.

古文：郡人甄子然、临孝存知名早卒，融恨不及之，乃命配食县社。
现代文：郡人甄子然，临孝存，有名气，死得早，孔融以没有见到为遗憾。命配食县社。
English: County people Yan Ziran, Lin Xiao Cun, famous, died early, Kong Rong did not see it as a pity.

古文：其余虽一介之善，莫不加礼焉。
现代文：其余虽然只有一点微小的善行，也没有不以礼对待的。
English: The rest, though they have only done a little good, have not been treated with disrespect.

古文：郡人无后及四方游士有死亡者，皆为棺具而敛葬之。
现代文：郡人无后代及四方游士有死亡的，都做棺材埋葬。
English: The county people who had no descendants and the wanderers of the four directions who died were all buried in coffins.

古文：时，黄巾复来侵暴，融乃出屯都昌，为贼管亥所围。
现代文：这时，黄巾又来侵扰，孔融于是出驻都昌县，被贼管亥所围。
English: At this time, the yellow scarf came to intrude again, so Kong Rong was stationed in Duchang County and was surrounded by thieves.

古文：融逼急，乃遣东莱太史慈求救于平原相刘备。
现代文：孔融非常危险，派东莱太史慈求救于平原相刘备。
English: Kong Rong was in great danger, so he sent Donglai Taishi to seek help from Liu Bei on the plain.

古文：备惊曰： 孔北海乃复知天下有刘备邪？ 
现代文：刘备惊奇地说： 孔北海竟知道天下还有个刘备呢。 
English: Liu Bei said in surprise, "Kong Beihai actually knows that there is another Liu Bei in the world."

古文：即遣兵三千救之，贼乃散走。
现代文：马上派兵三千救援他，贼因散乱逃走了。
English: Immediately sent three thousand soldiers to rescue him, the thieves fled because of the confusion.

古文：时，袁、曹方盛，而融无所协附。
现代文：当时，袁绍、曹操势力很强盛，孔融不对谁依附。
English: At that time, the forces of Yuan Shao and Cao Cao were very strong, and Kong Rong did not attach himself to anyone.

古文：左丞祖者，称有意谋，劝融有所结纳。
现代文：左丞祖富有谋略，劝孔融与曹操、袁绍相结纳。
English: Zuojo's ancestor was full of strategies and advised Kong Rong to make a deal with Cao Cao and Yuan Shao.

古文：融知绍、操终图汉室，不欲与同，故怒而杀之。
现代文：孔融知道袁绍、曹操最终企图篡夺汉世，不想与他们搞在一块儿，一怒之下把左丞祖杀了。
English: Kong Rong knew that Yuan Shao and Cao Cao would eventually attempt to usurp the Han Dynasty, and did not want to be associated with them. In a fit of rage, he killed Zuo Rong.

古文：融负有高气，志在靖难，而才疏意广，迄无成功。
现代文：孔融自己以为有高尚的意气，立志平定国家的危难，因为才器疏阔，思想空乏，所以竟无成功。
English: Kong Rong thought that he had a noble spirit and was determined to pacify the country's crisis. However, he was unsuccessful because his talent was broad and his thoughts were empty.

古文：在郡六年，刘备表领青州刺史。
现代文：在郡六年，刘备上表荐他兼任青州刺史。
English: In the county for six years, Liu Bei recommended him to serve as the mayor of Qingzhou.

古文：建安元年，为袁谭所攻，自春至夏，战士所余裁数百人，流矢雨集，戈矛内接。
现代文：建安元年，被袁谭攻击，自春至夏，战士仅仅剩下几百人，流矢像雨一样射来，城内已经短兵相接。
English: In the first year of Jianan, it was attacked by Yuan Tan. From spring to summer, there were only a few hundred soldiers left. Streams of arrows came like rain, and the city was already short of soldiers.

古文：融隐几读书，谈笑自若。
现代文：孔融凭几读书，谈笑自若。
English: Kong Rong can read a few books and can talk and laugh freely.

古文：城夜陷，乃奔东山，妻、子为谭所虏。
现代文：晚上城陷，逃奔山东，妻子被袁谭所掳。
English: In the evening, the city fell, he fled to Shandong, and his wife was captured by Yuan Tan.

古文：及献帝都许，征融为将作大匠，迁少府。
现代文：到了献帝以许昌为都，征召孔融为将作大匠，升少府。
English: When it came to the dedication of the emperor, Xu Chang was chosen as the capital, and Kong Rong was conscripted as the grand master, and promoted to the minor prefecture.

古文：融乃独议曰： 日磾以上公之尊，秉髦节之使，衔命直指，宁辑东夏，而曲媚奸臣，为所牵率，章表署用，辄使首名，附下罔上，奸以事君。
现代文：每朝会皇上访问召对，孔融常引正定议，公卿大夫都不过挂个名而已。以前，太傅马日石单奉使山东，及至淮南，多次对袁术不满，袁术轻视他，侮辱他，夺了他的符节。马日石单自己忧愤已极，呕血而死。马日石单的丧还京师，朝廷想加礼葬，孔融独说： 马日石单凭上公的尊贵身份，持天子的髦节，奉命直接处理地方事务，安宁东夏，竟然取媚奸臣，被他所指使，所上章表署名补用，马日石单都是第一个。依附下级，欺骗朝廷，奸诈事君。
English: Every dynasty would invite the emperor to visit, and Kong Rong would often make the final decision. The noble doctor was just a name. In the past, Taifu Ma Rishi Shan was sent to Shandong and even to Huainan. He was repeatedly dissatisfied with Yuan Shuxi. Yuan Shuxi despised him, insulted him, and robbed him of his symbols. Ma Rishi Shan was so upset that he vomited blood and died. The death of Ma Rishi Shan brought him back to Beijing, and the court wanted to give him a ceremonial funeral. Kong Rong Du said: Ma Rishi Shan, with the noble status of Shangguo, held the fashionable festival of Tian

古文：昔国佐当晋军而不挠，宜僚临白刃而正色。
现代文：从前国佐敌晋军，不为所折服，宜僚当着白晃晃的刀而色不变。
English: From the former state of Saenger Jin army, do not be impressed, Yili in the face of the white-glittering knife and the same color.

古文：王室大臣，岂得以见胁为辞！
现代文：朝廷大臣难道可以受威胁为借口吗？
English: Can a minister of the court be threatened as an excuse?

古文：又袁术僭逆，非一朝一夕，日磾随从，周旋历岁。
现代文：又袁术越分叛逆，不是一朝一夕，与日石单随从，周旋历岁。
English: In addition, Yuan Shuxu became more and more rebellious, not overnight, and he followed the order of the sun and the moon, circling for years.

古文：《汉律》与罪人交关三日已上，皆应知情。
现代文：《汉律》：与罪人往来三天以上，都应该知道其情况。
English: "Han Lu": If you have been in contact with a criminal for more than three days, you should know the situation.

古文：《春秋》鲁叔孙得臣卒，以不发扬襄仲之罪，贬不书日。
现代文：《春秋》：鲁叔孙得臣死了，为了不张扬襄仲的罪贬，不写日子。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Lu Shushun Desheng died, in order not to publicize Xiangzhong's crime, do not write the date.

古文：郑人讨幽公之乱，斫子家之棺。
现代文：郑讨伐幽公，砍薄子家的棺材，因为他杀君的缘故。
English: Zheng chased Yugong and cut down the coffin of the Bo family because he had killed him.

古文：圣上哀矜旧臣，未忍追案，不宜加礼。 
现代文：皇上可怜旧臣，不忍追相案罪，这是很宽大了，不宜加礼。 
English: The emperor felt sorry for his former vassal and could not bear to prosecute him for the crime. This was a very lenient punishment and should not be commended.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷采纳了他的意见。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：时论者多欲复肉刑。
现代文：当时的舆论大都想恢复肉刑。
English: Public opinion at the time was overwhelmingly in favour of reinstating corporal punishment.

古文：融乃建议曰：古者敦，善否不别，吏端刑清，政无过失。
现代文：孔融建议说 ：古时候的人浑厚朴实，善恶不别，官吏正直，刑法清明，政治没有错误。
English: Kong Rong suggested, "In ancient times, people were thick and simple, there was no distinction between good and evil, officials were honest, criminal law was clear, and there were no mistakes in politics.

古文：百姓有罪，皆自取之。
现代文：老百姓有罪，都是自己的责任。
English: If the common people are guilty, it is their own responsibility.

古文：末世陵迟，风化坏乱，政挠其俗，法害其人。
现代文：末世衰微，风气教化坏乱，政治搅乱了风俗，国家的法律害了人民。
English: The last days are waning, the culture is degenerating into chaos, politics has disturbed the customs, and the laws of the country have harmed the people.

古文：故曰上失其道，民散久矣。而欲绳之以古刑，投之以残弃，非所谓与时消息者也。
现代文：所以说君主失为君主的道，老百姓就涣散不服，而想用古时候的刑法残废他们的肢体，这不是除恶长善的办法。
English: Therefore, to say that if the monarch loses the way of the monarch, the common people will be dissatisfied, and want to use the ancient criminal law to cripple their limbs, this is not a way to eliminate evil and good.

古文：纣斫朝涉之胫，天下谓为无道。
现代文：纣砍断早晨涉水者的小腿，天下的人都说纣暴虐无道。
English: When the dragonfly cut off the calf of the morning wader, people all over the world said that the dragonfly's cruelty was senseless.

古文：夫九牧之地，千八百君若各刖一人，是下常有千八百纣也。
现代文：从前，周有千八百国，九州之人，养一千八百个君，如果各砍掉一人的脚，下面就有一千八百个纣呢。
English: Once upon a time, Kyushu was surrounded by people from 1,800 countries, who raised 1,800 princes. If you cut off one person's foot, there would be 1,800 skeletons underneath.

古文：求俗休和，弗可得已。
现代文：想风俗纯美，是绝对做不到的。
English: It is absolutely impossible to make customs pure and beautiful.

古文：且被刑之人，虑不念生，志在思死，类多趋恶，莫复归正。
现代文：并且受了刑罚的人，有不想活的意念，有求死的决心。大多铤而走险，不再回归正道。
English: Moreover, those who have been punished never want to live again in their hearts, and with a single heart think of death, and most of them gradually deteriorate and can never return to the right path.

古文：夙沙乱齐，伊戾祸宋，赵高、英布，为世大患。
现代文：夙沙乱齐，伊戾祸宋，赵高、英布为世大患。
English: Tantrums are the scourge of society, and tanning, waxing, and waxing have become the scourges of society.

古文：不能止人遂为非也，适足绝人还为善耳。
现代文：不但不能禁止人做坏事，正好断绝了人为善的途径。
English: You can't stop people from eventually doing bad things.

古文：虽忠如鬻拳，信如卞和，智如孙膑，冤如巷伯，才如史迁，达如子政，一离刀锯，没世不齿。
现代文：虽忠如鬻拳，信如卞和，智如孙膑，冤如巷伯，才如史迁，达如子政，一遭刀锯，死了也为人耻笑。
English: Although loyalty is like Taekwondo, faith is like peace, wisdom is like Sun Yat-sen, misfortune is like the vicissitudes of history, and achievement is like sonship, it is a shame for a person to die after being cut with a knife.

古文：是太甲之思诵，穆公之霸秦，南睢之骨立，卫武之《初筵》，陈汤之都赖，魏尚之守边，无所复施也。
现代文：所以太甲的的思念常道，秦穆公之使秦国霸西戎，南睢之骨立，卫武之《初筵》饮酒悔过，陈汤之矫制发兵，斩郅支单于都赖水上，魏尚之守边，等等，不用再举了。
English: Therefore, there is no need to bring up Taiga's nostalgia for the common way, Qin Mu Gong's making Qin dominate Xirong, Nan Xun's skeleton, Wei Wu's drinking repentance in the "First Day of Spring," Chen Tang's arbitrary dispatch of troops, Zeng Xizhong's support on the waters of Turai, Wei Shang's defense of the border, and so on.

古文：汉开改恶之路，凡为此也。
现代文：汉朝广开改恶之路，大都是这样。
English: It is for this reason that Lian Suo opened the road to change.

古文：故明德之君，远度深惟，弃短就长，不荀革其政者也。
现代文：所以聪明有德的君王，深思远虑，弃短取长，政治上的措施是不随便进行改革的。 
English: Therefore, the wise and virtuous monarchs are thoughtful, abandon shortcomings and take advantage of strengths, and political measures are not arbitrarily reformed.

古文：朝廷善之，卒不改焉。
现代文：朝廷认为他的建议很好，终于没有恢复肉刑。
English: The Imperial Court thought this was a good idea and did not change it in the end.

古文：是时，荆州牧刘表不供职贡，多行僭伪，遂乃郊祀天地，拟斥乘舆。
现代文：这时，荆州牧刘表不向朝廷进贡，做了不少逾越法度不安本分的事情，居然郊祀天地，拟指皇上。
English: At this time, the Jingzhou Liu watch did not pay tribute to the imperial court, did a lot of things that exceeded the law and were not responsible, and actually worshiped heaven and earth in the suburbs, intending to refer to the emperor.

古文：诏书班下其事。
现代文：诏书把他宣示天下。
English: The imperial edict proclaimed him to the world.

古文：融上疏曰：窃闻领荆州牧刘表桀逆放恣，所为不轨，至乃郊祭天地，拟仪社稷。
现代文：孔融上疏说 ：听说荆州牧刘表凶狠忤逆，行事不守礼制，甚至郊祀天地，拟仪如皇上。
English: Kong Rong Shang So said: It is said that Jingzhou herdsmen are fierce and rebellious, do not observe the etiquette, and even worship heaven and earth in the suburbs, imitating the emperor.

古文：虽昏僭恶极，罪不容诛，至于国体，宜且讳之。
现代文：虽然逾制越分，罪大恶极，死有余辜。但就国家大体而言，应当暂时不要公开。
English: Although over-control is excessive, the crime is extremely evil, and the death is more than guilty. However, as far as the country is concerned, it should not be made public for the time being.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：万乘至重，天王至尊，身为圣躬，国为神器，陛级县远，禄位限绝，犹天之不可阶，日用之不可逾也。
现代文：国家至上，皇上至尊。身是圣哲之躬，国家是神器。群臣如陛，陛级悬远，禄位限绝，这有如天之不可由阶而升，日月的不得而逾越一样。
English: The country is supreme, the emperor is supreme. The body is the bow of a sage, the country is a sacred artifact. The ministers are like the majesty, the majesty level is far away, and the rank is limited, which is like the sky can not be raised from the level, and the sun and moon can not be exceeded.

古文：每有一竖臣，辄云图之，若形之四方，非所以杜塞邪萌。
现代文：偶有一个小臣，就要处理，并使四方都知道，这不是堵塞邪萌的办法。
English: If there is a junior minister, it is necessary to deal with it and let all parties know that this is not a way to block the evil.

古文：愚谓虽有重戾，必宜隐忍。
现代文：我以为虽有重大的罪过，也一定要隐忍。
English: I thought that even though I had committed a serious sin, I must be patient.

古文：贾谊所谓 掷鼠忌器 ，盖谓此也。
现代文：贾谊说： 掷鼠忌器 就是这个意思。
English: Jia Yi said, "This is what it means to throw a mousetrap."

古文：是以齐兵次楚，唯责包茅；王师败绩，不书晋人。
现代文：所以齐兵伐楚，只责备楚国不朝贡，王师败绩，不说为晋所败。
English: Therefore, Qi soldiers fought against Chu, only blaming Chu for not paying tribute, and Wang Shi for his defeat, not saying that he was defeated by Jin.

古文：前以露袁术之罪，今复下刘表之事，是使跛牂欲窥高岸，天险可得而登也。
现代文：以前揭露袁术的罪过，现在又把刘表的事宣扬开来，这是使瘸腿的母羊窥视高岸，认为天险也可上啊！
English: Previously exposing Yuan Shuxu's sins, and now promoting Liu Biao's case, this is to make the lame ewe peep at the high bank and think that the heavenly peril can also be climbed!

古文：案表跋扈，擅诛列侯，遏绝诏命，断盗贡篚，招呼元恶，以自营卫，专为群逆，主萃渊萎。郜鼎在庙，章孰甚焉！
现代文：查刘表跋扈不臣，杀害列侯，阻止诏命不行，断盗贡篚，召集大恶，保卫自己，寓藏天下的叛逆坏蛋，郜鼎纳在太庙，没有比这更彰著的！
English: There is nothing more conspicuous than to investigate rebellious vassals, to kill vassals, to stop imperial edicts from being carried out, to cut off the tribute of thieves, to summon great evil, to defend oneself, to harbor the world's traitorous villains, and to receive them in the Great Temple!

古文：桑落瓦解，其势可见。
现代文：桑落瓦解，形势自见。
English: With the collapse of Sanlu, the situation is self-evident.

古文：臣愚以为宜隐郊祀之事，以崇国防。
现代文：所以我认为应当隐瞒郊祀这件事，以维护国体。 
English: Therefore, I think that the suburban worship should be concealed in order to preserve the national identity.

古文：五年，南阳王冯、东海王祗薨，帝伤其早殁，欲为修四时之祭，以访于融。
现代文：五年，南阳王冯、东海王祗死了。献帝悲伤他俩死得太早了，想为他们规定四时致祭，为此，献帝问孔融。
English: Five years later, King Feng of Nanyang and King Yao of the East Sea died. Emperor Xian was saddened that they both died too early, and wanted to set a four o'clock offering for them. To this end, Emperor Xian asked Kong Rong.

古文：融对曰：圣恩敦睦，盛时增思，悼二王之灵，发哀愍之诏，稽度前典，以正礼制。
现代文：孔融回答说 ：皇上仁厚，感时增思，哀悼二王的魂灵发布哀怜的诏章，考查审度从前的典章制度，订正礼制。
English: Kong Rong replied, "The emperor is benevolent, he thinks more deeply when he feels, he mourns the souls of the two kings, issues a sad imperial decree, examines the previous system of awards, and revises the etiquette.

古文：窃观故事，前梁怀王、临江愍王、齐哀王、临淮怀王并薨无后，同产昆弟，即景、武、昭、明四帝是也，未闻前朝修立祭祀。
现代文：我看历史，从前梁怀王、临江愍王、齐哀王、临淮怀王都死而无后代，同胞兄弟，就是景帝、武帝、昭帝、明帝四帝，没有听说前朝为他们修祭祀。
English: I look at history. Once upon a time, King Liang Huai, King Linjiang, King Qiemo, and King Linhuaihuai all died without descendants. Their brothers and sisters, the four emperors Jing, Wu, Zhao, and Ming, did not hear of the previous dynasty performing sacrifices for them.

古文：若临时所施，则不列传纪。
现代文：如果是临时的，就不要列入传纪。
English: If it is temporary, it should not be included in the transmission of discipline.

古文：臣愚以为诸在冲，圣慈哀悼，礼同成人，加以号谥者，宜称上恩，祭祀礼毕，而后绝之。
现代文：我不懂事，认为他们都在幼小的年龄死去，皇上哀痛，以成人礼加以谥号，这应遵照您的意思办理，祭祀结束，以后就不要再行。
English: I do not understand, I think that they all died at a young age, the emperor mourns, and they are given a nickname with a rite of passage. This should be done according to your will, the sacrifice is over, and it should not be done again.

古文：至于一岁之限，不合礼意，又违先帝已然之法，所未敢处。
现代文：至于一岁为期，不合礼意，又违背了先帝既定的法制，这是不合适的。 
English: As for the one-year period, it is not appropriate, and it violates the legal system established by the former emperor.

古文：初，曹操攻屠鄴城，袁氏妇子多见侵略，而操子丕私纳袁熙妻甄氏。
现代文：先时，曹操进攻邺城屠杀邺城居民，袁绍家的妇人女子多被掳掠。曹操的儿子曹丕私自娶了袁熙的妻子甄氏。
English: Earlier, Cao Cao attacked and massacred the residents of Lucheng. Most of the women and children of Yuan Shao's family were abducted. Cao Cao's son Cao Bing married Yuan Xi's wife, Zhen.

古文：融乃与操书，称 武王伐纣，以妲己赐周公 。
现代文：孔融写信给曹操，说： 武王伐纣，把妲己赏赐给周公。 
English: Kong Rong wrote a letter to Cao Cao, saying, "Wu Wang has cut the straw and given the straw to Zhou Gong.

古文：操不悟，后问出何经典。
现代文：曹操不明白，后来问孔融这出于何经何典。
English: Cao Cao didn't understand, and later asked Kong Rong why and from what text.

古文：对曰： 以今度之，想当然耳。 
现代文：孔融答说 ：按现在的事情量一量，想一定的呢。 
English: Kong Rong replied: According to the current state of affairs, it is a certain amount.

古文：后操讨乌桓，又嘲之曰： 大将军远征，萧条海外。昔肃慎不贡楛矢，丁零盗苏武牛羊，可并案也。 
现代文：后来曹操讨伐乌桓，孔融又讥笑他说： 大将军远征，萧条海外，从前肃慎不进贡木苦矢，丁零偷盗苏武的牛羊，可以一并讨伐啊！ 
English: Later, Cao Cao fought Wuhuan, and Kong Rong also mocked him, saying, "The great general's expedition, the depression overseas, the formerly scrupulous not paying tribute, Ding Zi stealing Su Wu's cattle and sheep, can be fought together!"

古文：时，年饥兵兴，操表制酒禁，融频书争之，多侮慢之辞。
现代文：当时，饥荒战乱，曹操上表请禁酒，孔融多次写信给曹操，认为不要禁酒，而且词多侮慢。
English: At that time, famine and war were raging, and Cao Cao was on the table asking for a ban on alcohol. Kong Rong wrote to Cao Cao many times, saying that he did not want to ban alcohol, and his words were often insulting.

古文：既见操雄诈渐著，数不能堪，故发辞偏宕，多致乖忤。
现代文：已经看到曹操奸雄诡诈，渐渐显露，多不能忍受，所以说话偏激，常常触犯了曹操。
English: He had already seen Cao Cao's treachery and deceitfulness gradually revealed, and he couldn't bear it. Therefore, he spoke out of turn and often offended Cao Cao.

古文：又尝奏宜准古王畿之制，千里寰内，不以封建诸侯。
现代文：又曾经上奏认为应当遵照古时京师的体制，千里以内，不封建诸侯。
English: In addition, it was once proposed that the system of the ancient capital division should be followed, with no feudal lordships within a thousand miles.

古文：操疑其所论建渐广，益惮之。
现代文：曹操怀疑他所说渐广，更加害怕他。
English: Cao Cao doubted what he said and was even more afraid of him.

古文：然以融名重天下，外相容忍，而潜怨正议，虑鲠大业。
现代文：然而，因为孔融名重天下，表面上装着容忍，暗中却嫉忌他的正确的议论，怕阻抗他的大业。
English: However, because Kong Rong Rong's reputation is so important, on the surface they are tolerant, but secretly they are jealous of his correct arguments and are afraid to oppose his great cause.

古文：山阳郗虑承望风旨，以微法奏免融官。
现代文：山阴郗虑揣摩曹操的心事，按蔑视国法奏免孔融的官。
English: Shanyin anxiously speculated about Cao Cao's state of mind, and according to the contempt of the state law, the official was exempted.

古文：因显明仇怨，操故书激厉融曰：
现代文：为了显明雠怨，曹操故意挑拨孔融。
English: In order to show the grudge, Cao Cao deliberately provoked Kong Rong.

古文：盖闻唐、虞之朝，有克让之臣，故麟凤来而颂声作也。
现代文：说： 曾经听说唐、虞时代，有能让的臣子，所以麟凤飞来，颂声大作。
English: He said, "I once heard that in the Tang and Yu dynasties, there were courtiers who were able to let go, so Lin Feng flew in and made a big celebration.

古文：后世德薄，犹有杀身为君，破国为国。
现代文：后世德薄，但也还有杀身以卫君，破家以为国的。
English: Future generations will be less virtuous, but there will also be those who kill themselves to defend the emperor, and those who break up the family to fight for the country.

古文：及至其敝，睚眦之怨必仇，一餐之惠必报。故晁错念国，遘祸于袁盎；屈平悼楚，受谮于椒、兰；彭宠倾乱，起自朱浮；邓禹威损，失于宗、冯。
现代文：及至衰敝，微小的怨恨，一定成仇，一顿饭的恩惠，一定要报答，所以晁错念国，由于结祸于袁盎，屈平怀念楚国，因椒兰进馋言诬陷他，彭宠谋反，因朱浮的诽谤，邓禹威损，失于宗钦、冯暗的争权。
English: At the time of decline, a small grudge will surely become a vendetta, and a meal's favor must be repaid. Therefore, he mistakenly thought of the country, because of the misfortune of Yuan Ang, Qu Ping missed the country of Chu, because of the slander of Jia Lan Jin, Peng Ji conspired to rebel, because of Zhu Fu's slander, Deng Yu was defeated, and lost to Zong Qin and Feng An's competition for power.

古文：由此言之，喜怒怨爱，祸福所困，可不慎与！
现代文：这样说来，喜怒怨爱，祸福之因，难道不应当谨慎吗？
English: So, shouldn't we be careful about taking pleasure, anger, resentment, and love as the cause of misfortune or good fortune?

古文：昔廉、蔺小国之臣，犹能相下；寇、贾仓卒武夫，屈节崇好；光武不问伯升之怨；齐侯不疑射钩之虏。
现代文：从前廉颇、蔺相如小国的臣子，尚且能够相让，寇、贾乱世的武夫，彼此谦让崇好；光武不记杀害哥哥伯升的仇怨，齐侯不疑射钩敌人。
English: In the past, the courtiers of a small country, who were honest and courteous, were able to make concessions to each other. The warriors of the Qo and Jia eras of chaos respected and respected each other. Guangwu did not remember the grudge of killing his brother Bo Sheng, and they did not hesitate to shoot at the enemy.

古文：夫立大操者，岂累细故哉！
现代文：那些立大节的人，难道会被一些细故所累吗？
English: Could it be that those who established the festival are tired of the details?

古文：往闻二君有执法之平，以为小介，当收旧好；而怨毒渐积，志相危害，闻之怃然，中夜而起。
现代文：以前听说两位执法虽平，但在私情有些芥蒂，应当修好如旧，而你们的怨恨却渐积渐多，直至互相危害，我听了非常难过，半夜就起床了。
English: Previously, I heard that although the two law enforcement officers were on an even keel, there were some thorns in their personal relationship, which should be repaired as before, but your resentment gradually accumulated until they harmed each other. I was very sad to hear this, and I got up in the middle of the night.

古文：昔国家东迁，文举盛叹鸿豫名实相副，综达经学，出于郑玄，又明《司马法》，鸿豫亦称文举奇逸博闻，诚怪今者与始相违。
现代文：以前国家东迁，文举盛称鸿豫名实相副，精通经学，出于郑玄，又明晓《司马法》。鸿豫也称文举奇逸传闻，我很奇怪现在你们与过去相反。
English: Before the country's eastward migration, Wenju Sheng said that Hongyu was true to his name, well-versed in classics, from Zheng Xuan, and knew "Sima Fa." Hongyu also said that Wenju was strange and rumored. I am surprised that you are now the opposite of the past.

古文：孤与文举既非旧好，又于鸿豫亦无恩纪，然愿人之相美，不乐人之相伤，是以区区思协欢好。
现代文：我与文举既不是老朋友，又于鸿豫也没有什么恩谊，然而愿人相好，不愿人有伤和睦，所以衷心希望你们协和欢好。
English: I am not an old friend of Wenqiu, nor do I have any friendship with Hongyu. However, I would like to get along with people and do not want people to hurt the harmony, so I sincerely hope that you will be happy together.

古文：又知二君群小所构，孤为人臣，进不能风化海内，退不能建德和人，然抚养战士，杀身为国，破浮华交会之徒，计有余矣。
现代文：又晓得二君是被小人离间，作为人臣，进不能风化海内，退不能建德和人，然而抚养战士，亲身为国，对付浮华交结之徒，我的计谋多着呢。 
English: I also know that the two princes were separated by a villain. As a vassal, I cannot go into the sea to change the weather, and I cannot go back to build morality and people. However, I have more plans to raise soldiers, to be a country myself, and to deal with flashy people.

古文：融报曰：猥惠书教，告所不逮。
现代文：孔融报书说： 蒙来书赐教，告我所不及。
English: Confucius said, "I am not able to learn as much as I have been taught by books."

古文：融与鸿豫州里比郡，知之最早。
现代文：我与鸿豫州里邻郡，很早就知道他。
English: I've known him for a long time, as I'm from the neighboring county of Hongyuzhou.

古文：虽尝陈其功美，欲以厚于见私，信于为国，不求其覆过掩恶，有罪望不坐也。
现代文：虽然曾经说他的功业美好，不过想使他多看到自己的不足，忠信为国，不意他竟隐过掩恶，有罪不以为罪。
English: Although he once said that his work was good, but he wanted him to see more of his own shortcomings and be loyal to the country, he inadvertently concealed his evil and did not feel guilty.

古文：前者黜退，欢欣受之。
现代文：以前我遭到废退，欣然接受。
English: I've been passed over before and I've accepted it.

古文：昔赵宣子朝登韩厥，夕被其戮，喜而求贺。
现代文：从前赵宣子早上升韩厥的官，晚上韩厥就杀了赵宣子的使人，赵宣子终以礼待他，高兴地要别人向他道贺，说 从此我可以免罪了。 
English: Once upon a time, Zhao Xuan Zi rose to the rank of Han Jue early in the morning, and in the evening, Han Jue killed Zhao Xuan Zi's man. Zhao Xuan Zi finally treated him with courtesy, and happily asked others to congratulate him, saying, "From now on, I can be exonerated."

古文：况无彼人之功，而敢枉当官之平哉！
现代文：何况没有韩厥的功，而敢枉当官之平呢？
English: What's more, without the merits of Han Jue, how dare he become a high-ranking official?

古文：忠非三闾，智非晁错，窃位为过，免罪为幸。乃使余论远闻，所以惭惧也。
现代文：没有屈原的忠，错的智，窃位就是罪过，免罪是幸，而竟使一些多余的议论，让您得知，这是我引为惭愧恐惧的。
English: There is no Qu Yuan's loyalty, wrong wisdom, stealing is a sin, exoneration is a blessing, but to make some superfluous discussions, let you know, this is what I am ashamed of and afraid of.

古文：朱、彭、寇、贾，为世壮士，爱恶相攻，能为国忧。
现代文：朱、彭、寇、贾为世的壮士，爱恶相攻，是为国忧。
English: Zhu, Peng, Kou and Jia are the heroes of the world. They love and hate each other, and they are worried about the country.

古文：至于轻弱薄劣，犹昆虫之相啮，适足还害其身，诚无所至也。
现代文：至于轻弱薄劣，正如众虫的相咬，恰恰害了自己，没有别的什么。
English: As for the weak and feeble, like the gnashing of gnats, they have only harmed themselves, nothing else.

古文：晋侯嘉其臣所争者大，而师旷以为不如心竞。
现代文：晋侯嘉奖其臣所争之大，而师旷则以为不如心竞竞。
English: Jin Hwang praised his vassal as the greatest, but Shiguang thought it was not as good as his heart.

古文：性既迟缓，与人无伤，虽出胯下之负，榆次之辱，不如贬毁之于己，犹蚊虻之一过也。
现代文：本性迟钝，与人无伤，虽如韩信受了胯下之耻，荆轲受了榆次之辱，也不知贬毁对自己的严重性，还认为不辽蚊虻一过，是无所谓的。
English: His nature is obtuse, and he is not hurt by others. Although Han Xin suffered the shame of being humiliated, and Jing Yi suffered the humiliation of being humiliated, he did not know how to belittle the seriousness of himself, and thought that it did not matter if a mosquito passed by.

古文：子产谓人心不相似，或矜势者，欲以取胜为荣，不念宋人待四海之洛，大炉不欲令酒酸也。
现代文：子产说人心不相同，有的重视权势，想取胜为光荣，没有想宋人接待四海的客人。大钅卢本不想使酒酸嘛。
English: Offspring said that people's hearts are different, some people attach importance to power, want to win for glory, and do not want Song people to receive guests from all over the world. Dahu Lu did not want to sour the wine.

古文：至于屈穀巨瓠，坚而无窃，当以无用罪之耳。
现代文：至于屈的大瓦壶，坚硬无窍，应当处以无用之罪啊。
English: As for the bent large earthenware pot, it is hard and has no holes, so it should be punished with the crime of uselessness.

古文：它者奉遵严教，不敢失坠。
现代文：其他当谨遵严教，不敢有失。
English: Others should earnestly follow the strict teachings and dare not make mistakes.

古文：郗为故吏，融所推进。
现代文：郗虑是故吏，我所推举。
English: I'm not worried about the old guard, I'm promoting from within.

古文：赵衰之拔穀，不轻公叔之升臣也。
现代文：赵衰提拔谷阝鄃，不轻公叔升臣。
English: Zhao Sheng was promoted to the rank of grand vassal, and his uncle was promoted to the rank of minister.

古文：知同其爱，训诲发中。
现代文：知道您我都爱护郗虑，训诲出自衷心。
English: Knowing that you and I both love and care for each other, the teachings come from the heart.

古文：虽懿伯之忌，犹不得念，况恃旧交，而欲自外于贤吏哉！
现代文：虽有懿伯之忌，尚且不得念及，况恃旧交而欲自外于贤吏呢？
English: Although there is the death of his uncle, it is still not worth mentioning. What if he is an old friend and wants to become a scholar?

古文：辄布腹心，修好如初。
现代文：专布腹心，修好如初。
English: The repair is as good as the first time.

古文：苦言至意，终身诵之。
现代文：您的苦言至意，终身诵之不忘。 
English: Your bitter words are to my liking, and I will never forget them.

古文：岁余，复拜太中大夫。
现代文：一年多，再任为太中大夫。
English: More than a year later, he was reappointed to the post of Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：必宽容少忌，好士，喜诱益后进。
现代文：本性宽容不猜忌，好士，喜欢诱导提拔年轻人。
English: Natural tolerance, not suspicious, good man, likes to induce and promote young people.

古文：及退闲职，宾客日盈其门。
现代文：及退任闲职，宾客天天满门。
English: and retire from idle duty, the door is full of guests every day.

古文：常叹曰： 坐上客恒满，尊中酒不空，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：常叹说： 坐上客恒满，木尊中酒不空，我就无忧了。 
English: He often sighed, "If the number of guests is always full, and there is always wine in the wood, then I have no worries."

古文：与蔡邕素善，邕卒后，有虎贲士貌类于邕，融每酒酣，引与同坐，曰： 虽无老成人，且有典刑。 
现代文：与蔡邕很好，蔡邕死后，有个虎贲士相貌有点像蔡邕，孔融每次喝足了酒，招他与同坐，说： 虽然没有了老成人，且喜还有典型。 
English: He got along well with Cai Xuan. After Cai Xuan's death, there was a vixen who looked a bit like Cai Xuan. Every time Kong Rong drank enough wine, he invited him to sit with him and said: Although there is no old adult, there is still a typical Xi.

古文：融闻人之善，若出诸己，言有可采，必演而成之，面告其短，而退称所长，荐达贤士，多所奖进，知而未言，以为己过，故海内英俊皆信服之。
现代文：孔融听说人家有善行，好像自己的一样，言语有可采取的，一定敷衍成之，告诉人家所不足的地方，称赞他的长处。推荐贤士，奖励进取。如果他知道的，没有说，认为是自己的过错，所以海内英俊之士，都信服他。
English: Kong Rong heard that people have good deeds, like his own, words can be taken, must be perfunctory, tell people where they are lacking, praise his strengths. Recommend sages, reward enterprising. If he knows, does not say, thinks it is his fault, so the handsome people in the sea are convinced of him.

古文：曹操既积嫌忌，而郗虑复构成其罪，遂令丞相军谋祭酒路粹枉状奏融曰：少府孔融，昔在北海，见王室不静，而招合徒众，欲规不轨，云 我大圣之后，而见灭于宋，有天下者，何必卯金刀 。
现代文：曹操既积满了一肚子的猜疑忌妒，郗虑又诬陷其罪，于是指使丞相军谋祭酒路粹冤枉上状奏孔融说： 少府孔融，从前在北海，看见王室不安宁，招集徒众，图谋不轨，说： 我大圣之后，被宋所灭。有天下的，何必一定是卯金刀。 
English: Cao Cao not only had a belly full of suspicion, jealousy, and misgivings, but also framed him for the crime, so he ordered the prime minister's army to plan a sacrificial wine road to wrongfully slander Kong Rong, saying: Shao Fu Kong Rong, once in the North Sea, saw that the royal family was restless, gathered disciples, and plotted evil, saying: After my great saint, I was destroyed by Song. If there is a world, why must it be a golden sword.

古文：及与孙权使语，谤讪朝廷。
现代文：后来与孙权的使者说话，诽谤朝廷。
English: Later, he spoke with Sun Quan's emissary and slandered the imperial court.

古文：又融为九列，不遵朝仪，秃巾微行，唐突官掖。
现代文：又孔融位在九卿，不遵守朝廷的礼仪，不戴帻微行，唐突宫掖。
English: In addition, Kong Rong is in the nine nobles, does not abide by the etiquette of the imperial court, does not wear the shackles, and does not wear the palace robes.

古文：又前与白衣祢衡跌荡放言，云 父之于子，当有何亲？
现代文：又以前与没有出仕的祢衡无所检点地乱说什么 父亲与儿子，有什么亲？
English: And what did You Heng, who did not attend the ceremony, say in an undisciplined manner? What is the relationship between a father and his son?

古文：论其本意，实为情欲发耳。
现代文：论其本意，实为情欲而已。
English: On its own terms, it's really just lust.

古文：子之于母，亦复奚为？
现代文：儿子与母亲，又是怎么回事呢？
English: Son and mother, what's going on?

古文：譬如寄物缶中，出则离矣 。
现代文：譬如寄物缶瓦中，出来就分离了 。
English: For example, if there is a foreign object in a tin tile, it will be separated when it comes out.

古文：既而与衡更相赞扬。衡谓融曰： 仲尼不死。 
现代文：不久，与祢衡更相标榜，祢衡说孔融是 仲尼不死 。
English: Not long after, he and Nehei made a similar announcement, with Nehei saying that Kong Rong is "immortal."

古文：融答曰： 颜回复生。 
现代文：孔融回答说： 颜回再生。 
English: Kong Rong replied, "The regeneration of the anus."

古文：大逆不道，宜极重诛。
现代文：大逆不道，应当予以重诛。 
English: It is an act of high treason and should be severely punished.

古文：书奏，下狱弃市。
现代文：书奏，判处弃市。
English: Shosei was sentenced to leave the city.

古文：时年五十六。
现代文：时年五十六。
English: He was fifty-six years old.

古文：妻、子皆被诛。
现代文：妻子儿女都被诛。
English: His wife and children were all abducted.

古文：初，女年七岁，男年九岁，以其幼弱得全，寄它舍。
现代文：先，女儿年七岁，男年九岁，因都幼弱，得保全。寄在人家。
English: First, a seven-year-old girl and a nine-year-old boy, because they are both young and weak, have to be preserved. They are sent to someone's home.

古文：二子方弈棋，融被收而不动。
现代文：二子下棋，孔融被捕，不为之动。
English: The two sons play chess, Kong Rong is arrested and does not move.

古文：左右曰： 父执而不起，何也？ 
现代文：左右的人说： 父亲被逮捕，不起，为什么？ 
English: People around me said, "My father was arrested, it's terrible, why?"

古文：答曰： 安有巢毁而卵不破乎！ 
现代文：答说 ：哪里有巢毁坏了卵不破的呢？ 
English: Answer: Where is the nest that has been destroyed but the eggs remain unbroken?

古文：主人有遗肉汁，男渴而饮之。
现代文：主人有遗肉汁的，男孩口渴喝了。
English: The owner had left gravy, and the boy drank it because he was thirsty.

古文：女曰： 今日之祸，岂得久活，何赖知肉味乎？ 
现代文：女孩说： 今天这样的祸，难道能够久活，还要知道肉味吗？ 
English: The girl said, "With today's calamity, can one live long and still know the taste of meat?"

古文：兄号泣而止。
现代文：哥号哭而止饮。
English: The elder brother cried and stopped drinking.

古文：或言于曹操，遂尽杀之。
现代文：有人对曹操说了，于是决定都杀掉。
English: Someone told Cao Cao, so he decided to kill them all.

古文：及收至，谓兄曰： 若死者有知，得见父母，岂非至愿！ 
现代文：等到捉拿的人到，女的对哥哥说 ：如果死者有知，得见父母，难道不是我们最大的愿望！ 
English: When the men arrived to arrest her, the woman said to her brother: "If the dead man knew, wouldn't it be our greatest wish to see our parents?

古文：乃延颈就刑，颜色不变，莫不伤之。
现代文：于是引颈就刑，颜色不变，没有人不为之悲伤的。
English: As a result, he was sentenced to death by beheading, his color unchanged, and no one was not saddened by it.

古文：初，京兆人脂习元升，与融相善，每戒融刚直。
现代文：以前，京兆人脂习、元升，与孔融相好，曾戒孔融刚直。
English: In the past, Jingzhao people, such as Zhixi and Yuan Sheng, had a good relationship with Kong Rong, and had forbidden Kong Rong to be upright.

古文：及被害，许下莫敢收者，习往抚尸曰： 文举舍我死，吾何用生为？ 
现代文：及被害，许昌没有敢收尸的，脂习去抚尸说： 文举丢下我死了，我也不再活了。 
English: When Xu Chang didn't dare to collect the body after the accident, Zhixi went to touch the corpse and said, "I died when I left Wenju, and I won't live anymore."

古文：操闻大怒，将收习杀之，后得赦出。
现代文：曹操听说大怒，准备收捕脂习杀害，后得赦，释放出来。
English: Cao Cao heard of the great anger, prepared to arrest and kill Zhixi, and was later pardoned and released.

古文：魏文帝深好融文辞，每叹曰： 杨、班俦也。 
现代文：魏文帝最爱孔融的文辞，每每叹说： 扬雄、班固一流。 
English: Emperor Wei Wendi loved the words of Kong Rong the most, and sighed every time: Yang Xiong, Ban Gu first-class.

古文：募天下有上融文章者，辄赏以金、帛。
现代文：招募天下有送上孔融文章的，赏以金帛。
English: Recruitment Anyone who submits an article on Kong Rong will be rewarded with a gold ingot.

古文：所著诗、颂、碑文、论议、六言、策文、表、檄、教令、书记凡二十五篇。
现代文：孔融所著诗、颂、碑文、论议、六言、策文、表、檄、教令、书记共二十五篇。
English: There are a total of twenty-five poems, odes, inscriptions, discussions, six sayings, sermons, tables, sermons, edicts and secretaries written by Kong Rong.

古文：文帝以习有栾布之节，加中散大夫。
现代文：文帝认为脂习有栾布的大节，加中散大夫。
English: Emperor Wen believed that the fat habit had a large section of the braid, and added a Chinese doctor.

古文：论曰：昔谏大夫郑是有言： 山有猛兽者，藜藿为之不采。 
现代文：史官评论说：从前谏大夫郑昌有句话说： 山有猛兽，藜藿也没有人敢采。 
English: The historian commented, "Once upon a time, Dr. Zheng Chang said, 'There are ferocious beasts in the mountains, but no one dares to pluck them.'

古文：是以孔父正色，不容弑虐之谋；平仲立朝，有纾盗齐之望。
现代文：所以孔父正色立朝，没有人过而致难于其君，晏平仲在朝中，田成子不敢弑齐君而盗其国。
English: Therefore, Confucius' father established the dynasty in a positive way, and no one caused difficulties for his prince by doing so. Zou Pingzhong was in the middle of the dynasty, and Tian Chengzi did not dare to steal his country by stealing his prince.

古文：若夫文举之高志直情，其足以动义概而忤雄心。
现代文：至于孔文举的高洁志行与坦率情怀，它完全可以鼓动义气而抵触奸雄之心。
English: As for the noble aspiration and frank feelings mentioned by Kong Wenjie, it can fully encourage the spirit of righteousness and resist the heart of the villain.

古文：故使移鼎之迹，事隔于人存；代终之规，启机于身后也。
现代文：所以曹操在世，不敢篡汉，代汉而兴的却是死后的曹丕。
English: So while Cao Cao was alive, he did not dare to usurp Han. However, it was Cao Pi who revived Han after his death.

古文：夫严气正性，覆折而己。
现代文：严气正性，不过倾覆摧折而已。
English: Strictly positive, but the overturn is just a setback.

古文：岂有员园委屈，可以每其生哉！懔懔焉，皓皓焉，其与琨玉秋霜比质可也。
现代文：难道可以委曲求全以贪生吗？严严整整，明光洁白，孔融的品质可与白玉秋霜相比啊！
English: Is it possible to be greedy for life? Strict and tidy, bright and white, the quality of the pores can be compared to the white jade autumn frost!

古文：荀彧字文若，颍川颍阴人，朗陵令淑之孙也。
现代文：◆荀彧传，荀彧字文若，颍川颍阴人，是朗陵县令荀淑的孙子。
English: ◆ According to legend, the grandson of Lanling County's Grand Empress Min Sook.

古文：父绲，为济南相。
现代文：父亲荀绲，任济南相。
English: His father was appointed Minister of Jinan Province.

古文：绲畏惮宦官，乃为彧娶中常侍唐衡女。
现代文：荀绲害怕宦官，于是为荀彧娶了中常侍唐衡的女儿。
English: He was afraid of eunuchs, so he married Tang Heng's daughter.

古文：彧以少有才名，故得免于讥议。
现代文：荀彧由于年轻是就有才名，所以才免于被嘲笑。
English: Because young people have talent, they are immune to ridicule.

古文：南阳何颙名知人，见彧而异之，曰： 王佐才也。 
现代文：南阳人何颙号称能了解人，见到荀彧认为他奇异不凡，说： 这是帝王的辅佐之才啊。 
English: Nanyang man He Xuan claimed to be able to understand people. When he saw Xuan, he thought he was extraordinary and said, "This is the emperor's assistant talent."

古文：中平六年，举孝廉，再迁亢父令。
现代文：中平六年，被荐举为孝廉，又任亢父县令。
English: In the sixth year of Zhongping, he was recommended to be promoted to Xiaolian, and he was also appointed as the county magistrate of Yifu County.

古文：董卓之乱，弃官归乡里。
现代文：董卓作乱时，弃官回到家乡。
English: When Dong Zhuo started a riot, he resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：同郡韩融时将宗亲千余家，避乱密西山中。
现代文：同郡的韩融当时带着宗族千余家，在密县西山中避乱。
English: At that time, Han Rong of the same county took more than a thousand families of his clan to escape the turmoil in Xishan County, Miyagi Prefecture.

古文：彧谓父老曰： 颍川，四战之地也。
现代文：荀彧对父老们说： 颍川是战争必经之地。
English: Zou said to his parents: Zou River is a place where war is inevitable.

古文：天下有变，常为兵冲。
现代文：天下有变，常是用兵之处。
English: The world is changing, and it is often a place where soldiers are used.

古文：密虽小固，不足以大难，宜亟避之。 
现代文：密县虽说稍微保险，但不足以抵御大的灾难，应赶快离开这里。 
English: Although there is some insurance in Miyakata, it is not enough to withstand a major disaster. You should leave here as soon as possible.

古文：乡人多怀土不能去。
现代文：同乡人大多留恋故土，不愿离开。
English: Most of my fellow countrymen are nostalgic for their homeland and do not want to leave.

古文：会冀州牧同郡韩馥遣骑迎之，彧乃独将宗族从馥，留者后多为董卓将李所杀略焉。
现代文：碰上冀州牧同乡人韩馥派骑兵来接他们，荀彧于是自己带领宗族跟随韩馥，留下的后来大多被董卓的部将李傕所杀害、抢走了。
English: When they came across the Jizhou herdsmen and fellow countryman Han Qi, he sent cavalry to pick them up. He then led his clan to follow Han Qi. Most of those who stayed behind were later killed and robbed by Dong Zhuo's general Li Qi.

古文：彧比至冀州，而袁绍已夺馥位，绍待彧以上宾之礼。
现代文：等荀彧到了冀州，袁绍已经夺了韩馥的位置。袁绍用贵宾的礼遇对待荀彧。
English: By the time Zhai arrived in Jizhou, Yuan Shao had already taken the place of Han Zhai. Yuan Shao treated Zhou with the courtesy of a distinguished guest.

古文：彧明有意数，见汉室崩乱，每怀匡佐之义。
现代文：荀彧是心中有数的人，看到汉室混乱，每每有匡正之心。
English: Zou is a person who knows the numbers in his heart. Seeing the chaos in the Chinese room, he always has a righteous heart.

古文：时，曹操在东郡，彧闻操有雄略，而度绍终不能定大业。
现代文：当时曹操在东郡，荀彧听说曹操又雄才大略，而估计袁绍最终不能成就大事。
English: At that time, Cao Cao was in Dong County. Zou had heard that Cao Cao was very talented, but he estimated that Yuan Shao would not be able to achieve great things in the end.

古文：初平二年，乃去绍从操。
现代文：初平二年，就离开袁绍投奔曹操。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he left Yuan Shao and joined Cao Cao.

古文：操与语大悦，曰： 吾子房也。 
现代文：曹操和他交谈后大喜，说： 是我的张良啊。 
English: Cao Cao was overjoyed after talking with him and said, "It's my Zhang Liang."

古文：以为奋武司马，时年二十九。
现代文：任命他为奋武司马，当年他二十九岁。
English: He was twenty-nine years old when he was appointed to the post.

古文：明年，又为操镇东司马。
现代文：第二年，又任镇东司马。
English: The following year, he was also appointed as the Zhendong Sima.

古文：兴平元年，操东击陶谦，使彧守甄城，任以留事。
现代文：兴平元年，曹操东击陶谦，派荀彧守甄城，主管留守之事。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian in the east, sent him to guard Zhencheng, and was in charge of the matter of staying behind.

古文：会张邈、陈宫以兗州反操，而潜迎吕布。
现代文：赶上张邈、陈宫据兖州反曹操，而暗地迎接吕布。
English: Catching up with Zhang Ye and Chen Gong, according to Zhang Zhou, he was against Cao Cao, but secretly welcomed Lv Bu.

古文：布即至，诸城悉应之。
现代文：吕布到后，各城响应。
English: After the arrival of Lübbe, the cities responded.

古文：邈乃使人谲彧曰： 吕将军来助曹使君击陶谦，宜亟供军实。 
现代文：张邈就派人欺骗荀彧说： 吕将军来帮助曹使君打陶谦，应赶紧供应他军需物资。 
English: Zhang Ye sent someone to trick Yao, saying, "General Lu should help Cao Zhijun fight Tao Qian and quickly supply him with military supplies.

古文：彧知邈有变，即勒兵设备，故邈计不行。
现代文：荀彧知道张邈有变，就布兵设防，因此张邈的计谋不能得逞。
English: Knowing of Zhang Ye's change of heart, Zou set up troops and fortified the city. As a result, Zhang Ye's stratagem could not succeed.

古文：豫州刺史郭贡率兵数万来到城下，求见彧。
现代文：豫州刺史郭贡率兵数万来到城下，求见荀彧。
English: Guogong, the governor of Yuzhou, led tens of thousands of soldiers to the outskirts of the city and asked to see him.

古文：彧将往，东郡太守夏侯淳等止之。曰： 何知贡不与吕布同谋，而轻欲见之。
现代文：荀彧就要前去，东郡太守夏侯惇等人阻止他，说： 怎么知道郭贡不与吕布同谋，而轻率地见他？
English: When he was about to go, the East County Governor Xia Houjun and others stopped him, saying, "How do you know that Guo Gong is not a co-conspirator with Lv Bu, but is seeing him indiscriminately?

古文：今君为一州之镇，往必危也。 
现代文：如今您作为一州之首，到那儿一定危险。 
English: Now that you are the head of a state, it must be dangerous to go there.

古文：彧曰： 贡与邈等分非素结，今来速者，计必未定，及其犹豫，宜时说之，纵不为用，可使中立。
现代文：荀彧说： 郭贡与张邈等人平常并没有情谊，如今来得这么快，一定还没有商定，在他犹豫不决的时候，应及时劝说他，即使不为我们所用，也可以中立。
English: Zou said: Guo Gong and Zhang Ye and others usually do not have a friendship, now they come so fast, they must not have agreed, when he hesitates, he should be persuaded in time, even if it is not for us, it can be neutral.

古文：若先怀疑嫌，彼将怒而成谋，不如往也。 
现代文：如果先对他怀疑，他将会恼怒而与他们合谋，不如去一下。 
English: If you doubt him first, he will be angry and conspire with them, it's better to go.

古文：贡既见彧无惧意，知城不可攻，遂引而去。
现代文：郭贡见荀彧没有惧怕的意思，知道城不可攻，就领兵离去。
English: Guo Gong saw that Yan had no fear and knew that the city could not be attacked, so he led his troops away.

古文：彧乃使程昱说范、东阿，使固其守，卒全三城以待操焉。
现代文：荀彧就派程昱去游说范县、东阿，让他们加强城防，终于保全了三城以等待曹操归来。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to persuade Fan County and Dong'a to strengthen their city defenses, and finally preserved the three cities to wait for Cao Cao's return.

古文：二年，陶谦死，操欲遂取徐州，还定吕布。
现代文：兴平二年，陶谦死，曹操想马上攻取徐州，回兵后平定吕布。
English: In the second year of Xingping, when Tao Qian died, Cao Cao wanted to immediately conquer Xuzhou, and after the return of the troops, he wanted to pacify Lvbu.

古文：彧谏曰：昔高祖保关中，光武据河内，皆深根固本，以制天下。
现代文：荀彧劝谏说： 以前高祖占据关中，光武帝占据河内，都是先巩固根本，以控制天下。
English: "In the past, Gaozhu occupied Guanzhong, and Emperor Guangwu occupied Hanoi, but they first consolidated the foundation in order to control the whole country," he said.

古文：进可以胜敌，退足以坚守，故虽有困败，而终济大业。
现代文：进可攻，退可守，所以虽然有失败之时，而终能完成大业。
English: It is possible to advance and attack, and it is possible to retreat and defend, so although there are times of failure, it is ultimately possible to complete the great cause.

古文：将军本以兗州首事，故能平定山东，此实天下之要地，而将军之关河也。
现代文：将军本以兖州为根本，所以能平定山东，这实在是天下的要地，将军的函谷关和黄河啊。
English: The general took Bozhou as the foundation, so he was able to pacify Shandong, which is really an important place in the world, the general's Hanyuguan and the Yellow River.

古文：若不先定之，根本将何寄乎？
现代文：如果不先安定它，要把根本放在哪里呢？
English: If you don't stabilize it first, where are you going to put the foundation?

古文：宜急分讨陈宫，使虏不得西顾，乘其间而收熟麦，约食稸谷，以资一举，则吕布不足破也。
现代文：应立即分兵讨伐陈宫，使敌寇不能西顾，乘机收割成熟的麦子，节食蓄粮，以助军事行动，则吕布不难击败。
English: It is necessary to immediately dispatch troops to fight Chen Gong, so that the enemy raiders can not go to the west, take the opportunity to harvest mature wheat, diet and store grain to help military operations, then Lvbu is not difficult to defeat.

古文：今舍之而东，未见其便。
现代文：如今丢下这里而向东去，不见得有什么好处。
English: Leaving here now and heading east may not be a good idea.

古文：多留兵则力不胜敌，少留兵则后不足因。
现代文：多留兵则前方力量不能战胜敌人，少留兵则后方不能巩固。
English: If more soldiers are left behind, the front force will not be able to defeat the enemy, and if fewer soldiers are left behind, the rear cannot be consolidated.

古文：布乘虚寇暴，震动人心，纵数城或全，其余非复己有，则将军尚安归乎？
现代文：吕布乘虚入侵，震动人心，纵然有几座城池得以保全，其余的已不再为自己所有，那么将军还能回到哪里去呢？
English: Lvbu's surprise invasion shook the hearts of the people. Even if a few cities were preserved, and the rest were no longer his own, where could the general go back to?

古文：且前讨徐州，威罚实行，其子弟念父兄之耻，必人自为守。就能破之，尚不可保。
现代文：况且以前讨伐徐州，逞威施罚，那里的子弟记得父兄被杀的耻辱，必定人人坚守，即使能够攻克，也不能守住。
English: Moreover, in the past, they fought against Xuzhou and imposed punishments. The children there remember the shame of their father and brother being killed. Everyone must stick to it. Even if they can conquer it, they can't keep it.

古文：彼若惧而相结，共为表里，坚壁清野，以待将军，将军攻之不拔，掠之无获，不出一旬，则十万之众未战而自困矣。
现代文：他们如果恐惧而联合起来，互相支持，坚壁清野，来等着对付将军，将军进攻打不下来，抢掠又没收获，不出十天，十万大军还未交战就陷入被动了。
English: If they unite out of fear, support each other, stand firm and clear the field, and wait to deal with the general, the general will not be able to attack, loot and plunder will not be fruitful, and within ten days, the hundred thousand army will fall into passivity before engaging in battle.

古文：夫事固有弃彼取此，以权一时之势，愿将军虑焉。
现代文：虽然本来就有弃彼取此的事例，但要取决于衡量当时的形势，希望将军考虑。 
English: Although there have been cases of abandoning the other to take this, but it depends on the measurement of the situation at the time, I hope the general will consider.

古文：操于是大收熟麦，复与布战。
现代文：曹操于是大力抢收成熟的麦子，又和吕布交战。
English: Cao Cao then vigorously seized the ripe wheat and fought with Lv Bu.

古文：布败走，因分定诸县，兗州遂平。
现代文：吕布败走，趁机分别平定各县，兖州于是被平定。
English: Lvbu was defeated and took the opportunity to subdue each county separately, and Bozhou was then subdued.

古文：建安元年，献帝自河东还洛阳，操议欲奉迎车驾，徙都于许。
现代文：建安元年，献帝从河东回到洛阳，曹操打算迎接车驾，迁都到许昌。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Emperor Xian returned to Luoyang from Hedong. Cao Cao planned to welcome him with a carriage and move the capital to Xuchang.

古文：众多以山东未定，韩暹、杨奉负功恣睢，未可卒制。
现代文：众人大多认为山东还未安定，韩暹、杨奉自恃有功，傲横妄为，不可仓猝行事。
English: Most people think that Shandong is not yet stable, and Han Siem and Yang Bong are conceited and arrogant. They should not act in haste.

古文：彧乃劝操曰： 昔晋文公纳周襄王，而诸侯景从；汉高祖为义帝缟素，而天下归心。
现代文：荀彧于是鼓动曹操说： 从前晋文公接纳周襄王，而诸侯像影子一般跟随着晋；汉高祖为义帝戴孝，而天下人心归附。
English: Yan then encouraged Cao Cao to say: Formerly, the Prince of Jin accepted King Zhou Xiang, while the princes generally followed Jin like shadows; the founder of the Han Dynasty was the Righteous Emperor Dai Xiao, and the hearts of the people of the world were attached to him.

古文：自天子蒙尘，将军首唱义兵，徒以山东扰乱，未遑远赴，虽御难于外，乃心无不在王室。
现代文：自从天子遭难，将军首举义兵，只是因为山东纷扰混乱，没有顾得上接驾，虽然在外平定祸乱，但心里却无时不在挂念着王室。
English: Since Tianzi's calamity, the general has been the first to raise a volunteer army, but because of the turmoil in Shandong, he did not care enough to take the lead. Although he has settled the disaster outside, he is always concerned about the royal family in his heart.

古文：今銮驾旋轸，东京榛芜，义士有存本之思，兆人怀感旧之哀。
现代文：如今皇帝回还，洛阳荒芜，义士有保护正统的心愿，万民怀着感念旧时的哀思。
English: Nowadays, the emperor has returned, Luoyang is desolate, the righteous have the desire to protect the orthodoxy, and all the people are nostalgic for the old days.

古文：诚因此时奉主上以从人望，大顺也；秉至公以服天下，大略也；扶弘义以致英俊，大德也。
现代文：如真能在此时奉迎主上以顺应万民心愿，这是大顺；执最大的公来使天下服从，这是大略；扶持大义来网罗英才，这是大德。
English: If you can truly serve the Lord at this time by complying with the wishes of all the people, this is a great success; holding the greatest duty to make the world obey, this is a rough outline; supporting the great righteousness to snare talents, this is a great virtue.

古文：四方虽有逆节，其何能为？
现代文：即使有人抗命，又能有何作为呢？
English: Even if someone disobeys, what can be done?

古文：韩暹、杨奉，安足恤哉！
现代文：韩暹、杨奉哪里值得顾虑呢！
English: Where are Han Siem and Yang Bong worth worrying about?

古文：若不时定，使豪杰生心，后虽为虑，亦无及矣。 
现代文：如果不及时决定，让别的豪杰生出此心，以后即使再想这样，可就来不及了。 
English: If we don't decide in time to let other heroes have this heart, even if we think about it in the future, it will be too late.

古文：操纵之。
现代文：曹操听从了他的意见。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：及帝都许，以彧为侍中，守尚书令。
现代文：等到皇帝迁都许昌，任命荀彧为侍中，代理尚书令。
English: When the emperor moved the capital to Xuchang, he appointed Zou as an attendant and appointed Shang Shuling as his deputy.

古文：操每征伐在外，其军国之事，皆与彧筹焉，彧又进操计谋之士从子攸，及钟繇、郭嘉、陈群、杜袭、司马懿、戏志才等，皆称其举。
现代文：曹操经常在外面征战，军国大事，都和荀彧商议。荀彧又向曹操推荐他的长于计谋的侄子荀攸，以及钟繇、郭嘉、陈群、杜袭、司马懿、戏志才等，都不辜负他的推荐。
English: Cao Cao often went abroad to fight, and discussed military and state affairs with Zou Yu. Zou Yu also recommended to Cao Cao his nephew Zou Yu, who was good at scheming, as well as Zhong Yu, Guo Jia, Chen Qun, Du Hao, Sima Yu, and Zhezhi Cai, all of whom lived up to his recommendation.

古文：唯严象为杨州，韦康为凉州，后并负败焉。
现代文：只有严象任扬州刺史，韦康任凉州刺史，后来一并败死。
English: Only Yan Xiang was appointed Yangzhou chief historian, and Wei Kang was appointed Liangzhou chief historian, and later they were both defeated and died.

古文：袁绍既兼河朔之地，有骄气。
现代文：袁绍兼并了河朔之地后，有了骄气。
English: After Yuan Shao annexed the land of Hexuo, he became proud.

古文：而操败于张绣，绍与操书甚倨。
现代文：而曹操被张绣打败，袁绍给曹操的信件语气很傲慢。
English: But Cao Cao was defeated by Zhang Xiu. Yuan Shao's letter to Cao Cao was very arrogant.

古文：操大怒，欲先攻之，而患力不敌，以谋于彧。
现代文：曹操大怒，想先攻打袁绍，而怕力量敌不过，就此和荀彧商量。
English: Cao Cao was furious and wanted to attack Yuan Shao first, but he was afraid of the enemy's strength, so he discussed the matter with Yao.

古文：彧量绍虽强，终为操所制，乃说先取吕布，然后图绍，操从之。
现代文：荀彧估计袁绍虽强，早晚要被曹操制服，于是劝曹操先消灭吕布，然后再对付袁绍。曹操听从了他的建议。
English: Yan estimated that although Yuan Shao was strong, he would be subdued by Cao Cao sooner or later, so he advised Cao Cao to eliminate Lv Bu first, and then deal with Yuan Shao. Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：三年，遂擒吕布，定徐州。
现代文：建安三年，终于擒获吕布，平定徐州。
English: After three years of Jian'an, he finally captured Lvbu and pacified Xuzhou.

古文：五年，袁绍率大众以攻许，操与相距。
现代文：建安五年，袁绍率大军攻许昌，曹操和他相持。
English: In the fifth year of Jian'an, Yuan Shao led a large army to attack Xu Chang, and Cao Cao stood with him.

古文：绍甲兵甚盛，议者咸怀惶惧。
现代文：袁绍的军队很多，论及此事的人都心怀惶恐。
English: Yuan Shao's army was large, and those who discussed the matter were filled with trepidation.

古文：少府孔融谓彧曰： 袁绍地广兵强，田丰、许攸智计之士为其谋，审配、逢纪尽忠之臣任其事，颜良、文丑勇冠三军，统其兵，殆难克乎？ 
现代文：少府孔融对荀彧说： 袁绍地广兵强，田丰、许攸这些智谋之士为他策划，审配、逢纪尽忠之臣任其要职，颜良、文丑勇冠三军。统率其军队。
English: Xiaofu Kong Rong said to Yu: Yuan Shao led a broad and strong army, Tian Feng and Xu You, these wise men, planned for him, selected and disciplined loyal vassals, and appointed them to important posts. Yan Liang and Wen Gui won the three armies. He led his army.

古文：彧曰： 绍兵虽多而法不整，田丰刚而犯上，许攸贪而不正，审配专而无谋，逢纪果而自用，颜良、文丑匹夫之勇，可一点而擒也。 
现代文：恐怕难以战胜吧？ 荀彧说： 袁绍兵虽多而军法不严，田丰刚直而犯上，许攸贪心而不正派，审配专横而无谋，逢纪果敢而自以为是，颜良文丑匹夫之勇，一战就可以把他们擒获。 
English: I'm afraid it will be difficult to win, isn't it? Zhai said: Although Yuan Shao's soldiers are numerous and the military law is not strict, Tian Feng is straightforward and committed, Xu You is greedy and dishonest, Auditing is arbitrary and reckless, Discipline is bold and self-righteous, Yan Liangwen is ugly and brave, they can be captured in one battle.

古文：后皆如彧所筹，事在《袁绍传》。
现代文：后来事情都如同荀彧所预计的那样，此事在《袁绍传》中。
English: Later, things unfolded as Zou had predicted, and the story is told in "The Biography of Yuan Shao."

古文：操保官度，与绍连战，虽胜而军粮方尽，书与彧议，欲还许以致绍师。
现代文：曹操守官渡，与袁绍接连交战，虽然得胜但军粮就要吃完，写信与荀彧商议，想回兵许昌以等待袁绍的军队。
English: Cao Cao was in charge of Guandu and fought with Yuan Shao successively. Although he was victorious, he was about to run out of food. He wrote a letter to negotiate with Zou and wanted to return to Xu Chang to wait for Yuan Shao's army.

古文：彧报曰： 今谷食虽少，未若楚汉在荥阳、成皋间也。
现代文：荀彧回信说： 如今粮食虽少，还不像楚汉在荥阳、成皋之间相持那时候。
English: Zou replied in a letter: Although there is little grain now, it is not like the time when Chu Han was stuck between Shenyang and Chengdu.

古文：是时刘、项莫肯先退者，以为先退则势屈也。
现代文：当时刘邦项羽都不肯先退兵，认为先退就会折了士气。
English: At that time, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu both refused to retreat first, believing that retreating first would break their morale.

古文：公以十分居一之众，画地而守之，扼其喉而不得进，已半年矣。
现代文：您以对方十分之一的兵力，划地而守，扼守咽喉要道而使他不能前进，已经半年了。
English: Now you only rely on a team that is only one-tenth of Yuan Shao's army, and you have been holding Yuan Shao's throat so that he cannot advance for half a year.

古文：情见势谒，必将有变，此用奇之时，不可失也。 
现代文：可以看出这种局面就要结束，马上一定会有转机，这是使用非常之计的时候，不可错失良机。 
English: It can be seen that this situation is about to end, and there will be a turning point soon. This is the time to use extraordinary measures, and we must not miss the opportunity.

古文：操从之，乃坚壁持之。
现代文：曹操听从他的意见，于是坚守壁垒和袁绍相持。
English: Cao Cao listened to his advice, so he held fast to the wall and supported Yuan Shao.

古文：遂以奇兵破绍，绍退走。
现代文：终于用奇兵打败袁绍，袁绍败走。
English: Finally, he defeated Yuan Shao with a miracle soldier, and Yuan Shao was defeated.

古文：封彧万岁亭侯，邑一千户。
现代文：封荀彧为万岁亭侯，食邑一千户。
English: The seal was hooray for the pavilion, and there were a thousand households in the food village.

古文：六年，操以绍新破，未能为患，但欲留兵卫之，自欲南征刘表，以计问彧。
现代文：建安六年，曹操认为袁绍刚败，不足为患，想只留守卫之兵，自己南征刘表，以此来问荀彧。
English: In the sixth year of Jianan, Cao Cao thought that Yuan Shao had just been defeated and was not enough, and wanted to leave only the guards and his own southern expedition Liu table, in order to ask the question.

古文：彧对曰： 绍既新败，众惧人扰，今不因而定之，而欲远兵江汉，若绍收离纠散，乘虚以出，则公之事去矣。 
现代文：荀彧回答说： 袁绍刚败，人心惶惶，如今不趁机平定，而要远征江汉，如果袁绍收罗纠集打败的部众，乘虚而出，那么您的大事就坏了。 
English: Zou replied: Yuan Shao has just been defeated and his heart is in turmoil. Now, instead of taking advantage of the opportunity to pacify the situation, he wants to go on an expedition to the provinces. If Yuan Shao gathers his defeated subordinates and takes advantage of the situation, then your great undertaking will be ruined.

古文：操乃止。
现代文：曹操这才作罢。
English: Cao Cao finally gave up.

古文：九年，操拔鄴，自领冀州牧。
现代文：建安九年，曹操攻下邺城，自任冀州牧。
English: In the ninth year of Jian'an, Cao Cao conquered Lucheng and appointed himself the governor of Jizhou.

古文：有说操宜复置九州者，以为冀部所统既广，则天下易服。
现代文：有人劝曹操恢复古代九州的建制，认为冀州所统辖的地盘大了，那么天下就容易服从。
English: Some people urged Cao Cao to restore the ancient Kyushu system, believing that the territory under the jurisdiction of Jizhou was large, so it would be easy for the world to obey.

古文：操将从之。
现代文：曹操打算接受这项提议。
English: Cao Cao intends to accept the proposal.

古文：彧言曰： 今苦依古制，是为冀州所统，悉有河东、冯翊、扶风、西河、幽、并之地也。
现代文：荀彧对他说： 如今要是依照古制，这样冀州所统辖的范围就包括了河东、冯翊、扶风、西河、幽州、并州等地。
English: Zou said to him, "Nowadays, if we follow the old system, the scope of Jizhou's jurisdiction will include Hedong, Fengyuan, Fufeng, Xihe, Yuzhou, and Binzhou.

古文：公前屠鄴城，海内震骇，各惧不得保其土宇，守其兵众。
现代文：您以前屠杀邺城，天下震恐，各人都害怕不能保住自己的地盘，守住自己的军队。
English: You used to massacre Lucheng, the whole world was in shock, and everyone was afraid of not being able to keep their own territory and keep their own army.

古文：今若一处被侵，必谓以次见夺，人心易动，若一旦生变，天下未可图也。
现代文：如今如果一处被进攻，别人一定认为其他地方也要依次被夺，人心动荡，如果一旦发生变乱，天下事就不好办了。
English: Nowadays, if one place is attacked, others must think that other places will also be taken in turn, people's hearts are unstable, and if there is a disturbance, it will be difficult to manage the affairs of the world.

古文：愿公先定河北，然后修复旧京，南临楚郢，责王贡之不入。
现代文：希望您能先平定河北，然后修整恢复旧日京城，进兵楚郢，指责他们不向朝廷纳贡。
English: I hope you can first pacify Hebei, and then repair and restore the old capital city, march into Chu'an, and accuse them of not paying tribute to the imperial court.

古文：天下咸知公意，则人人自安。
现代文：天下人都明白了您的意思，就人人安下心来。
English: People all over the world have understood what you meant, and everyone has calmed down.

古文：须海内大定，乃议古制，此主稷长久之利也。 
现代文：必须天下彻底安定，才能说到古制问题，这符合国家长久的利益。 
English: It is in the long-term interest of the country that the world must be completely stable before we can talk about the issue of the old system.

古文：操报曰： 微足下之相难，所失多矣！ 
现代文：曹操回信说： 不是足下的提醒，损失就大了！ 
English: Cao Cao wrote back: It's not a reminder, it's a big loss!

古文：遂寝九州议。
现代文：于是九州之议作罢。
English: Therefore, the discussion on Kyushu is over.

古文：十二年，操上书表彧曰：昔袁绍作逆，连兵官度，时众寡粮单，图欲还许。
现代文：建安十二年，曹操上书称赞荀彧的功劳说： 从前袁绍作乱，在官渡集结大军，当时我们兵寡粮少，打算退回许昌。
English: In the twelfth year of Jian'an, Cao Cao wrote a letter praising the merits of Xuan, saying: In the past, Yuan Shao made a riot and gathered a large army in Guandu. At that time, we were short of soldiers and grain and planned to return to Xuchang.

古文：尚书令荀彧深建宜住之便，远恢进讨之略，起发臣心，革易愚虑，坚营固守，徼其军实，遂摧扑大寇，济危以安。
现代文：尚书令荀彧极力申述应当坚守的好处，高屋建瓴提出作战方略，启发我的思想，改变了我错误的打算，加固营垒顽强守卫，缴获了敌人军备，终于打垮强敌，转危为安。
English: Shang Shuling started to vigorously appeal the benefits that should be adhered to, Gao Ya Jianqi proposed a battle strategy, inspired my thoughts, changed my wrong intention, strengthened the camp, tenaciously guarded, captured the enemy's armaments, and finally defeated the strong enemy and turned the corner.

古文：绍既破败，臣粮亦尽，将舍河北之规，改就荆南之策。
现代文：袁绍战败后，臣的军粮也用完了，打算要舍弃收取河北的计划，转而图谋荆南。
English: After the defeat of Yuan Shao, the vassal's military grain also ran out, and he planned to abandon the plan to take over Hebei and instead try to take over Jingnan.

古文：彧复备陈得失，用移臣议，故得反冀土，克平四州。
现代文：荀彧又详尽说明得失，以改变臣的意见，因此能够回师冀州，平定四个州郡。
English: He also explained the gains and losses in detail to change the minister's opinion, so he was able to return to Jizhou and subdue four counties.

古文：向使臣退军官度，绍必鼓行而前，敌人怀利以自百，臣众怯沮以丧气，有必败之形，无一捷之势。
现代文：当初如果臣从官渡退兵，袁绍必定击鼓前进，敌人占了上风而勇气百倍，臣的军队胆怯不前士气低落，有必败的形势，没有一点会胜利的机会。
English: At the beginning, if the vassal withdrew from Guandu, Yuan Shao would certainly advance with drums beating. The enemy had the upper hand and was a hundred times more courageous. The vassal's army was timid and demoralized, facing a situation of certain defeat, with no chance of victory.

古文：复苦南征刘表，委弃兗、豫，饥军深入，逾越江、沔，利既难要，将失本据。
现代文：又如果南征刘表，丢下兖州、豫州，饥军深入，跨越长江、汉水，不光难以得利，还会失去依托。
English: In addition, if the Southern Expedition Liu table, leaving Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, hungry troops deep, across the Yangtze River, Hanshui, not only difficult to make a profit, but also lose support.

古文：而彧建二策，以亡为存，以祸为福，谋殊功异，臣所不及。
现代文：而荀彧提出这两条计谋，转败为胜，转祸为福，谋略非凡而功劳出众，臣是比不上的。
English: However, Zou put forward these two strategies, turning defeat into victory, turning misfortune into good fortune, extraordinary strategy and outstanding merit, which is unmatched by any vassal.

古文：是故先帝贵指纵之功，薄搏获之赏；古人尚帷幄之规，下攻拔之力。
现代文：所以先帝看重指挥调度的功劳，而给予搏击斩获者的赏赐就较少；古人重视运筹帷幄之功，看轻攻城拔寨之勇。
English: Therefore, the former emperor valued the merit of command and scheduling, while the reward given to those who won the battle was less; the ancients valued the merit of operational planning, and looked down on the courage of attacking the city.

古文：原其绩效，足享高爵。
现代文：追论荀彧的功绩，足以享有高官厚禄。
English: His achievements are enough for him to enjoy the high rank and rich reward.

古文：而海内未喻其状所受不侔其功，臣诚惜之，乞重平议，增畴户邑。
现代文：而天下人不明情况，他所得到的与他的功劳不相称，臣实在对此遗憾，请求重新评议，增添他的食邑。 
English: However, the world does not know the situation, and what he received is not commensurate with his merit. The minister really regrets this and requests a new review to add his food.

古文：彧深辞让。
现代文：荀彧极力推辞。
English: strenuously declined.

古文：操譬之曰： 昔介子推有言： 窃人之财，犹谓之盗。 
现代文：曹操劝导他说： 从前介子推有话说： 盗窃别人财物，尚且叫做盗贼。 
English: Cao Cao advised him, "There is a saying that goes: Stealing other people's property is still called theft.

古文：况君奇谟拔出，兴亡所系，可专有之邪？
现代文：何况先生奇谋超群，关系到天下兴亡，我难道可以独占功劳吗？
English: What's more, he is a mastermind, and he is related to the rise and fall of the world. Can I take all the credit?

古文：虽慕鲁连冲高之迹，将为圣人达节之义乎！ 
现代文：虽说仰慕鲁仲连清高的行为，还是效法圣人通达时务吧！ 
English: Although I admire Lu Zhonglian's high-minded behavior, let's follow the sage's example and be up-to-date!

古文：于是增封千户，并前二千户。
现代文：于是增封一千户，加上以前的共两千户。
English: As a result, an additional 1,000 households were sealed, adding to the previous total of 2,000.

古文：又欲授以正司，彧使荀攸深自陈让，至于十数，乃止。
现代文：又要任命他为正式的尚书令，荀彧让荀攸也极力推让，达到十来次，这才作罢。
English: He also wanted to appoint him as an official Shang Shuling, and he also pushed hard to make concessions, reaching more than ten times, before giving up.

古文：操将伐刘表，问彧所策。
现代文：曹操将要讨伐刘表，询问荀彧用兵方略。
English: Cao Cao is going to attack Liu Biao and inquire about the strategy of using soldiers.

古文：彧曰： 今华夏以平，荆、汉知亡矣，可声出宛、叶而间行轻进，以掩其不意。 
现代文：荀彧说： 如今中原已经平定，荆、汉知道将要灭亡了，可声言从宛、叶进兵而从小道轻骑奔袭，以出其不意。 
English: Zou said, "Nowadays, the Central Plains have been pacified, and Jing and Han know that they are about to perish. However, they may say that soldiers from Wan and Ye will enter the battlefield and ride lightly from the trail to attack, so as to surprise them.

古文：操从之。
现代文：曹操听从了他的建议。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：会表病死。
现代文：这时刘表病死。
English: At this time, Liu Biao died of illness.

古文：十七年，董昭等欲共进操爵国公，九锡备物，密以访彧。
现代文：建安十七年，董昭等人要联名推戴曹操晋封国公，赐予九锡仪仗器物，秘密地征询荀彧的意见。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jianan, Dong Zhao and others wanted to jointly promote Cao Cao to the title of Prince of the State, give Jiuxi ceremonial objects, and secretly solicit the opinions of Yao.

古文：彧曰： 曹公本兴义兵，以匡振汉朝，虽勋庸崇著，犹秉忠贞之节。
现代文：荀彧说： 曹公本是发动义兵，以振兴汉朝，虽然功勋卓著，还保持忠贞之节。
English: Zou said: Cao Gong originally started to mobilize volunteers in order to revitalize the Han Dynasty, although he had outstanding merits, he still remained loyal.

古文：君子爱人以德，不宜如此。 
现代文：君子爱人要合于道德，不应该这样。 
English: A gentleman should be ethical in his love. It shouldn't be like this.

古文：事遂。
现代文：事情就这么搁置下来。
English: It's just been put on hold.

古文：操心不能平。
现代文：曹操心里难以平静。
English: Cao Cao could not calm down.

古文：会南征孙权，表请彧劳军于谯，因表留彧曰： 臣闻古之遣将，上设监督之重，下建副二之任，所以尊严国命，谋而鲜过者也。
现代文：等到南征孙权，曹操上表请荀彧到谯郡劳军，趁机表奏把荀彧留下来，说： 臣听说古代排遣大将，上面设有监军，下面派有相助的副职，以此来显示国家的尊严，减少过失。
English: When it came to the southern conquest of Sun Quan, Cao Cao took the opportunity to take advantage of the opportunity to take the lead and leave the shackles behind, saying: Minister, I have heard that in ancient times, there was a general in charge of dispatching troops, with a supervisor at the top and an assistant at the bottom, in order to show the dignity of the country and reduce mistakes.

古文：臣今当济江，奉辞伐罪，宜有大使肃将王命。
现代文：如今臣正要渡江，奉辞伐罪，应当有尊贵的使节来庄重地奉行王命。
English: Now that the vassal is about to cross the river and confess his crime, there should be a distinguished envoy to solemnly carry out the king's order.

古文：文武并用，自古有之。
现代文：文武并用，自古有之。
English: The combination of literature and martial arts has existed since ancient times.

古文：使持节侍中守尚书令万岁亭侯彧，国之重臣，德洽华夏，既停军所次，便宜与臣俱进，宣示国命，威怀丑虏。
现代文：使持节侍中守尚书令万岁亭侯荀彧，是国家的重臣，德行遍及华夏，已经到了军队的驻处，便于和臣一道进军，宣示朝廷命令，用威德镇抚敌寇。
English: Long live Ting Houtong, the chief minister of the state, whose virtue has spread all over China. He has arrived at the army's residence, so that he can march with his vassals, announce the imperial order, and pacify the enemy with Weide.

古文：军礼尚速，不及先请，臣辄留彧，依以为重。 
现代文：军贵神速，来不及请示，臣私自留下荀彧，以作重要的助手。 
English: The general was in a hurry and did not have time to ask for instructions, so the vassal left the yakitori to serve as an important assistant.

古文：书奏，帝从之，遂以彧为侍中、光禄大夫，持节，参丞相军事。
现代文：奏书报上去，皇帝答应了他，于是任命荀彧为侍中、光禄大夫，持节，参谋丞相军事。
English: After the report was published, the emperor agreed to his request, and appointed Zou as a chamberlain, a doctor of the imperial household, a military strategist, and a staff officer of the prime minister.

古文：至濡须，彧病留寿春，操馈之食，发视，乃空器也，于是饮药而卒。
现代文：到了濡须，荀彧因病留在寿春，曹操赠送他食物，打开一看，却是空盒，于是荀彧服毒而死。
English: When it came to Nusshu, Zhai stayed in Shuchun due to illness. Cao Cao gave him food, but when he opened it, it was an empty box, so Zhai took the poison and died.

古文：时年五十。
现代文：当年五十岁。
English: fifty years old.

古文：帝哀惜之，祖日为之废宴乐。
现代文：皇帝为他难过痛惜，祭祀之日因此而不奏乐。
English: The emperor felt sorry for him and did not play music on the day of the ritual.

古文：谥曰敬侯。
现代文：谥为敬候。
English: His posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：明年，操遂称魏公云。
现代文：第二年，曹操终于称了魏公。
English: In the second year, Cao Cao finally called Wei Gong.

古文：论曰：自迁帝西京，山东腾沸，天下之命倒县矣。
现代文：论曰：自从董卓把皇帝迁到西京，山东大乱。天下苍生的性命如倒悬一般。
English: On saying: Since Dong Zhuo moved the emperor to Xijing, Shandong has been in turmoil. The lives of all living beings in the world are in a state of upheaval.

古文：荀君乃越河、冀，间关以从曹氏。
现代文：荀君跨越黄河、冀州，辗转来跟随曹氏。
English: Zhai Jun crossed the Yellow River and Jizhou, and then came to follow Cao.

古文：察其定举措，立言策，崇明王略，以急国艰，岂云因乱假义，以就违正之谋乎？
现代文：察看他定立的措施，谋划的策略，都是尊奉王道，以急于解救国家的危难，怎能说是趁乱而假借仁义，来迎合奸邪的阴谋呢？
English: Observing that the measures he established and the strategies he planned were all based on the principle of honoring the king and the urgency of saving the country from danger, how can it be said that he took advantage of the turmoil and used the pretext of benevolence and righteousness to cater to the conspiracy of treachery?

古文：诚仁为己任，期纾民于仓卒也。
现代文：实在是把行仁义作为自己的责任，希望在这变乱时期解救民众啊。
English: It is my duty to practice benevolence and righteousness, hoping to save the people in this time of turmoil.

古文：及阻董昭之议，以致非命，岂数也夫！
现代文：等到阻碍董昭的提议，丢了性命，难道不是命该如此吗！
English: Waiting until he obstructed Dong Zhao's proposal, he lost his life. Isn't that how life should be?

古文：世言荀君者，通塞或过矣。
现代文：世人对荀君的评论，也许过于注意其显达与困厄了。
English: The world's comments on Jun Jun may have paid too much attention to his achievements and hardships.

古文：常以为中贤以下，道无求备，智算有所研疏，原始未必要末，斯理之不可全诘者也。
现代文：我常认为，中等以下的贤人，立身行事不能求全责备，谋划有精细与粗疏，考虑到起始未必考虑到结尾，这就是不可求全的道理啊。
English: I often think that wise people below the middle level can not be blamed for their actions. There are fine and rough plans, and considering the beginning does not necessarily consider the end. This is the reason why it is impossible to achieve perfection.

古文：夫以卫赐之贤，一说而毙两国。
现代文：以子贡的贤明，一经他游说尚且危害了两国。
English: With the wisdom of Zi Gong, once he lobbied, he still harmed the two countries.

古文：彼非薄于仁而欲之，盖有全必有丧也，斯又功之不兼者也。
现代文：他并非是缺少仁德而故意如此，恐怕有所保全就必有所丢失吧，这就是做事难以两全的道理。
English: It's not that he lacks benevolence and does it on purpose. I'm afraid that if something is preserved, something must be lost. That's the reason why it's difficult to do things perfectly.

古文：方时运之屯，非雄才无以济其溺，功高势强，则皇器自移矣。
现代文：当时时运艰难，不是英雄人物就没有能力挽救其衰亡，而此人功高势强，政权自然也就转移到他的手里。
English: At that time, the situation was difficult. If he was not a hero, he would not have been able to save his downfall. However, he was a man of great merit and influence, and the power was naturally transferred to his hands.

古文：此文时之不可并也。
现代文：这又是此一时彼一时不能相提并论。
English: This, again, is where he falls short.

古文：盖取其归正而已，亦杀身以成仁之义也。
现代文：主要看他回到朝廷立场上的大节，还是合于杀身成仁的大义的啊。
English: The main thing to look at is whether his return to the position of the imperial court is still consistent with the great justice of killing oneself and becoming benevolent.

古文：赞曰：公业称豪，骏声升腾。
现代文：赞曰：邓太挥洒豪气，美名传扬。
English: Praise says: Deng Tai is full of courage and spreads his good name.

古文：权诡时逼，挥金僚朋。
现代文：为形势所逼，虚意应付权奸，挥霍钱财救助朋友。
English: Forced by the situation, he vainly tried to deal with the usurper and squandered money to save his friend.

古文：北海天逸，音情顿挫。越俗易惊，孤音少和。
现代文：孔融俊逸，抑扬有致，超越世俗，易使人惊骇，孤单的声音少有应和。
English: He is well-rounded, articulate, transcends the mundane, easily startles people, and his lone voice rarely strikes a chord.

古文：直辔安归，高谋谁佐？
现代文：直道前行，哪里是归宿？高远的谋略，辅佐谁人？
English: Straight ahead, where is the destination? Far-reaching strategy, assisted by whom?

古文：彧之有弼，诚感国疾。
现代文：荀彧辅助曹操，实是有感于国难。
English: He assisted Cao Cao and was really moved by the national tragedy.

古文：功申运改，迹疑心一。
现代文：事业成功却命运改变，行为可疑而心中同样不离正道。
English: Career success but the fate of change, suspicious behavior and the heart of the same do not leave the right path.

