古文：鲁侯伯禽宅曲阜，徐、夷并兴，东郊不开。
现代文：鲁侯伯侵住在曲阜，徐戎、淮夷一同叛乱，鲁国的东郊都不得安宁了。
English: Lu Houbo invaded Qufu, Xu Rong and Huaiyi rebelled together, and the eastern suburbs of Lu were restless.

古文：作《费誓》。
现代文：鲁侯将要征伐，作了《费誓》。
English: Lu Hou is about to go on a crusade, and he has made the "Fierce Vow."

古文：公曰： 嗟！
现代文：公说： 喂！
English: Mu Gong said: Ah!

古文：人无哗，听命。
现代文：大家不要喧哗，听我的命令。
English: Everybody quiet down and listen to my orders.

古文：徂兹淮夷、徐戎并兴。
现代文：现如今淮夷、徐戎同时发生了叛乱。
English: Now both Huaiyi and Hsu Rong rebelled at the same time.

古文：善敹乃甲胄，敿乃干，无敢不吊！
现代文：赶快缝制好你们的军服头盔，系好你们的盾牌，不能不准备好！
English: Quickly sew your military uniforms and helmets, fasten your shields, and get ready!

古文：备乃弓矢，锻乃戈矛，砺乃锋刃，无敢不善！
现代文：准备好你们的弓箭，锻造好你们的戈矛，磨利你们的锋刃，不能不追备好！
English: Prepare your bows and arrows, forge your spears, sharpen your blades, be ready!

古文：今惟淫舍牿牛马，杜乃擭，敜乃穽，无敢伤牿。牿之伤，汝则有常刑！
现代文：如今要将牛马从脚铐桎梏中解放出来，将不妥的计划丢掉，填上捕捉野兽的陷阱，让牛马不受到伤害。伤害了牛马，你们就要受到常刑！
English: Now it's time to free the cow and horse from the shackles, discard the bad plan, fill in the trap to catch the beast, so that the cow and horse are not harmed. If you hurt the cow and horse, you will be sentenced to imprisonment!

古文：马牛其风，臣妾逋逃，勿敢越逐，祗复之，我商赉汝。
现代文：牛马走失了，男女奴仆逃跑了，不许离开队伍去追赶！
English: The ox and horse have strayed, the men and women slaves have fled, do not leave the team to chase them!

古文：乃越逐不复，汝则有常刑！
现代文：得到了的，要恭敬送还原主，我会赏赐你们。
English: What you have received, respectfully return to the original owner, and I will reward you.

古文：无敢寇攘，逾垣墙，窃马牛，诱臣妾，汝则有常刑！
现代文：如果你们擅自离开队伍去追赶，或者不归还原主，你们就要受到常刑！不许抢夺掠取，跨过围墙，偷窃马牛，骗其他的奴隶逃脱，如果做了这些，就一定会收到刑罚的处罚！
English: If you leave the group without permission to go in pursuit, or if you do not return the cow to its original owner, you will be punished with a long prison sentence! Do not loot and plunder, cross the fence, steal horses and cattle, and trick other slaves to escape. If you do these things, you will definitely receive a criminal punishment!

古文：甲戌，我惟征徐戎。
现代文：甲戌这天，我们要去讨伐徐戎。
English: On Armor Day, we will go to fight Xu Rong.

古文：峙乃糗粮，无敢不逮；汝则有大刑！
现代文：准备好干粮，如果达不到标准，你们将会被处以死刑！
English: Prepare dry food, if it does not meet the standard, you will be sentenced to death!

古文：鲁人三郊三遂，峙乃桢干。
现代文：我们鲁国各地的百姓，要准备好你们的筑墙工具。
English: We, the people of all parts of Russia, must prepare your wall-building tools.

古文：甲戌，我惟筑，无敢不供；汝则有无馀刑，非杀。
现代文：甲戌这天，我们要修筑好营垒，不准不准备好；如果不准备，你们将受到终身不释放的刑罚，只是不杀头。
English: On this day, we must build a good camp, and we must not be unprepared; if you do not prepare, you will be punished for life without release, but do not kill the head.

古文：鲁人三郊三遂，峙乃刍茭，无敢不多；汝则有大刑！ 
现代文：我们鲁国的百姓，要准备你们的生草料和干草料，不许不够；如果不够，你们就要受到死刑！ 
English: We, the people of Lu, must prepare your raw grass and hay, and not allow it to run out; if it is not enough, you will be put to death!

