古文：凡步兵与车、骑战者，必依丘陵、险阻、林木而战则胜。
现代文：凡是以步兵对敌战车、骑兵作战时，一定要依托丘陵、险隘或林木丛生之地形而战，才能获胜。
English: Whenever infantry fight against enemy chariots and cavalry, they must rely on hilly, narrow or wooded terrain in order to win.

古文：若遇平易之道，须用拒马枪为方阵，步兵在内。
现代文：如果遇到开阔无险的地形，必须使用拒马枪排成方阵，掩护步兵在内。
English: If you encounter open and safe terrain, you must use a horse-drawn gun to form a square, including covering infantry.

古文：马军、步兵中分为驻队、战队。
现代文：再把骑、步兵分别编为驻队和战队交替战守。
English: Then, the cavalry and infantry were separately organized into garrisons and battalions for alternate defense.

古文：驻队守阵，战队出战；战队守阵，驻队出战。
现代文：驻队守阵时，战队出战；战队守阵时，驻队出战。
English: When garrisoned, the troops go to war; when garrisoned, the troops go to war.

古文：敌攻我一面，则我两哨出兵，从旁以掩之；敌攻我两面，我分兵从后以捣之；敌攻我四面，我为圆阵，分兵四出以奋击之。
现代文：当敌人攻我一面时，我就从两翼出击，侧袭进攻之敌；敌人攻我两面时，我就分兵迂回敌后袭击之；敌人攻我四面时，我就列成圆阵，分兵四面奋力阻击之。
English: When the enemy attacks one side of me, I will attack from two sides and flank the attacking enemy; when the enemy attacks two sides of me, I will detach troops to bypass the enemy and attack them; when the enemy attacks four sides of me, I will form a circle and detach troops to block them on all sides.

古文：敌若败走，以骑兵追之，步兵随其后，乃必胜之法。
现代文：敌人如果败走，我就立即使用骑兵追击之，而今步兵随后跟进，这是步兵对敌车骑兵作战的必胜战法。
English: If the enemy retreats, I will immediately use cavalry to chase them, and now the infantry will follow. This is a surefire way for the infantry to fight against the enemy cavalry.

古文：法曰： 步兵与车、骑战者，必依丘陵、险阻，如无险阻，令我士卒为行马、蒺藜。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 步兵与战车、骑兵作战，一定要依托陵、险阻；如果没有险阻，就让我方官兵多制作拒马和蒺藜。 
English: It is true what the military law says: when infantry fight with chariots and cavalry, they must rely on tombs and obstacles; if there are no obstacles, let our officers and soldiers make more horses and ploughs.

古文：《五代史》：晋将周德威为卢龙节度使，恃勇不修边备，遂失榆关之险。
现代文：《旧五代史》记载：晋王李存勖的大将周德威出任卢龙节度使时，自恃作战英勇，放松边防守备，以致于丢失了榆关这一险要关隘。
English: "The History of the Old Five Dynasties" records: When Zhou Dewei, the general of the Jin king Li Cunxu, was appointed as the envoy of the Lulong Festival, he boasted of fighting bravely and relaxed the border defense preparations, so that he lost the pass, which was a dangerous pass.

古文：契丹每刍牧于营、平之间，陷新州，德威复取不克，奔归幽州。
现代文：致使契丹人得以南下放牧于营州与平州之间，并乘隙攻占了新州，周德威想要再夺回来已经来不及了，败归幽州城。
English: As a result, the Khitan people were able to go south to graze between Yingzhou and Pingzhou, and took advantage of the gap to capture Xinzhou. Zhou Dewei was too late to recapture it, and was defeated and returned to Yuzhou City.

古文：契丹围之二百日，城中危困。
现代文：契丹兵乘胜进围幽州长达二百天，迫使城中陷入危境。
English: The Khitan soldiers took advantage of the victory and besieged Yuzhou for 200 days, forcing the city into a dangerous situation.

古文：李嗣源闻之，约李存勖，步骑七万，会于易州救之。
现代文：晋将李嗣源获此消息后，便约李存审等将率领步骑兵七万人会师于易州，准备援救危困中的周德威。
English: After the general Li Siyuan received this news, he invited Li Cunxin and others to lead 70,000 infantry and cavalry to join the division in Yizhou to prepare to rescue Zhou Dewei in peril.

古文：乃自易州北行，逾大房岭，循涧而东。
现代文：他们从易州北出，越过大房岭，沿着山涧向东前进。
English: They set out from the north of Yizhou, crossed the Dafangling, and marched eastward along the ridge.

古文：嗣源与养子从珂将三千骑为先锋，进至山口，契丹以万骑遮其前，将士失色。嗣源以百骑先进，免冑扬鞭，胡语谓契丹曰： 汝无故犯我疆埸，晋王命我将百万骑众，直抵西楼，灭汝种族。 
现代文：嗣源与其养子从珂率三千骑兵为先锋，当进至山口之时，契丹以一万骑兵拦截在前，晋军将士惊惧失色；李嗣源率领百名骑兵先行前进，他摘掉护首头盔，高高扬起马鞭，用契丹语厉声指斥敌人说： 你们无故侵犯我国疆土，晋王命令我率领百万骑兵，直捣你们西楼老巢，灭掉你们契丹种族！ 
English: With his adopted son, Li Siyuan led 3,000 cavalrymen as the vanguard. When they entered the mountain pass, the Khitan intercepted them with 10,000 cavalrymen. The Jin soldiers were shocked and disgraced. Li Siyuan led 100 cavalrymen to advance. He took off his helmet, raised his horse whip, and sharply rebuked the enemy in the Khitan language, saying: "You have invaded our territory without reason. The King of Jin ordered me to lead a million cavalrymen to directly attack your West Tower and destroy your Khitan race!"

古文：因跃马奋挝，三入其阵，斩契丹酋长一人。
现代文：说完，立即跃马奋击，三次冲入敌阵，击杀一名契丹酋长。
English: Having said this, he immediately leapt onto his horse and charged into the enemy lines three times, killing a Khitan chieftain.

古文：后军齐进，契丹兵却，晋兵始得出。
现代文：晋军后续部队乘势齐头并进，契丹兵向后败退，晋军这才得以越出山口向幽州进发。
English: The Jin army's follow-up troops advanced together, and the Khitan soldiers retreated backwards. Only then was the Jin army able to leave the mountain pass and head for Yuzhou.

古文：李存勖命步兵伐木为鹿角阵，人持一枝以成寨。
现代文：李存审命令步兵砍伐树木设置鹿角阵，每人手持一枝结成营寨。
English: Li Cunxin ordered the infantry to cut down trees and set up a deer antler array, each holding a branch to form a camp.

古文：契丹环寨而过，寨中万弩齐发射之，流矢蔽日，契丹人马死者塞道。
现代文：契丹兵绕寨而过时，寨中万箭齐发，箭矢盖天遮日，契丹触箭而死伤的人马堵塞了道路。
English: When the Khitan soldiers went around the village, thousands of arrows were shot in the village, the arrows covered the sky, and the road was blocked by the dead and wounded people who were hit by the arrows.

古文：将至幽州，契丹列阵以待之。
现代文：当晋军即将进至幽州时，契丹部队又列好阵势等待之。
English: When the Jin army was about to enter Yuzhou, the Khitan forces lined up and waited for them.

古文：存勖令步兵阵于后，戒勿先动。令羸兵曳柴、燃草而进，烟尘蔽天，契丹莫测其多少，因鼓入战。
现代文：存审把步兵部署在敌军背后，戒令他们不得先动；又令一些老弱残兵拖着树枝，点燃柴草前进，顿时烟尘漫空蔽日，致使契丹兵无法测知晋军究竟多少。
English: He ordered the infantry to be deployed behind the enemy, and ordered them not to move first. He also ordered some old and weak remnants to drag branches and ignite firewood to advance, and the smoke and dust suddenly covered the sky, so that the Khitan soldiers could not detect the exact number of Jin troops.

古文：存勖乃趋后阵，起而乘之，契丹遂大败，席卷其众，自北山口遁去。
现代文：晋军乘机擂鼓交战，李存审急趋敌军阵后，亲率事先部署在那里的步兵发起突袭，契丹军队大败亏输，狼狈逃窜，从北山口败走。
English: The Jin army took advantage of the opportunity to fight. After Li Cunxu rushed to the enemy's line, the infantry deployed there in advance launched a surprise attack. The Khitan army was defeated and fled in disarray, defeated from the North Mountain Pass.

古文：俘斩其首级万计，遂解幽州之围。
现代文：晋军俘虏斩获首级共万多，终于解了幽州之围。
English: The Jin army captured a total of more than 10,000 prisoners of the first level, and finally lifted the siege of Yuzhou.

