古文：所谓平天下在治其国者，上老老而民兴孝，上长长而民兴悌，上恤孤而民不倍，是以君子有絜矩之道也。
现代文：之所以说平定天下要治理好自己的国家，是因为，在上位的人尊敬老人，老百姓就会孝顺自己的父母，在上位的人尊重长辈，老百姓就会尊重自己的兄长；在上位的人体恤救济孤儿，老百姓也会同样跟着去做。所以，品德高尚的人总是实行以身作则，推己及人的 絜矩之道 。
English: The reason why it is said that to pacify the world, it is necessary to govern one's own country well is that if those in power respect the elderly, the common people will be filial to their parents; if those in power respect the elders, the common people will respect their brothers and sisters; if those in power show compassion and relief to orphans, the common people will do the same. Therefore, people with high moral character always practice the way of setting an example and encouraging others to do the same.

古文：所恶于上，毋以使下，所恶于下，毋以事上；所恶于前，毋以先后；所恶于后，毋以从前；所恶于右，毋以交于左；所恶于左，毋以交于右；此之谓絜矩之道。《诗》云： 乐只君子，民之父母。 
现代文：如果厌恶上司对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待你的下属；如果厌恶下属对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待你的上司；如果厌恶在你前面的人对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待在你后面的人；如果厌恶在你后面的人对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待在你前面的人；如果厌恶在你右边的人对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待在你左边的人；如果厌恶在你左边的人对你的某种行为，就不要用这种行为去对待在你右边的人。这就叫做 絜矩之道 。《诗经》说： 使人心悦诚服的国君啊，是老百姓的父母。 
English: If you dislike a certain action of your superior, do not do it to your subordinate; if you dislike a certain action of your subordinate, do not do it to your superior; if you dislike a certain action of the person in front of you, do not do it to the person behind you; if you dislike a certain action of the person behind you, do not do it to the person in front of you; if you dislike a certain action of the person on your right, do not do it to the person on your left; if you dislike a certain action of the person on your left, do not do it to the person on your right.

古文：民之所好好之，民之所恶恶之，此之谓民之父母。《诗》云： 节彼南山，维石岩岩。
现代文：老百姓喜欢的他也喜欢，老百姓厌恶的他也厌恶，这样的国君就可以说是老百姓的父母了。《诗经》说： 巍峨的南山啊，岩石耸立。
English: He also likes what the common people like, and he also dislikes what the common people dislike. Such a sovereign can be said to be the common people's parents. "Song of Songs" says: Towering Nanshan, the rock stands tall.

古文：赫赫师尹，民具尔瞻。 
现代文：显赫的尹太师啊，百姓都仰望你。 
English: Eminent Yin Taishi, the people are looking up to you.

古文：有国者不可以不慎，辟，则为天下僇矣。
现代文：统治国家的人不可不谨慎。稍有偏颇，就会被天下人推翻。
English: Those who govern the country must be cautious. If they are a little biased, they will be overthrown by the people of the world.

古文：《诗》云： 殷之未丧师，克配上帝。
现代文：《诗经》说： 殷朝没有丧失民心的时候，还是能够与上天的要求相符的。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When the Yin Dynasty has not lost the hearts of the people, it can still meet the requirements of heaven.

古文：仪监于殷，峻命不易。 
现代文：请用殷朝作个鉴戒吧，守住天命并不是一件容易的事。 
English: Please use Yin Dynasty as a warning. It is not an easy thing to keep one's destiny.

古文：道得众则得国，失众则失国。
现代文：这就是说，得到民心就能得到国家，失去民心就会失去国家。
English: That is to say, if you win the people's hearts, you will win the country, and if you lose the people's hearts, you will lose the country.

古文：是故君子先慎乎德。
现代文：所以，品德高尚的人首先注重修养德行。
English: Therefore, people with high moral character first pay attention to cultivating virtue.

古文：有德此有人，有人此有土，有土此有财，有财此有用。
现代文：有德行才会有人拥护，有人拥护才能保有土地，有土地才会有财富，有财富才能供给使用。
English: Virtue is needed to be supported, support is needed to hold land, land is needed to have wealth, and wealth is needed to supply and use.

古文：德者本也，财者末也。外本内末，争民施夺。
现代文：德是根本，财是枝末，假如把根本当成了外在的东西，却把枝末当成了内在的根本，那就会和老百姓争夺利益。
English: Virtue is the root, wealth is the branch. If the root is made into an external thing, but the branch is regarded as the internal root, it will compete with the common people for profits.

古文：是故财聚则民散，财散则民聚。
现代文：所以，君王聚财敛货，民心就会失散；君王散财于民，民心就会聚在一起。
English: Therefore, if a king amasses wealth and hoards goods, the people's hearts will be scattered; if a king scatters wealth and hoards goods, the people's hearts will be gathered together.

古文：是故言悖而出者，亦悖而入；货悖而入者，亦悖而出。《康诰》曰： 惟命不于常。 
现代文：这正如你说话不讲道理，人家也会用不讲道理的话来回答你；用不正当的方法得来的财物，又被别人用不正当的方法拿去。《康诰》说： 天命是不会始终如一的。 
English: Just as you speak unreasonably, people will answer you with unreasonable words; the wealth obtained by improper means will be taken away by others in an improper manner. "Kang Xi" said: The fate of heaven will not be consistent.

古文：道善则得之，不善则失之矣。
现代文：这就是说，行善便会得到天命，不行善便会失去天命。
English: That is to say, if you do a good deed, you will get a good fortune, and if you don't do a good deed, you will lose a good fortune.

古文：《楚书》曰： 楚国无以为宝，惟善以为宝。 
现代文：《楚书》说： 楚国没有什么是宝，只是把善当作宝。 
English: "The Book of Chu" says: Nothing in the State of Chu is a treasure, only the good is considered a treasure.

古文：舅犯曰： 亡人无以为宝，仁亲以为宝。 
现代文：舅犯说， 我逃亡之人，不以富贵为宝，只是把仁爱当作宝。 
English: My fugitive, my uncle said, does not treasure wealth, but kindness.

古文：《秦誓》曰： 若有一介臣，断断兮无他技，其心休休焉，其如有容焉。
现代文：《秦誓》上说： 假如有这样的一位大臣，诚恳忠实，无他特长，但其品德高尚，心地宽厚，能够容人容物。
English: "Qin Zhe" said: If there is such a minister, sincere and faithful, with no other special skills, but his character is noble, his heart is generous, and he can accommodate people.

古文：人之有技，若己有之；人之彦圣，其心好之，不啻若自其口出。实能容之，以能保我子孙黎民，尚亦有利哉！
现代文：别人有了什么本领，就好像他自己有了；别人的才能，别人的美德，他都衷心地赞美，不但口头上加以称道，而且还能包容推荐他们，这就使我的子孙黎民得到保护，也有利于国家。
English: He praises the talents and virtues of others from the bottom of his heart, not only praising them verbally, but also recommending them with tolerance. This has enabled my children and grandchildren to be protected and is also beneficial to the country.

古文：人之有技，媢嫉以恶之；人之彦圣，而违之，俾不通：实不能容，以不能保我子孙黎民，亦曰殆哉！ 
现代文：别人有了什么本领，他就嫉妒厌恶；别人的才能，别人的美德，他压着盖着不让君王知道，不能包容推荐，因而使我的子孙黎民不能得到保护，对国家也很危险。 
English: Other people's talents, other people's virtues, he suppressed and did not let the king know, and could not tolerate recommendation, thus making it impossible for my son Limin to be protected, and it was also dangerous for the country.

古文：唯仁人放流之，迸诸四夷，不与同中国。
现代文：只有仁爱的君王能够流放此辈嫉贤妒能之人，把他们驱逐到四夷，不和他们同居国中。
English: Only a benevolent ruler can exile these jealous people, banish them to Shii, and not live with them in the country.

古文：此谓唯仁人为能爱人，能恶人。
现代文：这就是说，只有仁人才懂得要热爱什么样的人，厌恶什么样的人。
English: That is to say, only a benevolent person knows what kind of person to love and what kind of person to loathe.

古文：见贤而不能举，举而不能先，命也；见不善而不能退，退而不能远，过也。
现代文：见到贤人而不能推荐，推荐以后而不能重用，这是怠慢。见到坏人而不能斥退，斥退以后又不能流放远方，这是错误。
English: To see a wise man and not recommend him, or to recommend him and not reuse him, is negligence; to see a bad man and not expel him, or to expel him and not exile him far away, is a mistake.

古文：好人之所恶，恶人之所好，是谓拂人之性，灾必逮夫身。
现代文：喜欢众人所厌恶的，厌恶众人所喜欢的，这是违背人的本性，灾难必定要落到自己身上。
English: It is against human nature to like what everyone else dislikes, and it is against human nature to dislike what everyone else likes. Disaster is bound to befall you.

古文：是故君子有大道，必忠信以得之，骄泰以失之。
现代文：所以，做国君的人有正确的途径：忠诚信义，便会获得一切；骄奢放纵，便会失去一切。
English: Therefore, there is a correct way for a person to be a sovereign: if you are loyal and faithful, you will gain everything; if you are arrogant and indulgent, you will lose everything.

古文：生财有大道，生之者众，食之者寡，为之者疾，用之者舒，则财恒足矣。
现代文：生产财富也有正确的途径；生产的人多，消费的人少；生产的人勤奋，消费的人节省。
English: There is also a correct way to produce wealth; more people produce, fewer people consume; people who produce are diligent, and people who consume are thrifty.

古文：仁者以财发身，不仁者以身发财。
现代文：这样，财富便会经常充足。仁爱的人仗义疏财以修养自身的德行，不仁的人不惜以生命为代价去敛钱发财。
English: In this way, wealth will always be plentiful. Benevolent people cultivate their virtues by saving money for the sake of righteousness. Uncharitable people save money for the sake of wealth at the cost of their lives.

古文：未有上好仁而下不好义者也，未有好义其事不终者也，未有府库财非其财者也。
现代文：没有在上位的人喜爱仁德，而在下位的人却不喜爱忠义的；没有喜爱忠义而做事却半途而废的；没有国库里的财物不是属于国君的。
English: There is no one at the top who loves kindness, and no one at the bottom who loves faithfulness; there is no one at the bottom who loves faithfulness and does things half-heartedly; there is no treasure in the treasury that does not belong to the sovereign.

古文：孟献子曰： 畜马乘不察于鸡豚，伐冰之家不畜牛羊，百乘之家不畜聚敛之臣。
现代文：孟献子说： 养了四匹马拉车的士大夫之家，就不需再去养鸡养猪；祭祀用品的卿大夫家，就不要再去养牛养羊；拥有一百辆兵车的诸侯之家，就不要去收养搜刮民财的家臣。
English: Meng Xianzi said: If the family of a scholar-doctor raised four horse-drawn carriages, they would no longer need to raise chickens and pigs; if the family of a noble-doctor raised sacrificial supplies, they would no longer need to raise cattle and sheep; if the family of a feudal lord owned a hundred chariots, they would not need to adopt a vassal who scrounged people's wealth.

古文：与其有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣。 
现代文：与其有搜刮民财的家臣，不如有偷盗东西的家臣。 
English: It is better to have a vassal who steals than to have a vassal who steals.

古文：此谓国不以利为利，以义为利也。
现代文：这意思是说，一个国家不应该以财货为利益，而应该以仁义为利益。
English: Therefore, a country should not take wealth and goods as its interests, but should take benevolence as its interests.

古文：长国家而务财用者，必自小人矣。彼为善之，小人之使为国家，灾害并至。
现代文：做了国君却还一心想着聚敛财货，这必然是有小人在诱导，而那国君还以为这些小人是好人，让他们去处理国家大事，结果是天灾人祸一齐降临。
English: If a ruler is bent on amassing wealth, he must be guided by villains, and the ruler thinks that these villains are good people and allows them to handle national affairs. The result is that natural disasters and man-made disasters come together.

古文：虽有善者，亦无如之何矣！
现代文：这时虽有贤能的人，却也没有办法挽救了。
English: At this time, although there are capable people, there is no way to save them.

古文：此谓国不以利为利，以义为利也。
现代文：所以，一个国家不应该以财货为利益，而应该以仁义为利益。
English: Therefore, a country should not take wealth and goods as its interests, but should take benevolence as its interests.

