古文：管仲夷吾者，颍上人也。
现代文：管仲，名夷吾，是颍上人。
English: Guanzhong, also known as Yiguo, was a disciple of Shao Shangren.

古文：少时常与鲍叔牙游，鲍叔知其贤。
现代文：他年轻的时候，常和鲍叔牙往来，鲍叔牙知道他贤明、有才干。
English: When he was young, he often went out with Uncle Bao, who knew that he was wise and talented.

古文：管仲贫困，常欺鲍叔，鲍叔终善遇之，不以为言。
现代文：管仲家贫，经常占鲍叔牙的便宜，但鲍叔牙始终都对管仲很好，不因为这些事而有什么怨言。
English: As Guan Zhong's family was poor, he often took advantage of Bao Shuya, but Bao Shuya always treated Guan Zhong well. It was not because of these things that he had any complaints.

古文：已而鲍叔事齐公子小白，管仲事公子纠。
现代文：不久，鲍叔牙侍奉齐国公子小白，管仲侍奉公子纠。
English: Soon after, Bao Shuga served the prince of Qi, Xiao Bai, and Guanzhong served the prince of Guanzhong.

古文：及小白立为桓公，公子纠死，管仲囚焉。
现代文：等到小白即位，立为齐桓公以后，桓公让鲁国杀了公子纠，管仲被囚禁。
English: After the enthronement of Xiao Bai and his enthronement as Prince Qi Huan, Prince Huan ordered the State of Lu to kill Gongzi Guan, and Guan Zhong was imprisoned.

古文：鲍叔遂进管仲。
现代文：于是鲍叔牙向齐桓公推荐管仲。
English: Therefore, Bao Shuji recommended Guanzhong to Qi Huan.

古文：管仲既用，任政于齐，齐桓公以霸，九合诸侯，一匡天下，管仲之谋也。
现代文：管仲被任用以后，在齐国执政，桓公凭借着管仲而称霸，并以霸主的身份，多次会合诸候，使天下归正于一，这都是靠管仲的智谋才实现的。
English: After Guanzhong was appointed, he ruled the state of Qi. With the help of Guanzhong, King Huan gained supremacy, and as the overlord, he held many meetings to unify the country. All of this was made possible by Guanzhong's wisdom.

古文：管仲曰： 吾始困时，尝与鲍叔贾，分财利多自与，鲍叔不以我为贪，知我贫也。
现代文：管仲说： 我当初贫困时，曾经和鲍叔牙一起合伙做生意，分财利时自己总是多要一些，鲍叔牙并不认为我贪财，他知道我是家里贫穷。
English: Guanzhong said: When I was poor, I used to do business in partnership with Bao Shuya. I always wanted more when I shared my wealth. Bao Shuya didn't think I was greedy, he knew I was poor at home.

古文：吾尝为鲍叔谋事而更穷困，鲍叔不以我为愚，知时有利不利也。
现代文：我曾经替鲍叔牙谋划事情，反而使他更加困顿不堪，陷于窘境，鲍叔牙不认为我愚笨，因为他知道时运有顺利的时候，也有不顺利的时候。
English: I used to plan things for Uncle Bao, but it made him more embarrassed and embarrassed. Uncle Bao doesn't think I'm stupid, because he knows that there are times when things go well, and there are times when they don't.

古文：吾尝三仕三见逐于君，鲍叔不以我为不肖，知我不遭时也。
现代文：我曾经多次作官多次都被国君驱逐，鲍叔牙不认为我没有才能，他知道我是没遇上好时机。
English: I have been an official many times and have been expelled by the sovereign many times. Bao Shouya does not think that I have no talent, he knows that I did not have a good opportunity.

古文：吾尝三战三走，鲍叔不以我怯，知我有老母也。
现代文：我曾经多次打仗时逃跑。鲍叔牙不认为我胆小，他知道我家里有老母需要赡养。
English: I had run away many times during the war. Uncle Bao didn't think I was a coward, he knew that I had an old mother at home who needed support.

古文：公子纠败，召忽死之，吾幽囚受辱，鲍叔不以我为无耻，知我不羞小节而耻功名不显于天下也。
现代文：公子纠在争夺国君之位的斗争中失败，召忽为他殉难，我被囚禁遭受屈辱，鲍叔牙不认为我是不知廉耻的人，因为他知道我不因小的过失而感到羞愧，而以功名不显扬于天下而感到耻辱。
English: Prince Tang failed in his struggle for the throne of the country, I was summoned to be martyred for him, I was imprisoned and humiliated, Bao Shugang did not think that I was a shameless person, because he knew that I was not ashamed of a small mistake, but was ashamed of not being famous in the world.

古文：生我者父母，知我者鲍子也。 
现代文：生养我的是父母，真正了解我的是鲍叔牙啊。 
English: My parents are the ones who gave birth to me, but it's Uncle Bao who really knows me.

古文：鲍叔既进管仲，以身下之。
现代文：鲍叔牙推荐了管仲以后，情愿在管仲手下做事。
English: After Bao Shouya recommended Guanzhong, he was willing to work under Guanzhong.

古文：子孙世禄于齐，有封邑者十余世，常为名大夫。
现代文：他的子孙世世代代在齐国享有俸禄，得到封地的有十几代，多数是著名的大夫。
English: For generations, his children and grandchildren have enjoyed salaries in Qi, and more than a dozen generations have received fiefs, most of whom are famous doctors.

古文：天下不多管仲之贤而多鲍叔能知人也。
现代文：因此，天下的人不称赞管仲的才干，反而赞美鲍叔牙能够识别人才。
English: Therefore, people around the world do not praise Guanzhong's talent, but praise Bao Shuji for being able to recognize talent.

古文：管仲既任政相齐，以区区之齐在海滨，通货积财，富国强兵，与俗同好恶。
现代文：管仲出任齐相执政以后，凭借着小小的齐国在海滨的条件，流通货物，积聚财富，使得国富兵强，与百姓同好恶。
English: After Guan Zhong assumed the post of Qi Xiang in power, he relied on the conditions of the small Qi country on the seashore, the circulation of goods, and the accumulation of wealth to make the country rich and strong, and the people liked and disliked it.

古文：故其称曰： 仓廪实而知礼节，衣食足而知荣辱，上服度则六亲固。四维不张，国乃灭亡。
现代文：所以，他在《管子》一书中称述说： 仓库储备满了粮食，百姓才懂得礼节；衣食丰足了，百姓才能分辨荣辱；国君的作为合乎法度， 六亲 才会得以稳固  礼义廉耻得不到提倡和发扬，国家就会灭亡。 
English: Therefore, he said in his book "Pipe": The warehouse is full of grain reserves, so the people can understand the etiquette; the food and clothing are plentiful, so the people can distinguish honor and disgrace; the actions of the sovereign are in accordance with the law, so that the six relatives can be stable; if courtesy, honesty and integrity are not promoted and developed, the country will perish.

古文：下令如流水之原，令顺民心。 
现代文： 国家下达政令就像流水的源头，顺着百姓的心意流下。 
English: The decrees issued by the state are like the source of flowing water, flowing down in accordance with the will of the people.

古文：故论卑而易行。
现代文：所以政令符合下情就容易推行。
English: Therefore, the decree is easy to implement if it meets the following conditions.

古文：俗之所欲，因而予之；俗之所否，因而去之。
现代文：百姓想要得到的，就给他们；百姓所反对的，就将其废除。
English: Give the people what they want; abolish what they don't want.

古文：其为政也，善因祸而为福，转败而为功。
现代文：管仲执政的时候，善于把祸患化为吉祥，使失败转化为成功。
English: When Guanzhong was in power, he was good at turning disaster into auspiciousness and turning failure into success.

古文：贵轻重，慎权衡。
现代文：他重视分别事物的轻重缓急，慎重地权衡事情的利弊得失。
English: He attaches importance to the priorities of different things, and carefully weighs the pros and cons of things.

古文：桓公实怒少姬，南袭蔡，管仲因而伐楚，责包茅不入贡于周室。
现代文：齐桓公实际上是怨恨少姬改嫁，想要袭击蔡国，管仲就借此机会攻打楚国，责备它没有向周王室进贡菁茅。
English: In fact, Prince Qi Huan was resentful of Shaoqi's remarriage and wanted to attack Cai Province. Guanzhong took this opportunity to attack Chu Province, accusing it of not paying tribute to the Zhou royal family.

古文：桓公实北征山戎，而管仲因而令燕修召公之政。
现代文：桓公实际上是想向北出兵攻打山戎，而管仲就趁机让燕国重修召公时期的政教。
English: In fact, Emperor Kan intended to send troops to the north to attack Yamashiro, but Guanzhong took the opportunity to have Yan Guo reinstate the political and religious leadership of the imperial period.

古文：于柯之会，桓公欲背曹沫之约，管仲因而信之，诸侯由是归齐。
现代文：在柯地会盟，桓公想背弃曹沫逼迫他订立的盟约，管仲就顺应形势劝他信守盟约，诸候们因此归顺齐国。
English: In the alliance at Ke Di, Kuan Gong wanted to renege on the alliance that Cao Moru had forced him to conclude, and Guan Zhong persuaded him to keep the alliance according to the situation. As a result, all the states surrendered to Qi.

古文：故曰： 知与之为取，政之宝也。 
现代文：所以说： 懂得给予正是为了取得的道理，这是治理国家的法宝。 
English: Therefore, it is said that knowing how to give for the sake of receiving is a magic weapon for governing the country.

古文：管仲富拟于公室，有三归、反坫，齐人不以为侈。
现代文：管仲拥有的财富可以跟国君相比拟，拥有设置华丽的三归台和国君的宴饮设备，齐国人却不认为他奢侈僭越。
English: Guanzhong's wealth can be compared to that of the king. He has a magnificent three-tiered table and the king's banquet equipment. However, the people of Qi do not think he is extravagant.

古文：管仲卒，齐国遵其政，常强于诸侯。
现代文：管仲逝世后，齐国仍遵循他的政策，常常比其它诸候国强大。
English: After the death of Guan Zhong, Qi still followed his policies and was often stronger than other states.

古文：后百余年而有晏子焉。
现代文：此后过了百余年，齐国又出了个晏婴。
English: More than a hundred years later, the country of Qi had another baby stork.

古文：晏平仲婴者，莱之夷维人也。
现代文：晏平仲，名婴，是齐国莱地夷维人。
English: Zou Pingzhong, a famous infant, was from Laiji, Qi Province.

古文：事齐灵公、庄公、景公，以节俭力行重于齐。
现代文：他辅佐了齐灵公、庄公、景公三代国君，由于节约俭仆又努力工作，在齐国受到人们的尊重。
English: He assisted the three generations of sovereigns, Qilinggong, Zhuanggong, and Jinggong, and was respected by the people of Qi due to his frugality and hard work.

古文：既相齐，食不重肉，妾不衣帛。
现代文：他做了齐国的宰相，每顿饭不吃两种以上的肉食，妻妾不穿丝绸衣服。
English: When he became the prime minister of Qi, he did not eat more than two kinds of meat at each meal, and his wife and concubine did not wear silk clothes.

古文：其在朝，君语及之，即危言；语不及之，即危行。
现代文：在朝廷上，国君说话涉及到他，就正直地陈述自己的意见；国君的话不涉及他，就正直地去办事。
English: In the imperial court, when the sovereign's words concern him, he honestly states his opinion; when the sovereign's words do not concern him, he honestly goes about his business.

古文：国有道，即顺命；无道，即衡命。
现代文：国君能行正道，就顺着他的命令去做，不能行正道时，就对命令斟酌着去办。
English: If the sovereign is able to take the right path, he will follow his orders. If he is not able to take the right path, he will act according to his orders.

古文：以此三世显名于诸侯。
现代文：因此，他在齐灵公、庄公、景公三代，名声显扬于各国诸候间。
English: Therefore, he is the third generation of Qi Ling Gong, Zhuang Gong, and Jing Gong, and his fame is prominent among the dignitaries of various countries.

古文：越石父贤，在縲绁中。
现代文：越石父是个贤才，正在囚禁着服劳役。
English: Yue Shifu is a genius and is serving hard labor in prison.

古文：晏子出，遭之涂，解左骖赎之，载归。
现代文：晏子外出，在路上遇到他，就解开乘车左边的马，把他赎出来，然后驾车将他带回了家。
English: The mule went out, met him on the road, untied the horse on the left side of the car, ransomed him, and then drove him home.

古文：弗谢，入闺。久之，越石父请绝。
现代文：道家后，晏子没有向越石父告辞，就走进内室，过了好久没出来，越石父就请求与晏子绝交。
English: After the Taoist home, Zizi did not say goodbye to Yue Shi father, he went into the inner room. After a long time, he did not come out, and Yue Shi father asked to sever relations with Zizi.

古文：晏子戄然，摄衣冠谢曰： 婴虽不仁，免子于戹，何子求绝之速也？ 
现代文：晏子大吃一惊，匆忙整理好衣帽道歉说： 我即使说不上善良宽厚，也总算帮助您从困境中解脱出来，您为什么这么快就要求绝交呢？ 
English: The cripple was taken aback, hastily arranged his clothes and hat, and apologized, saying, "Even if I can't say I'm kind and generous, I've finally helped you out of your predicament. Why are you so quick to demand severance of friendship?

古文：石父曰： 不然。吾闻君子诎于不知己而信于知己者。
现代文：越石父说： 不是这样的，我听说君子在不了解自己的人那里受到委屈，而在了解自己的人面前意志就会得到伸张。
English: Yue Shi's father said, "It's not like that. I've heard that a gentleman will be wronged by someone who doesn't know him, but a gentleman's will will be strengthened by someone who knows him."

古文：方吾在縲绁中，彼不知我也。
现代文：当我在囚禁之中，那些人不了解我。
English: When I was in prison, they didn't understand me.

古文：夫子既已感寤而赎我，是知己；知己而无礼，固不如在縲绁之中。 
现代文：你既然已经受到感动而醒悟，把我赎买出来，这就是了解我；了解我却不以礼相待，还不如让我继续被囚禁服劳役。 
English: Since you have been moved to wake up and ransom me, this is understanding me; if you understand me but do not treat me with courtesy, it is better for me to continue to be imprisoned for forced labor.

古文：晏子于是延入为上客。
现代文：于是晏子就请他进屋待为贵宾。
English: So the cripple invited him into the house to stay as a guest of honour.

古文：晏子为齐相，出，其御之妻从门间而闚其夫。
现代文：晏子做齐国宰相的时候，一次坐车外出，车夫的妻子从门缝里偷偷地看她的丈夫。
English: When Miao Zi was the prime minister of Qi, he once went out in a car, and the driver's wife secretly watched her husband through the cracks in the door.

古文：其夫为相御，拥大盖，策驷马，意气扬扬甚自得也。
现代文：看到他丈夫替宰相驾车，头上遮着大伞，挥动着鞭子赶着四匹马，神气十足，洋洋得意。
English: To see her husband driving for the prime minister, with a large umbrella over his head, driving four horses with a whip, full of dignity and pride.

古文：既而归，其妻请去。夫问其故。妻曰： 晏子长不满六尺，身相齐国，名显诸侯。今者妾观其出，志念深矣，常有以自下者。
现代文：不久回到家里，妻子就要求离开他，车夫问她离开的原因，妻子说： 晏子身高不过六尺，却做了齐国的宰相，名声在各国显扬，我看他外出，志向思想都非常深沉，常有那种甘居人下的态度。
English: Soon after returning home, his wife asked to leave him. The coachman asked her the reason for her departure. His wife said: "Mushi is only six feet tall, but he has become the prime minister of Qi, and his reputation is renowned in all countries. When I see him go out, his aspirations and thoughts are very deep, and he often has the attitude of being willing to live below others.

古文：今子长八尺，乃为人仆御，然子之意自以为足，妾是以求去也。 
现代文：现在你身高八尺，才不过做人家的车夫，看你的神态，却自以为挺满足，因此我请求您让我离开。 
English: Now you're eight feet tall, you're just a driver, and you look like you're having a good time, so I'm asking you to let me go.

古文：其後夫自抑损。
现代文：从此以后，车夫就谦虚恭谨起来。
English: From then on, the coachman became humble and respectful.

古文：晏子怪而问之，御以实对。
现代文：晏子发现了他的变化，感到很奇怪，就问他，车夫也如实相告。
English: The mule, who noticed the change in his carriage, felt very strange and asked him about it. The coachman also told him the truth.

古文：晏子荐以为大夫。
现代文：晏子就推荐他做了大夫。
English: Mame recommended him to become a doctor.

古文：太史公曰：吾读管氏牧民、山高、乘马、轻重、九府，及晏子春秋，详哉其言之也。
现代文：太史公说：我读了管仲的《牧民》、《山高》、《乘马》、《轻重》、《九府》和《晏子春秋》，这些书籍真是写得太详细了！
English: Taishikong said, "I have read Guanzhong's "Herdsmen," "Mountain High," "Riding a Horse," "Heavyweight," "Nine Prefectures" and "Dragonfly Spring and Autumn." These books are really too detailed!

古文：既见其著书，欲观其行事，故次其传。
现代文：读了他们的著作，还想让人们了解他们的事迹，所以就依次为他们作传。
English: After reading their works, I also wanted to let people know about their deeds, so I wrote biographies for them in turn.

古文：至其书，世多有之，是以不论，论其轶事。
现代文：至于他们的著作，社会上已有很多，因此不再论述，只记载他们那些不为人知的事情。
English: As for their writings, there are already a lot of them in society, so they are no longer discussed, only their unknown things are recorded.

古文：管仲世所谓贤臣，然孔子小之。岂以为周道衰微，桓公既贤，而不勉之至王，乃称霸哉？
现代文：管仲是世人所说的贤臣，然而孔子却轻视他，难道是因为周朝统治衰微，桓公既然贤明，管仲不勉励他实行王道却辅佐他只称霸主吗？
English: Guanzhong is what the world calls a wise minister, but Confucius despised him. Was it because the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, and since Kuan Kung was wise, Guanzhong did not encourage him to practice the royal way, but only supported him as the overlord?

古文：语曰 将顺其美，匡救其恶，故上下能哙亲也 。
现代文：古语说： 要顺势助成君子的美德，纠正挽救他的过错，所以君臣百姓之间能亲密无间。 
English: An ancient saying says: It is necessary to support the virtue of the gentleman and correct and save his mistakes, so that the relationship between the prince and the people can be intimate.

古文：岂管仲之谓乎？
现代文：这大概就是说的管仲吧？
English: This is probably what is meant by "governance," right?

古文：方晏子伏庄公尸哭之，成礼然後去，岂所谓 见义不为无勇 者邪？
现代文：当初晏子枕伏在庄公尸体上痛哭，完成了礼节然后离去，难道是人们所说的 遇到正义的事情不去做就是没有勇气 的表现吗？
English: At the beginning, Diao Zizhimiao lay down on Zhuang Gong's corpse and cried bitterly, completed the etiquette and then left. Is this what people call "failing to do what is just" a manifestation of "lack of courage"?

古文：至其谏说，犯君之颜，此所谓 进思尽忠，退思补过 者哉！
现代文：至于晏子直言进谏，敢于冒犯国君的威严，这就是人们所说的 进就想到竭尽忠心，退就想到弥补过失 的人啊！
English: As for Zizi's outspoken insolence, daring to offend the majesty of the sovereign, this is what people call a person who thinks of doing his best to be loyal when he advances, and thinks of making up for his mistakes when he retreats!

古文：假令晏子而在，余虽为之执鞭，所忻慕焉。
现代文：假使晏子还活着，我即使替他挥动着鞭子赶车，也是我非常高兴和十分向往的啊！
English: If the mule is still alive, even if I wave the whip for him to catch the bus, I am very happy and very yearning!

