古文：鄢之役，荆压晋军，军吏患之，将谋。
现代文：鄢陵之战时，楚军逼近晋军摆开阵势，晋军将士都很担忧，打算谋划如何应战。
English: During the Battle of Fuling, the Chu army approached the Jin army to set up a position. The Jin soldiers were very worried and planned how to fight.

古文：范匄自公族趋过之，曰： 夷灶堙井，非退而何？ 
现代文：范匄以公族大夫的身份赶紧走上前说： 楚军现在把营地上的炉灶摧毁，把水井填平，不撤退又能怎样呢？ 
English: As a public doctor, Fan Qi hurriedly stepped forward and said: The Chu army is now destroying the camp's stoves and filling up the wells. If they don't retreat, what can they do?

古文：范文子执戈逐之，曰： 国之存亡，天命也，童子何知焉？
现代文：范文子拿起戈来就追打范匄，说： 国家的存亡是出于天意，你小孩子懂得什么？
English: Fan Wenzi picked up Golai and chased Fan Yao, saying: The survival of the country is due to the will of heaven. What do you children know?

古文：且不及而言，奸也，必为戮。 
现代文：而且并未征求你的意见，你就胡乱发言，这是奸行，一定要执行刑戮。 
English: Moreover, without asking for your opinion, you made a wild statement, which is treason, and the torture must be carried out.

古文：苗贲皇曰： 善逃难哉！ 
现代文：苗贲皇称道： 范文子善于逃避灾难啊！ 
English: Miao Wei praised: Fan Wenzi is good at escaping disaster!

古文：既退荆师于鄢，将谷，范文子立于戎马之前，曰： 君幼弱，诸臣不佞，吾何福以及此！
现代文：在鄢陵打败楚军之后，晋军将要吃楚军囤积的军粮，这时范文子站在大队兵马前面说： 我们的国君年幼，各位大臣又都没才干，我们凭什么福分能得到这一战果呢？
English: After defeating the Chu army in Fuling, the Jin army was about to eat the army rations hoarded by the Chu army. At this time, Fan Wenzi stood in front of a large group of soldiers and horses and said: Our sovereign is young, and all the ministers are incompetent. On what basis can we obtain this victory?

古文：吾闻之， 天道无亲，唯德是授。 
现代文：我听说《周书》上有句话说： 天意并不特别亲近哪一个人，只授福给有德的人。 
English: I have heard that there is a saying in the "Weekly Book": Providence is not particularly close to any one person, and only bestows blessings on those who are virtuous.

古文：吾庸知天之不授晋且以劝楚乎，君与二三臣其戒之！
现代文：我怎么知道这是上天授福给晋国并且以此来勉励楚国呢？国君和各位将士应当警惕啊！
English: How do I know that this is God's blessing to Jin and encouragement to Chu? The sovereign and his soldiers should be on their guard!

古文：夫德，福之基也，无德而福隆，犹无基而厚墉也，其坏也无日矣。 
现代文：德是福的基础，没有德业而享的福太多，就好像地基没有打好，却在上面筑起了高墙，不知道哪一天它就倒塌了。 
English: Virtue is the foundation of happiness. Too much happiness without virtue is like building a high wall without a good foundation, and not knowing when it will collapse.

