古文：◎世宗一
现代文：世宗一
English: Sejong I

古文：世宗钦天履道英毅神圣宣文广武洪仁大孝肃皇帝，讳厚，宪宗孙也。
现代文：世宗钦天履道英毅圣神宣文广武洪仁大孝肃皇帝，叫朱厚趈，明宪宗的孙子。
English: Shizong Qin Tianlu Dao Ying Yi Sheng Xuanwen Guangwu Hongren Da Xiaoshu Emperor, called Zhu Huxuan, is the grandson of Ming Xian Zong.

古文：父兴献王祐杬，国安陆，正德十四年薨。
现代文：其父兴献王朱祐杬，封国于安陆，正德十四年死。
English: His father dedicated the throne to King Zhu Rong, who was enthroned in Anlu. Zhengde died 14 years later.

古文：帝年十有三，以世子理国事。
现代文：当时世宗朱厚趈才十三岁，以世子身份处理封国事务。
English: At that time, Shizong Zhu Houxuan was only thirteen years old, and he handled the affairs of sealing the country as the heir.

古文：十六年三月辛酉，未除服，特命袭封。
现代文：正德十六年三月九日，还没有除去丧服，特命令他承袭封国之职。
English: On March 9 of the 16th year of Zhengde, before removing his mourning clothes, he was ordered to take over the post of vassal state.

古文：丙寅，武宗崩，无嗣，慈寿皇太后与大学士杨廷和定策，遣太监谷大用、韦彬、张锦，大学士梁储，定国公徐光祚，驸马都尉崔元，礼部尚书毛澄，以遗诏迎王于兴邸。
现代文：十四日，武宗死，没有继承人，慈圣皇太后与大学士杨廷和定策，派太监谷大用、韦彬、张锦，大学士梁储，定国公徐光祚，驸马都尉崔元，礼部尚书毛澄，以遗诏迎接兴献王朱厚趈于兴献王官邸。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Wuzong died without an heir. Empress Dowager Cixi and the university scholars Yang Tinghe and Ding Zheng sent the eunuchs Gu Dajian, Wei Bin, Zhang Jin, the university scholar Liang Yuan, Ding Guo Gong, Xu Guangyao, the imperial equerry Cui Yuan, and the etiquette scholar Shang Shu Mao Cheng to greet King Xingxian Zhu Houyi at the official residence of King Xingxian.

古文：夏四月癸未，发安陆。
现代文：四月二日，兴献王朱厚趈从安陆出发。
English: On April 2nd, the Wang Zhu Houxuan expedition set off from Anlu.

古文：癸卯，至京师，止于郊外。
现代文：二十二日，到京师，在郊外停下来。
English: On the 22nd, I arrived in Beijing and stopped in the suburbs.

古文：礼官具仪，请如皇太子即位礼。
现代文：礼官准备好全部仪式，按皇太子即位礼节拜见兴献王。
English: The etiquette officer prepares all the ceremonies and pays homage to the crown prince according to the enthronement ceremony.

古文：王顾长史袁宗皋曰： 遗诏以我嗣皇帝位，非皇子也。 
现代文：兴献王朱厚趈望着长史袁宗皋说： 遗诏要我继承皇帝位，我不是皇长子。 
English: King Zhu Houxun looked at Yuan Zongyao and said, "The imperial edict requires me to succeed to the throne. I am not the eldest son of the emperor.

古文：大学士杨廷和等请如礼臣所具仪，由东安门入居文华殿，择日登极。
现代文：大学士杨廷和请求按礼官准备的仪式，由东安门入居文华殿，选择吉日登基。
English: At the request of Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, and according to the ceremony prepared by the etiquette officer, he entered the Wenhua Palace through the Dongan Gate and chose a auspicious day to ascend to the throne.

古文：不允。
现代文：兴献王没同意。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：会皇太后趣群臣上笺劝进，乃即郊外受笺。
现代文：刚好，皇太后催促群臣上书劝兴献王到朝廷，他这才在郊外接受上书。
English: It just so happened that the empress dowager urged her courtiers to send a letter to the emperor to persuade him to present the king to the imperial court, and it was only then that he accepted the letter in the suburbs.

古文：是日日中，入自大明门，遣官告宗庙社稷，谒大行皇帝几筵，朝皇太后，出御奉天殿，即皇帝位。
现代文：当天中午，从大明门进入朝廷，派官吏祭告宗庙社稷，拜见大行皇帝宝座，朝见皇太后，在奉天殿即皇帝位。
English: At noon on the same day, he entered the imperial court through the Daiming Gate and sent officials to announce the imperial edict of the Zong Temple, to see the throne of Emperor Da Xing, to see the empress dowager, and to receive the imperial throne in the Bongten Hall.

古文：以明年为嘉靖元年，大赦天下。
现代文：以明年为嘉靖元年，大赦天下。
English: Next year will be the first year of Jiajing, and the world will be amnestied.

古文：恤录正德中言事罪废诸臣，赐天下明年田租之半，自正德十五年以前逋赋尽免之。丙午，遣使奉迎母妃蒋氏。
现代文：二十五日，派使臣奉迎母妃蒋氏。
English: On the 25th, he sent an envoy to welcome his mother, Empress Jiang.

古文：召费宏复入阁。
现代文：召费宏入阁。
English: Fee Hong is appointed to the cabinet.

古文：戊申，命礼臣集议兴献王封号。
现代文：二十七日，命礼臣集中商议兴献王封号。
English: On the 27th, it was ordered that the courtiers should discuss the presentation of the imperial seal.

古文：五月乙卯，罢大理银矿。
现代文：五月四日，停开大理银矿。
English: On May 4, Dalian Silver Mine was shut down.

古文：丙辰，梁储致仕。
现代文：五日，梁储辞官退职。
English: On the fifth day, Liang retired from his post.

古文：壬戌，吏部侍郎袁宗皋为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十一日，吏部侍郎袁宗皋为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yuan Zongyao, the attendant of the personnel department, became a member of the etiquette department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, and participated in the military and national events.

古文：壬申，钱宁伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，钱宁被诛杀。
English: On the 21st, Channing was beaten to death.

古文：六月戊子，江彬伏诛。
现代文：六月八日，江彬被诛杀。
English: On June 8, Jiang Bin was beaten to death.

古文：乙未，纵内苑禽兽，令天下毋得进献。
现代文：十五日，释放内苑禽兽，命令天下不得再次进献。
English: On the fifteenth day, the animals and animals of the inner courtyard were released, and the world was ordered not to donate again.

古文：丁酉，革锦衣卫冒滥军校三万余人。
现代文：十七日，革除锦衣卫冒充军校三万余人。
English: On the 17th, more than 30,000 people dressed in leather and brocade to impersonate a military school.

古文：戊戌，振江西灾。
现代文：十八日，赈济江西灾害。
English: On the 18th, the disaster occurred in Ganzi, Jiangxi Province.

古文：壬寅，革传升官。
现代文：二十二日，革除传升官。
English: On the 22nd, he was dismissed from his post.

古文：癸卯，振辽东饥。
现代文：二十三日，赈济辽东饥荒。
English: On the 23rd, famine broke out in Liaodong, Fujian Province.

古文：秋七月壬子，进士张璁言，继统不继嗣，请尊崇所生，立兴献王庙于京师。
现代文：七月三日，进士张趈说： 继承大统不继承为后代，请求尊奉生身父母，在京师立兴献王庙。 
English: On July 3rd, Zhang Ye said: "Inheriting the throne is not for posterity. I request you to honor your biological parents and build a temple dedicated to the king in Beijing."

古文：初，礼臣议考孝宗，改称兴献王皇叔父，援宋程颐议濮王礼以进，不允。
现代文：开始，礼臣议论兴献王死去的父亲孝宗，改称兴献王皇叔父，援用宋朝程颐议论濮王礼节进奏，世宗不允许。
English: At the beginning, the courtiers discussed the dead father of King Xingxian, Xiaozong, changed his name to King Xingxian's uncle, and quoted the Song Dynasty's Cheng Yi to discuss the etiquette of King Xing, which was not allowed by King Xizong.

古文：至是，下璁奏，命廷臣集议。
现代文：这时，下达张趈奏书，命廷臣集中讨论。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye's report was issued, and the order was intensively discussed by the courtiers.

古文：杨廷和等抗疏力争，皆不听。
现代文：杨廷和等不服，拒理力争，世宗都不听。
English: Yang Tinghe and others were not satisfied, and although they tried to argue, Shizong would not listen.

古文：癸丑，命自今亲丧不得夺情，著为令。
现代文：四日，命令从今起，奔丧必须离职回家守孝，写成法令。
English: On the fourth day, the order was issued that from now on, mourners must leave work and go home to be filial, and it was written into a decree.

古文：丁巳，小王子犯庄浪，指挥刘爵御却之。
现代文：八日，小王子侵犯庄浪，被指挥刘爵击退。
English: On the eighth day, Xiao Wang violated Zhuang Lang and was repulsed by the commander Liu Jie.

古文：丙子，革锦衣卫所及监局寺厂司库、旗校、军士、匠役投充新设者，凡十四万八千余人。
现代文：二十七日，革除锦衣卫所及监局寺厂司库、旗校、军士、匠役投充新设立者，共十四万八千余人。
English: On the 27th, the newly established treasurer, banner school, sergeant, and craftsman of the brocade clothing sanitarium and the supervision bureau of the temple and factory were removed, with a total of more than 148,000 people.

古文：丁丑，宁津盗起。德平知县龚谅死之。
现代文：二十八日，宁津盗贼大起，德平知县龚谅死。
English: On the 28th, thieves in Ningjin went on a rampage, and De Pingzhi County's Zou Tong died.

古文：九月乙卯，袁宗皋卒。
现代文：九月七日，袁宗皋死。
English: On September 7, Yuan Zongxuan died.

古文：庚午，葬毅皇帝于康陵。
现代文：二十二日，安葬毅皇帝于康陵。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Yi was buried in Kangling.

古文：冬十月己卯朔，追尊父兴献王为兴献帝，祖母宪宗贵妃邵氏为皇太后，母妃为兴献后。
现代文：十月初一日，追尊其父亲兴献王为兴献帝，祖母宪宗贵妃邵氏为皇太后，母妃为兴献后。
English: On the first day of October, he honored his father, King Xingxian, as Emperor Xingxian, his grandmother, Empress Dowager Shao of Guizong, and his mother, Empress Dowager Xingxian.

古文：壬午，兴献后至自安陆。
现代文：四日，兴献后亲自巡察安陆。
English: On the fourth day, after the dedication ceremony, he personally inspected Anlu.

古文：十一月庚戌，振江西灾。
现代文：十一月二日，赈救江西灾害。
English: On November 2nd, the rescue of Jiangxi disasters began.

古文：丁巳，录平宸濠功，封王守仁新建伯。
现代文：九日，考核记录平定宸濠功劳，封王守仁新建伯。
English: On the 9th, the appraisal record was completed, and Wang Shouren was awarded the newly-created honor.

古文：甲戌，乾清宫成。
现代文：二十六日，乾清宫建成。
English: On the 26th, the Qianqing Palace was completed.

古文：罢广西贡香。
现代文：停止广西进献香。
English: Stop Guangxi from offering incense.

古文：谕各镇巡守备官，凡额外之征悉罢之。
现代文：告诉各镇边守备官，凡是额外征收全部减免。
English: Tell the town border guards that any additional levies will be fully exempted.

古文：嘉靖元年春正月癸丑，享太庙。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月五日，用食物供奉太庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the year of Jiajing, food was offered to the Great Temple.

古文：己未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：清宁宫后殿灾。
现代文：清宁宫后殿发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the back hall of the Qingning Palace.

古文：命称孝宗皇考，慈寿皇太后圣母，兴献帝后为本生父母。
现代文：命令尊称孝宗皇考，慈寿皇太后为圣母，兴献帝皇后为亲生父母。
English: He ordered to call the Emperor Takamune, the Empress Dowager Cizhou as the Virgin Mary, and the Empress Dowager Xingxian as the biological parents.

古文：己巳，甘州兵乱，杀巡抚都御史许铭。
现代文：二十一日，甘州发动兵变，杀巡抚都御史许铭。
English: On the twenty-first day, Gansu launched a mutiny and killed the governor of the capital, Shi Xuming.

古文：二月己卯，耕耤田。
现代文：二月二日，耕种謖田。
English: On February 2nd, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：三月辛亥，弗提卫献生豹，却之。
现代文：三月四日，弗提卫进献活豹子，被拒绝。
English: On March 4th, Fotiwei offered a live leopard and was turned down.

古文：甲寅，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：七日，祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the seventh day, there will be a memorial service for the forerunner of Confucius.

古文：丁巳，上慈寿皇太后尊号曰昭圣慈寿皇太后，武宗皇后曰庄肃皇后。
现代文：十日，上慈寿皇太后尊号叫昭圣寿皇太后，武宗皇后叫庄肃皇后。
English: On the 10th, the honorary title of the Dowager Empress Dowager Zhaoxian was called the Dowager Empress Zhaoxian, and the Empress Wu Zong was called the Empress Zhuangsu.

古文：九月辛未，立皇后陈氏。
现代文：十一日，上皇太后尊号叫寿安皇太后，兴献后叫兴国太后。
English: On the 11th day, the honorary title of the former empress dowager was called Empress Dowager Shouan, and after the dedication, it was called Empress Dowager Xingguo.

古文：冬十月辛卯，振南畿、湖广、江西、广西灾，免税粮有差。
现代文：四月十六日，命各边境巡按御史三年检阅一次兵马武器。七月五日，赈济南畿、湖广、江西、广西灾害，免除税粮不等。
English: On April 16th, the border patrols were ordered to inspect the soldiers' and horses' weapons for the first time in three years. On July 5th, the disasters in Nanki, Hukang, Jiangxi and Guangxi were exempted from tax grain.

古文：壬辰，以灾伤敕群臣修省。
现代文：二十日，因灾害命群臣修身反省。
English: On the 20th, as a result of the disaster, a group of ministers left to reflect on their lives.

古文：十一月庚申，寿安皇太后崩。
现代文：十一月十八日，寿安皇后死。
English: On November 18, Empress Shouan died.

古文：十二月戊寅。振陕西被寇及山东矿贼流劫者。
现代文：十二月六日，赈济陕西遭侵掠和山东矿贼抢劫之平民。
English: On December 6th, civilians in Shaanxi, Fujian and Shandong were invaded and robbed by miners.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：嘉靖二年正月十三日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Jiajing, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：丁卯，小王子犯沙河堡，总兵官杭雄战却之。
现代文：二十五日，小王子侵犯沙河堡，被总兵官杭雄击退。
English: On the 25th, the Little Prince invaded the Shahe Fort and was repulsed by the commander-in-chief, Hang Xiong.

古文：二月癸未，振辽东饥。
现代文：二月十二日，赈救辽东饥荒。
English: On February 12th, the relief of the famine in Liaodong began.

古文：壬辰，总督军务右都御史俞谏、总兵官鲁纲讨平河南、山东贼。
现代文：二十一日，总督军务右都御史俞谏、总兵官鲁纲讨平河南、山东盗贼。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Governor of the Military Affairs of the Right Capital, Mi Shi Jun, and the Chief Military Officer, Lu Gang, went to fight the thieves in Henan and Shandong.

古文：三月乙巳，俺答寇大同。
现代文：三月四日，俺答侵犯大同。
English: On March 4th, I decided to invade Datong.

古文：甲寅，武宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：十三日，武宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On the thirteenth day, the accompanying festival of the god of the warrior class was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊午，赐姚涞等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐姚讠来等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Yao Xinglai and others were promoted to the ranks, and their ranks and origins were different.

古文：夏四月壬申，以灾异敕群臣修省。
现代文：四月一日，因灾害及异常事件，命群臣修身反省。
English: On April 1st, due to disasters and abnormal events, the lives of the ministers have been revised.

古文：癸未，以宋朱熹裔孙墅为《五经》博士。
现代文：十二日，以宋朝朱熹裔孙朱墅为《五经》博士。
English: On the 12th, Sun Zhushu, a descendant of Zhu Xi of the Song Dynasty, was awarded the title of "Doctor of the Five Classics."

古文：癸巳，命两京三品以上及抚、按官举堪任守令者。
现代文：二十二日，命两京三品以上及抚、按官推举能胜任太守县令官职的人。
English: On the 22nd, people who can be appointed to the posts of Taishu (governor) and county magistrate with the rank of Ryakkyo Sanbon or higher, and those who can be promoted and elected by officials.

古文：五月庚午，小王子犯密云石塘岭，杀指挥使殷隆。
现代文：五月一日，小王子侵犯密云石塘岭，杀指挥使殷隆。
English: On May 1, Xiao Wang violated Miyun Shitangling and killed commander Yinlong.

古文：六月癸丑，以灾伤免嘉靖元年天下税粮之半。
现代文：六月十四日，因灾害损失减免嘉靖元年天下税粮的一半。
English: On June 14th, due to disaster losses, half of the tax grain in the first year of Jiajing was exempted.

古文：秋八月辛酉，小王子犯丁字堡，都指挥王纲战死。
现代文：八月二十四日，小王子侵犯丁字堡，都指挥王纲战死。
English: On August 24th, the Little Prince invaded Tientsin, and the commander Wang Gang was killed in the battle.

古文：冬十一月丁卯，免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：十一月一日，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: On November 1, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：己丑，振河南饥。
现代文：二十三日，赈济河南灾害。
English: On the 23rd, the disaster occurred in the southern part of Qijihe.

古文：是年，撒马儿罕、土鲁番、天方入贡。
现代文：这年，撒马儿罕、土鲁番、天方入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Samarkand, Turpan and Tianfang paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月丙寅朔，两畿、河南、山东、陕西同时地震。
现代文：嘉靖三年正月初一日，两畿、河南、山东、陕西同时发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Jiajing, an earthquake occurred simultaneously in the two ancient capitals, Henan, Shandong and Shaanxi.

古文：丁丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：丙戌，南京刑部主事桂萼请改称孝宗皇伯考，下廷臣议。
现代文：二十一日，南京刑部主事桂萼请改称孝皇伯考，下达给群臣讨论。
English: On the 21st, Gui Cale, the head of the Nanjing Criminal Justice Department, changed his name to Xiao Wang Berkao and ordered his ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：是月，朵颜入寇。
现代文：这月，朵颜向中原侵犯。
English: This month, Do Yan invaded the Central Plains.

古文：二月丙午，杨廷和致仕。
现代文：二月十一日，杨廷和辞官退职。
English: On February 11, Yang Tinghe resigned from his post.

古文：庚戌，南京地震。
现代文：十五日，南京发生地震。
English: On the 15th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：三月壬申，振淮、扬饥。
现代文：三月七日，赈济淮、扬饥荒。
English: On March 7th, the famine in Yanjihuai and Yangshan occurred.

古文：辛巳，振河南饥。
现代文：十六日，赈济河南饥荒。
English: On the 16th, famine broke out in Henan Province.

古文：夏四月己酉，上昭圣皇太后尊号曰昭圣康惠慈寿皇太后。
现代文：四月十五日，上昭圣皇太后尊号叫昭圣康惠慈寿皇太后。
English: On April 15th, Her Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager Zhao Sheng was given the honorary title of Empress Dowager Zhao Sheng Kanghui Cixu.

古文：庚戌，上兴国太后尊号曰本生圣母章圣皇太后。
现代文：十六日，上兴国太后尊号叫本生圣母章圣皇太后。
English: On the 16th, the honorary title of the Empress Dowager of Shangxing Province was changed to the Holy Empress Dowager of the Virgin Mary.

古文：癸丑，追尊兴献帝为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝，大赦。
现代文：十九日，追尊兴献帝为本生皇考恭穆献皇帝，大加赦免。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Emperor Xingxian was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：辛酉，编修邹守益请罢兴献帝称考立庙，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：二十七日，编修邹守益请求停止兴献帝称考立庙，被下锦衣卫狱。
English: On the 27th day, the editor, Zou Shouyi, requested to stop the dedication of the emperor called the Kaoling Temple, and was sent to prison.

古文：五月乙丑，蒋冕致仕。
现代文：五月一日，蒋冕辞官退职。
English: On May 1, Jiang Guanyin resigned from his post.

古文：修撰吕柟言大礼未正，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：修撰吕木冉说大礼未正，被下锦衣卫狱中。
English: Shoshen Lvmu Ran said that the grand ceremony was not correct, and he was sent to Jinbei Prison.

古文：丁丑，遣使迎献皇帝神主于安陆。
现代文：十三日，派使者去安陆迎接献皇帝灵牌。
English: On the thirteenth day, an envoy was sent to Anlu to welcome the offering of the emperor's spiritual tablet.

古文：己卯，吏部尚书石珤兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十五日，吏部尚书石王缶兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 15th, Shangshu Shiwang Can, a member of the Personnel Department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, participated in the military and national events.

古文：六月，御史段续、陈相请正席书、桂萼罪，吏部员外郎薛蕙上《为人后解》，鸿胪少卿胡侍言张璁等议礼之失，俱下狱。
现代文：六月，御史段续、陈相请求正席书、桂萼之罪，吏部员外郎薛蕙献上《为人后解》，鸿胪少卿胡侍谈论张璁等议礼之失，全部被下狱中。
English: In June, Chen Xiang was sentenced to prison for the crimes of requesting a formal letter from the Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (CPLA) and making a request to Gui Cai for a letter from the General Secretary of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (CPLA), and for the crimes of presenting the "Post-Civilization Solution" to his brother Xue Yao, who was a member of the General Staff, and discussing the loss of etiquette with his brother-in-law Hu Zhi, who was a member of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA), and so on.

古文：秋七月乙亥，更定章圣皇太后尊号，去本生之称。
现代文：七月十二日，改从章圣皇太后尊号，去掉本生之称。
English: On July 12th, she changed her name from "Chang Sheng" to "Empress Dowager" and removed her birth name.

古文：戊寅，廷臣伏阙固争，下员外郎马理等一百三十四人锦衣卫狱。
现代文：十五日，廷臣伏于阶下据理力争，下员外郎马理等一百三十四人于锦衣卫狱中。
English: On the fifteenth day, courtiers bowed to their subordinates and argued with them. One hundred and thirty-four subordinates, including Wairo Marri, were taken to Jinbei Prison.

古文：癸未，杖马理等于廷，死者十有六人。
现代文：二十日，在朝廷杖打马理等人，十六人因此先后死去。
English: On the 20th, Marri and others were beaten with canes in the imperial court. Sixteen people died as a result.

古文：甲申，奉安献皇帝神主于观德殿。
现代文：二十一日，献皇帝神牌安放到观德殿。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the sacred tablet dedicated to the emperor was placed in the Kuangde Hall.

古文：己丑，毛纪致仕。
现代文：二十六日，毛纪辞官退职。
English: On the 26th, Mao Ji resigned and retired.

古文：辛卯，杖修撰杨慎，检讨王元正，给事中刘济、安磐、张汉卿、张原，御史王时柯于廷。原死，慎等戍谪有差。
现代文：二十八日，杖修撰杨慎，检讨王元正，给事中刘济、安磐、张汉卿、张原，御史王时柯于朝廷，张原被打死，杨慎等各贬官戍边不等。
English: On the 28th day of the month, Yang Sheng was written up and Wang Yuanzheng was reviewed. Liu Ji, Anbang, Zhang Hanqing, Zhang Yuan, and Wang Shike were present at the imperial court. Zhang Yuan was beaten to death, and Yang Sheng and other demoted officials were not on the same side.

古文：是月，免南畿、河南被灾税粮。
现代文：这月，免南畿、河南受灾税粮。
English: This month, Nanki and Henan were exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：八月癸巳，大同兵变，杀巡抚都御史张文锦。
现代文：八月一日，大同发生兵变，杀巡抚都御史张文锦。
English: On August 1, a mutiny broke out in Datong, and the governor of the capital, Zhang Wenjin, was killed.

古文：乙卯，吏部侍郎贾咏为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十三日，吏部侍郎贾咏为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Jia Wei, the attendant of the personnel department, became a member of the etiquette department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, and participated in the military and national events.

古文：九月丙寅，定称孝宗为皇伯考，昭圣皇太后为皇伯母，献皇帝为皇考，章圣皇太后为圣母。
现代文：九月五日，论定后称孝宗为皇伯考，昭圣皇太后为皇伯母，献皇帝为皇考，章圣皇太后为圣母。
English: On September 5th, after the discussion, Xiaozong was named as the imperial examination, Zhaosheng Empress Dowager was named as the imperial aunt, Xian Emperor was named as the imperial examination, and Zhangsheng Empress Dowager was named as the Virgin Mary.

古文：丙子，诏天下。
现代文：十五日，诏告天下。
English: On the 15th, it was announced to the world.

古文：丙戌，土鲁番入寇，围肃州。
现代文：二十五日，土鲁番大举向内侵犯，围攻肃州。
English: On the 25th, Turuban launched a large-scale invasion and besieged Suizhou.

古文：兵部尚书金献民总制军务，署都督佥事杭雄充总兵官，太监张忠提督军务，御之。
现代文：兵部尚书金献民总督节制军务，代理都督佥事杭雄充任总兵官，太监张忠提督军务，抵御入侵之敌。
English: The governor of the military department, Shang Shuxin, donated money to the people to restrain military affairs, the acting governor, An Zhi Hangxiong, was appointed as the chief military officer, and the eunuch Zhang Zhong was appointed as the admiral of military affairs to resist the invasion of the enemy.

古文：冬十一月己卯，户部侍郎胡瓒提督宣、大军务，都督鲁纲充总兵官，讨大同叛卒。
现代文：十一月十九日，户部侍郎胡瓒提督宣府、大同军务，都督鲁纲充任总兵官，讨伐大同叛变士兵。
English: On November 19th, Admiral Hu Jintao of the Xuanfu and Datong Military Departments, and the governor of Datong, Lu Gang, were appointed as the chief military officers to fight against the Datong rebel soldiers.

古文：十二月壬子，甘、凉寇退，召金献民还。
现代文：十二月二十二日，甘、凉敌寇退败，召金献民回京。
English: On December 22nd, Gan and Liang were defeated by the enemy bandits and returned to Beijing to collect money to donate to the people.

古文：戊午，起致仕大学士杨一清为兵部尚书，总制陕西三边军务。
现代文：二十八日，起用退职大学士杨一清为兵部尚书，总督节制三边军务。
English: On the 28th, Yang Iqing, a retired university professor, was appointed as the military secretary of the military department, and the governor restrained the military affairs of the three sides.

古文：是年，琉球入贡，鲁迷国贡狮子、犀牛。
现代文：当年，琉球入朝进贡，鲁迷国贡献狮子、犀牛。
English: In that year, Ryukyu paid tribute to the North Korean government, and the North Korean government contributed lions and rhinoceroses.

古文：四年春正月丙寅，西海卜儿孩犯甘肃，总兵官姜奭击败之。
现代文：嘉靖四年正月初六日，西海卜儿孩侵犯甘肃，被总兵官姜击败。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 4th year of Jiajing, the West Sea Children invaded Gansu and were defeated by the general officer Jiang Rong.

古文：辛未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月乙卯，禁淹狱囚。
现代文：二月二十六日，禁止关押囚犯推迟时间。
English: On February 26th, the ban on the detention of prisoners was extended.

古文：三月壬午，仁寿宫灾。
现代文：三月二十三日，仁寿宫发生火灾。
English: On March 23rd, a fire broke out in Renshou Palace.

古文：夏五月甲戌，赐庐州知府龙诰官秩，诏天下仿诰备荒振济法。
现代文：五月十六日，赐庐州知府龙诰职官俸禄，下诏天下仿效龙诰备荒赈济之法。
English: On May 16th, Longyu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was awarded a salary, and it was decreed that the whole world should follow Longyu's method of preparing for desertification.

古文：庚辰，作世庙祀献皇帝。
现代文：二十二日，在世庙作文祭祀献皇帝。
English: On the 22nd, there was a ritual offering to the emperor at the world temple.

古文：八月戊子，作仁寿宫。
现代文：八月一日，建仁寿宫。
English: August 1st, Jianren Palace.

古文：冬十月丁亥，作玉德殿，景福、安喜二宫。
现代文：十月二日，建玉德殿及景福、安喜二宫。
English: On October 2nd, the construction of the Jade Palace and the Gyeongbokgung Palace were completed.

古文：十二月辛丑，《大礼集议》成，颁示天下。
现代文：十二月十七日，撰成《大礼集议》，颁布于天下。
English: On December 17th, it was compiled into the "Grand Assembly Resolution" and promulgated to the world.

古文：闰月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰十二月一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of leap December, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙亥，振辽东灾。
现代文：二十二日，赈济辽东灾荒。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the eastern part of Liaodong Province was ravaged by natural disasters.

古文：是年，天方入贡。
现代文：当年，天方入朝进贡。
English: In that year, tribute was paid to the emperor.

古文：五年春正月乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：嘉靖五年正月十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the fifth year of Jiajing, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月甲寅，命道士邵元节为真人。
现代文：二月一日，命道士邵元节为真人。
English: On February 1st, the life of Taoist priest Shao Yuan Si was confirmed to be that of a real person.

古文：庚辰，免山西被灾税粮。
现代文：二十七日，免山西受灾税粮。
English: On the 27th, Shanxi disaster-affected tax grain was exempted.

古文：壬午，振京师饥。
现代文：二十九日，赈济南京饥荒。
English: On the 29th, famine broke out in Nanjing.

古文：三月辛丑，赐龚用卿等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐龚用卿等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the 18th of March, there were different ranks and origins for those who were awarded the title of Yeongyeong.

古文：丁未，定有司久任法。
现代文：二十四日，制订有关官吏长久任职之法。
English: On the 24th, the law on the long-term employment of officials was enacted.

古文：夏五月庚子，杨一清复入阁。
现代文：五月十八日，杨一清再次入阁。
English: On May 18th, Yang Iqing once again joined the cabinet.

古文：秋七月庚寅，免四川被灾税粮。
现代文：七月九日，免四川受灾税粮。
English: On July 9th, tax-exempt grain from Sichuan was released.

古文：八月丙寅，振湖广饥。
现代文：八月十五日，赈济湖广饥荒。
English: On August 15th, famine broke out in the Lake Biji region.

古文：九月己亥，章圣皇太后有事于世庙。
现代文：九月十九日，章圣皇太后在世庙行祭。
English: On September 19th, Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng performed a ritual at the World Temple.

古文：冬十月辛亥朔，亲享如太庙礼。
现代文：十月初一日，亲自按太庙礼节祭享。
English: On the first day of October, I personally celebrated the festival according to the etiquette of the temple.

古文：壬子，振南畿、浙江灾，免税粮物料。
现代文：二日，赈济南畿、浙江灾害，免除税粮、物料。
English: On the second day, due to the disasters in Nanki and Zhejiang provinces, tax-free grain and materials were issued.

古文：庚午，颁御制《敬一箴》于学宫。
现代文：二十日，将御制《敬一箴》颁布于学宫。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict "Keiichimon" was promulgated at the Imperial Palace.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗入朝进贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月癸未，命群臣陈民间利病。
现代文：嘉靖六年正月五日，命令群臣陈述民间利弊得失。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of Jiajing, he ordered his ministers to present the pros and cons to the people.

古文：己丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月辛亥，小王子犯宣府，参将王经战死。
现代文：二月四日，小王子侵犯宣府，参将王经战死。
English: On February 4, the Little Prince invaded Xuanfu, and Wang Jing died in the battle.

古文：癸亥，费宏、石珤致仕。
现代文：十六日，费宏、石王缶辞官退职。
English: On the 16th, Fei Hong and Shi Wang Can resigned from their posts.

古文：庚午，召谢迁复入阁。
现代文：二十三日，召谢迁重新入阁。
English: On the 23rd, Xie Qian was summoned to rejoin the cabinet.

古文：三月庚辰，寇复犯宣府，参将关山战死。
现代文：三月三日，小王子再次侵犯宣府，参将关山战死。
English: On March 3, the Little Prince invaded Xuanwu again, and General Guanshan was killed in the battle.

古文：甲午，礼部侍郎翟銮为吏部侍郎兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：十七日，礼部侍郎翟銮为吏部侍郎兼翰林学士，入阁参与军国大事。
English: On the seventeenth day, the eunuch of the etiquette department became the eunuch of the personnel department and the scholar of Hanlin, and entered the cabinet to participate in the military and national affairs.

古文：夏四月己巳，免广西被灾税粮。
现代文：四月二十三日，免广西受灾税粮。
English: On April 23, the disaster-affected grain in Guangxi was exempted from tax.

古文：五月丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，前南京兵部尚书王守仁兼左都御史，总制两广、江西、湖广军务，讨田州叛蛮。
现代文：十一日，前任南京兵部尚书王守仁兼任左都御史，总督节制两广、江西、湖广军务，讨伐田州蛮酋叛乱。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the predecessor of the Nanjing Military Department, Shangshu Wang Shuren, also served as the governor of the Left Capital, the governor restrained the military affairs of the two Guang, Jiangxi and Hougang, and fought the rebellion of the Tianzhou barbarians.

古文：秋八月庚戌，以议李福达狱，下刑部尚书颜颐寿、左都御史聂贤、大理寺卿汤沐等于锦衣卫狱，侍郎桂萼、张璁，少詹事方献夫署三法司，杂治之。
现代文：八月五日，因议论李福达下狱一案，下刑部尚书颜颐寿、左都御史聂贤、大理寺卿汤沐等于锦衣卫狱，侍郎桂萼、张璁，少詹事方献夫代理以上三个部门，全权治理。
English: On August 5, due to the discussion of the case of Li Fuda's release from prison, Shang Shuxuan and Yan Shou, Zuo Guo Shi and Yan Xian, Daliji Ching and Tang Mu equal to Jin Yi Wei prison, and the attendants, Gui Caly, Zhang Xuan and Shao Zhan, are acting as agents of more than three departments in the lower criminal department, with full authority to govern.

古文：总制尚书王宪击败小王子于石臼墩。
现代文：总制尚书王宪在石臼墩击败小王子。十八日，贾咏辞官退职。
English: General Secretary Wang Xian defeated the Little Prince at the Stone Mill. On the 18th, Jia Wei resigned from his post.

古文：癸亥，贾咏致仕。庚午，振湖广水灾。
现代文：二十五日，赈救湖广水灾。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the flood disaster in Hubei Province broke out.

古文：九月己卯，免江西、河南、山西被灾秋粮。
现代文：九月五日，免江西、河南、山西受灾秋粮。
English: On September 5th, the autumn grain in Jiangxi, Henan and Shanxi was exempted from the disaster.

古文：壬午，颁《钦明大狱录》于天下。
现代文：八日，将《钦明大狱录》颁行天下。
English: On the 8th, the "Qingming Prison Record" was issued to the world.

古文：冬十月戊申，兵部侍郎张璁为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十月四日，兵部侍郎张璁为礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On October 4th, Zhang Jun, the attendant of the military department, became a member of the ceremonial department and a scholar of Wenyu Academy, and participated in the military affairs.

古文：是年，鲁迷入贡。
现代文：这年，鲁迷来朝进贡。
English: This year, Lu Fan came to the morning to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月癸未，考核天下巡抚官。
现代文：嘉靖七年正月十日，考核天下巡抚官员。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the seventh year of Jiajing, the inspection of the world's governor officials began.

古文：丙戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：三月戊寅，谢迁致仕。
现代文：三月七日，谢迁辞官退职。
English: On March 7, Xie Qian resigned from his post.

古文：癸巳，右都御史伍文定为兵部尚书提督军务，侍郎梁材督理粮储，讨云南叛蛮。
现代文：二十二日，右都御史伍文定为兵部尚书提督军务，侍郎梁材督促经理粮饷，征讨云南叛蛮。
English: On the 22nd, the Right Metropolitan, Wu Wen, was appointed as the admiral of the military affairs of the military department, and the attendant, Liang Zai, urged the manager, Grain, to discuss the Yunnan rebellion.

古文：夏四月甲寅，甘露降，告于郊庙。
现代文：四月十三日，降甘露，祭告于郊庙。
English: On April 13th, the lowering of the nectar was announced at the suburb temple.

古文：六月辛丑，《明伦大典》成，颁示天下。
现代文：六月一日，《明伦大典》修成，颁布于天下。
English: On June 1st, the "Ming Lun Canon" was completed and promulgated to the world.

古文：癸卯，定议礼诸臣罪，追削杨廷和等籍。
现代文：三日，给议礼诸臣定罪，追削杨廷和等官籍。
English: On the third day, he convicted the courtiers involved in the debate and stripped Yang Tinghe and others of their official titles.

古文：丁卯，云南蛮平。
现代文：二十七日，平定云南叛蛮。
English: On the 27th, the Yunnan Rebellion was put down.

古文：秋七月己卯，追尊孝惠皇太后为太皇太后，恭穆献皇帝为恭睿渊仁宽穆纯圣献皇帝。
现代文：七月十日，追尊孝惠皇太后为太皇太后，恭穆献皇帝为恭睿渊仁宽穆纯圣献皇帝。
English: On July 10, the Dowager Empress Dowager Sonno Takahide became the Grand Dowager Empress Dowager, and the Emperor presented to the Emperor was the Emperor presented to the Emperor.

古文：辛巳，尊章圣皇太后为章圣慈仁皇太后。
现代文：十二日，尊章圣皇太后为章圣慈仁皇太后。
English: On the 12th, the title of the Holy Empress Dowager was changed to the Holy and Merciful Empress Dowager.

古文：戊子，诏天下。
现代文：十九日，诏告天下。
English: On the 19th, it was announced to the world.

古文：八月壬子，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：八月十三日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On August 13th, the disaster-affected grain in Henan was exempted from the tax.

古文：九月甲戌，王守仁讨广西蛮，悉平之。
现代文：九月五日，王守仁讨伐广西叛蛮，全部平定叛乱。
English: On September 5, Wang Shouren led a crusade against the rebels in Guangxi, and all the rebellions were put down.

古文：壬午，振嘉兴、湖州灾。
现代文：十三日，赈济嘉兴、湖州水灾。
English: On the 13th, floods hit Jiaxing and Huzhou in Fujian Province.

古文：冬十月丁未，皇后崩。
现代文：十月九日，皇后死。
English: On October 9, the empress died.

古文：十一月丙寅，立顺妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月二十八日，立顺妃张氏为皇后。
English: On November 28th, Shunfei Zhang was enthroned as empress.

古文：十二月丙子，小王子犯大同，指挥赵源战死。
现代文：十二月九日，小王子侵犯大同，指挥赵源战死。
English: On December 9, the Little Prince invaded Datong, and the commander Zhao Yuan was killed.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月己亥，振山西灾。
现代文：嘉靖八年正月二日，赈救山西灾荒。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 8th year of Jiajing, he came to the rescue of the Shanxi disaster.

古文：庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：二月癸酉，吏部尚书桂萼兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：二月七日，吏部尚书桂萼兼武英殿大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On February 7th, Shang Shuxu calyx of the Ministry of Personnel and Wu Ying palace scholar, participated in the military affairs.

古文：丁丑，振襄阳饥。
现代文：十一日，赈济襄阳饥荒。
English: On the 11th day of the month, famine broke out in Xiangyang.

古文：甲申，旱，躬祷于南郊。
现代文：十八日，天旱，亲自到南郊祈祷雨。
English: On the 18th, due to the drought, I personally went to the southern suburbs to pray for rain.

古文：乙酉，祷于社稷。
现代文：十九日，祈祷社稷。
English: On the 19th, the prayer group left.

古文：三月丙申，葬悼灵皇后。
现代文：三月一日，安葬悼灵皇后。
English: On March 1st, the funeral for the deceased empress took place.

古文：戊戌，振河南饥。
现代文：三日，赈济河南饥荒。
English: On the third day, famine broke out in Henan Province.

古文：甲寅，赐罗洪先等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十九日，赐罗洪先等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 19th, Luo Hongxian and other new recruits had different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：秋七月甲午，以议狱不当，下郎中魏应召等于狱，右都御史熊浃削籍。
现代文：七月一日，因谈论刑狱不妥，下郎中魏应召等于狱，右都御史熊浃被削除官籍。
English: On July 1st, because of improper discussion of imprisonment, the junior vassal Wei was summoned to prison, and the right vassal, Xiong Yao, was removed from the official register.

古文：八月丙子，张璁、桂萼罢。
现代文：八月十三日，张璁、桂萼停职。
English: On August 13th, Zhang Wei and Gui Cale were suspended.

古文：壬午，始亲祭山川，著为令。
现代文：十九日，首次亲自祭祀山川，定为制度。
English: On the 19th, for the first time, he personally offered sacrifices to mountains and rivers, and this was established as a system.

古文：九月癸巳，召张璁复入阁。
现代文：九月一日，召张璁再次入阁。
English: On September 1st, Zhang Ye was once again invited to join the cabinet.

古文：癸丑，杨一清罢。
现代文：二十一日，杨一清停职。
English: On the 21st, Yang Iqing was suspended.

古文：是月，免两畿、河南被灾税粮，振江西、湖广饥。
现代文：这月，免两畿、河南受灾税粮，赈救江西、湖广饥荒。
English: This month, the disaster-affected tax grain in the two Kis and Henan was exempted, and the famine in Jiangxi and Hukang was saved.

古文：冬十月癸亥朔，日有食之。己巳，除外戚世封，著为令。
现代文：十月初一日，有日食。七日，削除外戚世代加封之制，定为法令。
English: On the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse. On the seventh day, the removal of the system of adding a seal to the generation of relatives was made into a law.

古文：十一月庚子，召桂萼复入阁。
现代文：十一日八日，又诏桂萼入阁。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, he also entered the cabinet.

古文：甲辰，振浙江灾。
现代文：十二日，赈救浙江灾害。
English: On the 12th, the rescue of Zhejiang disasters began.

古文：戊申，祷雪。
现代文：十六日，祈求下雪。
English: On the 16th, pray for snow.

古文：己酉，雪。
现代文：十七日，再次祈祷下雪。
English: On the 17th, I prayed for snow again.

古文：丁巳，亲诣郊坛告谢。
现代文：二十五日，亲自到郊坛祭告谢祖。
English: On the 25th, he personally went to the suburb altar to offer thanks to the ancestor.

古文：百官表贺。
现代文：文武百官上奏祝贺。
English: Congratulations to all the top officials in literature and martial arts.

古文：是年，天方、撒马儿罕、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，天方、撒马儿罕、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Tianfang, Samarhan and Turuban entered the court to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：嘉靖九年正月六日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 9th year of Jiajing, the grand festival took place in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：丙午，作先蚕坛于北郊。
现代文：十五日，建先蚕坛于北郊。
English: On the 15th, the first silkworm coop was built in the northern suburbs.

古文：丁巳，振山西饥。
现代文：二十六日，赈救山西饥荒。
English: On the 26th, the relief of Shanxi famine began.

古文：二月戊辰，耕耤田。
现代文：二月七日，耕种謖田。
English: On February 7th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：乙亥，振京师饥。
现代文：十四日，赈救京师饥荒。
English: On the 14th, he came to the rescue of the starving people in Beijing.

古文：丁丑，禁官民服舍器用逾制。
现代文：十六日，禁止官吏、百姓在衣着、房屋、器物、用具上超过规定。
English: On the 16th, officials and ordinary people were prohibited from exceeding the regulations on clothing, housing, utensils and equipment.

古文：三月丁巳，皇后亲蚕于北郊。
现代文：三月二十七日，皇后在北郊亲蚕。
English: On the 27th of March, the Empress went to have sex with a silkworm in the northern suburbs.

古文：夏四月丙戌，振延绥饥。
现代文：四月二十七日，赈救延绥饥荒。
English: On the 27th of April, the famine began to spread.

古文：五月己亥，更建四郊。
现代文：五月十日，改建四郊。
English: On May 10, four suburbs were rebuilt.

古文：六月癸亥，立曲阜孔、颜、孟三氏学。
现代文：六月五日，立孔子、颜、孟三氏学校于曲阜。
English: On June 5, the Confucius, Yan and Meng San Schools were established in Qufu.

古文：秋八月壬午，免江西被灾税粮。
现代文：八月二十五日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: August 25th, Jiangxi disaster-affected tax-free grain.

古文：九月壬辰，罢云南镇守中官。
现代文：九月六日，罢免云南镇守中官。
English: On September 6th, the Yunnan town guard was dismissed.

古文：乙未，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：九日，免南畿受灾秋粮。
English: On the 9th, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected autumn grain.

古文：冬十一月辛丑，更正孔庙祀典，定孔子谥号曰至圣先师孔子。
现代文：十一月十五日，改正孔庙祭典，定孔子谥号叫至圣先师孔子。
English: On November 15th, the Confucius Temple Festival was revised, and it was decided that Confucius would be called the Holy Prophet Confucius.

古文：己酉，祀昊天上帝于南郊，礼成，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，祈祷昊天上帝于南郊，礼节完后，大加赦免。
English: On the 23rd, he prayed to God in the southern suburb of Haotian, and after the ceremony, he was greatly pardoned.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：本年，琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：十年春正月辛卯，祈谷于大祀殿，奉太祖、太宗配。
现代文：嘉靖十年正月六日，在大祀殿祈祷谷神，顺便祭太祖、太宗。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 10th year of the Jiajing era, they prayed to the Valley God in the Great Hall of Worship, and the Taizu and Taizong festivals were also held.

古文：甲午，更定庙祀，奉德祖于祧庙。
现代文：九日，改定庙祀，德祖奉于祧庙。
English: On the 9th, it was decided to change the temple worship, and Dezu was worshipped at the Ye Temple.

古文：乙巳，桂萼致仕。
现代文：二十日，桂萼辞官退职。
English: On the 20th, Katsura resigned and retired.

古文：二月甲戌，免庐、凤、淮、扬被灾秋粮。
现代文：二月七日，免庐、凤、淮、扬受灾秋粮。
English: On February 7, the autumn grain crops of Mengyao, Feng, Huai and Yang were affected by the disaster.

古文：壬申，赐张璁名孚敬。
现代文：十七日，赐张璁名叫孚敬。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Ye was given the name Fu Jing.

古文：三月戊申，罢四川分守中官。
现代文：三月二十三日，罢免四川分守中官。
English: On March 23, the vice-governor of Sichuan was dismissed.

古文：夏四月丁巳，皇后亲蚕于西苑。
现代文：四月三日，皇后在西苑亲蚕。十日，在太庙祭祀祖先。
English: On April 3rd, the Empress had a close encounter with a silkworm in the West Garden, and on the 10th, she performed a ritual for her ancestors at the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲子，禘于太庙。
现代文：五月二十九日，祭皇地神于方泽。
English: On May 29th, the Imperial Land God Festival was held in Fonze.

古文：五月壬子，祀皇地祇于方泽。闰六月己丑，罢浙江、湖广、福建、两广及独石、万全、永宁镇守中官。
现代文：闰六月七日，罢免浙江、湖广、福建、两广及独石、万全、永宁镇守中官。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the leap year, the vice-governors of Zhejiang, Huguang, Fujian, Liangang, and the towns of Doushi, Wanchuan, and Yongning were dismissed.

古文：秋七月癸丑，侍郎叶相振陕西饥。
现代文：七月二日，侍郎叶相赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On July 2nd, Ye Xiangyao, a chamberlain, came to the rescue of the famine in Shaanxi.

古文：戊午，张孚敬罢。
现代文：七日，张孚敬停职。
English: On the 7th, Zhang Fuqing was suspended.

古文：辛巳，郑王厚烷献白雀，荐之宗庙。
现代文：三十日，郑王朱厚烷进献白雀，被进献到宗庙祭祖。
English: On the 30th, King Zhu Houxan of Zheng donated a white sparrow, which was donated to the ancestral temple.

古文：八月辛丑，改安陆州曰承天府。
现代文：八月二十日，改安陆州叫承天府。
English: On August 20th, Luzhou was renamed as Chengdu.

古文：九月乙丑，西苑宫殿成，设成祖位致祭，宴群臣。
现代文：九月五日，西苑宫殿落成，设成祖灵位祭祀，大宴群臣。
English: On September 5th, the West Court Palace was completed, and a grand banquet was held in honor of the ancestors.

古文：丙寅，礼部尚书李时兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十六日，礼部尚书李时兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 16th, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Li Shikeng, a scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion University, participated in important affairs.

古文：壬申，幸西苑，御无逸殿，命李时、翟銮进讲，宴儒臣于豳风亭。
现代文：二十二日，巡幸西苑，到无逸殿，命令李时、翟銮进入讲解，在豳风亭宴请儒臣。
English: On the 22nd, he went on a tour of Xiyuan and arrived at Muyidun. He ordered Li Shih and Zou to give a lecture and invited Confucius to a banquet at Shufu Pavilion.

古文：冬十一月甲寅，祀天于南郊。戊辰，免陕西被灾秋粮。
现代文：十一月四日，在南郊祭天。十八日，免陕西受灾秋粮。
English: On November 4th, a festival was held in the southern suburbs. On the 18th, Shaanxi was spared from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：丁丑，召张孚敬复入阁。
现代文：二十七日，再次召张孚敬入阁。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Fuqing was once again summoned to the cabinet.

古文：十二月戊子，御史喻希礼、石金因修醮请宥议礼诸臣罪，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：十二月九日，御史喻希礼、石金因祭神请求饶恕议礼诸臣罪行，被下锦衣卫狱中。
English: On December 9th, due to the fact that they had made a request to the deity for forgiveness for the crimes of their vassals, they were taken to the Shimogimi prison.

古文：十一年春正月辛未，祈谷于圜丘，始命武定侯郭勋摄事。
现代文：嘉靖十一年正月二十二日，在圜丘祈祷谷神。开始命令武定侯郭勋辅佐处理政事。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the 11th year of Jiajing, he prayed to the Valley God in Shaoqiu. He began to order Wuding Hou Guo Xun's assistant to deal with political affairs.

古文：二月戊戌，免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：二月十九日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On February 19th, tax-exempt grain from the disaster-affected areas of Hubei Province was announced.

古文：三月戊辰，赐林大钦等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十九日，赐林大钦等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 19th, Lin Daqin and other new recruits had different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月辛卯，续封常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和后为侯。
现代文：四月十三日，续封常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和后代为侯。
English: On April 13th, Zhefeng Changyu Chun, Li Wenzhong, Dengyu, Tang and their descendants were born.

古文：五月丙子，前吏部尚书方献夫兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：五月二十九日，前任吏部尚书方献夫兼武英殿大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On May 29th, Shang Shufang, a former cadre of the General Staff and a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency, participated in the military and national events.

古文：六月壬午，免畿内被灾秋粮。
现代文：六月五日，免畿内受灾秋粮。
English: On June 5, the affected autumn grain crops in the Kinai region were exempted.

古文：甲申，续封刘基后诚意伯。
现代文：七日，续封刘基后代为诚意伯。
English: On the seventh day, Liu Ji's descendants were renewed as sincerity.

古文：秋七月戊辰，免南畿被灾夏税。
现代文：七月二十二日，免南畿受灾夏税。
English: On July 22, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected summer tax.

古文：八月戊子，以星变敕群臣修省。
现代文：八月十三日，因星位变化命群臣修身反省。
English: On August 13th, due to the change in the position of the stars, the ministers were ordered to self-reflect.

古文：辛丑，张孚敬罢。
现代文：二十六日张孚敬停职。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Fuqing was suspended.

古文：九月丁巳，振陕西饥。
现代文：九月十二日，赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On September 12th, the relief of Shaanxi famine began.

古文：冬十月甲申，编修杨名以灾异陈言，下狱谪戍。
现代文：十月十日，编修杨名因灾害异常陈述于上，被下狱贬官戍边。
English: On October 10th, editor Yang Ming was sent to prison for making an abnormal report on the disaster.

古文：是月，免山东被灾税粮，振山西饥。
现代文：这月，免山东受灾税粮，赈济山西饥荒。
English: This month, the disaster-affected tax grain in Shandong was exempted, and the famine in Shanxi was alleviated.

古文：十一月甲寅，四川巡抚都御史宋沧献白兔，群臣表贺。
现代文：十一月十日，四川巡抚都御史宋沧进献白兔，群臣上奏庆贺。
English: On November 10th, Song Cang, the governor of Sichuan, presented a white rabbit, and the courtiers sang in celebration.

古文：庚申，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十六日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 16th, the Southern Suburbs Festival will be held.

古文：十二月己亥，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月二十六日，免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On December 26th, tax-free grain was distributed to the disaster-affected areas in the Kansai region.

古文：是年，琉球、哈密、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、哈密、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕来朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Hami, Turuban, Amakata and Samal rarely came to pay tribute.

古文：十二年春正月丙午，湖南巡抚都御史吴山献白鹿，群臣表贺。
现代文：嘉靖十二年正月初三日，河南巡抚都御史吴山进献白鹿，群臣上奏庆贺。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 12th year of Jiajing, the governor of Henan Province, the governor of the capital, Wushan, presented a white deer, and a group of ministers came to celebrate.

古文：自后，诸瑞异表贺以为常。
现代文：从此以后，凡是吉祥事情上奏庆贺一贯如此。
English: Since then, this has always been the case for all auspicious events.

古文：丙辰，召张孚敬复入阁。
现代文：十三日，召张孚敬再次入阁。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Fuqing was summoned to the cabinet again.

古文：是月，免浙江、河南被灾税粮。
现代文：这月，免江西、河南受灾税粮。
English: This month, Jiangxi and Henan were exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：二月乙酉，振云南饥。
现代文：二月十二日，赈救云南饥荒。
English: On February 12th, the Yunnan famine relief began.

古文：三月丙辰，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：三月十三日，奠祭先师孔子。
English: On March 13th, the ceremonial offering was led by Confucius.

古文：秋八月乙未，以皇子生，诏赦天下。
现代文：八月二十五日，因皇子降生，下诏大赦天下。
English: On August 25th, due to the birth of the prince, the imperial edict of amnesty was issued.

古文：九月庚戌，广东巢贼乱，提督侍郎陶谐讨平之。
现代文：九月十一日，广东巢贼作乱，提督侍郎陶谐征讨并平定贼乱。
English: On September 11th, the Guangdong thieves rioted, and Admiral Zhilang Tao led a concerted effort to quell the riot.

古文：冬十月乙亥，大同兵乱，杀总兵官李瑾，代王奔宣府。
现代文：十月六日，大同发生兵变，杀总兵官李瑾，代王逃到宣府。
English: On October 6th, a mutiny occurred in Datong, killing the commander-in-chief Li Yan, and the acting king fled to Xuanfu.

古文：丙子，下建昌侯张延龄于狱。
现代文：七日，建昌侯张延龄被下狱。
English: On the 7th, Jianchang Mayor Zhang Yanling was released from prison.

古文：十一月己亥，振辽东灾。
现代文：十一月一日，赈救辽东灾害。
English: On November 1st, the rescue of Liaodong disaster began.

古文：癸丑，翟銮以忧去。
现代文：十五日，翟銮因父母丧而离职。
English: On the 15th, Hao resigned from his position due to the death of his parents.

古文：十二月己卯，吉囊犯宁夏，总兵官王效、副总兵梁震击败之。
现代文：十二月十一日，吉囊侵犯宁夏，被总兵官王效、副总兵梁震击败。
English: On December 11, Yoshizaki invaded Ningxia, and was defeated by the commander-in-chief Wang Hui and the deputy commander-in-chief Liang Zhen.

古文：是年，土鲁番、天方入贡。
现代文：这年，土鲁番、天方入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Turuban and Amakata paid tribute to the Emperor.

古文：十三年春正月癸卯，废皇后张氏。
现代文：嘉靖十三年正月六日，废除张皇后。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 13th year of Jiajing, Empress Zhang was abolished.

古文：壬子，立德妃方氏为皇后。
现代文：十五日，立德妃方氏为皇后。
English: On the 15th, Lide Fang became the empress.

古文：二月己丑，总督宣大侍郎张瓒抚定大同乱卒。
现代文：二月二十二日，总督宣大侍郎张瓒抚辑安定大同士兵。
English: On February 22nd, Governor Xuan's chief aide-de-camp, Zhang Ye, led the soldiers of the Stable Taedong.

古文：辛卯，代王返国。
现代文：二十四日，代王返回大同。
English: On the 24th, the acting king returned to Datong.

古文：三月壬申，振大同被兵者。
现代文：三月六日，赈救大同遭兵祸军民。
English: On March 6th, he came to the rescue of the soldiers and civilians in Datong.

古文：乙酉，吉囊犯响水堡，参将任杰击败之。
现代文：十九日，吉囊侵犯响水堡，被参将任杰击败。
English: On the 19th, Yoshizuku invaded Xingshui Fort and was defeated by General Ren Jie.

古文：夏四月己酉，方献夫致仕。
现代文：四月十三日，方献夫离职退休。
English: On April 13, Fang Xianfu retired.

古文：六月甲子，南京太庙灾。
现代文：六月二十九日，南京太庙发生火灾。
English: On June 29, a fire broke out in the Great Temple of Nanjing.

古文：秋八月壬子，寇犯花马池，梁震御却之。
现代文：八月十八日，吉囊侵犯花马池，被梁震击退。
English: On August 18th, Yoshizuku invaded Hanamachi Pond and was repulsed by Liang Zhen.

古文：冬十一月庚午，祀天于南郊。是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：十一月八日，在南郊祭天。这年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: On November 8th, a festival was held in the southern suburbs. This year, Ryukyu paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：十四年春正月壬申，罢督理仓场中官。
现代文：嘉靖十四年正月十一日，罢免督理仓场中官。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 14th year of Jiajing, the supervisor of the warehouse was dismissed.

古文：丙戌，庄肃皇后崩。
现代文：二十五日，庄肃皇后死。
English: On the 25th, Empress Shoshu died.

古文：二月己亥，作九庙。
现代文：二月八日，建九庙。
English: On February 8, nine temples were built.

古文：丁未，禁冠服非制。
现代文：十六日，禁止穿没有规定的衣服和戴没有规定的帽子。
English: On the 16th, it is forbidden to wear clothes and hats that are not prescribed.

古文：三月戊子，葬孝静皇后于康陵。
现代文：三月二十八日，安葬孝静皇后于康陵。
English: On March 28th, the funeral of Empress Xiao Jing was held at Kangling.

古文：己丑，辽东军乱，执都御史吕经。
现代文：二十九日，辽东军中内乱，捉拿都御史吕经。
English: On the 29th, the Liaodong army had a civil war and captured the capital, Lucheng.

古文：夏四月甲午，张孚敬致仕，召费宏复入阁。
现代文：四月四日，张孚敬辞官退职，再召费宏入阁。
English: On April 4, Zhang Fuqing resigned from his post, and Feihong was reappointed to the cabinet.

古文：丙申，赐韩应龙等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：六日，赐韩应龙等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the sixth day, Han Yinglong and other new recruits were given different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：丙午，广宁兵乱。
现代文：十六日，广宁兵作乱。
English: On the 16th, Guangning soldiers started a riot.

古文：六月，吉囊犯大同，总兵官鲁纲御却之。
现代文：六月，吉囊侵犯大同，被总兵官鲁纲击败。
English: In June, Yoshizuku invaded Datong and was defeated by the commander-in-chief Lu Gang.

古文：秋七月甲申，广宁乱卒平。
现代文：七月二十五日，广宁兵乱被平定。
English: On July 25, the Guangning Rebellion was finally put down.

古文：八月乙巳，诏九卿会推巡抚官，著为令。
现代文：八月十七日，下诏九卿官一起推荐巡抚官，写成法令。
English: On August 17th, the following edict was issued, in which nine high-ranking officials jointly recommended the procuratorate.

古文：冬十月戊申，费宏卒。
现代文：十月二十日，费宏死。
English: Fei Hong passed away on October 20th.

古文：十一月乙亥，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月十八日，祭天于南郊。
English: On November 18th, the festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十五年春二月癸巳，振湖广灾。
现代文：嘉靖十五年二月八日，赈救湖广灾害。
English: On February 8th, 15th year of Jiajing, Zou came to the rescue of Hukang disaster.

古文：三月丙子，奉章圣皇太后如天寿山谒陵，免昌平今年税粮三之二，赐高年粟帛。
现代文：三月二十一日，侍奉章圣皇太后到天寿山去拜谒祖陵，免昌平今年税粮的三分之二，赏赐高年长寿者米和丝帛。
English: On March 21, Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng went to Tianshou Mountain to pay homage to her ancestral tomb, exempted Changping from two-thirds of this year's tax grain, and rewarded the elderly with rice and silk cocoons.

古文：癸未，谒恭让章皇后、景皇帝陵。
现代文：二十八日，拜谒恭让章皇后、景皇帝陵墓。
English: On the 28th, the mausoleum of Empress Zhang Rong and Emperor Jing was visited.

古文：是日还宫。
现代文：当天回到宫中。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace the same day.

古文：夏四月癸巳，诏建山陵。
现代文：四月九日，下诏建山陵。
English: On April 9, it was announced that the mausoleum would be built.

古文：癸卯，诣七陵祭告。
现代文：十九日，到七陵祭祀奉告祖先。
English: On the 19th, they went to the seven mausoleums to offer sacrifices to their ancestors.

古文：癸丑，还宫。
现代文：二十九日回宫。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是月，吉囊犯甘、凉，总兵官姜奭击败之。
现代文：本月，吉囊侵犯甘、凉二州，被总兵官姜击败。
English: This month, Yoshizuku invaded the two states of Gan and Liang and was defeated by the general officer Jiang.

古文：秋九月庚午，如天寿山。
现代文：九月十八日，到天寿山。
English: September 18th, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：丁丑，还宫。
现代文：二十五日回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是秋，吉囊犯延绥，官军四战皆败之。
现代文：这年秋天，吉囊侵犯延绥，官军四战皆败。
English: In the autumn of that year, Yoshizuku invaded Yancheng, and the government army was defeated in all four battles.

古文：冬十月己亥，更定世庙为献皇帝庙。戊申，如天寿山。
现代文：十月十七日，改世庙为献皇帝庙。二十六日，到天寿山。
English: On October 17th, the temple was dedicated to the emperor. On the 26th, it was moved to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：壬子，还宫。
现代文：三十日回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on the 30th.

古文：十一月戊午，以皇长子生，诏赦天下。
现代文：十一月六日，因皇长子出生，下诏大赦天下。
English: On November 6th, due to the birth of the emperor's eldest son, the imperial edict of amnesty was issued.

古文：辛巳，祀天于南郊。
现代文：二十九日，祭天于南郊。
English: On the 29th, the festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：十二月辛卯，九庙成。
现代文：十二月十日，九庙建成。
English: On December 10, nine temples were completed.

古文：闰月癸亥，以定庙制，加上两宫皇太后徽号，诏赦天下。
现代文：闰十二月十二日，因制定祖庙制度，加上两宫皇太后徽号，下诏赦免天下。
English: On leap December 12th, due to the establishment of the ancestral temple system and the addition of the emblem of the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces, the imperial edict was issued to pardon the world.

古文：乙丑，礼部尚书夏言兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：十四日，礼部尚书夏言兼武英殿大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 14th, the Rector of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Shangshu Xiayan, who is also a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency, participated in important affairs.

古文：丙寅，享九庙。
现代文：十五日，在九庙祭祀。
English: On the 15th, a ritual was held at nine temples.

古文：是年，免山西、山东被灾税粮。
现代文：这年，免山西、山东受灾税粮。
English: This year, Shanxi and Shandong were exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：琉球、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: The Ryukyus and the Ussuri Islands paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十六年春二月壬子，安南黎宁遣使告莫登庸之难。
现代文：嘉靖十六年二月三日，安南黎宁派使者报告莫登庸之难。
English: On February 3 of the 16th year of Jiajing, Annan-Reinin sent an envoy to report the difficulties of Mordenyang.

古文：癸酉，如天寿山。
现代文：二十四日，到天寿山。
English: On the 24th, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：三月甲申，还宫。
现代文：三月五日回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on March 5.

古文：丙午，幸大峪山视寿陵。
现代文：二十七日，巡幸大峪山视察寿陵。
English: On the 27th, they went to visit Shouling Mountain to inspect Shouling Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月癸丑，还宫。
现代文：四月五日回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on April 5.

古文：六月癸酉，吉囊寇宣府，指挥赵镗战死。
现代文：六月二十六日，吉囊侵犯宣府，指挥赵镗战死。
English: On June 26th, Guizang invaded Xuanfu, and the commander Zhao Yao died in the battle.

古文：秋八月，复寇宣府，杀参将张国辅。
现代文：八月，吉囊又侵犯宣府，杀参将张国辅。
English: In August, Yoshizuku invaded Xuanfu again and killed Zhang Guofei.

古文：冬十一月，故昌国公张鹤龄下狱，瘐死。
现代文：十一月，原昌国公张鹤龄下狱，病死于狱中。
English: In November, Zhang He, the former governor of Changguo Province, was released from prison and died of illness in prison.

古文：是年，土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：这年，土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Turuban, Amakata and Samarkand paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：十七年春二月戊辰，如天寿山。
现代文：嘉靖十七年二月二十四日，到天寿山。
English: On February 24 of the 17th year of Jiajing, he went to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：壬申，还宫。
现代文：二十八日回宫。
English: On the fourth day, they drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月壬辰，赐茅瓒等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十九日，赐茅瓒等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 19th, Mao Yao and other new recruits were given different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：辛丑，咸宁侯仇鸾为征夷副将军。充总兵官，兵部尚书毛伯温参赞军务，讨安南莫登庸。
现代文：二十八日，咸宁侯仇鸾为征夷副将军，充任总兵官，兵部尚书毛伯温参与辅助军务，讨伐安南莫登庸。
English: On the 28th, Xianning Hou Qianqian was promoted to the vice-general of the expeditionary force and appointed as the chief military officer. Shangshu Mao Bowen of the military department participated in the auxiliary military affairs and fought against Annan Moden Yong.

古文：夏四月庚戌，如天寿山。
现代文：四月七日，到天寿山。十一日回宫。
English: On the 7th of April, he went to Tianshou Mountain. On the 11th, he returned to the palace.

古文：甲寅，还宫。
现代文：十五日，收回安南军队。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：戊午，罢安南师。甲子，祷雨于郊坛。戊辰，雨。
现代文：二十一日，在郊坛祈祷下雨。二十五日，下雨。
English: On the twenty-first day, they prayed for rain at the suburb altar. On the twenty-fifth day, it rained.

古文：六月，寇犯宣府，都指挥周冕战死。
现代文：六月，吉囊侵犯宣府，都指挥周冕战死。
English: In June, Yoshizaki invaded Xuanwu, and both the commander and Zhou Guanyin were killed.

古文：丙辰，定明堂大飨礼。
现代文：十五日，规定明堂大饷礼节。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, it was decided that there would be a large feast in the Ming Hall.

古文：下户部侍郎唐胄于狱。
现代文：下户部侍郎唐胄于狱。
English: The lower house's chamberlain, Tang Xi, is in prison.

古文：秋七月辛卯，开河南、云南银矿。
现代文：七月二十日，开河南、云南银矿。
English: On July 20th, the Henan and Yunnan silver mines were opened.

古文：癸巳，慈宁宫成。
现代文：二十二日，慈宁宫建成。
English: On the 22nd, the Jining Palace was completed.

古文：八月甲辰，吉囊犯河西，总督都御史刘天和御却之。
现代文：八月四日，吉囊侵犯河西，总督都御史刘天和击败吉囊。
English: On August 4th, Yoshizuku invaded Hexi, and the governor of the capital, Liu Tianhe, defeated Yoshizuku.

古文：丙辰，礼部尚书掌詹事府事顾鼎臣兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十六日，礼部尚书掌詹事府事顾鼎臣兼文渊阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 16th, Shang Shushou of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Zhan Zhizhi of the General Office of the State Council and Wen Yuange University, participated in the military and national events.

古文：九月戊寅，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：九月八日，免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On September 8th, tax-free grain was distributed to those in the Kinai region who were affected by the disaster.

古文：辛巳，上太宗庙号成祖，献皇帝庙号睿宗。
现代文：十一日，上太宗庙号成祖，献皇帝庙号睿宗。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the temple of Shang Taizong became the ancestor, and the temple of Emperor Ruizong was dedicated.

古文：遂奉睿宗神主祔太庙，跻武宗上。
现代文：于是，奉睿宗神牌于太庙，升于武宗之上。
English: As a result, the god of the Bongrei Sect was enshrined in the Imperial Temple and elevated above that of the Wu Sect.

古文：辛卯，大享上帝于玄极宝殿，奉睿宗配。
现代文：二十一日，大祭上帝于玄极宝殿，睿宗顺祭。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the grand festival of the gods was held at the Hall of Mystic Treasures, the Ruizong Shun Festival.

古文：乙未，如天寿山。丁酉，还宫。
现代文：二十五日，到天寿山，二十七日回宫。
English: On the 25th, he went to Tianshou Mountain, and on the 27th, he returned to the palace.

古文：冬十一月辛未朔，诣南郊，上皇天上帝号。
现代文：十一月一日，到南郊，上皇天上帝号。
English: On the first day of November, in the southern suburbs, the last emperor, Emperor Tenjo, ascended the throne.

古文：还诣太庙，上太祖高皇帝、高皇后尊号。
现代文：回到太庙，上太祖高皇帝、高皇后尊号。
English: Back at the Imperial Temple, the names of Emperor Gao and Empress Gao are inscribed.

古文：辛卯，礼天于南郊。
现代文：二十一日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 21st, the Southern Suburbs Day is celebrated.

古文：诏赦天下。
现代文：下诏赦免天下。
English: He also announced a general amnesty.

古文：乙未，免江西被灾税粮。
现代文：二十五日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: On the 25th, the disaster-affected tax grain in Jiangxi Province was exempted.

古文：十二月癸卯，章圣皇太后崩。
现代文：十二月四日，章圣皇太后死。
English: On December 4, Empress Dowager Zhang Sheng passed away.

古文：壬子，如大峪山相视山陵。
现代文：十三日，到大峪山观察山陵。
English: On the 13th, they went to Mount Dafu to observe the mausoleum.

古文：甲寅，还宫。
现代文：十五日回宫。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：乙卯，李时卒。
现代文：十六日，李时死。
English: On the 16th, Li Shou died.

古文：戊午，振宁夏灾。
现代文：十九日，赈济宁夏灾害。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the Ningxia disaster occurred.

古文：是年，琉球、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu and Truk were the first to pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：十八年春二月庚子朔，立皇子载壑为皇太子，封载为裕王，载圳景王。
现代文：嘉靖十八年二月一日，立皇子朱载壑为皇太子，封朱载篨为裕王、载圳景王。
English: On February 1 of the 18th year of Jiajing, the prince Zhu Zhaojun was established as the crown prince, and Zhu Zhaojun was given the titles of Yu Wang and Zhaozhen Jing Wang.

古文：辛丑，诏赦天下。
现代文：二日，下诏赦免天下。
English: On the second day, the emperor pardoned the whole country.

古文：起黄绾为礼部尚书，宣谕安南。
现代文：起用黄绾为礼部尚书。向安南宣告谕旨。
English: Appointed Huang Qi as the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies. Issued an edict to Annan.

古文：壬寅，起翟銮为兵部尚书兼右都御史，充行边使。
现代文：三日，起用翟銮为兵部尚书兼右都御史，充任行边特使。
English: On the third day, he was appointed to the post of Hyobusho (Minister of the Ministry of War) and Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and served as a special envoy to Gyobyo.

古文：丁未，祈谷于玄极宝殿。
现代文：八日，在玄极宝殿祈祷谷神。
English: On the eighth day, they prayed to the Valley God at the Hall of Mystic Treasures.

古文：先贤曾子裔孙质粹为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
现代文：先贤曾子后裔曾质粹为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
English: The descendants of the great-great-grandsons of the sages were the hereditary doctors of the "Five Classics" of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：壬子，振辽东饥。
现代文：十三日，赈救辽东饥荒。
English: On the 13th, the relief of Liaodong famine began.

古文：癸丑，安南莫方瀛请降。
现代文：十四日，安南莫方瀛请求投降。
English: On the 14th, Annan called for surrender.

古文：乙卯，幸承天，太子监国。
现代文：十六日，巡幸承天，皇太子监国。
English: On the 16th, Crown Prince Junko succeeded to the throne and became the overseer of the country.

古文：辛酉，次真定，望于北岳。
现代文：二十二日，到真定，在北岳眺望。
English: On the 22nd, I went to Shinding to look out at Beidake.

古文：丁卯，次卫辉，行宫火。
现代文：二十八日，临时住卫辉，行宫起火。
English: On the 28th, Wei Hui temporarily lived there, and the palace caught fire.

古文：三月己巳，渡河，祭大河之神。
现代文：三月一日，渡过黄河，祭祀大河神。
English: On March 1st, they crossed the Yellow River to worship the river god.

古文：辛未，次钧州，望于中岳。
现代文：三日，暂住钧州，在中岳眺望。
English: On the third day, I stayed in Bozhou for a while and looked out at Zhongyue.

古文：甲戌，免畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：六日，免畿内受灾税粮。
English: On the 6th, disaster-affected tax grain in the Kinai region was exempted.

古文：庚辰，至承天。
现代文：十二日，到承天。
English: On the 12th, I went to Jotian.

古文：辛巳，谒显陵。
现代文：十三日，拜谒显陵。
English: On the 13th, they paid their respects at the tomb of Pu Xian.

古文：甲申，享上帝于龙飞殿，奉睿宗配。
现代文：十六日，祭上帝于龙飞殿，顺祭睿宗。
English: On the 16th, the deity was enshrined at Longfei Hall, and Ruizong was also enshrined.

古文：秩于国社、国稷，遍群祀。
现代文：加俸禄于国社、国稷，群臣普遍祭祀。
English: In addition, a stipend was paid to attend the national shrine and the imperial court, and a group of vassals generally performed religious rites.

古文：戊子，御龙飞殿受贺，诏赦天下。
现代文：二十日，在龙飞殿接受朝贺，下诏赦免天下。
English: On the 20th, he received morning greetings at Longfei Hall and issued a decree to pardon the whole country.

古文：给复承天三年，免湖广明年田赋五之二，畿内、河南三之一。
现代文：减免承天三年赋役。免湖广明年五分之二田租，畿内、河南明年田租减免三分之一。
English: Hunan and Guangxi will be exempt from two-fifths of the next year's farmland rent, and the Kinai region and Henan will be exempt from one-third of the next year's farmland rent.

古文：夏四月壬子，至自承天。
现代文：四月十五日，亲自巡察承天。
English: On April 15th, he personally inspected Jotan.

古文：壬戌，免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：二十五日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On the 25th, tax-free grain was distributed to those affected by the disaster.

古文：甲子，幸大峪山。
现代文：二十七日，巡幸大峪山。
English: On the 27th, the inspection tour of Dalatang Mountain began.

古文：丙寅，还宫。
现代文：二十九日回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on the 29th.

古文：秋闰七月庚申，葬献皇后于显陵。
现代文：闰七月二十五日，安葬献皇后于显陵。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th lunar month, the funeral for the empress was held at the Xianling Mausoleum.

古文：辛酉，复命仇鸾、毛伯温征安南。
现代文：二十六日，又命仇銮、毛伯温征讨安南。
English: On the 26th, he also ordered his vendetta, Mao Bo Wen, to attack Annan.

古文：九月辛酉，如天寿山。
现代文：九月二十七日，到天寿山。
English: September 27th, to Tianshou Mountain.

古文：侍郎王杲振河南饥。
现代文：侍郎王杲赈救河南饥荒。
English: Wang Xi, a chamberlain, saved Henan from famine.

古文：冬十月丙寅，还宫。
现代文：十月二日，回宫。
English: On October 2, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十一月丙申，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月三日，在南郊祭天。
English: On November 3rd, the Southern Suburbs held a festival.

古文：是年，日本、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，日本、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Japan paid tribute to the Emperor Hamid.

古文：十九年春正月丙午，召翟銮复入阁。
现代文：嘉靖十九年正月十三日，再召翟銮入阁。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 19th year of Jiajing, he was reappointed to the cabinet.

古文：辛亥，吉囊寇大同，杀指挥周岐。
现代文：十八日，吉囊侵犯大同，杀指挥周岐。
English: On the 18th, Yoshizuku invaded Datong and killed Commander Zhouqi.

古文：三月戊戌，诏修仁寿宫。
现代文：三月六日，下诏修建仁寿宫。
English: On March 6, the edict to build the Palace of Renshou was issued.

古文：夏六月辛巳，瓦剌部长款塞。
现代文：六月二十一日，瓦剌酋长到边塞。
English: On June 21st, the chief of Wajang arrived at the border fortress.

古文：秋七月癸卯，吉囊入万全右卫，总兵官白爵逆战于宣平，败之。
现代文：七月十四日，吉囊侵入万全右卫，总兵官白爵在宣平抗击，打败吉囊。
English: On July 14th, Yoshizuku invaded Manchukuo's right wing, and the commander-in-chief, Bai Jue, fought back and defeated Yoshizuku.

古文：壬子，又败之于桑乾河。
现代文：二十三日，又在桑乾河打败吉囊。
English: On the 23rd, he again defeated Yoshizuku in Sangqian River.

古文：戊午，振江西灾。
现代文：二十九日，赈救江西灾害。
English: On the 29th, the rescue of Jiangxi disasters began.

古文：八月丁丑，太仆卿杨最谏服丹药，予杖死。
现代文：八月十八日，太仆卿杨最进谏世宗服用丹药，被杖死。
English: On August 18th, Yang Samjin, the servant of Emperor Taizong, was beaten to death with a cane for taking herbal medicine.

古文：九月，吉囊犯固原，周尚文败之于黑水苑。
现代文：九月，吉囊侵犯固原，周尚文在黑水苑打败吉囊。
English: In September, Yoshizuku invaded Guhara, and Zhou Shangwen defeated Yoshizuku in Heisuien.

古文：延绥总兵官任杰追击于铁柱泉，又败之。
现代文：延绥总兵官任杰追击于铁柱泉，又打败吉囊。
English: Yancheng's commander-in-chief, Ren Jie, chased them to Tiezhuquan and defeated them.

古文：己酉，召仇鸾还。
现代文：二十日，召仇銮回师。
English: On the 20th, he summoned his vengeful disciple.

古文：冬十月庚申，罢矿场。
现代文：十月二日，停开矿场。
English: On October 2, the mine was shut down.

古文：甲子，顾鼎臣卒。
现代文：六日，顾鼎臣死。
English: On the sixth day, Gu Dingchen died.

古文：十一月丙辰，慈庆宫成。
现代文：十一月二十九日，慈庆宫修成。
English: On November 29th, the construction of Cixing Palace was completed.

古文：是年，琉球、日本入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、日本入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu and Japan paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二十年春正月，免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：嘉靖二十年正月，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of Jiajing, Nanki was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：二月乙丑，显陵成，给复承天三年。
现代文：二月八日，显陵修成，减免承天赋役三年。
English: On February 8th, Xianling was completed, and the reduction and exemption of inheriting talent service for three years.

古文：丙寅，御史杨爵言时政，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：九日，御史杨爵谈论时政，被下锦衣卫狱。
English: On the 9th, Mishi Yangjie talked about current affairs and was sent to prison.

古文：三月乙巳，赐沈坤等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十九日，赐沈坤等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 19th, Zi Shenkun and others were promoted to the ranks, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：是春，吉囊寇兰州，参将郑东战死。
现代文：这年春天，吉囊侵犯兰州，参将郑东战死。
English: In the spring of that year, Yoshizuku invaded Lanzhou, and General Zheng Dong was killed in the battle.

古文：夏四月己未，莫登庸纳款，改安南国为安南都统使司，以登庸为都统使。
现代文：四月三日，莫登庸投诚，改安南国为安南都统使司，以莫登庸为安南都统使。
English: On April 3rd, Morden Yong defected to Chungcheong and changed the name of South Annam to Annam-do Unification Envoy Division, with Morden Yong as Annam-do Unification Envoy.

古文：辛酉，九庙灾，毁成祖、仁宗主。
现代文：五日，九庙发生火灾，烧毁成祖、仁宗神牌。
English: On the fifth day, a fire broke out in nine temples, burning down the Cheng Zu and Ren Zong sacred tablets.

古文：丙子，诏行宽恤之政。
现代文：二十日，下诏施行宽恤政策。
English: On the 20th, the government announced the implementation of a lenient pension policy.

古文：五月戊子，采木于湖广、四川。
现代文：五月三日，在湖广、四川采木。
English: On May 3, they were harvesting trees in Huguang and Sichuan.

古文：甲寅，振辽东饥。
现代文：二十九日，赈济辽东灾荒。
English: On the 29th, the eastern Liaodong Province of Fujian Province was ravaged by natural disasters.

古文：六月，振畿内、山西饥。
现代文：六月，赈救畿内、山西饥荒。
English: In June, the famine in Gyeonggi Province and Shanxi Province was brought under control.

古文：秋七月丁酉，俺答、阿不孩遣使款塞求贡，诏却之。
现代文：七月十三日，俺答、阿不孩派使者到边关来请求进贡，下诏拒绝。
English: On July 13th, I replied, "Abuha sent an envoy to the border to ask for tribute, but the emperor refused."

古文：是月，免河南、陕西、山东被灾税粮。
现代文：当月，免河南、陕西、山东受灾税粮。
English: In the same month, Henan, Shaanxi and Shandong were exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：八月辛酉，昭圣皇太后崩。
现代文：八月八日，昭圣皇太后死。
English: On August 8, Empress Dowager Zhaosheng passed away.

古文：庚辰，夏言罢。
现代文：二十七日，夏言停职。
English: On the 27th, Natsugen was suspended from his duties.

古文：是月，俺答、阿不孩、吉囊分道入寇，总兵官赵卿帅京营兵，都御史翟鹏理军务，御之。
现代文：这月，俺答、阿不孩、吉囊分路入侵，总兵官赵卿率领京师营兵，都御史翟鹏处理军务，抗击入侵之敌。
English: This month, we, Ah Boo, and Ji Zucan invaded the branch road, and the chief military officer Zhao Qing led the battalion of the Beijing Division, and the governor Shi Xianpeng handled military affairs to resist the invasion of the enemy.

古文：九月乙未，翊国公郭勋有罪，下狱死。
现代文：九月十二日，翊国公郭勋犯罪，下狱而死。
English: On September 12th, Guo Xun, the prince of Shandong Province, committed a crime and died in prison.

古文：辛亥，俺答犯山西，入石州。
现代文：二十八日，俺答侵犯山西，侵入石州。
English: On the 28th, we invaded Shanxi and invaded Shizhou.

古文：冬十月癸丑，振山西被寇者，复徭役二年。
现代文：十月一日，赈救山西遭兵祸军民，减免徭役二年。
English: On October 1st, he helped the soldiers and civilians in Shanxi who suffered from the war, and was exempted from military service for two years.

古文：丁卯，召夏言复入阁。
现代文：十五日，又召夏言入阁。
English: On the fifteenth day, Natsugen was also summoned to the cabinet.

古文：十一月辛卯，葬敬皇后于泰陵。
现代文：十一月九日，安葬敬皇后于泰陵。
English: On November 9th, the funeral of Empress Kei was held at Tai Ling.

古文：丙申，免四川被灾税粮。
现代文：十四日，免四川受灾税粮。
English: On the 14th, tax grain from Sichuan was exempted.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二十一年夏四月庚申，大高玄殿成。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年四月十日，大高玄殿修成。
English: On the 10th day of April in the 21st year of Jiajing, the Great High Courtyard was completed.

古文：闰五月戊辰，俺答、阿不孩遣使款大同塞，巡抚都御史龙大有诱杀之。
现代文：闰五月十九日，俺答、阿不孩派使者到大同要塞，巡抚都御史龙大有引诱捕杀其使者。
English: On the 19th day of the 5th month, I replied, "Abu Hao sent an envoy to the Datong Fortress, and the governor, Shilong, did a great job of luring and killing his envoy.

古文：六月辛卯，俺答寇朔州。
现代文：六月十二日，俺答侵犯朔州。
English: On June 12th, I responded to the invasion of Shuozhou.

古文：壬寅，入雁门关。
现代文：二十三日，进入雁门关。
English: On the 23rd, enter the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：丁未，犯太原。
现代文：二十八日，侵犯太原。
English: On the 28th, it invaded Taiyuan.

古文：秋七月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月一日，有日食。夏言退职。
English: On July 1, there was a solar eclipse. Natsugen resigned.

古文：夏言罢。己未，俺答寇潞安，掠沁、汾、襄垣、长治，参将张世忠战死。
现代文：十一日，俺答侵犯潞安，抢劫沁、汾、襄垣、长子，参将张世忠战死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, I responded to the invasion of Huanan, the robbery of Huan, Huan, Xiangaki, and the eldest son, and the general Zhang Shizhong died in battle.

古文：八月辛巳，募兵于直隶、山东、河南。
现代文：八月四日，在直隶、山东、河南招募士兵。
English: On August 4, soldiers were recruited in Zhili, Shandong and Henan.

古文：壬午，振山西被兵州县，免田租。
现代文：五日，赈救山西遭战乱州县，免除田租。
English: On the fifth day, he rescued Shanxi from the war-torn prefectures and was exempted from the field rent.

古文：癸巳，礼部尚书严嵩兼武英殿大学士，预机务。
现代文：十六日，礼部尚书严嵩兼武英殿大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 16th, the Rector of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Shangshu Yanlong, who was also a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency, participated in the military and national events.

古文：九月癸亥，员外郎刘魁谏营雷殿，予杖下狱。
现代文：九月十六日，员外郎刘魁进谏修建雷殿，给予杖刑然后下狱。
English: On September 16th, Liu Kuijin, a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, built a mine hall, was given a cane sentence and then released from prison.

古文：冬十月丁酉，宫人谋逆伏诛，磔端妃曹氏、宁嫔王氏于市。
现代文：十月二十一日，宫人谋反被诛杀，将端妃曹氏分尸，宁嫔王氏弃尸示众。
English: On October 21st, the palace people plotted a rebellion and were killed. The bodies of the princess Cao were dismembered, and the body of the prince Ning Xi was abandoned and displayed to the public.

古文：是年，免畿内、陕西、河南、福建被灾税粮。
现代文：这年，免畿内、陕西、河南、福建受灾税粮。
English: This year, tax-free grain was provided to the disaster-affected areas in Gyeonggi Province, Shaanxi Province, Henan Province and Fujian Province.

古文：安南入贡。
现代文：安南入朝进贡。
English: Annan came to pay tribute.

