古文：有躄盗者，一足躄，善穿窬。
现代文：原文有个窃贼虽断了一条腿，但仍善于穿墙偷窃之术。
English: There was a thief who had broken his leg, but was still good at stealing through walls.

古文：尝夜从二盗入巨姓家，登屋翻瓦，使二盗以绳下之，搜资入之柜，命二盗系上已，复下其柜，入资上之，如是者三矣。躄盗自度曰： 柜上，彼无置我去乎。 
现代文：有一天夜里，这名断脚盗跟另外两个窃贼潜入一个大户人家中行窃。断脚盗先要另外两人翻上屋顶，再垂下绳索，让他能入屋搜刮财物，装入大箱中，再要两人将大箱吊起，接着再放下大箱。如此连续三次后，断脚盗突然想到： 大箱上去后，他们是否会丢下我不管？ 
English: One night, the thief with the broken leg sneaked into a large house with two other thieves. The thief with the broken leg first asked the other two to turn over the roof, then lowered the rope so that he could enter the house to search for property, put it in a large box, and then asked the two to lift the large box and then put the large box down. After doing this three times in a row, the thief with the broken leg suddenly thought: Will they leave me after the large box goes up?

古文：遂自入坐柜中，二盗系上之，果私语曰： 资重矣，彼出必多取，不如弃去。 
现代文：于是自己钻进箱内。两人将大箱拉上后，果然暗暗商量： 箱子那么重，财物一定不少，他一定会要求要多分一些，不如丢下他吧！ 
English: So he got into the box himself. After the two men pulled the large box up, they secretly discussed: The box is so heavy, there must be a lot of belongings, he will definitely ask for more, why not leave him!

古文：遂持柜行大野中，一人曰： 躄盗称善偷，乃为我二人卖。 
现代文：于是两人抬着箱子向郊外逃去。途中，一名盗匪说： 断脚盗号称神偷，但是还是被我们出卖了。 
English: On the way, one of the robbers said, "The thief with the broken leg called himself a god thief, but we still betrayed him."

古文：一人曰： 此时将见主人翁矣。 
现代文：另一人说： 此刻恐怕已被主人发觉了。 
English: Another said: 'I'm afraid it's been spotted by its owner at this point.

古文：相与大笑欢喜，不知躄盗乃在柜中，顷二盗倦，坐道上，躄盗度将曙，又闻远舍有人语笑，从柜中大声曰： 盗劫我。 
现代文：两人不觉得意大笑，不知断脚盗就在大箱中。又走了一段路，两人累了，就在路边休息，断脚盗盘算天快亮了，又听见远处屋舍传来人语声，于是笑着由箱中走出，大声说： 有强盗抢我的东西。 
English: The two did not feel like laughing out loud, they did not know that the thief was in the big box. They walked another stretch of road, the two were tired and rested on the side of the road. The thief thought that the day was about to dawn, and heard human voices coming from a distant house, so he laughed and walked out of the box and said loudly: There is a robber robbing my things.

古文：二盗惶讶遁去，躄盗顾乃得金资归。
现代文：两名强盗在惊惧讶异中逃走，于是断脚盗获得全部的赃物。
English: Shocked and surprised, the two robbers fled, leaving the bandit with all the loot.

古文：何大复作《躄盗篇》。
现代文：这件事记载在何大复所著的《躄盗篇》中。
English: This incident is recorded in the "Theft" by He Daifu.

