古文：○理宗一理宗建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，讳昀，太祖十世孙。
现代文：理宗建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，名晌，宋太祖第十世孙。
English: Emperor Ming'an and Emperor Xiao, eminent scholars, the 10th-generation grandson of Song Taizu.

古文：父希卢，追封荣王，家于绍兴府山阴县，母全氏。
现代文：父亲赵和笋，追封为荣王，家住绍兴府山阴县，母亲全氏。
English: His father, Zhao Heqi, was posthumously named Rongwang and lived in Shanyin County, Shaoxing Prefecture. His mother was a member of the Quan family.

古文：以开禧元年正月癸亥生于邑中虹桥里第。
现代文：开禧元年正月初五生于县中虹桥家中。
English: He was born on the fifth day of the first month of the year in Zhonghongqiao.

古文：前一夕，荣王梦一紫衣金帽人来谒，比寤，夜漏未尽十刻，室中五采烂然，赤光属天，如日正中。
现代文：出生前一天晚上，荣王梦见一个穿戴紫衣金帽之人来拜访；等醒来，夜漏十刻没到，室中五彩灿烂，赤光照天，如日正中。
English: On the night before his birth, Rong Wang dreamed that a person wearing a purple robe and a gold hat came to visit him. When he woke up, the night-time hourglass had not yet reached ten o'clock, and the room was brightly colored with red light shining into the sky, as if it were the middle of the day.

古文：既诞三日，家人闻户外车马声，亟出，无所睹。
现代文：出生三天后，家人听到屋外面有车马声，急忙赶出来看，什么也没看见。
English: Three days after he was born, his family heard a car outside their house and hurried out to look, but saw nothing.

古文：幼尝昼寝，人忽见身隐隐如龙鳞。
现代文：小时候曾经白天睡觉，人家忽然看见他身上隐隐像龙鳞。
English: When he was a child, he used to sleep during the day, and people suddenly saw a faint resemblance of dragon scales on his body.

古文：是时，宁宗弟沂靖惠王薨，无嗣，以宗室希瞿子赐名均为沂王后，寻改赐名贵和。
现代文：这时，宁宗弟沂靖惠王逝世，没有后代，以宗室赵希瞿子赐给名均为沂王后代，不久改赐为赵贵和。
English: At this time, Ning's younger brother, King Jiejing Hui, passed away and had no descendants. He was given the name Zhao Xizhi, which means "descendant of King Jie," by his father's wife, but this was soon changed to Zhao Guihe.

古文：嘉定十三年八月，景献太子薨，宁宗以国本未立，选太祖十世孙年十五以上者教育，如高宗择普安、恩平故事，遂以十四年六月丙寅立贵和为皇子，改赐名竑，而以帝嗣沂王。
现代文：嘉定十三年八月，景献太子去世，宁宗以国家的根本没有立稳，选择太祖十世孙十五岁以上的人进行教育，像高宗选择普安、恩平故事，于是在嘉定十四年六月十三日立赵贵和为皇子，改赐名，而以理宗为沂王后代。
English: In August of the 13th year of Jiading, Prince Jingxian died. Ningzong took the view that the country was not stable at all, and chose the 10th grandchild of the great-grandfather to educate people over the age of 15. Like Gaozong, he chose Pu'an and Enping stories. Therefore, on June 13th of the 14th year of Jiading, Zhao Guihe was established as the prince, and the name was changed, and Rizong was chosen as the descendant of the king.

古文：六月乙亥，补秉义郎。
现代文：六月二十二日，补为秉义郎。
English: On June 22nd, he was replaced by Bing Yiro.

古文：八月甲子，授右监门卫大将军，赐名贵诚。
现代文：八月十三日，授为右监门卫大将军，赐名赵贵诚。
English: On August 13th, he was awarded the title of General of the Right Guard and given the name Zhao Guicheng.

古文：十五年五月丁巳，以竑为检校少保，进封济国公。
现代文：嘉定十五年五月初十，以为检校少保，进封为济国公。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month of the fifteenth year of the Jiading era, he was promoted to the position of the provincial governor of Ji Province.

古文：己未，以帝为邵州防御使。
现代文：十二日，任命理宗为邵州防御使。
English: On the 12th, Ri Zong was appointed as the defense envoy of Shaozhou.

古文：帝性凝重寡言，洁修好学，每朝参待漏，或多笑语，帝独俨然。
现代文：理宗生性凝重寡言，洁修好学，每次早晨人朝等待参见皇帝，其他人大多欢声笑语，理宗独自俨然站立在那里，不苟言笑。
English: Risso was by nature taciturn, chaste and studious. Every morning, people waited to see the emperor. Most of the others were laughing and joking. Risso stood there alone, unsmiling.

古文：出入殿庭，矩度有常，见者敛容。会济国公竑与丞相史弥远有违言，弥远日谋媒蘖其失于宁宗，属意于帝而未遂。
现代文：出人殿廷，都遵守宗室规矩，见者敛容，恰逢济国公赵与承相史弥远有矛盾，史弥远每天在宁宗面前构陷诬害赵，有意立理宗为皇太子而没有得逞。
English: Those who were promoted to the imperial court had to abide by the rules of the imperial family and show restraint. This coincided with the conflict between King Zhao of the State of Ji and the heir apparent, Shi Yayuan. Shi Yayuan framed and slandered Zhao in front of Ning Zong every day, intending to establish Ri Zong as the crown prince, but was unsuccessful.

古文：十七年八月丙戌，宁宗违豫，自是不视朝。
现代文：嘉定十七年八月二十一日，宁宗身体不适，从此不上朝处理政事。
English: On August 21 of the 17th year of Jiading, Ningzong became unwell and did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：壬辰，疾笃，弥远称诏以贵诚为皇子，改赐名昀，授武泰军节度使，封成国公。
现代文：二十七日，宁宗病危，史弥远称诏以赵贵诚为皇子，改赐名晌，授为武泰军节度使，封为成国公。
English: On the 27th, with Ningzong in critical condition, Shi Miyan proclaimed that Zhao Guicheng was the prince, changed his name to Zhao Guicheng, and was awarded the title of Military Attaché to the Thai Armed Forces and the title of Prince of Chengguo.

古文：闰月丙申，宁宗疾甚，丁酉，崩于福宁殿。
现代文：闰八月初二，宁宗病情加重，初三，在福宁殿逝世。
English: On the second day of the second month of August, Ningzong's condition worsened, and on the third day of the third month, he passed away at the Fu Ning Palace.

古文：弥远使杨谷、杨石入白杨皇后，称遗旨以皇子竑开府仪同三司，进封济阳郡王、判宁国府，命子昀嗣皇帝位。
现代文：史弥远命令杨谷、杨石告诉杨皇后，按照遗诏任命皇子赵为开府仪同三司，进封为济阳郡王，判宁国府，命令皇子赵晌即皇帝位。
English: Shi Miyuan ordered Yang Gu and Yang Shi to tell Empress Yang that, in accordance with the last will and testament, he would appoint the prince Zhao as Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, Jinfeng as Jiyang County King, and Janning Guofu, and order the prince Zhao Qi to be the emperor.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦全国。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：尊杨皇后曰皇太后，同听政。
现代文：尊杨皇后为皇太后，代理主管国政。
English: Empress Sonnyang is the empress dowager, acting in charge of state affairs.

古文：封竑为济王，赐第湖州，以醴泉观使就第。
现代文：封赵为济王，赐给湖州宅第，以醛泉观使前往居住。
English: He made Zhao the king of Jizhou, gave him a mansion in Huzhou, and sent him to live in Yuqingquan.

古文：癸亥，诏宫中自服三年丧。
现代文：二十九日，下诏宫中各自服丧三年。
English: On the 29th, the three-year mourning period began at the Imperial Palace.

古文：九月乙亥，诏褒表老儒，以傅伯成为显谟阁学士，杨简宝谟阁直学士，并提举南京鸿庆宫。柴中行叙复元职，授右文殿修撰、主管南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：九月十二日，下诏褒扬老儒，以傅伯成为显漠阁学士，杨简为宝漠阁直学士，二人都为提举南京鸿庆宫；柴中行恢复原职，授为右文殿修撰，主管南京鸿庆宫。
English: On September 12th, the following edict was issued to commend the old man, with Fu Bo becoming a scholar of Xianba Pavilion, and Yang Jian becoming a scholar of Bao Bao Pavilion. Both of them were promoted to Nanjing Hongqing Palace; Chai Zhongxing resumed his original position, was awarded the right to write, and was in charge of Nanjing Hongqing Palace.

古文：戊寅，诏兄济王妻卫国夫人吴氏封许国夫人。
现代文：十五日，下诏封兄济王妻卫国夫人吴氏为许国夫人。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Wu, the wife of Emperor Wei and the younger brother of Emperor Jie, became the wife of Emperor Xu.

古文：己卯，皇太后、皇帝御便殿垂帘。
现代文：十六日，皇太后、理宗到便殿垂帘听政。
English: On the 16th, the Empress Dowager and Emperor Ritsumo went to the hall to listen to the government.

古文：诏以先圣四十九代孙行可为迪功郎，授判、司、簿、尉；以礼部侍郎程珌、吏部侍郎朱著、中书舍人真德秀兼侍读；工部侍郎葛洪、起居郎乔行简、宗正少卿陈贵谊、军器监王塈兼侍讲。
现代文：下诏任命先圣四十九代孙孔行可为迪功郎，授判、司、簿、尉；任命礼部侍郎韵孙、吏部侍郎朱著、中书舍人真德秀兼侍读；工部侍郎葛洪、起居郎乔行简、宗正少卿陈贵谊、军器监王兼侍讲。
English: The following edict appointed the forty-ninth generation grandson of the first saint, Kong Xing, as Di Gong Rong, conferring, secretary, bookkeeper, and lieutenant; appointed the servant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Rong Xing Rong, the servant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Zhu Zhu, and the servant of the Ministry of Education, Zhen De Xiu; the servant of the Ministry of Industry, Ge Hong, the servant of the Ministry of Education, Qijiro Qiao Xing Jian, the junior secretary of the Ministry of Education, Chen Guizhi, and the servant of the King of Armaments.

古文：壬午，葛洪权工部尚书，升兼侍读。
现代文：十九日，葛洪代理工部尚书，升兼侍读。
English: On the 19th, Ge Hong, acting for the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, was promoted to assistant teacher.

古文：辛卯，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：二十八日，祭祀明堂，大赦全国。
English: On the 14th, the memorial service was held at Myeongdong, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：冬十月戊戌，诏诸路提点刑狱以十一月按理囚徒。
现代文：冬十月初五，下诏各路提点刑狱在十一月视察处理囚犯。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the next step is to inspect and deal with prisoners in November.

古文：己亥，嗣秀王师嵓薨。
现代文：初六，嗣秀王赵师莆去世。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Zhao Shijun, the successor of King Xiu, passed away.

古文：壬子，诏百官奉按月给。
现代文：十九日，下诏文武百官棒禄按月供给。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the monthly stipend for 100 civil and military officials will be provided.

古文：十一月甲子，右正言麋溧请承顺东朝，继志述事，壹以孝宗为法，而新政之切者，曰畏天、悦亲、讲学、仁民。
现代文：十一月初二，右正言康漂请求承顺东朝，继志述事，以孝宗为榜样，而新政之急切者，就是畏天、悦亲、讲学、仁民。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, U-Majong Kangbue requested to succeed the Eastern Shun Dynasty, to follow his will, and to follow the example of Xiaozong, and the eager people of the New Deal are fear of heaven, pleasing relatives, lecturing, and benevolence to the people.

古文：上嘉纳焉。
现代文：理宗高兴地采纳了这一建议。
English: At that time, it was widely believed that Shi Hao was a recommended candidate.

古文：癸未，以五月十六日为皇太后寿庆节。
现代文：二十一日，以五月十六日为皇太后寿庆节。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the birthday of the Empress Dowager was changed to May 16th.

古文：丁亥，诏改明年为宝庆元年。
现代文：二十五日，下诏改明年为宝庆元年。
English: On the 25th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of Baoqing.

古文：戊子，以葛洪为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十六日，任命葛洪为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 26th, Ge Hong was appointed as a member of the Academy of Duanming Palace and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：己丑，诏以生日为天基节。
现代文：二十七日，下诏以生日为天基节。
English: On the 27th, the following edict declared his birthday to be the Day of Heaven.

古文：十二月甲午，雪寒，免京城官私房赁地、门税等钱。
现代文：十二月初一，降雪寒冷，免除京城官私房屋租地、门税等钱。
English: On the first day of December, with snowfall and cold weather, the official and private houses in Beijing were exempted from land rent, door tax and other fees.

古文：自是祥庆、灾异、寒暑皆免。
现代文：从此，样庆、灾异、寒暑皆免。
English: From now on, celebrations, natural disasters, and cold and hot weather are all exempt from this tax.

古文：癸丑，开经筵，诏辅臣观讲。
现代文：二十一日，开经筵，下诏辅臣观讲。
English: On the twenty-first day, the sutra was opened, and the following sermon was delivered.

古文：诏太后所居殿号曰慈明。
现代文：下诏太后所居殿为慈明殿。
English: The palace where the empress dowager lived is called Jimei-den.

古文：辛酉，请大行皇帝谥号于南郊，谥曰仁文哲武恭孝皇帝，庙号曰宁宗。
现代文：二十九日，到南郊请大行皇帝宁宗溢号，溢号为仁文哲武恭孝皇帝，庙号宁宗。
English: On the 29th, Da Xing invited Emperor Ningzong of the Southern Suburbs to visit. The Emperor Ningzong's posthumous name was Ren Wen Zhe Wu Gong Xiao, and his temple name was Ningzong.

古文：宝庆元年春正月壬戌朔，诏举贤良。
现代文：宝庆元年春正月初一，下诏举荐贤良。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Baoqing, the following edict recommended the virtuous.

古文：庚午，湖州盗潘壬、潘丙、潘甫谋立济王竑，竑闻变，匿水窦中，盗得之，拥至州治，以黄袍加其身，守臣谢周卿率官属入贺。
现代文：初九，湖州盗贼潘壬、潘丙、潘甫阴谋立济王赵为帝，赵听说此事，躲到水洞中，盗贼得到后，拥至州治，把黄袍披在赵身上，守臣谢周卿率官属朝贺。
English: In the early 9th century, the Huzhou thieves Pan Ren, Pan Pi, and Pan Fu plotted to make King Zhao the emperor. When Zhao heard about this, he hid in a water cave. After the thieves got it, they rushed to Shuzhi and put the yellow robe on Zhao's body. The vassal, Xie Zhouqing, led the officials in morning greetings.

古文：初，壬等伪称李全以精兵二十万助讨史弥远擅废立之罪，比明视之，皆太湖渔人及巡尉兵卒，竑乃遣王元春告于朝，而率州兵诛贼。
现代文：起初，潘壬等伪称李全率精兵二十万助讨史弥远擅自废立的罪行，等天明观看，他们都是太湖渔民和巡尉士卒，赵于是派遣王元春报告朝廷而自己亲率州兵诛讨盗贼。
English: At first, Pan Ren and others falsely claimed that Li Quan led 200,000 elite soldiers to help investigate Shi Yiyuan's crime of unilaterally abolishing the government, and when it became clear that they were all Taihu fishermen and lieutenants, Zhao then sent Wang Yuanchun to report to the imperial court and personally led the state soldiers to investigate the thieves.

古文：弥远奏遣殿司将彭任讨之，至则盗平。
现代文：史弥远奏请殿司将领彭任讨伐，刚到达，盗贼就平定了。
English: Shi Mi called for the palace general Peng Ren to fight, and as soon as he arrived, the thieves were pacified.

古文：又遣其客秦天锡托宣医治竑疾，谕旨逼竑死，寻诏贬为巴陵郡公。
现代文：又派遣其客秦天锡假托朝廷命令治赵的病，逼迫赵死，不久贬降为巴陵郡公。
English: He also sent his guest Qin Tianxi under the pretense of asking the imperial court to order the treatment of Zhao's illness, forcing Zhao to die, and was soon demoted to the position of the governor of Baling County.

古文：辛未，诏保宁军节度使师弥为检校少保。
现代文：初十，下诏保宁军节度使赵师弥为检校少保。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Boryeongjun military festival made Zhao Shiya the junior guard of the inspection school.

古文：诏以皇太后弟奉国军节度使杨谷、保宁节度杨石并开府仪同三司。
现代文：下诏以皇太后弟奉国军节度使杨谷、保宁节度杨石为开府仪同三司。
English: The following edict designated Yanggu, the younger brother of the Empress Dowager, and Yangshi, the younger brother of the Empress Dowager, as the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：丙戌，济王竑讣闻，特辍视朝。
现代文：二十五日，济王赵逝世消息传到朝廷，理宗特停止上朝处理政事。
English: On the 25th, the news of the death of King Zhao of Jizhou reached the imperial court, and Li Zong stopped dealing with political affairs.

古文：己丑，上宁宗谥册、宝。
现代文：二十八日，呈上宁宗溢号、册宝。
English: On the 28th, Ningzong's posthumous name and treasures were presented.

古文：二月甲午，诏故太师、武胜定国军节度使、鄂王岳飞谥忠武。
现代文：二月初三，下诏已故太师、武胜定国军节度使、鄂王岳飞溢号为忠武。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month, the late Grand Master, Wu Shengding, the festival envoy of the National Army, and Hwang Yuefei were awarded the title of Zhongwu.

古文：丙申，诏师弥检校少师、嗣秀王。
现代文：初三，下诏赵师弥为检校少师、嗣秀王。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhao Shiya was promoted to junior high school teacher, and then to junior high school teacher.

古文：丙辰，楚州火。
现代文：二十三日，楚州发生火灾。
English: On the 23rd, a fire broke out in Chuzhou.

古文：戊午，发廪振在京细民，给犒马步军、皇城司守卫军有差。
现代文：二十五日，开仓发米贩济京城小民，供给搞赏马步军、皇城司守卫军队不等。
English: On the 25th, rice traders opened their warehouses to help the small people of Beijing, and the supplies ranged from the reward horse army to the imperial city guard army.

古文：三月癸酉，葬宁宗于会稽永茂陵。
现代文：三月十三日，葬宁宗于会稽永茂陵。
English: On March 13, the funeral of Ning Zong took place at the Yongmao Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月辛卯朔，宁宗祔庙。
现代文：夏四月初一，在太庙撇祭宁宗。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the Ningzong skimming festival is held in the Great Temple.

古文：壬辰，诏皇兄竑赠少师、保静、镇潼军节度使，直舍人院王塈等缴奏命，遂寝。
现代文：初二，下诏皇兄赵赠为少师、保静镇撞军节度使，直舍人院王等缴还奏命，于是收回成命。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that the emperor's elder brother, Zhao Sheng, be appointed as a minor teacher and Bao Jingzhen, the commander of the army, as the festival envoy, and the empress dowager, etc. were to surrender their lives to the emperor, and thus their lives were taken back.

古文：丁酉，皇太后手书： 多病，自今免垂帘听政。 
现代文：初七，皇太后手书： 多病，从此不垂帘听政。 
English: On the seventh day of her junior year, the Empress Dowager wrote in her handwriting: I am very ill, and henceforth I will not listen to politics.

古文：壬寅，帝两请皇太后垂帘，不允。
现代文：十二日，理宗两次请皇太后垂帘听政，没有应允。
English: On the twelfth day, the Emperor twice asked the Empress Dowager to listen to the government, but she did not agree.

古文：辛亥，发廪振在京细民。
现代文：二十一日，发仓库米贩济在京小民。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, rice traders from a warehouse in Beijing came to Xiaomin.

古文：五月甲子，诏： 内外文武大小之臣，于国政有所见闻，封章来上，毋或有隐。 
现代文：五月初四，下诏： 内外文武大小臣僚，对国家政事有什么意见，呈上密封奏章，不要有所隐瞒。 
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the following edict was issued: Foreign and domestic ministers of all ranks and ranks, big and small, if you have any opinions on national politics, please submit a sealed record, and do not hide anything.

古文：丙寅，诏不熄为保康军承宣使、嗣濮王。
现代文：初六，下诏赵不熄为保康军承育使、嗣攫王。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Fuxue was appointed as the education envoy of the Hokang Army and the heir to the throne.

古文：六月辛卯，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of June, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁未，诏史弥远为太师，依前右丞相兼枢密使，进封魏国公。
现代文：十八日，下诏史弥远为太师，依照前例右承相兼枢密使，进封为魏国公。
English: On the 18th, the next emperor, Shi Yayuan, became the Grand Master, and in accordance with the precedent of the Right Heir to the Throne and the Privy Envoy, he was enthroned as the Prince of Wei.

古文：弥远辞免太师。
现代文：史弥远辞免太师。
English: Shi Miyan resigned from the position of Grand Master.

古文：秋七月丁丑，滁州大水，诏振恤之。
现代文：秋七月十八日，滁州发大水，下诏贩济抚恤灾民。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhangzhou was hit by a big flood, and the merchants donated money to the victims.

古文：乙酉，诏行大宋元宝钱。
现代文：二十六日，下诏流通大宋元宝钱。
English: On the 26th, the Great Song and Yuan Dynasties treasure coins were put into circulation.

古文：八月壬寅，以司农丞姚子才封事切直，诏进一秩，授秘书郎。
现代文：八月十四日，因司农承姚子才所上密封章奏切直，下诏进秩一级，授为秘书郎。
English: On August 14th, the seal of the Agricultural Science Research Institute of Yao Zi Cai was officially sealed, and the next edict was promoted to the first rank and awarded to the secretary.

古文：癸卯，诏知袁州赵夫直秘阁、福建提点刑狱，以旌廉吏。
现代文：十五日，下诏袁州知州赵硕夫为直秘阁、福建提点刑狱，用以表彰廉吏。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Shuofu of Yuzhou and Zhizhou was awarded the title of "Direct Secretary" and Fujian Province was awarded a prison sentence to commend corrupt officials.

古文：丙午，诏侍从、给谏、卿监、郎官，并在外前执政、侍从、帅臣、监司，各举廉吏三人。
现代文：十八日，下诏侍从、给谏、卿监、郎官，以及在外前任执政、侍从、帅臣、监司，各自举荐廉吏三人。
English: On the 18th day of the following year, the imperial edict recommended three corrupt officials to the emperor: the attendant, the vassal, the inspector, and the vassal, as well as the former ruler, the attendant, the courtier, and the inspector.

古文：戊申，诏侍从、两省、台谏、三衙、知阁、御带、环卫官，在外前执政、侍从，帅臣、监司、都副都统制及屯戍主将，其各举堪充将帅三人。
现代文：二十日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏、三衙、知阎、御带、环卫官，在外前任执政、侍从、帅臣、监司、都副都统制和屯戍主将，各自举荐可以担任将帅者三人。
English: On the 20th day of the following year, three people who can serve as the commander-in-chief are recommended by the following officials: the attendant, the two provinces, the Taiwan Province, the Sanjiang Province, the Zhiyan Province, the Imperial Belt, the environmental protection officer, the former governor, the attendant, the commander-in-chief, the supervisor, the deputy commander-in-chief, and the commander-in-chief of the garrison.

古文：己酉，地震。
现代文：二十一日，地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake.

古文：壬子，张九成赠太师，追封崇国公，谥文忠。
现代文：二十四日，赠张九成为太师，追封为崇国公，溢号文忠。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jiu was given the title of Grand Master, posthumously awarded the title of Prince of the State, and given the title of Wenzhong.

古文：甲寅，以程颐四世孙源为籍田令。
现代文：二十六日，任命程颐四世孙程源为籍田令。
English: On the 26th, Cheng Yu's fourth-generation grandson, Cheng Yuan, was appointed as the head of the family.

古文：乙卯，莫泽言真德秀舛论纲常，简节上语，曲为济王地。
现代文：二十七日，莫泽议论说真德秀怜论纲常，简节皇上的话，为济王赵辩解。
English: On the 27th, Mozer argued that the truth, virtue, beauty, and mercy were all normal, and the emperor's words were simple, justifying King Zhao of Jiefang.

古文：诏德秀焕章阁待制、提举玉隆万寿宫。
现代文：下诏真德秀为焕章阁待制、提举玉隆万寿宫。
English: The following edict of Zhen Dexiu is to award the title of honor to the palace, and to elevate the Yulong Palace of Longevity.

古文：丁巳，诏戒贪吏。
现代文：二十九日，下诏告诫贪吏。
English: On the 29th, he issued an imperial edict admonishing corrupt officials.

古文：九月丙寅，著作佐郎陶崇上保业、慎独、谨微、持久四事，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：九月初八，著作佐郎陶崇呈上保业、慎独、谨微、持久四项建议，理宗高兴地采纳。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, the author Saro Tao Chong presented four suggestions, namely, to safeguard one's career, to be cautious and independent, to be prudent, and to persevere, which Riso gladly accepted.

古文：冬十月癸巳，有流星大如太白。
现代文：冬十月初六，有流星比太白星还要大。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, there was a meteor even bigger than the white star.

古文：甲寅，诏会稽欑宫所在，税赋尽免折科，山阴县权免三年。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：会稽殡宫所在，税赋尽免折科，山阴县暂免三年。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: the county in which the Funeral Palace of the Board of Examiners is located is exempt from taxes, and the county in Shanyin County is exempt for three years.

古文：十一月癸亥，宣缯兼同知枢密院事，薛极参知政事，葛洪签书枢密院事。
现代文：十一月初六，宣增兼同知枢密院事，薛极为参知政事，葛洪为签书枢密院事。
English: At the beginning of November 6, Xuan Zeng and Tongzhi were appointed to the Privy Council, Xue was appointed to the Council of State, and Ge Hong was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：诏邵州潜藩，可升为宝庆府。
现代文：下诏说： 邵州曾是潜藩所在，可升为宝庆府。
English: The next edict said: Shaozhou was once the location of a subterranean domain, and it can be upgraded to Baoqingfu.

古文：筠州与御名音相近，改为瑞州。
现代文：箔州的箔与理宗名字音相近，避讳改为瑞州。 
English: The name of Haku-shu is close in pronunciation to the name of Risso, so the name was changed to Shizu-shu.

古文：壬午，雪寒，在京诸军给缗钱有差，出戍之家倍之。
现代文：二十五日，雪寒，在京各军供给络钱不等，出戍士兵之家加倍。
English: On the 25th, with snow and cold, the supply of network money to each army in Beijing varied, and the soldiers' home doubled.

古文：自是祥庆、灾异、霪雨、雪寒咸给。
现代文：从此样庆、灾异、霍雨、雪寒都给络钱。
English: From now on, celebrations, disasters, rainstorms, snow and cold weather are all given to the network money.

古文：甲申，朱端常言魏了翁封章谤讪，真德秀奏札诬诋。
现代文：二十七日，朱端常上奏说魏了翁封章谤汕，真德秀奏札诬低。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Zhu Duang often played the "Wei Yao Weng Feng Zhang Zhan" and Zhen De Xiu played the "Zhang Dao."

古文：诏魏了翁落职，夺三秩、靖州居住；真德秀落职罢祠。
现代文：下诏魏了翁免职，削夺三官，靖州居住；真德秀免职罢祠。
English: In the following Zhao Wei, Weng was dismissed from his post, the three officials were removed, and he lived in Jingzhou; Zhende Xiu was dismissed from his post and went to the temple.

古文：十二月甲辰，诏删修敕令。
现代文：十二月十八日，诏令删修救令。
English: On December 18th, the rescue order was deleted from the edict.

古文：是岁，两浙路户一百九十七万五千九百九十六，口二百八十二万二千三十二。
现代文：这一年，两浙路户数为一百九十七万五千九百九十六，口数为二百八十二万二千零三十二。
English: In the same year, the number of households in the two Zhejiang provinces was 1,975,996, and the number of households was 2,822,032.

古文：福建路户一百七十万四千一百八十六，口二百五十五万三千七十九。
现代文：福建路户数为一百七十万四千一百八十六，口数为三百五十五万三千零七十九。
English: The number of households in Fujian Province ranged from 1.704 million to 1.186 million, and the number of households was 3.553 million.

古文：二年春正月癸亥，诏赠沈焕、陆九龄官，焕谥端宪，九龄谥文达。
现代文：宝庆二年春正月初七，下诏赠沈焕、陆九龄官，溢号分别为端宪、文达。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring of Baoqing, the following edict presented Shen Huan and Lu Jiuling to officials, and the exclamation marks were respectively given to Duan Xian and Wenda.

古文：录张九成、吕祖谦、张栻、陆九渊子孙官各有差。
现代文：录用张九成、吕祖谦、张试、陆九渊子孙官不等。
English: Zhang Jiucheng, Lü Zuqian, Zhang Qian, and Lu Jiuyuan's sons and grandsons were appointed as officials.

古文：癸酉，诏布衣李心传赴阙。
现代文：十七日，召布衣李心传到朝廷。
English: On the 17th, Li Xin's call for cloth was sent to the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，荧惑入氐。
现代文：二十二日，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On the 22nd, the fluorescent planet entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：壬午，太白、岁星、填星合于女。
现代文：二十六日，太白星、岁星、填星合于女宿。
English: On the 26th, Tai Bai Xing, Ji Xing, and Fufeng Xing converged at the girls' hostel.

古文：二月辛卯，临察御史梁成大言真德秀有大恶五，仅褫职罢祠，罚轻。
现代文：二月初六，监察御史梁成大说真德秀有大恶五项，仅仅被革去官职，罢除祠官，处罚轻了。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, Liang Chengda, the supervising magistrate, said that Zhendexiu had committed five major evils, but he was only dismissed from his post, dismissed from his position as an ancestral hall official, and his punishment was light.

古文：诏削二秩。
现代文：下诏削二官。
English: Cut two posts in the next government.

古文：三月癸酉，以久雨，诏大理寺、三衙、两浙运司、临安府诸属县榷酒所，凡赃赏等钱，罪已决者，一切勿征，毋锢留妻子。
现代文：三月十八日，因久雨不晴下诏大理寺、三衙、两浙运司、临安府各属县榷酒所，凡赃赏等钱，罪犯已被处理断案者，一切不要再追究，不得拘留妻子儿女。
English: On March 18th, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the Dalian Temple, Samye, the two Zhejiang Transportation Departments, and the county liquor stores of Lin'an Prefecture were ordered not to investigate and not to detain the wives and children of the offenders who had already been dealt with and convicted.

古文：自是霖潦、寒暑皆免。
现代文：从此水早、寒暑皆免。
English: From now on, water, cold and heat are all exempt.

古文：戊寅，诏太常寺建功臣阁，以 昭勋崇德 为名。
现代文：二十三日，下诏太常寺建造功臣阁，名称为 昭勋崇德 。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor ordered the construction of the Hall of Merit in Taizho-ji Temple, which was named Shokun Chongde (昭勋崇德).

古文：己卯，蕲州火。
现代文：二十四日，薪州发生火灾。
English: On the 24th, a fire broke out in Zhouzhou.

古文：夏四月己丑，诏辅臣奉薄，其以《隆兴格》为制。
现代文：夏四月初五，下诏辅臣棒薄，以《隆兴格为制度。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month in summer, the following edict was issued: "Longxingge is the system.

古文：辛亥，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十七日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 27th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：六月丙申，御后殿，赐进士王会龙以下九百八十九人及第、出身有差。
现代文：六月十三日，到后殿，赐进士王会龙等九百八十九人及第、出身不等。
English: On June 13th, he went to the back hall and bestowed the title of "Wang Huilong" to 989 people of various ranks and backgrounds.

古文：壬寅，诏以孔子五十二代孙万春袭封衍圣公。
现代文：十九日，下诏以孔子五十二代孙孔万春袭封衍圣公。
English: On the 19th, it was announced that the 52nd generation of Confucius's grandson, Kong Wanchun, would succeed to the throne.

古文：秋七月戊辰，雷电、雨，昼晦，大风。
现代文：秋七月十五日，雷电雨交相发作，白天阴晦，刮大风。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, thunder, lightning and rain were interspersed. The day was cloudy and windy.

古文：遂安、休宁两县界山裂，洪水坏公宇、民居、田畴。
现代文：遂安、休宁两县界山裂；洪水冲坏公宁、民居、田畴。
English: The border between the two counties of Sui'an and Xuning is broken; floods have destroyed communities, residences, and fields.

古文：八月乙巳，济王竑追降巴陵县公。
现代文：八月二十二日，济王赵追降为巴陵县公。
English: On August 22, King Zhao of Jiefang was demoted to the position of governor of Baling County.

古文：辛亥，卫泾薨。
现代文：二十八日，卫径去世。
English: On the 28th, Weidong passed away.

古文：九月庚申，雷。
现代文：九月初八，打雷。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, there was thunder.

古文：冬十月甲申，诏《宁宗御集》阁以 宝章 为名，仍置学士、待制员。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏泞宗御集阁名称为 宝章 ，仍设置学士、待制官员。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the name of the Lower Zhaozhuangzong Gushikou was changed to "Treasure Medal," and there were still bachelors and officials on standby.

古文：辛丑，又雷。
现代文：十九日，又打雷。
English: On the 19th, it thundered again.

古文：辛亥，荧惑、岁星、填星合于女，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：二十九日，荧惑星、岁星、填星合于女宿，荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: On the 29th, the fluorescent planet, the year star, and the filling star met in the female inn, and the fluorescent planet encroached on the filling star.

古文：改湖州为安吉州。
现代文：改湖州为安吉州。
English: Change Huzhou to Anji.

古文：十一月甲寅，修祚德庙，以严程婴、公孙杵臼之祀。
现代文：十一月初三，修建柞德庙，严格程婴、公孙柞臼的祭祀。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Zhengde Temple was built, and the sacrificial rites of Chengnang and Gongsun Zhenwu were strictly carried out.

古文：丙辰，始御紫宸殿。
现代文：初五，始到紫哀殿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the procession began to the Purple Shrine.

古文：辛酉，荧惑犯岁星。
现代文：初十，荧惑星侵犯岁星。
English: On the 28th, Mars invaded Jupiter.

古文：丙子，日南至，上诣慈明殿。
现代文：二十五日，冬至，理宗到慈明殿。
English: On the 25th day, the winter solstice, Rizo went to Jimyo-den.

古文：十二月癸卯，亲享太庙。
现代文：十二月二十二日，理宗亲自祭太庙。
English: On December 22nd, Risso himself dedicated the temple.

古文：三年春正月辛亥朔，上寿明皇太后尊号册、宝于慈明殿。
现代文：宝庆三年春正月初一，到慈明殿呈上寿明皇太后尊号册宝。初二，史弥远进官二级。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Baoqing, the honorary title of the Empress Dowager Shouming was presented to Jiming Palace. On the second day of the first month, Shi Yuan was promoted to the second grade.

古文：壬子，史弥远二秩。辛酉，以杨谷、杨石并为少傅。
现代文：十一日，任命杨谷、杨石为少傅。
English: On the 11th day, Yang Gu and Yang Shi were appointed as junior sous chefs.

古文：知楚州姚翀朝辞，奏淮楚忠义军事，上曰： 南北皆吾赤子，何分彼此，卿其为朕抚定之。 
现代文：楚州知州姚是到朝廷告辞，奏疏淮、楚忠义军事，理宗说： 南北都是我大宋赤子，何必分彼此，你去替我抚定他们。 
English: Chuzhou, Zhizhou and Yao went to the imperial court to say farewell, and the military of Song, Shao and Huai, and Chu and Zhongyi, and Li Zong said: The north and south are my big Song babies, why do they have to be separated, you go to settle them for me.

古文：己巳，诏： 朕观朱熹集注《大学》、《论语》、《孟子》、《中庸》，发挥圣贤蕴奥，有补治道，朕励志讲学，缅怀典刑，可特赠熹太师，追封信国公。 
现代文：十九日，下诏： 肤观朱熹集注大学、论语、孟予、冲庸，发挥圣贤思想，有益治道。肤立志学习，追念典刑，可以特赠朱熹为太师，追封为信国公。 
English: On the 19th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Zhu Xi's view of the skin is to collect the university, the anecdote, Meng Yu, and Chong Yong, to give play to the thoughts of saints and sages, and to be beneficial to the administration of justice. If you are determined to study and remember the punishment, you can specially present Zhu Xi as the Grand Master and be posthumously awarded the title of the Prince of Belief.

古文：三月庚戌朔，诏郡县长吏劝农桑，抑末作，戒苛扰。
现代文：三月初一，下诏郡县长吏劝督农桑，抑制从商，严诫苛扰。
English: On the first day of March, the county magistrate issued an edict to urge farmers and farmers to restrain themselves from engaging in business and to strictly prohibit harassment.

古文：工部侍郎朱在进对，奏人主学问之要，上曰： 先卿《中庸序》言之甚详，朕读之不释手，恨不与同时。 
现代文：工部侍郎朱在进对，奏疏皇帝学问之要，理宗说： 先卿冲庸序言之甚详，肤爱不释手，恨不能与其同时。 
English: The workshop's chamberlain, Zhu, was on the right track, reciting the essentials of the emperor's learning, and Rizong said: The preface of the sage Chongyong is very detailed, and the love of the skin does not let go. I would like to do it at the same time.

古文：辛亥，以皇太后尊号册、宝礼成，侄孙杨凤孙以下推恩有差。
现代文：初二，因皇太后尊号册宝礼成，侄孙杨凤孙以下施予恩赏不等。
English: On the second day of the new year, because the empress dowager's name was inscribed in the Book of Honor, the rewards given ranged from her grandnephew Yang Fengsun downwards.

古文：夏四月戊戌，宣引前丞相谢深甫孙女谢氏诣慈明殿进见。
现代文：夏四月十九日，皇上宣召要前承相谢深甫孙女谢氏到慈明殿进见。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor issued a proclamation to summon the former heir to the throne, Emperor Xie Sheng, and his granddaughter, Empress Dowager Xie, to come to the Jimei Palace for an audience.

古文：五月壬子，诏岳珂户部侍郎，依前淮东总领兼制置使。
现代文：五月初四，诏令岳坷为户部侍郎，依前淮东总领兼制置使。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Zhao decreed that Yue Bu was to be the steward of the household, and the former general of Huaidong was also appointed as the envoy.

古文：闰月己卯朔，诏：郡县系囚不实书历，未经结录，守臣辄行特判，宪司其详覆所部狱案，岁月淹延者重置于宪。
现代文：闰五月初一，下诏：郡县在押囚犯不真实书写经历，没有经过讯问核实，守臣就实行特判，宪司详细审查所部狱案，拖欠推诱者重置典刑。
English: On the first day of the leap month of May, the following edict was issued: county and county prisoners did not have true writing experience, and did not go through interrogation and verification. The guards were given a special sentence, the registrar reviewed the prison case in detail, and rescheduled the sentence for those who delayed payment.

古文：六月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月乙酉，太阴犯心。
现代文：秋七月初八，月亮侵犯心宿。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, the moon invades the heart.

古文：丁酉，诏振赡被水郡县，其竹木等税勿征。
现代文：二十日，下诏贩济遭水灾的郡县，竹木等不征税。
English: On the 20th, it was announced that the counties and counties affected by floods would not be taxed on bamboo and wood.

古文：丙午，史弥远乞归田里，诏不允。
现代文：二十九日，史弥远请求归故乡，下诏不准。
English: On the 29th, Shi Yayuan requested to return to his hometown, but was denied.

古文：八月庚戌，诏谢氏特封通义郡夫人。
现代文：八月初四，下诏谢氏特封为通义郡夫人。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the next Zhao Xie became the wife of Tongyi County.

古文：癸亥，诏凡试邑两经罢黜，更勿授知县、县令。
现代文：十七日，下诏：凡试邑两次被罢除，再不授为知县、县令。
English: On the seventeenth day, the following edict was issued: If an audition village was removed twice, it would no longer be awarded the title of county seat or county magistrate.

古文：甲戌，太白、荧惑合于翼。
现代文：二十八日，太白星、荧惑星合于翼宿。
English: On the 28th, the Taibai Star and the Fluorescent Planet rendezvoused with the Pleiades.

古文：丙子，城太平州，诏知州綦奎进中奉大夫，余推恩有差。
现代文：三十日，在太平州建城，下诏知州纂奎进升为中奉大夫，其余施加恩惠不等。
English: On the 30th, the city was founded in Taiping Prefecture, and the governor of Taiping Prefecture, Kui Jin, was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking doctor, and the rest were granted various favors.

古文：九月癸未，故观文殿大学士、魏国公、赠太师留正谥忠宣。
现代文：九月初七，已故观文殿大学士、魏国公、赠太师留正溢号为忠宣。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, the late Kuomintang University Scholar, Wei Guogong, and Grand Master Ruizheng's posthumous name was changed to Zhongxuan.

古文：丙午，追上宁宗徽号曰法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝。
现代文：三十日，追上宁宗徽号为法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝。
English: On the 30th, he caught up with the Ningzong emblem as the Emperor of the Law, Heaven, Preparation, Virtue, Morality, Merit, Literature, Wisdom, Military Might, Wisdom, and Filial Piety.

古文：冬十月甲子，右监门卫大将军与奭改赐名贵谦，授宜州观察使，继沂王后。
现代文：冬十月十八日，右监门卫大将军赵与改赐名贵谦，授为宜州观察使，继为沂王后代。
English: On the 18th day of winter in October, the Right Supervisor and Gatekeeper General Zhao Youkai bestowed the title of Noble and Humble, and was awarded the title of Yizhou Observation Envoy, succeeding the descendants of King Zou.

古文：右千牛卫将军孟杓改赐名乃裕，授和州防御使，继景献太子后。
现代文：右千牛卫将军孟构改赐名乃裕，授为和州防御使，继为景献太子后代。
English: Gen. Meng Jianwei was given the title of Nanyu, and was awarded the title of Wazhou Defense Envoy, followed by the descendants of Prince Jing.

古文：甲戌，赵范江东提刑兼知池州，节制防江水步军、池州都统司军马。
现代文：二十八日，江东提刑赵范兼池州知州，主管调遣防江水步军、池州都统司军马。
English: On the 28th, Jiangdong punished Zhao Fan and Chizhou Chizhou Chizhou, and the supervisor dispatched the anti-river water marching army and the Chizhou capital city army.

古文：十一月戊寅，奉上宁宗徽号册宝于太庙。
现代文：十一月初三，到太庙奉上宁宗徽号册宝。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Ningzong emblem was presented to the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛巳，日南至，郊，大赦。
现代文：初六，冬至，到南郊举行祭祀，大赦全国。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the winter solstice, a religious service is held in the southern suburbs, and a nationwide amnesty is declared.

古文：改明年为绍定元年。
现代文：改明年为绍定元年。
English: Next year will be the first year of Shaoding.

古文：十二月己酉，日旁有气如珥。
现代文：十二月初四，太阳边有气像光圈。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, there is an aura-like aperture around the sun.

古文：壬申，发廪振赡京城细民。
现代文：二十七日，开仓发米贩济京城小民。
English: On the 27th, the opening of the warehouse sent rice traders to Beijing Xiaomin.

古文：大元兵破关外诸隘，四川制置郑损弃三关。
现代文：大元军队攻破关外各关隘，四川制置使郑损放弃三关。
English: The Taiyuan army broke through every pass outside the pass, and the establishment of the Sichuan system made Zhengzhou give up three passes.

古文：绍定元年春正月丙子朔，上寿明慈睿皇太后尊号册宝于慈明殿。
现代文：绍定元年春正月初一，到慈明殿奉上寿明慈睿皇太后尊号册宝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the year of Shao Ding, the treasure of the name of the Empress Dowager Shouming Ci Rui was presented to the Ciming Hall.

古文：六月壬寅朔，日有食之。己酉，流星昼陨。
现代文：杨谷、杨石都升为少师。六月初一，日食。初八，流星白天坠落。
English: Yanggu and Yangshi were promoted to junior teachers. On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the eighth day of the first month, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：秋七月戊戌，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, the fluorescent planet invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：冬十月戊申，荧惑犯壁垒阵星。
现代文：冬十月初八，荧惑星侵犯壁垒阵星。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, a fluorescent planet invaded the barrier array.

古文：丁巳，荧惑、填星合于危。
现代文：十七日，荧惑星、填星合于危宿。
English: On the 17th, the fluorescent planet and the star-filled star met in the dangerous place.

古文：甲子，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：二十四日，荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: On the 24th, the fluorescent planet encroached on the star.

古文：十一月癸酉，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：十一月初三，荧惑星进人羽林。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the fluorescent planet entered the feather forest.

古文：庚辰，雷。
现代文：初十，打雷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, there was thunder.

古文：丁酉，诏申严皇城司给符之制，照阑入法。
现代文：二十七日，下诏申严皇城司给符制度，违者按擅人法处罚。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict stated that the imperial city would strictly enforce the system of giving certificates, and violators would be punished according to the law of unauthorized persons.

古文：十二月辛亥，以薛极知枢密院事兼参知政事，葛洪参知政事，袁韶同知枢密院事，郑清之端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：十二月十二日，任命薛极为知枢密院事兼参知政事，葛洪为参知政事，袁韶为同知枢密院事，郑清之为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: On December 12, he appointed Xue Weiwei as the Privy Councillor and the Councillor of State, Ge Hong as the Councillor of State, Yuan Qi as the Councillor of State, and Zheng Qing as the Councillor of State and the Councillor of State.

古文：二年春正月庚辰，大理司直张衍上检验、推鞠四事。
现代文：绍定二年春正月十一日，大理司直张衍奏上检验、推讯四事。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the second year of Shao Ding's Spring, four matters were inspected and reported to the Dai Li Division.

古文：诏刑狱人命所关，其令有司究行之。
现代文：下诏：刑狱关系人命，命令有关部门研究实行。
English: The following edict: Imprisonment affects people's lives, and relevant departments are ordered to study and implement it.

古文：丁亥，荧惑、岁星合于娄。
现代文：十八日，荧惑星，岁星合于娄宿。
English: On the 18th, the fluorescent planet, the year star, is in conjunction with the Pleiades.

古文：二月庚戌，诏岁举廉吏或犯奸赃，保任同坐，监司、守臣其申严觉察。
现代文：二月十一日，下诏：每年被举荐的廉吏，如果有犯贪赃罪的，保任同坐，监司守臣申严觉察。
English: On February 11th, the following edict was issued: the corrupt officials who are recommended every year, if they have committed the crime of corruption, will be appointed to the same seat, and the supervisors and supervisors are strictly aware of it.

古文：三月辛卯，诏郡县系囚多瘐死狱中，宪司其具狱官姓名以闻，黜罢之。
现代文：三月二十三日，下诏：郡县在押囚犯有很多饿死在狱中的，宪司开列这些狱官的姓名上报朝廷，罢除这些狱官。
English: On March 23, the following edict was issued: Many county and county prisoners died of starvation in prison. The Registrar listed the names of these prison officials and reported them to the Imperial Court, and these prison officials were dismissed.

古文：夏四月庚申，诏郡县官阙，毋令艺术人、豪民、罢吏借补权摄。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，下诏：郡县官缺乏，不得令艺术人、豪民、罢吏借补权摄郡县官。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: In the absence of county officials, artists, wealthy people, and officials should not be allowed to borrow the right to replace county officials.

古文：五月，诏成都、潼川路岁旱民歉，制司、监司其亟振恤，仍察郡县奉令勤惰以闻。
现代文：五月，下诏：成都、撞川路岁早民歉，制司、监司要尽最大努力进行贩济，并且考察郡县执行命令好坏上报朝廷。
English: In May, the following edict was issued: Chengdu and Qianchuan Road have apologized to the people. The system and supervision departments should do their best to carry out economic trafficking, and investigate whether the county and county executive orders are good or bad and report to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，赐进士黄朴以下五百五十七人及第、出身有差。
现代文：十四日，赐给进士黄朴以下五百五十七人及第、出身不等。
English: On the 14th, five hundred and fifty-seven people of various ranks and backgrounds, from Huang Pu on down, were given the title of Jin Shi.

古文：诏户绝者许立嗣，毋妄籍没。
现代文：下诏： 户绝者允许立继承人，不得妄为籍没财产。 
English: The following edict: Those who die without a family member are allowed to set up an heir, and must not take it upon themselves to lose their property.

古文：六月丁巳，诏通义郡夫人谢氏进封美人。
现代文：六月二十一日，下诏通义郡夫人谢氏进封为美人。
English: On June 21, Lady Xie of Tongyi County was crowned a beauty.

古文：九月丁卯，台州大水。
现代文：九月初三，台州发大水。
English: On the third day of September, Taizhou was hit by heavy rain.

古文：壬辰，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十八日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 28th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：冬十月壬戌，诏台州水灾，除民田租及茶、盐、酒酤诸杂税，郡县抑纳者监司察之。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，下诏：台州水灾，免除民田租税和茶、盐、酒酣各项杂税，郡县强制收取者，由监司负责查处。
English: On the 28th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Taizhou floods, exempt from farmland tax and tea, salt, wine and other miscellaneous taxes, counties and counties will be responsible for investigating and dealing with.

古文：十一月己丑，荧惑入氐。
现代文：十一月二十五日，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On November 25th, the fluorescent planet entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：三年春正月甲申，诏故皇子缉赠保信、奉国军节度使，开府仪同三司，追封永王，谥冲安。
现代文：绍定三年春正月二十一日，下诏追赠已故皇子赵缉为保信、奉国军节度使、开府仪同三司，追封永王，溢号冲安。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Shao Ding, the following edict posthumously awarded the deceased prince Zhao Ji as the letter of guarantee, the festival envoy of the national army, the opening ceremony and the three departments, the enthronement of Yongwang, and the auspicious sign of Chong'an.

古文：壬辰，知枣阳军史嵩之创置屯田，以劳赏官两转。
现代文：二十九日，枣阳知军史篙之创置屯田，因此功劳转任两官。
English: On the 29th, the Zaoyang Zhijun Army created and set up a military garrison, so the merit was transferred to the two officials.

古文：二月丙申，日有背气。
现代文：二月初三，太阳上有背气。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the sun has bad luck.

古文：戊戌，诏汀、赣、吉、建昌蛮獠窃发，经扰郡县复赋税一年。
现代文：初五，下诏：汀、赣、吉、建昌蛮撩人暗暗起来反抗，遭受骚扰郡县免除赋税一年。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Ting, Zou, Ji, and Jianchang, who had secretly rebelled and suffered harassment, were exempted from paying taxes for one year.

古文：庚戌，诏赵范起复，依前知镇江府、节制防江水步并本州在砦军马；赵葵起复，依前知滁州、节制本州屯戍军马。
现代文：十七日，下诏起复赵范，依前知镇江府、节制防江水步军和本州在碧军马；起复赵葵，依前知滁州、节制本州屯戍军马。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued to restore Zhao Fan, according to the previous knowledge of Zhenjiang Prefecture, restrain the river defense water marching army and the Honshu army in Bixi; to restore Zhao Kwai, according to the previous knowledge of Luzhou, restrain the Honshu army.

古文：壬子，诏故皇子绎赐忠正、保宁军节度使、开府仪同三司，追封昭王，谥冲纯。
现代文：十九日，下诏：已故皇子赵绎赐为忠正、保宁军节度使、开府仪同三司，追封为昭王，溢号冲纯。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: The late Prince Zhao Yizhi was given the titles of Zhongzheng, Boryeong's military festival envoy, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, with the posthumous title of Shao Wang.

古文：闰月癸酉，逃卒穆椿夜窃入皇城，烧毁甲仗，卫士捕得之，诏磔于市。
现代文：闰二月初十，逃卒穆椿夜晚偷偷进人皇城，烧毁甲仗，被卫士捕捉，下诏在闹市碎尸。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the leap year, the fugitive soldier Mutsumi sneaked into the Imperial City at night, burned armor, was caught by guards, and then dismembered the corpse in the downtown.

古文：乙酉，太白、岁星合于毕。
现代文：二十二日，太白星、岁星合于毕宿。
English: On the 22nd, the Taibai Star and the Year Star will meet at the end of the year.

古文：三月丁酉，雨土。
现代文：三月初五，降土。
English: On the 5th of March, the earth fell.

古文：戊申，奉国军节度使不忄冬薨，赠少傅，追封乐平郡王。
现代文：十六日，奉国军节度使赵不冬逝世，追赠少傅，追封为乐平郡王。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Boudong was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Fu and was posthumously crowned the King of Leping County.

古文：夏四月己卯，漳州、连城盗起，知龙岩县庄梦诜、尉钟自强不能效死守土，诏各削二秩罢。
现代文：夏四月十八日，漳州、连城盗贼兴起，知龙岩县庄梦洗、县尉钟自强不能效死守土，下诏各自削夺二官。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of summer, thieves from Zhangzhou and Liancheng rose up. Zhuang Mengsai and County Lieutenant Zhong Ziqiang from Zhilongyan County could not effectively defend the land, so they each took two posts.

古文：五月甲寅，检校少保李全授彰、化保康军节度使，开府仪同三司、京东镇抚使，依旧京东忠义诸军都统制。
现代文：五月二十三日，检校少保李全授为彰化保康军节度使、开府仪同三司、京东镇抚使，并且依旧担任忠义各军都统制。
English: On May 23rd, Li Quanzhang, a junior guard of the inspection school, was appointed as the military governor of Changhua, the military governor of Kepu, and the military governor of Jingdong, and still served as the military governor of Zhongyi.

古文：戊午，李全左右金吾卫上将军，职任仍旧。
现代文：二十七日，李全授左右金吾卫上将军，职任仍旧。
English: On the 27th, Li Quanzhong conferred the title of General of the Left and Right Armies on King Wuwei, and the post remained unchanged.

古文：六月乙酉，岁星入井。
现代文：六月二十五日，岁星进人井宿。
English: On the 25th of June, the year star entered the manor house.

古文：秋七月丁酉，汀州宁化县曾氏寡妇晏给军粮御漳寇有功，又全活乡民数万人，诏封恭人，赐冠帔，官其子承信郎。
现代文：秋七月初八，汀州宁化县曾氏寡妇晏氏给军粮抵御漳州寇盗有功，又保全乡民数万人，下诏封为恭人，赐给冠裙，任其子为承信郎。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the widow of the Zeng clan in Ninghua County, Tingzhou, the Zeng clan, gave military grain to resist the theft of Zhangzhou, and also saved tens of thousands of villagers. She was awarded the title of "Congratulatory Person," was given the crown skirt, and her son was appointed as the successor.

古文：九月辛丑，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月十三日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On September 13th, the sacrificial Myeongdong ended, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：丙午，美人谢氏进封贵妃。
现代文：十八日，美人谢氏进封贵妃。
English: On the 18th, the beautiful Xie entered the imperial court.

古文：冬十月己巳，荧惑、填星合于室。
现代文：冬十月十一日，荧惑星、填星合于室宿。
English: On the 11th day of October in winter, the fluorescent planets and the star-filled stars converged on Murojuku.

古文：十一月丁酉，有星孛于天市垣。
现代文：十一月初十，有彗星出现天市垣。
English: On the tenth day of the eleventh month, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：丁未，流星昼陨。
现代文：二十日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 20th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：十二月庚申，诏录用孔子四十九代孙灿补官。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏录用孔子四十九代孙孔灿补官。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the 49th generation of Confucius's grandson, Kong Can, was appointed to the post.

古文：李全叛。
现代文：李全反叛。
English: Li Quan rebelled.

古文：壬戌，淮东官兵王青力战，死之，赠右武大夫、蕲州防御使。
现代文：初五，淮东官兵王青力战，战死，赠右武大夫、薪州防御使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Qingli, an officer and soldier from Huadong, fought and died in battle. He was awarded the title of Doctor of the Right Division and the title of Defense Minister of Zhouzhou.

古文：甲子，诏： 逆贼李全，反形日著，今乃肆为不道，已敕江、淮制臣率兵进讨，有能擒斩全以降者，加以不次之赏。 
现代文：初七，下诏： 逆贼李全，反形日著，现在肆为不道，已经命令江、淮制臣率兵进讨，有能擒斩李全或使之投降者，加以赏赐。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: The traitor Li Quan, who has been on the run for a long time and is now acting recklessly, has ordered Jiang and Huai to lead soldiers to investigate, and reward those who can behead Li Quan or make him surrender.

古文：乙丑，诏免明年元会礼。
现代文：初八，下诏免除明年元会礼。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, the emperor issued an edict exempting the next year's New Year's ceremony.

古文：以郑清之参知政事兼签书枢密院事，乔行简端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命郑清之为参知政事兼签书枢密院事，乔行简为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: Zheng Qing was appointed to be a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council, and Qiao Xingjian was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council.

古文：诏： 史弥远敷奏精敏，气体向安，朕未欲劳以朝谒，可十日一赴都堂治事。 
现代文：下诏： 史弥远敷奏精敏，气体向安，肤不想劳以朝拜，可十日一赴都堂处理政事。 
English: The following edict was issued: Shimiyan's dress was well-made, his health was good, and he did not want to go to the temple, so he could go to the capital on the tenth day to deal with political affairs.

古文：丁卯，册命贵妃谢氏为皇后。
现代文：初十，册命贵妃谢氏为皇后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Guifei Xie was proclaimed empress.

古文：己卯，慈明殿出缗钱百五十万犒诸军，振赡在京细民。
现代文：二十二日，慈明殿出络钱一百五十万搞赏诸军，贩济在京小民。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Jimei offered one and a half million yuan to reward the soldiers, and the money was sold to the common people in Beijing.

古文：癸未，上寿明仁福慈睿皇太后尊号册宝。
现代文：二十六日，奉上寿明仁福慈睿皇太后尊号册宝。
English: On the 26th, it was presented to Her Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager Zhou Ming Ren Fu Ci Rui.

古文：四年春正月戊子，皇太后年七十有五，上诣慈明殿行庆寿礼，大赦，史弥远以下进秩有差。
现代文：绍定四年春正月初一，皇太后七十五岁，理宗到慈明殿行庆寿礼，大赦，史弥远以下官员进升不等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Shao Ding, when the empress dowager was 75 years old, Li Zong went to Ciming Palace to celebrate her birthday, and there was an amnesty. Officials below Shi Yiyuan were promoted.

古文：赐李心传同进士出身。
现代文：赐李心传为同进士出身。
English: Li Xinxuan was born as a Tongjin scholar.

古文：壬寅，赵范、赵葵等诛李全于新塘，诏各进两秩，余推恩有差。
现代文：十五日，赵范、赵葵等在新塘诛杀李全，下诏各进官二级，其余人施赏不等。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Fan, Zhao Kwai and others killed Li Quan in Xintang, and were each promoted to the second level, and the rest were rewarded.

古文：二月戊午朔，诏：雄边军统制、总辖范胜、谷汝砺等诛逆著劳，各官五转，将士立功者，趣具等第、姓名来上。
现代文：二月初一，下诏：雄边军统制、总辖范胜、谷濒厉等诛杀叛逆有功劳，各转五官，将士立功者，督促开列等第、姓名上报。
English: On the first day of February, the following edict was issued: the commanders of the Xiongbian army, the commander-in-chief Fan Sheng, and the commander-in-chief Gu Xianli, who had distinguished themselves in fighting against the rebels, were each transferred to five officials, and those who had distinguished themselves as soldiers were urged to list their names and report their names.

古文：丙子，诏起复孟珙从义郎、京西路分，枣阳军驻扎。
现代文：十九日，下诏重新起用孟琪为从义郎、京西路分都监、枣阳军驻扎。
English: On the 19th, Meng Qi was re-appointed as Zhu Yiro, the sub-district inspector of West Beijing Road, and the Zaoyang Army stationed there.

古文：夏四月戊辰，赵范、赵葵并进中大夫、右文殿修撰，赐紫章服、金带。
现代文：夏四月十二日，赵范、赵葵都进为中大夫、右文殿修撰，赐给紫章服、金带。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of summer, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai were promoted to the position of junior doctors, and were given purple uniforms and gold belts.

古文：丁丑，以郑清之兼同知枢密院事；乔行简签书枢密院事；赵善湘兵部尚书、江淮制置大使、知建康府，依旧安抚使；赵范权兵部侍郎、淮东安抚副使、知扬州兼江淮制司参谋官；赵葵换福州观察使、右骁卫大将军、淮东提刑、知滁州兼大使司参议官。
现代文：二十一日，任命郑清之兼同知枢密院事；乔行简为签书枢密院事；赵善湘为兵部尚书、江淮制置大使、建康知府，依旧任安抚使；赵范代理兵部侍郎、淮东安抚副使、知扬州兼江淮制置司参谋；赵葵换为福州观察使、右晓卫大将军、淮东提刑、知滁州兼大使司参议官。
English: On the 21st, Zheng Qing and Tongzhi were appointed to the Privy Council; Qiao Xingjian was appointed as the signer of the letter to the Privy Council; Zhao Shanxiang was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the Ambassador of Jianghuai Province, and the Governor of Jiankang Province, and still served as the Pacifying Envoy; Zhao Fan was appointed as the Acting Attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the Deputy Envoy of Huaidong Province, the Staff Officer of Zhiyang Province and the Department of Jianghuai Province; Zhao Kwai was replaced by the Fuzhou Observation Envoy, the General

古文：五月丙午，宗室司正检校少傅、安德军节度使、天水郡公，加食邑五百户；贵谦承宣使；乃裕观察使。
现代文：五月二十一日，宗室赵司正为检校少傅、安德军节度使、天水郡公，加食邑五百户，赵贵谦为承宣使，赵乃裕为观察使。
English: On May 21, Zhao Sizheng, Zhao Guiqian's father-in-law, was appointed as the junior inspector of the school, the festival envoy of the Andean Army, the governor of Tianshui County, and 500 households in Jiaxiu, Zhao Guiqian was appointed as the envoy of the propaganda, and Zhao Naiyu was appointed as the observation envoy.

古文：六月己未，诏魏了翁、真德秀、尤焴、尤龠并叙复元官职祠禄。
现代文：六月初四，下诏魏了翁、真德秀、尤婚、尤抓都重新起用，官职棒禄予以恢复。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the following officials, Wei Liao Weng, Zhen De Xiu, You Yuan and You Fang, were re-appointed, and their official posts and salaries were restored.

古文：七月己丑，日生承气。
现代文：七月初五，太阳生出承气。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, the sun gave birth to Chengqi.

古文：丁酉，贾涉女侍后宫，诏封文安郡夫人。
现代文：十三日，贾涉女儿侍奉后宫，下诏封为文安郡夫人。
English: On the 13th, Jia Wanzhong's daughter served in the harem and was given the title of Lady of Wen'an County.

古文：庚戌，葛洪资政殿学士、知绍兴府。
现代文：二十六日，葛洪为资政殿学士、绍兴知府。
English: On the 26th, Ge Hong was appointed as the Vice-governor and Governor of Shaoxing.

古文：有流星大如太白。
现代文：有流星如太白星。
English: There are meteors like white stars.

古文：八月己未，大元兵破武休，入兴元，攻仙人关。
现代文：八月初六，大元兵攻破武休，进人兴元，进攻仙人原。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the Taiyuan soldiers broke through the Wuxu, entered the Xingyuan, and attacked the Xianren Plain.

古文：辛酉，洪咨夔叙复元官祠禄。
现代文：初八，洪咨夔恢复原官祠禄。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Hong Ziqi restored the original official shrine.

古文：辛未，文安郡夫人贾氏封才人。
现代文：十八日，文安郡夫人贾氏封为才人。
English: On the 18th, the wife of Wen'an County, Jia Shifeng, was appointed as a talented person.

古文：九月丙戌夜，临安火，延及太庙，统制徐仪、统领马振远坐救焚不力，贬削有差。
现代文：九月初三夜晚，临安府发生火灾，延及太庙，统制徐仪、统领马振远因救火不力，贬降削夺官职不等。
English: On the evening of the third day of early September, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture, extending to the Grand Temple. The governor Xu Yi and the commander Ma Zhenyuan were not able to extinguish the fire, and were demoted or removed from their posts.

古文：上素服视朝，减膳彻乐。
现代文：理宗素服上朝处理政事，减膳撤乐。
English: Rizong Su dressed up as the emperor to deal with political affairs, cutting down on meals and withdrawing from entertainment.

古文：庚子，建昌军火。
现代文：十七日，建昌军发生火灾。
English: On the 17th, a fire broke out in Jianchang Army Base.

古文：甲辰，流星昼陨。
现代文：二十一日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 21st, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：冬十月戊午，太常少卿度正、国史院编修官李心传各疏言：宗庙之制，未合于古，兹缘灾异，宜举行之。
现代文：冬十月初六，太常少卿度正、国史院编修官李心传分别上疏说：宗庙之制，不符古礼，现在遇上灾异，应该按古礼实行。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, Du Zheng, Taizang Shaoqing, and Li Xinchuan, editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History, respectively, said: the system of the ancestral temple does not conform to the ancient rite, and now, in the event of a disaster, it should be implemented according to the ancient rite.

古文：诏两省、侍从、台谏集议以闻。
现代文：下诏两省、侍从、台谏官一起讨论上报。
English: The two provinces, attendants, and Taiwan eunuchs discussed the report together.

古文：甲子，以余天锡为户部侍郎兼知临安府、浙西安抚使。
现代文：十二日，任命余天锡为户部侍郎兼临安知府、浙西安抚使。
English: On the 12th, Yu Tianxi was appointed as the Household Attendant and Lin'an Prefecture, Zhejiang and West China's Peace Envoy.

古文：癸酉，大元兵破蜀口诸郡，御前中军统制张宣战青野原有功，诏授沔州都统。
现代文：二十一日，元军攻破蜀口各郡，御前中军统制张宣在青野原战斗有功，下诏授为洒州都统。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Yuan army broke through the counties of Shukou, and Zhang Xuan, the commander of the Imperial Chinese Army, was awarded the title of Suran County Governor.

古文：戊寅，以李为焕章阁直学士、四川制置使、知成都府，赵彦呐直龙图阁、四川安抚制置副使、知兴元府、利路安抚使，安癸仲户部郎中、总领四川财赋。
现代文：二十六日，任命李皇为焕章阁直学士、四川制置使、成都知府，赵彦呐为直龙图阁、四少安抚制置副使、兴元知府、利路安抚使，安葵仲为户部郎中、总领四川财赋。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Li was appointed as the direct scholar of Huanzhang Pavilion, the envoy of Sichuan Province, and the governor of Chengdu, Zhao Yannan was appointed as the vice-envoy of Jialong Pavilion, the vice-envoy of Shishao Pacification, the governor of Xingyuan Province, and the envoy of Liluo Pacification, and An Kwai Chung was appointed as the head of the household department and the general leader of Sichuan's wealth.

古文：十一月乙酉，诏忠义总管田遂力战而殁，赠武节大夫、忠州刺史，加封立庙。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏：忠义总管田遂力战而死，赠武节大夫、忠州刺史，加封六庙。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: General of the Chungyi Province, Tian Suirong, died in battle, and was presented with the titles of Wu Jie Daifu, Chungju Jishi, and six temples.

古文：十二月乙亥，以史嵩之为大理少卿兼京湖制置副使。
现代文：十二月二十四日，任命史篙之为大理少卿兼京湖制置副使。
English: On December 24th, Shi Xuanqin was appointed as the Dali Shaoqing and the vice-envoy for the construction of Beijing Lake.

古文：五年春正月己丑，以孟珙为京西路兵马钤辖、枣阳军驻扎。
现代文：绍定五年春正月初八，任命孟琪为京西路兵马铃辖，枣阳军驻札。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fifth year of Shao Ding's reign, Meng Qi was appointed to be in charge of the West Beijing Road, and the Zaoyang Army was stationed there.

古文：庚寅，诏：李全之叛，淮东提刑司检法吴澄等出泰州城谒贼，各追官勒停。
现代文：初九，下诏： 李全之叛，淮东提刑司检法吴澄等出泰州城拜见叛贼，分别追官勒停。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Li Quan, the traitor, and Wu Cheng, the procurator of the Criminal Division of the East Huaiqi People's Procuratorate, went to Taizhou City to visit the traitor, and suspended the pursuit of the official.

古文：其不出见贼者高梦月、刘宾云循升二资。
现代文：没有出来拜见者高梦月、刘宾云进升二级。
English: Gao Mengyue and Liu Binyun, who did not come out to visit, were promoted to the second grade.

古文：骂贼而死者海陵簿吴嚞，特赠朝奉郎，官其一子将仕郎。 
现代文：骂贼而死者海陵簿吴哲，特赠朝奉郎，任命其子一人为将仕郎。 
English: The epitaph of Wu Zhe, who died while cursing a thief, was presented to the emperor as a special gift, and one of his sons was appointed as the emperor's steward.

古文：壬辰，史嵩之进大理卿、权刑部侍郎、京湖安抚制置使、知襄阳府。
现代文：十一日，史篙之进为大理卿和代理刑部侍郎、京湖安抚制置使、襄阳知府。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shi Xizhunjin was appointed as the Lord of Dali, the Acting Chamberlain of the Criminal Investigation Department, the Commissioner for the Pacification of Beijing and Hubei, and the Governor of Yangyang.

古文：壬寅，新作太庙成。
现代文：二十一日，新建太庙竣工。
English: On the twenty-first day, the newly built Great Temple was completed.

古文：二月癸丑，帝谒太庙。
现代文：二月初二，理宗朝拜太庙。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month of the second month.

古文：三月乙酉，诏京城内外免征商三月。
现代文：三月初四，下诏京城内外免征商税三个月。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, it was decreed that there would be a three-month exemption from commercial tax in and out of Beijing.

古文：丁酉，日后抱气、承气。
现代文：十六日，太阳生出抱气、承气。
English: On the 16th, the sun gave birth to the wind and the wind.

古文：夏四月癸亥，以宝章阁直学士桂如渊顷帅蜀日，北兵攻城，不能合谋死守而遁，致军民罹殃，反以捷闻，诏褫职罢祠。
现代文：夏四月十三日，因宝章阁直学士桂如渊前不久统帅蜀期间，元兵攻城，不能合力死守而逃跑，致使军民遭殃，反而向朝廷上报战胜元军，下诏革职罢祠。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, during the reign of Shu, the Yuan soldiers besieged the city, unable to defend themselves and fled, resulting in the suffering of the military and the people. Instead, they reported to the imperial court that they had defeated the Yuan army, and issued an edict to quit the temple.

古文：丁卯，起魏了翁以集英殿修撰知遂宁府。
现代文：十七日，起用魏了翁，以集英殿修撰知遂宁府。
English: On the 17th, Wei Liao Weng was appointed to the Suining government.

古文：五月己丑，诏： 昨郁攸为灾，延及太室，罪在朕躬，而二三执政，引咎去职。
现代文：五月初九，下诏： 昨日临安发生火灾，波及太庙，罪在肤自己，但二三个执政大臣，因而引咎去职。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, the following edict was issued: Yesterday, a fire broke out in Lin'an, affecting the Great Temple. The crime was my own, but two or three ruling ministers were blamed and removed from office.

古文：今宗庙崇成，神御妥安，薛极、郑清之、乔行简并复元官。 
现代文：今天新宗庙已经修成，神主安妥，薛极、郑清之和乔行简都恢复原官。 
English: Today, the new ancestral temple has been completed, the deity is safe, and Xue Ji, Zheng Qingzhi, and Qiao Xingjian have all been restored to their original positions.

古文：辛卯，臣僚言： 积阴霖霪，历夏徂秋，疑必有致咎之征。
现代文：十一日，臣僚说： 接连阴雨连绵，从夏到秋，可能有致咎的征兆。
English: On the eleventh day, the ministers said: "Continuous rainy weather, from summer to autumn, may be a sign of guilt.

古文：比闻蕲州进士冯杰，本儒家，都大坑冶司抑为炉户，诛求日增，杰妻以忧死，其女继之，弟大声因赴诉，死于道路，杰知不免，毒其二子一妾，举火自经而死。
现代文：近来听说薪州进士冯杰，本是儒家，都大坑冶司抑为笋户，诛求日增，冯杰妻子因忧而死，其女继之而死，弟弟冯大声因上访申诉死于途中，冯杰知道自己难免于死，毒死他的两个儿子和妾一人，投火自杀而死。
English: Recently, it was heard that Feng Jie, a scholar of Confucianism from Zhouzhou, was a tenant of Du Da Hang Ye Jie, and he asked for more and more money. Feng Jie's wife died of worry, and his daughter died next. His brother Feng Lou died on the way to appeal. Feng Jie knew that he could not avoid death, poisoned his two sons and one of his concubines, and committed suicide by setting himself on fire.

古文：民冤至此，岂不上干阴阳之和？ 
现代文：民冤至此，难道不影响阴阳调和吗了？
English: If the people's grievances have reached this point, won't this affect the harmony between yin and yang?

古文：诏都大坑冶魏岘罢职。
现代文：下诏都大坑冶瑰见罢职。
English: The following are the reasons for the resignation of Dahegyi Zhu.

古文：癸巳，太白经天，昼见。
现代文：十三日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 13th, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊戌，诏今后齐民有罪，监司、守臣毋辄籍没其家，必具闻俟命。
现代文：十八日，下诏： 今后百姓有罪，监司、守臣不得动不动就籍没其家，必须上报待命。 
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: In the future, if a commoner is found guilty, the superintendent and his subordinates must not move from place to place without a home, and must report to be on standby.

古文：六月乙丑，荧惑、填星合于娄，荧惑顺行犯填星。
现代文：六月十六日，荧感星、填星合于娄宿，荧惑星顺行侵犯填星。
English: On June 16th, the fluorescent star and the filling star coincided in Oshuku, and the fluorescent planet followed the filling star.

古文：丙子，诏诸狱官不理他务。
现代文：二十七日，下诏各狱官不管理其他事务。
English: On the 27th, all prison officers were ordered not to manage other matters.

古文：秋七月甲申，诏： 近岁北兵再入利、阆，迫近顺庆，承奉郎胡元琰摄郡事，能收散卒，定居民，谕叛将，以全阖郡，以功特转官三资。 
现代文：秋七月初五，下诏： 近年元兵两次进人利州、间州，逼近顺庆，承奉郎胡元淡代管郡事，能够收集散卒，安定居民，招谕叛将，保全郡土，因功劳特转官三资。 
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: In recent years, the former soldiers have twice entered Lishu and Yanzhou, approaching Shunqing, and have served as deputies to the county, able to collect scattered soldiers, stabilize residents, recruit traitors, preserve the county land, and transfer officials and resources due to their merits.

古文：太白入井。
现代文：太白星进人井宿。
English: Taibai Xingjinjing Youth Hostel.

古文：丙戌，监楚州大军仓富起宗军变死难，诏赠宣教郎，官一子文林郎。
现代文：初七，监楚州大军仓富起宗因军士叛变而死，下诏赠宣教郎，任其一子为文林郎。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, the warden of the Chuzhou Armory, Fuchizong, died as a result of a mutiny by a sergeant, and the following edict bestowed him with the title of missionary, and one of his sons was named Wenlin Lang.

古文：张焕同时被创，害及其家，诏转官一资。
现代文：张焕同时被创，害及其家，诏令转官一级。
English: Zhang Huan was created at the same time, harmed his family, and transferred to the first level by imperial decree.

古文：丁酉，以吴潜为太府少卿、总领淮西财赋，陈贵谊端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命吴潜为太府少卿，总领淮西财赋，陈贵谊为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Wu Qian was appointed as Taifu Shaoqing, the leader of Huaxi's financial resources, and Chen Guiyi was appointed as Duanmingden's bachelor and co-signer of the Privy Council.

古文：八月乙卯，起真德秀为徽猷阁待制、知泉州。
现代文：八月初七，起用真德秀为徽酞阁待制，为泉州知州。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Zhendexiu was appointed as the vice-governor of Hebei Province and Quanzhou Province.

古文：丁巳，泗州路分刘虎、副都统董琳焚断盱泗桥遏金兵。
现代文：初九，泅州路分都监刘虎、副都统董琳焚断盯泅桥来遏制金兵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Luzhou Road Branch Supervisor Liu Hu and the Deputy Metropolitan Supervisor Dong Lin set fire to the bridge to contain the gold soldiers.

古文：己未，魏了翁以宝章阁待制、潼川安抚使知泸州。
现代文：十一日，魏了翁任命宝章阁待制、撞川安抚使、知沪州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wei Liao Weng appointed Baozhangge to be on standby, Bangchuan to be a pacifying envoy, and Zhishuzhou to be on standby.

古文：乙丑，赐进士徐元杰等四百九十三人及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐进士徐元杰等四百九十三人及第、出身不等。
English: On the seventeenth day, four hundred and ninety-three people, including Xu Yuanjie, were awarded the title.

古文：壬申，太白、岁星合于张。
现代文：二十四日，太白星、岁星合于张宿。
English: On the 24th, the Taibai Star and the Year Star converged on Zhangshu.

古文：甲戌，新作玉牒殿，奉安累朝玉牒。
现代文：二十六日，新作玉碟殿，恭敬安放历朝玉碟。
English: On the 26th, the new jade dish hall was built, and the morning jade dish was respectfully placed.

古文：九月乙巳，雨雹，雷。
现代文：九月二十八日，降冰雹，打雷。
English: September 28th, hail and thunder.

古文：闰月己酉，有流星大如太白。
现代文：闰九月初二，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the second day of the second month of September, a meteor as large as a white star appeared.

古文：庚戌，彗星出于角。
现代文：初三，彗星出现在角宿。
English: On the third day of the new year, a comet appeared in Kakunodate.

古文：戊辰，史弥远乞归田里，诏不允。
现代文：二十一日，史弥远请求回归故里，下诏不允。
English: On the twenty-first day, Shi Yayuan requested to return to his hometown, but was not allowed.

古文：冬十月戊子，以星变，大赦。
现代文：冬十月十二日，因星变大赦。
English: In winter, on October 12th, there was an amnesty due to a change in the stars.

古文：金将以盱眙军来降，赦盱眙，改为招信军。
现代文：金将以盯胎军来投降，赦免盯胎，改为招信军。
English: Kim surrenders with the army of surrogate mothers, pardons surrogate mothers, and changes it to the army of recruiting believers.

古文：十一月己巳，乔行简累疏乞归田，诏不允。
现代文：十一月二十三日，乔行简多次请求回归故里，下诏不允。
English: On November 23rd, Qiao Xingjian repeatedly requested to return to her hometown, but was not allowed.

古文：十二月丙子朔，进封才人贾氏为贵妃。辛巳，皇太后不豫。
现代文：十二月初一，进封才人贾氏为贵妃。初六，皇太后染病。
English: On the first day of December, Jia, a scholar from Jinfeng, became a noble consort. On the sixth day of the month, the empress dowager fell ill.

古文：壬午，大赦。
现代文：初七，大赦。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：皇太后崩。
现代文：皇太后逝世。
English: The Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：癸卯，群臣凡七表请听政，从之。
现代文：二十八日，大臣共七次上表请理宗亲政，理宗同意。
English: On the 28th, the minister made a total of seven requests to Rhizong for personal governance, and Rhizong agreed.

古文：诏：外朝大典，不敢轻改，宫中自服三年丧。
现代文：下诏：外朝大典，不敢轻易改变，宫中自服三年丧。
English: The following edict was issued: The imperial edict would not be easily changed, and the imperial court would observe a three-year mourning period.

古文：时宋与大元兵合围汴京，金主奔归德府，寻奔蔡州，大元再遣使议攻金，史嵩之以邹伸之报谢。
现代文：当时宋与大元兵联合围攻汁京，金主逃向归德府，不久逃回蔡州，大元军再次派遣使臣商议进攻金兵，史篙之派邹伸之答谢。
English: At that time, Song and the Great Yuan Army jointly besieged Jijing. The gold owners fled to Guidefu and soon returned to Caizhou. The Great Yuan Army again sent envoys to discuss attacking the gold soldiers, and Shi Yan's faction extended thanks.

古文：六年春正月己酉，以少傅、保宁军节度使、嗣秀王师弥判大宗正事，赵善湘光禄大夫、江淮制置大使兼知建康府、行宫留守，加食邑四百户。
现代文：绍定六年春正月初四，以少傅、保宁军节度使、嗣秀王赵师弥判大宗正事，光禄大夫、江淮制置大使赵善湘兼知建康府、行宫留守，加食邑四百户。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first month of the sixth year of the spring of Shaoding, Zhao Shiya, the younger brother of Fu, the military festival envoy of Boryeong, and the heir of King Xiu, was judged to be the most important matter. Zhao Shanxiang, the doctor of Guanglu and the ambassador of the Jianghuai Dynasty, also stayed at Jiankangfu and the palace, and there were 400 households in Jianshui.

古文：戊辰，史弥远加食邑千户。
现代文：二十三日，史弥远加食邑千户。
English: On the 23rd, Shi Miyako and 1,000 households in Shokuura left.

古文：二月丁丑，上大行皇太后谥曰恭圣仁烈皇后。
现代文：二月初二，上大行皇太后溢号为恭圣仁烈皇后。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：以赵范为工部侍郎兼中书门下省检正公事，赵葵秘书监兼侍讲，余天锡礼部侍郎兼侍读。
现代文：任命赵范为工部侍郎兼中书门下省检正公事。赵葵为秘书监兼侍讲，余天锡为礼部侍郎兼侍读。
English: Zhao Fan was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Industry and the provincial procuratorate under the disciple of Zhongshu, Zhao Kwai as the secretary supervisor and the attendant lecturer, and Yu Tianxi as the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the attendant reader.

古文：癸卯，荧惑犯东井。
现代文：二十八日，荧惑星侵犯东井。
English: On the 28th, a fluorescent planet invaded Higashii.

古文：三月丙辰，大雨、雹。
现代文：三月十二日，降大冰雹。
English: On March 12, large hailstones fell.

古文：夏四月壬寅，葬恭圣烈皇后于永茂陵。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，葬恭圣仁烈皇后于永茂陵。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, the funeral of the Empress Sheng Ren Rong took place at the Yongmao Mausoleum.

古文：五月庚戌，太白、荧惑合于柳。
现代文：五月初六，太白星、荧惑星合于柳宿。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, Taibai Star and Fluorescent Planet rendezvous at Yanagishuku.

古文：邓州移剌以城来降。
现代文：邓州移刺投降。
English: Dengzhou capitulated.

古文：六月丁酉，史嵩之刑部侍郎兼京湖安抚制置使兼知襄阳府。
现代文：六月二十四日，史篙之为刑部侍郎、兼京湖安抚制置使兼襄阳知府。
English: On June 24th, Shi Xuanqin was appointed as the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, the Keikou Pacification Commissioner, and the governor of Xiangyang.

古文：秋七月，败武仙于浙江。八月，拔唐州。
现代文：秋七月，在浙江打败武仙。八月，攻拔唐州。
English: In autumn and July, it defeated Wuxian in Zhejiang, and in August, it invaded Tangzhou.

古文：九月壬寅朔，日有食之。辛亥，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月初一，日食。初十，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the first day of September, the solar eclipse. On the tenth day of the month, the memorial service, and the general amnesty.

古文：辛酉，经筵官请以御制敬天、法祖、事亲、齐家四十八条及缉熙殿榜、《殿记》宣付史馆。
现代文：二十日，经筵官请求用御制敬天、法祖、事亲、齐家四十八条和辑熙殿榜、溅主己给付史馆。
English: On the 20th, at the request of the eunuch, the history museum was given the 48 articles of the imperial system of reverence for heaven, ancestors, relatives, the Qi family, the list of Xi dynasty, and the splash itself.

古文：冬十月，江海领襄军从大元兵合围金主于蔡州。
现代文：冬十月初五，江海率领襄军随大元军在蔡州联合围金主。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the winter, Jianghai led the Xiangjun Army to join the Dayuan Army to jointly besiege the gold owner in Caizhou.

古文：甲申，史宅之太府少卿，史宇之将作少监，并赐同进士出身。
现代文：十三日，史宅之为太府少卿，史宁之为将作少监，都赐同进士出身。
English: On the 13th, Shizakoto was promoted to Taifu Shoko, and Shiningoto was promoted to Shoko, both of whom were from the same family.

古文：丙戌，史弥远进太师、左丞相兼枢密使、鲁国公，加食邑一千户；郑清之光禄大夫、右丞相兼枢密使，加食邑一千户。
现代文：十五日，史弥远升太师、左承相兼枢密使、鲁国公，加食邑一千户；郑清之为光禄大夫、右承相兼枢密使，加食邑一千户。
English: On the 15th, Shiyan Yuan was promoted to Grand Master, Zuo Zheng and Privy Envoy, Lu Guogong, plus 1,000 households; Zheng Qing was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, Zuo Zheng and Privy Envoy, plus 1,000 households.

古文：丁亥，史弥远保宁、昭信军节度使，充醴泉观使，进封会稽郡王，仍奉朝请，加食邑封。
现代文：十六日，史弥远为保宁、昭信军节度使，担任醛泉观使，进封会稽郡王，并且逢一日、五日朝见皇帝，加食邑封。
English: On the 16th, Shi Miyan was the festival envoy of the Boryeong and Shoshin armies, served as the Aldehyde Spring Observation Envoy, and was crowned the county king of the county council. He also met with the emperor in the morning every day and every five days, and was awarded the title of county governor.

古文：以薛极为枢密使，乔行简参知政事兼同知枢密院事，陈贵谊参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命薛极为枢密使，乔行简为参知政事兼同知枢密院事，陈贵谊为参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed Xue Wei as Privy Councilor, Qiao Xingjian as Councillor of State and Councillor of Privy Council, Chen Guoyi as Councillor of State and Signatory of Privy Council.

古文：诏： 史弥远有定策大功，勤劳王室，今以疾解政，宜加优礼。
现代文：下诏：史弥远有定策大功，勤劳王室，今因疾病解除政职，应该加以优礼。
English: The following edict: Shiyan has made great contributions to policy-making, and has worked hard for the royal family. Now that he has been relieved of his political duties due to illness, he should be given a courtesy.

古文：长子宅之权户部侍郎兼崇政殿说书，次子宇之直华文阁、枢密院副都承旨，长孙同卿直宝章阁，次孙绍卿、良卿、会卿、晋卿并承事郎，女夫赵汝禖军器少监，孙女夫赵崇榟官一转。 
现代文：长子史宅之代理户部侍郎兼崇政殿说书。次子史宁之直华文阁、枢密院副都承旨，长孙史同卿直宝章阁，次孙史绍卿、史会卿、史晋卿为承事郎，女婿赵汝葆为军器少监，孙女夫赵崇梓转一官。
English: The eldest son, Shizuka, was appointed as the acting head of the household and the vice-president of the Imperial Household Agency. The second son, Shining, was appointed as the vice-president of the Privy Council, the eldest grandson, Shizuka, was appointed as the vice-president of the Privy Council, the second grandson, Shizuka, was appointed as the vice-president of the Privy Council, the second grandson, Shizuoka, was appointed as the vice-president of the Privy Council, the second grandson, Shizuoka, was appointed as the vice-president of the Privy Council, the second grandson, Shizuoka, was appointed as the vice-president of

古文：己丑，诏崔与之、李、郑性之赴阙。
现代文：十八日，下诏崔与之、李皇、郑性之到朝廷。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Cui, Emperor Li, and Emperor Zheng went to the imperial court.

古文：庚寅，以显谟阁待制、知福州真德秀兼福建安抚使。
现代文：十九日，任命显漠阁待制、知福州真德秀兼福建安抚使。
English: On the 19th, Xianba Pavilion was put on standby, and Zhi Fuzhou Zhendexiu and Fujian Pacifying Envoy were appointed.

古文：乙未，史弥远薨，赠中书令，追封卫王，谥忠献。
现代文：二十四日，史弥远去世，赠中书令，追封为卫王，溢号忠献。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Shi Yiyuan passed away, and was presented with the Chinese imperial edict, posthumously crowned as the King of Wei, and given the honorific title of Yue.

古文：诏戒贪吏。
现代文：下诏警告贪吏。
English: The following is a warning to corrupt officials.

古文：十一月乙巳，给事中莫泽等言，差提举千秋鸿禧观梁成大暴狠贪婪，苟贱无耻，诏夺成大祠禄。
现代文：十一月初五，给事中莫泽等说，差提举千秋鸿禧观梁成大暴狠贪婪，苟贱无耻，诏令削夺梁成大祠禄。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, in the middle of the matter, Moser and others said that it was necessary to raise the millennium jubilee to view Liangcheng as a violent, greedy and shameless person, and the edict was issued to deprive Liangcheng of the grand shrine.

古文：丙午，诏改明年为端平元年。
现代文：初六，诏令改明年为端平元年。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the imperial edict changed the next year to the first year of the era.

古文：己未，以魏了翁为华文阁待制、知泸州、潼川安抚使，赐金带。
现代文：十九日，任命魏了翁为华文阁待制、知沪州、撞川安抚使，赐给金带。
English: On the 19th, Wei Lioweng was appointed as the Chinese Ambassador to Japan, Chihshu, and Qianchuan, and was given a gold belt.

古文：癸亥，进赵葵兵部侍郎、淮东制置使兼知扬州。
现代文：二十三日，升赵葵为兵部侍郎、淮东制置使兼知扬州。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Kwai was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department, and was appointed as the envoy to Huaidong and Yangzhou.

古文：甲子，台臣劾刑部尚书莫泽贪淫忮害，罢之。
现代文：二十四日，台臣弹勃刑部尚书莫泽贪婪淫恶，怀奸害人，罢除。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the criminal department of the Taishin Rebellion, Shang Shumose, who was greedy, lewd and malicious, and harbored traitors, was dismissed.

古文：丙寅，权工部尚书赵范言： 宣和海上之盟，厥初甚美，迄以取祸，其事不可不鉴。 
现代文：二十六日，代理工部尚书赵范说： 宣和海上之盟，其初甚坚，最后以取祸告终，其事不可不借鉴。 
English: On the 26th, Zhao Fan, the acting secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, said: The alliance between Xuanhe and the sea, which was very strong at the beginning, ended in disaster, and it is necessary to learn from it.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：理宗高兴地采纳了。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：丁卯，诏赵葵任责防御。
现代文：二十七日，下诏赵葵担任防御大任。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Kwai assumed the defense post.

古文：戊辰，礼部郎中洪咨夔进对：今日急务，进君子，退小人，如真德秀、魏了翁当聚之于朝。
现代文：二十八日，礼部郎中洪咨夔进对说： 今日急务，进君子，退小人，像真德秀、魏了翁应当聚之于朝廷。 
English: On the 28th, the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies, Hong Zhaojin, said: Today is an urgent matter. It is necessary to gather the nobles and the commoners, such as Zhen De Xiu and Wei Yao Weng, in the imperial court.

古文：帝是其言，命咨夔洎王遂同为监察御史。
现代文：理宗认为他说得很对，命令洪咨夔到王遂都为监察御史。
English: Rizong thought that he was right, and ordered Hong Zhaopeng and Wang Sui to be the supervisors of history.

古文：己巳，赵葵入见，帝问以金事，对曰： 今国家兵力未赡，姑从和议。俟根本既壮，雪二帝之耻，以复中原。 
现代文：二十九日，赵葵朝见皇上，理宗询问金国的事情，赵葵回答说： 今天国家兵力不强大，姑且采取和议策略，等国家根本强壮，再雪徽、钦二帝之耻，恢复中原诸地。 
English: On the 29th, Zhao Kwai Chao met with the emperor, and Li Zong inquired about the affairs of Jin. Zhao Kwai replied: Today, the country's military strength is not strong. Even if we adopt a strategy of peaceful negotiation, the country is fundamentally strong. Let's restore the Central Plains after the disgrace of Xue Hui and Qin Erdi.

古文：十二月戊寅，史宅之缴纳赐第，诏给赐本家，仍奉家庙。
现代文：十二月初八，史宅之缴纳赐宅，下诏给赐本家，仍奉家庙。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, the payment of the historical house was given to the house, and the edict was issued to give it to the family, and the family temple was still honored.

古文：庚辰，以薛极为观文殿大学士、知绍兴府兼浙东安抚使。
现代文：初十，任命薛极为观文殿大学士、知绍兴府兼浙东安抚使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Xue Diwei as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, as well as the Zhishao Xingfu and the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：甲申，吴潜太府卿，仍淮西总领财赋，暂兼沿江制置、知建康府。
现代文：十四日，吴潜为太府卿，仍旧为淮西总领财赋，暂兼沿江制置、建康知府。
English: On the 14th, Wu Qian became the grand prefect of the province, and continued to be the general leader of the west of Huaixi Province. He also temporarily set up and constructed the Kangkang Prefecture along the river.

古文：戊申，洪咨夔言： 资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫袁韶，仇视善类，谄附弥远，险忮倾危。 
现代文：戊申日，洪咨夔说： 资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫袁韶，仇视君子好人，馅附小人史弥远，阴险毒辣。 
English: On the day of Wushen, Hong Zhaojun said: "The academician of the Capital and Political Bureau, the promotion of the Dongxiao Palace Yuan Xuan, the hatred of the gentleman and the good man, and the attachment to the villain are far-reaching and insidious.

古文：诏袁韶夺职、罢祠禄。
现代文：下诏削夺袁韶官职罢除祠禄。
English: The next edict was to deprive Yuan Shao of his official post and remove his stipend.

古文：壬辰，台臣言： 赵善湘、陈晐、郑损纳赂弥远，怙势肆奸，失江淮、荆襄、蜀汉人心，罪状显著。 
现代文：二十二日，台臣说： 赵善湘、陈歇&;;郑损纳贿史弥远，依仗史弥远的势力肆意为奸，失掉江淮、荆襄、蜀汉人心，罪状显著。 
English: On the 22nd, the Taiwanese minister said: Zhao Shanxiang, Chen Xie &; Zheng lost a long history of accepting bribes, relying on a long history of influence to act as a traitor, losing the hearts of Jianghuai, Jingxiang and Shu Han, and the crime was significant.

古文：诏赵善湘有讨李全功，特寝免；陈晐与祠，郑损落职与祠。
现代文：下诏赵善湘有讨伐李全之功，特免罪；陈歇为祠禄官，郑损免职为祠禄官。
English: According to the following edict, Zhao Shanxiang was specially pardoned for his contribution to the crusade against Li Quan; Chen Xie was made an official of the ancestral shrine, and Zheng Ji was dismissed as an official of the ancestral shrine.

古文：端平元年春正月庚子朔，诏求直言。侍从、卿监、郎官，在外执政、从官，举堪为监司、守令者各二人。三衙、统帅、知阁、御带、环卫官，在外总管、军帅，举堪为将帅者各二人。
现代文：端平元年春正月初一，下诏寻求直言；侍从、卿监、郎官，在外执政、从官，推举可以担任监司、守令者各二人；三衙、统帅、知阎、御带、环卫官，在外总管、军帅，举荐可以担任将帅者各二人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the second year of the Heian era, the following edict was issued to seek direct speech; the attendant, the lord supervisor, the vassal, the foreign ruling, the vassal, the nomination can serve as the supervisor and the keeper of the order; the three generals, the commander-in-chief, the scholar, the imperial belt, the environmental protection officer, the chief manager and the military commander in foreign countries, the nomination can serve as the commander-in-chief two people each.

古文：钟震、陈公益、李性传、张虙并兼侍读。
现代文：钟震、陈公益、李性传、张虑都兼侍读。
English: Zhong Zhen, Chen Gongye, Li Shichuan and Zhang Xian are all in attendance.

古文：徐清叟、黄朴、李大同、叶味道并兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：徐清雯、黄朴、李大同、叶味道都兼崇政殿说书。
English: Xu Qingwen, Huang Puk, Li Datong, and Ye Fang are all involved in the story of the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：辛丑，赵范依前沿江制置副使，权移司知黄州，史嵩之权京湖安抚制置使兼知襄阳府，陈韡华文阁待制，仍知隆兴府、江西安抚使。
现代文：初二，赵范依前为沿江制置副使，暂移司知黄州，史篙之代理京湖安抚制置使兼襄阳知府，陈擎为华文阁待制，仍知隆兴府、江西安抚使。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Zhao Fan Yi was previously the deputy envoy along the Yangtze River, and was temporarily transferred to Huangzhou as the secretary of the Yangtze River, Shi Yan's deputy was the Beijing Lake pacification envoy and the governor of Xiangyang, Chen Qing was the Huaweng Pavilion, and was still the Yongxing Prefecture and Jiangxi pacification envoy.

古文：诏德安三关使彭哲，去年十月北兵至，弃关遁，削二秩勒停。
现代文：下诏：德安三关使彭哲，去年十月元兵到达，弃关逃跑，削夺二官勒令停职。
English: The following edict was issued: Peng Zhe, the envoy of the Third Gate of De'an, arrived in October last year, abandoned the gate and fled, and the second official was ordered to be suspended.

古文：乙巳，赐故少傅、权参知政事任希夷谥宣宪。
现代文：初六，赐已故少傅、代理参知政事任希夷溢号宣宪。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the late Shofu, Acting Vice-Chairman of the Council of State, was given the honorary title of proclamation of the Constitution.

古文：丙午，诏赵范兼淮西制置副使，任责防御。
现代文：初七，下诏赵范兼淮西制置副使，担任防御敌军大任。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhao Fan, the vice-envoy of the Huaixi Provincial Government, assumed the important position of defending the enemy.

古文：太白、荧惑合在斗。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星合在斗宿。
English: A too-white star and a fluorescent planet are in a fight.

古文：戊申，金主完颜守绪传位于宗室承麟。
现代文：初九，金主完颜守绪传位给宗室完颜承麟。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Kanen Shosei, the financial master, passed the throne to Kanen Shorenlin, the head of the family.

古文：己酉，城破，守绪自经死，承麟为乱兵所杀，执其参知政事张天纲。
现代文：初十，城被攻破，完颜守绪自杀而死，完颜承麟为乱兵杀死，俘获参知政事张天纲。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the city was breached, Yan Shouxu committed suicide, Yan Chenglin was killed by the rioters, and Zhang Tiangang, a member of the Council of State, was captured.

古文：丙寅，诏： 太师、中书令荣王已进王爵，宜封三代，曾祖子奭赠太师、吴国公，祖伯旴赠太师、益国公，父师意赠太师、越国公。 
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 太师、中书令荣王已经进封王爵，宜封三代，曾祖子赐太师、吴国公，祖伯即赠太师、益国公，父师意赠太师、越国公。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: Grand Master Rong Wang of the Chinese Academy of Letters has been invested with the title of prince, and it is appropriate to invest three generations. The great-grandfather gave Grand Master Rong Wang of the Wu Kingdom, the great-grandfather gave Grand Master Rong Wang of the Yue Kingdom, the great-grandfather gave Grand Master Rong Wang of the Yue Kingdom, and the great-grandfather gave Grand Master Rong Wang of the Wu Kingdom.

古文：戊辰，以枢密院言，诏： 京西忠顺统制江海、枣阳同统制郭胜，向因所部兵行劫，坐不发觉，除名、广州拘管。
现代文：二十九日，采纳枢密院建议，下诏： 京西忠顺统制江海、枣阳同统制郭胜，从前因所率兵劫掠，因没能发觉被除名，广州拘管。
English: On the 29th, he adopted the recommendation of the Privy Council and issued the following edict: Guo Sheng of the Jianghai and Zaoyang Dynasties, formerly of the Zhongshun Dynasties in Beijing and Xi'an, was removed from the list for failing to discover that he had led soldiers to plunder, and was placed under detention in Guangzhou.

古文：遇赦还军前自效有功，并叙复元受军职。 
现代文：遇到赦免回到军前效力有功，都可恢复原授军职。 
English: In the event of an amnesty returning to the pre-military effect with merit, the original military post can be restored.

古文：史嵩之露布告金亡，谨遣郭春按循故壤，诣奉先县汛扫祖宗诸陵。
现代文：史篙之用没封口的文书向朝廷报告金国亡国的消息，谨派郭春视察故壤，到奉先县汛扫祖宗诸陵。
English: Shi Xizhi used an unsealed document to report the news of the fall of the Jin Dynasty to the imperial court, and sent Guo Chun to inspect the ancestral land and visit the tombs of the Ancestor Sect in Fengxian County.

古文：还师屯信阳。
现代文：回师屯信阳。
English: Back to Shinyang.

古文：命王旻守随州，王安国守枣阳，蒋成守光化，杨恢守均，并益兵饬备，经理唐、邓屯田。
现代文：命王守卫随州，王安国守卫枣阳，蒋成守卫光化，杨恢守卫均州，都增兵防备，经理唐、邓州屯田。
English: Wang An Guo guarded Zuizhou, Wang An Guo guarded Zaoyang, Jiang Cheng guarded Guanghua, and Yang Hui guarded Junzhou. All of them increased their troops and prepared for battle. Tang and Dengzhou were in charge of Tunden.

古文：二月辛未，监察御史洪咨夔言： 上亲政之始，斥逐李知孝、梁成大，其谄事权奸，党私罔上，倡淫黩货，罪大罚轻。 
现代文：二月初二，监察御史洪咨夔说： 皇上亲政之始，斥逐李知孝、梁成大，他们馅事权奸，党私同上，倡淫默货，罪大罚轻。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of February, the Inspector-General Hong Zhaojun said: At the beginning of the Emperor's personal governance, Li Zhixiao and Liang Chengda were expelled. They were involved in treason, party and private affairs, advocating prostitution and smuggling, and the punishment was light.

古文：诏李知孝削一秩，罢祠；梁成大削两秩。
现代文：诏令李知孝削夺一官，罢祠禄；梁成大削夺二官。
English: The edict ordered Li Zhixiao to be stripped of one post and stripped of his stipend; Liang Chengda was stripped of two posts.

古文：壬申，以赵彦呐为四川安抚制置使兼知兴元府。
现代文：初三，任命赵彦呐为四川安抚制置使兼兴元知府。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhao Yannan was appointed as the Sichuan pacification envoy and the leader of the Gengcheng prefecture.

古文：丁亥，诏端平元年正月以前诸命官贬窜物故者，许令归葬。
现代文：十八日，下诏：端平元年正月以前各命官因政事贬窜者，允许归葬。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: Before the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：三月己酉，以贾涉子似道为籍田令。
现代文：三月十一日，任命贾涉子贾似道为籍田令。
English: On March 11th, Jia Shanzi and Jia Lian Dao were appointed as provincial governors.

古文：辛酉，诏遣太常寺主簿朱扬祖、阁门祗候林拓诣洛阳省谒八陵。
现代文：二十三日，诏令派遣太常寺主簿朱扬祖、间门抵侯林拓到洛阳朝拜八陵。
English: On the 23rd, Zhu Yangzu, the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, was sent to Luoyang to pay homage to the eight mausoleums.

古文：四月辛未，诏遣朱复之诣八陵，相度修奉。
现代文：四月初三，诏令派遣朱复之到洛阳八陵，相度修缮。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Zhu Fuzhi was sent to Luoyang to repair the eight mausoleums.

古文：丁丑，诏： 比年宗亲贫窭，或致失所。甚非国家睦族之意。
现代文：初九，下诏： 近年宗室贫穷，或致失所，甚非国家睦族之意。
English: The ninth day of the new year, the following edict: In recent years, the poverty of the family, or the loss of the family, is not the meaning of the national family.

古文：大宗正司、南外西外宗正司，其申严州郡，以时赡给，违者有刑。 
现代文：大宗正司、南外西外宗正司，申严州郡，按时赡给，违者处罚。 
English: Daizong Zhengji, Nanwai Xizong Zhengji, Shenyang County, will be paid on time, and violators will be punished.

古文：监察御史王遂言： 史嵩之本不知兵，矜功自侈，谋身诡秘，欺君误国，留之襄阳一日，则有一日之忧。 
现代文：监察御史王遂说： 史篙之本不知兵，矜功自侈，谋身诡秘，欺君误国，留在襄阳一天，就有一天的忧虑。 
English: Supervisor Wang Shih then said: Shi Yan did not know how to be a soldier, he was proud of his achievements, he was secretive, he was a traitor to his country, and if he stayed in Xiangyang for one day, he would be worried for one day.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：戊寅，岁星守太微垣上相星。
现代文：初十，岁星守太微垣上相星。
English: On his first day of school, the ten-year-old star guard was too weak to catch up with the star.

古文：壬午，监察御史洪咨夔言： 今残金虽灭，邻国方强，益严守备犹恐不逮，岂可动色相贺，涣然解体，以重方来之忧？ 上嘉纳。
现代文：十四日，监察御史洪咨夔说： 今天残金虽然消灭，邻国元朝正日益强盛，加强守备还恐怕来不及，怎么可以喜色庆贺，涣然解体，来增加将来的忧患呢了理宗称许采纳。
English: On the 14th, the inspector-general Hong Zhaojun said: Although the remaining gold has been eliminated today, the neighboring Yuan Dynasty is becoming increasingly strong, and it is probably too late to strengthen the defense. How can we celebrate with joy, collapse suddenly, and increase future worries?

古文：甲申，日生赤晕。
现代文：十六日，太阳有赤色光晕。
English: On the 16th, the sun has a red glow.

古文：丙戌，以灭金获其主完颜守绪遗骨告太庙，其玉宝、法物并俘囚张天纲、完颜好海等命有司审实以闻。
现代文：十八日，以灭亡金国俘获金主完颜守绪遗骨报告太庙，玉宝、法物和俘囚张天纲、完颜好海等命令有关部门审查核实上报。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the relevant departments to review and verify the report on the report of the remains of the gold master Kanyan Shouxu, who was captured by Jin Guo with the death of Jin Guo, the Great Temple, the jade treasure, the legal objects and the prisoners Zhang Tiangang and Kanyan Haohai.

古文：庚寅，诏授孟珙带御器械，京、襄部押官属陈一荐、江海官两转，余论功行赏。
现代文：二十二日，诏令授孟琪带御器械，京、襄部押官属陈一荐、江海转两官，其余人论功行赏。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict awarded Meng Qi with the imperial instrument. The Beijing and Xiangbu overseers were recommended by Chen I and transferred to Jianghai, and the rest were awarded for their merits.

古文：金降人夹谷奴婢改姓同名鼎，王闻显、呼延实、来伯友、石大瑞、白华各授官有差。
现代文：金国降人夹谷奴婶改姓同名鼎，王闻显、呼延实、来伯友、石天瑞、白华各授官不等。
English: Wang Wenxian, Hu Yanshi, Lai Boyou, Shi Tianrui, Baihua were awarded various positions.

古文：丁酉，臣僚言： 江淮、荆襄诸路都大提点坑冶吴渊，恃才贪虐，籍人家赀以数百万计，掩为己有，其弟潜违道干誉，任用非类。 
现代文：二十九日，臣僚说： 江淮、荆襄各路都大提点坑冶吴渊，恃才贪虐，籍没人家资产以数百万计，据为己有，其弟吴潜违道干誉，任用非类。 
English: On the 29th, the ministers said: Jianghuai and Jingxiang all have a big advantage over Wuyuan, and Wuyuan is greedy and abusive. No one has millions of assets, which are owned by him, and his brother Wu Qian has a reputation for doing things against the law, and his appointment is not good.

古文：诏吴渊落右文殿修撰，吴潜落秘阁修撰，并放罢。
现代文：诏令吴渊免除右文殿修撰，吴潜免除秘阁修撰，都被放罢。
English: The imperial edict exempted Wuyuan from editing the Right Text Hall, and exempted Wuxun from editing the Secret Cabinet, both of which were banned.

古文：五月庚子，薛极卒，赠少师。
现代文：五月初二，薛极去世，赠少师。
English: On the second day of May, Xue Ji passed away and was given the title of junior teacher.

古文：戊申，太平州螟。
现代文：初十，太平州螟灾。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, there was a flood in Taiping.

古文：己酉，太阴入氐。
现代文：十一日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 11th day, the moon entered Hitoshi's lodgings.

古文：乙卯，诏李知孝瑞州居住，梁成大潮州居住，莫泽南康军居住，并再降授官，寻尽追爵秩。
现代文：十七日，诏令李知孝瑞州居住，梁成大潮州居住，莫泽南康军居住。并再次降所授官，不久追免全部爵秩。
English: On the 17th, Li Zhixiao was ordered to live in Ruizhou, Liang Chengda to live in Chaozhou, and Mozenan Kangjun to live in Mozenan. He was once again demoted in rank, and was soon stripped of all peerages.

古文：诏魏了翁赴阙。
现代文：诏令魏了翁到朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered Wei to come to the imperial court.

古文：丙辰，以赵范为两淮制置使、节制军马兼沿江制置副使。
现代文：十八日，任命赵范为两淮制置使、节制军马兼沿江制置副使。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Fan was appointed as the envoy of the two Huai armies and the deputy envoy of the temperate army and the riverside army.

古文：壬戌，以崔与之为端明殿学士、提举西京嵩山崇福宫，陈韡权工部尚书、知隆兴府、江西安抚使。
现代文：二十四日，任命崔与之为端明殿学士、提举西京篙山崇福宫，陈擎代理工部尚书、隆兴知府、江西安抚使。
English: On the 24th, Cui Yingcai was appointed as the academician of Duanming Palace, Xi Jing Lushan Chongfu Palace was promoted, and Chen Jing was appointed as the acting secretary of the Ministry of Industry, Longxing Prefecture, and Jiangxi Pacifying Envoy.

古文：丙寅，诏： 黄干、李燔、李道传、陈宓、楼昉、徐宣、胡梦昱皆厄于权奸，而各行其志，没齿无怨，其赐谥、复官、优赠、存恤，仍各录用其子，以旌忠义。
现代文：二十八日，下诏： 黄干、李播、李道传、陈必、楼意、徐宣、胡梦星都被权奸排斥，而各行其志，没齿无怨，都赐给溢号、恢复官职、优加赠爵、慰问抚恤，并且分别录用其子，以表彰忠义。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: Huang Gan, Li Bian, Li Daochuan, Chen Bi, Lou Yi, Xu Xuan, and Hu Mengxing were all ostracized by the usurpers, and each of them, without complaint, was given a posthumous name, reinstated in official positions, given a knighthood, received a condolence pension, and their sons were hired separately in recognition of their loyalty.

古文：戴野，其复元资，以励士风。 
现代文：戴眺，恢复原资，以励士风。 
English: Wear a watch, restore the original capital, and encourage the style of a scholar.

古文：建阳县盗发，众数千人，焚劫邵武、麻沙、长平。
现代文：建阳县盗贼兴起，有数千之众，焚劫邵武、麻沙、长平。
English: Thieves in Jianyang County rose up, with thousands of people looting and burning Shaowu, Masa, and Changping.

古文：六月戊辰朔，郑清之等进奏选德殿柱有金书六字曰： 毋不敬，思无邪。 
现代文：六月初一，郑清之等进奏选德殿柱有金书六字为： 毋不敬，思无邪。 
English: On the first day of June, Zheng Qingzhi and others marched into the Zhengde Hall, and the pillars of the hall were inscribed with six words: "No disrespect, no malice."

古文：上曰： 此坐右铭也。 
现代文：理宗说： 此座右铭也。 
English: Riso said, "This motto is also true.

古文：庚午，荧惑、填星合于胃。
现代文：初三，荧惑星、填星合于胃宿。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the fluorescent planet and the star-filled star merged in the stomach.

古文：壬申，诏蠲漳、泉、兴化三州丁米钱。
现代文：初五，下诏免除漳、泉、兴化三州丁米钱。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following edict exempted the dingmei money from the three prefectures of Handan, Quan and Xinghua.

古文：丙子，以李鸣复为侍御史兼侍讲。
现代文：初九，任命李鸣复为侍御史兼侍讲。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Li Mingfu was appointed as an attendant historian and an attendant speaker.

古文：戊寅，以乔行简知枢密院事，曾从龙参知政事，郑性之签书枢密院事，陈贵谊兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命乔行简为知枢密院事，曾从龙参知政事，郑性之为签书枢密院事，陈贵谊兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Qiao Xingjian was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, who had been a member of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, Zheng Shixing was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, and Chen Guiyi was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：己卯，诏： 故巴陵县公竑可尽复本身官爵，有司其检视墓域，以时致祭。
现代文：十二日，下诏：已故巴陵县公赵可全部恢复本身官爵，有司检视墓域，按时致祭。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: the late Baling County official Zhao could fully restore his official title, have a division inspect the cemetery, and make a sacrifice on time.

古文：妻吴昨自请为尼，特赐慧净法空大师，绍兴府月给衣资缗钱。 
现代文：妻吴氏，昨天自请为尼，特赐给慧净法空大师，绍兴府每月供给衣资络钱。
English: Mr. Wu's wife, who volunteered to be a nun yesterday, was specially given to Master Hui Ching, and the Shaoxing government provided monthly clothing allowance.

古文：诏殿司选精锐千人，命统制娄拱、统领杨辛讨捕建阳县盗。
现代文：下诏殿司选择精锐一千人，命统制娄拱、统领杨辛讨捕建阳县盗贼。
English: In the following edict, the palace secretary selected one thousand elite people, and ordered them to control Gong Gong and lead Yang Xin to capture the thieves in Jianyang County.

古文：幸巳，诏故端明殿学士、开府仪同三司史弥远赠资政殿大学士，谥忠宣。
现代文：十四日，下诏已故端明殿学士、开府仪同三司史弥远赠资政殿大学士，溢号忠宣。
English: On the 14th, it was announced that the late Duan Myeong-dong, a bachelor, and Kaifu Yi and Sanji Shiyan, a scholar of the University of Finance and Administration, would be awarded the honorary title of "Tadanobu."

古文：荧惑犯填星。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: Fluorescent planets invade star-filled skies.

古文：丙戌，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十九日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 19th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：乙亥，以赵范为京河关陕宣抚使、知开封府、东京留守，赵葵京河制置使、知应天府、南京留守，全子才关陕制置使、知河南府、西京留守。甲午，权邵武军王野以平建阳寇有功，官两转，余推赏有差。
现代文：二十一日，史篙之升兵部尚书。禁止焚毁铜钱制造器用物品和贸易下海。秋七月初八，诏令嘉兴县王临一百零二岁，补迪功郎退休。八月初七，下诏： 河南新收复的郡县，很久没有播种耕种了，百姓非常缺乏粮食，江、淮制司发米麦一百万石接济归附军民，并且张榜公告开封、应天、河南三京。 初八，朱扬祖、林拓朝拜八陵回，进呈地图，理宗询问各陵相离多远和陵前涧水新复，朱扬祖一一回答，理宗忍住哭泣，然后叹息。初九，任命赵范为京河关陕宣抚使、知应天府、南京留守，全子才为关陕制置使、知河南府、西京留守。二十八日，代理邵武军王眺因平息建阳寇贼有功，转两官，其余推赏不等。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shih's promotion to the military department was announced. It was forbidden to burn items used in copper money makers and to go to sea for trade. On the eighth day of the seventh month of the autumn, Wang Lin of Jiaxing County, 102 years old, was ordered to retire. On the seventh day of the eighth month, the following decree was issued: The newly recovered counties and counties in Henan have not been sown and cultivated for a long time, and the people are very short of grain. The Jiang and Huai Departments issued a million stone of rice and wheat to aid the military and civilians, and announced the opening of Kaifeng, Y

古文：九月庚子，赵范依旧京西、湖北安抚制置大使、知襄阳府。
现代文：九月初四，赵范依旧为京西、湖北安抚制置大使、知襄阳府。
English: On the fourth day of September, Zhao Fan was still appointed as the ambassador of the Beijing West and Hubei pacification system, Zhixiangyang Prefecture.

古文：辛丑，荧惑入井。
现代文：初五，荧惑星进人井宿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the fluorescent planet enters the man's house.

古文：壬寅，赵范言： 赵葵、全子才轻遣偏师复西京，赵楷、刘子澄参赞失计，师退无律，致后阵败覆。 
现代文：初六，赵范说： 赵葵、全子才轻率派兵收复西京，赵楷、刘子澄参赞大计，师退无律，致使后军失败。 
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Zhao Fan said: Zhao Kwai and Quanzhicai rashly sent troops to recapture West Beijing, and Zhao Kai and Liu Zicheng made a grand plan. The division retreated without discipline, resulting in the defeat of the rear army.

古文：诏赵葵削一秩，措置河南、京东营田边备；全子才削一秩，措置唐、邓、息营田边备；刘子澄、赵楷并削三秩放罢。
现代文：下诏：赵葵削夺一官，措置邓、唐、息州营田边备；全子才削夺一官，措置河南、京东营田边备；刘子澄、赵楷都削夺三官放罢。
English: The following edict was issued: Zhao Kwai was to be deprived of one post, and Deng, Tang, and Sichuan Yingtian Bian Bei were to be deprived of one post; Quanzhong Cai was to be deprived of one post, and Henan and Jingdong Yingtian Bian Bei were to be deprived of one post; Liu Zicheng and Zhao Kai were to be deprived of three posts, and were to be released.

古文：又言： 杨义一军之败，皆由徐敏子、范用吉怠于赴援，致不能支。 
现代文：又说： 杨义一军失败，都是由于徐敏子、范用吉怠于救援，致使杨义军不能应付局面。 
English: He also said: The failure of Yang Yi's army was all due to Xu Tinsi and Fan Yingji's negligence in rescue, resulting in Yang Yi's army being unable to cope with the situation.

古文：诏范用吉降武翼郎，徐敏子削三秩放罢，杨义削四秩，勒停自效。
现代文：下诏范用吉降为武翼郎，徐敏子降三官罢免，杨义削夺四秩，勒令停职自效。
English: In the following edict, Fan Yijie was demoted to Wu Yulang, Xu Tinsi was demoted three ranks and dismissed, Yang Yi was demoted four ranks and ordered to suspend his duties.

古文：己酉，真德秀言：权臣罔上，讲筵官亦傅会其言，今承其弊，有当虑者五事，并及泉、漳寇盗、盐法之弊。
现代文：十三日，真德秀说： 权臣同上，讲筵官也附会其言，今承其弊，应当考虑者有五件事，并涉及泉漳二州寇盗、盐法的弊端。 
English: On the 13th, Zhen Dexiu said: "As mentioned above, there are five things that should be considered by the powerful ministers, and the eunuchs have also added their comments. They are related to Quanzhang's robbery of the two states and the drawbacks of the Salt Law.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：理宗称赞采纳。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：诏：进士何霆编类朱熹解注文字，有补经筵，授上文学。
现代文：下诏：进士何霆编类朱熹解注文字，有补经筵，授为上文学。
English: The following is the edict: Jin Shi He Ting compiled Zhu Xi commentary on the text, with supplementary scriptures, and was awarded the title of Shang Literature.

古文：冬十月己卯，真德秀进《大学衍义》。
现代文：冬十月十四日，真德秀进呈大学衍必。
English: In the winter of October 14th, Zhendexiu entered the University of Yanbei.

古文：辛卯，陈贵谊薨，赠少保。
现代文：二十六日，陈贵谊逝世，赠少保。
English: On the 26th, Chen Guiyi passed away and was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：十一月壬子，京、湖制司创镇北军，诏以襄阳府驻扎御前忠卫军为名。
现代文：十一月十七日，京湖制司创设镇北军，下诏以襄阳府驻扎御前忠卫军为名。
English: On November 17th, the Jinghu System Division created the Town North Army, and issued the following edict in the name of the Imperial Guard stationed in Yangyang Prefecture.

古文：壬戌，太白经天。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十二月己卯，大元遣王楫来。
现代文：十二月十五日，元朝派昨绪来。
English: On December 15th, the Yuan Dynasty sent Zeng Xiu.

古文：戊子，王楫辞于后殿。
现代文：二十四日，昨潇：于后殿。
English: On the 24th, yesterday: in the back hall.

古文：辛卯，遣邹伸之、李复礼、乔仕安、刘溥报谢，各进二秩。
现代文：二十七日，派遣邹伸之、李复礼、乔仕安、刘溥答谢，各进二秩。
English: On the 27th, Zou Shinzhi, Li Fulei, Qiao Shi'an, and Liu Wei were sent to the parade to express their thanks, and each of them was promoted to the second rank.

