古文：壶公蓟子训董奉李常在
现代文：壶公蓟子训董奉李常在
English: The potter and the mason are often in the same place

古文：壶公
现代文：壶公
English: The kettle is boiling

古文：壶公者，不知其姓名也。
现代文：壶公是一位道教真人，不知他凡间的姓名叫什么。
English: Kugong is a Taoist real person, I don't know what his ordinary name is.

古文：今世所有召军符、召鬼神治病玉府符，凡二十余卷，皆出自公、故总名 壶公符 。
现代文：当今世上所有的召军符和召鬼神、治疾病的玉府符共二十多卷，都出自壶公之手，所以总称为 壶公符 。
English: There are more than 20 volumes of jade talismans in the world today, which are used to summon armies, summon ghosts and gods, and cure diseases. All of them were made by Jugong, so they are all called Jugong talismans.

古文：时汝南有费长房者，为市掾，忽见公从远方来，入市卖药。
现代文：当时河南汝南有个当市掾的人叫费长房，忽然看见壶公从远方来到街上卖药。
English: At that time, there was a merchant in Renan, Henan Province, called Fei Changfang, who suddenly saw Jugong come from afar to sell medicine on the street.

古文：人莫识之，卖药口不二价，治病皆愈。
现代文：人们都不认识壶公，他卖药不许还价，他的药服后不管什么病都能治好。
English: People don't know Jug-Gong. He sells medicine without asking for a counter-offer, and after taking his medicine, he can cure any disease.

古文：语买人曰：服此药必吐某物，某日当愈。
现代文：壶公把药卖出之后，总要嘱咐买药的人，说服了药之后会吐出什么东西，哪一天病会好，他说的话每一次都很应验。
English: After selling the medicine, Kugong always wanted to tell the person who bought the medicine what he would vomit after convincing the medicine, and what day the disease would get better. His words came true every time.

古文：事无不效。其钱日收数万，便施与市中贫乏饥冻者，唯留三五十。
现代文：他每天卖药都能挣好几万钱，然后就把钱施舍给街上那些饥寒贫穷的人，只留下三五十个钱。
English: He earns tens of thousands of yuan every day by selling medicine, and then he gives the money to the poor and hungry people on the street, leaving only thirty or fifty yuan.

古文：常悬一空壶于屋上，日入之后，公跳入壶中。
现代文：经常把一个空壶挂在屋顶上，太阳落山之后，他就跳进壶里。
English: He often hangs an empty jug on the roof and jumps into it when the sun goes down.

古文：人莫能见，唯长房楼上见之，知非常人也。
现代文：这事谁也没发现，只有费长房在楼上看见了，由此而知壶公不是凡人。
English: No one found out about this, only Fei Changfang saw it upstairs, from which he knew that Jugong was not an ordinary person.

古文：长房乃日日自扫公座前地，及供馔物，公受而不辞。
现代文：费长房就天天清扫壶公的屋子，供给壶公吃的东西，壶公并不推辞。
English: Every day, Fei Changfang would clean Jugong's house and offer Jugong something to eat. Jugong did not refuse.

古文：如此积久，长房尤不懈，亦不敢有所求。
现代文：日子长了费长房仍坚持不懈地照常扫地供食，也不敢对壶公有所请求。
English: As the days passed, Fei Changfang still persistently swept the floor as usual to provide food, and did not dare to ask Jugong for anything.

古文：公知长房笃信，谓房曰： 至暮无人时更来。 
现代文：壶公看出来费长房心地很虔诚，有一次就对他说： 到晚上没人的时候你到我这儿来吧。 
English: Kugong saw that Fei Changfang was very pious, and once said to him: Come to me when there is no one in the evening.

古文：长房如其言即往，公语房曰： 见我跳入壶中时，卿便可效我跳，自当得入。 
现代文：费长房晚上来到壶公屋里，壶公对他说： 你看我跳进壶里时，你也和我一样跳。 
English: Fei Changfang came to the kettle public house in the evening, and the kettle master said to him: You see, when I jump into the kettle, you also jump like me.

古文：长房依言，果不觉已入。
现代文：费长房照他的话一跳，果然不知不觉地已在壶中了。
English: Fei Changfang did as he said and jumped into the pot.

古文：入后不复是壶，唯见仙宫世界。
现代文：进去后才发现不是壶，而是进入了一个神仙的世界。
English: Only after entering did he discover that it was not a pot, but that he had entered a world of immortals.

古文：楼观重门阁道，公左右侍者数十人。
现代文：只见楼台殿阁林立在道旁，还看见壶公带看好几十个随从。
English: I only saw a forest of buildings and pavilions standing by the roadside, and I also saw dozens of attendants watching the kettle with optimism.

古文：公语房曰： 我仙人也，昔处天曹，以公事不勤见责，因谪人间耳。
现代文：壶公对费长房说： 我是神仙，当年在天界因为处理公务不够勤勉，受到上界的责备把我贬到人间。
English: Kugong said to Fei Changfang: I am a immortal. In the heavenly world, I was reproached by the higher world for not being diligent enough in handling my official duties, and I was relegated to the human world.

古文：卿可教，故得见我。 
现代文：我看你有道根可以受教，才让你接近我。 
English: I think it's because you have roots that can be taught that you're able to get close to me.

古文：长房下座顿首曰： 肉人无知，积罪却厚，幸谬见哀悯，犹入剖棺布气。生枯起朽。
现代文：费长房立刻离座下拜磕头说： 我这俗人凡胎十分愚昧，积下了很多罪孽，幸亏得到你的怜悯关怀，就像劈开棺木给死尸送去仙气，使枯朽的的尸骨起死回生。
English: Fei Changfang immediately left his seat and bowed his head and said, "I, a worldly mortal, am very ignorant and have accumulated a lot of sins. Fortunately, receiving your compassionate care is like opening the coffin to send the dead body to the fairy spirit, and bringing the dead bones back to life.

古文：但恐臭秽顽弊，不任驱使。
现代文：我只怕自己愚笨顽劣，不能为大仙效力。
English: I'm just afraid that I'm stupid and clumsy, and I can't work for the Great Immortal.

古文：若见哀怜，百生之厚幸也。 
现代文：如果大仙继续指引点化，真是我百世难遇的大幸啊！ 
English: If the Great Immortal continues to guide me, I will truly be blessed beyond my wildest dreams!

古文：公曰： 审尔大佳，勿语人也。 
现代文：壶公说： 我看你这人很不错，但你千万不许泄露天机。 
English: Jug Gong said: I think you are a very good person, but you must not reveal the secret.

古文：公后诣长房于楼上曰： 我有少酒，相就饮之。 
现代文：壶公后来到楼上去看费长房，对他说： 我这里有点酒，咱们俩喝几杯吧。 
English: Afterward, the potter went upstairs to see Fei Long's room and said to him: I have some wine here, let's have a few drinks.

古文：酒在楼下，长房使人取之，不能举盎，至数十人莫能得上。乃白公，公乃下，以一指提上。
现代文：壶公的酒在楼下装在一个酒坛里，费长房就让人到楼下取来，但几十个人也抬不动那坛子，只好来告诉壶公，壶公下楼去，用一个手指把酒坛子拎到楼上来了。
English: Kugong's wine was stored downstairs in a wine jug, so Fei Changfang had people come downstairs to retrieve it, but dozens of people could not lift the jug, so they had to tell Kugong that Kugong had gone downstairs and used one finger to lift the wine jug upstairs.

古文：与房公饮之，酒器如拳许大，饮之至暮不竭。
现代文：两个人对饮，酒器只有拳头大，但喝到天黑也喝不尽。
English: Two people drink, the wine container is only the size of a fist, but they can drink until dark.

古文：告长房曰： 我某日当去，卿能去乎？ 
现代文：壶公告诉费长房： 我不久要回上仙界，你愿意和我同去吗？ 
English: Kugong told Fei Changfang: I will soon return to the spirit world. Would you like to go with me?

古文：房曰： 欲去之心，不可复言，欲使亲眷不觉知去，当有何计？ 公曰： 易耳。 
现代文：费长房说： 可还用说？不过我想让家里人不要发现我出走，有没有什么办法呢？ 壶公说： 这很简单。 
English: Fei Changfang said: Is it still necessary to say? But I want my family not to find out that I have run away, is there any way? Jug Gong said: This is very simple.

古文：乃取一青竹杖与房，戒之曰： 卿以竹归家，便可称病，以此竹杖置卿所卧处，默然便来。 
现代文：他就给了费长房一支青竹杖，告诫他说： 你拿这支竹杖归家后，就对家人说你病了，然后把竹杖放在你的床上，就悄悄到我这里来。 
English: He gave Fei Changfang a blue bamboo cane and warned him, "When you get home with this bamboo cane, tell your family that you are ill, then put the bamboo cane on your bed and come to me quietly."

古文：房如公言。去后，家人见房已死，尸在床。
现代文：费长房按照壶公的话做了，离开家后，京里人见费长房已死在床上了。
English: Fei Changfang did what Kugong said, and after leaving home, people in Beijing saw that Fei Changfang was dead on the bed.

古文：乃向竹杖耳，乃哭泣葬之。
现代文：其实床上的尸首就是壶公的那支竹杖，家人痛哭后就把费长房埋葬了。
English: In fact, the corpse on the bed is the bamboo cane of Jugong, and the family buried Fei Changfang after crying bitterly.

古文：房诣公，恍惚不知何所，公乃留房于群虎中，虎磨牙张口欲噬房，房不惧。
现代文：费长房跟着壶公，恍恍惚惚不知到了什么地方，壶公故意把他放在一群虎中，老虎张牙舞爪要吃掉他，他也没害怕。
English: Fei Changfang followed Jugong, and in a daze, he did not know where he was. Jugong deliberately put him in a group of tigers. The tiger was about to eat him with its teeth and claws, and he was not afraid.

古文：明日，又内于石室中，头上有一方石，广数丈，以茅绹悬之，又诸蛇来啮绳，绳即欲断，而长房自若。
现代文：第二天，壶公又把费长房关在一个石洞里，头顶上用草绳挂着一块几丈宽的大石头，又让几条蛇咬那草绳，绳眼看要断了，下面的费长房仍泰然自若。
English: The next day, the potter again shut Fei Changfu in a stone cave. Over his head, he hung a large stone several feet wide with a grass rope. He also let several snakes bite the grass rope. The rope was about to break, but Fei Changfu below was still calm.

古文：公至，抚之曰： 子可教矣。 
现代文：壶公来到石洞看见这情景，就安抚他说： 你可以受教学道了。 
English: When Kugong came to the cave and saw this scene, he calmed him down and said, "You can accept the teachings."

古文：又令长房啖屎，兼蛆长寸许，异常臭恶。
现代文：后来壶公又让费长房吃屎，屎里还有一寸多长的蛆，又臭又脏，费长房这次可为了难。
English: Later, the pot lord made Fei Changfang eat feces again. There was still more than an inch of pus in the feces, which was smelly and dirty. Fei Changfang was in trouble this time.

古文：房难之，公乃叹谢遣之曰： 子不得仙道也。
现代文：壶公就打发他回去，对他说， 看来你还是得不了仙道啊。
English: The pot lord sent him back and said to him, "It looks like you still won't get the fairy road."

古文：赐子为地上主者，可得寿数百岁。 
现代文：我让你当地上的人瑞吧，可以活好几百岁。 
English: I'll let your local people know, you can live for hundreds of years.

古文：为传封符一卷付之，曰： 带此可主诸鬼神，常称使者，可以治病消灾。 
现代文：说罢给了他一卷封着的符说： 你有了这符就能驱使鬼神，长期当天神的使者，还可以治病消灾。 
English: And when he had said this, he gave him a sealed scroll of characters, saying, "With this, you will be able to drive out demons and evil spirits, and for a long time you will be God's emissary. You will also be able to cure diseases and eliminate disasters."

古文：房忧不得到家，公以一竹杖与之曰： 但骑此，得到家耳。 
现代文：费长房担心到不了家，壶公又给他一支竹杖，说骑着它就可以到家了。
English: Fei Changfang was worried that he would not be able to get home. Jugong also gave him a bamboo cane, saying that he could get home by riding it.

古文：房骑竹杖辞去，忽如睡觉，已到家。
现代文：费长房骑上竹杖，忽然像大梦初醒，一看已经在家里了。
English: Fei Changfang rode on a bamboo cane, suddenly woke up like a dream, and was already at home.

古文：家人谓是鬼，具述前事，乃发棺视之，唯一竹杖，方信之。
现代文：家里以为他是鬼，他就详细讲述了经过，家人去墓地打开棺材一看，里面只是一支竹杖，这才相信了他的话。
English: His family thought he was a ghost, so he told them in detail what had happened. When they went to the cemetery and opened the coffin, they saw that there was only a bamboo cane inside, and they believed him.

古文：房所骑竹杖，弃葛陂中，视之乃青龙耳。
现代文：费长房骑回来的那支竹杖扔在草滩，一看原来是一条青龙。
English: Fei Changfang rode back and threw the bamboo cane on the grass beach. At first glance, it turned out to be a blue dragon.

古文：初去至归谓一日，推问家人，已一年矣。
现代文：费长房说他从离家到回来只是一天的事，家里人一算，已是一年了。
English: Fei Changfang said that it had only been a day since he left home and came back. For his family, it had already been a year.

古文：房乃行符，收鬼治病，无不愈者。
现代文：费长房就带着符收鬼治病，没有治不好的。
English: Fei Changfang took the charms to cure diseases, and nothing is incurable.

古文：每与人同坐共语，常呵责嗔怒，问其故，曰： 嗔鬼耳。 
现代文：有时他和病人坐着谈话，忽然就大声呵斥起来，客人奇怪地问怎么回事，他说刚才是呵斥鬼呢。
English: Sometimes he would be sitting talking with a patient, and suddenly he would start shouting loudly. The guests would ask him what was going on, and he would say that he had just been shouting at a ghost.

古文：时汝南有鬼怪，岁辄数来郡中，来时从骑如太守，入府打鼓，周行内外，尔乃还去，甚以为患。
现代文：当时汝南有个妖怪，一年里要到郡里来几回，来时带着骑马的随从，变成太守的样子，进到太守府内敲动堂鼓，然后在府内外转悠，随后就走了，太守十分讨厌也没办法。
English: At that time, there was a yokai in Runan. It would come to the county several times a year. When it came, it came with a horse-riding retinue, changed into the appearance of the daimyō, entered the daimyō's residence, beat a drum, then wandered around inside and outside the residence, and then left. There was nothing the daimyō could do to stop it.

古文：房因诣府厅事，正值此鬼来到府门前。
现代文：恰好费长房进太守府，那鬼怪也来到府门前。
English: Just as Fei Changfang entered the governor's residence, the ghost also came to the front of the residence.

古文：府君驰入，独留房。
现代文：太守跑进府内，只把费长房留在大厅里。
English: The Empress Dowager ran into the palace, leaving only Fei Changfu in the hall.

古文：鬼知之，不敢前。房大叫呼曰，便捉前鬼来。
现代文：鬼怪知道后不敢进府，费长房就大喊一声： 把那个鬼给我抓起来。 
English: Knowing that ghosts dare not enter the house, Fei Changfang shouted: "Catch that ghost for me."

古文：乃下车伏庭前，叩头乞曰改过。
现代文：鬼吓得赶快下车趴在大厅前，不停地磕头乞求，保证改过。
English: Terrified, the ghost quickly got out of the car and lay down in front of the hall, begging ceaselessly and promising to mend his ways.

古文：房呵之曰： 汝死老鬼，不念温良，无故导从，唐突官府，自知合死否？
现代文：费长房喝斥道： 你这个该死的老鬼，不老老实实呆在阴曹，竟敢带着随从冒犯官府，该不该死？
English: Fei Changfang shouted back, "You damn old ghost, you have been dishonestly staying in the underworld, how dare you bring your entourage to offend the government, do you deserve to die?

古文：急复真形。 
现代文：还不快现出原形来？ 
English: Are you still not happy to show your true colours?

古文：鬼须臾成大鳖，如车轮，头长丈余。
现代文：鬼立现了原形变成一只大乌龟，身子有车轮大，头有一丈多长。
English: The ghost appeared in its original form as a large turtle, with a body the size of a car wheel and a long head.

古文：房又令复人形。房以一札符付之，令送与葛陂君，鬼叩头流涕，持札去。
现代文：费长房又让它变成人形，交给鬼一道竹符，命他把符送交葛陂君，鬼流泪磕头而去。
English: Fei Changfang also made it into a doll, gave the ghost a bamboo charm, ordered him to send the charm to Ge Yingjun, and the ghost ran away in tears.

古文：使人追视之，乃见符札立陂边，鬼以头绕树而死。
现代文：费长房派人在后面看，只是竹符在草滩下，鬼把颈子缠在树上死了。
English: Fei Changfang sent someone to look at the back, but the bamboo shoots were under the grass bank, and the ghost wrapped its neck around a tree and died.

古文：房后到东海，东海大旱三年。
现代文：费长房后来到东海郡，东海郡已经三年大旱。
English: After Fei Changfang came to Donghai County, Donghai County has been in drought for three years.

古文：谓请两者曰： 东海神君前来淫葛陂夫人，吾系之，辞状不测，脱然忘之，遂致之旱，吾今当赦之，令其行雨。 
现代文：费长房对求雨的人们说： 东海神君前来奸淫葛陂君的夫人，被我扣压了，因为没有核查他的口供，我也忙得忘记了处理，结果造成这里久旱，现在我立刻放掉他让他马上行雨。 
English: Fei Changfang said to the people begging for rain: The East Sea God came to fornicate with Ge Yao's wife, I held him down, because I did not check his confession, I was so busy that I forgot to deal with it, resulting in a long drought here, now I immediately release him and let it rain immediately.

古文：即便有大雨。
现代文：接着果然下起了大雨。
English: Then, sure enough, it rained heavily.

古文：房有神术，能缩地脉，千里存在，目前宛然，放之复舒如旧也。
现代文：费长房有神术能把大地缩成一小块，千里之远的情景就在眼前，放开就又恢复原状了。
English: Fei Changfang's magic can shrink the earth into a small piece, and the scene thousands of miles away is right in front of you. When you release it, it will return to its original state.

古文：蓟子训
现代文：蓟子训
English: Chun Zi Xun

古文：蓟子训者，齐人也。少尝仕州郡，举孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：蓟子训是齐人，青年时代曾在州、郡做过官，被举荐为孝廉，任命为郎中。
English: Xun Zixun is a Qi person. In his youth, he worked as an official in the state and county, was recommended as a filial son, and was appointed as a disciple.

古文：又从军，除驸马都尉。
现代文：后来他又从军，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: Later he joined the army and was appointed lieutenant of the horse.

古文：人莫知其有道。
现代文：蓟子训有道术，但人们并不知道。
English: There is a Daoism in the teachings of Xunzi, but people don't know about it.

古文：在乡里时，唯行信让，与人从事。
现代文：他在家乡时，待人接物十分讲信义和礼让。
English: When he was in his hometown, he was very loyal and courteous to everyone.

古文：如此三百余年，颜色不老，人怪之。好事者追随之，不见其所常服药物也。
现代文：蓟子训活到三百多岁仍不显老，人们十分奇怪，就有些好事的人追随在他周围，想探到一些长寿的奥秘，但是并没发现他服用什么长寿药物。
English: Zou Zixun lived to be more than three hundred years old and still did not look old. People were very strange. Some good people followed him around, trying to find out some secrets of longevity, but they did not find out what longevity drugs he was taking.

古文：性好清淡，常闲居读《易》，小小作文，皆有意义。
现代文：他的性情爱好清淡，经常闲着没事研读《易经》，或写些短小的文章，文章虽短但涵义很深。
English: His disposition is light, and he often idly studies the I Ching, or writes short articles, which are short but have deep meaning.

古文：见比屋抱婴儿，训求抱之，失手堕地，儿即死。
现代文：有一次，他见邻居抱着一个小孩，他很喜爱，就要来抱着，没想到一失手把孩子掉在地上摔死了。
English: Once, he saw a neighbor holding a child in his arms. He was very fond of the child and was about to come and hold him. However, he accidentally dropped the child to the ground and it died.

古文：邻家素尊敬子训，不敢有悲哀之色，乃埋瘗之。
现代文：邻居平常十分尊重蓟子训，没有太多地表露出悲痛，就把孩子埋了。
English: Neighbours usually respect the children's wishes and bury them without too much public display of grief.

古文：后二十余日，子训往问之曰： 复思儿否？ 邻曰： 小儿相命，应不合成人，死已积日，不能复思也。 
现代文：过了二十多天，子训问邻居还想不想孩子，邻居说： 这孩子大概命中注定不该长大成人，死了这么多天，不再想他了。 
English: After more than twenty days, the son asked the neighbor if he still wanted to have a child. The neighbor said, "This child is probably fated not to grow up to be an adult. He has been dead for so many days that I no longer think about him."

古文：子训因外出，抱儿还其家。
现代文：子训就到外面去，把那孩子抱了回来。
English: The apprentice went outside and brought the child back.

古文：其家谓是死，不敢受。
现代文：邻居以为是死孩儿，不敢要。
English: The neighbours thought it was a dead child and did not dare to ask for it.

古文：子训曰： 但取之无苦，故是汝本儿也。 
现代文：子训说： 别担心。 
English: The tutor said, "Don't worry.

古文：子训既去，夫妇共视所埋儿，棺中唯有一泥儿，长六七寸。
现代文：邻居还不敢相信。子训走后，邻居夫妇到坟地打开孩子的棺材看，只见棺中是一个泥娃娃，六七寸长。
English: The neighbors still can't believe it. After Zixun left, the neighbor couple went to the cemetery to open the child's coffin. Inside the coffin was a mud doll, six or seven inches long.

古文：此儿遂得长成。
现代文：后来这孩子很好地长大成人。
English: The child grew up well into adulthood.

古文：诸老人须发毕白者，子训但与之对坐共语，宿昔之间，明旦皆黑矣。
现代文：子训常常和一些白发老人同坐闲谈，过了一宿这里人的须发都变黑了。
English: Zixun often sat and chatted with some white-haired old people. After a night's stay, people's hair turned black.

古文：京师责人闻之，莫不虚心谒见，无缘致之。
现代文：京城的一些达官贵人听说子训有道术，都虚心地来拜见，但很少能见到他本人。
English: Some high-ranking officials and dignitaries in Beijing heard that Zixun had a Daoist practice, and they came to visit him humbly, but they rarely saw him in person.

古文：有年少与子训邻居，为太学生。
现代文：有个子训少年时的邻居现在是太学里的学生。
English: A neighbor who had a son as a trainee is now a student at Taigakuryo.

古文：诸贵人作计，共呼太学生谓之曰： 子勤苦读书，欲规富贵，但召得子训来，使汝可不劳而得矣。 
现代文：一些贵人们就把他找来说： 你发奋读书，不就为了能求得富贵功名吗？只要你能把蓟子训为我们请来，我们可以让你毫不费力地得到富贵功名。 
English: Some dignitaries came to him and said, "If you study hard, aren't you just trying to get rich and famous? As long as you can bring us the Xunzi teachings, we can get you rich and famous without any effort."

古文：生许诺。
现代文：书生答应了。
English: The student agreed.

古文：便归事子训，洒扫供侍左右数百日。
现代文：就从太学回到家乡，专门侍奉蓟子训，为他扫庭院跑腿效劳，这样干了好几百天。
English: He came back to his hometown from Taigaku, and dedicated himself to serving Zongzi Xun, sweeping the courtyard and running errands for him. He did this for several hundred days.

古文：子训知意，谓生曰： 卿非学道，焉能如此？ 
现代文：子训知道书生的用意，就对书生说： 你并不打算学道，却这样卖力气地侍奉我图个什么呢？ 
English: Knowing the intention of the scholar, the tutor said to the scholar, "You don't intend to study the Tao, but you serve me so diligently. What is your intention?

古文：生尚讳之，子训曰： 汝何不以实对，妄为虚饰，吾已具知卿意。诸贵人欲见我，我岂以一行之劳，而使卿不获荣位乎。
现代文：书生吞吞吐吐地不说实话。子训就直截了当地说： 你别掩饰了，就是不说我也知道你的意思，是那些贵人想见我一面才让你到我这儿来的。我怎么能硬不去见他们而误了你的功名前程呢？
English: The scholar hesitantly did not tell the truth. Zixun then said bluntly, "Don't cover it up, even if I don't say it, I know what you mean. It was those nobles who wanted to see me that made you come here. How could I miss your mission by not going to see them?"

古文：汝可还京，吾某日当往。 
现代文：你回京城去吧。我某天一定也去京城。 
English: You should go back to Kyoto. I will definitely go to Kyoto one day.

古文：生甚喜，辞至京，与贵人具说。
现代文：书生很高兴，告别了子训回到京城，告诉贵人们蓟子训某天会来京城见他们。
English: The student was very happy. He said goodbye to Zixun and returned to Beijing. He told the dignitaries that Zixun would come to Beijing one day to meet them.

古文：某日子训当到，至期未发，生父母来诣子训。子训曰： 汝恐吾忘，使汝儿失信不仕邪？
现代文：到了约定的那天，子训并没动身去京城，书生的父母很着急，跑来问子训，子训说： 你们是怕我忘了去京城的事，使你儿子在贵人面前由于失信而得不到官位吧？
English: On the appointed day, Zi Xun did not set off for Beijing. The scholar's parents were very anxious and came to ask Zi Xun. Zi Xun said: "Are you afraid that I will forget about going to Beijing, and your son will not get an official position due to dishonesty in front of the nobles?"

古文：吾今食后即发。 
现代文：我吃了饭就出发。 
English: I ate my meal and set off.

古文：半日乃行二千里。
现代文：子训吃了饭就上路，半天工夫就走了二千里进了京城。
English: After eating the meal, Zixuan went on the road and walked two thousand miles in half a day to enter Beijing.

古文：既至，生急往拜迎，子训问曰： 谁欲见我？ 
现代文：书生听说后急忙迎接，子训问书生： 都是什么人要见我？ 
English: After hearing the news, the students hurried to meet him. Zixun asked the students: Who are all these people who want to see me?

古文：生曰： 欲见先生者甚多，不敢枉屈，但知先生所至，当自来也。 
现代文：书生说： 想和先生见面的人太多了，他们怕白跑你家一趟，见不到你。
English: The student said, "There are too many people who want to meet my husband. They are afraid of running to your house in vain and not seeing you.

古文：子训曰： 吾千里不倦，岂惜寸步乎？
现代文：他们知道你来到京城，定会不请自来的，你就坐等他们拜见吧。 子训说： 几千里地我都不嫌劳累，现在走几步路怕什么？
English: They know that you have come to the capital, and that you will come uninvited, so just wait for them to see you. Zixun said: I don't mind being tired even after traveling thousands of miles, so why am I afraid to walk a few steps?

古文：欲见者，语之令各绝宾客，吾明日当各诣宅。 
现代文：你可以告诉那些想见我的人，让他们谢绝自己家中的宾客，我明天会到他们各家登门拜访的。 
English: You can tell those who want to see me to say no to guests in their homes, and I will visit their homes tomorrow.

古文：生如言告诸贵人，各自绝客洒扫，至时子训果来。
现代文：书生把子训的话告诉了所有的贵人们，他们都把家打扫干净，谢绝了宾客，专候蓟子训来访。
English: The scholar told all the dignitaries about the words of Zixun. They all cleaned up their homes, declined the guests, and waited for Zixun to visit.

古文：凡二十三家，各有一子训。
现代文：第二天，蓟子训果然登门，二十三家每家都来了一位蓟子训。
English: The next day, Shanzi Xun really came to the door, and one Shanzi Xun came to each of the 23 families.

古文：诸朝士各谓子训先到其家，明日至朝，各问子训何时到宅，二十三人所见皆同时，所服饰颜貌无异，唯所言语，随主人意答，乃不同也。
现代文：每位贵人都说蓟子训先到自己家，第二天上朝后，他们互相问蓟子训什么时候登的门，这才知道二十三家同时来了个蓟子训，服饰相貌一点也不差，只是说的话随着主人的问答而不相同。
English: Each of the nobles said that the eunuch first came to his own house. The next day, after the morning, they asked each other when the eunuch came to the door. Only then did they know that the eunuch came to twenty-three houses at the same time. The appearance of the clothing was not bad at all, but the words were different according to the owner's question and answer.

古文：京师大惊异，其神变如此。
现代文：这一下京城里开了锅，都惊叹蓟子训的分身实在了不起。
English: This caused a stir in the capital, with everyone marveling at the fact that the reincarnation of Shun Zi Xun was truly remarkable.

古文：诸贵人并欲诣子训，子训谓生曰： 诸贵人谓我重瞳八采，故欲见我。
现代文：后来贵人们又想一同来拜访蓟子训，子训对那书生说： 那些贵人们都说我眼里有四个黑眼珠八种颜色，所以想见见我。
English: Later, the dignitaries wanted to visit Zou Zixun again. Zixun said to the scholar: Those dignitaries all said that I have four black eyes and eight colors in my eyes, so they wanted to see me.

古文：今见我矣，我亦无所能论道，吾去矣。 
现代文：他们不是见到我了吗？我既不是四个黑眼珠，也不会和他们谈论道术，他们还见我做什么呢？我该走了。 
English: Didn't they see me? I'm not four black eyes, and I'm not going to talk to them about martial arts. What else could they see me doing? I should go.

古文：适出门，诸贵人冠盖塞路而来。
现代文：子训刚走，贵人们就乘车骑马来见子训，把大道都堵塞了。
English: As soon as Zixun left, the nobles came to see Zixun by car and on horseback, blocking the avenue.

古文：生具言适去矣，东陌上乘骡者是也。
现代文：书生告诉贵人们蓟子训刚走，东边小路上骑骡子的那人就是。
English: The scholar told the dignitaries that the person riding the mule on the east side path was the one who had just left the mule training.

古文：各走马逐之不及，如此半日，相去常一里许，终不能及，遂各罢还。
现代文：于是贵人们立刻骑马追赶子训，怎么追也追不上，追了半天也总是距子训的骡子一里来地，只好各自回来了。
English: As a result, the nobles immediately rode on horseback to catch up with Zixun, but they couldn't catch up. After half a day of chasing, they were always a mile away from Zixun's mule, so they had to return separately.

古文：子训至陈公家，言曰： 吾明日中时当去。 
现代文：蓟子训有一次到陈公家说： 我明天中午就走了。 
English: Xun Zixun once went to Chen Gongye and said: I will leave tomorrow at noon.

古文：陈公问远近行乎，曰： 不复更还也。 
现代文：陈公问他走多远，他说不再回来了。
English: Chen Gong asked him how far he had gone, and he said that he would not come back.

古文：陈公以葛布单衣一送之。至时，子训乃死，尸僵，手足交胸上，不可得伸，状如屈铁，尸作五香之芳气，达于巷陌，其气甚异。
现代文：陈公送了一套葛布单衣给子训，到了第二天中午，蓟子训就死了，尸体僵硬，手脚都叠放在胸上不能伸直，好像一块弯曲的铁器，尸体散发出很浓的香气，香味很怪，弥漫到街巷中。
English: Chen Gong sent a set of Ge cloth singlet to Zixun. By noon of the next day, Zixun was dead. The corpse was stiff, the hands and feet were stacked on the chest and could not be straightened. It was like a piece of bent iron. The corpse emitted a very strong aroma. The aroma was very strange and pervaded the streets.

古文：乃殡之棺中。
现代文：于是把他装殓入棺。
English: So they put him in a coffin.

古文：未得出，棺中吸然作雷霆之音，光照宅宇。
现代文：还没等出殡，棺木中突然发出雷霆般的轰鸣，闪光把屋子庭院都照得通亮。
English: Before the funeral was over, a thunderous roar erupted from the coffin, and a flash of light lit up the courtyard.

古文：坐人顿伏良久，视其棺盖，乃分裂飞于空中，棺中无人，但遗一只履而已。
现代文：守灵的人吓得趴在地上好半天，再看棺材，盖子已经裂开飞到空中，棺木中没有尸体，只剩下子训的一只鞋子。
English: The mourners were so scared that they lay on the ground for half a day. When they looked at the coffin again, the lid had been ripped open and flown into the air. There was no body in the coffin, only one of Son Heung's shoes was left.

古文：须臾，闻陌上有人马萧鼓之声，径东而去，乃不复见。子训去后，陌上数十里，芳香百余日不歇也。董奉
现代文：过了不久就听见大道上有人喊马嘶和箫鼓管弦的奏乐声，一直往东而去，不知去了哪里，蓟子训走后，几十里大道上仍然飘着香气，一百多天仍然不散。董奉
English: After a short while, I heard someone shouting horse neighing and the sound of a gong and drum orchestra playing on the avenue. I kept going east, I don't know where I went. After the mule parade, the aroma still wafted on the avenue for dozens of miles, and it still hasn't dissipated for more than a hundred days.

古文：董奉者，字君异，候官人也。
现代文：董奉字君异，候官县人。
English: Dong Fengzhi Junyi, candidate for county magistrate.

古文：吴先主时，有少年为奉本县长，见奉年四十余，不知其道。
现代文：吴先主时，有一个年轻人任候官县的长吏，见董奉当时有四十来岁，他不知道董奉有道术。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, there was a young man who served as a county magistrate. When he saw Dong Bong, who was around forty years old at the time, he did not know that Dong Bong had Taoism.

古文：罢官去，后五十余年，复为他职，得经候官，诸故吏人皆老，而奉颜貌一如往日。
现代文：后来这位长吏罢官走了，五十多年后又担任了另外的职务，经过候官县，见当年的同事都老了，而董奉的容貌似和五十年前一样。
English: Later, this official was dismissed from his post, and after more than 50 years, he took up another post. Passing through the prefecture, he saw that his colleagues of that year were all old, while Dongfeng's appearance was the same as it was 50 years ago.

古文：问言 君得道邪？
现代文：他就问董奉： 你是不是得了道呢？
English: He then asked Dong Bong: Have you attained the Way?

古文：吾昔见君如此，吾今已皓首，而君转少，何也？ 
现代文：我当年看见你是这样，现在我已白发苍苍，可你却比当年还年轻，这是怎么回事？ 
English: I used to see you like this, now I'm grey-haired, but you're younger than you were then, what's going on?

古文：奉曰： 偶然耳。 
现代文：董奉含糊地应了一句： 这是偶然的事罢了。 
English: Dong Fang replied vaguely: This is just a coincidence.

古文：又杜燮为交州刺史，得毒病死，死已三日，奉时在彼，乃往，与药三丸，内在口中，以水灌之，使人捧举其头，摇而消之，须臾，手足似动，颜色渐还，半日乃能坐起，后四日乃能语。
现代文：交州刺史杜燮得了暴病死去，已经停尸三天，正好董奉在交州，听说后就前去看望，把三个药丸放在死者嘴里，又给灌了些水，让人把死者的头捧起来摇动着让药丸溶化，不一会儿，杜燮的手脚就像能动，脸上有了活人的颜色，半日就能坐起来，四天后就能说话了。
English: Jiaozhou Jinshi cuckoo died of a violent disease and had been in the morgue for three days. It just so happened that Dong Bong was in Jiaozhou. When he heard about it, he went to visit, put three pills in the mouth of the deceased, and poured some water, and had the deceased's head held up and shaken to dissolve the pills. Soon, Cuckoo's hands and feet seemed to be able to move, his face had the color of a living person, he could sit up in half a day, and he could speak in four days.

古文：云： 死时奄忽如梦，见有十数乌衣人来，收燮上车去，入大赤门，径以付狱中。
现代文：杜燮说： 我刚死的时候就像在梦中，看见来了十几个穿黑衣的人把我抓上车去，进了一个大红门把我塞进了监狱。
English: Du Juan said, "When I had just died, as if in a dream, I saw a dozen men dressed in black grab me into a car, take me to a big red door and shove me into prison.

古文：狱各一户，户才容一人，以燮内一户中，乃以土从外封塞之，不复见外光。
现代文：监狱里都是小单间，一间里只能住一个人。他们把我塞进一个小单间里，用土把门封上，就看不见一点光亮了。
English: They put me in a small cell, sealed the door with soil, and I couldn't see any light.

古文：忽闻户外人言云： 太乙遣使来召杜燮 ，又闻除其户土，良久引出。
现代文：我忽然听见门外有人说太乙真人派人来召我，又听见有人挖开门上封的泥土，半天才把我弄出来。
English: I suddenly heard someone outside the door say that the Emperor had sent someone to summon me. I also heard someone dig up the dirt that had sealed the door, and it took them half a day to get me out.

古文：见有车马赤盖，三人共坐车上，一个持节，呼燮上车。
现代文：这时我看见有一辆支着红伞盖的马车，车上坐着三个人，有一个人拿着符节，招呼我上车。
English: At this time, I saw a carriage with a red umbrella cover. There were three people sitting on the carriage, and one person was holding a rune, beckoning me to get on.

古文：将还至门而觉，燮遂活。 
现代文：车把我送到家门口我醒了，就复活了。 
English: The car brought me to the door of my house. I woke up and came back to life.

古文：因起谢曰： 甚蒙大恩，何以报效？ 
现代文：杜燮向董奉跪拜说： 承蒙您救死复生的大恩，我该怎样报效呢？ 
English: Du Juan kneeled down to Dong Feng and said, "Thanks to your great kindness in saving my life, how should I repay you?

古文：乃为奉起楼于庭中。
现代文：于是他就给董奉在院里盖了一座楼侍奉他。
English: So he built a building for Dong Bong in the courtyard to serve him.

古文：奉不食他物，唯啖脯枣，饮少酒，燮一日三度设之。
现代文：董奉不吃别的东西，只吃干肉和枣，还能喝一点酒，杜燮就一天三次供奉肉、枣和酒。
English: Dong Bong does not eat anything else, only eats dried meat and dates, and can also drink a little wine. Du Qiu offers meat, dates and wine three times a day.

古文：奉每来饮食，或如飞鸟，腾空来坐，食了飞去，人每不觉。
现代文：董奉每次进食都像鸟一样腾空来到座位，吃完了就飞走，别人常常无所察觉。
English: Every time Dong Bong eats, he comes to the seat like a bird, and flies away after eating. Others often don't notice.

古文：如是一年余，辞燮去。
现代文：这样过了一年多，董奉辞别离去。
English: After more than a year of this, Dong resigned.

古文：燮涕泣留之不住，燮问欲何所之，莫要大船否。
现代文：杜燮哭着挽留也留不住，就问董奉要去什么地方，要不要租买一条大船。
English: Du Wei cried and couldn't keep him, so he asked Dong Feng where he was going and whether he wanted to rent or buy a big boat.

古文：奉曰： 不用船，唯要一棺器耳。 
现代文：董奉说： 我不要船，只要一具棺木就行了。 
English: "I don't need a boat, just a coffin will do," said Dong Feng.

古文：燮即为具之，至明日日中时，奉死，燮以其棺殡埋之。
现代文：杜燮就准备了一具棺木。第二天中午董奉就死了，杜燮把他装殓后埋葬了。
English: Du Juan prepared a coffin. At noon the next day, Dong Bong died, and Du Juan buried him after decorating him.

古文：七日后，有人从容昌来，奉见嘱云： 为谢燮，好自爱理。 
现代文：七天后，有个从容昌来的人捎话给杜燮，说董奉感谢他，望他多多珍重。
English: Seven days later, a person from Yongchang sent a message to Du Juan, saying that Dongfeng thanked him and hoped that he would treasure it.

古文：燮闻之，乃启殡发棺视之，唯存一帛。
现代文：杜燮知道董奉未死，就到墓地打开棺材，见里面只有一块绸子。
English: Du Juan knew that Dong Bong was not dead, so he went to the cemetery and opened the coffin, only to find a piece of silk inside.

古文：一面画作人形，一面丹书作符。
现代文：绸子的一面画着个人形，另一面用朱砂画了道符。
English: One side of the silk is painted with a human figure, while the other side has Taoist symbols drawn in cinnabar.

古文：后还豫章庐山下居，有一人中有疠疾，垂死，载以诣奉，叩头求哀之。
现代文：后来董奉回到豫章庐山下住，有一个人得了热病，快死了，用车拉着来见董奉，叩头哀求董奉救命。
English: Later, Dong Bong returned to live at the foot of Yu Zhangye Mountain. There was a man who had a fever and was about to die. He pulled his car to see Dong Bong and begged him to save his life.

古文：奉使病人坐一房中，以五重布巾盖之，使勿动。
现代文：董奉让病人坐在一间屋子里，用五层布单子蒙上他，让他别动。
English: Dong Feng made the patient sit in a room and covered him with five layers of cloth to prevent him from moving.

古文：病者云： 初闻一物来舐身，痛不可忍，无处不匝。
现代文：病人说起初觉得一个什么动物舔他身子的每一个地方，使他疼痛难忍。
English: The patient said he initially felt an animal licking every part of his body, causing him excruciating pain.

古文：量此舌广一尺许，气息如牛，不知何物也。
现代文：这个东西的舌头好像有一尺多长，喘气像牛一样粗，不知是个什么玩艺儿。
English: This thing's tongue seems to be more than a foot long, and its breath is as thick as a cow's. I don't know what kind of trick it is.

古文：良久物去。 
现代文：过了很久那东西走了。
English: After a long time, the thing left.

古文：奉乃往池中，以水浴之，遣去，告云： 不久当愈，勿当风。 
现代文：董奉就把病人身上的布单揭下来给他洗澡，然后就让他回家。董奉告诉病人不久就会好，注意不要受风。
English: Dong Bong took off the cloth sheet from the patient's body and gave him a bath, and then let him go home. Dong Bong told the patient that he would be fine soon, be careful not to be affected by the wind.

古文：十数日，病者身赤无皮，甚痛，得水浴，痛即止。
现代文：十几天后，病人身上的皮全脱掉了，全身通红十分疼痛，只有洗澡才能止痛。
English: A dozen days later, the skin on the patient's body was completely peeled off, the whole body was red and very painful, and only a bath could relieve the pain.

古文：二十日，皮生即愈，身如凝脂。
现代文：二十天后，病人身上长出新皮，病也好了，皮肤十分光滑，像凝结后的油脂。
English: Twenty days later, a new skin grows on the patient's body, the disease is cured, and the skin is very smooth, like condensed grease.

古文：后忽大旱，县令丁士彦议曰： 闻董君有道，当能致雨。 
现代文：后来当地忽然大旱，县令丁士彦和官员们议论说： 听说董奉有道术，也许能降雨。 
English: Later, there was a sudden drought in the area, and the county magistrate, Ding Shihang, argued with the officials, saying, "I heard that Dong Bong has a Taoism, so maybe it can rain.

古文：乃自赍酒脯见奉，陈大旱之意。奉曰： 雨易得耳。 
现代文：就亲自带了礼物拜见董奉，说了旱情。董奉说： 下雨还不容易吗？ 
English: He personally brought a gift to meet Dong Bong and talked about the drought situation. Dong Bong said: Isn't it hard to have rain?

古文：因视屋曰： 贫道屋皆见天，恐雨至何堪。 
现代文：说着抬头看看自己的屋子后说： 贫道的屋子都露天了，我担心真来了雨我可怎么办。 
English: After looking up at his house, he said, "All the poor people's houses are open to the public. I'm worried about what to do if it really rains.

古文：令解其意，曰： 先生但致雨，当为立架好屋。 
现代文：县令立刻明白了，就说： 先生只要能行雨，我保证马上给你盖新房子。 
English: The county magistrate immediately understood and said: Sir, as long as it can rain, I promise to build you a new house right away.

古文：明日，士彦自将人吏百余辈，运竹木，起屋立成。
现代文：第二天，县令自己带着官员民工一百多人，运来了竹子木材，屋架很快立起来了。
English: The next day, the county magistrate himself, accompanied by more than 100 officials and migrant workers, brought bamboo wood, and the roof frame was quickly erected.

古文：方聚土作泥，拟数里取水。奉曰： 不须尔，暮当大雨。 
现代文：但和泥没有水，打算到几里外去运水。董奉说： 不必了，今晚将有大雨。 
English: But there was no water in the mud, so he planned to carry water a few miles away. Dong Feng said, "No need, it will rain heavily tonight."

古文：乃止。
现代文：他们就没去运水。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：至暮即大雨，高下皆平，方民大悦。
现代文：到了晚上果然下起了大雨，水把高处低处的田地都灌平了，老百姓都高兴坏了。
English: In the evening, it rained heavily. The water leveled the fields at high and low points, and the people were overjoyed.

古文：奉居山不种田，日为人治病，亦不取钱。
现代文：董奉住在山里不种田，天天给人治病也不取分文。
English: Dong Bong lives in the mountains and does not farm. He treats people every day and does not charge a penny.

古文：重病愈者，使栽杏五株，轻者一株。如此数年，计得十万余株，郁然成林。
现代文：得重病经他治好的，就让患者栽五棵杏树，病轻的治好后栽一棵，这样过了几年就栽了十万多株杏树，成了一大片杏林。
English: When a patient was cured of a serious illness, he asked the patient to plant five almond trees, and when the patient was cured of a minor illness, he planted one tree. In this way, after a few years, more than 100,000 almond trees were planted, forming a large apricot forest.

古文：乃使山中百禽群兽，游戏其下。卒不生草，常如芸治也。
现代文：他就让山中的鸟兽都在杏林中嬉戏，树下不生杂草，像是专门把草锄尽了一样。
English: He let all the birds and beasts in the mountains play in the almond grove, and no weeds grew under the trees, as if he had specially cut the grass.

古文：后杏子大熟，于林中作一草仓，示时人曰： 欲买杏者，不须报奉，但将谷一器置仓中，即自往取一器杏去。 
现代文：杏子熟后，他就在杏林里用草盖了一间仓房，并告诉人们，想要买杏的不用告诉他，只要拿一罐粮食倒进仓房，就可以装一罐杏子走。
English: After the apricots were ripe, he built a warehouse in the apricot grove with grass, and told people that if they wanted to buy apricots, they didn't have to tell him, as long as they poured a can of grain into the warehouse, they could pack a can of apricots and go.

古文：常有人置谷来少，而取杏去多者，林中群虎出吼逐之，大怖，急挈杏走，路傍倾覆，至家量杏，一如谷多少。
现代文：曾经有个人拿了很少的粮食，却装了很多的杏，这时杏林里的一群老虎突然吼叫着追了出来，那人听得捧着装杏的罐子急忙往回跑，由于惊惶逃命，一路上罐里的杏子掉出去不少。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man who took very little grain, but packed a lot of apricots. At this time, a group of tigers in the apricot forest suddenly roared and chased him out. The man was heard to run back hurriedly, holding a jar of apricots. Due to the panic of fleeing for their lives, a lot of apricots in the jar fell out along the way.

古文：或有人偷杏者，虎逐之到家，啮至死。
现代文：到家一看，剩下的杏正好和送去的粮食一样多。
English: When I got home, I saw that there were just as many apricots left as there was grain.

古文：家人知其偷杏，乃送还奉，叩头谢过，乃却使活。
现代文：有时有人来偷杏，老虎就一直追到偷杏人的家中把他咬死，死者家的人知道是因为偷了杏，就赶快把杏拿来还给董奉，并磕头认罪，董奉就让死者复活。
English: Sometimes someone comes to steal an apricot, the tiger chases him all the way to the apricot thief's home and bites him to death. The dead man's family knows that it is because of the stolen apricot, so they quickly bring the apricot back to Dong Bong and confess their sins. Dong Bong then resurrects the dead.

古文：奉每年货杏得谷，旋以赈救贫乏，供给行旅不逮者，岁二万余斛。
现代文：董奉每年把卖杏得来的粮食全部救济了贫困的人和在外赶路缺少路费的人，一年能散发出去两万斛粮食。
English: Every year, Dongfeng distributes all the grain from the sale of apricots to the poor and those who lack travel expenses, and can distribute 20,000 baht of grain a year.

古文：县令有女，为精邪所魅，医疗不效，乃投奉治之，若得女愈，当以侍巾栉。
现代文：县令有个女儿被鬼缠住，医治无效，就投奔董奉求治，并说如果治好了就把女儿许给董奉为妻。
English: The county magistrate had a daughter who was haunted by a ghost, and the treatment was ineffective, so he went to Dong Bong to seek treatment, and said that if she was cured, he would give his daughter to Dong Bong as his wife.

古文：奉然之，即召得一白鼍，长数丈，陆行诣病者门，奉使侍者斩之，女病即愈。
现代文：董奉答应了，就施起法术，召来了一条几丈长的白鳄鱼，鳄鱼自己在地上一直爬到县令家门口，董奉就让随从的人把鳄鱼杀死，县令女儿的病就好了。
English: Dong Bong agreed, so he cast a spell and summoned a white crocodile several feet long. The crocodile itself crawled on the ground all the way to the gate of the county magistrate's house. Dong Bong then asked his entourage to kill the crocodile, and the county magistrate's daughter's illness was cured.

古文：奉遂纳女为妻，久无儿息。
现代文：董奉就娶了县令的女儿，但很久没有儿女。
English: Dong Feng married the daughter of the county magistrate, but had no children for a long time.

古文：奉每出行，妻不能独住，乃乞一女养之。
现代文：董奉经常外出，妻子一人在家很孤单，就收养了一个女孩。
English: Dong Bong often goes out, and his wife was lonely at home, so she adopted a girl.

古文：年十余岁，奉一日竦身入云中去。
现代文：女孩长到十几岁后，有一天董奉腾空升入云中成仙而去了。
English: After the girl grew into her teens, one day, Dongfeng Tengku ascended into the clouds and became an immortal.

古文：妻与女犹存其宅，卖杏取给，有欺之者，虎还逐之。
现代文：他的妻子和养女仍然住在家里，靠卖杏维持生活，有敢欺骗她们母女的，老虎仍然追咬。
English: His wife and adopted daughter still live at home and make a living by selling apricots. If anyone dares to deceive their mother and daughter, the tiger will still bite them.

古文：奉在人间三百余年乃去，颜状如三十时人也。
现代文：董奉在人间三百多年才仙去，容貌仍像三十岁的人。
English: Dong Bong has been on earth for more than three hundred years and still looks like a thirty-year-old.

古文：李常在
现代文：李常在
English: Li Changzhu

古文：李常在者，蜀郡人也。
现代文：李常在是蜀郡人氏。
English: Li Changzai is a native of Shu County.

古文：少治道术，百姓累世奉事。
现代文：年轻时就研究道术，好几代人都侍奉着他。
English: He studied Daoism when he was young, and several generations have served him.

古文：计其年，已四五百岁而不老，常如五十许人。
现代文：计算他的年龄，已有四五百岁了。但从不见老，总像四五十岁的人。
English: He is four or five hundred years old, but he never looks old, he always looks like a man of forty or fifty.

古文：治病，困者三日，微者一日愈。
现代文：他经常给人治病，重病三天治好，病轻的一天就痊愈了。
English: He often cures people. He cures a serious illness in three days and a minor illness in one day.

古文：在家有二男一女，皆已嫁娶，乃去。
现代文：他有两儿一女，都已经娶妻嫁人，他就离家出走了。
English: He had two sons and a daughter, all married, and he ran away from home.

古文：去时从其弟子曾家孔家，各请一小儿，年皆十七八。
现代文：他走时带着他弟子曾某和孔某的两个儿子，都十七八岁。
English: When he left, he took his disciples Zeng Mou and Kong Mou's two sons, both seventeen and eight years old.

古文：家亦不知常在欲何去，即遣送之。
现代文：曾、孔两家并不知道李常在要去什么地方，就把两个孩子给李常在送去了。
English: Once, the two Kong families did not know where Li Chang was going, so they sent their two children to Li Chang.

古文：常在以青竹杖度二儿，遣归置其家所卧之处。
现代文：李常在交给两个孩子两支青竹杖、用竹杖超度他们，让他们先各回自己的家。
English: Li Chang handed the two children two green bamboo canes. He used the bamboo canes to overcome them and let them go back to their own homes first.

古文：径还，勿与家人语。
现代文：把青竹杖放在自己的床上，然后就悄悄回来，不要对家里人说。
English: Put the bamboo cane on your own bed, and then quietly come back, do not tell the family.

古文：二子承教，以杖归家，家人了不见儿去。
现代文：两个孩子按照指示拿着竹杖回了家。家里人看见孩子一直没走，后来就发现死在自己床上。
English: The two children followed the instructions and returned home with a bamboo cane. When the family saw that the child had not left, they later found him dead in his bed.

古文：后乃各见死在床上，二家哀泣，殡埋之。
现代文：两家人十分悲痛的把孩子埋葬了。
English: Distraught, the two families buried their children.

古文：百余日，弟子从郫县逢常在，将此二儿俱行，二儿与弟子泣语良久，各附书到。
现代文：一百多天后，李常在的弟子在郫县遇见了李常在带着那两个死去的孩子一同走，两个孩子和常在的弟子哭着谈了很久，并各自给家里捎了信。
English: More than a hundred days later, a disciple of Li Changzai met Li Changzai in Lu County. Li Changzai was walking with the two dead children. The two children cried and talked with the disciple for a long time, and each wrote a letter to his family.

古文：二家发棺视之，唯青竹杖耳，乃知非死。
现代文：孔、曾两家打开棺材，见里面只有一支青竹杖，这才知道儿子没有死。
English: Kong and Zeng both opened the coffin and saw that there was only a blue bamboo cane inside. Only then did they know that their son was not dead.

古文：后三十余年，居地肺山。更娶妇。
现代文：李常在三十年后住进地肺山中，又娶了一房妻室。
English: Thirty years later, Li Chang lived in the mountains and married a second wife.

古文：常在先妇儿乃往寻求之。
现代文：他前妻的儿就出门去找李常在。
English: His ex-wife's son went out to look for Li Changzhao.

古文：未至十日，常在谓后妻曰： 吾儿欲来见寻，吾当去，可将金饼与之。 
现代文：常在当儿子来到前十天就对后妻说： 我儿子要来找我，我得出去躲一躲。他来以后，你把这金饼给他吧。 
English: Ten days before his son's arrival, he would often say to his second wife: "My son is coming to look for me, I have to go out and hide. When he comes, give him this golden cake."

古文：及至，求父所在，妇以金与之。
现代文：儿子到了以后，问后娘父亲去了哪里，后娘就把金饼给了他。
English: When the son arrived, he asked the daughter-in-law where her father was, and the daughter-in-law gave him the golden cake.

古文：儿曰： 父舍我去数十年，日夜思恋，闻父在此，故自远来觐省，不求财也。 
现代文：儿子说： 我父亲扔下我出走好几十年了。我日夜想念他，听说他在这里，我才千里迢迢看望他，并不是来找他要钱的。 
English: The son said, "My father left me and ran away for decades. I miss him day and night. When I heard he was here, I traveled thousands of miles to see him. I didn't come to ask him for money.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就住下了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：三十日父不还，儿乃欺其母曰： 父不还，我去矣。 
现代文：过了一个月，李常在还没回来，儿子就骗他后娘说： 我父亲不回来，我就回去了。 
English: After a month, when Li Changzhi still hadn't returned, his son lied to him and his daughter said, "If my father doesn't come back, I'll go back."

古文：至外，藏于草间。常在还语妇曰： 此儿诈言如是，当还。
现代文：儿子出去后藏在草丛里，李常在回来对后妻说： 我儿子骗你，他并没有走，还会回来。
English: After his son went out and hid in the bushes, Li Chang came back and said to his wife: My son lied to you, he didn't leave and will come back.

古文：汝语之，汝长不复须我，我在法不复与汝相见。 
现代文：他回来后你就对他说你已长大成人，不需要我抚养照料了，我一心修炼道术，不会再见他。 
English: When he comes back, you should tell him that you are an adult and no longer need my care. I will devote myself to cultivating Taoism and will not see him again.

古文：乃去。
现代文：李常在向后妻交待完就去了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：少顷儿果来，母语之如此。
现代文：不大一会儿，儿子果然又回来了，后妻就把李常在的话转告给他。
English: A short while later, the son did indeed return, and his second wife relayed Li Chang's words to him.

古文：儿自知不复见其父，乃泣涕而去。
现代文：儿子知道再也见不到父亲，就哭着走了。
English: Knowing he would never see his father again, the son left in tears.

古文：后七十余年，常在忽去。
现代文：七十多年后，李常在又离家出走。
English: More than seventy years later, Li Changzhe ran away from home again.

古文：弟子见在虎寿山下居，复娶妻。
现代文：他的弟子见他在虎寿山下住，又娶了妻。
English: His disciples saw him living at the foot of Tiger Shou Mountain and marrying a wife.

古文：有父子，世世见之如故，故号之曰 常在 。
现代文：当地人父子几代都看见他，总是不变老。所以称他为李常在。
English: Local people, father and son, have seen him for several generations, always the same age, so they call him Li Changzai.

