古文：秦围赵之邯郸。
现代文：秦国围困赵国都城邯郸。
English: Qin besieged the capital city of Zhao.

古文：魏安釐王使将军晋鄙救赵。
现代文：魏安釐王派大将晋鄙前去援救赵国。
English: Wei Anqian sent General Jin to rescue Zhao.

古文：畏秦，止于荡阴，不进。
现代文：但魏王与晋鄙都害怕秦军，所以魏军驻扎在魏赵接壤的汤阴，不再前进。
English: However, both the Wei and Jin dynasties were afraid of the Qin army, so the Wei army was stationed in Tangyin, bordering Wei and Zhao, and no longer advanced.

古文：魏王使客将军新垣衍间入邯郸，因平原君谓赵王曰： 秦所以急围赵者，前与齐湣王争强为帝，已而复归帝，以齐故。
现代文：魏王又派客将军辛垣衍秘密潜入邯郸城，通过平原君对赵王说： 秦国之所以加紧围攻邯郸的原因，是因为先前它与齐王互相争强逞威称帝，后来齐王取消了帝号。
English: The Wei king also sent a guest general, Xinqi Yan, to secretly sneak into Handan, and said to King Zhao through the Plain King: The reason why the Qin state intensified the siege of Handan was because it had previously competed with King Qi for strength and arrogance to become emperor. Later, King Qi cancelled the imperial title.

古文：今齐湣王已益弱。
现代文：因为齐国不称帝，所以秦国也取消了帝号。
English: Because Qi did not call him emperor, Qin also abolished the imperial title.

古文：方今唯秦雄天下，此非必贪邯郸，其意欲求为帝。
现代文：如今，齐国日渐衰弱，只有秦国能在诸侯之中称雄了。可见，秦国不是为了贪图邯郸之地，它真正的目的是想要称帝。
English: Nowadays, Qi is weakening day by day, and only Qin can dominate among the princes. It can be seen that Qin is not for the sake of coveting the land, but its real purpose is to become an emperor.

古文：赵诚发使尊秦昭王为帝，秦必喜，罢兵去。 
现代文：如果赵国真能派谴使者尊崇秦昭王为帝，秦国一定会很高兴，这样秦兵就会自解邯郸之围。 
English: If Zhao could send an envoy to serve Qin Zhao as emperor, Qin Zhao would be so happy that he would withdraw his troops.

古文：平原君犹豫未有所决。
现代文：平原君一直很犹豫，没有作出决定。
English: Mr. Hirahara has been very hesitant and has not made a decision.

古文：此时鲁仲连适游赵，会秦围赵。
现代文：这个时候，鲁仲连恰好在赵国游玩，正赶上秦军围攻邯郸。
English: At this time, Lu Zhonglian happened to be playing in Zhao Province and was just catching up with the Qin Army's siege of Yunnan.

古文：闻魏将欲令赵尊秦为帝，乃见平原君曰： 事将奈何矣？ 
现代文：他听说魏国打算让赵国尊称秦王为帝，就去拜见平原君，说： 事情打算怎么办啊？ 
English: When he heard that Wei planned to have Zhao Guotong proclaim Qin as emperor, he went to see Pingyuan and said, "What are you going to do about it?

古文：平原君曰： 胜也何敢言事？
现代文：平原君回答说： 我哪里还敢谈论战事？
English: Mr. Hirahara replied, "How dare I talk about the war?

古文：百万之众折于外，今又内围邯郸而不能去。
现代文：赵国的百万大军在长平战败，如今秦军又进攻到赵国，围困了邯郸，而且没有什么办法能够让他们撤兵。
English: Zhao's million-strong army was defeated in Changping, and now the Qin army has attacked Zhao again, besieged Handan, and there is no way for them to withdraw.

古文：魏王使将军辛垣衍令赵帝秦，今其人在是，胜也何敢言事？ 
现代文：魏王派将军辛垣衍来，让赵国尊秦为帝，现在辛将军就在邯郸城里，我哪里还敢谈论战事呢？ 
English: The Wei king sent General Xin Qian to make Zhao worship Qin as emperor, and now General Xin is in Handan. How dare I talk about the war?

古文：鲁仲连曰： 始吾以君为天下之贤公子也，吾乃今然后知君非天下之贤公子也。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 刚开始我认为您是天下贤明的公子，直到今天我才知道您其实并不贤明。
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "In the beginning, I thought you were a wise man, but today I realized that you are not wise at all.

古文：梁客辛垣衍安在？
现代文：魏国的客将军辛垣衍在哪里？
English: Where is the guest general of Wei, Xinqi Yan?

古文：吾请为君责而归之。 
现代文：请让我为您当面去斥责他，让他回到魏国去。 
English: I'll scold him for you and send him back.

古文：平原君曰： 胜请召而见之与先生。 
现代文：平原君说： 我叫他来和先生见一面吧！ 
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "I'll ask him to come and meet my husband!"

古文：平原君遂见辛垣衍曰： 东国有鲁仲连先生，其人在此，胜请为绍介而见之于将军。 
现代文：平原君于是就去见辛垣衍，说： 齐国有个叫鲁仲连的先生，他现在正在这里，我把他介绍给你，让他来跟你见个面。 
English: He went to see Xin Qian and said, "There is a teacher in Qi Province named Lu Zhonglian. He is here right now. I will introduce him to you and ask him to meet with you."

古文：辛垣衍曰： 吾闻鲁连先生，齐国之高士也。
现代文：辛垣衍说： 我听说过鲁仲连先生，他是齐国的高士。
English: Xinqi Yan said: I have heard of Mr. Lu Zhonglian, he is a high-ranking official of Qi.

古文：衍，人臣也，使事有职。
现代文：而我，是魏王的臣子，这次来担负着重要的职责。
English: And I, a vassal of the Wei king, have come this time to shoulder important responsibilities.

古文：吾不愿见鲁连先生也。 
现代文：我不想见鲁仲连先生。 
English: I don't want to see Mr. Lu Zhonglian.

古文：平原君曰： 胜已泄之矣。 
现代文：平原君说： 我已经跟他说你在这里了。 
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "I already told him you were here."

古文：辛垣衍许诺。
现代文：辛垣衍于是就答应去见鲁仲连。
English: Xinqi Yan then agreed to meet Lu Zhonglian.

古文：鲁仲连见辛垣衍而无言。
现代文：鲁仲连见到辛垣衍后，没有什么话说。
English: Lu Zhonglian did not have much to say after seeing Xingaki Yan.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 吾视居北围城之中者，皆有求于平原君也。
现代文：辛垣衍说： 在我看来，在这个被围困的城中居住的人，都是有求于平原君的。
English: "It seems to me that everyone who lives in this besieged city has something to ask of Hirahara no Kimi," said Sinagaki.

古文：今吾视先生之玉貌，非有求于平原君者，曷为久居此围城之中而不去也？ 
现代文：今天我看先生的仪容相貌，并不是有求于平原君的人，为什么长时间地居住在这个围城中而不走呢？ 
English: Today, I see that the gentleman's appearance is not that of someone who is looking for a plain prince. Why did he live in this besieged city for a long time and not leave?

古文：鲁连曰： 世以鲍焦无从容而死者，皆非也。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 世上那些认为鲍焦是不能自我宽容而死去的人，其实都看错了。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Those people in the world who think that Baojiao is unable to self-tolerate and died are actually wrong.

古文：今众人不知，则为一身。
现代文：现在一般的人理解鲍焦的死，认为他是为了自身的利益而死的。
English: Now the common people understand the death of Bogyoke and think that he died for his own benefit.

古文：彼秦者，弃礼义而上首功之国也。
现代文：那个秦国，是一个抛弃了仁义礼制，并且以杀敌斩首为功的国家。
English: That Qin state was a country that abandoned the system of benevolence, righteousness and courtesy, and took credit for killing and beheading its enemies.

古文：权使其士，虏使其民。
现代文：国君用权术来驾驭臣子，像对待奴隶一样来役使它的百姓。
English: The sovereign uses power tricks to control his vassals, and treats his people like slaves.

古文：彼则肆然而为帝，过而遂正于天下，则连有赴东海而死矣。
现代文：如果秦国肆无忌惮地称帝为王的话，然后用他的法令来规范天下，那么我鲁仲连也只好跳东海死了。
English: If the state of Qin had the audacity to proclaim the emperor as king, and then used his decrees to regulate the world, then I, Lu Zhonglian, had no choice but to jump into the East Sea and die.

古文：吾不忍为之民也！
现代文：我无法容忍做它的顺民啊！
English: I can't bear to be a bystander!

古文：所为见将军者，欲以助赵也。 
现代文：我之所以要见将军，只是想对赵国有所帮助。 
English: The reason I came to see the general today is to help Zhao Guo.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 先生助之奈何？ 
现代文：辛垣衍问： 先生您打算如何来帮助赵国呢？ 
English: Xinqi Yan asked: Sir, how do you plan to help Zhao Guo?

古文：鲁连曰： 吾将使梁及燕助之。齐、楚则固助之矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 我要让魏国和燕国发动军队来援救赵国，齐国、楚国本来就会帮助赵国的。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: I want Wei and Yan to send troops to rescue Zhao. Qi and Chu would have helped Zhao.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 燕则吾请以从矣。
现代文：辛垣衍说： 燕国我是认为它会听从您的。
English: Xingaki Yan said: I think that Yan Guo will listen to you.

古文：若乃梁，则吾乃梁人也，先生恶能使梁助之耶？ 
现代文：如果说魏国，那么我就是魏国人，先生怎么能让魏国来帮助赵国呢？ 
English: If we talk about Wei, then I am a Wei person. How can you ask Wei to help Zhao?

古文：鲁连曰： 梁未睹秦称帝之害故也，使梁睹秦称帝之害，则必助赵矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连回答： 魏国还没有看到秦国称帝的危害才不愿出兵帮助，如果魏国看到了秦国称帝的危害，那么它一定会援救赵国。 
English: Lu Zhonglian replied: Wei has not yet seen the harm of Qin's claim to be emperor, so it is unwilling to send troops to help. If Wei sees the harm of Qin's claim to be emperor, then it will definitely rescue Zhao.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 秦称帝之害将奈何？ 
现代文：辛垣衍说： 秦国称帝会有哪些危害呢？ 
English: Xinqi Yan said: What harm will there be if Qin claims to be the emperor?

古文：鲁仲连曰： 昔齐威王尝为仁义矣，率天下诸侯而朝周。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 过去齐威王曾经施行仁义之政，率领天下的诸侯去朝见周天子。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: In the past, King Qi Wei once implemented the policy of benevolence and righteousness, and led the princes of the world to the court to see Zhou Tianzi.

古文：周贫且微，诸侯莫朝，而齐独朝之。
现代文：当时的周王室既贫穷又衰弱，诸侯没有去朝见他，而只有齐国一个国家去朝见他。
English: At that time, Zhou Tianzi was poor and weak, and none of the princes were willing to go to worship, only Qi Guo went to worship.

古文：居岁余，周烈王崩，诸侯皆吊，齐后往。
现代文：过了一年多，周烈王死了，各国的诸侯都来吊丧，齐国去得晚了。
English: After more than a year, King Zhou Liang died. Princes from all over the world came to pay their respects, but Qi was too late.

古文：周怒，赴于齐曰： 天崩地坼，天子下席。
现代文：周的大臣大为恼怒，到齐国对齐王说： 天子驾崩，就如同天地塌陷，新的天子都亲自在这里守丧。
English: Zhou's minister was very angry. He went to Qi Province and said to the king of Qi: "When a heavenly son dies, it is as if heaven and earth have collapsed. The new heavenly son himself will hold a funeral here."

古文：东藩之臣田婴齐后至，则斮之！ 
现代文：而东藩诸侯一一齐国的田婴竟然敢迟到，按照法律杀掉他。 齐威王勃然大怒，说： 呸！
English: However, the princes of the Eastern Domain and the whole country dared to be late and killed him in accordance with the law. King Qi Wei flew into a rage and said, "Bang!

古文：威王勃然怒曰： 叱嗟，而母婢也。 卒为天下笑。
现代文：你母亲也不过是个奴婢罢了。 结果成了天下的笑柄。
English: Your mother was nothing but a slave, and she became the laughing stock of the world as a result.

古文：故生则朝周，死则叱之，诚不忍其求也。
现代文：齐威王之所以在周天子活着的时候去朝见他，死后却辱骂他，这其实是忍受不了周王室对他的苛求。
English: That's why King Qiwei went to see the emperor when Zhou Tianzi was still alive, and when he died, he cursed loudly, because he really couldn't bear Zhou Tianzi's demands.

古文：彼天子固然，其无足怪。 
现代文：然而做天子的本来就如此，这并没有什么可以感到奇怪的。 
English: Those who are the sons of heaven are like this in the first place, and there is nothing strange about it.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 先生独未见夫仆乎？
现代文：辛垣衍说： 先生您难道没有见过做奴仆的吗？
English: Xinqi Yan said: Sir, haven't you ever seen a servant?

古文：十人而从一人者，宁力不胜、智不若耶？
现代文：十个仆人跟随一个主子，难道是仆人的力量和智慧都不如主人吗？
English: If ten servants follow one master, are not the servants greater in strength and wisdom than the master?

古文：畏之也。 
现代文：不是，只是因为仆人害怕主人罢了！ 
English: No, it's just because the servant is afraid of his master!

古文：鲁仲连曰： 然梁之比于秦若仆耶？ 辛垣衍曰： 然。 
现代文：鲁仲连问： 照你这样说，魏国和秦国的关系就是仆人与主人的关系了？ 辛垣衍说： 是的。 
English: Lu Zhonglian asked: According to you, the relationship between Wei and Qin is the relationship between servant and master? Xin Qian said: Yes.

古文：鲁仲连曰： 然吾将使秦王烹醢梁王。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 这样的话，我就能够让秦王把魏王煮熟了剁成肉酱！ 
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "In this way, I will be able to make Qin Wang boil Wei Wang into meat sauce!"

古文：辛垣衍怏然不悦曰： 嘻！
现代文：辛垣衍一副很不服气的样子，不高兴地说： 嘻！
English: Sinagaki Yan looked very unconvinced and said unhappily, "Hee!

古文：亦太甚矣，先生之言也。
现代文：先生所说的话太过分了。
English: What the teacher said went too far.

古文：先生又恶能使秦王烹醢梁王？ 
现代文：您又怎么能让秦王把魏王煮熟了剁成肉酱呢？ 
English: How could the teacher let the Qin King cook the Wei King and turn him into meat sauce?

古文：鲁仲连曰： 固也，待吾言之。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 当然可以，等我慢慢跟你说。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Of course you can, wait for me to tell you slowly.

古文：昔者，鬼侯、鄂侯、文王，纣之三公也。
现代文：过去，鬼侯、鄂侯、文王三个人都是商纣王所封的诸侯。
English: In the past, Gihou, Ehou, and Wenwang were all vassals of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：鬼侯有子而好，故入之于纣，纣以为恶，醢鬼侯。
现代文：鬼侯有个女儿很漂亮，所以就把她送到纣王的后宫里，纣王却认为她长得丑陋，就把鬼侯剁成了肉酱。
English: The ghost lord had a daughter who was very beautiful, so he sent her to the dragon king's harem, but the dragon king thought she was ugly, so he turned the ghost lord into meat sauce.

古文：鄂侯争之急，辨之疾，故脯鄂侯。
现代文：鄂侯为了这件事，强烈地为鬼侯辩护，所以也被纣王杀死，做成了肉干。
English: For this matter, E Hou vehemently defended Ghost Hou, so he was also killed by King Yao and turned into jerky.

古文：文王闻之，喟然而叹，故拘之于牖里之库，百日而欲舍之死。
现代文：文王听说后，只是长叹一声，纣王就把他囚禁在牖里的库房里，关了一百天，还打算要把他杀死。
English: When King Wen heard of this, he only sighed. King Yao imprisoned him in the storeroom of his palace, locked him up for a hundred days, and planned to kill him.

古文：曷为与人俱称帝王，卒就脯醢之地也？ 
现代文：是什么原因使这些和别人同样是号称帝王的人，最后却沦落到被人制成肉酱、肉干的下场呢？ 
English: Isn't this exactly what happened in the past, when people supported others as emperors, but ended up inviting the disaster of suicide, being turned into mincemeat and dried meat?

古文： 齐闵王将之鲁，夷维子执策而从，谓鲁人曰： 子将何以待吾君？ 
现代文：齐王准备去鲁国，夷维子驾车随行。问鲁国人： 您打算用什么样的礼节接待我的国君呢? 
English: King Qi was preparing to go to the State of Lu, and Yivizi was driving with him. He asked the people of the State of Lu: What kind of etiquette do you plan to use to receive my sovereign?

古文：鲁人曰： 吾将以十太牢待子之君。 
现代文：鲁国人回答： 我们准备用十太牢的规格来款待贵国国君。 
English: Lu officials said: "We plan to receive your king with the most solemn of ceremonies.

古文：维子曰： 子安取礼而来待吾君？
现代文：夷维子说： 您怎么能用这样的礼节来接待我们的国君呢?
English: Ivica said: How can you use such etiquette to receive our sovereign?

古文：彼吾君者，天子也。
现代文：我们的国君是天子。
English: Our sovereign is the Son of God.

古文：天子巡狩，诸侯辟舍，纳于筦键，摄衽抱几，视膳于堂下，天子已食，退而听朝也。 
现代文：天子巡视四方，各诸侯国君都要离开自己的宫室到别处避居，还要交出钥匙，自己提起衣襟，捧着几案，在堂下侍候天子吃饭。天子吃完饭，诸侯才能告退去处理政务。 
English: The heavenly son patrols the four directions, and all the princes have to leave their palace rooms to take refuge elsewhere. They also have to hand over their keys, lift their collars, hold several cases, and wait for the heavenly son to eat in the hall. After the heavenly son has finished eating, the princes can leave to deal with government affairs.

古文：鲁人投其籥，不果纳，不得入于鲁。将之薛，假涂于邹。
现代文：鲁国人一听这番话，立刻锁门下匙，没有让他们进城。
English: Upon hearing this, the Lu people immediately locked the doors and did not let them enter the city.

古文：当是时，邹君死，闵王欲入吊。
现代文：齐王不能进入鲁国，又准备到薛地去，向邹国借路通行。恰巧在这个时候，邹国国君死了。
English: King Qi was unable to enter the State of Lu, so he prepared to go to the State of Xue, taking a route from the State of Yao. Coincidentally, it was at this time that the Emperor of Yao died.

古文：夷维子谓邹之孤曰： 天子吊，主人必将倍殡柩，设北面于南方，然后天子南面吊也。 
现代文：滑王想入城吊丧，夷维子就对邹国的孝子说： 天子来吊丧，主人一定要把灵柩移到相反的方向，在南边设立朝北的灵堂，然后让天子面向南祭吊。 
English: When the king of Sui wanted to enter the city to hold a funeral, Yiwu Zi said to the filial son of Shao Guo: When the son of heaven comes to hold a funeral, the master must move the coffin in the opposite direction, set up a north-facing chapel on the south side, and then let the son of heaven face south to hold a funeral.

古文：邹之群臣曰： 必若此，吾将伏剑而死。 
现代文：邹国的大臣们说： 如果一定要这么办，我们就只有以死抗争了。 
English: The ministers said: "We must do this, we would rather kill ourselves with our swords."

古文：故不敢入于邹。
现代文：所以，齐滑王就没有胆量进入邹城。
English: As a result, Qizhi kings and princes did not dare to enter the country.

古文：邹、鲁之臣，生则不得事养，死则不得饭含。然且欲行天子之礼，于邹鲁之臣，不果纳。
现代文：鲁国和邹国的臣子，都很贫寒，生前领不到俸禄，死后又得不到很好的安葬，然而一旦委让他们对其行天子之礼时，他们也都不能接受。
English: The courtiers of the states of Lu and Yao were very poor. They did not receive a salary during their lifetime, and after their death they did not receive a good burial. However, once they were commissioned to perform the gift of the son of heaven, they could not accept it.

古文：今秦万乘之国，梁亦万乘之国。俱据万乘之国，交有称王之名，睹其一战而胜，欲从而帝之，是使三晋之大臣不如邹、鲁之仆妾也。
现代文：现在秦国是拥有万辆兵车的大国，魏国也是拥有万辆兵车的大国，彼此都是拥有万辆兵车的大国，相互都有称王的名分，仅仅看到秦国打了一次胜仗，就要尊秦为帝，这样看来，赵、韩、魏三国的大臣还不如邹、鲁二国的大臣啊!
English: Now Qin is a big country with tens of thousands of chariots, and Wei is a big country with tens of thousands of chariots. Both are big countries with tens of thousands of chariots, and both have the title of king. Just seeing that Qin has won a victory, it is necessary to respect Qin as the emperor. In this way, the ministers of Zhao, Han, and Wei are not as good as the ministers of Han and Lu!

古文：且秦无已而帝，则且变易诸侯之大臣。
现代文：况且秦国一旦顺利地实现了它称帝的野心，会马上更换各诸侯国的大臣们。
English: If Qin wasn't greedy enough to finally make him emperor, then he would replace the vassals' ministers.

古文：彼将夺其所谓不肖，而予其所谓贤；夺其所憎，而与其所爱。
现代文：他们将撤换他们认为没有才能的臣子，把职务授与他们认为有才能的人；撤换他们所憎恨的人，把职务授与他们亲近的人。
English: They will replace ministers they think are incompetent with those they think are competent; replace those they hate with those who are close to them.

古文：彼又将使其子女谗妾为诸侯妃姬，处梁之宫，梁王安得晏然而已乎？
现代文：他们还会把他们的女儿和那些善于毁贤嫉能的女人配给诸侯充当妃嫔，日夜谗毁。这样的女人进入魏王的王宫里，魏王还能安安然然地过日吗?
English: They would also assign their daughters and those women who were good at destroying jealousy to the lords as concubines, destroying them day and night. If such a woman entered the palace of the Wei King, would the Wei King still be able to live peacefully?

古文：而将军又何以得故宠乎？ 
现代文：而将军您又怎么能继续像原来那样受宠信呢? 
English: And how, General, did you manage to get the original favour?

古文：于是辛垣衍起，再拜谢曰： 始以先生为庸人，吾乃今日而知先生为天下之士也。
现代文：于是，辛垣衍站起身来，向鲁仲连拜了两拜，道歉说： 起初我还以为先生是个平庸之辈，如今我才知道先生是能经纬天下的士人呀!
English: As a result, Xinqi Yan stood up, bowed twice to Lu Zhongfu, and apologized, saying: At first, I thought you were a mediocre person, but now I know that you are a scholar who can study the world!

古文：吾请去，不敢复言帝秦。 
现代文：请让我离开这里，我不敢再说尊秦为帝的事了。 
English: Please let me get out of here. I don't dare to talk about revering Qin as emperor anymore.

古文：秦将闻之，为却军五十里。
现代文：秦国的将军听说这件事后，把围困邯郸的部队撤退了五十里。
English: After the Qin general heard about this, he ordered the Qin army to retreat fifty miles.

古文：适会魏公子无忌夺晋鄙军以救赵击秦，秦军引而去。
现代文：恰巧这时魏国的公子无忌夺取了晋鄙的兵权，率领军队前来援救赵国，进攻秦军。秦军撤退，离开了邯郸。
English: Coincidentally, it was at this time that the princes of Wei seized the military power of Jin and led the army to come to the rescue of Zhao and attack the Qin army. The Qin army retreated and left Shu.

古文：于是平原君欲封鲁仲连。
现代文：这时，平原君想封赏鲁仲连。
English: At this time, Plains wanted to reward Lu Zhonglian.

古文：鲁仲连辞让者三，终不肯受。
现代文：鲁仲连再三辞让，始终不肯接受。
English: Lu Zhonglian repeatedly refused to make concessions and refused to accept.

古文：平原君乃置酒，酒酣，起前以千金为鲁连寿。
现代文：平原君就摆酒宴款待他。当酒喝得正畅快的时候，平原君站起身来，上前用千金向鲁仲连祝福。
English: Mr. Hirahara treated him to a wine banquet. When the wine was well drunk, Mr. Hirahara stood up and came forward to bless Lu Zhonglian with thousands of dollars.

古文：鲁连笑曰： 所贵于天下之士者，为人排患、释难，解纷乱而无所取也。
现代文：鲁仲连笑着说： 天下之士所看重的，是替人排除忧患，解除危难，排解纷乱而不收取任何报酬。
English: Lu Zhonglian said with a smile: What the people of the world value is to eliminate sorrow, relieve danger, and resolve chaos for others without receiving any remuneration.

古文：即有所取者，是商贾之人也，仲连不忍为也。 
现代文：如果说收取报酬，那就和买卖人没有什么区别了。我鲁仲连不忍心做这样的事。 
English: If we are talking about receiving remuneration, then there is no difference between that and a trader. I, Lu Zhonglian, can't bear to do such a thing.

古文：遂辞平原君而去，终身不复见。
现代文：于是辞别平原君而离开赵国，终身不再露面。
English: So Hirahara left, and they never saw each other again.

