古文：赵高董仲君葛玄窦玄德
现代文：赵高董仲君葛玄窦玄德
English: Zhao Gao Dong Zhongjun Ge Xuan Dou Xuan De

古文：赵高
现代文：赵高
English: Zhao Gao

古文：秦王子婴，常寝于望夷宫。
现代文：秦王子婴曾经在望夷宫睡觉。
English: The infant Qin Prince used to sleep in the Palace of Wangyi.

古文：夜梦有人，身长十丈，鬓发绝伟，纳玉舄而乘丹车，驾朱马，至宫门云： 欲见秦王婴。 
现代文：有一天夜里，他梦见有个人，身高十丈，鬓发极长，穿着白色双底鞋，乘着朱红色的车子，驾着大红色的马，到宫门说： 我想要见见秦王子婴。 
English: One night, he dreamed that a man, very tall, with very long hair, wearing white double-soled shoes, riding a scarlet car, driving a big red horse, came to the palace gate and said: I want to see Prince Qin.

古文：阍者许进焉。子婴乃与之言。
现代文：守门人同意他进宫，子婴就与那个人谈话。
English: The gatekeeper agreed to let him in, and the baby talked to the man.

古文：谓婴曰： 予是天使也，从沙丘来。
现代文：那个人对子婴说： 我是天使啊，从沙丘来。
English: The man said to the child, "I am an angel from the sand dunes.

古文：天下将乱，当有欲诛暴者，翌日乃起。 
现代文：天下将乱，当有打算诛杀暴君的人，明日就起事了。 
English: The whole world will be in turmoil. If there are people who plan to fight and kill the tyrant, there will be a riot tomorrow.

古文：子婴既疑赵高，因囚高于咸阳狱。
现代文：子婴已经怀疑赵高，就把赵高囚禁在咸阳监狱。
English: The infant already suspected Zhao Gao, so he imprisoned Zhao Gao in Xianyang Prison.

古文：纳高于井中，七日不死；更以镬煮之，亦七日不沸。
现代文：把赵高放进井里，七天没有死；又用铁锅煮他，又是七天锅里的水不开。
English: They put Zhao Gao into a well, and he did not die for seven days. They also boiled him in an iron pot, and the water in the pot did not boil for seven days.

古文：戮之。
现代文：于是就把他杀了。
English: So they killed him.

古文：子婴问狱吏曰： 高其神乎？ 
现代文：子婴问狱吏说： 赵高难道是神吗？ 
English: The baby asked the prison officer, "Is Zhao Gao really a god?

古文：狱吏曰： 初囚高之时，见高怀有一青丸，大如雀卵。
现代文：狱吏说： 刚囚禁赵高的时候，看见赵高怀里有一个青色的药丸，像雀卵那么大。
English: The warden said, "When I first imprisoned Zhao Gao, I saw a blue pill the size of a sparrow's egg in Zhao Gao's arms.

古文：时方士说云： 赵高先世受韩众丹法。
现代文：当时方士说： 赵高前世学过韩众的丹法。
English: At that time, the Fang people said: Zhao Gao had learned the Korean Dan method in his previous life.

古文：受此丹者，冬日坐于冰，夏日卧于炉上，不觉寒热也。  
现代文：接受这种丹药的人，冬天坐在冰上，夏天躺在炉子上，都不觉得寒冷或炎热。  
English: People who receive this elixir do not feel cold or hot when they sit on the ice in winter or lie on the stove in summer.

古文：及高戮，子婴弃尸于九逵之路，泣哭者千家。
现代文：等到赵高被杀，子婴把赵高的尸体抛到九逵之路，哭着为赵高送终的人有上千家。
English: When Zhao Gao was killed, the baby threw Zhao Gao's corpse onto the Jiuzhaigou Road, and there were thousands of people crying for Zhao Gao to die.

古文：咸见一青雀从高尸中出，直飞入云。
现代文：人们忽然看见一只青雀从赵高的尸体中飞出，一直飞入云彩里。
English: People suddenly saw a young sparrow fly out of Zhao Gao's body and into the clouds.

古文：九转之验，信于是乎！
现代文：九转仙丹的灵验，果真到这种地步吗？
English: Has the efficacy of the Nine Immortals really reached this level?

古文：董仲君
现代文：董仲君
English: Dong Zhongjun

古文：汉武帝嬖李夫人。
现代文：汉武帝宠幸李夫人。
English: Emperor Hanwu favored Lady Li.

古文：及夫人死后，帝欲见之，乃诏董仲君，与之语曰： 朕思李氏，其可得见乎？ 
现代文：及李夫人死后，汉武帝想要见到她，就下诏把董仲君找来，告诉他说： 我想念李氏，还可以见得到她吗？ 
English: And after the death of Mrs. Li, Emperor Hanwu wanted to see her, so he sent an imperial edict to find Dong Zhongjun and told him: I miss Ms. Li, can I still see her?

古文：仲君曰： 可远见而不可同于帷席。 
现代文：仲君说： 可以从远处看而不可在同一帷席上。 
English: Nakakimi said: You can watch from a distance, but not at the same table.

古文：帝曰： 一见足矣，可致之。 
现代文：汉武帝说： 见一面就满足了。请你把她招来。 
English: Han Wudi said, "I'm satisfied with just seeing her. Please bring her to me."

古文：仲君曰： 黑河之北，有对野之都也。
现代文：仲君说： 黑河的北面，有个对野之都，那里出产一种隐含花纹的石头。
English: Zhongjun said: On the north side of the Heihe River, there is a capital of the opposite field, where a stone with an implied pattern is produced.

古文：出潜英之石，其色青，质轻如毛羽，寒盛则石温，夏盛则石冷。
现代文：那种石头颜色是青的，质地轻得像羽毛，严寒时石头就温热，酷暑时石头就寒冷。
English: The color of the stone is blue, the texture is light like feathers, the stone is warm when it is very cold, and the stone is cold when it is very hot.

古文：刻之为人像，神语不异真人。
现代文：用它雕刻成人像，神态和言语跟真的人没有差别。
English: It is used to carve a portrait of an adult, whose appearance and speech are indistinguishable from that of a real person.

古文：使此石像往，则夫人至矣。
现代文：让这石像前去，夫人就来了。
English: Let the statue go, the lady is coming.

古文：此石人能传译人语，有声无气，故知神异也。 
现代文：这种石头能够传递翻译人的语言，有声音没有气息，所以知道它神奇啊。 
English: This kind of stone can transmit the translator's language, there is sound without breath, so it's amazing to know it.

古文：帝曰： 此石可得乎？ 
现代文：汉武帝说： 这种石头能得到吗？ 
English: Han Wudi said: Can this kind of stone be obtained?

古文：仲君曰： 愿得楼船百艘，巨力千人。 
现代文：仲君说： 希望您给我一百艘楼船，一千个大力士。 
English: Naka said, "I hope you will give me a hundred houseboats and a thousand Hercules.

古文：能浮水登木者，皆使明于道术，赍不死之药，乃至海。
现代文：汉武帝满足这些条件，选派能浮水能上树的人，董仲君都让他们掌握道术，带着不死之药，这才到达了昏暗的海上。
English: Emperor Hanwu met these conditions, selected people who could float on water and climb trees, and Dong Zhongjun let them master Taoism, carrying the elixir of life. Only then did he reach the dark sea.

古文：经十年而还，昔之去人，或升云不归，或托形假死，获反者四五人，得此石。
现代文：经过十年后回来时，从前去的那些人，有的升天不归，有的托形假死，能够返还的仅有四五人，才得到这种石头。
English: When they came back ten years later, some of those who had gone before had ascended to heaven and never returned, while others had faked their death. Only four or five of them were able to return, and only then did they receive this stone.

古文：即令工人，依先图刻作李夫人形。
现代文：董仲君就令工匠依照先前画的图样，刻成李夫人的形像。
English: Dong Zhongjun ordered the craftsman to follow the previously drawn pattern and carve the image of Mrs. Li.

古文：俄而成，置于轻纱幕中，婉若生时。
现代文：不久，石像刻成了，放到轻纱帷幕之中，容貌象李夫人活着的时候一样。
English: Soon, the stone statue was carved and placed in the gauze curtain, looking just like Mrs. Li when she was alive.

古文：帝大悦，问仲君曰： 可得近乎？ 
现代文：汉武帝非常高兴，问仲君说： 我能离她近点吗？ 
English: Emperor Hanwu was very happy and asked Zhongjun, "Can I get closer to her?"

古文：仲君曰： 譬如中宵忽梦，而昼可得亲近乎？
现代文：仲君说： 譬如在半夜时忽然做个梦，而在白天能与梦中人亲近吗？
English: Zhongjun said: For example, if you suddenly have a dream in the middle of the night, can you get close to the person in the dream during the day?

古文：此石毒，特宜近望，不可迫也。
现代文：这种石头有毒，只适宜在近处望，不可靠近啊。
English: This kind of stone is poisonous. It is only suitable to look at it from a close distance, and should not be approached.

古文：勿轻万乘之尊，惑此精魅也。 
现代文：您不要轻视自己的万乘之尊，被这个精魅所迷惑。 
English: You should not despise your own Mahayana Buddha and be bewitched by this genie.

古文：帝乃从其谏。
现代文：汉武帝就听从了他的劝谏。
English: Emperor Hanwu heeded his advice.

古文：见夫人毕，仲君使人舂此石人为九段，不复思梦，乃筑梦灵台，时祀之。
现代文：见夫人完毕，董仲君就派人把这个石人捣为九段，使汉武帝不再思念梦境，就修筑了梦灵台，按时祭祀她。
English: After seeing his wife, Dong Zhongjun sent someone to break the stone man into nine pieces, so that Emperor Hanwu would no longer miss the dream, and built a dream shrine to worship her on time.

古文：葛玄
现代文：葛玄
English: Ge Xuan

古文：葛玄，字孝先，从左元放受《九丹金液仙经》，未及合作，常服饵术。
现代文：葛玄字孝先，从左元放那里接受《九丹金液仙经》，没来得及合成制作丹药，经常服食苍术，他更擅长于治邪病。
English: Ge Xuan Zi Xiaoxian, from Zuo Yuan Pang, received the "Jiudan Jin Shu Xian Jing" from Luo, but did not have time to synthesize and produce the medicine, and often took the medicine. He was better at curing evil diseases.

古文：尤长于治病，鬼魅皆见形，或遣或杀。
现代文：鬼魅都现形，有的放走，有的杀掉。能够一粒粮食不吃，而连续几年不饿。
English: Ghosts are real, some are let go, some are killed. You can not eat a grain of grain and not be hungry for several years.

古文：能绝谷，连年不饥；能积薪烈火而坐其上，薪尽而衣冠不灼。
现代文：能把薪柴堆积起来点着火坐在火焰上面，薪柴烧光了而他的衣帽却没烧着。
English: He could heap sticks together, light a fire, sit on the flame, and the sticks would burn out, but his hat would not.

古文：饮酒一斛，便入深泉涧中卧，酒解乃出，身不濡湿。
现代文：有时喝一斛酒，就进入深泉涧中去躺着，酒劲过去才出来，而身上竟没有沾湿。
English: Sometimes, after drinking a cup of wine, he would go into a deep well and lie down. The strength of the wine would pass and he would come out, but his body was not wet.

古文：玄备览《五经》，又好谈论。好事少年数十人，从玄游学。
现代文：葛玄通览《五经》，又喜好谈论，几十个好胜的年轻人跟随他游学。
English: Ge Xuan reads through the "Five Classics" and likes to talk about it. Dozens of eager young people follow him to study.

古文：尝船行，见器中藏书札符数十枚，因问： 此符之验，能为何事？
现代文：曾经有一次乘船，那些年轻人看到他的器具中藏着书写的札符有几十枚，就问他： 这些符灵验吗？能做什么事？
English: Once on a boat, the young men saw that he had dozens of written talismans hidden in his utensils, and asked him: Do these talismans work? What can be done?

古文：可得见否？ 
现代文：可以让我们见识见识吗？ 
English: Can you give us some insight?

古文：玄曰： 符亦何所为乎？ 
现代文：葛玄说： 符又能干什么呢？ 
English: Ge Xuan said: What can a charm do?

古文：即取一符投江中，流而下。
现代文：就取出一道符投到江中，符顺着江水就流下去了。
English: He took out a string and threw it into the river. The string flowed down the river.

古文：玄曰： 何如？ 
现代文：葛玄问： 怎么样？ 
English: Ge Xuan asked: How is it?

古文：客曰： 吾投之亦能尔。 
现代文：从学少年说： 我把它投下去也能这样。 
English: The apprentice said, "I can do the same if I throw it down."

古文：玄又取一符投江中，逆流而上。
现代文：葛玄又取出一道符投进江中，符逆着水流往上走。
English: Ge Xuan also took out a rune and threw it into the river, and the rune went up against the current.

古文：曰： 何如？ 
现代文：葛玄说： 怎么样？ 
English: Ge Xuan said: How about it?

古文：客曰： 异矣！ 
现代文：从学少年说： 奇怪了。 
English: The schoolboy said: "It's weird.

古文：又取一符投江中，停立不动。
现代文：葛玄又取出一道符投进江中，这道符在江中停立不动。
English: Ge Xuan also took out a flag and threw it into the river. This flag stood still in the middle of the river.

古文：须臾下符上、上符下，三符合一处，玄乃取之。
现代文：不一会儿，往下流去的那道符往上游漂来，逆流而上的那道符又往下游漂去，三道符汇合在一处，葛玄就把这些符取回来。
English: In a short while, the stream that had been flowing downstream drifted upstream, and the stream that had been flowing upstream drifted downstream again. The three streams converged in one place, and Ge Xuan retrieved these streamers.

古文：又江边有一洗衣女，玄谓诸少年曰： 吾为卿等走此女，何如？ 
现代文：还有一件事：江边有个洗衣服的女子，葛玄对那些年轻人说： 我让你们这些人看这个女子跑，怎么样？ 从学少年们说： 好！ 
English: There was one more thing: there was a woman washing clothes by the river. Ge Xuan said to the young people: How about I let you people watch this woman run? The boys said: Good!

古文：客曰： 善。 乃投一符于水中，女便惊走，数里许不止。玄曰： 可以使止矣。 
现代文：葛玄就把一道符投进水中，那个女子就惊慌地走了，走了几里左右还没有停下来。葛玄说： 可以让她停止了。 
English: Ge Xuan threw a rune into the water, and the woman panicked and walked for a few miles without stopping. Ge Xuan said, "You can make her stop."

古文：复以一符投水中，女即止还。
现代文：又拿一道符投到水中，那个女子就停下，又回来了。
English: She threw another beacon into the water, and the woman stopped and came back.

古文：人问女： 何怖而走？ 答曰： 吾自不知何故也。 
现代文：人们问那女子为什么吓跑了，她回答： 我自己也不知道是什么缘故。 
English: When asked why she ran away, the woman replied: "I don't know why myself.

古文：玄常过主人，主人病，祭祀道精。
现代文：葛玄曾经以客人的身份去拜访主人，那个主人病了，祭祀道精。
English: Ge Xuan once went to visit his master as a guest, but the master was ill and had to make a sacrifice to a Taoist.

古文：精人使玄饮酒，精人言语不逊。玄大怒曰： 奸鬼敢尔！ 
现代文：巫师让葛玄饮酒时。巫师出言不逊，葛玄大怒说： 奸鬼怎敢这样！ 
English: When the sorcerer asked Ge Xuan to drink, the sorcerer spoke harshly, and Ge Xuan said angrily, "How dare the traitor do this!

古文：敕五伯曳精人，缚柱鞭脊。
现代文：就敕令五伯把巫师拖出去，绑在柱子上鞭打脊背。
English: He ordered five magistrates to drag the sorcerer out, tie him to a post and whip his back.

古文：即见如有人牵精人出者，至庭抱柱，解衣投地，但闻鞭声，血出流漓，精人故作鬼语乞命。玄曰： 赦汝死罪。汝能令生人病愈否？ 精人曰： 能。 
现代文：人们就看到好像有人牵着巫师出去似的，那个巫师到了院子里抱住柱子，把衣服脱下扔到地上，人们只听见鞭子声，看到巫师血流淋漓。巫师故作鬼语乞求饶命，葛玄说： 赦免你的死罪，你能让主人的病好吗？ 巫师说： 能。 
English: People saw as if someone was leading the sorcerer out. The sorcerer went into the courtyard, hugged the pillar, took off his clothes and threw them on the ground. People only heard the whip and saw the sorcerer bleeding. The sorcerer pretended to speak in tongues and begged for his life. Ge Xuan said, "Forgive your mortal sin. Can you make your master sick?" The sorcerer said, "Yes."

古文：玄曰： 与汝三日期，病者不愈，当治汝。 
现代文：葛玄说： 给你三天期限，得病的人没好，定当惩治你。 
English: Ge Xuan said, "I'll give you a three-day deadline. People who get sick are not good, so I'll definitely punish you."

古文：精人乃见放。
现代文：巫师才被释放。
English: The sorcerer was released.

古文：玄尝行过庙，此神常使往来之人，未至百步，乃下骑乘。
现代文：葛玄曾经在一座庙前走过，这个庙里的神常常使过往行人走不到百步，就下马下车。
English: Ge Xuan once walked in front of a temple. The god in this temple often made passers-by get off the horse and get off the car within a hundred paces.

古文：中有大树数十株，上有众鸟，莫敢犯之。
现代文：庙中有几十棵大树，上边有一群鸟，没有人敢触犯它们。
English: There are dozens of large trees in the temple, with a flock of birds above. No one dares to touch them.

古文：玄乘车过，不下，须臾有大风回逐玄车，尘埃漫天，从者皆辟易。
现代文：葛玄坐着车过去，没有下车。不一会儿，有大风刮来，往回驱逐葛玄的车，刮起的尘埃弥漫了天空，跟随葛玄的人都被惊退。
English: Ge Xuan drove past in his car and did not get out. Soon, a strong wind came and drove Ge Xuan's car back and forth. The blowing dust filled the sky, and everyone following Ge Xuan was scared away.

古文：玄乃大怒曰： 小邪敢尔！ 
现代文：葛玄于是大怒，说： 小小妖邪怎敢如此！ 
English: Ge Xuan was furious and said, "How dare the evil little demon do such a thing!

古文：即举手止风，风便止。
现代文：就举起手制止风，风就停息了。
English: And he put forth his hand, and brake the wind: and there was a calm.

古文：玄还，以符投庙中，树上鸟皆堕地而死。
现代文：葛玄回来，把符投进庙中，大树上的那些鸟全都掉到地上死了。
English: Ge Xuan came back and threw the charm into the temple. All the birds on the tree fell to the ground and died.

古文：后数日，庙树盛夏皆枯，寻庙屋火起，焚烧悉尽。
现代文：过后几天，庙里的树在盛夏时却干枯了，不久，庙屋起了火，把庙全都烧光了。
English: A few days later, the trees in the temple dried up at the height of summer, and soon after, a fire broke out in the temple building, burning the temple to the ground.

古文：玄见买鱼者在水边，玄谓鱼主曰： 欲烦此鱼至何伯处，可乎？ 
现代文：葛玄看见一个买鱼的人在水边，葛玄就对鱼的主人说： 我想要麻烦这条鱼到河伯那里去一趟，可以吗？ 
English: Ge Xuan saw a fish buyer on the water's edge. Ge Xuan said to the fish's owner: "I want to trouble this fish to go to Hebe, is that okay?

古文：鱼人曰： 鱼已死矣，何能为？ 
现代文：鱼的主人说： 鱼已经死了，怎么能去得了？ 
English: The fish's owner said, "The fish is dead, how can I go?"

古文：玄曰： 无苦也。 
现代文：葛玄说： 没有关系。 
English: Ge Xuan said: It doesn't matter.

古文：乃以鱼与玄。玄以丹书纸纳鱼腹，掷鱼水中。
现代文：鱼的主人就把鱼给了葛玄，葛玄就把丹书之纸放到鱼肚子里，把鱼扔到水中。
English: The owner of the fish gave the fish to Ge Xuan, and Ge Xuan put the paper in the fish's stomach and threw the fish into the water.

古文：俄顷，鱼还跃上岸，吐墨书青色，如大叶而飞去。
现代文：不一会儿，鱼回来跳上岸，吐出墨书，青色，像大树叶子似地飞走了。
English: After a while, the fish came back, jumped onto the shore, spit out the ink, turned blue, and flew away like a big leaf.

古文：玄常有宾后来者，出迎之，座上又有一玄，与客语，迎送亦然。
现代文：葛玄经常在有宾客后来时，出去迎接他，而座位上又有一个葛玄与客人说话，迎送都这样。
English: Ge Xuan often went out to greet guests when they came back, and there was another Ge Xuan on the seat talking to the guests. This was how they were greeted.

古文：时天寒，玄谓客曰： 贫居，不能人人得炉火，请作火，共使得暖。 
现代文：当时天气寒冷，葛玄对客人说： 我住在这里很穷，不能让你们人人都烤上炉火，请允许我作火，让你们都得到温暖。 
English: At that time, the weather was cold, Ge Xuan said to the guests: I live here very poor, can not let you all have a fire, please allow me to make a fire, so that you all get warm.

古文：玄因张口吐气，赫然火出，须臾满屋，客尽得如在日中，亦不甚热。
现代文：葛玄就张口吐气，火苗就忽忽地从他口中喷出来了，一会儿就充满了屋子，客人全像在阳光之中，也不太热。
English: Ge Xuan opened his mouth to exhale, and flames suddenly shot out of his mouth, filling the room in an instant. The guests all seemed to be in the sun, and it wasn't too hot.

古文：诸书生请玄作可以戏者。玄时患热，方仰卧，使人以粉粉身，未及结衣。答曰： 热甚，不能起作戏。 
现代文：众书生请求葛玄做可以玩耍的法术，葛玄这时嫌热正仰卧着，让人用粉搽身子，没来得及穿上衣服，就回答说： 热得很，不能起来做游戏。 
English: All the students asked Ge Xuan to do a magic trick that they could play with. At that time, Ge Xuan was lying on his back because of the heat, and someone doused his body with powder. Before he had time to put on his clothes, he replied, "It's very hot, I can't get up to play."

古文：玄因徐徐以腹揩屋栋数十过，还复床上，及下，冉冉如云气。腹粉着屋栋，连日犹在。
现代文：葛玄正与客人对面坐着吃饭，吃完了漱口，口中的饭全变成了大蜂子，有几百只，飞行时发出声音来。过了很久，葛玄张开口，群蜂又飞回他的口中，葛玄咀嚼它，仍然是饭。
English: Ge Xuan was sitting across from his guests eating dinner. After he finished eating, he rinsed his mouth. The meal in his mouth had all turned into large bees, several hundred of them, and they were making sounds as they flew. After a long time, Ge Xuan opened his mouth, and the bees flew back into his mouth. Ge Xuan chewed it, and it was still food.

古文：玄方与客对食，食毕漱口，口中饭尽成大蜂数百头，飞行作声。良久张口，群蜂还飞入舞，皆应弦节如人；玄止之即止。
现代文：葛玄用手拍床，虾蟆及各种虫子、飞鸟、燕子、麻雀、鱼、鳖之类就都出现了，葛玄就让它们跳舞，都能像人那样随着节拍跳，葛玄让它们停下来就停下来。
English: Ge Xuan patted the bed with his hand, and shrimp, worms, birds, swallows, sparrows, fish, and dragonflies all appeared. Ge Xuan let them dance, and they could dance to the beat like humans. Ge Xuan let them stop when they stopped.

古文：玄冬中能为客设生瓜，夏致冰雪。
现代文：葛玄在冬天的时候能给客人摆设刚摘下的瓜，夏天能弄来冰雪。
English: In winter, Ge Xuan can decorate freshly picked melons for guests, and in summer he can make ice and snow.

古文：又能取数十钱，使人散投井中，玄徐徐以器于上呼钱出，于是一一飞从井中出，悉入器中。
现代文：又能拿出几十个铜钱，让人散乱地投到井中，葛玄慢慢地把器具放在井上呼唤那些铜钱出来，于是那些铜钱就一个一个地从井中飞出来，全落进器具中。
English: He was also able to pull out dozens of copper coins, which people scattered and threw into the well. Ge Xuan slowly placed the equipment on the well and called for the copper coins to come out, so the copper coins flew out of the well one by one and all fell into the equipment.

古文：玄为客致酒，无人传杯，杯自至人前，或饮不尽，杯亦不去。
现代文：葛玄为客人弄来了酒，没有人传送酒杯，杯子就自己到人面前，有人喝不尽，杯子也不离去。
English: Ge Xuan brought wine for the guests. No one passed the wine cup, the cup came to the people on its own. Some people could not drink it all, and the cup would not leave.

古文：画流水，即为逆流十丈余。
现代文：他在流水上画一下，就成了十丈左右的逆流。
English: He drew a line on the flowing water, and it turned into a countercurrent about ten meters high.

古文：于时有一道士，颇能治病，从中国来，欺人，言我数百岁。
现代文：当时有一个道士很能治病，从中原来，骗人说自己有几百岁了。
English: At that time, there was a Taoist priest who was very good at curing diseases. From this, he lied and said that he was hundreds of years old.

古文：玄知其诳，后会众坐。玄谓所亲曰： 欲知此公年否？ 所亲曰： 善。 
现代文：葛玄知道这个道士说谎，后来赶上一次众人在座，葛玄对他亲近的人说： 你们想知道这位先生的年龄吗？ 亲近的人说： 好。 
English: Ge Xuan knew that this Taoist was lying. Later, when he caught up with the crowd, Ge Xuan said to those close to him, "Do you want to know the age of this gentleman?" Those close to him said, "Good."

古文：忽有人从天上下，举座瞩目。良久集地，着朱衣进贤冠，入至此道士前曰： 天帝诏问公之定年几许，而欺诳百姓！ 
现代文：忽然有人从天上下来，在座的所有的人都注视着，过了好一会儿，那个人落到地上，穿的是大红色衣服，戴的缁布儒冠。进室就到了这个道士的面前，说： 天帝下诏问你的准确年龄是多少，而你竟然欺骗百姓。 
English: Suddenly, someone came down from the sky, and everyone present watched. After a while, the man fell to the ground, wearing a bright red robe and a skullcap. When he entered the room, he came to the Taoist and said, "The Heavenly Emperor has asked you what your exact age is, and you have actually deceived the people."

古文：道士大怖，下床长跪，答曰： 无状，实年七十三。 
现代文：道士非常慌恐，下床跪得直挺挺地，回答说： 我太不象话了，实际年龄七十三岁。 
English: The moralist was very panicked, got out of bed, knelt down and replied, "I'm too old for words. I'm actually 73 years old."

古文：玄因抚手大笑。
现代文：葛玄于是拍手大笑，穿红衣服的人也忽然不见了。
English: Ge Xuan then clapped his hands and laughed, and the man in red suddenly disappeared.

古文：忽然失朱衣所在，道士大惭，遂不知所之。吴大帝请玄相见，欲加荣位，玄不听，求去不得，以客待之。
现代文：那个道士非常羞愧，就不知跑哪去了。吴大帝请葛玄相见，打算加封他荣耀的官位，葛玄没有听从，请求离去又不成，吴大帝就用客礼招待他，经常共同游乐。
English: The Taoist was so ashamed that he did not know where he had gone. Emperor Wu invited Ge Xuan to meet him, intending to give him a glorious official title. Ge Xuan did not listen, and his request to leave did not come to fruition. Emperor Wu invited him as a guest, and they often had fun together.

古文：常共游宴，坐上见道间人民请雨，帝曰： 百姓请雨，安可得乎？ 
现代文：有一次，吴大帝因见道间人民求雨，便对葛玄说： 百姓求雨，怎么能得到呢？ 
English: Once, Emperor Wu said to Ge Xuan when he saw people begging for rain in the streets: "How can the people ask for rain?

古文：玄曰： 易得耳。 
现代文：葛玄说： 容易办到。 
English: Ge Xuan said: It's easy to do.

古文：即便书符著社中，一时之间，天地晦冥，大雨流注，中庭可平地水尺余。
现代文：就立即画了一张符放到社庙中，一时之间，天昏地暗，大雨倾注，院子中平地水深一尺多。
English: He immediately drew a sign and placed it in the temple. In an instant, the sky darkened, heavy rain poured down, and the flat ground in the courtyard was more than a foot deep in water.

古文：帝曰： 水宁可使有鱼乎？ 
现代文：吴大帝问他说： 这些水里能够使它有鱼吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu asked him, "Can there be fish in these waters?"

古文：玄曰： 可。 
现代文：葛玄说： 可以。 
English: Ge Xuan said: Yes.

古文：复书符水中。
现代文：又画一张符投进水中。
English: Draw another sign and throw it into the water.

古文：须臾，有大鱼百许头，亦各长一二尺，走水中。
现代文：不一会儿，有大鱼一百多条，又各长一二尺，游入水中。
English: Soon, more than a hundred large fish, each measuring a couple of feet in length, swam into the water.

古文：帝曰： 可食乎？ 玄曰： 可。 
现代文：吴大帝又问： 这些鱼可以吃吗？ 葛玄说： 可以。 
English: Emperor Wu asked again, "Can these fish be eaten?" Ge Xuan said, "Yes."

古文：遂使取治之，乃真鱼也。
现代文：就派人把鱼抓去烹炙宰杀，原来是真鱼。
English: They sent someone to catch the fish, cook and slaughter it, and it turned out to be real fish.

古文：常从帝行舟，遇大风，百官船无大小多濡没，玄船亦沦失所在。
现代文：有一次，葛玄曾随吴大帝乘船走，遇到了大风，百官的船无论大小都沉没了，葛玄的船也淹没不知哪里去了。
English: On one occasion, Ge Xuan was sailing with Emperor Wu and encountered a strong wind. All the officials' boats, big and small, sank, and Ge Xuan's boat was also swamped and sank.

古文：帝叹曰： 葛公有道，亦不能免此乎！ 
现代文：吴大帝叹息说： 葛公是有法术的人，也不能避免这场灾难啊？ 
English: Emperor Wu sighed and said: Ge Gongru is a person with magic, can't he avoid this disaster?

古文：乃登四望山，使人船钩，船没已经宿，忽见玄从水上来。既至，尚有酒色。谢帝曰： 昨因侍从，而伍子胥见强牵过，卒不得舍去。烦劳至尊，暴露水次。 
现代文：就登上四望山，派人驾船去捞，船沉没已经过了一夜，忽然看到葛玄从水上而来，到吴大帝面前以后，脸上还带着酒气，向吴大帝道歉说： 昨天因为陪同跟随您，而被伍子胥看见，强行把我拉过去，仓卒间没能挣脱，使您烦劳，在水边耽搁一夜。
English: He went up to Mount Siwang and sent someone to drive the boat to go fishing. It had been a night since the boat sank. Suddenly, he saw Ge Xuan coming from the water. When he arrived in front of Emperor Wu, he still had alcohol on his face. He apologized to Emperor Wu and said, "Yesterday, because I was accompanying you, I was seen by Wu Zixuan. He forcibly pulled me over. I couldn't break free in my haste, which made you tired and delayed you at the water's edge for a night.

古文：玄每行，卒逢所亲，要于道间树下，折草刺树，以杯器盛之，汁流如泉，杯满即止。
现代文：葛玄每次出门，突然遇到亲近的人，就邀请到道边树下，用折断的草去刺树，用杯子接着，汁水就像泉水一样流下来，到杯满为止。
English: Every time Ge Xuan went out and suddenly met someone close to him, he invited them to go to the roadside tree, use the broken grass to prick the tree, then use a cup, and the juice would flow down like spring water until the cup was full.

古文：饮之，皆如好酒。
现代文：把它喝下去，都像好酒一样。
English: Drink it down, it's like fine wine.

古文：又取土石草木以下酒，入口皆是鹿脯。
现代文：又取来土石草木用来下酒，吃到口中都是鹿脯。
English: In addition, earth, stone, plants and trees were used to brew the wine, and the deerskin was eaten until it reached the mouth.

古文：其所刺树，以杯承之，杯至即汁出，杯满即止。他人取之，终不为出也。
现代文：他所刺过的树，用杯子又去接汁水，杯子一到汁水就流出来，杯子满了就停止，如果别人去接它，却始终不流汁水。
English: He pricked the tree, and used a cup to collect the sap. When the sap reached the cup, it flowed out. When the cup was full, it stopped. If someone else picked it up, the sap would not flow.

古文：或有请玄，玄意不欲往，主人强之，不得已随去。
现代文：有一次，有人请葛玄，葛玄心里不想去，主人勉强他，不得已跟着去了。
English: Once, someone invited Ge Xuan. Ge Xuan didn't want to go, but his master forced him and he had to go.

古文：行数百步，玄腹痛，止而卧地，须臾死，举头头断，举四肢四肢断；更臭烂虫生，不可复近。
现代文：走了几百步时，葛玄肚子痛，停下来就倒在地上，不一会儿就死了。抬一抬他的头，头就断了；举一举他的四肢，四肢就断了，还腐烂生了虫子，不可再靠近。
English: After walking a few hundred steps, Ge Xuan had a stomachache, stopped and fell to the ground, and died soon after. If you lift his head, his head will be broken; if you lift his limbs, his limbs will be broken, and they will rot and give birth to worms. Do not go near him again.

古文：请之者遽走告玄家，更见玄故在堂上。
现代文：请他的人急忙跑到葛玄家里去报信，又见到葛玄仍旧在堂上。
English: He asked his people to hurry to Ge Xuan's home to report the letter, and saw that Ge Xuan was still in the hall.

古文：此人亦不敢言之，走还向玄死处，已失玄尸所在。
现代文：这个人也不敢说葛玄死了这件事，跑回刚才葛玄死去的地方，已经不知葛玄的尸体哪里去了。
English: This person did not dare to say that Ge Xuan had died, and ran back to the place where Ge Xuan had just died, already not knowing where Ge Xuan's body had gone.

古文：与人俱行，能令去地三四尺，仍并而步。
现代文：葛玄与别人一起走时，能令这个人和自己离开地面三四尺，仍然一起往前走。
English: When Ge Xuan walks with someone else, he can make this person and himself leave the ground three or four feet and still walk forward together.

古文：又玄游会稽，有贾人从中国过神庙，庙神使主簿教语贾人曰： 欲附一封书与葛公，可为致之。 
现代文：又有一次，葛玄去游会稽，有个商人从中原来时路过一座神庙，庙神使主簿叫他告诉商人说： 想要顺便捎去一封信给葛公，你可以替我送给他。 
English: On another occasion, when Ge Xuan was on a tour of the capital, a merchant passed by a temple. The god of the temple told him to tell the merchant: "If you want to take a letter to Ge Gong, you can give it to him for me."

古文：主簿因以函书掷贾人船头，如钉着，不可取。
现代文：主簿就把书函抛掷到商人的船头上，好像用钉子钉着似的，拿不下来。
English: The chief clerk threw the letter over the merchant's bow, as if it had been nailed there and could not be taken down.

古文：及达会稽，即以报玄。玄自取之，即得。
现代文：等到那商人到达了会稽时，就把这事报告了葛玄，葛玄自己去取，就把信函取回来了。
English: When the merchant arrived at the auditor's office, he reported the matter to Ge Xuan. Ge Xuan went to get the letter himself and got it back.

古文：语弟子张大言曰： 吾为天子所逼留，不遑作大药，今当尸解，八月十三日日中时当发。 
现代文：葛玄告诉弟子张大言说： 我被天子逼迫留在这里，来不及制作灵药了，如今当尸解，八月十三日中午时该当出发。 
English: Ge Xuan told his disciple Zhang Dajin, "I am forced to stay here by the Son of Heaven. I can't make the elixir in time. Now it's time to dissect the corpse. We should leave at noon on August 13th."

古文：至期，玄衣冠入室，卧而气绝，其色不变。
现代文：到了日期，葛玄把衣服帽子都穿戴好就进了室内，倒下就断了气，而他的脸色没有变化。
English: When the date arrived, Ge Xuan took off his clothes and hat and went indoors. He collapsed and passed out, but his face did not change.

古文：弟子烧香守之三日，夜半忽大风起，发屋折木，声如雷，炬灭。
现代文：弟子烧香守了他三天，一天夜半时分，忽然刮起大风，掀开了屋顶吹折了树，声音如雷，火烛熄灭。
English: His disciple burned incense for him for three days. At midnight one day, a strong wind suddenly blew. The roof was torn off and trees were blown down. The sound was like thunder, and the candles were extinguished.

古文：良久风止，忽失玄所在，但见委衣床上，带无解者。
现代文：过了好一会儿，大风方才止住，忽然葛玄的尸体不见了，只看到他的衣服扔在床上，带子都没有解开。
English: It took a while for the wind to die down, and suddenly Ge Xuan's body was gone. All I saw was his clothes thrown on the bed, with the straps still undone.

古文：旦问邻家，邻家人言了无大风，风止止一宅，篱落树木，皆败拆也。
现代文：早晨去问邻近人家，邻家人都说根本没有大风。起风和风止都只在一个院子里，篱笆都刮落到树木上，都折坏了。
English: In the morning, I asked the neighbors, and they all said that there was no strong wind at all. The wind started and stopped only in one yard, and the fences blew down onto the trees and broke.

古文：窦玄德
现代文：窦玄德
English: Dou Xuande

古文：窦玄德，河南人也。贞观中，任都水使者，时年五十七，奉使江西。
现代文：窦玄德是河南人，贞观年间任都水使者，当时他五十七岁，奉命出使江西。
English: Dou Xuande is a native of Henan Province. During the Zhenguan era, he served as the water envoy to the capital. At that time, he was fifty-seven years old and was ordered to go to Jiangxi.

古文：发路上船，有一人附载。窦公每食余，恒啗附载者，如是数日，欲至扬州，附载辞去。
现代文：启程上船的时候，有一个人捎带搭乘，窦玄德每当吃罢饭之后，就总是让搭乘的那个人吃，几天都是这样。将要到扬州时，搭乘的那个人告辞离去。
English: When setting out on the boat, there was one person with umbilical cord on board. Whenever Dou Xuande went without eating, he always let the person on board eat, this was the case for several days. When he was about to arrive in Yangzhou, the person on board said goodbye and left.

古文：公问曰： 何速？ 
现代文：窦玄德就问他： 你为什么这么快就走呢？ 
English: Dou Xuande asked him: Why did you leave so quickly?

古文：答曰： 某是司命使者，因窦都水往扬州，司命遣某追之。 
现代文：那个人回答说： 我是司命使者，因为窦都水前往扬州，司命派我追他性命。 
English: The man replied, "I am an emissary of the shogunate, because Dou Du Shui is on his way to Yangzhou, and the shogunate has sent me to pursue his life.

古文：公曰： 都水即是某也，何不早言？ 
现代文：窦玄德说： 都水就是我呀，你为什么不早说？ 
English: Dou Xuande said: Duoshui is me, why didn't you say so earlier?

古文：答曰： 某虽追公，公命合终于此地，此行未至，不可漏泄，可以随公至此。
现代文：那个人回答说： 我虽然追您，但您的生命应当在此地终结。还没到地方，不可泄露，我所以随您到此地。
English: The man replied: Although I am chasing you, your life should end here. It is not yet in place, it cannot be disclosed, so I am following you here.

古文：在路蒙公余食，常愧于怀，意望免公此难，以报长者深惠。 
现代文：在路上承蒙您一路赏赐给我饭吃，常怀惭愧之意，心中希望免除您的这个灾难，来报答长者深厚的恩惠。 
English: On the way, I gratefully accepted the meal you gave me along the way. With a sense of shame, I sincerely hope to spare you this disaster and repay the elders for their profound favor.

古文：公曰： 可禳否？ 
现代文：窦玄德说： 可以消灾吗？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "Can I use the prayer to drive away the comet?"

古文：答曰： 彼闻道士王知远乎？ 
现代文：那人回答说： 您以前听说过道士王知远吗？ 
English: The man replied, "Have you ever heard of the Taoist Wang Zhiyuan before?"

古文：公曰： 闻之。 
现代文：窦玄德说： 听说过这个人。 
English: Dou Xuande said: I have heard of this person.

古文：使者曰： 今见居扬州府。
现代文：使者说： 他现在住在扬州府。
English: The messenger said: He is now living in Yangzhou Prefecture.

古文：幽冥间事甚机密，幸勿泄之。但某在船日，恒赖公赐食，怀愧甚深。今不拯公，遂成负德。
现代文：阴间的事情很机密，希望您不要泄露，只是我在船上的日子，总是仰赖您赐给食品，怀愧很深，如果不救您，就成了忘恩之人。
English: The affairs of the underworld are very secret, I hope you will not divulge them, but during my days on the ship, I always relied on you to give me food. I am deeply ashamed, and if I do not save you, I will become an ungrateful person.

古文：王尊师行业幽显，众共尊敬。其所施为，人天钦尚。
现代文：王尊师道行极深，大家都尊敬他，他所做的事情，人天都很钦佩。
English: Wang Zunshi's moral conduct is profound, everyone respects him, and everyone admires what he has done.

古文：与人章醮，有厄难者，天曹皆救。
现代文：他给人上表祈祷，有灾难的人，天曹都援救。
English: He gave people the watch to pray, and people in distress were rescued by Heavenly Father.

古文：公可屈节咨请，得度斯难。
现代文：您可以虔诚地与他商议，向他请求解救，方能渡过这场灾难。
English: You can only get through this calamity by devoutly consulting Him and asking Him for deliverance.

古文：明晚当奉报灭否。 
现代文：明天晚上我会奉报此难消除没有。 
English: I'll be briefed tomorrow night as to whether or not this has been resolved.

古文：公既奉敕，初到扬州，长史已下诸官皆来迎。
现代文：窦玄德系尊奉皇命而来，初次到扬州，长史以下各级官吏都来迎接他。
English: Dou Xuande came to Yangzhou for the first time by order of the emperor, and officials from all levels including Changshi came to meet him.

古文：公未论事，但问官僚，见王尊师乎。
现代文：他没有谈论政事，只问官员僚属见到王尊师没有。
English: He did not talk about politics, only asking officials whether they had seen Wang Zongshi.

古文：于时诸官，莫测其意，催遣迎之。
现代文：当时各级官员没有人能猜透他的心意便催促派人去迎接王尊师。
English: At that time, officials at all levels, none of whom could fathom his intentions, urged that someone be sent to meet Wang Zunshi.

古文：须臾，王尊师至，屏左右具陈情事。
现代文：不一会儿，王尊师来到了，窦玄德就屏退左右的人，把请求解救的事情详细陈述一遍。
English: A short while later, Wang Zunshi arrived. Dou Xuande screened the people around him and gave a detailed account of the request for rescue.

古文：师曰： 比内修行正法，至于祭醮之业，皆所不为。
现代文：王尊师说： 近年内我修行正法，至于关涉祭祀祈祷的事情，我都不做。
English: Wang Zongshi said, "In recent years, I have been practicing the Fa-rectification, but I don't do anything related to sacrifice and prayer.

古文：公衔命既重，勉励为作，法之效验，未敢悬知。 
现代文：您既然担负重大的使命，我就勉为您施为，但是效验，我还不能预先知道。 
English: Since you are entrusted with an important mission, I will do my best for you, but I cannot know the results in advance.

古文：于是命侍童写章，登坛拜奏。
现代文：于是王尊师就令侍童写陈奏文书，登坛跪拜上奏。
English: As a result, Wang Zunshi ordered the attendant to write the chenso instrument and kneel on the altar to play it.

古文：明晚，使者来报公曰： 不免矣。 
现代文：第二天晚上，那个司命使者来报告窦玄德说： 不能免除灾难。 
English: The next evening, the messenger came to report to Dou Xuande and said: "We cannot avoid disaster.

古文：公又求哀甚切。使者曰： 事已如此，更令奏之，明晚当报。
现代文：窦玄德又非常恳切地哀求他，使者说： 事情已经这样了，再求王尊师向天曹奏报一次，我明晚会报告您结果的。
English: Dou Xuande also implored him very earnestly. The messenger said, "Things have come to this. Again, ask Wang Rongshi to report to the Heavenly Father. I will report to you tomorrow evening."

古文：仍买好白纸作钱，于净处咨白天曹吏，使即烧却；若不烧，还不得用。
现代文：再买好白纸作纸钱，在洁净的地方向天曹官吏禀报求请，让人立即把纸钱烧掉；如果不烧掉，还不管用。
English: Then buy white paper to make paper money. In a clean place, report to the government officials and ask them to burn the paper money immediately. If it is not burned, it is useless.

古文：不尔，曹司稽留，行更得罪。 
现代文：不这样的话，天曹官署拖延不办，您将更要获罪了。 
English: Otherwise, the public prosecutor's office will delay the case, and you will be even more guilty.

古文：公然之，又白师，师甚不悦。
现代文：窦玄德觉得这话很对，又禀告王尊师，王尊师很不高兴。
English: Dou Xuande felt that this was very right, and also denounced Wang Zunshi. Wang Zunshi was very unhappy.

古文：公曰： 惟命是遵，愿垂拯济。 
现代文：窦玄德说： 我完全遵从您的吩咐了，望您施恩拯救我吧。 
English: Dou Xuande said, "I have completely obeyed your order. I hope you will be kind enough to save me."

古文：师哀之，又奏。
现代文：王尊师觉得他很可怜，又奏报天曹。
English: Wang Rongshi felt very sorry for him and reported him to Tiancao.

古文：明晚使者来，还报云： 不免。 
现代文：第二天晚上使者到来，回报说： 还是没有免除。 
English: The next evening, the emissary arrived and replied: "Still no exemption."

古文：公苦问其故，初不肯言，后俯首答曰： 道家章奏，犹人间上章表耳。
现代文：窦玄德苦苦追问其中的缘故。使者最初不肯说，后来低头回答说： 道家表章上奏，如同人间上奏表章一样。
English: Dou Xuande painstakingly asked the reason for this. The messenger initially refused to say, but later bowed his head and replied: The Taoist chapter is played, just as the human chapter is played.

古文：前上之章，有字失体；次上之章，复草书 仍乞 二字。
现代文：前一次上奏的表章，有的字写错了；第二次上奏的表章，又把 仍乞 二字写得潦草。
English: In the previous watch chapter, some words were written incorrectly; in the second watch chapter, the word "still begging" was scribbled.

古文：表奏人主，犹须整肃，况天尊大道，其可忽诸？
现代文：上表向人间之主陈奏，尚且须工整严肃，何况向天尊大道陈奏，哪里可以疏忽呢？
English: The above table plays to the Lord of the human world, yet it must be neat and serious, not to mention playing to the heavenly road, where can it be neglected?

古文：所上之章，咸被弃掷，既不闻彻，有何济乎？ 
现代文：前两次上奏的表章，全都被扔到一边去了，既然不能使天尊听到，有什么作用呢？ 
English: The first two overtures have all been thrown aside. Since it is not possible to make the deity hear, what is the use?

古文：公又重使令其请托，兼具以事白师。
现代文：窦玄德又重新求请王尊师让他请托天曹，同时把前前后后的事情都向他说明了，王尊师很高兴地说： 确实如此吗？
English: Dou Xuande again asked Wang Rongshi to let him ask Tong Tiancao, and at the same time explained to him everything that had happened before and after. Wang Rongshi said happily, "Is it really so?"

古文：师甚悦云： 审尔乎！比窃疑章表符奏，缪妄而已。如公所言，验若是乎！ 
现代文：近来我心里怀疑章表符奏，只不过是虚妄的事情，如您所说的，灵验真的如此吗？ 
English: Lately, I've been having doubts in my mind about chapter and verse, it's just a nonsense thing, like you said, is it really so?

古文：乃于坛上取所奏之章，见字误书草，一如公言。
现代文：王尊师就到坛上取过前两次上奏的表章，看到文字错误、书写潦草，全像窦玄德说的那样。
English: Wang Zunshi went to the altar to take the seal of the previous two performances, and saw that the words were wrong and the writing was sloppy, just like Dou Xuande said.

古文：师云： 今奏之章，贫道自写。 
现代文：王尊师说： 这次上奏的表章，贫道自己来写。 
English: Wang Zunshi said, "This time, I'm going to write the first chapter myself.

古文：再三合格，如法奏之。
现代文：写完后再三检查确实合格了，按道家之法把表章奏报上去。
English: After writing it, he checked again and again that it had indeed passed. According to the Taoist method, he submitted the seal to the newspaper.

古文：明旦使者报公云： 事已谐矣。 
现代文：第二天早晨，那个使者就来向窦玄德报信说： 事情已经成功了。 
English: The next morning, the messenger came to report to Dou Xuande and said: The matter has been successful.

古文：师曰： 此更延十二年。 
现代文：王尊师说： 这次又延长十二年寿命。 
English: Wang Zunshi said, "This time, his life span has been extended by another twelve years.

古文：公谓亲表曰： 比见道家法，未尝信之。今蒙济拔，其验如兹。
现代文：窦玄德对他的家里人和亲戚说： 我每次看到道家法术，都不曾相信它，如今承蒙道术救拔，方知如此灵验。
English: Dou Xende said to his family and relatives: Every time I saw Taoist magic, I didn't believe it. Now, thanks to the help of Taoism, I know it so well.

古文：从今以往，请终身事之。 
现代文：从今以后，请让我终身奉道。 
English: From now on, please let me be a disciple for life.

古文：便就清都观尹尊师受法箓，举家奉道。
现代文：就到清都观尹尊师那里接受了法箓，全家信道。
English: He went to Qingdu to receive the Dharma teachings from the Venerable Master Guan Yin, and his whole family became believers.

古文：春秋六十九而卒。
现代文：窦玄德活到六十九岁才死。
English: Dou Xuande lived to the age of sixty-nine before he died.

