古文：沙陀沙陀，西突厥别部处月种也。
现代文：沙陀，是西突厥的别部处月族人。
English: The Sadducees, another branch of the Western Turks, were a lunar people.

古文：始，突厥东西部分治乌孙故地，与处月、处蜜杂居。
现代文：起初，突厥东西两部，分别治理乌孙的旧地，与处月、处蜜人混居。
English: At first, the two parts of the Turkic East and West administered the old land of Wusun separately, and mixed with the local moon and honey people.

古文：贞观七年，太宗以鼓纛立利邲咄陆可汗，而族人步真觖望，谋并其弟弥射乃自立。
现代文：贞观七年，太宗赐给鼓纛，立利必阝咄陆可汗。其族人步真未得封赏，打算吞并其弟弥射而自立为可汗。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong bestowed the title of khan on Drum Jiao, who was a member of a tribe that had not been awarded the title of khan, and intended to annex his brother, Misha, and establish himself as khan.

古文：弥射惧，率处月等入朝。而步真势穷，亦归国。
现代文：弥射害怕，率领处月等入朝，后来步真势窘也来归附。
English: Fearing that he would be fired upon, he led his troops into the imperial court, and was later forced to surrender in disgrace.

古文：其留者，咄陆以射匮特勒劫越之子贺鲁统之。
现代文：留下的人众，咄陆派射匮特勒劫越之子贺鲁统辖。
English: The people who remained were ruled by Horu, the son of the land-grabber, Sagittarius.

古文：西突厥浸强，内相攻，其大酋乙毘咄陆可汗建廷镞曷山之西，号北庭，而处月等又隶属之。
现代文：西突厥渐强，内部互相攻争，其大酋乙毗咄陆可汗在镞曷山之西建立牙廷，称为 北庭 ，处月等均隶属。
English: The West Turkic Empire became stronger and stronger, and they fought against each other internally. Their great chief, Bifidor Khan, established a court in the west of the Lushan Mountains, called the North Court, to which all provinces and cities were subordinate.

古文：处月居金娑山之阳，蒲类之东，有大碛，名沙陀，故号沙陀突厥云。
现代文：处月在金娑山之南、蒲类之东，有大碛，名沙陀，所以称为沙陀突厥。
English: In the first month, south of the Jinshan Mountain and east of the Putuo Mountain, there is a large cormorant called Shado, which is why it is called Shado Turk.

古文：咄陆寇伊州，引二部兵围天山，安西都护郭孝恪击走之，拔处月俟斤之城。
现代文：咄陆入侵伊州，带领二部的兵围困天山，安西都护郭孝恪将他们击走，攻克处月俟斤的城。
English: He invaded Izhou by land, and led the second group of soldiers to besiege Tianshan. Guo Xiaoqi, the governor of Anxi Province, fought them off and conquered the city of Yueyujin.

古文：后乙毘可汗败，奔吐火罗。
现代文：后来乙毗可汗败，逃奔吐火罗。
English: Later, he was defeated and fled to the fire.

古文：贺鲁来降，诏拜瑶池都督，徙其部庭州之莫贺城。
现代文：贺鲁来降，诏任为瑶池都督，将他的部落从庭州迁到莫贺城。
English: When Horu came to the capital, he was appointed as the governor of Tsugaike and moved his tribe from Niigata to Moga.

古文：处月硃邪阙俟斤阿厥亦请内属。
现代文：处月的朱邪阙俟斤阿厥也请求归附。
English: Zhu Yanzhang, the first month of the month, also requested to be annexed.

古文：永徽初，贺鲁反，而硃邪孤注亦杀招慰使连和，引兵据牢山。
现代文：永徽初年，贺鲁叛变，朱邪孤注也杀了招慰使与之连手，领兵盘据牢山。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Heru rebelled, and Zhu Yixu also killed Zhaotong so that he could join hands with him and lead the army.

古文：于是射脾俟斤沙陀那速不肯从，高宗以贺鲁所领授之。
现代文：那时射脾俟斤沙陀那速不肯跟从，高宗就将原贺鲁所辖给了他。
English: At that time, Emperor Gaozong gave him the control of the former Horus Sect after Shado, the great warrior, refused to follow him.

古文：明年，弓月道总管梁建方、契苾何力引兵斩孤注，俘九千人。
现代文：第二年，弓月道总管梁建方、契必艹何力率兵斩杀孤注，俘九千人。
English: In the second year, Liang Jianfang, the head of the Yunyue Dao, and Qibing He Li led the soldiers to slaughter the enemy and captured nine thousand people.

古文：又明年，废瑶池都督府，即处月地置金满、沙陀二州，皆领都督。
现代文：又过了一年，废瑶池都督府，在处月的辖地设置金满、沙陀二州，都任命都督。
English: A year later, he abolished the Chuchi Governor-General's Office and set up two prefectures, Kinman and Sado, in the same area, both of which appointed governors-general.

古文：贺鲁亡，安抚大使阿史那弥射次伊丽水，而处月来归。
现代文：贺鲁死，安抚大使阿史那弥射到伊丽水，处月来归附。
English: After the death of Horus, the pacification ambassador, Ashnami, was sent to the Elysian Fields, where he was eventually reinstated.

古文：乃置昆陵都护府，统咄陆部，以弥射为都护。
现代文：于是设置昆陵都护府，统领咄陆部，任命弥射为都护。
English: As a result, the Kunling Capital Protection Office was set up, with the Ministry of Land and Resources in charge, and Misha was appointed as the Capital Protection Officer.

古文：龙朔初，以处月酋沙陀金山从武卫将军薛仁贵讨铁勒，授墨离军讨击使。
现代文：龙朔初年，因处月酋长沙陀金山随从武卫将军薛仁贵讨伐铁勒，任金山为墨离军讨击使。
English: In the first year of Longshuo, because of the position of the lunar chieftain Shado Jinshan, he followed the Wuwei general Xue Rengui to fight against Tiele, and appointed Jinshan as the envoy of the Mexican army.

古文：长安二年，进为金满州都督，累封张掖郡公。
现代文：长安二年，升任金满州都督，累功封爵张掖郡公。
English: In the second year of Chang'an, he was promoted to the governor of Manchukuo, and was awarded the title of Zhangye County.

古文：金山死，子辅国嗣。
现代文：金山死，子辅国袭爵。
English: Jinshan died, and Zifu Guo became a peer.

古文：先天初避吐蕃，徙部北庭，率其下入朝。
现代文：先天初年为避吐蕃，率部迁往北庭，带领下属入朝。
English: The year before yesterday was the first year of avoiding exile, and the headquarters moved to Beiting, leading subordinates into the imperial court.

古文：开元二年，复领金满州都督，封其母鼠尼施为鄯国夫人。
现代文：开元二年，再任金满州都督，其母鼠尼施受封为鄯国夫人。
English: In the second year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was reappointed as the governor of Manchukuo, and his mother, Nishi, was named the first lady of the Republic of China.

古文：辅国累爵永寿郡王。
现代文：辅国累爵为永寿郡王。
English: Fu Guo Jie is the king of Yongshou County.

古文：死，子骨咄支嗣。
现代文：死后，子骨咄支嗣爵。
English: After his death, his son became the heir to the throne.

古文：天宝初，回纥内附，以骨咄支兼回纥副都护。
现代文：天宝初年，回纥来归附，任骨咄支兼回纥副都护。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, it was annexed to Yunnan Province and became the capital of Yunnan Province.

古文：从肃宗平安禄山，拜特进、骁卫上将军。
现代文：后来随肃宗平定禄山之乱，晋升为特进、骁卫上将军。
English: Later, following the suppression of the Lushan Rebellion by Emperor Suzong, he was promoted to the posts of special envoy and senior general of the National Guard.

古文：死，子尽忠嗣，累迁金吾卫大将军、酒泉县公。
现代文：死，子尽忠即位，累功升金吾卫大将军、封酒泉县公。
English: After his death, his son Zhenzhong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the rank of General of the Jinwu, and was given the title of Prince of Quan County.

古文：至德、宝应间，中国多故，北庭、西州闭不通，朝奏使皆道出回纥，而虏多渔撷，尤苦之，虽沙陀之倚北庭者，亦困其暴敛。
现代文：至德、宝应年间，中国多事，北庭、西州闭塞不通，朝奏使臣都借道回纥。虏人常要打劫抢掠，甚苦。即使是倚附北庭的沙陀，也因其暴敛苦不堪言。
English: In the years of the Northern Court and the Western Court, there were many events in China. The Northern Court and the Western Court were blocked and impassable, and the Chosei envoys had to return to the capital by other means. It was very difficult for the Kushites, who often had to loot and plunder. Even the Sadas, who were dependent on the Northern Court, were miserable because of their violence.

古文：贞元中，沙陀部七千帐附吐蕃，与共寇北庭，陷之。
现代文：贞元年间，沙陀部七千帐依附吐蕃，与之一同攻陷了北庭。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, seven thousand units of the Shado Department were attached to Tubo, and together they captured Beiting.

古文：吐蕃徙其部甘州，以尽忠为军大论。
现代文：吐蕃将其部落迁往甘州，任尽忠为军大论。
English: Tubo moved his tribe to Ganzhou, and appointed Zhenzhong as the general of the army.

古文：吐蕃寇边，常以沙陀为前锋。
现代文：吐蕃来侵犯我边陲，常派沙陀为前锋。
English: He often sent Shado as a striker.

古文：久之，回鹘取凉州，吐蕃疑尽忠持两端，议徙沙陀于河外，举部愁恐。
现代文：后来，回鹘攻取了凉州，吐蕃怀疑尽忠脚踏两只船，想把沙陀迁到黄河外。沙陀全部哀愁且害怕。
English: Later, when Uighur conquered Liangzhou, Tubo suspected that Zhenzhong had set foot on two ships and wanted to move Shado out of the Yellow River. Shado was sad and afraid.

古文：尽忠与硃邪执宜谋，曰： 我世为唐臣，不幸陷污，今若走萧关自归，不愈于绝种乎？ 尽忠曰： 善。 
现代文：尽忠与朱邪执宜商议，朱邪执宜说： 我世代是唐臣，不幸而落入泥潭。现在如能赴萧关归朝，不强似送命绝种吗？ 尽忠说 ：好。 
English: Zhenzhong and Zhu Yixing had a discussion, and Zhu Yixing said: My generation was a Tang retainer, and unfortunately fell into a quagmire. Now, if we can return to Xiaoguan, wouldn't it be better to let the species die out? Zhenzhong said: Good.

古文：元和三年，悉众三万落循乌德鞬山而东。
现代文：元和三年，带领全部三万多部众落沿乌德革建山东去。
English: In the first and third years of the Yuan Dynasty, he led all of the more than thirty thousand congregations to go along the Ude River to build Shandong.

古文：吐蕃追之。
现代文：吐蕃追来，边走边战。
English: The peregrine falcon chases after it, fighting as it goes.

古文：行且战，旁洮水，奏石门，转斗不解，部众略尽，尽忠死之。
现代文：经过洮水，又进石门，辗转战斗均不得甩脱，部众几乎全完，尽忠战死。
English: After passing through Surabaya, they entered Shimen again, and they could not escape from the battle. Almost all of the soldiers died in the battle.

古文：执宜裒瘢伤，士裁二千，骑七百，杂畜橐它千计，款灵州塞。
现代文：朱邪执宜收集伤残，士兵仅剩二千，骑兵七百，杂畜及骆驼亦只几千。
English: Zhu Yanzhi insisted on collecting the injured and disabled. There were only two thousand soldiers left, seven hundred cavalry, and only a few thousand animals and camels.

古文：节度使范希朝以闻。诏处其部盐州，置阴山府，以执宜为府兵马使。
现代文：到灵州塞降，节度使范希朝上报朝廷，诏令在盐州安顿他们，设置阴山府，任执宜为府兵马使。
English: In Lingshou, they were forced to abdicate, and the festival made Fan Xi report to the imperial court. The imperial edict settled them in Yanzhou, set up the Yinshan Prefecture, and appointed him as the prefectural envoy.

古文：沙陀素健斗，希朝欲藉以捍虏，为市牛羊，广畜牧，休养之。
现代文：沙陀一向善战，范希朝想借他们的兵力抵御入寇者，替他们购置牛羊，发展其畜牧，使他们休养生息。
English: Sadu has always been good at war, and the Fanxi Dynasty wanted to use their military strength to resist the invaders, purchase cattle and sheep for them, develop their animal husbandry, and let them rest and recuperate.

古文：其童耄自凤翔、兴元、太原道归者，皆还其部。
现代文：沙陀族中的老人小孩从凤翔、兴元、太原辗转而来的，都让他们回原部落。
English: The old people and children of the Shado tribe, who came from Fengxiang, Xingyuan and Taiyuan, all let them return to the original tribe.

古文：尽忠弟葛勒阿波率残部七百叩振武降，授左武卫大将军，兼阴山府都督。
现代文：尽忠的弟弟葛勒阿波率残部七百人到振武降。任他为左武卫大将军，兼阴山府都督。
English: His loyal younger brother, Guleabo, led the remaining seven hundred men to Zhenwu to surrender. He was appointed General of the Left Division and Governor of Yinshan Prefecture.

古文：执宜朝长安，赐金币袍马万计，授特进、金吾卫将军。
现代文：执宜到长安朝见，受赐金币、锦袍、马等以万计，委任为特进、金吾卫将军。
English: Xingyi went to Chang'an to see the emperor, was given gold coins, gold robes, horses, etc. in the tens of thousands, and was appointed as a special envoy and general of King Wuwei.

古文：然议者以灵武迫吐蕃，恐后反覆生变，又滨边，益口则食翔价。
现代文：但有人议论认为灵武靠近吐蕃，担心以后会反复生变，又靠近边城，增加人口，粮食会涨价。
English: However, some people argue that Lingwu is close to Tubo, fearing that it will change repeatedly in the future. It is also close to the border town, increasing the population, and grain prices will rise.

古文：顷之，希朝镇太原，因诏沙陀举军从之。
现代文：不久，范希朝镇守太原，诏令沙陀全军随从。
English: Soon after, Fan Xichang was put in charge of Taiyuan, and he ordered the whole army of Shado to follow him.

古文：希朝乃料其劲骑千二百，号沙陀军，置军使，而处馀众于定襄川。
现代文：希朝挑选了精锐骑兵一千二百人，称为沙陀军，设置军使，将其余人马安顿在定襄川。
English: The Greek dynasty selected 1,200 elite cavalrymen, known as the Shatou Army, set up military envoys, and settled the rest of them in Dingyang River.

古文：执宜乃保神武川之黄花堆，更号阴山北沙陀。
现代文：执宜就此守神武川之黄花堆，改名号为阴山北沙陀。
English: As a result, Shigeyoshi changed the name of his shrine, the Yellow Flower Mound of the Jinmu River, to Yinshan Bei Shado.

古文：是时，天子伐镇州，执宜以军七百为前锋，王承宗众数万伏木刀沟，与执宜遇，飞矢雨集。
现代文：那时，天子伐镇州，执宜带领七百人为前锋，王承宗几万人埋伏在木刀沟，与执宜相遇，伏军万箭齐发，矢如雨下。
English: At that time, Tian Zi fell to Zhenzhou, Xiyi led seven hundred people to be the forwards, Wang Chengzong tens of thousands of people ambushed in the wood knife ditch, and met with Xiyi, and the ambush army launched thousands of arrows, and the arrows rained down.

古文：执宜提军横贯贼阵鏖斗，李光颜等乘之，斩首万级。
现代文：执宜领军横冲贼阵，勇猛杀敌，李光颜等乘势而进，杀敌万人。
English: Xingyi led the army to rampage against the bandits, bravely killed the enemy, Li Guangyan and others took advantage of the situation and killed tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：镇兵解，进蔚州刺史。
现代文：镇州乱平。执宜晋升为蔚州刺史。
English: Zhenzhou is in a state of turmoil. Xiyi is promoted to the top of Ulsan's history.

古文：王锷节度太原，建言： 硃邪族孳炽，散居北川，恐启野心，愿析其族隶诸州，势分易弱也。 
现代文：那时王锷掌管太原，建议： 朱邪族繁衍兴旺，散居在北川，可能会引发其野心。如把他的部族分散隶属各州，则其势分兵弱了。 
English: At that time, Wang Qian was in charge of Taiyuan. He suggested: The Zhu Yao tribe is flourishing and prospering, and its dispersion in Beichuan may trigger its ambitions. If his tribe is dispersed and subordinated to the states, its military power will be weak.

古文：遂建十府以处沙陀。
现代文：于是建立十个府以安顿沙陀的人马。
English: As a result, ten villages were established to accommodate the Satoru people.

古文：八年，回鹘过碛南取西城、柳谷，诏执宜屯天德。
现代文：元和八年，回鹘穿过碛南攻取西城、柳谷，诏令执宜屯守天德。
English: In the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hui Xuan crossed the southern part of Fujian to capture Xicheng and Liuguan, and issued a decree that Xiyi should stay in Tiande.

古文：明年，伐吴元济，又诏执宜隶李光颜，破蔡人时曲，拔凌云栅。
现代文：第二年，讨伐吴元济，又诏令执宜隶属李光颜，击破蔡人时曲，攻克凌云栅。
English: In the second year, he fought against Wu Yuanji, and he also ordered Xingyi to be subordinated to Li Guangyan, defeated Cai Ren Shiji, and conquered Lingyunzhao.

古文：元济平，授检校刑部尚书，犹隶光颜军。
现代文：元济之乱平，任执宜为检校刑部尚书，仍隶属光颜麾下。
English: In the chaos of Yuanji, Ren Xingyi was appointed as the inspector of the school punishment department, still under the command of Guangyan.

古文：长庆初，伐镇州，悉发沙陀，与易定军掎角，破贼深州。
现代文：长庆初年，再伐镇州，调发沙陀全军，与易定军成犄角，破贼于深州。
English: In the first year of Changqing, he attacked Zhenzhou again, dispatched the whole army of Sadu, and fought with the Yi Ding army, and defeated the bandits in Shenzhou.

古文：执宜入朝，留宿卫，拜金吾卫将军。
现代文：执宜入朝，留下宿卫，授官金吾卫将军。
English: Xingyi entered the imperial court, leaving behind a bodyguard, who was given the title of General Jinwu.

古文：大和中，柳公绰领河东，奏陉北沙陀素为九姓、六州所畏，请委执宜治云、朔塞下废府十一，料部人三千御北边，号代北行营，授执宜阴山府都督、代北行营招抚使，隶河东节度。
现代文：大和四年，柳公绰统领河东兵，上奏说： 陉北沙陀一向威慑九姓、六州，请求委派执宜去治理云、朔塞下的十一个废府。 执宜选部属三千御守北部边界，称为代北行营，任执宜为阴山府都督、代北行营招抚使，隶属河东节度。
English: In the fourth year of the Yamato era, Liu Gongzhu led the soldiers to the east of the river, and the report said: "Beijing Shatou has always deterred nine surnames and six states, and requested that Xiyi be appointed to govern the eleven abandoned prefectures under Yun and Shuo Jie. Xiyi's election department belongs to the northern border of the Three Thousand Imperial Guards, known as the northbound camp, and Xiyi is appointed as the governor of Yinshan Prefecture, the northbound camp recruiting envoy, and belongs to the east of the river.

古文：执宜死，子赤心嗣。
现代文：执宜死，子赤心嗣。
English: Xiyi died, and his son Chiaxinshi succeeded him.

古文：开成四年，回鹘径碛口，抵榆林塞。宰相掘罗勿以良马三百遗赤心，约共攻彰信可汗。
现代文：开成四年，回鹘穿过碛口，抵达榆林塞，回鹘宰相掘罗勿送赤心三百匹良马，约赤心共攻彰信可汗。
English: It took four years to complete the journey, and after crossing the Hukou Pass and arriving at Yulin Pass, Hukou's prime minister, Hubao Luo, sent three hundred fine horses to Chixin. Around Chixin, they all defeated Zhangxin Khan.

古文：可汗死，节度使刘沔以沙陀击回鹘于杀胡山。
现代文：可汗死，节度使刘沔带沙陀兵在杀胡山击败回鹘。
English: After the death of Khan, Liu Ye led the soldiers of Shatou to defeat Hui Zang in the Battle of Hu Mountain.

古文：久之，伐潞，诛刘稹，诏赤心率代北骑军三千隶石雄为前军，破石会关，助王宰下天井，合太原军，次榆社，与监军使吕义忠禽杨弁。
现代文：后来，讨伐潞州、诛杀刘稹，诏令赤心率代北骑兵三千隶属石雄为前军，攻破石会关，又助王宰攻克天井，与太原军会合，到达榆社，与监军使吕义忠合力擒获杨弁。
English: Later, he attacked Zhangzhou, killed Liu Bei, and ordered Chixin to lead three thousand Northern cavalrymen belonging to Shixiong as the front army on behalf of Shixiong, broke through the Shiquan Pass, helped Wang Zai conquer the ceiling, met with the Taiyuan Army, arrived at Shisha, and worked with the supervising envoy Lv Yizhong to win Yang Ben.

古文：潞州平，迁朔州刺史，仍为代北军使。
现代文：潞州平定，赤心升任朔州刺史，仍为代北军使。
English: Bozhou was pacified, and Chixin was promoted to the post of the governor of Shuozhou, still acting as the envoy of the Northern Army.

古文：大中初，吐蕃合党项及回鹘残众寇河西，太原王宰统代北诸军进讨，沙陀常深入，冠诸军。
现代文：大中初年，吐蕃会合党项及回鹘残众入侵河西，太原的河东节度使王宰统领代北各军进讨。沙陀兵常深入敌阵，为诸军之冠。
English: In the first year of the middle school, the party of the Tubo Association and the remnants of the Hui invaded the west of the river, and the east of the river in Taiyuan led the king to lead the northern army. The soldiers of Satao often went deep into the enemy lines, and they were the crown of the army.

古文：赤心所向，虏辄披靡，曰： 吾见赤马将军火生头上。 
现代文：赤心所向，望风披靡，败军们说： 我看见赤心将军头上生火。 
English: The defeated troops said, "I saw General Akechi's head on fire."

古文：始，沙陀臣吐蕃，其左老右壮，溷男女，略与同，而驰射趫悍过之，虏倚其兵，常苦边。
现代文：早先，沙陀臣服吐蕃，其重视壮年轻视老年，男女混居等习俗与吐蕃大致相同，但骑术射技及骄悍勇猛则胜于吐蕃。吐蕃倚仗其兵力，常骚扰边域。
English: In the early days, Satao submitted to Tubo. They valued youth over old age, and had the same customs as Tubo, such as men and women living together. However, they were superior to Tubo in horsemanship, marksmanship, and bravery. Tubo relied on its military strength and often harassed the border areas.

古文：及归国，吐蕃由此亦衰。
现代文：及沙陀归附，吐蕃自此亦衰。
English: And when Sadu was annexed, Tubo also fell into decline.

古文：宣宗已复三州、七关，征西戍皆罢，乃迁赤心蔚州刺史、云州守捉使。
现代文：宣宗恢复了三州、七关，征西戍边之役皆止，升赤心为蔚州刺史、云州守捉使。
English: Xuan Zong restored the three prefectures and seven passes, and stopped the campaign to conquer the west side of the Yunnan Peninsula. Sheng Chixin was appointed as the governor of Ulshu and the governor of Yunnan.

古文：庞勋乱，诏义成康承训为行营招讨使，赤心以突骑三千从。
现代文：庞勋作乱，诏令义成节度使康承训为行营招讨使，赤心带三千骑兵随从。
English: Pang Xun made a disturbance, issued the edict Yicheng Jie Du, made Kang Chengxun the envoy to recruit soldiers for the campaign, and accompanied him with 3,000 cavalrymen.

古文：承训兵绝涣水，遇伏，堕围中几没，赤心以骑五百掀出之。
现代文：承训兵渡涣水，遇到埋伏，落入重围，几乎覆没。赤心带五百骑兵冲破包围圈将他们救出。
English: The trainee soldiers crossed the Yangtze River, encountered an ambush, fell into a heavy siege, and were almost overrun. Five hundred cavalrymen from the Chixin Belt broke through the encirclement and rescued them.

古文：勋欲速战，众八万，短兵接，赤心勒劲骑突贼，与官军夹击，败之。其弟赤衰以千骑追之亳东。
现代文：庞勋想速战速决，发兵八万，短兵相接，赤心指挥精骑冲入敌阵与官军夹击，将其打败，其弟赤衷率一千骑兵直追到亳东。
English: Pang Xun wanted to make a quick decision, so he dispatched 80,000 soldiers, and the short soldiers were in contact with each other. Chixin, commanding the elite cavalry, rushed into the enemy line and clamped down on the official army, defeating it. His brother Chixin led a thousand cavalry straight to Shandong.

古文：勋平，进大同军节度使，赐氏李，名国昌，预郑王属籍，赐亲仁里甲第。
现代文：庞勋之乱平，升赤心为大同军节度使，赐姓李，名国昌，加入郑王的属籍，赐给亲仁里的宅第。
English: Pang Xun's name was Rong Ping, and Sheng Chixin was given the surname of Li and the name of Guochang as the chief envoy of the Datong Army. He was added to King Zheng's family, and was given the residence of a relative.

古文：回鹘叩榆林，扰灵、盐，诏国昌为鄜延节度使。
现代文：回鹘攻榆林，扰灵州、盐州，诏令国昌为延节度使。
English: He returned to Yunnan and attacked Yulin, disturbing Lingzhou and Yanzhou, and ordered Guochang to be the envoy of Yan Jie.

古文：又寇天德，乃徙节振武，进检校司徒。
现代文：后来回鹘又入侵天德，乃命国昌去镇守振武，升任检校司徒。
English: Later, Hui Xuan invaded Tiande again and ordered Guochang to go to the town of Zhenwu and was promoted to the post of school inspector.

古文：王仙芝陷荆、襄，朝廷发诸州兵讨捕，国昌遣刘迁统云中突骑逐贼，数有功。
现代文：王仙芝攻陷荆、襄等州，朝廷征发各州兵讨伐，国昌派刘迁统领云中精锐杀贼，多次建功。
English: Wang Xianzhi invaded Jing, Xiang and other prefectures, the imperial court conscripted and dispatched soldiers from all prefectures to fight, Guochang sent Liu Qian to lead the elite thieves in the clouds, and made many contributions.

古文：乾符三年，段文楚为代北水陆发运、云州防御使。
现代文：乾符三年，段文楚任代北水陆发运、云州防御使。
English: Three years later, Duan Wenchu was appointed as the representative of the North Water and Land Transport and the Yunnan Defense.

古文：是时无年，文楚晙损用度，下皆怨。
现代文：这年欠收，文楚削减费用，下属都埋怨。
English: This year's shortfall, Wenchu cut costs, and subordinates are complaining.

古文：边校程怀信、王行审、盖寓、李存璋、薛铁山、康君立等曹议曰： 世多难，丈夫当投罅立功。
现代文：边校程怀信、王行审、盖寓、李存璋、薛铁山、康君立等议论 ：时世多难，大丈夫该乘机立功。
English: Side schools such as Cheng Huixin, Wang Xingren, Gai Yue, Li Cunxu, Xue Tieshan, and Kang Junli discussed: The times are difficult, it is okay to take the opportunity to make a contribution.

古文：段公乃儒者，难共计。
现代文：段公是个儒者，难得与他商量。
English: Duan Gong is a Confucian, and it is rare to have a discussion with him.

古文：拾取富贵若何？ 
现代文：沙陀兵雄劲，李振武父子勇冠三军。我们若推他为首，肯定会答应。
English: The soldiers of Satou are strong, and Li Zhenwu and his son are the most courageous of the three armies. If we push him to be the leader, he will certainly agree.

古文：咸曰： 善！ 
现代文：那代北唾手可得，富贵俯拾即是。 
English: In that generation, the north was easy to get to, and the rich were easy to pick off.

古文：乃夜谒国昌子云中守捉使克用曰： 岁艰禀食削，吾等不忍饿死，公家威德著闻，请诛虐帅，安部内。 
现代文：大家都说好，于是夜里去见国昌之子云中守捉使克用，说： 年成不好，供应削减了，我们不愿意饿死，您一家威德有名，希望您能诛杀残虐的统帅以安定部内。 
English: Everyone said yes, so in the night he went to see Guochang's son, Yunzhongshuo, and said: The year is not good, supplies have been cut, we don't want to starve to death, your family is famous for its virtue, I hope you can kill the cruel commander to stabilize the ministry.

古文：克用许之，募得士万人，趋云州，次斗鸡台。
现代文：克用同意，召募了一万人，赴云州，驻在斗鸡台，城中人捉了文楚送来，诛杀。
English: Kecheng agreed and recruited ten thousand people to go to Yunnan and stay at the cockfighting ring. People in the city captured Wenchu and sent him to fight and kill.

古文：城中执文楚至，杀之；据州以闻，共丐克用为大同防御留后。
现代文：盘据云州后上报朝廷，共同要求任克用为大同防御留后。皇帝不许，调各道兵来讨捕，各道兵不很有用，而黄巢此时正引兵渡长江。
English: After receiving the information from Yunnan, they reported it to the imperial court and jointly requested that Ren Ke stay behind to defend Datong. The emperor did not allow it, and sent soldiers from various provinces to fight. The soldiers from various provinces were not very useful, but Huang Chao was leading soldiers across the Yangtze River at this time.

古文：不许，发诸道兵进捕，诸道不甚力，而黄巢方引度江，朝廷度未能制，乃赦之，以国昌为大同军防御使。
现代文：朝廷估计无力制服克用他们，乃赦罪，任国昌为大同军防御使。
English: The imperial court estimated that it was powerless to subdue and defeat them, so it pardoned the crime and appointed Guochang as the defense envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：国昌不受命，诏河东节度使崔彦昭、幽州张公素共击之，无功。
现代文：国昌不受命，皇帝诏河东节度使崔彦昭、幽州的张公素共同去讨伐。无功。
English: Guochang did not accept the order, and Emperor Zhao sent Cui Yan Zhao and Zhang Gongsu to Yuzhou to fight together. To no avail.

古文：国昌与党项战，未决，大同川吐浑赫连鐸袭振武，尽取其赀械。
现代文：国昌与党项战，胜负尚未定，大同川的吐浑赫连铎袭击振武，将财物兵械全抢光。
English: In the battle between Guochang and the party, the winner is yet to be determined. Tutunhe Lianqi from Datong River attacked Zhenwu and robbed him of all his property and weapons.

古文：国昌穷，挈骑五百还云州，州不纳，鐸遂取之。
现代文：国昌困窘，带领五百骑兵回云州，云州不接纳，赫连铎乃取云州。
English: Guochang was embarrassed and led five hundred cavalrymen back to Yunnan. Yunnan did not accept them, but Khelian took Yunnan.

古文：克用转侧蔚、朔间，裒兵才三千，屯新城，鐸引万人围之，隧而攻，三日不拔，鐸兵杀伤甚。
现代文：克用辗转蔚州、朔州之间，聚兵才三千人，屯扎新城，铎领一万人来围攻，挖隧道入城，三天不能攻克，铎兵的伤亡惨重。
English: He used a plough to travel between Ulshu and Shuozhou. He gathered only three thousand soldiers, camped in Xincheng, led ten thousand people to besiege, dug a tunnel into the city, and could not conquer it for three days. The casualties of his soldiers were heavy.

古文：国昌自蔚州来，鐸引去。
现代文：此时国昌自蔚州来，赫连铎退兵。
English: At this time, Guochang came from Ulshu, and He Lianhe retired.

古文：僖宗以鐸领大同节度，畀讨国昌。
现代文：僖宗让铎指挥大同节度讨伐国昌。
English: Emperor Xizong asked Emperor Gao to command the Datong Sect to attack Guochang.

古文：六年，诏昭义李钧为北面招讨使，督潞、太原兵屯代州；幽州李可举会鐸攻蔚州，国昌以一队当之。
现代文：乾符六年，诏令昭义节度使李钧为北面招讨使，指挥潞州、太原兵屯守代州；幽州节度使李可举会同赫连铎攻蔚州。国昌以一队来抵挡，克用分兵抵达遮虏城迎战李钧。
English: In the sixth year of the Kianfu era, the Zhaoyi Festival made Li Jie the north-side recruiting envoy, commanding Bozhou and Taiyuan soldiers to defend Daizhou; the Yuzhou Festival made Li Ke hold a meeting with Helian Jie to attack Ulshu. Guochang resisted with a team, and Kegui's detachment arrived at Chailu City to meet Li Jie.

古文：克用分兵抵遮虏城拒钧，天大雪，士戺仆，钧众溃，还代州，军遂乱，钧死于兵。广明元年，以李琢为蔚、朔招讨都统，率兵数万屯代州。
现代文：天大雪，士兵都冻僵了，李钧军溃败，回到代州，军中乱起，李钧被杀死。广明元年，任李琢为蔚州、朔州招讨都统，率兵几万人屯守代州。
English: It snowed heavily and the soldiers froze to death. Li Gan's army was defeated and returned to Daizhou. Riots broke out in the army, and Li Gan was killed. In the first year of Guangming, Li Taku was appointed as the leader of Ulshu and Shuozhou, and led tens of thousands of soldiers to defend Daizhou.

古文：克用使傅文达调蔚、朔兵，朔州刺史高文集缚以送琢。
现代文：克用派傅文达调蔚州、朔州之兵，朔州刺史高文集捉住傅文达送给李琢。
English: Ke used to send Fu Wenda to tune the soldiers of Wuzhou and Shuozhou, and Shuozhou sent Fu Wenda to present the collection of Gao Shi to Li Tuo.

古文：琢进攻蔚州，国昌败，与克用举宗奔达靼。
现代文：李琢进攻蔚州，国昌败，与克用带领全宗族逃奔鞑靼。
English: Li Taku attacked Ulshu, the state was defeated, and the whole clan fled to Tartary, led by Keren.

古文：鐸密畀酋长图之，克用得其计，因豪桀大会驰射，百步外针芒木叶无不中，部人大惊，即倡言： 今黄巢北寇，为中原患，一日天子赦我，愿与公等南向定天下，庸能终老沙碛哉！ 
现代文：赫连铎秘密要鞑靼酋长杀死国昌。克用将计就计，在豪杰大会上驰马射击，百步以外树叶针尖，发箭无不中的。鞑靼部人大惊。克用扬言： 如今黄巢作战，是中原的大患，若天子哪一天赦我罪，我愿与公等南下平定天下，岂能终老于沙碛。 
English: Kherlian secretly asked the Tatar chieftain to kill Guochang. Keren used the strategy to his advantage, riding a horse and shooting at the hero convention. A hundred paces away, the leaves of the trees were needle-sharp, and the arrows could not miss. The Tatar people were shocked. Keren threatened: Today, the Yellow Nest battle is a great plague of the Central Plains. If the Son of Heaven forgives my sin one day, I would like to go south with the public to pacify the world. Will I be able to stay in Shajing forever?

古文：达靼知不留，乃止。
现代文：鞑靼知道他们不会久留，不再谋杀他们。
English: The Tartars knew they wouldn't stay long, so they stopped murdering them.

古文：巢攻潼关，入京师，诏河东监军陈景思发代北军。
现代文：黄巢攻破潼关，入京师。皇帝命河东监军陈景思发代北军入援京师。
English: Huang Chao broke through Shaoguan and entered the Beijing Division. The emperor ordered Chen Jingshi, the commander of the East River Supervision Army, to enter the Beijing Division on behalf of the Northern Army.

古文：时沙陀都督李友金屯兴唐军，萨葛首领米海万、安庆都督史敬存屯感义军，克用客塞下，众数千无所属。
现代文：当时沙陀都督李友金屯驻兴唐军，萨葛首领米海万、安庆都督史敬存屯驻感义军，李克用客居塞下，几千人马无所属。
English: At that time, Li Youjin, the governor of Shatou, was stationed with the Xing-Tang army, Mai Haiwan, the leader of Sagat, and Shi Jingcun, the governor of Anqing, were stationed with the Xing-Tang army, and Li Ke was stationed as a guest, leaving several thousand people without any affiliation.

古文：景思闻天子西，乃与友金料骑五千入居绛，兵擅劫帑自私。
现代文：陈景思听说天子已西行，乃与李友金挑选了五千骑兵到达绛州，士兵们擅自抢劫官库。
English: Chen Jingsi heard that Tianzi had gone west, but he and Li Youjin selected five thousand cavalry to arrive in Zhangzhou. The soldiers robbed the official treasury without authorization.

古文：还代州，益募士三万，屯崞西，士嚣纵，友金不能制，谋曰： 今合大众，不得威名宿将，且无功。
现代文：绛州刺史劝景思多召些兵，景思乃回代州，募兵三万，屯扎崞西，士兵们犷悍横暴，李友金驾驭不了，乃与陈景思商议 ：如今招募了这些兵，如没有威信高的宿将来统率，终将无功。
English: Zhang Zhou advised Jingshi to call up more soldiers, and Jingshi returned to Daizhou, recruited 30,000 soldiers, and camped in the west of Anhui. The soldiers were fierce and violent, and Li Youjin could not control them, but discussed with Chen Jingshi: These soldiers have been recruited now, and if there is no prestigious future command, it will ultimately be useless.

古文：吾兄司徒父子，材而雄，众所推畏，比得罪于朝，侨戍北部不敢还。
现代文：我哥哥司徒父子勇略过人，一向为士兵所敬畏。近来得罪朝廷，侨居北部不敢回来。
English: My elder brother, Satoru, father and son, have always been feared by soldiers. Recently, they have offended the imperial court, and expatriates in the northern part of the country are afraid to return.

古文：今若召之使将兵，代北豪英，一呼可集，整行伍，鼓而南，贼不足平也。 
现代文：如果能召他来带兵，代北的英豪，将会一呼而集，整肃行伍，浩荡南下，黄巢是不足虑的。 
English: If he can be called upon to lead the troops, the heroes of the north will gather in unison, clean up the ranks, and sweep southward. Huang Chao is not worried.

古文：景思曰： 善！ 
现代文：景思说 ：对。 
English: Jing Si said, "Yes."

古文：乃丐赦国昌，使讨贼赎罪。
现代文：于是奏请赦免国昌，让他讨贼赎罪。
English: So he appealed to the emperor to pardon Guochang and let him atone for his crime.

古文：有诏拜克用代州刺史、忻代兵马留后，促本军讨贼。
现代文：皇帝乃授克用为代州刺史、忻代兵马留后，统本军讨贼。
English: Emperor Naijuk used Daishu Shishi and Shidai Terracotta Warriors and Horses to lead the main army to fight against the bandits.

古文：克用募达靼万人，趋代州，将南道太原。
现代文：克用招募一万鞑靼人前往代州，将南经太原。
English: KGB recruited ten thousand Tatars to go to Daizhou, and sent them south via Taiyuan.

古文：节度使郑从谠塞石岭关，不得前，克用儳道至太原，营城下五日，邀粮赀，从谠不答，乃大略，还屯代州。
现代文：节度使郑从谠闭塞石岭关，不得通，克用走小路到太原，扎营城下五天，要求资助钱粮，从谠不答，于是大打出手，回代州留驻。
English: Due to the festival, Zheng Conglu blocked the Shiling Pass and was unable to pass through. He used the footpath to Taiyuan and camped for five days. He asked for money and grain, but Zonglu did not answer, so he fought hard and returned to Daizhou to stay.

古文：中和二年，蔚州刺史苏祐会赫连鐸兵将攻代州，克用率骑五百先袭蔚州，下之。
现代文：中和二年，蔚州刺史苏会同赫连铎兵将攻击代州，克用率五百骑兵先袭蔚州，攻克。
English: In the middle of the 2nd year of the Heian period, the Ulshu Shishi-Shu Association and the Herenghui soldiers attacked Daizhou. Five hundred cavalrymen were used to attack and conquer Ulshu.

古文：祐屯美女谷，鐸与幽州李可举众七万攻蔚州，谯栅相属。
现代文：苏屯守美女谷，赫连铎与幽州的李可举合兵七万攻蔚州，工事连着工事。
English: Su Tun guarded Bijie Valley, while Helian and Yuzhou's Li Ke raised 70,000 troops to attack Ulshu, and the construction continued.

古文：克用直捣营，入蔚州，燔府库，弃而去，屯雁门。
现代文：克用直捣其军营，入蔚州，烧毁府库后弃城而去，屯驻雁门。
English: He stormed his military camp, entered Ulsan, burned down the government treasury, abandoned the city, and settled in Ganmen.

古文：国昌自达靼率兵归代州。
现代文：国昌自鞑靼率兵回代州。
English: Guochang led the troops from Tatar back to Dayaizhou.

古文：扰汾、并、楼烦，不释铠。
现代文：骚扰汾、并、楼烦，兵不卸甲。
English: Harassment, and building troubles, soldiers do not unload armor.

古文：帝诏克用还军朔州。
现代文：皇帝诏令克用回军朔州。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered his troops to return to Shuozhou.

古文：于是义武节度使王处存、河中节度使王重荣传诏招克用同讨巢。
现代文：那时，义武节度使王处存、河中节度使王重荣传诏召克用共同讨伐黄巢。
English: At that time, the Yiwu Festival made the king survive, and the Mid-River Festival made Wang Chongrong issue an edict calling for a joint crusade against the Yellow Nest.

古文：克用喜，即大阅雁门，得忻、代、蔚、朔、达靼众三万、骑五千而南。
现代文：克用喜，即在雁门大阅兵，得忻、代、蔚、朔、鞑靼的兵众三万、骑兵五千南下。
English: Kechengi, that is, the large military parade at the Wild Goose Gate, attracted 30,000 soldiers and 5,000 cavalrymen from Shan, Dai, Wei, Shuo and Tatar to the south.

古文：于是国昌守代州。
现代文：国昌驻守代州。
English: Guochang was stationed in Daizhou.

古文：郑从谠不肯假道，克用军傅太原而营，奉币马遗从谠，身从数骑呼曰： 我且西，愿与公一言。 
现代文：郑从谠不肯借道，克用的军队在太原城边扎营，送钱及马给从谠，只带几个骑兵大喊： 我即将西行，想与公说句话。 
English: Zheng Conglu did not want to take the road, and the army of Kegui camped on the edge of Taiyuan City, sent money and horses to Conglu, and shouted with only a few cavalrymen: I am about to go west, I want to have a word with Gong.

古文：从谠升陴慰勉，归货币饔饩。
现代文：从谠到城垛上对克用慰勉一番，归还他财币牲畜。
English: From the plough to the battlements, he was consoled with grain, and his money and livestock were returned.

古文：克用乃自阴地趋晋，会河中。
现代文：克用即从阴地向晋进发，与王重荣在河中相会。
English: He immediately started from Yin to Jin and met Wang Chongrong in the middle of the river.

古文：帝闻，擢克用雁门节度、神策天宁军镇遏、忻代观察使。
现代文：皇帝得知后，升克用为雁门节度使、神策天宁军镇遏、忻代观察使。
English: After the emperor learned about it, Shengke was used as the envoy of the Wild Goose Gate Festival, the divine plan to suppress the Tianning Army, and the observation envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：明年，宰相王鐸承制，授克用东北面行营都统，河东监军陈景思为监军使。
现代文：第二年，宰相王铎依例，授克用为东北面行营都统。河东监军陈景思为监军使。
English: In the following year, the prime minister, Wang Qian, followed the precedent and appointed Ke as the commander of the northeastern camp, and Chen Jingshi, the military inspector of the eastern part of the river, as the military inspector.

古文：克用使弟克脩领彀骑五百度河，克用自夏阳济，留薛阿檀扼津口，次同州，壁乾坑，与贼战梁田坡，败之。进壁渭桥，遂收京师。
现代文：克用让弟弟克修领弓箭骑兵五百人渡河，克用从夏阳渡河，留薛阿檀扼守津口，屯扎同州，在乾阝亢修筑工事，与黄巢军在梁田坡一战，大胜，进而驻守渭桥，终于克复京师。
English: He let his brother Keshu cross the river with 500 archers and horsemen. He crossed the river from Xiayang, left Xueadan to guard Tsuguchi, camped in Tongzhou, built in Qianlong, fought with the Yellow Nest Army in Liangtanpo, won a great victory, and then stationed in Qianqiao. Finally, he restored the Beijing Division.

古文：功第一，进同中书门下平章事、陇西郡公；国昌为代北军节度使。
现代文：因有首功，升同中书门下平章事，封爵陇西郡公，任国昌为代北军节度使。
English: As a result of his first merit, he was promoted to the rank of Chushumon Shimohei Shoji, given the title of Duke of Shaanxi County, and appointed as the representative of the Northern Army.

古文：未几，以克用领河东节度。
现代文：不久，派克用任河东节度使。
English: Soon after, Pike was appointed as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：黄巢与秦宗权合寇河南。
现代文：黄巢与秦宗权联合入侵河南。
English: Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan jointly invaded Henan.

古文：四年，克用率河东、代北兵将自泽、潞下天井关，河阳诸葛爽堙井以拒，克用乃由河中济，趋许州，合徐、汴兵破尚让于太康。
现代文：中和四年，克用率河东、代北兵将从泽、潞州下天井关，河阳的诸葛爽塞井拒绝克用，克用乃由河中渡河，前往许州，会合徐、汴的兵在太康击破尚让。
English: In the four years of the Sino-Japanese War, the soldiers from the eastern part of the river and the soldiers from the northern part of the river who were used to defeat the enemy came from Ze and Zhangzhou. Zhuge Shuo Sai Jing of Heyang refused to be used to defeat the enemy, but they crossed the river from the middle of the river and went to Xuzhou. The soldiers of Xu and Zou met in Taikang and defeated Shangzhang.

古文：战西华，又破之。
现代文：再战西华，又胜。
English: In the rematch against West China, they won again.

古文：贼走，河南平。
现代文：贼逃走，河南平定。
English: The thief fled and Henan was pacified.

古文：追北曹州，还过汴，硃全忠邀之，克用留兵于郊，入舍上源馆。
现代文：克用追败军至曹州，回军时经汴州，朱全忠邀他，乃留兵于郊，入城住在上源馆。
English: K used to chase the defeated army to Caozhou, and when he returned to the army, he went through Zhangzhou. Zhu Quanzhong invited him, but he stayed in the suburbs and entered the city to live in Shangyuan Pavilion.

古文：夜帐饮，全忠自佐饔，进赀宝，握手谆劳。
现代文：夜晚宴饮，朱全忠亲自把盏，馈赠财宝，握手慰劳。
English: At the evening banquet, Zhu Quanzhong personally presented a cup, gave away treasures, and shook hands.

古文：是时，全忠忌克用桀迈难制，则连车外环，陈兵道左右。
现代文：这时，朱全忠嫉恨克用桀骜难制，于是在舍外联车竖栅，在大路左右排列兵士。
English: At this time, Zhu Quanzhong hated to use force to overcome difficulties, so he set up a barricade outside the house and lined up soldiers on the left and right sides of the road.

古文：克用醉。
现代文：那时克用已醉，全忠发兵攻馆。
English: At that time, Kegui was already drunk, and Quanzhong sent troops to attack the hall.

古文：乃攻馆，下拒战，亲将郭景铢灭烛扶克用，徐告之，尚被酒，乃引弓射。
现代文：手下人迎战，亲将郭景铢吹灭蜡烛扶起克用，告知祸事。克用酒尚未全醒，即援弓而射。
English: His subordinates went into battle, and Guo Jingyao personally blew out the candles, helped Guo Jian up, and informed him of the calamity. Guo Jian was not yet fully awake, so he shot a bow.

古文：会烟嚣四合，大震电，克用与薛志勤等间关升南谯门，缒走营。部下死者数百人，所获贼乘舆物尽亡之。
现代文：全忠兵纵火，烟焰四合，忽大雷电，克用与薛志勤等人觅小路上南谯门，缒城而出，部下被杀几百人，所缴获的车物等全没了。
English: Quanzhong soldiers set fire, smoke and fire, sudden thunder and lightning, Ke Ying and Xue Zhiqin and others searched for a path to the South Gate, out of Lucheng, hundreds of subordinates were killed, and the seized vehicles and so on were all gone.

古文：克用整众归太原，益训兵，将报仇，使弟克勤以万骑屯河中，乃请击全忠。使者八返，内外震恐，帝使内谒慰解。寻进位检校太傅、陇西郡王。
现代文：克用整军回太原，加紧练兵，准备报仇，派弟弟克勤率一万骑兵屯驻河中，上奏要求讨伐全忠，使者八次往返，内外均震恐，皇帝派中使去安慰劝解，不久晋升为检校太傅，封爵陇西郡王。
English: He returned to Taiyuan with the whole army, intensified the training of soldiers, and prepared to take revenge. He sent his younger brother Ke to diligently stationed ten thousand cavalry in the middle of the river, and made a request to fight against Quanzhong. The envoy went back and forth eight times, and both at home and abroad were shocked. The emperor sent a middle envoy to comfort and persuade. Soon he was promoted to the school inspection taifu, and was knighted as the king of Shaanxi County.

古文：光启元年，幽州李可举、镇州王景崇言： 易定故燕、赵境，请取分之。 
现代文：光启元年，幽州的李可举、镇州的王说： 易定旧属燕赵境，请求能取而分之。 
English: In the first year of the Guangqi era, Li Keju of Yuzhou and Wang of Zhenzhou said: Yiding used to belong to Yan Zhao territory, and the request can be taken.

古文：于是可举攻易州，下之；景崇攻无极。
现代文：可举乃攻取了易州；王攻无极。
English: It is possible to capture Yizhou, but it is impossible to conquer everywhere.

古文：易定节度使王处存求救于克用，克用自将救无极，败镇人，攻马头，固新城。
现代文：易定节度使王处存向克用求援。克用自己带兵援助无极，打败王，进而攻马头，拔新城，镇州兵逃走。
English: The easy-to-determine degree of victory made the king ask for help from Kegui. Kegui used his own soldiers to help immensely, defeated the king, then attacked Ma Tau, took Xincheng, and the Zhenzhou soldiers fled.

古文：镇兵走，处存复取易州。
现代文：王处存收回易州。
English: King's Office to recover Yizhou.

古文：凤翔李昌符、邠宁硃玫与全忠连和，观军容使田令孜恶克用与王重荣合，建言： 不可处近辅，请授王处存河中，而徙重荣于易定，则克用孤矣。 
现代文：凤翔的李昌符、宁的朱玫与朱全忠联和，观军容使田令孜不喜欢克用与王重荣联合，乃建议： 不可把他们放在京都附近，请将王处存调往河中，将王重荣调往易定，这样克用就孤立了。 
English: Fengxiang's Li Changfu, Ning's Zhu Mei and Zhu Quanzhong were united, and Tian Lingzi, a military observer, did not like the union of Keguin and Wang Chung Rong, but suggested: Do not put them near Kyoto, please transfer Wang Chung to the middle of the river and Wang Chung Rong to Yiding, so that Keguin is isolated.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：重荣以告，克用怒曰： 我当从公提鼓出汜水关诛全忠，回歼穴鼠耳。 
现代文：王重荣将此事告诉克用，克用怒，说： 我一定随公出汜水关诛杀全忠，回头再来歼灭洞中鼠。 
English: Wang Chong Rong told the matter to Ge Ying, Ge Ying angered, saying: I will definitely follow the public out of Surabaya to kill Quanzhong, and come back to destroy the rats in the cave.

古文：重荣计曰： 公兵朝出关，则邠、岐兵夕傅吾堞，愿先治邠、岐。 
现代文：重荣设想说： 公的兵早上出关，则、岐州的兵晚上就会上我的城头，希望能先治、岐。 
English: Chong Rong thought: If the public soldiers leave the customs in the morning, then the soldiers from Qizhou will come to my castle in the evening, hoping to be the first to rule and conquer.

古文：克用乃表言： 玫、昌符连全忠为乱，请以兵十五万度河枭二竖，然后平汴雪大耻，愿陛下戒严，无为贼所摇。 
现代文：克用即上表： 朱玫、李昌符连同朱全忠为乱，请求能以十五万兵渡河杀此二奸贼，然后雪汴州之耻，希望陛下警戒，不要被贼人所动摇。 
English: He immediately used the above table: Zhu Mei, Li Changfu, together with Zhu Quanzhong, were in chaos, and he asked to be able to cross the river with 150,000 soldiers to kill these two traitors, and then the disgrace of Xue Bingzhou, hoping that His Majesty would be alert and not be shaken by the thieves.

古文：帝遣使慰止，背相望也。
现代文：皇帝派使者安慰劝止。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to comfort and dissuade him.

古文：克用不奉诏，玫亦引邠、凤兵营沙苑。克用薄战，玫败，夜亡去。
现代文：克用不肯听，朱玫就领宁、凤翔的兵屯驻沙苑，克用迫战，朱玫败，夜里逃走。
English: Kegui did not want to listen, so Zhu Mei led Ning and Fengxiang's soldiers to stay in Shayuan. Kegui forced them to fight, but Zhu Mei was defeated and fled in the night.

古文：克用还河中，天子出趣凤翔，道传兵且至，即趣宝鸡。
现代文：克用回军河中。天子出京去凤翔，路上传说兵将至，天子乃去宝鸡。
English: The emperor went to Fengxiang on his way out of the capital, and it was rumored that the soldiers would be arriving, and that the emperor was going to Baoji.

古文：克用与重荣联章请还宫，愿留兵卫京师，即还镇。
现代文：克用与重荣联名上奏章请皇帝回宫，愿留兵卫京师，自己回镇。
English: He used the joint petition with Chong Rong to ask the emperor to return to the palace. He was willing to stay behind to guard the capital and return to the town.

古文：帝惧，走大散关，驻兴元。
现代文：皇帝害怕，又行至大散关，驻在兴元。
English: The emperor was afraid, so he went to Great Sankuan again and stayed in Xingyuan.

古文：克用引归。
现代文：克用领兵回。
English: Krzyzewski led the troops back.

古文：嗣襄王煴伪诏至太原，克用燔之，执其使，间道奉表兴元。
现代文：嗣襄王誰的伪诏送到太原，克用拘扣使者，烧掉伪诏，从小路上表到兴元皇帝处。
English: The heir to the throne, whose forged edict was sent to Taiyuan, seized the envoy, burned the forged edict, and went to the Emperor Xingyuan from a small road.

古文：始，朝廷意玫结克用迫乘舆，及表至，示群臣，因腾晓山南诸镇，行在少安。
现代文：当初，朝廷认为是朱玫与克用勾结逼迫皇帝，及克用的表到，群臣传观。于是传谕山南诸镇讨贼，心中稍安。
English: At first, the imperial court believed that Zhu Mei and Kegui had conspired to persecute the emperor, and when Kegui's appearance was discovered, a group of courtiers were sent to investigate. Therefore, they sent an envoy to the towns in Shannan to search for the thieves, and they felt a little more at ease.

古文：王行瑜斩玫，克用以千骑经略京畿。
现代文：朱玫的将领王行瑜斩杀朱玫，克用以一千骑兵攻克京畿。
English: Zhu Mei's general Wang Xingyu killed Zhu Mei and used a thousand cavalry to conquer Gyeonggi.

古文：三年，国昌卒。
现代文：光启三年，国昌死。
English: In the third year of Guangqi, Guochang died.

古文：俄而昭宗即位，进克用检校太师兼侍中。
现代文：不久，昭宗即位，克用升任检校太师兼侍中。
English: Soon after, Akimune ascended to the throne, and Kagenori was promoted to Kengyo Taishi and Samurai Junior High School.

古文：大顺初，克用自攻赫连鐸于云州，拔东郛。幽州李匡威以兵三万救之，杀其将安金俊，克用走。
现代文：大顺初年，克用自己在云州攻击赫连铎，拔取东城，幽州李匡威派三万兵来救援，杀其将安金俊，克用退走。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Ke used himself to attack Helianthus in Yunnan and take Dongcheng. Yuzhou Li Kuangwei sent thirty thousand soldiers to rescue and kill An Jinjun, and Ke used himself to retreat.

古文：鐸与匡威共建言： 山南乱，克用实首之。
现代文：赫连铎与李匡威共同建议： 山南之乱，克用是首犯。
English: He Lianyao and Li Kuangwei jointly proposed: In the Shannan Rebellion, Kegui was the first offender.

古文：今乘其败，可伐而取也。 
现代文：现在可乘他战败，一举歼灭。 
English: Now we can take advantage of his defeat and annihilate him in one fell swoop.

古文：全忠亦请与河北三镇共讨之。
现代文：朱全忠也请求与河北三镇共同讨伐克用。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also requested to work with the three towns in Hebei Province to jointly use Slovakia.

古文：宰相张浚是其计，乃下制削克用官爵、属籍，以浚为兵马招讨、制置、宣慰使，京兆尹孙揆副之，枢密使骆全諲为行营都监，华州节度使韩建为行营马步都虞候兼供军粮料使，王镕领河东东面，全忠南面，李匡威北面，并为行营招讨使。鐸副匡威，先薄战。
现代文：宰相张浚肯定了这建议，于是下制削去克用的官爵、属籍，派张浚为兵马招讨制置使、宣慰使，京兆尹孙揆为副使，枢密使骆全为行营都监，华州节度使韩建为行营马步都虞候兼供军粮料使；王为河东东面招讨使，朱全忠为河东南面招讨使，李匡威为河东北面招讨使，赫连铎为李匡威副手，先去迎战。
English: The prime minister Zhang Jun affirmed this suggestion, so the next step was to reduce the ranks and titles of officials and subordinates, and Zhang Jun was sent as the army and horse recruiting and placing envoy, the propaganda and consolation envoy, Jing Zha Yin Sun Rong as the deputy envoy, the privy envoy Luo Quan as the commander of the camp, the Huazhou Festival to make Han Jian as the commander of the camp and the grain supply envoy; Wang was the recruiting envoy for the east side of the river, Zhu Quanzhong was the recruiting envoy for the south-east side of the river, Li Kuangwei was the recruiting envoy for the northeast

古文：克用追潞兵，不肯行，共杀守将李克恭，送款于汴，南首阙下。
现代文：克用正追潞州兵，铎不肯行。杀守将李克恭，送书愿归附汴州，献首京师。
English: Keren was in pursuit of the Yongzheng soldiers, but Zou refused to go. He sent a letter to Li Keqiong, saying that he wanted to be annexed to Yongzheng and offer his head to the Beijing division.

古文：更诏揆为昭义节度使，克用将李存孝邀揆长子杀之。
现代文：皇帝诏派孙揆为昭义节度使，克用的将领李存孝在长子谷拦截并杀死孙揆。
English: Emperor Zhao sent Sun Yat-sen as an envoy to the Zhao Yi Festival, and the general Li Cunxiao intercepted and killed Sun Yat-sen in the Valley of the Firstborn.

古文：匡威、鐸并吐蕃、黠戛斯众十万攻遮虏军，杀其将刘胡子。
现代文：李匡威、赫连铎及吐蕃、黠戛斯带十万人马攻遮虏军，杀其将刘胡子。
English: Li Kuangwei, Helianthus, and Tujing and Jiaxing led 100,000 men to attack the Qajar army and kill its commander, Liu Huci.

古文：克用乃屯浑河川，存孝与鐸战乐安，鐸败走。
现代文：克用乃屯守浑河川，存孝在乐安与铎战，铎败走。
English: Ketsune Naito guarded the Hunkawa River, while Cun Taka fought against the Hunkawa in Le An, but was defeated and left.

古文：浚入阴地关，壁汾、隰，薛铁山、李承嗣营洪洞迎战。
现代文：张浚入阴地关，闭守汾州、隰州。薛铁山、李承嗣营地洪洞迎战。
English: Zhang Jian entered Yinji Pass, closed off Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou. Xue Tieshan and Li Chengzhi's camp in Hongdong faced the battle.

古文：存孝次赵城，韩建夜出壮士三百乘其营，存孝伏以待，建兵大奔。
现代文：存孝驻扎赵城，韩建率三百壮士夜袭存孝营地，谁知存孝早有伏兵，建兵大败。
English: Cun Xiao was stationed in Zhaocheng. Han Jian led three hundred strong men to attack Cun Xiao's camp at night. Who knew that Cun Xiao had already been ambushed and defeated.

古文：存孝攻绛州，未下，晋州刺史张行恭弃城走，建与浚遁还。
现代文：存孝进而攻绛州，城未破时，晋州刺史张行恭就弃城而去，韩建与张浚偷偷逃归。
English: Cunxiao went on to attack Bozhou, and when the city was not breached, Zhang Xingxiong, the governor of Jinzhou, abandoned the city, and Han Jian and Zhang Jian secretly fled.

古文：明年，克用奉表自陈，乃复拜检校太师、守中书令、陇西郡王。
现代文：第二年，克用上表说明攻战缘由，于是重新委任他为检校太师、守中书令，封爵陇西郡王。
English: In the second year, Ke used the above table to explain the reasons for attacking the war, and then re-appointed him as the school inspector, the guard of the middle school, and the king of Shaanxi County.

古文：克用悉兵攻鐸云州，以骑将薛阿檀为前军，设伏河上。
现代文：克用全力攻云州赫连铎，派骑将薛阿檀为前军，设伏兵于河上。
English: He used all his strength to attack Yunnan's Herengganu, sent his cavalry to take Xueadan as the vanguard, and set up an ambush on the river.

古文：鐸纵骑追阿檀，遇伏而奔。鐸亡入吐浑。
现代文：铎纵马去追阿檀，遇到伏兵，败逃入吐浑。
English: Zangzhongma chased after Adan, encountered an ambush, and fled to Tuban.

古文：克用取云州，以部将石善友为刺史、大同军防御使。
现代文：克用取得云州，派部将石善友为刺史、大同军防御使。
English: With the acquisition of Yunnan by the KMT, the faction designated Shi Shengyou as the scribe and the defense envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：景福初，镇州王镕攻尧山，克用使李嗣勋击之，斩级三万，克用遂拔天长，略常山，度滹沱，燔其郛。
现代文：景福初年，镇州的王攻尧山，克用派李嗣勋迎战，杀三万人。克用攻克天长，侵常山，渡滹沱河，焚烧其外城。
English: In the first year of Jingfu, the king of Zhenzhou attacked Lushan, and sent Li Shixun to fight, killing 30,000 people. He used it to conquer Tianchang, invade Changshan, cross the Lushan River, and burn its outer city.

古文：徇地至赵，取鼓、藁二城。
现代文：巡行至赵，再攻取鼓、藁二城。
English: They marched to Zhao, and then captured the two cities of Drum and Gong.

古文：赫连鐸众八万攻天成军，克用飞檄发军太原，匡威已壁云州北郊，克用自神堆引军夜入云州，死战，走之。
现代文：赫连铎率众八百攻天成军，克用飞传檄书至太原调兵。李匡威已在云州北郊筑工事坚守，克用从神堆领军入云州，死战，被匡威赶走。
English: Helianthus led an army of eight hundred to invade heaven, and Confucius flew to Taiyuan to transfer the army. Li Kuangwei had been in the northern suburbs of Yunnan to build and maintain the construction, and Confucius led the army from Shendui into Yunnan, fought to the death, and was driven away by Confucius.

古文：乾宁元年，克用次新城，鐸膝行诣军门降，克用鞭而纵之。
现代文：乾宁元年，克用驻军新城，赫连铎膝行到军门降，克用鞭打了他一顿后放了他。
English: In the first year of the Qianning era, when Kegui was stationed in Xincheng, Herien went on his knees to the military gate to surrender. Kegui whipped him and then released him.

古文：进下武州，攻新州。李匡筹引步骑七万救之，克用迎战，斩首万级，俘少将三百，徇城下，新州降。
现代文：进而克武州，攻新州，李匡筹率七万步兵来援，克用迎战，杀死万人，俘少将三百。巡行城下，新州降。
English: Then he marched to Kew Chow and attacked New Chow. Li Kuang led 70,000 infantrymen to come to the aid of the city. They fought bravely, killed 10,000 people and captured 300 major generals. They marched down to the city and surrendered New Chow.

古文：取妫州，匡筹弃幽州走。
现代文：又攻取妫州，匡筹弃幽州而逃。
English: He also captured Bozhou, but Kuang abandoned Yuzhou and fled.

古文：明年，幽州降，克用以刘仁恭为留后，乃旋。
现代文：第二年，幽州也降。克用派刘仁恭为留后，自己领兵归。
English: The next year, Yuzhou also surrendered. After Kegui sent Liu Rengong to stay, he led his troops back.

古文：王行瑜、韩建、李茂贞连兵南阙下，杀李溪。
现代文：王行瑜、韩建、李茂贞等连兵入京师南门杀了李奚谷。
English: Wang Xingyu, Han Jian, Li Maozhen and other soldiers entered Beijing and killed Li Shugu at the South Gate.

古文：克用尽调北部兵度河，拔绛州，斩刺史王瑶。
现代文：克用尽调北部兵渡河，攻克绛州，斩杀刺史王瑶。
English: He exhausted the northern troops to cross the river, conquered Zhangzhou, and killed the assassin Wang Yao.

古文：次河中，王珂谒于道。
现代文：到达河中，王珂在道边迎谒。
English: Reaching the middle of the river, Wang Ke greeted the dragonfly on the roadside.

古文：同州王行约奔京师。
现代文：同州节度使王行约逃奔京师。
English: The festival in the same state caused Wang Xing to flee to Beijing.

古文：围韩建于华州，京师震动，帝为幸石门、莎城，遣内谒郗廷昱慰劳，且言茂贞屯盩厔，行瑜屯兴平，克用乃进营渭桥。
现代文：克用围韩建于华州，京师震动，皇帝到石门、莎城，派内谒郗廷昱前去慰劳，且告诉克用茂贞屯兵銩稨，行瑜屯兵兴平，有劫驾之意，克用乃移驻渭桥。
English: Ke used the siege of Han to build in Huazhou, the Beijing division was shaken, the emperor went to Shimen and Shacheng, and sent the Inner Court Courier to comfort, and told Ke to use the Maozhen garrison and the Xingping garrison, with the intention of hijacking, and Ke used it to move to Longqiao.

古文：帝以嗣延王戒丕、嗣丹王允诏克用击邠、凤。
现代文：皇帝派嗣延王戒丕、嗣丹王允带诏书命克用攻击州、凤州。
English: The emperor sent his heir Yan Wang Jiechi and his heir Dan Wang Yun with an edict ordering them to attack Suzhou and Fengzhou.

古文：克用奉诏，屯渭北，遣史俨以票骑三千护石门，且令王珂输河中粟备行在。
现代文：克用遵旨屯驻渭北，派史俨领骠骑军三千人守护石门，又令王珂将河中粮食运来供行宫所用。
English: He stationed himself in northern Gansu in accordance with the emperor's order, and sent 3,000 soldiers to guard the Stone Gate. He also ordered Wang Ke to transport grain from the river for use in the palace.

古文：帝以赤诏嘉答，进克用诸道兵马都招讨使，命二嗣王兄事之，令促讨行瑜。
现代文：皇帝写赤笔诏嘉奖克用，升克用为诸道兵马都招讨使，命两个嗣王把克用当哥哥看待，促令他讨伐行瑜。
English: The emperor wrote a red-pen edict praising Kegui, and promoted Kegui to be an envoy for all the armies and horses of all the realms, and ordered the two heirs to treat Kegui as an elder brother and urge him to fight against Xingyu.

古文：克用请帝还京师，以二千骑卫乘舆。
现代文：克用请皇帝回京师，派二千骑兵护卫。
English: He invited the emperor to return to Beijing and sent two thousand cavalry to escort him.

古文：时宫室煨残，驻尚书省，百官丧马，克用进乘舆金具装二驷，又上百乘给从官。
现代文：当时宫室残破，暂驻尚书省。此时百官均无马，克用贡献皇帝用金装车马两套，又送上百乘车给随从。
English: At that time, the imperial household was in ruins, temporarily stationed in Shangshu Province. At this time, all officials had no horses. The emperor contributed two sets of gold-plated chariots and horses, and sent hundreds of cars to his entourage.

古文：进太师、兼中书令、邠宁四面行营都统。
现代文：皇帝乃升他为太师、兼中书令、宁四面行营都统。
English: The emperor promoted him to daishi and chujo, and Ning marched on all sides of the capital.

古文：行瑜坚壁梨园，茂贞自率师三万逼咸阳而屯。
现代文：行瑜坚壁梨园，茂贞亲自率三万人马逼近咸阳而屯扎。
English: Maozhen personally led thirty thousand horses to approach Xianyang and encamp there.

古文：克用请帝责茂贞罢兵，因削官爵，愿与河中共讨之。
现代文：克用请皇帝责令茂贞撤兵，削其官爵，愿与河中合力讨伐他。
English: He asked the emperor to order Maozhen to withdraw his troops and to demote him to a peerage. He was willing to join forces with Hechong to fight against him.

古文：帝诏弟事行瑜，贷茂贞，俾结好。硃诏赐魏国夫人陈氏。
现代文：皇帝诏令只对付王行瑜，宽恕李茂贞，要茂贞与克用言和；且写朱笔诏书将魏国夫人陈氏赐给克用。
English: The emperor's edict only dealt with Wang Xingyu, forgave Li Maozhen, and asked Maozhen to make peace with Ke; and wrote a red-pen edict to give Wei's wife Chen to Ke.

古文：陈，襄阳人也，善书，帝所爱，欲急平贼，故予之。
现代文：陈氏，是襄阳人，长于书法，是皇帝所爱。此刻急于平贼乱，就送给了克用。
English: Chen, a native of Xiangyang, was good at calligraphy and was loved by the emperor. In his eagerness to quell the banditry, he gave it to Keren.

古文：茂贞以兵援龙泉，克用使李罕之、李存审夜引兵劫其饷，援兵亡，行瑜溃而走，追杀万计。
现代文：茂贞派兵到龙泉援助行瑜，克用派李罕之、李存审带兵夜里劫其粮饷。援兵亡散，行瑜败退，追杀以万计。
English: Maozhen sent soldiers to Longquan to aid Xingyu, while GeYi sent Li HanZhi and Li CunXin to lead soldiers to loot his grain store at night. The reinforcements were dispersed, XingYu was defeated, and tens of thousands were killed in the pursuit.

古文：行瑜入邠州，丐归款，克用使史俨入其城。行瑜死庆州，传自京师。
现代文：行瑜奔入州，乞降。克用派史俨入其城。后行瑜死于庆州，传首京师。
English: Xingyu rushed to Gyeongju and begged to be demoted. Gyeongyonghae Shihyeon entered his city. Later, Xingyu died in Gyeongju, and was said to be the first teacher in Beijing.

古文：帝悉论幕府官属及诸子功，封爵之，克用赐号 忠贞平难功臣 ，进封晋王。
现代文：皇帝对所有有功幕府官属及诸子一一封爵，赐克用号 忠贞平难功臣 ，进封晋王。
English: The emperor bestowed the title of "loyal, peaceful and meritorious vassal" on all meritorious officials of the shogunate and their sons.

古文：克用屯云阳，遣李习吉入朝，且请与王珂悉力讨茂贞，帝不许。
现代文：克用屯守云阳，派李习吉入朝，且要求与王珂合力讨平茂贞，皇帝不允。
English: The emperor did not allow Kegui to stay in Yunyang, sent Li Xiji to the imperial court, and demanded that he and Wang Ke work together to pacify Maozhen.

古文：克用私于使者曰： 叛根不除，忧未艾也。 
现代文：克用私下对使者说： 叛根不除，忧患不会结束。 
English: Kegui said to the messenger in private, "Rebellion cannot be eradicated, and sorrow cannot be ended.

古文：天子发度支钱三十万缗劳其军。
现代文：天子发库钱三十万缗犒劳其军。
English: The Son of Heaven paid 300,000 yuan in treasury money to his army.

古文：时郓州硃宣兄弟为全忠所困，使来告，克用请道于魏救之。
现代文：那时，郓州朱宣兄弟被朱全忠所困，派人来河东告急，克用请求借道魏州前去救援。
English: At that time, Zhu Xuan's brothers in Ganzhou were trapped by Zhu Quanzhong. They sent someone to Hedong to express their urgency, and Ke used the request to go to the rescue through Weizhou.

古文：兵解复斗，克用自将而往，使李存信率兵三万与史俨等次于莘，为魏兵所破。
现代文：郓城之围解后，又因他事起争斗，克用亲自带兵前往，派李存信率兵三万与史俨等人驻扎莘州，被魏兵攻破。
English: After the encirclement and liberation of Handan City, and because of the quarrel started by him, Kegong personally led the troops to Handan and sent Li Cunxin with 30,000 soldiers and Shi Yan and others to stationed in Handan, which was defeated by the Wei soldiers.

古文：克用怒，大略相、魏去。
现代文：克用怒，在相州、魏州大掠一通而去。
English: He used his anger to go on a rampage in Sanzhou and Weizhou.

古文：始，茂贞畏克用见讨，修贡献如籓臣。
现代文：当初，茂贞怕克用来打，向朝廷贡献有如藩臣。
English: At first, Maozhen was afraid of being used to fight, and contributed to the imperial court like a vassal.

古文：及克用还，绝贡献，与韩建谋以兵入朝。
现代文：及至克用回河东，就不再贡献，且与韩建商议要领兵入朝廷。
English: When he returned to Hedong, he no longer contributed, and negotiated with Han Jian to lead soldiers into the imperial court.

古文：帝惧，诏克用进卫京师。
现代文：皇帝害怕，诏令克用来保卫京师。
English: The emperor was afraid, and used the imperial edict to defend the capital.

古文：帝谋度河幸太原，遣延王入克用军促迎天子。
现代文：皇帝打算渡黄河到太原去，派嗣延王到克用处催促他来护驾。
English: The emperor planned to cross the Yellow River to Taiyuan, and sent his heir Yan Wang to urge him to come and escort him.

古文：既次渭北，建固请幸华州。
现代文：皇帝到达渭北，韩建坚持要皇帝到华州。
English: When the emperor arrived in northern Shandong, Han Jian insisted that the emperor go to Huazhou.

古文：克用谓王曰： 患本于不断，顾上自为之。 
现代文：克用对延王说 ：祸患始于当初当断不断，实在是皇上自己招来的。 
English: Kanyo said to Yan Wang, "The misfortune began when there were constant quarrels, and it was really brought about by the emperor himself.

古文：李存信攻魏，葛从周引众三万来援，战洹水上，汴人夜坎诸野，哄合，克用子落落马陷而颠，克用救之，亦颠；追兵迫，射之乃免。
现代文：李存信攻魏，葛从周领兵三万来救，战于洹水上。汴州人夜里在野外挖许多深坎，引克用军追击，克用之子落落连马跌入坎中，克用来救，马也陷落。追兵赶来，克用射杀汴将乃得脱身。
English: Li Cunxin attacked Wei, Ge led 30,000 soldiers from Zhou to rescue, and fought on the Surabaya River. The people of Zhangzhou dug many deep ditches in the field at night, attracted Ke's army to chase, Ke's son fell and his horse fell into the ditch, Ke used to save, and the horse also fell. The pursuers arrived, Ke used to shoot the dragonfly, but had to escape.

古文：存信已傅魏城，克用并力，罗弘信以捉生逆战，为克用所败，追及郛，叩阖而还。
现代文：存信已迫近魏城，克用与之合力。罗弘信派捉生迎战，败。克用追及外城，破城后回。
English: Cunxin was close to Weicheng, and Keren joined forces with him. Luo Hongxin's faction tried to fight for survival, but was defeated. Keren chased after the outer city, and broke through the city.

古文：于是陕州王珙攻河中，李嗣昭援珂，再战再胜，珙围解。
现代文：于是，陕州王珙攻河中，李嗣昭援王珂，二战二胜，王珙之围解。
English: As a result, in the middle of the invasion of the Shaanxi Wangye River, Li Shizhao supported Wangke, won two victories in World War II, and encircled Wangye.

古文：帝使延王持节至太原，谓克用曰： 不用卿计，故逮此，无可言者。
现代文：皇帝派延王持节到太原，对克用说： 不用你的建议，致有今日之难。
English: The emperor sent Yan Wang to Taiyuan to hold the festival, and said to Kegui: Without your advice, today's difficulties have occurred.

古文：今我寄于华，百司群官无所托，非卿尚谁与忧？
现代文：现在我寄居华州，百司群官没一个可信托的。除了你，谁还能与我分忧？
English: Now that I'm living in Washington, there's not a single government official I can trust. Besides you, who can share my worries?

古文：不则不复见宗庙矣！ 
现代文：否则，我再也见不到宗庙了。 
English: Otherwise, I will never see my ancestral temple again.

古文：王至太原，克用留累月，每大张饮，王必以舞属克用，因陈国事，涕数行下，冀感动之。
现代文：王到太原，克用留王一个多月。每次宴饮，王都向克用敬酒，陈述国事，涕泪涟涟，希望能感动克用。
English: When the king came to Taiyuan, Kegui stayed with him for more than a month. At every banquet, the king would make a toast to Kegui, present state affairs, shed tears, and hope to move Kegui.

古文：时刘仁恭据幽州，贰于克用，数召兵不应，克用以书让之，仁恭得书，抵于地，遂显绝。
现代文：那时刘仁恭盘踞幽州，对克用离心，克用几次召用他的兵都不应允。克用写信责备他，仁恭将信丢在地下，完全背弃克用。
English: At that time, Liu Rengong tried to invade Yuzhou, but he did not agree to Kegui's centrifugal force and Kegui's several calls for his soldiers. Kegui wrote a letter to reproach him, and Rengong threw the letter in the ground, completely abandoning Kegui.

古文：故克用内忧幽州，以好辞谢王，不复有西意。
现代文：因此克用添了幽州之患，只得好言辞谢延王，不再有西去之意。
English: As a result, Kegui added to the troubles of Yuzhou, and had to thank Yan Wang in words, and no longer had the intention of going west.

古文：俄自将屯蔚州，会晨大雺冥，仁恭来薄战，克用大败，走太原，大将多死。
现代文：不久，克用带兵屯驻蔚州，恰逢大雾迷漫。刘仁恭来逼战，克用大败，退走太原，大将很多战死。
English: Soon after, Ge Ying led his troops to settle in Ulshu, coinciding with the fog. Liu Rengong came to force the battle, Ge Ying was defeated, and retreated to Taiyuan. Many generals died in the battle.

古文：全忠夺邢、磁、洺三州，茂贞度克用沮桡，无能出师，乃与韩建谩好，致书言帝暴露累年，请共治宫室迎天子。
现代文：朱全忠夺得邢、磁、氵名三州，茂贞估计克用伤了元气不可能出师。于是与韩建假意与克用修好，写信给他。说皇帝在外多年，要克用共同修建宫室迎回天子。
English: Zhu Quanzhong won the Three Provinces of Jie, Jie and Shenyi, and Maozhen thought it was impossible for him to become a disciple because he had lost his vitality. Therefore, he wrote to Han Jian, pretending to make peace with him. He said that the emperor had been away for many years, and he wanted to use Ke to jointly build a palace to welcome back the heavenly son.

古文：初，长安自石门之奔，宫殿焚圮，及岐人再逆，火闾里皆尽，宫城昏夜狐狸鸣啼，无人迹。
现代文：当初，皇帝避难石门，宫殿遭焚毁，及至岐人李茂贞再次叛逆，连闾里市肆都遭焚毁。宫城自黄昏至夜杳无人迹，只有狐狸哀鸣。
English: At first, the emperor took refuge at the stone gate, the palace was burned, and when the Gui people, Li Maozhen, rebelled again, even the Baili city hall was burned. Miyagi was deserted from dusk to dusk, only foxes whined.

古文：帝幸华西溪，望旧京必泫然流涕，左右凄塞不得语。
现代文：皇帝到华州西溪，远望旧京方向，必泫然泪下，左右亦凄怆哽咽。
English: When the emperor went to Xixi, Huazhou, and looked far and wide in the direction of the old capital, he would burst into tears and choke up.

古文：王建方盗两川，茂贞欲披其鄙私之，数南师，不暇东，而全忠缮治洛阳，茂贞因约克用共其劳，克用辞穷，乃出赀为助。
现代文：此时王建正窃据两川，茂贞欲控制王建，无暇东顾。朱全忠则修缮洛阳宫室。茂贞约克用共同出力，克用不能推卸，出资助修建。
English: At this time, Wang Jian was stealing the two rivers, Maozhen wanted to control Wang Jian, and had no time to look east. Zhu Quanzhong repaired the Luoyang palace. Maozhen York used joint efforts, and could not shirk, and provided funding for construction.

古文：光化初，帝还京师，诏克用与全忠解仇，宰相徐彦若、崔胤皆劝之。
现代文：光化初年，皇帝回到京师，诏克用与全忠和解。宰相徐彦若、崔胤也都劝解。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, the emperor returned to Beijing and reconciled with Zengzhong. The prime ministers Xu Yanrao and Cui Yin also persuaded him.

古文：克用势已折，然尚以功高位全忠上，耻先下之，时王镕方睦于汴，乃遗书镕，使为己倡。
现代文：克用虽然威势已折，但仍以自己功高位在全忠之上，不肯先低头。那时王与汴州全忠已言和，克用送信给王，让他代自己表达意思。
English: Although Kegui's power had been broken, he still placed himself above Quanzhong and refused to bow down first. At that time, the king and Quanzhong had already made peace. Kegui sent a letter to the king, asking him to express his will on his behalf.

古文：全忠即遣使奉书币恭甚，克用亦报之。
现代文：全忠即派使者送信及礼品，十分恭敬，克用也同样答礼。
English: Quanzhong immediately sent an envoy to send gifts, which was very respectful, and Ke also responded with the same courtesy.

古文：然汴日益张，穷斗不置。
现代文：然而全忠军日益猖狂，争战不已。
English: However, the Quanzhong Army became increasingly rampant and continued to fight.

古文：王珙请汴兵攻河中，克用使李嗣昭、张汉瑜援之，汴兵走。
现代文：王珙请汴兵攻河中，克用派李嗣昭、张汉瑜援河中，汴兵退。
English: Wang Hui invited the Han soldiers to attack the middle of the river, and Kegui sent Li Shizhao and Zhang Hanyu to support the middle of the river, and the Han soldiers retreated.

古文：葛从周取承天军，氏叔琮取辽州、乐平，进壁榆次，克用使周德威逐出之。
现代文：葛从周取承天军，氏叔琮取辽州、东平，进驻榆次。克用派周德威将他赶走。
English: Ge took the Heaven-sent Army from Zhou, and his uncle Zou took Liaozhou and Dongping and stationed them in Shiji. He sent Zhou Dewei to drive him away.

古文：李嗣昭以步骑三万下太行，略河内，拔怀州，进攻河阳，汴人阎宝救之，嗣昭退保怀。
现代文：李嗣昭率三万人马下太行，攻河内，拔怀州，进攻河阳。汴军阎宝来救，嗣昭退兵守怀州。
English: Li Shizhao led 30,000 men on horseback to attack Hanoi, take Huai Zhou, and attack Heyang. Yan Bao's army came to the rescue, and Shizhao withdrew to defend Huai Zhou.

古文：天复元年，全忠取晋、绛，逼河中，王珂告急，使相望，汴人扼空道，晋兵不得前，遂虏珂。
现代文：天复元年，朱全忠攻取晋州、绛州，逼迫河中。王珂告急，然汴军扼制道路，晋兵不得来。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Zhu Quanzhong captured Jinzhou and Zhangzhou and forced them into the middle of the river. Wang Ke was in a hurry, but the Yan army blocked the road, and the Jin soldiers were forced to come.

古文：珂妻，克用女，不能救，全忠遂有河中，克用朝贡道亦梗。
现代文：于是王珂被虏，珂妻是克用之女，也不能救。朱全忠乃据有河中，克用朝见贡献之路被阻。
English: As a result, Wang Ke was captured, and his wife, who was Keguin's daughter, could not be saved. Zhu Quanzhong was in the middle of the river, and Keguin's path to contribute to the imperial court was blocked.

古文：全忠知克用迮不振，乃大举攻太原，分遣锐将氏叔琮等率魏博、兗郓、邢洺、义武、晋绛兵环入之，晋城邑多下。
现代文：全忠知克用窘困不振，乃大举攻太原，分派锐将氏叔琮等率领魏博、兖郓、邢氵名、义武、晋绛之兵围攻，晋城邑大都被攻克。
English: Since Quan Zhongzhi could not overcome the difficulties, he decided to attack Taiyuan in a big way. He dispatched Rui Shoujun and other generals to lead the troops of Wei Bo, Yao, Xingna, Yiwu, and Jinbei to besiege the city, and most of Jincheng was conquered.

古文：会大雨，汴兵粮乏，士疟疠，遂解。
现代文：遇天大雨，汴兵缺粮，士兵又传染疾病，乃解围。
English: In the event of heavy rain, the soldiers were short of food, and the soldiers were infected with diseases, but the siege was lifted.

古文：克用虽内愤悒，惮全忠强难与争，乃厚致币马谢，复请修好。
现代文：克用虽心中郁愤，但觉全忠强盛难与争胜，于是送重礼，请修好。
English: Although Kegui was upset in his heart, he felt that Quanzhong Qiang was in great difficulty and struggling for victory, so he sent a heavy gift, please fix it.

古文：全忠遂取同、华，屯渭上。
现代文：全忠乃攻取同州、华州，屯兵渭上。
English: Quanzhong captured Dongzhou and Huazhou, and sent troops to occupy them.

古文：帝如凤翔，李茂贞、韩全诲请召克用入卫。
现代文：皇帝避到凤翔，李茂贞、韩全诲请皇帝召克用入宫护卫，克用派使者从小路奔回。
English: The emperor fled to Fengxiang. Li Maozhen and Han Quanzhang asked the emperor to call on Ke to escort him into the palace. Ke sent an envoy to run back from the path.

古文：克用间道遣使者奔问，并诒书全忠劝还汴，全忠不答。克用率兵趋平阳，攻吉上堡，破汴军于晋州。李嗣昭、周德威下慈、隰，进屯河中。
现代文：并写信给全忠，劝他回汴州，全忠不答。克用率兵前往平阳，攻吉上堡，在晋州攻破汴军。李嗣昭、周德威攻下慈州、隰州，进驻河中。
English: He also wrote to Quanzhong, urging him to return to Zhangzhou, but Quanzhong did not reply. Kegui led his troops to Pingyang, attacked Jizhang Fort, and defeated the Zhang army in Jinzhou. Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewi conquered Cizhou and Zhangzhou, and were stationed in Hezhong.

古文：汴将硃友宁以兵十万壁其南，全忠自屯晋州。
现代文：汴将朱友宁以十万兵驻军晋州南，全忠自己屯驻晋州。
English: He stationed Zhu Youning with 100,000 soldiers in the south of Jinzhou, and Quanzhong stationed himself in Jinzhou.

古文：晋人闻全忠至，皆失色。
现代文：晋州人听说全忠兵来都大惊失色。
English: People in Jinzhou were shocked when they heard that the loyal soldiers had come.

古文：时有虹贯德威营，氏叔琮薄垒疾斗，晋兵大败，仗械辎储皆尽。
现代文：那时有虹贯穿德威军营，氏叔琮逼近城堡猛攻，晋兵大败，兵械辎重全都丢失。
English: At that time, there was a rainbow running through the Dulwich barracks, Mr. Uncles approached the castle and stormed it, the Jin soldiers were defeated, and all the heavy weapons were lost.

古文：友宁长驱略汾、慈、隰州，皆下，遂围太原，攻西门。
现代文：朱友宁长驱攻取汾、慈、隰三州。进而围困太原，攻西门。
English: Zhu Youning chased and captured the three prefectures of Yan, Ci and Yan, and then besieged Taiyuan and attacked Ximen.

古文：德威、嗣昭循山挈馀众得归，克用大恐，身荷版筑，率士拒守，阴于嗣昭、德威谋奔云州。
现代文：德威、嗣昭沿山边带领余众归来，克用惊恐，带领士兵筑工事拒守。暗中与嗣昭、德威商议打算投奔云州。
English: De Wei and Zi Zhao led the rest of the crowd back along the mountainside. To overcome their fear, they led the soldiers to build fortifications and refused to defend themselves. They secretly discussed with Zi Zhao and De Wei their plan to march to Yunnan.

古文：李存信曰： 不如依北蕃。 
现代文：李存信说 ：不如去倚靠北蕃。 
English: Li Cunxin said: It is better to rely on Beilun.

古文：国昌妻刘语克用曰： 闻王欲委城入蕃，审乎？
现代文：国昌妻刘氏对克用说： 听说王准备弃城入蕃，是真的吗？
English: Mr. Liu, Guochang's wife, said to Ketsong: Is it true that Wang is preparing to abandon the city and go into exile?

古文：计谁出？ 
现代文：谁出的主意？ 
English: Whose idea was it?

古文：曰： 存信等为此。 
现代文：克用答 ：存信等建议。 
English: Best answer: suggestions such as saving letters.

古文：刘曰： 彼牧羊奴，安办远计。
现代文：刘氏说： 他是个牧羊奴，怎会有深谋远虑。
English: Mr. Liu said: He is a shepherd, how can he have forethought?

古文：王常笑王行瑜失城走而死，若何效之？
现代文：王常笑王行瑜轻易弃城，终致身死。你为何蹈他覆辙？
English: Wang Changlao Wang Xingyu easily abandoned the city and eventually died. Why did you follow his footsteps?

古文：且王顷居达靼，危不免。
现代文：况且王前居鞑靼，几乎送命。
English: Moreover, the king lived in Tartary and almost died.

古文：必一朝去此，祸不旋跬，渠能及北虏哉？ 
现代文：现在一旦出城，祸患接踵即来，还能到达塞外么？ 
English: Now, once you leave the city, disaster follows. Can you go outside the city?

古文：克用悟，乃止。
现代文：克用醒悟，弃城计作罢。
English: Let's wake up and stop planning to abandon the city.

古文：居数日，散士复集。
现代文：几天后，走散的士兵渐渐回来。
English: A few days later, the soldiers who had wandered away gradually returned.

古文：嗣昭夜扰友宁营，汴人惊，引去。
现代文：嗣昭夜晚去偷袭友宁营，汴人惊恐，退走。
English: Tsuchizaki sneaked into the Youning camp at night, terrified everyone, and retreated.

古文：德威追之，抵白壁关，复收慈、隰、汾三州。
现代文：德威追敌，到达白壁关，再收复慈、隰、汾三州。
English: Dewey chased the enemy, reached Baijie Pass, and then retook Fuzi, Handan, and Handan.

古文：三年，克用攻晋州，闻帝自凤翔还京师，乃去。
现代文：天复三年，克用攻晋州。听说皇帝从凤翔回京师，乃退去。
English: Three years later, the Qing used it to attack Jinzhou. It is said that the emperor retreated from Fengxiang back to Beijing.

古文：云州都将王敬晖杀刺史刘再立，以地予刘仁恭；李嗣昭讨之。
现代文：云州都将王敬晖杀刺史刘再立，将地送刘仁恭，李嗣昭讨伐王敬晖，仁恭援助敬晖，嗣昭驻扎乐安。
English: In Yunnan, Wang Jingyi was killed and Liu Zairi was assassinated, Liu Renkong was given the land, Li Shizhao fought Wang Jingyi, Renkong assisted Jingyi, and Shizhao was stationed in Le'an.

古文：仁恭援敬晖，嗣昭壁乐安，欲战，仁恭取敬晖，弃城去。
现代文：正准备出战，仁恭与敬晖弃城去。
English: They are preparing to go to war, and Renkong and Kei abandon the city.

古文：帝东迁，诏至太原，克用泣谓其下曰： 乘舆不复西矣。 
现代文：皇帝东迁洛阳，诏书到太原。克用流泪对下属说 ：皇上再也不会回来了。 
English: The emperor moved east to Luoyang, and the imperial edict was sent to Taiyuan. With tears, he said to his subordinates: "The emperor will never return."

古文：遣使者奔问行在，俄加号 协盟同力功臣。 
现代文：派使者驰往行宫问安。不久加号克用为 协盟同力功臣 。
English: He sent an envoy to the imperial court to ask for their greetings. He was soon awarded the title of Hero of the Alliance.

古文：李茂贞、王建与邠州杨崇本遣使者来约义举，克用顾籓镇皆附汴，不可与共功，惟契丹阿保机尚可用，乃卑辞召之。
现代文：李茂贞、王建与州的杨崇本都派使者来约发兵举义旗。克用环顾众藩镇，都是倚附朱全忠的，不可能一心举大事，只有契丹阿保机尚可用，于是婉言召他。
English: Li Maozhen, Wang Jian and the state's Yang Chongben all sent emissaries to send troops to raise the flag of righteousness. Kegui looked around all the towns and villages, all of which were loyal to Zhu Quanzhong. It was impossible to do great things with one's heart. Only Khitan Ah Bao Ji was still available, so he gently called him.

古文：保机身到云中，与克用会，约为兄弟，留十日去，遗马千匹、牛羊万计，期冬大举度河，会昭宗弑而止。
现代文：阿保机亲自到云中，与克用相会，约为兄弟。停留十天才去，送他马千匹，牛羊以万计，相约冬天渡河行大事。适遇昭宗被害，义举作罢。
English: Ah Bao Ji himself went to Yunzhong to meet with Ke Yong, who was his brother. He stayed there for ten days and sent him thousands of horses, cattle and sheep by the tens of thousands. They agreed to cross the river in winter for a big event. If Zhaozong was killed, he would not perform the act of charity.

古文：四年，王建、李茂贞约克用大举。
现代文：天复四年，王建、李茂贞约克用声讨全忠，王建率康晏人马两万与克用监军张承业会于凤翔。
English: In the fourth year of Tianfu, Wang Jian and Li Maozhen yoked together to protest against Quanzhong, and Wang Jian led a contingent of twenty thousand people to fight against Zhang Chengye's army in Fengxiang.

古文：建将康晏步骑二万与克用监军张承业会凤翔，是时汴将王重师守长安，刘知俊守同州，与战长安西，建兵败，遂不振。唐亡，建与淮南杨渥请克用自王一方，须贼平访唐宗室立之。
现代文：那时全忠的将领王重师守长安，刘知俊守同州。在长安西与义军战，王建兵败，义军后不振。唐朝亡，王建与淮南的杨渥请克用称王于一方，待贼乱平定后寻访唐宗室扶立为帝。
English: At that time, the loyal generals Wang Chung Shih guarded Chang'an, Liu Zhijun guarded Tongzhou. In the west of Chang'an, Wang Jian was defeated by the rebels, and the rebels did not recover. The Tang Dynasty died, and Wang Jian and Yang Wo of Huainan invited Ke to praise the king on the one hand, and to visit the Tang family after the suppression of the chaos.

古文：建请悉蜀工制乘舆御物。
现代文：王建提议召集全部蜀地工匠制造皇帝用的车辆等物。
English: Wang Jian proposed to gather all the Shu craftsmen to make vehicles and other things for the emperor.

古文：克用答曰： 自王，非吾志也。 
现代文：克用回答说： 自己称王，不是我的志愿。 
English: He replied, "It is not my wish to proclaim myself king.

古文：建又劝茂贞王岐，茂贞孱褊，亦不敢当，但侈府第、僭宫禁而已。
现代文：王建又劝茂贞在岐地称王，茂贞没有魄力也不敢当。只是大修宅第，豪华得有如宫殿而已。
English: Wang Jian also advised Maozhen to proclaim himself king in Qiji, but Maozhen did not have the courage to do so. It was just a large-scale renovation of his residence, which was as luxurious as a palace.

古文：建、渥乃自王。
现代文：王建、杨渥乃自己称王一方。
English: Wang Jian and Yang Wo are self-proclaimed kings.

古文：是岁，克用有疾，城门自坏，明年卒。
现代文：这一年，克用生病，城门自己坏了。第二年，克用死。
English: This year, Kegong fell ill, and the gate itself broke. The next year, Kegong died.

古文：赞曰：沙陀始归命天子，仰哺于边，世喋血助征讨，常为边兵雄。
现代文：评论：沙陀开始时归顺天子，在边区仰受皇恩，世代喋血助天子东征西讨，是边兵中的雄杰。
English: Comment: At the beginning, Shatou submitted to the heavenly son, received the imperial grace in the border area, and helped the heavenly son in the east and west campaigns for generations. He was a hero among the border soldiers.

古文：至克用逢王室乱，遂有太原。
现代文：到克用时，王室内乱，遂据有太原。
English: When he arrived in Gyeonggi, the royal household was in turmoil, and Taiyuan was seized.

古文：虏性惇固，少它肠，自负材果，欲经营天下而不克也。
现代文：少数民族生性淳厚固执，少有二心。又自负才干，想治理天下而终不能。
English: Ethnic minorities are by nature thick-skinned and obstinate, with few double-minded people. They are also conceited, and they want to rule the world, but in the end they cannot.

古文：兵虽胜，然数败；地虽得，辄复失，故熟视帝劫迁，缩颈羞汗，偷景待僵，不亦鄙乎！
现代文：战争虽多胜，但也几次失败；地虽取得，但终究又失。所以眼看着皇帝被劫持，却只是含羞而龟缩，苟且观望，不也可鄙吗？
English: Although many wars have been won, there have also been several defeats; although land has been gained, it has ultimately been lost. Therefore, watching the emperor being kidnapped, is it not despicable to just shyly cringe and watch?

古文：赖其子慓锐，抑而复振。
现代文：有幸其子剽悍，故能抑而复振。
English: Fortunately, his son is tough, so he can restrain and revive.

古文：是时，提兵托勤王者五族，然卒亡硃氏为唐涤耻者，沙陀也。
现代文：这时，借口勤王而举兵的有五家，但最终击败朱氏而为唐雪耻的，只有沙陀。
English: At this time, there were five families that raised an army under the pretext of being loyal to the king, but only Sadu defeated the Zhu clan in the end and brought disgrace to Tang Xue.

古文：使克用稍知古今，能如齐桓、晋文，唐遽亡乎哉？
现代文：假若克用略知古今之事，能如齐桓公、晋文公时那样，唐朝怎会这么快的灭亡呢？
English: How could the Tang Dynasty have perished so quickly if Ke had been able to use a little knowledge of the past and present, as was the case with Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen?

