古文：高宗纪高宗文成皇帝，讳浚，恭宗景穆皇帝之长子也。
现代文：高宗文成皇帝，名托跋浚，是恭宗景穆皇帝的长子。
English: Emperor Gaozong Wencheng, also known as Emperor Gaozong, was the eldest son of Emperor Gongzong Jingmu.

古文：母曰闾氏。真君元年六月生于东宫。
现代文：母亲是闾氏，真君元年六月出生在东宫。
English: His mother was from the Min clan, and he was born in June of the first year in the Eastern Palace.

古文：帝少聪达，世祖爱之，常置左右，号世嫡皇孙。
现代文：皇帝年少时聪明通达，世祖喜爱他，常常放在左右，称为世嫡皇孙。
English: When the emperor was young, he was intelligent and accomplished. The ancestors loved him, and he was often placed on the right and left, and was called the heir to the throne.

古文：年五岁，世祖北巡，帝从在后，逢虏帅桎一奴欲加其罚。
现代文：五岁时，世祖北巡。皇帝跟从在后，遇到夷人头领捆绑一个奴仆要施用刑罚。
English: At the age of five, Shizu was on a tour of the north with the emperor following behind, when he encountered a barbarian chieftain tying up a slave to be punished.

古文：帝谓之曰： 奴今遭我，汝宜释之。 
现代文：皇帝对他说： 奴仆今天遇到我，你应放了他。 
English: The emperor said to him, "You should release the slave who ran into me today.

古文：帅奉命解缚。
现代文：头领奉命解除捆绑。
English: The ringleaders were ordered to remove the shackles.

古文：世祖闻之，曰： 此兒虽小，欲以天子自处。 
现代文：世祖听到这件事，说： 这孩儿虽然小，想要以天子自居。 
English: When the patriarch heard this, he said, "Though this child is small, he wants to set himself up as the son of heaven.

古文：意奇之。
现代文：心中认为他很奇特。
English: In his mind, he's a freak.

古文：既长，风格异常，每有大政，常参决可否。
现代文：长大后，风格不同一般，每当有大政，时常参与决定可否。
English: After growing up, the style is generally different, and whenever there is a major policy, they often participate in deciding whether or not to participate.

古文：正平二年十月戊申，即皇帝位于永安前殿，大赦，改年。
现代文：正平二年十月戊申，在永安前殿登上皇帝位，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In October of the second year of Zhengping, Emperor Wu Shen ascended to the throne in the Yong'an Front Hall. He was pardoned by the emperor and changed his era name.

古文：兴安元年冬十月，以骠骑大将军元寿乐为太宰、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事；尚书长孙渴侯为尚书令，加仪同三司。
现代文：里室元年冬十月，任命骠骑大将军元寿乐为太宰、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事；尚书长孙渴堡为尚书令，加授仪同三司。
English: In the winter and October of the first year of the 21st century, he appointed General Yuan Shule, the commander of the cavalry, as the Dazai and the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and recorded the official records; the eldest grandson of the official records, Qianbao, was the official records, and the award ceremony and the three departments were added.

古文：十有一月丙子，二人争权，并赐死。
现代文：十一月丙子，二人争权，都赐令自杀。
English: In November of the same year, the two fought for power, and both were ordered to commit suicide.

古文：癸未，广阳王建薨，临淮王谭薨。
现代文：癸未，广阳王元建逝世。临淮王亘望逝世。
English: In the meantime, Guangyang Wang Yuanjian passed away, and Linhuai Wang Wubang passed away.

古文：甲申，皇妣薨。
现代文：甲申，皇帝的母亲逝世。
English: Jiaxin, the emperor's mother passed away.

古文：太尉张黎、司徒古弼，以议不合旨，黜为外都大官。
现代文：太尉退垫、司徒直翅，以议事不合旨意，贬为外都大官。
English: Captain Fushimado and Sito Tadahira were demoted to Goto no daikan (high-ranking official outside the capital) due to disagreements in the deliberation.

古文：平南将军、宋子侯周忸进爵乐陵王，南部尚书、章安子陆丽为平原王，文武各加位一等。
现代文：平南将军、宋子侯周忸升爵位为乐陵王，南部尚书、章安子陆丽为垩驻，文武官员各加职位一级。
English: General Pingnan and Song Zihou Zhou Rong were promoted to the rank of Le Ling Wang, Nanbu Shangshu and Zhang Anzi Lu Li were stationed there, and the civil and military officials were each promoted to the first level.

古文：壬寅，追尊景穆太子为景穆皇帝，皇妣为恭皇后；尊保母常氏为保太后。
现代文：壬寅，追尊景穆太子为景穆皇帝，皇帝的母亲为恭皇后；尊崇乳母赏氏为保太后。
English: Jinyin, revered Prince Jingmu as the Emperor Jingmu, the Emperor's mother as the Empress Gong, and revered his wet nurse as the Empress Dowager.

古文：陇西屠各王景文叛，诏统万镇将、南阳王惠寿讨平之。
现代文：壁疆屋各王景文反叛，诏令统万镇将、南阳王蛊画讨伐平定他。
English: King Jingwen rebelled in the region of the Great Wall, and the emperor ordered the general Wan Zhen and the king of Nanyang to fight and subdue him.

古文：十有二月戊申，祔葬恭皇后于金陵。
现代文：十二月戊申，将恭皇后合葬到壬遗。
English: In December, Queen Gong was buried in Jinyi.

古文：乙卯，初复佛法。
现代文：乙卯，开始恢复佛法。
English: Second, he began to restore the Dharma.

古文：丁巳，以乐陵王周忸为太尉，平原王陆丽为司徒，镇西将军杜元宝为司空。
现代文：丁巳，任命乐陵王弛为太尉，乎原王陆丽为司徒，镇西将军杜丞宜为司空。
English: Ding Si, appointed Le Ling Wang Zhao as the first lieutenant, Hu Yuan Wang Lu Li as the second lieutenant, and Zhenxi General Du Rong as the second lieutenant.

古文：保达、沙猎国各遣使朝献。
现代文：跶、丝周蝈各遣使者入朝献纳。
English: The envoys sent to the Imperial Court by the Empress Dowager Cixi and the Empress Dowager Cixi and the Empress Dowager Cixi and the Empress Dowager Cixi were all present.

古文：戊寅，建业公陆俟进爵东平王，广平公杜遗进爵为王。
现代文：戊寅，建业公堕堡升爵位为束平王，广平公杜遗升爵位为王。
English: In Wu Yin, King Jianye was promoted to the title of King Sokping, and King Guangping was promoted to the title of King Duyi.

古文：癸亥，诏以营州蝗开仓赈恤。
现代文：癸亥，诏令因营州发生蝗灾，开仓赈济抚恤。
English: In the year of the boar, because of the locust plague in Yingzhou, it was decreed to open a warehouse and provide a pension.

古文：甲子，太尉、乐陵王周忸有罪，赐死。
现代文：甲子，太尉、乐陵王周忸有罪，赐令自杀。
English: Gao Zi, Taifu, and Le Ling Wang Zhou Qi were found guilty and ordered to commit suicide.

古文：濮阳公闾若文进爵为王。
现代文：遐厘公图羞塞升爵位为王。
English: Balikongtu Shijie was promoted to the title of king.

古文：二年春正月辛巳，司空杜元宝进爵京兆王。
现代文：二年春正月辛巳，司空杜元宝升爵位为京兆王。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Siku Du Yuanbao was promoted to the peerage of King Jingzhao.

古文：广平王杜遗薨。
现代文：广平王杜遣逝世。
English: Guangping Wang Duyuan passed away.

古文：尚书仆射、东安公刘尼进爵为王。
现代文：尚书仆射、东安公刘尼升爵位为王。
English: Shang Shuxu's vassal, Liu Ni, Lord of Dong'an, was promoted to the peerage and became king.

古文：封建宁王崇子丽为济南王。
现代文：封建宁王元崇的儿子元丽为济南王。
English: The son of the feudal Ning king, Yuan Chong, Yuan Li became the king of Jinan.

古文：癸未，诏与民杂调十五。
现代文：癸未，下诏对民众的杂调为十五种。
English: At the same time, the next edict for the people is fifteen kinds of miscellaneous tunes.

古文：丙戌，尚书、西平公源贺进爵为王。
现代文：丙戌，尚书、西平公源贺升爵位为王。
English: Xiping Gongyuan He, Shangshu and Xiping Gongyuan He were promoted to the peerage.

古文：二月己未，司空、京兆王杜元宝谋反，伏诛；建宁王崇、崇子济南王丽为元宝所引，各赐死。
现代文：二月己未，司空、京兆王杜元宝谋反，受死刑；建宁王元崇、元崇的儿子济南王元丽为元宝所连累，各赐自杀。
English: Before February, Siku and Jingzhao Wang Du Yuanbao conspired to rebel and were sentenced to death; Jianning Wang Yuan Chong and Jinan Wang Yuan Li, the son of Yuan Chong, were implicated by Yuanbao and each committed suicide.

古文：乙丑，发京师五千人穿天渊池。
现代文：乙丑，调发京城五千人开凿天渊池。
English: In the second ugliness, five thousand people from Beijing were sent to excavate Tianyuan Pond.

古文：是月，刘义隆子勋杀其父而自立。
现代文：当月，刘义隆的儿子刘劭杀父亲而自己登位。
English: That month, Liu Yilong's son, Liu Xi, killed his father and ascended to the throne himself.

古文：三月壬午，尊保太后为皇太后。
现代文：三月壬午，尊崇保太后为皇太后。
English: In March at noon, Empress Dowager Pao became Empress Dowager.

古文：安丰公闾虎皮进爵为河间王。
现代文：安丰公间虎皮升爵位为河间王。
English: Anfeng King Tiger Skin was promoted to the title of King of Kawama.

古文：乙未，疏勒国遣使朝献。
现代文：乙未，疏勒国派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: Soon after, the state of Sule sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：夏五月乙酉，行幸崞山。
现代文：夏五月乙酉，前往崞山。
English: In the summer and May, he went to Shaoshan.

古文：辛卯，还宫。
现代文：辛卯，回宫。
English: In September, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

古文：是月，刘劭弟骏杀劭而自立。
现代文：这月，刘劭的弟弟刘骏杀死刘劭而自己登位。
English: This month, Liu Hui's brother Liu Hui killed Liu Hui and ascended to the throne himself.

古文：闰月乙亥，太皇太后赫连氏崩。
现代文：闰月乙亥，太皇太后赫连氏逝世。
English: In the leap month of Yihai, the great empress Dowager Heren passed away.

古文：秋七月辛亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：秋七月辛亥，前往阴山。
English: Autumn and July, Xinhai, go to the gloomy mountains.

古文：濮阳王闾若文，征西大将军、永昌王仁谋反。
现代文：濮阳王间若文，征西大将军、永昌王元仁图谋反叛。
English: The king of Shenyang, the general of the Western Conquest, and the king of Yongchang, Wang Yuanren, conspired to rebel.

古文：乙丑，赐仁死于长安，若文伏诛。
现代文：乙丑，赐元仁在长安自杀，若文受死刑。
English: In the second case, Jie Yuanren committed suicide in Chang'an, and Jowen was sentenced to death.

古文：己巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：己巳，皇帝回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：是月，筑马射台于南郊。
现代文：这月，在南郊建筑马射台。
English: This month, in the southern suburbs, the construction of a horse shooting range.

古文：八月辛未，渴槃陀国遣使朝贡。
现代文：八月辛未，渴槃陁国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In late August, the Thirteenth Dynasty sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 朕以眇身，纂承大业，惧不能宣慈惠和，宁济万宇，夙夜兢兢，若临渊谷。
现代文：戊戌，下诏说： 我以低微的身份，继承大业，深恐不能广施恩惠，安宁天下，日夜战战兢兢，如同面临深渊。
English: Wu Xuan, the next emperor, said: I came from a lowly status to inherit a great cause, deeply afraid of not being able to extend grace, peace in the world, day and night trembling, as if facing the abyss.

古文：然即位以来，百姓晏安，风雨顺序，边方无事，众瑞兼呈，不可称数。
现代文：然而即位以来，百姓太平，风调雨顺，边境没有事端，各种祥瑞纷呈，不能计数。
English: However, since he ascended the throne, the people have been peaceful, the weather has been fine, there have been no incidents at the border, and there have been countless auspicious events.

古文：又于苑内获方寸玉印，其文曰 子孙长寿 。群公卿士咸曰 休哉 ！岂朕一人克臻斯应，实由天地祖宗降祐之所致也。
现代文：又在苑囿内获得一寸见方的玉印，文字为 子孙长寿 ，群公卿士都说 美哉 这哪仅是我一人能引起这种感应，实在是由天地祖宗降福所导致的。
English: In addition, I received a one-inch-square jade seal in the courtyard, with the words "offspring longevity," and a group of nobles and aristocrats all said "beautiful." I am the only one who can cause this kind of induction, and it is really caused by the blessing of the ancestors of heaven and earth.

古文：思与兆庶共兹嘉庆，其令民大酺三日，诸殊死已下各降罪一等。 
现代文：思虑与广大百姓共享这个吉庆，现命令民众聚饮三天，死刑以下罪犯各降罪一等。 
English: Thinking of sharing this auspicious celebration with the broad masses of the people, the people are now ordered to drink together for three days, and the criminals below the death penalty are each reduced to the first class.

古文：九月壬子，阅武于南郊。
现代文：九月壬子，在南郊阅兵。
English: In September, a military parade was held in the southern suburb of Imoko.

古文：冬十有一月辛酉，行幸信都、中山，观察风俗。
现代文：冬十一月辛酉，前往信都、中山，观察风尚习俗。
English: In November, when winter is at its worst, they go to Xindu and Zhongshan to observe the fashion and customs.

古文：十有二月，诛河间鄚民为贼盗者，男年十五以下为生口，班赐从臣各有差。
现代文：十二月，诛杀河间郑县为贼盗的民众，男子十五岁以下的没为奴仆，分发赏赐随从臣属多少不等。
English: In December, the people of Hema Zheng County who were thieves were killed, and the men under the age of fifteen were not slaves, and the rewards were distributed according to the number of subordinates.

古文：甲午，车驾还宫。
现代文：甲午，皇帝回宫。
English: At noon, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：库莫奚、契丹、罽宾等十余国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：库莫奚、契丹、厨宾等十多个国家各派使者入朝贡奉。
English: Envoys from more than ten countries, including Kumo, Khitan, and Cuisine, came to pay tribute.

古文：复北平公长孙敦王爵。
现代文：恢复北平公长孙敦的王爵。
English: to restore the peerage of Sun Tun, the Duke of Peiping.

古文：兴光元年春正月乙丑，以侍中、河南公伊馛为司空。
现代文：兴光元年春正月乙丑，任命侍中、河南公伊钹为司空。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Xingguang, the second ugly, the chamberlain, Henan Gongyi, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：二月甲午，帝至道坛，登受图箓；礼毕，曲赦京师，班赏各有差。
现代文：二月甲午，皇帝到道坛，登坛接受图录；礼仪结束，赦免京城囚犯，分发赏赐多少不等。
English: On the afternoon of February 1st, the emperor went to the Buddhist altar, ascended the altar to accept the catalogue; the ceremony was over, the capital prisoners were pardoned, and the rewards were distributed.

古文：夏六月丙寅，行幸阴山。
现代文：夏六月丙寅，前往阴山。
English: Summer, June, and July, go to the gloomy mountains.

古文：秋七月庚子，皇子弘生。
现代文：秋七月庚子，皇子托跋弘出生。
English: In the autumn and July, Emperor Genshi and Prince Tobakuhiro were born.

古文：辛丑，大赦，改年。
现代文：辛丑，大赦天下，改年号。
English: Xin ugly, amnesty to the world, change the year.

古文：八月甲戌，赵王深薨。
现代文：八月甲戌，赵王元深逝世。
English: In August, Zhao Wangyuan died.

古文：乙亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：乙亥，皇帝回宫。
English: The Emperor returns to the Imperial Palace.

古文：乙丑，皇叔虎头、龙头薨。
现代文：乙丑，皇叔虎头、龙头逝世。
English: Second ugly, imperial uncle tiger head, dragon head passed away.

古文：九月庚申，库莫奚国献名马，有一角，状如麟。
现代文：九月庚申，库莫奚国献名马，有一个角，形状如麒麟。
English: In September, Goshun, a famous horse donated by the Kuomintang, has a horn, shaped like a unicorn.

古文：是月，闭都城门，大索三日，获奸人亡命数百人。
现代文：这月，关闭都城门，大力搜索三天，捕获奸诈逃亡的有几百人。
English: This month, closed the capital gate, vigorously searched for three days, and captured hundreds of treacherous fugitives.

古文：冬十有一月，北镇将房杖击蠕蠕，虏其将豆浑与句等，获马千余匹。
现代文：冬十一月，北镇将房杖攻打蠕蠕，擒获他们的将领豆浑与句等人，缴获马一千多匹。
English: In the winter of November, the Beizhen attacked the House Stick against the Creep Creep, captured their leader, the Bean Creep, and others, and seized more than a thousand horses.

古文：戊戌，行幸中山，遂幸信都。
现代文：戊戌，前往中山，于是到信都。
English: Wuzhen, went to Zhongshan, then came to Xindu.

古文：十有二月丙子，还幸灵丘，至温泉宫。
现代文：十二月丙子，返回到灵丘，到温泉宫。
English: In December, he returned to Lingqiu, to the hot spring palace.

古文：庚辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：庚辰，皇帝回宫。
English: Geng Chen, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：出于、叱万单国各遣使朝献。
现代文：出于、叱万单国各派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: As a result, many countries sent envoys to the Imperial Court to offer tribute.

古文：太安元年春正月辛酉，奉世祖、恭宗神主于太庙。
现代文：太安元年春正月辛酉，供奉世祖、恭宗的牌位于太庙。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of the Taian era, in the month of Hsinchu, a plaque dedicated to the ancestor, King Gongzong, was placed in the Taimiao.

古文：车骑大将军、乐平王拔有罪，赐死。
现代文：车骑大将军、乐平王元拔犯罪，被赐令自杀。
English: The general of chariot and cavalry, Leping Wang Yuanba committed a crime and was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：二月癸未，武昌王提薨。
现代文：二月癸未，武昌王元提逝世。
English: In late February, Wuchang Wangyuan Ti passed away.

古文：三月己亥，诏曰： 今始奉世祖、恭宗神主于太庙，又于西苑遍秩群神。
现代文：三月己亥，下诏说： 现在开始在太庙供奉世祖、恭宗的牌位，又在西苑遍祭众神。
English: In March of the same year, the following edict was issued: "From now on, the plaques honoring our ancestor, King Gyeongjong, will be offered at the Grand Temple, and all the gods will be offered at the Western Garden.

古文：朕以大庆飨赐百僚，而犯罪之人独即刑戮，非所以子育群生，矜及众庶。
现代文：我以大喜庆招待赏赐百官，而犯罪的人独受刑罚杀戮，不是养育众生，怜悯遍及百姓的做法。
English: I invite and reward all officials with great joy, and the criminals alone are punished and killed. This is not the way to nurture sentient beings. Compassion pervades the people.

古文：夫圣人之教，自近及远。
现代文：圣人的教化，由近而到远。
English: The enlightenment of a saint reaches from near and far.

古文：是以周文刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御家邦。
现代文：所以周文王以嫡妻为典范，直到兄弟。以治理国家。
English: Therefore, King Zhouwen used his legitimate wife as a model, until he became a brother, to govern the country.

古文：化苟从近，恩亦宜然。
现代文：教化如果从近开始，恩惠也应如此。
English: If edification begins recently, so should grace.

古文：其曲赦京师死囚已下。 
现代文：现赦免京城死囚以下罪犯 
English: now pardons the following criminals from the capital's death row

古文：夏六月壬戌，诏名皇子曰弘，曲赦京城，改年。
现代文：夏六月壬戌，诏令给皇子起名为弘，赦免京城囚犯，改年号。
English: In the summer of June, the imperial decree named the prince Hiroshi, pardoned the prisoners of the capital, and changed the year.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 夫为治者，因宜以设官，举贤以任职，故上下和平，民无怨谤。
现代文：癸酉，下韶说：治理天下的人，依据事宜而设立官职，推举贤人而委任职位，所以上下和睦，民众没有怨愤诽谤。
English: , 下 said: the people who govern the world, set up official positions according to matters, elect sages and appoint positions, so there is harmony from top to bottom, and the people have no resentment and slander.

古文：若官非其人，奸邪在位，则政教陵迟，至于凋薄。
现代文：如果官吏授任不是合适的人，奸邪之徒在位，就会政教衰微，直到凋败。
English: If officials are not the right people to be appointed, and traitors are in power, then politics and religion will decline until they wither away.

古文：思明黜陟，以隆治道。
现代文：思虑明确地予以升降，以兴盛治道。
English: They should be promoted and demoted in a well-thought-out manner, so as to lead a prosperous life.

古文：今遣尚书穆伏真等三十人，巡行州郡，观察风俗。
现代文：现在派遣尚书穆伏真等三十人，巡视州郡，考察民情。
English: Thirty people, including Shang Shumu and Fuzhen, are now being sent to inspect counties and prefectures to study the people's living conditions.

古文：入其境，农不垦殖，田亩多荒，则徭役不时，废于力也；耆老饭蔬食，少壮无衣褐，则聚敛烦数，匮于财也；闾里空虚，民多流散，则绥导无方，疏于恩也；盗贼公行，劫夺不息，则威禁不设，失于刑也；众谤并兴，大小嗟怨，善人隐伏，佞邪当途，则为法混淆，昏于政也。
现代文：进入境内，农民不垦田，土地多荒芜，就是徭役不合时节，耗费了劳力；老年人吃粗食，青壮年没有粗布衣，就是征收频繁，刮光了财产；乡里空荡荡的，民众大多逃散，就是安抚引导无方，恩隋淡薄；盗贼猖獗，抢劫不止息，就是禁令不立，在刑罚上有亏缺；各种诽谤一起出现，上下慨叹怨恨，好人隐藏，奸佞当道，就是执法混乱，政治昏暗。
English: Entering the territory, the farmers do not plow the fields, the land is mostly barren, that is, the plowing service is out of season, labor is consumed; the elderly eat coarse food, the young and the strong do not have coarse cloth, that is, the levy is frequent, the property is scraped; the countryside is empty, the people mostly flee, that is, there is no way to pacify and guide, the grace is weak; the thieves are rampant, the robbery does not stop, that is, the ban does not stand, there is a deficit in the penalty; all kinds of slander appear together, the resentment is lamented, the good people

古文：诸如此比，黜而戮之。
现代文：诸如此类，废黜而杀了他们。
English: And so on and so forth, deposed and killed them.

古文：善于政者，褒而赏之。
现代文：善于施政的人，褒奖而赏赐他们。
English: Reward those who govern well.

古文：其有阿枉不能自申，听诣使告状，使者检治。
现代文：有冤屈不能申理，准许前往使者那里告状，使者检验处治。
English: If there is a grievance that cannot be resolved, it is permitted to go to the messenger to file a complaint, and the messenger will inspect and deal with it.

古文：若信清能，众所称美，诬告以求直，反其罪。
现代文：如果果真清廉能干，众人所赞美，有人诬告以求申理，对诬告者以相应罪处治。
English: If someone is praised for his honesty, integrity and ability, and someone is falsely accused to seek justice, the false accuser will be punished with the corresponding crime.

古文：使者受财，断察不平，听诣公车上诉。
现代文：使者接受财物，裁断不公平，准许前往官府上诉。
English: The envoy accepted the property, concluded that the ruling was unfair, and was allowed to go to the government office to appeal.

古文：其不孝父母，不顺尊长，为吏奸暴，及为盗贼，各具以名上。
现代文：不孝敬父母，不顺从尊长，为官奸诈残暴，以及做盗贼的，各列举而呈上来。
English: Those who do not honor their parents, those who do not obey their superiors, those who are treacherous and cruel, and those who are thieves, are all listed.

古文：其容隐者，以所匿之罪罪之。 
现代文：有阿容隐瞒的，以所隐瞒的罪过治他的罪。
English: If anyone hides anything, he shall be guilty of the sin he hides.

古文：是月，遮逸国遣使朝贡。
现代文：这月，遮逸国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: This month, the country of Tibet sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，帝畋于犊倪山。
现代文：戊寅，皇帝在犊倪山狩猎。
English: In Wuyin, the emperor went hunting in the Neishan Mountains.

古文：甲申，还宫。
现代文：甲申，回宫。
English: Kashin, back to the palace.

古文：秋七月丙辰，行幸河西。
现代文：秋七月丙辰，前往黄河以西地区。
English: In the autumn and July, he went to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：八月丁亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月丁亥，皇帝回宫。
English: In August of Dinghai, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：冬十月，波斯、疏勒国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，波斯、疏勒国派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the winter of October, Persia and Sule dispatched envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：庚午，以辽西公常英为太宰，进爵为王。
现代文：庚午，任命辽西公常英为太宰，升爵位为王。
English: Geng Wu appointed Liao Xi Gong Changying as Dazai and promoted him to the rank of Wang.

古文：二年春正月乙卯，立皇后冯氏。
现代文：二年春正月乙卯，立皇后；蛆。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, the Empress was enthroned.

古文：二月丁巳，立皇子弘为皇太子，大赦天下。
现代文：二月丁巳，立皇子珏强弘为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: In February, Prince Shun Qianghong was enthroned as crown prince and granted amnesty.

古文：丁零数千家亡匿井陉山，聚为寇盗。
现代文：工玺几千家逃入井陉山，聚集起来进行劫掠。
English: Thousands of workers and peasants fled into the hills and gathered to loot.

古文：诏定州刺史许宗之、并州刺史乞佛成龙讨平之。
现代文：诏令定蛆刺史注画之、并州刺史乞佛成龙讨伐平定他们。
English: The imperial edict ordered the state to suppress them, and the prefectural government dispatched troops to subdue them.

古文：夏六月，羽林郎于判、元提等谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：夏六月，羽林郎工判、亘钟等人策谋叛逆，受死刑。
English: In the summer of June, Uebayashi Langokuban, Watatsune and others plotted a rebellion and were sentenced to death.

古文：秋八月甲申，畋于河西。
现代文：秋八月甲申，在黄河以西地区狩猎。
English: Autumn and August in Jiaxing, hunting in the west of the Yellow River.

古文：是月，平西将军、渔阳公尉眷北击伊吾，克其城，大获而还。
现代文：逭月。平西将军、渔阳公尉眷向北攻打伊吾，攻克城池，大量缴获而回。
English: At the end of the month, General Pingxi and Lieutenant Yuyang went north to attack Igu, conquered the city, and returned with a large number of captured soldiers.

古文：九月辛巳，河东公闾毗、零陵公闾纥并进爵为王。
现代文：九月辛巳，河东公闾毗、零陵公间纥一起升爵位为王。
English: In September of the same year, both Hedong Gongfui and Ziling Gongmeng were promoted to the rank of king.

古文：冬十月甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十月甲申，皇帝回宫。
English: In winter, October, Jiaxing, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：甲午，曲赦京师。
现代文：甲午，赦免京城囚犯。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, he pardoned the prisoners in Beijing.

古文：十有一月，尚书、西平王源贺改封陇西王。
现代文：十一月，尚书、西平王源贺改封为陇西王。
English: In November, Shangshu changed the title of Xiping King Yuan He to Shaanxi King.

古文：嚈哒、普岚国并遣使朝献。
现代文：噘哇、普岚国一齐派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: Wow, the whole of Pu'er sent an envoy to the North to offer tribute.

古文：刘骏濮阳太守姜龙驹、新平太守杨伯伦，各弃郡率吏民来降。
现代文：刘骏的濮阳太守姜龙驹、新乎太守杨伯伦，各自抛下郡城率领官吏民众前来投降。
English: Jiang Longyu, the governor of Shenyang at the time of Liu Bei, and Yang Bailun, the governor of Xinhu, each left the county seat to lead the officials and people to surrender.

古文：三年春正月壬戌，畋于崞山。
现代文：三年春正月壬戌，在崞山狩猎。
English: In the first month of the third year of spring, Rinchen went hunting in Lushan.

古文：戊辰，还宫。
现代文：戊辰。回宫。
English: Boshin. Back to the palace.

古文：粟特、于阗国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：粟特、于阗国各派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: Sogdia and Yunnan sent envoys to pay tribute to the court.

古文：征渔阳公尉眷，拜太尉，进爵为王，录尚书事。
现代文：征召渔阳公尉眷，任命为太尉，升爵位为王，绿尚书事。
English: Yuyang's relatives were conscripted, and he was appointed to the rank of captain, promoted to the rank of king, and promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：夏五月庚申，畋于松山。
现代文：夏五月庚申，在松山狩猎。
English: In summer and May, Koshin went hunting in Matsuyama.

古文：己巳，还宫。
现代文：己巳，回宫。
English: It's time to go back to the palace.

古文：封皇弟新成为阳平王。
现代文：封皇弟新成为阳平王。
English: Feng Wang's younger brother has become the new Yangping King.

古文：六月癸卯，行幸阴山。
现代文：六月癸卯，前往阴山。
English: In June, he left for the gloomy mountains.

古文：秋八月，畋于阴山之北。
现代文：秋八月，在阴山之北狩猎。
English: Autumn and August, deer hunting in the north of the gloomy mountains.

古文：己亥，还宫。
现代文：己亥，回宫。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月，将东巡，诏太宰常英起行宫于辽西黄山。
现代文：冬十月，将要向东巡视，韶令太宰鲎墓在产酉的娄山修建行宫。
English: In the winter of October, there will be an inspection to the east, and the emperor will order the tomb of Dazai Zang to build a palace in Lushan, the birthplace of Zang.

古文：十有一月，蛮王文虎龙率千余家内附。
现代文：十一月，蛮王塞虚垄率领一千多家归附。
English: In November, the barbarian king Sehulong led more than a thousand people to annexation.

古文：十有二月，以州镇五蝗，民饥，使使者开仓以赈之。
现代文：十二月，因州镇五处蝗灾，民众饥饿。派使者开粮仓来赈济他们。
English: In December, due to five locust plagues in the town, the people were starving. An emissary was sent to open the granary to feed them.

古文：是月，于阗、扶余等五十余国各遣使朝献。
现代文：这月，主题、迭篮等五十多个国家遣使者入朝献纳。
English: This month, more than 50 countries sent emissaries to the DPRK with themes, baskets, etc.

古文：四年春正月丙午朔，初设酒禁。
现代文：四年春正月丙午初一，首次设立饮酒禁令。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the fourth year, the ban on drinking alcohol was established for the first time.

古文：乙卯，行幸广宁温泉宫，遂东巡平州。
现代文：乙卯，前往广宁的温泉宫，于是向东巡视平州。
English: Second, he went to the hot spring palace in Guangning, and then went to the east to inspect Pingzhou.

古文：庚午，至于辽西黄山宫，游宴数日，亲对高年，劳问疾苦。
现代文：庚午，到达辽西的黄山宫，游玩宴饮了几天，亲自接见老年人，询问疾苦。
English: In the afternoon, he arrived at the Huangshan Palace in western Liaoning Province. He spent a few days enjoying the banquet, personally met with the elderly, and inquired about their ailments.

古文：二月丙子，登碣石山，观沧海，大飨群臣于山下，班赏进爵各有差。
现代文：二月丙子，登上碣石山，观望沧海，在山下大宴群臣，分发赏赐升进爵位各有等级。
English: In February, Cixi ascended Shaoshishan Mountain and watched the sea of clouds. At the foot of the mountain, a large banquet was held for the courtiers, and rewards and promotions to the peerage were distributed according to rank.

古文：改碣石山为乐游山，筑坛记行于海滨。
现代文：改碣石山名称为乐游山，在海滨筑坛记录行事。
English: He changed the name of Shaoshishiyama to Leyou Mountain, and set a record for the construction of the altar on the beach.

古文：戊寅，南幸信都，畋游于广川。
现代文：戊寅，向南前往信都，在广川狩猎游玩。
English: Wu Yin, heading south to Xindu, went hunting in Guangchuan.

古文：三月丁未，观马射于中山。
现代文：三月丁未，在中山观看骑马射箭。
English: In March, Ding Wei watched horse riding and archery in Zhongshan.

古文：所过郡国赐复一年。
现代文：所经过的郡国免除一年租税。
English: The county you pass through is exempt from tax for one year.

古文：丙辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：丙辰，皇帝回宫。
English: B Chen, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：起太华殿。
现代文：修建太华殿。
English: The construction of Taihada-den was completed.

古文：乙丑，东平王陆俟薨。
现代文：乙丑，束平王陆俟逝世。
English: In the second ugliness, Sokuhira no Okimi died.

古文：夏五月壬戌，诏曰： 朕即阼至今，屡下宽大之旨，蠲除烦苛，去诸不急，欲令物获其所，人安其业。
现代文：夏五月壬戌，下诏说： 我即位以来，多次颁布宽大的旨意，免除烦杂苛刻的征敛，废掉不紧急的事务，想要使物得其所用，人安其本业。
English: At the end of the summer and the beginning of the May, the emperor said: Since I came to the throne, I have repeatedly issued generous wills, dispensed with cumbersome and harsh collection, abolished non-urgent matters, and wanted to make things useful and people safe in their work.

古文：而牧守百里，不能宣扬恩意，求欲无厌，断截官物以入于己，使课调悬少，而深文极墨，委罪于民。苛求免咎，曾不改惧。
现代文：而州牧郡守县令，不能宣扬恩惠，贪求欲望没有得到满足，裁截官府物资落入自己手中，使课税很少；却援用法律条文苛细周纳，推诿罪过给民众，极力谋求免除追究，竞不改正畏惧。
English: On the other hand, the county magistrate of Zhumu County could not publicize the favors, the greed and desire were not satisfied, and the government materials fell into their own hands, so that the taxation was very small; but they used the strict legal provisions, pushed the crime to the people, and tried their best to get rid of the investigation, but failed to correct the fear.

古文：国家之制，赋役乃轻；比年已来，杂调减省。而所在州郡，咸有逋悬，非在职之官绥导失所，贪秽过度，谁使之然？
现代文：国家的制度，赋税徭役是不重的，近年以来，各种微调减省，而各个州郡，都有拖欠，不是在职的官员安抚引导失责，贪财过分，谁导致情况如此?
English: In recent years, various fine-tuning and reductions have taken place, and all states and counties have arrears, officials who are not in office appease and guide dereliction of duty, and greed is excessive. Who caused this situation?

古文：自今常调不充，民不安业，宰民之徒，加以死罪。
现代文：从现在起常调不收齐，民众不安于本业，治理民众的官员，处以死罪。
English: From now on, officials who misbehave with the public, who make the public uneasy, will be punished with the death penalty.

古文：申告天下，称朕意焉。 
现代文：遍告天下，以如我的心意。 
English: I want to tell the whole world what I think.

古文：六月丙申，畋于松山。
现代文：六月丙申，在松山狩猎。
English: In June, he went hunting in Matsuyama.

古文：秋七月庚午，行幸河西。
现代文：秋七月庚午，前往黄河以西地区。
English: On the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, I went to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：九月乙巳，还宫。
现代文：九月乙巳，回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace in September.

古文：辛亥，太华殿成。
现代文：辛亥，太华殿建成。
English: In Xinhai, the Taihua Hall was completed.

古文：丙寅，飨群臣，大赦天下。
现代文：丙寅，招待群臣。大赦天下。
English: Cui Yin, invite your ministers. The world is at your mercy.

古文：冬十月甲戌，北巡。
现代文：冬十月甲戌，向北巡视。
English: Winter, October, Armor, patrol north.

古文：至阴山，有故冢毁废，诏曰： 昔姬文葬枯骨，天下归仁。
现代文：到达阴山，有旧时坟墓被毁坏，下诏说： 从前周文王收葬无主枯骨，天下归向仁义。
English: Arriving at the gloomy mountain, where some ancient tombs had been destroyed, he issued the following edict: Once upon a time, King Zhouwen collected the dead bones of those who had no master for burial, and the whole world returned to benevolence and righteousness.

古文：自今有穿毁坟陇者斩之。 
现代文：从现在起有开凿毁坏坟墓的人斩首。 
English: From now on, anyone who digs up graves and destroys them will be beheaded.

古文：刘骏将殷孝祖修两城于清水东，诏镇西将军、天水公封敕文等击之。
现代文：刘骏的将领殷孝祖在清水以束修了两座城，诏令镇西将军、天水公封敕文等人攻打他。
English: Liu Bei's general, Yin Xiaozu, built two cities in Qingshui Yizhuang, and ordered Zhenxi General, Tianshui Gongfu Xiwen and others to attack him.

古文：辛卯，车驾次于车轮山，累石记行。
现代文：辛卯，皇帝停驻在车轮山，堆积石头记行事。
English: Xinwu, the emperor stopped at the Wheel Mountain, piling up stones to mark the occasion.

古文：十一月，诏征西将军皮豹子等三将三万骑助击孝祖。车驾度漠，蠕蠕绝迹远遁，其别部乌朱贺颓、库世颓率众来降。
现代文：十一月，诏令征西将军皮豹子等三位将领三万骑兵协助攻打孝祖，皇帝越过沙漠，蠕蠕不见行迹而远逃，它的别部乌朱贺颓、库世颓率领部众前来投降。
English: In November, three generals of 30,000 cavalry, including the general of the Western Expedition, the Leopard Skin, were ordered to help attack Xiao Zu. The emperor crossed the desert and fled far away without leaving a trace. Its other units, led by U Zhu He and Ku Shijun, came to surrender.

古文：十有二月，征东将军、中山王托真薨。
现代文：十二月，征束将军、中山王托真逝世。
English: In December, the conscript general, Zhongshan Wang Tozhen passed away.

古文：五年春正月己巳朔，征西将军皮豹子略地至高平，大破孝祖，斩获五千余级。
现代文：五年春正月己巳初一，征西将军皮豹子攻取土地到高平，大败殷孝祖，斩获五千多首级。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the general of the Western Conquest, the Leopard Skin, conquered the land to Gaoping, defeated Yin Xiaozu, and won more than five thousand heads.

古文：二月己酉，侍中、司空、河南公伊馛薨。
现代文：二月己酉，侍中、司空、河南公伊跋逝世。
English: In February, Ji Yao, a chamberlain, Siku, and Henan Gong Yibao passed away.

古文：三月庚寅，曲赦京师死罪已下。
现代文：三月庚寅，赦免京城死罪以下囚犯。
English: In March, Goiin pardoned the capital's death row prisoners.

古文：夏四月乙巳，封皇弟子推为京兆王。
现代文：夏四月乙巳，封皂弟子推为京兆王。
English: In the summer of April, a disciple of Feng Soap was elected King of Jing Zhao.

古文：五月，居常国遣使朝献。
现代文：五月。居常国派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: In May, Jocho sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to offer tribute.

古文：六月戊申，行幸阴山。
现代文：六月戊申，前往阴山。
English: June wushin, go to the gloomy mountain.

古文：九月戊辰，诏曰： 夫褒赏必于有功，刑罚审于有罪，此古今之所同，由来之常式。牧守莅民，侵食百姓，以营家业，王赋不充，虽岁满去职，应计前逋，正其刑罪。
现代文：秋八月庚戌，前往云中。
English: Autumn and August Geng Yao, go to Yunzhong.

古文：而主者失于督察，不加弹正，使有罪者优游获免，无罪者妄受其辜，是启奸邪之路，长贪暴之心，岂所谓原情处罪，以正天下？
现代文：壬戌，回宫。九月戊辰，下诏说： 褒奖赏赐必确有功劳，行刑处罚必确有罪过，这是古今所相同，自来的常规。州牧郡守治理民众，侵犯鱼肉百姓，以经营自家产业，致使国家赋税不充备，虽岁月已满而离职，应核计从前的拖欠，依法治罪。而主管的人怠忽于督察，不加以弹劾，使有罪的人逍遥法外，没有罪的平白受其罪过，这是打开奸邪的道路，助长贪婪暴虐的心理，哪里是所谓推究实情治罪，来端正天下呢?
English: In September, the Emperor issued the following edict: The rewards and rewards must be truly meritorious, and the execution and punishment must be truly guilty, which is the same old and new, self-made routine. The state and county governors govern the people, encroach on the fish and meat people, run their own industries, resulting in insufficient state taxation, although the years have expired and left the job, the previous arrears should be calculated, and the crime should be governed by the law. And the person in charge neglects the inspector, does not impeach, so that the guilty go unpunished, and the innocent are punished for their crimes. This is the way to open the road of

古文：自今诸迁代者，仰列在职殿最，案制治罪。
现代文：从现在起各离职的人，列举在职时的政绩优劣，依据制度治罪。
English: From now on, each person who leaves office will list the merits and demerits of his or her political performance while in office, and will be punished according to the system.

古文：克举者加之爵宠，有愆者肆之刑戮，使能否殊贯，刑赏不差。
现代文：致力建功的给予爵位恩宠，有罪过的施以刑罚杀戮，使优劣不同例，刑赏无差错。
English: Those who are committed to building merit will be given the grace of a knighthood, and those who are guilty will be punished and killed, so that there will be different examples of superiority and inferiority, and the punishment and reward will be perfect.

古文：主者明为条制，以为常楷。 
现代文：主管的人明确订立条例，作为常规。 
English: The person in charge clearly sets out the regulations as a rule.

古文：仪同三司、敦煌公李宝薨。
现代文：仪同三司、敦煌公李宝逝世。
English: Yi Tong San Si and Dunhuang Gong Li Bao passed away.

古文：冬十有二月戊申，诏曰： 朕承洪业，统御群有，思恢政化，以济兆民。
现代文：冬十二月戊申，下诏说： 我继承宏大的基业，统治天下，思虑恢宏政治，来救助百姓。
English: In the winter of December, Wu Shen, the next emperor said: I inherit a grand foundation, rule the world, think about grand politics, and come to the rescue of the people.

古文：故薄赋敛以实其财，轻徭役以纾其力，欲令百姓修业，人不匮乏。
现代文：所以降低赋税来充实他们的财产，减轻徭役来舒缓他们的劳力，想使百姓致力本业，人人不缺衣食。
English: Therefore, reduce taxes to enrich their property, reduce labor to ease their labor, and want to make the people devote themselves to their work, so that everyone will not lack food and clothing.

古文：而六镇、云中、高平、二雍、秦州，遍遇灾旱，年谷不收。
现代文：可是六镇、云中、高平、二雍、秦州，普遍遭遇灾旱，谷物无收成。
English: However, Liuzhen, Yunzhong, Gaoping, Eryong and Qinzhou generally suffered from drought, and there was no grain harvest.

古文：其遣开仓廪以赈之。
现代文：现派人打开仓廪来赈济他们。
English: Now they are sending people to open barns to feed them.

古文：有流徙者，谕还桑梓。
现代文：有流浪迁徙的，告谕返回故乡。
English: Those who have wandered or migrated are told to return to their hometown.

古文：欲市籴他界，为关傍郡，通其交易之路。
现代文：想要在其他地区贸易罗粮，为他们关照旁郡，打通交易的道路。
English: If you want to trade Luo grain in other regions, take care of the neighboring counties for them, and open up the trading road.

古文：若典司之官，分职不均，使上恩不达于下，下民不赡于时，加以重罪，无有攸纵。 
现代文：如果主管的官员，理事不均匀，使上面的恩惠不能传达到下层，下面的民众此时不丰足，处以重罪，不得有所放纵。 
English: If the officials in charge, the directors are not uniform, so that the blessings from above cannot be transmitted to the lower level, and the people below are not abundant at this time, it is a serious crime and must not be indulged.

古文：和平元年春正月甲子朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：和平元年正月甲子初一，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Heian era, the world was amnestied, and the year name was changed.

古文：庚午，诏散骑常侍冯阐使于刘骏。
现代文：庚午，诏令散骑常侍冯阐出使刘骏。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the imperial edict ordered the imperial equerry, Feng, to ride out and bring Liu Bei.

古文：二月，卫将军、乐安王良督东雍、吐京、六壁诸军西趣河西，征西将军皮豹子等督河西诸军南趋石楼，以讨河西叛胡。
现代文：二月，卫将军、乐安王元良统领束雍州、吐京、六壁各军向西赶往黄河以西地区，征西将军皮豹子等人统领黄河以西各军向南赶往石楼，去讨伐黄河以西背叛的胡人。
English: In February, General Wei and Le'an Wang Yuanliang led the armies of Yongzhou, Tujing and Liuping to the west and rushed to the west of the Yellow River, and General Pei Leopard and others led the armies west of the Yellow River to the south and rushed to Shilou to fight the Hu people who had betrayed west of the Yellow River.

古文：夏四月戊戌，皇太后常氏崩于寿安宫。
现代文：夏四月戊戌，皇太后常氏在寿安宫逝世。
English: In the summer of April, Empress Dowager Jang Ji passed away at Shouan Palace.

古文：五月癸酉，葬昭太后于广宁鸣鸡山。
现代文：五月癸酉，将昭太后安葬在广宁的呜鸡山。
English: At the end of May, Empress Dowager Zhao was laid to rest in Wuchishan, Guangning.

古文：六月甲午，诏征西大将军、阳平王新成等督统万、高平诸军出南道，南郡公李惠等督凉州诸军出北道，讨吐谷浑什寅。
现代文：六月甲午，诏令征西大将军、阳平王新成等人统领统万、高平各军从南路出兵，南郡公李惠等人统领凉州各军从北路出兵，讨伐吐谷浑什寅。
English: On the afternoon of June 1st, General Zheng Xi, Yang Ping Wang Xincheng and other generals led the Wan and Gaoping armies to send troops from the south road, and Nan County official Li Hui and other generals led the Liangzhou armies to send troops from the north road to fight against Tuyun Hunshyin.

古文：崔浩之诛也，史官遂废，至是复置。
现代文：崔浩被杀后，史官就废除了，到这时重加设置。
English: After Cui Hao was killed, the historian was abolished, and then reinstated.

古文：河西叛胡诣长安首罪，遣使者安慰之。
现代文：黄河以西背叛的胡人前往长安自首，皇帝派遣使者安抚。
English: The rebellious Hu people west of the Yellow River went to Chang'an to surrender, and the emperor sent an envoy to appease them.

古文：秋七月乙丑，刘骏遣使朝贡。
现代文：秋七月乙丑，刘骏派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In the second month of the autumn, Liu Bei sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：壬午，行幸河西。
现代文：壬午，前往黄河以西地区。
English: In the morning, go to the area west of the Yellow River.

古文：八月，西征诸军至西平，什寅走保南山。
现代文：八月，西征各军到达西平，什寅逃到南山据守。
English: In August, the armies of the Western Expedition reached Xiping, and Shiyin fled to Nanshan to defend himself.

古文：九月，诸军济河追之，遇瘴气，多有疫疾，乃引军还；获畜二十余万。
现代文：九月，各军渡过黄河追击，遇到瘴气，瘟疫疾病多，于是率军返回；缴获牲畜二十多万头。
English: In September, the armies crossed the Yellow River in pursuit, encountered bad air and many plagues and diseases, so they led the army back; they captured more than 200,000 head of livestock.

古文：庚午，舆驾还宫。
现代文：庚午，皇帝回宫。
English: At noon, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：冬十月，居常王献驯象三。
现代文：冬十月，昼鲎王进献驯象三头。
English: In the winter of October, the Day Heron King presented three tame elephants.

古文：十有一月，诏散骑侍郎卢度世、员外郎朱安兴使于刘骏。
现代文：十一月，诏令散骑侍郎卢度世、员外郎朱安兴出使刘骏。
English: In November, it was decreed that Lu Duxie, Zangjie's equerry, and Zhu Anxing, Zangjie's foreign envoy, would be dispatched to Liu Bei.

古文：二年春正月乙酉，诏曰： 刺史牧民，为万里之表。
现代文：二年春正月乙酉，下诏说： 刺史治民，是一州的表率。
English: In the second year of the Spring and the first month of the Year of the Rooster, the following edict was issued: "To make history and govern the people is to set an example for the whole state."

古文：自顷每因发调，逼民假贷，大商富贾，要射时利，旬日之间，增赢十倍。
现代文：近来时常利用调发，逼迫民众借贷，豪富的商人，邀取利益，十来天之间，增加十来倍。
English: Recently, people have been forced to borrow money with the help of money changers, while wealthy businessmen have been able to increase their profits tenfold in just a few days.

古文：上下通同，分以润屋。
现代文：上下串通，瓜分财利而使居室华丽生辉。
English: Up and down collude, carve up the profits and make the room gorgeous.

古文：故编户之家，困于冻馁；豪富之门，日有兼积。
现代文：所以编户人家，被冻饿所困迫；豪富门庭每曰加倍积累。
English: Therefore, the accountants are forced by cold and hunger; the rich and affluent are doubling their accumulation every day.

古文：为政之弊，莫过于此。
现代文：为政的弊端，没有超过这一点的。
English: The evils of politics do not go beyond this.

古文：其一切禁绝，犯者十疋以上皆死。
现代文：现全部禁止，违犯的人在十匹以上都处死。
English: All are now banned, and violators can be punished with the death of ten or more animals.

古文：布告天下，咸令知禁。 
现代文：布告天下，使大家都知道禁令。 
English: Announce it to the whole world so that everyone knows about the ban.

古文：二月辛卯，行幸中山。
现代文：二月辛卯，前往中山。
English: In February, he left for Zhongshan.

古文：丙午，至于鄴，遂幸信都。
现代文：丙午，到达邺城，于是前往信都。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, he arrived in Lucheng, and then went to Xindu.

古文：三月，刘骏遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月，刘骏派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In March, Liu Bei sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：舆驾所过，皆亲对高年，问民疾苦。
现代文：皇帝所经过地区，都亲自接见老年人，询问民众疾苦。
English: In the regions that the emperor passed through, he personally met with the elderly and inquired about the hardships of the people.

古文：诏民年八十以上，一子不从役。
现代文：诏令民众年纪在八十岁以上的人，一个儿子的不服徭役。
English: The edict ordered people over the age of 80 not to have a son serve in the military.

古文：灵丘南有山，高四百余丈。
现代文：灵丘南有座山，高四百多丈。
English: There is a mountain to the south of Lingqiu, more than four hundred meters high.

古文：乃诏群官仰射山峰，无能逾者。
现代文：于是诏令群臣朝上射山峰，没有能射过的。
English: So the emperor ordered the courtiers to shoot the mountain peaks in the morning, but no one was able to shoot them.

古文：帝弯弧发矢，出山三十余丈，过山南二百二十步，遂刊石勒铭。
现代文：皇帝弯弓射箭，出山三十多丈，超过山南二百二十步，于是刻石碑记载。
English: The emperor shot arrows with a curved bow, reaching a height of more than thirty meters, exceeding the southern part of the mountain by two hundred and twenty paces. This was recorded on a stone monument.

古文：是月，发并、肆州五千人治河西猎道。
现代文：这月，调发并州、肆州五千人修治黄河以西狩猎道路。
English: This month, five thousand people from Anhui and Wuzhou were dispatched to repair the hunting roads west of the Yellow River.

古文：辛巳，舆驾还宫。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝回宫。
English: Soon after, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月乙未，侍中、征东大将军、河东王闾毗薨。
现代文：夏四月乙未，侍中、征东大将军、河东王间毗逝世。
English: In the fourth month of the summer, a chamberlain, a general of the Eastern Expedition, and a king of Hedong all passed away.

古文：五月癸未，诏南部尚书黄卢头、李敷等考课诸州。
现代文：五月癸未，诏令南部尚书黄卢头、李敷等人考核各州。
English: At the end of May, the Southern Shangshu, Huang Lu Tou, Li Shiki and others were ordered to assess each state.

古文：秋七月戊寅，封皇弟小新成为济阴王，加征东大将军，镇平原；天赐为汝阴王，加征南大将军，镇虎牢；万寿为乐浪王，加征北大将军，镇和龙；洛侯为广平王。
现代文：秋七月戊寅，封皂弟小新成为济阴王，加授征束大将军，镇守平原；天赐为汝阴王，加授征南大将军，镇守虎牢；万寿为乐浪王，加授征北大将军，镇守和龙；洛侯为广平王。
English: In the autumn and July of Wu Yin, Xiao Xin, the younger brother of Feng Soap, became the king of Jiyin, and was awarded the title of Conscript General, and guarded the plains; the king of Ru Yin was given by heaven, and was awarded the title of Conscript General of Nantai, and guarded the tiger stronghold; the king of Le Lang Wang was given the title of Manshou, and was awarded the title of Conscript General of North University, and guarded the dragon; and the king of Guangping was given the title of Lohu.

古文：壬午，行巡山北。
现代文：壬午，巡视山北。
English: In the morning, inspect the northern part of the mountain.

古文：八月戊辰，波斯国遣使朝献。
现代文：八月戊辰，波斯国派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: In August, the Persian Empire sent an envoy to the North to offer tribute.

古文：丁丑，舆驾还宫。
现代文：丁丑，皇帝回宫。
English: Ding Chou, the emperor returns to the palace.

古文：冬十月，诏假员外散骑常侍游明根、员外郎昌邑侯和天德使于刘骏。
现代文：冬十月，韶令代行员外散骑常侍游明根、员外郎昌邑侯和天德出使刘骏。
English: In the winter of October, the imperial command sent Liu Xuan to Mingyuan, Changyi, and Tiande.

古文：博陵之深泽、章武之束州，盗杀县令，州军讨平之。
现代文：博陵的深泽、章武的束州，盗贼杀死县令，州中军队讨伐平定了他们。
English: In Fukasawa of Boling and Sokcho of Zhangwu, the thieves killed the county magistrate, and the army of the county pacified them.

古文：广平王洛侯薨。
现代文：广平王洛侯逝世。
English: Guangping Wang Luo Hou passed away.

古文：三年春正月壬午，以车骑大将军、东郡公乙浑为太原王。
现代文：三年春正月壬午，封车骑大将军、东郡公乙浑为太原王。
English: On the morning of the first day of spring in the third year, the chariot and cavalry general, Donggun Gongyi, became the king of Taiyuan.

古文：癸未，乐浪王万寿薨。
现代文：癸未，乐浪王万寿逝世。
English: Soon after, the king of music, Manshou, passed away.

古文：二月癸酉，畋于崞山，遂观渔于旋鸿池。
现代文：二月癸酉，在崞山狩猎，于是在旋鸿池观看捕鱼。
English: In February, I went deer hunting in Shaoshan, so I watched fishing in Zhunhong Pool.

古文：三月甲申，刘骏遣使朝贡。
现代文：三月甲申，刘骏派遣使者入朝贡奉。
English: In March of Jiaxun, Liu Bei sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court.

古文：高丽。蓰王、契啮、思厌于师、疏勒、石那、悉居半、渴槃陀诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、蓰王、契啮、思厌于师、疏勒、石那、悉居半、渴槃陁各国各派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: The countries of Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo,

古文：夏六月庚申，行幸阴山。
现代文：夏六月庚申，前往阴山。
English: In the summer, June, Koshin, go to the gloomy mountains.

古文：诏将军陆真讨雍州叛氐仇傉檀等，平之。
现代文：诏令将军陆真讨伐雍州反叛的氐族入仇僵担等，平定了他们。
English: He ordered General Lu Zhen to fight against the rebellious Yi people in Yongzhou and pacified them.

古文：秋七月壬寅，幸河西。
现代文：秋七月壬寅，前往黄河以西地区。
English: Autumn and July: Ren Yin, travel to the west of the Yellow River.

古文：九月壬辰，征西大将军、常山王素薨。
现代文：九月壬辰，征西大将军、常山王元素逝世。
English: In September, Imjin, the great general of the Western Conquest and the king of Jozan, passed away.

古文：冬十月丙辰，诏曰： 朕承洪绪，统御万国，垂拱南面，委政群司，欲缉熙治道，以致宁一。
现代文：冬十月丙辰，下诏说： 我继承宏大的基业，统领万国，垂衣拱手面南而坐，政事委任给各官府，想要逐渐至于治理，达到安宁统一。
English: In the winter, in October, at the stroke of midnight, the emperor said: "I have inherited a great inheritance, I am the ruler of all countries, I sit with my back to the south, I delegate political affairs to various government offices, I want to gradually govern and achieve peace and unity.

古文：夫三代之隆，莫不崇尚年齿。
现代文：三代兴盛时，无不崇尚年资。
English: When the three generations prospered, they all revered seniority.

古文：今选举之官，多不以次，令班白处后，晚进居先。
现代文：现在选拔的官员，多不按照次序，使头发斑白的处在后面，后辈居于前列。
English: The officials who are selected now are mostly not in order, so that the gray-haired are at the back, and the younger generation is at the front.

古文：岂所谓彝伦攸叙者也！
现代文：这哪裹是所谓常道得其次序呢?
English: What is this so-called normal order of precedence?

古文：诸曹选补，宜各先尽劳旧才能。 
现代文：各官府选拔官员，应各自首先任用有功劳旧勋及有才能的人。 
English: Each government should first appoint meritorious and talented persons to select officials.

古文：是月，诏员外散骑常侍游明根，员外郎、昌邑侯和天德使于刘骏。
现代文：这月，诏令员外散骑常侍游明根，员外郎、昌邑侯和天德出使到刘骏。
English: This month, members of the Imperial Household Agency rode out to Mingge, and members of the Imperial Household Agency, Changyi, and Tiande were dispatched to Liuye.

古文：十有一月壬寅，舆驾还宫。
现代文：十一月壬寅，皇帝回宫。
English: In November, Emperor Jinnin returned to the palace.

古文：十有二月乙卯，制战陈之法十有余条。
现代文：十二月乙卯，制定战阵方法十多条。
English: On the second day of December, more than ten battle lines were drawn up.

古文：因大傩耀兵，有飞龙、腾蛇、鱼丽之变，以示威武。
现代文：利用禳祭之曰炫耀兵力，有飞龙、腾蛇、鱼丽的变化，以显示威武。
English: They use the festival to show off their military strength, with flying dragons, soaring serpents, and beautiful fish to display their might.

古文：戊午，零陵王闾拔薨。
现代文：戊午，零陵王闾拔逝世。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, King Jibba of Joling passed away.

古文：四年春三月乙未。赐京师民年七十以上太官厨食，以终其年。
现代文：四年春三月乙未，将太官厨食赏赐给京城七十岁以上的百姓，以终其天年。
English: In the spring of the fourth year and in March of the second year, the food cooked by the eunuchs was given to the people over the age of seventy in the capital to last them a lifetime.

古文：皇子胡仁薨，追封乐陵王。
现代文：皇子胡仁逝世，追封为乐陵王。
English: After the death of Prince Hu Rong, he was posthumously awarded the title of "King of the Happy Tombs."

古文：乙巳，诏曰： 朕宪章旧典，分职设官，欲令敷扬治化，缉熙庶积。
现代文：乙巳，下诏说： 我效法前代制度，分掌职务设官，想要使他们弘扬政治教化，治理各项事功。
English: Then, he said: I am following the system of the previous generation and appointing officials according to their positions. I want them to promote political enlightenment and manage various affairs.

古文：然在职之人，皆蒙显擢，委以事任，当厉己竭诚，务省徭役，使兵民优逸，家给人赡。
现代文：然则在职的人，都受到显赫的提拔，委以职事重任，应当激励自己竭尽忠诚，一心减省徭役，使兵士民众悠闲安逸，家给人足。
English: On the other hand, those who are on duty, who have received prominent promotions and have been entrusted with important duties, should motivate themselves to be loyal, focus on reducing labor costs, make soldiers and civilians leisurely and comfortable, and give people enough.

古文：今内外诸司、州镇守宰，侵使兵民，劳役非一。
现代文：现在内外各官府、州镇郡县，侵渔役使兵士民众，劳役繁多。
English: At present, all government offices, counties, towns, and counties at home and abroad have a large number of soldiers and soldiers.

古文：自今擅有召役，逼雇不程，皆论同枉法。 
现代文：从现在起有擅自调发劳役，强迫雇佣者，都以违法定罪。 
English: From now on, anyone who dispatches laborers without authorization or forces employees to do so will be guilty of violating the law.

古文：夏四月癸亥，上幸西苑，亲射虎三头。
现代文：夏四月癸亥，皇上前往西苑，亲自射了三只老虎。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor went to Xiyuan and personally shot three tigers.

古文：五月壬辰，侍中、渔阳王尉眷薨。
现代文：五月壬辰，侍中、渔阳王尉眷逝世。
English: In May, Imjin, a chamberlain, and Yuyang Wangfei passed away.

古文：壬寅，行幸阴山。
现代文：壬寅，前往阴山。
English: Jinyin, go to the gloomy mountain.

古文：秋七月壬午，诏曰： 朕每岁以秋日闲月，命群官讲武平壤。
现代文：秋七月壬午，下诏说： 我每年因秋季闲暇月份，命令官员们在平地习武。
English: At noon on the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: Every year, because of the fall leisure month, I order officials to practice martial arts on flat ground.

古文：所幸之处，必立宫坛，糜费之功，劳损非一。
现代文：所到之处，必定设立宫坛，耗费的功夫，劳累损失很多。
English: Wherever they go, they are sure to set up palace altars, which takes a lot of effort and fatigue.

古文：宜仍旧贯，何必改作也。 
现代文：应该因循旧规矩，何必改变呢? 
English: We should follow the old rules, why change them?

古文：八月丙寅，遂畋于河西。
现代文：八月丙寅，于是在黄回以西地区狩猎。
English: In August, he went hunting in the area west of the Yellow River.

古文：诏曰： 朕顺时畋猎，而从官杀获过度，既殚禽兽，乖不合围之义。
现代文：下诏说： 我按节令狩猎，而随从官员杀获太多，捕光禽兽，违背不合围的古训。
English: The next edict said: I hunted according to the festival, and the officials who followed me killed too much, caught all the animals and animals, and violated the ancient teaching of not joining the encirclement.

古文：其敕从官及典围将校，自今已后，不听滥杀。其畋获皮肉，别自颁赍。 
现代文：现敕令随从官员和主管围捕的将校，从今以后，不准肆意杀戮捕获的皮肉，另外加以赏赐。 
English: It is hereby ordered that the officers accompanying the officials and supervising the round-up, from now on, are not allowed to kill the captured meat at will, and are additionally rewarded.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 前以民遭饥寒，不自存济，有卖鬻男女者，尽仰还其家。
现代文：壬申，下诏说： 从前因民众遭受饥寒，不能养活自己，有卖儿卖女的，都望归还给人家。
English: Jinshin, the next edict said: In the past, because the people suffered from hunger and cold and could not feed themselves, those who sold their sons and daughters were expected to return them to their families.

古文：或因缘势力，或私行请托，共相通容，不时检校，令良家子息仍为奴婢。
现代文：有的凭藉势力，有的私下嘱托，互相串通，不及时查核，使良家子女仍旧做奴婢。
English: Some rely on force, some privately entrust, collude with each other, and do not check in time, so that the children of good families are still slaves.

古文：今仰精究，不听取赎，有犯加罪。
现代文：现在望精心推究，不准许交钱物才赎入，有违犯的治罪。
English: Now, it is hoped that careful investigation will be carried out, and it will not be allowed to pay money to redeem the goods, and there will be a violation of the crime.

古文：若仍不检还，听其父兄上诉，以掠人论。 
现代文：如果仍旧不查核放人回家，准许被卖者的父兄上诉，以掠卖人口罪论处。 
English: If they still do not check the verification and let the person go home, the parents and brothers of the sold person are allowed to appeal, and they will be punished with the crime of human trafficking.

古文：九月辛巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月辛巳，皇帝回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月，以定、相二州霣霜杀稼，免民田租。
现代文：冬十月，因室、翅二州落霜损坏庄稼，免除民众的田租。
English: In the winter of October, due to frost damage to crops in two prefectures, the people's field rent was exempted.

古文：是月，诏员外散骑常侍游明根，骁骑将军、昌邑子娄内近，宁朔将军、襄平子李五鳞使于刘骏。
现代文：这月，韶令员外散骑常侍游塱退，骁骑将军、昌邑子娄内近，宁朔将军、襄平子奎亘鳝出使到刘墅。
English: This month, the commander of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry, the son of Changyur, the general of the imperial cavalry, the son of Changyur, the son of Ningshuo, the son of Xiangping, and the son of Guiwang, sent envoys to Liu Villa.

古文：十有二月辛丑，诏曰： 名位不同，礼亦异数，所以殊等级，示轨仪。
现代文：十二月辛丑，下韶说： 名位不相同，礼仪也不同等级，是用来区分级别，显示规则的。
English: In December, Xin ugly, the lower jaw said: the name is not the same, the etiquette is also different levels, it is used to distinguish the level, show the rules.

古文：今丧葬嫁娶，大礼未备，贵势豪富，越度奢靡，非所谓式昭典宪者也。
现代文：现在丧葬嫁娶，大礼不完备，显赫豪富的家庭，超越法度奢侈浪费，不是所谓彰明典制的行为。
English: Nowadays, it is not the so-called behavior of highlighting the ceremony system to marry and marry, the grand gift is not complete, and the family of prominent rich people is extravagant and wasteful beyond the law.

古文：有司可为之条格，使贵贱有章，上下咸序，著之于令。 
现代文：有关官员可为此订立条规，使贵贱有章法，上下都有次序，编著在令文中。 
English: Relevant officials may establish rules and regulations for this purpose, so that there are rules and regulations for nobility and lowliness, and there is an order from top to bottom, which is compiled in the order.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 夫婚姻者，人道之始。
现代文：壬寅，下诏说： 婚姻，是人道的开始。
English: Jinyin said solemnly, "Marriage is the beginning of humanity."

古文：是以夫妇之义，三纲之首；礼之重者，莫过于斯。
现代文：所以夫妇的义理，在三纲之首位，礼仪中的重要者，没有超过这个的。
English: Therefore, the husband and wife's righteousness, in the first place of the three aspects, the important person in the etiquette, does not exceed this.

古文：尊卑高下，宜令区别。
现代文：尊卑高下，应该使他们有分别。
English: There should be a distinction between the superior and the inferior.

古文：然中代以来，贵族之门多不率法。或贪利财贿，或因缘私好，在于苟合，无所选择，令贵贱不分，巨细同贯，尘秽清化，亏损人伦，将何以宣示典谟，垂之来裔。
现代文：然而近代以来，贵族家庭多不遵循法度，有的贪图利益财货，有的依据私人喜好，在于苟且结合，没有选择，使贵贱不分，大小同例，污染清明的教化，亏损人间的秩序，将怎么宣扬典章，流传后世?
English: However, since modern times, most aristocratic families do not follow the law, some are greedy for profits and goods, and some are based on personal preferences. There is no choice but to combine, there is no choice, so that the high and low are not divided, the size is the same, the pollution is clear and enlightened, and the order of the world is at a loss. How will the regulations be promoted and passed on to future generations?

古文：今制皇族、师傅、王公侯伯及士民之家，不得与百工、伎巧、卑姓为婚，犯者加罪。 
现代文：现在规定皇族、师傅、王公侯伯和官吏平民家庭，不能和各种工匠、艺人、卑姓通婚，违犯者治罪。 
English: It is now stipulated that members of the imperial family, masters, princes, nobles, and the families of government officials and commoners cannot marry craftsmen, artists, and people with lowly surnames. Violators will be punished.

古文：五年春正月丁亥，封皇弟云为任城王。
现代文：五年春正月丁亥，封皇弟元云为任城王。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of spring, Ding Hai, the emperor's younger brother, Yuan Yun, was appointed king of the city.

古文：二月，诏以州镇十四去岁虫、水，开仓赈恤。
现代文：二月，诏令因十四个州镇去年发生虫灾、水灾，开仓赈济抚恤。
English: In February, due to the occurrence of insect plagues and floods in fourteen prefectural towns last year, the prefectural government issued an order to open warehouses and provide subsidies.

古文：夏四月癸卯，顿丘公李峻，进爵为王。
现代文：夏四月癸卯，顿丘公李峻升爵位为王。
English: In the summer of April, Dongqiu Gong Li Jun was promoted to the title of king.

古文：闰月戊子，帝以旱故，减膳责躬。
现代文：闰月戊子，皇帝因天旱的缘故，减少膳食责备自己。
English: During the leap month, the emperor blamed himself for cutting down on his diet due to the drought.

古文：是夜，澍雨大降。
现代文：这天夜晚，天降大雨。
English: On this day, it rained heavily.

古文：五月庚申，刘骏死，子子业僭立。
现代文：五月庚申，刘骏死去，儿子工业僭越即位。
English: In May, Gao Sheng, Liu Bei died, and his son, Gong Gong Yue, ascended to the throne.

古文：六月丁亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：六月丁亥，前往阴山。
English: June Dinghai, go to the gloomy mountains.

古文：秋七月辛丑，北镇游军大破蠕蠕。
现代文：秋七月辛丑，北镇游动作战的军队大败蟋蠕。
English: In the autumn and July, the army of Beizhenyou's action battle suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：壬寅，行幸河西。
现代文：壬寅，前往萱回以西地区。
English: Minshin, go to the area west of Shoubei.

古文：九月辛丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月辛丑，皇帝回宫。
English: In September, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：冬十月，琅邪王司马楚之薨。
现代文：冬十月，琅邪王司马楚之逝世。
English: In the winter of October, the evil king Sima Chu passed away.

古文：十有二月，南秦王杨难当薨。
现代文：南秦王杨难当逝世。
English: King Yang Nan of the Southern Qin Dynasty died.

古文：吐呼罗国遣使朝献。
现代文：吐呼罗国派遣使者入朝献纳。
English: The country of Tokhura sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：六年春正月丙申，大赦天下。
现代文：六年春正月丙申，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of spring in the sixth year, he was granted amnesty.

古文：二月丁丑，行幸楼烦宫。
现代文：二月丁丑，前往楼烦宫。
English: In February, Ding Ugly went to Lou Yu Palace.

古文：高丽、蓰王、对曼诸国各遣使朝献。
现代文：高丽、蓰王、对曼各国各遣使者入朝献纳。
English: The emissaries sent by Goryeo, Goryeo, and Manchukuo to various countries came to the imperial court to offer gifts.

古文：三月戊戌，相州刺史、西平郡王吐谷浑权薨。
现代文：三月戊戌，相州刺史、西平郡王吐谷浑权逝世。
English: In March, Wuzhong, Sanzhou Sisi, and Xiping County King Tuya Hunquan passed away.

古文：乙巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：乙巳，皇帝回宫。
English: Immediately, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：夏四月，破洛那国献汗血马，普岚国献宝剑。
现代文：夏四月，破洛那国献汗血马，普岚国献宝剑。
English: In the summer of April, the country of Bolona offered its sweat and blood, and the country of Pu'er offered its sword.

古文：五月癸卯，帝崩于太华殿，时年二十六。
现代文：五月癸卯，皇帝在叁茎毖逝世，时年二十六岁。
English: In May, the emperor died at the age of twenty-six.

古文：六月丙寅，上尊谥曰文成皇帝，庙号高宗。
现代文：六月丙寅，奉上谧号为文成皇帝，庙号为直塞。
English: In June, he was given the posthumous title of Emperor Wencheng, and the name of the temple was Jinsai.

古文：八月，葬云中之金陵。
现代文：八月，安葬在云主的金堕。
English: In August, he was buried in Jinpu, Yunnan Province.

古文：史臣曰：世祖经略四方，内颇虚耗。
现代文：史臣曰：世祖治理四方，内部颇为空虚。
English: Shichen said, "The ancestors ruled in all directions, and the inside was rather empty.

古文：既而国衅时艰，朝野楚楚。
现代文：不久国家内乱时事艰辛，朝野凄苦。
English: Soon after, the country fell into civil strife. Current affairs were difficult, and the government and opposition were in dire straits.

古文：高宗兴时消息，静以镇之，养威布德，怀缉中外。
现代文：高宗顺时而变，以平静加以镇抚，培养声威布下恩德，怀柔和睦内外的人。
English: Gao Zong changes with the times, calms people with calmness, cultivates benevolence, and brings harmony to people at home and abroad.

古文：自非机悟深裕，矜济为心，亦何能若此！可谓有君人之度矣。
现代文：除非机敏善悟深情宽厚，以怜悯济民为心胸，又怎能如此可以说是有治理人的气度了。
English: Unless one is quick-witted, well-informed, affectionate and generous, and has compassion for the people at heart, how can one be said to have the temperament to govern people?

