古文：梁武帝张裨羊道生释僧越江陵士大夫徐铁臼萧续乐盖卿康季孙张绚杨思达弘氏朱贞北齐文宣帝梁武帝韦戴隋庶人勇京兆狱卒邛人
现代文：梁武帝张裨羊道生释僧越江陵士大夫徐铁臼萧续乐盖卿康季孙张绚杨思达弘氏朱贞北齐文宣帝梁武帝韦戴隋庶人勇京兆狱卒邛人
English: Emperor Liangwu, Zhang Buyang, Tao Shengli, monk Yue Jiangling, doctor Xu Tiewu, Shao Zhili, Le Gai, Kangji Sun, Zhang Hua, Yang Sida, Hong Zhi, Zhu Zhen, North Qi, Wen Xuan, Emperor Liangwu, Emperor Wei Dai, Sui Zheng, commoner Yong Jingzhao, jailer Yan Ren

古文：梁武帝
现代文：梁武帝
English: Emperor Liangwu

古文：梁武帝萧衍杀南齐主东昏侯，以取其位，诛杀甚众。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍杀了齐主东昏侯，取代他的王位。被杀死的人很多。
English: Liangwu Emperor Xiaoyan killed Qi Lord Dongwu Hou and replaced him on the throne. Many people were killed.

古文：东昏死之日，侯景生焉。
现代文：东昏侯死的那一天，侯景出生了。
English: On the day Dongdimhou died, Houjing was born.

古文：后景乱梁，破建业，武帝禁而饿终，简文幽而压死，诛梁子弟，略无孑遗。
现代文：后来侯景在梁作乱，攻占建业，武帝被囚禁饿死。简文幽禁被压死，梁武帝的宗族子弟几乎无人幸免。
English: Later, Houjing made a riot in Liang, occupied Jianye, and Emperor Wu was imprisoned and starved to death. Jianwen was imprisoned and crushed to death, and almost none of Emperor Liang's descendants were spared.

古文：时人谓景是东昏侯之后身也。
现代文：当时的人都说侯景是东昏侯的后身。
English: At that time, people said that Houjing was the successor of Dongwu Hou.

古文：张裨
现代文：张裨
English: Zhang Tuo

古文：下邳张裨者，家世冠族，末叶衰微。
现代文：下邳的张裨，是名门大家的出身，到后来家业破落衰败了。
English: Zhang Biao, the lower jaw, was born into a prestigious family, and later the family business fell into decline.

古文：有孙女，殊有姿貌，邻人欲聘为妾，裨以旧门之后而不许。
现代文：他有一个孙女，姿容美丽出众。有个邻居想聘他这个孙女为妾。但张裨认为自己是名门大家之后没有同意。
English: He had a granddaughter who was exceptionally beautiful. A neighbor wanted to hire his granddaughter as a concubine, but Zhang Biyi, who considered himself a member of a prestigious family, did not agree.

古文：邻人忿之，乃焚其屋，裨遂烧死。
现代文：邻居很怨忿，就放火烧了张裨的房子，张裨被烧死了。
English: The neighbor was very angry and set fire to Zhang Tuo's house. Zhang Tuo was burned to death.

古文：其息邦，先行不在，后还，亦知情状，而畏邻人之势，又贪其财而不言，嫁女与之。
现代文：他的儿子叫邦的在这以前不在家，回来以后也了解了这些情况，但他惧怕邻居的势力，又贪图他的钱财，而没有说什么。
English: His son, named Bon, had not been at home before this, and when he returned, he also learned about these circumstances, but he was afraid of the power of his neighbors and coveted his money, and did not say anything.

古文：后经一年，邦梦见裨曰： 汝为儿子，逆天不孝，弃亲就怨，潜同凶党。 
现代文：然后就把女儿嫁过去了。经一年以后，张邦梦见张裨说： 你是我的儿子，大逆不孝，抛弃亲属靠近仇敌，暗地同凶恶的人勾连。 
English: Then he married off his daughter. A year later, Zhang Bangru dreamed of Zhang Tui and said, "You are my son. You are a traitor and unfilial, abandoning your relatives to be with your enemies, and secretly colluding with evil people."

古文：便捉邦头，以手中桃杖刺之。邦因病两宿，呕血而死。邦死日，邻人又见裨排门户直入，张目攘袂曰： 君恃势纵恶，酷暴之甚，枉见杀害。我已上诉，事获申雪，却后数日，令君知之。 邻人得病，寻亦陨殁。
现代文：张邦死那天，邻居又看见张裨推门直入他家，瞪着眼睛挽起袖子说： 你凭借着财势放纵作恶，残酷凶暴到了极点，我冤枉地被你杀害，现在我已经上诉了，事情获得申张昭雪，过几天以后就会让你知道。 邻居得了病，不久也死了。
English: On the day of Zhang Bang's death, the neighbor also saw Zhang Biao push the door straight into his house, stared with his eyes, rolled up his sleeves and said: You indulge in evil with your wealth, cruel and ferocious to the extreme, I was unjustly killed by you, now I have appealed, the matter has been reported to Zhang Zhaoxue, in a few days I will let you know. The neighbor got sick and died soon.

古文：羊道生
现代文：羊道生
English: Yang Daosheng

古文：梁太山羊道生，为邵陵王中兵参军。其兄海珍，任溠州刺史。
现代文：梁太山人羊道生，任邵陵王中兵参军，他的兄长海珍任溠州刺史。
English: Liang Taishan was born in Yangdao. He joined the army as a soldier of Shao Ling Wang. His elder brother, Hai Zhen, became a historian of Luzhou.

古文：道生乞假省之，临别，兄于近路设顿，祖送道生。
现代文：道生请假前往探亲。当羊道生要返回临别那天，他的哥哥在近路设下止宿之所，祭奠路神给他饯行。
English: When Yang Daosheng was about to return on the day of his farewell, his brother set up a place to stay on a short road, and worshipped the god of the road to guide him.

古文：道生见缚一人于树，就视，乃故旧部曲也。
现代文：这时道生看见树上绑着一个人，走近一看，原来是他家过去的家仆。
English: At this time, Dousheng saw a man tied to a tree. When he approached and took a closer look, it turned out to be a former servant of his family.

古文：见道生涕泣哀诉云： 溠州欲赐杀，乞求救济。 
现代文：家仆见是道生就哭着告诉道生： 溠州刺史想要杀我，请求你救我。 
English: When the servant saw that it was Daosheng, he cried and told Daosheng: "Zhangzhou Jishi wants to kill me, I beg you to save me."

古文：道生问： 汝何罪。 
现代文：道生问： 你是什么罪？ 
English: Dosheng asked: What is your crime?

古文：答云： 失意逃叛。 
现代文：回答说： 不如意想逃跑。 
English: And he said, It is not good to be a fugitive.

古文：道生便曰： 此最可忿。 
现代文：道生便说： 这种事最可恨！ 
English: Tao Sheng then said: This kind of thing is the most hateful!

古文：即下马，以佩刀刳其眼睛吞之，部曲呼天大哭。
现代文：然后就下了马，用带的佩刀剜下他的眼睛吞了下去。家仆疼得呼天唤地大哭。
English: Then he dismounted, cut out his eyes with his belted saber, and swallowed them. The servant cried out in agony.

古文：须臾海珍来。
现代文：不一会儿海珍来了。
English: Soon after, Hai Zhen arrived.

古文：又嘱兄决斩。
现代文：道生又叫海珍杀了他。
English: Dousheng also ordered Hai Zhen to kill him.

古文：道生良久，方觉眼睛在喉内，噎不下。索酒咽之，顿尽数杯，终不能去。
现代文：过了半天，道生才觉得眼睛还在喉咙里，噎住咽不下去，他就要酒喝往下咽，一气喝了几杯酒最终还是没咽下去。
English: After half a day, Tao Sheng only felt that his eyes were still in his throat, choking and unable to swallow. He wanted to drink wine and swallow it down. He drank several glasses of wine in one go, but eventually could not swallow it.

古文：转觉胀塞，遂不成咽而别。
现代文：马上又觉得堵胀得慌。于是咽不成。
English: Immediately I felt bloated and panicked. So I couldn't swallow it.

古文：在路数日死，当时莫不以为有天道焉。
现代文：而与兄分别了，在路上只几天就死了，当时没有人不认为这是有天理存在。
English: But he was separated from his brother and died only a few days later on the road. At that time, no one did not think that there was a divine reason for this.

古文：释僧越
现代文：释僧越
English: Shosong Yue

古文：梁东徐州刺史张皋，仆射永之孙也。
现代文：梁东徐州刺史张皋是仆射张永的孙子。
English: Liang Dong Xuzhou Zhang Zhi is the grandson of Zhang Yong.

古文：尝因败入北，有一土民，与皋盟誓，将送还南。
现代文：曾因打了败仗跑到北方。有一个当地的百姓，他同张皋结盟发誓，一定想办法把张皋送回南方。
English: He had fled to the north after losing a battle. There was a local citizen who swore an alliance with Zhang Xuan and vowed to find a way to send Zhang Xuan back to the south.

古文：土民遂即出家，法名僧越，皋供养之。
现代文：这个人以后当了和尚，法号叫僧越。张皋就供养他。
English: This man later became a monk, and his Buddhist name was "Sangyue." Zhang Ye supported him.

古文：及在东徐，且随至任，恃其勋旧，颇以言语忤皋。皋怒，遣两门生，夜往杀之。
现代文：等后来到了东徐，他也就跟张皋去了任所，僧越依仗他是故旧有功劳，竟以言语冲撞张皋，张皋很生气，就派了两个门生在夜间杀了僧越。
English: Later, when he came to Dongxu, he also went to the office with Zhang Ye. The monk Yue relied on him for his old merit, but he actually confronted Zhang Ye with words. Zhang Ye was very angry and sent two disciples to kill the monk Yue in the night.

古文：尔后忽梦见僧越，云： 来报怨。 
现代文：之后张皋忽然梦见僧越，僧越说： 我来报仇。 
English: After that, Zhang Ye suddenly dreamed of Zeng Yue. Zeng Yue said, "I will take revenge."

古文：少时出射，而箭栝伤指，才可见血，不以为事。
现代文：不久张皋出外射猎，箭尾扣弦处伤了手指，刚刚能看出有血。张皋不认为是什么事。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jun went out to shoot. He injured his finger on the string of the arrow's tail, and blood could just be seen. Zhang Jun didn't think anything of it.

古文：后因破梨，梨汁浸渍，乃加脓烂。
现代文：后来因为切梨，梨汁浸入伤口，使手指出脓溃烂。
English: Later, because of cutting pears, pear juice soaked into the wound, causing the hand ulcer to fester.

古文：停十许日，膊上无故复生一疮，脓血与指相通，月余而死。
现代文：过了十多天，胳膊上无故又长出一个疮，流脓出血和手指相通，一个多月就死了。
English: After more than ten days, another ulcer developed on his arm for no reason. It was oozing blood and connected to his finger, and he died more than a month later.

古文：江陵士大夫
现代文：江陵士大夫
English: Dr. Gangneung

古文：江陵陷时，有关内人梁元晖，俘获一士大夫，姓刘。
现代文：江陵沦陷的时候，有一个关内人叫梁元晖，他俘获了一个士大夫，姓刘。
English: At the time of the fall of Gangneung, there was a guan insider named Liang Yuanqi, who captured a senior official, surnamed Liu.

古文：此人先遭侯景丧乱，失其家口，唯余小男，始数岁，躬自担负，又值雪泥，不能前进。
现代文：这个人先遭到侯景丧乱，失去了家口，身边只剩下一个小男孩，才几岁。他热诚地背着孩子，当时赶上大雪，难再往前走。
English: This man was first devastated by Houjing, lost his home, and only had a little boy around him, only a few years old. He enthusiastically carried the child, when he caught up with the heavy snow, it was difficult to go further.

古文：梁元晖监领入关，逼令弃儿。刘甚爱惜，以死为请。
现代文：梁元晖负责押着他们入关，就逼迫他把孩子扔下，可是刘又非常疼爱舍不得丢下，就请求梁元晖宁可自己死了也要留下孩子。
English: Liang Yuanjun was in charge of holding them at the customs, so he forced him to throw the child down, but Liu loved him very much and was reluctant to throw him down, so he asked Liang Yuanjun if he would rather die than leave the child.

古文：遂强夺取，掷之雪中，杖棰交下，驱蹙使去。
现代文：梁元晖哪里肯听，就强夺下孩子扔到雪里。又棍棒交加，驱赶刘快点走。
English: Wherever Liang Yuanjun would listen, he would forcibly snatch the child and throw it into the snow. Again, sticks were used to drive Liu away.

古文：刘乃步步回顾，号叫断绝，辛苦顿毙，加以悲伤，数日而死。
现代文：刘就一步一回头，又哭又号差点断了气。一路上辛苦困顿再加上悲伤，几天就死了。
English: Liu turned his head back one step, cried and wailed, and almost lost his breath. Along the way, hardships and sadness combined, and he died a few days later.

古文：死后，元晖日见刘伸手索儿，因此得病。
现代文：死后，元晖天天都看见刘伸手向他要儿子。
English: After his death, Geng Yao saw Liu reaching out to him for a son every day.

古文：虽复悔谢，来殊不已，元晖载病到家而卒。
现代文：因此得了病，虽然他多次表示后悔道歉，但刘还是总来不停。元晖带着病到家就死了。
English: As a result, he fell ill. Although he repeatedly expressed regret and apologized, Liu still kept coming back. Yuan Xuan took the illness home and died.

古文：徐铁臼
现代文：徐铁臼
English: Xu Tiewu

古文：东海徐甲，前妻许氏，生一男，名铁臼。
现代文：东海人徐甲，前妻许氏，生一男孩，取名铁臼。
English: Xu Jia, a resident of the East China Sea, and his ex-wife Xu, gave birth to a boy, named Tiezhou.

古文：而许氏亡，甲改娶陈氏，凶虐之甚，欲杀前妻之子。
现代文：甲又娶了陈氏。凶狠残暴得很。想杀前妻的孩子。
English: A married Mr. Chen again. He was very vicious and cruel. He wanted to kill his ex-wife's child.

古文：陈氏产一男，生而祝之曰： 汝若不除铁臼，非吾子也。 
现代文：陈氏后来生了一个男孩。刚生下来就祝愿说： 你若不除掉铁臼，就不是我的儿子。 
English: Mr. Chen later gave birth to a boy, and as soon as he was born, he made a wish: "If you don't get rid of the millstone, you won't be my son."

古文：因名之为铁杵，欲以捣臼也。
现代文：因此她给孩子取名叫铁杵。想要用铁杵捣铁臼。
English: So she named her child Spade, because she wanted to use the spade to beat the iron.

古文：于是捶打铁臼，备诸毒苦，饥不给食，寒不加絮。
现代文：于是她常常捶打铁臼。用尽了各种办法让铁臼受苦。饿了不给吃的，冷了不加棉的。
English: So she often beat the iron mill. She exhausted all kinds of ways to make the iron mill suffer. If she was hungry, she would not give her food. If she was cold, she would not add cotton.

古文：甲性暗弱，又多不在舍，后妻得意行其酷暴。
现代文：徐甲生性糊涂软弱，又多半时间不在家。后老婆实行残酷凶暴的行动更加得意。
English: Xu Jiasheng is confused and weak, and most of the time he is not at home. After his wife, he is more adept at carrying out cruel and violent actions.

古文：铁臼竟以冻饿甚，被杖死，时年十六。
现代文：死后十多天，铁臼变鬼忽然回家，登上陈氏的床说： 我是铁臼，我实在没有什么过错，无故被你残害。
English: More than ten days after his death, the ghost of Tie Mu suddenly came home, climbed onto Mr. Chen's bed and said: I am Tie Mu, I really did nothing wrong, I was killed by you for no reason.

古文：亡后旬余，鬼忽还家，登陈氏床曰： 我铁臼也，实无罪，横见残害，我母诉怨于天，得天曹符，来雪我冤，当令铁杵疾病，与我遭苦时同，将去自有期日，我今停此待之。 声如生时，家人不见其形，皆闻其语，恒在屋梁上住。
现代文：我的母亲上天诉冤，得到天官的命令，来洗刷我的冤仇。该当让铁杵得病，和我遭受的痛苦一样，我自有要走的时候，但我现在要住在这儿等待，说话的声音和活着的时候一样。家里的人看不见铁臼的形体，但都能听到他说话。他总在屋梁上住。
English: My mother went to heaven to appeal for justice, and received an order from the heavenly authorities to cleanse me of my wrongdoings. It was time to let the anvil get sick, like the pain I suffered. I had to go, but now I have to stay here and wait, speaking the same voice as when I was alive. The people at home can't see the shape of the iron mill, but they can hear him speak. He always lives on the roof beam.

古文：陈氏跪谢，频为设奠，鬼云： 不须如此，饿我令死，岂是一餐所能酬谢？ 
现代文：陈氏跪着道歉，一次又一次地摆设祭奠。鬼说： 不用这样，饿我让我死，怎么是一顿饭就能酬谢得了的呢？ 
English: Mr. Chen apologized on his knees and set up a memorial again and again. The ghost said, "No need, I'm starving to death, how can I be rewarded with a meal?"

古文：陈氏夜中窃语道之，鬼应声云： 何故道我？今当断汝屋栋。 
现代文：陈氏在半夜时私语提起这些事，鬼就应声说： 为什么说我，我现在要锯断你的屋栋。 
English: Mr. Chen mentioned these things in a whisper in the middle of the night, and the ghost replied, "Why me, I'm going to saw through your house now."

古文：便闻锯声，屑亦随落，拉然有声响，如栋实崩。
现代文：接着就听到锯声，木屑也随着落下来，哗啦一声响，就好象屋栋真的崩塌了一样。
English: Then there was the sound of sawing and sawdust falling, followed by a loud crash, as if the building had actually collapsed.

古文：举家走出，炳烛照之，亦无异。
现代文：全家吓得都跑出来，拿来蜡烛照着一看，没有一点异样。
English: The whole family ran out in fright, took a candle and looked at it. There was nothing unusual about it.

古文：又骂铁杵曰： 杀我，安坐宅上为快耶？
现代文：鬼又骂铁杵说： 杀了我，你安安稳稳地坐在屋子里高兴了吗？
English: The ghost also scolded the spade and said, "Kill me, are you happy to sit safely in the house?

古文：当烧汝屋。 
现代文：我该烧你的屋子。 
English: I should burn your house down.

古文：即见火然，烟烂火盛，内外狼籍，俄而自灭，茅茨俨然，不见亏损。
现代文：接着就见火燃起来，火越烧越大。内外一片混乱，不一会儿又自己灭了。茅草还同以前一样，不见一点减少损坏。
English: Then there was a fire, and the fire grew bigger and bigger. There was chaos inside and outside, and in a short time it extinguished itself. The thatch was still the same as before, with no reduction in damage.

古文：日日骂詈，时复讴歌，歌云： 桃李花，严霜落奈何。桃李子，严霜落早已。 
现代文：鬼每天都责骂，有时又唱歌，歌词是 桃李花，严霜落下来怎么办；桃李子，严霜落下来早死。 
English: Ghosts scolded every day, sometimes singing, the lyrics are peach and plum blossoms, frost fall down how to do; peach and plum, frost fall down early death.

古文：声甚伤凄，似是自悼不得成长也。
现代文：声音非常悲伤凄凉，好象是自己哀悼自己得不到成长。
English: The voice was very sad and desolate, as if he was mourning his own failure to grow.

古文：于是铁杵六岁，鬼至，病体痛腹大，上气妨食。
现代文：那时铁杵六岁，鬼来时，他就有病，肚子大，喘不上气来吃不下饭。
English: At that time, Tie Yao was six years old. When the ghost came, he was sick, his stomach was big, he couldn't breathe and couldn't eat.

古文：鬼屡打之，打处青黡，月余而死，鬼便寂然。
现代文：鬼还经常打他，被打的地方就有青印，一个多月就死了。鬼也从此就安静了。
English: The ghost also often beat him, and there were bruises where he had been beaten. He died more than a month later. The ghost has been quiet ever since.

古文：萧续
现代文：萧续
English: On and on

古文：梁庐陵王萧续，为荆州刺史。时有武宁太守张延康，甚便弓马，颇为人伏。
现代文：梁庐陵王萧续任荆州刺史，那时有武宁太守张延康，很擅长骑马射箭，别人都很佩服，调令下达将要还京。
English: Liang Kunling Wang Xiao continued to serve as Jingzhou stabbing history. At that time, there was the Wu Ning Taishou Zhang Yankang, very good at riding and archery, others are very impressed, the transfer order will be returned to Beijing.

古文：代下将还，王要伏事，延康意贪进上，辞不肯留。
现代文：庐陵王要他为自己办事，但延康心里想要进京更上一级官职，辞别萧续不肯留下。
English: The King of Fuling wanted him to do things for himself, but Yan Kang wanted to go to Beijing for a higher-level official post, and he refused to stay.

古文：王遂寻延康为郡时罪，锁系在狱，发使启申，意望朝廷委州行决。
现代文：萧续就收集延康在任郡太守期间的罪过，押进监狱，派使者启奏申报，想让朝廷下令在州郡处决延康。
English: He collected Yan Kang's sins during his time as county governor, sent an envoy to report them, and wanted the court to order Yan Kang's execution in Zhouzhu County.

古文：梁主素识延康，兼疑王启不实，乃敕送都。
现代文：梁王平素很了解延康，再加上怀疑庐陵王诉奏不真实，就下敕令送到京都来。
English: Liang Wang Ping knew Yan Kang very well, and he suspected that the complaint of Gongling Wang was not true, so he sent it to Kyoto.

古文：王既怀恨，又惧延康申雪，翻复获罪，乃未宣敕，使狱卒说延康曰： 如闻王欲见杀，君何不拔身还都自理，若能去，当为方便。 
现代文：庐陵王既怀恨延康，又害怕延康申诉之后得到昭雪，翻案后自己获罪。于是没有宣读敕令，派狱卒劝说延康： 如果知道王爷要杀害你，为什么不脱身到京申理？如果能去的话，我该为你找方便。 
English: Wuling Wang both harbored hatred for Yan Kang and feared that he would be punished after Yan Kang's appeal, and that he would be convicted after the case was overturned. Therefore, he did not read out the royal edict and sent the jailer to persuade Yan Kang: If you know that the prince is going to kill you, why not escape to Beijing to appeal? If I can go, I should find a convenient place for you.

古文：延康然之，遂夜逃。
现代文：延康认为狱卒说得有理，于是在夜间逃跑了。
English: Yan Kang thought the warden was right, so he escaped in the night.

古文：王遣游军设伏，刺延康于城下，乃表叛狱格战而死。
现代文：庐陵王派了游军在路上设下埋伏，在城下把延康刺死。然后上表奏延康从狱中逃跑后格斗而死。
English: The king of Fuling sent a detachment to set up an ambush on the road and stabbed Yan Kang to death at the foot of the city. It is said that Yan Kang died in a fight after escaping from prison.

古文：又有支江令吴某，将还扬州，被王要结，亦不肯住，遂使人于道击杀之，举家数十口，并从沉溺。
现代文：还有个枝江县令吴某，将要回到扬州，也被庐陵王要求留下，但吴某也不肯留，庐陵就派人在道上袭击杀死了他，全家几十口也一起被沉到江里淹死。
English: There was also a governor of Yangtze River County, Wu Mou, who was going to return to Yangzhou. He was also asked by the king of Fuling to stay, but Wu Mou did not want to stay. Fuling sent people to attack and kill him on the road, and dozens of members of his family were also drowned in the river.

古文：后数年得疾，王日夜常见张吴二人，王但曰： 宽我宽我。 
现代文：几年以后庐陵王得了病，他日夜常常见到张、吴二人，他只是说： 饶了我，饶了我。 
English: A few years later, King Fuling fell ill. He often saw Zhang and Wu day and night. He only said, "Forgive me, forgive me."

古文：少时而薨。
现代文：不久就死了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：乐盖卿
现代文：乐盖卿
English: Lord Legate

古文：庐陵王在荆州时，尝遣从事量括民田，南阳乐盖卿，亦充一使。
现代文：庐陵王在荆州作刺史时，曾派手下的人丈量收括民田，南阳人乐盖卿也参与了这件事。
English: When the king of Fuling made a stabbing history in Jingzhou, he sent his men to measure and collect the people's fields, and the Nanyang people also participated in this matter.

古文：公府舍人韦破虏，发遣诫敕，失王本意。
现代文：公府的舍人官韦破虏曾发出告诫敕令，这个事违背了庐陵王的本来用意。
English: Wei Bajiru, the official of the public office, had issued a warning order, which was contrary to the original intention of the King of Fuling.

古文：及盖卿还，以数误得罪，破虏惶惧，不敢引愆，但诳盖云： 自为分雪，无劳诉也。 
现代文：等到盖卿回到荆州，因为数目不对得了罪。破虏这时也很惶恐惧怕，不敢承认自己的罪过，但是却欺骗盖卿说： 我自然要想办法帮助你洗清罪名，不用上诉了。 
English: When Sir Gai returned to Jingzhou, he was found guilty because the number was not right. At this time, he was very scared and did not dare to admit his guilt, but he deceived Sir Gai and said, "Of course, I will find a way to help you clear your name, there is no need to appeal."

古文：数日之间。遂斩于市，盖卿号叫，无由自陈，唯语人以纸笔随殓。
现代文：几天以后，乐盖卿就在街市上被斩首，盖卿号叫，但没有什么办法再陈述，只告诉别人把纸和笔随身收殓。
English: A few days later, Sir Le Gai was beheaded in the street market. Sir Gai cried out, but there was nothing he could do to explain, except to tell others to take paper and pens with them.

古文：死后少日，破虏在槽上看牛，忽见盖卿挈头而入，持一碗蒜斋与之。破虏惊呼奔走，不获已而服之，因得病，未几卒。
现代文：死后不多日子，有一天，破虏在牛槽边看牛，忽然看见盖卿带着自己的头走进来，拿着一碗捣碎的蒜给他，破虏见是盖卿惊叫奔逃，但没有跑出去却已经把蒜吃下去了，因此破虏得了病，不长时间就死了。
English: Not many days after his death, one day, the cowherd was looking at the cows at the trough, when he suddenly saw Sir Gai come in with his head and give him a bowl of mashed garlic. The cowherd saw that it was Sir Gai who screamed and ran away, but instead of running out, he had already eaten the garlic. As a result, the cowherd fell ill and died not long after.

古文：康季孙
现代文：康季孙
English: Kang Jisun

古文：康季孙性好杀，滋味渔猎故恒事。奴婢愆罪，亦或死之。
现代文：康季孙生性好杀，为了吃得有滋味打鱼狩猎是常事，奴婢们有了过错，也有时要处死。
English: Kang Ji Sun was born with a predisposition to kill. In order to eat well, fishing and hunting were common. If the slaves made a mistake, they were sometimes put to death.

古文：常病笃，梦人谓曰： 若能断杀，此病当差，不尔必病。 
现代文：他经常病得很重，梦见有人对他说： 你如果不再杀生，这种病就能好，不然的话一定会死。 
English: He was often very ill, and he dreamt that someone said to him, "If you don't kill any more animals, this illness will get better, otherwise you will surely die."

古文：即于梦中，誓不复杀。
现代文：就在梦中，康季孙发誓再也不杀生了。
English: In his dream, Kang Jisun vowed never to kill again.

古文：惊悟战悸，汗流浃体，病亦渐瘳。
现代文：惊醒后还浑身颤抖，心跳不止，直淌冷汗，但却日见好转。
English: After waking up, I was still shivering all over, my heart was pounding, and I was in a cold sweat, but I was getting better day by day.

古文：后数年，三门生窃其两妾以叛，追获之，即并殴杀。
现代文：几年以后，三个门生和他的两个妾私奔了，他把他们追了回来，立刻一块儿打死了。
English: A few years later, three of his disciples ran away with two of his concubines. He chased them back and immediately killed them together.

古文：其夕，复梦见前人来曰： 何故负信，此人罪不至死，私家不合擅杀，今改亦无济理。 
现代文：当天夜间，又梦见前次梦中的人来到说： 你为什么失信？这些人的罪过不应该死，再说你私设公堂杀人也不合法，现在你改也无济于事了。 
English: That same night, I had another dream in which the people from the previous dream came to me and said, "Why did you betray my trust? The sins of these people should not be punished with death. Furthermore, it is illegal for you to set up a private court and kill people. Now, your change will not help matters."

古文：迨明呕血，数日而卒。
现代文：到天亮就呕吐鲜血，几天就死了。
English: By dawn he was vomiting blood and died a few days later.

古文：张绚
现代文：张绚
English: Zhang Hua

古文：梁武昌太守张绚，尝乘船行，有一部曲，役力小不如意，绚便躬捶之，杖下臂折，无复活状，绚遂推江中。
现代文：梁武昌太守张绚，有一天外出乘船，有一个仆人，力气太小使他不大满意，张绚就亲自打他，一棍子下去把仆人的胳膊打折了，看情形也不能好了，张绚就把他推入江里。
English: Liang Wuchang, the father-in-law of Zhang Huan, was out on a boat one day. There was a servant whose strength was too small for him to be satisfied. Zhang Huan himself hit him. He went down with a stick and broke the servant's arm. It didn't look good. Zhang Huan pushed him into the river.

古文：须臾，见此人从水而出，对绚抚手曰： 罪不当死，官枉见杀，今来相报。 
现代文：不一会儿，看到这个人从水里出来，对绚拍着手说： 我的过错是不该死的，你残酷地把我杀了，现在我来报仇。 
English: After a while, he saw the man emerge from the water and begin to say to Huanpai, "My crime is not fatal. You killed me cruelly, now I will take revenge."

古文：即跳入绚口，因得病，少日而殂。
现代文：立刻就跳到张绚的嘴里，因此张绚得了病，没几天就死了。
English: It immediately jumped into Zhang Huan's mouth. As a result, Zhang Huan became ill and died a few days later.

古文：杨思达
现代文：杨思达
English: Yang Sida

古文：梁杨思达为西阳郡守，值侯景乱，时复旱歉。
现代文：梁杨思达任西阳郡太守。正赶上侯景作乱，又加上旱灾欠收。
English: Liang Yang Sida served as the governor of Xiyang County. He was just catching up with the unrest caused by Houjing, coupled with the drought and poor harvest.

古文：饥民盗田中麦。
现代文：饥民就偷盗田里的麦子。
English: Hungry people steal the wheat from the fields.

古文：思达遣一部曲守视，所得盗者，辄截手腕，凡戮十余人。
现代文：杨思达派一个家兵去看守。他抓到偷麦子的人就截断人家的手腕，一共截了十多个人。
English: Yang Sida sent a soldier from his family to keep watch. When he caught someone stealing wheat, he cut off the man's wrists. In total, he cut off more than ten people.

古文：部曲后生一男，自然无手。
现代文：这个家兵后来生一个男孩，天生就没有手。
English: The family soldier later gave birth to a boy who was born without hands.

古文：弘氏
现代文：弘氏
English: Mr. Hiroshi

古文：梁武帝欲为文皇帝陵上起寺，未有佳材，宣意有司，使加采访。
现代文：梁武帝想在文皇帝的陵墓上修建寺庙，没找到好的木材，他就宣诏有司，让他们加紧采访。
English: Emperor Liangwu wanted to build a temple on top of Emperor Wen's mausoleum. When he couldn't find any good wood, he announced that he had an idea and asked them to step up their efforts.

古文：先有曲阿人姓弘，家甚富厚，乃共亲族，多赍财货，往湘州治生。
现代文：这之前有个曲阿人姓弘，家中很富有，就和他的亲族人携带了很多财货到湘州作买卖。
English: Before this, there was a Qua man surnamed Hong, whose family was very rich, and he and his relatives brought a lot of goods to Hunan for trading.

古文：经年营得一筏，可长千步，材木壮丽，世所稀有。
现代文：经过一年多营造了一排木筏，总长有一千多步，都是上好的木材，又粗又好，是世上少有的。
English: After more than a year, they built a row of rafts, with a total length of more than a thousand paces. They are all fine wood, coarse and fine, and are rare in the world.

古文：还至南津，南津校尉孟少卿，希朝廷旨，乃加绳墨。
现代文：做生意回到南津，南津校尉孟少卿看他的木筏很好，就对照皇上的旨意加以丈量。
English: When he returned to Nanzin to do business, Nanzin Lieutenant Meng Shaoqing saw that his raft was in good condition and measured it according to the emperor's will.

古文：弘氏所卖衣裳缯綵，犹有残余，诬以涉道劫掠所得，并造作过制，非商贾所宜，结正处死，没入其财充寺用，奏遂施行。
现代文：当时弘氏卖的衣服布疋绸缎等还剩了一些，孟少卿就诬陷他这些财物是拦路抢劫所得到的，并说他的木筏太大，不是商人所应该有的。断定案情应该处死，没收他的财物充公修寺庙用。上奏以后立即施行。
English: At that time, some of the clothes, cloth, silk, and silk sold by Hiroshi were left over, and Meng Shaoqing falsely accused him that these belongings were obtained by highway robbery, and said that his raft was too big and should not be owned by a merchant. It was determined that the case should be put to death, and his belongings should be confiscated for use in the public repair of temples. It was implemented immediately after the performance.

古文：弘氏临刑之日，敕其妻子，可以黄纸笔墨置棺中，死而有如，必当陈诉，又书少卿姓名数十吞之。
现代文：弘氏临刑那天，告诉他的妻和子，可以把黄纸和笔墨放到棺材里，死后如果有知，一定上天陈诉。又写了数十张少卿姓名吞下去。
English: On the day of his execution, Hiroshi told his wife and son that they could put yellow paper and pen and ink in the coffin, and if they knew anything after his death, they would surely report it to heaven. He also wrote down dozens of names of Shokyo and swallowed them.

古文：经月，少卿端坐，便见弘来，初犹避捍，后乃款服，但言乞恩，呕血而死。
现代文：经过一个月，少卿在室内端坐，就看见弘氏来到，开始时少卿还很强硬躲避他，后来就恳切服从了，只是说饶命请求恩典。呕吐鲜血而死。
English: After a month, Shokyo was sitting in the room when he saw Hiroshi coming. At first, Shokyo avoided him very hard, but later he sincerely obeyed, only saying that he begged for mercy to spare his life. He vomited blood and died.

古文：凡诸狱官及主书舍人，预此狱事署奏者，以次殂殁，未及一年，零落皆尽。
现代文：那些狱官以及主书舍人，还有那些对这个案子签名上奏的人，都一个接一个死去。
English: One by one, the wardens, the chief clerk, and the people who signed off on the case have died.

古文：其寺营构始讫，天火烧之，略无纤芥，所埋柱木，亦入地成灰。
现代文：没到一年，这些人都死光了，那座寺庙刚刚完工，就遭天火烧了，连一点儿残余都没有，埋在地下的木柱子也入地成灰了。
English: In less than a year, these people were all dead, and the temple, which had just been completed, was burned by the fire of heaven, and there was not even a remnant, and the wooden pillars buried underground turned into ashes.

古文：朱贞
现代文：朱贞
English: Zhu Zhen

古文：梁秣陵令朱贞，以罪下狱，廷尉虞献者覆其事，结正入重。
现代文：梁秣陵县令朱贞因为犯罪押在狱中。廷尉虞献掩盖了他的事，结案改判重刑。
English: Zhu Zhen, the magistrate of Liangwuling County, was detained in prison for the crime. The court official, Yu Xian, covered up his crime, and the case was closed and the sentence was changed to a heavy sentence.

古文：贞遣相知谓献曰： 我罪当死，不敢祈恩，但犹冀主上万一弘宥我。
现代文：朱贞就让他的好朋友对虞献说： 我的罪过应该判死罪，不敢祈求恩典，但还是希望皇上万一宽大原谅我。
English: Zhu Zhen asked his good friend to say to Yu Xian: My sin should be sentenced to death, I dare not ask for grace, but I still hope that the emperor will pardon me.

古文：明日即是国家忌曰，乞得过此奏闻，可乎？ 
现代文：明天是国家的忌日，请求你不要奏闻我的事，可以吗？ 
English: Tomorrow is the anniversary of the country's death. Can I ask you not to report on me?

古文：献答曰： 此于理无爽，何谓不然，谨闻命矣，而朱事先明日奏来。 
现代文：虞献回答说： 这件事从道理上说没什么问题，怎么能说不行呢？我只好听你的话了，你的事一定要在早一天奏明皇上。 
English: Yu Xian replied, "There is nothing wrong with this matter from a logical point of view. How can you say it is impossible? I just have to listen to your words. I must report your matter to the emperor at an early date."

古文：献便遇客共饮，颇醉，遂忘抽文书。
现代文：虞献便同客人喝酒，喝醉了，就忘了把文书抽出来。
English: Yu Xian then drank with the guests, and when he was drunk, he forgot to take out the paperwork.

古文：旦日，家人合束，内衣箱中，献复不记。
现代文：第二天，家人收拾文书，都放在衣箱里了，虞献也没想起来。
English: The next day, the family packed up the paperwork and put it all in a suitcase. They didn't even think about the yakitori.

古文：比至帝前，顿束香案上，次第披之，方见此事。
现代文：等他来到皇帝面前，把那些文书都放到皇帝的书案上，皇帝挨着翻阅，才见到朱贞的案卷也在里面，但他看形势是不能隐瞒了，就向皇上说了。
English: When he came before the emperor, he put all those documents on the emperor's desk, and the emperor looked through them, only to see Zhu Zhen's case file was also inside, but when he saw that the situation could not be concealed, he told the emperor.

古文：势不可隐，便尔上闻，武帝以为合死，付外详决。贞闻之，大恨曰： 虞小子，欺罔将死之人，鬼若无知，固同灰土；倘有识，誓必报之。 
现代文：武帝认为应该判死罪，就给外面下公文处决。朱贞听说这件事后，非常愤恨，说： 姓虞的小子，你欺骗我这个要死的人，鬼若是无知，本来同灰土一样，如果有知，我发誓一定报仇！ 
English: Emperor Wu thought that they should be sentenced to death, so he had them publicly executed. After Zhu Zhen heard about this, he was very angry and said, "Young boy surnamed Yu, you have deceived me, a mortal man. If a ghost is ignorant, it is the same as ashes. If it knows, I swear I will take revenge!"

古文：于市始当命绝，而献已见其来。
现代文：朱贞在街市上刚刚命绝，而虞献已经见他来了。
English: Zhu Zhen had just died on the street market, and Yu Xian had already seen him coming.

古文：自尔之后，时时恒见，献甚恶之。
现代文：自这以后，时时常见朱贞来，虞献很讨厌他。
English: From then on, Zhu Zhen often came to see him, and Yu Xian hated him very much.

古文：又梦乘车在山下行，贞于山上推石压之。
现代文：又作梦梦见自己乘车在山下走，朱贞在山上推石头压他。
English: He also had a dream that he was going down the mountain in a car, and Zhu Zhen was pushing stones up the mountain to crush him.

古文：居月余，献除曲阿令，拜之明日。诣谢张门下。其妇平常，于宅暴卒，献狼狈而还，入室哭妇。
现代文：过了一个多月以后，虞献被解除廷尉之职改任曲阿县令，第二天去到谢张门下拜别，虞献的妇人在家好好的，突然暴死了，虞献很狼狈地回家了，进屋子就哭他的妇人，抬头看见朱贞在房梁上。
English: After more than a month, Yu Xian was relieved of his duties as a courtier and was appointed as the governor of Qu'a County. The next day, he went to Xie Zhang's door to say goodbye. Yu Xian's wife was fine at home, but suddenly died. Yu Xian went home very upset. When he entered the house, his wife was crying. He looked up and saw Zhu Zhen on the beam of the house.

古文：举头见贞在梁上，献曰： 朱秣陵在此，我妇岂得不死！ 
现代文：他就说： 朱秣陵在这里，我的妇人还能不死？ 
English: He said, "Ju Bei Ling is here, can my wife still not die?"

古文：于时屋无故忽崩，献及男女婢使十余人，一时并命。
现代文：正在这时房屋忽然无故崩塌，虞献以及男仆女婢十多个人同时丧命。
English: Just at this time, the house suddenly collapsed for no reason, and Yu Xian and more than ten male and female servants died at the same time.

古文：虞骘是其宗室，助丧事，见献如是，走下堂避之，仅乃得免。
现代文：虞骘是虞献的亲戚，来帮助料理丧事，见虞献这种样子，跑到堂下躲起来了，只有他得免于死。
English: Yu Xuan, a relative of Yu Xian, came to help with the funeral. Seeing Yu Xian like this, he ran to hide under the hall. Only he was spared from death.

古文：北齐文宣帝
现代文：北齐文宣帝
English: Northern Qi Emperor Xuanwu

古文：北齐文宣高洋既死，太子嗣位，年号乾明。
现代文：北齐文宣帝高洋死了，太子继位，年号改为乾明。
English: Northern Qi Wen Xuan Emperor Gao Yang died, the crown prince succeeded to the throne, and the year name was changed to Qianming.

古文：文宣母弟常山王演，在并州，权势甚重。
现代文：文宣帝的母弟常山王演，在并州，权势很大。
English: Emperor Wenzhong's mother and brother, Changshan Wangyuan, wielded great power in Bianzhou.

古文：因文宣山陵，留为录尚书事，王遂怒，潜生异计。
现代文：因为文宣的陵是山陵，乾明留下任命为录尚书事，常山王很气愤，暗暗策划了一个计策。
English: Because Wenxuan's mausoleum is a mountain mausoleum, Qianming left it as an appointment to record the records. Changshan Wang was very angry and secretly planned a strategy.

古文：上省之日，内外官僚，皆来奔集，即收缚乾明腹心尚书令杨遵彦等五人，皆为事状，奏斩之。
现代文：进京省亲那天，宫内外的大臣官僚都进京集聚，常山王趁机收绑了乾明皇帝的亲信，其中有尚书令杨遵彦等五人。都给他们编造了罪名，奏明皇帝斩首。
English: On the day of Emperor Qianming's arrival in Beijing, ministers and bureaucrats from both inside and outside the imperial court gathered in Beijing. King Jingshan took the opportunity to arrest Emperor Qianming's close confidants, including five people such as Yang Zunyan, the imperial secretary. He fabricated charges against them and had Emperor Qianming beheaded.

古文：寻废乾明而自立，是为孝昭帝。
现代文：不久又废掉了乾明帝自立为皇帝，就是孝昭皇帝。
English: Soon after, Emperor Qianming self-proclaimed himself as emperor, that is, Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：后在并州，望气者奏邺中有天子气。
现代文：后来在并州，望天象的人说在邺中有天子气，平秦王高归彦劝孝昭帝杀乾明。
English: Later, in Bianzhou, people who looked at the celestial elephant said that there was a heavenly son in the cocoon, and Ping Qin Wang Gao Guihang advised Xiao Zhaodi to kill Qianming.

古文：平秦王高归彦，劝杀乾明，遂录向并州，尽杀之。
现代文：于是就让高归彦到并州，把乾明一家都杀了。
English: So he had Gao Guihang go to Bianzhou and kill the Qianming family.

古文：其年，孝昭数见文宣作诸妖怪，就其索儿，备为厌禳，终不能遣而死。
现代文：就在那一年，孝昭帝多次看见文宣帝变成各种妖怪到他面前要儿子，孝昭帝各种祈祷祭祀的方法都用尽了，最终还是没有使文宣帝走去而死。
English: That very year, Emperor Xiaozhao repeatedly saw Emperor Wenzhong transform into various monsters and come to him to ask for a son. Emperor Xiaozhao exhausted all methods of prayer and sacrifice, but ultimately did not let Emperor Wenzhong go and died.

古文：陈霸先初立梁元帝第九子晋安王为主，而辅戴之。
现代文：陈霸先开始时立梁元帝第九子晋安王为帝，辅佐并拥戴他。
English: At the beginning, Chen Baxian made the ninth son of Emperor Liang Yuan, King Jinan, the emperor, and supported and embraced him.

古文：会稽虞涉本梁武世为中书舍人尚书右丞，于时梦见梁武帝谓涉曰： 卿是我旧左右，可语陈公，篡杀于公不利。 
现代文：会稽的虞涉原来是梁武帝那时的中书舍人尚书右丞。当时梦见梁武帝对虞涉说： 你是我的老大臣，可以告诉陈公，篡权杀帝对他不利，这件事是很明白的。 
English: At that time, Emperor Liangwu dreamed that Emperor Liangwu said to Emperor Yuwu: You are my old minister, you can tell Emperor Chen that usurping power and killing the emperor is not good for him. This is very clear.

古文：事甚分明，涉即未见篡杀形迹，不敢言之，数日，复梦如此，并语涉曰： 卿若不传意，卿亦不佳。 
现代文：但虞涉没有看出篡权杀帝的迹象，不敢对陈霸先说。几天以后，又作了这样的梦，帝又对虞涉说： 卿如果不传达我的意见，对卿也不好。 
English: A few days later, he had the same dream, and the emperor said to him, "If you do not convey my opinion, it will not be good for you."

古文：涉虽嗟惋，决无言理。少时之间，太史启云： 殿有急兵。 
现代文：虞涉虽然叹息不止，但考虑还是没有说的道理，不长时间，太史来报告说： 殿外有支军队急速开来。 
English: Although Gu Zang sighed more and more, he still did not think about the truth. Not long after, Taishi came to report: An army was rapidly advancing outside the palace.

古文：霸先曰： 急兵正是我耳。 
现代文：霸先说： 那支军队是我派来的。 
English: He said, "I sent that army.

古文：仓卒遣乱兵害少主而自立。
现代文：仓猝之间霸先派乱兵杀了少帝自立为帝。
English: In a moment of haste, he sent his soldiers ahead to kill the young emperor and set himself up as emperor.

古文：尔后涉便得病，又梦梁武曰： 卿不为我语，致令祸及，卿与陈主，寻当知也。 
现代文：这以后虞涉就得了病，又梦到梁武帝说： 你不给我传话，导致灾祸的到来，你和陈主，不久就会明白的。 
English: After this, Gu Gu fell ill, and dreamed of Emperor Liangwu, saying, "If you don't give me a message, it will lead to the arrival of disaster. You and Lord Chen will soon understand."

古文：涉方封启报梦之由。
现代文：虞涉这时才肯起来报告梦中的缘由。
English: It was only then that he was willing to get up and report the reason for the dream.

古文：陈主为人，甚信鬼物，闻此大惊，遣舆迎涉，面相询访，乃尤涉曰： 卿那不道奇事？ 
现代文：陈主这个人，平生非常相信鬼神，听到这件事以后很吃惊，派了车迎接虞涉，当面询问，然后埋怨虞涉说： 你怎么不说这种奇事？ 
English: Mr. Chen, who had always been a great believer in ghosts and gods, was very surprised to hear about this. He sent a car to meet Mr. Yu, questioned him in person, and then complained to Mr. Yu, saying, "Why don't you talk about this kind of miracle?

古文：六七日涉死，寻有韦戴之事。
现代文：六七天的时间虞涉就死了。不久又出现了韦戴的事。
English: Six or seven days later, she died. Soon after that, the matter of Wei Dai came up again.

古文：韦戴
现代文：韦戴
English: Wei Dai

古文：陈武帝霸先既害梁大司空王僧辩，次讨诸将。
现代文：陈武帝陈霸先杀害了梁大司空王僧辩以后，接着就征讨他部下将领。
English: After Chen Wudi Chen Ba first killed Liang Daizi Kuo Wang Sangye, he then went to enlist his subordinate generals.

古文：义兴太守韦戴，黄门郎放之第四子也，为王公固守。
现代文：义兴太守韦戴是黄门郎韦放的第四个儿子。他为王僧辩固守。
English: Yixing Daju Wei Dai was the fourth son of Huangmen Lang Wei Fang. He was a staunch defender of Wang So.

古文：陈主频遣攻围，不克。
现代文：陈霸先频繁派兵围攻，还是攻打不下。
English: Chen Baxian frequently sent troops to besiege, but they still could not attack.

古文：后重征之，诱说戴曰： 王公亲党，皆已殄灭，此一孤城，何所希冀？过尔相拒耶？
现代文：后来又重兵征讨，并诱说韦戴： 王公的亲信党羽，都已经被歼灭，只剩你这一座孤城，还有什么希望，为什么要过分抗拒呢？
English: Later, there was a heavy conscription, and Wei Dai was enticed: "Wang Gong's close friends and followers have all been annihilated, only your lonely city is left, what hope is there, why resist too much?

古文：若能见降，不失富贵。 
现代文：如果你能投降，我不让你失去富贵。 
English: If you can surrender, I won't let you lose your wealth.

古文：戴曰： 士感知己，本为王公抗御大军，致成仇敌。今亦承明公尽定江左，穷城自守，必无路活。但锋刃屡交。杀伤过甚，军人忿怨，恐不见全。
现代文：韦戴说： 士为知己死，本来我是为王公抗御大军，致使我们成了仇敌，现在承明公您已经平定了长江下游一带，我们这座孤城自己防守，一定是没有活路了，但刀枪多次相交，杀伤人数太多，军中的人也都有怨忿情绪，害怕不能保全自身。
English: Wei Dai said: "The soldier died for his friend. Originally, I was fighting for the prince against the great army, which made us enemies. Now, I admit that you have leveled the lower reaches of the Yangtze River. Our lonely city defends itself, and there must be no way out. However, swords and guns have intersected many times, and there are too many casualties. People in the army are also resentful and afraid of not being able to protect themselves.

古文：老母在堂，弥惧祸及，所以苟延日月，未能束手耳。
现代文：我的老母亲在家里更是害怕大祸降临，所以我们才暂时延长时间，没能束手就擒罢了。
English: At home, my elderly mother was even more afraid of a catastrophe, so we only extended the time for a while and left it at that.

古文：必有誓约，不敢久劳神武。 
现代文：现在一定要有誓约我们才能投降，不敢再长久地劳动你的军队了。 
English: Now there must be a pledge before we can surrender and no longer dare to work your army for a long time.

古文：乃遣刑白马为盟，戴遂开门，陈主亦宽信还扬都。
现代文：于是陈主派人杀了一匹白马盟誓，韦戴也就开了城门。陈主也很宽容信任韦戴回到扬都。
English: So Master Chen sent someone to kill a white horse and swore an oath, and Wei Dai opened the gate. Master Chen was also very tolerant and trusted Wei Dai to return to Yangdu.

古文：后陈主即位，遣戴从征，以小迟晚，因宿憾斩之，寻于大殿视事，便见戴来，惊走入内。移坐光严殿，戴又逐入，顾访左右，皆无所见，因此得病死。
现代文：后来陈主当了皇帝，派韦戴随他出征，因为一点小过错，再加上以前的那件遗憾的事就把韦戴斩了。不久陈主在大殿中处理国事时，便看见韦戴来了，就心惊胆颤地跑到内宫，到光严殿坐下来，韦戴又紧跟着进去，陈主四下看看然后问左右的侍从们，大家都说没看见。因此他就得病死了。
English: Later, when Chen became emperor, he sent Wei Dai to accompany him on a campaign. Because of a small mistake, coupled with the previous regrettable matter, he beheaded Wei Dai. Soon, when Chen was handling state affairs in the Great Hall, he saw Wei Dai coming. He ran to the Inner Palace in fear and trembling, sat down in the Hall of Light, and Wei Dai followed him inside. Chen looked around and then asked the attendants on both sides. Everyone said that they did not see him. Therefore, he had to die of illness.

古文：隋庶人勇
现代文：隋庶人勇
English: Sui commoner Yong

古文：隋炀帝元德太子寝疾，帝遣见鬼人崔善影看祟。
现代文：隋炀帝元德太子睡觉得了病。炀帝就让能看见鬼的人崔善影来给看鬼。
English: Emperor Yuan of the Sui and Qian Dynasties fell ill in his sleep. Emperor Yuan sent Cui Shanying, a man who could see ghosts, to see the ghosts.

古文：善影幼来无目，而言见庶人勇，瞋目攘袂，大呼云： 我不放你！ 
现代文：善影小时候就没有眼睛，但他说他看见了庶人勇。他瞪着眼睛挽起袖子大叫说： 我不放你！ 
English: Goodshadow didn't have eyes when he was a child, but he said he saw the commoner, Yong. He rolled up his sleeves with his eyes wide open and shouted, "I won't let you go!"

古文：善影具述勇状貌，如旧相识。
现代文：善影详细地述说庶人勇的形态相貌，好象老相识。
English: Good-shadow describes in detail the form and appearance of the commoner Yong, as if he were an old acquaintance.

古文：京兆狱卒
现代文：京兆狱卒
English: Keizho's Jailer

古文：隋炀帝大业中，京兆狱卒失其名，酷暴诸囚，囚不堪其苦，而狱卒以为戏乐。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，京兆有个狱卒，不知道他叫什么名了，这个人残酷凶暴地对待囚犯，囚犯们不能忍受这种痛苦，而狱卒却以此游戏为乐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, there was a jailer in Beijing, I don't know his name, who treated prisoners cruelly and violently. The prisoners couldn't bear the pain, but the jailer enjoyed the game.

古文：后生一子，颐下肩上，有若肉枷，无颈，数岁不能行而死。
现代文：后来他生了一个儿子，腮下肩上好象有肉枷，没有脖子，都好几岁也不能行走而死。
English: Later, he gave birth to a son, who had what looked like meat shackles around his shoulders, no neck, and was unable to walk for several years before he died.

古文：邛人
现代文：邛人
English: Hayato

古文：唐武德中，邛人姓韦，与一妇人言，誓期不相负。
现代文：唐朝武德年间，有个邛人姓韦。他对一妇人说： 我发誓永远也不背弃你。 
English: During the Wude period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a eunuch surnamed Wei. He said to a woman: I swear I will never betray you.

古文：累年宠衰，妇人怨恨，韦惧其反己，自缢杀之。
现代文：多年以后宠爱她的劲头就衰落下去，妇人也就经常怨恨他。韦害怕她背叛自己，就亲自勒死了妇人。
English: After many years, his love for her waned, and the woman often resented him. Wei was afraid that she would betray him, so he strangled the woman himself.

古文：后数日，韦遍身痒，因发癞疮而死。
现代文：几天以后，韦遍身发痒，后来发展成癞疮死掉了。
English: A few days later, Wei was itchy all over, and later developed into scabies and died.

