古文：孙子曰：兵之胜在于篡卒，其勇在于制，其巧在于势，其利在于信，其德在于道，其富在于亟归；其强在于休民，其伤在于数战。
现代文：孙膑说： 用兵作战取得胜利的关键在于选拔士兵。士兵的勇敢在于军纪严明，士兵能够激动灵活作战，在于将领的指挥得当，士兵的战斗力强大在于将领的赏罚分明持有威信，士兵拥有良好的德行素养，则在于将领的教导有方。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: The key to victory in the use of soldiers in combat lies in the selection of soldiers. The bravery of soldiers lies in strict military discipline, soldiers can be excited and flexible in combat, the command of generals is proper, the combat effectiveness of soldiers is strong, the reward and punishment of generals clearly holds prestige, soldiers have good moral character, and the instruction of generals is good.

古文：孙子曰：德行者，兵之厚积也。信者，兵明赏也。
现代文：军需充足在于作战时能够速战速决减少损耗，军队的强大在于能够合理妥善地休养生息养精蓄锐，军中士气削弱，明显的损伤过大，则在于太过频繁的征讨作战。 
English: The sufficiency of military supplies lies in the ability to quickly fight and reduce losses during combat, the strength of the army lies in the ability to reasonably and properly rest and recuperate, the morale of the army is weakened, and the obvious damage is too large, and it lies in the too frequent war.

古文：恶战者，兵之王器也。
现代文：孙膑说： 士兵的品德高尚是用兵的深厚基础。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "A soldier's noble character is the profound foundation of being a soldier.

古文：取众者，胜囗囗囗也。
现代文：将帅言而有信，是对士兵施行奖罚分明的有利保证。
English: If the general's words are trustworthy, it is a favorable guarantee for the soldiers to carry out rewards and punishments.

古文：孙子曰：恒胜有五：得主专制，胜。知道，胜，得众，胜。左右和，胜。量敌计险，胜。
现代文：孙膑说： 在战争中，经常取胜的办法有五条：将领得到君王充分信任，得以全权指挥军队时，可以取胜；将领懂得用兵之道，可以取胜；将领得到广大士兵的拥护，可以取胜；军队上下左右同心同德，可以取胜；将领能够充分了解敌情，并能利用地形，可以取胜！ 
English: Sun Yat-sen said: In war, there are five ways to always win: generals can win when they have the full trust of the king and can command the army with full authority; generals can win when they know how to use soldiers; generals can win when they have the support of the majority of soldiers; the army can win when they are of the same mind and have the same morality; generals can win when they fully understand the enemy situation and can use the terrain!

古文：孙子曰：恒不胜有五：御将不胜。不知道不胜。乖将不胜。不用间不胜。不得众不胜。
现代文：孙膑说： 常败的原因也有五条：将领受君王控制而不能独立指挥，不能取胜；将领不懂用兵规律，不能取胜：将领不和，不能取胜；将领不能得到广大士兵拥护，不能取胜。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said: There are also five reasons for permanent defeat: generals are under the control of the king and cannot command independently and cannot win; generals do not understand the rules of using soldiers and cannot win; generals do not get along and cannot win; generals cannot get the support of the majority of soldiers and cannot win.

古文：孙子曰：胜在尽囗，明赏，选卒，乘敌之囗。是谓太武之葆。
现代文：孙膑说： 取胜在于明确赏格，选拔士兵，趁敌军这是用兵取胜建立奇功的法宝。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Winning lies in clearly awarding ranks, selecting soldiers, and taking advantage of the enemy army. This is the magic weapon of using soldiers to win and establish miraculous feats."

古文：孙子曰：不得主弗将也令，一曰信，二曰忠，三曰敢。
现代文：孙膑说， 得不到君王的信任是无法统兵作战的。 一是信，二是忠，三是敢。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Without the confidence of the king, it is impossible to lead an army into battle.

古文：安忠？
现代文：什么是忠？
English: What is loyalty?

古文：忠王。
现代文：就是忠于君王。
English: It's called loyalty to the crown.

古文：安信？
现代文：什么是信？
English: What is a letter?

古文：信赏。
现代文：就是对悬赏讲信用。
English: It's about the credibility of the reward.

古文：安敢？
现代文：什么是敢？
English: What is daring?

古文：敢去不善。
现代文：就是敢于抛弃不正确的东西。
English: It is the courage to discard what is not right.

古文：不忠于王，不敢用其兵。
现代文：如果不忠于君王，就不敢领君王的兵打仗。
English: If you are not loyal to the king, you will not dare to lead the king's soldiers into battle.

古文：不信于赏，百姓弗德。
现代文：如果对奖赏不讲信用，就不能得到士兵的拥护。
English: If you don't believe in rewards, you won't get the soldiers' support.

古文：不敢去不善，百姓弗畏。
现代文：如果不能抛弃错误的东西，士兵就不会敬服。
English: If you can't discard what's wrong, soldiers won't respect you.

