古文：李渤，字浚之，后魏横野将军申国公发之后。
现代文：李渤，字浚之，是后魏横野将军、申国公李发的后代。
English: Li Kun, also known as Junchi, was a descendant of the late Wei general Yokono and the Shengukong Li Fa.

古文：祖玄珪，卫尉寺主簿。
现代文：他的祖父李玄王圭，曾任卫尉寺主簿。
English: His grandfather, Li Xuanwanggui, was the chief bookkeeper of the Temple of the Guards.

古文：父钧，殿中侍御史，以母丧不时举，流于施州。
现代文：其父李钧，是殿中侍御史，由于母亲亡故不按时行守丧之制，被流放到施州。
English: His father, Li Qian, was an attendant of the palace, but because of his mother's death, he did not observe the mourning system on time and was exiled to Shizhou.

古文：渤耻其家污，坚苦不仕；励志于文学，不从科举，隐于嵩山，以读书业文为事。
现代文：李渤为自己家这一污点感到羞耻，坚心苦志不出仕做官，而立志在文章博学上勤奋努力，不追逐科举功名，隐居在嵩山，以读书撰述为业。
English: Li Yao felt ashamed of this stain on his family, and strove hard not to become an official. Instead, he resolved to work hard at writing erudite articles, not to pursue academic honors, to live in seclusion in Songshan, and to make reading and writing his profession.

古文：元和初，户部侍郎盐铁转运使李巽、谏议大夫韦况更荐之，以山人征为左拾遗。
现代文：元和初年，户部侍郎、盐铁转运使李巽、谏议大夫韦况一再举荐他，李渤以隐士被征召任左拾遗。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, he was repeatedly recommended by the head of the household, the salt and iron transporter, Li Xi, and the doctor Wei Quan. Li Xi was conscripted as a hermit to collect leftover relics.

古文：渤托疾不赴，遂家东都。
现代文：李渤推托有病不赴任，于是迁家至东都。
English: Li Hongtuo did not go to work due to illness, so he moved his family to Dongdu.

古文：朝廷政有得失，附章疏陈论。
现代文：朝廷施政有得失，便奉寄奏疏进陈议论。
English: If there are gains and losses in the administration of the imperial court, it will be sent to the court for deliberation.

古文：又撰《御戎新录》二十卷，表献之。
现代文：另撰有《御戎新录》二十卷，附表进献朝廷。
English: In addition, twenty volumes of "Gorebi Shinroku" were compiled, and the schedule was presented to the Imperial Court.

古文：九年，以著作郎征之。诏曰： 特降新恩，用清旧议。 
现代文：元和九年，朝廷以著作郎官职征召他，诏书说： 特降新的恩赐，以了结从前授予官职的谋议。 
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court called him to the post of writer and official, and the imperial edict said: Special new gift, to conclude the deliberation of the previous official position.

古文：渤于是赴官。
现代文：李渤因而赴任就职。
English: As a result, Li Wei took office.

古文：岁余，迁右补阙。
现代文：一年多后，他晋升为右补阙。
English: A little over a year later, he was promoted to right tackle.

古文：连上章疏忤旨，改丹王府谘议参军，分司东都。
现代文：由于接连上奏忤逆了皇帝心意，将他改任为丹王府咨议参军，在分设于东都的衙署任职。
English: Due to the fact that the Emperor's wishes were repeatedly thwarted by Shang So-yeon, he was reassigned to advise and join the army of the King of Denmark's government and to work in the So-yeon Office, which was located in Dongdu.

古文：十二年，迁赞善大夫，依前分司。
现代文：元和十二年，升任赞善大夫，仍在分设于东都的府署任职。
English: In 1902, he was promoted to Dr. Zanzan and still worked at the prefectural office in Dongdu.

古文：十三年，遣人上疏论时政，凡五事：一礼乐，二食货，三刑政，四议都，五辩雠。
现代文：元和十三年，李渤派人上疏朝廷，议论五个方面的现行政治措施：一、礼制与乐教；二、经济与财政；三、刑罚与政令；四、议都；五、辩答问难。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Zhou Dynasty, Li Yu sent people to the imperial court to discuss the current political measures in five aspects: First, etiquette and music education; Second, economy and finance; Third, criminal punishment and government decree; Fourth, discussion capital; Fifth, debate and answer difficult questions.

古文：渤以散秩在东都，以上章疏为己任，前后四十五封。
现代文：李渤在东都担任闲散而又无一定职守的官职，以向朝廷上呈奏疏为己任，前后上奏疏四十五封。
English: In Dongdu, Li Gan held an official position that was idle and had no fixed duties. It was his duty to present a report to the imperial court, and he submitted 45 reports.

古文：再迁为库部员外郎。
现代文：再次迁升，任库部员外郎。
English: He was promoted again, to the post of treasury department member, Gekiro.

古文：时皇甫镈作相，剥下希旨。
现代文：这时皇甫任宰相，剥夺下民迎合君主心意。
English: At this time, the emperor's father-in-law was appointed prime minister, depriving the people to meet the monarch's wishes.

古文：会泽潞节度使郗士美卒，渤充吊祭使，路次陕西。渤上疏曰： 臣出使经行，历求利病。窃知渭南县长源乡本有四百户，今才一百余户；阒乡县本有三千户；今才有一千户，其他州县大约相似。
现代文：适逢泽潞节度使郗士美去世，李渤任吊祭使，途中在陕县西部歇住，上疏说： 臣在出使行经之处，广泛访求施政的利弊，察知：渭南县长源乡本有四百户，现今才一百余户；阌乡县本有三千户，现今才一千户，其他州县情况大约相似。
English: On the occasion of the Zeyu Festival, which led to the death of Gong Shimei, Li Xi was appointed as the envoy of the hanging ceremony, and stopped in the western part of Shaanxi County on the way. Shang Shu said: The minister made extensive visits to seek the pros and cons of governance in the places where the envoys traveled. He noticed that there were four hundred households in the Changyuan Township of Yinan County, but now there are only more than one hundred households; there were three thousand households in the Yinxiang County, but now there are only one thousand households, and the situation in other states and counties is roughly similar.

古文：访寻积弊，始自均摊逃户。
现代文：察询探寻积久的弊端，起自平摊逃亡户的赋税。
English: Investigate and explore the long-standing drawbacks, starting with the tax of flat-rate fugitive households.

古文：凡十家之内，大半逃亡，亦须五家摊税。
现代文：大概十家之中，一半逃亡，也该另五家平摊十户赋税。
English: Out of about ten families, half of them fled, and the other five families had to share the tax equally among ten families.

古文：似投石井中，非到底不止。
现代文：有如投石到井中，不到底不停止。
English: It's like throwing a stone into a well, it won't stop until it reaches the bottom.

古文：摊逃之弊，苛虐如斯，此皆聚敛之臣剥下媚上，唯思竭泽，不虑无鱼。
现代文：均摊逃亡户赋税的弊端，苛刻暴虐到如此地步，这全是搜刮财货之臣剥夺下民向上献媚所致；他们只想竭泽捕鱼，而不思虑最终无鱼。
English: The evils of the equalization of taxes for fugitive households, the harshness and brutality to such an extent, are all caused by the wealth-seeking courtiers depriving the people of flattery; they only want to exhaust fishing, without thinking, and eventually have no fish.

古文：乞降诏书，绝摊逃之弊。
现代文：祈请赐予诏书，杜绝均摊逃户赋税的积弊。
English: Pray for the issuance of an edict to eliminate the accumulated evils of tax evasion.

古文：其逃亡户以其家产钱数为定，征有所欠，乞降特恩免之。
现代文：逃亡户的赋税按其家产钱数确定，征收赋税所欠部分，祈请赐予特殊恩典将其免除。
English: The tax of fugitive households shall be determined according to the amount of money produced by their families, the tax arrears shall be collected, and they shall be exempted by praying for special grace.

古文：计不数年，人必归于农矣。
现代文：估计不要几年，逃亡的人就必定归田务农了。
English: It is estimated that it will not take several years for the fugitives to return to farming.

古文：夫农者，国之本，本立然后可以议太平。
现代文：农业，是国家的根本，根本牢固确立了然后才能谈论天下太平。
English: Agriculture is the foundation of the country. Once the foundation is firmly established, then we can talk about world peace.

古文：若不由兹，而云太平者，谬矣。 
现代文：若不经由这一途径，却说什么天下太平的话，这就荒谬了。 
English: It would be absurd to say that the world is at peace without going through this channel.

古文：又言道途不修，驿马多死。
现代文：奏疏中还谈到道路不予修治，驿马多有死掉的情况。
English: In the report, it was also mentioned that the road was not repaired and that many horses had died.

古文：宪宗览疏惊异，即以飞龙马数百匹，付畿内诸驿。
现代文：宪宗看了李渤的奏疏感到惊诧，立即诏令将宫内飞龙厩的马数百匹，交给京城辖区的各驿站使用。
English: Kenzong was surprised to see Li Qiye's performance, and immediately ordered that hundreds of horses from the palace's flying dragon stables be given to various stations in the capital's jurisdiction for use.

古文：渤既以草疏切直，大忤宰相，乃谢病东归。
现代文：李渤后来因奏疏的拟文措语严厉、无所顾忌，与宰相大相径庭，于是以有病为由归返东都。
English: Later, because of his sloppy writing style, Li Gan used harsh and reckless words, which was very different from the prime minister, so he returned to Dongdu on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：穆宗即位，召为考功员外郎。
现代文：穆宗登基后，征召李渤任考功员外郎。
English: After Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne, he conscripted Lijun to serve as an examiner.

古文：十一月，定京官考，不避权幸，皆行升黜。
现代文：同年十一月，评定在京都的官员的考绩等级，李渤不回避得到皇帝宠信的权臣，一概进行升官降职的考核评定。
English: In November of the same year, the performance evaluation level of officials in Kyoto was evaluated, and Li Wei did not avoid the power of the emperor's favorite minister, and all carried out the promotion and demotion assessment.

古文：奏曰：
现代文：他有考绩奏章称：
English: He has a report card saying:

古文：宰臣萧俛、段文昌、崔植，是陛下君临之初，用为辅弼，安危理乱，决在此时。
现代文： 宰辅大臣萧亻免、段文昌、崔植，这是陛下统治天下之初，任用为宰辅的大臣，国家的安危治乱，决定于此时。
English: This was the beginning of His Majesty's reign over the world, and the appointment of Vice-Ministers Xiao Yimin, Duan Wenchang, and Cui Zhi as Vice-Ministers was decided at this time.

古文：况陛下思天下和平，敬大臣礼切，固未有昵比左右、侈满自贤之心。
现代文：况且陛下思慕天下和顺太平，敬重大臣礼遇诚恳，因此没有亲近身边近臣、骄恣自恃之心。
English: Moreover, His Majesty yearns for peace and harmony in the world, and treats important courtiers with sincerity. Therefore, he is not close to close courtiers around him and is not arrogant.

古文：而宰相之权，宰相之事，陛下一以付之，实君义臣行，千载一遇之时也。
现代文：而宰相的权柄，宰相的职事，陛下全都交付给了他们，实在是君主重义、臣易功成、千载一遇的时机。
English: And the power of the prime minister, the duties of the prime minister, His Majesty handed them all over to them. It is truly a time of great importance for the monarch, easy achievement for the minister, and a once-in-a-generation opportunity.

古文：此时若失，他更无时。
现代文：如果失去这一时机，就再没有这种机遇。
English: If this opportunity is lost, there will be no such opportunity again.

古文：而俛等上不能推至公，申炯诫，陈先王道德，以沃君心；又不能正色匪躬，振举旧法，复百司之本，俾教化大立。
现代文：可是萧亻免等人对皇上不能奉献至公的诚心，申述至明的鉴戒，弘扬先王的大道美德，进献皇帝以谋略建议。又不能严正地舍身克尽忠心，奋发地兴起前代法度，恢复百官依从的根本，以使政教风化大有成效。
English: However, Xiao Shimen and others could not offer the emperor the sincerity of the public, the clearest criticism and admonition, the promotion of the great virtue of the former king, and the strategic advice to the emperor. And they could not rigorously devote themselves to loyalty, vigorously promote the previous generation of laws, and restore the fundamental compliance of all officials, so as to make the politico-religious etiquette very effective.

古文：臣闻政之兴废，在于赏罚。
现代文：臣听说，政治的兴衰，在于赏罚。
English: The minister heard that the rise and fall of politics lies in rewards and punishments.

古文：俛等作相已来，未闻奖一人德义，举守官奉公者，使天下在官之徒有所激劝；又不闻黜一人职事不理、持禄养骄者，使尸禄之徒有所惧。
现代文：萧亻免等人做宰相以来，没有听说褒奖过任何一人的德行义举，提拔奉公尽职的官员，使得全国身在官位的人有所激励。也不曾听说罢黜任何一个不办理本职公务、专靠结交权贵保持俸禄的人，从而使得空受俸禄而并不管事的那班人有所畏惧。
English: Since Xiao Bingmen and others became the prime minister, I have not heard of anyone being praised for their virtuous and righteous deeds, and the promotion of officials who have served the public and fulfilled their duties has inspired people in official positions across the country. I have also not heard of anyone who does not perform their duties and relies on contacts with the powerful to maintain their salary being dismissed, which has made those who are paid and do not take care of their duties afraid.

古文：如此，则刑法不立矣！
现代文： 像这样子，刑法的威力就树立不起来了。
English: In this way, the power of criminal law cannot be established.

古文：邪正莫辩，混然无章，教化不行，赏罚之设，天下之事，复何望哉！
现代文：正邪不能分辨，良莠杂然混同，教化不予推行，赏罚不予施用，天下的治理，还有什么指望呢！
English: Right and wrong cannot be distinguished, good and evil are confused, enlightenment is not carried out, reward and punishment are not applied, and what hope is there for the governance of the world!

古文：一昨陛下游幸骊山，宰相、翰林学士是陛下股肱心腹，宜皆知之。
现代文： 前些日子，陛下游历骊山，宰相、翰林学士是辅佐陛下的心腹大臣，应该都知道这件事。
English: A few days ago, His Majesty travelled to Lushan. The Prime Minister and Hanlin, who is a close confidant of His Majesty, must have known about this.

古文：萧俛等不能先事未形，忘躯恳谏，而使陛下有忽谏之名流于史册，是陷君于过也。
现代文：萧亻免等人不能在事未成之前，忘我恳切劝谏，而使陛下有轻忽劝谏的名声流播于史册，这是使君主陷入过失。
English: It is the fault of the monarch that Xiao Rongmen and others could not selflessly and earnestly advise him before the matter was accomplished, and let the reputation of his majesty's negligent advice spread in the annals of history.

古文：孔子曰： 所谓大臣者，以道事君，不可则止。 
现代文：孔子说： 所谓大臣，就是以正道侍奉君王，不能做到这一点就该免职。 
English: Confucius said: The so-called minister is to serve the king in an upright manner. If he cannot do this, he should be removed from office.

古文：若俛等言行计从，不当如是。
现代文：如果萧亻免等人进言成功，使君主听从他们的计议，不应发生这样的事。
English: If Xiao Xuanmen and others succeed in making the monarch listen to their advice, such a thing should not happen.

古文：若言不行，计不从，须奉身速退，不宜尸素于化源。
现代文：如果进言不成，计议不被接受，即当保身迅速离职，不应在乞讨财源上身居禄位而不理事。
English: If the proposal is not made, and the proposal is not accepted, that is, when the bodyguard quickly leaves the office, he should not be in a position of begging for financial resources and not be a director.

古文：进退戾也，何所避辞？
现代文：进退惟利，岂能逃避遭受指责？
English: If you advance and retreat, but gain, can you escape being criticized?

古文：其萧亻免、段文昌、崔植三人并翰林学士杜元颖等，并请考中下。
现代文：萧亻免、段文昌、崔植三人与翰林学士杜元颖等人，一并请考绩为中下等。
English: Xiao Yimeng, Duan Wenchang, Cui Zhi and Hanlin Scholar Du Yuanying were also asked to be evaluated as middle and lower class.

古文：御史大夫李绛、左散骑常侍张惟素、右散骑常侍李益等谏幸骊山，郑覃等谏畋游，是皆恐陛下行幸不息，恣情无度；又恐马有衔蹶不测之变，风寒生疾之忧，急奏无所诣，国玺委于妇人中幸之手。
现代文： 御史大夫李绛、左散骑常侍张惟素、右散骑常侍李益等谏阻陛下游历骊山，郑覃等人谏阻打猎、游历，这都是担心陛下出行没有止息，放纵无度，又忧虑车马驰骤有倾覆之祸，风寒侵体有染病之患，紧急陈奏无处进献，皇帝国玺落于宫中妇人、宠臣之手。
English: His Excellency was prevented from travelling to Shaoshan by the imperial historian Li Qian, his left-hand riding attendant Zhang Weisu, and his right-hand riding attendant Li Yik, while Zheng Qi and others prevented him from hunting and travelling. They were all worried that His Majesty's travel had not stopped, indulged in excesses, and worried that the carriage ride would suddenly capsize, that the cold would invade the body, and that there would be the risk of infection, that there would be nowhere to donate emergency supplies, and that the imperial empire would fall into the hands of the women in the palace and their favorite subjects.

古文：绛等能率御史谏官论列于朝，有恳激事君之体。
现代文：李绛等人能率领御史谏官在朝堂上论列是非，有恳诚谏阻忠心侍奉君主的风范。
English: Li Yu and others were able to lead the imperial eunuchs to discuss the rights and wrongs in the court, and had the demeanor of serving the monarch with sincerity and loyalty.

古文：其李绛、张惟素、李益三人，伏请赐上下考外，特与迁官，以彰陛下优忠赏谏之美。
现代文：李绛、张惟素、李益三人，敬祈赐予考绩为上之下等之外，另恩赐他们加官晋爵，以显示陛下优奖忠心、赏识谏官的美德。
English: Li Lan, Zhang Weisu, and Li Yik are three people who, in addition to being given the highest performance appraisal as the top and bottom, are also given the grace of promotion to the rank of knight, to show His Majesty's loyalty and appreciation of the virtues of eunuchs.

古文：其崔元略冠供奉之首，合考上下；缘与于翚上下考，于翚以犯赃处死，准令须降，请赐考中中。
现代文： 崔元略职居陛下诸近身供奉官员之首，应当考绩为上之下等；因为他给予于以上之下等的考绩评定，于以犯贪赃罪处死，按考绩标准必须降等，请赐考绩为中中等。
English: Cui Yuanliao, who is the first among His Majesty's close and devoted officials, should be given a performance appraisal of above and below; because he gave a performance appraisal of above and below, he was sentenced to death for corruption, according to the performance appraisal standard, he must be downgraded, please give him a performance appraisal of medium and medium.

古文：大理卿许季同，任使于翚、韦道冲、韦正牧，皆以犯赃，或左降，或处死，合考中下；然顷者陷刘辟之乱，弃家归朝，忠节明著，今宜以功补过，请赐考中中。
现代文：大理寺卿许季同，任用的于、韦道冲、韦正牧，都因犯贪赃罪，有的降职，有的处死，本应考绩定等为中下；然而，近时刘辟作乱，他身临刘贼占领地区，弃家返朝，忠贞之节彰明较著，现应将功补过，请赐予许季同考绩为中中等。
English: Yu, Wei Daochong, and Wei Zhengmu, who were all appointed by Dali Temple Lord Xu Ji, were all guilty of corruption, some were demoted, and some were executed. They should have been ranked as middle and lower in the performance appraisal. However, recently, Liu Bi caused a disturbance, he was in the area occupied by Liu Qi, abandoned his home and returned to the North, and the festival of loyalty was more prominent. Now it is time to make amends. Please grant Xu Ji the same performance appraisal as middle and medium.

古文：少府监裴通，职事修举，合考中上；以其请追封所生母而舍嫡母，是明罔于君，幽欺其先，请考中下。
现代文：少府监裴通，奉行本职事务整饬清明而有成效，本当考评为中上等；由于他奏请追封生母爵号却撇弃嫡母，这是在人间迷惑君主，在冥间欺凌先人，请给他考绩定等为中下等。
English: Baitong, the young prefectural inspector, was very clear and effective in the performance of his duties, and was rated as middle-upper class in the final examination. Since he asked for the title of his birth mother but abandoned his legitimate mother, this is to confuse the monarch in the world and to bully the ancestors in the underworld. Please give him a performance rating of middle-upper class.

古文：伏以昔在宰夫入寝，擅饮师旷、李调。
现代文：我以往在膳官入寝之际，擅自与乐师李调饮酒。
English: In the past, I used to mix alcohol with musician Li without permission when the caterer was falling asleep.

古文：今愚臣守官，请书宰相学士中下考。
现代文：现今愚臣为执掌考绩之官，祈请宰相、学士记载臣考绩为中下等。
English: Today, the follower is the official in charge of performance appraisal, please ask the prime minister and the bachelor to record the performance appraisal of the follower as middle and lower.

古文：上爱圣运，下振颓纲，故臣惧不言之为罪，不惧言之为罪也。
现代文：臣对上珍惜陛下的国运，在下挽救弊坏的纲纪，因此忧惧有话不说是罪过，不怕畅所欲言而获罪。
English: A vassal should cherish the national fortune of his majesty above and save the bad discipline below. Therefore, he should not be afraid to say something without saying it is a sin, and should not be afraid to say whatever he wants without fear of being punished.

古文：其三品官考，伏缘限在今月内进，辄先具如前。
现代文：三品以上官员的考绩评等，因限期在本月内进呈，即先开列如前。
English: The performance evaluation grades of officials with three or more products will be listed first as before, since the deadline is within this month.

古文：其四品以下官，续具条疏闻奏。
现代文：四品以下官员的考绩，容再逐条陈报朝廷。 
English: The performance appraisals of officials below the fourth grade can be reported to the imperial court one by one.

古文：状入，留中不下。
现代文：李渤的奏状进呈后，穆宗将其留在宫中，不予批示交付评议。
English: After Li Xi's petition was submitted, Mu Zong left it in the palace and did not order it to be submitted for review.

古文：议者以宰辅旷官，自宜上疏论列，而渤越职钓名，非尽事君之道。
现代文：非议者认为，宰辅大臣旷废职守不能尽责，自应上疏评论是非，但李渤越职行事沽名钓誉，这不是克尽侍奉君主职责的正道。
English: The detractors believed that the Vice-Minister of the State Council was derelict in his duties and unable to fulfill his responsibilities, and that he should comment on the rights and wrongs. However, it was not the right way to fulfill the duties of serving the monarch.

古文：未几，渤以坠马伤足，请告，会魏博节度使田弘正表渤为副使。
现代文：不久，李渤因从马上跌落，脚部受伤，告假病休，适逢魏博节度使田弘正上表朝廷，请任李渤为副节度使。
English: Soon after, Li Qian fell from a horse, injuring his foot and taking sick leave. At the time of the Wei Bo Festival, Tian Hongzheng, the imperial envoy, came to the court and asked Li Qian to be the deputy imperial envoy.

古文：杜元颖奏曰： 渤卖直沽名，动多狂躁。
现代文：杜元颖进奏说： 李渤炫耀刚直沽名钓誉，举动多带狂躁。
English: Du Yuanying said: "Li Yao flaunts his reputation as a tough fisherman, and his behavior is often manic.

古文：圣恩矜贷，且使居官。
现代文：圣上恩典，怜悯宽容，并且让他做官。
English: God's grace, mercy, and tolerance allowed him to become an official.

古文：而干进多端，外交方镇，远求奏请，不能自安。
现代文：但他多方谋求晋升，在朝廷外交结方镇大臣，向远地求助于奏请提拔，不能安分守己。
English: However, he sought promotion in many ways. In the imperial court, he was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs, and he asked for help from far away to apply for promotion. He could not keep to himself.

古文：久留在朝，转恐生事。 
现代文：长期留在朝廷，日后恐怕生事。 
English: If he stays at the Imperial Court for a long time, I'm afraid there will be trouble in the future.

古文：乃出为虔州刺史。
现代文：于是将李渤调出朝廷，任虔州刺史。
English: As a result, Li Qiye was transferred out of the imperial court, and he was appointed as the chief historian of Qianzhou.

古文：渤至州，奏还邻境信州所移两税钱二百万，免税米二万斛，减所由一千六百人。
现代文：李渤赴任到州后，奏报朝廷：因归还邻境信州转来本州的两税钱二百万，请求免除本州的税米二万斛，裁减地方官吏、差役一千六百人。
English: After Li Xi took office in the prefecture, he reported to the imperial court: because of the return of the two-tax money of neighboring Shinshu, he transferred two million to the prefecture, requested the exemption of the prefecture's tax rice of twenty thousand baht, and the reduction of local officials and police officers of sixteen hundred people.

古文：观察使以其事上闻。
现代文：观察使将他的任职情况禀报给皇帝。
English: The observation officer falsely reported his position to the emperor.

古文：未满岁，迁江州刺史。
现代文：不到一年，李渤改任江州刺史。
English: Less than a year later, Li Wei was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：张平叔判度支，奏征久远逋悬，渤在州上疏曰： 伏奉诏敕，云度支使所奏，令臣设计征填当州贞元二年逃户所欠钱四千四百一十贯。
现代文：张平叔兼任度支使，奏请征收历年积压悬欠旧税。李渤在州上呈奏说： 敬奉诏令，称：根据度支使的奏报，让臣设法征收填补本州贞元二年逃税户所欠的税钱四千四百一十贯。
English: Zhang Pingxu, concurrently serving as the Provincial Commissioner, made a report requesting the collection of the old tax arrears accumulated over the years. Li Xi made a report on the state and said: "Respecting the imperial edict, said: According to the report of the Provincial Commissioner, let the minister try to collect the tax money owed by the tax evaders in the second year of the Zhenyuan period in this state to the amount of 4,410 yuan."

古文：臣当州管田二千一百九十七顷，今已旱死一千九百顷有余，若更勒徇度支使所为，必惧史官书陛下于大旱中征三十六年前逋悬。
现代文：臣在任的州管辖农田二千一百九十七顷，现已旱死一千九百余顷，若再按度支使所要求的勒取欠税，臣极忧惧史官记载下陛下在大旱之年征收三十六年前所悬欠的逃税之事。
English: His Excellency has 2,197 hectares of farmland under his jurisdiction in the state where he is currently in office, and more than 1,900 hectares have already died of drought. If he continues to pay the tax arrears as required, his Excellency is very worried that historians will record that His Majesty collected the tax arrears outstanding 36 years ago in the year of the drought.

古文：臣任刺史，罪无所逃。
现代文：臣任本州刺史，无法躲避罪罚。
English: A vassal can't hide from the punishment for being a traitor to the state.

古文：臣既上不副圣情，下不忍鞭笞黎庶，不敢轻持符印，特乞放臣归田。 
现代文：臣既不能有负圣上恩情，又不忍鞭挞黎民百姓，因而不敢轻率持印为官，特乞放臣去职归田。 
English: The vassal could not bear to be ungrateful for the grace of the emperor, nor could he bear to whip the Li people. Therefore, he did not dare to hold the seal of the official carelessly, and especially begged the vassal to leave the post and return to the field.

古文：乃下诏曰： 江州所奏，实为恳诚。
现代文：穆宗终于下诏说： 江州所奏，实为恳诚。
English: Mu Zong finally issued an edict saying, "What Jiangzhou has done is really sincere.

古文：若不蠲容，必难存济。
现代文：若不宽容，必难安顿。
English: If you are not tolerant, it will be difficult to settle down.

古文：所诉逋欠并放。 
现代文：所陈述的积年欠税一并免去。 
English: The accumulated tax arrears stated are also exempted.

古文：长庆二年，入为职方郎中。
现代文：长庆二年，李渤调入朝廷任职方郎中。
English: In the second year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Li Qian was transferred to the imperial court as an official Fang Langzhong.

古文：三年，迁谏议大夫。
现代文：三年，迁升谏议大夫。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the post of chief medical officer.

古文：敬宗冲年即位，坐朝常晚。
现代文：敬宗幼少之年即位，上朝经常很晚。
English: Emperor Keizong ascended the throne at a young age, and often ascended the throne very late.

古文：一日入阁，久不坐，群臣候立紫宸门外，有耆年衰病者，几将顿仆。渤出次白宰相曰： 昨日拜疏陈论，今坐益晚，是谏官不能回人主之意，渤之罪也。
现代文：一天，敬宗进入阁房后，久久不坐朝处理政务。群臣等候站立在紫宸门外，有高龄体衰患病者几乎坚持不住将要跌倒，李渤走出班列禀告宰相说： 昨日上疏陈论祈请皇上按时坐朝，今天坐朝更迟，这是谏官奏论不力，不能使君主回心转意，是我李渤的罪过。
English: One day, after Keizong entered the attic, he did not sit in the morning for a long time to deal with government affairs. A group of ministers waited to stand outside the purple gate, and those with advanced age, physical decline and illness could hardly hold on and were about to fall. Li Xi walked out of the queue and told the prime minister: Yesterday, I prayed for the emperor to sit in the morning on time, and today I sat in the morning later. This was a weak eunuch's argument, and I could not make the monarch change his mind. It was my Li Xi's fault.

古文：请先出阁，待罪于金吾仗。 
现代文：请让我先离班出阁，等候金吾仗的惩治。 
English: Please let me leave the office first and wait for the punishment.

古文：语次唤仗，乃止。
现代文：正说话间，呼唤起仗升朝，李渤才未行动。
English: While he was speaking, he called for war and the rise of the dynasty, but Li Qiye did not act.

古文：渤又以左右常侍，职参观讽，而循默无言，论之曰： 若设官不责其事，不如罢之，以省经费。
现代文：李渤还就左右常侍的职责在于以正道之言规劝谏戒君主却缄默无言这一现状而奏论说： 如果设置了官员不要求他履行职责，不如取消这一官职，以节省经费。
English: Li Wei also commented on the current situation that the duties of the left and right attendants are to use words and rules to persuade the monarch but remain silent, saying: If there is an official who does not require him to perform his duties, it is better to cancel this official position to save money.

古文：苟未能罢，则请责职业。 
现代文：如若不能取消这一职位，就请朝廷督责他履行其应尽的职责。 
English: If it is not possible to cancel this position, please ask the Imperial Court to supervise him to perform his due duties.

古文：渤充理匭使，奏曰： 事之大者闻奏，次申中书门下，次移诸司。
现代文：李渤担任理匦使后，上奏建议： 大事奏报皇帝，稍次的向中书、门下两省申报，再次要一点的移文给平行的诸官处置。
English: After Li Qian assumed the position of the chief envoy, he made a suggestion: Report the important matter to the emperor, report it to Zhongshu and the two provinces under his command, and once again ask for a little transfer to the parallel officials.

古文：诸司处理不当，再来投匭，即具事奏闻。
现代文：有关的诸官处理不当，再来朝堂投匦禀报，理匦使即详情奏报皇上。
English: The officials concerned mishandled the matter, then reported it to the Imperial Court, and the magistrate immediately reported the details to the Emperor.

古文：如妄诉无理，本罪外加一等。
现代文：如果随意投诉无理之事，本罪之外再加罪一等。
English: If you arbitrarily make an unreasonable complaint, you will be charged with a first-degree crime in addition to this crime.

古文：准敕告密人付金吾留身待进止。
现代文：依照敕令：准许将告密人交付执金吾留在朝内听候皇上处置的吩咐。
English: According to the imperial edict: the informant is allowed to be handed over to the executor of the imperial edict to remain in the imperial court to await the emperor's disposition.

古文：今欲留身后牒台府，冀止绝凶人。 
现代文：现今打算将投匦者留在后牒台府，期望能禁绝恶人。 
English: It now plans to keep the defectors in Taiwan, hoping to weed out evildoers.

古文：从之。
现代文：敬宗听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：长庆、宝历中，政出多门，事归邪幸。
现代文：穆宗长庆、敬宗宝历年间，政令出于多门，政事归邪佞之徒控制。
English: During the reigns of Mu Zong Changqing and Keizong Baoli, government decrees came from many sources, and political affairs were controlled by evil-doers.

古文：渤不顾忠难，章疏论列，曾无虚日。
现代文：李渤不顾祸难，上奏呈疏论列是非，竟然不空一日。
English: In spite of the calamity, Li Qian did not waste a single day on the report, which was a slack discussion of the rights and wrongs.

古文：帝虽昏纵，亦为之感悟。
现代文：皇帝虽然昏聩迷乱，也被他的行为感动而有所省悟。
English: Although the emperor was dazed and confused, he was also moved by his actions and reflected.

古文：转给事中，面赐金紫。
现代文：提升他为给事中，当面赐给他金鱼袋与紫衣。
English: When he was promoted, he was given a goldfish bag and a purple robe.

古文：宝历元年，改元大赦。
现代文：宝历元年，改年号，施行大赦。
English: In the first year of the Horyu era, the year name was changed, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：先是，鄠县令崔发闻门外喧斗，县吏言五坊使下殴击百姓。
现代文：在此之前，县县令崔发听到门外有喧闹斗殴的声音，县吏说是五坊使的手下人殴打百姓。
English: Prior to this, the county magistrate Cui Fa heard the sound of a noisy fight outside the door, and the county official said that it was the subordinates of the Wubo Envoy beating the people.

古文：发怒，命吏捕之。曳挟既至，时已曛黑，不问色目。
现代文：崔发大怒，命令县吏逮捕他，等到把他拖拽来时，天色已经昏暗，没有查问他的身份。
English: Cui flew into a rage and ordered the county officials to arrest him. By the time they dragged him here, it was already dark, and they didn't check his identity.

古文：良久与语，乃知是一内官。
现代文：很久以后与此人谈话，才知道他是宫内近侍官员。
English: It was only after talking to this man for a long time that I learned that he was an official of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：天子闻之怒，收发系御史台。
现代文：皇帝听说这件事后很生气，下令将崔发逮捕关押在御史台。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he was very angry and ordered that Cui Fa be arrested and detained in the Imperial Palace.

古文：御楼之日，放系囚，发亦在鸡竿下。
现代文：在登楼宣布赦令的这天，释放在押囚犯，崔发也在发布赦令的金鸡竿下。
English: On the day of the announcement of the pardon order, the release of the prisoners in custody, Cui Fa was also under the golden chicken rod of the pardon order.

古文：时有品官五十余人，持仗殴发，纵横乱击，发破面折齿。
现代文：这时五十多名有品级的官员，手持棍棒殴打崔发，横来直去肆意乱打，崔发的脸被打破、牙被打断。
English: At this time, more than 50 dignified officials, armed with clubs, beat Cui Fa and beat him wildly. Cui Fa's face was broken and his teeth were broken.

古文：台吏以席蔽之，方免。
现代文：御史台的吏员用席子遮蔽崔发，这才使他免遭击打。
English: The official of the Imperial Historical Records Office covered Cui Fa with a mat, which saved him from being beaten.

古文：是日系囚皆释，发独不免。
现代文：这天，在押囚犯全被释放，惟独崔发不被赦免。
English: On this day, all prisoners were released, except for Cui Fa, who was not pardoned.

古文：渤疏论之曰： 县令不合曳中人，中人不合殴御囚，其罪一也。
现代文：李渤上疏陈论说： 县令不该抓宦官，宦官不该殴打御史台的囚犯，他们的罪过是相同的。
English: Li Xuan Shang Shou Chen said: The county should not arrest the eunuch, and the eunuch should not beat the prisoners of the imperial court. Their crimes are the same.

古文：然县令所犯在恩前，中人所犯在恩后。
现代文：但是县令所犯罪过在施恩大赦之前，宦官所犯罪过在施恩赦免之后。
English: However, the county magistrate committed crimes before the amnesty, and the eunuch committed crimes after the amnesty.

古文：中人横暴，一至于此，是朝廷驯致使然。
现代文：宦官凶横残暴，竟然达到如此地步，这是朝廷放纵宦官逐渐使他们达到这地步的。
English: The eunuchs' ferocity and brutality had reached such a level because the imperial court had gradually allowed them to reach this level.

古文：若不早正刑书，臣恐四夷之人及籓镇奏事传道此语，则慢易之心萌矣。 
现代文：若不及早按刑法条款惩治宦官，臣担心周边异族的人和各地藩镇来朝进奏相互传说此事，那么轻忽怠慢朝廷法纪的意念就会萌发了。 
English: If the eunuchs were not punished in accordance with the provisions of the criminal law at an early stage, and the vassal was worried that the surrounding people of different ethnic groups and the various towns and villages would come to the court and tell each other about the matter, then the idea of carelessly neglecting the court's legal discipline would sprout.

古文：渤又宣言于朝云： 郊礼前一日，两神策军于青城内夺京兆府进食牙盘，不时处置，致有殴击崔发之事。 
现代文：李渤又在朝堂上宣称： 在天子举行祭祀天地大礼的前一天，两神策军在青城内夺取京兆府进献食品的牙盘，没有及时处置，致使有殴打崔发的事情发生。 
English: Li Wei also declared in the morning hall: On the day before the Tianzi held the sacrifice of heaven and earth, the two gods' strategists in Qingcheng seized the tooth tray of the food donated by Beijing Zhaofu, but did not dispose of it in time, resulting in the beating of Cui Fa.

古文：上闻之，按问左右，皆言无夺食事。
现代文：皇帝闻知奏章后，查问身边的侍臣，都说没有抢夺进献食物的事情。
English: After the emperor heard the music, he asked the attendants around him, and they all said that there was no robbery of food.

古文：以渤党发，出为桂州刺史、兼御史中丞，充桂管都防御观察使。
现代文：于是以李渤偏袒崔发论处，将他调出朝廷任桂州刺史、兼御史中丞，担任桂管都防御观察使。
English: As a result, he was removed from the imperial court to serve as Guizhou chief historian and vice-chief historian, and served as the Guizhou Provincial Defense Observation Envoy.

古文：渤虽被斥，正论不已，而谏官继论其屈。
现代文：李渤虽遭贬斥，仍然坚持正道之论不止，而谏官也相继陈论李渤受到的冤屈。
English: Although Li Xi was disparaged, he still insisted on the theory of the right path, and the eunuchs also successively discussed the grievances Li Xi received.

古文：后宰相李逢吉、窦易直、李程因延英上语及崔发，逢吉等奏曰： 崔发凌轹中人，诚大不敬。
现代文：嗣后，宰相李逢吉、窦易直、李程等趁到延英殿对答策问之便，对皇帝谈到崔发的事。李逢吉等禀奏说： 崔发冒犯宦官，确属大不恭敬。
English: Later, Prime Minister Li Fengji, Dou Yizhi, Li Cheng and others took the opportunity to go to Yan Ying's palace to ask about the answer, and talked to the emperor about Cui Fa. Li Fengji and others said: Cui Fa offends eunuchs, it is indeed disrespectful.

古文：然发母是故相韦贯之姊，年仅八十。
现代文：但崔发的母亲是已故宰相韦贯之的姐姐，已年近八十。
English: But Cui Fa's mother, the sister of the late Prime Minister Wei Gangzhi, is nearly 80 years old.

古文：自发下狱，积忧成疾。
现代文：自从崔发被下狱，积忧成疾。
English: Since Cui Fa was released from prison, his worries have turned into a disease.

古文：伏以陛下孝治天下，稍垂恩宥。 
现代文：臣等敬知陛下以孝治天下，祈请略示恩宽。 
English: Your Majesty's subjects respectfully know that His Majesty rules the world with filial piety, and we ask you to show us a little grace.

古文：帝愍然良久，曰： 比谏官论奏，但言发屈，未尝言不敬之罪，亦不言有老母。
现代文：敬宗流露出忧伤的神情好一会儿，说： 近日谏官奏论，只说崔发受屈，从未讲他有 不敬 之罪，也没有讲到他有年迈的母亲。
English: Keizong showed a sad look for a while and said, "Recently, the eunuch's report only said that Cui Fa suffered, but it never said that he was guilty of disrespect, nor did it say that he had an elderly mother.

古文：如卿等言，宁无愍恻！ 
现代文：像卿等所讲到的情况，我难道会不怜悯同情？ 
English: Am I to feel no pity or compassion for a situation such as the one described by Sir?

古文：即遣中使送发至其家，兼抚问发母。
现代文：于是派宫中使者将崔发送到他家，同时安抚慰问崔发的母亲。
English: Therefore, an emissary from the palace was sent to send Cui to his home, and at the same time to comfort and console Cui Fa's mother.

古文：韦夫人号哭，对中使杖发四十，拜章谢恩。
现代文：韦夫人号啕痛哭，当着宫中使臣的面鞭打崔发四十棍，上奏谢恩。
English: Mrs. Wei cried bitterly, and in front of the palace envoys, she whipped Cui Fa with forty sticks and sang a song of thanks.

古文：帝又遣中使慰安之。
现代文：皇帝又派宫中使者去他家慰问安抚。
English: The emperor also sent an envoy from the court to his home to offer condolences and comfort.

古文：渤在桂管二年，风恙求代，罢归洛阳。
现代文：李渤在桂管任职二年，因身染风疾奏请朝廷委派别人接替自己的职务，而免职返回洛阳。
English: After serving for two years in the Guizhong, he was relieved of his duties and returned to Luoyang due to illness. He asked the imperial court to appoint someone else to take over his duties.

古文：太和五年，以太子宾客征至京师。
现代文：文宗太和五年，李渤被征召为太子宾客去到京都。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, Li Yao was summoned to Kyoto as a guest of the crown prince.

古文：月余卒，时年五十九，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：到京都后一个多月去世，这时他五十九岁，被追赠礼部尚书职衔。
English: He died more than a month after arriving in Kyoto, when he was fifty-nine years old, and was posthumously awarded the title of Shosho of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：渤孤贞，力行操尚，不苟合，而阘茸之流，非其沽激。
现代文：李渤忠贞无援却竭力效忠，节操高尚，从不苟合，但是那些卑贱低能之徒，总是指责他矫情求誉。
English: Li Shizhen is loyal and helpless, but he tries his best to be loyal, has a high moral code, and never fornicates. However, those lowly and incompetent people always accuse him of seeking fame.

古文：至于以言摈退，终不息言，以救时病，服名节者重之。
现代文：他就是到了因言致祸、遭到排斥贬谪的境地，仍始终不停止发正论之言，以期纠正时弊，钦服名誉与节操的人们很推重他。
English: Even when he came to the situation of being ostracized and belittled because of his speech, he still did not stop speaking the truth, with a view to correcting the shortcomings of the times. People who admire honor and integrity are very important to him.

