古文：黄帝问曰：五运更治，上应天期，阴阳往复，寒暑迎随，真邪相薄，内外分离，六经波荡，五气倾移，太过不及，专胜兼并，愿言其始，而有常名，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：五运相互更替，上与天道的运行周期相应，阳去阴来往复交替，寒去暑来循环相接，正气与邪气相互交争，内与外不得统一，六经的血气动荡不安，五脏的本气相互倾轧而转移，如果五运之气太过，则导致克制的力量太强；不及，则导致被制约己气的力量加倍地克制，我要知道它起始的原理和一般的常规，是否能讲给我听？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: The five movements alternate with each other, the upper one corresponding to the running cycle of the heavenly path, the yang goes to the yin and vice versa, the cold goes to the heat, and the cycles are connected, the righteous and the evil are in conflict with each other, the inside and the outside cannot be unified, the blood of the six precepts is turbulent and unstable, and the original energy of the five internal organs is rolled over and transferred to each other. If the air of the five movements is too much, it will cause the power of restraint to be too strong; if it is not enough, it will cause the power of restraint that is constrained by one's own

古文：岐伯稽首再拜对曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯稽首再拜对答说：你问得很好！
English: Qibo prayed for two days and answered: This question is very clever!

古文：是明道也！此上帝所贵，先师传之，臣虽不敏，往闻其旨。
现代文：这是应该明白的道理，它一直是历代帝王所注意的问题，也是历代医师传授下来的，我的学问虽然很肤浅，但过去曾听老师讲过它的道理。
English: This is a principle that should be understood. It has always been a problem that emperors have paid attention to, and it has also been taught by doctors throughout the ages. Although my knowledge is very shallow, I have heard teachers talk about it in the past.

古文：帝曰：余闻： 得其人不教，是谓失道，传非其人，慢泄天宝。 
现代文：黄帝道：我听人家说： 遇到适当的人而不教，就会使学术的相传受影响，称为 失道 ；如传授给不适当的人，是轻视学术，不负责任的表现。 
English: Huang Di said: I have heard people say: If you meet the right people and do not teach, it will affect the academic transmission, known as the lost path; if you teach to inappropriate people, it is a sign of contempt for academia and irresponsibility.

古文：余诚菲德，未足以受至道，然而众子哀其不终，愿夫子保于无穷，流于无极，余司其事，则而行之，奈何？
现代文：我虽然没有很高的修养，不一定符合传授学术至要的标准，但是民众多因疾病而早夭，是应同情的。期望先生为了保全民众的健康，和学术的永远流传，只要先生能讲授出来，我一定按照规矩来办理，你看怎样？
English: Although I do not have a high level of cultivation, I do not necessarily meet the most important standards for teaching academics, but people mostly die early due to illness, which is to be pitied. I expect that in order to preserve the health of the people and the eternal transmission of the academic, as long as the teacher can teach it, I will definitely follow the rules. What do you think?

古文：岐伯曰：请遂言之也。
现代文：岐伯说：让我详细地讲给你听吧！
English: Qibo said, "Let me tell you about it in detail!"

古文：《上经》曰： 夫道者，上知天文，下知地理，中知人事，可以长久。 
现代文：《上经》说： 研究医学之道者，要上知天文，下知地理，中知人事，这样学说方能保持长久。 
English: "Shangjing" said: Those who study medicine should know astronomy above, geography below, and personnel in the middle, so that the theory can be maintained for a long time.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个道理。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：何谓也？
现代文：黄帝又问：有哪些不同呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：本气位也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是为了推求天、地、人三气的时位啊。
English: Qibo said, "This is to seek the position of heaven, earth, and human beings."

古文：位天者，天文也；位地者，地理也；通于人气之变化者，人事也。
现代文：推求天位者，依靠的是天文学；推求地位者，依靠的是地理学；通晓人气变化者，是人事。
English: Those who aspire to heavenly places rely on astronomy; those who aspire to status rely on geography; those who understand the changes in popularity rely on personnel.

古文：故太过者先天，不及者后天，所谓治化而人应之也。
现代文：因而，太过的气候先时令而至，不及的气候后时令而至，所以说，一年的天地运动有正常的变化，而人体的活动也随之起着相感应的变化。
English: Therefore, too much climate comes from time to time, and too little climate comes from time to time, so that the movement of heaven and earth in a year has normal changes, and the activities of the human body also have corresponding changes.

古文：帝曰：五运之化，太过何如？
现代文：黄帝问：五运气化太过怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What if the five lucky charms are too much?"

古文：岐伯曰：岁木太过，风气流行，脾土受邪。
现代文：岐伯说：木气值年而运气太过，则风气流行，脾土受其侵害。
English: Qi Bo said: if the wood gas value is too high and the luck is too high, then the culture is popular and the spleen is infringed.

古文：民病飧泄，食减，体重，烦冤，肠鸣，腹支满，上应岁星。
现代文：人们多患消化不良的泄泻，饮食减少，肢体沉重无力，烦闷抑郁，肠中鸣响，腹中胀满，在天上应木星倍明。
English: People often suffer from dyspeptic diarrhea, reduced diet, heavy limbs, fatigue, depression, ringing in the intestines, bloating in the abdomen, and Jupiter should be bright in the sky.

古文：甚则忽忽善怒，眩冒巅疾。化气不政，生气独治，云物飞动，草木不宁，甚而摇落，反胁痛而吐甚，冲阳绝者死不治，上应太白星。
现代文：木气过于亢盛，会不时容易发怒，并出现头昏眼花等头部病症，这是克制之气无权，木气独胜的现象，好像天上的云在飞跑，地上的万物迅速变动，草木动摇不定，甚至树倒草偃，人们发病多表现为胁部疼痛，呕吐不止，若冲阳脉绝则多死亡而无法治疗，在天上应金星独明。
English: Wood gas is too abundant, it will be easy to get angry from time to time, and head diseases such as dizziness will appear. This is a phenomenon in which the restraint gas has no right, and the wood gas is unique. It is as if the clouds in the sky are flying, everything on the ground is rapidly changing, the plants are wavering, and even the trees are swaying. People's illnesses are mostly manifested as pain in the hypochondrium, vomiting and vomiting. If the pulse of the sun is impeded, most people will die and cannot be treated. In the sky, Venus should be unique.

古文：岁火太过，炎暑流行，金肺受邪。
现代文：火气值年而运气太过，则暑热流行，肺受火邪。
English: If you are lucky enough to be born in a fire year, you will have a hot summer, and your lungs will be affected by the heat.

古文：民病疟，少气，咳喘，血溢、血泄、注下，嗌燥，耳聋，中热、肩背热，上应荧惑星。
现代文：人们多患疟疾，呼吸少气，咳嗽气喘，吐血、衄血，二便下血，水泻如注，咽喉干燥，耳聋，胸中热，肩背热，在天上应火星倍明。
English: People are more likely to suffer from malaria, shortness of breath, coughing and wheezing, vomiting blood, coughing up blood, bloody stools, watery diarrhea, dry throat, deafness, fever in the chest, fever in the back of the shoulders, and the Mars should be bright in the sky.

古文：甚则胸中痛，胁支满，胁痛，膺背肩胛间痛，两臂内痛，身热骨痛而为浸淫。
现代文：火气过于亢盛，在人体甚至会有胸中疼痛，胁下胀满，胁痛，胸背、肩胛间疼痛，两臂内侧疼痛，身热骨痛而发生火热疮。
English: The fire is too hot, and in the human body, there will even be pain in the chest, swelling under duress, pain under duress, pain in the back of the chest and between the shoulders, pain in the inner side of the arms, and hot sores caused by body heat bone pain.

古文：收气不行，长气独明，雨水霜寒，上应辰星。
现代文：这是收敛之气不振，火气独胜的现象，火气过旺就会有雨加冰雹之灾，在天上应水星明亮。
English: This is a phenomenon in which the wind of convergence is weak and the wind of fire prevails. If the wind of fire is too strong, there will be rain and hail. In the sky, Mercury should be bright.

古文：上临少阴少阳，火燔焫，水泉涸，物焦槁，病反谵妄狂越，咳喘，息呜，下甚，血溢泄不已，太渊绝者死不治，上应荧惑星。
现代文：如果遇到少阴或少阳司天的年份，火热之气更加亢盛，有如燃烧烤灼，以致水源干涸，植物焦枯。人们发病多见谵语妄动，发狂越常，咳喘，呼吸困难，火气甚于下部则血从二便下泄不止，若太渊脉绝多死亡而无法治疗，在天上应火星倍明。
English: If you encounter a year of less yin or less yang, the fiery air will be more prosperous, like a barbeque, so that the water source dries up and the plants are scorched. People are more likely to suffer from slang, and they are more likely to go crazy, cough, have difficulty breathing, the fire is more than the lower part, and the blood leaks from the lower part of the stool. If the abyssal vein is mostly dead and cannot be treated, the Mars should be bright in the sky.

古文：岁土太过，雨湿流行，肾水受邪。
现代文：土气值年运气太过，则雨湿之气流行，肾受湿邪。
English: If the luck of the year is too good, the rain and humidity will be prevalent, and the kidneys will be affected by the humidity.

古文：民病腹痛，清厥，意不乐，体重，烦冤，上应镇星。
现代文：人们多病腹痛，四肢厥冷，情绪忧郁，身体困重而烦闷，在天上应土星比平常明亮。
English: People are often ill with abdominal pain, cold limbs, depressed mood, heavy and tired body, and Saturn should be brighter than usual in the sky.

古文：甚则肌肉萎，足萎不收，行善瘈，脚下痛，饮发，中满，食减，四肢不举。
现代文：土气过于亢盛，则肌肉枯萎，两足痿弱不能行动，抽掣挛痛，足底疼痛，水饮病发，腹内胀满，饮食减少，四肢无力，不能举动。
English: If the soil is too rich, the muscles will wither, the legs will be weak and unable to move, cramping pain, pain in the soles of the feet, water sickness, abdominal distension, reduced diet, limb weakness, unable to move.

古文：变生得位，藏气伏，化气独治之，泉涌河衍，涸泽生鱼，风雨大至，土崩溃，鳞见于陆，病腹满，溏泄，肠鸣，反下甚而太溪绝者死不治，上应岁星。
现代文：若遇土旺之时，收敛之气伏埋，土气独旺，则泉水喷涌，河水高涨，本来干涸的低地就会生出鱼类，风雨暴至，使堤岸崩溃，河水泛滥，陆地也可出现鱼类，人们就会病肚腹胀满，大便溏泄，肠鸣，泄泻不止，而太溪脉绝则多死亡无法治疗，在天上应木星倍明。
English: If, at the time of monsoon, the wind of convergence is subdued, and the earth's wind is dominant, then the spring water will gush, the river water will rise, the lowland that was originally dry will produce fish, the storm will come, causing the embankment to collapse, the river water will flood, and fish can also appear on the land, people will have a full belly, excreting feces, ringworm, and diarrhea, and most of the streams will die and cannot be treated. In the sky, Jupiter should be bright.

古文：岁金太过，燥气流行，肝木受邪。
现代文：金气值年运气太过，则燥气流行，燥邪伤肝。
English: If the luck of the year is too good, the dry air will be popular, and the dry evil will hurt the liver.

古文：民病两胁下少腹痛，目赤痛，眦疡，耳无所闻。
现代文：人们多病两胁之下及少腹疼痛，眼睛赤痛，眼梢溃烂，耳朵听不到声音。
English: People are more likely to be sick and have less abdominal pain, red eyes, ulcerated eyelids, and deaf ears.

古文：肃杀而甚，则体重，烦冤，胸痛引背，两胁满且痛引少腹，上应太白星。
现代文：燥金的肃杀之气过于亢盛，就会身体重而烦闷，胸部疼痛并牵引及背部，两胁胀满而痛势下连少腹，在天上应金星比平常明亮。
English: If the suicidal energy of dry gold is too strong, the body will be heavy and dull, the chest will ache and drag the back, the cheeks will be swollen and painful, and the abdomen will be small. In the sky, Venus should be brighter than usual.

古文：甚则喘咳，逆气，肩背痛，尻阴、股、膝、髀、腨、胻、足皆病，上应荧惑星。
现代文：金气更加亢盛，则发生喘息咳嗽，呼吸困难，肩背疼痛，尻阴、大腿、膝部、小腿、脚足等处都疼痛的病症，在天上应火星比平常明亮。
English: If the air of gold is more abundant, there will be wheezing, coughing, difficulty breathing, pain in the back of the shoulder, pain in the buttocks, thighs, knees, calves, feet and so on. In the sky, Mars should be brighter than usual.

古文：收气峻，生气下，草木敛，苍干凋陨，病反暴痛，胠胁不可反侧，咳逆甚而血溢，太冲绝者死不治，上应太白星。
现代文：如果金气突然亢盛，水气下降，在草木则生气收敛，枝叶枯干凋落，在人则病多见胁肋急剧疼痛，不能翻身，咳嗽，气逆，甚至吐血、衄血，若太冲脉绝则多死亡而无法治疗，在天上应金星比平常明亮。
English: If the gold qi suddenly surges, the water qi drops, in the grass and trees, the anger converges, the branches and leaves wither and fall, in humans, the disease is more common, the ribs are sharply painful, can not turn over, cough, gas back, and even vomit blood and spit blood. If the pulse is too strong, it is more likely to die and cannot be treated. In the sky, Venus should be brighter than usual.

古文：岁水太过，寒气流行，邪害心火。
现代文：水气值年运气太过，则寒气流行，寒邪将损害心脏的火气。
English: If the water vapor value is too high in a year, the cold air will be prevalent, and the cold evil will damage the heart's fire.

古文：民病身热，烦心，躁悸，阴厥，上下中寒，谵妄，心痛，寒气早至，上应辰星。
现代文：人们多患发热，心悸，烦躁，四肢逆冷，全身发冷，谵语妄动，心痛，这是寒气非当时令而早至的缘故，在天上应水星倍明。
English: People often suffer from fever, palpitations, irritability, chills in the extremities, chills throughout the body, slang, and heartache. This is due to the fact that the cold comes too early, and it should be twice as bright as Mercury in the sky.

古文：甚则腹大胫肿，喘咳，寝汗出，憎风，大雨至，埃雾朦郁，上应镇星。
现代文：水邪过于亢盛，则有腹水，足胫浮肿，气喘，咳嗽，盗汗，怕风，在气候方面则降暴雨，雾霾蒙郁，在天上应土星倍明。
English: If the water is too polluted, there will be ascites, swollen ankles, asthma, cough, night sweats, and fear of wind. In terms of climate, there will be torrential rain, thick haze, and Saturn will be bright in the sky.

古文：上临太阳，雨冰雪，霜不时降，湿气变物，病反腹满，肠鸣，溏泄，食不化，渴而妄冒，神门绝者死不治，上应荧惑、辰星。
现代文：如遇太阳寒水司天，在气候方面则下冰雹，霜降提前，湿气大盛，物变其形，在人则多患腹中胀满，肠鸣，溏泄，积食不化，口渴但喝水后仍感口渴，如神门脉绝则多死亡而无法治疗，在天上应火星失色、水星倍明。
English: If the sun and cold water dominate the sky, in terms of climate, hail will fall, frost will fall ahead of schedule, moisture will abound, and things will change their shape. In humans, the abdomen will be bloated, the intestines will rumble, excretion will occur, food will not dissolve, and thirst will still be felt after drinking water. If the god's portal vein is blocked, many will die and cannot be treated. In the sky, Mars will lose its color, and Mercury will become brighter.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：很好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：其不及何如？
现代文：五运气化不及怎样呢？
English: How is five less than a lucky number?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：问的真详细啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：岁木不及，燥乃大行，生气失应，草木晚荣，肃杀而甚，则刚木辟着，柔萎苍干，上应太白星。
现代文：木气值年运气不及，燥气就会旺盛，生气迟于时令，草木不能当时生荣，萧杀之气亢盛，就会使刚劲的树木劈裂，柔嫩苍翠的枝叶干枯，在天上应金星比平常明亮。
English: Wood gas is unlucky in the year, dry gas will be strong, anger will be later than the season, plants can not grow and flourish at that time, depression will make the strong trees split, the tender and verdant branches and leaves will wither, and Venus should be brighter than usual in the sky.

古文：民病中清，胠胁痛，少腹痛，肠鸣，溏泄，凉雨时至，上应太白星，其谷苍。
现代文：人们多患气虚寒，胠胁部疼痛，少腹痛，肠中鸣响，大便溏泄。在气候方面是冷雨不时下降，在天上应金星、木星二星倍明，在五谷是不能成熟。
English: People often suffer from cold and shortness of breath, pain in the diaphragm, less abdominal pain, ringing in the intestines, and defecation. In terms of climate, cold and rain fall from time to time, Venus and Jupiter should be twice as bright in the sky, and they cannot mature in the grain.

古文：上临阳明，生气失政，草木再荣，化气乃急，上应太白、镇星，其主苍早。
现代文：如果遇到阳明司天，则木气失却了应有的生气，草木在夏秋才变繁荣，开花结实的过程就非常急促，在天上应金星、土星二星比平常光明，在植物是绿叶过早变黄。
English: If you encounter the sun and the stars, the wood gas will lose its due vitality. Grasses and trees only become prosperous in summer and autumn. The process of flowering and fruiting is very rapid. In the sky, Venus and Saturn should be brighter than usual. In plants, green leaves turn yellow prematurely.

古文：复则炎暑流火，湿性燥，柔脆草木焦槁，下体再生，华实齐化，病寒热，疮疡，疿胗，痈痤，上应荧惑、太白，其谷白坚。
现代文：金气抑木，则炎暑热火往复，湿润的便为干燥，柔嫩脆弱的草木变为焦枯，枝叶从根部重新生长，开花与结果并见，在人体则炎热之气郁结于皮毛，多病寒热往来、疮疡、疿疹、痈痤，在天上应火星增光、金星失色，在五谷则外强中干，秀而不实。
English: In the case of the human body, hot and cold are intertwined in the fur, and there are many diseases, sores, herpes, and warts. In the sky, Mars should increase in brightness and Venus should lose its color. In the grain, it should be strong and dry, but not solid.

古文：白露早降，收杀气行，寒雨害物，虫食甘黄，脾上受邪，赤气后化，心气晚治，上胜肺金，白气乃屈，其谷不成，咳而鼽，上应荧惑、太白星。
现代文：在气候则白霜提早下降，秋天肃杀之气流行，寒雨降临损害万物，味甘色黄之物多生虫变，在人则脾土先受燥邪，火气起后，心气亦继之亢盛，上传到肺金，金气被受到抑制，在五谷是谷物不能成熟，在疾病是咳嗽、鼻塞，在天上应火星明亮、金星减明。
English: In climate, white frost descends early, autumn's suffocating air is prevalent, cold rain falls and damages everything, and sweet yellow things mostly become insects. In humans, the spleen is first affected by dryness, after the fire, the heart is also followed by prosperity, uploaded to the lungs, and the gold gas is suppressed. In cereals, cereals cannot mature. In diseases, coughs and nasal congestion occur. In the sky, Mars should be bright and Venus should be fading.

古文：岁火不及，寒乃大行，长政不用，物荣而下，凝惨而甚，则阳气不化，乃折荣美，上应辰星。
现代文：火气值年运气不及，寒气就旺盛，夏天生长之气不能发挥作用，万物就缺乏向上茂盛的力量，阴寒凝滞之气过盛，则阳气不能生化，繁荣美丽的生机就受到摧折，在天上应水星倍明。
English: The value of fire gas is less than luck in the year, the cold gas is strong, the summer growth gas cannot play a role, everything lacks the power to flourish, the cold stagnant gas is too strong, the yang gas cannot be biochemical, the prosperity and beauty of life are devastated, and Mercury should be bright in the sky.

古文：民病胸中痛，胁支满，两胁痛，膺背肩胛间及两臂内痛，郁冒朦昧，心痛暴瘖，胸腹大，胁下与腰背相引而痛，甚则屈不能伸，髋髀如别，上应荧惑、辰星，其谷丹。
现代文：人们的疾病是胸中疼痛，胁部胀满，两胁疼痛，上胸部、背部、肩胛之间及两臂内侧都感疼痛，抑郁眩晕，头目不清，心痛，突然失音，胸腹肿大，胁下与腰背相互牵引而痛，甚至四肢蜷屈不能伸展，髋骨与大腿之间不能活动自如，在天上应火星失色、水星倍明，在五谷是赤色的谷类不能成熟。
English: People's diseases are pain in the chest, swelling of the diaphragm, pain in both diaphragms, pain in the upper chest, back, between the shoulder blades and the inner side of the arms, depression, dizziness, confusion, heartache, sudden loss of voice, enlarged chest and abdomen, pain under the diaphragm and back pain, even the limbs can not be stretched, the shinbone and thigh can not move freely, Mars should be discolored in the sky, Mercury should be bright, and red grains should not be ripe in the grain.

古文：复则埃郁，大雨且至，黑气乃辱，病骛溏，腹满，食饮不下，寒中，肠鸣，泄注，腹痛，暴挛痿痹，足不任身，上应镇星、辰星，玄谷不成。
现代文：湿土来复，于是埃尘遮天，大雨倾盆，水气大行其道，故病见大便溏泄，腹中胀满，饮食不下，腹中寒冷，肠中鸣响，大便泄泻如注，腹中疼痛，两足急剧拘挛、萎缩麻木、不能行走，在天上应土星增明、水星失色，在五谷是黑色的谷物不能成熟。
English: The wet soil came back, so the dust covered the sky, heavy rain poured down, and the water vapor took its course. Therefore, the disease saw the excretion of feces, the abdomen was full, the diet did not fall, the abdomen was cold, the intestines were ringing, the excretion of feces was pouring, the abdomen was painful, the feet were sharply cramped, atrophied and numb, and could not walk. In the sky, Saturn should brighten, Mercury should lose its color, and in the grain, black grains could not mature.

古文：岁土不及，风乃大行，化气不令，草木茂荣，飘扬而甚，秀而不实，上应岁星。
现代文：土气值年运气不及，风气因而流行，土气失却生化之能力，风气旺盛，则草木茂盛繁荣，但生化无能，以致秀而不实，在天上应木星润而明亮。
English: The value of earth and air is less than luck every year, and the culture is popular as a result. The earth and air loses the ability of biochemistry. When the culture is strong, the plants are lush and prosperous, but the biochemistry is incompetent, so that it is not real, and it should be bright and bright in the sky.

古文：民病飧泄霍乱，体重腹痛，筋骨繇复，肌肉瞤酸，善怒，藏气举事，蛰虫早附，咸病寒中，上应岁星、镇星，其谷黅。
现代文：人们的疾病多见消化不良的泄泻，上吐下泻的霍乱，身体重，腹中痛，筋骨动摇，肌肉跳动酸疼，时常容易发怒，在气候是寒水之气失制而旺，在虫类则提早伏藏，在人病寒泄中满，在天上应木星光芒增强而土星失色，在五谷是黄色的谷类不能成熟。
English: People's diseases are mostly dyspeptic diarrhea, cholera with vomiting and diarrhea, heavy body, abdominal pain, shaky bones and muscles, muscle throbbing with soreness, often prone to anger, in the climate is the cold water of the air out of control and prosperous, in the insects are early hiding, in the human disease cold sores full, in the sky should be enhanced by Jupiter and Saturn discoloration, in the grain is yellow grain can not mature.

古文：复则收政严峻，名木苍凋，胸胁暴痛，下引少腹，善太息，虫食甘黄，气客于脾，黅谷乃减，民食少失味，苍谷乃损，上应太白、岁星。
现代文：燥金来复，于是秋气肃杀峻烈当令，坚固的树木也不免要枝叶凋谢，在病则胸胁急剧疼痛，波及少腹，常呼吸少气而太息，在五谷则是味甘色黄的谷物被虫蛀食，在人体则邪气客于脾脏，所以黄色的谷物还在青绿色的时候就受到损害、收获减少，在人则多病饮食减少，食而无味，在天上应金星增光、木星减明。
English: Dryness comes back, so the autumn air is fierce and severe, and strong trees will inevitably have their branches and leaves withered. In illness, the chest is strained and sharp pain, affecting the small stomach, often breathing less and breathing too much. In cereals, sweet-tasting yellow grains are eaten by insects. In the human body, evil spirits are guests in the spleen, so yellow grains are damaged and harvest is reduced when they are still green and blue. In people, the diet is reduced, and the food is tasteless. In the sky, Venus should increase in brightness, and Jupiter should decrease in brightness.

古文：上临厥阴，流水不冰，蛰虫来见，藏气不用，白乃不复，上应岁星，民乃康。
现代文：如遇厥阴司天相火在泉，则流水不能结冰，本来已经冬眠的虫类重新又活动起来，不及的土运得到在泉相火的帮助，所以寒水之气不致独旺，在天上应木星正常，在人是康健。
English: If there is a fire in a spring in the yin and yang period, then the flowing water cannot freeze. Insects that have already hibernated will become active again. Unexpected soil movement will be helped by the fire in the spring phase. Therefore, the cold water will not be dominant. In the sky, Jupiter should be normal, and in humans, healthy.

古文：岁金不及，炎火乃行，生气乃用，长气专胜，庶物以茂，燥烁以行，上应荧惑星。
现代文：金气值年运气不及，火气与木气就相应地旺盛，长夏之气专胜，所以万物因而茂盛，干燥烁热，在天上应火星倍明。
English: The value of gold and gas is less than luck every year, fire gas and wood gas are correspondingly strong, and the long summer gas is superior, so everything is lush, dry and hot, and Mars should be bright in the sky.

古文：民病肩背瞀重，鼽嚏，血便，注下，收气乃后，上应太白星，其谷坚芒。
现代文：人们多患肩背闷重，鼻塞流涕，喷嚏，大便下血，泄泻如注，秋收之气不能按时令而至，在天上应金星失色、火星光明，在五谷应白色的谷类不能及时成熟。
English: People often suffer from heavy shoulders, runny noses, sneezing, bloody stools, diarrhea, the autumn harvest cannot arrive on time, Venus should be discolored in the sky, Mars should be bright, and white grains should not mature in time.

古文：复则寒雨暴至，乃零冰雹霜雪杀物，阴厥且格，阳反上行，头脑户痛，延及囟顶发热，上应辰星，丹谷不成，民病口疮，甚则心痛。
现代文：水乃复之，于是寒雨突然而来，以致降落冰雹霜雪，杀害万物，阴气厥逆而格拒，使阳气反而上行，所以头后部疼痛，病势连及头顶发热，在天上应水星倍明、火星失明，在谷类应红色之谷不能成熟，在人多病口腔生疮，甚至心痛。
English: When the water was restored, the cold rain suddenly came, causing hail, frost and snow to fall, killing everything. The yin air was rejected, and the yang air rose instead. Therefore, the back of the head was painful, the disease was connected to the top of the head, Mercury was bright in the sky, Mars was blind, the red valley could not mature in cereals, and the mouth was sore in people with many diseases, and even the heart was in pain.

古文：岁水不及，湿乃大行，长气反用，其化乃速，暑雨数至，上应镇星。
现代文：水气值年运气不及，湿土之气因而大盛，水不治火，火气反而生旺，万物的生化很迅速，天气炎热，常降暴雨，在天上应土星倍明。
English: The water and gas values are not as good as in previous years. As a result, the wetland gas is abundant. Water does not extinguish fire, but fire gas thrives. The biochemistry of all things is very rapid. The weather is hot, heavy rain often falls, and Saturn should be bright in the sky.

古文：民病腹满身重，濡泄，寒疡流水，腰股痛发，腘、腨、股、膝不便，烦冤，足痿，清厥，脚下痛，甚则跗肿，藏气不政，肾气不衡，上应辰星，其谷秬。
现代文：人们多患腹胀，身体困重，大便溏泄，阴性疮疡脓水稀薄，腰股疼痛，下肢关节活动不利，烦闷抑郁，两脚萎弱厥冷，脚底疼痛，甚至足背浮肿，这是由于冬藏之气不能发挥作用，肾气不平衡，在天上应土星倍明、水星失色，在五谷应黑色的谷类不能成熟。
English: People often suffer from bloating, heavy body, excretion of feces, negative sores, thin watering, pain in the groin, unfavorable activity of the lower limb joints, boredom and depression, weak and cold feet, pain in the soles of the feet, and even edema of the instep. This is due to the fact that the winter qi cannot play a role, the kidney qi is unbalanced, Saturn should be bright in the sky, Mercury should be discolored, and black grains should not mature in the grain.

古文：上临太阴，则大寒数举，蛰虫早藏，地积坚冰，阳光不治，民病寒疾于下，甚则腹满浮肿，上应镇星，其主黅谷。
现代文：如遇太阴司天，寒水在泉，则寒气时时侵袭，虫类很早就冬眠，地上的积水结成厚冰，阳气伏藏，不能发挥它温暖的作用，人们多患下半身的寒性疾病，甚至腹满浮肿，在天上应土星比平常明亮、火星失色，在五谷应黄色的谷类成熟。
English: If it is too cloudy, and the cold water is in the spring, the cold air will invade from time to time, the insects will hibernate very early, the accumulated water on the ground will form thick ice, and the yang gas will be trapped and cannot play its warm role. People mostly suffer from cold diseases of the lower body, and even the abdomen is full of swelling. In the sky, Saturn should be brighter than usual, Mars should lose color, and yellow cereals should be ripe in the grain.

古文：复则大风暴发，草偃木零，生长不鲜，面色时变，筋骨并辟，肉瞤瘛，目视䀮䀮，物疏璺，肌肉胗发，气并膈中，痛于心腹，黄气乃损，其谷不登，上应岁星。
现代文：风木来复，则大风暴发，草类偃伏，树木凋零，生长的力量不显，面色时时改变，筋骨拘急疼痛，活动不利，肌肉跳动抽掣，两眼昏花，视觉不明或失常，物体视之若分裂，肌肉发出风疹，若邪气侵入胸膈之中，就有心腹疼痛，土气受伤，在五谷则是黄色的谷类没有收获，在天上应木星倍明，土星失色。
English: When the wind and the trees come back, there will be a big storm, the grasses will be dormant, the trees will wither, the power of growth will not appear, the complexion will change from time to time, the bones and muscles will be in acute pain, the activity will be unfavorable, the muscles will beat and twitch, the eyes will be dizzy, the vision will be unclear or abnormal, the object will appear to be split, the muscles will emit rubella, if the evil spirit invades the chest, there will be pain in the abdomen, the native spirit will be injured, in the grain, the yellow grain will not be harvested, in the sky, Jupiter should

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：很好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：愿闻其时也。
现代文：希望听你讲一讲五气与四时相应的关系。
English: I would like to hear you talk about the relationship between the five qi and the four o'clock.

古文：木不及，春有鸣条律畅之化，则秋有雾露清凉之政；春有惨凄残贼之胜，则夏有炎暑燔烁之复。
现代文：木运不及的丁年，如果春天有和风使草木萌芽抽条的正常时令，那秋天也就有雾露润泽而凉爽的正常气候；如果春天反见寒冷惨凄霜冻残贼的秋天气候，那夏天就有特别炎热的反应。
English: In bad years, if there is a normal season in spring when the wind and the wind make the plants sprout and sprout, the autumn will also have a foggy, moist and cool normal climate; if the spring opposes the cold, miserable and frosty autumn climate, the summer will have a particularly hot reaction.

古文：其眚东，其脏肝，其病内舍胠胁，外在关节。
现代文：它的自然灾害在东方，在人体应在肝脏，其病所，内在胠胁部，外在筋骨关节。
English: Its natural disasters in the East, in the human body should be in the liver, its disease sites, the inner diaphragm, the outer musculoskeletal joints.

古文：火不及，夏有炳明光显之化，则冬有严肃霜寒之政；夏有惨凄凝冽之胜，则不时有埃昏大雨之复。
现代文：火运不及的癸年，如果夏天有景色明显的正常气候，那冬天也就有严肃霜寒的正常时令；如果夏天反见萧条惨凄寒冻的冬天气候，那时常会有倾盆大雨的反应。
English: In leap years, when the weather is not so lucky, if the summer has a normal climate with obvious scenery, then the winter will also have a normal season of severe frost; if the summer has a depressing winter climate, then there will often be a downpour reaction.

古文：其眚南，其脏心，其病内舍膺胁，外在经络。
现代文：它的自然灾害在南方，在人体应在心脏，其病所，内在胸胁部，外在经络。
English: Its natural disasters are in the south, in the human body should be in the heart, its sickbed, internal chest wall, external meridians.

古文：土不及，四维有埃云润泽之化，则春有鸣条鼓拆之政；四维发振拉飘腾之变，则秋有肃杀霖霪之复。
现代文：土运不及的己年，如果辰、戌、丑、未月有尘土飘扬和风细雨的正常时令，那春天也就有风和日暖的正常气候；如果辰、戌、丑、未月仅见狂风拔倒树木的变化，那秋天也就有久雨霜雪的反应。
English: In the year when the earth's fortune is not good, if the crescent, the dragonfly, the ugly and the new moon have a normal season of dust flying and wind and drizzle, then the spring will also have a normal climate of wind and sunshine; if the crescent, the dragonfly, the ugly and the new moon only see the changes of the wind uprooting trees, then the autumn will also have the reaction of long rain, frost and snow.

古文：其眚四维，其脏脾，其病内舍心腹，外在肌肉四肢。
现代文：它的自然灾害在四隅，在人体应在脾脏，其病所，内在心腹，外在肌肉四肢。
English: Its natural disasters are in the four corners, in the human body should be in the spleen, its disease site, internal ventricle, external muscles limbs.

古文：金不及，夏有光显郁蒸之令，则冬有严凝整肃之应；夏有炎烁燔燎之变，则秋有冰雹霜雪之复。
现代文：金运不及的乙年，如果夏天有景色明显树木茂盛的正常时令，那冬季也就有冰冻寒冷的正常气候；如果夏天出现如火烧灼的过于炎热的气候，那秋天就会有冰雹霜雪的反应。
English: In year B, which is not so lucky, if the summer has a normal season with clear scenery and lush trees, then the winter will also have a freezing cold normal climate; if the summer has a too hot climate, then the autumn will have a hail frost snow reaction.

古文：其眚西，其脏肺，其病内舍膺胁肩背，外在皮毛。
现代文：它的自然灾害在西方，在人体应在肺脏，其病所，内在胸胁肩背，外在皮毛。
English: Its natural disasters in the West, in the human body should be in the lungs, its disease sites, internal chest and shoulders, external fur.

古文：水不及，四维有湍润埃云之化，则不时有和风生发之应；四维发埃昏骤注之变，则不时有飘荡振拉之复。
现代文：水运不及的辛年，辰、戌、丑、未月有尘砂荡扬而无暴雨的气候，则时常有风生发的正常气候；如果辰、戌、丑、未月有出现飞砂走石的狂风暴雨的变化，则时时会有吹断的树木飘荡的反应。
English: In years when the water level is too low, and when there is dust and sand swirling in the morning, afternoon, evening, and new moon, but no rainstorms, it is a normal climate with frequent winds; if there is a change in the storm and rain of flying sand and stones in the morning, afternoon, morning, evening, and new moon, there will always be a reaction of blowing trees.

古文：其眚北，其脏肾，其病内舍腰脊骨髓，外在溪谷腨膝。
现代文：它的自然灾害在北方，在人体应在肾脏，其病所，内在腰脊骨髓，外在肌肉之会与小腿膝弯等处。
English: Its natural disaster is in the north, in the human body should be in the kidney, its disease site, internal lumbar spine bone marrow, external muscle meeting and calf knee bend and other places.

古文：夫五运之政，犹权衡也，高者抑之，下者举之。化者应之，变者复之，此生长化成收藏之理，气之常也，失常则天地四塞矣。
现代文：总而言之，五运的作用，好似权衡之器，太过的加以抑制，不及的加以帮助，正常则和平，反常则必起反应，这是生长化收藏的道理，是四时气候应有的规律，如果失却了这些规律，天地之气不升不降，就是闭塞不通了。
English: All in all, the role of the five movements is like a weighing instrument, too much to suppress, too little to help, normal is peaceful, abnormal is bound to react. This is the principle of growth and collection, is the law of the four-time climate. If these laws are lost, the atmosphere of heaven and earth will not rise or fall, it will be blocked.

古文：故曰： 天地之动静，神明为之纪，阴阳之往复，寒暑彰其兆。 
现代文：所以说： 天地的动静变化，受自然规律的控制；阴去阳来、阳去阴来的往复变化，可以从四时寒暑来显示出它的征兆。 
English: Therefore, it is said: the movement and change of heaven and earth are controlled by the laws of nature; the reciprocal changes of yin to yang and yang to yin can show its signs from four o'clock.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：夫子之言五气之变，四时之应，可谓悉矣。
现代文：黄帝道：先生讲五气的变化与四时气候的相应，已经说得很详尽了。
English: Huang Di said: Sir, when you talk about the changes in the five elements corresponding to the four-hour climate, you have already talked about it in detail.

古文：夫气之动乱，触遇而作，发无常会，卒然灾合，何以期之？
现代文：气有时很混乱，有所触犯才会发生，与突发的自然灾害相合，怎样才能知道呢？
English: The qi is sometimes chaotic, and only when there is an offense does it occur, coinciding with sudden natural disasters. How can we know?

古文：岐伯曰：夫气之动变，固不常在，而德化政令灾变，不同其候也。
现代文：岐伯说：五气的变动，固然没有常规，但是它们的德、化、政、令、灾、变，都是各有不同的表征。
English: Qibo said, "Of course, there is no standard for the changes of the five qi, but their virtue, transformation, politics, order, calamity, and change all have different characteristics.

古文：岐伯曰：东方生风，风生木，其德敷和，其化生荣，其政舒启，其令风，其变振发，其灾散落。
现代文：岐伯说：风是生于东方的，风能使木气旺盛，木气的特性是柔和地散发，它的生化作用是滋生荣盛，它行使的职权是舒展阳气，宣通筋络，它所行时令是风，它的异常变化是发散太过而动荡不宁，它的灾害是摧残散落。
English: Qibo said: the wind is born in the east, the wind can make the wood gas vigorous, the characteristic of the wood gas is to spread softly, its biochemical role is to breed prosperity, its authority is to stretch the yang, promote the network, its season is the wind, its abnormal change is to spread too much and be turbulent, and its disaster is to destroy and scatter.

古文：南方生热，热生火，其德彰显，其化蕃茂，其政明曜，其令热，其变销烁，其灾燔焫。
现代文：热是生于南方的，热能使火气旺盛，火气的特性是光明显著，它的生化作用是繁荣茂盛，它行使的职权是明亮光耀，它所行时令是热，它的异常变化是销铄煎熬，它的灾害作用是焚烧。
English: Heat is born in the south, heat energy makes fire vigorous, the characteristics of fire are light and obvious, its biochemical role is prosperous, its authority is bright and shiny, its season is hot, its abnormal change is burning, and its disaster role is burning.

古文：中央生湿，湿生土，其德溽蒸，其化丰备，其政安静，其令湿，其变骤注，其灾霖溃。
现代文：湿是生于中央的，湿能使土气旺盛，土气的特性是洋溢，它的生化作用是充实丰满，它行使的职权比较安静，它所行时令是湿，它的异常变化是急剧的暴风雨，它的灾害是久雨不止，泥烂堤崩。
English: Humidity is born in the center, humidity can make the earth exuberant, the characteristics of the earth are exuberant, its biochemical role is full and rich, its authority is relatively quiet, its season is wet, its abnormal changes are sharp storms, its disasters are long rains, muddy embankment collapse.

古文：西方生燥，燥生金，其德清洁，其化紧敛，其政劲切，其令燥，其变肃杀，其灾苍陨。
现代文：燥是生于西方的，燥能使金气旺盛，金气的特性是清洁凉爽，它的生化作用是紧缩收敛，它行使的职权是锐急，它所行时令是干燥，它的异常变化是肃杀，它的灾害是干枯凋落。
English: Dryness is born in the West, dryness can make gold gas vigorous, the characteristics of gold gas are clean and cool, its biochemical role is contraction and convergence, its authority is urgent, its season is dry, its abnormal change is suffocation, and its disaster is dry and withering.

古文：北方生寒，寒生水，其德凄沧，其化清谧，其政凝肃，其令寒，其变凓冽，其灾冰雪霜雹。
现代文：寒是生于北方的，寒能使水气旺盛，水气的特性是寒冷，它的生化作用是清静而安谧，它行使的职权是凝固严厉，它所行时令是寒冷，它的异常变化是剧烈的严寒和冰冻，它的灾害是冰雹霜雪。
English: Cold is born in the north, cold can make water vapor vigorous, the characteristic of water vapor is cold, its biochemical role is quiet and calm, it exercises the authority of solidification and severity, its season is cold, its abnormal change is severe cold and freezing, and its disaster is hail and frost.

古文：是以察其动也，有德有化，有政有令，有变有灾，而物由之，而人应之也。
现代文：所以观察五行的运动，分辨五运的特性、生化、权力、表现、变异、灾害，就可以知道万物因之而起的变化，以及人类因之而生的疾病了。
English: Therefore, by observing the movement of the five elements, distinguishing the characteristics of the five movements, biochemistry, power, performance, variation, and disasters, we can know the changes of all things caused by it, as well as the diseases caused by it.

古文：帝曰：夫子之言岁候，其太过不及而上应五星。
现代文：黄帝说：先生讲过五运的不及太过，与天上的五星变化相应。
English: Huang Di said, "What you said about the five unlucky omens is too much. It corresponds to the changes of the five stars in the sky.

古文：今夫德化政令，灾眚变易，非常而有也，卒然而动，其亦为之变乎？
现代文：现在五运的特性、生化、权力、表现、灾害、变异，并不是按常规发生的，而是突然的变化，天上的五星是不是也会随之变动呢？
English: The characteristics, biochemistry, power, manifestations, disasters, and variations of the five movements are not occurring as usual, but are sudden changes. Will the five stars in the sky also change?

古文：岐伯曰：承天而行之，故无妄动，无不应也。
现代文：岐伯说：五运如果随着天道运行，就没有突发的变动，与五星没有不应的情况。
English: Qi Bo said: "If the five auspicious events follow the course of heaven, there will be no sudden changes, and there will be no undesired situation with the five stars.

古文：卒然而动者，气之交变也，其不应焉。
现代文：五运如果突然发生变动，是天地之气相遇交合所引起的偶然变化，所以五星不受影响。
English: If there is a sudden change in fortune, it is an accidental change caused by the meeting of heaven and earth, so the five stars are not affected.

古文：故曰： 应常不应卒。 
现代文：因此说： 五星对应常规变化，不对应突然发生的偶然变化。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Five stars correspond to regular changes, and do not correspond to sudden accidental changes.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：其应奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：五星与天运正常相应的规律是怎样的？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is the rule for the normal correlation between the five stars and good fortune?

古文：岐伯曰：各从其气化也。
现代文：岐伯说：各自按照其气的生化规律。
English: Qi Bo said, "Each one of us will rise according to the biochemical laws of his or her qi.

古文：帝曰：其行之徐疾逆顺何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：五星运行的徐缓迅速、逆行顺行是怎样的？
English: Huang Di asked: How is the Five-Star moving slowly and quickly, and how is it moving backwards and forwards?

古文：岐伯曰：以道留久，逆守而小，是谓省下。以道而去，去而速来，曲而过之，是谓省遗过也。久留而环，或离或附，是谓议灾与其德也。
现代文：岐伯说：五星在它的轨道上运行，如久延而不进，或逆行留守，其光芒变小，叫做 省下 ；若在其轨道上去而速回，或屈曲而行的，称为 省遗过 ；若久延不进而回环旋转，似去似来的，称为 议灾 或 议德 。
English: Qibo said: The five stars move in their orbits. If they are delayed for a long time and do not advance, or remain retrograde, and their light becomes small, it is called "saving"; if they go up in their orbits and return quickly, or bend and go, it is called "saving"; if they are delayed for a long time and do not continue to rotate, it is called "disaster" or "disaster."

古文：应近则小，应远则大。
现代文：气候的变化近则小，变化远则大。
English: Changes in climate are small in the near future, but large in the far future.

古文：芒而大，倍常之一，其化甚；大常之二，其眚即也；小常之一，其化减；小常之二，是谓临视，省下之过与其德也。
现代文：光芒大于正常一倍的，气化亢盛；大二倍的，灾害即至。小于正常一半的，气化减退；小于正常四分之一的，称为 临视 ，此时应省察自身的过与德，有德的获得幸福，有过的会得灾害。
English: If the radiance is more than double the normal, the gasification is in full swing; if it is twice as large, the disaster is imminent; if it is less than half the normal, the gasification is reduced; if it is less than a quarter of the normal, it is called "imminent," at this time, you should reflect on your own virtues and virtues, have the virtue to gain happiness, and have the disaster.

古文：德者福之，过者伐之，是以象之见也，高而远则小，下而近则大，故大则喜怒迩，小则祸福远。
现代文：所以五星之象，高而远的就小，低而近的就大；大则灾变近，小则灾变远。
English: Therefore, the five-star image, high and far is small, low and near is large; large disaster becomes close, small disaster becomes far.

古文：岁运太过，则运星北越，运气相得，则各行其道。
现代文：岁运太过的，主运之星就向北越出常道；运气相和，则五星各运行在正常的轨道上。
English: If the fortune of the year is too far gone, the main lucky star will move to the north and go out of the normal path; if the luck is the same, the five stars will run on a normal track.

古文：故岁运太过，畏星失色而兼其母，不及则色兼其所不胜。
现代文：所以，岁运太过，被克制之星就暗淡而兼见母星的颜色；岁运不及，被克制之星就兼见其所不克星的颜色。
English: Therefore, if the fortune of the year is too much, the restrained star will be dim and see the color of the parent star; if the fortune of the year is not enough, the restrained star will also see the color of the star it does not overcome.

古文：肖者瞿瞿，莫知其妙。闵闵之当，孰者为良。妄行无征，示畏侯王。
现代文：研究天象而不精通天道的人，看见了天象的变化，不知道是什么道理，因此心里非常忧惧，不知道应该怎样应对才好，妄行猜测毫无征验，徒然使侯王畏惧。
English: People who study celestial phenomena but are not familiar with the heavenly way, when they see the changes in celestial phenomena, they do not know what is the reason, so they are very worried in their hearts and do not know how to deal with it. They make wild guesses without any inquiry, and frighten the king in vain.

古文：帝曰：其灾应何如？
现代文：黄帝问：其在灾害方面的应验怎样？
English: Huang Di asked: What is its fulfillment in terms of disasters?

古文：岐伯曰：亦各从其化也。故时至有盛衰，凌犯有逆顺，留守有多少，形见有善恶，宿属有胜负，征应有吉凶矣。
现代文：岐伯说：也是各从其变化而变化，所以时令有盛衰，侵犯有逆顺，留守时间有长短，所见的形象有好坏，星宿所属有胜负，征验所应有吉有凶。
English: Qibo said: It also changes according to its changes, so the season has its ups and downs, the invasion has its ups and downs, the time spent has its ups and downs, the image seen has its ups and downs, the constellation has its ups and downs, and the conscription office should have its ups and downs.

古文：帝曰：其善恶何谓也？
现代文：黄帝问：好坏怎样？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is good and bad?"

古文：岐伯曰：有喜有怒，有忧有丧，有泽有燥，此象之常也，必谨察之。
现代文：岐伯说：有喜悦，有愤怒，有忧愁，有悲伤，有润泽，有烦燥，这是星象变化所常见的，必须小心观察。
English: "There is joy, there is anger, there is sorrow, there is sadness, there is moisture, there is irritation. This is common to the changes in the constellations, and must be carefully observed.

古文：帝曰：六者高下异乎？
现代文：黄帝又道：星象的喜、怒、忧、丧、泽、燥六种现象，与五星的高低位置有无关系？
English: Huang Di also said: Are the six phenomena of the stars' happiness, anger, sorrow, grief, grief, and anguish related to the high and low positions of the five stars?

古文：岐伯曰：象见高下，其应一也，故人亦应之。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：五星的形象虽有高低位置的不同，但其应于物候是一致的，所以人体也是这样相应的。黄帝道：好。
English: Qi Bo said: Although the image of the five stars has different heights and positions, it should be consistent with the phenology, so the human body is also corresponding. Huang Di Dao: Good.

古文：其德化政令之动静损益，皆何如？
现代文：五气的德、政、化、令的动静损益是怎样的？
English: What are the dynamic gains and losses of the five elements of morality, politics, transformation, and order?

古文：岐伯曰：夫德、化、政、令、灾、变，不能相加也；胜复盛衰，不能相多也；往来小大，不能相过也；用之升降，不能相无也；各从其动而复之耳。
现代文：岐伯说：五气的德、政、化、令、灾、变都是有一定规律而不能彼此相加的，胜负和盛衰不能随意增多的，往来大小不能随便超越的，升降作用不会互不存在的，这些都是从运动中所产生出来的。
English: Qibo said: The five elements of morality, politics, transformation, order, calamity, and change all have a certain law and cannot be added to each other; victory and defeat, as well as rise and fall, cannot be increased arbitrarily; the size of exchanges cannot be exceeded arbitrarily; the effect of rise and fall cannot exist without each other. All of these come from movement.

古文：帝曰：其病生何如？
现代文：黄帝道：它们与疾病发生关系是怎样的？
English: Huang Di: How are they related to diseases?

古文：岐伯曰：德化者气之祥，政令者气之章，变易者复之纪，灾眚者伤之始，气相胜者和，不相胜者病，重感于邪则甚也。
现代文：岐伯说：德化是五气正常的吉祥之兆，政令是五气规则和表现形式，变易是产生胜气与复气的纲纪，灾祸是万物损伤的开始。大凡人的正气能抗拒邪气就平和无病，不能抗拒邪气就会生病，重复感受邪气病就更加严重了。
English: Qibo said: Degeneracy is the auspicious sign of the normalization of the five qi, decrees are the rules and forms of expression of the five qi, change is the discipline of generating victory and revival, and disaster is the beginning of damage to all things. The mortal's righteous qi can resist the evil qi and is peaceful and disease-free, but if it cannot resist the evil qi, it will get sick, and the repeated feeling of evil qi will become more serious.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：所谓精光之论，大圣之业，宣明大道，通于无穷，究于无极也。
现代文：这些正是所谓精深高明的理论，圣人的伟大事业，研究发扬它的道理，达到了无穷无尽的境界。
English: These are the so-called profound and sophisticated theories, the great cause of the sage, the study and development of its principles, and it has reached an endless realm.

古文：余闻之： 善言天者，必应于人；善言古者，必验于今；善言气者，必彰于物；善言应者，同天地之化；善言化言变者，通神明之理。 
现代文：我听说： 善于谈论自然规律的，必定能应验于人；善于谈论古代的，必定验证于现在；善于谈论气化的，必定能通晓万物；善于谈论应变的，就会采取与天地同一的步骤；善于谈论化与变的，就会通达自然界变化莫测的道理。 
English: I have heard: Those who are good at talking about the laws of nature must be able to verify them with people; those who are good at talking about ancient times must be able to verify them with the present; those who are good at talking about gasification must be able to understand all things; those who are good at talking about strain will take the same steps as heaven and earth; those who are good at talking about transformation and change will be able to understand the unpredictable nature of the natural world.

古文：非夫子孰能言至道欤！
现代文：除非先生，还有谁能够说清楚这些至理要道呢！
English: Except for you, sir, who else can articulate these essentials?

古文：乃择良兆而藏之灵室，每旦读之，命曰：《气交变》，非斋戒不敢发，慎传也。
现代文：黄帝于是选择了一个好日子，把本篇藏在灵兰秘室里，每天早晨取出来攻读，这篇文章称为《气交变》，在斋戒之后才能取出来，不肯轻易传给他人。
English: The Yellow Emperor then chose a good day to hide this article in the secret room of the Ling-Lan and take it out every morning to study it. This article is called "Changing Qi" and can only be taken out after fasting. He did not want to easily pass it on to others.

