古文：余髫年蓄五岳志，而玄岳出五岳上，慕尤切。
现代文：我幼年时便怀有登览中岳嵩山、东岳泰山、南岳衡山、西岳华山、北岳恒山的志愿，玄岳嵩山的名气在五岳之上，仰慕之心更切。
English: When I was a child, I had the ambition to visit Mount Song of the Middle Mountains, Mount Tai of the East Mountains, Mount Heng of the South Mountains, Mount Hua of the West Mountains, and Mount Heng of the North Mountains. The fame of Mount Song of the Central Mountains is higher than that of the Five Mountains, and my admiration is even greater.

古文：久拟历襄、郧，扪太华，由剑阁连云栈，为峨眉先导；而母老志移，不得不先事太和，犹属有方之游。
现代文：很久以来就打算经过襄阳府、郧阳府，亲临华山，再过剑阁关的连云栈，以此为攀登峨眉山的前站；但因为母亲年纪大而改变计划，不得不先游武当山，还是属于不失孝道的出游。
English: For a long time, she had planned to pass through Xiangyang Prefecture and Shuyang Prefecture, visit Mount Huashan in person, and then pass through Lianyungang of Jiange Pass, as a pre-station for climbing Mount Emei; but because her mother was old, she had to change her plan and travel to Mount Wudang first, which is still a filial outing.

古文：第沿江溯流，旷日持久，不若陆行舟返，为时较速。
现代文：只是沿长江溯流而上，多费时日、时间拖得久，不如从陆路去、水路返回，所需时间较短。
English: It's just upstream along the Yangtze River, which takes a lot of time and time drags on for a long time. It's better to go by land and return by water, which takes less time.

古文：乃陆行汝、邓间，路与陕、汴略相当，可以兼尽嵩、华，朝宗太岳。
现代文：从汝州、邓州之间的陆路走，路程与走陕州、开封府相同，却可以将嵩山、华山两处都游完，然后朝拜泰山。
English: If you take the overland route between Ruzhou and Dengzhou, the distance is the same as that between Shaanxi and Kaifeng, but you can swim all the way to Songshan and Huashan, and then worship Mount Tai.

古文：遂以癸亥仲春朔，决策从嵩岳道始。凡十九日，抵河南郑州之黄宗店。
现代文：于是决定首先去高山，在癸亥年二月初一动身。走了十九天，抵达河南开封府郑州的黄宗店。
English: So they decided to go to Takayama first, and set off on the first day of February in the year of the boar. After nineteen days of travel, they arrived at the Huangzong Store in Zhengzhou, Kaifeng Prefecture, Henan Province.

古文：由店右登石坡，看圣僧池。
现代文：沿黄宗店右边登石坡，观看圣僧池。
English: Climb the stone slope along the right side of the Huangzong Store to see the Holy Monk Pond.

古文：清泉一涵潭，停碧山半。
现代文：尸潭清澈的泉水，汇聚在半山腰，如碧玉一般。
English: The clear spring water of the corpse pool converges in the middle of the mountainside, like jasper.

古文：山下深涧交叠，涸无滴水。
现代文：山下深涧纵横交错、高低重叠，涧中干涸，没有一滴水。
English: Deep ravines criss-cross the lower part of the mountain, overlapping high and low. The middle of the ravine is dry, without a single drop of water.

古文：下坡行涧底，随香炉山曲折南行。
现代文：下坡后从涧底走，顺着香炉山曲折地往南行。
English: After descending the slope, walk from Loudi and take a meandering route south along Mount Incense Burner.

古文：山形三尖如覆鼎，众山环之，秀色娟娟媚人。
现代文：香炉山的形状是三座尖峰挨得很近，如同倒置的鼎，众多的峰峦环绕，景色秀丽迷人。
English: In the shape of the Incense Burner Mountain, three peaks are very close to each other, like an inverted top, surrounded by numerous peaks, and the scenery is beautiful and charming.

古文：涧底乱石一壑，作紫玉色。
现代文：涧底散乱的石头布满沟壑，显现出紫玉色。
English: The scattered stones at the bottom of the ravine are covered with gullies, showing a purple-jade color.

古文：两崖石壁宛转，色较缜润细致而润泽；想清流汪注时，喷珠泄黛，当更何如也！
现代文：两岸的崖壁宛转，崖石质地细密、色感润泽；想像清澄的流水从涧中倾泻而过时，水珠喷溅、绿波翻涌，又该是何等的景致啊！
English: The cliff walls on both sides face each other, the cliff stone texture is fine and the color is moist; imagine clear running water pouring out of the reeds and out of date, water splashing, green waves surging, and what a landscape it is!

古文：十里，登石佛岭。
现代文：走十里，登上石佛岭。
English: Walk ten miles and climb Shifoling.

古文：又五里，入密县界，望嵩山尚在六十里外。
现代文：又走五里，进入密县境，遥望嵩山，还在六十里以外。
English: I walked another five miles and entered the border of Mixian County. I could see Songshan Mountain in the distance, which was still sixty miles away.

古文：从岐路东南二十五里，过密县，抵天仙院。
现代文：从岔路往东南走二十五里，过密县县治，到达天仙院。
English: From Kushiro, go southeast for twenty-five miles, pass through the county seat of Miyakojima, and arrive at Tensen-in.

古文：院祀天仙，黄帝之三女也。
现代文：天仙院祭祀黄帝的三女儿夫仙。
English: Tensen-in Temple is dedicated to the three daughters of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：白松在祠后中庭，相传三女蜕骨其下。
现代文：白松矗立在祠堂后面的庭院中，相传三女儿是在白松下蜕变成仙的。
English: A white pine tree stands in the courtyard behind the ancestral hall. According to legend, three daughters were transformed into fairies under the white pine tree.

古文：松大四人抱，一本三干，鼎耸霄汉，肤如凝脂，洁逾傅粉，蟠枝虬曲，绿鬣舞风，昂然玉立半空，洵是奇观也！
现代文：松树有四人围抱粗，一棵树根分出三棵枝干，三干鼎立，高耸入云，树皮柔滑得好似凝固的脂肪，比涂过粉还要洁净，松枝弯弯曲曲、如同虫龙，绿色的松针迎风飞舞，昂首挺胸，亭亭玉立在半空中，真是奇观啊！
English: There are four people around the pine tree, one tree root has three branches, three trunks stand tall, towering into the clouds, the bark is silky smooth like solidified fat, cleaner than powdered, the pine branches are crooked, like a dragon, the green pine needles fly into the wind, head held high, and the pavilion stands in the middle of the air, what a spectacle!

古文：周以石栏。
现代文：松树周围有石栏。
English: There is a stone fence around the pine trees.

古文：一轩临北，轩中题咏绝盛。
现代文：一道长廊正对北方，廊中题有很多诗词楹联。
English: A long corridor is facing the north, and there are many poems in the middle of the corridor.

古文：徘徊久之，下观滴水。
现代文：我在长廊中逗留了很长时间，才下去观看滴水。
English: I stayed in the corridor for a long time before I went down to see the dripping water.

古文：涧到此忽下跌，一崖上覆，水滴历历通沥其下。
现代文：山涧到这里突然下陷，一块崖石从上面覆盖，水从崖石上往下滴。
English: At this point, the mountain suddenly sinks, a cliff stone covers it from above, and water drips down from the cliff stone.

古文：还密，仍抵西门。
现代文：返回密县，仍然到城西门。
English: Returning to Miyakata, we still went to the west gate of the city.

古文：三十五里，入登封界，曰耿店。
现代文：行三十五里，进入登封县境的耿店。
English: Go thirty-five miles and enter the Geng store on the border of Dengfeng County.

古文：南向石淙道，遂税驾停宿，税通 脱 焉。二十日从小径南行二十五里，皆土冈乱垄。
现代文：往南是去石徐的路，于是在耿店停宿。二十日从小路往南走二十五里，沿途都是土冈和不规则的高地。
English: To the south is the road to Shixu, so we stopped at Gengdian. On the 20th, we walked 25 miles from the small road to the south, along the way there were hills and irregular highlands.

古文：久之，得一溪。
现代文：走了很久，才看到一条溪水。
English: I walked for a long time before I saw a stream.

古文：渡溪，南行冈脊中，下瞰则石淙在望矣。
现代文：渡过溪水，往南从冈梁上行走，往下俯瞰就看到了石涂。
English: After crossing the stream, walking south from the ridge, I saw the stone coating from the overlook.

古文：余入自大梁即开封之古称，平衍广漠，古称 陆海 ，地以得泉为难，泉以得石尤难。
现代文：我自从进入开封府，地势平坦舒展、宽阔无边，古人称之为 陆海 。平地上难以有泉水，有了泉水又难以有岩石。
English: Since I entered Kaifeng Prefecture, the land is flat, stretched, wide and boundless. The ancients called it "land sea." It is difficult to have spring water on the flat land, and with spring water it is difficult to have rocks.

古文：近嵩始睹蜿蜒众峰，于是北流有景、须诸溪，南流有颍水，然皆盘伏土碛中。
现代文：走近嵩山开始看到蜿蜒起伏的众多山峰，北边有景溪、须溪等河流，南边有颖水，但这些河流都盘绕隐伏在土堆沙滩中。
English: Approaching Songshan, you begin to see the many peaks that meander and undulate. To the north, there are rivers such as Jingxi and Suxi, and to the south, there is Yingshui, but these rivers are coiled and hidden in the mounds of sand.

古文：独登封东南三十里为石淙，乃嵩山东谷之流，将下入于颍。
现代文：只有登封县东南三十里的石涂河，是嵩山东面山谷中的流水，将往下流入颖水。
English: Only the Shitu River, 30 miles southeast of Dengfeng County, is the flowing water in the valley on the east side of Mount Song, and will flow down into the Yingshui River.

古文：一路陂陀屈曲，水皆行地中，到此忽逢怒石。
现代文：一路上地形高低不平、弯转曲折，水都在地面下流，流到这里忽然遇到形状峥嵘的巨石。
English: Along the way, the terrain is uneven, twists and turns, the water is flowing down to the ground, and the flow suddenly encounters a huge rock with a strange shape.

古文：石立崇冈山峡间，有当关扼险之势。
现代文：巨石突立在高高的山冈和峡谷之间，有一夫当关、扼险制要的气势。
English: The boulder protrudes between the high mountain and the canyon, and has the potential to be a dangerous obstacle.

古文：水沁入胁下，从此水石融和，绮变万端。
现代文：水浸泡到巨石胁下，从此水石交融，形态峭丽，变化万端。
English: Water soaked into the megalithic barrier, since then the water and stone have blended, the shape is steep and ever-changing.

古文：绕水之两崖，则为鹄立，为雁行：踞中央者，则为饮兕，为卧虎。
现代文：流水环绕的两岸崖石，像天鹅延颈而立，又像大雁成行而飞；矗立在水中的岩石，则犹如犀牛饮水、猛虎卧伏。
English: The cliffs on both sides of the river surrounded by flowing water are like swans stretching their necks and flying like geese. The rocks standing in the water are like rhinos drinking water and tigers lying down.

古文：低则屿，高则台，愈高，则石之去水也愈远，乃又空其中而为窟，为洞。
现代文：低矮的形成小岛，高大的形成平台，岩石越高大，则距离水面越远，却又中空而形成石窟和石洞。
English: Shallow ones form islets, tall ones form platforms, the higher the rock, the further it is from the water, but hollow ones form grottoes and caves.

古文：揆估计崖之隔，以寻八尺为寻尺计，竟水之过，以数丈计，水行其中，石峙于上，为态为色，为肤为骨，备极妍丽。
现代文：估计每块岩石的间隔，要以八尺计算，水流最大时的水面，要以数丈计算。水在山崖中间流淌，岩石峙立水上，石态水色，如肤如骨，景致极其妍丽。
English: The distance between each rock should be estimated at eight feet, and the water surface at the time of maximum water flow should be calculated by several feet. The water flows in the middle of the cliff, the rock stands on the water, the stone water color is like skin and bone, and the scenery is extremely beautiful.

古文：不意黄茅白苇中，顿令人一洗尘目也！
现代文：想不到茅草芦苇之中，竟令人顿时眼目一新。
English: Unexpectedly, among the reeds of the thatch, there is a sudden eye-opener.

古文：登陇，西行十里，为告成镇，古告成县地。
现代文：登上田中高地，往西走十里，是告成镇，古代告成县所在地。
English: After ascending the Tanaka Heights and walking west for ten miles, you will find Kosei Town, the ancient seat of Kosei County.

古文：测景台在其北。
现代文：测景台在镇北。
English: The observatory is in the north of the town.

古文：西北行二十五里，为岳庙。
现代文：往西北走二十五里，到中岳庙。
English: Twenty-five miles to the northwest, to Zhongyue Temple.

古文：入东华门时，日已下舂日落时分，余心艳卢岩，即从庙东北循山行。
现代文：进入东华门时，太阳已经落山了。我心中想往着去卢岩寺，就从中岳庙东北沿山行。
English: When I entered Donghua Gate, the sun had already set. I wanted to go to Luyan Temple in my heart, so I walked along the mountain northeast of Zhongyue Temple.

古文：越陂陀数重，十里，转而入山，得卢岩寺。
现代文：越过数道高低不平的坡地，走十里，转进山，到达卢岩寺。
English: Crossed several uneven slopes, walked ten miles, turned into the mountains, and arrived at Luyan Temple.

古文：寺外数武步，即有流铿然，下坠石峡中。
现代文：寺外几步远之处，就有铿然作响的流水坠入石峡中。
English: A few steps away from the outside of the temple, there is the sound of rushing water crashing into the stone gorge.

古文：两旁峡色，氤氲成霞。
现代文：峡谷两边的山色，雾气弥漫，蕴为云霞。
English: The mountains on both sides of the canyon are misty and cloud-covered.

古文：溯流造寺后，峡底矗崖，环如半规即半圆，上覆下削。
现代文：溯流上到寺后，峡谷底部陡崖矗立，如半圆环绕，上部倾覆，下部凹削。
English: After following the river upstream to the temple, a steep cliff stands at the bottom of the canyon, surrounded like a semicircle, the upper part is overturned, and the lower part is concave.

古文：飞泉随空而下，舞绡曳练，霏微散满一谷，可当武彝之水帘。
现代文：飞流的泉水从空中直泻而下，仿佛丝绸凌空飘舞，细雨般的水珠洒满山谷，和武彝山的水帘洞不相上下。
English: The flying spring water cascades down from the sky, as if it were silk dancing in the air, and the drizzle-like water beads are sprinkled all over the valley, which is on a par with the water curtain cave in Wuyi Mountain.

古文：盖此中以得水为奇，而水复得石，石复能助水，不尼阻止水，又能令水飞行，则比武彝为尤胜也，徘徊其下，僧梵音以茶点饷，急返岳庙，已昏黑。
现代文：因此山以有水为奇，而水又得岩石映衬，岩石又能助水而不是阻水，从而使得泉水飞流，于是大大胜过武彝山了。在瀑布下徘徊，僧人梵音用茶点款待我们。急忙返回中岳庙，天已经昏黑。
English: Therefore, the mountain is surprised to have water, and the water is contrasted by the rock, and the rock can help the water instead of blocking the water, thus making the spring water fly, so it is much better than Mount Wuyi. Wandering under the waterfall, the monk Sanskrit treats us with tea. Rushing back to Zhongyue Temple, it is already dark.

古文：二十一日晨，谒岳帝。
现代文：二十一日早晨，祭拜嵩山之神岳帝。
English: On the morning of the 21st, the god of Mount Song, Emperor Yue, was worshipped.

古文：出殿，东向太室绝顶。
现代文：走出大殿，向东攀登太室山绝顶。
English: Walk out of the main hall and climb eastward to the top of Mount Taimuro.

古文：按嵩当天地之中，祀秩排列次序为五岳首，故称嵩高，与少室并峙，下多洞窟，故又名太室。
现代文：据考证，嵩山位于天地正中，祭祀的顺序为五岳之首，所以称为嵩高。嵩山和少室山并排峙立，山下洞窟很多，所以又名太室山。
English: According to the research, Songshan is located in the middle of the world, and the order of sacrifice is the first of the five mountains, so it is called Songgao. Songshan and Shomuro Mountain stand side by side, and there are many caves under the mountain, so it is also known as Taimuro Mountain.

古文：两室相望如双眉，然少室嶙峋，而太室雄厉称尊，俨若负扆。
现代文：太室山、少室山远看犹如双眉并列，但少室山嶙峋，而太室山雄厉、独居尊位，俨然像背靠屏风的帝王。
English: From a distance, Taimuroyama and Shomuroyama look as if their eyebrows are side by side, but Shomuroyama is short, while Taimuroyama is strong and lives alone, resembling an emperor with his back to the screen.

古文：自翠微以上，连崖横亘，列者如屏，展者如旗，故更觉岩岩。
现代文：从翠色弥漫的山脚而上，连绵的山崖横亘不断，好似排列的屏风、伸展的旗帜，因此更觉得高峻威严。
English: From the foot of the mountain, which is filled with emerald green, the continuous mountain cliffs stretch endlessly, resembling an array of screens and extended flags, which makes it feel even more majestic.

古文：崇封始自上古，汉武以嵩呼之异，特加祀邑。
现代文：尊崇、祭祀嵩山从远古就开始了，汉武帝因为嵩山山呼 万岁 的奇异，特别增加了奉祀岳神的嵩高邑。
English: The veneration and worship of Mount Song has been going on since ancient times. Emperor Hanwu, because of the strangeness of Mount Song shouting "long live," especially increased the worship of the mountain god Songgao.

古文：宋时逼近京畿，典礼大备。
现代文：宋朝因嵩山靠近京城附近，祭山的典礼十分完备。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Songshan was close to the capital, so the ceremony was very complete.

古文：至今绝顶犹传铁梁桥、避暑寨之名。
现代文：至今绝顶上还留下铁梁桥、避暑寨的名称。
English: So far, the names of the iron girder bridge and the summer resort have been left on the very top.

古文：当盛之时，固想见矣。
现代文：当时的盛况，完全可以想见。
English: The pomp of that time is entirely conceivable.

古文：太室东南一支，曰黄盖蜂。
现代文：太室山东南的一支山脉，名黄盖峰。
English: A mountain range in the southeast of Mt. Taimuro, known as Huanggeifeng.

古文：峰下即岳庙，规制宏壮。
现代文：峰脚就是中岳庙，庙的规模宏伟壮观。
English: At the foot of the peak is the Zhongyue Temple. The scale of the temple is magnificent.

古文：庭中碑石矗立，皆宋、辽以来者。
现代文：庭院中碑刻林立，都是宋、辽以来的题刻。
English: There is a forest of inscriptions in the courtyard, all inscriptions from the Song and Liao dynasties.

古文：登岳正道，乃在万岁峰下，当太室正南。
现代文：登高山的正道是在万岁峰下，位于太室山正南方。
English: The right way to climb the mountain is under the Wanlian Peak, which is located in the south of Mount Taimuro.

古文：余昨趋卢岩时，先过东峰，道中见峰峦秀出，中裂如门，或指为金峰玉女沟，从此亦有路登顶，乃觅樵预期为导，今遂从此上。
现代文：我昨天奔向卢岩寺时，首先经过东峰，途中看见峰峦秀丽突出，中部裂开如同门扇，有人指着说是金峰玉女沟，顺沟也有路登上绝顶，于是寻找打柴的人，约好作向导，今天就从这里上绝顶。
English: When I ran to Luyan Temple yesterday, I first passed the east peak. On the way, I saw the peak of the beautiful protruding, the middle cracked like a door. Some people pointed out that it was the Golden Peak Yumenogou, and there was also a road along the ditch to climb to the top. So I was looking for a fireman and agreed to be a guide. Today, I will climb to the top from here.

古文：近秀出处，路渐折，避之，险绝不能径越也。
现代文：走近秀峰突出处，山路渐渐断开，险要到了极点，不可能直接越过去。
English: Approaching the protrusion of Xiufeng, the mountain road gradually breaks off, almost reaching the extreme point, it is impossible to directly pass.

古文：北就土山，一缕仅容攀跻，约二十里，遂越东峰，已转出裂门之上。
现代文：往北靠土山走，路窄得好像一根线，只容向上攀爬，大约二十里路，才越过东峰，不久转到裂门上面。
English: Going north along the hill, the road is as narrow as a thread, and only allows climbing upwards for about twenty miles before crossing the east peak and soon reaching the top of the crack.

古文：西度狭脊。
现代文：往西翻越狭窄的山脊，看着绝顶往前走。
English: Climb over the narrow ridge to the west and watch the peaks go by.

古文：望绝顶行，是日浓云如泼黑，余不为止。
现代文：这一天，浓黑的云如同用墨染过，我没有因此停步。
English: On this day, the thick black clouds seemed to have been dyed with ink, so I did not stop.

古文：至是岚气即雾水气愈沉，稍开则下瞰绝壁重崖，如列绡削玉，合则如行大海中。
现代文：此时雾气越来越阴沉，稍稍晴开时就可以朝下俯视到绝壁重崖，似丝织品罗列、玉石剖开；云雾聚合时，则如同在大海中前进。
English: At this time, the fog is getting more and more gloomy. When it clears up a little, you can look down to the steep cliffs, like silk fabrics lined up and jade cut open; when the clouds and fog converge, it is like advancing in the sea.

古文：五里，抵天门。
现代文：五里，到达天门峰。
English: Five miles to reach Tianmen Peak.

古文：上下皆石崖重叠，路多积雪。
现代文：上下都是重叠的石崖，路上积雪很多。
English: There are overlapping stone cliffs up and down, and there is a lot of snow on the road.

古文：导者指峻绝处为大铁梁桥。
现代文：向导指着最陡峻的地方，称为大铁梁桥。
English: The guide points to the steepest part, known as the Great Iron Bridge.

古文：折而西，又三里，绕峰南下，得登高岩。
现代文：转向西走，又三里，绕着山峰往南下，到登高岩。
English: Turn to the west and walk another three miles, around the mountain peak to the south, to Denggaoyan.

古文：凡岩幽者多不畅，畅者又少回藏映带之致。
现代文：大凡幽深处山岩多数不畅通，畅通处岩石又缺少曲折、隐蔽以及互相映衬的景致。
English: Most of the mountain rocks in the great depths are not smooth, and the smooth rocks lack twists, hidden and contrasting scenery.

古文：此岩上倚层崖，下临绝壑，洞门重峦拥护，左右环倚台嶂。
现代文：此岩上靠层层山崖，下临陡峭的深壑，洞门重山族拥，左右环靠平台及屏障般的山峰。
English: This rock is surrounded by layers of cliffs on the top and steep cliffs on the bottom. The cave is surrounded by heavy mountains, surrounded by platforms and barrier-like peaks on the left and right.

古文：初入，有洞岈然，洞壁斜透；穿行数武步，崖忽中断五尺，莫可着趾。
现代文：一上登高岩，就有又深又大的洞穴，洞壁斜穿；在洞中穿行数步，山崖忽然从中断开五尺，没有可以落脚的地方。
English: As soon as you climb the high rock, there are deep and large caves, cave walls slanting through; walk a few steps through the cave, the cliff suddenly opens five feet from the break, there is no place to land.

古文：导者故老樵，狷捷如猿猴，侧身跃过对崖，取木二枝，横架为阁道。
现代文：向导是当地的老樵夫，敏捷得好似猿猴，侧身跳到断崖对面，取来两枝树千，横架在断崖上形成阁道。
English: The guide is an old local widower, agile as an ape, who leaps sideways to the opposite side of the cliff, picks up a couple of twigs, and straddles the cliff to form a walkway.

古文：既度，则岩穹然上覆，中有乳泉、丹灶、石榻诸胜。
现代文：过了断崖，拱形的岩石高高覆盖在上方，当中有乳泉、丹灶、石榻等名胜。
English: After passing the cliff, the arch-shaped rock is covered high above, among which there are famous places such as milk spring, rice cooker, stone bed.

古文：从岩侧跻而上，更得一台，三面悬绝壑中。
现代文：从岩边攀登而上，另外又有一平台，三面悬空在极深的沟壑中。
English: Climbing up from the edge of the rock, there is also a platform, suspended on three sides in a very deep ravine.

古文：导者曰： 下可瞰登封，远及箕、颍。 
现代文：向导说： 往下可以俯视登封县，远处看得到箕山、颖水。 
English: The guide said: You can look down on Dengfeng County, and see Lushan and Yingshui in the distance.

古文：时浓雾四塞，都无所见。
现代文：当时四周浓雾迷漫，什么都看不见。
English: At the time, there was thick fog all around, and I couldn't see anything.

古文：出岩，转北二里，得白鹤观址。
现代文：走出登高岩，转北行二里，到白鹤观遗址。
English: Go out of Denggaoyan, turn north for two miles, and go to the Baizheguan site.

古文：址在山坪，去险就夷，孤松挺立有旷致。
现代文：遗址在山间平地上，远离险峻而靠近平坦的地方，独自挺立着一棵松树，有一种旷达的情趣。
English: The site is on a mountain plain, far from the precipitous and close to the flat, with a pine tree standing alone. It has an expansive feeling.

古文：又北上三里，始跻绝顶，有真武庙三楹。
现代文：又往北上三里，才登上绝顶，顶上有真武庙，分为三列。
English: Another three miles to the north, before reaching the very top, there is the True Martial Arts Temple at the top, which is divided into three rows.

古文：侧一井，甚莹，曰御井，宋真宗避暑所浚挖掘疏导也。
现代文：旁边有一口井，井水十分清莹，名御井，是宋真宗到顶上避暑时开掘的。
English: There is a well next to it. The well water is very clear and the well is famous. It was excavated by Song Zhenzong when he went to the top to spend the summer.

古文：饭真武庙中。
现代文：在真武庙中吃饭。
English: Eat in the middle of the Zen temple.

古文：问下山道，导者曰： 正道从万岁峰抵麓二十里。若从西沟悬溜而下，可省其半，然路极险峻。 
现代文：询问下山的路，向导说： 正道顺万岁峰下到山脚，有二十里，如果顺西沟悬空滑行而下，可以省掉一半的路程，但是道路极其险峻。 
English: When inquiring about the way down the mountain, the guide said, "It takes twenty miles to get to the foot of the mountain by following the straight path down Wanzheifeng. If you glide down along the West Gorge, you can save half of the distance, but the road is extremely steep.

古文：余色喜，谓嵩无奇，以无险耳。
现代文：我面露喜色，原来认为嵩山不奇，因为没有险峻之处。
English: My face was beaming with joy. Originally, I thought it was strange that the mountain was so high, because there was nothing steep about it.

古文：亟从之，遂策杖前。
现代文：赶忙跟随向导，拄着手杖往前走。
English: Hurry to follow the guide, walking with a cane.

古文：始犹依岩凌石，披丛条以降。
现代文：开始还傍靠着岩石穿越，拨开丛密的草木往下走。
English: At the beginning, I also leaned on the side of the rock to cross, and pushed aside the thick vegetation to go down.

古文：既而从两石峡溜中直下，仰望夹崖逼天。
现代文：接着就从两石峡中滑行直下，仰望夹在两旁的崖壁几乎逼近天际。
English: Next, we glided straight down from the middle of the two rock canyons, looking up at the cliff walls sandwiched between the two sides, almost approaching the sky.

古文：先是峰顶雾滴如雨，至此渐开，景亦渐奇。
现代文：在这之前，峰顶上的雾气像雨一样往下滴，下到这里雾气渐渐散开，景色也渐渐奇异。
English: Before this, the mist at the top of the peak dripped down like rain, and when it came down here, the mist gradually dispersed, and the scenery gradually became strange.

古文：然皆垂沟脱磴，无论不能行，且不能止。
现代文：但一直是垂直的沟谷，没有石阶，不要说不能行走，而且无法停留下来。
English: But it has always been a vertical ravine, without stone steps, not to say that you can't walk, and you can't stay down.

古文：愈下，崖势愈壮，一峡穷，复转一峡。
现代文：越往下滑，崖壁的气势愈壮观，下完一道峡谷，又转入另一道峡谷。
English: The more you slide down, the more spectacular the cliff walls become. After descending one canyon, you turn into another canyon.

古文：吾目不使旁瞬目不斜视，吾足不容求处息也。如是十里，始出峡，抵平地，得正道。
现代文：我的眼睛不敢斜视，我的脚不能止住。就这样一了十里，才走出峡谷，到达平地，上了正道。
English: My eyes dared not squint, and my feet could not stop. It took me ten miles to get out of the canyon, onto flat ground, and onto the right path.

古文：过无极洞。西越岭，趋草莽中，五里，得法皇寺。
现代文：经过无极洞，往西翻越山岭，在草丛中急行，五里，到法皇寺。
English: After passing through Wujiuji Cave, westward over the mountains, in the grass rush, five miles, to the Fao Temple.

古文：寺有金莲花，为特产，他处所无。
现代文：寺里有金莲花，是本地特产，其它地方没有。
English: There are golden lotus flowers in the temple, which are a local specialty and not found anywhere else.

古文：山雨忽来，遂借榻僧寮á小屋。
现代文：山雨忽然降临，于是在僧人的小屋留宿。
English: A sudden downpour of rain forced them to stay in a monk's hut.

古文：其东石峰夹峙，每月初生，正从峡中出，所称 嵩门待月 也，计余所下之峡，即在其上，今坐对之，只觉云气出没，安知身自此中来也。
现代文：寺东石峰对峙，每当月亮初升时，正好照在峡谷中间，是所谓的 嵩山待月 。想来我先前所下的峡谷，就在这道峡谷上面，现在面对面地坐下来，只觉得上面云气出没，哪里知道自己是从中下来的呢。
English: Every time the moon rises, it shines right in the middle of the canyon. It is the so-called "Mount Takeshi waiting for the moon." If you think about it, the canyon I went down earlier is just above this canyon. Now I sit down face to face, and I only feel the clouds above me. How do I know where I came from?

古文：二十二日出山，东行五里，抵嵩阳宫废址。
现代文：二十二日出了山，往东行五里，到达荒废的嵩阳宫遗址。
English: On the 22nd, I went out of the mountains and traveled five miles eastward, arriving at the abandoned Songyang Palace site.

古文：惟三将军柏郁然如山指柏树郁郁葱葱干大枝繁，汉所封也；大者围七人，中者五，小者三。
现代文：遗址上只郁郁葱葱、岿然如山的三棵将军柏，这是汉朝封的名称；大的一棵有七人围抱粗，中等的要五人围抱，小的三人围抱。
English: On the site, there are only three generals' cypresses, which is the name of the Han Dynasty seal, lush and resembling a mountain. The large one is surrounded by seven people, the medium one is surrounded by five, and the small one is surrounded by three.

古文：柏之北，有室三楹，祠二程先生指程颐程颢。
现代文：柏树北边，有三排房屋，祭祀程颐、程颖两位先生。
English: On the north side of the cypress tree, there are three rows of houses, and two men, Cheng Yu and Cheng Ying, are involved in the ritual.

古文：柏之西，有旧殿石柱一，大半没于土，上多宋人题名，可辨者为范阳祖无择、上谷寇武仲及苏才翁数人而已。
现代文：柏树西边，有一根旧殿石柱，大半截埋在土中，上面有很多宋代人的题名，可以分辨出来的有范阳人祖无择、上谷人寇武仲和苏才翁等数人。
English: On the west side of the cypress tree, there is a stone pillar of the old palace, mostly buried in the soil. There are many titles of the Song Dynasty people on it. Some people can be distinguished, such as Fan Yang, Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu Zu

古文：柏之西南，雄碑杰然，四面刻蛟螭一种龙甚精。
现代文：柏树西南，是石碑雄伟巨大，四面雕刻的龙形装饰图非常精致。
English: Southwest of the cypress tree, the stone monument is majestic and huge, and the dragon-shaped decorative figure carved on all four sides is very delicate.

古文：右则为唐碑，裴迥撰文，徐浩八分书书法之一种也。
现代文：右边是块唐代的石碑，碑文为裴迥撰写，徐浩用八分书书写。
English: On the right is a stone monument from the Tang Dynasty. The inscription was written by Pei Yao, and Xu Hao wrote it in octavo.

古文：又东二里，过崇福宫故址，又名万寿宫，为宋宰相提点处。
现代文：又往东走二里，经过崇福宫旧址，崇福宫又叫万寿宫，是宋朝宰相提点官处。
English: Another two miles to the east, past the former site of the Chongfu Palace, the Chongfu Palace, also known as the Manshou Palace, was the prime minister of the Song Dynasty.

古文：又东为启母石，大如数间屋，侧有一平石如砥。
现代文：再东边是启母石，有几间屋那么大，旁边有一块像磨刀石一样的平石。
English: Further to the east is the Kaimos stone, the size of several houses, and next to it is a flat stone like a grindstone.

古文：又东八里，还饭岳庙，看宋、元碑。
现代文：又往东走八里，回到中岳庙吃饭，观看宋代、元代的碑刻。
English: We walked another eight miles to the east and returned to Zhongyue Temple to eat and see the inscriptions from the Song and Yuan dynasties.

古文：西八里，入登封县。
现代文：往西走八里，进入登封县。
English: Go west for eight miles and enter Dengfeng County.

古文：西五里，从小径西北行。
现代文：再往西走五里，顺小路往西北行。
English: Go five miles further west and follow the path to the northwest.

古文：又五里，入会善寺， 茶榜 在其西小轩内，元刻也。
现代文：又五里，到会善寺， 茶榜 碑刻在寺中西边小屋里，是元代刻的。
English: Another five miles to Hoizen-ji Temple, tea table Inscribed in a hut on the west side of the temple, it was carved in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：后有一石碑仆墙下，为唐贞元《戒坛记》，汝州刺史陆长源撰，河南陆郢书。
现代文：背后有一块石碑倒在墙脚，是唐朝贞元年间刻的《戒坛记》，碑文为汝州刺史陆长源撰写，河南人陆邹书写。
English: Behind, a stone tablet lies at the foot of the wall. It is the "Record of the Altar of Consecration" inscribed in the first year of the Tang Dynasty. The inscription was written by Lu Changyuan, a historian from Ruzhou, and Lu Yao, a native of Henan Province.

古文：又西为戒坛废址，石上刻镂极精工，俱断委草砾。
现代文：再西边是荒废的戒坛遗址，石上的雕刻极其精致工整，但都残缺不齐地扔在荒草碎石之中。
English: Further west is the abandoned site of the sacrificial altar. The carvings on the stone are extremely elaborate, but they are all scattered among the weeds and rubble.

古文：西南行五里，出大路，又十里，至郭店。
现代文：往西南行五里，出到大路上，又走十里，到达郭店。
English: Go southwest for five miles, get out on the main road, and walk another ten miles to reach Guodian.

古文：折而西南，为少林道。
现代文：转向西南走，是去少林寺的路。
English: Turn to the southwest and walk, it is the road to Shaolin Temple.

古文：五里，入寺，宿瑞光上人房。
现代文：五里，进入少林寺，在僧人瑞光房中住宿。
English: Wuli, enter the Shaolin Temple and stay in the monk Ruiguang room.

古文：二十三日云气俱尽。
现代文：二十三日云雾完全散去。
English: On the 23rd, the fog completely dispersed.

古文：入正殿，礼佛毕，登南寨。
现代文：进正殿，拜完佛后攀登南寨。
English: After entering the main hall and worshipping the Buddha, climb Nanzhai.

古文：南寨者，少室绝顶，高与太室等，而峰峦峭拔，负 九鼎莲花 之名。
现代文：南寨是少室山绝顶，高度与太室山相等，但峰峦陡峭挺拔，享有 九鼎莲花 的盛名。
English: Nanzhai is the highest peak of Shomu Mountain. Its height is equal to that of Taimuro Mountain, but its peak is steep and straight. It enjoys the reputation of Jiuding Lotus Flower.

古文：俯环其后者为乳峰，蜿蜒东接太室，其阴则少林寺在焉。
现代文：低环在少室山后的是九乳峰，峰峦向东蜿蜒伸去，和太室山相连，少室山北面就是少林寺。
English: The low ring behind Shomuroyama is Jiulongfeng, the peak of which stretches out to the east and is connected to Taimuroyama. To the north of Shomuroyama is Shaolin Temple.

古文：寺甚整丽，庭中新旧碑森列成行，俱完善。
现代文：少林寺十分庄严华丽，庭院中新旧碑刻森林般地排列成行，都很完好。
English: Shaolin Temple is very solemn and gorgeous. In the courtyard, old and new monuments are lined up like a forest. They are all in good condition.

古文：夹墀上之空地二松，高伟而整，如有尺度。
现代文：台阶两侧的两棵松树，高大雄壮而且整齐，如同用尺量裁过一样。
English: The two pine trees on either side of the steps are tall, majestic and neat, as if they had been cut to size with a ruler.

古文：少室横峙于前，仰不能见顶，游者如面墙而立，辄谓少室以远胜。
现代文：少室山横障在寺前，抬头看不到山顶，游人像面对墙壁而立，于是就认为少室山的景致，以远看为好。
English: In front of the temple, the crossbar of Mt. Shomuro prevents the top of the mountain from being seen, and visitors stand as if facing a wall. Therefore, it is better to see the scenery of Mt. Shomuro from a distance.

古文：余昨暮入寺，即问少室道，俱谓雪深道绝，必无往。
现代文：我昨天傍晚进寺时，就打听登少室山的路，都说雪深路断，肯定去不了。
English: When I went to the temple yesterday evening, I asked about the way to climb Mt. Shōmuro, and they all said that the road was blocked by deep snow, so I definitely couldn't go.

古文：凡登山以晴朗为佳。
现代文：一般情况，在晴朗的天气登山最好。
English: In general, it is best to climb in fine weather.

古文：余登太室，云气弥漫，或以为仙灵见拒，不知此山魁梧，正须止露半面。
现代文：我登太室山时，云烟雾气弥漫，有人认为是山神拒绝游客，却不知道太室山雄伟高大，恰好只需露出半面。
English: When I climbed Mt. Taimuro, clouds of smoke and mist filled the air. Some people thought that the mountain gods were rejecting tourists, but they didn't know that Mt. Taimuro is so majestic and tall that it only needs to show half of its face.

古文：若少室工于掩映，虽微云岂宜点滓？
现代文：如果少室山的优美之处在于山石云雾互相掩映，那么，虽然是薄薄的云彩，山色又怎能被遮蔽呢？
English: If the beauty of Mt. Shōmuro is that the mountain's rocks and clouds obscure each other, then how can the mountain's color be obscured even though it is a thin cloud?

古文：今则霁甚，适逢其会，乌可阻也！
现代文：今天则十分晴朗，巧遇这样的机会，有什么能够阻止我登山呢！
English: Today it is very sunny, and what can stop me from climbing if I stumble upon such an opportunity!

古文：乃从寺南渡涧登山，六七里，得二祖庵。
现代文：于是从寺南渡过山涧登山，走六七里，到达二祖庵。
English: So he crossed the mountains from the south of the temple, walked six or seven miles, and arrived at the second ancestor's hermitage.

古文：山至此忽截然土尽而石，石崖下坠成坑。
现代文：到这里山忽然明显没有土而全是石头，石崖往下坠落，形成深坑。
English: At this point, the mountain suddenly appears to have no soil, but is all stone, and the cliff falls down, forming a deep pit.

古文：坑半有泉，突石飞下，亦以 珠帘 名之。
现代文：坑的半中腰有泉，泉水越过岩石，飞速下泻，也用 珠帘 命名。
English: There is a spring in the middle of the pit. The spring water flows over the rock and falls down rapidly. It is also named after the pearl crab.

古文：余策杖独前，愈下愈不得路，久之乃达，其岩雄拓不如卢岩，而深峭过之。
现代文：我拄着拐杖独自往前走，愈下去愈没有路，很久才到崖底。其岩比不上卢岩雄伟开阔，但幽深峻峭则超过卢岩。
English: I walked alone on crutches. The further I went, the more there was no path. It took me a long time to reach the bottom of the cliff. Its rock is not as majestic and open as Lu Rock, but it is deeper and steeper than Lu Rock.

古文：岩下深潭泓碧，僵雪四积。
现代文：岩下一潭碧绿的清泉，四周积雪板结。
English: The rock has a pool of clear, green spring water surrounded by snow.

古文：再上，至炼丹台。
现代文：又往上走，到炼丹台。
English: Further up, to the dance hall.

古文：三面孤悬，斜倚翠壁，有亭曰小有天，探幽之屐指足迹，从未有抵此者。
现代文：台三面悬空，一面斜靠青翠的崖壁，台上有亭，名小有天，游人的足迹，从来没到过这里。
English: Three sides of the platform are suspended in the air, one side leans against the verdant cliff, there is a pavilion on the platform, there is a small name, there is a day, there are footprints of tourists, they have never been here.

古文：过此皆从石脊仰攀直跻，两旁危崖万仞，石脊悬其间，殆无寸土，手与足代匮而后得升以手足来代替登山设备的缺乏而爬上山。
现代文：从这里过去都是顺石脊抬着头直直往上攀登，两旁陡岩高万初，石脊悬挂在陡崖之中，几乎没有一寸土，手足竭尽全力地交替使用，才能升登。一共七里，才登上大峰。
English: From here, I used to climb straight up along the ridge with my head held high. The steep rocks on both sides are very high, the ridge hangs in the steep cliff, there is hardly an inch of soil, and my hands and feet are used alternately as much as possible to ascend. A total of seven miles to reach the summit.

古文：凡七里，始跻大峰。峰势宽衍，向之危石，又截然忽尽为土。
现代文：大峰的地势宽阔平坦，刚才都是陡直的岩石，现在又突然全是土。
English: The topography of the big peak is broad and flat. Just now it was all sheer rock, but now it is suddenly all earth.

古文：从草棘中莽莽南上，约五里，遂凌南寨顶，屏翳ì遮蔽之土始尽。
现代文：从草丛荆棘中莽撞地往南上，大约五里，就登上南寨顶，屏蔽在岩石上的土到这里完全消失。
English: From the thorns in the thicket, I ran southward, about five miles, and climbed to the top of Nanzhai, where the soil shielded on the rock completely disappeared.

古文：南寨实少室北顶，自少林言之，为南寨去。
现代文：南寨其实是少室山北顶，就少林寺而言，才是南寨。
English: Nanzhai is actually the northern peak of Shomuro Mountain. As far as Shaolin Temple is concerned, it is Nanzhai.

古文：盖其顶中裂，横界南北，北顶若展屏，南顶列戟峙其前，相去仅寻丈，中为深崖，直下如剖。
现代文：原来少室山顶从中裂开，横断为南北两部分，北顶像屏风伸展，南顶像利刃排列峙立，两座山顶前沿相距仅八尺到一丈，中间是深谷，陡直下陷如同用刀剖开一样。
English: Originally, the top of Mt. Shōmuro was split down the middle, with the cross-section divided into two parts, north and south. The north peak stretched out like a screen, while the south peak stood upright like a sharp blade. The front of the two peaks were only eight feet to one height apart, with a deep valley in the middle, and it fell straight down as if it had been cut open with a knife.

古文：两崖夹中，坑底特起一峰，高出诸峰上，所谓摘星台也，为少室中央。
现代文：两边山崖相夹，从底部奇特地耸起一座山峰，高出众峰之上，就是所说的摘星台，为少室山的正中央。
English: With cliffs on both sides, a mountain peak rises strangely from the bottom, towering above all the peaks. This is the so-called star-gathering platform, which is the very center of Mt. Shomuro.

古文：绝顶与北崖离倚，彼此斩绝不可度。
现代文：绝顶和北部山崖若即若离，彼此间断开不能越过。
English: The highest peak and the northern cliff are so far apart that they cannot cross each other.

古文：俯瞩其下，一丝相属。
现代文：低头看绝顶下面，只有很少的一点和北崖相连。
English: Looking down from the very top, only a few points are connected to the north cliff.

古文：余解衣从之，登其上，则南顶之九峰森立于前，北顶之半壁横障于后，东西皆深坑，俯不见底，罡风乍至，几假翰凭借红色的羽毛飞去。
现代文：我脱掉衣服顺着走，登上绝顶，南顶的九峰森林般地峙立在前面，北顶的半壁屏障横列在后面，东西两面都是深坑，低头看不见底，狂风忽然刮来，令人几乎想像羽毛那样乘风飞去。
English: I took off my clothes and walked along, climbing to the top. The nine peaks of the south peak stood in front like a forest, and the half-wall barrier of the north peak lined up behind. The east and west sides were deep pits, and I could not see the bottom when I looked down. A strong wind suddenly blew, making me almost imagine flying away like a feather.

古文：从南寨东北转，下土山，忽见虎迹虎的足印大如升。
现代文：沿南寨往东北转，下土山，忽然看见有升那么大的老虎足迹。
English: Along Nanzhai to the northeast, down the hill, suddenly saw the tiger footprints so big.

古文：草莽中行五六里，得茅庵，击石炊所携米为粥，啜三四碗，饥渴霍然去。
现代文：在草丛中行五六里，到茅庵，用打火石取火，把带来的米煮成粥，喝了三四碗，饥渴迅速消失。
English: After walking five or six miles through the grass, they arrived at a thatched hut, lit a fire with a flint, boiled the rice they had brought into porridge, and drank three or four bowls. Their hunger and thirst quickly disappeared.

古文：倩庵僧为引龙潭道。
现代文：请庵中的僧人指引去龙潭的路。
English: Ask the monks in the hermitage to show you the way to Longtan.

古文：下一峰，峰脊渐窄，土石间出，棘蔓翳之，悬枝以行，忽石削万丈，势不可度。
现代文：下一座峰，峰脊渐渐狭窄，土石交互出现，荆棘藤蔓覆盖，抓着树枝荡着行走，岩石忽然耸立万丈，必定过不去。
English: The next peak, the ridge gradually narrows, soil and rock appear alternately, covered with thorns and vines, clinging to branches and swaying, the rock suddenly stands tall, and it is impossible to pass.

古文：转而上跻，望峰势蜿蜒处趋下，而石削复如前。
现代文：转向上攀，从峰势蜿蜒处往下走，但岩石又像前面一样陡然突立。
English: Turn to climb up and go down from the peak meandering, but the rock protrudes as steeply as before.

古文：往复不啻数里，乃迂过一坳，又五里而道出，则龙潭沟也。
现代文：来来回回不止数里，才迂绕过一道山坳，又走五里后才有路，是龙潭沟。
English: After walking back and forth for more than a few miles, they bypassed a mountain pass, and after walking five miles, they found the road, which is Longtangou.

古文：仰望前迷路处，危崖欹石俱在万仞峭壁上。
现代文：仰望刚才迷路之处，陡峭的崖壁、倾斜的岩石，都在万初高的绝壁上。
English: Looking up at the place where I just got lost, the steep cliffs and sloping rocks are all on the highest cliff.

古文：流泉喷薄其中，崖石之阴森崭嶻é山高状者，俱散成霞绮。峡夹涧转，两崖静室如峰房燕垒。
现代文：清流从中喷涌，高峻阴森的崖石，都披上了云霞。峡谷夹着山涧转，两边崖上的静室如同蜂房燕窝一样。
English: Clear streams gush from it, and the high, gloomy cliffs are draped in clouds. The canyon is surrounded by mountains, and the quiet rooms on the cliffs on both sides are like beehives and bird's nests.

古文：凡五里，一龙潭沉涵疑碧，深不可规测量以丈。
现代文：共走了五里，一处幽静碧绿的龙潭，深得无法丈量。
English: We walked a total of five miles to a quiet, verdant Longtan, which is immeasurably deep.

古文：又经二龙潭，遂出峡，宿少林寺。
现代文：又经过两处龙潭，于是走出峡谷，住在少林寺。
English: After passing through two more dragon pools, he walked out of the canyon and lived in Shaolin Temple.

古文：二十四日从寺西北行，过甘露台，又过初祖庵。
现代文：二十四日从寺西边往北行，经过甘露台，又经过初祖庵。
English: On the 24th, I walked from the west side of the temple to the north, passing the Kan Terrace and the Hatsuzo-an.

古文：北四里，上五乳峰，探初祖洞。
现代文：往北四里，登上五乳峰，探游初祖洞。
English: Four miles to the north, climb the Wuzhiyuan Peak, and explore the Chuzhu Cave.

古文：洞深二丈，阔杀之即宽度不及深度，达摩九年面壁处也。洞门下临寺，面对少室。
现代文：洞有二丈深，宽不到二丈，是达摩面壁九年的地方。洞门下对少林寺，正对少室山。
English: The cave is two meters deep and less than two meters wide, and it is a place where the wall of Dharma has been standing for nine years. Under the door of the cave is Shaolin Temple, and it is facing Shomuroyama.

古文：地无泉，故无栖者。
现代文：地下没有泉水，所以没人居住。
English: There is no underground spring, so no one lives there.

古文：下至初祖庵，庵中供达摩影石。
现代文：往下到初祖庵，庵中供奉着达摩影石。
English: Descend to the ancestral hermitage, where the Dharma shadow stone is enshrined.

古文：石高不及三尺，白质黑章，俨然胡僧立像。
现代文：影石不到三尺高，白色的石质、黑色的花纹，俨然一幅胡僧站立的图像。
English: The shadow stone is less than three feet high, white stone, black patterns, resembling a standing image of a monk.

古文：中殿六祖手植柏，大已三人围，碑言自广东置钵中携至者。
现代文：中殿六祖慧能亲手种的柏树，已经有三人围抱粗了，碑文记载说，树是慧能放在钵中从广东带到这里来的。
English: The cypress tree in the middle of the hall, which was planted by the sixth ancestor Hui Neng himself, has already been hugged by three people. The inscription says that the tree was brought here from Guangdong by Hui Neng in a basket.

古文：夹墀二松亚少林。
现代文：台阶两侧的两棵松树不如少林寺的松树。
English: The two pine trees on either side of the steps are not as tall as those at Shaolin Temple.

古文：少林松柏俱修伟，不似岳庙偃仆盘曲，此松亦然。
现代文：少林寺的松柏都是挺拔雄伟，不像中岳庙的仰倒、仆伏而盘曲，这里的松柏也是直立的。
English: The pine trees of Shaolin Temple are majestic and majestic, unlike the ups and downs of Zhongyue Temple, the pine trees here are also upright.

古文：下至甘露台，土阜矗起，上有藏经殿。
现代文：下到甘露台，土山矗立，山上有藏经殿。
English: Go down to the Kan Terrace, where the earthen mound stands, and on the mountain there is the Hall of the Tibetan Scriptures.

古文：下台历殿三重，碑碣散布，目不暇接。
现代文：从甘露台下去，经过三层殿宇，各种碑刻遍布，令人目不暇接。
English: Going down from the balcony, past the three-story hall, various inscriptions are all over the place, which is dizzying.

古文：后为千佛殿，雄丽罕匹。
现代文：后面有千佛殿，其雄壮华丽的建筑，很少有比得上的。
English: At the back is the Hall of a Thousand Buddhas, a building of such grandeur and magnificence that few can match it.

古文：出饭瑞光上人舍。
现代文：出殿到僧人瑞光房中吃饭。
English: They went out of the palace to eat in the room of the monk Rui Guang.

古文：策骑趋登封道，过轩辕岭，宿大屯。
现代文：鞭赶着马走上登封的大路，经过辍辕岭，在大屯住宿。
English: The whip drove the horse onto the main road of Dengfeng, passed through Jiaozhuangling, and stayed in Datun.

古文：二十五日西南行五十里，山冈忽断，即伊阙也，伊水南来经其下，深可浮数石舟。
现代文：二十五日往西南行五十里，山冈忽然被劈断，这就是伊网山。伊水从南边流来经过山下，水的深度可以通行载重数石的船。
English: On the 25th, after traveling 50 miles to the southwest, the mountain was suddenly split in two. This is Mount Iaeshi. Iaeshi water flows from the south and passes under the mountain. The depth of the water is deep enough for a boat weighing several stone to pass.

古文：伊阙连冈，东西横亘，水上编木桥之。
现代文：伊网山相连的山冈，从东往西横贯，伊水上架有木桥。
English: The connected hills of the Itaishan Mountains run horizontally from east to west, with a wooden bridge over the Itaishui River.

古文：渡而西，崖更危耸。
现代文：渡水到西岸，崖壁更加陡削、高耸。
English: After crossing the water to the west coast, the cliff wall becomes steeper and higher.

古文：一山皆劈为崖，满崖镌佛其上。
现代文：一座山都劈成崖壁，整个崖壁上全部雕刻有佛像。
English: A mountain is split into cliffs, and the entire cliff is carved with Buddha statues.

古文：大洞数十，高皆数十丈。
现代文：有几十个大洞，高达数十丈。
English: There are dozens of large holes, up to tens of meters high.

古文：大洞外峭崖直入山顶，顶俱刊小洞，洞俱刊佛其内。
现代文：大洞外峭壁直插山顶，顶上文凿有小洞，洞中都雕刻有佛像。
English: The cliff outside the large cave plunges straight into the top of the mountain, and there are small holes drilled above the top, and Buddha statues are carved in the holes.

古文：虽尺寸之肤，无不满者，望之不可数计此所记叙，即著名龙门石窟。洞左，泉自山流下，汇为方池，余泻入伊川。
现代文：即使是一尺一寸大小的表层，也都雕满了，看上去无法计算。山洞左边，泉水从山上流下来，汇聚成方池，其余的泻入伊水。
English: Even the one-foot-by-one-inch surface layer is carved full of cormorants, seemingly incalculable.On the left of the cave, spring water flows down from the mountain and gathers into a square pool, while the rest pours into the Yishui River.

古文：山高不及百丈，而清流淙淙不绝，为此地所难少见之景。
现代文：一伊网山高不过百丈，却有源源不断的涂涂清流，这在当地很难得。
English: Although the Yi Net Mountain is only a hundred meters high, it has a steady stream of clear streams, which is rare in the local area.

古文：伊阙摩肩接毂指接连不断非常繁盛，为楚、豫大道，西北历关、陕。
现代文：山前人挤着人，车挨着车，是湖北、河南通往西北陕西关中的大路。
English: People crowd in front of the mountain, cars next to cars. It is the main road from Hubei and Henan to Guanzhong in northwest Shaanxi.

古文：余由此取西岳道去。
现代文：我从这里取道去西岳华山。
English: From here, I took the road to Xidake Huashan.

