古文：《齐民要术》：收取种茧，必取居簇中者。
现代文：《齐民要术》：收取作种用的茧，一定要选位于蚕簇中间的。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": When collecting cocoons for planting, be sure to choose the one that is located in the middle of the silkworm cluster.

古文：近上则丝薄，近地则子不生也。
现代文：靠近上面的，将来蚕茧丝薄；靠近地面的，所产的卵不会孵化。
English: Close to the top, the cocoon will be thin; close to the ground, the eggs will not hatch.

古文：《务本新书》：养蚕之法，茧种为先。
现代文：《务本新书》：养蚕的方法，选取茧种最为首要。
English: "Ryuhon Shinsho": the method of raising silkworms, the most important is the selection of silkworm species.

古文：今时摘茧，一概并堆箔上，或因缲丝不及，有蛾出者，便就出种。
现代文：现在人们将摘下来的蚕茧，一概堆放在箔上，往往还没有等到缲丝，有的茧已经出蛾，便将这样的蚕蛾用来下种。
English: Now, people pile the removed cocoons on the foil, often without waiting for cocoons, and some cocoons have already been mothed, and then use such cocoons for seeding.

古文：罨压、熏蒸，因热而生，决无完好。
现代文：这些因为罨压熏蒸受了热而生出的蚕蛾，没有不带病的。
English: None of these silkworm moths, which are produced as a result of the heat of fumigation and steaming under pressure, are disease-free.

古文：其母病，则子病，诚由此也。
现代文：病蛾所产的子将来必会生病，这是很自然的事情。
English: It is only natural that the offspring of a diseased moth will be diseased in the future.

古文：今后茧种，开簇时须择近上向阳，或在苫草上者，此乃强梁好茧，《农桑要旨》云：茧必雌雄相半，簇中在上者多雄；下者，多雌。
现代文：今后选取茧种，在开簇的时候，应择取靠近蚕簇上部向阳的蚕茧，或者在苫草上的茧，都是强健的好茧。《农桑要旨》说：选取种茧，应使雌茧和雄茧各占一半。在簇上部的多为雄茧，在下部的多为雌茧。
English: In the future, when selecting cocoon seeds, when opening the cluster, you should select cocoons that are close to the upper part of the cluster and face the sun, or cocoons on the reeds, which are strong and good cocoons. "Essence of Agricultural Mulberry" says: When selecting cocoons, the female cocoons and male cocoons should each account for half. In the upper part of the cluster, most are male cocoons, and in the lower part, most are female cocoons.

古文：陈志弘云：雄茧尖细、紧小，雌者圆慢、厚大。
现代文：陈志弘说：雄茧形状尖细，茧丝紧实，茧较小；雌茧形状圆粗，茧丝厚，茧较大。
English: Chen Zhihong said: the male dragonfly has a slender shape, the silk is tight, and the beak is small; the female dragonfly has a round shape, the silk is thick, and the beak is large.

古文：另摘出。于透风凉房内净箔上，一一单排。
现代文：另外摘下，放在通风凉房中的干净箔上，一个一个地排列成整齐的单层。
English: In addition, remove and place on a clean foil in a ventilated cool room, arranging the foam one by one into a neat single layer.

古文：日数既足，其蛾自生，免熏罨，钻延之苦，此诚胎教之最先。
现代文：日数到了以后，蚕蛾自然地会化生出来，且可免受热蒸、掩压、钻延的苦难。这是保持幼蚕先天壮健的首要的事情。
English: After the number of days is up, the silkworm moth will naturally be born, and can be protected from the suffering of hot steaming, pressurization, and drilling. This is the most important thing to keep the young silkworms congenitally strong.

古文：若有拳翅、秃眉、焦脚、焦尾、熏黄、赤肚、无毛、黑纹、黑身、黑头、先出、末后生者，拣出不用。
现代文：蚕蛾中如果有拳翅、秃眉、焦脚、焦尾、熏黄、赤肚、无毛、黑纹、黑身、黑头、最先出的、末后生的，一概拣出不用。
English: If the moth has fist wings, bald brow, scorched foot, scorched tail, yellowing, red belly, hairless, black stripe, black body, black head, first-born, last-born, there is no need to pick them out.

古文：止留完全肥好者，匀稀布于连上。
现代文：只留完全肥而好的，均匀、稀疏地布放在连纸上面。
English: Leave only a completely fat and good, even, sparsely creased cloth on the lined paper.

古文：择高明凉处，置箔铺连。箔下地须洒扫洁净。
现代文：选择高亢明亮风凉的地方，安置蚕箔铺放蚕连，箔下的地面须洒水扫除干净。
English: Choose a bright, windy and cool place on stilts, place the silkworm foil and release the silkworms. The ground under the foil must be sprinkled with water and swept clean.

古文：蚕连厚纸为上，薄纸不禁浸浴。
现代文：作蚕连用的纸，以厚纸为最好，薄纸经受不住浸种浴种。
English: For paper used for sericulture, thick paper is best, thin paper can not withstand the soaking of bath seeds.

古文：《野语》云：连，用小灰纸更妙。
现代文：《野语》说：蚕连用小灰纸更好。
English: "Yangyu" said: it is better to use small gray paper for silkworm coils.

古文：候蛾生足，移蛾下连。屋内一角空处，竖立柴草，散蛾于上。
现代文：等到蚕蛾产子毕，将蛾移下蚕连，在屋中空闲的角落，树立起一些柴草，将蛾散布在草上。
English: Wait until the moth has finished giving birth, remove the moth from the moth, and set up some firewood in an idle corner of the house to spread the moth on the grass.

古文：至十八日后，西南净地，掘坑贮蛾。
现代文：到十八天过后，在西南方的空地上，挖掘土坑，将蛾贮藏入坑中。
English: Eighteen days later, in an open space in the south-west, they dug a pit and stored the moths in it.

古文：上用柴草搭合，以土封之，庶免禽虫伤食。
现代文：上面用柴草盖好，然后用土覆埋，以免被虫鸟啄食。
English: Cover it with brushwood and then cover it with soil to prevent it from being eaten by insects and birds.

古文：盖有功于人，理当如此。
现代文：因为蚕是对人有功的，故理当受到这样的爱重。
English: Because silkworms are beneficial to humans, it is only natural that they should receive such love.

古文：《农桑要旨》云：将蛾作三坑，埋种田地内，能使地中数年不生刺芥。
现代文：《农桑要旨》说：将蚕蛾分作三坑埋在田地中，能使地在数年以内不生刺芥。
English: "Essence of Agricultural Mulberry" said: the silkworm moth is divided into three pits and buried in the field, which can make the land not produce thorny mustard within a few years.

古文：《士农必用》：蚕事之本，惟在谨于谋始，使不为后日之患也。
现代文：《士农必用》：养蚕一事的根本，全在于从一开始便要事事谨慎，让日后没有忧患。
English: "Essential for farmers": The essence of raising silkworms is to be cautious from the very beginning, so that there will be no worries in the future.

古文：眠起不齐，由于变生之不一；变生不一，由于收种之不得其法。故曰： 惟在谨于谋始。 
现代文：蚕的眠起时间不整齐化一，是因为蚁蚕化生的时间不一致；蚁蚕化生的时间不一致，是因为收取蚕种不得法；所以说： 养蚕一事全在于注意开始。 
English: The reason why the dormancy time of silkworms is not uniform is because the time of ant-silkworm metamorphosis is not consistent; the time of ant-silkworm metamorphosis is not consistent because it is illegal to collect silkworm seeds; so it is said: raising silkworms is all about paying attention to the beginning.

古文：择茧出种者：取簇中腰东南，明净厚实茧。
现代文：择茧出种者：摘取蚕簇中间部分东南面的，明亮、光洁又非常厚实的蚕茧。
English: For selecting the cocoons for sowing: take the bright, glossy and very thick cocoons from the south-eastern part of the middle part of the cluster.

古文：蛾：第一日出者，名 苗蛾 ，不可用。
现代文：蛾：第一天出的蚕蛾叫做 苗蛾 ，不可用。
English: Moth: The silkworm moth that emerges on the first day is called the seedling moth, not available.

古文：屋中置柴草，上放不用蛾。
现代文：屋中放置柴草，将不用的蛾放在上面。
English: Place firewood in the house and place the moth on it.

古文：次日以后出者，可用。
现代文：第二天以后出的蛾可以用。
English: Moths that emerge after the second day can be used.

古文：每一日所出，为一等辈。
现代文：每天生出的蛾，各作为一等辈。
English: Moths born every day, each as the first generation.

古文：各于连上写记，后来下蚁时各为一等辈；二日相次为一辈犹可，次三日者则不可，为将来成蚕，眠起不能齐，极为患害。
现代文：分别在蚕连上作记录，日后下蚁时各为一等辈。将两天先后相邻的蚕连作为一辈也还可以，如将三天相邻的蚕连作为一辈却不可，这样做会使将来长出的蚕，眠起先后不齐，极为有害。
English: It is also possible to take two consecutive days of adjacent cocoons as a generation, but it is not possible to take three consecutive days of adjacent cocoons as a generation. Doing so will cause the silkworms that grow up in the future to sleep unevenly, which is extremely harmful.

古文：另作一辈养则可。
现代文：只有另行分开作为一辈饲养才可以。
English: They can only be reared separately as a single generation.

古文：末后出者，名 末蛾 ，亦不可用。
现代文：末后出的蛾，叫做 末蛾 ，也不能用。
English: The moth that comes out at the end, called the last moth, can not be used.

古文：铺连于槌箔上，雄雌相配。
现代文：蚕连铺在蚕槌上面的箔上，让雌蛾和雄蛾交配。
English: The silkworms are laid out in a row on the foil above the silkworm hammer, allowing the female moth and the male moth to mate.

古文：当日可提掇连三五次，去其尿也。
现代文：当天可将蚕连提掀三五次，抖去尿液。
English: On the same day, you can lift the silkworm three to five times and shake off the urine.

古文：至未时后，款摘去雄蛾，放在 苗蛾 一处，将母蛾于连上匀布。
现代文：到午后未时，便可轻轻地将雄蛾摘掉，同苗蛾放在一起。将母蛾均匀地放置在连上，稀稠要适中。
English: By late afternoon, you can gently remove the male moth and place it together with the seedling moth. Place the mother moth evenly on the moth, the density should be moderate.

古文：稀稠得所。所生子如环成堆者，其蛾与子皆不用。
现代文：有的蚕蛾所下的卵子，呈环状并且累积成堆，这样的蛾与子皆不用。
English: The eggs laid by some silkworm moths are ring-shaped and accumulate in piles, so neither the moth nor the eggs are used.

古文：其余者，生子数足，更当就连上，令覆养三五日。
现代文：其余的蛾产卵完毕，还应当让在蚕连上继续覆养蚕子三五天。
English: After the rest of the moths have finished laying eggs, they should also be allowed to continue to cover the silkworms for three to five days.

古文：不覆养，则气不足。
现代文：蚕子不经过母蛾的覆养，便生气不足。
English: If the silkworm is not covered by the mother moth, it will not have enough energy.

古文：然后将母蛾亦置在雄蛾、苗蛾、末蛾处，十八日后，埋之。
现代文：然后也将母蛾同雄蛾、苗蛾、末蛾放置在一处，十八天后将其掩埋。
English: The mother moth, together with the male moth, the seedling moth and the last moth, is then placed in one place and buried 18 days later.

