古文：二十三年春，宋景曹卒。
现代文：二十三年春季，宋国的景曹死了。
English: In the spring of 233, Jing Cao of the Song Dynasty died.

古文：季康子使冉有吊，且送葬，曰： 敝邑有社稷之事，使肥与有职竞焉，是以不得助执绋，使求从舆人。曰，以肥之得备弥甥也，有不腆先人之产马，使求荐诸夫人之宰，其可以称旌繁乎？ 
现代文：季康子派冉有去吊唁，并且送葬，说： 敝邑有国家大事，使肥事务繁忙，因此不能帮着送葬，特派求前来跟随在舆人之后，说： 由于肥忝居远房外甥，有不丰厚的先人的马匹，派求奉献给夫人的家宰，也许能和夫人的马匹相称吧！  
English: Ji Kangzi sent Ran You to pay condolences and attend the funeral, saying: There are national events in the county, which makes the fat affairs busy, so I can't help with the funeral. The special envoy asked to come and follow the public, saying: Because the nephew of the distant house of the fat man, there are horses of the ancestors that are not plentiful. Send a donation to the wife's steward, maybe it can be commensurate with the wife's horses!

古文：夏六月，晋荀瑶伐齐。高无帅师御之。
现代文：夏季，六月，晋国的荀瑶攻打齐国，高无邳率军抵御。
English: In the summer, in June, the Shans in Jin attacked Qi, and Gao Wusheng led the army to resist.

古文：知伯视齐师，马骇，遂驱之，曰： 齐人知余旗，其谓余畏而反也。 
现代文：荀瑶观察齐军的虚实，马受惊，就索性驱马前进，说： 齐国人已经看到我的旗帜，如果不向前进，恐怕要说我害怕而回去了。 
English: Zhai observed the falsity and reality of the Qi army. The horse was frightened, so he just drove the horse forward, saying: The people of Qi have already seen my flag. If I don't go forward, I'm afraid I'll say I'm scared and go back.

古文：及垒而还。
现代文：到达齐军的营垒以后才回去。
English: They did not return until they reached the camp of the Qi army.

古文：将战，长武子请卜。
现代文：将要作战，长武子请求占卜。
English: Nagatake asked for a divination when he was about to fight.

古文：知伯曰： 君告于天子，而卜之以守龟于宗祧，吉矣。吾又何卜焉？
现代文：荀瑶说： 国君报告了天子，在宗庙里已经用龟占卜过，卦像很吉利，我又占卜什么呢？
English: Zou said: The sovereign has reported the heavenly son, and has already divined with a turtle in the ancestral temple. The divination seems to be very auspicious. What should I divine?

古文：且齐人取我英丘，君命瑶，非敢燿武也，治英丘也。
现代文：况且齐国人占领了我们的英丘。国君命令瑶，不是敢于炫耀武力，而是为了治理英丘。
English: Moreover, the Qixu people occupied our Yingqiu. The sovereign ordered him not to dare to show off force, but to govern Yingqiu.

古文：以辞伐罪足矣，何必卜？ 
现代文：用正当的理由讨伐有罪者就足够了，何必占卜？ 
English: It is enough to fight the guilty with a just cause, why divination?

古文：壬辰，战于犁丘。齐师败绩，知伯亲禽颜庚。
现代文：二十六日，在犁丘作战，齐军大败，荀瑶亲自捉住了颜庚。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, in the battle of Yaoqiu, the Qi army was defeated, and Yao personally captured Yan Geng.

古文：秋八月，叔青如越，始使越也。
现代文：秋季，八月，叔青到越国去，这是第一次出使越国。
English: In the autumn, in August, Shu Qing went to Yue Guo, which was the first time to go to Yue Guo.

古文：越诸鞅来聘，报叔青也。
现代文：越国的诸鞅前来鲁国聘问，这是回报叔青的访问。
English: Vietnamese officials came to Lu to ask questions, which was in return for the visit of Shuzhong.

