古文：秀禅师义福神鼎广陵大师和和空如禅师僧些阿足师鉴师从谏
现代文：秀禅师义福神鼎广陵大师和和空如禅师僧些阿足师鉴师从谏
English: Shou Zen master, Yifu Shending Guangling master, and He Kuo Zen master, monks, monks, monks, monks, monks, monks, monks,

古文：秀禅师
现代文：秀禅师
English: Shou Zenji

古文：洛都天宫寺有秀禅师者，俗姓李，汴州陈留人。
现代文：洛阳天宫寺内有个秀禅师，俗姓李，汴州陈留县人。
English: In Luoyang's Temple of Heaven, there is a famous Zen master with the common surname Li, who hails from Chenliu County, Luzhou.

古文：习禅精苦。
现代文：他刻苦修习禅宗。
English: He studied Zen diligently.

古文：初至荆州，后移此寺。
现代文：以前曾到过荆州，后来移住天宫寺。
English: He had been to Jingzhou before, and later moved to Tiangong Temple.

古文：深为武太后所敬礼。
现代文：深受武后则天的敬重和礼遇。
English: He was treated with the utmost respect and courtesy by Empress Wu.

古文：玄鉴默识，中若符契。
现代文：他在暝暝中感悟到的东西，常常与事实相符，就像符箓一般。
English: What he perceives in the cocoon often corresponds to reality, just like a cocoon.

古文：长安中入京，住资圣寺。
现代文：武周长安中年进入京都洛阳时，住在资圣寺内。
English: When the middle-aged Wu Zhou Chang'an entered Kyoto's Luoyang, he lived in Zhisheng Temple.

古文：忽戒禅院弟子灭灯烛，弟子留长明灯，亦令灭之。
现代文：一天，他忽然告诫禅院弟子熄灭所有灯烛，弟子留下长明灯，他也让熄掉。
English: One day, he suddenly admonished a Zen disciple to extinguish all the candles. The disciple left a long light, and he also let it go out.

古文：因说： 火灾难测，不可不备。
现代文：于是，他向弟子们讲道： 火灾难测，不可不备。
English: Therefore, he preached to his disciples: It is necessary to be prepared for fire disasters.

古文：尝有寺家不备火烛，佛殿被灾；又有一寺钟楼遭火，一寺经藏焚爇，殊可痛惜。 
现代文：曾有家寺院因为不防备火烛，佛殿遭了火灾；还有一座寺院钟楼遭了火灾，全寺院收藏的经籍都被焚烧了，实在令人痛惜。 
English: There was once a case of a fire in the Buddhist hall of a temple due to the fact that candles were not prepared; there was also a fire in the bell tower of a temple, and the entire collection of scriptures of the temple were burned, which is really regrettable.

古文：寺众不知其意。
现代文：全院众僧都不知道他这样做的意图是什么。
English: All the monks in the monastery did not know what his intention was.

古文：至夜失火，果焚佛殿钟楼，及经藏三所。
现代文：到了夜晚，院内失火，果然烧毁了佛殿与钟楼，还有三所藏经楼也被烧了。
English: In the evening, a fire broke out in the courtyard, and the Buddha hall and bell tower were indeed burned, as well as three Buddhist scriptures.

古文：唐玄宗在藩时，常与诸王俱诣作礼，留施一笛。
现代文：唐玄宗为王的时候，常与各位王爷到寺院礼拜秀禅师，还留下了一支笛子放在寺院里。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was king, he often went to the temple with the princes to worship the Zen master, and he also left a flute in the temple.

古文：玄宗出后，秀召弟子曰： 谨掌此，后有要时，当献上也。 
现代文：玄宗离开寺院时，秀禅师召集弟子说道： 好好保管这支笛子，以后他有要的时候，就献给他。 
English: When Xuanzong left the temple, Master Xiuzhen called his disciples together and said, "Take good care of this flute. When he needs it in the future, give it to him."

古文：及玄宗登极，达摩等方悟其言，取笛以进。
现代文：等到玄宗即位后，弟子达摩等人才明白秀禅师这番话是有预见之明的，便拿着这支笛子进献给了玄宗皇帝。
English: It wasn't until after Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne that his disciple Damo and others understood that what Master Xiuzhen had said was foreshadowing, and they took this flute and presented it to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：秀师年百岁，卒于此寺，瘗于龙门山，道俗奔赴数千人，燕国公张说为其碑文。
现代文：秀禅师一百岁时死于这座寺内，埋葬在龙门山，前来奔丧的僧人与老百姓多达几千人，燕国公张说为他撰写了碑文。
English: Shiu Zen master died in this temple at the age of 100 and was buried on Longmen Mountain. Thousands of monks and ordinary people came to pay their respects. Yan Guo Gong Zhang said that he had written an inscription for him.

古文：义福
现代文：义福
English: Yifu District

古文：唐开元中，有僧义福者，上党人也。
现代文：唐玄宗开元中业，有个僧人叫义福，是上党人。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty founded the Yuan Dynasty, there was a monk named Yifu, who belonged to the Shang Dynasty.

古文：梵行精修，相好端洁，缙绅士庶，翕然归依。
现代文：他精心修习佛道，为人端庄高洁，无论公卿大臣还是庶民百姓，都乐于跟他学道。
English: He diligently practiced Buddhism and was a dignified and noble person. Both nobles, ministers and common people were happy to learn from him.

古文：尝从驾往东都，所历郡县，人皆倾向，擅施巨万，皆委之而去。
现代文：他曾跟从皇帝去东都洛阳，沿途经过的郡县，人人都仰慕向往他，专门给他的施舍就多达数万，他都没有接受就走了。
English: He once followed the emperor to the eastern capital of Luoyang, passing through counties along the way. Everyone admired and yearned for him. Tens of thousands of alms were specially given to him, but he did not accept and left.

古文：忽一旦，召其学徒，告己将终。
现代文：忽有一天早上，他召集自己的门徒，告诉他们说自己即将逝世。
English: Suddenly, one morning, he called his disciples together and told them that he was going to die.

古文：兵部侍郡张均、中书侍郎严挺之、刑部侍郎房琯、礼部侍郎韦陟，常所礼谒。
现代文：兵部侍郎张均、中书侍郎严挺之、刑部侍郎房琯、礼部侍郎韦陟等，平日常来拜访他，这天他们也都来了。
English: Zhang Jun, the attendant of the Military Department, Yan Tingri, the attendant of the Chinese Literature Department, Fong Yao, the attendant of the Criminal Department, Wei Yao, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, etc. usually came to visit him, and they all came on this day.

古文：是日亦同造焉。
现代文：义福像往常一样准时登上讲坛，给门徒们讲说佛法。
English: As usual, Yifu made it to the pulpit on time and spoke about Buddhism to the disciples.

古文：义福乃升座。
现代文：他说道： 我要在今天死去，要跟诸位诀别了。 
English: He said: "I'm going to die today, I'm going to say goodbye to you all.

古文：为门徒演法。乃曰： 吾没于是日，当以诀别耳。 
现代文：过了好长时间，张均对房琯说： 我常年服用长生不老的金丹，从未参加过别人的丧礼。 
English: After a long time, Zhang Jun said to Fang Yu: "I have been taking the elixir of life all year round, and I have never attended anyone's funeral.

古文：久之，张谓房曰： 某宿岁饵金丹，尔来未尝临丧。 言讫，张遂潜去。
现代文：说完，张均便偷偷地溜走了。义福突然间对房琯说： 我与张公交游多年了。
English: After that, Zhang Jun sneaked away. Yi Fu suddenly said to Fang Yao: I have been traveling with Zhang for many years.

古文：义福忽谓房曰： 某与张公游有数年矣，张有非常之咎，名节皆亏。向来若终法会，足以免难，惜哉！ 
现代文：张均有非同寻常的灾难，要在名誉与节操方面都蒙受损害。如若他能一直坚持到法会的终了，那就足能免除其灾难。实在可惜呀！ 
English: Zhang Jun had an unusual disaster, and suffered damage to his reputation and self-discipline. If he could have persevered until the end of the puja, it would have been enough to avoid his disaster. What a pity!

古文：乃携房之手曰： 必为中兴名臣，公其勉之。 
现代文：他握着房琯的手说： 您一定会成为唐朝中兴的名臣。您要善自为之！ 
English: Holding Fang Yao's hand, he said: "You will surely become a famous minister of the Tang Dynasty. You must be good at what you do!

古文：言讫而终。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：及禄山之乱，张均陷贼庭，授伪署。房琯赞两朝，竟立大节。
现代文：等到安禄山谋反篡位时，张均为叛贼抓获，在安禄山临时朝庭内被授为重要官职，果然气节名节皆亏。房琯则在平定叛乱，唐朝中兴之后，再次襄赞皇朝，最终保持了大节。
English: By the time of Anlu Mountain's counter-usurpation, Zhang was captured by the traitors and was given an important official position in the temporary court of Anlu Mountain. As it turned out, all the famous festivals were lost. Fusang was in the process of suppressing the rebellion, and after the rise of the Tang Dynasty, he once again praised the imperial dynasty and finally maintained the grand festival.

古文：神鼎
现代文：神鼎
English: Shending

古文：唐神鼎师不肯剃头，食酱一郖。
现代文：唐代有个神鼎法师，不愿意剃头，能吃一斗酱。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a divine sorcerer who did not want to shave his head, but could eat a bucket of sauce.

古文：每巡门乞物，得粗布破衣亦著，得细锦罗绮亦著。
现代文：沿门乞讨的时候，讨得粗布破衣他就穿在身上，讨得绫罗锦缎他也穿在身上。
English: When he was begging at the door, he would wear rags if he could get them, and brocade if he could get it.

古文：于利真师座前听，问真师曰： 万物定否？ 真曰： 定。 
现代文：在利真法师的讲座前面听讲佛法时，他向利真师道： 世间万物有定还是不定？ 利真说： 有定。 
English: While listening to a lecture on Buddhism by Master Lishen before his lecture, he asked Master Lishen, "Are all things in the world certain or uncertain?"

古文：鼎曰： 阇梨言若定，何因高岸为谷，深谷为陵；有死即生，有生即死；万物相纠，六道轮回；何得为定耶？ 
现代文：神鼎说： 如按禅师所说的万物有定，为什么高岸能变成河谷，深谷能变成山岭，有的死了又生了，有的生了又死了呢？万物相因，六道循环，怎么能说是有定呢？ 
English: Shanting said, "If, according to the Zen master, all things are determined, why can a high bank turn into a river valley, a deep valley into a mountain range, some die and are reborn, and some are born and die? How can the cause of all things, the six-way cycle, be said to be determined?

古文：真曰： 万物不定。 
现代文：利真说： 万物不定。 
English: Lizhen said: Everything is uncertain.

古文：鼎曰： 若不定，何不唤天为地，唤地为天；唤月为星，唤星为月；何得为不定？ 
现代文：神鼎说： 如果是不定，为什么不把天叫做地，把地叫做天，把月亮叫做星星，把星星叫做月亮呢？怎么能说是不定呢？ 
English: Shanting said, "If it is uncertain, why not call the sky the earth, the earth the sky, the moon the stars, and the stars the moon? How can it be uncertain?"

古文：真无以应之。
现代文：利真无言以对。
English: Lizhen was speechless.

古文：时张文成见之，谓曰： 观法师即是菩萨行人也。 
现代文：张文成看到神鼎时，对他说： 我看法师的行为就跟菩萨一样。 
English: When Zhang Wencheng saw Shen Dingru, he said to him: I think that the teacher's behavior is the same as that of a Bodhisattva.

古文：鼎曰： 菩萨得之不喜，失之不悲；打之不怒，骂之不嗔；此乃菩萨行也。
现代文：神鼎说： 菩萨的态度是，得到什么不欢喜，失掉什么不悲哀，有人打他他不怒，有人骂他他不恼；这才是菩萨的行为呢。
English: The deity said, "The attitude of a bodhisattva is that he is not happy when he gains something, he is not sad when he loses something, he does not get angry when someone hits him, and he does not get angry when someone scolds him; this is the behavior of a bodhisattva.

古文：鼎今乞得即喜，不得即悲；打之即怒，骂之即嗔；以此论之，去菩萨远矣。 
现代文：我神鼎是乞得东西就高兴，乞不到时就悲伤，有人打我我就怒，有人骂我我就恼；由此而论，我的行为距离菩萨还远着呢！ 
English: My godhead is that if I beg for something, I will be happy; if I do not beg, I will be sad; if someone beats me, I will be angry; if someone curses me, I will be annoyed; therefore, my behavior is still far from that of a bodhisattva!

古文：广陵大师
现代文：广陵大师
English: Guangling Grandmaster

古文：唐贞元中，有一僧客于广陵，亡其名，自号大师。广陵人因以大师呼之。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，有个僧人客居于广陵，忘了叫什么名字，自号为 大师 ，广陵人因此就叫他大师。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk who lived as a guest in Guangling. He forgot what his name was and called himself Master, so the people of Guangling called him Master.

古文：大师质甚陋，好以酒肉为食，常以穗裘，盛暑不脱，由是蚤虮聚其上。
现代文：大师为人粗野，喜欢喝酒吃肉，总穿着一件破烂棉袍，盛暑季节也不脱掉，上面生满了跳蚤虱子。
English: The master is a rough person, likes to drink and eat meat, always wears a tattered cotton robe, does not take it off in the summer season, and it is full of fleas and lice.

古文：侨居孝感寺，独止一室，每夕阖扉而寝，率为常矣。
现代文：他客居在广陵的孝感寺，自己住在一间屋里，每到天黑就关门睡觉，已经习以为常了。
English: He is a guest at the Xiaogan Temple in Guangling. He lives in a room by himself and has become accustomed to closing the door to go to bed when it gets dark.

古文：性狂悖，好屠犬彘，日与广陵少年斗殴，或醉卧道傍。
现代文：他性格狂暴蛮横，喜欢杀狗宰猪，天天与广陵的年轻人打架斗殴，有时喝醉了就躺在道旁。
English: He is violent and rude, likes to kill dogs and pigs, fights with young people in Guangling every day, and sometimes lies on the roadside when he is drunk.

古文：广陵人俱以此恶之。
现代文：广陵人因此而厌恶他。
English: Guangling people loathe him for this.

古文：有一少年，以力闻。常一日，少年与人对博。大师大怒。以手击其博局尽碎。
现代文：有个小伙子以力气大闻名，这一天，他与别人赌博，大师突然无名火起，用手把赌局砸了粉碎。
English: On this day, a young man who was famous for his strength gambled with others, and the master suddenly burst into flames and smashed the gamble with his hand.

古文：少年曰： 呆儿，何敢逆壮士耶？ 
现代文：小伙子说道： 呆子！你怎么敢惹我堂堂壮士呢？ 
English: The young man said: "Stupid! How dare you mess with my big strong man?

古文：大师且骂而唾其面，于是与少年斗击，而观者千数。
现代文：大师边骂边唾他的脸，于是两个人打在了一起，数以千计的人都来围观。
English: The grandmaster scolded and spat in his face, and the two got into a fight that drew thousands of onlookers.

古文：少年卒不胜，竟遁去。
现代文：那个大力士小伙子最后没有打赢，结果逃跑了。
English: The young Hercules did not win in the end and ran away.

古文：自是广陵人谓大师有神力，大师亦自负其力，往往剽夺市中金钱衣物。市人皆惮其勇，莫敢拒。
现代文：从此，广陵人都说大师有神力，大师本人也以力大而自负。他常常在市场上抢夺金钱衣物，商人都怕他凶猛，谁也不敢抗拒。
English: From then on, the people of Guangling said that the master had divine power, and the master himself was powerful and conceited. He often robbed money and clothes in the market. Merchants were afraid of his ferocity, and no one dared to resist.

古文：后有老僧召大师至曰： 僧当死心奉戒。
现代文：后来有个老僧把大师叫到跟前说： 出家为僧就应死守戒规。
English: Later, an old monk called the master to his side and said, "When you become a monk, you should stick to the precepts.

古文：奈何食酒食，杀犬彘，剽夺市人钱物，又与少年同殴击，岂僧人之道耶？
现代文：你怎么喝酒吃肉、杀狗宰猪、抢夺市人钱物，又与年轻人打架斗殴呢？难道这些是僧人应有的行为吗？
English: How can you drink alcohol and eat meat, kill dogs and slaughter pigs, rob the townspeople of their money and goods, and fight and brawl with young people? Are these the proper actions of a monk?

古文：一旦吏执以闻官，汝不羞天耶？ 
现代文：一旦被差吏抓去告官，你不感到是天大的羞耻吗？ 
English: Once you are caught by the police and taken to the prosecutor's office, don't you feel great shame?

古文：大师怒骂曰： 蝇蚋徒嗜膻腥耳，安能如龙鹤之心哉？
现代文：大师愤怒地骂道： 苍蝇蚊子自然喜欢腥臭的东西，哪能与清高的龙鹤相比呢！
English: The master scolded angrily: Flies and mosquitoes naturally like foul-smelling things, but how can they be compared to the lofty crane!

古文：然则吾道亦非汝所知也。且我清其中而混其外者，岂若汝龊龊无大度乎？ 
现代文：然而我所信奉的道理，也是你所不能了解的，况且我是清清白白而外表混浊的人，哪像你一样内心肮脏胸怀狭窄呢！ 
English: But what I believe is also beyond your comprehension, and I am a pure and innocent man with a turbid exterior, who is not filthy at heart and narrow-minded like you!

古文：老僧卒不能屈其词。后一日，大师自外来归，既入室，闭户。
现代文：老僧终于没能说服他，后来有一天，大师从外面回来进屋之后关上了房门。
English: The old monk finally failed to convince him, and then one day, the master came back from outside and closed the door after entering the house.

古文：有于门隙视者，大师坐于席，有奇光，自眉端发，晃然照一室。
现代文：有人从门缝里看他，只见大师坐在床上，眉端发出奇异的光芒，明晃晃地照遍全屋。
English: Someone looked at him through a crack in the door and saw the master sitting on the bed, his eyebrows emitting a strange glow that shone brightly all over the house.

古文：观者奇之，具告群僧。群僧来，见大师眉端之光相，指语曰： 吾闻佛之眉有白毫相光，今大师有之，果佛矣。 
现代文：看的人非常惊奇，便去告诉了群僧，群僧都来了，看到大师眉端的光相后，有人指着说： 我听说佛的眉端就有白光，现在大师也有这样的光，可见他果然成佛了。 
English: The onlookers were very surprised, so they went and told the monks. The monks all came. After seeing the light at the end of the master's eyebrow, someone pointed and said, "I heard that there is a white light at the end of the Buddha's eyebrow. Now the master also has such a light, which shows that he has indeed become a Buddha."

古文：遂相率而拜。
现代文：于是大家纷纷礼拜。
English: As a result, everyone prayed in succession.

古文：至明日清旦，群僧俱集于庭，候谒广陵大师。比及开户，而广陵大师已亡去矣。
现代文：到了第二天清晨，群僧都集会在院子里，等候拜谒广陵大师，等到开门请他时，广陵大师已经不见了。
English: In the early morning of the next day, the monks gathered in the courtyard, waiting to pay homage to Master Guangling. By the time they opened the door to invite him, Master Guangling had already disappeared.

古文：群僧益异其事，因号大师为大师佛焉。
现代文：群僧对此事更为惊异，于是称大师为 大师佛 。
English: The monks were even more surprised by this, so they called the master Daishi Buddha.

古文：和和
现代文：和和
English: and and

古文：唐代国公主适荥阳郑万钧，数年无子。
现代文：唐朝代国公主嫁给了荥阳郑万钧，婚后多年没生儿子。
English: The princess of the Tang Dynasty married Zhengyang Zheng Wanzhong, but did not have a son for many years after the marriage.

古文：时有僧和和者，如狂如愚，众号为圣。
现代文：当时有个僧人叫和和，既像疯子又像傻子，大家称他为圣人。
English: At that time there was a monk named Hawa, who was both like a madman and a fool, and everyone called him a saint.

古文：言事多中。
现代文：他预言吉凶祸福时，多数能够说中。
English: When he predicts good, evil, misfortune or fortune, most people can tell the difference.

古文：住大安寺，修营殿阁。
现代文：他住在大安寺，寺内正在修造殿阁。
English: He lives in Daian-ji Temple, where a pavilion is currently under construction.

古文：和和常至公主家，万钧请曰： 吾无嗣，愿得一子，惟师降恩，可得乎？ 
现代文：和和常到公主家，万钧对他请求道： 我没有后代，想得到一个儿子，请求师父降恩于我，可以吗？ 
English: When Kazuchika went to the princess's house, Manchukuo pleaded with him, "I have no offspring, I want to have a son, can I ask Master to be gracious to me?"

古文：师曰： 遗我三千疋绢，主当诞两男。 
现代文：和和说： 给我三千匹丝绢，公主能生两个男孩。 
English: And she said, Give me three thousand silken reeds, that a princess may have two sons.

古文：钧如言施之。
现代文：万钧照他说的施舍了三千疋丝绢。
English: If you give alms as he said, it will amount to three thousand dinars.

古文：和和取绢付寺，云修功德。
现代文：和和将丝绢交给寺院，说是修造殿阁用的。
English: He gave the silk cocoon to the temple, saying that it would be used to build a pavilion.

古文：乃谓钧曰： 主有娠矣，吾令二天人下，为公主作儿。 
现代文：他又对万钧说： 公主有孕了，我令两位天人下来，给公主作儿子。
English: He also said to Manju, "The princess is pregnant. I have sent two celestial beings to come down and give the princess a son."

古文：又曰： 公主腹小，能并娠二男乎？
现代文：公主肚子小，能同时怀下两个男孩吗？
English: The princess has a small belly. Can she conceive two boys at the same time?

古文：吾当使同年而前后耳。 
现代文：我要使这两个男孩虽然生在同一年，但要一个在前一个在后。 
English: I want the two boys to be born in the same year, but one before and one after.

古文：公主遂娠，年初岁终，各诞一子。
现代文：公主真的怀了孕，在年初与岁末各生了一个男孩。
English: The princess was indeed pregnant and gave birth to a boy at the beginning of the year and a boy at the end of the year.

古文：长曰潜耀。少曰晦明。
现代文：这两个男孩，大的叫潜耀，小的叫晦明。
English: The two boys, the older one is called Lingering Shine, the younger one is called Fading Light.

古文：皆美丈夫，博通有识焉。
现代文：长大之后，都是美男子。而且学识渊博。
English: When they grow up, they are all handsome men. And they are well-educated.

古文：空如禅师
现代文：空如禅师
English: Empty like a Zen master

古文：空如禅师者，不知何许人也。
现代文：空如禅师不知属于哪种类型的人。
English: I don't know what type of person Emptiness belongs to.

古文：少慕修道，父母抑婚，以刀割其势，乃止。
现代文：年轻时羡慕出家修道，父母逼他成婚时，他要用刀子割掉小便，父母只好作罢。
English: When he was young, he envied monasticism. When his parents forced him to marry, he wanted to cut off his pee with a knife, but his parents had no choice.

古文：后成丁，徵庸课，遂以麻蜡裹臂，以火爇之，成废疾。入陆浑山，坐兰若。
现代文：后来成为人丁，政府征他服劳役，他便用麻绳涂上蜡缠在胳臂上，用火烧成残废，于是进了陆浑山，坐在寺庙里。
English: Later, when he became a man, the government conscripted him for forced labor. He wrapped his arms with hemp rope coated with wax and burned them to cripple him. So he went into Lukhun Mountain and sat in the temple.

古文：虎不暴。
现代文：老虎在他面前也会变得很驯良，毫不凶暴。
English: Tigers also become very docile in front of him, without any ferocity.

古文：山中偶见野猪与虎斗，以藜杖挥之曰： 檀越不须相争。 
现代文：山中偶然遇见野猪与老虎搏斗时，他用手杖驱赶道： 施主不必相争。 
English: When he chanced upon a wild boar fighting a tiger in the mountains, he chased it away with his cane, saying, "The giver does not have to fight.

古文：即分散。
现代文：双方便乖乖地散开。
English: Both sides obediently dispersed.

古文：人皆敬之，无敢騃者。
现代文：人们都很敬重他，没人敢对他有所轻慢。
English: People hold him in high esteem, and no one dares to treat him with contempt.

古文：僧些唐贞元初，荆州有狂僧，些其名者，善歌河满子。
现代文：僧些唐贞元初，荆州有狂僧，些其名者，善歌河满子。
English: Some of the monks are from the beginning of Tang Zhengyuan, Jingzhou has mad monks, and some are famous, such as Zengkahe Manzi.

古文：常遇伍伯乘醉，于途中辱之，令歌。
现代文：常遇伍伯乘醉，于途中辱之，令歌。
English: Wubo often gets drunk and insults him on the way.

古文：僧即发声，其词皆陈伍伯从前隐慝也。
现代文：僧即发声，其词皆陈伍伯从前隐慝也。
English: When a monk utters a word, Chen Wubo, formerly a hermit, also utters it.

古文：伍伯惊而自悔。
现代文：伍伯听了又惊又怕，后悔不该侮辱他。
English: Hearing this, Wu Bo was shocked and afraid. He regretted that he should not have insulted him.

古文：阿足师
现代文：阿足师
English: Aashishi

古文：阿足师者，莫知其所来，形质痴浊，神情不慧，时有所言，靡不先觉。
现代文：不知道阿足师是从什么地方来的，看他那副神志不清的样子，还有那满脸的傻气，但只要他开口说点什么，无不属于先知先觉。
English: I don't know where he came from, but looking at his dazed look and the stupidity on his face, as soon as he opened his mouth to say something, I knew it was a premonition.

古文：居虽无定，多寓阌乡。
现代文：他虽然居无定所，但多半住在阌乡。
English: Although he has no fixed abode, he mostly lives in Handan.

古文：憧憧往来，争路礼谒。山岳檀施，曾不顾瞻。
现代文：门前人来人往，争先恐后地拜访他；山里的大寺名僧，施主们却懒得光顾。
English: People come and go in front of the door, scrambling to visit him; famous monks from the big temple in the mountains, but donors are too lazy to patronize.

古文：人或忧或疾，获其指南者，其验神速。
现代文：人们或有忧虑或有疾病，只要得到他的指点，无不立即应验。
English: People may have worries or diseases, as long as they get his guidance, they will be fulfilled immediately.

古文：时陕州有富室张臻者，财积钜万，止有一男。
现代文：当时陕州有个富户叫张臻，家有财产一万万，可惜只有一废物儿子。
English: At that time, there was a rich family in Shaanxi Province called Zhang Zhen. The family had a fortune of ten million yuan, but unfortunately, they had only one useless son.

古文：年可十七，生而愚騃，既挛手足，复懵语言，惟嗜饮食，口如溪壑。
现代文：儿子现在十七岁了，生下来就愚呆。不但手脚痉挛，而且不会说话，一天到晚只知道吃，肚子永远填不满。
English: My son is now seventeen years old. He was born stupid. Not only are his hands and feet lame, but he can't speak. All he knows how to do is eat all day long, and his stomach is always full of discontent.

古文：父母钟爱，尽力事之，迎医求药。不远千里。
现代文：父母十分疼爱，尽心尽力服侍，到处求医求药，不惜奔波千里。
English: My parents love me very much, do their best to serve me, seek medical treatment everywhere, and travel thousands of miles.

古文：十数年后，家业殆尽。
现代文：折腾了十几年后，家产耗费殆尽。
English: After more than ten years of hard work, the family's resources were exhausted.

古文：或有谓曰： 阿足贤圣，见世诸佛，何不投告，希其痊除。 
现代文：有人对老两口说： 阿足是当今的圣人，现世的菩萨，为什么不去求求他，他会给你们解除痛苦的。 
English: Someone said to the old couple: "Aty is the saint of today, the bodhisattva of this world, why not ask him, he will relieve your pain."

古文：臻与其妻，来抵阌乡，叩头抆泪，求其拯济。
现代文：老两口来到阌乡，磕头作揖，擦眼抹泪，苦苦哀求阿足相救。
English: The old couple came to Handan Township, bowed their heads, wiped their eyes with tears, and begged for help.

古文：阿足久之谓臻曰： 汝冤未散，尚须十年。
现代文：阿足想了半天，便对张臻说： 你身上的冤魂还没有散去，还得十年才能了结。
English: After thinking for half a day, Ah Tu said to Zhang Zhen: The evil spirits in your body have not yet dispersed, and it will take ten years to end.

古文：愍汝勤虔，为汝除去。 
现代文：可怜你如此殷勤、虔诚，我马上就为你消除灾难。 
English: I pity you for being so diligent and pious. I will soon remove the calamity for you.

古文：即令选日，于河上致斋，广召众多，同观度脱。仍令赍致其男，亦赴道场。
现代文：阿足让他们选定日子，在河岸上摆下道场，尽量多召集些人来，共同观赏度脱冤魂的情景，并让他把儿子也带到道场。
English: Atasu asked them to choose a day, set up a dojo on the riverbank, gather as many people as possible to watch the scene of the liberation of the wrongdoers, and let him bring his son to the dojo.

古文：时众谓神通，而观者如堵。
现代文：到了那一天，众人都以为阿足要大显神通，所以观看如云，围得像一堵密不透风的墙一样。
English: On that day, everyone thought that Ahaz was going to perform a great miracle, so they watched like a cloud, surrounded like an impenetrable wall.

古文：跂竦之际，阿足则指壮力者三四人，扶拽其人，投之河流。
现代文：正当大家踮脚伸脖子之际，阿足点出三四个壮汉，连拖带拽就把张臻的儿子扔进了河里。
English: Just as everyone was stamping their feet and craning their necks, Ah Fu pointed out three or four strong men, who dragged Zhang Zhen's son into the river.

古文：臻洎举会之人，莫测其为。阿足顾谓臻曰： 为汝除灾矣。 
现代文：张臻与所有赴会的人，都猜不透阿足要干什么，阿足看着张臻对他说道： 我为你除去灾祸了！ 
English: Zhang Zhen and all the people who attended the meeting could not figure out what Ah Tu wanted to do. Ah Tu looked at Zhang Zhen and said to him, "I have removed the disaster for you!"

古文：久之，其子忽于下流十数步外，立于水面。戟手于其父母曰： 与汝冤仇，宿世缘业。
现代文：过了好长时间，张臻儿子突然在下游十几步远的地方，站在水面上，用手指着他父母说： 我与你们的冤仇，是前生结下的因缘。
English: After a long time, Zhang Zhen's son suddenly stood on the surface of the water, more than a dozen steps downstream, and said to his parents with his fingers: "My grudge against you is the cause of the previous life.

古文：赖逢圣者，遽此解挥。
现代文：幸遇圣人给我们当即解脱。
English: If we are lucky enough to meet a saint, we are immediately liberated.

古文：傥或不然，未有毕日。 
现代文：倘若不然，永无终日。 
English: If you don't, you'll never get through the day.

古文：挺身高呼，都不愚痴。
现代文：他挺身高呼的样了，一点也不呆痴。
English: He's a stand-up guy, he's not stupid.

古文：须臾沉水，不知所适。
现代文：转眼之间他又沉入水底，不知到哪里去了。
English: In the blink of an eye, he sank to the bottom of the water and I don't know where he went.

古文：鉴师
现代文：鉴师
English: Connoisseurs

古文：唐元和初，有长乐冯生者，家于吴，以明经调选于天官氏，是岁见黜于有司，因侨居长安中。
现代文：唐宪宗元和初年，吴郡长乐县冯生原以明经科考入吏部供职，这年被上司免除了官职，暂时客居在长安。
English: In the first year of Tang Xian Zongyuan and Tang Xian Zongyuan, Feng Sheng of Changle County, Wuxi County, who had entered the cadre department with the examination of Ming and Jing, was relieved of his official post by his boss this year and temporarily lived in Chang'an.

古文：有老僧鉴其名者，一日来诣，谓生： 汝吾姓也。 因相与往来，近岁余。
现代文：有位老僧名字叫鉴，有一天来到冯生住处，对冯生说： 你与我是一个姓。 
English: An old monk named Jian came to Feng Sheng's residence one day and said to him, "You and I have the same surname.

古文：及冯尉于东越，既治装，鉴师负笈来，告去。冯问曰： 师去安所诣乎？ 
现代文：于是两人互相来往了一年多的时间，交情甚密。等到冯生治办好行装，要到东越出任都尉时，鉴法师背着书箱来向他辞行，冯生问道： 法师要去什么地方呢？ 
English: As a result, the two of them spent more than a year visiting each other and became very close friends. When Feng Shengzhi had finished packing and was about to go to East Vietnam to serve as a captain, Jian Mage came to him with a bookcase on his back to say goodbye. Feng Sheng asked: Where is Mage going?

古文：鉴师曰： 我庐于灵岩寺之西庑下且久，其后游长安中，至今十年矣。
现代文：鉴法师说： 我住的小屋在灵岩寺西廊下面，在那里住了很久了，后来才云游到长安城里，到现在已经十年了。
English: The sorcerer said, "The hut I live in is under the west corridor of Lingyan Temple. I lived there for a long time, and later I moved to Chang'an City. It's been ten years now.

古文：幸得与子相遇。
现代文：值得庆幸的是，在长安认识了你。
English: Fortunately, I met you in Chang'an.

古文：今将归故居，故来告别。
现代文：如今我要返回故居，所以来向你告别。
English: Now I'm going back to my old house, so I've come to say goodbye to you.

古文：然吾子尉于东越，道出灵岩寺下，当宜一访我也。 
现代文：然而你要去东越作都尉，正好路过灵岩寺山下，可以去访问我一下的。 
English: However, if you want to go to East Vietnam as a captain, and you happen to pass under the mountain of Lingyan Temple, you can visit me.

古文：生诺曰： 谨受教。 
现代文：冯生应诺道： 一定遵嘱前去拜访。 
English: Feng Sheng promised: I will definitely go to visit as instructed.

古文：后数月，冯生自长安之任，至灵岩寺门，立马望曰： 岂非鉴师所居寺乎？ 
现代文：过了几个月，冯生自长安出前往东越赴任，走到灵岩寺门前，勒马站定望了望说： 这不是鉴法师住的寺院吗？ 
English: A few months later, Feng Sheng left Chang'an to take up a post in East Vietnam. He walked up to the door of Lingyan Temple. Le Ma stopped and looked at it and said, "Isn't this the temple where the sorcerer lives?"

古文：即入而诣焉。
现代文：他立即下马走了进去。
English: He immediately dismounted and went inside.

古文：时有一僧在庭，生问曰： 不知鉴师庐安在，吾将诣之。 
现代文：这时正有一个僧人在庭院里，冯生问他道： 不知鉴师住的小屋在什么地方，我想到那里去看看。 
English: At this time, there was a monk in the courtyard. Feng Sheng asked him, "I don't know where the hut where the expert lives is. I want to go there to have a look."

古文：僧曰： 吾曹数辈，独无鉴其名者。 
现代文：僧人说： 我们这里有好多法师，独独没有名字叫鉴的。 
English: The monk said, "We have a lot of sorcerers here, but no one by the name of Chan.

古文：生始疑异，默而计曰： 鉴师信士，岂欺我耶？ 
现代文：冯生开始有些怀疑，心里合计道： 鉴法师乃是讲究信用的人，哪能骗我呢。 
English: Feng Sheng began to have some doubts, and in his heart he said, "The appraiser is a trustworthy person. How could he lie to me?"

古文：于是独游寺庭，行至西庑下，忽见有群僧画像，其一人状同鉴师。生大惊曰： 鉴师果异人也！
现代文：于是一个人在寺院内游览起来。走到西廊下面时，忽然看见有许多僧人的画像，其中一人的形状与鉴法师一样，冯生大为惊奇地说： 鉴法师果然是个异人！
English: So one of them went on a tour of the temple. When he got to the bottom of the west corridor, he suddenly saw many images of monks, one of whom had the same shape as the sorcerer. Feng Sheng was surprised and said: The sorcerer is indeed a stranger!

古文：且能神降于我。 
现代文：而且能神奇地降临到我的面前。 
English: And it can magically appear in front of me.

古文：因慨然泣下者久之。
现代文：于是慨然泪下，心情久久不能平静。
English: As a result, she burst into tears, and her mood could not be calmed for a long time.

古文：视其题曰： 冯氏子，吴郡人也。年十岁，学浮图法，以道行闻，卒年七十八。 
现代文：冯生仔细看了看画像下面的题辞只见下面写道： 此人姓冯，吴郡人，十岁始学佛法，以道行高深闻名于世，终年七十八岁。 
English: Feng Sheng took a closer look at the picture and saw the following inscription: This person's surname is Feng. He is from Wuxian County. He began to learn Buddhism at the age of ten. He is famous for his profound practice of the Dharma. He is 78 years old.

古文：冯阅其题，益异之。
现代文：冯生看完题辞，更觉鉴法师神奇。
English: After reading the inscription, Feng Sheng was even more aware of the magic of the mage.

古文：从谏
现代文：从谏
English: From

古文：东都敬爱寺北禅院大德从谏，姓张氏，南阳人。徙居广陵，为土著姓。
现代文：洛阳敬爱寺北禅院的高僧从谏，本姓张，南阳人，迁居广陵后，改为土著人的姓。
English: Luoyang Jing'ai Temple North Zen Monastery's senior monk, originally surnamed Zhang, was from Nanyang. After he moved to Guangling, he changed his surname to that of an indigenous person.

古文：身长八尺，眉目魁奇。
现代文：身长八尺，相貌魁梧。
English: He is eight feet tall, with a burly appearance.

古文：越壮室之年，忽顿悟真理，遂舍妻子从披削焉。
现代文：过了壮年期以后，忽然顿悟真理，于是抛弃老婆孩子出家削发为僧。
English: After passing the prime of life, he suddenly had an epiphany of truth, so he abandoned his wife and children and became a monk.

古文：于是研精禅观，心境明白，不逾十载，耆年宿德。皆所推服。
现代文：他精心研习禅观，心境了然明白，修行了不超过十年，许多资深德高的高僧大德，都对他深表推崇和佩服。
English: He carefully studied Zen, and his state of mind was clearly understood. He had practiced for no more than ten years. Many senior monks and eminent scholars expressed their deep respect and admiration for him.

古文：及来洛，遂止敬爱寺。
现代文：等他来到洛阳后，便住在了敬爱寺。
English: After he came to Luoyang, he lived in the Temple of Reverence.

古文：年德并成，缁黄所宗。每赴供，皆与宾头卢尊者对食，其为人天钦奉若此。
现代文：他的资历与道德都已达到成熟阶段，成为佛僧与道人的宗师，每次赴会时，都与宾头卢尊者坐在一起吃饭，他是如此的受人钦敬与供奉。
English: His qualifications and morals have reached a mature stage, and he has become a guru of Buddhist monks and Taoists. Every time he attends a meeting, he sits and eats with the Venerable Binh Tuan Lu. He is so admired and worshipped.

古文：唐武宗嗣历，改元会昌，爱驭凤骖鹤之仪，薄点墨降龙之教，乃下郡国，毁塔庙，令沙门复初。
现代文：唐武宗继位后，改元会昌，他喜爱成仙长寿之道而鄙薄佛教，于是下令各处毁坏寺庙，让僧人回乡返俗。
English: After Tang Wuzong succeeded to the throne, he changed the era name to Heichang. He liked the way of immortality and longevity and despised Buddhism, so he ordered the destruction of temples everywhere and let the monks return to their hometowns and return to secular life.

古文：谏公乃乌帽麻衣，潜于皇甫枚之温泉别业。
现代文：谏公便头戴黑布帽身穿麻布衣，潜藏到皇甫枚之温泉别墅里。
English: Wearing a black cloth cap on his head and a linen shirt, he sneaked into the hot spring villa of the emperor.

古文：后冈上乔木骈郁，巨石砥平。谏公夏日，常于中入寂，或补毳事。
现代文：后山上林木参天，巨石平坦，谏公于炎热的盛夏常常在这里端坐入定，求学道事。
English: In the mountains behind, the trees are towering and the boulders are flat. In the hot midsummer, Ying Gong would often sit here and study Taoism.

古文：忽一日，颓云駃雨，霆击石傍大檀。
现代文：有一天，浓云骤雨突然涌了上来，雷电轰击着石旁边的大檀树。
English: One day, thick clouds and a sudden downpour came up, and lightning bombarded the large sandalwood tree next to the stone.

古文：雨至，诸兄走往林中，谏公恬然趺坐，若无所闻者。诸兄致问，徐曰： 恶畜生而已。 
现代文：暴雨到来时，一起修练的各位兄弟纷纷跑进树林躲避，谏公则静静地盘腿坐在原处，好像没有听到什么动静一样，兄弟们问他为什么这样，谏公从容答道： 只因厌恶那帮畜生而已。 
English: When the rainstorm came, all the brothers who were practicing together ran into the woods to hide, and Zou Gong quietly sat cross-legged in the same place, as if he did not hear any movement. When the brothers asked him why, Zou Gong calmly replied: It was just because he hated those animals.

古文：至大中初，宣宗复兴内教，谏公归东都故居。
现代文：唐宣家大中初年，佛教复兴，谏公又回到洛阳故居。
English: In the first year of Tang Xuanjia University, Buddhism was revived, and Zeng Gong returned to his former residence in Luoyang.

古文：其子自广陵来观，适与遇于院门，威貌崇严，不复可识。
现代文：他的儿子有一天从广陵来看望他，正巧在寺院门口与他相遇，儿子长得高大魁伟，有些认不出来了。
English: One day, his son came to visit him from Guangling and just happened to meet him at the entrance of the temple. The son was tall and big, and some could not recognize him.

古文：乃拜而问从谏大德所居，谏公指曰： 近东头。 
现代文：儿子向他施礼，问他从谏高僧住在什么地方，从谏用手指了指说道： 就在那边的东头。 
English: His son bowed to him and asked him where the high priest lived. He pointed with his finger and said, "It's over there, at the east end."

古文：其子既去。遂阖门不出。
现代文：儿子去了之后，他回到自己屋里关上房门再也不出来。
English: After his son left, he went back to his room, closed the door and never came out.

古文：其割裂爱网又如此。
现代文：这就是这样的割裂情网断绝尘缘！
English: This is how such a break-up of a love network leads to a break-up!

古文：咸通丙戌岁夏五月。忽遍诣所信向家，皆谓曰： 善建福业。
现代文：懿宗咸通丙戊年夏季五月，从谏老家的人突然普遍地收到他所写的信，他在这些信里都是告诉家里人说： 要好好供奉佛教，积善修德。
English: In the summer of May in the year of Zong Zong Hamdong, people from Zong Zong's hometown suddenly received letters written by him. In these letters, he told his family members to: "Worship Buddhism well and be good at cultivating virtue."

古文：贫道秋初当远行，故相别耳。 
现代文：贫道秋初要远行，所以写信与你们告别。 
English: The road to poverty is a long one in early autumn, so I'm writing to say goodbye.

古文：至秋七月朔，清旦，盥手焚香，念慈氏如来，遂右胁而卧。呼门人玄章等戒曰： 人生难得，恶道易沦，唯有归命释尊，励精梵行。
现代文：到了秋季七月初一日清晨，从谏洗完手点上香，反复念诵我佛如来，然后右侧向下躺在床上，招呼门徒玄章等来到面前，告诫他们道： 人生多难，世道险恶，稍有不慎，极易沉沦；唯有归依佛法，精诚守戒修行，方能救拔超脱。
English: In the early morning of the first day of July in autumn, after performing the ablution, he put incense on his hand, chanted "I am the Buddha" repeatedly, and then lay down on his right side on the bed. He called his disciples, such as Xuanzang, to come to him and admonished them, saying, "Life is difficult, the world is perilous, if you are a little careless, you can easily fall into the pit; only by returning to Buddhism and diligently following the precepts can you be saved and transcend.

古文：龙花会上，当复相逢。
现代文：来日龙花会上，还能与诸位相逢。
English: I will also be able to meet you all at the Dragon and Flower Festival.

古文：生也有涯，与尔少别。 
现代文：人之生命有限，我今与你们暂别。 
English: Human life is limited. I'll leave you now.

古文：是日无疾奄化，年有八十余矣。
现代文：过一天，从谏无病而亡，享年八十余岁。
English: One day later, he died without any illness at the age of 80.

古文：玄章等奉遗旨，送尸于建春门外尸陁林中，施诸鸟兽。
现代文：玄章等人遵照师父遗嘱，把他的尸体送到建春门外停放尸体的山林里，奉献给饥饿的鸟兽。
English: According to the master's will, Xuanzang and others sent his corpse to the mountain forest where the corpse was parked outside Jianchun Gate, and dedicated it to the hungry birds and beasts.

古文：三日复视之，肌貌如生，无物敢近。
现代文：第三天再去看时，肌体的样子与活的时候相同，没有鸟兽敢于靠近，于是在尸体上盖了一层干粮食物。
English: On the third day, when they went to see it again, the body looked the same as when it was alive. No birds or animals dared to approach, so they covered the corpse with a layer of dry food.

古文：遂覆以饼饵。经宿，有狼狐迹，唯啗饼饵，而丰肤宛然。
现代文：过了一宿，见有豺狼狐狸之类兽曾经光顾的痕迹，但它们只吃掉了干粮食物，尸体的肌肤仍然完好无损。
English: After an overnight stay, there were signs that animals such as jackals and foxes had once visited, but they only ate dry food, and the skin of the corpse was still intact.

古文：乃依天竺法阇维讫，收余烬，起白塔于道傍，春秋奉香火之荐焉。
现代文：玄章等人便依照天竺的办法将遗体火化完了，收藏起骨灰在道旁建起一座白塔，将骨灰存放在塔内，年年供奉香火。
English: Xuanzang and others then cremated the remains according to the method of Tianyao, collected the ashes, built a white tower next to the road, stored the ashes in the tower, and offered incense every year.

