古文：汉兴之初，反秦之敝，与民休息，凡事简易，禁罔疏阔，而相国萧、曹以宽厚清静为天下帅，民作 画一 之歌。
现代文：汉朝兴起之初，一反秦代的弊政，使百姓得以休养生息，凡事都从简而行，禁例法规也大为放宽，而相国萧何、曹参以宽厚清静的办事作风成为了天下的表率，人民因而编了一首 画一 歌来加以称颂。
English: At the beginning of the rise of the Han Dynasty, an anti-Qin Dynasty maladministration enabled the people to rest and recuperate, everything was simplified, prohibitions and regulations were greatly relaxed, and Xiao He and Cao San, with their generous and quiet work style, became the model for the world. The people thus composed a "painting a song" to praise them.

古文：孝惠垂拱，高后女主，不出房闼，而天下晏然，民务稼穑，衣食滋殖。
现代文：惠帝无为而治，吕后隐居深宫，而天下平安，人民专心从事农业生产，一片丰衣足食的景象。
English: Emperor Hui ruled without doing anything, Empress Lu lived in seclusion in the Deep Palace, while the world was at peace, the people concentrated on agricultural production, and there was an abundance of food and clothing.

古文：至于文、景，遂移风易俗。
现代文：而到文帝、景帝年间，便又移风易俗。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, however, the custom changed.

古文：是时，循吏如河南守吴公、蜀守文翁之属，皆谨身帅先，居以廉平，不至于严，而民从化。
现代文：当时能奉公守法的循吏如河南郡太守吴公、蜀郡太守文翁这些人，都能严于律己，为人表率，办事清廉公正，不用强迫的方法，就能使人民顺从地接受感化。
English: At that time, officials who were able to abide by the law, such as Wu Gong, the grand marshal of Henan County, and Wen Weng, the grand marshal of Shu County, were able to be strict with themselves, set an example, act with integrity and fairness, and make the people obediently accept the influence without forcing them.

古文：孝武之世，外攘四夷，内改法度，民用凋敝，奸轨不禁。
现代文：武帝时，对外抗御四方的蛮夷，对内修改法规条令，因而搞得人民疲惫不堪，内乱外患无法禁止。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, he resisted the barbarians of the four sides from the outside and revised the laws and regulations from the inside, thus making the people exhausted and unable to prevent civil unrest from the outside.

古文：时少能以化治称者，惟江都相董仲舒、内史公孙弘、皃宽，居官可纪。
现代文：那时已很少能有以教化治理而著称的人，衹有江都相董仲舒、内史公孙弘和倪宽等，其政縯值得一书。
English: At that time, there were already very few people who were known for their enlightened governance, such as the Jiangsu provincial governor, Dong Zhongshu, the official historian, Sun Hong, and Ni Guang. Their policies are worthy of a book.

古文：三人皆儒者，通于世务，明习文法，以经术润饰吏事，天子器之。
现代文：三人都是儒生，既精通处世之道，又熟习文章之法，他们以经学的思想方法帮助自己处理政务，天子很器重他们。
English: All three of them are Confucian scholars, who are not only well-versed in the way of life, but also familiar with the method of writing. They help themselves to deal with government affairs with the thought method of scripture study. Heavenly Father is very concerned about them.

古文：仲舒数谢病去，弘、宽至三公。
现代文：董仲舒因病多次辞官，而公孙弘、倪宽做官做到三公。
English: Dong Zhongshu resigned several times due to illness, while Gongsun Hong and Ni Guang became the third generation of officials.

古文：孝昭幼冲，霍光秉政，承奢侈师旅之后，海内虚耗，光因循守职，无所改作。
现代文：昭帝年幼登基，由霍光代为主持政务，此时正值长年征战之后，海内消耗很大，霍光沿袭于此而恪守职责，没有改变以前的作法。
English: Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne at a young age, and Ho Guang took over the government affairs. At this time, after many years of war, there was a lot of domestic consumption. Ho Guang followed this and adhered to his duties, and did not change the previous practice.

古文：至于始元、元凤之间，匈奴乡化，百姓益富，举贤良文学，问民所疾苦，于是罢酒榷而议盐铁矣。
现代文：到了始元和元凤年间，匈奴归顺，而老百姓生活也渐渐富足，于是开始举荐人才，关心人民疾苦，废除酒税而讨论盐铁之利。
English: By the years of the Yuan and Yuanfeng, the Xiongnu had surrendered, and the people's lives had gradually become prosperous, so they began to recommend talents, care about the people's hardships, abolish the liquor tax and discuss the benefits of salt and iron.

古文：及至孝宣，由仄陋而登至尊，兴于闾阎，知民事之艰难。
现代文：待到了宣帝时，由于他是身经微贱而当上的皇帝，本起家于里巷，所以深知人民的喜怒哀乐。
English: When Emperor Xuan arrived, because he was an emperor who had risen from humble beginnings and came from humble beginnings, he was well aware of the people's emotions.

古文：自霍光薨后始躬万机，厉精为治，五日一听事，自丞相已下各奉职而进。
现代文：他从霍光死后便开始亲自过问处理各项朝政，励精图治，每五天便上朝听政一次，从丞相以下各官职依次进朝禀告。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, he began to personally inquire into and deal with various court politics, and worked hard to govern. Every five days, he went to the court to listen to politics, and from the official positions below the prime minister, he successively entered the court obituary.

古文：及拜刺史守相，辄亲见问，观其所由，退而考察所行以质其言，有名实不相应，必知其所以然。
现代文：待授予刺史、郡守、诸侯相等官职时，都要亲自接见询问，了解他们的思想，然后再考察其行为以与其言论相比较，有名实不符合的，必须找到它的根源。
English: When a person is to be awarded the post of chief historian, county magistrate or vassal, he or she should be questioned in person to understand his or her thoughts, and then his or her actions should be examined to compare with his or her words. If there is a discrepancy between what is said and what is done, the root cause must be found.

古文：常称曰： 庶民所以安其田里而亡叹息愁恨之心者，政平讼理也。
现代文：宣帝曾说道： 老百姓所以能够安心于农业生产而消除忧虑怨恨的不良心情，是因为政治清平而法律能够主持正义。
English: Emperor Xuan once said: The reason why the common people can feel at ease in agricultural production and eliminate the bad feelings of worry and resentment is because politics is fair and the law can preside over justice.

古文：与我共此者，其唯良二千石乎！ 以为太守，吏民之本也。数变易则下不安，民知其将久，不可欺罔，乃服从其教化。
现代文：而与我共同保证这一点的人，衹有那些好的郡守啊厂他认为郡守是管理官吏人民的根本，频繁调换就会造成地方上的不安宁，人民当知道太守的人选十分稳定，不可欺瞒时，才会服从他的教化。
English: And the people who jointly guarantee this with me are none other than those good county magistrates. He believes that county magistrates are fundamental to the management of officials and the people. Frequent replacement will cause local unrest. When the people know that the candidate for county magistrate is very stable and cannot be deceived, they will obey his indoctrination.

古文：故二千石有治理效，辄以玺书勉厉，增秩赐金，或爵至关内侯，公卿缺则选诸所表以次用之。
现代文：所以郡守要是治理有成效，他总是亲自颁书勉励，增加其俸禄并赐以重金，或授爵号至关内侯，公卿位缺时则以所表彰者依次任用之。
English: Therefore, if the county governor's governance is effective, he will always personally issue a letter of encouragement, increase his salary and give him heavy money, or give him a knighthood, and if there is no noble title, he will be appointed in the order of those who have been awarded.

古文：是故汉世良吏，于是为盛，称中兴焉。
现代文：由此原因汉代的循良官吏才得以层出不穷，有中兴之称。
English: For this reason, the Han Dynasty's virtuous officials were able to emerge one after another, known as ZTE.

古文：若赵广汉、韩延寿、尹翁归、严延年、张敞之属，皆称其位，然任刑罚，或抵罪诛。
现代文：如赵广汉、韩延寿、尹翁归、严延年、张敞这些人，都能做到称职尽责，但却任用刑罚，有的甚至犯了死罪。
English: For example, Zhao Guanghan, Han Yanshou, Yin Wengui, Yan Yan Nian, Zhang Zhang, all of these people are capable of fulfilling their duties, but they have been punished, and some have even committed capital crimes.

古文：王成、黄霸、朱邑、龚遂、郑弘、召信臣等，所居民富，所去见思，生有荣号，死见奉祀，此廪廪庶几德让君子之遗风矣。
现代文：王成、黄霸、朱邑、龚遂、郑弘、召信臣等人，在位时人民富足，离任后人民思念，生前有荣誉的称号，死后被祭祀缅怀，这样的风采也许就是仁德礼让的君子遣风吧。
English: Wangcheng, Huangba, Zhuyi, Shuxui, Zhenghong, Zhao Xincheng and others, the people were rich when they were in power, the people missed them after they left office, they had honorary titles during their lifetime, and they were sacrificed and remembered after their death. Such a style may be a gentleman who is kind and courteous.

古文：文翁，庐江舒人也。
现代文：文翁，庐江郡舒县人。
English: Wen Weng, from Shu County, Minjiang County.

古文：少好学，通《春秋》，以郡县吏察举。
现代文：年少时热爱学习，通晓《春秋》，以郡县官吏的身份被察举到朝廷做官。
English: When he was young, he loved to study and was familiar with "Spring and Autumn." As a county official, he was promoted to the imperial court.

古文：景帝末，为蜀郡守，仁爱好教化。
现代文：景帝末年，文翁任蜀郡太守，宽仁爱民，喜欢用政治教化来影响、治理蜀郡百姓。
English: In the last years of Emperor Jing, Wen Weng became the governor of Shu County. He loved the people and liked to use political indoctrination to influence and govern the people of Shu County.

古文：见蜀地辟陋有蛮夷风，文翁欲诱进之，乃选郡县小吏开敏有材者张叔等十余人亲自饬厉，遣诣京师，受业博士，或学律令。减省少府用度，买刀布蜀物，赍计吏以遗博士。
现代文：他见蜀郡位处偏远僻陋的边疆地区，受少数民族落后风俗的影响，便想从多方面教导启发而使之进步，于是挑选郡县小吏中开明敏睿又有才能的如张叔等十多人，亲自对他们诫诲勉励，并送往首都长安，或随博士学习儒家经传，或向文吏学习法律条令；减损郡少府的费用开支，购买蜀地名贵特产金刀蜀布，让掌管计簿的官员上京汇报情况时带上，赠送给博士们。
English: He saw that Shu County was located in a remote and desolate frontier area, influenced by the backward customs of ethnic minorities, and he wanted to teach and inspire it from various aspects to make it progress. Therefore, he selected more than ten open-minded, clever and talented people such as Uncle Zhang from the county and county officials, personally exhorted them, and sent them to the capital Chang'an, or to study Confucian classics with the doctor, or to study laws and regulations from the clerks; to reduce the expenses of the county government, to purchase the famous special product of Shu, the golden sword Shu cloth, and to let the official in charge of the account book take it with him when reporting to Beijing

古文：数岁，蜀生皆成就还归，文翁以为右职，用次察举，官有至郡守刺史者。
现代文：几年后，派出去的入学满而归，文翁让他们担任郡中高级职务，并相继通过察举等途径把他们推荐给朝廷，有官至郡守或刺史的。
English: A few years later, those who were sent out to enroll in school returned home, and Wen Weng allowed them to hold high-ranking positions in the county, and successively recommended them to the imperial court through surveys and other means, with officials ranging from county governors to historians.

古文：又修起学官于成都市中，招下县子弟以为学官弟子，为除更徭，高者以补郡县吏，次为孝弟力田。
现代文：此外，文翁还在成都市中建立学校，招收成都以外各县的少年子弟为学生，免除他们的更赋徭役，学习成绩好的充补县官吏，差一些的担任孝悌、力田等乡宫职务。
English: In addition, Wen Weng also established a school in the middle of Chengdu city, enrolling young boys and girls from all counties outside Chengdu as students, exempting them from more duties, supplementing county officials with good academic performance, and serving as filial piety, power fields and other township palace duties for those with poor academic performance.

古文：常选学官僮子，使在便坐受事。
现代文：又经常选拔学校中的青年学生，让他们在郡府偏房裹帮助处理政务。
English: In addition, young students in schools are often selected to help deal with government affairs in the prefectural government.

古文：每出行县，益从学官诸生明经饬行者与俱，使传教令，出入闺阁。
现代文：每当外出巡行各县的时候，文翁总是让很多通晓经书、品行端庄的学生随他一道四处宣扬教化政令，出入于郡县官衙。
English: Whenever Wen Weng went on a tour of the counties, he always had many students who were well versed in scriptures and behaved in a dignified manner go with him to promote the edification decree everywhere, and enter and leave the county government offices.

古文：县邑吏民见而荣之，数年，争欲为学官弟子，富人至出钱以求之。
现代文：县邑吏民看到这种情形，非常羡慕。几年之间，便都争着要成为学校学生，以致有钱的大户人家出钱买学。
English: When the officials and people of the county and town saw this situation, they were very envious. For several years, they all competed to become school students, so that rich large households paid to buy education.

古文：由是大化，蜀地学于京师者比齐鲁焉。
现代文：从此教化盛行，蜀郡风气大为改变。在京师学习的蜀郡人多得可以同齐、鲁等地相媲美。
English: Since then, enlightenment has prevailed, and the culture of Shu County has changed greatly. The number of Shu County people studying in Beijing can be compared with that of Qi, Lu and other places.

古文：至武帝时，乃令天下郡国皆立学校官，自文翁为之始云。
现代文：到武帝的时候，便下令郡国设置学校及有关管理官员，这是文翁先开始的。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived, he ordered the county to set up schools and relevant management officials, which was started by Wen Weng.

古文：文翁终于蜀，吏民为立祠堂，岁时祭祀不绝。
现代文：文翁寿终于蜀郡后，当地的官吏人民为他立了祠堂，逢年过节祭祀不绝。
English: After Wen Wengshou was finally exiled to Shu County, the local officials and people built an ancestral hall for him. Every year, there are endless festivals and sacrifices.

古文：至今巴蜀好文雅，文翁之化也。
现代文：直到今天，巴蜀地区的人民喜好文雅，都是受文翁教化的影响。
English: To this day, the people's taste for elegance in the Bashu region has been influenced by the influence of the literati.

古文：王成，不知何郡人也。
现代文：王成，不知是哪一郡人。
English: Wang Cheng, I don't know which county he is from.

古文：为胶东相，治甚有声。
现代文：曾任胶束相，治理地方很有声望。
English: He was once the Minister of Micellar Wines, and he has a very good reputation in the local government.

古文：宣帝最先褒之，地节三年下诏曰： 盖闻有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽唐、虞不能以化天下。
现代文：宣帝最先赞扬了他。地节三年颁下的韶书说： 如果听到哪裹有功不去奖赏，有罪不去诛除，那即使唐尧虞舜的名义也不能教化天下。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan was the first to praise him. The imperial edict issued by the three-year land festival said: If you hear that there are some merits that cannot be rewarded, and some sins that cannot be eliminated, then even in the name of Tang Xuan and Gu Yao, you cannot enlighten the world.

古文：今胶东相成，劳来不怠，流民自占八万余口，治有异等之效。
现代文：现在胶束相王成，劝勉招怀百姓从不懈怠，招来流民八万余人，治理地方有特殊的功劳。
English: At present, Wang Cheng, Minister of Micronutrients, has never slacked in exhorting and inviting the people, and has attracted more than 80,000 displaced people. He has made special contributions to local governance.

古文：其赐成爵关内侯，秩中二千石。 
现代文：赐给王成爵号关内侯，俸禄中二千石。 
English: The title of Lord Wangcheng was given to Guanai, with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：未及征用，会病卒官。
现代文：但没等到征用之时，王成就患病去世了。
English: However, before the time of requisition, Wang Chengzong fell ill and passed away.

古文：后诏使丞相、御史问郡国上计长吏守丞以政令得失，或对言前胶东相成伪自增加，以蒙显赏，是后俗吏多为虚名云。
现代文：后来又下韶让丞相、御史查问郡国上计长吏、太守、府丞政令方面的得失，有的禀告说前胶束相王成曾假报夸大自己的成绩，以骗取显要的赏誉，致使后来平庸的官吏们也多不择手段地追求虚名。
English: Some obituaries said that Wang Cheng, the former Minister of Microbiology, had falsely exaggerated his own achievements and cheated to win prominent awards, so that later mediocre officials also pursued false fame by all means.

古文：黄霸字次公，淮阳阳夏人也，以豪杰役使徙云陵。
现代文：黄霸，字次公，淮阳郡阳夏县人，其家因为是豪绅而徙居云陵。
English: Huang Ba, Zi Gong, Huaiyang County, Yangxia County, his family moved to Yunnan because he was a gentleman.

古文：霸少学律令，喜为吏，武帝末以待诏入钱赏官，补侍郎谒者，坐同产有罪劾免。
现代文：黄霸年少时就学习法律条令，喜好当官，武帝末年以待诏身份捐钱而获赏为官，补侍郎谒者，因亲兄弟犯罪而被弹劾罢免。
English: When Huang Ba was young, he studied the laws and regulations and liked to be an official. At the end of Emperor Wu's life, he was rewarded for donating money as an official, and he was impeached and removed from office for his brothers' crimes.

古文：后复入谷沈黎郡，补左冯翊二百石卒史。
现代文：后来又捐谷给沈黎郡，补左冯翊官俸二百石的卒史。
English: Later, he donated the valley to Shenli County, supplementing his official salary of 200 koku.

古文：冯翊以霸入财为官，不署右职，使领郡钱谷计。
现代文：左冯翊因为黄霸是捐财为官，轻视他而不给他高职，让他负责掌管郡裹的钱、谷出入工作。
English: Zuo Fengyao despised Huangba for donating his wealth to become an official and did not give him a high-ranking position, leaving him in charge of the county's money and the work of entering and leaving the valley.

古文：簿书正，以廉称，察补河东均输长，复察廉为河南太守丞。
现代文：黄霸记账不欺瞒，以廉洁被察知后升补为河东郡均输长，后又因廉洁被察知而升为河南郡太守丞。
English: Huangba did not cheat in his accounting, and was promoted to the post of the head of the per capita income of Hedong County after he was found to be dishonest. Later, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Henan County after he was found to be dishonest.

古文：霸为人明察内敏，又习文法，然温良有让，足知，善御众。
现代文：黄霸为人善于观察，且思维敏捷，又熟习法律条文，待人接物温良谦让，能体家人，善于团结众人。
English: Huang Ba is a person who is good at observation, and has a quick mind. He is also familiar with legal provisions, treats people with gentleness and humility, can be a family man, and is good at uniting everyone.

古文：为丞，处议当于法，合人心，太守甚任之，吏民爱敬焉。
现代文：做太守丞时，处事议政合乎法度，顺应人心，太守十分信任他，老百姓也敬爱他。
English: When he was the grand marshal, he handled affairs and deliberated on politics in accordance with the law and followed the will of the people. The grand marshal trusted him very much, and the people also loved him.

古文：自武帝末，用法深。
现代文：自武帝末年开始，使用法律开始严厉起来。
English: From the end of Emperor Wu's reign, the use of the law began to become stricter.

古文：昭帝立，幼，大将军霍光秉政，大臣争权，上官桀等与燕王谋作乱，光既诛之，遂遵武帝法度，以刑罚痛绳群下，由是俗吏上严酷以为能，而霸独用宽和为名。
现代文：昭帝即位时还很年幼，大将军霍光代为辅政，大臣之间争权夺利，上官桀等人还与燕王合谋作乱，霍光杀掉了他们，于是仍遵守武帝时代的法度，以严厉的刑罚约束广大臣民，由此一些粗俗的官吏便以严酷的刑法为其能事，而惟独黄霸因宽容温和而著名。
English: Emperor Zhao was still very young when he ascended to the throne. General Huo Guangdai was the ancillary government, and ministers competed for power and profit. Shangguan Zhai and others also conspired with Yan Wang to create turmoil. Huo Guangdai killed them, so he still obeyed the laws of Emperor Wu's era and restricted the people of Guangdian with severe punishments. As a result, some vulgar officials were able to use harsh criminal laws, but Huangba was famous for his tolerance and gentleness.

古文：会宣帝即位，在民间时知百姓苦吏急也，闻霸持法平，召以为廷尉正，数决疑狱，庭中称平。
现代文：会宣帝即位，他在民间时便深知百姓苦于官吏用刑的严峻，又听说黄霸持法公平，便召黄霸做了廷尉正，黄霸数次裁决疑难案件，庭中都一致认为判得公平。
English: He would proclaim the enthronement of the emperor. When he was a commoner, he was well aware that the people suffered from the severity of the punishment used by officials. He also heard that Huang Ba was fair in upholding the law, so he called Huang Ba to be a courtier. Huang Ba ruled on difficult cases several times, and the court unanimously agreed that the ruling was fair.

古文：守丞相长史，坐公卿大议廷中知长信少府夏侯胜非议诏书大不敬，霸阿从不举劾，皆下廷尉，系狱当死。
现代文：于是他又临时担任了丞相长史，在一次公卿的高级会议中，黄霸却因明知长信宫少府夏侯胜有非议皇帝诏书的大不敬言行而不举报，与夏侯胜一起被下交给了廷尉去审罪，结果以死罪关入监狱。
English: As a result, he temporarily assumed the post of chancellor and minister of history. During a high-level meeting of court nobles, Huang Ba did not report the disrespectful words and deeds of Xia Hossheng, the young governor of the Palace of Letters, because he knew that he had criticized the emperor's edict. Together with Xia Hossheng, he was handed over to a courtier to be tried, and as a result, he was sentenced to death.

古文：霸因从胜受《尚书》狱中，再逾冬，积三岁乃出，语在《胜传》。
现代文：黄霸由此而在狱中跟着夏侯胜学习了《尚书》。过了两个冬天到第三年才出狱，其详细事迹见于《夏侯胜传》。
English: As a result, Huang Ba studied "Shang Shu" with Xia Hou Sheng in prison. After two winters, he did not get out of prison until the third year, and his detailed story can be found in "Biography of Xia Hou Sheng."

古文：胜出，复为谏大夫，令左冯翊宋畸举霸贤良。
现代文：夏侯胜出狱后，又当上了谏大夫，便让左冯翊宋畸举荐黄霸为贤良。
English: After Xia Hou Sheng was released from prison, he became a gong doctor again, so he asked Zuo Feng Jun Song Ji to recommend Huang Ba as a virtuous person.

古文：胜又口荐霸于上，上擢霸为扬州刺史。
现代文：夏侯胜又亲口向皇帝推荐黄霸，皇上便提拔黄霸当了扬州刺史。
English: Xia Hou Sheng also personally recommended Huang Ba to the emperor, and the emperor promoted Huang Ba to be the Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：三岁，宣帝下诏曰： 制诏御史：其以贤良高第扬州刺史霸为颍川太守，秩比二千石居，官赐车盖，特高一丈，别驾主簿车，缇油屏泥于轼前，以章有德。 
现代文：又过了三年，宣帝颁下诏书说： 命令御史：任命以贤良高第身份担任扬州刺史的黄霸为颖川郡太守，俸禄每月二千石，上任时赐给车中高盖，特许可高一丈，其下属别驾和主簿乘坐的车，车轼前可挂挡泥的丹黄色帘子，以示仁德。 
English: After another three years, Emperor Xuan issued an edict saying, "Order to Emperor Shi: Appoint Huangba, who served as Yangzhou's magistrate, as the governor of Yingchuan County, with a salary of 2,000 koku per month. When he took office, he was given a high cover in his car, a special permit for a high-ranking official, a car for his subordinates to drive and a car for his master, and a yellow curtain that could be hung in front of the car to show his benevolence.

古文：时，上垂意于治，数下恩泽诏书，吏不奉宣。
现代文：当时皇上正专心于治理天下，多次下达韶书给民众，但有的官吏却不让百姓知道。
English: At that time, the emperor was concentrating on governing the world, repeatedly issuing imperial edicts to the people, but some officials did not let the people know.

古文：太守霸为选择良吏，分部宣布诏令，令民咸知上意，使邮亭乡官皆畜鸡豚，以赡鳏寡贫穷者。
现代文：太守黄霸却专门选择了优秀的下属吏员，分到各处去发布皇上韶令，让民众都能知道皇上的旨意。他还让邮亭乡官都养上鸡和猪，以赡养鳏寡贫穷的人。
English: However, Governor Huang Ba specially selected excellent subordinate officials and sent them to various places to issue the imperial edict, so that the people could know the emperor's will. He also asked the post office town officials to raise chickens and pigs to support the widows and the poor.

古文：然后为条教，置父老师师伍长，班行之于民间，劝以为善防奸之意，及务耕桑，节用殖财，种树畜养，去食谷马。
现代文：然后又制订了条令教则，发给各方父老、师帅和伍长等基层小吏，由其颁行于民间，劝说百姓严防奸盗，并安心于农耕蚕桑之业，节约使用货物资财，种树木、养牲畜，去掉浮华奢侈的浪费。
English: Then, they also formulated a set of rules and regulations, which were issued to grassroots petty officials such as fathers, teachers, and corporals of all parties, and issued by them to the people, persuading the people to strictly prevent theft, and to be at ease in the farming of silkworms, to save the use of goods and resources, to plant trees, to raise livestock, and to eliminate wasteful extravagance.

古文：米盐靡密，初若烦碎，然霸精力能推行之。
现代文：像数米粒盐粒一样细密的公事，最初显得烦杂碎乱，然而黄霸却全力以付地加以推行。
English: The business, which is as fine as a few grains of salt, initially seemed complicated and chaotic, but Huangba did his best to implement it.

古文：吏民见者，语次寻绎，问它阴伏，以相参考。
现代文：官吏民众凡可遇见的人，黄霸都要从其言行中了解有用的情况，询问事情的来龙去脉，以资参考。
English: For government officials and the public, Huangba should learn useful information from the words and deeds of everyone he meets, inquire about the ins and outs of things, and use them as a reference.

古文：尝欲有所司察，择长年廉吏遣行，属令周密。
现代文：曾经遇有密事调查，于是择派一位老成的廉吏前往访察，并令其绝不能泄露机密。
English: Once, when there was a secret investigation, he chose to send a veteran corrupt official to visit, and ordered him never to divulge secrets.

古文：吏出，不敢舍邮亭，食于道旁，乌攫其肉。
现代文：廉吏依言出发，途中易服微行，不敢住在驿亭，饿了便躲在路边悄悄地吃些食物，这时忽有一只乌鸦飞来抢走了他手裹拿的肉。
English: The corrupt official set off on his own accord. On the way, he did not dare to stay in the pavilion. When he was hungry, he hid on the side of the road to quietly eat some food. Suddenly, a crow flew to snatch the meat he had wrapped in his hands.

古文：民有欲诣府口言事者适见之，霸与语，道此。
现代文：百姓中正好有一个要到郡府陈报事情的人看到这一情况，便与黄霸讲了此事。
English: One of the villagers who was going to the county government to report the incident saw this situation and told Huangba about it.

古文：后日吏还谒霸，霸见迎劳之，曰： 甚苦！
现代文：后那廉吏回来拜见黄霸，黄霸迎上前慰劳他，说： 太辛苦了！
English: Later, the corrupt official came back to see Huang Ba. Huang Ba came forward to console him, saying: It was too hard!

古文：食于道旁乃为乌所盗肉。 
现代文：在路上吃饭还被乌鸦抢走了肉。 
English: On the way to dinner, a crow stole the meat.

古文：吏大惊，以霸具知其起居，所问豪氂不敢有所隐。
现代文：廉吏大惊，以为黄霸对他外出的起居情况都已知晓，所以对黄霸问及的调查结果便不敢有丝毫的隐瞒。
English: The corrupt officials were shocked, thinking that Huang Ba knew everything about his living conditions outside, so they did not dare to conceal the results of the investigation from Huang Ba.

古文：鳏寡孤独有死无以葬者，乡部书言，霸具为区处，某所大木可以为棺，某亭猪子可以祭，吏往皆如言。
现代文：郡中若有鳏寡孤独的人死了没钱安葬的，由乡吏上书报知，黄霸都能为他们分别妥善处理，告其某处有棵大树叮做棺椁之材，某亭有头小猪可以做宰祭之用，乡吏依令去取，果然都像黄霸所说的一样。
English: If there are widows, widowers and lonely people in the county who have died and have no money to be buried, the township officials will notify them in writing, and Huangba can properly deal with them separately, telling them that somewhere there is a big tree to be used as a coffin, and a small pig in a pavilion can be used as a sacrifice, and the township officials will go to fetch it according to the order, and they are all as Huangba said.

古文：其识事聪明如此，吏民不知所出，咸称神明。
现代文：黄霸了解情况清晰明了到这样的程度，官吏民众不知底细的人，都称他是神明。
English: Huangba's understanding of the situation was so clear and clear that officials and people who did not know the details called him a god.

古文：奸人去入它郡，盗贼日少。
现代文：奸盗也祇好转移到其他的郡中，所以本郡的盗贼就曰渐减少。
English: Thieves can just move to other counties, so the number of thieves in this county is gradually decreasing.

古文：霸力行教化而后诛罚，务在成就全安长吏。
现代文：黄霸尽力施行教化，然后才使用刑罚，注意成全维护下属官吏。
English: Huangba tried his best to carry out the indoctrination, and only then used the punishment. He paid attention to the integrity and protection of subordinate officials.

古文：许丞老，病聋，督邮白欲逐之，霸曰： 许丞廉吏，虽老，尚能拜起送迎，正颇重听，何伤？
现代文：许县县丞年纪老了，耳朵也聋了，督邮报告黄霸想要辞退他，黄霸说： 许县县丞是廉洁的官吏，虽然上了年纪，但还能应付官场拜起送迎之类的例行公事，即使很聋，又有何妨呢？
English: Xu Xianxianjo is old and deaf. Huang Ba, the postmaster general, wanted to dismiss him. Huang Ba said: Xu Xianxianjo is an honest official. Although he is old, he can still cope with routine duties such as greeting and seeing off officials. Even if he is deaf, what's the harm?

古文：且善助之，毋失贤者意。 
现代文：还是好好地帮助他，不要让贤德的人失望。 
English: Or help him well, and don't let the virtuous person be disappointed.

古文：或问其故，霸曰： 数易长吏，送故迎新之费及奸吏缘绝簿书盗财物，公私费耗甚多，皆当出于民，所易新吏又未必贤，或不如其故，徒相益为乱。
现代文：有人请教他其中的缘故，黄霸道： 一再更换长吏，送旧迎新的费用，以及奸猾官吏乘机销毁账册文书而盗窃财物，公家和私人的损失很大，所有的费用都得百姓供给，换上的新官又未必贤德，或者还不如他的前任，白白地反复加剧混乱。
English: Someone asked him about the reasons for this, Huang Badao said: Repeatedly changing officials, the cost of sending the old and welcoming the new, as well as treacherous officials taking the opportunity to destroy accounting documents and steal property, the loss of public and private people is great, all expenses have to be provided by the people, and the new official may not be virtuous, or may not be as good as his predecessor, and repeatedly aggravate the chaos in vain.

古文：凡治道，去其泰甚者耳。 
现代文：大凡治民的道理，主要是做得不要太过头罢了。 
English: The main principle of great governance is not to overdo it.

古文：霸以外宽内明得吏民心，户口岁增，治为天下第一。
现代文：黄霸以外宽内明的作风而赢得了属吏和民众的心，从而郡内的户口逐年增长，治理情况堪称天下第一。
English: In addition to Huangba, his open-minded style of work has won the hearts of subordinate officials and the public. As a result, the number of households in the county has increased year by year, and the governance situation is the best in the world.

古文：征守京兆尹，秩二千石。
现代文：皇上征召他试任京兆尹，俸禄二千石。
English: The emperor called him to try out for the post of Jing Zhaoyun, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：坐发民治驰道不先闻，又发骑士诣北军马不适士，劾乏军兴，连贬秩。
现代文：后因调遣民工修治驰道没有事先上报朝，又调遣骑士到北方造成军马无法配给的局面，黄霸被举劾影响了军队出动，于是他接连被贬官降职。
English: Later, because the dispatch of migrant workers to repair the Jizhi Road was not reported to the DPRK in advance, and the dispatch of knights to the north caused the situation that the army horses could not be distributed. Huangba's impeachment affected the army's dispatch, so he was demoted one after another.

古文：有诏归颍川太守官，以八百石居治如其前。前后八年，郡中愈治。
现代文：后来有诏书令他回颖川郡作太守，可俸禄却已被降至八百石居官。前后八年，郡中越加安顺。
English: Later, there was an imperial edict ordering him to return to Yingchuan County to serve as governor, but his salary had been reduced to 800 koku. Eight years later, Anshun was added to the county.

古文：是时，凤皇神爵数集郡国，颍川尤多。
现代文：遣时凤凰神乌多次飞集各郡国，而颖川郡更是特别多。
English: The phoenix god Wu repeatedly flew to gather the counties and states, and Yingchuan County is particularly abundant.

古文：天子以霸治行终长者，下诏称扬曰： 颍川太守霸，宣布诏令，百姓向化，孝子弟弟贞妇顺孙日以众多，田者让畔，道不拾遣，养视鳏寡，赡助贫穷，狱或八年亡重罪囚，吏民向于教化，兴于行谊，可谓贤人君子矣。
现代文：天子以为这是黄霸治理长久的吉兆，便下韶书赞扬他说： 颖川郡太守黄霸，积极向民众宣布皇上旨意，百姓都向往而归化了朝廷，守孝之子、尊长之弟、贞洁之妇以及乖顺之孙都日渐众多，在田地耕作的人互相谦让田界，在大道上行走的人不捡拾别人的遗失物品，供养探望鳏寡老人，赡养帮助贫苦穷人，监狱甚至八年没有重罪囚犯，官吏民众向往教化，熟衷交谊，真可说是贤人君子的风貌。
English: Tianzi thought that this was a good omen for Huangba's long-term governance, and wrote a letter of commendation to him, saying: Huangba, the governor of Yingchuan County, actively announced the emperor's will to the people. The people all yearned for and naturalized the imperial court. The sons of filial piety, the brothers of dignitaries, the chaste women, and the obedient grandchildren were increasingly numerous. The people working in the fields were humble to each other, the people walking on the road did not pick up other people's lost items, provided for and visited the widowed elderly, supported and helped the poor and needy. The prison did not have

古文：《书》不云乎？ 股肱良哉！ 
现代文：《书经》中不是这样说吗？ 股肱大臣品行优良啊！ 
English: Isn't that what it says in the "Shu Jing" (Book of Confucianism)? Minister Kunlun has a good moral character!

古文：其赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤，秩中二千石。 
现代文：赐封黄霸爵号关内侯，黄金百斤，俸禄中二千。 
English: He was given the title of Yellow Overlord, the title of Guan Nei Hou, one hundred jin of gold, and two thousand in salary.

古文：而颍川孝弟有行义民、三老、力田，皆以差赐爵及帛。
现代文：而颖川郡孝悌贤民以及乡宫中三老、力田等都分等级赐予爵号和帛匹。
English: On the other hand, the filial piety and virtuous people of Yingchuan County, as well as the three elders of the rural palace and the powerful peasants, were all given the rank of peerage and knighthood.

古文：后数月，征霸为太子太傅，迁御史大夫。
现代文：几个月后，朝廷征召黄霸为太子太傅，又调任御史大夫。
English: A few months later, the imperial court summoned Huang Ba to serve as the prince's daifu, and he was also transferred to the position of goshi daifu.

古文：五凤三年，代丙吉为丞相，封建成侯，食邑六百户。
现代文：五凤三年，黄霸取代丙吉任丞相，封建成侯，拥有六百户的封地。
English: In the third year of Wu Feng, Huang Ba replaced He Jie as chancellor, and he was given the title of vassal, owning 600 fiefs.

古文：霸材长于治民，及为丞相，总纲纪号令，风采不及丙、魏、于定国，功名损于治郡。
现代文：黄霸的才能主要是在地方治理人民，待做了丞相，需要全盘协调发布全国性的号令，其能力风度就不如丙吉、魏相和于定国等前任，其政绩名声比他治郡时也有所下降。
English: Huang Ba's talent was mainly in the local governance of the people. When he became the prime minister, he needed to fully coordinate and issue nationwide orders. His ability and demeanor were not as good as his predecessors such as Bo Ji, Wei Xiang and Yu Dingguo. His political achievements and reputation were also lower than when he governed the county.

古文：时，京兆尹张敞舍鹖雀飞集丞相府，霸以为神雀，议欲以闻。
现代文：时值京兆尹张敞家中的鵾雀飞到了丞相府，董灵以为是神雀，便商议着想上书称瑞。
English: At that time, Jingzha Yin Zhang Zhang's family's chaffinch flew to the prime minister's office, and Dong Ling thought it was a divine bird, so they discussed the idea of writing a letter to Rui.

古文：敞奏霸曰： 窃见丞相请与中二千石博士杂问郡国上计长吏、守丞为民兴利除害、成大化，条其对，有耕者让畔，男女异路，道不拾遗，及举孝子贞妇者为一辈，先上殿，举而不知其人数者次之，不为条教者在后叩头谢。
现代文：于是张敞奏了黄霸一本说： 臣下见到丞相和九卿、博士一起接见各郡国派来京师奏报考绩的长吏、守丞，让他们逐条报告为民兴利除弊、推行教育、感化的情况，凡是报告辖区内做到农夫在田间让田界，男女不混杂同行，遗失在路上的东西没有捡了据为已有，以及能列举出孝子、悌弟、贞妇姓名人数的，列为第一等，让他们先入厅屋上坐；有能举出郡中孝子、悌弟、贞妇的一些情况，但是说不出姓名人数的，列为第二等；没有制定条规制度的，在最后，这些郡国的长吏、守丞应向丞相叩头谢罪。
English: So Zhang Zhang played the role of Huangba and said: When the subjects saw the prime minister and the nine lords and doctors together, they received the chief officers and chief officers of the counties and states who were sent to Beijing to report on the performance appraisal report, and asked them to report one by one on the situation of eliminating the disadvantages, promoting education and influencing the people. All reports within the jurisdiction that the farmers in the fields were allowed to leave the fields, the men and women were not mixed, the things lost on the road were not picked up, and the names of the filial children, brothers and sisters, and the number of married women were listed as existing, and they were listed as the first class,

古文：丞相虽口不言，而心欲其为之也。
现代文：丞相嘴上虽然没说话，实际上心裹是希望他们这样做。
English: Although the prime minister did not say anything on his lips, he actually hoped that they would do so.

古文：长吏、守丞对时，臣敞舍有鹖雀飞止丞相府屋上，丞相以下见者数百人。
现代文：长吏、守丞众官正应对时，恰有臣下张敞家中鹃雀飞到丞相府屋上，丞相下面的官吏看到鵾雀的有数百人。
English: When the chief officials, the governor and the officials were dealing with the situation, it so happened that a courtier, Zhang Zhang, saw a flock of starlings fly to the roof of the prime minister's office. The officials below the prime minister saw hundreds of starlings.

古文：边吏多知鹖雀者，问之，皆阳不知。
现代文：官吏们大多认识鵾雀这种鸟，丞相询问他们，却都假装不知。
English: Most of the officials knew the bird, but when the prime minister asked them, they all pretended not to know.

古文：丞相图议上奏曰： 臣问上计长吏、守丞以兴化条，皇天报下神雀。 
现代文：丞相便商议上奏圣上说： 臣下黄霸召问前来报考绩的郡国长吏、守丞关于推行教化的情况时，上天显示祥瑞，降下了神雀。 
English: The prime minister then discussed the matter with the emperor and said: When the vassal Huang Ba summoned the county magistrate, Shou Zheng, who had come to report on his performance, to inquire about the implementation of education, the heavens showed auspiciousness and lowered the divine bird.

古文：后知从臣敞舍来，乃止。
现代文：事后他得知鹃雀是从臣下张敞家裹飞来，才没有上奏。
English: After the event, he learned that the chaffinch came from his vassal Zhang Zhangjiajie, so he didn't play it.

古文：郡国吏窃笑丞相仁厚有知略，微信奇怪也。
现代文：郡国官吏都暗暗耻笑丞相虽有仁厚足智的名望，却又自以为是而大惊小怪。
English: County and state officials are secretly ashamed to laugh at the minister, although he has a reputation for benevolence and wisdom, but he is self-righteous and makes a fuss.

古文：昔汲黯为淮阳守，辞去之官，谓大行李息曰： 御史大夫张汤怀诈阿意，以倾朝廷，公不早白，与俱受戮矣。 
现代文：昔日汲黯接任淮阳太守，辞别同僚离京赴任，他对大行李息说： 御史大夫张汤内怀奸诈，欺君瞒上，你若不早去告发，一旦事情败露，恐怕你也难免与他同遭杀身之祸。 
English: Once upon a time, Ku Ying took over as the governor of Huaiyang and said goodbye to his colleagues as he left Beijing for his new post. He said to his great-grandfather: Grand Historian Zhang Tang harbored treachery and deceived the prince. If you did not report it early, once the matter was revealed, I'm afraid you would inevitably be killed along with him.

古文：息畏汤，终不敢言。
现代文：李息害怕张汤，一直没敢告发。
English: Li Xi was afraid of Zhang Tang and never dared to approach the emperor.

古文：后汤诛败，上闻黯与息语，乃抵息罪而秩黯诸侯相，取其思竭忠也。
现代文：后来张汤事情败露被诛，皇上听说了汲黯对李息说的话，就问了李息的罪而升任汲黯为诸侯相，以表彰他的一片忠心。
English: Later, Zhang Tang's affair was exposed and he was arrested. The emperor heard what Qiu Ying said to Li Xi, he questioned Li Xi's guilt and promoted Qiu Ying to the position of vassal, in recognition of his loyalty.

古文：臣敞非敢毁丞相也，诚恐群臣莫白，而长吏、守丞畏丞相指，归舍法令，各为私教，务相增加，浇淳散朴，并行伪貌，有名亡实，倾摇解怠，甚者为妖。
现代文：臣张敞不敢诋毁丞相，惟恐众臣对此事不加上报，而长吏、守丞又害怕丞相的权势，致使法令失效，私心暗存，浮夸成风，淳朴失落，虚伪盛行，名实难符，公事懈怠，乱臣横行。
English: The vassal Zhang Chang did not dare to defame the prime minister, fearing that the vassals would not report the matter, while the officials and the governor were afraid of the power of the prime minister, resulting in the failure of the decree, selfishness, pomposity, simplicity, hypocrisy, laxity in public affairs, and chaotic vassals.

古文：假令京师先行让畔异路，道不拾遗，其实亡益廉贪贞淫之行，而以伪先天下，固未可也；即诸侯先行之，伪声轶于京师，非细事也。
现代文：假如下令京城地区先期推行 让界分路，路不拾遣 之风，其实正好适得其反，而为天下事先树立了虚伪的典型，所以决不可行；就是诸侯国先期推行，若虚伪之风超过京城，其后果也不堪设想。
English: If the following were to be implemented in the capital region ahead of time, it would be counterproductive, and it would set a hypocritical example for the world, so it would never be feasible; if the vassal states were to implement it ahead of time, if the wind of hypocrisy overtook the capital, the consequences would be unimaginable.

古文：汉家承敝通变，造起律令，所以劝善禁奸，条贯详备，不可复加。
现代文：我大汉朝除弊通变，制定法令，以便劝民从善，防盗禁奸，其条文详备，不可增改。
English: Our great Han Dynasty eliminated all evils and established laws and regulations in order to persuade the people to be good, prevent theft and forbid adultery. Its provisions are detailed and cannot be added to or changed.

古文：宜令贵臣明饬长吏、守丞，归告二千石、举三老、孝弟、力田、孝廉、廉吏务得其人，郡事皆以义法令捡式，毋得擅为条教；敢挟诈伪以奸名誉者，必先受戮，以正明好恶。 
现代文：应该令大臣明白地训示长吏、守丞，回去禀告郡守，推举三老、孝子、悌弟、力田、孝廉、廉吏一定要名符其实，郡中公务应依法而行，不可擅自制定法令；如有胆敢用伪诈手段骗取名誉的，一定先行正法，以正明善恶。 
English: The minister should be ordered to clearly instruct the chieftain and shoujo, go back and sue the county governor, and nominate the three elders, filial son, elder brother, power field, filial piety, and incorruptible officials must be true to the name, the county's official duties should be carried out in accordance with the law, and it is not allowed to formulate laws and regulations without authorization; if you dare to use fraudulent means to gain reputation, you must first correct the law, and be honest and clear about good and evil.

古文：天子嘉纳敞言，召上计吏，使侍中临饬如敞指意。
现代文：天子采纳了张敞的奏言，召集郡国来奏报考绩的长吏、守丞，令侍中敕告了张敞的奏言。
English: Tianzi adopted Zhang Zhan's report, and summoned the county magistrate, Shou Rong, to report the report, and ordered the chamberlain to report Zhang Zhan's report.

古文：霸甚惭。
现代文：黄霸因此十分惭愧。
English: As a result, Huangba is very ashamed.

古文：又乐陵侯史高以外属旧恩侍中贵重，霸荐高可太尉。
现代文：又一次，乐陵侯史高以外戚身份任侍中一职，名望很高，黄霸推荐史高可任太尉。
English: Once again, Leling Hou Shigao was appointed to the position of chamberlain as a relative, with a high reputation. Huang Ba recommended that Shigao be appointed to the rank of captain.

古文：天子使尚书召问霸： 太尉官罢久矣，丞相兼之，所以偃武兴文也。
现代文：天子令尚书召黄霸质问说： 太尉一官废除已久，其责由丞相兼管，这是为了息武而兴文。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shuxiu to summon Huang He for questioning, saying: "The position of captain has been abolished for a long time, and its responsibilities are also handled by the prime minister. This is to appease the military and promote literature.

古文：如国家不虞，边境有事，左右之臣皆将率也。
现代文：如果国家动乱，边境吃紧，左右大臣都可任领兵的将帅。
English: If the country is in turmoil and the borders are tight, ministers on both sides can be appointed as generals to lead the troops.

古文：夫宣明教化，通达幽隐，使狱无冤刑，邑无盗贼，君之职也。
现代文：而宣明教化，顺通隐情，使牢狱中再无冤案，地方上再无盗贼，是你丞相的职责。
English: And it is the duty of you, the prime minister, to enlighten and enlighten, to pass on secrets, so that there are no more unjust cases in prison, and no more thieves in the localities.

古文：将相之官，朕之任焉。
现代文：将相一级的官员，是由我来任命的。
English: I am the one who appoints officials at the ministerial level.

古文：侍中乐陵侯高帷幄近臣，朕之所自亲，君何越职而举之？ 
现代文：侍中乐陵侯史高是我的帷幄近臣，我对他的才能已有深知，何劳你越职举荐他呢？ 
English: Servant-in-chief Le Ling Hou Shigao is my closest vassal. I am well aware of his talent. Why do you take it upon yourself to recommend him?

古文：尚书令受丞相对，霸免冠谢罪，数日乃决。
现代文：尚书请丞相陈言，黄霸羞惭满面，连忙摘下帽子谢罪，数后才裁定黄霸免罪。
English: Shang Shu asked the Minister of Justice Chen Yan, Huang Ba ashamed face, quickly took off his hat to thank the crime, a few days later ruled that Huang Ba was exonerated.

古文：自是后不敢复有所请。
现代文：从此以后，黄霸再也不敢向君上进奏。
English: From then on, Huangba never dared to play for him again.

古文：然自汉兴，言治民吏，以霸为首。
现代文：然而自从汉朝兴起，讲到治理地方官吏民众的，还是以黄霸为第一。
English: However, since the rise of the Han Dynasty, when it comes to the governance of local officials and people, Huangba is still the first.

古文：为相五岁，甘露三年薨，谥曰定侯。
现代文：黄霸任丞相五年，甘露三年寿终，谧号定侯。
English: Huangba served as chancellor for five years, and when he died three years later, his posthumous name was Dinghou.

古文：霸死后，乐陵侯高竟为大司马。霸子思侯赏嗣，为关都尉。
现代文：黄霸死后，乐陵侯史高竟升为大司马，黄霸的儿子思侯黄赏继承了爵位，任关都尉。
English: After Huang Ba's death, Leling Hou Shigao was promoted to the rank of grand steward. Huang Ba's son, Sihou Huang Bao, inherited the title and was appointed to the post of Guan Duifeng.

古文：薨，子忠侯辅嗣，至卫尉九卿。
现代文：黄赏去世，其子忠侯黄辅继承了他，官至卫尉九卿。
English: Huang Yun passed away, and his son Zhong Hou (忠侯) Huang Fu (黃輔) succeeded him as the ninth Lord of the Imperial Guards.

古文：薨，子忠嗣侯，讫王莽乃绝。
现代文：黄辅去世，其儿子黄忠继承他为侯，到王莽时黄家才断绝了封爵。
English: When Huang Fu died, his son Huang Zhong succeeded him as marquess. It was not until Wang Mang that the Huang family cut off the knighthood.

古文：子孙为吏二千石者五六人。
现代文：子孙中做官做到郡守一级的有五、六人。
English: Among the descendants, there are five or six officials who have reached the level of county governor.

古文：始，霸少为阳夏游徼，与善相人者共载出，见一妇人，相者言： 此妇人当富贵，不然，相书不可用也。 
现代文：早年黄霸任阳夏游徼，与一看相人同车出游，路旁遇见一位少女，看相人看了一下说： 这女子以后一定有富贵之命，不然的话，相书就要作废。 
English: In the early years of Huang He's reign, he went on a trip to Yangxia, and went on a road trip with an acquaintance. On the side of the road, he met a girl. The acquaintance took a look and said, "This woman must have a rich life in the future, otherwise, the photo album will be scrapped."

古文：霸推问之，乃其乡里巫家女也。
现代文：黄霸过去探问女子姓氏，原来是乡间巫家之女。
English: In the past, Huang Ba inquired about the woman's surname, and it turned out that she was the daughter of a village sorcerer.

古文：霸即娶为妻，与之终身。
现代文：黄霸就娶了她做妻子，并与她白头到老。
English: Huang Ba took her as his wife and lived with her until old age.

古文：为丞相后徙杜陵。
现代文：在黄霸当了丞相后便迁徙到了杜陵。
English: After Huang Ba became the prime minister, he moved to Du Ling.

古文：朱邑字仲卿，庐江舒人也。
现代文：朱邑字仲卿，庐江郡舒县人。
English: Zhuyun Zi Zhongqing, from Shu County, Minjiang County.

古文：少时为舒桐乡啬夫，廉平不苛，以爱利为行，未尝笞辱人，存问耆老孤寡，遇之有恩，所部吏民爱敬焉。
现代文：他年轻时曾任舒县桐乡负责听讼收赋税的啬夫一职，办事清廉公正，不施苛政，以仁爱之心为民谋利，未曾笞打欺辱过乡人，关心爱护年迈老人和孤儿寡母，对他们多有恩惠，因此他所在地区的官吏民众都很敬重喜爱他。
English: When he was young, he served as a miser in charge of hearing lawsuits and collecting taxes in Tongxiang, Shu County. He was honest and fair, did not impose harsh policies, used benevolence to benefit the people, never beat or bullied the villagers, cared about the elderly and orphans and widows, and had many favors for them. Therefore, the officials and people in his area respected and loved him.

古文：迁补太守卒史，举贤良为大司农丞，迁北海太守，以治行第一入为大司农。
现代文：后来他调任太守卒吏，又因被推举为贤良而被任用为大司农丞，后又调任北海郡的太守，接着又因治理情况和品行出类拔萃而升任大司农。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of the governor of Beihai County, and then he was promoted to the post of the governor of Beihai County because of his outstanding governance and conduct.

古文：为人淳厚，笃于故旧，然性公正，不可交以私。
现代文：朱邑为人淳厚，珍重故旧之情，然而又秉性正派，公事上不徇私情。
English: Zhu Yu is a decent person. He cherishes the old-fashioned feelings. However, he is also a decent person. He does not indulge in personal feelings in business.

古文：天子器之，朝廷敬焉。
现代文：因此天子器重他，朝廷官员也敬重他。
English: As a result, he was held in high esteem by the emperor and court officials.

古文：是时，张敞为胶东相，与邑书曰： 明主游心太古，广延茂士，此诚忠臣竭思之时也。
现代文：那时张敞任胶束国相，给朱邑来信说： 当今皇上向往远古圣明之风，广泛招用善士，这真是忠臣们最最向往的大好时光。
English: At that time, Zhang Danzhong, the Minister of Micellar Beads, sent a letter to Zhu Yu, saying: Today's emperor yearns for the ancient sage's style and extensively recruits good men. This is truly a great time that loyal subjects yearn for the most.

古文：直敞远守剧郡，驭于绳墨，匈臆约结，固亡奇也。
现代文：然而我张敞此时却远守偏僻难治之郡，受到法规的拘束，心胸郁结，难有更大的抱负。
English: However, at this time, I Zhang Zhang was far away from the remote and difficult-to-cure county, constrained by laws and regulations, heartbroken, and it was difficult to have greater ambitions.

古文：虽有，亦安所施？
现代文：即使有，也哪有地方施展？
English: Even if there were, where would there be a place to display it?

古文：足下以清明之德，掌周稷之业，犹饥者甘糟糠，穰岁余梁肉。
现代文：而您以清廉贤明的品德，主持农业，造就好像腹饥的人以糟糠为美味，而丰收的年景裹却要遗弃许多精美的食粮。
English: You, on the other hand, presided over agriculture with a virtuous and wise character, and made it seem as if starving people were enjoying the dross, while many fine foods had to be abandoned when the harvest was in full swing.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：有亡之势异也。
现代文：无非是因为有和没有之间的情况的差异造成的。
English: It's simply because of the difference in circumstances between having and not having.

古文：昔陈平虽贤，须魏倩而后进；韩信虽奇，赖萧公而后信。
现代文：从前陈平虽有贤能，也须有魏倩的帮助才得以进步；韩信虽是奇才，也要靠萧何的举荐才得到信任。
English: In the past, although Chen Ping was capable, he needed the help of Wei Wei to make progress; although Han Xin was a prodigy, he had to rely on Xiao He's recommendation to gain trust.

古文：故事各达其时之英俊，若必伊尹、吕望而后荐之，则此人不因足下而进矣。 
现代文：所以所有生逢其时的英杰俊秀，如果一定要像古代的伊尹、吕望那样出名而后才推荐，那么人才就不会因为您而得到任用了。 
English: Therefore, if all the outstanding people who were born at that time must be famous and then recommended like the ancient Yi Yin and Lü Wang, then the talent will not be appointed because of you.

古文：邑感敞言，贡荐贤士大夫，多得其助者。
现代文：朱邑对张敞所言极为感慨，便极力举荐人才，并给予多方的帮助。
English: Zhu Yu was extremely moved by Zhang Zhang's words, and he tried his best to recommend talents and provide various kinds of help.

古文：身为列卿，居处俭节，禄赐以共九族乡党，家亡余财。
现代文：朱邑身为列卿，家中却十分节俭，所得俸禄和赏赐都与家乡父老共享，自家却没有多余的钱财。
English: Zhu Yu was a peer, but his family was very frugal. They shared their salary and rewards with their parents back home, but they did not have any extra money.

古文：神爵元年卒。
现代文：朱邑于神爵元年过世。
English: Zhu Yu passed away in the first year of his reign.

古文：天子闵惜，下诏称扬曰： 大司农邑，廉洁守节，退食自公，亡强外之交，束脩之馈，可谓淑人君子，遭离凶灾，朕甚闵之。
现代文：皇上怜惜他，便下韶称赞说： 大司农朱邑，廉洁守节，一片公心，不胡乱结交，收取贿赂，可称得上是一位正入君子。这番身遭不幸，我十分怜念。
English: The emperor took pity on him and praised him, saying, "Daishi Nongzhuyi, who is incorruptible, observes the festival, is a public-spirited person, does not make friends indiscriminately, and does not accept bribes, can be said to be a true gentleman. I am very sorry for this misfortune.

古文：其赐邑子黄金百斤，以奉其祭祀。 
现代文：特赐给朱邑之子黄金一百斤，用以祭祀之需。 
English: He specially gave 100 jin of gold to Zhu Yi's son to be used for the ritual.

古文：初，邑病且死，属其子曰： 我故为桐乡吏，其民爱我，必葬我桐乡。
现代文：当初朱邑病危之时，曾嘱咐儿子说： 我原是桐乡的小官，当地的人民爱护我，死后我也一定要埋葬在桐乡。
English: At the beginning, when Zhuyi was critically ill, he told his son: I was a minor official in Tongxiang, the local people loved me, and I must be buried in Tongxiang after death.

古文：后世子孙奉尝我，不如桐乡民。 
现代文：后代子孙祭祀我，不如桐乡的父老乡亲。 
English: Future generations and their descendants will not worship me as much as the parents and fellow villagers of Tongxiang.

古文：及死，其子葬之桐乡西郭外，民果共为邑起冢立祠，岁时祠祭，至今不绝。
现代文：待他死后，他的儿子便把他埋葬在桐乡西城的外面，人民果然为朱邑起坟墓立祠堂，每年按时祭祀，到今天也从未断绝。
English: After his death, his son buried him outside the west town of Tongxiang, and the people indeed built a shrine for Zhu's grave. The annual ritual has never been interrupted to this day.

古文：龚遂字少卿，山阳南平阳人也。
现代文：龚遂，字少卿，是山阳郡南平阳县人。
English: Yan Sui, nicknamed Shaoqing, was from Nanpingyang County, Shanyang County.

古文：以明经为官，至昌邑郎中令，事王贺。
现代文：因通晓经术出去做官，做到昌邑国郎中令，奉事昌邑王刘贺。
English: Because of his knowledge of the sutras, he went to work as an official, and became the second-in-command of the provincial governor of Chang'e, serving Chang'e King Liu He.

古文：贺动作多不正，遂为人忠厚，刚毅有大节，内谏争于王，外责傅相，引经义，陈祸福，至于涕泣，蹇蹇亡已。
现代文：刘贺的行为很不正经，龚遂为人忠厚，刚强果断，在大节上从不含糊，对内向国王直言劝谏，对外督责太傅、国相，总是引经据典，陈述祸福得失，直到流泪哭泣，忠心无比。
English: Liu He's behavior was very unorthodox. He was a loyal, strong and decisive person. He never equivocated on major issues. He spoke frankly to the king and advised him, and supervised the emperor and the minister of state to the outside world. He always quoted scriptures and stated the benefits and drawbacks until he was in tears. His loyalty was incomparable.

古文：面刺王过，王至掩耳起走，曰： 郎中令善愧人。 
现代文：他从不阿谀奉承，常常当面指出刘贺的不是，使他听不下去，掩着耳朵起身走掉说： 郎中令真会使人羞愧。 
English: He never flattered. He often pointed out Liu He's faults to his face, which made him unable to continue listening. He covered his ears, got up and walked away, saying, "A henchman can really make people feel ashamed."

古文：及国中皆畏惮焉。
现代文：刘贺和国中大臣没有一个不敬畏他的。
English: Liu He and the Minister of the Middle Kingdom did not have anyone who did not revere him.

古文：王尝久与驺奴宰人游戏饮食，赏赐亡度。遂入见王，涕泣膝行，左右侍御皆出涕。王曰： 郎中令何为哭？ 
现代文：刘贺曾经与奴仆和膳食人员等吃喝玩乐，给他们的赏赐没完没了，龚遂进宫劝谏，双膝跪地而行，泪流满面，低声哭泣，刘贺周围侍候的人都感动得直落泪。刘贺问道： 郎中令为什么哭？ 
English: Liu He used to eat, drink, and have fun with the servants and waiters. He gave them endless rewards. He finally entered the palace to persuade them. He walked on his knees, with tears streaming down his face, and wept in a low voice. The waiters around Liu He were moved to tears. Liu He asked: Why is the middle brother crying?

古文：遂曰： 臣痛社稷危也！
现代文：龚遂回答说： 我伤心国家危险啊！
English: He then replied: I am sad, the country is in danger!

古文：愿赐清闲竭愚。 
现代文：希望您抽出一点空闲时间，让我把自己愚昧的意见说完。 
English: I hope you will spare some of your free time to let me finish my stupid opinion.

古文：王辟左右，遂曰： 大王知胶西王所以为无道亡乎？ 王曰： 不知也。 
现代文：刘贺就叫周围的人避开，龚遂问道： 大王知道胶西王不干好事因而灭亡的事情吗？ 刘贺说： 不知道。 
English: Liu He told the people around him to move away, and then asked, "Does the great king know that King Jiaoxi died because he did not do good deeds?" Liu He said, "I don't know."

古文：曰： 臣闻胶西王有谀臣侯得，王所为拟于桀、纣也，得以为尧、舜也。
现代文：龚遂便说： 我听说胶西王有一个善于谄媚的臣子叫侯得，胶西王的所作所为明明和夏桀、商纣一样，侯得却说与尧、舜相同。
English: The donkey then said, "I have heard that King Gyasi had a courtier named Hod, who was good at flattery. It is clear that King Gyasi's actions were the same as those of Hatshepsut and Shangchen, but Hod said that they were the same as those of the donkeys and mules.

古文：王说其谄谀，尝与寝处，唯得所言，以至于是。
现代文：胶西王喜欢他善于奉承，经常和他同起居，专门听信他的妖言邪说，以致弄到身死国亡。
English: King Gyosei liked him because he was good at flattery. He often lived with him and listened to his evil sayings, which led to his death and the death of the country.

古文：今大王亲近群小，渐渍邪恶所习，存亡之机，不可不慎也。
现代文：如今大王亲近那批小人，渐渐地就会沾染上他们的恶习，这是关系到国家存亡的问题，不可不慎重啊！
English: Now that the great king is close to that group of villains, he will gradually become infected with their vices. This is a matter of the country's survival. We must be careful!

古文：臣请选郎通经术有行义者与王起居，坐则通《诗》、《书》，立则习礼容，宜有益。 
现代文：请允许我在郎宫中挑选一些精通儒术、品德高尚的人同大王一起生活，坐时就一道读《诗》、《书》，立时就共同演习礼仪。这样，或许对大王有些帮助。 
English: Please allow me to select some people in the palace who are proficient in Confucianism and have high moral character to live with the great king, read "Poetry" and "Books" together when sitting, and immediately practice etiquette together. In this way, it may be of some help to the great king.

古文：王许之。
现代文：刘贺同意了这一建议。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：遂乃选郎中张安等十人侍王。
现代文：于是龚遂挑选了郎中张安等十人侍候他。
English: As a result, he selected ten people, including his son-in-law Zhang An, to wait on him.

古文：居数日，王皆逐去安等。
现代文：可是，过了没几天，刘贺就把他们统统赶走了。
English: However, a few days later, Liu He drove them all away.

古文：久之，宫中数有妖怪，王以问遂，遂以为有大忧，宫室将空，语在《昌邑王传》。
现代文：又过了很久，宫中多次发生怪异现象，刘贺就问龚遂这是为什么，龚遂认为会有大的不幸事件发生，是宫室将要空虚的征兆，此事在《昌邑王传》中有叙述。
English: After a long time, strange phenomena occurred many times in the palace. Liu He asked Gong Sui why this was, and Gong Sui thought that there would be a great misfortune, a sign that the palace would be empty. This matter is described in "Changyi Wang Chuan."

古文：会昭帝崩，亡子，昌邑王贺嗣立，官属皆征入。
现代文：恰逢昭帝去世，没有儿子，由昌邑王刘贺继承帝位，他手下的官员也都征调进京。
English: When Emperor Zhao died without a son, Liu He, the King of Changyi, succeeded to the throne. His officials were also transferred to Beijing.

古文：王相安乐迁长乐卫尉，遂见安乐，流涕谓曰： 王立为天子，日益骄溢，谏之不复听，今哀痛未尽，日与近臣饮食作乐，斗虎豹，召皮轩，车九流，驱驰东西，所为悖道。
现代文：相国安乐调任长乐宫卫尉，龚遂去见他，流着眼泪对他说： 大王立为天子以来，一天比一天骄傲自满，不再听别人的劝谏，如今还在服丧守孝，就天天同亲信臣僚饮酒作乐，不是斗虎豹，就是聚集皮车，车上插着九条飘带的大旗，到处乱跑，所作所为违背正道。
English: Since the Great King was enthroned as the Son of Heaven, he became more and more proud and complacent day by day. He no longer listened to the advice of others. Today, he is still a filial son. Every day, he drinks and plays with his trusted ministers. They either fight tigers and leopards or gather leather carts with large flags with nine streamers on them. They run around everywhere, and their actions are against the right path.

古文：古制宽，大臣有隐退，今去不得，阳狂恐知，身死为世戮，奈何？
现代文：古代法制宽厚，大臣见国君无道可以隐退，如今却不能辞职，想假装疯癫，辞官避祸，又怕被别人知道，一朝身死，为世人耻笑，这该怎么办呢？
English: The ancient legal system was generous. A minister could retire when he saw that the sovereign had no way out, but now he can't resign. He wants to pretend to be insane, the dictionary avoids disaster, and is afraid of being known by others. He will die one day and become a laughing stock of the world. What should he do?

古文：君，陛下故相，宜极谏争。 
现代文：您过去是皇上的国相，应当直言规劝啊！ 
English: You were the emperor's minister of state in the past, you should speak out and give advice!

古文：王即位二十七日，卒以淫乱废。
现代文：刘贺即位十七天，终因荒淫昏乱，为大臣们所废黜。
English: Seventeen days after Liu He ascended the throne, he was finally dethroned by his ministers due to senselessness.

古文：昌邑群臣坐陷王于恶不道，皆诛，死者二百余人，唯遂与中尉王阳以数谏争得减死，髡为城旦。
现代文：从昌邑来的群臣犯了纵容国王陷于邪恶不道的罪行，统统处死，共达两百多人，衹有龚遂和中尉王阳由于曾多次劝谏刘贺，尽到了一定的职责，减去死罪，处以髡刑，罚服四年筑城苦役。
English: A group of courtiers from Chang'e committed the crime of allowing the king to fall into evil and immorality, and they were all executed, a total of more than two hundred people. Zou Yuxu and Lieutenant Wang Yang, who had repeatedly advised Liu He, fulfilled a certain duty, subtracted the death penalty, sentenced to beheading, and sentenced to four years of hard labor to build the city.

古文：宣帝即位，不久，渤海左右郡岁饥，盗贼并起，二千石不能禽制。
现代文：刘贺被废黜后，宣帝即位。过了几年，渤海附近郡县闹灾荒，饥民纷纷起来造反，太守制服不了他们。
English: After Liu He was deposed, Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne. A few years later, the counties and counties near the Bohai Sea were plagued by famine, and the starving people rebelled one after another. Tai Shou could not subdue them.

古文：上选能治者，丞相、御史举遂可用，上以为渤海太守。
现代文：宣帝想要选一位能够治理渤海的人，丞相和御史大夫推荐龚遂，认为可用，宣帝就任命他做渤海太守。
English: Emperor Xuanzong wanted to choose a person who could govern the Bohai Sea. Emperor Xuanzong appointed him as the governor of the Bohai Sea after the prime minister and the chief historian recommended Xuanzong.

古文：时，遂年七十余，召见，形貌短小，宣帝望见，不副所闻，心内轻焉，谓遂曰： 渤海废乱，朕甚忧之。
现代文：那时龚遂已经七十多岁了，宣帝召见时，望见他形貌矮小，与自己听到的不相符合，心裹有点看不起他，就问他说： 渤海郡法纪废弛，饥民作乱，我非常担忧。
English: At that time, Yan Sui was already more than seventy years old. When Emperor Xuan summoned him, he saw his short stature, which did not match what he heard, and his heart despised him a little. He asked him: "Buhai County's legal discipline is slack, and the hungry people are making trouble. I am very worried."

古文：君欲何以息其盗贼，以称朕意？ 
现代文：您准备用什么办法来平息郡中盗贼，好让我放心？ 
English: What are you going to do to quell the thieves in the county so that I can rest easy?

古文：遂对曰： 海濒遐远，不沾圣化，其民困于饥寒而吏不恤，故使陛下赤子盗弄陛下之兵于潢池中耳。
现代文：龚遂回答说： 无非是因为渤海远在海边，没有受过圣朝的教化，那儿的百姓饥寒交迫，而地方官吏又不加体恤，所以才逼得皇上的子民盗了皇上的兵器在水塘中戏耍罢了，并不是有意存心叛乱啊！
English: Zou then replied, "It is because the Bohai Sea is far away from the sea, and has not been educated by the Holy Dynasty, the people there are hungry and cold, and the local officials are not considerate, so they forced the emperor's people to steal the emperor's weapons and play in the pond. It is not intentional rebellion!

古文：今欲使臣胜之邪，将安之也？ 
现代文：如今不知是要我去镇压他们呢，还是去安抚他们呢？ 
English: Now I don't know whether I should suppress them or appease them.

古文：上闻遂对，甚说，答曰： 选用贤良，固欲安之也。 
现代文：宣帝听了龚遂的对答，非常高兴，回答道： 选用贤良，本来就是为了安抚百姓啊！ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very pleased to hear the answer from Zi Sui and replied, "The selection of a virtuous person was originally intended to appease the people!

古文：遂曰： 臣闻治乱民犹治乱绳，不可急也；唯缓之，然后可治。
现代文：龚遂说： 我听说治乱民就像理乱绳一样，是急不来的啊。衹有不要着急，然后才能治理。
English: Zou Sui said, "I've heard that governing a chaotic population is like straightening a chaotic rope. It can't be done in a hurry. You don't have to rush, and then you can govern.

古文：臣愿丞相、御史且无拘臣以文法，得一切便宜从事。 
现代文：我请求丞相和御史大夫暂且不要用一般法令条文约束我，让我根据实际情况自行处置。 
English: I request the Prime Minister and the Minister of History not to use the provisions of the general law to restrict me for the time being, and to let me dispose of the matter myself according to the actual situation.

古文：上许焉，加赐黄金，赠遣乘传。
现代文：宣帝同意了，额外赏赐了黄金，派他赴任。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed, gave him extra gold, and sent him to the post.

古文：至渤海界，郡闻新太守至，发兵以迎，遂皆遣还，移书敕属县悉罢逐捕盗贼吏。
现代文：龚遂乘坐驿站的专车到达渤海郡界，郡中听说新太守到了，派出军队前往迎接，龚遂叫军人统统回去，随即发出公文指示所属各县把所有追捕盗贼的官吏一律撤回。
English: He then took a special train from the railway station to arrive at the border of Bohai County. When the county heard that the new Empress Dowager had arrived, they sent troops to meet her. He then ordered all the soldiers to go back, and immediately issued a document instructing all the counties to withdraw all the officials who were chasing the thieves.

古文：诸持锄钩田器者皆为良民，吏毋得问，持兵者乃为盗贼。
现代文：凡是拿锄头镰刀等农具的全部算良民，官吏不得追究；衹有拿兵器的才算盗贼。
English: All those who carry agricultural tools such as hoes and sickles are considered to be good citizens, and officials are not allowed to investigate them; only those who carry weapons are considered to be thieves.

古文：遂单车独行至府，郡中翕然，盗贼亦皆罢。
现代文：然后不带随从，单独一人乘车到府，郡中上下一致拥护他，成群结队的饥民也都纷纷解散。
English: Then, without an entourage, he drove to the prefectural capital alone. The county unanimously supported him, and the hordes of starving people dispersed.

古文：渤海又多劫略相随，闻遂教令，即时解散，弃其兵弩而持钩锄。
现代文：渤海还有不少结伙打劫和拦路抢夺的人，听了龚遂的教令，也都即时解散，扔掉兵器，改拿镰锄。
English: In Bohai, there are still many gangs of robbers and roadblock robbers. After listening to the teachings of Shuxui, they also immediately disbanded, threw away their weapons, and changed their weapons.

古文：盗贼于是悉平，民安土乐业。
现代文：盗贼于是全部平息，百姓得到安居乐业。
English: As a result, the thieves were all subdued, and the people were able to live and work in peace.

古文：遂乃开仓廪假贫民，选用良吏，尉安牧养焉。
现代文：龚遂这才开仓救济贫民，挑选清廉的官吏安抚百姓，让他们各安生业。
English: It was only then that they opened warehouses to relieve the poor, and elected clean officials to pacify the people and let them live and work in peace.

古文：遂见齐俗奢侈，好末技，不田作，乃躬率以俭约，劝民务农桑，令口种一树榆，百本薤、五十本葱、一畦韭，家二母彘、五鸡。
现代文：龚遂眼看渤海地方风俗奢侈，喜欢工商业，轻视农耕，于是亲自带头厉行节俭，劝导百姓务农种桑，叫每人种一株榆树，百棵薤，五十棵葱，一畦韭菜，每家养二只母猪，五只鶸。
English: He saw that the local customs in Bohai were extravagant, liked industry and commerce, and despised farming, so he personally took the lead in practicing frugality, persuading the people to engage in farming and planting mulberry trees, asking each person to plant one eucalyptus tree, one hundred alder trees, fifty onions, and one leek, and each family to raise two sows and five calves.

古文：民有带持刀剑者，使卖剑买牛，卖刀买犊，曰： 何为带牛佩犊！ 
现代文：如果发现百姓有带刀佩剑的，就要他们卖剑买牛，卖刀买犊，说： 为什么把牛和犊佩在身上？ 
English: If any of the people are found to have swords, let them sell their swords for oxen, and their knives for plowshares, and say, "Why have you put on oxen and mules?

古文：春夏不得不趋田亩，秋冬课收敛，益蓄果实菱芡。
现代文：春夏两季劝百姓到田野耕作，到了秋冬就督促他们收割，还让家家户户多储果实、菱角、芡实之类。
English: In the spring and summer, the people were advised to go to the fields to cultivate, and in the autumn and winter, they were urged to harvest, and they were also asked to store more fruits, hawthorn, and compost.

古文：劳来循行，郡中皆有蓄积，吏民皆富实。狱讼止息。
现代文：由于龚遂的巡视劝勉，郡中都有积蓄，官吏和百姓都殷实富足，诉讼案件也没有了。
English: As a result of Zou Sui's inspection and exhortation, there are savings in the county, officials and people are rich and prosperous, and there are no litigation cases.

古文：数年，上遣使者征遂，议曹王生愿从。
现代文：过了几年，宣帝派使者召回龚遂，议曹王生请求同去。
English: A few years later, Emperor Xuanzong sent an envoy to recall Shuxiu and persuade Cao Wangsheng to go with him.

古文：功曹以为王生素耆酒，亡节度，不可使。
现代文：功曹认为王生一向喝酒成癖，没有节制，不宜让他跟去。
English: Gong Cao thought that Wang Sheng had always been addicted to drinking and had no self-control, and it was not appropriate for him to go with him.

古文：遂不忍逆，从至京师。
现代文：可是龚遂不忍心拒绝，就让他随从到京。
English: However, Shun couldn't bear to refuse, so he let him follow him to Beijing.

古文：王生日饮酒，不视太守。
现代文：王生到了京城，衹管天天喝酒，从来不去看龚遂。
English: When Wang Sheng arrived in Beijing, he drank alcohol every day and never went to see the opera.

古文：会遂引入宫，王生醉，从后呼，曰： 明府且止，愿有所白。 
现代文：一天，龚遂被召入宫，正逢王生喝得醉醺醺的，他跟在后面大声叫道： 明府暂且停一下，我有几句话要向您说。 
English: One day, he was summoned to the palace, just as Wang Sheng was getting drunk. He followed behind and shouted loudly, "Minfu, stop for a moment, I have a few words to say to you."

古文：遂还问其故，王生曰： 天子即问君何以治渤海，君不可有所陈对，宜曰 皆圣主之德，非小臣之力也 。 遂受其言。
现代文：龚遂回头问他喊什么，他说： 天子假如问您是怎样治理渤海的，您切不可多说什么，衹宜对答说： 全凭圣上的威德，不是我有什么能耐啊！ ，龚遂接受了他的意见。
English: Then he turned around and asked him what he was shouting. He said, "Son of heaven, if I were to ask you how you governed the Bohai Sea, you must not say much. Changi replied, "I did it by the power of God, not by any ability of mine!" and then he accepted his opinion.

古文：既至前，上果问以治状，遂对如王生言。
现代文：龚遂到了宣帝跟前，皇上果然向他问起治理渤海的情形，他就按照王生的话作了回答。
English: When he finally arrived in front of Emperor Xuan, the emperor asked him about the administration of the Bohai Sea, and he answered according to Wang Sheng's words.

古文：天子说其有让，笑曰： 君安得长者之言而称之？ 
现代文：宣帝高兴他谦让有礼，笑着说： 您讲的这种忠厚长者的话，是从哪儿学来的？ 
English: Emperor Xuan was pleased that he was so courteous and polite, and said with a smile: Where did you learn the words of such a loyal elder?

古文：遂因前曰： 臣非知此，乃臣议曹教戒臣也。 
现代文：龚遂乘机上前一步说： 我并不知道应该这么说，是我的议曹王生告诫我的。 
English: Yan Sui stepped forward on the plane and said, "I didn't know I should say that, it was my advisor Cao Wang Sheng who told me to say that."

古文：上以遂年老不任公卿，拜为水衡都尉，议曹王生为水衡丞，以褒显遂云。
现代文：宣帝因为龚遂年事已高，不能担当公卿重任，就拜他做水衡都尉，议曹王生任水衡丞，用以表示对龚遂的褒奖和尊重。
English: Because Emperor Xuan was too old to take on the heavy responsibilities of a courtier, he made him the captain of the water balance, and appointed Cao Wangsheng as the vice-commander of the water balance, to show his praise and respect for Xuan.

古文：水衡典上林禁苑，共张宫馆，为宗庙取牲，官职亲近，上甚重之。
现代文：水衡都尉主管上林苑，负责宫庭馆阁的陈设，为宗庙祭祀提供牺牲，是一种亲近天子的官职。
English: Captain Mizuhira was in charge of the Shanglin Garden, responsible for the furnishings of the palace garden pavilion, and provided sacrifices for the ancestral temple rituals. It was an official position close to the Son of Heaven.

古文：以官寿卒。
现代文：龚遂很受宣帝器重，在任上寿终。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very fond of him, and he died in office.

古文：召信臣字翁卿，九江寿春人也。
现代文：召信臣，字翁卿，九江郡寿春县人。
English: Zhao Xincheng, also known as Wengqing, was from Shuchun County, Jiujiang County.

古文：以明经甲科为郎，出补穀阳长。
现代文：以明经甲科身份任郎官，出京补做谷阳县长。
English: He was appointed as a vassal of Ming Jing Jia Ke and went to Beijing to become the governor of Guiyang County.

古文：举高第，迁上蔡长。
现代文：在考绩中列为头等，调任上蔡县长。
English: He was ranked first in the performance appraisal and was transferred to the post of Cai County Governor.

古文：其治视民如子，所居见称述，超为零陵太守，病归。
现代文：召信臣爱民如子，为官期间甚受称赞。后来他便越级升为零陵郡太守，又因病而归。
English: During his term of office, he was highly praised for calling loyal subjects and loving the people like a son. Later, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Joling County, but he had to return home due to illness.

古文：复征为谏大夫，迁南阳太守，其治如上蔡。
现代文：病愈后他又被征为谏大夫，后调任南阳郡太守，其治理情况也如在上蔡时一样好。
English: After he recovered from his illness, he was recruited as a doctor of Qi, and then transferred to the post of Nanyang County Governor, and his governance was as good as when he was in Cai.

古文：信臣为人勤力有方略，好为民兴利，务在富之。
现代文：召信臣为人勤勉有计谋，喜欢为人民兴办福利，致力于使他们富裕起来。
English: Zhao Xincheng was a diligent and resourceful person, who liked to establish welfare for the people and was committed to making them rich.

古文：躬劝耕农，出入阡陌，止舍离乡亭，稀有安居时。
现代文：亲自努力于农耕，出入于田间地头，在乡间公舍住宿，很少能有安闲的时候。
English: I personally work hard at farming, go in and out of the fields, and stay in public housing in the countryside. I rarely have time to relax.

古文：行视郡中水泉，开通沟渎，起水门提阏凡数十处，以广溉灌，岁岁增加，多至三万顷。
现代文：他在郡中巡视水泉，主持开通沟渎，竖起水门提闸数十处，使受灌溉的农田有所增加，最多时达到了三万顷。
English: He inspected water springs in the county, presided over the opening of ditches, and erected water gates and sluices in dozens of places, increasing the irrigated farmland to a maximum of 30,000 hectares.

古文：民得其利，蓄积有余。
现代文：人民得到水利灌溉的益处，收获的粮食贮蓄有余。
English: The people have benefited from water conservancy and irrigation, and the harvested grain reserves are more than enough.

古文：信臣为民作均水约束，刻石立于田畔，以防分争。
现代文：召信臣还为百姓制定了用水的规定，并把这些规定刻在石碑上，立在田地边界处，以防止争抢。
English: Zhao Xincheng also established water regulations for the people, and these regulations were engraved on stone tablets and placed at the boundaries of fields to prevent fighting.

古文：禁止嫁娶送终奢靡，务出于俭约。
现代文：此外他还禁止婚丧嫁娶时奢侈浪费，致力于推行勤俭节约的风尚。
English: In addition, he also prohibited extravagance and waste in marriage and devoted himself to promoting the fashion of thrift and economy.

古文：府县吏家子弟好游敖，不以田作为事，辄斥罢之，甚者案其不法，以视好恶。
现代文：对府县官吏家的子弟任意漫游，而府县官吏不以耕作大事作为本职业务的，则通通斥责罢官，严重者还要绳之以法，以察善恶。
English: If the children of prefectural and county officials roam at will, and the prefectural and county officials do not take farming as their main business, they will all be reprimanded and dismissed, and those who are serious will be brought to justice to investigate good and evil.

古文：其化大行，郡中莫不耕稼力田，百姓归之，户口增倍，盗贼狱讼衰止。
现代文：通过以上种种措施，教化在郡中得以广泛推行，郡中没有不努力从事农业的，人民拥护郡县官吏，郡中的户也成倍增加，盗贼和打官司的事减少到了很小的程度。
English: Through the above-mentioned measures, enlightenment has been widely implemented in the county, there is no one in the county who does not work hard in agriculture, the people support the county officials, the households in the county have also multiplied, and the thieves and lawsuits have been reduced to a very small extent.

古文：吏民亲爱信臣，号之曰召父。
现代文：官吏民众都爱戴召信臣，称他为召父。
English: Government officials and the public all love Zhao Xincheng, calling him the father of Zhao.

古文：荆州刺史奏信臣为百姓兴利，郡以殷富，赐黄金四十斤。
现代文：荆州刺史上奏称赞召信臣能为百姓谋取福利，所辖郡治得以富庶，赐给黄金四十斤。
English: In the history of Jingzhou, it was praised for summoning trusted vassals to seek welfare for the people, and the county government under its jurisdiction was prosperous, and it was given forty catties of gold.

古文：迁河南太守，治行常为第一，复数增秩赐金。
现代文：后召信臣调任河南太守，治理情况常居天下第一，因此又多次被增加俸禄并赐给黄金。
English: Afterward, he summoned his trusted vassals and transferred them to the position of the governor of Henan Province. The governance of the province was always the best in the world. Therefore, his salary was increased many times and he was given gold.

古文：竟宁中，征为少府，列于九卿，奏请上林诸离远宫馆稀幸御者，勿复缮治共张，又奏省乐府黄门倡优诸戏，及宫馆兵弩什器减过泰半。
现代文：竟宁年间，召信臣被征为少府，列在九卿之中，他奏请皇上对上林一带的一些远处宫馆中皇上极少去的，不要再加以修缮治理，又奏请减省乐府黄门、倡优等娱乐活动，并将宫馆中的兵弩器具减少大半。
English: During the reign of Emperor Genning, Zhao Xincheng was enlisted as a minor prefect and was listed as one of the nine nobles. He requested the emperor not to renovate and manage some distant palaces in the Shanglin area that the emperor rarely visited. He also requested to reduce entertainment activities such as the Yellow Gate of the Music Palace and advocating excellence, and to reduce the number of military equipment in the palace.

古文：太官园种冬生葱韭菜茹，覆以屋庑，昼夜然蕴火，待温气乃生。信臣以为此皆不时之物，有伤于人，不宜以奉供养，乃它非法食物，悉奏罢，省费岁数千万。
现代文：而太官园中所种冬生葱韭蔬菜，要在暖房裹种植，日夜烧火，要有温气才能生长，召信臣认为这些都不是按季节自然生长的，吃了会有害于人，不适宜用以供皇宫需用，应该与其他不按节气种植的作物，全都奏请不再种植，这样节省费用每年达数千万。
English: On the other hand, the winter-grown scallions and leeks and vegetables grown in the Taikangyuan need to be wrapped in heating coils and burned day and night, and they need warm air to grow. Therefore, the officials believed that these were not naturally grown according to the season, and eating them would be harmful to people. They were not suitable for the needs of the Imperial Palace, and they should be asked not to plant them with other crops that were not planted according to the solar terms. This would save tens of millions of dollars every year.

古文：信臣年老以官卒。
现代文：后召信臣年老死在官任上。
English: Afterward, Nobushige died of old age while in office.

古文：元始四年，诏书祀百辟卿士有益于民者，蜀郡以文翁，九江以召父应诏书。
现代文：元始四年，皇上下达诏书祭祀百官卿士中为民做过益事的人，蜀郡以文翁，九江以召信臣应诏。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor issued an imperial edict to honor those who had done good deeds for the people among the hundreds of officials and nobles. Shu County honored them with the title of "Wen Weng" (文翁) and Jiujiang County honored them with the title of "Zhaozhu" (信臣).

古文：岁时郡二千石率官属行礼，奉祠信臣冢，而南阳亦为立祠。
现代文：每年一到时候郡太守都率领下属官吏去行礼，供奉祭拜召信臣的坟墓，而南阳也为他立了祠。
English: Every year, when the time comes, the county grand marshal leads his subordinate officials to perform a ritual, offering a sacrifice to worship the grave of the faithful minister, and Nanyang has also set up a shrine for him.

