古文：圣哲彝训曰经，述经叙理曰论。论者，伦也；伦理无爽，则圣意不坠。
现代文：圣人先哲将永恒不变的训导称作 经 ，将解释 经 的精义、阐述 经 的义理的著作称作 论 。 论 ，即道理，道理正确，便不悖于圣人先哲之意，经书的原意也不会受损。
English: The sages referred to the eternal and unchanging teachings as the sutra, and the works that explain the essence of the sutra and expound the righteousness of the sutra as the treatise. The treatise, that is, the truth, if the truth is correct, does not contradict the meaning of the sages, and the original meaning of the scripture will not be damaged.

古文：昔仲尼微言，门人追记，故抑其经目，称为《论语》。
现代文：从前，在回答弟子和时人问题时，孔子说了很多精妙的话，在他死后，弟子们就把这些话记录下来，因为谦虚不敢称作 经 ，只称作《论语》。
English: Once upon a time, when answering questions from disciples and contemporaries, Confucius said a lot of subtle words. After his death, his disciples recorded these words, because modesty did not dare to call it a sutra, but only an "Analects."

古文：盖群论立名，始于兹矣。
现代文：后人写论文、论著时，就开始称作 论 。
English: Later generations began to refer to it as "On" when writing papers and treatises.

古文：自《论语》以前，经无 论 字。
现代文：在《论语》以前，一般的 经 中不以 论 作书名、篇名。
English: Before the Analects, the title of a book or the title of a section of a sutra was generally not an analect.

古文：《六韬》二论，后人追题乎！
现代文：《六韬》中的两篇论一一《霸典文论》和《文师武论》，大概为后人追加！
English: The two essays in "Six Degrees of Separation" - "On the Domination of Literature" and "On Literature and the Martial Arts" - will probably be added for posterity!

古文：详观论体，条流多品∶陈政则与议说合契，释经则与传注参体，辨史则与赞评齐行，铨文则与叙引共纪。
现代文：详察 论 这种文体，存在着各种支流：陈述政事的，与议论文和说理文要求相同；注释经书精义的，与传文、注释相近；辩论历史的，与赞辞、评语意义一致；诠释文章的，与序文、引言一致。
English: Detailed observation of this style, there are various tributaries: the presentation of political affairs has the same requirements as the argumentative essay and the argumentative essay; the commentary on the essence of the scripture is similar to the preface and commentary; the debate on history is consistent with the praise and commentary; the interpretation of the article is consistent with the preface and introduction.

古文：故议者宜言，说者说语，传者转师，注者主解，赞者明意，评者平理，序者次事，引者胤辞：八名区分，一揆宗论。
现代文：所以， 议 即要说适宜的话； 说 即说令人感觉动听服膺的话； 传 即将老师的话向后世转述； 注 即对经书字词意义的解释； 赞 即说明经书全文的意义； 评 即对经书做出公平的评论； 序 即对原文内容的次第顺序给出交代； 引 即用引述法说明正文内容。
English: Therefore, 議 means to say what is appropriate; 說 means to say what is pleasing to the ear; 傳 means to convey the words of the teacher to future generations; 注 means to explain the meaning of the words in the scripture; 赞 means to explain the meaning of the entire scripture; 评 means to make a fair comment on the scripture; 序 means to give an account of the order of the contents of the original text; 引用 means to explain the contents of the text by quotation.

古文：论也者，弥纶群言，而研精一理者也。
现代文：这些文体虽然存在着名称上的区别，但都是论述道理的。所谓 论 ，综合各家说法，即深入探讨某一义理的文章。
English: Although there is a difference in the names of these styles, they all discuss the principle.The so-called "on" is a synthesis of various sayings, that is, an article that explores a certain principle in depth.

古文：是以庄周《齐物》，以论为名；不韦《春秋》，六论昭列。
现代文：所以，庄周的《齐物论》，以论作为篇名；吕不韦的《吕氏春秋》，列出了六篇 论 。
English: Therefore, Zhuang Zhou's "Theory of Equal Things" takes the theory as the title; Lü Buwei's "Lu's Spring and Autumn" lists six theories.

古文：至石渠论艺，白虎通讲，述圣通经，论家之正体也。
现代文：汉宣帝时，皇帝召集儒生在石渠谈经论艺，汉章帝在白虎观与众儒生讲读 五经 ，都是为了对圣人之道进行阐释，讨论其中的异同，其实是谈论论文的文体形式。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, the emperor convened the Confucian students to discuss the scriptures and arts in the stone canal, and Emperor Han Zhang read the Five Classics with the Confucian students in the White Tiger View, all in order to interpret the way of the sage, discuss the differences and similarities, and actually talk about the stylistic form of the thesis.

古文：及班彪《王命》，严尤《三将》，敷述昭情，善入史体。
现代文：班彪的《王命论》，严尤的《三将军论》，就已能将情理表述明白，并借用史实论证了。
English: Ban Biao's "Treatise on the King's Life" and Yan Yu's "Treatise on the Three Generals" have been able to express the situation clearly and demonstrate it by using historical facts.

古文：魏之初霸，术兼名法。傅嘏、王粲，校练名理。
现代文：等到曹魏时期，曹操刚刚建立霸业不久，就兼用名家和法家学说巩固统治，从傅嘏、王粲的论文就可以看出，时人已能熟练运用相关理论了。
English: By the time of the Cao Wei period, Cao Cao had just established hegemony and soon consolidated his rule by using the teachings of both famous scholars and legal scholars. From the papers of Fu Xi and Wang Xi, it can be seen that the people of that time were already able to skillfully use relevant theories.

古文：迄至正始，务欲守文；何晏之徒，始盛玄论。于是聃周当路，与尼父争途矣。
现代文：正始年间，当时文人仍然注重继承前代文风。受何晏等人的倡导，讲玄之风开始盛行，于是老庄学说大行其时，与儒家思想平分秋色。
English: In the early years, when writers still focused on inheriting the previous generation's literary style, the style of speaking about the occult began to prevail, advocated by He Zhe and others. As a result, the Laozhuang doctrine became popular, and it was on an equal footing with Confucianism.

古文：详观兰石之《才性》，仲宣之《去伐》，叔夜之《辨声》，太初之《本无》，辅嗣之《两例》，平叔之二论，并师心独见，锋颖精密，盖论之英也。
现代文：详细观览傅嘏《才性四本论》，王粲《去伐论》，嵇康《声无哀乐论》，夏侯玄《本无论》，王弼《易略例》，何晏《道德论》等，都是有别于前人的匠心之作，笔锋新颖，论述精密，算得上论著中的精彩之作。
English: A detailed look at Fu Xi's "Four Treatises on Talent," Wang Xi's "Treatise on Deforestation," Xing Kang's "Treatise on Sound and Music without Sorrow," Xia Houxuan's "No Matter What," Wang Xi's "A Brief Example of Ease," He Xi's "Treatise on Morality," etc. are all works of craftsmanship that are different from their predecessors. The writing style is novel and the exposition is precise, which can be regarded as a wonderful work in the treatise.

古文：至如李康《运命》，同《论衡》而过之；陆机《辨亡》，效《过秦》而不及，然亦其美矣。
现代文：此外，像李康《运命论》，在论述命运上与王充《论衡》相同，但文采却远超《论衡》；陆机《辨亡论》，模仿贾谊《过秦论》而作，却远比不上它。
English: In addition, like Li Kang's "Theory of Fortune and Destiny," it is the same as Wang Chong's "On Balance" in the discussion of fate, but the literature is far superior to "On Balance"; Lu Ji's "Theory of Discerning Death," imitated by Jia Yi's "Theory of Over Qin," is far less than it.

古文：次及宋岱、郭象，锐思于几神之区；夷甫、裴頠，交辨于有无之域；并独步当时，流声后代。
现代文：即便这样，它们也是这类文章中较好的了。再如晋代宋岱、郭象等人的著述，都能敏锐地触碰到事物变化精深微妙的境界；同为晋代的王衍和裴□，则是在 尚无 和 崇有 上展开辩论和交锋。
English: Even so, they are the best of this kind of articles. For example, the writings of Song Xi, Guo Xiang and others in the Jin Dynasty can keenly touch the subtle realm of things' changes; Wang Yan and Pei Xi, who are also from the Jin Dynasty, debate and confront each other on the subject of "nothing yet" and "nothing yet."

古文：然滞有者，全系于形用；贵无者，专守于寂寥。
现代文：他们都是创名当世又扬名后世的著名人物。始终坚持 有 的人，是将眼光拘泥在形体上；而始终坚持 无 的人，又囿于无声无形的 虚无 之中。
English: They are all famous figures who have made a name for themselves in this world and will be famous in the next. Those who always insist on having, will keep their eyes fixed on the form; and those who always insist on nothing, will be stuck in the silent and invisible nothingness.

古文：徒锐偏解，莫诣正理；动极神源，其般若之绝境乎？
现代文：白白地对义理进行精辟的片面解释，却没能求得正确且全面的道理；探索到了神妙深奥的自然之理，只有佛学 有无不分、无思无欲 那样的最高境界吧？
English: It is in vain to carry out an incisive one-sided interpretation of the principle of righteousness, but it has failed to obtain a correct and comprehensive principle; it has explored the wonderful and profound principle of nature. Is it only Buddhism that has the highest realm of indifference, thoughtlessness and desirelessness?

古文：逮江左群谈，惟玄是务；虽有日新，而多抽前绪矣。
现代文：东晋时期，文人们都开始清静无为的玄学空谈，即便有所创新，也是对前人的引述罢了。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the literati all began to indulge in idle metaphysical chatter. Even if there was some innovation, it was nothing more than quoting the predecessors.

古文：至如张衡《讥世》，颇似俳说；孔融《孝廉》，但谈嘲戏；曹植《辨道》，体同书抄。
现代文：至于此时张衡的《讥世论》，非常像是以俳优戏子的口吻开玩笑；孔融《孝廉论》也只说些玩笑话了；曹植《辨道论》就跟抄书没什么差别了。
English: As for Zhang Heng's "Criticism of the World" at this time, it was very much like a joke in the tone of a haiku actor; Kong Rong's "Criticism of Filial Piety" also only said some jokes; Cao Zhi's "Criticism of the Way" was no different from copying a book.

古文：言不持正，论如其已。
现代文：如果写作论述时不能坚持正道，就不如不写了。
English: If you can't stick to the right path when writing an essay, it's better not to write it.

古文：原夫论之为体，所以辨正然否。
现代文：考察 论 这种文体，主要是用以把是非辨别清楚。
English: This style is mainly used to distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：穷于有数，究于无形，钻坚求通，钩深取极；乃百虑之筌蹄，万事之权衡也。
现代文：不仅对具体问题进行透彻地研讨，并深入追究抽象的道理；要把论述的难点攻破钻通，深入挖出理论的终极。论著是表达各种思考的工具，用以对万事万物进行衡量。
English: It is not only a thorough study of specific issues, but also a deep pursuit of abstract principles; it is necessary to break through the difficulties of the discussion and dig deep into the ultimate theory. The treatise is a tool for expressing various thoughts and is used to measure everything.

古文：故其义贵圆通，辞忌枝碎，必使心与理合，弥缝莫见其隙；辞共心密，敌人不知所乘：斯其要也。
现代文：所以，道理要讲得全面而通达，避免写得支离破碎；必须做到思想和道理统一，把论点组织严密，没有漏洞；文辞和思想密切结合，使论敌无懈可击：这就是写论文的基本要点。
English: Therefore, the theory should be comprehensive and comprehensive, and avoid writing fragmented; it is necessary to achieve the unity of thought and reason, organize the argument closely, and there is no loophole; the wording and thought should be closely combined to make the argument invulnerable: This is the basic point of writing a thesis.

古文：是以论如析薪，贵能破理。
现代文：因此，写论文和劈木柴一样，以正好破开木柴的纹理为贵。
English: Therefore, writing a thesis is just like splitting firewood. It is important to break the texture of the firewood.

古文：斤利者，越理而横断；辞辨者，反义而取通；览文虽巧，而检迹知妄。
现代文：如果斧子太锐利，就会超出纹理把木柴砍断；巧于文辞的人，违反正理而勉强把道理说通，文辞上看起来虽然巧妙，但检查实际情形，就会发现是虚妄的。
English: If the axe is too sharp, it will cut the wood beyond the texture; the person who is good at words, violates the truth and barely makes the truth clear. Although it looks clever in terms of words, it will be found to be false when checking the actual situation.

古文：唯君子能通天下之志，安可以曲论哉？
现代文：只有有才德的人，能用正当的道理来说服天下之人的心意，怎么可以讲歪道理呢？
English: Only a person with talent and virtue can use legitimate reason to convince the world's people's minds, how can he talk about crooked reason?

古文：若夫注释为词，解散论体，杂文虽异，总会是同。
现代文：至于注释经典的文字，是把论述分散在注释中，这种碎杂的注释虽有别于论文，但会总起来就和论文相同了。
English: As for the annotation of the classic text, it is to disperse the discussion in the annotation. Although this kind of fragmentary annotation is different from the thesis, it will be the same as the thesis.

古文：若秦延君之注《尧典》，十馀万字；朱文公之解《尚书》，三十万言，所以通人恶烦，羞学章句。
现代文：不过像秦延君注《尚书·尧典》的 尧典 二字，就用了十多万字；朱普注《尚书》，用了三十万言；这就为通达的学者所厌烦，而耻于从事烦琐的章句之学了。
English: However, like Qin Yanjun's annotation of "Shangshu·Shangxuan," the second word of "Shangxuan," used more than 100,000 words; Zhu Pu's annotation of "Shangshu," used 300,000 words; this is bored by knowledgeable scholars, but ashamed of engaging in tedious chapter and sentence learning.

古文：若毛公之训《诗》，安国之传《书》，郑君之释《礼》，王弼之解《易》，要约明畅，可为式矣。
现代文：如毛亨的《毛诗诂训传》、孔安国的《尚书传》、郑玄的《三礼注》、王弼的《周易注》等，其传注都简要明畅，这些可算是注经的典范了。
English: For example, Mao Heng's "Mao Shi Xuan Biography," Kong An Guo's "Shang Shu Biography," Zheng Xuan's "Three Rites Commentary," Wang Xi's "Zhou Yi Commentary," etc., their commentaries are concise and clear, which can be regarded as a model of annotation.

古文：说者，悦也；兑为口舌，故言资悦怿；过悦必伪，故舜惊谗说。
现代文：所谓 说 ，就是喜悦； 说 字从 兑 ，《周易》中的《兑卦》象征口舌，所以说话应该令人喜悦。但过分追求讨人喜悦，就必然是虚假的；所以，虞舜曾惊震谗言太多。
English: The so-called "said" means joy; the word "said" comes from "to" and "to" in "Zhou Yi" symbolizes the spoken language, so the speech should be joyful. However, the excessive pursuit of pleasing people is necessarily false; therefore, Gu Yao was shocked and said too much.

古文：说之善者∶伊尹以论味隆殷，太公以辨钓兴周，及烛武行而纾郑，端木出而存鲁：亦其美也。
现代文：自来善说的人，如商代伊尹用烹调方法来说明如何把殷商治理强大，周初吕望用钓鱼的道理来说明怎样使周代兴盛；以及春秋时期郑国烛之武说服秦国退后，因而解救了郑国的危亡；鲁国的端木赐说服齐国转攻吴国，因而保存了鲁国等：这些都是说辞中较好的。
English: People who have been good at saying since time immemorial, such as Yi Yin of the Shang Dynasty, who used cooking methods to explain how to make the Yin Dynasty strong, and Lu Wang of the Zhou Dynasty, who used the principle of fishing to explain how to make the Zhou Dynasty prosperous; and the Spring and Autumn Period, when Zheng Guo's "Candle Warrior" persuaded Qin to retreat, thus saving Zheng from peril; and Lu Guo's "Tang Mu Zi" persuaded Qi to attack Wu, thus preserving Lu, etc.: These are all good at saying.

古文：暨战国争雄，辨士云涌；从横参谋，长短角势；转丸骋其巧辞，飞钳伏其精术。
现代文：到了战国时期，七国争雄，游说之士风起云涌；他们用合纵、连横之说参与谋划，用纷坛复杂的计策来争夺权势，用圆转如弹丸的方法来施展其巧妙的辩辞，或用首先飞扬声誉以引出对方的论点，然后加以钳伏的妙术。
English: In the Warring States period, the Seven Kingdoms were competing with each other, and the lobbyists were on the rise. They participated in the planning with the theory of "convergence" and "continuity," used complex strategies to compete for power, used the method of rounding like a projectile to carry out their clever arguments, or used the trick of first flying reputation to draw out the other side's arguments, and then suppressing them.

古文：一人之辨，重于九鼎之宝；三寸之舌，强于百万之师。六印磊落以佩，五都隐赈而封。
现代文：战国时毛遂一人的辩辞，比传国之宝的钟鼎还贵重，他的一张嘴唇，胜过百万雄狮；苏秦佩带着六国的一大串相印，张仪被封赠五座富饶的城市。
English: During the Warring States period, Mao Sui's one-man speech was more valuable than the bell of the national treasure. His one lip was worth more than a million lions. Su Qin Pei carried a large string of seals from six countries, and Zhang Yi was given five rich cities.

古文：至汉定秦楚，辨士弭节。
现代文：到汉代平定秦、楚之后，辩士们的活动逐渐停止。
English: After Qin and Chu were subdued in the Han Dynasty, the activities of the debaters gradually ceased.

古文：郦君既毙于齐镬，蒯子几入乎汉鼎；虽复陆贾籍甚，张释傅会，杜钦文辨，楼护唇舌，颉颃万乘之阶，抵戏公卿之席，并顺风以托势，莫能逆波而溯洄矣。
现代文：汉代的少数说客，如郦食其被齐王田广所烹杀，蒯通也几乎被投入刘邦的汤锅。即使还有陆贾颇负盛誉，张释之的附会时事，杜钦的文辞辨析，楼护以唇舌锋利称著，他们都活动于帝王的玉阶之前，戏谈于王公大人的坐席之间；但都不过看风驶舵，迎合趋势，已没有人能逆流而上以扭转大局了。
English: A few lobbyists in the Han Dynasty, such as Lu Jia, were killed by Tian Guang, the king of Qi, and Shantong was almost thrown into Liu Bang's soup pot. Even Lu Jia, who was quite famous, Zhang Xizhi's current affairs, Duchin's literary analysis, and Lou Guo, who was known for his sharp tongue, were all active before the emperor's jade steps, and talked about between the seats of the prince. However, they were all just watching the wind and steering, catering to the trend, and no one could go against the tide to reverse the overall situation.

古文：夫说贵抚会，弛张相随，不专缓颊，亦在刀笔。
现代文： 说 贵在合于时机，或缓或急，灵活运用，不仅仅是婉言陈说，也要书写成文。
English: Saying "you are valuable" at the right time, either slowly or urgently, and using it flexibly, is not just a euphemism, but also a written document.

古文：范雎之言疑事，李斯之止逐客，并顺情入机，动言中务，虽批逆鳞，而功成计合，此上书之善说也。
现代文：如战国时范睢的《献书昭王》，要求进言献策；秦代李斯的《上秦始皇书》，谏阻驱逐客卿；都循着情理而深入机要，言辞动听而切中要务；虽然触及帝王的某些险要问题，却能功业告成，计议符合，这就是向帝王上书方面善于陈说的了。
English: For example, during the Warring States Period, Fan Ye's "The Book Offering to the King" asked for input and suggestions; Li Si's "The Book of the First Emperor of the Upper Qin Dynasty" in the Qin Dynasty resisted the expulsion of the Hakka chieftain; they all followed the reason and went deep into the essence, and the words were beautiful and relevant to the important tasks; although they touched on some important issues of the emperor, they were able to accomplish the work and the plan was in line, which was good at presenting to the emperor.

古文：至于邹阳之说吴梁，喻巧而理至，故虽危而无咎矣；敬通之说鲍邓，事缓而文繁，所以历骋而罕遇也。
现代文：此外，如西汉邹阳上书吴王和梁王，比喻巧妙而道理恰当，所以，虽有危险却无罪过。又如东汉冯衍进说于鲍永和邓禹，所讲之事既不紧迫而又文辞繁多，所以虽然多次陈政言事，却很少有人重用他。
English: In addition, for example, in the Western Han Dynasty, King Wu and King Liang, who were sent to Shiyang, had clever metaphors and appropriate reason, so although there was danger, they were not guilty. Also, for example, in the Eastern Han Dynasty, Feng Yanjin, who was sent to Baoyong and Deng Yu, spoke about things that were not urgent and had a lot of words, so although he spoke about politics many times, few people reused him.

古文：凡说之枢要，必使时利而义贞，进有契于成务，退无阻于荣身。
现代文：说理文的关键，是必须使之有利于时政而又意义正当；既要有助于政务的完成，又要不妨害自己的荣显。
English: The key to the text of reason is that it must be conducive to current affairs and have a legitimate meaning; it must not only contribute to the completion of government affairs, but also not harm its own glory.

古文：自非谲敌，则唯忠与信。
现代文：除了欺骗敌人，就应该讲得忠诚可信。
English: In addition to deceiving the enemy, we should be loyal and trustworthy.

古文：披肝胆以献主，飞文敏以济辞，此说之本也。
现代文：要把真心诚意的话献给主上，用敏锐的文思来完成说辞，这就是 说 的基本特点。
English: This is the basic characteristic of preaching: to offer sincere and sincere words to the Lord, and to complete the speech with keen thoughts.

古文：而陆氏直称 说炜晔以谲诳 ，何哉？
现代文：可是，陆机的《文赋》却说： 说 的特点是表达明显而进行欺骗。
English: However, Lu Jian's "Wen Fu Rong" said: "Saying is characterized by obvious expression and deception.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：这是什么话呢？总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：理形于言，叙理成论。
现代文：道理通过语言来表达，把道理陈述出来就成为 论 。
English: The truth is expressed through language, and when the truth is stated, it becomes a theory.

古文：词深人天，致远方寸。
现代文：论说之词可以深究天地间的至理，说服天下人的心意。
English: The words of exposition can deeply investigate the truth between heaven and earth, and persuade the hearts of people around the world.

古文：阴阳莫忒，鬼神靡遁。
现代文：即使抽象的阴阳变化之理，也要说得令人不疑；秘奥的鬼神之道，也同样不能隐避。
English: Even the abstract principle of the change of yin and yang must be stated beyond doubt; the mysterious way of ghosts and gods cannot be avoided either.

古文：说尔飞钳，呼吸沮劝。
现代文：用 飞钳 等精妙的方法来说服对方，能够很快就发生阻止或劝进的实际效力。
English: Using subtle methods such as flying kites to persuade the other side can quickly have the practical effect of stopping or persuading.

