古文：唐开元中，封孔子为文宣王，颜子为兖公，闵子至子夏为侯，群弟子为伯。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，封孔子为文宣王，颜子为兖公，闵子到子夏这些孔门贤人为侯，众孔子弟子封为伯。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Confucius was given the title of "Wen Xuan Wang," Yan Zi was given the title of "Shan Guo" and Shanzi was given the title of "Zixia." These wise men of Confucius were given the title of "Hou," and all the disciples of Confucius were given the title of "Bao."

古文：本朝祥符中，进封公为国公，侯为郡公，伯为侯。
现代文：宋朝祥符年间，又进一步封公为国公，侯为郡公，伯为侯。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Xiangfu Dynasty, he was further named Guo Guo, Guo Guo, and Bo Guo.

古文：绍兴二十五年，太上皇帝御制赞七十五首。
现代文：宋绍兴二十五年，太上皇帝亲自写了七十五首赞词。
English: In the 25th year of Song and Shaoxing, the empress dowager personally wrote 75 poems of praise.

古文：而有司但具唐爵，故宸翰所标，皆用开元国邑，其失于考据如此。
现代文：可是官员们只写唐代的封爵，因此帝王的书迹所标写的，都用唐代开元时的爵位，他们在考证方面疏失到这种地步。
English: However, the officials only wrote about the knighthoods of the Tang Dynasty, so the emperor's writings were marked with the knighthoods of the Tang Dynasty at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty. They were so negligent in terms of reference.

古文：今当请而正之可也。
现代文：现在应该请求改正它们。
English: They should now be asked to rectify them.

古文：绍兴末，胡马饮江，既而自毙，诏加封马当、采石、金山三水府。
现代文：宋绍兴末年，金国军队到了长江边，不久自行崩溃，皇上下令加封马当、采石、金山三地的水神。
English: In the late years of Song Shaoxing, the Jin army arrived at the Yangtze River and soon collapsed on its own. The emperor ordered the water gods of the three provinces of Madang, Quarrying and Jinshan to be added.

古文：太常寺按籍，系四字王，当加至六字。
现代文：太常寺考察记录，原来的封爵是四个字的王，加封应当加到六个字。
English: According to the records of the inspection of Taizhoji Temple, the original knighthood was a four-character king, and the additional seal should be added to six characters.

古文：及降告命至其处，庙令以旧告来，则已八字矣。
现代文：等到皇上的封爵命令传到这三地后，掌管礼寺的官员拿着原来的封爵命令来，却已经有八个字了。
English: After the Emperor's knighting order had been sent to these three places, the official in charge of the Rite Temple came with the original knighting order, but it already had eight words.

古文：逐郡为缴回新命，而别易二美名以宠之。
现代文：各个郡为交回新的诰命，又另外加两个赞美的名号来表示荣宠。
English: Each county will add two more names to the roll of honor to commemorate the return of the new swords.

古文：礼寺之失职类此。
现代文：礼祭祠寺的失职都跟这相似。
English: The dereliction of duty of the ceremonial shrines and temples is similar.

古文：方完颜亮据淮上，予从枢密行府于建康，尝致祷大江；能令虏不得渡者，当奏册为帝。
现代文：当完颜亮占据淮河流域时，我跟随枢密院到建康办公，曾经向长江致祠祈铸：如果能让金兵不能渡过长江的话，就奏明皇上，封江神为帝。
English: When Yan Liang occupied the Huai River basin, I followed the Privy Council to the Jiankang office. I once prayed to the Yangtze River to the ancestral shrine: If you can make the golden soldier unable to cross the Yangtze River, you should report to the emperor that the god of the river is the emperor.

古文：洎事定，朝廷许如约。
现代文：等到战事平定后，朝廷允许履行和江神的盟约。
English: After the war was settled, the imperial court allowed the fulfillment of the covenant with Jiang Shen.

古文：朱丞相汉章曰： 四渎当一体，独帝江神，礼乎？ 
现代文：丞相朱汉章说： 长江、淮河、黄河、济水四条大河应该是一个整体，只尊长江之神为帝，合乎礼吗？ 
English: Consul-General Zhu Hanzhang said: The Yangtze River, the Huai River, the Yellow River and the Jishui River should be a whole. Is it proper to worship only the god of the Yangtze River?

古文：予曰： 惩劝之道，人神一也。
现代文：我说： 惩戒奖劝的道理，人和神是一样的。
English: I said: The principle of discipline, reward and exhortation is the same for man and God.

古文：彼洪河长淮，受国家祭祀血食，不为不久，当胡骑之来，如行枕席，唯大江滔滔天险，坐遏巨敌之冲，使其百万束手倒戈而退，此其灵德阴功，于河、淮何如？
现代文：那黄河、淮汀享受国家杀牲取血的祭祀不可说不久，当金人骑兵到来，渡河好象在枕上、席上行走，只有长江滔滔天险，挫折阻遏了强大敌人的冲击，使他们百万军队束手无策倒转武器撤退了，这就是长江暗中的灵验功德，跟黄河、淮河有什么关系？
English: It cannot be said that the Yellow River and Huai Ting enjoyed the sacrifice of the state to kill animals and take blood. Soon, when the Jin cavalry arrived, crossing the river seemed to be walking on a pillow and a seat. Only the Yangtze River was dangerous. Setbacks stopped the impact of a powerful enemy, leaving their million-strong army helpless to reverse the weapons and retreat. This is the Yangtze River's secret virtue. What does it have to do with the Yellow River and the Huai River?

古文：自五岳进册之后，今蒋庙、陈果仁祠亦称之，江神之帝，于是为不鳦矣。 
现代文：自从五岳加了封爵以后，现在蒋庙、陈果仁祠也跟它们相称，因此长江之神被封为帝，就不算是辱没了这样的爵号了。 
English: Since Wuyue was knighted, now Jiang Temple and Chen Guoren Temple are also commensurate with them. Therefore, if the god of the Yangtze River was made emperor, it would not be considered a disgrace to lose such a knighthood.

古文：朱公终以为不可，亦仅改两字。
现代文：朱公最后还是认为不可以，也只在原封号之上改了两个字。唉！
English: In the end, Zhu Gong still thought it was unacceptable, and only changed two words on the original seal number. Alas!

古文：吁，可惜哉！
现代文：真可惜呀！
English: What a shame!

