古文：一曰：开春始雷，则蛰虫动矣。
现代文：开春开春刚刚响起雷声，蛰伏的动物就苏醒了。
English: As soon as the thunder sounded at the beginning of spring, the hibernating animals woke up.

古文：时雨降，则草木育矣。
现代文：应时之雨降落下来，草木就滋生了。
English: When the rain falls at the right time, the plants grow.

古文：饮食居处适，则九窍百节千脉皆通利矣。
现代文：饮食居处适度，身体各种器官和骨节经脉就都通畅了。
English: If the diet is moderate, the various organs and bones of the body will be unimpeded.

古文：王者厚其德，积众善，而凤皇圣人皆来至矣。
现代文：治理天下的人增加自己的美德，积累各种善行，凤凰和圣人就都到他身边来了。
English: The man who governs the world increases his virtue, accumulates all kinds of good deeds, and phoenixes and saints come to him.

古文：共伯和修其行，好贤仁，而海内皆以来为稽矣。
现代文：共伯和修养他的品行，喜好贤士仁人，海内就都西此来归附了。
English: Together with his uncle and cultivating his character, liking sages and benevolent people, the whole country came to adhere to this.

古文：周厉之难，天子旷绝，而天下皆来谓矣。
现代文：厉王之乱，王位废缺，天下诸侯就都来朝见共伯和了。
English: Li Wang's rebellion, the throne was abolished, and all the princes in the world came to the court to meet with him.

古文：以此言物之相应也，故曰行也成也。
现代文：这些事情说明事物是互相应和的，所以任何行为都有其相应的结果。
English: These things indicate that things correspond to each other, so any action has its corresponding result.

古文：善说者亦然。
现代文：善于说服别人的人也是这样。
English: The same is true for people who are good at persuading others.

古文：言尽理而得失利害定矣，岂为一人言哉！
现代文：把道理说透，事情最终的得失利害就确定了，他们的议论哪里是为了某一个人随意而发呢！
English: If you explain the reason thoroughly, the ultimate gain and loss of the matter will be determined, where is their discussion for the sake of a certain person at will!

古文：魏惠王死，葬有日矣。
现代文：魏惠王死了，安葬的日期已经临近。
English: Wei Hui Wang died, the day of the funeral has been set.

古文：天大雨雪，至于牛目。
现代文：正遇上下大雪，深得几乎埋住牛的眼睛。
English: Heavy snow was falling, so deep that it almost covered the cows' eyes.

古文：群臣多谏于太子者，曰： 雪甚如此而行葬，民必甚疾之，官费又恐不给，请弛期更日。 
现代文：臣子们有很多人劝谏太子，说； 雪下得这样大还要举行葬礼，百姓们一定感到非常困苦，国家的费用也恐怕不够。请您把日期推迟，改日安葬。 
English: There were many courtiers who urged the crown prince to postpone the funeral, saying, "The snow is so heavy that a funeral must be held, the people must be very poor, and the state's expenses may not be enough. Please postpone the date and hold the funeral on another day."

古文：太子曰： 为人子者，以民劳与官费用之故，而不行先王之葬，不义也。
现代文：太子说； 做子女的，如果因为百姓劳苦和国家费用不足的缘故就不举行先王的葬礼，这是不义的。
English: The crown prince said: "It is not fair to our children if the former king's funeral is not held because of the hard work of the people and the shortage of state funds.

古文：子勿复言。 
现代文：你们不要再说了。 
English: Just stop talking.

古文：群臣皆莫敢谏，而以告犀首。
现代文：臣子们都不敢再劝谏，就把达件事告诉了犀首。
English: The courtiers did not dare to persuade him any further, so they told him the whole story.

古文：犀首曰： 吾未有以言之。是其唯惠公乎！请告惠公。 
现代文：犀首说： 我也没有办法去劝说，能做这件事的恐怕只有惠公吧，请让我告诉惠公。 
English: The head of the rhinoceros said, "I have no way to persuade him. I'm afraid that only Huigong can do this. Please let me tell Huigong."

古文：惠公曰： 诺。 
现代文：惠公听了说： 好吧。 
English: After listening to the head of the rhinoceros, Huigong said: Okay.

古文：驾而见太子曰： 葬有日矣？ 
现代文：就坐着车来见太子，说： 安葬的日期临近了吗? 
English: He came to see the crown prince in his car and said: Is the date of the funeral approaching?

古文：太子曰： 然。 
现代文：太子说： 是的。 
English: The prince said: Yes.

古文：惠公曰： 昔王季历葬于涡山之尾，灓水啮其墓，见棺之前和。
现代文：惠公说； 从前王季历葬在涡山脚下，渗漏下来的水流浸坍了他的坟墓，露出了棺木的前脸。
English: Huigong said: Wang Jili was once buried at the foot of Turbu Mountain, and the seepage of water flowed into his grave, exposing the front of the coffin.

古文：文王曰： 嘻！先君必欲一见群臣百姓也夫！故使灓水见之。 
现代文：周文王说； 啊，先王一定是想看一看臣下和百姓吧，所以才让漏水把棺木露出来。 
English: Ah, the former king must have wanted to have a look at his vassals and people, so he let the leaking water expose the coffin, Zhou Wenwang said.

古文：于是出而为之张朝，百姓皆见之，三日而后更葬。
现代文：于是就把棺木挖出，给它设置帷幕，举行朝会，百姓都来谒见，三天以后才改葬。
English: So they dug up the coffin, put a curtain over it, held a court meeting, and the people all came to pay their respects. The reburial took place three days later.

古文：此文王之义也。
现代文：这是文王的直呀！
English: This is King Wen's act of charity.

古文：今葬有日矣，而雪甚，及牛目，难以行。太子为及日之故，得无嫌于欲亟葬乎？
现代文：现在安葬的日期已经临近，但雪大得几乎埋住牛的眼睛，路难以行走，太子您为了赶上既定日期的缘故坚持要安葬，恐怕有想快点安葬了事之嫌吧?
English: Now the date of the burial is approaching, but the snow is so thick that it has almost buried the eyes of the cow, and the road is difficult to walk on. Prince, you insist on being buried in order to meet the set date. I'm afraid you want to be buried quickly, right?

古文：愿太子易日。
现代文：希望您改个日子。
English: I'd like you to change the date.

古文：先王必欲少留而抚社稷安黔首也，故使雨雪甚。
现代文：先王一定是想稍作停留以便安抚国家和百姓，所以才使雪下得这样大。
English: The previous king must have wanted to make a short stop to appease the country and the people, which is why it snowed so much.

古文：因弛期而更为日，此文王之义也。
现代文：据此推迟葬期另择日子，这样估做正是文王的义啊！
English: According to this, delaying the funeral period and choosing another day, it is the righteousness of King Wen to do so!

古文：若此而不为，意者羞法文王也？ 
现代文：象目前这种情况还不改日安葬，想来是把效法文王当作羞耻了? 
English: If, as is currently the case, the date of his burial is not changed, is it a shame to follow the example of the French king?

古文：太子曰： 甚善。敬弛期，更择葬日。 
现代文：太子说： 您说得太好了，我谨奉命缓期，另选安葬的日子。 
English: The prince said, "You have said it so well. I have been ordered to postpone the funeral and choose another day for the burial.

古文：惠子不徒行说也，又令魏太子未葬其先君而因有说文王之义。
现代文：惠子不仅使自己的主张得以实行，又使魏太子由不葬先王进而喜好文王之义。
English: Not only did Keiko succeed in putting her own ideas into practice, but she also made the Wei prince change from not burying his predecessor to favoring the teachings of King Wen.

古文：说文王之义以示天下，岂小功也哉！
现代文：喜好文王之义，并以此显示于天下，哪里是小功劳呢!
English: To love the righteousness of King Wen, and to show it to the world, is no small feat!

古文：韩氏城新城，期十五日而成。
现代文：韩国修筑新城的城墙，规定十五天完成。
English: South Korea is building the walls of a new city, which is scheduled to be completed in 15 days.

古文：段乔为司空，有一县后二日，段乔执其吏而囚之。
现代文：段乔做司空，主管这件事，有一个县拖延了两天，段乔就逮捕了这个县的主管官员，把他囚禁起来。
English: Duan Qiao was the S.C.O. in charge of this matter. In one county, there was a delay of two days, and Duan Qiao arrested the official in charge of this county and imprisoned him.

古文：囚者之子走告封人子高曰: 唯先生能活臣父之死，愿委之先生。 
现代文：这个官员的儿子跑来告诉封人子高，说。 只有先生您才能把我父亲从死罪中拯救出来，我想把这件事托付给先生。 
English: The official's son ran to tell Mr. Fong, saying, "Only you, sir, can save my father from capital punishment, and I want to entrust this matter to you, sir."

古文：封人子高曰： 诺。 
现代文：封人子高说； 好吧。 
English: Feng Renzhigo said; All right.

古文：乃见段乔。
现代文：就去拜见段乔。
English: I went to see Duan Qiao.

古文：自扶而上城。封人子高左右望曰： 美哉城乎！
现代文：子高自己攀登上城墙，向左右张望说： 这城墙修得真漂呀!
English: Zigao himself climbed the city wall, looked to the right and left and said: "This city wall is really well built!

古文：一大功矣，子必有厚赏矣！
现代文：真算得上一件大功了，您一定能得到重赏了。
English: This is truly a great achievement, and you will surely be rewarded.

古文：自古及今，功若此其大也，而能无有罪戮者，未尝有也。 
现代文：从古到今，功劳这样大又能不处罚杀戮一个人，这种人还没有过。 
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been such a person who has made such a great contribution and can kill a person without punishment.

古文：封人子高出，段乔使人夜解其吏之束缚也而出之。
现代文：封人子高离开以后，段乔就派人在夜里解开被囚禁的官员的绳索，释放了他。
English: After Feng Renzigao left, Duan Qiao sent someone to untie the ropes of the imprisoned official in the night and released him.

古文：故曰封人子高为之言也，而匿己之为而为也；段乔听而行之也，匿己之行而行也。
现代文：所以可以说，封人子高说服别人说了又不让人看出是在说服他，段乔听从别人的意见并加以实行，做了又不让人看出是自己做的。
English: Therefore, it can be said that Fong Niang Zigao persuaded others to speak and did not let people see that he was persuading him, Duan Qiao listened to others' opinions and implemented them, and did not let people see that he did it himself.

古文：说之行若此其精也，封人子高可谓善说矣。
现代文：说服别人的做法如此精妙，封人子高可算是善于说服别人了。
English: The practice of persuading others is so exquisite that it can be said that Fong Ren Zigao is good at persuading others.

古文：叔向之弟羊舌虎善栾盈。栾盈有罪于晋，晋诛羊舌虎，叔向为之奴而朡。
现代文：叔向的弟弟羊舌虎与栾盈友善，栾盈在晋国犯了罪，晋国杀了羊舌虎，叔向为此没入官府为奴，戴上了刑具。
English: Uncle Xiang's brother, Sheep Tongue Tiger, was friendly with Zou Ying. Zou Ying committed a crime in Jin Province, and Jin Province killed Sheep Tongue Tiger. For this, Uncle Xiang was enslaved in the government office and put on a torture device.

古文：祈奚曰： 吾闻小人得位，不争不祥；君子在忧，不救不祥。 
现代文：祈奚说。 我听说当小人得到官位时，不谏争是不善，当君子处于忧患时，不援救是不善。 
English: "I have heard that when a villain gains a position, it is not good to quarrel, and when a gentleman is in distress, it is not good to save him.

古文：乃往见范宣子而说也，曰： 闻善为国者，赏不过而刑不慢。
现代文：于是就去拜见范宣子，劝他说。 我听说善于治国的人，行赏不过度，施刑不轻忽。
English: So he went to see Fan Xuan Zi and persuaded him, "I have heard that those who are good at governing the country should not be rewarded excessively, nor should they be punished lightly.

古文：赏过则惧及淫人，刑慢则惧及君子。
现代文：行赏过度，恐怕会赏到奸人，施刑轻忽，恐怕会处罚到君子。
English: If you reward excessively, you will probably reward a traitor, and if you punish lightly, you will probably punish a gentleman.

古文：与其不幸而过，宁过而赏淫人，毋过而刑君子。
现代文：如果不得已做得过分了，那么宁可行赏过度赏赐了奸人，也不要施刑过度处罚了君子。
English: If you have to go too far, it is better to reward the traitor excessively than to punish the gentleman excessively.

古文：故尧之刑也殛，于虞而用禹；周之刑也戮管、蔡，而相周公：不慢刑也。 
现代文：所以尧施刑罚杀死了鲧，而在舜的时候却仍起用了鲧的儿子禹，周施刑罚诛杀了管叔蔡叔，而仍任用他们的弟兄周公。这都是施刑不轻忽啊！ 
English: Therefore, Zou Shi killed Zou, but still appointed Zou's son Yu as Zou's successor. Zhou Shi killed Guan's uncle Cai, but still appointed their brother Zhou Gong. These are not light punishments!

古文：宣子乃命吏出叔向。
现代文：于是范宣子命令官吏把叔向放了出来。
English: As a result, Fan Xuan Zi ordered officials to release him.

古文：救人之患者，行危苦，不避烦辱，犹不能免；今祈奚论先王之德，而叔向得免焉。
现代文：解救别人危难的人，冒着危险和困苦，不怕麻烦和屈辱，有时仍然不能使人免于患难，如今祈奚论说先王的德政，叔向却因而得以免遭危难。
English: The man who rescues others from peril, braves danger and hardship, is not afraid of trouble and humiliation, and sometimes still cannot save people from suffering, now prays for the former king's virtue, but his uncle was able to avoid danger.

古文：学岂可以已哉！
现代文：由此看来，学习怎么能废止呢！
English: From this point of view, how can learning be abolished!

古文：类多若此。
现代文：很多事情都象这种情形一样。
English: A lot of things are like that.

古文：二曰：今有良医于此，治十人而起九人，所以求之万也。
现代文：察贤假如有这样一个良医，给十个人治病治好了九个，找他治病的人必定会成千上万。
English: If there were such a good doctor who treated ten people and cured nine, there would surely be thousands of people seeking his treatment.

古文：故贤者之致功名也，比乎良医，而君人者不知疾求，岂不过哉！
现代文：贤人能为君主求致功名，就好比良医能给人治好病一样，可是当君主的却不知赶快去寻找，这难道不是错了吗？
English: Is it not wrong for a wise man to seek merit for the sovereign, just as a good doctor can cure a person's illness, but when the sovereign does not know, it is necessary to search for it?

古文：今夫塞者，勇力时日卜筮祷祠无事焉，善者必胜。
现代文：如今下棋人，用不着凭借勇力、时机、占卜、祭祷，技巧高的一定获胜。
English: Nowadays, chess players do not need to rely on courage, timing, divination, and prayer, but must win with high skills.

古文：立功名亦然，要在得贤。
现代文：建立功名也是如此，关键在于得到贤人。
English: It's the same with building a reputation. The key is to get the right people.

古文：魏文侯师卜子夏，友田子方，礼段干木，国治身逸。
现代文：魏文侯以卜子夏为师，与田子方交友，对段干木礼敬尊崇，就使得国家太平，自身安逸。
English: Wei Wenhou took Bu Zixia as his teacher, made friends with Tian Zifang, and respected and revered Duan Ganmu, which made the country peaceful and himself comfortable.

古文：天下之贤主，岂必苦形愁虑哉！
现代文：天下贤明的君主哪里必定要劳身费心呢?
English: Where does a wise monarch have to exert himself?

古文：执其要而已矣。
现代文：掌握冶国要领就行了。
English: It's just a matter of mastering the essentials.

古文：雪霜雨露时，则万物育矣，人民修矣，疾病妖厉去矣。
现代文：霜雪雨露合乎时节，万物就会生长了，人们就会舒适了，疾病和怪异灾祸就不会发生了。
English: Frost, snow, rain and dew are in season, everything will grow, people will be comfortable, diseases and strange disasters will not happen.

古文：故曰尧之容若委衣裘，以言少事也。
现代文：所以人们说到尧的仪表形容，就说他穿着宽大下垂的衣服，这是说他很少有政务啊！
English: That's why, when it comes to describing Gong's appearance, people say that he wears large, loose-fitting clothes, which means that he rarely has affairs of state!

古文：宓子贱治单父，弹鸣琴，身不下堂，而单父治。
现代文：宓子贱治理单父，每天在堂上静坐弹琴，单父就治理得很好。
English: Zou Zi Tian manages her single father well. She sits quietly in the hall and plays the piano every day. She manages her single father well.

古文：巫马期以星出，以星入，日夜不居，以身亲之，而单父亦治。
现代文：巫马期披星戴月，早朝晚退，昼夜不闲，亲自处理各种政务，肆父也治理得很好。
English: During the Wuma period, he wore a star on his lapel, retired early in the morning and late at night, and was not idle day and night. He personally handled various government affairs, and his father also governed well.

古文：巫马期问其故于宓子。
现代文：巫马期向宓子询问其中的缘故。
English: The sorcerer asked the mule about the reason.

古文：宓子曰： 我之谓任人，子之谓任力；任力者故劳，任人者故逸。 
现代文：宓子说： 我的做法叫做使用人才，你的做法叫傲使用力气。使用力气的人当然劳苦，使用人才的人当然安逸。 
English: Zou Zi said: My practice is called using talent, and your practice is called using strength. People who use strength naturally work hard, and people who use talent are naturally at ease.

古文：宓子则君子矣。
现代文：宓子算得上君子了。
English: A cripple can be considered a gentleman.

古文：逸四肢，全耳目，平心气，而百官以治，义矣，任其数而已矣。
现代文：使四肢安逸，耳目保全，心气平和，而官府的各种事务处理得很好，这是应该的了，他只不过使用正确的方法罢了。
English: It is only right that his limbs should be at ease, his eyes and ears preserved, and his mind at peace, while the various affairs of the government should be handled well. He is just using the right method.

古文：巫马期则不然，弊生事精，劳手足，烦教诏，虽治犹未至也。
现代文：巫马期却不是这样。他损伤生命，耗费精气，手足疲劳，教令烦琐，尽管也治理得不错，但还未达到最高境界。
English: However, this was not the case in the Wuma period. He wasted his life, exhausted his energy, his arms and legs were tired, his teachings were tedious, and although he was well governed, he had not yet reached the highest realm.

古文：三曰：今夫爚蝉者，务在乎明其火、振其树而已。
现代文：期贤如今以火照蝉的人，要做的事只在于弄亮火光、摇动树木罢了。
English: The people who are now lighting cicadas with fire, the only thing they have to do is to light the fire and shake the trees.

古文：火不明，虽振其树，何益？
现代文：火光不明，即使摇动那些树木，又有什么用处?
English: We don't know the cause of the fire. Even if we shake the trees, what good will it do?

古文：明火不独在乎火，在于暗。
现代文：弄亮火光，不仅在于火光本身，还在于黑暗的映衬。
English: To brighten the firelight, not only in the firelight itself, but also in the dark background.

古文：当今之时，世暗甚矣，人主有能明其德者，天下之士，其归之也，若蝉之走明火也。
现代文：现在这个时候，社会黑暗到极点了，国君中如有能昭明自己德行的，天下的士人归附他，就象蝉奔向明亮的火光那样。
English: Now, at this time, society is dark to the extreme. If there is a sovereign who can show his virtue, the world's scholars will join him, just like a cicada running towards a bright flame.

古文：凡国不徒安，名不徒显，必得贤士。
现代文：凡国家都不会无缘无故地安定，国君的名声都不会无缘无故地显赫，一定要得到贤士才行。
English: All countries will not be stable without reason, the reputation of the sovereign will not be prominent without reason, it is necessary to get a wise man.

古文：赵简子昼居，喟然太息曰： 异哉！吾欲伐卫十年矣，而卫不伐。 
现代文：赵简子白日闲坐，慨然长叹，说： 真是不寻常啊，我想伐卫已经有十年了，可是卫国总是伐不成。 
English: Zhao Jianzi sat idly during the day, sighed with emotion, and said, "It's really unusual. I think it's been ten years since the defense was cut, but the defense of the country has always failed.

古文：侍者曰： 以赵之大而伐卫之细，君若不欲则可也；君若欲之，请今伐之。 
现代文：侍从的人说， 凭赵国这样的大国来伐卫国那样的小国，您要是不想伐它也就罢了，您要是想这样做，只管立即动手就是了。 
English: The attendant said, if you want to use a big country like Zhao to attack a small country like Wei, you don't have to attack it. If you want to do it, just do it immediately.

古文：简子曰： 不如而言也。
现代文：赵简子说； 事情不象你说的那样啊，卫国有十位士人在我这里。
English: Zhao Jianzi said, "Things are not as you said. I have ten officials from the Central Military Commission here.

古文：卫有士十人于吾所，吾乃且伐之，十人者其言不义也，而我伐之，是我为不义也。 
现代文：我确实想伐卫，可是这十个人都说伐卫不义，如果我还硬去伐它，那我就是做不义的事了。 
English: I really want to cut the hedge, but these ten people all say that cutting the hedge is unjust. If I still go ahead and cut it, then I am doing something unjust.

古文：故简子之时，卫以十人者按赵之兵，殁简子之身。
现代文：所以说，赵简子的时候，卫国用十个人就遏止了赵国的军队，直到简子去世。
English: Therefore, at the time of Zhao Jianzi, the defense of the country with ten people stopped the army of Zhao, until Jianzi died.

古文：卫可谓知用人矣，游十士而国家得安。
现代文：卫国可以算是懂得使用人才了。让十位士人出游赵国，国家就获得了安全。
English: The defense of the country can be regarded as knowing how to use talent. Let ten statesmen travel to Zhao, and the country will be safe.

古文：简子可谓好从谏矣，听十士而无侵小夺弱之名。
现代文：简子可以算是喜欢听从劝谏了，接受十位士人的意见，从而避免了侵夺弱小的坏名声。
English: It can be said that Chen Zi liked to listen to the advice and accepted the opinions of ten scholars, thus avoiding the bad reputation of taking advantage of the weak.

古文：魏文侯过段干木之闾而轼之，其仆曰: 君胡为轼？ 
现代文：魏文侯从段干木居住的里巷前经过，手扶车轼表示敬意。
English: Wei Wenhou passed in front of the alley where Duan dry wood lived, and the handrail showed respect.

古文：曰： 此非段干木之闾欤？
现代文：他的车夫说： 您为什么要挟轼致敬? 魏文侯； 这不是段千木住的里巷吗?
English: His driver said, "Why are you saluting Wei Wenhou? Isn't this the alley where Duan Qiji lived?

古文：段干木盖贤者也，吾安敢不轼？
现代文：段干木是个贤者呀，我怎么敢不致敬?
English: Duan dry wood is a sage, how dare I not pay homage?

古文：且吾闻段干木未尝肯以己易寡人也，吾安敢骄之？
现代文：而且我听说，段干木把操守看得比什么都重要，即使拿我的君位同他的操守相交换，他也绝不会同意，我怎么敢对他骄慢无礼呢?
English: Moreover, I have heard that Duan dry wood regards integrity as more important than anything else, even if I exchange my dignity with his integrity, he will never agree, how dare I be arrogant and rude to him?

古文：段干木光乎德，寡人光乎地；段干木富乎义，寡人富乎财。 
现代文：段干木是在德行上显耀，而我只是在地位上显耀，段干木是在道义上富有，而我只是在财物上富有。 
English: A block of dry wood is rich in virtue, but I am rich only in position; a block of dry wood is rich in morals, but I am rich only in goods.

古文：其仆曰： 然则君何不相之？ 
现代文：他的车夫说。 既然如此，那么您为什么不让他敞国相呢? 
English: In that case, said his driver, why don't you ask him to reveal the secret of the kingdom?

古文：于是君请相之，段干木不肯受。
现代文：于是魏文侯就请段干木做国相，段干木不肯接受这个职位。
English: As a result, Wei Wenhou asked Duan Dry wood to be the minister of state, but Duan Dry wood refused to accept this position.

古文：则君乃致禄百万，而时往馆之。
现代文：文侯就给了他丰厚的俸禄，并且时常到家里去探望他。
English: The prince gave him a generous salary and often visited him at home.

古文：于是国人皆喜，相与诵之曰： 吾君好正，段干木之敬；吾君好忠，段干木之隆。 
现代文：于是国人都很高兴，共同吟咏道； 我们国君喜欢廉正，把段干木来敬重，我们国君喜欢忠诚，把段干木来推崇。 
English: As a result, the Chinese people were very happy and chanted together: Our king likes integrity and respects Duan Jianmu, our king likes loyalty and respects Duan Jianmu.

古文：居无几何，秦兴兵欲攻魏，司马唐谏秦君曰: 段干木贤者也，而魏礼之，天下莫不闻，无乃不可加兵乎？ 
现代文：过了没多久，秦国出兵，想去攻魏，司马唐劝谏秦君说： 段干木是个贤者，魏国礼敬他，天下没有谁不知道，恐怕不能对魏国动兵吧? 
English: Not long after, Qin dispatched troops and wanted to attack Wei. Sima Tang advised Yu Qinjun to say: Duan dry wood is a wise man, Wei pays tribute to him, no one in the world does not know, I'm afraid you can not mobilize against Wei?

古文：秦君以为然，乃按兵，辍不攻之。
现代文：秦君认为司马唐说得很对，于是止住军队，不再攻魏。
English: Qin Jun thought that Sima Tang was right, so he stopped the army and no longer attacked Wei.

古文：魏文侯可谓善用兵矣。
现代文：魏文侯可以说是善于用兵了。
English: Wei Wenhou can be said to be good at using soldiers.

古文：尝闻君子之用兵，莫见其形，其功已成，其此之谓也。
现代文：曾听说君子用兵，没有人看见军队的举动，大功却已告成，恐怕说的就是魏文侯这种情况。
English: It was once heard that a gentleman used soldiers, but no one saw the army's actions, but the great work had been completed. I am afraid to say that this is the case of Wei Wenhu.

古文：野人之用兵也，鼓声则似雷，号呼则动地，尘气充天，流矢如雨，扶伤舆死，履肠涉血，无罪之民，其死者量于泽矣，而国之存亡、主之死生犹不可知也。
现代文：鄙陋无知的人用兵，则是鼓声如雷，喊声动地，烟尘满天，飞箭如雨，扶救伤兵，抬运死尸，踩着尸体，踏着血泊，使无辜百姓尸横遍野。尽管这样，国家的存亡、君主的生死仍然不可料定。
English: When a despicable and ignorant person uses soldiers, the drums beat like thunder, shouts resound, smoke and dust fill the sky, and arrows fly like rain, rescuing wounded soldiers, carrying dead bodies, stepping on dead bodies, treading on pools of blood, and causing the corpses of innocent people to spread across the fields. Despite this, the survival of the country and the life and death of the monarch are still unpredictable.

古文：其离仁义亦远矣！
现代文：这种做法离仁义实在是太远了。
English: This practice is really too far from benevolence and righteousness.

古文：四曰：身者，所为也；天下者，所以为也。
现代文：审为自身的生命是目的，天下是用亲保养生命的凭借。
English: Judging one's own life is the goal, and the world is dependent on one's relatives to maintain life.

古文：审所以为，而轻重得矣。
现代文：弄清哪个是目的，哪个是凭借，二者的轻重位置就能摆恰当了。
English: Find out which is the purpose, which is by virtue of, the weight and importance of the two can be placed appropriately.

古文：今有人于此，断首以易冠，杀身以易衣，世必惑之。
现代文：假如有这样一个人，为了换帽子而砍掉头颅，为了换衣服而残杀身躯，世上的人一定认为他胡涂。
English: If there were such a man, who would cut off his head in order to change his hat, and mutilate his body in order to change his clothes, the people of the world would certainly think he was crazy.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：冠，所以饰首也，衣，所以饰身也，杀所饰要所以饰，则不知所为矣。
现代文：因为帽子是用来打扮头部的，衣服是用来打扮身体的，残杀要打扮的头颅身躯以求得作打扮用的衣帽的完好，这就是不懂得自己的行动该以什么为目的了。
English: Because the hat is used to dress the head, the clothes are used to dress the body, and killing the head and body to be dressed in order to keep the hat intact is not knowing what the purpose of one's actions should be.

古文：世之走利有似于此。
现代文：世上的人趋向财利跟这种情形相似。
English: The tendency of people in the world to seek financial gain is similar to this situation.

古文：危身伤生、刈颈断头以徇利，则亦不知所为也。
现代文：他们危害身体，损伤生命，甚至不惜割断脖子、砍掉头颅来追求财利，这也是不懂得该以什么为目的。
English: They endanger their bodies, damage their lives, and even cut their necks and cut off their heads in pursuit of financial gain, which is also because they do not know what to aim for.

古文：太王亶父居邠，狄人攻之。
现代文：太王亶父居于邠地，北方狄人攻打他。
English: His father, the great king, lived in the land of Yunnan, and the northern Di people attacked him.

古文：事以皮帛而不受，事以珠玉而不肯，狄人之所求者，地也。
现代文：太王亶父用皮毛丝帛侍奉他们，狄人不接受，用珍珠美玉侍奉他们，狄人不应允。狄人所要的是土地。
English: Their great-grandfather served them with fur and silk, but they would not accept it; he served them with pearls and precious stones, but they would not listen. What they wanted was land.

古文：太王亶父曰： 与人之兄居而杀其弟，与人之父处而杀其子，吾不忍为也。
现代文：而如果为此同狄人争战，一定含使很多年轻人战死。太王亶父说： 跟人家的哥哥在一起，却使他的弟弟被杀，跟人家的父亲在一起，却使他的儿子被杀，我不忍心这样做。
English: And if you fight with the Di people for this, you will certainly cause many young people to die in battle. The great king said: "To be with someone's brother and have his brother killed, to be with someone's father and have his son killed, I can't bear to do that."

古文：皆勉处矣！为吾臣与狄人臣，奚以异？
现代文：你们都好好在这里住下去吧，给我做臣民和给狄人做臣民有什么不同呢?
English: You should all live here. What's the difference between being a subject to me and being a subject to Di?

古文：且吾闻之，不以所以养害所养。 
现代文：而且我听说，不为用以养育民众的土地危害所养育的民众。 
English: And I've heard it said that people who aren't raised for the land they're raised on are a danger to it.

古文：杖策而去。
现代文：于是拄着手杖离开了邠。
English: So he left the donkey with his staff.

古文：民相连而从之，遂成国于岐山之下。
现代文：百姓们成群结队地跟着他，终于在岐山下又建起了国家。
English: The people followed him in droves, and finally a state was established at the foot of the mountain.

古文：太王亶父可谓能尊生矣。
现代文：太王亶父可算是能够看重生命了。
English: The great-grandfather can be said to value life.

古文：能尊生，虽贵富，不以养伤身；虽贫贱，不以利累形。今受其先人之爵禄，则必重失之。
现代文：能够看重生命，即使富贵，也不因为供养丰足损害生命，即使贫贱，也不为了财利而拖累身体，假如人们继承了先人的官爵俸禄，一定舍不得失去。
English: If people can value life, even if they are rich and noble, they will not harm life because they are well provided for, and even if they are poor, they will not drag down their bodies for financial gain. If people have inherited the official salary of their ancestors, they will not be willing to lose it.

古文：生之所自来者久矣，而轻失之，岂不惑哉！
现代文：而生命的由来长久多了，人们却不把失去生命放在心上，达难道不是胡涂吗?
English: And the origin of life is much longer, but people do not take the loss of life to heart. Isn't that nonsense?

古文：韩魏相与争侵地。
现代文：韩魏两国互相争夺侵占来的土地。
English: Han and Wei countries fought against each other for the occupied land.

古文：子华子见昭釐侯，昭釐侯有忧色。
现代文：子华子拜见韩昭釐侯，昭釐侯面有忧色。
English: Zihua Zi met Han Zhaohong, and Zhaohong's face was sad.

古文：子华子曰： 今使天下书铭于君之前，书之曰： 左手攫之则右手废，右手攫之则左手废，然而攫之必有天下。 
现代文：子华子悦： 假使现在天下人在您面前写下铭文，这样写道： 左手抓取这篇铭文就砍击右手，右手抓取这篇铭文就砍去左手，但是抓取了就一定占有天下。 
English: Zihua Ziyue: If all the people in the world were to write an inscription in front of you now, they would write it like this: If you grasp this inscription with your left hand, you will cut off your right hand; if you grasp this inscription with your right hand, you will cut off your left hand; but if you grasp it, you will surely occupy the whole world.

古文：君将攫之乎？亡其不与？ 
现代文：您是抓取呢，还是不抓取呢? 
English: Are you going to grab it or not?

古文：昭釐侯曰： 寡人不攫也。 
现代文：昭釐侯说： 我是不抓取的。 
English: Zhaohui Hou said, "I don't want to be captured."

古文：子华子曰： 甚善。
现代文：子华子说； 您说得很好。
English: Zihua Zi said; You spoke very well.

古文：自是观之，两臂重于天下也。
现代文：由此看来，两臂比天下重要。
English: From this point of view, two arms are more important than the whole world.

古文：身又重于两臂。
现代文：而身体又比两臂重要。
English: And the body is more important than the arms.

古文：韩之轻于天下远；今之所争者，其轻于韩又远。
现代文：韩国比天下次要得多，现在您争夺的土地又比韩国次要得多。
English: Korea is much less important than the world, and now you are competing for land that is much less important than Korea.

古文：君固愁身伤生以忧之，戚不得也。 
现代文：您丢掉两臂占有天下尚且不愿去做，反倒要劳神伤生为得不到这些土地而忧虑，这恐怕是不得当的。 
English: It is probably not right for you to occupy the whole world with both hands and not want to do it, but to work hard and worry about not getting these lands.

古文：昭釐侯曰： 善。教寡人者众矣，未尝得闻此言也。 
现代文：昭釐侯说； 好，教诲我的人已有很多了，但我从未听刘过这样的话。 
English: "Well, I've had a lot of people teach me, but I've never heard Liu say anything like that," Mr. Zhao said.

古文：子华子可谓知轻重矣。
现代文：子华子可说是知道轻重了。
English: Zihua Zi can be said to know what is important.

古文：知轻重，故论不过。
现代文：知道轻重，所以议论不犯错误。
English: They know what is important, so they can talk without making mistakes.

古文：中山公子牟谓詹子曰: 身在江海之上，心居乎魏阙之下，奈何？ 
现代文：中公子牟对詹子说： 我身居江海之上，可是心却在朝廷之中，该怎么办? 
English: Zhongguo Zimou said to Zhan Zi: I live on the river, but my heart is in the court. What should I do?

古文：詹子曰： 重生。
现代文：詹于说； 看重生命。
English: Zhan Yu said; value life.

古文：重生则轻利。 
现代文：看重生命就会轻视名利了。
English: To value life is to despise fame and fortune.

古文：中山公子牟曰： 虽知之，犹不能自胜也。 
现代文：中山公子牟说： 虽然知道这个道理，还是不能克制自己。 
English: Mr. Nakayama said, "Although I know this truth, I still cannot restrain myself.

古文：詹子曰： 不能自胜则纵之，神无恶乎！不能自胜而强不纵者，此之谓重伤。重伤之人无寿类矣。 
现代文：詹子说； 不能克制自己就放纵它，这样，精神就没什么伤害了吧，不能克制自己又硬不放纵，这叫做双重损伤，双重损伤的人没有长寿的。 爱类
English: Zhan Zi said: If you can't restrain yourself, you can indulge it, so there's no harm to the spirit. If you can't restrain yourself and don't indulge, it's called double damage. People with double damage don't have a long life.

古文：五曰：仁于他物，不仁于人，不得为仁。不仁于他物，独仁于人，犹若为仁。
现代文：对其他物类仁爱，对人却不仁爱，不能算是仁，对其他物类不仁爱，只是对人仁爱，仍然算是仁。
English: To be benevolent to other species but not to human beings is not benevolence, but to be benevolent to human beings is still benevolence.

古文：仁也者，仁乎其类者也。
现代文：所谓仁，就是对自己的同类仁爱。
English: The so-called benevolence is benevolence to one's own kind.

古文：故仁人之於民也，可以便之，无不行也。
现代文：所以仁德的人对于百姓，只要可以使他们得利，就没有什么事情是不去做的。
English: Therefore, people of benevolence for the people, as long as they can make them benefit, there is nothing not to do.

古文：神农之教曰: 士有当年而不耕者，则天下或受其饥矣；女有当年而不绩者，则天下或受其寒矣。 
现代文：神农的教令说： 男子如果有人正当成年却不种田，那么天下就会有人因此而挨饿，女子如果有人正当成年却不缉麻，那么天下就会有人因此而受冻。 
English: Shennong's edict said: If a man who is of legal age does not farm, there will be people starving in the world. If a woman who is of legal age does not gather hemp, there will be people freezing in the world.

古文：故身亲耕，妻亲绩，所以见致民利也。
现代文：所以神农自己亲自种田，妻子亲自缉麻，以此表示要为百姓谋利。
English: Therefore, Shennong himself personally planted fields, and his wife personally hunted hemp, in order to make a profit for the people.

古文：贤人之不远海内之路，而时往来乎王公之朝，非以要利也，以民为务故也。
现代文：贤人不嫌海内路途遥远，时来时往于君主的朝廷，并不是以此谋求私利，而是要努力为百姓谋利的缘故。
English: Wise men do not like to travel long distances by sea. They come and go from time to time to the monarch's court, not to seek personal gain, but to strive for the sake of the people.

古文：人主有能以民为务者，则天下归之矣。
现代文：国君如有能努力为百姓谋利益，那么天下就会归附他了。
English: If there is a sovereign who can work hard for the benefit of the people, then the world will belong to him.

古文：王也者，非必坚甲利兵选卒练士也，非必隳人之城郭杀人之士民也。
现代文：统一天下，并不一定要靠坚利的武器铠甲和经过挑选的精兵猛士，不一定非要毁坏人家的城郭杀戮人家的臣民。
English: To unify a country, it is not necessary to rely on sturdy weapons, armor and selected elite soldiers, and it is not necessary to destroy other people's castles and kill other people's subjects.

古文：上世之王者众矣，而事皆不同，其当世之急、忧民之利、除民之害同。
现代文：上古统一天下的人很多，他们的情形都不相同，但他们承担社会的急难，关心百姓的利益，消除百姓的祸害，这是相同的。
English: In ancient times, there were many people who were in the same position, and their situations were all different, but they shouldered the social hardships, cared about the interests of the people, and eliminated the scourge of the people, which is the same.

古文：公输般为高云梯，欲以攻宋。
现代文：公输般制作高大的云梯，想用来进攻宋国。
English: He wanted to use the tall ladder to attack Song.

古文：墨子闻之，自鲁往，裂裳裹足，日夜不休，十日十夜而至于郢。
现代文：墨子听说这件事，从鲁国出发步行到楚国去。他撕了衣裳裹脚，日夜不停地走，一直走了十天十夜才到达郢都。
English: When Mozi heard about this, he set out on foot from the State of Lu to the State of Chu. He tore his clothes and bound his feet, walking day and night without stopping. He walked for ten days and ten nights until he reached the capital of Shu.

古文：见荆王曰： 臣北方之鄙人也，闻大王将攻宋，信有之乎？ 
现代文：墨子拜见楚王，说： 我是北方的鄙野之人，听说大王想进攻宋国，确实有这回事吗? 
English: Mozi paid a visit to King Chu and said, "I am a person from the northern wilds. I heard that the great king wanted to attack Song. Is this really true?

古文：王曰： 然。 墨子曰： 必得宋乃攻之乎？亡其不得宋且不义犹攻之乎？ 
现代文：楚王说； 有， 墨子说： 您是认为一定能得到宋国才进攻它呢，还是即使得不到宋国并且要落下不义的名声仍要进攻它呢? 
English: King Chu said, "Yes," and Mozi said, "Do you think that you can only attack Song without fail, or do you still want to attack Song even if you can't get it and you want to lose your reputation for injustice?"

古文：王曰： 必不得宋且有不义，则曷为攻之？ 
现代文：楚王说： 如果一定不能得到宋国而且有不义的名声，那么为什么还进攻它? 
English: King Chu said, "If you can't get Song and it has an unfair reputation, then why attack it?"

古文：墨子曰： 甚善。
现代文：墨子说： 您说得很好。
English: Mozi said, "You spoke very well.

古文：臣以宋必不可得。 
现代文：我认为您一定不能得到宋国。 
English: I think you must not get the Song Dynasty.

古文：王曰： 公输般，天下之巧工也，已为攻宋之械矣。 
现代文：楚王说， 公输般是天下最有名的巧匠，已经制作出进攻宋国的器械了。 
English: King Chu said that Gongpu, the world's most famous craftsman, had already made the equipment to attack Song.

古文：墨子曰： 请令公输般试攻之，臣请试守之。 
现代文：墨子说： 请您让公输般试着攻一攻，我来试着守一守。 
English: Mozi said: Please let me try to attack like a loser, and I will try to defend.

古文：于是公输般设攻宋之械，墨子设守宋之备。
现代文：于是公输般设置攻宋的器械，墨子设置守宋的设备。
English: As a result, the instruments for attacking the Song Dynasty were set up, and the equipment for defending the Song Dynasty was set up.

古文：公输般九攻之，墨子九却之，不能入。故荆辍不攻宋。
现代文：公输般多次进攻，墨于多次把他打遇，公输般不能攻人城中，所以楚国不再进攻宋国。
English: Chu attacked Song many times, but was defeated many times. Chu could not attack Song, so Chu no longer attacked Song.

古文：墨子能以术御荆免宋之难者，此之谓也。
现代文：所谓墨子能够设法抵御楚国而解救宋国的危难，说的就是这件事。
English: The so-called Mozi's ability to manage to fend off the danger of Chu and save Song is what this story is about.

古文：圣王通士，不出于利民者无有。
现代文：圣明的君主和通达的士人，言行不出自为民谋利的人是没有的。
English: There is no such thing as a saintly monarch or an enlightened statesman who cannot speak and act for the benefit of the people.

古文：昔上古龙门未开，吕梁未发，河出孟门，大溢逆流，无有丘陵沃衍、平原高阜，尽皆灭之，名曰 鸿水 。
现代文：上古时代，龙门山尚未开凿，吕粱山尚来打通，黄河从孟门山漫过，大水泛滥横流，不管丘陵、沃野、平原、高山，全都淹没，人们把它叫做 鸿水 。
English: In ancient times, Longmen Mountain had not yet been excavated, Lvanshan had yet to be opened, the Yellow River flowed through the Monmen Mountain, and the floodwaters flowed across the hills, fertile fields, plains, and mountains, all of which were flooded. People called it the "great water."

古文：禹于是疏河决江，为彭蠡之障，干东土，所活者千八百国。
现代文：于是禹疏通黄河，导引长江，筑起彭蠡泽的堤防，使东方洪水消退，拯救的国家有一千八百多个。
English: As a result, Yu dredged the Yellow River, guided the Yangtze River, built the embankment of Penghu Lake, and caused the Eastern Flood to recede, saving more than 1,800 countries.

古文：此禹之功也。
现代文：这是禹的功绩啊！
English: This is Yu's achievement!

古文：勤劳为民，无苦乎禹者矣。
现代文：为百姓辛苦操劳，没有比得上禹的了。
English: There is no one like Yu to work hard for the people.

古文：匡章谓惠子曰： 公之学去尊，今又王齐王，何其到也？ 
现代文：匡章对意子说； 您的学说主张废弃尊位，现在却尊齐王为王，为什么言行如此矛盾昵? 
English: Kuanzhang said to Yizi: Your doctrine advocates the abolition of dignity, but now you honor the king as king. Why are your words and deeds so contradictory?

古文：惠子曰： 今有人于此，欲必击其爱子之头，石可以代之一一 匡章曰： 公取之代乎？其不与？ 
现代文：惠子说： 假如有这样一个人，迫不得已，一定得击打自己的爱子之头，而爱子之头又可以用石头代替一一 匡章接过来说： 您是拿石头代替呢，还是不这样做呢? 
English: Keiko said, "If there were such a person, out of necessity, he would have to hit the head of his beloved son, and the beloved son's head could be replaced with a stone." Kuanzhang continued, "Would you take a stone instead, or would you not do that?

古文： 施取代之。
现代文：惠子说： 我是要拿石头来代替爱子之头的。
English: Keiko said, "I want to replace Aiko's head with a rock."

古文：子头，所重也；石，所轻也。击其所轻以免其所重，岂不可哉！ 
现代文：爱子之头是重要的，石头是轻贱的，击打轻贱之物使重要之物避免受害，为什么不可以呢? 
English: The head of the beloved son is important, the stone is unimportant, hitting the unimportant thing to prevent the important thing from being harmed, why not?

古文：匡章曰： 齐王之所以用兵而不休，攻击人而不止者，其故何也？ 惠子曰： 大者可以王，其次可以霸也。
现代文：匡章又问： 齐王用兵不休，攻战不止，是什么缘故呢? 惠子说： 因为这样做功效大的话可以称王天下，次一等也可以称霸诸侯。
English: Kuanzhang also asked, "What is the reason for King Qi's incessant use of troops and endless attacks?" Keiko said, "Because if this is done effectively, he can be praised as the king of the world, and the next highest rank can also be praised for dominating the princes."

古文：今可以王齐王而寿黔首之命，免民之死，是以石代爱子头也，何为不为？ 
现代文：现在可以用尊齐王为王的方法使齐王罢兵，使百姓得以寿终，免于死亡，这正是用石头代替受子之头啊！为什么不去做呢? 
English: Now we can use the method of honoring King Qi as king to make King Qi retire from the army, so that the people can live to the end and avoid death. This is exactly replacing the head of the son-in-law with a stone! Why not do it?

古文：民寒则欲火，暑则欲冰，燥则欲湿，湿则欲燥。
现代文：百姓寒冷了就希望得到火，炎热了就希望得到冰，干燥了就希望潮湿些，潮湿了就希望干燥些。
English: When it's cold, people want fire, when it's hot, they want ice, when it's dry, they want wet, and when it's wet, they want dry.

古文：寒暑燥湿相反，其于利民一也。
现代文：寒冷与炎热、干燥与潮湿互相对立，但它们在利于百姓方面是一样的。
English: Cold and heat, dryness and dampness are opposed to each other, but they are the same in terms of benefiting the people.

古文：利民岂一道哉！
现代文：为民谋利岂止一种办法呢？
English: Isn't there more than one way to benefit the people?

古文：当其时而已矣。
现代文：只不过要适合时宜罢了。
English: It's just a matter of timing.

古文：六曰：力贵突，智贵卒。
现代文：贵卒使用力量贵在突然，智慧的发明贵在快。
English: The use of force is sudden, and the invention of wisdom is fast.

古文：得之同则速为上，胜之同则湿为下。
现代文：得到的一样，先得为上，胜利的相同，大汗淋漓、鲜血淋漓为下。
English: The same as getting, the first to get is on the top, the same as winning, sweating profusely and bleeding profusely is on the bottom.

古文：所为贵骥者，为其一日千里也；旬日取之，与驽、骀同。
现代文：人们看重骐骥，是因为它能日行千里，如果走上十天才能到达，就与劣马相同了。
English: People value the donkey because it can travel thousands of miles a day. If it takes ten days to get there, it's the same as the inferior horse.

古文：所为贵镞矢者，为其应声而至；终日而至，则与无至同。
现代文：人们看重利箭，是因为它能应声而至；如果整整一天才能到达，就跟没有达到目标结果相同了。
English: People value a sharp arrow because it comes in response to a sound; if it takes a whole day to arrive, it is the same as not achieving the goal.

古文：吴起谓荆王曰: 荆所有余者地也；所不足者民也。
现代文：吴起对楚王说： 楚国有余的是土地，不足的是百姓。
English: Wu Qi said to the King of Chu: What the state of Chu has in excess is land, what it lacks is the people.

古文：今君王以所不足益所有余，臣不得而为也。 
现代文：现在您想用本就不足的百姓作战来增加本就有余的土地，我是无法办到的。 
English: Now you want to use the already insufficient people to fight to increase the already surplus land, I can't do it.

古文：于是令贵人往实广虚之地。
现代文：于是下令显贵们迁居到荒无人烟的地方去。
English: So he ordered the dignitaries to move to a deserted place.

古文：皆甚苦之。
现代文：显贵们都深以为苦。
English: The dignitaries were deeply distressed.

古文：荆王死，贵人皆来。
现代文：楚王死了，显贵们都回到京城。
English: King Chu died, and the dignitaries all returned to the capital.

古文：尸在堂上，贵人相与射吴起。
现代文：楚王尸体停在堂上，显贵们共同射吴起。
English: The body of King Chu stopped on the hall, and the dignitaries jointly shot Wu Qi.

古文：吴起号呼曰： 吾示子吾用兵也。 
现代文：吴起高喊着说。 我让你们看看我怎样用兵！ 
English: Wu Qi shouted, "Let me show you how I use soldiers!

古文：拔矢而走，伏尸插矢而疾言曰： 群臣乱王！ 
现代文：拔下箭跑到堂上，趴在楚王尸体上，一面把箭插于王尸，一面大声说道： 臣子们作乱射王尸！ 
English: He pulled out the arrow and ran to the hall, lay down on the corpse of King Chu, and while sticking the arrow into the king's corpse, he said loudly: "Ministers, make a mess and shoot the king's corpse!"

古文：吴起死矣，且荆国之法，丽兵于王尸者，尽加重罪，逮三族。
现代文：吴起虽说死了，而楚国的法律，武器碰到君王身体的都要处以重罪，连及三族。
English: Although Wu Qi is said to be dead, according to the laws of the State of Chu, if a weapon touches the body of the king, it will be punished with a felony, including the three tribes.

古文：吴起之智可谓捷矣。
现代文：吴起用智可算是敏捷。
English: Wu Qiming's use of intelligence can be considered agile.

古文：齐襄公即位，憎公孙无知，收其禄。
现代文：齐襄公即位，厌恶公孙无知，收回了他的禄位。
English: Prince Qixiang ascended the throne, detested his grandson's ignorance, and took back his throne.

古文：无知不说，杀襄公。
现代文：无知很不高兴，杀死了襄公。
English: Ignorance was not happy and killed Prince Xiang.

古文：公子纠走鲁，公子小白奔莒。
现代文：公子纠投奔到鲁国，公子小白出逃到莒国。
English: Prince Guozong fled to Lu Province, while Prince Xiaobai fled to Shandong Province.

古文：既而国杀无知，未有君，公子纠与公子小白皆归，俱至，争先入公家。
现代文：不久国内杀死了无知，齐国没有君主。公子纠与公子小白都动身回国，二人同时到达国内，争先入主朝廷。
English: Soon, ignorance was killed in the country, and there was no monarch in Qi. Prince Guo and Prince Xiaobai both set out to return home, and both arrived in the country at the same time, vying to enter the main court.

古文：管仲扜弓射公子小白，中钩。
现代文：管仲开弓射公子小白，射中了衣带钩。
English: Guanzhong opened his bow and shot the boy, Xiao Bai, and hit the belt hook.

古文：鲍叔御公子小白僵。
现代文：鲍叔牙让公子小白仰面倒下去。
English: Bao Shouya let his son Xiao Bai go down with a hangover.

古文：管子以为小白死，告公子纠曰： 安之，公子小白已死矣！ 
现代文：管仲以为小白死了，告诉公子纠说； 从从容容地走吧，公子小白已经死了。 
English: Guanzhong thought Xiao Bai was dead, so he told the young man to argue with him. Let's go at a leisurely pace, the young man Xiao Bai is dead.

古文：鲍叔因疾驱先入，故公子小白得以为君。
现代文：鲍叔牙乘机赶车快跑，首先进入朝廷，所以公子小白得以做国君。
English: Bao Shuga took advantage of the opportunity to catch a fast car and first entered the imperial court, so Prince Xiaobai was able to become the king.

古文：鲍叔之智应射而令公子小白僵也，其智若镞矢也。
现代文：鲍叔牙机智地对付管仲射来的箭让公子小白仰面倒下，他用起智来象箭一样快啊！
English: Bao Shuzhen cunningly dealt with the arrow shot by Guanzhong, and let the young man Xiao Bai fall down. He used his wits to be as fast as an arrow!

古文：周武君使人刺伶悝于东周。
现代文：周武君派人刹东周刺杀伶悝。
English: Zhou Wukun sent people to the east of the city to assassinate him.

古文：伶悝僵，令其子速哭曰： 以谁刺我父也？ 
现代文：伶悝仰面倒下，让他的儿子赶快装哭，边哭边说； 这是谁刺杀了我的父亲啊? 
English: And he fell on his face; and his son made haste to come to him, and fell on his face, and wept, and said, Who is he that smote my father?

古文：刺者闻，以为死也。
现代文：行刺的人听到哭声，以为伶悝已经死了。
English: The assassins thought the baboon was dead when they heard her crying.

古文：周以为不信，因厚罪之。赵氏攻中山。
现代文：周武君认为刺客的话不诚实，于是重重地治了他的罪。赵国进攻中山。
English: Zhou Wujun thought that the assassin's words were dishonest, so he severely punished his crime. Zhao attacked Zhongshan.

古文：中山之人多力者曰吾丘鴧，衣铁甲操铁杖以战，而所击无不碎，所冲无不陷，以车投车，以人投人也。
现代文：中山国有个力士叫吾丘鸩，穿着铁甲，拿着铁杖作战。打到什么，什么就被打碎，冲向哪里，哪里就被冲垮。
English: In Zhongshan Province, there is a wrestler named Wuchuang, who wears iron armor and fights with an iron rod. Whatever he hits, he will break, and wherever he rushes, he will be crushed.

古文：几至将所而后死。
现代文：尽管几乎打到赵军主帅所在之处，也还是被杀死了。
English: Despite being hit almost to where Zhao Jun, the coach, was, he was also killed.

