古文：哥舒高封哥舒翰，其先盖突骑施酋长哥舒部之裔。
现代文：哥舒翰的祖先是突骑施酋长哥舒部的后代。
English: The ancestor of Goshukhan was a descendant of the Tujia Shi chieftain Goshukbe.

古文：父道元，为安西都护将军、赤水军使，故仍世居安西。
现代文：他的父亲是哥舒道元，任安西都护将军、赤水军使，因此仍然世代住在安西。
English: His father was Koshu Dogen, the Anxi tutelary general and envoy of the Red Water Army, so he still lived in Anxi for generations.

古文：翰少补效毂府果毅，家富于财，任侠重然诺，纵蒱酒长安市。
现代文：哥舒翰少年时任效毂府果毅官，家里非常富有，行侠义重承诺，在长安街上随意赌博喝酒。
English: When he was a young boy, Goshukhan served as an official of the Guoyi prefecture. His family was very rich, and he made a solemn promise to be a chivalrous person. He would gamble and drink alcohol on the streets of Chang'an.

古文：年四十馀，遭父丧，不归。
现代文：四十多岁时，父亲去世了，也不回去。
English: When he was in his forties, his father passed away, and he never went back.

古文：不为长安尉所礼，慨然发愤，游河西，事节度使王倕。
现代文：因为没受到长安县县尉的礼遇，激动发愤，跑到河西，在节度使王亻垂的手下办事。
English: Because he did not receive the courtesy of the Chang'an County Lieutenant, he was so excited and angry that he ran to Hexi to work under Wang Xitai at the festival.

古文：倕攻新城，使翰经略，稍知名。
现代文：王亻垂进攻新城，派哥舒翰指挥，略有了点名气。
English: Wang Bingli attacked Xincheng, and sent brother Shu Han to command, and gained a little fame.

古文：又事王忠嗣，署衙将。
现代文：后又在王忠嗣的手下办事，被任命为衙将。
English: Later, he worked under Wang Zhongzhi and was appointed as a general.

古文：翰能读《左氏春秋》、《汉书》，通大义。
现代文：哥舒翰能读懂《左氏春秋》、《汉书》，精通主要内容。
English: Goshukhan can read "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," "Chinese Classics," and is proficient in the main content.

古文：疏财，多施予，故士归心。
现代文：不重钱财，常赠送、奖赏兵将，所以兵将都向着他。
English: He did not care much about money. He often gave gifts and rewards to generals, so generals were attracted to him.

古文：为大斗军副使，佐安思顺，不相下。
现代文：后任大斗军副使，辅佐安思顺，两人互不服气。
English: He was later appointed deputy envoy of the Great Patriotic War, assisted by An Sishun, and the two were not satisfied with each other.

古文：忠嗣更使讨吐蕃，副将倨见，翰怒，立杀之，麾下为股抃。
现代文：王忠嗣又派他去讨伐吐蕃，副将见面时很傲慢，哥舒翰发怒了，立刻杀死了他，部下都害怕了。
English: Wang Zhongzhi also sent him to fight the Tuyu. The vice-general was very arrogant when he met him. Brother Shu Han became angry and immediately killed him. His subordinates were afraid.

古文：迁左卫郎将。
现代文：后升任左卫郎将。
English: He was later promoted to General of the Left Guards.

古文：吐蕃盗边，与翰遇苦拔海。
现代文：吐蕃进犯边境，与哥舒翰在苦拔海遭遇。
English: Tubo invaded the border, and met with Goshukhan in the bitter sea.

古文：吐蕃枝其军为三行，从山差池下，翰持半段枪迎击，所向辄披靡，名盖军中。
现代文：吐蕃把军队分成三行，从山上参差不齐地冲下来，哥舒翰手持半截矛迎战，所到之处敌军都败逃了，名声在全军中数第一。
English: Tubo divided the army into three lines and rushed down from the mountain in a jagged line. Goshukhan met the battle with a half-cut spear in his hand. The enemy army was defeated and fled everywhere he went. His reputation was the first in the whole army.

古文：擢授右武卫将军，副陇右节度，为河源军使。
现代文：后被提升为武卫将军、陇右节度副使、河源军使。
English: Later, he was promoted to General Wuwei, Vice-Minister of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and Minister of the Army of Heyuan.

古文：先是，吐蕃候积石军麦熟，岁来取，莫能禁。
现代文：此前，吐蕃每年等积石军的麦子熟了，就来收割，没人能够禁止。
English: Previously, every year, when the Jisheng Army's wheat was ripe, they would come to harvest, and no one could forbid them.

古文：翰乃使王难得、杨景晖设伏东南谷。
现代文：哥舒翰派王难得、杨景晖在东南山沟里埋伏。
English: Goshukhan rarely sent Wang, and Yang Jingyao ambushed him in the southeastern mountain gully.

古文：吐蕃以五千骑入塞，放马褫甲，将就田，翰自城中驰至鏖斗，虏骇走，追北，伏起，悉杀之，只马无还者。
现代文：吐蕃派五千名骑兵进入境内，放马解甲，准备下田割麦，哥舒翰从城中飞马前来进攻，吐蕃军受惊逃跑，追击时，伏兵杀出，将敌兵全部杀死了，没有一名骑兵逃回去。
English: Tubo sent five thousand cavalrymen into the territory, let the horses loose, and prepared to go down to the fields to cut wheat. Goshukhan attacked from a flying horse in the city. The Tubo army was frightened and fled. When they chased, they killed the ambush, killed all the enemy soldiers, and none of the cavalrymen fled back.

古文：翰尝逐虏，马惊，陷于河，吐蕃三将欲刺翰，翰大呼，皆拥矛不敢动，救兵至，追杀之。
现代文：哥舒翰有次追击敌军，战马受惊，陷到河里，吐蕃三位将领想刺杀他，他大吼一声，敌将都持矛不敢动手，救兵来了，追上把他们都杀死了。
English: Goshukhan once chased the enemy army. The horses were frightened and fell into the river. Three generals of the Tujue wanted to assassinate him. He shouted loudly. The enemy generals did not dare to use their spears. The rescuers came and caught up with them and killed them all.

古文：翰有奴曰左车，年十六，以膂力闻。
现代文：哥舒翰有名家奴叫左车，十六岁，因力气大有名。
English: Sixteen-year-old Goshukhan is famous for his strength.

古文：翰工用枪，追及贼，拟枪于肩，叱之，贼反顾，翰刺其喉，剔而腾之，高五尺许，乃堕，左车即下马斩其首，以为常。
现代文：哥舒翰擅长使用矛，追上敌人后，把矛对准他的肩上，大吼一声，敌人回头看，哥舒翰就刺中他的咽喉，把他挑起来，腾空有五尺多高，才落下来，左车就下马割下他的头，成了惯例。
English: Goshukhan was good at using a spear. When he caught up with an enemy, he aimed the spear at his shoulder and shouted loudly. When the enemy looked back, Goshukhan stabbed him in the throat, picked him up, soared more than five feet into the air, only to fall down. It became customary to dismount and cut off his head.

古文：会忠嗣被罪，帝召翰入朝，部将请赍金帛以救忠嗣，翰但赍朴装，曰： 使吾计从，奚取于是？
现代文：遇上王忠嗣被治罪，皇帝召哥舒翰进京朝拜，部下将领请求带钱财去救王忠嗣，哥舒翰只带行装，说道 ：如果我的计谋成功了，哪里需要钱财？
English: When Wang Zhongzhi was being punished, the emperor summoned Brother Shuhan to Beijing to pay homage. His subordinate generals asked him to bring money to save Wang Zhongzhi. Brother Shuhan only brought his uniform and said, "If my plan succeeds, where is the need for money?"

古文：不行，用此足矣。 
现代文：如果不成功，有行装就够了。 
English: If it doesn't work out, it's enough to have a line-up.

古文：翰至，帝虚心待，与语，异之，拜鸿胪卿，为陇右节度副大使。
现代文：哥舒翰到朝廷朝拜，皇帝不带成见地接见他，和他谈话，认为他不寻常，任命他为鸿胪卿、陇右节度副大使。
English: Goshukhan made a pilgrimage to the imperial court. The emperor received him without prejudice, talked with him, thought he was unusual, and appointed him as the deputy ambassador of Hongyeqing and Shiyu Jiedu.

古文：翰已谢，即极言忠嗣之枉。
现代文：哥舒翰谢恩后，就极力说王忠嗣受冤枉。
English: After his brother Shuhan expressed his gratitude, he tried his best to say that Wang Zhongzi had been wronged.

古文：帝起入禁中，翰叩头从帝，且泣。
现代文：皇帝起身去宫中，哥舒翰跟着皇帝磕头，并且哭了。
English: The emperor got up and went to the palace. Brother Shu Han followed the emperor, bowed his head and cried.

古文：帝寤，为末贷其罪，忠嗣不及诛。朝廷称其义。
现代文：皇帝醒悟了，将王忠嗣贬官免死，王忠嗣没被杀头，朝官们都称赞他仗义。
English: When the emperor came to his senses, he spared the death of Wang Zhongzhi, who had been demoted. Wang Zhongzhi was not beheaded, and the court officials all praised him for his bravery.

古文：逾年，筑神威军青海上，吐蕃攻破之。
现代文：过了一年，他在青海湖边筑神威军，吐蕃攻破了它。
English: A year later, he built the Shenwei army on the edge of Qinghai Lake, and the Tuoba defeated it.

古文：更筑于龙驹岛，有白龙见，因号应龙城。
现代文：他又在龙驹岛筑城，当时有白龙出现过，因此称这城为应龙城。
English: He also built a city on the island of Longjing. At that time, a white dragon appeared, so the city was called Yinglong City.

古文：翰相其川原宜畜牧，谪罪人二千戍之，由是吐蕃不敢近青海。
现代文：哥舒翰观察当地河流和土地适宜畜牧，就派两千名罪犯去驻守，从此吐蕃不敢接近青海湖。
English: When Goshukhan observed that the local rivers and land were suitable for animal husbandry, he sent two thousand convicts to stand guard. From then on, the spade dared not approach Qinghai Lake.

古文：天宝八载，诏翰以朔方、河东群牧兵十万攻吐蕃石堡城。
现代文：天宝八年，有诏命哥舒翰率朔方、河东群牧兵十万名攻打吐蕃石堡城。
English: In the eighth year of Tianbao, Brother Shuhan was ordered by the emperor to lead the Shuo side and the herdsmen of the Hedong group of 100,000 to attack the Tujianshi Castle.

古文：数日未克，翰怒，捽其将高秀岩、张守瑜，将斩之。秀岩请三日期，如期而下。
现代文：几天没攻下，哥舒翰发怒了，打了部将高秀岩、张守瑜，要杀他们，高秀岩请求给三天时间，按期攻下了它。
English: After failing to capture it for a few days, Goshukhan got angry and hit the commanders Gao Xiuyan and Zhang Shouyu, wanting to kill them. Gao Xiuyan asked for three days and captured it on schedule.

古文：遂以赤岭为西塞，开屯田，备军实。
现代文：于是将赤岭作为西部边塞，进行屯田，准备军需品。
English: As a result, Akaling was used as a western border fortress, and military camps were set up to prepare military supplies.

古文：加特进，赐赉弥渥。
现代文：加封为特进官，赏赐更丰厚了。
English: He was also awarded a special promotion, making his reward even richer.

古文：十一载，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：天宝十一年，又加封为开府仪同三司。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianbao, he was also awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si.

古文：翰素与安禄山、安思顺不平，帝每欲和解之。
现代文：哥舒翰一贯和安禄山、安思顺合不来，皇帝常想让他们和解。
English: Goshukhan had always been at odds with An Lushan and An Sishun, and the emperor often wanted to reconcile them.

古文：会三人俱来朝，帝使骠骑大将军高力士宴城东，翰等皆集。
现代文：遇上他们三人都来朝拜，皇帝就派骠骑大将军高力士在城东设宴，哥舒翰等都去了。
English: When all three of them came to pay homage, the emperor sent his cavalry general, Colossus, to hold a banquet in the eastern part of the city.

古文：诏尚食生击鹿，取血瀹肠为热洛河以赐之。
现代文：有诏命尚食生杀鹿，用血煮汤做热洛何赏给他们吃。
English: There was an imperial edict ordering them to kill deer and boil them in blood to make soup.

古文：翰母，于阗王女也。
现代文：哥舒翰的母亲是于阗国王的女儿。
English: Goshukhan's mother was the daughter of King Yuwen.

古文：禄山谓翰曰： 我父胡，母突厥；公父突厥，母胡。
现代文：安禄山对哥舒翰说 ：我们的父亲是胡人，母亲是突厥人；您父亲是突厥人，母亲是胡人。
English: An Lushan said to Goshukhan: Our father is a Hu and our mother is a Turk; your father is a Turk and your mother is a Hu.

古文：族类本同，安得不亲爱？ 
现代文：种族都一样，怎能不友好呢？ 
English: We are all the same race, how can we not be friendly?

古文：翰曰： 谚言 狐向窟嗥，不祥 ，以忘本也。
现代文：哥舒翰说 ：俗话说 狐狸对巢穴叫，不吉利 ，因为它忘了本。
English: Brother Shuhan said: As the saying goes, the fox shouts to the den, unlucky, because it forgot the book.

古文：兄既见爱，敢不尽心。 
现代文：兄长既然愿和我交好，我敢不一心友好吗？ 
English: Since my brother is willing to make friends with me, do I dare not be friendly?

古文：禄山以翰讥其胡，怒骂曰： 突厥敢尔！ 
现代文：安禄山以为哥舒翰讥讽他是胡人，发怒骂道： 突厥种竟敢这样？ 
English: An Lushan thought that Goshukhan was mocking him for being a barbarian, and angrily scolded him: How dare a Turk do this?

古文：翰欲应之，力士目翰，翰托醉去。
现代文：哥舒翰想回骂他，高力士用眼色阻止了，哥舒翰假托酒醉走了。
English: Brother Shuhan wanted to scold him back, but Goliath stopped him with a wink. Brother Shuhan pretended to be drunk and left.

古文：久之，进封凉国公，兼河西节度使。
现代文：过了一段时间，晋爵为凉国公，兼任河西节度使。
English: After a period of time, he became the prince of Liang Province and also served as the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：攻破吐蕃洪济、大莫门等城，收黄河九曲，以其地置洮阳郡，筑神策、宛秀二军。
现代文：攻下了吐蕃洪济、大莫门等城，占领了黄河九曲，在这地区设洮阳郡，筑神策、宛秀两个军。
English: They captured the cities of Tubo, Hongji, and Damomen, and occupied the nine bends of the Yellow River. In this area, they set up the Poyang County, and the two armies of Chuxinshe and Wanxiu.

古文：进封西平郡王，赐音乐、田园，又赐一子五品官，裨将赏拜有差。
现代文：又晋爵为西平郡王，并赏给他乐师、田地花园，又赐他一个儿子为五品官，部将也各有封赏。
English: He also promoted him to the peerage as the king of Xiping County, and awarded him a musician, a field garden, and gave him a son as a five-rank official, and each minister also received a reward.

古文：宰相杨国忠恶禄山，白发其反状，故厚结翰。
现代文：宰相杨国忠讨厌安禄山，告发他反叛的表现，因此和哥舒翰结为深交。
English: Prime Minister Yang Guozhong disliked Anlu Shan and denounced his rebellious behavior, so he formed a close friendship with his brother Shu Han.

古文：俄进太子少保。
现代文：不久，又晋升太子少保。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Crown Prince and Junior Protector.

古文：翰耆酒，极声色，因风痹，体不仁。
现代文：哥舒翰爱喝酒，享受音乐女色不节制，因而患了风痹，身体不能行动。
English: Goshukhan loved to drink, enjoyed music, and was sexually promiscuous. As a result, he suffered from wind paralysis and was physically unable to move.

古文：既疾废，遂还京师，阖门不朝请。
现代文：因病残疾后，就回到了京城，闭门不去朝拜了。
English: After he became disabled due to illness, he returned to the capital and no longer went to worship behind closed doors.

古文：十四载，禄山反，封常清以王师败。
现代文：天宝十四年，安禄山反叛了，封常清率唐军战败。
English: In the 14th year of Tianbao, Anlu Mountain rebelled, and the Tang army led by Feng Changqing was defeated.

古文：帝乃召见翰，拜太子先锋兵马元帅，以田良丘为军司马，萧昕为判官，王思礼、钳耳大福、李承光、高元荡、苏法鼎、管崇嗣为属将，火拔归仁、李武定、浑萼、契苾宁以本部隶麾下，凡河、陇、朔方、奴刺等十二部兵二十万守潼关。
现代文：皇帝就召见哥舒翰，任命为太子先锋兵马元帅，命田良丘任军司马、萧昕任判官，王思礼、钳耳大福、李承光、高元荡、苏法鼎、管崇嗣任部将，火拔归仁、李武定、浑萼、契必艹宁率自己的部队隶属于他，总计有河西、陇右、朔方、奴刺等十二部二十万军队守卫潼关。
English: The emperor summoned Goshukhan, appointed the prince as the vanguard of soldiers and horses, appointed Tian Liangqiu as the military secretary, Xiao Yu as the judge, Wang Sili, Wu Er Dafu, Li Chengguang, Gao Yuanlang, Su Fading, and Guan Chongzi as the general, and Hui Ba Guiren, Li Wuding, Hun Cai, and Che Bijuning led their own troops subordinate to him, with a total of twelve units of 200,000 troops guarding Shiguan, such as Hexi, Shao Yu, Shuo Fang, and Nuxi.

古文：师始东，先驱牙旗触门，堕注旄，干折，众恶之。
现代文：军队开始东行，先锋的大旗碰到城门上，主帅标志掉到地上，旗杆折断了，大家都为此感到害怕。
English: The army began to march eastward, the vanguard's great flag touched the city gate, the captain's sign fell to the ground, the flagpole broke, and everyone was afraid of it.

古文：天子御勤政楼临送，诏翰以军行，过门毋下，百官郊饯，旌旗亘二百里。
现代文：皇帝到勤政楼送行，下诏命哥舒翰率军前进，过城门不要下车，群臣到郊外饯行，旗帜排列有两百里长。
English: The emperor went to the Gongzheng Tower to see him off, and issued an edict ordering his brother Shuhan to lead the army forward, and not to get off the car after passing through the city gate. The courtiers marched to the suburbs, and the flags were arranged two hundred miles long.

古文：翰惶恐，数以疾自言，帝不听。
现代文：哥舒翰害怕，多次说自己有病，皇帝不听他的。
English: Goshukhan was afraid. He said many times that he was ill, but the emperor did not listen to him.

古文：然病痼不能事，以军政委良丘，使王思礼主骑，李承光主步。
现代文：但他因病不能管事，将军中事务交给田良丘管，又命王思礼主管骑兵，李承光主管步兵。
English: However, he was unable to take charge of affairs due to illness, so he put Tian Liangqiu in charge of general affairs, and also ordered Wang Sili to be in charge of cavalry, and Li Chengguang to be in charge of infantry.

古文：三人争长，政令无所统一，众携弛，无斗意。
现代文：三个人争当指挥，军令不能统一，军队不齐心，纪律差，没有斗志。
English: Three people are vying for command, military orders cannot be unified, the army is not united, discipline is poor, and there is no fighting spirit.

古文：明年，进拜尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：第二年，升任尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the position of Shoshu Zuopuzha, and in the same year, he was promoted to the position of Shomon Shimohei.

古文：禄山遣子庆绪攻关，翰击走之。
现代文：安禄山派儿子安庆绪进攻潼关，哥舒翰把他打跑了。
English: An Lushan sent his son An Qingxu to attack Shaoguan. Brother Shuhan beat him and ran away.

古文：始，安思顺度禄山必反，尝为帝言，得不坐。
现代文：先前，安思顺估计安禄山必定反叛，曾对皇帝说过，因此没连坐治罪。
English: Previously, An Shishun estimated that Anlu Mountain must have rebelled, and had told the emperor, so he did not even take the punishment.

古文：翰既恶禄山，又怨思顺。
现代文：哥舒翰既讨厌安禄山，又恨安思顺。
English: Brother Shuhan hated both Anlu Mountain and Anshun.

古文：及是，知重兵在己，有所论请，天子重违，因伪为贼书遗思顺者，使关逻禽以献。
现代文：到这时，知道兵权在握，上奏请求治他的罪，皇帝不想违拗他，就假冒给安禄山送信的，让潼关巡逻的抓住献上。
English: At this time, knowing that the military power was in his hands, the emperor did not want to defy him, so he pretended to send a letter to Anlu Mountain and let the Shaoguan patrol seize and present it.

古文：翰因疏七罪，请诛之。
现代文：哥舒翰因此上疏列举安思顺的七条罪状，请求杀死他。
English: Goshukhan therefore enumerated seven charges against Ansishun and requested that he be killed.

古文：有诏思顺及弟元贞皆赐死，徙放其家。
现代文：皇帝下诏杀死了安思顺和弟弟安之贞，流放了他们的家属。
English: The emperor had An Shishun and his brother An Zhizhen killed and their families exiled.

古文：国忠始惧。
现代文：杨国忠开始害怕了。
English: Yang Guozhong began to be afraid.

古文：或说翰曰： 禄山本以诛国忠故称兵，今若留卒三万守关，悉精锐度浐水诛君侧，此汉挫七国计也。 
现代文：有人劝哥舒翰说 ：安禄山本来用杀杨国忠的理由起兵，现如留三万兵守潼关，率全部精兵渡过氵产水杀死杨国忠，这是汉朝挫败七国叛乱的办法。 
English: Some people advised Brother Shu Han to say: An Lushan originally used the reason of killing Yang Guotong as a pretext to raise an army. Now, if he keeps thirty thousand soldiers to guard Shiguan and leads all the elite soldiers to cross the Yangtze River to kill Yang Guotong, this is a way for the Han Dynasty to defeat the rebellion of the seven countries.

古文：思礼亦劝翰。
现代文：王思礼也劝哥舒翰。
English: Wang Sili also advised his brother Shuhan to quit.

古文：翰犹豫未发，谋颇露。
现代文：哥舒翰犹豫而没出兵，计谋略有泄露。
English: Goshukhan hesitated and did not send troops, and the plot was slightly leaked.

古文：国忠大骇，入见帝曰： 兵法，安不忘危。
现代文：杨国忠大惊，进宫求见皇帝说： 兵法说，居安思危。
English: Yang Guozhong was shocked. He entered the palace and asked to see the emperor. He said, "According to the laws of war, it is important to stay safe.

古文：大兵在潼关而无后殿，万有一不利，京师危矣。 
现代文：大军在潼关但无后备，万一作战失利，京城就危险了。 
English: A large army is in Shaoguan, but there is no backup. In the unlikely event that the battle is lost, the capital city will be in danger.

古文：即募牧儿三千人，日夜训练，以剑南列将分统之。
现代文：于是招募了监牧小儿三千名，日夜训练，任命剑南的将领们分别率领他们。
English: So he recruited three thousand overseer children, trained them day and night, and appointed generals from Jian'nan to lead them separately.

古文：又募万人屯灞上，使腹心杜乾运为帅。
现代文：又招募了一万兵驻扎在灞上，派心腹杜乾运任主帅。
English: He also recruited ten thousand soldiers to be stationed on the raft, and sent his confidant Du Qianyun to be the commander.

古文：翰疑图己，表请乾运兵隶节下，因诡召乾运计事者，至军，即斩首枭牙门，并其军。
现代文：哥舒翰怀疑他要算计自己，上奏请求将杜乾运的军队划归他统率，因而假托召杜乾运商量事情，杜乾运到他的军营来后，哥舒翰立即将他在军门斩首示众，吞并了他的军队。
English: Goshukhan suspected that he was trying to take advantage of him and made a request to transfer the army of Du Qianyun to his command, so he pretended to summon Du Qianyun to discuss the matter. After Du Qianyun arrived at his military camp, Goshukhan immediately beheaded him at the military gate and annexed his army.

古文：国忠愈恐，谓其子曰： 吾无死所矣！ 
现代文：杨国忠更害怕了，对他的儿子说： 我死无葬身之地了。 
English: Yang Guozhong was even more afraid and said to his son, "I have nowhere to go after I die."

古文：然翰亦不自安，又谋久不决。
现代文：但哥舒翰自己也不安心，加上计划长期没做决断。
English: But Goshukhan himself is not at ease, and the plan has not been decided for a long time.

古文：数奏言： 禄山虽窃据河朔，不得人心，请持重以敝之，待其离隙，可不血刃而禽。 
现代文：他多次上奏说 ：安禄山虽然占据了河北，但不得人心，请求稳妥地对付他，等到他们分裂了，可以不战就抓获他。 
English: He repeatedly appealed that although Anlu Mountain occupied Hebei, it was not popular, and asked to deal with him safely. When they were divided, they could capture him without a fight.

古文：贼将崔乾祐守陕郡，仆旗鼓，羸师以诱战。
现代文：叛军将领崔乾驻扎在陕郡，隐蔽了军队，只布置一点弱兵来引诱唐军进攻。
English: The rebel general, Cui Qian, stationed in Shaanxi, concealed the army and only deployed a few weak soldiers to lure the Tang army to attack.

古文：觇者曰： 贼无备，可图也。 
现代文：间谍报告说： 叛军没有防备，可以进攻。 
English: The spy reported: The rebels are unprepared and can attack.

古文：帝信之，诏翰进讨。
现代文：皇帝相信了，下诏命哥舒翰进兵讨伐。
English: The emperor believed him and ordered his brother Shuhan to join the crusade.

古文：翰报曰： 禄山习用兵，今始为逆，不能无备，是阴计诱我。
现代文：哥舒翰报告说 ：安禄山长期带兵，现刚称帝，不会没有准备，这是他用计引诱我们。
English: Goshukhan reported: An Lushan has been leading soldiers for a long time, now he has just been proclaimed emperor, he will not be unprepared, this is his trick to lure us.

古文：贼远来，利在速战。
现代文：叛军从远处来，有利在速战。
English: Rebels come from far away and have the advantage of being able to fight quickly.

古文：王师坚守，毋轻出关，计之上也。
现代文：我军只应坚守，不应轻率出关，这是上策。
English: Our army should only hold fast, and should not rashly leave the pass. This is the best policy.

古文：且四方兵未集，宜观事势，不必速。 
现代文：况且各地的军队还没集中，应该观察局势，不必速战。 
English: Moreover, the military forces of various regions have not yet been concentrated. It is necessary to observe the situation, and there is no need for a quick war.

古文：当是时，禄山虽盗河、洛，所过残杀，人人怨之，淹时月不能进尺寸地。
现代文：这时，安禄山虽然攻占了河北、洛阳，但所过之处杀人如麻，人们都恨他，因此很长时间没能攻占一点地方。
English: At this time, although An Lushan conquered Hebei and Luoyang, he was hated by the people everywhere he went, so he was unable to conquer any place for a long time.

古文：又郭子仪、李光弼兵益进，取常山十数郡。
现代文：加上郭子仪、李光弼的军队继续前进，攻占了常山等十多个郡。
English: In addition, the armies of Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao continued to advance and captured more than ten counties including Changshan.

古文：禄山始悔反矣，将还幽州以自固。
现代文：安禄山开始后悔不该反叛了，准备回到幽州去固守。
English: Anlu Mountain began to regret that it should not have rebelled, and prepared to return to Yuzhou to hold fast.

古文：而国忠计迫，谬说帝趣翰出潼关复陕、洛。
现代文：但杨国忠担心哥舒翰算计自己，胡乱劝皇帝催他出潼关去收复陕州、洛阳。
English: However, Yang Guozhong was worried that his brother Shuhan was counting on him and recklessly persuaded the emperor to urge him to leave Shaoguan to recover Shaanxi and Luoyang.

古文：时子仪、光弼遥计曰： 翰病且耄，贼素知之，诸军乌合不足战。
现代文：当时郭子仪、李光弼在河北分析说： 哥舒翰有病并且年迈，叛贼都知道，部下各军都是匆忙集中的不能力战。
English: At that time, Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao analyzed the situation in Hebei and said: Goshukhan is sick and old, the traitors all know that the subordinate armies are hastily concentrated and unable to fight.

古文：今贼悉锐兵南破宛、洛，而以余众守幽州，吾直捣之，覆其巢窟，质叛族以招逆徒，禄山之首可致。
现代文：现叛军用全部精兵南攻宛丘、洛阳，而用剩余的军队守卫幽州，我们直攻幽州，捣毁他们的巢穴，将叛军的亲属抓住招降叛军，安禄山的头就可到手。
English: Now the rebel army has all the elite soldiers attacking Wanqiu and Luoyang in the south, while using the remaining troops to guard Yuzhou. We will directly attack Yuzhou, destroy their nests, seize the relatives of the rebels and recruit rebels, and the head of Anlu Mountain can be obtained.

古文：若师出潼关，变生京师，天下怠矣。 
现代文：如果哥舒翰的军队出了潼关，京城出了问题，天下就危险了。 
English: If Goshukhan's army gets out of the pass, and there is a problem in the capital, the world will be in danger.

古文：乃极言请翰固关无出军。
现代文：于是极力请求令哥舒翰固守潼关不要出兵。
English: Therefore, he strongly requested his brother Shuhan to hold fast to Shaoguan and not to send troops.

古文：而帝入国忠之言，使使者趣战，项背相望也。
现代文：但皇帝听了杨国忠的话，派使者催促出兵，一个使者接着一个。
English: But the emperor listened to Yang Guozhong's words and sent emissaries to urge the dispatch of troops, one emissary after another.

古文：翰窘不知所出。
现代文：哥舒翰被逼得没有办法。
English: His brother Shuhan was forced to leave.

古文：六月，引而东，恸哭出关，次灵宝西原，与乾祐战。
现代文：六月份，率军东征，大哭着出了潼关，驻扎在灵宝县的西原，与崔乾会战。
English: In June, he led the army on an eastward march, crying out of Shaoguan, stationed in the West Plains of Lingbao County, and fought with Cui Qian.

古文：由关门七十里，道险隘，其南薄山，北阻河，贼以数千人先伏险。
现代文：从潼关出去十七里远，路险且窄，路南边是山，北边是黄河，叛军派几千人先埋伏在险要地方。
English: Seventeen miles away from Shouguan, the road is dangerous and narrow. There are mountains on the south side of the road and the Yellow River on the north side. The rebels sent several thousand people to ambush the dangerous place.

古文：翰浮舟中流以观军，谓乾祐兵寡，易之，促士卒进，道岨无行列。
现代文：哥舒翰坐船在河中观察情况，认为崔乾的军队少，轻视他们，催军队进兵，路险队伍乱了。
English: Goshukhan rode a boat in the river to observe the situation, thought that Cui Qian's army was small, despised them, urged the army to enter the army, and the road hazard team was chaotic.

古文：贼乘高颓石下击，杀士甚众。
现代文：叛军登高推岩石砸下来，砸死很多士兵。
English: The rebels climbed up and pushed the rocks down, killing many soldiers.

古文：翰与良丘登北阜，以军三万夹河鸣鼓，思礼等以精卒居前，余军十万次之。
现代文：哥舒翰和田良丘登上北岸的山丘，率兵三万隔河击鼓，王思礼率精兵在前边，其余十万军队在后边。
English: Goshukhan and Tian Liangqiu ascended the hill on the north bank, leading 30,000 soldiers across the river to play the drums. Wang Sili led the elite soldiers in front, and the remaining 100,000 troops were behind.

古文：乾祐为阵，十十五五，或却或进，而陌刀五千列阵后。王师视其阵无法，指观嗤笑，曰： 禽贼乃会食。 
现代文：崔乾布阵，有的一行十人，有的五人，有的后退，有的前进，但将五千精锐的长刀手排在阵后，唐军见叛军军阵混乱，指着看并且嘲笑他们，说道 ：抓住敌将再会餐。 
English: Cui Qian spread out his troops, some in a line of ten, some in a line of five, some retreating, some advancing, but he placed five thousand elite swordsmen at the back of the line. When the Tang army saw that the rebel army was in disarray, they pointed and laughed at them, saying, "Catch the enemy and we will have dinner again."

古文：及战，乾祐旗少偃，如欲遁者，王师懈，不为备。
现代文：开战后，崔乾军旗帜有些歪倒下去，像想逃跑的样子，唐军松懈了，没有防备。
English: After the start of the war, the banner of the Cui Qian army fell down a little crooked, as if it wanted to escape. The Tang army was slack and unprepared.

古文：伏忽起薄战，皆奋死斗。
现代文：叛军伏兵突然杀出近战，并且都拼命作战。
English: The rebel ambush suddenly turned into a melee, and both sides fought hard.

古文：翰以氈蒙马车，画龙虎，饰金银爪目，将骇贼，掎戈矢逐北。
现代文：哥舒翰用毛毡蒙着马车，上面画上龙和虎，装饰有金银的爪子和眼睛，想惊吓叛军，士兵拿着戈和箭准备追击。
English: Goshukhan, with a wagon covered with felt and painted with dragons and tigers, decorated with gold and silver claws and eyes, wants to scare the rebels, and the soldiers are ready to chase him with clubs and arrows.

古文：贼负薪塞路，顺风火其车，熛焱炽突，腾烟如夜，士不复相辨，自相斗杀，尸血狼籍，久乃悟。又弃甲奔山谷及陷河死者十一二。
现代文：叛军用柴草塞住道路，顺风放火烧车，烈焰冲天，黑烟满天，士兵不能互相辨别，自相砍杀，死伤累累，很长时间才弄明白，同时丢掉铠甲跑到山谷里和掉到河里淹死了的有十分之一二。
English: The rebels blocked the road with firewood, set fire to the car with the wind, the flames soared into the sky, the black smoke filled the sky, the soldiers could not distinguish each other, killed each other, killed and wounded, it took a long time to figure out, and lost their armor and ran into the valley and fell into the river, and two-tenths of them drowned.

古文：有粮艘百余，军争济，艘辄沉，至缚矛盾乘以度，喧叫振天地。
现代文：黄河中有运粮船一百多艘，士兵们抢着上船，船都压沉了，甚至有人把长矛盾牌绑起来坐着渡河，哭叫声惊天动地。
English: There were more than a hundred grain ships in the Yellow River. Soldiers scrambled to get on board, and the ships were all sunk. Some people even tied up long contradictory placards and sat on them to cross the river, crying and screaming at the top of their lungs.

古文：贼乘之，奔溃略尽。
现代文：叛军乘机进攻，唐军都逃跑了。
English: The rebels took the opportunity to attack, and the Tang army fled.

古文：始，斗门有三堑，广二丈，深一丈，士马奔籥相压迮，少选堑平，后至者践之以入。
现代文：先前，关门口有三道壕沟，宽两丈，深一丈，人和马逃跑时都跌了进去，一会儿都填满了，后到的人就踏着死尸逃进关内。
English: Previously, there were three trenches at the gate, each two meters wide and one meter deep. When people and horses ran away, they fell into them. They filled up in a moment, and those who came later ran into the gate on the dead bodies.

古文：既败，翰引数百骑绝河还营，羸兵裁八千，至潼津，收散卒复守关。
现代文：战败后，哥舒翰率几百名骑兵渡过黄河回到军营，老弱兵只有八千人，回到潼津，招集失散士兵再来守卫潼关。
English: After the defeat, Goshukhan led several hundred cavalrymen across the Yellow River and returned to the military camp. The old and weak soldiers were only eight thousand. They returned to Shaozing and summoned the separated soldiers to guard Shaoguan again.

古文：乾祐进攻，于是火拔归仁等绐翰出关，翰曰： 何邪？ 
现代文：崔乾佑进兵攻城，这时火拔归仁等人把哥舒翰骗出关外，哥舒翰说： 有什么事？ 
English: Cui Qianyu entered the army to attack the city. At this time, Hui Ba Guiren and others cheated Goshukhan out of the prison. Goshukhan said: What's the matter?

古文：曰： 公以二十万众，一日覆没，持是安归？
现代文：他们说 ：您率二十万军队，一天就丢光了，带这点军队回哪里去？
English: They said: You led two hundred thousand troops and lost them all in one day. Where are you going with this army?

古文：公不见高仙芝等事乎？ 
现代文：您不知道高仙芝等人的下场吗？ 
English: Don't you know what happened to Gao Xianzhi and the others?

古文：翰曰： 吾宁效仙芝死，汝舍我。 
现代文：哥舒翰说 ：我宁愿像高仙芝那样去死，你们放了我吧。 
English: Brother Shuhan said, "I would rather die like Gao Xianzhi, so let me go."

古文：归仁不从，执以降贼，械送洛阳，京师震动，由是天子西幸。
现代文：火拔归仁不听，把他抓住投降了叛军，戴上刑具，送到了洛阳，长安震惊，因此皇帝西逃了。
English: He didn't listen, so the rebels captured him, put him in a torture device, and sent him to Luoyang. Chang'an was shocked, so Emperor Xi fled.

古文：禄山见翰责曰： 汝常易我，今何如？ 
现代文：安禄山见到哥舒翰后责问他说 ：你总是瞧不起我，现在怎么样？ 
English: After seeing Goshukhan, An Lushan scolded him, saying, "You always look down on me, how about now?

古文：翰俯伏谢罪曰： 陛下拨乱主。
现代文：哥舒翰跪拜认罪说： 您是开创天下的皇帝。
English: Goshukhan knelt down and confessed, saying, "You are the emperor who created the world.

古文：今天下未平，李光弼在土门，来瑱在河南，鲁炅在南阳，臣为陛下以尺书招之，三面可平。 
现代文：现国内还未平定，李光弼在土门，来調在河南，鲁炅在南阳，为臣给皇上写信去招降他们，三处都可以平定了。 
English: At present, the country has not yet been pacified. Li Guangya is in Tuyun, Lai Tong is in Henan, and Lu Ya is in Nanyang. As a vassal, I will write to the emperor to invite them to surrender. All three places can be pacified.

古文：禄山悦，即署司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：安禄山高兴了，就任命他为司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: When An Lushan was happy, he appointed him as the secretary of the sky and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：执火拔归仁，曰： 背主忘义，吾不尔容。 
现代文：安禄山把火拔归仁绑起来，说： 你背叛主人不顾道义，我容不得你。 
English: An Lushan tied up the fire-breather Kuerin and said: "You betrayed your master regardless of morality, I will not tolerate you.

古文：斩之。
现代文：就把他杀了。
English: Just kill him.

古文：翰以书招诸将，诸将皆让翰不死节。
现代文：哥舒翰写信招降众将，众将都谴责他不守节而死。
English: Goshukhan wrote a letter calling for the surrender of the generals, and the generals all condemned him to die for breaking the rules.

古文：禄山知事不可就，囚之。
现代文：安禄山知道招降不能成功，就把他关押起来。
English: An Lushan knew that he could not succeed in inducing him to surrender, so he imprisoned him.

古文：东京平，安庆绪以翰度河。及败，乃杀之。
现代文：洛阳收复后，安庆绪带着哥舒翰渡过黄河去了，到战败后，就把他杀了。
English: After the recovery of Luoyang, An Qingxu took his brother Shuhan across the Yellow River. After the defeat, he killed him.

古文：翰为人严，少恩。
现代文：哥舒翰对人严厉，不爱惜士兵。
English: Goshukhan was strict with people and did not spare soldiers.

古文：军行未尝恤士饥寒，有啗民椹者，痛笞辱之。
现代文：军队行动时不过问士兵的饥饿寒冷，有人吃了老百姓的桑葚，他就痛打侮辱。
English: When the army was in action, it didn't care if the soldiers were hungry or cold. If someone ate the people's mulberries, he would beat and insult them.

古文：监军李大宜在军中，不治事，与将士樗蒱、饮酒、弹箜篌琵琶为乐，而士米籺不餍。
现代文：监军李大宜在军队中，也不管事，和将领们赌博、喝酒，弹箜篌琵琶取乐，但士兵们米糠都吃不饱。
English: Li Dayi, the supervisor of the army, did not care about anything in the army. He gambled, drank, and played the gong and lute with the generals for fun, but the soldiers could not get enough rice.

古文：帝令中人袁思艺劳师，士皆诉衣服穿空，帝即斥御服余者，制袍十万以赐其军，翰藏库中，及败，封鐍如故。
现代文：皇帝命宦官袁思艺慰问军队，士兵都诉说衣服穿破了，皇帝就拆宫中多余的衣服，制战袍十万套赐给哥舒翰的军队，他藏到仓库里，到战败后，还原封未动。
English: The emperor ordered the eunuch Yuan Siyi to offer condolences to the troops. The soldiers all complained that their clothes were worn out. The emperor tore up the extra clothes in the palace and made 100,000 sets of battle robes for the troops given to Goshukhan. He hid them in a warehouse. After the defeat, they were returned intact.

古文：先是，有客梁慎初遗翰书，请壁勿战以屈贼，翰善之，奏为左武卫胄曹参军，留幕府。
现代文：先前，有门客梁慎初给哥舒翰写信，请求坚守不出战来制服叛军，哥舒翰认为他说得好，任命他为左武卫胄曹参军，留在官府中。
English: Previously, there was a guest, Liang Shenchu, who wrote a letter to Goshukhan, asking him to stick to not going to war to subdue the rebels. Goshukhan thought he spoke well and appointed him to join the army as a left guard and stay in the government office.

古文：及翰与国忠贰，慎初曰： 难将作矣。 
现代文：到哥舒翰和杨国忠不合，梁慎初说： 灾难要降临了。 
English: When he came to Goshukhan and Yang Guozhong did not get along, Liang Shenhu said: Disaster is coming.

古文：乃遁去。
现代文：就逃跑了。
English: and ran away.

古文：翰失守，华阴、冯翊、上洛郡官吏皆溃。
现代文：哥舒翰丢失了潼关，华阳、冯翊、上洛郡的官员都逃跑了。
English: Goshukhan lost Shaoguan, and officials from Huayang, Fengye and Shangluo counties all fled.

古文：子七人，俱以儒闻。峘，茂才高第，有节概。
现代文：皇帝派剑南将领刘光庭等人率刚招募的军队一万多人去增援哥舒翰，还没到达，哥舒翰已被绑架走了。
English: The emperor sent Liu Guangting, the general of Jian'nan, and others to reinforce Goshukhan with a newly recruited army of more than ten thousand. Before they arrived, Goshukhan had already been kidnapped.

古文：崿、嵫、屺皆明经擢第。
现代文：后来哥舒翰被赠官太尉。
English: Later, his brother Shuhan was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：高仙芝，高丽人。
现代文：赐谥号叫武愍。高仙芝是高丽人。
English: His posthumous name is Mukhyeon. Gao Xianzhi is a Korean.

古文：父舍鸡，初以将军隶河西军，为四镇校将。
现代文：父亲是高舍鸡，开始在河西军任将军，后在四镇任校将。
English: His father was Gao Sheqin, who began as a general in the Hexi Army and later served as a schoolmaster in Shizhen.

古文：仙芝年二十馀，从至安西，以父功补游击将军。
现代文：高仙芝二十几岁时，跟着父亲到了安西，因父亲的战功担任游击将军。
English: When Gao Xianzhi was in his twenties, he followed his father to Anxi and served as a guerrilla general due to his father's military exploits.

古文：数年，父子并班。
现代文：几年后，和父亲官职就相同了。
English: A few years later, he was appointed to the same post as his father.

古文：仙芝美姿质，善骑射，父犹以其儒缓忧之。
现代文：高仙芝容貌漂亮，擅长骑马射箭，他父亲还担心他优柔寡断。
English: Gao Xianzhi is good-looking, good at horseback riding and archery, and his father is worried about his indecisiveness.

古文：初事节度使田仁琬、盖嘉运等，不甚知名。
现代文：开始他在节度使田仁琬、盖嘉运等人手下带兵，不很出名。
English: At the beginning, he led troops under the command of Tian Rincun, Gai Jiayun and others at the festival, and was not very famous.

古文：后事夫蒙灵察，乃善遇之。
现代文：后来隶属夫蒙灵察，开始受重用。
English: Later, she was subordinated to her husband, Meng Lingcha, and began to be used heavily.

古文：开元末，表为安西副都护、四镇都知兵马使。
现代文：开元末年，封他为安西副都护、四镇都知兵马使。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, he was appointed as the Anxi deputy capital guard and the commander of the four towns.

古文：小勃律，其王为吐蕃所诱，妻以女，故西北二十馀国皆羁属吐蕃。
现代文：小勃律国的国王被吐蕃引诱，吐蕃赞普将女儿嫁给他做妻子。因此西北二十多国都归附了吐蕃。
English: The king of the small country of Bodu was seduced by Tubo, and Tubo Zampo married his daughter to him as his wife. As a result, more than twenty countries in the northwest were annexed to Tubo.

古文：自仁琬以来三讨之，皆无功。
现代文：从田仁琬以来多次讨伐小勃律国，都没有成功。
English: Since Tian Rincun, there have been many crusades against Xiaoboru, all of which have been unsuccessful.

古文：天宝六载，诏仙芝以步骑一万出讨。
现代文：天宝六年，皇帝下诏令高仙芝率步、骑兵一万名出兵讨伐。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, the emperor issued an edict ordering Gao Xianzhi to lead 10,000 cavalry troops in a crusade.

古文：是时步兵皆有私马自随，仙芝乃自安西过拨换城，入握瑟德，经疏勒，登葱岭，涉播密川，遂顿特勒满川，行凡百日。
现代文：当时步兵都有私人马匹随行，高仙芝就从安西经过拨换城，进入握瑟德，又经过疏勒，越过葱岭，渡过播密川，就驻扎在特勒满川，共走了一百天。
English: At that time, the infantry were all accompanied by private horses. Gao Xianzhi went from Anxi to Zhucheng via Zhucheng, entered Shixi Sud, passed through Shule, crossed Qiuling, crossed the Hanmi River, and was stationed in the Tule Man River, a total of one hundred days.

古文：特勒满川，即五识匿国也。
现代文：特勒满川就是五识匿国。
English: Telemann River is the country of the Five Senses.

古文：仙芝乃分军为三，使疏勒赵崇玼自北谷道、拨换贾崇瓘祐自赤佛道、仙芝与监军边令诚自护蜜俱入，约会连云堡。
现代文：高仙芝把军队分成三支，派疏勒将领赵崇王此从北谷路线、拨换将领贾崇馞从赤佛路线、高仙芝和监军边令诚从护密路线同时进攻，约定在连云堡会合。
English: Gao Xianzhi divided the army into three, sent Shule general Zhao Chongwang to attack simultaneously from the Chatan route, transferred general Jia Chongyi from the Red Buddha route, and Gao Xianzhi and the supervisor of the army, Bianlingcheng, from the guarding route, and agreed to meet at Lianyungang Fort.

古文：堡有兵千馀。
现代文：连云堡有守兵一千多人。
English: There are more than a thousand guards at Lianyungang Fort.

古文：城南因山为栅，兵九千守之。
现代文：城南边依山修寨，又有守兵九千人守卫。
English: On the south side of the city, there is a walled village built on a hill, guarded by nine thousand soldiers.

古文：城下据婆勒川。
现代文：城下是婆勒川。
English: Below the castle is the Boler River.

古文：会川涨，不得度，仙芝杀牲祭川，命士人赍三日备集水涯，士不甚信。
现代文：遇上川水上涨，无法渡过，高仙芝杀牲口祭祀，命兵将每人带三天的干粮在川边集合，兵将都不大相信。
English: When the river water rises and it is impossible to cross, Gao Xianzhi kills the animal sacrifice, and the soldiers gather at the riverside with three days of dry grain each. The soldiers are not very confident.

古文：既涉，旗不沾，鞯不濡。
现代文：涉水过去后，旗没沾水，马未湿鞍。
English: After wading through the water, the flag did not get wet, and the horse did not get a wet saddle.

古文：兵已成列，仙芝喜，告令诚曰： 向吾方涉，贼击我，我无类矣。
现代文：军队列好了阵，高仙芝高兴了，对边令诚说： 刚才我们才过河时，敌军如进攻我们，我们就活不成了。
English: The army was lined up, Gao Xianzhi was happy, and said to the border guard: Just now, when we crossed the river, if the enemy attacked us, we would not be able to survive.

古文：今既济而阵，天以贼赐我也。 
现代文：现已过河列好阵，是老天帮助我们讨贼成功。 
English: Now that we have crossed the river, it is God's will to help us succeed in catching the thief.

古文：遂登山挑战，日未中，破之。拔其城，斩五千级，生禽千人，马千馀匹，衣资器甲数万计。
现代文：于是上山挑战，没到中午，攻破了敌军，占领了敌人城堡，杀头五千颗，俘获了一千人，战马一千多匹，衣裳物资器械铠甲数以万计。
English: So he challenged himself to go up the mountain, and before noon, he broke through the enemy army, occupied the enemy castle, killed five thousand, captured one thousand people, more than one thousand horses, and tens of thousands of clothes, materials, equipment, and armor.

古文：仙芝欲遂深入，令诚惧，不肯行。
现代文：高仙芝想乘胜向国内进攻，边令诚害怕了，不肯走。
English: Gao Xianzhi wanted to take advantage of the victory to attack the country, but the border guard was afraid and refused to go.

古文：仙芝留羸弱三千使守，遂引师行。
现代文：高仙芝就留下三千名老弱兵派他据守，于是率军进兵。
English: Gao Xianzhi left behind three thousand old and weak soldiers to send him to defend, and then led the army into battle.

古文：三日，过坦驹岭，岭峻绝，下四十里。
现代文：三天后，登上了坦驹岭。山岭极陡，下山有四十里路。
English: Three days later, he climbed Mount Tanggu, an extremely steep mountain with a forty-mile descent.

古文：仙芝恐士惮险不敢进，乃潜遣二十骑，衣阿弩越胡服来迎，先语部校曰： 阿弩越胡来迎，我无虑矣。 
现代文：高仙芝怕兵将畏险不敢前进，就偷偷派二十名骑兵，穿上阿弩越胡的服装来迎接，他先对部将说： 阿弩越胡来迎接了，我没有担心了。 
English: Gao Xianzhi was afraid that the soldiers would be afraid of danger and would not dare to advance, so he secretly sent twenty cavalrymen to wear the clothes of Ah Yue Hu to welcome them. He first said to the commander: Ah Yue Hu has come to welcome me, I am not worried anymore.

古文：既至，士不肯下，曰： 公驱我何去？ 
现代文：到了山边，兵将不肯下山，说 ：您把我们带到哪里去？ 
English: When they reached the edge of the mountain, the soldiers refused to come down, saying: "Where are you taking us?"

古文：会二十人至，曰： 阿努越胡来迎，已数娑夷桥矣。 
现代文：碰上先派出的二十人来了，声称 ：阿弩越胡来迎接大军，我们已切断了娑夷桥。 
English: When they met the first twenty men, they came and announced: "Ayu Yue Hu has come to meet the large army, we have cut off the Qianyi Bridge."

古文：仙芝即阳喜，令士尽下。
现代文：高仙芝马上假装高兴，命兵将都下山。
English: Gao Xianzhi immediately pretended to be happy, and the soldiers all went down the mountain.

古文：娑夷河，弱水也。
现代文：娑夷河就是弱水。
English: The Qiyi River is weak water.

古文：既行三日，越胡来迎。
现代文：走了三天，阿弩越胡真的前来迎接了。
English: After walking for three days, Grandmother Yue Hu really came to meet us.

古文：明日，至阿弩越城。
现代文：第二天，到达了阿弩越城。
English: The next day, we arrived at the town of Ayuehue.

古文：遣将军席元庆以精骑一千先往，谓小勃律王曰： 不窥若城，吾假道趋大勃律耳。 
现代文：他派将军席元庆率精锐骑兵一千名先去，对小勃律国王说： 不攻你的城，我们路过到大勃律国去。 
English: He sent his general Yuan Qing and a thousand of his best cavalry ahead, and said to King Little Borth: "We won't attack your city, we'll pass by and go to Big Borth."

古文：城中大酋领皆吐蕃腹心，仙芝密令元庆曰： 若酋领逃者，弟出诏书呼之，赐以缯彩，至，皆缚以待我。 
现代文：城中大酋长都是吐蕃的心腹，高仙芝暗地命令席元庆说： 如果酋长们逃跑，就拿出诏书叫住他们，赐给他们绸缎，他们来了，就都绑起来等我处置。 
English: The great chiefs in the city were all close confidants of Tubo, and Gao Xianzhi secretly ordered Xi Yuanqing to say: If the chiefs escape, take out an edict to stop them, give them silken robes, and when they come, tie them up and wait for me to deal with them.

古文：元庆如言。
现代文：席元庆按他说的做了。
English: Shi Yuanqing did as he said.

古文：仙芝至，悉斩之。
现代文：高仙芝到了，把酋长们都杀了。
English: Gao Xianzhi arrived and killed all the chiefs.

古文：王及妻逃山穴，不可得，仙芝招喻，乃出降，因平其国。
现代文：国王和妻子逃到山洞里去了，抓不到，高仙芝招降他们，他们才出来投降了，因此平定了小勃律国。
English: The king and his wife fled into a cave and could not be caught. Gao Xianzhi invited them to surrender, and they came out and surrendered, thus pacifying Xiaoboluo.

古文：急遣元庆断娑夷桥，其暮，吐蕃至，不克度。
现代文：他又赶快派席元庆去砍断了娑夷藤桥。当天傍晚，吐蕃兵来了，不能过河。
English: He also quickly sent Yuanqing to cut off the Qiji Bridge. In the evening of the same day, the Tubo soldiers came and could not cross the river.

古文：桥长度一箭所及者，功一岁乃成。
现代文：藤桥长大约一箭地，需要一年才能建成。
English: The bridge is about a stone's throw long and will take a year to build.

古文：八月，仙芝以小勃律王及妻自赤佛道还连云堡，与令诚俱班师。
现代文：八月份，高仙芝带着小勃律王和妻子从赤佛路线回到连云堡，和边令诚一起率军归来。
English: In August, Gao Xianzhi took Xiao Boru Wang and his wife back to Lianyungang from the Red Buddha Route, and led the army back together with Bian Rongcheng.

古文：于是拂菻、大食诸胡七十二国皆震慑降附。
现代文：这时拂林艹、大食各族七十二国都震惊投降归附了。
English: At this time, the seventy-two countries of all ethnic groups were shocked and surrendered.

古文：仙芝遣判官王庭芬奏捷京师。
现代文：高仙芝派判官王庭芬送捷报到京城。
English: Gao Xianzhi sent the judge Wang Tingfen to Beijing.

古文：军至河西，灵察怒，不迎劳。
现代文：军队回到了河西，夫蒙灵察发怒了，不迎接慰劳他。
English: When the army returned to Hexi, Meng Lingcha's husband became angry and refused to be consoled.

古文：既见，骂曰： 高丽奴，于阗使尔何从得之？ 
现代文：见面后，骂道： 高丽奴才，于阗使你从谁那里得到的？ 
English: After the meeting, he scolded, "Goryeo slave, from whom did you get the yakitori?"

古文：仙芝惧，且谢曰： 中丞力也。 
现代文：高仙芝害怕了，道歉说： 是御史中丞您的大力栽培。 
English: Gao Xianzhi was scared and apologized, saying, "It is because of your vigorous cultivation.

古文：又曰： 焉耆镇守使、安西副都护、都知兵马使，皆何从得之？ 
现代文：他又问： 焉耆镇守使、安西副都护、都知兵马使，都是从谁那里得到的？ 
English: He also asked: From whom did Yancheng Town Guard Envoy, Anxi Deputy Town Guard, and Tochi Soldier and Horse Envoy all come from?

古文：答曰： 亦中丞力也。 
现代文：高仙芝回答说 ：也是御史中丞您的大力栽培。 
English: Gao Xianzhi replied, "It is also due to your vigorous cultivation."

古文：灵察曰： 审若此，捷书不待我而敢即奏，何邪？
现代文：夫蒙灵察说： 知道这些，捷报不经过我就敢上奏，是为什么？
English: Her husband, Meng Lingcha, said: "Knowing this, I dare to play the piano without the newspaper passing by. Why?

古文：奴当斩，顾新立功，故贷尔。 
现代文：奴才该杀，看你刚立了功，饶了你。 
English: Slaves should be killed, look at you, you have just won a merit, I have spared you.

古文：仙芝不知所为。
现代文：高仙芝不知如何是好。
English: I don't know what to make of Gao Xianzhi.

古文：令诚密言状于朝，且曰： 仙芝立功而以忧死，后孰为朝廷用者？ 
现代文：边令诚秘密对朝廷报告了这事，并且说： 如果高仙芝立了功却忧愁而死，以后谁会为朝廷卖力呢？ 
English: Bian Rongcheng secretly reported this to the imperial court and said, "If Gao Xianzhi made great achievements but died in sorrow, who will work hard for the imperial court in the future?"

古文：帝乃擢仙芝鸿胪卿、假御史中丞，代灵察为四镇节度使，而诏灵察还，灵察惧。
现代文：皇帝就提升高仙芝任鸿胪卿、代理御史中丞，代替夫蒙灵察任四镇节度使，下诏命夫蒙灵察回京，他害怕了。
English: The emperor promoted Gao Xianzhi to the position of Hongyuqing and acting goshi zhongzheng, replaced her husband Meng Lingcha as the four-town festival envoy, and ordered her husband Meng Lingcha to return to Beijing. He was afraid.

古文：仙芝朝夕见，辄趋走，灵察益惭。
现代文：高仙芝早晚拜见他，像过去一样行礼，他更惭愧了。
English: Gao Xianzhi visits him in the morning and evening, bowing as in the past, he is even more ashamed.

古文：副都护程千里、衙将毕思琛、行官王滔康怀顺陈奉忠等皆尝谮仙芝于灵察者。
现代文：副都护程千里，衙将毕思琛，行官王滔、康怀顺、陈奉忠等人都曾在夫蒙灵察面前说过高仙芝的坏话。
English: The vice-governor of the capital, vice-commander of the garrison, commander of the garrison, and officials such as Wang Tao, Kang Huai Shun, and Chen Bongzhong all spoke ill of Gao Xianzhi in front of their husbands.

古文：既视事，呼千里嫚骂曰： 公面虽男儿，而心似妇女，何邪？ 
现代文：高仙芝上任后，把程千里喊来骂道： 您外表是个男子，但内心却像个娘们，是为什么？ 
English: After Gao Xianzhi took office, he called Cheng Qianli and scolded him: You look like a man, but you are like a girl at heart. Why?

古文：谓琛曰： 尔夺吾城东千石种田，忆之乎？ 
现代文：又对毕思琛说 ：你夺走了我城东的一千石种子田，还记得吗？ 
English: He also said to Bisya: You took away my 1,000-koku seed field in the east of the city, remember?

古文：对曰： 公见赐者。 
现代文：毕思琛回答说 ：是您赏给我的。 
English: Bessie replied, "You gave it to me."

古文：仙芝曰： 尔时吾畏汝威，岂怜汝而赐邪？ 
现代文：高仙芝说： 那时我怕你的威风，哪里是因可怜赏给你的呢？ 
English: Gao Xianzhi said: At that time, I was afraid of your arrogance. Where is the reward for your mercy?

古文：又召滔，欲捽辱。良久，皆释，曰： 吾不恨矣。 
现代文：他又把王滔喊来，想打他们，过了一阵，把他们都放了，说 ：我的气出了。 
English: He called out again for the king and wanted to beat them, but after a while he let them all go, saying: "I've lost my temper."

古文：由是举军安之。
现代文：因此全军都安心了。
English: As a result, the entire army was reassured.

古文：俄加左金吾卫大将军，与一子五品官。
现代文：不久又加封为左金吾卫大将军，赐他一个儿子为五品官。
English: Soon after, he was also given the title of General Zuo Kinguwei, and one of his sons was given the title of Fifth Rank Officer.

古文：九载，讨石国，其王车鼻施约降，仙芝为俘献阙下，斩之，由是西域不服。
现代文：天宝九年，征讨石国，石国国王车鼻施投降了，高仙芝把他作为俘虏献到朝廷，把他杀死了，从此西域各国不臣服了。
English: In the ninth year of Tianbao, the conquest of Shikoku, the king of Shikoku, Che Nanshi, surrendered. Gao Xianzhi presented him as a prisoner to the imperial court and killed him. Since then, the countries in the western region have not been subjugated.

古文：其王子走大食，乞兵攻仙芝于怛逻斯城，以直其冤。
现代文：石国王子逃到大食，借兵到怛逻斯进攻高仙芝，来报冤杀他父亲的仇。
English: King Shi's son fled to Dafeng and borrowed soldiers to attack Gao Xianzhi in Tieluos to avenge the unjust killing of his father.

古文：仙芝为人贪，破石，获瑟瑟十馀斛、黄金五六橐驼、良马宝玉甚众，家赀累钜万。
现代文：高仙芝生性贪婪，攻占石国后缴获了十几斛瑟瑟、五六匹骆驼驮运的黄金和很多好马宝玉，家财积累极多。
English: Gao Xianchi was greedy by nature. After conquering Shikoku, he captured more than a dozen horses, five or six camels, a lot of gold, and a lot of precious stones. He accumulated a lot of wealth.

古文：然亦不甚爱惜，人有求辄与，不问几何。
现代文：但他也不很吝啬，有人求他就给，不管多少。
English: But he's also not very stingy. If someone asks him for something, he'll give it to them, no matter how much.

古文：寻除武威太守，代安思顺为河西节度使，群胡固留思顺，更拜右羽林军大将军，封密云郡公。
现代文：不久被封为武威太守，代替安思顺任河西节度使，当地各民族坚决挽留安思顺，就又改任他为右羽林军大将军，封他为密云郡公。
English: He was soon appointed as the Wuwei governor-general, replacing An Shishun as the Hexi Festival envoy. Local ethnic groups resolutely retained An Shishun, and then he was appointed as the general of the Uhlin Army, and he was appointed as the Miyun County governor.

古文：禄山反，荣王为元帅，仙芝副之，领飞骑、彍骑及朔方等兵，出禁财募关辅士五万，继封常清东讨。
现代文：安禄山反叛后，任命荣王为元帅，高仙芝做他的副手，率领飞骑、弓广骑和朔方等军队，又拿出皇宫的财宝招募关中士兵五万人，在封常清之后东征。
English: After the rebellion of Anlu Mountain, he appointed Rongwang as marshal, Gao Xianzhi as his deputy, led the armies of Feiqi, Yuguangqi and Shuo Fang, and took out the treasure of the imperial palace to recruit 50,000 soldiers from Guanzhong to march eastward after sealing Changqing.

古文：帝御勤政楼，引荣王受命，宴仙芝以下。
现代文：皇帝到了勤政楼，叫荣王来接受任命，为高仙芝和部下设宴。
English: When the emperor arrived at the Gongzheng Building, he called Rong Wang to accept the appointment and held a banquet for Gao Xianzhi and his subordinates.

古文：帝又幸望春亭劳遣，诏监门将军边令诚监军。
现代文：皇帝又到望春楼慰问送行，下诏命监门将军边令诚为监军。
English: The emperor also went to Wangchun Tower to offer his condolences and send-off, and issued an edict ordering the gatekeeper general Bian Rongcheng to supervise the troops.

古文：次陕郡，而常清败还。
现代文：走到陕郡，封常清战败逃回。
English: He went to Shaanxi, but was defeated and fled back to Fengchang and Qing.

古文：仙芝急，乃开太原仓，悉以所有赐士卒，焚其馀，引兵趋潼关。
现代文：高仙芝急了，就打开太原仓，将所有库存物赏给兵将，烧掉了剩下的，率军赶赴潼关。
English: Gao Xianzhi was in a hurry, so he opened the Taiyuan warehouse, gave all the inventory to the general, burned the rest, and led the army to Shaoguan.

古文：会贼至，甲仗资粮委于道，弥数百里。
现代文：等叛军来了，铠甲兵器物资粮食丢满了道路，长几百里。
English: When the rebels arrived, armored weapons, supplies and grain littered the road, which was several hundred miles long.

古文：既至关，勒兵缮守具，士气稍稍复振。
现代文：他到潼关后，训练士兵修理攻守用具，士气逐渐振作起来了。
English: After he arrived in Shaoguan, he trained soldiers to repair offensive and defensive equipment, and morale gradually picked up.

古文：贼攻关不得入，乃引还。
现代文：叛军进攻潼关攻不破，就退兵了。
English: When the rebels failed to break through at Shaoguan, they withdrew.

古文：初，令诚数私于仙芝，仙芝不应，因言其逗挠状以激帝，且云： 常清以贼摇众，而仙芝弃陕地数百里，朘盗禀赐。 
现代文：此前，边令诚多次因事求高仙芝，高仙芝没有答应，因此边令诚就奏报他不敢进兵损失物资的情况来激怒皇帝，并说 ：封常清说叛军强大动摇军心，而高仙芝放弃了陕郡几百里地，偷偷克扣士兵的粮食和赏赐。 
English: Prior to this, Bian Rongcheng had repeatedly asked Gao Xianzhi about the matter, but Gao Xianzhi did not agree. Therefore, Bian Rongcheng angered the emperor by reporting that he did not dare to enter the army and lost materials, and said: Feng Changqing said that the rebels were strong and shook the military spirit, while Gao Xianzhi gave up hundreds of miles of land in Shaanxi County and secretly cut off the soldiers' grain and rewards.

古文：帝大怒，使令诚即军中斩之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，命边令诚在军中将他们斩首。
English: The emperor was enraged, and on the brink of death, he had them beheaded in the army.

古文：令诚已斩常清，陈尸于蘧祼。
现代文：边令诚将封常清斩首后，把他的尸体放在席子上。
English: After decapitating Feng Changqing, Bian Rongcheng put his corpse on the mat.

古文：仙芝自外至，令诚以陌刀百人自从，曰： 大夫亦有命。 
现代文：高仙芝从外面回来，边令诚身后带着一百名长刀手，说： 御史大夫也有诏命处死。 
English: Gao Xianzhi came back from outside, with a hundred swordsmen behind him, and said, "Dr. Guo Shi also has the imperial command to be executed.

古文：仙芝遽下，曰： 我退，罪也，死不敢辞。
现代文：高仙芝急忙下马，说： 我退兵是有罪，死罪我不敢否认。
English: Gao Xianzhi hurriedly dismounted and said, "I am guilty of deserting the army. I dare not deny the capital crime.

古文：然以我为盗颉资粮，诬也。 
现代文：但认为我偷偷克扣赏赐和军粮，是诬蔑。 
English: But it is a slander to say that I have secretly reduced the bounty and rations.

古文：谓令诚曰： 上天下地，三军皆在，君岂不知？ 
现代文：他对边令诚说： 上有天、下有地，兵将都在这里，您难道不知道？ 
English: He said to the commander, "Don't you know that there is a heaven above and a earth below, and the generals are all here?

古文：又顾麾下曰： 我募若辈，本欲破贼取重赏，而贼势方锐，故迁延至此，亦以固关也。
现代文：他又回头对部下说： 我把你们招募来，当然是想打败叛军多得重赏，但叛军力量正强，所以撤退到这里，也是为了加强潼关的防守。
English: He turned back to his subordinates and said: I recruited you, of course, to defeat the rebels, but the rebels are strong, so I retreated here to strengthen the defense of Shaoguan.

古文：我有罪，若辈可言；不尔，当呼枉。 
现代文：我如有罪，你们可以说，如没有罪，你们就喊冤枉。 
English: If I am guilty, you can say so; if I am not guilty, you can say I am not guilty.

古文：军中咸呼曰： 枉！ 
现代文：全军都喊： 冤枉！ 
English: The whole army shouted: "Wronged!

古文：其声殷地。
现代文：喊声动地。
English: Shouting excitedly.

古文：仙芝视常清尸曰： 公，我所引拔，又代吾为节度，今与公同死，岂命欤！ 
现代文：高仙芝看着封常清的尸体说 ：您是我提拔的，又接替我当节度，我现和你一起死，难道是命吗？ 
English: Gao Xianzhi looked at Feng Changqing's corpse and said, "You were promoted by me, and you succeeded me as governor. I am now going to die with you. Is this really life?

古文：遂就死。
现代文：于是被杀死了。
English: He was killed.

古文：封常清，蒲州猗氏人。外祖教之读书，多所该究。
现代文：封常清是蒲州猗氏县人，外祖父教他读书，学识广博精深。
English: Fong Changqing is a native of Bushi County, Puzhou. His maternal grandfather taught him to read, and his knowledge is extensive and profound.

古文：然孤贫，年过三十，未有名。
现代文：但从小成了孤儿，又穷，三十多岁了，还没有成名。
English: But he was orphaned as a child, poor, and in his thirties, and had not yet become famous.

古文：夫蒙灵察为四镇节度使，以高仙芝为都知兵马使。
现代文：夫蒙灵察任四镇节度使时，任命高仙芝为都知兵马使。
English: When Meng Lingcha's husband was appointed as the envoy to the Four Towns Festival, Gao Xianzhi was appointed as the envoy to the Sich Troops and Horses.

古文：尝出军，奏傔从三十馀人，衣褷鲜明，常清慨然投牒请豫。
现代文：有次出兵，高仙芝任命了三十多名侍从，衣裳鲜艳漂亮，封常清因而感慨并报名请求担任侍从。
English: During a military expedition, Gao Xianzhi appointed more than 30 attendants. They were dressed in bright and beautiful clothes. As a result, Gao Changqing was moved and signed up to be an attendant.

古文：常清素瘠，又脚跛，仙芝陋其貌，不纳。
现代文：封常清很瘦，加上脚又跛，高仙芝瞧不起他的外表，不录用他。
English: Fong Changqing was very thin, and his feet were lame. Gao Xianzhi looked down on his appearance and did not hire him.

古文：明日复至，仙芝谢曰： 傔已足，何庸复来？ 
现代文：第二天他又来了，高仙芝道歉说 ：侍从已录取够了，哪里用得着又来呢？ 
English: The next day, he came again. Gao Xianzhi apologized and said, "I've already accepted enough attendants. Why do I need to come again?"

古文：常清怒曰： 我慕公义，愿事鞭靮，故无媒自前，公何见拒深乎？
现代文：封常清发怒说 ：我仰慕您的高义，愿意侍奉您，所以没人介绍自己来了，您为什么一定要拒绝呢？
English: Fang Changqing said angrily, "I admire your high-mindedness and am willing to serve you, so no one has introduced themselves. Why do you have to refuse?"

古文：以貌取士，恐失之子羽。
现代文：看容貌录用人，会把子羽看错，您还是考虑一下吧。 
English: If you hire someone based on their looks, you'll get the wrong impression of them, so think about it.

古文：公其念之。 仙芝犹未纳，乃日候门下，仙芝不得已，窜名傔中。
现代文：高仙芝还是没接受他，他就每天到门口来等候，高仙芝没办法，就把他录取到侍从里了。
English: Gao Xianzhi still did not accept him, so he waited at the door every day. Gao Xianzhi had no choice but to accept him as a servant.

古文：会达奚诸部叛，自黑山西趣碎叶，有诏邀击。
现代文：遇上达奚各部反叛，从黑山向西奔向碎叶城，有诏命令拦击。
English: In the face of rebellion from all parts of Daguang, he rushed westward from Montenegro to Chiba City, and was ordered to stop.

古文：灵察使仙芝以二千骑追蹑。达奚行远，人马疲，禽馘略尽。
现代文：夫蒙灵察派高仙芝率两千名骑兵追击，达奚走了很远的路，人和马都疲劳了，因此几乎被全部俘获或杀死了。
English: Meng Lingzha's husband sent Gao Xianzhi with two thousand cavalry to pursue. Daju walked a long way. Both men and horses were tired, so they were almost all captured or killed.

古文：常清于幕下潜作捷布，具记井泉次舍、克贼形势谋略，条最明审。
现代文：封常清在下面暗暗写好了捷报，详细记载了井眼、泉水、驻军地点、胜敌的情况和战术，条理分明。
English: Feng Changqing secretly wrote a victory report below, detailing the borehole, spring water, garrison location, the situation and tactics of the victorious enemy, organized and clear.

古文：仙芝取读之，皆意所欲出，乃大骇，即用之。
现代文：高仙芝拿来看了，都是自己想写的，于是大惊，马上采用了。
English: Gao Xianzhi took a look and saw that they all wanted to write it themselves, so he was shocked and immediately adopted it.

古文：军还，灵察迎劳，仙芝已去奴袜带刀，而判官刘眺、独孤峻争问： 向捷布谁作者？
现代文：军队归来，夫蒙灵察迎接、慰劳他，高仙芝已解下奴袜带刀拜见了，判官刘眺、独孤峻争着问 ：此前送来的捷报是谁写的？
English: When the troops returned, her husband Meng Lingcha greeted and consoled him. Gao Xianzhi had already taken off his slave socks and bowed to him with a knife. The judges Liu Zhan and Du Guojun asked each other: Who wrote the victory report sent earlier?

古文：公幕下安得此人？ 
现代文：您帐下怎么有这样的人才？ 
English: How do you have such talent under your belt?

古文：答曰： 吾傔封常清也。 
现代文：他回答说 ：是我的侍从封常清。 
English: He replied, "It was my servant, Fong Changqing."

古文：眺等惊，进揖常清坐，与语，异之，遂知名。
现代文：刘眺等吃惊了，对封常清施礼让座，又和他谈话，认为他是奇才，他于是有了名气。
English: Liu Zhan was so surprised that he bowed to Feng Changqing and gave up his seat. He also talked to him, thinking that he was a genius. He then became famous.

古文：以功授叠州戍主，仍为判官。
现代文：后因功封叠州戍主，多次任判官。
English: Later, he was appointed as a judge for several times due to his service as the governor of Yazhou.

古文：仙芝破小勃律，代灵察为安西节度使，常清以从战有劳，擢庆王府录事参军事，为节度判官。
现代文：高仙芝攻破小勃律国后，替代夫蒙灵察任安西节度使，封常清因随从作战有功，升任庆王府录事参军事，当节度判官。
English: After Gao Xianzhi defeated Xiaoborui Province, he replaced his husband Meng Lingcha as the Anxi festival envoy, and Fong Changqing was promoted to the record of the Qing Wangfu and participated in the military, and was the judge of the festival.

古文：仙芝征讨，常知后务。
现代文：高仙芝出征，他常任留后。
English: Gao Xianzhi went to the front, but he stayed behind permanently.

古文：常清才而果，胸无疑事。
现代文：封常清有才能又果断，没有事能难住他。
English: Feng Changqing is talented and decisive, nothing can stop him.

古文：仙芝委家事于郎将郑德诠，其乳母子也，威动军中。
现代文：高仙芝委任郎将郑德诠管理家事，他是高仙芝奶妈的儿子，在军中很威风。
English: Gao Xianzhi appointed his son-in-law Zheng Deyan to manage the family affairs. He was the son of Gao Xianzhi's wet nurse and was very powerful in the army.

古文：常清尝自外还，诸将前谒。
现代文：封常清有次从外面回来，众将上前拜见。
English: When Feng Changqing came back from outside, everyone came forward to see him.

古文：德诠见常清始贵，易之，走马突常清驺士去。
现代文：郑德诠见他才上任，轻视他，骑马撞了他的骑马侍从后离开了。
English: Zheng De interpreted that he had just taken office, despised him, and rode away after hitting his riding attendant.

古文：常清命左右引德诠至廷中，门辄闭，因离席曰： 吾起细微，中丞公过听，以主留事，郎将安得无礼？ 
现代文：封常清命侍从把他带到厅堂里，就关上了门，离开座位说 ：我出身微贱，御史中丞大人错爱，让我主持留后事务，郎将怎能无礼？ 
English: An attendant of the Imperial Household Agency took him to the hall, closed the door, left his seat and said, "I come from a lowly family, but I was mistakenly chosen by the Emperor to preside over the affairs of the empress dowager. How can the empress dowager be so rude?"

古文：因叱曰： 须暂假郎将死，以肃吾军。 
现代文：接着叱责他说 ：必须借你的死，来严肃军纪。 
English: Then he scolded him, saying, "It is necessary to use your death to strengthen military discipline."

古文：因杖死，以面仆地曳出之。
现代文：于是用杖打死了他，把他的脸朝下拖了出去。
English: So they beat him to death with a stick and dragged him out, face down.

古文：仙芝妻及乳母哭门外救请，不能得，遽以状白仙芝，仙芝惊，及见常清，惮其公，不敢让。
现代文：高仙芝的妻子和奶妈在门外哭着求情，没能救他的命，很快将情况告诉了高仙芝，高仙芝很吃惊，到见了封常清，敬畏他的公正，没敢责备他。
English: Gao Xianzhi's wife and wet nurse were crying and pleading outside the door, unable to save his life, and soon told Gao Xianzhi the situation. Gao Xianzhi was very surprised to see Feng Changqing, fearing his fairness, and did not dare to blame him.

古文：常清亦不谢。
现代文：他也不道歉。
English: He didn't apologize either.

古文：会大将有罪，又杀二人，军中莫不股栗。
现代文：遇上大将犯罪，他又杀死了两位，全军没有不害怕他的。
English: When the general committed a crime, he killed two more people, and the whole army was afraid of him.

古文：仙芝节度河西，复请为判官。
现代文：高仙芝任河西节度，又请他当判官。
English: Gao Xianzhi served as the Hexi Festival and invited him to be the judge.

古文：久之，擢安西副大都护、安西四镇节度副大使，知节度事。
现代文：一段时间后，升任安西副大都护、安西四镇节度副大使，知节度事。
English: After a period of time, he was promoted to Anxi deputy metropolitan protector and deputy ambassador of Anxi four towns festival, knowing the festival.

古文：未几，改北庭都护，持节伊西节度使。
现代文：不久，改任北庭都护、持节伊西节度使。
English: Soon after, he was reassigned to the position of Kitaniwa-dōgo (the guardian of the Northern Court) and the position of Isshiki-setsudō no kami (the guardian of the Isshiki festival).

古文：常清性勤俭，耐劳苦，出军乘骡，私厩裁二马，赏罚分明。
现代文：封常清生性勤劳节俭，吃苦耐劳，出兵骑驿马，私人马厩只有两匹马，赏罚严明。
English: He was an industrious and thrifty person, hardworking and hardworking, sent soldiers to ride horses, and had only two horses in his private stable. He was severely punished.

古文：天宝末入朝，而安禄山反，帝引见，问何策以讨贼。
现代文：天宝末年进京朝拜时，安禄山反叛了，皇帝召见他，问用什么办法对付叛贼。
English: At the end of Tenpo's life, when he went to Beijing to pay homage, An Lushan rebelled. The emperor summoned him and asked him how to deal with the traitor.

古文：常清见帝忧，因大言曰： 天下太平久，人不知战。
现代文：封常清看见皇帝担忧，就夸口说： 国内长期太平，人们不懂作战。
English: Seeing that the emperor was worried, Feng Changqing boasted, "The country has been at peace for a long time, and people do not know how to fight.

古文：然事有逆顺，势有奇变，臣请驰至东京，悉府库募骁勇，挑马箠度河，计日取逆胡首以献阙下。 
现代文：但道义上有正义和不义，战场上有各种谋略。我请求赶到洛阳，用全部库存物招募勇士，甩着马鞭过黄河，不久就把叛贼的头献到朝廷来。 
English: But there is justice and injustice in morality, and there are various strategies on the battlefield. I asked to rush to Luoyang, use all the inventory to recruit warriors, cross the Yellow River with a horse whip, and soon bring the head of the traitor to the court.

古文：天子壮之。
现代文：皇帝欣赏他的勇气。
English: The emperor admired his courage.

古文：明日，以常清为范阳节度副大使，乘驿赴东京。
现代文：第二天，任命封常清为范阳节度副大使，骑驿马到了洛阳。
English: The next day, he appointed Feng Changqing as Vice-Ambassador of the Fanyang Festival, and rode a horse to Luoyang.

古文：常清募兵得六万人，然皆市井庸保，乃部分旗帜，断河阳桥以守。
现代文：招募到六万军队，但都是市民和仆役，于是安排军队拆毁了河阳桥守黄河。
English: He recruited sixty thousand troops, but they were all citizens and servants, so he arranged for the army to demolish the Heyang Bridge guarding the Yellow River.

古文：贼移书平原，令太守颜真卿以兵七千防河。
现代文：叛军对平原郡发动进攻，命颜真卿率兵七千人防守黄河。
English: The rebels launched an attack on Pingyuan County and ordered Yan Zhenqing to lead seven thousand soldiers to defend the Yellow River.

古文：真卿驰使司兵参军事李平入奏。
现代文：颜真卿派司兵参军李平飞马到朝廷奏报。
English: Yan Zhengying sent an officer to join the army, Li Ping Fei Ma, to report to the imperial court.

古文：常清取平表发视，即倚帐作书遗真卿，劝坚守，且传购禄山檄数十函与之，真卿得，以分晓诸郡。
现代文：封常清把李平拿的报告打开看了，就靠着营帐写信给颜真卿，劝他坚持守城，并且通过驿站送悬赏捉拿安禄山的檄文几十份给他，颜真卿收到后，就分送给各州郡。
English: Fong Changqing opened Li Ping's report and read it, and then wrote to Yan Zhenqing with the help of the camp account to persuade him to persist in defending the city, and sent him dozens of copies of the reward for capturing Anlu Mountain through the post station. After Yan Zhenqing received it, he sent it to the states and counties.

古文：禄山度河，陷荥阳，入罂子谷，先驱至葵园。
现代文：安禄山渡过了黄河，攻占了荥阳，进入了罂子谷，先锋到了葵园。
English: Anlu Mountain has crossed the Yellow River, captured Fenyang, entered Lazy Valley, and the vanguard has reached Kwaiyuan.

古文：常清使骁骑拒之，杀拓羯数十百人。
现代文：封常清派精锐骑兵抵御，杀死了叛军几十上百人。
English: Feng Changqing sent elite cavalry to resist and killed dozens of rebels.

古文：贼大军至，常清不能御，退入上东门，战不利。
现代文：叛军大部队到了，封常清抵挡不住，退进上东门，接战后又战败了。
English: When the large rebel army arrived, Feng Changqing could not resist, retreated to Shangdong Gate, and was defeated after a battle.

古文：贼鼓而进，劫官吏。
现代文：叛军击鼓进兵，搜捕官员。
English: Rebels marched into the army to the beat of drums and searched for officials.

古文：再战于都亭驿，又不胜，引兵守宣仁门，复败。
现代文：封常清又在都亭驿迎战，又打了败仗。退兵守宣仁门，又打败了。
English: Fong Changqing once again faced a battle at Du Tingtao, and was defeated again. He retreated to guard Xuanren Gate, and was defeated again.

古文：乃自提象门出，伐大木塞道以殿，至谷水，西奔陕。
现代文：于是从提象门出城，砍倒大树堵住道路来阻挡追兵，至谷水后，向西逃往陕郡。
English: So he went out of the city from the Tizhong Gate, cut down large trees to block the road to block the pursuers, and fled westward to Shaanxi County after reaching Guishui.

古文：语高仙芝曰： 贼锐甚，难与争锋。
现代文：他对高仙芝说： 叛军力量很强大，不能和他们硬拼。
English: He said to Gao Xianzhi: The rebel forces are very strong, and we cannot fight them.

古文：潼关无兵，一夫奔突则京师危，不如急守潼关。 
现代文：潼关无守军，一旦叛军冲过潼关，京城就危险了，不如赶快去守潼关。 
English: Shaoguan has no defenders. Once the rebels rush through Shaoguan, the capital will be in danger. It is better to quickly go to guard Shaoguan.

古文：仙芝从之。
现代文：高仙芝听从了他。
English: Gao Xianzhi obeyed him.

古文：败书闻，帝削常清官，使白衣隶仙芝军效力。
现代文：战败的报告送到了朝廷，皇帝罢免了封常清的官职，让他作为老百姓隶属高仙芝给高仙芝办事。
English: The report of the defeat was sent to the imperial court, and the emperor dismissed the official post of Feng Changqing and made him work for Gao Xianzhi as a commoner subordinate to Gao Xianzhi.

古文：仙芝使衣黑衣监左右部军。
现代文：高仙芝让他穿着黑色衣裳监督部署在左右边的军队。
English: Gao Xianzhi asked him to wear black clothes to supervise the troops deployed on the left and right.

古文：及边令诚以诏书至，示之，常清曰： 吾所以不死者，恐污国家节，受戮贼手。
现代文：边令诚拿着杀死他的诏书来了，给他看，封常清说 ：我之所以不拼死在战场，是怕污辱了国家的官职，被叛军抓住杀死。
English: Bianlingcheng came with the edict to kill him and showed it to him. Feng Changqing said, "The reason why I did not fight to the death on the battlefield was that I was afraid of dishonoring the country's official position and being caught and killed by the rebels."

古文：今死乃甘心。 
现代文：现在我死心甘情愿。 
English: Now I do it willingly.

古文：始，常清败，径入关，欲见上陈讨贼事。
现代文：当初封常清战败后，直接进了潼关，想见皇帝汇报征战叛军的情况。
English: At first, after the defeat of Feng Changqing, he went directly to Shaoguan to see the emperor to report on the situation of the rebel army.

古文：至渭南，有诏赴潼关。
现代文：到了渭南，皇帝下诏命他到潼关去。
English: When he arrived in southern Anhui, the emperor ordered him to go to Shouguan.

古文：常清忧惧，为表以谢，且言： 自东京陷，三遣使表论成败，不得对。 
现代文：封常清既忧虑又害怕，就写遗表谢罪，说道： 自从洛阳失守以后，三次派使者上奏章陈述讨贼战略，都没被接见。 
English: Anxious and afraid, Fong Changqing wrote a posthumous apology, saying: Since the fall of Luoyang, I have sent envoys to Luoyang three times to report on the strategy to drive out the bandits, but they have not been received.

古文：又言： 臣死后，望陛下无轻此贼，则社稷安。 
现代文：又说 ：我死了以后，希望皇上不要看轻这叛贼，那么国家就安定了。 
English: He also said, "After my death, I hope the emperor will not look down on this traitor, and then the country will be stable."

古文：至是临刑，以表授令诚而死。
现代文：到将被处死时，将遗表交给边令诚就去受刑死了。
English: When it was time for him to be executed, he handed his death certificate to Bian Rongcheng and went to his death.

古文：人多哀之。
现代文：人们多数同情他。
English: Most people sympathize with him.

