古文：李秀才王山人王琼王固符契元白皎贾耽茅安道骆山人石旻
现代文：李秀才王山人王琼王固符契元白皎贾耽茅安道骆山人石旻
English: Li Xiucai, Wang Shanren, Wang Qiong, Wang Gufu, Qi Yuan, Baiyao, Jia Tan, Mao Antao, Luo Shanren, Shizhuo

古文：李秀才
现代文：李秀才
English: Li Xiucai

古文：唐虞部郎中陆绍，元和中，尝谒表兄于定水寺。因为院僧具蜜饵时果，邻院僧亦陆所熟也，遂令左右邀之，良久，僧与李秀才偕至。
现代文：唐朝虞部郎中陆绍，元和中业，曾去定水寺看望表兄，因为常常给院内僧人带去甜食与新鲜水果，邻院的僧人也跟陆绍熟识，他便叫身边的人邀请他们过来。过了一会儿，邻院的僧人与李秀才一起来到。
English: Lu Shao, Yuan and Zhongye, the middle son of the Tang Dynasty's Yu Department, once went to Jingshui Temple to visit his cousin, because he often brought sweets and fresh fruits to the monks in the monastery. The monks from the neighboring monastery were also familiar with Lu Shao, so he called the people around him to invite them over. After a while, the monks from the neighboring monastery came with Li Xiucai.

古文：环坐笑语颇剧。
现代文：大家围坐一起，欢声笑语十分热闹。
English: Everyone sat around together, and the laughter was very lively.

古文：院僧顾弟子煮新茗，巡将匝而不及李。陆不平曰： 茶初未及李秀才何也？ 
现代文：主人吩咐弟子煮新茶，茶水斟了快到一圈独独没轮到李秀才，陆绍不平地说： 茶水头一遍没轮到李秀才，这是为什么？ 
English: The master ordered the disciple to brew new tea, and the tea was poured until it was almost a circle, but it was not Li Xiucai's turn. Lu Shao complained: It was not Li Xiucai's turn to pour the tea, why is that?

古文：僧笑曰： 如此秀才，亦要知茶味，且以余荼饮之。 
现代文：僧人笑着说： 这样一个秀才，也要品尝茶的味道！等着把喝剩的茶给他喝吧。 
English: The monk smiled and said, "Such a talented person should also enjoy the taste of tea! Wait and give him the leftover tea to drink."

古文：邻院僧曰： 秀才乃术士，座主不可轻言。 
现代文：邻院僧人说： 秀才是一个术士，主人不可轻慢。 
English: A monk from a neighboring monastery said: "A scholar is a sorcerer, the master should not be disdainful.

古文：其僧又言： 不逞之子弟，何所惮！ 
现代文：那个僧人又说： 不逞之徒，有何可怕的！ 
English: The monk also said, "How terrible it is to be a coward!

古文：秀才忽怒曰： 我与上人，素未相识，焉知予不逞徒也？ 
现代文：秀才忽然愤怒地说： 我与上人素不相识，怎么知道我是不逞之徒？ 
English: The scholar suddenly said angrily, "I don't know the guru. How do you know I'm a coward?"

古文：僧复大言： 望酒旗玩变场者，岂有佳者乎？ 
现代文：僧人仍出狂言道： 奔酒而玩反复的人，哪里会有好东西？ 
English: The monk still came out with a rant: People who drink and play repeatedly, where will there be good things?

古文：李乃白座客： 某不免对贵客作造次矣。 
现代文：秀才便对同座客人说： 我不免要对贵宾失礼了。 
English: The scholar then said to a fellow guest: I am bound to be rude to the distinguished guest.

古文：因奉手袖中，据两膝，叱其僧曰： 麄行阿师，争敢辄无礼，拄杖何在，可击之。 
现代文：说完，袖起两手。放在膝上，呵斥那个僧人道： 好个粗野的师傅，竟敢如此无礼。拐杖在哪里？
English: When he had finished, he raised his hands, put them on his knees, and shouted at the monk: "What a rude master, how dare you be so impolite. Where is your crutch?"

古文：僧房门后有筇杖子，忽跳出，连击其僧。
现代文：你给我狠狠地揍他！ 僧房门后有根竹棍子，忽然跳出来，连连打那个僧人。
English: Hit him hard! There was a bamboo stick behind the door of the monk's room, and it suddenly jumped out and hit the monk repeatedly.

古文：时众亦为蔽护，杖伺人隙捷中，若有物执持也。
现代文：这时，大家都上去掩护他，竹杖便寻找人缝过去打他，好像有什么东西操纵一样。
English: At this time, everyone went up to cover him, and the bamboo cane looked for someone to sew and hit him, as if something was manipulating it.

古文：李复叱曰： 捉此僧向墙。 
现代文：李秀才又喝斥道： 捉住此僧推到墙那边！ 
English: Li Xiucai shouted again, "Catch this monk and push him over the wall!"

古文：僧乃负墙拱手，色青短气，唯言乞命。
现代文：僧人便背着墙拱起手，脸色青黑，呼吸短促，频频乞求饶命。
English: With his back to the wall, the monk arched his hands, his face darkened, his breathing short, and he repeatedly begged to be spared.

古文：李又曰： 阿师可下阶。 
现代文：李又说道： 那个师傅可以下阶去。 
English: Li also said: That master can go to the next level.

古文：僧又趋下，自投无数，衂鼻败颡不已。
现代文：僧人便跌跌撞撞下阶，自己上上下下跌了无数遍，鼻脸破伤出血不止。
English: The monk then stumbled down the steps, falling up and down countless times, and his nose and face were bleeding profusely.

古文：众为请之，李徐曰： 缘对衣冠，不能杀此为累。 
现代文：众人为他求情。李秀才慢慢说道： 看在各位面上，我不杀他，以免连累大家。 
English: Many people pleaded for him. Li Xiucai said slowly: For everyone's sake, I won't kill him, so as not to implicate everyone.

古文：因揖客而去。
现代文：说完，向客人施礼，然后扬长而去。
English: After saying this, he bowed to the guests and left.

古文：僧半日方能言，如中恶状，竟不之测矣。
现代文：那位僧人半天才说出话来，好像中了邪一样，不知后来结局怎么样。
English: It took the monk only half a day to utter the words, as if he had been possessed by evil. I don't know what the outcome was.

古文：王山人
现代文：王山人
English: Wang Sanren

古文：唐太尉卫公李德裕为并州从事，到任未旬月，有王山人诣门请谒。
现代文：唐代太尉李德裕任并州从事时，任职不到十个月，有个王山人登门求见。
English: When the Tang Dynasty Lieutenant Li Deyu was appointed and engaged in the state, he was in office for less than ten months, and a person from Wangshan came to see him.

古文：因请虚正寝，备几案纸笔香水而已，令重帘静伺之。
现代文：跟他一起落座后，王便说： 我能预见未来的事。 李开始并不以为奇。王便请他假做睡好了，准备下桌案纸笔香水之类，叫人放下帘子静静地等候。
English: After sitting down with him, Wang said, "I can foresee things in the future." Li was not surprised at first. Wang asked him to pretend to be asleep, prepare to leave the table, prepare pen and paper, perfume, etc., and ask people to put down the curtain and wait quietly.

古文：生与之偕坐于西庑下。顷之，王生曰： 可验之矣。 
现代文：王与他一起坐在正房对面西侧的小房子里。不一会儿，王说： 可以验证一下了。 
English: Wang sat with him in a small house on the west side across from the main house. After a while, Wang said, "I can verify it."

古文：纸上书八字甚大，且有楷注，曰： 位极人臣，寿六十四。 
现代文：只见纸上写着八个大字，而且有正规的注释，八个字是： 位极人臣，寿六十四。 
English: I could only see eight large characters written on the paper, and there was a formal annotation. The eight characters were: "He is a very senior minister and is 64 years old."

古文：生遽请归，竟亦不知所去。
现代文：王山人立即要求回去，不知到底上哪里去了。
English: Wang Shanren immediately asked to go back, not knowing where he had gone.

古文：及会昌朝，三策至一品，薨于海南，果符王生所按之年。
现代文：到了会昌年间，李公三次受封，官至一品，最后死于海南，果然符合王所算的岁数。
English: During the Huichang era, Li Gong was awarded the title of nobility three times, rose to the rank of first-ranked official, and finally died in Hainan, which indeed corresponded to the number of years calculated by Wang.

古文：王琼
现代文：王琼
English: Wang Qiong

古文：唐元和中，江淮术士王琼尝在段君秀家。
现代文：唐朝元和年间，江淮术士王琼曾住在段君秀家。
English: During the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, the Jianghuai warlock Wang Qiong once lived in the home of Duan Junxiu.

古文：令坐客取一瓦子，画作龟甲，怀之一食顷，取出乃一龟。
现代文：一次，他令坐在身边的一位客人取一瓦片，画成乌龟甲壳，放在怀里约一顿饭的时间，取出来乃是一只活乌龟。
English: Once, he asked a guest sitting next to him to take a tile, draw a turtle carapace, put it in his arms for about a meal time, and take out a live turtle.

古文：放于庭中，循垣而行，经宿却成瓦子。
现代文：放在庭院里，它便顺着墙脚爬行，过一宿却又变成瓦片。
English: Placed in the courtyard, it crawled along the foot of the wall, but after one night it turned into tiles.

古文：又取花含，默封于密器中，一夕开花。
现代文：又拿一枝花蕾，密封在容器之中，一天时间便开了花。
English: He also took a flower bud, sealed it in a container, and it bloomed in a day.

古文：王固
现代文：王固
English: Wang Gu

古文：唐于頔在襄州，尝有山人王固谒见。
现代文：唐代于頔住在襄州，曾有山人王固求见。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Yu Xuan lived in Xiangzhou. Wang Gu, a mountain man, once came to see him.

古文：頔性快，见其拜伏迟钝，不甚礼之。
现代文：頔性格爽快，见王固跪拜时动作迟滞呆笨，便对他不怎么以礼相待。
English: He is a cheerful person. When he saw Wang Gu kneeling, his movements were sluggish and clumsy, so he did not treat him with much courtesy.

古文：别日游宴，复不得预。
现代文：改日要与别人游玩欢宴，没有预先邀请王固。
English: Wang Gu did not invite Wang Gu in advance because he wanted to have a party with others on another day.

古文：王殊怏怏。因至使院，造判官曾叔政。
现代文：王固很是生气，便到官署去见判官曾叔政，曾接待他十分讲究礼节。
English: Wang Gu was very angry, so he went to the government office to see the judge, Zeng Shuzheng. He was very polite when he received him.

古文：颇礼接之，王谓曾曰： 予以相公好奇，故不远而来，今实乖望。
现代文：王对曾说：我因相公爱好奇异之物，所以远道而来，实在有违于您的重望。
English: Wang Du once said: "I came all the way here because I am curious and love strange things, so it really goes against your expectations.

古文：予有一艺，自古无者，今将归，且荷公之厚，聊为一设。 
现代文：我有一种技艺，自古以来没有人会。现在我就要回去了，承蒙您对我的厚爱，特为您表演一番。 
English: I have a skill that no one has been able to do since ancient times, and now I'm going back, thanks to your love for me, especially to perform for you.

古文：遂诣曾所居，怀中出竹一节及小鼓，规才运寸。良久，去竹之塞，折枝击鼓。
现代文：于是来到曾的住处，从怀里掏一节竹子和一面鼓。规才动了一寸，过了好长时间，取出竹管的塞子，折根木棒敲起了鼓。
English: So he came to Zeng's place of residence and took out a piece of bamboo and a drum from his arms. The gauge only moved an inch, and after a long time, he took out the plug of the bamboo tube and beat the drum with a wooden stick.

古文：筒中有蝇虎子数十枚，列行而出，分为二队，如对阵势，击鼓或三或五，随鼓音变阵，天衡地轴，鱼丽鹤列，无不备也，进退离附，人所不及。
现代文：只见几十个蝇虎从竹筒里列队而出，排成两行，宛如两军相对的阵势。击鼓三下或五下，蝇虎随着鼓声变化队列，天衡地轴，鱼丽鹤列，各种阵势无不具备，而且或进或退，或离或拢，变化多端又井然有序，实在是人所不及也。
English: I saw dozens of fly tigers come out of the bamboo tube in a line, lined up in two rows, like the opposing positions of the two armies. Drumming three or five times, the fly tigers changed with the drum sound. The axis of the earth, the line of cranes, all kinds of positions, and either advancing or retreating, or moving away or closing, varied and well-ordered, are really beyond human reach.

古文：凡变阵数十，复作队入筒中。
现代文：一共变了几十个阵势，又排队进入竹筒里面。
English: A total of dozens of positions were changed, and they lined up to enter the bamboo tube.

古文：曾睹之大骇，乃言于于公。
现代文：曾叔政看了十分惊讶，便将见到的情形说给于頔听。
English: Zeng Shuzheng was very surprised when he saw it, so he told everyone what he had seen.

古文：王已潜去，于悔恨，令物色求之，不获。
现代文：王固已经悄悄离去，于頔很是悔恨，派人各处寻找，没有找到王固。
English: Wang Gu had already quietly left, and Yu Yao was very remorseful. He sent people to search everywhere, but they did not find Wang Gu.

古文：符契元
现代文：符契元
English: Certificate of origin

古文：唐上都昊天观道士符契元，闽人也，德行法术，为时所重。
现代文：唐朝上都昊天观里有个道士叫符契元，是闽地人，他的德行和法术都为当时人所看重。
English: There was a Taoist called Fu Qiyuan in the Taoist Temple of the Tang Dynasty, who was from Shandong. His virtues and magic were valued by the people at that time.

古文：长庆初，中夏，晨告门人曰： 吾习静片时，慎无喧动。 
现代文：长庆初年五月，他早晨告诉守门人说： 我习惯静养一会儿，小心不要吵闹。 
English: In May of the first year of Changqing, he told the gatekeeper in the morning: I am used to resting for a while, be careful not to make noise.

古文：乃扃户昼寝。
现代文：于是关上门窗白天睡觉。
English: So they closed the doors and windows and slept during the day.

古文：既而道流四人，邀延出门。
现代文：一会儿，有四个道士邀请他出了门。
English: After a while, four Taoists invited him to come out.

古文：心欲有诣，身即辄至，离乡三十余年，因思一到，俄造其居。
现代文：他心里想去什么地方，身体就立即到什么地方。离开家乡三十多年了，想回去一趟，于是立即到了他家。
English: Wherever he wanted to go in his mind, he immediately went there in his body. After more than thirty years away from his hometown, he wanted to go back, so he immediately went to his home.

古文：室宇摧落，园圃荒芜，旧识故人，孑遗殆尽。
现代文：只见房屋残破，园田荒芜，熟人一个也没有了。
English: I saw houses in ruins, gardens deserted, and not a single acquaintance left.

古文：时果未熟，乃有邻里小儿，攀缘采摘，契元护惜咄叱，曾无应者，契元愈怒。
现代文：树上的果子还没成熟，邻里小孩就爬上去采摘，契元护惜果子，大声驱赶小孩，但是谁也不听，契元更为恼火。
English: The fruit on the tree is not yet ripe, so the neighborhood children climb up to pick it. Ke Yuan takes care of the fruit and drives the children away, but no one listens, and Ke Yuan is even more annoyed.

古文：傍道流止之曰： 熟与未熟，同归摘拾，何苦挂意也。 
现代文：旁边有个道士制止他说： 熟的也好，不熟的也好，早晚都要摘的，何苦放在心上呢！ 
English: A Taoist next to him stopped him and said, "Whether it's a ripe or an unripe gourd, sooner or later you have to pick it, so don't worry about it!

古文：又曾居条山炼药，乃亦思一游，忽已至矣。
现代文：契元曾在条山上炼过药，便想前去一游，忽的一下便到了。
English: Qiyuan had been practicing medicine on the mountain, so he wanted to go for a walk, and suddenly he arrived.

古文：恣意历览，遍穷岩谷。
现代文：他尽情游历观览，遍及高山深谷。
English: He enjoyed traveling and sightseeing, throughout the high mountains and deep valleys.

古文：道流曰： 日色晚，可归矣。 
现代文：道士说： 天色已晚，应该回去了。 
English: The Taoist priest said: It's too late, we should go back.

古文：因同行入京。
现代文：便跟他同行入京。
English: So I went to Beijing with him.

古文：道上忽逢鸣驺，导引甚盛。
现代文：路上忽然听到赶马人的吆喝声，好像有许多人马。
English: On the way, we suddenly heard the yells of horse-drawn carriages, as if there were a lot of horses.

古文：契元遽即避路，道流曰： 阳官不宜避阴官，但遵路而行。 
现代文：契元迅即闪开路，道士说： 阳间的官不应躲避阴间的官，只管沿着路走就行。 
English: Ke Yuan immediately turned away from the road. The Taoist said, "Officials in the world of yang should not avoid officials in the world of yin. Just walk along the road."

古文：须臾，前导数辈，望契元即狼狈奔迸。
现代文：不一会儿，赶马的前导数人，看到契元便狼狈逃散。
English: In a short while, several of the leading horsemen, seeing Che Yuan, fled in confusion.

古文：及官至，谛视之，乃仆射马骢，时方为刑部尚书。
现代文：等后面的官人到跟前时，仔细一看，原来是仆射马骢，这时刚刚担任刑部尚书。
English: When the officials in the back came up to the front, they took a closer look and saw that it was originally a courier, who had just been working as a clerk in the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：素善契元，马亦无恙。
现代文：他一向跟契元友善，他的身体也没有病。
English: He has always been friendly with Qi Yuan, and his body is not sick.

古文：与契元晤，心独异之。
现代文：看到契元时便上前相见，契元在心里觉得很奇怪。
English: When he saw Ke Yuan, he came forward to meet him. Ke Yuan felt very strange in his heart.

古文：日已夕矣，迟明，即诣开化坊访马，而与兵部韩侍郎对弈，因留连竟日。
现代文：这时天已傍晚了，第二天没等天亮，契元就去开化坊看望马骢，马正与兵部韩侍郎下棋，便在那里逗留了一天。
English: At this time, it was already late in the evening. The next day, before dawn, Qi Yuan went to Kaifang to visit Ma Jun. Ma was playing chess with Han Zirong of the military department, and he stayed there for a day.

古文：而旁察辞气神色，曾无少异，私怪其故。
现代文：他在一旁观察其语气神色，并无少许特异之处，私下甚觉奇怪。
English: Observing his tone and demeanour from the sidelines, there was nothing particularly unusual about it. Privately, he found it strange.

古文：有顷，闻中疾，不旬日而殁。
现代文：过了一段时间，听说他中了病，不到十天就死了。
English: After some time, I heard that he fell ill and died less than ten days later.

古文：又给事李忠敏云，此是陶天活，有道术者，中朝奉道者多归之。
现代文：又据给事李忠敏说，此人是陶天活，是个有道术的人，中朝奉道者多归之。
English: It was also reported to Li Zhongmin that this person was Tao Tianhu, a person with Taoism, and most of the people in the Middle Kingdom were followers of Taoism.

古文：天活本安南人，非闽人也，能于入静日，多神游诸岳。
现代文：天活本是安南人，不是闽地人，能在入静的时候神游各处山岳。
English: Tenkatsu is originally from Annam, not from Shikoku, and is able to meditate on the mountains when he is calm.

古文：马公事人皆知之。
现代文：马公的事情，人们都知道。
English: Everyone knows about Mr. Ma.

古文：白皎
现代文：白皎
English: White stork

古文：河阳从事樊宗仁，长庆中，客游鄂渚，因抵江陵，途中颇为驾舟子王升所侮。
现代文：河阳从事樊宗仁，长庆中年，在鄂渚游览，因为要去江陵，途中大受船夫王升的侮辱。
English: In the middle of his life in Changqing, he went on an excursion to Ezhu, because he wanted to go to Jiangling. On the way, he was greatly insulted by the boatman Wang Sheng.

古文：宗仁方举进士，力不能制，每优容之。
现代文：宗仁刚刚举为进士，没有能力制服他，只好总是宽容他。
English: Zongren had just been promoted to the rank of officer, and since he had no ability to subdue him, he always had to tolerate him.

古文：至江陵，具以事诉于在任，因得重笞之。
现代文：到江陵后，就把这件事告诉了在任的官员，王升受到重重的鞭笞。
English: After arriving in Gangneung, he reported the matter to the officials in charge. Wang Sheng was severely beaten.

古文：宗仁以他舟上峡，发荆不旬日，而所乘之舟，泛然失缆，篙橹皆不能制。
现代文：宗仁用别的船上三峡，从荆州出发不到十天，所乘的就船失去了缆绳，篙杆和桨橹都不能控制。
English: Zongren used another boat to climb the Three Gorges less than ten days after setting off from Jingzhou. The boat he was on lost its cable, and the oars and oars could not be controlled.

古文：舟人曰： 此舟已为仇人之所禁矣，昨水行岂常有所忤哉，今无术以进，不五百里，当历石滩，险阻艰难，一江之最。
现代文：船夫说： 这只船已被仇人施了法术了，要不，昨天在水上哪能总出故障呢？现在无法往前走了，不到五百米处要经过石滩，其艰难险阻为一江之最。
English: The boatman said, "This boat has been bewitched by the enemy. Otherwise, how could it have broken down on the water yesterday? We can't go any further now. We have to pass a rocky beach less than five hundred meters away, which is the most difficult obstacle in a river."

古文：计其奸心，度我船适至，则必触碎沉溺。
现代文：估计仇人的险恶用心在此，揣度我们的船到那里时，必然触礁船碎沉水。
English: It is estimated that the enemy's sinister intentions are here, and when our ship gets there, it will inevitably hit the reef and sink.

古文：不如先备焉。 
现代文：我们还是预先有所准备为好。 
English: We'd better be prepared in advance.

古文：宗仁方与仆登岸，以巨索絷舟，循岸随之而行。
现代文：宗仁便跟仆人下船上岸，用一条大绳子索着船，沿岸顺流而行。
English: Zongren then disembarked from the boat with his servant, roped the boat with a large rope, and walked along the riverbank.

古文：翌日至滩所。船果奔骇狂触，恣纵升沉，须臾瓦解。
现代文：第二天到了石滩的地方，船只果然颠簸冲撞，恣意升沉，很快就破碎了。
English: The next day, when they arrived at the rocky beach, the boats bumped into each other, rose and sank arbitrarily, and soon broke apart.

古文：赖其有索，人虽无伤，物则荡尽。
现代文：因为有那条大绳子，人员幸无伤亡；但是船上的物品却荡然无存。
English: Thanks to the large rope, there were no casualties, but everything on board was destroyed.

古文：峡路深僻，上下数百里，皆无居人，宗仁即与仆辈阴于林下，粮饩什具，绝无所有，羁危辛苦，忧闷备至。
现代文：峡岸上的道路幽深偏僻，上下数百里没有人烟，宗仁只好与仆从们暂蔽于林荫之下，吃的用的一无所有，险恶劳累，忧闷备至。
English: The road on the bank of the canyon was deep and remote, and there was no one for hundreds of miles up and down. Zongren had no choice but to temporarily hide under the shade of the forest with his servants. They had nothing to eat, were dangerously overworked, and were very depressed.

古文：虽发人告于土官，去二日不见返。
现代文：派人报告当地官员，去了两天仍未返回来。
English: Sent someone to report to local officials, went away for two days and never came back.

古文：饥馁逮绝。
现代文：饥饿困顿，已临绝境。
English: Starving, desperate.

古文：其夜，因积薪起火，宗仁洎童仆皆环火假寤。
现代文：那天夜里，堆柴升火，宗仁与僮仆都围着火堆和衣而睡。
English: That night, when the woodpile caught fire, Zonin and his servants slept around the fire and the clothes.

古文：夜深忽寝。见山獠五人列坐，态貌殊异，皆挟利兵，瞻顾睢盱，言语凶谩。
现代文：夜深时他猛然醒来，看见五个山里的猎人坐在那里，相貌特异，都拿着利器，瞪着眼睛张望，言语鲁莽。
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly woke up and saw five hunters from the mountains sitting there, with a peculiar appearance, all holding sharp weapons, staring wide-eyed, and speaking recklessly.

古文：假令挥刃，则宗仁辈束手延颈矣。
现代文：假如他们挥刀上来，宗仁他们则只有束手等死而已。
English: If they brandish their swords, they will only have to wait for death.

古文：睹其势逼，因大语曰： 尔辈家业，应此山中，吾不幸舟船破碎，万物俱没，涸然古岸，俟为豺狼之饵。
现代文：宗仁见他们要到跟前来，便高声说道： 你们的家业该就在这山里，我不幸船只破碎，全部物品都沉没了，困在岸上，等着豺狼来收拾我们。
English: When Zongren saw that they were coming to him, he shouted: "Your family business should be in this mountain. Unfortunately, my ship broke and all my belongings sank. I'm stranded on the shore, waiting for the wolves to come and get us.

古文：尔辈圆首横目，曾不伤急，而乃瞷然笑侮，幸人危祸，一至此哉。
现代文：你们圆头横目，亦不为我们难受着急，而且公然笑侮，幸灾乐祸以至如此。
English: You round-heads are cross-eyed, you are not worried about us, and you openly laugh at us, gloat over our misfortune, and so on.

古文：吾今绝粮，已逾日矣，尔家近者，可遽归营饮食，以济吾之将死也。 
现代文：我现在断粮已经一天多了，你们家住附近的可赶快回去做饭，拿来救救我们这些快死的人。 
English: I've been without food for more than a day now. If you live nearby, you can quickly go back to cooking to save those of us who are dying.

古文：山獠相视，遂令二人起，未晓，负米肉盐酪而至。
现代文：他们互相看了看，便叫二人起来回去做饭，不到天亮就带着米肉盐酪之类回来了。
English: They looked at each other, then told the two of them to get up and go back to cooking, and returned before dawn with things like rice meat, salt and cheese.

古文：宗仁赖之以候回信。
现代文：宗仁借这些东西维持生命，以等待回信。
English: Zongren used these items to stay alive while he waited for a reply.

古文：因示舟破之由，山獠曰： 峡中行此术者甚众，而遇此难者亦多。
现代文：他向他们说明船撞碎的原由，山獠说： 在峡里行此术的人很多，所以遭遇此难的也很多。
English: He explained to them the reason for the ship crashing, and Yamazaki said, "There are a lot of people who do this in the gorge, so there are a lot of people who have encountered this difficulty.

古文：然他人或有以解，唯王升者犯之，非没溺不已，则不知果是此子否。
现代文：但是，别人施行此术或者还能解除，唯独王升施行此术时，非沉船不可。不知究竟是不是这小子干的。
English: However, other people perform this trick or can still get rid of it, but when Wang Sheng performs this trick, a shipwreck is inevitable. I don't know if this kid did it.

古文：南山白皎者，法术通神，可以延之，遣召行禁。
现代文：南山上有个叫白皎的人，法术通神，可以请他来，遣召行禁。
English: There is a man on the South Mountain, called the White Heron, who has magical powers. You can ask him to come and summon you.

古文：我知皎处，试为一请。 
现代文：我知道皎的住处，替你们请请看看。 
English: I know where the baboons live. Please look for them.

古文：宗仁因恳祈之，山獠一人遂行。
现代文：宗仁诚恳地相求于他，那个山獠就去了。
English: Zongren earnestly made a request to him, and the falcon went away.

古文：禽兽为祖。宗仁则又示以穷寓之端。
现代文：第二天，白皎果然来到，他头戴黄冠身穿野服，手拄拐杖脚穿草鞋，一副山野之人的姿态相貌，禽兽是他的祖宗。
English: The next day, the egret did indeed come. He wore a yellow crown on his head, wore field clothes, handcuffs, crutches, and straw sandals on his feet. He had the appearance of a man of the mountains and fields. Animals were his ancestors.

古文：皎笑日： 琐事耳，为君召而斩之。 
现代文：宗仁又将这次历险遭困的缘由跟他说了一遍。皎笑道： 小事一件。我替你把他召来杀了。 
English: Sonohito also told him the reason for this adventure. He smiled and said, "It's a small matter. I called him to kill him for you."

古文：因薙草剪木，规地为坛，仍列刀水，而胶立中央。
现代文：他清除草木，划地为坛，摆上刀和水，自己站在中间。
English: He cleared the grass and trees, marked the ground for the altar, set up the knife and water, and stood in the middle.

古文：夜阑月晓，水碧山青，杉桂朦胧，溪声悄然，时闻皎引气呼叫召王升，发声清长，激响辽绝，达曙无至者。
现代文：夜深月明，水碧山青，树影朦胧，溪水潺潺，不断听到皎在引气呼叫召唉王升的声音，发声清晰悠长，回音辽远飘渺，远达曙光到不了的地方。
English: Deep in the night, the moon is bright, the water is blue, the mountains are blue, the shadows of the trees are hazy, and the streams are turbid. I constantly hear the sound of the dragonfly calling for the king in the air, the sound is clear and long, and the echo is far away and ethereal, far away from the place where the dawn cannot reach.

古文：宗仁私语仆使曰： 岂七百里王升而可一息致哉？ 
现代文：宗仁悄悄对仆使说： 难道七百里远的王升，这一声叫唤就能传到他那里吗？ 
English: Zongren whispered to his servant, "Can Wang Sheng, who is seven hundred miles away, be reached by this cry?"

古文：皎又询宗仁曰： 物沉舟碎，果如所言，莫不自为风水所害耶？ 
现代文：皎又询问宗仁： 物沉船破，真如你说的那样？莫不是因为风大浪急才出了事么？ 
English: Zou also asked Zongren: Is it true that the shipwrecked ship broke, as you said? Wasn't it because of the strong winds and waves that something happened?

古文：宗仁暨舟子又实告。
现代文：宗仁与船夫又把真实经过告诉了他。
English: Sonen and the boatman told him the true story.

古文：皎曰： 果如是，王升安所逃形哉？ 
现代文：皎说： 果真如此，王升怎么能跑没影了呢？ 
English: Zou said: If this is really the case, how can Wang Sheng run out of shadow?

古文：又谓宗仁所使曰： 然请郎君三代名讳，方审其术耳。 
现代文：又对宗仁的手下人说： 既然这样，请把主人三代的名字告诉我，我才能推断王升用的是什么法术。 
English: He also said to Zongren's men, "In that case, please tell me the names of the three generations of your master, so that I can deduce what kind of magic Wang Sheng used."

古文：仆人告之。
现代文：仆人便如实告诉了他。
English: And the servant told him the truth.

古文：皎遂入深远，别建坛墠，暮夜而再召之，长呼之声，又若昨夕。
现代文：皎到山林深远处另建了一个坛台，晚上再召呼王升，长呼的声音跟昨天一样。
English: When he reached the farthest reaches of the forest, he built another altar. In the evening, he called Wang Sheng again. The voice was the same as yesterday.

古文：良久，山中忽有应皎者，咽绝，因风始闻。
现代文：过了很长时间，山里面忽然有人应答王皎，呜咽之声低微，借着风才能听到。
English: After a long time, someone in the mountains suddenly answered Wang Yao, the sobbing voice was so low that it could only be heard through the wind.

古文：久乃至皎处，则王升之魄也。
现代文：很久。这个人便来王皎面前，原来是王升的魂魄。
English: For a long time. This person came to Wang Yao and turned out to be Wang Sheng's ghost.

古文：皎于是责其奸蠹，数以罪状。
现代文：王皎斥责他奸凶狠毒，历数他的罪状。
English: Wang Yao scolded him for being a traitor, and listed his crimes.

古文：升求衷俯状，稽颡流血。
现代文：王升跪在地上叩头求饶，脸都叩破了流出血来。
English: Wang Sheng kneeled on the ground, bowed his head and begged for forgiveness. His face was broken and bleeding.

古文：皎谓宗仁曰： 已得甘伏，可以行戮矣。 
现代文：王皎对宗仁说： 他已甘愿服罪，可以把他杀死了。 
English: Wang Yao said to Zongren, "He has already willingly confessed, so you can kill him."

古文：宗仁曰： 原其奸凶尤甚，实为难恕，便行诛斩，则又不可，宜加以他苦焉。
现代文：宗仁说： 论他的奸诈凶残之严重，实在难以宽恕，要是施行斩杀，则不可以，应该给他增加别的痛苦。 
English: Zongren said, "Regarding the seriousness of his treachery and cruelty, it is really difficult to forgive. If he is to be killed, it is not permissible. He should be given additional suffering.

古文：皎乃斥王升曰： 全尔腰领，当百日血痢而死。 
现代文：王皎便喝叱王升道： 保全你的躯体，要你身染血痢，百日而死。 
English: Wang Yao then scolded Wang Sheng: "Protect your body. I want you to be infected with dysentery and die within 100 days."

古文：升号泣而去。
现代文：王升哭泣着去了。
English: Wang Sheng went away crying.

古文：皎告辞，宗仁解衣以赠皎，皎笑而不受。
现代文：王皎告辞，宗仁脱下自己的衣服赠送王皎，皎笑而不受。
English: Wang Yao said goodbye, and Zong Ren took off his clothes to give Wang Yao a gift. He couldn't bear the ridicule.

古文：有顷，舟船至，宗仁得进发江陵。
现代文：过了一会儿，船只到了，宗仁乘船进发江陵。
English: After a while, the boat arrived, and Zongren took the boat to Fangjiangling.

古文：询访王升，是其日皎召致之夕，在家染血痢，十旬而死。
现代文：打听王升的下落，王升就在被皎召去的那天在家里染上了血痢，一百天就死了。
English: When inquiring about Wang Sheng's whereabouts, Wang Sheng contracted dysentery at home on the day he was summoned by the police, and died a hundred days later.

古文：贾耽
现代文：贾耽
English: Jia Tan

古文：唐宰相贾耽秉政，直道事君，有未萌之祸，必能制除。
现代文：唐朝宰相贾耽执政期间，以忠直磊落态度辅佐皇上，凡有尚未萌发的灾福，定能根治消除。
English: During the reign of Jia Tan, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, he assisted the emperor with a loyal and straightforward attitude. Any disaster or blessing that has not yet sprouted can be eliminated.

古文：至于阴阳时象纬，无不洞晓。
现代文：至于阴阳星相占卜之类，他也无不通晓。
English: As far as yin and yang horoscope divination and the like, he knows everything.

古文：有村人失牛，诣桑国师卜之，卦成，国师谓曰： 尔之牛，是贾相国偷将置于中帽笥中。
现代文：有个农民丢失了一头牛，到桑国师那里占卜，卦成之后，桑国师对他说： 你的牛，是贾相国偷了去放在巾帽盒里了。
English: There was a farmer who lost a cow and went to Kuang Guo Shi to do divination. After the divination was completed, Kuang Guo Shi said to him, "Your cow was stolen by Jia Xiangguo and put in a box."

古文：尔但候朝时突前告之。 
现代文：你只要等候上朝时突然到他面前将此事告诉他就行。 
English: All you have to do is wait until the morning and suddenly appear in front of him and tell him about it.

古文：叟乃如其言所请。
现代文：这个老农就按国师的话去见相国。
English: The old farmer followed the words of the state teacher and went to see his home country.

古文：公诘之，具以卜者语告公，公于马上笑，为发巾笥。取式盘，据鞍运转以视之，良久，谓失牛者曰： 相公不偷尔牛，要相公知牛去处，但可于安国观三门后大槐树之梢鹊巢探取之。 
现代文：相国盘问他，便将算卦人的话告诉了他，相国在马上大笑，为他打开巾盒，取出式盘，在马鞍上运转给他看，过了一段时间，对丢牛的说： 我没偷你的牛，要想知道牛的去处，只要在安国观三门后面大槐树梢上的鹊窝去取就行。 
English: His partner interrogated him, and then told him the words of the fortune-teller. His partner burst out laughing, opened the box for him, took out the dial, and showed him how it worked on the saddle. After a while, he said to the one who had lost the cow: I didn't steal your cow. If you want to know where the cow went, just go to the armpit on the top of the big eucalyptus tree behind the three gates of An Guo Guan.

古文：村叟迳诣三门上，见槐树杪果有鹊巢，都无所获，乃下树。
现代文：老农径直来到三门，见槐树梢上果然有鹊巢。爬上去一看，毫无所获，便从树上下来。
English: The old farmer went straight to Sanmen and saw that there was indeed a dragonfly's nest on the eucalyptus tree. When he climbed up and took a look, he found nothing, so he came down from the tree.

古文：低头见失牛在树根，系之食草，草次是盗牛者家。
现代文：低头一看，丢失的那头牛正在树根下，用绳拴着吃草，草的旁边就是偷牛人的家。
English: Looking down, he saw that the lost cow was grazing under a tree root, tethered by a rope. Next to the grass was the rustler's house.

古文：茅安道
现代文：茅安道
English: Mao'an Road

古文：唐茅安道，庐山道士，能书符役鬼，幻化无端，从学者常数百人。
现代文：唐朝有个茅安道，是庐山的道士，能写符降鬼，又能变化成各种形态，跟他学习的有几百个人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist from Mao'an, a Taoist from Lushan, who could write symbols to cast out demons and change into various forms. There were several hundred people who studied with him.

古文：曾授二弟子以隐形洞视之术，有顷，二子皆以归养为请。
现代文：他曾经教两个弟子隐形和透视的法术，教了一段时间，两个弟子都以回去抚养老人为由请求回家。
English: He once taught two disciples the magic of invisibility and clairvoyance for a while, and both disciples asked to go home on the grounds of going back to raise the elderly.

古文：安道遣之。仍谓曰： 吾术传示，尽资尔学道之用。即不得盗情而炫其术也。
现代文：安道打发他们上路，但仍对他们说： 我教给你们的法术，只供你们学道之用，不要为了取得名声而炫耀你们的法术。
English: Ando sent them on their way, but still told them: The spells I teach you are only for you to learn the way, don't show off your spells to gain fame.

古文：苟违吾教，吾能令尔之术，临事不验耳。 
现代文：如果违背我的教诲，我能叫你们的法术遇事不得灵验。 
English: If you disobey my instructions, I can render your spells useless.

古文：二子授命而去。
现代文：两人领命而去。
English: The two men were ordered to leave.

古文：时韩晋公滉在润州，深嫉此辈。
现代文：那时，韩晋公滉居润州，深恶懂得法术的这些人。
English: At that time, Han Jin Gong lived in Rongzhou and detested these people who knew magic.

古文：二子径往修谒，意者脱为晋公不礼，则当遁形而去。
现代文：这两个人直接去从从容容地拜见晋公，心里想，如果晋公不以礼相待，那就遁形而去。
English: The two men went directly to meet the Shingong, thinking that if the Shingong did not treat them with courtesy, they would run away.

古文：及召入，不敬，二子因弛慢纵诞，摄衣登阶。
现代文：等把两人召进去时，晋公毫不客气，两人就傲慢随便，提着衣服走上台阶，并不下跪行礼。
English: When the two were called in, Jin Gong was not at all polite, and the two were arrogant and casual, carrying their clothes up the steps without kneeling down and bowing.

古文：韩大怒，即命吏卒缚之，于是二子乃行其术，而法果无验，皆被擒缚。
现代文：韩晋公大怒，立即命令吏卒把他俩捆绑起来，两人见状便要施行法术逃脱，但法术果然不灵验，两人都被捉住绑起来了。
English: Han Jin Gong was furious and immediately ordered the officials to tie the two of them up. The two were told to perform a spell to escape, but the spell did not work, and both of them were caught and tied up.

古文：将加诛戮，二子曰： 我初不敢若是，盖师之见误也。 
现代文：晋公要把他俩杀死，两人便说： 我们本来不敢这样，这都是我们师父的错误啊！ 
English: Jin Gong wanted to kill them both, but they said, "We wouldn't dare to do that, it's all our master's fault!"

古文：韩将并绝其源，即谓曰： 尔但致尔师之姓名居处，吾或释汝之死。 
现代文：晋公要把传授法术的人也杀绝，便对他俩说： 你们只要将师父的姓名和住处告诉我，我就可能免除你们的死刑。 
English: Jin Gong also wanted to kill the person who taught the magic, so he said to the two of them: "If you just tell me the name and address of the master, I might be able to spare you the death penalty."

古文：二子方欲陈述，而安道已在门矣。卒报公，公大喜，谓得悉加戮焉。
现代文：两人刚要说，安道已来到门前。吏卒向晋公传报，晋公大喜，心里说，现在可以把他们统统杀掉了。
English: The two were just about to say that Ando had come to the door. The official sent a message to Jin Gong, and Jin Gong was overjoyed, saying in his heart that he could now kill them all.

古文：遽令召入，安道庞眉美髯，姿状高古。
现代文：立即令人把安道召进来，只见安道有两道宽宽的眉毛和漂亮的胡须，姿态神气高远古奥。
English: Immediately, people called Ando in. Ando had two wide eyebrows and a beautiful beard. He had an air of sophistication.

古文：公望见，不觉离席，延之对坐。
现代文：晋公看后，不由自主地离开座席，请他与自己对面而坐。
English: After looking at him, Jin Gong involuntarily left his seat and asked him to sit opposite him.

古文：安道曰： 闻弟子二人愚騃，干冒尊严。
现代文：安道说： 听说我的两个弟子愚昧无知，冒犯了您的尊严。
English: Ando said, "I heard that two of my disciples were foolish and ignorant, and I offended your dignity.

古文：今者命之短长，悬于指顾，然我请诘而愧之，然后俟公之行刑也。 
现代文：现在他俩的死活，掌握在您的手中。但我想责难羞愧他们，然后等您施行刑罚。 
English: Now their lives are in your hands, but I want to blame and shame them, and then wait for you to punish them.

古文：公即临以兵刀，械系甚坚，召致阶下，二子叩头求哀。
现代文：晋公便令兵士举着兵器围了上来，将其捆绑得很紧，那两个人被召到阶下时，频频叩头哀求。
English: Jin Gong then ordered the soldiers to surround him with their weapons, tied him up tightly, and when the two men were called to the steps, they repeatedly bowed their heads and begged.

古文：安道语公之左右曰： 请水一器。 
现代文：安道对晋公身边的人说： 请给我一杯水。 
English: Ando said to the people around Jin Gong: Please give me a glass of water.

古文：公恐其得水遁术，因不与之。
现代文：晋公害怕他施行水遁之术，坚决不给他。
English: Jin Gong was afraid that he would perform the Water Margin, and resolutely refused to give it to him.

古文：安道欣然，遽就公之砚水饮之，而噀二子。
现代文：安道并不在乎，当即把晋公砚石的水喝了一口，然后喷向那两个弟子。
English: Ando didn't care. He immediately took a sip of the water from Jin Gong Zhi Shi and then sprayed it at the two disciples.

古文：当时化为双黑鼠，乱走于庭前。
现代文：两个弟子当时就化为两只黑老鼠，在庭前乱跑。
English: At that time, the two disciples turned into two black mice and ran around in front of the court.

古文：安道奋迅，忽变为巨鸢，每足攫一鼠，冲飞而去。
现代文：安道动作迅速，忽然变成一只大鹰，一脚抓一只老鼠，冲天飞去。
English: Ando moves quickly, suddenly turning into a big eagle, catching a mouse with one foot and flying into the sky.

古文：晋公惊骇良久，终无奈何。
现代文：晋公吃惊地看了好长时间，始终无可奈何。
English: Surprised, Jin Gong watched for a long time, helpless.

古文：骆山人
现代文：骆山人
English: Luo Shan Ren

古文：唐田弘正之领镇州，三军杀之而立王廷凑。
现代文：唐代田弘正统领镇州时，被三军杀死而拥立王廷凑。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Tian Hong Zheng led Zhenzhou, he was killed by three armies and supported Wang Tingpai.

古文：即王武侯之属也，廷凑生于别墅。
现代文：王廷凑是王武侯的后代，他生于别墅之中。
English: Wang Tingpai is a descendant of Wang Wuhou, who was born in a villa.

古文：尝有鸠数十。朝集庭树，暮集檐下，有里人骆德播异之。
现代文：曾有几十个斑鸠早晨停留在院里树上，傍晚则栖息在房檐下面，村人骆德便当作异闻到处传布。
English: There used to be dozens of turtle doves that stayed on the trees in the courtyard in the morning and roosted under the eaves in the evening. The villager Luo De spread the news everywhere as a strange rumor.

古文：及长骈胁，喜阴符鬼谷之书，历军职，得士心。
现代文：长大之后，肋骨紧紧地联在一起，喜爱《阴符》、《鬼谷》之类的书籍，在军队里任职，深得士卒之心。
English: When he grew up, his ribs were tightly connected, he loved books such as "Yin Fu" and "Ghost Valley," served in the army, and won the hearts of soldiers.

古文：曾使河阳，回在中路，以酒困寝于路隅，忽有一人荷策而过，熟视之曰： 贵当列土，非常人也。 
现代文：一次出使河阳，返回途中因为酒喝多了睡倒在路旁，忽有一个手拿马鞭的人从他身边走过，仔细看了看他说道： 此人大富大贵，当被封疆列土，绝非寻常之人。 
English: Once he was on a mission to Kheyang. On his way back, he fell asleep on the roadside because he had drunk too much wine. Suddenly, a man with a whip in his hand walked past him. He took a closer look and said, "This man is very rich and very valuable. When the borders of the country were sealed, he was by no means an ordinary man."

古文：仆者寤。以告廷凑。
现代文：仆人是醒着的，便把这件事告诉了廷凑。
English: The servant, who was awake, told the king about this.

古文：驰数里及之，致敬而问，自云济源骆山人也，向见君鼻中之气，左如龙而右如虎，二气交王，应在今秋，子孙相继。满一百年。
现代文：廷凑策马跑了几里路追上这个人，向他表示敬意之后便询问刚才的事情，此人自称济源骆山人，说： 刚才见您鼻孔里的气息，左面如龙右面如虎，二气相交为王，应验的日子就在今秋。以后将由子孙代代相继，一直延续一百年。 
English: The man, who claimed to be from Jiyuan and Luoshan, said, "Just now, I saw the breath in your nostrils. The left nostril is like a dragon and the right nostril is like a tiger. The two breaths are intertwined. The day of fulfillment is this autumn. In the future, it will be passed down from generation to generation, and will continue for one hundred years."

古文：又云，家之庭合有大树，树及于堂，是其兆也。
现代文：又说： 您家的院里当有大树，树冠笼罩到正面的房子，这就是你家富贵的兆头。 
English: He also said: There should be a big tree in the courtyard of your house, and the canopy of the tree should cover the front of the house. This is a sign that your house is rich.

古文：是年果为三军扶立。
现代文：这一年果然被三军扶立。
English: This year, he was indeed promoted by the three armies.

古文：后归别墅，而庭树婆娑，暗庇舍矣。
现代文：后来他回到别墅，见庭院里树木参天。
English: When he returned to the villa later, he saw the trees in the courtyard reaching up to the sky.

古文：墅有飞龙山神，廷凑往祭之，将及祠百步，有人具冠冕，恭要于中路，廷凑及入庙，神像已侧坐。
现代文：葱茏茂盛，树荫笼罩着房舍。别墅中有飞龙山神，廷凑前去祭祀，走到离祠庙百步远时，有人冠冕整齐地恭候在路上迎接，筵请廷凑进入庙时，神像已经面东侧坐。
English: The greenery is lush and the shade of the trees envelops the house. There is a flying dragon mountain god in the villa, and Ting Chih stepped forward to make a sacrifice. When he walked a hundred paces away from the ancestral temple, someone was neatly waiting on the road to meet him. When he invited Ting Chih to enter the temple, the statue of the god was already sitting on the east side.

古文：因而面东。庙宇至今尚存。
现代文：这座庙宇至今尚存。
English: This temple still exists today.

古文：廷凑清俭公正，勤于朝廷，惠于军民。
现代文：廷凑为官清廉俭朴公正，勤政于朝廷，施惠于军民。
English: The imperial court officials were clean, frugal, simple and fair. They worked hard to administer the imperial court and benefit the military and the people.

古文：子孙世嗣为镇帅。
现代文：他的子孙世代相继为镇州统帅。
English: His children and grandchildren successively became the commander of the township.

古文：至朱梁时，王镕封赵王，为部将张文礼灭之。
现代文：到朱氏建立的后梁时，王镕被封为赵王，后为部将张文礼灭掉。
English: At the time of the backbone established by the Zhu clan, Wang Qian was given the title of Zhao Wang, and later the minister Zhang Wenli was eliminated.

古文：石旻
现代文：石旻
English: Stonehenge

古文：唐石旻有奇术，在扬州。
现代文：唐代石旻有奇异之术，住在扬州。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Shijie lived in Yangzhou and had a strange skill.

古文：段成式数年，不隔旬必与之相见。
现代文：段成式一连数年，隔不上十天必定与他相见。
English: It has been several years in a row, and I am sure that I will meet him in less than ten days.

古文：至开成初，在城亲故间，往往说石旻术不可测。
现代文：到了开成初年，在城里的亲友故旧之间，都说石旻的法术妙不可测。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, among the relatives and friends of the city, it was said that the magic of the stalagmites was unfathomable.

古文：盛传宝历中，石随尚书钱徽至湖州学院，子弟皆在，时暑月，猎者进一兔，钱命作汤。
现代文：盛传宝历年间，石旻随同尚书钱徽到湖州学院，学生都在，当时是暑季，猎人进献了一只兔子，钱徽令人把它做成汤。
English: During the prosperous years of Baoli, Shijie accompanied Shang Shu Qian Hui to Huzhou College. The students were all there. It was the summer season at the time. The hunter presented a rabbit, and Qian Hui had it made into soup.

古文：方共食，旻笑曰： 可留兔皮，聊志一事。 
现代文：大家刚要坐下来一块儿吃，石旻笑着说： 可把兔子皮留下来，用它标记一件事。 
English: Just as everyone was about to sit down and eat together, Shi Yan said with a smile: You can keep the rabbit skin and use it to mark one thing.

古文：遂钉皮于地，垒墼涂之，上朱书一符，独言曰： 恨校迟，恨校迟。 
现代文：他便把兔子皮钉在地上，涂抹好了，在上面用朱砂写了一道符，咒语只有一句话： 恨校迟，恨校迟。 
English: He nailed the rabbit's skin to the ground, smeared it, and wrote a sign with cinnabar on it. The spell had only one sentence: Hate being late for school, hate being late for school.

古文：钱氏兄弟诘之，石曰： 欲共请君共记卯年也。 
现代文：钱氏兄弟问他是什么意思，石旻说： 想与各位共同记着卯年。 
English: When Mr. Qian's brother asked him what he meant, Shi Hao said, "I want to remember the Year of the Rooster together with you."

古文：至太和九年，钱可复凤翔遇害。岁在乙卯也。
现代文：到了太和九年，钱徽便在凤翔遇害，这一年正是乙卯年。
English: In the ninth year of the Taihe era, Qianhui was killed in Fengxiang, which was the second year of the Wu era.

