古文：善者，敌人军□人众，能使分离而不相救也，受敌而不相知也。
现代文：善于用兵的将领，面对兵力多而强的敌军时，能使得敌军兵力分散而不能相互支援，遭到攻击时仍不能互通消息，彼此不知情况。
English: Generals who are good at using troops, when facing a large and strong enemy force, can make the enemy forces dispersed and unable to support each other. When attacked, they still cannot exchange information, and they do not know each other's situation.

古文：故沟深垒高不得以为固，车坚兵利不得以为威，士有勇力而不得以为强。
现代文：所以说，壕沟很深、壁垒很高的阵地算不得坚固，战车坚固、兵器锐利算不上成不可挡，士兵勇猛善战也算不上强大。
English: Therefore, a position with a deep trench and high barriers is not considered strong, a strong chariot and sharp weapons are not considered unstoppable, and soldiers who are brave and good at fighting are not considered strong.

古文：故善者制险量阻，敦三军，利屈伸，敌人众能使寡，积粮盈军能使饥，安处不动能使劳，得天下能使离，三军和能使柴。
现代文：因此，善于用兵的将领善于审视地形险阻而加以利用，能够指挥全军将士进退自如，敌军兵多时能使其变少，敌军军粮充足时能让其挨饿受饥，敌军稳守不动时能使敌军疲劳，能让得全国民心的敌军离心离德，能使全军同心协力的敌军不和。
English: Therefore, a general who is good at using troops is good at examining the terrain and obstacles and taking advantage of them. He can command the soldiers of the whole army to advance and retreat freely. He can reduce the number of enemy soldiers at most times, starve the enemy army when the army is well-fed, fatigue the enemy army when the enemy army is stable, make the enemy army that has won the hearts of the whole country leave Germany, and make the enemy army that the whole army is working together discord.

古文：故兵有四路、五动：进，路也；退，路也；左，路也；右，路也。进，动也；退，动也；左，动也；右，动也；默然而处，亦动也。
现代文：所以说，用兵有四路五动，前进是一条路，后退是一条路，向左是一条路，向右也是一条路；前进是动，后退是动，向左是动，向右是动，按兵不动同样也是动。
English: Therefore, there are four ways and five movements in the use of troops. Forward is one way, backward is one way, to the left is one way, and to the right is also one way; forward is movement, backward is movement, to the left is movement, to the right is movement, and according to the movement of troops is also movement.

古文：善者四路必彻，五动必工。
现代文：善于用乓的将领做到四路通达，五动巧妙。
English: A general who is good at using ping-pong to achieve four-way communication and five-move skillfully.

古文：故进不可迎于前，退不可绝于后，左右不可陷于阻，默，□□于敌之人。故使敌四路必穷，五动必忧。进则傅干前，退则绝于后，左右则陷于阻，默然而处，军不免于患。
现代文：因此，当自己的军队前进时会让敌军不能阻挡，后退时不会让敌军切断后路，向左向右不会受敌军阻拦，按兵不动时反过来要使敌军四路全都受困，五动必定有忧虑，前进时必有我军阻挡于前，后退时必定被切断后路，向左向右一定受到阻拦，即使按兵不动，也必定免不了灾祸。
English: Therefore, when one's own army advances, it will make the enemy army unstoppable. When retreating, it will not let the enemy army cut off the back way. To the left and to the right, it will not be blocked by the enemy army. When the army does not move, it will in turn cause the enemy army to be trapped in all four directions. There must be worries in the five movements. When advancing, there must be our army to block the front. When retreating, the back way must be cut off. To the left and to the right, it must be blocked. Even if the army does not move, it must not avoid disaster.

古文：善者能使敌卷甲趋远，倍道兼行，倦病而不得息，饥渴而不得食。
现代文：善于用兵的将领能让敌军偃旗息鼓绕远路，也能使敌军抄近路急行军，能使敌军疲病而得不到休息，又饥又渴而不能吃饭喝水。
English: A general who is good at using troops can make the enemy troops march around the long way, can also make the enemy troops take a shortcut and make a quick march, can make the enemy troops tired without rest, and hungry and thirsty without eating and drinking.

古文：以此薄敌，战必不胜矣。
现代文：敌方用这样的军队交战那肯定是不能取牲了。
English: If the enemy were to fight with such an army, it would certainly be a losing battle.

古文：我饱食而侍其饥也，安处以侍其劳也，正静以侍其动也。
现代文：而我军则是吃饱了等待饥饿的敌军，以逸而等待疲惫的敌军。按兵不动而等敌军动。
English: Our army, on the other hand, waits for the hungry enemy to get fed up, and waits for the tired enemy to slip away.

古文：故民见进而不见退，蹈白刃而不还踵。
现代文：这样交战，我军士兵当然会勇往直前，绝不会后退，即使踩上敌军锋利的刀刃，也绝不会转身退缩。
English: In such an engagement, our soldiers will, of course, march forward and never retreat. Even if they step on the enemy's sharp blade, they will never turn around and retreat.

