古文：昔汉宣帝以为 政平讼理，其惟良二千石乎！ 
现代文：从前，汉宣帝认为， 施政公平端方，诉讼能够公正审理，恐怕就算是好的太守吧! 
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Han Xuan of Han thought that if the government was fair and the lawsuits could be fairly tried, then he would probably be a good ruler.

古文：前史亦云： 今之郡守，古之诸侯也。 
现代文：前代史书上也说： 现在的郡守，就是古代的诸侯。 
English: In the history books of the previous generation, it was also said: The current county governors are the ancient princes.

古文：故长吏之职，号为亲民，是以导德齐礼，移风易俗，咸必由之。
现代文：所以地方长官，被称为亲民之官，因此劝导百姓树立德行，用礼整肃民风，移风易俗，都一定要由地方长官来实施。
English: Therefore, local governors, known as officials who are close to the people, must persuade the people to establish virtues, use etiquette to rectify folk customs, and change customs, and must be implemented by local governors.

古文：齐末昏乱，政移群小，赋调云起，徭役无度。守宰多倚附权门，互长贪虐，掊克聚敛，侵愁细民，天下摇动，无所厝其手足。
现代文：齐代末年，朝政昏乱，权力旁落到一群小人手中，各种赋税繁苛征收，征发徭役没有节制，地方长官多投靠依附权贵豪门，贪婪残暴，狼狈为奸，搜括民财，侵害百姓，天下人，浮动，百姓无处安居。
English: At the end of the Qi Dynasty, the imperial government was in disarray, power fell into the hands of a group of villains, various taxes were levied onerously, there was no restraint in the collection and distribution of taxes, local governors mostly relied on the power of the rich and powerful, they were greedy and cruel, they were traitors, they collected people's wealth, infringed on the people, the people of the world, and floated, and the people had nowhere to live safely.

古文：高祖在田，知民疾苦，及梁台建，仍下宽大之书，昏时杂调，咸悉除省，于是四海之内，始得息肩。
现代文：高祖那时尚在民间，了解百姓的疾苦，到梁王台府建立之后，高祖频频颁布宽缓对待百姓的命令，把朝政昏乱时各种繁苛的赋税，全都免除停收，于是天下百姓，都得到休养生息的机会。
English: Gaozu was still a commoner at that time, and he understood the sufferings of the common people. After the establishment of the Liangwang Taifu, Gaozu frequently issued orders to treat the common people with leniency, and exempted all kinds of burdensome taxes from being suspended when the imperial government was in disarray. As a result, the common people all over the world were given the opportunity to recuperate and live.

古文：逮践皇极，躬览庶事，日昃听政，求民之瘼。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，亲自了解各种事务，夜处理政事，了解百姓的疾苦病痛。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, personally understanding all kinds of affairs, dealing with political affairs at night, and understanding the sufferings and illnesses of the people.

古文：乃命輶轩以省方俗，置肺石以达穷民，务加隐恤，舒其急病。
现代文：于是派出使者视察各地风俗民情，在朝廷门外设置肺石让困窘无靠的百姓能呜冤求告，对百姓同情优恤，解除他们的疾苦急难。
English: Therefore, emissaries were sent to inspect the customs and people's conditions in various regions. Lung stones were set up outside the imperial court so that the distressed and helpless people could complain, sympathize with the people, and relieve their sufferings and hardships.

古文：元年，始去人赀，计丁为布；身服浣濯之衣，御府无文饰，宫掖不过绫彩，无珠玑锦绣；太官撤牢馔，每日膳菜蔬，饮酒不过三盏一一以俭先海内。
现代文：天监元年，开始除去对未成年人征收的资钱，衹是按照成年的人丁征收赋税。高祖自己身穿洗涤过的旧衣裳，府库中也不藏华贵的彩饰，宫廷之人穿的不过是绫绸，没有珠玑锦绣；太官遵从高祖的命令不设酒食，每天衹是食用蔬菜素食，即使饮酒也不超过三盏：逭都是用自己的节俭作天下人的表率。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Guardianship, the capital levied on minors began to be removed, and the tax was levied according to the number of adult people. Gaozu himself wore washed old clothes, and the treasury did not hide expensive ornaments. The people at the court wore only satin silk, without embroidered beads and brocades; the eunuchs obeyed Gaozu's order not to eat or drink alcohol, and ate vegetables and vegetarian food every day, and even drank no more than three glasses of alcohol: they all used their own frugality to set an example for the people of the world.

古文：每选长吏，务简廉平，皆召见御前，亲勖治道。
现代文：高祖每次选拔地方长官，一定挑选那些廉洁公正的官员，地方长官上任，高祖都亲自召见，鼓励他们施行惠政，治理一方百姓。
English: Every time Gaozu selected local governors, he always chose those officials who were honest and fair. When the local governors took office, Gaozu personally summoned them to encourage them to implement favorable policies and govern the people.

古文：始擢尚书殿中郎到溉为建安内史，左民侍郎刘鬷为晋安太守，溉等居官，并以廉洁著。
现代文：高祖先是擢拔尚书殿中郎到溉任建安内史，左民侍郎刘被任晋安太守，到溉等人上任之后，都以廉洁着称。
English: Gao's ancestor was the promotion of Shang Shudun's middle son to the post of Jian'an in the history of irrigation, and Zuomin's servant Liu was appointed as the governor of Jin'an. After the appointment of Jian'an and others, they were all known for their integrity.

古文：又著令：小县有能，迁为大县；大县有能，迁为二千石。
现代文：高祖又颁布命令：担任小县县令的官员，如果有能力，可以迁升为大县县令；大县县令如果有能力，可以迁升为郡守。
English: Gaozu also issued an order: officials who have served as county magistrates of small counties may be promoted to county magistrates of large counties if they are capable; county magistrates of large counties may be promoted to county governors if they are capable.

古文：于是山阴令丘仲孚治有异绩，以为长沙内史；武康令何远清公，以为宣城太守。
现代文：在这时候，山阴县令丘仲孚有突出的政绩，于是命他任长沙内史；武康县令何远清廉公正，于是命他任宣城太守。
English: At this time, the leader of Shanyin County, Qiu Zhongfu, had outstanding political achievements, so he was appointed as the history of Changsha; the leader of Wukang County, He Yuan, was clean, honest and fair, so he was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：剖符为吏者，往往承风焉。
现代文：担任地方长官的人，一时都仰慕仿效，蔚为风气。
English: The people who serve as local governors all admire imitation for a while, and it is a tradition.

古文：若新野庾荜诸任职者，以经术润饰吏政，或所居流惠，或去后见思，盖后来之良吏也。
现代文：像新野庾摹等担任地方长官职务的人，用经学润饰政令，有的给治理的百姓普施恩惠，有的离任之后还被百姓怀念，这可算是后起的良吏。
English: People who hold the position of local governors, such as Shin Yoshinobu, embellish their decrees with learning, some give favors to the people they govern, and some are still remembered by the people after leaving office. These can be regarded as good officials who came later.

古文：缀为《良吏篇》云。
现代文：遣裹把他们的事迹编纂为《良吏篇》。
English: He compiled their stories into "The Good Official."

古文：庾荜，字休野，新野人也。
现代文：庾摹字休野，新野人。
English: A new wild man is born.

古文：父深之，宋应州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲庾深之，宋时任雍州刺史。
English: His father, Zou Sheng, was the governor of Yongzhou during the Song Dynasty.

古文：荜年十岁，遭父忧，居丧毁瘠，为州党所称。
现代文：庾摹十岁的时候，父亲去世，在守丧期间，庾摹因哀痛而形销骨立，因而被同州之人称道。
English: When she was ten years old, her father passed away. During the mourning period, she was devastated by grief and was praised by people in the same state.

古文：弱冠，为州迎主簿，举秀才，累迁安西主簿、尚书殿中郎、骠骑功曹史。
现代文：弱冠之年，被州中选用为主簿，举秀才，积功迁升为安西主簿，尚书殿中郎，骠骑功曹史。
English: In the year of the weak crown, he was selected as the main book by the middle of the state, and was promoted to the main book of Anxi, the middle son of Shangshu, and the rider of Cao Shi.

古文：博涉群书，有口辩。
现代文：庾摹广泛地涉猎群书，极有口才。
English: Extensively dabbled in books, extremely eloquent.

古文：齐永明中，与魏和亲，以荜兼散骑常侍报使，还拜散骑侍郎，知东宫管记事。
现代文：齐国在永明年间和重庾摹友好往来，朝廷命庾摹兼散骑常侍，作使者回访翘厘，回国后座庾摹任命为散骑侍郎，知束宫管记事。
English: During the Yongle era, the State of Qi had friendly exchanges with Chongzhen. The imperial court appointed him to be an envoy to pay a return visit to Chongzhen. After returning to the country, he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, and he was in charge of records at Zhizhong Palace.

古文：郁林王即位废，掌中书诏诰，出为荆州别驾。
现代文：郁林王即位、被废，都由庾摹主持中书韶诰。庾摹后来出京任荆州别驾。
English: The enthronement and dethronement of King Yulin were both presided over by Yu Zhongshu. Later, Yu went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：仍迁西中郎谘议参军，复为州别驾。
现代文：接着迁任西中郎谘议参军，又任荆州别驾。
English: Next, he was transferred to Nishinakuro to advise on joining the army, and then to Jingzhou.

古文：前后纲纪，皆致富饶。荜再为之，清身率下，杜绝请托，布被蔬食，妻子不免饥寒。
现代文：以前在荆州担任别驾的人，都靠这一职位使家中财物富饶，庾摹两次担任这一职务，却以清廉为下属作表率，杜绝私人请托，自己布衣蔬食，过着清贫的生活，妻子儿女都免不了挨饿受冻。
English: In the past, people who served as second-in-command in Jingzhou relied on this position to enrich their family's wealth. However, after serving this position twice, they set an example for their subordinates by being incorruptible, eliminating private patronage, making their own clothes, vegetables and food, and living a poverty-stricken life. Their wives and children could not avoid starving and freezing.

古文：明帝闻而嘉焉，手敕褒美，州里荣之。
现代文：明帝听到庾摹的情况，十分赞赏，亲自写诏书褒扬表彰庾摹，州中之人都觉得这是极大的荣耀。
English: When Emperor Ming heard about this, he was very appreciative and personally wrote an edict praising and commending him. Everyone in the prefecture felt that this was a great honor.

古文：迁司徒谘议参军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：庾摹迁任司徒谘议参军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to serve as an advisor to join the army, and became a regular attendant.

古文：高祖平京邑，霸府建，引为骠骑功曹参军，迁尚书左丞。
现代文：高狙平定京城，建立王府，选拔庾摹任骠骑功曹参军，庾摹迁任尚书左丞。
English: Gao aimed to pacify the capital city, establish the royal palace, select Gao Ren as Gao Jie Gong Cao to join the army, and transfer Gao Ren to Shang Shuzhong.

古文：出为辅国长史、会稽郡丞、行郡府事。
现代文：又出京任辅国长史、会擅邓丞、行郡府事。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as Vice-Governor of Guizhou Province, Vice-Governor of Guizhou Province, Vice-Governor of Guizhou Province, Vice-Governor of Guizhou Province.

古文：时承凋弊之后，百姓凶荒，所在谷贵，米至数千，民多流散，荜抚循甚有治理。
现代文：当时正处在国家动乱之后，民生凋敝，又遇上灾荒，处处谷米昂贵，米价涨至数千钱一石，百姓因此大多逃亡，流离失所，庾摹抚恤百姓，有很好的政绩。
English: At that time, it was just after the national turmoil, people's livelihoods were withering, and there was a natural disaster. Grain and rice were expensive everywhere, and rice prices rose to thousands of yuan per stone. As a result, most of the people fled and were displaced. He took care of the people and had a good political record.

古文：唯守公禄，清节逾厉，至有经日不举火。
现代文：他自己衹是享用国家俸禄，更加严谨地持守高洁的节操，因此家境清贫，有时甚至整天因为柴米匮乏而不烧火煮饭。
English: He himself did not enjoy the state salary, but adhered more strictly to the principles of high cleanliness, so his family was poor, and sometimes he did not cook rice all day because of the lack of firewood.

古文：太守、襄阳王闻而馈之，荜谢不受。
现代文：会稽太守永阳王听说他清贫至此就馈赠财物给他，庾草婉言谢绝，不肯接受。
English: Upon hearing that he was destitute, the Auditor-General Yongyang Wang presented him with gifts of money and property, but he declined to accept them.

古文：天监元年，卒，停尸无以殓，柩不能归。
现代文：天监元年，庾摹去世。去世之后，庾单的尸身陈放着，家人无钱殡殓，灵柩无法归葬。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Gong died. After his death, Gong Shan's body was left unattended, his family had no money to bury him, and the coffin could not be buried.

古文：高祖闻之，诏赐绢百匹、米五十斛。
现代文：高祖听到这消息，下韶赐给庾摹家一百匹绢，五十斛米。
English: When Gaozu heard the news, he gave the Xing family one hundred horses and fifty bushels of rice.

古文：初，荜为西楚望族，早历显官，乡人乐蔼有干用，素与荜不平，互相陵竞。
现代文：当初，庾摹家属西楚望族，他又早年就已担任显要官职。庾摹的同乡乐蔼有才干，他一向和庾摹不和，两人处处竞争，互不相让。
English: At the beginning, Zou's family members were well-respected in West Chu, and he had already served as a prominent official in his early years. Zou's fellow townsman was amiable and talented. He had always been at odds with Zou, and the two competed everywhere and did not give in to each other.

古文：蔼事齐豫章王嶷，嶷薨，蔼仕不得志，自步兵校尉求助戍归荆州，时荜为州别驾，益忽蔼。
现代文：乐蔼事奉齐豫章王萧嶷，萧嶷死后，乐蔼仕途不得意，就以步兵校尉的身份帮助处理防守事务，投归荆州，当时庾摹任荆州别驾，因此就更加藐视乐蔼。
English: Le Ai served Qiyuzhang Wang Xiaoqi. After Xiao Yu's death, Le Ai was not satisfied with his career, so he helped to deal with defense affairs as an infantry captain and returned to Jingzhou. At that time, he was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, so he despised Le Ai even more.

古文：及高祖践阼，蔼以西朝勋为御史中丞，荜始得会稽行事，既耻之矣；会职事微有谴，高祖以蔼其乡人也，使宣旨诲之，荜大愤，故发病卒。
现代文：高祖登上帝位之后，乐蔼因为帮助梁振兴帝业有功而任御史中丞，庾摹却祇得到行会稽郡事的职位，庾摹就已经觉得这是耻辱，又遇上庾摹处理政务有小的过失，高祖因为乐蔼是庾革的同乡，因此就派乐蔼宣谕旨意开导庾摹，庾草内心愤愤不平，所以发病而死。
English: After Gao Zu ascended to the throne, Le Ai was appointed as the vice-chairman of the imperial history because of his meritorious service in helping Liang Zhenxing the imperial cause, but Yao only got the position of the guild inspector, Yao already felt that this was a disgrace, and also encountered Yao's handling of government affairs with a small fault. Gao Zu, because Le Ai was a fellow villager of Yao Ge, therefore sent Le Ai to proclaim the will to enlighten Yao, and Yao Yao's heart was indignant, so he died of the disease.

古文：沈瑀，字伯瑜，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈踽字伯瑜，吴兴武康人。他的叔父沈昶。
English: Wu Xingwu Kangren. His uncle is Shen Yao.

古文：叔父昶，事宋建平王景素，景素谋反，昶先去之；及败，坐系狱，瑀诣台陈请，得免罪，由是知名。
现代文：事奉宋建乎王刘景素，刘景素谋反，沈昶已经在事前离开刘基塞，刘基塞谋反计划败露，这垄也因为受牵连而被关押，沈玛赶往御史台为叔父陈奏实情，请求赦免，他叔父沈昶因此而得以免罪，沈璃也因此而出名。
English: He served Liu Jingsu, the king of Song Jianhu. Liu Jingsu plotted rebellion. Shen Yao had already left Liu Kisei in advance. Liu Kisei's plot to rebel was exposed. He was also detained because he was implicated. Shen Ma rushed to the State Council to report the truth for his uncle Chen and request a pardon. His uncle Shen Yao was thus exonerated. Shen Li is also famous for this.

古文：起家州从事、奉朝请。
现代文：沈踽初出仕任州从事、奉朝请。
English: At the beginning of his term of office, Shen Yi was assigned to the prefecture and asked to serve the imperial court.

古文：尝诣齐尚书右丞殷沵，沵与语及政事，甚器之，谓曰： 观卿才干，当居吾此职。 
现代文：沈玛曾经去拜谒齐尚书右丞殷涌，殷浦与沈璃谈及政事，听到选基的见解，非常器重逸基，对说： 看你的才干，你将会担任我逭一官职。 
English: Shen Ma once went to visit Yan Chih, Shang Shuh Rong, and Yin Chung. Yin Pu talked with Shen Li about politics. When he heard the views of the foundation, he was very impressed with the foundation and said: "Look at your talent, you will hold my first official post."

古文：司徒、竟陵王子良闻瑀名，引为府参军，领扬州部传从事。
现代文：司徒竟陵王子良听说沈踽的名声，就选用选玛为府参军，领沈踽部传从事。
English: Upon hearing of Shen Yi's reputation, Prince Jingtou Qingtongliang chose Shen Ma to join the army and lead the army to subjugate Shen Yi.

古文：时建康令沈徽孚恃势陵瑀，瑀以法绳之，众惮其强。
现代文：当时令仗权势欺凌沈璃，沈踽按法律惩治了沈徽孚，大家从此畏惧选玛的刚强正直。
English: At that time, the powers-that-be bullied Shen Li, and Shen Yu punished Shen Huifu according to the law. Since then, everyone has been afraid of Shen Ma's strength and honesty.

古文：子良甚相知赏，虽家事皆以委瑀。
现代文：萧子良非常赏识他，即使是家事也交给沈玛处置。
English: Xiao Ziliang appreciates him very much. Even the household chores are left to Shen Ma.

古文：子良薨，瑀复事刺史、始安王遥光。
现代文：萧子良去世，沈璃又事奉扰州刺史始安王萧子良。
English: Xiao Ziliang passed away, and Shen Li also served as the state secretary to disturb the history of King Xiao Ziliang.

古文：尝被使上民丁，速而无怨。
现代文：边疆曾被州府派去押送民丁，他很快应召而毫无怨言。
English: Frontier was once sent by the prefectural government to escort Min Ding. He quickly responded to the call and did not complain.

古文：遥光谓同使曰： 尔何不学沈瑀所为？ 
现代文：萧遥光对同被派遣的官员说： 你们为什么不仿效沈玛的所作所为? 
English: Xiao Yaoguang said to the officials dispatched with him: Why don't you follow Shenma's example?

古文：乃令专知州狱事。
现代文：于是萧遥光命沈玛独自主管州中狱讼之事。
English: As a result, Xiao Yaoguang Shenma was in sole charge of the state prison litigation.

古文：湖熟县方山埭高峻，冬月，公私行侣以为艰难，明帝使瑀行治之。
现代文：湖熟县方山埭高而险峻，寒冬腊月，因公因私路过这地方的行人都认为这裹艰险难行，明童派选玛去修治这地方。
English: The Fangshan Mountains in Hukou County are high and steep, and the cold winter is waning. People who pass by this place for business or pleasure think that it is a difficult and dangerous place to go. Ming Tong sent Shenma to cultivate this place.

古文：瑀乃开四洪，断行客就作，三日立办。
现代文：边垂于是计划凿开水急滩险的四处，他截下来往行人参加工程施工，三天就把事情全部办好。
English: Therefore, he planned to drill the four parts of the rapids. He intercepted and sent pedestrians to participate in the project construction, and the whole thing was done in three days.

古文：扬州书佐私行，诈称州使，不肯就作，瑀鞭之三十。
现代文：扬州书佐因私事行经这地方，诈称是州府的使者，不肯参加施工，沈璃命令鞭笞他三十下。
English: Yangzhou Shuzo traveled through the area on private business, falsely claiming to be an emissary of the state government, and refused to participate in the construction. Shen Li ordered him to be whipped 30 times.

古文：书佐归诉遥光，遥光曰： 沈瑀必不枉鞭汝。 
现代文：书佐回去向萧遥光诉苦，萧遥韭说： 选玛一定不会无缘无故鞭打你。 
English: Shosa went back to complain to Xiao Yaoguang. Xiao Yaoguang said: Shenma will not whip you for no reason.

古文：覆之，果有诈。
现代文：于是派人去核查，果然是书佐有欺诈行为。
English: So they sent someone to check, and sure enough, it was Shousa who had committed fraud.

古文：明帝复使瑀筑赤山塘，所费减材官所量数十万，帝益善之。
现代文：明帝又派沈顼修筑赤山塘，费用比材官预计的数量减少数十万，旦嘘就更加认为选垣有才能。
English: Emperor Ming also sent Shen Zhen to build the Red Mountain Pond, the cost was hundreds of thousands less than the amount expected by the material officer, and the lie was even more that the selection was talented.

古文：永泰元年，为建德令，教民一丁种十五株桑、四株柿及梨栗，女丁半之，人咸欢悦，顷之成林。
现代文：永泰元年，任建德令，他教导百姓，每一成年男丁栽种十五棵桑树、四棵柿树以及梨树、栗树，每一成年女丁按以上数量的一半栽种树木，百姓都欢欢喜喜地听从沈顼的教导，不久百姓栽种的树木就形成大片树林。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Ren Jiande ordered that every adult male should plant 15 mulberry trees, 4 persimmon trees, pear trees, and chestnut trees, and every adult female should plant half of the above number of trees. The people happily obeyed the instructions of Shen Qi, and soon the trees planted by the people formed a large forest.

古文：去官还京师，兼行选曹郎。
现代文：沈瑀离职回到京城，兼行选曹郎。
English: Shen Yao left his post and returned to Beijing, concurrently leading the election of Cao Lang.

古文：随陈伯之军至江州，会义师围郢城，瑀说伯之迎高祖。
现代文：沈瑀后随陈伯之军到江州，适逢高祖义军包围郢城，沈瑀就劝说陈伯之投降高祖。
English: After Shen Yi followed Chen Bo's army to Jiangzhou, when Gao Zu's rebels encircled Handan City, Shen Yi persuaded Chen Bo to surrender to Gao Zu.

古文：伯之泣曰： 余子在都，不得出城，不能不爱之。 
现代文：伯之之哭着说： 我的儿子在京城，不能出城，我不能不顾惜他。 
English: The old man cried and said, "My son is in the capital, he can't leave the city, I can't ignore him.

古文：瑀曰： 不然，人情匈匈，皆思改计，若不早图，众散难合。 
现代文：沈玛说： 不能这么看。你手下人心动乱不安，都想着改换门庭的主意，假如不早作打算，手下人众心散了就再也难以聚合。 
English: Shenma said, "I can't see it that way. The hearts of your subordinates are in turmoil, and they are all thinking about changing the idea of the courtyard. If you don't make a plan early, it will be difficult for your subordinates to come together once they are scattered.

古文：伯之遂举众降，瑀从在高祖军中。
现代文：陈伯之于是就率领全军投降高祖，沈瑀也就此跟随在高祖军中。
English: Chen Bozhi then led the whole army to surrender to Gaozhu, and Shen Yi also followed in Gaozhu's army.

古文：初，瑀在竟陵王家，素与范云善。
现代文：当初，沈瑀还在竟陵王府的时候，就一直和范云善交情很好。
English: In the beginning, when Shen Yi was still at the King's Palace of Jingling, he had always been on good terms with Fan Yunshan.

古文：齐末，尝就云宿，梦坐屋梁柱上，仰见天中有字曰 范氏宅 。
现代文：齐朝末年，沈瑀曾经到那儿去住宿，他做梦坐在房屋梁柱上，仰头看见天空中有 范氏宅 三个字。
English: In the last years of the Qi Dynasty, Shen Yao once went there to stay. In his dream, he was sitting on the beams and pillars of a house. Looking up, he saw three words in the sky: "Fan's House."

古文：至是，瑀为高祖说之。
现代文：沈瑀跟随高祖以后，就把逭梦境向高祖述说。
English: After Shen Yi followed Gao Zu, he recounted his dream to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖曰： 云得不死，此梦可验。 
现代文：高祖说： 衹要范云不死，遣梦最终总能应验。 
English: Gao Zu said: If you want Fan Yun not to die, your dream will eventually come true.

古文：及高祖即位，云深荐瑀，自暨阳令擢兼尚书右丞。
现代文：高祖登上帝位之后，范云极力向直担推荐选艺，沈瑀从暨阳令擢拔为兼尚书右丞。
English: After Gao Zu ascended to the throne, Fan Yun tried his best to recommend the selection of art to the direct supervisor, and Shen Yu was promoted from Cai Yangling to concurrently Shang Shu Yu Rong.

古文：时天下初定，陈伯之表瑀催督运转，军国获济，高祖以为能。
现代文：当时天下刚刚安定，陈伯之上表启奏沈玛催督粮草转运，使军队、国家及时获得接济，高祖认为沈瑀很有能力。
English: At that time, the world had just been stabilized. Chen Bo's top table inspired Shen Ma to urge the transfer of grain and grass, so that the army and the country could receive timely aid. Gao Zu believed that Shen Yao was very capable.

古文：迁尚书驾部郎，兼右丞如故。
现代文：沈瑀迁任尚书驾部郎，兼尚书右丞之职不变。
English: Shen Qiqian was appointed as Shang Shuxu's driver, and his position as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man remained unchanged.

古文：瑀荐族人沈僧隆、僧照有吏干，高祖并纳之。
现代文：沈瑀推荐本族人沈僧隆、沈僧照，说他们有从政的才干，高祖都接纳任用了他们。
English: Shen Yao recommended his own people Shen Sanglong and Shen Sangzhao, saying that they had the ability to be in politics, and Gao Zu accepted and appointed them.

古文：以母忧去职，起为振武将军、余姚令。
现代文：沈瑀因为母亲去世而离职，他重新被起用后任振武将军、余姚令。
English: Shen Wei resigned because of his mother's death, and he was reappointed to the post of General Zhenwu, Yu Yaoling.

古文：县大姓虞氏千余家，请谒如市，前后令长莫能绝。
现代文：余姚县的大姓虞氏共有千余家，虞氏到衙门请托、疏通关节的人络绎不绝，如同赶集，以前的县令没有谁能杜绝这种现象。
English: Yuyao County has more than a thousand families with the surname Yu, and there is an endless stream of people with the surname Yu who come to the county gate to ask for help and unclog their joints. It's like a stampede, and no one in the previous county government could stop this phenomenon.

古文：自瑀到，非讼所通，其有至者，悉立之阶下，以法绳之。
现代文：沈璃到任之后，那些和讼案没有联系的人，假若来到衙门，沈玛就让他们全都站在台阶下，一一按法纪惩治他们。
English: After Shen Li took office, if those who had no connection with the case came to the court, Shen Ma would make them all stand under the steps and punish them one by one according to the law.

古文：县南又有豪族数百家，子弟纵横，递相庇廕，厚自封植，百姓甚患之。
现代文：县南又有个豪门大族，共有数百家，子弟很多，他们互相庇护，搜括聚敛财物，百姓很害怕他们。
English: In the southern part of the county, there is another large clan of wealthy families. There are hundreds of families with many children. They protect each other, collect and accumulate wealth, and the people are very afraid of them.

古文：瑀召其老者为石头仓监，少者补县僮，皆号泣道路，自是权右屏迹。
现代文：沈瑀把豪门大族的人召来，年老者就命他们做石头仓监，年少者就命他们补任县僮，担负县衙的杂役。这些人都在路上号呼哭泣。
English: Shen Ye called the members of the big families, the old ones ordered them to be stone warehouse supervisors, and the young ones ordered them to fill in for the county magistrate and carry the county magistrate's chores. These people were crying on the road.

古文：瑀初至，富吏皆鲜衣美服，以自彰别。
现代文：从此以后，豪门大族的行为都有所收敛，不敢胡作非为。沈瑀刚到余姚，那些富有的县吏都穿着鲜艳华美的衣服，以表明和一般人的区别。
English: From then on, the behavior of the big families all became more restrained, and they did not dare to do anything wrong. As soon as Shen Yi arrived in Yuyao, those rich county officials all wore bright and beautiful clothes to show their difference from ordinary people.

古文：瑀怒曰： 汝等下县吏，何自拟贵人耶？ 
现代文：沈瑀怒气冲冲地说： 你们衹不过是个小县的县吏，怎么能私自去和显贵的官员攀比呢? 
English: Shen Rong said angrily, "You are just a county official of a small county. How can you go and compete with high-ranking officials?

古文：悉使著芒矰粗布，侍立终日，足有蹉跌，辄加榜棰。
现代文：沈玛命他们全都穿粗劣简朴的服饰，整天在衙门侍立，稍有闪失差错，就加以责罚鞭打。
English: By the grace of God, they all wore coarse and simple clothes, stood all day at the gate, and if there was the slightest mistake, they were punished and whipped.

古文：瑀微时，尝自至此鬻瓦器，为富人所辱，故因以报焉，由是士庶骇怨。
现代文：沈玛还处在贫贱中时，曾经到余姚卖陶器，被当地富人羞辱，所以藉任县令的时机报复，因此当地士族庶族都十分害怕，大有怨言。
English: When Shenma was still in poverty, he once went to Yuyao to sell pottery and was humiliated by the local rich people, so he took the opportunity to take revenge. Therefore, the local gentry and commoners were very afraid and complained a lot.

古文：然瑀廉白自守，故得遂行其志。
现代文：但是沈璃自己保持公正廉洁，所以能够如意地实现自己报复的意图。
English: But Shen Li himself remained fair and honest, so he was able to successfully realize his intention of revenge.

古文：后王师北伐，征瑀为建威将军，督运漕，寻兼都水使者。
现代文：后来朝廷军队北伐，征调沈踽为建威将军，督运粮草，不久沈瑀兼都水使者。
English: Later, during the Northern Expedition of the imperial army, Shen Yi was recruited and transferred to be the general of Jianwei, the superintendent of grain and grass transportation, and soon became the emissary of water for the capital.

古文：顷之，迁少府卿。
现代文：又过了不久，沈玛迁任少府卿。
English: Soon after, Shen Ma was transferred to the post of Shao Fuqing.

古文：出为安南长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：沈瑀又出京任安南长史、寻阳太守。
English: Shen Yi also went to Beijing to serve as Annan Changshi and Huanyang Taishu.

古文：江州刺史曹景宗疾笃，瑀行府州事。
现代文：江州刺史曹景宗病得很重，沈瑀行府州事。
English: The statesman of Jiangzhou, Cao Jingzong, was very ill, and Shen Yi was busy with the affairs of the prefecture.

古文：景宗卒，仍为信威萧颖达长史，太守如故。
现代文：曹景宗去世，沈瑀接着任信威将军萧颖达长史，寻阳太守之职不变。
English: Cao Jingzong passed away, and Shen Yi was succeeded by General Xinwei Xiao Yingda. The position of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong remained unchanged.

古文：瑀性屈强，每忤颖达，颖达衔之。
现代文：沈瑀性格倔强，常常违逆触忤萧颖达，萧颖达对他怀恨在心。
English: Shen Yao's character was stubborn, and he often rebelled against Xiao Yingda. Xiao Yingda held a grudge against him.

古文：天监八年，因入谘事，辞又激厉，颖达作色曰： 朝廷用君作行事耶？ 
现代文：天监八年，沈璃入萧颖达府中商量事情，言辞又激烈率直，萧颖达变脸发怒说： 朝廷任命你摄理州府事务吗? 
English: In the eighth year of Tianjun, Shen Li entered Xiao Yingda's office to discuss matters. The words were fierce and frank. Xiao Yingda turned angry and said: Did the court appoint you to take charge of the affairs of the state government?

古文：瑀出，谓人曰： 我死而后已，终不能倾侧面从。 
现代文：沈踽出府，对人说： 我死了之后才会停止争辩，总不能当面阿谀随声附和。 
English: Shen Yi went out of the palace and said to the people: I will not stop arguing until I am dead. You must not agree with me in front of others.

古文：是日，于路为盗所杀，时年五十九，多以为颖达害焉。
现代文：当天，沈瑀在路上被强盗杀死，死时五十九岁，很多人认为是萧颖达杀害了沈瑀。
English: On the same day, Shen Rong was killed by robbers on the road. He was fifty-nine years old at the time of his death. Many people believe that Xiao Yingda killed Shen Rong.

古文：子续累讼之，遇颖达亦寻卒，事遂不穷竟。
现代文：沈瑀之子沈续一再提出诉讼，控告萧颖达，恰遇上萧颖达不久也去世，这事也就不再追究。
English: Shen Yingda's son, Shen Zhe, repeatedly filed lawsuits against Xiao Yingda. It just so happened that Xiao Yingda died soon after, and the matter was no longer investigated.

古文：续乃布衣蔬食终其身。
现代文：沈瑀于是穿布衣吃蔬食。直至去世。
English: As a result, Shen Yi wore cloth clothes and ate vegetables until his death.

古文：范述曾，字子玄，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：范述曾字子玄，吴郡钱唐人。
English: Zeng Zixiu Xuan, Wu County Qian Tang people.

古文：幼好学，从余杭吕道惠受《五经》，略通章句。
现代文：他从幼年开始就爱好学习，他师从余杭吕道惠学习《五经》，精通《五经》的经义解说。
English: He has been fond of learning since he was a child. He studied the "Five Classics" from Yu Hang Lyu Daohui and is proficient in the interpretation of the "Five Classics."

古文：道惠学徒常有百数，独称述曾曰： 此子必为王者师。 
现代文：吕道惠的学生曾经有数百人，但他独独称赞范述曾说： 这人一定会成为帝王之师。 
English: There were once hundreds of students of Lü Daohui, but he praised Fan Shu alone and said: This person will surely become the emperor's teacher.

古文：齐文惠太子、竟陵文宣王幼时，高帝引述曾为之师友。
现代文：齐文惠太子、竟陵文宣王年幼时，范述曾选拔任他们的师友。
English: When Prince Qi Wenhui and King Jingling Wenxuan were young, Fan Shu had chosen to be their teacher and friend.

古文：起家为宋晋熙王国侍郎。
现代文：范述曾初出仕任宋晋熙王国侍郎。
English: Fan Shu served as an attendant of the Song Dynasty for the first time.

古文：齐初，至南郡王国郎中令，迁尚书主客郎、太子步兵校尉，带开阳令。
现代文：齐代初年，范述曾出任王国郎中令，迁任尚书主客郎、太子步兵校尉，带开阳令。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, Fan Shu served as the second-in-command of Wang Guoling, and was transferred to the position of the host of the Shang Dynasty, the prince's infantry lieutenant, and the leader of the Yang Dynasty.

古文：述曾为人謇谔，在宫多所谏争，太子虽不能全用，然亦弗之罪也。
现代文：范述曾为人正直敢言，在宫中对很多事都提出谏诤，太子虽然不能全都采用，但也不怪罪他。
English: Although the prince could not adopt all of them, he did not blame the prince, who was an honest person and raised objections to many things in the palace.

古文：竟陵王深相器重，号为 周舍 。
现代文：竟陵王非常器重范述曾，称他为 周舍 。
English: In fact, the king of the mausoleum was very particular about the description of Zeng, calling him Zhou She.

古文：时太子左卫率沈约亦以述曾方汲黯。
现代文：当时太子左卫率沈约也拿范述曾和漠代的遝壁相提并论。
English: At that time, the prince Zuo Wei and Shen You also compared the model with the wall of the desert.

古文：以父母年老，乞还就养，乃拜中散大夫。
现代文：因为父母年老，范述曾请求返回家乡赡养父母，于是朝廷授任茎述壁为中散大夫。
English: Because his parents were old, Fan Shu had requested to return to his hometown to support his parents, so the court appointed Zhu Xiubai as the doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：明帝即位，除游击将军，出为永嘉太守。
现代文：登上帝位，范述曾被除授为游击将军，出京任丞塞太守。
English: After ascending to the throne, Fan Shu was stripped of his title of guerrilla general and sent to Beijing to serve as the imperial governor of Joseon.

古文：为政清平，不尚威猛，民俗便之。
现代文：范述曾治政清廉公正，不崇尚用威严凶猛的办法治理百姓，百姓感到安适。
English: Fan Shu once governed a clean, honest and just government, and did not advocate governing the people by means of majesty and ferocity. The people felt at ease.

古文：所部横阳县，山谷险峻，为逋逃所聚，前后二千石讨捕莫能息。
现代文：永台所属的撞垦困，山高谷深，地势险要，是逃亡的罪人聚集的地方，前任太守采用征讨的办法，也没有一个能够平定逭地方。
English: Yongtai belongs to the bump bail, the mountains and valleys are deep, the terrain is precarious, it is a place where fugitive sinners gather, the former governor used the method of collection, and there is no one who can pacify the bumpy place.

古文：述曾下车，开示恩信，凡诸凶党，涘负而出，编户属籍者二百余家。
现代文：范述曾初任，就昭示恩德，申明信义，那些凶恶之徒，拖儿带女从深山中出来，编入户籍成为良民百姓的共有二百余家。
English: When Fan Sui was first appointed, he showed benevolence, affirmed loyalty, and those evil-doers who dragged their children and women out of the mountains were registered as good people in a total of more than 200 families.

古文：自是商贾流通，居民安业。
现代文：从此之后，这地方商人往来通行无阻，百姓安居乐业。
English: Since then, merchants have been able to come and go freely, and the people have been able to live and work in peace.

古文：在郡励志清白，不受馈遗，明帝闻甚嘉之，下诏褒美焉。
现代文：范述曾在永嘉郡任职时，努力保持清正廉洁的操守，不接受馈赠，明帝听说范述曾的情况，很是赞赏，下韶褒扬赞美他。
English: When Fan Shu served in Yongjia County, he worked hard to maintain a clean and honest ethics, and did not accept gifts. When Emperor Ming heard about Fan Shu's situation, he was very appreciative and praised him.

古文：征为游击将军。
现代文：又被征调为游击将军。
English: He was also conscripted as a guerrilla general.

古文：郡送故旧钱二十余万，述曾一无所受。
现代文：范述曾离开永嘉郡的时候，郡中按旧例送给离任太守故旧钱二十余万，他全不接受。
English: When Fan Shu left Yongjia County, the county government sent more than 200,000 yuan of old money to the departing governor according to the old practice, but he did not accept it at all.

古文：始之郡，不将家属；及还，吏无荷担者。
现代文：范述曾刚到郡中上任的时候，不带家属，到离郡回京的时候，他手下属吏依然行李简单，没有谁的行李需要车运担挑。
English: When Fan Shu had just taken office in the county, he did not take his family with him. When he left the county to return to Beijing, the luggage of his subordinates was still simple, and no one's luggage needed to be transported by car.

古文：民无老少，皆出拜辞，号哭闻于数十里。
现代文：百姓无论老少，都出来拜辞范述曾，百姓依依不舍、挽留太守的哭声在数十里外都能听到。
English: The people, both young and old, all came out to pay homage to the emperor. According to the legend, the cries of the people to remain loyal to the emperor could be heard dozens of miles away.

古文：东昏时，拜中散大夫，还乡里。
现代文：柬昏侯在位时，范述曾被任命为中散大夫，回归家乡。
English: During the reign of the Khmer Rouge, Fan Shu was appointed as a doctor in Zhongshan and returned to his hometown.

古文：高祖践阼，乃轻舟出诣阙，仍辞还东。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，范述曾就乘坐小船离开家乡，到京城拜见高祖，接着辞别高祖束归。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God. Fan Shu once left his hometown on a small boat to visit Gao Zu in Beijing, and then bid farewell to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖诏曰： 中散大夫范述曾，昔在齐世，忠直奉主，往莅永嘉，治身廉约，宜加礼秩，以厉清操。
现代文：直担下诏说： 中散大夫范述曾，从前在齐代，忠实耿直事奉主上，他担任永嘉太守时，清廉简约，坚守高洁，应当加赐爵禄，用以激励有高洁操守的人。
English: Directly under his charge, he said: Dr. Zhong San once served the Lord faithfully and sincerely in the Qi Dynasty. When he served as the Yongjia Empress, he was clean, simple, and adhered to purity. He should be given a peerage to encourage people with purity and integrity.

古文：可太中大夫，赐绢二十匹。 
现代文：应当任命他为太中大夫，赏赐绢二十匹。 
English: He should be appointed to the position of Grand Physician, and be rewarded with twenty donkeys.

古文：述曾生平得奉禄，皆以分施。
现代文：范述曾一生得到的俸禄，都分别施赠给人。
English: The salary that Fan Shu once received in his lifetime was given to people separately.

古文：及老，遂壁立无所资。
现代文：到他年老之时，家徒四壁，没有资产。
English: By the time he reached old age, he was a pauper with no assets.

古文：以天监八年卒，时年七十九。
现代文：范述曾在天监八年去世，死时七十九岁。
English: Fan Shu died in the eighth year of Tianjing, at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：注《易文言》，著杂诗赋数十篇。
现代文：范述曾为《易文言》作注，着有杂诗赋敷十篇。
English: Fan Shu once annotated "Yiwenwen" and contributed ten miscellaneous poems to it.

古文：丘仲孚，字公信，吴兴乌程人也。
现代文：丘仲孚字公信，吴兴乌程人。
English: Qiu Zhongfu's character is Gongxin, Wu Xing's character is Wucheng.

古文：少好学，从祖灵鞠有人伦之鉴，常称为千里驹也。
现代文：他从小好学，他的从祖父丘灵鞠懂得相面术，曾经把丘仲孚称作千里驹。
English: He has been eager to learn since he was a child. His grandfather, Chuling Qi, knew the art of face painting. He once called Qiu Zhongfu the "Thousand-Mile Dragonfly."

古文：齐永明初，选为国子生，举高第，未调，还乡里。
现代文：齐永明初年，丘仲孚被选为国子生，举高第，但未被征调，他于是回归家乡。
English: In the first year of Qi Yongming, Qiu Zhongfu was selected as a national student, promoted to a high rank, but was not transferred, so he returned to his hometown.

古文：家贫，无以自资，乃结群盗，为之计画，劫掠三吴。
现代文：丘仲孚家中贫穷，没有钱养家糊口，他于是交结一群盗贼，为他们出谋划策，在三吴劫掠。
English: Qiu Zhongfu's family was poor and had no money to feed the family, so he formed an alliance with a group of thieves, advised them, and plundered in Sanwu.

古文：仲孚聪明有智略，群盗畏而服之，所行皆果，故亦不发。
现代文：丘仲孚聪明而又有智谋，那些盗贼都畏惧他，也听从他，他的谋划都能一一实施并取得成功，所以也不会败露。
English: Qiu Zhongfu is clever and resourceful. The thieves are afraid of him and obey him. His plans can be implemented one by one and succeed, so they will not be revealed.

古文：太守徐嗣召补主簿，历扬州从事、太学博士、于湖令，有能名。
现代文：太守徐嗣召丘仲孚补任主簿，丘仲孚历任扬州从事，太学博士，于湖令，有能干的名声。
English: Tai Shou Xu Zhi summoned Qiu Zhongfu to fill in as chief accountant, Qiu Zhongfu successively engaged in Yangzhou, Tai Xue Ph.D., Yu Huling, has a reputation for ability.

古文：太守吕文显当时幸臣，陵诋属县，仲孚独不为之屈。
现代文：淮南太守吕文显当时是皇上宠幸的臣子，他常常轻侮责骂属县官员，丘仲孚却单单不被他折服。
English: Lu Wenxian, the governor of Huainan at the time, was the emperor's favorite vassal. He often scolded and insulted county officials, but Qiu Zhongfu was simply not impressed by him.

古文：以父丧去职。
现代文：丘仲孚因为父亲去世而离职。
English: As a result of his father's death, Yau Chung-Fu resigned from his post.

古文：明帝即位，起为烈武将军、曲阿令。
现代文：明帝登上帝位，丘仲孚被起用为烈武将军、曲阿令。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and Qiu Zhongfu was appointed as the general of the army and the commander of the army.

古文：值会稽太守王敬则举兵反，乘朝廷不备，反问始至，而前锋已届曲阿。
现代文：会稽太守王敬则发兵反叛，他乘朝廷对他不防备突然进兵，他反叛的消息刚刚传到京城，叛军的前锋已经到达曲阿。
English: Wang Jing, the auditor of the imperial court, sent troops to rebel. He took advantage of the fact that the imperial court did not protect him from the sudden advance of troops. The news of his rebellion had just reached the capital, and the rebels' vanguard had already reached Qu'ao.

古文：仲孚谓吏民曰： 贼乘胜虽锐，而乌合易离。
现代文：丘仲孚对本县县吏和百姓说： 叛贼乘胜前进，虽然锐气很盛，但他们是乌合之众，容易离散。
English: Qiu Zhongfu said to the county officials and people of this county: The traitors are advancing by taking advantage of the victory. Although they are full of vigor, they are a rabble and are easily dispersed.

古文：今若收船舰，凿长岗埭，泄渎水以阻其路，得留数日，台军必至，则大事济矣。 
现代文：现在我们把船舰收聚起来，开挖长岗埭，让河渠的水流干，阻止叛军船只前进，如果能阻遏他们几天，朝廷的军队一定会赶到，那平叛的大事就能成功了。 
English: Now we are gathering the ships, digging long embankments, letting the water flow in the canals dry, and stopping the rebel ships from advancing. If we can hold them off for a few days, the imperial army will surely arrive, and the great matter of suppressing the rebellion will be successful.

古文：敬则军至，值渎涸，果顿兵不得进，遂败散。
现代文：王敬则叛军来到，河渠中的水已经排干，叛军果然被阻滞，不能前进，叛军就此被击败溃散。
English: Wang Jing's rebels came, the water in the canal had been drained, and the rebels were indeed blocked, unable to advance, and the rebels were defeated and dispersed.

古文：仲孚以距守有功，迁山阴令，居职甚有声称，百姓为之谣曰： 二傅沈刘，不如一丘。 
现代文：丘仲孚因为抵御叛军有功，迁任山阴令，他在任期间很有声誉，百姓为他编了句歌谣说： 二傅沈刘，不如一丘。 
English: Qiu Zhongfu was transferred to Shanying because of his achievements in resisting the rebels. During his tenure, he had a great reputation. The people made up a song for him, saying: "Two Fu Shen Liu are not as good as one Qiu."

古文：前世傅琰父子、沈宪、刘玄明，相继宰山阴，并有政绩，言仲孚皆过之也。
现代文：以前傅琰父子、沈宪、刘玄明相继担任山阴令，都有很好的政绩，歌谣说丘仲孚的政绩都超过了他们。
English: In the past, Fu Xi and his son, Shen Xian, and Liu Xuanming successively served as Shan Yinling, and all of them had good political achievements. The song said that Qiu Zhongfu's political achievements exceeded them.

古文：齐末政乱，颇有赃贿，为有司所举，将收之，仲孚窃逃，径还京师诣阙，会赦，得不治。
现代文：齐代末年政治混乱，丘仲孚颇有贪脏纳贿的行为，被有司举报弹劾，将要将他收捕，丘仲孚暗中逃跑，径直回到京城赴朝廷认罪，恰逢朝廷发布赦令，丘仲孚得以不受惩治。
English: At the end of the Qi Dynasty, there was political turmoil. Qiu Zhongfu was accused of corruption and bribe-taking. He was reported to the authorities for impeachment and was about to be arrested. Qiu Zhongfu secretly fled and went straight back to Beijing to confess his guilt to the imperial court. This coincided with the issuance of a pardon by the imperial court, and Qiu Zhongfu was not punished.

古文：高祖践阼，复为山阴令。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，丘仲孚又任山渣令。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, and Qiu Zhongfu was appointed as the mountain slag.

古文：仲孚长于拨烦，善适权变，吏民敬服，号称神明，治为天下第一。
现代文：丘仲孚擅长处理繁杂琐细的政务，善于顺应时势，随机应变，县吏百姓都尊重他信服他，称他明智如神。丘仲孚的治政能力被称为天下第一。
English: Qiu Zhongfu is good at dealing with complicated and detailed government affairs, good at adapting to the times and responding to changes. The county officials and the people respect him, believe in him, and call him wise as a god. Qiu Zhongfu's ability to govern is said to be the best in the world.

古文：超迁车骑长史、长沙内史，视事未期，征为尚书右丞，迁左丞，仍擢为卫尉卿，恩任甚厚。
现代文：丘仲孚被越级升迁为车骑长史、长沙内史，他任职不满一年，又被征召为尚书右丞，迁任左丞，接着擢拔为卫尉卿，皇上对丘仲孚的恩宠很深，任用也很优厚。
English: Yau Chung-Fu was promoted to the rank of Cheki Chang-Min and Changsha Neishi. He served for less than a year. He was also conscripted as Shangshu Yu-Cheng, transferred to Zuo-Cheng, and then promoted to the rank of Wei-Cheng. The emperor's favor for Yau Chung-Fu was deep, and his appointment was also excellent.

古文：初起双阙，以仲孚领大匠。事毕，出为安西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：朝廷建造双阙，命丘仲孚领将作大匠，工程完毕，丘仲孚出京任安西长史、太守。
English: The imperial court built the twin towers, and Meikyo Chungfu, the leader, became the master builder. When the project was completed, Chungfu left for Beijing to serve as Anxi Changshi and Taishu.

古文：迁云麾长史、江夏太守，行郢州州府事，遭母忧，起摄职。
现代文：迁任云麾长史、江夏太守，行郢州州府事，母亲去世，朝廷命他在守丧期间夺情起复摄理州府职务。
English: He was transferred to the post of the governor-general of Yunnan Province and the governor-general of Jiangxi Province, and was in charge of the affairs of the state capital of Zhangzhou. When his mother died, the imperial court ordered him to resume his duties as the governor-general of the state capital during the mourning period.

古文：坐事除名，复起为司空参军。
现代文：因为事情牵连而有罪，被免职除去名籍，又被起用为司空参军。
English: Guilty because of the implication of the matter, he was removed from office and removed from the register of names, and was appointed as an air marshal to join the army.

古文：俄迁豫章内史，在郡更励清节。
现代文：不久，丘仲孚迁任邃童内史，任职期间，他改变以前的行为，砥砺清廉的节操。
English: Soon after, Qiu Zhongfu was transferred to the position of the internal history of Xingdong. During his tenure, he changed his previous behavior and strengthened his integrity.

古文：顷之，卒，时年四十八。
现代文：不久，丘仲孚去世，死时四十八岁。
English: Soon after, Qiu Zhongfu died at the age of forty-eight.

古文：诏曰： 豫章内史丘仲孚，重试大邦，责以后效，非直悔吝云亡，实亦政绩克举。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 豫章内史丘仲孚，在大州中被重新任用，以观后效。他在任期间，不衹是灾害全无，实在可以算是政绩卓著。
English: The imperial edict said: Yu Zhang's subordinate, Shi Qiu Zhongfu, was reappointed in Dazhou to see the effect. During his tenure, there were no disasters at all, which can be regarded as an outstanding political achievement.

古文：不幸殒丧，良以伤恻。
现代文：现在他不幸去世，实在让人伤痛凄恻。
English: Now that he's sadly passed away, it's just heartbreaking.

古文：可赠给事黄门侍郎。 
现代文：应当追赠丘仲孚给事黄门侍郎。 
English: Yao Zhongfu should be posthumously given to Huangmen Zhi Rong.

古文：仲孚丧将还，豫章老幼号哭攀送，车轮不得前。
现代文：丘仲孚的灵柩将要运回去的时候，豫童百姓老老少少都号哭着送行，许多人攀住灵车，灵车无法前行。
English: When Qiu Zhongfu's coffin was about to be transported back, the people of Yutong, young and old, cried as they saw it off. Many people clung to the hearse, and the hearse could not go forward.

古文：仲孚为左丞，撰《皇典》二十卷、《南宫故事》百卷，又撰《尚书具事杂仪》，行于世焉。
现代文：丘仲孚任左丞时，撰写《皇典》二十卷，《南宫故事》一百卷，又撰写了《尚书具事杂仪》，这些书都在世上流传。
English: When Yau Chung-Fu was appointed as the left-hand man, he wrote 20 volumes of "Imperial Decrees," 100 volumes of "Tales of the Southern Palace," and also wrote "Miscellaneous Documents of the Imperial Household," all of which have been circulated around the world.

古文：孙谦，字长逊，东莞莒人也。
现代文：孙谦字长逊，东莞莒人。
English: Sun Qianzi is a long-suffering person, Dongguan is a lazy person.

古文：少为亲人赵伯符所知。
现代文：孙谦年轻时就被亲戚赵伯符了解器重。
English: When he was young, Sun Qian learned a lot from his relative Zhao Bofu.

古文：谦年十七，伯符为豫州刺史，引为左军行参军，以治干称。
现代文：孙谦十七岁时，孙谦签任辽州刺史，选用孙谦为左军行参军，孙谦以处理公事的才干著称。
English: When Sun Qian was seventeen years old, Sun Qian signed a contract to become the governor of Liaozhou, and selected Sun Qian to join the left army. Sun Qian was famous for his ability to handle public affairs.

古文：父忧去职，客居历阳，躬耕以养弟妹，乡里称其敦睦。
现代文：因为父亲去世，孙谦离职守丧。他客居历屋，亲自耕种以供养弟妹，同乡人都称赞他们兄弟问的亲厚和睦。
English: Because of his father's death, Sun Qian left his job to attend the funeral. He stayed in Liyao and personally cultivated to support his younger brothers and sisters. Fellow villagers all praised the cordiality and harmony of their brothers and sisters.

古文：宋江夏王义恭闻之，引为行参军，历仕大司马、太宰二府。
现代文：宋江夏王刘义恭听说逊遂的为人，选用茎邀为行参军。孙谦先后在大司马、太宰两个官府中任职。
English: Liu Yigong, the Xia king of Songjiang, heard that Sun Sui was a person, and he chose to be invited to join the army. Sun Qian successively served in the two government offices of Da Sima and Dazai.

古文：出为句容令，清慎强记，县人号为神明。
现代文：孙谦出京任句容令，他清廉谨慎，记忆力强，县中百姓称他明智如神。
English: Sun Qian was allowed to leave Beijing. He was clean, prudent and had a strong memory. The people in the county said that he was as wise as a god.

古文：泰始初，事建安王休仁，休仁以为司徒参军，言之明帝，擢为明威将军、巴东、建平二郡太守。
现代文：泰始初年，孙谦事奉建安王刘休仁，刘休仁命孙谦为司徒参军，并向明帝推荐他，孙谦被擢拔为明威将军、巴东建平二郡太守。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Sun Qian served Liu Xuren, the king of Jianan. Liu Xuren ordered Sun Qian to join the army as an apprentice and recommended him to Emperor Ming. Sun Qian was promoted to Mingwei general and the governor of the two counties of Jianping and Badong.

古文：郡居三峡，恒以威力镇之。
现代文：二郡都处在三峡之中，以往常常依靠武力威压镇服郡中百姓。
English: Both counties are located in the middle of the Three Gorges, and in the past, they often relied on force and intimidation to subdue the people in the county.

古文：谦将述职，敕募千人自随。
现代文：孙谦将要赴任，明帝下令要孙谦招募一千兵丁跟随。
English: When Sun Qian was about to take office, Emperor Ming ordered Sun Qian to recruit a thousand soldiers to follow him.

古文：谦曰： 蛮夷不宾，盖待之失节耳。何烦兵役，以为国费。 
现代文：孙谦说： 蛮夷不肯归顺，是因为对待他们缺少一定的准则罢了，哪裹用得着派兵打仗，耗费国家资财呢! 
English: Sun Qian said, "If the barbarians refuse to submit, it is only because of the lack of a certain standard for dealing with them. What is the use of sending soldiers to fight and wasting the country's resources?"

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：孙谦坚决拒绝，不肯接受兵丁。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：至郡，布恩惠之化，蛮獠怀之，竞饷金宝，谦慰喻而遣，一无所纳。
现代文：到郡之后，孙谦广施惠政，推行教化，蛮僚都纷纷归服，并争着向孙谦馈赠金银财宝，孙谦一一抚慰他们，晓之以理，然后把他们送回去，馈赠的金银财宝一点儿也不接受。
English: After arriving at the county, Sun Qianguang made benevolent policies and promoted enlightenment. The barbarian colleagues all submitted in succession, and competed to give gold, silver and treasure to Sun Qian. Sun Qian consoled them one by one, reasoned with them, and then sent them back. He did not accept the gold, silver and treasure gifts at all.

古文：及掠得生口，皆放还家。
现代文：后来抓住一些违法的蛮僚，也都把他们释放回家。
English: Later, they caught some of their colleagues who violated the law, but they also released them to go home.

古文：俸秩出吏民者，悉原除之。
现代文：本由吏民承担的官员俸禄，也全都把吏民的负担免除。
English: The salary of officials, which was originally borne by officials and the people, has also been completely exempted from the burden of officials and the people.

古文：郡境翕然，威信大著。
现代文：这样一来，郡境之内安然无事，孙谦的威望大大提高。
English: As a result, the county was safe and sound, and Sun Qian's prestige was greatly enhanced.

古文：视事三年，征还为抚军中兵参军。
现代文：孙谦在二郡治政三年，朝廷征召他回京任抚军中兵参军。
English: After Sun Qian had ruled the country for three years, the imperial court summoned him back to Beijing to enlist in the army.

古文：元徽初，迁梁州刺史，辞不赴职，迁越骑校尉、征北司马府主簿。
现代文：元徽初年，孙谦迁任梁州刺史，他拒绝任命，不肯赴职，又迁任越骑校尉、征北司马府主簿。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sun Qian was transferred to the post of Liangzhou chief historian. He refused to be appointed, refused to go to work, and was transferred to the post of Yue riding school captain and the main book of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：建平王将称兵，患谦强直，托事遣使京师，然后作乱。
现代文：建平王将要举兵反叛，他担心孙谦刚强正直，怕孙谦出来谏止，于是假藉公事之名派孙谦赶赴京城，然后发动叛乱。
English: King Jianping was about to raise an army to rebel. He was worried that Sun Qian was strong and honest, and was afraid that Sun Qian would come out to stop him. Therefore, he sent Sun Qian to rush to Beijing in the name of business, and then launched a rebellion.

古文：及建平诛，迁左军将军。
现代文：建平王被诛之后，孙谦迁任左军将军。
English: After King Jianping was captured, Sun Qian became the general of the Left Army.

古文：齐初，为宁朔将军、钱唐令，治烦以简，狱无系囚。
现代文：齐代初年，孙谦任宁朔将军、钱唐令。他以简洁的方法处理繁杂的政务，狱中不拘留尚未审讯判罪的犯人。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, Sun Qian was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the commander of Qian Tang. He handled complicated government affairs in a concise manner, and prisoners who had not been tried and convicted were not detained in prison.

古文：及去官，百姓以谦在职不受饷遗，追载缣帛以送之，谦却不受。
现代文：孙谦离职的时候，百姓们因为孙谦在职期间不接受馈赠，就在孙谦离县之后用船装着缣帛追着送给孙谦，孙谦拒不接受。
English: When Sun Qian left office, the people did not accept the gift because of Sun Qian's behavior during his term of office. After Sun Qian left the county, they chased him with a boat equipped with a raft to give it to Sun Qian. Sun Qian refused to accept it.

古文：每去官，辄无私宅，常借官空车厩居焉。
现代文：每次离职，孙谦总是没有自己私有的房宅，常常向官府借空车棚居住。
English: Every time he left office, Sun Qian always did not have his own private house, and often borrowed a car shed from the government to live in.

古文：永明初，为冠军长史、江夏太守，坐被代辄去郡，系尚方。
现代文：永明初年，孙谦任冠军长史、江夏太守，他因为被替换但却擅自离开江夏郡而获罪，被关押在尚方狱中。
English: In the first year of Yongming, when Sun Qian was the champion of Changshi and the governor of Jiangxia, he was arrested for leaving Jiangxia County without permission after being replaced, and was detained in Shangfang Prison.

古文：顷之，免为中散大夫。
现代文：不久，孙谦被免罪，任中散大夫。
English: Soon after, Sun Qian was exonerated and appointed as Dr. Zhongshan.

古文：明帝将废立，欲引谦为心膂，使兼卫尉，给甲仗百人，谦不愿处际会，辄散甲士，帝虽不罪，而弗复任焉。
现代文：明帝将行废立之事，想要选用孙谦做自己心腹，于是命孙谦兼卫尉，配给他一百名披甲执仗的卫士，孙谦不愿意置身权力之争当中，自己作主遣散卫士，明帝虽不怪罪他，但从此之后也就不再委以重任了。
English: Emperor Ming was about to abolish the post and wanted to choose Sun Qian as his henchman, so he appointed Sun Qian as the captain of the guards and assigned him a hundred guards with armor to fight. Sun Qian did not want to be in the middle of the power struggle and dismissed the guards on his own. Although Emperor Ming did not blame him, he no longer entrusted him with important duties.

古文：出为南中郎司马。
现代文：孙谦出京任南中郎司马。
English: Sun Qian left Beijing to take up the post of South Middle Palace Master.

古文：东昏永元元年，迁囗囗大夫。
现代文：东昏侯永元元年，孙谦迁任口口大夫。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Dynasties, Sun Qianqian was appointed as the mouth doctor.

古文：天监六年，出为辅国将军、零陵太守，已衰老，犹强力为政，吏民安之。
现代文：天监六年，孙谦出京任辅国将军、零陵太守，他已经年老衰弱，但还是努力处理政事，属吏百姓都感到安适。
English: Six years after he assumed the post of overseer of heaven, Sun Qian left Beijing to serve as the general of the auxiliary state and the governor of Jilin Province. He was already old and weak, but he still made efforts to deal with political affairs, and the officials and the people all felt at ease.

古文：先是，郡多虎暴，谦至绝迹。
现代文：孙谦到任以前，郡中虎多，常伤害人畜，孙谦到任之后，虎竟绝迹。
English: Before Sun Qian took office, there were many tigers in the county, often harming people and animals. After Sun Qian took office, the tigers actually disappeared.

古文：及去官之夜，虎即害居民。
现代文：孙谦离职的那天夜晚，虎又出来伤害当地百姓。
English: On the night of Sun Qian's departure, the tiger came out again to hurt local people.

古文：谦为郡县，常勤劝课农桑，务尽地利，收入常多于邻境。
现代文：孙谦任郡县长官，常常努力鼓励督促百姓耕种农田，种桑养蚕，力求地尽其利，他属下百姓常常比相邻郡县的百姓收入更多。
English: Sun Qian, the county magistrate, often tried to encourage and urge the people to cultivate farmland, grow mulberry and raise silkworms, and strive to make the best profit. The people under him often earned more than the people in neighboring counties.

古文：九年，以年老，征为光禄大夫。
现代文：天监九年，因为孙谦年老，朝廷征调他为光禄大夫。
English: Because Sun Qian was old, the imperial court transferred him to the post of Guanglu doctor.

古文：既至，高祖嘉其清洁，甚礼异焉。
现代文：孙谦回京赴任之后，高祖十分赞赏孙谦的清廉高洁，对他以隆厚的礼仪相待，恩宠又特别优厚。
English: After Sun Qian returned to Beijing to take office, Gaozu fully appreciated Sun Qian's integrity and nobility, treated him with grand etiquette, and his grace was particularly generous.

古文：每朝见，犹请剧职自效。
现代文：但孙谦每逢朝见，还是请求担当烦难的重任以报效朝廷。
English: However, whenever Sun Qian met with the emperor, he still asked to take on a difficult and important task to serve the imperial court.

古文：高祖笑曰： 朕使卿智，不使卿力。 
现代文：高祖笑着对他说： 我要用你的才智，不用你的力气。 
English: Gaozu smiled and said to him, "I will use your talent, not your strength.

古文：十四年，诏曰： 光禄大夫孙谦，清慎有闻，白首不怠，高年旧齿，宜加优秩。
现代文：天监十四年，高祖下韶说： 光禄大夫孙谦，清廉忠诚，很有名望，直到白首之年，仍毫不懈怠，这位年高德劭的老臣，应当给予优厚的俸禄。
English: In the 14th year of Tianjun, Gao Zu said: Sun Qian, the doctor of Guanglu, is honest and loyal, and is very famous. Until the first year of Bai, he still did not slacken. This old minister with high moral standards should be given a generous salary.

古文：可给亲信二十人，并给扶。 
现代文：应该配给亲信二十名，并给予扶持之人。 
English: It should be distributed to 20 close friends and supporters.

古文：谦自少及老，历二县五郡，所在廉洁。
现代文：孙谦从年轻直到年老，历任二县五郡的长官，处处都保持廉洁。
English: From his youth to his old age, Sun Qian, who served as the governor of two counties and five counties, maintained his integrity at all times.

古文：居身俭素，床施蘧除屏风，冬则布被莞席，夏日无帱帐，而夜卧未尝有蚊蚋，人多异焉。
现代文：他生活俭约朴素，坐榻旁衹设置苇编屏风，冬天盖布被铺莞席，夏天没有床帐，但他夜晚睡觉却未曾有蚊蚋侵扰，很多人对此都感到奇异。
English: He lived a frugal and simple life. He had a woven screen next to his bed, covered with a cloth in winter and without a bedspread in summer. However, he never had a mosquito infestation when he slept at night. Many people found this strange.

古文：年逾九十，强壮如五十者，每朝会，辄先众到公门。
现代文：孙谦年逾九十，但身体强壮，如同五十岁的人。每逢朝会，他往往在众人之先到达朝门。
English: Sun Qian is over ninety years old, but his body is as strong as that of a fifty-year-old. Whenever there is a court meeting, he often arrives at the imperial gate ahead of everyone else.

古文：力于仁义，行己过人甚远。
现代文：他努力奉行仁义，立身行事超过别人很远。
English: He strives to pursue benevolence and righteousness, and he is far ahead of others.

古文：从兄灵庆常病寄于谦，谦出行还问起居。
现代文：孙谦的从兄孙灵庆曾因有病寄住在孙谦家中，孙谦一次出外，回家后去问候孙灵庆的饮食起居状况。
English: Sun Qian's brother-in-law, Sun Lingqing, once stayed at Sun Qian's home due to illness. Sun Qian went out once and went home to greet Sun Lingqing's diet and living conditions.

古文：灵庆曰： 向饮冷热不调，即时犹渴。 
现代文：孙灵庆说： 先前喝水觉得冷热不合适，随即就又感到口渴。 
English: Sun Lingqing said, "Previously, I felt it was inappropriate to drink hot or cold water, but then I felt thirsty again.

古文：谦退遣其妻。
现代文：孙谦从孙灵庆那儿出来后就休弃自己的妻子。
English: After Sun Qian left Sun Lingqing, he abandoned his wife.

古文：有彭城刘融者，行乞疾笃无所归，友人舆送谦舍，谦开厅事以待之。
现代文：彭城人刘融，行乞时病重，无家可归，朋友们把他抬到孙谦家中，孙谦打开厅堂接待刘融。
English: Liu Rong, a resident of Pengcheng, was seriously ill and homeless when he was begging. His friends carried him to Sun Qian's home. Sun Qian opened the hall to receive Liu Rong.

古文：及融死，以礼殡葬之。
现代文：刘融死后，孙谦按礼仪殡殓埋葬他。
English: After Liu Rong's death, Sun Qian buried him according to the etiquette.

古文：众咸服其行义。
现代文：大家对他奉行仁义都非常敬服。
English: Everyone has great respect for his benevolence.

古文：十五年，卒官，时年九十二。
现代文：天监十五年，孙谦在任职期间去世，死时九十二岁。
English: Sun Qian died at the age of ninety-two, fifteen years into his tenure as overseer of heaven.

古文：诏赙钱三万、布五十匹。
现代文：高祖下诏送钱三万、布五十匹给他家资助办理丧事。
English: Gao Zu sent 30,000 yuan and 50 pieces of cloth to his family to help pay for the funeral.

古文：高祖为举哀，甚悼惜之。
现代文：高祖亲自为孙谦举哀，为琢谦的去世伤心惋惜。
English: Gao Zu personally mourned for Sun Qianming and was saddened by the death of Taku Qianming.

古文：谦从子廉，便辟巧宦。
现代文：孙谦的侄子孙廉，善于谄谀奉承，精于仕途钻营。
English: Sun Qian, the nephew of Sun Qian, is good at flattery and is good at career development.

古文：齐时已历大县，尚书右丞。
现代文：齐代他就已经历任大县县令，尚书右丞。
English: In the Qi Dynasty, he had already served as the grand county magistrate, Shang Shu Rong.

古文：天监初，沈约、范云当朝用事，廉倾意奉之。及中书舍人黄睦之等，亦尤所结附。
现代文：孟监初年，沈约、范云等人在朝廷掌管朝政，孙廉极力奉承他们，对中书舍人黄睦之等人，他更是巴结依附。
English: In the first year of Meng Jian, Shen Yotong, Fan Yun and others were in charge of the imperial government in the imperial court. Sun Liang flattered them as much as possible, and he was even more attached to Huang Mutsu, who was a Chinese scholar.

古文：凡贵要每食，廉必日进滋旨，皆手自煎调，不辞勤剧，遂得为列卿、御史中丞、晋陵、吴兴太守。
现代文：凡是贵官显要索要食物，孙廉一定每天进奉美味佳肴，而且都亲手烹调，不辞辛劳繁杂。孙廉于是能够位列九卿，任御史中丞，晋陵、吴兴太守。
English: Whenever a dignitary apparently asked for food, Sun Liang would serve delicious food every day, and he would cook it all by himself, with great effort. Sun Liang was then able to rank among the nine nobles, and was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History, the governor of Jinling, and the governor of Wu Xing.

古文：时广陵高爽有险薄才，客于廉，廉委以文记，爽尝有求不称意，乃为屐谜以喻廉曰： 刺鼻不知嚏，蹋面不知瞋，啮齿作步数，持此得胜人。 
现代文：当时广陵高爽有才学，但为人轻薄，没有德行，他寄食孙廉家中作门客，孙廉把处理官府文书之事交给高爽。高爽曾向孙廉有所求，没有得到满意的结果，于是编制一条谜语暗指孙廉。谜面说： 刺他的鼻子不会打喷嚏，蹋他的面不会发脾气，靠动动齿朝前迈脚步，凭藉遣得以胜遇别人。 
English: At that time, Guangling Gao Shuang was a talented scholar, but he was a light-hearted person with no virtue. He was a guest at Sun Liang's home, and Sun Liang entrusted Gao Shuang with the handling of official documents. Gao Shuang had asked Sun Liang for something, but did not get a satisfactory result, so he compiled a riddle alluding to Sun Liang. The riddle said: If you prick his nose, he will not sneeze; if you scratch his face, he will not lose his temper; if you move your teeth forward, you will be able to defeat others.

古文：讥其不计耻辱，以此取名位也。
现代文：谜底是底下有齿的木屐。孙廉藉此讥讽茎庆不知羞耻，不怕受辱，用这样的手段获取名声和官位。
English: The answer to the riddle is a wooden stake with teeth at the bottom. Sun Lian used this as a way to ridicule Zhuge Qing, who knew no shame and was not afraid of being humiliated, and used this means to gain fame and official position.

古文：伏恒，字玄耀，曼容之子也。
现代文：伏佢字玄耀，是伏曼容之子。
English: Fuxin Zi Xuan Yao is the son of Fuman Rong.

古文：幼传父业，能言玄理，与乐安任昉、彭城刘曼俱知名。
现代文：他从小继承父亲的学业，能谈论微妙的义理。他与乐安任防、彭城刘曼一同出名。
English: He inherited his father's studies from a young age and can talk about subtle principles. He is famous with Le An Renfen and Pengcheng Liu Man.

古文：起家齐奉朝请，仍兼太学博士，寻除东阳郡丞，秩满为鄞令。
现代文：伏佢初离家出仕任齐奉朝请，接着兼太学博士，不久被除授为东阳郡丞，任期满后他担任鄞令。
English: At the beginning of his career, Fuxi left home to serve at the request of the imperial court, and then became a doctor of science. He was soon removed from the post of Dongyang county magistrate, and after his term of office expired, he served as a magistrate.

古文：时曼容已致仕，故频以外职处恒，令其得养焉。
现代文：当时伏曼容已经退休居家，所以朝廷频频让伏佢在京城之外任职，使他能够赡养父亲。
English: At that time, Fumanrong had already retired and lived at home, so the imperial court frequently let Fusang serve outside the capital so that he could support his father.

古文：齐末，始为尚书都官郎，仍为卫军记室参军。
现代文：齐代末年，伏佢开始任尚书都官郎，接着任卫军记室参军。
English: In the last years of the Qi Dynasty, Fuxi began to serve as the official of the capital of Shangshu, and then joined the army.

古文：高祖践阼，迁国子博士，父忧去职。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，伏佢迁任国子博士，他因为父亲去世而离职守丧。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, and was transferred to the position of Dr. Guo Zi. He left the position due to the death of his father.

古文：服阕，为车骑谘议参军，累迁司空长史、中书侍郎、前军将军、兼《五经》博士，与吏部尚书徐勉、中书侍郎周舍，总知五礼事。
现代文：服丧期满，伏堕任车骑谘议参军，积功迁任司空长史，中书侍郎，前军将军，兼《五经》博士，他和吏部尚书徐勉、中书侍郎周舍，总管五种礼仪事务。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was assigned to the cavalry advisory council to join the army, and his achievements were transferred to the general of the former army, and the doctor of the "Five Classics," as well as the general of the cavalry advisory council, the general of the cavalry advisory council, the general of the cavalry advisory council, the general of the cavalry advisory council, and the general of the cavalry advisory council.

古文：出为永阳内史，在郡清洁，治务安静。
现代文：伏佢出京任永阳内史，在郡任职期间清正廉洁，政务处理得很好，郡境安定。
English: Fuxi was appointed to Yongyang Inner History from Beijing. During his tenure in the county, he was honest and clean, handled government affairs well, and the county was stable.

古文：郡民何贞秀等一百五十四人诣州言状，湘州刺史以闻。
现代文：郡中百姓何贞壶等一百五十四人到州府呈报本郡治理有方的情况，渔业刺史把这事奏闻朝廷。
English: One hundred and fifty-four people from the county, including He Zhengyu, went to the state capital to report on the good governance of the county, and the fishery history reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：诏勘有十五事为吏民所怀，高祖善之，征为新安太守。
现代文：高祖下诏审核，共有十五件事伏佢办得很好，使百姓县吏感恩戴德，产担认为达堕有才能，征调他为堑玄太守。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict for approval, and a total of fifteen things were done well in Fuxi, which made the people of the county officials grateful, and the production manager thought that Gao Rui was talented, and he was appointed as the governor of Xuan.

古文：在郡清恪，如永阳时。
现代文：在郡任职时清正严谨，和在永阳任职时一样。
English: When he served in the county, he was scrupulously honest, just as he was when he served in Yongyang.

古文：民赋税不登者，辄以太守田米助之。
现代文：百姓无力交纳赋税，伏佢就常常用自己的俸米帮助百姓交纳。
English: The people were unable to pay the taxes, so Fuxi often used his own salary to help the people pay.

古文：郡多麻苎，家人乃至无以为绳，其厉志如此。
现代文：堑安郡多产麻苎，但伏佢家人竟然没有麻苎纺绳，他保持节操，磨砺意志竟然到了这样的程度。
English: Lian'an County is a prolific producer of maple syrup, but the Fuxi family didn't even have a maple syrup spinning rope. He kept his discipline and tempered his will to such an extent.

古文：属县始新、遂安、海宁，并同时生为立祠。
现代文：新安郡属县始新、遂安、海宁等地，都同时为他建立生祠供奉。
English: Xin'an County belongs to the counties of Shixin, Sui'an, Haining and other places, all of which have also established ancestral shrines to worship him.

古文：征为国子博士，领长水校尉。
现代文：伏佢被征调为国子博士，领长水校尉。
English: Fuxi was conscripted and transferred to the position of Dr. Kuniko, leading chief water officer.

古文：时始兴内史何远累著清绩，高祖诏擢为黄门侍郎，俄迁信武将军、监吴郡。
现代文：当时始兴内史何远累以清明廉洁的政绩著称，高祖下诏，擢拔何远为黄门侍郎，不久又迁任信武将军、监吴郡。
English: At that time, Shixing Naishi He Yuanli was famous for his clear and clean political achievements, Gao Zu issued an edict, promoted He Yuanli to Huangmen waiter, and soon he was transferred to General Xinwu and Inspector of Wu County.

古文：恒自以名辈素在远前，为吏俱称廉白，远累见擢，恒迁阶而已，意望不满，多托疾居家。
现代文：伏佢自认为自己的名望和身份一向都在何远之上，两人做官都有廉明清正的名声，何远多次被擢拔，而自己衹是循官阶逐级迁升而已，于是他感到愿望不能满足，常常托病待在家中。
English: Fuxin thought that his reputation and identity were always far above the others. Both of them had a reputation for being honest and upright, and had been promoted many times, while he had only moved up through the ranks. Therefore, he felt that his wishes could not be satisfied, and he often stayed at home on sick leave.

古文：寻求假到东阳迎妹丧，因留会稽筑宅，自表解，高祖诏以为豫章内史，恒乃出拜。
现代文：不久，伏佢请假到束阳接回妹妹的灵柩，也就此留在会稽建造住宅，自己上表请求解职。高担下诏命述堕任重蝗内史，达堕才出来接受官职。
English: Soon after, Fuxi took a leave of absence to Sokyang to pick up his sister's coffin. He also stayed in the auditor's office to build a house, and petitioned for his dismissal. Under the high burden of the imperial edict, he recounted the internal history of his fall from grace, and only after his fall from grace did he come out to accept the official post.

古文：治书侍御史虞爵奏曰：
现代文：治书侍御史虞嚼上表启奏说：
English: The chief clerk of the court, Lady Shi Yu, said at the opening of the trial:

古文：臣闻失忠与信，一心之道以亏；貌是情非，两观之诛宜及。
现代文：我听说丢失了忠和信，那忠诚事君之道就会受到损害；口是，表裹不一，就应看作是乱臣贼子，要对这种人施行刑戮。
English: I have heard that if loyalty and faith are lost, the way of loyalty and service to the king will be damaged; if the words are not consistent, it should be regarded as a traitor, and such a person should be punished.

古文：未有陵犯名教，要冒君亲，而可纬俗经邦者也。
现代文：冒犯礼教，要挟顶撞君父的人，就不能够治理国家、教化百姓。
English: Those who offend manners and etiquette and try to pick a fight with the Emperor cannot govern the country and enlighten the people.

古文：风闻豫章内史伏恒，去岁启假，以迎妹丧为解，因停会稽不去。
现代文：听传闻说，豫章内史伏佢，去年上表告假，以迎回妹妹的灵柩为托辞，就此滞留会稽不再离开。
English: According to hearsay, Yu Zhang's subordinate Fuxi, who was on leave last year, used the excuse of welcoming back his sister's coffin as an excuse to stay in the auditorium and not leave.

古文：入东之始，货宅卖车。
现代文：他刚要束去的时候，卖掉住宅和车马。
English: He sold his house, his car and his horse just as he was about to retire.

古文：以此而推，则是本无还意。
现代文：从这一点推测，那么伏佢本来就没有返回任所的打算。
English: Judging from this, Fusang had no intention of returning to his post.

古文：恒历典二邦，少免贪浊，此自为政之本，岂得称功。
现代文：伏佢先后掌管二郡的政事，没有贪脏枉法的行为，逭本来就是治理政事的根本，哪能称得上有功。
English: Fuxi successively took charge of the political affairs of the two counties. There was no act of corruption. Fuxi was originally the basis for the governance of political affairs, which can be called a merit.

古文：常谓人才品望，居何远之右，而远以清公见擢，名位转隆，恒深诽怨，形于辞色，兴居叹咤，寤寐失图。
现代文：伏佢曾经说，自己的才能名望，都在何远之上，而何远因为清廉公正被擢拔，地位更高，名声更大，伏佢深怀不满，怨恨之情流露在言辞和神色之中，成天感慨哀叹，干事没有主意。
English: Fusang once said that his talent and reputation are far above, and how far because of honesty and fairness has been promoted, higher status, greater reputation, Fusang is deeply dissatisfied, resentment is revealed in words and countenance, all day long feeling and lamenting, the officer has no idea.

古文：天高听卑，无私不照。
现代文：上天神明，能了解下情，没有一件事情，不在洞察之中。
English: In God's eyes, there is not a single thing that cannot be understood.

古文：去年十二月二十一日诏曰： 国子博士、领长水校尉伏恒，为政廉平，宜加将养，勿使恚望，致亏士风。
现代文：去年十二月二十一日皇上下韶说： 国子博士、领长水校尉伏佢，治政廉洁公正，应当加以抚慰，不要使他产生怨恨之心，以致损害士大夫的风度。
English: On December 21 last year, the emperor said in the imperial edict: Dr. Kuniko, the leader, the captain and the lieutenant-colonel Fuchu, governs with integrity and justice, and should be comforted, and should not cause him to have a resentful heart, so as to damage the demeanor of the scholar-officer.

古文：可豫章内史。 
现代文：应当授任他为重跶内史。 
English: He should be awarded the title of "Important National Historical Figure."

古文：岂有人臣奉如此之诏，而不亡魂破胆，归罪有司；擢发抽肠，少自论谢？而循奉慠然，了无异色。
现代文：哪有身为人臣，接到这样的韶命，竟然不会丢魂失魄，向有司投案自首，敷落自己的罪状，竭尽自己的忠心，恭恭敬敬地自己定罪认罪；却反而傲然地接受诏命，全无愧疚的神色呢?
English: Who, as a vassal, receiving such a harsh sentence, would not lose heart, surrender himself to the court, lay down his own charges, do his best to be loyal, respectfully convict himself and plead guilty; but on the other hand, proudly accept the imperial edict, with a guilt-free look?

古文：恒识见所到，足达此旨，而冒宠不辞，吝斯苟得，故以士流解体，行路沸腾，辩迹求心，无一可恕。
现代文：据伏佢的见识，足以了解这一点，但他自己没有勋德却蒙受恩宠，毫不推辞，吝惜苟且得来的名利，所以致使士大夫之流人心离散，行路之人愤愤不平。看看伏佢的行动，分析他的内心，没有一个方面可以宽恕。
English: According to Fuxi's insight, it is enough to understand this, but he himself has no virtue but has been favored, without hesitation, begrudging hard-earned fame and fortune, so causing the hearts of scholars and doctors to drift apart, and those who travel are angry. Look at Fuxi's actions, analyze his heart, and there is no aspect that can be forgiven.

古文：窃以恒踉蹡落魄，三十余年，皇运勃兴，咸与维始，除旧布新，濯之江、汉，一纪之间，三世隆显。曾不能少怀感激，仰答万分，反覆拙谋，成兹巧罪，不忠不敬，于斯已及。
现代文：我认为，伏佢颠沛困顿，三十多年郁郁不得志，我朝鸿运勃然兴盛，大家都弃旧图新，皇上革除旧弊，革新政令，犹如在江、漠中洗去污浊，在十二年内，伏佢家三代人被提拔到了尊贵显要的职位，但伏佢竟然不能感激朝廷，仰报皇恩，却反覆无常，作出这种拙劣的举动，犯下这种欺诈的罪行，逭就够得上不忠不敬的罪名。
English: In my opinion, Fuxi has been in the doldrums. For more than 30 years, it has been depressed and discouraged. During my reign, Hongyun flourished. Everyone abandoned the old and the new. The emperor eliminated the old defects and reformed the decrees. It was like washing away the filth in the river and the desert. Within 12 years, three generations of Fuxi family members were promoted to dignified and important positions. However, Fuxi was unable to be grateful to the court and repay the royal grace, but was capricious. To make such a clumsy move and commit such a fraudulent crime, it was enough to be accused of disloyalty and

古文：请以恒大不敬论。
现代文：我请求皇上以大不敬的罪名给伏眶定罪。
English: I ask the emperor to convict Fuxi of the crime of great disrespect.

古文：以事详法，应弃市刑，辄收所近狱洗结，以法从事。
现代文：按照法律规定，应判死罪，斩首弃市的人，通常就近逮捕入狱审查结案，按法定罪。
English: According to the provisions of the law, those who should be sentenced to death, beheaded and abandoned the city are usually arrested nearby, put in prison for review and case closed, according to the statutory crime.

古文：如法所称，恒即主。
现代文：按照法律所说，伏眶就应当这样处置。
English: According to the law, Fuxi should be dealt with in this way.

古文：臣谨案：豫章内史臣伏恒，含疵表行，藉悖成心，语默一违，资敬兼尽。
现代文：臣谨案：豫章内史伏佢，内心的污浊表露在行动上，存有欺凌悖乱之心，出仕退隐全都满腹怨恨，对君上的敬重丢失殆尽。
English: Minister Zheng: The history of Yu Zhang is hidden, the inner filth is exposed in action, there is a bullying and rebellious heart, all of them are full of resentment, and they have lost all respect for you.

古文：幸属昌时，擢以不次。
现代文：伏佢有幸，适逢昌明盛世，受到越级擢拔的宠遇。
English: Fuxin was fortunate to be born in the golden age of Changming and was favored with promotion beyond his class.

古文：溪壑可盈，志欲无满。
现代文：溪壑能够填满，但伏佢的欲望却永无满足。
English: The creek can be filled, but the longing of the paddlefish is never satisfied.

古文：要君东走，岂曰止足之归；负志解巾，异乎激处之致。
现代文：他离职束去要胁君上，哪裹是想止足归隐?他有志于仕宦，但和那些以激情处世的人情致并不一样。
English: He quit his job to become a priest, but what if he wants to retire? He wants to serve, but he's not the same as those who live life with passion.

古文：甘此脂膏，孰非荼苦；佩兹龟组，岂殊缧绁。
现代文：享受了朝廷的恩典，就会觉得样样都像荼菜那么苦；佩上了龟印组绶，担任了官职，就要自觉约束。
English: If you have enjoyed the grace of the imperial court, you will feel that everything is as bitter as leeks; if you have worn the turtle seal and held an official post, you must consciously restrain yourself.

古文：宜明风宪，肃正简书。
现代文：应当明确风纪，端正法令。
English: It is necessary to clarify the etiquette and correct the laws.

古文：臣等参议，请以见事免恒所居官，凡诸位任，一皆削除。
现代文：我们在一起谋议，奏请皇上就据伏佢现在的所作所为，免去伏佢现任官职。其他各种职位，也都一起削除。
English: We discussed together and petitioned the emperor to remove Fuxi from his current official position based on his current behavior. Various other positions were also removed.

古文：有诏勿治，恒遂得就郡。
现代文：高祖下达诏令，不加追究，于是伏佢能赴豫章郡上任。
English: Gaozu issued an imperial edict, without investigation, so Fuxuneng went to Yuzhang County to take office.

古文：视事三年，征为给事黄门侍郎，领国子博士，未及起。
现代文：伏佢在豫章任职三年，朝廷征调他为黄门侍郎，领国子博士。
English: Fuxiong served in Yuzhang for three years, and the imperial court transferred him to the Yellow Gate as a waiter, leading Dr. Kuniko.

古文：普通元年，卒于郡，时年五十九。
现代文：伏呕还未来得及赴任，普通元年，他就在豫章郡中去世，死时五十九岁。
English: Fuzhen did not have time to take office. In the first year of the year, he died in Yuzhang County, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：尚书右仆射徐勉为之墓志，其一章曰： 东区南服，爱结民胥，相望伏阙，继轨奏书。
现代文：尚书右仆射徐勉为伏佢撰写墓志，其中一段说： 伏佢在东区在南服任职，在百姓属吏心中留下了情爱，使臣相继呈奏他的政绩，伏阙拜请希望他留任。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Jie Xu, wrote a epitaph for Fuxi, one paragraph of which said: Fuxi served in the Southern Uniform in the East District, leaving love in the hearts of the people's officials. The envoys successively presented his political achievements. Fuxi, please hope that he will remain in office.

古文：或卧其辙，或扳其车，或图其像，或式其闾。
现代文：有人躺卧在车辙上，有人攀住车驾挽留他，有人绘下他的图像，有人经过他家的里门就抚轼致敬。
English: Some people lay down on the ruts, others clung to the car to hold him, others painted his image, others passed through the inner door of his house and stroked his beard.

古文：思耿借寇，曷以尚诸。 
现代文：怀思耿秉藉留寇恂的古事，又哪裹比得上这种情意。 
English: This sentiment is matched by Geng's nostalgia for the old days, when he used to stay with the bandits.

古文：初，恒父曼容与乐安任瑶皆匿于齐太尉王俭，瑶子昉及恒并见知。
现代文：以前，伏佢之父伏曼容和乐安任遥都和齐太尉王俭交往亲密，任遥之子任防和伏佢都被王俭赏识。
English: Previously, Fu Rong's father, Fu Man Rong, and Le An's brother, Ren Yaodu, were close with the Qi Taijun Wang Jian. Ren Yaodu's sons, Ren Zheng and Fu Rong, were both appreciated by Wang Jian.

古文：顷之，昉才遇稍盛，齐末，昉已为司徒右长史，恒犹滞于参军事；及其终也，名位略相侔。
现代文：不久，任防受到的恩宠任用逐渐隆盛，齐代末年，任瞻己任司徒右长史，伏佢却还滞留在参军事的职位上。到伏佢去世的时候，声名官位才和任防大致相当。
English: Soon, the favored appointment of Ren Fang gradually flourished. At the end of the Qi Dynasty, Ren Zhan himself was appointed as the chief historian of the State Council, but Fuxi still remained in the military position. By the time of Fuxi's death, the reputation and official rank were roughly equivalent to that of Ren Fang.

古文：恒性俭素，车服粗恶，外虽退静，内不免心竞，故见讥于时。
现代文：伏佢生性俭约朴素，车马服饰都粗糙简陋。伏佢表面上虽然谦退沉静，但内心免不了暗中竞逐，所以被当时人批评指责。
English: Fuxiong's nature was frugal and simple, and his chariot and horse costumes were coarse and simple. Although Fuxiong was modest and quiet on the surface, he could not help but secretly compete in his heart, so he was criticized and blamed by the people at that time.

古文：能推荐后来，常若不及，少年士子，或以此依之。
现代文：伏佢能够尽力推荐年轻人，惟恐荐举不力，有的少年士人就因为这一点而依附伏佢。
English: Fuxi can do its best to recommend young people, but it may not be able to recommend them. Some young scholars are attached to Fuxi because of this.

古文：何远，字义方，东海郯人也。
现代文：何远字义方，东海郯人。
English: Ho Yuan is a native of Yifang in the East China Sea.

古文：父慧炬，齐尚书郎。
现代文：他的父亲何慧炬，变时任尚书郎。
English: His father, He Huihuang, later became Shang Shuro.

古文：远释褐江夏王国侍郎，转奉朝请。
现代文：何远初出仕任江夏王国侍郎，转任奉朝请。
English: He Yuan first served as the attendant of the Jiangxia Kingdom, and was transferred to the imperial court.

古文：永元中，江夏王宝玄于京口为护军将军崔慧景所奉，入围宫城，远豫其事。
现代文：永元年间，江夏王萧宝玄在京口被护军将军崔慧景拥戴，于是率兵进京包围宫城，何远参与了这件事。
English: During the Yongyuan era, Xiao Baoxuan, the king of Jiangxia, was embraced by the general of the escort army, Cui Huijing, at the gates of Beijing, so he led his troops into Beijing to encircle the palace city. He Yuan participated in this matter.

古文：事败，乃亡抵长沙宣武王，王深保匿焉。
现代文：江夏王失败，何远于是逃到长沙宣武王那儿，长沙王藏匿保护他。
English: When the King of Jiangxia failed, he fled to the King of Changsha Xuanwu. The King of Changsha hid and protected him.

古文：远求得桂阳王融保藏之，既而发觉，收捕者至，远逾垣以免；融及远家人皆见执，融遂遇祸，远家属系尚方。
现代文：后来何远又找到桂阳王萧融，桂阳王也藏匿保护何远。不久藏匿何远的事被朝廷发觉，收捕何远的人已到王府，何远翻墙逃脱，萧融以及何远的家属都被收捕，萧融就此被害，何远的家属被关押在尚方狱中。
English: Later, King Guiyang Xiao Rong was found and King Guiyang also hid and protected Xiao Rong. Soon, the imperial court found out about Xiao Rong's hiding, arrested Xiao Rong's people and brought them to the royal palace, Xiao Rong escaped by climbing over the wall, arrested Xiao Rong and Xiao Rong's family members, killed Xiao Rong, and imprisoned Xiao Rong's family members in Shangfang Prison.

古文：远亡渡江，使其故人高江产共聚众，欲迎高祖义师，东昏党闻之，使捕远等，众复溃散。
现代文：何远逃跑渡江，又叫老友高江产和自己一起收聚士兵。想要响应高祖的义军，东昏侯的党羽听到这消息，就派人去收捕何远等人，何远收聚的士兵又都溃散。
English: Ho Yuan fled across the river and asked his old friend Gao Jiang Rong to gather soldiers together with him. Wanting to respond to Gao Zu's rebel army, the party members of Dongming Hou heard the news and sent someone to arrest Ho Yuan and others. The soldiers who had gathered were dispersed.

古文：远因降魏，入寿阳，见刺史王肃，欲同义举，肃不能用，乃求迎高祖，肃许之。
现代文：何远就投降魏，进入寿阳，他谒见豫州刺史王肃，想要王肃和自己一起起义响应高祖，王肃不肯采用何远的主张。
English: How far he surrendered to Wei and entered Shouyang. He met Wang Su, the governor of Yuzhou, who wanted to join him in an uprising in response to Gao Zu. Wang Su refused to accept How far's proposal.

古文：遣兵援送，得达高祖。高祖见远，谓张弘策曰： 何远美丈夫，而能破家报旧德，未易及也。 
现代文：何远就请求王肃让自己去迎接高祖的义军，王肃答应了他，并且派兵护送何远，何远因此得以到达高祖义军中。高祖见到何远，对张弘策说： 何远是个出色的大丈夫，竟然能弃家不顾以报答旧恩，一般人不容易做到。 
English: He asked Wang Su to let him go to meet Gao Zu's rebel army. Wang Su agreed, and sent soldiers to escort Gao Zu to meet Gao Zu's rebel army. Gao Zu saw Gao Zu and said to Zhang Hongze: Gao Zu is an excellent man, he can even abandon his home to repay his old favor, which is not easy for ordinary people to do.

古文：板辅国将军，随军东下，既破硃雀军，以为建康令。
现代文：高祖以王府的名义任命何远为辅国将军，命他随军束下。击破朱雀航的守军之后，高祖命何远为建康令。
English: Gao Zu, in the name of the royal court, appointed He Yuan as an auxiliary national general and ordered him to follow the army. After defeating the defenders of Zhu Qiaohang, Gao Zu ordered He Yuan to build a healthy society.

古文：高祖践阼，为步兵校尉，以奉迎勋封广兴男，邑三百户。
现代文：高祖登上帝位，命何远任步兵校尉。因为奉迎高祖为帝有功，何远被封为广兴男，食邑三百户。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, and He Yuan was appointed as an infantry lieutenant. Because of the merits of worshiping Gao Zu as the emperor, He Yuan was awarded the title of Guangxing Man, and fed three hundred households.

古文：迁建武将军、后军鄱阳王恢录事参军。
现代文：何远迁任建武将军、后军鄱阳王萧恢录事参军。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Jianwu, and later the army was joined by Shenyang Wang Xiao.

古文：远与恢素善，在府尽其志力，知无不为，恢亦推心仗之，恩寄甚密。
现代文：何远与萧恢一向交情很好，于是在王府中尽心尽力，凡是了解懂得的事情都去干，萧恢也推心置腹，完全依靠何远，对他的恩宠很深厚，完全信任他。
English: He had always had a good relationship with Xiao Wei, so he did his best in the royal palace and did everything he knew how to do. Xiao Wei also put his heart and soul into it, completely relied on He Yuan, was deeply favored by him, and trusted him completely.

古文：顷之，迁武昌太守。
现代文：不久，何远迁任武昌太守。
English: Soon, He Yuan was transferred to the position of Wuchang governor.

古文：远本倜傥，尚轻侠，至是乃折节为吏，杜绝交游，馈遗秋毫无所受。
现代文：何远性情本来豪爽洒脱，崇尚轻生重义的侠义行为，到遣时候何远改变操守出任朝廷官员，他杜绝与朋友的交游，一丝一毫也不接受别人的馈赠。
English: How far his nature was originally bold and free, advocating chivalrous behavior that valued life and death, and how far he changed his behavior when he was sent to serve as a court official. He cut off his friends and did not accept gifts from others at all.

古文：武昌俗皆汲江水，盛夏远患水温，每以钱买民井寒水；不取钱者，则摙水还之。
现代文：武昌百姓都取用江水，盛夏季节，何远担心江水太热，每每用钱向百姓买井中凉水使用，井水主人不收钱的话，何远就把井水运还主人。
English: The people of Wuchang all use river water. In midsummer, they are worried that the river water is too hot. They often buy cold water from wells to use. If the owner of the well does not collect the money, they will return the well water to the owner.

古文：其佗事率多如此。
现代文：其他的事情大抵也都是这样。
English: Most of the other things are the same.

古文：迹虽似伪，而能委曲用意焉。
现代文：这种行动虽然好像有些虚伪做作，但却可见他周密详尽的用心。
English: Although this kind of action seems to be somewhat hypocritical and artificial, it shows his meticulous intentions.

古文：车服尤弊素，器物无铜漆。
现代文：何远的车马特别破旧，服饰也很朴素，他的器具中没有铜器、漆器这类精致贵重的制品。
English: Ho Yuan's chariots and horses are particularly dilapidated, and his clothing is also very simple. There are no delicate and valuable products such as copperware and lacquerware in his utensils.

古文：江左多水族，甚贱，远每食不过干鱼数片而已。
现代文：江左多水产，价钱很便宜，但何远每次食用，衹是几片干鱼而已。
English: There are many aquatic products in the Yangtze River, and the price is very cheap. However, it is only a few pieces of dried fish per meal.

古文：然性刚严，吏民多以细事受鞭罚者，遂为人所讼，征下廷尉，被劾数十条。
现代文：但何远生性刚直严厉，属吏百姓中很多人都因为小小的过错受到鞭打责罚，于是有人向朝廷告何远的状，何远就被征召到京城，交付廷尉审讯，被审定有数十条罪状。
English: However, He Yuan was rigid and stern, and many of the officials and commoners were whipped and punished for small mistakes. Therefore, some people reported to the imperial court about He Yuan, and He Yuan was summoned to the capital, interrogated by the imperial lieutenant, and convicted of dozens of crimes.

古文：当时士大夫坐法，皆不受立，远度己无赃，就立三七日不款，犹以私藏禁仗除名。
现代文：当时士大夫犯法获罪，都不受站测的刑法，何远想到自己没有贪脏纳贿，经受站测的刑法二十一天，就是不肯服罪，但他还是因私藏皇帝仪仗的罪名而被除去名籍。
English: At that time, the magistrate was convicted of a crime and was not subject to the criminal law of the station test. How far did he think that he was not corrupt and bribed? After the criminal law of the station test for 21 days, he refused to plead guilty, but he was still removed from the register for the crime of hiding the emperor's honor.

古文：后起为镇南将军、武康令。
现代文：后来何远又被起用为镇南将军、武康令。
English: Later, He Yuan was appointed as Zhenan General and Wu Kangling.

古文：愈厉廉节，除淫祀，正身率职，民甚称之。
现代文：他更加砥砺清廉正直的节操，他除去各种不合礼制的祭祀，公正不阿，尽心奉职，百姓非常称道他。
English: He has further sharpened the integrity of honesty, he has eliminated all kinds of improper sacrificial rituals, he is fair, and he is dedicated to his duties. The people praise him very much.

古文：太守王彬巡属县，诸县盛供帐以待焉，至武康，远独设糗水而已。
现代文：太守王彬巡视属县，各县都置办隆盛的宴席招待王彬，到武康，何远却衹准备干粮茶水而已。
English: The grand marshal Wang Bin is on a tour of the counties, and each county is holding a grand banquet to invite Wang Bin. When he comes to WuKang, all he has to do is prepare dried grain and tea.

古文：彬去，远送至境，进斗酒双鹅为别。
现代文：王毖离去的时候，何远送他到边境，进献一斗酒一只鹅为王彬饯行。
English: When Wang Qian left, he sent him as far as the border, presented him with a cask of wine and a goose for Wang Bin to walk with.

古文：彬戏曰： 卿礼有过陆纳，将不为古人所笑乎？ 
现代文：王彬和何远开玩笑说： 晋朝陆铀用一斗酒、一盘鹿肉送礼，你的礼物超过陆纳，会不会被古人嘲笑呢? 
English: Wang Bin and He Yuan joked: "The Jin Dynasty sent Lu Yuanzhang a bucket of wine and a plate of venison as a gift. Your gift is more than Lu Na. Will the ancients laugh at it?"

古文：高祖闻其能，擢为宣城太守。
现代文：高祖知道了何远的才能，就把他擢拔为宣城太守。
English: Gaozu knew how much talent he had, so he promoted him to be the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：自县为近畿大郡，近代未之有也。
现代文：从县令提拔为京畿附近大郡的太守，这是近代没有的事情。
English: To be promoted from county magistrate to the governor of a large county near Gyeonggi is unprecedented in modern times.

古文：郡经寇抄，远尽心绥理，复著名迹。
现代文：宣城郡经过叛贼洗劫，坦达尽心安抚百姓，全力处理政务，又以政绩著称。
English: After the ransacking of Xuancheng County by traitors, Tanda did his best to appease the people, deal with government affairs, and was also known for his political achievements.

古文：期年，迁树功将军、始兴内史。
现代文：过了一年，何远迁任树功将军、赵璺内史。
English: A year later, He Yuan was transferred to the post of General Shu Gong and Zhao Xunai.

古文：时泉陵侯渊朗为桂州，缘道剽掠，入始兴界，草木无所犯。
现代文：当时星陆堡芦遄朗任挂业刺史，他上任的时候，沿路抢劫掠夺，但进入始兴地界，他连草木都没有损害。
English: At that time, Star City's Lulu Lang was in charge of recording history. When he took office, he robbed and plundered along the way, but when he entered the Land of the Rising Sun, he didn't even damage the vegetation.

古文：远在官，好开途巷，修葺墙屋，民居市里，城隍厩库，所过若营家焉。
现代文：任职的时候，喜欢开修道路，修墙建百姓住房，街市里巷，城池仓库，他一一整理，如同营建家室。
English: When he was in office, he liked to open roads, repair walls, build people's houses, streets, alleys, and warehouses. He sorted them out one by one, as if he were building a house.

古文：田秩俸钱，并无所取，岁暮，择民尤穷者，充其租调，以此为常。
现代文：田秩俸钱，何远全不取用，到了年终，他挑选最为窘困的百姓，用自己的俸禄充作他们的赋税，他经常这样做。
English: At the end of the year, he selects the most destitute people and uses his salary to pay their taxes, which he often does.

古文：然其听讼犹人，不能过绝，而性果断，民不敢非，畏而惜之。
现代文：但是他处理诉讼案件也如同别人，没有超过一般人的地方，但他生性果断，百姓不敢干坏事，害怕他却又敬爱他。
English: But he handled lawsuits like everyone else, no more than the average person, but he was decisive by nature, the people did not dare to do bad things, they feared him but loved him.

古文：所至皆生为立祠，表言治状，高祖每优诏答焉。
现代文：何远任职的地方百姓都为他设立生祠祭祀，又上表呈奏他的政绩，高祖常常下诏书褒美嘉奖他。
English: The local people, no matter how far away he was from his post, set up a memorial shrine for him, and presented his political achievements on the table. Gaozu often issued an imperial edict to reward and commend him.

古文：天监十六年，诏曰： 何远前在武康，已著廉平；复莅二邦，弥尽清白。
现代文：天监十六年，高祖下诏说： 何远先在武康任职，已经显扬廉明公正的名声，接着治理两个郡，更加体现了他的清正高洁。
English: In the 16th year of Tianjun, Gao Zu issued an edict saying: He had served in Wukang before, and had already shown a reputation for integrity and fairness, and then governed two counties, which further reflected his purity and nobility.

古文：政先治道，惠留民爱，虽古之良二千石，无以过也。
现代文：施政先修整道路，留下惠政百姓敬爱，即使是古代的贤良太守，也没有超过何远。
English: Schizheng first repaired the road, leaving Huizheng loved by the people. Even the ancient virtuous emperors did not go far.

古文：宜升内荣，以显外绩。
现代文：应当迁升何远任朝中荣耀的职务，以表彰他在郡县任职的业绩。
English: He should be promoted to a more prestigious post in recognition of his performance in county posts.

古文：可给事黄门侍郎。 
现代文：应当授任何远为给事黄门侍郎。 
English: It should be awarded to anyone who is far from being a yellow gate attendant.

古文：远即还，仍为仁威长史。
现代文：何远随即回郡，接着任仁威长史。
English: He immediately returned to the county, followed by Ren Wei Changshi.

古文：顷之，出为信武将军，监吴郡。
现代文：不久，何远出京任信武将军，监吴郡。
English: Soon after, He Yuan left Beijing to serve as General Xinwu, the governor of Wu County.

古文：在吴颇有酒失，迁东阳太守。
现代文：在吴郡常因喝酒而有过失，迁任东阳太守。
English: In Wu County, he was often guilty of drinking and was transferred to the position of the governor of Dongyang.

古文：远处职，疾强富如仇雠，视贫细如子弟，特为豪右所畏惮。
现代文：何远任职期间，痛恨豪强富家，对待他们如同对待仇敌，而看待贫穷孤弱之家，如同自己的子弟，因此那些豪门大族特别畏惧害怕何远。
English: When he was in office, he hated the rich and powerful and treated them as enemies, while he regarded the poor and the weak as his own children. Therefore, those big families were particularly afraid of him.

古文：在东阳岁余，复为受罚者所谤，坐免归。
现代文：何远在束阳任职一年多，又因为受到那些曾被他责罚之人的毁谤，免职回家。
English: He served in Sokyang for more than a year, but was dismissed and returned home because he was slandered by those who had been punished by him.

古文：远耿介无私曲，居人间，绝请谒，不造诣。
现代文：何远为人光明正大，不阿附私情，他处在官场上，断绝私人请托，自己也不谒见权贵。
English: How far is a person above board, not attached to personal feelings, he is in the official field, cut off private solicitation, and does not see himself as a dignitary.

古文：与贵贱书疏，抗礼如一。
现代文：何速写信给人，无论贵贱，都以同样的平等之礼相待。
English: No matter how fast you write to someone, no matter how high or low, you should treat each other with the same equal courtesy.

古文：其所会遇，未尝以颜色下人，以此多为俗士所恶。
现代文：他聚会遇见人，不会显露卑贱的神色逢迎奉承，因此何远常被一些平庸浅薄的士大夫厌恶忌恨。
English: When he meets people at gatherings, he will not show a lowly countenance and accept flattery, so he is often loathed and hated by some mediocre and shallow scholars.

古文：其清公实为天下第一。
现代文：何远的清廉公正实在居于天下第一位。
English: How far integrity and justice really rank first in the world.

古文：居数郡，见可欲终不变其心，妻子饥寒，如下贫者。
现代文：他在好几个郡任职，虽然见到那些想要的东西，但最终仍不会改变自己的节操去贪求。何远的妻子儿女遭受饥饿寒冷，他们的生活和最为贫穷的百姓差不多。
English: He served in several counties, and although he saw what he wanted, in the end he would not change his discipline to covet.His wife and children suffered from hunger and cold, and their lives were similar to those of the poorest people.

古文：及去东阳归家，经年岁口不言荣辱，士类益以此多之。
现代文：何远从束阳免职回家，经过很长时间，但始终不谈及个人的荣辱，士人因此也就更加敬重何远。
English: He was dismissed from Sokyang and returned home after a long time, but he never talked about his personal honor and disgrace. As a result, people respected him even more.

古文：其轻财好义，周人之急，言不虚妄，盖天性也。
现代文：何远轻财重义，别人有急事他愿全力帮助，不说空话大话，这实在都是他的天性。
English: He is willing to do his best to help others in an emergency, and he does not talk nonsense, which is really his nature.

古文：每戏语人云： 卿能得我一妄语，则谢卿以一缣。 
现代文：何远常常开玩笑似地对人说： 你能找到我一句虚妄的话，那我就酬谢你一匹缣。 
English: How often do you say to someone, as if joking: If you can find me a false statement, then I will reward you with a donkey.

古文：众共伺之，不能记也。
现代文：许多人在暗中窥伺等待，但还是找不出来。
English: Many are lurking and waiting, but cannot be found.

古文：后复起为征西谘议参军、中抚司马。
现代文：后来何远又被起用为征西谘议参军、中抚司马。
English: Later, He Yuan was also appointed as the Westward Conquest Advisory Joining the Army, Vice-governor Sima.

古文：普通二年，卒，时年五十二。
现代文：普通二年，何远去世，死时五十二岁。
English: He died two years later at the age of fifty-two.

古文：高祖厚赠赐之。
现代文：高祖给他家很丰厚的赠赐。
English: Gao Zu gave his family a very generous gift.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：前史有循吏，何哉？
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：前代史书有循吏的传记，是什么原因呢?
English: Chen Li Bu Shang Shu Yao said: The previous generation of history books have biographies of officials, what is the reason?

古文：世使然也。
现代文：是时世促使出现这种情况。
English: It is the times that have brought this about.

古文：汉武役繁奸起，循平不能，故有苛酷诛戮以胜之，亦多怨滥矣。
现代文：汉武帝时徭役繁重，各种奸偶都纷纷出现，任用良善的官吏、采用清平时代的治理方法不能止住奸伪，所以任用酷吏、采用诛戮之刑来制止奸伪，但同时也因滥施刑诛带来许多怨怪。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there was a lot of corruption, and all kinds of traitors appeared one after another. The appointment of good officials and the use of governance methods in the Qing and Heian eras could not stop the corruption, so cruel officials were appointed and the punishment of beating was used to stop the corruption, but at the same time, it brought a lot of grudges due to the indiscriminate application of punishment.

古文：梁兴，破觚为圆，斫雕为朴，教民以孝悌，劝之以农桑，于是桀黠化为由余，轻薄变为忠厚。
现代文：梁代兴起，除去严刑峻法而力行简易，除去浮华之风而崇尚质朴，用孝悌之道教化百姓，鼓励百姓务农种桑，于是凶悍狡黠的人都成为由余那样的贤人，轻薄之徒都变成忠实厚道之人。
English: The Liang Dynasty arose, removed the severe punishments and harsh laws and promoted simplicity, removed the flashy style and advocated simplicity, educated the people with filial piety, and encouraged the people to work in agriculture and grow mulberry trees. As a result, the fierce and cunning people became wise men like Yu, and the frivolous people became loyal and virtuous people.

古文：淳风已洽，民自知禁。
现代文：淳厚的民风已经普遍形成，百姓自然自觉地遵守禁令。
English: An honest and decent folk custom has generally formed, and the people naturally and consciously abide by the ban.

古文：尧舜之民，比屋可封，信矣。
现代文：尧舜时代的百姓，家家都有德行高尚的人，可以封赠为侯王，这是确确实实的啊。
English: The people of that era, every family has a virtuous and noble person, who can be given the title of prince. This is indeed true.

古文：若夫酷吏，于梁无取焉。
现代文：至于酷吏，在梁代没有采择为传。
English: As for the cruel officials, there was no selection in the Liang Dynasty.

