古文：耶律仁先，字糺邻，小字查剌，孟父房之后。
现代文：耶律仁先，字纠邻，乳名查剌，孟父房之后裔。
English: Yelu Rensen, the character of rectifying neighbors, the nickname Chao, the offspring of Meng's father.

古文：父瑰引，南府宰相，封燕王。
现代文：父耶律瑰引，为南府宰相，封燕王。
English: His father, Ye Lu Zhuqi, was the prime minister of Nanfu and the King of Fongyan.

古文：仁先魁伟爽秀，有智略。
现代文：仁先魁梧隽秀，富于智慧和谋略。
English: Rensen was a burly and handsome man, rich in wisdom and strategy.

古文：重熙三年，补护卫。
现代文：重熙三年，补为护卫。
English: In the third year of Chongxi, he was appointed as an escort.

古文：帝与论政，才之。
现代文：兴宗皇上与他谈论政事，觉得他有才。
English: Emperor Xingzong talked to him about politics and thought he was talented.

古文：仁先以不世遇，言无所隐。
现代文：仁先因受一世罕有之宠遇，言事无所隐讳。
English: Rensen, due to the rare favor of a lifetime, has nothing to hide.

古文：授宿直将军，累迁殿前副点检，改鹤剌唐古部节度使，俄召为北面林牙。
现代文：授为宿直将军，累迁至殿前副点检，改任鹤剌唐古部节度使，不久征召为北面林牙。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Sukuzuna, and was successively transferred to the deputy inspector in front of the palace. He was appointed as the chief inspector of the ancient Tang Dynasty in Hefei, and was soon conscripted as the chief inspector of the Northern Forest.

古文：十一年，升北院枢密副使。
现代文：十一年，升任北院枢密副使。
English: Eleven years later, he was promoted to the position of Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

古文：时宋请增岁币银绢以偿十县地产，仁先与刘六符使宋，仍议书 贡 。
现代文：时逢宋朝请求增加岁币银绢以换回对十县土地的所有权，仁先与刘六符出使宋国，仍然坚持岁币文书用 贡 字。
English: At a time when the Song Dynasty requested an increase in the annual coin silver ingot in exchange for the return of ownership of the land in ten counties, Rensen and Liu Liufu sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty, still insisting on the use of the word "Gong" in the annual coin document.

古文：宋难之。
现代文：宋人拒绝。
English: Song Ren refused.

古文：仁先曰： 曩者石晋报德本朝，割地以献，周人攘而取之，是非利害，灼然可见。 
现代文：仁先说 ：从前石晋王朝报本朝之恩德，割让土地进献，周人强行夺取之，谁是谁非，如何做有利，如何做有害，清清楚楚。 
English: Rensen said: In the past, the Shi Jin Dynasty reported the benevolence of this dynasty, ceded land for donation, Zhou people forcibly seized it, who is to blame, how to do it is beneficial, how to do it is harmful, it is clear.

古文：宋无辞以对。乃定议增银、绢十万两、匹，仍称 贡 。
现代文：于是议定增加银十万两、绢十万匹，仍旧称为 贡 。
English: Therefore, it was agreed to increase the amount of silver by 100,000 taels and the number of horses by 100,000, which was still called "tribute."

古文：既还，同知南京留守事。
现代文：回国之后，任同知南京留守事。
English: After returning to China, Ren Tongzhi stayed in Nanjing.

古文：十三年，伐夏，留仁先镇边。
现代文：十三年，讨伐夏国，留仁先镇守边境。
English: In the thirteenth year, the summer country was attacked, and Ruren was the first to defend the border.

古文：未几，召为契丹行宫都部署，奏复王子班郎君及诸宫杂役。
现代文：不久，召任契丹行宫都部署，上奏折请求免除王子班郎君及诸宫的杂役。
English: Soon, all the palace staff were called to go to the palace of Khitan, and the request was made to exempt Prince Ban Langjun and the palace attendants.

古文：十六年，迁北院大王，奏今两院户口殷庶，乞免他部助役，从之。
现代文：十六年，迁任北院大王，奏称如今两院户口众多且富足，请求免予由他部来帮助服役，诏令从其所请。
English: Sixteen years later, when he was transferred to the position of the Northern Court's Grand Prince, he reported that the households of the two courts were now numerous and affluent, and he requested to be exempted from helping with the military service from other departments. The edict was accepted.

古文：十八年，再举伐夏，仁先与皇太弟重元为前锋。
现代文：十八年，再度举兵伐夏，仁先与皇太弟重元担任前锋。
English: In the 18th year, the army was raised again for the summer campaign, and Rinsen and the crown prince's younger brother, Chogen, served as forwards.

古文：萧惠失利于河南，帝犹欲进兵，仁先力谏，乃止。
现代文：萧惠在河南失利，皇上还想进兵再战，仁先全力谏阻，皇上便停止进兵。
English: Xiao Hui lost in Henan, the emperor still wanted to enter the army to fight again, Rensen resisted with all his might, and the emperor stopped entering the army.

古文：后知北院枢密使，迁东京留守。
现代文：后来担任了知北院枢密使，迁东京留守。
English: Later, he served as a privy councilor of Chihoku-in and moved to Tokyo.

古文：女直恃险，侵掠不止，仁先乞开山通道以控制之，边民安业。
现代文：女真恃仗地势之险要，不停地侵犯掠夺，仁先请求开挖山地沟通道路以控制之，边民得以安居乐业。
English: Nianzhen fought against the dangerous situation of the terrain, constantly invaded and plundered, and requested the excavation of a mountain communication road to control it. The border residents were able to live and work in peace.

古文：封吴王。
现代文：封为吴王。
English: He was named the King of Wu.

古文：清宁初，为南院枢密使。
现代文：清宁初，任南院枢密使。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, he served as a privy councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：以耶律化哥谮，出为南京兵马副元帅，守太尉，更王隋。
现代文：因耶律化哥诬陷，出贬为南京兵马副元帅，守太尉，改号隋王。
English: Because of the frame-up of Ye Ruihua's brother, he was demoted to vice-marshal of the Nanjing Terracotta Army and Guard, and changed his name to Sui Wang.

古文：六年，复为北院大王，民欢迎数百里，如见父兄。
现代文：六年，再度担任北院大王，百姓走数百里前往欢迎，就像见到父亲和兄长一般。
English: Six years later, when he again served as the Great King of the Northern Court, the people traveled hundreds of miles to welcome him, as if they were meeting their father and elder brother.

古文：时北、南院枢密官涅鲁古、萧胡睹等忌之，请以仁先为西北路招讨使。
现代文：当时南院枢密官涅鲁古、萧胡睹等人妒忌他，请道宗皇上让仁先担任西北路招讨使。
English: At that time, the privy councillors of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Nehru Gu, Xiao Husi and others were jealous of him and asked Emperor Daozong to let Ren first serve as the Northwest Road recruiting envoy.

古文：耶律乙辛奏曰： 仁先旧臣，德冠一时，不宜补外。 
现代文：耶律乙辛上奏说 ：仁先是旧臣，德望冠绝一时，不应外补任京外官。 
English: Yerut Yetsin, the chief envoy, said, "Ren is a former minister, so he should not be appointed as the foreign minister of Beijing.

古文：复拜南院枢密使，更王许。
现代文：又拜为南院枢密使，改为许王。
English: He was also made a privy councillor of the Southern Court, and changed his name to King Xu.

古文：九年七月，上猎太子山，耶律良奏重元谋逆，帝召仁先语之。
现代文：九年七月，皇上出猎于太子山，耶律良奏称重元谋反，皇上召来仁先与他谈论这件事。
English: In July of the ninth year, the emperor went hunting in Mt. Taizi, and when Yelu Liangso spoke highly of Yuan's rebellion, the emperor summoned Rensen to discuss the matter with him.

古文：仁先曰： 此曹凶狠，臣固疑之久矣。 
现代文：仁先说 ：这种人凶残狠毒，我本来就怀疑他很久了。 
English: Rensen said, "This kind of person is vicious and cruel. I have suspected him for a long time.

古文：帝趣仁先捕之。
现代文：皇上敦促仁先搜捕之。
English: The emperor urged Jin to search for and arrest him first.

古文：仁先出，且曰： 陛下宜谨为之备！ 
现代文：仁先出宫，又说： 陛下应当小心防范！ 
English: Jin left the palace first, and said, "Your Majesty should be careful to guard against this!"

古文：未及介马，重元犯帷宫。
现代文：还未来得及披挂，重元已经前来攻打行宫了。
English: Before he could be hanged, Chongyuan had already come to attack the palace.

古文：帝欲幸北、南院，仁先曰： 陛下若舍扈从而行，贼必蹑其后；且南、北大王心未可知。 
现代文：皇上想到北、南院去，仁先说： 陛下如果撇下扈从单独出去，贼人必会紧随其后，况且南、北大王之心也不可知。 
English: When the emperor wanted to go to the Northern and Southern Courts, Rinshi said, "If your majesty were to leave the scepter and go out alone, thieves would surely follow, and what's more, the hearts of the Southern and Northern Kings are unknowable.

古文：仁先子挞不也曰： 圣意岂可违乎？ 
现代文：仁先之子挞不也说： 皇上自己的想法怎么能违逆呢？ 
English: Emperor Nin's son, Shun, also said, "How can the emperor go against his own thoughts?

古文：仁先怒，击其首。
现代文：仁先发怒，打了他的脑袋。
English: Jin got angry first and hit him on the head.

古文：帝悟，悉委仁先以讨贼事。
现代文：皇上明白了，便将讨伐贼人之事全权交付仁先处理。
English: The emperor understood this, and gave him full authority to deal with the matter of fighting thieves.

古文：乃环车为营，拆行马，作兵仗，率官属近侍三十余骑阵柢枑外。
现代文：于是将马车排列为营垒，拆开行马，制作兵器，仁先率领属吏近侍三十余骑结阵于行马之外。
English: Therefore, the carriage platoon was classified as a battalion, the cavalry was dismantled, weapons were made, and more than thirty cavalrymen led by the subordinate officers and close attendants were lined up outside the cavalry.

古文：及交战，贼众多降。
现代文：及至交战，贼众大多投降。
English: When it came to fighting, most of the thieves surrendered.

古文：涅鲁古中矢堕马，擒之，重元被伤而退。
现代文：涅鲁古中流矢坠马，被活捉，重元带伤而退。
English: The middle class of the Nehruvian period fell by the wayside, were captured alive, and Chogen retreated with injuries.

古文：仁先以五院部萧塔剌所居最近，亟召之，分遣人集诸军。
现代文：仁先觉得五院部萧塔剌居所最近，赶紧召他来，分头派人会集诸军。
English: Rensen felt that the residence of the fifth hospital, Xiaotang, was the closest, so he quickly called him to come and sent people to gather the troops.

古文：黎明，重元率奚人二千犯行宫，萧塔剌兵适至。
现代文：黎明，重元率领奚人两千人前来攻打行宫，萧塔剌的兵马正好赶到。
English: At dawn, Chongyuan led two thousand of his men to attack the imperial palace, and Xiao Taguo's soldiers and horses arrived just in time.

古文：仁先料贼势不能久，俟其气沮攻之。
现代文：仁先料想敌人势必不能持久，等待他们气馁时再行攻击。
English: Rensen anticipated that the enemy would not be able to hold out, and waited for them to be discouraged before attacking.

古文：乃背营而阵，乘便奋击，贼众奔溃，追杀二十余里，重元与数骑遁去。
现代文：于是背着营垒结阵，瞅准机会奋勇出击，贼众奔逃溃散，仁先率兵追杀二十余里，重元与数骑人马逃跑了。
English: As a result, they formed a line with the camp behind them, took the opportunity to attack bravely, the bandits fled and dispersed, Rensen led the soldiers to chase them for more than twenty miles, and Chongyuan and several horsemen fled.

古文：帝执仁先手曰： 平乱皆卿之功也。 
现代文：皇上握着仁先的手说 ：这次平乱都是你的功劳啊。 
English: The Emperor shook Rinsen's hand and said, "This time, it was all thanks to you.

古文：加尚父，进封宋王，为北院枢密使，亲制文以褒之，诏画《滦河战图》以旌其功。
现代文：加号尚父，进封为宋王，担任北院枢密使，并亲自为他制文以示褒奖，又诏令绘制《滦河战图》以表彰其功劳。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Shangfu (尚父) and enthroned as Song Wang (宋王) and served as the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty. He personally wrote a document for him to show his appreciation, and ordered to draw the "Baohe Battle Map" to commend his service.

古文：咸雍元年，加于越，改封辽王，与耶律乙辛共知北院枢密事。
现代文：咸雍元年，加于越，改封辽王，与耶律乙辛共同主持北院枢密事务。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was given the title of Liao Wang and jointly presided over the confidential affairs of the Northern Yuan with Yelu Yixin.

古文：乙辛恃宠不法，仁先抑之，由是见忌，出为南京留守，改王晋。
现代文：乙辛倚恃宠幸，违法行事，仁先阻止他，因此受到忌恨，出贬为南京留守，改为晋王。
English: Yixin, who was favoured by the emperor, broke the law and was prevented from doing so by the emperor. As a result, he was hated and relegated to the status of a "stayer" in Nanjing, and changed his title to "King of Jin."

古文：恤孤惸，禁奸慝，宋闻风震服。
现代文：仁先存恤孤独，禁绝奸恶，宋人闻风震慑畏服。
English: Benevolence precedes compassion and solitude, forbids adultery and evil, and the Song people are shocked and intimidated by the wind.

古文：议者以为自于越休哥之后，惟仁先一人而已。
现代文：论及他的人认为自于越休哥之后，可令宋人畏服的，只有仁先一人。
English: The people who discussed him thought that since Yue Xiu Ge, there was only one person who could daunt the Song people, and that was Ren Xian.

古文：阻卜塔里干叛命，仁先为西北路招讨使，赐鹰纽印及剑。
现代文：阻卜塔里干背叛王命，仁先担任了西北路招讨使，赐给鹰纽印及尚方剑。
English: In order to prevent Tarikan from betraying the king's order, Rensen served as the envoy of the Northwest Road, and gave him the Eagle Knot Seal and the Shang Fang Sword.

古文：上谕曰： 卿去朝廷远，每俟奏行，恐失机会，可便宜从事。 仁先严斥候，扼敌冲，怀柔服从，庶事整饬。
现代文：皇上晓谕说： 你此去离朝廷太远，如果每次都奏明后再行事，恐怕会失去机会，你可以随机行事，先斩后奏。 仁先严密设置斥候，扼守敌人的要塞，对于顺服的部族加以笼络安抚，各种政务都整治得有条有理。
English: The emperor said, "You have gone too far from the imperial court. If you always act after making a clear statement, you will probably lose the opportunity. You can act at random, act first, and act later. You should first set up scouts, guard the enemy's fortresses, and pacify the obedient tribes. All kinds of government affairs should be well organized.

古文：塔里干复来寇，仁先逆击，追杀八十余里。
现代文：塔里干又来侵犯，仁先迎击，追杀八十余里。
English: The Taligans invaded again, and Ren was the first to meet them, chasing them for more than eighty miles.

古文：大军继至，又败之。
现代文：大军接着赶到，又击败了塔里干。
English: A large force then arrived and again defeated the Tarigans.

古文：挞不也少谨愿，后为族嫠妇所惑，出其妻，终以无子。
现代文：别部把里斯、秃没等人前来援救塔里干，见他屡次挫败，不敢交战而投降了。北部边境便得以安宁。八年，仁先去世，年六十岁，遗命让家人薄葬。弟义先、信先，子挞不也。
English: The other departments sent Riis, Balding and others to come to the rescue of Tarikan. Seeing that he was repeatedly defeated, he did not dare to fight and surrendered. The northern border was peaceful. In eight years, Rinsen died at the age of sixty, leaving his family with a short funeral. His younger brothers, Yixian and Xinxian, did not survive.

古文：人以此讥之。耶律良，字习撚，小字苏，著帐郎君之后。
现代文：耶律良，字习睰，乳名苏，著帐郎君之后裔。
English: Ye Lu Liang, Zi Xi Jiu, Nian Nian Su, descendant of Zhele Ro Kun.

古文：生于乾州，读书医巫闾山。
现代文：出生于乾州，在医巫闾山读书。
English: He was born in Qianzhou and studied medicine in Lushan.

古文：学既博，将入南山肄业，友人止之曰： 尔无仆御，驱驰千里，纵闻见过人，年亦垂暮。
现代文：学问既已广博，准备进入南山修习学业，友人阻止他说 ：你又没有个驾车马的仆人，就这样千里奔波，即使你将来见识过人，年纪也老了。
English: His knowledge was already extensive, and he was about to enter Nanshan to study. A friend stopped him and said, "You don't have a servant to drive your horse, so you have to travel thousands of miles. Even if you meet someone in the future, you will be too old."

古文：今若即仕，已有余地。 
现代文：现在如果赶紧出来做官，还行有余力。 
English: Now, if you hurry to become an official, there is still room for improvement.

古文：良曰： 穷通命也，非尔所知。 
现代文：耶律良说： 困窘还是通达，都是命中注定，不是你所知道的。 
English: Yeruliang said, "Difficulty or accomplishment are predestined by fate, not by what you know."

古文：不听，留数年而归。
现代文：没有听友人的话，留在南山过了几年才回。
English: I didn't listen to my friends and stayed in Nanshan for a few years before returning.

古文：重熙中，补寝殿小底，寻为燕赵国王近侍。
现代文：重熙年间，补为寝殿小底，不久做了燕赵国王的近侍。
English: During the reign of King Chongxi, Zhi was the bedchamber's footman, and soon became the close attendant of King Yanzhao.

古文：以家贫，诏乘厩马。
现代文：因为家境贫穷，诏令乘坐官府厩马。
English: Because his family was poor, he rode in the government stables.

古文：迁修起居注。
现代文：迁官修起居注。
English: The relocation of officials and the start of a new life.

古文：会猎秋山，良进《秋游赋》，上嘉之。
现代文：适逢兴宗皇上出猎于秋山，耶律良进献《秋游赋》，皇上十分嘉许。
English: On the occasion of Emperor Xingzong's hunting in the autumn mountains, Yeruliang presented "Autumn Excursion," which was highly appreciated by the emperor.

古文：清宁中，上幸鸭子河，作《捕鱼赋》。
现代文：清宁年间，道宗临幸鸭子河，耶律良做《捕鱼赋》。
English: During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, Daozong Linxing Duck River, Yeruliang made "Fishing Fu."

古文：由是宠遇稍隆，迁知制诰，兼知部署司事。
现代文：从此受到恩遇渐渐隆盛，迁任知制诰，兼知部署司事。
English: From then on, thanks to his good fortune, he gradually prospered, and was transferred to the post of secretary for intellectual property and the deployment of intellectual property.

古文：奏请编御制诗文，目曰《清宁集》；上命良诗为《庆会集》，亲制其序。
现代文：上奏请求编纂道宗御制诗文，书名《清宁集》；皇上为耶律良诗集命名为《庆会集》，亲自为他做序。
English: Shangso requested the compilation of Taoist imperial poetry, the title of the book was "Qingning Collection"; the emperor named the collection of poems by Yeruliang "Celebration Collection" and personally made a preface for him.

古文：顷之，为敦睦宫使，兼权知皇太后宫诸局事。
现代文：不久，担任敦睦宫使，兼权知皇太后宫诸局事。
English: Soon, he assumed the position of Dunmutu palace envoy, and was also given the authority to know all the affairs of the empress dowager's harem.

古文：良闻重元与子涅鲁古谋乱，以帝笃于亲爱，不敢遽奏，密言于皇太后。
现代文：耶律良得知重元与其子涅鲁古图谋叛乱，因为皇上更信任自己亲近喜爱之人，不敢立即上奏，暗里向皇太后说明。
English: When Ye Lu Liang learned that Chongyuan and his son Nelu Gu were plotting a rebellion, he did not dare to play it immediately because the emperor trusted those he was close to and loved more, so he secretly explained it to the empress dowager.

古文：太皇托疾，召帝白其事。
现代文：太后假托有病，召来皇上告知此事。
English: The Empress Dowager pretended to be ill and summoned the Emperor to inform him of the matter.

古文：帝谓良曰： 汝欲间我骨肉耶？ 
现代文：皇上对耶律良说 ：你想离间我们兄弟骨肉之情吗？ 
English: The emperor said to Jericho: "Do you want to separate our brothers in flesh and blood?

古文：良奏曰： 臣若妄言，甘伏斧锧。
现代文：耶律良奏道： 我如果胡乱发言，情愿伏斧钅质就死。
English: Yeruryeo said, "If I speak out of turn, I would rather be beaten to death."

古文：陛下不早备，恐堕贼计。
现代文：陛下如果不早做准备，恐怕堕入贼人的奸谋之中。
English: If His Majesty does not prepare early, I am afraid he will fall into the trap of the thieves.

古文：如召涅鲁古不来，可卜其事。 
现代文：如果征召涅鲁古而不来，可以推断此事。 
English: If Nehru is called and does not come, it can be inferred.

古文：九年，复为南府宰相。
现代文：皇上听从了他的话。使者到涅鲁古门前，涅鲁古想杀他，扣留于帐下。
English: The emperor obeyed his words. The messenger arrived in front of the gate of Nehru, but Nehru wanted to kill him and detained him.

古文：重元之乱，推锋力战，斩涅鲁古首以献，论功封汉王。
现代文：使者用佩刀割破帐幕逃出，赶赴行宫将实际情形奏闻皇上。皇上这才相信。待到重元之乱平定，耶律良因功升迁汉人行宫都部署。
English: The envoy cut through the tent curtain with a saber to escape, and rushed to the imperial palace to report the actual situation to the emperor. The emperor believed this. Until the Chongyuan Rebellion was quelled, Yeruliang was promoted to the Han people's imperial palace.

古文：咸雍初，以告老归，优诏不许。
现代文：咸雍初，任同知南院枢密使事，又任惕隐，出京任知中京留守事。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, Tongzhi was appointed as a confidential envoy of the Southern Yuan, and he was also appointed as a privy councillor, and he was appointed to leave Beijing and stay in Beijing.

古文：久之，加尚父，致仕。卒，年七十二。萧惟信，字耶宁，楮特部人。
现代文：不久去世，皇上感叹哀伤，派遣重臣赠资助祭，并赐给葬具，追封为辽西郡王，谥曰忠成。萧惟信，字耶宁，楮特部人。
English: Shortly after his death, the emperor lamented his grief, sent his senior vassals to donate offerings, and gave them funerary equipment. He was posthumously named the king of Liaoxi County, and his posthumous name was Zhongcheng. Xiao Weixin, surnamed Yanning, was a member of the imperial special department.

古文：五世祖霞赖，南府宰相。
现代文：五世祖霞赖，南府宰相。
English: Zu Xia Lai, the fifth, is the chancellor of Nanfu.

古文：曾祖乌古，中书令。
现代文：曾祖乌古，中书令。
English: Zeng Zuwu, Chinese calligrapher.

古文：祖阿古只，知平州。
现代文：祖父阿古只，平州知州。
English: His grandfather, Agudai, was from Chizhou in Pingzhou.

古文：父高八，多智数，博览古今。
现代文：父高八，富于谋术，博览古今。
English: My father was in the eighth grade of high school. He was good at scheming and had an extensive knowledge of the past and present.

古文：开泰初，为北院承旨，稍迁右夷离毕，以干敏称，拜南府宰相。
现代文：开泰初，任北院承旨，渐升为右夷离毕，以干练敏捷著称，拜为南府宰相。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed as the Northern Yuan Emperor's successor, and gradually rose to become the Right Hegemon. He was known for his ability and agility, and became the Prime Minister of Nanfu.

古文：累迁倒塌岭节度使，知兴中府，复为右夷离毕。
现代文：累迁倒塌岭节度使，兴中府知府，再度担任右夷离毕。
English: He was appointed as the chief of the Qingzhong prefectural government, and served as the chief of the Right Division of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：陵青诱众作乱，事觉，高八按之，止诛首恶，余并释之。
现代文：陵青引诱众人作乱，事情败露，由高八审讯，只诛杀首恶，其余一概释免之。
English: Ling Qing lured the crowd into a riot, the affair was exposed, and he was put on trial by the eighth-grade high school. He was only convicted of killing the ringleader, but the rest were all released.

古文：归奏，称旨。
现代文：回头上奏，甚合皇上心意。
English: Played backwards, it is very much to the Emperor's liking.

古文：惟信资沉毅，笃志于学，能辨论。
现代文：惟信天性沉着坚毅，专心于学业，擅长辨析论说。
English: However, he believes that he is calm and determined by nature, concentrates on his studies, and is good at analytical reasoning.

古文：重熙初始仕，累迁左右丞。
现代文：重熙初开始出来任官，累迁至左中丞。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Shigehiro started to be appointed to positions, and was successively moved to the position of Zuochujo.

古文：十五年，徙燕赵国王傅，帝谕之曰： 燕赵左右多面谀，不闻忠言，浸以成性。
现代文：十五年，改任燕赵国王傅导，兴宗晓谕他说： 燕赵王左右大多是当面恭维的人，他听不到忠言，渐渐养成习性。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed as King Yan Zhao's tutor, and Xing Zong told him: Most of the people around King Yan Zhao are those who flatter him in person. He cannot listen to honest advice, and gradually developed a habit.

古文：汝当以道规诲，使知君父之义。
现代文：你应当以正道对他加以规劝教导，让他知道君父之大义。
English: Exhort and instruct him in the way of righteousness, and teach him the statutes of his father.

古文：有不可处王邸者，以名闻。 
现代文：如果他左右有人不适合居于王府，你写上他们的名字奏闻。 
English: If there are people around him who are not fit to live in the royal palace, you should write down their names and report them.

古文：惟信辅导以礼。
现代文：惟信以礼义对燕赵国王加以辅导。
English: However, Xin advised King Yanzhao with courtesy.

古文：十七年，迁北院枢密副使，坐事免官。
现代文：十七年，迁任北院枢密副使，因事获罪免官。
English: Seventeen years later, he was transferred to the position of Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court, and was removed from office for his crime.

古文：寻复职，兼北面林牙。
现代文：不久复职，兼任北面林牙。
English: He was reinstated shortly afterwards, and also held the post of Hokumen no Ringa.

古文：迁上京留守。大安中，改塌母城节度使。
现代文：清宁九年，重元作乱，干犯滦河行宫，惟信跟随耶律仁先击破之，赐为竭忠定乱功臣。历任南京留守、左右夷离毕，又重任北院枢密副使。
English: In the ninth year of the Qing Dynasty, Chongyuan made a disturbance and committed the crime of marching to the palace by the Minhe River, but Xin followed Yerujin to defeat him first, and was given the title of meritorious vassal for his loyalty. Successive officials stayed in Nanjing, left left and right, and was also appointed to the position of Vice-Minister of the Privy Council of the Northern Court.

古文：以疾致仕，加兼侍中，赐一品俸。
现代文：大康年间，托言年老请求辞官归田，皇上不准。
English: During the prosperous years, the emperor did not allow the retired official to return to the field on the pretext that he was too old.

古文：八年卒。姚景行，始名景禧。祖汉英，本周将，应历初来聘，用敌国礼，帝怒，留之，隶汉人宫分。
现代文：枢密使耶律乙辛诬陷致使太子被废，内外官员都知道太子冤枉，无人敢于论辩，惟信多次在朝廷上争辩，皇上没有答复。告老还乡，加守司徒，去世。姚景行，初名景禧。祖父汉英，本为周国将领，应历初来访我国，用敌国之礼仪，皇上发怒，扣留了他，隶属于汉人宫分。
English: The prince was dethroned as a result of the false accusation of the confidential envoy, Yelu Yixin. Officials at home and abroad knew that the prince was wronged, and no one dared to argue. However, it is believed that they argued many times in the imperial court, and the emperor did not answer. He returned to his hometown, added Sito, and died. Yao Jingxing, first name Jingxi. Grandfather Han Ying, originally a general of Zhou, visited China at the beginning of the year, using the etiquette of an enemy country. The emperor was angry and detained him, and he was subordinated to the Han People's Palace.

古文：及景行既贵，始出籍，贯兴中县。
现代文：及至景行贵显之后，才出其宫籍，定籍贯为兴中县。
English: It was not until after Jingxing Guixian that he was registered as a member of the imperial family, and he was always registered in Xingzhong County.

古文：景行博学。
现代文：景行博学。
English: Jing Xingxing is a scholar.

古文：重熙五年，擢进士乙科，为将作监，改燕赵国王教授。
现代文：重熙五年，提升入进士乙科，任将作监，改任燕赵国王教授。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of King Hei, he was promoted to a professor in the Department of Ethology, appointed as a superintendent, and appointed as a professor of King Yanzhao.

古文：不数年，至翰林学士，枢密副使，参知政事。
现代文：没几年，升为翰林学士、枢密副使、参知政事。
English: Within a few years, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, Privy Vice-Minister, and Sanchi Politician.

古文：性敦厚廉直，人望归之。
现代文：性情敦厚，清廉正直，深得人心。
English: He has a strong character, is honest and honest, and is deeply popular.

古文：道宗即位，多被顾问，为北府宰相。
现代文：道宗即位，多次接受咨询，任北府宰相。
English: Dosong ascended to the throne, received consultations many times, and was appointed as the prime minister of the northern prefecture.

古文：九年秋，告归，道闻重元乱，收集行旅，得三百余骑勤王。
现代文：九年秋，辞官回乡，途中听说重元作乱，便招集行路旅客得三百骑前往勤王。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year, the magistrate returned to his hometown. On the way, he heard that Chongyuan had caused a disturbance, so he summoned 300 travelers to ride to Qinwang.

古文：比至，贼已平。
现代文：待到赶到京城，贼乱已被平定。
English: By the time they arrived in the capital, the thieves' riot had been quelled.

古文：帝嘉其忠，赐以逆人财产。
现代文：皇上嘉赏他忠诚，将谋反者的财产赐给他。
English: The emperor rewarded him for his loyalty and gave him the rebel's property.

古文：咸雍元年，出为武定军节度使。
现代文：咸雍元年，出京任武定军节度使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he went to Beijing to serve as the military envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：明年，驿召拜南院枢密使。
现代文：次年，皇上以驿马征召他拜为南院枢密使。
English: The following year, Emperor Go-Shirakawa summoned him to serve as a privy councilor of the Southern Court.

古文：上从容问治道，引入内殿，出御书及太子书示之，赐什器车仗。
现代文：皇上从容向他请问治国之道，领他进入内殿，取出御书及太子书法给他看，赐予器物和车马仪仗。
English: The emperor took the time to ask him about the way of governing the country, led him into the inner hall, took out his book and showed him the prince's calligraphy, and gave him utensils and ceremonial chariots and horses.

古文：帝有意伐宋，召景行问曰： 宋人好生边事，如何？ 
现代文：皇上有心进攻宋国，召景行问道： 宋人喜欢在边境滋事，怎么办才好？ 
English: The emperor wanted to attack Song, so he summoned Jingxing and asked: Song people like to make trouble at the border, what should we do?

古文：对曰： 自圣宗皇帝以威德怀远，宋修职贡，迨今几六十年。
现代文：景行回答说： 自从圣宗皇帝凭借声威与德行怀柔包容远方各国，宋朝修治职贡，迄今将近六十年了。
English: Jing Xing replied, "It has been nearly sixty years since Emperor Shengzong, by virtue of his prestige and virtue, extended hospitality to distant countries, and the Song Dynasty began to pay tribute.

古文：若以细故用兵，恐违先帝成约。 
现代文：如果因为小过就对宋用兵，恐怕有违先帝与宋人所订的旧和约。 
English: If he uses troops against the Song Dynasty because they are too small, I am afraid it will violate the old peace treaty between the former emperor and the Song Dynasty.

古文：上然其言而止。
现代文：皇上觉得他的话有理便打消了这个念头。
English: The Emperor thought his words were reasonable and dismissed the idea.

古文：致仕，不逾月复旧职。
现代文：辞官，没过一月又官复原职。
English: He resigned his post, but was reinstated less than a month later.

古文：丁家艰，起复，兼中书令。
现代文：遭逢父丧去职，皇上起复他续任，兼中书令。
English: After his father passed away, the emperor reinstated him and he continued to serve as chancellor.

古文：上问古今儒士优劣，占对称旨，知兴中府，改朔方军节度使。
现代文：皇上向他询问古今儒士之优劣，景行作答，甚合皇上心意，任为兴中府知府，改朔方军节度使。
English: The emperor asked him about the merits and demerits of ancient and modern Confucianists, and Jing Xing replied, which was very much in line with the emperor's wishes, and he was appointed as the governor of Xingzhongfu and the envoy of the Qing army.

古文：大康初，徙镇辽兴。
现代文：大康初，移镇辽兴军。
English: At the beginning of the Great Prosperity, the Liao Xing Army moved to the town.

古文：以上京多滞狱，命为留守，不数月，以狱空闻。
现代文：因上京积压案件甚多，皇上命他为上京留守，没几个月，以监狱变空闻名。
English: Due to the large backlog of cases in Kyoto, the emperor ordered him to stay in Kyoto for a few months, and he became famous for emptying the prison.

古文：累乞致政，不从。
现代文：多次请求辞官，皇上没有批准。
English: He repeatedly asked to be demoted, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：复请，许之，加守太师。
现代文：又请辞，皇上答允了，加号守太师。
English: He also asked to resign, and the Emperor agreed. He was given the additional title of Grand Master.

古文：卒，遣使吊祭，追封柳城郡王，谥文宪。
现代文：去世，皇上派使者前往吊唁祭祀，追封为柳城郡王，谥文宪。
English: After his death, the emperor sent an envoy to the condolence ceremony, and he was posthumously crowned as the county king of Liucheng County.

古文：寿隆五年，诏为立祠。
现代文：寿隆五年，诏令为他建立祠庙。
English: In the fifth year of Shulong's reign, a decree was issued to build an ancestral temple for him.

