古文：强圉单阏，一年。
现代文：强圉单阏，一年。
English: One year of intensive cultivation and single cultivation.

古文：高祖武皇帝十六太清元年
现代文：梁武帝太清元年
English: Emperor Liangwu in the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty

古文：春，正月朔，日有食之，不尽如钩。
现代文：春季，正月朔，发生日偏食，未被遮尽的太阳象钩一样。
English: In spring, at the first day of the new month, a partial solar eclipse occurs, and the unobscured sun is like a hook.

古文：壬寅，荆州刺史庐陵威王续卒。
现代文：壬寅，荆州刺史庐陵威王萧续去世。
English: Ren Yin, Jing Zhou, Jian Shi, Ling Wei, and Wang Xiao Rui passed away.

古文：以湘东王绎为都督荆、雍等九州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝任命湘东王萧绎为都督荆、雍等九州诸军事以及荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed Xiaoyan, the king of eastern Hunan, as the military governor of Jing, Yong and other provinces in Kyushu, as well as the governor of Jing Province.

古文：续素贪婪，临终，有启遣中录事参军谢宣融献金银器千馀件，上方知其富，因问宣融曰： 王之金尽此乎？ 
现代文：萧续平素很贪婪，临终之时，他给中录事参军萧宣融留下了一封信，献出一千多件金银器皿。梁武帝这才知道萧续如此富有，便问谢宣融： 庐陵威王萧续的金银财宝只有这些吗？ 
English: Xiao Cui used to be very greedy. At the time of his death, he left a letter to Xiao Xuan Rong, a member of the Central Military Records, and donated more than a thousand gold and silver utensils. Emperor Liang Wu only knew that Xiao Cui was so rich when he asked Xie Xuan Rong: Is this all the gold and silver treasures of Xiao Cui, the King of Fuling?

古文：宣融曰： 此之谓多，安可加也！
现代文：谢宣融回答说： 这些已可以说是非常多了，怎么可以更多呢！
English: Xie Xuan Rong replied: These can be said to be very much more, how can there be more!

古文：大王之过如日月之食，欲令陛下知之，故终而不隐。 
现代文：大王的过失就象日食月食一样，是有目共睹的，他想让陛下您了解这一切，所以最终没有对您隐瞒。 
English: The fault of the great king, like the eclipses of the sun and the moon, is obvious to all. He wanted to let Your Majesty know all this, so he did not hide it from you.

古文：上意乃解。
现代文：梁武帝心里的疙瘩这才解开了。
English: The knot in Emperor Liangwu's heart was finally loosened.

古文：初，湘东王绎为荆州刺史，有微过，续代之，以状闻，自此二王不通书问。
现代文：当初，湘东王萧绎担任荆州刺史，犯下了一些小过错，萧续接替他以后，就把萧绎的过错汇报朝廷，从此以后，这两个藩王就彼此不通书信，互相不往来了。
English: At the beginning, King Xiaoyan of eastern Hunan served as the governor of Jingzhou and made some minor mistakes. After Xiaoyan succeeded him, he reported Xiaoyan's mistakes to the imperial court. Since then, the two kings have not exchanged letters and have not visited each other.

古文：绎闻其死，入阁而跃，屟为之破。
现代文：萧绎听到萧续去世的消息，进门后高兴得跳了起来，连鞋都撑破了。
English: When Xiao Yu heard the news of Xiao Cui's death, she jumped for joy after entering the door, and even her shoes were broken.

古文：丙午，东魏勃海献武王欢卒。
现代文：丙午，东魏勃海献武王高欢去世。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Gao Huan, the King of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：欢性深密，终日俨然，人不能测，机权之际，变化若神。
现代文：高欢性格深沉谨细，一天到晚总是一副很庄严的样子，谁都不能猜测到他内心想些什么，在掌握机会和权变方面，他能千变万化，如有神助。
English: Gao Huan's personality is profound and prudent. He always wears a very solemn look from one day to the next. No one can guess what he is thinking in his heart. In terms of grasping opportunities and power changes, he can be ever-changing, if he has divine help.

古文：制驭军旅，法令严肃。
现代文：在治理、驾驭军队方面，又能做到法令严格。
English: In terms of governance and control of the military, it can also be very strict.

古文：听断明察，不可欺犯。
现代文：他听取和断决事情，能做到明察秋毫，谁也不敢冒犯、欺骗他。
English: He listens and decides things, and can do so clearly, and no one dares to offend or deceive him.

古文：擢人受任，在于得才，苟其所堪，无问厮养；有虚声无实者，皆不任用。
现代文：在选拔人才，提升任用官员时，只注重其才能，如果能担当此任，哪怕是仆人也不管；那些徒有虚名而无实际能力的，都不被任用。
English: In the selection and promotion of officials, only talents should be considered, and even servants should not be considered if they can perform this duty; those who have a false name but no real ability should not be appointed.

古文：雅尚俭素，刀剑鞍勒无金玉之饰。
现代文：高欢平时喜好节俭朴素，所用的刀、剑、马鞍以及缰绳都没用金银玉器装饰。
English: Gao Huan usually prefers to be frugal and simple. The swords, saddles and bridles he uses are not decorated with gold and silver jewelry.

古文：少能剧饮，自当大任，不过三爵。
现代文：他年轻时很能饮酒，自从担当大任之后，饮酒便不超过三杯。
English: A heavy drinker in his youth, he has not had more than three drinks since taking office.

古文：知人好士，全护勋旧；每获敌国尽节之臣，多不之罪。
现代文：他了解下属，喜欢人才，对有功勋者和老部下都极力保护、成全；每次俘获到敌国的那些为本国尽忠尽节的大臣，大多不处罚他们。
English: He knows his subordinates, likes talented people, and protects and perfects those who have meritorious deeds and old subordinates. Whenever ministers who are loyal to their country are captured in an enemy country, most of them do not punish them.

古文：由是文武乐为之用。
现代文：由于这样，文武百官都乐意被他使用。
English: As a result, all civil and military officials are willing to be used by him.

古文：世子澄秘不发丧，唯行台左丞陈元康知之。
现代文：长子高澄封锁了高欢去世的消息，秘而不宣，只有行台左丞陈元康知道。
English: The eldest son, Gao Cheng, sealed the news of Gao Huan's death and kept it a secret. Only Chen Yuankang, the secretary of the left, knew about it.

古文：侯景自念已与高氏有隙，内不自安。
现代文：侯景想到自己与高家有隔阂，心里感到惴惴不安。
English: Hou Jing felt uneasy when he thought of the distance between himself and Gao Jia.

古文：辛亥，据河南叛，归于魏，颍州刺史司马世云以城应之。
现代文：辛亥，侯景依据河南而反叛东魏，归属了西魏，颍州刺史司马世云带领全城百姓响应他的行动。
English: Xinhai, Houjing rebelled against the Eastern Wei Dynasty according to Henan, and belonged to the Western Wei Dynasty. Zhangzhou chief Sima Shiyun led the people of the whole city to respond to his actions.

古文：景诱执豫州刺史高元成、襄州刺史李密、广州刺史怀朔暴显等。
现代文：侯景引诱并捉住了豫州刺史高元成、襄州刺史李密、广州刺史怀朔人暴显等人。
English: Hou Jing lured and captured the Yuzhou assassin Gao Yuancheng, the Xiangzhou assassin Li Mi, the Guangzhou assassin Huai Shuo Ren Rongxian and others.

古文：遣军士二百人载仗，暮入西兗州，欲袭取之。
现代文：他派遣了二百人的军队，用战车载着刀、戟等兵器在黄昏时分进入了西兖州，想用偷袭的方法夺取这个州。
English: He sent an army of two hundred men with chariots carrying swords, halberds and other weapons into Xidi at dusk, hoping to seize the province by stealth.

古文：刺史邢子才觉之，掩捕，尽获之。因散檄东方诸州，各为之备，由是景不能取。
现代文：西兖州刺史邢子才发觉了，不动声色先发制人，侯景派出的二百人马全部被擒，于是邢子才向东方的各个州都散发了檄文，这些州各自都做了准备，因此侯景未能夺取这些地方。
English: It was only when the West Guizhou cutter, Shishi Zizi, found out that the two hundred men and horses sent by Hou Jing had all been captured, that he launched a preemptive strike. The cutter then sent out letters to all the eastern provinces, and each of these provinces had made preparations, so Hou Jing was unable to seize these places.

古文：诸将皆以为景之叛由崔暹，澄不得已，欲杀暹以谢景。
现代文：各位将领都认为侯景之所以反叛是由崔暹引起的，高澄出于不得已，想要崐杀掉崔暹，以此向侯景道歉。
English: The generals all believed that the reason for Hou Jing's rebellion was caused by Choi Siem, and that Gao Cheng, out of desperation, wanted to kill Choi Siem and apologize to Hou Jing.

古文：陈元康谏曰： 今虽四海未清，纲纪已定；若以数将在外，苟悦其心，枉杀无辜，亏废刑典，岂直上负天神，何以下安黎庶！
现代文：陈元康劝谏高澄说： 现在虽然天下还未太平，但国家法纪已经确定。如果因为几个将领外叛，为了讨得他们的欢心，便枉杀无辜、破坏刑典，岂止有负于上苍神灵，而且又用什么来安抚黎民百姓呢！
English: Chen Yuankang advised Zou Gaocheng: Although the world is not yet at peace, the country's laws and regulations have already been determined. If, because a few generals have rebelled, in order to win their favor, they kill innocent people and destroy the criminal code, they will not only be unworthy of the gods of heaven, but also what will they use to appease the people of Li!

古文：晁错前事，愿公慎之。 
现代文：汉朝晁错的事情是前车之鉴，希望大人您慎重处理此事。 
English: I hope you can carefully learn from the mistakes of the Han Dynasty.

古文：澄乃止，遣司空韩轨督诸军讨景。
现代文：高澄听完这番话，便打消了杀崔暹的念头。高澄派遣了司空韩轨督率各路军队去讨伐侯景。
English: After listening to these words, Gao Cheng gave up the idea of killing Cui Siam. Gao Cheng dispatched the second-in-command, the commander of the Korean Railroad, and the troops from all directions to fight Houjing.

古文：辛酉，上祀南郊，大赦；甲子，祀明堂。
现代文：辛酉，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下；甲子，在明堂祭祀。
English: In Xinzhuang, Emperor Liangwu offered sacrifices to Heaven in the southern suburb, and was pardoned by Heaven; in Jiazi, sacrifices were offered in the Ming Hall.

古文：二月，魏诏： 自今应宫刑者，直没官，勿刑。 
现代文：二月，西魏朝廷诏令： 从今开始，凡是应该受到宫刑处罚的人，只把犯罪者没收入官为奴，不再用刑。 
English: In February, the Western Wei Dynasty issued a royal decree: From now on, anyone who should be punished by palace punishment will only enslave the offender to officials, and will no longer be punished.

古文：魏以开府仪同三司若于惠为司空，侯景为太傅、河南大行台、上谷公。
现代文：西魏任命开府仪同三司若干惠为司空，侯景为太傅、河南道行台、上谷公。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and three other officials as Siku, Hou Jing as Taifu, Henan Dao Xingtai, and Shangguo.

古文：庚辰，景又遣其行台郎中丁和来，上表言： 臣与高澄有隙，请举函谷以东，瑕丘以西，豫、广、颍、荆、襄、兗、南兗、济、东豫、洛、阳、北荆、北扬等十三州内附，惟青、徐数州，仅须折简。
现代文：庚辰，侯景又派遣他的行台郎中丁和前来梁朝，在上表中讲道： 我与高澄之间有隔阂，请允许我率领函谷关以东，瑕丘以西，豫州、广州、郢州、荆州、襄州、兖州、南兖州、济州、东豫州、洛州、阳州、北荆州、北扬州等十三个州来归附，而青州、徐州等几个州，我只要随便写封信过去就能来归降。
English: Geng Chen and Hou Jing also sent his traveling agent Zhong Ding and came to the Liang Dynasty and preached in the above table: There is a gap between me and Gao Cheng, please allow me to lead thirteen states east of Hantian Pass and west of Keqiu, such as Yuzhou, Guangzhou, Zhangzhou, Jingzhou, Xiangzhou, Zhangzhou, Nanluozhou, Jeju, East Yuzhou, Luozhou, Yangzhou, North Jingzhou and North Yangzhou, and I can return to several states such as Qingzhou and Xuzhou as long as I write a letter.

古文：且黄河以南，皆臣所职，易同反掌。
现代文：况且黄河以南，都是我管辖的范围，行动起来易如反掌。
English: Moreover, everything south of the Yellow River is under my jurisdiction, so it's easy to act.

古文：若齐、宋一平，徐事燕、赵。 
现代文：倘若青州、徐州一旦平定，就可以随后慢慢攻取燕、赵之地了。 
English: If the Qi and Song dynasties are pacified, then we can slowly draw a map of Yan and Wa.

古文：上召群臣廷议。
现代文：梁武帝召集大臣们来朝廷商议此事。
English: Emperor Liangwu summoned his ministers to the imperial court to discuss the matter.

古文：尚书仆射谢举等皆曰： 顷岁与魏通和，边境无事，今纳其叛臣，窃谓非宜。 
现代文：尚书仆射谢举等人都说： 近年来，我们与魏友好往来，边境地区一直平安无事，现在若要收留其叛逆之臣，我们私下都认为不太合适。 
English: Shang Shufu, Sha Xieju and others all said: In recent years, we have had friendly exchanges with Wei, and the border areas have always been safe and sound. Now, if we want to receive their rebellious vassals, we all privately think it is not appropriate.

古文：上曰： 虽然，得景则塞北可清；机会难得，岂宜胶柱！ 
现代文：梁武帝回答说： 尽管如此，如果得到侯景的话，塞北就可以到手了；机会难得，怎么能胶柱鼓瑟而不知变通呢。 
English: Emperor Liangwu replied, "Nevertheless, if you get Houjing, you can get the northern part of Saipan; the opportunity is rare, how can you be flexible without knowing it?

古文：是岁，正月，乙卯，上梦中原牧守皆以地来降，举朝称庆。
现代文：这一年，正月，乙卯，梁武帝梦见中原地区的牧守们都献地来投降，举朝上下一片欢庆。
English: That year, in the first month of the year, Emperor Liang Wu dreamed that the herdsmen in the Central Plains region all offered their land and surrendered, leading to a great celebration.

古文：旦，见中书舍人硃异，告之，旦曰： 吾为人少梦，若有梦，必实。 
现代文：早晨起来，梁武帝遇见中书舍人朱异，便把做梦的事告诉了他，并说： 我这个人很少做梦，如果做了梦，梦中之事就一定会应验。 
English: When Emperor Liangwu got up in the morning, he met Zhu Yi, a scholar from the Middle Kingdom, and told him about his dream. He said, "I rarely have dreams. If I did have a dream, the dream would surely come true."

古文：异曰： 此乃宇内混壹之兆也。 
现代文：朱异忙说： 这是天下要统一的征兆。 
English: Zhu Yixia said: This is a sign that the world wants to be unified.

古文：及丁和至，称景定计以正月乙卯，上愈神之。
现代文：等到丁和前来告诉梁武帝，说侯景定下计策要在正月乙卯这天行动，梁武帝就更相信这个梦是天神的意志。
English: When Ding He came to tell Emperor Liang Wu that Hou Jingding had decided to take action on the first day of the first month, Emperor Liang Wu believed that this dream was the will of the gods.

古文：然意犹未决，尝独言： 我国家如金瓯，无一伤缺，今忽受景地，讵是事宜？
现代文：但是他的决心还没有完全定下，曾独自自言自语地说： 我的国家象金瓯一样，无一伤缺之处，现在忽然要接受侯景送来的土地，这难道是合乎事理的吗？
English: However, his determination was not completely settled. He once said to himself, "My country is like a golden calf, without a single flaw. Now, all of a sudden, it wants to accept land sent by Hou Jing. Is this reasonable?"

古文：脱致纷纭，悔之何及？ 
现代文：倘若因此而引起混乱，后悔怎么来得及呢？ 
English: If this causes confusion, how can there be time for regret?

古文：硃异揣知上意，对曰： 圣明御宇，南北归仰，正以事无机会，未达其心。
现代文：朱异揣摩到了梁武帝的心思，便对梁武帝说： 陛下圣明无比，君临天下，南北方的人都仰慕、归心于您，只是因为没有机会奉事您，所以其心意一直没有实现。
English: Zhu Yi guessed the thoughts of Emperor Liangwu and said to Emperor Liangwu: Your Majesty is incomparably holy, you reign over the world, people in the south and north admire and confide in you, but because they have no opportunity to serve you, their intentions have not been realized.

古文：今侯景分魏土之半以来，自非天诱其衷，人赞其谋，何以至此！
现代文：现在，侯景把魏的一半土地分割出来归附您，如果不是天意引导他的心，人们又赞助他的打算，怎么会走到这一步呢！
English: Now, Hou Jing has divided half of Wei's land and given it to you. If it wasn't for the providence guiding his heart and the people supporting his plan, how could he have come this far?

古文：若拒而不内，恐绝后来之望。
现代文：如果拒绝侯景，不收留他，恐怕就会堵绝了随后准备来归降的人的希望。
English: If they reject Hou Jing and do not take him in, they will probably crush the hopes of those who are preparing to return later.

古文：此诚易见，愿陛下无疑。 
现代文：这些实在是显而易见的，希望陛下您不要犹豫。 
English: It's obvious, Your Majesty, don't doubt it.

古文：上乃定议纳景。
现代文：梁武帝听完这席话，于是决定接纳侯景。
English: After listening to this speech, Emperor Liangwu decided to accept Houjing.

古文：壬午，以景为大将军，封河南王，都督河南北诸军事、大行台，承制如邓禹故事。
现代文：壬午，梁武帝任命侯景为大将军，封他为河南王，让他担任都督崐河南、北诸军事及大行台之职，并特意授权他可以如后汉的邓禹那样秉承皇帝的旨意发号施令。
English: At noon, Emperor Liangwu appointed Houjing as a general and made him the king of Henan Province. He made him the military governor of Henan Province, the Northern Provinces and the Grand Canal, and specifically authorized him to issue orders in accordance with the emperor's will, just like Deng Yu in the later Han Dynasty.

古文：平西咨议参军周弘正，善占候，前此谓人曰： 国家数年后当有兵起。 
现代文：平西谘议参军周弘正擅长观察天象变化而预测吉凶，他在侯景投奔梁朝之前曾对人说： 几年之后国内会有兵戈之乱。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng, a member of the Pingxi Advisory Council and the army, was good at observing the changes in the celestial phenomena and predicting the fortunes. Before Hou Jing went to the Liang Dynasty, he told people: "After a few years, there will be a war in the country."

古文：及闻纳景，曰： 乱阶在此矣！ 
现代文：等他听说梁武帝接纳了侯景，便说： 祸乱原因就在这里了。 
English: When he heard that Emperor Liangwu had accepted Houjing, he said, "This is the cause of the calamity."

古文：丁亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：丁亥，梁武帝耕种藉田。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Liangwu began to cultivate the borrowed land.

古文：三月，庚子，上幸同泰寺，舍身如大通故事。
现代文：三月，庚子，梁武帝临幸同泰寺，举行舍身仪式，和大通元年那次一样。
English: In March, Emperor Gaozhi and Emperor Liangwu visited Tongtai Temple and held a ceremony of self-sacrifice, which was the same as the one in the first year of Datong.

古文：甲辰，遣司州刺史羊鸦仁督兗州刺史桓和、仁州刺史湛海珍等，将兵三万趣悬瓠，运粮食应接侯景。
现代文：甲辰，梁武帝派司州刺史羊鸦仁督率兖州刺史桓和、仁州刺史湛海珍等人，带领三万人马向悬瓠方向靠近，运送粮食以接应侯景。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Emperor Liangwu sent Shizhou Jishi Yangqiu Rinduo, led by Shizhou Jishi Huanhe, Renzhou Jishi Zhan Haizhen and others, to lead 30,000 horses to the direction of the suspension bridge to transport grain to meet Houjing.

古文：魏大赦。
现代文：西魏大赦天下。
English: The West Wei Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：东魏高澄虑诸州有变，乃自出巡抚。
现代文：东魏高澄担心各州会出现变故，便亲自外出巡视各地，安抚下属。
English: Eastern Wei Gao Cheng was worried that there would be changes in the states, so he personally went out to inspect various regions to reassure his subordinates.

古文：留段韶守晋阳，委以军事；以丞相功曹赵彦深为大行台都官郎中。
现代文：他让段韶留下守卫晋阳，并委以军事重任；又让丞相功曹赵彦深担任了大行台都官郎中。
English: He left Duan Yu to guard Jinyang and entrusted him with important military responsibilities; he also allowed Cao Zhao Yanshen, the Minister of War, to serve as the second-in-command of the Taihang capital.

古文：使陈元康豫作丞相欢条教数十纸付韶及彦深，在后以次行之。
现代文：并让陈元康把事先写在几十张纸上，以丞相高欢的名义发布的命令，交给段韶和赵彦深，让他们在高澄走后按顺次去执行。
English: He also asked Chen Yuankang to hand over the order issued in the name of the prime minister Gao Huan, which was written on dozens of pieces of paper in advance, to Duan Yu and Zhao Yanshen, and let them carry it out in sequence after Gao Cheng left.

古文：临发，握彦深手泣曰： 以母、弟相托，幸明此心！ 
现代文：临出发之前，高澄握住赵彦深的手，哭着对他说： 我把自己的母亲、弟弟托付给你了，希望你明白我的心意！ 
English: Before setting off, Gao Cheng grasped Zhao Yanshen's hand and cried to him, "I entrusted my mother and brother to you. I hope you understand my heart!

古文：夏，四月，壬申，澄入朝于鄴。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬申，高澄到邺城去朝见。
English: In the summer, in April, Jinshin, Gao Cheng went to Lucheng to see the morning.

古文：东魏主与之宴，澄起舞，识者知其不终。
现代文：东魏孝静帝设宴招待他，席间，高澄起身舞蹈，有识之士认为高澄父亲刚死就乐而忘哀，不会有好下场。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty invited him to a banquet. During the meal, Gao Cheng got up and danced. People with insight believed that Gao Cheng's father had just died and had forgotten to mourn, which would not have a good ending.

古文：丙子，群臣奉赎。
现代文：丙子，梁朝文武百官给佛门捐钱为梁武帝赎身。
English: Cun Zi, Liang Chao, Wen Wu, and hundreds of officials donated money to the Buddhist gate to redeem Emperor Liang Wu.

古文：丁亥，上还宫，大赦，改元，如大通故事。
现代文：丁亥，梁武帝回到了皇宫，大赦天下，改换年号为 太清 ，就象大通年间那次一样。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Liangwu returned to the imperial palace, pardoned the world, and changed the era name to Taiching, just as he did during the Datong era.

古文：甲午，东魏遣兼散骑常侍李系来聘。
现代文：甲午，东魏派兼散骑常侍李系来梁朝聘问。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, the Eastern Wei faction and the horseback riding attendant Li family came to the Liang Dynasty for an interview.

古文：系，绘之弟也。
现代文：李系是李绘的弟弟。
English: Li Jie is the younger brother of Li Miao.

古文：五月，丁酉朔，东魏大赦。
现代文：五月，丁酉朔，东魏大赦天下。
English: In May, Ding Junshuo, the Eastern Wei Dynasty was pardoned.

古文：戊戌，东魏以襄城王旭为太尉。
现代文：戊戌，东魏任命襄城王元旭为太尉。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Yuanxu of Xiangcheng as a lieutenant.

古文：高澄遣武卫将军元柱等将数万众昼夜兼行以袭侯景，遇景于颍川北，柱等大败。
现代文：东魏高澄派遣武卫将军元柱等人率领几万大军日夜兼程去袭击侯景，在颍川北面与侯景相遇，结果元柱等人遭到惨败。
English: Eastern Wei Gaocheng sent Wuwei General Yuan Zhu and others, leading tens of thousands of troops, to attack Houjing day and night, and met with Houjing in the north of the Fenchuan River. As a result, Yuan Zhu and others were defeated.

古文：景以羊鸦仁等军犹未至，乃退保颍川。
现代文：侯景因为羊鸦仁等人的军队还没有赶到，于是，便退守颍川。
English: Because the armies of Goats, Ravens, and others had not yet arrived, Hou Jing retreated to the Shichuan River.

古文：甲辰，东魏以开府仪同三司库狄干为太师，录尚书事孙腾为太傅，汾州刺史贺拔仁为太保，司徒高隆之录尚书事，司空韩轨为司徒，青州刺史尉景为大司马，领军将军可硃浑道元为司空，仆射高洋为尚书令、领中书监，徐州刺史慕容绍宗为尚书左仆射，高阳王斌为右仆射。
现代文：甲辰，东魏任命开府仪同三司库狄干为太师，录尚书事孙腾为太傅，汾州刺史贺拔仁为太保，司徒高隆之为录尚书事，司空韩轨为司徒，青州刺史尉景为大司马，领军将军可朱浑道元为司空，仆射高洋为尚书令、领中书监，徐州刺史慕容绍宗为尚书左仆射，高阳王元斌为右仆射。
English: In Jia Chen, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Ku Dickan as the grand master, Sun Teng as the grand master of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the

古文：戊午，尉景卒。
现代文：戊午，尉景去世。
English: In the afternoon, Leung King passed away.

古文：韩轨等围侯景于颍川。
现代文：韩轨等人率军把侯景包围在颍川。
English: Han Zhaoli and others led an army to surround Hou Jing in the Minchuan River.

古文：景惧，割东荆、北兗州、鲁阳、长社四城赂魏以求救。
现代文：侯景见这种状况，害怕了，便把东荆、北兖州、鲁阳、长社四座城割让给了西魏，用此来贿赂西魏，以便取得其援救。
English: Seeing this situation, Hou Jing was afraid, so he ceded the four cities of Dongjing, Beilunzhou, Luyang and Changsha to the Western Wei Dynasty, using this to bribe the Western Wei Dynasty in order to obtain its rescue.

古文：尚书左仆射于谨曰： 景少习兵，奸诈难测，不如厚其爵位以观其变，未可遣兵也。 
现代文：西魏尚书左仆射于谨说： 侯景在少年时就习武练兵，为人奸诈，难以揣测，所以不如封以他高官厚禄，看看他的变化再说，先不要派兵去援救他。 
English: Xiwu Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Yu, said: "Hou Jing learned martial arts and trained soldiers when he was a boy. He is a treacherous person, and it is difficult to guess. Therefore, it is better to seal him with a high-ranking official's honor. Let's see how he changes. First, don't send soldiers to rescue him.

古文：荆州刺史王思政以为： 若不因机进取，后悔无及。 
现代文：荆州刺史王思政却认为： 如果不抓住时机进取，后悔就来不及了。 
English: However, Wang Sizheng, Jingzhou chief historian, believes that: If you do not seize the opportunity to forge ahead, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：即以荆州步骑万馀从鲁阳关向阳翟。
现代文：于是便派荆州的一万多名步兵和骑兵经鲁阳关向阳翟进发。
English: As a result, more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry from Jingzhou were sent through Luyang Pass to Impotence.

古文：丞相泰闻之，加景大将军兼尚书令，遣太尉李弼、仪同三司赵贵将兵一万赴颍川。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰知道情况之后便封侯景为大将军兼尚书令，并派遣太尉李弼、仪同三司赵贵率领一万人马赶赴颍川去为侯景解围。
English: After knowing the situation, the Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, appointed Hou Jing as the general and the commander-in-chief, and dispatched Lieutenant Li Jun and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhao Gui, to lead ten thousand horses to rush to Luochuan to relieve Hou Jing.

古文：景恐上责之，遣中兵参军柳开奉启于上，以为： 王旅未接，死亡交急，遂求援关中，自救目前。
现代文：侯景怕梁武帝责怪他向西魏求援一事，便派中兵参军柳昕向梁武帝送去一封信，上面说道： 陛下您派出的军队还没有来到，而我这里生死攸关，情况十分危急，便向关中求援，以便挽救自己所面临的危机。
English: Hou Jing was afraid that Emperor Liangwu would blame him for asking for help from West Wei, so he sent a letter to Emperor Liangwu, saying: Your Majesty, the army you sent has not yet arrived, and my life and death are at stake here, the situation is very critical, so I asked Guanzhong for help in order to save myself from the crisis.

古文：臣既不安于高氏，岂见容于宇文！
现代文：我既不能安处于高澄手下，又怎么会被宇文泰所容纳？
English: I can't be at ease under Takasumi, so how can I be accommodated by Uwentai?

古文：但螫手解腕，事不得已，本图为国，愿不赐咎！
现代文：但是手遭毒蛇螫咬而连手腕去掉，这是万不得已之事，本来想着为国，希望您不要怪罪我！
English: However, my hand was bitten by a poisonous snake and my wrist was also removed. This was a matter of last resort. I had originally wanted to serve my country. I hope you don't blame me!

古文：臣获其力，不容即弃，今以四州之地为饵敌之资，已令宇文遣人入守。
现代文：我得到了关中的帮助，所以不能马上就背弃他们，现在我把四个州的地方当做引敌人上钩的诱饵，已经让宇文泰派了军队进入颍川，帮助我守卫这里。
English: I got help from the Guanzhong, so I couldn't turn my back on them right away. Now I'm using the four-state region as bait to lure the enemy. I've had Uwentai send troops into the Fenchuan to help me guard it.

古文：自豫州以东，齐海以西，悉臣控压；见有之地，尽归圣朝，悬瓠、项城、徐州、南兗，事须迎纳。
现代文：从豫州以东到齐海以西的地区，都在我的控制范围之内；我的这些现在实有的土地，都归于梁朝所有，悬瓠、项城、徐州、南兖这些地方，只需要派人去加以接管就可以了。
English: The areas from the east of Yuzhou to the west of Qihai are all under my control. These lands that are actually mine now all belong to the Liang Dynasty, and it is only necessary to send someone to take over these places, such as Xuanwu, Xiangcheng, Xuzhou and Nanxun.

古文：愿陛下速敕境上，各置重兵，与臣影响，不使差互！ 
现代文：希望陛下您迅速向边境下发命令，让他们各置重兵，与我呼应，相互之间不要发生差脱误会！ 
English: I hope, Your Majesty, that you will quickly issue an order to the border, so that they will place heavy troops on each side, echoing me, and there will be no misunderstanding between each other!

古文：上报之曰： 大夫出境，尚有所专；况始创奇谋，将建大业，理须适事而行，随方以应。
现代文：梁武帝回答说： 大夫离开国境，还有自做主张的权限呢，何况你始创奇谋，将建大业，理应根据事情的发展而行事，随机应变。
English: Emperor Liangwu replied: Doctors have the authority to make their own proposals when they leave the country. Moreover, if you start a conspiracy, you will build a great career. You should act according to the development of the situation and adapt to the situation at random.

古文：卿诚心有本，何假词费！ 
现代文：你一片诚意，心系朝廷，何须多加解释呢？ 
English: You are full of sincerity and care about the imperial court. Why do you need to explain more?

古文：魏以开府仪同三司独孤信为大司马。
现代文：西魏任命开府仪同三司独孤信为大司马。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi to be the chief secretary of the three departments.

古文：六月，戊辰，以鄱阳王范为征北将军，总督汉北征讨诸军事，击穰城。
现代文：六月，戊辰，西魏委任鄱阳王元范为征北将军，令他总督汉北征讨诸军事，去进攻穰城。
English: In June, the Western Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Yuanfan of Shenyang as the general of the Northern Expedition, and ordered him to be the governor of the Northern Expeditionary Army to attack Shicheng.

古文：东魏韩轨等围颍川，闻魏李弼、赵贵等将至，己巳，引兵还鄴。
现代文：东魏的韩轨等人包围了颍川，得知西魏的李弼、赵贵等人将要领兵到来，乙巳，带领军队撤回了邺城。
English: Han Luo and others from the Eastern Wei Dynasty encircled Luochuan. When they learned that Li Yu, Zhao Gui and others from the Western Wei Dynasty were coming to lead the troops, they immediately led the troops back to Lucheng.

古文：侯景欲因会执弼与贵，夺其军；贵疑之，不往。
现代文：侯景想趁机抓获李弼和赵贵二人，夺取他们的军队；赵贵对侯景产生了怀疑，不去颍川与侯景相会。
English: Hou Jing wanted to seize the opportunity to capture the two Li Yan and Zhao Gui and seize their army; Zhao Gui became suspicious of Hou Jing and did not go to Luchuan to meet with Hou Jing.

古文：贵欲诱景入营而执之，弼止之。
现代文：赵贵想把侯景诱入军营而趁机拘捕他，李弼制止了赵贵这一做法。
English: Zhao Gui wanted to lure Hou Jing into the military camp and seize the opportunity to arrest him. Li Yan stopped Zhao Gui from doing this.

古文：羊鸦仁遣长史邓鸿将兵至汝水，弼引兵还长安。
现代文：这时，羊鸦仁派长史邓鸿率领军队到了汝水，李弼便率领军队回到了长安。
English: At this time, Yang Rongren sent the commander Shi Denghong to lead the army to Riushui, and Li Xuan led the army back to Chang'an.

古文：王思政入据颍川。
现代文：王思政带兵占据了颍川。
English: Wang Sizheng led the troops to occupy the Lugu River.

古文：景阳称略地，引军出屯悬瓠。
现代文：侯景假称要攻取州郡，带领军队出颍川城，驻扎于悬瓠。
English: Hou Jing pretended that he wanted to conquer the prefectures and counties, and led the army out of Luchuan City and stationed it in Xuanwu.

古文：景复乞兵于魏，丞相泰使同轨防主韦法保及都督贺兰愿德等将兵助之。
现代文：侯景又向西魏乞求援兵。丞相宇文泰让同轨郡的防主韦法保以及都督贺兰愿德等人率领军队前去帮助他。
English: Hou Jing also begged for reinforcements from the Western Wei Dynasty. The prime minister, Uwen Tai, sent Wei Fa Bao, the governor of the same county, and the governor, He Lanqiande, to lead the army to help him.

古文：大行台左丞蓝田王悦言于泰曰： 侯景之于高欢，始敦乡党之情，终定君臣之契，任居上将，位重台司；今欢始死，景遽外叛，盖所图甚大，终不为人下故也。
现代文：大行台左丞蓝田人王悦对宇文泰说： 侯景同高欢之间，开始是亲密的乡党关系，最终变成了君臣关系，侯景位居上将，权倾朝廷；而今高欢刚刚死去，侯景便很快外叛，这是因为他的图谋很大，终不甘居人下的缘故。
English: Wang Yue, the left-hand man of Dajangdai and a person from Lantian, said to Wu Wentai: The relationship between Hou Jing and Gao Huan started as a close relationship between the township party, and eventually turned into a relationship between the sovereign and the vassal. Hou Jing was a high-ranking general, and his power was in favor of the imperial court. Now that Gao Huan has just died, Hou Jing will soon rebel, because his plans are great, and he is not willing to live under others.

古文：且彼能背德于高氏，岂肯尽节于朝廷！
现代文：况且他能对高氏背信弃义，又怎么会为本朝尽忠尽节呢？
English: Besides, how could he betray Gao and be loyal to this dynasty?

古文：今益之以势，援之以兵，窃恐朝廷贻笑将来也。 
现代文：现崐在您扩大他的势力，派兵去援助他，我私下担心这样会让后人耻笑的。 
English: Now that you are expanding his power and sending troops to help him, I am privately worried that this will make future generations laugh.

古文：泰乃召景入朝。
现代文：于是宇文泰便派人召侯景入朝。
English: As a result, Uwentai sent someone to summon Hou Jing to the imperial court.

古文：景阴谋叛魏，事计未成，厚抚韦法保等，冀为己用，外示亲密无猜间，每往来诸军间，侍从至少，魏军中名将，皆身自造诣。
现代文：侯景暗中打算反叛西魏，但计划没有实现，便优抚韦法保等人，希望他们能替自己效力，表面上做出亲密无间的样子。侯景每每来往于各个军队之间，带的侍从极少，对于西魏军队中的各个著名将领，他都亲自去拜访他们。
English: Hou Jing secretly planned to rebel against the Western Wei Dynasty, but the plan did not come to fruition, so he gave preferential treatment to Wei Fa Bao and others, hoping that they could work for him, and on the surface they appeared to be very close. Hou Jing often traveled between various armies, with very few attendants. For each famous general in the Western Wei Army, he personally visited them.

古文：同轨防长史裴宽谓法保曰： 侯景狡诈，必不肯入关，欲托款于公，恐未可信。
现代文：同轨防长史裴宽对韦法保说： 侯景为人奸诈狡猾，一定不肯应宇文丞相之召而入关，他肯定要通过您向朝廷讲情，恐怕不可以相信他。
English: Defense Minister Shi Pei Kuan, who was on the same track, said to Wei Fabao: "Hou Jing is a treacherous and cunning person, and he will certainly not accept the call of Minister Uwen. He will definitely appeal to the imperial court through you. I'm afraid you can't trust him."

古文：若伏兵斩之，此亦一时之功也。
现代文：如果埋伏兵士斩了他，这也是一时的功劳啊。
English: If the ambushers had killed him, it would have been a one-time achievement.

古文：如其不尔，即应深为之防，不得信其诳诱，自贻后悔。 
现代文：如果你不这样，我们就应该深深地提防他，不能轻信他的欺骗和引诱，以致为自己留下悔恨。 
English: If you do not, we should be deeply wary of him and not be so gullible to his deceit and seduction that we are left with regrets.

古文：法保深然之，不敢图景，但自为备而已；寻辞还所镇。
现代文：韦法保非常赞同裴宽的话，不敢杀掉侯景，只是自己加强了防卫罢了。
English: Wei Fabao very much agreed with Pei Kuan's words and did not dare to kill Hou Jing, but he only strengthened his defense.

古文：王思政亦觉其诈，密召贺兰愿德等还，分布诸军，据景七州、十二镇。
现代文：后来，他找了个借口便回自己的镇所去了。王思政也觉得侯景在欺骗他，就秘密把贺兰愿德等人召回来，分别部署了各路军队，占领了侯景所管辖的七个州，十二个镇。
English: Later, he found an excuse and went back to his own town. Wang Sizheng also felt that Hou Jing was deceiving him, so he secretly called back He Lanqiande and others, separately deployed various armies, and occupied the seven provinces and twelve towns under the jurisdiction of Hou Jing.

古文：景果辞不入朝，遗丞相泰书曰： 吾耻与高澄雁行，安能比肩大弟！ 
现代文：侯景果然推辞而不肯入朝，他在给宇文泰的信中说： 我耻于同高澄并行，又怎么能同大弟您比肩呢！ 
English: Hou Jing refused to enter the imperial court, saying in a letter to Wu Wentai: "I am ashamed to walk alongside Gao Cheng, but how can I stand shoulder to shoulder with you, my elder brother!"

古文：泰乃遣行台郎中赵士宪悉召前后所遣诸军援景者。
现代文：宇文泰收到了这封信后，便派行台郎中赵士宪将以前派去的救援侯景的各路军队全部召回。
English: After receiving this letter, Uwentai sent Zhao Shixian, a member of the Gang Tai Lang, to recall all the troops that had been sent to rescue Houjing.

古文：景遂决意来降。
现代文：于是，侯景便决心投降梁朝。
English: As a result, Hou Jing decided to surrender to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：魏将任约以所部千馀人降于景。
现代文：西魏将领任约带领所属的一千多名将士投降了侯景。
English: The Western Wei general took the lead and led more than a thousand soldiers who belonged to him to surrender to Houjing.

古文：泰以所授景使持节、太傅、大将军、兼尚书令、河南大行台、都督河南诸军事回授王思政，思政并让不受；频使敦谕，唯受都督河南诸军事。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰把以前授给侯景的使持节、太傅、大将军、兼尚书令、河南大行台、都督河南诸军事等官职收回并转授给了王思政，王思政一并推辞不受；宇文泰频繁地派人敦促劝谕王思政走马上任，最后，王思政只接受了都督河南诸军事这一职务。
English: The Western Wei chancellor, U Wentai, took back and transferred to Wang Sizheng the military posts previously awarded to Hou Jing, such as envoy, taifu, grand general, concurrently Shang Shuling, Henan Dajangtai, and the governor of Henan. Wang Sizheng was not rejected; U Wentai frequently sent people to urge and advise Wang Sizheng to take office immediately. In the end, Wang Sizheng only accepted the post of the governor of Henan.

古文：高澄将如晋阳，以弟洋为京畿大都督，留守于鄴，使黄门侍郎高德政佐之。
现代文：高澄将要去晋阳，便任命他的弟弟高洋为京畿大都督，让他留守邺城，并让黄门侍郎高德政来辅佐他。
English: When Gao Cheng was about to leave for Jinyang, he appointed his younger brother Gao Yang as the Grand Governor of Gyeonggi Province, leaving him in Yeongseong, and asked Gao Dezheng, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, to assist him.

古文：德政，颢之子也。
现代文：高德政是高颢的儿子。
English: Gao Desheng is Gao Yao's son.

古文：丁丑，澄还晋阳，始发丧。
现代文：丁丑，高澄回到了晋阳，方才开始为高欢发丧。
English: Ding Qiu, Gao Cheng returned to Jinyang, and only then began to mourn for Gao Huan.

古文：秋，七月，魏长乐武烈公若于惠卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，西魏长乐武烈公若干惠去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Western Wei Emperor Changle Wuling died.

古文：丁酉，东魏主为丞相欢举哀，服缌缞，凶礼依汉霍光故事，赠相国、齐王，备九锡殊礼。
现代文：丁酉，东魏孝静帝为丞相高欢举行哀悼仪式，穿上了缌丧服。丧礼依照汉代霍光去世时的规格而进行，追封高欢为相国、齐王，并备九锡之礼。
English: The Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing held a mourning ceremony for the prime minister Gao Huan and put on the mourning clothes. The funeral ceremony was carried out according to the specifications of the Han Dynasty Ho Guang's death, and Gao Huan was posthumously crowned as the King of Qi and Jiuxi.

古文：戊戌，以高澄为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、勃海王；澄启辞爵位。
现代文：戊戌，东魏孝静帝任命高澄为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、勃海王；高澄启奏孝静帝，请求辞去封给他的爵位。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhing appointed Gao Cheng as envoy, grand chancellor, governor of armies at home and abroad, record of letters, grand march, and sea king; Gao Cheng appealed to Emperor Xiaozhing and asked to resign the title given to him.

古文：壬寅，诏太原公洋摄理军国，遣中使敦谕澄。
现代文：壬寅，孝静帝颁下诏书，令太原公高洋摄理军政大事，并派宦官敦促劝谕高澄，走马上任。
English: In Renin, Emperor Xiaojing issued an imperial edict, ordering Taiyuan Duke Gao Yang to take charge of military and political affairs, and sent eunuchs to urge Gao Cheng to take up the post.

古文：庚申，羊鸦仁入悬瓠城。
现代文：庚申，羊鸦仁进入了悬瓠城。
English: Goshun, Goat Raven has entered the Hanging City.

古文：甲子，诏更以悬瓠为豫州，寿春为南豫州，改合肥为合州。
现代文：甲子，梁武帝诏令改悬瓠为豫州，改寿春为南豫州，改合肥为合州。
English: In the 6th century, Emperor Liangwu issued an imperial edict to change Xuancheng to Yuzhou, to change Shuchun to South Yuzhou, and to change Hefei to Hezhou.

古文：以鸦仁为司、豫二州刺史，镇县瓠；西阳太守羊思达为殷州刺史，镇项城。
现代文：任命羊鸦仁为司、豫两州刺史，镇守悬瓠；任命西阳太守羊思达为殷州刺史，镇守项城。
English: He appointed Yang Guoren as the secretary and Hen as the governor of the two prefectures, and appointed Yang Sida, the governor of Xiyang, as the governor of Yin prefecture and the governor of Xiangcheng.

古文：八月，乙丑，下诏大举伐东魏。
现代文：八月，乙丑，梁武帝诏令派大量军队去讨伐东魏。
English: In August, the second month of the year, Emperor Liangwu sent a large number of troops to fight against the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：遣南豫州刺史贞阳侯渊明、南兗州刺史南康王会理分督诸将。
现代文：他派遣南豫州刺史贞阳侯萧渊明、南兖州刺史南康王萧会理分别督率各位将领进攻东魏。
English: He dispatched Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming from South Henan Province and Nankang Wang Xiao Hui from South Fujian Province respectively to lead the generals to attack Eastern Wei.

古文：渊明，懿之子；会理，绩之子也。
现代文：萧渊明是萧懿的儿子，萧会理是萧续的儿子。
English: Xiao Yuanming was the son of Xiao Yao, and Xiao Huili was the son of Xiao Zhuang.

古文：始，上欲以鄱阳王范为元帅；硃异取急在外，闻之，遽入曰： 鄱阳雄豪盖世，得人死力，然所至残暴，非吊民之材。
现代文：开始，梁武帝想让鄱阳王萧范担任元帅；朱异正在外面休假，听说梁武帝要让萧范担任元帅，急忙进朝对梁武帝说： 鄱阳王虽然是英雄豪杰，盖世无双，许多人为他竭尽全力地效劳。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Liangwu wanted to make Xiao Fan, the King of Shenyang, a marshal; Zhu Yiren was on vacation outside. Hearing that Emperor Liangwu wanted to make Xiao Fan a marshal, he hurried into the North and said to Emperor Liangwu: Although King Shenyang is a heroic hero, he is unique in the world, and many people are doing their best to serve him.

古文：且陛下昔登北顾亭以望，谓江右有反气，骨肉为戎首。今日之事，尤宜详择。 
现代文：但他所到之处非常残忍凶暴，不是个能爱惜百姓的人。况且陛下您往日登上北顾亭眺望远方时曾说长江西边的地区有反叛之气，骨肉之亲常常是战争的祸首，所以由谁挂帅尤其应该仔细选择。 
English: But everywhere he went, he was very cruel and ferocious, and he was not a man who could spare the people. Moreover, Your Majesty, when you climbed to the top of the Beigu Pavilion to look into the distance in the past, you said that the region on the west side of the Yangtze River had a rebellious spirit, and relatives were often the cause of war, so who should be in charge should be carefully chosen.

古文：上默然，曰： 会理何如？ 
现代文：梁武帝点头称是，又问： 萧会理如何呢？ 
English: Emperor Liang Wu nodded yes and asked: How is Xiao Huili?

古文：对曰： 陛下得之矣。 
现代文：朱异回答说： 陛下选对人了。 
English: Zhu Ying replied, "Your Majesty has chosen the right person."

古文：会理懦而无谋，所乘襻舆，施板屋，冠以牛皮。上闻，不悦。
现代文：萧会理怯懦而又少谋，他所乘坐的抬轿，用木板屋子的形状，外面蒙着牛皮，梁武帝知道之后，很不高兴。
English: Xiao Hui was cowardly and unscrupulous. The palanquin he rode in was made in the shape of a wooden plank house and covered with cowhide. Emperor Liang Wu was very unhappy when he found out.

古文：贞阳侯渊明时镇寿阳，屡请行，上许之。
现代文：贞阳侯萧渊明此时正镇守寿阳，他多次向梁武帝请求去带兵打仗，梁武帝允许了。
English: At this time, Zhenyang marquis Xiao Yuanming was guarding Shouyang. He repeatedly asked Emperor Liangwu to take soldiers to fight, and Emperor Liangwu allowed it.

古文：会理自以皇孙，复为都督，自渊明已下，殆不对接。
现代文：而萧会理自恃是皇帝的孙子，又担任了都督，便不把众人放在眼里，自萧渊明以下的人，一概不予理睬。
English: But Xiao Huili considered himself to be the emperor's grandson, and when he became the governor of the capital, he did not pay attention to anyone. He did not pay attention to anyone below Xiao Yuanming.

古文：渊明与诸将密告硃异，追会理还，遂以渊明为都督。
现代文：萧渊明便和诸位将领一起把这件事秘密通报给了朱异，朱异派人把萧会理追了回来，就让萧渊明担任了都督。
English: Xiao Yuanming then, together with all the generals, secretly reported the matter to Zhu Yixing. Zhu Yixing sent people to chase Xiao Huili back, and let Xiao Yuanming serve as the governor.

古文：辛未，高澄入朝于鄴，固辞大丞相；诏为大将军如故，馀如前命。
现代文：辛未，东魏高澄来到邺城朝拜孝静帝，坚决辞去大丞相的职务；东魏孝静帝诏令他仍然担任大将军，其它职务还同以前任命的那样。
English: Soon after, Gao Cheng of the Eastern Wei Dynasty came to Lucheng to pay homage to Emperor Xiaozhing and resolutely resigned from the post of grand chancellor; Emperor Xiaozhing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty ordered him to still serve as grand general, and the other posts were the same as those previously appointed.

古文：甲申，虚葬齐献武王于漳水之西；潜凿成安鼓山石窟佛顶之旁为穴，纳其柩而塞之，杀其群匠。
现代文：甲申，东魏把齐献武王高欢先虚葬在漳水之西；又在成安县鼓山石窟佛寺旁边秘密挖了一个墓穴，把齐献武王的灵柩放进穴内，然后把所有工匠都杀掉了。
English: In Jiaxing, the Eastern Wei Dynasty buried the coffin of King Gao Huan of Qi Xianwu in the west of Surabaya; and secretly dug a grave beside the Gushan Grottoes Buddhist Temple in Cheng'an County, put the coffin of King Qi Xianwu into the grave, and then killed all the craftsmen.

古文：及齐之亡也，一匠之子知之，发石取金而逃。
现代文：等到北齐灭亡时，一位工匠的儿子知道了安葬地点，撬开了石板，取出了墓穴中的黄金便逃走了。
English: When Bei Qi died, the son of a craftsman found out where he was buried, broke open the stone slab, took out the gold in the tomb and fled.

古文：戊子，武州刺史萧弄璋攻东魏碛泉、吕梁二戍，拔之。
现代文：戊子，梁朝武州刺史萧弄璋带兵去攻打东魏的碛泉、吕梁二座城堡，并占领了它们。
English: Wu Zi, Liang Zhaozhong, Wuzhou Zhi Shi, Xiao Loren, led the troops to attack the two castles of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Luquan and Luliang, and occupied them.

古文：或告东魏大将军澄云： 侯景有北归之志。 
现代文：有人告诉东魏大将军高澄： 侯景有北归之意。 
English: Someone told the East Wei general Gao Cheng: "Hou Jing means to return to the north."

古文：会景将蔡道遵北归，言 景颇知悔过 。
现代文：这时正好侯景的将领蔡道遵回到了东魏，讲道： 侯景有所悔过。 
English: At this time, Hou Jing's general Cai Daozun returned to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, preaching: Hou Jing has repented.

古文：景母及妻子皆在鄴，澄乃以书谕之，语以阖门无恙，若还，许以豫州刺史终其身，还其宠妻、爱子，所部文武，更不追摄。
现代文：侯景的母亲和妻子儿女都住在邺城，高澄便写信告诉侯景，说他的全家人都安然无恙，如果他肯回到东魏，便许诺让他终身担任豫州刺史，并还他宠妻爱子，对于他手下的文武官员，更是既往不咎。
English: Hou Jing's mother, wife, and children all lived in Handan. Gao Cheng then wrote to Hou Jing, saying that his whole family was safe and sound. If he would return to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he promised to let him serve as a historian of Yuzhou for life. He also loved his wife and son. For his civil and military officials, he never blamed them.

古文：景使王伟复书曰： 今已引二邦，扬旌北讨，熊豹齐奋，克复中原，幸自取之，何劳恩赐！
现代文：侯景指使手下人王伟给高澄回信说： 现在，我已经带领梁和西魏的军队，举旗北伐，兵卒们士气高涨；恢复中原地区，我希望能自己攻取，怎么能有劳您来恩赐给我呢！
English: Hou Jing instructed his subordinate Wang Wei to reply to Gao Cheng's letter, saying: Now, I have led the Liang and West Wei armies, raised the banner of the Northern Expedition, and the soldiers' morale is high; I hope to recover the Central Plains region by myself, how can I be bothered by you to give me grace!

古文：昔王陵附汉，母在不归，太上囚楚，乞羹自若，矧伊妻子，而可介意！
现代文：从前王陵归附了刘邦，母亲被项羽抓去他仍不肯回去；刘邦的父亲被项羽囚禁了，项羽威胁要杀掉其父，刘邦却坦然地向项羽讨要煮他父亲的肉汤喝，父母尚且如此，何况是妻子儿女，那就更不介意了！
English: Liu Bang was once attached to the royal tomb. His mother was taken away by Xiang Yu, but he still refused to go back. Liu Bang's father was imprisoned by Xiang Yu. Xiang Yu threatened to kill his father, but Liu Bang calmly asked Xiang Yu to cook his father's broth for him to drink. If his parents are still like this, let alone his wife and children, then he doesn't mind!

古文：脱谓诛之有益，欲止不能，杀之无损，徒复坑戮，家累在君，何关仆也！ 
现代文：如果说杀掉我的妻子和孩子对你有利的话，我想阻止你也是阻止不了的，如果杀掉他们对我毫无损害，那么您杀戮了他们也是徒然，反正我的家室全在您手中，如何处置，与我有什么相关啊！ 
English: If it is to your advantage to kill my wife and children, I cannot stop you. If killing them does me no harm, then you have killed them in vain. In any case, my home is entirely in your hands. How you dispose of it has nothing to do with me.

古文：戊子，诏以景录行台尚书事。
现代文：戊子，梁武帝诏令委任侯景为录行台尚书事。
English: In response, Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty issued an edict appointing Hou Jing as the recorder.

古文：东魏静帝，美容仪，旅力过人，能挟石师子逾宫墙，射无不中；好文学，从容沉雅。
现代文：东魏孝静帝容貌、仪表俊美，臂力过人，能把石狮子夹在胳膊下面飞崐身跳过宫墙，射箭百发百中；他还喜好文学，行止丛容沉稳，性情高雅。
English: Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty was good-looking, had a handsome appearance, and had superior arm strength. He could hold a stone lion under his arm, fly and jump over the palace wall, and shoot arrows in a hundred different ways. He also liked literature, had a steady gait, and an elegant temperament.

古文：时人以为有孝文风烈，大将军澄深忌之。
现代文：当时的人都认为他有北魏孝文帝的风范，因此大将军高澄特别防范他。
English: At that time, people thought he had the demeanor of the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen, so General Gao Cheng took special precautions against him.

古文：始，献武王自病逐君之丑，事静帝礼甚恭，事无大小必以闻，可否听旨。
现代文：以前，献武王高欢自恨背上了驱逐君主的丑名，所以侍奉孝静帝时执礼甚恭，事无大小都一定汇报给孝静帝，听旨而行，自己从不专权。
English: In the past, Gao Huan, the King of the Consecrated Warriors, had the bad reputation of expelling the monarch out of self-hatred. Therefore, when he served Emperor Xiaozhing, he was very courteous. He always reported to Emperor Xiaozhing about all matters, big and small, and did as he was told. He never had any power of his own.

古文：每侍宴，俯伏上寿；帝设法会，乘辇行香，欢执香炉步从，鞠躬屏气，承望颜色，故其下奉帝莫敢不恭。
现代文：每次侍宴，他都俯下身子向皇帝祝寿；孝静帝举办法会，乘坐銮驾去进香时，他手持香炉，徒步跟在后面，屏住气息，弯腰鞠躬，看皇上的眼色行事，所以他的下属在侍奉孝静帝时也没有人敢不恭敬。
English: Every time he served a banquet, he bent down to wish the emperor a happy birthday; Emperor Xiaozhing held a meeting, and when he took the carriage to make incense, he held the incense burner in his hand, followed behind on foot, held his breath, bent down and bowed, and looked at the emperor's eyes. Therefore, none of his subordinates dared to be disrespectful when serving Emperor Xiaozhing.

古文：及澄当国，倨慢顿甚，使中书黄门郎崔季舒察帝动静，小大皆令季舒知之。
现代文：高澄执掌国家大权后，很快就骄傲自大起来，他让中书黄门郎崔季舒暗中窥探皇帝的举动，孝静帝所做的大大小小的事都让崔季舒知道了。
English: After Gao Cheng took over the power of the country, he soon became proud and arrogant. He let Cui Jishu, the Huangmen Lang of the Chinese book, spy on the emperor's actions in the dark. He let Cui Jishu know all the big and small things that Emperor Xiaojing did.

古文：澄与季舒书曰： 痴人比复何似？
现代文：高澄写给崔季舒的信中说： 那傻子比以前怎么样了，他呆傻的程度比以前稍好一点了没有？
English: In his letter to Choe, Gao wrote: "How is that idiot any better than before? Is his stupidity any better than before?

古文：痴势小差未？
现代文：你应该用心去检查、核对一下。 
English: You should check and double-check with your heart.

古文：宜用心检校。 帝尝猎于鄴东，驰逐如飞，监卫都督乌那罗受工伐从后呼曰： 天子勿走马，大将军嗔！ 
现代文：孝静帝曾在邺城的东边打猎，骑马逐兽如飞，监卫都督乌那罗受工伐跟在孝静帝的马后高声呼喊道： 皇上不要让马跑起来，大将军要怪罪的！ 
English: Emperor Xiaojing once went hunting on the east side of Lucheng. He rode a horse and chased the animal as if it were flying. The guard, the governor Unaro, was chased by workmen and shouted loudly after Emperor Xiaojing's horse: "Emperor, don't let the horse run up, the general is to blame!"

古文：澄尝侍饮酒，举大觞属帝曰： 臣澄劝陛下酒。 
现代文：高澄曾经陪着孝静帝饮酒，他举起手中大酒杯向孝静帝劝酒说： 臣高澄劝陛下喝一杯。 
English: Takasumi used to drink alcohol with Emperor Xiaojing. He raised a large wine glass in his hand to persuade Emperor Xiaojing to drink and said, "Vassal Takasumi, persuade His Majesty to drink a glass."

古文：帝不胜忿，曰： 自古无不亡之国，朕亦何用此生为！ 
现代文：那样子好象他们是平起平坐一样，孝静帝不胜愤怒，对高澄说： 自古以来没有不灭亡的国家，朕还要这一生干什么？ 
English: Looking as if they were standing on an equal footing, Emperor Xiao Jing was furious and said to Gao Cheng: Since ancient times, there has never been a country that has not perished. What do I want to do in this lifetime?

古文：澄怒曰： 朕，朕，狗脚朕！ 
现代文：高澄恼羞成怒地说： 什么朕、朕的，是长着狗脚的朕！ 
English: Exasperated, Gao Cheng said angrily, "What am I, what am I, am I the one with dog's paws!

古文：使崔季舒殴帝三拳，奋衣而出。
现代文：又让崔季舒打了孝静帝三拳，然后奋衣而出。
English: He also let Cui Jishu beat the three fists of Xiao Jingdi, and then came out fighting.

古文：明日，澄使季舒入劳帝。帝亦谢焉，赐季舒绢百匹。
现代文：第二天，高澄让崔季舒进宫去慰问孝静帝，孝静帝也表示歉意，并且赏赐给他一百匹绢。
English: The next day, Gao Cheng asked Cui Jishu to go to the palace to offer condolences to Emperor Xiao Jing. Emperor Xiao Jing also expressed his apologies and rewarded him with one hundred yakitori.

古文：帝不堪忧辱，咏谢灵运诗曰： 韩亡子房奋，秦帝鲁连耻。本自江海人，忠义动君子。 
现代文：孝静帝忍受不了这种侮辱，便借吟咏谢灵运的诗来抒发自己的情怀： 韩亡子房奋，秦帝仲连耻，本自江海人，忠义动君子。 
English: Emperor Xiaojing could not bear this kind of insult, so he borrowed a poem from the poet Xie Lingyun to express his feelings: Han Xiezi Fang Fen, Qin Emperor Zhong Lian Shan, originally from the Jianghai people, loyal and motivated gentleman.

古文：常侍、侍讲颍川荀济知帝意，乃与祠部郎中元瑾、长秋卿刘思逸、华山王大器、淮南王宣洪、济北王徽等谋诛澄。
现代文：常侍、侍讲颍川人荀济了解孝静帝的心思，便和祠部郎中元瑾、长秋卿刘思逸、华山王元大器、淮南王元宣洪，济北王元徽等人一起密谋杀掉高澄。
English: The regular attendants and the attendants lectured by the people of Suichuan helped to understand the thoughts of Emperor Xiaojing, and they plotted to murder Gao Cheng together with the ancestor of the ancestral hall, the middle son of the emperor, Liu Siyi, the eldest son of the emperor, King Yuan Daqi of Huashan, King Yuan Xuanhong of Huainan, King Yuanhui of Jibei and others.

古文：大器，鸷之子也。
现代文：元大器是元鸷的儿子。
English: Yuan Daki is the son of Yuan Shao.

古文：帝谬为敕问济曰： 欲以何日开讲？ 
现代文：孝静帝降旨假意问荀济： 您打算在什么时间开讲？ 
English: Emperor Xiaojing issued an order and asked Han Ji: What time do you plan to start the speech?

古文：乃诈于宫中作土山，开地道向北城。
现代文：于是便借口要在皇宫里修一座土山，挖了一条通向城北的地道。
English: So he dug a tunnel to the north of the city under the pretext of building a mound of earth in the imperial palace.

古文：至千秋门，门者觉地下响，以告澄。
现代文：地道挖到了千秋门时，守门的兵卒发觉地下有响动，便把这一情况告诉了高澄。
English: When the tunnel reached the Qianqiu Gate, the soldiers guarding the gate noticed that there was noise underground and told Gao Cheng about this.

古文：澄勒兵入宫，见帝，不拜而坐，曰： 陛下何意反？
现代文：高澄带着兵士入宫，见到了孝静帝，没有叩拜便坐下来，问道： 陛下为什么要谋划反叛？
English: Takasumi entered the palace with soldiers, met Emperor Xiaozhing, sat down without bowing, and asked: Why is His Majesty planning a rebellion?

古文：臣父子功存社稷，何负陛下邪！
现代文：我们父子有保存国家的功绩，有什么对不起陛下的地方呢？
English: Our father and son have the merit of preserving the country. What is there to be sorry for, Your Majesty?

古文：此必左右妃嫔辈所为。 
现代文：这一定是您身边侍卫人员和嫔妃们所搞的鬼。 
English: This must be the work of the attendants and concubines around you.

古文：欲杀胡夫人及李嫔。
现代文：说完便要杀掉胡夫人以及李嫔。
English: After saying that, he wanted to kill Mrs. Hu and Li Yao.

古文：帝正色曰： 自古唯闻臣反君，不闻君反臣。
现代文：孝静帝扳起面孔说道： 自古以来只听说过臣子反叛君王，没听说过君王反叛臣子。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing pulled up his face and said, "Since ancient times, we have only heard of vassals rebelling against kings, but never of kings rebelling against their vassals.

古文：王自欲反，何乃责我！
现代文：你自己要造反，又何必还要责怪我呢！
English: You yourself want to rebel, and why should you blame me?

古文：我杀王则社稷安，不杀则灭亡无日，我身且不暇惜，况于妃嫔！
现代文：我杀掉你江山社稷就会安定，不杀则国家就会很快灭亡。我对自己都没时间去爱惜，何况对这些嫔妃呢！
English: If I kill you, the country and society will be stable, but if I don't kill you, the country will soon perish. I don't have time to take care of myself, let alone these concubines!

古文：必欲弑逆，缓速在王！ 
现代文：如果你一定要反叛弑君的话，是早动手还是晚动手就在于你自己了！ 
English: If you must rebel against Shun, it's up to you whether you do it early or late!

古文：澄乃下床叩头，大啼谢罪。
现代文：高澄听完这些话，便离开坐床向孝敬帝叩头，痛哭流涕地向孝静帝道歉、请罪。
English: After listening to these words, Gao Cheng left his bed and bowed down to Emperor Xiaojing. He apologized and pleaded guilty to Emperor Xiaojing with tears.

古文：于是酣饮，夜久乃出。
现代文：于是，一起痛饮，直到深夜，高澄才离开皇宫。
English: As a result, they drank heavily together, and Takasumi did not leave the Imperial Palace until late at night.

古文：居三日，幽帝于含章堂。
现代文：隔了三天，高澄便把孝静帝囚禁在含章堂里。
English: Three days later, Gao Cheng imprisoned Emperor Xiao Jing in the Han Zhang Hall.

古文：壬辰，烹济等于市。
现代文：壬辰，把荀济等人在街市上用大锅煮死了。
English: In Imjin, he used a large cauldron to boil people such as Hao Ji to death in the street market.

古文：初，济少居江东，博学能文。与上有布衣之旧，知上有大志，然负气不服，常谓人曰： 会于盾鼻上磨墨檄之。 
现代文：当初，荀济年轻时住在江东，他学识渊博，擅长诗文，与梁武帝有布衣交情，他知道梁武帝有远大的志向，但心里却不服气他，常常对别人说： 如果他真是要造反篡位，我也将起兵，在战场的盾鼻上磨墨写檄文来声讨他的罪孽。 
English: At first, when he was young and lived in the east of the Yangtze River, he was well-read, good at poetry, and had a close friendship with Emperor Liangwu. He knew that Emperor Liangwu had lofty aspirations, but he was not convinced in his heart. He often said to others: If he really wants to rebel against the usurpation, I will also take up arms and write an apology on the shield nose of the battlefield to complain about his sins.

古文：上甚不平。
现代文：梁武帝知道后非常愤愤不平。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very indignant after he found out.

古文：及即位，或荐之于上，上曰： 人虽有才，乱俗好反，不可用也。 
现代文：等到梁武帝即位后，有人将荀济推荐给他，梁武帝说： 这个人虽然有才，但常常做违犯习俗的事，喜好唱反调，不可以任用。 
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, someone recommended Xizhi to him. Emperor Liangwu said: Although this person is talented, he often does things that violate customs, likes to sing the opposite tune, and cannot be appointed.

古文：济上书谏上崇信佛法、为塔寺奢费，上大怒，欲集朝众斩之；硃异密告之，济逃奔东魏。
现代文：荀济上书梁武帝劝谏他不该崇信佛法，而大兴土木，为建造寺塔而靡费天下，梁武帝勃然大怒，要召集朝臣斩杀荀济；朱异将这一消息密告荀济，荀济便逃往东魏。
English: Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty sent a letter to Xizhi, advising him that he should not believe in Buddhism, and that he should build temples and pagodas. Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty flew into a rage and summoned his courtiers to assassinate Xizhi. Zhu Ying leaked the news to Xizhi, and Xizhi fled to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：澄为中书监，欲用济为侍读，献武王曰： 我爱济，欲全之，故不用济。
现代文：高澄担任中书监的时候，想让荀济担任侍读，高欢对高澄说： 我喜爱荀济，想保全他，所以才不任用他。
English: When Gao Cheng served as the middle school's librarian, he wanted to make Hao Ji serve as a reader. Gao Huan said to Gao Cheng: I like Hao Ji, I want to keep him, so I won't appoint him.

古文：济入宫，必败。 
现代文：荀济一旦进入皇宫，必定会失败。 
English: Once it enters the imperial palace, it is bound to fail.

古文：澄固请，乃许之。
现代文：高澄坚决请求允许让荀济做侍读，高欢才答应了。
English: Gao Cheng resolutely asked for permission to let Yan Ji do the reading, and Gao Huan only agreed.

古文：及败，侍中杨遵彦谓之曰： 衰暮何苦复尔？ 
现代文：等到荀济与一些人密谋杀掉高澄一事败露之后，侍中杨遵彦对荀济说： 你已是衰暮之年，何必再如此呢？ 
English: After it was revealed that Hao Ji had conspired with some people to murder Gao Cheng, chamberlain Yang Zunyan said to Hao Ji: You are already in your twilight years, why do you need to do this again?

古文：济曰： 壮气在耳！ 
现代文：荀济回答说： 虽然如此，但壮气还在！ 
English: Hao Jie replied: Even so, the spirit is still there!

古文：因下辨曰： 自伤年纪摧颓，功名不立，故欲挟天子，诛权臣。 
现代文：于是杨遵彦便在狱辞中写道： 荀济自伤年纪衰老，还没有建立功名，所以便挟持天子，诛杀权臣。 
English: As a result, Yang Zunyan wrote in his prison dictation: "Han Ji was self-inflicted old age and senility, and had not yet established a reputation, so he took Tianzi hostage and killed the powerful minister.

古文：澄欲宥其死，亲问之曰： 荀公何意反？ 
现代文：高澄想宽宥荀济，免他一死，亲自去问他： 荀公为什么要谋反？ 
English: Gao Cheng wanted to pardon Xizhe and spare his life, so he went to ask him in person: Why did Xizhe rebel?

古文：济曰： 奉诏诛高澄，何谓反！ 
现代文：荀济回答说： 我奉皇帝的诏令去诛戮高澄，怎么叫谋反呢！ 
English: Hao Jie replied, "I went to assassinate Gao Cheng according to the emperor's edict, how can it be called plotting a rebellion?"

古文：有司以济老病，鹿车载诣东市，并焚之。
现代文：有司认为荀济年老多病，就用小车载着他来到东市，连人带车都烧了。
English: Yu Si thought that Hao Ji was old and sick, so he brought him to Dongshi with a small car, and even the people and the car were burned.

古文：澄疑咨议温子升知瑾等谋，方使之作献武王碑，既成，饿于晋阳狱，食弊襦而死。
现代文：高澄怀疑谘议温子知道元瑾等人的阴谋，他正在撰写《献武王碑》，作好之后，就把他关进了晋阳监狱，不给饭吃，饿极了，便吃自己穿的破短袄，终于死去。
English: Gao Cheng suspected that Wen Zi, the adviser, knew about the plot of Yuan Qi and others. He was writing "The Monument to the King of Wu." After he finished, he put him in Jinyang Prison. He did not give him any food. He was so hungry that he ate his own worn shorts and finally died.

古文：弃尸路隅，没其家口，太尉长史宋游道收葬之。
现代文：高澄叫人把他的尸体抛在路边，又把他的家口没收入官府为奴婢，太尉长史宋道收葬了他。
English: Gao Cheng ordered his corpse to be left on the roadside, and his family to be treated as slaves by the government. He was buried by the captain Shi Songdao.

古文：澄谓游道曰： 吾近书与京师诸贵，论及朝士，以卿僻于朋党，将为一病。今乃知卿真是重故旧、尚节义之人，天下人代卿怖者，是不知吾心也。 
现代文：高澄对宋道说： 我最近写信给京师的各位达官贵人，谈论到了一些朝廷中的人，认为你疏远朋党，将会给你带来祸灾；现在才知道你是注重老交情、崇尚气节、讲义气的人，天底下那些替你惶恐不安的人，是因为不了解我的心思啊！ 
English: Gao Cheng said to Song Dao, "I recently wrote to all the high-ranking officials and dignitaries in Beijing, and talked about some people in the imperial court who thought that if you alienated your friends and party, it would bring disaster to you. Only now do I know that you are a person who pays attention to old friendships, reveres the seasons, and teaches the spirit of righteousness. Those people under the heavens who are worried about you are because they don't understand my thoughts!

古文：九月，辛丑，澄还晋阳。
现代文：九月，辛丑，高澄回到了晋阳。
English: In September, Gao Cheng returned to Jinyang.

古文：上命萧渊明堰泗水于寒山以灌彭城，俟得彭城，乃进军与侯景掎角。
现代文：梁武帝命令萧渊明在寒山一带筑堰挡泗水淹灌彭城，等到夺取了彭城，便进军与侯景形成犄角之势而夹击故人。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered Xiao Yuanming to build a weir to block the floodwaters and flood Pengcheng in the area of the Cold Mountain. When he captured Pengcheng, he marched into the conflict with Houjing and clamped down on the deceased.

古文：癸卯，渊明军于寒山，去彭城十八里，断流立堰。
现代文：癸卯，萧渊明驻军于寒山，他在离彭城十八里远的地方修堰截流。
English: At the same time, Xiao Yuanming stationed troops in Janshan. He cut off the flow by building a weir 18 miles away from Pengcheng.

古文：侍中羊侃监作堰，再旬而成。
现代文：侍中羊侃负责监督修建堰坝，只用了二十天时间便建成。
English: The chamberlain, Yang Kan, was responsible for supervising the construction of the dam, which was completed in just twenty days.

古文：东魏徐州刺史太原王则婴城固守，侃劝渊明乘水攻彭城，不从。
现代文：东魏徐州刺史太原人王则环城固守。羊侃劝告萧渊明趁着水势攻打彭城，萧渊明没有听从。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, King Taiyuan of Xuzhou besieged and defended the city. Yang Kan advised Xiao Yuanming to take advantage of the water situation to attack Pengcheng, but Xiao Yuanming did not listen.

古文：诸将与渊明议军事，渊明不能对，但云 临时制宜 。
现代文：众将领与萧渊明一起商议军机大事，萧渊明不能做出判断回答，只是说： 到时再根据情况采取相应措施。 
English: The generals and Xiao Yuanming discussed the military machine event together. Xiao Yuanming could not make a judgment and answer, but said: At that time, according to the situation, take corresponding measures.

古文：冬，十一月，魏丞相泰从魏主狩于歧阳。
现代文：冬季，十一月，西魏丞相宇文泰跟随西魏文帝到岐阳打猎。
English: In the winter, in November, the Western Wei chancellor Yu Wentei followed the Western Wei emperor to hunt in Qiyang.

古文：东魏大将军澄使大都督高岳救彭城，欲以金门郡公潘乐为副。
现代文：东魏大将军高澄派遣大都督高岳去援救彭城，并想让金门郡公潘乐担任崐高岳的副手。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty general Gao Cheng dispatched the great governor Gao Yue to rescue Pengcheng, and wanted the Kinmen County official Pan Le to serve as Gao Yue's deputy.

古文：陈元康曰： 乐缓于机变，不如慕容绍宗；且先王之命也。
现代文：陈元康对高澄说： 潘乐反应比较迟缓，不能随机应变，不如慕容绍宗；何况让慕容绍宗去对付侯景也是先王高欢的命令。
English: Chen Yuankang said to Gao Cheng: Pan Le's reaction is relatively slow, he can't react at random, he is not as good as Murong Shaosong; moreover, it was the order of the previous king Gao Huan to let Murong Shaosong deal with Hou Jing.

古文：公但推赤心于斯人，景不足忧也。 
现代文：您只要赤诚对待慕容绍宗，侯景是不足为虑的。 
English: As long as you sincerely treat Murong Shaosong, Houjing is not enough to worry about.

古文：时绍宗在外，澄欲召见之，恐其惊叛；元康曰： 绍宗知元康特蒙顾待，新使人来饷金；元康欲安其意，受之而厚答其书，保无异也。 
现代文：当时慕容绍宗正在外地，高澄想召见他，但又怕他受惊起疑心而反叛；陈元康对高澄说： 慕容绍宗知道我陈元康特别受您的照顾和优待，最近他又派人来馈赠我黄金；我为了让他放心，便接受了这些黄金，并在给他的回信中厚谢了他，所以可以保证他不会有别的的想法。 
English: At that time, Murong Shaosong was out of town, Gao Cheng wanted to summon him, but he was afraid that he would be alarmed and suspicious and rebel; Chen Yuankang said to Gao Cheng: Murong Shaosong knows that I, Chen Yuankang, am especially cared for and favored by you, and he recently sent someone to give me gold as a gift; in order to reassure him, I accepted the gold and thanked him profusely in my reply to him, so I can guarantee that he would not have any other idea.

古文：乙酉，以绍宗为东南道行台，与岳、乐偕行。
现代文：乙酉，东魏让慕容绍宗担任了东南道行台，使他与高岳、潘乐一起去援救彭城。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Murong Shaosong served as the southeastern road platform, and he went with Gao Yue and Pan Le to rescue Pengcheng.

古文：初，景闻韩轨来，曰： 啖猪肠儿何能为！ 
现代文：当初，侯景听说韩轨要来，便说： 这个吃猪肠子的小子能干些什么！ 
English: At first, when Hou Jing heard that Han Rail was coming, he said, "What can this kid who eats pig intestines do!

古文：闻高岳来，曰： 兵精人凡。 
现代文：当侯景听说高岳要来，又说： 兵士倒是很精锐，但领兵的人很一般。 
English: When Hou Jing heard that Gao Yue was coming, he also said: The soldiers are very elite, but the person leading the soldiers is very ordinary.

古文：诸将无不为所轻者。
现代文：各位将领没有不被侯景轻视的。
English: Generals, there is no one who is not despised by Hou Jing.

古文：及闻绍宗来，叩鞍有惧色，曰： 谁教鲜卑儿解遣绍宗来！
现代文：但是，当侯景听说慕容绍宗要来时，便敲打着马鞍，脸上露出恐惧的神色，说： 谁使高澄这个鲜卑小子懂得派遣慕容绍宗来呢！
English: However, when Hou Jing heard that Murong Shaosong was coming, he beat his saddle, and with a look of fear on his face, said: "Who made Gao Cheng, this lowly young man, know how to send Murong Shaosong here!

古文：若然，高王定未死邪？ 
现代文：如果这样，高王就一定没有死去！ 
English: If so, Gao Wang must not have died!

古文：澄以廷尉卿杜弼为军司，摄行台左丞，临发，问以政事之要、可为戒者，使录一二条。
现代文：高澄任命廷尉卿杜弼为军司，代理行台左丞，临出发时，高澄询问了他一些政事要点需要警惕的，并让他写出一两条来。
English: Gao Cheng appointed the courtier Du Xuan as the military commander, acting as the acting commander of the left line. Before leaving, Gao Cheng asked him about some political points that needed to be guarded, and asked him to write down one or two.

古文：弼请口陈之，曰： 天下大务，莫过赏罚。
现代文：杜弼请求口述给高澄，他说： 天下的大事，没有比赏罚更重要的了。
English: Du Juan asked to dictate to Gao Cheng. He said, "There is nothing more important than reward and punishment.

古文：赏一人使天下之人喜，罚一人使天下之人惧，苟二事不失，自然尽美。 
现代文：奖赏一人而使天下的人都高兴，惩罚一人而使天下的人害怕，如果做到了这两点，自然就会尽善尽美了。 
English: If you can reward one person and make everyone in the world happy, and punish one person and make everyone in the world afraid, if you can achieve these two points, you will naturally be perfect.

古文：澄大悦，曰： 言虽不多，于理甚要。 
现代文：高澄听后非常高兴，说： 话虽然说得不多，道理却很重要。 
English: After listening, Gao Cheng was very happy and said, "Although I don't talk much, the truth is very important.

古文：绍宗帅众十万据橐驼岘。
现代文：慕容绍宗率领十万人马占据了橐驼岘。
English: Murong Shaosong led a hundred thousand people to occupy the camel.

古文：羊侃劝贞阳侯渊明乘其远来击之，不从，旦日，又劝出战，亦不从；侃乃帅所领出屯堰上。
现代文：羊侃劝贞阳侯萧渊明趁着慕容绍宗远道而来，人困马乏之时去攻打他，萧渊明没有听从羊侃的劝告。
English: Yang Kan advised Zhengyang marquis Xiao Yuanming to take advantage of Murong Shaosong's long journey and attack him when he was in need. Xiao Yuanming did not listen to Yang Kan's advice.

古文：丙午，绍宗至城下，引步骑万人攻潼州刺史郭凤营，矢下如雨。
现代文：第二天，羊侃又规劝萧渊明出战，萧渊明还是没有听从他的话；于是羊侃率领他的部下离开了萧渊明驻扎到了新修好的堰坝上。
English: The next day, Yang Kan again urged Xiao Yuanming to go to war, but Xiao Yuanming still did not listen to him. Therefore, Yang Kan led his men to leave Xiao Yuanming and stationed them on the newly repaired dam.

古文：渊明醉，不能起，命诸将救之，皆不敢出。
现代文：丙午，慕容绍宗的军队来到城下，他带领一万多名步兵和骑兵攻打潼州刺史郭凤的军营，箭象雨点一样纷纷射来。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the army of Murong Shaosong came to the city. He led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to attack the military camp of Guo Feng, the governor of Zhangzhou. Arrows were shot like raindrops.

古文：北兗州刺史胡贵孙谓谯州刺史赵伯超曰： 吾属将兵而来，本欲何为，今遇敌而不战乎？ 
现代文：萧渊明饮酒醉了，不能起床，他命令将领们去援救郭凤，但没有人敢出战。北兖州刺史胡贵孙对谯州刺史赵伯超说： 我们这些人带兵来这里，是来做什么的，现在遇到了敌人，难道不去应战吗？ 
English: Xiao Yuanming was drunk and couldn't get up. He ordered his generals to go and rescue Guo Feng, but no one dared to go to war. Hu Guisun, the governor of Beizhou, said to Zhao Bochao, the governor of Zhangzhou, "We are the ones who brought soldiers here. What did we come for? Now that we have met the enemy, shouldn't we go and fight?"

古文：伯超不能对。
现代文：赵伯超无以对答。
English: Zhao Bochao had no answer.

古文：贵孙独帅麾下与东魏战，斩首二百级。
现代文：胡贵孙便独自率领自己的军队与东魏的军队作战，斩了二百名东魏人。
English: Hu Guisun alone led his army to fight against the Eastern Wei army and killed two hundred Eastern Wei people.

古文：伯超拥众数千不敢救，谓其下曰： 虏盛如此，与战必败，不如全军早归，可以免罪。 
现代文：赵伯超拥有几千人马却不敢前去救援，对自己的部下说： 敌军如此强盛，与他们交战一定会失败，倒不如保全军队早日回去。 他的手下人都说： 好！ 
English: Zhao Bochao owned several thousand horses, but he did not dare to go to the rescue, saying to his subordinates, "The enemy army is so powerful, fighting with them will surely fail, it would be better to keep the army back as soon as possible."

古文：皆曰： 善！ 
现代文：于是，赵伯超便逃回去了。
English: His subordinates all nodded and said, "That's a good idea."

古文：遂遁还。初，侯景常戒梁人曰： 逐北勿过二里。 
现代文：当初，侯景常常告诫梁朝人说： 追杀溃退的军队不要超过二里地。 
English: At the beginning, Hou Jing often admonished the Liang Dynasty people: Do not chase and kill the retreating army for more than two miles.

古文：绍宗将战，以梁人轻悍，恐其众不能支，一一引将卒谓之曰： 我当阳退，误吴儿使前，尔击其背。 
现代文：慕容绍宗将要出战，他认为梁朝士兵轻巧灵活，且又很勇敢，害怕自己的军队打不过他们，便一一召见手下的将士们，对他们说： 我假装败退，引诱吴儿向前追，你们从背后攻打他们。 
English: Murong Shaosong was about to go to war. He thought the Liang soldiers were light, nimble, and very brave. Afraid that his own army could not beat them, he summoned his soldiers one by one and said to them, "I will pretend to retreat, lure Wu Er to chase ahead, and you attack them from behind."

古文：东魏兵实败走，梁人不用景言，乘胜深入。
现代文：交战中，东魏的军队果真败退逃跑，但梁朝军队没有听从侯景的话，乘胜而深入追击。
English: During the battle, the Eastern Wei army was defeated and fled, but the Liang Dynasty army did not listen to Hou Jing's words and took advantage of the victory to pursue deeply.

古文：魏将卒以绍宗之言为信，争共掩击之，梁兵大败，贞阳侯渊明及胡贵孙、赵伯超等皆为东魏所虏，失亡士卒数万人。
现代文：东魏的将士都听信了慕容绍宗的话，争相从背后对梁朝军队发起突然攻击，梁朝军队大败，贞阳侯萧渊明以及胡贵孙、赵伯超等人都被东魏俘虏，伤亡失散的士兵有几万之多。
English: The generals of the Eastern Wei Dynasty all listened to Murong Shaosong's words and scrambled to launch a sudden attack on the Liang Dynasty army from behind. The Liang Dynasty army was defeated, and Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming, Hu Guisun, Zhao Bochao and others were all captured by the Eastern Wei Dynasty. There were tens of thousands of casualties and lost soldiers.

古文：羊侃结陈徐还。
现代文：羊侃摆开了阵势，缓缓撤退而返。
English: Yang Kan took up a position and slowly retreated.

古文：上方昼寝，宦者张僧胤白硃异启事，上骇之，遽起升舆，至文德殿阁。
现代文：梁武帝正在睡午觉，宦官张僧胤禀告说朱异要启奏事情，梁武帝不禁惊恐万分，他马上起床，坐上轿子，来到了文德殿的殿堂上。
English: Emperor Liangwu was taking an afternoon nap when eunuch Zhang Soyin told him that Zhu Yixing wanted to open the matter. Emperor Liangwu couldn't help but be terrified. He immediately got up, sat on a palanquin, and came to the main hall of the Winter Palace.

古文：异曰： 寒山失律。 
现代文：朱异启奏说： 韩山战事失利。 
English: Zhu Yixing said, "Hanshan lost the war.

古文：上闻之，恍然将坠床。僧胤扶而就坐，乃叹曰： 吾得无复为晋家乎！ 
现代文：梁武帝听了之后，吓得恍恍忽忽，要从坐床上倒下去，张僧胤忙把他扶着坐下，于是梁武帝感叹道： 我难道也要落到江山被夷狄所夺取的晋朝那样的下场吗？ 
English: After hearing this, Emperor Liangwu was so scared that he was about to fall off his bed. Zhang Soyin helped him to sit down, and Emperor Liangwu lamented: "Do I have to end up like the Jin Dynasty, which was conquered by the barbarians?

古文：郭凤退保潼州，慕容绍宗进围之。
现代文：郭凤退守潼州，慕容绍宗进兵包围了他。
English: Guo Feng retreated to Bozhou, and Murong Shaosong's soldiers surrounded him.

古文：十二月，甲子朔，凤弃城走。
现代文：十二月，甲子朔，郭凤弃城而逃。
English: In December, at the turn of the year, Guo Feng fled the city.

古文：东魏使军司杜弼作檄移梁朝曰： 皇家垂统，光配彼天，唯彼吴、越，独阻声教。
现代文：东魏让军司杜弼撰写檄文送给梁朝，檄文写道： 皇家一统天下，光辉配于上苍，唯独你们吴、越地区尚违命顽抗，未从圣教。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty had the military commander Du Xuan write an imperial edict and send it to the Liang Dynasty. The imperial edict wrote: The royal family rules the world, and its glory is worthy of heaven. However, your Wu and Yue regions still defy orders and do not follow the holy religion.

古文：元首怀止戈之心，上宰薄兵车之命，遂解絷南冠，喻以好睦。
现代文：我们的圣上有心停止兵戈，大丞相也已很少下达出征命令，于是我们对南方俘虏一律放还，以表明我朝欲与你们和睦相处的态度。
English: Our Emperor has the will to stop the war, and the Prime Minister has rarely issued an order to go to war, so we have released all the prisoners in the south to show our attitude of wanting to live in harmony with you.

古文：虽嘉谋长算，爰自我始，罢战息民，彼获其利。
现代文：虽然这样的好主意，是我们首先想到的，但是休战养民，你们实获其利。
English: Although such a good idea was the first thing we thought of, you have actually benefited from the truce to feed the people.

古文：侯景竖子，自生猜贰，远托关、陇，依凭奸伪，逆主定君臣之分，伪相结兄弟之亲，岂曰无恩，终成难养，俄而易虑，亲寻干戈。
现代文：侯景这小子自己胡乱猜疑，起了异心，托身于远方的关、陇地区，依靠奸伪之朝，关中的叛逆首领与他确定君臣名分，伪丞相宇文泰同他结为兄弟，怎么能说他们没有给他恩惠，但是侯景终于还是成了叛逆小人，很快又另有所谋，亲手挑起战端。
English: Hou Jing, a young man with his own wild suspicions and alien mind, hid himself in the distant areas of Guan and Handan, relying on the treacherous and false morning. The rebellious leaders in Guan determined the position of the monarch and the vassal with him, and the pseudo-chancellor Uwentai became a brother with him. How can it be said that they did not give him favors, but Hou Jing finally became a rebellious villain, and soon he had another plan, and he himself provoked the war.

古文：衅暴恶盈，侧首无托，以金陵逋逃之薮，江南流寓之地，甘辞卑礼，进孰图身，诡言浮说，抑可知矣。
现代文：这个人罪过显露，恶贯满盈，无所依托，又把金陵作为逃亡之处，将江南作为寄身之地，以甜言蜜语和谦卑的礼节，想在梁朝找到立身之地，他的那些虚假浮夸的话语，其用意是不难知道的。
English: This man's sins are exposed, his evil is rampant, and he has nothing to rely on. He also regards Jinling as a place to flee, and the south of the Yangtze River as a place to stay. With sweet words and humble etiquette, he wants to find a place to stand in the Liang Dynasty. It is not difficult to know the intention of his false and pompous words.

古文：而伪朝大小，幸灾忘义，主荒于上，臣蔽于下，连结奸恶，断绝邻好，征兵保境，纵盗侵国。
现代文：而伪朝的大小官员们都幸灾乐祸，忘却大义，主子在上面荒淫元道，臣子在下面隐瞒真相，勾结奸恶之徒，断绝邻好之交，征兵保境，纵盗侵国。
English: But the big and small officials of the pseudo-Dynasty all gloated over the misfortune and forgot about the great justice. The masters above debauched the original way, and the courtiers below concealed the truth, colluded with evil-doers, broke off friendly relations with neighbors, conscripted soldiers to protect the border, and plundered and invaded the country.

古文：盖物无定方，事无定势，或乘利而受害，或因得而更失。
现代文：物无定向，事无定势，有的国君为了追逐利益而受害，有的国君则因贪小利而酿成大的损失。
English: Things have no direction, things have no fixed situation, some sovereigns suffer in order to pursue profits, and some sovereigns incur large losses due to greed for small profits.

古文：是以吴侵齐境，遂得句践之师，赵纳韩地，终有长平之役。
现代文：所崐以吴国侵略齐国，结果越王勾践率军乘虚而入，灭掉吴国；赵国接受韩国的土地，终于导致了长平之战，使赵国衰微。
English: The plan was for the State of Wu to invade the State of Qi. As a result, the army led by King Gojun of Yue took advantage of the situation to invade and annihilate the State of Wu. The State of Zhao accepted land from Korea, which finally led to the War of Changping and caused the decline of the State of Zhao.

古文：矧乃鞭挞疲民，侵轶徐部，筑垒拥川，舍舟徼利。
现代文：况且你们驱使疲惫之民，侵略我国徐州，修筑堡垒，拦截河流，阻断水运而追求一时的利益，能不遭到惨败的下场吗？
English: Moreover, can you drive the tired people to invade our Xuzhou, build fortresses, intercept rivers, block water transportation and pursue temporary interests without being defeated?

古文：是以援枹秉麾之将，拔距投石之士，含怒作色，如赴私仇。
现代文：所以，那些击鼓挥旗的将领，那些勇力无比的士卒，出征时都面带怒容，好象要去报自己的私仇一样。
English: So the drum-beating, flag-waving generals, the brave-hearted soldiers, go off to war with angry faces, as if to avenge themselves.

古文：彼连营拥众，依山傍水，举螳蜋之斧，被蛣蜣之甲，当穷辙以待轮，坐积薪而候燎。
现代文：你们营垒一个紧挨一个，兵马众多，依山傍水，地势优越，举着螳螂前臂一样的斧头，披着蜣螂虫一样的甲衣，立在车辙上面等待车轮压来，坐在柴禾堆上等候大火燃烧。
English: You camped one next to the other, a large number of soldiers and horses, along the mountains and water, superior terrain, holding an axe like a cockroach's forearm, wearing a roach-like robe, standing on the ruts waiting for the wheels to come, sitting on the pile of firewood waiting for the fire to burn.

古文：及锋刃暂交，埃尘且接，已亡戟弃戈，土崩瓦解，掬指舟中，衿甲鼓下，同宗异姓，缧绁相望。
现代文：等到两军刚刚互相接触，战尘已经连成一片，便纷纷丢戟弃戈，土崩瓦解，抢着上船而逃时被砍下落在舱里的手指多得可以掬起来，官兵们一个个听命受绑，不管是同宗还是异姓的人，都被囚禁起来，只能默默对视。
English: When the two armies had just come into contact with each other, and the dust of war had already become one, they abandoned Go one after another and fell apart. There were so many fingers that were cut off and fell into the cabin when they tried to board the ship and escape that they could be tied up. The officers and soldiers were bound one by one according to their orders. Whether they were from the same clan or had different surnames, they were all imprisoned and could only stare at each other in silence.

古文：曲直既殊，强弱不等，获一人而失一国，见黄雀而忘深穽，智者所不为，仁者所不向。
现代文：是非分明，强弱不等，为了得到一个人而失去一个国家，只见黄雀却忘掉下面有深深的陷井，这种事情是智者不做，仁者不为的。
English: Whether it is clear or not, whether it is strong or weak, whether it is losing a country in order to gain a person, whether it is forgetting that there is a deep trap below, these are things that the wise do not do and the benevolent do not do.

古文：诚既往之难逮，犹将来之可追。
现代文：诚然，已经过去的事情便无法挽回了，但将来之事则是可以防止的。
English: It is true that what is past cannot be undone, but what is future can be prevented.

古文：侯景以鄙俚之夫，遭风云之会，位班三事，邑启万家，揣身量分，久当止足。
现代文：侯景本是一个出身低贱的乡野之夫，刚好赶上风云变幻之际，因此借机而位列三卿，食邑万户，他要是能拈量清自己的身份，便早就应该满足了。
English: Hou Jing was originally a low-born countryman, just in time for the changing of the wind and clouds, so he took the opportunity to rank among the three nobles, the food of all households. If he could measure his own identity, he should have been satisfied.

古文：而周章向背，离披不已，夫岂徒然，意亦可见。
现代文：但是他自始至终反复无常，朝秦暮楚，散乱无章，没完没了。他这么做岂能无所用心，其用意是很容易看出来的。
English: But he is capricious from beginning to end, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic, chaotic.

古文：彼乃授之以利器，诲之以慢藏，使其势得容奸，时堪乘便。
现代文：但是你们还授予他兵权，引诱他去干坏事，使他得势而能够行使奸计，乘机实现自己的野心。
English: But you have also given him authority to wage war, you have enticed him to do evil, you have strengthened his hand so that he is able to plot and scheme to achieve his ambition.

古文：今见南风不竞，天亡有征，老贼奸谋，将复作矣。
现代文：现在他看到南方势力衰微，这是天将要灭梁朝的征兆，侯景这老贼恐怕又要实施他的阴谋了。
English: Now he sees that the forces of the south are waning. This is a sign that the heavens are about to destroy the Liang Dynasty. I'm afraid that this old thief, Hou Jing, is going to carry out his plot again.

古文：然推坚强者难为功，摧枯朽者易为力。
现代文：然而想要推倒坚强之物的难以成功，而摧折枯朽之物的则容易达到目的。
English: However, it is difficult to succeed in overthrowing a strong thing, but it is easy to achieve the goal by destroying a withered thing.

古文：计其虽非孙、吴猛将，燕、赵精兵，犹是久涉行陈，曾习军旅，岂同剽轻之师，不比危脆之众。
现代文：侯景虽然算不上是孙武、吴起那样的猛将，他率领的也不是燕国、赵国的精兵，可是毕竟久经战阵，熟于军事，既非脆弱之师，又非无力之众。
English: Although Hou Jing was not a fierce general like Sun Wu and Wu Qi, and he did not lead the elite soldiers of Yan Guo and Zhao Guo, after all, he had been in battle for a long time and was familiar with military affairs. He was neither a weak division nor a weak crowd.

古文：拒此则作气不足，攻彼则为势有馀，终恐尾大于身，踵粗于股，倔强不掉，狼戾难驯。呼之则反速而衅小，不征则叛迟而祸大。
现代文：他如果要与我朝相抗则气势不足，但是攻打你们则力量有余，最终恐怕会尾大于身，脚跟粗过大腿，倔强而不肯转身，狠戾而难以驯服，如果召他回朝，削掉兵权的话，他会立即反叛，但是只能引起小的事端；如果不召回的话，虽然他可能反叛得迟一些，但是会酿出更大的祸患。
English: If he were to oppose me, he would not have enough strength, but if he were to attack you, he would have more than enough strength. In the end, I am afraid that his tail would be bigger than his body, his heels would be thicker than his thighs, he would be stubborn and would not turn around, and he would be fierce and difficult to tame. If he were to be recalled to the North and his military powers were to be curtailed, he would immediately rebel, but this would only lead to minor incidents. If he were not recalled, although he might rebel later, it would lead to greater disasters.

古文：会应遥望廷尉，不肯为臣，自据淮南，亦欲称帝。
现代文：他一定会象苏峻那样不会听任廷尉捕治而束手待毙，最终不肯为臣，也一定会象黥布占据淮南那样，也想自己称帝。
English: He will certainly, like Su Jun, not allow himself to be captured and killed by a courtier, and will eventually refuse to be a vassal. He will also want to claim himself as an emperor, like Zibo occupied Huainan.

古文：但恐楚国亡猨，祸延林木，城门失火，殃及池鱼。横使江、淮士子，荆、扬人物，死亡矢石之下，夭折雾露之中。
现代文：只恐怕会有楚国亡猿，祸延林木；城门失火，殃及池鱼那样的灾祸发生，使江淮士子、荆扬人物，横死于乱箭飞石之下，丧身于迷雾湿露之中。
English: However, I am afraid that there will be an ape killed in Chu, and the disaster will spread to the forest trees; the city gate will be set on fire, and a disaster similar to that of the pond fish will occur, causing the Jianghuai scholar and the Jingyang person to die under the flying stones of the arrows, and lose their lives in the misty wet dew.

古文：彼梁主，操行无闻，轻险有素，射雀论功，荡舟称力，年既老矣，耄又及之，政散民流，礼崩乐坏。
现代文：你们梁朝的君主，没有什么操行，却一向轻薄阴险，把射雀鸟计算功劳，摇小船称为勇力，专在小事上斤斤计较。他年纪已经老了，头脑也糊涂了，搞得政务散乱，民众流失，礼崩乐坏。
English: Your emperor of the Liang Dynasty, who has no manners, but has always been frivolous and insidious, counts shooting birds as a merit, calls rocking a small boat as courage, and specializes in petty squabbles. He is old, and his mind is confused. He has made government affairs chaotic, people have been lost, and etiquette has fallen into disrepute.

古文：加以用舍乖方，废立失所，矫情动俗，饰智惊愚，毒螫满怀，妄敦戒业，躁竞盈胸，谬治清净。
现代文：加上他任免官员背离原则，废立太子失去顺序，违背常情以煽动俗人，弄巧设诈以惊服愚人，蛇蝎之毒满怀，却假奉佛祖，争权之心盈胸，却诳称清净。
English: In addition, his appointment and removal of officials deviated from the principle, the abolition of the prince lost order, incited the laity in violation of common sense, and tricked the fools with clever tricks. He was full of poisonous snakes and scorpions, but pretended to be a Buddha, and his heart was full of competition for power, but he pretended to be pure.

古文：灾异降于上，怨讟兴于下，人人厌苦，家家思乱，履霜有渐，坚冰且至。
现代文：上天降下灾异以示警告，百姓怨谤于下，人人厌苦，家家思乱，冰冻三尺，非一日之寒，这也不是一朝一夕的事了。
English: The heavens rain down plagues to warn, the people complain, everyone is fed up, families are confused, and it's freezing cold. It's not a one-day cold, and it's not an overnight thing.

古文：传险躁之风俗，任轻薄之子孙。朋党路开，兵权在外。
现代文：他还倡导邪异的风俗，任用言行轻薄的子孙，朋党大兴，兵权在外。
English: He also advocated perverse customs, appointed sons and daughters with frivolous words and deeds, promoted cronyism, and ruled out military power.

古文：必将祸生骨肉，衅起腹心，强弩冲城，长戈指阙；徒探雀鷇，无救府藏之虚，空请熊蹯，讵延晷刻之命。
现代文：这样必然导致亲骨肉之间酿出灾祸，心腹人中间制造出事端，强弩射向都城，长戈指向宫殿；到时候就是如赵武灵王那样去捉雏鸟来吃也是白搭，无法补救脏腑的空虚；就是象楚成王那样请求吃了熊掌再死也是无济于事，又怎么能使生命延长片刻。
English: This will inevitably lead to disaster between relatives and relatives, and create an incident between confidants. The strong beak shoots to the capital, and the long sword points to the palace. At that time, it is useless to catch the chicks and eat them like King Zhao Wuling, and it can not remedy the emptiness of the bowels. It is useless to ask to eat the bear's paw and die again like King Chu Cheng, and how can life be extended for a while.

古文：外崩中溃，今实其时。鹬蚌相持，我乘其弊。
现代文：你们朝廷外部分崩离析，里面溃败不堪的时候已经来临，你们内部正在鹬蚌相争，我们乘机而得利。
English: The time has come for the outer part of your court to fall apart, and for your inner part to suffer a crushing defeat. You are fighting amongst yourselves, and we are taking advantage of the opportunity.

古文：方使骏骑追风，精甲辉日，四七并列，百万为群，以转石之形，为破竹之势。
现代文：这将使我们骏马追风，精甲耀日，几十员大将列阵，百万名大军云集，以高山滚石之形呈破竹之势。
English: This will allow us to chase the wind on horseback, shining armor, dozens of generals lined up, a million troops gathered, with the shape of a high mountain rolling stone.

古文：当使钟山渡江，青盖入洛，荆棘生于建业之宫，糜鹿游于姑苏之馆。
现代文：要使锺山移到江北，銮仪进入洛阳，建业城的宫殿里长满荆棘，姑苏城的馆舍中有麋鹿漫游。
English: It is necessary to move Lushan to the north of the river, Puyi into Luoyang, the palace of Jianye City is full of thorns, and there are moose roaming in the buildings of Gusu City.

古文：但恐革车之所轥轹，剑骑之所蹂践，杞梓于焉倾折，竹箭以此摧残。
现代文：只担心战车所到之处碾压一切，铁骑跃过之处蹂践群物，以致杞梓倾折，竹箭摧残。
English: They only worry that the chariot will crush everything wherever it goes, and the iron horse will trample the herd wherever it leaps, so that the dragonfly will be crushed and the bamboo arrow will be destroyed.

古文：若吴之王孙，蜀之公子，归款军门，委命下吏，当即授客卿之秩，特加骠骑之号。
现代文：如果你们能象左思《三都赋》中的东吴王孙和西蜀公子那样，前来我们的军门投诚，听命于我们的下级官吏，我们就会象秦国任用从楚国而来的李斯为客卿以及晋朝加封从吴国而来的孙秀为骠骑将军那样，立即授与你们高官厚禄。
English: If you can, like the Eastern Wu King Sun and the Western Shu Prince in Zuo Si's "Three Kingdoms," come to our military gate to show your sincerity and obey the orders of our lower-level officials, we will immediately award you high-ranking officials, just as the Qin Dynasty appointed Li Si from the State of Chu as the guest lord and the Jin Dynasty appointed Sun Xiu from the State of Wu as the cavalry general.

古文：凡百君子，勉求多福。 
现代文：各位君子，希望你们认真思量，自求多福。 
English: Gentlemen, I hope you will think seriously and seek your own good fortune.

古文：其后梁室祸败，皆如弼言。
现代文：其后，梁室祸败，情况正如杜弼所说的那样。
English: After that, Liangshu disaster, the situation is just as Cuckoo said.

古文：侯景围谯城，不下。退攻城父，拔之。
现代文：侯景围攻谯城，不能攻克，便退攻城父，打下了该城。
English: Houjing besieged the city of Zou, but could not conquer it, so he retreated to attack the city father and defeated the city.

古文：壬申，遣其行台左丞王伟等诣建康说上曰： 鄴中文武合谋，召臣共讨高澄。事泄，澄幽元善见于金墉，杀诸元六十馀人。
现代文：壬申，侯景派遣他的行台左丞王伟等人到建康游说梁武帝： 邺城中的文武百官们一崐起谋划，召我与他们一起讨伐高澄，事情泄露了，高澄把元善见囚禁在金墉，杀死了六十多个元氏家族的人。
English: Jinshin, Hou Jing sent Wang Wei and others to Jiankang to lobby Emperor Liang Wu: The hundreds of civil and military officials in the city of Jiankang immediately made plans and called me to fight Gao Cheng together with them. The matter leaked out. Gao Cheng imprisoned Yuan Shanshan in Jinyuan and killed more than sixty members of the Yuan family.

古文：河北物情，俱念其主，请立元氏一人以从人望，如此，则陛下有继绝之名，臣景有立功之效。河之南北，为圣朝之邾、莒；国之男女，为大梁之臣妾。 
现代文：河北的民心所向，都思念他们的主人，请求立元氏一人为主，以便顺应百姓的愿望，这样一来，则陛下有兴亡继绝之美名，我侯景也有立功建勋的成就，黄河的南边和北边，便成为圣朝附属国，那里的男男女女，都成为大梁的臣妾。 
English: The hearts of the people in Hebei all yearn for their masters, and request that the Yuan Dynasty be established as the sole ruler in order to comply with the wishes of the people. In this way, His Majesty has the reputation of successively rising and falling, and I, Houjing, have the achievement of making meritorious contributions. The south side and the north side of the Yellow River have become the subordinate countries of the Holy Dynasty, and the men and women there have become the vassals and concubines of Daliang.

古文：上以为然，乙亥，下诏以太子舍人元贞为咸阳王，资以兵力，使还北主魏，须渡江，许即位，仪卫以乘舆之副给之。
现代文：梁武帝认为侯景讲的是对的，乙亥，颁布诏书封立太子舍人元贞为咸阳王，并给他军队，让他回到北方入主魏国，等到元贞渡过了长江，梁武帝就允许他登上王位，按仅次于皇帝的规格配给他仪仗和卫士。
English: Emperor Liangwu thought that what Houjing said was right, and issued an edict to enthrone the crown prince, Yuan Zhen, as the King of Xianyang, and gave him an army to return to the north to enter Wei. When Yuan Zhen crossed the Yangtze River, Emperor Liangwu allowed him to ascend the throne and assigned him ceremonial soldiers and guards according to the specifications second only to the emperor.

古文：贞，树之子也。
现代文：元贞是元树的儿子。
English: Motosada is the son of Motoki.

古文：萧渊明至鄴，东魏主升阊阖门受俘，让而释之，送于晋阳，大将军澄待之甚厚。
现代文：萧渊明被押送到了邺城，东魏孝静帝登上了阊阖门接收战俘，责备之后就给他松绑，然后送到了晋阳，大将军高澄非常厚待萧渊明。
English: Xiao Yuanming was escorted to Shicheng. The Eastern Wei Emperor Xiao Jing boarded the Shimen Gate to receive prisoners of war. After reprimanding him, he released him and then sent him to Jinyang. General Gao Cheng was very kind to Xiao Yuanming.

古文：慕容绍宗引军击侯景，景辎重数千两，马数千匹，士卒四万人，退保涡阳。
现代文：慕容绍宗带领军队攻打侯景，侯景带着几千辆辎重，几千匹马，四万名兵卒，退守涡汤。
English: Murong Shaosong led the army to attack Houjing. Houjing retreated with several thousand carts, several thousand horses, and forty thousand soldiers.

古文：绍宗士卒十万，旗甲耀日，鸣鼓长驱而进。
现代文：慕容绍宗统帅十万士兵，旌旗、铠甲在阳光下闪闪发光，敲着战鼓长驱直进。
English: Murong Shaosong, the commander of 100,000 soldiers, with banners and armor glittering in the sun, drove straight ahead while beating the war drum.

古文：景使谓之曰： 公等为欲送客，为欲定雌雄邪？ 
现代文：侯景派人对慕容绍宗说： 你们这是想送客人，还是想决一雌雄？ 
English: Hou Jing sent people to Murong Shaosong to say: Do you want to send guests, or do you want to decide a male and female?

古文：绍宗曰： 欲与公决胜负。 
现代文：慕容绍宗回答说： 想和你决一胜负。 
English: Murong Shaosong replied, "I want to fight you to a finish.

古文：遂顺风布陈。景闭垒，俟风止乃出。
现代文：于是，他顺着风势摆了阵势，侯景关闭了营垒，等风停了才出来。
English: As a result, he followed the wind and set up a position. Houjing closed the camp and waited for the wind to die down before coming out.

古文：绍宗曰： 侯景多诡计，好乘人背。 
现代文：慕容绍宗说： 侯景诡计多端，喜欢从人的背后进攻。 
English: Murong Shaosong said: "Houjing is very cunning and likes to attack from behind.

古文：使备之，果如其言。
现代文：他派人加强防备，结果确如他所说的那样。
English: He warned people to be on their guard, and he was proved right.

古文：景命战士皆被短甲，执短刀，入东魏陈，但低视，斫人胫马足。
现代文：侯景命令战士们身披短小的铠甲，手持短刀，从背后进入了东魏军队的阵营，只是低头而视，瞧准东魏士兵的小腿和马腿砍去。
English: Hou Jing ordered the soldiers to enter the camp of the East Wei army from behind, wearing short armor and holding short knives. He just looked down and saw the East Wei soldiers' lower legs and horse legs cut off.

古文：东魏兵遂败，绍宗坠马，仪同三司刘丰生被伤，显州刺史张遵业为景所擒。
现代文：东魏的军队于是溃败了。慕容绍宗从马上坠下来，仪同三司刘丰生被砍伤，显州刺史张遵业被侯景擒获。
English: The Eastern Wei army was then routed. Murong Shaosong fell from his horse, Liu Fengsheng of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division was slashed, and Zhang Zunye of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：绍宗、丰生俱奔谯城，裨将斛律光、张恃显尤之，绍宗曰： 吾战多矣，未见如景之难克者也。
现代文：慕容绍宗、刘丰生一起逃往谯城。裨将斛律光、张恃显责怪他们，慕容绍宗说： 我身经多次战斗，没有见到象侯景这样难以对付的敌手。
English: Murong Shaosong and Liu Fengsheng fled to Lucheng together. The generals Bao Riguang and Zhang Yuxian blamed them. Murong Shaosong said, "I have been through many battles, but I have never seen an enemy as difficult to deal with as Houjing.

古文：君辈试犯之！ 
现代文：你们试着去斗他一斗吧！ 
English: You try to fight him!

古文：光等被甲将出，绍宗戒之曰： 勿渡涡水。 
现代文：斛律光等人披上铠甲要去出战，慕容绍宗告诫他们说： 不要渡过涡水。 
English: Baoliguang and others put on armor to go to war. Murong Shaosong warned them: Don't cross the whirlpool.

古文：二人军于水北，光轻骑射之。景临涡水谓光曰： 尔求勋而来，我惧死而去。
现代文：斛律光与张恃显两个人把军队驻扎在涡水北面，斛律光乘轻骑用弓箭射侯景，侯景在涡水边对斛律光说： 你为求取功勋而来，我因害怕死而离去。
English: Two men, Peliguang and Zhang Yuxian, stationed their army on the north side of the whirlpool. Peliguang rode a light horse and shot Houjing with a bow and arrow. Houjing said to Peliguang on the edge of the whirlpool: You came to seek merit, I left for fear of death.

古文：我，汝之父友，何为射我？
现代文：我是你父亲的朋友，你为什么用箭射我？
English: I am your father's friend. Why are you shooting arrows at me?

古文：汝岂自解不渡水南？慕容绍宗教汝也！ 
现代文：你哪里能懂得不可渡涡水到南面来的道理，一定是慕容绍宗教你的。 
English: Where you can understand the principle of the impassable whirlpool to the south, it must be your Murongsha religion.

古文：光无以应。
现代文：斛律光无言以对。
English: Gao Liguang was speechless.

古文：景使其徒田迁射光马，洞胸；光易马隐树，又中之，退入于军。
现代文：侯景让他的手下人田迁用箭射斛律光的马，箭穿透了马的胸膛。斛律光又换了匹马躲在树后。田迁的箭又射中了他的马，斛律光便退回了军营。
English: Hou Jing had his men, the Tianqian, shoot an arrow at the horse of the Zhaoliguang, and the arrow penetrated the horse's chest. The Zhaoluguang changed horses and hid behind a tree. The Tianqian's arrow hit his horse again, and the Zhaoluguang returned to the military camp.

古文：景擒恃显，既而舍之。
现代文：侯景捉住了张恃显，很快又放了他。
English: Houjing caught Zhang Yuxian and soon released him.

古文：光走入谯城，绍宗曰： 今定何如，而尤我也！ 
现代文：斛律光跑到了谯城，慕容绍宗说： 今天你们交兵究竟如何？你还责怪我！ 
English: Baoliguang ran to Lucheng, Murong Shaosong said: How is your battle today? You still blame me!

古文：光，金之子也。
现代文：斛律光是斛律金的儿子。
English: Pelican Light is the son of Pelican Gold.

古文：开府仪同三司段韶夹涡而军，潜于上风纵火，景帅骑入水，出而却走，草湿，火不复然。
现代文：开府仪同三司段韶驻军于涡水两岸偷偷地顺风纵火，侯景率领骑兵进入水中，从水中出来向后撤退，草被打湿以后，火便不再燃烧。
English: Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of the eunuch garrison secretly set fire to the wind on both sides of the whirlpool. Hou Jing led the cavalry into the water, came out of the water and retreated backwards. After the grass was wet, the fire would no longer burn.

古文：魏岐州久经丧乱，刺史郑穆初到，有户三千，穆抚循安集，数年之间，至四万馀户，考绩为诸州之最；丞相泰擢穆为京兆尹。
现代文：西魏岐州长期经受战乱，刺史郑穆初到任时，只有三千户人家，郑穆安抚百姓，让他们休养生息，并让他们聚集而居，几年之间，岐州便有了四万多户人家，朝廷考绩时在所有州刺史中他的政绩最好；丞相宇文泰提拔郑穆为京兆尹。
English: During the Western Wei Dynasty, Qizhou suffered from war for a long time. When the statesman Zheng Mu first took office, there were only three thousand households. Zheng Mu appeased the people, let them rest and recuperate, and let them gather and live. Within a few years, Qizhou had more than forty thousand households. When the imperial court evaluated his performance, his political performance was the best in the history of all states. The prime minister, Yu Wentai, promoted Zheng Mu to the Jingzha Yin.

古文：侯景与东魏慕容绍宗相持数月，景食尽，司马世云降于绍宗。
现代文：侯景与东魏的慕容绍宗相持了几个月，侯景的粮食吃完了，司马世云投降了慕容绍宗。
English: Houjing held out against Murong Shaosong of the Eastern Wei Dynasty for several months. When Houjing ran out of grain, Sima Shiyun surrendered to Murong Shaosong.

