古文：丁丑正月十一日是日立春，天色开霁。
现代文：丁丑年正月十一日这一天是立春，天气晴朗。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the Dingwuxian year, it was the first day of spring and the weather was fine.

古文：亟饭，托静闻随行李从舟顺流至衡州，期十七日会于衡之草桥塔下，命顾仆以轻装从陆探茶陵、攸县之山。
现代文：赶紧吃了饭，委托静闻随同行李一起坐船顺流到衡州，预约本月十七日在衡州草桥塔下相会，叫顾仆携带着轻装跟随我从陆路探游茶陵州和枚县的山。
English: After a quick meal, I asked Jingwen to take a boat with his colleague Li to go down the river to Hengzhou. We made an appointment to meet under the Hengzhou grass bridge tower on the 17th of this month. I asked Gu to take me with light luggage to explore the mountains of Chaling Prefecture and Mii County by land.

古文：及出门，雨霏霏下。
现代文：等走出门，满天细雨霏霏。
English: When I walked out the door, it was drizzling.

古文：渡溪南涯，随流西行。
现代文：渡过溪流到南岸，顺流往西行。
English: Cross the stream to the south bank and follow the stream to the west.

古文：已而溪折西北，逾一冈，共三里，复与溪遇，是为高陇。
现代文：随后溪折往西北，我们越过一座山冈，共走三里，又与溪流相遇，这地方是高陇。
English: Then the stream turned to the northwest, we crossed a mountain, walked a total of three miles, and met the stream again, this place is sorghum.

古文：于是仍逾溪北，再越两冈，共五里，至盘龙庵。
现代文：从高陇仍旧渡过溪流到了北面，再越过两座山冈，共走五里，到盘龙庵。
English: From Kaohsiung, we still had to cross the stream to the north, and then cross two mountains, a total of five miles, to Panlongan.

古文：有小溪北自龙头山来，越溪西去，是为巫江，乃茶陵大道；随山顺流转南去，是为小江口，乃云嵝山道。
现代文：有条小溪从北面的龙头山流来，渡过溪流往西去，这是巫江，是到茶陵州城的大路；依山顺流转往南去，为小江口，这是到云峻山的路。
English: A small stream flows from Longtou Mountain in the north and crosses the stream to the west. This is Wujiang River, which is the main road to Chalingzhou City. It turns south along the mountain, and is the mouth of the small river, which is the road to Yunjun Mountain.

古文：二道分于盘龙庵前。
现代文：两条道路在盘龙庵前分岔。
English: Two roads diverged in front of Pan Long An.

古文：云嵝山者，在茶陵东五十里沙江之上，其山深峭。
现代文：小江口就是蟠龙、巫江两溪从北面的龙头流到此处，然后往南汇入发源于黄零仙庙的那条大溪的地方。云嶙山在茶陵州东面五十里沙江的上边，那山深幽峻峭。
English: Xiao Jiangkou is the place where the two streams of the Qiaolong River and Wujiang River flow from Longtou in the north to this place, and then flow south into the big stream that originated from Huang Zixian Temple. Yunfu Mountain is on the upper side of the Jinsha River, which is 50 miles east of Chaling Prefecture. The mountain is deep and steep.

古文：神庙初，孤舟大师开山建刹，遂成丛林。
现代文：神宗初年，孤舟大师开山建寺，于是这里便成了众僧聚居念佛修道的地方。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu sect, Master Solitary Boat opened the mountain to build a temple, so this became a place where monks gathered to practice Buddhism.

古文：今孤舟物故，两年前虎从寺侧攫é抓取一僧去，于是僧徒星散，豺虎昼行，山田尽芜，佛宇空寂，人无入者。
现代文：现今孤舟已经离世，两年前老虎从寺侧叼衔了一个僧人去，于是众僧徒四处奔散，豺狼虎豹白天出没，山中的田地全部荒芜，佛宇变得空寂，没有人再去。
English: Now Lone Boat has passed away. Two years ago, a tiger dragged a monk away from the side of the temple. As a result, all the monks scattered everywhere. Wolves, tigers and leopards roamed during the day, all the fields in the mountains were deserted, the Buddha's abode became empty, and no one went there anymore.

古文：每从人问津，俱戒通 诫 莫入。
现代文：每当向人间起到那寺的路，都告戒我不要去。
English: Every time the path to the temple appeared in the world, I was warned not to go.

古文：余不为阻，从盘龙小路，南渡小溪入山，雨沉沉益甚。
现代文：而且雨雾迷潦，阴霆浓密，没有谁肯给我们作向导。我不被这一切所阻，从盘龙庵的小路，往南沿小溪而行，两里，又与大溪相遇。往南渡过小溪进入山中，雨下得更猛。
English: Moreover, the rain and fog were confused, the clouds were thick, and no one was willing to guide us. I was not hindered by all of this. From the path of Panlongan, I walked south along the creek, and two miles later, I met the creek. I crossed the creek to the south and entered the mountains, and the rain was more violent.

古文：从山夹小路西南二里，有大溪自北来，直逼山下，沿之二里，是为沙江，即云端溪入大溪处。
现代文：从两山间的小路往西南走两里，有条大溪自北面流来，直逼山下，曲折地绕流在山峡中，溪两旁的石崖，被水流侵蚀而形成一个个横伸斜突的矶石。沿溪走两里，为沙江，它就是云峻山来的溪水汇入大溪的地方。
English: Two miles to the southwest from the path between the two mountains, there is a large stream flowing from the north, straight down the mountain, winding around in the canyon. The stone cliffs on both sides of the stream are eroded by the current to form a series of oblique rocks. Two miles along the stream is the sand river, it is the place where the stream water from the cloud-capped mountains flows into the stream.

古文：途遇一人持伞将远，见余问道，辄曰： 此路非多人不可入，余当返家为君前驱。 
现代文：路途中遇到一个人拿着伞将要远出，见我间路，就说道： 这条路若不是几个人一起就不可以进去，我应当返回家为先生您作先导。 
English: On the way, he met a man with an umbrella who was about to set out, and when he saw the path between us, he said, "This path cannot be entered unless several people are together. I should return home to guide you, sir."

古文：余感其意，因随至其家。
现代文：我感谢他的情意，于是跟随他到了他家。
English: I thanked him for his kindness and followed him to his house.

古文：其人为余觅三人，各持械赍ī携带火，冒雨入山。
现代文：那人为我又找了三个人，每人拿着些刀棍、火把，冒雨进入山中。
English: The man found three more people for me, and each of them took some knives, sticks, and torches and went into the mountains in the rain.

古文：初随溪口东入，望西峡，石崖层亘，外束如门。
现代文：起先是从溪口往东进去，走一里，望见一条小溪从西南的山峡中穿流出来，石崖层层横贯，对峙如门。
English: At first, go east from the mouth of the stream, walk one mile, and see a small stream flowing out of the southwestern mountain gorge. The stone cliffs are layered across, facing each other like a door.

古文：导者曰： 此虎窟山。从来烧采之夫俱不敢入。 
现代文：向导说： 此地是虎穴，烧炭打柴的人都不敢进去。 
English: The guide said, "This place is a tiger's den. People who burn charcoal and firewood are afraid to go in.

古文：时雨势渐盛，遂溯大溪入，宛转二里，于是上山，转山嘴而下，得平畴一壑，名为和尚园。
现代文：这时雨势渐大，于是溯大溪往里走，曲折地走两里，溪底石头耸峙如同平台，石台中间破裂开一条通道，水从其间流泻下去，景象很优美。从此处登上山，转过山嘴往下走，见到一片平整的谷地，名叫和尚园。
English: At this time, the rain was getting heavier and heavier, so we followed the creek and walked for two tortuous miles. The stones at the bottom of the creek stood up like a platform, and a channel was opened in the middle of the platform, and water flowed down from it. The scenery was very beautiful. From here, we climbed up the mountain, turned around the peak and walked down, and saw a flat valley, called the Monk's Garden.

古文：约一里，复逾一小山，循前溪上流宛转峡中，又一里而云嵝寺在焉。
现代文：谷地四面一重重山峰环绕聚合。从那片平坦的田野尽头约走一里，又翻过一座小山，顺前面所沿的那条溪流曲折地行进在山峡中，又走一里云嶙寺便到了。
English: The valley is surrounded on all sides by a mass of mountain peaks. From the end of the flat field, walk about a mile, then turn over a hill, follow the stream along the front and meander through the canyon. Walk another mile and you will reach Unzen Temple.

古文：山深雾黑，寂无一人，殿上金仙云冷，厨中丹灶烟空。
现代文：山峦幽深雾气浓黑，寺中静寂无一人，佛殿上如来的金身久无香火祭供而透出冷气，厨灶中早已火灭烟空。
English: The mountains are misty and dark, the temple is silent and empty, the golden body of the long-lost incense offering on the Buddhist altar emits cold air, and the fire in the kitchen has already extinguished the smoke.

古文：徘徊久之，雨愈催行，遂同导者出。
现代文：徘徊了许久，雨势更大，像是催我们快走，于是同向导出了寺。
English: It lingered for a long time, the rain was heavier, as if urging us to walk faster, so the guide led us out of the temple.

古文：出溪口，导者望见一舟，亟呼而附焉。
现代文：走出溪口，向导望见一只船，于是赶忙呼叫住而搭乘上。
English: Out of the mouth of the stream, the guide saw a boat, so he hurriedly called the boat to stop and boarded.

古文：顺流飞桨，舟行甚疾即急。余衣履沾湿、气寒砭肌，惟炙衣之不暇，无暇问两旁崖石也。
现代文：船顺流飞浆，航行得很快，我衣服鞋子全湿透了，水气寒冷，浸入肌肤，连烘烤衣服都来不及，更无暇再探问溪两旁崖石的情形。
English: The boat sailed swiftly, with the silt flying down the stream. My clothes and shoes were drenched, the water was cold and soaked into my skin. I didn't even have time to bake my clothes, and I didn't have time to investigate the situation of the cliffs on both sides of the stream.

古文：山谿纡曲，下午登舟，约四十里而暮，舟人夜行三十里，泊于东江口。
现代文：山溪迂回曲折，下午登船，约行了四十里，天就黑下来，船夫又在夜色中撑船航行三十里，停泊在东江口。
English: In the afternoon, they boarded the boat and sailed for about forty miles. It was getting dark, and the boatman paddled the boat for another thirty miles in the dark, anchoring at the mouth of the East River.

古文：十二日，晓寒甚。
现代文：十二日清晨非常寒冷。
English: The morning of the 12th was very cold.

古文：舟人由江口挽舟入酃，遂循茶陵城过东城，泊于南关。
现代文：船夫将船从江口牵入鄙水中，于是顺茶陵城驶过东城，停泊在南关。
English: The boatman took the boat from the mouth of the river into the shallow water, so Shunchaling Castle sailed past Dongcheng and anchored in Nankan.

古文：入关，抵州前，将出大西门，寻紫云、云阳之胜。
现代文：下船进了关，抵达州衙门前，打算出茶陵城大西门，去探寻紫云山、云阳山的美好风景。
English: After disembarking and passing through customs, before arriving at Zhouzhuamen, he planned to go out of the West Gate of Chaling City to explore the beautiful scenery of Mount Ziyun and Mount Yunyang.

古文：闻灵岩在南关外十五里，乃饮于市，复出南门，渡酃水。
现代文：听说灵岩在南关外十五里，便在城中集市上喝了些酒，又走出南门，渡过都水。
English: Hearing that Lingyan was fifteen miles away from Nankan, he drank some wine at the city market, walked out of the south gate, and crossed the capital.

古文：时微雨飘扬，朔风寒甚。
现代文：当时细雨飘飞，北风寒冷异常。
English: At that time, light rain was falling and the north wind was unusually cold.

古文：东南行，陂陀高下五里，得平畴，是曰欧江。
现代文：往东南方向行，在倾斜不平的山坡间忽上忽下走了五里，见到一片平坦的田野，这地方叫欧江。
English: Heading south-east, I walked for five miles, up and down unevenly sloping hillsides, and saw a flat field. This place is called Oujiang.

古文：有溪自东南来，遂溯之行，雾中望见其东山石突兀，心觉其异。
现代文：有条溪水从东南面流来，于是溯溪而行，从雾气中望见溪东边的山上石头突兀，心里觉得那山很奇异。
English: There was a stream flowing from the southeast, so I followed the stream. From the fog, I could see the rocks on the mountain on the east side of the stream, and I thought that the mountain was very strange.

古文：又五里，抵山嘴溪上，是曰沙陂，以溪中有陂也。
现代文：又走五里，抵达山嘴处的溪边，这里叫沙酸，因为溪流中有个沙石堆。
English: After another five miles, we arrived at the stream at the mouth of the mountain. This place is called "sand acid" because there is a pile of sand and stones in the stream.

古文：陂之上，其山最高者，曰会仙寨，其内穹崖裂洞，曰学堂岩。
现代文：溪流的源头在东面四十里的百丈潭。沙石堆边上那最高的山叫会仙寨，山中弯隆的崖壁破裂开，形成岩洞，叫学堂岩。
English: The source of the stream is in Baizhangtan, forty miles to the east. The highest mountain on the edge of the sandstone heap is called He Xian Zhai. The steep cliffs in the mountains break apart to form a rock cave, called the School Rock.

古文：再东，山峡盘亘，中曰石梁岩，即在沙陂之上，余不知也。
现代文：再往东，山峡盘曲绵亘，山峡的中部叫石梁岩，它就在沙破的上边，但我不知道。
English: Further to the east, the canyon stretches on and on. The middle part of the canyon is called Shiliangyan, which is just above the sand break, but I don't know.

古文：又东一里，乃北入峡中。
现代文：又往东走一里，便往北进入山峡中。
English: Another mile to the east, then north into the canyon.

古文：一里，得碧泉岩、对狮岩，俱南向。
现代文：从山峡中走一里，见到碧泉岩、对狮岩，它们都朝南面。
English: Walking one mile from the gorge, I saw the Biquan Rock and the Lion Rock, both facing south.

古文：又东逾岭而下，转而北，则灵岩在焉。
现代文：又往东翻过山岭向下走，转往北面，就到灵岩了。
English: Then I walked eastward across the mountain range, turned north, and arrived at Lingyan.

古文：以东向，曾守名才汉又名为月到岩云。
现代文：因为岩朝东面，曾知州又称为月到岩。
English: Because of the rocky eastern face, Zengchizhou is also known as the moon to the rock.

古文：其后裔犹有读书岩中者。
现代文：洞外列置着门窗，但那门窗没有抵到洞口顶部，所以洞形自然就不被遮掩。
English: There are doors and windows outside the cave, but the doors and windows do not reach the top of the cave, so the shape of the cave is naturally not covered.

古文：观音现像，伏狮峰之东，回崖上万石迹成像，赭黄其色。
现代文：它是唐代时陈光间读书的地方。陈光间居住在严塘，他的后裔还有到这岩洞中读书的。观音现像在伏狮峰的东面。回浪的崖壁上有个由石头的痕印组合成的观音像，颜色为赫黄色。
English: It was a place of study for Chen Guangma during the Tang Dynasty. Chen Guangma lived in Yantang, and his descendants also studied in this cave. Guanyin is now on the east side of Fuxiong Peak. There is a Guanyin statue made of stone imprints on the cliff wall of the circling waves. The color is bright yellow.

古文：对狮岩者，一名小灵岩，在灵岩南岭之外。
现代文：对狮岩又叫小灵岩，在灵岩南面的山岭外。
English: The Lion Rock, also known as Xiaoling Rock, is located outside the mountain range on the south side of Lingyan.

古文：南对狮峰，上下两层，上层大而高穹，下层小而双峙。
现代文：它南面对着狮峰，分为上下两层，上层大而高高隆起，下层小而两个洞穴对峙。
English: It faces the Lion's Peak to the south and is divided into two levels, the upper level is large and high, and the lower level is small and two caves face each other.

古文：碧泉岩者，在对狮之西，亦南向，洞深三丈，高一丈余。
现代文：碧泉岩在对狮岩的西面，也是朝南面，洞深三丈，高一丈多。
English: Biquan Rock is on the west side of Lion Rock, also facing south, with a depth of three meters and a height of more than one meter.

古文：内有泉一缕，自洞壁半崖滴下，下有石盘承之，清冽异常，亦小洞间一名泉也。
现代文：洞内有一缕泉水从洞壁的半中腰往下滴，下面有一个石盘承接着，那泉水清冽异常，也可算是小洞中的一条名泉。
English: Inside the cave, there is a stream of spring water dripping down from the middle of the cave wall, followed by a stone plate below. The spring water is unusually clear, and can be considered a famous spring in a small cave.

古文：伏虎岩，在清泉之后。
现代文：伏虎岩在清泉岩的后面。
English: Fuhu Rock is behind Qingquan Rock.

古文：石梁岩，在沙陂会仙寨东谷。
现代文：石梁岩在沙阪会仙寨东面的山谷中。
English: Shi Liangyan is in the valley east of Shashankai Xianzhai.

古文：其谷乱崖分亘，攒列成坞，两转而东西横亘，下开一窦，中穹若梁，由梁下北望，别有天地，透梁而入，梁上复开崖一层，由东陂而上，直造梁中而止，登之如践层楼矣。
现代文：那山谷中，纷乱的山崖横贯交错，聚集排列形成山坞，山坞折了两个弯后东西横亘。山坞的崖壁下裂开个小洞，中间弯隆如同桥梁，从梁下向北望去，别有天地，穿过石梁进去，上面又裂开一层崖壁。我从东面的山坡向上爬，直攀到那石梁中何而停止，攀登起来如同登临一座重叠高耸的楼阁一样。
English: In that valley, the chaotic mountain cliffs are crisscrossed and interlaced. They are arranged to form a dock. The dock has two bends and then the east and west are spread out. A small hole has opened under the cliff wall of the dock. The middle is curved like a bridge. Looking north from under the beam, there is no heaven and earth. Entering through the stone beam, another layer of cliff wall has been cracked. I climbed up from the eastern slope and stopped in the middle of the stone beam. Climbing up was like climbing an overlapping towering castle.

古文：会仙寨，下临沙溪，上亘圆顶，如叠磨然，独出众山，罗洪山罗名其纶，琼司理。结净蓝于下，即六空上人所栖也。
现代文：二会仙寨下临沙溪，上面横贯着一个圆顶，如重叠的磨盘，一它独自高出众山，罗洪山在山下营建了寺宇，这就是如今六空上人栖身的地方。
English: Second, Xian Village is next to Shaxi Creek. A dome runs across the top, like an overlapping grinder. It alone towers above the mountains. Luo Hongshan built a temple at the foot of the mountain. This is where the Six Heavenly Kings live today.

古文：其师号涵虔。
现代文：－
English: -

古文：学堂岩，在会仙之北，高崖间迸开一窦，云仙人授学之处。
现代文：学堂岩在会仙寨的北面，高峻的崖壁间迸裂开一个小石洞，传说是仙人传授学间的地方。
English: On the north side of Xianzhai, the steep cliff walls split open a small stone cave, which is said to be the place where the immortals taught the students.

古文：此灵岩八景也。
现代文：这就是灵岩八景。
English: This is the Eight Views of Lingyan.

古文：余至灵岩，风雨不收。
现代文：我到灵岩后，风雨一直不停。
English: Since I arrived at Lingyan, the wind and rain have been incessant.

古文：先过碧泉、对狮二岩，而后入灵岩，晓霞留饭，已下午矣。
现代文：先经过碧泉、对狮两岩，而后进入灵岩少晓霞留我在岩中吃饭，这时已下午了。
English: First, I went through the Biquan and the Two Lion Rocks, and then entered the Shao Xiaoxia Spiritual Rock to stay and eat in the rock. By this time, it was afternoon.

古文：适有一僧至，询为前山净侣六空也。
现代文：恰好有一个僧人来到岩中，询何后知道他是前面山中的净侣六空。
English: A monk happened to come to the rock and asked how he knew that he was the pure soul of the mountain in front of him.

古文：时晓霞方理诸俗务，结茅、喂猪。饭罢，即托六空为导。
现代文：当时晓霞正在干着一些日常的世俗事务于是吃罢饭便拜托六空作向导。
English: At that time, Xiaoxia was doing some daily mundane affairs, so she stopped eating and asked Liukong to be her guide.

古文：回途至狮峰而睹观音现像，抵沙陂而入游石梁，入其庵，而乘暮登会仙，探学堂，八景惟伏虎未至。
现代文：往回走的途中，到狮峰便亲睹了观音现像的景观，抵沙破便进入石梁岩游览，进了六空所居的庙庵，便乘着暮色攀登会仙寨，探游学堂岩，八景中只有伏虎岩未曾到。
English: On the way back, they saw the scene of the Guanyin statue at Shifeng, visited Shiliang Rock when they arrived at Saba, entered the temple and hermitage where Liukong lived, took the twilight climbing club Xianzhai, and explored the school rock. Of the eight scenic spots, only the Fuhu Rock has not been reached.

古文：是日雨仍空濛，而竟不妨游，六空之力也。
现代文：这一天仍然细雨迷檬，竟然没有妨碍游览，这是因为得力于六空的帮助。
English: On this day, it was still drizzling, but it did not hinder the tour. This was thanks to the help of Roku.

古文：晚即宿其方丈。
现代文：夜晚我就牲宿在六空的方丈内。
English: At night, I slept in the abbot's quarters in Rokkō.

古文：十三日，晨餐后寒甚，阴翳如故。
现代文：十三日早餐后，夭气很寒冷，天空云雾遮蔽如故。
English: After breakfast on the 13th, the morning air was very cold, and the sky was still covered with clouds.

古文：别六空，仍旧路西北行。
现代文：告别了六空，沿原路往西北行，走三里到欧江。
English: After bidding farewell to Liukang, I drove northwest along the original road and walked three miles to Oujiang.

古文：三里至欧江，北入山，为茶陵向来道；南沿沙陂江西去，又一道也。
现代文：往北进入山中，是昨天从茶陵城来时所走的路；往南沿沙破江向西去，是到茶陵城的另一条道路。
English: Going north into the mountains is the road I took yesterday when I came from Chaling City; going south along the Shabang River to the west is another road to Chaling City.

古文：过欧江，溪胜小舟，西北过二小岭，仍渡茶陵南关外，沿城溯江，经大西门，西行三里，过桥开陇，始见大江自东北来。
现代文：过了欧江，溪流才能够航行船只，我往西北翻过两座小山岭，仍然从茶陵城南关外渡过江流，沿城墙溯江而行，经过大西门，去探寻紫云山、云限山的各处优美风景。
English: After crossing the Ou River, the stream can only be navigated by ships. I climbed over two small mountains to the northwest, and still crossed the river from the outside of Chaling South Gate, walked along the city wall, and passed through the Great West Gate to explore the beautiful scenery of Ziyun Mountain and Yunfen Mountain.

古文：于是越黄土坳，又三里，过新桥，雾中始露云阳半面。
现代文：往西走三里，越过一座桥后冈陇渐开，这才看见大江从东北面流来，从冈陇间越过黄土坳，又走兰里，跨过新桥，云雾中隐隐露出半边云阳山。
English: After walking three miles to the west and crossing a bridge, the ridge gradually opened up. Only then did I see the big river flowing from the northeast, crossing the loess ridge between the ridge and the loess ridge, walking along Lanli, crossing the new bridge, and half of Yunyang Mountain looming in the clouds.

古文：又三里，抵紫云山麓，是为沙江铺，大江至此直逼山下。
现代文：又走三里，抵达紫云山麓，为沙江铺，大江到了这里直逼山下。
English: I walked another three miles and arrived at the foot of Ziyun Mountain. It was a sandy river, and when I got here, the big river came right down the mountain.

古文：由沙江铺西行，为攸县、安仁大道。
现代文：从沙江铺往西走，是通往枚县和安仁县的大道。
English: If you walk west from Shajiangpu, you will find a highway leading to Hii County and Anren County.

古文：南登山，是为紫云仙。
现代文：从南边登山，山脚下是紫云仙。
English: Climbing from the south, at the foot of the mountain is the Purple Cloud Immortal.

古文：上一里，至山半为真武殿，上有观音庵，俱东北瞰来水。
现代文：朝上走一里，到半山为真武殿，殿上有座观音庵，它们都朝东北面，下临东北面流来的水流。
English: Walk up a mile in the morning and you will reach the middle of the mountain, where you will find the Majestic Hall. There is a Guanyin hermitage in the hall. They all face the northeast, with water flowing from the northeast below.

古文：观音庵松岩，老僧也。
现代文：观音庵中的松岩，是个年纪已大的僧人。
English: The pine rock in the Guanyin hermitage is the remains of an elderly monk.

古文：予询云阳道，松岩曰： 云阳山者，在紫云西十里。
现代文：我问他到云阳山的道路，他回答说： 云阳山在紫云山西面十里。
English: I asked him the way to Yunyang Mountain, and he replied: Yunyang Mountain is ten miles west of Ziyun Mountain.

古文：其顶为老君岩；云阳仙在其东峰之胁，去顶三里；赤松坛又在云阳仙之麓，去云阳仙三里。
现代文：山顶为老君岩；云阳仙在老君岩半山间，离山顶有三里；赤松坛又在云阳仙的山麓，离云阳仙有三里。
English: The top of the mountain is Laojun Rock; Yunyangxian is in the middle of Laojun Rock, three miles from the top of the mountain; the Red Pine Altar is at the foot of Yunyangxian, three miles from Yunyangxian.

古文：盖紫云为云阳尽处，而赤松为云阳正东之麓。
现代文：大概地说紫云山在云阳山尽头处，而赤松坛在云阳山正东麓。
English: It is generally said that Mount Ziyun is at the end of Mount Yunyang, while the Red Pine Altar is at the eastern foot of Mount Yunyang.

古文：由紫云之下，北顺江岸西行三里，为洪山庙，乃登顶之北道；由紫云之下，南循山麓西行四里，为赤松坛，乃登顶之东道；去顶各十里而近。
现代文：从紫云山下顺江北岸往西行三里，为洪山庙，那里是攀登山顶的北路；从紫云山下，顺山南麓往西行四里，为赤松坛，那里是攀登山顶的东路。
English: Three miles westward from the northern bank of the Shun River below Mount Ziyun is the Hongshan Temple, where is the northern route for climbing to the summit; four miles westward from the southern foot of Mount Ziyun below Mount Ziyun is the Red Pine Altar, where is the eastern route for climbing to the summit.

古文：二道之中有罗汉洞，在紫云之西，即由观音庵侧小径横过一里，可达其庵。
现代文：洪山庙和赤松珐离山顶各不足十里。两条道路的中间有个罗汉洞，在紫云山的西面，从观音庵侧面的小路横穿一里，可以到达洞边的庵。
English: Hongshan Temple and Red Pine Pagoda are each less than ten miles from the top of the mountain. There is a Luohan Cave in the middle of the two roads. On the west side of Mount Ziyun, you can reach the cave-side hermitage by crossing a mile from the path on the side of Guanyin Hermitage.

古文：由庵登顶，亦有间道可达，不必下紫云也。 
现代文：从庵攀登山顶也有小路可以到达，这样就不必下紫云山了。 
English: There is also a path from the hermitage to the top of the mountain, so you don't have to go down to Mount Ziyun.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我按他所说的而行。
English: I listened to him.

古文：遂由真武殿侧，西北度两小坳，一涧从西北来，则紫云与肯莲庵即罗汉仙。
现代文：于是从真武殿侧面，往西北越过两个小山坳，见一条涧流从西北流来，它是从紫云山与青莲庵后面的山流出的。
English: Then, from the side of the Shinnobu-den, I crossed two small hills to the northwest, and saw a trickling stream coming from the northwest. It was flowing from the mountains behind Mt. Shiyun and Seiryo-an.

古文：后山夹而成者。渡涧即青莲庵，东向而出，地幽而庵净。
现代文：涧中水流往北汇人大江，紫云山和它西面的山峰被水流分隔开。渡过涧流就是青莲庵，它朝向东面而突出出来，地方清幽而庵中洁净。
English: Water flows from the middle of the Yangtze River to the North Huijin River. Mount Ziyun and the peaks to the west of it are separated by the water flow. Across the turbulent flow is Qinglian An, which protrudes to the east. The place is quiet and the inside of the an is clean.

古文：僧号六涧，亦依依近人，坚留余饭，余亟于登岭，遂从庵后西问登山。
现代文：庵中僧人法号叫六涧，也是温和而易于接近，他坚决要留我吃饭。我急着登岭，子是从庵后往西攀登。
English: The monk in the hermitage, whose dharma name is Rokujo, is also gentle and easy to approach. He was adamant that he wanted to keep me for dinner. I was in a hurry to get to the top of the mountain, so I climbed westward from behind the hermitage.

古文：其时浓雾犹翳山半，余不顾，攀跻直上三里，逾峰脊二重，足之所上，雾亦旋开。
现代文：当时浓雾还笼罩着半山间，我全然不顾，直往上攀登三里，翻越了两层峰脊，脚步踏上的地方，雾气也旋即散开。
English: At that time, a thick fog still shrouded the middle of the mountain, I completely disregarded it and climbed three miles straight up, climbed over two layers of ridges, and where I stepped on, the fog immediately dispersed.

古文：又上二里，则峰脊冰块满枝，寒气所结，大者如拳，小者如蛋，依枝而成，遇风而坠，俱堆积满地。
现代文：又往上两里，峰脊上冰块缀满枝头，那寒气凝结成的冰块，大的如拳头，小的如鸡蛋，依树枝而结成，遇来风而坠落，满地到处堆积。
English: Two miles further up, the ridges of the peak are dotted with branches covered in ice. The cold condensed ice, as big as a fist and as small as an egg, clung to the branches and fell with the wind, piling up all over the ground.

古文：其时本峰雾气全消，山之南东二面，历历可睹，而北西二面，犹半为霾掩，始知云阳之峰，俱自西南走东北，排叠数重：紫云，其北面第一重也；青莲庵之后，余所由跻者，第二重也；云阳仙，第三重也；老君岩在其上，是为绝顶，所谓七十一峰之主也。
现代文：当时我所在的山峰雾气已经全部消散，山的南东两面，景物明晰可辨，然而北西两面，仍有一半被雾气遮掩，部江从山东南面流来，黄零江自西北面流来，环绕迁曲得很远。这才知道云阳山的山峰，都是自西南走向东北出卜列重叠为数重：紫云山是它北面的第一重；青莲庵的后面，即我从那里登山的地方是第二重；云阳仙所在的山峰是第三重；老君岩在云阳仙上面，为山的最高顶端，它就是所说的七十一峰的主峰。
English: At that time, the fog had completely dissipated from the peak I was on. The southeastern and southeastern sides of the mountain were clearly visible, but the northwestern sides were still half covered by fog. The Be River flowed from the southeastern side of the mountain, and the Yellow River flowed from the northwest side, with a very long circumferential curve. It was only then that I knew that the peaks of Yunyang Mountain were from the southwest to the northeast. There were several overlapping layers: Ziyun Mountain was the first layer on its northern face; behind Qinglian, that is, the place where I climbed from there, was the second layer; the peak where Yunyang

古文：云峰在南，余所登峰在北，两峰横列，脉从云阳仙之下度坳而起，峙为余所登第二重之顶，东走而下，由青莲庵而东，结为茶陵州治。
现代文：云峰在南面，我所登上的山峰在北面，两峰横列，山脉从云阳仙的下面越山坳而耸起，耸为我所登山峰的第二重的最高顶端，然后向东延伸下下去，从青莲庵再往东，盘结成茶陵州城所背靠的山峰。
English: Yunfeng is in the south, the peak I climbed is in the north, the two peaks are in a row, the mountains rise from the bottom of Yunyangxian across the mountains, towering as the second highest peak of my mountain peak, and then extending down to the east, from Qinglian'an to the east, coalescing into the mountain peak backed by the city of Chalingzhou.

古文：余现登第二重绝顶，径路迷绝，西南望云峰绝顶，中隔一坞，而绝顶尚霾夙雾中。
现代文：我登上第二重的最高顶端后，道路迷失甚至断绝了，往西南眺望云峰的最高顶端，中间隔着一个山坞，而云峰的最高顶端还隐没在晨雾中。
English: After I climbed the second highest peak, the road was lost and even cut off, looking southwest to the highest peak of Yunfeng, separated by a dock, and the highest peak of Yunfeng was still hidden in the morning mist.

古文：俯瞰过脊处，在峰下里许。
现代文：俯瞰山脊越过去的地方，在峰下一里左右。
English: Looking down where the ridge passes, about a mile below the peak.

古文：其上隔山竹树一壑，两乳回环掩映，若天开洞府，即云阳仙无疑也。
现代文：山脊那边有长满翠竹绿树的山谷，两侧的山峰如同两乳，曲折环绕而相互掩映，整个山谷若天然洞府，无疑它就是云阳仙的所在。
English: On the other side of the ridge, there is a valley full of emerald bamboo and green trees. The peaks on both sides are like two breasts, twists and turns surround and cover each other. If the entire valley were a natural cave, it would undoubtedly be the place of the Yunyang Immortal.

古文：虽无路，亟直坠而下，度脊而上，共二里，逾一小坳，入云阳仙。
现代文：虽无路，也赶忙直坠而下，然后越过山脊往上走，共两里，翻过一小个山坳，进入云阳仙。
English: Although there was no road, he hurriedly fell straight down, and then walked up over the ridge, a total of two miles, over a small mountain ridge, and into Yunyangxian.

古文：其庵北向，登顶之路，由左上五里而至老君岩；下山之路，由右三里而至赤松坛。
现代文：那庵朝北，登顶的路从庵的左边走，往上五里便到老君岩，下山的路在庵右侧，三里便到赤松坛 庵后面有大石头高高累起、飞架在空中而中间透出逢隙，竹子树木悬缀在石头上，景象极为美妙。
English: The hermitage faces north, and the path to the top is on the left side of the hermitage. Five miles up leads to Laojun Rock, and the path down the mountain is on the right side of the hermitage. Three miles lead to the Red Pine Altar. Behind the hermitage, there are large stones piled up high, flying frames in the air with gaps in the middle, and bamboo trees hanging over the stones. The scenery is extremely beautiful.

古文：庵后有大石飞累，驾空透隙，竹树悬缀，极为倩叠，石间有止水一泓，澄碧迥异，名曰五雷池，雩祝甚灵；层岩上突，无可攀踄，其上则黑雾密翳矣。
现代文：石头中间有一潭不流动的深水，异常清澈碧绿，名叫五雷池，天旱时祭祀求雨很灵验。
English: In the middle of the stone, there is a pool of deep water that does not flow. It is unusually clear and green. It is called Wuling Pond. When the weather is dry, the ritual of praying for rain is very effective.

古文：盖第二重之顶，当风无树，故冰止随枝堆积。
现代文：一层层岩石向上突起，没办法攀登，岩石上浓雾遮掩。大概因为第二重山的顶上，树木当风起舞，所以冰块只是依附着树枝而堆积。
English: Layer upon layer of rock jut upwards, making it impossible to climb, obscured by thick fog on the rocks. Probably because the trees on the top of the second heaviest mountain dance when the wind blows, so the ice just clings to the branches and piles up.

古文：而庵中山环峰夹，竹树蒙茸，萦雾成冰，玲珑满树，如琼花瑶谷，朔风摇之，如步摇玉珮。声叶金石。
现代文：而庵所在的山谷环绕夹峙，竹树茂密婆婆，雾气索绕在其间结成冰，便是满树玲珑，如同琼花瑶谷，北风一吹摇，便如妇女们佩带的步摇玉佩，声音和谐，如同清越的钟磐奏鸣声。
English: But the valley where the hermitage is located is surrounded by a standoff. The bamboo trees are thick, and the fog rope around them freezes in the middle. It is full of trees, like the valley of the agapanthus. When the north wind blows, it is like the women wearing the jade jade jade. The sound is harmonious, like the bell of Qingyue.

古文：偶振坠地，如玉山之颓，有积高二三尺者，途为之阻。
现代文：冰块冰条偶尔被震动而坠落地下，便如玉石山崩塌下来，有堆积到两三尺高的，道路都被阻塞。
English: Ice blocks and ice bars occasionally shook and fell to the ground, then collapsed like a jade mountain, some piled up to two or three feet high, and roads were blocked.

古文：闻其上登踄更难。
现代文：听说庵上面登攀起来更为艰难。
English: I heard that it is more difficult to climb up to the top of the hermitage.

古文：时日过下午，闻赤松坛尚在下，而庵僧音，误为 石洞 。
现代文：这时已经过了下午，听说赤松坛还在庵下边。因庵中僧人讲的是楚地音，我将 赤松 误听成了 石洞 。
English: By this time, the afternoon had passed, and I heard that the red pine altar was still under the hermitage. Because the monks in the hermitage spoke Chudi tones, I misheard the red pine as a stone cave.

古文：余意欲登顶右后。遂从顶北下山，恐失石洞之奇，且谓稍迟可冀希望晴朗也。
现代文：我本意想登上云阳山山顶右侧后，便从山顶北面下山，但又恐怕错过石洞的奇景，并且有人说稍迟一会天气可望晴朗。
English: I originally wanted to climb to the right side of the summit of Yunyang Mountain and then descend from the north side of the summit, but I was afraid that I would miss the wonderful scenery of the stone cave, and some people said that the weather would be fine later.

古文：索饭于庵僧镜然，遂东下山。
现代文：我向庵中僧人镜然要了些食物，便往东面下山。
English: I asked the monk at the hermitage for some food and went down the mountain to the east.

古文：路侧涧流泻石间，僧指为 子房炼丹池 、 捣药槽 、 仙人指迹 诸胜，乃从赤松神话中之仙人，为道教所信奉而附会留侯也。
现代文：路侧涧流奔泻在石缝间，僧人指点着说是 子房炼丹池 、 捣药槽 、 仙人指迹 等一些名胜，这是将赤松子的传说附会于留候张良。
English: The roadside torrent rushes between the stone cracks, and the monks point out that there are some places of interest such as the Zibo curing pond, the pounding pot, and the hermit's footprints. This is to attach the legend of the red pine to Zhang Liang.

古文：直下三里抵赤松坛，始知赤松之非石洞也。
现代文：直往下走三里抵达赤松坛，这才知道是赤松而不是石洞。
English: I walked straight down for three miles to reach the red pine altar, only then did I know that it was red pine and not a stone cave.

古文：遂宿庵中。
现代文：于是宿在庵中。
English: So they stayed in a hermitage.

古文：殿颇古，中为赤松，左黄石，而右子房即张良。
现代文：庵中的殿很古老，中间供奉赤松子，左边是黄石公，右边是张子房。
English: The hall in the hermitage is very old. The center is dedicated to the red pine, on the left is Huangshi Gong, and on the right is Zhang Zifu.

古文：殿前有古树松一株，无他胜也。
现代文：殿前有一棵古松，没有其他好的景物。
English: There is an old pine tree in front of the hall, but no other good scenery.

古文：僧葛民亦近人。
现代文：庵中僧人葛民也平易近人。
English: Ge Min, the monk in the hermitage, is also very approachable.

古文：十四日，晨起寒甚，而浓雾复合。
现代文：十四日早晨起来，天气很寒冷，而浓雾又密布山冈。
English: On the morning of the 14th, the weather was very cold, and a thick fog covered the mountains.

古文：先是，晚至赤松，即嘿默祷黄石、子房神位，求假半日晴霁，为登顶之胜。
现代文：这之前，昨天晚上到赤松坛后，我就默默祈祷过黄石和子房的神位，祈求给半天的晴朗天气，为的是我能登上山顶饱览那里的优美景致。
English: Before that, after arriving at the red pine altar yesterday evening, I silently prayed to the deities of Huangshi and Zibo, praying for half a day of fine weather, so that I could climb to the top of the mountain and enjoy the beautiful scenery there.

古文：至是望顶浓霾，零雨四洒，遂无复登顶之望。
现代文：到现在望着山顶上浓雾弥漫、零星的小雨四处飞洒的样子，便不再抱有攀登山顶的希望。
English: Until now, looking at the dense fog on the top of the mountain and the scattered light rain falling everywhere, I no longer had any hope of climbing to the top.

古文：饭后，遂别葛民下山。
现代文：饭后，便告别葛民下山。
English: After the meal, they bid farewell to Ge Min and went down the mountain.

古文：循山麓北行，逾小涧二重，共四里，过紫云之麓，江从东北来，从此入峡，路亦随之。
现代文：顺山麓往北行，越过两条小涧，共走四里，经过紫云山山麓，江流从东北面流来，从此处流入山峡中，路也顺流而去。
English: I walked north along the foot of the mountain, crossing two small streams, walking a total of four miles, passing through the foot of Mount Ziyun, the river flowed from the northeast, from here it flowed into the mountain gorge, and the road also flowed along.

古文：绕出云阳北麓，又二里，为洪山庙。
现代文：绕出云阳山北麓，又走两里，为洪山庙。
English: Go around the northern foot of Yunyang Mountain and walk another two miles to reach Hongshan Temple.

古文：风雨交至，遂停庙中，市薪炙衣，煨榾柮者竟日。
现代文：因为风雨交加，便停留在庙中，买了些柴禾烧火烤衣服，一整天都围着火盆烤火。
English: Because of the wind and rain, they stayed in the temple, bought some firewood and barbecue clothes, and spent the whole day around the brazier.

古文：庙后有大道南登绝顶。
现代文：庙后面有条大路，沿着它往南可以登到云阳山最高顶。
English: There is a big road behind the temple, and you can climb to the highest peak of Yunyang Mountain along it to the south.

古文：时庙下江旁停舟数只，俱以石尤石头太多横甚，不能顺流下，屡招予为明日行，余犹不能恝淡忘不以为意于云阳之顶也。
现代文：当时庙下面江边停着儿只船，都是因为江流中石头太多，堵塞得厉害，不能顺流而下，船夫屡屡招呼我，叫我明天搭乘船走，我却仍不能放弃游览云阳山的念头。
English: At that time, there was only one boat parked on the riverbank below the temple, all because there were too many stones in the river flow and it was blocked so badly that I couldn't go down the river. The boatman repeatedly greeted me and told me to take the boat tomorrow, but I still couldn't give up the idea of visiting Yunyang Mountain.

古文：十五日，晨起，泊舟将放，招余速下舟；予见四山雾霁，遂饭而决策登山。
现代文：十五日早晨起来，停泊的船只即将挂帆航行，招呼我赶快上船；我见四周山上的雾气已散开，便吃了饭，打定主意登山。
English: On the morning of the fifteenth day, I got up. The anchored ship was about to set sail and beckoned me to get on board as soon as possible. When I saw that the fog on the mountains had dispersed, I ate my meal and decided to climb the mountain.

古文：路由庙后南向而登，三里，复有高峰北峙，一岐从峰南，一岐从峰西南。
现代文：路从庙后向南往上走，登三里，又有座高峰耸立在北面，道路分成两条：一条岔向那座高峰的南面，一条岔向它的西南面。
English: The road goes up from behind the temple to the south and climbs for three miles. Another peak rises to the north, and the road is divided into two: one to the south of the peak and one to the southwest of it.

古文：余初由东南行，疑为前上罗汉峡中旧道，乃向云阳仙，非迳造老君岩者，乃复转从西南道。
现代文：我先是从东南面走，疑心它就是前日我上罗汉洞时所经过的山峡中的那条旧道，而实际上它是到云阳仙的路，不是径直通到老君岩的，这才又折回来从西南面那条路走。
English: I first walked from the southeast, suspecting that it was the old road in the gorge that I had passed the day before when I went to Luohan Cave, but in fact it was the road to Yunyangxian, not the one that led directly to Laojun Rock, and then I turned back and walked from the southwest.

古文：不一里，行高峰西峡，顾仆南望峡顶有石梁飞驾，余瞻眺不及。
现代文：不到一里，走到那座高峰的西面山峡中，顾仆往南望见山峡顶上有一座石桥飞架在两端，我急忙眺望但未能望见。
English: Less than a mile into the gorge on the west side of the peak, Gu looked south and saw a stone bridge flyover at both ends at the top of the gorge. I hurried to look but couldn't see it.

古文：及西上岭侧，见大江已环其西，大路乃西北下，遂望岭头南跻而上。
现代文：等往西上到岭侧面，看见大江已经绕流到岭西面，大路却往西北下去，于是朝岭头往南向上攀登。
English: After waiting westward to the side of the ridge, he saw that the big river had circled to the west of the ridge, but the highway went northwest, so he climbed southward to the top of the ridge in the morning.

古文：时岭头冰叶纷披，虽无径路，余意即使路讹错误，可得石梁胜，亦不以为恨，及至岭上遍觅，无有飞驾之石，第见是岭之脊，东南横属高顶，其为登顶之路无疑。
现代文：当时岭头上叶片似的冰块纷乱杂沓，虽然没有路，但我想，即使路走错了，只要可以寻到石梁美景，也就不感到遗憾。等到达岭上四处寻觅，没有飞架的石头，只是见到所在之岭的岭脊，往东南横连着一个高顶，我想，那高顶定是登云阳山顶的路。
English: At that time, the ice on the ridge was a jumble of blade-like ice, and although there was no road, I thought that even if I took the wrong road, I would not be sorry as long as I could find a beautiful view of stone beams. When I reached the ridge, I searched around, there were no flying stones, but I saw the ridge of the ridge where I was, connected to the southeast by a high peak. I thought, that high peak must be the way to the top of Yunyang Mountain.

古文：遂东南度脊，仰首直上，又一里，再逾一脊，则下瞰脊南，云阳仙已在下方矣。
现代文：于是往东南越过山脊，仰头直往上爬，又走一里，再越过一山脊，往下俯瞰山脊南面，云阳仙已经在下方了。
English: So I went southeast over the ridge, climbed straight up with my head up, walked another mile, then over a ridge, and looked down to the south of the ridge. Yunyang Xian was already below.

古文：盖是岭东西横亘，西为绝顶北尽处，东即属于前所登云阳东第二层之岭也。
现代文：大概这座山岭东西横亘，西面为云阳山最高顶端的北面尽头处，东面就是与前面所登云阳山东边第二层山相连接的山岭。
English: Presumably, this mountain range stretches from east to west, with the western side being the northern end of the highest peak of Yunyang Mountain, and the eastern side being the mountain range connected to the second mountain on the eastern side of Yunyang Mountain that was climbed earlier.

古文：于是始得路，更南向登顶，其上冰雪层积，身若从玉树中行。
现代文：从此处开始才找到路，于是继续向南朝山顶攀登，山岭上泳雪层层堆积，身躯若像从玉树林中穿行。
English: It was from here that I began to find my way, so I continued to climb southwards towards the summit, where snow piled up layer upon layer, and my body felt like I was walking through a forest of jade trees.

古文：又一里，连过两峰，始陟最高顶。
现代文：又走一里，接连翻过两座山峰，才登到最高顶。
English: He walked another mile and climbed two mountains in succession before reaching the highest peak.

古文：是时虽旭日藏辉，而沉霾屏伏，远近诸峰尽露真形，惟西北远峰尚存雾痕一抹。
现代文：这时虽然旭日隐藏着它的光辉，但浓黑的阴霆消散了，远近各山峰都显露出真实形态，只有西北方远处的一座山峰还被淡淡的雾痕遮掩。
English: At this time, although the rising sun hides its brilliance, the thick black gloom dissipates, and all the peaks near and far reveal their true forms. Only one peak in the far northwest is still obscured by faint traces of fog.

古文：乃从峰脊南下，又一里，复过两峰，有微路 十 字界峰坳间：南上复登山顶，东由半山直上，西由山半横下。
现代文：于是从峰脊往南下走，又走一里，再翻过两座山峰，峰坳间有两条隐隐约约的小路，呈 十 字状交叉：往南上又是登山顶的路，东边的从半山中直往上延伸，西边的从半山腰斜伸下去。
English: So I walked from the ridge of the peak to the south, walked another mile, and then turned over two peaks. Between the peaks, there were two faint paths, which intersected in the shape of a cross: to the south was the road to the top of the mountain, the east side extended straight up from the middle of the mountain, and the west side extended diagonally down from the middle of the mountain.

古文：然脊北之顶虽高，而纯土无石；脊南之峰较下，而东面石崖高穹，峰笋离立。
现代文：然而，峰脊北面的山顶虽然高，却纯是土，没有石头；峰脊南面的山峰较低一些，而它的东面却是石崖高高隆起，石峰石笋相对耸立。
English: However, the top of the mountain to the north of the ridge, although high, is pure earth, without stone; the peak to the south of the ridge is lower, while its east side is a high cliff, and the stone peak is relatively towering.

古文：乃与顾仆置行李坳中，从南岭之东，攀崖隙而踞石笋，下瞰坞中，有茅一龛，意即老君岩之静室，所云老主庵者。
现代文：于是和顾仆将行李放在峰坳中，从峰坳南边山岭的东面，攀着崖壁间的缝隙而上，坐在石笋间，向下俯瞰山坞中，有一间茅屋，心想它就是老君岩的静室、所说的老主庵。
English: So he and his servant put their luggage in the peak, climbed up from the eastern side of the mountain ridge on the south side of the peak, climbed the gap between the cliffs, sat down between the rocks, and looked down at the dock. There was a hut, thinking that it was the quiet room of Laojun Rock, the so-called Laozhuan.

古文：窃计直坠将及一里，下而复上，其路既遥，况既踞石崖之顶，仰瞩俯瞰，胜亦无殊，不若逾脊从西路下，便则为秦人洞之游，不便即北去江浒觅舟，顺流亦易。
现代文：我私下想，直下到茅屋处有将近一里的距离，下去后又上来，路程既遥远，况且又已经坐在石崖的顶上仰视俯瞰过，四周的景物也没有什么特殊的，所以不如越过山脊从西边的路下山，方便就去游览秦人洞，不方便就往北到江边去找船顺流而下，也很容易。
English: Privately, I thought that the distance straight down to the hut was nearly a mile, and then it was up again. The distance was far, and besides, I had already sat on the top of the stone cliff and looked up and down. The scenery around me was nothing special, so it was better to cross the ridge and go down the mountain from the west side. It was convenient to visit the Qin Man Cave, and if it was not convenient, it was easy to go north to the river and find a boat to go down the river.

古文：乃遂从西路行。
现代文：于是便从西边的路走。
English: So they took the road to the west.

古文：山阴冰雪拥塞，茅棘交萦，举步渐艰。
现代文：山北面冰雪奎塞，茅草荆棘交错缠绕，举步渐渐艰难。
English: The north face of the mountain is covered with snow and ice, and the thorns of the thatch are intertwined, making it difficult to walk.

古文：二里，路绝，四顾皆茅茨为冰冻所胶结，上不能举首，下无从投足，兼茅中自时有堰宕延误耽搁，疑为虎穴，而山中浓雾四起，瞰眺莫见，计难再下。
现代文：两里后路断绝了，四顾都是茅草羡黎，被冰凌粘结着，上不能伸头，下无从投足，加之茅草丛中本来就不时有一些倒卧的石头，我怀疑这地方是虎穴，而山中又浓雾四起，俯瞰眺望一无所见，心里计议着难以再往下走。
English: Two miles later, the road was cut off. All I could see was thatched grass, stuck together with ice. I couldn't put my head up, and I couldn't put my feet down. In addition, there were always some stones lying upside down in the thatch. I suspected that this place was a tiger's den, and there was thick fog in the mountains. I couldn't see anything when I looked down, and I thought it would be difficult to go any further.

古文：乃复望山崩而上，冰滑草拥，随跻随坠。
现代文：于是又朝着山顶往上爬，因为冰滑、丛草奎塞，所以一边往上登一边向下跌落。
English: So he climbed up towards the top of the mountain, because the ice was slippery and the bushes were full of weeds, so he climbed up and fell down.

古文：念岭峻草被，可脱虎口，益鼓勇直上。
现代文：想着峰岭峻峭深草遮覆，可以脱离虎口，就更加鼓足勇气直往上爬。
English: Thinking that the peaks and ridges are steep and covered with deep grass, you can get away from the tiger's mouth, you will have more courage to climb straight up.

古文：二里，复得登顶，北望前西下之脊，又隔二峰矣。
现代文：两里，重新登上山顶，往北回望前面从西边向下所走的那山脊，又隔着两座山峰了。
English: Two miles later, after climbing back to the top of the mountain, I looked back north to the ridge I had descended from the west, and there were two more peaks in the distance.

古文：其处岭东茅棘尽焚，岭西茅棘蔽山，皆以岭头路痕为限，若有分界者。
现代文：那地方山岭的东面茅草荆棘全都被火烧光，山岭的西面却是茅草荆棘遮蔽着山野，并且都是以岭头上的路痕为界限，像是有条分界似的。
English: On the eastern side of the mountain range, all the thatch thorns had been burned away by the fire, but on the western side of the mountain range, it was the thatch thorns that covered the mountains and fields, and they were all delimited by the road marks at the top of the ridge, as if there was a demarcation.

古文：是时岭西黑雾弥漫，岭东日影宣朗，雾欲腾冲而东，风辄驱逐而西，亦若以岭为界者。
现代文：这时岭西面黑雾弥漫，岭东面日影明朗，雾气想要翻腾冲滚到东面，风立刻将其驱逐向西面，也好像是以岭头为分界似的。
English: At this time, the west side of the ridge was full of dark fog, and the east side of the ridge was brightly shaded. The fog wanted to tumble to the east, and the wind immediately expelled it to the west, and it seemed to be separated by the ridge head.

古文：又南一里，再下二峰，岭忽乱石森列，片片若攒刃交戟，雾西攫其尖，风东捣其膊，人从其中溜足直下，强攀崖踞坐，益觉自豪。
现代文：又往南一里，再走下两座山峰，忽然见到峰岭上乱石林立，一片片如像刀刃合聚、戈戟交集，西面石丛的尖尖上雾气拂掠，东面石丛中烈风劲吹，人从石丛中溜足直下，又坚决攀上石崖坐在上面，更加觉得自豪。
English: Another mile to the south, another walk down the two peaks, and suddenly I saw the jumble of rocks on the peak and ridge. The pieces were like blades coming together and ridges intersecting. The fog swept over the tips of the rocks on the west side, and the gale blew hard in the rocks on the east side. People walked straight down from the rocks, and resolutely climbed up the cliff to sit on it. I felt even more proud.

古文：念前有路而忽无，既雾而复雾，欲下而转上，皆山灵未献此奇，故使浪游之踪，迂回其辙耳。
现代文：回想起前时下山先有路而忽然路断绝，雾散后又阴霆满天，想下山却又被迫转回山上的情景，都是因为山中神灵还没有呈献出这一奇景，所以故意使我放慢脚步，迁回曲折地绕圈子。
English: When I recall the scene of going down the mountain when there was a road and suddenly the road was cut off, when the fog dispersed and the sky was overcast, when I wanted to go down the mountain but was forced to turn back to the mountain, it was because the gods in the mountains had not yet presented this miracle, so they deliberately made me slow down and move back around in a zigzag circle.

古文：既下石峰，坳中又得 十 字路，于是复西向下岭，俱从浓雾中行矣。
现代文：下了石片林立的峰岭，到山坳中又见到呈 十 字状交叉的路，从 十 字路口往西下岭，便都是在浓雾中穿行了。
English: After descending the stone-studded peak, we came to the ridge of the mountain and saw a road that intersected in the shape of a ten, and from the junction of the ten to the west of the ridge, we drove through the thick fog.

古文：始二里，冰霾而草中有路，又二里，路微而石树蒙翳；又二里，则石悬树密而路绝，盖前路之逾岭而西，皆茶陵人自东而来，烧山为炭，至此辄返。
现代文：开头的两里，到处是冰凌阴霆，但草丛中有路；又走两里，路变得隐微而且石头树草遮掩了路径和视线；再走两里，却是石头悬立树木茂密，道路断绝。大概前面所经过的西路，都是茶陵人从东面过来，到山中砍柴禾烧炭走出来的，到了此处就往回走。
English: At the beginning of the first two miles, it was overcast with ice everywhere, but there was a path in the grass; after another two miles, the path became obscure and the stone and grass obscured the path and the line of sight; after another two miles, however, the stones were overhanging the thick trees, and the path was cut off.

古文：过此，崖穷树益深，上者不能下，下者不复上。
现代文：过了此处，崖石弯隆树木更深，从上面不能下，从下面同样不能上。
English: Beyond this point, the cliff bends and the trees grow deeper. You can't get down from the top, and you can't get up from the bottom either.

古文：余念所下既遥，再下三四里当及山麓，岂能复从前还跻？
现代文：我想，往下走的路程已经有好远，再往下走三四里就应当到达山麓了，岂能又像前面那次一样往回登？
English: I thought, it's already a long way down, and if I walk another three or four miles I should reach the foot of the mountain. Will I be able to climb back up again like the last time?

古文：遂与顾仆挂石投崖，悬藤倒柯树干、树枝，坠空者数层，渐闻水声遥遥，而终不知去人世远近。
现代文：于是与顾仆或吊在石头上或纵身跃向崖壁间，或悬在藤条上或倒钩着树枝，从虚空的崖石间坠落了几层，渐渐听到水声从遥远处传来，然而终究不知道离人世是远还是近！
English: So he and his attendant either hung on a rock, or leapt headlong into the cliff face, or hung on a rattan cane, or tied a branch to a barb, and fell several stories down the empty cliff face. Gradually, they heard the sound of water coming from far away, but in the end, they didn't know if they were far away or close to the human world!

古文：已而雾影忽闪，露出眉峰峡谷，树色深沉。
现代文：旋即雾影忽然闪开，露出层层山峰和峡谷，树色浓暗。
English: Suddenly, the misty shadow suddenly flashed away, revealing layers of peaks and canyons, and the trees were dark.

古文：再一闪影，又见谷口两重外，有平坞可瞩。
现代文：雾影再一闪，又见峡谷口上的两重山崖外，有一个平坦的山坞可以看得见。
English: Another flash of the misty shadow, and the double mountain cliffs at the mouth of the canyon are visible. A flat dock can be seen.

古文：乃益揆í度量丛历级，若邓艾之下阴平，坠壑滚崖，技无不殚，然皆赤手，无从裹毡也。
现代文：于是更是揣度着草丛的深浅踩踏着石瞪往下走，若像当年邓艾的军队下阴平间道一样，遇着沟谷往下坠，遇着崖壁朝下滚，什么技法都用尽了，然而我们都是赤裸着手，无从让手上裹上套子而身上披上毡子。
English: As a result, it is even more difficult to calculate the depth of the grass, step on the stones and go down. If, like Deng Ai's army in the past, they went down a dark and flat path, fell into a ditch, and rolled down a cliff, all techniques were exhausted, but we were all bare-handed, unable to have our hands wrapped in a noose and our bodies covered with braids.

古文：既而忽下一悬崖，忽得枯涧，遂得践石而行。
现代文：不久，忽然下了一座悬崖，见到一条干涸的山涧，于是得以踏着石头向前走。
English: Soon after, he suddenly descended a cliff and saw a dry mound, so he was able to walk on the stone.

古文：盖前之攀枝悬坠者藉树，而兜衣挂履亦树，得涧而树梢为开。既而涧复生草，草复翳涧，靡草之下，不辨其孰为石，孰为水，既难着足。
现代文：前面攀着枝条悬空下坠借助于树，而刺穿衣服钩挂住鞋子的也是树，到了山涧中树木才稍微稀疏些，随即山涧中又生长了些草，草又遮蔽了涧底，倒伏的草丛下边，不能分辨哪是石头哪是水，很难下足。
English: In front of me, I was climbing branches, dangling in the air, and falling down with the help of a tree, and the tree that pierced my clothes and hooked my shoes was also a tree. When I got to the mountains, the trees were a little sparser, and then some grasses grew in the mountains, and the grasses covered the bottom of my shoes. Under the overhanging grass, I couldn't tell which was stone and which was water, and it was difficult to get off my feet.

古文：或草尽石出，又棘刺勾芒，兜衣挂履如故。
现代文：即或草没有了石头露出来，而棘刺勾芒，又像前面下山时一样戳衣挂鞋。
English: Even if there are no stones in the grass, thorns and thistles will poke out, and clothes and shoes will be poked like when going down the mountain.

古文：如是三里，下一瀑崖，微见路影在草间，然时隐时现。
现代文：如此这般走了三里，下了一座有瀑布悬挂的山崖，隐约见到路影在草丛间，然而时隐时现。
English: I walked for three miles like this, descended a cliff with a waterfall hanging over it, and vaguely saw the shadow of the road in the grass, but it was fleeting.

古文：又一里，涧从崖间破峡而出，两崖轰峙，而北尤危峭，始见路从南崖逾岭出。
现代文：又走一里，涧流从两边山崖间破峡而出，两边的山崖高高地对峙着，北边的尤其高峻陡峭，这才见到路从南边山崖间越过岭而出去。
English: After walking another mile, the turbulent current emerged from the gap between the cliffs on both sides. The cliffs on both sides faced each other at a high altitude, and the north side was particularly high and steep. It was only then that I saw the road over the ridge between the cliffs on the south side.

古文：又一里，得北来大道，始有村居，询其处，为窑里，盖云阳之西坞也。
现代文：又走一里，见到从北面来的大路，这才开始有村庄，一打听，这地方为窑里，大略是云阳山西面的一个山坞。
English: After walking another mile, I saw a camel coming from the north on the main road, and that's when the village started to appear. Upon inquiry, I learned that this place was a kiln, roughly a dock on the west side of Yunyang Mountain.

古文：其地东北转洪山庙五里而遥，南至东岭十里而遥，东岭而南更五里，即秦人洞矣。
现代文：从窑里折往东北到洪山庙有五里多，往南到东岭有十里多，东岭往南再走五里，就是秦人洞了。
English: From the kiln, it is more than five miles to the northeast to Hongshan Temple, more than ten miles to the south to Dongling, and another five miles to the south to Dongling, which is Qinren Cave.

古文：时雾影渐开，遂南循山峡行。逾一小岭，五里，上枣核岭，下一里，渡涧，傍西麓溯涧南上半里，为络丝潭，深碧无底，两崖多叠石。
现代文：当时迷雾渐渐散开，于是往南顺着山峡行、越过一座小山岭，走五里，登上枣核岭，这两岭都是云阳山向西延伸而后转往北形成山峡的山岭。朝下走一里，渡过一条涧流，那涧流从南面的龙头岭下流来，流出上清洞。依傍着岭西麓溯涧往南上行半里，为络丝潭，此潭深碧无底，两旁的山崖间堆叠着许多石头。
English: At that time, the fog gradually dispersed, so I walked south along the mountain canyon, crossed a small mountain ridge, walked five miles, and ascended Zaoju Ridge. These two ridges are the mountains of Yunyang Mountain extending to the west and then turning to the north to form a canyon. I walked one mile down and crossed a turbulent current, which flowed from the south of Longtou Ridge and flowed out of Shangqing Cave. I followed the west foot of the ridge for half a mile to the south, and it was Lo Si Lake. This lake is deep and bottomless, with many stones stacked between the cliffs on both sides.

古文：又半里，复度涧，傍东麓登山。
现代文：又走半里，仍渡过涧流，依傍着岭东麓往山上登。
English: I walked another half-mile, still crossing the turbulent current, and climbed up the mountain alongside the eastern foot of the ridge.

古文：是处东为云阳之南峰，西为大岭之东嶂。
现代文：此处东面为云阳山的南面山峰，西面是大岭东面的一座高峻的山峰。
English: To the east is the southern peak of Yunyang Mountain, and to the west is the eastern peak of Daling Mountain.

古文：一溪自大岭之东北来者，乃洪碧山之水；一溪自龙头岭北下者，乃大岭、云阳过脊处之水。二水合而北出把七铺名。
现代文：大岭与云阳山一样高，龙头岭在大岭的山脊上，它东南面到西岭结束，东北面抵麻叶洞，西北面耸立着五凤楼峰，西南面为古爽冲。从大岭的东北面流来的一条溪水，发源于洪碧山；从龙头岭往北朝下流的一条溪水，发源于大岭、云阳山山脊，两条溪水汇合而往北流出把七。
English: Daling is as high as Yunyang Mountain, Longtouling is on the ridge of Daling, it ends in the southeast to Xiling, northeast to Ma Ye Cave, northwest to Wu Feng Lou Peak, and southwest to Gu Shuang Chong. A stream flowing from the northeast side of Daling originates from Hongbi Mountain; a stream flowing down from Longtouling to Beichang originates from Daling and Yunyang Mountain ridge, and the two streams converge and flow out to the north.

古文：龙头岭水分南北，其南下之水，由东岭坞合秦人洞水出大罗埠。
现代文：龙头岭的水分流往南北两面，从岭南面流下去的水，经东岭坞汇合秦人洞来的水流出大罗埠。
English: The water of the Longtou Ridge is diverted to the north and south, and the water flowing down from the south of the ridge flows through the Dongling dock to the Qinren Cave.

古文：共二里，越岭得平畴，是为东岭坞。
现代文：共走两里，越过山岭到一片平坦的田野，这是东岭坞。
English: A total of two miles, over the mountains to a flat field, this is Dongling dock.

古文：坞内水田平衍连绵铺开，村居稠密，东为云阳，西为大岭，北即龙头岭过脊，南为东岭回环。
现代文：山坞内水田平展，村落稠密，山坞的东面为云阳山，西面为大岭，北面就是龙头岭的山脊，南面是东岭曲折环绕。
English: The paddy fields in the dockyard are flat, the villages are dense, the east side of the dockyard is Yunyang Mountain, the west side is Daling, the north side is the ridge of Longtouling, and the south side is surrounded by Dongling.

古文：余始至以为平地，即下东岭，而后知犹众山之上也。
现代文：我刚到时以为这个山坞已经是低平的地方，待走下东岭，而后知道这山坞仍处在众山之上。
English: When I first arrived, I thought that this dock was already a low-lying place, until I walked down Dongling, and then I knew that this dock was still on top of the mountains.

古文：循坞东又一里，宿于新庵。
现代文：顺山坞东面又走一里，投宿在新庵。
English: I walked another mile to the east of Shunsan dock and stayed at Shinan.

