古文：◎儒林四
现代文：吕祖谦，字伯恭，是尚书右丞吕好问的孙子。
English: Lv Zuqian, also known as Boqiong, was the grandson of Shang Shuyuan Lv Haoqian.

古文：○刘子翚吕祖谦蔡元定陆九龄陆九渊薛季宣陈傅良叶适戴溪蔡幼学杨泰之
现代文：从他祖父时候起，其家便居住在婺州。吕家向为书香门第，藏书甚丰，这就给吕祖谦小时候的启蒙教育及后来从事学问研究提供了极为便利的条件。
English: Since his grandfather's time, his family has been living in Zhangzhou. The Lv family is famous for its rich collection of books, which provided extremely convenient conditions for Lu Zuqian's initial education as a child and later for his academic research.

古文：刘子翚，字彦冲，赠太师韐之仲子。
现代文：成人后，吕祖谦与林之奇、汪应辰、胡宪等人交往密切。
English: After he became an adult, Lu Zuqian had close contacts with Lin Zhiqi, Wang Yingchen, Hu Xian and others.

古文：以父任授承务郎，辟真定府幕属。
现代文：并与张木式、朱熹等理学名流成为好友。
English: He also became good friends with famous scientists such as Zhang Muxi and Zhu Xi.

古文：韐死靖康之难，子翚痛愤，几无以为生，墓三年。
现代文：他们在一起相互探讨，切磋理学有关问题。学问做得既深又细。
English: They discuss with each other and discuss issues related to science. The learning is both deep and detailed.

古文：初，荫补入官，后举进士，复中博学宏词科，调南外宗教。丁内艰，居明招山，四方之士争趋之。
现代文：起初，吕祖谦受父荫进入仕途，后来通过自己的努力考取进士，中的是博学宏词科，遂调南外宗教，服母丧期间，吕祖谦住在明抬山上，由于他有名声，所以许多名士、学子都前去向他求教、问学。
English: At first, Lu Zuqian entered the career under his father's shadow. Later, through his own efforts, he passed the entrance examination to become a scholar. His major was "Erudition and Rhetoric," and then he transferred to a religion outside of China. During his mother's funeral, Lu Zuqian lived on the Mingzhu Mountain. Because of his fame, many celebrities and students came to him to ask for advice and study.

古文：除太学博士，时中都官待次者例补外，添差教授严州，寻复召为博士兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
现代文：不久，吕祖谦被授为太学博士，当时中都官在等待引见皇上、正式赴任前按规定补外，遂以添差官的身份教授严州，旋又被朝廷召为博士兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
English: Soon after, Lü Zuqian was awarded the title of Doctor of Theology. At that time, the vice-governor was waiting to be introduced to the emperor and was filling in as required before officially taking office. As a result, he taught Yanzhou as an assistant official, and was then called by the imperial court to be a doctor, editor of the Academy of National History, and reviewer of the Academy of Historical Records.

古文：轮对，勉孝宗留意圣学。且言： 恢复大事也，规模当定，方略当审。
现代文：在任职期间，他曾建议皇帝留意圣学，并说： 要恢复大业，应当定规模，审方略。
English: During his term of office, he advised the emperor to pay attention to sacred learning, and said: To restore the great cause, it is necessary to determine the scale and review the strategy.

古文：陛下方广揽豪杰，共集事功，臣愿精加考察，使之确指经画之实，孰为先后，使尝试侥幸之说不敢陈于前，然后与一二大臣定成算而次第行之，则大义可伸，大业可复矣。 
现代文：陛下方广揽豪杰，共集事功，我愿精加考察，将政策方略拟定好，并分清主次，排定先后，使那些侥幸之言无立足之地，然后与一、二位大臣商定后分别奏呈皇上，颁布实行。这样一来，就可伸大义，复大业了。 
English: His Majesty's side has gathered a wide range of heroes and heroes, and they have made great contributions. I would like to study hard, formulate the policy strategy well, and distinguish the priorities, arrange them in order, so that those lucky words have no foundation, and then, after agreeing with one or two ministers, separately submit to the emperor and promulgate and implement. In this way, we can promote justice and restore the great cause.

古文：召试馆职。
现代文：吕祖谦被召试馆职。
English: Lu Zuqian was called to the post of examiner.

古文：先是，召试者率前期从学士院求问目，独祖谦不然，而其文特典美。
现代文：召试前，许多人到学士院打听题目，独吕祖谦不以为然。但召试结果，吕祖谦的章特别典雅优美。
English: Before the examination, many people came to the academy to ask questions, but Lu Zuqian did not agree. However, as a result of the examination, Lu Zuqian's chapter was particularly elegant and beautiful.

古文：尝读陆九渊文，喜之，而未识其人。考试礼部，得一卷，曰： 此必江西小陆之文也。 揭示，果九渊，人服其精鉴。
现代文：吕祖谦曾经读过陆九渊的文章，且非常喜欢，但并不认识这位后生，在负责礼部考试的时候，吕祖谦阅鉴一份答卷后说 ：这肯定是江西小陆的文章。 揭开弥封一看，果如其言。
English: Lu Zuqian had read Lu Jiuyuan's article and liked it very much, but he did not know this future student. When he was in charge of the etiquette exam, Lu Zuqian read an answer sheet and said: "This must be an article by Jiangxi Xiaolu.

古文：父忧，免丧，主管台州崇道观。
现代文：人们因此都赞叹吕祖谦有精湛的鉴别才能。父亲死后，免丧，主管台州崇道观。
English: As a result, people praised Lu Zuqian for his exquisite discernment. After his father's death, he was allowed to remain in charge of Taizhou Chong Dao Guan.

古文：越三年，除秘书郎、国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
现代文：过了三年，吕祖谦外任秘书郎、国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
English: Three years later, Lu Zuqian became the external secretary, the editor-in-chief of the Academy of National History, and the reviewer of the Institute of Historical Records.

古文：以修撰李焘荐，重修《徽宗实录》。
现代文：因为修撰李焘的推荐，吕祖谦得以参与重修《徽宗实录》的工作。
English: Lu Zuqian was able to participate in the work of revising the "Hui Sect Record" because of the recommendation of Li Jie.

古文：书成，进秩。
现代文：书成后，品级又得以晋升。
English: After the book was completed, the grade was promoted again.

古文：面对，言曰： 夫治道体统，上下内外不相侵夺而后安。
现代文：吕祖谦在接受皇帝咨询时说： 治道体统，只有上下内外不相侵夺才可以安定。
English: When receiving the emperor's consultation, Lü Zuqian said, "The system of governance can only be stable if the upper and lower levels do not encroach on each other.

古文：乡者，陛下以大臣不胜任而兼行其事，大臣亦皆亲细务而行有司之事，外至监司、守令职任，率为其上所侵而不能令其下。
现代文：以往，陛下往往因不相信大臣而兼管大臣之职，大臣无事可做，只得做一些本来该属下做的细务琐事。这样层层相因，至监司、守令莫不如此。都因自己的职权被上司侵夺而不能有效地命令部下。
English: In the past, His Majesty often held the post of minister because he did not trust the minister. The minister had nothing to do, but had to do some minor tasks that should have been done by his subordinates. This was the case with supervisors and shoremen. They were unable to effectively command their subordinates because their authority was usurped by their superiors.

古文：故豪猾玩官府，郡县忽省部，掾属凌长吏，贱人轻柄臣。
现代文：由此就产生这样一个结果：豪猾之人玩弄官府，郡县忽视省部，属吏欺凌上司，贱人轻视权臣。
English: As a result, the result is as follows: brave people play with the government, counties ignore ministries and departments, subordinate officials bully superiors, and lowlifes despise powerful ministers.

古文：平居未见其患，一旦有急，谁与指麾而伸缩之邪？
现代文：这种现象在平常可能看不出它的弊端，一旦出现危急情况，由谁来行使指挥之权呢？
English: This phenomenon may not be able to see its drawbacks in ordinary times. In the event of a critical situation, who will exercise the right of command?

古文：如曰臣下权任太重，惧其不能无私，则有给、舍以出纳焉，有台谏以救正焉，有侍从以询访焉。
现代文：如果说臣下权任太重，可能会产生私心私欲，那么陛下可以在经济上加以控制，可以用台谏之官加以弹劾，并且可以随时派侍从加以探询监视。
English: If the power of a vassal is too heavy and may produce selfish desires, then His Majesty can control it economically, can impeach it with a magistrate, and can send attendants to investigate and monitor it at any time.

古文：傥得端方不倚之人分处之，自无专恣之虑，何必屈至尊以代其劳哉？
现代文：如此，则即便有那种心术不正之人，他也不能专横弄权。陛下又何必屈尊以代大臣之劳呢？
English: In this way, even if there is such a person who is mentally dishonest, he cannot arbitrarily manipulate power. Why does His Majesty have to deign to be a substitute minister?

古文：人之关鬲脉络少有壅滞，久则生疾。陛下于左右虽不劳操制，苟玩而弗虑，则声势浸长，趋附浸多，过咎浸积，内则惧为陛下所遣而益思壅蔽，外则惧为公议所疾而益肆诋排。
现代文：人的关节脉络如有阻塞就会生病，陛下虽然日理万机，操劳不已，如果不注意这个问题，则势必造成声势浸长，趋附浸多，过咎浸积的状况。大臣一方面因惧怕为皇帝所责而隐瞒事实，一方面因怕舆论所指而相互推诿诋毁排斥。
English: If there is a blockage in a person's joint vein, the person will fall ill. Although His Majesty takes all possible measures and works tirelessly, if he does not pay attention to this problem, it is bound to lead to a situation where there is too much pressure, too much attachment, and too much blame. On the one hand, ministers hide the facts for fear of being blamed by the emperor, and on the other hand, they push and discredit and exclude each other for fear of being pointed out by public opinion.

古文：愿陛下虚心以求天下之士，执要以总万事之机。勿以图任或误而谓人多可疑，勿以聪明独高而谓智足遍察，勿详于小而忘远大之计，勿忽于近而忘壅蔽之萌。 
现代文：愿陛下虚心以求天下之士，抓住要点管好大政方针，不要因任人失误而以为人多可疑，不要自认聪明过人就足以偏察于人，不要详于小事而忘远大之计，不要忽视近佞而忘了壅蔽的萌生。 
English: May His Majesty humbly seek the world's people, grasp the essentials and manage the major policies, do not think that many people are suspicious because of their mistakes, do not think that they are smart enough to be biased, do not dwell on small things and forget the big plan, do not ignore the near future and forget the emergence of the future.

古文：又言： 国朝治体，有远过前代者，有视前代为未备者。
现代文：吕祖谦还说： 国朝治体，有些是比前代高明的，有些是前代所不具备的。
English: Lu Zuqian also said: Some of the dynasties are more sophisticated than the previous generation, and some are not possessed by the previous generation.

古文：夫以宽大忠厚建立规模，以礼逊节义成就风俗，此所谓远过前代者也。
现代文：比如说以宽大忠厚建立规模，以礼逊节义成就风俗，就是胜过前代的。
English: For example, it is better than the previous generation to establish a scale with generosity and loyalty, and to achieve a custom with courtesy.

古文：故于俶扰艰危之后，驻跸东南逾五十年，无纤毫之虞，则根本之深可知矣。
现代文：因此，在经过了民族危难之后，驻守东南逾五十年，而没有丝毫担忧。但是，在文治可观的喜人景象下面，却又存在着武绩未振的事实。
English: Therefore, after the national crisis, we have been stationed in Southeast Asia for more than 50 years without the slightest concern. However, under the pleasant scenery of the civil administration, there is the fact that the military performance has not been improved.

古文：然文治可观而武绩未振，名胜相望而干略未优，故虽昌炽盛大之时，此病已见。是以元昊之难，范、韩皆极一时之选，而莫能平殄，则事功之不竞从可知矣。臣谓今日治体视前代未备者，固当激厉而振起。
现代文：名胜相望而方略未优，这在盛平之时业已显现出隐忧。当初西夏元昊发难，范仲淹、韩琦是众望所归的人物，但最终仍没有解除忧患，由此可以想见要成事建功是多么不容易。我认为，当今政治，对于那些前代未解决的问题，要激励而振起。
English: At the beginning, Western Xia Yuanhao was in trouble, and Fan Zhongyan and Han Xuan were the figures to whom people looked up, but in the end, they still did not relieve their worries. From this, we can imagine how difficult it is to accomplish things. I believe that today's politics should encourage and inspire those previously unsolved problems.

古文：远过前代者，尤当爱护而扶持。 
现代文：对于高于前代的东西，更要特别加以爱护和扶持。 
English: For something that is higher than the previous generation, it is even more important to give it special care and support.

古文：迁著作郎，以末疾，请祠归。
现代文：吕祖谦升著作郎后，因病请辞归。
English: Lyu Zu Qian Sheng, the author's son-in-law, asked to resign due to illness.

古文：先是，书肆有书曰《圣宋文海》，孝宗命临安府校正刊行。
现代文：这之前，书肆有书曰《圣宋文海》，孝宗命临安府将此书校正后刊行。
English: Prior to this, the publishing house had a book called "Song of Song and the Sea of Literature," which was corrected and published by the Lin'an prefectural government under the order of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：学士周必大言：《文海》去取差谬，恐难传后，盍委馆职铨择，以成一代之书？
现代文：但学士周必大认为该书取舍不当，错误较多，恐难传世，请委馆职重新铨释，以成一代之书。
English: However, the bachelor Zhou Bida believed that the book was improperly selected, there were many errors, and it would be difficult to pass it on to the next generation. He asked the librarian to re-release it, so that it would become a book for the next generation.

古文：孝宗以命祖谦。
现代文：孝宗因而命吕祖谦负责这项工作。
English: Therefore, Xiaozong ordered Lü Zuqian to be in charge of this work.

古文：遂断自中兴以前，崇雅黜浮，类为百五十卷，上之，赐名《皇朝文鉴》。
现代文：吕祖谦将此书断自中兴以前，崇雅黜浮，分门别类编为一百五十卷。书呈皇帝后，被赐名为《皇朝文鉴》。
English: Lu Zuqian cut this book off from ZTE before, and it was divided into 150 volumes. After the book was presented to the emperor, it was given the name "Imperial Literature."

古文：诏除直秘阁。
现代文：吕祖谦受诏升直秘书阁。
English: Lu Zuqian was promoted to the post of cabinet secretary.

古文：时方重职名，非有功不除，中书舍人陈爓驳之。
现代文：当时很重职名，不是有功之人不能升任，所以中书舍人陈揆不同意起草诏书。
English: At that time, the title of the post was very important, and those who were not meritorious could not be promoted, so Chen Xi, the person who gave up the post, did not agree to draft the edict.

古文：孝宗批旨云： 馆阁之职，文史为先。祖谦所进，采取精详，有益治道，故以宠之，可即命词。 爓不得已草制。
现代文：孝宗批旨说 ：馆阁之职，文史为先，祖谦所进之书，取舍精当，有益治道，因此特受朕之器重，应当马上起草任命诏书。 陈揆不得已照办。
English: Emperor Xiaozong approved the edict, saying, "The post of the Cabinet of the Great Hall of the People is first of all that of literature and history, and the books that Zou Qian entered into should be chosen carefully and be beneficial to the governance of the country. Therefore, it is of great importance to me that an imperial edict of appointment should be drafted immediately. Chen Xi had no choice but to do so.

古文：寻主管冲祐观。
现代文：不久，吕祖谦主管冲佑观。
English: Soon, Lyu Zuqian, director of Chong You Guan, left.

古文：明年，除著作郎兼国史院编修官。
现代文：又过一年，升为著作郎兼国史院编修官。
English: A year later, he was promoted to Shosho-ro and Editor-in-Chief of the Academy of National History.

古文：卒，年四十五。
现代文：去世，终年四十五岁。
English: He died at the age of 45.

古文：谥曰成。
现代文：谥号 成 。
English: 号成.

古文：祖谦学以关、洛为宗，而旁稽载籍，不见涯涘。心平气和，不立崖异，一时英伟卓荦之士皆归心焉。
现代文：吕祖谦承继张载、二程之学，但能旁征博引。平生心平气和，不标新立异，一时间，许多杰出人士皆对其心悦诚服。
English: Lyu Zuqian followed the teachings of Zhang Zai and Ercheng, but was able to learn from others. In his lifetime, he was peaceful and unconventional, and for a time, many outstanding people were convinced of his sincerity.

古文：少卞急，一日，诵孔子言： 躬自厚而薄责于人 ，忽觉平时忿懥涣然冰释。
现代文：小时候，性情较为急躁，有一天，当谈到孔子言 躬自厚而薄责于人 时，忽然觉得平时那种急躁之情涣然冰释了。
English: When I was a child, I was rather impatient. One day, when talking about Confucius's saying, "Be generous, but not overbearing," I suddenly felt that my usual impatience had melted away.

古文：朱熹尝言： 学如伯恭，方是能变化气质。 其所讲画，将以开物成务，既卧病，而任重道远之意不衰。
现代文：朱熹为此曾说： 如果能像吕祖谦那样学习，就能改变自己的气质之性。 吕祖谦主张学以致用，反对空谈性理，患病后，其任重道远之意不衰。
English: For this reason, Zhu Xi once said: If you can study like Lu Zuqian, you can change the nature of your temperament.Lu Zuqian advocated the application of learning and opposed idle talk about nature.

古文：居家之政，皆可为后世法。
现代文：其居家之政，可成为后世楷模。
English: His domestic policy can become a model for future generations.

古文：修《读诗记》、《大事记》，皆未成书。
现代文：他修《读诗记》、《大事记》，皆未成书。
English: He studied "Poetry Recitation" and "Major Events," neither of which were completed.

古文：考定《古周易》、《书说》、《阃范》、《官箴》、《辨志录》、《欧阳公本末》，皆行于世。
现代文：但他考定《古周易》、《书说》、《阃范》、《官箴》、《辨志录》、《欧阳公本末》，皆行于世。
English: However, he judged that "Ancient Zhou Yi," "Shu Xuan," "Juan Fan," "Guan Zhen," "Beng Zhi Lu" and "The End of Ouyang Gong Ben" were all practiced in the world.

古文：晚年会友之地曰丽泽书院，在金华城中，既殁。
现代文：吕祖谦晚年会友之地曰 丽泽书院 ，在金华城中。
English: The place of Lyu Zuqian's late-life friends is Lize Academy, in Jinhua City.

古文：郡人即而祠之。
现代文：去世后，郡人于此为他建了祠堂。
English: After his death, the people of the county built a shrine for him here.

古文：子延年。
现代文：吕祖谦有子名延年。
English: Lu Zuqian had a son named Yan Nian.

古文：蔡元定，字季通，建州建阳人。生而颖悟，八岁能诗，日记数千言。
现代文：蔡元定字季通，宋建州建阳人，从小天资聪颖，悟性极好，八岁时即能做诗，写日记数千言。
English: Cai Yuan Dingzhi Jitong, Song Jianzhou Jianyangren, from an early age was gifted with intelligence and excellent comprehension. At the age of eight, he was able to make poems and write thousands of words in a diary.

古文：父发，博览群书，号牧堂老人，以程氏《语录》、邵氏《经世》、张氏《正蒙》授元定，曰： 此孔、孟正脉也。 元定深涵其义。
现代文：蔡元定的父亲名蔡发，号牧堂老人，是个博学多才的人。蔡发将程颢、程颐的《语录》，邵雍的《皇极经世》、张载的《正蒙》教授给蔡元定，并且说 ：这些都是继承孔子、孟子之道的正统理论。 蔡元定深深理解其话的涵义。
English: Cai Yuanding's father, Cai Fa, known as the Old Man of the Pastoral Hall, was an erudite and multi-talented person. Cai Fa taught Cai Yuanding the "Quotations" of Cheng Xuan and Cheng Xuan, the "Imperial Teaching" of Shao Yong, and the "Righteous Monk" of Zhang Zai, and said: These are the orthodox theories that inherit the way of Confucius and Mencius. Cai Yuanding deeply understood the meaning of his words.

古文：既长，辨析益精。登西山绝顶，忍饥啖荠读书。
现代文：长大后，辨析理解能力更精强，蔡元定曾登上西山顶峰，并在那里忍饥食菜，潜心苦读。
English: After growing up, Cai Yuanding's ability to distinguish and understand was stronger. Cai Yuanding once climbed to the top of the West Mountain, where he endured hunger, ate vegetables, and studied hard.

古文：闻朱熹名，往师之。
现代文：蔡元定曾听说朱熹有名望，即前往拜师。
English: Cai Yuanding once heard that Zhu Xi was famous and went to visit him.

古文：熹扣其学，大惊曰： 此吾老友也，不当在弟子列。 遂与对榻讲论诸经奥义，每至夜分。
现代文：朱熹在了解蔡元定已有的学识后，大惊曰： 这个人应该是我的老友，而不应该是我的弟子。 于是朱熹常与蔡元定研讨诸经的深奥义理，每每谈至深夜。
English: After learning about Cai Yuanding's knowledge, Zhu Xi was shocked and said, "This person should be my old friend, not my disciple." Therefore, Zhu Xi often studied the esoteric teachings of the scriptures with Cai Yuanding, and they often talked until late at night.

古文：四方来学者，熹必俾先从元定质正焉。
现代文：朱熹要求从四方来求学的人，先从师于蔡元定，由此可见他是十分器重蔡元定的。
English: Zhu Xi required that those who came to study from the four directions should first study under Cai Yuanding, which shows that he was a great admirer of Cai Yuanding.

古文：太常少卿尤袤、秘书少监杨万里联疏荐于朝，召之，坚以疾辞。
现代文：当时的太常少卿尤袤、秘书少监杨万里两人联名将蔡元定举荐给朝廷，但是蔡元定对朝廷的召用，以有病为由，坚辞不就。
English: At that time, the then Taizhang Shaoqing Youjun and the secretary Shaojing Yang Wanli jointly recommended Cai Yuanding to the imperial court, but Cai Yuanding refused to be summoned to the imperial court on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：筑室西山，将为终焉之计。
现代文：他曾在西山建有一间房子，是为将来辞世所做的准备。
English: He once built a house in Xishan to prepare for his death.

古文：时韩侂胄擅政，设伪学之禁，以空善类。台谏承风，专肆排击，然犹未敢诵言攻朱熹。
现代文：当时，韩胄擅权专政，出于巩固权势的需要，韩胄将道学诬为伪学并加以查禁，台谏受韩胄的要挟与影响，专门从事一些打击排挤忠良之事。
English: At that time, Han Kuo was in a dictatorial power, and out of the need to consolidate power, Han Kuo falsified Taoism as a pseudoscience and banned it. Taiwan Kuo was threatened and influenced by Han Kuo, and specialized in fighting against the exclusion of the loyal.

古文：至沈继祖、刘三杰为言官，始连疏诋熹，并及元定。
现代文：不过当时还没有直接倡言攻击朱熹，只是到了沈继祖、刘三杰担任谏官的时候，才开始连篇累牍地诋毁朱熹，并连及蔡元定。
English: However, at that time, there was no direct advocacy to attack Zhu Xi. It was only when Shen Jizu and Liu Sanjie served as eunuchs that they began to slander Zhu Xi and Cai Yuanding.

古文：元定简学者刘砺曰： 化性起伪，乌得无罪！ 未几，果谪道州。
现代文：蔡元定致信学者刘砺说 ：现在韩党已将道学定性为伪学，恐怕我罪名难逃了。 不久，蔡元定果然被贬谪道州。
English: Cai Yuanding sent a letter to the scholar Liu Xuan saying, "Now that the Korean Party has classified Taoism as a pseudoscience, I'm afraid I can't escape the blame." Soon after, Cai Yuanding was indeed denounced as a Taoist.

古文：州县捕元定甚急，元定闻命，不辞家即就道。
现代文：州县的官吏奉韩胄的密令，急于逮捕蔡元定。元定听此消息后，来不及与家人告别就匆匆上路，准备出走。
English: State and county officials, acting on a secret order from Han Zheng, were eager to arrest Cai Yuanding. After hearing this news, Yuanding hurriedly went on his way without time to say goodbye to his family and prepared to leave.

古文：熹与从游者数百人饯别萧寺中，坐客兴叹，有泣下者。
现代文：临行时，朱熹与从游者数百人在萧寺为蔡元定饯行。
English: On the eve of the trip, Zhu Xi and hundreds of tourists were at Xiao Temple for Cai Yuanding.

古文：熹微视元定，不异平时，因喟然曰： 友朋相爱之情，季通不挫之志，可谓两得矣。 元定赋诗曰： 执手笑相别，无为儿女悲。 众谓宜缓行，元定曰： 获罪于天，天可逃乎？ 杖屦同其子沉行三千里，脚为流血，无几微见言面。
现代文：朱熹悄悄观察蔡元定，见他与平时一样平静，感叹说： 朋友之间的友情，元定不怕受挫的志气，我都得到了。 蔡元定当时赋诗说： 执手笑相别，无为儿女悲。 大家都嘱咐元定慢走并注意身体，蔡元定说： 如果得罪于天，难道能逃过恢恢天网吗？ 蔡元定拄着拐杖带着儿子蔡沉步行近三千里，脚都走得流了血，面容憔悴，不成人形。
English: Zhu Xi quietly observed Cai Yuanding and saw that he was as calm as usual, and sighed: I have gained the friendship between friends, and the ambition that Cai Yuanding is not afraid of being frustrated. At that time, Cai Yuanding said in a poem: "Hold hands and smile, there is no sorrow for children." Everyone told Cai Yuanding to walk slowly and pay attention to his body. Cai Yuanding said: If you sin against heaven, can you escape the net of heaven? Cai Yuanding walked nearly three thousand miles on crutches with his son Cai Shen. His feet were bleeding, his face was haggard, and he did not look like a man.

古文：至舂陵，远近来学者日众，州士子莫不趋席下以听讲说。
现代文：走到舂陵，远近的许多学子皆慕名前来求学，听蔡元定讲学。
English: When I went to Fuling, many students from near and far came to study and listen to Cai Yuanding's lectures.

古文：有名士挟才简傲、非笑前修者，亦心服谒拜，执弟子礼甚恭。
现代文：有位名士恃才傲慢，取笑那些前去向元定求学的人，后来也心悦诚服，拜蔡元定为师，并表现得十分恭敬。
English: There was a famous person who was arrogant and made fun of those who went to study with Cai Yuan. Later, he was convinced that Cai Yuan was his teacher and behaved very respectfully.

古文：人为之语曰： 初不敬，今纳命。 爱元定者谓宜谢生徒，元定曰： 彼以学来，何忍拒之？
现代文：人们因之说： 初不敬，今纳命。 有些关心爱护蔡元定的人劝他辞谢前来求学的生徒，蔡元定说： 人家为求学而来，怎么好忍心拒绝呢？
English: Some people who are concerned about and care for Cai Yuanding advised him to decline the students who came to study, Cai Yuanding said: People come to study, how can they refuse?

古文：若有祸患，亦非闭门塞窦所能避也。 贻书训诸子曰： 独行不愧影，独寝不愧衾，勿以吾得罪故遂懈。 一日，谓沉曰： 可谢客，吾欲安静，以还造化旧物。 阅三日卒。
现代文：如果有祸患，你就是闭门不出也不能避免。 
English: If there is a calamity, you can't avoid it by shutting the door.

古文：侂胄既诛，赠迪功郎，赐谥文节。元定于书无所不读，于事无所不究。
现代文：蔡元定赠书并训导诸学子说 ：为人不做亏心事，半夜不怕鬼敲门，不要因为我有罪而放松了学习，失去了志向。 有一天，蔡元定对儿子蔡沉说 ：可以辞谢客人的拜访，我想安静一下，将我身体还给造物主。 
English: Cai Yuanding presented books and instructed his students, saying, "Don't do things that are harmful to people, don't be afraid of ghosts knocking on the door in the middle of the night, don't relax your studies and lose your ambition because of my sins."One day, Cai Yuanding said to his son Cai Shen, "You can decline the guest's visit. I want to be quiet for a while and return my body to the Creator."

古文：谥文节。
现代文：谥号 文节 。
English: 号 Wen section.

古文：傅良著述有《诗解诂》、《周礼说》、《春秋后传》、《左氏章指》行于世。
现代文：陈傅良之著述有《诗解诂》、《周礼说》、《春秋后传》、《左氏章指》，并流行于世。
English: Chen Fuliang's writings include "Poetic Interpretation," "Zhou Li said," "Spring and Autumn," "Zao's Chapter Finger," and are popular in the world.

