古文：士人入学曰游泮，又曰采芹；士人登科曰释褐，又曰得隽。
现代文：书生中了秀才，入学读书叫做 游泮 ，又叫做 采芹 ；士人应考登了进士科，可以脱去布衣换上官服称为 释褐 ，又叫 得隽 。
English: A scholar who is a brilliant student is called a wandering scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar, and a scholar who is a scholar is called a scholar.

古文：宾兴即大比之年，贤书乃试录之号。
现代文：三年一次考举人的乡试，称 大比之年 ，又称为 宾兴 ； 贤书 是乡试取中者的名单。
English: The township examination held once every three years is called the Year of Dabi, also known as the Year of Binxing; the Book of the Wise is a list of those who have passed the township examination.

古文：鹿鸣宴，款文榜之贤；鹰扬宴，待武科之士。
现代文： 鹿鸣宴 ，是款待文举进士的宴会； 鹰扬宴 ，是款待武举进士的宴会。
English: The Deer Chanting Banquet is a banquet for the winners of the literary examination; the Eagle Flying Banquet is a banquet for the winners of the martial arts examination.

古文：文章入式，有朱衣以点头；经术既明，取青紫如拾芥。
现代文：文章符合要求被选中，有朱衣老人在暗中示意；经书弄明白了，获取官职就像拾取芥子一样容易。
English: The article met the requirements and was selected, Zhu Yi secretly indicated; the book made it clear that obtaining an official post is as easy as picking up a mustard seed.

古文：其家初中，谓之破天荒；士人超拔，谓之出头地。
现代文：某家第一次有人考中进士，称作 破天荒 ；读书人出类拔萃，称作 出头地 。
English: The first time someone from a certain family passes the junior high school entrance examination, it is called "unprecedented"; the reader is outstanding, it is called "out of the box."

古文：中状元，曰独占鳌头；中解元，曰名魁虎榜。
现代文：考中状元叫 独占鳌头 ；考中解元，称 名魁虎榜 。
English: The middle school entrance examination is called "Exclusive Shantou"; the middle school entrance examination is called "Celebrity Tiger."

古文：琼林赐宴，宋太宗之伊始；临轩问策，宋神宗之开端。
现代文：皇帝在琼林苑赐宴新考中的进士，这是从宋太宗才开始有的；皇帝亲临殿前提问应试的新进士，这是从宋神宗才开始的。
English: The emperor's banquet in Qionglin Court to present new candidates for the entrance examination only began with Song Taizong; the emperor's personal visit to the palace to inquire about new candidates for the entrance examination only began with Song Shenzong.

古文：同榜之人，皆是同年；取中之官，谓之座主。
现代文：同榜取中之人互称为 同年 ，进士举人称自己的主考官为 座主 。
English: The people in the same list are mutually referred to as the same year, and the candidates call their chief examiner as the chairperson.

古文：应试见遗，谓之龙门点额；进士及第，谓之雁塔题名。
现代文：应试没有取中，如同鲤鱼没有跳过龙门，触额而返，故称为 龙门点额 。唐代进士及第后，把姓名写在慈恩寺雁塔上，后人便称登科为 雁塔题名 。
English: If a candidate fails to pass the entrance examination, it is as if the eel did not jump over the gantry and returned after touching the gantry, so it is called the gantry point. In the Tang Dynasty, Jin Shi and Ji Hou wrote their names on the wild goose tower of Cien Temple, and later generations called Deng Ke the title of the wild goose tower.

古文：贺登科，曰荣膺鹗荐；入贡院，曰鏖战棘闱。
现代文：祝贺别人考中登科，叫 荣膺鹗荐 ；考场如战场，所以进贡院应试，谓之 鏖战棘闱 。
English: Congratulating others on passing the junior high school entrance examination is called "honor" and "recommendation"; the examination hall is like a battlefield, so it is "difficult" to pass the entrance examination.

古文：金殿唱名曰传胪，乡会放榜曰撤棘。
现代文：殿试后金銮殿上传唱新科进士名次的典礼叫做 传胪 。乡试会试到发榜期叫做 撤棘 。
English: After the entrance examination, the ceremony in which the Jinqiao Hall sings the new science promotion rank is called "passing." The township entrance examination is called "withdrawing thorns" until the release of the list.

古文：攀仙桂，步青云，皆言荣发；孙山外，红勒帛，总是无名。
现代文： 攀仙桂 、 步青云 都是说进士及第而荣耀发达。 孙山外 、 红勒帛 都是说榜上无名、没有考取的婉转之辞。
English: "Pangxian Gui" and "Buxingyun" are euphemisms for "emerging star" and "first and foremost developed with glory," while "Sun Shanwai" and "Hong Le Yao" are euphemisms for "no name on the list" and "no award."

古文：英雄入吾彀，唐太宗喜得佳士；桃李属春官，刘禹锡贺得门生。
现代文： 英雄入吾彀 ，这是唐太宗看到新科进士时的喜悦之情； 桃李属春官 ，这是刘禹锡道贺礼部侍郎选拔了一批新门生。
English: The hero enters the Urumqi, this is the joy of Tang Taizong when he sees the new scholars; the peach and plum belong to the spring official, this is Liu Yuxi, the attendant of the congratulatory ceremony department, selected a group of new disciples.

古文：薪，采也，槱，积也，美文王作人之诗，故考士谓之薪槱之典；汇，类也，征，进也，是连类同进之象，故进贤谓之汇征之途。
现代文：《诗经》以采伐积聚木柴以备燃烧来比喻赞美周文王培育人才，因此后世称以考试选拔人才叫做 薪槱之典 。《易经》泰卦说： 以其汇，征吉。 讲的就是连类同进的卦象，后把举荐人才称 汇征之途 。
English: "The Book of Songs" praises King Chouwen for cultivating talents with the metaphor of harvesting and accumulating firewood to prepare for burning. Therefore, in later generations, the selection of talents by examination is called "the book of firewood." "I Ching" Taiga said: "Seek good fortune by collecting firewood." It is the story of the elephant that goes with its kind, and then the recommended talent is called "the way of collecting firewood."

古文：赚了英雄，慰人下第；傍人门户，怜士无依。
现代文： 赚了英雄 是对落第之人的安慰； 傍人门户 是对读书人无依无靠的怜惜之词。
English: Earned a hero is a consolation to the losers; the gate of the bystanders is a word of pity for the helpless readers.

古文：虽然有志者事竟成，伫看荣华之日；成丹者火候到，何惜烹炼之功。
现代文：虽然这样，但有志者事竟成，终会有荣华富贵的时候；火候到了仙丹自然就能炼成，千万不能吝惜修炼的功夫。
English: Although this is the case, those who have the will to succeed will eventually have a time of glory and wealth; when the fire reaches the immortals, it can be naturally refined, and the effort of cultivation must not be spared.

