古文：张辽受曹公命屯长社。临发，军中有谋反者，夜惊乱火起，一军尽扰。
现代文：原文大将张辽受曹操之命驻扎长社县，临出发时，张辽的部队中有人谋反，夜里营中惊乱不止，着起大火，全军都骚动不安。
English: The original text: General Zhang Liao was ordered by Cao Cao to be stationed in Changshe County. At the time of departure, some of Zhang Liao's troops plotted a rebellion. During the night, the camp was in constant turmoil, and a fire broke out. The entire army was in turmoil.

古文：辽谓左右曰： 勿动！
现代文：张辽对身边的将领说： 不要乱动！
English: Zhang Liao said to the generals around him: Don't move!

古文：是不一营尽反，必有造变者，欲以动乱人耳。 
现代文：这不是全营的人都反了，而必定是叛变的人想以此来惑乱人心而已！ 
English: It's not that the whole battalion has turned against them, but it must be that the mutineers want to use this as a means of confusing people!

古文：乃令军中曰： 不反者安坐。 
现代文：他向军营中下达号令： 凡没有参加叛乱者要安稳坐好不要乱动！ 
English: He issued an order to the camp: All those who did not participate in the rebellion should sit quietly and do not move!

古文：辽将亲兵数十人中阵而立，有顷，即得首谋者，杀之。
现代文：张辽率领几十名警卫士兵，站在军营中央巍然屹立。不一会儿工夫，就把带头谋反的人捉住，立即杀掉了。
English: Zhang Liao led dozens of guards and soldiers, standing tall in the center of the military camp. Within a short time, he caught the person who led the rebellion and immediately killed him.

古文：周亚夫将兵讨七国，军中尝夜惊。
现代文：评译汉朝周亚夫率兵讨伐七国之乱，一日夜间军营中发生夜惊。
English: Commentary on the translation of Han Dynasty Zhou Yafu led the troops to fight against the Seven Kingdoms Rebellion. One night, night terrors occurred in the military camp.

古文：亚夫坚卧不起，顷之自定。
现代文：周亚夫安稳地躺在床上不起身，不久惊扰就自然平定了。
English: Zhou Yafu lay safely in bed and did not get up. Soon, the alarm was naturally calmed down.

古文：吴汉为大司马，尝有寇夜攻汉营，军中惊扰，汉坚卧不动，军中闻汉不动，皆还按部，汉乃选精兵夜击，大破之。
现代文：吴汉担任大司马时，曾经有贼寇半夜攻击他的军营，军中受到惊扰。吴汉坚持卧床不起，军中士卒听说大司马连床都没起，便都回到自己的岗位。等军中安定下来，吴汉才起床挑选精兵，半夜出击，大破贼寇。
English: When Wu Han served as the grand steward, there was once a bandit attacking his military camp in the middle of the night, and the army was alarmed. Wu Han insisted on being bedridden. When the army sergeant heard that the grand steward did not even get out of bed, they all returned to their posts. When the army settled down, Wu Han got up to select elite soldiers, and attacked in the middle of the night to break the bandit.

