古文：成淹，字季文，上谷居庸人也。
现代文：成淹，字季文，上谷居庸人。
English: Cheng Duan, Zi Jiwen, Shangguo Juyangren.

古文：自言晋侍中粲之六世孙。
现代文：自称晋侍中成粲的六世孙。
English: He is the sixth generation grandson of the self-proclaimed Jin Samurai, Zhong Chengyu.

古文：祖升，家于北海。
现代文：祖成升，居家北海。
English: Zou Chengsheng lives in the North Sea.

古文：乃敕停行。
现代文：父亲成洪，名字犯显祖庙讳，仕职刘义隆，为抚军府中兵参军。早年去世。
English: He then ordered a halt to the Northern Patrol.

古文：太和中，文明太后崩，萧赜遣其散骑常侍裴昭明、散骑侍郎谢竣等来吊，欲以朝服行事。
现代文：成淹爱好文学，有气度志向。太和年间，文明太后逝世，萧赜派其散骑常侍裴昭明、散骑侍郎谢竣等人前来吊唁，使者想穿着朝服吊唁。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, when Empress Dowager Cixi passed away, Emperor Xiao Yao sent his equerry, Pei Zhaoming, and his equerry, Xie Jun, to offer condolences. The envoys wanted to offer their condolences in imperial robes.

古文：主客执之，云： 吊有常式，何得以朱衣入山庭！ 
现代文：主客官员把他们抓了起来，说： 吊有常式，怎么能穿着朱衣入山庭呢？ 
English: The host and guest officials caught up with them and said, "How can you enter the mountain garden wearing a vermillion robe if you have a regular robe?"

古文：昭明等言： 本奉朝命，不容改易。 
现代文：昭明等人说： 我们本奉朝命，不容改易服装。 
English: Akira Akira and others said, "We have been ordered by the government not to change our clothes.

古文：如此者数四，执志不移。
现代文：如此往复四次，昭明等人就是不换丧服。
English: This happened four times in a row, and Akimei and the others simply did not change their mourning clothes.

古文：高祖敕尚书李冲，令选一学识者更与论执，冲奏遣淹。
现代文：高祖命令尚书李冲，令他选择一位学识渊博的人再与他论执，李冲启奏派成淹。
English: Gaozhu ordered Shangshu Li Chong to choose a knowledgeable person to debate with him, and Li Chong Kai's faction was overwhelmed.

古文：昭明言： 未解魏朝不听朝服行礼，义出何典？ 
现代文：昭明说： 不知道魏朝不让我们穿朝服行礼，义出何典？ 
English: Zhao Ming said, "I don't know, the Wei Dynasty didn't allow us to wear the imperial robes and salute. What happened?

古文：淹言： 吉凶不同，礼有成数；玄冠不吊，童孺共闻。
现代文：成淹说： 吉凶不问，礼有成数，去冠不吊，童孺共闻。
English: Chengyun said: Good luck or bad luck does not matter, etiquette is a matter of degree, crowns are not to be removed, and children are common knowledge.

古文：昔季孙将行，请遭丧之礼，千载之下，犹共称之。
现代文：过去季孙将行，请求依照遭丧之礼，千年以下，人们还在赞美。
English: In the past, if Ji Sun was going to attend a funeral, he would first ask for advice on the etiquette of the funeral. For thousands of years, people have been praising him.

古文：卿远自江南奉慰，不能式遵成事，方谓议出何典，行人得失，何其异哉！ 
现代文：卿从遥远的江南前来吊唁，却不能按照吊丧程式办事，我正要问这义出何典，行入的得与失，何其异哉！ 
English: Sir came from the far south of the Yangtze River to offer condolences, but he could not follow the mourning procedure. I was about to ask what was the reason for this, what were the gains and losses, what a difference!

古文：昭明言： 二国交和既久，南北皆须准望。
现代文：昭明说： 我们两国交和既久，南北都应互相理解。
English: Zhao Ming said: Our two countries have had long-standing diplomatic relations, and both North and South Korea should understand each other.

古文：齐高帝崩，魏遣李彪通吊，于时初不素服，齐朝亦不以为疑，那得苦见要逼。 
现代文：齐高帝去世，魏派李彪通吊，当时一开始不穿丧服，齐朝也不以此相疑，今天你们怎么能苦相逼迫。 
English: After the death of Qigong Emperor, Wei sent Li Biao to hang him. At that time, he did not wear mourning clothes at the beginning, and the Qi Dynasty did not doubt this. How can you persecute him today?

古文：淹言： 彪通吊之日，朝命以吊服自随，而彼不遵高宗追远之慕，乃逾月即吉。彪行吊之时，齐之君臣皆已鸣玉盈庭，貂珰曜日，百僚内外，朱服焕然，彪行人不被主人之命，复何容独以素服间衣冠之中？
现代文：成淹说： 李彪致吊之日，朝廷命他带上吊丧的服装，而齐不遵高宗追远之心，刚过一个月便完丧事，李彪行吊之时，齐国君臣都已经钟鼓鸣玉满庭，貂裘丽饰光耀白日，内外百官，朱服焕然，李彪不受主人之命，又何容独穿素服夹杂在衣冠楚楚的百僚中间？
English: Cheng said: On the day of Li Biao's hanging, the imperial court ordered him to wear mourning clothes, but Qi did not follow Gaozong's long-distance pursuit, and just over a month later the funeral was over. When Li Biao hanged himself, the princes and ministers of Qi were already in the court, and the gongs and juries were shining in the daytime. There were hundreds of officials at home and abroad, and the red suits were resplendent. Li Biao was not ordered by his master, and how could he wear plain clothes alone among the well-dressed hundred colleagues?

古文：来责虽高，未敢闻命。
现代文：你责问虽高，我却不敢以之为然。
English: Although the responsibility to go is great, it is impossible not to follow the master's arrangements.

古文：我皇帝仁孝之性，侔于有虞，处谅暗以来，百官听于冢宰，卿岂得以此方彼也？ 
现代文：我皇帝生性仁孝，比于有虞，服丧以来，百官都听宰臣调遣，卿岂能以此与齐相比呢。 
English: My emperor was born with benevolence and filial piety, rather than with danger. Since his funeral, hundreds of officials have listened to the dispatch of vice-ministers. How can you compare this with Qi?

古文：昭明乃摇膝而言： 三皇不同礼，亦安知得失所归。 
现代文：昭明于是摇着膝说： 三皇不同礼，也知道他们得失在什么地方。 
English: Shomei then shook his knee and said, "The three emperors do not have the same etiquette, and they also know where they stand.

古文：淹言： 若如来谈，卿以虞舜、高宗为非也？ 
现代文：成淹说： 如果像你方才说的，卿认为虞舜、高宗不对了？ 
English: Chengyun said, "If, as you just said, your lordship thinks that Gudong and Gaozong are wrong?

古文：昭明遂相顾而笑曰： 非孝者，宣尼有成责，行人亦弗敢言。
现代文：昭明于是相顾而笑说： 不孝的行为，仲尼有现成的责备，我这样的人也不敢乱说。
English: Zhao Ming then looked at each other and smiled and said, "The act of being unfilial, Zhong Ni has a ready-made reproach, and people like me dare not say anything out of line.

古文：希主人裁以吊服，使人唯，赍裤褶，比既戎服不可以吊，幸借缁衣幍，以申国命。
现代文：我希望主人为我裁缝丧服，出使之人，只准备了换洗内衣，这既是戎服，不可以吊丧，希望你们借我黑衣帽，以申国命。
English: I hope my master will provide me with a tailor to make my mourning clothes. He has sent someone out to prepare only a change of underwear. Since this is a military uniform, it is not appropriate for mourning. I hope you will borrow my black cap and swear allegiance to the country.

古文：今为魏朝所逼，违负指授，还南之日，必得罪本朝。 
现代文：今天被魏朝所逼，违背临行指授，还归南朝时候，我肯定会得罪本朝。 
English: Today, I was forced by the Wei Dynasty to disobey the instructions of the Provisional Government, and when I returned to the Southern Dynasty, I would certainly offend the Southern Dynasty.

古文：淹言： 彼有君子也，卿将命折中，还南之日，应有高赏；若无君子也，但令有光国之誉，虽复非理见罪，亦复何嫌？
现代文：成淹说： 那里也有君子，卿将命折中，还南之日，一定会有高赏；若无君子，只要你有光耀国家的赞誉，即使被无理见罪，那又有什么关系。
English: Cheng Yu said, "There are also gentlemen there. If you risk your life and return to the south, you will certainly be highly rewarded. If there are no gentlemen, as long as you have the praise of the country, even if you are unjustly found guilty, what does it matter?

古文：南史、董狐，自当直笔。 
现代文：公正的史臣，自然会直笔而书。 
English: Honest historians such as Nan Shi and Dong Foo would naturally be forthright.

古文：既而高祖遣李冲问淹昭明所言，淹以状对，高祖诏冲曰： 我所用得人。 
现代文：后来，高祖派李冲问成淹，了解昭明都说了些什么，成淹如实汇报了情况。高祖下诏李冲说： 我所用得人。 
English: Later, Emperor Gaozhu sent Li Chong to inquire of Chengyun to find out what Zhao Ming had said, and Chengyun truthfully reported the situation. Emperor Gaozhu ordered Li Chong to say, "I only use the best people."

古文：仍敕送衣巾给昭明等，赐淹果食。
现代文：仍敕送丧服丧帽给昭明等人，赐给成淹果品食物。
English: He still sent mourning clothes and hats to people such as Zhao Ming, and gave Chengyun fruit and food.

古文：明旦引昭明等入，皆令文武尽哀。
现代文：第二天早上，引昭明等人入丧堂，皆令文武官员尽哀。
English: The next morning, Zhi Zhaoming and others entered the funeral hall, and all the civil and military officials expressed their condolences.

古文：后正侍郎。
现代文：后来授成淹正侍郎。
English: Later, he was awarded the rank of Injo no Samurai.

古文：高祖以淹清贫，赐绢百匹。
现代文：高祖以淹清贫，赐给绢百匹。
English: Gao Zu used the money to wipe out poverty and gave hundreds of donkeys to the poor.

古文：十六年，萧赜遣其散骑常侍庾荜、散骑侍郎何宪、主书邢宗庆朝贡，值朝廷有事明堂，因登灵台以观云物。
现代文：太和十六年，萧赜派其散骑常侍庾荜、散骑侍郎何宪、主书邢宗庆前来朝贡，正逢朝廷在明堂有活动，因此登上灵台观看。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Taizu, Emperor Xiao Rong sent his errand horseman, errand horseman He Xian, and chief scribe, Er Zongqing, to pay tribute to the emperor. The imperial court was having an event in the Ming Hall, so they climbed onto the platform to watch.

古文：高祖敕淹引荜等馆南瞩望行礼，事毕，还外馆，赐酒食。
现代文：高祖让成淹引庾荜等在馆舍南面瞩望行礼，事毕，还外馆，高祖赐予酒食。
English: Gao Zu invited Cheng Nong to lead the eunuchs and others to the south of the pavilion to watch and salute. After the event, Gao Zu gave them wine and food.

古文：宗庆语淹言： 南北连和既久，而比弃信绝好，为利而动，岂是大国善邻之义？ 
现代文：宗庆对成淹说： 南北两朝连和既久，而一段时间以来你们弃信绝好，为利而动，哪是作为大国善邻所应该做的？ 
English: Gong Zongqing said to Cheng Juan: It has been a long time since the North and South have been friendly, and you have betrayed your trust, broken off friendly exchanges, and attacked us for the benefit of one country. Is this the attitude of a big country to treat a neighboring country in a friendly manner?

古文：淹言： 夫为王者，不拘小节。
现代文：成淹说： 大凡作为王者，不必拘于小节。
English: Chengyun said, "As a great king, you don't have to stick to a small section.

古文：中原有菽，工采者获多，岂眷眷守尾生之信。
现代文：中原有豆，善于采摘的收获便多，哪能眷眷守尾生之信。
English: There are beans in the Central Plains, and if you are good at picking, you will have more harvest. How can you cling to the belief of being born late?

古文：且齐先主历事宋朝，荷恩积世，当应便尔欺夺？ 
现代文：况且齐先帝历事宋朝，累世荷恩，就应当夺人宋朝之命？ 
English: Moreover, should Emperor Qixian, who lived through the Song Dynasty and was known as Hone, take the lives of the Song Dynasty's people?

古文：宗庆、庾荜及行者皆相顾失色。
现代文：宗庆、庾荜以及其他使者都相顾失色。
English: Zongqing, Zou, and the other emissaries all lose interest in each other.

古文：何宪知淹昔从南入，而以手掩目曰： 卿何为不作于禁，而作鲁肃？ 
现代文：何宪知道成淹过去由南入魏，便以手掩住眼睛说： 卿为什么不作于禁，而作了鲁肃？ 
English: He Xian knew that Cheng Nong had passed from the south into the Wei Dynasty, so he covered his eyes with his hands and said: Sir, why didn't you make a ban, but a ban?

古文：淹言： 我舍危效顺，欲追踪陈韩，何于禁之有！ 
现代文：成淹说： 我舍弃危殆之朝效力和顺之国，志行欲追迹陈、韩，和于禁有什么好比的！ 
English: Cheng said: I abandon the dangerous morning effect and the country of Shun, I want to follow the footsteps of Chen and Han, and what is comparable to the ban!

古文：宪亦不对。
现代文：何宪再也不说话了。
English: He Xian and others were speechless.

古文：王肃归国也，高祖以淹曾宦江表，诏观是非。
现代文：王肃投归朝廷，高祖以成淹曾经为官江表，下诏要他观察是非。
English: Wang Sui-tung returned to the imperial court, Gao Zu and Cheng Duan were once the official river watch, and the next edict asked him to observe the rights and wrongs.

古文：乃造肃与语，还奏言实，时议纷纭，犹谓未审。
现代文：于是成淹到王肃处与他交谈，还朝奏说情况属实。当时各方议论纷纷，还说此事不太确切。
English: As a result, Cheng Duan went to Wang Su's place to talk to him, and also reported to the emperor that the situation was true. At that time, all parties discussed it and said that the matter was not accurate.

古文：高祖曰： 明日引入，我与语，自当知之。 
现代文：高祖说： 明天引他进来，我与他交谈，自然就知道虚实了。 
English: Gaozu said, "Bring him in tomorrow, and I'll have a talk with him, and naturally I'll know the truth from the lie."

古文：及銮舆行幸，肃多扈从，敕淹将引，若有古迹，皆使知之。
现代文：等到高祖车驾出巡，王肃多派护从，帝让成淹当向导，一路遇到古迹，都让他知道。
English: When Gao Zu's car drove out on a tour, Wang Suda sent an escort, and Emperor Zhan Chengnong acted as a guide. When he encountered ancient monuments along the way, he let him know.

古文：行到朝歌，肃问： 此是何城？ 
现代文：行至朝歌，王肃问这是何城。
English: Walking to the morning song, Wang Su asked: What is this city?

古文：淹言： 纣都朝歌城。 肃言： 故应有殷之顽民也。 
现代文：成淹说是纣都城朝歌。王肃说： 怪不得有殷之顽民了。 
English: Chengyun is said to be the morning song of the capital. Wang Su said: It is no wonder that there are Yin people.

古文：淹言： 昔武王灭纣，悉居河洛，中因刘石乱华，仍随司马东渡。 
现代文：成淹说： 过去武王灭纣，帝都都居河、洛，中间因刘、石乱华，帝都便随司马氏东渡。 
English: Chengyun said: In the past, when King Wu was overthrown, the imperial capital resided in Hehe and Luo. In the middle, due to Liu and Shi's rebellion, the imperial capital followed the Sima clan to Dongdu.

古文：肃知淹寓于青州，乃笑而谓淹曰： 青州间何必无其余种？ 
现代文：王肃知道成淹本隶青州，于是笑着对成淹说： 青州间为什么无其余种？ 
English: Wang Su knew that Cheng Duan was originally from Qingzhou, so he smiled and said to Cheng Duan: Why are there no remaining species in Qingzhou?

古文：淹以肃本隶徐州，言： 青州本非其地，徐州间今日重来，非所知也。 
现代文：成淹以青州本属徐州，说： 青州间本非其地，徐州间有人今日重来。这你不是不知道的。 
English: Cheng Duan pointed out that Qingzhou originally belonged to Xuzhou, and said, "There is no place between Qingzhou and Xuzhou. Someone from Xuzhou came back today. You are not unaware of this."

古文：肃遂伏马上掩口而笑，顾谓侍御史张思宁曰： 向者聊因戏言，遂致辞溺。 
现代文：王肃于是伏在马上掩口而笑，回头对侍御史张思宁说： 刚才聊因戏言，反被别人咬了一口。 
English: Wang Su immediately covered his mouth and laughed. He turned to Zhang Shining, the head waiter, and said, "Just now, we were chatting about a joke, but someone else took a bite.

古文：思宁驰马奏闻，高祖大悦，谓彭城王勰曰： 淹此段足为制胜。 
现代文：思宁驰马奏闻皇上，高祖大为高兴，对彭城王元勰说： 成淹此段表现足可制胜。 
English: Gao Zu was very pleased and said to Pengcheng Wangyuan: "Chening, this performance is enough to win.

古文：舆驾至洛，肃因侍宴。
现代文：车驾到洛阳，王肃参与帝宴。
English: Wang Su drove to Luoyang to attend the imperial banquet.

古文：高祖又戏肃曰： 近者行次朝歌，闻成淹共卿殊有往覆，卿试重叙之。 
现代文：高祖与王肃开玩笑说： 不久前行至朝歌，听说成淹与你很有一番往复，卿试着重新演示一回，如何？ 
English: Gaozu joked with Wang Su: "I went to the morning song not long ago. I heard that Cheng Dun had a lot of interaction with you. Sir, how about trying to demonstrate it again?"

古文：肃言： 臣前朝歌为淹所困，不谓此事仰闻听览。
现代文：王肃说： 臣前番在朝歌被成淹所围，没想到这事被陛下知道了。
English: Wang Su said, "The vanguard of the vassals was surrounded by Cheng Yu in the morning song. I didn't expect His Majesty to know about it.

古文：臣尔日失言，一之已甚，岂宜再说。 
现代文：臣前番失言，一次就够受的了，哪里还能再说？ 
English: A minister's first gaffe, once is enough, what more can I say?

古文：遂皆大笑。
现代文：于是二人都大笑不止。
English: They both burst out laughing.

古文：高祖又谓肃曰： 淹能制卿，其才亦不困。 
现代文：高祖又对王肃说： 成淹能制住卿，其才也不简单。 
English: Gao Zu also said to Wang Su: It is not easy for Cheng Nong to control his lord.

古文：肃言： 淹才词便为难有，圣朝宜应叙进。 
现代文：王肃说： 成淹才辞实在难得，圣朝应该升他官职。 
English: Wang Su said, "It is rare for a person to resign from a post only after drowning. The Holy See should promote him to a higher official post."

古文：高祖言： 若因此进淹，恐辱卿转甚。 
现代文：高祖说： 如果因这提拔成淹，朕担心更加有辱于卿了。 
English: Gaozu said, "If this promotion turns into a flood, I'm afraid it will be even more humiliating for my lord."

古文：肃言： 臣屈己达人，正可显臣之美。 
现代文：王肃说： 为臣委屈自己达进他人，这正可以显出为臣品德之美。 
English: Wang Su said, "I can show my virtue by harming myself and letting others see it."

古文：高祖曰： 卿既为人所屈，欲求屈己之名，复于卿太优。 
现代文：高祖说： 卿既被人所屈，又想求屈己之名，这于卿也太过了。 
English: Gao Zu said, "It is too much for him to have been humbled by others and still want to make a name for himself.

古文：肃言： 淹既蒙进，臣得屈己伸人，此所谓陛下惠而不费。 
现代文：王肃说： 成淹既进官，臣得能屈己伸人，这就显示出陛下惠而不费的旨意来。 
English: Wang Su said, "Since Cheng Dun entered the government, his subjects have been able to submit to him. This shows His Majesty's benevolent and effortless will.

古文：遂酣笑而止。
现代文：于是二人酣笑不止。
English: After saying that, I couldn't stop laughing.

古文：乃赐淹龙厩上马一匹，并鞍勒宛具、朝服一袭，转谒者仆射。
现代文：于是赐予成淹龙厩好马一匹，加上鞍勒车免具，朝服一套，转任他为谒者仆射。
English: So he gave a good horse from the Chenghuanglong Stable, a saddle-drawn carriage, a set of imperial robes, and he was appointed as the eunuch's attendant.

古文：时迁都，高祖以淹家无行资，敕给事力，送至洛阳，并赐假，日与家累相随。
现代文：当时朝廷迁都，高祖以成淹搬家缺少人手，赐给劳力，送到洛阳，并赐予假日让他与家人一起行进。
English: At that time, when the imperial court moved the capital, Gao Zu gave Cheng Hun the labor to move the capital to Luoyang due to lack of manpower, and gave him a holiday to let him travel with his family.

古文：行次灵丘，属萧鸾遣使，敕驿马征淹。
现代文：行至灵丘，正逢萧鸾派的使者来了，高祖派驿马征召成淹。
English: When they went to Lingqiu, the envoys of the Xiao Yu faction arrived, and Gao Zu sent his horse to summon Cheng Rong.

古文：车驾济淮，淹于路左请见，高祖伫驾而进之。
现代文：帝车驾渡淮，成淹在路旁请见，高祖停驾引见他。
English: The imperial car drove across the Huai River, Chenghong met him on the roadside, and Gao Zu stopped the car to introduce him.

古文：淹曰： 萧鸾悖虐，幽明同弃，陛下俯应人神，按剑江涘，然敌不可小，蜂虿有毒，而况国乎？
现代文：成淹说： 萧鸾悖逆残虐，幽明之人都抛弃了他，陛下俯应人神，按剑江边，但敌人不可小看，蜂虿依然有毒，而况国家呢？
English: Cheng Wan said: Xiao Yao was rebellious and cruel, the people of darkness and light abandoned him, his majesty bowed down to the gods and worshipped the edge of the Jianjiang River, but the enemy should not be underestimated, the bee sting is still poisonous, and what about the country?

古文：深愿圣明保万全之策。 
现代文：臣殷切希望圣明君主保万全之策。 
English: The courtier ardently hoped that the sage monarch would take all possible measures.

古文：诏曰： 此前车之辙，得不慎乎！ 
现代文：帝诏说： 这是前车之辙，能不谨慎吗！ 
English: The emperor said, "This is the same as before, can we not be prudent?"

古文：淹曰： 伏闻发洛已来，诸有谏者，解官夺职，恐非圣明纳下之义。 
现代文：成淹说： 臣听说向洛阳出发以来，诸多谏陈之人，都被陛下解官夺职，这恐怕不是圣明君主接纳臣言的好方法。 
English: Chengyun said, "I have heard that since I set out for Luoyang, many of the people who had slandered Chen have been dismissed and deprived of their posts by His Majesty. I am afraid that this is not a good way for the Holy Emperor to accept my words.

古文：高祖曰： 此是我命耳，卿不得为干斧钺。 
现代文：高祖说： 这是我的命而已，卿不得做干戈斧钺伐罪的事。 
English: Gaozu said, "This is just my life. Sir, you must not do anything that is against the law.

古文：淹曰： 昔文王询于刍荛，晋文听舆人之诵，臣虽卑贱，敢同匹夫。 
现代文：成淹说： 过去文王询于刍荛，晋文接纳赶车人的话，为臣虽然卑贱，但也敢与匹夫相比。 
English: Chengyun said, "In the past, when King Wen inquired about the chariot and Jinwen accepted the chariot driver, although he was a lowly vassal, he dared to be compared to a peer.

古文：高祖优而容之，诏赐绢百匹。
现代文：高祖优礼而容忍下来，下诏书赐给他绢一百匹。
English: Gao Zu politely tolerated it and gave him a hundred yakitori in the next imperial edict.

古文：高祖幸徐州，敕淹与闾龙驹等主舟楫，将泛泗入河，溯流还洛。
现代文：高祖幸临徐州，敕成淹与吕龙驹等人主办舟船之事，准备经泗水入黄河，逆流而上，还归洛阳。
English: Gao Zu Xinglu went to Xuzhou, and Rui Chengyun and Lu Longyu and others sponsored the boat. They were preparing to enter the Yellow River through the water of Rui, go upstream, and return to Luoyang.

古文：军次碻敖，淹以黄河峻急，虑有倾危，乃上疏陈谏。
现代文：军队驻扎在郂，成淹看到黄河水流深急，担心有危险，于是上疏陈谏。
English: The army was stationed in Handan. When Cheng Fu saw that the Yellow River was flowing fast, he was worried about the danger, so he went to Shangxu, Chen'an.

古文：高祖敕淹曰： 朕以恆代无运漕之路，故京邑民贫。
现代文：高祖敕书成淹说： 朕因恒、代没有运漕之路，所以京邑百姓贫困。
English: Gao Zuan Shushi Chengyun said: Due to the fact that there is no railway in our generation, the people of Beijing are poor.

古文：今移都伊洛，欲通运四方，而黄河急峻，人皆难涉。
现代文：现在移都伊、洛，为的是道航四方，而黄河急流深浚，人们都难渡过。
English: Now the capital is moved to Ili and Luo, in order to sail in all directions, and the Yellow River rapids are deep-dredged, making it difficult for people to cross.

古文：我因有此行，必须乘流，所以开百姓之心。
现代文：我有今天此行，必须乘流而上，为的是开百姓之心。
English: I have this trip today, I have to go upstream in order to open the hearts of the people.

古文：知卿至诚，而今者不得相纳。 
现代文：朕知卿一片忠心，而今天朕不准备接纳你的意见。 
English: I know you are a loyal man, and today I am not prepared to accept your opinion.

古文：敕赐骅骝马一匹、衣冠一袭。
现代文：诏敕骅骝马一匹，衣帽一套。
English: One horse, one set of clothes.

古文：除羽林监，领主客令，加威远将军。
现代文：除授羽林监，领主客令，加威远将军。
English: In addition to conferring the title of forest inspector, the lord's guest order, plus Wei Yuan general.

古文：于时宫殿初构，经始务广，兵民运材，日有万计，伊洛流澌，苦于厉涉，淹遂启求，敕都水造浮航。
现代文：当时宫殿初构，建造务求广大，兵民运材，日有万计，而伊、洛水急，兵民苦于涉渡，成淹于是请求，敕在洛都二水上造浮航。
English: At that time, the palace was first constructed, the construction was extensive, and there were thousands of soldiers and civilians to transport materials, while Iraq and Laos were in urgent need of water, the soldiers and civilians were suffering from wading, so the flood was requested, and the raft was made to float on the two waters of Laos.

古文：高祖赏纳之，意欲荣淹于众，朔旦受朝，百官在位，乃赐帛百匹，知左右二都水事。
现代文：高祖很赞赏，接纳了他的意见，准备在众官面前夸奖成淹，清晨上朝，百官在位，赐给他帛百匹，让他知掌左右二都水事。
English: Gaozu was very appreciative, accepted his opinion, and prepared to praise him in front of all officials. In the morning, when the emperor ascended the throne, hundreds of officials were present. He was given hundreds of horses, so that he would know the water affairs of the two capitals.

古文：世宗初，司徒、彭城王勰曰： 先帝本有成旨，淹有归国之诚，兼历官著称，宜加优陟。
现代文：世宗初年，司徒、彭城王元勰说： 先帝本有成旨，成淹有归国之诚，加上历官著称，应加特别提拔。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, King Wonjo of Sutu and Pengcheng said, "The former emperor had a strong will, a strong will to return to the country, and a distinguished record of service, so he should be given a special promotion."

古文：高祖虽崩，诏犹在耳。 
现代文：高祖虽然仙逝，诏言还历历在耳。 
English: Although Gao Zu passed away, the edict is still fresh in our ears.

古文：乃相闻选曹，加淹右军，领左右都水，仍主客令。
现代文：于是传知选官部门，加授成淹为右军、领左右都水、仍为主客令。
English: As a result, it was announced to the selection department that Cheng Duan would be awarded the right wing, leading the left and right wings, and still be the main guest.

古文：复授骁骑将军，加辅国将军，都水、主客如故。
现代文：又授骁骑将军，加授辅国将军，都水，主客照旧。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of Horse and Rider, as well as the title of General of the Auxiliary State.

古文：淹小心畏法，典客十年，四方贡聘，皆有私遗，毫厘不纳，乃至衣食不充，遂启乞外禄。
现代文：成淹小心畏法，掌管国家迎来送往十年，四方贡聘之人，都送给他一些礼物，而他毫厘不受，全部退还，以至于衣食不足。于是请求外任。
English: He was afraid of drowning in success, he had been in charge of the country for ten years, and all the tributary people gave him some gifts, but he did not accept anything, he returned everything, so much so that he did not have enough food and clothing. So he asked to be transferred to another post.

古文：景明三年，出除平阳太守，将军如故。
现代文：景明三年，出任平阳太守，将军职仍旧。
English: In the third year of Jingming, he was appointed the governor of Pingyang, and still held the military post.

古文：还朝，病卒。
现代文：还朝后，病逝。
English: The next morning, he died of illness.

古文：赠本将军、光州刺史，谥曰定。
现代文：赠本将军、光州刺史，谥称定。
English: Presenting this general, Gwangju stabbing history,  is determined.

古文：子霄，字景鸾。
现代文：子成霄，字景鸾。
English: Zixing Rongxiao, Zijing Zong.

古文：亦学涉，好为文咏，但词彩不伦，率多鄙俗。
现代文：也有学问，喜为文章吟咏。但是辞采不行，大多粗陋。
English: They also have knowledge and enjoy writing. However, they are not good at writing, and most of them are crude.

古文：与河东姜质等朋游相好，诗赋间起。
现代文：与河东姜质等人朋游交好，诗赋时有所作。
English: He was on good terms with fellow travelers such as Hedong Jiangxi, and wrote poems.

古文：知音之士，共所嗤笑；闾巷浅识，颂讽成群，乃至大行于世。
现代文：内行中人，共相嗤笑；而街巷乡里，浅识之人，则颂传成风，于是其作大行于世。
English: Connoisseurs laugh at each other, but in the streets and villages, people with little knowledge spread the chant and it became popular.

古文：历治书侍御史而卒。
现代文：官历治书侍御史而去世。
English: He passed away with the title of Kanshitsu Jisho Samurai Goshi.

古文：范绍，字始孙，敦煌龙勒人。
现代文：范绍，字始孙，敦煌龙勒人。
English: Fan Shao, the first grandson of Dunhuang Longle.

古文：少而聪敏。
现代文：少年聪敏。
English: The boy, Satoshi.

古文：年十二，父命就学，师事崔光。
现代文：年十二，父命学习，师从崔光。
English: In the twelfth year, my father ordered me to study, and I learned from Cui Guang.

古文：以父忧废业。母又诫之曰： 汝父卒日，令汝远就崔生，希有成立。
现代文：因父亲去世废弃学业，母亲又告诫他说： 你父亲去世那天，令你远就崔生，希望你有所成就。
English: He abandoned his studies after his father's death, and his mother admonished him: "On the day your father died, you were far away from home. I hope you will achieve something."

古文：今已过期，宜遵成命。 
现代文：而今已过丧期，你应遵照父亲成命。 
English: Now that the mourning period is over, you should follow your father's orders.

古文：绍还赴学。
现代文：孙绍又去赴学。
English: Sun Shao went to school again.

古文：太和初，充太学生，转算生，颇涉经史。
现代文：太和初年，范绍充任太学生，转算生，广涉经史。
English: In the first year of Taihe, Fan Shaocheng was a student of Taihe, a transfer student, and widely involved in history.

古文：十六年，高祖选为门下通事令史，迁录事，令掌奏文集，高祖善之，又为侍中李冲、黄门崔光所知，出内文奏，多以委之。
现代文：太和十六年，高祖选他为门下通事令史，选录事，令他掌奏启文案。高祖对他很好。范绍又被侍中李冲、黄门崔光所知，出纳文奏，大多委交给他。
English: In the 16th year of the Taihe era, Gao Zu chose him to be his disciple's secretary to record the history and select the records, and let him play the opening of the text. Gao Zu was very good to him. Fan Shao was also known by the attendants Li Chong and Huangmen Cui Guang, and he was paid to play the text, and most of the committee was handed over to him.

古文：高祖曾谓近臣曰： 崔光从容，范绍之力。 
现代文：高祖曾经对近臣说： 崔光从容任职，全仗范绍从中出力。 
English: Gao Zu once said to his close vassal: Cui Guang will take his duties calmly, while Fan Shao will do his best.

古文：稍迁强弩将军、积弩将军、公车令，加给事中，迁羽林监。
现代文：渐迁强驽将军、积驽将军、公车令，加授给事中，迁任羽林监。
English: Gradually, he was transferred to the posts of general forester, general forester and bus driver, and was promoted to the post of forest supervisor.

古文：扬州剌史、任城王澄请征钟离，敕绍诣寿春，共量进止。
现代文：扬州刺史、任城王元澄请求征讨钟离，帝命范绍到寿春，共商进止大计。
English: Yangzhou burr history, Rencheng Wang Yuancheng request to solicit Zhongli, the emperor's life Fan Shao to Shuchun, to discuss the overall plan.

古文：澄曰： 须兵十万，往还百日。涡阳、钟离、广陵、庐江，欲数道俱进，但粮仗军资，须朝廷速遣。 
现代文：元澄说： 此番须兵十万，往返百日，涡阳、钟离、广陵、庐江，我想数道并进，但是粮草兵仗等军用物资，必须速速调遣。 
English: Motsumi said, "This time, we need 100,000 soldiers, and it will take 100 days to go back and forth. I want to go through several routes, including the Vortex Yang, Zhongli, Guangling, and Minjiang Rivers, but military supplies such as grain and grass must be dispatched as soon as possible.

古文：绍曰： 计十万之众，往还百日，须粮百日。
现代文：范绍说： 计十万之众，往还百日，必须准备百日粮草。
English: Fan Shao said, "There are a hundred thousand people, and there are still a hundred days to go. We must prepare a hundred days of grain and grass.

古文：顷秋以向末，方欲征召，兵仗可集，恐粮难至。
现代文：自秋以来，正在征召，我觉得兵仗可以集齐，但粮草恐怕不容易征满。
English: Since autumn, conscription has been in progress. I feel that the army can be brought up to strength, but I fear that it will not be easy to fill the ranks.

古文：有兵无粮，何以克敌？
现代文：有兵无粮，拿什么战胜敌人？
English: With soldiers and no food, how can you defeat the enemy?

古文：愿王善思，为社稷深虑。 
现代文：希望王公好好考虑，为社稷安全多想想。 
English: I hope that Wang Gong will think about it carefully, and think more about the safety of the society.

古文：澄沉思良久曰： 实如卿言。 
现代文：元澄沉思很久说： 确实像卿所言。 
English: Motosumi pondered for a long time and said, "It really is as you say."

古文：使还，具以状闻。
现代文：使者回朝，把情况禀报朝廷。
English: After the envoys returned to Kyoto, they reported the entire situation to the Emperor.

古文：后澄遂征钟离，无功而返。
现代文：后元澄征讨钟离，无功而返。
English: Afterward, Yuan Chengzheng left to discuss the matter, but to no avail.

古文：寻除长兼奉车都尉，转右都水使者，录事如故。
现代文：不久除授范绍为奉车都尉，转任右都水使者，录事职仍旧。
English: Soon after, Fan Shao was awarded the title of Fengche captain and transferred to the post of Right Capital Water Envoy. He still holds the post of recorder.

古文：丁母忧去职。
现代文：服母丧去职。
English: My mother-in-law passed away.

古文：值义阳初复，起绍除守远将军、郢州龙骧府长史，带义阳太守。
现代文：正值义阳刚刚光复，朝廷起范绍，除授为宁远将军、郢州龙骧府长史，带义阳太守。
English: At the time when Yiyang had just been liberated, Fan Shao was appointed by the imperial court as the general of Ningyuan, the prefect of Longyuan in Zhangzhou, and the governor of Yiyang.

古文：其年冬，使还都，值朝廷有南讨之计，发河北数州田兵二万五千人，通缘淮戍兵合五万余人，广开屯田。
现代文：这年冬天，使者还都，逢朝廷有南讨之计，征发河北数州屯田兵卒二万五千人，加上戍淮兵马总共五万多人，广泛屯田。
English: In the winter of that year, the envoys also sent 25,000 soldiers from several states in Hebei Province, plus more than 50,000 soldiers and horses from Shu and Huai Provinces, to occupy a wide range of farmlands in the hope that the imperial court would discuss the issue with the south.

古文：八座奏绍为西道六州营田大使，加步兵校尉，绍勤于劝课，频岁大获。
现代文：八座高级官员启奏范绍为西道六州营田大使，加步兵校尉。范绍勤于劝耕，连年大有收成。
English: The high-ranking officials of the eight provinces and prefectures made Fan Shao the ambassador of Yingtian in the six prefectures of the West Road, and he was also an infantry lieutenant. Fan Shao was diligent in persuading farmers to cultivate, and the harvest was great year after year.

古文：又诏绍诣钟离，与都督、中山王英论攻钟离形势，英固言必克。
现代文：帝又诏范绍出使钟离，与都督、中山王元英讨论进攻钟离的事情，元英坚持认为一定可以攻克钟离。
English: The emperor also ordered Fan Shao to send an envoy to Zhongli, and discussed the attack on Zhongli with the governor and Zhongshan Wang Yuanying. Yuanying insisted that Zhongli could be conquered.

古文：绍观其城隍防守，恐不可陷，劝令班师，英不从。
现代文：范绍观察钟离的城池防守，担心难以攻下，劝其回师，元英不听。
English: Fan Shao observed Zhong Li's defense of the castle, worried that it would be difficult to attack, and advised him to return to his division, but Yuan Ying did not listen.

古文：绍还，具以状闻。
现代文：范绍还朝，报告了具体情况。
English: Fan Shao also arrived in the morning and reported the specific situation.

古文：俄而英败。
现代文：不久元英战败。
English: Soon Yuan Ying was defeated.

古文：诏以徐豫二境，民稀土旷，令绍量度处所，更立一州。
现代文：帝下诏以徐、豫二州，民稀土广，令范绍量度地域，别建一州。
English: The emperor decreed that there should be two prefectures, Xu and Henan, with a wide range of rare earths, and ordered Fan Shao to measure the region, and build one prefecture.

古文：绍以谯城形要之所，置州为便，遂立南兗。
现代文：范绍认为谯城为地形险要之所，置州有利，于是立南兖州。
English: Fan Shao thought that Lucheng was a place where the terrain was precarious, and it was advantageous to set up a prefecture, so he set up a prefecture in the south.

古文：入为主衣都统，加中坚将军，转前军将军。
现代文：范绍入朝廷为主衣都统，加授中坚将军，转任前军将军。
English: Fan Shao entered the imperial court as the main general, was awarded the title of general, and was transferred to the general of the former army.

古文：追赏营田之勤，拜游击将军，迁龙骧将军、太府少卿，都统如故。
现代文：追赏他营田之勤，拜授游击将军。迁任龙骧将军、太府少卿，都统仍旧。
English: He was rewarded for his diligence in the battlegrounds and given the title of guerrilla general. He was transferred to the post of Longjing general and Taifu Shaoqing, and he is still at the top of the government.

古文：转长兼太府卿。
现代文：转任长兼太府卿。
English: He was appointed to the post of chancellor and grand steward.

古文：绍量功节用，甄烦就简，凡有赐给，千匹以上，皆别覆奏，然后出之。
现代文：范绍量功节用，剔繁就简，凡是朝廷有所赐予，千匹以上的，他都别书复奏，然后出之。
English: Fan Shao is meticulous in his work. He cuts out the complex and simplifies the simple. If the imperial court gives him more than a thousand horses, he will compile them and publish them.

古文：灵太后嘉其用心，敕绍每月入见，诸有益国利民之事，皆令面陈。
现代文：灵太后称赞其用心，敕范绍每个月入内廷见帝一次，诸项有益于国家有利于民众的事，都令他当面陈奏。
English: Empress Dowager Ling praised his diligence. Gong Fan Shao entered the Inner Court to see the emperor once a month, and all kinds of things that were beneficial to the country and beneficial to the people made him face to face.

古文：少好学，颇有文义。
现代文：少年好学，颇有文义。
English: He has been fond of learning since childhood and is very familiar with the meaning of the article.

古文：起家四门博士，历殿中侍御史、国子助教、积射将军、兼中书舍人。
现代文：起家任四门博士，历任殿中侍御史、国子助教、积射将军、兼中书舍人。
English: He started his career as a four-door doctor, and successively served as a palace attendant, an assistant professor, a general, and a junior high school teacher.

古文：辩于对问，为世宗所赏。
现代文：对问善辩，被世宗所赞赏。
English: He was praised by the Sejong for his ability to debate questions.

古文：豫州城人白早生以城南叛，诏绍慰劳。
现代文：豫州城人白早生举城南叛，帝诏让董绍前去慰劳。
English: Bai, a citizen of the city of Yuzhou, rebelled against the southern part of the city at an early age, and the emperor sent Dong Shao to comfort him.

古文：至上蔡，为贼所袭，囚送江东，仍被锁禁。
现代文：到上蔡，被敌人袭击，把他囚送江东，锁禁起来。
English: When he arrived in Shangcai, he was attacked by the enemy, who sent him to the east of the Yangtze River as a prisoner and locked him up.

古文：萧衍领军将军吕僧珍暂与绍言，便相器重。
现代文：萧衍领军将军吕僧珍刚与董绍交谈，便相器重。
English: Xiao Yan's army leader, General Lv Sozhen, had just had a conversation with Dong Shao, and he was very interested in photography.

古文：衍闻之，遣使劳绍云： 忠臣孝子，不可无之。
现代文：萧衍听说，派使者劳慰董绍说： 忠臣孝子，不可无人。
English: Xiao Yan heard that he sent an envoy to console Dong Shao and said: "Loyal subject and filial son, no one must be left behind.

古文：今当听卿还国。 
现代文：现在当让卿还归魏国。 
English: Now, Dangjangyeong belongs to the State of Wei.

古文：绍对曰： 老母在洛，无复方寸，既奉恩贷，实若更生。 
现代文：董绍回答说： 老母在洛阳，而臣囚此，心中正失方寸，现在既奉恩慈宽贷，实若再生。 
English: Dong Shao replied, "My mother is in Luoyang, and I am a prisoner here. My heart is losing an inch, but now, thanks to your kindness and leniency, I have truly been reborn."

古文：衍又遣主书霍灵超谓绍曰： 今放卿还，令卿通两家之好，彼此息民，岂不善也？ 
现代文：萧衍又派主书霍灵超对董绍说： 今天放卿还魏，是想让卿通结两国之好，彼此息民安国，岂不是一件好事。 
English: Xiao Yan also sent the main writer, Huo Ling Chao, to Dong Shao to say: Today, it is a good thing to return the Qing Dynasty to the Wei Dynasty. It is a good thing to let the Qing Dynasty connect the two countries and keep the people and the country safe.

古文：对曰： 通好息民，乃两国之事，既蒙命及，辄当闻奏本朝。 
现代文：董绍回答说： 通好息民，乃是两国之事，既蒙提到，我就应如实给本朝汇报。 
English: Dong Shao replied: It is a matter of the two countries to get along well with the people. Since it has been mentioned, I should report it to this government truthfully.

古文：衍赐绍衣物，引入见之，令其舍人周舍慰劳，并称： 战争多年，民物涂炭，是以不耻先言，与魏朝通好。
现代文：萧衍赐给董绍衣物，引他入见，令他的舍人周舍慰劳董绍，并称： 战争多年，民生灵涂炭，所以不耻先言，与魏朝通好。
English: Xiao Yan gave clothes to Dong Shao, led him to an opinion, made his subordinate Zhou Shie comfort the labor of Dong Shao, and said: The war has been going on for many years, the people's lives and spirits have been charred, so it is not a shameful prophecy, and it is good to communicate with Wei Dynasty.

古文：比亦有书，都无报旨。
现代文：前亦有书，都无回音。
English: There have been books before, but no echoes.

古文：卿宜备申此意，故遣传诏周灵秀送卿至国，迟有嘉问。 
现代文：卿应该备申此意，所以朕派传诏周灵秀送你归国，迟迟有此嘉问。 
English: Sir should be prepared to express this intention, so I sent a messenger to Zhou Lingxiu to send you back to the country.

古文：又令谓绍曰： 卿知所以得不死不？
现代文：又令人对他说： 卿知道为什么能不死呢？
English: And they said to him, Sir, do you know why you are not dead?

古文：今者获卿，乃天意也。
现代文：今天得到你，乃是天意。
English: It's God's will to get you now.

古文：夫千人之聚，不散则乱，故须立君以治天下，不以天下养一人。
现代文：夫千人之聚，不散则乱，故须立君以治天下，不以天下奉养一人。
English: If thousands of people gather together, there will be chaos. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a prince to rule the world, not to support one person with the world.

古文：凡在民上，胡不思此？
现代文：凡在民上之人，谁不想到这一点？
English: Who among the people does not think of this?

古文：若欲通好，今以宿豫还彼，彼当以汉中见归。 
现代文：如想通好，今天就应该把宿豫还给魏，魏当把汉中还给我。 
English: If we are willing to be reconciled, we should return Suyuan City to the Wei Dynasty, and Wei should also return Hanzhong to us.

古文：先是，诏有司以所获衍将齐苟兒等十人欲以换绍，事在《司马悦传》。
现代文：这以前，帝下诏让有关部门用所抓获的萧衍将齐苟儿等十人换回董绍，事在《司马悦传》。
English: Prior to this, the emperor ordered the relevant departments to use the captured Xiao Yan to exchange ten people such as Qigong Er back to Dong Shao, the matter is in "Sima Yue Biography."

古文：及绍还，世宗愍之。永平中，除给事中，仍兼舍人。
现代文：等到董绍还归，世宗爱悯他，永平年间，除授他为给事中，仍兼舍人。
English: When Dong Shao returned, the world loved and pitied him. During the Yongping era, in addition to awarding him, he still gave up people.

古文：绍虽陈说和计，朝廷不许。
现代文：董绍虽然向世宗陈说和好之计，朝廷不答应。
English: Although Dong Shao proposed a reconciliation plan to Shizong Chen, the imperial court did not agree.

古文：久之，加轻车将军、正舍人，又除步兵校尉。
现代文：很久以后，加授他为轻车将军、正舍人，又除步兵校尉。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the rank of light vehicle general, a regular soldier, and an infantry captain.

古文：肃宗初，绍上《御天马颂》，帝赏其辞，赐帛八十匹。
现代文：肃宗初年，董绍上《御天马颂》，魏帝赏识其文辞藻，赐给帛八十匹。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, when Dong Shao published the "Song of the Heavenly Horse," Emperor Wei appreciated his literary style and gave him 80 horses.

古文：又除龙骧将军、中散大夫，舍人如故。
现代文：又除授龙骧将军、中散大夫，舍人官职如故。
English: In addition to conferring the titles of General Longyu and Doctor Zhongshan, he still refuses to hold any official posts.

古文：加冠军将军，出除右将军、洛州刺史。
现代文：加授冠军将军，出除右将军、洛州刺史。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of Champion General, expelled from the Right General, and expelled from the History of Lozhou.

古文：绍好行小惠，颇得民情。
现代文：董绍喜好施行小惠，颇得民心。
English: Dong Shao likes to implement small benefits, which has won the hearts of the people.

古文：萧衍将军曹义宗、王玄真等寇荆州，据顺阳马圈，裴衍、王罴讨之。
现代文：萧衍将军曹义宗、王玄真等侵犯荆州，据占顺阳、马圈，裴衍、王罴讨伐。
English: Xiao Yan's generals Cao Yizong, Wang Xuanzhen and others invaded Jingzhou, occupied Shunyang, Ma Hui, Pei Yan and Wang Hui.

古文：既复顺阳，进围马圈。
现代文：攻下顺阳之后，又进围马圈。
English: After capturing Shunyang, they encircled the horse ring.

古文：城坚，裴、王粮少，绍上书言其必败。
现代文：城池坚固，裴、王二人粮草短少，董绍上书说其必败。
English: The castle is strong, Pei and Wang are short of grain and grass, and Dong Shao wrote a letter saying that they would be defeated.

古文：未几，裴衍等果失利，顺阳复为义宗所据。
现代文：没多久，裴衍等人果然失利，顺阳又被义宗占据。
English: Soon, Pei Yan and others were defeated, and Shunyang was occupied by Yizong.

古文：绍有气病，启求解州，诏不许。
现代文：董绍有气病，请求解除州职，帝下诏不许。
English: Dong Shao had qi sickness and requested to be relieved of his state duties. The emperor did not allow him to do so.

古文：萧宝夤反于长安也，绍上书求击之，云： 臣当出瞎巴三千，生啖蜀子！ 
现代文：萧宝夤在长安反叛，董绍上书请求讨伐，说： 臣当出瞎巴兵三千，生吃蜀子。 
English: Xiao Baojun rebelled in Chang'an, and Dong Shao sent a letter to request a crusade, saying: "The vassal should send out three thousand blind soldiers and eat raw shu zi.

古文：肃宗谓黄门徐纥曰： 此巴真瞎也？ 
现代文：肃宗对黄门徐纥说： 这巴人真是瞎子吗？ 
English: Su Zong said to Huangmen Xu Yao: Is this person really blind?

古文：纥曰： 此是绍之壮辞。云巴人劲勇，见敌无所畏惧，非实瞎也。 
现代文：徐纥说： 这是董绍的豪言壮语，说巴人勇猛善战，见敌无所畏惧，不是真的瞎子。 
English: Xu Wei said: This is the powerful speech of Dong Shao, saying that the Ba people are brave and good at fighting, fearless in the face of the enemy, not really blind.

古文：帝大笑，敕绍速行，又加平西将军。
现代文：帝大笑，命董绍火速前去，又加授平西将军。
English: The emperor laughed loudly, and Meitong Shao hurried forward. He was also awarded the title of General Pingxi.

古文：以拒宝夤之功，赏新蔡县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：以迎战萧宝夤之功，赏爵新蔡县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: Xiao Baojun was awarded the title of the founding father of Xin Cai County for his contribution to the war, and there are more than 200 households in the county.

古文：永安中，代还。
现代文：永安年间，人代其职，董绍回到京都。
English: During the Yongan era, Dong Shao returned to Kyoto.

古文：于是除安西将军、梁州刺史、假抚军将军、兼尚书，为山南行台，颇有清称。
现代文：于是除授安西将军、梁州刺史、假抚军将军、兼尚书，为山南行台，颇有清廉称誉。
English: As a result, in addition to awarding General Anxi, Liangzhou Zhishi, General Fufu, and Shangshu, he also went to Shannan, which has a reputation for integrity.

古文：前废帝以元孚代之。
现代文：前废帝以元孚代其职任。
English: The former deposed emperor named Yuan Fu as his successor.

古文：绍至长安，时尔朱天光为关右大行台，启绍为大行台从事、兼吏部尚书，又除征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：董绍到长安，当时朱天光任关右大行台，启奏董绍为大行台从事，兼任吏部尚书，又除授征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Dong Shao went to Chang'an. At that time, Zhu Tianguang was in charge of the Guan Yu Grand Marching Band, and Dong Shao was engaged in the opening ceremony for the Grand Marching Band. He also served as the secretary of the cadre department, and in addition to being awarded the title of Western General, he was also awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：天光赴洛，留绍于后。
现代文：朱天光率兵赴洛，留董绍在后。
English: Zhu Tianguang led the troops to Luo, leaving Dong Shao behind.

古文：天光败，贺拔岳复请绍为其开府谘议参军。
现代文：天光军败，贺拔岳又请董绍为其开府谘议参军。
English: After Zhu Tianguang's defeat, He Batyue invited him to join the army.

古文：永熙中，加车骑将军。
现代文：永熙年间，加授车骑将军。
English: During the Yongxi era, he was awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：忽遇盗，大失绫缣，时人鄙其矫诈。
现代文：贺拔岳后来携董绍在高平牧马，董绍悲而赋诗： 走马山之阿，马渴饮黄河。宁谓胡关下，复闻楚客歌。 
English: Later, He Baturake took Dong Shao to herd horses in Gaoping, and Dong Shao wrote a sad poem: Go horse mountain, horse thirsty to drink the Yellow River. It is better to say under Hu Guan, and listen to Chu guest song.

古文：鹿悆，字永吉，济阴人。
现代文：后来被宇文黑獭杀害。子董敏，永安年间，任太尉西祭酒。鹿胒，字永吉，济阴人。
English: Later, he was killed by Uwen Heixuan. His son, Dong Min, was appointed as the first lieutenant of the West Festival of Wine in the Yong'an era. Lu Xun, surnamed Yongji, was from Jilin.

古文：父生，在《良吏传》。
现代文：父鹿生，在《良吏传》。
English: His father, Deersheng, appears in "The Biography of a Good Official."

古文：悆好兵书、阴阳、释氏之学。
现代文：胒喜欢兵书、阴阳、释氏之学。
English: Yao likes military history, yin and yang, and the teachings of the Shih family.

古文：太师、彭城王勰召为馆客。
现代文：太师、彭城王元勰召他为馆客。
English: His teacher, Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, invited him as a guest.

古文：尝诣徐州，马疫，附船而至大梁。
现代文：他曾经到徐州，马病了，搭船而到大梁。
English: He once went to Xuzhou, but his horse got sick, so he took a boat to Dalian.

古文：夜睡，从者上岸窃禾四束以饲其马。
现代文：夜晚睡觉，跟从的人上岸偷来四捆禾草喂养其马。
English: When he went to bed at night, his men came ashore and stole four bundles of grass to feed his horses.

古文：船行数里，悆觉，问得禾之处，从者以告，悆大忿，即停船上岸，至取禾处，以缣三丈置禾束下而返。
现代文：船行数里，鹿胒发觉此事，追问从哪里弄到禾草的，跟随的人告诉了他。鹿胒大怒，马上停船上岸，到取禾的地方，拿了三丈缣帛放到禾束之下才回来。
English: After sailing for several miles, Deerslayer found out about this and asked where the grass had come from. His followers told him. Deerslayer flew into a rage and immediately stopped the boat on the shore, went to the place where the grass was to be gathered, took the three-jointed hoe and put it under the bundle of grass before returning.

古文：初为真定公元子直国中尉，恆劝以忠廉之节。
现代文：当初任真定公元子直国中尉，经常劝元子直以忠诚廉洁之节奉君。
English: At first, he was appointed as a lieutenant of Genji Naokuni, and often advised Motoko Naokuni to serve him with loyalty and integrity.

古文：尝赋五言诗曰： 峄山万丈树，雕镂作琵琶。
现代文：曾赋五言诗说： 峄山万丈树，雕镂作琵琶。
English: Zeng Fu said in a five-character poem: "The mountains are full of tall trees, and the carved gourds are made into lutes."

古文：由此材高远，弦响蔼中华。 
现代文：由此材高远，弦响蔼中华。 
English: As a result, he is a man of great talent, and his strings are resoundingly Chinese.

古文：又曰： 援琴起何调？
现代文：又说： 援琴起何调？
English: And he said, What is the key of the harp?

古文：《幽兰》与《白雪》。
现代文：《幽兰》与《白雪》。
English: "Yulan" and "Snow White."

古文：丝管韵未成，莫使弦响绝。 
现代文：丝管音员未成，莫使弦响绝。 
English: If the trumpet player is not ready, the strings cannot be made to sound.

古文：子直少有令问，悆欲其善终，故以讽焉。
现代文：子直很少向他询问什么事情，鹿胒想让他善终，所以作诗讽咏。
English: Motoko has had a good reputation since he was a child. Deerslayer wanted him to have a good start and a good end, so he wrote a poem to advise him.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：服母丧去职。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：服阕，仍卒任。
现代文：丧满后，仍赴原任。
English: After the funeral, he still went to his original post.

古文：子直出镇梁州，悆随之州。
现代文：子直出镇梁州，鹿胒随他到州。
English: Zhi Zhi went straight out of Zhenliangzhou, and Lu Yao followed him to the state.

古文：州有兵粮和籴，和籴者靡不润屋，悆独不取，子直强之，终不从命。
现代文：州中有兵粮购买，购买的人无不发其财，鹿胒独独不取，子直强迫他干，他始终不从命。
English: There were soldiers' rations in the state to buy, and everyone who bought them made money. Deerslayer was the only one who didn't want to take them, so his son forced him to do it, but he never obeyed.

古文：庄帝为御史中尉，悆兼殿中侍御史，监临淮王彧军。
现代文：庄帝任御史中尉，鹿胒兼任殿中侍御史，监督淮阳王元军队。
English: Zhuang Di was appointed lieutenant of the imperial historian, and Lu Yao was concurrently appointed as the attendant of the imperial historian, supervising the army of Huaiyang Wangyuan.

古文：时萧衍遣其豫章王综据徐州，综密信通彧，云欲归款。
现代文：当时萧衍派他的豫章王萧综据守徐州，萧综写密信给元，说想归顺。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan sent his Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Si to guard Xuzhou. Xiao Si wrote a secret letter to Yuan, saying that he wanted to surrender.

古文：综时为萧衍爱子，众议咸谓不然，彧募人入报，验其虚实。悆遂请行，曰： 若综有诚心，与之盟约；如其诈也，岂惜一人命也！ 
现代文：萧综为萧衍爱子，大家都说这是不可能的。元招人入报，验其虚实，鹿胒于是请行，说： 如萧综有诚心，我们便与他盟约；如其事属诈，岂是爱惜一人生命的时候。 
English: Xiao Zomei was Xiao Yan's beloved son, everyone said that this was impossible. Yuan recruited people to enter the newspaper to test its falsity, and Lu Yao then asked to go, saying: If Xiao Zomei is sincere, we will make a covenant with him; if the matter is fraudulent, is it time to cherish one's life.

古文：时徐州始陷，边方骚扰，综部将成景俊、胡龙牙并总强兵，内外严固。
现代文：当时徐州刚刚沦陷，边境常常受到骚扰，萧综部将成景隽、胡龙牙都统领强兵，内外防守严密坚固。
English: At that time, Xuzhou had just been occupied by Liang's army, and the border was very chaotic. Xiao Zui's generals Cheng Jingjun and Hu Longya both led strong soldiers, and the inside and outside were guarded very tightly.

古文：悆遂单马间出，径趣彭城，未至之间，为综军主程兵润所止，问其来状，悆答曰： 兵交使在，自昔通言。
现代文：鹿胒于是单马从小道出城，径往彭城。未至之间，被萧综军主程兵润所阻止，问他来干什么。鹿胒说： 两兵交战，使者犹在，从过去到现在交战双方通言不绝。
English: Lu Yao then rode out of the city on a single horse from the trail and went to Pengcheng. Before he arrived, he was stopped by the main troop of the Xiao Zhai Army and asked what he was doing. Lu Yao said: Two soldiers were fighting, the messenger was still there, and from the past to the present, the two sides of the war were in constant communication.

古文：我为临淮王所使，须有交易。 
现代文：我被临淮王派遣，必须完成使命。 
English: I was sent by Lin Huai Wang, and I must complete my mission.

古文：兵润遂先遣人白龙牙等，综既有诚心，闻悆被执，语景俊等曰： 我每疑元略规欲叛城，将验其虚实。且遣左右为元略使，入魏军中，唤彼一人，其使果至。
现代文：程兵润于是先派人告诉龙牙等人。萧综既有诚心，听说鹿胒被抓了起来，对景隽说： 我经常怀疑元略打算以城叛归的真实性，准备验其虚实，准备派左右为元略使入魏军中，唤彼一人，他们的使者果然来了。
English: Cheng Bingrun then first sent someone to tell Longya and the others. Xiao Zhan was sincere, and when he heard that Lu Yao had been arrested, he said to Jingyao: I often doubted the authenticity of Yuan Liang's plan to return to the city as a rebel, and I was ready to test its authenticity. I was ready to send an envoy to the Wei army on Yuan Liang's behalf to summon him, and their envoy did indeed come.

古文：可令人诈作略身，在一深室，诡为患状，呼使户外，令人传语。 
现代文：我们可让人诈作元略身形，在一深室，诡称患病了，呼使户外，令人传话。 
English: We can have someone impersonate the founder, in a deep room, pretend to be ill, call out to the outdoors, and make people talk.

古文：时略始被衍追还。
现代文：当时元略刚被萧衍追还。
English: At that time, Yuan Liang had just been chased back by Xiao Yan.

古文：综又遣腹心梁话迎悆，密语意状，令善酬答，引悆入城，诣龙牙所。
现代文：萧综又派心腹梁话迎接鹿胒，秘密告诉他怎么办怎么办，令他善为酬答，梁话引鹿胒入城，到龙牙处所。
English: Xiao Zomei also sent his heart to meet Deerslayer, secretly told him what to do, made him a good reward, and led Deerslayer into the city and to Longya's place.

古文：时日已暮，龙牙列仗举火引悆曰： 元中山甚欲相见，故令唤卿。 
现代文：当时天色已晚，龙牙摆列仪仗举火引导鹿胒说： 元中山很想与你相见，所以令我们召唤你。 
English: At that time, it was late in the day. Longya arranged a ceremonial battle and held a fire to guide Deerslayer and said, "Former Zhongshan is very eager to meet you, so we have summoned you."

古文：又曰： 安丰、临淮将少弱卒，规复此城，容可得乎！ 
现代文：又说： 安丰、临淮将少兵弱，图谋攻克此城，我们能容你们得到吗？ 
English: He also said: Anfeng and Linhuai will have fewer and weaker soldiers, and they will try to conquer this city. Can we allow you to do so?

古文：悆曰： 彭城魏之东鄙，势在必争，得否在天，非人所测。 
现代文：鹿胒说： 彭城是魏朝边境，势在必争，得否在天，不是人所能预测的。 
English: Lu Yao said: Pengcheng is the border of the Wei Dynasty, it is imperative to fight, whether it will be in the sky is not something that people can predict.

古文：龙牙曰： 当如卿言。 
现代文：龙牙说： 当如卿言。 
English: Dragon's Teeth said: Just as you said.

古文：复诣景俊住所，停悆在外门，久而未入。
现代文：又到景隽住所，停鹿胒在外门，很久没让他进来。
English: He went to Jingyao's residence again, parked his car at the outer gate, and didn't let him in for a long time.

古文：时夜已久，星月甚明。
现代文：当时夜已很晚，星月甚明。
English: It was very late at night, and the stars and moon were very bright.

古文：有综军主姜桃来与悆语曰： 君年已长宿，又充今使，良有所达。
现代文：萧综军主姜桃来跟鹿胒说： 君年纪已很大，又充任如今的使者，良有所达。
English: Jiang Taolai, the commander of Xiao Zi's army, said to Lu Yao, "You are very old, and you have served as today's emissary. You have achieved a lot.

古文：元法僧魏之微子，拔城归梁，梁主待物有道。 
现代文：元法僧是魏朝的微子，拔城归梁，梁主待物有道。 
English: The former monk is a microcosm of the Wei Dynasty, pulling the city back to the beam, the beam has a way of waiting for things.

古文：乃举手上指： 今岁星在斗。
现代文：于是举手指天说： 今年岁星在斗。
English: So he raised his finger to the heavens and said: This year, the stars are fighting.

古文：斗，吴之分野。君何为不归梁国，我令君富贵。 
现代文：斗，是吴地分野，君为什么不归顺梁国，我可让君富贵。 
English: Why don't you go to Shunliang country, I can make you rich.

古文：悆答曰： 君徒知其一，未知其二。
现代文：鹿胒回答说： 君只知其一，不知其二。
English: Deerslayer replied, "You only know one, you don't know the other."

古文：法僧者，莒仆之流，而梁纳之，无乃有愧于季孙也？
现代文：法僧，是莒仆之流，而梁朝容纳了他，难道不有愧于季孙吗？
English: Wasn't it worthy of Qisun that the Liang Dynasty accepted him, even though he was a dharma monk from a line of eunuchs?

古文：今月建鹑首，斗牛受破，岁星木也，逆而克之。
现代文：这个月建鹑首，斗牛受破，岁星木也，迎面克之。
English: This month, the dagger was built, the bull was broken, and the yearling star tree also came face to face.

古文：君吴国败丧不久。
现代文：君的吴国不久就会败丧。
English: Your State of Wu will soon be defeated.

古文：且衣锦夜游，有识不许。 
现代文：况且我衣锦夜游，这是有见识的人所不能允许的。 
English: You're like a swimmer in the middle of the night in fancy clothes, which no sensible person would do.

古文：言未及尽，引入见景俊，景俊曰： 元中山虽曰相唤，不惧而来，何也？ 
现代文：话还没说完，就被引见景隽，景隽说： 元中山虽说唤你，你却不害怕生命危险前来，这是为什么？ 
English: Before he had finished speaking, he was introduced to Jingyao. Jingyao said: Although Yuan Zhongshan is calling you, you are not afraid to risk your life to come. Why is that?

古文：答曰： 昔楚伐吴，吴遣蹶由劳师，今者此行，略同于彼。 
现代文：回答说： 过去楚伐吴国，吴国派蹶由劳慰军队，今天此行，与那时略同。 
English: He replied, "In the past, Chu was the capital of the State of Wu, and the State of Wu sent troops to comfort the troops. Today's trip is somewhat similar to that time.

古文：又曰： 游历多年，与卿先经相识。 
现代文：又说： 我游历多年，与你先就相识。 
English: He also said: I have been traveling for many years, and I met you first.

古文：仍叙由缘，景俊便记。
现代文：于是叙说缘由，景隽便记下来。
English: So he explained the reason, and then he wrote it down.

古文：引悆同坐，谓悆曰： 卿不为刺客也？ 
现代文：引鹿胒一同入座，对鹿胒说： 卿不是刺客吧？ 
English: He led Deerslayer to a seat and said to him: Sir, aren't you an assassin?

古文：答曰： 今者为使，欲返命本朝，相刺之事，更卜后图。 
现代文：鹿胒回答说： 今天作为使者，想返命本朝，相刺之事，就留给以后吧。 
English: Deer God replied: Today, as an envoy, I would like to respond to this morning's order. As for the conflict, let it be left for later.

古文：为设饭食杂果，悆强饮多食，向敌数人，微自夸矜。
现代文：景隽为他安排饭食果品之类，鹿胒能吃能喝，一人食量敌过数人，微自得意夸耀。
English: Jingyao arranged for him to eat fruits and other things, while Lu Yao was able to eat and drink. One person's food consumption exceeded that of several people, and he boasted with a little pride.

古文：诸人相谓曰： 壮士哉！ 
现代文：众人议论说： 壮士！ 
English: And all the people answered and said, "Away with the mighty man!

古文：乃引向元略所，一人引入户内，指床令坐。
现代文：于是带他到元略住所，一个人带他到门内，指床让他坐下。
English: So they took him to Yuanliu's residence. A person took him to the door and told him to sit on the bed.

古文：一人别在室中，出谓悆曰： 中山有教，与君相闻。 
现代文：一人别在室中，出来对鹿胒说： 中山有指教，要说给你听。 
English: Don't be alone in the room, come out and say to Deerslayer: Zhongshan has some advice to give you.

古文：悆遂起立。
现代文：鹿胒于是起立。
English: Deerslayer then stood up.

古文：使人谓悆曰： 君但坐。 
现代文：他们派人对鹿胒说： 君你只管坐下。 
English: They sent someone to Deer God to say: You, just sit down.

古文：悆曰： 家国王子，岂有坐听教命？ 
现代文：鹿胒说： 家国王子有教，为臣的哪能坐听教命？ 
English: Lu Yao said: The son of a king is educated, how can a vassal sit and listen to instruction?

古文：使人曰： 顿首君，我昔有以向南，且遣相唤，欲闻乡事。
现代文：使人说： 顿首君，我过去归诚南边，早晨派人唤你，想知道家乡之事。
English: The messenger said, "Dear sir, I have just returned to the south. In the morning, I sent someone to call you to find out about my hometown.

古文：晚来患动，不获相见。 
现代文：但夜晚怕动，不能相见。 
English: I'm not well enough to see you tonight.

古文：悆曰： 且奉音旨，冒险祗赴，不得瞻见，内怀反侧。 
现代文：鹿胒说： 早奉王公音旨，臣冒险赶赴，但却不能瞻见，为臣辗转反侧，难以释怀。 
English: Lu Yao said: I had already obeyed the king's order, and the vassal ventured to rush there, but I couldn't see it, and it was hard to let go of the vassal.

古文：遂辞而退。
现代文：于是辞别而退。
English: Deerslayer bids farewell, then withdraws.

古文：须臾天晓，综军主范勖、景俊、司马杨票等竞问北朝士马多少。
现代文：不一会，天就亮了，萧综军主范、景隽、司马杨日票等人竞相询问北朝士卒马匹多少。
English: In a short while, the sky will be bright, and Xiao Zongjun's main Fan, Jing Yi, Sima Yang Rongqi and others will compete to inquire how many horses there are in the North Asians.

古文：悆云： 秦陇既平，三方静晏，今有高车、白眼、羌、蜀五十万，齐王、李陈留、崔延伯、李叔仁等分为三道，径趣江西；安乐王鉴、李神领冀、相、齐、济、青、光羽林十万，直向琅邪南出。 
现代文：鹿胒说： 秦、陇既已平定，三方安静晏平，现在有高车、白眼、羌、蜀五十万人，齐王、李陈留、崔延伯、李叔仁等人分为三道，径往江西；安乐王元鉴、李神领冀、相、齐、青、光州羽林军十万人，直接从琅笽向南进发。 
English: Lu Yao said: Since Qin and Shu have been pacified and the three sides are calm and level, there are now five hundred thousand Gao Che, Baiyan, Yao and Shu. Qi Wang, Li Chen Liu, Cui Yanbo, Li Shuren and others are divided into three roads and headed to Jiangxi; Anle Wang Yuan Jian, Li Shen Liji, Fang, Qi, Qing and Gwangju Ulin Army of one hundred thousand people, directly from Shu to the south.

古文：诸人相谓曰： 讵非华辞也？ 
现代文：诸人相互说： 该不是华饰之词吧？ 
English: People say to each other: Shouldn't it be a flowery word?

古文：悆曰： 可验崇朝，何华之有！ 
现代文：鹿胒说： 可验皇朝，何华之有？ 
English: Lu Yao said: You can examine the imperial dynasty, what is there?

古文：日晏令还。
现代文：上午九、十点钟，才让他回去。
English: He was not allowed to return until nine or ten in the morning.

古文：景俊送悆上戏马台，北望城垒，曰： 何此城之固，良非彼军士所能图拟，卿可语二王，回师改计。 
现代文：景隽送鹿胒上戏马台、北望城垒，说： 此城坚固，的确不是你们魏国军人所能攻下的，卿回去可以告诉两位王公，赶紧回师改计。 
English: Jing Ye sent Lu Ye up to the circus ring and the north lookout of the fortress, saying: This city is strong, it is really not possible for you Wei soldiers to conquer it. Sir, when you go back, you can tell the two princes to hurry back to the division and change the plan.

古文：悆曰： 金墉汤池，冲甲弥巧，贵守以人，何论险害！ 
现代文：鹿胒说： 金城汤池，冲甲弥巧，贵守以人，论险要有什么意思？ 
English: Lu Yao said: Jincheng Tangchi, Chongjia Yaqiao, Guizhou with people, what is the meaning of discussing risk?

古文：还军，于路与梁话誓盟。
现代文：准备回到军中，在路上与梁话誓盟。
English: He was preparing to return to the army, and he made a promise with Liang on the way.

古文：契约既固，未旬，综果降。
现代文：契约既固，不到十天，萧综果然归降。
English: The contract was solid, and less than ten days later, Xiao Siming finally surrendered.

古文：诏曰： 日者，法僧父子，顽固自天，长恶不已，窃城外叛，职此乱阶，遂使彭宋名籓，翻为贼有。
现代文：帝诏说： 日者，法僧父子，顽固自天，长期为恶不止，窃城外叛，为乱一方，遂使彭、宋名州，反为贼有。
English: Emperor Zhao said: The Japanese, the legal monk father and son, are stubborn from heaven, and have been evil for a long time, stealing and rebelling outside the city, and being a chaotic party, so they made Peng and Song Mingzhou become thieves.

古文：虽宗臣名将，挥戈于泗滨；虎士雄卒，竦剑于汴渚。
现代文：虽然宗臣名将，挥戈于泗水之滨；虎士雄卒。扬剑于汴水之滨，虎士雄卒，挥剑下汴河水边。
English: Although the great vassals are famous, they are waving their swords on the shore of Surabaya; the tigers are young. They are waving their swords on the shore of Surabaya, the tigers are young, and they are waving their swords on the waterfront of Surabaya.

古文：然高墉峻堞，非可易登；广涘深隍，实为难践。
现代文：然而高墙竣垛，并非很容易登上；广水深隍，实在难以通过。
English: However, the high wall is completed, it is not easy to climb; the wide water is deep, it is really difficult to pass.

古文：是用日昃忘食，中宵愤惋者也，而衍都督、豫章王萧综体运知机，欲归有道，潜遣密信，送款于都督临淮王。
现代文：因此朕日影西斜仍不就食，夜半愤怒惋惜不已。而萧衍都督、豫章王萧综体识运祚知晓机算，欲归有道，偷偷派秘密信使，送诚于都督临淮王。
English: Therefore, I, Sun Yat-sen, still do not eat, and I regret my anger in the middle of the night. And Xiao Yan, the governor of the capital, and Yu Zhang Wang Xiao, comprehensively experienced the movement, knew the machine, wanted to have a way, secretly sent a secret messenger to send sincerity to the governor of the capital, King Huai.

古文：于时事同夜光，能不按剑。
现代文：当时事出意料，能不警惕。
English: It was unexpected, so we had to be on our guard.

古文：殿中侍御史监军鹿悆，不惮虎口，视险若夷，便能占募，入验虚实。
现代文：殿中侍御史监军鹿胒，不怕虎口，视险如平地，充任使者，入南验查虚实。
English: The palace attendant, the inspector of history, the military deer, not afraid of the tiger's mouth, sees the danger as flat ground, serves as an emissary, enters the south to check the facts.

古文：誓盟既固，所图遂果。
现代文：誓盟既固，所图于是结果。
English: The vows were firm, and the plan came to fruition.

古文：返地复城，息我兵甲，亦是悆之力焉。
现代文：收复失城失地，却不动用一兵一卒，也是鹿胒之力也。
English: It is also the strength of Deer God to recover the lost city and land without using a single soldier.

古文：若不酬以荣禄，何以劝厉将来？
现代文：如不以荣禄报答他，哪拿什么来劝勉将来之人呢？
English: If we do not reward him with glory, how can we encourage future generations?

古文：可封定陶县开国子，食邑三百户。 
现代文：可封他为定陶县开国子，食邑三百户。 
English: He can be called the founding father of Dingtao County, with 300 households in the county.

古文：除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：朝廷除授他为员外散骑常侍。
English: In addition to being a member, the Imperial Court also awarded him the title of "random riding attendant."

古文：俄出为青州彭城王劭府长兼司马，寻解长兼。
现代文：不久，出任青州彭城王元劭府长兼司马。不久解长兼之职。
English: Soon after, he became the governor of Wangyuan County, Pengcheng, Qingzhou, and also the secretary. He was soon relieved of his duties as governor.

古文：广川人刘钧、东清河人房须反，劭遣悆监州军讨之，战于商山，颇有所捷。
现代文：广川人刘钧、东清河人房须反叛，元劭派鹿胒监督州军讨伐他们，战于商山，很打了一些胜仗。
English: Liu Qi from Guangchuan and Fang Su from East Qinghe rebelled, and Yuan Qi sent Lu Qi to supervise the state army to fight them. They fought in Shangshan and won some victories.

古文：将统皆劭左右，擅增首级，妄请赏帛，悆面执不与，劭弗从。
现代文：将领统军都是元劭左右，他们擅自增加斩杀首级的数量，妄自请求赏赐缣帛，鹿胒坚持认为不可，元劭不依他的看法。
English: The generals of the unified army were all around Yuan Shao. They arbitrarily increased the number of heads they cut off, and pretentiously requested a reward for the heads. Lu Yao insisted that it was impossible, and Yuan Shao did not follow his opinion.

古文：悆勃然作色曰： 竭志立言，为王为国，岂悆家事！ 
现代文：鹿胒勃然变色说： 竭志言立，为王为国，这岂是我鹿胒家中之事！ 
English: Deerslayer suddenly changed color and said, "I will do my best to stand up for the king and the country. Is this really happening in my Deerslayer's home?

古文：不辞而出，劭追而谢焉。
现代文：不辞而出，元劭追上给他道歉。
English: He did not give up, and Geng Yao caught up and apologized to him.

古文：窃勋者放言噂沓欲加私害，悆闻而笑之，不以介意。
现代文：偷窃功劳的人放出狂言，要私自加害于他，鹿胒听说一笑置之，一点也不介意。
English: A person who steals credit issues a rant, saying that he wants to harm himself. Lu Yao laughs it off and doesn't mind at all.

古文：先是，萧衍遣将彭群、王辩率众七万围逼琅邪。
现代文：这以前，萧衍派将领彭群、王辩率七万人马围逼琅笽。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan's generals, Peng Qun and Wang Du, had forced seventy thousand people to surround the capital.

古文：自春及秋，官军不至，而两青士马，裁可万余，师次郧城，久而未进。
现代文：自春及秋，官军也不见到来，而两青州人马，才有一万多人，军驻郧城，久久不前进。
English: Since the spring and autumn, the government army has not arrived, and the two Qingzhou people and horses only have more than 10,000 people. The army is stationed in Lucheng and has not advanced for a long time.

古文：劭乃遣悆，南青州刺史胡平遣长史刘仁之，并监勒诸将，径赴贼垒，大破之，斩群首，俘馘二千余级。
现代文：元劭于是派鹿胒，南青州刺史胡平派长史刘仁之，一起监督众将，径直奔赴敌人营垒，大破敌人，斩杀彭群，俘敌首二千多级。
English: Therefore, Yuan Shun sent Lu Yao and Liu Renzhi, the head of Hu Ping's faction in South Qingzhou, to supervise the generals. They went straight to the enemy camp, defeated the enemy, killed Peng Qun, and captured more than two thousand enemy leaders.

古文：肃宗嘉之，玺书劳问。
现代文：肃宗称赞他，玺书劳问。
English: Su Zong praised him and asked him a lot of questions.

古文：永安中，入为左将军、给事黄门侍郎，又以前赏悆入徐之功未尽，增邑二百户，进爵为侯。
现代文：永安年间，入朝为左将军、给事黄门侍郎，又因前鹿胒入徐州之功未尽，增加食邑二百户，晋爵为侯。
English: During the Yong'an era, he entered the court as General Zuo and served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and because of the outstanding contribution of the former Deer Herder to Xuzhou, he increased the number of households by 200, and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：虽任居通显，志在谦退，迎送亲宾，加于畴昔，而自无室宅，常假赁居止，布衣粝食，寒暑不变。
现代文：鹿胒虽然任职显要，但志在谦退，迎送亲朋宾客，比过去更为周全，而自己没有房屋住宅，经常借租居室，身穿布衣，口吃粗食，寒暑都是一样。
English: Although he holds an important position, Lu Yao is trying to be more humble. He welcomes friends and relatives more carefully than in the past. However, he does not own a house or apartment, he often rents a room, wears cloth clothes, stutters, eats coarse food, and is cold and hot all the same.

古文：庄帝嘉其清素，时复赐以钱帛。
现代文：庄帝嘉许他的清正素朴，又赐给他钱帛。
English: Emperor Zhuang appreciated his honesty and simplicity, and gave him money.

古文：及东徐城民吕文欣杀刺史元大宾，南引贼众，屯栅曲术，诏悆使持节、散骑常侍、安东将军，为六州大使，与行台樊子鹄讨之。
现代文：等到东徐城百姓吕文欣杀害刺史元大宾，南引敌人，屯驻曲术，帝诏鹿胒为使持节、散骑常侍、安东将军，为六州大使，与行台樊子鹄讨伐打败了敌人。
English: Until the people of Dongxucheng, Lu Wenxin, killed the great guest of the Grand Historian, led the enemy to the south, stationed the music, and defeated the enemy with the Emperor Lugu as the envoy, the horseman, the general Anton, and the ambassador of the six states.

古文：破文欣党，重以购之，文欣同逆人韩端正斩文欣送首，魁帅同死者十二人。
现代文：以重金购买斩杀擒捉文欣党羽，与文欣一起叛逆的韩端正斩杀文欣送来首级，敌魁帅同死的有十二个人。
English: He paid a large sum of money to buy party members who would kill and capture Wenxin. Han Duanzheng, who was a traitor together with Wenxin, killed Wenxin and sent the head of the group. There were twelve people who died together with the enemy leader.

古文：诏书褒慰。
现代文：帝下诏书褒奖慰问。
English: Emperor's edict of commendation and condolence.

古文：还拜镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：还朝，拜为镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the morning, he also paid homage to Zhendong General and Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：寻诏为使持节、兼尚书左仆射、东南道三徐行台。
现代文：不久诏为使持节、兼尚书左仆射、东南道三徐行台。
English: Soon after, it was announced that the festival would be held on the third day of the third month of the third lunar month.

古文：至东郡，值尔朱仲远陷西兗，向滑台，诏与都督贺拔胜等拒仲远。
现代文：到东郡后，正逢朱仲远攻陷西兖州，挥师向滑台，帝诏他与都督贺拔胜等抵抗仲远。
English: After arriving in Dong County, Zhu Zhongyuan attacked and occupied West Luzhou at the right time, waved his division to the slide, and the emperor said that he was far away from the resistance of the governor He Puxin and others.

古文：军败还京。
现代文：军败，鹿胒还归京城。
English: Defeated, Lukang returned to the capital.

古文：普泰中，加征东将军，转卫将军、右光禄大夫、兼度支尚书、河北五州和籴大使。
现代文：普泰年间，加授他为征东将军，转任卫将军、右光禄大夫、兼度支尚书、河北五州和籴翟大使。
English: During the Putai era, he was awarded the title of General of the Expedition to the East, and was transferred to the post of General of the Guards, Doctor of the Right Guanglu, and Ambassador of the Five Provinces of Hebei Province and Shandong Province.

古文：天平中，除梁州刺史，时荥阳民郑荣业等聚众反，围逼州城。
现代文：天平年间，除任他为梁州刺史。当时荥阳百姓郑荣业等人聚众造反，围逼州城。
English: During the Tenpyeong era, he was removed from his post as governor of Liangzhou. At that time, Zheng Rongye and other citizens of Puyang gathered to rebel and besieged the city of Liangzhou.

古文：悆不能固守，遂以城降。
现代文：鹿胒不能固守城池，于是投降。
English: Lugu could not hold on to the castle, so he surrendered.

古文：荣业送悆于关西。
现代文：荣业把鹿胒送到关西。
English: Rongye sent Deerslayer to Kansai.

古文：张熠，字景世，自云南阳西鄂人，汉侍中衡是其十世祖。
现代文：张熠，字景世，自称是南阳西鄂人，汉代侍中张衡是他的十世祖。
English: Zhang Rong, also known as Jingshi, claimed to be from Nanyang and Xi'an. Zhang Heng, a Han Dynasty chamberlain, was his 10th ancestor.

古文：熠自奉朝请为扬州车骑府录事参军。
现代文：张熠应朝廷所请任扬州车骑府录事参军。
English: At the request of the imperial court, Zhang Ye was appointed to the Yangzhou Cavalry Corps to join the army.

古文：入除步兵校尉。
现代文：入朝廷除授步兵校尉。
English: After entering the imperial court, he was awarded the rank of infantry captain.

古文：永宁中，寺塔大兴，经营务广。灵太后曾幸作所，凡有顾问，熠敷陈指画，无所遗阙，太后善之。
现代文：永宁寺塔营造之风大兴，经构规模求广，灵太后曾经亲到兴建工地，凡是太后问到的，张熠敷陈指画，无所遗漏，太后称赞他。
English: The construction of the Yongning Pagoda was booming, and the scale of the structure was expanding. The Empress Dowager Ling once visited the construction site. Whenever the Empress Dowager asked, Zhang Xizhi made finger paintings, and nothing was left out. The Empress Dowager praised him.

古文：久之，除冠军将军、中散大夫。
现代文：很久以后，除授冠军将军、中散大夫。
English: After a long time, he was awarded the title of champion general and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：后为别将，随长孙稚西征，转平西将军、太中大夫，为关西都督。
现代文：后为别将，随长孙稚西征，转任平西将军、太中大夫，为关西都督。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of second-in-command and, following the Western Expedition of his eldest grandson, he was transferred to the position of General of Pingxi Province, Grand Vice-Minister of Health, and Governor of Kansai Province.

古文：以功封长平县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：因功封长平县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: He is known as the founding father of Changping County and has 200 households in his hometown.

古文：永安初，除平西将军、岐州刺史、假安西将军，寻加抚军将军。
现代文：永安初年，除任平西将军、岐州刺史、假安西将军，不久又加授抚军将军。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he dismissed General Pingxi, General Qizhou Zhishi, and General Fake Anxi, and soon promoted him to General of the General Staff.

古文：矜恤贫弱，为民所爱。
现代文：他怜恤贫困弱小之人，为老百姓所热爱。
English: He pitied the poor and the weak and was loved by the common people.

古文：代还，值元颢入洛，仍令复州，熠遂私还。
现代文：人代其职，张熠还都，正值元颢率部入洛，仍令复州职，张熠私自回来了。
English: On behalf of his post, Zhang Xuan also went to the capital, just as the Yuan Xuan rate department entered Luo, still ordered to return to the state post, Zhang Xuan came back himself.

古文：庄帝还宫，出除镇南将军、东荆州刺史。
现代文：庄帝还宫，出授他为镇南将军、东荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, and he was awarded the title of Zhenan General and East Jingzhou Chief Historian.

古文：寻加散骑常侍、征蛮大都督，转荆州刺史。
现代文：不久加授散骑常侍、征蛮大都督，转荆州刺史。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the rank of knight-errant, and was made the grand governor of Jing Province.

古文：值尔朱兆入洛，不行。
现代文：正逢朱兆入洛，不去就任。
English: Just as Zhu Zhao entered the capital, he did not go to take office.

古文：普泰中，卫将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：普泰年间，为卫将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: During the Putai era, he served as Wei general and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：天平初，迁鄴草创，右仆射高隆之、吏部尚书元世俊奏曰： 南京宫殿，毁撤送都，连筏竟河，首尾大至，自非贤明一人，专委受纳，则恐材木耗损，有阙经构。
现代文：天平初年，迁都草创，右仆射高隆之、吏部尚书元世隽启奏说： 南京的宫殿，毁撤送往新都，连筏竞塞黄河，首尾相接，这如不是让贤明的一个人，专门管理，则恐怕材木耗损，有缺经构。
English: In the first year of the Tianping era, the relocation of the capital was initiated by Gao Long, the right-hand man of Gao Long, and the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre of the cadre

古文：熠清贞素著，有称一时，臣等辄举为大将。 
现代文：张熠清贞素著，有称一时，臣等推他为大将，总管此事。 
English: Zhang Jianqing Zhenxue's book, said that for a while, the vassals pushed him to be the general in charge of the matter.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：帝下诏依从。
English: He complied.

古文：熠勤于其事。
现代文：张熠对营造十分勤勉。
English: Zhang Ye is very diligent in building up the company.

古文：寻转营构左都将。
现代文：不久，转任营构左都将。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the left wing of the organization.

古文：兴和初，卫大将军。
现代文：兴和初年，任卫大将军。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：宫殿成，以本将军除东徐州刺史。
现代文：宫殿修成之后，以本将军除任东徐州刺史。
English: After the palace was completed, this general was removed from the post of East Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：三年，卒于州，时年六十。
现代文：兴和三年，死于州任之上，时年六十岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty, three years after the end of the Heian period.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、司空公、兗州刺史，谥曰懿。
现代文：朝廷赠他为骠骑大将军、司空公、兖州刺史，谥称懿。
English: The imperial court gave him the titles of General of the Horse Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, and General of the Cavalry.

