古文：韦叔裕，字孝宽，京兆杜陵人也，少以字行。世为三辅著姓。
现代文：韦叔裕，字孝宽，京兆杜陵人，从少年时就以字著名于世。世代为三辅一带有名的大姓。
English: Wei Shuyu, also known as Xiao Kuan, a native of Jingzha Tulin, has been famous for his writing since he was a boy. He has been a famous family name in the Sanfu area for generations.

古文：祖直善，魏冯翊、扶风二郡守。
现代文：祖父韦直善，曾任冯翊、扶风二郡的太守。
English: His grandfather, Wei Zhaozhan, was once the governor of Fenghuang and Fufeng counties.

古文：父旭，武威郡守。
现代文：父亲韦旭，任武威郡太守。
English: His father, Wei Xu, was the governor of Wuwei County.

古文：建义初，为大行台右丞，加辅国将军、雍州大中正。
现代文：建义初年，韦旭任大行台右丞，又加封为辅国将军、雍州大中正。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Wei Xu was appointed as Da Xing Tai Yu Zheng, and was also awarded the title of Auxiliary National General and Yongzhou University Vice President.

古文：永安二年，拜右将军、南豳州刺史。
现代文：永安二年，他又拜受右将军、南豳州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yongan, he was again worshipped by the right general and the history of Nanluozhou.

古文：时氐贼数为抄窃，旭随机招抚，并即归附。
现代文：这时氐族人多次掠夺，他随机招安慰抚，氐族人大多归附。
English: At this time, the Yao people plundered many times, he randomly called for consolation, and most of the Yao people joined in.

古文：寻卒官，赠司空、冀州刺史，谥曰文惠。
现代文：不久在官位上去世，朝廷追赠他为司空、冀州刺史，谥号为文惠。
English: Soon after he died in office, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Siku and Jizhou Zhishi, and his nickname was Wen Hui.

古文：孝宽沈敏和正，涉猎经史。
现代文：韦孝宽性情沉稳机敏，平和公正，广泛涉猎经典著作。
English: Wei Xiaokuan is calm and alert, peaceful and fair, and is widely involved in classic works.

古文：弱冠，属萧宝夤作乱关右，乃诣阙，请为军前驱。
现代文：二十岁时，萧宝夤在关中作乱，孝宽到朝廷请求充任军队的先锋前去讨伐。
English: At the age of twenty, Xiao Baojun caused a disturbance in Guanzhong, and Xiao Guang went to the imperial court to request to serve as the vanguard of the army to fight.

古文：朝廷嘉之，即拜统军。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖了他，命他为统军。
English: The imperial court commended him and ordered him to lead the unified army.

古文：随冯翊公长孙承业西征，每战有功。拜国子博士，行华山郡事。
现代文：他跟随冯翊公长孙承业西征，逢战立功，被朝廷封为国子博士，代行华山郡太守职务。
English: He followed Feng Yu Gong's eldest grandson, Chengye, on his westward expedition. He distinguished himself in battle and was awarded the title of "Dr. Kuniko" by the imperial court. He served as acting governor of Huashan County.

古文：属侍中杨侃为大都督，出镇潼关，引孝宽为司马。
现代文：侍中杨侃任大都督出镇潼关，荐引韦孝宽为司马。
English: Yang Kan, a chamberlain, was appointed as the governor of the town of Shouguan, and recommended that Wei Xiaokang be appointed as the governor.

古文：侃奇其才，以女妻之。
现代文：杨侃爱重他的人才，把女儿嫁给他。
English: Yang Kan valued his talent and married his daughter to him.

古文：永安中，授宣威将军、给事中，寻赐爵山北县男。
现代文：永安年间，朝廷授予他宣威将军、给事中，不久又赐爵为山北县男。
English: During the Yong'an era, the imperial court awarded him the title of General Xuan Wei, and shortly after that, the title of the Man of Shanbei County.

古文：普泰中，以都督从荆州刺史源子恭镇穰城，以功除淅阳郡守。
现代文：普泰时，他以都督的官职随从荆州刺史源子恭镇守穰城，因立功任淅阳郡太守。
English: During the reign of Putai, he served as the official governor of Jingzhou, accompanied by Zhang Shi Yuan Zi Gong Zhen to guard the city of Handan, and was appointed as the governor of Handan County for his distinguished service.

古文：时独孤信为新野郡守，同隶荆州，与孝宽情好款密，政术俱美，荆部吏人号为连璧。
现代文：这时独孤信任新野郡太守，都隶属荆州管辖。他们二人关系亲密，为政的方法都很得当，荆州的官吏百姓称他们为双连的璧玉。
English: At this time, only a few people trusted the Nino County Governor, both of whom were under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou. The two of them had a close relationship, and their methods of government were very appropriate. Officials and people in Jingzhou called them the gems of the couple.

古文：孝武初，以都督镇城。
现代文：孝武初年，他任都督镇守州城。
English: In the first year of Xiaowu, he was appointed as the governor of the town of Shuzhou.

古文：周文帝自原州赴雍州，命孝宽随军。
现代文：宇文泰从原州到达雍州，命他随军东征。
English: U Wentai arrived in Yongzhou from Wonju and was ordered to march with the army.

古文：及克潼关，即授弘农郡守。
现代文：攻克潼关，即授予他弘农太守的职务。
English: After conquering Shaoguan, he was given the post of the governor of Hongnong.

古文：从拎窦泰，兼左丞，节度宜阳兵马事。
现代文：他又跟从宇文泰生擒窦泰，被提升为兼左丞，负责统领宜阳兵马。
English: He also followed Yuwen Tai's student, Zou Dou Tai, and was promoted to concurrently be the left-hand man, responsible for commanding the Yiyang soldiers and horses.

古文：仍与独孤信入洛，为阳城郡守，复与宇文贵、怡峰应接颍川义徒，破东魏将任祥、尧雄于颍川。
现代文：又与独孤信进入洛阳，被任命为阳城郡太守。还与宇文贵、怡峰去接应颍川的义军，打败了东魏将领任祥、尧雄。
English: He also entered Luoyang with Du Guoxin and was appointed as the first governor of Yangcheng County. He also went with Wu Wengui and Yifeng to meet the rebel army in Beichuan, and defeated the Eastern Wei generals led by Xiang Renxiang and Juxiong.

古文：孝宽又进平乐口，下豫州，获刺史冯邕。
现代文：他又平定乐口，拿下豫州，俘获刺史冯邕。
English: He also subdued Lekou, took over Yuzhou, and captured the assassin Feng Yu.

古文：又从战于河桥。
现代文：又随大军与东魏军战于河桥。
English: He also fought with the Eastern Wei army in the Battle of Heqiao.

古文：时大军不利，边境骚然，乃令孝宽以本将军行宜阳郡事。
现代文：这时西魏军队失利，边境混乱骚动，朝廷便命他以本将军的职务代行宜阳郡太守。
English: At this time, the West Wei army was defeated, the border was in turmoil, and the imperial court ordered him to act as the governor of Yiyang County in place of the general.

古文：寻迁南兗州刺史。
现代文：不久迁任南兖州刺史。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of South Luzhou chief historian.

古文：是岁，东魏将段琛、尧杰复据宜阳，遣其阳州刺史牛道恆扇诱边人。
现代文：这一年，东魏将领段琛、尧杰又占据宜阳，派来他们的阳州刺史牛道恒引诱边境上的西魏百姓。
English: In the same year, the Eastern Wei generals Duan Zheng and Gong Jie occupied Yiyang again, and sent their Yangzhou general Zishi Niu Dao Heng to lure the Western Wei people on the border.

古文：孝宽深患之，乃遣谍人访获道恆手迹，令善学书者伪作道恆与孝宽书，论归款意，又为落烬烧迹，若火下书者，还令谍人送于琛营。
现代文：孝宽深以为患，便派间谍获取了牛道恒的手迹，命善于书法的人模仿他的笔迹，写了一封牛道恒给韦孝宽的信，商量通款归顺的事。又仿造火烧的痕迹，好像要烧掉这封信的样子，派间谍将书信送达段琛的军营。
English: Takahiro was deeply concerned, so he sent spies to obtain Niu Daocheng's handwriting. He ordered a calligrapher to imitate his handwriting and write a letter from Niu Daocheng to Wei Takahiro to discuss the surrender. He also imitated the traces of fire, as if he wanted to burn the letter, and sent spies to deliver the letter to the military camp in Duanlu.

古文：琛得书，果疑道恆，其所欲经略，皆不见用。
现代文：段琛得到书信，果然怀疑牛道恒，道恒想施行的办法，段琛都不采用。
English: Duan Qi received the letter and indeed suspected Niu Daoheng. The method that Daoheng wanted to implement was not adopted by Duan Qi.

古文：孝宽知其离阻，因出奇兵掩袭，禽道恆及琛等，崤渑遂清。
现代文：孝宽知道他们已被离间，因而出奇兵进攻，拿获牛道恒和段琛等人，崤山渑池一带从此便清静了。
English: Knowing that they had been separated, Takahiro launched a surprise attack and captured Niu Daoheng and Duan Qi. The area around Lushan and Dianchi has been quiet ever since.

古文：大统五年，进爵为侯。
现代文：大统五年，他被晋爵为侯。
English: In the fifth year of unification, he was promoted to marquis.

古文：八年，转晋州刺史，寻移镇玉壁，兼摄南汾州事。
现代文：大统八年，任晋州刺史，不久移镇玉壁，兼管南汾州的政务。
English: In the eighth year of unification, he was appointed as the governor of Jinzhou, and soon moved to the town of Yubi, where he was also in charge of the government affairs of Nanluozhou.

古文：先是，山胡负险，屡为劫盗，孝宽示以威信，州境肃然。
现代文：原先，山里的胡人依恃险要，多次出来抢劫，孝宽对他们恩威并施，南汾州境内一片肃然。
English: Originally, the Hu people in the mountains clung to the Jurchen and repeatedly came out to rob, and Xiaokang showed them grace and favor, and the territory of Nanluozhou was in a state of awe.

古文：进授大都督。
现代文：他又被晋封为大都督。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of grand governor.

古文：十二年，齐神武倾山东之众，志图西入，以玉壁冲要，先命攻之。
现代文：大统十二年，高欢倾东魏人马，志在攻取西魏。因玉壁是他西进的要道，所以首先攻打。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, Gao Huan attacked the Eastern Wei, aiming to capture the Western Wei. Because the Jade Wall was the key to his westward advance, he attacked it first.

古文：连营数十里，至于城下。
现代文：东魏军连营数十里，直到玉壁城下。
English: The Eastern Wei army marched for dozens of miles until they reached the foot of the Jade Wall.

古文：乃于城南起土山，欲乘之以入。
现代文：他们又在城南堆起土山，想登高进入城内。
English: They also piled up mounds of earth to the south of the city, hoping to climb high enough to enter the city.

古文：当其山处，城上先有两高楼。
现代文：与土山相对，城内原来有两座高楼。
English: In contrast to the mounds, there were originally two high-rises in the city.

古文：孝宽更缚木接之，令极高峻，多积战具以御之。
现代文：孝宽命再用木头往上接，让它更加高大，又准备了许多攻守的器械以作防御。
English: He then used the wood to make it taller, and prepared many offensive and defensive tools for defense.

古文：齐神武使谓城中曰： 纵尔缚楼至天，我会穿城取尔。 
现代文：高欢派人对城中的人说： 纵然你们把楼接上天，我也会攻进城把你们活捉。 
English: Gao Huan sent a message to the people in the city: "Even if you connect the tower to the sky, I will invade the city and capture you alive."

古文：遂于城南凿地道，又于城北起土山，攻具，昼夜不息。
现代文：东魏军又在城南挖掘地道，在城北垒起土山，准备攻城器具，昼夜不停。
English: The Eastern Wei army also dug tunnels in the south of the city, and raised earth mounds in the north of the city to prepare siege equipment, day and night.

古文：孝宽复掘长堑，要其地道，仍简战士屯堑。
现代文：孝宽又挖掘长壕，挡住敌人的地道，并派战士守在壕内。
English: Takahiro also dug a long trench to block the enemy's tunnel, and sent soldiers to guard the trench.

古文：城外每穿至堑，战土即擒杀之。
现代文：城外的敌兵每通过地道来到壕内，西魏的战士就把他们抓住杀死。
English: Whenever the enemy soldiers from outside the city came to the trench through the tunnel, the West Wei soldiers caught them and killed them.

古文：又于堑外积柴贮火，敌人有在地道内者，便下柴火，以皮排吹之。
现代文：又在壕外堆积柴草，准备火种，敌兵如在地道内，便将柴草放进地道点燃，再用皮囊向里面吹风。
English: They also piled up firewood and grass outside the trench to prepare kindling. If the enemy soldiers were inside the tunnel, they would put the firewood and grass into the tunnel to ignite it, and then use the leather bag to blow the wind inside.

古文：火气一冲，咸即灼烂。
现代文：火焰的热浪一冲，地道内的敌兵就被烧得皮焦肉烂。
English: The enemy soldiers in the tunnel were scorched to a crisp in the heat of the flames.

古文：城外又造攻车，车之所及，莫不摧毁，虽有排楯，莫之能抗。
现代文：敌兵又在城外制造攻车，攻车所到的地方，无不被摧毁，虽然有成排的栏杆也无法阻挡。
English: Outside the city, the enemy soldiers also made attacking vehicles. Wherever the attacking vehicles reached, they were destroyed, although they could not be blocked by rows of railings.

古文：孝宽乃缝布为缦，随其所向则张设之。
现代文：孝宽便用布缝成布幔，随着攻车行驶的方向张设。
English: Xiaokuan then sewed cloth into cloth cocoons and set them up in the direction of the oncoming vehicle.

古文：布悬于空中，其车竟不能坏。
现代文：布幔悬在空中，攻车无法破坏。
English: The cloth curtain hangs in the air, and it cannot be destroyed by attacking.

古文：城外又缚松于竿，灌油加火，规以烧布，并欲焚楼。
现代文：城外的东魏兵士又在长竿上缚上松木，蘸油点燃，想烧毁布幔和城楼。
English: Outside the city, the Eastern Wei soldiers tied pine trees to long poles and set oil on fire to try to burn down the cloth curtain and the city tower.

古文：孝宽复长作铁钩，利其锋刃，火竿一来，以钩遥豁之，松麻俱落。
现代文：孝宽又打造很长的铁钩，磨利铁钩的锋刃，火竿一举起来，就用铁钩远远地将它割断，燃烧的松木和麻布都落在城外。
English: Takahiro also made a very long iron hook, sharpened the sharp edge of the iron hook, and when the fire stick was lifted, he used the iron hook to cut it far away. The burning pine and linen fell outside the city.

古文：外又于城四面穿地，作二十一道，分为四路，于其中各施梁柱。
现代文：东魏兵士又在城的四面挖穿城墙，共挖掘二十一处，分作四路，在挖穿的地方顶上木柱。
English: East Wei soldiers also dug through the city wall on all four sides of the city, digging a total of twenty-one places, divided into four roads, and erecting wooden pillars in the excavated places.

古文：作讫，以油灌柱，放火烧之，柱折，城并崩坏。
现代文：再在木柱上浇上油，放火焚烧。木柱烧断，城墙便一起崩塌。
English: Then they poured oil on the wooden posts and set fire to them. When the wooden posts burned down, the city wall collapsed.

古文：孝宽又随崩处，竖木栅以捍之，敌不得入。
现代文：孝宽便在塌陷的地方竖上木栅栏阻挡敌兵。
English: Takahiro erected a wooden fence in the collapsed area to block the enemy soldiers.

古文：城外尽其攻击之术，孝宽咸拒破之。
现代文：城外用尽了攻击的办法，孝宽都一一破除。
English: Outside the city, all means of attack were exhausted, and Takahiro was eliminated one by one.

古文：神武无如之何，乃遣仓曹参军祖孝征谓曰： 未闻救兵，何不降也？ 
现代文：高欢没有办法，便派仓曹参军祖孝征对韦孝宽说 ：没有听说西魏有救兵到来，你为何不投降呢？ 
English: Gao Huan had no choice, so he sent Cang Cao to join the army and Zou Xiao Zheng to say to Wei Xiaokang: You haven't heard that there are rescuers coming from West Wei, why don't you surrender?

古文：孝宽报云： 我城池严固，兵食有余，攻者自劳，守者常逸，岂有旬朔之间，已须救援？
现代文：孝宽答道： 我的城池防守得严密坚固，军粮充足，攻的人劳顿，守的人安逸，哪能旬月之间就需要救援？
English: Xiaokuan replied, "My castle is well-defended, and there is plenty of food. Those who attack are exhausted, and those who defend are at ease. Who needs rescue in the middle of the month?

古文：适忧尔众有不反之危。
现代文：我正担忧你们不撤兵就会遇到危险。
English: I'm worried that if you don't pull out, you'll be in danger.

古文：孝宽关西男子，必不为降将军也。 
现代文：我是关西的一个堂堂男子，一定不会作投降的将军。 
English: I am a dignified man from Kansai, and I will never be a general who surrenders.

古文：俄而孝征复谓城中人曰： 韦城主受彼荣禄，或复可尔，自外军士，何事相随入汤火中邪？ 
现代文：不久，祖孝征又对城里的人说： 韦城主受朝廷的官职俸禄，坚守下去还有原因，其他将士又为什么和他一起在滚汤热火中受煎熬呢？ 
English: Soon, Zu Xiao Zheng also said to the people in the city: Wei, the lord of the city, receives the official salary of the imperial court, there is still a reason to stick to it, why do other soldiers suffer with him in the boiling heat?

古文：乃射募格于城中云： 能斩城主降者，拜太尉，封开国郡公，邑万户，赏帛万匹。 
现代文：东魏军又将赏格射入城中，说： 能将韦城主斩首投降的，授予太尉，封为开国郡公，食邑一万户，赏丝帛一万匹。 
English: The Eastern Wei army also shot the reward into the city, saying: "If you can behead the lord of Wei City and surrender, you will be awarded the rank of captain, the title of county governor of the founding of the country, 10,000 households of food villages, and 10,000 silk reeds."

古文：孝宽手题书背，反射城外，云： 若有斩高欢者，一依此赏。 
现代文：孝宽在书信的背后亲笔题写，又射回城外，说 ：如有斩杀高欢的，也照此奖赏。 
English: Takahiro wrote a personal inscription on the back of the letter and sent it back outside the city, saying: "If anyone kills Gao Huan, he will be rewarded accordingly."

古文：孝宽弟子迁，先在山东，又锁至城下，临以白刃云： 若不早降，便行大戮。 
现代文：孝宽弟弟的儿子韦迁原先在山东，这时被东魏军绑至城下，把刀架在他的脖子上，对韦孝宽说： 如不及早降，便将他杀死。 
English: Wei Qian, the son of Wei Xiaokuan's younger brother, was originally in Shandong. At that time, he was tied to the city by the Eastern Wei army. They put a knife on his neck and said to Wei Xiaokuan, "If you don't surrender soon, they will kill you."

古文：孝宽慷慨激扬，略无顾意。
现代文：孝宽对此慷慨激昂，没有丝毫眷顾的意思。
English: Takahiro is impassioned about this, and has no intention of caring in the slightest.

古文：士卒莫不感励，人有死难之心。
现代文：守城的将士无不受到感动和激励，人人都有战死殉难的决心。
English: The soldiers guarding the city were all moved and inspired, and all of them were determined to die a martyr's death.

古文：神武苦战六旬，伤及病死者十四五，智力俱困，因而发疾。其夜遁去。
现代文：高欢挥军苦战六十天，受伤和病死的十有四五，他的精神和体力都耗费殆尽，因而生病，当夜撤兵而去。
English: Gao Huanwang's army fought hard for sixty days, and forty-five out of ten were wounded or died of disease. His spirit and physical strength were exhausted, so he fell ill and withdrew that night.

古文：后因此忿恚，遂殂。
现代文：后来，因此忿恨气恼而去世。
English: He later died of his anger.

古文：魏文帝嘉孝宽功，令殿中尚书长孙绍远、左丞王悦至玉壁劳问，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵建忠郡公。
现代文：魏文帝嘉奖韦孝宽守城的功劳，命殿中尚书长孙绍远、左丞王悦到玉壁慰劳，授予他骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋封爵位为建忠郡公。
English: Emperor Weiwen commended Wei Xiaokuan for his contribution to the defense of the city. Sun Shaoyuan, the chief of the General Staff, and Wang Yue, the left-hand man of the General Staff, went to the Jade Wall to commiserate with Wei Xiaokuan. He was awarded the title of General of the Cavalry, the title of General of the Cavalry and the title of General of the Cavalry, and the title of General of the Cavalry and the title of General of the Cavalry.

古文：废帝二年，为雍州刺史。
现代文：废帝二年，他任雍州刺史。
English: Two years after the dethronement of the emperor, he was appointed Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：先是，路侧一里置一土堠，经雨颓毁，每须修之。
现代文：原先，路旁每隔一里筑一土墩以记里程。经雨水冲刷，常需修复。
English: Originally, a dirt mound was built every mile along the road to keep track of the mileage. It was washed away by rain and often needed to be repaired.

古文：自孝宽临州，乃勒部内，当堠处植槐树代之。既免修复，行旅又得庇阴。
现代文：孝宽上任后便命令在土墩处裁上槐树代替，既免于修复，行人也可乘凉。
English: After taking office, Takahiro ordered that an eucalyptus tree be planted at the mound to replace it. Since it is not subject to repair, pedestrians can also enjoy the coolness.

古文：周文后见，怪问知之，曰： 岂得一州独尔，当令天下同之。 
现代文：宇文泰后来见了感到奇怪，问清情况后说： 怎么能只有一个州这样，应该让天下都这样。 
English: Later, he felt strange when he saw Uwentai, and after clarifying the situation, he said: How can only one state be like this, it should be like this all over the world.

古文：于是令诸州夹道一里种一树，十里种三树，百里种五树焉。
现代文：于是下令各州在道路两边一里种一棵树，十里处种三棵树，一百里的地方种五棵树。
English: So he ordered the states to plant a tree every mile on both sides of the road, three trees every ten miles, and five trees every hundred miles.

古文：恭帝元年，以大将军与燕公于谨伐江陵，平之，以功封穰县公。
现代文：恭帝元年，孝宽任大将军，与燕公于谨进攻江陵，讨平敌兵，因立功封爵为穰县公。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, Xiaokuan was appointed as a general. Together with Yan Gong, he attacked Gangneung, defeated the enemy soldiers, and was knighted as the governor of Jixian County for his meritorious service.

古文：还，拜尚书右仆射，赐姓宇文氏。
现代文：还朝后被授予尚书右仆射，赐姓为宇文氏。
English: He was also awarded the title of Shangshu Righteous Servant of the Emperor, and was given the surname of Uwen.

古文：三年，周文北巡，命孝宽还镇玉壁。
现代文：恭帝三年，宇文泰到北方巡视，命孝宽镇守玉壁。
English: In the third year of Emperor Gong, Uwentai went on a tour to the north, and his son Takahiro was appointed to guard the Jade Wall.

古文：周孝闵帝践祚，拜小司徒。
现代文：周孝悯帝即位，授他为小司徒。
English: Zhou Xiao took pity on the emperor's accession to the throne and gave him the title of Xiao Shitou.

古文：明帝初，参麟趾殿学士，考校图籍。
现代文：明帝初年，他被封为麟趾殿学士，负责校勘图书典籍。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Lin Zi Dian Baccalaureate, responsible for the review of books and classics.

古文：保定初，以孝宽立勋玉壁，置勋州，仍授勋州刺史。
现代文：保定初年，朝廷因孝宽在玉壁建立殊勋，便设置勋州，命他任勋州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the imperial court set up a state of honor and ordered him to be appointed as the state's honorary historian.

古文：齐人遣使至玉壁，求通互市。
现代文：北齐派使者到玉壁，请求互通贸易。
English: Northern Qi sent an envoy to Yubi to request mutual trade.

古文：晋公护以其相持日久，绝无使命，一日忽来求交易，疑别有故。
现代文：晋公宇文护因两国相持很长时间，从未通过使者，忽然请求互市，怀疑有其他原因。
English: Because the two countries have been hostile to each other for a long time, Jin Gongyu Wenguo has never been through an emissary, suddenly requesting mutual market, suspecting that there are other reasons.

古文：又以皇姑、皇世母先没在彼，因其请和之际，或可致之。
现代文：又因皇姑和皇世母过去流落北齐，利用他们请和的机会，或许可以接回。
English: Also, since the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager used to live in North Qi, it may be possible to take advantage of the opportunity to invite them to return.

古文：遂令司门下大夫尹公正至玉壁，共孝宽详议。
现代文：朝廷便命司门下大夫尹公正到玉璧，与韦孝宽一起详细商议。
English: The imperial court then ordered his disciple, doctor Yin Zhengzheng, to go to Yubi to discuss the matter in detail with Wei Xiaokang.

古文：孝宽乃于郊盛设供帐，令公正接对使人，兼论皇家亲属在东之意。
现代文：孝宽便在郊外设下供帐，命尹公正接待北齐使者，并提及皇室亲属在北齐的事情。
English: Xiaokuan then set up a supply account in the suburbs and ordered Yin to receive the North Qi envoy fairly, and mentioned the matter of the royal family's relatives in North Qi.

古文：使者辞色甚悦。
现代文：使者说话的表情非常和悦。
English: The messenger spoke with a very pleasant expression.

古文：时又有汾州胡抄得关东人，孝宽复放东还，并致书一牍，具陈朝廷欲敦邻好。
现代文：这时有汾州的胡人掠得关东的齐人，孝宽命令将他们放还，并写书信一封，陈述朝廷想和睦邻国。
English: At this time, there were Hu people from Zhangzhou who had kidnapped Qidong people from Kanto, and Xiaokang ordered them to be released and wrote a letter stating that the imperial court wanted to make peace with neighboring countries.

古文：遂以礼送皇姑及护母等。
现代文：北齐便按礼仪送回皇姑和宇文护的母亲。
English: In accordance with protocol, Beiqi then sent back the empress dowager and the mother of Wu Wenzhou.

古文：孝宽善于抚御，能得人心，所遣间谍入齐者，皆为尽力。
现代文：孝宽善于抚慰管理，颇得人心。他所派到齐国的间谍，都为他尽心尽力。
English: He was good at soothing and managing people, and was very popular. The spies he sent to Qi did their best for him.

古文：亦有齐人得孝宽金货，遥通书疏。
现代文：也有北齐人接受孝宽的金银财货，遥通书信。
English: There are also Beiqi people who accept the gold and silver goods of the filial piety, and the long-distance letters.

古文：故齐动静，朝廷皆先知。
现代文：所以，齐人的动静朝廷都预先知道。
English: Therefore, the movements of the Qi people were known to the imperial court in advance.

古文：时有主帅许盆，孝宽度以心膂，令守一城。
现代文：当时有一个主帅叫许盆，孝宽把他当做心腹，命他守卫一座城池。
English: At that time, there was a coach named Xu Bon, and Takahiro took him as a confidant and ordered him to guard a castle.

古文：盆乃以城东入。
现代文：许盆献城降齐。
English: Xu Bon's offering brought the city down to a tie.

古文：孝宽怒，遣谍取之，俄而斩首而还。
现代文：孝宽恼怒，派间谍去取他的头颅，不久，间谍带着他的头颅回来。
English: Infuriated, he sent a spy to retrieve his head, who soon returned with it.

古文：其能致物情如此。汾州之北，离石以南，悉是生胡，抄掠居人，阻断河路。
现代文：汾州之北，离石以南，全是没有开化的胡人。他们抢掠北周的居民，阻断河流道路。
English: North of Luzhou and south of Shishi, they were all uncivilized Hu people. They robbed the residents of Beizhou and blocked the river road.

古文：孝宽深患之，而地入于齐，无方诛剪。
现代文：孝宽深以为患，而胡人居住在齐地，无法弹压他们。
English: Xiaokuan is deeply worried, and the Hu people live in Qi, unable to bounce them.

古文：欲当其要处，置一大城。
现代文：他想在要害的地方建起一座规模很大的城池。
English: He wanted to build a large-scale castle in a critical place.

古文：乃于河西征役徒十万，甲士百人，遣开府姚岳监筑之。
现代文：便在黄河两侧征集役夫十万人，派将士一百人，由开府姚岳监察修筑。
English: On both sides of the Yellow River, he conscripted 100,000 laborers and dispatched 100 soldiers, with Kaifu Yao Yue supervising the construction.

古文：岳色惧，以兵少为难。
现代文：姚岳面有惧色，以兵少为理由表示为难。
English: Yao Yue's face was fearful, and he said that it was difficult because of the small number of soldiers.

古文：孝宽曰： 计成此城，十日即毕。
现代文：孝宽说 ：我估计建造这座城池，十天就可竣工。
English: Takahiro said: I estimate that the construction of this castle can be completed in ten days.

古文：既去晋州四百余里，一日创手，二日伪境始知，设令晋州征兵，二日方集，谋议之间，自稽三日，计其军行，二日不到。
现代文：这里离晋州四百多里，第一天动工，第二天北齐人才知道。假如他在晋州征兵，两天才能将部队调齐，商议与准备也需三天。估计齐军在路上两天也来不到。
English: It is more than four hundred miles away from Jinzhou, the construction started on the first day, and only the North Qi people knew about it on the second day. If he was recruiting troops in Jinzhou, it would take two days to mobilize the troops, and it would take three days to discuss and prepare. It is estimated that the Qi army would not come for two days on the road.

古文：我之城隍，足得办矣 。
现代文：这样，我们的城池足可以建成了。 
English: In this way, the foundation of our city can be built.

古文：乃令筑之。
现代文：便下令修筑。
English: So he ordered the construction of a new one.

古文：齐人果至南首，疑有大军，乃停留不进。
现代文：齐人果然到达周军的南面，怀疑北周布有重兵，便逗留不前。
English: Qi people indeed reached the south side of the Zhou army, suspected that there were heavy soldiers in the north Zhou cloth, and then lingered.

古文：其夜，又令汾水以南，傍介山、稷山诸村，所在纵火。
现代文：这天夜里，孝宽命在汾水南岸，沿介山、稷山各处点燃篝火。
English: On this night, Takahiro no Mikoto lit bonfires along the southern coast of Surabaya, as well as in various places along Mount Jieshan and Mount Lushan.

古文：齐人谓是军营，遂收兵自固。
现代文：齐军以为是周军的军营，便收兵自我保固。
English: The Qi army thought it was the military camp of the Zhou army, so they gathered troops to protect themselves.

古文：版筑克就，卒如其言。
现代文：周军的城墙修筑完毕，一切都和他估计的一样。
English: When Zhou Jun's city wall was completed, everything was just as he had expected.

古文：四年，进位柱国。
现代文：保定四年，他晋升为柱国。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, he was promoted to the pillar country.

古文：时晋公护将东讨，孝宽遣长史辛道宪启陈不可，护不纳。
现代文：这时，晋公宇文护即将东讨，他派长史辛道宪启陈宇文护，认为不宜东征，宇文护不采纳。
English: At this time, Jin Gong Yuwenguo was about to go to the East, and he sent the head of Shixin Daoxian to guide Chen Yuwenguo, believing that it was not appropriate to go to the East, and that Yuwenguo would not be accepted.

古文：既而大军果不利。
现代文：不久周军果然失利。
English: Before long, Zhou's army was defeated.

古文：后孔城遂陷，宜阳被围。
现代文：后来孔城失陷，宜阳被齐军包围。
English: Later, Kongcheng fell and Yiyang was surrounded by the Qi army.

古文：孝宽乃谓其将帅曰： 宜阳一城之地，未能损益。
现代文：孝宽对他的将领们说 ：宜阳这一座城池的得失，无关大局。
English: Takahiro said to his generals, "The gains and losses of this city of Yiyang are irrelevant to the overall situation.

古文：然两国争之，劳师数载。
现代文：然而两国反复争夺，数年来一直兴师动众。
English: However, the two countries have been competing repeatedly, and for several years they have been stirring up the masses.

古文：彼多君子，宁乏谋猷？
现代文：齐国也有很多有智谋的人，难道会缺乏韬略？
English: There are also a lot of resourceful people in Qi. Will there be a lack of strategy?

古文：若弃崤东，来图汾北，我之疆界，必见侵扰。
现代文：如果他们放弃崤山之东，来图取汾河以北，我们的疆界必定遭受侵扰。
English: If they give up the east of Lushan and try to take the north of Luhe, our borders will certainly be encroached upon.

古文：今宜于华谷及长秋速筑城，以杜贼志。
现代文：现在应该在华谷和长秋赶快筑造一座城堡，以杜绝齐军的阴谋。
English: Now it is time to build a castle in Huaya and Changqiu to stop the Qi army's plot.

古文：脱其先我，图之实难。 
现代文：如果齐军走在我们前面，再计议就来不及了。 
English: If the Qi army goes ahead of us, it will be too late to reconsider.

古文：于是画地形，具陈其状。
现代文：于是他指定地形，详细陈述城堡的规模形状。
English: So he specified the terrain, detailing the scale and shape of the castle.

古文：晋公护令长史叱罗协谓使人曰： 韦公子孙虽多，数不满百。
现代文：宇文护命长史叱罗协对孝宽派去的人说： 韦公家的子孙虽然很多，然而不超过一百。
English: Yuwen's tutor, Long Shi, scolded Luo Xie and said to the people sent by Xiaokuan: Although the descendants of Wei Gongjia are many, they do not exceed one hundred.

古文：汾北筑城，遣谁固守？ 
现代文：在汾北修筑城堡，派谁去把守？ 
English: Building a castle in northern Shandong, who will be sent to guard it?

古文：事遂不行。
现代文：事情便停了下来。
English: Things came to a halt.

古文：天和五年，进爵郧国公，增邑通前一万户。
现代文：天和五年，他被晋爵为郧国公，增加的食邑连同以前的共一万户。
English: Five years later, he was raised to the peerage as the Duke of Yunnan, and together with the previous ten thousand households, the number of food villages increased.

古文：是岁，齐人果解宜阳之围，经略汾北，遂筑城守之。
现代文：这一年，齐军果然解除对宜阳的包围，进向汾河以北。孝宽便筑城坚守。
English: That year, the Qi army successfully lifted the siege of Yiyang and advanced north of the Li River. Xiaokang then built a city to hold out.

古文：其丞相斛律明月至汾东，请与孝宽相见。明月云： 宜阳小城，久劳战争。
现代文：北齐丞相斛律明月到汾东，请求与孝宽见面，明月说： 宜阳这座小城，长久劳于战争。
English: The Minister of Northern Qi, Yao Lu Ming Yue, went to Shandong and asked to meet with Xiao Guang. Ming Yue said, "This small city of Yiyang has long been engaged in war.

古文：今既入彼，欲于汾北取偿，幸勿怪也。 
现代文：现在既然我军到达你这里，想在汾北取得补偿，请你不要见怪。 
English: Now that our troops have arrived here and want to get compensation in northern Shandong, please don't be surprised.

古文：孝宽答曰： 宜阳彼之要冲，汾北我之所弃。
现代文：孝宽答道： 宜阳是齐国的要冲，汾北是周国要放弃的地方。
English: Xiaokuan replied, "Yiyang is the key to Qi, and Shandong is the key to Zhou.

古文：我弃彼图，取偿安在？
现代文：我方放弃，你方图取，补偿的道理何在？
English: We give up, you try to take, what is the reason for compensation?

古文：且若辅翼幼主，位重望隆，理宜调阴阳，抚百姓，焉用极武穷兵，构怨连祸！
现代文：您在朝中辅助幼主，官位很高，声望颇重，理应调和朝廷政治，安抚全国的百姓，怎么穷兵黩武，制造怨恨，使祸患相连！
English: You assist the young master in the government, your official rank is high, and your reputation is quite high. It is your duty to reconcile the politics of the imperial court and pacify the people throughout the country. How can you be so belligerent, create resentment, and connect disasters?

古文：且沧、瀛大水，千里无烟，复欲使汾、晋之间，横尸暴骨，苟贪寻常之地，涂炭疲弊之人，窃为君不取。 
现代文：且齐国的沧、瀛一带发生水灾，千里泽国没有人烟。您又想使汾、晋一带横尸遍野，贪图这块平常的地方，祸害疲弊不堪的百姓，我认为您不应该这样。 
English: Moreover, floods occurred in the vicissitudes of Qi Province and the area around Jinyang, and there was no one in Qilian Province. You also want to make the area around Jinyang and Jin full of corpses, covet this ordinary place, and harm the exhausted people. I don't think you should do this.

古文：孝宽参军曲岩颇知卜筮，谓孝宽曰： 来年东朝必大相杀戮。 
现代文：他的参军曲岩颇懂得占卜之术，对他说： 近来齐朝内部必定大肆互相杀戮。 
English: His conscript Qu Yan, who was quite familiar with divination, said to him, "Recently, there must have been a lot of killing within the Qi Dynasty.

古文：孝宽因令岩作谣歌曰： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
现代文：孝宽因而命曲岩制作歌谣说 ：百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
English: As a result, Takahiro Takahiro composed a song about the rock, saying, "Hundreds soar into the sky, the bright moon shines on Chang'an."

古文：百升，斛也。
现代文：百升，指斛。
English: One hundred liters, fingers clenched.

古文：又言： 高山不摧自崩，槲树不扶自竖。 
现代文：又说 ：高山不摧自崩，槲树不扶自竖。 
English: He also said: "Mountains do not collapse, eucalyptus trees do not stand on their own."

古文：令谍人多赉此文，遗之于鄴。
现代文：命间谍多带些抄写的歌谣散发到邺城。
English: The life spies brought more copied songs and distributed them to Lucheng.

古文：祖孝征既闻，更润色之，明月竟以此诛。
现代文：祖孝征听说后，进一步润色，斛律明月竟因此被诛杀。
English: After Zu Xiao Zheng heard about it, he further polished it, and Bao Lu Ming Yue was killed as a result.

古文：建德之后，武帝志在平齐。
现代文：改元建德以后，周武帝立志讨平北齐。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty was reformed, Emperor Zhou set out to level the North.

古文：孝宽乃上疏陈三策。
现代文：韦孝宽便上疏陈奏平齐三策：
English: Wei Xiaokuan took the following three measures:

古文：其第二策曰： 若国家更为后图，未即大举，宜与陈人分其兵势。三鵶以北，万春以南，广事屯田，预为贮积。
现代文：第一策说： 我军如果出轵关东进，加上与南陈互为犄角，并命广州的义师从三亚鸟出击；另外，招募山南的勇士沿黄河东进；再派北山的胡人断绝齐军的并州和晋州的退路。 第二策说 ：在三亚鸟以北，万春以南，大肆屯田，早作储备。
English: The first strategy said: If our army marches eastward from Guanzhong, we should make common cause with the Southern Chen and order the righteous teachers from Guangzhou to attack from Sanya; in addition, we should recruit the warriors from Shannan to march eastward along the Yellow River; and then send the Hu people from Beishan to cut off the retreat route of the Qi army from the unified states and Jinzhou. The second strategy said: In the north of Sanya and the south of Banchun, we should build a lot of fields and make reserves early.

古文：募其骁悍，立为部伍。
现代文：招募骁勇骠悍的兵士建立队伍。
English: Recruit brave and courageous soldiers to build a team.

古文：彼既东南有敌，戎马相持，我出奇兵，破其疆埸。
现代文：我军在东南有这股兵马，齐人一定会派军队进攻。乘两军相持时，我军派出奇兵，打破齐军的边防。
English: Our army has this group of soldiers and horses in the southeast, and the Qi people will certainly send troops to attack. When the two armies are holding each other, our army will send special soldiers to break the Qi army's border defense.

古文：彼若兴师赴援，我则坚壁清野，待其去远，还复出师。
现代文：他们如兴师救援，我军则坚壁清野，等到他们去远，我军再出来作战。
English: They are like the relief of the Hing Division, our army is a solid wall and a clear field. When they go far away, our army will come out to fight again.

古文：常以边外之军，引其腹心之众。
现代文：要经常以边境上的军队引诱他们国内的军队出来。
English: Always use troops on the border to lure their domestic troops out.

古文：我无宿舂之费，彼有奔命之劳。
现代文：我方没有住宿吃饭的消耗，敌军却有奔波往返的疲劳。
English: We do not have the consumption of accommodation and meals, but the enemy has the fatigue of running back and forth.

古文：今若更存遵养，且复相时，臣谓宜还崇邻好，申其盟约，安人和众，通商惠工，蓄锐养威，观衅而动。
现代文：一二年的时间，齐军必定自动叛离。 第三策说： 过去勾践灭掉吴国，还需要十年；武王讨伐淫乱的纣王，仍要两次举兵。现在如果国家进一步积蓄力量，等待时机，与邻国修好，申订盟约，安抚百姓，发展商业，优惠工匠，养精蓄锐，等到对方有了裂痕再发动进攻。
English: The third strategy said: In the past, it took ten years to wipe out the state of Wu; King Wu still had to raise an army twice to fight the adulterous King He. Now, if the country further accumulates strength, waits for the opportunity, makes peace with its neighbors, signs a treaty, pacifies the people, develops business, favors craftsmen, and cultivates energy and sharpness, wait until the other side has a crack before launching an attack.

古文：斯则长策远驭，坐自兼并也。 
现代文：那么，我们就会挥舞长鞭，远驭齐人，坐等兼并天下。 
English: Then, we will wield the long whip, drive away the Qi people, and wait for the annexation of the world.

古文：书奏，武帝遣小司寇淮南公元伟、开府伊娄谦等重币聘齐。尔后遂大举，再驾而定山东。卒如孝宽之策。
现代文：奏疏上达后，武帝派小司寇淮南公元伟、开府伊娄谦等携重金出使齐国，接着大举伐齐，山东再次被荡平，行动完全按韦孝宽平齐三策的意见。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, Emperor Wu dispatched Xiao Siqo Huainan Decheng Wei, Kaifu Yijian Qian and other minor officials to Qi with a large amount of money, followed by a large-scale campaign of Qi. Shandong was once again flattened, and the action was completely in accordance with Wei Xiaokang's opinion of the three policies of Qi.

古文：孝宽每以年迫悬车，屡请致仕。
现代文：韦孝宽因年近七十，到了悬车家居的年纪，多次请求辞职。
English: Wei Xiaokuan was nearly seventy years old, and when he reached the age of a trailer home, he repeatedly asked to resign.

古文：帝以海内未平，优诏弗许。
现代文：武帝以海内还未平定，不允许他的请求。
English: Emperor Wu did not allow his request as the situation at sea had not yet been settled.

古文：至是，复称疾乞骸骨。
现代文：这时，他便称病请求退隐。
English: At this time, he called in sick and asked to retire.

古文：帝曰： 往已面申本怀，何烦重请也。 
现代文：武帝说 ：过去已当面向您申述了我的情怀，何需再次请求呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: I have already expressed my feelings to you in person in the past, why do I need to ask again?

古文：五年，帝东伐，过幸玉壁。观御敌之所，深叹美之，移时乃去。
现代文：建德五年，武帝亲自东伐齐国，路过玉壁，观看孝宽抗御齐兵的地方，深深地感叹并称赞他，过了很长时间才离去。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, Emperor Wu personally led the Eastern Expedition of Qi, passed by the Jade Wall, watched the place where Xiaokang resisted the Qi soldiers, deeply lamented and praised him, and left after a long time.

古文：孝宽自以习练齐人虚实，请为先驱。
现代文：孝宽自认为熟悉齐军的虚实，请求作大军的先驱。
English: Takahiro thought that he was familiar with the truth and falsehood of the Qi army and asked to be the forerunner of the great army.

古文：帝以玉壁要冲，非孝宽无以镇之，乃不许。
现代文：武帝认为玉壁地处咽喉要道，非他不能镇守，没有接受他的请求。
English: Emperor Wu thought that the Jade Wall was located at the throat of the road, and he could not defend the town without him, and did not accept his request.

古文：及赵王招率兵出稽胡，与大军掎角，乃敕孝宽为行军总管，围守华谷以应接之。
现代文：赵王宇文招率军进向稽胡，与武帝率领的大军成为犄角之势，才命孝宽为行军总管，围困华谷的齐军，以策应武帝的大军。
English: Zhao Wang Yuwen led the army to march to Qihu, and the army led by Emperor Wu became a cornered situation, so he appointed Xiaokang as the general manager of the march, besieged the Qi army in Huaguan, and responded to Emperor Wu's army.

古文：孝宽克其四城。
现代文：他率军攻克敌兵的四座城池。
English: He led his army to conquer four cities of the enemy.

古文：武帝平晋州，复令孝宽还旧镇。
现代文：武帝率军攻破晋州，又命孝宽回镇玉壁。
English: Emperor Wu led the army to break through Jinzhou, and ordered Xiao Guang to return to the town of Yubi.

古文：及帝凯旋，复幸玉壁。从容谓孝宽曰： 世称老人多智，善为军谋。
现代文：武帝凯旋归来，又来到玉壁，从容地对他说： 人们都认为老年人多智，善于谋划军事。
English: After Emperor Wu's triumphant return, he came to Yubi again and calmly said to him, "People all think that the elderly are wise and good at military planning.

古文：然朕唯共少年一举平贼，公以为如何？ 
现代文：然而，我与几个少年一举平定齐军，您认为怎么样？ 
English: However, what do you think of the fact that I and a few young boys were able to defeat the Qi army in one fell swoop?

古文：孝宽对曰： 臣今衰耄，唯有诚心而已。
现代文：孝宽对答说： 我现在已经衰老，只剩下一颗对朝廷的诚心。
English: Takahiro replied, "I'm getting old now, and all I have left is a sincere heart for the Imperial Court.

古文：然昔在少壮，亦曾输力先朝，以定关右。 
现代文：然而过去在少壮的时候，也曾为先朝出力，平定关中。 
English: However, in the past, when they were young and strong, they also worked hard for the previous government to pacify the middle class.

古文：帝大笑曰： 实如公言。 
现代文：武帝大声笑着说： 实在像您说的那样。 
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly and said, "It really is as you say.

古文：乃诏孝宽随驾还京。
现代文：便命他随车驾回到京城。
English: He was then ordered to drive back to the capital.

古文：拜大司空，出为延州总管，进位上柱国。
现代文：拜授他为大司空，出任延州总管，晋爵位为上柱国。
English: He was awarded the title of Daishi Ku, served as the governor of Yenzhou, and received the title of Shangzhuang.

古文：大象元年，除徐、兗等十一州十五镇诸军事、徐州总管。
现代文：大象元年，他被任命为徐、兖等十一州十五镇诸军事、徐州总管。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was appointed as the general manager of the military and Xuzhou of 15 towns in 11 states including Xu and Handan.

古文：又为行军元帅，徇地淮南。
现代文：又任行军元帅，率军进向淮南。
English: He was also appointed as a marching marshal and led the army to march to Huainan.

古文：乃分遣巳公宇文亮攻黄城，郕公梁士彦攻广陵，孝宽率众攻寿阳，并拔之。
现代文：他分别派遣杞公宇文亮进攻黄城，成阝公梁士彦进攻广陵，他亲率一路人马进攻寿阳，一举将寿阳攻克。
English: He separately dispatched Gongguan Yu Wenliang to attack Huangcheng, Chengyu Gongliang Shihang to attack Guangling, and he personally led the way to attack Shouyang, conquering Shouyang in one fell swoop.

古文：初，孝宽到淮南，所在皆密送诚款。
现代文：孝宽开始到淮南时，到处都有人秘密表示投诚。
English: When Xiaokuan first came to Huainan, people everywhere secretly expressed their sincerity.

古文：然彼五门，尤为险要，陈人若开塘放水，即津济路绝。
现代文：然而陈国的五门这个据点十分险要，陈人如果掘开塘堤放水，周军的道路就会被断绝。
English: However, Chen's Five Gates stronghold was very vulnerable. If Chen opened the dike to release water, Zhou's army would be cut off.

古文：孝宽遽令分兵据守之。
现代文：他立即命分兵把守五门。
English: He immediately ordered his soldiers to guard the five gates.

古文：陈刺史吴文立果遣决堰，已无及。
现代文：南陈刺史吴文立果然掘开堤堰，但已不起作用。
English: Nan Chen Zishi Wu Wenli did succeed in digging out the dike weir, but it was no longer effective.

古文：诏以平淮南之功，别封一子滑国公。及宣帝崩，隋文帝辅政。
现代文：于是陈军败退，江北全被平定。宣帝驾崩，杨坚辅助朝政。
English: As a result, Chen's army was defeated and the northern part of the Yangtze River was completely pacified. Emperor Xuan died, and Yang Jian assisted the imperial government.

古文：时尉迟迥先为相州总管，诏孝宽代之。
现代文：这时尉迟迥任相州总管，朝廷命孝宽去接替他。
English: At this time, Lieutenant Shigeyuki assumed the post of Sengoku chieftain, and the imperial court ordered Takahiro Moro to succeed him.

古文：又以小司徒叱列长叉为相州刺史，先令赴鄴。
现代文：又派小司徒叱列长叉任相州刺史。
English: He also sent Xiao Szeto to reprimand the leader of the Long Fork, who was appointed to be the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：孝宽续进，至朝歌，迥遣其大都督贺兰贵赉书候孝宽。
现代文：朝廷命长叉先到邺城上任，孝宽接着出发，来到朝歌，尉迟迥派他的大都督贺兰贵带着书信等候孝宽。
English: The imperial court ordered Chosaku to go to Shicheng to take office first, and then Takahiro set off and came to Chaoga. He later sent his great viceroy, Horangui, to wait for Takahiro with a letter.

古文：孝宽留贵与语以察之，疑其有变，遂称疾徐行。
现代文：他留下贺兰贵谈话以察看虚实动静，怀疑尉迟迥会有变故，便假称有病，放慢行走的速度。
English: He left the conversation with Helangui to observe the true and false movement, suspected that there would be a change in the delay, pretended to be ill, and slowed down the speed of walking.

古文：又使人至相州求医药，密以伺之。
现代文：他又派人到相州求医取药，暗中查访。
English: He also sent someone to Songzhou to seek medical treatment and visit secretly.

古文：既到汤阴，逢长叉奔还。
现代文：他行至汤阴，遇见相州刺史叱列长叉逃回。
English: He went to Tangyin, met with a long line of officials from the Xiangzhou Jishi, and fled back.

古文：孝宽兄子魏郡守艺又弃郡南走。
现代文：他哥哥的儿子魏郡太守韦艺也弃下守地南逃。
English: His brother's son, Wei County Governor Wei Yi, also abandoned his post and fled south.

古文：孝宽审知其状，乃驰还。
现代文：他了解到其中的缘由，便飞驰返回。
English: He understood the reason for this and sped back.

古文：所经桥道，皆令毁撤，驿马悉拥以自随。
现代文：沿途经过的桥梁都命毁坏，驿站的人马也都带走。
English: The bridges along the way were destroyed, and the people and horses at the station were also taken away.

古文：又勒驿将曰： 蜀公将至，可多备肴酒及刍粟以待之。 
现代文：又命令驿站将领说 ：蜀公尉迟迥如果来到，可多准备些酒饭和喂马的草料招待他。 
English: He also ordered the general of the post to say, "If Shu Gonglian comes late, you can prepare more wine and rice and grass to feed the horse to invite him."

古文：迥果遣仪同梁子康将数百骑追孝宽，驿司供设丰厚，所经之处，皆辄停留，由是不及。
现代文：尉迟迥果然派仪同梁子康率数百名骑兵追来，驿司对他们招待得十分周到丰厚，所经之处都要停留，因此没有追上韦孝宽。
English: After a long delay, Yi sent Yi with Liang Zikang and hundreds of cavalrymen to chase them. He invited them very thoughtfully and generously, and they had to stop at every place they passed, so they did not catch up with Wei Xiaokuan.

古文：时或劝孝宽，以为洛京虚弱，素无守备，河阳镇防，悉是关东鲜卑，迥若先往据之，则为祸不小。
现代文：这时有人劝他，认为洛京空虚，平常没有多少人马守卫。在河阳镇守的将士，全是关东的鲜卑人，尉迟迥如果先占据了那里，为祸不会太小。
English: At this time, someone advised him that Luojing was empty and there were usually not many people to guard it. The soldiers guarding the town of Heyang were all low-ranking people from the Kanto region, so it would not be a small misfortune if he occupied there first.

古文：乃入保河阳。河阳城内，旧有鲜卑八百人，家并在鄴，见孝宽轻来，谋欲应迥。
现代文：他便进入河阳，河阳城内原有八百名鲜卑人守卫，家都住在邺城，他们见韦孝宽轻装简从，阴谋响应尉迟迥。
English: He then entered Hebei. There were originally eight hundred Xingbei guards in Hebei City, all of whom lived in Handan City. They saw that Wei Xiaokang was lightly armed and a simple follower, and they were slow to respond to the conspiracy.

古文：孝宽知之，遂密造东京官司，诈称遣行，分人诣洛受赐。
现代文：孝宽暗中造访东京的官司，由官司出面诈称要派这些鲜卑人回去，分头到洛阳接受赏赐。
English: Takahiro secretly visited a court in Tokyo, and the court came forward to claim that they wanted to send these lowlifes back to receive their reward in Luoyang.

古文：既至洛阳，并留不遣。因此离解，其谋不成。
现代文：他们到洛阳后，都被留下来，因此将这些人分散，他们的阴谋无法得逞。
English: After they arrived in Luoyang, they were all left behind, so they dispersed these people, and their plot could not succeed.

古文：六月，诏发关中兵，以孝宽为元帅东伐。
现代文：六月，朝廷命征发关中兵马，以韦孝宽为元帅东伐。
English: In June, the imperial court ordered the dispatch of troops and horses from Guanzhong, with Wei Xiaokuan as marshal of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：七月，军次河阳。
现代文：七月，大军来到河阳。
English: In July, a large army came to Kheyang.

古文：迥所署仪同薛公礼等围逼怀州，孝宽遣兵击破之。
现代文：尉迟迥任命的仪同薛公礼等人围困怀州，孝宽派兵将他打败，进至怀县永桥城的东南。
English: Xue Gongli and others besieged Huai Zhou, and Xiaokuan sent troops to defeat him and enter the southeast of Yongqiao City, Huai County.

古文：进次怀县永桥城之东南，其城既在要冲，雉堞牢固，迥已遣兵据之。诸将士以此城当路，请先攻取。
现代文：这座城池地处要道，城墙坚固，尉迟迥已派兵占据。孝宽的部将都认为这座城池挡在路上，应先攻取。
English: This castle is located on an important road, the city walls are strong, and soldiers have been sent to occupy it. The generals of Takahiro all think that this castle is blocking the road and should be captured first.

古文：孝宽曰： 城小而固，若攻而不拔，损我兵威。
现代文：孝宽说： 这座城池很小但很坚固，如果不能攻克，就会磨损我军的锐气。
English: Takahiro said, "This castle is small but very strong. If we can't conquer it, it will wear down the spirit of our army.

古文：今破其大军，此亦何能为也？ 
现代文：现在如能打破他们的大军，这座小小的城池还会有什么作用呢？ 
English: Now, if we can defeat their army, what good will this small city be?

古文：于是引军次于武陟，大破迥子惇，惇轻骑奔鄴。
现代文：于是，他率领军队到达武陟，打败尉迟迥的儿子尉迟，尉迟逃回邺城。
English: As a result, he led the army to Wuxi, defeated the son of Fei Xiyi, Fei Xiyi, and Fei Xiyi fled back to Handan.

古文：军次于鄴西门豹祠之南，迥自出战，又破之。
现代文：官军进至邺城西门豹祠以南，尉迟迥亲自出战，又被打败。
English: The government army marched to the south of the West Gate Panther Shrine in Handan City, and Li Shizhen personally went out to fight and was defeated again.

古文：迥穷迫自杀。
现代文：他被追上穷途末路，被迫自杀。
English: He was at the end of his rope and was forced to commit suicide.

古文：兵士在小城中者，尽坑之于游豫园。
现代文：留在大小城中的叛军全被韦孝宽在游豫园中活理。
English: The rebels who remained in the big and small cities were all led by Wei Xiaokuan to live in Yuyuan Garden.

古文：诸有未服，皆随机讨之。
现代文：其他还没有降服的，都被一一消灭。
English: The others, who had not yet surrendered, were wiped out one by one.

古文：关东悉平。
现代文：关东全部肃清。
English: All of Kanto has been cleared.

古文：十月，凯还京师。
现代文：这年十月，孝宽凯旋归京。
English: In October of that year, Takahiro made a triumphant return to Kyoto.

古文：十一月，薨，时年七十二。赠太傅、十二州诸军事、雍州牧，谥曰襄。
现代文：十一月去世，时年七十二岁，朝廷追赠他为太傅、十二州诸军事、雍州刺史，谥号为襄。
English: He died in November, at the age of seventy-two, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Taifu, Military Commander of the Twelve Provinces, and Military Historian of Yongzhou. His posthumous name was Xiang.

