古文：又一年，王召范蠡而问焉，曰： 吾与子谋吴，子曰 未可也 。
现代文：又过了一年，越王召见范蠡，向他请教说： 前次我同你商讨报复吴国，你说还不可以。
English: After another year, King Yue summoned Fan Xuan and asked him for advice: "The last time I discussed revenge against the State of Wu with you, you said it was not possible.

古文：今其稻蟹不遗种，其可乎？ 
现代文：如今吴国天灾严重，稻和蟹都吃得没有剩余了，你看现在可以行动了吗？ 
English: Now that the natural disaster in Wuzhou is serious, there is no more rice and crabs to eat. Do you think you can act now?

古文：对曰： 天应至矣，人事未尽也，王姑待之。 
现代文：范蠡答道： 上天的报应可说已经来到了，可是人事方面还没有完全成熟，君王还是再等一等。 
English: Fan Ye replied: Heaven's retribution may be said to have arrived, but the personnel has not yet fully matured. The monarch should wait a little longer.

古文：王怒曰： 道固然乎，妄其欺不穀耶？
现代文：越王发怒说： 道理真的是这样的吗？
English: Yue Wang said angrily: Is this really the reason?

古文：吾与子言人事，子应我以天时；今天应至矣，子应我以人事，何也？ 
现代文：还是你在欺骗我呢？我跟你谈人事，你说要等天时；现在天时已到，你又说要等人事，这是什么原因？ 
English: Or are you deceiving me? When I spoke to you about personnel matters, you said that you wanted to wait for the right time; now that the right time has come, you say that you want to wait for personnel matters. What is the reason for this?

古文：范蠡对曰： 王姑勿怪。
现代文：范蠡答道： 君王先不要见怪。
English: Fan Ye replied: The king should not be surprised.

古文：夫人事必将与天地相参，然后乃可以成功。
现代文：人事一定要和天地相互配合起来，然后才可以成功。
English: Personnel affairs must be coordinated with heaven and earth before they can be successful.

古文：今其祸新民恐，其君臣上下，皆知其资财之不足以支长久也，彼将同其力，致其死，犹尚殆。
现代文：如今吴国的天灾刚发生不久，人民仍有戒惧之心，他们君臣上下都知道本国的物资不能持久，一定会同心合力，拼命对付我们，所以现在打起来还有危险。
English: Now that the natural disaster in Wuxi has just occurred, the people are still wary. They and their officials know that their country's supplies cannot last, and they will work together to deal with us, so there is still danger in fighting now.

古文：王其且驰骋弋猎，无至禽荒；宫中之乐，无至酒荒；肆与大夫觞饮，无忘国常。
现代文：君王暂且只管外出跑马打猎，但不要真正沉缅在狩猎上；只管在宫中饮酒取乐，但不要真正沉缅在酒色上；只管随意和臣僚们大摆酒宴，但不要忘记国家的正事。
English: For the time being, the monarch should only go out to run horses and hunt, but not really indulge in hunting; only drink alcohol in the palace for fun, but not really indulge in wine; only casually have a grand wine banquet with his ministers, but do not forget the serious business of the country.

古文：彼其上将薄其德，民将尽其力，又使之望而不得食，乃可以致天地之殛，王姑待之。 
现代文：这样，吴国上层的统治者将会放松警惕而更加荒淫无道，百姓将被弄得精疲力尽，使他们心怀怨恨而又得不到粮食，那时我们就可以执行天地的惩罚去诛灭吴国了。君王暂且再等一等吧。 
English: In this way, the upper-level rulers of the State of Wu will relax their vigilance and become more debauched, and the people will be exhausted, making them hold grudges and not get food. Then we can carry out the punishment of heaven and earth to annihilate the State of Wu. Let the king wait for a while.

