古文：情理设位，文采行乎其中。
现代文：根据情理来谋篇布局，其中自然就有文采了。
English: According to the circumstances to plan the layout, which naturally has literary merit.

古文：刚柔以立本，变通以趋时。
现代文：创作的根本风格可以刚健也可以柔美，但要根据时代要求变通。
English: The basic style of creation can be either tough or soft, but it should be flexible according to the requirements of the times.

古文：立本有体，意或偏长；趋时无方，辞或繁杂。
现代文：写文章要有中心，否则文章容易偏颇片面、篇幅过长，跟随时代趋势而没有一定的方法，所以文辞会有所繁杂。
English: Writing an article should have a center, otherwise the article is likely to be biased, one-sided, too long, follow the trend of the times without a certain method, so the wording will be complicated.

古文：蹊要所司，职在熔裁，隐括情理，矫揉文采也。规范本体谓之熔，剪截浮词谓之裁。
现代文：其中关键是做好熔意裁辞，所谓熔裁，就是纠正文章情理缺点，矫正文章文采毛病。 熔 是规范文章本体内容， 裁 是取出文章浮夸的文辞，经过剪裁，文章简练，通过熔磨，纲领清晰。
English: The key is to do a good job of "melting and tailoring," the so-called "melting and tailoring" is to correct the shortcomings of the article and correct the defects of the article. "Melting" is to standardize the content of the article, "tailoring" is to take out the pompous words of the article, after cutting, the article is concise, and through "melting and grinding," the program is clear.

古文：裁则芜秽不生，熔则纲领昭畅，譬绳墨之审分，斧斤之斫削矣。
现代文：就如同用墨线来审查度量分辨木材的曲直，用斧头砍削使木料端正一样。
English: It's like using an ink line to measure and determine the straightness of a piece of wood, or using an axe to cut and straighten wood.

古文：骈拇枝指，由侈于性；附赘悬肬，实侈于形。
现代文：手脚多指是多余的，身上肿瘤也是不需要的。
English: Multiple fingers and toes are superfluous, and a tumor on the body is also unnecessary.

古文：一意两出，义之骈枝也；同辞重句，文之肬赘也。
现代文：文章中意思重复两遍就多余了，话语说了两遍是文辞上多余。
English: It is superfluous to repeat the meaning twice in the article, and it is superfluous to say the words twice.

古文：凡思绪初发，辞采苦杂，心非权衡，势必轻重。
现代文：当开始构思的时候，拟用的文辞常嫌太杂乱；内心很难像天平那么准确地衡量，势将犯偏重偏轻的毛病。
English: When beginning to conceive, the proposed wording is often too messy; it is difficult to measure the heart as accurately as a balance, and it is bound to be overweighted.

古文：是以草创鸿笔，先标三准∶履端于始，则设情以位体；举正于中，则酌事以取类；归馀于终，则撮辞以举要。
现代文：所以要想写成一篇好文章，必须先提出三项准则：首先根据内容来确定主体，其次选择与内容有联系的素材，最后选用适当的语言来突出重点。
English: Therefore, if you want to write a good article, you must first put forward three criteria: first, determine the subject according to the content, second, select the material related to the content, and finally select the appropriate language to highlight the point.

古文：然后舒华布实，献替节文，绳墨以外，美材既斫，故能首尾圆合，条贯统序。
现代文：这样才能安排文辞来配合内容，把必要的东西写上去而把不必要的省略掉，以力求精当。正与木工根据绳墨来削凿美好的木材一样，文章必须如此才能写得首尾妥帖，条理清楚。
English: Only in this way can we arrange the words to match the content, write the necessary things and omit the unnecessary, in order to be precise. Just as the woodworker chisels beautiful wood according to the rope ink, the article must be written in such a way as to be complete and clear.

古文：若术不素定，而委心逐辞，异端丛至，骈赘必多。
现代文：如果不先确定写作方法，却只任意地追求辞采，那么不必要的内容就都挤进来，而废话就必然太多。
English: If you do not first determine the method of writing, but only arbitrarily pursue diction, then unnecessary content will be crowded in, and nonsense will inevitably be too much.

古文：故三准既定，次讨字句。句有可削，足见其疏；字不得减，乃知其密。
现代文：所以确定这三条准则之后，就可以开始修剪句子，句子可以削减，就代表其有疏漏，句子不能削减了，才是紧密简练。
English: Therefore, after determining these three criteria, you can start trimming sentences, sentences can be cut, which means they have omissions, sentences can not be cut, it is tight and concise.

古文：精论要语，极略之体；游心窜句，极繁之体。
现代文：精简的评论和扼要的言语，是简略的风格；思想灵动和语句夸张，是繁复的风格。
English: Terse comments and terse language are the style of brevity; wit and hyperbole are the style of complexity.

古文：谓繁与略，适分所好。
现代文：作家在书写时选择简略还是繁复，需要按情况而定。
English: When writing, a writer can choose to be concise or complex, depending on the situation.

古文：引而申之，则两句敷为一章，约以贯之，则一章删成两句。
现代文：延伸话语，两句话也可以写作一章，简练话语，一章的语言也能减少成两句。
English: Extended discourse, two sentences can also be written a chapter, concise discourse, the language of a chapter can also be reduced to two sentences.

古文：思赡者善敷，才核者善删。
现代文：文思丰富的人善于扩充，文才简练的人善于简化。
English: People with a wealth of literary talent are good at expanding, and people with a concise literary talent are good at simplifying.

古文：善删者字去而意留，善敷者辞殊而义显。
现代文：善于简化的减少了文字而没有减少意思，善于扩充的增加了文辞而用意更明显。
English: Those who are good at simplifying have reduced the text without reducing the meaning, and those who are good at expanding have increased the wording and the intention is more obvious.

古文：字删而意缺，则短乏而非核；辞敷而言重，则芜秽而非赡。
现代文：如果精简文字而导致意义残缺，那就是不足而非扼要；如果扩充导致重复，那就是多余而非丰富。
English: If the reduction of words results in a loss of meaning, it is insufficiency rather than brevity; if the enlargement results in repetition, it is superfluity rather than richness.

古文：昔谢艾、王济，西河文士，张骏以为 艾繁而不可删，济略而不可益 。
现代文：晋代的谢艾和王济，是西河地方的文士。张骏认为：谢艾文辞虽繁富却不可删减，王济的文辞虽简略却不可增添。
English: Xie Ai and Wang Ji of the Jin Dynasty were the greatest writers in the West River region. Zhang Xi believed that: Xie Ai's words, although rich, should not be deleted, and Wang Ji's words, although simple, should not be added.

古文：若二子者，可谓练熔裁而晓繁略矣。
现代文：像这两位，可以说是精通熔意裁辞的方法，懂得怎样该繁该简的道理了。
English: Like these two, it can be said that they are proficient in the method of melting and tailoring words, and know how to simplify and simplify.

古文：至如士衡才优，而缀辞尤繁；士龙思劣，而雅好清省。
现代文：至于陆机，才华虽然卓越，但写作起来未免文辞过繁；陆云文思虽然较差，但平日就喜欢文笔简净。
English: As for the land machine, although the talent is excellent, the writing is too complicated; although Lu Yun's literary thoughts are poor, he likes to write concisely on weekdays.

古文：及云之论机，亟恨其多，而称 清新相接，不以为病 ，盖崇友于耳。
现代文：陆云论陆机的时候，虽常怪陆机文采过多，却又说陆机不断有清新的文句，所以不算毛病；其实这不过是重视兄弟间的情谊而已。
English: When Lu Yun talked about the land machine, although he often thought that the land machine had too much literature, he also said that the land machine constantly had fresh phrases, so it was not a problem; in fact, it was just a matter of valuing the brotherhood between brothers.

古文：夫美锦制衣，修短有度，虽玩其采，不倍领袖，巧犹难繁，况在乎拙？
现代文：好比用美好的锦缎做衣服，长短有定；即使欣赏锦缎的花纹，也不能在领子、袖子上增加一倍。
English: It's like using beautiful brocade to make clothes, the length is fixed; even if you appreciate the pattern of brocade, you can't double it on the collar and sleeves.

古文：而《文赋》以为 榛楛勿剪，庸音足曲 ，其识非不鉴，乃情苦芟繁也。
现代文：善于写作的人还不易把繁多的文采处理得当，何况不善于写作的人呢？陆机《文赋》认为只要有美鸟来住，恶木也不必砍去；不得已时也不妨在一篇歌曲中凑上些平庸的音节。他并不是没有见识，只是难于割爱罢了。
English: It is not easy for a person who is good at writing to deal with a large number of literary works properly, let alone a person who is not good at writing. The land machine "Wenfu" believes that as long as there are beautiful birds to live, evil trees do not have to be cut down; if necessary, it is also possible to put together some mediocre syllables in a song. He is not without insight, but it is difficult to cut love.

古文：夫百节成体，共资荣卫，万趣会文，不离辞情。
现代文：成百的骨节组成整个身体，都靠气血流畅；万千种意思写成一篇文章，离不开文辞与内容的配合。
English: Hundreds of bones make up the entire body, all of which rely on qi and blood to flow smoothly; thousands of meanings are written into an article, which is inseparable from the coordination of words and content.

古文：若情周而不繁，辞运而不滥，非夫熔裁，何以行之乎？
现代文：想要文章内容全备而不太繁复，文辞多变化而不是滥用，那么，若非注意熔意裁辞，怎能做得到呢？
English: If you want the content of the article to be complete and not too complicated, and the wording to be varied and not abused, then how can you do it if you don't pay attention to the meaning of the words?

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：篇章户牖，左右相瞰。
现代文：作品里的各部分，应该像门户似地左右互相配合。
English: Each part of the work should fit together like a portal.

古文：辞如川流，溢则泛滥。
现代文：文辞好比河水，太多了就要泛滥。
English: Words are like rivers. If there are too many, they will overflow.

古文：权衡损益，斟酌浓淡。
现代文：必须考虑如何增减，推敲详略。
English: It is necessary to consider how to increase or decrease, and to work out a detailed plan.

古文：芟繁剪秽，弛于负担。
现代文：删去多余的和杂乱的部分，文章就没有什么累赘了。
English: Remove the superfluous and cluttered parts, and there is nothing burdensome about the essay.

