古文：王华，字子陵，琅邪临沂人，太保弘从祖弟也。
现代文：王华，字子陵，琅王牙临沂人，太保王弘叔祖的弟弟。
English: Wang Hua, also known as Ziling, was the younger brother of the uncle of King Taobao Wang Hong.

古文：祖荟，卫将军，会稽内史。
现代文：祖父王荟，卫将军、会稽内史。
English: His grandfather, Wang Qian, was a general of the Wei army and a history reviewer.

古文：父，廞，太子中庶子，司徒左长史。
现代文：父亲王貵，太子中庶子、司徒左长史。
English: His father was Wang Yao, the prince's middle child and an illegitimate son, and his father was Siu Zuo Changshi.

古文：国宝既死，恭檄廞罢兵。廞起兵之际，多所诛戮，至是不复得已，因举兵以讨恭为名。
现代文：家住吴中，晋隆安初年，王恭起兵讨伐王国宝，当时王貵正服母丧在家，王恭下檄文命令他也起兵，他聚集民众响应，让自己的女儿任贞烈将军。国宝死后，王恭让王貵罢兵。貵起兵时杀了很多人，到此时已不能停下来，于是就以讨伐王恭的名义再次举兵。
English: Living in Wuzhong, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinlongan, Wang Qiong raised an army to fight against the treasure of the kingdom. At that time, Wang Qiong was at home mourning the death of his mother. Wang Qiong issued an edict ordering him to also raise an army. He gathered the people's response and had his daughter appointed as the general of the Zhengrong. After the death of the national treasure, Wang Qiong ordered Wang Qiong to disband the army. He killed many people when he raised an army. By this time, he could not stop, so he raised an army again in the name of fighting against Wang Q

古文：恭遣刘牢之击廞，廞败走，不知所在。
现代文：王恭派遣刘牢之攻打王貵，貵兵败逃亡，不知所终。
English: Wang Gong sent Liu Du to attack Wang Yao, but Wang Yao was defeated and fled to I don't know where.

古文：长子泰为恭所杀。
现代文：长子王泰被杀死。
English: The eldest son Wang Tai was killed.

古文：华时年十三，在军中，与廞相失，随沙门释昙永逃窜。
现代文：王华当时十三岁，在军中与父亲走失，跟着和尚释昙永逃命。
English: Wang Hua was thirteen years old at the time, lost his way with his father in the army, and followed the monk Xie Xuan to escape for his life.

古文：时牢之搜检觅华甚急，昙永使华提衣幞随后，津逻咸疑焉。
现代文：当时刘牢之搜索王华非常急迫，昙永让王华提着衣服跟在他后面，追查的士兵对他有些怀疑。
English: At that time, Liu Dolezhi's search for Wang Hua was very urgent. Gong Yong let Wang Hua follow him with his clothes, and the pursuing soldiers had some doubts about him.

古文：华行迟，永呵骂云： 奴子怠懈，行不及我！ 
现代文：王华走得慢，昙永责骂他： 奴才懒惰，还跟不上我！ 
English: Wang Hua walked slowly, Yu Yong scolded him: The lackey is lazy and can't keep up with me!

古文：以杖捶华数十，众乃不疑，由此得免。
现代文：用手杖打了王华几十下，众士兵不再怀疑，王华因此免除杀身之祸。
English: After striking Wang Hua dozens of times with a cane, the soldiers no longer doubted, and Wang Hua was thus exempted from the scourge of suicide.

古文：遇赦还吴。
现代文：遇大赦王华回到吴中。
English: After the amnesty, Wang Hua returned to Wuzhong.

古文：少有志行，以父存亡不测，布衣蔬食不交游，如此十余年，为时人所称美。
现代文：王华年少时就有志向，因为父亲生死不明，王华过着普通的平民生活，布衣疏食，不与外人交往，这样过了十几年，被当时人所赞美。
English: Wang Hua had aspirations when he was young. Because his father's life and death were unknown, Wang Hua lived an ordinary civilian life, wearing plain clothes, avoiding food, and not socializing with outsiders. After more than ten years, he was praised by the people at the time.

古文：高祖欲收其才用，乃发廞丧问，使华制服。
现代文：高祖想要启用他，给王貵举行葬礼，让王华戴孝服丧。
English: Gao Zu wanted to use him, hold a funeral for Wang Yao, and let Wang Huadei pay his respects.

古文：服阕，高祖北伐长安，领镇西将军、北徐州刺史，辟华为州主簿，仍转镇西主簿，治中从事史，历职著称。
现代文：丧礼完毕后，高祖北伐长安，领镇西将军北徐州刺史，他征召王华为州主簿、又转为镇西主簿，治中从事史，各职任上都有好的名声。
English: After the funeral, Gao Zu led the Northern Expedition to Chang'an and the Western Zhen General to Northern Xuzhou to make history. He conscripted Wang Huazhou as the main record of the state, and then turned into the main record of the western town. He was engaged in history in the middle of the administration, and had a good reputation in all positions.

古文：太祖镇江陵，以为西中郎主簿，迁咨议参军，领录事。
现代文：太祖镇守江陵，任王华为西中郎主簿，调任咨议参军，领禄事。
English: Grandfather Zhengu Jiangling, appointed Wang Huai as the chief secretary of the West Middle Lang, transferred to join the army for consultation, and received his reward.

古文：太祖进号镇西，复随府转。
现代文：太祖进号镇西将军，王华也随之调去。
English: The great-grandfather Jin was transferred to Zhenxi General, and Wang Hua was also transferred.

古文：太祖未亲政，政事悉委司马张邵。
现代文：太祖没有亲自处理政事，所有行政事务都委派给司马张邵处理。
English: The great-grandfather did not personally handle political affairs, and all administrative affairs were delegated to Sima Zhang Shao.

古文：华性尚物，不欲人在己前；邵性豪，每行来常引夹毂，华出入乘牵车，从者不过二三以矫之。
现代文：王华性情尚物，不愿意别人比自己强，张邵性情豪纵，每次出行总用许多车辆，王华出行则用一辆牵车，随从不过两三人。
English: Wang Hua's temperament is noble, he does not want others to be stronger than him. Zhang Shao's temperament is arrogant, and he always uses many vehicles for each trip. Wang Hua uses a tow truck to travel, but only two or three people follow him.

古文：尝于城内相逢，华阳不知是邵，谓左右： 此卤簿甚盛，必是殿下出行。 
现代文：两人曾在城中相遇，王华假装不知是张邵，对身边人说： 这声势非常浩大，肯定是皇帝出行。 
English: The two had met in the city. Wang Hua pretended to be Zhang Shao and said to the people around him, "This is a very big event. It must be the emperor's trip."

古文：乃下牵车，立于道侧；及邵至，乃惊。
现代文：他下了车，站立路旁，张邵过来非常震惊。
English: He got out of the car and stood by the side of the road. Zhang Shao came over and was very shocked.

古文：邵白服登城，为华所纠，坐被征；华代为司马、南郡太守，行府州事。
现代文：张邵穿白衣服登城，被王华纠问，因此掉职，王华代任司马、南郡太守，管理府州的事务。
English: Zhang Shao dressed in white clothes and went to the city. Wang Hua interrogated him. As a result, he lost his post. Wang Hua took the place of Sima, the governor of Nan County, and managed the affairs of the prefecture.

古文：太祖入奉大统，以少帝见害，疑不敢下。
现代文：太祖入朝继任帝位，因为少帝被害，疑虑而不敢下决断。
English: The great-grandfather entered the imperial court to succeed the throne, but he was hesitant to make a decision because the young emperor was injured.

古文：华建议曰： 羡之等受寄崇重，未容便敢背德，废主若存，虑其将来受祸，致此杀害。
现代文：王华建议说： 羡之等人被寄以重任，不容许他们轻易地叛逆。废主活着，他们就担心将来遭到灾祸，这样才导致少帝被害。
English: Wang Hua suggested: Enzhi and the others were entrusted with a heavy responsibility, and they were not allowed to rebel easily. If the master was still alive, they feared that they would suffer a disaster in the future, which led to the young emperor's death.

古文：盖由每生情多，宁敢一朝顿怀逆志。
现代文：人大多贪恋生命，怎敢一下子就抱有叛逆的念头。
English: Most people are greedy for life, how dare they suddenly have rebellious thoughts.

古文：且三人势均，莫相推伏，不过欲握权自固，以少主仰待耳。
现代文：况且他们三个势力相当，互不相让，不过是想掌握大权巩固自己的地位，以此让少主重用依靠他们罢了。
English: Moreover, their three forces are equal, and they do not concede to each other, but they just want to seize power and consolidate their position, so that the young masters can rely on them.

古文：今日就征，万无所虑。 
现代文：现在下诏行事，根本不用担心。 
English: There is nothing to be afraid of when you go for your call-up today.

古文：太祖从之，留华总后任。
现代文：太祖听从了他的话，留王华全权处理宫内事务。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed his words and left Wanghua with full power to handle the affairs of the palace.

古文：宁子与华并有富贵之愿，自羡之等秉权，日夜构之于太祖。
现代文：太祖登基，任王华为侍中、领骁骑将军，没有接受，转任右卫将军，侍中之职不变。先前，会稽孔甯子任太祖的镇西咨议参军，因文章好被赏识。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Wang Huai was appointed as an aide-de-camp and general leading the cavalry, but he did not accept, and was transferred to the general of the right guard, and his position as an aide-de-camp remained unchanged. Previously, it was reported that Confucius, who was appointed as the great-grandfather's aide-de-camp, proposed to join the army, which was appreciated because the article was good.

古文：宁子尝东归，至金昌亭，左右欲泊船，宁子命去之，曰： 此弑君亭，不可泊也。 
现代文：这时任黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉。甯子和王华都有富贵的愿望，自从羡之等人掌权后，羡之日夜在太祖面前陷害诽谤他们二人。甯子曾回到东部地区，到了金昌亭，手下人想在那里靠船，他命令离开并说： 这是杀君的亭子，不能停靠。 
English: At that time, he was serving as the Yellow Gate's steward and leading the infantry's captain. Zou Zi and Wang Hua both had the desire to be rich. Ever since Enizhi and others took power, Enizhi framed and slandered the two of them in front of the grandfather day and night. Zou Zi had returned to the eastern region and arrived at Jinchang Pavilion. His men wanted to dock their boat there, but he ordered them to leave and said, "This is a pavilion for killing the king. You cannot dock here."

古文：华每闲居讽咏，常诵王粲《登楼赋》曰： 冀王道之一平，假高衢而骋力。 
现代文：王华每次闲居在家，总是朗诵王粲《登楼赋》中 冀王道之一平，假高衢而骋力。 
English: Every time Wang Hua is idle at home, he always recites one of the most famous passages from Wang Hui's "Climbing the Building," pretending to be high-spirited and vigorous.

古文：出入逢羡之等，每切齿愤咤，叹曰： 当见太平时不？ 
现代文：他外出碰到羡之等人，每次总是咬牙切齿，怒目相向，叹息着说： 应该能见到太平之时吗？ 
English: Whenever he goes out and meets people he admires, he always grits his teeth, glares at them, and says with a sigh: Should we be able to see a time of peace?

古文：元嘉二年，宁子病卒。
现代文：元嘉二年，甯子病逝。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Xun Zi died of illness.

古文：三年，诛羡之等，华迁护军，侍中如故。
现代文：元嘉三年，诛杀羡之等人，王华升任护军，侍中不变。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hua was promoted to the position of escort, and remained in the same position.

古文：宋世惟华与南阳刘湛不为饰让，得官即拜，以此为常。
现代文：南朝宋只有王华和南阳刘湛不矫饰谦让，得到官职就接受，觉得是平常之事。
English: In the Southern Dynasty and Song Dynasty, only Wang Hua and Nanyang Liu Zhan were unpretentious and humble, and accepted the official post, which they thought was a common thing.

古文：华以情事异人，未尝预宴集，终身不饮酒，有燕不之诣。
现代文：王华的性情和行事与别人不同，从不参加宴饮聚会，终身不喝酒，有宴会都不去。
English: Wang Hua's temperament and behavior are different from others. He never attends banquets and parties, never drinks, and never goes to banquets.

古文：若宜有论事者，乘车造门，主人出车就之。及王弘辅政，而弟昙首为太祖所任，与华相埒，华尝谓己力用不尽，每叹息曰： 宰相顿有数人，天下何由得治！ 
现代文：到了王弘辅佐朝政，王弘的弟弟昙首被太祖任用，和王华职位相当。王华曾说自己力量使不完，常叹息说： 宰相一下子有好几个，天下怎能治理好。 
English: When it came to Wang Hongfu, Wang Hong's younger brother, Dagger Wang, was appointed by the great-grandfather to a position equivalent to that of Wang Hua. Wang Hua once said that he could not use all of his strength, and often sighed, "How can the world be governed well when there are several prime ministers at once?"

古文：四年，卒，时年四十三。
现代文：元嘉四年，王华逝世，时年四十三岁。
English: In the fourth year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hua died at the age of forty-three.

古文：世祖即位，配飨太祖庙庭。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为散骑常侍、卫将军。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously bestowed him with the title of Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, or General of the Imperial Guard.

古文：子僧绰嗣，别有传。少子僧虔，升明末，为尚书令。
现代文：元嘉九年，皇帝考虑王华诛灭羡之的功劳，追封他为新建县侯，食邑一千户，谥号为宣侯。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the emperor considered the merits of Wang Huajian's death and envied him. He was appointed as the new county magistrate, with a thousand households in the county, and his posthumous name was Xuanhuang.

古文：殷景仁，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：世祖即位，将王华的灵位移入太祖的宗庙。殷景仁，陈郡长平人。
English: ○Yin JingrenYin Jingren, Chen County Governor Pingren.

古文：曾祖融，晋太常。
现代文：曾祖父殷融，晋朝太常。
English: Zeng Zu Yin Rong was the first emperor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖茂，散骑常侍、特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父殷茂，散骑常侍、特进、左光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather, Yin Mao, was a knight-errant, a special envoy, and a doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：父道裕，蚤亡。
现代文：父亲殷道裕早亡。
English: His father, Yin Daoyu, died at an early age.

古文：景仁少有大成之量，司徒王谧见而以女妻之。
现代文：殷景仁小时候就有成就大业的胸怀，司徒王谧见到他就将女儿许配给他。
English: When Yin Jingren was a young boy, he had a great potential. When King Stutts saw this, he married his daughter to him.

古文：初为刘毅后军参军，高祖太尉行参军。
现代文：他始任刘毅的后军参军、高祖的太尉行参军。
English: He was the first to join the army after Liu Yi and the first to join the army after Gao Zu.

古文：建议宜令百官举才，以所荐能否为黜陟。
现代文：他建议朝廷命令百官举荐人才，以其推荐的人是否贤能作为他们升降的依据。
English: He suggested that the imperial court should order the hundred officials to recommend talents, and use the merit of the person they recommend as the basis for their promotion.

古文：迁宋台秘书郎，世子中军参军，转主簿，又为骠骑将军道怜主簿。
现代文：任宗台秘书郎、世子中军参军，转任主簿，又任骠骑将军道怜的主簿。
English: He was appointed the secretary of the Sotai and the heir of the army to join the army, he was transferred to the main book, and he was also appointed the main book of the cavalry general.

古文：出补衡阳太守，入为宋世子洗马，仍转中书侍郎。
现代文：出朝补任衡阳太守，入朝任宋世子洗马，又转任中书侍郎。
English: He was appointed as Hengyang Taishu (the governor of Hengyang) when he left the imperial court, and he was appointed as Song's heir to wash horses when he entered the imperial court, and he was also transferred to the position of Chushushushijiro.

古文：臣迕违之愆，既已屡积，宁当徒尚浮采，尘黩天听。丹情悾款，仰希照察。 诏曰： 景仁退挹之怀，有不可改，除黄门侍郎，以申君子之请。 
现代文：景仁为学但不著文章，敏捷有思致，口不谈义理，深识大体，对国家典章朝廷礼仪旧的规章制度，无不抄录撰写，了解他的人知道他有志在当世的抱负，高祖非常了解他，提升他为太子中庶子。少帝即帝位，景仁入朝补侍中，屡次上表辞谢。皇帝下诏称： 景仁退让礼揖的主意不会改变，可让他改任黄门侍郎，以满足正人君子的心愿。 
English: Jingren was studious but did not write articles, he was quick and thoughtful, he did not talk about righteousness, he was generally knowledgeable, and he copied and wrote about the old rules and regulations of the national ordinances and court etiquette. Those who knew him knew that he had ambitions in the present world. Gaozu knew him very well and promoted him as the prince's illegitimate son. The young emperor is the imperial throne, and when Jingren entered the imperial court, he repeatedly expressed his thanks. The emperor said: The idea of Jingren's retreat from etiquette will not change, and he can be changed to the Yellow Gate waiter to meet the wishes of the upright gentleman.

古文：寻领射声。顷之，转左卫将军。
现代文：不久他领射声，很快又转任左卫将军。
English: Soon he was leading the firing squad, and soon he was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division.

古文：太祖即位，委遇弥厚，俄迁侍中，左卫如故。
现代文：太祖即帝位后对他非常器重，不久调任侍中，左卫将军不变。
English: After his grandfather ascended the throne, he was very important to him, and he was soon transferred to the position of chamberlain, and the position of General of the Left Division remained unchanged.

古文：时与侍中右卫将军王华、侍中骁骑将军王昙首、侍中刘湛四人，并时为侍中，俱居门下，皆以风力局干，冠冕一时，同升之美，近代莫及。
现代文：当时他与侍中右卫将军王华、侍中骁骑将军王昙首、侍中刘湛四人同为侍中，都在宰相府，他们几个皆以非凡的气度和杰出的才干而冠绝一时，共同升迁的荣耀近代以来无人能赶得上他们。
English: At that time, he was one of the four attendants together with the attendant of the right guard general Wang Hua, the attendant of the cavalry general Wang Shanshou, and the attendant Liu Zhan, all of whom were in the Prime Minister's Office. Several of them were crowned with extraordinary temperament and outstanding talent. Since modern times, no one can catch up with them in the glory of common promotion.

古文：上从之。丁母忧，葬竟，起为领军将军，固辞。
现代文：元嘉三年皇帝亲征谢晦，司徒王弘入朝掌管中书下省，景仁因年长正直和王弘一道执掌留守京城的重任。平定谢晦后，景仁代替到彦之任中领军，侍中不变。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the emperor personally recruited Xie Ying, and Wang Hong, a scholar, entered the court to take charge of the province of Zhongshih, and Jing Ren, due to his age and honesty, held the important position of staying in Beijing together with Wang Hong. After the suppression of Xie Ying, Jing Ren took the position of leading the army in place of Yan Yan, and there was no change in the attendants.

古文：上使纲纪代拜，遣中书舍人周赳舆载还府。
现代文：景仁服母丧，母亲刚下葬完毕，朝廷就起用他为领军将军，他则坚决辞绝。皇帝派中书舍人周赳用车子接他回府。
English: Just after the funeral of his mother, the imperial court appointed him as the leading general, but he resolutely refused. The emperor sent Zhou Jun, a Chinese scholar, to pick him up in a car and take him back to the capital.

古文：九年，服阕，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：元嘉九年服丧完后，调任尚书仆射。
English: After Yuan Jia completed the nine-year mourning period, he was transferred to Shang Shufu.

古文：太子詹事刘湛代为领军，与景仁素善，皆被遇于高祖，俱以宰相许之。
现代文：太子詹事刘湛代任领军，他和景仁一向关系密切，都被高祖重用，被委以宰相之职。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Liu Zhan took over as the leader of the army. He and Jing Ren have always had a close relationship. Both were highly valued by Gao Zu and were entrusted with the post of prime minister.

古文：湛尚居外任，会王弘、华、昙首相系亡，景仁引湛还朝，共参政事。
现代文：刘湛在朝外任职，恰值此时王弘、王华、昙首相继故去，景仁就让刘湛回到朝中，共同参予朝政。
English: Liu Zhan served outside the imperial court. Just as Wang Hong, Wang Hua, and Premier Zou passed away, Jing Ren let Liu Zhan return to the imperial court to participate in imperial politics.

古文：湛既入，以景仁位遇本不逾己，而一旦居前，意甚愤愤。
现代文：刘湛回来后，认为景仁的地位待遇本不该超过他，现在一下子位列于自己前面，心里非常气愤。
English: After Liu Zhan returned, he thought that Jingren's status and treatment should not have exceeded his, and now he was suddenly ranked ahead of himself. He was very angry.

古文：知太祖信仗景仁，不可移夺，乃深结司徒彭城王义康，欲倚宰相之重以倾之。
现代文：他知道太祖信任依靠景仁，不能动摇他的地位，于是就暗中勾结司徒彭城王刘义康，想借宰相的权位推倒景仁。
English: He knew that the great-grandfather trusted and relied on Jingren and could not shake his position, so he secretly colluded with Liu Yikang, the king of Stubai Pengcheng, to use the power of the prime minister to overthrow Jingren.

古文：十二年，景仁复迁中书令，护军、仆射如故。
现代文：元嘉十二年景仁又升任中书令、护军，仆射不变。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Jingren was promoted to the post of middle secretary and military escort, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：寻复以仆射领吏部，护军如故。
现代文：不久，又以仆射之职领吏部，护军不变。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the position of the leader of the officers, and the escort remained unchanged.

古文：湛愈忿怒。
现代文：刘湛更加怨恨景仁。
English: Liu Zhan was even more resentful of Jingren.

古文：义康纳湛言，毁景仁于太祖；太祖遇之益隆。
现代文：义康采纳了刘湛的主意，在太祖面前诋毁景仁，太祖却更器重他。
English: Yikang adopted Liu Zhan's idea and slandered Jingren in front of the grandfather, but the grandfather held him in higher esteem.

古文：景仁对亲旧叹曰： 引之令入，入便噬人。 
现代文：景仁曾叹息着对亲戚朋友说： 我将刘湛引荐入朝，他一来就咬人。 
English: With a sigh, Jingren once said to his relatives and friends: "I introduced Liu Zhan to the imperial court, but once he came, he started biting people."

古文：乃称疾解职，表疏累上，不见许，使停家养病。发诏遣黄门侍郎省疾。
现代文：于是他就称病辞职，屡次上表皇上但总不能被允许。皇上让他在家中养病，并派黄门侍郎看望他。
English: So he resigned, claiming to be ill, and repeatedly petitioned the emperor, but was never allowed to do so. The emperor let him recover at home, and sent Huangmen's attendant to visit him.

古文：湛议遣人若劫盗者于外杀之，以为太祖虽知，当有以，终不能伤至亲之爱。
现代文：刘湛商议派人装作窃贼在外面将景仁杀死，认为即使太祖知道，想必不会对他们怎么样，因为皇帝终究不会伤了骨肉亲情。
English: Liu Zhan deliberated and sent someone to pretend to be a thief to kill Jingren outside, thinking that even if the great-grandfather knew, it would not be good for them, because the emperor would not hurt the flesh and blood.

古文：上微闻之，迁景仁于西掖门外晋鄱阳主第，以为护军府，密迩宫禁，故其计不行。
现代文：皇帝稍微觉察到了他们的阴谋，将景仁迁到西掖门外晋鄱阳王的宅第，并将那里作为护军府，严加防备，所以刘湛等的阴谋未得逞。
English: The emperor was slightly aware of their plot, and moved Jing Ren to the residence of King Jinyang outside the West Gate of the Forbidden City, and used it as a military garrison, so Liu Zhan's plot did not succeed.

古文：景仁卧疾者五年，虽不见上，而密表去来，日中以十数；朝政大小，必以问焉，影迹周密，莫有窥其际者。
现代文：景仁卧病五年，虽然见不到皇帝，但却与皇帝秘密地书信往来，每天达十多封，大小朝政一定要向他询问。但他们往来极其秘密周详，没有人窥破这个秘密。
English: Although Jingren was bedridden for five years, he could not see the emperor, but he secretly exchanged letters with the emperor, more than ten letters a day, and the government of the dynasties must ask him. But their exchanges were extremely secretive, and no one could penetrate this secret.

古文：收湛之日，景仁使拂拭衣冠，寝疾既久，左右皆不晓其意。
现代文：皇上逮捕刘湛的那天，景仁让人给他整理衣裳，他卧病很长时间，左右手下都不知道他的用意。
English: On the day the emperor arrested Liu Zhan, Jingren had someone sort out his clothes for him. He had been ill for a long time, and his right and left subordinates did not know what he was up to.

古文：其夜，上出华林园延贤堂召景仁，犹称脚疾，小床舆以就坐，诛讨处分，一皆委之。
现代文：当日晚上，皇上出华林园延贤堂召见景仁，景仁仍然脚不好使，皇上让他坐在小床上，将对刘湛的审判全部交给他。
English: On the evening of the same day, the emperor went to the Yan Xian Hall of the Hualin Garden to summon Jingren. Jingren still had a bad foot, so the emperor let him sit on a small bed and handed over the entire trial of Liu Zhan to him.

古文：代义康为扬州刺史，仆射领吏部如故。
现代文：景仁代替刘义康任扬州刺史，仆射领吏部不变。
English: Jingren will replace Liu Yikang as Yangzhou chief historian, and the position of deputy chief historian will remain unchanged.

古文：遣使者授印绶，主簿代拜，拜毕，便觉其情理乖错。
现代文：皇上派使者授给他印和绶带，主簿代他向皇上拜谢，拜完后就发现景仁性情变得乖错。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to present him with the seal and the sash. The ambassador thanked the emperor on his behalf. After the prayer, it was discovered that Jingren's disposition had become perverse.

古文：性本宽厚，而忽更苛暴，问左右曰： 今年男婚多？女嫁多？ 
现代文：他本来性情非常宽厚，现在突然严厉暴躁，他问左右手下人说： 今年男子结婚的多，还是女子出嫁的多？ 
English: He had a very generous nature, but now he was suddenly stern and irascible. He asked his right and left subordinates, "Did more men get married this year, or did more women get married?"

古文：是冬大雪，景仁乘舆出听事观望，忽惊曰： 当阁何得有大树？ 
现代文：这年冬天下雪，景仁坐车出厅外眺望，忽然震惊地说： 正门外怎么有棵大树？ 
English: In the winter of that year, when it snowed, Jingren drove out of the hall to look around. Suddenly, he was shocked and said, "How come there's a big tree right outside the front door?"

古文：既而曰： 我误邪？ 
现代文：接着又说： 我搞错了吗？ 
English: Then he added: Did I make a mistake?

古文：疾转笃。
现代文：病情变得非常严重。
English: The condition became very serious.

古文：太祖谓不利在州司，使还住仆射下省，为州凡月余卒。
现代文：太祖认为景仁在州里任职对他不利，就让他回到仆射下省。景仁任州刺史一个多月就死了。
English: The great-grandfather thought that Jingren's position in the prefecture was unfavorable to him, so he let him return to Pusha County. Jingren died after more than a month as prefect of the prefecture.

古文：或云见刘湛为祟。
现代文：有人说他见到了刘湛的鬼魂。
English: Some people say they have seen the ghost of Liu Zhan.

古文：时年五十一，追赠侍中、司空，本官如故。
现代文：景仁时年五十一岁。皇帝追赠他为侍中、司空，其他的官职不变。
English: When he was fifty-one years old, the emperor posthumously promoted him to the positions of chamberlain and steward, but the other positions remained unchanged.

古文：谥曰文成公。
现代文：谥号文成公。
English: His posthumous name was Munchenggong.

古文：上与荆州刺史衡阳王义季书曰： 殷仆射疾患少日，奄忽不救。
现代文：太祖在写给荆州刺史衡阳王义季的信中写道： 殷仆射生病不久，病重不治。
English: The great-grandfather wrote in a letter to Hengyang Wang Yizi, the chief historian of Jingzhou: "Yin Fuxia fell seriously ill and died soon after.

古文：其识具经远，奉国竭诚，周游缱绻，情兼常痛。
现代文：他的识见远大，竭诚报国，我和他感情日深，如今心里非常痛苦。
English: He is a man of great vision and dedication to his country. My feelings for him have grown deeper and deeper, and now my heart is very painful.

古文：民望国器，遇之为难，惋叹之深，不能已已。
现代文：人民渴望国家出现栋梁之才，而得到是非常艰难的。我对他怀有深深的哀婉之情，不能自已。
English: People are longing for the emergence of a pillar talent in the country, and it is very difficult to get it. I have a deep melancholy feeling for him, I can't help myself.

古文：汝亦同不？
现代文：你也一样吗？
English: Do you do the same?

古文：往矣如何！ 
现代文：一切都过去了，奈何？ 
English: He's gone, what can I do!

古文：世祖大明五年，行幸经景仁墓，诏曰： 司空文成公景仁德量淹正，风识明允，徽绩忠谟，夙达先照，惠政茂誉，实留民属。
现代文：世祖大明五年，世祖出行经过景仁的墓地，下诏说： 司空文成公殷景仁品德严正，识见明哲，功绩卓著，忠诚宏谟，为政泽民，佳誉流传。
English: In the fifth year of the founder of the world, the founder of the world traveled past the cemetery of Jingren, and issued the following edict: Siku Wencheng, Yin Jingren, had a strict moral character, was a sage, had outstanding achievements, was loyal, was a politician, and had a good reputation.

古文：近瞻丘坟，感往兴悼，可遣使致祭。 
现代文：近来瞻仰其墓地，有感到他的过去，可派使者来祭悼他。 
English: Having recently visited his grave, and having a sense of his past, we can send an emissary to mourn him.

古文：子道矜，幼而不慧，官至太中大夫。
现代文：殷景仁的儿子道矜小时候就不太聪明，官至太中大夫。
English: When he was a child, Daojun, the son of Yin Jingren, was not very bright, but he rose to the position of Grand Vice-Marshal.

古文：道矜子恆，太宗世为侍中，度支尚书，属父疾积久，为有司所奏。
现代文：道矜的儿子殷恒，太宗的时候任侍中、度支尚书，因父亲的疾病长时不愈而被官府弹劾，降为散骑常侍。
English: Daojun's son, Yin Heng, who was an aide-de-camp to the emperor and a courtier at the time of Emperor Taizong, was impeached by the government due to his father's long-term illness and demoted to an aide-de-camp.

