古文：世儒学者，好信师而是古，以为贤圣所言皆无非，专精讲习，不知难问。
现代文：社会上的儒生学者，喜欢迷信老师，崇拜古人，认为圣贤说的都没有错，专心致志地讲述和学习，不知道进行反驳和质问。
English: Confucian scholars in society like superstitious teachers, worship the ancients, think that what sages say is not wrong, concentrate on telling and learning, and do not know how to refute and question.

古文：夫贤圣下笔造文，用意详审，尚未可谓尽得实，况仓卒吐言，安能皆是？
现代文：圣贤下笔写文章，尽管构思周密，还不能说完全正确，何况是匆忙中说的话，怎么能都对呢？
English: An article penned by a sage, although well-thought-out, cannot be said to be completely correct, and what's more, if it is said in a hurry, how can it be right?

古文：不能皆是，时人不知难；或是，而意沉难见，时人不知问。
现代文：不能全对，当时的人却不懂得反驳；有的虽正确，但意思隐晦，难得明白，当时的人也不晓得去追问。
English: Not all of them were right, but people at the time did not know how to refute them; some were correct, but the meaning was obscure, it was difficult to understand, and people at the time did not know how to investigate.

古文：案贤圣之言，上下多相违；其文，前後多相伐者。世之学者，不能知也。
现代文：考察起来，圣贤的说法，前后有很多自相违背：他们的文章，上下有很多互相矛盾，当今的学者，却不知道这一点。
English: If you look at the sayings of the sages, there are a lot of self-contradictions: their writings are full of contradictions, but today's scholars don't know this.

古文：论者皆云： 孔门之徒，七十子之才，胜今之儒。 
现代文：一般评论者都说： 孔子门下的学生，七十个弟子的才能，都胜过今天的儒生。 
English: General commentators say: The students under Confucius, the talents of the seventy disciples, are superior to today's Confucians.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这个说法很荒谬。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：彼见孔子为师，圣人传道，必授异才，故谓之殊。夫古人之才，今人之才也。
现代文：他们看见孔子当这些人的老师，就认为圣人传授学说一定要授给有特殊才能的人，所以说这些人与众不同。
English: Seeing Confucius as the teacher of these people, they thought that the teachings of the sages must be given to people with special talents, so they said that these people were different.

古文：今谓之英杰，古以为圣神，故谓七十子历世希有。
现代文：其实，古人的才能，跟今人的才能一样，今天称为 英杰 的，古人认为是 圣神 ，所以说七十弟子是历代少有的。
English: In fact, the talent of the ancients was the same as the talent of today's people, and today it is called Yingjie, which the ancients believed to be the Holy Spirit, so the seventy disciples are rare in all ages.

古文：使当今有孔子之师，则斯世学者，皆颜、闵之徒也；使无孔子，则七十子之徒，今之儒生也。
现代文：假使现在有孔子这样的老师，那么当代的学者都是颜回、闵损之类人物；假使当时没有孔子，那么七十弟子这些人，也跟今天的儒生一样。
English: If there were a teacher like Confucius today, then contemporary scholars would be people like Yan Hui and Zangzai; if there was no Confucius at that time, then these seventy disciples would be the same as today's Confucians.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：以学於孔子，不能极问也。
现代文：用他们向孔子学习，不能追根问底这一点就可以证明。
English: Their learning from Confucius proves that it is impossible to get to the bottom of the matter.

古文：圣人之言，不能尽解；说道陈义，不能辄形。
现代文：圣人的话，不能完全理解；陈述的道理，不能立即领会透彻。
English: The words of a sage cannot be fully comprehended; the reason of a statement cannot be immediately grasped thoroughly.

古文：不能辄形，宜问以发之；不能尽解，宜难以极之。
现代文：不能立即领会透彻。就应该追问下去搞清楚；不能完全理解，就应该提出疑问来彻底弄通它。
English: If you can't understand it thoroughly immediately, you should ask questions to find out more; if you can't understand it completely, you should ask questions to fully understand it.

古文：皋陶陈道帝舜之前，浅略未极。
现代文：当年皋陶在舜的面前陈述治国的道理，说得肤浅粗略而不透彻。
English: At that time, Juntao stated the principle of governing the country in front of Yao, saying it was superficial and rough, but not thorough.

古文：禹问难之，浅言复深，略指复分。
现代文：经过禹的追问和责难，原来肤浅的话又深入了一步，粗略的意思才又更清楚了。
English: After Yu's questioning and reproach, the original superficial words went one step deeper, and the rough meaning became clearer.

古文：盖起问难此说激而深切、触而著明也。
现代文：大概由于这样追问和责难，才使皋陶的话因受激发而说得更深刻，被触动而讲得更明白了。
English: It was probably because of such questioning and reproach that the words of Juntao were inspired to speak more profoundly, and were touched to speak more clearly.

古文：孔子笑子游之弦歌，子游引前言以距孔子。
现代文：孔子笑子游弹琴唱歌，子游引用孔子以前说过的话来反驳他。
English: Confucius laughed, Ziyu played the piano and sang, Ziyu quoted what Confucius had said before to refute him.

古文：自今案《论语》之文，孔子之言多若笑弦歌之辞，弟子寡若子游之难，故孔子之言遂结不解。
现代文：直到现在考察《论语》的原文，孔子的言论中还有很多类似讥笑弹琴唱歌的文句，但他的弟子中却很少有像子游那样敢辩驳的，所以孔子的话，始终有些像死结一样无法解开。
English: Up until now, when examining the original text of the Analects of Confucius, there are still many phrases in Confucius's speech that are similar to mocking, playing the piano and singing, but few of his disciples dare to argue like Ziyou, so Confucius's words have always been like a dead knot that cannot be untied.

古文：以七十子不能难，世之儒生，不能实道是非也。
现代文：由于七十弟子不敢辩驳，现在的儒生，就不能切实讲清孔子言论的是非了。
English: Since the seventy disciples did not dare to argue, today's Confucians cannot really clarify the rights and wrongs of Confucius's speech.

古文：凡学问之法，不为无才，难於距师，核道实义，证定是非也。
现代文：凡做学问的方法，不在于有无才能，难就难在敢于反问老师核实道理，确定是非。
English: The way to do learning is not to have talent or not, the difficulty is to dare to ask the teacher to verify the truth and determine right and wrong.

古文：问难之道，非必对圣人及生时也。
现代文：问难的方法，不一定对面对圣人，赶在他活着的时候。
English: The way to ask difficult questions is not necessarily to confront the saint, but to catch him while he is alive.

古文：世之解说说人者，非必须圣人教告，乃敢言也。
现代文：现在解说圣人的道理来教人的人，不一定要圣人教过的话才敢说。
English: Those who now teach others by expounding the truths of the saints do not necessarily need to have been taught by the saints before they dare to speak.

古文：苟有不晓解之问，难孔子，何伤於义？
现代文：如果有不理解的问题，追问责难孔子，对道理有什么损害呢？
English: If there is a problem of not understanding, and it is difficult to pursue accountability, what is the damage to reason?

古文：诚有传圣业之知，伐孔子之说，何逆於理？
现代文：果真有传授圣人学业的才智，反驳孔子的说法，又有什么不合理呢？
English: If there really is the ability to teach the teachings of the sages and refute the argument of Confucius, what is unreasonable?

古文：谓问孔子之言，难其不解之文，世间弘才大知生，能答问、解难之人，必将贤吾世间难问之言是非。
现代文：追问孔子的言论，反问不理解的词句，世上如果有才高智深的人出现，而他们又是能回答问题解释疑难的人，一定会肯定我通过责难追问讲清是非的做法。
English: If there are highly intelligent people in the world who can answer questions and explain difficulties, they will certainly affirm my practice of clarifying the rights and wrongs through criticism and questioning.

古文：孟懿子问孝。子曰： 毋违。 
现代文：孟懿子向孔子问孝，孔子说： 不要违背。 
English: Meng Xunzi asked Confucius for filial piety. Confucius said: Don't disobey.

古文：樊迟御，子告之曰： 孟孙问孝於我，我对曰 毋违 。 
现代文：樊迟驾着车，孔子告诉他说： 孟懿子向我问孝，我对他说： 不要违背 。 
English: After driving for a while, Confucius said to him, "Meng Yao asked me to be a filial son, and I told him, 'Don't disobey me.

古文：樊迟曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：樊迟问： 这话怎么说呢？ 
English: "What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 生，事之以礼；死，葬之以礼。 
现代文：孔子说： 父母活着的时候，要按照周礼的规定侍奉他们；死了，要按周礼的规定埋葬他们，要按周礼的规定祭祀他们。 
English: Confucius said: When parents are alive, they should be served according to the rules of the weekly ritual; when they die, they should be buried according to the rules of the weekly ritual, and they should be sacrificed according to the rules of the weekly ritual.

古文：问曰：孔子之言毋违，毋违者，礼也。
现代文：请问：孔子说 不要违背 ，是指不要违背周礼。
English: Question: When Confucius said, "Don't violate," he meant don't violate the weekly ritual.

古文：孝子亦当先意承志，不当违亲之欲。
现代文：那么孝子应当事先体会父母的心意，顺从他们的愿望，而不该违背他们的愿望。
English: Then filial sons and daughters should understand their parents' intentions in advance and obey their wishes, instead of going against their wishes.

古文：孔子言毋违，不言违礼。懿子听孔子之言，独不为嫌於毋违志乎。
现代文：孔子说 不要违背 ，而不说 不要违背周礼 ，孟懿子听孔子的话，难道不会误解为不要违背父母的愿望吗？
English: Confucius said, "Don't go against," but he didn't say, "Don't go against the weekly ritual," wouldn't Meng Yanzi's listening to Confucius be misinterpreted as not going against his parents' wishes?

古文：樊迟问何谓，孔子乃言 生，事之以礼；死，葬之以礼，祭之以礼。 
现代文：樊迟问这话怎么说，孔子才说 父母活着的时候，要按照周礼的规定侍奉他们；死了，要按照周礼的规定埋葬他们，要按照周礼的规定祭祀他们 。
English: After a long time of asking how to say this, Confucius finally said that when parents are alive, they should serve them according to the rules of the weekly ritual; when they die, they should be buried according to the rules of the weekly ritual, and they should be sacrificed according to the rules of the weekly ritual.

古文：使樊迟不问，毋违之说，遂不可知也。
现代文：如果樊迟不追问， 不要违背 说法的含义，始终不可能知道。
English: It is always impossible to know without questioning, without violating the meaning of the statement.

古文：懿子之才，不过樊迟，故《论语》篇中不见言行。樊迟不晓，懿子必能晓哉？
现代文：孟懿子的才干，不会超过樊迟，所以《论语》中看不到有关他的言行记录，樊迟都不理解，孟懿子就一定能理解吗？
English: Meng Xunzi's talent will not exceed that of Xuan Zhe, so there is no record of his words and deeds in the "Analects," and Xuan Zhe does not understand, can Meng Xunzi understand it?

古文：孟武伯问孝，子曰： 父母，唯其疾之忧。 
现代文：孟武伯向孔子问孝，孔子说： 对父母，只在他们病的时候才忧虑。 
English: Meng Wubo asked Confucius about filial piety. Confucius said, "You should only worry about your parents when they are ill.

古文：武伯善忧父母，故曰 唯其疾之忧 。
现代文：因为孟武伯总爱为他父母担忧，所以孔子说 只在父母生病时才担忧 。
English: Because Meng Wubo always worried about his parents, Confucius said that he only worried when his parents were ill.

古文：武伯忧亲，懿子违礼。
现代文：孟武伯处处为双亲担忧，而孟懿子侍奉父母却违背周礼。
English: Meng Wubo worries about his parents all the time, while Meng Yanzi serves his parents in violation of the weekly ritual.

古文：攻其短，答武伯云 父母，唯其疾之忧 ，对懿子亦宜言唯水火之变乃违礼。
现代文：如果是针对他们的短处，那么应该回答武伯说： 对父母，只在他们生病时才担忧 ，对懿子也应该说 只有遇到水灾火灾时才能违背周礼 。
English: If it is aimed at their shortcomings, then they should reply to Wubo, saying: To parents, only worry when they are sick, and to children, they should also say that they can only violate the weekly ritual when they encounter floods and fires.

古文：周公告小才敕，大材略。
现代文：周公告诫才能小的人说得详尽，对才能大的人说得简略。
English: Zhou Enlai said that the precepts should be detailed for those with little talent, and simple for those with great talent.

古文：子游之大材也，孔子告之敕；懿子小才也，告之反略。
现代文：樊迟是大才，孔子告诉得详尽；孟懿子是小才，告诫得反而简略，这违背了周公的用意。
English: It was contrary to Zhou Gong's intention that Zhai was a great talent and Confucius could tell him everything in detail, while Meng Rongzi was a small talent and could only give him a brief admonition.

古文：违周公之志，攻懿子之短，失道理之宜。弟子不难，何哉？
现代文：想针对懿子的短处，却不符合道理，而弟子又不责难，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it unreasonable to want to address the shortcomings of the mule, but the disciple does not rebuke?

古文：如以懿子权尊，不敢极言，则其对武伯亦宜但言毋忧而已。
现代文：如果因为孟懿子有权势地位尊贵，不敢说透彻，那么孔子对孟武伯也只能说 不要担忧 就行了。
English: If, because of Meng Xunzi's powerful and distinguished position, he did not dare to speak thoroughly, then Confucius could only say to Meng Wubo, "Don't worry."

古文：俱孟氏子也，权尊钧同，敕武伯而略懿子，未晓其故也。
现代文：他们都是孟孙氏家的后代，权力和地位都一样，对武伯说得详尽而对懿子说得简略，不知道其中是什么缘故。
English: They are all descendants of the Monsun family, the power and status are the same, and they speak in detail to Wubo and briefly to Xunzi, I don't know why.

古文：使孔子对懿子极言毋违礼，何害之有？
现代文：即使孔子对懿子说穿 不要违背周礼 ，又有什么危害呢？
English: Even if Confucius said to the mule, "Don't violate the weekly ritual," what harm would it do?

古文：专鲁莫过季氏，讥八佾之舞庭，刺太山之旅祭，不惧季氏增邑不隐讳之害，独畏答懿子极言之罪，何哉？
现代文：垄断鲁国大权莫过于季孙氏，孔子讥刺他在家中庭院里以 八佾 表演舞蹈，讥刺他在泰山举行旅祭，而不惧怕季孙氏憎恶不为他隐瞒过错带来的祸害，却偏偏害怕回答孟懿子时把话说穿的罪过，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that there is no one who monopolizes the great power of Lu than the Ji Sun clan, and Confucius ridicules him for performing a dance in the courtyard of his home with eight cymbals, and ridicules him for holding a traveling festival on Mount Tai, but is not afraid of the evil brought by Ji Sun clan's hatred and not concealing his mistakes, but is afraid of the sin of wearing words when answering Meng Yao?

古文：且问孝者非一，皆有御者，对懿子言，不但心服臆肯，故告樊迟。
现代文：况且向孔子问孝的不止一个人，每次都有赶车的人在场，不把回答的话都对他们讲一篇，而对懿子的回答，不但心满意足，而且还要故意告诉樊迟。
English: Moreover, there is more than one person who asks Confucius for filial piety. Every time, there are people who are rushing to catch the bus. If you don't answer them, tell them a story. If you answer the mule, you will not only be satisfied, but you will also deliberately tell the mule that you are late.

古文：孔子曰： 富与贵，是人之所欲也，不以其道得之，不居也；贫与贱，是人之所恶也，不以其道得之，不去也。 
现代文：孔子说： 富裕与显贵，是人人想往的，不以正当途径得到它，君子是不接受的；贫穷与卑贱，是人人厌恶的，但是富贵不从正当途径得到它，君子宁可不摆脱它。 
English: Confucius said: "Wealth and nobility are desired by everyone. If they are not obtained through legitimate means, they will not be accepted by a gentleman. Poverty and lowliness are detested by everyone, but if they are not obtained through legitimate means, a gentleman would rather not get rid of them."

古文：此言人当由道义得，不当苟取也；当守节安贫，不当妄去也。
现代文：这是说人们应当通过正道取得富贵，不应该用不正当手段得到它；应当保持节操，安于贫贱，不应该不择手段地摆脱它。
English: This means that people should acquire wealth through the right way, and should not obtain it through improper means; they should maintain self-discipline, be content with poverty, and should not get rid of it by any means.

古文：夫言不以其道，得富贵不居，可也；不以其道，得贫贱如何？
现代文： 不以正道取得富贵就不接受 ，可以；富贵不以正道取得宁可不摆脱贫困和卑贱，这是什么意思？
English: What does it mean that it is not acceptable to get rich without following the right path, but it is acceptable to get rich without following the right path, but it is better not to get rid of poverty and lowliness?

古文：富贵顾可去，去贫贱何之？
现代文：富贵固然可以摆脱，摆脱贫困和卑贱又到哪里去呢？
English: Of course, one can get rid of wealth and nobility, but where can one go to get rid of poverty and lowliness?

古文：去贫贱，得富贵也。不得富贵，不去贫贱。
现代文：摆脱了贫贱，就得到了富贵，没有得到富贵，就没有摆脱贫贱。
English: If you get rid of poverty, you will get rich; if you don't get rich, you won't get rid of poverty.

古文：如谓得富贵不以其道，则不去贫贱邪？
现代文：如果说取得富贵不用正道，就宁可不摆脱贫贱？
English: If it is said that one does not have to follow the right path to get rich, would it be better not to get rid of poverty?

古文：则所得富贵，不得贫贱也。
现代文：那么所谓 得 是指得到富贵，不是指得到贫贱了。
English: So the so-called "getting" refers to getting rich, not getting poor.

古文：贫贱何故当言得之？
现代文：这样，贫贱为什么能说 得到 呢？
English: So how is it possible for the poor to "get by"?

古文：顾当言贫与贱是人之所恶也，不以其道去之，则不去也。
现代文：本来该说 贫困和卑贱，是人人厌恶的，不以正道摆脱它，就宁可不摆脱它 。
English: It should have been said that poverty and lowliness are detestable to everyone, and it is better not to get rid of them without the right way.

古文：当言去，不当言得。得者，施於得之也。
现代文：应当说 摆脱 ，不应该说 得到 。 得 字是用在得到什么东西上的。
English: It should be "get rid of," not "get." "Get" is used to get something.

古文：今去之，安得言得乎？
现代文：现在说摆脱贫贱，怎么能说得到呢？
English: Now, how can it be said that it is possible to get rid of poverty?

古文：独富贵当言得耳。
现代文：只有富贵才该说得到。
English: Only the rich can say that.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：得富贵，乃去贫贱也。
现代文：因为得到富贵，才能摆脱贫贱。
English: Because to get rich is to get rid of being poor.

古文：是则以道去贫贱如何？
现代文：那么怎么才能以正道摆脱贫贱呢？
English: So how can we get rid of poverty with the right path?

古文：修身行道，仕得爵禄、富贵。
现代文：要修身行道，通过做官才能得到爵位、俸禄、荣华富贵。
English: It is necessary to improve oneself and one's behavior, and it is only through being an official that one can obtain a peerage, salary, glory and wealth.

古文：得爵禄、富贵，则去贫贱矣。
现代文：得到爵位、俸禄、荣华富贵，就摆脱贫困和卑贱。
English: If you get a peerage, a salary, glory and wealth, you will get rid of poverty and lowliness.

古文：不以其道去贫贱如何？
现代文：不以正道摆脱贫贱会怎样呢？
English: What will happen if we do not take the right path to get rid of poverty?

古文：毒苦贫贱，起为奸盗，积聚货财，擅相官秩，是为不以其道。
现代文：由于痛恨贫贱，就会起来做盗贼，积累钱财，擅自互相封官许愿，这就是不按正道摆脱贫贱。
English: Because of their hatred for the poor, they will become thieves, accumulate money, and arbitrarily make vows to each other. This is not the right way to get rid of poverty.

古文：七十子既不问，世之学者亦不知难。
现代文：七十弟子当时既然不向孔子提问，今天的学者也不知道提出质疑。
English: Since the seventy disciples did not ask questions to Confucius at that time, today's scholars do not know how to raise doubts.

古文：使此言意不解而文不分，是谓孔子不能吐辞也；使此言意结文又不解，是孔子相示未形悉也。
现代文：如果这话的意思无法理解而文字又不分明，这说明孔子不会说话；如果这话的含意纠缠不清而文字又不好理解，这是孔子向人表示得不明白不详尽。
English: If the meaning of this saying is incomprehensible and the text is not clear, this shows that Confucius cannot speak; if the meaning of this saying is entangled and the text is not easy to understand, this is Confucius expressing to people incomprehensibly and incompletely.

古文：弟子不问，世俗不难，何哉？
现代文：学生不提问，世人不提出质疑，这是为什么呢？
English: Students don't ask questions, the world doesn't question, why is that?

古文：孔子曰： 公冶长可妻也，虽在缧绁之中，非其罪也。 
现代文：孔子说： 公冶长这个人，可以把女儿嫁给他，虽然还在监狱中，但不是他的罪过。 
English: Confucius said, "This man, the chief magistrate, may marry his daughter to him, although he is still in prison, but it is not his fault.

古文：以其子妻之。
现代文：于是把自己的女儿嫁给了他。
English: and she gave him her daughter in marriage.

古文：问曰：孔子妻公冶长者，何据见哉？
现代文：请问：孔子把女儿嫁给公冶长，是根据什么，见到了什么呢？
English: Excuse me: On what basis did Confucius marry his daughter to Gongye Chang, and what did he see?

古文：据年三十可妻邪，见其行贤可妻也？
现代文：是根据他年三十可以把女儿嫁给他呢？
English: Is it because he is 30 years old that his daughter can be married to him?

古文：如据其年三十，不宜称在缧绁；如见其行贤，亦不宜称在缧绁。
现代文：还是看见品行好可以把女儿嫁给他呢？如果是根据年三十了，不该说他 在监狱 ；如果是看见他品行好，也不该说他 在监狱 。
English: If it is based on the age of thirty, it should not be said that he is in prison; if it is seen that his character is good, it should not be said that he is in prison.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：诸入孔子门者，皆有善行，故称备徒役。
现代文：因为凡在孔子门下的，都有好的德行，所以才称得上具备了当学生的条件。
English: Because everyone under the tutelage of Confucius has good moral character, they can be said to have the conditions to be a student.

古文：徒役之中无妻，则妻之耳，不须称也。
现代文：在学生中公冶长没有妻子，那把女儿嫁给他好了，不必要称赞他。
English: Among the students, Gongye Chang doesn't have a wife, so it's better to let his daughter marry him. There's no need to praise him.

古文：如徒役之中多无妻，公冶长尤贤，故独妻之，则其称之宜列其行，不宜言其在缧绁也。
现代文：如果学生中有很多人没有妻子，而公冶长特别好，所以只把女儿嫁给他，那么称赞他就应该列出他的好品行，而不该说他监狱里。为什么呢？
English: If there are many students who do not have a wife, and the mayor is a particularly good man, so he only married his daughter to him, then he should be praised for his good deeds, and should not be said to be in prison. Why?

古文：何则？世间强受非辜者多，未必尽贤人也。
现代文：因为社会上无辜被强迫受惩罚的人很多，他们未必都是贤人。
English: Because there are many innocent people in society who are forced to be punished, they may not all be wise.

古文：恆人见枉，众多非一，必以非辜为孔子所妻，则是孔子不妻贤，妻冤也。
现代文：一般人被冤枉的多得很不只一个，如果一定要因为他无辜被拘禁，孔子就把女儿嫁给他，那么就是孔子不把女儿嫁给贤人，而是嫁给受冤枉的人。
English: If Confucius had to marry his daughter to him because he was imprisoned for being innocent, then Confucius would not have married his daughter to a sage, but to someone who had been wronged.

古文：案孔子之称公冶长，有非辜之言，无行能之文。
现代文：认真考查一下，孔子称赞公冶长，有无辜的说法，却没有关于他品行才能方面的言词。
English: A careful examination shows that Confucius praised Gong Ye Chang and made innocent remarks, but did not say anything about his moral qualities.

古文：实不贤，孔子妻之，非也；实贤，孔子称之不具，亦非也。
现代文：如果公冶长确实不好，孔子把女儿嫁给他，就不对；要是确实很好，孔子称赞他不全面，也不对。
English: If Gongye Chang is really bad, it is not right for Confucius to marry his daughter to him; if he is really good, it is not right for Confucius to praise him incompletely.

古文：诚似妻南容云，国有道不废，国无道免於刑戮，具称之矣。
现代文：如果孔子像把侄女嫁给南容时说的那样： 国家有道的时候，他能做官；国家无道的时候，能免遭刑罚。 这就是全面称赞了。
English: If Confucius had said, as he did when he married his niece to Nan Rong, "When the country has morality, he can be an official; when the country has no morality, he can be exempted from punishment," then this would be a full compliment.

古文：子谓子贡曰： 汝与回也，孰愈？ 
现代文：孔子对子贡说： 你跟颜回哪个强些？ 
English: Confucius said to Zigong: Which of you is stronger than Yan Hui?

古文：曰： 赐也，何敢望回？
现代文：子贡回答说： 我怎么敢和颜回比呢？
English: Zigong replied, "How dare I compare myself to Yan?"

古文：回也，闻一以知十；赐也，闻一以知二。 
现代文：颜回听到一件事就能推知十件事，我听到一件事只能推知二件事。 
English: If you listen to one thing, you can deduce ten things. If I listen to one thing, I can only deduce two things.

古文：子曰： 弗如也，吾与汝俱不如也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不如他，我和你都不如他。 
English: Confucius said, "If I am not as good as him, then neither are you and I."

古文：是贤颜渊试以问子贡也。
现代文：这是孔子认为颜渊贤能，以此来试探子贡的。
English: This is what Confucius thought Yan Yuan was capable of, in order to test Zi Gong.

古文：问曰：孔子所以教者，礼让也。
现代文：请问：孔子用来教导学生的是礼让。
English: Question: Confucius used to teach his students to be polite.

古文：子路，为国以礼，其言不让，孔子非之。
现代文：子路有志于 用礼让来治理国家，由于他说话不谦虚 ，孔子就认为不对。
English: Zilu was interested in governing the country with courtesy, but Confucius thought it was wrong because he spoke immodestly.

古文：使子贡实愈颜渊，孔子问之，犹曰不如，使实不及，亦曰不如，非失对欺师，礼让之言宜谦卑也。
现代文：假使子贡确实强过颜渊，孔子问他，他还得说不如；假使实在不及颜渊，也要说不如。这并不是胡乱回答来欺骗老师，而是按礼让的说法应该谦虚。
English: If it is true that Zigong is stronger than Yan Yuan, Confucius asked him what he should say; if it is true that he is inferior to Yan Yuan, he should also say what he should say. This is not a random answer to deceive the teacher, but it should be modest according to the language of courtesy.

古文：今孔子出言，欲何趣哉？
现代文：如今孔子说那番话，想达到什么目的呢？
English: Now that Confucius has said that, what is he trying to achieve?

古文：使孔子知颜渊愈子贡，则不须问子贡。
现代文：假使孔子知道颜渊强过子贡，那就不必问子贡。
English: If Confucius knew that Yan Yuan was stronger than Zigong, then there would be no need to ask Zigong.

古文：使孔子实不知，以问子贡，子贡谦让亦不能知。
现代文：假使孔子确实不知道而问子贡，子贡一谦虚，也不可能知道。
English: If Confucius really didn't know and asked Zigong, Zigong would be too modest to know.

古文：使孔子徒欲表善颜渊，称颜渊贤，门人莫及，於名多矣，何须问於子贡？
现代文：假使孔子只是想表扬赞美一下颜渊，称赞颜渊贤能，没有学生赶得上他，那名目多得很，何必去问子贡呢？
English: If Confucius just wanted to praise Yan Yuan, praise Yan Yuan, praise Yan Yuan's virtue, no student can catch up with him, there are so many names, why ask for tribute?

古文：子曰： 贤哉，回也！ 
现代文：孔子就说过： 贤能啊，颜回！ 
English: Confucius said: "Worthy of merit, return to the world!"

古文：又曰： 吾与回言终日，不违如愚。 
现代文：又说过： 我整天跟颜回讲学，他从来不反问，好像很笨。 
English: He also said, "I lecture back and forth with Yan all day long, and he never asks questions back. He seems to be very stupid."

古文：又曰： 回也，其心三月不违仁。 
现代文：还说过： 颜回这个人，他的思想能长期不违反仁。 
English: He also said: Yan Hui is a person whose thoughts can not violate humanity for a long time.

古文：三章皆直称，不以他人激。至是一章，独以子贡激之，何哉？
现代文：这三章中都是直接称赞，没有通过旁人来抬高他，但到这一章，偏偏要用子贡来抬高他，是为什么呢？
English: In these three chapters, he is praised directly, and is not exalted by others, but in this chapter, he is exalted by paying tribute. Why is that?

古文：或曰：欲抑子贡也。
现代文：有人说： 是想压抑子贡。
English: Some people say: they want to suppress the child tax.

古文：当此之时，子贡之名凌颜渊之上，孔子恐子贡志骄意溢，故抑之也。
现代文：因为当时，子贡的名声在颜渊之上，孔子担心子贡骄傲自满，故意压压他的。 
English: Because at that time, Zigong's reputation was beyond reproach, Confucius worried that Zigong was proud and complacent, and deliberately oppressed him.

古文：夫名在颜渊之上，当时所为，非子贡求胜之也。
现代文：名声在颜渊之上，是当时的人造成的，并不是子贡自己要胜过他。
English: The reputation of being above reproach was created by the people of the time, and it was not that Zigong himself wanted to surpass him.

古文：实子贡之知何如哉？
现代文：实际上子贡自知得怎么样呢？
English: In fact, how well does Zigong know himself?

古文：使颜渊才在己上，己自服之，不须抑也。使子贡不能自知，孔子虽言，将谓孔子徒欲抑已。
现代文：假使颜渊才能在自己之上，自己自然佩服他，就用不着压抑；假使子贡不能自知，孔子即使说了，他将会认为孔子只想压抑自己。
English: If Yan Yuan is able to be above himself, and he naturally admires him, he does not need to suppress; if Zigong cannot know for himself, even if Confucius said it, he will think that Confucius only wants to suppress himself.

古文：由此言之，问与不问，无能抑扬。
现代文：由此说来，问与不问，都不能起到压抑或表扬的作用。
English: Therefore, whether you ask or not, you can't suppress or praise.

古文：宰我昼寝。
现代文：宰我白天睡觉。
English: I can't sleep during the day.

古文：子曰： 朽木不可雕也，粪土之墙不可圬也，於予予何诛。 
现代文：孔子说： 腐朽的木头是不能雕刻的，粪土样的墙壁是无法粉刷的，对于宰予这样的人，我还责备他干什么呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "Decaying wood cannot be carved, and walls like dung cannot be painted. What should I reproach such a person for?"

古文：是恶宰予之昼寝。
现代文：这是在厌恶宰予白天睡觉。
English: It comes down to an aversion to sleeping during the day.

古文：问曰：昼寝之恶也，小恶也；朽木粪土，败毁不可复成之物，大恶也。
现代文：请问：白天睡觉的过错，是小缺点；朽木和粪土，是腐败毁坏得不能再恢复的东西，是大罪恶。
English: Excuse me: the fault of sleeping during the day is a minor shortcoming; rotten wood and dung are things that have been destroyed by corruption and can no longer be restored, which is a great sin.

古文：责小过以大恶，安能服人？
现代文：用指责大罪恶的话来责备小过错，怎么能服人呢？
English: For how can one be a servant if he reproves a small fault by recriminating a great evil?

古文：使宰我性不善，如朽木粪土，不宜得入孔子之门，序在四科之列。使性善，孔子恶之，恶之太甚，过也；人之不仁，疾之已甚，乱也。
现代文：假使宰予本性不好，像朽木粪土一样，就不该入到孔子的门下，排在四科之列；假使他本性是好的，而孔子厌恶他，也太厌恶得过分了。 对人的不仁行为，痛恨得过分，就会出乱子。 
English: If one's nature is not good, like rotten wood and dung, he should not enter the door of Confucius and be ranked among the four disciplines; if his nature is good, and Confucius hates him, he is too disgusted.

古文：孔子疾宰予，可谓甚矣。
现代文：孔子痛恨宰予，可以说过分了！
English: Confucius hated to be slaughtered, to say the least!

古文：使下愚之人涉耐罪，狱吏令以大辟之罪，必冤而怨邪？将服而自咎也？
现代文：即使是一个很蠢的人犯了轻罪，而司法官吏下令处死他，他一定会感到冤枉、怨恨，怎肯服罪而自责呢？
English: Even if a very stupid person commits a misdemeanor, and the judicial officer orders him to be executed, he will certainly feel wronged, resentful, how can he confess and blame himself?

古文：使宰我愚，则与涉耐罪之人同志；使宰我贤，知孔子责人，几微自改矣。
现代文：即使宰予很愚蠢，那跟犯轻罪的人想法相同。假使宰予贤明，知道孔子责备他，只要稍微暗示就会自己改正。
English: Even if he is stupid, he still thinks the same way as someone who has committed a minor crime. If he is wise, he will know that Confucius is criticizing him, and he will correct himself with just a hint.

古文：明文以识之，流言以过之，以其言示端而已自改。
现代文：或是用明白的话使他知道，或是传话责备他，只要用话给点启示他本人就会自觉改正。
English: Either let him know with clear words, or send him a message to reproach him. As long as the words give some inspiration, he will consciously correct himself.

古文：自改不在言之轻重，在宰予能更与否。
现代文：自觉改正不在话轻话重，而在宰予能改不能改。
English: Self-correction is not a trivial matter, but can be changed or not changed.

古文：《春秋》之义，采毫毛之善，贬纤介之恶，褒毫毛以巨大，以巨大贬纤介。观《春秋》之义，肯是之乎？
现代文：《春秋》的原则，是对细小的好事都要称赞，对细微的坏事都要指责。现在是用分量很重的话来表扬毫毛大的好事，用分量极重的话来指责纤介小的过错，按照《春秋》的原则，能认为这是对的吗？
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" is to praise the small good things and criticize the small bad things. Now it is to praise the insignificant good things with very heavy words, and to blame the small mistakes with very heavy words. According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," can you think that this is right?

古文：不是，则宰我不受；不受，则孔子之言弃矣。
现代文：要是不对，那么宰予就会不接受；不接受，那么孔子的话就白费。
English: If it is not correct, then Zayou will not accept it; if it is not accepted, then the words of Confucius will be wasted.

古文：圣人之言与文相副，言出於口，文立於策，俱发於心，其实一也。
现代文：圣人说的跟写的应该互相一致，话从口中说出，文章在简策上写着，都发自内心，实质是一样的。
English: What a sage says and what he writes should be consistent with each other. The words come out of his mouth, the article is written in a concise manner, both come from the heart, and the essence is the same.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，不贬小以大。其非宰予也，以大恶细，文语相违，服人如何？
现代文：孔子写《春秋》，不用重话来指责小过，但他指责宰予时，却用指责罪大恶极的话来指责小过，写的与说的互相矛盾，怎么能服人呢？
English: When Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," he did not use heavy words to accuse Zaiyou of being too small, but when he accused Zaiyou, he accused Zaiyou of being too small with words of accusation of the most heinous crimes. How can he persuade people when what he wrote and what he said contradicted each other?

古文：子曰： 始吾於人也，听其言而信其行；今吾於人也，听其言而观其行。
现代文：孔子说： 起初我对于人，是听了他的话，就相信他做的事；今天我对于人，是听了他的话，还要观察他做的事。
English: Confucius said: At first, I listened to people and believed in what they did; today, I listen to people and observe what they do.

古文：於予予改是。 
现代文：从宰予身上，我改变了原先对人的态度。 
English: From Zayo, I changed my original attitude towards people.

古文：盖起宰予昼寝，更知人之术也。
现代文：这是孔子从宰予白天睡觉开始，改变了了解人的方法。
English: This is when Confucius changed the way of understanding people, starting with the idea of sleeping during the day.

古文：问曰：人之昼寝，安足以毁行？
现代文：请问：人白天睡觉，怎么能够就败坏品行呢？
English: Excuse me: how can a person sleep during the day and still behave badly?

古文：毁行之人，昼夜不卧，安足以成善？
现代文：品行败坏的人，白天晚上都不睡觉，怎么又能够成为好人呢？
English: How can a person with a bad character, who does not sleep during the day and at night, become a good person?

古文：以昼寝而观人善恶，能得其实乎？
现代文：凭白天睡觉来观察人的好坏，能符合他的实际情况吗？
English: Can observing a person's good or bad by sleeping during the day be consistent with his actual situation?

古文：案宰予在孔子之门，序於四科，列在赐上。
现代文：据考查，宰予在孔子门徒中，在 四科 顺序里，列在子贡之上。
English: According to the investigation, among the disciples of Confucius, in the order of the four disciplines, Zayu is listed above Zigong.

古文：如性情怠，不可雕琢，何以致此？
现代文：如果性情懒惰，不能造就，怎么能达到这地步呢？
English: If the disposition is lazy and unproductive, how can it reach this stage?

古文：使宰我以昼寝自致此，才复过人远矣。
现代文：假使宰我由于白天睡觉能自然达到这地步，那么他的才能更是远远超过其他人！
English: If my son can naturally reach this level by sleeping during the day, then his talent is far superior to others!

古文：如未成就，自谓已足，不能自知，知不明耳，非行恶也。
现代文：如果他没有成就，就自认为已经满足了，不能自知，只是没有自知之明罢了，并不是品行恶劣。
English: If he doesn't achieve, he thinks he's satisfied and can't be self-aware, but he just doesn't have self-awareness, it's not a bad character.

古文：晓敕而已，无为改术也。
现代文：这样，向他说明告诫就行了，用不着为此改变了解人的方法。
English: In this way, it is enough to explain the admonition to him, without having to change the way of understanding people.

古文：如自知未足，倦极昼寝，是精神索也。
现代文：如果是他自己知道不足，只因疲倦到极点才在白天睡觉，这是由于精神耗尽的缘故。
English: If he knows he is deficient and only sleeps during the day because he is too tired, this is due to mental exhaustion.

古文：精神索至於死亡，岂徒寝哉？
现代文：精神耗尽会导致死亡，那岂只是白天睡觉的问题呢！
English: Exhaustion can lead to death, it's just a matter of sleeping during the day!

古文：且论人之法，取其行则弃其言，取其言则弃其行。
现代文：况且评定人的方法，要是他行为可取就不必管他的言语，要是他的言语可取就不必管他的行为。
English: Moreover, the way to judge a man is not by his words if his actions are good, but by his actions if his words are good.

古文：今宰予虽无力行，有言语。
现代文：如今宰予虽然没有努力去行动，但有言语方面的成就。
English: Today, although Zayo has made no effort to act, he has made verbal achievements.

古文：用言，令行缺，有一概矣。
现代文：凭他言语的成就，即使行为有缺陷，也算有一方面长处。
English: By virtue of his verbal achievements, even if his behavior is flawed, it is also a strength.

古文：今孔子起宰予昼寝，听其言，观其行，言行相应，则谓之贤。是孔子备取人也。
现代文：现在孔子从宰予白天睡觉这事开始，不仅要听人说的，还要看人做的，要说的与做的互相一致，才认为是贤人，这是孔子求全责备选择人。
English: Now Confucius began with the matter of allowing people to sleep during the day. It is not only necessary to listen to what people say, but also to look at what they do, and what they say and do must be consistent with each other before they are considered wise. This is Confucius seeking full blame and selecting people.

古文：毋求备於一人之义，何所施？
现代文：那么周公 对人不要求全责备 的道理又运用到哪儿去了呢？
English: So where did Zhou Gong apply the principle of not demanding full blame to others?

古文：子张问： 令尹子文三仕为令尹，无喜色；三已之，无愠色；旧令尹之政，必以告新令尹。
现代文：子张问孔子： 令尹子文多次做楚国的令尹，没有高兴的样子；多次被罢官，也没有怨恨的样子。
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius: Ling Yin Ziwen repeatedly became the Ling Yin of Chu, but he did not look happy; he was dismissed many times, but he did not look resentful.

古文：何如？ 子曰： 忠矣。 
现代文：每次交接时，总要把自己原来做令尹时的政务，都告诉给新的令尹。这人怎么样？ 
English: Every time there is a handover, you always have to tell the new lingyin about the government affairs you were doing when you were lingyin. How is this person?

古文：曰： 仁矣乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 忠臣！ 
English: Zhang Zi said, "Can you be considered to have benevolence?

古文：曰： 未知，焉得仁？ 
现代文：子张又问： 算得上仁吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "I don't know, how can this be regarded as benevolence?"

古文：子文曾举楚子玉代己位而伐宋，以百乘败而丧其众，不知如此，安得为仁？
现代文：孔子说： 没有智，怎么算得上仁呢？ 这是指子文曾举荐楚子玉接替自己的职位去讨伐宋国，结果用一百辆战车的兵力被打败，而且丧了他的全部人马，不智到这种地步，怎么算得上是仁呢？
English: Confucius said: "Without wisdom, how can one be regarded as a benevolent person?" This is a reference to the fact that Fingers Wen once recommended Chu Ziyu to take over his post to fight the Song Dynasty. As a result, he was defeated with the strength of a hundred chariots and lost all his men and horses. Without wisdom to such an extent, how can one be regarded as a benevolent person?

古文：问曰：子文举子玉，不知人也。
现代文：请问：子文举荐子玉，是不了解人的问题。
English: Excuse me: the problem of not understanding people is at the root of the problem of recommending Zidama.

古文：智与仁，不相干也。
现代文：智与仁，是不相干的。
English: Wisdom and benevolence are irrelevant.

古文：有不知之性，何妨为仁之行？
现代文：人有不了解人的缺点，怎么会妨害他具有仁的品行呢？
English: If a person does not understand the shortcomings of others, how can they prevent him from having a benevolent character?

古文：五常之道，仁、义、礼、智、信也。
现代文：五种道德规范，是仁、义、礼、智、信。
English: The five moral norms are benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith.

古文：五者各别，不相须而成。故有智人、有仁人者，有礼人、有义人者。
现代文：这五种道德各不相同，不必相互依赖才能具备某种道德，所以有的人智，有的人仁，有的人礼，有的人义。
English: These five kinds of morality are all different, and they do not have to depend on each other to have a certain kind of morality. Therefore, some people have wisdom, some people have humanity, some people have courtesy, and some people have righteousness.

古文：人有信者未必智，智者未必仁，仁者未必礼，礼者未必义。
现代文：有信的未必智，有智的未必仁，有仁的未必礼，有礼的未必义。
English: The faithful may not be wise, the wise may not be kind, the kind may not be courteous, the courteous may not be righteous.

古文：子文智蔽於子玉，其仁何毁？
现代文：子文的智慧在识别子玉上有所不足，这对他的仁有什么损害呢？
English: Zi Wen's wisdom is deficient in recognizing Zi Yuping, what harm does this do to his benevolence?

古文：谓仁，焉得不可？
现代文：说他仁，怎么不可以呢？
English: Say he is benevolent, how can he not be?

古文：且忠者，厚也。
现代文：况且，忠就是厚。
English: Besides, loyalty is thick.

古文：厚人，仁矣。
现代文：待人厚道，就是仁。
English: Kindness to others is benevolence.

古文：孔子曰： 观过，斯知仁矣。 
现代文：孔子说过： 考察一个人犯的过错，就知道他仁不仁了。 
English: Confucius said: If you examine the faults of a person, you will know whether he is kind or not.

古文：子文有仁之实矣。
现代文：可见，子文是有仁的事实。
English: It can be seen that Ziwen is a benevolent fact.

古文：孔子谓忠非仁，是谓父母非二亲，配匹非夫妇也。
现代文：孔子说忠不是仁，这等于说父母不是双亲，配偶不是夫妻一样。
English: Confucius said that loyalty is not benevolence, which is tantamount to saying that parents are not parents, and spouses are not husband and wife.

古文：哀公问： 弟子孰谓好学？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子： 你弟子中谁是最好学的？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius: Which of your disciples is the best at learning?

古文：孔子对曰： 有颜回者，不迁怒，不贰过，不幸短命死矣。
现代文：孔子回答说： 有个颜回好学，他从不把怒气发泄到别人身上，从不犯同样的过错，不幸短命死了。
English: Confucius replied, "There was a virtuous scholar who never vented his anger on others and never committed the same mistake. Unfortunately, he died young.

古文：今也则亡，未闻好学者也。 
现代文：现在没有这样的人了，再也没有听说有像他这样好学的人了。 
English: There's no one like him now, and I've never heard of anyone as studious as he was.

古文：夫颜渊所以死者，审何用哉？
现代文：颜渊早死的原因，到底是由于什么呢？
English: What was the cause of Yan Yuan's early death?

古文：令自以短命，犹伯牛之有疾也。
现代文：假使由于生来就短命，就像伯牛得恶疾一样。
English: If you are born with a short life, it's like a cow with a bad disease.

古文：人生受命，皆全当洁。今有恶疾，故曰无命。
现代文：要是人生下来禀受的命，都该健全美好，现在伯牛得了恶疾，所以说他 没有这样的命 。
English: If a person is born with a hard life, it should be healthy and beautiful. Now Uncle Niu has a bad disease, so he does not have such a life.

古文：人生皆当受天长命，今得短命，亦宜曰无命。
现代文：人生下来都应该承受天赋予的长命，现在颜渊得了短命，也应该说他 没有这样的命 。
English: All human beings should be able to withstand the long life given by heaven. Now that Yan Yuan has a short life, it should also be said that he does not have such a life.

古文：如有短长，则亦有善恶矣。
现代文：如果命有长命有短命，那么也该有善命有恶命。
English: If there is a long life and a short life, then there should also be a good life and a bad life.

古文：言颜渊短命，则宜言伯牛恶命；言伯牛无命，则宜言颜渊无命。
现代文：说颜渊 短命 ，也该说伯牛 恶命 ；说伯牛 无命 ，也该说颜渊 无命 。
English: Say Yan Yuan is short-lived, it should also be said that Uncle Cow has a bad life; say Uncle Cow is lifeless, it should also be said that Yan Yuan is lifeless.

古文：一死一病，皆痛云命。所禀不异，文语不同。
现代文：一个死了，一个病了，都沉痛地谈到 命 ，其实他们禀受的命没有什么差异，而孔子用的言辞却不同，不知道这是什么缘故。
English: One is dead, one is sick, both speak sadly of "life," in fact, there is no difference in the lives they suffer, but the words used by Confucius are different, I don't know why.

古文：未晓其故也。哀公问孔子孰为好学。孔子对曰： 有颜回者好学，今也则亡。
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子他的弟子中谁最好学，孔子回答： 有颜回最好学，现在则没有了。
English: When Lu Aigong asked Confucius which of his disciples was the best at learning, Confucius replied, "Those who had the courage to learn were the best, but now there are none."

古文：不迁怒，不贰过。 
现代文：他不迁怒于人，不犯相同的过错。 
English: He does not take his anger out on others and does not make the same mistakes.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么要这样回答呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：曰：并攻哀公之性，迁怒、贰过故也。
现代文：有人说： 这样可以一并指责鲁哀公性情爱迁怒于人、爱犯相同错误的缘故。
English: Some people said: In this way, Lu Aigong's temperament and love of anger can be accused of committing the same mistake.

古文：因其问则并以对之，兼以攻上之短，不犯其罚。
现代文：这样一来，顺着他的发问就一并给予回答，既顺便指责了鲁哀公的缺点，而又不冒犯他受到他的责罚。
English: In this way, in accordance with his question, he gave an answer, incidentally accusing Rouye of his shortcomings, without offending him and being punished by him.

古文：问曰：康子亦问好学，孔子亦对之以颜渊。
现代文：请问：季康子也问过孔子他弟子中谁最好学，孔子也以颜渊回答他。
English: Question: Ji Kangzi also asked Confucius which of his disciples was the best at learning, and Confucius answered him with Yan Yuan.

古文：康子亦有短，何不并对以攻康子？
现代文：季康子也有短处，为什么又不一并以回答来指责季康子呢？
English: Ji Kangzi also has a shortcoming, why do they not all criticize Ji Kangzi with an answer?

古文：康子，非圣人也，操行犹有所失。
现代文：季康子不是圣人，操行还有不够的地方。
English: Ji Kang Zi is not a saint, and there is still room for improvement.

古文：成事，康子患盗，孔子对曰： 苟子之不欲，虽赏之不窃。 
现代文：如已有的事例：季康子担忧鲁国盗贼多，孔子回答说： 假使你不贪财，即使奖励盗窃也不会有人来偷。 
English: For example: Ji Kangzi was worried that there were many thieves in Lu. Confucius replied, "If you are not greedy, even if you reward theft, no one will steal."

古文：由此言之，康子以欲为短也。
现代文：由此说来，季康子的短处是贪财，那么，孔子不乘机一起指责他，是为什么呢？
English: Therefore, the shortcoming of Ji Kangzi is greed, so why did Confucius not take the opportunity to criticize him?

古文：不攻，何哉？孔子见南子，子路不悦。
现代文：孔子去见南子，子路不高兴。
English: Confucius went to see Nan Zi, but Zi Lu was not happy.

古文：子曰： 予所鄙者，天厌之！
现代文：孔子说： 我如果有卑鄙行为，天塌下来压死我！
English: Confucius said: "If I commit a vile act, the sky will fall down and crush me!"

古文：天厌之！ 
现代文：天塌下来压死我！ 
English: Let the heavens abhor me!

古文：南子，卫灵公夫人也，聘孔子，子路不说，谓孔子淫乱也。
现代文：南子，就是卫灵公夫人，她聘请孔子，子路不高兴，认为孔子有淫乱行为。
English: Nan Zi, that is, Wei Ling Gong's wife, hired Confucius, but Zilu was not happy and thought that Confucius had committed adultery.

古文：孔子解之曰：我所为鄙陋者，天厌杀我。
现代文：孔子辩解说： 我如果干了卑鄙的事，天塌下来压死我！ 
English: Confucius defended himself by saying: "If I do something despicable, the sky will fall down and crush me!"

古文：至诚自誓，不负子路也。
现代文：以极真诚的态度自己发誓，不欺骗子路。
English: I swear to myself with the utmost sincerity that I will not cheat.

古文：问曰：孔子自解，安能解乎？
现代文：请问：孔子自己辩解，怎么能辩解得了呢？
English: Excuse me: Confucius defended himself, how could he defend himself?

古文：使世人有鄙陋之行，天曾厌杀之，可引以誓；子路闻之，可信以解；今未曾有为天所厌者也，曰天厌之，子路肯信之乎？
现代文：假使社会上有人有卑鄙行为，天曾经塌下来压死过他，那才可以引用来发誓，子路听了，才会相信而解除怀疑。直到现在还未曾有过被天塌下来压死的人，就说 天塌下来压死我 ，子路肯相信吗？
English: If there is someone in society who commits despicable acts, and the sky once fell down and crushed him to death, then he can be quoted as swearing, and if Zilu hears it, he will believe and remove his doubt. Up until now, there has never been anyone crushed to death by the sky falling down, so let's say that the sky fell down and crushed me to death, will Zilu believe it?

古文：行事，雷击杀人，水火烧溺人，墙屋压填人。
现代文：已有的事例是： 雷打死人，水淹死人，火烧死人，墙壁和房屋倒塌压死人。
English: There have been cases of people being killed by lightning, drowning by water, burning by fire, and crushed by collapsing walls and houses.

古文：如曰雷击杀我，水火烧溺我，墙屋压填我，子路颇信之；今引未曾有之祸，以自誓於子路，子路安肯晓解而信之？
现代文：如果说 雷打死我 ， 水淹死我，火烧死我 ， 墙壁和房屋倒下来压死我 ，子路还可能相信。如今引用未曾有过的灾祸，用它来为自己对子路发誓，子路怎么会消除怀疑而相信孔子呢？
English: If thunder were to strike me dead, water to drown me, fire to burn me, walls and houses to fall down and crush me, Zilu might still believe. Now, citing an unprecedented calamity and using it to swear to Zilu, how could Zilu dispel doubt and believe in Confucius?

古文：行事，适有卧厌不悟者，谓此为天所厌邪？
现代文：已有的事例是：碰巧有睡觉做恶梦惊叫死去的人，能说这是被天塌下来压死的吗？
English: The existing cases are: Can we say that a person who happened to sleep, have nightmares, and die screaming was crushed to death by the sky falling?

古文：案诸卧厌不悟者，未皆为鄙陋也。
现代文：考察起来，凡是睡觉做恶梦死去的人，未必都干了卑鄙的事。
English: On reflection, anyone who dies while sleeping and having nightmares may not necessarily have done something despicable.

古文：子路入道虽浅，犹知事之实。
现代文：子路学问即使浅薄，还能知道事情的实际情况。
English: Even if Zilu's knowledge is shallow, he can still know the actual situation of things.

古文：事非实，孔子以誓，子路必不解矣。
现代文：事情不符合实际情况，孔子用它来发誓，子路肯定不会消除怀疑的。
English: Things do not conform to the actual situation, Confucius used it to swear, Zi Lu will certainly not eliminate the doubt.

古文：孔子称曰： 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文：孔子称说： 生死都是命中注定，富贵由天决定。 
English: Confucius said: "Life and death are predetermined by fate, and wealth is decided by heaven.

古文：若此者，人之死生自有长短，不在操行善恶也。
现代文：像这样，人的生死本来有长命的有短命的，而不由操行的好坏来决定。
English: In this way, people's life and death have long and short lives, and are not determined by whether they are good or bad.

古文：成事，颜渊蚤死，孔子谓之短命。
现代文：已有的事例是：颜渊早死，孔子说他 短命 。
English: There are already examples: Yan Yuan died early, and Confucius said that his life was short.

古文：由此知短命夭死之人，必有邪行也。
现代文：由此知道短命早死的人，未必有邪恶的品行。
English: From this we know that people with short lives and early deaths do not necessarily have evil characters.

古文：子路入道虽浅，闻孔子之言，知死生之实。
现代文：子路学问即使浅薄，听了孔子的教导，还是晓得生死的真实道理。
English: Even if Zilu's knowledge is shallow, after listening to the teachings of Confucius, he still knows the true meaning of life and death.

古文：孔子誓以 予所鄙者，天厌之 ！独不为子路言：夫子惟命未当死，天安得厌杀之乎？
现代文：孔子用 我如果有卑鄙行为，天塌下来压死我 来发誓，难道不怕被子路反问： 夫子你的命不该死，天怎么会塌下来压死你呢？ 
English: Confucius swore that if I did something despicable, the sky would fall down and crush me. Wasn't he afraid that Quetzalcoatl would ask: "Master, your life is not worth dying for, how could the sky fall down and crush you?"

古文：若此，誓子路以天厌之，终不见信。
现代文：像这样，用 天塌下来压死我 来对子路发誓，始终是不会被子路相信的。
English: As such, swearing to Zilu with "the sky will fall down and crush me" will never be believed by Zilu.

古文：不见信，则孔子自解，终不解也。
现代文：不被子路相信，那么孔子自我辩解，也始终不能消除子路的怀疑。
English: If he was not believed by Zilu, then Confucius's self-justification could not eliminate Zilu's suspicion.

古文：《尚书》曰： 毋若丹硃敖，惟慢游是好。 
现代文：《尚书·益稷》说： 不要像丹朱那样傲慢，只喜欢游手好闲。 
English: "Shangshu · Yixuan" said: Don't be arrogant like Dan Zhu, just like idleness.

古文：谓帝舜敕禹毋子不肖子也。
现代文：这是说舜告诫禹不要溺爱没出息的儿子。
English: This is to say that Hao cautioned Yu not to indulge his son who had no prospects.

古文：重天命，恐禹私其子，故引丹硃以敕戒之。
现代文：舜尊重天命，担心禹偏爱自己的儿子，所以引用丹朱的事来告诫他。
English: Zou respects the fate of heaven and fears that Yu prefers his own son, so he quotes the story of Danzhu to admonish him.

古文：禹曰： 予娶若时，辛壬癸甲，开呱呱而泣，予弗子。 
现代文：禹说： 我娶妻的那个时候，才过了辛、壬、癸、甲四天就离开了，从启呱呱落地起，我就没有溺爱过他。 
English: Yu said, "When I married my wife, I only left him after four days. I haven't spoiled him since I got married.

古文：陈已行事以往推来，以见卜隐，效己不敢私不肖子也。不曰天厌之者，知俗人誓，好引天也。孔子为子路所疑，不引行事，效己不鄙，而云天厌之，是与俗人解嫌引天祝诅，何以异乎？
现代文：这是禹陈述自己做过的事，想根据过去推论将来，用现在出现的事来推断尚未发生的事，以此来证明自己不敢偏爱没出息的儿子，但他不说： 如果我偏爱儿子天就塌下来压死我 ，因为他知道一般人喜欢用天来发誓，孔子被子路怀疑，他不用过去的事来证明自己不会干卑鄙的事，而说： 天塌下来压死我 ，这跟庸俗的人为解脱嫌疑，而指天发誓、赌咒，有什么两样呢？
English: This is Yu stating what he has done, trying to deduce the future based on the past, and using the current events to deduce what has not yet happened, in order to prove that he does not dare to prefer his son who has no prospects, but he does not say: If I prefer my son, the sky will fall down and crush me, because he knows that ordinary people like to swear by the sky, and Confucius is suspected by the way. He does not use past events to prove that he will not do despicable things, but says: The sky will fall down and crush me. What is the difference between this and vulgar people who swear and swear by the sky to get rid of suspicion?

古文：孔子曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 凤凰不飞来，黄河中没有图出现，我的一生已经完了！ 
English: Confucius said, "If the phoenix does not fly, and no map appears in the Yellow River, then my life is over!"

古文：夫子自伤不王也。
现代文：这是孔子自己悲伤没有当王。
English: This was due to Confucius's own grief at not becoming king.

古文：己王，致太平；太平则凤鸟至，河出图矣。
现代文：他认为自己当了王，能使天下太平；天下太平，那么凤凰就会飞来，黄河中就会有图出现。
English: He thought that if he became king, he could make the world peaceful; if the world was peaceful, then the phoenix would fly and the dragonfly would appear in the Yellow River.

古文：今不得王，故瑞应不至，悲心自伤，故曰 吾已矣夫 。
现代文：如今没有能当上王，所以吉祥的征兆不出现，自己感到悲痛伤感，因此说 我的一生已经完了 ！
English: Now I can't become king, so the auspicious signs don't appear, I feel sad and sad, so I say that my life is over!

古文：问曰：凤鸟、河图，审何据始起？
现代文：请问：凤凰飞来、河图出现，究竟根据什么来的呢？
English: Excuse me: What is the basis for the appearance of the phoenix flying and the river map?

古文：始起之时，鸟、图未至；如据太平，太平之帝，未必常致凤鸟与河图也。
现代文：如果根据帝王开始兴起的时候，那么凤鸟、河图都未必出现；如果根据天下太平，使天下太平的帝王，又未必总能招来凤凰和河图。
English: If it is based on the time when emperors began to rise, then phoenixes and river maps may not appear; if it is based on world peace, the emperor who makes the world peaceful may not always be able to attract phoenixes and river maps.

古文：五帝、三王，皆致太平。
现代文：五帝三王都曾使得天下太平，但考察他们的吉兆，并不都以凤凰作为必然的祥瑞。
English: Five emperors and three kings have made the world peaceful, but when examining their good omens, they do not all take the phoenix as the inevitable auspiciousness.

古文：案其瑞应，不皆凤皇为必然之瑞；於太平，凤皇为未必然之应。孔子，圣人也，思未必然以自伤，终不应矣。
现代文：既然对于天下太平，凤凰不是必然的吉兆，孔子是圣人，总想着不是必然出现的事情而自我感伤，这终究不会应验的。
English: Since the phoenix is not necessarily a good omen for world peace, and Confucius is a saint, always thinking about things that are not inevitable and feeling sorry for yourself will not come true.

古文：或曰：孔子不自伤不得王也，伤时无明王，故己不用也。
现代文：有人说： 孔子不是自己感伤没有能当帝王，而是感伤当时没有圣明的帝王，所以自己不被重用。
English: Some people say: Confucius is not sentimental about not being able to be emperor, but he is sentimental about not being emperor at that time, so he is not reused.

古文：凤鸟、河图，明王之瑞也。
现代文：凤凰、河图是圣明帝王的祥瑞。
English: The phoenix and the map of the river represent the auspiciousness of Emperor Shengming.

古文：瑞应不至，时无明王；明王不存，己遂不用矣。
现代文：祥瑞不出现，说明当时没有圣明帝王；圣明帝王不存在，自己就不能被重用。 
English: Xiang Rui did not appear, indicating that there was no Emperor Shengming at that time; Emperor Shengming did not exist, and he could not be reused.

古文：夫致瑞应，何以致之？
现代文：说到招致瑞应，它是用什么招来的呢？
English: Speaking of attracting Rui Ying, what did it use to attract her?

古文：任贤使能，治定功成；治定功成，则瑞应至矣。
现代文：如果是靠任用贤能的人，使统治稳定，功业告成。那么统治稳定，功业告成，瑞应就该出现了。
English: If it is by appointing a capable person to make the reign stable and the work accomplished, then the reign stable and the work accomplished, Rui Ying should have appeared.

古文：瑞应至後，亦不须孔子。
现代文：瑞应出现之后，也就不再需要孔子了。
English: After Rui Ying appeared, Confucius was no longer needed.

古文：孔子所望，何其末也！
现代文：孔子盼望的，怎么本末倒置呢！
English: What Confucius hoped for, has been turned upside down!

古文：不思其本而望其末也。不相其主而名其物，治有未定，物有不至，以至而效明王，必失之矣。
现代文：不考虑根本问题，而盼望那些旁枝末节，不看那些君主英不英明，却去说那些凤凰、河图出不出现。即使出现了圣明帝王，由于国家统治有不稳定的时候，凤凰、河图也有可能不出现，因此以祥瑞的出现来证明圣明帝王的出现，必然会出错。
English: Without considering the fundamental problems, they look forward to those side branches and branches, and do not look at those monarchs whether they are wise or not, but say that those phoenixes and river maps will not appear. Even if the Holy Emperor Ming appears, due to the instability of the country's rule, the phoenixes and river maps may not appear, so it will be a mistake to prove the appearance of the Holy Emperor Ming with the appearance of Xiang Rui.

古文：孝文皇帝可谓明矣，案其《本纪》，不见凤鸟与河图。
现代文：汉文帝可以说是圣明了，但察看一下《史记·孝文本纪》，也没有出现过凤鸟跟河图的记载。
English: Emperor Hanwen can be said to be holy and wise, but if you look at the "Histories and Chronicles of Filial Piety," there is no record of the phoenix bird and the river map.

古文：使孔子在孝文之世，犹曰 吾已矣夫 。
现代文：假使孔子生在汉文帝的时代，大概还会说： 我的一生已经完了！ 
English: If Confucius were born in the era of Emperor Hanwen, he would probably say: My life is over!

古文：子欲居九夷，或曰： 陋，如之何？ 
现代文：孔子想到九夷地方去居住，有人说： 那儿太落后，怎么办？ 
English: When Confucius wanted to live in Jiujiang, some people said, "It's too backward, what should we do?"

古文：子曰： 君子居之，何陋之有！ 
现代文：孔子说： 君子住在那儿，怎么会落后呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If a gentleman lives there, how can he be a scoundrel?"

古文：孔子疾道不行於中国，志恨失意，故欲之九夷也。
现代文：孔子恨他的政治主张在中原各国行不通，感到怨恨不得志，所以想去九夷地方。
English: Confucius hated that his political ideas could not work in the Central Plains countries. He felt resentful and discouraged, so he wanted to go to Jiujiang.

古文：或人难之曰： 夷狄之鄙陋无礼义，如之何？ 
现代文：有人责难他说： 少数民族地区落后，没有礼义，怎么办？ 
English: Some people reproached him and said, "What should we do about the backwardness and lack of courtesy in ethnic minority areas?"

古文：孔子曰： 君子居之，何陋之有？ 
现代文：孔子说： 君子住在那儿，怎么会落后呢？ 
English: Confucius said: If a gentleman lives there, how can he be backward?

古文：言以君子之道，居而教之，何为陋乎？
现代文：这是说住在那儿用 君子之道 教导他们，怎么会落后呢？
English: That is to say, how can you be backward if you live there and teach them the way of a gentleman?

古文：问之曰：孔子欲之九夷者，何起乎？
现代文：请问：孔子想去九夷地方，是怎样引起来的？
English: Excuse me: Confucius wanted to go to Jiujiang, how did he come up with the idea?

古文：起道不行於中国，故欲之九夷。
现代文：是他的政治主张在中原各国行不通引起的，所以他想去九夷地方。
English: It was caused by the fact that his political ideas would not work in the Central Plains countries, so he wanted to go to the Jiujiang area.

古文：夫中国且不行，安能行於夷狄？ 夷狄之有君，不若诸夏之亡 。
现代文：试想在中原各国尚且行不通，怎么能在少数民族地区行得通呢？ 少数民族有君主，还不如中原地区还没有君主。 
English: Just imagine, if it is not feasible in the Central Plains countries, how can it be feasible in ethnic minority areas? Ethnic minorities have monarchs, but it is not as good as the Central Plains region does not have a monarch.

古文：言夷狄之难，诸夏之易也。
现代文：这是说少数民族难得治理，中原地区容易治理。
English: This means that ethnic minorities are difficult to govern, while the Central Plains region is easy to govern.

古文：不能行於易，能行於难乎？
现代文：在容易治理的地方尚且行不通，在难得治理的地方能行得通吗？
English: It has not worked in places that are easy to govern, but can it work in places that are difficult to govern?

古文：且孔子云： 以君子居之者，何谓陋邪？ 
现代文：况且孔子说 作为君子住在那儿，怎么会落后呢？ 
English: Besides, Confucius said, if you live there as a gentleman, how can you fall behind?

古文：谓修君子之道自容乎？
现代文：这话，是在说以 君子之道 进行修养使自己能安身呢？
English: Does this mean cultivating oneself in the manner of a gentleman so as to be able to settle down?

古文：谓以君子之道教之也？
现代文：还是在说用 君子之道 去教化他们呢？
English: Or are you talking about using the gentleman's way to educate them?

古文：如修君子之道苟自容，中国亦可，何必之夷狄？
现代文：如果是以 君子之道 进行修养随便使自己能安下身来，那么在中原各国也可以，何必要去少数民族地区呢？
English: If you cultivate yourself in a gentlemanly way so that you can settle down, then you can do it in the Central Plains countries, why do you need to go to ethnic minority areas?

古文：如以君子之道教之，夷狄安可教乎？
现代文：如果用 君子之道 去教化他们，而少数民族怎么能教化得了呢？
English: If we use the gentlemanly way to educate them, how can ethnic minorities be educated?

古文：禹入裸国，裸入衣出，衣服之制不通於夷狄也。
现代文：禹到裸国去，要脱掉衣服进去，出来后再穿衣服，这是因为要穿衣服的规定在少数民族地区行不通。
English: When Yu went to the naked country, he had to take off his clothes to go in, and then put them on again when he came out. This is because the requirement to wear clothes does not work in ethnic minority areas.

古文：禹不能教裸国衣服，孔子何能使九夷为君子？
现代文：禹尚且不能教化裸国人穿衣服，孔子又怎么能让东部少数民族成为君子呢？
English: Yu Shang could not teach the naked people to wear clothes, how could Confucius make the eastern ethnic minorities become gentlemen?

古文：或： 孔子实不欲往，患道不行，动发此言。
现代文：或许孔子本来不想去，是恨他的政治主张行不通，一时激动说出这样的话。
English: Perhaps Confucius did not want to go in the first place, because he hated the fact that his political ideas did not work, and he was momentarily excited to say such a thing.

古文：或人难之，孔子知其陋，然而犹曰 何陋之有 者，欲遂已然，距或人之谏也。 
现代文：或许是有人责难孔子，孔子也知道那儿落后，然而还要说 怎么会落后 ，是想坚持已经说过的话，拒绝别人的劝告。
English: Perhaps someone rebuked Confucius, and Confucius also knew that there was a backwardness, but he still said, "How can there be a backwardness?" because he wanted to stick to what he had already said and reject the advice of others.

古文：实不欲往，志动发言，是伪言也。君子於言无所苟矣。
现代文：孔子实际不想去，一时心情激动说出来的，是句假话。 君子说话不该这样随便。 
English: Confucius did not really want to go, and what he said out of a momentary excitement was a lie. A gentleman should not speak so casually.

古文：如知其陋，苟欲自遂，此子路对孔子以子羔也。子路使子羔为费宰，子曰： 贼夫人之子。 
现代文：如果明知那儿落后，还要勉强想自己坚持已说过的话，这就正和子路回答孔子关于子羔的事一样。 子路让子羔做郈的地方长官，孔子说： 简直是在害别人的子弟。 
English: If, knowing that there is a backwardness there, you still reluctantly want to stick to what you have said, this is exactly the same as Zilu's answer to Confucius about the lamb. Zilu let the lamb be the local governor, Confucius said: It is really harming other people's children.

古文：子路曰： 有社稷焉，有民人焉，何必读书，然後为学？ 
现代文：子路说： 那里有政权机构，有老百姓，为什么一定要读书，然后才算学习呢？ 
English: Zilu said: Where there are government agencies and ordinary people, why do they have to read before they can be considered to be studying?

古文：子曰： 是故恶夫佞者。 
现代文：孔子说： 所以我讨厌那些强词夺理的人！  
English: The son said, "That's why I hate people who can speak well."

古文：子路知其不可，苟欲自遂，孔子恶之，比夫佞者。
现代文：这是子路知道自己不对，勉强回答以自圆其说，所以孔子讨厌他，把他比做那些强词夺理的人。
English: This is because Zilu knows that he is wrong and reluctantly answers to justify himself, so Confucius hates him and compares him to those who use strong words to argue.

古文：孔子亦知其不可，苟应或人。
现代文：孔子也明知自己不对，还勉强回答别人的责难。
English: Confucius also knew that he was wrong, and he reluctantly answered the criticisms of others.

古文：孔子、子路皆以佞也。
现代文：这样孔子和子路都成了强词夺理的人了。
English: In this way, both Confucius and Zilu have become people who use strong words to escape from reason.

古文：孔子曰： 赐不受命而货殖焉，亿则屡中。 
现代文：孔子说： 端木赐没有禀受天命而做买卖，猜测行情却往往猜中。 
English: Confucius said: It is not given to a man to do business, but it is given to him to guess the market.

古文：何谓不受命乎？
现代文：什么叫： 没有禀受天命 呢？
English: What does it mean to say, "No one is predestined"?

古文：说曰：受当富之命，自以术知数亿中时也。
现代文：有人解释说： 就是没有禀受应该发财致富的命，而自己靠本领和智慧，多次猜中了物价涨落的时机。 
English: Some people explained: They just didn't want to suffer the fate of being rich, and by their own ability and wisdom, they repeatedly guessed the timing of the rise and fall of prices.

古文：夫人富贵，在天命乎？
现代文：人富贵在于天命呢？
English: Is it destiny that makes people rich?

古文：在人知也？
现代文：还是在于人的智慧呢？
English: Or is it human wisdom?

古文：如在天命，知术求之不能得；如在人，孔子何为言 死生有命，富贵在天 ？
现代文：如果在于天命，那么靠本领和智慧寻求它是得不到的；如果在人的智慧，那么孔子为什么要说 生死有命安排，富贵由天决定 呢？
English: If it lies in the fate of heaven, then it cannot be obtained by relying on ability and wisdom; if it is in human wisdom, then why did Confucius say that life and death have life and death arrangements, and wealth is determined by heaven?

古文：夫谓富不受命，而自知术得之，贵亦可不受命，而自以努力求之。
现代文：说发财致富不禀受天命而是凭自己用本领和智慧得到它，那么做官发达也可以不禀受天命而凭自己努力奋斗得到了。
English: If it is said that getting rich is not a matter of fate, but of using one's own ability and wisdom to get it, then it is also possible to be a well-developed official without accepting one's fate, but by one's own efforts.

古文：世无不受贵命而自得贵，亦知无不受富命而自得富得者。
现代文：世上没有不禀受贵命而靠自己努力能当官发达的，因而也可以知道世上没有不禀受富命而靠自己本领和智慧能发财致富的。
English: There is no one in the world who can be promoted to a high-ranking position by his or her own efforts, and there is no one in the world who can get rich by his or her own ability and wisdom.

古文：成事，孔子不得富贵矣，周流应聘，行说诸侯，智穷策困，还定《诗》、《书》，望绝无翼，称 已矣夫 自知无贵命，周流无补益也。
现代文：已有的事例是：孔子没有做官发达，就周游列国接受聘请，到处游说诸侯，智慧用尽，计谋不行，只得返回鲁国删定《诗经》、《尚书》，由于感到绝望，所以说 一辈子已经完了 。孔子自己知道没有贵命，而去周游列国也没有得到什么好处。
English: There are already examples: Confucius did not make a developed official, he traveled around the countries to accept employment, lobbied the lords everywhere, exhausted his wisdom, could not strategize, and had to return to Lu to delete the "Song of Songs" and the "Book of Songs." Because he felt desperate, he said that his life was over. Confucius himself knew that there was no noble life, and he did not get any benefit from traveling around the countries.

古文：孔子知己不受贵命，周流求之不能得，而谓赐不受富命，而以术知得富，言行相违，未晓其故。
现代文：孔子知道自己没有禀受贵命，于是周游列国寻求当官却得不到，但是说瑞木赐没有禀受富命却凭自己本领和智慧能发财致富，孔子说的和做的互相违背，不晓得是什么缘故。
English: Confucius knew that he did not receive a precious life, so he traveled around the countries to seek officials but could not get them. However, he said that Shunmu did not receive a rich life but could get rich with his own ability and wisdom. What Confucius said and did contradicted each other, I don't know why.

古文：或曰： 欲攻子贡之短也。子贡不好道德而徒好货殖，故攻其短，欲令穷服而更其行节。 
现代文： 有人说： 孔子是想指责子贡的短处，因为子贡不喜欢道德修养，而只喜欢做买卖，所以指责他的短处，想叫他辞穷信服而改变他的行为。 
English: Some people said: Confucius wanted to point out the shortcomings of Zigong, because Zigong did not like moral cultivation, but only liked to do business, so he pointed out his shortcomings and wanted him to change his behavior.

古文：夫攻子贡之短，可言赐不好道德而货殖焉，何必立不受命，与前言富贵在天相违反也？
现代文：其实，孔子每日指责子贡的短处，可以直说 端木赐不喜欢道德修养而喜欢做买卖 ，为什么一定要提出 不禀受天命 的话，来跟他以前说过的 富贵由天来决定 的话相矛盾呢？
English: In fact, Confucius daily criticized the shortcomings of tithes, and it can be said that Duanmu did not like moral cultivation but liked to do business. Why did he have to put forward the words "not subject to the fate of heaven" to contradict what he had said before, "wealth is determined by heaven"?

古文：颜渊死，子曰： 噫！
现代文：颜渊死了，孔子说： 唉！
English: Yan Yuan died, Confucius said: Alas!

古文：天丧予！ 
现代文：老天要我的命啊！ 
English: I'll be damned!

古文：此言人将起，天与之辅；人将废，天夺其佑。
现代文：这是说人要兴起，天会给他得力的辅佐；人要衰败，天会夺去他亲近的人。
English: This means that if a person wants to rise, the heavens will give him powerful assistance; if a person wants to decline, the heavens will take away those who are close to him.

古文：孔子有四友，欲因而起，颜渊早夭，故曰 天丧予 。
现代文：孔子有四个得力的学生，想靠他们兴起作一番事业。颜渊早死，所以孔子说 天要我的命啊！ 
English: Confucius had four capable students, and he wanted to rely on them to rise up and make a career. Yan Yuan died early, so Confucius said, "Heaven wants my life!"

古文：问曰：颜渊之死，孔子不王，天夺之邪？不幸短命自为死也？
现代文：请问：颜渊的死，是孔子命定不能当帝王，天夺去了他的命呢，还是他不幸短命自己死去的呢？
English: Excuse me: Yan Yuan's death, is it that Confucius decreed that he could not be emperor, and heaven took his life, or did he unfortunately die young?

古文：如短命不幸，不得不死，孔子虽王，犹不得生。
现代文：如果是不幸短命，那不得不死，孔子即是当了帝王，还是不得活。
English: If it is short-lived, it will have to die, and Confucius will not be able to live even if he becomes emperor.

古文：辅之於人，犹杖之扶疾也。
现代文：辅佐对于君主，就像拐杖扶持病人一样。
English: Aides are to a monarch as crutches are to a sick man.

古文：人有病，须杖而行；如斩杖本得短，可谓天使病人不得行乎？
现代文：人有了疾病，必须扶拐杖才能走路；如果砍的拐杖本来就短，能说是天让病人不能走路吗？
English: When a person has a disease, he must use a cane to walk. If the cane is short, can it be said that the patient cannot walk?

古文：如能起行，杖短能使之长乎？
现代文：要是病人能起来走路，本来短的拐杖能使它变长吗？
English: If a patient can get up and walk, can a short cane make them walk longer?

古文：夫颜渊之短命，犹杖之短度也。
现代文：看来，颜渊的短命，就像拐杖短了尺寸一样。
English: It seems that Yan Yuan's short life is like a crutch with a short size.

古文：且孔子言 天丧予 者，以颜渊贤也。
现代文：孔子说： 天要我的命 ，是因为颜渊特别贤能。
English: Confucius said: Heaven wants my life, because Yan Yuan is particularly virtuous.

古文：案贤者在世，未必为辅也。
现代文：考查一下，贤能的人在世上，不一定是帝王的辅佐。
English: As a matter of fact, it is not necessarily the emperor's aides who are the most virtuous people in the world.

古文：夫贤者未必为辅，犹圣人未必受命也。
现代文：贤能的人不一定成为帝王的辅佐，就像圣人不一定禀受天命成为帝王一样。
English: A virtuous person does not necessarily become the emperor's assistant, just as a saint is not necessarily destined to become the emperor.

古文：为帝有不圣，为辅有不贤。
现代文：当帝王有不是贤圣的，作辅佐有不是贤能的。
English: It is not virtuous to be an emperor, and it is not virtuous to be an assistant.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：禄命骨法，与才异也。
现代文：因为人的禄命、骨相，跟人的才能不是一回事。
English: Because a person's luck, fortune, and bone structure are not the same as a person's talent.

古文：由此言之，颜渊生未必为辅，其死未必有丧。孔子云 天丧予 ，何据见哉？
现代文：由此说来，颜渊活着未必是孔子很得力的助手，他死了也未必对孔子有损失，孔子却说： 天要我的命 ，这话的根据又是什么呢？
English: From this, Yan Yuan may not have been a very effective assistant to Confucius when he was alive, and he may not have been a loss to Confucius when he died. However, Confucius said: Heaven wants my life. What is the basis for this statement?

古文：且天不使孔子王者，本意如何？
现代文：况且，上天不让孔子作帝王，它原来的意思是什么呢？
English: Besides, heaven forbid that Confucius should become emperor. What did it originally mean?

古文：本禀性命之时，不使之王邪，将使之王，复中悔之也？
现代文：是在最初禀受生命和禄命的时候就不让他当帝王呢，还是决定让他当帝王而又中途翻悔了呢？
English: Did they not let him become emperor at the time when his life and fortune were at stake, or did they decide to let him become emperor and then changed their minds halfway through?

古文：如本不使之王，颜渊死，何丧？
现代文：如果原来就不让他当帝王，颜渊死了，有什么损失呢？
English: If he had not been allowed to become emperor and Yan Yuan died, what would have been the loss?

古文：如本使之王，复中悔之，此王无骨法，便宜自在天也。
现代文：如果原来让他当帝王，又中途翻悔，这是说当帝王没有骨相，本来可以由天来随便更改的。
English: If he was originally allowed to become emperor, and then changed his mind halfway through, this means that the emperor had no bone structure and could have been changed at will by the heavens.

古文：且本何善所见，而使之王？
现代文：再说，天原来见到他什么长处而决定让他当帝王呢？
English: Besides, what advantage did Heaven see in him that it decided to make him emperor?

古文：後何恶所闻，中悔不命？
现代文：以后又听到了他什么短处而中途翻悔不授命于他了呢？
English: Did you later hear about his shortcomings and change your mind and not give him the order?

古文：天神论议，误不谛也？
现代文：看来，孔子关于天很神灵的议论，是荒谬而无法弄清楚的。
English: It seems that Confucius's argument that the heavens are very divine is absurd and cannot be clarified.

古文：孔子之卫，遇旧馆人之丧，入而哭之。
现代文：孔子去卫国，遇见从前住过的旅馆为办事的人办丧事，就进去哭他。
English: When Confucius went to defend his country, he met a man from the hotel where he had stayed in the past who was in charge of a funeral. He went in and cried for him.

古文：出使子贡脱骖而赙之。
现代文：出来后，让子贡解下一匹骖马来给他作丧礼。
English: After he came out, he asked Zigong to untie a horse to give him a funeral.

古文：子贡曰： 於门人之丧，未有所脱骖。脱骖於旧馆，毋乃已重乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 在弟子的丧事中，你从没有解下骖马作丧礼的，而在为从前住过的旅馆中的办事人举丧中却解下骖马来作丧礼，不是太重了吗？ 
English: Zigong said, "In the funeral of your disciple, you never dismounted your horse for the funeral, but in the funeral of the clerk of the hotel you used to stay in, you dismounted your horse for the funeral. Isn't it too heavy?"

古文：孔子曰： 予乡者入而哭之，遇於一哀而出涕，予恶夫涕之无从也，小子行之。 
现代文：孔子说： 我刚才进去哭他，刚好心理难过就流出了眼泪。我埋怨自己只流眼泪而没有相应的表示，小子你就这样办吧。 
English: Confucius said, "I just went in to cry for him, and just as I was feeling sad, I shed tears. I complained that I only shed tears and did not express myself accordingly. Kid, you can do it this way."

古文：孔子脱骖以赙旧馆者，恶情不副礼也。
现代文：孔子之所以卸骖马用来作过去旅馆办事人的丧礼，是因为埋怨自己只流露感情而不配合送礼。
English: The reason why Confucius dismounted his horse and used it for the funeral of a former hotel clerk was because he complained that he only showed his feelings and did not cooperate with the gift-giving.

古文：副情而行礼，情起而恩动，礼情相应，君子行之。
现代文：配合感情要赠送礼物，动了感情，礼物就要随着送去。礼物与感情要相称，君子都是这样做的。
English: Gifts should be given in accordance with one's feelings. If one is moved by one's feelings, the gift should be sent along with it. Gifts should be commensurate with one's feelings. This is what gentlemen do.

古文：颜渊死，子哭之恸。
现代文：颜渊死了，孔子哭得非常悲痛。
English: Yan Yuan died, and Confucius wept bitterly.

古文：门人曰： 子恸矣。 
现代文：弟子们说： 老师太悲伤了。 
English: The disciples said, "The teacher is too sad."

古文： 吾非斯人之恸而为？ 
现代文：孔子说： 我不为这样的人悲痛还为谁悲痛呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If I do not grieve for such a man, who should I grieve for?"

古文：夫恸，哀之至也。
现代文：恸，是悲痛到极点的意思。
English: , is the meaning of grief to the extreme.

古文：哭颜渊恸者，殊之众徒，哀痛之甚也。
现代文：孔子哭颜渊非常悲痛，与一般弟子有区别，显得哀痛极深。
English: Confucius crying Yan Yuan is very sad, different from ordinary disciples, and appears to be very sad.

古文：死有棺无椁，颜路请车以为之椁，孔子不予，为大夫不可以徒行也。
现代文：颜渊死了，有棺无椁，颜路请孔子卖掉车来为颜渊买椁，孔子不给，认为当大夫的出门不可步行。
English: Yan Yuan is dead, there is no coffin, Yan Lu asked Confucius to sell his car to buy a coffin for Yan Yuan, but Confucius refused, saying that a doctor should not go out on foot.

古文：吊旧馆，脱骖以赙，恶涕无从；哭颜渊恸，请车不与，使恸无副。
现代文：吊唁以前旅馆的办事人，要卸下骖马作丧礼，不然会埋怨自己光流泪而没有相应的表示；哭颜渊如此悲痛，请求卖掉车给颜渊买椁却不给，这样即使很悲痛也没有丧礼相配合。
English: The clerk of the former hotel of condolences had to unload the horse for the funeral, otherwise he would complain that he shed tears but did not express it accordingly; Yan Yuan was so sad, he asked to sell the car to Yan Yuan to buy a horse but did not give it, so even if he was very sad, there was no funeral to match.

古文：岂涕与恸殊，马与车异邪？
现代文：难道流泪和悲痛有区别，用马与车作丧礼有不同吗？
English: Is there a difference between shedding tears and grieving, and between using horses and cars for funerals?

古文：於彼则礼情相副，於此则恩义不称，未晓孔子为礼之意。
现代文：对于那从前旅馆的办事人就要丧礼与感情相称，而对于这颜渊就可以丧礼与感情不符，真不知道孔子对丧礼的做法是什么意思。
English: For the clerk of the former hotel, the funeral must be commensurate with the feelings, but for this abyss, the funeral can be inconsistent with the feelings. I really don't know what Confucius means about the funeral.

古文：孔子曰： 鲤也死，有棺无椁，吾不徒行以为之椁。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲤死了，也有棺无椁，我不能卖掉车步行出门来为他买椁。 
English: Confucius said, "If the donkey died and the coffin was empty, I couldn't sell my car and go out on foot to buy the donkey for him.

古文：鲤之恩深於颜渊，鲤死无椁，大夫之仪，不可徒行也。
现代文：孔子对鲤的恩情比颜渊深厚，鲤死了没有椁，是因为当大夫的礼仪不能步行出门。
English: Confucius's kindness to the baboons was deeper than the abyss. The baboons died without the baboons, because the etiquette of being a doctor did not allow them to go out on foot.

古文：鲤，子也；颜渊，他姓也。
现代文：鲤，是孔子的儿子；颜渊，是异姓的人。
English: Zou, is the son of Confucius; Yan Yuan, is a person with a different surname.

古文：子死且不礼，况其礼他姓之人乎？
现代文：儿子死了尚且不按丧礼行事，何况他姓的人能按丧礼行事吗？
English: If a man's son dies, and he does not perform the funeral rites, how much more will the man who bears his name perform the funeral rites?

古文：曰：是盖孔子实恩之效也。
现代文：有人说： 这大概是孔子按实际情况施恩的证明。 
English: Some people said: This is probably a proof of Confucius's benevolence according to the actual situation.

古文：副情於旧馆，不称恩於子，岂以前为士，後为大夫哉？
现代文：孔子对从前旅馆的办事人丧礼与感情相称，对自己的儿子丧葬与感情不相称，这难道因为从前是士，后来做了大夫吗？
English: Is it because Confucius was once a scholar and later became a doctor that the funeral of a former hotel clerk is commensurate with his feelings, but the funeral of his own son is not?

古文：如前为士，士乘二马；如为大夫，大夫乘三马。
现代文：如果从前是士，士坐二匹马的车；如果做了大夫，大夫坐三匹马的车。
English: If you were a scholar, you rode in a two-horse carriage; if you were a doctor, you rode in a three-horse carriage.

古文：大夫不可去车徒行，何不截卖两马以为椁，乘其一乎？
现代文：大夫不能弃车步行，为什么不卖掉两匹马来买椁，改坐那一匹马的车呢？
English: The doctor can't abandon the car and walk, so why not sell two horses to buy a donkey and ride that horse's car instead?

古文：为士时乘二马，截一以赙旧馆，今亦何不截其二以副恩，乘一以解不徒行乎？
现代文：为士的时候坐二匹马的车，可以解下一匹马来作从前旅馆办事人的丧礼，如今也何不卖掉二匹马买椁来以便跟感情相称，而坐一匹马的车解决步行问题呢？
English: When travelling in a two-horse carriage, one horse can be dismounted for the funeral of a former hotel clerk. Now, why not sell two horses and buy a donkey to match the emotions, and travel in a one-horse carriage to solve the problem of walking?

古文：不脱马以赙旧馆，未必乱制。葬子有棺无椁，废礼伤法。
现代文：孔子不解下一匹马来作从前旅馆办事人的丧礼，不一定违反礼制；埋葬自己儿子有棺无椁，却破坏了礼制。
English: Confucius did not necessarily violate the etiquette by not untying a horse for the funeral of a former hotel clerk; however, he broke the etiquette by burying his own son with an intact coffin.

古文：孔子重赙旧人之恩，轻废葬子之礼。此礼得於他人，制失亲子也。
现代文：孔子看重要与从前旅馆办事人的恩情相称，但却随便破坏埋葬自己儿子的礼制，这是对外人符合礼制，而对亲生儿子违背礼制。
English: Confucius considered it important to be worthy of the kindness of the former hotel clerk, but he casually destroyed the etiquette of burying his son. This was in line with the etiquette for outsiders, but against the etiquette for his own son.

古文：然则孔子不粥车以为鲤椁，何以解於贪官好仕恐无车？
现代文：那么孔子不肯卖车来为鲤买椁，又怎么能解释自己贪恋官位害怕出门没有车子呢？
English: So how can Confucius explain his reluctance to sell his car in order to buy a new one for his wife, and how can he explain his greed for an official position and his fear of going out without a car?

古文：而自云 君子杀身以成仁 ，何难退位以成礼？
现代文：孔子自己说过： 君子宁可牺牲生命来成全仁义 ，怎么会难于放弃大夫地位来成全礼制呢？
English: Confucius himself said, "A gentleman would rather sacrifice his life to accomplish benevolence and righteousness, how can it be more difficult than giving up his position as a doctor to accomplish etiquette?"

古文：子贡问政，子曰： 足食，足兵，民信之矣。 
现代文：子贡问治理国家的办法。孔子说： 使粮食充足，使军备充足，取得老百姓的信任。 
English: Confucius said: make grain sufficient, make armaments sufficient, and win the trust of the common people.

古文：曰： 必不得已而去，於斯三者何先？ 
现代文：子贡说： 如果迫不得已要去掉一个，在这三者中该先去掉谁呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "If you have to get rid of one, which one should you get rid of first?"

古文：曰： 去兵。 
现代文：孔子说： 去掉军备。 
English: Confucius said: Abolish armaments.

古文：曰： 必不得已而去，於斯二者何先？ 
现代文：子贡说： 要是迫不得已还要去掉一个，在这二者中该先去掉谁呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "If you have to get rid of one, which one should you get rid of first?"

古文：曰： 去食。
现代文：孔子说： 去掉粮食。
English: Confucius said: Eliminate grain.

古文：自古皆有死，民无信不立。 
现代文：自古以来人都要死，而没有老百姓的信任，国家就站不住脚。 
English: Since ancient times, people have always wanted to die. If the people do not trust the rulers, the country cannot stand on its own feet.

古文：信最重也。
现代文：可见，取得老百姓的信任是最重要的。
English: It can be seen that gaining the trust of the people is the most important thing.

古文：问：使治国无食，民饿，弃礼义礼义弃，信安所立？
现代文：请问：假使治理国家没有粮食，老百姓饥饿，就会抛弃礼义。礼义被抛弃，信任怎么建立呢？
English: Excuse me: if there is no food to govern the country and the people are hungry, they will abandon propriety. If propriety is abandoned, how can trust be established?

古文：传曰： 仓禀实，知礼节；衣食足，知荣辱。 
现代文：传书上说： 粮仓充实了，老百姓才知道礼节；衣食丰足了，老百姓才懂得荣辱。 
English: It is said in the biography: When the granary is full, the common people will know the etiquette; when the food and clothing are plentiful, the common people will know the honor and disgrace.

古文：让生於有余，争生於不足。
现代文：礼让从富裕产生，争夺从贫因而来。
English: Compromise comes from affluence, competition from poverty.

古文：今言去食，信安得成？
现代文：如今说 去掉粮食 ，那么信任怎么建立呢？
English: Now that we are talking about eliminating food, how can trust be established?

古文：春秋之时，战国饥饿，易子而食析，骸而炊，口饥不食，不暇顾恩义也。
现代文：春秋的时候，交战各国发生饥荒，人们相互交换孩子来吃，劈开死人骨头来烧火，这是由于肚子饥饿没有吃的，无空来顾及什么恩义。
English: In spring and autumn, when famine occurred in the belligerent countries, people exchanged children with each other to eat, and split the bones of the dead to make fire. This was due to the fact that they had no food in their stomachs, and had no time to consider any gratitude.

古文：夫父子之恩，信矣。饥饿弃信，以子为食。
现代文：父子的恩情，是最可靠的，由于饥饿这种信任被迫抛弃，用孩子来作为粮食。
English: The kindness of father and son is the most reliable, because of hunger, this trust is forced to abandon, using the child as food.

古文：孔子教子贡去食存信，如何？
现代文：孔子教子贡放弃粮食保存信任，怎么行呢？
English: How is it possible for Confucius and Confucius' disciple Gong to give up the trust of grain preservation?

古文：夫去信存食，虽不欲信，信自生矣；去食存信，虽欲为信，信不立矣。
现代文：放弃信任保存粮食，虽然不想得到信任，但信任会自然建立；放弃粮食保全信任，虽然想取得信任，但信任却无法建立。
English: Abandoning trust to preserve food, although you don't want to get trust, trust will naturally be established; abandoning trust to preserve food, although you want to get trust, trust can't be established.

古文：子适卫，冉子仆，子曰： 庶矣哉！ 
现代文：孔子去卫国，冉求给他赶车。孔子说： 卫国人真多啊！ 
English: When Confucius went to defend the country, Ran begged him to drive him. Confucius said, "There are so many patriots!

古文：曰： 既庶矣，又何加焉？ 
现代文：冉求问： 人已经很多了，还该做些什么呢？ 
English: Ran Qiu asked: There are already a lot of people, what else should we do?

古文：曰： 富之。 
现代文：孔子回答： 让他们富裕起来。 
English: Confucius said: Let them get rich.

古文：曰： 既富矣，又何加焉？ 曰： 教之。 
现代文：冉求又问： 他们已经富裕了，还该做些什么呢？ 孔子回答： 教育他们 。
English: Ran Qiu asked again: They are already rich, what else should they do? Confucius answered: Educate them.

古文：语冉子先富而後教之，教子贡去食而存信。
现代文：孔子告诉冉求先富裕起来而后教育老百姓，教导子贡是先抛弃粮食来保全信任。
English: Confucius told Ran to seek wealth first and then educate the common people, and to teach Zigong to discard grain first in order to maintain trust.

古文：食与富何别？
现代文：粮食和富裕有什么分别？
English: What is the difference between food and wealth?

古文：信与教何异？
现代文：信任与教育有什么不同？
English: What is the difference between trust and education?

古文：二子殊教，所尚不同，孔子为国，意何定哉？
现代文：对两个学生的教导不一样，所倡导的内容也不同，孔子治理国家，其政治主张是根据什么来定的呢？
English: The teachings for the two students are different, and the content advocated is also different. Confucius governed the country, and his political views were based on what?

古文：蘧伯玉使人於孔子，孔子曰： 夫子何为乎？ 
现代文：蘧伯玉派人去问候孔子。孔子说： 他老先生在干什么？ 
English: Zibo Yu sent someone to greet Confucius. Confucius said: What is his old master doing?

古文：对曰： 夫子欲寡其过而未能也。 
现代文：使者回答说： 他老先生想减少自己的过错但还没有做到。 
English: The messenger replied, "The teacher wants to reduce his mistakes, but he hasn't been able to yet.

古文：使者出，孔子曰： 使乎！
现代文：使者告辞出去，孔子说： 有这样的使者！
English: When the messenger left, Confucius said, "Such a messenger!

古文：使乎！ 
现代文：有这样的使者！ 
English: What a messenger!

古文：非之也。
现代文：这是在责备使者。
English: This is blaming the messenger.

古文：说《论语》者，曰： 非之者，非其代人谦也。 
现代文：解释《论语》的人说： 孔子责备他，是责备使者代替主人表示谦虚。 
English: Those who interpret the Analects say: Confucius rebuked him, rebuking the messenger in place of the master to show modesty.

古文：夫孔子之问使者曰： 夫子何为 ，问所治为，非问操行也。
现代文：孔子问使者说 他老先生在干什么 ，问的是在政治上的所作所为，不是问他的操行。
English: Confucius asked the envoy what his old master was doing. He was asking about his political conduct, not his manners.

古文：如孔子之问也，使者宜对曰 夫子为某事，治某政 ，今反言 欲寡其过而未能也 ，何以知其对失指，孔子非之也？
现代文：按照孔子的问话，使者应该回答说 他老先生在干某件事，治理某项政务 ，如今使者反而说 他想减少自己过错还没有做到 。
English: According to Confucius's question, the messenger should have answered that his old master was doing something, governing a certain government, but now the messenger said that he wanted to reduce his mistakes and had not done it.

古文：且实孔子何以非使者？
现代文：那么，人们是凭什么知道使者回答得不符合孔子问话的原意，而孔子在责备他呢？
English: So, how did people know that the messenger's answer was not in line with the original intention of Confucius' question, and that Confucius was reproaching him?

古文：非其代人谦之乎？
现代文：再说，究竟孔子凭什么要责备使者呢？
English: Moreover, on what basis did Confucius blame the messenger?

古文：其非乎对失指也？所非犹有一实，不明其过，而徒云 使乎使乎！ 後世疑惑，不知使者所以为过。
现代文：是责备他代替主人表示谦虚呢，还是责备他的回答不符合问话的原意呢？孔子所责备的总还要有一个具体的东西，不说清楚他的过错，而只说 有这样的的使者，有这样的的使者 ，这就使后人疑惑不解，不知道使者犯错误的原因。
English: Whether to reproach him for expressing modesty in place of his master, or to reproach his answer for not conforming to the original intention of the question? Confucius's reproach must always have a specific thing, not to make clear his fault, but only to say that there is such a messenger, there is such a messenger, which makes future generations puzzled and do not know the reason why the messenger made a mistake.

古文：韩子曰： 书约则弟子辨。 
现代文：韩非子说： 书写得太简略就会使学生们发生争辩。 
English: Han Feizi said: Writing too briefly will cause students to argue.

古文：孔子之言 使乎 ，何其约也？
现代文：孔子说 使乎 ，是何等的简略啊！
English: Confucius said, "What a shortcut!"

古文：或曰： 《春秋》之义也，为贤者讳。
现代文：有人说： 按照《春秋》的原则，要替贤者隐瞒缺点。
English: Some people said: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," it is necessary to conceal the shortcomings for the wise.

古文：蘧伯玉贤，故讳其使者。 
现代文：蘧伯玉是个贤者，所以孔子要替他的使者隐瞒缺点。 
English: Zibo Yu is a wise man, so Confucius wants to hide the shortcomings of his emissary.

古文：夫欲知其子视其友，欲知其君，视其所使。
现代文：要想了解那个人的儿子，就看他所交的朋友；要想了解那个君主，就看他所派的使者。
English: To understand a man's son, look at the friends he keeps; to understand a prince, look at the envoys he sends.

古文：伯玉不贤，故所使过也。
现代文：蘧伯玉不贤，所以派的使者会有过错。
English: Zou Bo-yu is not virtuous, so the emissary sent will be at fault.

古文：《春秋》之义，为贤者讳，亦贬纤介之恶。
现代文：《春秋》的原则，要替贤者隐瞒缺点，也批评其极细微的过失。
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" is to conceal the shortcomings of the wise, and also criticize their very minor mistakes.

古文：今不非而讳，贬纤介安所施哉？
现代文：现在不责备而采取隐瞒的态度，那么 要批评极细微的过失 的原则应用在哪里呢？
English: Where is the application of the principle of criticizing the slightest fault, now that the attitude is one of concealment rather than reproach?

古文：使孔子为伯玉讳，宜默而已。扬言曰 使乎！
现代文：假使孔子要替伯玉隐瞒缺点，应该沉默，但却高声说 有这样的使者，有这样的使者 。
English: If Confucius wanted to cover up the shortcomings of Bo Yu, he should be silent, but he said aloud, "There is such a messenger, there is such a messenger."

古文：使乎！ ，时人皆知孔子之非也。
现代文：这样当时的人就都知道孔子在责备他了。
English: In this way, people at that time knew that Confucius was reproaching him.

古文：出言如此，何益於讳？佛肸召，子欲往。
现代文：像这样说话，对替别人隐瞒缺点有什么好处呢？佛肸招聘孔子，孔子想去。
English: Speaking like this, what is the benefit of concealing one's shortcomings for others? Buddha Hall recruits Confucius, Confucius wants to go.

古文：子路不说，曰： 昔者，由也闻诸夫子曰： 亲於其身为不善者，君子不入也。 
现代文：子路不高兴，说： 过去我听老师说： 亲身做过坏事的人，君子是不去他那里的。 
English: Zi Lu was not happy and said: In the past, I heard a teacher say: A gentleman will not go to a person who has personally done bad things.

古文：佛肸以中牟畔，子之往也如之何？ 
现代文：佛肸占据中牟反叛赵简子，你还要去，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Buddhas and Bodhisattvas occupy the middle of the rebel Zhao Jianzi, you still want to go, why is that?

古文：子曰： 有是也。
现代文：孔子说： 不错，我说过这话！
English: Confucius said, "That's right, I said that!"

古文：不曰坚乎？磨而不磷；不曰白乎？涅而不淄。
现代文：但不是也说过坚硬的东西磨也磨不薄，洁白的东西染也染不黑吗？
English: But didn't he also say that hard things don't wear thin, and white things don't turn black?

古文：吾岂匏瓜也哉，焉能系而不食也？ 
现代文：我难道是个匏瓜吗？怎么能挂着不吃东西呢？ 
English: Am I a dumpling? How can I not eat?

古文：子路引孔子往时所言以非孔子也。
现代文：子路引用孔子过去说过的话来责怪孔子。
English: Zi Lu quoted what Confucius had said in the past to blame Confucius.

古文：往前孔子出此言，欲令弟子法而行之，子路引之以谏，孔子晓之，不曰 前言戏 ，若非而不可行，而曰 有是言 者，审有当行之也。 不曰坚乎？磨而不磷；不曰白乎？
现代文：从前孔子说这话，是想让学生效法实行。子路引用它来规劝，孔子是懂得的，但不说以前的话是开玩笑，或者说它不对不能实行，而是说 有这话 ，确实有，应当实行。 不是说过坚硬的东西磨也磨不薄，洁白的东西染也染不黑吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, Confucius said this to encourage his students to follow his example. Zilu quoted it to persuade them. Confucius understood it, but he didn't say that what he had said before was a joke, or that it was wrong and couldn't be put into practice. Instead, he said that there was this saying, that it really existed, and that it should be put into practice. Didn't he say that hard things don't wear thin, and white things don't get dyed black?

古文：涅而不淄 ，孔子言此言者，能解子路难乎？ 亲於其身为不善者，君子不入也 ，解之，宜：佛肸未为不善，尚犹可入。而曰 坚磨而不磷，白涅而不淄 。
现代文：孔子说这话，能解答子路的责难吗？要为 亲身做坏事的人，君子不去他那里 这句话辩解，就应该说 佛肸没有做坏事，还是能去的 ，而却说 坚硬的东西，磨也磨不薄；洁白的东西，染也染不黑 。
English: Confucius said this, can it answer the reproach of the path of the son? To justify the saying that a gentleman does not go to a person who personally does bad things, it should be said that the Buddha did not do bad things, but still can go, but said that hard things are not worn thin; white things are not dyed black.

古文：如孔子之言，有坚白之行者可以入之，君子之行软而易污邪，何以独不入也？
现代文：按照孔子的说法，有 坚硬 、 洁白 操行的人是可以去的，那么 君子 的操行是软弱而容易受污染的吗？不然，凭什么唯独 君子 不能去呢！
English: According to Confucius, a person with hard, pure white conduct can go, so is a gentleman's conduct weak and easily tainted? Otherwise, why can't a gentleman go?

古文：孔子不饮盗泉之水，曾子不入胜母之闾，避恶去污，不以义耻辱名也。
现代文：孔子不喝盗泉水，曾子不进胜母巷，是为了避开邪恶，远离污秽，由于这两个名字取得不合礼义，怕因此玷污了自己的名声。
English: Confucius did not drink stolen spring water, and Zengzi did not enter Shengmu Alley, in order to avoid evil and stay away from filth, because these two names were obtained inappropriately, fearing that they would tarnish their reputation.

古文：盗泉、胜母有空名，而孔、曾耻之；佛肸有恶实，而子欲往。
现代文：盗泉、胜母只有空名，孔子、曾子就以它为耻；佛肸有罪恶事实，而孔子却想去他那里。
English: "Thief Spring" and "Victorious Mother" are only empty names, and Confucius and his great-grandson are ashamed of them; "Buddha Pagoda" is a sinful fact, but Confucius wants to go there.

古文：不饮盗泉是，则欲对佛肸非矣。 不义而富且贵，於我如浮云 ，枉道食篡畔之禄，所谓 浮云 者非也？
现代文：不喝盗泉水是对的，那么想见佛肸就不对了。孔子说过 不合道义得来的富贵，对于我像浮云一样。 现在却要违背道义去享受篡权叛乱者的俸禄，难道是所谓： 不义而富且贵，于我如浮云 这句话说错了吗？
English: It is right not to drink stolen spring water, but it is not right to want to see Buddha statues. Confucius said, "Riches and honors acquired immorally are like floating clouds to me." Now, however, I want to enjoy the pay of a usurper and rebel against morality. Is it wrong to say, "Riches and honors acquired immorally are like floating clouds to me"?

古文：或： 权时欲行道也即权时行道，子路难之，当云 行道 ，不言食。
现代文：或许是孔子随机应变想推行自己的政治主张呢？即使是随机应变想推行自己的政治主张，子路责难他，就应该说 为了推行政治主张 ，而不该说 为了食俸禄 。
English: Perhaps Confucius wanted to promote his own political ideas at random? Even if he wanted to promote his own political ideas at random, the way to reproach him should be to promote his political ideas, not to get a salary.

古文：有权时以行道，无权时以求食。 吾岂匏瓜也哉，焉能系而不食 ？
现代文：只有随机应变来推行政治主张，而没有随机应变来找饭吃的。 我难道是匏瓜！怎么能挂着不吃饭呢？ 
English: There are only random contingencies to implement political propositions, but no random contingencies to find food to eat. Am I a melon! How can I not eat?

古文：自比以匏瓜者，言人当仕而食禄。
现代文：孔子用匏瓜自比，是说人应当做官食俸禄。
English: Confucius compared himself to a gourd, saying that a person should make the most of the government food allowance.

古文：我非匏瓜系而不食，非子路也。
现代文：说 我不是匏瓜，不能挂着不吃饭 ，这是反驳子路的。
English: Saying I'm not a dumpling, I can't skip meals, that's the way to refute it.

古文：孔子之言，不解子路之难。
现代文：其实，孔子这话，并不能解答子路的责难。
English: In fact, the words of Confucius cannot answer the reproach of Zi Lu.

古文：子路难孔子，岂孔子不当仕也哉？
现代文：子路责难孔子，哪里是说孔子不该做官呢？
English: Zilu criticized Confucius. Where does it say that Confucius should not be an official?

古文：当择善国而入之也。
现代文：是说应该选择好的国家去做官。
English: It means that you should choose a good country to work in.

古文：孔子自比匏瓜，孔子欲安食也。
现代文：孔子自比匏瓜，是想到哪里找饭吃呢？
English: When Confucius compared himself to a melon, he was thinking about where to find food.

古文：且孔之言，何其鄙也！
现代文：再说，孔子这话，是何等卑鄙！
English: Besides, what a despicable thing for Confucius to say!

古文：何彼仕为食哉？
现代文：怎么能说他自己做官是为了找饭吃呢？
English: How can he say that he himself became an official in order to find food?

古文：君子不宜言也。
现代文：君子是不该说这种话的。
English: A gentleman should not say such things.

古文：匏瓜系而不食，亦系而不仕等也。
现代文：匏瓜挂着不吃饭，也跟人闲着不做官一样。
English: If you don't eat when the melon is hanging, it's the same as if you don't work when you're idle.

古文：距子路可云： 吾岂匏瓜也哉，系而不仕也 ？
现代文：反驳子路可以说： 我难道是匏瓜，要挂着不做官？ 
English: A rebuttal could be: Am I a dumbbell, do I want to hang around and not become an official?

古文：今吾 系而不食 ，孔子之仕，不为行道，徒求食也。
现代文：现在却说 挂着不吃饭 ，那么孔子做官，不是为了推行政治主张，而只是为了找饭吃。
English: Now, however, it is said that Confucius did not become an official in order to promote his political ideas, but only to find food.

古文：人之仕也，主贪禄也。礼义之言，为行道也。
现代文：人做官，主要是贪图俸禄，按礼义的话来说，是为了推行政治主张。
English: When people become officials, they are mainly greedy for a salary, or, to put it politely, in order to promote their political views.

古文：犹人之娶也，主为欲也，礼义之言，为供亲也。
现代文：就像人娶妻，主要是为了情欲，照礼义的说法，是为了供养双亲。
English: For just as a man marries a woman chiefly for the sake of her beauty, so also he marries a woman chiefly for the sake of providing for his father and mother.

古文：仕而直言食，娶可直言欲乎？
现代文：做官直说是为了吃饭，娶妻能直说是为了情欲吗？
English: To be an official is, to put it bluntly, for the sake of eating, but can marrying a wife be, to put it bluntly, for the sake of lust?

古文：孔子之言，解情而无依违之意，不假义理之名，是则俗人，非君子也。
现代文：孔子的话，说出了实情，没有模棱两可的意思，不借用礼义的名义来掩饰，这是个庸俗的人，而不个君子。
English: Confucius spoke the truth, without ambiguity, without using the name of propriety to cover up. This is a vulgar person, not a gentleman.

古文：儒者说孔子周流应聘不济，闵道不行，失孔子情矣。
现代文：儒者说孔子周游列国想接受聘请没有成功，担心自己的政治主张不能推行，这违背了孔子的真情实意。
English: Confucians say that Confucius traveled around the world to accept the appointment without success, fearing that his political ideas could not be implemented, which is contrary to the true intentions of Confucius.

古文：公山弗扰以费畔，召，子欲往。
现代文：公山弗扰在费邑反叛季氏，招聘孔子，孔子想去。
English: Mount Fuhu rebelled against Fei Yu and summoned Confucius. Confucius was ready to go.

古文：子路曰： 未如也已，何必公山氏之之也？ 
现代文：子路说： 没有去的地方算了，何必去公山氏那里。 
English: Zilu said, "I don't have any place to go, so why should I go to Mr. Gongshan's?"

古文：子曰： 夫召我者，而岂徒哉？
现代文：孔子说： 招聘我去，难道是平白无故的吗？
English: Confucius said, "Is it for nothing that you have recruited me?

古文：如用我，吾其为东周乎。 
现代文：如果用我，我要在东方推行周朝的政治！ 
English: If you use me, I will promote Zhou Dynasty politics in the East!

古文：为东周，欲行道也。
现代文：在东方推行周朝的政治，就是想推行自己的政治主张。
English: To promote Zhou politics in the East is to promote one's own political views.

古文：公山、佛肸俱畔者，行道於公山，求食於佛肸，孔子之言无定趋也。
现代文：公山、佛肸都是叛乱的人，在公山那里想推行政治主张，在佛肸那里只想找饭吃，孔子的话没有一定准则。
English: Both the public mountain and the Buddhist stupa are rebellious people. On the public mountain, they want to promote their political ideas, while on the Buddhist stupa, they just want to eat. Confucius's words do not have a certain standard.

古文：言无定趋，则行无常务矣。
现代文：说话没有一定准则，那么行为就会没有固定的目标。
English: If there is no rule of speech, there will be no fixed aim of action.

古文：周流不用，岂独有以乎？
现代文：孔子周游列国不被重用，难道不是有原因的吗？
English: Isn't there a reason why Confucius's travels around the world are not reused?

古文：阳货欲见之，不见；呼之仕，不仕，何其清也？
现代文：阳货想见孔子，孔子不见；想喊孔子做官，孔子不做，何等清高啊！
English: Yangfang wants to see Confucius, but Confucius is not there; he wants to call for Confucius to be made an official, but Confucius will not do it. How lofty!

古文：公山、佛肸召之欲往，何其浊也？
现代文：公山、佛肸招聘孔子，孔子却想去，又何等污浊啊！
English: Public mountains and Buddhist monasteries recruit Confucius, but Confucius wants to go, and what a dirty trick!

古文：公山不扰与阳虎俱畔，执季桓子，二人同恶，呼召礼等。独对公山，不见阳虎，岂公山尚可，阳虎不可乎？
现代文：公山弗扰和阳虎一起背叛季孙氏，囚禁了季桓子，两人罪恶一样，召请孔子的礼节相同，孔子只见公山，不见阳虎，难道公山还能合作，阳虎不能吗？
English: Foshan Gongshan and Yanghu together betrayed the Ji Sun clan and imprisoned Ji Huanzi. The two committed the same crime, and the etiquette of summoning Confucius was the same. Confucius only saw Gongshan, but not Yanghu. Could Gongshan still cooperate, but Yanghu could not?

古文：子路难公山之，孔子宜解以尚及佛肸未甚恶之状也。
现代文：那么子路反对公山的招聘，孔子就应该用公山比佛肸强，不太坏，来作辩解。
English: Then Zilu opposed the recruitment of Gongshan, Confucius should use Gongshan is stronger than Buddha, not too bad, to justify.

