古文：则天皇后则天皇后武氏，讳曌，并州文水人也。
现代文：则天皇后武氏，名明空，是山西并州文水人。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu, whose name is unknown, was born in Shanxi and studied in Wenzhou.

古文：父士，隋大业末为鹰扬府队正。
现代文：父亲名士，隋朝大业末年做鹰扬府队正的官。
English: His father was a famous scholar, and in the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he was a high-ranking official in the Yangfu army.

古文：高祖行军于汾、晋，每休止其家。
现代文：高祖在汾、晋行军作战，常在他家休息。
English: Gaozu fought in the Song and Jin campaigns and often rested at his home.

古文：义旗初起，从平京城。
现代文：高祖初举义旗起事之时，武士跟从高祖平定了京城。
English: When Gaozu raised the banner of righteousness for the first time, the samurai followed Gaozu and leveled the capital.

古文：贞观中，累迁工部尚书、荆州都督，封应国公。
现代文：贞观年间，逐步升到工部尚书、荆州都督，封为应国公。
English: During the years of Zhenguan, he gradually rose to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, the governor of Jingzhou, and was appointed as the prince of Yingguo.

古文：初，则天年十四时，太宗闻其美容止，召入宫，立为才人。
现代文：当初，武则天年十四岁时，太宗听说她仪容举止美，召她入宫，封为才人。
English: At the beginning, when Wu Zetian was 14 years old, Emperor Taizong heard that she was beautiful in appearance and demeanor, invited her to the palace, and named her a talented person.

古文：及太宗崩，遂为尼，居感业寺。
现代文：等到太宗去世，就做了尼姑，住在感业寺。
English: After Emperor Taizong passed away, she became a nun and lived at Sangye Temple.

古文：大帝于寺见之，复召入宫，拜昭仪。
现代文：大帝高宗在寺中见到她，再次召入宫中，封她为昭仪。
English: Emperor Gaozong saw her in the temple, summoned her to the palace again, and made her an honorary consort.

古文：时皇后王氏、良娣萧氏频与武昭仪争宠，互谗毁之，帝皆不纳。进号宸妃。
现代文：当时王皇后、妃子萧良娣经常与武昭仪争宠，互相说坏话，高宗都不听，晋封武则天为宸妃。
English: At that time, Empress Wang and her concubine Xiao Liangyao often competed for favor with Wu Zhaoyi, saying bad words to each other. Gao Zong did not listen, and was promoted to Wu Zetian's concubine.

古文：永徽六年，废王皇后而立武宸妃为皇后。
现代文：永徽六年，废除王皇后而立武宸妃为皇后。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yonghui, Empress Wang was abolished and Empress Wu Rong became the empress.

古文：高宗称天皇，武后亦称天后。
现代文：高宗号称天皇，武后也号称天后。
English: Gao Zong claimed to be the emperor, and Wu Wu also claimed to be the empress.

古文：后素多智计，兼涉文史。
现代文：天后素来多智谋计策，兼通文史。
English: The Empress Dowager has always been a shrewd strategist, as well as a literary historian.

古文：帝自显庆已后，多苦风疾，百司表奏，皆委天后详决。
现代文：高宗从显庆年以后，经常苦于肢体麻痹瘫痪，百官上奏表章，都委托天后公平决断。
English: Gaozong often suffered from paralysis of limbs after the Year of the Epiphany, and all the officials entrusted the fair decision to the Empress Dowager.

古文：自此内辅国政数十年，威势与帝无异，当时称为 二圣 。
现代文：从此在内部辅政数十年，威势与皇帝没有区别，当时号称为 二圣 。
English: Since then, it has been in the internal auxiliary government for decades, and there is no difference between the power and the emperor. At that time, it was called the Second Holy.

古文：弘道元年十二月丁巳，大帝崩，皇太子显即位，尊天后为皇太后。
现代文：弘道元年十二月四日，大帝去世，皇太子李显即皇帝位，尊天后为皇太后。
English: On December 4th of the 1st year of Hongdao, the Great Emperor passed away. Crown Prince Li Xian became the Emperor, and His Highness the Empress Dowager became the Empress Dowager.

古文：既将篡夺，是日自临朝称制。
现代文：太后既然已将篡夺帝位，这天便亲自登朝代理国政。
English: Since the empress dowager was about to usurp the imperial throne, she went to the imperial court in person that day to act as regent.

古文：庚午，加授泽州刺史、韩王元嘉为太尉，豫州刺史、滕王元婴为开府仪同三司，绛州刺史、鲁王灵夔为太子太师，相州刺史、越王贞为太子太傅，安州都督、纪王慎为太子太保。
现代文：十七日，授予泽州刺史、韩王元嘉为太尉的加官，授予豫州刺史、滕王元婴为开府仪同三司的加官，授予相州刺史、越王贞为太子太傅的加官，授予安州都督、纪王慎为太子太保的加官。
English: On the 17th, additional posts were awarded to Zhezhou Zishi and Han Wangyuanjia as captain, to Yuzhou Zishi and Teng Wangyuan as keeper of the imperial residences and three departments, to Xiangzhou Zishi and Yue Wangzhen as prince's daifu, and to Anzhou Tudor and Ji Wangshun as prince's taibo.

古文：元嘉等地尊望重，恐其生变，故进加虚位，以安其心。
现代文：元嘉、元婴、灵夔等人地位尊贵威望贵重，怕他们发生变故，所以加给空衔虚位，以安定他们之心。
English: Yuan Jia, Yuan Jiao, Ling Yao and others are of high status and prestige, and they are afraid of changes, so they are given empty ranks to stabilize their hearts.

古文：甲戌，刘仁轨为尚书左仆射，岑长倩为兵部尚书，魏玄同为黄门侍郎，并依旧知政事。
现代文：二十一日，刘仁轨为尚书左仆射，岑长倩为兵部尚书，魏玄同为黄门侍郎，并依旧任知政事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Renzhao was Shangshu's left-hand man, Zou Changyu was Shangshu of the military department, and Wei Xundong was Huangmen's attendant, and still served as governor.

古文：刘齐贤为侍中，裴炎为中书令。
现代文：刘齐贤为侍中，裴炎为中书令。
English: Liu Qixian was a chamberlain, and Pei Yan was a secretary.

古文：嗣圣元年春正月甲申朔，改元。
现代文：嗣圣元年春正月一日，改易年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring of the following year, the name of the year was changed.

古文：二月戊午，废皇帝为庐陵王，幽于别所，仍改赐名哲。
现代文：二月六日，废皇帝为庐陵王，软禁在别的地方，仍然改名，赐名为哲。
English: On February 6, the deposed emperor became the King of Fuling and was placed under house arrest in another place. He still changed his name and was given the name Zhe.

古文：己未，立豫王轮为皇帝，令居于别殿。
现代文：七日，立豫王轮为皇帝，命令他居住在别的宫殿而不住在皇帝的宫殿。
English: On the seventh day, Yu Wanglun was made emperor and ordered to live in a palace other than the emperor's palace.

古文：大赦天下，改元文明。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为文明。
English: Amnesty to the world, change the year name to civilization.

古文：皇太后仍临朝称制。
现代文：皇太后仍然临朝代行皇帝事。
English: The Empress Dowager Takeshi still exercised imperial power and governed the country.

古文：庚午，废皇太孙重照为庶人。
现代文：十八日，废皇太子重照为庶人。
English: On the 18th, the former crown prince was reinstated as a commoner.

古文：太常卿兼豫王府长史王德真为侍中，中书侍郎、豫王府司马刘祎之同中书门下三品。
现代文：太常卿兼豫王府长史王德真为侍中，中书侍郎、豫王府司马刘之同中书门下三品。
English: Shi Wang Dezhen, Taizongqing and the governor of Yuwangfu, was a chamberlain, and Ma Liu, the secretary of Yuwangfu, was also a chamberlain.

古文：三月，庶人贤死于巴州。
现代文：三月，废太子庶人贤在巴州死去。
English: In March, the former crown prince, commoner Xian, died in Bazhou.

古文：夏四月，滕王元婴薨。
现代文：夏四月，滕王元婴去世。
English: In the summer of April, Teng Wangyuan died.

古文：改封毕王上金为泽王，葛王素节为许王。
现代文：改封毕王上金为泽王，葛王素节为许王。
English: King Bi Shangjin was changed to King Ze, and King Ge to King Xu.

古文：丁丑，迁庐陵王哲于均州。
现代文：二十六日，迁徙庐陵王李哲到均州。
English: On the 26th, Li Zhe, the king of Fuling, moved to Junzhou.

古文：闰五月，礼部尚书武承嗣同中书门下三品。
现代文：闰五月，礼部尚书武承嗣同中书门下三品。
English: In the leap month of May, Heir of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Shang Shubu, was promoted to the third grade of the same school.

古文：秋七月，突厥骨咄禄、元珍寇朔州，命左威卫大将军程务挺拒之。
现代文：秋七月，突厥骨笃禄、元珍入侵朔州，命令左威卫大将军程务挺率兵抵御他们。
English: In autumn and July, the Turks, Bone Tuklu and Yuan Zhen, invaded Shuozhou, and ordered the General of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Cheng Mu Ting, to lead the troops to resist them.

古文：彗星见西北方，长二丈余，经三十三日乃灭。
现代文：彗星出现在西北方，长两丈多，经过三十三天才灭。
English: The comet appeared in the northwest, more than twice as long, and it took 33 days to disappear.

古文：九月，大赦天下，改元为光宅。
现代文：九月，大赦天下，改年号为光宅。
English: In September, the country was amnestied, and the year name was changed to Matsuya.

古文：旗帜改从金色，饰以紫，画以杂文。
现代文：旗帜改从金色，以紫色装饰，以杂色文采图画。
English: The flag was changed from gold to purple, with multi-coloured text and pictures.

古文：改东都为神都，又改尚书省及诸司官名。
现代文：改东都为神都，又改尚书省及各司官名。
English: He changed the name of Dongdu to Shendu, and also changed the name of Shangshu and the names of all officials.

古文：初置右肃政御史台官员。
现代文：开始设置右肃政御史台官员。
English: The establishment of officials of the Right Solemnity of the Reigning Emperor's Historiography Office began.

古文：故司空李勣孙柳州司马徐敬业伪称扬州司马，杀长史陈敬之，据扬州起兵，自称上将，以匡复为辞。
现代文：已故司空李责力之孙、柳州司马徐敬业诈称扬州司马，杀长史陈敬之，占据扬州起兵，自称上将，打着恢复唐朝的名义。
English: Liuzhou Sima Xu Jingye, the grandson of the late Siku Li Rongli, fraudulently claimed to be Yangzhou Sima, killed Changshi Chen Jingzhi, occupied Yangzhou, raised an army, claimed to be a general, and claimed to restore the Tang Dynasty.

古文：冬十月，楚州司马李崇福率所部三县以应敬业。
现代文：冬十月，楚州司马李崇福率领所管辖的三县以响应徐敬业。
English: In the winter of October, Sima Li Chongfu of Chuzhou led the three counties under his jurisdiction to march in response to Xu Jingye.

古文：命左玉钤卫大将军李孝逸为大总管，率兵三十万以讨之。
现代文：命令左玉钤卫大将军李孝逸为大总管，率兵三十万讨伐他。
English: He ordered the left jade guardian general Li Xiaoyi to be the general manager and led 300,000 soldiers to fight against him.

古文：杀内史裴炎。
现代文：武后杀内史裴炎。
English: Wu Hou's killing of Neishi Pei inflamed the situation.

古文：丁酉，追削敬业父祖官爵，复其本姓徐氏。
现代文：十九日，削去徐敬业父亲、祖父的官职爵位，恢复他的本姓徐氏。
English: On the 19th, the official titles of Xu Jingye's father and grandfather were removed, and his original surname, Xu, was restored.

古文：十二月，前中书令薛元超卒。
现代文：十二月，前中书令薛元超去世。
English: In December, Xue Yuanchao passed away.

古文：杀左威卫大将军程务挺。
现代文：武后杀左威卫大将军程务挺。
English: General Cheng Mu Ting, who was killed by Emperor Wu's second-in-command, Emperor Wei.

古文：垂拱元年春正月，以敬业平，大赦天下，改元。
现代文：垂拱元年春正月，因为徐敬业被平定，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the first month of spring in the year of the hanging arch, because Xu Jingye was subdued, he was pardoned by the world and changed his name.

古文：刘仁轨薨。
现代文：刘仁轨去世。
English: Liu Renzhong passed away.

古文：三月，迁庐陵王哲于房州。
现代文：三月，迁徙庐陵王李哲到房州。
English: In March, Li Zhe, the king of Fuling, moved to Fangzhou.

古文：颁下亲撰《垂拱格》于天下。
现代文：武后亲自撰写的《垂拱格》在天下颁布。
English: Wu Hou's personally written "Tang Gong Ge" was promulgated throughout the world.

古文：夏四月，内史骞味道左授青州刺史。
现代文：夏四月，内史骞味道降职为青州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, he was demoted from the position of Inner Historian to the position of Qingzhou Historian.

古文：五月，秋官尚书裴居道为内史，纳言王德真配流象州，冬官尚书苏良嗣为纳言。
现代文：五月，秋官尚书裴居道为内史，纳言王德真流放充军到象州，冬官尚书苏良嗣为纳言。
English: In May, the autumn official, Shangshu Pei Ju Dao, wrote the internal history, the Nagan Wang Dezhen was exiled to Zhangzhou, and the winter official, Shangshu Su Liang Zi, wrote the Nagan.

古文：诏内外文武九品已上及百姓，咸令自举。
现代文：诏令内外文武九品以上官员及百姓，都让他们自我举荐。
English: According to the edict, officials and ordinary people of nine grades and above in and out of the civil service and military are allowed to self-nominate.

古文：是夏大旱。
现代文：这年夏天大旱。
English: The summer was marked by a severe drought.

古文：二年春正月，皇太后下诏，复政于皇帝。
现代文：二年春正月，皇太后武氏下诏书，把政事归还给皇帝。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, Empress Dowager Wu issued an imperial edict to return political affairs to the emperor.

古文：以皇太后既非实意，乃固让。
现代文：因为皇太后既不是真心实意，于是皇帝坚决辞让。
English: Because the empress dowager was not sincere, the emperor resolutely gave in.

古文：皇太后仍依旧临朝称制，大赦天下。
现代文：皇太后仍然依旧临朝代行皇帝事，大赦天下。
English: The empress dowager was still acting as empress on behalf of the imperial court, and the world was at her mercy.

古文：初令都督、刺史并准京官带鱼。
现代文：开始命令都督、刺史一概依照许京官带铜鱼符。
English: At the beginning, the governor and Sashi were all ordered to wear bronze fish charms in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：三月，初置匭于朝堂，有进书言事者听投之，由是人间善恶事多所知悉。
现代文：三月，初次在朝堂设置木匣子，有进奏章言事的人听任他们投递，从此，人间善恶之事武则天大多知道。
English: In March, for the first time, a wooden box was set up in the morning hall, and people who had something to say were allowed to deliver it. From then on, most people knew about the good and evil in the world.

古文：夏四月，岑长倩为内史。
现代文：夏四月，岑长倩为内史。
English: In the summer of April, 長 became the internal history.

古文：六月，苏良嗣为文昌左相，天官尚书韦待价为文昌右相，并同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：六月，苏良嗣为文昌左相，天官尚书韦待价为文昌右相，并同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In June, Su Liang Zi was appointed as the left minister of Wenchang, and the heavenly official Shang Shu Wei was appointed as the right minister of Wenchang, and he and Feng Ge were appointed as the three ministers of the imperial court.

古文：右肃政御史大夫韦思谦为纳言。
现代文：右肃政御史大夫韦思谦为纳言。
English: Right-wing political historian Dr. Wei Sichen was the first to speak out.

古文：三年春正月，封皇子成义为恆王，隆基为楚王，隆范为卫王，隆业为赵王。
现代文：三年春正月，封皇子成义为恒王，隆基为楚王，隆范为卫王，隆业为赵王。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Fong Zi Chengyi became King Heng, Longji became King Chu, Long Fan became King Wei, and Longye became King Zhao.

古文：二月，韦思谦请致仕，许之。
现代文：二月，韦思谦请求辞官，武后同意了。
English: In February, Wei Sichen requested to be demoted, and Wu Hou agreed.

古文：夏四月，裴居道为纳言，夏官侍郎张光辅为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：夏四月，裴居道为纳言，夏官侍郎张光辅为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the summer of April, Pei Ju Dao was Nagon, and Zhang Guangfu, the summer official's attendant, was Fengge's attendant, and Tongfengge's attendant was Taihei.

古文：庚午，刘祎之赐死于家。
现代文：五月七日，刘之在家被武后赐死。
English: On May 7, Liu Zhi was beheaded at home by the Empress Wu.

古文：秋八月，地官尚书魏玄同检校纳言。
现代文：秋八月，地官尚书魏玄同任检校纳言。
English: In autumn and August, the local official, Shangshu Wei Xuan, also served as the school inspector.

古文：四年春二月，毁乾元殿，就其地造明堂。
现代文：四年春二月，毁掉乾元殿，并就其原地址造明堂。
English: In the spring and February of the fourth year, the Qianyuan Hall was destroyed, and the Ming Hall was built at its original address.

古文：山东、河南甚饥乏，诏司属卿王及善、司府卿欧阳通、冬官侍郎狄仁杰巡抚赈给。
现代文：山东、河南非常饥饿缺粮，诏令司属卿王及善、司府卿欧阳通、冬官侍郎狄仁杰巡视安抚赈贷救济。
English: Shandong and Henan were very hungry and short of grain, and the imperial edict ordered the subordinate secretary Wang Yizhen, the secretary Ouyang Tong, and the attendant of the winter official Di Renjie to inspect the appeasement and loan relief.

古文：夏四月，魏王武承嗣伪造瑞石，文云： 圣母临人，永昌帝业。 令雍州人唐同泰表称获之洛水。
现代文：夏四月，魏王武承嗣伪造有吉祥之石，上面有文字曰： 圣母临人，永昌帝业 ，并命令雍州人唐同泰上表宣称此祥瑞之石是在洛水获得。
English: In the summer of April, the Wei king Wu Chengxi forged a stone with auspiciousness, with the words above: Virgin Mary, Eternal Emperor, and ordered the Yongzhou people Tang Tong Tai to declare on the table that this stone of auspiciousness was obtained in Luoshui.

古文：皇太后大悦，号其石为 宝图 ，擢授同泰游击将军。
现代文：皇太后武则天大喜，号其石曰 宝图 ，提拔唐同泰为游击将军。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Zetian was overjoyed, called the stone Baotu, and promoted Tang Tongtai to be a guerrilla general.

古文：五月，皇太后加尊号曰圣母神皇。
现代文：五月，皇太后加尊号曰圣母神皇。
English: In May, the empress dowager was given the title of "Holy Mother of God."

古文：秋七月，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月，大赦天下。
English: In autumn and July, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：改 宝图 曰 天授圣图 ，封洛水神为显圣，加位特进，并立庙。就水侧置永昌县。
现代文：改 宝图 为 天授圣图 ，封洛水神为显圣，加位为特进，并建立庙宇，在水边设置永昌县。
English: The treasure map was changed to the Sacred Map of Heaven's Bestowal, the water god of Fenluo was made a saint, and a place was added for special advancement, and a temple was built, and Yongchang County was set up on the water's edge.

古文：天下大酺五日。
现代文：天下大宴饮五天。
English: Five days of great feasting.

古文：八月壬寅，博州刺史、琅邪王冲据博州起兵，命左金吾大将军丘神勣为行军总管讨之。
现代文：八月十七日，博州刺史、琅笽王冲占据博州起兵造反，武后命金吾大将军丘神责力为行军总管讨伐他。
English: On August 17th, when Bozhou was occupied by Shishi and Shao Wangchong, they revolted, and the Empress ordered Kingu's general, Qiu Shenreili, to fight against him as the commander-in-chief.

古文：庚戌，冲父豫州刺史、越王贞又举兵于豫州，与冲相应。
现代文：二十五日，李冲之父豫州刺史、越王贞又在豫州举兵造反，与李冲相呼应。
English: On the 25th, Li Chong's father, Yu Zhou Zishi, and Yue Wang Zhen also rebelled in Yu Zhou, echoing Li Chong.

古文：九月，命内史岑长倩、凤阁侍郎张光辅、左监门大将军鞠崇裕率兵讨之。
现代文：九月，命令内史岑长倩、凤阁侍郎张光辅、左监门大将军鞫崇裕率兵讨伐他们。
English: In September, he ordered Inner Historian Zou Changyu, Fengge Attendant Zhang Guangyu, and Left Guardian Gate General Zou Chongyu to lead the troops to fight them.

古文：丙寅，斩贞及冲等，传首神都，改姓为虺氏。
现代文：十一日，将李贞、李冲等人斩首，在神都把他们首级示众，并改姓为虺氏。
English: On the 11th day, Li Zhen, Li Chong and others were beheaded, and their heads were displayed in front of the gods, and their surnames were changed to Yu.

古文：曲赦博州。
现代文：特别赦免博州。
English: A special pardon for Boshou.

古文：韩王元嘉、鲁王灵夔、元嘉子黄国公譔、灵夔子左散骑常侍范阳王蔼、霍王元轨及子江都王绪、故虢王元凤子东莞公融坐与贞通谋，元嘉、灵夔自杀，元轨配流黔州，譔等伏诛，改姓虺氏。
现代文：韩王元嘉、鲁王灵夔、元嘉子黄国公讠巽、灵夔子左散骑常侍范阳王蔼、霍王元轨及其子江都王绪、故虢王元凤子东莞公融与贞通谋犯法，元嘉、灵夔自杀，元轨充军流放到黔州，讠巽等被杀，改姓虺氏。
English: Han Wang, Yuanjia, Lu Wang, Lingya, Yuanjia's son Huang Guogong, Lingya's son Zuo Zangjia, the attendants Fan Yang, Wang Yi, Huo Wang, Yuanlu and his son Jiangdu, Wang Xiu, the late Zi Wang, Yuanlu's son Dongguan, conspired with Zhen to break the law, Yuanjia and Lingya committed suicide, Yuanlu was exiled to Zhangzhou, Zou was killed, and changed his surname to Zou.

古文：自是宗室诸王相继诛死者，殆将尽矣。
现代文：从此，宗室诸王相继被杀者，差不多快杀尽了。
English: From then on, the lineage of kings who were killed one after another was almost exhausted.

古文：其子孙年幼者咸配流岭外，诛其亲党数百余家。
现代文：他们的子孙年纪幼小者，都流放充军到岭外，杀他们亲族党羽一百多家。
English: Their children and grandchildren, young and old, were all exiled by the army outside the ridge, and more than a hundred of their relatives and followers were killed.

古文：十二月己酉，神皇拜洛水，受 天授圣图 ，是日还宫。
现代文：十二月二十五日，神皇武则天跪拜洛水，接受 天授圣图 ，这天回宫。
English: On December 25th, Emperor Wu Zetian knelt down to pray for Luoshui and accepted the divine map. He returned to the palace that day.

古文：明堂成。
现代文：明堂建成。
English: Myeongdong is completed.

古文：永昌元年春正月，神皇亲享明堂，大赦天下，改元，大酺七日。
现代文：永昌元年春正月，神皇武则天亲自祭献明堂，大赦天下，改年号，大宴饮七天。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongchang, God Emperor Wu Zetian personally dedicated the Ming Hall, pardoned the world, changed the year, and held a grand banquet for seven days.

古文：三月，张光辅为内史，武承嗣为纳言。
现代文：三月，张光辅为内史，武承嗣为纳言。
English: In March, Zhang Guangfu was promoted to the position of Inner Historian, and Wu Chengzhi was promoted to the position of Counselor.

古文：夏四月，诛蒋王恽、道王元庆、徐王元礼、曹王明等诸子孙，徙其家属于巂州。
现代文：夏四月，杀蒋王恽、道王元庆、徐王元礼、曹王明等所有子孙，迁移他们的家属到辒州。
English: In the summer of April, they killed all the descendants of Jiang Wangyao, Tao Wangyuanqing, Xu Wangyuanli, Cao Wangming, and moved their families to Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，命文昌右相韦待价为安息道大总管以讨吐蕃。
现代文：五月，命令文昌右相韦待价为安息道大总管以讨伐吐蕃。
English: In May, he ordered Wenchang U Xiang Wei, who was waiting to be appointed as the general manager of the Sabbatic Way, to fight against Tu Wei.

古文：六月，令文武官五品已上各举所知。
现代文：六月，命令文武官员五品以上各人举荐自己所了解的人。
English: In June, it ordered civil and military officials with five or more grades to recommend people they knew.

古文：秋七月，纪王慎被诬告谋反，载以槛车，流于巴州，改姓虺氏。
现代文：秋七月，纪王慎被诬告谋反，将他装载在槛车中，流放到巴州，改姓为虺氏。
English: In the autumn of July, Ji Wangshen was falsely accused of plotting a rebellion. He was loaded into a cart and exiled to Bazhou, where he changed his surname to Zou.

古文：韦待价坐迟留不进，士卒多饥馑而死，配流绣州。
现代文：韦待价因迟留不进而犯法，士卒多饥饿而死，待价充军流放到绣州。
English: Wei Beiyuan did not violate the law because of his delay, and many soldiers died of starvation. Beiyuan was exiled to Shizhu.

古文：八月，左肃政御史大夫王本立同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：八月，左肃政御史大夫王本立同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In August, Dr. Wang Benli of Zuozheng Government and History left Tongfeng Pavilion for the third time.

古文：辛巳，诛内史张光辅。
现代文：一日，杀内史张光辅。
English: On the same day, Zhang Guangyu was killed.

古文：九月，纳言魏玄同赐死于家。
现代文：九月，纳言魏玄同在家被赐死。
English: In September, Nagan Wei Xuan Tong was sentenced to death at home.

古文：冬十月，春官尚书范履冰、凤阁侍郎邢文伟并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：冬十月，春官尚书范履冰、凤阁侍郎邢文伟都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the winter of October, the spring official, Shang Shufan, and the Fengge's chamberlain, Zou Wenwei, were both appointed to the Fengge's court.

古文：改羽林军百骑为千骑。
现代文：改羽林军百名骑兵为千名骑兵。
English: The hundred cavalrymen of the Wu Lin Army were changed to a thousand cavalrymen.

古文：载初元年春正月，神皇亲享明堂，大赦天下。
现代文：载初元年春正月，神皇亲自祭献明堂，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, the God Emperor personally dedicated Myodo and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：依周制建子月为正月，改永昌元年十一月为载初元年正月，十二月为腊月，改旧正月为一月，大酺三日。
现代文：依照周制建子月为正月，改永昌元年十一月为载初元年正月，十二月为腊月，改旧正月为一月，大宴饮三天。
English: According to the weekly system, Jianzi Month is the first month, and the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：神皇自以 曌 字为名，遂改诏书为制书。
现代文：神皇自己以 明空 字为名，于是改诏书为制书。
English: The divine emperor himself took the name "Mingku" (明空) and changed the imperial edict into a book.

古文：春一月，苏良嗣为特进，武承嗣为文昌左相，岑长倩为文昌右相，裴居道为太子少傅，并依旧同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：春一月，苏良嗣为特进，武承嗣为文昌左相，岑长倩为文昌右相，裴居道为太子少傅，并且依旧任同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In the spring and January, Su Liang Zi was promoted to the special promotion, Wu Cheng Zi to the left of Wenchang, Zou Chang Zi to the right of Wenchang, Pei Ju Dao to the prince junior tutor, and he was still appointed to the three posts of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：凤阁侍郎武攸宁为纳言，邢文伟为内史。
现代文：凤阁侍郎武攸宁为纳言，邢文伟为内史。
English: Fengge's chamberlain, Wu Youning, was Nagon, and Zou Wenwei was Neishi.

古文：秋七月，杀豫章王亶，迁其父舒王元名于和州。
现代文：秋七月，杀豫章王，迁徙其父舒王元名到和州。
English: In the autumn of July, King Yuanzhang was killed and his father, King Shu Yuanmei, migrated to Wazhou.

古文：有沙门十人伪撰《大云经》，表上之，盛言神皇受命之事。
现代文：有和尚十人伪造《大云经》，表章上奏，极力称赞神皇承受天命之事。
English: There were ten monks who forged the "Great Cloud Sutra" and played it on the frontispiece, praising the divine emperor's acceptance of God's will.

古文：制颁于天下，令诸州各置大云寺，总度僧千人。
现代文：诏命颁布天下，命令各州各设置大云寺，总计度僧一千人。
English: The imperial edict was promulgated to the whole country, ordering each state to set up a great cloud temple, with a total of one thousand monks.

古文：丁亥，杀随州刺史泽王上金、舒州刺史许王素节并其子数十人。
现代文：十三日，杀随州刺史泽王上金、舒州刺史许王素节并其儿子数十人。
English: On the 13th, Suizhou assassin Zhe Wang Shangjin, Shuzhou assassin Xu Wang Su Jie and his son killed dozens of people.

古文：九月九日壬午，革唐命，改国号为周。
现代文：九月九日，革唐命，改国号为周。
English: On September 9th, Ge Tang died and the country name was changed to Zhou.

古文：改元为天授，大赦天下，赐酺七日。
现代文：改年号为天授，大赦天下，赐宴饮七天。
English: The name of the new year is given by heaven, the world is pardoned, and the banquet is given for seven days.

古文：乙酉，加尊号曰圣神皇帝，降皇帝为皇嗣。
现代文：十二日，加尊号曰圣神皇帝，把皇帝降为皇帝继承人。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor was given the title of "Holy Spirit Emperor," and the emperor was reduced to the emperor's successor.

古文：丙戌，初立武氏七庙于神都。
现代文：十三日，在神都开始建立武氏七庙。
English: On the 13th, the construction of the seven temples of the Bu clan began in Jindo.

古文：追尊神皇父赠太尉、太原王士为孝明皇帝。
现代文：追尊神后父赠太尉、太原王武士为孝明皇帝。
English: Emperor Suizong's father gave him the title of Taijun and Taiyuan Wangwushi to Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：兄子文昌左相承嗣为魏王，天官尚书三思为梁王，堂侄懿宗等十二人为郡王。
现代文：兄之子文昌左相武承嗣为魏王，天官尚书武三思为梁王，堂侄武懿宗等十二人为郡王。
English: His elder brother's son, Wenchang Zuo Wu, succeeded him as the king of Wei, the heavenly officer Shang Shubu Sansi became the king of Liang, and his cousin Wu Yanzong and twelve others became the kings of the county.

古文：司宾卿史务滋为纳言，凤阁侍郎宗秦客为内史。
现代文：司宾卿史务滋为纳言，凤阁侍郎宗秦客为内史。
English: Lord Privy Councilor Shibusushi is Nagan, and Fengge's chamberlain Soqinq is Naishi.

古文：给事中傅游艺为鸾台侍郎，仍依旧知凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：给事中傅游艺为鸾台侍郎，仍旧任凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Fu Youyi was the attendant of Fengtai in the middle of the event, and still served as Fengge Fengtai Pingzhang.

古文：令史务滋等十人分道存抚天下。
现代文：命令史务滋等十人分道安抚天下。
English: He ordered Shibusushi and ten others to go out and pacify the world.

古文：改内外官所佩鱼并作龟。
现代文：把内外官员所佩之鱼改为龟。
English: The fish adored by officials at home and abroad has been changed to a turtle.

古文：冬十月，改并州文水县为武兴县，依汉丰、沛例，百姓子孙相承给复。
现代文：冬十月，改并州文水县为武兴县，依照汉朝丰、沛旧例，百姓子孙世代免除徭役。
English: In the winter of October, Zhoushuanshui County was merged into Wuxing County. In accordance with the Han Dynasty Feng and Pei old cases, the descendants of the people were exempted from the corvee.

古文：二年正月，亲祀明堂。
现代文：天授二年，圣神皇帝武则天亲自祭祀明堂。
English: In the second year of Tenju, the Holy Spirit Emperor Buzetian himself made a sacrifice to Myeongdong.

古文：春三月，改唐太庙为享德庙。
现代文：春三月，改唐太庙为享德庙。
English: In March of the spring, the Tang Dynasty Temple was changed to the Hongde Temple.

古文：夏四月，令释教在道法之上，僧尼处道士女寇之前。
现代文：夏四月，命令释教地位在道家法家之上，僧尼处于道士、女道士之前。
English: In the summer of April, it was ordered that the status of Shakyamuni should be above that of the Taoist legalists, and that monks and nuns should be placed ahead of Taoists and female Taoists.

古文：六月，命岑长倩率诸军讨吐蕃。
现代文：六月，命令岑长倩率领诸军讨伐吐蕃。
English: In June, he ordered Zou Changyu to lead the army to fight against the Tuyi.

古文：左肃政御史大夫格辅元为地官尚书，鸾台侍郎乐思晦并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：左肃政御史大夫格辅元为地官尚书，和鸾台侍郎乐思晦都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the left is the local official, Shang Shu, who was the governor of Su Zheng, and the attendant of Xingtai, Le Siwei, both of whom were in charge of the affairs of Xingtai and Fengge.

古文：秋七月，徙关内雍、同等七州户数十万以实洛阳。
现代文：秋七月，迁徙关内雍州、同州等七州数十万户以充实洛阳。
English: In autumn and July, hundreds of thousands of households from seven prefectures including Guanai, Yongzhou and Tongzhou migrated to enrich Luoyang.

古文：分京兆置鼎、稷、鸿、宜四州。
现代文：分京兆地方而设置鼎、稷、鸿、宜四州。
English: Four prefectures, including Ding, Handan, Hong and Yi, were set up in the Beijing-Zhao region.

古文：夏官尚书欧阳通知纳言事。
现代文：尚书欧阳通主持纳言事。
English: Shangshu Ouyang Tong presided over the speech.

古文：九月，傅游艺下狱死。
现代文：九月，傅游艺下狱而死。
English: In September, Fu Youyi died in prison.

古文：右羽林卫大将军、建昌王攸宁为纳言，洛州司马狄仁杰为地官侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：右羽林卫大将军、建昌王武攸宁为纳言，洛州司马狄仁杰为地官侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: The right wing general Lin Wei and the king of Jianchang, Wu Youning, were the high-ranking officials, while the governor of Lozhou, Di Renjie, was the local official's valet, and the governor of Tongfeng Pavilion, Taihei Zhang.

古文：冬十月，制官人者咸令自举。
现代文：冬十月，皇上下令当官的人都让他们自我举荐。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor and his subordinates ordered all officials to let them self-nominate.

古文：杀文昌左相岑长倩、纳言欧阳通、地官尚书格辅元。
现代文：皇上杀了文昌左相岑长倩、纳言欧阳通、地官尚书格辅元。
English: The emperor killed Wenchang's minister of the left, Zou Changyu, Nagan Ouyang Tong, and local official Shang Shuge Fuyuan.

古文：三年正月，亲祀明堂。
现代文：天授三年正月，皇上亲自祭祀明堂。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Tenju's reign, the Emperor himself held a religious service at Myodo.

古文：春一月，冬官尚书杨执柔同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：春一月，冬官尚书杨执柔同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the spring and January, the winter official Shangshu Yang Jie Rong and Fengge Xuan Tai Ping Zhang.

古文：秋官侍郎崔元琮为鸾台侍郎，夏官侍郎李昭德为凤阁侍郎，检校天官侍郎姚璹为文昌左丞，地官侍郎李元素为文昌右丞，并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：三月，五个天竺国都派遣使者前来朝贡。四月，大赦天下，改元为如意，禁止天下屠杀牲畜。秋七月，大雨，洛水泛滥，漂流居住人户五千多家，皇上派使者巡抚慰问赈贷救济。八月，魏王武承嗣为特进，建昌王武攸宁为冬官尚书，杨执柔为地官尚书，都罢免知政事。夏官侍郎李昭德为凤阁侍郎，检校天官侍郎姚王寿为文昌左丞，地官侍郎李元素为文昌右丞，都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In March, envoys from five countries were sent to pay tribute to the imperial court. In April, a general amnesty was issued, the era was changed to Ruyi, and the slaughter of livestock was prohibited. In autumn and July, there was heavy rain, the Luo River flooded, and more than 5,000 households were left adrift. The emperor sent envoys to offer condolences and loan relief. In August, Wei King Wu Chengzhi was appointed as a special envoy, and Jianchang King Wu Yuening was appointed as the winter official Shangshu, and Yang Jirou was appointed as the local official Shangshu. Li Zhaode, the servant of the summer official,

古文：九月，大赦天下，改元为长寿。
现代文：九月，大赦天下，改元为长寿。
English: In September, there was a general amnesty and the era was changed to longevity.

古文：改用九月为社，大酺七日。
现代文：改用九月为祭祀土地神的日子，允许民间大会饮七天。
English: The month of September was changed to the day of worshipping the land god, and the people's assembly was allowed to drink for seven days.

古文：并州改置北都。
现代文：并州改设为北都。
English: And the state was re-established as the northern capital.

古文：冬十月，武威军总管王孝杰大破吐蕃，复龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶镇。
现代文：冬十月，武威军总管王孝杰大破吐蕃，恢复龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶镇。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Xiaojie, the commander-in-chief of the Wuwei army, made a major breakthrough in Tuye, and restored the towns of Guizi, Yuye, Shule and Chibiye.

古文：二年春一月，亲享明堂。
现代文：长寿二年春正月，皇上亲自祭献明堂。
English: In the first month of the second year of his long life, the emperor himself dedicated Myodo.

古文：癸亥，杀皇嗣妃刘氏、窦氏。
现代文：腊月三日，杀皇嗣轮之妃刘氏、窦氏。
English: On the third day of the twelfth lunar month, the Liu and Dou clans killed the empress Dowager Liu.

古文：腊月，改封皇孙成器为寿春郡王，恆王成义为衡阳郡王，隆基为临淄郡王，卫王隆范为巴陵郡王，隆业为彭城郡王。
现代文：改封皇孙成器为寿春郡王，恒王成义为衡阳郡王，隆基为临淄郡王，卫王隆范为巴陵郡王，隆业为彭城郡王。
English: The imperial grandson Cheng Jie was named the king of Shuchun County, Heng Wang Cheng Yi was named the king of Hengyang County, Longji was named the king of Linyi County, Wei Wang Long Fan was named the king of Baling County, and Longye was named the king of Pengcheng County.

古文：春二月，尚方监裴匪躬坐潜谒皇嗣，腰斩于都市。
现代文：春二月，尚方监裴匪躬犯了私自晋见皇嗣豫王轮的罪，在都市腰斩。
English: In the spring of February, Shangfang supervisor Pei Bandits committed the crime of seeing the imperial heir Yu Wanglun, and was beheaded in the city.

古文：秋九月，上加金轮圣神皇帝号，大赦天下，大酺七日。
现代文：秋九月，皇上加金轮圣神皇帝尊号，大赦天下，特许百姓大会饮七天。
English: In the autumn and September, the emperor gave Jinlun the title of Holy Spirit Emperor, pardoned the world, and allowed the people's assembly to drink for seven days.

古文：辛丑，司宾卿豆卢钦望为内史，文昌右丞韦巨源同凤阁鸾台平章事，秋官侍郎陆元方为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：十五日，司宾卿豆卢钦望为内史，文昌右丞韦巨源同凤阁鸾台平章事，秋官侍郎陆元方为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the chief guest, Doulu Qinwang, served as the secretary, Wenchang Yuzheng Wei Jiuyuan and Fengge Quan Taihei as the secretary, and Lu Yuanfang, the attendant of the autumn official, served as the attendant of Xingtai and Fengge Quan Taihei as the secretary.

古文：三年春一月，亲享明堂。
现代文：长寿三年正月，皇上亲自祭献明堂。
English: In the first month of the third year of his long life, the emperor himself dedicated Myodo.

古文：三月，凤阁侍郎李昭德检校内史，鸾台侍郎苏味道同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：三月，凤阁侍郎李昭德任检校内史，鸾台侍郎苏味道任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In March, Fengge's chamberlain Li Zhaode was assigned to inspect the school's internal history, and Xingtai's chamberlain Su Yucheng was assigned to Fengge's Xingtaiping chapter.

古文：韦巨源为夏官侍郎，依旧知政事。
现代文：韦巨源为夏官侍郎，依旧主持政事。
English: Wei Jiuyuan was the summer official's valet and still presided over government affairs.

古文：四月，夏官尚书王孝杰同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：四月，夏官尚书王孝杰同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In April, Xia Guan Shangshu Wang Xiaojie and Fengge Gongtai three dishes.

古文：五月，上加尊号为越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元为延载，大酺七日。
现代文：五月，皇上加尊号为越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元为延载，允许百姓大会饮七天，以示庆贺。
English: In May, Emperor Gaozong changed his title to Emperor of the Holy Spirit of the Golden Wheel of the Yue Dynasty, granted amnesty to the whole world, changed the era name to Yangtze, and allowed the general assembly of the people to drink for seven days to celebrate.

古文：秋八月，司宾少卿姚璹为纳言。
现代文：秋八月，司宾少卿姚王寿为纳言。
English: In the autumn and August, the chief secretary, Yao Wangshou, became the prime minister.

古文：左肃政御史中丞杨再思为鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，仍并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：左肃政御史中丞杨再思为鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，仍然都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Zuo Su Zheng Mi Shi Zhongzheng Yang Zaisi was the attendant of Fengtai, and Luo Zhou Sima Du Jing Jian was the attendant of Fengge, both of whom were still in charge of Fengtai.

古文：梁王武三思劝率诸蕃酋长奏请大征敛东都铜铁，造天枢于端门之外，立颂以纪上之功业。
现代文：梁王武三思劝导统率所有蕃人的酋长奏请皇上大力征集东都铜铁，建造象征国家权力的北斗天枢星在端门之外，建立颂词以纪皇上之功业。
English: Liang Wang Wu thoughtfully advised and led all the eunuchs' chiefs to ask the emperor to vigorously collect Dongdu copper and iron, build the Big Dipper, a symbol of national power, outside the front gate, and establish a eulogy to commemorate the emperor's achievements.

古文：九月，内史李昭德左授钦州南宾县尉。
现代文：九月，内史李昭德降职为钦州南宾县尉。
English: In September, local historian Li Zhaode was demoted to the rank of lieutenant of Nanbin County, Qinzhou.

古文：冬十月，文昌右丞李元素为凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：冬十月，文昌右丞李元素任凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the winter of October, Wenchang Rongcheng was assigned to Fengge and Taiheizhang.

古文：证圣元年春一月，上加尊号曰慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元，大酺七日。
现代文：证圣元年春一月，皇上加尊号曰慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元，特许民间大宴饮七天。
English: In the spring and January of the first year of Jian Sheng, the emperor's honorary title was changed to Cixi Yuegu Golden Wheel Holy Spirit Emperor, the world was amnestied, the era was changed, and a special folk banquet was held for seven days.

古文：戊子，豆卢钦望、韦巨源、杜景俭、苏味道、陆元方并左授赵、鄜、集、绥等州刺史。
现代文：九日，豆卢钦望、韦巨源、杜景俭、苏味道、陆元方，都降职授予赵州、州、集州、绥州等州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Jinwang, Wei Jiuyuan, Du Jingjian, Su Ji, and Lu Yuanfang of Doulu were all demoted to Zhao, Zhou, Juzhou, and Zhangzhou.

古文：丙申夜，明堂灾，至明而并从煨烬。
现代文：十七日夜，明堂发生火灾，到天明全部烧为灰烬。
English: On the evening of the 17th, a fire broke out in the Ming Hall, and by dawn it was all burned to ashes.

古文：庚子，以明堂灾告庙，手诏责躬，令内外文武九品已上各上封事，极言正谏。
现代文：二十一日，因为明堂发生火灾皇上告于太庙，亲自下诏书责备自己，命令内外文武九品以上官员各人上封章奏事，尽力提出正告和规劝的意见。
English: On the twenty-first day, because a fire broke out in the Ming Hall, the emperor sent a report to the Great Temple. He personally issued an edict to reproach himself, and ordered the officials of the nine civil and military ranks and above at home and abroad to each write a report, and try their best to put forward a serious report and persuasive opinions.

古文：春二月，上去慈氏越古尊号。
现代文：春二月，皇上取消了慈氏越古的尊号。
English: In the spring of February, the emperor abolished the honorary title of Cixi Yuegu.

古文：秋九月，亲祀南郊，加尊号天册金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元为天册万岁，大辟罪已下及犯十恶常赦所不原者，咸赦除之，大酺九日。
现代文：秋九月，皇上亲自在冬至日到南郊祭天，加尊号曰天丹金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，改元为天册万岁，死罪以下以及犯了十大罪恶、常规赦免而不能饶恕的人，都加以赦免，特许天下百姓大宴饮九天。
English: In autumn and September, the emperor himself went to the southern suburbs on the day of the winter solstice to hold a festival of heaven, and the honorific title was given to the Emperor of Heaven, the Golden Wheel of the Holy Spirit. The emperor pardoned the world, changed the era to the heavenly book, and pardoned all those who committed less than the death penalty and those who committed the ten major sins and those who could not be pardoned, and specially allowed the people of the world to have a grand banquet for nine days.

古文：万岁登封元年腊月甲申，上登封于嵩岳，大赦天下，改元，大酺九日。
现代文：万岁登封元年腊月十六日，皇上在嵩岳登山封禅祭天，大赦天下，改元，特许天下人大宴饮九天。
English: On the 16th day of the twelfth month of the first year of the year, the emperor went to Mount Songyue for a Zen festival. He granted amnesty to the world, changed the era, and specially allowed the world's people to feast for nine days.

古文：丁亥，禅于少室山。
现代文：十九日，在少室山上祭天。
English: On the 14th, Empress Wu went to Mt. Shomuro for a religious service.

古文：己丑，又制内外官三品已上通前赐爵二等，四品已下加两阶。
现代文：二十一日，又诏令内外官三品以上官员按前例赐爵二等，四品以下官员加两阶。
English: On the 21st, he also ordered that officials at home and abroad with three or more court ranks be awarded second-class knighthoods according to precedent, and officials with four or fewer court ranks be awarded two additional ranks.

古文：洛州百姓给复二年，登封、告成县三年。
现代文：洛州百姓免除徭役两年，登封县、告成县百姓免除徭役三年。
English: The people of Lozhou are exempt from corvee service for two years, and the people of Dengfeng County and Guicheng County are exempt from corvee service for three years.

古文：癸巳，至自嵩岳。
现代文：二十五日，皇上从嵩岳回来。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor returned from Mt. Song.

古文：甲午，亲谒太庙。
现代文：二十六日，皇上亲自晋见太庙。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor personally visited the Imperial Temple.

古文：春三月，重造明堂成。
现代文：春三月，重建明堂成功。
English: In March of the spring, the reconstruction of Myeongdong was successful.

古文：夏四月，亲享明堂，大赦天下，改元为万岁通天，大酺七日。
现代文：夏四月，皇上亲自祭祀明堂，大赦天下，改元为万岁通天，特许民间大宴饮七天。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor himself offered a sacrifice to Myeongdong, pardoned the world, changed the era to Long Live Tongtian, and specially allowed a large folk banquet for seven days.

古文：以天下大旱，命文武官九品以上极言时政得失。
现代文：因为天下大旱，命令文武九品以上官员尽力陈述时政得失。
English: Because of the drought, officials of the nine military regions and above were ordered to do their best to explain the gains and losses of the current government.

古文：五月，营州城傍契丹首领松漠都督李尽忠与其妻兄归诚州刺史孙万荣杀都督赵文翙，举兵反，攻陷营州。
现代文：五月，营州城旁契丹首领松漠都督李尽忠与其妻之兄归诚州刺史孙万荣杀了都督赵文岁羽，举兵造反，攻陷营州。
English: In May, near Yingzhou City, the leader of the Khitan people, Songpan Governor Li Jianzhong, and his wife's brother, Guicheng County Governor Sun Wanrong, killed the Governor Zhao Wenyi, raised an army to rebel, and invaded Yingzhou.

古文：尽忠自号可汗。
现代文：李尽忠自己号称可汗。
English: Li Jianzhong calls himself a khan.

古文：乙丑，命鹰扬将军曹仁师、右金吾大将军张玄遇、右武威大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八将讨之。
现代文：二十五日，命令鹰扬将军曹仁师、右金吾大将军张玄遇、右武威大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八名将军讨伐他。
English: On the 25th, he ordered 28 generals to fight against him, including Yingyang General Cao Ren Shi, Right Kingu General Zhang Xuan Yu, Right Wuwei General Li Duan, and Sino-Minor Secretary Ma Ren Si.

古文：秋七月，命春官尚书、梁王三思为安抚大使，纳言姚璹为之副。
现代文：秋七月，命令春官尚书、梁王武三思为安抚大使，纳言姚王寿为副大使。
English: In the autumn and July, he ordered the spring officials Shang Shu and Liang Wang Wu to think twice about being the ambassador of appeasement, and the nagin Yao Wang Shou to be the deputy ambassador.

古文：制改李尽忠为尽灭，孙万荣为万斩。
现代文：诏命改李尽忠的名字为李尽灭，孙万荣为孙万斩。
English: The imperial edict changed the name of Li Jianzhong to Li Jianzhong, and the name of Sun Wanrong to Sun Wancheng.

古文：秋八月，张玄遇、曹仁师、麻仁节与李尽灭战于西硖石黄麞谷，官军败绩，玄遇、仁节并为贼所虏。
现代文：秋八月，张玄遇、曹仁师、麻仁节与李尽灭在西硖石黄鹿章谷作战，官军大败，张玄遇、麻仁节都被贼人所俘虏。
English: In the autumn and August, Zhang Xuanqian, Cao Ren Shi, Ma Ren Jie and Li Jiancai fought in Huanglu Zhanggu, West Fujian, and the government army was defeated. Zhang Xuanqian and Ma Ren Jie were all captured by the thieves.

古文：九月，命右武卫大将军、建安王攸宜为大总管以讨契丹。
现代文：九月，命令右武卫大将军、建安王攸宜为大总管以讨伐契丹。
English: In September, he ordered General Ubuwei and Jian'an Wang Yougi to fight against the Khitan as the general manager.

古文：并州长史王方庆为鸾台侍郎，与殿中监李道广并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：并州长史王方庆为鸾台侍郎，与殿中监李道广都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: And the governor Shi Wang Fangqing was the attendant of Xingtai, and Li Daoguang, the superintendent of the palace, was assigned to Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：吐蕃寇凉州，都督许钦明为贼所执。
现代文：吐蕃入侵凉州，都督许钦明被贼捉住。
English: Tu Wei invaded Liangzhou, and the governor Xu Qinming was captured by the thieves.

古文：庚申，王方庆为凤阁侍郎，仍依旧知政事。
现代文：二十一日，王方庆为凤阁侍郎，仍然依旧主持政事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Fangqing became Fengge's chamberlain and still presided over political affairs.

古文：李尽灭死，其党孙万斩代领其众。
现代文：李尽灭死去，他的部下由孙万斩代替率领。
English: Li Yanqi died, and his subordinates were led by Sun Wanzhao instead.

古文：冬十月，孙万斩攻陷冀州，刺史陆宝积死之。
现代文：冬十月，孙万斩攻陷冀州，刺史陆宝积战死。
English: In the winter of October, Sun Wan finally invaded Jizhou, stabbing Shi Lu Bao to death.

古文：十一月，又陷瀛州属县。
现代文：十一月，孙万斩又攻陷瀛州下属各县。
English: In November, Sun Wancheng again invaded the counties under Ganzhou.

古文：二年正月，亲享明堂。
现代文：万岁通天二年正月，皇上亲自祭明堂。
English: In the first month of the second year of Wanrei Tsuten, the emperor himself dedicated Myodo.

古文：凤阁侍郎李元素、夏官侍郎孙元亨坐与綦连耀谋反，伏诛。
现代文：凤阁侍郎李元素、夏官侍郎孙元亨犯了与綦连耀共同谋反的罪，被判死刑。
English: Fengge's chamberlain, Li Ying, and Xia Guan's chamberlain, Sun Yuanheng, were found guilty of plotting a rebellion with Zou Lianyao and sentenced to death.

古文：原州都督府司马娄师德为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：原州都督府司马娄师德为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Sima Qian Shide, the governor of Wonju, was Fengge's chamberlain and Tongfengge's secretary-general.

古文：春二月，王孝杰、苏宏晖等率兵十八万与孙万斩战于硖石谷，王师败绩，孝杰没于阵，宏晖弃甲而遁。
现代文：春二月，王孝杰、苏宏晖等率兵十八万与孙万斩在硖石谷作战，王孝杰在阵中死去，苏宏晖抛弃铠甲逃跑。
English: In the spring of February, Wang Xiaojie, Su Hongtao and other 180,000 soldiers led by Wang Xiaojie and Su Hongtao fought with Sun Wancheng in Shaoshi Valley. Wang Xiaojie died in the battle, and Su Hongtao abandoned armor and fled.

古文：夏四月，铸九鼎成，置于明堂之庭，前益州大都督府长史王及善为内史。
现代文：夏四月，九鼎铸造成功，放置在明堂的庭院里，先前任益州大都督府长史的王及善为内史。
English: In the summer of April, the Jiuding was successfully cast and placed in the courtyard of the Ming Hall. Wang Hezen, who had previously served as the governor of Yizhou, was the chief historian.

古文：五月，命右金吾大将军、河内王懿宗为大总管，右肃政御史大夫娄师德为副大总管，右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义为前军总管，率兵二十万以讨孙万斩。
现代文：五月，命令右金吾大将军、河内王懿宗为大总管，右肃政御史大夫娄师德为副大总管，右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义为前军总管，率兵二十万人以讨伐孙万斩。
English: In May, he ordered the grand general of the Right Kingu, Hanoi Wang Shanzong, to be the grand general manager, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the grand master of the Right Sui Dynasty, the

古文：六月，内史李昭德、司仆少卿来俊臣以罪伏诛。
现代文：六月，内史李昭德、司仆少卿来俊臣因犯罪而被杀。
English: In June, Li Zhaode, a member of the Inner History Department, and Lai Juntong, a servant of Shaoqing, were killed for committing crimes.

古文：孙万斩为其家奴所杀，余党大溃。
现代文：孙万斩被他的家中奴仆所杀，其余党徒崩溃。
English: Sun Wancheng was killed by his family servant, and the rest of the party collapsed.

古文：魏王承嗣、梁王三思并同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：魏王武承嗣、梁王武三思都任同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: Wei Wangwu Chengzhi and Liang Wangwu Sanshi were both assigned to Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：秋八月，纳言姚璹为益州大都督府长史。
现代文：秋八月，纳言姚王寿为益州大都督府长史。
English: In autumn and August, Nagan Yao Wang Shou became the governor of Yizhou.

古文：九月，以契丹李尽灭等平，大赦天下，改元为神功，大酺七日。
现代文：九月，因为契丹李尽灭等被平定，大赦天下，改元为神功，特许民众大宴饮七天。
English: In September, because Khitan Li Jianhu and others were subdued, the world was pardoned, the Yuan was changed to Shengong, and the people were allowed to have a grand banquet for seven days.

古文：娄师德为纳言。
现代文：娄师德任命为纳言。
English: His teacher was De Ren Nagon.

古文：冬十月，前幽州都督狄仁杰为鸾台侍郎，司刑卿杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：冬十月，前幽州都督狄仁杰为鸾台侍郎，司刑卿杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the winter of October, the former Yuzhou governor Di Renjie served as the attendant of Fengtai, and the chief magistrate Du Jingjian served as the attendant of Fengge, both of which were appointed as the subordinate officers of Fengtai.

古文：圣历元年正月，亲享明堂，大赦天下，改元，大酺九日。
现代文：圣历元年正月，皇上亲自祭祀明堂，大赦天下，改元，特许民间大宴饮九天。
English: In the first month of the first year of the sacred calendar, the emperor personally sacrificed the Ming hall, pardoned the world, changed the era, and specially allowed the folk banquet for nine days.

古文：春三月，召庐陵王哲于房州。
现代文：春三月，皇上召庐陵王李哲在房州会见。
English: In the spring of March, the emperor summoned the king of Fuling, Li Zhe, to meet him in Fangzhou.

古文：夏五月，禁天下屠杀。
现代文：夏五月，禁止天下屠杀牲畜。
English: In the summer of May, the slaughter of livestock was banned throughout the world.

古文：突厥默啜上言，有女请和亲。
现代文：突厥默啜上书言，有女儿请求与大唐和亲。
English: The Turk silently recited the sutra, and his daughter begged him to make peace with the Great Tang.

古文：秋七月，令淮阳王武延秀往突厥，纳默啜女为妃。
现代文：秋七月，皇上命令淮阳王武延秀前往突厥，娶默啜的女儿为妃子。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor ordered Huaiyang King Wu Yanxiu to go to Turkey to marry his silent daughter.

古文：遣右豹韬卫大将军阎知微摄春官尚书，赴虏庭。
现代文：派遣右豹韬卫大将军阎知微代理春官尚书，前往敌虏王庭。
English: He dispatched the Right Leopard Guard General Yan Zhiwei, acting on behalf of Chun Guan Shang Shu, to march to the enemy's palace.

古文：八月，突厥默啜以延秀非唐室诸王，乃囚于别所，率众与阎知微入寇妫、檀等州。
现代文：八月，突厥默啜因为淮阳王武延秀不是唐宗室诸王，竟将武延秀囚禁在别处，率领部众与阎知微入侵妫、檀等州。
English: In August, because Huaiyang King Wu Yanxiu was not from the Tang dynasty, the Turks imprisoned Wu Yanxiu in a different place and led his followers and Yan Zhiwei to invade Shandong, Danzhou and other provinces.

古文：命司属卿高平王重规、右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义、幽州都督张仁亶、右羽林卫大将军李多祚等率兵二十万逆击，乃放延秀还。
现代文：皇上命令司属卿高平王重规、右武威卫大将军沙吒忠义、幽州都督张仁、右羽林卫大将军李多祚等人率兵二十万迎击，默啜这才放回武延秀。
English: The emperor ordered the subordinate secretary Gao Ping Wang Chong Gai, the right wing Wei Wei general Shajian Zhongyi, the Yuzhou governor Zhang Ren, the right wing Lin Wei general Li Daojun and others to lead 200,000 soldiers to counterattack. It was only then that Wu Yanxiu was released.

古文：己丑，默啜攻陷定州，刺史孙彦高死之，焚烧百姓庐舍，遇害者数千人。
现代文：二日，默啜攻陷定州，刺史孙彦高战死，突厥人焚烧百姓房屋，遭残害者数千人。
English: On the second day, they silently attacked and besieged Dingzhou. Sun Yat-sen was killed in the battle, the Turks burned people's houses, and thousands of people were injured.

古文：魏王承嗣卒。
现代文：魏王武承嗣去世。
English: Wei King Wu Chengzhi passed away.

古文：庚子，梁王三思为内史，狄仁杰为纳言。
现代文：十三日，梁王武三思为内史，狄仁杰为纳言。
English: On the 13th, Liang Wangwusanzi was the internal history, and Di Renjie was the advice.

古文：九月，建昌王攸宁同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：九月，建昌王武攸宁任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In September, Jianchang Wangwu Youning was appointed to Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：默啜攻陷赵州，刺史高睿遇害。
现代文：默啜攻陷赵州，刺史高睿被杀死。
English: Zhaozhou was invaded in silence, and the assassin Gao Rui was killed.

古文：丙子，庐陵王哲为皇太子，令依旧名显，大赦天下，大酺五日。
现代文：十九日，庐陵王李哲为皇太子，命令他依旧名叫显，大赦天下，特许民间大宴会五天。
English: On the 19th, Li Zhe, the king of Fuling, became the crown prince and ordered that he still be called Xian, granted amnesty to the whole world, and allowed a grand folk banquet for five days.

古文：令纳言狄仁杰为河北道行军元帅。
现代文：命令纳言狄仁杰为河北道行军元帅。
English: Nagon Di Renjie was ordered to be the marshal of the march in Hebei Province.

古文：辛巳，皇太子谒太庙。
现代文：二十四日，皇太子晋见太庙。
English: On the 24th, Crown Prince Jin visited the Imperial Temple.

古文：天官侍郎苏味道凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：天官侍郎苏味道任凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: The celestial officer's attendant, Su Ji, was appointed as Fengge's attendant, and Dongfengge's concubine, Taihei, was appointed to the post.

古文：癸未，默啜尽杀所掠赵、定州男女万余人，从五回道而去，所至残害，不可胜纪。
现代文：二十六日，默啜全部杀掉了所掳掠的赵州、定州男女一万多人，然后从五回道返回去，所到之处，残害民众，不可胜记。
English: On the 26th, he silently killed more than ten thousand men and women from Zhaozhou and Dingzhou, whom he had captured, and then he returned from five directions, and wherever he went, he massacred the people.

古文：冬十月，夏官侍郎姚元崇、麟台少监李峤并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：冬十月，夏官侍郎姚元崇、麟台少监李峤都任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the winter of October, Xia Guan's valet, Yao Yuan Chong, and Lintai's junior inspector, Li Yan, were both assigned to Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：是月，阎知微自突厥叛归，族诛之。
现代文：这月，阎知微从突厥叛逃归来，皇上将他灭族。
English: This month, Yan Zhiwei returned from defecting from the Turks, and the emperor ordered him to be exterminated.

古文：二年春二月，封皇嗣旦为相王。
现代文：圣历二年春二月，封皇嗣李旦为相王。
English: In the spring and February of the second year of the Sacred Calendar, Li Dan, the heir to the throne, was crowned as the King of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：初为宠臣张易之及其弟昌宗置控鹤府官员，寻改为奉宸府，班在御史大夫下。
现代文：当初为了宠臣张易之及其弟张昌宗而设置控鹤府官员，不久控鹤府改为奉宸府，官职地位在御史大夫之下。
English: At first, officials of Hengchun were set up for the sake of his favorite vassal Zhang Yizhi and his younger brother Zhang Changzong. Soon, Hengchun was changed to Bongye, and the official position was below that of the Grand Historian.

古文：左肃政御史中丞魏元忠为凤阁侍郎，吉顼为天官侍郎，并同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：左肃政御史中丞魏元忠为凤阁侍郎，吉顼为天官侍郎，并任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Zuo Su Zheng Mi Shi Zhongzheng Wei Yuanzhong was Fengge's chamberlain, and Jixuan was the celestial officer's chamberlain, and also served as Fengge's eunuch.

古文：戊子，幸嵩山，过王子晋庙。
现代文：三日，皇上驾到嵩山，拜访了王子晋庙。
English: On the third day, the emperor drove to Songshan and visited the Prince Jin Temple.

古文：丙申，幸缑山。
现代文：十一日，皇上驾到缑山。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor drove to Shaoshan.

古文：丁酉，至自嵩山。
现代文：十二日，皇上从嵩山归来。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor returned from Songshan.

古文：夏四月，吐蕃大论赞婆来奔。
现代文：夏四月，吐蕃大论赞婆前来投奔。
English: In the summer of April, Ms. Zhanba, a famous poet from Tubo, came to the capital.

古文：秋七月，上以春秋高，虑皇太子、相王与梁王武三思、定王武攸宁等不协，令立誓文于明堂。
现代文：秋七月，皇上武则天因年龄太大，担忧皇太子李哲、相王李旦与梁王武三思、定王武攸宁等人不和，命令他们立下誓词在明堂。
English: In autumn and July, Emperor Wu Zetian was worried that Crown Prince Li Zhe and Prince Li Dan would not get along with Liang Wang Wusan Si and Ding Wang Wu Youning because they were too old, and ordered them to swear an oath in the Ming Hall.

古文：八月，王及善为文昌左相，豆卢钦望为文昌右相，仍并同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：八月，王及善为文昌左相，豆卢钦望为文昌右相，仍然都是同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In August, Wang Jizhen became the left minister of Wenchang, and Doulu Qinwang became the right minister of Wenchang. They are still the three ministers of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：冬十月乙亥，幸福昌县。
现代文：冬九月二十四日，皇上驾到福昌县。
English: On the 24th day of the 9th month of winter, the emperor drove to Fuchang County.

古文：王及善薨。
现代文：王及善去世。
English: Wang Yizhen passed away.

古文：三年正月戊寅，梁王三思为特进，天官侍郎吉顼配流岭表。
现代文：圣历三年正月二十八日，梁王武三思为特进，天官侍郎吉顼流放充军到岭表。
English: On the 28th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the 3rd lunar calendar, Liang Wang Wu San Si marched as a special advance, and the celestial officer's attendant Yoshitaka exiled the army to the Ling table.

古文：腊月辛巳，封皇太子男重润为邵王。
现代文：腊月一日，封皇太子之子重润为邵王。
English: On the first day of the lunar month, the son of Crown Prince Fong, Chongrun, became King Shao.

古文：狄仁杰为内史。
现代文：狄仁杰为内史。
English: Di Renjie is an internal history.

古文：戊寅，幸汝州之温汤。
现代文：二十五日，在嵩山造三阳宫。一月十七日，皇上驾到汝州之温汤。
English: On the 25th, the Sanyang Palace was built in Songshan. On the 17th of January, the emperor drove to the warm soup of Ruzhou.

古文：甲戌，至自温汤、造三阳宫于嵩山。春三月，李峤为鸾台侍郎，知政事如故。
现代文：二十四日，皇上从温汤回来。春三月，李峤为鸾台侍郎，主持政事仍依原来一样。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor returned from the hot soup. In the spring and March, Li Qiye was the attendant of Xingtai, and presided over the affairs of state as before.

古文：夏四月戊申，幸三阳宫。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，驾到三阳宫。
English: On the 29th day of the 4th month of summer, I drove to Sanyang Palace.

古文：五月癸丑，上以所疾康复，大赦天下，改元为久视，停金轮等尊号，大酺五日。
现代文：五月五日，皇上因疾病康复，大赦天下，改元为久视，停止金轮等尊号，特许民间大饮宴五天。
English: On May 5th, the emperor recovered from illness, pardoned the world, changed the era to Jiuzi, stopped the golden wheel and other honorary titles, and allowed the folk banquet for five days.

古文：六月，魏元忠为左肃政御史大夫，仍旧知政事。
现代文：六月，魏元忠为左肃政御史大夫，仍旧主持政事。
English: In June, Wei Yuanzhong was promoted to Zuo Su Zheng Mi Shi Daifu, and still presided over political affairs.

古文：是夏大旱。
现代文：这年夏天大旱灾。
English: The summer was marked by a severe drought.

古文：冬十月甲寅，复旧正朔，改一月为正月，仍以为岁首，正月依旧为十一月，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月，皇上从三阳宫归来。天官侍郎张锡为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事；他的外甥凤阁鸾台平章事李峤任成均祭酒，罢免参知政事。九月，内史狄仁杰去世。冬十月十日，恢复旧的正月和朔日，改一月为正月，仍然以正月为年头，正月依旧为十一月，大赦天下。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor returned from Sanyang Palace. Zhang Xi, the attendant of the heavenly official, was the attendant of Fengge, the same as Fengge Xingtai Pingzhang; his nephew Fengge Xingtai Pingzhang, Li Xunren, was appointed as the sacrificial wine, and was dismissed as the political advisor. In September, Nishi Di Renjie died. In the winter, on October 10, the old New Year's Day and New Year's Day were restored, and January was changed to the New Year's Day. The New Year's Day was still the beginning of the year, and the New Year's Day was still November

古文：韦巨源为地官尚书，文昌左丞韦安石为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：韦巨源任地官尚书，文昌左丞韦安石为鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Wei Jiuyuan was appointed as the local official of Shangshu, and Wenchang Zuo and Wei Anshi as the attendants of Xingtai and Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：丁卯，幸新安，曲赦其县。
现代文：二十三日，皇上驾到新安，特别赦免新安县的徭役。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor drove to Xin'an and specially pardoned the officials of Xin'an County.

古文：壬申，至自新安。
现代文：二十八日，皇上从新安归来。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned from Xin'an.

古文：十二月，开屠禁，诸祠祭令依旧用牲牢。
现代文：十二月，放开屠杀牲畜的禁令，所有祠庙祭祀可以仍旧杀猪、牛、羊来祭祀。
English: In December, the ban on the slaughter of livestock was lifted, and all temples and shrines can still slaughter pigs, cattle, and sheep for sacrifice.

古文：大足元年春正月，制改元。
现代文：大足元年春正月，皇上诏令改元。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the year, the emperor issued a decree to change the era.

古文：二月，鸾台侍郎李怀远同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：二月，鸾台侍郎李怀远任凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In February, the Xingtai waiter Li Huaiyuan was appointed to Fengge Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：三月，姚元崇为凤阁侍郎，依旧知政事。
现代文：三月，姚元崇任凤阁侍郎，依旧主持政事。
English: In March, Yao Yuan Chong became Fengge's chamberlain and continued to preside over government affairs.

古文：丙申，凤阁侍郎张锡坐赃配循州。
现代文：二十三日，凤阁侍郎张锡因贪污犯法发配到循州。
English: On the 23rd, Fengge waiter Zhang Xi was sent to Chuzhou for corruption.

古文：夏五月，幸三阳宫。
现代文：夏五月，皇上驾到三阳宫。
English: In the summer of May, the emperor arrived at Sanyang Palace.

古文：命左肃政御史大夫魏元忠为总管以备突厥。
现代文：命令左肃政御史大夫魏元忠为总管以防备突厥。
English: He ordered Wei Yuanzhong, the doctor of history of Zuozheng, to be the chief administrator to guard against the Turks.

古文：天官侍郎顾琮同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：天官侍郎顾琮任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Gu Yao, the attendant of the heavenly official, was assigned to the Taihei chapter of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：六月，夏官侍郎李迥秀同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：六月，夏官侍郎李迥秀任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In June, Li Lanxiu, the summer official's personal attendant, went to the Fengge Pavilion for the Taihei Ceremony.

古文：辛未，曲赦告成县。
现代文：三十日，特别赦免告成县一切徭役。
English: On the 30th, a special amnesty was issued to all bailiffs in Zhucheng County.

古文：秋七月甲戌，至自三阳宫。
现代文：秋七月三日，皇上从三阳宫回来。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month in autumn, the emperor returned from Sanyang Palace.

古文：九月，邵王重润为易之谗构，令自死。
现代文：九月，邵王重润被张易之进谗言陷害，皇上令他自杀。
English: In September, Shao Wang Chongrun was framed by Zhang Yizhi's slander, and the emperor ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：冬十月，幸京师，大赦天下，改元为长安。
现代文：冬十月，皇上驾到京师，大赦天下，改元为长安。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor rode to Beijing, pardoned the world, and changed the era to Chang'an.

古文：二年春正月，突厥寇盐、夏等州，杀掠人吏。
现代文：二年春正月，突厥入侵盐、夏等州，残杀、掳掠官员和百姓。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Turks invaded Salt, Xia and other states, killing and looting officials and people.

古文：秋九月乙丑，日有蚀之，不尽如钩，京师及四方见之。
现代文：秋九月一日，有日蚀，太阳仅剩下钩状，京师及四方之人都见到。
English: On the first day of autumn and September, there was a solar eclipse, and the sun was only hook-shaped, which was seen by people in Beijing and all over the country.

古文：冬十月，日本国遣使贡方物。
现代文：冬十月，日本国派遣使者进贡土特产。
English: In the winter of October, Japan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local specialty.

古文：十一月，相王旦为司徒。
现代文：十一月，相王旦被任命为司徒。
English: In November, So Wangdan was appointed as the chief monk.

古文：戊子，亲祀南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，皇上亲自在南边郊外祭祀天地，大赦天下。
English: On the 25th, the emperor himself went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth and grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：三年春三月壬戌，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年春三月一日，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March in the spring of the third year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏四月庚子，相王旦表让司徒，许之。
现代文：夏四月九日，相王李旦上表请求辞去司徒，皇上同意了。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the king of the Sangha, Li Dan, petitioned the emperor to resign from the post of sutra, and the emperor agreed.

古文：改文昌台为中台。
现代文：改文昌台为中台。
English: Changdai was changed to Zhongdai.

古文：李峤知纳言事。
现代文：李峤主持纳言之事。
English: Li Wei presided over the acceptance speech.

古文：六月，宁州雨，山水暴涨，漂流二千余家，溺死者千余人。
现代文：六月，宁州大雨，山水猛涨，山水冲走了两千多家，淹死了一千多人。
English: In June, Ningzhou was hit by heavy rain, and the floods surged. The floods swept away more than two thousand people and drowned more than one thousand people.

古文：秋七月，杀右金吾大将军唐休璟。
现代文：秋七月，皇上杀了右金吾大将军唐休王景。
English: In autumn and July, the emperor killed the right Kingu general Tang Xiu Wangjing.

古文：秋九月，正谏大夫硃敬则同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：秋九月，正谏大夫朱敬则任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the autumn and September, Zhu Jing, the chief doctor of the General Hospital, was appointed to Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：戊申，相王旦为雍州牧。
现代文：二十日，相王李旦任雍州牧。
English: On the 20th, the king of the party, Li Dan, was appointed Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：是月，御史大夫兼知政事、太子右庶子魏元忠为张昌宗所谮，左授端州高要尉。
现代文：这月，御史大夫兼知政事、太子右庶子魏元忠被张昌宗所诋毁，降职为端州高要县尉。
English: In this month, Wei Yuanzhong, the imperial historian, scholar and statesman, and the prince's son-in-law, was slandered by Zhang Changzong and demoted to the position of county official of Danzhou High School.

古文：京师大雨雹，人畜有冻死者。
现代文：京师下大雨冰雹，人和畜牲都有冻死的。
English: Beijing was hit by heavy rain and hail, and people and animals froze to death.

古文：冬十月丙寅，驾还神都。
现代文：冬十月八日，皇上车驾还神都。
English: On the 8th day of October in winter, the imperial chariot drove back to the capital.

古文：乙酉，至自京师。
现代文：二十七日，皇上从京师来。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor came from Kyoto.

古文：四年春正月，造兴泰宫于寿安县之万安山。
现代文：四年春正月，在寿安县之万安山建造兴泰宫。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the Xingtai Palace was built in the Wan'an Mountain of Shou'an County.

古文：天官侍郎韦嗣立为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：天官侍郎韦嗣立为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Emperor Tenkan's attendant Wei Xi became Fengge's attendant, and Fengge's retainer Taihei Shoji.

古文：硃敬则请致仕，许之。
现代文：朱敬则请求辞官，皇上同意了。
English: Zhu Jing asked to be relieved of his duties, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三月，进封平恩郡王重福为谯王，夏官侍郎宗楚客同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：三月，晋封平恩郡王重福为谯王，夏官侍郎宗楚客任同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: In March, the king of Ping'an County, Wang Shifu, was promoted to the position of the king of Shanshan, and the summer official, Zong Chu, was appointed to the position of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：夏四月，韦安石知纳言事，李峤知内史事。
现代文：夏四月，韦安石主持纳言事，李峤主持内史事务。
English: In the summer of April, Wei Anshi presided over the speech affairs, and Li Xi presided over the internal history affairs.

古文：丙子，幸兴泰宫六月，天官侍郎崔玄暐同凤阁鸾台平章事；李峤为国子祭酒，知政事如故。
现代文：二十一日皇上驾到兴泰宫。六月，天官侍郎崔玄日韦任同凤阁鸾台平章事；李峤为国子祭酒，主持政事按原来一样。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove to the Xingtai Palace. In June, the celestial official's servant, Cui Xuan Ribei, was appointed to the Tongfeng Pavilion to preside over the Taihei chapter; Li Xi was the son of the country and presided over the government affairs as before.

古文：七月丙戌，杨再思为内史。
现代文：七月三日，杨再思为内史。
English: On July 3rd, Yang Jieshi became an internal historian.

古文：甲午，至自兴泰宫。
现代文：十一日，皇上从兴泰宫回来。
English: On the eleventh day, the emperor returned from the Xingtai Palace.

古文：自九月至于是，日夜阴晦，大雨雪，都中人有饥冻死者，令官司开仓赈给。
现代文：宗楚客降职为原州都督。八月，姚元崇为司仆卿、知政事；韦安石任检校扬州大都督府长史。冬十月，李峤为地官尚书，张柬之为凤阁鸾台平章事。从九月到这天，日夜天气晦暗，下大雪，京师中有饥饿和冻死的人，皇上命令官府开仓赈济。
English: Zong Chuk was demoted to the position of the governor of Yuanzhou. In August, Yao Yuan Chong was appointed to the position of the secretary and the governor; Wei Anshi was appointed to the position of the chief historian of the governor of Yangzhou. In winter, in October, Li Qian was appointed to the position of the governor of Shangshu, and Zhang Qian was appointed to the position of the governor of Fengge and Taihei. From September to this day, the weather was gloomy day and night, it was snowing heavily, and there were people in Beijing who were starving and freezing to death. The emperor ordered the government to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：神龙元年春正月，大赦，改元。
现代文：神龙元年春正月，大赦，改元。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Dragon, the amnesty came into effect and the era was changed.

古文：上不豫，制自文明元年已后得罪人，除扬、豫、博三州及诸逆魁首，咸赦除之。
现代文：皇上身体不适，诏令从文明元年以后犯罪的人，除了扬、豫、博三州以及所有叛逆罪首外，都加以赦免。
English: The emperor was unwell, and issued a decree to pardon all those who had committed crimes since the first year of civilization, with the exception of Yang, Yu, Bosanzhou, and all the heads of treason.

古文：癸亥，麟台监张易之与弟司仆卿昌宗反，皇太子率左右羽林军桓彦范、敬晖等，以羽林兵入禁中诛之。
现代文：二十二日，麟台监张易之与弟司仆卿张昌宗谋反，皇太子率领左右羽林军桓彦范、敬晖等人，用羽林兵入宫禁中杀了他们。
English: On the 22nd, Lintai Supervisor Zhang Yizhi plotted a rebellion with his younger brother, Zhang Changzong, who was a servant of the secretary. The crown prince led the left and right Ulin troops, including Quan Yanfan and Jing Yi, and killed them with Ulin soldiers in the palace.

古文：甲辰，皇太子监国，总统万机，大赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，皇太子代理国政，总统国家，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, the crown prince took over as acting head of state, the president of the country, and pardoned the world.

古文：是日，上传皇帝位于皇太子，徙居上阳宫。
现代文：这天，皇上传皇帝位给皇太子李显，迁居到上阳宫。
English: On this day, the emperor transferred the imperial throne to Crown Prince Li Xian and moved to Shangyang Palace.

古文：戊申，皇帝上尊号曰则天大圣皇帝。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝上尊号曰则天大圣皇帝。
English: On the 27th, the emperor's posthumous name was changed to Emperor Zetian the Great and Holy.

古文：冬十一月壬寅，则天将大渐，遗制祔庙、归陵，令去帝号，称则天大圣皇后；其王、萧二家及褚遂良、韩瑗等子孙亲属当时缘累者，咸令复业。
现代文：冬十一月二十六日，武则天病危，遗令死后附到李唐之太庙、归到李氏陵墓，命令取消皇帝号，称作则天大圣皇后；那些王皇后、萧良悌二家以及褚遂良、韩瑗等人的子孙亲属当时由于受到牵连者，都令他们恢复常业。
English: On the 26th day of the 11th month of the winter, Wu Zetian was critically ill. After his death, his last will and testament was attached to the Great Temple of Li Tang and returned to the tomb of the Li clan. He ordered the cancellation of the emperor's name, which was called the Zetian Great Holy Empress. Those descendants and relatives of the Wang Empress, Xiao Liang and the two families of Xiao Suiliang and Han Qi, who were implicated at the time, were ordered to resume their regular work.

古文：是日，崩于上阳宫之仙居殿，年八十三，谥曰则天大圣皇后。
现代文：这天，武则天在上阳宫之仙居殿去世，年八十三岁，谥号曰则天大圣皇后。
English: On this day, Wu Zetian passed away at the age of 83, in the Hall of Immortals in the Shangyang Palace. Her posthumous name was Zetian the Great Holy Empress.

古文：二年五月庚申，祔葬于乾陵。
现代文：神龙二年五月十八日，合葬于乾陵。
English: They were buried together in the Qianling Mausoleum on May 18, the second year of the Dragon.

古文：睿宗即位，诏依上元年故事，号为天后，未几，追尊为大圣天后，改号为则天皇太后。
现代文：睿宗即皇帝位，诏令依照上元年间的旧例，号称武则天为天后，不久，追尊为大圣天后，改号为则天皇太后。
English: Ruizong was the emperor, and the imperial edict, in accordance with the old practice in the first year of the new century, announced that Wu Zetian was the empress dowager. Soon after, she was revered as the great holy empress dowager and renamed the empress dowager of Emperor Zetian.

古文：太后尝召文学之士周思茂、范履冰、卫敬业，令撰《玄览》及《古今内范》各百卷，《青宫纪要》、《少阳政范》各三十卷，《维城典训》、《凤楼新诫》、《孝子列女传》各二十卷，《内轨要略》、《乐书要录》各十卷，《百僚新诫》、《兆人本业》各五卷，《臣范》两卷，《垂拱格》四卷，并文集一百二十卷，藏于秘阁。
现代文：太后曾经召文学之士周思茂、范履冰、卫敬业，令他们撰写《玄览》及《古今内范》各一百卷，《青宫纪要》、《少阳政范》各三十卷，《维城典训》、《凤楼新诫》、《孝子列女传》各二十卷，《内范要略》、《乐书要录》各十卷，《百僚新诫》、《兆人本业》各五卷，《臣轨》两卷，《垂拱格》四卷，并且还有文集一百二十卷，藏在秘阁。
English: The empress dowager once summoned the literary figures Zhou Shimao, Fan Libing, and Wei Jingye, and ordered them to write 100 volumes each of "Ground Survey" and "Ancient and Modern Inner Criterion," 30 volumes each of "Record of the Qing Dynasty" and "Ancient and Modern Inner Criterion," 20 volumes each of "Vicheng Classic," "Fenglou's New Commandment" and "A Biography of Filial Piety," 10 volumes each of "Outline of Inner Criterion" and "Composition of Music," 5 volumes each of "A Hundred New Commandments" and "A Trillion Lives," 2 volumes of "Subject's

古文：史臣曰：治乱，时也，存亡，势也。
现代文：史臣道：治和乱是时势也，存和亡是时势造成的。
English: Shi Shengdao: Governance and chaos are also caused by the current situation. Existence and death are caused by the current situation.

古文：使桀、纣在上，虽十尧不能治；使尧、舜在上，虽十桀不能乱；使懦夫女子乘时得势，亦足坐制群生之命，肆行不义之威。
现代文：让夏桀和商纣两个残暴的君主高居王位，即使十个圣贤的尧也不能治好国家。让圣贤的尧、舜高居君王之位，即使十个夏桀也不可能混乱国家。让懦弱的男人和妇人女子乘着时机而得势，也足以轻易地控制群生的性命，肆意施展不仁义的淫威。
English: If the two cruel monarchs, Hsia-tzu and Shang-tzu, were allowed to occupy the throne, even ten sages could not heal the country. If the sages, Hsi-tzu and Shao-tzu, were allowed to occupy the throne, even ten Hsia-tzu could not disrupt the country. If cowardly men and women took advantage of the opportunity to gain power, it was enough to easily control the lives of the masses of people, and freely exercise the power of unkindness.

古文：观夫武氏称制之年，英才接轸，靡不痛心于家索，扼腕于朝危，竟不能报先帝之恩，卫吾君之子。
现代文：看那武氏称帝的年代，众多英才，无不由于牝鸡司晨而痛心，由于朝廷的危亡而愤怒。终竟不能报答先帝的恩情，保卫君王之子。
English: Looking at the era when the Namu clan was proclaimed emperor, there were many great talents, all of whom were saddened by the death of the emperor, and angry because the imperial court was in danger. In the end, they could not repay the grace of the former emperor and protect the king's son.

古文：俄至无辜被陷，引颈就诛，天地为笼，去将安所？
现代文：不久竟无罪而被陷害，伸着颈子等待杀戮，天地形成了牢笼，哪里是安身立命之所？
English: Soon after, he was found not guilty and framed. He craned his neck waiting to be killed. Heaven and earth formed a cage. Where was the place to live?

古文：悲夫！
现代文：悲痛啊！
English: How sad!

古文：昔掩鼻之谗，古称其毒；人彘之酷，世以为冤。
现代文：古代楚怀王时，有郑袖掩鼻的谗言，古代号称为狠毒；汉高祖的吕后残酷的人彘刑法，世上认为是大冤枉。
English: In ancient times, when King Chuhai was on the throne, there was a sneering rebuke from Zheng Sleeve, known in ancient times as malevolence; the cruel people of Luguo, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, criticized the criminal law, which the world considered to be a great injustice.

古文：武后夺嫡之谋也，振喉绝襁褓之兒，菹醢碎椒涂之骨，其不道也甚矣，亦奸人妒妇之恆态也。
现代文：武后杀嫡子夺帝位之阴谋，断送唐帝王婴儿之生命，杀害压碎了椒房皇后、淑妃的骨头，她的不仁道也太过分了，这也是奸诈忌妒的妇人的常态。
English: Empress Wu's plot to kill her legitimate son to seize the throne, the killing of Emperor Tang's infant daughter, and the crushing of the bones of Empress Jiaofang and Empress Shuxi. Her ruthlessness went too far. This is also the normal state of a treacherous and jealous woman.

古文：然犹泛延谠议，时礼正人。初虽牝鸡司晨，终能复子明辟，飞语辩元忠之罪，善言慰仁杰之心，尊时宪而抑幸臣，听忠言而诛酷吏。
现代文：然而她还广泛援引正直的言论，对正人君子时时给以礼遇，当初虽然是母鸡鸣叫司晨，终于能够使儿子恢复圣明的皇位，很快地辨明御史大夫魏元忠的无罪，好言好语抚慰狄仁杰之心，尊重当时的教令而压抑宠幸之臣，听忠言而诛杀酷吏。
English: However, she also extensively quoted honest remarks, and always gave courtesy to the upright gentleman. Although it was a hen that chirped early in the morning, she was finally able to restore her son to the holy imperial throne. She quickly identified the innocence of the imperial historian Wei Yuanzhong, soothed the heart of Di Renjie with kind words, respected the edict of the time and suppressed the favored minister, and listened to the loyal advice and killed the cruel officials.

古文：有旨哉，有旨哉！
现代文：武则天有好的一面啊！有好的地方啊！
English: Wu Zetian has a good side! There are good places!

