古文：维四月乙未日，武王成辟，四方通殷，命有国。
现代文：四月初七乙未日，武王成了国君。奉命征伐的将领从四方归来，汇报伐殷的战果。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month, King Wu became the ruler of the country. The generals who were ordered to conquer returned from the four directions to report the results of the conquest.

古文：惟一月丙午，旁生魄，若翼日丁未，王乃步自于周，征伐商王纣。
现代文：至此，武王始有天下。一月十六丙午，第二天丁未，武王带兵从宗周来，又起兵出发，去征伐商纣王。
English: At this point, King Wu began to rule the country. On the afternoon of January 16th, and on the following day, King Wu led an army from Zhouzhou and set out again to conquer the Shang Dynasty.

古文：越若来二月既死魄，越五日，甲子朝，至接于商。则咸刘商王纣，执矢恶臣百人。
现代文：到了二月初一，过五天甲子日早上到了商都，杀了商纣王，捉了那些邪恶大臣近百人。
English: On the first day of February, five days later, on the morning of the first day of the second month, he arrived at the mercantile capital, killed the king of merchants, and captured nearly a hundred of those evil ministers.

古文：太公望命御方来，丁卯至，告以馘俘。
现代文：太公望受命阻击纣党方来，丁卯初八归至王所，汇报杀敌及生俘者。
English: Taigongwang was ordered to block the arrival of the Kuomintang side, and Ding Yu returned to the king's palace at the beginning of the eighth month to report on the enemy killed and the prisoners.

古文：戊辰，王遂御循追祀文王。
现代文：初九戊辰，武王于是烧柴燎祭天，追祀文王。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, King Wu then burned firewood to sacrifice to the heavens and worship King Wen.

古文：时日王立政。
现代文：这一天，武王还任命了带兵的长官。
English: On this day, King Wu also appointed a commander to lead the troops.

古文：吕他命伐越、戏、方，壬申荒新至，告以馘俘。
现代文：吕他受武王命讨伐戏方。十三日壬申，吕他归至王所，汇报杀敌数及生俘者。
English: On the thirteenth day of Jinshin, Luta returned to the king's palace to report the number of enemies killed and prisoners taken alive.

古文：侯来命伐，靡集于陈。
现代文：侯来受武王命伐靡及陈。
English: Hou Lai was ordered by King Wu to defeat Chen.

古文：辛巳，至，告以馘俘。
现代文：二十二日辛巳，侯来归至王所，汇报杀敌数及生俘者。
English: On the 22nd day of Hsin, Hou came back to the king's palace to report the number of enemies killed and prisoners taken alive.

古文：甲申，百唶以虎贲誓命伐卫，告以亳俘。
现代文：伯算率勇士誓师，受命伐卫。二十五日甲申，派人向武王汇报杀敌数及生俘者。
English: On the 25th day of Jiaxing, he sent someone to report to King Wu on the number of enemies killed and prisoners taken alive.

古文：辛亥，荐俘殷王鼎。武王乃翼，矢慓矢宪，告天宗上帝。
现代文：手持黄色大斧，把统治众诸侯国之事敬告祖庙。乐师奏乐九节。
English: Holding a large yellow axe in hand, the musician announces to the ancestral temple that he is going to rule all the states. The musician plays nine sections.

古文：王不革服，格于庙，秉语治庶国，籥入九终。王烈祖自太王、太伯、王季、虞公、文王、邑考以列升，维告殷罪，籥人造，王秉黄钺，正国伯。
现代文：武王有功业之祖，从太王、太伯、王季、虞公、文王、伯邑考，依次列其神位于庙堂。
English: King Wu had ancestors of great achievements, from King Taejo, King Taejo, King Ji, King Yugong, King Wen, and King Boejo, and their deities are located in the temple.

古文：壬子，王服衮衣，矢琰格庙，籥人造王，秉黄钺，正邦君。
现代文：武王向先辈神位历数殷纣之罪。乐师奏乐，武王手持黄色大斧任命方伯为各方诸侯之长。壬子这天，武王穿上天子之服，执琰圭，来到周庙。乐师奏乐，武王持黄色大斧任命诸侯。
English: King Wu told his ancestors about the sins of the gods. Musicians played music, and King Wu, holding a large yellow axe, appointed Fangbo as the head of all the princes. On this day, King Wu put on the robe of the son of heaven and came to the Zhou Temple. Musicians played music, and King Wu held a large yellow axe and appointed princes.

古文：癸丑，荐殷俘王士百人。
现代文：癸丑这天，献上所俘殷之王士百人。
English: On that fateful day, he presented a hundred of Yin's captives to the king.

古文：籥人造王矢琰、秉黄钺、执戈王奏庸，大享一终，王拜手，稽首。
现代文：乐师奏乐，武王执琰圭，持黄色大斧，武王执戈守护。王入庙，乐师击金乐《大享》一节。武王拜手稽首，敬礼毕。
English: Musicians play music, King Wu holds a scepter, holding a large yellow axe. King Wu enters the temple, musicians strike a section of the golden music "Great Sharing." King Wu bows his head and salutes.

古文：王定奏庸，大享三终。
现代文：乐师又击金乐《大享》三节。
English: The musicians also played the three movements of the Golden Melody "Great Sharing."

古文：凡天智玉，武王则宝与同。
现代文：那天智玉，武王视之如宝物。
English: On that day, King Wu treated Zhidama like a treasure.

古文：凡武王俘商旧玉有百万。
现代文：武王总共得商王宝玉一万四千，佩带玉一十八万。
English: King Wu won a total of 14,000 Shangwang jewels and 180,000 jewels.

