古文：燕攻齐，取七十余城，唯莒、即墨不下。
现代文：燕国攻打齐国，夺取了七十多座城池，只有莒和即墨两地没有被攻破。
English: Yan attacked Qi and captured more than 70 cities. Only the cities of Yan and Jimo were not conquered.

古文：齐田单以即墨破燕，杀骑劫。
现代文：齐将田单就将即墨作为据点大败燕军，杀死燕国大将骑劫。
English: Qizhong Tiandan took Zhimo as a stronghold to defeat Yan's army and killed the general of Yan's country.

古文：初，燕将攻聊城，人或谗之。燕将惧诛，遂保守聊城，不敢归。
现代文：当初，有位燕国大将攻占了聊城，可是却被人在燕王那里进了谗言，这位燕将害怕会被处死，就死守在聊城不敢回国。
English: At the beginning, a general of Yan Guo captured Liaocheng, but he was reprimanded by someone in Yan Wang. This Yan Guo was afraid of being executed, so he stayed in Liaocheng and did not dare to return to China.

古文：田单攻之岁余，士卒多死，而聊城不下。
现代文：齐将田单为收复聊城，打了一年多，将士死伤累累，可聊城仍然岿然不动。
English: They fought for more than a year to recapture Liaocheng, leaving many soldiers dead and wounded, but Liaocheng remained unmoved.

古文：鲁连乃书，约之矢以射城中，遣燕将曰： 吾闻之，智者不倍时而弃利，勇士不怯死而灭名，忠臣不先身而后君。
现代文：齐国谋臣鲁仲连就写了一封信，绑在箭杆上，射到城内，信中这样对燕将讲： 我听说，智者不违背时势而去做有损利益的事，勇士不会因为害怕死亡就做毁掉名声的事，忠臣总是处处为君王着想而后才想到自己。
English: Lu Zhonglian, the adviser of Qi, wrote a letter, which was tied to an arrow and shot into the city. In the letter, he said to Yan Zheng: I have heard that a wise man does not go against the trend of the times and do something that would harm his interests. A warrior does not do something that would ruin his reputation because he is afraid of death. A loyal subject always thinks about the king before he thinks about himself.

古文：今公行一朝之忿，不顾燕王之无臣，非忠也；杀身亡聊城，而威不信于齐，非勇也；功废名灭，后世无称，非知也。
现代文：现在将军竟因一时的激愤，而不顾燕王将失去一位大臣，这不是忠臣所做的事情；城破身死，威名不会在齐国传播，这不是勇士的举动；战功废弃，英名埋没，后人不会称道，这不是聪明人的举动。
English: Now the general, out of a momentary rage, disregards the fact that King Yan will lose a minister, which is not what a loyal subject would do; the city will be destroyed, the reputation will not spread in Qi, which is not the act of a warrior; the war exploits will be abandoned, the fame will be buried, and posterity will not praise, which is not the act of a clever person.

古文：故知者不再计，勇士不怯死。今死生荣辱，尊卑贵贱，此其一时也。愿公之详计而无与俗同也。
现代文：因此，明智的人不会踌躇不决，勇敢的人也不会贪生怕死，如今生死荣辱、尊卑贵贱，都取决于一时的当机立断，希望将军能够三思而行，不要同世俗之人持一样的想法。
English: Therefore, a wise person will not hesitate, and a brave person will not be greedy for life and afraid of death. Nowadays, life and death, honor and disgrace, high and low, all depend on a momentary snap decision. I hope the general can think twice and not hold the same idea as worldly people.

古文：且楚攻南阳，魏攻平陆，齐无南面之心，以为亡南阳之害，不若得济北之利，故定计而坚守之。
现代文：而且楚国进攻南阳、魏国进逼平陆，齐国压根就没有分兵拒击的意思，认为失去南阳之害，不及攻取聊城之利，所以一心一意攻打聊城。
English: Moreover, Chu attacked Nanyang, Wei invaded and leveled the land, and Qi basically had no intention of refusing to attack. They believed that losing the harm of Nanyang was not as good as capturing Liaocheng, so they single-mindedly attacked Liaocheng.

古文：今秦人下兵，魏不敢东面，横秦之势合，则楚之形危。
现代文：如今秦王出兵助齐，魏国再不敢出兵平陆；秦齐连横之势已定，楚国此刻岌岌可危。
English: Now that the Qin king has sent troops to help Qi, Wei no longer dares to send troops to level the land; Qin Qilian's situation has been determined, and Chu is now in a precarious situation.

古文：且弃南阳，断右壤，存济北，计必为之。
现代文：何况即便弃南阳、失平陆，只要能保全聊城之地，齐国也会一意孤行，在所不惜。
English: What's more, even if Nanyang is abandoned and Pinglu lost, as long as the land of Liaocheng can be preserved, Qi Guo will do whatever it takes.

古文：今楚、魏交退，燕救不至，齐无天下之规，与聊城共据期年之弊，即臣见公之不能得也。
现代文：如今楚、魏先后退兵，可燕国的援军仍然毫无消息，齐国既没有了外患，就会与你相持下去直至最终定出成败。一年之后，我恐怕就见不到将军之面了。
English: Now, Chu and Wei have retired one after another, but there is still no news of reinforcements from Yan's country. Since Qi has no foreign diseases, it will continue with you until the final success or failure is determined. A year later, I am afraid I will not see the general's face.

古文：齐必决之于聊城，公无再计。
现代文：总之，攻取聊城是秦国既定不变的方略，你切莫举棋不定。
English: In short, the capture of Liaocheng is the established and unchanging strategy of Qin. You must not hesitate.

古文：彼燕国大乱，君臣过计，上下迷感，栗腹以百万之众，五折于外，万乘之国，被围于赵，壤削主困，为天下戮，公闻之乎?
现代文：将军知道吗？目下燕国内乱，君臣失措，上下惶惑。燕将栗腹率领百万军队进攻赵国，却屡战屡败，燕国本是万乘强国，却被赵国围困。土地被掠夺，国君遭困厄，为天下诸侯耻笑。
English: Did the general know? At the moment, Yan's country is in turmoil, the princes and ministers are at a loss, confused. Yan led a million troops to attack Zhao, but was repeatedly defeated. Yan's country was originally a powerful country, but was besieged by Zhao. The land was plundered, the sovereign was trapped, and it was a shame for the world's princes.

古文：今燕王方寒心独立，大臣不足恃，国弊祸多，民心无所归。
现代文：现在，大臣不足以倚仗，兵祸连连，国难深重，民心涣散。
English: Now, the minister is not enough to rely on, the military disaster is continuous, the country is in deep trouble, and the people's hearts are scattered.

古文：今公又以弊聊之民，距全齐之兵，期年不解，是墨翟之守也；食人炊骨，士无反北之心，是孙膑、吴起之兵也。
现代文：燕王正处在心惊胆战、孤立无援的境地，而你却能指挥早已疲惫不堪的聊城子民，抗拒整个齐国的兵马，已历一年，聊城现今仍安如磬石，将军确如墨翟一般善于攻守；士兵们饥饿到食人肉炊人骨的地步，而始终没有背弃你的想法，你确如孙膑、吴起一样善于用兵。
English: Yan Wang is in a state of panic and helplessness, but you are able to command the people of Liaocheng, who are already exhausted, and resist the soldiers and horses of the whole country of Qi. It has been a year, and Liaocheng is still as stable as flint. The general is indeed as good at attacking and defending as a moth; the soldiers are hungry to the point of cannibalism, but they have never betrayed your idea. You are indeed as good at using soldiers as Sun Yat-sen and Wu Qi.

古文：能以见于天下矣。
现代文：就凭这两条，将军足可成名于天下！
English: On the strength of these two, the general foot can become famous throughout the world!

古文： 故为公计者，不如罢兵休士，全车甲，归报燕王，燕王必喜。
现代文：因此，我为您考虑，不如罢兵休斗，保全车仗和甲胄，回国向燕王复命，他一定会很高兴。
English: Therefore, I think for you, it would be better to call a truce, preserve the chariot and armor, and return to Yan Wang to return his life, he will be very happy.

古文：士民见公，如见父母，交游攘臂而议于世，功业可明矣。
现代文：燕国的官吏和子民见到您，就如同见到父母一样，交游的人会抓着您的胳膊赞扬将军的赫赫战功，您的功业就建立了。
English: When the officials and people of Yan's country see you, it's just like seeing your parents. Your friends will hold your arm and praise the general's great war exploits, and your career will be established.

古文：上辅孤主，以制群臣；下养百姓，以资说士。
现代文：将军上可辅佐国君，统制群臣；下可存恤百姓，招纳说客。
English: At the top, the general can assist the sovereign and control the vassals; at the bottom, he can show mercy to the people and recruit lobbyists.

古文：矫国革俗於天下，功名可立也。
现代文：矫正国家的弊端，改革社会的陋俗，完全能够建立更大的功名。
English: Correcting the shortcomings of the country and reforming social vulgarities can fully establish a greater reputation.

古文：意者亦捐燕弃世，东游与齐乎?
现代文：如果将军不愿回去，是否能考虑一下抛弃世俗的成见，隐居于齐国呢？
English: If the general does not want to go back, can he consider abandoning worldly prejudices and living in seclusion in Qi Province?

古文：请裂地定封，富比陶、卫，世世称孤寡，与齐久存，此亦一计也。
现代文：我会让齐王赐您封地，与秦国的魏冉、商鞅一样富有，代代相袭，和齐国并存，这是另一条出路。
English: I will let the King of Qi give you a fiefdom, as rich as Wei Ran and Shang Qi in Qin, and coexist with Qi from generation to generation. This is another way out.

古文：二者显名厚实也，愿公熟计而审处一也。
现代文：这两者，要么扬名当世，要么富贵安逸，希望您能慎重考虑，选择其中的一个。
English: These two, either famous in the world, or rich and comfortable, I hope you can carefully consider choosing one of them.

古文： 且吾闻，效小节者不能行大威，恶小耻者不能立荣名。
现代文：我还听说过于看重小节，难以建树大功；不堪忍受小辱，难以成就威名。
English: I have also heard that it is difficult to make great achievements if you attach importance to minor tasks, and it is difficult to achieve prestige if you can't bear humiliation.

古文：昔管仲射桓公中钩，篡也；遗公子纠而不能死，怯也；束缚桎桔，辱身也。
现代文：从前管仲弯弓射中桓公的带钩，这是篡逆作乱；不能为公子纠死义，这是贪生惜命；身陷囚笼，这是奇耻大辱。
English: It is an act of treachery to shoot the hook of Prince Huan with a bow and arrow from the middle of the front pipe; it is greedy for life to not be able to die for the prince; and it is a great shame to be imprisoned.

古文：此三行者，乡里不通也，世主不臣也。
现代文：有了这三种行径，虽乡民野老也不会与之交往，君主也不会以之为臣。
English: With these three actions, although the villagers will not interact with them, the monarch will not regard them as vassals.

古文：使管仲终穷抑，幽囚而不出，惭耻而不见，穷年没寿，不免为辱人贱行矣。
现代文：如果管仲因此困辱抑制自己的志向，不再出仕，以卑贱的劳作辱没一生。
English: If, as a result of this humiliation, Guanzhong curbed his ambition and no longer served, he would live out the rest of his life with the humiliation of menial labor.

古文：然而管子并三行之过，据齐国之政，一匡天下，九合诸侯，为五伯首，名高天下，光照邻国。
现代文：可是他却在身兼三种恶行的情况下，执掌齐国政事，扶正天下，九次召集诸侯会盟，使桓公得以成为春秋五霸之首，他自己也名满天下，光耀邻邦。
English: However, under the circumstances of three kinds of evil deeds, he took charge of the national politics, promoted the world, and convened the association of lords nine times, so that Huan Gong could become the head of the Spring and Autumn Five Hegemons. He himself was famous all over the world and shone brightly in neighboring countries.

古文：曹沫为鲁君将，三战三北，而丧地千里。
现代文：曹沫是鲁国的将军，三战三败，失地千里。
English: Cao Miao was a general of the State of Lu. He lost three times in three battles and lost thousands of miles.

古文：使曹子之足不离陈，计不顾后，出必死而不生，则不免为败军禽将。
现代文：如果他发誓永远不离开疆场，不顾后果一意孤行，他一定会战死沙场，那就不过是一个丧师身殁的败将而已。
English: If he swears never to leave the battlefield, regardless of the consequences, he will surely die on the battlefield, it is nothing more than a defeat.

古文：曹子以败军禽将，非勇也；功废名灭，后世无称，非知也。
现代文：这样一来，就不能称为勇士；功名淹没，不能算是聪明。
English: In this way, one cannot be called a warrior; if one's exploits are drowned out, one cannot be considered clever.

古文：故去三北之耻，退而与鲁君计也，曹子以为遭。
现代文：可是，他能隐忍三次败北的耻辱，与庄公重新谋划。
English: However, he could bear the humiliation of three defeats and made a new plan with Zhuang.

古文：齐桓公有天下，朝诸侯。曹子以一剑之任，劫桓公于坛位之上，颜色不变，而辞气不悖。
现代文：齐桓公威服天下之后，召集诸侯会盟，曹沫就凭着一柄宝剑，在祭坛之上劫持桓公，从容不迫，义正辞严，一朝收回失地，天下为之震动。
English: After Qi Kuan's public authority had been accepted by the world, the League of Princes was convened, and Cao Miao, armed with a sword, abducted Kuan on the altar. He was unhurried, righteous and stern. Once he recovered the lost land, the world was shaken.

古文：三战之所丧，一朝而反之，天下震动惊骇，威信吴、楚，传名后世。若此二公者，非不能行小节，死小耻也，以为杀身绝世，功名不立，非知也。
现代文：他的威名更远播吴楚而名重后世。以上说的管仲、曹沫两个人，并不是不能遵行小节，为小耻而死，只是他们认为功名未立，壮志未酬，愤而求死是不明智的做法。
English: The above-mentioned two people, Guanzhong and Cao Miao, were not unable to follow the rules and died of shame, but they thought that their achievements had not been established, their ambitions had not been rewarded, and it was unwise to die of anger.

古文：故去忿恚之心，而成终身之名；除感忿之耻，而立累世之功。
现代文：所以才决定抛弃愤恨之心，成就一生的功名；忍受一时耻辱，建立万世功业。
English: That's why I decided to abandon my resentment and achieve a lifetime of achievement; endure a moment of shame and build a lifetime of achievement.

古文：故业与三王争流，名与天壤相敝也。
现代文：他们的功业可与三王争高低，声名可与天地共短长，愿将军三思而后行！ 
English: Their achievements can compete with the three kings, and their fame can be as long as heaven and earth. May the general think twice before proceeding!

古文：公其图之! 燕将曰： 敬闻命矣。 
现代文：燕国大将深为折服，答复鲁仲连说： 谨遵先生之命。 
English: General Yan Guo was deeply flattered and replied to Lu Zhonglian, saying, "I will do my best to carry out your order."

古文：因罢兵到读而去。
现代文：于是就撤军回国了。
English: So they withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：故解齐国之围，救百姓之死，仲连之说也。
现代文：所以说，解除齐兵对聊城的围困，使百姓免遭战祸，全是鲁仲连的功劳呀！
English: Therefore, it is all the merit of Lu Zhonglian to lift the siege of Liaocheng by Qi soldiers and save the people from the scourge of war!

