古文：旧制，馆职自校勘以上，非特除者，皆先试，唯检讨不试。
现代文：按以往的规定，馆职自馆阁校勘以上，除非特别授予者都要先经过考试，只有检讨一职是不经过考试就任命的。
English: According to the previous regulations, the post of librarian is higher than the post of librarian, unless the special grantor has to pass the examination first. Only the post of reviewer is appointed without examination.

古文：初置检讨官，只作差遣，未比馆职故也。
现代文：这是由于初置检讨官，只是作为一种差遣安置的，并没有把此职列入馆职的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that the initial placement of the review officer was only a kind of assignment and resettlement, and this post was not included in the post of the museum.

古文：后来检讨给职钱，并同带职在校勘之上，亦承例不试。
现代文：后来检讨官也加给职钱，与其他官带馆职的已没有区别，级别在校勘之上，而仍然沿承旧例不考试。
English: Later, the examiners were also given more money, and there was no difference between them and other officials with librarianship. Their rank was higher than that of school inspectors, but they still followed the old practice of not taking exams.

古文：兴国中，琴待诏朱文济鼓琴为天下第一。
现代文：北宋太平兴国年间，琴待诏朱文济弹琴技艺天下第一。
English: During the Northern Song Dynasty's period of peace and rejuvenation, Zhu Wenzhi's skill in playing the qin was the best in the world.

古文：京师僧慧日大师夷中尽得其法，以授越僧义海，海尽夷中之艺，乃入越州法华山习之，谢绝过从，积十年不下山，昼夜手不释弦，遂穷其妙。
现代文：京城僧人慧日大师夷中完全学到了朱文济的技法，将弹琴技法传授给了越地的僧人义海。义海全面掌握了夷中的弹琴技艺，于是来到越州法华山中潜心练习，谢绝人际交往，累计十年不曾下山，白天黑夜手不离弦，终于掌握了弹琴的奥秘。
English: Yizhong, a monk from Beijing, fully learned the techniques of Zhu Wenzhi, and passed on the piano playing techniques to the monk from Yueyang, Yihai. Yihai fully mastered the piano playing skills of Yizhong, so he came to the Fahuashan Middle School in Yuezhou to practice hard, refused to interact with others, and never went down the mountain for a total of ten years. During the day and night, his hands never left the strings, and finally mastered the mysteries of playing the piano.

古文：天下从海学琴者辐辏，无有臻其奥。
现代文：各地师从义海学习弹琴的人会聚而至，但是没有人能够完全达到义海的水平。
English: People from all over the country come to learn to play the piano from Yihai, but no one can fully reach the level of Yihai.

古文：海今老矣，指法于此遂绝。
现代文：义海现在已经老了，他的弹琴技法就此失传了。
English: Now that Yoshihai is old, his piano playing technique has been lost.

古文：海读书，能为文，士大夫多与之游，然独以能琴知名。
现代文：义海爱好读书，能写文章，士大夫们多与之交游，然而唯独以擅长弹琴而闻名。
English: Yihai loved to read and could write articles, and scholars and doctors often traveled with him. However, he was only known for being good at playing the piano.

古文：海之艺不在于声，其意韵萧然，得于声外，此众人所不及也。
现代文：义海的琴艺不仅仅在于声音，那种蕴涵于琴音之外的冷静深邃的意韵，是一般人所无法达到的。
English: Yihai's piano art is not just about the sound, the kind of calm and profound rhyme that is contained in the sound of the piano is beyond the reach of the average person.

古文：古乐钟皆扁，如盒瓦。
现代文：古代用来演奏音乐的钟都是扁的，像是两片瓦对合起来的样子。
English: The bells used to play music in ancient times were all flat, like two pieces of tile put together.

古文：盖钟圆则声长，扁则声短。
现代文：这大概是因为圆的钟敲起来余音长，扁的钟敲起来余音短。
English: This is probably because round bells have a long aftertaste when struck, while flat bells have a short aftertaste.

古文：声短则节，声长则曲。
现代文：余音短就容易形成节奏，圆钟敲起来声音长，因而余音也长。
English: A short aftertaste makes it easy to form a rhythm. When the bell is struck, the sound is long, so the aftertaste is also long.

古文：节短处声皆相乱，不成音律。
现代文：遇到节奏快的地方，长长的余音就会相互干扰，造成杂乱。
English: Where the rhythm is fast, the long aftertaste will interfere with each other, causing clutter.

古文：后人不知此意。悉为扁钟，急叩之多晃晃尔，清浊不復可辨。建茶之美者号 北苑茶 。
现代文：后代的人们不明白这个道理，都把钟做成圆的，敲快了的时候，就会发出 晃晃 的声音，无法再分辨声音的高低清浊了。福建建州最好的茶，号称 北苑茶 。
English: People of later generations do not understand this principle. They have all made the clock round. When it strikes fast, it will emit a "wobbly" sound, and it will no longer be possible to distinguish the high and low clarity of the sound. The best tea in Fujian and Jianzhou is known as Beiyuan tea.

古文：今建州凤凰山，土人相传，谓之北苑，言江南尝置官领之，谓之北苑使。
现代文：如今建州的凤凰山，当地人历来沿称为 北苑 ，本来指的是南唐曾设官兼管这里的茶叶征收，兼管的官员就称为 北苑使 。
English: Nowadays, Jianzhou's Phoenix Mountain has always been called Beiyuan by the local people, which originally referred to the fact that the Southern Tang Dynasty once set up an official who was also in charge of collecting tea leaves here, and the official who was also in charge was called Beiyuan Envoy.

古文：余因读《李后主人集》有《北苑诗》及《文苑纪》，知北苑乃江南禁苑，在金陵，非建安也。
现代文：我因为读李后主的文集，见其中有《北苑诗》及《文苑记》，始知北苑是南唐的皇家园林，在金陵，而不在建安。
English: I read "Beiyuan Poetry" and "Wen Yuan Ji" in the anthology of Queen Li. I knew that Beiyuan was a royal garden in Southern Tang Dynasty, in Jinling, not Jian'an.

古文：江南北苑使，正如今之内园使。
现代文：南唐的北苑使，正相当于现在的内园使。
English: The Beiyuan envoy of the Southern Tang Dynasty was equivalent to the current Naiyuan envoy.

古文：李氏时有北苑使，善制茶，人竞贵之，谓之 北苑茶 。如今茶器中有 学士瓯 之类，皆因人得名，非地名也。
现代文：李氏统治南唐时，有个北苑使善于制茶，人们竞相以他所制的茶为珍贵，称之为 北苑茶 ，就像现在的茶具中有 学士瓯 之类，都是因人而得名的， 北苑 并非地名。
English: When the Li clan ruled Southern Tang, there was a Beiyuan official who was good at making tea. People competed to make the tea he made as precious, calling it Beiyuan tea. Just as there are things like Bachelor's gourd in tea sets today, they are all named after people. Beiyuan is not a place name.

古文：丁晋公为《北苑茶录》云： 北苑，地名也，今曰龙焙。 
现代文：丁晋公撰写的《北苑茶录》说： 北苑，乡村名，今称龙焙。 
English: "Beiyuan Cha Luo" written by Ding Jin Gong said: Beiyuan, the name of the village, is now called Longbao.

古文：又云： 苑者，天子园囿之名。
现代文：又说：  苑 是天子园囿之名。
English: He also said: "Yuen" is the name of the garden of heaven.

古文：此在列郡之东隅，缘何却名北苑？ 
现代文：这地方在天下州郡的东南一角，为什么却叫北苑？ 
English: This place is in the southeast corner of Chaozhou County. Why is it called Beiyuan?

古文：丁亦自疑之。
现代文：丁氏也自己有疑问，看来他不知道所谓 北苑茶 的 北苑 本来不是地名。
English: Mr. Ding also has his own doubts. It seems that he does not know that the so-called Beiyuan tea, Beiyuan, was not originally a place name.

古文：盖不知北苑茶本非地名，始因误传，自晋公实之于书，至今遂谓之北苑。
现代文：开始时是因为误传，自从丁晋公在书中把它说成是实有的地名之后，这地方竟至今就叫 北苑 了。
English: At the beginning, it was because of misinformation, but since Ding Jin Gong described it as a real place name in the book, this place has actually been called Beiyuan.

古文：古人引《诗》，多举《诗》之断章。断音段，读如断截之断，谓如一诗之中，只断取一章或一二句取义，不取全篇之义，故谓之断章。今之人多读为断章，断音锻，谓诗之断句，殊误也。《诗》之末句，古人只谓之 卒章， 近世方谓 断句 。
现代文：班固论司马迁撰写《史记》，认为 其是非标准颇与儒家圣人的观念相抵触，所以在讨论天地自然的大道理时便首先注重黄老之学而然后才及于儒家经典，在叙述游侠的事迹时便排斥有志节的隐士而专为一些奸雄人物立传，在记录工商业经济状况和相关人物的活动时便崇尚发财致富的势利而以贫贱为耻辱，这些都是司马迁观念上的囿蔽和局限性所在 。我查考《后汉书》记载王允说： 汉武帝不杀司马迁，使得他作出了一部诽谤的书，贻害于后世。 被班固所批评的司马迁的观念，就是所谓 谤 了。
English: According to Bangu, Sima Qian wrote "Historical Records" and believed that its standards of right and wrong were quite contrary to the ideas of Confucian saints. Therefore, when discussing the great principles of heaven, earth and nature, he first focused on the study of Huang Lao and then reached the Confucian classics. When describing the deeds of rangers, he excluded the ambitious hermits and established a biography exclusively for some malevolent figures. When recording the industrial and commercial economic situation and the activities of related figures, he advocated the snobbery of getting rich and making poverty a disgrace. These are the concealment and limitations of Sima Qian's concept. I checked the "Post-H

