古文：二十有五年春，齐崔杼帅师伐我北鄙。
现代文：二十五年春季，齐国的崔杼率领军队攻打鲁国北面边境。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, Qi's Cui Yong led the army to attack the northern border of Lu.

古文：夏五月乙亥，齐崔杼弑其君光。
现代文：夏季五月乙亥日，齐国的崔杼杀掉齐国国君。
English: In the summer of May, on the day of the Year of the Boar, Cui Xuan of Qi killed the sovereign of Qi.

古文：公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子于夷仪。
现代文：襄公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在夷仪会见。
English: Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Zheng, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Teng, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, and Prince Xiao Zizi in Yiyi.

古文：六月壬子，郑公孙舍之帅师入陈。
现代文：六月壬子日，郑公孙舍之率领军队攻打陈国。
English: On Jinsi Day in June, Zheng Gong Sun Shezhi led an army to attack Chen Province.

古文：秋八月己巳，诸侯同盟于重丘。
现代文：秋季八月己巳日，诸侯在重丘结盟。
English: In the autumn, on August 6th, the feudal lords formed an alliance at Shigeoka.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：襄公从重丘回来。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：卫侯入于夷仪。
现代文：卫侯进入夷仪。
English: Wei Hou enters Yiyi.

古文：楚屈建帅师灭舒鸠。
现代文：楚国的屈建率领军队灭掉舒鸠。
English: Chu's Qu Jian led the army to exterminate the Shuxiong.

古文：冬，郑公孙夏帅师伐陈。
现代文：冬季，郑公孙夏率领军队攻打陈国。
English: In winter, Zheng Gong Sun Xia led the army to attack Chen Guo.

古文：十有二月，吴子遏伐楚，门于巢，卒。
现代文：十二月，吴王诸樊攻打楚国，进攻巢地的城门，被箭射死。
English: In December, King Zhu Xi of Wu attacked the kingdom of Chu, attacking the city gate of the nest, and was shot dead by an arrow.

古文：二十五年春，齐崔杼帅师伐我北鄙，以报孝伯之师也。
现代文：二十五年春季，齐国的崔杼率领军队进攻鲁国北部边境，报复孝伯那次进攻齐国。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, Cui Yong of Qi led an army to attack the northern border of Lu, to retaliate against Xiaobiao's attack on Qi.

古文：公患之，使告于晋。孟公绰曰： 崔子将有大志，不在病我，必速归，何患焉！
现代文：鲁襄公担心，派人向晋国报告，孟公绰说： 崔子将要有大志，不在于困扰我国，一定很快回去，担心什么？
English: Lu Xianggong was worried and sent someone to report to Jin Guo. Meng Guoqiao said: Cui Zi will have a great ambition, not to trouble our country, he must go back soon. What are you worried about?

古文：其来也不寇，使民不严，异于他日。 
现代文：他来的时候不劫掠，使用百姓不严厉，和平日不同。 
English: When he came, he did not loot and plunder, and he did not use the people harshly, which was different from the days of peace.

古文：齐师徒归。
现代文：齐军空来了一趟而退兵。
English: The Qi army came by air and withdrew.

古文：齐棠公之妻，东郭偃之姊也。
现代文：齐国棠公的妻子，是东郭偃的姐姐。
English: The wife of Qi Guotanggong is the sister of Dongguo Yao.

古文：东郭偃臣崔武子。
现代文：东郭偃是崔武子的家臣。
English: Dong Guojun was a vassal of Cui Wu Zi.

古文：棠公死，偃御武子以吊焉。
现代文：棠公死，东郭偃为崔武子驾车去吊唁。
English: After Tang Gong's death, Dong Guoqi drove to pay condolences to Cui Wuzi.

古文：见棠姜而美之，使偃取之。
现代文：崔武子看到棠姜很美，便很喜爱她，让东郭偃为他娶过来。
English: When Cui Wu Zi saw that Tang Jiang was very beautiful, he loved her very much and asked Dong Guo Yao to marry him.

古文：偃曰： 男女辨姓，今君出自丁，臣出自桓，不可。 
现代文：东郭偃说： 男女婚配要辨别姓氏。现在您是丁公的后代，下臣是桓公的后代，这可不行。 
English: Dong Guojun said: It is necessary to distinguish surnames between men and women in marriage. Now you are a descendant of Ding Gong, and your vassal is a descendant of Huan Gong. This is not acceptable.

古文：武子筮之，遇《困》之《大过》。史皆曰： 吉。 
现代文：崔武子占筮，得到《困》卦变成《大过》，太史都说 吉利 。
English: Cui Wuzi took advantage of the situation and got "sleepy" to become "great," and the great historian said that it was auspicious.

古文：示陈文子，文子曰： 夫从风，风陨，妻不可娶也。
现代文：拿给陈文子看，陈文子说： 丈夫跟从风，风坠落妻子，不能娶的。
English: He showed it to Chen Wenzi, and Chen Wenzi said, "The husband follows the wind, and the wind falls on the wife, and they cannot get married."

古文：且其《繇》曰： 困于石，据于蒺藜，入于其宫，不见其妻，凶。 
现代文：而且它的繇辞说： 为石头所困，据守在蒺藜中，走进屋，不见妻，凶。 
English: Moreover, its epitaph says: Trapped by a stone, kept in a cocoon, walks into a house, doesn't see his wife, fierce.

古文：困于石，往不济也。
现代文：为石头所困，这意味前去不能成功。
English: Trapped by the stone, this meant that the march could not succeed.

古文：据于蒺藜，所恃伤也。
现代文：据守在蒺藜中，这意味所依靠的东西会使人受伤。
English: He's in a cocoon, which means he's relying on something that's going to hurt.

古文：入于其宫，不见其妻，凶，无所归也。 
现代文：走进屋，不见妻，凶，这意味无所归宿。 
English: If you walk into a house and don't see your wife, it means you have nowhere to go.

古文：崔子曰： 嫠也何害？
现代文：崔武子说： 她是寡妇，有什么妨碍？
English: Cui Wuzi said, "She's a widow, what's the problem?

古文：先夫当之矣。 
现代文：死去的丈夫已经承担过这凶兆了。 
English: Her dead husband had already borne the brunt of it.

古文：遂取之。
现代文：于是崔武子就娶了棠姜。
English: As a result, Cui Wuxi married Tang Jiang.

古文：庄公通焉，骤如崔氏。以崔子之冠赐人，侍者曰： 不可。 
现代文：齐庄公和棠姜私通，经常到崔家去，把崔武子的帽子赐给别人。侍者说： 不行。 
English: Qi Zhuang and Tang Jiang had a love affair and often went to Cui's home to give Cui Wuzi's hat to others. The waiter said, "No."

古文：公曰： 不为崔子，其无冠乎？ 
现代文：齐庄公说： 不用崔子的帽子，难道就没有帽子了？ 
English: Qizhongong said, "If you don't use Cui Zi's hat, won't there be a hat?"

古文：崔子因是，又以其间伐晋也，曰： 晋必将报。 
现代文：崔武子由此怀恨齐庄公，又因为齐庄公乘晋国的动乱而进攻晋国，说： 晋国必然要报复。 
English: As a result, Cui Wu Zi held a grudge against Qi Zhuang, and attacked Jin Province because Qi Zhuang took advantage of the turmoil in Jin Province, saying: Jin Province must take revenge.

古文：欲弑公以说于晋，而不获间。
现代文：崔武子想要杀死齐庄公来讨好晋国，而又没有得到机会。
English: Choi Takeko wanted to kill Lord Qizhuang to please Jin, but he didn't get the chance.

古文：公鞭侍人贾举而又近之，乃为崔子间公。
现代文：齐庄公鞭打了侍人贾举，后来又亲近贾举，贾举就为崔武子找机会杀死齐庄公。
English: Prince Qizhuang whipped the attendant Jia Jiu, and later became close to Jia Jiu. Jia Jiu then found an opportunity for Cui Wu Zi to kill Prince Qizhuang.

古文：夏五月，莒为且于之役故，莒子朝于齐。
现代文：夏季，五月，莒国由于且于这次战役的缘故，莒子到齐国朝见。
English: In the summer, in May, because of this battle, Zizi went to Qi to see the emperor.

古文：甲戌，飨诸北郭。崔子称疾不视事。
现代文：十六日，齐庄公在北城设享礼招待他，崔武子推说有病，不办公事。
English: On the 16th, the lord of Qizhuang invited him to a banquet in Beicheng. Cui Wuzi said that he was ill and could not attend the banquet.

古文：乙亥，公问崔子，遂从姜氏。
现代文：十七日，齐庄公去问候崔武子，乘机又与棠姜幽会。
English: On the 17th, Qizhuanggong went to greet Cui Wuxi, and took the opportunity to meet with Tang Jiang.

古文：姜入于室，与崔子自侧户出。
现代文：姜氏进入室内和崔武子从侧门出去。
English: Mr. Jiang entered the room and Ms. Cui went out the side door.

古文：公拊楹而歌。
现代文：齐庄公拍着柱子唱歌。
English: Qizhuanggong clapped his hands on the pillar and sang.

古文：侍人贾举止众从者，而入闭门。
现代文：侍人贾举禁止庄公的随从入内，自己走进去，关上大门。
English: The attendant Jia Jiu forbade Zhuangguo's entourage to enter, walked in himself, and closed the door.

古文：甲兴。公登台而请，弗许。
现代文：甲士们一哄而起，齐庄公登上高台请求免死，众人不答应；请求在太庙自杀，还不答应。
English: The knights got up in a frenzy, Qizhuanggong climbed onto the platform to ask to be spared death, but the people did not agree; he asked to commit suicide in the Great Temple, but they did not agree.

古文：请盟，弗许。
现代文：都说： 君王的下臣崔杼病得厉害。
English: They all said, "The king's vassal Choe Ryong is gravely ill."

古文：请自刃于庙，弗许。
现代文：不能听取您的命令。
English: I can't follow your orders.

古文：皆曰： 君之臣杼疾病，不能听命。
现代文：这里靠近君王的宫室，陪臣巡夜搜捕淫乱的人，此外不知道有其他命令。 
English: Everyone said, "The Emperor's vassal Choe Hee is seriously ill and cannot come in person to receive your order."

古文：近于公宫，陪臣干掫有淫者，不知二命。 公踰墙。
现代文：齐庄公跳墙，有人用箭射他，射中大腿，掉在墙内，于是就杀死了他。
English: Mr. Qizhuang jumped over a wall, someone shot him with an arrow, he was shot in the thigh, he fell into the wall, and they killed him.

古文：贾举、州绰、邴师、公孙敖、封具、铎父、襄伊、偻堙皆死。
现代文：贾举、州绰、邴师、公孙敖、封具、铎父、襄伊、偻堙都被杀死。
English: Jia Jiu, Zhou Zhuo, Zou Shi, Gong Sun Zou, Fugu, Zou Father, Xiang Yi and Zou were all killed.

古文：祝佗父祭于高唐，至，复命。不说弁而死于崔氏。
现代文：祝佗父在高唐祭祀，到达国都，复命，还没有脱掉官帽，就在崔武子家里被杀死。
English: Zhu Xi's father was killed at the home of Cui Wuzi before he could take off his official hat, after he had arrived at the capital to attend a ceremony in Gaotang.

古文：申蒯，侍渔者，退谓其宰曰： 尔以帑免，我将死。 
现代文：申蒯，是管理渔业的人，退出来，对他的家臣头子说： 你带着我的妻子儿女逃走，我准备一死。 
English: Shen Xuan, who was in charge of the fishing industry, retreated and said to his chief vassal: "Take my wife and children and run away. I am ready to die."

古文：其宰曰： 免，是反子之义也。 
现代文：他的家臣头子说： 如果我逃走，这是违背了您的道义了。 
English: His chief retainer said, "If I run away, it will be against your morals."

古文：与之皆死。
现代文：就和申蒯一起自杀。
English: He committed suicide together with Shin Min.

古文：崔氏杀鬷蔑于平阴。晏子立于崔氏之门外，其人曰： 死乎？ 
现代文：崔氏在平阴杀死了鬷蔑。晏子立在崔氏的门外边，他的手下人说： 死吗？ 
English: Mr. Cui killed the traitor in the twilight. A cripple stood outside Mr. Cui's door, and his men said, "Is he dead?"

古文：曰： 独吾君也乎哉？
现代文：晏子说： 是我一个人的国君吗？我去死？ 手下人说： 逃吗？ 
English: The lame man said, Am I a king alone? Shall I die? His men said, Shall we flee?

古文：吾死也。 
现代文：晏子说： 是我的罪过吗？我逃走？ 
English: The cripple said, "Is it my fault? Why did I run away?"

古文：曰： 行乎？ 
现代文：手上人说： 回去吗？ 
English: The cripple said, "Is it my fault?

古文：曰： 吾罪也乎哉？
现代文：晏子说： 国君死了，回到哪儿去？
English: The cripple said, "The king is dead, where shall I go back to?"

古文：吾亡也。 曰： 归乎？ 
现代文：作为百姓的君主，难道是用他的地位，来凌驾于百姓之上？
English: As the people's monarch, does he use his position to rise above the people?

古文：曰： 君死安归？
现代文：应当主持国政。作为君主的臣下，难道是为了他的俸禄？
English: Should preside over state affairs. As a vassal of the monarch, is it for his salary?

古文：君民者，岂以陵民？
现代文：应当保护国家。
English: The country should be protected.

古文：社稷是主。臣君者，岂为其口实？社稷是养。故君为社稷死，则死之；为社稷亡，则亡之。
现代文：所以君主为国家而死，那么也就是为他而死，为国家而逃亡，那么也就是为他而逃亡。
English: Therefore, if a prince dies for the state, it is for him to die, and if he flees for the state, it is for him to flee.

古文：若为己死而为己亡，非其私暱，谁敢任之？
现代文：如果君主为自己而死，为自己而逃亡，不是他个人宠爱的人，谁敢承担这个责任？
English: If the sovereign died for himself, fled for himself, and was not his personal favorite, who would dare to take on this responsibility?

古文：且人有君而弑之，吾焉得死之，而焉得亡之？
现代文：而且别人有了君主反而杀死了他，我哪能为他而死？哪里能为他而逃亡？
English: And others have had a prince and killed him. How can I die for him? Where can I flee for him?

古文：将庸何归？ 
现代文：但是又能回到哪里去呢？ 
English: But where can you go back to?

古文：门启而入，枕尸股而哭，兴，三踊而出。
现代文：开了大门，晏子进去，头枕在尸体的大腿上而号哭，起来，往上跳三次以后才出去。
English: He opened the door, the cripple went in, laid his head on the corpse's lap and cried, got up, jumped up three times and then went out.

古文：人谓崔子： 必杀之！ 
现代文：有人对崔武子说： 一定要杀了他！ 
English: Someone said to Choi Takeko, "You must kill him!"

古文：崔子曰： 民之望也！舍之得民。 
现代文：崔武子说： 他是百姓所向往的人，放了他，可以得民心。 
English: Cui Wuzi said, "He is the one whom the people yearn for. If they release him, they can win the hearts of the people."

古文：卢蒲癸奔晋，王何奔莒。
现代文：卢蒲癸逃亡到晋国，王何逃亡到莒国。
English: Lu Bupu fled to Jin, and Wang He fled to Shandong.

古文：叔孙宣伯之在齐也，叔孙还纳其女于灵公。嬖，生景公。
现代文：叔孙宣伯在齐国的时候，叔孙还把叔孙宣伯的女儿嫁给齐灵公，受到宠爱，生了齐景公。
English: When Xuanbo's great-uncle was in Qi, his great-uncle also married Xuanbo's great-uncle's daughter to Qilinggong, and was loved by him and gave birth to Qijinggong.

古文：丁丑，崔杼立而相之。庆封为左相。盟国人于大宫，曰： 所不与崔、庆者。 晏子仰天叹曰： 婴所不唯忠于君利社稷者是与，有如上帝。 
现代文：十九日，崔武子拥立景公为国君而自己出任宰相，庆封做左相，和国内的人们在太公的宗庙结盟，说： 有不依附崔氏、庆氏的一 晏子向天叹气说： 婴如果不依附忠君利国的人，有上天为证！ 
English: On the 19th, Cui Wuzi supported the enthronement of King Gyeonggong as the country's ruler and became the prime minister himself, while Gyeongbokgung became the minister of the left. He allied with the people of the country at the ancestral temple of King Gyeonggong, saying, "If there is a son of a bitch who does not cling to the Cui clan or the Gyeonggokgung clan, he will sigh to the heavens and say, 'If a son of a bitch does not cling to those who are loyal to the king and benefit the country, the heavens will bear witness!'"

古文：乃歃。
现代文：于是就歃血。
English: So he coughed up blood.

古文：辛巳，公与大夫及莒子盟。
现代文：二十三日，齐景公和大夫以及莒子结盟。
English: On the 23rd, Lord Qi Jing allied with the doctor and the mule.

古文：大史书曰： 崔杼弑其君。 
现代文：太史记载说： 崔杼杀了他的国君。 
English: The historical record says: Cui Xuan killed his sovereign.

古文：崔子杀之。
现代文：崔武子杀死了太史。
English: Choi Takeko killed Taishi.

古文：其弟嗣书而死者二人。
现代文：他的弟弟接着这样写，因而死了两人。
English: His brother went on to write that two people died as a result.

古文：其弟又书，乃舍之。
现代文：太史还有一个弟弟又这样写，崔武子就没杀了。
English: Tai Shi also had a younger brother who wrote like this, but Choi Takeko did not kill him.

古文：南史氏闻大史尽死，执简以往。
现代文：南史氏听说太史都死了，拿了照样写好了的竹简前去，听到已经如实记载了，这才回去。
English: When Mr. Nan Shi heard that both Mr. and Mrs. Taishi were dead, he took the bamboo slips that were still written and went there. When he heard that they had been recorded truthfully, he returned.

古文：闻既书矣，乃还。闾丘婴以帷縳其妻而载之，与申鲜虞乘而出。
现代文：闾丘婴用车子的帷幕包了妻子，装上车，和申鲜虞坐一辆车逃走。
English: Mengqiu Infant wrapped his wife with the curtain of the car, loaded the car, and fled with Shen Xiangyu in a car.

古文：鲜虞推而下之，曰： 君昏不能匡，危不能救，死不能死，而知匿其暱，其谁纳之？ 
现代文：鲜虞把闾丘婴的妻子推下车，说： 国君昏昧不能纠正，国君危险不能救驾，国君死亡不能以身殉，只知道把自己所亲爱的人藏匿起来，有谁会接纳我们？ 
English: Xiang Yu pushed the wife of Zou Qiuying out of the car and said: "The emperor's blindness cannot be corrected, the emperor's danger cannot be saved, the emperor's death cannot be killed with his own body, he only knows how to hide his loved ones, who will accept us?"

古文：行及弇中，将舍。婴曰： 崔、庆其追我！ 
现代文：走到弇中狭道，准备住下来，闾丘婴说： 崔氏、庆氏可能在追我们。 
English: After walking to the narrow road in the middle of the valley and preparing to settle down, the baby said, "Cui and Qing may be chasing us."

古文：鲜虞曰： 一与一，谁能惧我？ 
现代文：鲜虞说： 一对一，谁能让我们害怕？ 
English: "One-on-one, who can scare us?

古文：遂舍，枕辔而寝，食马而食。
现代文：就住下来，头枕着马缰而睡，先喂饱马然后自己吃饭，套上马车继续赶路。
English: He lived there, slept with his head on his horse's bridle, first fed his horse and then himself, hitched up his carriage and continued on his way.

古文：驾而行，出弇中，谓婴曰： 速驱之！崔、庆之众，不可当也。 
现代文：走出弇中，对闾丘婴说： 快点赶马，崔氏、庆氏人多，是不能抵挡的。 
English: He came out of the cocoon and said to the cocoon baby: "Hurry up and catch the horse, there are too many Cui and Qing people, it is impossible to resist."

古文：遂来奔。
现代文：于是就逃亡到鲁国来。
English: So he fled to Lu.

古文：崔氏侧庄公于北郭。
现代文：崔氏没有把齐庄公的棺材殡于庙就放在外城北边。
English: Mr. Cui did not bury the coffin of Qi Zhuanggong in the temple, but placed it on the north side of the outer city.

古文：丁亥，葬诸士孙之里，四翣，不跸，下车七乘，不以兵甲。
现代文：二十九日，安葬在士孙之里，葬礼用四把长柄扇，不清道，不警戒，送葬的破车七辆，不用武器盔甲随葬。
English: On the 29th, he was buried in Shisunzhi. The funeral procession used four long-handled fans. The route was not clear and there was no warning. Seven broken cars were used for the funeral procession. No weapons or armor were used for the funeral.

古文：晋侯济自泮，会于夷仪，伐齐，以报朝歌之役。
现代文：晋平公渡过泮水，和鲁襄公、宋平公、卫殇公、郑简公、曹武公、莒子、邾于、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子在夷仪会合，进攻齐国，以报复朝歌这一战役。
English: After crossing the Surabaya River, Jinping, Lu Xiang, Songping, Weihai, Zheng Jian, Cao Wu, Zizi, Zouyu, Tengzi, Xue Bo, Zibo and Xiao Zizi met in Yiyi to attack Qi and take revenge for the Battle of Chaoga.

古文：齐人以庄公说，使隰鉏请成。
现代文：齐国人想用杀齐庄公这件事情向晋国解释，派隰鉏请求讲和。
English: The Qizhong people wanted to use the murder of Qizhong Gong to explain the matter to the Jin Dynasty, and sent an envoy to ask for peace.

古文：庆封如师，男女以班。
现代文：庆封来到军中，男男女女分开排列、捆绑。
English: When Qingfeng came to the army, the men and women were lined up separately and tied up.

古文：赂晋侯以宗器、乐器。
现代文：齐国把宗庙里的祭器和乐器送给晋平公。
English: The State of Qi gave the sacrificial vessels and musical instruments from the ancestral temple to Emperor Jinpyeong.

古文：自六正、五吏、三十帅、三军之大夫、百官之正长、师旅及处守者，皆有赂。
现代文：从六卿、五吏、三个师的将领、各部门的首长、属官和留守的人都赠送财礼。晋平公答应了。
English: From the six nobles, five officials, three division commanders, heads of various departments, subordinate officials and those who stayed behind, they all presented gifts.

古文：晋侯许之。使叔向告于诸侯。
现代文：派叔向告诉诸侯。
English: Uncle Pa told the lords what had happened.

古文：公使子服惠伯对曰： 君舍有罪，以靖小国，君之惠也。
现代文：襄公派子服惠伯回答说： 君王宽恕了有罪，以安定小国，这是君王的恩惠。
English: Prince Xiang sent Zifu Huibo to reply, "It is the king's favor to pardon the guilty to stabilize the small country.

古文：寡君闻命矣！ 
现代文：寡君听到命令了。 
English: The widower heard the order.

古文：晋侯使魏舒、宛没逆卫侯，将使卫与之夷仪。
现代文：晋平公派魏舒、宛没迎接卫献公，准备让卫国把夷仪给卫献公居住。
English: Jin Ping sent Wei Shu and Wan Wu to welcome Wei Xianguo, and prepared to let Wei Guo bring Yi Yi to live with Wei Xianguo.

古文：崔子止其帑，以求五鹿。
现代文：崔武子留下卫献公的妻子儿女，来谋求五鹿这块地方。
English: Cui Wuzi left Wei Xiangong's wife and children behind to seek out the Wulu region.

古文：初，陈侯会楚子伐郑，当陈隧者，井堙木刊。郑人怨之。
现代文：当初，陈哀公会合楚王进攻郑国，陈军经过的路上，水井被填，树木被砍，郑国人很怨恨。
English: At first, Chen Aigong gathered with King Chu to attack Zheng. On the way of Chen's army, wells were filled and trees were cut. Zheng people were very resentful.

古文：六月，郑子展、子产帅车七百乘伐陈，宵突陈城，遂入之。
现代文：六月，郑国的子展、子产领着七百辆战车攻打陈国，夜里发动突然袭击，就进了城。
English: In June, Zheng's sons Zhan and Zibo led seven hundred chariots to attack Chen, launched a surprise attack at night, and entered the city.

古文：陈侯扶其大子偃师奔墓，遇司马桓子，曰： 载余！ 
现代文：陈哀公扶着他的太子偃师逃奔到坟地里，碰到司马桓子，说： 用车装上我！ 
English: Chen Aigong escapes to the graveyard with the help of his son Zou Shi, runs into Sima Huan Zi, and says, "Pick me up in your car!"

古文：曰： 将巡城。 
现代文：司马桓子说： 我正打算巡城呢。 
English: Sima Kaneko said, "I was just planning to go on a city tour."

古文：遇贾获，载其母妻，下之而授公车。公曰： 舍而母！ 
现代文：碰到贾获，车上装着他的母亲和妻了，贾获让他母亲、妻子下车而把车子交给陈哀公。陈哀公说： 安置好你的母亲。 
English: When he met Jia Guo, the car was carrying his mother and wife. Jia Guo ordered his mother and wife to get out of the car and handed the car to Chen Aigong. Chen Aigong said, "Settle down your mother."

古文：辞曰： 不祥。 
现代文：贾获辞谢说： 妇女和你同坐，不吉祥。 
English: Jia Huoxie said: It is not auspicious for a woman to sit with you.

古文：与其妻扶其母以奔墓，亦免。
现代文：贾获说完就和他妻子扶着他母亲逃奔到坟地里，也免于祸难。
English: After he finished speaking, Jia Huo and his wife helped his mother to flee to the graveyard and were also spared from the disaster.

古文：子展命师无入公宫，与子产亲御诸门。陈侯使司马桓子赂以宗器。
现代文：子展命令军队不要进入陈哀公的宫室，和子产亲自守卫在宫门口，陈哀公让司马桓子把宗庙的祭器赠送给他们。
English: Zizan ordered the army not to enter Chen Aigong's palace room, and Zizang personally guarded the palace gate. Chen Aigong asked Sima Hanzi to give them the sacrificial vessels from the ancestral temple.

古文：陈侯免，拥社。使其众，男女别而累，以待于朝。
现代文：陈哀公穿上丧服，抱着土地神的神主，让他手下的男男女女分开排列、捆绑，在朝廷上等待。
English: Chen Aigong put on mourning clothes, hugged the god of the land god, and ordered the men and women under his command to line up separately, tie them up, and wait in the imperial court.

古文：子展执絷而见，再拜稽首，承饮而进献。
现代文：子展拿着绳子进见陈哀公，再拜叩头，捧着酒杯向陈哀公献礼。
English: Zochan took the rope to see Chen Aigong, then bowed down and held a wine glass to Chen Aigong.

古文：子美入，数俘而出。
现代文：子产进入，点了点俘虏的人数就出去了。
English: The cubs came in, and when the number of captives was counted, they went out.

古文：祝祓社，司徒致民，司马致节，司空致地，乃还。
现代文：郑国人向陈国的土地神祝告消灾去邪，司徒归还百姓，司马归还兵符，司空归还土地，于是就回国。
English: The people of Zheng gave their wishes to the land god of Chen for the elimination of disasters and the removal of evil spirits, and then returned to the country. Sittu returned the people, Sima returned the military insignia and Siku returned the land.

古文：秋七月己巳，同盟于重丘，齐成故也。
现代文：秋季，七月二十日，诸侯在重丘一起结盟，这是由于跟齐国讲和的缘故。
English: In the autumn, on July 20th, the feudal lords made an alliance together in Chongqiu, which was due to the peace treaty with Qi.

古文：赵文子为政，令薄诸侯之币而重其礼。
现代文：赵文子主持政事，命令减轻诸侯的贡品而着重礼仪。
English: Zhao Wenzi presided over the government affairs and ordered to reduce the tributes of the lords while emphasizing the etiquette.

古文：穆叔见之。
现代文：穆叔进见他。
English: My uncle went to see him.

古文：谓穆叔曰： 自今以往，兵其少弭矣！
现代文：赵文子对穆叔说： 从今以后，战争恐怕可以稍稍停止了。
English: Zhao Wenzi said to Mu Shuang: From now on, I'm afraid the war can be stopped a little.

古文：齐崔、庆新得政，将求善于诸侯。
现代文：齐国的崔氏、庆氏新近当政，将要向诸侯改善关系。
English: The Cui and Qing dynasties of Qi have recently come to power, and they are going to improve relations with the princes.

古文：武也知楚令尹。
现代文：武也了解楚国的令尹。
English: Wu also understands the order of the state of Chu.

古文：若敬行其礼，道之以文辞，以靖诸侯，兵可以弭。 
现代文：如果恭敬地执行礼仪，用外交辞令和他说，用来安定诸侯，战争可以停止。 
English: If you respectfully carry out the etiquette, use diplomatic language and say to him, used to stabilize the princes, the war can stop.

古文：楚薳子冯卒，屈建为令尹。屈荡为莫敖。
现代文：楚国的薳子冯死了，屈建做令尹，屈荡做莫敖。
English: Feng, the mule of Chu, is dead. Qu Jian will do the work of Yin, and Qu Wang will do the work of Miao.

古文：舒鸠人卒叛。
现代文：舒鸠人终于肯叛楚国。
English: The people of Shu finally agreed to betray the State of Chu.

古文：楚令尹子木伐之，及离城。
现代文：屈建率兵进攻舒鸠，到达离城，吴国人救援舒鸠。
English: Qu Jian led the troops to attack Shuxi, reached the outskirts of the city, and the Wu people came to the rescue of Shuxi.

古文：吴人救之，子木遽以右师先，子彊、息桓、子捷、子骈、子盂帅左师以退。
现代文：屈建急忙让右翼部队先出动，子强、息桓、子捷、子骈、子盂率领左翼部队向后撤退。
English: Qu Jian hurriedly let the right-wing troops go first, and Zi Qiang, Xi Huan, Zijie, Zibo and Zibo led the left-wing troops to retreat.

古文：吴人居其间七日。
现代文：吴国人处在左右两军之间七天。
English: The people of Wu were caught between the left and right armies for seven days.

古文：子彊曰： 久将垫隘，隘乃禽也。不如速战！
现代文：子强说： 时间久了将会疲弱，疲弱就会被俘，不如赶快打仗。
English: Zi Qiang said, "If you wait too long, you will become weak, and if you are weak, you will be captured. It is better to fight as soon as possible."

古文：请以其私卒诱之，简师陈以待我。
现代文：我请求带领家兵去引诱他们，你们选择精兵，摆开阵势等待我。
English: I ask you to lead your soldiers to entice them. Choose your best soldiers and wait for me.

古文：我克则进，奔则亦视之，乃可以免。
现代文：我得胜就前进，我败逃就看情况办，这样就可以免于被俘。
English: If I win, I will advance; if I lose, I will flee, as the case may be, so that I may not be captured.

古文：不然，必为吴禽。 
现代文：不这样，一定被吴国俘虏。 
English: Otherwise, he must have been captured by Wu.

古文：从之。
现代文：大家听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五人以其私卒先击吴师。吴师奔，登山以望，见楚师不继，复逐之，傅诸其军。
现代文：五个人带领他们的家兵先攻吴军，吴军败逃，登山而远望，看到楚军没有后继，就再次追赶，迫近楚军。
English: Five people led their family soldiers to attack the Wu army first, the Wu army was defeated and fled, they climbed the mountain and looked far and wide, and when they saw that the Chu army had no successor, they chased again, approaching the Chu army.

古文：简师会之，吴师大败。
现代文：楚军精选部队就和家兵会合作战，吴军大败。
English: The elite troops of the Chu army fought in cooperation with the family soldiers' association, and the Wu army suffered a major defeat.

古文：遂围舒鸠，舒鸠溃。
现代文：楚军乘机就包围了舒鸠，舒鸠溃散。
English: The Chu army took advantage of the opportunity to encircle Shuxi, and Shuxi was dispersed.

古文：八月，楚灭舒鸠。
现代文：八月，楚国灭亡了舒鸠。
English: In August, the State of Chu was overthrown by Shu Han.

古文：卫献公入于夷仪。
现代文：卫献公进入夷仪。
English: Wei Xiangong enters the ceremony.

古文：郑子产献捷于晋，戎服将事。
现代文：郑国的子产向晋国奉献战利品，穿着军服主持事务。
English: The sons and daughters of Zheng donated war trophies to Jin and presided over affairs while wearing military uniforms.

古文：晋人问陈之罪，对曰： 昔虞阏父为周陶正，以服事我先王。
现代文：晋国人质问陈国的罪过，子产回答说： 从前虞父做周朝的陶正，服事我们先王。
English: The people of Jin Province questioned Chen Guo's sins, and his son replied: Formerly, Father Yu was Tao Zheng of the Zhou Dynasty and served our former king.

古文：我先王赖其利器用也，与其神明之后也，庸以元女大姬配胡公，而封诸陈，以备三恪。
现代文：我们先王嘉奖他能制作器物，于人有利，并且是虞舜的后代，就把大女儿太姬匹配给胡公，封他在陈地，以表示对黄帝、尧、舜的后代的诚敬。
English: Our first king commended him for his ability to make utensils that are beneficial to people, and as a descendant of Yu Yu, he matched the eldest daughter, Taiki, to Hu Gong and sealed him in Chen, in order to show his sincere respect for the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, Yao and Yao.

古文：则我周之自出，至于今是赖。
现代文：所以陈国是我周朝的后代，到今天还依靠着周朝。
English: Therefore, Chen Guo is my descendant of the Zhou Dynasty, and I still rely on the Zhou Dynasty to this day.

古文：桓公之乱，蔡人欲立其出。我先君庄公奉五父而立之，蔡人杀之。
现代文：陈桓公死后发生动乱，蔡国人想要立他们的后代，我们先君庄公奉事五父而立了他，蔡国人杀死了五父。
English: After the death of Chen Huan, there was turmoil. The Cai people wanted to set up their descendants. We first set up Jun Zhuang to serve the Five Fathers, and the Cai people killed the Five Fathers.

古文：我又与蔡人奉戴厉公，至于庄、宣，皆我之自立。
现代文：我们又和蔡国人奉事厉公，至于庄公、宣公，都是我们所立的。
English: We, together with the people of Cai Guo, are dedicated to public service, and as far as dignity and publicity are concerned, we have established them.

古文：夏氏之乱，成公播荡，又我之自入，君所知也。
现代文：夏氏的祸乱杀死了灵公，成公流离失所，又是我们让他回国的，这是君王知道的。
English: The calamity of the Xia clan killed the spiritual father, the father-in-law was displaced, and we let him return to the country, which the king knew.

古文：今陈忘周之大德，蔑我大惠，弃我姻亲，介恃楚众，以冯陵我敝邑，不可亿逞。我是以有往年之告。
现代文：现在陈国忘记了周朝在的大德，丢弃我们的大恩，抛弃我们这个亲戚，倚仗楚国人多，以进逼我敝邑，但是并不能满足，我国因此而有去年请求攻打陈国的报告。
English: Now, Chen Guo has forgotten the great virtue of the Zhou Dynasty, abandoned our great favor, abandoned our relative, and relied on many people from Chu to invade and force me to stay. However, it is not enough. As a result, our country had a report last year requesting to attack Chen Guo.

古文：未获成命，则有我东门之役。
现代文：没有得到贵国的命令，反却有了陈国进攻我国东门那次战役。
English: There was no order from your country, but on the contrary, there was the battle in which Chen Guo attacked the eastern gate of our country.

古文：当陈隧者，井堙木刊。
现代文：在陈军经过的路上，水井被填塞，树木被砍伐。
English: As Chen's army passed by, wells were blocked and trees were cut down.

古文：敝邑大惧不竞，而耻大姬。天诱其衷，启敝邑心。
现代文：敝邑非常害怕敌兵压境，给太姬带来羞耻，上天诱导我们的心，启发了敝邑攻打陈国的念头。
English: Zouyi was very afraid of the enemy's invasion, which brought shame to the Empress Dowager. Heaven induced our hearts and inspired Zouyi to attack Chen Guo.

古文：陈知其罪，授手于我。
现代文：陈国知道自己的罪过，在我们这里得到惩罚。
English: Chen Guo knew his crime and was punished by us.

古文：用敢献功！ 
现代文：因此我们敢于奉献俘虏。 
English: That is why we dare to sacrifice prisoners.

古文：晋人曰： 何故侵小？ 
现代文：晋国人说： 为什么侵犯小国？ 
English: The people of Jin also asked: Why attack a small country?

古文：对曰： 先王之命，唯罪所在，各致其辟。
现代文：子产回答说： 先王的命令，只要是罪过所在，就要分别给刑罚。
English: The progeny replied, "The king's order is that if there is a crime, the punishment should be given separately.

古文：且昔天子之地一圻，列国一同，自是以衰。
现代文：而且从前天子的土地方圆一千里，诸侯的土地方圆一百里，以此递减。
English: Moreover, the land area of the former emperor was reduced by one thousand li, and the land area of the feudal lords by one hundred li.

古文：今大国多数圻矣！若无侵小，何以至焉？ 
现代文：现在大国的土地多到方圆几千里，如果没有侵占小国，怎么能到这地步呢？ 
English: At present, the land of the big countries is several thousand miles in circumference. If they did not invade and occupy the small countries, how could they have reached this stage?

古文：晋人曰： 何故戎服？ 
现代文：晋国人说： 为什么穿上军服？ 
English: Jin people say: Why put on a military uniform?

古文：对曰： 我先君武、庄，为平、桓卿士。
现代文：子产回答说： 我们先君武公、庄公做周平王、周桓王的卿士。
English: Zizang replied, "We were the noblemen of King Zhou Ping and King Zhou Kuan before King Wu and King Zhuang.

古文：城濮之役，文公布命曰： 各复旧职！ 
现代文：城濮这一战役后，晋文公发布命令，说： 各人恢复原来的职务。 
English: After the battle of Chenghuang, Jinwen issued an order, saying: "Everyone resume their original duties.

古文：命我文公戎服辅王，以授楚捷，不敢废王命故也。 
现代文：命令我郑文公穿军服辅佐天子，以接受楚国俘虏献给天子，现在我穿着军服，这是由于不敢废弃天子命令的缘故。 
English: Zheng Wenguang ordered me to wear a military uniform to assist the Son of Heaven in order to accept the prisoners of Chu for the Son of Heaven. Now I am wearing a military uniform because I dare not abandon the Son of Heaven's order.

古文：士庄伯不能诘，复于赵文子。
现代文：士庄伯已经不能再质问，于是向赵文子回复。
English: Shizhuang Bo could no longer ask questions, so he replied to Zhao Wenzi.

古文：文子曰： 其辞顺，犯顺不祥。 
现代文：赵文子说： 他的言辞顺理成章，违背了情理不吉利。 
English: Zhao Wenzi said: His words are logical, contrary to reason and unlucky.

古文：乃受之。
现代文：于是就接受郑国奉献的战利品。
English: It was only then that Cao Hong accepted them.

古文：冬十月，子展相郑伯如晋，拜陈之功。
现代文：冬季，十月，子展作为郑简公的相礼一起去到晋国，拜谢晋国接受他们奉献的陈国战利品。
English: In the winter, in October, Zizeng went to Jin Province as Zheng Jiangong's best man, to thank Jin Province for accepting the trophies of Chen Province donated by them.

古文：子西复伐陈，陈及郑平。
现代文：子西再次发兵进攻陈国，陈国和郑同讲和。
English: Zixi once again sent troops to attack Chen, and Chen and Zheng made peace.

古文：仲尼曰： 《志》有之： 言以足志，文以足言。 
现代文：孔子说： 古书上说： 言语用来完成意愿，文采用来完成言语。 
English: Confucius said: The ancient book said: Words are used to accomplish intentions, and sentences are used to accomplish words.

古文：不言，谁知其志。
现代文：不说话，谁知道他的意愿是什么？
English: Without speaking, who knows what his will is?

古文：言之无文，行而不远。
现代文：说话没有文采，不能到达远方。
English: There is no eloquence in speech, and one cannot travel far.

古文：晋为伯，郑入陈，非文辞不为功。
现代文：晋国成为霸主，郑国进入陈国，不是善于辞令就不能成功。
English: If Jin becomes the hegemon and Zheng enters Chen, they cannot succeed unless they are good at rhetoric.

古文：慎辞哉！ 
现代文：要谨慎地使用辞令。 
English: You have to be careful with your words.

古文：楚蒍掩为司马。子木使庀赋，数甲兵。
现代文：楚国的蒍掩做司马，子木让他治理军赋，检查盔甲武器。
English: Chu's 掩 acted as Sima, and Ziki let him manage the military supplies and inspect the armour and weapons.

古文：甲午，蒍掩书土田，度山林，鸠薮泽，辨京陵，表淳卤，数疆潦，规偃豬，町原防，牧隰皋，井衍沃，量入修赋。
现代文：十月初八日，蒍掩记载土泽地田的情况：度量山林的木材，聚集水泽的出产，区别高地的情况，标出盐碱地，计算水淹地。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of the year, the situation of the soil-thawed land was recorded: the timber of the mountain forest was measured, the production of the gathered water was measured, the situation of the highland was distinguished, the saline-alkaline land was marked, and the flooded land was calculated.

古文：赋车籍马，赋车兵、徒兵、甲楯之数。
现代文：规划蓄水池，划分小块耕地，在水草地上放牧，在肥沃的土地上划定井田。
English: Reservoirs are planned, small plots of arable land are delineated, pastures are grazed on water meadows, and wells are delineated on fertile land.

古文：既成，以授子木，礼也。十二月，吴子诸樊伐楚，以报舟师之役。
现代文：计量收入制定赋税制度，征收百姓交纳战车和马匹税、征收战车步卒所用的武器和盔甲盾牌税。完成以后，把它交付给子木，这是合于礼的。十二月，吴王诸樊进攻楚国，为报复 舟师之战 。
English: Measurement of income to establish a tax system, collect the people to pay the chariot and horse tax, collect the weapons and armor shield tax used by the chariot foot soldiers. After completion, it is proper to hand it over to Zi Mu. In December, King Wuzhong attacked Chu, in retaliation for the Battle of Zhoushi.

古文：门于巢。
现代文：进攻巢地的城门。
English: Attack the gate of the Hive.

古文：巢牛臣曰： 吴王勇而轻，若启之，将亲门。
现代文：巢牛臣说： 吴王勇敢而轻率，如果我们打开城门，他将会亲自带头进门。
English: Chao Niu Zhen said: King Wu is brave and reckless. If we open the gate, he will personally lead the way into the gate.

古文：我获射之，必殪。
现代文：我乘机射他，一定能射死。
English: I took the opportunity to shoot him. I'm sure I can shoot him dead.

古文：是君也死，疆其少安！ 
现代文：这个国君死了，边境上或可以稍为安定一些。 
English: This sovereign is dead, and there may be a little more stability on the border.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：吴子门焉，牛臣隐于短墙以射之，卒。
现代文：吴王进入城门，牛臣躲在短墙后用箭射他，吴王死了。
English: Wu Wang entered the city gate, Niu Chen hid behind a short wall and shot him with an arrow. Wu Wang died.

古文：楚子以灭舒鸠赏子木。
现代文：楚康王由于灭亡了舒鸠赏赐子木。
English: As a result of his death, King Chukang rewarded Shuxuan with a sapling.

古文：辞曰： 先大夫子之功也。 
现代文：子木推辞说： 这是先大夫蒍子的功劳。 
English: Zi Mu said, "This is the merit of the former doctor Zangzi."

古文：以与掩。
现代文：楚康王就把赏赐给了蒍掩。
English: King Chu Kang then gave the reward to Zou Xuan.

古文：晋程郑卒。子产始知然明，问为政焉。
现代文：晋国的程郑死，子产才开始了解然明。子产向然明询问有关施政的方针。
English: It was only after the death of Cheng Zheng of Jin that his children began to understand Ranming. His children asked Ranming about the policy of governance.

古文：对曰： 视民如子。
现代文：然明回答说： 把百姓看成像儿子一样。
English: Yan Ming replied: Treat the people like sons.

古文：见不仁者诛之，如鹰鹯之逐鸟雀也。 
现代文：见到不仁的人，就诛戮他，好像老鹰追赶鸟雀。 
English: When he sees a wicked man, he slays him as an eagle slays a sparrow.

古文：子产喜，以语子大叔，且曰： 他日吾见蔑之面而已，今吾见其心矣。 
现代文：子产很高兴，把这些话告诉子太叔，而且说： 以前我见到的只是然明的面貌，现在我了解到他内心甚有见识。 
English: Zi Yuan was very happy and told these words to Uncle Zi, and said, "Before, I only saw a bright face, but now I know that he has a lot of insight in his heart.

古文：子大叔问政于子产。
现代文：子太叔向子产询问政事。
English: The great-uncle asked the great-grandchild about politics.

古文：子产曰： 政如农功，日夜思之，思其始而成其终。
现代文：子产说： 政事好像农活，白天黑夜想着它，要想着他的开始又想着要取得好结果。
English: Zi Yuan said, "Politics is like farm work. You should think about it day and night. You should think about how to start and how to get a good result.

古文：朝夕而行之，行无越思，如农之有畔。其过鲜矣。 
现代文：早晨晚上都照想着的去做，所做的不超过所想的，好像农田里有田埂一样，过错就会少一些。 
English: In the morning and in the evening, do what you want to do, do not exceed what you think, as if there were rice fields in the farmland, the mistakes will be less.

古文：卫献公自夷仪使与甯喜言，甯喜许之。
现代文：卫献公从夷仪派人向宁喜谈复国的事情，宁喜同意了。
English: Wei Xianguo sent someone from Yiyi to talk to Ning Xi about the restoration of the country, and Ning Xi agreed.

古文：大叔文子闻之，曰： 乌乎！
现代文：太叔文子听说了，说： 啊！
English: Uncle Fumiko heard about it and said, "Ah!

古文：《诗》所谓 我躬不说，皇恤我后 者，甯子可谓不恤其后矣。
现代文：《诗》所谓 我的一身还不能被人容纳，哪里来得及顾念我的后代？ 宁子可以说是不顾他的后代了。
English: "Poem" so-called My whole body can not be accommodated by people, where is the time to think about my descendants? Ning Zi can be said to ignore his descendants.

古文：将可乎哉？
现代文：难道可以吗？
English: Is it possible?

古文：殆必不可。
现代文：大概是一定不可以的。
English: Probably not.

古文：君子之行，思其终也，思其复也。《书》曰： 慎始而敬终，终以不困。 
现代文：君子有所行动，要想到结果，想到下次能够再如此。《书》说： 慎重于开始，而重视其结果，结果就不会困惑。 
English: A gentleman takes action, thinks about the result, and thinks about the next time he can do it again. "The Book" says: "Be cautious at the beginning, but pay attention to the result, and the result will not be confused."

古文：《诗》曰： 夙夜匪懈，以事一人。 
现代文：《诗》说： 早晚不敢懈怠，以事奉一人。 
English: "Poetry" says: In the morning and in the evening, do not dare to slack off, so as to serve one person.

古文：今甯子视君不如弈棋，其何以免乎？
现代文：现在宁子看待国君不如下棋，他怎么能免于祸难呢？
English: Now Ning Zi regarded the sovereign as a chess player, how could he be free from the calamity?

古文：弈者举棋不定，不胜其耦。而况置君而弗定乎？
现代文：下棋的人举棋不定，就不能击败他的对方，而何况安置国君而不能决定呢？
English: If a chess player is indecisive, he can't beat his opponent, and what's more, he can't decide on the placement of the sovereign?

古文：必不免矣。
现代文：必定不能免于祸难了。
English: There is no escaping the calamity.

古文：九世之卿族，一举而灭之。
现代文：九代相传的卿族，一旦被灭亡，可悲啊！ 
English: If the noble family, which has been passed down for nine generations, were to perish, how sad!

古文：可哀也哉！ 会于夷仪之岁，齐人城郏。
现代文：在夷仪会见的那一年，齐国人在郏地筑城。
English: In the year of the meeting with the Empress Dowager Cixi, the people of Qi built a city in Handan.

古文：其五月，秦、晋为成。晋韩起如秦涖盟，秦伯车如晋涖盟，成而不结。
现代文：那年五月，秦国、晋国讲和，晋国的韩起去到秦国参加结盟，秦国的伯车去到晋国参加结盟。
English: In May of that year, Qin and Jin declared peace. Han Qi from Jin went to Qin to join the alliance, and Baoqi from Qin went to Jin to join the alliance.

