古文：一卷真形统汇此山之纲领也。
现代文：一卷真形统汇
English: A volume of true unification

古文：山名山脉山形山界开辟鼎盛二卷名胜分标胜概本乎天，故随其发脉，自顶而下分也。
现代文：山名山脉山形山界开辟鼎盛二卷名胜分标
English: The opening of the Yamagata mountain range is at the peak of its prosperity, and the two volumes of the classification of scenic spots

古文：峰岩洞台石岭
现代文：峰岩洞台石岭
English: Fengyan Cave Stone Ridge

古文：梯谷峡箐坪林
现代文：梯谷峡著坪林
English: Ladder canyon with pinglin

古文：泉瀑潭涧温泉
现代文：泉瀑潭涧温泉
English: Tantan Hot Spring

古文：三卷化宇随支功业本乎人，故因其登陟，自卑而上升也。
现代文：三卷化宇随支
English: Three volumes of Kazuo Suetsubashi

古文：中条刹舍
现代文：中间支峰的佛寺
English: The Buddhist temple on the middle peak

古文：四卷化宇随支
现代文：四卷化宇随支
English: Four volumes of Kazuo Suetsubashi

古文：东条刹舍西条刹舍
现代文：东面支峰的佛寺西面支峰的佛寺
English: Buddhist temple on the east side of the peak Buddhist temple on the west side of the peak

古文：五卷化宇随支
现代文：五卷化宇随支
English: Five volumes of Kazuo Suetsubashi

古文：绝顶罗城山外刹舍附坊、亭、桥、聚六卷神迹原始
现代文：绝顶的罗城山外的佛寺附记牌坊、亭子、桥梁、聚落六卷神迹原始
English: The Buddhist temple outside the peak of Mount Luocheng, complete with memorial plaza, pavilion, bridge, and settlement, is a six-volume wonderland

古文：传法正宗传附法显事迹附小沈事迹古德垂芬
现代文：传法正宗传附记法显事迹附记小沈事迹古德流芳
English: Transmission of the authentic teachings of the Fa Transmission of the authentic teachings of the Fa Transmission of the authentic teachings of the Fa Transmission of the authentic teachings of

古文：名宿传高隐传
现代文：著名前辈传高人隐士传
English: Passed down by famous predecessors, passed down by scholars, passed down by hermits

古文：七卷宰官护法
现代文：七卷宰官护法
English: The seven volumes of the Law of the Protector of Clerics

古文：名宦传乡贤传附檀越信施胜事记余
现代文：著名官吏传乡间名贤传附记施主信徒布施胜事记余
English: Famous officials handed down from village to village, famous sages passed down from village to village

古文：灵异十则物产临莅朝参市集塔墓十则
现代文：灵异十则景致十则物产在临视察上朝参拜集市塔墓十则
English: Ten extraordinary scenes, ten scenes of scenery, ten scenes of products under close inspection, ten scenes of market tower tombs visited in the morning

古文：八卷艺苑集成
现代文：又卷艺苑集成
English: Wenzhong Art Park is also integrated

古文：集诗集文
现代文：诗集文集
English: Collection of Poems

古文：徐子曰：志图经者，有山川之一款；志山川者，又有图经之全例，不相假也。
现代文：徐子说：记述地理志的人，有山川这一款；记述山川的人，又有地理志的全部体例，不互相借用。
English: Xu Zi said: People who write geography have this paragraph about mountains and rivers; people who write about mountains and rivers have all the examples of geography, and they do not borrow from each other.

古文：兹帙首真形，次名胜，次化宇，渐由天而入；次古德，次护法，则纯乎人矣；胜事天之余，艺苑人之余，故又次焉。
现代文：这套书首先记真形，其次记名胜，其次记佛宇，逐渐由天到人；其次是古德，其次护法，则纯粹是人了；胜事是天余下的内容，艺苑是人余下的内容，所以又在其次。
English: This set of books first records the true form, then the famous places, then the Buddhas, and gradually from heaven to man; followed by the good, followed by the protection of the law, it is purely human; the victory is the remaining content of heaven, the art park is the remaining content of man, so it is second.

古文：此编次之大意也。
现代文：这是编撰次序的主要意旨。
English: This is the main intention of the order.

