古文：刘梦得、李习之、皇甫持正、李汉，皆称诵韩公之文，各极其挚。刘之语云： 高山无穷，太华削成。
现代文：刘禹锡、李习之、黄甫持正、李汉，都极为诚恳地称赞韩愈的文章，刘禹锡的诗说： 高山无穷，太华削成。
English: Liu Yuxi, Li Xizhi, Huang Fu Jizheng, and Li Han all praised Han Yu's article very sincerely. Liu Yuxi's poem said: "Mountains are boundless, too much beauty has been whittled away."

古文：人文无穷，夫子挺生。
现代文：人文无穷，夫子挺生。
English: The humanities are endless, and the professor is very lively.

古文：鸾凤一鸣，蜩螗革音。
现代文：鸾风一鸣，蜩螗革音。
English: The wind whistles, the leather rustles.

古文：手持文柄，高视寰海。
现代文：手持文柄，高视寰海。
English: He is holding a letter in his hand and gazing up at the Bohai Sea.

古文：权衡低昂，瞻我所在。
现代文：权衡低昂，瞻我所在。
English: The balance is low, I am where I am.

古文：三十余年，声名塞天。 
现代文：三十余年，声名塞天。 
English: For more than 30 years, his reputation has been tarnished.

古文：习之云： 建武以还，文卑质丧。
现代文：李习之的诗说： 建武以还，文卑质丧。
English: Li Xi Zhi's poem said: "Constructing martial arts is good, but the quality of literature is inferior."

古文：气萎体败，剽剥不让。
现代文：气萎体败，剽剥不让。
English: Disheartened and defeated, he refused to be beaten.

古文：拔去其华，得其本根。
现代文：拨去其华，得其本根。
English: If you take away the flower, you get the root.

古文：包刘越嬴，并武同殷。
现代文：包刘越赢，并武同殷。
English: Liu Bao is winning more and more, and Wu Tongyin is leading.

古文：《六经》之风，绝而复新。
现代文：《六经》之风，绝而复新。
English: The style of "The Six Classics" has been completely revived.

古文：学者有归，大变于文。 
现代文：学者有归，大变于文。 
English: Scholars have returned, and there has been a great change in literature.

古文：又云： 公每以为自扬雄之后，作者不出，其所为文，未尝效前人之言而固与之并，后进之士有志于古文者，莫不视以为法。 
现代文：他又说： 韩公常认为从杨雄以后，就没有真正的作家出现，他所作的文章未曾模仿过前人，却总是能和前贤的并驾齐驱。有志于学习古文的年轻人，没有不把他的文章看做楷模的。 
English: He also said: Han Gong often thought that since Yang Xiong, there has been no real writer. His articles have never imitated the predecessors, but they can always keep pace with the predecessors. There are no young people who are interested in learning ancient literature who do not regard his articles as a model.

古文：皇甫云： 先生之作，无圆无方，主是归工，抉经之心，执圣之权，尚友作者，跂邪觝异，以扶孔子，存皇之极。
现代文：黄甫持正说： 先生的文章，无论什么形式，都十分高妙。他深入研究六经的精髓，掌握圣人权衡事物的观点，与天下作家为友，坚决抵制异端邪说，以辅助孔子，捍卫伟大的儒家经典。
English: Huang Fuzhizheng said: Mr. Huang's articles, no matter what form, are very exquisite. He has deeply studied the essence of the Six Classics, grasped the point of view of saints to weigh things, made friends with writers around the world, resolutely resisted heresy, assisted Confucius, and defended the great Confucian classics.

古文：茹古涵今，无有端涯。
现代文：他的思想包古含今，无边无际。
English: His thought embraces the past and the present, and is boundless.

古文：鲸铿春丽，惊耀天下，栗密窈眇，章妥句适，精能之至，鬼入神出，姬氏以来，一人而已。 
现代文：他的文章笔力雄健，辞藻华丽，震惊天下，内容充实缜密，章句妥帖美妙，登峰造极，达到出神入化的地步，从周代以来，仅此一人而已。 
English: He is the only person since the Zhou Dynasty to have written such powerful and magnificent articles that shocked the world. The content was rich and detailed, the sentences were well-written and wonderful, and he reached the pinnacle of perfection, to the point of being delirious.

古文：又云： 属文意语天了，业孔子、孟轲而侈其文，焯焯烈烈，为唐文章 。
现代文：又说： 先生作文章，立意、语言似乎都是出自天然。他学习孔子、孟子并以文章发扬他们的思想，鲜明壮美，是唐代散文的大家。 
English: He also said: "When writing articles, the professor's intention and language seem to come from nature. He studied Confucius and Mencius and developed their thoughts in articles. They are vivid and magnificent. He is a master of Tang Dynasty prose.

古文：又云： 如长江秋注，千里一道，然施于灌激，或爽于用。 
现代文：又说： 先生的文章，如长江秋天的洪流，一泻千里，气势磅礴，但如用于灌溉，则可能是不适用的。 
English: He also said: Mr. Wang's article, such as the torrent of the Yangtze River in autumn, covers thousands of miles and is very powerful, but if it is used for irrigation, it may not be applicable.

古文：此论似为不知公者。
现代文：这一点如同不了解韩公似的。
English: It's as if they don't understand Han.

古文：汉之语云： 诡然而蛟龙翔，蔚然而虎风跃，锵然而韶钧鸣，日光玉洁，周情孔思，千态万貌，卒泽于道德仁义，炳如也。 
现代文：李汉说： 韩公文章的奇诡如蛟龙在飞翔，文采像是虎凤在跳跃，语言铿锵有力如韶乐鸣奏，文章像太阳那样光芒四射，像宝玉那样晶莹璀璨，表现出孔子的思想，周代六经中的感情，千姿百态，最终是对道德仁义的润泽、表现，这是很明显的。 
English: Li Han said: It is very obvious that Han Gong's articles are as eccentric as flying dragons, his literary works are like leaping tigers and phoenixes, his language is as powerful as musical chords, his articles are as radiant as the sun, and as crystal clear as precious stones, and they show the thoughts of Confucius, the feelings of the Six Classics of the Zhou Dynasty, and a thousand different attitudes, and finally, they are the gloss and expression of morality and benevolence.

古文：是四人者，所以推高韩公，可谓尽矣。
现代文：这四个人对韩公的推崇可谓到极点了。
English: These four people have the utmost respect for Han.

古文：及东坡之碑一出，而后众说尽废，其略云： 匹夫而为百世师，一言而为天下法，是皆有以参天地之化，关盛衰之运。
现代文：及至苏东坡的《韩文公庙碑》一问世，所有的评说都销声匿迹了。苏东坡说： 一个普通的人却成为百代宗师，说出一句话能成为天下人效法的准则，这是因为他的成就可以和天地的化育万物并论，和国家命运的盛衰有深切的关系。
English: As soon as Su Dongpo's "Korean Public Temple Monument" came out, all the comments disappeared. Su Dongpo said: An ordinary person has become a master of hundreds of generations. Saying a word can become a standard for people around the world to follow. This is because his achievements can be discussed with the creation of heaven and earth, and have a deep relationship with the rise and fall of the country's fate.

古文：自东汉以来，道丧文弊，历唐贞观开元而不能救，独公谈笑而麾之，天下靡然从公，复归于正。
现代文：从东汉以来，儒道衰丧，文风败坏，经过唐朝贞观、开元两个兴盛时期也不能挽救，只有韩文公谈笑着挥斥邪说，天下人狂热地追随他，使思想和文风重新回到正道上来。
English: Since the Eastern Han Dynasty, Confucianism has been in decline and the literary style has deteriorated. After the two prosperous periods of the Tang Dynasty's Zhenguan and the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, there is no way to save it. Only Han Wen Gong Dan laughed and rebuked the heresy. People all over the world enthusiastically followed him to bring the thought and literary style back to the right path.

古文：文起八代之衰，道济天下之涨，岂非参天地而独存者乎？ 
现代文：他的文章使东汉、魏、晋、宋、齐、梁、陈、隋八代以来衰败的文风得以振兴，他宣扬儒道，把天下人从沉溺中拯救出来，这难道不就是赞助天地、关系盛衰、浩大独立的正气吗？ 
English: His articles revitalized the literary style that had been in decline since the eighth generation of the Eastern Han, Wei, Jin, Song, Qi, Liang, Chen, and Sui dynasties. He preached Confucianism and saved the world from indulgence. Isn't this the righteous spirit of sponsoring heaven and earth, the rise and fall of relationships, and vast independence?

古文：骑龙白云之诗，蹈厉发越，直到《雅》、《颂》，所谓若捕龙蛇、搏虎豹者，大哉言乎！
现代文：在碑文后面，苏东坡又写了一首骑龙遨游白云乡的诗，慷慨激越，直追《诗经》中雅、颂的风格，正所谓象捕龙蛇，搜虎豹似的，宏大啊！
English: Behind the inscription, Su Dongpo also wrote a poem about riding a dragon to travel around Baiyun Township. Generous and impassioned, it directly follows the elegant and eulogistic style of the "Book of Songs." It is just like catching a dragon and a snake, or searching for a tiger and a leopard. Magnificent!

