古文：自尧、舜及今，天下裂而复合者四：周之末为七战国，秦合之；汉之末分为三国，晋合之；晋之乱分为十余国，争战三百年，隋合之；唐之后又分八九国，本朝合之。
现代文：从尧舜至今，天下分裂而又统一的有四次：周朝末年为战国七雄，秦朝统一；汉朝末年为魏、蜀、吴三国鼎立，晋朝统一；晋朝大乱分裂为十几个小国，争战持续了三百年，隋朝统一；唐朝之后又分裂为八、九个小国，本朝统一。
English: Up to now, there have been four times when the world was divided and unified: the end of the Zhou Dynasty was the year of the Warring States and the unification of the Qin Dynasty; the end of the Han Dynasty was the year of the Wei, Shu and Wu dynasties and the unification of the Jin Dynasty; the Jin Dynasty was divided into more than a dozen small countries, the war lasted for three hundred years, and the Sui Dynasty was unified; after the Tang Dynasty, it was divided into eight or nine small countries and the unification of this dynasty.

古文：然秦始皇一传而为胡亥，晋武帝一传而为惠帝，隋文帝一传而为炀帝，皆破亡其社稷。
现代文：然而秦始皇传了一世而为胡亥，晋武帝传了一世而为晋惠帝，隋文帝传了一世而为隋炀帝，都葬送了自己的江山社稷。
English: However, Emperor Qin Shi Huang, Emperor Jin Wu, Emperor Jin Hui, and Emperor Sui Wen, Emperor Sui Jiu, all passed away in the same year.

古文：独本朝九传百七十年，乃不幸有靖康之祸，盖三代以下治安所无也。
现代文：唯独本朝传了九世一百七十年，不幸遭遇了靖康之祸，大概三代以来没有如本朝这样和平安定的了。
English: However, this dynasty, which has been passed down for nine generations and one hundred and seventy years, has unfortunately encountered the calamity of pacification. For about three generations, it has not been as peaceful and stable as this dynasty.

古文：秦、晋、隋皆相似，然秦、隋一亡即扫地，晋之东虽曰 牛继马后 ，终为守司马氏之祀，亦百有余年。
现代文：秦朝、晋朝、隋朝都有相似之处，然而秦、隋一旦灭亡即彻底消失了，东晋虽然被称为 牛继马后 ，但毕竟保持了司马氏的社稷，也享国百余年。
English: The Qin Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty all have similarities. However, once the Qin Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty were destroyed, they completely disappeared. Although the Eastern Jin Dynasty was known as the "Cow following the Horse," it still maintained the social order of the Sima Dynasty and enjoyed more than 100 years of national prosperity.

古文：盖秦、隋毒流四海，天实诛之，晋之八王擅兵，孽后盗政，皆本于惠帝昏蒙，非得罪于民，故其亡也，与秦、隋独异。
现代文：大概秦朝、隋朝流毒四海，罪恶极大，上天诛之，晋朝的 八王之乱 ， 孽后 贾南风擅权乱国，都是因为晋惠帝昏庸无能造成的，并不是得罪了百姓，所以它的灭亡和秦、隋朝的灭亡不同。
English: Presumably, the Qin and Sui dynasties poisoned the four seas, the evil was extremely great, and it was instigated by heaven. The eight kings' rebellion of the Jin dynasty, and its aftermath, Jia Nanfeng's abuse of power and chaos of the country, were all caused by the incompetence of Emperor Jinhui. It did not offend the people, so its demise was different from the demise of the Qin and Sui dynasties.

