古文：力谓命曰： 若之功奚若我哉？ 
现代文：人力对天命说： 你的功劳怎么比得上我呢？ 
English: Manpower says to Mandate of Heaven: How does your merit compare to mine?

古文：命曰： 汝奚功于物而欲比朕？ 
现代文：天命问道： 你对万物有什么功劳，而想来和我比较？ 
English: Mandate of Heaven asked, "What merit do you have in all things that you want to compare with me?

古文：力曰： 寿夭、穷达、贵贱、贫富，我力之所能也。 
现代文：人力说： 人们的长寿或短命、困厄或显达、尊贵或卑贱、贫穷或富有，是我人力能够决定的。 
English: Manpower says: People's longevity or short life, hardship or prominence, honor or lowliness, poverty or wealth can be determined by my manpower.

古文：命曰： 彭祖之智不出尧、舜之上，而寿八百；颜渊之才不出众人之下，而寿四八。
现代文：天命道： 彭祖的智力赶不上尧、舜，却享年八百；颜渊的才华不在众人之下，却只活了三十二岁。
English: Mandate of Heaven: Peng Zu's intellect could not keep up with that of Miao and Yao, but he died at the age of eight hundred; Yan Yuan's talent was not below everyone, but he only lived for thirty-two years.

古文：仲尼之德不出诸侯之下，而困于陈、蔡；殷纣之行不出三仁之上，而居君位。
现代文：孔子的仁德不在诸侯之下，却受困在陈、蔡两国的荒野；殷纣王的品行远不如微子、箕子、比干，却高居在国君的位子上。
English: The benevolence of Confucius is not under the princes, but is trapped in the wilderness of Chen and Cai; the behavior of King Yin Zi is far less than that of Wuzi, Zizi and Bi Gan, but he is high on the throne of the country.

古文：季札无爵于吴，田恒专有齐国。
现代文：贤者季札在吴国没有封爵，富于心计的田恒却专权齐国。
English: There was no knighthood for the wise man Ji Zha in the State of Wu, but the scheming Tian Heng gained absolute power in the State of Qi.

古文：夷、齐饿于首阳，季氏富于展禽。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐饿死在首阳山，鲁国的季孙氏却比柳下惠还富有。
English: Bo Yi and his uncle Qi starved to death on Shouyang Mountain, but the Ji Sun clan in Lu was richer than Liu Shimo Hui.

古文：若是汝力之所能，奈何寿彼而夭此，穷圣而达逆，贱贤而贵愚，贫善而富恶邪？ 
现代文：倘若这是你人力所能决定的，那为什么让彭祖长寿而颜渊短命，让圣人困厄而逆者显达，让贤者卑贱而愚人尊贵，让好人贫穷而坏人富有呢？ 
English: If this is what your human power can decide, then why let Peng Zu live long and Yan Yuan live short, let the saints be troubled and the rebels be revealed, let the wise be humble and the fools be honored, let the good people be poor and the bad people be rich?

古文：力曰： 若如若言，我固无功于物，而物若此邪，此则若之所制邪？ 
现代文：人力说： 就算像你说的，我对于万物本没有什么功劳，但万物何以如此这般，这难道是你所主宰的吗？ 
English: Manpower said: Even if, as you said, I have nothing to do with all things, but why are all things like this, is this something you control?

古文：命曰： 既谓之命，奈何有制之者邪？
现代文：天命道： 既然称作天命，如何还有主宰者呢？
English: The Mandate of Heaven: Since it is called the Mandate of Heaven, how can there be a ruler?

古文：朕直而推之，曲而任之。
现代文：遇上正直的事，我推动它；遇上歪曲的事，我放任它。
English: Where there is honesty, I promote it; where there is crookedness, I allow it.

古文：自寿自夭，自穷自达，自贵自贱，自富自贫，朕岂能识之哉？
现代文：世间一切自然地长寿、自然地短命，自然地困厄、自然地显达，自然地尊贵、自然地卑贱，自然地富有、自然地贫穷，我又怎么能够明了其中的道理呢？
English: Of all the things in the world that are naturally long-lived, naturally short-lived, naturally in distress, naturally prominent, naturally noble, naturally lowly, naturally rich, naturally poor, how can I understand the reason for them?

古文：朕岂能识之哉？ 
现代文：我又怎么能够明了其中的道理呢？ 
English: How can I make sense of this?

古文：北宫子谓西门子曰： 朕与子并世也，而人子达；并族也，而人子敬；并貌也，而人子爱；并言也，而人子庸；并行也，而人子诚；并仕也，而人子贵；并农也，而人子富；并商也，而人子利。
现代文：北宫子对西门子说： 我和你生活在同一个时代，而人们让你显达；一样的世家大族，而人们尊敬您；相貌也差不多，而人们喜爱你；一样地说话，而别人却采纳你的意见；一样的做事，而别人却信任你；一样的做官，而别人却重用你；一样的种田，而别人却使你富裕；一样的经商，而别人却使你发财。
English: Kita Miyako said to Siemens: I live in the same era as you, but people make you famous; the same family and people, but people respect you; the appearance is similar, but people love you; speak the same way, but others accept your opinion; do the same things, but others trust you; the same official, but others reuse you; the same farmland, but others make you rich; the same business, but others make you rich.

古文：朕衣则裋褐，食则粢粝，居则蓬室，出则徒行。
现代文：我穿的是粗布衣服，吃的是粗糙的饭菜，住的是茅草屋，外出便步行。
English: I wear coarse clothes, eat coarse food, live in a thatched hut and go out on foot.

古文：子衣则文锦，食则粱肉，居则连欐，出则结驷。
现代文：你穿的是绣着花纹的丝绸衣服，吃的是精美的饭菜，住的是高大华丽的房屋，外出则车马成群。
English: You wear silk clothes embroidered with patterns, eat exquisite meals, live in tall and magnificent houses, and go out in a herd of horses and chariots.

古文：在家熙然有弃朕之心，在朝谔然有敖朕之色。
现代文：在家庭中，你嬉戏欢笑有不理我的念头；在朝廷上，你夸夸其谈有轻视我的脸色。
English: In the family, you play and laugh with the idea of ignoring me; in the court, you talk boastfully and look down on me.

古文：请谒不及相，遨游不同行，固有年矣。
现代文：请客问候没有我的份，外出游玩不和我同行；已经有好多年了。
English: I don't get invited to parties, I don't get taken on outings; it's been years.

古文：子自以德过朕邪？ 
现代文：你自以为仁德超过了我吗？ 
English: Do you think you are better than me?

古文：西门子曰： 予无以知其实。
现代文：西门子说： 我无法知道真实原因。
English: "I don't know the real reason," Siemens said.

古文：汝造事而穷，予造事而达，此厚薄之验欤？
现代文：你做事老碰钉子，我做事总是顺利，这不就是厚薄不同的证明吗？
English: You always hit the nail on the head when you do things, and I always do things smoothly. Isn't this just proof of the difference between thick and thin?

古文：而皆谓与予并，汝之颜厚矣。 
现代文：你却说和我都一样，你的脸皮也太厚了。 
English: But you say you're just like me, your skin is too thick.

古文：北宫子无以应，自失而归。
现代文：北宫子无法回答，失魂落魄地回去了。
English: Kita Miyako couldn't answer, and went back in a despondent mood.

古文：中途遇东郭先生。
现代文：半路上碰到了东郭先生。
English: On the way, I met Mr. Dongguo.

古文：先生曰： 汝奚往而反，偊偊而步，有深愧之色邪？ 
现代文：东郭先生问： 你是从哪里回来，独自行走，且面带深深的惭愧脸色呢？ 
English: Mr. Dongguo asked: Where did you come back from, walking alone, and with a deeply ashamed face?

古文：北宫子言其状。
现代文：北宫子说了上述情况。
English: Kita Miyako said the above situation.

古文：东郭先生曰： 吾将舍汝之愧，与汝更之西门氏而问之。 
现代文：东郭先生说： 我可以消除你的惭愧，和你再到西门氏家去问问他。 
English: Mr. Dongguo said: I can remove your shame and go with you to Mr. Simon's house to ask him.

古文：曰： 汝奚辱北宫子之深乎？
现代文：东郭先生问西门子说： 你为什么要那么厉害地侮辱北宫子呢？姑且说说原因吧。 
English: Mr. Dongguo asked Siemens, "Why did you insult Kita Miyako so severely? Let me tell you the reason."

古文：固且言之。 西门子曰： 北宫子言世族、年貌、言行与予并，而贱贵、贫富与予异。
现代文：西门子说： 北宫子讲他的时代、家族、年龄、相貌、言论、做事都与我相同，而低贱与尊贵、贫苦与富有却与我不一样。
English: Siemens said: Kitamiyako said that his era, family, age, appearance, speech, and actions were the same as mine, but the lowly and the noble, the poor and the rich were different from me.

古文：予语之曰： 予无以知其实。
现代文：我对他说：我无法知道真实原因。
English: I said to him: I don't know the real reason.

古文：汝造事而穷，予造事而达，此将厚薄之验欤？
现代文：你做事老碰钉子，我做事总是顺利，这恐怕是厚薄不同的证明吧？
English: You always hit the nail on the head when you do things, and I always do things well. I'm afraid that's proof of the difference between thick and thin, right?

古文：而皆谓与予并，汝之颜厚矣。  
现代文：你却说你跟我都一样，你的脸皮也太厚了。 
English: But you say you're just like me, your skin is too thick.

古文：东郭先生曰： 汝之言厚薄不过言才德之差，吾之言厚薄异于是矣。
现代文：东郭先生说： 你所讲的厚薄不过是说才能和仁德的差别，我所讲的厚薄与此不同。
English: Mr. Dongguo said: What you are talking about is the difference between talent and benevolence. What I am talking about is different.

古文：夫北宫子厚于德，薄于命；汝厚于命，薄于德。
现代文：北宫子的仁德厚，命运薄，你的命运厚，仁德薄。
English: Bei Gongzi's benevolence is thick, fate is thin, your fate is thick, benevolence is thin.

古文：汝之达，非智得也；北宫子之穷，非愚失也。
现代文：你的显达，不是凭智慧得到的；北宫子的穷困，不是冒昧的过失。
English: Your success is not due to wisdom; the poverty of Bei Gongzi is not a presumptuous mistake.

古文：皆天也，非人也。
现代文：都是天命，而不是人力。
English: It's all fate, not manpower.

古文：而汝以命厚自矜，北宫子以德厚自愧，皆不识夫固然之理矣。 
现代文：而你却以德薄命厚自以为了不起，北宫子又以德厚命薄自觉惭愧，都不懂得本来的道理。 
English: However, you are proud of being a virtuous person, while Kitamiya is ashamed of being a virtuous person, and neither of you understands the real reason.

古文：西门子曰： 先生止矣！
现代文：西门子说： 先生不要讲了。
English: Siemens said: Sir, stop talking.

古文：予不敢复言。 
现代文：我不敢再说了。 
English: I dare not say any more.

古文：北宫子既归，衣其裋褐，有狐貉之温；进其茙菽，有稻粱之味；庇其蓬室，若广厦之荫；乘其筚辂，若文轩之饰。
现代文：北宫子回去以后，穿他的粗布衣服，觉得有狐貉裘毛那样的温暖；吃他的粗粮大豆，觉得有精美饭菜的味道；住他的茅草屋，像是住在宽广的大厦中；乘坐他的柴车，像是有华丽雕饰的高大车马。
English: After Kitamiya went back, wearing his coarse cloth clothes, he felt warm like a fox's fur; eating his coarse grain soybeans, he felt the taste of fine meals; living in his thatched cottage, it was like living in a wide building; riding in his chai cart, it was like a tall carriage with ornate carvings.

古文：终身逌然，不知荣辱之在彼也，在我也。
现代文：终身舒适自得，不知道荣辱在他们那里还是在自己这里。
English: Comfortable and self-satisfied for life, not knowing whether the glory or shame lies with them or with themselves.

古文：东郭先生闻之曰： 北宫子之寐久矣，一言而能寤，易悟也哉！ 
现代文：东郭先生听到后说： 北宫子已经糊涂很久了，一句话便能醒悟，也是容易醒悟啊！ 
English: After hearing this, Mr. Dongguo said: Bei Gongzi has been confused for a long time, one sentence can wake him up, and it is easy to wake him up!

古文：管夷吾、鲍叔牙二人相友甚戚，同处于齐。管夷吾事公子纠，鲍叔牙事公子小白。
现代文：管夷吾、鲍叔牙两人交朋友十分亲近，都在齐国做事，管夷吾帮助公子纠，鲍叔牙帮助公子小白。
English: Guan Yiwu and Bao Shuya became very close friends. They both worked in Qi. Guan Yiwu helped Guo Zi, and Bao Shuya helped Guo Zi.

古文：齐公族多宠，嫡庶并行。
现代文：当时齐国公族的公子被宠幸的很多，嫡子和庶子没有区别。
English: At that time, there were many favored sons and daughters of the public figures in Qi, and there was no difference between the legitimate son and the illegitimate son.

古文：国人惧乱。管仲与召忽奉公子纠奔鲁，鲍叔奉公子小白奔莒。
现代文：大家害怕发生动乱，管仲与召忽帮助公子纠逃到了鲁国，鲍叔牙帮助公子小白逃到了莒国。
English: Everyone was afraid of turmoil. Guanzhong and Zhaogu helped Gu Zi to escape to Lu, and Bao Shuya helped Gu Zi Xiaobai to escape to Shandong.

古文：既而公孙无知作乱，齐无君，二公子争入。
现代文：后来公孙无知发动兵乱，齐国没有君主，两位公子抢着回国。
English: Later, Gongsun Wuzhong unleashed a mutiny, leaving Qi without a monarch, and the two princes rushed to return home.

古文：管夷吾与小白战于莒道，射中小白带钩。
现代文：管夷吾与公子小白在莒国境内作战，路上射中了公子小白的衣带钩。
English: Guan Yiwu fought with Prince Xiaobai in the territory of Shandong Province. On the way, he shot Prince Xiaobai's belt hook.

古文：小白既立，胁鲁杀子纠，召忽死之，管夷吾被囚。
现代文：公子小白立为齐君以后，威胁鲁国杀死公子纠，召忽也被迫自杀，管夷吾被囚禁。
English: After Prince Xiao Bai was made the Prince of Qi, he threatened the State of Lu to kill Prince Guo, while Zhao Guo was also forced to commit suicide and Guan Yiguo was imprisoned.

古文：鲍叔牙谓桓公曰： 管夷吾能，可以治国。 
现代文：鲍叔牙对桓公说： 管夷吾很能干，可以治理国家。 
English: Bao Shuga said to Huan Gong: Guan Yiguo is very capable, he can govern the country.

古文：桓公曰： 我仇也，愿杀之。 
现代文：桓公说： 他是我的仇人，希望能杀了他。 
English: He said, "He is my enemy, I hope to kill him."

古文：鲍叔牙曰： 吾闻贤君无私怨，且人能为其主，亦必能为人君。如欲霸王，非夷吾其弗可。
现代文：鲍叔牙说： 我听说贤明的君主没有个人怨恨，而且一个人能尽力为主人做事，也一定能尽力为国君做事，您如果想称霸为王，非管夷吾不可。
English: Bao Shouya said: I have heard that a wise ruler has no personal grudges, and that a person who can do his best for his master will also be able to do his best for the sovereign. If you want to be a king, you must rule over me.

古文：君必舍之！ 
现代文：请您一定赦免他！ 
English: Please grant him a pardon!

古文：遂召管仲。
现代文：桓公于是召管仲回国。
English: Lord Kan therefore summoned Kanenaka to return to the country.

古文：鲁归之齐，鲍叔牙郊迎，释其囚。
现代文：鲁国把他送了回来，齐国鲍叔牙到郊外迎接，释放了他的囚禁。
English: The State of Lu sent him back, and the State of Qi sent Bao Shugang to the suburbs to meet him and release him from captivity.

古文：桓公礼之，而位于高国之上，鲍叔牙以身下之，任以国政，号曰仲父。
现代文：桓公用厚礼对待他，地位在高氏与国氏之上，鲍叔牙也把自己置于管仲之下。桓公把国政交给管仲，称他为 仲父 。
English: Huan treated him with great courtesy. His status was higher than that of Gao and Guo, and Bao Shuga also placed himself under Guanzhong. Huan entrusted the affairs of state to Guanzhong and called him "Middle Father."

古文：桓公遂霸。
现代文：桓公终于称霸于诸侯。
English: Kan finally gained supremacy over the lords.

古文：管仲尝叹曰： 吾少穷困时，尝与鲍叔贾，分财多自与；鲍叔不以我为贪，知我贫也。
现代文：管仲曾感叹说： 我年轻穷困的时候，曾经与鲍叔一道做买卖，分配钱财时总是多给自己，鲍叔不认为是我贪婪，知道我贫穷。
English: Guanzhong once lamented: When I was young and poor, I used to do business with Uncle Bao. When allocating money, I always gave more to myself. Uncle Bao didn't think I was greedy, he knew I was poor.

古文：吾尝为鲍叔谋事而大穷困，鲍叔不以我为愚，知时有利不利也。
现代文：我曾替鲍叔出主意而非常失败，鲍叔不认为是我愚笨，知道时机有时顺利有时不顺利。
English: I once made a suggestion for Uncle Bao and failed miserably. Uncle Bao didn't think I was stupid and knew that sometimes the timing was right and sometimes it wasn't.

古文：吾尝三仕，三见逐于君，鲍叔不以我为不肖，知我不遭时也。
现代文：我曾三次做官，三次被国君驱逐，鲍叔不认为是我不好，知道我没有碰到机会。
English: I have been an official three times, and I have been expelled by the sovereign three times. Uncle Bao doesn't think I am bad, he knows that I didn't have a chance.

古文：吾尝三战三北，鲍叔不以我为怯，知我有老母也。
现代文：我曾三次作战三次败逃，鲍叔不认为是我胆小，知道我有老母要人照顾。
English: I had fought three times and escaped three times. Uncle Bao didn't think I was a coward. He knew I had a mother to take care of.

古文：公子纠败，召忽死之，吾幽囚受辱；鲍叔不以我为无耻，知我不羞小节而耻名不显于天下也。
现代文：公子纠失败了，召忽自杀了，我也被囚禁而受耻辱，鲍叔不认为是我无耻，知道我不在乎小节而以不能扬名于天下为耻辱。
English: My father-in-law failed in his entreaties and committed suicide. I was also imprisoned and suffered humiliation. Uncle Bao did not think I was shameless. He knew that I did not care about the details and was ashamed of not being able to make a name for myself in the world.

古文：生我者父母，知我者鲍叔也！ 
现代文：生我的人是父母，了解我的人是鲍叔。 
English: The people who gave birth to me are my parents, and the people who know me are Uncle Bao.

古文：此世称管、鲍善交者，小白善用能者。
现代文：这是人们称道的管、鲍善于结交朋友的事，小白善于任用能人的事。
English: This is what people praise, Bao is good at making friends, and Xiao Bai is good at appointing capable people.

古文：然实无善交，实无用能也。
现代文：然而实际上无所谓善于结交朋友、实际上无所谓任用能人。
English: However, it doesn't really matter if you're good at making friends, and it doesn't really matter if you hire good people.

古文：实无善交实无用能者，非更有善交，更有善用能也。召忽非能死，不得不死；鲍叔非能举贤，不得不举；小白非能用仇，不得不用。
现代文：说他们实际上无所谓善于结交朋友、实际上无所谓任用能人，并不是说世上有比他们更善于结交朋友、更善于任用能人的事，而是说召忽不是能够自杀，而是不得不自杀；鲍叔不是能够推举贤能，而是不能不推举贤能；小白不是能够任用仇人，而是不得不任用仇人。
English: To say that they are not really good at making friends, and not really good at appointing capable people, is not to say that there are things in the world that are better at making friends and appointing capable people than they are, but to say that Zhaohui is not able to commit suicide, but has to commit suicide; Bao Uncle is not able to promote capable people, but cannot not promote capable people; Xiaobai is not able to appoint enemies, but has to appoint enemies.

古文：及管夷吾有病，小白问之，曰： 仲父之病病矣，可不讳云，至于大病，则寡人恶乎属国而可？ 
现代文：到管夷吾生了重病的时候，小白问他，说： 仲父的病已经很重，不能再瞒着你了，如果你的病治不好，那我把国家政事交给谁呢？ 
English: When Guan Yiwu became seriously ill, Xiao Bai asked him, saying: "Zhongfu's illness is already very serious, I can no longer hide it from you. If your illness cannot be cured, then to whom should I entrust the affairs of state?

古文：夷吾曰： 公谁欲欤？ 
现代文：管夷吾问： 您想交给谁呢？ 
English: Guan Yigu asked: Who do you want to give it to?

古文：小白曰： 鲍叔牙可。 
现代文：小白说： 鲍叔牙可以。 
English: Xiao Bai said, "Bao Shou Ya can do it.

古文：曰： 不可。其为人也，洁廉善士也。其于不己若者不比之人，一闻人之过，终身不忘。
现代文：管仲说： 不行，他的为人，是一个廉洁的好人，但他不把比自己差的人当人看待，一听到别人的过错，终身也不会忘记。
English: Guanzhong said, "No, his character is that of an honest and good person, but he does not treat people who are worse than him as human beings. As soon as he hears about someone else's fault, he will never forget it.

古文：使之理国，上且钩乎君，下且逆乎民。
现代文：用他来治理国家，在上面会困扰国君，在下面会违背民意。
English: To use him to govern the country would trouble the sovereign at the top and go against public opinion at the bottom.

古文：其得罪于君也，将弗久矣。 
现代文：他得罪于您，也就不会太久了。 
English: He's offended you, and it won't be long.

古文：小白曰： 然则孰可？ 
现代文：小白问： 那么谁行呢？ 
English: Xiao Bai asked: Then who can do it?

古文：对曰： 勿已，则隰朋可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 不得已的话，隰朋可以。
English: Guanzhong replied, "If you have to, you can.

古文：其为人也，上忘而下不叛，愧其不若黄帝而哀不己若者。
现代文：他的为人，在上面能忘掉自己，在下面能使下属不卑不亢，对于自己不如黄帝而感到惭愧，对于别人不如自己表示同情。
English: He is a person who can forget himself above and make his subordinates humble below, feel ashamed that he is not as good as the Yellow Emperor, and sympathize with others who are not as good as himself.

古文：以德分人谓之圣人，以财分人谓之贤人。
现代文：把仁德分给别人的叫做圣人，把钱财分给别人的叫做贤人。
English: Those who distribute kindness to others are called saints, and those who distribute money to others are called sages.

古文：以贤临人，未有得人者也；以贤下人者，未有不得人者也。
现代文：以为自己贤能而瞧不起别人的人，没有能得到别人拥护的；自己虽贤能而能尊重别人的人，没有得不到别人拥护的。
English: Those who think they are wise and despise others cannot be supported by others; those who are wise and respect others cannot be supported by others.

古文：其于国有不闻也，其于家有不见也。
现代文：他对于国事有所不闻，对于家事也有所不见。
English: He is not familiar with state affairs, and he is not familiar with family affairs.

古文：勿已，则隰朋可。 
现代文：不得已的话，隰朋还可以。 
English: If you have to, it's okay to be friends.

古文：然则管夷吾非薄鲍叔也，不得不薄；非厚隰朋也，不得不厚。
现代文：可见管夷吾并不是要轻视鲍叔，而是不得不轻视他；并不是要重视隰朋，而是不得不重视他。
English: It can be seen that we do not want to despise Uncle Bao, but we have to despise him; we do not want to attach importance to our friends, but we have to attach importance to him.

古文：厚之于始，或薄之于终；薄之于终，或厚之于始。厚薄之去来，弗由我也。
现代文：开始时重视，有可能后来要轻视；开始时轻视，有可能后来要重视，重视与轻视的变化，并不由我自己。
English: At the beginning of attention, it is possible to despise later; at the beginning of contempt, it is possible to attach importance later; the change of attention and contempt is not my own.

古文：邓析操两可之说，设无穷之辞，当子产执政，作《竹刑》。
现代文：邓析持模棱两可的学说，创设出巧辩圆滑的辞令，在子产执政的时候，作了一部写在竹简上的法律《竹刑》。
English: Deng Xiaoping held an ambiguous doctrine, created a clever and smooth rhetoric, and when Zisang was in power, he made a law "Bamboo Punishment" written on bamboo.

古文：郑国用之，数难子产之治。
现代文：郑国采用了它，却屡屡妨碍子产的治理。
English: Zhengzhou has adopted it, but it has repeatedly hindered the governance of child labor.

古文：子产屈之，子产执而戮之，俄而诛之。
现代文：子产被弄得理屈词穷，于是子产便把邓析抓了起来，并当众羞辱他，不久就将他杀死了。
English: Zi Yuan was at a loss for words, so he arrested Deng Xie, publicly humiliated him, and soon killed him.

古文：然则子产非能用《竹刑》，不得不用；邓析非能屈子产，不得不屈；子产非能诛邓析，不得不诛也。
现代文：可见子产并非乐意采用《竹刑》，而是在当时的形势下，不得不用它；邓析并不是能够使子产屈服，而是在当时的形势下不得不使他屈服；子产并不是能够诛杀邓析，而是在当时的形势下不得不诛杀他。
English: It can be seen that Zifang was not willing to adopt "Bamboo Torture," but had to use it under the current situation; Deng Xiaoping was not able to make Zifang give in, but had to make him give in under the current situation; Zifang was not able to kill Deng Xiaoping, but had to kill him under the current situation.

古文：可以生而生，天福也；可以死而死，天福也。
现代文：应当生存而得到生存，这是上天赐予的福分；应当死亡而得到死亡，这也是上天赐予的福分。
English: It is a blessing from heaven to be alive and to survive; it is a blessing from heaven to die and to die.

古文：可以生而不生，天罚也；可以死而不死，天罚也。
现代文：应该出生却没有出生，这是天的惩罚；应该死亡却没有死亡的，这也是天的惩罚。
English: To be born, and not born, is God's punishment; to die, and not die, is also God's punishment.

古文：可以生，可以死，得生得死有矣；不可以生，不可以死，或死或生，有矣。
现代文：应该出生的出生了，应该死亡的死亡了，这是有的；应该出生的却死亡了，应该死亡的却出生了，这也是有的。
English: There is a birth that should have been a birth, and a death that should have been a death; there is a birth that should have been a birth, and a death that should have been a death; there is a death that should have been a birth, and a death that should have been a death.

古文：然而生生死死，非物非我，皆命也。
现代文：但是出生也好，死亡也好，既不是外物的作用，也不是自己的力量，都是命运决定的。
English: But whether it is birth or death, it is neither the effect of external things nor one's own strength, it is all determined by fate.

古文：智之所无奈何。
现代文：人们的智慧对它是无可奈何的。
English: People's intelligence is helpless against it.

古文：故曰，窈然无际，天道自会；漠然无分，天道自运。
现代文：所以说，深远没有边际，天道是自然会聚的；寂静没有界限，天道是自然运动的。
English: Therefore, there is no limit to the depth, and the heavenly way naturally converges; silence has no boundaries, and the heavenly way is a natural movement.

古文：天地不能犯，圣智不能干，鬼魅不能欺。自然者，默之成之，平之宁之，将之迎之。
现代文：天地不能侵犯它，圣明智慧不能干扰它，鬼魅不能欺骗它，自然的意思是无声无息就成就了，平常而安宁，时而消失，时而出现。
English: Heaven and earth cannot invade it, holy wisdom cannot interfere with it, ghosts and spirits cannot deceive it. Nature's meaning is achieved silently and quietly, ordinary and peaceful, sometimes disappearing, sometimes appearing.

古文：杨朱之友曰季梁。
现代文：杨朱的一个朋友叫季梁。
English: One of Yang Zhu's friends is named Ji Liang.

古文：季梁得病，七日大渐。
现代文：季梁生病，至第七日已病危。
English: Ji Liang fell ill and became critically ill on the seventh day.

古文：其子环而泣之，请医。
现代文：他的儿子们围绕着他哭泣，请医生医治。
English: His sons, crying all around him, begged the doctors to heal him.

古文：季梁谓杨朱曰： 吾子不肖如此之甚，汝奚不为我歌以晓之？ 
现代文：季梁对杨朱说： 我儿子不懂事到了这样厉害的程度，你为什么不替我唱个歌使他们明白过来呢？ 
English: Ji Liang said to Yang Zhu: My son's lack of understanding has reached such a severe level, why don't you sing a song for me to make them understand?

古文：杨朱歌曰： 天其弗识，人胡能觉？
现代文：杨朱唱道： 天尚且不认识，人又怎么能明白？
English: Yang Zhu sang: If the heavens do not know, how can people understand?

古文：匪祐自天，弗孽由人。
现代文：并不是由于天的保佑，也不是由于人的罪孽。
English: It is not due to the blessing of heaven, nor is it due to the sins of man.

古文：我乎汝乎！其弗知乎！
现代文：我呀你呀，都不知道啊！
English: I don't know, and neither do you!

古文：医乎巫乎！其知之乎？ 
现代文：医呀巫呀，难道知道吗？ 
English: Medicine is magic, don't you know that?

古文：其子弗晓，终谒三医。
现代文：他的儿子还是不明白，最后请来了三位医生。
English: His son still didn't understand, and eventually three doctors were called in.

古文：一曰矫氏，二曰俞氏，三曰卢氏，诊其所疾。
现代文：一位叫矫氏，一位叫俞氏，一位叫卢氏，诊治他所害的病。
English: One by the name of Jiao, one by the name of Zou, and one by the name of Lu, diagnosed and treated the disease he had caused.

古文：矫氏谓季梁曰： 汝寒温不节，虚实失度，病由饥饱色欲。精虑烦散，非天非鬼。
现代文：矫氏对季梁说： 你体内的寒气与热气不调和，虚与实越过了限度，病由于时饥时饱和色欲过度，使精神思虑烦杂散漫，不是天的原因，也不是鬼的原因。
English: Kaori said to Ji Liang: The cold and hot air in your body are not in harmony, the virtual and the real have exceeded the limit, and the disease is caused by excessive saturation and sexual desire when you are hungry, which distracts your mental thoughts. It is not the cause of heaven, nor the cause of the ghost.

古文：虽渐，可攻也。 
现代文：虽然危重，仍然可以治疗。 
English: Although critical, it can still be treated.

古文：季梁曰： 众医也。
现代文：季梁说： 这是庸医，快叫他出去！ 
English: Ji Liang said, "This is a quack doctor, get him out!

古文：亟屏之！ 俞氏曰： 汝始则胎气不足，乳湩有馀。病非一朝一夕之故，其所由来渐矣，弗可已也。 
现代文：俞氏说： 你在娘肚子里就胎气不足，生下来后奶水就吃不了，这病不是一朝一夕的原因，它是逐渐加剧的，已经治不好了。 
English: Mr. Zou said, "When you are in your daughter's stomach, you will have insufficient gas, and you will not be able to drink milk after giving birth. This disease is not caused overnight, it is gradually aggravated, and it cannot be cured.

古文：季梁曰： 良医也。且食之！ 
现代文：季梁说： 这是一位好医生，暂且请他吃顿饭吧！ 
English: Ji Liang said: This is a good doctor, let's invite him to dinner for the time being!

古文：卢氏曰： 汝疾不由天，亦不由人，亦不由鬼。禀生受形，既有制之者矣，亦有知之者矣。
现代文：卢氏说： 你的病不是由于天，也不是由于人，也不是由于鬼，从你禀受生命之气而成形的那一天起，就既有控制你命运的，又有知道你命运的。
English: Lu said, "Your illness is not caused by heaven, nor is it caused by man, nor is it caused by ghosts. From the day you are formed by the breath of life, there are both those who control your fate and those who know your fate.

古文：药石其如汝何？ 
现代文：药物针砭能对你怎样呢？ 
English: What can acupuncture do for you?

古文：季梁曰： 神医也。重贶遣之！ 
现代文：季梁说： 这是一位神医，重重地赏赐他！ 
English: Qiliang said, "This is a divine doctor, bestow great rewards on him!"

古文：俄而季梁之疾自瘳。
现代文：不久季梁的病自己又好了。
English: Soon, Ji Liang's illness was cured.

古文：生非贵之所能存，身非爱之所能厚；生亦非贱之所能夭，身亦非轻之所能薄。
现代文：生命并非珍惜它就能长存，身体并非爱护它就能强壮；生命也并非贱待它就会夭亡，身体也并非轻视它就会虚弱。
English: Life is not to be treasured, that it may live long; the body is not to be loved, that it may grow strong; life is not to be despised, that it may die young; the body is not to be despised, that it may grow weak.

古文：故贵之或不生，贱之或不死；爱之或不厚，轻之或不薄。
现代文：所以珍惜生命或许不得生存，贱待生命或许不会死亡；爱护身体或许不得强壮，轻视身体或许不会虚弱。
English: Therefore, to cherish life may not be to live, to despise life may not be to die; to cherish the body may not be to be strong, to despise the body may not be to be weak.

古文：此似反也，非反也；此自生自死，自厚自薄。
现代文：这前因后果看似相悖，却并没有相悖；它不过是自然地生自然地死，自然地强壮自然地虚弱。
English: Before this, because of the consequences, it seems contradictory, but it is not contradictory; it is just a natural birth and a natural death, a natural strength and a natural weakness.

古文：或贵之而生，或贱之而死；或爱之而厚，或轻之而薄。
现代文：生命或许因为珍惜它而得以长存，或许因为贱待它而死亡；身体或许因为爱护它而得以强壮，或许因为轻视它而变得虚弱。
English: Life may be prolonged by cherishing it, or it may die by despising it; the body may be strengthened by cherishing it, or it may be weakened by despising it.

古文：此似顺也，非顺也；此亦自生自死，自厚自薄。
现代文：这前因后果看似互相顺应，却并没有互相顺应；它也只是自然地生自然地死，自然地强壮自然地虚弱。
English: Before that, the consequences seemed to conform to each other, but they did not conform to each other; it was just natural birth and natural death, natural strength and natural weakness.

古文：鬻熊语文王曰： 自长非所增，自短非所损。
现代文：鬻熊对文王说： 自然要变长的，并非是由于外力的增加；自然要变短的，并非是由于外力的减损。
English: The raccoon said to King Wen, "It is not due to the increase of external force that the raccoon naturally grows longer; it is not due to the decrease of external force that the raccoon naturally grows shorter.

古文：算之所亡若何？ 
现代文：人的智谋对此又有什么办法呢？ 
English: What can human ingenuity do about it?

古文：老聃语关尹曰： 天之所恶，孰知其故？ 
现代文：老聃对关尹说： 天所厌恶的，谁又知道其中的缘故呢？ 
English: Lao Zi said to Guan Yin: What Heaven abhors, who knows the reason?

古文：言迎天意，揣利害，不如其已。
现代文：意思就是说与其迎合天意，揣摩利害，还不如任其自然，趁早罢手。
English: The meaning is that rather than pandering to the will of heaven and guessing the interests, it is better to let it be natural and stop it as soon as possible.

古文：杨布问曰： 有人于此，年兄弟也，言兄弟也，才兄弟也，貌兄弟也；而寿夭父子也，贵贱父子也，名誉父子也，爱憎父子也。
现代文：杨布问他的哥哥杨朱说： 有两个人在这里，年龄差不多，资历差不多，才能差不多，相貌差不多，而长寿与早夭大不相同，尊贵与低贱大不相同，名份与荣誉大不相同，喜爱与憎恶大不相同。
English: Yang Bu asked his brother Yang Zhu and said, "There are two people here with similar age, qualifications, talents and appearance, but their longevity and premature death are very different, their high rank and low rank are very different, their titles and honors are very different, and their likes and dislikes are very different.

古文：吾惑之。 
现代文：我对此感到很不理解。 
English: I don't understand it at all.

古文：杨子曰： 古之人有言，吾尝识之，将以告若。不知所以然而然，命也。
现代文：杨朱说： 古时候的人有句话，我曾把它记了下来，现在将它告诉你：不知道为什么这样而这样的，这是命运。
English: Yang Zhu said: In ancient times, people had a saying. I wrote it down, and now I'm going to tell it to you: I don't know why things are like this, it's fate.

古文：今昏昏昧昧，纷纷若若，随所为，随所不为。
现代文：现有的一切都糊里糊涂，纷杂混乱，任凭你做些事情，或者什么也不做。
English: Everything that exists is a muddle, a jumble, leaving you to do something or nothing.

古文：日去日来，孰能知其故？
现代文：一天天过去，一天天到来，谁能知道其中的缘故？
English: Every day that passes, every day that comes, who can know the reason for it?

古文：皆命也夫。
现代文：这都是命啊！
English: This is all life!

古文：信命者，亡寿夭；信理者，亡是非；信心者，亡逆顺；信性者，亡安危。
现代文：相信命运的，无所谓长寿与夭亡；相信自然之理的，无所谓是与非；相信本心的，无所谓困难与顺利；相信自然本性的，无所谓安危祸福。
English: Those who believe in fate do not care about longevity and early death; those who believe in the principles of nature do not care about right and wrong; those who believe in their own hearts do not care about difficulties and success; and those who believe in the nature of nature do not care about safety, misfortune or fortune.

古文：则谓之都亡所信，都亡所不信。
现代文：这就叫做什么都不信，又什么都相信。
English: This is called not believing in anything and believing in everything.

古文：真矣悫矣，奚去奚就？
现代文：真诚的态度，哪里还去考虑何去何从？
English: Sincere attitude, where else to consider where to go from?

古文：奚哀奚乐？
现代文：为什么悲哀又为什么高兴？
English: Why sad and why happy?

古文：奚为奚不为？
现代文：究竟什么该做什么又不该做？
English: What should and should not be done?

古文：黄帝之书云： 至人居若死，动若械。 
现代文：《黄帝之书》说： 德性最高的人坐下来像死了一样，动起来好比木偶。 
English: "The Book of the Yellow Emperor" said: The most virtuous person sits down as if dead, and moves like a puppet.

古文：亦不知所以居，亦不知所以不居；亦不知所以动，亦不知所以不动。
现代文：不知道为什么坐，也不知道为什么不做；不知道为什么动，也不知道为什么不动。
English: I don't know why I sit, and I don't know why I don't; I don't know why I move, and I don't know why I don't.

古文：亦不以众人之观易其情貌，亦不谓众人之不观不易其情貌。
现代文：也不因为大家都来观看而改变情态与形貌，也不因为大家都不来观看而下改变他的情态与形貌。
English: Nor does he change his appearance and form because everyone is watching, nor does he change his appearance and form because no one is watching.

古文：独往独来，独出独入，孰能碍之？ 
现代文：独自去，独自来，独自出，独自入，谁能阻碍他？ 
English: Going alone, coming alone, going out alone, coming in alone, who can stop him?

古文：墨杘、单至、啴咺、憋懯四人相与游于世，胥如志也；穷年不相知情，自以智之深也。
现代文：墨杘、单至、啴咺、憋懯四个人在世上互相交朋友，各随自己的意志，整年不互相通报情况，自以为智慧十分深湛。
English: There are four people in the world who make friends with each other, each according to their own will, do not inform each other of the situation for the whole year, and think that their wisdom is very profound.

古文：巧佞、愚直、婩斫、便辟四人相与游于世，胥如志也；穷年而不相语术，自以巧之微也。
现代文：巧佞、愚直、婩斫、便辟四个人在世上互相交朋友，各随自己的意志，整年不互相告诉道木，自以为技巧十分精微。
English: There are four people in the world who make friends with each other, each according to their own will, and do not tell each other the way of the tree for the whole year. They think that their skills are very delicate.

古文：狡犽、情露、瀽极、凌谇四人相与游于世，胥如志也；穷年不相晓悟，自以为才之得也。
现代文：狡犽、情露、瀽极、凌谇四个人在世上互相交朋友，各随自己的意志，整年不互相启迪开悟，自以为一切本领部获得了。
English: There are four people in the world who make friends with each other, each according to their own will, and do not enlighten each other for the whole year. They think that they have gained all the skills.

古文：眠娗、諈诿、勇敢、怯疑四人相与游于世，胥如志也；穷年不相谪发，自以行无戾也。
现代文：眠娗、諈诿、勇敢、怯疑四个人在世上互相交朋友，各随自己的意志，整年不互相批评启发，自以为行为没有一点差错。
English: Sleepy, lazy, brave, and fearful, the four of them make friends with each other in the world, each according to their own will, do not criticize and inspire each other for the whole year, and think that there is no mistake in their behavior.

古文：多偶、自专、乘权、只立四人相与游于世，胥如志也；穷年不相顾眄，自以时之适也。
现代文：多偶、自专、乘权、只立四个人在世上互相交朋友，各随自己的意志，整年不互相检查回顾，自以为一切都适合时宜。
English: There are four people in the world who make friends with each other, each according to their own will, do not check and review each other throughout the year, and think that everything is appropriate.

古文：此众态也。其貌不一，而咸之于道，命所归也。
现代文：这许多情态，它们的表现虽然不一样，却都走向了自然之道，这是命运的归宿。
English: These many situations, although their manifestations are different, are all moving towards the natural path, which is the destination of fate.

古文：佹佹成者，俏成也，初非成也。
现代文：差不多要成功了，看似成功，但原本并非成功。
English: It was almost a success, it looked like a success, but it wasn't a success.

古文：佹佹败者，俏败者也，初非败也。
现代文：差不多要失败了，看似失败，但原本并非失败。
English: It almost fails, it looks like a failure, but it's not a failure.

古文：故迷生于俏，俏之际昧然。
现代文：所以迷惑产生于相似，在相似的边界上事物变得蒙昧不清，难以分辨。
English: So confusion comes from similarity, and on the border of similarity things become blurred and indistinguishable.

古文：于俏而不昧然，则不骇外祸，不喜内福；随时动，随时止，智不能知也。
现代文：如果能不迷惑于相似性，就不会因为外来的灾祸而惊骇，也不会为自身的福泽而欣喜；顺应时势而动，顺应时势而止，这单凭智力是不能明了的。
English: If you can not be confused by similarity, you will not be shocked by external disasters, nor will you rejoice in your own blessings; move with the times and stop with the times, which cannot be understood by intelligence alone.

古文：信命者于彼我无二心。
现代文：相信天命的人对于外物和自身没有喜惧之心。
English: Those who believe in predestination have no fear of external things or of themselves.

古文：于彼我而有二心者，不若掩目塞耳，背坂面隍亦不坠仆也。
现代文：对于外物和自身存在喜惧之心的人，不如闭目塞听，这样背对城墙面朝城壕也不至于坠落下去。
English: It is better to shut one's eyes and shut one's ears to those who delight in external things and in their own existence, so that one will not fall with one's back to the wall and one's face to the ditch.

古文：故曰：死生自命也，贫穷自时也。
现代文：所以说：死生定自天命，贫穷源于时机。
English: Therefore, it is said that life and death are determined by fate, and poverty is caused by chance.

古文：怨夭折者，不知命者也；怨贫穷者，不知时者也。
现代文：抱怨短命夭折的人，不明白天命；抱怨贫穷困苦的人，不明白时机。
English: He who complains of the shortness of life does not understand destiny; he who complains of poverty and hardship does not understand opportunity.

古文：当死不惧，在穷不戚，知命安时也。
现代文：面对着死亡而不恐惧，身处于穷困而不悲戚，是洞达天命随遇而安的表现。
English: Facing death without fear, being in poverty without sadness, is a manifestation of living up to one's destiny.

古文：其使多智之人量利害，料虚实，度人情，得亦中，亡亦中。
现代文：假使让足智多谋的人去衡量利害，预料虚实，揣度人情，行事正确的是一半，失误的也是一半。
English: If you ask a resourceful person to weigh the interests, anticipate the false and the true, and calculate the human feelings, half of the actions will be correct, and half will be mistakes.

古文：其少智之人不量利害，不料虚实，不度人情，得亦中，亡亦中。
现代文：假使让愚笨无计的人不衡量利害，不预料虚实，不揣度人情，行事正确的也是一半，失误的也是一半。
English: If the stupid and reckless people do not measure the interests, do not expect the truth, and do not consider the feelings of the people, they will only do half of what is right and half of what is wrong.

古文：量与不量，料与不料，度与不度，奚以异？
现代文：衡量与不衡量，预料与不预料，猜度与不猜度，又有什么差别呢？
English: What is the difference between measuring and not measuring, anticipating and not anticipating, guessing and not guessing?

古文：唯亡所量，亡所不量，则全而亡丧。
现代文：只有对什么都不去估量，而又无所不估量，才能保全本性而无所丧失。
English: Only when one does not measure anything, but measures everything, can one preserve one's nature and not lose anything.

古文：亦非知全，亦非知丧，自全也，自亡也，自丧也。
现代文：也并非凭借着智识得以保全，也并非由于智识而导致丧失，它们都是自然而然地保全，自然而然地消亡，自然而然地丧失的。
English: Neither are they preserved by reason, nor are they lost by reason; they are preserved by nature, they perish by nature, they are lost by nature.

古文：齐景公游于牛山，北临其国城而流涕曰： 美哉国乎！
现代文：齐景公在牛山游览，向北观望他的国都临淄城而流着眼泪说： 真美啊，我的国都！
English: Qi Jing Gong toured in Niu Mountain, looked north to see his national capital Linyi City and said with tears: It's so beautiful, my national capital!

古文：郁郁芊芊，若何滴滴去此国而死乎？
现代文：草木浓密茂盛，我为什么还要随着时光的流逝离开这个国都而去死亡呢？
English: The vegetation is thick and luxuriant. Why should I leave this capital city to die with the passage of time?

古文：使古无死者，寡人将去斯而之何？ 
现代文：假使古代没有死亡的人，那我将离开此地到哪里去呢？ 
English: If there were no dead in ancient times, where would I go from here?

古文：史孔、梁丘据皆从而泣曰： 臣赖君之赐，疏食恶肉可得而食，驽马棱车可得而乘也，且犹不欲死，而况吾君乎！ 
现代文：史孔和梁丘据都跟着垂泪说： 我们依靠国君的恩赐，一般的饭菜可以吃得到，一般的车马可以乘坐，尚且还不想死，又何况我的国君呢！ 
English: Shukong and Liang Qiu both said with tears: We rely on the gift of the sovereign, we can eat ordinary meals, we can ride ordinary cars and horses, and we don't want to die, let alone my sovereign!

古文：晏子独笑于旁。
现代文：晏子一个人在旁边发笑。
English: Mule laughs alone at his side.

古文：公雪涕而顾晏子曰： 寡人今日之游悲，孔与据皆从寡人而泣，子之独笑，何也？ 
现代文：景公揩干眼泪面向晏子说： 我今天游览觉得悲伤，史孔和梁丘据都跟着我流泪，你却一个人发笑，为什么呢？ 
English: Jing Gong Li wiped away his tears and said to Zizi, "I feel sad after today's tour. Shikong and Liang Qiu have both shed tears with me, but you are laughing alone. Why?

古文：晏子对曰： 使贤者常守之，则太公、桓公将常守之矣；使有勇者而常守之，则庄公、灵公将常守之矣。
现代文：晏子回答说： 假使让贤明的君主长久地统治齐国，那么太公、桓公就会长久地统治这个国家；假使勇敢的君主能够长久地拥有自己的国家，那么庄公、灵公就会长久地拥有这个国家了。
English: Xun Zi replied: "If a wise monarch is allowed to rule Qi for a long time, then Taigong and Huan Gong will rule this country for a long time; if a brave monarch can have his own country for a long time, then Zhuangong and Lingong will have this country for a long time.

古文：数君者将守之，吾君方将被蓑笠而立乎畎亩之中，唯事之恤，行假念死乎？
现代文：这么多君主都将拥有这个国家，那您现在就只能披着蓑衣，戴着斗笠站在田地之中，一心只考虑农活了，哪有闲暇想到死呢？
English: So many monarchs will have owned this country, so now you can only stand in the middle of the field, wearing a loincloth and a bucket hat, thinking only about agricultural work. How can you have any leisure time to think about death?

古文：则吾君又安得此位而立焉？
现代文：您又怎么能得到国君的位置而成为国君呢？
English: How can you get the position of the sovereign and become the sovereign?

古文：以其迭处之迭去之，至于君也，而独为之流涕，是不仁也。
现代文：就是因为他们一个个成为国君，又一个个相继死去，才轮到了您，您却偏要为此而流泪，这是不仁义的。
English: It is because they became kings one after another and died one after another that it is your turn, but you want to shed tears for this, which is uncharitable.

古文：见不仁之君，见谄谀之臣。
现代文：我看到了不仁不义的君主，又看到了阿谀奉承的大臣。
English: I saw a cruel and unjust monarch, and I saw a flattering minister.

古文：臣见此二者，臣之所为独窃笑也。 
现代文：看到了这两种人，我所以一个人私下发笑。 
English: Seeing these two types of people makes me laugh in private.

古文：景公惭焉，举觞自罚。罚二臣者各二觞焉。
现代文：景公觉得惭愧，举起杯子自己罚自己喝酒，又罚了史孔、梁丘据各两杯酒。
English: Jing Gong felt ashamed, raised his glass to punish himself for drinking, and punished Shikong and Liang Qiu Jian with two glasses of wine each.

古文：魏人有东门吴者，其子死而不忧。
现代文：魏国有个叫东门吴的人，他儿子死了，他却不伤心。
English: In Wei, there was a man named Dongmen Wu. His son died, but he was not sad.

古文：其相室曰： 公之爱子，天下无有。
现代文：他的管家说： 您对儿子的怜爱程度，天下是找不到的。
English: His housekeeper said: "You have a level of compassion for your son that you can't find anywhere else in the world.

古文：今子死不忧，何也？ 
现代文：现在儿子死了你却不伤心，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Now that your son is dead, you are not sad. Why is that?

古文：东门吴曰： 吾常无子，无子之时不忧。
现代文：东门吴说： 我过去没有儿子，没有儿子的时候并不伤心。
English: Dongmen Wu said, "In the past, I didn't have a son. I didn't feel sad when I didn't have a son.

古文：今子死，乃与向无子同，臣奚忧焉？ 
现代文：现在儿子死了，就和过去没有儿子的时候一样，我有什么可伤心的呢？ 
English: Now that my son is dead, just as in the past when I didn't have a son, why should I be sad?

古文：农赴时，商趣利，工追术，仕逐势，势使然也。
现代文：农民抢赶时令，商人追逐利益，工人讲究技术，仕人追逐权势，这是时势使他们这样的。
English: Farmers rush to catch up with the times, businessmen chase profits, workers pay attention to technology, and officials chase power. It is the times that have made them like this.

古文：然农有水旱，商有得失，工有成败，仕有遇否，命使然也。
现代文：但农民有水旱之灾，商人有得失之时，工人有成功与失败之别，仕人也有顺逆之境，这都是命运造成的。
English: However, farmers have floods and droughts, merchants have gains and losses, workers have successes and failures, and officials have ups and downs. All of these are caused by fate.

