古文：○卢光稠谭全播
现代文：卢光稠、谭全播，都是南康人。
English: Lu Guangcong and Tan Quanbai are both from Nankang.

古文：卢光稠、谭全播，皆南康人也。光稠状貌雄伟，无佗材能，而全播勇敢有识略，然全播常奇光稠为人。
现代文：卢光稠身材高大，外貌俊伟，没有别的才能，而谭全播勇敢有胆识谋略，但谭全播常常觉得卢光稠的为人非同寻常。
English: Lu Guangchong is tall, handsome, and has no other talent, while Tan Quanbo is brave and daring, but Tan Quanbo often feels that Lu Guangchong is an extraordinary person.

古文：唐末，群盗起南方，全播谓光稠曰： 天下汹汹，此真吾等之时，无徒守此贫贱为也！ 
现代文：唐末，众多盗贼在南方兴起，谭全播对卢光稠说： 天下喧扰，这真是我们的大好时机，木要枉自守着这贫贱过活！ 
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, many thieves arose in the south. Tan Quan Biao said to Lu Guangzhu: The world is noisy, this is really a great opportunity for us. It is useless for us to live in poverty.

古文：乃相与聚兵为盗。
现代文：于是一起招聚士兵做盗贼。
English: So they recruited soldiers to act as thieves.

古文：众推全播为主，全播曰： 诸君徒为贼乎？而欲成功乎？
现代文：众人推举谭全播作首领，谭全播说： 各位只是做贼呢，还是想建立功业呢？
English: The people elected Tan Quan Biao as their leader. Tan Quan Biao said, "Are you all just thieves, or do you want to build a career?

古文：若欲成功，当得良帅，卢公堂堂，真君等主也。 
现代文：如果想建立功业，应当有个好统帅，卢公仪表堂堂，确实是你们的主人。 
English: If you want to build a career, you should have a good commander. Lu Gong is very handsome and is indeed your master.

古文：众阳诺之，全播怒，拔剑击木三，斩之，曰： 不从令者如此木！ 
现代文：众人假装同意，谭全播发怒，拔出剑三次击树，砍断了它，说： 不听从命令的人就像这树一样！ 
English: The crowd pretended to agree, and Tan Quan flew into a rage, pulled out his sword, struck the tree three times, cut it down, and said, "People who don't follow orders are just like this tree!

古文：众惧，乃立光稠为帅。
现代文：众人害怕，于是拥立卢光稠为统帅。
English: The people were afraid, so they appointed Lu Guangzhuo as commander.

古文：是时，王潮攻陷岭南，全播攻潮，取其虔、韶二州，又遣光稠弟光睦攻潮州。
现代文：这时，王潮攻陷岭南，谭全播进攻王潮，攻取他的虔、韶二州，又派卢光稠的弟弟卢光睦攻打潮州。
English: At this time, Wang Chao invaded Lingnan, and Tan Quan Biao attacked Wang Chao and captured his two states of Qian and Jian. He also sent Lu Guangmu, the younger brother of Lu Guang, to attack Chaozhou.

古文：光睦好勇而轻进，全播戒其持重，不听，度其必败，乃为奇兵伏其归路。
现代文：卢光睦好逞勇猛而轻易进军，谭全播告诫他要稳重，他不听，谭全播估计他必定失败，于是在他返回的路上埋伏奇兵。
English: Lu Guangmu was brave and bold and easily marched into the army. Tan Quanbo warned him to be steady, but he did not listen. Tan Quanbo estimated that he must fail, so he ambushed the strange soldiers on his way back.

古文：光睦果败走，潮人追之，全播以伏兵邀击，大败之，遂取潮州。
现代文：卢光睦果然败逃，潮州人追击他，谭全播率奇兵拦击，大败潮州人，于是攻取了潮州。
English: Lu Guangmu was defeated and fled, the Chaozhou people chased him, and Tan Quanzhang led the soldiers to intercept, defeated the Chaozhou people, and then captured Chaozhou.

古文：是时，刘岩起南海，击走光睦，以兵数万攻虔州。
现代文：这时，刘岩在南海起兵，赶走卢光睦，率兵几万人进攻虔州。
English: At this time, Liu Yan raised an army in the South China Sea, drove out Lu Guangmu, and led tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Gyeongju.

古文：光稠大惧，谓全播曰： 虔、潮皆公取之，今日非公不能守也。 
现代文：卢光稠十分恐惧，对谭全播说： 虔、潮二州都是你夺取的，现在不是你就不能坚守。 
English: Lu Guangcong was very afraid and said to Tan Quanlong: You have conquered Qian and Chaozhou, and now you can't hold on unless you do.

古文：全播曰： 吾知刘岩易与尔！ 
现代文：谭全播说： 我知道刘岩容易对付！ 
English: Tan Quan Biao said: I know Liu Yan is easy to deal with!

古文：乃选精兵万人，伏山谷中，阳治战地于城南，告岩战期。
现代文：于是挑选精兵一万人，埋伏在山谷中，假装在城南修治阵地，告诉刘岩会战的日期。
English: So he selected ten thousand elite soldiers, ambushed them in the valley, pretended to set up a position in the south of the city, and told Liu Yan the date of the battle.

古文：以老弱五千出战，战酣，伪北，岩急追之，伏兵发，岩遂大败。
现代文：率领老弱十兵五千人出战，正打得激烈时，假装败逃，刘岩紧迫他们，伏兵突起，刘岩于是大败。
English: He led five thousand old and weak ten soldiers to fight, and when they were fighting fiercely, he pretended to be defeated and fled, Liu Yan pressed them, the ambush sprang up, and Liu Yan was defeated.

古文：光稠第战功，全播悉推诸将，光稠心益贤之。
现代文：卢光稠论列战功，谭全播全部推给将领们，卢光稠心里更加觉得他贤明。
English: Lu Guangchong listed the war exploits, Tan Quanbai all pushed to the generals, Lu Guangchong in his heart felt that he was wise.

古文：梁初，江南、岭表悉为吴与南汉分据，而光稠独以虔、韶二州请命于京师，愿通道路，输贡赋。
现代文：梁初，江南、嵌表全部被昊和南漠分割占据，而卢光稠只是以虔、韶二州向京师请求任命，希望疏通道路，输送赋税。
English: At the beginning of the Liang Dynasty, the south of the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River were all occupied by Hao and Nanmu, while Lu Guangcong only requested the appointment of the Beijing division with the two states of Qian and Jian, hoping to clear the roads and deliver taxes.

古文：太祖为置百胜军，以光稠为防御使、兼五岭开通使，又建镇南军，以为留后。
现代文：梁太祖为他设置百胜军，任卢光稠为防御使、兼五岭开通使，又建立镇南军，任命他为留后。
English: Liang Taizu set up the Yousheng Army for him, appointed Lu Guangcong as the defense envoy and the Wuling Kaitong Envoy, and established the Zhennan Army, and appointed him to stay behind.

古文：开平五年，光稠病，以符印属全播，全播不受。
现代文：开平五年，卢光稠病重，把符印交付给谭全播，谭全播不接受。
English: In the fifth year of Kaiping, Lu Guang was seriously ill and delivered the seal to Tan Quanbang, but Tan Quanbang did not accept it.

古文：光稠卒，全播立其子延昌而事之。
现代文：卢光稠死，谭全播拥立他的儿子卢延昌而事奉他。
English: After the death of Lu Guangzhu, Tan Quan Bo supported his son Lu Yanchang and served him.

古文：延昌好游猎，其将黎求闭门拒延昌，延昌见杀。
现代文：卢延昌喜好游猎，他的将领黎求关闭城门拒绝卢延昌回城，卢延昌被杀。
English: Lu Yanchang liked to go hunting. His general, Li Kui, closed the city gate and refused to allow Lu Yanchang to return to the city. Lu Yanchang was killed.

古文：求因谋杀全播，全播惧，称疾不出。
现代文：黎求于是谋划杀死谭全播，谭全播害怕，称病不出来。
English: Li Qiu then plotted to kill Tan Quanbang. Tan Quanbang was afraid and said that he was too ill to come out.

古文：求乃自立，请命于梁。
现代文：黎求于是自立，向梁请求任命。
English: Reqiu then stood up for himself and asked Liang for an appointment.

古文：乾化元年，拜求防御使。
现代文：干化元年，拜黎求为防御使。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Bai Liguo was appointed as a defense envoy.

古文：求暴病死，其将李彦图自立，全播益惧，遂称疾笃，杜门自绝。
现代文：黎求暴病而死，他的将领李彦图自立，谭全播更加恐惧，于是称说病重，闭门不与人交往。
English: Li Qiu died of violent illness, his general Li Yantu became independent, and Tan Quanbai was even more afraid, so he said that he was seriously ill and did not socialize with people behind closed doors.

古文：彦图疑之，使人觇其动静，全播应觇为状以自免。
现代文：李彦图怀疑他，派人窥视他的动静，谭全播对着窥视他的人做出生病的样子纔幸免。
English: Li Yantu suspected him, sent someone to spy on his movements, and Tan Quan Bo avoided the person who spied on him by pretending to be ill.

古文：彦图死，州人相率诣全播第，扣门请之，全播乃起，遣使请命于梁，拜防御使。
现代文：李彦图死，州中的人一起到谭全播的住宅去，敲门请求他，谭全播纔重新出仕，派使臣向梁请求任命，拜为防御使。
English: After Li Yantu's death, the people in the prefecture went to Tan Quanhang's residence together and knocked on the door to ask him to serve again. Tan Quanhang sent an envoy to Liang to ask him to appoint him as a defense envoy.

古文：全播治虔州七年，有善政，杨隆演遣刘信攻破虔州，以全播归广陵，卒年八十五。
现代文：谭全播治理虔州七年，有很好的玫绩，杨隆演派刘信攻破虔州，把谭全播带回广陵，死时八十五岁。
English: Tan Quanbang governed Gyeongju for seven years and had a good record. Yang Longyuan sent Liu Xin to invade Gyeongju and bring Tan Quanbang back to Guangling. He was 85 years old when he died.

古文：当卢氏时，刘已取韶州，及全播被执，虔州遂入于吴。
现代文：当卢氏还在时，刘龚已攻取韶州，到谭全播被俘时，虔州就归属昊了。
English: When the Lu clan was still around, Liu Bei had already conquered Zhangzhou. When Tan Quan Biao was captured, Qianzhou belonged to Hao.

古文：○雷满雷满，武陵人也。
现代文：雷满是武陵人。
English: Lei Man is from Wuling.

古文：为人凶悍獢勇，文身断发。
现代文：为人凶悍骁勇，文身断发。
English: He is a fierce and courageous man, with a tattoo and haircut.

古文：唐广明中，湖南饥，盗贼起，满与同里人区景思、周岳等聚诸蛮数千，猎于大泽中，乃击鲜酾酒，择坐中豪者，补置伍长，号土团军，诸蛮从之，推满为帅。
现代文：唐广明年问，湖南饥荒，盗贼兴起，雷满和同乡人区景思、周岳等聚集了诸南蛮几千人，在大沼泽中打猎，于是射猎斟酒，挑选座中英豪的人，补设伍长，号称土团军，蛮人们追随他，推举雷满为主帅。
English: Tang Guangming asked, Hunan famine, the rise of thieves, Lei Man and fellow villagers Jing Si and Zhou Yue gathered several thousand people in Zhunan, hunted in the Everglades, then shot and poured wine, selected the heroes of the party, and set up a captain, known as the local regiment, and the barbarians followed him and nominated Lei Man as the head coach.

古文：是时，高骈镇荆南，召满隶麾下，使以蛮军击贼。
现代文：适时，高骈镇守剂南，召雷满做部下，让他率领蛮军击贼。
English: At the right time, Gaochun town guard Yanan, called Lei Man to be his subordinate, and let him lead the barbarian army to fight the thieves.

古文：骈徙淮南，满从至广陵，逃归，杀刺史崔翥，遂据朗州，请命于唐。
现代文：高骈调任到淮南，雷满跟随到广陵，逃回，杀刺史崔翥，于是占据朗州，向唐请求任命。
English: Gao Yao was transferred to Huainan, Lei Man followed to Guangling, fled back, assassinated Shi Cui Yao, and then occupied Langzhou and requested the appointment from Tang.

古文：昭宗以澧、朗为武贞军，拜满节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗以澧、朗二州为武贞军，拜雷满为节度使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty used Zhai and Lang of the two states as the army of Wu Zhen, and Baileiman as the envoy of the festival.

古文：是时，澧阳人向瑰杀刺史吕自牧据澧州，而溪洞诸蛮宋鄴昌、师益等，皆起兵剽掠湖外，满亦以轻舟上下荆江，攻劫州县。
现代文：这时，澧阳人向瓖杀刺史吕自牧占据澧州，而溪洞各蛮宋邺昌、师益等人，都起兵剽掠大湖以外的地方，雷满也用轻便船只出没于剂江，攻劫州县。
English: At this time, the people of Fenyang occupied Fuzhou, while Song Yuchang, Shiyi and other barbarians in Xidong took up arms and plundered places other than the Great Lake. Lei Man also used light vessels to haunt the Jiujiang River and attack counties.

古文：杨行密攻杜洪于鄂州，荆南成汭出兵救洪，汭战败，溺死于君山。
现代文：杨行密在鄂州进攻杜洪，剂南成油出兵救援杜洪，成油战败，在君山被淹死。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Duhong in Ezhou. Agent Nancheng Oil sent troops to rescue Duhong. Oilcheng was defeated and drowned in Junshan.

古文：满袭破荆南，不能守，焚掠殆尽而去。
现代文：雷满袭击攻破剂南，不能守卫，焚烧掠夺殆尽纔离去。
English: The thunderstorm hit the south of the breaching agent, it could not be guarded, and it was burned and plundered.

古文：满尝凿深池于府中，客有过者，召宴池上，指其水曰： 蛟龙水怪皆窟于此，盖水府也。 
现代文：雷满曾在府中挖了个深池，有客人来访，就在池上设宴，指着池水说： 蛟龙水怪都栖居在这里，这里是水府。 
English: Lei Man once dug a deep pond in the middle of the palace. When guests came to visit, he held a banquet on the pond, pointing to the water and saying: "The dragon and water monsters all live here, this is the water palace."

古文：酒酣，取坐上器掷池中，因裸而入，取器嬉水上，久之乃出，治衣复坐，意气自若。
现代文：饮酒尽兴，拿座上的器物投到水中，接着裸体进入水中，取出器物在水上嬉戏，很久纔出来，整理衣服又坐下，神态自如。
English: Drink to your heart's content, take the objects on the seat and throw them into the water, then enter the water naked, take out the objects and play on the water, come out for a long time, sort out your clothes and sit down again, look at ease.

古文：满居朗州，引沅水堑其城，上为长桥，为不可攻之计。
现代文：雷满住在朗州，引沅水环绕城墙，上面修筑长桥，作不能被攻破的安排。
English: Lei Man lived in Lanzhou, diverting water to encircle the city wall and building a long bridge above it, making an arrangement that could not be broken.

古文：天祐中，满卒，子彦恭自立。
现代文：天佑中，雷满死，儿子雷彦恭自任。
English: With God's blessing, Lei Man died, and his son Lei Yanqun took over.

古文：彦恭附于杨行密，亦尝攻劫为荆、湖患。
现代文：雷彦恭依附杨行密，也曾攻劫州县，成了荆、湖的祸患。
English: Lei Yanyang adhered to Yang Xingmi, and also attacked and plundered the prefectures, becoming the scourge of Jing and the lake.

古文：开平元年，马殷发兵攻彦恭，恃堑为阻，逾年不能破。
现代文：开平元年，马殷出兵攻打雷彦恭，他依靠城壕的阻隔，一年多没能攻破。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Ma Yin sent troops to attack Lei Yanqong. He relied on the barrier of the trench and failed to break through for more than a year.

古文：三年，彦恭奔于杨行密，马殷擒其弟彦雄等七人送于梁，斩于汴市，彦恭卒于淮南，澧、朗遂入于楚。
现代文：三年，雷彦恭投奔杨行密，马殷捉获他的弟弟雷彦雄等七人送到梁，在汴州街市上斩首，雷彦恭死在淮南，澧、朗二州于是归属楚。
English: In the third year, Lei Yan Gong defected to Yang Xingmi, Ma Yin captured his brother Lei Yan Xiong and seven others and sent them to Liang, where they were beheaded in the city of Quzhou. Lei Yan Gong died in Huainan, and the two states of Quzhou and Long belonged to Chu.

古文：○钟传钟传，洪州高安人也。
现代文：锺传是洪州高安人。
English: Zou is said to be from Gao'an, Hongzhou.

古文：事州为小校，黄巢攻掠江淮，所在盗起，往往据州县。
现代文：在州中任小校，黄巢攻掠江淮，各地盗贼兴起，往往占据州县。
English: In the state of Zhongren Elementary School, the Yellow Nest attacked and plundered the Jianghuai River, and thieves from all over the country arose, often occupying the state and county.

古文：传以州兵击贼，频胜，遂逐观察使，自称留后。
现代文：锺传率领州兵攻打贼军，频频取胜，于是赶走观察使，自称留棱。
English: Zou Chuan led the National Guard to attack the Kleptocratic Army and frequently won, so he drove away the observers and claimed to stay behind.

古文：唐以洪州为镇南军，拜传节度使。
现代文：唐以洪州为镇南军，拜锺传为节度使。
English: The Tang Dynasty used Hongzhou as a garrison for the southern army, and Baizhun as a festival envoy.

古文：江夏伶人杜洪者，亦据鄂州，杨行密屡攻之，洪颇倚传为首尾。
现代文：江夏乐人杜洪，也占据鄂州，杨行密多次攻打他，杜洪每每倚仗锺傅首尾接应。
English: Du Hong, a Jiangxia musician, also occupied Ezhou. Yang Xingmi attacked him many times, and Du Hong always supported him.

古文：久之，洪败死。
现代文：过了很久，杜洪战败而死。
English: After a long time, Du Hong was defeated and died.

古文：是时，危全讽、韩师德等分据抚、吉诸州，传皆不能节度，以兵攻之，稍听命，独全讽不能下，乃自率兵围之。
现代文：这时，危全讽、韩师德等人分别占据抚、吉各州，锺传都不能指挥他们，率兵攻打他们，纔稍稍听从命令，惟独危全讽不能攻克，于是亲自率兵包围他。
English: At this time, Gui Quanlian, Han Shide and others occupied Fuzhou and Jizhou Provinces respectively. Zou Chuan could not command them and led the troops to attack them. Zou slightly obeyed the order, but only Gui Quanlian could not be defeated, so he personally led the troops to surround him.

古文：城中夜火起，诸将请急攻之，传曰： 吾闻君子不迫人之危。 
现代文：城中晚上起火，将领们请求紧急进攻，锺传说： 我听说君子不趁人之危。 
English: In the evening, a fire broke out in the city, and the generals requested an urgent attack, quoting a legend: I heard that a gentleman does not take advantage of human danger.

古文：乃扫地祭天，向城再拜，祝曰： 全讽不降，非民之罪，愿天止火。 
现代文：于是扫地祭天，对城再拜，祝福说： 危全讽不投降，不是老百姓的罪遇，希望老天灭火。 
English: So he swept the ground and offered it to the heavens, bowed again to the city, and gave his blessing, saying, "It is not the common people's fault if they do not surrender in the face of danger. I hope God will extinguish the fire."

古文：全讽闻之，明日乃亦听命，请以女妻传子匡时。
现代文：危全讽获知后，第二天也就听从命令了，请求把女儿嫁给锺传的儿子锺匡时。
English: After learning of the danger, he obeyed the order the next day and asked for his daughter to be married to Gong Chuan's son, Gong Guanzhong.

古文：传居江西三十馀年，累拜太保、中书令，封南平王。
现代文：锺传占据江西三十多年，多次拜授为太保、中书令，封为南平王。
English: Zou Chuan occupied Jiangxi for more than 30 years, and was awarded the title of Taiho, the title of Chushuling, and the title of Nanping Wang for many times.

古文：天祐三年，传卒，子匡时自称留后，请命于唐。
现代文：天佑三年，锺传死，其子锺匡时自称留后，向唐请求任命。
English: By the grace of God, after three years, Gong Chuan died, and his son Gong Kuang Shih claimed to stay behind and asked Tang Zorong for an appointment.

古文：全讽曰： 听钟郎为节度使三年，吾将自为之。 
现代文：危全讽说： 听任锺郎做了三年节度使，我将自己来做了。 
English: Keizhen said sarcastically, "I listened to Ren Shulang and did three years as a festival marshal. I will do it myself."

古文：已而传养子延规与匡时争立，乞兵于杨渥，渥遣秦裴等攻匡时，匡时败，被执归广陵。
现代文：不久锺传的养子锺延规和锺匡时争位，向杨渥求兵，杨渥派秦裴等人进攻锺匡时，锺匡时战败，被押回广陵。
English: Soon after, Zou's adopted son Zou Yanjie and Zou Kuang were fighting for the top spot, and Yang Wu sent Qin Pei and others to attack Zou Kuang. Zou Kuang was defeated and sent back to Guangling.

古文：开平三年，全讽等起兵江西，谋复钟氏故地，全讽为杨隆演将周本所败，江西遂入于吴。
现代文：开平三年，危全讽等人在江西起兵，策划恢复锺氏旧地，危全讽被杨隆演的将领周本打败，江西于是归属昊。
English: In the third year of Kaiping, Gui Quanlian and others raised an army in Jiangxi and planned to restore the old land of the Min clan. Gui Quanlian was defeated by Yang Longyan's general Zhou Ben, and Jiangxi then belonged to Hao.

古文：○赵匡凝赵匡凝，字光仪，蔡州人也。
现代文：趟匡凝字光仪，蔡州人。
English: A trip to the Condenser, a native of Caizhou.

古文：其父德諲事秦宗权，为申州刺史。
现代文：父亲赵德湿跟随秦宗权，任申州刺史。
English: His father, Zhao Dehum, followed Qin Zongquan and served as the prefect of Shenzhou.

古文：宗权反，德諲攻下襄阳。
现代文：秦宗权反叛，趟德谨攻克襄阳。
English: Qin Zongquan rebelled and invaded Xiangyang.

古文：梁太祖攻蔡州，宗权屡败，德諲乃以山南东道七州降。
现代文：梁太祖攻打蔡州，秦宗权多次被打败，趟德锲于是以山南柬道七州投降。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Caizhou, Qin Zongquan was defeated many times, and Decheng surrendered the seven states of Shannan-Cambodia Road.

古文：梁太祖初镇宣武，尝为宗权所困，闻德諲降，大喜，表为行营副都统，河阳、保义、义昌三节度行军司马。
现代文：梁太祖最初镇守宣武时，曾被秦宗权围困，听说趟德护投降，十分高兴，表奏为行营副都统，河阳、保义、义昌三节度行军司马。
English: When Liang Taizu was the first commander of Xuanwu, he was besieged by Qin Zongquan. He was very happy to hear that Dehu surrendered. He played the role of the deputy commander of the camp, and the marshal of the camp during the three stages of marching in Heyang, Boyi and Yichang.

古文：会其兵以攻蔡州，破之，德諲功多。
现代文：会合他的军队攻打蔡州，攻破蔡州，趟德谨功劳最大。
English: He joined his army to attack Caizhou and defeated Caizhou, which was his greatest achievement.

古文：德諲卒，子匡凝自立。
现代文：趟德护死，儿子趟匡凝自立。
English: After the death of Dechu, his son, Wai Kongge, became independent.

古文：是时，成汭死，雷彦恭袭取荆南，匡凝遣其弟匡明逐彦恭，太祖表匡凝荆襄节度使，以匡明为荆南留后。
现代文：这时，成油已死，雷彦恭袭取剂南，赵匡凝派他的弟弟趟匡明驱逐雷彦恭，梁太祖表奏赵匡凝为荆襄节度使，任赵匡明为剂南留后。
English: At this time, Chengyu was already dead, Lei Yan Gong attacked and took the medicine to the south, Zhao Kuangge sent his brother Wai Kuangming to expel Lei Yan Gong, Liang Taizu appointed Zhao Kuangging as Jing Xiang's deputy, and appointed Zhao Kuangming as the medicine to stay in the south.

古文：是时，唐衰，籓镇不复奉朝廷，独匡凝兄弟贡赋不绝。
现代文：逭时，唐衰落，藩镇不再尊奉朝廷，惟独赵匡凝兄弟没有停止进贡。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty was in decline, and the towns no longer honored the imperial court. However, the Zhao Kuangning brothers did not stop paying tribute.

古文：匡凝为人气貌甚伟，性方严，喜自修饰，颇好学问，聚书数千卷，为政有威惠。
现代文：趟匡凝为人气度相貌很雄伟，性格正直严肃，喜欢修筛自己，颇为喜好学问，藏书几千卷，为政威严有恩。
English: Wuchang Kuangge is a person with a very majestic appearance, an honest and serious personality, likes to refine himself, is quite fond of learning, has a collection of thousands of volumes, and is dignified and grateful for politics.

古文：太祖攻兗州，硃瑾求救于晋，晋遣史俨等将兵数千救瑾，瑾败，与俨等奔于淮南。
现代文：梁太祖进攻兖州，朱瑾向晋求救，晋派史俨等人率兵几千人救援朱瑾，朱瑾失败，和史俨等人逃奔到淮南。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Bozhou, Zhu Di asked Jin for help, Jin sent Shi Yan and others to lead thousands of soldiers to rescue Zhu Di, Zhu Di failed, and Shi Yan and others fled to Huainan.

古文：晋王李克用遣人以书币假道于匡凝，以聘于杨行密，求归俨等。
现代文：晋王李克用派人送书信礼物向趟匡凝借道，以出使到杨行密那里，要求放回史俨等人。
English: The Jin king Li Ke used the opportunity of sending someone to send a letter as a gift to the Wei emperor to send an envoy to Yang Xingmi to request the release of Shi Xuan and others.

古文：晋王使者为梁得，太祖大怒。
现代文：晋王的使臣被梁抓获，梁太祖大怒。
English: Emperor Jin's envoy was captured by Liang, and Liang Taizu was furious.

古文：是时，梁已破兗、郓，遣氏叔琮、康怀英等攻匡凝，叔琮取泌、随二州，怀英取邓州，匡凝惧，请盟，乃止。
现代文：这时，梁已攻破兖、郓二州，派氏叔琮、康怀英等人攻打趟匡凝，氏叔琮攻取泌、随二州，康怀英攻取邓州，赵匡凝害怕，请求订盟誓，纔作罢。
English: At this time, Liang had already conquered Shandong and Shandong two provinces, Pai Shizhong and Kang Huaiying and others had already attacked Quanzhou, Shizhong had already conquered Hebei and Guizhou, Kang Huaiying had already conquered Dangzhou, Zhao Kuanggen was afraid and asked to sign an oath to stop fighting.

古文：太祖弑昭宗，将谋代唐，畏匡凝兄弟不从，遣使告之，匡凝对使者流涕答曰： 受唐恩深，不敢妄有佗志。 
现代文：梁太祖杀了唐昭宗，将要谋划取代唐，怕赵匡凝兄弟不从，派使臣告诉他们，赵匡凝哭泣着回答使臣说： 蒙受唐的恩德很深，不敢妄有别的打算。 
English: Liang Taizu killed Tang Zhaozong and was planning to replace Tang. Fearing that Zhao Kuangning's brothers would not follow suit, he sent an envoy to tell them. Zhao Kuangning wept and replied to the envoy, "I am deeply indebted to Tang and dare not have any other plans.

古文：太祖遣杨师厚攻之，太祖以兵殿汉北，匡凝战败，以轻舟奔于杨行密。
现代文：梁太祖派杨师厚攻打他，梁太祖率兵在汉水以北殿后，赵匡凝战败，乘轻便小船投奔杨行密。
English: Liang Taizu sent Yang Shihou to attack him. After Liang Taizu led his troops to the north of Hanshui, Zhao Kuangge was defeated and fled to Yang Xingmi in a light boat.

古文：师厚进攻荆南，匡明奔于蜀。
现代文：杨师厚进攻剂南，赵匡明逃奔到蜀。
English: Yang Shihou attacked the south, and Zhao Kuangming fled to Shu.

古文：匡凝至广陵，行密见之，戏曰： 君在镇时，轻车重马，岁输于梁，今败乃归我乎？ 
现代文：赵匡凝到达广陵，杨行密见到他，开玩笑说： 你在节镇时，轻车重马，每年向梁输送财物，现在被打败了就回到我这里吗？ 
English: When Zhao Kuangning arrived at Guangling, Yang Xingmi saw him and joked: "When you were in the festival town, you had a heavy load of goods to transport to Liang every year. Now that you have been defeated, will you come back to me?"

古文：匡凝曰： 仆世为唐臣，岁时职贡，非输贼也。
现代文：趟匡凝说： 我世代做唐的臣子，每年向朝廷贡纳财物，不是向贼人输送财物。
English: Wai Kuangge said: I am a Tang courtier of my generation, and every year I donate property to the imperial court, not to the thieves.

古文：今以不从贼之故，力屈归公，惟公生死之耳！ 
现代文：如今因为不顺从贼的缘故，力量尽竭纔到你这里，只有由你决定我的生死罢了！ 
English: Now, because of my disobedience to the thief, I have come to you with all my strength, and it is up to you to decide whether I live or die!

古文：行密厚遇之。
现代文：杨行密待他很好。
English: Yang Xingmei treated him very well.

古文：其后行密死，杨渥稍不礼之。渥方宴，食青梅，匡凝顾渥曰： 勿多食，发小兒热。 
现代文：后来杨行密死了，杨渥逐渐对他无礼，杨渥正在设宴，吃青梅子，趟匡凝望着杨渥说： 不要多吃，会发小儿热。 
English: Later, Yang Xingmi died, and Yang Wou gradually became rude to him. Yang Wou was holding a banquet and eating young plums. Wai Kuang stared at Yang Wou and said, "Don't eat too much, you'll catch a fever."

古文：诸将以为慢，渥迁匡凝海陵，后为徐温所杀。
现代文：将领们认为他轻慢无礼，杨渥迁移趟匡凝到海陵，后来被徐温杀死。
English: The generals thought he was impertinent and disrespectful. Yang Wo moved to Hailing and was later killed by Xu Wen.

古文：匡明卒于蜀。
现代文：趟匡明死在蜀中。
English: Wu Kuangming died in Shuzhong.

