古文：肃宗纪肃宗孝明皇帝，讳诩，世宗宣武皇帝之第二子。母曰胡充华。
现代文：肃宗孝明皇帝，讳称诩，世宗宣武皇帝的第二子。母亲名叫胡充华。
English: Emperor Suizong Xiaoming, commonly known as Yu, was the second son of Emperor Sejong Xuanwu. His mother's name was Hu Chonghua.

古文：永平三年三月丙戌，帝生于宣光殿之东北，有光照于庭中。
现代文：永平三年三月十四日，肃宗在宣光殿东北降生，当时有光照于庭中。
English: On the 14th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of Yongping, Su Zong was born in the northeast of Xuan Guang Dian. At that time, there was light shining in the courtyard.

古文：延昌元年十月乙亥，立为皇太子。
现代文：延昌元年十月十八日被立为皇太子。
English: He was enthroned as crown prince on October 18 of the first year of Yanchang.

古文：四年春正月丁巳夜，即皇帝位。
现代文：延昌四年正月十三日夜，即皇帝位。
English: On the evening of the 13th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Yanchang, he became emperor.

古文：戊午，大赦天下。
现代文：十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：己未，征下西讨东防诸军。
现代文：十五日，召回西讨东防诸军。
English: On the 15th, the troops of the East Defense were recalled to the West.

古文：庚申，诏太保、高阳王雍入居西柏堂，决庶政。
现代文：十六日，帝下诏让太保、高阳王元雍入居西柏堂，决断处理政务。
English: On the 16th, the emperor ordered Taibao and Goyang Wangyuan Yong to move into Xibaidang and deal with government affairs.

古文：又诏任城王澄为尚书令，百官总己以听于二王。
现代文：又下诏命任城王元澄为尚书令，百官调度听从二王。
English: The imperial edict also ordered the appointment of the king of the city, Yuancheng, as Shang Shuling, and the dispatch of hundreds of officials obeyed the two kings.

古文：己巳，勿吉、达般、地豆和、尼步伽、拔但、佐越费实等诸国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十五日，勿吉、达、地豆和、尼步伽、拔但、佐越费实等国派使者入朝纳贡。
English: On the 25th, envoys were sent to pay tribute to the imperial court from countries such as Bukit, Dadu, Jidowa, Nibuga, Bataan, and Sagoe Fushi.

古文：二月庚辰，尊皇后高氏为皇太后。
现代文：二月初七，尊皇后高氏为太后。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month, Empress Gao became empress dowager.

古文：辛巳，司徒高肇至京师，以罪赐死。
现代文：初八，司徒高肇到京城，因罪被赐死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Stogao Zhao went to Beijing and was sentenced to death for his crime.

古文：萧衍宁州刺史任太洪率众寇关城，益州长史成兴孙击破之。
现代文：萧衍宁州刺史任太洪率部侵犯关城，益州长史成兴孙打垮了敌人。
English: Xiao Yan, the governor of Ningzhou, attacked Guancheng at the head of Shiren Taihong, and the governor of Yixing, Shicheng Xingsun, defeated the enemy.

古文：癸未，太保、高阳王雍进位太傅、领太尉，司空、清河王怿为司徒，骠骑大将军、广平王怀为司空。
现代文：初十，太保、高阳王元雍进位太傅、领太尉，司空、清河王元怿为司徒，骠骑大将军、广平王元怀为司空。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Taibao and Goyang Wang Yuan Yong were promoted to taifu and lance corporal, Siku and Qinghe Wang Yuanxuan were appointed as officers, and the general of the cavalry, Guangping Wang Yuanhuai was appointed as Siku.

古文：己亥，尊胡充华为皇太妃。
现代文：二十六日，尊胡充华为皇太妃。
English: On the 26th, Son Ho Chung became the Crown Princess.

古文：宕昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：宕昌国派使者朝献。
English: The Tang and Chang dynasties sent emissaries to present gifts to the imperial court.

古文：三月甲辰朔，皇太后出俗为尼，徙御金墉。
现代文：三月初一，皇太后出家为尼，迁至金墉。
English: On the first day of March, the Empress Dowager became a nun and moved to Gimhae.

古文：丙辰，诏进宫臣位一级。
现代文：十三日，下诏晋升宫臣官阶一级。
English: On the 13th, he was promoted to the first rank of palace official.

古文：先是，萧衍于浮山堰淮，规为扬徐之害，诏平南将军杨大眼讨之。
现代文：这以前，萧衍在浮山筑堤拦截淮河，试图制造扬、徐二州的水灾。下诏让平南将军杨大眼讨伐。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan built a dike in Fushan to block the Huai River and tried to cause floods in Yang and Xu Erzhou. The next order was to let Pingnan General Yang Dajian fight.

古文：乙丑，进文武群官位一级。
现代文：二十二日，诏令朝廷文武百官晋升一级。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict promoted more than 100 civil and military officials of the imperial court to the first level.

古文：夏四月，梁州刺史薛怀古破反氐于沮水。
现代文：夏四月，梁州刺史薛怀古在沮水打败反叛的氐人。
English: In the summer of April, Xue Huai Gu, the governor of Liangzhou, defeated the rebellious Xiang people in the battle of Deshui.

古文：五月甲寅，南秦州刺史崔暹击破氐贼，解武兴围。
现代文：五月十二日南秦州刺史崔暹打败氐贼，解除武兴之围。
English: On May 12th, the Southern Qin State Jinshi Cui Siam defeated the bandits and lifted the siege of Wuxing.

古文：六月，沙门法庆聚众反于冀州，杀阜城令，自称大乘。
现代文：六月，和尚法庆在冀州聚众造反，杀害阜城令，自称大乘。
English: In June, the monk Fa Qing gathered a crowd to rebel in Jizhou, killed the Fucheng Emperor, and claimed to be a Mahayana Buddhist.

古文：秋七月癸卯，蠕蠕国遣使朝献。
现代文：秋七月初二，蠕蠕国派使者前来进献。
English: On the second day of the seventh month of autumn, the State of Cm Cm sent an envoy to present the offering.

古文：丁未，诏假右光禄大夫元遥征北大将军，攻讨法庆。
现代文：初六，帝诏假右光禄大夫元遥为征北大将军，攻讨法庆。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the imperial edict named Doctor Yuan Yao as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force to attack and defeat the Fa Qing.

古文：宕昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：宕昌国派使者前来朝献。
English: The Tang and Chang dynasties sent emissaries to present gifts to the imperial court.

古文：八月乙亥，领军于忠矫诏杀左仆射郭祚、尚书裴植，免太傅、领太尉、高阳王雍官，以王还第。
现代文：八月初五，领军于忠矫诏杀害左仆射郭祚、尚书裴植，罢免太傅、领太尉、高阳王元雍官职，以王的身份还归府第。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the leader of the army, Yuzhong Jiaozhao, killed the left-hand servant, Shao Guoqi, and Shang Shu Pei Zhi, and dismissed the official posts of Taifu, Cui Taijun, and Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, and returned to the capital as the king.

古文：丙子，尊皇太妃为皇太后。
现代文：初六，尊皇太妃为皇太后。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, His Majesty the Crown Princess became the Empress Dowager.

古文：己卯，吐谷浑国遣使朝献。
现代文：初九，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month, an envoy from the Kingdom of Tugu was sent to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：庚辰，萧衍定州刺史田超秀率众三千请降。
现代文：初七，萧衍政权的定州刺史田超秀率领三千军马请降。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Tian Chaoxiu, a member of Xiao Yan's regime from Dingzhou, led 3,000 troops and horses to surrender.

古文：戊子，帝朝皇太后于宣光殿，大赦天下。
现代文：十六日，皇帝在宣光殿朝见皇太后，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, the emperor met with the empress dowager at the Xuanguang Palace and pardoned the world.

古文：己丑，司徒、清河王怿进位太傅，领太尉；司空、广平王怀为太保，领司徒；骠骑大将军、任城王澄为司空。
现代文：十七日，司徒、清河王元怿位进太傅，领太尉；司空、广平王元怀为太保、领司徒；骠骑大将军、任城王元澄为司空。
English: On the 17th, Sito and Qinghe Wangyuan were promoted to taifu and given the rank of lieutenant; Siku and Guangping Wangyuanhuai were promoted to taibo and given the rank of sito; and Shanying general and Rencheng Wangyuancheng was promoted to siku.

古文：庚寅，车骑大将军于忠为尚书令，特进崔光为车骑大将军，并仪同三司。
现代文：十八日，车骑大将军于忠为尚书令，特进崔光为车骑大将军，并授仪同三司。
English: On the 18th, Yu Zhong, the general of the cavalry, was awarded the honorary title, and Cui Guang, the special envoy, was awarded the title of general of the cavalry, and the ceremony was held with the three divisions.

古文：壬辰，复前江阳王继本国；以济南王彧复先封，为临淮王。
现代文：二十日，恢复前江阳王元继领国；济南王元恢复封爵，转封临淮王。
English: On the 20th, the former Jiangyang Wangyuan was reinstated as the successor state; the Jinan Wangyuan was reinstated as a knight and transferred to Lin Huai Wang.

古文：群臣奏请皇太后临朝称制。
现代文：群臣奏请皇太后临朝听政。
English: The group of courtiers asked the Empress Dowager Lin to listen to the government.

古文：九月乙巳，皇太后亲览万机。诏曰： 高祖革礼成治，遗泽在民。
现代文：九月初五，皇太后开始亲临朝政，下诏曰： 魏高祖革新礼制，乃成大治，遗恩泽于民。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the empress dowager began to attend the court in person, and issued the following edict: Wei Gao Zu innovated the ceremonial system, which was a great success and a great benefit to the people.

古文：世宗纂承丕业，圣德昭远。
现代文：世宗继承大业，圣德昭远。
English: Shizong inherits the great cause, and the sacred virtue is far ahead.

古文：朕以冲孺，属当宝图，洪基至重，若履冰薄。
现代文：当今圣上年龄尚幼，已登皇极，社稷万机极重，如履薄冰。
English: Today, the saint's age is still young, he has ascended to the throne, and the social pressure is extremely heavy, like walking on thin ice.

古文：王公百辟群牧庶官，皆受遇先朝，宠荣自昔，宜各勉崇，共康世道，戮力竭诚，以匡辅不逮。
现代文：王公百官牧守县令，都受恩遇于先朝，宠荣来日已久，理应各自齐心勉力，共兴世道，尽心尽诚，以匡辅国家。
English: Wang Gong, hundreds of officials, herdsmen, and county magistrates, have all been favored by the previous dynasty, and have been favored for a long time. It is natural that they should make concerted efforts to work together to improve the world, devote themselves wholeheartedly, and supplement the country with encouragement.

古文：其有怀道丘园、昧迹板筑、山栖谷饮、舒卷从时者，宜广戋帛，缉和鼎饪。
现代文：其中如有怀道丘园、隐迹板筑、山栖谷饮、舒卷从时的人，那朝廷则广赐金帛，以全其志。
English: Among them, if there are people from the time of Huai Dao Qiuyuan, hidden plate building, mountain valley drinking, Shu scroll, the imperial court will give a large amount of gold ingots to fulfill their aspirations.

古文：有能谠言直谏、济世益时者，在所以闻，当待以不次之位。
现代文：有能谠言直谏、济世益时的，如实上报，朝廷当不拘名第地提拔任用。
English: When there is a person who can tell the truth and benefit the world, it should be reported truthfully, and the imperial court should promote and appoint him regardless of his name.

古文：孝子、顺孙、义夫、节妇，表其门闾，以彰厥美。
现代文：孝子、顺孙、义夫、节妇，理当旌表族门乡闾、以表彰其美。
English: Filial sons and daughters, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law.

古文：高年孤独不能自存者，赡以粟帛。
现代文：那些年高孤独不能自养的人，官府供给布粟赡养。
English: For those who are too old and lonely to support themselves, the government will provide them with poppy seeds.

古文：若因饥失业、天属流离，或卖鬻男女以为仆隶者，各听归还。
现代文：如因饥荒失业、天灾流离，或者是卖男鬻女作为役奴仆隶的，各听其归还。
English: In case of unemployment due to famine, displacement due to natural disasters, or sale of men, women and children as indentured servants, they shall be returned to their owners.

古文：比冀方未肃，徐城寇扰，将统久劳，士卒疲弊，并遣抚慰，赐以衣马。
现代文：一段时间以来，冀方未宁，徐州被侵扰，将帅劳苦，士卒疲惫，都应派人抚慰，赐予衣马。
English: For some time, Hebei has been unsettled, Xuzhou has been invaded, the generals have been working hard, and the officers are tired. They should send someone to comfort them and give them clothes and horses.

古文：缘边州镇，固捍之劳，朔方酋庶，北面所委，亦令劳赍，以副其心。
现代文：沿边州镇，镇守之劳，北方酋庶，归顺效力的，也应劳慰，以与其忠心相符。
English: Towns along the border of the state, the work of the town guard, the northern chieftain's children, who have surrendered to the force, should also work hard to match their loyalty.

古文：其有先朝舅事寝而不举、顷来便习不依轨式者，并可疏闻，当加览裁。若益时利治、不拘常制者，自依别例。
现代文：其有先朝旧事停而不举，一向以来的固习不依常式的，都可奏疏上闻，当予览视裁决，若是有益于国家的人，自当破格录用。
English: It has the precedent of the previous government, which did not raise the issue, and its long-standing practice of non-conformity can be heard. When the ruling is previewed, if it is beneficial to the country, it should be hired in an unconventional way.

古文：其明相申约，称朕意焉。 
现代文：应将上述措施明白地昭示各级部门，以求合于朕意。 
English: The above-mentioned measures should be clearly communicated to departments at all levels in order to meet our intentions.

古文：甲寅，征北元遥破斩法庆及渠帅百余人，传首京师。
现代文：十四日，征伐北方的元遥击杀法庆及其将帅一百多人，传首至京城。
English: On the 14th, Yuan Yao, who was on a campaign in the north, killed Fa Qing and more than a hundred of his generals, and his head was sent to the capital.

古文：安定王燮薨。
现代文：安定王元燮去世。
English: Wang Yuanxuan passed away.

古文：庚申，高昌、库莫奚、契丹诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十日，高昌、库莫奚、契丹等国都派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 20th, envoys from Gaochang, Kumho, Khitan and other countries came to pay homage.

古文：萧衍将赵祖悦袭据硖石。
现代文：萧衍将领赵祖悦偷袭占据硖石。
English: Xiao Yan's general Zhao Zuyue made a sneak attack to occupy Zibo.

古文：癸亥，诏定州刺史崔亮假镇南将军，率诸将讨之；冀州刺史萧宝夤为镇东将军，次淮堰。
现代文：二十三日，帝下诏命定州刺史崔亮假镇南将军，率领众将讨伐赵祖悦；冀州刺史萧宝夤为镇东将军，驻军淮堰。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict, commanding the general of Dingzhou Province, Shi Cui Liang, to fight against Zhao Zuyue; the general of Jizhou Province, Shi Xiao Baojun, to fight against Zhendong and garrison Huaiyan.

古文：戊辰，邓至国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十八日，邓至国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 28th, Deng Zhi Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月庚午朔，勿吉国贡楛矢。
现代文：冬十月初一，勿吉国献眓矢。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the spring equinox is celebrated in Besshi Province.

古文：壬午，高丽、吐谷浑国并遣使朝献。
现代文：十二日，高丽、吐谷浑派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 12th, emissaries from Goryeo and Tugu were sent to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：乙酉，以安定公胡国珍为中书监、仪同三司。
现代文：十五日，命安定公胡国珍为中书监、仪同三司。
English: On the fifteenth day, Hu Guozhen, a public servant with a stable life, was appointed as the middle school librarian and the third secretary of the ceremony.

古文：甲午，萧衍弘化太守杜桂举郡内属。
现代文：二十四日，萧衍政权的弘化太守杜桂举郡归附魏廷。
English: On the 24th, Gonghua Daju Du Guizhou County, which belonged to Xiao Yan's regime, was annexed by Wei Ting.

古文：十有二月辛丑，以高阳王雍为太师。
现代文：十二月初二，任命高阳王元雍为太师。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong was appointed Grand Master.

古文：己酉，镇南崔亮破祖悦，遂围硖石。
现代文：初十，镇南崔亮打败赵祖悦，于是包围硖石。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhenan Cui Liang defeated Zhao Zuyue, and then surrounded Shanshi.

古文：丁卯，帝、皇太后谒景陵。
现代文：十六日，皇帝、皇太后拜谒景陵。
English: On the 16th, the emperor and empress dowager paid homage to the tomb of Pu Jing.

古文：高车国遣使朝献。
现代文：高车国派使者朝见。
English: The State of Takaoka sent an envoy to see the emperor.

古文：熙平元年春正月戊辰朔，大赦，改年。
现代文：熙平元年正月初一，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Xi Jinping, the world was amnestied, and the year name was changed.

古文：荆沔都督元志大破萧衍军，斩其恆农太守王世定等。
现代文：荆、沔都督元志大破萧衍军队，斩杀其恒农太守王世定等。
English: The Jing and Qin governor, Yuan Zhi, defeated Xiao Yan's army and killed its peasant governor, Wang Shiding.

古文：以吏部尚书李平为镇军大将军兼尚书右仆射，为行台，节度讨硖石诸军。
现代文：朝廷以吏部尚书李平为镇军大将军兼尚书右仆射，建行台，节度讨伐硖石的诸路军马。
English: The imperial court made Li Ping, Shangshu of the cadre department, the general of the town army and Shangshu's right-hand man. He built the parade ground and led the troops to fight against the Jinshi.

古文：二月乙巳，镇东萧宝夤大破衍将于淮北。
现代文：二月初八日，镇东将军萧宝夤在淮北大破萧衍军队。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month, Zhendong General Xiao Baojun defeated Xiao Yan's army in Huaibei.

古文：癸亥，初听秀才对策，第居中上已上，叙之。
现代文：二十六日，肃宗第一次听秀才对策，对策成绩在中上以上的，录用为官。
English: On the 26th, Su Zong listened to the talented countermeasures for the first time, the countermeasures results were above middle school, and he was hired as an official.

古文：乙丑，镇南崔亮、镇军李平等克硖石，斩衍豫州刺史赵祖悦，传首京师，尽俘其众。
现代文：二十八日，镇南将军崔亮、镇军大将军李平等人攻克硖石，杀了萧衍豫州刺史赵祖悦，传首京城，把他的军队全部俘虏了。
English: On the 28th, the general of the south of the town, Cui Liang, and the general of the town's army, Li Tongren, attacked Zhanshi, killed Zhao Zuyue, Xiao Yan's aide in Yuzhou, and sent him to the capital, and captured all of his army.

古文：是月，吐谷浑、宕昌、邓至诸国并遣朝贡。
现代文：这个月，吐谷浑、宕昌、邓至等国都来朝纳贡。
English: This month, Tuyuhun, Tangchang, Dengzhi and other countries came to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：三月辛未，以扬州刺史李崇为骠骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：三月初四，以扬州刺史李崇为骠骑将军、仪同三司。
English: On the 4th day of March, Yangzhou prefect Li Chong was appointed as the commander of the cavalry and the third secretary of the ceremony.

古文：壬辰，以硖石俘虏分赐百僚。
现代文：二十五日，把硖石的俘虏分赐众臣僚。
English: On the 25th, he distributed the prisoners of He Shi to his ministers.

古文：夏四月戊戌，以瀛州民饥，开仓赈恤。
现代文：夏四月初一，因为瀛州老百姓发生饥荒，开仓济民。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, because the people of Zhangzhou suffered from famine, they opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：高昌、阴平国并遣使朝献。
现代文：高昌、阴平国派使者前来朝贡。
English: Gaochang and Yinping sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：五月丁卯朔，诏曰： 炎旱积辰，苗稼萎悴，比虽微澍，犹未沾洽。晚种不纳，企望忧劳，在予之责，思自兢厉。
现代文：五月初一，帝下诏说： 烈日炎炎，积日连月，苗田枯焦，最近虽有缓解，但仍是杯水车薪，无法晚种，令人焦心，这都是朕的过错，想来痛心疾首。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Taizong said, "The scorching sun and scorching heat, the accumulation of days and months, and the scorched rice paddies of Miaotian, although recently alleviated, are still a drop in the bucket. It is impossible to plant late, which is worrisome. This is all my fault, and I want to come to my senses.

古文：尚书可厘恤狱犴，察其淹枉，简量轻重，随事以闻，无使一人怨嗟，增伤和气。
现代文：尚书可斟酌狱案，察其冤枉，权衡轻重，随时报到朕处，不要使一个人哀叹嗟怨，损伤和气。
English: Shangshu can weigh the prison case, check its injustice, weigh the weight, report to us at any time, do not make a person lament grievances, injuries and qi.

古文：土木作役，权皆休罢，劝农省务，肆力田畴。
现代文：土木建筑，暂且作罢，让老百姓努力农务，努力耕种。
English: Civil engineering and construction should be suspended for the time being, so that the people can work hard on agriculture and farming.

古文：庶嘉泽近降，丰年可必。 
现代文：希望近降甘霖，以保丰年。 
English: It is hoped that the rain will fall soon, so as to ensure a prosperous year.

古文：萧衍衡州刺史张齐寇益州，复以傅竖眼为刺史以讨之，频破贼军，斩其将任太洪首。
现代文：萧衍衡州刺史张齐进犯益州，朝廷以傅竖眼为益州刺史率军讨伐，屡次击败敌军，斩杀敌将任太洪。
English: Xiao Yan, the governor of Hengzhou, and Zhang Qi, the governor of Yizhou, invaded Yizhou, and the imperial court led the crusade led by the governor of Yizhou, Fu Qianyan, repeatedly defeated the enemy army and killed the enemy general Ren Taihong.

古文：庚午，诏放华林野兽于山泽。
现代文：初四，帝下诏把华林园中的野兽都放归山野。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor decreed that all the beasts in the Hualin Garden be released into the wild.

古文：丙戌，吐谷浑遣使朝献。
现代文：二十日，吐谷浑派使者前来朝拜。
English: On the 20th, Tukuhun sent an emissary to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：秋七月庚午，重申杀牛之禁。
现代文：秋七月初六，朝廷重申杀牛的禁令。
English: Autumn On the 6th day of the 7th month, the Imperial Court reaffirmed the ban on killing cows.

古文：丙子，诏兵士征硖石者复租赋一年。
现代文：十二日，下诏在硖石征战过的士兵免除一年租赋。
English: On the 12th, it was decreed that soldiers who had fought in the Battle of Flint would be exempted from paying rent for one year.

古文：傅竖眼大破张齐，齐遁走。
现代文：傅竖眼大破张齐，张齐逃走。
English: Mr. Fu broke Zhang Qi's eye, and Zhang Qi ran away.

古文：乙酉，高昌国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十二日，高昌国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 22nd, Gaochang sent an envoy to present it to the emperor.

古文：八月乙巳，以侍中、中书监、仪同三司、安定郡开国公胡国珍为都督雍泾岐华东秦豳六州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史。
现代文：八月十一日，命侍中、中书监、仪同三司、安定郡开国公胡国珍为都督雍泾岐华东秦豳六州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史。
English: On August 11th, Hu Guozhen, the designated attendant of the middle, the book supervisor of the middle, the three divisions of the ceremony, and the founding father of the stable county, was the military governor of the six states of the East Qin Dynasty, the general of the cavalry, the three divisions of the ceremony and the history of Yongzhou.

古文：丙午，诏曰： 先贤列圣，道冠生民，仁风盛德，焕乎图史。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 先贤列圣，道冠生民，仁风盛德，灿著图籍。
English: On the twelfth day, the following edict was issued: The sages were canonized, the people of Tao were crowned, benevolence and virtue prevailed, and the books were brilliant.

古文：暨历数永终，迹随物变，陵遂沓蔼，鞠为茂草，古帝诸陵，多见践藉。
现代文：如今既已，仙归而去，迹随物变，他们的陵墓，杂沓矮小，长满杂草，古代帝王的陵墓，多被践踏。
English: Now that the immortals have gone, their traces have changed with the passage of time. Their tombs are small and overgrown with weeds. The tombs of ancient emperors are often trampled.

古文：可明敕所在，诸有帝王坟陵，四面各五十步勿听耕稼。 
现代文：可明示这些地方，有帝王陵陵的，四面各五十步以内不要耕种。 
English: It can be made clear that these places, where there are imperial tombs, should not be cultivated within fifty paces on each side.

古文：宕昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：宕昌国派使者朝贡。
English: The Tang and Chang dynasties sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：九月丁丑，淮堰破，萧衍缘淮城戍村落十余万口，皆漂入于海。
现代文：九月十四日，淮河堰堤溃决，萧衍沿淮城池村落戍边兵民十万多人，全都漂入大海。
English: On September 14th, the dam of the Huaihe River broke, and more than 100,000 soldiers and civilians along the edge of Huai Chengchi Village were swept away, all of them drifted into the sea.

古文：十有二月癸巳，诏洛阳、河阴及诸曹杂人年七十巳上、鳏寡贫困不能自存，及年虽少而痼疾长废、穷苦不济者，研实具列以闻。
现代文：十二月十九日，肃宗下诏让洛阳、河阴及各部曹杂人七十以上、鳏寡贫困不能自养的，加上年少而因病残废、穷苦不济的，核查清楚以后一一上报。
English: On December 19th, Su Zong issued an edict that Luoyang, Heyin and all Cao Zong people over 70, widows and widowers who are poor and unable to support themselves, and young people who are disabled due to illness and poor, should be reported one by one after verification.

古文：二年春正月，大乘余贼复相聚结，攻瀛州。
现代文：二年春正月，大乘余贼又纠集到一起，攻打瀛州。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the remaining thieves of the Mahayana gathered together again to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：刺史宇文福讨平之。
现代文：刺史宇文福讨伐并平定了他们。
English: Shi Yuwenfu led a crusade and defeated them.

古文：甲戌，大赦天下。
现代文：十二日，大赦天下。
English: On the 27th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：戊子，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十六日，勿吉国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 26th, an envoy from the kingdom of Bekichi came to pay tribute.

古文：庚寅，诏遣大使巡行四方，问疾苦，恤孤寡，黜陟幽明。
现代文：二十八日，帝下诏派大使巡察四方，问民疾苦，体恤孤寡，黜幽升明。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Dahal sent an ambassador to inspect the four directions, to ask the people about their sufferings, to sympathize with the lonely and the widows, and to lead them to the path of enlightenment.

古文：又诏： 选曹用人，务在得才，广求栖遁，共康治道。
现代文：又下诏说： 选部用人，务在得才，必须广求野栖之人，共同治理国家。
English: The next edict also said: The selection of ministry employees must be based on talent, and it is necessary to seek out people who live in the wild to jointly govern the country.

古文：州镇城隍，各令严固。
现代文：州郡城防，各令加固。
English: County and prefectural city defenses have been strengthened.

古文：斋会聚集，纠执妖諠。
现代文：聚集的斋会，要惩治那些参与的妖人。
English: Gathered for a feast, those who participate are to be punished.

古文：囹圄皆令造屋，桎梏务存轻小。
现代文：监狱都要造屋，枷锁务必轻小。
English: Prisons must be built, and shackles must be light.

古文：工巧浮迸，不得隐藏。
现代文：能工巧匠，不得隐藏技能。
English: A skilled craftsman must not hide his skills.

古文：绢布缯彩，长短合式。
现代文：绢布彩缎，长短合式。
English: Cloth-dyed satin, the length is closed.

古文：偷窃军阶，亦悉沙汰。
现代文：假冒军功的，必须全部淘汰。
English: Those who fake their military exploits must all be eliminated.

古文：籍贯不实，普使纠案，听自归首，逋违加罪。 
现代文：籍贯不实的，普使纠查按察，听其投案，违抗加罪。 
English: If the person's origin is not true, the general envoy will investigate and investigate, listen to his case, and add a crime for defiance.

古文：诏中尉元匡考定权衡。
现代文：下诏让中尉元匡考定权衡这些事。
English: I hereby order Lieutenant Yuan Kuang to weigh up these matters.

古文：癸丑，地伏罗、罽宾国并遣使朝献。
现代文：癸丑日，伏地罗、宾国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the day of the Ugly Duckling, Voldemort and Bin Guo sent an emissary to present it to the emperor.

古文：二月庚子，契丹、邓至、宕昌诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二月初九，契丹、邓至、宕昌等国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Qidan, Deng Zi, Gaochang and other countries sent envoys to present gifts to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，封御史中尉元匡为东平王。
现代文：十三日，肃宗封御史中尉元匡为东平王。
English: On the 13th, Su Zongfu's lieutenant, Yuan Kuang, became the King of Dongping.

古文：三月甲戌，吐谷浑国遣使朝献。
现代文：三月初九，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, an envoy from the Kingdom of Tugu was sent to present an offering to the emperor.

古文：丁亥，太保、领司徒、广平王怀薨。
现代文：二十四，太保、领司徒、广平王元怀逝世。
English: On the 24th, the eunuch, leader, and Guangping Wang Yuanhuai passed away.

古文：夏四月甲午，高丽、波斯、疏勒、嚈哒诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：夏四月初四，高丽、波斯、疏勒、口厌哒等国派使者前来朝献。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5

古文：丁酉，诏京尹所统，百年以上赐大郡板，九十以上赐小郡板。
现代文：初八，下诏京城长官治下，百岁以上的赐大郡板，九十岁以上的赐小郡板。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, under the rule of the prefect of the capital, those who are over 100 years old are given a large county board, and those who are over 90 years old are given a small county board.

古文：戊申，以中书监、开府仪同三司胡国珍为司徒公，特进、汝南王悦为中书监、仪同三司。
现代文：十八日，任命中书监、开府仪同三司胡国珍为司徒公，特进、汝南王元悦为中书监、仪同三司。
English: On the 18th, Hu Guozhen, the chief librarian of the Middle School, and Wang Yuanyue, the director of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division

古文：乙卯，皇太后幸伊阙石窟寺，即日还宫。
现代文：二十五日，皇太后驾临伊阙石窟寺，当天回到宫中。
English: On the 25th, the Empress Dowager visited the Ili Grottoes Temple and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：安定王超改封北平王。
现代文：安定王元超改封为北平王。
English: Wang Yuanchao of Anding changed his title to King of Peiping.

古文：五月辛酉，诏曰： 扬州硖石、荆山、新淮、酂城兵士战没者，追给敛财，复一房五年；若无妻子，复其家一人二年。
现代文：五月初二，皇帝下诏说： 扬州硖石、荆山、新淮、駉城战死的士兵，追赠财物，免除其家中一房亲属五年的赋税劳役；若无妻子儿女，则免除其家族中一人二年的赋税劳役。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the emperor issued an edict saying: The soldiers who died in the war in Yangzhou, Shanshi, Jingshan, Xinhuai and Lucheng should be given property as a posthumous gift, and one family member should be exempted from five years of tax and labor service; if there is no wife or child, one member of the family should be exempted from two years of tax and labor service.

古文：身被三创，赏一阶；虽一创而四体废落者，亦同此赏。 
现代文：身遭三处创伤的，赏升一阶；虽一处伤而四肢残废的，亦同此赏。 
English: Those who have suffered three traumas will be awarded one rank higher; those who have suffered one injury and are disabled in all four limbs will also receive the same award.

古文：庚辰，重申天文之禁，犯者以大辟论。
现代文：二十一日，皇宫重申天文禁例，违反的以极刑论处。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Imperial Palace reiterated the astronomical prohibitions, and violators were punished with capital punishment.

古文：乙酉，邓至国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十六日，邓至国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 26th, Deng Zhi Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：秋七月乙丑，地伏罗、罽宾国并遣使朝献。
现代文：秋七月初六，地伏罗、宾国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emissaries from Diburo and Bingoku came to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，中书监、仪同三司、汝南王悦坐杀人免官，以王还第。
现代文：十七日，中书监、仪同三司、汝南王元悦因杀人被免去官职，以王爵归第。
English: On the 17th, the Central Library's librarian, the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the King of Yunnan, Yuan Yue, were removed from their official posts for murder and demoted to peerage.

古文：己巳，车驾有事于太庙。
现代文：八月初三，肃宗在太庙祭祖。
English: On the third day of the eighth lunar month, Su Zong held the ancestor's festival in the Great Temple.

古文：八月戊戌，宴太祖以来宗室年十五以上于显阳殿，申家人之礼。
现代文：八月初十，在显阳殿宴请魏太祖以来宗室中年龄在十五岁以上的子弟，叙家人之礼。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, at the Hsien Yang Palace, a banquet was held to invite the sons and daughters over the age of 15 who had been in the family since the time of Emperor Wei.

古文：己亥，诏庶族子弟年未十五不听入仕。
现代文：十一日，下诏说庶族子弟年龄未到十五岁的不准入仕做官。
English: On the 11th day of the month, an imperial edict was issued stating that the children of commoners under the age of fifteen were not allowed to enter the civil service.

古文：诏曰： 皇魏开基，道迈周汉，蝉连二都，德盛百祀。虽帝胤蕃衍，亲贤并茂，而犹沉屈素履，巾褐衡门，非所谓广命戚族，翼屏王室者也。
现代文：帝下诏曰： 皇魏开创帝基，道义超过周、汉，蝉连二都，德盛百年，虽然已是帝绪繁衍兴旺，亲贤并茂，却仍然有人默默无闻，素履褐巾，这不是广命戚族、翼屏王室所应该出现的。
English: The imperial edict said: Emperor Wei founded the imperial foundation, morality surpassed that of Zhou and Han dynasties, the cicadas connected the two capitals, and virtue prevailed for a hundred years. Although the imperial family has flourished and prospered, and relatives and sages have grown up side by side, there are still people who are obscure and wear a brown scarf. This is not what a long-lived relative, a winged-screen royal family, should appear.

古文：今可依世近远，叙之列位。 
现代文：今天可依世系远近，加以任用。 
English: Today, appointments can be made on the basis of lineage.

古文：庚子，诏咸阳、京兆二王子女还附属籍。
现代文：十二日，帝诏命咸阳、京兆二王子女还京附归属籍。
English: On the 12th, the emperor ordered the children of Xianyang and Jingzhao II princes to return to Beijing.

古文：壬寅，吐谷浑国遣使朝献。
现代文：十四日，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 14th, an envoy from the Kingdom of Tugu was sent to pay tribute.

古文：丁未，诏侍中、太师、高阳王雍入居门下，参决尚书奏事。
现代文：十九日，肃宗下诏命侍中、太师、高阳王元雍入居门下省，参预决断尚书奏事。
English: On the 19th, Su Zong issued an edict ordering Wang Yuan Yong, the Vice Admiral, Grand Master, and Gaoyang to enter the province and participate in the pre-decision of the case.

古文：己酉，契丹国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十一日，契丹国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 21st, the Khitan Empire sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月辛酉，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：九月初三，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, an envoy from Tugu Hun sent to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 察讼理冤，实维政首；躬亲听览，民信所由。
现代文：初八，皇帝下诏说： 检察诉讼，处理冤狱，实在是为政之首，亲自审理案件，是取信于民的根本所在。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an imperial edict, saying, "Prosecutorial proceedings and the handling of unjust imprisonment are really the top priority for the government, and personally trying cases is the fundamental basis for gaining the trust of the people."

古文：比日谅暗之中，治纲未振，狱犴繁广，嗟诉骤闻，虽曰司存，每多诬壅。
现代文：近日以来，牢狱之中，治纲未振，狱讼奸邪繁杂，嗟怨苦诉骤然纷起，虽然衙司仍存，实际上则常常诬妄陈积。
English: In recent days, the prison has been plagued by unsettled policies, complicated prison procedures, and a sudden surge in complaints. Although the sham division still exists, in reality, it is often full of lies.

古文：曾是寡德，实深矜慨。
现代文：朕虽然寡德，但深深为此担忧。
English: Although I am a widow, I am deeply worried about this.

古文：自今月望，当暂出城闉，亲纳滞枉。
现代文：从本月十五日始，朕亲出宫城，亲自处理沉积的冤案。
English: From the fifteenth day of this month, I personally went to Miyagi to personally deal with the accumulated grievances.

古文：主者可宣诸近远，咸使闻知。 
现代文：主管此事的官员可广泛通知远近之人，让他们都知道这件事。 
English: The official in charge of the matter can widely inform people near and far and let them all know about it.

古文：是月，城青、齐、兗、泾、平、营、肆七州所治东阳、历城、瑕丘、平凉、肥如、和龙、九原七城。
现代文：这个月，在青、齐、兖、泾、平、营、肆七州修筑东阳、历城、瑕丘、平凉、肥如、和龙、九原七城。
English: This month, the seven cities of Dongyang, Licheng, Keqiu, Pingliang, Hiryu, Hulong and Jiuyuan were built in the seven provinces of Qing, Qi, Yunnan, Shandong, Ping, Ying and Zhuang.

古文：冬十月庚寅，以幽、冀、沧、瀛四州大饥，遣尚书长孙稚，兼尚书邓羡、元纂等巡抚百姓，开仓赈恤。
现代文：冬十月初二，因幽、冀、沧、瀛四州发生大饥荒，皇帝派尚书长孙稚，兼尚书邓羡、元纂等巡抚安慰百姓，开仓济民。
English: On the second day of October in winter, due to the great famine in the four provinces of Yu, Hebei, Cangzhou and Handan, the emperor sent governors such as Shangshu Changsundzhu, and also Shangshu Deng Xian and Yuan Zuo to comfort the people and open warehouses to help the people.

古文：丁酉，勿吉国贡楛矢。
现代文：初九，勿吉国贡奉眓矢。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month, the tribute from Beji Province came.

古文：戊戌，以光州饥弊，遣使赈恤。
现代文：初十，因光州饥荒凋弊，派使者救济。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, due to the famine in Gwangju, an envoy was sent to provide relief.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 北京根旧，帝业所基，南迁二纪，犹有留住。
现代文：二十七日，帝下诏曰： 北方京都是皇业根本，帝业基础，南迁已经两代，那里仍有皇族居住。
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an edict saying: "The northern capital is the foundation of imperial business, the foundation of imperial business. It has been two generations since the imperial family moved to the south, and the imperial family is still living there."

古文：怀本乐故，未能自遣，若未迁者，悉可听其仍停，安堵永业。
现代文：朕乐故怀本，不能自拔，如旧都中有仍未迁居的，全都听任他们停住那里，安居乐业。
English: I can't help myself. If there are people in the old capital who still haven't moved, I'll let them all stay there and live and work in peace.

古文：门才术艺、应于时求者，自别征引，不在斯例。
现代文：但如有精通才艺，应于时求的人，自当为国征选，不在其列。
English: However, if there are people who are proficient in the arts and who should be sought out at the right time, they should be selected for the country, not among them.

古文：周之子孙，汉之刘族，遍于海内，咸致蕃衍，岂拘南北千里而已哉。 
现代文：周代王室子孙，汉代刘氏家族，遍布海内，都大规模繁衍，哪里还拘泥于东南西北，相距千里之遥呢？ 
English: The descendants of the Zhou dynasty royal family, the Liu family of the Han dynasty, are all over the sea, all large-scale reproduction, where are they still stuck in the southeast and northwest, thousands of miles away?

古文：十有一月甲子，萧衍平西将军、巴州刺史牟汉宠遣使请降。
现代文：十一月初七，萧衍政权的平西将军、巴州刺史牟汉宠派使者前来请求投降。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, General Pingxi of the Xiao Yan regime sent an envoy to request surrender.

古文：十有二月丁未，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月二十日，蠕蠕国派使者前来纳贡。
English: On the 20th of December, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：神龟元年春正月甲子，诏以氐酋杨定为阴平王。
现代文：神龟元年春正月初八，下诏任命氐族酋长杨定为阴平王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Year of the Turtle, the following edict appointed Yang, the chief of the Yi people, as the king of Yinping.

古文：丙寅，以特进、江阳王继为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：十一日，以特进、江阳王元继为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the 11th day, with Tejin and Jiangyang Wangyuan as the grand marshal and the three officers of the ceremony.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 朕冲昧抚运，政道未康，民之疾苦，弗遑纪恤。夙宵矜慨，鉴寐深怀，眷彼百龄，悼兹六极。
现代文：十七日，肃宗下诏说： 朕年少即位，政道未康，百姓的疾苦，没来得及抚恤，为此朕日夜矜念感慨，深挂于心，眷顾百龄之人，悼怀治域六极。
English: On the 17th, Su Zong issued an imperial edict saying: I ascended the throne at a young age, the political road is not healthy, the people are suffering, and I have not had time to raise the pension. For this reason, I think about it day and night, and I am deeply concerned about it. I will take care of people of all ages, and mourn and cherish the six polar regions.

古文：京畿百年以上给大郡板，九十以上给小郡板，八十以上给大县板，七十以上给小县板；诸州百姓，百岁以上给小郡板，九十以上给小县板，八十以上给中县板；鳏寡孤独不能自存者，赐粟五斛、帛二匹。 
现代文：京郊百岁以上的人赐给大郡板，九十岁以上的赐给小郡板，八十岁以上的赐给中县板，七十岁以上赐给小县板；各州百姓，百岁以上的赐给小郡板，九十岁以上赐给上县板，八十岁以上的给中县板；鳏寡孤独不能自存自养的，赐给粟五斛、帛二匹。 
English: People over the age of 100 in the suburbs of Beijing will be given a large county board, over the age of 90 will be given a small county board, over the age of 80 will be given a middle county board, and over the age of 70 will be given a small county board; people in all states, over the age of 100 will be given a small county board, over the age of 90 will be given a high county board, and over the age of 80 will be given a middle county board; widows and widowers who are lonely and cannot support themselves will be given five millets and two donkeys.

古文：庚辰，诏以杂役之户或冒入清流，所在职人皆五人相保，无人任保者夺官还役。
现代文：二十日，下诏说供官府杂役的户民冒入官员队伍的，担任现职的人必须有五个人担保，无人担保的便夺官还役。
English: On the 20th, the next edict said that for the household servants of the government office to join the ranks of officials, the person holding the current position must have five guarantors, and if there is no guarantor, the official will be taken back into service.

古文：乙酉，加特进、汝南王悦仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，加授特进、汝南王元悦为仪同三司。
English: On the 29th, Wang Yuan Rong and Wang Yuan Rong were promoted to the Third Division.

古文：秦州羌反。
现代文：秦州羌民造反。
English: The people of Qinzhou rebelled.

古文：幽州大饥，民死者三千七百九十九人，诏刺史赵邕开仓赈恤。
现代文：幽州发生大饥荒，老百姓饿死者有三千七百九十九人，肃宗下诏让刺史赵邕开仓济民。
English: A great famine occurred in Yuzhou, in which 3,799 people died of starvation. Emperor Sui issued an edict to have the priest Zhao Jun open storehouses to help the people.

古文：二月戊申，嚈哒、高丽、勿吉、吐谷浑、宕昌、疏勒、久未陀、末久半诸国，并遣使朝献。
现代文：二月二十二日，口厌哒、高丽、勿吉、吐谷浑、宕昌、疏勒、久末、末久半等国，都派使者前来朝贡。
English: On February 22nd, envoys were sent to pay tribute from as far away as Goryeo, Goryeo, Baekje, Togokgun, Goseong, Sule, Kyushu, and the last half of Kyushu.

古文：己酉，诏以神龟表瑞，大赦改年。
现代文：二十三日，帝下诏因神龟表瑞，大赦天下，更改年号。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Yao pardoned the world and changed the year because of the divine tortoise.

古文：东益州氐反。
现代文：东益州氐族造反。
English: The Yi people in East Iksu rebelled.

古文：蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：蠕蠕国派使者前来朝贡。
English: The kingdom of Democritus sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月辛酉，以尚书右仆射于忠为仪同三司。
现代文：三月初五，任命尚书右仆射于忠为仪同三司。
English: On the fifth day of March, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Yu Zhong, was appointed to the Third Division.

古文：辛巳，仪同三司、尚书右仆射于忠薨。
现代文：二十五日，仪同三司、尚书右仆射于忠逝世。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Yi Tong, the third secretary, and Shang Shu's right-hand man, Yuzhong, passed away.

古文：南秦州氐反，遣龙骧将军崔袭持节喻之。
现代文：南秦州氐族反叛，朝廷派龙骧将军崔袭持节抚慰他们。
English: The Southern Qin State's Yi people rebelled, and the imperial court sent General Longyu Cui to pacify them.

古文：吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: The Kingdom of Tugu Hun sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月丁酉，司徒胡国珍薨。
现代文：夏四月十一日，司徒胡国珍逝世。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Stut Hu Guozhen passed away.

古文：甲辰，江阳王继改封京兆王。
现代文：十八日江阳王元继改封为京兆王。
English: On the 18th, Jiangyang Wangyuan was successively renamed as Beijing Zhao Wang.

古文：辛亥，舍摩国遣使朝献。
现代文：二十五日，舍摩国派使者朝献。
English: On the 25th, Shema sent an envoy to present the offering to the emperor.

古文：五月，高丽、高车、高昌诸国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：五月，高丽、高车、高昌等国都派使者来朝贡。
English: In May, Goryeo, Gocheok, Gochang and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：自正月不雨至于六月辛卯，澍雨乃降。
现代文：从正月开始一直到六月初七，干旱才随着喜雨降临而消解。
English: From the first month of the year until the seventh day of the sixth month of the year, the drought only ended with the arrival of rain.

古文：秋七月，河州民却铁匆聚众反，自称水池王。
现代文：秋七月，河州百姓却铁匆聚众造反，自称水池王。
English: In autumn and July, however, the people of Hezhou hastily rallied and rebelled, calling themselves the Pool King.

古文：诏行台源子恭讨之。
现代文：诏命行台源子恭前去讨伐。
English: The imperial edict ordered the emperor to march to the capital, Minamoto no Tsukiyasu, to fight.

古文：闰月戊戌，吐谷浑国遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰月十五日，吐谷浑国派使者朝贡。
English: On the fifteenth day of the leap month, the envoys of Tugu and Hun were sent to pay tribute.

古文：甲辰，开恆州银山之禁，与民共之。
现代文：二十一日，开放恒州银山之禁，与老百姓共享。
English: On the twenty-first day, the opening of the Hengzhou Silver Mountain was shared with the people.

古文：丁未，波斯、疏勒、乌苌、龟兹诸国并遣使朝献。
现代文：二十四日，波斯、疏勒、乌苌、龟兹等国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 24th, emissaries from Persia, Sule, Ur, Kuez and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：八月癸丑朔，诏曰： 朕冲昧纂历，未闲政道，皇太后殷忧在疚，始览万几。
现代文：八月初一，帝下诏曰： 朕年少登基，未谙政道，皇太后重孝在身，便开始料理万机。
English: On the first day of August, the emperor decreed: "I am too young to ascend to the throne, I have not yet entered politics, but with the Empress Dowager Shigetaka in my body, I will begin to prepare everything.

古文：故狱犴淹枉，百姓冤弊，言念繁刑，思存降省。京师见囚，殊死以下可悉减一等。 
现代文：所以狱案沉埋，百姓冤弊，朕念刑律繁杂，想从轻从简发落，京城中被囚禁的，除了死刑以外的都可减刑一等。 
English: Therefore, the prison case is buried, the people are wronged, the criminal law is complicated, and I want to make it lighter and simpler. Those who are imprisoned in Beijing can reduce their sentence to the first class in addition to the death penalty.

古文：丁巳，诏曰： 顷年以来，戎车频动，服制未终，夺哀从役。
现代文：初五，肃宗下诏说： 近年以来，战事频繁，甚至丧期未满的，都被夺哀从役。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Su Zong issued an edict saying: In recent years, wars have been frequent, and even those who have not yet passed away have been mourned and served.

古文：罔极之痛弗申，鞠育之恩靡报，非所谓敦崇至道者也。
现代文：这样一来，无限的哀痛无法表达，抚养之恩无法回报，这不是所谓的崇扬孝敬之道的做法。
English: In this way, the infinite sorrow cannot be expressed, and the kindness of raising cannot be repaid. This is not the so-called practice of revering the way of filial piety.

古文：自今虽金革之事，皆不得请起居丧。 
现代文：从今以后，即使是金革战事兴起，也不能征召那些正处丧期的人。 
English: From now on, even if there is a gold revolution, those who are in the period of mourning cannot be conscripted.

古文：甲子，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十七日，勿吉国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 17th, an envoy from the Kingdom of Besshi came to pay tribute.

古文：铁匆相率降于行台源子恭。
现代文：铁匆人马相继投降到源子恭麾下。
English: The iron men and horses surrendered one after another under the command of Minamoto no Kuniyoshi.

古文：九月癸未朔，以右光禄大夫刘腾为卫将军、仪同三司。
现代文：九月初一，任右光禄大夫刘腾为卫将军、仪同三司。
English: On the first day of September, Liu Teng, the doctor of Uguanglu, was appointed as the general of Wei and the third secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：戊申，皇太后高氏崩于瑶光寺。
现代文：二十六日，皇太后高氏在瑶光寺逝世。
English: On the 26th, the Empress Dowager Gao passed away at Rongguang Temple.

古文：冬十月丁卯，以尼礼葬于北邙。
现代文：冬十月十五日以尼姑逝世的礼节葬在北邙。
English: On the 15th day of winter, October, she was buried in Beilun with the proper etiquette of a nun.

古文：十有二月辛未，诏曰： 民生有终，下归兆域。京邑隐赈，口盈亿万，贵贱攸凭，未有定所。为民父母，尤宜存恤。
现代文：十二月二十日，帝下诏说： 生民有归，下归神州，京邑隐赈，丁口亿万，贵贱无凭，没有固定所属，作为百姓父母，尤宜存养抚恤。
English: On December 20th, the imperial edict said: "The living people have the right of return, and the descendants have the right of return to the Divine State, the capital city is secluded, the dingkou is hundreds of millions, the high and low are without proof, and there is no fixed affiliation. As the parents of the people, it is especially appropriate to save and maintain the pension.

古文：今制乾脯山以西，拟为九原。 
现代文：今划乾脯山以西，拟为九原。 
English: Now draw the line west of Qianlushan, which is intended to be nine plains.

古文：二年春正月丁亥，诏曰： 朕以冲眇，纂承宝位，夙夜惟寅，若涉渊海。
现代文：二年正月初七，肃宗下诏说： 朕年幼愚昧，继承宝位，日夜忧心，如涉渊海。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the second year, Su Zong issued an edict saying: I am young and foolish, I will inherit the throne, I am worried day and night, as if I were in the deep sea.

古文：赖皇太后慈仁，被以夙训。
现代文：幸赖皇太后慈爱仁心，诲教不断。
English: Fortunately, the Empress Dowager's compassionate and benevolent heart prevailed, and she continued to teach.

古文：自临朝践极，岁将半纪，天平地成，四海宁乂。
现代文：自临朝登极，将近六年，天平地成，四海宁安。
English: Since Lin Chao ascended to the throne, nearly six years have passed, the balance has been established, and the four seas have been at peace.

古文：天道高远，巍巍难名，犹以捴挹自居，称号弗备，非所以崇奉坤元，允协亿兆者也。
现代文：天道高远，巍巍光明，但却至今抑郁自处，没有称号，这不是崇奉坤元地道、允赞协理亿兆黎民所应有的。
English: The heavenly way is lofty and far-reaching, shining brightly, but so far it has been depressed and has no title. This is not what it should be for the people to worship Kunyuan's original way and praise him.

古文：宜遵旧典，称诏宇内，以副黎蒸元元之望。 
现代文：应按照过去旧典，诏告宇内，以符合亿万百姓的愿望。 
English: It should be announced to the world in accordance with the past classics, so as to meet the wishes of hundreds of millions of people.

古文：是月，改葬文昭皇太后高氏。
现代文：这个月，改葬文昭皇太后高氏。
English: This month, the funeral of Empress Dowager Gao of the Republic of China was rescheduled.

古文：二月乙丑，齐郡王祐薨。
现代文：二月十五日，齐郡王元去世。
English: On February 15, Wang Yuan of Qi County passed away.

古文：庚午，羽林千余人焚征西将军张彝第，殴伤彝，烧杀其子始均。
现代文：二十日，羽林军一千多人烧死征西将军张彝的弟弟，打伤张彝，烧死他的儿子始均。
English: On the 20th, more than a thousand people of the Ulin Army burned to death the younger brother of the Western Expeditionary General Zhang Jun, wounded Zhang Jun, and burned to death his son Shi Jun.

古文：吐谷浑、宕昌国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑、宕昌国派使者前来朝贡。
English: Envoys from the provinces of Tugu, Hun, and Tagacho came to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，大赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，大赦天下。
English: Eihei, amnesty to the world.

古文：丁丑，诏求直言，诸有上书者听密封通奏。
现代文：二十七日，帝下诏征求直言，凡有上书的听其密封直奏皇上。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to solicit candid opinions, and anyone who submitted a letter was to be sealed and delivered to the Emperor.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 农要之月，时泽弗应，嘉谷未纳，二麦枯悴。
现代文：三月初三，帝下诏说： 农耕月份，甘雨未下，谷粟未收，三麦枯焦。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the emperor said: "In the farming month, the sweet rain has not fallen, the millet has not been harvested, and the barley has withered.

古文：德之无感，叹惧兼怀。
现代文：朕德行未感于天，叹惋惧恐并生于怀。
English: Virtue is not found in the heavens, it is born in the heart.

古文：可敕内外，依旧雩祈，率从祀典。
现代文：可明示内外，在过去的祝祷地点，举行祭天仪式。
English: It can be specified inside and outside, in the past place of prayer, to hold a ceremony to worship the heavens.

古文：察狱理冤，掩胔埋骼。
现代文：官府察狱理冤，掩埋露骨。
English: The government investigates the prison's misdeeds and buries the bones.

古文：冀瀛之境，往经寇暴，死者既多，白骨横道，可遣专令收葬。
现代文：冀、瀛二州境内，以往屡经寇贼强暴，死者很多，白骨横道，可令专人负责收葬。
English: In the territory of the two prefectures of Hebei and Anhui, in the past, there have been many cases of violent robberies, and many people have died. Therefore, it is possible to make a special person responsible for the burial.

古文：赈穷恤寡，救疾存老，准访前式，务令周备。 
现代文：其他像赈穷恤寡。救病存老，依照以前方式，务必要周到详备。 
English: Others are like the poor and the widows. To help the sick and save the old, according to the previous way, it is necessary to be thoughtful and detailed.

古文：三月甲辰，澍雨大洽。
现代文：三月初五，喜雨大降。
English: On the fifth day of March, the rain fell heavily.

古文：夏四月乙丑，嚈哒国遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月十六日，口厌哒国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, the envoys of the Qing Dynasty sent tribute.

古文：五月戊戌，以司空、任城王澄为司徒，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、京兆王继为司空。
现代文：五月二十日，任命司空、任城王元澄为司徒，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、京兆王元继为司空。
English: On May 20, he appointed Siku and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng as his assistants, followed by Xing Jie Da Geng, Yi Tong San Si, and Keizhao Wang Yuan as Siku.

古文：秋八月己未，御史中尉、东平王匡坐事削除官爵。
现代文：秋八月十四日，御史中尉、东平王元匡因犯事被削除官爵。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of autumn, Lieutenant Mishi and Dongping Wangyuankuang were stripped of their official titles for their crimes.

古文：辛未，以左光禄大夫皇甫集为征西将军、仪同三司。
现代文：二十六日任命左光禄大夫皇甫集为征西将军、仪同三司。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Dr. Zuo Guanglu as the General of the Western Expedition and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：九月庚寅，皇太后幸崧高山；癸巳，还宫。
现代文：九月十四日，皇太后驾临崧高山；十七日，还归宫中。
English: On September 14th, the Empress Dowager drove to Linyi High Mountain; on the 17th, she returned to the palace.

古文：瀛州民刘宣明谋反，事觉伏诛。
现代文：瀛州百姓刘宣明谋反，事情败露后被杀。
English: Liu Xuanming, a citizen of Zhangzhou, plotted a rebellion and was killed after the plot was uncovered.

古文：冬十有一月乙酉，蠕蠕莫缘梁贺侯豆率男女七百人来降。
现代文：冬十一月初十，蠕蠕莫缘梁贺侯豆率领男女七百人前来归降。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of winter, seven hundred men and women led by Liang He Houzu came to surrender.

古文：十有二月癸丑，司徒、任城王澄薨。
现代文：十二月初八，司徒、任城王元澄逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, King Motosumi passed away.

古文：庚申，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the third day, there was a general amnesty.

古文：诏除淫祀，焚诸杂神。
现代文：皇帝下诏去除繁多淫杂的祭祀活动，焚烧众杂神像及神位。
English: The emperor issued an edict to get rid of the many and sordid sacrificial activities, and to burn all the statues and deities.

古文：是岁，高丽王云死，以世子安为其国王。
现代文：这一年，高丽王高云死，以其世子继承其王国。
English: In the same year, Goryeo King Gao Yun died, and his kingdom was succeeded by his heir.

古文：正光元年春正月乙酉，诏曰： 建国纬民，立教为本；尊师崇道，兹典自昔。
现代文：正光元年春季正月初十，皇帝下诏说： 建国治民，立教为本，尊师重道，此典自旧时沿袭下来。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the spring of the first month of the first year of Zhengguang, the emperor issued an edict saying: to build a country and govern the people, to establish religion as the basis, and to respect teachers. This edict has been handed down since ancient times.

古文：来岁仲阳，节和气润，释奠孔颜，乃其时也。
现代文：明年二月，节和气润，祭奠孔子、颜渊，正是时节。
English: In February next year, it will be the time of the Spring Festival, and the time to pay tribute to Confucius and Yan Yuan.

古文：有司可豫缮国学，图饰圣贤，置官简牲，择吉备礼。 
现代文：有关部门可预先修缮国学，图饰圣贤，设置官员，准备祭品，选择吉日实施此事。 
English: Relevant departments can pre-fix the study of Chinese classics, decorate the saints, set up officials, prepare offerings, and choose a good day to implement the matter.

古文：夏四月丙辰，诏尚书长孙稚巡抚北籓，观察风俗。
现代文：夏四月十三日，帝下诏让尚书长孙稚巡抚北境，观察风俗。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor issued an imperial edict to let Shangshu Changsunchu patrol the northern border and observe the customs.

古文：五月辛巳，诏曰： 朕以寡薄，运膺宝图，虽未明求衣，惕惧终日，而暗昧多阙，炎旱为灾，在予之愧，无忘寝食。
现代文：五月初九，肃宗下诏说： 朕德行寡薄，运获宝座，虽然是未明求衣，终日担心忧惧，但暗昧多缺，炎旱成灾，这都与我的责任分不开，以致我寝食尽忘。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Su Zong issued an imperial edict saying, "I am a man of poor virtue. Although I was given the throne, I did not know what to wear. I worried and worried all day long. However, I lacked a lot of things, and my life was full of hardships. All of this was inseparable from my responsibilities, so much so that I forgot to eat and sleep.

古文：今刑狱繁多，囹圄尚积，宜敷仁惠，以济斯民。
现代文：而今刑狱繁多，囹圄仍积，应广施仁惠，以济万民。
English: But now there are many prisons, and the debts are still piling up. We should extend benevolence and benefit to the people.

古文：八座可推鞠见囚，务申枉滥。 
现代文：有关官员可察纠囚徒，务必申直枉滥。 
English: Relevant officials may inspect the prisoners, and it is imperative to report any abuse.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 攘灾招应，修政为本，民乃神主，实宜率先。
现代文：二十一日，肃宗下诏说： 祛灾招运，以修明政治为本，百姓是神主，实应置之首位。
English: On the twenty-first day, Su Zong issued an edict saying: To relieve the calamity and promote the development of the country, we should base ourselves on rectifying politics. The people are the masters of the gods, and they should be placed first.

古文：刺史守令与朕共治天下，宜哀矜勿喜，视民如伤。
现代文：刺史郡守县令与朕一起共同治理天下，应该哀矜于怀，切勿自喜，视民怵惕如伤。
English: The prefectural governor of the prefectural government of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural governor of the prefectural

古文：况今炎旱历时，万姓雕弊，而不抚恤穷冤，理决庶狱。
现代文：何况今天炎旱历时，万民凋弊，而我们却不抚慰体恤穷困冤屈，按理决断众狱。
English: What's more, today's hot and dry weather has lasted for a long time, and all the people are withering away, but we do not comfort, sympathize with the poor and the wronged, and judge the jails according to reason.

古文：可严敕州郡，善加绥隐，务尽聪明，加之祗肃，必使事允人神，时政灵应。其赋役不便于民者，具以状闻，便当蠲罢。 
现代文：可严令州郡官员，妥善安抚百姓，务必尽心尽智，还要决事果断迅速，一定要使事情公允，人神共宁，那些个不便于百姓的赋役，都要报上来，以便减除。 
English: However, state and county officials should be strictly ordered to properly appease the people, they must do their best, they must decide things decisively and quickly, they must make things fair, people and gods should be harmonious, and those who are inconvenient to the people should be reported for reduction.

古文：秋七月丙子，侍中元叉、中侍刘腾奉帝幸前殿，矫皇太后诏曰： 魏有天下，奕叶重光。
现代文：秋七月初四，侍中元叉、中侍中刘腾奉迎肃宗到前殿，谎称皇太后旨意说： 魏有天下，吉星高照。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the middle attendant Yuan Zha and the middle attendant Liu Teng Bong Ying Su Zong went to the front hall and falsely claimed that the empress dowager had said: "Wei has the world, and the auspicious star shines high."

古文：高祖孝文皇帝，以英圣驭天，徙京定鼎。
现代文：高祖孝文皇帝，以英明神圣的驭天之才，迁徙都城定下江山。
English: Emperor Gaozhu Xiaowen, with the wisdom and divine ability to control the heavens, moved the capital to settle down the country.

古文：世宗宣武皇帝，以睿明承业，廓宁区夏，而鸿勋未半，早已登遐。
现代文：世宗宣武皇帝，以聪明睿智，承继帝业，拓展安定海内，但鸿勋未半，早早登仙。
English: Emperor Shizong Xuanwu, with his wisdom and sagacity, succeeded the imperial business and expanded the stability of the sea, but he was not half as great as he should have been and ascended to heaven early.

古文：乃令车书弗同，鲸寇尚炽。
现代文：这样车未同轨，书未同文，大贼势头尚旺。
English: In this way, the car is not on the same track, the book is not the same text, and the momentum of the big thief is still strong.

古文：幼主稚弱，夙纂宝历，曾是宗祏，莫克祗奉。朕所以敬顺群请，临朝总政。
现代文：幼主稚弱，早登皇基，无法担当起统治天下的重任，朕因此顺从群臣所请，临朝总揽朝政。
English: As I was too young and too weak to assume the important task of ruling the world when I ascended the throne, I obeyed the request of my vassals to take charge of the imperial government.

古文：帝年以长，久思退身，所以往岁殷勤，具陈情旨。百官内外，已照此怀。
现代文：帝年岁渐长，朕长久以来思谋退居，所以去年殷勤再三，陈述此意，百官群僚、内外众人都已明朕怀。
English: As the emperor's age is getting older, I have long been thinking about retiring, so last year I diligently and repeatedly stated this intention, and hundreds of officials and colleagues, both at home and abroad, have all understood my intention.

古文：而佥尔众意，苦见勤夺，僶俯从事，以迄于兹。
现代文：但大家的意思，却让朕再勤于政，于是朕便努力于政，直到现在。
English: But everyone wanted me to be more diligent in politics, so I worked hard in politics until now.

古文：自此春来，先疾屡发，药石摄疗，莫能善瘳。夏首及今，数加动剧，便不堪日厘万务，巨细兼省。
现代文：从今年春天以来，旧病又发，药石加治，未能见好，夏天以来，屡屡发作，所以不堪日理万机、巨细兼顾。
English: Since this spring, the old disease has flared up again, the stone has been added to cure it, and it has not been good. Since the summer, there have been repeated attacks, so it is unbearable to deal with everything, both big and small.

古文：帝齿周星纪，识学逾跻，日就月将，人君道茂，足以抚缉万邦，谐决百揆。
现代文：帝年岁已长，学识齐备，日复一日，人君的素质已经具备，足以抚治万邦，妥善和谐地治理各种事物。
English: The emperor is old and learned, and day by day he is becoming a man of sufficient quality to govern all nations, and to administer all things well and harmoniously.

古文：朕当率前志，敬逊别宫，远惟复子明辟之义，以自绥养。实望群公逮于黎庶，深鉴斯理。
现代文：朕当续起前志，退居别宫，远思复子理政、身自明避之义，以自安养，实在希望众臣为百姓着想，深鉴此理。
English: I should continue my previous aspiration, retire to another palace, think far and wide about the return of my sons to the government, and the meaning of self-evasion and self-reliance. I really hope that all ministers will think about the people and deeply study this principle.

古文：如此，则上下休嘉，天地清晏，魏道熙隆，人神庆悦，不其善欤？ 
现代文：如这样，那就会上下安顺，天地清晏，魏道宏大，人神庆悦，不是件很好的事吗？ 
English: If this is the case, then there will be peace and tranquility, the heavens and the earth will be clear, the Wei Road will be grand, and people and gods will be happy. Isn't this a good thing?

古文：乃幽皇太后于北宫，杀太傅、领太尉、清河王怿，总勒禁旅，决事殿中。
现代文：于是把皇太后幽禁在北宫，杀了太傅、领太尉、清河王元怿，总领禁卫部队，在殿中处理政务。
English: As a result, he confined the empress dowager to the North Palace, killed Taifu, the leading lieutenant, and Qinghe Wang Yuanjun, the leader of the guards, and dealt with government affairs in the palace.

古文：辛卯，帝加元服，大赦，改年，内外百官进位一等。
现代文：十九日，肃宗加皇帝礼服，大赦天下，改年号，内外百官晋升官位一级。
English: On the 19th, Su Zong added the emperor's ceremonial dress, pardoned the world, changed the year, and promoted hundreds of officials at home and abroad to the first level.

古文：八月甲寅，相州刺史、中山王熙举兵欲诛叉、腾，不果见杀。
现代文：八月十三日，相州刺史、中山王元熙起兵欲诛杀元叉、刘腾，未果被杀。
English: On August 13th, Wang Yuanxi, the Prince of Songzhou and Zhongshan, raised an army to kill Yuan Zha and Liu Teng, but he was killed.

古文：九月壬辰，蠕蠕主阿那环来奔。
现代文：九月十三日，蠕蠕国主阿那瑰前来投奔。
English: On September 13th, Anagui, the leader of the Cree nation, came to take refuge.

古文：戊戌，以太师、高阳王雍为丞相，加后部羽葆、鼓吹、班剑四十人。
现代文：二十七日，任命太师高阳王元雍为丞相，加授后部羽葆、鼓吹、班剑四十人。
English: On the 27th, Grand Master Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong was appointed as chancellor, and forty people were awarded the rear eagle, trumpet, and team sword.

古文：冬十月乙卯，以骠骑大将军、仪同三司、汝南王悦为太尉公。
现代文：冬十月十五日，以骠骑大将军、仪同三司、汝南王元悦为太尉公。
English: On the 15th day of winter in October, he was promoted to the rank of Tai-Lieutenant with the title of General of Cavalry, the title of Third Division of Cavalry, and the title of Yuan-Yue, King of Yunnan.

古文：十有一月己亥，诏曰： 蠕蠕世雄朔方，擅制漠裔，邻通上国，百有余载。
现代文：十一月二十九日，肃宗下诏说： 蠕蠕世代雄居北方，在大漠中自成一统与华夏上国邻近相通，已经一百多年。
English: On November 29th, Su Zong issued an edict saying: "For more than a hundred years, the Demu-Demu generation has been living in the north, and has been united in the desert, and has been in close contact with China and Shangguo.

古文：自神鼎南底，累纪于兹，虔贡虽违，边燧静息，凭心象魏，潜款弥纯。
现代文：自神鼎南底，世代相传，以至今天，虔诚的贡献虽时有违背，但边境平安，他们全心向魏，款款忠纯。
English: Since the Southern Wei Dynasty, the pious contribution has been passed down from generation to generation, and even today, although there are violations at times, the border is safe. They are wholeheartedly loyal to Wei and pure.

古文：今其主阿那瑰属离时难，邦分亲析，万里远驰，庇命有道。
现代文：现在其主阿那瑰遭逢劫难，国家分裂，亲众离析，他万里远驰，投奔我朝。
English: Now his master, Anagui, has suffered a disaster, the country is divided, relatives and people are separated, and he has traveled thousands of miles to our country.

古文：悲同申、伍，忠孝足矜。
现代文：悲同申、伍，忠孝足嘉。
English: Woe to Shin and Wu, and loyalty and filial piety.

古文：方存兴灭之师，以隆继绝之举，宜且优以宾礼，期之立功，疏爵胙土，大启河岳，可封朔方郡开国公、蠕蠕王，食邑一千户。赐以衣冕，加以轺车，禄恤仪卫，同乎戚蕃。 
现代文：我朝应为其兴复国之师，以嘉其继绝之举，应以宾礼待他，期望其立功，恢复其地，大启河岳，可封他为朔方郡开国公、蠕蠕主，食邑一千户，赐给衣帽，加以礼车，赏给仪仗、护卫，例同亲蕃。 
English: Our imperial court should treat him as a teacher of the restoration of the country, commend him for his act of succession, treat him as a guest, expect him to make great contributions, restore his land, and make great achievements. He can be awarded the title of the founder of Shuofang County, the lord of the worms, the food of a thousand households, be given a cap, a ceremonial car, and be awarded a ceremonial battle and escort, such as a relative.

古文：十有二月壬子，诏曰： 蠕蠕王阿那瑰，遭离寇祸，远来投庇，邦分众析，犹无定主，而永怀北风，思还绥集。
现代文：十二月十三日，肃宗下诏说： 蠕蠕主阿那瑰，遭逢寇乱，远来投庇，其邦分崩离析，犹无定主，而他深怀归愿、忧心切痛。
English: On December 13th, Su Zong issued the following edict: "Lord Anagui, having suffered from the turmoil, has come from afar to take refuge. His country is falling apart, and there is still no settled master, and he has a deep desire to return, and he is worried and pained.

古文：启诉情切，良用愍然。
现代文：启诉情切，其情哀哀。
English: The opening of the lawsuit is emotional, and its feelings are sad.

古文：夫存亡恤败，自古通典。
现代文：扶持复兴灭亡的政权，体恤败者，自古以来即为通典。
English: Supporting the revival of the fallen regime, sympathizing with the losers, has been a classic since ancient times.

古文：可差国使及彼前后三介，与阿那瑰相随；并敕怀朔都督，简锐骑二千，躬自率护，送达境首，令观机招纳。
现代文：可派国使前后三人，与阿那瑰一道；并明令怀朔都督，领精锐骑兵二千人，亲自率领，把阿那瑰送至其领土边境，令其见机行事。
English: He could send three envoys to accompany Anagi, and order the governor of Waisaku to personally lead 2,000 elite cavalrymen to escort Anagi to the border of his territory, so that he could take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：若彼候迎，宜锡筐篚车马之属，务使优隆，礼饯而返；如不容受，任听还阙。
现代文：如蠕蠕迎候，应赐车马物品之类，务必要礼遇优厚隆重，礼饯而返；如不接受，听任其还归宫阙。
English: If he is welcomed, he should be given chariots, horses, and other items. He should be treated with great courtesy and returned with a bow. If he is not accepted, he should be allowed to return to the palace.

古文：其行装资遣，付尚书量给。 
现代文：阿那瑰的行装资给，交给尚书办理。 
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture has been instructed to pay the shipment cost of this operation according to the amount of the cost.

古文：辛酉，以司空、京兆王继为司徒公。
现代文：二十二日，任命司空、京兆王元继为司徒公。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Siku and Jingzhao Wangyuan to succeed him as Stukong.

古文：甲午，右卫将军奚康生于禁内将杀元叉，不果，为叉矫害。
现代文：正光二年，南秦州氐族造反。二月十二日，假光禄大夫邴虬以抚军将军率部讨伐。二十五日，肃宗车驾驾临国子学，讲《孝经》。
English: In the second year of Zhengguang, the Yi people in South Qin State rebelled. On February 12, the fake Guanglu doctor Zou Yifu led the army to fight. On the 25th, Su Zongche drove to Guozixu to speak about the "Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：以仪同三司刘腾为司空公。
现代文：三月初二，肃宗幸临国子学祭祀孔子，以颜渊配祭。
English: On the 2nd day of the 3rd month, Su Zongxing attended the Confucius Memorial Service, with Yan Yuan as the officiant.

古文：夏四月庚子，司徒、京兆王继进位太保。
现代文：二十四日，右卫将军奚康生在禁宫内准备杀元叉，不果，被元叉矫诏害死。夏四月初三，司徒京兆王元继进位太保。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the right guard general Zou Yansheng prepared to kill Yuan Zha in the Forbidden City, but was unsuccessful, and was killed by Yuan Zhaozhao. On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Szeto Jingzhao Wangyuan succeeded to the position of Taibo.

古文：壬寅，车骑大将军、仪同三司崔光为司徒公。
现代文：初五，车骑大将军、仪同三司崔光任司徒公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the general of chariot and cavalry and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, Cui Guangren, became the tutor.

古文：萧衍义州刺史文僧明率众内属。
现代文：萧衍义州刺史文僧明率领部下归附朝廷。
English: Xiao Yan Yizhou stabbed Shi Wen So Ming and led his subordinates to join the imperial court.

古文：五月辛巳，南荆州刺史桓叔兴自安昌南叛。
现代文：五月十四日，南荆州刺史桓叔兴自安昌南叛。
English: On May 14th, South Jingzhou assassinated Shixuan Xing, a traitor from Anchang.

古文：乙酉，乌苌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十八日，乌苌国派使者来朝。
English: On the 18th, the State of Wuyi sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：闰月丁巳，居密、波斯国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰月初九，居密、波斯国都派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th lunar month, Jimei and Persia sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：六月己巳，高昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月初三，高昌国派使者朝贡。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Gaochang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，勿吉国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十七日，勿吉国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 27th, an envoy from the kingdom of Bekichi came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月癸丑，诏曰： 时泽弗降，禾稼形损。在予之责，夙宵震惧，虽克躬撤降，仍无招感。
现代文：秋七月十七日，肃宗下诏书曰： 时雨未降，禾苗形损，是我的过错，朕日夜担心忧惧，虽然勉力祭天招应，但至今仍无反应。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Su Zong issued an edict saying: "It is my fault that the rain did not fall and the grass seedling was damaged. I am worried and anxious day and night. Although I have tried my best to respond to the call of heaven, I still have no response.

古文：有司可修案旧典，祗行六事：圄犴淹枉，随速鞫决；庶尹废职，量加修厉；鳏独困穷，在所存恤；役赋烦民，咸加蠲省；贤良谠直，以时升进；贪残邪佞，即就屏黜；男女怨旷，务令会偶。
现代文：有关部门可修按旧典，快做以下六件事：监狱中被冤枉的人火速断决；众官旷职，据情严处；鳏独困穷，宜加抚恤；役赋烦民，全加减省；贤良谠直，按时升进；贪官污吏，即地罢免，怨男旷女，务令偶配。
English: The relevant departments can quickly do the following six things according to the old code: the unjustly accused in prison should be sentenced immediately; the officials who are absent from duty should be severely punished according to the circumstances; the poor who are alone should be given a pension; the people who are annoying should be reduced; the virtuous and upright should be promoted on time; the corrupt officials should be dismissed immediately; the male and female offenders should be punished according to the circumstances; and the official orders should be combined.

古文：庶革止惩违，有弭灾沴。 
现代文：希望克恶惩违，消除灾害。 
English: We hope that evils will be punished and disasters will be eliminated.

古文：八月己巳，伏罗国遣使朝贡。
现代文：八月初二，伏罗国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month, Voro sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：蠕蠕后主郁久闾侯匿伐来奔怀朔镇。
现代文：蠕蠕后主郁久闾侯匿伐前来投奔怀朔镇。
English: Emperor Wu's empress, Iku Jiuyong, came to the town of Wai Shuo.

古文：十有一月乙未朔，高昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月初一，高昌国派使者朝贡。
English: On the first day of November, Gaochang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊申，卫大将军、仪同三司皇甫集薨。
现代文：十四日，卫大将军，仪同三司皇甫集去世。
English: On the 14th, General Wei Da passed away together with the three emperors.

古文：癸丑，侍中、车骑大将军侯刚加仪同三司。十有二月甲戌，诏司徒崔光、安丰王延明等议定服章。庚辰，以东益、南秦氐反，诏中军将军、河间王琛讨之，失利。三年春正月辛亥，帝耕籍田。
现代文：十二月初九，肃宗下诏让司徒崔光、安丰王元延明等议定服礼章法。十五日，因东益、南秦氐族人造反，帝诏让中军将军、河间王元琛讨伐他们，失利。正光三年春正月十八日，皇帝在藉田中象征性地耕田，以励农稼。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 12th month, Emperor Su issued an imperial edict to have the emperors Sutoku Cui Guang (司徒崔光) and Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming (安丰王元延明) to agree on the dress code. On the 15th day of the 12th month, Emperor Su issued an imperial edict to have the general of the Chinese army, Kawama Wangyuan Qi (河間王元), to fight against the Dongyi and the Southern Qin Yi people for their rebellion, but he failed. On the 18th day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Zhengguang, the emperor

古文：夏四月庚辰，以高车国主覆罗伊匐为镇西将军、西海郡开国公、高车王。
现代文：夏季四月十九日，任命高车国主覆罗伊匐为镇西将军、西海郡开国公、高车王。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, Gao Che, the ruler of Gao Che, appointed Zou Roi Yao as the general of Zhenxi, the founding father of Xihai County and the king of Gao Che.

古文：六月己巳，诏曰： 朕以冲昧，夙纂宝历，不能祗奉上灵，感延和气，致令炎旱频岁，嘉雨弗洽，百稼焦萎，晚种未下，将成灾年，秋稔莫觊。
现代文：六月初六，肃宗下诏说： 朕以幼年，早登皇基，但不能上奉天灵，感应和气，以致炎旱连年，甘雨未降，百禾枯焦，晚种未下，将成灾年，秋熟无望。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month, Su Zong issued an edict saying, "I am too young to ascend to the throne, but I cannot serve the spirit of heaven, sense the harmony of the air, so that the hot and dry years continue, the sweet and rainy years do not fall, the hundred grasses wither and burn, the late seeds do not fall, it will be a year of disaster, and the autumn ripening is hopeless.

古文：在予之责，忧惧震怀。
现代文：这都是我的过错，因此朕忧惧震怀。
English: It's all my fault, so I'm worried sick.

古文：今可依旧分遣有司，驰祈岳渎及诸山川百神能兴云雨者，尽其虔肃，必令感降，玉帛牲牢，随应荐享。
现代文：今可依旧分派有关部门，驰奔祈祝山岳及诸山川百神能兴起云雨的，务尽虔诚整肃，一定要让苍天感应降雨，玉帛牲品，有求必给。
English: Relevant departments can still be dispatched now, and if you are running to pray for the mountains and the hundreds of gods in the mountains and rivers to bring about clouds and rain, you must do your best to be pious and clean up. You must let the sky feel the rain, and if you have a request, you must give it.

古文：丙午，诏曰： 治历明时，前王茂轨；考辰正律，奕代通规。
现代文：上下群官，躬身自责，断理冤狱，停止土木工程，减膳撤悬，禁止屠杀。 
English: Government officials at all levels should humbly reproach themselves, adjudicate unjust imprisonment, stop civil engineering projects, reduce meals and suspend suspension, and prohibit slaughter.

古文：是以北平革定于汉年，杨伟草算于魏世。
现代文：秋七月初九，波斯、不汉、龟兹等国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, emissaries from Persia, Bhutan, Tibet and other countries came to pay tribute.

古文：自皇运肇基，典章犹缺，推步晷曜，未尽厥理。
现代文：冬十月八日，吐谷浑国派使者前来朝贡。十一月二十二日，皇帝到临丘处理战事。二十五日，肃宗下诏曰： 治体正处明时，前王茂轨，考定律历，是历代通常的规律。
English: On the winter of October 8th, the envoys of the Hun Kingdom of Tugu came to pay tribute. On November 22nd, the emperor went to Linqiu to deal with the war. On the 25th, Su Zong issued an edict saying: The governing body is at the right time, the former Wang Maozhu, and the examination of laws and calendars are the usual laws of all ages.

古文：先朝仍世，每所慨然。
现代文：先朝各代，每每对此慨然而叹。
English: All previous dynasties have lamented this.

古文：至神龟中，始命儒官，改创疏踳，回度易宪，始会璇衡。
现代文：到神龟年间，朝廷始命儒官改创疏漏的律历，回度易宪，才让律历与天象合拍。
English: It was not until the years of the Divine Turtle that the imperial court first ordered the Confucian officials to alter the omitted rhythms of the calendar, and the times were changed according to the constitution, so that the rhythms of the calendar would coincide with those of the celestial bodies.

古文：今天正斯始，阳煦将开，品物初萌，宜变耳目，所谓魏虽旧邦，其历维新者也。
现代文：而今皇天应人，阳春将开，万物初萌，应变耳目，这是所谓魏虽旧邦，律历维新的做法。
English: But now, the Emperor Heaven responds to the people, the Yang Chun will open, all things will sprout, and the ears and eyes will respond. This is the so-called Wei, although the old state, the practice of maintaining the new calendar.

古文：便可班宣内外，号曰《正光历》。
现代文：现可颁布宣明内外，名叫《正光历》。
English: Now it can be promulgated both inside and outside Xuanming, called "Zhengguang Calendar."

古文：又首节嘉辰，获展丘禘，神人交和，理契幽显，思与亿兆共此维新，可大赦天下。 
现代文：又加此是改历后的首节嘉辰，获展祝祀，神人交和，情理和合幽显，朕思考这与亿兆百姓共维此新，可大赦天下。 
English: In addition, this is the first day of Jia Chen after the calendar was changed, and it was exhibited and worshiped, and the gods and mortals were reconciled, and the reason and harmony were revealed. I think that if we can jointly maintain this new situation with hundreds of trillions of people, we can be forgiven by the whole world.

古文：十有二月癸酉，以左光禄大夫皇甫度为仪同三司。
现代文：十二月十六日，以左光禄大夫皇甫度为仪同三司。
English: On December 16th, Dr. Zuo Guanglu and Dr. Wang Fudu were appointed as the new Third Division.

古文：乙酉，以车骑大将军、尚书右仆射元钦为仪同三司，太保、京兆王继为太傅，司徒崔光为太保。
现代文：二十七日，任命车骑大将军、尚书右仆射元钦为仪同三司，太保、京兆王元继为太傅，司徒崔光为太保。
English: On the 27th, he appointed the general of cavalry and cavalry, Shang Shu's right-hand man, Sha Yuanqin, as the grand marshal and the third secretary, Taibo, Jing Zhao Wangyuan as Taifu, and Sito Cui Guang as Taibo.

古文：丁亥，以牧守妄立碑颂，辄兴寺塔；第宅丰侈，店肆商贩，诏中尉端衡，肃厉威风，以见事纠劾；七品、六品，禄足代耕，亦不听锢贴店肆，争利城市。
现代文：二十九日，因为牧守妄立碑颂，动不动建造寺塔；第宅丰伟奢侈，店肆商贩横行。下诏中尉严加纠摘威风，见到法规不允的事即行纠奏。七品、六品，俸禄足以代耕，也不能听其经营店铺，在城市中争利。
English: On the 29th, because of the herdsman's arrogance in erecting monuments and insisting on building temples and pagodas, the second house was extravagant, and shops and vendors were rampant. The second lieutenant severely corrected the prestige, and when he saw something that was not allowed by the law, he corrected it. Seven products, six products, the salary is enough to do the farming, and they can't be allowed to run shops and compete for profits in the city.

古文：四年春二月壬辰，追封故咸阳王禧为敷城王，京兆王愉为临洮王，清河王怿为范阳王，以礼加葬。
现代文：正光四年春二月初七，肃宗追封已故咸阳王元禧为敷城王，京兆王元愉为临洮王，清河王元怿为范阳王，以礼加葬。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the spring of the 4th year of Zhengguang, Su Zong followed the deceased Xianyang King Yuan Xiyi as the king of Shiki City, Jingzhao King Yuan Yu as the king of Linyi, and Qinghe King Yuan Xuan as the king of Fanyang, and was buried with ceremony.

古文：丁丑，河间王琛、章武王融，并以贪污削爵除名。
现代文：二十三日，河间王元琛、章武王元融，都因贪污的罪名被削爵除名。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Yuan Rong of Kawama and Wang Yuan Rong of Zhangwu were both stripped of their titles for the crime of corruption.

古文：己卯，以蠕蠕主阿那瑰率众犯塞，遣尚书左丞元孚兼尚书，为北道行台，持节喻之。
现代文：二十五日，因柔然主阿那环率众侵犯边境，朝廷派尚书左丞元孚兼任尚书，为此道行台，持节抚慰他们。
English: On the 25th, due to the encroachment of the border by Lord Anahiro and his followers, the imperial court sent Shangshu Zuojo Yuanfu to serve as Shangshu, and for this reason, he went to the Daogyo-dai and held a festival to comfort them.

古文：蠕蠕后主侯匿伐来朝京师。
现代文：蠕蠕后主侯匿伐到京师朝见。
English: After the battle, the lord of the castle went to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：宕昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：宕昌国派使者前来朝贡。
English: The Tang and Chang dynasties sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：司空刘腾薨。
现代文：司空刘腾逝世。
English: Siku Liu Teng passed away.

古文：夏四月，阿那瑰执元孚，驱掠畜牧北遁。
现代文：夏季四月，阿那环俘获元孚，驱兵掠抢魏畜牧后北逃。
English: In the summer of April, Anahuan captured Yuanfu, drove the soldiers to plunder Wei's livestock, and then fled north.

古文：甲申，诏骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇，中军将军、兼尚书右仆射元纂率骑十万讨蠕蠕，出塞三千余里，不及而还。
现代文：二十三日，肃宗诏骠骑大将军、尚书令李崇，中军将军、兼尚书右仆射元纂率领十万骑兵讨伐蠕蠕，出塞三千余里，追不上敌人以后回师。
English: On the 23rd, Su Zong Zhaozhong riding the general, Shang Shuling Li Chong, the general of the Chinese army, and Shang Shul's right-hand man, Sha Yuan Cao, led a hundred thousand cavalry to fight against Crum Crum, out of the fortress for more than three thousand miles, unable to catch up with the enemy, and then returned to the division.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏曰： 达尊斯在，齿预一焉，崇敬黄耇，先代通训。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，肃宗下诏曰： 尊贵之人，年龄即是标志之一，崇奉高年的人，是先代通训。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Su Zong issued an edict saying: "For those who are respected, age is one of the signs. Those who worship the elderly are the previous generation's apprentices.

古文：故方叔以元老处位，充国缘自强见留。
现代文：所以方叙以元老处于尊位，充国因自强不息而被朝廷挽留。
English: Therefore, Fang Xiu put the elders in a position of dignity, and the imperial court retained the power of the state due to its relentless self-improvement.

古文：虽七十致仕，明乎典故，然以德尚壮，许其絷维。
现代文：虽然说七十退休，明于典故，然而因以德尚壮，允许他继续在官。
English: Although it is clear from the allusion that he retired at the age of seventy, he was allowed to continue in office because of his virtue.

古文：今庶僚之中，或年迫悬车，循礼宜退。
现代文：而今众官之中，或年近退休，按礼当退。
English: But now, among all officials, or recently retired, they should retire according to etiquette.

古文：但少收其力，老弃其身，言念勤旧，眷然未忍。
现代文：但是他们少年时朝廷用其才力，老了就搁置一边，朕念其旧时勤勉，实在不忍心。
English: But when they were young, the imperial court used their talent, and when they were old, they put it aside. I can't bear to think of their old diligence.

古文：或戴白在朝，未当外任；或停私历纪，甫受考级；如此之徒，虽满七十，听其莅民，以终常限。
现代文：或在朝为官，未当外任；或因私事停官，常受考级。这样的人，虽然已年满七十，听任其治民，以终常限。
English: or he is an official in the imperial court and has not been appointed to a position outside it; or he has been suspended from his post for personal reasons and is often subjected to a rank examination. Such a person, even though he has reached the age of seventy, is allowed to govern the people for the rest of his life.

古文：或新解郡县，或外佐始停，已满七十，方求更叙者，吏部可依令不奏。
现代文：或有新解郡县之职，或外佐始停，已满七十，又求重新任职的，吏部可依令不予上报。
English: If a person who has reached the age of 70 and is seeking to be reappointed to a newly-dissolved county post, or who has been appointed to a position other than that of assistant, may be ordered not to report to the cadre department.

古文：其有高名俊德、老成髦士、灼然显达、为时所知者，不拘斯例。
现代文：这中间有高名俊德、老成的长者，灼然显达、为时人所知晓的，不拘于此例。
English: Among them, there were famous, virtuous and accomplished elders, who were well-known at the time, regardless of the case.

古文：若才非秀异，见在朝官，依令合解者，可给本官半禄，以终其身。
现代文：如若才非秀异，现任朝廷官员，依律令应当解职，可给本官半禄，以终养其身。
English: If it is not exceptional, the current imperial court official should be dismissed in accordance with the law, and the official can be given half of the salary to support himself.

古文：使辞朝之叟，不恨归于闾巷矣。 
现代文：以使辞官于朝的长者，也不对还归乡闾的人怀怨而终了余生。 
English: The elders who made the dictionary official in the imperial court did not hold a grudge against those who returned to their hometowns and lived out the rest of their lives.

古文：八月己巳，诏曰： 狂蠢肆暴，陵窃北垂。虽军威时接，贼徒慑遁，然獯虐所过，多离其祸。言念斯弊，有轸深怀。
现代文：八月十一日，肃宗下诏曰： 狂暴之徒肆意施暴，凌欺窃取北方，虽然皇魏军威不断，贼徒震慑逃走，但是暴徒所经之地，当地多遭祸患，每每念此，朕心中切痛异常。
English: On August 11th, Su Zong issued an edict saying: "Rampaging thugs wantonly commit violence, bully and steal the north. Although the imperial and Wei armies are unceasing, and the thieves are shocked and flee, but the places where the thugs pass through are often plagued by disasters. Every time I think about this, my heart is extremely painful.

古文：可敕北道行台，遣使巡检，遭寇之处，饥馁不粒者，厚加赈恤，务令存济。 
现代文：可令北道行台，派使巡视检察北方，遭到寇掠的地方，饥馁无粮的，厚加赈恤，务必救济。 
English: It is possible to make the northern road a platform, send an envoy to inspect the north, a place that has been plundered, a famine without food, a thick cotton shirt, and relief.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 朕以眇暗，忝承鸿绪，因祖宗之基，托王公之上，每鉴寐属虑，思康亿兆。
现代文：十四日，肃宗下诏书曰： 朕以不才，登上皇极，借光祖宗之基，身处王公之上，每每昼思夜想，考虑康抚百姓。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Suzong issued an edict saying, "I, with no talent, ascended to the imperial throne, by virtue of the foundation of the ancestors, I am above the prince, I think every day and night, and consider appeasing the people.

古文：比雨旱愆时，星运舛错，政理阙和，灵祗表异，永寻夕惕，载恧于怀。
现代文：最近以来雨旱失时，星运错纟比，政理失和，神灵变异，想到这些，朕忧心忡忡。
English: Recently, when the rains and droughts fail, the stars are out of kilter, politics is out of kilter, and the gods are mutating. When I think of these things, I am worried.

古文：宜诏百司各勤厥职，诸有鳏寡穷疾冤滞不申者，并加厘恤。
现代文：宜诏示百司各勤其职，那些鳏寡穷疾冤滞不申的人，一并加以抚惜。
English: It is appropriate to point out that all the hundred departments should be diligent in their duties, and those who are widowed, poor, and sick, and who do not report their grievances, should be treated with compassion.

古文：若孝子顺孙、廉贞义节、才学超异、独行高时者，具以言上，朕将亲览，加以旌命。 
现代文：像那些孝子顺孙，廉洁贞节，忠心耿耿、才学超群、独行于世的，都要向上反映，朕将亲自考察，加以提拔任命。 
English: Like those filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters, sons and daughters of filial sons and daughters,

古文：癸未，追复故范阳王泽为清河王。
现代文：二十日追复已故范阳王元怿为清河王。
English: On the 20th, the late Fan Yang Wang Yuanjun was reinstated as the King of Qinghe.

古文：九月丁酉，库莫奚国遣使朝献。
现代文：九月十七日，库莫奚国派使者前来朝拜纳贡。
English: On September 17th, Cuomo sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：诏侍中、太尉、汝南王悦入居门下，与承相、高阳王雍参决尚书奏事。
现代文：肃宗下诏让侍中、太尉、汝南王元悦入居门下省，与丞相、高阳王元雍一起议决尚书们所奏的事情。
English: Su Zong issued an edict to have the chamberlain, captain, and King Yuan Rong of Yunnan Province move to live in the province next door, and together with the prime minister and King Yuan Yong of Goyang Province, to discuss the matter that Shang Shu and his men had raised.

古文：冬十有一月丙申，赵郡王谧薨。
现代文：冬十一月十一日，赵郡王元谧逝世。
English: On November 11, winter, Wang Yuanjun of Zhao County passed away.

古文：丁酉，太保崔光薨。
现代文：十二日，太保崔光去世。
English: On the 12th, the eunuch Choe Kwang passed away.

古文：十有二月，萧衍遣将寇边，诏假征南将军崔延伯讨之。
现代文：十二月，萧衍派将侵犯边疆，肃宗下诏让假南将军崔延伯率兵讨伐。
English: In December, the Xiao Yan faction will invade the border, Su Zong issued an edict to let the fake South General Cui Yanbo lead the troops to fight.

古文：以太尉、汝南王悦为太保。
现代文：任命太尉、汝南王元悦为太保。
English: He appointed Prince Yunnan Wang Yuan Rong as Tai Po.

古文：徐州刺史、北海王颢坐贪污削除官爵。
现代文：徐州刺史、北海王元颢因贪污事发被削去官职。
English: Xuzhou Zhishi and Beihai Wangyuanqian were removed from their posts due to corruption.

古文：五年春正月辛丑，车驾有事于南郊。
现代文：正光五年正月二十日，肃宗在南郊举行祭祀活动。
English: On the 20th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Zheng Guang, Su Zong held a religious service in the southern suburb.

古文：闰二月癸巳，嚈哒国遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰二月初九，口厌哒达国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the leap year, China sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月，沃野镇人破落汗拔陵聚众反，杀镇将，号真王元年。
现代文：三月，沃野镇人破落汗拔陵聚众造反，杀死镇守将领，号称真王元年。
English: In March, the people of the town of Vo'no rebelled and killed the town's commander, known as the Year of the True King.

古文：诏临淮王彧为镇军将军，假征北将军，都督北征诸军事以讨之。
现代文：肃宗下诏让临淮王元为镇军将军，假镇北将军，都督北征诸军事率兵讨伐。
English: Su Zong issued an edict to make Lin Huai Wang Yuan the general of the township army, the general of the fake township north, and the governor of the north to recruit soldiers to lead the crusade.

古文：夏四月，高平酋长胡琛反，自称高平王，攻镇以应拔陵。
现代文：夏四月，高平酋长胡琛造反，自称高平王，攻打镇池以响应拔陵。
English: In the summer of April, Gaoping chieftain Hu Yao rebelled, calling himself King Gaoping, and attacked Zhenchi in response to the removal of the mausoleum.

古文：别将卢祖迁击破之，琛北遁。
现代文：别将卢祖谦打败了他，胡琛北逃。
English: Don't let Lu Zuqian beat him, let Hu Rong escape to the north.

古文：五月，临淮王彧败于五原，削除官爵。
现代文：五月，临淮王元在五原战败，被朝廷削去官爵。
English: In May, Lin Huai Wang Yuan was defeated in the Battle of Wuhuan and was stripped of his title by the imperial court.

古文：壬申，诏尚书令李崇为大都督，率广阳王渊等北讨。
现代文：二十三日，肃宗下诏，命尚书令李崇为大都督，率广阳王元渊等人讨伐北方敌人。
English: On the 23rd, Su Zong issued an edict, ordering Li Chong to be the grand governor, and led Guangyang King Yuan Yuan and others to fight the northern enemy.

古文：六月，秦州城人莫折太提据城反，自称秦王，杀刺史李彦。
现代文：六月，秦城人莫折太提据城反叛，自称秦王，杀死刺史李彦。
English: In June, the people of Qincheng rebelled against the city, claiming to be the Qin king, and killed the assassin Li Yan.

古文：诏雍州刺史元志讨之。
现代文：肃宗下诏让刺史元志率部讨伐。
English: Sozong issued an edict to let Sashi Motoshi lead the crusade.

古文：南秦州城人孙掩、张长命、韩祖香据城反，杀刺史崔游以应太提。
现代文：南秦州人孙掩、张长命、韩祖香据城反叛，杀死刺史崔游以响应莫折太提。
English: Southern Qin people Sun Guan, Zhang Changmei, and Han Zuxiang rebelled against the city and killed the assassin Cui You in response to Mo Rongtai.

古文：太提遣城人卜朝袭克高平，杀镇将赫连略、行台高元荣。
现代文：太提派城民卜朝袭击高平，杀死镇将赫连略、行台高元荣。
English: Tai Ti sent the townspeople Bu Chao to attack Gaoping, killing the town's commander, Heren Liu, and the governor, Gao Yuan Rong.

古文：太提寻死，子念生代立，僭称天子，号年天建，置立百官。
现代文：太提不久死，子莫折念生代之而立，僭称天子，建年号为天建，设立百官。
English: Soon after the death of Tae-ti, his son, without hesitation, stood up in his place, falsely claiming to be the son of heaven, establishing the year of establishment as the year of establishment, and establishing a hundred officials.

古文：丁酉，大赦。
现代文：十八日，朝廷大赦天下。
English: On the 19th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：秋七月甲寅，诏吏部尚书元脩义兼尚书仆射，为西道行台，率诸将西讨。
现代文：秋季，七月初六，肃宗诏命吏部尚书元修义兼任尚书仆射，为西道行台，率领众将西讨。
English: In the autumn, on the 6th day of the 7th month, Su Zong issued an order to Shang Shu Yuan Xiu Yi, who was also a member of Shang Shu's retinue, to go to the west and lead the troops to the west.

古文：戊午，复河间王琛、临淮王彧本封。
现代文：初十，复河间王元琛、临淮王元本封。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, he reinstated Wang Yuanjun from Kawama and Wang Yuanjun from Linhuai.

古文：都督崔暹失利于白道，大都督李崇率众还平城，坐长史祖莹截没军资，免除官爵。
现代文：都督崔暹在白道失利，大都督李崇率部还驻平城，因其帐中长史祖莹截获吞没军用物资被免除官爵。
English: The governor, Cui Siam, was defeated at Baidoa, and the grand governor, Li Chong, and his staff were still stationed in Pingcheng. He was stripped of his title because his chief of accounts, Shi Zuying, had intercepted and swallowed military supplies.

古文：丁丑，念生遣其都督杨伯年、樊元、张朗等攻仇鸠、河池二戍，东益州刺史魏子建遣将尹祥、黎叔和击破之，斩樊元首，杀贼千余人。
现代文：二十八日，念生派其都督杨伯年、樊元、张朗人攻打仇鸠、河池两个戍镇，东益州刺史魏子建派将领尹祥、黎叔和打败他们，砍下樊元首级，斩杀敌人一千多人。
English: On the 28th, Nian Sheng sent his governors Yang Botian, Xuan Yuan, and Zhang Lang to attack the two towns of Qiuyuan and Hechi in East Yizhou Province, and Wei Zi Jian sent generals Yin Xiang and Li Shuhe to defeat them, cut off the head of Qiuyuan, and killed more than a thousand enemies.

古文：是月，凉州幢帅于菩提、呼延雄执刺史宋颖据州反。
现代文：这个月，凉州禁卫军将领于菩提、呼延雄绑起刺史宗颖，据城反叛。
English: This month, the commander of the Liangzhou Imperial Guard in Bodhi and Huaneng tied up the assassin Zong Ying and rebelled against the city.

古文：念生遣其兄高阳王天生下陇东寇。
现代文：莫折念生派其兄高阳王莫折天生率兵下陇向东侵犯。
English: He sent his brother, Goyang Wang Morencheng, to invade the east with his soldiers.

古文：八月甲午，元志大败于陇东，退守岐州。
现代文：八月十六日，元志在陇东大败，退守岐州。
English: On August 16th, Yuan Zhi suffered a crushing defeat in Shandong and retreated to Qizhou.

古文：丙申，诏曰： 赏贵宿劳，明主恆德；恩沾旧绩，哲后常范。
现代文：十九日，肃宗下诏曰： 嘉贵赏劳，是圣明之主的常德；恩及旧绩，是警示后人的常规。
English: On the 19th, Su Zong issued an edict, saying: "To be highly regarded and rewarded is the common virtue of the Lord of the Sacred Light; to be favored and honored is the common practice of warning future generations.

古文：太祖道武皇帝应期拨乱，大造区夏；世祖太武皇帝纂戎丕绪，光阐王业，躬率六师，扫清逋秽；诸州镇城人，本充牙爪，服勤征旅，契阔行间，备尝劳剧。
现代文：太祖道武皇帝顺应天期，拨乱返正，大造华夏；世祖太武皇帝继承洪绪，光大王业，亲率六师，扫清恶秽；诸州城镇人，充当士卒，南征北战，戎马倥偬，备受劳苦。
English: The great-great-grandfather Emperor Daowu obeyed the call of heaven, rectified the chaos, and made China great; the great-great-grandfather Emperor Daowu inherited Hongxu, Guangda Wangye, and led six divisions to clean up the filth; people in towns in various states served as soldiers, fought in the Southern Expedition and the Northern War, and served in the Horse Guards, and suffered great hardships.

古文：逮显祖献文皇帝，自北被南，淮海思乂，便差割强族，分卫方镇。
现代文：等到显祖献文皇帝，自北向南，淮海一带百姓归诚大义，因此他分划强族，派将镇守方镇。
English: By the time of Emperor Xianzu's dedication, from the north to the south, the people in the Huaihai area were sincere and righteous. Therefore, he divided the strong tribes and assigned the town to guard Fangzhen.

古文：高祖孝文皇帝，远遵盘庚，将迁嵩洛，规遏北疆，荡辟南境，选良家酋帅，增戍朔垂，戎捍所寄，实惟斯等。
现代文：高祖孝文皇帝，远遵盘庚，将迁都嵩山洛水之间，思求遏抑北疆，开拓南境，选任良家豪杰，增加北守力量，北戎所托，实倚此辈。
English: Emperor Gao Zu and Emperor Xiaowen, far from following Pan Geng, will move the capital between Songshan and Luoshui, seek to suppress the northern territory, explore the southern territory, select good heroes, increase the strength of the northern defense, entrust the northern military, and truly support this generation.

古文：先帝以其诚效既亮，方加酬锡，会宛郢驰烽，朐泗告警，军旗频动，兵连积岁，兹恩仍寝，用迄于今。
现代文：先帝因他们忠心不二，方加酬劳赐锡，逢宛、郢烽火烟起，朐、泗告警，军旗频动，连年动兵，这种恩宠方才停止。
English: Because of their loyalty, the former emperor rewarded them with more pay and labor and gave them more money. Every year, bonfires were lit, the police were alerted, military flags were frequently raised, and troops were mobilized year after year. This kind of favor only stopped.

古文：怨叛之兴，颇由于此。
现代文：到了今天，怨怒反叛兴起，很大程度上是由于此。
English: To a large extent, the rise of resentment and rebellion today is a result of this.

古文：朕叨承乾历，抚驭宇宙，调风布政，思广惠液，宜追述前恩，敷兹后施。
现代文：朕妄承皇统，安抚统治天下，调应天时，施布惠政，谋求广播恩泽，现在应追述这些人前番恩忠，追嘉其功。
English: We have arrogantly inherited the imperial succession, pacified and ruled the world, adjusted to the times, dispensed favorable policies, and sought to spread grace. Now we should recount these people's former loyalty and praise their achievements.

古文：诸州镇军贯，元非犯配者，悉免为民，镇改为州，依旧立称。
现代文：各州镇俘虏，只要原来不是犯罪发配的犯人。都免其为平民，镇改为州，依旧时称号。
English: The captives of each state town, as long as they were not originally prisoners of crime, were exempted from being civilians, and the town was changed to a state, still with the same title.

古文：此等世习干戈，率多劲勇，今既甄拔，应思报效。
现代文：这些人世代习于战伐，大多是刚劲勇猛之徒，今天既然受到甄选拔任，应思报效国家。
English: These people have been accustomed to fighting for generations, and most of them are tough and brave. Today, since they have been selected and appointed, they should think about serving the country.

古文：可三五简发，讨彼沙陇。
现代文：可间歇开拔前去征讨沙陇。
English: You can go out at intervals to fight sand flies.

古文：当使人齐其力，奋击先驱，妖党狂丑，必可荡涤。
现代文：当让人齐心协力，奋勇当先，这样，妖党狂丑之人，必可被荡除殆尽。
English: When people make concerted efforts and courageously take the lead, in this way, the ugly people of the evil party will surely be eliminated.

古文：冲锋斩级，自依恆赏。 
现代文：士卒冲锋陷阵，立下战功的，自依常式嘉赏。 
English: The soldiers charge into battle, and those who have made war achievements are awarded according to their own will.

古文：丁酉，南秀容牧子于乞真反，杀太仆卿陆延。
现代文：二十日，南秀容牧子于乞真反叛，杀害太仆卿陆延。
English: On the 20th, Nan Xiurong Muxi rebelled against Kianzhen and killed Lu Yan.

古文：别将尔朱荣讨平之。
现代文：别将尔朱荣讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: Don't let the Zhurong crackdown quell the rebellion.

古文：戊戌，莫折念生遣都督窦双攻盘头郡。
现代文：二十一日，莫折念生派都督宝双攻打盘头郡。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Moreno sent the governor Bao to attack the county twice.

古文：东益州刺史魏子建遣将窦念祖讨之，斩双，擒斩千余人。
现代文：东益州刺史魏子建派将领窦念祖讨伐他。斩杀宝双，擒获斩杀一千多人。
English: East Yizhou assassinated Shi Wei Zi and sent general Dou Nian Zu to fight him. He killed Baoshuang and won the victory of killing more than a thousand people.

古文：九月壬申，诏尚书左仆射、齐王萧宝夤为西道行台大都督，率征西将军、都督崔延伯，又诏复抚军将军、北海王颢官爵，为都督，并率诸将西讨。
现代文：九月二十九日，肃宗下诏命尚书左仆射，齐王萧宝夤为西道行台、大都督，率领征西将军、都督崔延伯，又下诏恢复抚军将军、北海王元颢官职、爵位，命其为都督，一起率领众将向西讨伐。
English: On September 29th, Su Zong issued an edict ordering Shang Shuxi to appoint Xiao Baojun, the King of Qi, as the Grand Governor of the Western Road and the Great Capital, leading the Western General and the Governor Cui Yanbo. He also issued an edict restoring the official position and peerage of the General of the Fuzhou Army and the North Sea King Yuan He, and appointed him as the Governor, together leading the people to fight against the West.

古文：乙亥，帝幸明堂，饯宝夤等。
现代文：二十八日，肃宗驾临明堂，为萧宝夤等饯行。
English: On the 28th, Su Zong drove to Linming Hall to perform for Xiao Baojun and others.

古文：是月，萧衍遣将裴邃、虞鸿袭据寿春外城，刺史长孙稚击走之，邃退屯黎浆。
现代文：这个月，萧衍派将裴邃、虞鸿袭据寿春外城，刺史长孙稚击退了他们，裴邃退居黎浆。
English: This month, Xiao Yan's faction attacked Pei Yao and Yu Hong in the outlying city of Shouchun, but was repulsed by Zhi Changsunzhi, and Pei Yao retreated to Li Li.

古文：诏河间王琛总众援之。
现代文：肃宗下诏让河间王元琛统兵支授长孙稚。
English: Emperor Su issued an edict to make Kawama no Okimi the grandchild of the grandchild of the grandchild of the grandchild of Kawama no Okimi.

古文：衍又遣将寇淮阳，诏秘书监、安乐王鉴率众讨之。
现代文：萧衍又派将领军侵犯淮扬，肃宗下诏让秘书监、安乐王元鉴率军讨伐他们。
English: Xiao Yan also sent generals to invade Huaiyang, Su Zong issued an edict to let the secretary and overseer, Anle Wang Yuan Jian, lead the army to fight them.

古文：吐谷浑主伏连筹兵讨凉州，于菩提弃城走，追斩之。城民赵天安复推宋颍为刺史。
现代文：吐谷浑主伏连筹率兵讨伐凉州叛军，于菩提弃城逃走，伏连筹追上杀了他，城民赵天安又推举宋颖为刺史。
English: The lord of Tugu Hun, Fuliang, led an army to fight against the rebels of Liangzhou, and fled from the abandoned city of Bodhi. Fuliang caught up with him and killed him. The citizens of the city, Zhao Tian'an, also nominated Song Ying as the assassin.

古文：冬十月，营州城人刘安定、就德兴据城反，执刺史李仲遵。
现代文：冬十月，营州城人赵安定、就德兴据城反叛，逮捕了刺史李仲遵。
English: In the winter of October, Yingzhou city residents Zhao Yan and De Xing rebelled against Yingzhou city and arrested the assassin Li Zhongzong.

古文：城人王恶兒斩安定以降。德兴东走，自号燕王。
现代文：城民王恶儿杀了赵安定归降朝廷，就德兴东逃而去，自称燕王。
English: The villain killed Zhao An and returned to the imperial court, so De Xing fled east and called himself the King of Swallows.

古文：胡琛遣其将宿勤明达寇豳、夏、北华三州。
现代文：胡琛派其将领宿勤明达侵犯豳、夏、北华三州。
English: Hu Jintao sent his general Qinmingda to invade Shandong, Xia and North China.

古文：壬午，诏都督、北海王景率诸将讨之。
现代文：初五，肃宗诏都督北海王元颢率领众将讨伐来敌。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Su Zongzhao, the governor of the North Sea, Wang Yuanqi, led the people to fight the enemy.

古文：十有一月戊申，莫折天生攻陷岐州，执都督元志及刺史裴芬之。
现代文：十一月初二，莫折天生攻陷岐州，逮起都督元志及刺史裴芬之。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Momotsu was born to invade Qizhou, arresting the governor, Motoshi, and the chief of police, Pei Fen.

古文：高平人攻杀卜朝，共迎胡琛。
现代文：高平人攻杀卜朝，一起迎接胡琛。
English: The Gaoping people attacked and killed the Bu dynasty, and together they greeted the Hu clan.

古文：十有二月壬辰，诏太傅、京兆王继为太师、大将军，率诸将讨之。
现代文：十二月十六日，肃宗下诏命太傅、京兆王元继为太师、大将军，率领众将讨伐天生。
English: On December 16th, Su Zong issued an edict ordering Taifu and Jing Zhao Wang Yuan to succeed him as Taishi and grand general, leading the people to fight against Tian Sheng.

古文：嚈哒、契丹、地豆于、库莫奚诸国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：口厌哒、契丹、地豆于、库莫奚等国都派使者前来朝贡。
English: Countries such as Kuching, Khitan, Jiuquan, and Kumo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：汾州正平、平阳山胡叛逆。
现代文：汾州正平、平阳山胡叛逆。
English: Bozhou Zhengping and Pingyang Mountain Hu rebelled.

古文：诏复征东将军、章武王融封爵，为大都督，率众讨之。
现代文：肃宗下诏恢复征东将军章武王元融封爵，命其为大都督，率部讨伐。
English: Emperor Suzong issued an edict to restore the title of grand marshal of the Eastern Expedition, Prince Wu Yuan Rong, and appointed him as the grand governor to lead the crusade.

古文：山南行台、东益州刺史魏子建招降南秦氐民，复六君十二戍，又斩贼王韩祖香。
现代文：山南行台东益州刺史魏子建招降南秦州氐族百姓，恢复其六郡十二戍，又斩杀贼王韩祖香。
English: Shannan marched to East Taizhou, defeated Shi Wei Zi Jian, subdued the Yi people in South Qin, restored the twelve counties in six counties, and killed the thief king Han Zu Xiang.

古文：南秦贼王张长命畏逼，乃告降于萧宝夤。
现代文：南秦州贼王张长命畏于逼迫，便向萧宝夤投降。
English: Zhang Langfei, the Thief King of Southern Qin, was afraid of persecution, so he surrendered to Xiao Baojun.

古文：是月，莫折念生遣兵攻凉州，城人赵天安复执刺史以应之。
现代文：这个月，莫折念生派兵攻打凉州，城中百姓赵天安又逮捕了刺史以响应他。
English: This month, he sent troops to attack Liangzhou, and the people in the city, Zhao Tian'an, also arrested Shishi in response to him.

古文：孝昌元年春正月庚申，徐州刺史元法僧据城反，害行台高谅，自称宋王，号年天启，遣其子景仲归于萧衍。
现代文：孝昌元年春季正月十五，徐州刺史元法僧据城反叛，害死行台高谅，自称宋王，年号天启，派其子元景仲归顺萧衍。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Xiaochang, Xuzhou Jishi Yuan, a legal monk, rebelled against the city, killed Xingtai Gaofeng, called himself Song Wang, the year was Tianqi, and sent his son Yuanjing Zhonggui to Shun Xiaoyan.

古文：衍遣其将胡龙牙、成景隽、元略等率众赴彭城。
现代文：萧衍派其将领胡龙牙、成景隽、元略等率部赴彭城。
English: Xiao Yan sent his generals Hu Rongya, Cheng Jingtao, Yuan Liang and others to Pengcheng.

古文：诏秘书监、安乐王鉴回师以讨之。鉴于彭城南击元略，大破之，尽俘其众。既而不备，为法僧所败。
现代文：肃宗诏命秘书监安乐王元鉴回师以讨伐他们，元鉴在彭城南面与元略接战，大破元略，尽俘叛军，紧接着由于警备疏忽，被元法僧打败。
English: Su Zongzhao ordered Wang Yuanjian, the secretary of the overseer of safety, to return to the division to fight them. Yuanjian fought against Yuanliu in the south of Pengcheng, defeated Yuanliu, captured the rebels, and was immediately defeated by the former monk due to the negligence of the guard.

古文：衍遣其豫章王综入守彭城，法僧拥其僚属、守令、兵戍及郭邑士女万余口南入。
现代文：萧衍派其豫章王萧综进入彭城内据守，元法僧拥其僚属、守令、士卒以及城郊士女万余人归入萧衍政权。
English: Xiao Yan sent his Yuzhang Wang Xiao Sim to enter and defend Pengcheng, and the former monk had more than 10,000 of his subordinates, guards, soldiers and women from the outskirts of the city join Xiao Yan's regime.

古文：诏镇军将军、临淮王彧，尚书李宪为都督，卫将军、国子祭酒、安丰王延明为东道行台，复仪同三司李崇官爵，为东道大都督，俱讨徐州。
现代文：肃宗下诏让镇军将军、临淮王元，尚书李宪为都督，卫将军、国子祭酒、安丰王元延明为东道行台，恢复仪同三司李崇官爵，为东道大都督，一起讨伐徐州。
English: Su Zong issued an edict to let the general of the town army, Lin Huai Wang Yuan, Shangshu Li Xian as the governor, Wei general, Guozi sacrifice wine, Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming as the host of the trip, and resume the ceremony with the three officers Li Chong official peer, as the host of the grand governor, together to fight against Xuzhou.

古文：崇以疾不行。
现代文：李崇因病没有前去。
English: Li Chong did not go due to illness.

古文：癸亥，萧宝夤、崔延伯大破秦贼于黑水，斩获数万。天生退走入陇西，泾、岐及陇东悉平。
现代文：十八日，萧宝夤、崔延伯在黑水大破秦州叛贼，斩首擒获的敌人达数万人，莫折念生退逃入陇西，泾、岐以及陇东都被平定。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Baojun and Cui Yanbo defeated the Qin rebels in Heishui, decapitated tens of thousands of captured enemies, retreated and fled to Shaanxi, and pacified Handan, Qi and East Handan.

古文：以太师、大将军、京兆王继为太尉，余官如故。
现代文：朝廷任命太师、大将军、京兆王元继为太尉，其余人官职依旧。
English: The Imperial Court appointed Taishi, Daigen, and Keizhao Wangyuan as Taifu, and the rest of the officials remained the same.

古文：二月，以领军将军元叉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：二月，任命领军将军元叉为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In February, the leader of the army, General Yuan Zha, was appointed as the General of the Horse Guards and the Third Division of the Horse Guards.

古文：诏追复乐良王长命本爵，以其子忠绍之。
现代文：肃宗下诏追复乐良王元长命本爵，让其子忠继承爵位。
English: Su Zong issued an edict to reinstate Le Liang Wang Yuan Changmei to the peerage, and let his son Zhong succeed to the peerage.

古文：侍中、特进、卫大将军穆绍为仪同三司。
现代文：侍中、特进、卫大将军穆绍任仪同三司。
English: Chamberlains, special envoys, and generals of the Imperial Guards, Mushō Renji and Sanji, marched together.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：壬辰，莫折念生遣都督杨鲊、梁下辩、姜齐等攻仇池郡城，行台、东益州刺史魏子建遣将盛迁击破之，斩下辩、齐等首。
现代文：十七日，莫折念生派都督杨、梁下辩、姜齐等攻击仇池郡城池，行台、东益州刺史魏子建派部将盛迁打败他们，杀了下辩、姜齐等人，砍下首级。
English: On the 17th, Yang, Liang Xiefen and Jiang Qi, the governors of Muxian, attacked Chengchi in Qiuqi County. The troops of Xingtai and Dongyizhou, led by Wei Zijian, defeated them, killed Xiefen and Jiang Qi, and cut off their heads.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 劝善黜恶，经国茂典。
现代文：二十七日，肃宗下诏曰： 扬善惩恶，为治国大典。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Suzong issued an edict saying, "Promoting good and punishing evil is the great law for governing the country."

古文：其令每岁一终，郡守列令长，刺史列守相，以定考课，辩其能否。
现代文：诏令是每年考核官吏一次，郡守考核令长，刺史考核郡守，以确定政绩，看其能否胜任。
English: The edict is to assess officials once a year, the county governor to assess the governor, and the county governor to assess the county governor to determine his political performance and see if he is competent.

古文：若有滥谬，以考功失衷论。 
现代文：如有杂滥谬妄，便以考功失实论处。 
English: If there is any indiscriminate fallacy, it will be dealt with by the examination of merits and errors.

古文：是月，齐州魏郡民房伯和聚众反。
现代文：这个月，齐州魏郡百姓房伯和聚众造反。
English: This month, the people of Wei County, Qizhou revolted.

古文：会赦，乃散。
现代文：正逢大赦，就散伙了。
English: Just in time for the amnesty, they split up.

古文：三月己巳，诏太尉、西道都督、京兆王继班师。
现代文：三月二十五日，肃宗下诏命太尉、西道都督、京兆王元继班师回朝。
English: On March 25th, Su Zong issued an imperial edict ordering Tai Liang, the West Road governor, and Keizhao Wang Yuan's successor to return to the imperial court.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 丞相高阳王，道德渊广，明允笃诚，仪型太阶，垂风下国，实所以予违汝弼，致治责成，宜班新制，宣之遐迩。
现代文：二十八日，下诏说： 丞相高阳王，道德渊广，光明磊落、笃厚忠诚，堪称朝仪楷模，下国榜样，所谓的我的失误你来辅佐，以求政治责成，宜颁布新的法令，宣明远近。
English: On the 28th, the next imperial edict said: "Prince Gaoyang, the prime minister, you are a man of profound morality, bright and upright, and thoroughly loyal. You can be called a model of imperial etiquette and a role model for the country. You should help me with my so-called mistakes in order to fulfill your political duty. It is appropriate to promulgate new laws and decrees. Your enlightenment is near and far.

古文：其州郡先上司徒公文，悉可改上相府施行，符告皆亦如之。 
现代文：各州郡先前上奏给司徒公的文牒，都可改奏给相府处理，符告也照此办理。 
English: All prefectures and counties may resubmit the written ultimatum previously submitted to the chief magistrate, and the notice shall be handled accordingly.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 选众而举，其来自昔。
现代文：三十日，下诏说： 选而后举，自古如此。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict said, "Select first, then raise, it's been that way since ancient times."

古文：朕缵承大业，综理万几，求贤致治，心焉若渴。
现代文：朕妄承大业，综理万机，求贤致治，心如饥渴。
English: My heart is hungry and thirsty for the great cause, the comprehensive solution of all problems, and the pursuit of excellence.

古文：知人则哲，振古所难，宜博访公卿，采兹声实。
现代文：知人善任，自古为难，应博访公卿，采集各方人士的声名事实。
English: Acquaintances are good at their jobs, and have been struggling since ancient times. They should visit the nobles in Bo to collect the reputation facts of people from all walks of life.

古文：可令第一品以下五品以上，人各荐其所知，不限素身居职。
现代文：现在可令第一品以下，第五品以上的官员，各人推荐自己所了解的人，不限身份和职务。
English: Now, officials below the first grade and above the fifth grade can be recommended by anyone they know, regardless of status and position.

古文：必使精辩器艺，具注所能，然后依牒简擢，随才收叙。庶济济之美，无替往时；謇謇之直，有申兹岁。 
现代文：一定要精审其器量才干，具体列举才能在哪一方面，然后依式提拔，按其才能安排位置，希望人才济济的景象，不差往昔，忠直之风，弘扬于今岁。 
English: It is necessary to scrutinize their talent, specifically enumerate which aspect of the talent is the best, and then promote according to the style, arrange the position according to their talent, and hope that the scene of abundant talent is not different from the past, and the style of loyalty is carried forward in this year.

古文：萧衍遣其北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和、上康太守姜平洛等入寇直城，梁州刺史傅竖眼遣息敬绍率众拒击，大破之，擒斩三千余人；休儒等走还魏兴。
现代文：萧衍派其北梁州长史锡休儒、司马鱼和，上庸太守姜平洛等侵犯直城，梁州刺史傅竖眼派儿子傅敬绍率众迎敌，大破敌军，擒斩敌军三千多人，锡休儒等人逃回魏兴。
English: Xiao Yan sent his governor of Beiliang, Shi Xixiuru, Sima Yuhe, Shangyong governor Jiang Pingluo and others to invade Zhicheng. Liangzhou sent his son, Fu Jingshao, who led the crowd to meet the enemy, defeated the enemy army, and killed more than 3,000 enemy troops. Xixiuru and others fled back to Weixing.

古文：是月，齐州清河民崔畜杀太守董遵，广川民傅堆执太守刘莽反。
现代文：这个月，齐州清河百姓崔畜杀了太守董遵，广川百姓傅堆逮捕太守刘莽然后反叛。
English: This month, the people of Qinghe in Qizhou, Cui Zhu, killed the governor, Dong Zun, and the people of Guangchuan, Fu Dui, arrested the governor, Liu Mang, and then rebelled.

古文：青州刺史、安乐王鉴讨平之。
现代文：青州刺史、安乐王元鉴讨伐并平定了他们。
English: Qingzhou Shishi and Anle Wang Yuan Jian led a crusade and defeated them.

古文：是月，破落汗拔陵别帅王也不卢等攻陷怀朔镇。
现代文：这个月，破落汗拔陵别帅王也不卢等攻陷怀朔镇。
English: This month, Wei Shuo Town was invaded by the Ruins of Wei Shuo King and others.

古文：夏四月，萧衍益州刺史萧渊猷遣将樊文炽、萧世澄等率众围小剑戍。
现代文：夏季四月，萧衍的益州刺史萧渊猷派将领樊文炽、萧世澄等率部围攻小剑戍镇。
English: In the summer of April, Xiao Yan's Yizhou assassin Xiao Yuan's faction led by generals such as Gao Wenglang and Xiao Shizhen besieged Xiaojianye Town.

古文：益州刺史邴虬遣子子达、行台魏子建遣别将淳于诞拒击之。
现代文：益州刺史邴虬派子邴子达，行台魏子建派别将淳于诞迎击。
English: The Yizhou Zhishi faction, the Zou faction and the Zi faction have reached the goal, and the Xingdai Wei Zi Jian faction will meet the attack at the birth.

古文：辛卯，皇太后复临朝摄政，引郡臣面陈得失。
现代文：二十五日，皇太后又临朝摄政，召集大臣们来议论得失。
English: On the 25th, the empress dowager became regent of the imperial court and summoned the ministers to discuss the gains and losses.

古文：诏曰： 朕以寡昧，夙承天历，茫若涉海，罔知所济，实凭宗社降祐之灵，庶勉幼志，以康世道。
现代文：下诏称： 朕寡陋昧暗，早承天历，茫茫然如涉渊海，不知所济，全靠祖宗在天之灵保佑，大家勉力辅弼，才得以康弘世道。
English: The following edict stated: "I am poor and obscure, an early inheritor of the heavenly calendar, lost and bewildered as if I were wading into a deep sea, and I do not know what to do. I rely entirely on the blessings of my ancestors in the spirit of heaven, and everyone's efforts to help me, so that I can prosper in the world.

古文：而神龟之末，权臣擅命，元叉、刘腾阴相影响，遂使皇太后幽隔后宫，太傅、清河王无辜致害，相州刺史、中山王熙横被夷灭，右卫将军奚康生仍见诛翦。
现代文：而神龟末年以来，权臣擅命，元叉、刘腾阴谋得逞，于是使皇太后被软禁在后宫，太傅、清河王无辜受害，相州刺史、中山王元熙横遭不测，右卫将军奚康生也被诛戮。
English: However, since the end of the Divine Turtle era, power-wielding officials have been acting on their own, and the conspiracy of Yuan Zhao and Liu Teng has been successful. As a result, the empress dowager has been placed under house arrest in the harem, Taifu and Qinghe Wang have been innocent victims, Sanzhou Zhishi and Zhongshan Wang Yuanxi have suffered accidents, and the right guard general Zou Kangsheng has also been killed.

古文：从此已后，无所畏忌，恣诸侵求，任所与夺。
现代文：从此以后，他们无所畏忌，姿意侵掠奢求，奖惩予夺随心所欲。
English: Since then, they have been fearless, covetous and extravagant in their attitude, and take whatever they want in rewards and punishments.

古文：无君之心，积习稍久；不臣之迹，缘事弥彰。
现代文：无君之心，积习渐久；不臣之迹，越发显明。
English: The heart without a ruler is a long-term habit; the trait of not being a subject becomes more and more obvious.

古文：蔽耳目之明，专生杀之柄，天下为之不康，四郊由兹多垒。
现代文：二人障蔽陛下耳目之明，专握生杀权柄，天下因此不安，四郊由之多阻隔不通。
English: The two of them have blinded His Majesty's eyes and ears, and have the power of life and death. As a result, the whole world is unsettled, and the four suburbs are cut off from each other.

古文：此而可忍，孰不可怀！
现代文：是可忍，孰不可忍！
English: It is bearable, it is unbearable!

古文：虽屡经赦宥，未容致之于法，犹宜辨正，以射朝野。
现代文：虽然朝廷屡经赦免，但在这个上面也应量法而行，仔细辨正，以谢朝野之愤。
English: Although the imperial court has been pardoned many times, it should also act according to the law in this respect, carefully judge and correct, and thank the anger of the court and the field.

古文：腾身既往，可追削爵位。
现代文：刘腾既已死去，可追削其爵位。
English: Now that Liu Teng has died, his title can be stripped.

古文：叉之罪状，诚合徽纆，但以宗枝舅戚，特加全贷，可除名为民。 
现代文：元叉的罪行，实应严惩，但因他是皇亲国戚，予以宽大处理，可除名为民。 
English: Yuan Zha's crime should be severely punished, but because he is a relative of the emperor, he will be treated leniently and may be removed from the people.

古文：壬辰，征西将军、都督崔延伯大败于泾川，战殁。
现代文：十八日，征西将军、都督崔延伯在泾川被打得大败，自己也战死。
English: On the 18th, Cui Yanbo, the general of the Western Conquest and the governor of the capital, suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Longchuan, and died in the battle.

古文：五月戊辰，淳于诞等大破萧衍军，俘斩万计，擒萧世澄等十一将。文识仅以身免，走成都。
现代文：五月二十四日，淳于诞等大破萧衍军队，俘虏斩首万人，擒获萧世澄等十一位将领，樊文炽仅以身免，逃往成都。
English: On May 24th, Jun Yu Xing and others defeated Xiao Yan's army, beheaded ten thousand captives, and captured eleven generals including Xiao Shizhen. Zou Wenzhuang escaped to Chengdu with only his life.

古文：戊子，骠骑大将军、仪司三司李崇薨。
现代文：戊子，骠骑大将军、仪同三司李崇逝世。
English: Pei Zi, the commander of the imperial cavalry, and Li Chong, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, passed away.

古文：六月癸未，大赦，改年。
现代文：六月初十，朝廷大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month, the imperial court amnestied the whole country and changed the year.

古文：诏文武之官，从军二百日，文官优一级，武官优二级。
现代文：下诏文武官员，凡从军二百天者，文官升一级，武官升两级。
English: According to the following edict, civil and military officials who have been in the military for 200 days will be promoted to the first grade, and military officers will be promoted to the second grade.

古文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰率众大破拔陵，斩其将孔雀等。
现代文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰率众大破拔陵，斩杀其将孔雀等。
English: The creepy-crawly master Anagu led a large number of people to break the tomb, killing the peacock and so on.

古文：诸将逼彭城，萧综夜潜出降，萧衍诸将奔退，众军追蹑，免者十一二。
现代文：众将逼近彭城，萧综在夜晚偷偷出来投降，萧衍众将奔逃而去，军队席卷过去，萧衍人马死里逃生的仅有十分之一二。
English: The crowd will approach Pengcheng, Xiao Zhao will sneak out at night to surrender, Xiao Yan's crowd will run away, the army will sweep past, and only two-tenths of Xiao Yan's army will escape.

古文：秋八月癸酉，诏断远近贡献珍丽，违者免官。
现代文：秋季八月初三，朝廷下诏禁止远近各地再行贡纳奇珍异宝，违诏者免去官职。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of August, the imperial court issued an edict prohibiting the performance of Gongna Qi Zhenyi Bao in far and near places, and those who violated the edict were removed from their official posts.

古文：柔玄镇人杜洛周率众反于上谷，号年真王，攻没郡县，南围燕州。
现代文：柔玄镇人杜洛周率众在上谷造反，年号真王，攻郡陷县，南围燕州城。
English: Zhuo Zhou, a resident of Zhuoxuan Town, led the people to rebel in Shanggu, the year of the real king, attacking the county, the county, and Yanzhou City in the south.

古文：戊子，莫折念生遣都督杜黑兒、杜光等攻仇池郡。
现代文：初八，莫折念生派都督杜黑儿、杜光等攻打仇池郡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the new year, he reluctantly sent the governors Du Haier and Du Guang to attack Qiuqi County.

古文：行台魏子建遣将成迁击破之，斩杜光首。
现代文：行台魏子建派将领成迁击败了他们，砍下杜光首级。
English: General Cheng Qian of the Wei Zi Jian faction defeated them and cut off Du Guang's head.

古文：九月乙卯，诏减天下诸调之半。
现代文：九月十三日，下诏减免百姓各种租税的一半。
English: On September 13th, the following edict reduced and exempted half of the people's various taxes.

古文：丙辰，诏左将军、幽州刺史常景为行台，征虏将军元谭为都督，以讨洛周。
现代文：十四日，朝廷下诏命左将军、幽州刺史常景为行台，征虏将军元谭为都督，以讨伐杜洛周。
English: On the 14th, the imperial court issued an edict to General Zuo, Yuzhou to assassinate Changjing, and to conscript General Yuan Tan as the governor to fight against Du Luo Zhou.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 追功表德，为善者劝。
现代文：十九日，朝廷下诏说： 追功表德，以勉励善者。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict issued by the imperial court said: "Pursue merit and virtue to encourage the virtuous."

古文：祖宗功臣，勒铭王府；而子孙废替，沦于凡民，爵位无闻，迁流有失。
现代文：祖宗为功臣，封为王爵，而他们的子孙废弃不名，沦为平民，爵位无闻，流落散失。
English: Their ancestors were meritorious vassals and were given the title of royal barons, while their descendants became nameless and were reduced to commoners, their titles were unknown, and their villages were dispersed.

古文：颍川名守，重泉令宰，惠风美政，结于民心，而犹同常品，未蒙褒陟，非所谓爱及甘棠，彝伦攸叙者也。
现代文：颍川名守，重泉名宰，惠风美政，结于民心，而他们却依然是寻常品级，未受褒扬提拔，这不是常说的爱及甘棠、良伦美列之意所应该的。
English: The famous governor of the Minchuan River, the famous governor of the heavy spring, the favorable wind and the beautiful politics are linked to the people's hearts, but they are still ordinary grades and have not been praised and promoted. This is not what is often said to be the meaning of love and gentleness.

古文：其功臣名将为先朝所知，子孙屈塞不见齿叙，牧守令长声称卓然者，皆仰有司具以名闻。
现代文：现在，那些先朝知名的功臣名将，他们的子孙沦湮埋没有官职的，那些牧令守长声誉政绩卓尔不凡的，都请有关部门具报上闻。
English: Now, those famous heroes and generals who were well-known in the previous dynasty, their descendants who were buried without official posts, those pastors and wardens with outstanding reputation and outstanding political achievements, have all been reported to the relevant departments.

古文：朕将振彼幽滞，用阐治风。 
现代文：朕将予以大力提拔，以光大治风。 
English: I will vigorously promote them and fight the wind with light.

古文：壬戌，诏百官五品已上，各举所知。
现代文：二十日，下诏让百官五品以上的，各举荐自己所知道的文武才俊者。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the emperor issued an edict to let the 100 officials with five or more merits each recommend a person they knew who was good at literature and martial arts.

古文：辛未，曲赦南、北两秦州。
现代文：二十九日，因特殊情况赦免南北两秦州罪民。
English: On the 29th, due to special circumstances, the criminals of the two Qin states in the north and south were pardoned.

古文：冬十月，蠕蠕国主阿那瑰遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬季十月，蠕蠕国主阿那瑰派使者朝贡。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Anaxias sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是月，吐谷浑国复讨赵天安，降之。
现代文：这个月，吐谷浑又讨伐赵天安，赵投降了。
English: This month, Tugu Hun again besieged Zhao Tian'an, and Zhao surrendered.

古文：河州长史元永平、治中孟宾等推嚈哒使主高徽行州事，而前刺史梁钊子景进攻杀之，景进又自行州事。
现代文：河州长史元永平、治中孟宾等共推口厌哒使主高徽处理州事，而前刺史梁钊之子梁景进杀了他，梁景进便自己行使起权力来了。
English: The governor of Hebei Province, Shi Yuan Yongping, and the governor of the Middle Kingdom, Meng Bin, were all reluctant to let Master Gao Hui deal with state affairs, but the former assassin Shi Liang Jun's son, Liang Jing Jin, killed him, and Liang Jing Jin himself exercised power.

古文：十有一月辛亥，诏曰： 大孝荣亲，著之昔典，故安平耄耋，诸子满朝。
现代文：十一月十一日，朝廷下诏书说： 大孝使亲故都很荣耀，古时法典已经注明，所以安平王年高，诸子满朝。
English: On November 11th, the imperial decree issued by the imperial court said: It is a great honor to be a great filial son. The ancient time code has been noted, so King Anping is old, and his sons are full of dynasty.

古文：自今诸有父母年八十以上者，皆听居官禄养，温清朝夕。 
现代文：从今以后各官员有父母年岁在八十以上的，都听其居官禄养，让其朝夕享受温情。 
English: From now on, all officials with parents over the age of 80 should listen to their officials and let them enjoy the warmth in the morning and evening.

古文：时四方多事，诸蛮复反。
现代文：当时天下处多事之时，诸少数民族再次反叛。
English: At that time, when the world was in turmoil, ethnic minorities once again rebelled.

古文：十有二月壬午，诏曰： 高祖以大明定功，世宗以下武宁乱，声溢朔南，化清中宇，业盛隆周，祚延七百。
现代文：十二月十二日，帝下诏说： 高祖以大德定功，世宗以武力息乱，声名漫溢南北，教化澄清中土，大业盛过强周，国运延续了七百年。
English: On December 12th, the imperial edict said: Gaozu made great achievements with great virtue, Shizong put an end to chaos with military force, fame spread to the north and south, enlightenment clarified the middle land, great undertakings prevailed over strong ones, and the national movement continued for seven hundred years.

古文：朕幼龄纂历，夙驭鸿基，战战兢兢，若临渊谷。
现代文：朕少年登基，早行皇权，战战兢兢，如临渊谷。
English: I was a young man when I ascended to the throne, and I ascended to the imperial power early. I trembled with fear, as if I were in the Valley of the Abyss.

古文：暗于治道，政刑未孚，权臣擅命，乱我朝式。致使西秦跋扈，朔漠构妖，蠢尔荆蛮，氛埃不息。
现代文：朕不明治道，政事刑法都不娴熟，权臣擅命，乱我朝廷程式，致使西秦跋扈、北戎嚣张，荆蛮蠢蠢欲动，战火纷飞，连年不息。
English: I don't know how to govern, I'm not familiar with political and criminal law, and I'm not good at following the orders of powerful officials. I've messed up the imperial court's procedures, causing the Western Qin Dynasty to be arrogant, the Northern Qin Dynasty to be arrogant, the Southern Qin Dynasty to be arrogant, the Northern Qin Dynasty to be arrogant, and the Northern Qin Dynasty to be arrogant.

古文：孔炽甚于泾阳，出军切于细柳。
现代文：乱急甚于当年泾阳之时，出军迫急超过旧时细柳扎营。
English: The rush was even greater than at the time of Shenyang that year, and the urgency to go to the army was greater than in the old days when they set up camp in Xiliu.

古文：而师旅盘桓，留滞不进，北淯悬危，南阳告急，将亏荆沔之地，以致蹙国之忧。
现代文：但军队盘桓，滞留不前，北氵育悬危，南阳告急，将失荆、沔之地，以致有逼迫国家之忧。
English: However, the army is entangled and does not move forward, the north is in peril, and the south is in a hurry, and will lose and lose ground, so that there is a fear of persecution of the country.

古文：今茅毂扼腕，爪牙叹愤，并欲摧挫封豕，剿截长蛇，使人神两泰，幽明献吉。
现代文：现在茅毂扼腕，爪牙叹愤，都希望能挫败大敌，剿截长蛇，使得人神两安，幽明献吉。
English: Now, the mastiff clenched his fists and his minions sighed with indignation, all hoping to defeat the great enemy and cut off the long snake, so that both humans and gods would be safe, and Yuming would be victorious.

古文：朕将躬驭六师，扫荡逋秽。
现代文：朕将亲统六师，扫荡污秽。
English: I will gather six divisions of relatives and sweep away the filth.

古文：其配衣六军，分隶熊虎，前驱后队，左翼右师，必令将帅雄果，军吏明济，粮仗车马，速度时须。
现代文：其配衣六军，分属龙虎，前驱后队，左翼右师，必须要将帅雄健果敢，军吏明济，粮草器仗车辆马匹，随供所需。
English: Its six armies, divided into dragons and tigers, the vanguard and the rearguard, the left wing and the right division, must be handsome, strong and courageous, the military officials must be kind, the grain and grass implements, vehicles and horses must be provided as needed.

古文：其有失律亡军、兵戍逃叛、盗贼劫掠伏窜山泽者，免其往咎，录其后效，别立募格，听其自新，广下州郡，令赴军所。
现代文：那些曾失误亡军、战前逃叛、窜伏山泽劫掠为盗的人，免除其以往的过失，收录其后来之忠，另立一种格式，听其自新，此令要广下各州郡，召他们赴军立功。
English: Those who have made mistakes and died in the army, fled before the war, and robbed and plundered the mountains and lakes will be absolved of their past mistakes, their later loyalty will be recorded, and a new format will be set up to listen to them. This order will spread to all states and counties, calling them to go to the army and make contributions.

古文：今先讨荆蛮，疆理南服；戈旗东指，扫平淮外。
现代文：今天先征伐荆蛮，使南疆臣服；然后大旗东指，扫平淮南。
English: Today, we will first conquer Jingmang and subjugate Southern Xinjiang. Then, we will sweep Huainan.

古文：然后奋七萃于西戎，腾五牛于北狄；躬抚乱离之苦，面恤饥寒之患。
现代文：然后军马汇集西域，扫平西疆，安定北境；抚慰离乱之人，安抚饥寒之民。
English: Then the army and horses gathered in the western region, swept the western region, and stabilized the northern region; soothed the people in disarray, and appeased the people who were hungry and cold.

古文：尔乃还跸嵩宇，饮至庙庭，沉璧河洛，告成泰岱，岂不盛欤！
现代文：最后登临嵩山，向神灵、祖先禀报大功告成，沉璧河洛，告成泰岳，那不是一种盛大的景观吗！
English: Finally, he ascended Songshan Mountain to report to the gods and ancestors that his great work had been accomplished, that he had devoted himself to Hailo, and that he had conquered Mount Tai. Isn't that a grand view?

古文：百官内外、牧守军宰，宜各肃勤，用明尔职。 
现代文：内外百官、牧守军宰，各各宜整肃勤勉，恪守职责。 
English: Officials at home and abroad, pastors and military commanders, each should be diligent and diligent, and abide by their duties.

古文：山胡刘蠡升反，自称天子，置官僚。
现代文：山胡刘蠡升造反，自称天子，设置百官。
English: Sanhu Liu Ying Sheng rebelled, claimed to be the son of heaven, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：是月，以临淮王彧为征南大将军，率众讨鲁阳蛮。
现代文：这个月，任命临淮王元为征南大将军，率军讨伐鲁阳蛮族。
English: This month, Lin Huai Wang Yuan was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition, leading the army to fight the barbarians of Luyang.

古文：二年春正月庚戌，封广平王怀庶长子、太常少卿诲为范阳王。
现代文：孝昌二年春正月初十，封广平王元怀的庶生长子、太常少卿元诲为范阳王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the second year of Xiaochang's reign, the illegitimate son of Guangping Wang Yuanhai, Taizhong Shaoqing Yuan, was named Fanyang Wang.

古文：壬子，以太保、汝南王悦领太尉。
现代文：十二日，以太保、汝南王元悦为领太尉。
English: On the 12th, Ether Bao and Runan Wang Yuan Rong were promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：是月，都督元谭次于军都，为洛周所败。
现代文：这个月，都督元谭驻军军都，被杜洛周打败。
English: This month, the governor, Yuan Tan, garrisoned the capital and was defeated by Du Luo Zhou.

古文：五原降户鲜于脩礼反于定州，号鲁兴元年。
现代文：五原归降户民鲜于修礼在定州造反，建号鲁兴元年。
English: The returnees from Wuhara rebelled in Dingzhou in the first year of Lu Xing.

古文：诏左光禄大夫长孙稚为使持节、假骠骑将军、大都督、北讨诸军事，与都督河间王琛率将讨之。
现代文：帝诏左光禄大夫长孙稚为使持节、假骠骑大将军、大都督、北讨诸军事，与都督河间王元琛率将讨伐。
English: Emperor Zoganglu sent doctor Chosun Choshu as envoy to hold the festival, and also sent the general of the cavalry, the grand governor, the military to the north, and the governor of Kawama, Wang Yuanjun, led the crusade.

古文：二月甲申，帝、皇太后临大夏门，亲览冤讼。
现代文：二月十五日，肃宗、皇太后驾临大夏门，亲自审理冤案。
English: On February 15, Su Zong and the Empress Dowager came to Daxia Gate to personally hear the case.

古文：是月，叠伏罗国遣使朝贡。
现代文：这个月，叠伏罗国派使者前来朝贡。
English: This month, the State of Suiburo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月庚子，以骠骑大将军、徐州刺史、安丰王廷明为仪同三司。
现代文：三月初二，任命骠骑大将军、徐州刺史、安丰王元延明为仪同三司。
English: On the second day of March, he appointed General Zou Jie, Xuzhou Zhishi, and Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming as the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：追复中山王熙本爵，子叔仁绍之。
现代文：追复中山王元熙本爵，其子叔仁继承爵位。
English: He restored the peerage of King Yuanxi of Zhongshan, and his son Shujin succeeded to the peerage.

古文：甲寅，西部敕勒斛律洛阳反于桑乾，西与河西牧子通连。
现代文：十六日，西部敕勒人斛律洛阳在桑乾反叛，向西与河西牧子相通连。
English: On the 16th, Luoyang in the west of Shandong rebelled in Sangqian, and was connected to the west of Hexi.

古文：别将尔朱荣击破之。
现代文：别将尔朱荣讨伐打败了他们。
English: Don't let the Zhurong Crusade defeat them.

古文：夏四月，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月，朝廷大赦天下。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：癸巳，以侍中、车骑大将军、城阳王徽为仪同三司。
现代文：十五日，任命侍中、车骑大将军、城阳王元徽为仪同三司。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the Chamberlain, the General of Chariots and Cavalry, and the King of Joyang, Yuan Hui, as the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：朔州城人鲜于阿胡、库狄丰乐据城反。
现代文：朔州城民鲜于阿胡、厍狄丰乐据城反叛。
English: The people of Shuozhou City have recently rebelled against Ahu, Zou Di Feng Le.

古文：丁未，都督李琚次于蓟城之北，又为洛周所败，琚战没。
现代文：二十九日，都督李琚军驻蓟城北面，又被杜洛周打败，李琚战死。
English: On the 29th, the military of the governor Li Xi was stationed in the north of the city, and was defeated by Du Luo Zhou. Li Xi died in the battle.

古文：戊申，以骠骑大将军、开府、齐王宝夤为仪同三司。
现代文：三十日，以骠骑大将军、开府、齐王萧宝夤为仪同三司。
English: On the 30th, the three generals, Kaifu, Qi Wang Xiao Baojun and Zou Jiaotong took part in the ceremony.

古文：北讨都督河间王琛、长孙稚失利奔还，诏免琛、稚官爵。
现代文：北讨都督河间王元琛、长孙稚兵败而回，帝下诏免去元琛、长孙稚官爵。
English: In the Northern Expedition, the governor of Kawama, King Motonari and his eldest grandson Chika, were defeated and returned home, but the emperor exempted Motonari and his eldest grandson Chika from the title of nobility.

古文：库莫奚国遣使朝贡。
现代文：库莫奚国派使者朝贡。
English: The Kuomintang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月丁未，车驾将北讨，内外戒严。
现代文：五月初九，肃宗准备亲征北方，内外戒严。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, Su Zong prepared to personally march to the north, and martial law was imposed at home and abroad.

古文：前给事黄门侍郎元略自萧衍还朝，封义阳王。
现代文：前任给事中黄门侍郎元略从萧衍政权逃归朝廷，被封为义阳王。
English: His predecessor, Huangmen Zhi Lang Yuan Rong, fled from the Xiao Yan regime and returned to the imperial court, and was crowned as the King of Yiyang.

古文：以丞相、高阳王雍为大司马；吏部尚书、广阳王渊为骠骑大将军、仪同三司，寻为大都督，率都督章武王融北讨脩礼。
现代文：任命丞相、高阳王元雍为大司马；吏部尚书、广阳王元渊为骠骑大将军、仪同三司，不久任大都督，率领都督章武王元融北讨鲜于修礼。
English: He appointed the chancellor, Goyang Wang Yuan Yong, as the chief secretary; the secretary, Shang Shu, and the Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan, as the cavalry general, the three officers of the ceremony, and the soon-to-be-appointed grand governor, led by the governor Zhang Wu Wang Yuan Rongbei.

古文：戊申，燕州刺史崔秉率众弃城南走中山。
现代文：初十，燕州刺史崔秉率众放弃城池南逃入中山境内。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Yanzhou assassin Cui Bing led the crowd to abandon the south of the city and flee into Zhongshan territory.

古文：乙丑，以安西将军、光禄大夫宗正珍孙为都督，讨汾州反胡。
现代文：二十七日，任命安西将军、光禄大夫宗正珍孙为都督，征讨汾州反叛的胡人。
English: On the 27th, Anxi General and Guanglu Doctor Zong Zheng Jinsun was appointed as the governor to recruit Hu rebels in Zhangzhou.

古文：六月己巳，曲赦齐州。
现代文：六月初二，在齐州实行特赦。
English: On the second day of June, an amnesty was implemented in Qizhou.

古文：绛蜀陈双炽聚众反，自号始建王。
现代文：绛蜀人陈双炽聚众造反，自号建始王。
English: Chen Shuang, a man from Shenshu, rallied the people to rebel and called himself the founding king.

古文：曲赦平阳、建兴、正平三郡。
现代文：特赦平阳、建兴、正平三郡。
English: The amnesty covers the three counties of Pingyang, Jianxing and Zhengping.

古文：诏假镇西将军、都督长孙稚讨双炽，平之。
现代文：下诏让假镇西将军、都督长孙稚征讨陈双炽，平定了他。
English: He issued an edict to have General Fuzhen Xi and Governor Sun Chizhi go to Chen Shuangtao and subdue him.

古文：丙子，义阳王略改封东平王。
现代文：初九，京兆王元略被改封为东平王。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19

古文：卫大将军、西道都督元恆芝为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：卫大将军、西道都督元恒芝为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: General Wei and former West Road Governor Heng Zhi are the General of Chariot and Cavalry, as well as the three departments of Ceremonies and Ceremonies.

古文：戊寅，诏复京兆王继本封江阳王。
现代文：十二日，帝下诏恢复义阳王元继的本来封号江阳王。
English: On the 12th, the emperor issued an edict to restore the original title of Yiyang Wang Yuanji to Jiangyang Wang.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 自运属艰棘，历载于兹，烽驿交驰，旌鼓不息。祖宗盛业，危若缀旒；社稷鸿基，殆将沦坠。
现代文：二十二日，帝下诏书说： 自从国运步入艰难的境地，一直到今天，烽火驿报交替驰传，旌旗战鼓从未停息，祖宗传下来的盛隆基业，危如垒卵，国家政权，快要沦落坠没。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict said: Since the national movement entered a difficult situation, until today, the bonfires and newspapers have been passed down alternately, the flags and drums have never stopped, the Shenglong Foundation passed down by the ancestors is in danger, and the state power is about to fall.

古文：朕威德不能遐被，经略无以及远，俾令苍生罹此涂炭，何以苟安黄屋，无愧黔黎？
现代文：朕威信德行不能传远，谋划运筹无法远播，致使苍生百姓遭此劫难、生灵涂炭，怎样做才能让皇基稳固，黎民安宁呢。
English: Our prestige and moral conduct cannot be transmitted far, and our planning and operational planning cannot be spread far. As a result, the people of all walks of life have suffered this calamity, and lives have been ruined. What can we do to keep the foundation of the imperial family stable and the people peaceful?

古文：今便避居正殿，蔬餐素服。
现代文：从今开始，朕便避居正殿，蔬食素服。
English: From now on, I will avoid the main hall and wear vegetarian clothes.

古文：当亲自招募，收集忠勇。
现代文：朕当亲自召募士卒，收集忠勇。
English: I should personally call for recruits and gather the loyal and brave.

古文：其有直言正谏之士，敢决徇义之夫，二十五日悉集华林东门，人别引见，共论得失。
现代文：其有能极言力谏之士，敢于申明忠义之人，二十五日以前都到华林东门集中，朕将分别引见，共商朝政得失。
English: Some of the most eloquent people, those who dare to declare their loyalty, have all gathered at the East Gate of Hualin before the 25th. I will introduce them separately and discuss the gains and losses of the dynasty.

古文：班告内外，咸使闻知。 
现代文：此令颁告朝野内外，使人们都知道此事。 
English: This order was issued to the court and outside, so that people knew about it.

古文：乙未，以卫将军、东平王略为左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，任命卫将军、东平王元略为左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: On the 29th, General Wei and Dongping Wangyuanli were appointed as Doctor of the Left Hand and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：秋七月丙午，杜洛周遣其别帅曹纥真寇掠幽州。
现代文：秋季七月初十，杜洛周派其别帅曹纥真侵犯幽州。
English: At the beginning of the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, Du Luo Zhou sent his other handsome Cao Bingzhen to invade Yuzhou.

古文：行台常景遣都督于荣邀于粟园，大破之，斩纥真，获三十余级，牛驴二万余头。
现代文：行台常景派都督于荣在粟园迎战，大破曹纥，斩杀曹纥，斩获三十多人，得到牛驴二万多头。
English: Yurong, the governor of the Changjing faction of the Xingtai clique, fought in the millet garden, defeated Cao Pi, killed Cao Pi, captured more than 30 people, and obtained more than 20,000 heads of cattle and donkeys.

古文：戊申，恆州陷，行台元纂奔冀州。
现代文：十二日，恒州陷落，行台元纂奔逃到冀州。
English: On the 12th, Hengzhou fell, and Xingtaiguanzuo fled to Jizhou.

古文：甲子，萧衍将元树、湛僧珍等寇寿春。
现代文：二十七日，萧衍将元树、湛僧珍等人率军侵犯寿春。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Yan invaded Shuchun with the army led by Yuan Shu, Zhan Sozhen and others.

古文：八月丙子，进封广川县开国公元邵为常山王。
现代文：八月初九，晋封广川县开国公元召己为常山王。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 9th year of the 9th month of the 8th year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th month of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 20th year of the 20

古文：以骠骑大将军、东道行台、临淮王彧为仪同三司。
现代文：任命骠骑大将军、东道行台、临淮王元为仪同三司。
English: He appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, the host of the imperial procession, and Lin Huai Wang Yuan as the three departments of the imperial procession.

古文：戊寅，帝幸南石窟寺，即日还宫。
现代文：十一日，肃宗驾临南石窟寺，当日便回宫。
English: On the 11th day, Su Zong drove to the South Grottoes Temple and returned to the palace on the same day.

古文：戊子，进散骑常侍、御史中尉、武城县开国公子攸为长乐王。
现代文：二十一日，晋封散骑常侍、御史中尉、武城县开国公元子攸为长乐王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Prince of Jin, the Prince of Zanyi, the Lieutenant of History, the son of the founder of Wucheng County, became the King of Changle.

古文：都督伊甕生讨巴，失利战殁。
现代文：都督伊瓮生讨伐巴人，失利战死。
English: The governor, Isen, was a crusader against the barbarians and died in the battle.

古文：癸巳，贼帅元洪业斩鲜于脩礼，请降，为贼党葛荣所杀。
现代文：二十六日，贼帅元洪业杀了鲜于修礼，请求投降朝廷，被贼党葛荣杀害。
English: On the 26th, the thief-commander-in-chief, Yuan Hongye, killed Xiang Yu and requested to surrender to the imperial court. He was killed by the thief-in-chief, Ge Rong.

古文：都督尔朱荣于肆州执刺史尉庆宾，令其从叔羽生统州事。
现代文：都督尔朱荣在肆州把刺史尉庆宾抓了起来，命令其堂叔尔朱羽生统摄州中事务。
English: In Zhouzhou, the governor Zhu Rong arrested the vice-governor Qing Bin and ordered his uncle Zhu Yansheng to take charge of the affairs of Zhouzhou Middle School.

古文：九月辛亥，葛荣败都督广阳王渊、章武王融于博野白牛逻，融殁于阵。
现代文：九月十五日，葛荣在博野白牛逻打败了都督广阳王元渊、章武王元融，元融战死阵前。
English: On September 15th, Ge Rong defeated the governor of Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan, Zhangwu Wang Yuan Rong, and Yuan Rong died before the battle.

古文：荣自称天子，号曰齐国，年称广安。
现代文：葛荣自称天子，国号齐，年号广安。
English: Ge Rong claimed to be the son of heaven, with the country name Qi and the year name Guang'an.

古文：甲申，常景又破洛周，斩其武川王贺拔文兴、别帅侯莫陈升，生擒男女四百口，牛驴五千余头。
现代文：甲申日，常景又打败杜洛周，杀了他的武川王贺拔文兴、别帅侯莫陈升，生擒男女俘虏四百多人，牛驴五千多头。
English: On the day of Jiaxing, Changjing defeated Dulozhou again, killed his Wuchuan kings He Bapwenxing and Bie Shuai Hou Mo Chensheng, captured more than four hundred men and women, and more than five thousand cattle and donkeys.

古文：就德兴攻陷平州，杀刺史王买奴。
现代文：就德兴攻陷平州，杀害刺史王买奴。
English: Dexing invaded Pingzhou, killed King Sashihong and bought slaves.

古文：是月，莫折天生请降，萧宝夤使行台左丞崔士和入据秦州。
现代文：这个月，莫折天生请求投降，萧宝夤派行台左丞崔士和前去据守秦州。
English: This month, Moreno naturally asked for surrender, and Xiao Baojun sent the left-handed general, Cui Shihe, to defend Qinzhou.

古文：天生复叛，送士和于胡琛，杀之。
现代文：天生又叛，把崔士和送给胡琛，被害。
English: A born rebel, he gave Choi Shih Ho to Hu Yao and was killed.

古文：冬十有一月戊戌，杜洛周攻陷幽州，执刺史王延年及行台常景。
现代文：冬季十一月三日，杜洛周攻陷幽州，把刺史王延年以及行台常景抓了起来。
English: On November 3rd in winter, Dulos Zhou invaded Yuzhou and captured Yan Nian and Xing Tai Chang Jie.

古文：丙午，税京师田租，亩五升；借赁公田者，亩一斗。
现代文：十一日，规定京郊的田租，每亩五升；借贷公田耕种的，每亩上缴一斗。
English: On the 11th, it was stipulated that the field rent in the suburbs of Beijing would be five liters per mu; those who cultivated public land on loan would pay one bucket per mu.

古文：闰月，税市人出入者各一钱，店舍为五等。
现代文：闰月中，规定在集市上做流动生意的，每人各一钱，店舍的税分为五等。
English: During the leap month, it is stipulated that those who do mobile business at the bazaar should pay one yuan per person, and the tax of the store is divided into five grades.

古文：齐州平原民刘树、刘苍生聚众反，州军破走之。刘树奔萧衍。
现代文：齐州平原郡百姓刘树、刘苍生聚众造反，州中驻军打败了他们，刘树投奔萧衍去了。
English: The people of Qizhou Plain County, Liu Shu and Liu Cang Sheng, gathered together to rebel. The garrison in the state defeated them, and Liu Shu went to Beng Xiaoyan.

古文：衍将元树逼寿春，扬州刺史李宪力屈，以城降之。
现代文：萧衍将领元树进逼寿春，扬州刺史李宪不敌，举城投降。
English: General Xiao Yan led the Yuan Shu into the forced Spring Festival, Yangzhou assassin Li Xian was defeated, and the city surrendered.

古文：初留州、郡、县及长史、司马、戍主副质子于京师。
现代文：当初，这些州、郡、县的行政长官及长史、司马、戍主都留有子女在京城作为人质。
English: At the beginning, the governors of these prefectures, counties, and counties, as well as Changshi, Sima, and the tyrant, all kept their children as hostages in the capital.

古文：衍又遣将攻逼新野，诏都督魏承祖讨之。
现代文：萧衍又派将领攻打新野，肃宗下诏命都督魏承祖讨伐他们。
English: Xiao Yan also sent generals to attack Nino, and Su Zong issued an edict ordering the governor Wei Chengzu to fight them.

古文：诏曰： 顷旧京沦覆，中原丧乱，宗室子女，属籍在七庙之内，为杂户滥门所拘辱者，悉听离绝。 
现代文：肃宗下诏说： 最近以来，旧京沦陷覆亡，中原丧乱，宗室子女，户籍在皇室家族之内，被杂户滥门所拘禁污辱的，听任其离绝。 
English: Su Zong issued an edict saying, "Recently, with the fall of the old Beijing and the turmoil in the Central Plains, the children of the imperial family who are registered with the imperial family and who are detained and insulted by disorderly households should be allowed to leave the imperial family.

古文：三年春正月甲戌，以司空公皇甫度为司徒，仪同三司萧宝夤为司空，车骑将军、北海王颢为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：孝昌三年春季正月初十，任命司空公皇甫度为司徒，仪同三司萧宝夤为司空，车骑将军、北海王元颢为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Xiaochang, he appointed Siku Gong Wangfudu as the tutor, and Xiao Baojun as the third secretary of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division.

古文：徐州民任道棱聚众反，袭据萧城以叛。
现代文：徐州百姓任道棱聚众造反，袭据萧城叛乱。
English: The people of Xuzhou rallied and rebelled, leading to the Xiaocheng Rebellion.

古文：州军讨平之。
现代文：州中驻军讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: A counter-offensive by the state's central garrison quelled the rebellion.

古文：辛巳，葛荣陷殷州，刺史崔楷固节死之，遂东围冀州。
现代文：十七日，葛荣攻陷殷州，刺史崔楷守节而死，于是朝廷东围冀州。
English: On the 17th, Ge Rong invaded Yinzhou and stabbed Cui Kai Shou Jie to death, so the imperial court went to the east to surround Jizhou.

古文：甲申，诏峻铸钱之制。
现代文：二十日，皇帝下诏严整铸钱的制度。
English: On the 20th, the emperor issued an edict strictly regulating the minting of money.

古文：萧宝夤、元恆芝大败于泾州，大陇都督、南平王仲冏，小陇都督高聿并相寻退散。东秦州刺史潘义渊以汧城降贼。
现代文：萧宝夤、元恒芝在泾州被打得大败，大陇都督、南平王仲礒，小陇都督高聿都相继退散而去，东秦州刺史潘义渊以城投降敌人。
English: Xiao Baojun and Yuan Hengzhi were soundly defeated in Zhangzhou. The governor of Daguo, Nanping Wang Zhongyao, and the governor of Xiaozhuang, Gao Yao, retreated one after another, and East Qin Province's governor, Pan Yiyuan, surrendered the city to the enemy.

古文：高平虏贼逼岐州，城人执刺史魏兰根，以城应之。
现代文：高平贼寇逼近岐州，城中百姓拘捕刺史魏兰根，以城投敌。
English: Gaoping bandits approached Qizhou, and the people in the city arrested and stabbed Wei Langen, and took the city to the enemy.

古文：豳州刺史毕祖晖、行台羊深并奔退，祖晖于阵殁。
现代文：豳州刺史毕祖晖、行台羊深一起奔逃，祖晖死于阵前。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Bi Zuyao and Xingtai Yoshen fled together, and Zuyao died before the battle.

古文：北海王颢寻亦败走。
现代文：北海王元颢不久也败退而去。
English: The king of the North Sea, Yuan Shao, was soon defeated and fled.

古文：贼帅胡引祖据北华州以应之。
现代文：贼帅胡引祖据北华州响应。
English: Thief-in-chief Hu Yingzu responds to North China summit.

古文：贼帅叱干骐麟入据豳州。
现代文：贼帅叱干骐麟入据豳州。
English: The thief-in-chief, Gan Kirin, entered Zhangzhou.

古文：曲赦关西及正平、平阳、建兴。
现代文：朝廷有条件地赦免关西以及正平、平阳、建兴有罪的人。
English: The imperial court conditionally pardoned Kansai as well as Zhengping, Pingyang and Jianxing.

古文：戊子，以司徒皇甫度为太尉。
现代文：二十五日，因四方未平，帝下诏京城内外戒严，自己准备亲自出征。
English: On the 25th, due to the four sides not being leveled, the emperor decreed martial law inside and outside the capital, and he prepared to go to war in person.

古文：己丑，以四方未平，诏内外戒严，将亲出讨。辛卯，萧衍将湛僧珍围东豫州，诏散骑常侍元暐为都督以讨之。是月，衍又遣将彭群、王辩等率众数万逼琅邪，诏青州、南青二州讨之。
现代文：二十七日，萧衍将领湛僧珍围困东豫州，帝下诏命散骑常侍元日韦为都督讨伐湛僧珍本月，萧衍又派将领彭群、王辩等率众数万进逼琅笽，肃宗下诏命青州、南青州出兵讨伐。
English: On the 27th, General Xiao Yan and his troops besieged East Henan Province, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the imperial equerry Yuan Rongwei to attack the Eastern Henan Province. This month, General Xiao Yan sent the generals Peng Qun and Wang Dian and tens of thousands of troops to force the Eastern Henan Province to surrender, and Emperor Su issued an imperial edict ordering the emperor to send troops to attack Qingzhou and South Qingzhou.

古文：二月丁酉，诏曰： 关陇遭罹寇难，燕赵贼逆凭陵，苍生波流，耕农靡业，加诸转运，劳役已甚，州仓储实，无宜悬匮。自非开输赏之格，何以息漕运之烦？
现代文：二月十四日，皇帝下诏说： 关陇一带遭遇敌寇祸难，燕、赵一带的逆贼欺凌百姓，苍生流离，农耕失时，加上转运，劳役已经很多，州中仓库储积，不应不动，如不开出运输粮食的赏格，怎能停息漕运的烦劳。
English: On February 14th, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: Guanzhang area suffered from the misfortune of enemy invasion, Yan and Zhao areas suffered from the villain's bullying of the people, and many people were displaced. When farming was lost, coupled with transportation, there were already a lot of laborers, and warehouses in the state were accumulated, and should not be moved. If the reward for transporting grain was not given, how could the labor of rowing be stopped.

古文：凡有能输粟入瀛、定、岐、雍四州者，官斗二百斛赏一阶；入二华州者，五百石赏一阶。
现代文：凡是有能把粮食运到瀛、定、岐、雍四州的，官斗二百斛赏赐一级官阶；输入二华州的，五百石赏赐官一阶。
English: For anyone who can transport grain to the four states of Min, Ding, Qi, and Yong, the government will reward the first level of officials with 200 baht; if the grain is imported into the two states of Huazhou, the first level of officials will be rewarded with 500 stone.

古文：不限多少，粟毕授官。 
现代文：不限运输粮食的数量，粮食运完后授给官职。 
English: There is no limit to the amount of grain that can be transported. After the grain has been transported, it is given to officials.

古文：虏贼据潼关。
现代文：敌寇占据潼关。
English: The enemy pirates have taken over the pass.

古文：丁未，追复故东平王匡爵，改封济南王。
现代文：二十四日，追复已故东平王元匡爵位，改封为济南王。
English: On the 24th, the title of the late Dongping Wang Yuankuang was restored, and he was renamed King of Jinan.

古文：庚申，东郡民赵显德反，杀太守裴烟，自号都督，立其兄子为太守。诏都督李仁叔讨之。
现代文：二十七日，东郡百姓赵显德造反，杀了太守裴烟，自称都督。立其兄的儿子为太守，帝诏都督李叔仁讨伐。
English: On the 27th, the people of Dong County rebelled against Zhao Xiande, killed the governor Pei Yan, and claimed to be the governor. He appointed his brother's son as the governor, and sent the governor Li Shuren to fight.

古文：是月，萧衍将成景隽寇彭城，诏员外常侍，崔孝芬为行台，率将击走之。
现代文：这个月，萧衍将领成景隽侵犯彭城。帝诏员外常侍崔孝芬为行台，率领军队击退了敌人。
English: This month, Xiao Yan led the general Cheng Jingyu to invade Pengcheng. The emperor's attendant Cui Xiaofen led the army to repel the enemy.

古文：三月甲子，诏将西讨，中外戒严。
现代文：三月初一，肃宗下诏准备征讨西部，中外戒严。
English: On the first day of March, Su Zong issued an edict to prepare for the imposition of martial law in the west, as well as in China and abroad.

古文：虏贼走，复潼关。
现代文：敌人逃走，收复潼关。
English: The enemy fled and the pass was recaptured.

古文：戊辰，诏将回驾北讨。诏金紫光禄大夫源子邕为大都督，讨葛荣。
现代文：初五，帝下诏准备回驾北讨，下诏命金紫光禄大夫源子邕为大都督，讨伐葛荣。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an imperial edict to return to the north for a discussion, and ordered the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, Yuan Zixuan, to become the great governor and fight against Ge Rong.

古文：辛未，齐州广川民刘钧执清河太守邵怀，聚众反，自署大行台。
现代文：初八，齐州广川郡百姓刘钧逮捕清河太守邵怀，聚众造反，自称大行台。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Liu Wei, a citizen of Guangchuan County, Qizhou, arrested Shao Huai, the governor of Qinghe, and rallied the people to rebel, claiming to be a revolutionary.

古文：清河民房须自署大都督，屯据昌国城。
现代文：清河百姓房须自称大都督，屯据昌国城。
English: The Qinghe people of Fangsu claimed to be the great governor and settled in Changguo City.

古文：夏四月，别将元斌之讨东郡，斩显德。
现代文：夏季四月，别将元斌之征讨东郡，斩杀赵显德。
English: In the summer of April, don't let Yuan Bin's conquest of Dong County go to waste and kill Zhao Xiande.

古文：己酉，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十七日，蠕蠕国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 17th, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：六月，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月，蠕蠕国派使者朝贡。
English: In June, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是月，诏都督李叔仁讨刘钧，平之。
现代文：这个月，帝诏都督李叔仁讨伐刘钧，平定了叛乱。
English: This month, the imperial governor Li Shuren led a crusade against Liu Bei and quelled the rebellion.

古文：秋七月，陈郡民刘获、郑辩反于西华，号年天授，州军讨平之。
现代文：秋季七月，陈郡百姓刘获、郑辩在西华反叛，年号天授。州军征讨平定了叛乱。
English: In the autumn of July, the people of Chen County, Liu Wou and Zheng Yan, rebelled in West China. The year was given by heaven. The rebellion was quelled by the state army.

古文：相州刺史、安乐王鉴据州反。
现代文：相州刺史、安乐王元鉴据州反叛。
English: The history of Xiangzhou and the rebellion of Anle Wangyuan.

古文：己丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二十八日，朝廷大赦天下。
English: On the 28th, the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：是月，青州刺史、彭城王劭，南青州刺史胡平，遣将斩萧衍将彭群首，俘获二千余人。
现代文：这个月，青州刺史、彭城王元劭，南青州刺史胡平，派将杀了萧衍将领彭群，俘敌二千多人。
English: This month, the Qingzhou Zhishi, the Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, and the South Qingzhou Zhishi Hu Ping killed the Xiao Yan general Peng Qun and captured more than two thousand enemies.

古文：八月，都督源子邕、李轨、裴衍攻鄴。
现代文：八月，都督源子邕、李轨、裴衍攻打邺城。
English: In August, the local governors, Yuan Zixuan, Li Rail, and Pei Yan attacked the city.

古文：丁未，斩鉴，相州平。
现代文：十七日，杀了元鉴，相州平定。
English: On the seventeenth day, he killed Yuan Jian and subdued Xiangzhou.

古文：仍令子邕等讨葛荣。
现代文：朝廷又令源子邕等征讨葛荣。
English: The imperial court also ordered Minamoto no Tsukuda and others to enlist Ge Rong.

古文：九月辛卯，东豫州刺史元庆和以城南叛。
现代文：九月辛卯日，东豫州刺史元庆和举城南叛萧衍政权。
English: In September, Eastern Henan Province assassinated Yuan Qing and overthrew the Xiaoyan regime.

古文：戊子，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十八日，蠕蠕国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 28th, the Kingdom of Crewe sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秦州城民杜粲杀莫折念生，自行州事。
现代文：秦州百姓杜粲杀了莫折念生，自己行使州中权力。
English: The people of Qin State, the cuckoo, killed the unyielding student, and exercised the power of the state.

古文：南秦州城民辛琛自行州事，遣使归罪。
现代文：南秦州百姓辛琛自行州中权力，派使者入朝请罪。
English: The people of the Southern Qin state of Xinjiang took the power of the state into their own hands and sent an envoy to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：冬十月戊申，曲赦恆农已西，河北、正平、平阳、邵郡及关西诸州。
现代文：冬季十月十九日，特赦恒农郡以西，河北、正平、平阳、邵郡以及关西诸州。
English: On October 19, winter, the amnesty was extended to the west of Hengnong County, Hebei, Zhengping, Pingyang, Shao County and Kansai provinces.

古文：辛亥，以卫将军、讨虏大部都督尔朱荣为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：二十二日，任命卫将军、讨虏大都督尔朱荣为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: On the 22nd, General Wei and the Grand Vizier Zhu Rong were appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：甲寅，雍州刺史萧宝夤据州反，自号曰齐，年称隆绪。诏尚书右仆射长孙稚讨之。
现代文：二十五日，雍州刺史萧宝夤据州反叛，自称国号为齐，年号隆绪，肃宗下诏命尚书右仆射长孙稚前去讨伐。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Xiao Baojun, the governor of Yongzhou, led a rebellion in Yongzhou, claiming that the country's name was Qi and the year was Longxu, and Su Zong issued an edict ordering Shangshu's right-hand man, Shachang Sunwaki, to go and fight.

古文：十有一月己丑，葛荣攻陷冀州，执刺史元孚，逐出居民，冻死者十六七。
现代文：十一月三十日，葛荣攻陷冀州，逮捕刺史元孚，逐出城中居民，被冻死的人有十分之六七。
English: On November 30th, Ge Rong invaded Jizhou, arrested Zhang Shiyuanfu, and drove out the residents of the city. Sixty-seven out of ten people died of cold.

古文：十有二月戊申，都督源子邕、裴衍与葛荣战，败于阳平东北漳水曲，并战殁。
现代文：十二月十九日，都督源子邕、裴衍与葛荣交战，在阳平东北的漳水转弯处被打败，二人战死。
English: On December 19th, the local governors, Yuan Zixuan and Pei Yan, fought against Ge Rong. They were defeated at the turning point of Surabaya in the northeast of Yangping, and both died in the battle.

古文：是月，杜粲为骆超所杀，超遣使归罪。
现代文：这个月，杜粲被骆超所杀，骆超派使者向朝廷请罪。
English: This month, Du Juan was killed by Luo Chao, and Luo Chao sent an envoy to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：武泰元年春正月癸亥，以北海王颢为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
现代文：武泰元年春季正月初五，朝廷任命北海王元颢为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Wu-tai era, the imperial court appointed the North Sea Wang Yuanjun as the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, and the Sanzhou stabbing history.

古文：乙丑，定州为杜洛周所陷，执刺史杨津。
现代文：初七，定州被杜洛周攻陷了，刺史杨津被俘。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Dingzhou was invaded by Du Luo Zhou, and Yangjin was captured.

古文：瀛州刺史元宁以城降于洛周。
现代文：瀛州刺史元宁举城投降杜洛周。
English: Zhangzhou's progenitor, Yuan Ning, surrendered the city to Du Luo Zhou.

古文：皇女生，秘言皇子。
现代文：皇女出生，秘称皇子。
English: A princess is born, and her secret name is Prince.

古文：丙寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：初八，朝廷大赦天下，改元。
English: On the 21st, Shozong implemented an amnesty and changed the year.

古文：丙子，长孙稚平潼关。
现代文：十八日，长孙稚平定潼关。
English: On the 18th, the eldest grandson, Wuchang, conquered Shaoguan.

古文：丁丑，雍州城人侯终德相率攻宝夤，宝夤携南阳公主及子，与百余骑渡渭而走，雍州平。
现代文：十九日，雍州城民侯终德结伙攻打萧宝夤，宝夤携南阳公主及其子，与百余名骑兵渡过渭河逃走。雍州平定。
English: On the 19th, the citizens of Yongzhou, who were all peasants, banded together to attack Xiao Baojun. Baojun took Nanyang Princess and her son, and fled with more than a hundred cavalry across the Li River. Yongzhou was pacified.

古文：二月，以长孙稚为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、兼尚书仆射、西道行台。
现代文：二月，朝廷任命长孙稚为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、兼尚书仆射、西道行台。
English: In February, the imperial court appointed the eldest grandson to be the general of chariot and cavalry, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, Yongzhou engraving history, concurrent study and writing, and west road trip.

古文：群盗烧劫巩县以西，关口以东，公路涧以南。
现代文：一群盗贼焚烧劫掠巩县以西、关口以东、公路涧以南一带。
English: A group of thieves burned, looted and plundered the areas west of Gong County, east of Guankou and south of the highway.

古文：诏武卫将军李神轨为都督，讨平之。
现代文：帝下诏命武卫将军李神轨为都督，讨伐平定了他们。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint Wuwei General Li Shenshu as the governor of the capital, and the crusade pacified them.

古文：癸丑，帝崩于显阳殿，时年十九。
现代文：二十五日，肃宗在显阳殿逝世，时年十九岁。
English: On the 25th, Su Zong passed away at the Hsien Yang Palace at the age of nineteen.

古文：甲寅，皇子即位，大赦天下。
现代文：二十六日，皇子即位，朝廷大赦天下。
English: On the 26th, the prince ascended the throne, and the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：皇太后诏曰： 皇家握历受图，年将二百；祖宗累圣，社稷载安。
现代文：皇太后下诏书说： 皇家握历受图，将近二百年，祖宗累世圣明，社稷安稳。
English: The empress dowager said in her imperial decree: The royal family has nearly two hundred years of history, the ancestors have been sacred for generations, and the society is stable.

古文：高祖以文思先天，世宗以下武经世，股肱惟良，元首穆穆。
现代文：高祖以文教理国，世宗以武功治世，辅臣惟良，元首穆穆。
English: Gaozu ruled the country with literature, Shizong ruled the world with military prowess, Sukeomi (assistant minister) Koreyoshi, and Fuhrer Mumu.

古文：及大行在御，重以宽仁，奉养率由，温明恭顺。
现代文：等到先帝在位，宽厚仁慈，奉养有度，温明恭顺。
English: Wait until the former emperor is on the throne, he will be generous and benevolent, well-mannered and mild-mannered.

古文：朕以寡昧，亲临万国，识谢涂山，德惭文母。
现代文：朕孤陋寡闻，临治万国，见识不如涂山，德行不如文母。
English: I am uneducated, ill-informed, and unable to rule all countries. My knowledge is not as good as that of a mountaineer, and my virtue is not as good as that of a writer.

古文：属妖逆递兴，四郊多故。
现代文：正逢妖逆蜂起，四方多事。
English: At the time of the rebel uprising, there was a lot going on in all directions.

古文：实望穹灵降祐，麟趾众繁。
现代文：实在希望苍天降灵保佑，子孙满堂。
English: I really hope that God's spirit will bless us and that our children and grandchildren will fill the hall.

古文：自潘充华有孕椒宫，冀诞储两，而熊罴无兆，维虺遂彰。
现代文：自从潘充华有孕东宫，希望其生下皇子，然而熊罴无兆。虺牝逐彰。
English: Ever since Pan Chonghua became pregnant with the Eastern Palace, it was hoped that she would give birth to a prince, but there was no sign of it.

古文：于时直以国步未康，假称统胤，欲以底定物情，系仰宸极。
现代文：其时国运未康，于是假称生子，想以此来安定民心，维系皇脉。
English: At that time, the national movement was not healthy, so he pretended to be a child, hoping to stabilize the people's hearts and maintain the imperial line.

古文：何图一旦，弓剑莫追，国道中微，大行绝祀。
现代文：谁想到皇帝一旦升天，弓剑莫追，国道中微，皇家断绝祭祀之人。
English: Who would have thought that once the emperor ascended to heaven, the bow and sword could not be chased, the national road would be insignificant, and the royal family would cut off the sacrificial rites.

古文：皇曾孙故临洮王宝晖世子钊，体自高祖，天表卓异，大行平日养爱特深，义齐若子，事符当璧。
现代文：皇曾孙已故临洮王元宝晖世子元钊，出自高祖一脉，人才卓异，先帝平日爱养特深，如亲子，事符当璧。
English: The great-great-grandson of the late Lintong Wang Yuanbo, the descendant of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the late Lintong Wang Yuanbo, comes from a line of great-great-grandfathers. He is an outstanding talent. The former emperor loved and nurtured him very deeply, as if he were his own son.

古文：及翊日弗愈，大渐弥留，乃延入青蒲，受命玉几。
现代文：等到先帝后来病重，弥留之际，便把他请入榻侧，受命玉几之前。
English: Later, when the former emperor was gravely ill and about to die, he invited him to his bedside, just before he was given the order.

古文：暨陈衣在庭，登策靡及，允膺大宝，即日践阼。
现代文：等到陈衣在庭，没有来得及登记在册，答应其拥有玉玺，即日登基。
English: When Chen Yi was in court, he did not have time to register in the register. He was allowed to have the jade scepter and ascended to the throne on the same day.

古文：朕是用惶惧忸怩，心焉靡洎。
现代文：朕对此惶惧忸怩，不知所措。
English: I'm scared, I don't know what to do.

古文：今丧君有君，宗祏惟固，宜崇赏卿士，爰及百辟，凡厥在位，并加陟叙。
现代文：而丧君有君，宗室稳固，理应崇赏官员，福泽士人，凡是在位之人，都加提拔。
English: But there is a prince in mourning, a stable family line, officials who should be revered, Fuzes, and all those who are in power, are promoted.

古文：内外百官文武、督将征人，遭艰解府，普加军功二阶；其禁卫武官，直阁以下直从以上及主帅，可军功三阶；其亡官失爵，听复封位。
现代文：内外文武百官、督将征人，遭难解除职位的，普加军功二阶；其中禁卫武官，直以下直从以上及主帅，可加军功三阶；那些丢官失爵的人，听其恢复本来的官爵。
English: Those who have been relieved of their posts due to hardships, such as civil and military officials at home and abroad, governors and generals, can be awarded the second level of military merit; those who have been awarded the third level of military merit can be awarded the third level of military merit; and those who have lost their rank and lost their peerage can be restored to their original rank.

古文：谋反大逆削除者，不在斯限。
现代文：因谋反大罪被削去官爵的，不在此列。
English: Those who were stripped of their peerage for conspiring to commit a serious crime are not included.

古文：清议禁锢，亦悉蠲除。
现代文：清议禁锢，也都涤除。
English: The purge and imprisonment have also been eliminated.

古文：若二品以上不能自受者，任授兒弟。
现代文：如是二品以上不能再自受爵官的，任其转授给儿子、兄弟。
English: If a person is unable to receive a knighthood from his or her own efforts, he or she may pass it on to his or her son or brother.

古文：可班宣远迩，咸使知之。 
现代文：可广告远近，都使知道。 
English: Advertisements can be seen from near and far.

古文：乙卯，幼主即位。
现代文：二十七日，幼主即位。
English: On the 27th, the young lord ascended the throne.

古文：仪同三司、大都督尔朱荣抗表请入奔赴，勒兵而南。
现代文：仪同三司、大都督尔朱荣抗表请求赴朝，统兵南进。
English: At the request of Zhu Rong, the grand vizier and the third secretary of the ceremony, he went to the North and marched south in an orderly manner.

古文：是月，杜洛周为葛荣所并。
现代文：这个月，杜洛周被葛荣吞并。
English: This month, Dulochow was absorbed by Ge Rong.

古文：三月癸未，葛荣攻陷沧州，执刺史薛庆之，居民死者十八九。
现代文：三月二十六日，葛荣攻陷沧州，逮捕刺史薛庆之，城中居民十分之八九遇难。
English: On March 26th, Ge Rong invaded Cangzhou and arrested the assassin, Xue Qingzhi. Eighty-nine out of ten residents of the city were killed.

古文：甲申，上尊谥曰孝明皇帝。
现代文：二十七日，给肃宗元恪上谥号称孝明皇帝。
English: On the 27th, Su Zongyuan was given the title Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：乙酉，葬于定陵，庙号肃宗。
现代文：二十八日，下葬定陵，庙号肃宗。
English: On the 28th, he was buried in the Dingling Mausoleum, and his temple name was Su Zong.

古文：夏四月戊戌，尔朱荣济河。
现代文：夏季四月十一日，尔朱荣渡过黄河。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, Le Zhu Rong crossed the Yellow River.

古文：庚子，皇太后、幼主崩。
现代文：十三日，皇太后、幼主一起死亡。
English: On the 13th, the empress dowager and the young lord died together.

古文：史臣曰：魏自宣武已后，政纲不张。
现代文：史臣曰：魏国自从宣垂造以后，朝廷的法度纪律不振作。
English: Shichen said: Since the proclamation of the establishment of the State of Wei, the legal discipline of the imperial court has not been vigorous.

古文：肃宗冲龄统业，灵后妇人专制，委用非人，赏罚乖舛。
现代文：肃宗以幼年统领基业，灵后以妇人专擅制命，任用不得其人，赏罚荒谬悖理。
English: It is absurd and unreasonable for Su Zong to command the foundation at a young age, and for his successor to be appointed by a woman.

古文：于是衅起四方，祸延畿甸，卒于享国不长。
现代文：于是裂痕出现于四方，祸患延及到京城，终于享受国祚不长久。
English: As a result, cracks appeared in the four directions, the disaster extended to the capital, and finally, it did not take long to enjoy the national treasure.

古文：抑亦沦胥之始也，呜呼！
现代文：这或许仅是遭受苦难的开端，呜呼!
English: This may only be the beginning of the suffering, alas!

