古文：东方朔字曼倩，平原厌次人也。
现代文：东方朔，字曼倩，平原郡厌次县人。
English: Dongfangshuo, the characters of the mandala, the people of Yanzhi County, Pingyuan County.

古文：武帝初即位，征天下举方正贤良文学材力之士，待以不次之位，四方士多上书言得失，自衒鬻者以千数，其不足采者辄报闻罢。朔初来，上书曰： 臣朔少失父母，长养兄嫂。
现代文：汉武帝即位不久，征告天下推荐方正、贤良、文学等有才能的士人，以破格授予职位任用他们，四方士人纷纷上书议论国家政事的得失，炫耀卖弄自己才能的人数以千计，其中不够录用条件的就通知他们：上书皇帝已经看了，让他们回家去。东方朔刚到长安，就上书说： 臣东方朔从小失去父母，由哥哥嫂子养大。
English: Not long after Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, he invited the world to recommend talented scholars such as Fang Zheng, Xian Liang, and literati, and appointed them to positions in an unprecedented manner. Four-party scholars have written to discuss the gains and losses of national politics, and the number of people showing off their talents is in the thousands. Among them, those who do not meet the conditions for admission are informed that the emperor has read the letter and let them go home. Dongfang Shuo just arrived in Chang'an, and wrote to say: Minister Dongfang Shuo lost his parents when he was young, and was raised by his brother and sister-in-law.

古文：年十三学书，三冬文史足用。
现代文：十三岁开始读书，三年学会了文书和记事。
English: At the age of thirteen he began to study, and in three years he learned to write and take notes.

古文：十五学击剑。
现代文：十五岁学击剑。
English: He learned fencing at the age of fifteen.

古文：十六学《诗》、《书》，诵二十二万言。
现代文：十六岁学习《诗经》、《尚书》，背诵了二十二万字。
English: At the age of 16, he studied the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs" and recited 220,000 words.

古文：十九学孙、吴兵法，战阵之具，钲鼓之教，亦诵二十二万言。
现代文：十九岁学习孙吴兵法，有关作战阵形的论说、打仗时队伍进退的节制等内容，也背诵了二十二万宇。
English: At the age of nineteen, he learned Sun Wu's Art of War, the theory of battle formation, and the restraint of the advance and retreat of the team during the war. He also recited 220,000 yu.

古文：凡臣朔固已诵四十四万言。
现代文：我总共背诵了四十四万字。
English: In total, I recited 440,000 words.

古文：又常服子路之言。
现代文：还经常熟习子路的言论。
English: He is also familiar with Zilu's speech.

古文：臣朔年二十二，长九尺三寸，目若悬珠，齿若编贝，勇若孟贲，捷若庆忌，廉若鲍叔，信若尾生。
现代文：我今年二十二岁，身高九尺三寸，眼睛像挂着的珍珠那样明亮，牙齿如同编成串的贝壳整齐洁白，勇猛像孟贲，敏捷如庆忌，廉洁似鲍叔，守信同尾生。
English: I am twenty-two years old, nine feet three inches tall, my eyes are as bright as hanging pearls, my teeth are as neat and white as a string of seashells, I am as brave as Meng Xuan, as agile as Qing Mei, as honest as Uncle Bao, and as trustworthy as a dog.

古文：若此，可以为天子大臣矣。臣朔昧死再拜以闻。 
现代文：像这样的人，可以做天子的大臣了，臣东方朔冒死再拜向皇上禀奏。 
English: A man like this can be a minister of the Son of Heaven, a vassal of Dongfang Shuo who will risk his life and bow down to the emperor.

古文：朔文辞不逊，高自称誉，上伟之，令待诏公车，奉禄薄，未得省见。
现代文：东方朔上书的文辞不谦逊，赞美抬高自己，汉武帝却认为他是个奇伟的人，命令他在公车府待韶，但俸禄微薄，得不到汉武帝的省问接见。
English: The words of Dongfang Shuo's letter were not humble, he praised and exalted himself, but Emperor Hanwu thought he was a wonderful person and ordered him to wait at the bus station, but his salary was meager and he could not get an interview with Emperor Hanwu.

古文：久之，朔绐驺朱儒，曰： 上以若曹无益于县官，耕田力作固不及人，临众处官不能治民，从军击虏不任兵事，无益于国用，徒索衣食，今欲尽杀若曹。 
现代文：过了很久，有一次东方朔哄骗看管御马圈的侏儒，说： 皇上认为你们这些人对朝廷没有用处，耕田力作当然赶不上旁人，位居民众之上当官不能治理民事，参军杀敌不能胜任用兵作战，对国家没有丝毫用处，衹会耗费衣食，现在皇上要把你们全都杀掉。 
English: After a long time had passed, Dongfang Shuo once tricked the dwarf who was in charge of the imperial stables, saying: "The emperor thinks that you people are of no use to the imperial court. Of course, you can't keep up with other people in farming. An official at the top of the population can't manage civil affairs. Joining the army to kill the enemy can't be qualified to fight with soldiers. You are of no use to the country. You will consume food and clothing. Now the emperor wants to kill all of you."

古文：朱儒大恐，啼泣。
现代文：侏儒们听了非常害怕，哭哭啼啼。
English: The dwarfs were very frightened and cried.

古文：朔教曰： 上即过，叩头请罪。 
现代文：东方朔教唆他们说： 皇上即将从这裹经过，你们要叩头请罪。 
English: Dongfang Shuo instigated them and said, "The emperor is about to pass through this shroud, you must bow down and plead guilty."

古文：居有顷，闻上过，朱儒皆号泣顿首。上问： 何为？ 
现代文：遇了一会儿，听说皇上路过，侏儒们都哭着跪在地上磕头。皇上问： 你们为什么这样？ 
English: After a while, hearing that the emperor was passing by, the dwarfs all knelt on the ground and bowed their heads in tears. The emperor asked: "Why are you doing this?"

古文：对曰： 东方朔言上欲尽诛臣等。 
现代文：侏儒们回答说： 东方朔说皇上要把我们全都杀掉。 
English: The dwarfs replied, "Dongfang Shuo said that the emperor wants to kill us all.

古文：上知朔多端，召问朔： 何恐朱儒为？ 
现代文：皇上知道东方朔花花肠子很多，就召见东方朔，责问他： 你为什么恐吓那些侏儒呢？ 
English: The emperor knew that Dongfangshuo had a lot of guts, so he summoned Dongfangshuo and scolded him: Why did you intimidate those dwarfs?

古文：对曰： 臣朔生亦言，死亦言。
现代文：东方朔回答说： 臣东方朔活着也要说，死了也要说。
English: Dongfangshuo replied, "The subject Dongfangshuo should speak when he is alive, and when he is dead.

古文：朱儒长三尺余，奉一囊粟，钱二百四十。
现代文：侏儒高三尺多，俸禄是一袋粟，二百四十钱。
English: The dwarf is more than three feet tall, and his salary is a sack of millet, two hundred and forty coins.

古文：臣朔长九尺余，亦奉一囊粟，钱二百四十。
现代文：臣东方朔高九尺多，俸禄也是一袋粟，二百四十钱。
English: The vassal Dongfang Shuo was more than nine feet tall, and his salary was also a sack of millet, which amounted to 240 yuan.

古文：朱儒饱欲死，臣朔饥欲死。
现代文：侏儒饱得要死，臣东方朔饿得要死。
English: The dwarf was too full to die, the vassal Dongfang Shuo was too hungry to die.

古文：臣言可用，幸异其礼；不可用，罢之，无令但索长安米。 
现代文：如果我的话可以采纳，希望改变礼节对待我；如果不能采纳，就让我回家，不要让我白吃长安的米。 
English: If my words can be accepted, I hope they will change their etiquette towards me; if they can't, let me go home, don't let me eat Chang'an rice for free.

古文：上大笑，因使待诏金马门，稍得亲近。
现代文：武帝听了大笑，因此让东方朔待韶金马门，逐渐得到皇上的亲近。
English: Emperor Wu listened to the laughter, so he let Dongfang Shuo wait at the Golden Horse Gate to gradually get close to the emperor.

古文：上尝使诸数家射覆，置守宫盂下，射之，皆不能中。朔自赞曰： 臣尝受《易》，请射之。 
现代文：武帝曾经让一些擅长占卜的术士射覆，把壁虎盖在盆子下面，让他们猜是什么东西，都没有猜中。东方朔自我介绍说： 臣曾学《易》，请允许我猜猜是什么。 
English: Emperor Wu once asked some magicians who were good at divination to cover the gecko under the pot, and asked them to guess what it was, but they did not guess it. Dongfang Shuo introduced himself: "I once studied "Yi," please allow me to guess what it is."

古文：乃别蓍布卦而对曰： 臣以为龙又无角，谓之为蛇又有足，跂跂脉脉善缘壁，是非守宫即蜥蜴。 
现代文：于是他将蓍草排成各种卦象，回答说： 我认为是龙又没有角，说它是蛇又有足，肢肢而行脉脉而视，善于爬墙，这东西不是壁虎就是蜥蜴。 
English: So he arranged the eelgrass into a variety of characters and replied: I think it is a dragon without horns, say it is a snake with legs, limbs and veins, good at climbing walls, this thing is either a gecko or a lizard.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：皇上说： 猜得对。 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：赐帛十匹。
现代文：赐给他十匹帛。
English: And he gave him ten stallions.

古文：复使射他物，连中，辄赐帛。
现代文：又让他猜别的东西，连着都猜对了，每次都赐给他帛。
English: He also asked him to guess something else, and he guessed it right every time, and he was given a gong every time.

古文：时，有幸倡郭舍人，滑稽不穷，常侍左右，曰： 朔狂，幸中耳，非至数也。
现代文：当时，皇宫里有个受宠幸的伶人郭舍人，滑稽得很，经常侍从在武帝身边。他说： 东方朔太狂了，不过是侥幸猜中罢了，并没有实在的术数。
English: At that time, there was a favored eunuch in the imperial palace, Guo Sheren, who was very funny and often sat next to Emperor Wu. He said: "Dongfang Shuo is too crazy, but it was just a lucky guess, and there is no real magic number."

古文：臣愿令朔复射，朔中之，臣榜百，不能中，臣赐帛。 
现代文：我希望让东方朔再猜，他猜中了，就打我一百鞭；猜不中，就赐给我帛。 
English: I hope to let Dongfangshuo guess again. If he guesses right, he will give me a hundred lashes; if he guesses wrong, he will give me a whip.

古文：乃覆树上寄生，令朔射之。朔曰： 是寠薮也。 
现代文：便把树上长的寄生盖在盆子下面，让东方朔猜是什么东西。东方朔说： 是宝薮。 
English: So he put the parasite growing on the top of the tree under the pot and asked Dongfang Shuo to guess what it was. Dongfang Shuo said, "It's Baodi."

古文：舍人曰： 果知朔不能中也。 
现代文：郭舍人说： 果真知道东方朔猜不中。 
English: Guo She'er said: If you really know the Orient, you can't guess it.

古文：朔曰： 生肉为脍，干肉为脯；著树为寄生，盆下为寠薮。 
现代文：东方朔说： 生肉叫脍，干肉叫脯，附在树上叫寄生，盖在盆子下面就叫窦薮。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: Raw meat is called carp, dried meat is called maggot, attached to a tree is called parasite, and covered under a basin is called maggot.

古文：上令倡监榜舍人，舍人不胜痛，呼謈。
现代文：皇上命令倡监鞭打郭舍人，郭舍人疼痛难忍，大声嚎叫。
English: Emperor Hanwu listened and ordered the head of the advocates to beat Guo She'er with a cane. Guo She'er was beaten so painfully that he cried out loudly.

古文：朔笑之曰： 咄！口无毛，声謷謷，尻益高。 
现代文：东方朔讥笑他说： 咄，嘴上没毛，叫声嗷嗷，屁股越来越高。 
English: Dongfang Shuo scoffed at him and said, "Ah, there's no hair on your mouth, your voice is hoarse, and your bottom is getting higher and higher.

古文：舍人恚曰： 朔擅诋欺天子从官，当弃市。 
现代文：郭舍人愤怒地说： 东方朔竟敢随便诋毁欺侮天子的侍从官，应该判处弃市死刑。 
English: Guo Xieren said angrily, "Dongfang Shuo dared to slander the attendant who bullied the Son of Heaven. He should be sentenced to death for abandoning the city."

古文：上问朔： 何故诋之？ 
现代文：皇上责问东方朔说： 你为什么诋毁侮辱他？ 
English: The emperor asked Dongfang Shuo: "Why did you slander and insult him?

古文：对曰： 臣非敢诋之，乃与为隐耳。 上曰： 隐云何？ 
现代文：东方朔回答说： 我不敢诋毁侮辱他，衹是跟他说个谜语而已。 皇上问： 说的是什么谜语？ 
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "I don't dare to slander or insult him, I'm just telling him a riddle." The emperor asked, "What riddle are you talking about?"

古文：朔曰： 夫口无毛者，狗窦也；声謷謷者，鸟哺鷇也；尻益高者，鹤俯啄也。 
现代文：东方朔说： 嘴上没毛，是狗洞；叫声嗷嗷，是母鸟喂雏鸟食时的叫声；屁股越来越高，是鹤低头啄食的样子。 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: The hairless mouth is a dog's hole; the chirping of crickets is the sound of a mother bird feeding her chicks; the ass is getting higher and higher, it is the appearance of a crane eating with its head down.

古文：舍人不服，因曰： 臣愿复问朔隐语，不知，亦当榜。 
现代文：郭舍人不服气，就说： 我希望也问东方朔一个谜语，如果不知道，他也应该挨鞭子。 
English: Guo Xian was not convinced and said, "I hope I can also ask Dongfang Shuo a riddle. If he does not know, he should also be whipped."

古文：即妄为谐语曰： 令壶龃，老柏涂，伊优亚，狋吽牙。
现代文：立即胡乱编了个谐音谜语说： 令壶龃，老柏涂，伊优亚，标畔牙。
English: He immediately made up a riddle of homophones and said: Ling Jujiao, Laobao Tuo, Yi Youya, Baoban Fang.

古文：何谓也？ 
现代文：说的是什么？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：朔曰： 令者，命也。
现代文：东方朔说： 令，就是命令。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: An order is an order.

古文：壶者，所以盛也。
现代文：壶，是用来盛放东西的。
English: A pot is used to hold things.

古文：龃者，齿不正也。
现代文：龃，是牙齿长得不正。
English: It's your teeth that are crooked.

古文：老者，人所敬也。
现代文：老，是人人尊敬的老人。
English: Old, is an old man respected by everyone.

古文：柏者，鬼之廷也。
现代文：柏，是鬼的廷府。
English: Kashiwa, it's a ghost's palace.

古文：涂者，渐洳径也。
现代文：涂，是浸湿的路。
English: It's a wet road.

古文：伊优亚者，辞未定也。
现代文：伊优亚，是言语含糊不清。
English: Iyoa, is a verbal ambiguity.

古文：狋吽牙者，两犬争也。 
现代文：标畔牙，是两条狗打架。 
English: A dogfight is a fight between two dogs.

古文：舍人所问，朔应声辄对，变诈锋出，莫能穷者，左右大惊。
现代文：郭舍人间的谜语，东方朔应声就答，变化奇巧机锋迭出，没有谜语能难住他，在场的人都非常惊奇。
English: Guo Xie's human riddles, Dongfang Shuo's answers, the changes of the wondrous and cunning, no riddle can stop him, the people present were very surprised.

古文：上以朔为常侍郎，遂得爱幸。
现代文：皇上任命东方朔为常侍郎，于是得到武帝的喜爱宠幸。
English: The emperor appointed Dongfang Shuo as a regular attendant, and he became a favorite of Emperor Wu.

古文：久之，伏日，诏赐从官肉。
现代文：过了很久，在一个三伏天，武帝诏令赏肉给侍从官员。
English: Much later, on one of the three sacred days, Emperor Wu decreed that meat be given to the attendant officials.

古文：大官丞日晏下来，朔独拔剑割肉，谓其同官曰： 伏日当蚤归，请受赐。 
现代文：大官丞到天晚还不来分肉，东方朔独自拔剑割肉，对他的同僚们说： 三伏天应当早回家，请允许我接受皇上的赏赐。 
English: Daikanjo did not come to divide the meat until late in the day, and Dongfangsaku alone drew his sword and cut the meat, saying to his colleagues: I should go home early in the morning, please allow me to accept the emperor's reward.

古文：即怀肉去。
现代文：随即把肉包好怀揣着离去。
English: After saying this, he chopped up a piece of meat with his sword and took it with him.

古文：大官奏之。
现代文：大官丞将这件事情上奏皇帝。
English: Daikanjo reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：朔入，上曰： 昨赐肉，不待诏，以剑割肉而去之，何也？ 
现代文：东方朔入宫，武帝说： 昨天赐肉，你不等诏令下达，就用剑割肉走了，这是为什么呢？ 
English: When Dongfang Shuo entered the palace, Emperor Wu said, "I gave you meat yesterday. You didn't wait for the imperial edict to be issued, so you cut the meat with a sword and left. Why is that?

古文：朔免冠谢。
现代文：东方朔摘下帽子下跪谢罪。
English: Dongfang Shuo took off his hat and knelt down to apologize.

古文：上曰： 先生起，自责也！ 
现代文：皇上说： 先生站起来自己责备自己吧。 
English: The emperor said: Teacher, stand up and blame yourself.

古文：朔再拜曰： 朔来！
现代文：东方朔再拜说： 东方朔呀！
English: Dongfangshuo said again: Dongfangshuo!

古文：朔来！
现代文：东方朔呀！
English: It's a new year in the East!

古文：受赐不待诏，何无礼也！
现代文：接受赏赐不等韶令下达，多么无礼呀！
English: How impolite to accept a reward without waiting for the order to be issued!

古文：拔剑割肉，一何壮也！
现代文：拔剑割肉，多么豪壮呀！
English: Drawing a sword to cut meat, how heroic!

古文：割之不多，又何廉也！
现代文：割肉不多，又是多么廉洁呀！
English: Not much meat is cut, but how clean it is!

古文：归遗细君，又何仁也！ 
现代文：回家送肉给妻子吃，又是多么仁爱呀！ 
English: To go home and give meat to his wife to eat, how benevolent!

古文：上笑曰： 使先生自责，乃反自誉！ 
现代文：皇上笑着说： 让先生自责，竟反过来称赞自己！ 
English: The emperor said with a smile: Let him blame himself, but he in turn praised himself!

古文：复赐酒一石，肉百斤，归遗细君。
现代文：又赐给他一石酒、一百斤肉，让他回家送给妻子。
English: When Emperor Hanwu had finished speaking, he also rewarded Dongfang Shuo with a stone of wine and a hundred pounds of meat, and told him to take it home and give it to his wife.

古文：初，建元三年，微行始出，北至池阳，西至黄山，南猎长杨，东游宜春。
现代文：当初，在建元三年，汉武帝开始微服出行，北至池阳宫，西至黄山宫，南到长杨宫，东游宜春宫。
English: At first, in the third year of the first century, Emperor Hanwu began to travel in micro-clothes, going as far as Chiyang Palace in the north, Huangshan Palace in the west, Changyang Palace in the south, and Yichun Palace in the east.

古文：微行常用饮酎已。
现代文：微服出行常常在每年新酒酿成宗庙饮酌完毕的时候。
English: The micro-suit trip often takes place when the annual new wine has been brewed and drunk.

古文：八九月中，与侍中常侍武骑及待诏陇西北地良家子能骑射者期诸殿门，故有 期门 之号自此始。
现代文：八九月间，皇上与随从的侍中、常侍、武骑，以及待韶陇西郡、北地郡能骑善射的良家子约定在殿门等候，所以从这时开始有了 期门 的称号。
English: Between August and September, the Emperor agreed to wait at the palace gate with his attendants, attendants, horsemen, and courtiers from Shensi County and Hokkaidō County who could ride and shoot well, so from that time the gate began to be known as the "Gate of Wait."

古文：微行以夜漏下十刻乃出，常称平阳侯。
现代文：武帝微服出行在夜漏下了十刻才出发，常常假称是平阳侯曹寿。
English: Wu Di micro-clothing travel in the night missed ten minutes before departure, often pretending to be Pingyang Hou Cao Shou.

古文：旦明，入山下驰射鹿豕狐兔，手格熊罴，驰骛禾稼稻粳之地。民皆号呼骂詈，相聚会，自言鄠杜令。
现代文：次日天明，到达终南山下，或驰射鹿猪狐兔，或徒手格击熊熊，奔驰在禾地稻田裹，农民们都大声呼喊叫骂，相聚在一起，向雩县、杜县县令告状。
English: At dawn the next day, when they arrived at the foot of the South Mountain, whether they were shooting deer, pigs, foxes and rabbits, or shooting bears with their bare hands, or driving in rice paddies, the farmers were shouting and cursing loudly, and gathered together to complain to the county magistrates of Min County and Du County.

古文：令往，欲谒平阳侯，诸骑欲击鞭之。
现代文：县令前往射猎的地方，要求谒见平阳侯，那些骑马的侍从想要鞭打县令。
English: The county magistrate went to the shooting place and asked to see Pingyang Hou. The attendants on horseback wanted to whip the county magistrate.

古文：令大怒。使吏呵止，猎者数骑见留，乃示以乘舆物，久之乃得去。
现代文：县令大怒，派属吏呵斥制止，射猎的几个骑手被扣留，于是他们拿出皇帝的御用物品，纠缠了许久才得以离去。
English: The county magistrate was outraged, and sent officials to stop the horse. Several horsemen were detained, so they took out the emperor's royal items and pestered them for a long time before they could leave.

古文：时夜出夕还，后赍五日粮，会朝长信官，上大欢乐之。
现代文：开始的时候，皇帝深夜出宫，次日傍晚返回，后来就携带五天的食品，到第五天该去长信宫谒见太后时才回京。
English: At the beginning, the emperor left the palace late at night and returned in the evening of the next day. Later, he carried food for five days. He did not return to Beijing until the fifth day, when he was supposed to go to the Changxin Palace to meet the empress dowager.

古文：是后，南山下乃知微行数出也，然尚迫于太后，未敢远出。
现代文：武帝十分喜欢这种微服出游射猎。此后，终南山下的老百姓才知道是皇帝经常微服出来射猎，但武帝还有些迫于太后的压力，不敢远行。
English: Emperor Wu was very fond of this kind of hunting trip. After that, the common people under the Southern Mountains finally knew that the emperor often went out to hunt, but Emperor Wu was still under some pressure from the empress dowager and did not dare to go far.

古文：丞相御史知指，乃使右辅都尉徼循长杨以东，右内史发小民共待会所。
现代文：丞相御史知道皇上的心意，就派右辅都尉在长杨宫以东巡逻，又命令右内史征发平民，到皇帝射猎的地方听候调用。
English: Knowing the emperor's intention, the chancellor, Mishi, sent the right auxiliary captain, Tsuma, to patrol east of the Changyang Palace, and also ordered the right internal historian to recruit and send civilians to the place where the emperor was shooting.

古文：后乃私置更衣，从宣曲以南十二所，中休更衣，投宿诸宫，长杨、五柞、倍阳、宣曲尤幸。
现代文：后来又私下为皇帝设置了更衣处，还配置了宫人，从宣曲宫以南共设置了十二所更衣处，供皇帝白天休息更衣，夜晚则去各行宫住宿，武帝多临幸长杨、五柞、倍阳、宣曲等宫。
English: Later, a dressing room was privately set up for the emperor, and palace attendants were also assigned. A total of twelve dressing rooms were set up from the south of the Xuanqu Palace for the emperor to rest and change during the day, and to go to each palace for accommodation at night. Emperor Wu mostly visited the palaces of Chengyang, Wuzhong, Beiyang, and Xuanqu.

古文：于是上以为道远劳苦，又为百姓所患，乃使太中大夫吾丘寿王与待诏能用算者二人，举籍阿城以南，盩厔以东，宜春以西，提封顷亩，乃其贾直，欲除以为上林苑，属之南山。
现代文：汉武帝认为路远劳苦，又被老百姓厌恨，于是派太中大夫吾丘寿王和两个懂算术的待诏，将阿城以南，盐厘以束，宜春宫以西地区，总计其中农田顷亩数，及农田折合价值的多少，编为簿册，打算在这裹置建上林苑，让它和终南山相连。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought that the road was long and arduous, and was hated by the common people, so he sent the Taizhong doctor Wuqiu Shouwang and two attendants who knew arithmetic to compile the areas south of Acheng, Yanli with bunches, and west of Yichun Palace, the total number of acres of farmland, and the amount of farmland equivalent value, into a book, intending to build a forest garden here, and connect it with the final Nanshan.

古文：又诏中尉、左右内史表属县草田，欲以偿鄠杜之民。
现代文：武帝又诏令中尉、左右内史标划出属县的荒地，想以此抵偿给郭、杜二县的农民。
English: Emperor Wu also issued a decree ordering the lieutenant and the left and right internal historians to mark out the wasteland belonging to the county, hoping to compensate the farmers of Guo and Du two counties.

古文：吾丘寿王奏事，上大说称善。
现代文：吾丘寿王向皇帝奏报了所做的事，皇上大喜，称赞他做得好。
English: Ikuo Shouwang reported to the emperor what he had done, and the emperor was overjoyed and praised him for a job well done.

古文：时朔在傍，进谏曰：
现代文：当时东方朔在旁边，向皇上进谏说：
English: At that time, Dongfang Shuo was nearby and approached the emperor and said:

古文：臣闻谦逊静悫，天表之应，应之以福；骄溢靡丽，天表之应，应之以异。
现代文：臣听说，为人谦逊恬静谨厚，天就显现报应，用福泽来报应他；为人骄纵奢侈，天也显现报应，用灾异来报应他。
English: The minister heard that if a person is humble, quiet and prudent, the heavens will show retribution and reward him with blessings; if a person is arrogant and extravagant, the heavens will also show retribution and reward him with disasters.

古文：今陛下累郎台，恐其不高也；弋猎之处，恐其不广也。
现代文：现在陛下修建台观廊屋，衹愁它不高；射猎的地方，惟恐它不广。
English: Now that His Majesty is building a viewing gallery, I am worried that it is not high enough; I am afraid that it is not wide enough for a shooting range.

古文：如天不为变，则三辅之地尽可以为苑，何必盩厔、鄠、杜乎！
现代文：如果天不降灾祸，那么三辅地区都可以作为陛下的苑囿，何必局限于盖匣、鄂、杜等地呢？
English: If the heavens do not bring disaster, then the three auxiliary regions can all be used as His Majesty's garden, why should it be limited to Gaiji, H, Du and other places?

古文：奢侈越制，天为之变，上林虽小，臣尚以为大也。
现代文：奢侈超越了礼制，天为此而降灾，上林苑虽然小，臣还认为它太大了。
English: The extravagance exceeded the etiquette, and the heavens sent down a disaster for this. Although Shanglin Court was small, the minister still thought it was too big.

古文：夫南山，天下之阻也，南有江、淮，北有河、渭，其地从汧、陇以东，商、雒以西，厥壤肥饶。
现代文：终南山是天下险要之地，南边有长江、淮河、北边有黄河、渭水。这个地方从妍水、陇山以束，到商、雒二县以西，土地肥沃，物产富饶。
English: After all, Nanshan is the most important place in the world, with the Yangtze River and Huaihe River on the south side and the Yellow River and Surabaya on the north side. This place is from Surabaya and Shaoshan to Izuka, and to the west of Shang and Shiji counties. The land is fertile and the products are rich.

古文：汉兴，去三河之地，止霸、产以西，都泾、渭之南，此所谓天下陆海之地，秦之所以虏西戎兼山东者也。
现代文：汉朝建立时，离开三河，留居在灞水、潼水以西，定都于泾水、渭水南面的长安，这一带是被称为天下山！形胜物产丰饶的 陆海之地 ，秦国之所以能够降服西戎兼并山东六国，就是因为据有这块地方。
English: When the Han Dynasty was established, they left the Three Rivers and stayed in Surabaya and the west of Surabaya, and eventually settled in Surabaya and Chang'an to the south of Surabaya. This area is known as the land and sea of the world's mountains! The reason why Qin State was able to subjugate Xi Rong and annex six countries in Shandong was because of this place.

古文：其山出玉石，金、银、铜、铁，豫章、檀、柘，异类之物，不可胜原，此百工所取给，万民所卬足也。
现代文：这裹的山出产玉石、金、银、铜、铁等矿产，还出产豫章、檀香、柘树等珍贵木材，异类的奇物，不可探究它的本原，这裹有百工生产的原料，是万民赖以富足的宝地。
English: This wrapped mountain produces jade, gold, silver, copper, iron and other minerals, and also produces precious wood such as yuanzhang, sandalwood, eucalyptus, etc. It is a strange wonder, and it is impossible to explore its origin. This is wrapped with raw materials produced by a hundred craftsmen, and it is a treasure land for all people to rely on.

古文：又有粳稻、梨、栗、桑、麻、竹箭之饶，土宜姜芋，水多蛙鱼，贫者得以人给家足，无饥寒之忧。
现代文：又有粳稻、梨、栗、桑、麻、竹箭的丰饶，土壤适宜种姜和芋头，水中盛产蛙、鱼。贫穷的人靠这些丰衣足食，没有饥寒之忧。
English: There is also an abundance of glutinous rice, pears, chestnuts, mulberry, hemp and bamboo shoots, the soil is suitable for growing ginger and taro, and the water is rich in frogs and fish. Poor people rely on these rich clothes and food, and do not worry about hunger and cold.

古文：故酆、镐之间号为土膏，其贾亩一金。
现代文：所以丰、镝之间号称沃土膏壤，这裹的地价每亩一斤黄金。
English: Therefore, the area between Feng and Handan is known as a fertile land, and the price of this land is one catty of gold per mu.

古文：今规以为苑，绝陂池水泽之利，而取民膏腴之地，上乏国家之用，下夺农桑之业，弃成功，就败事，损耗五谷，是其不可一也。
现代文：现在把它划为苑囿，断绝陂池水泽之利，并又占取农民肥沃的土地，上使国家的财用匮乏，下夺百姓赖以谋生的农桑之业。离弃成功，趋就失败，减损粮食收入，这是不能建上林苑的第一个原因。
English: Now it is classified as a garden, cutting off the benefits of the pond, and occupying the fertile land of farmers, on the one hand, making the country's financial resources scarce, and on the other hand, depriving the people of the agricultural mulberry industry on which they earn a living. Abandoning success, approaching failure, and reducing grain income, this is the first reason why it is impossible to build a forest garden.

古文：且盛荆棘之林，而长养麋鹿，广狐兔之苑，大虎狼之虚，又坏人冢墓，发人室庐，令幼弱怀土而思，耆老泣涕而悲，是其不可二也。
现代文：况且，使荆棘丛林茂密繁盛，以生长养育麋鹿，拓广狐兔栖身的园地，扩大虎狼出没的丘墟，又毁坏人家的坟茔墓地，拆除人家的居室屋庐，使幼弱怀土思乡，耆老涕泣悲哀，这是不能建上林苑的第二个原因。
English: Moreover, the second reason for not building a forest garden is to make the thorn jungle lush and prosperous, to grow and raise elk, to expand the garden where foxes and rabbits live, to expand the hills where tigers and wolves haunt, and to destroy people's graves and cemeteries, to demolish people's living room eaves, to make the young and weak homesick, and to make the old people cry.

古文：斥而营之，垣而囿之，骑驰东西，车骛南北，又有深沟大渠，夫一日之乐不足以危无堤之舆，是其不可三也。
现代文：拓地营建，筑墙为苑，骑马驰骋于东西，驾车驱奔于南北，又有深沟大渠，尽一日田猎之乐自然不会危及天子无限的富贵，这是不可建上林苑的第三个原因。
English: Building on reclaimed land, building walls for gardens, riding horses to the east and west, driving cars to the north and south, and having deep ditches. Naturally, doing one day of hunting will not endanger the infinite wealth of the heavenly son. This is the third reason why it is impossible to build a forest garden.

古文：故务苑囿之大，不恤农时，非所以强国富人也。
现代文：因此，务求苑囿广大，不恤农时，不是强国富民的办法。
English: Therefore, it is not a way to make the country strong and the people rich without considering the farmers.

古文：夫殷作九市之宫而诸侯畔，灵王起章华之台而楚民散，秦兴阿房之殿而天下乱。
现代文：殷纣王兴建九市之宫，因而诸侯反叛；楚灵王垒筑章华台，因而楚民离散；秦始皇修建阿房宫，因而天下大乱。
English: King Yinqin built the Nine-City Palace, which caused the princes to rebel; King Chuling built Zhanghuatai, which caused the Chu people to disperse; Emperor Qin Shihuang built Afang Palace, which caused the world to be in turmoil.

古文：粪土愚臣，忘生触死，逆盛意，犯隆指，罪当万死，不胜大愿，愿陈《泰阶六符》，以观天变，不可不省。
现代文：像粪土似的愚昧臣子，忘掉生命触犯死刑，违逆皇上的盛意隆旨，罪该万死，不能了却弘大心愿，希望陈奏《泰阶六符经》，用它来观察天象的变异，这是不能不明察的。
English: It cannot go unnoticed that a foolish minister, who is like dung, forgets his life, which is punishable by death, and disobeys the emperor's great will and lofty decree, which is a crime worthy of death, but he cannot help but have a great wish, hoping to play "The Book of Six Chinese Rhythms" and use it to observe the changes of the celestial phenomena.

古文：是日因奏《泰阶》之事，上乃拜朔为太中大夫给事中，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：这天因为上奏《泰阶六符经》的事，汉武帝就封东方朔为太中大夫、给事中，赏赐黄金一百斤。
English: On this day, Emperor Hanwu appointed Dongfang Shuo as the Grand Physician, and rewarded him with one hundred catties of gold.

古文：然遂起上林苑，如寿王所奏云。
现代文：但武帝仍按吾丘寿王上奏的计划修建了上林苑。
English: However, Emperor Wu still built Shanglinyuan according to the plan of Wuqiu Shouwang.

古文：久之，隆虑公主子昭平君尚帝女夷安公主，隆虑主病困，以金千斤、钱千万为昭平君豫赎死罪，上许之。
现代文：过了很久，隆虑公主的儿子昭平君娶丫汉武帝的女儿夷安公主。隆虑公主病危时，拿黄金千斤、钱一千万替昭平君预先赎免死罪，武帝允准了她的要求。
English: After a long time, the son of Princess Long Qian, Zhao Pingjun, married the daughter of Emperor Wu of Yanhan, Princess Yi'an. When Princess Long Qian was critically ill, she took ten million gold and money to redeem the death penalty for Zhao Pingjun in advance, and Emperor Wu granted her request.

古文：隆虑主卒，昭平君日骄，醉杀主傅，狱系内宫。
现代文：隆虑公主死后，昭平君日益骄纵，喝醉酒杀死了夷安公主的保姆，被捕入狱，囚禁在内宫。
English: After the death of Princess Long Qian, Zhao Pingjun became more and more arrogant. He got drunk and killed Princess Yi'an's nanny. He was arrested and imprisoned in the Inner Palace.

古文：以公主子，廷尉上请请论。左右人人为言： 前又入赎，陛下许之。 
现代文：因为他是隆虑公主的儿子，廷尉向皇上请示，请求给昭平君定罪，左右大臣纷纷为昭平君说情： 以前隆虑公主拿重金为他赎过死罪，陛下批准了隆虑公主的请求。 
English: Because he was the son of Princess Long Qian, the courtier petitioned the emperor to convict him, and ministers on both sides pleaded for him: Princess Long Qian had previously paid a large sum of money to atone for his death, and His Majesty approved Princess Long Qian's request.

古文：上曰： 吾弟老有是一子，死以属我。 于是为之垂涕叹息良久，曰： 法令者，先帝所造也，用弟故而诬先帝之法，吾何面目入高庙乎！
现代文：武帝说： 我妹妹老年才有这么个儿子，临死把他托付给我： 于是为昭平君的事流泪叹息，过了好久，才说： 法令，是先帝制定的，要是因为同情妹妹而违背先帝的法令，我还有什么脸面进高帝的祠庙呢！
English: Emperor Wu said, "My sister had such a son when she was old, and she entrusted him to me on her deathbed. So she shed tears and sighed over the matter of Shohei-kun. After a long time, she said, "The decree was made by the former emperor. If I violate the former emperor's decree out of sympathy for my sister, how can I enter Emperor Gao's ancestral temple?"

古文：又下负万民。 
现代文：再说也对不起老百姓。 
English: Moreover, I feel sorry for the common people.

古文：乃可其奏，哀不能自止，左右尽悲。
现代文：于是批准了廷尉给昭乎君定罪的奏请，武帝哀痛不能自止，左右的人都非常悲伤。
English: As a result, the imperial lieutenant approved the petition to convict Zhaohujun. Emperor Wu could not stop grieving, and people on both sides were very sad.

古文：朔前上寿，曰： 臣闻圣王为政，赏不避仇雠，诛不择骨肉。
现代文：束方朔却上前给武帝祝寿说： 臣听说圣明的君王执政，赏赐不避仇人，诛罚不选择是不是亲骨肉。
English: However, Sok Fang Shuo came forward to wish Emperor Wu a happy birthday, saying, "My lord, I have heard that a holy and wise king reigns, does not shun his enemies, does not punish them, and does not choose who is his own flesh and blood.

古文：《书》曰： 不偏不党，王道荡荡。 此二者，五帝所重，三王所难也。
现代文：《尚书》上说： 不要袒护不要偏私，王道坦荡无碍无阻，这两者为五帝所推重，连三王也难以做到。
English: "Shangshu" said: Don't patronize, don't favor me, the royal road is smooth and unimpeded, both of which are promoted by the five emperors, and even the three kings are difficult to achieve.

古文：陛下行之，是以四海之内元元之民各得其所，天下幸甚！
现代文：陛下这样做了，因此四海之内广大人民各得其所，天下大幸！
English: His Majesty has done this, and as a result, the broad masses of the people throughout the four seas have found their place, and all is well in the world!

古文：臣朔奉觞，昧死再拜上万岁寿。 
现代文：臣东方朔举杯敬酒，冒死再拜，祝皇上万岁。 
English: The vassal Dongfang Shuo raised his glass in a toast, braved death and bowed again, and wished the emperor a long life.

古文：上乃起，入省中，夕时召让朔，曰： 传曰 时然后言，人不厌其言 。今先生上寿，时乎？ 
现代文：武帝竟然站起身，回皇宫去了，傍晚召见东方朔责备他说： 古书上说 该说的时候才说，别人不厌烦他的话，今天先生给我祝寿，是时候吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu actually got up and went back to the palace. In the evening, he summoned Dongfang Shuo and scolded him, saying, "Ancient books say that you should only speak when it is appropriate. People do not get tired of what you say. Today, sir, is it time to wish me a happy birthday?"

古文：朔免冠顿首曰： 臣闻乐太盛则阳溢，哀太盛则阴损，阴阳变则心气动，心气动则精神散，精神散而邪气及。
现代文：东方朔脱去帽子叩头说： 臣听说快乐过分就会阳气过盛，悲伤过度就会阴气亏损，阴阳变异就会心气躁动，心气躁动就会精神散乱，精神散乱就会使邪气趁虚而入。
English: Dongfang Shuo took off his hat and kowtowed, saying: "Ministers have heard that if happiness is excessive, yang will be overflowing, sadness will be excessive, yin will be lost, yin and yang will change, the heart will be restless, the heart will be restless, and the spirit will be scattered, and the spirit will be scattered and evil will take advantage of it.

古文：销忧者莫若酒，臣朔所以上寿者，明陛下正而不阿，因以止哀也。
现代文：消忧解愁没有什么能比得上酒，臣东方朔之所以给陛下祝寿，是显明陛下刚正不阿，因此才用酒为陛下止哀啊。
English: There is nothing that can be compared to wine in relieving sorrow. The reason why the minister Dongfang Shuo wished his majesty a happy birthday was to show that his majesty was upright, so he used wine to stop his majesty's sorrow.

古文：愚不知忌讳，当死。 
现代文：臣愚昧不知忌讳，该死。 
English: Stupid vassals who don't know the taboo are doomed.

古文：先是，朔尝醉入殿中，小遗殿上，劾不敬。有诏免为庶人，待诏宦者署。因此对复为中郎，赐帛百匹。
现代文：在此之前，东方朔曾因喝醉了酒进入殿中，在殿上小便，被弹劾犯下大不敬罪，武帝下诏把他贬为平民，在宦者署待诏，因为这次与皇上的对话，又被任命为中郎，赐帛一百匹。
English: Prior to this, Dongfang Shuo had been impeached for drunkenly entering the hall, urinating on the hall, and committing the crime of disrespect. Emperor Wu decreed that he be reduced to a commoner, and he was waiting for the decree at the Imperial Household Agency. Because of this dialogue with the emperor, he was also appointed as a middle-ranking official, and was given a hundred yakitori.

古文：初，帝姑馆陶公主号窦太主，堂邑侯陈午尚之。
现代文：当初，汉武帝的姑母馆陶公主号称窦太主，堂邑侯陈午娶她为妻。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu's aunt, Princess Guan Tao, was known as Dou Taishu, and her cousin, Chen Wu, married her.

古文：午死，主寡居，年五十余矣，近幸董偃。
现代文：陈午死后，太主寡居，五十多岁了，却亲近、宠幸一个年轻人董偃。
English: After the death of Chen Mogao, the emperor was widowed, more than fifty years old, but he was close to and favored a young man, Dong Xuan.

古文：始偃与母以卖珠为事，偃年十三，随母出入主家。
现代文：起先董偃和母亲以卖珠为生，董偃那时十三岁，经常随母亲出入窦太主家。
English: At first, Dong Hui and his mother sold beads for a living. At that time, Dong Hui was 13 years old and often went to and from Dou Ta's home with his mother.

古文：左右言其姣好，主召见，曰； 吾为母养之。 
现代文：窦太主的侍从都夸董偃俊秀漂亮，窦太后召见董偃母子，对董偃母亲说： 我替你抚养这孩子吧。 
English: Dou Taishu's attendants all praised Dong Yao Junxiu for her beauty. Dou Taishi summoned Dong Yao's mother and son and said to Dong Yao's mother, "Let me raise this child for you."

古文：因留第中，教书计相马御射，颇读传记。
现代文：因而将他留在府中，教他写字、算术、相马、驾车、射箭等技巧，还让他读了些传记类的书。
English: So they kept him in the prefectural school, taught him writing, arithmetic, horse-drawn carriage, driving, archery and other skills, and also let him read some biographical books.

古文：至年十八而冠，出则执辔，入则侍内。
现代文：董偃到十八岁时行了冠礼，太主出门他驾车，太主回府他在身边侍奉。
English: At the age of eighteen, Dong Hao performed the coronation ceremony. When the Grand Master went out, he drove, and when the Grand Master returned, he served at his side.

古文：为人温柔爱人，以主故，诸公接之，名称城中，号曰董君。
现代文：董偃性情温柔慈爱他人。因为宝太主宠爱他的缘故，很多王公都接待他，名扬长安城，号称董君。
English: Dong Jun's disposition is gentle and loving towards others. Because he was favored by Bao Taishu, many princes received him. He became famous in Chang'an City and was known as Dong Jun.

古文：主因推令散财交士，令中府曰： 董君所发，一日金满百斤，钱满百万，帛满千匹，乃白之。 
现代文：宝太主趁机推荐他，让他散财结交士人，命令掌管府中金帛的中府官说： 董君支出的财物，一天中黄金满一百斤，钱满一百万，帛够一千匹，才禀告我。 
English: Baotai master took the opportunity to recommend him, let him spread his wealth and make friends, and ordered the central government official in charge of the central government's gold reserve to say: Dong Jun's expenditure of property, a day's worth of gold is a hundred catties, a million in money, and a thousand horses are enough, only to denounce me.

古文：安陵爰叔者，爰盎兄子也，与偃善，谓偃曰： 足下私侍汉主，挟不测之罪，将欲安处乎？ 
现代文：安陵县人袁叔，是袁盎哥哥的儿子，和董偃要好，对董偃说： 你私下侍奉窦太主，暗藏无法预测的大祸，你想怎样求得自安呢？ 
English: Yuan Shiu, a man from Anling County, was the son of Yuan Ang's elder brother Zhuo, and was closer to Dong Xuan. He said to Dong Xuan, "You secretly serve Dou Taishu, concealing an unpredictable catastrophe. How do you want to seek peace?

古文：偃惧曰： 忧之久矣，不知所以。 
现代文：董偃害怕地说： 我担忧这事已经很久了，不知道用什么办法解脱。 
English: "I've been worried about this for a long time, and I don't know how to get rid of it," Dong Ye said fearfully.

古文：爰叔曰： 顾城庙远无宿宫，又有萩竹籍田，足下何不白主献长门园？
现代文：袁叔说： 顾城庙远离长安没有供皇上居住的宿宫，那裹有竹林和楸树林，可供皇上游玩，又有皇帝的籍田，皇上要亲自巡行禾稼，你为什么不禀告太主，把长门园献给皇帝呢？
English: Uncle Yuan said: Gu Chengmiao is far away from Chang'an, and there is no lodging palace for the emperor to live in. There are bamboo forests and eucalyptus forests for the emperor to play in, and there are the emperor's home fields. The emperor should personally patrol the crops. Why don't you denounce the emperor and dedicate the Changmen Garden to the emperor?

古文：此上所欲也。
现代文：造正是皇上想要的地方。
English: It was built exactly where the emperor wanted it.

古文：如是，上知计出于足下也，则安枕而卧，长无惨怛之忧。
现代文：这样一来，皇上知道主意是你出的，那你就可以安枕而卧，永无恐惧悲愁之忧。
English: In this way, the emperor knows that you came up with the idea, then you can lie back and sleep, never fearing sadness.

古文：久之不然，上且请之，于足下何如？ 
现代文：如果久久不这样做，皇上要长门园，对你怎么样呢？ 
English: If you don't do this for a long time, the emperor will want a long gate, how about you?

古文：偃顿首曰： 敬奉教。 
现代文：董偃拜谢说： 敬听你的教诲。 
English: Dong Zi Bai Xie said, "I respectfully listen to your teachings.

古文：入言之主，主立奏书献之。
现代文：于是，董偃入府将此计禀告太主，窦太主立即上书把长门园献给武帝。
English: As a result, Dong Hui reported the scheme to the Grand Master, and the Grand Master immediately sent a letter dedicating the Changmen Garden to Emperor Wu.

古文：上大说，更名窦大主园为长门宫。
现代文：皇上大喜，把宝太主的长门园改名为长门宫。
English: The Emperor was overjoyed and renamed the Chōmon-en Garden of the Lord of Baotai as the Chōmon Palace.

古文：主大喜，使偃以黄金百斤为爰叔寿。
现代文：太主也很高兴，让董偃送一百斤黄金给袁叔祝寿。
English: The empress dowager was also very pleased, and asked Dong Hao to send a hundred catties of gold to Yuan Shu to wish him a happy birthday.

古文：叔因是为董君画求见上之策，令主称疾不朝。
现代文：袁叔因此替董偃筹划求见皇上的办法，让宝太主假称有病不能朝见皇帝。
English: Therefore, Uncle Yuan planned a way for Dong Xuan to see the emperor, so that Bao Taishu could pretend to be ill and not be able to see the emperor.

古文：上往临疾，问所欲，主辞谢曰： 妾幸蒙陛下厚恩，先帝遗德，奉朝请之礼，备臣妾之仪，列为公主，赏赐邑入，隆天重地，死无以塞责。
现代文：武帝亲自到窦太主府探视病情，问太主有什么要求，太主辞谢说： 臣妾幸运地蒙受陛下的厚恩、先帝的遣德，能参加奉朝大典，行君臣之礼，列为公主，赏赐封邑以收入租赋，恩德天高地厚，死也无法弥补内心的愧疚。
English: Emperor Wu personally visited Emperor Dou's residence to check on her condition. He asked Emperor Dou what her request was. Emperor Dou thanked Emperor Dou and said, "Your subject and concubine have been fortunate enough to receive Your Majesty's grace, the former emperor's patronage, to be able to participate in the grand ceremony of obeying the emperor, to perform the ceremony of obeying the emperor, to be ranked as a princess, to be rewarded with income and rent from the fiefdom, and to be blessed with God's grace. Even death cannot make up for the guilt in my heart.

古文：一日卒有不胜洒扫之职，先狗马填沟壑，窃有所恨，不胜大愿，愿陛下时忘万事，养精游神，从中掖庭回舆，枉路临妾山林，得献觞上寿，娱乐左右。
现代文：假如有一天我猝然不能尽侍奉皇上的职事，贱躯先填沟壑，私下感到遣憾的是，不能了却我报答陛下的心愿，希望陛下有时也能忘掉朝政，调养精神，从中掖庭回宫时，多走几步路光临我的府第，使我能献酒给陛下祝寿，在您身边使您快乐。
English: If one day I am suddenly unable to serve the emperor's duties, I will first fill the ditch with my humble body. Privately, I regret that I can't do it, but I will repay your majesty's wish. I hope that your majesty can sometimes forget about court politics and cultivate the spirit, and when returning to the palace from the court, take a few more steps to visit my capital, so that I can offer wine to your majesty to wish him a happy birthday, and make you happy around you.

古文：如是而死，何恨之有！ 上曰： 主何忧？
现代文：如果能这样，就是死了，还有什么遗恨呢！ 皇上说： 太主愁什么？
English: If he could do that, he would be dead and there would be nothing left to hate! The emperor said, "What are you so worried about?

古文：幸得愈。
现代文：希望你早康复。
English: Hope you get well soon.

古文：恐群臣从官多，大为主费。 
现代文：我担心随同的群臣、侍从太多，让你太破费了。 
English: I'm afraid there are too many courtiers and attendants accompanying you, making it too expensive for you.

古文：上还，有顷，主疾愈，起谒，上以钱千万从主饮。
现代文：武帝说完返回宫中。不久，太主病体痊愈，上朝谒见皇帝，皇上拿一千万钱置办酒宴与太主畅饮。
English: After saying this, Emperor Wu returned to the palace. Soon after, the emperor recovered from his illness and went to the imperial court to see the emperor. The emperor spent ten million yuan to hold a banquet and drink with the emperor.

古文：后数日，上临山林，主自执宰敝膝，道入登阶就坐。
现代文：过了几天，武帝驾临太主府第，太主穿上厨子用的围裙，亲自引武帝进府，登上台阶请武帝在大厅就坐。
English: A few days later, Emperor Wu arrived at the Grand Master's residence. The Grand Master put on a chef's apron, personally led Emperor Wu into the residence, climbed the steps and invited Emperor Wu to sit in the hall.

古文：坐未定，上曰： 愿谒主人翁。 
现代文：还没坐定，武帝就说： 希望见见主人翁。 
English: Not yet settled, Emperor Wu said: "I hope to meet the master."

古文：主乃下殿，去簪珥，徒跣顿首谢曰： 妾无状，负陛下，身当伏诛。
现代文：太主就急忙下殿，除下簪子耳环，光着脚叩头请罪说： 臣妾没有脸面见人，辜负了陛下，犯下死罪。
English: The great lord hurried down to the palace, took off his satin earrings, and, with bare feet, prostrated himself and begged for forgiveness, saying, "My vassal and concubine did not have the face to meet the people, and they failed His Majesty and committed a capital crime.

古文：陛下不致之法，顿首死罪。 
现代文：陛下不加罪于我，妾叩头请罪。 
English: Your Majesty does not accuse me, my concubine bows down and pleads guilty.

古文：有诏谢。
现代文：武帝下诏免去太主的罪。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict to absolve him of the crime.

古文：主簪履起，之东厢自引董君。
现代文：太主戴上簪子穿好鞋站起身，到束厢房领董偃出来。
English: The lady-in-waiting put on her pigtails, put on her good shoes, stood up, and went to the boudoir to lead Dong Xuan out.

古文：董君绿帻傅韝，随主前，伏殿下。
现代文：董偃戴着下人包头用的绿巾，身穿套袖，随着太主来到殿前，俯伏于地。
English: Wearing a green scarf used to wrap the head of a subordinate, and wearing sleeves, Dong Jun came to the front of the hall with the Great Lord and prostrated himself on the ground.

古文：主乃赞： 馆陶公主胞人臣偃昧死再拜谒。 
现代文：太主这才介绍说： 馆陶公主的厨子董偃冒死拜见皇上。 
English: It was only then that the lady-in-waiting said: Princess Guentao's cook, Dong Ye, risked his life to meet the emperor.

古文：因叩头谢，上为之起。
现代文：董偃趁机叩头请罪，皇上让他起来。
English: Dong Hao took the opportunity to kneel and plead guilty. The emperor ordered him to get up.

古文：有诏赐衣冠上。
现代文：诏令赐予衣帽让他上殿。
English: The imperial edict gave him a cap and gown and allowed him to enter the palace.

古文：偃起，走就衣冠。
现代文：董偃起身，去换衣服就坐。
English: Dong Qi got up, went to change clothes and sat down.

古文：主自奉食进觞。
现代文：太主亲自给武帝献食敬酒。
English: The great lord himself offered food and drink to Emperor Wu.

古文：当是时，董君见尊不名，称为 主人翁 ，饮大欢乐。
现代文：在此时，董偃虽受尊重但无称号，称为 主人翁 ，君臣开怀畅饮，欢乐异常。
English: At this time, although Dong Xuan was respected, he did not have a title, he was called the main man, the monarchs and ministers drank heartily and were extremely happy.

古文：主乃请赐将军、列侯、从官金钱杂缯各有数。于是董君贵宠，天下莫不闻。
现代文：太主于是敬献了许多金、钱、杂色丝帛，请武帝赐给将军、列侯、侍从官员。从此董偃更加显贵宠幸，天下没有不知道他的。
English: The great-grandmother then offered a lot of gold, money, and mixed-colored silk cocoons, and asked Emperor Wu to give them to the generals, lords, and officials. From then on, Dong Xuan became even more distinguished and favored, and there was no one in the world who did not know him.

古文：郡国狗马蹴鞠剑客辐凑董氏。
现代文：各郡国的赛狗、跑马、踢球、弄剑之徒，纷纷聚集到董偃周围。
English: Racers, runners, footballers and sword-players from all over the county gathered around Dong Hao.

古文：常从游戏北宫，驰逐平乐，观鸡鞠之会，角狗马之足，上大欢乐之。
现代文：董偃经常随从武帝到北宫游戏，去上林苑平乐观驰逐射猎，观看斗鸡、踢球、赛狗、跑马等比赛，皇上非常喜欢这些游乐。
English: Dong Hao often accompanied Emperor Wu to the North Palace to play games, go to Shanglinyuanping, and watch cockfighting, football, dog racing, horse racing and other competitions. The emperor liked these games very much.

古文：于是上为窦太主置酒宣室，使谒者引内董君。
现代文：于是皇上在宣室设酒宴招待窦太主，并派谒者引董偃进宫。
English: As a result, the emperor invited Dou Taishu to a banquet in the imperial office, and sent an envoy to bring Dong Xuan into the palace.

古文：是时，朔陛戟殿下，辟戟而前曰： 董偃有斩罪三，安得入乎？ 
现代文：这时，东方朔正持戟在殿阶下守卫，他放下戟上前对武帝说： 董偃犯有三条该砍头的罪，怎么能让他进宫呢？ 
English: At this time, Dongfang Shuo was guarding under the palace steps with a halberd. He put down the halberd and said to Emperor Wu: Dong Zhuo has committed three crimes that should be beheaded. How can he be allowed to enter the palace?

古文：上曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 是什么罪？ 
English: The emperor said: What is the crime?

古文：朔曰： 偃以人臣私侍公主，其罪一也。
现代文：东方朔说： 董偃作为皇上的臣民，私下侍奉公主，这是第一桩罪。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: As a subject of the emperor, Dong Zhuo served the princess in private, which was the first crime.

古文：败男女之化，而乱婚姻之礼，伤王制，其罪二也。 
现代文：败坏男女之间的风化，扰乱婚姻大礼，破坏朝廷制度，这是第二桩罪。
English: The second crime is to corrupt the manners between men and women, disrupt the marriage ceremony, and destroy the imperial court system.

古文：陛下富于春秋，方积思于《六经》，留神于王事，驰骛于唐、虞，折节于三代，偃不遵经劝学，反以靡丽为右，奢侈为务，尽狗马之乐，极耳目之欲，行邪枉之道，径淫辟之路，是乃国家之大贼，人主之大蜮。
现代文：陛下年富力强，正当专心研学《六经》，留心处理国家政事，追随唐、虞盛世，敬仰夏、商、周三代贤君。董偃不遵从经义劝勉学习，反而崇尚靡丽，追求奢侈，极尽狗马声色之乐，行走邪恶淫辟之路，此人是国家的大贼，迷惑帝王的鬼蜮。
English: His majesty was rich and powerful, devoted himself to the study of the "Six Classics" at the right time, paid attention to the handling of national affairs, followed Tang and Yu Shengshi, and admired Xia, Shang, and the three generations of sages. Dong Xi did not follow the precepts and exhortations to study, but instead advocated extravagance, pursued luxury, exhausted the music of dog and horse, and walked the road of evil and lasciviousness. This person was a great thief of the country and deceived the emperor's ghost.

古文：偃为淫首，其罪三也。
现代文：董偃是淫邪的祸首，这是他的第三椿罪。
English: Dong Hao is the chief culprit of adultery, and this is his third crime.

古文：昔伯姬燔而诸侯惮，奈何乎陛下？ 
现代文：从前，宋恭姬遇上火灾，因恪守礼制等待保姆而被烧死，受到诸侯敬畏，怎么办呢？陛下。 
English: Once upon a time, Song Kyong Hui was caught in a fire. She was burned to death for adhering to the etiquette of waiting for her nanny, and was feared by the princes. What should she do? Your Majesty.

古文：上默然不应良久，曰： 吾业以设饮，后而自改。 
现代文：武帝沉默不答，许久才说： 我已经设下酒宴，以后改正。 
English: Emperor Wu was silent and did not answer, and it was a long time before he said: I have already set up a wine banquet, and will correct it later.

古文：朔曰： 不可。
现代文：东方朔说： 不可以。
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "No."

古文：夫宣室者，先帝之正处也，非法度之政不得入焉。
现代文：宣室是先帝的正殿，不是议定法度的政事不能入内。
English: The Emperor's throne room was the former emperor's main palace, and government affairs that were not in accordance with the law could not enter it.

古文：故淫乱之渐，其变为篡，是以竖貂为淫而易牙作患，庆父死而鲁国全，管、蔡诛而周室安。 
现代文：因为淫乱会逐渐演变为篡逆大祸，所以春秋时竖貂行为淫乱而勾结易牙作乱，庆父死了鲁国才得以保全，诛杀管叔、蔡叔西周王室方享安宁。 
English: Because lewdness will gradually evolve into a great calamity, so in the spring and autumn, they will act lewdly and collude with each other to make a mess. Lu was preserved only after the death of King Qingfu, and the royal family of Western Zhou enjoyed peace after killing Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：武帝说： 好吧。 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：有诏止，更置酒北宫，引董君从东司马门。
现代文：下诏停止在宣室设席，酒宴改设在北宫，引董偃从束司马门进宫。
English: The following edict stopped setting up seats in the Xuan Room, and the banquet was held in the North Palace instead, with Dong Xuan being brought into the palace from the Soksima Gate.

古文：东司马门更名东交门。
现代文：为此束司马门改名柬交门。
English: For this reason, Soksima Gate changed its name to Cambodia Gate.

古文：赐朔黄金三十斤。
现代文：赏赐东方朔黄金三十斤。
English: He rewarded Dongfangshuo with 30 jin of gold.

古文：董君之宠由是日衰，至年三十而终。
现代文：董偃的尊宠从此曰衰，活到三十岁就死了。
English: From then on, Dong Xuan's cherished pet was said to be in bad health, and he died at the age of thirty.

古文：后数岁，窦太主卒，与董君会葬于霸陵。
现代文：过了几年，窦太主也死了，与董偃合葬在霸陵。
English: A few years later, Dou Taishu also died and was buried together with Dong Hao in Baoling.

古文：是后，公主贵人多逾礼制，自董偃始。
现代文：此后，公主贵人多逾礼越制，就是从董偃开始的。
English: After that, the princesses and nobles often overstepped the bounds of propriety, starting with Dong Xuan.

古文：时，天下侈靡趋末，百姓多离农亩。
现代文：当时天下崇尚奢侈靡丽，争相从事工商业。
English: At that time, the whole world advocated luxury and luxury, and competed to engage in industry and commerce.

古文：上从容问朔： 吾欲化民，岂有道乎？ 
现代文：农民纷纷离开农田。武帝闲谈时很随便地问东方朔： 我想教化人民，是否有什么办法？ 
English: Peasants left the farmland one after another. When Emperor Wu was chatting, he casually asked Dongfang Shuo: I want to enlighten the people, is there any way?

古文：朔对曰： 尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、成、康上古之事，经历数千载，尚难言也，臣不敢陈。
现代文：东方朔回答说： 尧、舜、禹、汤、文王、武王、成王、康王上古之事，几乎经历了数千年，还难以说清楚，臣不敢陈述。
English: Dongfangshuo replied, "The events of ancient times, such as the reigns of Zhou, Zhou, Yu, Tang, King Wen, King Wu, King Cheng and King Kang, have almost gone through thousands of years. It is still difficult to explain clearly, and the minister dares not present it.

古文：愿近述孝文皇帝之时，当世耆老皆闻见之。
现代文：愿意说说近代孝文皇帝时的事，这是当代在世老人都知道的事情。
English: I'd like to talk about the time of the modern-day Emperor Xiaowen, which is something that everyone alive today knows about.

古文：贵为天子，富有四海，身衣弋纟弟，足履革舄，以韦带剑，莞蒲为席，兵木无刃，衣缊无文，集上书囊以为殿帷；以道德为丽，以仁义为准。
现代文：文帝贵为天子，富有四海，但他身着黑色粗布衣服，脚穿生皮制成的鞋，用没有饰物的牛皮带挂着剑，铺着莞蒲编的草席，兵器像木制的没有利刃，冬衣没有文采，裹面装的是乱絮。收集装奏章的青布袋缝成宫殿帷幕。文帝以道德崇高为美，以仁义为准绳。
English: Emperor Wen was the son of heaven, rich in the four seas, but he wore black coarse cloth clothes, his feet wore shoes made of rawhide, swords were hung with cowhide belts without accessories, straw mats were laid, weapons were like wooden ones without sharp blades, winter coats were not elegant, and wraps were filled with rags. The blue cloth bags that were used to collect musical scores were sewn into palace curtains. Emperor Wen took lofty morality as beauty and benevolence as the yardstick.

古文：于是天下望风成俗，昭然化之。
现代文：于是天下入都仰望他的风范，形成淳厚的时俗，显明昭著地教化了民众。
English: As a result, people all over the world looked up to his example, forming a simple and dignified culture, and clearly enlightening the people.

古文：今陛下以城中为小，图起建章，左凤阙，右神明，号称千门万户；木土衣绮绣，狗马被缋罽；宫人簪玳瑁，垂珠玑；设戏车，教驰逐，饰文采，丛珍怪；撞万石之钟，击雷霆之鼓，作俳优，舞郑女。
现代文：现在陛下嫌长安城内地方小，在城外筑起建章宫，左有凤阙观，右有神明台，号称千门万户；宫内土木铺裹着锦绣丝绸，狗马披着五彩毛毯；宫人头簪玳瑁，身佩珠玑；设置玩耍车，倡导驰逐游猎之乐，追求装饰的文采绚丽，聚积奇珍异物；撞响万石重的巨钟，敲击声如雷霆的大鼓，倡优作耍，郑女起舞。
English: At present, His Majesty dislikes the small space in Chang'an City, and has built the Zhang Palace outside the city. On the left is the Fengxuanyuan, and on the right is the Shenmingtai, which is known as the Thousand Doors and Ten Thousand Households. The civil engineering shops in the palace are wrapped in brocade silk, and the dogs and horses are covered with colorful blankets. The palace people are bearded and wear pearl brooches. They set up a toy car, advocate the joy of riding and hunting, pursue the brilliance of decoration, and accumulate rare and exotic objects. They ring the huge stone-heavy bell, beat the drum like thunder, advocate

古文：上为淫侈如此，而欲使民独不奢侈失农，事之难者也。
现代文：皇上像这样淫侈无度，却想让老百姓不奢侈，不弃农经商，这是难以做到的事。
English: The emperor is so extravagant, but he wants the people not to be extravagant and not to abandon agriculture and commerce. This is difficult to achieve.

古文：陛下诚能用臣朔之计，推甲乙之帐燔之于四通之衢，却走马示不复用，则尧、舜之隆宜可与比治矣。《易》曰： 正其本，万事理；失之毫厘，差以千里。 
现代文：陛下果真能采纳臣东方朔的建议，除下众多华丽的帷帐，在四通八连的大街上焚毁，退弃那些善于奔驰的良马表示再不骑用，那么，就祇有尧舜盛世可以和陛下的治绩相媲美了。《易经》上说： 端正事物的本源，万事才有条理；失之毫厘，相差千里。 
English: If His Majesty can really adopt the suggestion of his vassal Dongfang Shuo, remove the many ornate curtains, burn them in the four-way eight-lane street, and abandon those good horses that are good at galloping to say that they will not be ridden again, then only a prosperous age can be comparable to His Majesty's performance. "I Ching" said: "The origin of things is correct, everything is organized; the slightest loss is a thousand miles away."

古文：愿陛下留意察之。 
现代文：希望陛下留心鉴察上述之事。 
English: I hope His Majesty will pay attention to the above.

古文：朔虽诙笑，然时观察颜色，直言切谏，上常用之。
现代文：东方朔虽然诙谐调笑，但时时观察皇帝的脸色，适时直言切谏，武帝经常采纳他的意见。
English: Although Dongfang Shuo was witty and humorous, he always observed the emperor's face, spoke frankly at the right time, and Emperor Wu often adopted his opinions.

古文：自公卿在位，朔皆敖弄，无所为屈。
现代文：从公卿到在位群臣，东方朔都敢轻视嘲弄，没有什么人他肯于屈从。
English: From the nobles to the reigning ministers, Dongfang Shuo dared to despise mockery, and there was no one he was willing to yield to.

古文：上以朔口谐辞给，好作问之。
现代文：皇上因为东方朔说话谐谑言辞敏捷，喜欢故意提些问题问东方朔。
English: The emperor liked to ask Dongfangshuo some questions on purpose, because Dongfangshuo was a witty and quick talker.

古文：尝问朔曰： 先生视朕何如主也？ 
现代文：武帝曾经问东方朔说： 先生看朕是什么样的君主呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu once asked Dongfang Shuo: Sir, what kind of monarch am I?

古文：朔对曰： 自唐、虞之隆，成、康之际，未足以谕当世。
现代文：东方朔回答说： 从唐、虞盛世，到周成王、周康王时代，足以比喻当世。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "From the Tang Dynasty and the reign of Yu Sheng, to the era of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang, is enough to describe the present world.

古文：臣伏观陛下功德，陈五帝之上，在三王之右。
现代文：臣看陛下功德，可以排在五帝三王之上。
English: In the eyes of the courtier, the emperor's merits and virtues ranked higher than those of the five emperors: Huangdi, Qi, Di, Kangxi, and Yu, and ahead of Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and King Zhou.

古文：非若此而已，诚得天下贤士，公卿在位咸得其人矣。
现代文：不仅如此，果然真正得到天下贤士，公卿和在位官员就都有了称职的人选。
English: Not only that, but the world's sages, court nobles, and reigning officials all have qualified candidates.

古文：譬若以周、邵为丞相，孔丘为御史大夫，太公为将军，毕公高拾遗于后，弁严子为卫尉，皋陶为大理，后稷为司农，伊尹为少府，子赣使外国，颜、闵为博士，子夏为太常，益为右扶风，季路为执金吾，契为鸿胪，龙逢为宗正，伯夷为京兆，管仲为冯翊，鲁般为将作，仲山甫为光禄，申伯为太仆，延陵季子为水衡，百里奚为典属国，柳下惠为大长秋，史鱼为司直，蘧伯玉为太傅，孔父为詹事，孙叔敖为诸侯相，子产为郡守，王庆忌为期门，夏育为鼎官，羿为旄头，宋万为式道侯。 
现代文：譬如以周公旦、邵公奭为丞相，孔丘为御史大夫，姜太公为将军，毕公高为太师，弁严于为卫尉，皋陶为大理，后稷为司农，伊尹为少府，子贡出使外国，颜回、闵子骞为博士，子夏为太常，益为右扶风，子路为执金吾，契为大鸿胪，关龙逢为宗正，伯夷为京兆尹，管仲为左冯翊，鲁般为将作大匠，仲山甫为光禄大夫，申伯为太仆，延陵季子为水衡都尉，百里奚为典属国，柳下惠为大长秋，史鱼为丞相司直，蘧伯玉为太傅，孔父为詹事，孙叔敖为诸侯相，子产为郡守，王庆忌为期门郎，夏育为鼎官，羿为旄头郎，宋万为式道候。 
English: For example, Zhou Gongtan and Shao Gongtao as chancellor, Kongqiu as minister of history, Jiang Taigong as general, Bi Gonggao as grandmaster, Ben Yan as guard lieutenant, Jintao as Dali, Houyi as farmer, Yi Yin as young prefect, Zigong as foreign envoy, Yan Hui, Jintao as doctor, Zixia as Taizhang, Yi as right wind, Zilu as Jinwu, Qi as great dragon, Guan Longfeng as Zongzheng, Bo Yi as Jing Zhaoyun, Guanzhong as Zuo Fengyao, Lu Pan as grand master, Zhongshan Fu as doctor of

古文：上乃大笑。
现代文：武帝听罢大笑起来。
English: Emperor Wu burst out laughing.

古文：是时，朝廷多贤材，上复问朔： 方今公孙丞相，皃大夫、董仲舒、夏侯始昌、司马相如、吾丘寿王、主父偃、朱买臣、严助、汲黯、胶仓、终军、严安、徐乐、司马迁之伦，皆辩知闳达，溢于文辞，先生自视，何与比哉？ 
现代文：这时朝廷有大量的能人，皇上又问东方朔说： 如今公孙弘丞相、倪宽大夫、董仲舒、夏侯始昌、司马相如、吾丘寿王、主父偃、朱买臣、严助、汲黯、胶仓、终军、严安、徐乐、司马迁之类，都能言善辩才智弘达，文辞横溢，先生你自己看看，怎么能与他们相比呢？ 
English: At this time, there were a large number of talented people in the imperial court. The emperor also asked Dongfang Shuo, "Nowadays, Gongsun Hongzheng, Ni Guangdafu, Dong Zhongshu, Xia Hou Shichang, Sima Xiangru, Wuchu Shouwang, Master Zhou, Zhu Baixian, Yan Su, Qiu Qian, Jiaochang, Yan An, Xu Le, Sima Qian, and so on, can all speak well, are talented, and are full of words. Sir, take a look for yourself. How can you compare with them?"

古文：朔对曰： 臣观其臿齿牙，树颊胲，吐唇吻，擢项颐，结股脚，连脽尻，遗蛇其迹，行步偊旅，臣朔虽不肖，尚兼此数子者。 
现代文：东方朔回答说： 臣看他们铲子牙，树皮腮，翻嘴唇，长脖子，结股脚，连雎尻，走路逶迤倾斜，曲身躬腰，臣东方朔虽然不怎么样，但还是兼有这些人的长处。 
English: Dongfang Shuo replied: "Looking at their shovel teeth, bark beaks, upturned lips, long necks, jointed feet, even-toed buttocks, walking crutches tilted, bent and stooped, although not good, but still have the advantages of these people.

古文：朔之进对澹辞，皆此类也。 
现代文：东方朔的进言对答言辞，都是这样。
English: Dongfang Shuo's opening and closing remarks are all like this.

古文：武帝既招英俊，程其器能，用之如不及。
现代文：汉武帝既已招览英杰俊士，衡量他们的才能，任用惟恐有失。
English: Emperor Hanwu has already invited outstanding young men and measured their talents, and there is nothing to lose by appointing them.

古文：时方外事胡、越，内兴制度，国家多事，自公孙弘以下至司马迁，皆奉使方外，或为郡国守相至公卿，而朔尝至太中大夫，后常为郎，与枚皋、郭舍人俱在左右，诙啁而已。
现代文：当时正对外经略包坦、直越，对内建立制度，国家多事，从丞相公还弘以下至司屋迁都奉命出使境外，有的担任郡守、诸侯王相直至公卿。惠左塑曾官至太中大夫，后来经常为郎，与枚皋、郭舍人都在武帝左右，衹是诙谐嘲谊的侍从。
English: At that time, a system was being established for foreign affairs that was a little more open and direct than for domestic affairs, and there were many things going on in the country. From the time of Emperor Zhao to the time of Emperor Jia, emissaries were sent abroad, and some of them served as county governors, princes and princes, and even court nobles. Huizangsuo was an official to the Taizhongdaifu, and later he was often a son-in-law, and he was around Emperor Wu with Heshi and Guo She. He was a witty and mocking attendant.

古文：久之，朔上书陈农战强国之计，因自讼独不得大官，欲求试用。
现代文：过了很久，东方朔上书陈奏农战强国之计，趁机诉说自己没做过大官，想请求皇上试用。
English: After a long time, Dongfang Shuo wrote to Chen about the strategy of playing a strong country in the agricultural war, taking the opportunity to say that he had never been a high-ranking official and wanted to ask the emperor to try it.

古文：其言专商鞅、韩非之语也，指意放荡，颇复诙谐，辞数万言，终不见用。
现代文：他的奏书独用商鞅、韩非的言论，意旨放荡，又很诙谐，字数万言，终究没被重用。
English: His playbook exclusively uses the words of Shangguan and Hanfei, the meaning is debauchery, and it is very witty, with tens of thousands of words. After all, it has not been reused.

古文：朔因著论，设客难己，用位卑以自慰谕。
现代文：东方朔于是著书立论，假设有客责问自己，拿地位卑下来用好话安慰解脱自己。
English: Therefore, Dongfang Shuo wrote a book to establish a theory, assuming that there are guests who blame themselves, take a lowly position, and use good words to comfort and liberate themselves.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：那篇文辞说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：客难东方朔曰： 苏秦、张仪一当万乘之主，而都卿相之位，泽及后世。
现代文：有客责问东方朔说： 苏秦、张仪一遇上有万辆兵车的君主，就位居卿相，恩惠传到后世。
English: A guest asked Dongfang Shuo: When Su Qin and Zhang Yi encountered a monarch with ten thousand chariots, they took the position of lord and minister, and the favor was passed down to future generations.

古文：今子大夫修先王之术，慕圣人之义，讽诵《诗》、《书》、百家之言，不可胜数，著于竹帛，唇腐齿落，服膺而不释，好学乐道之效，明白甚矣；自以智能海内无双，则可谓博闻辩智矣。
现代文：如今大夫您修习古代帝王的道术，钦慕圣人的道义，背诵、朗读《诗》、《书》和诸子百家的书籍，不可尽数，著书立说，写在竹简、白绢上，终身修术慕义，直至唇腐齿落仍谨记在心，不能忘怀，好学乐道的功效，十分明白；自认为才智贤能海内无双，那么可以说是博闻广见善辩聪慧的。
English: Now, doctor, you are practicing the ancient emperor's Taoism, admiring the morality of the saints, reciting and reading "Poems," "Books" and hundreds of books from all over the world, which are countless, writing books, writing on bamboo slips and egrets, and practicing the life-long practice of Muyi, until the decay of the lips and teeth is still kept in mind and cannot be forgotten. You are eager to learn the effectiveness of music, and you are very clear. You think that there is no match for wisdom and ability in the world, so you can be said to be well-known, eloquent and intelligent.

古文：然悉力尽忠以事圣帝，旷日持久，官不过侍郎，位不过执戟，意者尚有遗行邪？
现代文：然而竭力尽忠以侍奉圣明的帝王，旷日持久，官不过侍郎，位不过执戟，想来大概是品德还有缺点吧？
English: However, the emperors who tried their best to be loyal and serve the sacred light, lasted for a long time, the official was just a waiter, the position was just holding the scepter, so presumably there were flaws in their character, right?

古文：同胞之徒无所容居，其故何也？ 
现代文：官位低俸禄少，无法照顾他人，连亲兄弟都没有容身之地，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: What is the reason for the low salary, the inability to take care of others, and the fact that there is no place for even one's own brother?

古文：东方先生喟然长息，仰而应之曰： 是固非子之所能备也。
现代文：东方先生喟然长叹，抬头回答他说： 这个原因本来就不是您所能完全明了的啊。
English: Mr. Dongfang gave a long sigh, looked up and answered him: This reason is not something you can fully understand.

古文：彼一时也，此一时也，岂可同哉？
现代文：苏秦、张仪所处的是一个时代，现在又是一个时代，怎么能相同呢？
English: Su Qin and Zhang Yi were in one era, and now they are in another era. How can they be the same?

古文：夫苏秦、张仪之时，周室大坏，诸侯不朝，力政争权，相禽以兵，并为十二国，未有雌雄，得士者强，失士者亡，故谈说行焉。
现代文：苏秦、张仪的时代，周室卑弱，诸侯不朝见天子，竭力征战，争权夺利，用武力相互擒获，兼并为十二个诸侯国，不分雌雄，得士者强，失士者亡，所以谈辩游说风行天下。
English: In the era of Su Qin and Zhang Yi, the Zhou dynasty was weak, the princes did not see the Son of Heaven, they tried their best to wage war, fought for power and profit, captured each other by force, and merged into twelve principalities, regardless of gender, the winners were strong, and the losers were dead, so the debate lobbying was popular all over the world.

古文：身处尊位，珍宝充内，外有廪仓，泽及后世，子孙长享。
现代文：游说之士身居尊位，家中内藏珍宝，外有粮仓，恩泽传及后世，子孙长享。
English: Lobbyists live in a position of honor. They have treasures inside their homes and granaries outside. Their favors will be passed down to future generations and enjoyed by their children and grandchildren.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：如今却不是这样。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：圣帝流德，天下震慑，诸侯宾服，连四海之外以为带，安于覆盂，动犹运之掌，贤不肖何以异哉？
现代文：圣明的帝王德泽流布四方，天下畏服，诸侯朝贡归附，四海统一，像腰带一样围环包含，比翻过来扣着的盆子还安稳。
English: The holy Emperor Dezawa spread far and wide, feared by the world, received tribute from the princes, and unified the four seas. He was encircled like a girdle, and was more secure than a pot that had been turned upside down.

古文：遵天之道，顺地之理，物无不得其所；故绥之则安，动之则苦；尊之则为将，卑之则为虏；抗之则在青云之上，抑之则在深泉之下；用之则为虎，不用则为鼠；虽欲尽节效情，安知前后？
现代文：举动兴废就像运转在手掌内一样，贤和不贤用什么区分呢？当今朝廷遵循天地的发展规律，万物没有不各得其所的；所以保护他就安宁，惩罚他就愁苦，尊宠他就是将军，卑视他则成俘虏，提拔他就在青云之上，压抑他就在深泉之下；任用他就是猛虎，不用他则像老鼠；即使做臣子的想贡献才能，进奉忠心，哪知道是前进还是后退呢？
English: Today's imperial court follows the law of development of heaven and earth, and there is nothing that does not have its place. Therefore, to protect him is tranquility, to punish him is sorrow, to honor him is a general, to despise him is to become a prisoner, to promote him is above the clouds, and to suppress him is below the deep springs; to appoint him is a tiger, and not to use him is like a mouse; even if you want to be a vassal, to contribute talent, to be loyal, how do you know whether to advance or retreat?

古文：夫天地之大，士民之众，竭精谈说，并进辐凑者不可胜数，悉力募之，困于衣食，或失门户。
现代文：天地广大，士民众多，竭尽精力去游说，齐驱并进者就像车轮的辐条聚集到车轴上那样，多得敷不胜数，尽力思慕天子的恩德，被衣食所困，找不到进身的门路。
English: Heaven and earth are vast, there are many people, and they exert all their energy to lobby. Those who drive in unison are like the spokes of the wheel gathered on the axle, there are too many to count. They try their best to contemplate the benevolence of the Son of God, are trapped by food and clothing, and can't find a way in.

古文：使苏秦、张仪与仆并生于今之世，曾不得掌故，安敢望常侍郎乎？
现代文：假使苏秦、张仪和我一起生活在现在的社会，即使想做掌故那样的小吏也办不到，怎么还敢盼望当侍郎呢？
English: Assuming that Su Qin, Zhang Yi and I live together in today's society, even if a petty official who wants to be a palmist can't do it, how dare we hope to be a waiter?

古文：故曰时异事异。
现代文：所以说时代变了，做法就要跟着变。 
English: Therefore, the times have changed, and practices must change accordingly.

古文： 虽然，安可以不务修身乎哉！
现代文： 虽然这样，但是怎么可以不致力自身的修养呢？
English: In spite of this, how can you not be committed to cultivating yourself?

古文：《诗》云： 鼓钟于宫，声闻于外。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 在室内敲钟，声响传到室外。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Ring the bell indoors, and the sound will travel outside.

古文： 鹤鸣于九皋，声闻于天。 
现代文： 鹤在深泽岛叫，叫声传到天空。 
English: The cranes on Fukasawa Island are calling, and their cries are reaching the sky.

古文：苟能修身，何患不荣！
现代文：如果能修养身心，哪裹怕不荣耀！
English: If you can cultivate yourself, you still worry about what can't be glorified!

古文：太公体行仁义，七十有二乃设用于文、武，得信厥说，封于齐，七百岁而不绝。
现代文：姜太公亲自践行仁义，七十二岁重用于周文王、周武王，得以施展他的建议。受封于齐，七百年而不断绝。
English: Jiang Taigong personally practiced benevolence and righteousness, and at the age of seventy-two, he devoted himself to King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu, and was able to implement his suggestions. He was given the title of Qi, and continued to rule for seven hundred years.

古文：此士所以日夜孳孳，敏行而不敢怠也。
现代文：姜太公这样的榜样，使后来的士人受到鼓舞，夜勤学，奋勉力行而不敢懈怠。
English: Jiang Taigong's example inspired later scholars to study at night and work hard without slacking off.

古文：辟若鹡鸰，飞且鸣矣。
现代文：就像鹏鸰乌又飞又叫。
English: It's like Peng Rong Wu flying and screaming.

古文：传曰： 天不为人之恶寒而辍其冬，地不为人之恶险而辍其广，君子不为小人之匈匈而易其行。 
现代文：古书上说： 天不因为人怕冷就停止冬天，地不因为人厌恶险峻就停止广大，君子不因为小人喧闹反对就改变他的品行。 
English: An ancient book said: "Heaven does not stop winter because man is afraid of cold, the earth does not stop vastness because man abhors the precipice, and the gentleman does not change his behavior because of the ruffian's noisy opposition."

古文： 天有常度，地有常形，君子有常行；君子道其常，小人计其功。 
现代文： 天地有一定的运行规律，君子有恒久的德行；君子有正当的道路，小人计较自己的私利。 
English: Heaven and earth have a certain law of operation. A gentleman has permanent virtue; a gentleman has a legitimate path, and a villain is concerned with his own selfish interests.

古文：《诗》云： 礼义之不愆，何恤人之言？ 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 礼义没有差错，为什么害怕人们议论？
English: "The Book of Songs" says: There is nothing wrong with propriety, so why are people afraid to discuss it?

古文：故曰： 水至清则无鱼，人至察则无徒。冕而前旒，所以蔽明；黈纩充耳，所以塞聪。 明有所不见，聪有所不闻，举大德，赦小过，无求备于一人之义也。
现代文：所以说： 水太清了，鱼就无法生存，要求别人太严了，就没有伙伴，冠冕前悬垂着旒，用来遮蔽视緵；以黄色丝绵塞住耳朵，用来降低听觉，眼睛明亮还有看不见的东西，耳朵聪灵也有听不到的声响，嘉奖大德，赦免小过，不要苛求一个人的仁义完备无缺。
English: Therefore, it is said: the water is too clear, the fish cannot survive; if you are too strict with others, you will not have a partner; the crown is covered with hoops to cover the eyes; the ears are stuffed with yellow silk to reduce the hearing; the eyes are bright and there are things that cannot be seen; the ears are smart and there are sounds that cannot be heard; praise the great, forgive the small, and do not demand that a person's benevolence is complete.

古文：枉而直之，使自得之；优而柔之，使自求之；揆而度之，使自索之。
现代文：弯曲的应当使他直，但应该让他自己得到它；使他宽舒，但应该让他自己去求取；揆情度理，但应该让他自己去探索。
English: What the people have done wrong needs to be corrected, so that the people themselves have some understanding; treat the people with generosity and gentleness, let them find the mistakes themselves; measure the people's situation to educate them, let them understand right and wrong.

古文：盖圣人教化如此，欲自得之；自得之，则敏且广矣。
现代文：大概圣人的教化就是这样，要自己通过探索寻求而得到它。自己探求而得到它，就会聪敏而且宏大。
English: This is probably how sages were educated. They had to seek it for themselves through exploration, and when they obtained it through their own exploration, they became wise and great.

古文： 今世之处士，魁然无徒，廓然独居，上观许由，下察接舆，计同范蠡，忠合子胥，天下和平，与义相扶，寡耦少徒，固其宜也，子何疑于我哉？
现代文： 当今世上的隐士，孤独无友，空寂独居，上观隐士许由，下察春秋畴的隐士接舆，计同范蠡，忠合子胥。天下太平无事的时候，衹得与义相导，无所表现，寡合少友，本来是理所当然的事。
English: Today's hermits in the world are lonely and friendless, living alone in emptiness. The hermits of Shangguan can be forgiven, and the hermits of the Spring and Autumn Periods can be forgiven. When the world is peaceful, it is natural to be guided by righteousness, have nothing to show, and have few friends.

古文：若夫燕之用乐毅，秦之任李斯，郦食其之下齐，说行如流，曲从如环，所欲必得，功若丘山，海内定，国家安，是遇其时也，子又何怪之邪？
现代文：您对我的个人品德又有什么可怀疑的呢？至于燕国任用乐毅，秦国任用李斯、郦食其劝说齐王田广归汉，不战而得齐地七十余城，游说像流水那样顺利，说服别人放弃自己的意见而听从说客，像环子那样自由地转动，所想的必定能得到，功高如山，海内平定，国家安宁，这是他们遇上了能施展才能的时机，您又有什么感到奇怪的呢！
English: What do you have to doubt about my personal character? As for Yan's appointment of Le Yi, Qin's appointment of Li Si, and his persuasion of Qi Wang Tian Guang to return to Han without fighting and winning more than seventy cities, lobbying is as smooth as running water, persuading others to give up their own opinions and listen to lobbyists, and moving freely like a ring, what they think must be able to get, the achievement is as high as a mountain, the sea is calm, and the country is peaceful. This is the opportunity for them to exercise their talents. What are you surprised about?

古文：语曰 以管窥天，以蠡测海，以莛撞钟 ，岂能通其条贯，考其文理，发其音声哉！
现代文：俗语说： 用竹管看天，用瓢来量海，用草杆撞钟，这样做怎么能够通晓星象，考究海情，发出声响呢？
English: As the saying goes: Using a bamboo tube to look at the sky, measuring the sea with a shovel, and striking a bell with a straw pole, how can we understand the stars, study the sea conditions, and make sounds?

古文：繇是观之，譬犹鼱鼠句之袭狗，孤豚之咋虎，至则靡耳，何功之有？
现代文：由此看来，譬犹地鼠袭击狗，小猪咬老虎，就衹有被吃掉而已，那还有什么用呢？
English: From this point of view, if a rat attacks a dog or a pig bites a tiger, it will only be eaten, so what is the use?

古文：今以下愚而非处士，虽欲勿困，固不得已，此适足以明其不知权变而终或于大道也。 
现代文：现在凭你这样愚笨的人来责难我，要想不受窘，那是办不到的，这正好足以用来说明那些不知道随机应变的人为什么终究不明白真理啊。 
English: Now, for someone as stupid as you to accuse me of something I can't possibly be embarrassed about, it just goes to show why people who don't know about contingency don't know the truth after all.

古文：又设非有先生之论，其辞曰：
现代文：又假设非有先生的议论，那篇文辞说：
English: Again, supposing that there is no discussion of Mr., the text says:

古文：非有先生仕于吴，进不称往古以厉主意，退不能扬君美以显其功，默然无言者三年矣。
现代文：非有先生在吴国做官，进不能称颂遥远的古代来劝勉君王的意志，退不能赞扬君王的美德来显明自己的功绩，默然不语过了三年。
English: If he had not been an official in the State of Wu, if he had not been able to praise the distant ancient times to encourage the will of the king, if he had not been able to praise the virtue of the king to show his merits, he would have remained silent for three years.

古文：吴王怪而问之，曰： 寡人获先人之功，寄于众贤之上，夙兴夜寐，未尝敢怠也。
现代文：吴王感到很奇怪，就问他说： 我获承先人的功业，寄身在众位贤士之上，早起晚睡，从不敢懈怠。
English: King Wu felt very strange, so he asked him: I have inherited the work of my predecessors, I have lived on top of many sages, I get up early and go to bed late, and I never dare to slack off.

古文：今先生率然高举，远集吴地，将以辅治寡人，诚窃嘉之，体不安席，食不甘味，目不视靡曼之色，耳不听钟鼓之音，虚心定志欲闻流议者三年于兹矣。
现代文：先生神采飒爽奋然高飞，从速处来到吴国，将以平生所学来辅助寡人，我私下真诚地赞许你，三年来我体不安席，食不甘味，目不视华美之色，耳不听钟鼓之音，虚心定志想听取高明的宏论，一直盼望到现在。
English: I sincerely commend you in private. For the past three years, I haven't been able to sit comfortably, I haven't been able to eat sweet food, I haven't been able to look at the beautiful colors, I haven't been able to listen to the sound of the bell and drum, and I've only been able to listen to the brilliant and grand theories with a humble heart. I've been looking forward to this day.

古文：今先生进无以辅治，退不扬主誉，窃不为先生取之也。
现代文：如今先生进无以辅助吴国治理，退不能颂扬君主的声誉，我私下认为先生不应该采取这样的态度。
English: Now that he is no longer able to assist in the governance of the State of Wu, and is no longer able to praise the reputation of the monarch, I privately believe that he should not take such an attitude.

古文：盖怀能而不见，是不忠也；见而不行，主不明也。
现代文：身怀才能而不进献，是不忠；进献而不能施行，是君主不圣明。
English: It is disloyalty not to contribute one's talent; it is not a wise ruler to contribute one's talent without being able to put it into practice.

古文：意者寡人殆不明乎？ 
现代文：你大概是认为我不圣明吧？ 
English: I suppose you think I'm unholy?

古文：非有先生伏而唯唯。
现代文：非有先生伏在地上，恭敬地发出 唯唯 的应答声。
English: Mr. Fuxi prostrated himself on the ground and respectfully uttered a "woo woo" reply.

古文：吴王曰： 可以谈矣，寡人将竦意而览焉。 
现代文：吴王说： 可以说了，我将企待着观看、恭听呢。 
English: King Wu said, "It can be said that I will wait and watch and listen."

古文：先生曰： 於戏！
现代文：非有先生说： 呜呼！
English: Mr. Non-existent said: Alas!

古文：可乎哉？
现代文：可以了吗？
English: Are you ready?

古文：可乎哉？
现代文：可以了吗？
English: Are you ready?

古文：谈何容易！
现代文：谈何容易！
English: How easy it is to talk!

古文：夫谈有悖于目、拂于耳、谬于心而便于身者；或有说于目、顺于耳、快于心而毁于行者。非有明王圣主，孰能听之？ 
现代文：我的言谈有看着不顺眼、听着逆耳、心裹不舒服却有利于身体的，也有看着顺眼、听着悦耳、心裹高兴却毁坏德行的，没有明王圣主，又有谁能倾听呢？ 
English: My speech includes looking at things that are not pleasing to the eye, listening to things that are not pleasing to the ear, feeling uncomfortable but beneficial to the body, as well as looking at things that are pleasing to the eye, listening to things that are pleasant to the ear, feeling happy but destructive to virtue. Without the King of kings and Lord of lords, who can listen?

古文：吴王曰： 何为其然也？ 中人已上可以语上也。 
现代文：吴王说： 为什么这样说呢？孔子说 中等以上的人就可以跟他谈高深的道理。
English: Wu Wang said, "Why do you say that? Confucius said that people above the middle level can talk with him about profound truths.

古文：先生试言，寡人将听焉。 
现代文：先生还是说说吧，我将认真地听你说。 
English: Go ahead, sir. I'll listen to you carefully.

古文：先生对曰： 昔者关龙逢深谏于桀，而王子比干直言于纣，此二臣者，皆极虑尽忠，闵王泽不下流，而万民骚动，故直言其失，切谏其邪者，将以为君之荣，除主之祸也。
现代文：非有先生回答说： 从前关龙逢对夏桀极力进谏，王子比干对商纣直言规劝，这两位大臣都极尽自己的思虑竭力效忠，担忧君乇的德泽不能流布到下面，而使万民骚动不安，所以直接指陈夏桀商纣的过失，极力规劝他们改正邪恶的言行，想以此给君王带来荣耀，消除他们的祸患。
English: Mr. Fei replied: In the past, Guan Longfeng tried his best to persuade Xia Yao, and Prince Bi Gan tried to persuade Shang Yao. Both ministers tried their best to be loyal. They were worried that the prince's deze could not spread to the lower levels, causing unrest among the people. Therefore, they directly pointed to the mistakes of Chen Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and tried their best to persuade them to correct their evil words and deeds, hoping to bring glory to the king and eliminate their misfortune.

古文：今则不然，反以为诽谤君之行，无人臣之礼，果纷然伤于身，蒙不辜之名，戮及先人，为天下笑，故曰谈何容易！
现代文：现在却不是这样，反认为直言规劝是诽谤君王的行为，没有人臣的礼节。果然，直言规劝的人纷纷伤身，蒙受无辜的罪名，杀戮竟牵连到先人，被天下人讥笑，所以说谈何容易！
English: Today, however, this is not the case. On the contrary, it is considered that blunt exhortation is an act of slandering the king, without the etiquette of a vassal. Indeed, those who bluntly exhort have been wounded, have suffered innocent accusations, and the killings have actually implicated their ancestors, and have been ridiculed by the world, so how easy it is to talk about it!

古文：是以辅弼之臣瓦解，而邪谄之人并进，遂及蜚廉、恶来革等，二人皆诈伪，巧言利口以进其身，阴奉雕瑑刻镂之好以纳其心。
现代文：因此，忠心正直的辅政大臣纷纷瓦解，而奸邪谄媚的小人却一齐得到重用，最后发展到比得上商纣王时的邪佞臣子蜚廉、恶来革等。这两人都是奸诈虚伪之徒，巧言利口得以爬居高位，暗中奉献雕琢刻镂之好以骗取君王的信任。
English: As a result, the loyal and honest vice-ministers collapsed one after another, while the treacherous, evil and charming villains were all given heavy use, and finally developed to be comparable to the evil, vile and corrupt vassals of the merchant king. Both of them were treacherous and hypocritical. They were clever and clever to climb to high positions, and secretly dedicated their skills to deceive the king's trust.

古文：务快耳目之欲，以苟容为度。
现代文：致力于满足耳目的享乐欲望，以苟且容身于世为生活准则。
English: He is committed to satisfying the pleasure desires of the ears and eyes, and adheres to the principle of living in the world.

古文：遂往不戒，身没被戮，宗庙崩弛，国家为虚，放戮圣贤，亲近谗夫。
现代文：致使其君王往邪恶的道路上滑下去而不加防备，身死遭戮，宗庙崩坏，国家成为废墟，这都是由于流放、杀戮圣贤的大臣，亲近谗慝小人的结果。
English: So that his king slipped into the evil path without warning, was killed, the ancestral temple collapsed, and the country became a ruin, all of which were the result of the banishment, the killing of the saintly minister, and the closeness of the villain.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 谗人罔极，交乱四国 ，此之谓也。
现代文：《诗经》上不是说吗？ 谗言害人没有止境，构成四方国家与华夏的战乱，说的就是这种情况啊。
English: Isn't it said in the "Book of Songs" that there is no end to the harm caused by gossip, and it constitutes the war between the four countries and China. This is what is being said.

古文：故卑身贱体，说色微辞，愉愉呴呴，终无益于主上之治，则志士仁人不忍为也。
现代文：所以，卑躬屈膝，和颜悦色，言语柔顺，终究无益于主上的治理，而且也是志士仁人不愿做的。
English: Therefore, groveling and bending one's knees, being amiable and soft-spoken, are ultimately not beneficial to the Lord's governance, and they are also things that people of benevolence do not want to do.

古文：将俨然作矜严之色，深言直谏，上以拂主之邪，下以损百姓之害，则忤于邪主之心，历于衰世之法。
现代文：神色俨然，矜持严肃，深言直谏，上面辅佐君主改正奸邪，下面减少百姓的灾害，就会忤犯邪恶君主的思想，经受衰败时代的严刑酷法。
English: With a stern countenance, serious demeanor, and straight-talking manner, he will assist the monarch in correcting the evil of treachery above and reduce the disasters of the people below. He will commit the thought of the evil monarch and endure the harsh punishment of the era of decline.

古文：故养寿命之士莫肯进也，遂居深山之间，积土为室，编蓬为户，弹琴其中，以咏先王之风，亦可以乐而忘死矣。
现代文：所以益寿保命之士没有肯进言规劝的，就居住在深山之间，垒土为屋，用蓬草编成门户，坐在裹面弹琴，歌咏先代圣王的遣风，这样也可以快乐得忘掉死亡啊。
English: For this reason, those who do not want to be persuaded live deep in the mountains, with houses made of earth and gates made of rushes. They sit in their shrouds, play the lute, and sing about the winds sent by the holy kings of the past. In this way, they can forget about death with joy.

古文：是以伯夷、叔齐避周，饿于首阳之下，后世称其仁。
现代文：所以伯夷、叔齐逃避周武王，饿死在首阳山下，后世称赞他们是仁人。
English: Therefore, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi fled King Zhou Wu and starved to death at the foot of Shouyang Mountain. Later generations praised them as benevolent people.

古文：如是，邪主之行固足畏也，故曰谈何容易！ 
现代文：像造样，邪恶君主的行为本来足以令人生畏，所以说谈何容易！ 
English: As a role model, the evil monarch's behaviour would have been frightening enough, so how easy it is to talk about!

古文：于是吴王惧然易容，捐荐去几，危坐而听。
现代文：于是，吴王惧然若失，易容变色，命人撤除荐席和几案，正襟危坐而听。
English: As a result, King Wu was afraid of losing face, and his countenance was easily discolored. He ordered the removal of the recommendation seat and several cases, and sat and listened with a straight face.

古文：先生曰： 接舆避世，箕子被发阳狂，此二人者，皆避浊世以全其身者也。
现代文：非有先生说： 春秋时楚国隐士接舆佯狂避世，商纣时箕子披发装疯，这两个人都是躲避乱世来保全自己的生命。
English: Mr. Fei You said: In the spring and autumn, the hermit of Chu State was frantic to avoid the world, and when there was a business meeting, the lame man put on his hair and pretended to be mad. Both of these people were avoiding the chaotic world to preserve their lives.

古文：使遇明王圣主，得清燕之闲，宽和之色，发愤毕诚，图画安危，揆度得失，上以安主体，下以便万民，则五帝、三王之道可几而见也。
现代文：假使遇上明王圣主，得到清静安宁的闲暇，待以宽厚温和的辞色，使他们能抒发自己的愤懑，献出自己的全部忠诚，谋划国家的安危，揆度政事的得失，上可以安定君主身体，下可以便利万民，那么，五帝三王的道就差不多可以看到了。
English: If, when they meet the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, they are given a quiet and peaceful leisure, and are treated with a generous and gentle tone, so that they can express their anger, give all their loyalty, plan the security of the country, measure the gains and losses of government affairs, stabilize the monarch's body on the top, and facilitate the people on the bottom, then the path of the five emperors and three kings can almost be seen.

古文：故伊尹蒙耻辱、负鼎俎、和五味以干汤，太公钓于渭之阳以见文王。
现代文：所以，伊尹甘愿蒙受耻辱背着烹调用的鼎、俎，调和五味以求见商汤，姜太公垂钓于渭水之滨以拜会周文王。
English: Therefore, Yi Yin was willing to suffer the humiliation of carrying the ding and gong used for cooking and mixing the five flavors in order to see the commercial soup, and Jiang Taigong fished in the coast of Surabaya to visit King Zhou Wen.

古文：心合意同，谋无不成，计无不从，诚得其君也。
现代文：君臣心合意同，谋无不成，计无不从，真是贤臣遇到了明君。
English: The prince and the vassal are of the same mind, nothing can be achieved without a plan, and nothing can be done without a plan. It is truly a wise vassal who has met Ming Jun.

古文：深念远虑，引义以正其身，推恩以广其下，本仁祖义，褒有德，禄贤能，诛恶乱，总远方，一统类，美风俗，此帝王所由昌也。
现代文：深谋远虑，引义以端正自己的身心，推恩以广揽下属，以仁为本，以义为始，褒奖有德，禄厚贤能，诛除邪恶混乱，聚合远方异族，一统华夏同类，美化风俗，这是帝王昌盛的必由之路。
English: It is the only way for emperors to prosper: to be far-sighted, to correct one's own body and mind, to be benevolent, to be benevolent, to be benevolent, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous, to be virtuous.

古文：上不变天性，下不夺人伦，则天地和洽，远方怀之，故号圣王。臣子之职既加矣，于是裂地定封，爵为公侯，传国子孙，名显后世，民到于今称之，以遇汤与文王也。
现代文：上不改变天性，下不废弃人伦；就会天地和谐融洽，远方的人前来归附，所以商汤、周文王号称 圣王，臣子的官职不断提升，于是割地分封，爵为公侯，封国传到子孙后裔，名声传扬到后世，老百姓直到现在还称颂他们，这是因为伊尹、姜子牙遇上了商汤和周文王啊。
English: The above does not change nature, and the below does not abandon human relations; then heaven and earth will be in harmony, and people from far away will come to join. Therefore, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wen were known as holy kings, and the official posts of the courtiers were constantly upgraded. Therefore, the land was divided into fiefs, the nobles were princes, the fiefs were passed down to the descendants, and the fame was passed down to future generations. The common people still praise them to this day. This is because Yi Yin and Jiang Zi Ya met Shang Tang and King Zhou Wen.

古文：太公、伊尹以如此，龙逢、比干独如彼，岂不哀哉！
现代文：姜太公、伊尹的结局是如此辉煌，而龙逢、比干的下场却是那样悲惨，难道不令人哀伤吗！
English: The end of Jiang Taigong and Yi Yin is so brilliant, but the end of Long Feng and Bi Gan is so tragic, isn't it sad!

古文：故曰谈何容易！ 
现代文：所以说谈何容易！ 
English: So how easy it is to talk about it!

古文：于是吴王穆然，俯而深惟，仰而泣下交颐，曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：于是吴王默然不语，俯首静静地深思，抬起头来，泪水一直流到了下巴上，沉痛地说： 唉呀！
English: So Wu Wang silently said nothing, bowed his head and silently pondered, looked up, tears streamed down to his chin, and said sadly: Alas!

古文：余国之不亡也，绵绵连连，殆哉，世之不绝也！ 
现代文：我的国家不会灭亡，绵绵延续，危险呀，世系不会断绝！ 
English: My country will not perish, it will go on and on, danger, the line will not be broken!

古文：于是正明堂之朝，齐君臣之位，举贤材，布德惠，施仁义，赏有功；躬节俭，减后宫之费，损车马之用；放郑声，远佞人，省庖厨，去侈靡；卑宫馆，坏苑囿，填池堑，以予贫民无产业者；开内藏，振贫穷，存耆老，恤孤独；薄赋敛，省刑辟。
现代文：于是吴王端正明堂的朝会，整齐君臣间的位置，举荐贤才，散布德惠，广施仁义，奖赏有功的将士；亲自厉行节俭，减少后宫的开支和车马的费用；抛弃靡丽的郑国音乐，远离谄媚逢迎的小人，省减庖厨，离弃奢侈淫靡；缩小宫馆，毁坏苑囿，填平池塘沟堑，分给没有产业的贫民耕种；开放内宫库藏，赈济贫穷。慰问老人，救助孤独；减轻赋敛，省减刑法。
English: As a result, the imperial council of the Duanzhengming Hall of the King of Wu rectified the position of the monarchs and ministers, recommended talents, spread virtue and benevolence, and rewarded meritorious soldiers; personally enforced frugality to reduce the expenses of the harem and the cost of horses and carriages; abandoned the beautiful music of Zheng Guo, distanced himself from the flatterers, reduced the number of chefs, and abandoned the luxury of lasciviousness; reduced the size of the palace, destroyed the gardens, filled the ponds and ditches, and distributed to the poor without industry; opened the inner palace treasury, alleviated poverty; comforted the elderly

古文：行此三年，海内晏然，天下大洽，阴阳和调，万物咸得其宜；国无灾害之变，民无饥寒之色，家给人民，畜积有余，囹圄空虚；凤凰来集，麒麟在郊，甘露既降，朱草萌牙；远方异俗之人乡风慕义，各奉其职而来朝贺。
现代文：这些措施实行了三年，海内安然无事，天下洽和，阴阳和顺协调，万物各得其宜；国家没有灾害之变，百姓没有饥寒之色，家给人足，蓄积有余，监狱空虚；凤凰飞来，麒麟出现，甘露降临，朱草萌芽；远方不同风俗的人向往中原的风化，钦慕内地的礼义，各自奉献他们的职贡前来朝贺。
English: These measures have been implemented for three years, the sea is safe and sound, the world is at peace, the yin and yang are in harmony, and everything is appropriate; the country has no disaster changes, the people are not hungry and cold, the family is satisfied, the accumulation is more than enough, the prison is empty; the phoenix flies, the unicorn appears, the nectar falls, the vermilion grass sprouts; people with different customs from far away yearn for the customs of the Central Plains, admire the propriety of the inland, and come to pay their dues to the Imperial Court.

古文：故治乱之道，存亡之端，若此易见，而君人者莫肯为也，臣愚窃以为过。
现代文：所以，治和乱的道理，存或亡的头绪，就是像这样显而易见，可是为人君者却不肯去做，臣私下愚昧地认为这是不对的。
English: Therefore, the principle of governing and chaos, the thread of survival or death, is as obvious as this, but the ruler does not want to do it, and the vassal privately thinks it is wrong.

古文：故《诗》云： 王国克生，惟周之桢，济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：所以《诗经》上说： 周邦能出众贤士，都是国家好栋梁，济济一堂人才多，文王安宁国富强。 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" said: Zhou Bang can outperform the sages, they are all good pillars of the country, there are many talented people, and King Wen Anning makes the country rich and strong.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况啊。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：朔之文辞，此二篇最善。
现代文：东方朔的文辞，以《答客难》和《非有先生论》两篇最好。
English: Dongfang Shuo's literary works, "The Difficulty of Answering Customers" and "On Not Having a Teacher" are the two best.

古文：其余《封泰山》、《责和氏璧》及《皇太子生禖》、《屏风》、《殿上柏柱》、《平乐观赋猎》，八言、七言上下，《从公孙弘借车》，凡刘向所录朔书具是矣。
现代文：其余还有《封泰山》、《责和氏璧》和《皇太子生梅》、《屏风》、《殿上柏柱》、《平乐观赋猎》，八言、七言诗，各有上下篇，以及《从公孙弘借车》，凡是刘向所录东方朔之书就是这些。
English: In addition, there are "Feng Tai Shan," "Li Wo Shi Bi" and "Crown Prince Shengmei," "Screen," "Chalk Pillar on the Court," "Ping Optimistic Fu Hun," eight-character and seven-character poems, each with its next and next chapter, as well as "Borrowing a Car from Gongsun Hong," all of which are the books of Oriental Shu recorded by Liu Xiang.

古文：世所传他事皆非也。
现代文：社会上所传说的东方朔的其他事情都是假的。
English: Everything else that society says is going to happen is false.

古文：赞曰：刘向言少时数问长老贤人通于事及朔时者，皆曰朔口谐倡辩，不能持论，喜为庸人诵说，故令后世多传闻者。
现代文：赞日：刘向说他年轻时，多次访问贤明的老人中通晓故事的人和与东方朔同时的人，都说东方朔言语诙谐善辩，不能坚持自己的意见，喜欢跟平常人谈天闲聊，所以使得后世有很多人传闻他的事情。
English: Praise: Liu Xiang said that when he was young, he repeatedly visited wise old people who were familiar with stories and people at the same time as Dongfang Shuo. They all said that Dongfang Shuo was witty and eloquent, could not insist on his own opinions, and liked to chat with ordinary people, so he made many people hear about him in the future.

古文：而杨雄亦以为朔言不纯师，行不纯德，其流风遗书蔑如也。
现代文：可是扬雄却认为东方朔言不纯师，行不纯德，言辞意义浅薄，没有什么值得称道的。
English: However, Yang Xiong thought that Dongfang Shuo's words were impure, his actions were impure, his words were shallow, and there was nothing worth praising.

古文：然朔名过实者，以其诙达多端，不名一行，应谐似优，不穷似智，正谏似直，秽德似隐。
现代文：东方朔名过其实，是因为他诙谐通达机智多变，没有一种行为著名，应该诙谐而近似倡优，不穷似智，正谏似直，秽德似隐。
English: Dongfang Shuo's name is exaggerated, because he is witty, open-minded, witty and changeable. No one behavior is famous. It should be witty and approximate to advocate excellence, not endless to be like wisdom, upright to be like upright, and filthy to be like hidden.

古文：非夷、齐而是柳下惠，戒其子以上容： 首阳为拙，柱下为工；饱食安步，以仕易农；依隐玩世，诡及不逢 。
现代文：非议伯夷、叔齐而肯定柳下惠，告诫他的儿子全身避害： 伯夷、叔齐不食周粟，饿死首阳山是拙笨；老子任周朝柱下史，终身无患，这是工巧；吃饱了饭散散步，用做官的俸禄换取农民生产的束西；依隐在朝廷玩乐一世，行与时违而不逢祸害。 
English: He criticized Bo Yi and Uncle Qi, but affirmed Liu Shitai, and admonished his son to avoid all harm: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi did not eat Zhou millet, and it was stupid to starve himself to death; Lao Zi was appointed to write down the history of the Zhou Dynasty, and it was harmless for life, which was a skill; after eating a meal, he went for a walk, and used the salary of an official to exchange for a bunch of silk produced by farmers; Yiyin played at the court for a lifetime, and it was not a disaster to go against the times.

古文：其滑稽之雄乎！
现代文：东方朔是滑稽之雄啊！
English: Dongfang Shuo is a comedian!

古文：朔之诙谐，逢占射覆，其事浮浅，行于众庶，童儿牧竖莫不眩耀。
现代文：东方朔的诙谐表现在逆违讥刺、射覆等，这些事情浮浅，流传在百姓当中，儿童、放牧的小孩无不炫耀。
English: Dongfangshuo's wit manifests itself in backstabbing, mocking, shooting, etc. These things are shallow and spread among the people. Children and herding children are always showing off.

古文：而后世好事者因取奇言怪语附着之朔，故详录焉。
现代文：而后世喜欢多事的人就把一些奇言怪语托附在塞左塑身上，所以详细收集东方朔的言辞。
English: However, later generations of people who like to have a lot of things to do attach some strange words and sayings to the statue of Xie Zuo, so they collect the words of Dongfang Shuo in detail.

