古文：仇悆，字泰然，益都人。
现代文：仇悆，字泰然，益都人。
English: Xenophobia, the word is calm, and the people of Yiwu are happy.

古文：大观三年进士，授邠州司法，谳狱详恕，多所全活。
现代文：考中大观三年的进士，被任命为州司法，处理案件时，他审判定罪慎重而宽恕，救活很多人。
English: He was appointed to the state judiciary. When handling cases, he judged and convicted cautiously and forgave, saving many people.

古文：为邓城令，满秩，耆幼遮泣不得去。
现代文：仇悆为邓城县令，任职期满后，县中老人和小孩都哭着阻拦他不让他离开。
English: His nemesis was the county magistrate of Dengcheng County. After his term of office expired, the elderly and children in the county all cried to stop him from letting him leave.

古文：徙武陟令，属朝廷方调兵数十万于燕山，悆馈饷毕给。
现代文：仇悆调任武陟县令，恰好朝廷往燕山调兵数十万人，仇悆供给他们粮饷。
English: Qiu Qi was transferred to Wuxi County, just as the imperial court transferred hundreds of thousands of soldiers to Yanshan, and Qiu Qi provided them with grain.

古文：时主将纵士卒过市掠物，不予直，他邑官逃避，悆先期趣备，申严约束，遂以不扰。
现代文：当时领兵主将放纵士卒路过街市时抢夺财物，不给钱，别的县的官吏都逃避，仇悆事先做了防备，对士兵严格约束，因此士卒没骚扰武陟。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief would indulge the soldiers to rob the property when passing through the street market, and did not pay. The officials from other counties all fled. The enemy had made precautions in advance and strictly restrained the soldiers. Therefore, the soldiers did not harass the soldiers.

古文：已而悆送运饷于涿，值大军溃于卢沟河，囊橐往往委以资敌，悆间关营护，无一豪弃失。
现代文：不久，仇悆往涿州送军饷，正赶上宋军在卢沟河溃败，粮食物资基本都丢弃给敌人，仇悆设营垒加以保护军饷，一点也没放弃、丢失。
English: Not long after, the enemy sent military supplies to Bozhou, just in time for the Song Army's defeat at Lugou River. The grain and food supplies were basically abandoned to the enemy. The enemy set up a camp to protect the military supplies, but did not give up or lose anything.

古文：调高密丞，俗尚嚣讼，悆摄县事，剖决如流，事无淹夕，民至怀饼饵以俟决遣。
现代文：仇悆调任为高密丞，这里的风气是崇尚诉讼，仇悆负责县中的案件，对案件的分析判决很快，事情没有拖过晚上的，老百姓甚至怀里揣着饼来等着他的判决结果。
English: Cixi was appointed as Gao Mi Rong, the culture here is to advocate litigation, Cixi is responsible for the cases in the county, the analysis and judgment of the cases are fast, the matter did not drag on through the night, and the people even brought bread in their arms to wait for his verdict.

古文：猾吏杨盖每阴疏令过，胁持为奸，悆暴其罪黥之，无不悦服。
现代文：猾吏杨盖常暗中掩饰县令的过失，胁持县令与他一起做奸邪的事，仇悆揭露杨盖的罪行给他处以黥刑，没有不对他心悦诚服的。
English: The cunning official Yang Gai often secretly covered up the faults of the county magistrate, coerced the county magistrate to commit treason with him, and punished him with flogging when his enemies revealed Yang Gai's crimes. There was no one who was not pleased with him.

古文：州阙司录，命悆摄事，既行，邑氓万余邀留，至拥归县廨，时天寒，皆然火警守，布满后先，悆由它道得出，或追拜马首曰： 公舍我去，我必使公复来。 它日，悆方白事郡牙，忽数千人径夺以归，守针弗能遏。
现代文：州中缺司录，命令仇悆去担任，他将要动身时，高密县的百姓一万多人请他留下来，甚至又把他挟持回县衙中，当时天气很冷，大家都点着火守卫，前后都是人，仇悆走别的路才出来，有人追上他，在他的马前行礼说 ：您丢下我们离开，我们一定要让您再回来。 有一天，仇悆正在郡衙中汇报事情，忽然有数千人直接把他抢夺回来，守将不能阻止。
English: When he was about to leave, more than ten thousand people in Gaomi County asked him to stay, and even took him back to the county seat. The weather was very cold at the time. Everyone lit a fire to keep watch, and there were people in front and behind. He had to take a different route to get out. Someone caught up with him and saluted in front of his horse, saying, "You left us, we must let you come back again." One day, when he was reporting to the county seat, suddenly thousands of people directly snatched him back, and the guards could not stop him.

古文：剧寇起莱、密间，素闻悆名，戒其党毋犯高密境，民赖以安。
现代文：大寇盗在莱、密州之间起事，早就听说过仇悆，就告诫他们的党徒不要进犯高密县境，高密县的老百姓因此得以安宁。
English: The great robbers who rose up between Lai and Mizhou had long heard of the feud and warned their followers not to invade the border of Gaomi County. As a result, the people of Gaomi County were able to live in peace.

古文：密卒闭关叛掠，害官吏几尽，独呼曰： 无惊仇公。 
现代文：密州的士兵关上城门反叛并掳掠，官吏几乎都被害，反叛的人只呼喊着说 ：不要惊动仇公。 
English: The soldiers of Michoacán closed the gates of the city, rebelled and plundered. Almost all the officials were killed. The rebels only shouted: "Don't alarm the enemy."

古文：南迁，丁母忧。
现代文：宋朝迁到南方，仇悆遭母丧。
English: The Song Dynasty moved to the south, and Fei Xuan's mother passed away.

古文：服除，知建昌军，入为考功员外。
现代文：他为母亲守丧期满后，担任建昌知军，入朝为考功员外。
English: After he completed the mourning period for his mother, he served as a Jianchang scholar and entered the court as an examiner.

古文：时任者宛转兵间，亡失告牒十常七八，而铨部无案籍，诉丐者甚多，真伪错乱。
现代文：当时当文官的人辗转在军队中，十分之七八的告牒都被遗失，而铨部没有记录，很多人诉说自己的情况请求回来任职，真假混杂在一起。
English: At that time, when civilian officials were transferred to the military, seven out of ten notices were lost, and the Ministry did not record them. Many people told about their situation and asked to return to work. True and false were mixed together.

古文：悆亲为考核，其可据者悉责保识，因上闻行之。
现代文：仇悆亲自考核，其中有根据的都为他们作保，并且上奏给皇上加以实行。
English: He personally examined them, and those that were well-founded served as a guarantee for them, and were reported to the emperor for implementation.

古文：迁右司及中书门下检正诸房公事，俄为沿海制置使。
现代文：仇悆升为右司及中书门下检正诸房公事，不久他担任沿海制置使。
English: Qiu Jinsheng was appointed as the right secretary and the official in charge of inspecting and correcting all the houses under the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and soon he served as the coastal construction official.

古文：明守与宰相厚善，绐言士卒将为变，致遣精兵密捕。
现代文：明州守臣与宰相亲密友好，欺骗朝廷说士卒将要叛变，要求派精兵来秘密捕杀。
English: A close friend of the chancellor, he deceived the imperial court by saying that his vassals were about to mutiny, and demanded that elite soldiers be sent to secretly hunt and kill them.

古文：统制官徐文觉之，初谋纵军剽略，顷之泛海去，呼曰： 我以仇公故，不杀人，不焚屋庐。 一城晏然。
现代文：统制官徐文发觉后，开始时谋划纵容士兵剽掠，不久他们来到海上，他们呼喊着说： 我们因为有仇公在这里的缘故，不杀人，不烧房。 明州城安然无恙。
English: After Xu Wen, the commanding officer, discovered this, he initially planned to allow the soldiers to plunder and pillage, and soon they came to the sea. They shouted, "We don't kill people or burn houses because we have enemies here. The city of Mingzhou is safe and sound."

古文：犹坐削两官，主管太平观。
现代文：为此仇悆仍获罪被免去两个官职，为主管太平观。
English: For this, Qiu Gan was still convicted and removed from two official positions, and became the head of Taiping Guan.

古文：以淮西宣抚知庐州。
现代文：仇悆以淮西宣抚的身份为泸州知州。
English: Xuan Zang took the identity of Huaxi Xuan Fu as the leader of Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：刘豫子麟合金兵大入，民情汹惧。宣抚司统制张琦者，冀乘危为乱，驱居民越江南走。
现代文：刘豫的儿子刘麟汇合金兵大举入侵，老百姓非常恐惧，宣抚司统制张琦，希望趁着这个危急的时候叛乱，驱赶居民过江往南逃。
English: Liu Linhui, the son of Liu Yu, made a large-scale invasion of the alloy soldiers. The people were very afraid, and Zhang Ye, the procurator-general, hoped to take advantage of this critical time to rebel and drive the residents across the river to the south.

古文：欲先胁悆出，拥甲士数千突入，露刃登楼，扬白麾，左右惊溃，迫悆上马。
现代文：张琦想先胁迫仇悆投降，率领武士数千人突然闯入公堂，拿着兵器上楼，打出白旗，仇悆旁边的人都吓得溃散而去，张琦强迫仇悆上马。
English: Zhang Ye wanted to coerce Qian Ye into surrendering first, so he led thousands of warriors to burst into the courtroom, took weapons upstairs, and raised a white flag. The people around Qian Ye were so scared that they scattered, and Zhang Ye forced Qian Ye onto a horse.

古文：悆徐谓曰： 若辈无守土责，吾当以死徇国，寇未至而逃，人何赖焉。 坚不为动，神色无少异。
现代文：仇悆慢慢地对他说 ：你们这些人没有守卫疆土的责任，我应该以死来报效国家，敌寇没到就逃走，人们依靠什么呀？ 仇悆坚定、不动摇，神色没一点变化。
English: The enemy said to him slowly, "You people don't have the responsibility to guard the territory. I should repay the country with my death. The invaders fled before they arrived. What do people rely on? The enemy is firm and unwavering, and his countenance hasn't changed at all.

古文：琦等错愕，遽散其徒，人心遂定。
现代文：张琦等人惊愕，就解散了他们的党徒，于是人心就稳定下来。
English: Surprised, Zhang Ye and the others disbanded their followers, and the people's hearts became stable.

古文：时金人出入近境，悆求援于宣抚司，不报。
现代文：当时金兵已逼近泸州，仇悆向宣抚司求援，没得到答复。
English: At that time, the Jin soldiers had already approached Zhangzhou, and Qiu Jun appealed to the Propaganda and Fostering Department for help, but received no reply.

古文：又遣其子自间道赴朝廷告急，虽旌其子以官，而援卒不至。
现代文：他又派自己的儿子从小道赶奔朝廷去告急，虽然朝廷用官位表彰了他的儿子，但援兵始终不来。
English: He also sent his own son to rush to the imperial court from the trail. Although the imperial court honored his son with an official position, reinforcements never came.

古文：帝方下诏亲征，而诏亦不至淮甸，喧言将弃两淮为保江计。
现代文：皇上正下诏要亲临前线指挥，但诏书亦没传到淮甸，人们议论纷纷，传言说国家将要放弃两淮以便确保长江。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to personally command the front line, but the edict did not reach Huai Tien. People talked about it, and rumors spread that the country would give up the two Huai in order to secure the Yangtze River.

古文：悆录诏语揭之郡县，读者至流涕，咸思自奋。
现代文：仇悆抄录下诏书中的话把它张贴到郡、县中，读到它的人甚至流下眼泪，都考虑要自己发奋起来。
English: Qiu Qi copied the words in the edict and posted it to counties and counties. People who read it even shed tears and considered getting excited themselves.

古文：监押阎仅死于贼，余众来归，州帑匮竭，无以为赏，悆悉引班坐，犒以酒食，慰劳之，众皆感励。
现代文：监押阎仅被贼杀死，他的余部来归附仇悆，当时泸州的钱财库已枯竭，没有什么可作为奖赏的，仇悆把这些人都领到府衙中就座，用酒饭犒劳他们，大家都很感动。
English: Prisoner Yan was only killed by a thief, and the rest of him was given to the enemy. At that time, the money and treasure of Zhangzhou had dried up, and there was nothing to reward. The enemy led these people to sit in the middle of the hall, and rewarded them with food and wine. Everyone was very moved.

古文：募庐、寿兵得数百，益乡兵二千，出奇直抵寿春城下，敌三战皆北，却走度淮。
现代文：仇悆召募泸、寿二地的兵得到数百人，增加二千名乡兵，他派奇兵直接抵达寿春城下，敌人三次交战都失败，渡过淮河退走。
English: The enemy called for reinforcements and received hundreds of soldiers from Shou Erchi, and added two thousand townspeople. He sent a special force to arrive directly at the foot of Shouchun Castle. The enemy lost all three battles and retreated across the Huai River.

古文：其后麟复增兵来寇，悆复寿春，俘馘甚众，获旗械数千，焚粮船百余艘，降渤海首领二人。
现代文：后来刘麟又增加兵力来进犯，仇悆收复寿春，俘获了很多人，缴获战旗、武器数千件，烧毁一百多艘粮船，收降了渤海的两个首领。
English: Later, Liu Lin also increased the number of troops to attack, and the enemy recaptured Shouchun, captured many people, captured thousands of battle flags and weapons, burned more than a hundred grain ships, and captured two leaders in the Bohai Sea.

古文：初，金人围濠州，旬日未下，属天寒，马多僵死，乃悉众向淮东。
现代文：当初，金人包围濠州，十天也没攻下来，恰好天气寒冷，金人的战马很多被冻死，就全来到淮东。
English: At first, the Jin besieged Luzhou and did not attack it for ten days. The weather happened to be cold, and many of the Jin's horses froze to death, so they all came to Huadong.

古文：枢密使张浚方视师金陵，悆以策说之曰：金重兵在淮东，师老食匮，若以精兵二万一自寿阳，一自汉上，径趋旧京，当不战而退，继以大军尾击，蔑有不济者。
现代文：枢密使张浚正在金陵检阅军队，仇悆献出计策劝张浚说： 金国的主力大军在淮东，军队疲劳、粮食匮乏，如果我们用二万精兵，一部分从寿阳，一部分从汉北上，直奔旧京城，金人应该不战斗就退兵，接着我们用大军随后追击，没有不成功的。
English: The confidential envoy Zhang Jun was inspecting the army in Jinling, and the enemy presented a strategy to persuade Zhang Jun to say: The main army of the Jin country is in Huadong, the army is tired and food is scarce. If we use twenty thousand elite soldiers, some from Shouyang and some from Hanbei, to go straight to the old capital, the Jin people should withdraw without fighting, and then we will use a large army to pursue them, which is not unsuccessful.

古文：昔人谓 一日纵敌，数世之患。
现代文：前人说 一日纵容敌人，会留下数世的祸患。 
English: The ancients said that indulging the enemy for a day would bring disaster for several lifetimes.

古文：愿无失时之悔。 浚不能用。
现代文：希望我们将来没有丧失时机的悔恨。 张浚没采用他的建议。
English: I hope that in the future we will not regret the lost opportunity. Zhang Jun did not adopt his suggestion.

古文：麟复以步骑数千至合肥，谍言兀术为之殿，人心怖骇，不知所为。
现代文：刘麟又率领数千名步兵和骑兵到达合肥，侦察兵说兀为他压阵，人心恐怖，不知怎么办。
English: Liu Lin also led thousands of infantry and cavalry to arrive in Hefei. The scouts said that they would crush him. People were terrified and didn't know what to do.

古文：会京西制置使遣牛皋统兵适至，悆顾左右曰： 召牛观察来击贼。 皋既至，以忠义撼之，皋素勇甚，以二千余骑驰出，短兵相接，所向披靡，敌稍慑，散而复集者三。
现代文：恰好京西制置使派牛皋率兵赶到，仇悆对身边的人说： 召牛观察来攻打敌人。 牛皋来了以后，仇悆用忠义来感染他，牛皋一向很勇敢，就率二千多名骑兵出城，与敌人短兵相接，所到之处敌人都失败，敌人稍微恐惧，溃散后又聚集起来有三次。
English: It so happened that the Beijing-Shanghai system was set up, so they sent Niu Yao and his troops to arrive. The enemy said to the people around him, "Call Niu Yao to attack the enemy." After Niu Yao arrived, the enemy infected him with loyalty. Niu Yao had always been very brave. He led more than two thousand cavalry out of the city and met with the enemy's short soldiers. The enemy was defeated everywhere they went. The enemy was a little afraid. After they dispersed, they gathered again three times.

古文：其副徐庆忽坠马，敌竞赴之，皋掖以上，手刜数人，因免胄大呼曰： 我牛皋也，尝四败兀术，可来决死。 寇畏其名，遂自溃。
现代文：牛皋的副将徐庆忽然掉到马下，敌人争相奔来，牛皋把他挟到马上，亲手砍死数名金兵，并且摘掉头盔大声说： 我是牛皋，曾经四次打败兀，你们可以来和我决一死战。 敌人害怕他的名字，就自己溃败而去。
English: Cowslip's second-in-command, Xu Qing, suddenly fell under the horse, and the enemy rushed to him. Cowslip pinned him to the horse, killed several gold soldiers with his own hands, and took off his helmet and shouted: "I am Cowslip, I have defeated Ying four times, you can come and fight me to the death. The enemy is afraid of his name, so he defeats himself and leaves.

古文：以悆克复守御功，加徽猷阁待制。
现代文：因为仇悆有收复失地和防守的功劳，他被加官为徽猷阁待制。
English: Because he had the merit of recovering lost territory and defense, he was promoted to the position of Huiyang Pavilion.

古文：明年，宣抚司始遣大将王德来，时寇已去，德谓其伍曰： 当事急时，吾属无一人渡江击贼，今事平方至，何面目见仇公耶？ 德麾下多女真、渤海归附者，见悆像，不觉以手加额。
现代文：第二年，宣抚司才派大将王德来，这时敌寇已经退走，王德对他的军队说： 在事情紧急时，我们没有一个人渡江攻击敌人，现在事情已经平息我们才来，还有什么脸去见仇悆呢？ 王德的部下多是来归附的女真、渤海人，他们看到仇悆的画像，都不由自主地感到欢欣和庆幸。
English: In the second year, the chief of the propaganda department sent the general Wang De to come. By that time, the enemy corsairs had already retreated. Wang De said to his army: In the time of emergency, none of us crossed the river to attack the enemy. Now that the situation has calmed down, we have just come. What is the point of going to see the enemy cormorant? Most of Wang De's subordinates were Jianzhen and Bohai people who had come to join the enemy cormorant. When they saw the image of the enemy cormorant, they could not help but feel joyful and happy.

古文：初，宣抚司既不以一卒援诸郡，但令焚积聚，弃城退保，文移不绝于道，又请浚督行之。
现代文：当初，宣抚司不派一兵一卒去救援各地，只下令焚烧积聚的财物，放弃城池，退保京城，文移在路上不停地传送，又请求张浚督促执行。
English: At first, the Department of Publicity did not send a single soldier to rescue all over the country, but only ordered the burning of accumulated property, the abandonment of the city, the surrender of the capital, the constant transfer of documents on the road, and requested Zhang Jun to urge the implementation.

古文：浚檄悆度其宜处之，悆谓： 残破之余，兵食不给，诚不能支敌。
现代文：张浚传檄文给仇悆，让他根据情况来做决定。仇悆说： 城池残破，军队没有粮食吃，确实不能抵挡住敌人。
English: Zhang Jun passed the letter to Qian Ye and asked him to make a decision according to the situation. Qian Ye said: The city is in ruins, the army has no food to eat, and they really can't resist the enemy.

古文：然帅臣任一路之责，誓当死守。
现代文：但是帅臣负责一路抗敌的事，应该誓死守卫。
English: However, the handsome vassal is responsible for resisting the enemy all the way, and he should guard it to the death.

古文：今若委城，使金人有淮西，治兵舰于巢湖，必贻朝廷忧。 力陈不可，浚韪其言，而卒全活数州之众。
现代文：现在如果放弃城池，使金人拥有淮西，在巢湖制造兵舰，一定会给朝廷带来祸患。 仇悆极力说这样不行，张浚同意了他的话，最后终于使数州的百姓得以活命。
English: Now, if you give up the city, let the Jin people have Huaixi, and build warships in Chaohu, it will definitely bring disaster to the imperial court. Qiu Qi insisted that this was not possible, Zhang Jun agreed with his words, and finally allowed the people of Zhouzhou to live.

古文：寻诏诣阙，军民号送之。
现代文：不久，皇上下诏让他回到朝廷，军民号哭着送他。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict ordering him to return to the imperial court, and the soldiers and people sent him away crying.

古文：改浙东宣抚使、知明州，以挫豪强、奖善良为理。
现代文：仇悆改任浙东宣抚使、明州知州，他以压制豪强、奖励善良为原则。
English: He reappointed Qiu Qi as the East Zhejiang Procurator and Mingzhou as the Chizhou Procurator. His principle was to suppress the brave and the strong, and reward the good.

古文：吏受赇，虽一钱不贷，奸猾敛迹。
现代文：官吏受贿，即使接受一钱的贿赂也不宽恕，阴险奸诈的人不敢做坏事。
English: Officials accept bribes, even if they accept a bribe of one dollar, they will not forgive, and insidious and treacherous people will not dare to do bad things.

古文：州罹兵火既毁，悆斥厨钱助其费，买田行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：明州遭受兵祸已被烧毁，仇悆拿出吃饭的钱捐助修城的费用，买土地举行乡饮酒礼。
English: Mingzhou, which had suffered a military disaster, had been burned to the ground. The feudal lords took out the money for the meal to donate to the cost of rebuilding the city, and bought land to hold a township drinking ceremony.

古文：岁饥，发官储损其直，民无死徙。
现代文：荒年，仇悆拿出官府储备的粮食，降低价格卖给灾民，灾民没有饿死或迁居到别处的。
English: In the years of famine, Qiu Gan took out the grain stored by the government and sold it to the victims at a reduced price. The victims did not starve to death or move to other places.

古文：朝廷闻之，进秩一等。
现代文：朝廷知道后，给他升一级官职。
English: After the court found out, he was promoted to a higher rank.

古文：再召，进对，帝亲加褒谕，欲留置近密。
现代文：仇悆再次被召回朝廷，他在进朝奏对时，皇上亲自表彰和慰勉他，想留他担任身边的重要官职。
English: He was once again called back to the imperial court. When he entered the imperial court to perform, the emperor personally commended and consoled him, and wanted to retain him in an important official position.

古文：言者以悆在郡多黥胥吏为惨酷，请授外藩。
现代文：言官认为仇悆在郡时多次对胥吏处以黥刑，这太残酷，请求让他到地方任职。
English: The magistrate thought that it was too cruel that Qiu Gan had repeatedly beaten the officials when he was in the county, and asked him to serve in the local government.

古文：时峒獠未息，乃进直学士，为湖南安抚使，禁盗铸钱者，趣使为农，物价既平，商贾遂通。
现代文：这时峒獠没平息，就进升他为直学士，担任湖南安抚使，仇悆禁止私自铸钱，让那些私自铸钱的人去当农民，又使物价平稳，商贾随之流通。
English: At this time, the unrest subsided, and he was promoted to be a direct bachelor, and served as the pacifying envoy of Hunan Province. The enmity prohibited the private minting of money, and allowed those who minted money to become farmers. It also stabilized prices and allowed merchants to circulate.

古文：数月，召还，加宝文阁学士、陕西都转运使。
现代文：数月后，朝廷召回他，他被加官为宝文阁学士、陕西都转运使。
English: A few months later, the imperial court recalled him, and he was promoted to Baowenge Academician and transferred to Shaanxi Province.

古文：时金人无故归侵疆，诡计叵测，悆力陈非策，固辞不行。
现代文：这时金人无缘无故地把被他们占领的土地归还给朝廷，难以预料他们的诡计，仇悆极力陈述这不是好办法的理由，坚决推辞自己新任的官职不动身出发。
English: At this time, the Jin people returned the land occupied by them to the imperial court for no reason. It was difficult to predict their tricks, and the enemies tried their best to explain why this was not a good way, and firmly rejected their new official position without moving.

古文：秦桧方主和议，以为异己，落职，以左朝奉郎、少府少监分司西京，全州居住。
现代文：秦桧正主张和议，把仇悆看成异己分子，罢去了他的官职，仇悆以左朝奉郎、少府少监的身份分管西京，在全州居住。
English: Qin Hui was advocating peace talks, and regarded Qiu Hui as a dissident, and removed him from his official position. Qiu Hui was in charge of West Beijing as the Left Court's vassal and the Young Prefect's Young Supervisor, and lived in Quanzhou.

古文：起知河南府，未行，金人果复陷所归郡邑，如悆言。
现代文：仇悆被起用为河南府知府，还没动身，金人果然又攻陷了他们所归还的郡县，同仇悆说的一样。
English: Qiu Gan was appointed as the governor of Henan Province, but before he could leave, the Jin people invaded the counties they had returned, just as Qiu Gan had said.

古文：乃复待制，再知明州，改知平江府，陛辞，言： 我军已习战，非复前日，故刘锜能以少击众，敌大挫衄，若乘已振之势，鼓行而前，中原可传檄而定。 上嘉之。
现代文：仇悆复官为待制，再任明州知州，改为平江府知府，他向皇帝告辞时，说： 我军已经熟习战斗，不再像从前那样，所以刘钅奇能以少胜多，敌人大败，如果乘着已经振奋的军事形势，一鼓作气，中原可以传檄而定，不烦用兵。 
English: In his farewell to the emperor, he said: Our army has become familiar with fighting and is no longer the same as before. Therefore, Liu Beiqi can win more with less and defeat the enemy. If he takes advantage of the already exciting military situation and works hard, the Central Plains can pass the torch and not bother to use soldiers.

古文：以言罢，提举太平观。
现代文：皇上嘉奖了他。因为议论朝政得失，仇悆被罢官，为提举太平观。
English: The emperor commended him. Because he discussed the gains and losses of the imperial government, he was removed from his post and promoted to Taiping Guan.

古文：积官至左朝议大夫，爵益都县伯。
现代文：仇悆积累官职到左朝议大夫、益都县伯。
English: Cixi accumulated official positions to become the doctor of the Left Court and the county magistrate of Yidu County.

古文：卒，赠左通议大夫。
现代文：仇悆去世，被赠为左通议大夫。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Zuo Tongli Doctor.

古文：悆性至孝，母没时，方崎岖转徙，居丧尽礼。
现代文：仇悆的本性特别孝道，他母亲去世时，他正身处困境，为母亲守丧完全符合礼仪。
English: When his mother died, he was in a difficult situation, and his mother's funeral was completely in line with etiquette.

古文：沿海制置使陈彦文荐于朝，起复之，悆不就。
现代文：沿海制置使陈彦文把他推荐给朝廷，朝廷在他守孝期没满时重新起用他，仇悆没去任职。
English: The coastal system made Chen Yanwen recommend him to the imperial court, and the imperial court reappointed him when his period of filial piety was not complete. However, he did not take up the post.

古文：悆端方挺特，自初官讫通显，无所附丽。
现代文：仇悆端正有节操，从刚当官一直到地位显赫，没有攀附谁。
English: Feudal cadres had the virtue of self-restraint. They did not cling to anyone from the time they became officials to the time they reached a prominent position.

古文：令邓城时，丞相范宗尹方为邑子，以文谒悆。
现代文：他为邓城县令时，丞相范宗尹正是邓城县人，范宗尹拿着文章拜见仇悆。
English: When he was the governor of Dengcheng County, the chancellor Fan Zongyin was from Dengcheng County. Fan Zongyin took the article to meet his enemy.

古文：悆他日语其父： 是子公辅器也。 宗尹既当国，未尝以私见。
现代文：仇悆有一天对他的父亲说： 这个人是做三公、宰相的人才。 范宗尹掌权后，仇悆不曾以私交与他相见。
English: One day, Cixi said to his father, "This man is a talented person to be the Third Prince and the Prime Minister. After Fan Zongyin took power, Cixi never met him as a personal friend.

古文：悆在明州，尝欲荐一幕官，问曰： 君日费几何？ 对以 十口之家，日用二千 。
现代文：仇悆在明州，曾经想推荐一个幕僚，就问他： 你一天耗费多少？ 回答是： 十口人的家，一天用去二千缗。 
English: A friend of mine in Mingzhou once wanted to recommend a staff member, so he asked him: How much do you spend a day? The answer was: A family of ten people spends two thousand baht a day.

古文：悆惊曰： 吾为郡守费不及此，属僚所费倍之，安得不贪。 遂止。
现代文：仇悆吃惊地说 ：我身为郡守耗费都达不到这些，属僚的耗费是成倍的，哪能不贪污呢？ 
English: Surprised, Qiu Yao said, "As a county magistrate, I can't spend as much as this. My subordinates spend twice as much. How can I not be corrupt?"

古文：高登，字彦先，漳浦人。
现代文：仇悆就没有推荐这个慕僚。高登，字彦先，漳浦人。
English: He did not recommend this colleague to his enemies. Gao Deng, Aza Hixian, and Zou Pu.

古文：少孤，力学，持身以法度。
现代文：他少年时丧父，努力学习，用法度约束自己。
English: He lost his father when he was young, studied hard, and disciplined himself.

古文：宣和间，为太学生。
现代文：宣和年间，高登是太学生。
English: During the years of the declaration of peace, Gao Deng was a student.

古文：金人犯京师，登与陈东等上书乞斩六贼。
现代文：金人进犯京城，高登和陈东等人上书请求杀六贼。
English: The goldsmiths attacked the capital, and Gao Deng and Chen Dong, among others, sent a letter requesting the killing of the six thieves.

古文：廷臣复建和议，夺种师道、李纲兵柄，登与东再抱书诣阙，军民不期而会者数万。
现代文：朝廷中的大臣又建议和议，夺去种师道、李纲的兵权，高登和陈东再次到宫门去上书，军民不约而会集在宫门的有数万人。
English: The ministers in the imperial court also proposed and discussed, taking away the military power of the seed teacher Tao and Li Gang. Gao Deng and Chen Dong went to the palace gate again to submit a letter. Tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians gathered at the palace gate.

古文：王时雍纵兵欲尽歼之，登与十人屹立不动。
现代文：王时雍带兵想把这些人全杀死，高登和其他十人矗立不动。
English: Wang Shiyong and his soldiers wanted to kill all these people. Gao Deng and the other ten people stood still.

古文：钦宗即位，擢吴敏、张邦昌为相，敏又雪前相李邦彦无辜，乞加恩礼起复之。
现代文：钦宗即位后，提拔吴敏、张邦昌为宰相，吴敏又替前任宰相李邦彦平反昭雪，请求朝廷对李邦彦施加恩礼并重新起用他。
English: After Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, he promoted Wu Min and Zhang Bangchang to the post of prime minister. Wu Min also petitioned the imperial court on behalf of the former prime minister Li Bangyanping against Zhaoxue, requesting the court to impose a favor on Li Bangyan and reappoint him.

古文：登上书曰： 陛下自东宫即位，意必能为民兴除大利害。
现代文：高登上书说： 陛下由太子登上皇位，想必能为老百姓兴大利，除大害。
English: Gao Dengshu said: Your majesty, by ascending the throne from the crown prince, will surely be able to bring prosperity to the people and eliminate great harm.

古文：践阼之始，兵革扰攘，朝廷政事一切未暇，人人翘足以待事息而睹惟新之政，奈何相吴敏、张邦昌？
现代文：陛下刚即位时，正是战争时期，朝廷政事都没理顺，人人希望赶快结束战争，亲眼看到改革政治，怎么任用吴敏、张邦昌为宰相呢？
English: When His Majesty ascended the throne, it was a time of war, and the political affairs of the imperial court were not well-ordered. Everyone hoped to end the war as soon as possible and see political reform with their own eyes. How could Wu Min and Zhang Bangchang be appointed as prime ministers?

古文：又纳敏党与之言，播告中外，将复用李邦彦，道路之人无不饮恨而去。
现代文：又采纳吴敏的党羽的话，布告朝内外，将要起用李邦彦，道路上的人没有不含恨离去的。
English: He also adopted the words of Wu Min's party members to announce to the North and the outside world that Li Bangyan would be appointed. People on the road did not leave without hatred.

古文：是陛下大失天下之望，臣恐人心自此离矣。
现代文：这是陛下使天下人大失所望，我担心人心从此离散了。
English: His Majesty has disappointed the people of the world, and I fear that the hearts of the people have been divided ever since.

古文：太上皇久处邦彦等于政府，纪纲紊乱，民庶愁怨，方且日以治安之言诱误上皇，以致大祸，仓皇南幸，不获宁居。
现代文：太上皇长期任用李邦彦等担任重要的职位，法度紊乱，老百姓忧愁怨恨，李邦彦并且每天都用国家太平的话来引诱和欺骗太上皇，以致国家遭受大祸，太上皇仓惶去南方巡幸，没有一个安宁的住处。
English: Emperor Taizong appointed Li Bangyan and others to important positions for a long time, the legal system was in disarray, the people were sad and resentful, Li Bangyan also used the words of national peace and tranquility to lure and deceive Emperor Taizong every day, so that the country suffered a great disaster, Emperor Taizong went to the south in a panic, and there was no peaceful place to live.

古文：主辱臣死，此曹当尽伏诛，今乃偃然自恣，朋比为奸，蒙蔽天日。
现代文：君主受到屈辱，做臣的应该死，这些人应该都杀掉，如今他们仍然没受到处罚，自由放纵，结成朋党并且干那些奸邪的事，来蒙蔽陛下。
English: Monarchs were humiliated, courtiers were put to death, these people should all have been killed, and yet they remain unpunished, free to indulge in cronyism and do all manner of nefarious things to hoodwink His Majesty.

古文：陛下从敏所请，天下之人将以陛下为不明之君，人心自此离矣。 再上书曰： 臣以布衣之微贱，臣言系宗社之存亡，未可忽也。 于是凡五上书，皆不报。
现代文：陛下听从吴敏的请求，天下人将把陛下看成是昏庸的君主，人心从此离散了。 高登又上书说： 臣是普通百姓，出身微贱，但臣的话关系到国家的存亡，不应该忽视啊。 于是高登一共上书五次，都没得到答复。
English: His Majesty listened to Wu Min's request, and people around the world will regard His Majesty as a mediocre monarch, and people's hearts have been divided ever since. Gao Deng also wrote a letter, saying: "Your Excellency is an ordinary citizen, from a humble background, but your words are related to the survival of the country, and should not be ignored." So Gao Deng wrote a total of five times, and received no reply.

古文：因谋南归，忽闻邦昌各与远郡，一时小人相继罢斥，与所言偶合者十七八，登喜曰： 是可以尽言矣。 复为书论敏未罢，不报。
现代文：高登就计划回到南方，忽然听说张邦昌等人分别被发配到边远的州郡，一时间奸邪的人相继被罢官斥退，和高登说的有十分之七八相符合，高登高兴地说： 这下可以把要说的话都说了。 他又上书议论罢免吴敏的事，没得到答复。
English: Gauden was planning to return to the south, when he suddenly heard that Zhang Bangchang and others had been sent to outlying prefectures and counties separately, and those who had been treacherous for a while had been dismissed one after another. Gauden said that there was a seventy-eight percent match with what Gauden said. Gauden said happily, "Now I can say everything I want to say." He also wrote to discuss the dismissal of Wu Min, but did not get a reply.

古文：初，金人至，六馆诸生将遁去，登曰： 君在可乎？ 与林迈等请随驾，隶聂山帐中，而帝不果出。
现代文：当初，金人到来，六馆的学生准备逃走，高登说： 君主还在这里，我们可以逃走吗？ 他就和林迈等人请求跟随皇上，隶属聂山的营寨，而皇上果然没离开京城。
English: At first, when the goldsmiths arrived and the students of the Sixth Hall prepared to flee, Gauden said, "The monarch is still here, can we escape?" He and Lin Mai and others asked to follow the emperor to the camp belonging to Shaoshan, but the emperor did not leave Beijing.

古文：金人退师，敏遂讽学官起罗织，屏斥还乡。
现代文：金人退兵，吴敏怂恿学官编造高登等人的罪名，把他们逐退回乡。
English: Jinren retired from the army, and Wu Minjun, a scholar-official, fabricated the charges against Gao Deng and others and expelled them back to their hometown.

古文：绍兴二年，廷对，极意尽言，无所顾避，有司恶其直，授富川主簿。
现代文：绍兴二年，高登在朝廷上当众奏对，他把自己的意见完全表达出来，没有顾忌和躲避什么，有关的官吏恨他直率，他被任命为富川主簿。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, Gauden played the piano in public at the imperial court. He fully expressed his opinions, without scruples or evasion. The relevant officials hated his straightforwardness. He was appointed as the chief accountant of Buchuan.

古文：宪董弅闻其名，檄谳六郡狱，复命兼贺州学事。
现代文：提点刑狱董听说高登这个人后，就传檄文让他来负责审理、判决六郡的案件，又任命他兼贺州学事。
English: After hearing about Gao Deng's personality, the director of the Tingchi Detention Center sent a letter to Gao Deng, asking him to be in charge of hearing and judging cases in six counties, and also appointed him as Hezhou academic affairs.

古文：学故有田舍，法罢归买马司，登请复其旧。
现代文：州学本来有土地、房屋，按法令被罢去归买马司所有，高登请求恢复州学原有的土地和房屋。
English: State University originally had land and houses, but according to the law, they were taken away and bought by Ma. Gao Deng requested that the original land and houses of State University be restored.

古文：守曰： 买马、养士孰急？ 登曰： 买马固急矣，然学校礼义由出，一日废，衣冠之士与堂下卒何异？ 守曰： 抗长吏耶！ 曰： 天下所恃以治者，礼义与法度尔，既两弃之，尚何言！ 守不能夺，卒从之。
现代文：郡守说 ：买马、培养读书人哪件事急迫？ 
English: The county governor said, "Which is more urgent, to buy a horse or to train readers?"

古文：摄狱事，有囚杀人，守欲奏裁曰： 阴德可为。 登曰： 阴德岂可有心为之，杀人者死，而可幸免，则被死之冤何时而销？ 
现代文：他负责处理案件，有个囚犯杀人，郡守判决说： 给他条活命，也是积阴德。 高登说： 阴德怎么可以有意去积累，杀人的人要处死，如果可以免去死罪，那么被杀死的人的冤屈什么时候能除去？ 
English: He was in charge of handling the case. A prisoner had committed a murder, and the county magistrate said in his verdict, "If you give him a life sentence, you will also accumulate filth." Gauden said, "How can filth be intentionally accumulated? People who commit murder should be executed. If the death penalty can be waived, then when can the grievances of the person who was killed be removed?"

古文：满秩，士民丐留不获，相率馈金五十万，不告姓名，白于守曰： 高君贫无以养，愿太守劝其咸受。 登辞之，不可，复无所归，请置于学，买书以谢士民。
现代文：高登任职期满，士大夫和老百姓请求留下他，但没被获准，他们就相继赠给高登钱五十万，不告诉自己的姓名，他们对郡守说 ：高君贫困没有什么钱财可以依赖，希望太守劝他全部接受。 高登推辞，人们不答应，高登又不知把这些钱退还给谁，他就请求把钱放在州学中，买书向士大夫和老百姓表示感谢。
English: At the end of Gao Deng's term of office, Shidafu and the common people asked Gao Deng to keep him, but they were not allowed to do so. They successively gave Gao Deng 500,000 yuan in money without telling their names. They said to the county magistrate: Gao Jun is poor and has no money to rely on. I hope the county magistrate will advise him to accept everything. Gao Deng refused, the people did not agree, and Gao Deng did not know who to return the money to. He asked to put the money in the state school and buy books to express his gratitude to Shidafu and the common people.

古文：归至广，会新兴大饥，帅连南夫檄发廪振济，复为糜于野以食之，愿贷者听，所全活万计。
现代文：高登回到广州，恰好新兴县发生大饥荒，帅守连南夫发布檄命让打开仓库，赈济饥民，又在野外做稀粥让饥民吃，想借贷的也可以，被救活的人数以万计。
English: Gao Deng returned to Guangzhou, just as the great famine occurred in the emerging counties, the commander-in-chief, Lian Nanfu, issued an order to open the warehouse, feed the hungry, and make gruel in the field for the hungry to eat. Those who want to borrow money can also do so. The number of people who have been saved is tens of thousands.

古文：岁适大稔，而偿亦及数。民投牒愿留者数百辈，因奏辟终其任。
现代文：这年赶上大丰收，也补足了仓库中的粮食，老百姓投书请求留下他的有数百人，于是就奏请征用高登始终负责赈灾。
English: This year's bumper harvest also replenished the grain in the warehouse. Hundreds of people wrote to request that Gao Deng remain in charge of disaster relief.

古文：召赴都堂审察，遂上疏万言及《时议》六篇，帝览而善之，下六议中书。
现代文：高登被召回京城，他就上了万言书和《时议》六篇，皇上看后认为很好，把他的《时议》六篇交给中书。
English: Gao Deng was recalled to Beijing, and he wrote a thousand-character book and six articles of "Situation Report." After the emperor read it, he thought it was very good and handed over his six articles of "Situation Report" to Zhongshu.

古文：秦桧恶其讥己，不复以闻。
现代文：秦桧恨高登讥议自己，不再向皇上汇报这些。
English: Qin Yu hated Gao Deng's self-mockery and no longer reported these things to the emperor.

古文：授静江府古县令，道湖州，守汪藻馆之。
现代文：高登被授予静江府古县县令，他经过湖州时，湖州知州汪藻接待了他。
English: Gao Deng was awarded the county title of ancient county of Jingjiang Prefecture. When he passed through Huzhou, Huzhou Zhizhou Wangmo received him.

古文：藻留与修《徽宗实录》，固辞，或曰： 是可以阶改秩。 登曰： 但意未欲尔。 遂行。
现代文：汪藻留高登和他一起撰写《徽宗实录》，高登坚决推辞，有人说： 这可以提升官职。 高登说 ：只是我没有这种想法。 
English: Wang Mo Liu Gao Deng and he wrote "Hui Sect Record" together, Gao Deng firmly refused, some people said: This can promote the official post. Gao Deng said: But I don't have such an idea.

古文：广西帅沈晦问登何以治县，登条十余事告之。
现代文：就走了。广西帅沈晦问高登靠什么来处理县中的事，高登列出十多条原则告诉他。
English: Guangxi Shuai Shengyu asked Gao Deng what he relied on to deal with county affairs, and Gao Deng listed more than ten principles to tell him.

古文：晦曰： 此古人之政，今人诈，疑不可行。 对曰： 忠信可行蛮貊，谓不能行，诚不至尔。 豪民秦琥武断乡曲，持吏短长，号 秦大虫 ，邑大夫以下为其所屈。
现代文：沈晦说 ：这是古人的政事，现在的人都狡诈，恐怕行不通。 高登回答： 忠信可以在蛮夷地区实行，认为在我们这里不能实行，那是因为没诚心这样做。 豪强秦琥在乡间横行霸道，掌握官吏的生杀大权，号称 秦老虎 ，县中的士大夫以下都被他所屈服。
English: Shen Hui said, "This is the politics of the ancients, but people nowadays are cunning, so I'm afraid it won't work." Gao Deng replied, "Faithfulness can be practiced in barbarian regions, but it can't be practiced here, because it's not sincere. The powerful Qin Jiao is domineering in the countryside, wielding the power of life and death over officials, and is known as the "Qin Tiger," subjugating everyone from the county magistrate on down.

古文：登至，颇革，而登喜其迁善，补处学职。
现代文：高登来了以后，他有很大的转变，高登赞赏他改恶从善，就安排他为学官。
English: After Gao Deng came, he had a great transformation. Gao Deng appreciated that he had changed from bad to good, and arranged for him to be an academician.

古文：它日，琥有请属，登谢却之，琥怒，谋中以危法。
现代文：有一天，秦琥对高登有所请托，高登推辞了，秦琥大怒，谋划用破坏法度为名陷害高登。
English: One day, Qin Amber asked Gao Deng for a favor, Gao Deng refused, Qin Amber was furious and planned to use the destruction of the law to frame Gao Deng.

古文：会有诉琥侵贷学钱者，登呼至，面数琥，声气俱厉，叱下，白郡及诸司置之法，忿而死，一郡快之。
现代文：恰好有诉讼秦琥贪污学校钱的人，高登把秦琥叫来，当面指责他，十分严厉，呵斥他下去，高登向郡和有关部门汇报对秦琥以法治罪，秦琥忿恨而死，一郡的人都很高兴。
English: There just happened to be a lawsuit against Qin Ying for embezzling school money. Gao Deng called Qin Ying, accused him in person, was very harsh, and scolded him. Gao Deng reported to the county and relevant departments that Qin Ying had been charged with a crime against the rule of law. Qin Ying died in anger. People in the county were very happy.

古文：帅胡舜陟谓登曰： 古县，秦太师父旧治，实生太师于此，盍祠祀之？ 登曰： 桧为相亡状，祠不可立。 舜陟大怒，摭秦琥事，移荔浦丞康宁以代登，登以母病去。
现代文：统帅胡舜陟对高登说： 古县，是秦太师的父亲从前任官的地方，太师实际是在这里出生的，怎么祭祀他呢？ 高登说 ：秦桧任宰相没有什么事迹，不应该建立祠堂。 胡舜陟大怒，摘取秦琥的事，调荔浦丞康宁来代替高登，高登因母亲有病辞官。
English: General Hu Yao said to Gao Deng: Gu County is the place where Qin Taishi's father came from the previous official, and Taishi was actually born here, how should he be sacrificed? Gao Deng said: Qin Yao's appointment as prime minister has nothing to do with it, and the ancestral hall should not be built. Hu Yao was furious, and when it came to removing Qin Yu, he transferred Li Pu Zhi Kang Ning to replace Gao Deng, and Gao Deng resigned from the post because his mother was ill.

古文：舜陟遂创桧祠而自为记，且诬以专杀之罪，诏送静江府狱。
现代文：胡舜陟就建了秦桧的祠堂并且亲自写了记，胡舜陟还诬陷说高登擅自杀人，皇上下诏把高登送到静江府处治。
English: Hu Yao built Qin Yao's ancestral hall and wrote about it himself. Hu Yao also falsely accused Gao Deng of committing suicide, and the emperor sent Gao Deng to Jingjiang to be dealt with.

古文：舜陟遣健卒捕登，属登母死舟中，藁葬水次，航海诣阙上书，求纳官赎罪，帝闵之。
现代文：胡舜陟派矫健的兵卒去抓高登，正赶上高登的母亲死在船上，高登用藁草把母亲埋葬在岸边，他航海来到朝廷上书，请求用自己的官职赎罪，皇上怜悯他。
English: Hu Yao sent brave soldiers to capture Gao Deng. Just in time, Gao Deng's mother died on the ship. Gao Deng buried his mother on the shore with rushes. He sailed to the imperial court to submit a letter, asking to use his official position to atone for his sins. The emperor took pity on him.

古文：故人有为右司者，谓曰： 丞相云尝识君于太学，能一见，终身事且无忧，上书徒尔为也。 登曰： 某知有君父，不知有权臣。 既而中书奏故事无纳官赎罪，仍送静江狱。
现代文：友人中有位任右司的人，对他说： 丞相说曾在太学与您相识，你们如果能见上一面，那您一生的事都将不用忧虑，上书是徒劳的。 高登说： 我知道有皇上，不知道有掌权的大臣。 不久，中书上奏说没有用官赎罪的先例，仍把高登送交静江府治罪。
English: One of his friends, who was a member of the Right Division, said to him: "The prime minister said that he had met you at Taigaku, and if you could see the other side, then you would not have to worry about anything in your life, and it would be useless to submit a letter." Gao Deng said: "I know there is an emperor, but I do not know there is a minister in power." Shortly after, the report in the book said that there was no precedent for officials to atone for sins, but Gao Deng was still sent to Jingjiang Prefecture to be punished.

古文：登归葬其母，讫事诣狱，而舜陟先以事下狱死矣，事卒昭白。
现代文：高登回来埋葬了自己的母亲。办完事后就去静江府等待处治，而胡舜陟先因事获罪被投入狱中死了，高登的事才得以平反昭雪。
English: Gao Deng came back and buried his mother. After the deed was done, he went to Jingjiang Prefecture to await punishment, while Hu Yuxian was convicted of the crime and died in prison. Only then was Gao Deng's deed cleared up.

古文：广漕郑鬲、赵不弃辟摄归善令，遂差考试，摘经史中要语命题，策闽、浙水灾所致之由。
现代文：负责广州漕司的郑鬲、赵不弃征用高登担任归善县令，就让他出题考试，高登摘录经史中重要的话作为题目，让考生回答闽、浙水灾发生的原因。
English: Zheng Qi and Zhao Niu, who are in charge of the Guangzhou rowing club, conscripted Gao Deng as the county magistrate of Guishan County, and let him give a question exam. Gao Deng excerpted important words in history as a topic, and let the candidates answer the reasons for the floods in Zhuhai and Zhejiang.

古文：郡守李仲文即驰以达桧，桧闻震怒，坐以前事，取旨编管容州。
现代文：郡守李仲文就派人骑快马向秦桧汇报，秦桧听说后十分愤怒，因为以前的事使高登获罪，秦桧取得皇帝的同意后把高登编管到容州。
English: The county governor, Li Zhongwen, sent a man on a fast horse to report to Qin Yu. Qin Yu was very angry when he heard that Gao Deng had been convicted for his previous deeds. After obtaining the emperor's consent, Qin Yu sent Gao Deng to Yongzhou.

古文：漳州遣使臣谢大作持省符示登，登读毕，即投大作上马，大作曰： 少入告家人，无害也。 登曰： 君命不敢稽。 大作愕然。
现代文：漳州派使臣谢大作拿着这个命令给高登看，高登读完以后，就马上让谢大作上马，自己也跟着，谢大作说 ：你可以回家一会儿，告诉家里一声，没有坏处。 高登说 ：皇上的命令我不敢滞留。 谢大作很吃惊。
English: Zhangzhou sent an envoy, Xie Da Zuo, to show Gao Deng this order. After Gao Deng finished reading, he immediately asked Xie Da Zuo to mount his horse, and he followed. Xie Da Zuo said, "You can go home for a while, tell your family, there is no harm." Gao Deng said, "I don't dare to stay because of the emperor's order." Xie Da Zuo was very surprised.

古文：比夜，巡检领百卒复至，登曰： 若朝廷赐我死，亦当拜敕而后就法。 大作感登忠义，为泣下，奋剑叱巡检曰： 省符在我手中，无它语也。
现代文：当天夜里，巡检率领一百名士卒又来，高登说： 如果皇上让我死，我也应该拜谢诏敕以后就去死。 谢大作被高登的忠义所感动，为他流下了眼泪，他手拿着剑呵斥巡检说： 宰相的命令在我手中，没有别的话了。
English: In the evening of the same day, the inspectors led by a hundred soldiers came again, and Gauden said: "If the emperor lets me die, I should also die after paying homage to the emperor." Xie Dazaku was moved by Gauden's loyalty and shed tears for him. He held his sword in his hand and shouted at the inspectors, saying: "The prime minister's order is in my hands, there is nothing else to say."

古文：汝欲何为，吾当以死捍之。 鬲、不弃亦坐镌一官。
现代文：你想干什么，我应该以死来保护高登。 郑鬲、赵不弃也因此被降一级官职。
English: What do you want to do, I should protect Gao Deng with my death. Zheng Qi and Zhao Niuhuang were also demoted to the first-level official post.

古文：登谪居，授徒以给，家事一不介意，惟闻朝廷所行事小失，则颦蹙不乐，大失则恸哭随之，临卒，所言皆天下大计。
现代文：高登被贬后，以教书为生，高登对家中的事一点都不在意，只有听到朝廷所做的事有小失误时，他就皱着眉头不高兴，朝廷所做的事有大失误时，他就痛哭不止。临终前，他所说的都是天下大事。
English: After Gauden was demoted, he taught for a living. Gauden didn't care at all about what was going on at home. He only frowned when he heard that there was a small mistake in what the imperial court was doing. When there was a big mistake in what the imperial court was doing, he cried endlessly. Before his death, everything he said was a big deal.

古文：后二十年，丞相梁克家疏其事以闻。
现代文：他去世二十年以后，丞相梁克家上疏讲了他的事。
English: Twenty years after his death, Premier Liang Ke spoke about him at home.

古文：何万守漳，言诸朝，追复迪功郎。
现代文：何万为漳州知州，把高登的事对朝廷讲了，朝廷追复他为迪功郎。
English: Tens of thousands of people from Zhangzhou and Zhizhou told the imperial court about Gao Deng, and the imperial court reinstated him as a meritorious person.

古文：后五十年，朱熹为守，奏乞褒录，赠承务郎。
现代文：他去世五十年后，朱熹为漳州知州，上奏请求嘉奖高登并录用他的后代，皇上赠他为承务郎。
English: Fifty years after his death, when Zhu Xi was the governor of Zhangzhou, he petitioned the emperor to award Gao Deng and employ his descendants, and the emperor presented him as a steward.

古文：登事其母至孝，舟行至封、康间，阻风，方念无以奉晨膳，忽有白鱼跃于前。
现代文：高登侍奉自己的母亲十分孝道，船走到封、康之间时，遇到大风，高登正在想没什么食物给母亲做早饭时，忽然有白鱼跳到他的跟前。
English: Gao Deng served his mother with great filial piety. When the boat came between Feng and Kang, it encountered a strong wind. Gao Deng was thinking about not having enough food to make breakfast for his mother, when suddenly a white fish jumped in front of him.

古文：其学以慎独为本，所著《家论》、《忠辨》等编，有《东溪集》行世。
现代文：他以独处和谨慎不苟为研究学问的根本，著有《家论》、《忠辨》等文章，他的《东溪集》在世间流传。
English: He took solitude and meticulousness as the foundation of his study of culture. He wrote articles such as "On the Family" and "On Loyal Discernment," and his "Dongxi Collection" has been passed down to the world.

