古文：◎礼十一
现代文：礼十一
English: 11th day of the 11th month

古文：亲征遣将礻马祭受降奏凯献俘论功行赏大阅大射救日伐鼓
现代文：亲征遣将礻马祭受降奏凯献俘论功行赏大阅大射救日伐鼓
English: Conscripted in person, the horse-drawn chariot festival will be accompanied by the music of "Kai" (Kai is the Chinese word for "sacrifice" or "sacrifice"), the performance of meritorious deeds, the recitation of the "Great Reading," the "Great Shooting" and the "Rescue from the Sun" and the beating of drums.

古文：四曰军礼。
现代文：四是军礼。
English: The fourth is the military salute.

古文：亲征为首，遣将次之。
现代文：皇帝亲自出征之礼排在首位，派遣将领出征次之。
English: The emperor's invitation to personally go to the front ranks first, and dispatching generals to lead the expedition ranks second.

古文：方出师，有礻马祭之礼。
现代文：将要出军，有褥祭之礼。
English: He is about to leave for the army, and the burnt offering ceremony is about to take place.

古文：及还，有受降、奏凯献俘、论功行赏之礼。
现代文：到军队返回，有受降、奏凯献俘、论功行赏的礼仪。
English: Returning to the army, there is the etiquette of surrendering, playing the role of a hero, and awarding merit.

古文：平居有阅武、大射之礼。
现代文：平常有检阅军队、大射的礼仪。
English: There is usually a review of the army, the etiquette of shooting.

古文：而救日伐鼓之制，亦以类附焉。
现代文：而拯救日食击鼓的制度，也放在遭一类附记。
English: And the system of saving the eclipse drumming is also placed in the first category of notes.

古文：亲征
现代文：亲征
English: Self-enlistment

古文：洪武元年闰七月，诏定军礼。
现代文：洪武元年闰七月，下诏制定军礼。
English: In the leap July of the first year of Hongwu, the military etiquette was promulgated.

古文：中书省臣会儒臣言：古者天子亲征，所以顺天应人，除残去暴，以安天下。
现代文：中书省大臣舍合儒臣说，古代天子亲自率军出征，以此来顺应上天和人民的意志，除去残暴的人，以安定天下。
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Calligraphy Province, Shehe Ruchen, said that the ancient heavenly son personally led the army to go to war, in order to comply with the will of heaven and the people, remove the cruel people, and stabilize the world.

古文：自黄帝习用干戈以征不享，此其始也。
现代文：自从黄帝训练使用军队以征讨不来归顺的人，这是亲征的开始。
English: Ever since the Yellow Emperor trained and used the army to conquer those who would not submit, this was the beginning of personal enlistment.

古文：周制，天子亲征，则类于上帝，宜于大社，造于祖庙，礻马于所征之地，及祭所过山川。
现代文：周朝制度，天子亲自率军出征，便祭祀上天，祭祀土地神，祭祀祖宗，祭祀军队驻扎地之神，以及祭祀军队经过的山川神灵。
English: According to the Zhou Dynasty system, when the Emperor personally led an army to go to war, sacrifices were made to the heavens, to the gods of the land, to the ancestors, to the gods of the military garrison, and to the deities of the mountains and rivers through which the army passed.

古文：师还，则奏凯献俘于庙社。
现代文：军队返回，便在庙社奏凯乐献上战利品。
English: When the troops returned, they presented the trophies to the temple community by playing carols.

古文：后魏有宣露布之制。
现代文：在此之前，选择吉日祭祀祷告天地宗庙社稷。
English: Prior to this, they chose the auspicious day to worship and pray at the Heaven and Earth Sect Temple and Shrine.

古文：唐仍旧典，宋亦间行焉。于是历考旧章，定为亲征礼奏之。
现代文：皇帝穿戴着武弁，乘坐革辖车，准备好六军，供置牺牲和币帛，奏乐，都行三献礼，它的仪式与大祀相同。
English: The emperor wore a military uniform, rode in a leather chariot, prepared six armies, offered sacrifices and coins, and played music, all of which were three offerings. Its ceremony was the same as that of the Great Worship.

古文：前期，择日祭告天地神祠行礻马祭礼。
现代文：又在国都南部神祠举行军队驻扎地祭神的褐祭礼。
English: In addition, a brown festival was held at a shrine in the southern part of the national capital to celebrate the god of the military garrison.

古文：凡所过山川岳镇海渎用太牢，其次少牢，又次特牲。
现代文：凡是经过的山川岳镇海滨用太牢礼祭祀，其次用少牢礼祭祀，又其次用特牲礼祭祀。
English: On the coast of Yamakawadake Town, the Tairoku ritual is performed, followed by the Shoroku ritual, and then the Otome ritual.

古文：若行速，止用酒脯，祭器笾豆各一。
现代文：如果出征迅速，只用酒脯，祭器篷豆各一件。
English: If you leave for the battlefield quickly, use only the wine gourd and the taro offering, one each.

古文：前期，斋一日。
现代文：在此之前，斋戒一天。
English: Before that, fast for one day.

古文：皇帝服通天冠、绛纱袍，省牲视涤。
现代文：皇帝戴通天冠、穿绛纱袍，省察祭牲监视洗涤。
English: The emperor wore a crown and a gauze robe, and inspected the sacrificial animals and supervised the washing.

古文：祭之日，服武弁，行一献礼。
现代文：祭祀那一天，穿着武弁服，行一献礼。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, he wore a military uniform and made an offering.

古文：凯旋，告祭宗社，礼与出师同。
现代文：战胜归来，告祭宗庙社稷，礼仪与出军相同。
English: When returning from a victory, the family temple and shrine are dedicated, and the etiquette is the same as when going to war.

古文：献俘庙社，以露布诏天下，然后论功行赏。
现代文：向庙社进献战利品，以露布形式诏示天下，然后论功行赏。
English: They presented trophies to temples and shrines, announced it to the world in the form of a manifesto, and then gave out awards.

古文：永乐、宣德、正统间，率遵用之。
现代文：永乐、宣德、正统年间，都遵循施用。
English: In the years of Yongle, Xuande and Zhengde, the application is consistent.

古文：正德十四年，帝亲征宸濠，礼部上祭告仪注如旧。
现代文：正德十四年，皇帝亲自率军征讨朱宸濠，礼部像过去一样呈上祭告仪式。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, the emperor personally led the army to recruit Zhu Xi, and the ritual department presented the announcement ceremony as in the past.

古文：帝令祭祀俱遣官代。
现代文：皇帝命令祭祀都派官员代替。
English: The emperor ordered officials to be sent from the capital to replace them.

古文：及疏请遣官，有旨勿遣。
现代文：等到上疏请求派官员，有圣旨不用派遣。
English: Wait until Shang Su requests to send officials. If there is a sacred will, there is no need to send them.

古文：其颁诏，亦如旧制。
现代文：朝廷颁布诏书，也如同旧有制度。
English: The imperial edict issued by the imperial court is also the same as the old system.

古文：明年十一月将凯旋，礼臣言： 宸濠悖逆，皇上亲统六师，往正其罪，与宣德间亲征汉庶人高煦故事相同。
现代文：第二年十一月，将要胜利回军，礼官说： 朱宸濠背叛，皇上亲自统领六军，前往治他的罪，与宣德年间皇帝亲自率军征讨汉庶人朱高煦旧事相同。
English: In November of the following year, when he was about to return to the army in triumph, the etiquette official said: "The Emperor personally led six armies to punish Zhu Gaozhen, the traitor to the Han Dynasty, for his treachery, just as the Emperor personally led an army to punish Zhu Gaozhen, the commoner of the Han Dynasty, during the Xuande era.

古文：但一切礼仪无从稽考。
现代文：只是一切礼仪没有记载查考。
English: It's just that all the etiquette is not recorded for inspection.

古文：请于师还之日，圣驾从正阳门入，遣官告谢天地庙社。
现代文：请求在军队返回之日，圣上车驾从正阳门进入，派遣官吏告祭感谢天地宗庙社稷。
English: It was requested that on the day of the army's return, the Holy Father would drive in from the Zhengyang Gate and dispatch officials to offer thanks to the Heaven and Earth Patriarchal Temple and Shrine.

古文：驾诣奉先殿、几筵殿，谒见毕，朝见皇太后。
现代文：皇上到奉先殿、几筵殿，拜谒之后，朝见皇太后。
English: The Emperor went to the Bonshinden and the Kiso-den, and after paying homage, went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：次日早，御午门楼，百官朝见，行献俘礼。
现代文：第二天早晨，驾临午门城楼，百官朝见，举行献俘的礼仪。
English: The next morning, arriving at the gate tower at noon, hundreds of officials met in the morning and held a ceremony to dedicate the prisoners.

古文：择日诏告天下。 
现代文：选择吉日下诏告谕天下。 
English: Choose a lucky day and announce it to the world.

古文：十二月，帝还京，百官迎于正阳门外，帝戎服乘马入。
现代文：十二月，皇帝回京，百官在正阳门外迎接，皇帝穿着军服乘马入城。
English: In December, the emperor returned to Beijing. Hundreds of officials greeted him outside the Zhengyang Gate, and the emperor rode into the city wearing a military uniform.

古文：遣将
现代文：遣将
English: Sending a general

古文：洪武元年，中书省臣会官议奏，王者遣将，所以讨有罪，除民害也。
现代文：洪武元年，中书省大臣会同众官商议上妾，帝王派遣将帅，是用来讨伐有罪之人，铲除人民的祸害。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Minister of the Central Literature Department and all officials discussed the concubine, and the emperor sent a general to fight the guilty and eradicate the scourge of the people.

古文：《书》称大禹徂征，《诗》美南仲薄伐。
现代文：《尚书》称颂大禹出征，《诗经》赞美南仲讨伐西戎。
English: "Shoshu" praises Dayu's departure, and "Shisho" praises Nanzhong's battle against Xi Rong.

古文：《史记》引《兵书》曰： 古王者之遣将，跪而推毂。 
现代文：《史记》引用《兵书》说： 古代帝王派遣大将的时候，跪着推车毂以示尊崇。 
English: "Histories" quoted the "Book of Soldiers" as saying: When ancient emperors dispatched generals, they would kneel and push a cart to show their respect.

古文：汉高命韩信为将，设坛具礼。
现代文：汉高祖任命韩信为将，设坛台备礼仪。
English: Han Xin was appointed as the commander by Henkel's ancestor, and an altar was set up to prepare for the ceremony.

古文：北齐亲授斧钺。
现代文：北齐亲自授予斧钹。
English: North Qi personally awarded the axe to the dragonfly.

古文：唐则告于庙社，又告太公庙。
现代文：唐代则告祭于宗庙社稷，又告祭太公厩。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the festival was held at the family temple and shrine, and the festival was also held at the imperial stables.

古文：宋则授旌节于朝堂，次告庙社，又礻马祭黄帝。
现代文：塞朝则在朝堂授予旌旗节符，然后告祭宗庙社稷，又在军队驻扎地进行褥祭，祭祀黄帝。
English: The Seljuq dynasty, on the other hand, awarded the flag festival emblem in the imperial hall, and then offered the sacrificial offering to the patriarchal temple and shrine, and also held a sacrificial offering at the military garrison to worship the Yellow Emperor.

古文：今定遣将礼，皇帝武弁服，御奉天殿。
现代文：现制定派遣大将的礼仪，皇帝穿武弁服，驾临奉天殿。
English: Now, the etiquette for dispatching generals has been established. The emperor wears military uniform and arrives at the Imperial Palace.

古文：大将军入就丹墀，四拜，由西陛入殿，再拜跪。
现代文：大将军进入到宫殿的赤色台阶，拜四拜，从西面台阶进入宫殿，拜两拜跪。
English: The grand general entered the red steps of the palace and bowed four times. He entered the palace from the west steps and bowed twice.

古文：承制官宣制，以节钺授大将军。
现代文：承制官宣布制命，把节符斧钹交给大将军。
English: The officer-in-charge announced the order, and handed the axe to the general.

古文：大将军受之，以授执事者，俯伏，兴，再拜出。
现代文：大将军接受下来，把它交给执事者，俯首伏地，起身，拜两拜退出。
English: The general accepted it, handed it to the deacon, bowed his head to the ground, stood up, bowed twice and left.

古文：降陛，复位，四拜。
现代文：走下台阶，复返原位，拜四拜。
English: Walk down the steps, return to the original position, and bow four times.

古文：驾还宫，大将军出。
现代文：皇帝回官，大将军退出。
English: The emperor returned to his post, and the general resigned.

古文：至午门外勒所部将士，建旗帜，鸣金鼓，正行列，擎节钺。
现代文：到达午门外部署所统领的将士，建立旗帜，鸣金鼓，端正军队行列，高举节符斧钹。
English: Arriving at the noon gate, the commanding officers stationed outside set up a banner, played a golden drum, straightened the ranks of the army, and held aloft a ceremonial axe.

古文：奏乐前导，百官以次送出。
现代文：奏乐在前面开路，百官依次送出。
English: The music began to play, and the officials were sent out one by one.

古文：造庙宜社之礼，即命大将军具牲币，行一献礼，与遣官祭告庙社仪同。
现代文：到宗庙、社庙行祭祀礼仪，就是命令大将军准备好牺牲币帛，行一献礼，与派遣官吏祭告宗庙社庙的仪式相同。
English: To go to the ancestral temple or shrine and perform the ritual of sacrifice is to order the general to prepare the sacrificial coin and make a gift, which is the same as the ceremony of sending officials to the ancestral temple or shrine.

古文：其告武成王庙仪，前二日，大将省牲。
现代文：告祭武成王庙的仪式，前二日，大将省察祭牲。
English: Two days before the ceremony to announce the dedication of the King Wucheng Temple, the general inspected the sacrificial animals.

古文：祭日，大将于幕次佥祝版，入就位，再拜。
现代文：祭祀那天，大将在帐幕中签画祝文木版，进庙来到自己的位置，拜两拜。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, the general signed the wooden board of congratulations in the tabernacle, entered the temple, came to his place, and bowed twice.

古文：诣神位前上香、奠帛、再拜。
现代文：到神位前上香、置放祭礼、拜两拜。
English: In front of the altar, incense is offered, the offering is placed, and two prostrations are performed.

古文：进熟酌献，读祝，再拜。
现代文：进献熟牲和酌胙，读祝文，拜两拜。
English: Offer a cooked animal and a bowl of water, read a congratulatory text, and bow twice.

古文：诣位，再拜。
现代文：到自己的位置，拜两拜。
English: To your place, bow twice.

古文：饮福受胙，复再拜。
现代文：饮用供神的酒接受供神的胙肉，又拜两拜。
English: Drink the wine offered to the gods, receive the stew offered to the gods, and bow twice.

古文：彻豆，望燎。
现代文：撤去俎豆，举行望祭与燎祭。
English: Remove the peas, hold a memorial service and a bonfire.

古文：其配位，亦大将行礼。
现代文：配享的神位，也由大将行礼。
English: The god's throne, which is shared, is also saluted by the general.

古文：两庑陪祀，诸将分献。
现代文：两旁廊庶陪祭的神位，由众将分别祭献。
English: The altars on both sides of the gallery will be dedicated separately by the congregation.

古文：礻马祭
现代文：礻马祭
English: Horse-riding festival

古文：亲征前期，皇帝及大将陪祭官皆斋一日。
现代文：亲征之前，皇帝和大将陪祭官都斋戒一天。
English: Before personally leading the march, the emperor and the general and the sacrificial officer all fasted for a day.

古文：前一日，皇帝服通天冠、绛纱袍省牲，诣神厨，视鼎镬涤溉。
现代文：前一天，皇帝戴通天冠、穿绛紫纱袍省察祭牲，到神厕，视察鼎镂炊具的洗涤。
English: On the previous day, the emperor, wearing a crown and a purple gown, inspected the sacrificial animals, went to the sacred toilet, and inspected the washing of the cooking utensils.

古文：执事设军牙六纛于庙中之北，军牙东，六纛西，笾豆十二，簠簋各二，鉶登俎各三。
现代文：执事在庙中的北面设置军前大旗六纛旗帜，军前大旗在东面，六纛在西面，篷豆十二个，篮簋备二个，蜊登俎各三个。
English: The deacon set up the pre-war large banner with six banners on the north side of the temple, the pre-war large banner on the east side, six banners on the west side, twelve tarpaulins, two baskets, and three of each.

古文：设瘗坎位于神位西北，设席于坎前。
现代文：在神位西北设埋坎位，在坎前设席。
English: In the northwest of the shrine, there is a burial mound, and in front of the mound there is a seat.

古文：上置酒碗五，雄鸡五，余陈设如常仪。
现代文：上面放置酒碗五个，雄鸡五只，其余按照通常仪式设置。
English: Five wine bowls and five roosters are placed on it, and the rest is set up according to the usual ceremony.

古文：祭日，建牙旗六纛于神位后。皇帝服武弁，自左南门入。
现代文：祭祀那一天，在神位后面建立军前大旗六纛。皇帝穿着武弁，从左南门进入。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, six large military flags were set up behind the divine throne. The emperor, dressed in military uniform, entered through the south-left door.

古文：至庙庭南，正中北向立。
现代文：到庙庭的南面，正中面向北站立。
English: Go to the south side of the temple garden and stand in the middle facing north.

古文：大将及陪祭官分文武重行班于后。
现代文：大将和陪祭官分文武在后面列两行排列。
English: The general and the officiating priest, Bunmonbu, are lined up two rows behind.

古文：迎神，再拜，奠币。
现代文：迎神，拜两拜，放下祭礼。
English: Greet God, make two prostrations, and let go of the ritual.

古文：行初献礼，先诣军牙神位前，再诣六纛神位前，俱再拜。
现代文：行初献礼，先到军前大旗位前面，再到六纛旗帜神位前面，都拜两拜。
English: At the beginning of the procession, two prostrations should be made, first in front of the pre-war large banner and then in front of the six-banner shrine.

古文：亚献、终献如之。
现代文：行二献礼、终献礼如前一样。
English: Two offerings are made in a row, and the last offering is made as before.

古文：惟初献读祝，诣饮福位，再拜饮福，受胙，又再拜。
现代文：只有初献礼读祝祷文，到饮用祭神酒的位置，拜两拜饮祭神酒，接受祭肉，又拜两拜。
English: Only for the first offering, a blessing is recited, and two prostrations are performed before drinking the sacrificial wine and receiving the sacrificial meat.

古文：掌祭官彻豆，赞礼唱送神，复再拜。
现代文：执掌祭祀的官员撤除俎豆，赞礼宣唱送神，又拜两拜。
English: The official in charge of the ritual removed the peas, sang praises to the god, and prayed twice.

古文：执事官各以祝币，掌祭官取馔诣燎所，太常奏请望燎。
现代文：执事官各用祝礼，掌祭官取肴僎到燎祭的地方，太常上奏请求望祭和燎祭。
English: Each of the deacons made a toast, and the officiating priest went to the place of the burnt offering with food and drink, and often went up to the altar to ask for the memorial offering and the burnt offering.

古文：执事杀鸡，刺血于酒碗中，酹神。
现代文：执事杀鹦，让鸡血流到酒碗中，以酒浇地祭神。
English: The deacon killed the parrot, let the chicken's blood flow into the wine bowl, and sprinkled the ground with wine to sacrifice to the gods.

古文：燎半，奏礼毕，驾还。
现代文：燎祭到一半，上奏说祭礼完毕，皇帝返回。
English: Halfway through the burnt offering, after the sermon, the emperor returned.

古文：若遣将，则于旗纛庙坛行三献礼。
现代文：如果是派遣大将，便在旗纛庙坛举行三献礼。
English: In the case of dispatching a general, three offerings are held at the temple altar of the banner.

古文：大将初献，诸将亚献、终献。
现代文：大将初献，诸将行二次献、终献。
English: The first offering is made by the general, and the second and final offerings are made by the generals.

古文：受降
现代文：受降
English: Surrendered

古文：洪武四年七月，蜀夏明升降表至京师，太祖命中书集议受降礼。
现代文：洪武四年七月，蜀夏明升投降的章表送到京城，太祖命令中书集体议定受降礼仪。
English: In July of the 4th year of Hongwu, Shu Xia Ming Sheng's surrender document was sent to Beijing, and the etiquette of surrender was collectively agreed upon in the document ordered by the great ancestor.

古文：省部请如宋太祖受蜀主孟昶降故事，拟明升朝见日，皇帝御奉天门，升等于午门外跪进待罪表。
现代文：中书省部请求按照宋太祖接受蜀主孟昶投降的旧例，拟定明升朝见之日，皇帝驾临奉天门，明升等人在午门外跪着进呈待罪表。
English: The Chinese Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested that, in accordance with the old example of Song Taizu accepting the surrender of the Shu lord Meng Qi, the day of Ming Sheng's morning meeting be planned. The emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven, and Ming Sheng and others knelt outside the noon gate to present the charge sheet.

古文：侍仪使捧表入，宣表官宣读讫，承制官出传制。
现代文：侍仪使捧着降表进入，宣表官宣读降表结东，承制官出来传达制命。
English: The usher enters holding the table of precedence, the officer reads the table of precedence, and the usher comes out to give the order.

古文：升等皆俯伏于地，侍仪舍人掖升起，其属官皆起，跪听宣制释罪。
现代文：明升等人都俯身伏在地上，侍仪舍人搀扶明升起身，他的属官都起身，跪着听宣布制命赦罪。
English: Ming Sheng and the others all bowed down to the ground, the attendants stood up, and his subordinate officials all stood up, kneeling to listen to the announcement of the forgiveness of sins.

古文：升等五拜，三呼万岁。
现代文：明升等人拜五拜，高呼三声万岁。
English: Ming Sheng and the others bowed five times and shouted three times, "Long live the king!"

古文：承制官传制，赐衣服冠带。
现代文：承制官传达制命，赐给衣服，授给官爵。
English: The vassal conveyed the vassalage order, gave clothes, and conferred the title of nobility.

古文：侍仪舍人引升入丹墀中四拜。
现代文：侍仪舍人导引明升进入皇宫朱色空地中央拜四拜。
English: The maids of honor led Ming Sheng into the center of the palace's vermilion-colored open space, where he bowed four times.

古文：侍仪使传旨，升跪听宣谕，俯伏四拜，三呼万岁，又四拜出。
现代文：侍仪使传达圣旨，明升跪着听宣布告谕，俯身伏地拜四拜，高呼三声万岁，又拜四拜退出。
English: The ushers conveyed the sacred will. Ming Sheng knelt down to listen to the announcement, bowed down and bowed four times, shouted three times "long live" and bowed four times to withdraw.

古文：百官行贺礼。
现代文：百官行贺礼。
English: Hundreds of officials came to pay their respects.

古文：帝以昶专治国政，所为奢纵，升年幼，事由臣下，免其叩头伏地上表请罪礼，惟命升及其官属朝见，百官朝贺。
现代文：皇帝以孟昶专擅国政，行为奢侈放纵，明升年幼，事情由臣下决定。免除他的叩头伏地上表请罪礼，只是命令明升和他的官吏属下朝见，百官朝贺。
English: The emperor treated Meng Xuan as an expert in state affairs, indulging in extravagant behavior. Ming Sheng was young, and matters were decided by his vassals. He did not require his servants to prostrate themselves in front of the emperor to ask for forgiveness, but ordered Ming Sheng and his subordinates to meet with the emperor, and hundreds of officials came to congratulate him.

古文：奏凯献俘
现代文：奏凯献俘
English: Song Kai offering prisoners of war

古文：凡亲征，师还，皇帝率诸将陈凯乐俘馘于庙南门外，社北门外。告祭庙社，行三献礼，同出师仪。
现代文：凡是皇帝亲自出征，军队返回，皇帝率领诸将在宗庙南门外和社庙北门外陈凯旋乐和俘馘，告祭宗庙社稷，举行三献礼仪，与出军礼仪相同。
English: Whenever the emperor personally went to war and the troops returned, the emperor led the troops to sing the triumphal music and the prisoners' anthem outside the south gate of the family temple and the north gate of the community temple, to offer sacrifices to the family temple and community, and to hold the three offerings ceremony, which is the same as the military etiquette.

古文：祭毕，以俘馘付刑部，协律郎导乐以退。
现代文：祭祀完毕，把俘馘交给刑部，协律郎导引乐人退出。
English: After the ritual is over, the prisoner is handed over to the criminal justice department, and the bailiff leads the musicians out.

古文：皇帝服通天冠、绛纱袍，升午门楼，以露布诏天下，百官具朝服以听，仪与开读诏赦同。
现代文：皇帝戴通天冠、穿绛紫纱袍，登上午门城楼，用露布诏示天下，百官穿着朝服听诏，仪式与开读诏赦相同。
English: The emperor wore a crown and a purple gown, ascended the morning gate tower, and made a proclamation to the world with a cloth. Hundreds of officials listened to the proclamation in court dress, and the ceremony was the same as the proclamation of the proclamation.

古文：大将奏凯仪。
现代文：大将奏凯的仪式。
English: The ceremony of the general playing Kai.

古文：先期，大都督以露布闻。
现代文：在定期以前，大都督用露布形式启奏皇上。
English: Prior to the regular period, the Grand Duke used the form of a blouse to perform for the Emperor.

古文：内使监陈御座于午门楼上前楹，设奏凯乐位于楼前，协律郎位于奏凯乐北，司乐位于协律郎南。
现代文：内使监在午门楼土前楹陈设御座，在楼前设奏凯乐位，协律郎位在奏凯乐位的北面，司乐位在协律郎位南面。
English: The imperial envoy set up a throne in front of the door of the gate building, and set up a concert hall in front of the building, a concert hall in the north of the concert hall, and a concert hall in the south of the concert hall.

古文：又设献俘位于楼前少南，献俘将校位于其北，刑部尚书奏位于将校北，皆北向。
现代文：又在楼前稍微靠南设献俘位，献俘的将校位在献俘位的北面，刑部尚书进奏的位置在将校北面，都面向北。
English: Also, in front of the building, a place for offering prisoners was set up slightly to the south, the officer's place for offering prisoners was north of the place for offering prisoners, and the position of the criminal investigation department's inscriptions was north of the officer, all facing north.

古文：又设刑部尚书受俘位于献俘位西，东向。
现代文：又设置刑部尚书受俘的位置在献俘位的西面，面朝东。
English: In addition, the location of the prisoner of the penal department, Shangshu, was set up on the west side of the prisoner of war, facing east.

古文：设露布案于内道正中，南向。
现代文：设置露布文案于内道正中，面向南。
English: Set the blur text in the middle of the inner road, facing south.

古文：受露布位于案东，承制位于案东北，俱西向。
现代文：受露布位在案东，承制位在案东北，都面向西。
English: The exposed fabric position is in the east of the case, and the production position is in the northeast of the case, both facing west.

古文：宣露布位于文武班南，北向。
现代文：宣露布位在文武官员行列的南面，面向北。
English: Xuanlu cloth is on the south side of the ranks of civil and military officials, facing north.

古文：至日清晨，先陈凯乐俘馘于庙社门外，不奏歌曲。
现代文：到那一天的清晨，先陈列凯乐俘馘在庙社门外，不奏歌曲。
English: In the early morning of that day, they first displayed the Kai Le prisoners' cymbals outside the gate of the temple, but did not play any songs.

古文：俟告祭礼毕，复陈乐于午门楼前，将校引俘侍立于兵仗之外，百官入侍立位。
现代文：等到告祭礼完毕，又在午门城楼前陈设凯乐，将校导引着俘虏在兵仗的外面站着等待，百官入位站立等待。
English: When the memorial service was over, the carols were set up in front of the gate tower. The officers led the prisoners to stand and wait outside the battle, and the officers took their positions and stood and waited.

古文：皇帝常服升楼，侍卫如常仪。
现代文：皇帝穿着常服登上城楼，侍卫如同平常的仪节。
English: The emperor, dressed in his usual attire, ascended the castle tower, and the guards performed the usual ceremony.

古文：大将于楼前就位，四拜。
现代文：大将在楼前就位，拜四拜。
English: The grand marshal takes his place in front of the building and bows four times.

古文：诸将随之，退，就侍立位。
现代文：诸将跟随礼拜，退下，走到侍立的位置。
English: You will follow the service, step back, and walk to the pew.

古文：赞奏凯乐，协律郎执麾引乐工就位，司乐跪请奏凯乐。
现代文：礼赞奏凯乐，协律郎手拿指挥音乐演奏的旗帜，引导乐工走上奏乐位置，司乐跪着请求奏凯乐。
English: The accompanist, holding the flag of the conductor of the orchestra, leads the musicians to the position of the music, while the chorus kneels and asks for the music.

古文：协律郎举麾，鼓吹振作，编奏乐曲。
现代文：协律郎举起指挥旗，鼓吹开始演奏，编奏乐曲。
English: The accompanist held up the conductor's flag and began to play and arrange the music.

古文：乐止，赞宣露布。
现代文：音乐停止，赞礼人宣读露布。
English: The music stops, and the celebrant reads the reveille.

古文：承制官以露布付受露布官，引礼引诣案跪受，由中道南行，以授宣露布官。
现代文：承制官把露布交付受露布官，引礼官引到案前跪着接受，从中路向南行，把它交给宣露布官。
English: The officiating officer delivers the cloth to the officiating officer, the officiating officer kneels in front of the case to accept it, and travels south from the middle to hand it over to the officiating officer.

古文：宣讫，付中书省颁示天下。
现代文：宣读完毕，交付中书省颁布天下。
English: After the reading, it will be delivered to the Ministry of Education and Culture for promulgation to the world.

古文：将校引俘至位，刑部尚书跪奏曰： 某官某以某处所俘献，请付所司。 
现代文：将校导引俘虏到指定位置，刑部尚书跪着上奏说： 某官某人把某处俘虏的犯人献上，请求交付给主管官吏。 
English: The officer led the prisoner to the designated location, and the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shu, kneeled down and said: "A certain officer, a certain person, presented a prisoner from a certain place and requested that the prisoner be handed over to the competent official."

古文：奏讫，退复位。
现代文：上奏结东，退下返回原位。
English: Play up to the end, step back and return to the original position.

古文：其就刑者立于西厢，东向，以付刑官。
现代文：那些将受刑的人站在西厢，面向东，把他们交给刑官。
English: Those who were to be executed stood in the west wing, facing east, and handed them over to the executioner.

古文：其宥罪者，楼上承制官宣旨，有敕释缚。
现代文：那些被免罪的，楼上承制官宣告圣旨，有敕命解去东缚。
English: For those who were exonerated, the officials upstairs declared the sacred will and ordered them to be released.

古文：楼下承旨，释讫，赞礼赞所释之俘谢恩，皆四拜三呼，将校以所释俘退。
现代文：楼下禀承圣旨，解除东缚之后，赞礼官高呼宽释的俘虏谢恩，都拜四拜高呼谢恩三遍，将校带着宽释的俘虏退下。
English: Downstairs, after carrying out the sacred will and releasing the eastern shackles, the praising officer shouted the gratitude of the released prisoners. They all bowed four times and shouted the gratitude three times. The officer retreated with the released prisoners.

古文：如有所赐，就宣旨赐之。
现代文：如有赏赐，便宣布圣旨赏赐。
English: If there is a reward, it will be announced as a reward.

古文：大将以下就拜位，舞蹈山呼如常仪。
现代文：大将以下走上拜恩位置，按照常仪行舞蹈山呼礼。
English: The general will then walk up to the position of Bayon and perform the dance mountain hail in accordance with the usual ritual.

古文：班前稍前跪，称贺致词讫，百官复四拜，礼毕还宫。
现代文：站在行列之前的官员稍微朝前跪，高声祝贺并致词结东，百官又拜四拜，礼仪结东后返回内宫。
English: The officials standing at the front of the procession knelt slightly forward, congratulated loudly and gave a speech. The officials bowed four times and returned to the inner palace after the ceremony.

古文：洪武三年六月，左副将军李文忠北征大捷，遣官送所俘元孙买的里八剌及宝册至京师。
现代文：洪武三年六月，左副将军李文忠北征打了大胜仗，派官送所俘获的元王孙买的里八刺以及实册到京城。
English: In June of the third year of Hongwu, the left vice-general Li Wenzhong led the north to fight a great victory, and sent the captured Yuan Wangsun to buy the eight thorns and the book to the capital.

古文：百官请行献俘礼。
现代文：百官奏请举行献俘礼。
English: Please hold a dedication ceremony for the centurion.

古文：帝不许，事详《本纪》。
现代文：皇帝不同意，事情详载《本纪》。
English: The emperor did not agree, and the matter was recorded in detail in the "Analects."

古文：止令服本俗服，朝见毕，赐中国衣冠就谢。
现代文：只命令穿本国风俗的服饰，朝见结东，赐给中原之国的衣冠，王孙致谢。
English: He only ordered them to wear the costumes of their own customs, and the crown of the Central Plains country was given to Wang Sun as a token of thanks.

古文：复谓省臣曰： 故国之妃朝于君者，元有此礼，不必效之。 
现代文：又对中书省大臣说： 故国的妃朝拜国君，元朝有这个礼仪，不必仿效。 
English: He also said to the Minister of the Ministry of Literature: The empress of the motherland bowed to the sovereign, the Yuan Dynasty had this etiquette, there is no need to follow suit.

古文：亦令衣本俗服，入见中宫，赐中国服就谢。
现代文：也命令穿着本国风咱的服饰，入内朝见中宫皇后，赐给中原之国的服饰，致谢。
English: He also ordered them to wear the national style of clothing, enter the Inner Court to see the Empress of the Middle Court, and give the clothing of the Central Plains country as a token of thanks.

古文：十一月，大将军徐达及文忠等师还，车驾出劳于江上。
现代文：十一月，大将军徐逵和李文忠等回军，皇帝出京到长江岸边慰劳。
English: In November, the great generals Xu Wei and Li Wenzhong returned to the army, and the emperor went to the Yangtze River to console them.

古文：明日，达率诸将上《平沙漠表》。
现代文：第二天，徐达率领诸将呈上《平沙漠表》。
English: The next day, Xu Dada led the cadres to present the "Flat Desert Table."

古文：帝御奉天殿，皇太子亲王侍，百官朝服陪列，达、文忠奉表贺。
现代文：皇帝驾临奉天殿，皇太子、亲王陪侍，百官穿着朝服陪着排列，徐达、李文忠捧献章表祝贺。
English: The emperor arrived at the Temple of Heaven, accompanied by the crown prince and prince, accompanied by hundreds of officials wearing imperial robes, and congratulated by Xu Da and Li Wenzhong.

古文：礼成，退自西阶。
现代文：礼仪结东，从西阶退下。
English: The etiquette is to bow to the east and step down from the west step.

古文：皇太子亲王入贺。
现代文：皇太子、亲王入内祝贺。
English: Congratulations to the Crown Prince and Crown Princess on their marriage.

古文：后定，凡大捷，择日以宣，其日不奏事，百官吉服贺，即日遣官荐告郊庙。
现代文：以后规定，凡是大胜仗，选择日期宣布，那一天不奏政事，百官穿着朝服庆贺，当天派遣官员告祭郊宫和宗庙。
English: Later, it was stipulated that whenever there was a great victory in a war, the date of the election would be announced, and no political affairs would be conducted on that day. Hundreds of officials would wear imperial robes to celebrate, and on that day, officials would be dispatched to offer sacrifices at the suburban palace and the ancestral temple.

古文：中捷以下，止宣捷，不祭告庆贺。
现代文：中等胜利以下，只宣布捷报，不祭告庆贺。
English: Below the level of medium victory, only the victory report will be announced, and there will be no celebration.

古文：永乐四年定，凡捷，兵部官以露布奏闻，大将在军则进露布官行礼，次日行开读礼，第三日行庆贺礼，余如前仪。
现代文：永乐四年规定，凡是战争获胜，兵部官吏用露布形式上报，大将在军中，便由送呈露布的官员行礼，第二天举行开读礼，第三天举行庆贺礼，其余的如同先前的礼仪一样。
English: Yongle four years stipulates that whenever the war is won, the officers of the military department will report in the form of cloth, and the general in the army will be saluted by the officials who presented the cloth, the opening ceremony will be held on the second day, the celebration ceremony will be held on the third day, and the rest will be the same as the previous etiquette.

古文：武宗征宸濠还，礼部上献俘仪，值帝弗豫，不果行。
现代文：武宗征讨朱宸濠返回，礼部呈上献俘礼仪，时值皇帝病重，最后没有举行。
English: When Emperor Wuzong returned from his campaign to capture Zhu Xi, the ceremonial department presented a ceremony to honor the captive. The emperor was gravely ill at the time, and the ceremony was ultimately not held.

古文：嘉靖二十三年十月，叛贼王三屡导吉囊入犯大同，官军计擒之。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年十月，叛贼王三屡次引导吉囊入犯大同，官军用计擒获他。
English: In October of the 23rd year of Jiajing, the traitor Wang San repeatedly led Yoshizuku into Datong, and the government army caught him.

古文：遣官谢南北郊、景神殿、太社稷。
现代文：派官吏告谢南北郊宫、景神殿、太社稷。
English: Officials were dispatched to express their gratitude to Nanboku Suburban Palace, Kei Shrine, and Taisha Shrine.

古文：择日献俘，百官表贺。
现代文：选择日期献俘，百官上表称贺。
English: The date was chosen for the dedication of the prisoners, and hundreds of officials expressed their congratulations.

古文：天启二年，四川献逆犯樊友邦等，山东献逆犯徐鸿儒等，俱遣官告祭郊庙，御楼献俘。
现代文：天启二年，四川献叛逆犯樊友邦等人，山东献叛逆犯徐鸿儒等人，都派官告祭郊官和宗庙，皇帝驾临城楼举行献俘仪式。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, the Sichuan rebel criminal Zou Youbang and others, and the Shandong rebel criminal Xu Hongru and others, all sent officials to offer sacrifices to the suburb officials and the ancestral temple, and the emperor came to the castle to hold a sacrifice ceremony.

古文：论功行赏
现代文：论功行赏
English: On Merit and Reward

古文：凡凯还，中书省移文大都督府，兵部具诸将功绩，吏部具勋爵职名，户、礼二部具赏格。
现代文：凡是凯旋回师，中书省传送公文给大都督府，兵部具列诸将功绩，吏部记载勋爵官职名称，户、礼二部记载赏赐等级。
English: Whenever there was a victorious return of a division, the Central Literature Department would send official documents to the Grand Duchy, the military department would list the general's achievements, the personnel department would record the lord's official title, and the household and etiquette departments would record the reward level.

古文：中书集六部论定功赏，奏取上裁。
现代文：中书会集六部评论决定功劳赏赐，上奏听取皇上裁定。
English: The six-part review of the Chinese book collection decided to reward the merit, and the report was submitted to the emperor for ruling.

古文：前期，陈御座香案于奉天殿，设宝案诏书案于殿中，诰命案于丹陛正中之北，宣制案于诰命案之北。
现代文：在此之前，在奉天殿陈设皇帝座位和香案，在殿中设置宝案、诏书案，诰命案在宫殿台阶正中的北面，宣制案在诰命案的北面。
English: Prior to this, the emperor's seat and incense case were set up in the Bongten Hall, the treasure case and the imperial edict case were set up in the hall, the imperial edict case was in the north of the middle of the palace steps, and the imperial edict case was in the north of the imperial edict case.

古文：吏、户、礼三部尚书位于殿上东南，大都督、兵部尚书位于殿上西南，应受赏官拜位于丹墀中，序立位于丹墀西南，受赏位于诰命案之南，受赏执事位于受赏官序立位之西。
现代文：吏、户、礼三部尚书位在殿上的东南，大都督、兵部尚书位在殿上西南面，应受赏赐的官员的拜位在皇宫的赤色空地中，按序站立位在皇宫赤色空地的西南面，受赏位在诰命案的南面，受赏执事位在受赏官按序站立位的西面。
English: The official, household, and ceremonial offices are located in the southeast of the hall, the grand governor and the military department are located in the southwest of the hall, the officials who should be awarded are in the red open space of the palace, standing in order in the southwest of the red open space of the palace, the awarding place is in the south of the death case, and the awarding deacon is in the west of the awarding officer's standing in order.

古文：每官用捧诰命、捧礼物各一人，俱北向。
现代文：官员用以捧诰命、捧礼物的各一人，都面向北。
English: Each person, who is used by the officials to hold the scepter of life and the gift, faces north.

古文：余陈设如朝仪。
现代文：其余的陈设如同上朝的礼仪。
English: The rest of the furnishings resemble the etiquette of the previous dynasty.

古文：是日，鼓三严，执事官各就位。
现代文：这一天，更鼓打遇三遍，执事官各自就位。
English: On this day, the drum beat three times, and the deacons took their respective places.

古文：皇帝衮冕升座，皇太子诸王衮冕，自殿东门入侍立，受赏官入就拜位，四拜。
现代文：皇帝穿戴着衮冕升座，皇太子、诸王穿戴衮冕，从殿东门进入陪侍站立，受赏官进入走向拜位，拜四拜。
English: The emperor, wearing a crown, ascended the throne. The crown prince and other kings, wearing crowns, entered from the east gate of the hall to stand with the attendants. The awardees entered to bow, bowing four times.

古文：承制官跪承制，由殿中门出，吏、户、礼尚书由殿西门出，立于诰命案东。
现代文：承制官跪着禀承制令，从殿中门出去，吏、户、礼部尚书从殿西门出去，站在诰仑案的东面。
English: The officials kneeled to receive the orders and went out from the middle gate of the hall, and the officials, households, and the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies went out from the west gate of the hall and stood on the east side of the hall.

古文：承制官南向称有制，受赏官皆跪，宣制曰： 朕嘉某等为国建功，宜加爵赏。
现代文：承制官面向南声称有制命，受赏官都跪下，宣布制命说： 朕嘉奖某等人为国建立功勋，应该增加爵位赏赐。
English: The awarding officer faced south and claimed to have a commanding order. The awarding officers all knelt down and announced the commanding order, saying, "I commend a certain person for his meritorious service to the country. He should be awarded a higher rank."

古文：今授以某职，赐以某物，其恭承朕命。 
现代文：现在授以某职位，赐以某物，希望恭敬地承受朕的命令。 
English: Now, having been given a position, having been given something, I wish to respectfully receive my orders.

古文：宣毕，受赏官俯伏，兴，再拜。
现代文：宣读制命完毕，受赏官俯首伏地，起身，拜两拜。
English: After the reading of the order, the awardee bowed his head to the ground, stood up, and bowed twice.

古文：唱行赏，受赏官第一人诣案前跪，吏部尚书捧诰命，户部尚书捧礼物，各授受赏官。
现代文：宣唱行赏，受赏官第一人到案前跪下，吏部尚书捧诰命，户部尚书捧礼物，各自交给受赏官。
English: When the award is announced, the first person to kneel down before the awarding officer arrives at the case. The person in charge of the personnel department will hold the award, and the person in charge of the household department will hold the gift, and each will be handed over to the awarding officer.

古文：受赏官以授左右，俯伏，兴，复位。
现代文：受赏官把它交给左右之人，俯首伏地，起身，复返原位。
English: The awardee hands it to the person to his or her left and right, bows his or her head, rises, and returns to his or her original position.

古文：余官以次受赏讫，承制官、吏部尚书等俱至御前复命，退复位。
现代文：其余官员依次受赏结东，承制官、吏部尚书等都到皇帝面前复命，退下复归原位。
English: The rest of the officials were rewarded in turn, and all of them, including the officials in charge of the imperial household and the officials of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, went to the emperor to ask for his permission to resign and return to their original positions.

古文：受赏官皆再拜，三舞蹈，山呼。
现代文：受赏官都拜两拜，舞蹈三遍，山呼。
English: The awardees all bowed twice, danced three times, and shouted.

古文：俯伏，兴，复四拜。
现代文：俯首伏地，起身，又拜四拜。
English: He bowed his head to the ground, got up and bowed four times.

古文：礼毕，皇帝还宫。
现代文：礼仪结东，皇帝返回内宫。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor returned to the inner palace.

古文：各官出，至午门外，以诰命礼物置于龙亭，用仪仗鼓乐各送还本第。
现代文：各官退出，到午门外把诰命礼物放置在龙亭，用仪仗鼓乐各自送回本人的宅第。
English: The officials withdrew, placed their gifts outside the afternoon gate in Longting, and sent them back to their own homes with ceremonial drums and music.

古文：明日进表称谢，如常仪。
现代文：第二天，进呈章表称谢，如同平常的仪节。
English: The next day, the presentation of the certificate of commendation began, as usual.

古文：大阅
现代文：大阅
English: The Great Reading

古文：宣德四年十月，帝将阅武郊外，命都督府整兵，文武各堂上官一员、属官一员扈从。
现代文：宣德四年十月，皇帝将在郊外检阅军队，命令都督府整治军队，文武各官署长官一名，属官一名跟从。
English: In October of the 4th year of Xuande, the emperor will review the army in the suburbs, order the governor's office to rectify the army, and the chiefs of the civil and military departments will leave, followed by a subordinate officer.

古文：正统间，或阅于近郊，于西苑，不著令。
现代文：正统年间，有时在近郊，有时在西苑检阅军队，不写定为法令。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, sometimes in the suburbs, sometimes in the West Courtyard, the army was inspected, but it was not written as a decree.

古文：隆庆二年，大学士张居正言： 祖宗时有大阅礼，乞亲临校阅。 
现代文：隆庆二年，大学士张居正说： 祖宗时期有大型阅兵的礼仪，请求皇上亲临检阅。 
English: In the second year of Longqing, Zhang Jizheng, a university scholar, said: In the ancestral period, there was a large-scale military parade etiquette, requesting the emperor to come and inspect it in person.

古文：兵部引宣宗、英宗故事，请行之。
现代文：兵部援引宣宗、英宗旧例，请求施行。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs cited the old cases of Xuan Zong and Ying Zong and requested enforcement.

古文：命于明年八月举行。
现代文：命令在第二年八月举行。
English: The order went into effect the following August.

古文：及期，礼部定仪。
现代文：到预定日期，礼部制定仪式。
English: By the scheduled date, the ceremonial department will set up the ceremony.

古文：前期一日，皇帝常服告于内殿，行四拜礼，如出郊仪。
现代文：在此之前一天，皇帝穿平常服饰在内殿祭告，行四拜礼，如同到郊宫仪式。
English: The day before that, the emperor wore his usual attire to give a sermon in the inner shrine, and performed four prostrations, as if he were performing a ceremony at a suburban palace.

古文：司设监设御幄于将台上，总协戎政大臣、巡视科道督率将领军兵预肃教场。
现代文：司设监在将台上设置皇帝帷幄，总协戎政大臣、巡视科道官督率将领军士预先警戒教场。
English: The director of the division set up the emperor's curtain on the stage, and the general secretary of the General Association of Korean War Veterans and the minister of state, the inspector of science and technology, led by the general and the sergeant, warned the classroom in advance.

古文：至日早，遣官于教场祭旗纛之神。
现代文：到了日期，早晨，派遣官员在教场祭祀旗纛神。
English: On the morning of the date, officials were dispatched to hold a flag-raising ceremony at the school.

古文：三大营官军具甲仗，将官四员统马兵二千扈驾。
现代文：三大营官军准备好甲胄器杖，将官四人统领马兵二千人跟随皇帝。
English: The three battalions of the imperial army prepared their armor and staffs, and four generals led two thousand horse soldiers to follow the emperor.

古文：文臣各堂上官，科道掌印官、礼兵二科、礼部仪制司、兵部四司官、纠仪监射御史、鸿胪寺供事官，武臣都督以上、锦衣卫堂上及南镇抚司掌印佥书官，俱大红便服，关领扈从，牙牌悬带，先诣教场。
现代文：文臣各官署长官，科道掌印官、礼兵二部、礼部仪制司、兵部四司官、纠仪监射御史、鸿胪寺供事官，武臣都督以上、锦衣卫长官以及南镇抚司掌印食书官，都穿大红便服，领着随从，象牙腰牌悬垂绶带，先到达教场。
English: The chiefs of the ministries and departments of education, science and technology, and the second division of the army, the second division of the army, the third division of the army, the fourth division of the army, the inspector of the rectification ceremony, the supply officer of the Hongye Temple, the governor of the capital, the commander of the army, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander of the navy, the commander

古文：是日免朝。
现代文：这一天免于上朝。
English: This day is exempt from the last morning.

古文：锦衣卫备卤簿。
现代文：锦衣卫充作仪仗队。
English: The brocade guards act as a guard of honour.

古文：皇帝常服乘辇由长安左门出，官军导从，钲鼓振作。
现代文：皇帝穿平常服饰乘辇车从长安左门出宫，官军在前引导，在后跟从，钮豉兴起。
English: The emperor left the palace from the left gate of Chang'an in a carriage wearing ordinary clothes. The official army led the way, followed behind, and the nobles arose.

古文：出安定门，至阅武门外。
现代文：从安定门出城，到达阅武门外。
English: Go out of the city from the stable gate and arrive outside the reading gate.

古文：总协戎政官率大小将佐戎服跪迎，入将台下，北向序立。
现代文：总协戎政官率领大小将佐穿着军服跪下迎接，进入将台下，面向北依次站立。
English: The military and political officers of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan, led by generals and vice-generals wearing military uniforms, kneeled down to greet them, entered the podium, and stood up facing north.

古文：驾进阅武门，内中军举号炮三，各营钲鼓振作，扈从官序立于行宫门外。
现代文：皇帝进入阅武门，内中军发号炮三声，各营钮鼓兴起，扈从官依次站在行宫门外。
English: The emperor entered the gate of the military parade, the Chinese troops inside the palace fired three cannon shots, each battalion raised the drums, and the officials stood outside the palace gate in turn.

古文：驾至门，降辇。兵部官导入行宫，鸣金止鼓，候升座。
现代文：皇帝车驾到门口，从辇上下来，兵部官员引导入行宫，呜响金钮停止击鼓，等候皇帝升座。
English: The emperor's carriage drove to the door, descended from the plough, was guided into the palace by military officers, and the golden button was sounded to stop the drumming and wait for the emperor to ascend to the throne.

古文：扈从官行一拜礼，传赐酒饭。
现代文：扈从官行一拜礼，传令赐予酒饭。
English: from the official line of a worship, bequeathed rice and wine.

古文：各官谢恩出，将台下东西序立。
现代文：各官员谢恩退出，在将台下东西依次站立。
English: All the officials bowed their heads and left the stage, and everyone stood up in turn.

古文：兵部官奏请大阅。
现代文：兵部官员上奏请求大规模阅兵。
English: Military officials have requested a large-scale military parade.

古文：兵部、鸿胪寺官导驾登台，举炮三。
现代文：兵部、鸿胪寺官员引导皇帝登上将台，发三炮。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Military Affairs and Hongye Temple guided the emperor onto the platform and fired three cannons.

古文：京营将士叩头毕，东西侍立。
现代文：京营将士叩头完毕，站在东西侍候。
English: After kowtowing to the generals of the Peking Battalion, he stood waiting for them.

古文：总协戎政官列于扈从官之北，诸将列从官之南。
现代文：总协戎政官站在扈从官的北面，诸将站立在扈从官的南面。
English: The military and political officials of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan stood to the north of the eunuchs, and the generals stood to the south of the eunuchs.

古文：兵部尚书奏请，令各营整搠人马。
现代文：兵部尚书上奏请示，命令各营整顿人马。
English: The military department still issued a written request, ordering each battalion to rectify the situation.

古文：台上吹号笛，麾黄旗，总协戎政及将佐等官各归所部。
现代文：台上吹起号笛，挥动黄旗，总协戎政和将佐等官各自返回所属部队。
English: The bugle was blown on the stage, the yellow flag was waved, and the officers of the General Association of Military and Political Affairs and the General Staff returned to their respective units.

古文：兵部尚书请阅阵，举炮三。
现代文：兵部尚书请求检阅军阵，发出三声号炮。
English: Shang Shu of the Ministry of Military Affairs requested a review of the military formation, and a three-sound cannon was fired.

古文：马步官军演阵，如常法。
现代文：马步官军演习阵法，按照常法进行。
English: The horse-walking official army exercise formation method was carried out in accordance with the usual law.

古文：演毕，复吹号笛，麾黄旗，将士俱回营。
现代文：演习完毕，又吹号笛，挥动黄旗，将士都返回军营。
English: After the exercise was over, the bugle was blown and the yellow flag waved, and the soldiers all returned to the military camp.

古文：少顷，兵部尚书请阅射。
现代文：一会儿，兵部尚书请求检阅射箭。
English: After a while, Hyobusho Shosho requested a review of archery.

古文：总协戎政官以下及听射公、侯、驸马、伯、锦衣卫等官，俱于台下较射。
现代文：总协戎政官以下和等候肘箭的公、侯、驸马、伯、锦衣卫等官员，都在台下较量射箭。
English: The military and political officials of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan and below, as well as officials such as the prince, marquess, prince's equerry, prince's equerry, prince's equerry, prince's equerry, prince's equerry, and prince's equerry, all competed in archery under the stage.

古文：马三矢，步六矢，中的者鸣鼓以报，御史、兵部官监视纪录。
现代文：骑马射三箭，徒步射六箭，射中箭靶的击鼓报告，御史、兵部官员监视记录。
English: Three arrows shot on horseback, six arrows shot on foot, report on the drumming of the arrow target hit, and monitoring records of imperial history and military officials.

古文：把总以下及家丁、军士射，以府部大臣并御史、兵部官于东西厅较阅。
现代文：把总官以下和家丁、军士射箭，以府部大臣会同御史、兵部官员在东西厅检阅。
English: The general officer and his subordinates, together with Ieting and the sergeant, went archery shooting, and the prefectural minister, together with the historian and the military official, reviewed them in the East and West Hall.

古文：枪刀火器等艺，听总协戎政官量取一队，于御前呈验。
现代文：枪刀火器等武艺，任凭总协戎政官衡量选取一队，在皇帝面前呈上察验。
English: The military and political officials of the General Association of Korean People's Army were allowed to select a team of martial arts such as guns, swords, and firearms, and present them to the emperor for inspection.

古文：兵部尚书奏大阅毕，台下举号旗。总协戎政官及诸将领俱诣台下，北向序立。
现代文：兵部尚书上奏说大规模检阅完毕，台下举起号旗，总协戎政官和诸将领都到台下，面向北依次站立。
English: After the large-scale review was completed, the flag was raised under the stage, and the military and political officials and generals of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan all came to the stage and stood facing north.

古文：鸿胪寺官奏传制，赞跪。
现代文：鸿胪寺官员上奏传达皇帝制命，礼赞跪下。
English: The officials of Hongye Temple made a speech to convey the emperor's command, and kneeled down in praise.

古文：宣制讫，赞叩头。
现代文：宣布制命结东，礼赞叩头。
English: Announce the system of life and death, and bow to the praise.

古文：各官先退，出门外，赞扈从官行叩头礼。
现代文：各官员先退下，出门外，赞唱扈从官行叩头礼。
English: The officials first retreated and went outside, singing praises and kowtowing to the officials.

古文：礼毕，驾回行宫，少憩，扈从等官趋至门内立。
现代文：行礼结东，皇帝返回行宫，稍微休息，扈从等官员快步走到门内站立。
English: The salute ended, the emperor returned to the palace, took a short break, and the officials walked briskly to the door to stand up.

古文：皇帝升辇。中军举炮三，各营皆鼓吹，卤簿及马兵导从如来仪，钲鼓与大乐相应振作。
现代文：皇帝登上辇车，中军发炮三声，各营都鼓吹乐曲，仪仗队和马军前导后随按来时的仪式，釭鼓与大乐乐声互相应和。
English: The emperor boarded the carriage, the Chinese army fired three cannons, each battalion played music, the guard of honor and the horse army's forerunner followed the arrival ceremony, and the gongs and drums harmonized with the music.

古文：总协戎政以下候驾至，叩头退。
现代文：总协戎政以下官吏等候皇帝车驾到达，叩头退后。
English: The officials of the General Association of Military and Political Affairs waited for the emperor to arrive by car, bowed and retreated.

古文：马兵至长安左门外止。
现代文：马军到长安左门外面停下来。
English: The horse army stopped outside the left gate of Chang'an.

古文：卤簿、大乐至午门外止。
现代文：仪仗队、大乐到午门外停下来。
English: The guard of honor and the grand parade came to a halt outside the gate.

古文：驾还，仍诣内殿参谒，如前仪。
现代文：皇帝返回，仍然到内殿行参谒礼，如同先前的仪节。
English: When the emperor returned, he still went to the inner hall to perform the rite of accession, as in the previous ceremony.

古文：百官不扈从者，各吉服于承天门外桥南序立恭送，驾还，迎如之。
现代文：百官不跟随的，各自穿朝服在承天门外桥南依次站立。恭敬相送，皇帝返回，迎接也像恭送的礼仪。
English: The dignitaries, who did not follow, each wore a court dress and stood in turn on the south side of the bridge outside the Shoten Gate. They respectfully saw each other off, and when the emperor returned, the greeting was also like a ceremonial send-off.

古文：次日，总协戎政官以下表谢，百官侍班行称贺礼，如常仪。
现代文：第二天，总协戎政官以下上表称谢，百官列班侍立举行道贺礼，如同平常的仪节。
English: The next day, the military and political officials of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan (GACJ) and their subordinates came up to the table to express their gratitude, and hundreds of officials stood in formation to hold a congratulatory ceremony, as is the usual ritual.

古文：兵部以将士优劣及中箭多寡、教练等第奏闻。
现代文：兵部按将士的优劣和射中箭靶的多少、教练的等次上报。
English: The military department will report according to the strengths and weaknesses of the soldiers, the number of arrows hit the target, and the rank of the coach.

古文：越二日，皇帝御皇极门，赐敕勉励将士。
现代文：过二日，皇帝驾临皇极门，赐予敕俞勉励将士。
English: Two days later, the emperor arrived at the imperial gate and gave encouragement to the soldiers.

古文：总协戎政官捧至彩舆，将士迎导至教场，开读行礼如仪。
现代文：总协戎政官捧着敕命到彩车，将士迎接导引到教场，按照礼仪打开宣读、行礼。
English: The political officer of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan went to the floats with his life in his hands, welcomed the soldiers and guided them to the classrooms, where they were read aloud and saluted according to the etiquette.

古文：是日，即行赏赉并戒罚有差。
现代文：这一天，就举行赏赐和惩罪，各有等差。
English: On that day there will be rewards and punishments of varying degrees.

古文：次日，总协戎政官率将佐复谢恩。
现代文：第二天，总协戎政官率领将佐又谢恩。
English: The next day, the political officers of the General Association of Korean War Veterans led by Vice Admiral Mata Shane.

古文：诏如议行。
现代文：下诏按照提议施行。
English: The following edict will be implemented as proposed.

古文：驾还，乐奏《武成之曲》。
现代文：皇帝返回，乐曲演奏《武成之曲》。
English: The emperor returned, and "Bucheng's Song" was played.

古文：万历九年大阅，如隆庆故事。
现代文：万历九年举行大型阅兵，按照隆庆的旧例办。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, a large-scale military parade will be held in accordance with the old routine of Longqing.

古文：大射
现代文：大射
English: Big Shot

古文：大射之礼，后世莫讲，惟《宋史》列于嘉礼。
现代文：大射的礼仪，后代没有谁研求，只有《宋史》列在嘉礼中。
English: The etiquette of grand ejaculation has not been studied by future generations, and only the "Song Dynasty History" is listed in the ceremony.

古文：至《明集礼》则附军礼中，《会典》亦然。
现代文：到《明集礼》则附在军礼之中，《明会典》也是这样。
English: The "Ming Collection" is attached to the military salute, as is the "Ming Code."

古文：其制洪武三年定。
现代文：大射礼的制度，洪武三年制定。
English: The system of the grand shooting ceremony was established by Hongwu three years ago.

古文：凡郊庙祭祀，先期行大射礼，工部制射侯等器。
现代文：凡是郊宫宗庙祭祀，在祭祀日期以前举行大射礼，工部制造箭靶等器物。
English: In the case of the Suburban Palace Temple's ritual, a large shooting ceremony is held before the date of the ritual, and the engineering department makes arrow targets and other objects.

古文：其射鹄有七。
现代文：箭靶有七种。
English: There are seven types of arrow targets.

古文：虎鹄五采，天子用之。
现代文：虎鹄箭靶为五彩，供天子使用。
English: Tiger's beak archery target is multicolored, for the heavenly son to use.

古文：熊鹄五采，皇太子用之。
现代文：熊鹄箭靶为五彩，供皇太子使用。
English: Xiong Yao's arrow targets are multicolored and are used by the crown prince.

古文：豹鹄五采，亲王用之。
现代文：豹鹄箭靶为五彩，供亲王使用。
English: The leopard crossbow target is multicolored, for use by the prince.

古文：豹鹄四采，文武一品、二品者用之。
现代文：豹鹄箭靶四彩，供文武一品官、二品官使用。
English: Leopard crossbow archery target four-color, for the use of civil and military first-class officers, second-class officers.

古文：糁鹄三采，三品至五品用之。
现代文：糁鹄箭靶三彩，供三品官到五品官使用。
English: The crossbow target is three-colored, and can be used by three-grade officials to five-grade officials.

古文：狐鹄二采，六品至九品用之。
现代文：狐鹄箭靶为二彩，供六品官到九品官使用。
English: The fox quail arrow target is two-color, for six-grade officials to nine-grade officials to use.

古文：布鹄无采，文武官子弟及士民俊秀用之。
现代文：布鹄箭靶没有色彩，供文武官员的子弟和士民中的俊秀人才使用。
English: The cloth arrowhead target has no color, and is used by the sons of military and civilian officials and the talented people among the people.

古文：凡射时，置乏于鹄右。
现代文：凡是举行射礼时，在箭靶右边设置乏。
English: Whenever a shooting ceremony is held, a ring is set up on the right side of the target.

古文：乏又名容，见《周礼·大司马》服不氏，职执旗及待获者以蔽身。
现代文：乏又叫容，见《周礼·大司马》服不氏，用处是为执旗和待获者蔽障身体。
English: see "Zhou Li · Da Sima" clothing, the purpose is to cover the body of the flag holder and the receiver.

古文：设楅及韦，当射时置于前，以齐矢。
现代文：设置插箭的器具福和韦当，这两样东西在射箭时放在前面，用来整齐地插放箭。
English: Set of arrow-inserting devices Fu and Wei Tang, these two things are placed in front of the archery, used to neatly insert the arrow.

古文：设射中五。
现代文：设置行射礼时盛算筹五种名叫中的器具。
English: When setting up the shooting ceremony, there are five kinds of equipment in the middle.

古文：皮树中，天子大射用之。
现代文：树中，即皮制树形盛算筹的器具，是天子举行大射礼时使用的。
English: In the tree, that is, the leather-made tree-shaped calculating tool, is used when the son of heaven holds a grand shooting ceremony.

古文：闾中，天子宴射用之。
现代文：间中，即闾形盛算筹的器具，是天子举行宴射礼时使用的。
English: In the middle of the room, that is, the bowl-shaped calculating tool is used when the heavenly son holds a banquet.

古文：虎中，皇太子亲王射用之。
现代文：虎中，即虎形盛算筹器具，是皇太子、亲王行射礼时使用的。
English: The tiger in the middle, that is, the tiger-shaped calculating tool, is used by the crown prince and the prince when performing the shooting salute.

古文：兕中，一品至五品文武官用之。
现代文：兕中，即兕形盛算筹的器具，是一品到五品文武官员使用的。
English: 中, that is, 形盛算筹, is used by civil and military officials of one grade to five grades.

古文：鹿中，六品至九品及文武官子弟士民俊秀通用之。
现代文：鹿中，即鹿形盛算筹的器具，是六品到九品官以及文武官员的子弟和士民中的俊秀者通用的。
English: Deer, that is, the equipment of the deer-shaped summing-up device, is commonly used by officials of the sixth to ninth grades, as well as the sons of civil and military officials and the talented people among the judges and people.

古文：其职事，设司正官二，掌验射者品级尊卑人力强弱而定耦，其中否则书于算，兵部官职之。
现代文：射礼的经办官员，设司正官二名，掌管验证参加射礼的人的官阶品级尊卑、力量强弱而确定同射的对象，射中与否便书写于算筹，由兵部官贝任这个职务。
English: The official in charge of the shooting ceremony, consisting of two officers, is in charge of verifying the rank, class, dignity, and strength of the people participating in the shooting ceremony, and determining the target of the same shot. Whether or not it is shot is written in the calculation, and the military officer Bei is in charge of this post.

古文：司射二，掌先以强弓射鹄诱射，以鼓众气，武职官充之。
现代文：司射二名，掌管先用强弓射箭靶以诱发参加射礼的兴趣，以鼓起众人的士气，由武职官员充任。
English: There are two shooters, who first use a strong bow to shoot archery targets in order to arouse interest in participating in the shooting ceremony and to boost the morale of the crowd. Military officials are in charge.

古文：司射器官二，掌辨弓力强弱，分为三等，验人力强弱以授，工部官职之。
现代文：主管射礼器物的官员二名，掌管分辨弓的力量强弱，分为三等，察验人的力量强弱来分授弓，由工部官员充任。
English: There are two officials in charge of shooting gifts. They are in charge of distinguishing the strength of the bow, which is divided into three grades. The strength of the person is examined to award the bow, which is performed by the officials of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：举爵者，掌以马湩授中者饮，光禄寺官职之。
现代文：举爵者二名，主管用马奶子酒交给射中的人饮用，由光禄寺官员充任。
English: Two people were knighted, and the person in charge gave horse milk wine to the person who was shot to drink, with officials from Koroku-ji Temple filling the role.

古文：请射者，掌定耦射。
现代文：请射者，主管确定同射的对象。
English: If you wish to shoot, the supervisor will determine the object to be shot with.

古文：射毕，再请某耦射，侍仪司职之。
现代文：一人射完，再请某对手射，由侍仪司充任。
English: After one person shoots, a certain opponent is invited to shoot, and the master of ceremonies takes over.

古文：待获者、掌矢纳于司射器者，以隶仆供其役。
现代文：待获者、主管把箭纳入司射器的人，用仆人供奉这项工役。
English: The receiver, the director, the one who puts the arrow into the archer's quiver, uses a servant to perform this labor.

古文：执旗者六人，掌于容后执五色旗。
现代文：执旗帜的六人，主管在蔽障物后面持五色旗。
English: There are six people holding the flags, and the supervisor is holding a five-color flag behind a barrier.

古文：如射者中的，举红旗应之。
现代文：如射箭的人射中箭靶，举红旗应对。
English: If an archer hits the target, a red flag should be raised.

古文：中采，举采旗应之。
现代文：射中采，举彩旗应对。
English: Shots were fired, and flags were raised in response.

古文：偏西，举白旗。
现代文：偏西，举白旗。
English: To the west, raise the white flag.

古文：偏东，举青旗。
现代文：偏东，举青旗应对。
English: Far to the east, raise the blue flag to respond.

古文：过于鹄举黄旗。
现代文：超过箭靶，举黄旗应对。
English: If the target is exceeded, a yellow flag should be raised.

古文：不及鹄，举黑旗。
现代文：没有达到箭靶，举黑旗应对。
English: If the target is not reached, a black flag should be raised.

古文：军士二人掌之。
现代文：军士二名主管这事。
English: Two sergeants are in charge of this.

古文：引礼二，掌引文武官进退，侍仪司舍人职之。
现代文：引礼二名，主管导引文武官员进退，由侍仪司舍人充任。
English: There are two people who lead the salute, and the person in charge of leading the military and civilian officials advances and retreats. The person in charge is the master of ceremonies.

古文：太祖又以先王射礼久废，弧矢之事专习于武夫，而文士多未解，乃诏国学及郡县生员皆令习射，颁仪式于天下。
现代文：太祖又因为先王射礼废弃已久，射箭的事情专门由武夫练习，而文士多不懂得。于是下诏国学以及郡县的学坐都命令他们练习射箭，向天下颁布仪式。
English: The great-grandfather also said that the practice of archery had been abandoned for a long time, so it was practiced exclusively by warriors, and most scribes did not understand it. Therefore, he ordered the students of Chinese classics and counties to practice archery, and promulgated the ceremony to the world.

古文：朔望则于公廨或闲地习之。
现代文：朔日和望日便在官署或者空地上练习。
English: On New Year's Eve and New Year's Eve, they practice in government offices or open spaces.

古文：其官府学校射仪，略仿大射之式而杀其礼。
现代文：官府学校的射礼仪式，大致仿照大射礼的仪式而降低礼仪要求。
English: The shooting ceremony of the government school is roughly modeled on the ceremony of the grand shooting ceremony and has lower etiquette requirements.

古文：射位初三十步，自后累加至九十步。
现代文：射箭的位置最初为三十步，此后累加到九十步。
English: The archery position is initially 30 paces and then increases to 90 paces.

古文：射四矢，以二人为耦。
现代文：射四箭，以二人一组配对。
English: Shoot four arrows and pair them in groups of two.

古文：永乐时有击球射柳之制。
现代文：永乐时期有打击球射柳的制度。
English: In the Yongle period, there was a system of striking the ball and shooting the willow.

古文：十一年五月五日幸东苑，击球射柳，听文武群臣四夷朝使及在京耆老聚观。
现代文：永乐十一年五月五日，皇帝驾临东苑，擎球射柳，听凭文武众臣、四夷来朝的使者和在京城的年高有德的人聚集观看。
English: On May 5, Yongle XI, the emperor arrived at Dongyuan and shot a ball into a willow tree. He listened to all the courtiers, emissaries from the four provinces and people of high moral standards in Beijing gather to watch.

古文：分击球官为两朋，自皇太孙而下诸王大臣以次击射，赐中者币布有差。
现代文：分击球官为两组，从皇太孙以下诸王大臣依次擎射，射中的赏赐布帛多少不等。
English: There are two groups of batting officers. From the grand-grandson of the emperor to the ministers of the kings, they take turns to hit the ball. The reward for hitting the ball varies from the highest to the lowest.

古文：救日伐鼓
现代文：救日伐鼓
English: Drums for saving the sun

古文：洪武六年二月，定救日食礼。
现代文：洪武六年二月，制定拯救日食的礼仪。
English: In February of the sixth year of Hongwu, the etiquette for saving the solar eclipse was formulated.

古文：其日，皇帝常服，不御正殿。
现代文：这一天，皇帝穿着平常服饰，不驾临正殿。
English: On this day, the emperor, dressed in his usual attire, did not visit the main hall.

古文：中书省设香案，百官朝服行礼。
现代文：中书省设置香案，百官穿朝服行礼。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture set up an incense project, and hundreds of officials wore imperial robes and made a salute.

古文：鼓人伐鼓，复圆乃止。
现代文：鼓人击鼓，到太阳重新变圆纔停止。
English: The drummer beats the drum until the sun turns round again and the beat stops.

古文：月食，大都督府设香案，百官常服行礼，不伐鼓，雨雪云翳则免。
现代文：月食，大都督府设置香案，百官穿平常服饰行礼，不击鼓，下雨下雪云层遮蔽便免去。
English: The moon eclipses, the Grand Duchy sets incense, the officials wear ordinary clothes and salute, do not beat drums, and are not covered by clouds when it rains or snows.

古文：二十六年三月更定，礼部设香案于露台，向日，设金鼓于仪门内，设乐于露台下，各官拜位于露台上。
现代文：洪武二十六年三月重新制定，礼部在露台设置香案，朝着太阳，在仪门以内设置金鼓，在露台下设乐，各官的拜位在露台上。
English: Re-enacted by Hongwu in March 26th, the etiquette department set up incense on the terrace, facing the sun, set up a golden drum inside the ceremonial door, set music under the terrace, and the officials worshiped on the terrace.

古文：至期，百官朝服入班，乐作，四拜兴，乐止，跪。
现代文：到那个日期，百官穿朝服站入行列，奏乐，拜四拜，起身，音乐停止，跪下。
English: On that day, hundreds of officials in imperial robes stood in a line, played music, bowed four times, stood up, the music stopped, and they knelt down.

古文：执事者捧鼓，班首击鼓三声，众鼓齐鸣，候复圆，复行四拜礼。
现代文：执事者捧起鼓，班首击鼓三声，众鼓一齐敲响，等候太阳恢复圆形，又行拜四拜的礼仪。
English: The deacon picks up the drum, the leader of the class beats the drum three times, and all the drums beat together, waiting for the sun to return to its round shape, and the ritual of bowing four times.

古文：月食，则百官便服于都督府救护如仪。
现代文：月食，则百官穿便服按礼仪在都督府救护。
English: During the lunar eclipse, hundreds of officials dressed in casual clothes provided assistance at the governor's office according to etiquette.

古文：在外诸司，日食则于布政使司、府州县，月食则于都指挥使司、卫所，如仪。
现代文：在外各司，日食便在布政使司、府州县，月食便在都指挥使司、卫所，按照仪式擎鼓救日食、月食。
English: In the outer divisions, the solar eclipse will be in the political envoys division, Fuzhou County, and the lunar eclipse will be in the capital commanding the envoys division, the health station, in accordance with the ceremony to save the solar eclipse and the lunar eclipse.

古文：隆庆六年，大丧。
现代文：隆庆六年，呈帝死。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, the emperor died.

古文：方成服，遇日食。
现代文：刚刚大殓，纔穿上丧服，遇到日食。
English: He had just put on his mourning clothes when he encountered the solar eclipse.

古文：百官先哭临，后赴礼部，青素衣、黑角带，向日四拜，不用鼓乐。
现代文：百官先定时聚众举哀，然后到礼部，穿青色素衣，系黑色角带，向着太阳拜四拜，不用鼓乐。
English: Hundreds of officials first gather regularly to mourn, and then go to the ceremonial department, wear cyan dress, wear a black sash, bow to the sun, and do not use drum music.

