古文：丁丑十二月十一日夜雨达旦。
现代文：丁丑年十二月十一日夜雨通宵达旦。
English: On the night of December 11th in the year of the fox, it rained all night long.

古文：余苦疮，久而后起。
现代文：我苦于生疮，睡了很久后才起床。
English: I suffer from sores and wake up after a long sleep.

古文：然疮寒体惫，殊无并州之安也。
现代文：然而又是疮痛又是寒冷身体疲惫极了，全无在并州时的安稳了。
English: However, it was sore and cold, and my body was extremely tired, and I was not at all stable when I was admitted to the hospital.

古文：时行道莫决，且问带骸多阻，余心忡忡，乃为二阄请于天宁寺佛前，得带去者。
现代文：此时走哪条道未决定，听见静闻诀别时的声音，必定要葬在鸡足山，而且打听到带着骸骨难走路，我忧心忡忡，只得做了两个阉到天宁寺的佛像前求神，得到带着走的阉。
English: At this time, I was undecided as to which path to take. Hearing the sound of a crow saying goodbye, I knew I had to be buried on Chicken's Foot Mountain. And when I heard that it was difficult to walk with a skeleton, I was so worried that I had to make two cocoons and pray to God in front of the Buddha statue at Tianning Temple to get a cocoon to walk with.

古文：余乃冒雨趋崇善，以银畀僧宝檀，令备蔬为明日起室之具。
现代文：我于是冒雨赶到崇善寺，拿银子给僧人宝檀，命令他准备菜肴为明天起葬做准备。
English: So I braved the rain and rushed to the Sozenji Temple, took the silver and gave it to the Buddhist monk, ordering him to prepare dishes for the funeral tomorrow.

古文：晚抵梁店，雨竟不止。
现代文：晚上抵达梁家客店，雨整天不停。
English: I arrived at Liangjia Inn in the evening, and it rained non-stop all day.

古文：十二日雨不休，午后小止。
现代文：十二日雨下个不停，午后稍停。
English: On the 12th, it rained incessantly, stopping briefly in the afternoon.

古文：余市香烛诸物趋崇善，而宝檀、云白二僧欲瓜分静闻所遗经衣，私商于梁店，为互相推委计，谓余必得梁来乃可。
现代文：我买了香烛诸种物品赶到崇善寺，可宝檀、云白两个和尚想瓜分静闻遗下的佛经和衣服，与梁家店主私下商量好，计划好互相推楼，告诉我必定要梁店主来了才行。
English: I bought incense candles and other items and rushed to Chongzen Temple, but the two monks, Baodan and Yunbai, wanted to divide the Buddhist scriptures and clothes left behind by Jingwen. They had a private discussion with the shop owner of Liang's family and planned to push each other. They told me that the shop owner of Liang's family must come.

古文：而梁故坚不肯来，余再三苦求之，往返数四，而三恶互推互委，此不肯来，彼不肯去。
现代文：可是姓梁的故意坚决不肯来，我再三苦苦哀求他们，往返数次，但三个坏蛋你推过来我推过去，这里不肯来，那里不肯去。
English: But surnamed Liang deliberately and resolutely refused to come. I begged them again and again, going back and forth several times, but the three villains, you push them over, I push them over, refused to come here, refused to go there.

古文：及余坐促，彼复私会不休。
现代文：到我坐下催促时，他们又不停地私下相会。
English: By the time I sat down to urge them on, they were meeting privately again and again.

古文：余不识其展转作奸，是何意故？
现代文：我不懂他们翻来覆去地作恶，是什么意思，什么缘故？
English: I don't understand what they mean by doing evil over and over again, and why?

古文：然无可奈何。
现代文：然而无可奈何。
English: However, there was nothing to be done.

古文：惟日夜悬之，而彼反以诟交詈焉。
现代文：唯有日夜恳求他们，可他们反而用难听话交相骂人。
English: Day and night we pleaded with them, but instead they exchanged insults.

古文：十三日晨起，求梁一往崇善，梁决意不行。
现代文：十三日早晨起床，求姓梁的去一次崇善寺，姓梁的决意不走。
English: On the morning of the 13th, I got up and asked my surname, Liang, to go to Chongzhen Temple once. My surname, Liang, decided not to go.

古文：余乃书一领，求梁作见领者，梁终不一押画押。
现代文：我只得写了一个领条，求姓梁的作认领尸骨的见证人，梁某始终不肯画一个押。
English: I only had to write a lapel pin, asking for Liang's last name as a witness to claim the bones. Liang always refused to draw a seal.

古文：余复令顾仆求二僧，二僧意如故。
现代文：我又命令顾仆去求两个和尚，两个和尚的意思如故。
English: I also ordered Gu's servant to ask for two monks, and the two monks agreed.

古文：乃不得已，思鸣之于官，先为移寓计。
现代文：于是不得已，考虑到官府去鸣冤，先为换寓所做准备。
English: As a result, they had no choice but to make preparations for a change of residence, considering that the government was going to mend fences.

古文：遂入城，得邓贡士家旧房一间。
现代文：于是进城，找到一间邓贡士家的旧房。
English: So he went to the city and found an old house belonging to the Dangong family.

古文：乃出城，以三日房钱畀梁，移囊入城。
现代文：于是出城，把三天的房钱交给姓梁的，搬行李进城。
English: So I left the city, handed the three-day room fee to a man surnamed Liang, and carried my luggage into the city.

古文：天色渐霁。
现代文：天色渐渐转晴。
English: The weather is gradually clearing up.

古文：然此寓无锅，市罐为晚餐，则月色皎然，以为晴霁可望矣。
现代文：然而此处寓所无锅，买来瓦罐做晚饭。只见月光皎洁，以为可以指望天气晴朗了。
English: However, there was no cooking pot in this apartment, so they bought a crock pot to cook dinner. Seeing the bright moonlight, they thought they could count on the weather being fine.

古文：十四日早闻衙行蹑屐声，起视之，雨霏霏如故。
现代文：十四日早晨听见衙门踩着木板鞋行走的声音，起身看天色，淫雨霏霏如故。
English: On the morning of the 14th day, I heard the sound of the gate stepping on wooden shoes and got up to look at the sky. It was still raining.

古文：令顾仆炊而起，书一揭揭帖，具有揭发性质的私人文书令投之郡太守吴公。而是日巡方使者自武缘来，吴已往候于郊，顾仆留侦其还。
现代文：命令顾仆煮饭然后起床，写了一个揭帖命令把它投递给知府吴公。但这天巡察地方的使者从武缘县来，吴知府已去郊外迎候，顾仆留下暗中察看等他回来。
English: He ordered his servant to cook rice and then get up, wrote a notice and ordered it to be delivered to the prefectural governor Wu Gong. However, on this day, the envoy to inspect the area came from Wuyan County. The prefectural governor had already gone to the suburbs to greet him, leaving his servant behind to wait for him to return.

古文：余坐雨寓中，午余，余散步察院前，观左江道所备下程及宣化县今作南宁市所备下马饭，亦俱丰腆。
现代文：我坐在漏雨的寓所中，午后，我在都察院门前散步，观察到左江道准备的礼物和宣化县准备的下马饭，也全很丰厚。
English: I was sitting in my leaky apartment. In the afternoon, I took a walk in front of the door of the Duza Academy. I observed that the gifts prepared by Zuojiang Road and the horseback riding meal prepared by Xuanhua County were also very rich.

古文：还寓，顾仆以郡尊未还，请再从崇善求之。
现代文：返回寓所，顾仆因为知府大人未回来，请求再往崇善寺去求和尚。
English: Returning to the apartment, Gu's servant, because the prefect had not returned, asked him to go to Sozenji Temple to ask for a monk.

古文：余复书，顾畀之去，仍不理焉。
现代文：我又写了信，顾仆给他们送去，仍然不理会。
English: I wrote another letter, the servants sent it to them, and they still ignored it.

古文：太平、南宁俱有柑，而不见橘。
现代文：太平府、南宁府都有柑子，但不见桔子。
English: There are mandarin oranges in Taiping and Nanning, but no oranges.

古文：余在向武反食橘数枚。
现代文：我在向武州反而吃到几个桔子。
English: Instead, I ate a few oranges in Xiangwuzhou.

古文：橘与柑其形颇相似。
现代文：桔子与柑子它们的形状颇有些相似。
English: The shape of an orange and a mandarin orange are quite similar.

古文：边鱼南宁颇大而多，他处绝无之。
现代文：南宁的边鱼很大很多，其他地方绝然没有。
English: There are a lot of big fish in Nanning, and there are absolutely no other places.

古文：巨者四五觔，小者亦二三觔，佳品也。
现代文：大的四五斤，小的也有二三斤，是佳品。
English: The large ones weigh four or five pounds, and the small ones two or three pounds. They are the best.

古文：鲫鱼颇小而少，至大无出三寸者。
现代文：螂鱼很小而且很少，最大也没有超出三寸的。
English: Mantis fish are small and rare, with the largest not exceeding three inches.

古文：十五日五更峭寒，天明开霁。
现代文：十五日五更时酷寒，天明后晴开。
English: It was bitterly cold at 5 a.m. on the 15th, but it cleared up after daybreak.

古文：自初一早阴至此，恰半月而后晴朗。
现代文：从初一早晨阴到此时，恰好半个月后才晴朗。
English: It was cloudy from the morning of the first day of the month until this time, exactly half a month later it became clear.

古文：是日巡方使者驻南宁，接见各属吏。
现代文：这一天巡察地方的使者停在南宁，接见各方面的属吏。
English: On this day, the local inspection envoys stopped in Nanning to meet officials from various fields.

古文：余上午往观，既午，吴郡侯还自左江道，令顾仆以揭往诉静闻事，吴亦不为理，下午出城觅车夫，复俱不得，忡忡而已。
现代文：我上午前去观看，中午以后，吴知府从左江道返回，命令顾仆拿着揭帖去告静闻的事，吴知府也不作理睬。下午出城去找车子脚夫，又都找不到，忧心忡忡而已。
English: I went to watch in the morning. After noon, Wuchifu returned from Zuojiang Road and ordered his servant to take a postcard to report what he had heard. Wuchifu also ignored it. In the afternoon, I went out of town to look for the driver, but I couldn't find him. I was worried.

古文：十六日明爽殊甚。
现代文：十六日特别明丽爽朗。
English: The 16th was particularly bright and cheerful.

古文：五鼓，巡方使者即趋太平府。
现代文：五更时，巡察地方的使者就赶去太平府。
English: At five o'clock, the envoys who were inspecting the area rushed to Taiping.

古文：仍令顾仆遍觅车夫，终不可得。
现代文：他从思恩府来，也是如此急迫，不知是什么意思。
English: He came from Shion-fu, and he was in such a hurry, I don't know what he meant.

古文：南宁城北狭西阔，北乃望仙坡来龙，西乃濒江处也。
现代文：猜想也是因为交夷压境才这样的！但没听说他做了怎样的调度，这一带上上下下都把这事置若阁闻。仍命令顾仆四处去找车子脚夫，始终不能找到。
English: But I didn't hear what kind of scheduling he had done, this matter was ignored up and down the country. He still ordered his servants to look around for the porter, but they couldn't find him.

古文：北、东、南各一门，皆偏于角上，惟西面临江，有三门。
现代文：南宁城北面窄西面宽，北、东、南三面各有一道城门，都偏在城角上，唯有西面临江，有三道城门。
English: The north side of Nanning City is narrow and the west side is wide. There is a gate on each of the three sides of the north, east and south, all of which are on the corner of the city. Only the west faces the river, and there are three gates.

古文：十七日再备香烛素蔬往崇善，求云白熟而奠之，止索戒衣、册叶、竹撞即袈裟，经卷，竹箱，其他可易价者悉不问。
现代文：十七日再次备办了香烛素菜去崇善寺，求云白烧熟后祭奠静闻，只索要戒衣、经卷、竹箱，其他可换钱的东西一概不再追问。
English: On the 17th, they once again prepared incense, candles and vegetables and went to Chongzhen Temple. After the incense was cooked, they asked for the incense to be burned and the offering to be heard quietly. They only asked for the vows, scriptures and bamboo boxes. They did not ask for anything else that could be exchanged for money.

古文：云白犹委推诿候宝檀回。
现代文：云白仍推说要等宝檀回来。
English: Yun Bai still insisted on waiting for Baodan to come back.

古文：乃先起窆白骨，一瓶几满。
现代文：只得先起葬白骨，几乎装满一个瓶子。
English: We had to bury the white bones first, almost filling a bottle.

古文：中杂炭土，余以竹箸逐一拣取，遂竟日之力。
现代文：瓶中杂放着炭灰，我用竹筷子逐一拣出来，竟然花了一整天的时间。
English: There was charcoal ash in the bottle, and I used bamboo chopsticks to pick it out one by one. It actually took me a whole day.

古文：仍以灰炭存入瓶中，埋之旧处，以纸数重裹骨，携置崇善寺外，不容带入。
现代文：仍把木炭灰存放进瓶中，埋在原来的位置，用几层纸裹好白骨，带来放在崇善寺外，就见宝檀也归来了。
English: He still put the charcoal ash in a bottle and buried it in the original place. He wrapped the white bone with several layers of paper and brought it to the outside of the temple. Then he saw that the sandalwood had also returned.

古文：则宝檀归矣。见余索册、撞，辄作盗贼面孔向余曰： 僧死已安窆，如何辄发掘？ 
现代文：见我索要经卷、竹箱，立即作出盗贼样的面孔对我说： 僧人死后已经安葬，怎么擅自挖掘？ 
English: When he saw me asking for a scripture scroll and a bamboo box, he immediately made a face like a thief and said to me: A monk has been buried after death, how can you dig without permission?

古文：以索自锁，且以锁余。
现代文：用锁把门锁上并把我锁在里面。
English: Put a lock on the door and locked me in.

古文：余笑而度猜度之，盖其意欲余书一领，虚收所留诸物也。
现代文：我笑着揣侧他的心意，大概他的意思是想要写一个领条，虚造我收到过他们留下的各种东西。
English: I laughed and guessed what he meant, probably that he wanted to write a post-it note, making up all sorts of things they had left for me.

古文：时日色已暮，余先闻其自语云： 汝谓我谋死僧，我恨不谋汝耳！ 
现代文：此时天色已晚，我事先听见他自言自语说： 你说我谋杀了僧人，我恨不连你一起谋杀了！ 
English: By this time it was late in the day, and I had heard him say to himself beforehand: "You said I murdered a monk, I wish I hadn't murdered you too!"

古文：余忆其言，恐甚，遂从其意，以虚领畀之，只得戒衣、册叶，乃得抱骸归。
现代文：我想起他的话，非常害怕，就顺从了他的意思，把假领条交给他，只得到戒衣、经卷，这才得以抱着骸骨归来。
English: I thought of his words and was very scared, so I obeyed his wishes and gave him the fake collar. All I got was a ring and a sutra, and only then was I able to return with the skeleton in my arms.

古文：昏暮入邓寓，觅烛，重裹以拜，俱即戒衣内着。包而缝之置大竹撞间，恰下层一撞也。
现代文：在昏黑中走入邓家寓所，找来火烛，重新裹好骸骨拜过，全部包好缝起，放在大竹箱内，恰好装满竹箱的一个下层。
English: He walked into the Deng family's apartment in the dark, found a candle, re-wrapped the skeleton, bowed, wrapped it all up, sewed it up, and placed it in a large bamboo box, just filling the bottom layer of the bamboo box.

古文：是日幸晴霁，故得拣骨涯滨几近竟日，还从黑暗中，见沙堤有车，以为明日行可必矣。
现代文：这一天幸好晴朗，故而能够整天在溪岸边拣骨头，从黑暗中返还来时，见沙堤上有车，以为明天必定可以走了。
English: Fortunately, it was a clear day, so I was able to spend the whole day picking up bones on the banks of the stream. When I returned from the darkness, I saw a car on the sandbank and thought that I would definitely be able to go tomorrow.

古文：十八日早起则阴雨霏霏，街衢ｑú十字路口湿透。余持伞觅夫，夫之前约者，已不肯行。
现代文：十八日早晨起床就阴雨霏霏，街道湿透了。我打着伞去找脚夫，前一天约好的脚夫，已不肯走了。
English: On the morning of the 18th, I woke up to a cloudy and rainy day, and the streets were soaked. I took an umbrella to find a porter. The porter I had made an appointment with the day before refused to leave.

古文：出沙堤觅车，车又不复得。
现代文：出城到沙堤去找车，车又找不到。
English: I went out of the city to the sandbank to look for a car, but I couldn't find it.

古文：乃还寓，更令顾仆遍索之城外，终无有也。
现代文：只好返回寓所，再命令顾仆到城外去四处找车，始终没有。
English: He had no choice but to return to his apartment and order his servant to go outside the city to look for the car.

古文：十九日晨得一夫，价甚贵，不得已满其欲，犹推索再三，上午乃行。
现代文：十九日早晨找到一个脚夫，价非常贵，不得已满足了他的贪欲，还再三推却索价，上午才动身。
English: On the morning of the 19th, he found a porter, the price was very expensive, he had to satisfy his greed, but he repeatedly pushed for the price, and only left in the morning.

古文：雨色已开，阴云未豁。
现代文：雨色已经开雾，但阴云仍未散开。
English: The rain has cleared the mist, but the clouds have yet to disperse.

古文：出朝京门，由五公祠即望仙坡。
现代文：走出朝京门，由五公祠的东麓往东北行。
English: Go out of the morning gate, from the eastern foot of the Five Public Shrines to the northeast.

古文：东麓东北行。五里，过接官亭，有小水自西北注东南。
现代文：五里，路过接官亭，有小溪自西北流向东南。
English: Wuli, passing through the government office, there is a stream flowing from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：又五里，越一冈，连涉南行小水。
现代文：又走五里，越过一座山冈，接连涉过往南流的小溪。
English: I walked another five miles, over a mountain ridge, and waded through a south-flowing stream.

古文：又五里，有一溪较大，亦自西北向东南注，此即向往清秀所过香象桥之上流也。
现代文：又是五里，有一条溪较大，也是自西北向东南流注，这就是从前去清秀山时走过的香象桥的上游了。
English: It's another five miles, and there's a larger stream that also flows from the northwest to the southeast. This is the upstream of the fragrant elephant bridge that I used to walk when I went to Mount Qingxiu.

古文：盖郡北之山东西屏峙，西抚于石步墟，东极于司叛之尖山，皆崇峰联属如负扆ｙǐ屏风。
现代文：大致上府城北面的山东西两面屏风样矗立，西边连接到石步墟，东边尽于司叛的尖山，都是崇山峻岭连绵不断如像屏风。
English: The mountain to the north of Shangfucheng stands like a screen on both sides of east and west. The west side is connected to Shifu Market, and the east side is made up of the Jianshan Mountains, all of which are continuous like a screen.

古文：其中南走一支，数起数伏，而尽于望仙坡，结为南宁郡治。
现代文：其中往南延伸的一支，几次起伏，然后在望仙坡到了尽头，盘结为南宁府城。
English: One of them extended southward, several ups and downs, and then came to an end at the Wangxian slope, coiling into the city of Nanning.

古文：又东再南走一支，南尽于清秀山而为南宁之下砂。
现代文：再靠东又有一支往南延伸的山，南边在清秀山到了尽头而后成为南宁城下延的沙债地。
English: Further to the east, there is another mountain that extends southwards. The south side reaches the end of Qingxiu Mountain and then becomes the sandbank of Nanning City.

古文：此水其腋中之界也，有木梁架溪上，渡梁，遂登冈阜。
现代文：这条溪水是这两支山脉的分界，有木桥架在溪上，过桥后，就上登冈阜。
English: This stream is the boundary between the two mountain ranges. There is a wooden bridge over the stream. After crossing the bridge, you can go up to Gungfu.

古文：又五里，越一最高冈脊，东下有泉一窞在脊畔，是曰高井。
现代文：又走五里，越过一条最高的冈脊，向东下走有一深坑泉水在山脊畔，这叫做高井。
English: After walking another five miles, I crossed the highest ridge and went down to the east. There was a deep spring on the edge of the ridge, which is called Takai.

古文：由是三下三上，屡渡小水，皆自东南注西北，始知其过脊尚在东，此皆其回环转折之阜，流自西北注者，即西转而东南下木梁大溪者也。
现代文：由这里下山三次上山三次，多次渡过小溪，都是从东南流向西北的，这才明白山脉延伸而过的山脊还在东面，这些都是它回绕转折过的土阜，水流往西北流注的，就是在西边转向东南流入木桥下大溪的水流了。
English: From here, I went down the mountain three times, up the mountain three times, and crossed the creek many times, all of which flowed from the southeast to the northwest. It was only then that I understood that the ridge extending through the mountains was still in the east, and these were the earthenware that it had turned around and turned, and the water flowed to the northwest, that is, the water flowed from the west to the southeast into the large stream under the wooden bridge.

古文：共四里，又越一冈脊而下，其脊高不及高井之半，而实为西北来过脊以趋清秀者也。
现代文：共四里，又越一道冈脊后下走，这个冈脊高处不到高井的一半，但实际上是从西北前来趋向清秀山的延伸而过的山脊。
English: For a total of four miles, we followed a ridge down. This ridge is less than half as high as Takai, but it is actually a ridge that extends from the northwest towards Mount Kiyohide.

古文：下脊又二里，再渡一溪，其流亦自西北注东南。
现代文：下山脊后又走二里，再渡过一溪，这条溪流也是从西北流向东南的。
English: After descending the ridge, we walked another two miles and then crossed a stream, which also flows from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：过溪上冈又二里，为归仁铺，三四家在冈头而已。
现代文：过溪后上冈又走二里，是归仁铺，只是三四家人在冈头而已。
English: After crossing the stream, we walked up the hill for another two miles. It was a Guiren shop, but there were only three or four families at the top of the hill.

古文：又东北望尖山而行，七里为河丹公馆，亦有三四家在冈头，乃就饭焉。
现代文：又往东北望着尖山而行，七里后是河丹公馆，也有三四家人在冈头，便走过去吃饭。
English: He also went to the northeast, looking at the Jianshan Mountains. Seven miles later was the Hedan Mansion. There were also three or four families in Gangtou, so he walked over to eat.

古文：又东北行，屡涉南流小水，五里，一溪颇大，有木梁架之，至长于前二溪。
现代文：又向东北行，屡次涉过往南流的小溪，五里，一条溪流很大，有木桥架在溪上，与前两条溪上的桥相比最长。
English: He also went to the northeast, repeatedly wading through a stream flowing south. For five miles, there was a large stream with a wooden bridge over the stream, which was the longest compared to the bridges over the previous two streams.

古文：其溪盖自北崇山中来，有聚落倚其上流坞中，颇盛。
现代文：此溪大概是从北面的高山中流来的，有村落紧靠在它上游的山坞中，相当兴盛。
English: The stream probably comes from the high mountains to the north, and there is a thriving village nestled in the docks upstream.

古文：越梁东上冈，是为桥村墟赶集，数十家之聚。
现代文：过桥后向东上登山冈，这是桥村墟，是数十家人的村落。
English: After crossing the bridge, go east up the mountain. This is the bridge village, a village of dozens of families.

古文：时方趁墟，人声沸然。
现代文：此时正在赶集，人声鼎沸。
English: At this time, it is rushing to collect, and the voices of the people are booming.

古文：于是北望尖山行，又屡涉东南流小水，十二里，北渡一木梁颇大，又三里而至施湴ｂｎ驿，日将晡矣，歇于店。
现代文：从这里望着北面的尖山行，又多次涉过向东南流去的小溪，十二里，向北越过一座木桥，相当大，又走三里便来到施碰骚，日将西下了，停歇在客店中。
English: From here, I looked at the sharp mountains to the north, and repeatedly waded through the stream that flowed to the southeast. Twelve miles to the north, I crossed a wooden bridge, quite large, and then walked three miles to Scandanavia. The sun was setting, and I stopped at the inn.

古文：二十日五更起，饭而行，犹昧爽也。
现代文：二十日五更起床，饭后动身，仍是黎明。
English: Waking up at 5 a.m. on the 20th and setting off after dinner, it was still dawn.

古文：由施湴东北行二里，为站墟。
现代文：由施碰骤往东北行二里，是站墟。
English: Two miles north-east from Shihchuan is the station.

古文：又一里，降而下，渡一溪，木梁亦长。
现代文：又走一里，猛然而下，渡过一溪，木桥也很长。
English: Walked another mile, suddenly down, crossed a stream, wooden bridge is also very long.

古文：越溪东上，共一里，逾一冈，已越尖山东北矣。
现代文：越过溪流向东上行，共一里，越过一座山冈，已越出到尖山的东北方了。
English: A total of one mile upstream to the east across a stream, over a mountain ridge, and has now reached the northeastern part of the mountain range.

古文：途中屡越小水，皆北而南。
现代文：途中屡次越过小溪，都是自北流向南。
English: On the way, we repeatedly crossed the creek, always from the north stream to the south.

古文：又十二里，横径平畴中，其处北近崇山，南下平坞，西即所逾之冈，东则崇山东尽，转而南行，缭绕如堵墙环立。
现代文：又走十二里，横向经过平旷的田野中，此处北面靠近高山，南边下去是平坦的山坞，西面就是越过的山冈，东面就见高山到了东边的尽头后，转向南延伸，如环立的墙壁缭绕。
English: Another twelve miles laterally through the flat fields, here the north side is close to the mountain, the south side down is a flat dock, the west side is the mountain overpass, and the east side sees the mountain at the end of the east side, turning to the south and extending, like a ring of walls.

古文：又东二里，复得大溪自北山南注其内，溪北大山之下，聚落甚盛，曰韦村。
现代文：又向东二里，又见到一条大溪从北面山中向南流注到山坞中，溪北的大山之下，村落十分兴盛，叫韦村。
English: Another two miles to the east, I saw a large stream flowing south from the mountains in the north to the dock. Under the mountains north of the stream, the village is very prosperous, called Wei Village.

古文：大山负扆立村后，曰朝著山。
现代文：大山屏风样立在村后，叫朝著山。
English: A large mountain screen stands at the back of the village, inviting people to walk towards the mountain.

古文：渡溪桥，东上崇冈即南下之脊，为清秀之东郡城第二重下砂也。
现代文：走过溪上的桥，向东上登高冈，就是往南下延的山脊，是清秀山的东面府城的第二层下延的沙磺地。
English: Walking across the bridge over the stream and climbing up the hill to the east, it is the ridge that extends down to the south. It is the second layer of the capital city to the east of Mount Qingxiu.

古文：按《郡志》，东八十里有横山，高险横截江河，盖即此山南走截江而耸起者也。
现代文：据《郡志》，城东八十里有座横山，又高又险横截江流，大概就是此山往南延伸横截郁江高耸而起的了。
English: According to the "County History," there is a cross-mountain in the east eighty of the city, which is high and dangerous and cuts across the river flow. It is probably this mountain that extends southward and cuts across the Yujiang River.

古文：宋置横山寨，为市马之所。
现代文：宋代设置了横山寨，作为买马的场所。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Hengshan Zhai was set up as a place to buy horses.

古文：又东北二里，有三四家在山冈，曰火甲铺。
现代文：又向东北二里，有三四家在山冈上，叫火甲铺。
English: Another two miles to the northeast, there are three or four stores on the hill, called Hujia shops.

古文：于是北下行山坞间，四面皆山，水从东南透夹去。
现代文：从这里向北下到山坞间行走，四面都是山，水流从东南方穿过峡谷流去。
English: From here, walk north to the dock, where there are mountains on all sides and water flows from the southeast through the canyon.

古文：屡涉细流，五里，遂北折入山夹。
现代文：屡次涉过细小的溪流，五里，就向北折进山间峡谷。
English: After repeatedly wading through a small stream for five miles, he turned north into a mountain canyon.

古文：两山东西骈立，从其中溯流北上，共十里，山夹束处汇塘塸ōｕ积聚水，有三四家踞山脊中度处，两崖山甚逼，乃名曰关山，土人又名曰山心。
现代文：两面的山东西并立，从峡谷中溯流向北上走，共十里，山相夹紧束处聚沙汇积为水塘，有三四家人高踞在中央山脊延伸之处，两面的山崖非常狭窄，名字竟然叫关山，当地人又叫做山心。
English: The two sides of the mountain stand side by side, and the stream flows northward from the canyon for a total of ten miles. Sand collects at the junction of the mountain phase and accumulates into a pond. There are three or four families of stilts in the central ridge extension. The cliffs on both sides are very narrow. The name is actually Guanshan, and the locals also call it the mountain center.

古文：按《志》，昆仑山在郡城东九十余里，必此地无疑。
现代文：根据志书，昆仑山在府城东面九十多里，必定是此地无疑了。
English: According to the history book, Kunlun Mountain is more than ninety miles east of the capital, there is no doubt that this is the place.

古文：然询之土人，皆曰昆仑关在宾州南，即谢在杭《百粤志》亦云然。
现代文：不过向当地人询间此事，都说昆仑关在宾州南境，就是谢在杭的《百粤志》也这样说。
English: However, when inquiring about the matter with local people, they all said that Kunlun Pass is on the southern border of Pennsylvania, which is also the case with Xie's "Hundred Cantonese Stories" in Hangzhou.

古文：按宾州南者乃古漏关，非昆仑也。
现代文：据考察，宾州南境的是古漏关，不是昆仑关。
English: According to the investigation, the southern border of Pennsylvania is the ancient leakage pass, not the Kunlun pass.

古文：世因狄武襄即获青驻宾州，以上元即正月十五日飨士，夜二鼓被昆抵达仑，遂以宾州古漏当之。
现代文：世人因为狄青驻兵宾州，在上元节大宴将士，夜里二更时到达昆仑关，便把宾州的古漏关当做昆仑关。
English: Due to the fact that Di Qing was stationed in Pennsylvania and had a grand banquet on the Lantern Festival, people arrived at Kunlun Pass at two o'clock in the evening, and took Pennsylvania's Guo Guo Pass as Kunlun Pass.

古文：至今在南宁者，止知为关山，而不知昆仑；在宾州者，皆以为昆仑，而不知为古漏。
现代文：至今在南宁府的，只知它是关山，却不知是昆仑关；在宾州的，都以为它是昆仑关，却不知是古漏关。
English: So far, people in Nanning only know that it is Guanshan Pass, but do not know that it is Kunlun Pass; in Pennsylvania, they all think that it is Kunlun Pass, but do not know that it is ancient pass.

古文：若昆仑果在宾州南十里，则两军已对垒矣，武襄十日之驻，二鼓之起，及曙之破，反不足为神奇矣。
现代文：如果昆仑关果然在宾州南面十里，那么两军已经对垒了，狄青的十日驻兵，二更起兵，以及拂晓破贼，反而算不上神奇了。
English: If Kunlun Pass is indeed ten miles south of Pennsylvania, then the two armies have already confronted each other. Di Qing's ten-day garrison, two more soldiers, and breaking the thief at dawn, on the other hand, are not magical.

古文：饭于氓舍，遂东北下山。
现代文：在民房中吃了饭，于是向东北下山。
English: After eating in a private house, they went down the mountain to the northeast.

古文：一里，有大溪自北而南，其流汤汤，入自南宁境，尚无比也。
现代文：一里，有条大溪自北流向南，水流浩浩荡荡，自从进入南宁府境内，还没有可与它相比的。
English: For one kilometer, there is a large stream flowing from north to south, and the water flow is huge. Since it entered the territory of Nanning Prefecture, it has not been comparable to it.

古文：盖关山南北水虽分流，犹南下郁江。
现代文：关山南北两面的水流虽然分流，但仍然向南下流进郁江。
English: Although the water flow on the north and south sides of Guanshan is diverted, it still flows southward into the Yujiang River.

古文：于是溯其流北行山夹间，其山屡开屡合，又十四里，得百家之聚，曰长山驿。
现代文：于是溯溪流往北行走在山间峡谷中，沿途的山多次分开多次合拢，又走十四里，走到一个百户人家的村落，叫长山骚。
English: So he followed the stream to the north and walked in the mountain canyon. The mountains along the way were separated and closed many times. He walked another fourteen miles and reached a village of a hundred households, called Nagayama-so.

古文：聚落在溪之西。
现代文：村落在溪流的西面。
English: The village is on the west side of the stream.

古文：其北有两溪来会，一自西北，一自东北。
现代文：村北有两条溪水前来相会，一条从西北来，一条从东北来。
English: To the north of the village, two streams come together, one from the northwest and one from the northeast.

古文：二水会合，其北夹而成冈，有墟舍在其上，甚盛。
现代文：两条溪水会合处，那北面的夹角处形成山冈，在冈上有集市的棚舍，非常繁荣。
English: At the junction of the two streams, the corner on the north side forms a hill, on which there are market stalls, which are very prosperous.

古文：乃渡其西北来之溪，陟桥登墟，循东北来溪之右溯之行。
现代文：于是渡过那从西北流来的溪流，走上桥登上集市，沿东北流来的溪流右岸溯流前行。
English: So he crossed the stream that flowed from the northwest, walked onto the bridge, boarded the market, and followed the right bank of the stream that flowed from the northeast.

古文：又十里，溪水自东北盘坞中来，路由北麓而上，得数家之聚，曰里段墟，乃邕、柳界牌岭之南麓也。
现代文：又走十里，溪水从东北回绕在坞中流来，路经北麓上走，有个几家人的村落，叫里段墟，是琶州、柳州界牌岭的南麓。
English: After walking another ten miles, the stream water flows from the northeast back around the dock, passing the northern foot, and there is a village of several families, called Li Duan Hui, which is the southern foot of the Paju and Liuzhou border mountain range.

古文：其去界牌尚十里。此地犹属宣化。盖邕、柳之水以界牌岭而分，北下者由思笼西转武缘高峰岭西入右江，南下者入郁江。
现代文：大体上琶州、柳州的水流从界牌岭分流，往北下流的由思笼向西转过武缘县高峰岭西边流入右江，向南下流的流入郁江。
English: By and large, the water flow of the upper Pazhou and Liuzhou branches off from the Jiepailing. The northward-flowing water flows from the Shiguang to the west through the west side of the peak ridge of Wueran County and flows into the Yu River, and the southward-flowing water flows into the Yujiang River.

古文：此界牌岭南流之水，经长山而南，余以为即伶俐水之上流也。
现代文：此地界牌岭往南流的水流，经长山往南流，我以为就是伶俐水的上游了。
English: I thought it was the upper reaches of the Surabaya River, as the water flowed southward from the ridges that border the area and flowed southward through the mountains.

古文：然土人云： 伶俐水尚东隔一山；此水出大中港，其港在伶俐之西 云。
现代文：然而本地人说： 伶俐水还在东边隔着一座山；这条水流从大中港流出去，大中港在伶俐的西边 等等。
English: However, the local people said: Surabaya is still separated by a mountain in the east; this stream flows out of Datong Port, Datong Port is in the west of Surabaya, and so on.

古文：是日至里段，约行六十里，日才过午，夫以担重难行，且其地至思笼四十里，皆重山，无村可歇，遂税驾不前。
现代文：这天走到里段墟，约走了六十里，太阳才过中午，脚夫因为担子太重难行走，况且此地至思笼有四十里，都是重重深山，无村可歇，便住下不往前走了。
English: On this day, I went to Li Duan Hui and walked about sixty miles. The sun did not rise until after noon. It was difficult for the porter to walk because the burden was too heavy. Moreover, there were forty miles between here and Shige, all of which were deep mountains. There was no village to rest in, so I stayed put and did not go any further.

古文：二十一日平明，自里段北行，复下山，仍与北来水遇。
现代文：二十一日黎明，从里段墟往北行，又下山，仍与北面流来的溪水相遇。
English: At dawn on the twenty-first day, he walked northward from the village and went down the mountain. He still met the stream flowing from the north.

古文：溯之入五里，水左右各有支流自山腋来注，遂渡一小桥，乃西北来支流也。
现代文：溯流进去五里，溪水左右各有支流从山侧流来注入，于是越过一座小桥，是从西北流来的支流。
English: After following the stream for five miles, tributaries on either side of the stream flowed in from the mountainside, so I crossed a small bridge. It was a tributary flowing from the northwest.

古文：又四里，又渡小桥，越溪之东，东北山夹又有支流下注。
现代文：又行四里，又走过小桥，越到溪东，东北山间峡谷中又有支流下流注入。
English: I walked another four miles, crossed another small bridge, and got to the east of the creek. In the northeast mountain canyon, another tributary flowed downstream.

古文：又北一里，始北上登岭，西瞰其流自西夹中来，则里段、长山大溪之发源处矣。
现代文：又向北一里，开始北上登岭，俯瞰西面溪流从西边峡谷中流来，是里段墟、长山大溪的发源处了。
English: Another mile to the north, we began to climb northward, overlooking the west stream flowing from the west canyon, which is the source of the Li Duan Hui and the Changshan Creek.

古文：北上半里，东入一隘门，其东有公馆焉，是为邕、柳分界处。
现代文：向北上登半里，向东走入一道隘门，隘门东边有客馆，这是琶州、柳州的分界处。
English: Climb half a mile to the north and walk east into a narrow gate. There is a guest house on the east side of the narrow gate. This is the dividing point between Pazhou and Liuzhou.

古文：门以内属宾州。公馆惟中屋为瓦，其门庑俱茅所盖。
现代文：客馆唯有正堂屋是瓦房，馆门两侧的厢房全是茅草盖成的。
English: Only the main hall of the guesthouse is made of tiles. The guest rooms on both sides of the entrance are covered with thatch.

古文：馆门东向，其前后环壑为田，而南北更峙土山。
现代文：馆门向东，它前后壑谷环绕中有田地，但南北两面又耸峙着土山。
English: The gate of the museum faces east. It is surrounded by fields in front and behind Shibuya, but the north and south sides are also surrounded by hills.

古文：其水犹西坠馆右峡中，盖即前西麓登山时所见，东北夹支流下注之上流也。
现代文：这里的水流仍然向西坠入馆右的峡中，大概就是前边在西麓登山时见到的，从东北峡谷中下流的支流的上游了。
English: The water flow here still plunges westward into the gorge to the right of the pavilion, probably the upstream of the tributary flowing down from the middle of the northeast canyon that I saw when I was climbing at the western foot of the mountain.

古文：其隘土人名为界牌岭，又指为昆仑关。
现代文：这个隘口当地人起名叫界牌岭，又指认为昆仑关。
English: Locals call this pass "Kai Pailing" and refer to it as "Kunlun Pass."

古文：按昆仑为南宁地，去郡东九十五里；兹与宾分界，去南宁一百二十里，其非昆仑可知。
现代文：据考察，昆仑关是南宁府的辖地，距府城东面九十五里；这里与宾州分界，距南宁城一百二十里，可知它不是昆仑关。
English: According to the investigation, Kunlun Pass is under the jurisdiction of Nanning Prefecture, ninety-five miles east of the provincial capital; here is the border with Pennsylvania, one hundred and twenty miles from Nanning City, so it is not Kunlun Pass.

古文：今经行者见其处有隘，遂以昆仑当之。
现代文：现在经过此地的过路人见此处有隘门，便把它当做昆仑关。
English: Now, when passers-by see a narrow gate here, they think of it as a Kunlun pass.

古文：故《西事珥》云： 昆仑关不甚雄险，其上多支径，故曰： 欲守昆仑，须防间道。  亦误谓此也。
现代文：所以《西事饵》说： 昆仑关不怎么雄伟高险，关上分出很多岔道，因而说： 要守住昆仑关，必须防守小路。 ，也误认为是此地了。
English: Therefore, "Xi Shizhen" said: Kunlun Pass is not very majestic and high-risk, there are a lot of winding roads at the pass, so it said: To protect Kunlun Pass, we must defend small roads., also mistaken for this place.

古文：又平行岭夹，则田塍之东潴而为塘。
现代文：又平缓行走在山岭峡谷间，就见田野的东面蓄水为塘。
English: Walking smoothly between the mountains and canyons, we saw the water storage pond on the east side of the field.

古文：三塘连汇，共半里，塘尽，复环为田。
现代文：三个水塘连片积水，共走半里，水塘尽头又有田地环绕。
English: Three ponds with standing water, a total of half a mile, and fields surrounding the end of the pond.

古文：之南巨山横峙，田之北列阜斜骞，而田塍贯其间，即过脉处也，其东，水北流矣。
现代文：田野的南面大山横向屹立，田野的北面成列的小土山斜向高举，而田地纵贯其间，就是山脉延伸过之处了，它的东面，水向北流了。
English: On the south side of the field, large mountains stand horizontally, on the north side of the field, rows of small hills are raised diagonally, and the field runs through them, that is, where the mountains extend. On its east side, the water flows northward.

古文：余切以小脉自北南过，及随水东北下，抵思笼而问之，始知其水犹西北转武缘南之高峰，而出右江，则此脉乃自南而北渡，北起为陆蒙山，迤逦西行，过施湴尖峰，又西走而分支南结为南宁，其直西又西为罗秀，又西为石步，又西尽于王宫，则右江入郁之东岸也。
现代文：我起初以为这条小山脉是自北往南延伸而过，及顺水流往东北下走，抵达思笼时询问此山的走向，才知道这条水流仍然是向西北转过武缘县南的高峰，而后流入右江，那这条山脉是自南往北延伸，在北面突起成为陆蒙山，透邀向西延伸，延过施碰骤的尖峰，又往西延然后分出支脉在南面盘结为南宁府所在的山，它一直往西又在西面成为罗秀山，又往西是石步墟，又往西在王宫村到了尽头，就是右江流入郁江的东岸了。
English: At first, I thought that this small mountain range extended from the north to the south, and the water flowed down to the northeast. When I arrived at Sige, I asked about the direction of this mountain, only to know that this water flow still turned to the northwest over the high peak in the south of Wujiang County, and then flowed into the Right River. That mountain range extended from the south to the north, protruded in the north to become the Lu Mengshan, and extended to the west through the sharp peak of the collision, and extended to the west and then branched out. In the south, the branch was coiled to become the mountain where Nanning Prefecture is located. It

古文：自过脉处又东半里，乃下，又半里，下抵坞中。
现代文：从山脉延伸而过之处又向东走半里，于是下山，又走半里，下到坞中。
English: I walked half a mile east from where the mountains extended, then down the mountain, another half mile, and down to the dock.

古文：随水东北行，望前山一峰尖而甚高，云气郁勃，时漫时露。
现代文：顺水往东北行，望见前方的山中一座山峰的尖端非常高，云气浓郁旺盛，时而弥漫时而飘散。
English: Along the water to the northeast, the tip of a mountain peak in the mountain in front is very high, the clouds are rich and vigorous, sometimes diffuse and sometimes drifting.

古文：五里，渐抵尖峰之南，渡溪而北又二里，始见路左西山下有村倚焉。
现代文：五里，慢慢走到尖峰的南面，渡过溪水后往北又走二里，这才见到路左西山下有村庄依傍着。
English: After five miles, I slowly walked to the south side of the peak. After crossing the stream, I walked another two miles to the north. Only then did I see a village next to the mountain on the west side of the road.

古文：又东渡溪，于是循溪东而北向行。
现代文：又向东渡溪，于是沿溪流东岸向北行。
English: He also crossed the creek to the east, so he followed the east bank of the stream to the north.

古文：三里，已出尖峰之西麓，溪流东啮麓趾，路乃盘崖北上。
现代文：三里，已到尖峰的西麓，溪流向东啃咬着山麓的下部，路于是绕着山崖向北上走。
English: After three miles, I had reached the western foot of the peak. The stream to the east gnawed at the lower part of the foot of the mountain, so I walked around the cliff to the north.

古文：转出崖北，二里，东北下，已绕尖峰之北矣。
现代文：转到山崖的北面，二里，向东北下行，已绕到尖峰的北麓了。
English: Turn to the north side of the cliff, two miles, go down to the northeast, has been around to the northern foot of the peak.

古文：又行坞中二里，有小水南自尖山北夹来，北与界牌之水合，有小桥，渡之，是为上林县界。
现代文：又在山坞中行二里，有小溪从南边尖山北面的峡谷中流来，向北与界牌岭来的水合流，有小桥，过桥，这里是上林县的地界。
English: In addition, there are two miles in the middle of the dock, there is a stream flowing from the canyon on the north side of the mountain on the south side, and there is a confluence with the water coming from the boundary ridge to the north, there is a small bridge, crossing the bridge, here is the land boundary of Shanglin County.

古文：自界牌岭来至此皆为宾州境，而是水之东又为上林境，以上林之思笼一驿孤悬独界其中也。
现代文：从界牌岭来到此地都是宾州的辖境，但这条溪水的东岸又是上林县的辖境，是由于上林县的思笼一个骚站孤独地悬隔在其中。
English: It is the jurisdiction of Pennsylvania to come here from the Boundary Ridge, but the east bank of this stream is also the jurisdiction of Shanglin County, because of the lonely suspension of a station in the cages of Shanglin County.

古文：过桥，复东北升陟冈陀，四里抵思笼今作思陇，村落一区在冈头，是为思笼驿。
现代文：过桥后，又向东北登险在山冈斜坡之间，四里后抵达思笼，一片村落在冈头，这是思笼释。
English: After crossing the bridge, we went to the northeast to climb between the slopes of the mountain, and after four miles we arrived at Shige, a village at the top of the mountain. This was the release of Shige.

古文：按《志》，思笼废县，昔为南宁属，不知何时割属上林。其地东西南皆宾州境，惟西北五十里至上林县。
现代文：据志书，思笼是废除的县，往昔是南宁府的属地，不知何时划割给上林县所属飞这个地方东丫西、南三面都是宾州的辖境，唯有西北距五十里到上林县。
English: According to the history book, Shige is a abolished county, which used to belong to Nanning Prefecture. I don't know when it was assigned to Shanglin County, but this place is under the jurisdiction of Pennsylvania on the east, west and south sides, except for Shanglin County, which is 50 miles to the northwest.

古文：先是，雨色濛濛，初拟至思笼而止；及饭，而日色尚早，夫恐明晨雨滑，遂鼓勇而前。
现代文：这以前，雨色蒙蒙，最初打算到思笼便停下；到吃饭时，天色还早，脚夫担心明天早晨下雨路滑，就鼓足勇气往前走。
English: Prior to this, it had been raining heavily, and they had initially planned to stop at Shiguang. By the time of the meal, it was still early in the morning, and the porter was worried about the rain and slippery roads tomorrow morning, so he mustered up the courage to go ahead.

古文：由思笼遂东下坞中，溯细流东行，一里，田夹既尽，复潴水为池。
现代文：由思笼向东下到山坞中，溯细小的溪流往东行，一里，走完夹在两旁的田，又是积水的水池。
English: From Sigeon, I walked eastward to the dockyard, following a small stream eastward for one mile. When I was finished, the fields on either side of me were pools of stagnant water.

古文：其池长亘一里，池尽复环塍为田，其南北皆崇山壁夹，南为高尖之东北垂，北为北斗之东南垂，其中夹而成田。
现代文：这个水池长长地绵亘了一里，水池过后又是田埂环绕的田，这里南北两面都是高山石壁相夹，南面是高尖山的东北垂，北面是北斗山的东南垂，两山之中夹成田地。
English: This pool stretches for a mile. After the pool, there is a field surrounded by rice paddies. Here, the north and south sides are clamped by alpine stone walls. To the south is the northeast slope of Gaojian Mountain, to the north is the southeast slope of Beidou Mountain, sandwiched between the two mountains into a field.

古文：共半里，即二山度脉之脊，水至是遂分东北与西南二派，东北者入都泥江，西南者入右江，水之派至是始分。
现代文：共半里，就是这两座山山脉相连的山脊，水流到了这里便分为东北与西南两条支流，向东北的流入都泥江，向西南的流入右江，是黔江、郁江两江分流的山脊，水流的支系到这里开始分流。
English: A total of half a mile is the ridge where the two mountains are connected. When the water flows here, it is divided into two tributaries, northeast and southwest. It flows into the Dudong River to the northeast, and into the Right River to the southwest. It is the ridge where the Lijiang River and the Yujiang River diverge. The tributary of the water flow begins to diverge here.

古文：过脊，随水东北行峡中，其峡甚束。
现代文：走过山脊，顺水在峡中往东北行，此峡非常狭窄。
English: I walked over the ridge and followed the water in the gorge to the northeast. The gorge is very narrow.

古文：又半里始降而下，有坊焉，复为宾州界。
现代文：又走半里开始下降，有座牌坊，又是宾州的地界。
English: After another half-mile, it began to descend. There was an archway, and it was the border of Pennsylvania.

古文：盖宾州之地，东西夹思笼一驿于中，为上林南界者，横过仅七里云。
现代文：原来宾州的辖地，东西夹着一个思笼释在当中，是上林县的南部辖境，横过之处仅有七里。
English: The original jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, with the east and west sandwiched in the middle, is the southern jurisdiction of Shanglin County, only seven miles across.

古文：既下，山愈逼束，路益东转，已越高尖山之东麓矣。
现代文：下山之后，山更加紧逼束拢，路越加向东转，已越过高尖山的东麓了。
English: After descending, the mountain is more tightly bunched, and the road turns more and more to the east, and has already passed the eastern foot of Gao Jianshan.

古文：按《志》： 宾州南四十五里有古漏山，古漏之水出焉。
现代文：据志书说： 宾州南面四十五里处有座古漏山，古漏水源出于那里。
English: According to the book: "Forty-five miles south of Pennsylvania there is an ancient sinkhole mountain, and the source of the ancient sinkhole water comes from there.

古文：其关曰古漏关。 
现代文：那里的关隘叫古漏关。 
English: The pass there is called the Ancient Pass.

古文：即此矣，然土人无复知者。
现代文：就是此地了。然而当地人已不再有人知道。
English: This is the place. However, the locals are no longer known.

古文：随水东又三里，山峡渐辟，又六里，渐出峡，始东望遥峰甚高，双尖骈起者，为百花山。
现代文：顺水流又向东下行三里，山峡渐渐开阔，又走六里，渐渐出峡，这才望见东面远处的山峰非常高，双尖并排耸起，是百花山。
English: The water flowed eastward for another three miles, the gorge gradually widened, and after another six miles, it gradually emerged from the gorge. It was only then that we could see the very high peaks in the distance to the east, with their twin peaks rising side by side. They were the Hundred Flowers Mountains.

古文：水折而北，路亦随之，山乃大辟。
现代文：水折向北流，路也随着它走，山于是十分开阔。
English: The water turns to the north, the road follows it, and the mountain is wide open.

古文：六里，为双峰洞，阳有庙东向，曰陈崇仪庙，乃把宋守陈曙者。
现代文：六里，是双峰洞，山南有寺庙向东，叫陈崇仪庙，是祭祀宋代知州陈曙的庙。
English: Six miles away is the Shuangfeng Cave. In Shannan, there is a temple to the east called the Chen Chong Rite Temple. It is a temple dedicated to Chen Akebono of Chizhou in the Song Dynasty.

古文：依智高之乱，曙为宾守，以兵八千战于昆仑，兵溃，经略狄青以军法斩之，土人哀而祀焉。
现代文：侬智高作乱，陈曙任宾州知州，率兵八千在昆仑关作战，兵败，经略使狄青按军法斩了他，当地人哀悼祭祀他。
English: Nong Zhi Gao started a riot, Chen Shuguang was appointed as the governor of Pengzhou and Zhizhou, he led eight thousand soldiers to fight in Kunlun Pass, he was defeated, and the local people mourned and worshipped him.

古文：后韩都督征蛮，见有白马朱衣而导者，知为曙显灵，故拓而新之。
现代文：后来韩都督征讨蛮族，见到有个骑白马穿朱红衣服领路的人，知道是陈曙显灵，因而扩建翻新了庙宇。
English: Later, the Han governor conscripted barbarians, saw a person leading the way on a white horse wearing vermilion clothes, and knew that it was Chen Shugu who manifested the spirit, thus expanding and renovating the temple.

古文：其地乱山回伏，无双峰特耸；若百花骈拥，虽望而见之，然相距甚遥，不知何以 双峰 名洞。
现代文：此地乱山环绕起伏，没有双峰那样特别高耸的山；至于百花山双峰前拥，虽然望得见它，然而相距甚远，不知为什么用 双峰 来命名山洞。
English: This place is surrounded by undulating mountains, and there are no particularly towering mountains like the twin peaks; as for the twin peaks of the Hundred Flowers Mountain, although it can be seen, it is very far away, and I don't know why the cave is named after the twin peaks.

古文：碑曰： 在宾州三十里。 又北二里，有小水自西坞出，东注于大溪。
现代文：又向北二里，有小溪自西面山坞中流出，向东注入大溪。
English: Another two miles to the north, a stream flows out of the dockyard in the west and flows into the large stream to the east.

古文：即古漏水。又三里，乃渡大溪之东，溪乃东转，路亦从溪南随之。
现代文：又走三里，就渡到大溪的东岸，溪水于是向东转，路也从溪水南岸顺溪流走。
English: After walking another three miles, they crossed to the east bank of the large stream. The stream then turned to the east, and the road followed the stream from the south bank of the stream.

古文：共东十里，溪北之山东尽，溪南之山亦渐东转而南，是为山口。
现代文：共向东十里，溪北的山到了东边的尽头，溪南的山也渐渐由东转向南，这里是山口。
English: A total of ten miles to the east, the mountains to the north of the creek reached the end of the east side, and the mountains to the south of the creek gradually turned from east to south. This is Yamaguchi.

古文：其东平畴一望，天豁岚空，不意万山之中，复有此旷荡之区也！
现代文：它东面是一望无际的平旷田野，天空开阔山间雾气空壕，意想不到在这万山之中，又有这空阔广大的地方！
English: To the east of it is an endless plain of fields, the sky wide open, misty trenches between the mountains. Unexpectedly, in the midst of all these mountains, there is also this vast, open place!

古文：东望五里，为丁桥村，又东十里为宾州，皆在平楚中。
现代文：往东望去，五里外是丁桥村，又向东十里是宾州城，都在平川上的树丛之中。
English: Looking to the east, five miles away is Dingqiao Village, and ten miles to the east is Pennsylvania City, all in the trees on the Hirakawa River.

古文：谢肇淛云： 昆仑在宾州南十里。 
现代文：谢肇捌说： 昆仑关在宾州城南十里。 
English: Xie Zhaohui said: Kunlun Prison is located ten miles south of Pennsylvania City.

古文：此何据也？
现代文：这是根据什么呢？
English: What is the basis for this?

古文：少憩山口，征三里路于途人。
现代文：在山口稍稍休息，向途中的人证实去三里城的路。
English: Take a short break in Yamaguchi and confirm the way to Sanli Castle to people on the way.

古文：知者云： 当从此东北行，由北小岭入，是为口村。
现代文：知道的人说： 应当从此地往东北行，由北面的小岭进去，那是口村。
English: Those in the know say: You should go northeast from here, and enter from the small ridge to the north, which is Kuchimura.

古文：其道为径，可无宾州之迂。 
现代文：这条路是小路，可以不必绕道宾州。 
English: This road is a minor road, you don't have to go all the way around Pennsylvania.

古文：时甫下午，日色大霁，遂由出口北渡大溪，从平畴中行。
现代文：此时刚到下午，天色大晴，就由山口向北渡过大溪，从平旷的田野中前行。
English: At this time, just into the afternoon, the weather was very clear, and we crossed the large stream from Yamaguchi to the north, moving forward from the middle of a flat field.

古文：十里，抵北界小山下。
现代文：十里，抵达北面的小山下。
English: Ten miles, arriving at the foot of the hill to the north.

古文：其山颇低，自山口之北回环东北行，至此有村落依之。
现代文：此山很低，从山口的北面回绕着往东北延伸，延到这里有村落依傍着它。
English: This mountain is very low, stretching from the north side of the mountain pass to the northeast, and there are villages next to it.

古文：由村东又东北行五里，越山之北，复有坞自西而东，路横涉之。
现代文：由村东又向东北行五里，越到小山的北面，又有山坞自西向东扩展，路横涉过山坞。
English: From the east of the village to the northeast for five miles, to the north of the hill, there is a dock extending from west to east, and the road crosses the dock.

古文：二里，有水亦自西而东注，架小桥于上渡之。
现代文：二里，有水流也是自西向东流注，在上面架有小桥横渡过去。
English: For two miles, there is a stream of water flowing from west to east, and there is a small bridge across it.

古文：又北一里，直抵北山下，其山乃北第二重东行小支。
现代文：又向北一里，直达北山下，这里的山是北面第二层向东延伸的小支脉。
English: Another mile to the north, straight to the bottom of the North Mountain, where the mountain is a small branch extending eastward from the second layer in the north.

古文：又有水直逼山麓，自西向而东，架桥亦与前溪同。
现代文：又有水流直逼到山麓，自西流向东，也与前边的溪流相同架了桥。
English: There is also water flowing straight to the foot of the mountain, flowing from west to east, and it is also bridged by the same stream as the one in front.

古文：度桥即北向登山，山巅有堡一围，名竹马堡，乃二年前太平节推吴鼎元，高州人。署宾州所筑，招狼兵五十名以扼要地者。
现代文：过桥后马上向北登山，山顶有一座围起来的土堡，名叫竹马堡，是两年前太平府姓吴的节推官代理宾州州官时修筑的，他招集五十名土司兵扼守这个要地。
English: Immediately after crossing the bridge, head north up the mountain. At the top of the mountain, there is a walled earthen fort, called Zhuma Fort. It was built two years ago by the deputy governor of the Taiping Prefecture, surnamed Wu, when he was acting governor of Pennsylvania. He called up fifty Tusi soldiers to guard this important place.

古文：上山半里，又从山上北行半里，山北有水一塘，横浸山麓，四面皆山峡环之。
现代文：上山半里，又从山上向北行半里，山北面有一塘水，横浸着山麓，四面都是山峡环绕着它。
English: Half a mile up the mountain, and half a mile north from the mountain, there is a pond of water on the north side of the mountain, dipping into the foot of the mountain, surrounded on all sides by mountain gorges.

古文：下山又半里，北望公村尚在坞北二里外，担夫以力不能前，乃从山北麓东行半里，投宿小村。
现代文：下山又走半里，远望北面公村还在山坞北面二里路之外，挑夫由于力尽不能前走，就从山北麓往东行半里，投宿到小村中。
English: He walked another half-mile down the mountain. Looking far and wide, the village of Beimen Gongcun was still two miles north of the mountain dock. Since the porter could not walk forward with all his strength, he walked half a mile east from the northern foot of the mountain and lodged in the small village.

古文：村不当大道，村人初不纳客，已而一妇留之，乃南都即今南京市人李姓者之女，闻余乡音而款留焉。
现代文：村子不在大道上，村里人起初不接纳客人，不久一个女人留下了我们，是一个姓李的南京人的女儿，听见我的家乡口音便留下款待了。
English: The village is not on the main road, the villagers did not accept guests at first, and soon a woman left us, the daughter of a Nanjing man surnamed Li, who heard my hometown accent and left the hospitality.

古文：其夫姓邓，随驿骑至南宁。二十二日是为立春日。
现代文：二十二日这天是立春日。
English: The 22nd day is the first day of spring.

古文：晨起，阴云四合。
现代文：早晨起床，阴云四面合拢。
English: Get up in the morning, the clouds are closing in on all sides.

古文：饭而北行田坞间。
现代文：饭后往北行走在山坞中的田野间。
English: After lunch, walk north between the fields in the middle of the dock.

古文：二里，抵北山下，是为公村今作公车。
现代文：二里，抵达北山下，这是公村。
English: After two miles, you will arrive at the foot of the North Mountain. This is Gongcun.

古文：由村东越山而北，三里下及北麓，始见北向扩然，渐有石峰透突。
现代文：由村东越到山北，三里下到北麓，这才见到北方十分广阔，渐渐有石峰突起显露出来。
English: From the east of the village to the north of the mountain, three miles down to the northern foot, I saw that the north is very vast, and gradually there are stone peaks protruding.

古文：盖自隆安西岭入，土山崇卑不一，皆纯土而不见石，至此始复见峥嵘面目矣。
现代文：自从走入隆安县的西岭以来，土山高低不一，都是纯土却不见石头，来到此地才重又见到石山的峥嵘面目了。
English: Since I walked into the West Ridge of Longan County, the soil and mountains varied in height. They were all pure soil, but there was no stone. It was only when I came here that I saw the ugly face of the stone mountains again.

古文：于是复行平畴中，一里，北过一板桥，有小水亦自西而东。
现代文：于是又行走在平旷的田野中，一里，向北走过一座木板桥，桥下有小溪也是自西流向东。
English: So I walked in the middle of a flat field, one mile to the north, over a wooden bridge, under which there was a small stream that also flowed from west to east.

古文：又北行四里，抵北小山下，有水从山下漱南麓而东，架桥渡之。
现代文：又往北行四里，抵达北面的小山下，有溪水从山下冲刷着南麓往东流，架桥渡过溪流。
English: Another four miles to the north, arriving at the foot of a small mountain to the north, there is a stream running from the foot of the mountain to the east, bridging the stream.

古文：遂穿山腋而北，于是北行陂陀间，西望双峰峻极，氤氲云表者，大明山也。
现代文：于是往北穿越山侧，从这里起向北行走在山坡上，远望西方双峰极其险峻，高出云层外，云雾氰氯，是大明山。
English: So I went north across the mountain side, and from here I walked northward on the mountain slope, looking far and wide at the western twin peaks, which are extremely steep, high above the clouds, and the cyanogen chloride clouds, which are the Daming Mountains.

古文：其山为上林、武缘分界。
现代文：此山在北斗山西北，是上林县、武缘县的分界处。
English: This mountain is in the northwest of Beidou Mountain, and is the border between Shanglin County and Wueran County.

古文：按《志》，上林、武缘俱有镆铘、思邻二山，为二县界，曰镆铘而不及大明，岂大明即镆铘耶？
现代文：根据志书，上林县、武缘县都有镇椰、思邻两座山，是两县的分界处，说到镇挪关却不提及大明山，难道大明山就是镇椰山吗？
English: According to the history book, Shanglin County and Wujian County have two mountains, Zhenhuang Mountain and Sinu Mountain, which are the boundary between the two counties. When it comes to moving the town, Daming Mountain is not mentioned. Is Daming Mountain the same as Zhenhuang Mountain?

古文：又北五里，有大溪西自大明山东流而去，是又为宾州、上林之界，其水较古漏诸溪为大，故不能梁而涉焉。
现代文：又向北五里，有条大溪自西面的大明山向东流淌而去，这又是宾州、上林县的分界，它的水流比古漏水各条溪流都大，所以不能架桥涉水了。
English: Another five miles to the north, there is a large stream flowing from the west of the Great Ming Mountain to the east, which is also the boundary between Pennsylvania and Shanglin County. Its water flow is larger than all the streams of the ancient water leak, so it is impossible to bridge the water.

古文：由溪北又三里，登一冈，是为思洛墟，宾州北来大道至墟而合。
现代文：由溪北又走三里，登上一座山冈，这是思洛墟，从宾州往北面来的大道到了思洛墟便会合了。
English: From the north of the river, walk another three miles and climb up a hill, this is the Silo Market. The road from Pennsylvania to the north meets at the Silo Market.

古文：遂西北行，共十二里过白墟，又三里为牧民堡，有卖饭于冈头者，是为宾州往上林、三里中道也。
现代文：于是向西北行，共十二里走过白墟，又走三里是牧民堡，有在冈头卖饭的人，这是宾州去上林县、三里城的半路上。
English: So I headed northwest, walking a total of twelve miles past Bai Rui, and another three miles to the herdsmen's fort, and there were people selling rice at Gangtou. This was halfway to Shanglin County and Sanli City in Pennsylvania.

古文：又西北行十里至开笼山，已直逼北界石山下。
现代文：又往西北行十里到开笼山，又叫鸡笼，已经直逼北面一列石山之下。
English: I drove another ten miles northwest to Mount Kaiye, also known as Chicken Cage, which was already directly under a row of stone mountains to the north.

古文：由岐北入石山夹中，其山千百为群，或离或合，山虽小而变态特甚。
现代文：由岔路向北走入石山峡谷中，这里的山千百成群，或分或合，山虽小但姿态变化特别大。
English: Walking north from Kushiro into the stone mountain canyon, the mountains here are in thousands of groups, either divided or combined. Although the mountains are small, their posture changes are particularly large.

古文：由其西转而北，入石山峒中。
现代文：有分为三座支峰的，东边的支峰又大又高，中间的次于它，西边的支峰特别尖，细如竹枝，姿态尤其诡异；有耸立群峰间，高如发替笔尖的。由石山西面转向北，走入石山酮中。
English: It is divided into three peaks, the eastern peak is big and high, the middle one is lower than it, the western peak is particularly sharp, thin as a bamboo branch, and the posture is particularly strange; there is a towering peak, high as a pen tip. From the west side of the stone mountain to the north, walk into the stone mountain ketone.

古文：五里，北至杨渡今作洋渡，一大溪西由上林崇山中东流至此，直逼北面石山下，又有一溪北由三里山峡中南向入之，二流合而其溪即清水江愈大，循石山而东，抵迁江入都泥焉。
现代文：五里，向北来到杨渡，一条大溪从西面由上林县的崇山峻岭中向东流到此地，直逼到北面的石山下，又有一条溪水从北面由三里城的山峡中向南流入大溪，两条溪流会合后那溪水更加大了，沿着石山往东流，抵达迁江后流入都泥江。
English: Five miles north to Yangdu, a large stream flows from the west through the mountains of Shanglin County to the east to this place, reaching the north of Shishan. Another stream flows from the north through the mountains and canyons of Sanli City to the south into the large stream. After the two streams meet, the stream becomes larger and flows east along Shishan. After arriving at the river, it flows into the Mud River.

古文：方舟渡北山下，有卖饭者当道，渡者屡屡不绝，遂由其东溯南来溪西岸入峡。其峡或束或开，高盘曲峙，左右俱有村落。
现代文：刚乘船渡到北山下，有挡在道上卖饭的人，渡水的人一次次络绎不绝。于是由渡口东边溯向南流来的溪流西岸走入山峡，此峡时而束拢时而开阔，曲折起伏高高地屹立着，左右都有村落。
English: Just after taking the ferry to the foot of the North Mountain, there were people selling rice on the road, and people crossing the water were incessant. Therefore, the west bank of the stream flowing south from the east side of the ferry entered the mountain gorge. This gorge is sometimes closed and sometimes open, with twists and turns and hills. There are villages on both sides.

古文：十里，峡复大开，四山围绕，中成大坞。
现代文：十里，山峡重又十分开阔，四面群山围绕，中间成为大山坞。
English: Ten miles long, the gorge is heavy and very wide, surrounded by mountains on all sides, with a large dock in the middle.

古文：有一峰当坞起平畴中，四旁无倚，极似桂林之独秀、向武之瑞岩，更小而峭。
现代文：有一座山峰在坞中的平坦原野中突起，四旁无倚无靠，极像桂林的独秀峰、向武州的瑞岩，更小些更陡峭。
English: There is a mountain peak protruding from the flat plain in the dock, with no support on either side, very much like the Duxiu Peak in Guilin and the Zuiyan in Wuzhou, but smaller and steeper.

古文：路过其西，忽树影倒垂，天光中透，亟东入之，则其中南北中迸。
现代文：路经过它的西面，忽然树影倒垂，天光从中透出，急忙向东走进山，就见山南北向从中迸裂开。
English: The road passed to the west of it, and suddenly the shadows of the trees fell down, and the light of the sky shone through. I hurried eastward into the mountain, and saw the mountain split in half from north to south.

古文：南窍复有巨石自洞顶当门外倚，界洞门为二，门内裂窍高数丈，阔丈五，直透峰北者五六丈。
现代文：南面的洞穴又有巨石从洞顶挡在洞口外斜靠着，把洞口隔成两个，洞口内石窍裂开高数丈，宽一丈五，一直通向山峰北面五六丈。
English: In the cave to the south, there is also a boulder leaning against the outside of the cave from the top of the cave, separating the cave into two. The stone in the cave is cracked and is several meters high and five meters wide, leading all the way to the north face of the mountain, which is five or six meters high.

古文：出北窍，其上飞崖倒覆，骞腾而东，若复道回空，悬树倩影。
现代文：走出北面的洞穴，洞上方飞崖倒覆下来，向东高举腾空，好像双层的通道回绕在空中，悬垂的树枝透出倩影。
English: Coming out of the cave on the north side, the cliff above the cave fell down and rose high to the east, as if a double-layered passageway was circling in the air, and the overhanging branches cast shadows.

古文：复入其内，又西通一窍，西北转而出，其中宛转，屡有飞桥上悬，负窦层透，又透西门焉。
现代文：再进入洞内，又向西通着一个石窍，向西北转出去，其中弯弯转转，屡次有飞桥悬在头上，背顶着洞顶一层层钻进去，又钻出到西面的洞口。
English: Entering the cave again, he passed through a stone nook to the west and turned out to the northwest, where he turned around and around, repeatedly with a flying bridge hanging over his head, and with his back on the top of the cave, he drilled into it layer by layer, and then drilled out to the western hole.

古文：一峰甚小，下透四门，中通二道，亦琅岩之具体而微者，但琅岩高迥，而兹平狭耳。
现代文：整座山峰很小，下边通着四个洞口，中间通着两条通道，也是如琅岩那样具体而微的地方，但琅岩高远，而这里却又平又窄。
English: The entire peak is very small, with four openings at the bottom and two passages in the middle. It is also a place as concrete and subtle as quartzite, but quartzite is high and far away, while here it is flat and narrow.

古文：由岩北又北三里，为桂水桥，溪水自西北漱崖，而南崖瞰溪临桥。
现代文：由洞北又向北走三里，是桂水桥，溪水从西北流来冲刷着山崖，而南边的山崖俯瞰溪流下临桥梁。
English: Three miles further north from the north of the cave is the Katsura Water Bridge. The stream water coming from the northwest washes the cliff, while the cliff on the south overlooks the stream under the bridge.

古文：昔有叠石为台，构亭于上者，曰来远亭，今止存荒址矣。
现代文：从前有人用石块砌成平台，在上面建了亭子，叫来远亭，今天只存有荒废的基址了。
English: In the past, someone used stones to build a platform, built a pavilion on it, and called it Yuan Pavilion. Today, only the abandoned foundation site remains.

古文：越桥东，又北二里，为三里城。
现代文：越到桥东，又向北二里，是三里城。
English: East of the bridge and two miles to the north is Three Mile Town.

古文：城建于万历八年，始建参府，移南丹卫于此，以镇压八寨云。
现代文：城建于万历八年，开始建立参将府，把南丹卫迁到此地，以便镇压八寨。
English: The city was built in the eighth year of Wanli, and the establishment of the General Staff Headquarters began, and Nandanwei was moved to this place in order to suppress the Eight Villages.

古文：时已过午，税驾于南城外陈队长家。
现代文：此时已过中午，住宿在南城外陈队长家。
English: By this time, it was past noon, and Captain Chen's home outside Nancheng was no longer available for accommodation.

古文：其人乃浙之上虞陈氏也，居此二十年矣。
现代文：此人是浙江上虞县的陈家，住在此地二十年了。
English: This is Chen Jia from Shangyu County, Zhejiang Province. He has lived here for 20 years.

古文：晚日甚丽，余乃人城谒关帝庙，换钱于市而出。
现代文：傍晚落日非常艳丽，我于是进城拜渴了关帝庙，在市场上换钱后出城。
English: The sunset in the evening was very beautiful, so I went into the city to pay my respects to the Guan Di Temple. After changing money at the market, I left the city.

古文：及就寝，雨复大作。
现代文：到就寝时，暴雨重又大作。
English: By bedtime, the downpour was heavy and persistent.

古文：二十三日晨起雨止。
现代文：二十三日早晨起床雨停了。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, I woke up and the rain had stopped.

古文：既而日色皎然，遂令顾仆浣衣濯被，余乃作与陆参戎即参将书，并录《哭静闻》诸诗椷封信之，以待明晨投入。
现代文：不久阳光明亮，便命令顾仆洗衣被，我于是写了给陆参将的信，并抄录了《哭静闻》诸诗封在信中，等明天早晨投递进去。
English: Soon, the sun was shining brightly, and I ordered the servant to wash the quilt. I then wrote a letter to the General, and copied the poems of "Crying Quietly" and sealed it in the letter to be delivered tomorrow morning.

古文：迨暮，日复坠黑云中。
现代文：到天黑时，太阳重又坠入黑云中。
English: By nightfall, the sun had sunk back into the clouds.

古文：二十四日晨起，雨复作。
现代文：二十四日早晨起床，雨又下起来。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I got up and it started to rain again.

古文：上午以书投陆君。
现代文：上午把信投递给陆君。
English: In the morning, deliver the letter to Lu Jun.

古文：陆，镇江人也，镇此六年矣。
现代文：陆君是镇江人，镇守此地六年了。
English: Lu Jun is a native of Zhenjiang and has been the town guard here for six years.

古文：名万里。得书即令一把总以名帖即今之名片候余，余乃入谒，为道乡曲，久之乃别。
现代文：接到信立即命令一名把总拿着名帖来问候我，我于是进衙门去拜见他，为此互道乡情，很久后才告别。
English: After receiving the letter, I immediately ordered a general to come with a famous postcard to greet me, so I went to the gate to visit him, and exchanged hometown feelings for this, and only said goodbye after a long time.

古文：陆君曰： 本当即留款，以今日有冗，诘朝耑同 专 候耳。 
现代文：陆君说： 本来应该就留下款待，因为今天有冗务在身，只能明天早晨专门恭候了。 
English: Lu Jun said: Originally, I should have left the hospitality, because I have a lot of work to do today, I can only wait for tomorrow morning.

古文：盖是日乃其孙伯恒初冠，诸卫官有贺燕也。
现代文：原来这一天是他孙子陆伯恒举行成人的冠礼，卫里众官吏有庆贺的宴会。
English: Originally, this day was his grandson Lu Boheng's coming-of-age ceremony, and all the officials in Wei Li had a celebratory banquet.

古文：余返寓，雨纷纷不休。
现代文：我返回寓所，雨纷纷不止。
English: I got back to the apartment and it just kept raining.

古文：陈主人以酒饮余，遂醉而卧。
现代文：陈主人拿酒来给我饮，便喝醉了躺下。
English: Master Chen brought me some wine to drink, and then he got drunk and lay down.

古文：二十五日晨起渐霁，余作程纪于寓中。
现代文：二十五日早晨起床后渐渐转晴，我在寓所中写游记。
English: On the morning of the 25th, after getting up, it gradually became clear. I was writing a travelogue in my apartment.

古文：上午，陆君以手书订约订余小叙，尽返所馈仪。
现代文：上午，陆君送来亲笔信约我去叙谈叙谈，把我赠送的礼品尽数送还来。
English: In the morning, Lu Jun sent me a handwritten letter asking me to come and talk about it, and to return as many gifts as possible.

古文：余再作书强之，为受金谷秋香卷。
现代文：我再写信强逼他收下，为此接受了金谷秋的香卷。
English: I wrote another letter to force him to accept it, so he accepted Kanaya Aki's incense roll.

古文：下午，入宴于内署，晤陆君，令弟玄芝昆仲俱长厚纯笃ｄǔ忠实，极其眷爱焉。
现代文：下午，到内衙去赴宴，会晤了陆君，他的令弟陆玄芝兄弟全都恭谨纯朴忠厚，极其关照爱护。
English: In the afternoon, he went to Neili to attend a banquet and met Lu Jun. His younger brother, Lu Xuanqi, and his brothers were all respectful, pure and loyal, and extremely caring and loving.

古文：二十六日晨起，入谢陆君，遂为下榻东阁。
现代文：二十六日早晨起床，进衙门向陆君道谢，便在东阁住下。
English: On the morning of the 26th, he got up, entered the gate to thank Lu Jun, and then stayed in Dongge.

古文：阁在署东隅，乔松浮空，幽爽兼致，而陆君供具丰腆，惠衣袜裤履，谆谆款曲，谊逾骨肉焉。
现代文：东阁在衙门内的东角落上，高大的松树浮动在空中，兼有幽静与明亮的情趣，而且险君供给的酒肴非常丰盛，惠赠了衣裤鞋袜，诚恳表达了殷勤之意，情谊胜过亲骨肉。
English: On the east corner of the East Pavilion inside the main gate, tall pine trees float in the air, both quiet and bright, and the wine and food provided by Yanjun are very rich. He gave away clothes, pants, shoes and socks, and sincerely expressed the meaning of diligence. Friendship is better than flesh and blood.

古文：是日，陆君出新旧诸报即邸，报也，是传达政令，通报消息，由封建中央主办的报纸见示，始知石斋先生已入都，又上二疏，奉旨责其执坳，复令回话，吏部主政熊文举以疏救之。又知郑峚之狱拟戍，复奉旨欲加重刑，刑部尚书任为镌三级焉。
现代文：这天，陆君出示新旧邸报给我看，这才了解到黄石斋先生已调任进京，又呈上两个奏疏，接到圣旨责备他执拗，又命令他回话，吏部主事熊文举上疏救下了他。又了解到郑奏阳的案件，准备将他发配戍边，又接到圣旨要加以重刑，刑部任尚书判为降三级。
English: On this day, Lu Jun showed me the new and old residence newspaper. It was only then that he learned that Mr. Huang Shizai had been transferred to Beijing. He also submitted two reports. Upon receiving the imperial edict, he was reproached for his obstinacy and ordered him to reply. The head of the personnel department, Xiong Wen, rescued him. He also learned about the case of Zheng Soyang and was ready to hand him over to the imperial edict. Upon receiving the imperial edict, he was to be severely punished. The Ministry of Justice sentenced him to a three-level reduction.

古文：至六月，锦衣卫以病闻。
现代文：到了六月，锦衣卫把他生病的情况报告了皇帝。
English: In June, Jin Rongwei reported his illness to the emperor.

古文：又知钱牧斋即钱廉益，曾作《徐霞客传》为宵人即小人也上疏，以媚乌程，遂蒙迨入都，并瞿式耜下狱。抚宁侯朱国弼等疏攻乌程，六月间，乌程始归，郑、钱狱俱未结。
现代文：又了解到钱牧斋被小人上疏诬告，以讨好乌程，竟然被逮捕进京，连同瞿式铝一起关入狱中。抚宁侯朱国弼等人上疏攻击乌程，六月间，乌程这才回京，郑奏阳、钱谦益的案件都未结案。
English: It was also learned that Qian Muxai was falsely accused by villain Shang Soh in order to please Ucheng, and was even arrested in Beijing and put in prison together with Zou Shihai. Zhu Guoqi, Fuxing Hou, and others attacked Ucheng in Shang Soh. In June, Ucheng only returned to Beijing, and the cases of Zheng Soyang and Qian Qian Qianyun are still pending.

古文：二十七日雨。
现代文：二十七日下雨。
English: It rained on the 27th.

古文：二十八日稍霁。
现代文：二十八日稍微晴开。
English: On the 28th, the weather cleared up a bit.

古文：陆公特同余游韦龟岩。
现代文：陆公特意陪同我去游了韦龟岩。
English: Lu Gong specially accompanied me to swim around the Weigu Rock.

古文：岩在三里西十里。
现代文：韦龟岩在三里城西面十里处。
English: Weiguiyan is located ten miles west of Sanli City.

古文：二十九日复雨。
现代文：二十九日又下雨。
English: It rained again on the 29th.

古文：三十日复雨。
现代文：三十日又是下雨。
English: On the 30th it rained again.

