古文：先生王斗造门而欲见齐宣王，宣王使谒者延入。
现代文：王斗先生来到王宫，想要求见齐宣王。宣王吩咐侍者将他引进来。
English: Mr. Wang Dou came to the royal palace and wanted to ask for a meeting with King Xuan. King Xuan ordered the waiter to bring him in.

古文：王斗曰： 斗趋见王为好势，王趋见斗为好士，于王何如? 
现代文：王斗说： 我赶上前去见大王是趋炎附势，而大王主动来见我，就是礼贤下士，不知大王怎么看？ 
English: Wang Dou said: I caught up and went to see the great king, but the great king took the initiative to see me, that is, Corporal Li Xian, I don't know what the great king thinks?

古文：使者复还报。
现代文：负责接待的人将他的话如实地报告给齐宣王。
English: The person in charge of the reception reported his words truthfully to King Qi Xuan.

古文：王曰： 先生徐之，寡人请从。 
现代文：宣王赶紧说： 先生慢行，寡人亲自来迎接！ 
English: King Xuan said quickly: "Master, slow down, few people have come to meet you in person!"

古文：宣王因趋而迎之于门，与入，曰： 寡人奉先君之宗庙，守社稷，闻先生直言正谏不讳。 
现代文：于是快步前去迎接王斗，并和他一起进宫。宣王说： 寡人不才，有幸得以事奉先王宗庙，管理社稷，我平时听说先生能直言进谏，直言不讳。 
English: So he hurried forward to meet Wang Dou and entered the palace with him. Xuan Wang said: Some people are not talented, I am fortunate to be able to serve the ancestral temple of the king and manage the community hall. I usually heard that Mr. Wang Dou can speak frankly and speak frankly.

古文：王斗对曰： 王闻之过。斗生于乱世，事乱君，焉敢直言正谏。 
现代文：王斗回答说： 大王听错了，我生于乱世，事奉昏君，怎么敢直言进谏？ 
English: Wang Dou replied, "Your Majesty misheard me. I was born in a chaotic world, and I serve the dim prince. How dare I speak the truth?"

古文：宣王忿然作色，不说。
现代文：宣王极为不快，不禁忿然作色。
English: Emperor Xuanwang was extremely displeased and could not help but make an angry face.

古文：有间，王斗曰： 昔先君桓公所好者，九合诸侯，一匡天下，天子受籍，立为大伯。
现代文：过了一会儿，王斗说： 过去先王齐桓公，有五样爱好，后来九合诸侯，匡扶周室，周天子赐给封地，承认他为诸侯中的霸主。
English: After a while, Wang Dou said: In the past, the first king, King Qi Huan, had five hobbies. Later, he was given fiefdoms by nine princes, Kuang Fu Zhou, and Zhou Tianzi, who recognized him as the overlord among the princes.

古文：今王有四焉。 
现代文：现在大王有四种爱好与先主相同。 
English: Now the great king has the same four hobbies as his predecessor.

古文：宣王说，曰： 寡人愚陋，守齐国，唯恐失抎之，焉能有四焉? 王斗曰： 否。
现代文：宣王听了很高兴，但仍极力谦辞道： 寡人才识疏浅，治国安邦还担心力有不及，又怎能有四样爱好与先主相同呢？ 王斗说： 当然有。
English: Xuan Wang was very happy to hear this, but he still tried his best to be humble, saying: Few people have a shallow knowledge, and they are still worried that they are not strong enough to govern the country, so how can they have the same four hobbies as their predecessors? Wang Dou said: Of course.

古文：先君好马，王亦好马。先君好狗，王亦好狗。先君好酒，王亦好酒。先君好色，王亦好色。先君好士，是王不好士。 
现代文：先主喜欢，大王也喜欢马；先主喜欢狗，大王也喜欢狗；先主喜欢酒，大王也喜欢酒；先君好色，王也好色；先主好士，王却不是那样。 
English: The forefather liked horses, and the great king liked horses; the forefather liked dogs, and the great king liked dogs; the forefather liked wine, and the great king liked wine; the forefather was a womanizer, and the king was a womanizer; but the forefather was a good man, and the king was not.

古文：宣王曰： 当今之世无士，寡人何好? 
现代文：宣王勉强说： 当今世上没有优秀的人才，寡人如何喜爱他们？ 
English: Mr. Xuan Wang reluctantly said, "There are no outstanding talents in the world today. How can anyone love them?"

古文：王斗曰： 世无骐驎騄耳，王驷已备矣。世无东郭俊、卢氏之狗，王之走狗已具矣。世无毛嫱、西施，王宫已充矣。
现代文：王斗说： 当世没有？这样的骏马，卢氏那样的良犬，大王的马匹、猎狗已经够多的了；当世没有毛嫱、西施一类的美女，可大王的后宫已经充盈。
English: Wang Dou said, "Isn't there such a fine horse in this world, a good dog like Lu Shi, the great king's horses and hunting dogs are already enough; there are no beauties like Mao Dun and Xi Shi in this world, but the great king's harem is already full.

古文：王亦不好士也，何患无士? 
现代文：大王只是不喜欢贤士而已，那里是因为当世无贤士？ 
English: The great king just doesn't like sages. Is that because there are no sages in this world?

古文：王曰： 寡人忧国爱民，固愿得士以治之。 
现代文：宣王说： 我忧国爱民，本来就希望得到贤士来治理齐国。 
English: King Xuan said: I am concerned about the country and love the people. I had originally hoped to get a wise man to govern Qi.

古文：王斗曰： 王之忧国爱民，不若王爱尺縠也。 
现代文：王斗进一步说： 大王的忧国忧民远不如爱惜一尺绉纱。 
English: Wang Dou further said: The great king's concern for the country and the people is far less important than cherishing a foot of embroidery.

古文：王曰： 何谓也? 
现代文：宣王问道： 这话是什么意思？ 
English: King Qi said, "What does this mean?"

古文：王斗曰： 王使人为冠，不使左右便辟而使工者何也?
现代文：回答说： 大王做帽子，不用身边的人而请能工巧匠，是什么原因？
English: He replied, "What is the reason why the great king does not use people around him to make hats, but uses skilled craftsmen?

古文：为能之也。
现代文：是因为他们手艺高超，会做帽子。
English: It's because they are highly skilled and can make hats.

古文：今王治齐，非左右便辟无使也，臣故曰不如爱尺縠也。 
现代文：可是现在大王治理齐国，不问才德，非亲不用，所以我说大王的忧国忧民不如一尺绉纱。 
English: But now the great king governs the whole country, regardless of talent, without relatives, so I say that the great king's concern for the country and the people is not as good as a foot of crepe.

古文：宣王谢曰： 寡人有罪国家。 
现代文：宣王顿悟，向王斗道歉道： 寡人对国家有罪有罪。 
English: Xuan Wang had an epiphany and apologized to Wang Dou, saying: Some people are guilty of crimes against the state.

古文：于是举士五人任官，齐国大治。
现代文：于是，选拔五位贤士，委任他们官职，齐国因而治理得很好。
English: As a result, five wise men were selected and appointed to official positions, and the country was well governed.

