古文：一曰：仲冬之月，日在斗，昏东壁中，旦轸中。
现代文：仲冬仲冬之月，太阳的位置在斗宿。黄昏时刻，壁宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，轸宿出现在南方中天。
English: MidwinterIn the midwinter month, the sun's position is at the top of the zodiac. At dusk, the wall appears in the southern sky, and at dawn, the star appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日壬癸，其帝颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中黄钟。
现代文：仲冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之类的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与黄钟相应。
English: Midwinter in the heavenly stem belongs to Rinchen, its ruling emperor is Gong, the god of Zotei is the dark, the corresponding animal is a kind of tortoise, the corresponding sound is feather sound, and the melody corresponds to the yellow bell.

古文：其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：这个月的数字是六，味道是咸昧，气味是朽气，要举行的祭祀是行祭，祭祀时祭品以肾脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is six, the taste is saltiness, the smell is rottenness, the sacrifice to be held is the procession, and the sacrificial offering is the kidney.

古文：冰益壮，地始坼，鹖鴠不鸣，虎始交。
现代文：这个月，冰冻得越发坚实，地表开始冻出裂缝。鹖鴠不叫了，老虎开始交配。
English: This month, as the ice hardened, cracks began to appear in the frozen surface. The crickets stopped chirping, and the tigers began to mate.

古文：天子居玄堂太庙，乘玄辂，驾铁骊，载玄旂，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器宏以弇。
现代文：天子住在北向明堂的中央正室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色绘有龙牧的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩戴着黑色的饰玉。吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而口敛。
English: Tianzi lives in the central main room of Beichuanming Hall. He rides in a black car, with a black horse in front of the car, and a black flag with a dragon herd painted on it. Tianzi wears black clothes and black ornaments. The food he eats is glutinous rice and pork, and the utensils he uses are large and mouth-watering.

古文：命有司曰： 土事无作，无发盖藏，无起大众，以固而闭。 
现代文：命令司徒官说： 不要兴动土木工程，不要打开遮盖掩藏东西的仓廪府库，不要发动众多百姓，以此顺应时气的封固和闭藏。 
English: The magistrate ordered: Don't start any civil engineering projects, don't open the Canggu prefectural repository that covers and hides things, and don't mobilize a large number of people to comply with the current trend of sealing and closing.

古文：发盖藏，起大众，地气且泄，是谓发天地之房。
现代文：打开盖藏之物，发动众多百姓，地气就会宣泄，这叫做开启天地用来闭藏万物的房舍。
English: If you open something that has been covered and hidden, and mobilize a large number of people, the earth's air will be released. This is called opening the heavens and the earth to hide all things.

古文：诸蛰则死，民多疾疫，又随以丧。
现代文：这样一来，蛰伏的动物都会死去，百姓中会流行疫病，并随着丧亡。
English: Then all the animals that lie down will die, and there will be a plague among the people, and they will also be destroyed.

古文：命之曰 畅月 。
现代文：这个月，命名叫做 畅月 。
English: This month, the name is called "Changyue."

古文：是月也，命阉尹申宫令，审门闾，谨房室，必重闭。
现代文：这个月，命令官官的首领申明宫中的禁令，严加注意宫廷和房室的门户，一定要层层紧闭。
English: This month, the heads of the officials were ordered to affirm the ban in the palace, pay close attention to the doors of the court and the room, and must be closed tightly.

古文：省妇事，毋得淫，虽有贵戚近习，无有不禁。
现代文：要减少妇女的工作，不许她们制作过分奢华巧饰的东西，即使是尊贵的亲戚和宠幸的人，也没有不禁止的。
English: Women's work should be reduced, and they should not be allowed to make things that are excessively luxurious and ornate, even for distinguished relatives and favored people.

古文：乃命大酋，秫稻必齐，麹糵必时，湛饎必洁，水泉必香，陶器必良，火齐必得，兼用六物，大酋监之，无有差忒。
现代文：命令酒官之长监制酿酒，选用的高粱稻米必须纯净，制作酒麴酒蘖必须适时，浸渍炊煮米麴必须清洁，所用的井水泉水必须甘美，使用的陶器必须良好，酿制的火侯必须适中。这六件事要处处兼顾，酒官之长监督它，不得有一点差错。
English: He ordered the chief brewer to supervise the brewing of wine, the sorghum rice to be used must be pure, the sake lees to be made must be timely, the rice lees to be impregnated and cooked must be clean, the well and spring water to be used must be sweet, the pottery to be used must be good, and the brewing temperature must be moderate. These six things must be taken into account everywhere, and the chief brewer supervises it without a single mistake.

古文：天子乃命有司祈祀四海、大川、名原、渊泽、井泉。
现代文：天子命令主管官吏祭祀四海、大河，水源、深渊、大译及井泉的水神。
English: The Son of Heaven ordered the officials in charge to offer sacrifices to the water gods of the four seas, great rivers, water sources, abysses, great rivers and springs.

古文：是月也，农有不收藏积聚者，牛马畜兽有放佚者，取之不诘。
现代文：这个月，农民尚未收藏积聚的谷物、放牧在外的牛马，若被他人取用，不必责问。
English: This month, farmers have not yet collected the accumulated grain, cattle and horses grazing outside. If they are used by others, there is no need to ask.

古文：山林薮泽，有能取疏食田猎禽兽者，野虞教导之。其有侵夺者，罪之不赦。
现代文：农民有能在山林水泽中采取榛粟菱芡，捕猎禽兽的，主管山泽的官吏要教导并鼓励他们，若有人侵犯夺取他们的成果，一定要处罚，决不宽赦。
English: Peasants who are able to take poppy seeds in the mountains, forests and streams, and officials in charge of the mountains and streams who hunt animals should teach and encourage them. If someone encroaches on their achievements, they must be punished and never pardoned.

古文：是月也，日短至，阴阳争，诸生荡。
现代文：这个月，冬至到来，阴阳相争，各种生物都开始萌动。
English: This month, the winter solstice arrives, yin and yang compete, and all kinds of creatures begin to sprout.

古文：君子斋戒，处必弇，身欲宁，去声色，禁嗜欲，安形性，事欲静，以待阴阳之所定。
现代文：君子整洁身心，居处一定深邃，身心要宁静，屏除声色，禁绝嗜欲，保养身体和性情，对各种事情都不要急噪，而要静观，以等待阴阳消长的结果。
English: A gentleman should have a neat mind and body, his residence should be deep, his mind and body should be quiet, his voice and color should be screened, his desires should be restrained, his body and disposition should be maintained, and he should not rush into all kinds of things, but should wait for the results of yin and yang.

古文：芸始生，荔挺出，蚯蚓结，麋角解，水泉动。
现代文：这个月，芸草开始萌生，荔蒲挺挺而出，蚯蚓屈曲面动，麇鹿犄角坠落，水泉开始涌动。
English: This month, the rushes began to sprout, the linden trees stood up, the elm trees bent and moved, the elk's antlers fell, and the springs began to gush.

古文：日短至，则伐林木，取竹箭。
现代文：冬至的时候，可以砍伐林木，割取竹子。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, trees can be felled and bamboo can be cut.

古文：是月也，可以罢官之无事者，去器之无用者，涂阙庭门闾，筑囹圄，此所以助天地之闭藏也。
现代文：这个月，可以罢免无事可作的官吏，可以除去没有用处的器物。涂塞宫廷的门户，修筑牢狱，这些都是帮助上天闭藏的措施。
English: This month, officials who have nothing to do can be dismissed, useless utensils can be removed, the gates of the court can be blocked, and prisons can be built, all of which are measures to help the heavens close.

古文：仲冬行夏令，则其国乃旱，氛雾冥冥，雷乃发声；行秋令，则天时雨汁，瓜瓠不成，国有大兵；行春令，则虫螟为败，水泉减竭，民多疾疠。
现代文：仲冬实行应在夏天实行的政令，那幺，国家就会出现干旱，雾气就会弥漫，雷声就会震动。如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，雨雪就会时时相杂而落，瓜果就不能成熟，国家就有大兵侵扰；如果实行应在春天实行的政令，耶么，虫螟就会成灾，水泉就会衰减枯竭，百姓中就会流行疫病。
English: If, in the middle of winter, a decree is issued that should have been issued in the summer, then the country will experience drought, fog, and thunder. If a decree is issued that should have been issued in the fall, then rain and snow will fall intermittently, melons and fruits will not ripen, and the country will be invaded by soldiers. If a decree is issued that should have been issued in the spring, then the country will be plagued by insects, springs will be depleted, and epidemics will spread among the people.

古文：二曰：至忠逆于耳，倒于心，非贤主其孰能听之？
现代文：至忠至忠之言不顺耳，逆人心，如果不是贤明的君主，谁能听取它？
English: The words of the Most Faithful, the Most Faithful, fall on deaf ears and are contrary to the will of the people. Who can listen to them but a wise monarch?

古文：故贤主之所说，不肖主之所诛也。
现代文：因此，贤明的君主喜欢的，正是不肖的君主要惩罚的。
English: Therefore, the wise prince delights in the very things that the wicked prince punishes.

古文：人主无不恶暴劫者，而日致之，恶之何益？
现代文：君主无一不痛恨侵暴劫夺的行径，然而自己的所作所为却在天天招致它，痛恨它又有什么益处？
English: All monarchs abhor violence and plunder, yet their own actions invite it on a daily basis. What good does it do to abhor it?

古文：今有树于此，而欲其美也，人时灌之，则恶之，而日伐其根，则必无活树矣。
现代文：假如这里有棵树，希望它生长茂盛，可是别人按时浇灌它，自己却讨厌别人的行为，并且每天砍伐树根，照这样做，肯定不会有活树了。
English: If there is a tree here and you want it to grow well, but someone else waters it regularly, but you hate the actions of others and cut the roots of the tree every day, then there will definitely be no living tree.

古文：夫恶闻忠言，乃自伐之精者也。
现代文：厌恶听取忠言，正是最严重的一种自我毁灭的行为。
English: The aversion to listening to good advice is one of the most serious forms of self-destruction.

古文：荆庄王猎于云梦，射随兕，中之。申公子培劫王而夺之。
现代文：楚庄王在云梦泽打猎，射中了一只随兕，申公子培抢在王之前把随兕夺走了。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang was hunting in Yunmenze and shot an attendant pheasant. Shen Gongzi Pei robbed the attendant pheasant before the king.

古文：王曰： 何其暴而不敬也？ 
现代文：楚庄王说： 怎么这样地犯上不敬啊！ 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang said, "How dare you disrespect me like this!

古文：命吏诛之。
现代文：命令官吏杀掉子培。
English: He ordered officials to kill Zi Pei.

古文：左右大夫皆进谏曰： 子培，贤者也，又为王百倍之臣，此必有故，愿察之也。 
现代文：左右大夫都上前劝谏说： 子培是个贤人，又是您最有才能的臣子，这里面必有缘故，希望您能仔细了解这件事。 
English: Doctors on both sides came forward to persuade him, saying, "Zo Pei is a wise man and your most talented vassal. There must be a reason for this. I hope you can understand this matter carefully."

古文：不出三月，子培疾而死。
现代文：不到三个月，子培生病而死。
English: Less than three months later, Zopei fell ill and died.

古文：荆兴师，战于两棠，大胜晋，归而赏有功者。
现代文：后来楚国起兵，与晋国军队在两棠交战，大胜晋军，回国之后奖赏有功将士。
English: Later, the Chu state raised an army and fought with the Jin army in the Two Tongs, defeating the Jin army, and rewarding the meritorious soldiers after returning to China.

古文：申公子培之弟进请赏于吏曰： 人之有功也于军旅，臣兄之有功也于车下。 
现代文：申公子培的兄弟上前向主管官吏请赏说： 别人在行军打仗中有功，我的兄长在大王的车下有功。 
English: Shen Gongzibei's brother came forward to ask the officials in charge to reward him, saying: Others have made contributions in marching and fighting, but my brother has made contributions under the great king's chariot.

古文：王曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：庄王问； 你说的是什么意思？ 
English: Zhuang Wang asked, "What do you mean?

古文：对曰： 臣之兄犯暴不敬之名，触死亡之罪于王之侧，其愚心将以忠于君王之身，而持千岁之寿也。
现代文：回答说： 我的兄长在大王您的身旁冒着犯上不敬的恶名，遭获死罪，但他本心是要投效忠君王，让您享有千岁之寿啊！
English: He replied, "My brother was sentenced to death for committing the crime of lèse-majesté in your presence, but his real intention was to pledge his allegiance to the king and grant you a thousand years of life."

古文：臣之兄尝读故记曰: 杀随兕者，不出三月。 
现代文：我的兄长曾读古书，古书记载遣。 杀死随兕的人不出三个月必死。 
English: My brother used to read ancient books, and the ancient scribes used to say that anyone who killed a henchman would die within three months.

古文：是以臣之兄惊惧而争之，故伏其罪而死。 
现代文：因此我的兄长见到您射杀随兕，十分惊恐，因而抢在您之前把它夺走，所以后来遭其祸殃而死。 
English: My brother, therefore, when he saw you shoot the attendant pheasant, was so alarmed that he snatched it from you before you could, and was killed by it.

古文：王令人发平府而视之，于故记果有，乃厚赏之。
现代文：庄王让人打开平府查阅古籍，在古书上果然有这样的记载，于是厚赏了子培的兄弟。
English: Zhuang Wang asked people to open Pingfu to consult ancient books, and there was indeed such a record in the ancient books, so he highly appreciated Zibei's brother.

古文：申公子培，其忠也可谓穆行矣。穆行之意，人知之不为劝，人不知不为沮，行无高乎此矣。
现代文：申公子培的忠诚可称得上是 穆行 了。 穆行 的含义是：不因为别人了解自己就受到鼓劢，也不因为别人不了解自己就感到沮丧，德行没有比这更高尚的了。
English: Shen Gongzibo's loyalty can be said to be Mu Xingmao. Mu Xingmao means: It is not because others understand oneself that one is encouraged, nor is it because others do not understand oneself that one is frustrated. There is no higher virtue than this.

古文：齐王疾痏，使人之宋迎文挚，文挚至，视王之疾，谓太子曰： 王之疾必可已也。
现代文：齐王长了恶疮绝，派人到朱国接文挚文挚到了，察看了齐王的病，对太子说； 大王的病肯定可以治愈。
English: King Qi had a bad wound and died. He sent someone to Zhu Province to receive the letter. The letter arrived, examined King Qi's illness, and told the prince that the great king's illness could definitely be cured.

古文：虽然，王之疾已，则必杀挚也。 
现代文：虽然如此，大王的病一旦痊愈，一定会杀死我。 
English: Nevertheless, the illness of the great king, once cured, will surely kill me.

古文：太子曰： 何故？ 
现代文：太子说： 什么原因呢？ 
English: The prince said: What is the reason?

古文：文挚对曰： 非怒王则疾不可治，怒王则挚必死。 
现代文：文挚回答说： 如果不激怒大王，大王的病就冶不好，但如果大王真的被激怒了，那我就必死无疑。 
English: Wen earnestly replied, "If I don't anger the great king, the great king's illness will be cured, but if the great king is really angered, then I will surely die."

古文：太子顿首强请曰： 苟已王之疾，臣与臣之母以死争之于王。王必幸臣与臣之母，愿先生之勿患也。 文挚曰： 诺。
现代文：太子叩头下拜，极力请求说： 如果治好父王的病而父王真的要杀先生的话，我和我的母亲一以死向父王为您争辩，父王一定哀怜我和我的母亲，望先生不要担忧。 文挚说： 好吧。
English: The prince bowed down and begged earnestly, "If you cure my father's illness and my father really wants to kill me, my mother and I will fight to the death for you. My father will surely pity me and my mother. Don't worry, Mr. Wang." Wen earnestly said, "Okay."

古文：请以死为王。 
现代文：我愿拼着一死为大王治病。 
English: I would fight to the death to cure the great king.

古文：与太子期，而将往不当者三，齐王固已怒矣。
现代文：文垫跟太子约定了看病的日期，三次都不如期前往。齐王本来已经动怒了。
English: Wen Mat and the prince agreed on a date to see a doctor, but they did not go three times. King Qi was already angry.

古文：文挚至，不解屦登床，履王衣，问王之疾，王怒而不与言。
现代文：文挚来了之后，不脱鞋就登上了齐壬的床，踩着齐王的衣服，询问齐王的病情，齐王恼怒，不跟他说话。
English: After Wenxin arrived, he climbed onto Qiren's bed without taking off his shoes, stepped on King Qi's clothes, and inquired about King Qi's condition. King Qi was angry and would not talk to him.

古文：文挚因出辞以重怒王，王叱而起，疾乃遂已。
现代文：文挚于是口出不逊之辞激怒齐王。齐王大声呵斥着站了起来，病于是就好了。
English: Wenxin then said some harsh words, which enraged King Qi. King Qi stood up and shouted loudly, and his illness was cured.

古文：王大怒不说，将生烹文挚。
现代文：齐王大恐不消，要把文挚栝活煮死。
English: King Qi was so afraid that he wanted to boil Wenxin alive.

古文：太子与王后急争之，而不能得，果以鼎生烹文挚。
现代文：太子和王后为文挚激烈地与齐王争辩，但却未能改变齐王的决定。
English: The prince and the queen had a heated argument with King Qi over Wen, but they were unable to change King Qi's decision.

古文：爨之三日三夜，颜色不变。
现代文：齐王终于用邪把文挚活活地煮了。文挚被煮了三天三夜，容貌不毁。
English: King Qi finally boiled Wenzhong alive with a pickaxe. Wenzhong was boiled for three days and three nights, and his appearance was not ruined.

古文：文挚曰： 诚欲杀我，则胡不覆之，以绝阴阳之气？ 
现代文：文垫说； 真的要杀我，为什么不盖上盖，隔断阴阳之气？ 
English: The writing pad said, "If you really want to kill me, why don't you cover it up and cut off the yin and yang?"

古文：王使覆之，文挚乃死。
现代文：齐壬让人把鼎盖上，文挚才死。
English: Qiren let people put the lid on, Wen Wei only died.

古文：夫忠于治世易，忠于浊世难。
现代文：由此看来，在太平盛世做到忠容易，在乱世做到忠很难。
English: From this perspective, it is easy to be loyal in times of peace and prosperity, but it is difficult to be loyal in times of turmoil.

古文：文挚非不知活王之疾而身获死也，为太子行难，以成其义也。
现代文：文挚衄不是不知道治愈齐王的病自己就得被杀，他是为了太子去做招致杀身的事，以便成全本子的孝敬之义啊。
English: It was not because he did not know that he would have to be killed if he did not cure King Qi's illness, but he did it for the sake of the prince in order to fulfill his duty of filial piety.

古文：三曰：士议之不可辱者，大之也。
现代文：忠廉士的名节不可受到屈辱，这是由于士十分珍视名节。
English: The name day of the loyal and incorruptible must not be humiliated. This is because the loyal and incorruptible highly cherish the name day.

古文：大之则尊于富贵也，利不足以虞其意矣。
现代文：珍视名节，就会把它看得比富贵还尊贵，私利就不足以使士的心情快乐了。
English: If you cherish the famous festival, you will see it as more precious than wealth. Self-interest is not enough to make you happy.

古文：虽名为诸侯，实有万乘，不足以挺其心矣。
现代文：即使名列诸侯，拥有万辆兵车，也不足以使士的心志动摇了。
English: Even if he was ranked as a feudal lord and owned ten thousand chariots, it was not enough to shake the soldiers' spirit.

古文：诚辱则无为乐生。
现代文：假如受到羞辱，就不愿再活下去。
English: If you are humiliated, you don't want to live anymore.

古文：若此人也，有势则必不自私矣，处官则必不为污矣，将众则必不挠北矣。
现代文：像这样的人，有权势一定不会自私自利，居官一定不会贪赃枉法，率领军队一定不会屈服败逃。
English: Like such a person, the powerful must not be self-serving, the officials must not be corrupt, and the leaders of the army must not succumb to defeat.

古文：忠臣亦然。
现代文：忠臣也是这样。
English: The same is true for loyal retainers.

古文：苟便于主利于国，无敢辞违，杀身出生以徇之。
现代文：只要有利于君主、有利于国家的事，决不会推辞不干，一定杀身舍生为君为国献身。
English: As long as it is beneficial to the monarch and the country, they will never refuse to do it, and they will surely sacrifice their lives for the sake of the country.

古文：国有士若此，则可谓有人矣。
现代文：国家如有这样的士，就可以称得上有人了。
English: If a country has such a taxi, it can be said to have someone.

古文：若此人者固难得，其患虽得之有不智。
现代文：像这样的人本来就很难得到，国家之患在于即使遇到了达种人，君主又不了解他们。
English: People like that are hard to come by, and the trouble with the country is that even if you do meet them, the monarch doesn't know them.

古文：吴王欲杀王子庆忌而莫之能杀，吴王患之。
现代文：吴王想要杀掉王子庆忌，但是没有谁能杀死他，吴王很忧虑这件事。
English: King Wu wanted to kill Prince Qingyi, but no one could kill him. King Wu was very worried about this.

古文：要离曰: 臣能之。 
现代文：要离说； 我能够杀死王子庆忌。 
English: Needless to say; I was able to kill Prince Yingying.

古文：吴王曰： 汝恶能乎？
现代文：吴壬说： 你怎么能行呢？
English: Wu Ren said, "How can you do that?

古文：吾尝以六马逐之江上矣，而不能及；射之矢，左右满把，而不能中。
现代文：我曾经乘六匹马驾的车追赶他，一直追到江边，却赶不上他，用箭射他，他左右手各接了满把的箭，却射不中他。
English: I once chased him in a chariot drawn by six horses all the way to the river's edge, but I couldn't catch up with him. I shot him with arrows, and he caught a handful of arrows in each of his right and left hands, but I couldn't hit him.

古文：今汝拔剑则不能举臂，上车则不能登轼，汝恶能？ 
现代文：而今你拔剑在手却举不起手臂，登上车子却无法凭倚车轼，你怎么能行？ 
English: And now you draw your sword in your hand but can't lift your arm, get on the car but can't lean on the handlebars, how can you do it?

古文：要离曰： 士患不勇耳，奚患于不能？
现代文：要离说： 士只担忧自己不够勇敢罢了，哪里用得着担忧事情做不成？
English: It's not enough to say, "I'm just worried that I'm not brave enough," where is the need to worry about not being able to do something?

古文：王诚能助，臣请必能。 吴王曰： 诺。 
现代文：大王假如能够相助，我一定能够成功。 吴王说； 好吧。 
English: If the great king can help me, I will definitely succeed.Wu Wang said; All right.

古文：明旦加要离罪焉，挚执妻子，焚之而扬其灰。
现代文：第二天，吴王假装将要离治罪，拘捕了要离的妻子和孩子，处死了他们，并烧了尸体，扬散了骨获。
English: The next day, King Wu pretended that he was going to commit the crime of separation, arrested his wife and children who wanted to leave, executed them, and burned the bodies and scattered the bones.

古文：要离走，往见王子庆忌于卫。
现代文：要离逃跑了，跑到卫国去见王子庆忌。
English: He was about to run away, so he ran to the old country to see the prince and celebrate his death.

古文：王子庆忌喜曰： 吴王之无道也，子之所见也，诸侯之所知也。
现代文：王子庆忌高兴地说： 吴王暴虐无道是你亲眼所见，是诸侯所共知的。
English: Prince Qingyi said happily, "You have seen with your own eyes that King Wu is cruel and ruthless, and it is common knowledge among the princes.

古文：今子得免而去之，亦善矣。 
现代文：如今你得以幸免离开了他，也算幸运了。 
English: Now you are lucky to have escaped him.

古文：要离与王子庆忌居有间，谓王子庆忌曰： 吴之无道也愈甚，请与王子往夺之国。 王子庆忌曰： 善。 
现代文：要离和王子庆忌住了不长一段时间，就对王子庆忌说。 吴王暴虐无道越发厉害了，我愿跟随您去把国家从他手里夺过来。 王子庆忌说： 好。 
English: If she did not want to be separated from Prince Qingyi for a long time, she should say to Prince Qingyi, "Wu Wang's tyranny is getting worse and worse, and I would like to follow you to take the country away from him." Prince Qingyi said, "Good."

古文：乃与要离俱涉于江。
现代文：于是和要离一起渡江。
English: So they crossed the river together.

古文：中江，拔剑以刺王子庆忌。
现代文：行至江水中流，要离拔剑刺中王子庆忌。
English: If you go to the middle of the river, you should not pull out your sword to stab the prince.

古文：王子庆忌捽之，投之于江，浮则又取而投之，如此者三。
现代文：王子庆忌揪住要离的头发，把他投入江中，等他浮出水面，就又把他抓起来投入扛中，像这样重复了三次。
English: Prince Qingyi grabbed hold of the hair to be released, threw it into the river, and when it surfaced, he grabbed it again and threw it into the basket, and repeated this three times.

古文：其卒曰: 汝天下之国士也，幸汝以成而名。 
现代文：王子庆忌最后说： 你是天下的国土，饶你一死，让你成名。 
English: Prince Qingyi finally said: You are the land of the world, spare your life, let you become famous.

古文：要离得不死，归于吴。
现代文：要离得以不死，回到吴国。
English: If you want to be immortal, go back to Wu.

古文：吴王大说，请与分国。
现代文：吴王非常高兴，愿意与他分享国家。
English: King Wu was very happy and willing to share the country with him.

古文：要离曰： 不可。
现代文：要离说， 不行。
English: To put it bluntly, no.

古文：臣请必死！ 
现代文：我决心一死。 
English: I was determined to die.

古文：吴王止之，要离曰： 夫杀妻子，焚之而扬其灰，以便事也，臣以为不仁。
现代文：吴王劝阻他，要离说。 我让您杀死我的妻子和孩子，并烧了他们的尸体，扬散了骨灰，为的是有利于事业，但我认为这是我的不仁。
English: I let you kill my wife and children, and burn their bodies and scatter their ashes to benefit the cause, but I think this is my unkindness.

古文：夫为故主杀新主，臣以为不义。
现代文：为原先的主人杀死新的主人，我认为这是我的不义。
English: I think it is my injustice to kill the new owner for the former owner.

古文：夫捽而浮乎江，三入三出，特王子庆忌为之赐而不杀耳，臣已为辱矣。
现代文：王子庆忌揪住我的头发把我投入江中，我三次被投入水里，三次又浮出，我之所以还活着，只不过是王子庆忌对我开恩不杀拉罢了，我已经受到屈辱了。
English: Prince Qingyi grabbed me by my hair and threw me into the river. I was thrown into the water three times and came up again three times. The only reason I'm still alive is because Prince Qingyi was kind to me. I've been humiliated.

古文：夫不仁不义，又且已辱，不可以生。 
现代文：作为士，不仁不义，而且又已受辱。决不可再活在世上。 
English: As a priest, he has not only been unkind and unjust, but he has also been humiliated. He must never live in this world again.

古文：吴王不能止，果伏剑而死。
现代文：吴王劝止不住，要离最终还是用剑自杀了。
English: Wu Wang could not be dissuaded and eventually committed suicide with a sword.

古文：要离可谓不为赏动矣，故临大利而不易其义；可谓廉矣，廉，故不以贵富而忘其辱。
现代文：要离可称得上不为赏赐所动了，所以面对大利而不改变他的气节，要离可称得上廉洁了，正因为廉洁，所以不因富贵而忘记自己的耻辱。
English: It is to be called incorruptible, so as not to be moved by a reward, so as not to change one's temperament in the face of adversity; it is to be called incorruptible, so as not to forget one's humiliation because of one's wealth.

古文：卫懿公有臣曰弘演，有所于使。
现代文：卫懿公有个巨子叫弘演，受命出使国外。
English: The Duke of Wei and Yan had a giant named Hongxuan, who was ordered to be sent abroad.

古文：翟人攻卫，其民曰： 君之所予位禄者，鹤也；所贵富者，宫人也。君使宫人与鹤战，余焉能战？ 
现代文：这时，狄人进攻卫国，卫国的百姓说： 国君给予官位俸禄人是鹤，赐予富贵的是官中的侍从，国君还是让宫中的恃从和鹤去迎战吧，我们怎么能迎战？ 
English: At this time, the Di people attacked the defense of the country, and the people of the defense of the country said: It is the crane that gives the official position to the national ruler, and it is the servant of the official that is given to the rich and noble. The national ruler should let the eagle in the palace go to war with the crane. How can we go to war?

古文：遂溃而去。
现代文：于是溃散而去。
English: So they scattered and went away.

古文：翟人至，及懿公于荣泽，杀之，尽食其肉，独舍其肝。
现代文：狄人到了，在荧泽赶上了懿公，把他杀了，吃光了他的肉，只把他的肝扔在一旁。
English: When Di arrived, he caught up with Xing Gong in Huuzhe, killed him, ate all his meat, and only threw his liver aside.

古文：弘演至，报使于肝，毕，呼天而啼，尽哀而止，曰： 臣请为襮。 
现代文：弘演归来，向懿公的肝复命。复命完毕，他一边呼叫着上天一边痛哭，表达尽哀痛之后才停下来，说： 我愿给君作躯壳。 
English: When the performance was over, he cried out to the heavens and wept bitterly, expressing his sorrow before stopping and saying, "I would like to make a body for you."

古文：因自杀，先出其腹实，内懿公之肝。
现代文：于是剖腹自杀，先把自己腹中的内脏取出来，再把懿公的肝放入腹中，而后就死了。
English: So he committed suicide by caesarean section. First, he took out his own internal organs, then he put the lizard's liver into his stomach, and then he died.

古文：桓公闻之曰： 卫之亡也，以为无道也。今有臣若此，不可不存。 
现代文：齐桓公听到这作事说： 卫国灭亡一是因为卫君荒淫无道，而今有像弘演这样的臣子，不可不让卫国生存。 
English: Upon hearing this, Prince Qi Kuan said, "The fall of the old country was due to the immorality of Emperor Wei. Now that there is a vassal like Hongyan, it is imperative that the old country be allowed to survive."

古文：于是复立卫于楚丘。
现代文：于是在楚丘重建卫国。
English: So the defense of the country was re-established in Chuqiu.

古文：弘演可谓忠矣，杀身出生以徇其君。
现代文：弘演可称得上忠了，杀身舍生为他的国君而死。
English: He was so loyal that he gave up his life to die for his country.

古文：非徒徇其君也，又令卫之宗庙复立，祭祀不绝，可谓有功矣。
现代文：他不只为国君而死，又使卫国的宗庙得以重建，祭祀不断，真可称得上是有功了。
English: Not only did he die for the sovereign, but he also made it possible to rebuild the patriarchal temple for the defense of the country, and the sacrifices continued, which can truly be called a great achievement.

古文：四曰：辨而不当论，信而不当理，勇而不当义，法而不当务，惑而乘骥也，狂而操吴干将也，大乱天下者，必此四者也。
现代文：当务辩说而不合道理，诚实而不合理义，勇敢而不合正义，守法而不合时务，这就像人精神迷乱却乘着快马一样，像人神志颠狂却握着利剑一样，大乱天下的，一定是以上四种行为。
English: To argue but not to reason, to be honest but not to be reasonable, to be brave but not to be just, to be law-abiding but not to be up-to-the-minute, these are like a man who is mentally deranged but rides a fast horse, like a man who is mentally deranged but holds a sharp sword, the world is in chaos, it must be the above four behaviors.

古文：所贵辨者，为其由所论也；所贵信者，为其遵所理也；所贵勇者，为其行义也；所贵法者，为其当务也。跖之徒问于跖曰: 盗有道乎？ 
现代文：辩说之可贵在于它遵从道理，诚实之可贵在于它遵循理义，勇敢之可贵在于它伸张正义，守法之可贵在于它合于时务。跖的徒党问跖说； 强盗有道义吗？ 
English: Argument is valuable in that it obeys reason, honesty is valuable in that it obeys reason, courage is valuable in that it does justice, and lawfulness is valuable in that it is up to date.

古文：跖曰： 奚啻其有道也？
现代文：跖说： 何只是有道义啊！
English: Zou said, "What's the use of being moral?

古文：夫妄意关内，中藏，圣也；入先，勇也；出后，义也；知时，智也；分均，仁也。
现代文：猜测室内所藏之物而能猜中就是圣，带头进去就是勇，最后离去就是义，懂得时机就是智，分利均匀就是仁。
English: If you can guess what is hidden in the room and get it right, you are a saint. If you are the first to enter, you are brave. If you are the last to leave, you are righteous. If you know the right time, you are wise. If you divide the profits evenly, you are benevolent.

古文：不通此五者而能成大盗者，天下无有。 
现代文：不通晓这五点而能成为大盗的，天下没有。 
English: There is no one in the world who does not understand these five points and can become a great thief.

古文：备说非六王、五伯，以为尧有不慈之名，舜有不孝之行，禹有淫湎之意，汤、武有放杀之事，五伯有暴乱之谋。
现代文：跖以辩说非难六王五霸，认为尧有不慈的名声，舜有不孝的行为，禹有沉湎于酒的意愿，商汤、武王有放逐，杀死他们君主的罪行，五霸有侵暴必乱的图谋。
English: He accused the six kings and five overlords with arguments, arguing that he had a reputation for being uncharitable, he had unfilial behavior, he had a desire to indulge in wine, Shang Tang and King Wu had the crime of expelling and killing their monarchs, and the five overlords had a plan of violence and chaos.

古文：世皆誉之，人皆讳之，惑也。
现代文：然而世世代代都赞誉他们，人们都回避不谈他们的罪恶，真是糊涂。
English: Yet generation after generation has praised them, and men have shunned to speak of their crimes.

古文：故死而操金椎以葬，曰： 下见六王、五伯，将毃其头矣！ 
现代文：所以跖吩咐自己死后要持金锤下葬，他说； 下到黄泉，见到六王，五霸，要击碎他们的头。 
English: So he told himself that when he died, he would be buried with a golden hammer, he said; he would go down to the underworld and find six kings and five emperors, and he would smash their heads.

古文：辨若此不如无辨。
现代文：辩说要像这样不如没有。
English: Argue that it's better this way.

古文：楚有直躬者，其父窃羊而谒之上。
现代文：楚国有个 直道立身的人，他的父亲偷了羊，他向官府告发了这事。
English: There was a righteous man in the state of Chu whose father had stolen a sheep, and he reported the matter to the government.

古文：上执而将诛之。
现代文：官府抓住了他的父亲，将要处死。
English: The authorities have arrested his father, who is about to be executed.

古文：直躬者请代之。
现代文：这个以直道立身的人请求代父受刑。
English: The upright man asked his father to take his place.

古文：将诛矣，告吏曰： 父窃羊而谒之，不亦信乎？
现代文：将要行刑的时候，他告诉官吏说； 父亲偷羊而告发达件事，这样的人不是很诚实吗？
English: When he was about to be executed, he told the officials that his father had stolen a sheep and reported it to the authorities. Wasn't such a man honest?

古文：父诛而代之，不亦孝乎？
现代文：父亲受罚而代他受刑，这样的人不是很孝顺吗？
English: Isn't such a person very filial when his father is punished and he takes the punishment in his place?

古文：信且孝而诛之，国将有不诛者乎？ 
现代文：又诚实又孝顺的人都要杀掉，那么国家将还有不遭刑罚的人吗？ 
English: If everyone who is honest and dutiful is killed, will the country still have people who will not be punished?

古文：荆王闻之，乃不诛也。
现代文：楚王听说了这番话，就不杀他了。
English: When King Chu heard this, he did not kill him.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 异哉！直躬之为信也。一父而载取名焉。 故直躬之信不若无信。
现代文：孔子闻知这件事说； 这个人的所谓诚实太怪了，利用一个父亲却两次为自己捞取名声， 所以像 直躬 这样的诚实不如没有。
English: Confucius heard about this and said, "This man's so-called honesty is so strange, using a father to make a name for himself twice, so it's better not to be as honest as Zhiming."

古文：齐之好勇者，其一人居东郭，其一人居西郭。
现代文：齐国有两个好夸耀自己勇敢的人，一人住在城东，另一人住在城西。
English: There are two people in Qi who boast of their bravery. One lives in the east of the city and the other in the west.

古文：卒然相遇于涂，曰： 姑相饮乎？ 
现代文：一天，他们在路上意外地相遇了，彼此说： 姑且一起钦几杯吧？ 
English: One day, they met unexpectedly on the road and said to each other: Let's have a few drinks together.

古文：觞数行，曰： 姑求肉乎？ 
现代文：斟过几遍酒，一个说： 还是弄点肉吧？ 
English: After weighing the wine several times, one of them said, "Shall we make some meat?"

古文：一人曰： 子，肉也；我，肉也；尚胡革求肉而为？
现代文：另一人说： 你身上有的是肉，我身上也有的是肉，何必另去弄肉呢？
English: And another said, You have much flesh, and I have much flesh; why do you look for more?

古文：于是具染而已。 
现代文：在这儿准备下一点豉酱就够了！ 
English: It's enough to prepare a little dipping sauce here!

古文：因抽刀而相啖，至死而止。勇若此不若无勇。
现代文：于是两人拔出刀割下身上的肉对吃起来，一直到死。勇敢要像这样不如没有。
English: So the two of them pulled out their knives, cut the flesh off their bodies, and ate it until they died. It's better to be brave than not.

古文：纣之同母三人，其长曰微子启，其次曰中衍，其次曰受德。
现代文：商纣的同母兄弟共三人，长兄叫微子启，老二叫中衍，老三叫受德。
English: There are a total of three brothers of the same mother, the eldest brother is called Weiziqi, the second is called Zhongyan, and the third is called Jude.

古文：受德乃纣也，甚少矣。
现代文：受德就是纣，年龄最小。
English: Zhu De is the youngest.

古文：纣母之生微之启与中衍也，尚为妾，已而为妻而生纣。
现代文：纣的母亲生微子启和中衍的时侯还是妾，后来成为正妻而生下纣。
English: Yao's mother was a concubine when she gave birth to Yu Ziqi and Zhong Yan, and later became a legal wife and gave birth to Yao.

古文：纣之父、纣之母欲置微子启以为太子，太史据法而争之曰： 有妻之子，而不可置妾之子。 
现代文：纣的父母想要立微子启为太子，太史依据法典为此事争辩说： 有正妻的儿子在，就不可立妾的儿于作太子。 
English: Yao's parents wanted to make their daughter the crown prince, but Taishi argued the matter on the basis of the legal code: If there is a son of a legitimate wife, the son of a concubine should not be made the crown prince.

古文：纣故为后。
现代文：纣因此成为王位的继承人。
English: He thus became the heir to the throne.

古文：用法若此，不若无法。
现代文：用法要像这样，不如没有法。
English: Usage like this is better than no usage at all.

古文：五曰：智所以相过，以其长见与短见也。
现代文：长见人们的智力之所以彼此有差异，是由于有的人具有远见，有的人目光短浅。
English: The reason why the intelligence of long-sighted people differs from each other is that some people have foresight, while others are short-sighted.

古文：今之于古也，犹古之于后世也；今之于后世，亦犹今之于古也。
现代文：今天跟古代的关系，就像是古代跟将来的关系一样，今天跟将来的关系，也就像是今天跟古代的关系一样。
English: The relationship between today and antiquity is like the relationship between antiquity and the future, and the relationship between today and the future is like the relationship between today and antiquity.

古文：故审知今则可知古，知古则可知后，古今前后一也。故圣人上知千岁，下知千岁也。
现代文：所以，清楚地了解今天，就可以知道古代，知道古代就可以知道将来。古今前后是一脉相承的，所以圣人够上知千年，下知千年。
English: Therefore, if you have a clear understanding of today, you can know the ancient times, and if you know the ancient times, you can know the future.

古文：荆文王曰: 苋譆数犯我以义，违我以礼，与处则不安，旷之而不穀得焉。
现代文：楚文王说： 苋嘻多次据义冒犯我，据礼拂逆我的心意，跟他在一起就感到不安，但久而久之，我执中有所得。
English: Chu Wen Wang said, "Ying He has offended me many times. He has gone against my wishes. I feel uneasy when I am with him, but over time, I have gained something from my attachment.

古文：不以吾身爵之，后世有圣人，将以非不穀。 
现代文：如果我不亲自授予他爵位，后代如有圣人，将要阻此责难我。 
English: If I do not give him a knighthood myself, future generations, if there are any saints, will blame me.

古文：于是爵之五大夫。 申侯伯善持养吾意，吾所欲则先我为之，与处则安，旷之而不穀丧焉。
现代文：于是授予他五大夫爵位。文王又说， 申侯伯善于把握并迎合我的心意，我想要什么，他就在我之前准备好什么，跟他在一起就感到安逸，久而久之，我从中有所失。
English: Then he awarded him the title of the Fifth Great Lady. King Wen also said, "Shen Hou Bo is good at grasping and catering to my heart's desire. Whatever I want, he has prepared before me. I feel at ease with him. Over time, I have lost something from it."

古文：不以吾身远之，后世有圣人，将以非不穀。 
现代文：如果我不疏远他，后代如有圣人，将要因此责难我。 
English: If I do not distance myself from him, future generations, if there are any saints, will blame me for it.

古文：于是送而行之。
现代文：于是送走了他。
English: So they sent him away.

古文：申侯伯如郑，阿郑君之心，先为其所欲，三年而知郑国之政也，五月而郑人杀之。
现代文：申侯伯到了郑国，曲从郑君的心意，事先准备好郑君想要的一切，经过三年就执掌了郑国的国政，但仅仅五个月郑人就把他杀了。
English: When Shen Houbo arrived in Zheng Guo, he followed Zheng Jun's wishes and prepared everything Zheng Jun wanted in advance. After three years, he took charge of Zheng Guo's state affairs, but Zheng Man killed him after only five months.

古文：是后世之圣人使文王为善于上世也。
现代文：这是后代的圣人使文王在前世做了好事。
English: This is a descendant of the sage who made King Wen do good deeds in his previous life.

古文：晋平公铸为大钟，使工听之，皆以为调矣。
现代文：晋平台铸成大钟，让乐工审听钟韵声音，乐工都认为钟声很和谐了。
English: Jin platform cast into a large bell, let the musicians listen to the bell rhyme sound, the musicians all think that the bell is very harmonious.

古文：师旷曰: 不调，请更铸之。 
现代文：师旷说： 钟声还不和谐，请重新铸造它。 
English: Shigeaki said, "The bell is out of tune, please recast it."

古文：平公曰： 工皆为调矣。 
现代文：平公说。 乐工都认为很和谐了。 
English: The musicians all think it's very harmonious.

古文：师旷曰： 后世有知音者，将知钟之不调也，臣窃为君耻之。 
现代文：师旷说； 后代如有精通音律的人，将会知道钟声是不和谐的。我私下为您因此而感到羞耻。 
English: Shigeaki said, "Future generations who are familiar with musical notation will know that the chimes are discordant. I am privately ashamed of you for this.

古文：至于师涓而果知钟之不调也。
现代文：到了后来，师涓果然指出钟声不和谐。
English: Later, Shizuka did indeed point out that the bells were not in harmony.

古文：是师旷欲善调钟，以为后世之知音者也。
现代文：由此看来，师旷想要使钟声更为和谐，是考虑到后代有精通音律的人啊！
English: From this point of view, Shiguaku wanted to make the bells more harmonious, taking into account that future generations will have people who are proficient in musical rhythms!

古文：吕太公望封于齐，周公旦封于鲁，二君者甚相善也。
现代文：太公望封在齐国，周公旦封在鲁国，两位君主十分友好。
English: Taigongwang was enthroned in Qi and Zhou Gongdan was enthroned in Lu. The two monarchs were very friendly.

古文：相谓曰： 何以治国？ 
现代文：他们在一起互相设论说； 靠什么治理国家？ 
English: Together they debate among themselves; on what basis should the country be governed?

古文：太公望曰： 尊贤上功。 
现代文：太公望说； 尊敬贤人，崇尚功绩。 
English: Taigongwang said, "Respect the wise, and worship merit."

古文：周公旦曰： 亲亲上恩。 
现代文：周公旦说： 亲近亲人，崇尚恩爱。 
English: Zhou Gongdan said, "Be close to your relatives, and advocate kindness and love."

古文：太公望曰： 鲁自此削矣。 
现代文：太公望说： 照这样，鲁国从此就要削弱了。 
English: Taigongwang said, "In this way, the Lu nation will be weakened from now on."

古文：周公旦曰： 鲁虽削，有齐者亦必非吕氏也。 
现代文：周公旦说： 鲁国虽然会削弱，但后世占有齐国的，也肯定不是吕氏了。 
English: Zhou Gongdan said: Although the Lu state will weaken, it is definitely not the Lv dynasty that will occupy the Qi state in the future.

古文：其后，齐日以大，至于霸，二十四世而田成子有齐国。
现代文：后来，齐国日益强大，以至于称霸诸侯，但传到二十四代就被田成子占据了。
English: Later, the state of Qi became more and more powerful, so much so that it dominated the feudal lords, but it was passed down to the twenty-fourth generation and was occupied by Tian Chengzi.

古文：鲁日以削，至于觐存，三十四世而亡。
现代文：鲁国也日益削弱，以至于仅能勉强维持生存，传到三十四代也灭亡了。
English: The state of Lu also weakened day by day, to the extent that it was only able to eke out an existence, and after thirty-four generations, it too perished.

古文：吴起治西河之外，王错谮之于魏武侯，武侯使人召之。
现代文：吴起治理西河，王错在魏武侯面前诋毁他，武侯派人把吴起召回。
English: Wu Qi governed the West River. Wang Er slandered him in front of Wei Wuhou. Wuhou sent someone to recall Wu Qi.

古文：吴起至于岸门，止车而望西河，泣数行而下。
现代文：吴起走到岸门，停下车，回头遥望西河眼泪一行行流了下来。
English: Wu Qi walked to the shore gate, stopped the car, and looked back at the West River. Tears streamed down.

古文：其仆谓吴起曰: 窃观公之意，视释天下若释躧，今去西河而泣，何也？ 
现代文：他的车夫对他说： 我私下观察您的心志，把舍弃天下看得就像扔掉鞋子一样。如今离开酉河，您却流了泪，这是什幺缘故啊？ 
English: His coachman said to him, "I have observed your will in private, and regard giving up the world as if you were throwing away your shoes. Now that you have left Luohe, you shed tears. What is the reason for this?

古文：吴起抿泣而应之曰: 子不识。
现代文：吴超擦去眼泪回答说； 你不知道。
English: Wu Chao wiped away tears and replied; You don't know.

古文：君知我而使我毕能，西河可以王。
现代文：如果君主了解信任我，使我尽自己所能，那么我凭着西河就可以帮助君主成就王业。
English: If the sovereign understands and trusts me to do my best, then I can help the sovereign achieve the royal cause by relying on the West River.

古文：今君听谗人之议而不知我，西河之为秦取不久矣，魏从此削矣。 
现代文：如今君主听信了小人的馋言，而不信任我，西河被秦国攻取的日子不会久了，魏国从此要削弱了。 
English: Now that the sovereign has listened to the rantings of the villain and does not trust me, the day when the West River is conquered by Qin will not be long in coming, and Wei will be weakened from now on.

古文：吴起果去魏入楚。
现代文：吴起最后离开魏国，去了楚国。
English: Wu Qi finally left Wei and went to Chu.

古文：有间，西河毕入秦，秦日益大。
现代文：不久，西河完垒被秦国吞并了，秦国日益强大。
English: Soon, the West River fortress was annexed by Qin, and Qin became increasingly powerful.

古文：此吴起之所先见而泣也。
现代文：这正是吴起所预见到并为之流泪的事。
English: This is exactly what Wu Qizhao foresaw and shed tears for.

古文：魏公叔痤疾，惠王往问之，曰： 公叔之疾，嗟！
现代文：魏相公叔座病了，惠王去探望他，说： 公叔您的病，唉！
English: Wei Xianggong's uncle was ill. Hui Wang went to visit him and said, "Uncle, your illness, alas!

古文：疾甚矣！
现代文：病得根沉重了，国家该怎么办呢？ 
English: The country is gravely ill. What should the country do?

古文：将奈社稷何？ 公叔对曰： 臣之御庶子鞅，愿王以国听之也。
现代文：公叔回答说， 我的家臣御庶子公孙鞅很有才能，希望大王您能把国政交给他治理。
English: My uncle replied, "My vassal, my son-in-law, Sun Quan, is very talented. I hope that Your Majesty will entrust him with the administration of state affairs."

古文：为不能听，勿使出境。 
现代文：如果不能任用他，不要让他离开魏国。 
English: If you can't appoint him, don't let him leave Wei.

古文：王不应，出而谓左右曰： 岂不悲哉？
现代文：惠王没有回答，出来对左右侍从说； 难道不可悲吗？
English: Hui Wang did not answer, but came out and said to the attendants on his right and left, "Isn't it sad?"

古文：以公叔之贤，而今谓寡人必以国听鞅，悖也夫！ 
现代文：凭公叔这样的贤明，而今竞叫找一定要把国政交蛤公孙鞅治理，太荒谬了！ 
English: It's ridiculous to rely on the wisdom of an uncle like him, and now we're competing to find a way to make sure that state affairs are managed by a grandson.

古文：公叔死，公孙鞅西游秦，秦孝公听之。
现代文：公叔死后，公孙鞅向西游说秦国，秦孝公听从了他的意见。
English: After the death of his uncle, his grandson Gongsun Qi lobbied the Qin state to the west, and Qin Xiaogong listened to his opinion.

古文：秦果用强，魏果用弱。
现代文：秦国果然因此强盛起来，魏国果然因此削弱下去。
English: As a result, the state of Qin flourished and the state of Wei was weakened.

古文：非公叔痤之悖也，魏王则悖也。
现代文：由此看来，并不是公叔座荒谬，而是惠王自己荒谬啊！
English: From this point of view, it is not Guncle that is absurd, but Hui Wang himself!

古文：夫悖者之患，固以不悖为悖。
现代文：大凡行事荒谬的人的弊病，必是把不荒谬当成荒谬。
English: The great vice of those who live absurdly is to think that what is not absurd is absurd.

