古文：王峻，字秀峰，相州安阳人也。
现代文：王峻，字秀峰，相州安阳人。
English: Wang Jun, also known as Xiufeng, was born in Anyang, Gansu Province.

古文：父丰，本郡乐营使。
现代文：父亲王丰，是该郡乐营使。
English: His father, Wang Feng, is the county's music camp envoy.

古文：峻幼慧黠善歌，梁贞明初，张筠镇相州，怜峻敏惠，遂畜之。
现代文：王峻自小聪明机灵，善于唱歌，后梁贞明初年，张筠镇守相州，喜爱王峻的聪惠，就收养他。
English: Wang Jun has been clever and witty since childhood, and is good at singing. After Liang Zhenming's first year, Zhang Ye, the town guard of Xiangzhou, loved Wang Jun's wisdom and adopted him.

古文：及庄宗入魏州，筠弃镇南渡，以峻自随。
现代文：到后唐庄宗攻入魏州，张筠放弃州城渡过黄河到南方，让王峻跟随自己。
English: After arriving, Tang Zhuangzong invaded Weizhou, Zhang Ye abandoned the state capital, crossed the Yellow River to the south, and let Wang Jun follow him.

古文：时租庸使赵岩访筠于其第，筠召峻声歌以侑酒，岩悦，筠因以赠之，颇得亲爱。
现代文：这时租庸使赵岩到张筠家拜访，张筠叫王峻唱歌以助酒兴，赵岩很高兴，张筠就将王峻送给他，很得赵岩喜爱。
English: At this time, Zhaoyong asked Zhao Yan to visit Zhang Ye's home. Zhang Ye asked Wang Jun to sing to help with the drinking. Zhao Yan was very happy. Zhang Ye gave Wang Jun to him, which made Zhao Yan very happy.

古文：梁亡，赵氏族灭，峻流落无依，寄食于符离陈氏之家，久之弥窘，乃事三司使张延朗，所给甚薄。
现代文：后梁灭亡，赵家灭族，王峻流落没有依靠，寄居在符离陈家，久后更加困窘，于是服事三司使张延朗，待遇很薄。
English: After Liang's death, Zhao's family was wiped out, and Wang Jun's family had no support. He lived as a guest in Fuye Chen's house, which became even more embarrassing after a long time. So he served Zhang Yanlang, the Third Division's envoy, with poor treatment.

古文：清泰末，延朗诛，汉祖尽得延朗之资产仆从，而峻在籍中，从历数镇，常为典客。
现代文：清泰末年，张延朗被杀，后汉高祖全部接受张延朗的资产和仆从，而王峻就在其中。
English: At the end of the Qing dynasty, Zhang Yanlang was killed, and the later Han emperors all accepted Zhang Yanlang's assets and servants, and Wang Jun was among them.

古文：汉祖践阼，授客省使，奉使荆南，留于襄、汉为监军，入为内客省使。
现代文：汉高祖即位，授与王峻客省使一职，奉命出使荆南，留在襄州、汉州做监军，又回朝廷做内客省使。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended the throne, he awarded Wang Jun the post of the guest provincial envoy to Xiamen. He was ordered to send an envoy to Jingnan, stay in Xiangzhou and Hanzhou to supervise the troops, and then return to the imperial court to be the guest provincial envoy.

古文：及赵思绾作乱于永兴，汉隐帝命郭从义讨之，以峻为兵马都监。
现代文：到赵思纟官在永兴作乱，汉隐帝派郭从义征讨他，以王峻担任兵马总监。
English: When Zhao Siyuan started a riot in Yongxing, Emperor Han Yan sent Guo Ziyi to recruit him, with Wang Jun as the commander-in-chief.

古文：从义与峻不协，甚如水火。
现代文：郭从义与王峻合不来，如水火不相容。
English: Guo Congyi and Wang Jun are incompatible, like fire and water.

古文：未几，改宣徽北院使。
现代文：不久，改任宣徽北院使。
English: Soon, he was reassigned as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：贼平，加检校太傅，转南院使。
现代文：贼寇平定后，加封检校太傅，改任南院使。
English: After the Thieves and Robbers were subdued, he was promoted to the post of the Southern Courier.

古文：太祖镇鄴，兼北面兵马，峻为监军，留驻鄴城。
现代文：后周太祖镇守邺都，兼统北面兵马，王峻任监军，留驻邺城。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu held the capital of Yunnan, and also commanded the soldiers and horses in the north. Wang Jun was in charge of supervising the troops and stayed in Yunnan.

古文：隐帝萧墙变起，峻亦为群小所构，举家见害。
现代文：汉隐帝祸起萧墙，王峻也被众多小人陷害，全家被杀。
English: The calamity of Emperor Han Yin caused the collapse of the wall, Wang Jun was also framed by many villains, and the whole family was killed.

古文：从太祖赴阙，绸缪帷幄，赞成大事，峻居首焉。
现代文：王峻跟从太祖进军京城，运筹帷幄，辅佐太祖成就帝王大业，王峻功居首位。
English: Wang Jun followed his great-great-grandfather to march into the capital city, planned operations, assisted his great-great-grandfather to achieve the emperor's great cause, and Wang Jun's achievements ranked first.

古文：京师平定，受汉太后令，充枢密使。
现代文：京师平定后，受汉太后指令，担任枢密使。
English: After the subjugation of Beijing, he was ordered by the Empress Dowager of the Han Dynasty to serve as a privy envoy.

古文：太祖北征，至澶州，为诸军拥迫，峻与王殷在京闻变，乃遣侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇往宋州，前申州刺史马铎往许州，以防他变，二州安然，亦峻之谋也。
现代文：太祖北征，到澶州，被各军迫胁拥立，王峻和王殷在京城听到兵变，就派侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇到宋州，派前申州刺史马铎到许州，以防备其他变乱，后来这两州安然无事，都是王峻的谋划。
English: Emperor Taizu led the Northern Expedition to Bozhou, and was coerced by various armies to stand up. When Wang Jun and Wang Yin heard of the mutiny in Beijing, they sent the guards to command the horse army to make Guo Chong go to Songzhou, and sent the former Shenzhou chief Sima Jun to Huzhou, in order to prevent other upheavals. Later, the two states were safe and sound, all of which were planned by Wang Jun.

古文：太祖践阼，加平章事，寻兼右仆射、门下侍郎平章事，监修国史。
现代文：周太祖登帝位后，加封平章事，接着兼任右仆射、门下侍郎平章事，监修国史。
English: After Zhou Taizhu ascended the throne, he was given the additional title of Ping Zhangji, and then concurrently served as the right-hand servant of Zhao, and the servant of Ping Zhangji, supervising the national history.

古文：时朝廷初建，四方多故，峻夙夜奉事，知无不为，每侍太祖商榷军事，未尝不移时而退，甚有裨益。
现代文：这时朝廷初建，四方多事，王峻日夜奉守职事，知道的事没有不做的，常随太祖商计军事，总是长久才退下，很有裨益。
English: At this time, the imperial court was just beginning to be built, and there were many things going on in the four directions. Wang Jun was on duty day and night, and there was nothing he did not know. He often followed his great-grandfather's military plans, and always waited a long time before stepping down, which was very beneficial.

古文：然为性轻躁，举措率易，以天下之事为己任，每有启请，多自任情。太祖从而顺之，则忻然而退；稍未允可，则应声而愠，不逊之语随事辄发。
现代文：但性情轻浮急躁，行为轻率，把天下的事当作自己的事，每有报告请示，总是任性而为，太祖听取而顺着他，就高兴地退下，稍不允许认可，就立即生气，不尊重的话就马上随口而出。
English: However, he has a flighty and impetuous temperament, acts rashly, treats the world's affairs as his own, and is always capricious whenever he is asked for a report. When the great-grandfather listened and followed him, he was happy to retreat. If he was not allowed to recognize him, he would immediately get angry. If he did not respect him, he would immediately blurt it out.

古文：太祖素知其为人，且以佐命之故，每优容之。
现代文：太祖一向知道他的为人，又因他有辅佐自己的大功，常常宽容原谅他。
English: The great-grandfather always knew him as a person, and because he had the great merit of supporting himself, he often forgave him.

古文：峻年长于太祖二岁，太祖虽登大位，时以兄呼之，有时呼表字，不忘布衣之契也。
现代文：王峻年纪比太祖大两岁，太祖虽然当了皇帝，然经常以大哥称呼王峻，有时只称呼他的字，不忘记布衣时的交情。
English: Wang Jun is two years older than his great-grandfather. Although the great-grandfather became the emperor, he often called Wang Jun as his elder brother, and sometimes only called him by his first name, not forgetting the friendship when he was clothed.

古文：峻以此益自负焉。
现代文：王峻因此而更加自负。
English: As a result, Wang Jun became even more conceited.

古文：广顺元年冬，刘崇与契丹围晋州，峻请行应援，太祖用为行营都部署，以徐州节度使王彦超为副。
现代文：广顺元年冬天，刘崇与契丹人包围晋州，王峻请求前去接应支援，太祖任他为行营都部署，以徐州节度使王彦超为副将。
English: In the winter of the first year of Guangshun, Liu Chong and the Khitan besieged Jinzhou, Wang Jun requested to go to receive support, the great ancestor assigned him to deploy the camp, and made Wang Yanchao the vice-general at the Xuzhou festival.

古文：诏诸军并取峻节度，许峻以便宜从事，军行资用仰给于官，随行将吏得自选择。
现代文：诏令各军都听从王峻指挥，允许王峻相机行事，军费由官府供给，随行将吏，可自行挑选。
English: The edict ordered all armies to obey Wang Jun's command, allowing Wang Jun's camera to act, military expenses to be provided by the government, and accompanying generals to be selected by themselves.

古文：将发之前，召宴于滋德殿，太祖出女乐以宠之。
现代文：出发前，在滋德殿设宴，太祖召来宫中女乐招待他。
English: Before departure, a banquet was held at the Zide Hall, and the great-grandfather invited the court's female musicians to entertain him.

古文：奉辞之日，恩赐优厚，不拘常制。
现代文：辞行那天，恩赐财物特别优厚，超出一般的规定。
English: On the day of resignation, the gifts and property were particularly generous, exceeding the general provisions.

古文：及发，太祖幸西庄，亲临宴饯，别赐御马玉带，执手而别。
现代文：出发时，太祖驾临西庄，亲自设宴送行，另赐给皇帝骑的御马以及玉带，握着他的手送别。
English: At the time of departure, the great-grandfather drove to Xizhuang, personally set up a banquet to see him off, and also gave the emperor a horse to ride and a jade belt, holding his hand to see him off.

古文：峻至陕驻留数夕，刘崇攻晋州甚急，太祖忧其不可支，议亲征，取泽州路入，与峻会合，先令谕峻。
现代文：王峻到陕州时停驻几天，刘崇进攻晋州更加猛烈，太祖担心晋州支撑不住，准备亲自征伐，从泽州路过，与王峻会合，先派人告诉王峻。
English: When Wang Jun arrived in Shaanxi, he stayed there for a few days. Liu Chong attacked Jinzhou even more fiercely. Taizu was worried that Jinzhou could not be held, and he prepared to attack in person. He passed by from Zezhou to meet with Wang Jun, and sent someone ahead to tell Wang Jun.

古文：峻遣驿骑驰奏，请车驾不行幸。时已降御札，行有日矣，会峻奏至，乃止。
现代文：王峻派使者飞马报告，请太祖不要亲征，这时已下发了诏令有几天了，王峻奏章来到，太祖才停止亲征行动。
English: Wang Jun sent an envoy to report to Pegasus, asking Taizu not to personally enlist. At this time, the imperial decree had already been issued. It was a few days later, when Wang Jun's report arrived, that Taizu stopped personally enlisting.

古文：峻军既过绛郡，距平阳一舍，贼军燔营，狼狈而遁。
现代文：王峻军队已过了绛都，离平阳三十里，敌军就烧掉营寨，狼狈而逃。
English: Wang Jun's army had already passed Shidu, thirty miles from Pingyang, the enemy army burned down the camp and fled in disarray.

古文：峻入晋州，或请追贼，必有大利，峻犹豫久之，翌日方遣骑军袭贼，信宿而还。
现代文：王峻进入晋州，有人请求追击逃敌，必获大胜，王峻犹豫好久，第二天才派骑兵追袭，一两天就回来了。
English: Wang Jun entered Jinzhou. Someone asked him to pursue the fleeing enemy, and he was sure to win a great victory. Wang Jun hesitated for a long time. The next day, he sent cavalry to pursue and returned in a day or two.

古文：向使峻极力追蹑，则并、汾之孽，无噍类矣。
现代文：假使王峻极力追击，则并州、汾州的残兵余孽，就没有活着生存下来的。
English: If Wang Jun had pursued them as hard as he could, then the remnants of the soldiers in Bozhou and Zhangzhou would not have survived.

古文：峻亦深耻无功，因计度增修平阳故城而回。
现代文：王峻也深深羞愧师出无功，就将平阳旧城增修一番便回来了。
English: Wang Jun was also deeply ashamed of his failure, so he repaired the old city of Pingyang and came back.

古文：时永兴军节度使李洪信，汉室之密戚也，自太祖践阼，恆有忧沮之意，而本城军不满千，峻出征至陕州，以救援晋州为辞，抽起数百人，及刘崇北遁，又遣禁兵千余人，屯于京兆，洪信惧，遂请入朝。
现代文：当时永兴军节度使李洪信，是汉朝王室的嫡亲，自从周太祖登上帝位后，常有忧愤之心，但本城军队不满千人，王峻出征到陕州时，以救援晋州为名，抽出几百人，到刘崇向北逃走，王峻又抽出一千多名禁兵，驻扎在京兆，李洪信害怕，便请求到京城朝拜太祖。
English: At that time, the Yongxing Army Festival made Li Hongxin, a direct relative of the Han Dynasty royal family, often feel sad and angry since Zhou Taizu ascended the throne. However, the city's army was less than a thousand. When Wang Jun went to Shaanxi, he took out several hundred people in the name of rescuing Jinzhou and fled to Liu Chong to the north. Wang Jun also took out more than a thousand banned soldiers and stationed them in Beijing. Li Hongxin was afraid and asked to go to Beijing to worship Taizu.

古文：峻军回，太祖厚加优赐。
现代文：王峻部队回来，太祖赐以优厚的财物。
English: When Wang Jun's troops returned, the great-grandfather gave them a generous sum of money.

古文：时慕容彦超叛于兗州，已遣侍卫步军都指挥使曹英、客省使向训率兵攻之。
现代文：这时慕容彦超在兖州反叛，已派遣了侍卫步军都指挥使曹英、客省使向训领兵攻讨他。
English: At this time, Murong Yanchao rebelled in Bozhou, and had dispatched the envoy of Cao Ying, the commanding officer of the palace guards and foot soldiers, and the envoy of the guest province to the training leader to attack him.

古文：峻意欲自将兵讨贼，累言于太祖曰： 慕容剧贼，曹英不易与之敌耳。 
现代文：王峻想自己领兵去征讨，多次对太祖进言说 ：慕容彦超是厉害的贼寇，曹英不容易与他相敌。 
English: Wang Jun wanted to lead his own army to fight, and repeatedly said to the great ancestor: Murong Yanchao is a powerful thief, Cao Ying is not easy to compete with him.

古文：太祖默然。
现代文：太祖不做声。
English: The great-grandfather does not make a sound.

古文：未几亲征，命峻为随驾一行都部署，破贼之日，峻督军在城南，其众先登，颇有得色。
现代文：不久御驾亲征，命王峻担任随驾一行都部署，攻破慕容彦超那天，王峻在城南督战，他的军队首先登城，非常得意。
English: Soon after, Wang Jun was ordered to drive his own troops, and the whole party was deployed to accompany him. On the day of defeating Murong Yanchao, Wang Jun was in the south of the city, and his army was the first to enter the city. He was very pleased.

古文：从驾还京，未几贡表乞解枢机，即时退归私第。
现代文：跟从圣驾回京城，不久上表请求免除自己枢密使之职，立时退职回到家里。
English: After returning to the capital from a pilgrimage, he soon requested to be excused from his duties as a privy councillor and immediately retired to his home.

古文：峻贪权利，多机数，好施小惠，喜人附己。
现代文：王峻贪求权利，多计谋，爱施小恩惠，喜欢别人依附自己。
English: Wang Jun is greedy for power, a man of many stratagems, loves to grant small favors, and likes others to depend on him.

古文：太祖登极之初，务存谦抑，潜龙将佐未甚进用，其后郑仁诲、李重进、向训等稍迁要职，峻心忌之，至是求退，盖侦太祖之意也。
现代文：太祖登位初年，务求谦虚抑制，以前跟随的将佐，都没怎么提升任用。后来郑仁诲、李重进、向训等人逐渐升居要职，王峻心里嫉妒他们，到这时请求退职，原来是想探探太祖的意思。
English: In the first year of his grandfather's ascension to the throne, in order to be modest and restrained, the generals who had previously followed him did not have much promotion. Later, Zheng Renya, Li Chongjin, Xiang Xun and others gradually rose to important positions. Wang Jun was jealous of them in his heart, and at this time he asked to retire, originally to explore the meaning of his grandfather.

古文：未陈请之前，多发外诸侯书以求保证，旬浃之内，诸道驰骑进纳峻书，闻者惊骇其事。
现代文：在没有上表之前，王峻就向地方诸侯写了很多书信请求保荐自己。一、二十天内，各地诸侯飞骑进上挽留王峻的奏章，太祖听到后感到震惊。
English: Before there was a table, Wang Jun wrote many letters to local lords asking them to sponsor him. Within one to twenty days, lords from all over the country flew in to retain Wang Jun's music, and the great-grandfather was shocked to hear it.

古文：峻连贡三章，中使宣谕无虚日，太祖严驾将幸其第，峻闻之，即驰马入见，太祖慰劳久之，复令视事。
现代文：王峻接连三次递上退职奏章，朝中天天派人去劝导他，太祖严整车驾准备亲自到他家去，王峻听说后，就骑马奔见太祖，太祖慰劳他很久，又令他上任工作。
English: Wang Jun handed in his resignation three times in a row. The central government sent people to persuade him every day. Grandfather Yan prepared his car and drove to his home in person. After Wang Jun heard about it, he rode to see Grandfather. Grandfather comforted him for a long time and made him work.

古文：峻又于本院之东，别建公署，廓庑事，高广华侈。
现代文：王峻在枢密院的东边，另建一座公署，走廊大厅，高大豪华。
English: On the east side of the Privy Council, Wang Jun built another public office, the corridor hall, which is tall and luxurious.

古文：及土木之功毕，请太祖临幸，恩赐甚厚。
现代文：当建筑完工后，请太祖光临，太祖恩赐给他很多财物。
English: When the building was completed, he invited the great-grandfather to visit, and the great-grandfather graciously gave him many possessions.

古文：其后内园新起小殿，峻视之，奏曰： 宫室已多，何用于此？ 
现代文：后来太祖在内园盖一座小宫殿，王峻看见后，上奏说 ：宫室已经有很多，还造这干什么？ 
English: Later, the great-grandfather built a small palace in the inner garden. When Wang Jun saw it, he said, "There are already a lot of palace rooms, why do we still need to build this?"

古文：太祖曰： 枢密院舍宇不少，公更自兴造何也？ 
现代文：太祖说 ：枢密院的房屋也不少，您又自己兴建公署干什么？ 
English: Grandfather said, "There are many houses for the Privy Council, so why are you building a public office yourself?

古文：峻惭默而退。
现代文：王峻惭愧不做声而退下。
English: Wang Jun was ashamed and retreated silently.

古文：时峻以前事赵岩，颇承宠爱，至是欲希赠官立碑。
现代文：这时王峻因以前服事过赵岩，很受赵岩宠爱，现在想给他追赠官爵立碑纪念。
English: At this time, because Wang Jun had served Zhao Yan before, he was very favored by Zhao Yan, and now he wanted to give him a posthumous memorial monument.

古文：或谓峻曰： 赵岩以谄佞事君，破坏梁室，至今言者无不切齿，苟如所欲，必贻物议。 
现代文：有人对王峻说 ：赵岩以谗言奸诈服事君主，败坏梁朝王室，现在的人说起他，没有不切齿痛恨的，如果像你所想的那样做，一定会招致舆论的反对。 
English: Someone said to Wang Jun: Zhao Yan served the monarch with slander and treachery, and corrupted the Liang Dynasty royal family. Now people speak of him with hatred. If you do as you think, you will certainly attract public opinion opposition.

古文：乃止。
现代文：王峻才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：岩侄崇勋，居于陈郡，峻为求官田宅以赐之，太祖亦从之。
现代文：赵岩侄子赵崇勋，居住在陈郡，王峻为他请求赐给官位田地房屋，太祖也听从他。
English: Zhao Yan's nephew, Zhao Chongxun, lived in Chen County. Wang Jun asked for him to be given an official rank and a farmhouse. The great-grandfather also obeyed him.

古文：三年春，修利河堤，大兴土功，峻受诏检校。
现代文：三年春，兴修黄河大堤，工程浩大，王峻受诏在工地巡视督察。
English: In the spring of the third year, the construction of the Yellow River levee, the project is huge, Wang Jun was ordered to inspect the inspector at the construction site.

古文：既而世宗自澶州入觐，峻素惮世宗之聪明英果，闻其赴阙，即自河次归朝。
现代文：不久世宗从澶州入京城朝见太祖，王峻一向胆怯世宗的聪明英勇果断，听到世宗到了京城，立即从黄河工地回到朝廷。
English: Soon after, Shizong arrived in Beijing from Zhangzhou to meet the emperor. Wang Jun, who had always been afraid of Shizong's wisdom, courage and determination, heard that Shizong had arrived in Beijing and immediately returned to the imperial court from the Yellow River construction site.

古文：居无何，邀求兼领青州，太祖不得已而授之。
现代文：不多久，要求兼管青州，太祖不得已让他镇守青州。
English: Not long after, he asked to be in charge of Qingzhou as well, and the great-grandfather had no choice but to let him guard Qingzhou.

古文：及上交引新及第人至中书，峻在政事堂厉声曰： 今岁选士不公，当须覆试。 
现代文：接受任命后，要求马上赴任，又请求借用国库里的绫缎绢布一万匹，太祖答应了他。这年，户部侍郎赵上交临时掌管贡举选拔，赵上交曾经拜见王峻，王峻谈到一位童子，赵上交没理解王峻的用意，出榜的那天，那位童子没有录取，王峻记恨在心。
English: After accepting the appointment, he asked to take up the post immediately, and also asked to borrow ten thousand yakitori from the national treasury, which the great-grandfather agreed to. This year, the head of the household, Zhao Shangkao, temporarily took charge of the tribute selection. Zhao Shangkao once met Wang Jun. Wang Jun talked about a boy. Zhao Shangkao did not understand Wang Jun's intention. On the day of the list, the boy was not admitted, and Wang Jun kept it in his heart.

古文：诸相曰： 但缘已行指挥行过，临事不欲改移，况未敕下，覆试非晚。 
现代文：当赵上交带着新录取的人到中书省时，王峻在办公厅堂上厉声说： 今年选拔士子不公平，应当重新考试。 各位宰相说 ：但因事情已经办成，这时不好更改，况且尚没有重新考试的诏令下达，等下达后再复试也不晚。 
English: When Zhao Shangfu took the newly admitted people to the Ministry of Education and Culture, Wang Jun said sharply in the office hall: This year's selection of scholars is unfair and should be re-examined. The prime ministers said: But because things have been done, it is not easy to change at this time, and moreover, there is no re-examination decree yet, and it is not too late to retake the exam after it is issued.

古文：峻愈怒，诟责上交，声闻于外。
现代文：王峻更加生气，指责赵上交，声音在外面都能听到。
English: Wang Jun became even more angry and accused Zhao of handing himself in. His voice could be heard outside.

古文：少顷，竟令引过。
现代文：过一会，竟要赵上交引咎自责。
English: After a while, Zhao actually wanted to blame himself.

古文：及罢，上交诣本谢峻，峻又延之饮酌从容。
现代文：完后，赵上交到王峻处道歉，王峻又若无其事地留下他喝酒。
English: After finishing, Zhao handed it over to Wang Jun to apologize, and Wang Jun left him to drink as if nothing had happened.

古文：翌日，峻奏上交知举不公，请致之于法，太祖颔之而已。
现代文：第二天，王峻上奏章弹劾赵上交掌管贡举不公正，请绳之以法，太祖只得点头而已。
English: The next day, Wang Jun wrote a petition to impeach Zhao Shangfu for the injustice of administering the tribute, and asked him to be brought to justice. The great-grandfather only nodded.

古文：又奏请以颜愆、陈观代范质、李穀为相。
现代文：王峻又奏请以颜愆、陈观代替范质、李谷为宰相。
English: Wang Jun also asked Yan Xuan and Chen Guan to replace the norm, and Li Gu to be the prime minister.

古文：太祖曰： 进退宰辅，未可仓卒，待徐思之。 
现代文：太祖说： 提拔和罢免宰相，不能仓促，等慢慢考虑。 
English: The great-grandfather said: The promotion and dismissal of the prime minister should not be hasty, and should be considered slowly.

古文：峻论列其事，奏对不逊。
现代文：王峻辩论这事，言语不甚恭敬。
English: Wang Jun debated this matter, and his words were not very respectful.

古文：太祖未食，日将亭午，诤之不已。
现代文：太祖还没吃饭，都将到中午，王峻仍争持不止。
English: The great-grandfather hasn't eaten yet, and it's not even noon, and Wang Jun is still arguing.

古文：次日寒食时节，臣僚各归私第。
现代文：太祖说： 寒食节假之内，不好马上就办，等过了寒食节，就依您所说的做。 
English: Grandfather said, "If it's during the cold food festival, it's better to do it right away. If it's after the cold food festival, do what you said."

古文：午时，宣召宰臣、枢密使，及入，幽峻于别所。
现代文：王峻才退下回到中书省。第二天中午时分，太祖宣诏召来宰臣、枢密使，当都来到后，就将王峻软禁到别的地方。
English: At noon the next day, the great-grandfather issued an edict summoning his vassals and confidential envoys. When they all arrived, he placed Wang Jun under house arrest somewhere else.

古文：太祖见冯道已下，泣曰： 峻凌朕颇甚，无礼太过，拟欲尽去左右臣僚，剪朕羽翼。
现代文：太祖见冯道以下臣属，哭着说： 王峻欺凌我太过份了，非常没有礼貌，想全部除去我身旁臣僚，翦除我的助手。
English: When the great-grandfather saw the subordinates following Feng Dao, he cried and said: Wang Jun's bullying of me was too excessive and very impolite. He wanted to get rid of all the ministers around me and my assistants.

古文：朕兒在外，专意阻隔，暂令到阙，即怀怨望。
现代文：我的儿子在外地，专门想阻隔他，叫他暂时到京城来，王峻就心怀不满。
English: My son was out of town, and Wang Jun was dissatisfied because he specifically wanted to block him and ask him to come to Beijing temporarily.

古文：岂有既总枢机，又兼宰相，坚求重镇，寻亦授之，任其襟怀，尚未厌足，如此无君，谁能甘忍！ 
现代文：哪有已经总管枢密院，又兼任宰相，还坚持要执掌地方重镇的道理？我也马上就任命他，任其所欲，还不满足，这样目无君主，谁能甘心忍受！ 
English: Is there anyone who has been the head of the Privy Council and also the Prime Minister, and still insists on holding the power of the local town? I will also appoint him immediately, let him do whatever he wants, but he is not satisfied, who can bear such a blind monarch!

古文：即召翰林学士徐台符等草制。
现代文：立即叫翰林学士徐台符等起草诏令。
English: He immediately ordered Hanlin Scholar Xu Taifu and others to draft the edict.

古文：其日，退朝宣制，贬授商州司马，差供奉官蒋光远援送赴商州。
现代文：当天，退朝宣读诏令，贬谪王峻任商州司马，派供奉官蒋光远送往商州。
English: On the same day, the imperial edict was read out, appointing Wang Jun as the Sima of Shangzhou and sending the official Jiang Guangyuan to Shangzhou.

古文：未几，死于贬所，时广顺三年三月也。
现代文：不久，死在贬谪的地方，时为广顺三年三月。
English: Soon, he died in a place of disgrace, in March of the third year of Guangshun.

