古文：马脑犀月镜秦宝珊瑚四宝宫延清室玉如意七宝鞭犀导玉清三宝
现代文：马脑犀月镜秦宝珊瑚四宝宫延清室玉如意七宝鞭犀导玉清三宝
English: Horse brain rhinoceros crescent moon mirror Qin treasure coral four treasure palace extended Qing room jade wish seven treasure whip rhinoceros guide jade clear three treasure

古文：宝骨紫羜羯紫贝魏生
现代文：宝骨紫羜羯紫贝魏生
English: Precious bone, purple gourd, purple cow parsnip

古文：马脑
现代文：马脑
English: Horse brain

古文：帝颛顼时。丹丘之国献马脑瓮，以盛甘露。
现代文：帝颛顼时，丹丘国献来一个马脑瓮，用来盛甘露。
English: At the time of the Emperor's enthronement, Dancu offered a horse's brain to be used to hold the nectar.

古文：帝德所被，殊方入贡，以露充于厨也。
现代文：颛顼的威德所及的地方，都进贡甘露，甘露便充满厨房。
English: Wherever the roaring wind touches, it brings forth sweet nectar, and the kitchen is filled with it.

古文：马脑石类也，南方者为上。
现代文：马脑属于石类，南方产的为上。
English: Horse brains belong to the stone group, and those from the south are the best.

古文：令善别者，马死则扣其脑而视。
现代文：如今善于辨别马脑的人，马死之后就要取出马脑看一下。
English: Nowadays, people who are good at distinguishing horse brains need to take out the horse brain after the horse dies.

古文：其色如血者，则日行万里，能腾飞空虚；脑色黄者，日行千里；脑色青者，嘶闻数百里外；脑色黑者，入水毛鬣不濡，日行五百里；脑色白者，多力而驽。
现代文：脑色如血的，就能日行一万里，能腾飞空中；脑色发黄的，日行一千里；脑色发青的，嘶鸣起来数百里之外就可以听见；脑色发黑的，入水之后鬃毛不湿，日行五百里；脑色发白的，力气大而速度慢。
English: Those with blood-colored brains can travel ten thousand miles a day and can soar into the sky; those with yellow-colored brains can travel a thousand miles a day; those with blue-colored brains can be heard hundreds of miles away when they hiss; those with black-colored brains can travel five hundred miles a day if their mane is not wet after entering the water; and those with white-colored brains have great strength but slow speed.

古文：今为器多用赤色者。
现代文：如今制作器具多半用红色的。
English: Nowadays, red wax is mostly used to make utensils.

古文：若是人功所制者，多不成器，成器亦拙。
现代文：像这种人工制作的器具，多半不能令人满意，即使做出来也显得笨拙。
English: Artifacts such as this are often unsatisfactory, even clumsy.

古文：其国人听马鸣，别其脑色。
现代文：丹丘国的人听到马鸣，就知道马脑的颜色。
English: When the people of Danqiu heard the horsesong, they knew the color of the horse's brain.

古文：犀
现代文：犀
English: Rhinoceros

古文：犀牛，大约似牛而猪头。
现代文：犀牛，大体上像牛而长了一个猪脑袋。
English: The rhinoceros, which looks broadly like a cow, has a pig's head.

古文：脚似象。蹄有三甲。
现代文：脚似象，蹄子上有三片趾甲。
English: The feet are elephant-like, with three toenails on the hoof.

古文：首有二角，一在额上为兕犀；一在鼻上校小，为胡帽犀。
现代文：头上有两只角。一只较大，长在额上，叫 兕犀 ；一只较小，长在鼻上，叫 胡帽犀 。
English: There are two horns on its head. The larger one, which grows on the forehead, is called the rhinoceros horn; the smaller one, which grows on the nose, is called the cap rhinoceros horn.

古文：鼻上者皆窘束而花点少，多有奇文。
现代文：鼻上的都较细而且花点少，多半都有奇异的花纹。
English: The ones on the nose are thinner and have fewer spots, and most of them have strange patterns.

古文：牯犀亦有二角，皆为毛犀，俱粟文，堪为腰带。
现代文：公犀牛也有两只角，都是毛犀，都有疙疙瘩瘩的花纹，能做腰带。
English: The male rhinoceros also has two horns, both of which are woolly rhinoceros, both of which have a beak pattern and can be made into a belt.

古文：千百犀中，或偶有通者。
现代文：千百只犀角中，或许偶然能遇上中空而通的。
English: Out of thousands and hundreds of rhinoceros horns, you may come across a hollow one by chance.

古文：花点大小奇异，固无常定。
现代文：花点的大小各异，本没有一定。
English: The size of the dots varies and is not fixed.

古文：有偏花路者。有项花大而根花小者。谓之倒插通。
现代文：有花纹偏在一侧的；有顶上花点大根上花点小的，叫做 倒插通 。
English: The one with a pattern on one side; the one with a flower on the top and a small flower on the top is called inverted.

古文：此二种亦五色无常矣。
现代文：这两种犀角也是五色无常的。
English: These two species of rhinoceros horn are also five-coloured and impermanent.

古文：若通白黑分明，花点奇异，则价计巨万，乃希世之宝也。
现代文：如果中空两通，白黑分明，花点奇异，就价值巨万，是稀世之宝。
English: If the hollow two-way, white and black are clear, and the flower point is strange, it is of great value and is a rare treasure.

古文：又有堕罗犀，犀中最大，一株有重七八斤者，云是牯牛额上者。
现代文：又有一种叫做 堕罗犀 的，是犀角中最大的一种，有一只就有七八斤重的，说这是公犀牛额上长的。
English: There is also a species called the fallen rhinoceros horn, which is the largest type of rhinoceros horn. One horn weighs seven or eight kilos, and is said to be the longest horn on the forehead of a male rhinoceros.

古文：必花多是撒头豆点。
现代文：那上面的花纹多半都是散落的圆点。
English: The patterns above are mostly scattered dots.

古文：色深者堪为銙；散而浅。即拍为盘碟器皿之类。
现代文：色深的能做腰带上的饰物，散而浅的，就可以做成盘碟器皿之类的东西。
English: A dark color can be used to make an ornament on a belt, while a light color can be used to make a dish.

古文：又有骇鸡犀。辟尘犀辟水犀？
现代文：还有 骇鸡犀 、 辟尘犀 、 辟水犀 、 明犀 。
English: There's also a chicken rhinoceros, a dust rhinoceros, a water rhinoceros, and a bright rhinoceros.

古文：明犀，此数犀但闻其说，即不可得而见也。月镜
现代文：这几种犀角只听说过，却不曾得到它们。月镜
English: These types of rhino horns have only been heard of, but they have never been obtained.

古文：周灵王起处昆昭之台，有侍臣苌弘，巧智如流，因而得侍。
现代文：灵王起居在昆昭台。有一个侍臣叫苌弘，他乖巧机智，口若悬河，因而能侍奉灵王。
English: King Ling lived in Kunzhaotai. There was a courtier named Gong Hong, who was clever and witty, and his mouth was like a river, so he could serve King Ling.

古文：长夜宴乐，或俳谐儛笑，有殊俗之伎。百戏骈列，钟石并奏。
现代文：他们长夜饮酒作乐，滑稽诙谐，演技非凡。各种戏齐演，各种乐器齐奏。
English: They drink and make music all night long, they are funny and witty, and their acting is extraordinary. All kinds of plays are performed together, and all kinds of musical instruments are played together.

古文：亦献异方珍宝。
现代文：也献上一些异地的珍宝。
English: He also presented some treasures from other places.

古文：有如玉之人，如龙之锦，亦有如镜之石，如石之镜。
现代文：有像玉的人，像龙的锦。也有像镜子的石头，象石头的镜子。
English: There are people like jade, like dragon brocade. There are also stones like mirrors, like stone mirrors.

古文：此石色白如月，照面如雪，谓之月镜。
现代文：这种石头色白如月，照面如雪，叫做 月镜 。
English: This stone is as white as the moon and looks like snow. It is called a moon mirror.

古文：玉人皆有机类，自能转动，谓之机妍。
现代文：玉人都有机关，自己能转动，叫做 机妍 。
English: Jade people all have organs that can rotate on their own, which is called "cunning."

古文：苌弘言于王曰： 圣德所招也。 
现代文：苌弘对灵王说： 这些都是因为大王有圣德而招来的。 
English: Gong Hong said to King Ling, "All of this has come about because of the great king's holiness.

古文：故周人以弘媚谄而卒杀之。
现代文：所以周朝人认为苌弘谄媚而终于杀了他。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty people thought that Gong Hong was charming and finally killed him.

古文：流血成石，或言成璧，不见其尸矣。
现代文：他的血化成石头，有的说化成碧玉，看不到他的尸体了。
English: His blood turned into stone, some say into jasper, and his body could no longer be seen.

古文：秦宝
现代文：秦宝
English: Qin Bao

古文：汉高祖初入咸阳宫，周行府库。
现代文：汉高祖初进咸阳宫的时候，走遍所有的府库。
English: When Han Gaozu first entered Xianyang Palace, he walked through all the prefectural treasuries.

古文：金玉珍宝，不可称言。
现代文：库里的金玉珠宝，多得无法说全。
English: Curry's gold and jewels are too numerous to mention in full.

古文：其所惊异者，有玉五支灯，高七尺五寸，下作蟠螭，以口衔灯。
现代文：最让他惊异的，有五支玉灯，此灯高七尺五寸，下面是一条蟠龙，用口衔灯。
English: What surprised him the most was that there were five jade lamps. This lamp was seven feet and five inches high, and below it was a dragon with a mouth lamp.

古文：灯燃则鳞甲皆动，焕炳若列星而盈室焉。
现代文：把灯点燃，蟠龙的鳞甲就全都会动，焕然闪光就像群星充满屋子。
English: When the lamp is lit, the dragon's scales will all move, sparkling brightly like stars filling the room.

古文：复铸铜人十二枚，皆高三尺，列在一筵上。
现代文：还有铜铸的十二个人，都三尺高，摆在一张席上。
English: And twelve men of brass, three feet high, sitting in a row.

古文：琹筑笙竽，各有所执。
现代文：每人持一种乐器，或琴，或筑，或笙，或竽。个个华彩一身，就像活人。
English: Each person is holding a musical instrument, either a koto, or a tsukuru, or a gong, or a gong. All of them are resplendent, just like living people.

古文：皆结华彩，若生人。筵下有二铜管，上口高数尺，出筵后。
现代文：席下有两根铜管，上边的管口离地数尺，从席后伸出来。
English: There are two copper pipes under the seat, the upper pipe is a few feet from the ground, protruding from the back of the seat.

古文：其一管空，一管内有绳，大如指。
现代文：其中一根管是空的，一根管里装有一根绳子，手指那么粗。
English: One of the tubes is empty, one of the tubes has a rope in it, the fingers are so thick.

古文：使一人吹空管，一人纽绳，则琹筑笙竽皆作，与真乐不异焉。
现代文：让一个人吹空管，一个人扭动那绳子，就会琴筑笙竽一齐鸣奏，和真人所奏的音乐没什么两样。
English: Let one blow the trumpet, and one twist the string, and the harps and cymbals will play in unison, and the music will be no different from that played by real people.

古文：玉琹长六尺，上安十三弦，二十六徽，皆用七宝饰之，铭曰玙璠之乐。
现代文：玉琴长六尺，上边有十三根弦，二十六条系琴弦的绳子，全都用金、银、琉璃、玛瑙、玫瑰等宝物装饰而成，刻名叫做 玙璠之乐 。
English: The jade lute is six feet long, with thirteen strings on the top and twenty-six strings of strings, all decorated with gold, silver, glaze, onyx, roses and other treasures, engraved with the name "Music of the Dragonfly."

古文：玉笛长二尺三寸，六孔，吹之则见车马山林，隐嶙相次，吹息则不复见，铭曰昭华之管。
现代文：玉笛长二尺三寸，有六孔，吹奏起来就能出现车马山林，怪石嶙嶙。吹完也就不再出现。刻名叫 昭华之管 。
English: The jade flute is two feet and three inches long and has six holes. When it is played, the flute will make the appearance of a horse-drawn carriage, a mountain forest, and a strange stone cocoon. When it is finished, it will no longer appear. It is inscribed with the name "Zhao Hua's Pipe."

古文：有方镜，广四尺，高五尺九寸，表里洞明。
现代文：有一面方形镜子，宽四尺，高五尺九寸，里外通明。
English: There is a square mirror, four feet wide, five feet nine inches high, transparent inside and out.

古文：人直来照之，影则倒见；以手掩心而来，即见肠胃五脏。
现代文：人直接来照，影像就是倒的；用手捂着心来照，就能看见肠胃五脏，清清楚楚，没有遮碍。
English: If you look directly, the image is upside down; if you look with your hand over your heart, you can see your intestines and stomach, clear and unobstructed.

古文：历历无疑。人有疾病在内者，则掩心而照之，必知病之所在。又女子有邪心，则胆张心动。
现代文：体内有病的人，就捂着心口来照，一定能知道病在什么部位。另外，女子有邪心，一照就胆张心跳。
English: If a person has a disease in the body, he or she should cover the mouth with the heart to take a picture, so that he or she can definitely know where the disease is. In addition, if a woman has an evil heart, she will feel the heartbeat as soon as she is photographed.

古文：秦始皇帝常以照宫人，胆张心动，则杀之也。
现代文：秦始皇常用来照宫中美人，凡胆张心跳的，就一律处死。
English: It was often used by the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty to refer to beautiful women in the palace. Anyone who dared to show a heartbeat would be executed.

古文：高祖悉封闭，以待项羽。
现代文：汉高祖把这些宝物全都封存，等待项羽前来。
English: Han Gao Zu sealed all these treasures and waited for Xiang Yu to come.

古文：羽并将以东。
现代文：项羽将这些宝物全都带走了。
English: Xiang Yu took all these treasures with him.

古文：后不知所在。
现代文：以后不知这些宝物哪里去了。
English: I don't know where these treasures have gone.

古文：珊瑚
现代文：珊瑚
English: Corals

古文：汉宫积草池中，有珊瑚，高一丈二尺，一本三柯。
现代文：汉宫的积草池中有珊瑚一株，高一丈二尺，一干三枝。
English: In the sediment pond of the Han Palace, there is a coral plant, two feet high, with three branches.

古文：上有四百六十三条。
现代文：上面有四百六十三个枝条。
English: There are four hundred and sixty-three branches on it.

古文：是南越王赵佗所献，号曰烽火树。
现代文：这是南越国王赵佗献来的。名叫 烽火树 。
English: It was a gift from the South Vietnamese king, Zhao Hui, and is called the Bonfire Tree.

古文：夜有光，常欲然。
现代文：夜间发光，总像要燃烧的样子。
English: Glows at night, always looks like it's about to burn.

古文：又郁林郡有珊瑚市，海客市珊瑚处也。
现代文：郁林郡有珊瑚市，是下海人卖珊瑚的地方。
English: There is a coral market in Yulin County. It is a place where people from the lower sea sell coral.

古文：珊瑚碧色，一株株数十枝，枝间无叶。
现代文：这里的珊瑚呈碧绿色，一株株各有几十个枝杈，枝间没有叶。
English: The corals here are turquoise-green, each with dozens of branchlets and no leaves between the branches.

古文：大者高五六尺，尤小者尺余。
现代文：大的高五六尺，小的只有一尺多。
English: The big ones are five or six feet tall, the small ones are just over a foot.

古文：蛟人云，海上有珊瑚宫。
现代文：善于潜水的人说，海里有个珊瑚宫殿。
English: People who are good at diving say that there is a coral palace in the sea.

古文：汉元封二年，郁林郡献珊瑚妇人，帝命植于殿前，谓之女珊瑚。
现代文：汉元封二年的时候，郁林郡献来一个珊瑚妇人。皇帝让人把它摆放在殿前，称它为 女珊瑚 ，一时间居然枝繁叶茂。
English: In the second year of Hanyuan's reign, a coral woman was presented by Yulin County. The emperor had it placed in front of the palace, calling it the female coral, and for a while it actually had lush branches.

古文：忽柯叶甚茂，至灵帝时树死，咸以为汉室将衰之征也。
现代文：到灵帝时，这株珊瑚树便死了。人们都认为这是汉室将要衰败的征兆。
English: By the time of Lingdi, the coral tree had died, and it was thought to be a sign that the Han dynasty was in decline.

古文：又柫箖国海，去都城二千里，有飞桥。
现代文：柫箖国靠大海，离都城两千里，有飞桥。
English: Yunnan is by the sea, two thousand miles from the capital, and there is a flying bridge.

古文：渡海而西，至且兰国。
现代文：渡海向西，到且兰国。
English: Cross the sea to the west, and go to the country of Lanka.

古文：自且兰有积石，积石南有大海。
现代文：且兰国有积石山，积石山南有大海。
English: Moreover, there is a craggy mountain in Lanzhou, and there is a sea to the south of the craggy mountain.

古文：海中珊瑚生于水底。
现代文：海中珊瑚生于水底。
English: Marine corals are born underwater.

古文：大船载铁网下海中，初生之时，渐渐似菌。经一年，挺出网目间，变作黄色，支格交错。
现代文：用大船把铁网投入海中，珊瑚初生像竹笋，一年左右的时间，它就从网眼挺出来，变成黄色，枝桠交错。
English: A large ship is used to cast the iron net into the sea, and the coral initially grows like bamboo shoots. After about a year, it protrudes from the mesh, turns yellow, and the branches are intertwined.

古文：小者三尺，大者丈余。
现代文：小的三尺左右，大的一丈有余。
English: The small ones are about three feet tall, while the large ones are more than that.

古文：三年色青。
现代文：三年以后变成青色。
English: After three years, it turns blue.

古文：以铁钞发其根，于舶上为绞车，举铁网而出之。
现代文：用铁器斩断它的根部，在船上准备一个绞车，把铁网绞上来，珊瑚便采上来了。
English: They cut off its roots with an iron tool, prepared a winch on the boat, winched the iron net up, and the coral was picked up.

古文：故名其所为珊瑚洲。
现代文：所以这里名叫 珊瑚洲 。
English: That's why it's called the Coral Sea.

古文：久而不采，却蠹烂糜朽。
现代文：长时间不采，珊瑚就会朽烂。
English: If it is not harvested for a long time, the coral will rot.

古文：四宝宫
现代文：四宝宫
English: The Four Treasures Palace

古文：武帝为七宝床、杂宝按屏风、杂宝帐，设于桂宫。
现代文：武帝做了 七宝 床、 杂宝 按屏风、 杂宝 帐，都放在桂宫里。
English: Emperor Wu made seven treasures bed, miscellaneous treasures press screen and miscellaneous treasures account, all of which were placed in the Gui Palace.

古文：时人谓之四宝宫。
现代文：当时人们称桂宫为 四宝 宫。
English: At that time, people called Katsura Palace the Four Treasures Palace.

古文：延清室
现代文：延清室
English: Yanqing Room

古文：董偃常卧延清之室，以画石为床，盖石文如画也。
现代文：董偃常卧于延清室，用画石做床。之所以叫 画石 ，大概石的花纹像画。
English: Dong Hao often slept in Yanqing's room, making a bed with painting stones. The reason for the name "painting stone" is that the pattern of the stone is like a painting.

古文：石体盛轻，出郅支国。
现代文：这种石头体大而轻，出自郅支国。
English: This kind of stone body is large and light, and it comes from Minzhi Province.

古文：上设紫琉璃帐，火齐屏风，列灵麻之烛，以紫玉为盘。
现代文：床上有紫色的琉璃帐幔，有用火齐宝石做的屏风，排列着用灵麻做的蜡烛，还有用紫玉做的盘子。
English: On the bed there are purple glazed curtains, a screen made of precious stones, lined with candles made of nymphaea, and plates made of purple jade.

古文：如屈龙，皆杂宝饰之。
现代文：床似一条弯曲的龙，全都用杂色宝物装饰起来。
English: The bed resembles a curving dragon, all decorated with motley treasures.

古文：视者于户外扇偃。
现代文：侍者在窗外给董偃扇风。
English: The waiter fans Dong Qi outside the window.

古文：偃曰： 玉石岂须扇而后清凉耶？ 
现代文：董偃说： 难道玉石也需要扇风之后才清凉吗？ 
English: Dong Hao said: Does the jade also need a fan to cool down?

古文：侍者屏扇，以手摹之，方知有屏风也。
现代文：侍者收拢扇子，用手一摸，才知道有屏风。
English: The waiter closed the fan, and only when he touched it with his hand did he realize that there was a screen.

古文：偃又以玉精为盘，贮冰于膝前。
现代文：董偃又用玉精做的盘子，盘子里盛满冰块放在膝前。
English: Dong Hao also placed a plate made of jade, filled with ice cubes, in front of his knees.

古文：玉精与冰同洁彻，侍者言以冰无盘，必融湿席，乃和玉盘拂之。
现代文：玉精与冰都是洁白透明的物品，侍者见了忙说： 冰块不用盘盛着，一定会化了湿席的！ 
English: Both the jade essence and the ice are white and transparent items. The waiter saw it and said: "You don't need to put the ice in a tray, it will surely turn into a wet seat!"

古文：落阶下，冰玉俱碎。
现代文：说着他急忙伸手一拂，玉盘与冰全都落地摔碎。
English: Saying this, he quickly reached out with one sweep of his hand, and the jade plate and the ice all fell to the ground and shattered.

古文：偃更以为乐。
现代文：董偃便开怀大笑。
English: Dong Hao burst out laughing.

古文：此玉精千涂国所贡也，武帝以此赐偃。
现代文：这种玉精是千涂国贡进的，汉武帝又赐给董偃。
English: This kind of jade was donated by the Qiantu Kingdom, and Emperor Hanwu also gave it to Dong Xuan.

古文：哀平之世，民皆犹有此器，而多残破。
现代文：哀帝建平年间，百姓家还都有这种器物，但多半已经残破。
English: During the years of Emperor Jianping, people's homes still had this kind of utensil, but most of them have been destroyed.

古文：王莽之世，不复知所在。
现代文：王莽的时候，不再知道哪儿有了。
English: When Wang Mang, no longer know where to go.

古文：玉如意
现代文：玉如意
English: 玉如意

古文：吴孙权时，有掘得铜匣，长二尺七寸，以琉璃为盖。
现代文：东吴孙权的时候，有人从地下挖出一个铜匣，长二尺七寸，用琉璃做的盖。
English: When Sun Quan was in Eastern Wu, someone dug up a copper box from the ground. It was two feet seven inches long and had a lid made of glass.

古文：又一白玉如意。
现代文：还有一枚白玉如意。
English: There is also a white ball as desired.

古文：所执处皆刻龙虎及蝉形。
现代文：凡是用手拿的地方，都刻有龙、虎和蝉的形象。
English: Wherever it is held by hand, it is engraved with images of dragons, tigers and cicadas.

古文：莫能识其由。
现代文：谁也不知这是为什么。
English: No one knows why.

古文：使人问综。
现代文：于是就派人去问综。
English: So they sent someone to inquire.

古文：综，博物者也。
现代文：综就是一位博学多识的人。
English: All in all, he is a learned and knowledgeable person.

古文：曰： 昔秦皇以金陵有天子气，平诸山阜，处处埋宝，以当王气。 
现代文：他说： 过去秦始皇因为金陵有天子气，平了许多山岭，到处埋宝，用来镇压王气。 
English: He said: In the past, Qin Shihuang, because Jinling had the spirit of a son of heaven, leveled many mountains and buried treasures everywhere to suppress the king's spirit.

古文：此盖是乎？
现代文：这种说法可能是对的吧？
English: That's probably true, right?

古文：七宝鞭
现代文：七宝鞭
English: Seven Treasures Whip

古文：晋明帝单骑潜入，窥王敦营。敦觉，使骑追之。
现代文：晋明帝单枪匹马潜入王敦的兵营窥探敌情，被王敦发觉，王敦就派骑兵追他。
English: Emperor Jinming single-handedly sneaked into Wang Dun's barracks to spy on the enemy situation. When Wang Dun found out, Wang Dun sent cavalry to chase him.

古文：帝奔。仍以七宝鞭顾逆旅妪，扇马屎。
现代文：他在奔逃的路上，就用他的七宝鞭雇客栈里的老妇把马屎用扇子扇凉。
English: On his way to escape, he used his seven-treasure whip to hire an old woman in the inn to fan the horse dung with a fan.

古文：王敦追之人，见马屎，以为帝去已远。仍宝鞭，不复前追。
现代文：王敦派来追赶他的人见马屎都凉了，以为他已经跑远了，又艳羡这宝鞭十分珍贵，便不再追他。
English: When the men sent by Wang Dun to chase him saw that the horse's dung was all cold, they thought that he had already run far away, and they envied this precious whip, so they stopped chasing him.

古文：犀导
现代文：犀导
English: Rhino guide

古文：晋东海蒋潜，尝至不其县。
现代文：晋朝东海郡的蒋潜，有一次来到不其县。
English: Jiang Qian, who lived in Donghai County during the Jin Dynasty, once came to Fuxi County.

古文：见林下踣一尸，已臭烂。乌来食之。
现代文：见林下有一具尸体。尸体已经腐烂，乌鸦来啄食死人肉。
English: There was a corpse under the forest. The corpse had rotted, and the crows came to eat the dead flesh.

古文：辄见一小儿，长三尺许，来驱乌。乌乃起。
现代文：总能看到一个三尺来高的小孩前来驱赶乌鸦，乌鸦才飞起。
English: You can always see a three-foot-tall child come to drive the crows away, and the crows fly.

古文：如此非一。
现代文：如此往复好几次。
English: This happened more than once.

古文：潜异之，乃就看之。
现代文：蒋潜觉得奇怪，就走近去看。
English: Jiang Qian felt strange, so he walked closer to see.

古文：见死人头上著通天犀导，价数万钱，乃拔取之。
现代文：他看到死人头上佩戴一枚通天犀导。价值数万钱。他就拔取了这枚犀导。
English: He saw the dead man wearing a rhinoceros horn on his head, worth tens of thousands of dollars, and he pulled it out.

古文：既去，众乌争集，无复驱者。
现代文：他走后，一群乌鸦争集而来，没有人再来驱赶。
English: After he left, a flock of crows gathered, and no one came to chase them away.

古文：潜后以此导上晋武陵王。
现代文：后来蒋潜把这一犀导献给晋武陵王。
English: Later, Jiang Qian dedicated this rhinoceros guide to the king of Jinwuling.

古文：王薨。以衬众僧。
现代文：武陵王死后，此犀导又被施舍给僧人。
English: After the death of King Wuling, this rhinoceros horn was donated to the monks.

古文：王武刚以九万钱买之。
现代文：王武刚用九万钱把它买下。
English: Wang Wugang bought it for 90,000 yuan.

古文：后落褚太宰处。
现代文：后来又落到褚太宰手里。
English: Later, it fell into the hands of the Empress Dowager.

古文：褚以饷齐故丞相豫章王。
现代文：褚太宰又把它送给齐国前丞相豫章王。
English: Zhai Dazai also gave it to Yu Zhangwang, the former prime minister of Qi.

古文：王死后。内人江夫人遂断以为钗。
现代文：豫章王死后，其妻江夫人就把它弄断做成钗。
English: After the death of Yu Zhangwang, his wife, Mrs. Jiang, broke it to make a cocoon.

古文：每夜，辄见一儿绕床头啼叫云： 何为见屠割？
现代文：每天夜里，总能听见一个男孩绕床头啼叫道： 你为什么要杀害我？
English: Every night, a boy can be heard howling around the head of the bed: "Why did you kill me?

古文：必当相报：终不独受枉酷。 
现代文：我一定要报复的！无论如何也不能忍受这样的冤枉和残酷！ 
English: I'll have my revenge! I can't bear such injustice and cruelty!

古文：江夫人恶之。月余遂薨。
现代文：江夫人对此又腻烦，又畏惧，一个多月以后就死了。
English: Mrs. Jiang was bored and afraid of this, and died more than a month later.

古文：玉清三宝
现代文：玉清三宝
English: The Three Treasures of Jade and Clear

古文：杜陵韦弇，字景昭。开元中，举进士第，寓游于蜀。
现代文：杜陵人韦弇，字景昭，开元年间考进士，寄居在蜀地。
English: A native of Duling, Wei Wei, also known as Jing Zhao, passed the entrance examination in the first year of the year and lived in Shu.

古文：蜀多胜地。
现代文：蜀地名胜很多。
English: There are many places of interest in Shunde.

古文：会春末，弇与其友数辈，为花酒宴。
现代文：恰是春末，韦弇和他的几位朋友办了一个花酒宴会。
English: Just at the end of spring, Wei Wei and several of his friends held a flower wine banquet.

古文：虽夜不殆。
现代文：玩到半夜也不肯作罢。
English: He didn't want to stop playing until midnight.

古文：一日，有请者曰： 郡南去十里，有郑氏亭，亭起苑中，真尘外境也。
现代文：一天，有人来请他，说： 郡南十里处，有个郑氏亭。亭子建在花园里，真正是世外佳境啊。
English: One day, someone came to invite him, saying: "There is a Zheng's pavilion ten miles south of the county. The pavilion is built in a garden, and it is truly a wonderful place.

古文：愿偕去。 
现代文：请你和我一块去一趟。 
English: Please come with me to the ocean.

古文：弇闻其说，喜甚，遂与俱南。
现代文：韦弇听他讲完，特别高兴，就和那人一起向南而行。
English: After listening to him, Wei Zheng was very happy and went south with the man.

古文：出十里，得郑氏亭。
现代文：走出十里，来到郑氏亭前。
English: After walking ten miles, I arrived in front of Zheng's Pavilion.

古文：端空危危，横然四峙，门用花辟，砌用烟矗。
现代文：亭子高高耸立，四面环山，鲜花盛开成门，烟缠雾绕为墙。
English: The pavilion stands tall, surrounded by mountains on all sides, with flowers blooming like doors and smoke-filled fog like a wall.

古文：弇望之不暇他视。
现代文：韦弇简直都要看傻了。
English: Wei Wei is almost too stupid to watch.

古文：真所谓尘外境也。
现代文：心里叹道： 可真是世外之境啊！ 
English: I sighed inwardly: What a foreign country!

古文：使者揖弇入。
现代文：这时候使者说了声 请进 。
English: At this time, the messenger said, "Please come in."

古文：既入，见亭上有神仙十数，皆极色也。
现代文：进去后，见亭上有十几位仙女，都有倾城倾国的姿色。
English: After entering, there are more than a dozen fairies on the pavilion, all of whom have the appearance of being devoted to the city and country.

古文：凝立若伫，半掉云袂，飘飘然。其侍列左右者，亦十数。
现代文：仙女们亭亭玉立，衣袖飘飘。那些侍奉在左右的，也是十来个人。
English: The fairies stand tall, their sleeves billowing. The attendants on the left and right are also about ten people.

古文：纹绣杳眇，殆不可识。
现代文：所饰纹绣影影绰绰，几乎不能看清。
English: The embroidered patterns are so faint that they are barely visible.

古文：有一人望弇而语曰： 韦进士来。 
现代文：有一位仙女望着韦弇说： 韦进士来啦！ 
English: A fairy looked at Wei Wei and said: Wei Jin Shi has come!

古文：命左右请上亭。
现代文：于是让左右快请韦弇上亭。
English: So let the left and right quickly invite Wei Wei to the pavilion.

古文：斜栏层去，既上且拜。
现代文：韦弇顺着斜栏一层层上去，立即就拜。
English: Wei Wei climbed up the sloping railing one layer at a time and immediately bowed.

古文：群仙喜曰： 君不闻刘阮事乎？
现代文：众仙女高兴地说： 你听说过刘阮的事吧？
English: The fairies said happily: Have you heard about Liu Ruan?

古文：今日亦如是。
现代文：现在你也象刘阮那样了。
English: Now you're just like Liu Ruan.

古文：愿奉一醉，将尽春色。君以为何如？ 
现代文：我们愿意陪你喝个一醉方休，风流尽致，你以为如何？ 
English: We would like to accompany you for a night of drinking and flirting. What do you think?

古文：弇谢曰： 不意今日得为刘阮，幸何甚哉！
现代文：韦弇说： 没想到今天我也成了刘阮，真是太幸运了。
English: Wei Wei said: I didn't expect to become Liu Ruan today, I'm so lucky.

古文：然则次为何所？
现代文：但是这是什么地方？
English: But what is this place?

古文：女郎又何为者？
现代文：你们都是干什么的？请告诉我好吗？ 
English: What do you all do? Could you please tell me?

古文：愿一闻知。 群仙曰： 我玉清之女也，居于此久矣。此乃玉清宫也。
现代文：众仙女说： 我们是玉清之女，在这居住很久了。这地方叫玉清宫。
English: All the fairies said, "We are the daughters of the Jade Emperor and have lived here for a long time. This place is called the Jade Emperor's Palace."

古文：向闻君为下第进士，寓游至此，将以一言奉请，又惧君子不顾，且贻其辱。是以假郑氏之亭以命君。
现代文：听说你是落第的进士，客游至此，想去请你，又怕你不理而受到羞辱，所以假借郑氏之亭让你来。
English: I've heard that you're a failed student who came here as a tourist, and I want to invite you, but I'm afraid you'll be humiliated if you don't, so I'll let you come to Zheng's Pavilion.

古文：果副吾志。
现代文：果然如我们所愿。
English: It worked out exactly as we hoped.

古文：虽然，此仙府也。虽云不可滞世间人，君居之，固无损耳。
现代文：虽然这是仙府，虽然说凡人不能在仙界久留，但是你在这里，保你没有任何损害。
English: Although this is the realm of the immortals, and although it is said that mortals cannot stay long in the realm of the immortals, you are here, so there is no harm to you.

古文：幸不以为疑。 
现代文：亏请你不要怀疑。 
English: Please don't doubt me.

古文：即命酒乐宴亭中，丝竹尽举，飘然泠然，凌玄越冥，不为人间声曲。
现代文：于是就让人在亭中设宴。丝竹齐奏，乐声清娓婉转，悠悠然不绝于耳，不是人间所能听到的曲调。
English: So they invited people to hold a banquet in the pavilion. Silk and bamboo were played in unison, the music was clear and gentle, and it was not a tune that people could hear.

古文：酒既酣，群仙曰： 吾闻唐天子尚神仙。
现代文：酒到酣处，众仙女说： 我们听说大唐天子崇尚神仙。
English: When the wine had been drunk, the fairies said: We have heard that the Great Tang Emperor worshipped the gods.

古文：吾有新乐一曲，曰 紫云 ，愿授圣主。
现代文：我们有一支新乐曲，名叫 紫云 ，想送给唐天子。
English: We have a new piece of music, called "Ziyun," which we would like to give to Tang Tianzi.

古文：君唐人也，为吾传之一进，可乎？ 
现代文：你是唐人，替我们把曲子交给天子，可以吗？ 
English: You are a Chinese, can you play the music for us?

古文：曰： 弇一儒也，在长安中，徒为区区于尘土间，望天子门且不可见之，又非知音者，曷能致是？ 
现代文：韦弇说： 我是一个普通书生，在长安城中，只是个区区小人物，连天子的大门口都看不到，我又不懂音乐，怎么能办得到呢？ 
English: Wei Wei said: I am an ordinary student. In Chang'an City, I am just a petty person. I can't even see the gate of heaven. I don't know music. How can I do it?

古文：群仙曰： 君既不能，吾将以梦传于天子可也。 
现代文：众仙女说： 既然你办不到，我们托梦传给他也是可以的。 
English: All the fairies said, "Since you can't do it, we can pass the dream on to him."

古文：又曰： 吾有三宝，将以赠君。
现代文：又说： 我们有三件宝贝，要赠送给你。
English: And he said, Behold, I have three precious things which I will give thee.

古文：能使君富敌王侯，君其受之！ 
现代文：这几件宝贝能让你富比王侯，请你笑纳！ 
English: These few treasures can make you richer than a prince, please accept it!

古文：乃命左右取其宝。
现代文：于是就让左右取来那三件宝贝。
English: So let the left and right fetch the three treasures.

古文：始出一杯，其色碧而光莹洞澈。
现代文：首先拿出来的是一只杯子。杯子呈碧绿色，光亮透明。
English: The first thing they brought out was a cup. The cup was bright green, shiny and transparent.

古文：顾谓弇曰： 碧瑶杯也。 
现代文：仙女看着韦弇说： 这是碧瑶杯。 
English: The fairy looked at Wei Wei and said, "This is a tourmaline cup.

古文：又出一枕，似玉微红，曰红蕤枕也。
现代文：接着拿出来的是一个枕头，样子像玉，微微发红，说： 这是红蕤枕。 
English: Then he took out a pillow that looked like a jade, slightly red, and said, "This is a red satin pillow."

古文：又出一小函，其色紫，亦似玉，而莹澈则过之，曰紫玉函也。
现代文：又拿出一个小匣，紫色，也像玉，但是比玉莹澈光亮，说： 这是紫玉匣。 
English: He also took out a small box, purple, also like jade, but brighter than jade, and said: This is a box of purple jade.

古文：已而皆授弇。
现代文：然后就全送给韦弇。
English: Then they were all given to Wei Wei.

古文：弇拜谢别去。
现代文：韦弇拜谢之后便离去。
English: Wei Wei bowed and left.

古文：行未及一里，回望其亭，茫然无有。
现代文：走了不到一里地。回头望亭，茫茫然什么都没有了。
English: I walked less than a mile. I looked back at the pavilion, and there was nothing left.

古文：弇异之，亦竟不知何所也。
现代文：韦弇感到非常奇怪。到底也不知道这是什么地方。
English: Wei Yao felt very strange. He didn't know where he was.

古文：遂挈其宝还长安。
现代文：于是他带着三件宝物回到了长安。
English: So he returned to Chang'an with three treasures.

古文：明年下第，东游至广陵，因以其宝集于广陵市。
现代文：第二年又落第，东游到广陵，就把三件宝贝拿到市场上出卖。
English: In the second year, he failed again, and after traveling east to Guangling, he took three treasures to the market and sold them.

古文：有胡人见而拜曰： 此天下之奇宝也。
现代文：有一个胡人见到便下拜说： 这是天下的奇宝啊！
English: When a goose-man saw it, he bowed down and said, "This is a wonder of the world!"

古文：虽千万年，人无得者。
现代文：尽管千万年了，但是从来没人得到过它。
English: Despite thousands of years, no one has ever obtained it.

古文：君何得而有？ 
现代文：你是怎么得到的？ 
English: How did you get it?

古文：弇以告之。
现代文：韦弇就告诉了他。
English: Wei Yao told him.

古文：因问曰： 此何宝乎？ 
现代文：接着问道： 这是什么宝呢？ 
English: Then he asked, "What is this treasure?"

古文：曰： 乃玉清真三宝也。 
现代文：胡人说： 这是真正的玉清三宝啊！ 
English: Hu said, "This is the real Three Treasures!

古文：遂以数千万为值而易之。
现代文：于是胡人用数千万的价钱买去三宝。
English: As a result, Hu used tens of millions of dollars to buy the Three Treasures.

古文：弇由是建甲第，居广陵中为豪士。
现代文：韦弇从此开始建宅院，成为广陵的大富豪，到老也没有做过官。
English: From then on, Wei Wei began to build mansions and became a very wealthy man in Guangling. He never became an official.

古文：竟卒于白衣也。宝骨
现代文：宝骨
English: Treasure Bones

古文：长安平康坊菩提寺，缘李林甫宅在东，故建钟楼于西。
现代文：长安平康坊菩提寺，因为李林甫宅院在东，所以钟楼就建于西。
English: Chang'an Ping Kangfang Family Temple, because Li Linfu's residence is in the east, the bell tower was built in the west.

古文：寺内有郭令玳瑁鞭，及郭令王夫人七宝帐。
现代文：寺里头有郭令的玳瑁鞭，以及郭令、王夫人的七宝帐。
English: The temple has Guo Ling's whip, as well as Guo Ling and Mrs. Wang's cloak of seven treasures.

古文：寺主元意，多识故事。
现代文：寺主元意知道许多过去的事。
English: The head of the temple, Mototsune, knows a lot about the past.

古文：云，李相每至生日，常转请此寺僧，就宅设斋。
现代文：他说，李林甫每次过生日的时候，往往转请这寺里的和尚，就在本宅设斋。
English: He said that every time Li Linfu had a birthday, he often invited the monks from this temple to hold a meal in the house.

古文：有一僧尝赞佛，施鞍一具，卖之，价直七万。
现代文：有一回，一个和尚去念经，李林甫施舍给他一个马鞍。拿出去卖，价值七万。
English: Once, when a monk went to chant sutras, Li Linfu gave him a saddle. He took it out and sold it, worth seventy thousand.

古文：又僧广有声，口经数年，次当赞佛。
现代文：又一和尚广有名声，诵经多年，也被请到李林甫家念经。
English: Another well-known monk, who had been chanting sutras for many years, was also invited to Li Linfu's home to chant.

古文：因极祝林甫功德，冀获厚衬。
现代文：于是这位和尚极力称颂李林甫的功德，希望得到优厚的施舍。
English: So the monk tried his best to praise the merits of Li Linfu, hoping to receive generous alms.

古文：毕，帘下出彩篚；香罗帊籍一物，如朽钉，长数寸。
现代文：但是他得到的是一个长数寸，样子颇像一个朽烂钉子的东西。
English: But what he got was something a few inches long that looked rather like a rotting nail.

古文：僧归，大失所望，惭惋数日。
现代文：他大失所望，沮丧了多日。
English: He was very disappointed and depressed for many days.

古文：且意大臣不容欺已，遂携至西市，示于胡商，索价一千。
现代文：他想到李林甫这样的大官不至于欺哄他，就带着那东西到西市上，给一个胡商看。他要价一千。
English: He thought that a high-ranking official like Li Linfu would not deceive him, so he took the object to the West Market and showed it to a hawker. He asked for a thousand.

古文：胡见之，大笑曰： 未也。 更极意言之，加至五百千。
现代文：胡人大笑道： 要低了。 他使了个大劲，要到五百千。
English: Hu Ren laughed loudly, "It's going to be lower." He made a great effort to get it down to five hundred thousand.

古文：胡人曰： 此宝价直一千万。 
现代文：胡人说： 此宝价值一千万！ 
English: Hu said: This treasure is worth ten million!

古文：遂与之。
现代文：说完就付钱给他。
English: Then pay him.

古文：僧访其名。曰： 此宝骨也。 
现代文：他打听宝物的名称。胡人说： 这是宝骨。 
English: He asked the name of the treasure, and the fox said, "This is a bone."

古文：紫羜羯
现代文：紫羜羯
English: Violet Wax

古文：乾元中，国家以克复二京，粮饷不给。
现代文：乾元年间，国家因为克复 二京 ，粮饷供给不足。
English: During the year of Qianyuan, the country suffered from a shortage of grain and rice supply due to the recapture of Beijing.

古文：监察御史康云间，为江淮度支。
现代文：监察御史康云间是淮度支使。
English: Supervisor Mishi Kangyun is Huai Du's deputy.

古文：率诸江淮商旅百姓五分之一，以补时用。
现代文：他对江淮一带的商旅百姓提出了加收五分之一的要求，用以补充当时急用。
English: He proposed a one-fifth surcharge for business travelers in the Jianghuai area to supplement the emergency funds at that time.

古文：洪州，江淮之间一都会也，云间令录事参军李惟燕典其事。
现代文：洪州是江淮之间的一大都会，康云间让录事参军李惟燕掌管洪州之事。
English: Hongzhou is a large metropolis between the Yangtze River and the Huai River. Kangyun allowed Li Weiyan, who had joined the army, to take charge of Hongzhou.

古文：有一僧人，请率百万。
现代文：有一个和尚，请求加收他一百万。
English: There was a monk who asked for an extra million.

古文：乃于腋下取一小瓶。
现代文：说完他就从腋下掏出一个小瓶来。
English: With that, he pulled a small bottle from under his arm.

古文：大如合拳。
现代文：小瓶有拳头大小。
English: The vial is about the size of a fist.

古文：问其所实。诡不实对，惟燕以所纳给众，难违其言，诈惊曰： 上人安得此物？
现代文：问他瓶里装的是什么，他只是诡秘地笑笑，并不回答。李惟燕因为要用收入的供给许多人，不能不照他说的去做，就装作吃惊地说： 您是如何得到这东西的？
English: When she asked him what was in the bottle, he just smiled slyly and did not answer. Li Weiyan, who had to provide many people with income, could not help but do as he said, so she pretended to be surprised and said: How did you get this thing?

古文：必货此，当不违价。 
现代文：一定要卖它，可不能违背它的价格呀！ 
English: You have to sell it, but you can't go against its price!

古文：有波斯胡人见之如其价以市之而去，胡人至扬州。
现代文：有一个波斯胡人见了就如其价买了小瓶而去。胡人来到扬州。
English: A Persian Hu man saw it and bought a small bottle for the same price and left. Hu man came to Yangzhou.

古文：长史邓景山知其事，以问胡。
现代文：长史邓景山知道这件事，就问那胡人是怎么回事。
English: Chief historian Deng Jingshan knew about this and asked what had happened to the man with the beard.

古文：胡云： 瓶中是紫羜羯。
现代文：胡人说： 瓶中装的是羜羯。
English: Hu said: The bottle is filled with maggots.

古文：人得之者，为鬼神所护，入火不烧，涉水不溺。
现代文：人得了它，就能受到鬼神的保护，走进火里不能被烧，掉进水里不能被淹。
English: If you have it, you can be protected by ghosts and gods. If you walk into a fire, you can't be burned. If you fall into water, you can't be flooded.

古文：有其物而无其价，非明珠杂货宝所能及也。 
现代文：这是一种无价之宝，不是明珠珍宝可以达到的。 
English: This is a priceless treasure, not a pearl that can be reached.

古文：又率胡人一万贯。
现代文：于是，又加收胡人一万贯。
English: As a result, Hu Ren was fined an additional 10,000 yuan.

古文：胡乐输其财，而不为恨。
现代文：胡人乐于输散其财，并不为恨。
English: The Hu people are happy to spread their wealth and do not hate it.

古文：瓶中有珠十二颗。
现代文：其实瓶中装的是十二颗珍珠。
English: In fact, the bottle contains twelve pearls.

古文：紫贝
现代文：紫贝
English: Purple mussel

古文：紫贝即砑螺也。
现代文：紫贝就是砑螺。
English: The purple shellfish is the snailfish.

古文：儋振夷黎海畔，采以为货。
现代文：儋振夷黎海边，采紫贝当钱财。
English: On the coast of the Zhenyi River, there is money to be made from harvesting purple mussels.

古文：《南越志》云： 土产大贝，即紫贝也。 
现代文：《南越志》说： 土产大贝，即紫贝也。 
English: "Nan Yue Zhi" said: Native large shellfish, that is, purple shellfish.

古文：魏生
现代文：魏生
English: Wei Sheng

古文：唐安史定后，有魏生者，少以勋戚，历任王友，家财累万。然其交结不轨之徒，由是穷匮，为士旅所摈。
现代文：唐朝安史之乱被平定以后，有一个姓魏的读书人，人称魏生。小时候，因为他家是王族亲戚，本来财产累万，但是由于他交结不轨之徒，因此家境日衰，遭到当地士族的排斥，他不得不到外地避一避。
English: After the Anshi Rebellion of the Tang Dynasty was quelled, there was a reader surnamed Wei, known as Wei Sheng. When he was a child, because his family was a relative of the royal family, his property was originally tens of thousands, but because of his association with crooks, his family was in decline. He was ostracized by the local aristocrats, and he had to avoid the outside world.

古文：因避乱，将妻入岭南。数年，方宁后归。
现代文：他带妻子避到江南。几年之后，事情平静了，他才归乡，船走到虔州地界。
English: He and his wife fled to the south of the Yangtze River. A few years later, when things had calmed down, he returned home and sailed to the border of Kyeongju.

古文：舟行至虔州界，因暴雨息后，登岸肆目。忽于砂碛间，见一地，气直上冲数十丈。
现代文：一场暴雨下过之后，他离船登岸，观赏当地风光，忽然望见河岸沙滩上有一块地方，热气蒸腾，高达数丈，便走上前细看。
English: After a rainstorm, he disembarked from the ship to enjoy the local scenery. Suddenly, he saw a place on the beach of the river, steaming hot, several meters high, so he stepped forward to take a closer look.

古文：从而寻之，石间见石片如手掌大，状如瓮片，又类如石，半青半赤，甚辨焉。
现代文：他看到的是，乱石之间有一块状如瓮片手掌那么大的石片，颜色半青半赤。
English: What he saw was that between the rocks there was a piece of stone the size of the palm of a hand, half blue and half red.

古文：试取以归，致之书箧。
现代文：他觉得这块石头与众不同，就把它捡了回来，扔到书箱里。
English: He thought the stone was unusual, so he picked it up and threw it in the bookcase.

古文：及至家，故旧荡尽，无财贿以求叙录，假屋以居。
现代文：回到家乡一看，原先的财产已荡然无存，没有财物用来谋求官职，便只好租借一处房子住下来。
English: When he returned to his hometown, he saw that his original property had been completely destroyed, and he had no property to use to seek a government post, so he had to rent a house to live in.

古文：市肆多贾客胡人等。
现代文：这里的市场店铺之中有许多胡人商客。
English: There are many Hu merchants among the market stalls here.

古文：旧相识者哀之，皆分以财帛。
现代文：旧相识可怜他，都分一些吃穿的东西给他。
English: Old acquaintances took pity on him and allotted him something to eat and wear.

古文：尝因胡客自为宝会。
现代文：他家的转机，是借着一次胡人客商的 宝会 发生的。
English: His family's turnaround came about through a treasure hunt organized by a Hu merchant.

古文：胡客法：每年一度与乡人大会，名阅宝物。
现代文：按照胡人的习俗，每年都有一次与乡人相聚的大会。会上，每个人都要展示自己的宝物。
English: According to the customs of the Hu people, there is a meeting with the villagers once a year. At the meeting, everyone has to show their treasures.

古文：宝物多者，戴帽居于坐上，其余以次分列。
现代文：宝物多的人就戴着帽子坐在上首。其余的依次排列。
English: The person with the most treasures sits at the top, wearing a hat. The rest are arranged in order.

古文：召生观焉。生忽忆所拾得物，取怀之而去。
现代文：今年的宝会他们邀请魏生参加，其实是让他去参观开眼界。他忽然间就想到了拾到的那块石片，就把它揣到怀里去参加胡人的宝会。
English: They invited Wei Sheng to take part in this year's treasure fair, but they actually asked him to visit the eye-opening world. He suddenly thought of the piece of stone he had picked up and carried it in his arms to take part in the Hu people's treasure fair.

古文：亦不敢先言之，坐于席末。
现代文：到会之后，他并不敢说他带来宝物了，自觉地坐到了最末席。
English: After arriving at the meeting, he did not dare to say that he had brought a treasure, and deliberately sat in the last seat.

古文：食讫，诸胡出宝。
现代文：酒饭之后，胡人们开始展示宝贝。
English: After the meal, the Hu people began to display their treasures.

古文：上坐者出明珠四，其大逾径寸。
现代文：坐在最上座的拿出来的是四颗宝珠，每一颗都有径寸之大。
English: Sitting in the uppermost seat, he took out four beads, each of which had a large diameter.

古文：余胡皆起，稽首礼拜。
现代文：在场的胡人全都站起来，一齐向首席胡人稽首礼拜。
English: All the Hu people present stood up and bowed to the chief Hu people.

古文：其次以下所出者，或三或二，悉是宝。
现代文：其余依次展示出来的，或者三枚，或者两枚，全是珍宝。
English: The rest, displayed in turn, or three, or two, are all treasures.

古文：至坐末，诸胡咸笑，戏谓生： 君亦有宝否？ 
现代文：轮到坐末，胡人们全都笑了，和他开玩笑道： 您也有宝贝吗？ 
English: At the end of the session, the Hu people all laughed and joked with him, "Do you have a baby, too?

古文：生曰： 有之。 
现代文：他半真半假地说： 有！ 
English: He half-truly said: Yes!

古文：遂所出怀以示之，而自笑。三十余胡皆起，扶生于座首，礼拜各足。
现代文：于是就把石片拿出来展示，三十位胡人全都站起来，把他推到首席上去，一齐下拜。
English: So he took out the stone and showed it, and all thirty Hu people stood up, pushed him to the top, and bowed down together.

古文：生初为见谑，不胜惭悚。
现代文：他以为自己被捉弄了，很不好意思。
English: He thought he was being pranked and was embarrassed.

古文：后知诚意，大惊异。
现代文：后来才知道，胡人们是诚心诚意的，这才感到惊奇。
English: I was surprised to learn later that the Hu people were sincere.

古文：其老胡见此石，亦有泣者。
现代文：那些老一点的胡人见到此石，有的都流下眼泪。
English: Some of the older Hu people shed tears when they saw the stone.

古文：众遂求生，请市此宝，恣其所索。
现代文：于是众胡人就和魏生商量，要买这件宝贝，让他随便要价。
English: So all the Hu people discussed with Wei Sheng. If he wanted to buy this treasure, he could ask for any price.

古文：生遂大言，索百万。
现代文：他也就没客气，要一百万。
English: He didn't hesitate to ask for a million.

古文：众皆怒之， 何故辱吾此宝？ 
现代文：众胡人嗔怒道： 为什么要侮辱我们的宝贝呢？ 
English: All the Hu people angrily said, "Why do you want to insult our treasure?

古文：加至千万乃已。
现代文：于是再加价，一直加到一千万才算完。
English: As a result, the price was raised again, until it reached ten million.

古文：潜问胡： 此宝名何？ 
现代文：他悄悄问一个胡人这宝贝叫什么名字。
English: He quietly asked a goose what the baby's name was.

古文：胡云： 此是某本国之宝。
现代文：胡人说： 这是我们国家的国宝。
English: Hu said: "This is a national treasure of our country.

古文：因乱遂失之，已经三十余年。
现代文：因为战乱已经丢失了三十多年了。
English: Because of the war, it has been lost for more than thirty years.

古文：我王求募之，云，获者拜国相。
现代文：我们的国王下令寻求它，说，能找到此宝的人拜为国相。
English: Our king gave the order to search for it, saying that whoever found this treasure would be made a minister of state.

古文：此归皆获厚赏，岂止于数百万哉？ 
现代文：这次我们回去，都能得到重赏，何止几百万！ 
English: This time, when we go back, we can all get a big reward, more than several million!

古文：问其所用。
现代文：他又问有什么用。
English: He also asked what it was for.

古文：云： 此宝母也。
现代文：胡人说： 这是宝母啊！
English: Hu said, "This is the treasure mother!"

古文：但每月望，王自出海岸，设坛致祭之，以此置坛上。一夕，明珠宝贝等皆自聚。故名 宝母 也。 
现代文：每月的十五日，国王亲自来到海岸，把此宝放到一个事先设好的祭坛上祭奠，到了晚上，各种珍珠宝贝就会自动聚拢而来。所以叫做 宝母 。 
English: On the fifteenth day of each month, the king himself came to the coast and placed this treasure on a previously set altar for worship. In the evening, all kinds of pearl treasures would automatically gather. That's why it's called the treasure mother.

古文：生得财倍其先资也。
现代文：魏生这一次获得的钱财成倍于原先的家产。
English: The money that Wei Sheng obtained this time was double the original family property.

