古文：◎刑法一
现代文：刑法一
English: Criminal Law I

古文：自汉以来，刑法沿革不一。
现代文：自汉朝以来，刑法沿革不一。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, criminal law has had a mixed history.

古文：隋更五刑之条，设三奏之令。
现代文：隋朝变更了五刑的条例，设置三奏的法令。
English: The Sui Dynasty changed the regulation of the five punishments and set up a three-step decree.

古文：唐撰律令，一准乎礼，以为出入。
现代文：唐朝编写律令，宪全以礼为标准而增损。
English: The Tang Dynasty compiled the Ritsuryo Code, and the Constitution was based on etiquette.

古文：宋采用之，而所重者敕。律所不载者，则听之于敕。
现代文：宋采用唐律，然而更重敕令，法律没有记载的，便听从敕令。
English: The Song Dynasty adopted the Tang law, but the imperial edict was more important. If the law was not recorded, then the imperial edict was obeyed.

古文：故时轻时重，无一是之归。
现代文：因而法令时轻时重，没有二个正确的标准。
English: As a result, the law changes from time to time, and there are no two correct standards.

古文：元制，取所行一时之例为条格而已。
现代文：元朝制度，取所行一时的办案事例作为条规而已。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty system, the cases that were handled at one time were taken as rules and regulations.

古文：明初，丞相李善长等言： 历代之律，皆以汉《九章》为宗，至唐始集其成。
现代文：明朝初年，丞相李善长等说： 历代的法律，都以汉《九章》为标准，到唐代纔集其大成。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Minister of Justice Li Shanchang and others said: The laws of all ages are based on the Han "Nine Chapters" as the standard, and the Tang Dynasty was the culmination.

古文：今制宜遵唐旧。 
现代文：现在的制度应该遵从唐时旧制。 
English: The current system should follow the old Tang Dynasty system.

古文：太祖从其言。
现代文：太祖采纳了他们的意见。
English: The great-grandfather followed his advice.

古文：始，太祖惩元纵弛之后，刑用重典，然特取决一时，非以为则。
现代文：开初，太祖以元朝刑律任意而松懈为戒，判案使用重法。不过这祇是权宜之计，并非以此为法则。
English: At the beginning, Taizu warned against the arbitrariness and laxity of the criminal law of the Yuan Dynasty, and used the heavy law to judge cases. However, this was only an expedient measure, not a rule.

古文：后屡诏厘正，至三十年，始申画一之制，所以斟酌损益之者，至纤至悉，令子孙守之。
现代文：后来多次下诏整饬纠正，到洪武三十年纔倡明统一的制度，斟酌损益的条款，极其细致完备，让子孙遵守。
English: Later, it was rectified and corrected many times, and in the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, a unified system was proposed, and the terms for considering losses and profits were extremely detailed and complete, so that the descendants could comply.

古文：群臣有稍议更改，即坐以变乱祖制之罪。
现代文：群臣稍有更改的意见，就以变乱祖制治罪。
English: If there is any change in the opinions of the ministers, the crime will be dealt with according to the principle of mutiny.

古文：而后乃滋弊者，由于人不知律，妄意律举大纲，不足以尽情伪之变，于是因律起例，因例生例，例愈纷而弊愈无穷。
现代文：而后来又生出弊端，是由于人们不懂法律，胡乱理解律令纲要，不能依真伪变化而按寅情处理。于是根据律令而建立案例，又根据案例推衍案例，案例越多而积弊越多，以致无穷。
English: Later, however, drawbacks arose due to people's ignorance of the law, their confused understanding of the outline of the ritsuryo, and their inability to deal with cases according to the truth and falsity changes. Therefore, cases were established according to the ritsuryo, and cases were derived according to the cases, and the more cases there were, the more drawbacks there were, to the point of infinity.

古文：初诏内外风宪官，以讲读律令一条，考校有司。
现代文：起初皇帝下诏朝廷内外御史官，以讲读一条律令来考核有关官吏。
English: At first, the emperor ordered the imperial court's internal and external historians to evaluate the relevant officials by reading a law.

古文：其不能晓晰者，罚有差。庶几人知律意。
现代文：那些不能讲清楚的官吏按情况给予不同的处罚，希望人人都懂得律令的意思。
English: Those officials who can't explain clearly give different punishments according to the situation, and hope that everyone understands the meaning of the ritsuryo.

古文：因循日久，视为具文。
现代文：可是沿袭久了，就被当作一种空泛的形式。
English: But over time, it has come to be seen as an empty form.

古文：由此奸吏骫法，任意轻重。
现代文：由此奸吏枉法，任意减轻加重。
English: As a result, the corrupt officials abused the law and arbitrarily reduced or increased the punishment.

古文：至如律有取自上裁、临时处治者，因罪在八议不得擅自勾问、与一切疑狱罪名难定、及律无正文者设，非谓朝廷可任情生杀之也。
现代文：至于法律条文的设立，有的取自皇上裁决、临时处治，有的因罪在八议之内不能擅自提审、有的因一切疑案罪名难定、以及法律没有正式条文适用者，并不是说朝延可以任意决定人的生死。
English: As for the establishment of legal provisions, some are taken from the emperor's ruling and provisional punishment, some cannot be brought to trial without authorization within eight days for crimes, some are difficult to determine because of all doubtful crimes, and there is no formal application of the law. This does not mean that Chaoyang can arbitrarily decide the life and death of a person.

古文：英、宪以后，钦恤之意微，侦伺之风炽。
现代文：而英宗、宪宗以后，上面的慎重怜恤之心衰微，密探之风炽盛。
English: But after Yingzong and Kenzong, the above-mentioned cautious and compassionate heart waned, and the wind of espionage was in full swing.

古文：巨恶大憝，案如山积，而旨从中下，从之不问。或本无死理，而片纸付诏狱，为祸尤烈。
现代文：巨奸大恶，案如山积，祇要圣旨从宫中下达，就放纵不追问；有的人本来没有该死的罪，只要一张纸条便会被关进钦犯监狱，祸害特别惨烈。
English: A great traitor and a great evil, the cases are piling up. As long as the imperial edict is issued from the palace, they will be indulged without questioning. Some people do not have a damnable crime, as long as they have a piece of paper, they will be locked up in a prison for criminals. The scourge is particularly severe.

古文：故综明代刑法大略，而以厂卫终之。
现代文：因此综观明代刑法概况，而以厂、卫终结。
English: Therefore, the overview of the criminal law situation in the Ming Dynasty ends with the factories and hospitals.

古文：厂竖姓名，传不备载，列之于此，使有所考焉。
现代文：东厂特务的姓名，列传部分记载不全，列在此处，以备考查。
English: The names of the special agents of the East Factory, listed in the incomplete part of the record, are listed here for reference.

古文：明太祖平武昌，即议律令。
现代文：明太祖平定武昌之后，就与臣下商议律令。
English: After Emperor Taizu conquered Wuchang, he discussed the ritsuryo with his vassals.

古文：吴元年冬十月，命左丞相李善长为律令总裁官，参知政事杨宪、傅瓛，御史中丞刘基，翰林学士陶安等二十人为议律官，谕之曰： 法贵简当，使人易晓。
现代文：吴元年冬十月，太祖任命左丞相李善长为律令总裁官，参知政事杨宪、傅球，御史中丞刘基，翰林学士陶安等二十人为议律官，告谕他们： 法律贵在简洁恰当，使人容易明白。
English: In the winter and October of the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Emperor Taizu appointed the minister of the left, Li Shengchang, as the president of the ritsuryo, and the counselors, Yang Xian, Fuqiu, Liu Ji, Hanlin, and Tao An, as the twenty councilors of the ritsuryo, and told them: The law should be concise and appropriate, so that people can easily understand it.

古文：若条绪繁多，或一事两端，可轻可重，吏得因缘为奸，非法意也。
现代文：若是条目头绪繁多，或者同一罪有两种判法，可轻可重，司法官吏就会借机谋私作弊，这不符合法律的意旨。
English: If there are a large number of entries, or if there are two ways of judging the same crime, which can be light or heavy, judicial officials will take the opportunity to cheat for personal gain, which is not in line with the intention of the law.

古文：夫网密则水无大鱼，法密则国无全民。
现代文：鱼网太密，则水中无大鱼；法网太密，则国内无没有受刑的臣民。
English: If the fishing net is too tight, there will be no big fish in the water; if the legal net is too tight, there will be no subjects in the country who have not been punished.

古文：卿等悉心参究，日具刑名条目以上，吾亲酌议焉。 
现代文：诸位悉心比较研究，每天写出些刑名条目奏上来，我亲自斟酌裁择。 
English: You should carefully compare the research, write out some punishment items every day, and I will personally consider the selection.

古文：每御西楼，召诸臣赐坐，从容讲论律义。
现代文：太祖每次驾临西楼，都召见诸臣，赐坐，与他们随便讲论律文要义。
English: Every time the great-grandfather came to the West Tower, he summoned all the courtiers, gave them a seat, and casually lectured to them on the essentials of the law.

古文：十二月，书成，凡为令一百四十五条，律二百八十五条。
现代文：十二月，律书写成，共有令一百四十五条，律二百八十五条。
English: In December, the law was written, with a total of one hundred and forty-five orders and two hundred and eighty-five laws.

古文：又恐小民不能周知，命大理卿周桢等取所定律令，自礼乐、制度、钱粮、选法之外，凡民间所行事宜，类聚成编，训释其义，颁之郡县，名曰《律令直解》。
现代文：太祖又怕小民不能都知道法律，命令大理卿周桢等取出所定律令，除了礼乐、制度、钱粮和选法之外，凡是与民间事携有关的条文，分类编辑成册，解释其意义，颁发给郡县，称之为《律令直解》。
English: The great-grandfather was also afraid that the common people could not all know the law, and ordered the Dalian chancellor Zhou Qi and others to take out the laws and decrees, except for the ceremonial music, system, money and grain, and selection method, and all the provisions related to civil affairs, classified and edited into a book, explained its meaning, and issued to counties and counties, called "Direct Interpretation of Laws and Decrees."

古文：太祖览其书而喜曰： 吾民可以寡过矣。 
现代文：太祖翻阅此书，兴地说： 我的臣民可以少犯过错了。 
English: The great-grandfather flipped through the book and said cheerfully, "My subjects can make fewer mistakes."

古文：洪武元年，又命儒臣四人，同刑官讲《唐律》，日进二十条。
现代文：洪武元年太祖又命令儒臣四人同执法官讲习《唐律》，每天上奏二十条。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather also ordered four scholars of Confucianism to study the "Tang Dynasty Laws" with the magistrate, and recite twenty articles every day.

古文：五年，定宦官禁令及亲属相容隐律，六年夏，刊《律令宪纲》，颁之诸司。
现代文：五年，制定宦官禁令及亲属们互相隐瞒的法律，六年夏，刊印《律令宪纲》，颁发给各部门。
English: In the fifth year, the eunuch ban and the law of mutual concealment of relatives were enacted, and in the summer of the sixth year, the "Constitutional Law" was published and issued to all departments.

古文：其冬，诏刑部尚书刘惟谦详定《大明律》。
现代文：当年冬天，太祖下诏刑部尚书刘惟谦详细制定《大明律》。
English: In the winter of that year, Liu Weiqian, the head of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict department of the imperial edict.

古文：每奏一篇，命揭两庑，亲加裁酌。
现代文：每上奏一篇，皇帝就叫张贴于两边廊庶下，亲自加以裁夺。
English: Every time a piece was played, the emperor had it posted on both sides of the gallery and personally cut it.

古文：及成，翰林学士宋濂为表以进，曰： 臣以洪武六年冬十一月受诏，明年二月书成。
现代文：等律书修成，翰林学士宋濂写表进奏道： 臣于洪武六年冬十一月受诏，次年二月律书修成。
English: In November of the winter of the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the imperial edict was issued, and in February of the following year, the imperial edict was completed.

古文：篇目一准于唐：曰卫禁，曰职制，曰户婚，曰厩库，曰擅兴，曰贼盗，曰斗讼，曰诈伪，曰杂律，曰捕亡，曰断狱，曰名例。
现代文：篇目完全以《唐律》为准，称作卫禁、职制、户婚、厩库、擅兴、贼盗、斗讼、诈伪、杂律、捕亡、断狱和名例。
English: The contents are entirely based on the "Tang Dynasty Law" and are called "Security Restriction," "Service System," "Household Marriage," "Stables," "Arrogance," "Thieves and Robbers," "Dispute," "Fraud," "Miscellaneous Laws," "Catch and Kill," "Breaking Out of Prison" and "Famous Cases."

古文：采用旧律二百八十八条，续律百二十八条，旧令改律三十六条，因事制律三十一条，掇《唐律》以补遗百二十三条，合六百有六条，分为三十卷。
现代文：采用旧律二百八十八条，续作律文一百二十八条，将旧有法令改为律三十六条，根据需要制定律文三十一条，采撷《唐律》作为补遗一百二十三条，总共六百零六条，分为三十卷。
English: Adopting 288 articles of the old law, continuing 128 articles of the law, changing the old laws into 36 articles of the law, formulating 31 articles of the law as needed, and adopting 123 articles of the "Tang Law" as a supplement, a total of 606 articles, divided into 30 volumes.

古文：或损或益，或仍其旧，务合轻重之宜。 
现代文：有的增补，有的删削，有的沿袭旧制，务求轻重合宜。 
English: Some additions, some deletions, some follow the old system, in order to be appropriate.

古文：九年，太祖览律条犹有未当者，命丞相胡惟庸、御史大夫汪广洋等详议，厘正十有三条。
现代文：九年，太祖发现律条还有不恰当的，命令丞相胡惟庸、御史大夫汪广洋等详细讨论，改正了十三条。
English: In the ninth year, the great-grandfather found that there were still inappropriate rules, ordered the chancellor Hu Wei Yong and the chief historian Wang Guangyang to discuss in detail, and amended thirteen articles.

古文：十六年，命尚书开济定诈伪律条。
现代文：十六年，又命令尚书开济定下诈伪罪的律绦。
English: Sixteen years later, he also ordered Shang Shuxiaoji to set down the sentence for the crime of fraud.

古文：二十二年，刑部言： 比年条例增损不一，以致断狱失当。
现代文：二十二年，刑部官员说： 近年来条例增损不一，以致断案失当。
English: In 2012, officials from the Criminal Investigation Department said: "In recent years, the regulations have increased and decreased, resulting in inappropriate case dismissals.

古文：请编类颁行，俾中外知所遵守。 
现代文：请求将律绦按类编印颁行，使朝廷内外都知道应遵守的规则。 
English: It was requested that the ritsuryo be compiled and issued according to categories, so that both inside and outside the Imperial Court would know the rules to be observed.

古文：遂命翰林院同刑部官，取比年所增者，以类附入。改《名例律》冠于篇首。
现代文：于是太祖命令翰林院会同刑部官员，取近几年增加的条文按类附入《大明律》，改《名例律》，放在篇首。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather ordered the Hanlin Academy and the officials of the Criminal Law Department to take the provisions added in recent years and attach them to the "Daming Law" according to categories, and to change the "Naming Law" and put it at the beginning of the article.

古文：为卷凡三十，为条四百有六十。《名例》一卷，四十七条。《吏律》二卷，曰职制十五条，曰公式十八条。
现代文：总共三十卷，四百六十绦。《名例》一卷，四十七条。《吏律》二卷，职制十五条，公式十八条。
English: A total of thirty volumes, four hundred and sixty volumes, one volume of "Famous Cases" with forty-seven articles, two volumes of "Administrative Law" with fifteen articles on job titles and eighteen articles on formulas.

古文：《刑律》十一卷，曰盗贼二十八条，曰人命二十条，曰斗殴二十二条，曰骂詈八条，曰诉讼十二条，曰受赃十一条，曰诈伪十二条，曰犯奸十条，曰杂犯十一条，曰捕亡八条，曰断狱二十九条。
现代文：《户律》七卷，户役十五条，田宅十一条，婚姻十八条，仓库二十四条，课程十九条，钱债三条，市廛五条。《礼律》二卷，祭祀六条，仪制二十条。《兵律》五卷，宫卫十九条，军政二十条，关津七条，厩牧十一条，邮驿十八条。《刑律》十一卷，盗贼二十八条，人命二十条，斗殴二十二条，骂詈八条，诉讼十二条，受脏十一条，诈伪十二条，犯奸十条，杂犯十一条，捕亡八条，断狱二十九条。
English: "Household Law" 7 volumes, 15 articles on household service, 11 articles on field residence, 18 articles on marriage, 24 articles on warehouse, 19 articles on curriculum, 3 articles on money debt, 5 articles on market regulation, 2 volumes on etiquette, 6 articles on sacrifice, 20 articles on ceremonial system, 5 volumes on military law, 19 articles on palace guard, 20 articles on military and political affairs, 7 articles on Guanzin, 11 articles on stable management, 18 articles on postal regulations, 11 volumes on criminal law, 28 articles on theft, 20 articles on human life, 22 articles on fight, 8 articles on abuse, 12 articles on litigation, 11 articles on defilement, 12 articles

古文：《工律》二卷，曰营造九条，曰河防四条。
现代文：《工律》二卷，营造九条，河防四条。
English: "Working Rules" in two volumes, nine articles on construction and four on river protection.

古文：为五刑之图凡二。
现代文：绘制五刑之图两类。
English: There are two types of drawing the five punishments.

古文：首图五：曰笞，曰杖，曰徒，曰流，曰死。
现代文：第一类五种：笞，杖，徒，流，死。
English: There are five kinds of the first type: the cormorant, the cane, the acolyte, the stream, and the dead.

古文：笞刑五，自一十至五十，每十为一等加减。
现代文：笞刑五等，笞打十卞到五十下；每十下为一等相加减。
English: Caning is a fifth-class punishment, and beating is a tenth-class punishment up to fifty strokes; every tenth stroke is a first-class addition and subtraction.

古文：杖刑五，自六十至一百，每十为一等加减。
现代文：杖刑五等，杖打六十下到一百下；每十下为一等相加减。
English: The cane punishment is of the fifth degree, and the cane can be beaten from sixty to one hundred times. For every ten times, one degree is added and subtracted.

古文：徒刑五，徒一年杖六十，一年半杖七十，二年杖八十，二年半杖九十，三年杖一百，每杖十及徒半年为一等加减。
现代文：徒刑五等，罚苦役一年杖打六十下，一年半杖打七十下，二年杖打八十下，二年半杖打九十下，三年杖打一百下；每打十下及罚苦役半年为一等相加碱。
English: Imprisonment of the fifth degree, one year of hard labor with 60 strokes of the cane, one and a half years of hard labor with 70 strokes of the cane, two years of hard labor with 80 strokes of the cane, two and a half years of hard labor with 90 strokes of the cane, three years of hard labor with 100 strokes of the cane; every 10 strokes of the cane and six months of hard labor are first-class alkaline additives.

古文：流刑三，二千里，二千五百里，三千里，皆杖一百，每五百里为一等加减。
现代文：流刑三等，流放二千里，二千五百里，三千里，都杖打一百下；每五百里为一等相加减。
English: Third-class banishment, banishment of two thousand li, two thousand five hundred li, three thousand li, all with one hundred strokes of the cane; every five hundred li is one class plus or minus.

古文：死刑二，绞、斩。
现代文：死刑两种，绞和斩。
English: There are two types of death penalty, hanging and beheading.

古文：五刑之外，徒有总徒四年，有准徒五年，流有安置，有迁徙，有口外为民，其重者曰充军。
现代文：五刑之外，徒刑有总徒四年，遇惯例碱刑一年的，有准徒五年，判斩、绞、杂犯减等的。流刑的处理有安置，有迁徙，离乡一千里的，杖打一百下，准徒二年，有迁出长城外为民，罪行严重的称为充军。
English: In addition to the five punishments, there are four years of imprisonment for the general inmate, one year for the usual alkali punishment, five years for the probationer, and the sentence of beheading, hanging, and reduction for minor offenders. The treatment of banishment includes resettlement, migration, 1,000 miles away from home, 100 strokes of the cane, two years of probation, and moving out of the Great Wall for the people. Serious crimes are called military conscription.

古文：充军者，明初唯边方屯种。
现代文：充军之刑，明初只有去边境屯田。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the only punishment for joining the army was to be sent to the border garrison.

古文：后定制，分极边、烟瘴、边远、边卫、沿海、附近。
现代文：后定下制度，分为极边、畑瘴、边远、边卫、沿海和附近几等。
English: Later, a system was established, which was divided into the extreme edge, the fields, the outlying areas, the border guards, the coast, and the neighborhood.

古文：军有终身，有永远。
现代文：充军有终身，有永远二等。
English: There is life-long conscription, and there is second-class conscription forever.

古文：二死之外，有凌迟，以处大逆不道诸罪者。
现代文：两种死刑绞、斩之外，有凌迟，用来处决大逆不道的那几种罪犯。
English: In addition to the two types of death penalty, hanging and beheading, there is also lingzhi, which is used to execute those types of criminals who are traitors.

古文：充军、凌迟，非五刑之正，故图不列。
现代文：充军和凌迟，不在五刑正例中，所以刑图不列。
English: Kengjun and Lingzhi are not among the five positive cases of punishment, so they are not listed in the punishment chart.

古文：凡徒流再犯者，流者于原配处所，依工、乐户留住法。
现代文：凡是服徒、流之罪而重犯者，流放刑徒归原发配处所，依工户、乐户留住法处罚。
English: Any person who has committed the crime of serving as a convict or a vagrant and has repeated the crime shall be returned to the original place of assignment of the banished convict and shall be punished in accordance with the Law of Retention of Working Households and Pleasure Households.

古文：三流并决杖一百，拘役三年。
现代文：三种流放刑徒都判处杖刑一百下，拘役三年。
English: All three types of banishment convicts were sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane and three years of criminal detention.

古文：拘役者，流人初止安置，今加以居作，即唐、宋所谓加役流也。
现代文：拘役，指流放刑徒当初只是安置边荒居住，现在加罚苦役，即唐、宋所说的加役流。
English: Criminal detention refers to the fact that at the beginning, exiled prisoners were only resettled to live in the desert, but now they are punished with hard labor, that is, the type of forced labor mentioned by Tang and Song dynasties.

古文：徒者于原役之所，依所犯杖数年限决讫，应役无得过四年。
现代文：服徒罪者重犯，归原服役处所，依所犯之罪判决杖数和年限，服苦役不得超过四年。
English: If a person who has served a prison sentence commits a repeat offense, he or she shall return to the original place of service, and the number of canes and the term of service shall be determined according to the crime committed. The term of hard labor shall not exceed four years.

古文：次图七：曰笞，曰杖，曰讯杖，曰枷，曰杻，曰索，曰鐐。
现代文：第二类刑图有七种刑具：笞，杖，讯杖，枷，扭，索和镰铐。
English: The second type of torture chart has seven kinds of torture instruments: shackles, canes, telegraph rods, shackles, torsions, ropes and shackles.

古文：笞，大头径二分七厘，小头减一分。
现代文：笞具，大头直径二分七厘，小头减一分。
English: Utensil, the diameter of the large head is two-point-seven-percent, the small head is one-point-less.

古文：杖，大头径三分二厘，小头减如笞之数。
现代文：杖具，大头直径三分二厘，小头碱如同笞具之敷。
English: A cane tool, the diameter of the large head is two-thirds of a centimeter, and the base of the small head is like the lining of a cane tool.

古文：笞、杖皆以荆条为之，皆臀受。
现代文：笞、杖都以荆条制作，都打臀部。
English: The cymbals and staffs are made from strips of thorns, and they all strike the buttocks.

古文：讯杖，大头径四分五厘，小头减如笞杖之数，以荆条为之，臀腿受。
现代文：讯杖，大头直径四分五厘，小头减如笞、杖之数，用荆绦制作，打臀部和大腿。
English: A messenger cane, the diameter of the large end is four-and-a-half percent, the smaller end is reduced to the number of the cane and the cane, made of wattle, hitting the buttocks and thighs.

古文：笞、杖、讯，皆长三尺五寸，用官降式较勘，毋以筋胶诸物装钉。
现代文：笞、杖和讯杖，都长三尺五寸，用官府下达的式样校核，不准用皮筋粘附东西或装上钉子。
English: The pestle, the staff, and the cane are all three feet and five inches long. They are checked using the model issued by the government, and it is not allowed to use the leather strap to attach things or attach nails.

古文：枷，自十五斤至二十五斤止，刻其上为长短轻重之数。
现代文：枷，从十五斤到二十五斤，将长短轻重的数值刻在上面。
English: yoke, from fifteen pounds to twenty-five pounds, with the weights and measures inscribed on it.

古文：长五尺五寸，头广尺五寸，杻长尺六寸，厚一寸，男子死罪者用之。
现代文：枷长五尺五寸，头宽一尺五寸，扭长一尺六寸，厚一寸。犯了死罪的男囚徒使用它。
English: The length of the shackle is five feet and five inches, the width of the head is one foot and five inches, the twist length is one foot and six inches, and the thickness is one inch. Male prisoners who have committed capital crimes use it.

古文：索，铁为之，以系轻罪者，其长一丈。
现代文：索是铁做的，用来拘系轻罪犯，长度为一丈。
English: The rope is made of iron and is used to restrain petty criminals. It is a metre long.

古文：鐐，铁连环之，以絷足，徒者带以输作，重三斤。
现代文：镰，做成铁连环，用来系足，囚徒戴着它劳动，重三斤。
English: A shackle, made of iron links, used to tie the feet, prisoners wore it to work, weighing three pounds.

古文：又为丧服之图凡八：族亲有犯，视服等差定刑之轻重。
现代文：又绘制丧服之图八种：同族亲戚有犯罪者，视丧服等差定判刑的轻重。
English: In addition, eight types of mourning clothes were drawn: those who have relatives of the same ethnic group who have committed crimes, depending on the mourning clothes and other factors, the severity of the sentence will be different.

古文：其因礼以起义者，养母、继母、慈母皆服三年。
现代文：这是因礼法而定律义。对养母、继母和长养自己的庶母都服丧三年。
English: This is due to the rules of etiquette. For the adoptive mother, stepmother and stepmother who raised her for three years.

古文：殴杀之，与殴杀嫡母同罪。
现代文：如果殴打或杀害她们与殴打或杀害嫡母同罪。
English: If they are beaten or killed, it is the same as beating or killing the mother.

古文：兄弟妻皆服小功，互为容隐者，罪得递减。
现代文：焉兄弟之妻都服丧三个月。亲戚间互相隐瞒罪行，罪得以递减。
English: The wives of both brothers were in mourning for three months. The relatives concealed the crime from each other, and the crime was reduced.

古文：舅姑之服皆斩衰三年，殴杀骂詈之者，与夫殴杀骂詈之律同。
现代文：为公公、婆婆都服斩衰三年，打、杀、设骂他们的，与其夫打杀馒骂他们同罪。
English: For the father-in-law and the mother-in-law, they have been suffering for three years, and beating, killing, and mocking them are the same crime as beating, killing, and mocking them with their husbands.

古文：姨之子、舅之子、姑之子皆緦麻，是曰表兄弟，不得相为婚姻。
现代文：为姨妈的儿子、舅舅的儿子和姑姑的儿子都服总麻，他们互称表兄弟，不得联姻。
English: For the son of the aunt, the son of the uncle and the son of the aunt are all subject to the same law. They call each other cousins and are not allowed to marry.

古文：大恶有十：曰谋反，曰谋大逆，曰谋叛，曰恶逆，曰不道，曰大不敬，曰不孝，曰不睦，曰不义，曰内乱。虽常赦不原。
现代文：大恶有十种：称为谋反、谋大逆、谋叛、恶逆、不道、大不敬、不孝、不睦、不义和内乱。即使碰到常赦也不宽恕。
English: There are ten kinds of great evils: they are called plotting rebellion, plotting great rebellion, plotting rebellion, evil rebellion, immorality, great disrespect, lack of filial piety, discord, injustice, and civil strife.

古文：贪墨之赃有六：曰监守盗，曰常人盗，曰窃盗，曰枉法，曰不枉法，曰坐赃。
现代文：贪官污吏的赃物有六种：监守自盗，常人盗，偷窃，枉法，不枉法，坐脏。
English: There are six kinds of stolen goods of corrupt officials: theft by prison guards, theft by ordinary people, theft, cheating, cheating, and dirty.

古文：当议者有八：曰议亲，曰议故，曰议功，曰议贤，曰议能，曰议勤，曰议贵，曰议宾。
现代文：执法应当奏请商议的有八种：议亲戚，议故旧，议功劳，议贤良，议才能，议勤奋，议尊贵，议宾客。
English: There are eight kinds of law enforcement that should be submitted for discussion: discussion of relatives, discussion of the past, discussion of merits, discussion of the virtuous, discussion of talent, discussion of diligence, discussion of honor, discussion of guests.

古文：太祖谕太孙曰： 此书首列二刑图，次列八礼图者，重礼也。
现代文：太祖告谕太孙说： 此书首列两类刑图，次列八礼图的原因，是为了重礼。
English: The great-grandfather told the great-grandson, "The reason why the first two types of torture pictures and the second eight ritual pictures are listed in this book is for the purpose of heavy ritual.

古文：顾愚民无知，若于本条下即注宽恤之令，必易而犯法，故以广大好生之意，总列《名例律》中。
现代文：想到愚民无知，如果在刑律本条下就注明宽大怜悯之令，愚民一定会轻视刑律而犯法。故本着宽厚惜人之意，将它们全都列在《名例律》中。
English: Considering the ignorance of the stupid people, if an order of clemency and mercy is indicated under this article of the Criminal Law, the stupid people will certainly despise the Criminal Law and violate the law. Therefore, with the intention of being merciful, they will all be listed in the "Famous Cases Law."

古文：善用法者，会其意可也。 
现代文：善于施行法律者，领会其旨意即可。 
English: If you are good at enforcing the law, you can understand its purpose.

古文：太孙请更定五条以上，太祖览而善之。
现代文：太孙请求更改其中五条以上，太祖看了，觉得很好。
English: The great-grandson requested to change more than five of them. The great-grandfather read it and thought it was good.

古文：太孙又请曰： 明刑所以弼教，凡与五伦相涉者，宜皆屈法以伸情。 
现代文：太孙又请求道： 倡明刑罚是为了辅助教化。凡是同五伦相关的地方，最好一律枉屈法律，伸张人情。 
English: The great-grandson also pleaded, "We should make it clear that the purpose of punishment is to aid education. In all areas related to the Five Classics, it is best to bend the law and promote human feelings.

古文：乃命改定七十三条，复谕之曰： 吾治乱世，刑不得不重。
现代文：于是太祖下令改定七十三绦，又传谕太孙： 我是治理乱世，所以刑法不得不重。
English: As a result, the great-grandfather ordered to amend the Seventy-three Articles, and also told the great-grandson: I am the ruler of a chaotic world, so the criminal law had to be strengthened.

古文：汝治平世，刑自当轻，所谓刑罚世轻世重也。 
现代文：你是治理和平之世，刑罚自然应该轻一些。这就是刑罚要随时代治乱时轻时重。 
English: You are the ruler of a peaceful world. Naturally, the punishment should be lighter. This means that the punishment should be lighter and heavier according to the times.

古文：二十五年，刑部言，律条与条例不同者宜更定。
现代文：二十五年，刑部说，律条和条例不合的应该重新制定。
English: Twenty-five years later, the Criminal Law Department said that if the rules and regulations are inconsistent, they should be re-enacted.

古文：太祖以条例特一时权宜，定律不可改，不从。
现代文：太祖认为条例只是临时变通的措施，确定了的条律不可更改，不采纳刑部的意见。
English: Taizu believes that the regulations are only temporary measures, the established rules cannot be changed, and does not accept the opinion of the criminal department.

古文：三十年，作《大明律》诰成。
现代文：铿武三十年作成《大明律诰》。
English: It took him 30 years to compile "Daming Ritsuryo."

古文：御午门，谕群臣曰： 朕仿古为治，明礼以导民，定律以绳顽，刊著为令。
现代文：皇帝驾临午门，告谕群臣说： 朕效法古人治国，修明礼制来引导人民，制定法律来约束凶顽，刊印焉法令。
English: When the emperor arrived at the noon gate, he announced to his courtiers: "I will govern the country following the example of the ancients, amend the etiquette to guide the people, enact laws to restrain the ferocious, and publish and print decrees.

古文：行之既久，犯者犹众，故作《大诰》以示民，使知趋吉避凶之道。
现代文：施行已久，触犯刑律的人仍然很多，所以写作《大诰》昭示下民，使他们明白趋向吉利避免凶祸的办法。
English: It has been implemented for a long time, and there are still many people who violate the criminal law. Therefore, the writing of the "Great Edict" shows the people, so that they understand the way to avoid misfortune by tending to good luck.

古文：古人谓刑为祥刑，岂非欲民并生于天地间哉！
现代文：古人把刑律称为祥刑，难道不是希望百姓都生息在天地之间吗！
English: The ancients called the Penal Code the Xiang Penal Code. Didn't they want the people to live between heaven and earth?

古文：然法在有司，民不周知，故命刑官取《大诰》条目，撮其要略，附载于律。
现代文：然而法律掌握在主管官员手襄，并不是所有百姓都知道，所以朕下令刑官将《大诰》条目中重要的部分摘出，附载于法律之后。
English: However, the law is in the hands of the competent officials, and not all the people know it, so I ordered the criminal officer to take out the important part of the "Big Bang" entry and attach it to the law.

古文：凡榜文禁例悉除之，除谋逆及《律诰》该载外，其杂犯大小之罪，悉依赎罪例论断，编次成书，刊布中外，令天下知所遵守。 
现代文：凡是张榜的告示禁令一律废除，除了谋逆罪及《律诰》载列的全部罪行以外，那些大小杂罪，一律依赎罪条例判处。现编排成书，刊发于朝廷内外，使天下人都知道应该遵守的法规。 
English: All prohibitions against the publication of lists were abolished, and except for the crime of treason and all crimes listed in the "Ritsuryo," all miscellaneous crimes, large and small, were to be sentenced according to the Atonement Regulations. Now compiled into a book, published inside and outside the imperial court, so that the world knows the laws that should be observed.

古文：《大诰》者，太祖患民狃元习，徇私灭公，戾日滋，十八年，采辑官民过犯，条为《大诰》。
现代文：《大诰》之作，是因为太祖忧虑百姓习惯于元朝旧俗，徇私害公，暴戾日日滋长。十八年，采集官吏和平民过失犯罪，一条绦列出，修成《大诰》。
English: The work of "The Great Anvil" was written because the great-grandfather was worried that the people had become accustomed to the old customs of the Yuan Dynasty, that is, to commit crimes for personal gain and harm to the public, and that violence was growing day by day. In 18 years, officials and civilians were collected, and the crimes of negligence were listed and edited into "The Great Anvil."

古文：其目十条：曰揽纳户，曰安保过付，曰诡寄田粮，曰民人经该不解物，曰洒派抛荒田土，曰倚法为奸，曰空引偷军，曰黥刺在逃，曰官吏长解卖囚，曰寰中士夫不为君用。
现代文：其条目有十条：包揽他人赋税以代纳渔利，经中人交付钱财以暂保安稳，将田粮诡寄别处瞒税，遍读经书而不懂事务，将田地分派到他人名下或荒弃田地，凭执法之便干坏事，伪造通行证偷盗军需，黥面刺字的囚徒潜逃在外，官吏长途押解罪犯受贿宽纵囚犯，天下士大夫不为人君效劳。
English: There are ten items: collecting taxes from others to make a profit, paying money to a middleman for temporary security and stability, hiding taxes by sending crops and grain to other places, reading scriptures without understanding affairs, assigning fields to others or abandoning fields, doing bad things with the help of law enforcement, forging passes to steal military supplies, prisoners with tattoos on their faces absconding, officials escorting criminals for long distances, bribing and conning prisoners, and the world's sheriffs do not serve the people.

古文：其罪至抄劄。
现代文：其罪严重的抄家没收财产。
English: His crime was so serious that his house was raided and his property confiscated.

古文：次年复为《续编》、《三编》，皆颁学宫以课士，里置塾师教之。
现代文：第二年又颁布《大诰》的《续编》《三编》，都颁发到学宫以教育士子，每里指派塾师授课。
English: In the following year, the "Sequel" and "Sequel 3" of "The Great Calamity" were promulgated, all of which were awarded to the Academy to educate scholars, and each village was assigned a tutor to teach classes.

古文：囚有《大诰》者，罪减等。
现代文：手中有《大诰》的罪囚，其罪灭等。
English: In the hands of the criminal prisoners of the "Big Bang," their sins are destroyed, etc.

古文：于时，天下有讲读《大诰》师生来朝者十九万余人，并赐钞遣还。
现代文：那时候，天下讲读《大诰》的师生来京朝见星帝的达十九万余人，太祖都赐给钱钞，然后遣返回乡。
English: At that time, there were more than 190,000 teachers and students who came to Beijing to see the Emperor Xing, and they were all given money and sent back to their hometowns.

古文：自《律诰》出，而《大诰》所载诸峻令未尝轻用。
现代文：自从《大明律》和《大诰》出台，《大诰》所载的严厉法令不曾轻易使用过。
English: Since the promulgation of the "Great Law" and the "Great Edict," the severe decrees contained in the "Great Edict" have not been used lightly.

古文：其后罪人率援《大诰》以减等，亦不复论其有无矣。
现代文：此后犯罪的人都援引《大诰》以减轻罪等，也不管手中有没有《大诰》了。
English: Since then, people who commit crimes have invoked the "Great Charter" to mitigate their crimes, and it doesn't matter if they have the "Great Charter" in their hands.

古文：盖太祖之于律令也，草创于吴元年，更定于洪武六年，整齐于二十二年，至三十年始颁示天下。日久而虑精，一代法始定。
现代文：明太祖制定律令，开始于吴元年，改定在洪武六年，整饬规范在二十二年，到三十年纔颁布告示天下，费时久而考虑精，一代法律纔建立起来。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty formulated the ritsuryo, which began in the first year of the Wu Dynasty, and was revised in the sixth year of the Hongwu Dynasty. The rectification standard was issued in the 22nd year, and was announced to the world in the 30th year. It took a long time to consider and refine, and a generation of laws was established.

古文：中外决狱，一准三十年所颁。
现代文：朝廷内外判案，一律以三十年所颁行的为标准。
English: Judgments inside and outside the Imperial Court are all based on the standards issued over the past thirty years.

古文：其洪武元年之令，有律不载而具于令者，法司得援以为证，请于上而后行焉。
现代文：洪武元年的律令，有的不载于律文，而详备记载在法令中，司法官可以援引为证，请示皇上然后予以施行。
English: Some of the decrees of the first year of Hongwu are not contained in the legal text, but are recorded in detail in the decree. Judicial officers can cite them as evidence, request the emperor and then implement them.

古文：凡违令者罪笞，特旨临时决罪，不著为律令者，不在此例。
现代文：凡是违反律令的都处以笞刑，有专门圣旨临时断罪，律令不载的情况，不在此例。
English: Anyone who violates the ritsuryo edict will be punished by whipping, except in cases where there is a special imperial edict to issue a temporary sentence and the ritsuryo edict is not included.

古文：有司辄引比律，致罪有轻重者，以故入论。
现代文：主管官吏擅自引律令比附，导致判罪轻重有出入的，以故意加罪于人论处。
English: If the competent officials arbitrarily make a comparison of the laws and regulations, resulting in a discrepancy in the severity of the conviction, the person shall be punished for intentionally aggravating the crime.

古文：罪无正条，则引律比附，定拟罪名，达部议定奏闻。
现代文：罪行没有正式律文，则援引可比附的条律拟定罪名，送达刑部议定，上奏皇帝。
English: If the crime does not have an official legal text, the name of the person to be convicted shall be determined by invoking the comparable attached rule, and shall be reported to the emperor as agreed upon by the Criminal Law Department.

古文：若辄断决，致罪有出入者，以故失论。
现代文：若擅自判决，导致罪有出入者，以故意错判人罪论处。
English: If a verdict is made without authorization, resulting in a crime with discrepancies, the person shall be punished for the crime of intentionally misjudging a person.

古文：大抵明律视唐简核，而宽厚不如宋。
现代文：明律和唐律相比较，大体来说明律更为简洁详实，而宽厚不如宋律。
English: Compared with the Ming and Tang Dynasties, the Ming Dynasty is generally more concise and detailed, while the Song Dynasty is less generous.

古文：至其恻隐之意，散见于各条，可举一以推也。
现代文：至于其恻隐之心，散见于各条，可以举一例而类推。
English: As for his compassion, it is scattered throughout the articles, so we can take an example and draw an analogy.

古文：如罪应加者，必赃满数乃坐。
现代文：如应加之罪，一定要赃物达到规定数额纔判刑。
English: If a crime is to be added, the stolen goods must reach the specified amount and the sentence must be carried out.

古文：加极于流三千里，以次增重，终不得至死。
现代文：如监守自盗，赃物达到四十贯的处绞刑。假若只有三十九贯九十九文，即使差一文也不判绞刑。
English: If the prisoner steals from himself, he will be hanged if the stolen goods amount to forty yuan. If it is only thirty-nine yuan and ninety-nine yuan, he will not be sentenced to hanging even if it is one yuan less.

古文：而减至流者，自死而之生，无绞斩之别。
现代文：流放犯加刑加到流放三千里，依等级加重处罚，终究不至于一死。而死刑犯碱至流放，从死回生，再没有绞刑、斩刑的区别。
English: In the case of an exile, if the sentence is increased, it will be increased to three thousand li, and the punishment will be increased according to the level, but it will not result in death. In contrast, if a death row prisoner is exiled, there is no difference between death and hanging.

古文：称日者以百刻，称年者以三百六十日。
现代文：即唐律的称加就重绦。法律上称一日，要以一百刻计算；称年，以三百六十日计算。
English: That is to say, the Tang Dynasty's law of adding and subtracting. In legal terms, a day is counted as one hundred hours, and a year is counted as three hundred and sixty days.

古文：未老疾犯罪，而事发于老疾，以老疾论；幼小犯罪，而事发于长大，以幼小论。
现代文：如被告治疗伤者在限期内丢了人命以及各种文书传递违限，只要还有一个时刻未满，仍不得以所限的年月论罪，即唐代律例的称日以百刻条。年老得病前犯罪，老年有病时事情败露，以年老或生病时的情况论处；幼年犯罪，事情败露于成年之时，以幼年论处。
English: If the defendant treated the injured person within the time limit and lost his life, and the transmission of various documents was in violation of the time limit, as long as there is still a time limit left, it is still not possible to use the limited number of years to judge the crime, that is, the Tang Dynasty law is said to be a hundred and fifty days. Crimes before old age and illness, when things are revealed when the elderly are ill, are dealt with according to the situation at the time of old age or illness; juvenile crimes, when things are revealed at the time of adulthood, are dealt with according to the age.

古文：犯死罪，非常赦所不原，而祖父母、父母老无养者，得奏闻取上裁。
现代文：即唐律老小残病条。犯了死罪，只要不是十恶不赦之罪，如果祖父母、父母年老无人赡养，可以桌奏皇帝听从圣裁。
English: If you have committed a capital crime, as long as it is not an unpardonable sin, if your grandparents and parents are old and have no one to support them, you can play the emperor and listen to the sage.

古文：犯徒流者，余罪得收赎，存留养亲。
现代文：犯徒役流放罪人，其它的罪行可以交银子赎罪，留下来赡养父母。
English: For other crimes, they can pay money to atone for their sins and stay behind to support their parents.

古文：功臣及五品以上官禁狱者，许令亲人入侍，徒流者并听随行，违者罪杖。
现代文：就是唐律罪非十恶条。功臣和五品以上的官员被囚在监狱里，允许叫亲人进来服侍；犯苦役戏流放罪的，听凭其亲属随行，违反此条的官员罪当受杖打。
English: That is, the crime of the Tang Dynasty is not one of the ten evils. A meritorious subject and an official with five or more merits are imprisoned in prison, and relatives are allowed to be called in to serve; those who commit the crime of hard labor and banishment are accompanied by their relatives, and officials who violate this crime should be beaten with a cane.

古文：同居亲属有罪，得互相容隐。
现代文：同住的亲属有罪，可以互相包容隐瞒。
English: Relatives who live together are guilty, and they can tolerate and conceal each other.

古文：奴婢不得首主。
现代文：即唐律同居相容隐条。奴婢不准告发主人。
English: That is, the Tang law of cohabitation is compatible with the hidden rules. Slaves are not allowed to denounce their masters.

古文：凡告人者，告人祖父不得指其子孙为证，弟不证兄，妻不证夫，奴婢不证主。
现代文：凡是控告别人的人，告人祖父不能指其子孙作证，弟弟不为哥哥的罪行作证，妻子不为丈夫的罪行作证，奴婢不为主人的罪行作证。
English: If any man have a complaint against another, the father of the complaint shall not be a witness against his son or his daughter; the brother shall not be a witness against his brother; the wife shall not be a witness against her husband; the slave shall not be a witness against his master.

古文：文职责在奉法，犯杖则不叙。
现代文：文职官员的责任就在于奉行法律，犯了杖刑就不再任用。
English: The responsibility of civil servants is to uphold the law, and they will not be reappointed if they are punished with the cane.

古文：军官至徒流，以世功犹得擢用。
现代文：军官犯罪至服苦役、流放，还可以靠累世功勋而被任用。
English: An officer who commits a crime can be sentenced to hard labor or banishment, and can also be appointed by virtue of his or her lifetime achievements.

古文：凡若此类，或间采唐律，或更立新制，所谓原父子之亲，立君臣之义以权之者也。
现代文：凡此种种，有的采摘自唐律，有的是另立新法制，这就是为了体察父子的亲情，确立君臣的恰当关系而权变的方法。
English: All of these, some of which were taken from Tang law, and some of which were based on a new legal system, were methods of changing power in order to understand the relationship between father and son, and to establish the proper relationship between ruler and subject.

古文：建文帝即位，谕刑官曰： 《大明律》，皇祖所亲定，命朕细阅，较前代往往加重。
现代文：建文帝即位后，训谕刑官说： 《大明律》，是皇祖亲自制定的，皇祖命朕捆读，朕发觉刑罚条例常常比前代苛重。
English: After Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, he instructed the executioner: "The Great Ming Code was formulated by the emperor himself. The emperor ordered me to read it, and I found that the penal regulations were often harsher than the previous generation.

古文：盖刑乱国之典，非百世通行之道也。
现代文：我想刑律是治理国家混乱的法律，不是百世通行的恒法。
English: I think the criminal law is a law to govern the chaos of the country, not a universal law.

古文：朕前所改定，皇祖已命施行。
现代文：朕以前改定的条款，皇祖已下令施行。
English: The Emperor has issued an order to implement the previously amended provisions.

古文：然罪可矜疑者，尚不止此。
现代文：可是定罪可怜可疑的，还不止于此。
English: But the poor and dubious conviction goes further than that.

古文：夫律设大法，礼顺人情，齐民以刑，不若以礼。
现代文：律令设立大法，礼制顺乎人情，用刑罚来规范人民，不如以礼来教化人民。
English: The Great Law was established by the ritsuryo, and the etiquette conformed to the people's feelings. It was better to use punishment to regulate the people than to use etiquette to enlighten the people.

古文：其谕天下有司，务崇礼教，赦疑狱，称朕嘉与万方之意。 
现代文：现告谕天下主管官员，务必尊崇礼教，赦免罪证不足的犯人，以合于朕优抚天下的心意。 
English: I now tell the officials in charge around the world that they must respect and venerate the Rites and Teachings, and pardon prisoners with insufficient criminal records, so as to conform to the will of the world.

古文：成祖诏法司问囚，一依《大明律》拟议，毋妄引榜文条例为深文。
现代文：成祖下诏司法官，在审讯罪囚时，完全依照《大明律》议定，不要乱引告示的条文加重罪行。
English: During the interrogation of the criminal prisoner, the judicial officers under Emperor Chengzu agreed in full accordance with the "Great Law" not to mislead the provisions of the notice to aggravate the crime.

古文：永乐元年，定诬告法。
现代文：永乐元年，制定诬告法。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the False Accusation Law was enacted.

古文：成化元年，又令谳囚者一依正律，尽革所有条例。
现代文：成化元年，又命令审判罪犯的人一律依正式律文办事，革除所有附加条例。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he also ordered that all those who tried criminals should act in accordance with the official laws and remove all additional regulations.

古文：十五年，南直隶巡抚王恕言： 《大明律》后，有《会定见行律》百有八条，不知所起。
现代文：十五年，南直隶巡抚王恕说： 《大明律》颁布后，有《会定见行律》一百零八条，不知从哪里来的。
English: In the fifteenth year, Wang Shu, the governor of Nan Zhi Li, said: "After the promulgation of the "Great Ming Law," there were 108 articles of "Meeting, Determining, and Carrying Out Laws." I don't know where they came from.

古文：如《兵律》多支廪给，《刑律》骂制使及骂本管长官条，皆轻重失伦。
现代文：如其《兵律》规定多支付俸禄，《刑律》骂制使以及骂主管长官条律，这些条文都刑罪轻重失常。
English: For example, the "Military Law" stipulates the payment of more salary, and the "Criminal Law" stipulates the punishment of cursing the commander and the punishment of cursing the superior officer. These provisions are out of kilter with the severity of criminal offenses.

古文：流传四方，有误官守。
现代文：流传四方，误导各地官吏。
English: The rumor spread far and wide, misleading local officials.

古文：乞追板焚毁。 
现代文：请求追查其印版，予以烧毁。 
English: The request was to track down the printing plates and burn them.

古文：命即焚之，有依此律出入人罪者，以故论。
现代文：皇帝下令立即烧毁，凡依此律判罪的，以明知故犯论处。
English: The emperor ordered it to be burned immediately, and anyone found guilty according to this law would be punished for knowingly committing a crime.

古文：十八年，定挟诈得财罪例。
现代文：十八年，制定要挟诈骗财物罪的律条。
English: In 18 years, the regulation of the crime of extortion and swindling of property was formulated.

古文：弘治中，去定律时已百年，用法者日弛。
现代文：弘治年间，离制定法律的时间已有一百年，执法者日渐懈弛。
English: During the Hongzhi era, it had been a hundred years since the enactment of the law, and the law enforcers were becoming increasingly slack.

古文：五年，刑部尚书彭韶等以鸿胪少卿李鐩请，删定《问刑条例》。
现代文：五年，刑部尚书彭韶等根据鸿胪少卿李铲的请求，删定了《问刑条例》。
English: Five years ago, the Penal Department's Shang Shu, Peng Yao and others deleted the "Interrogation Regulations" according to the request of Hongyao Shaoqing Li Shuo.

古文：至十三年，刑官复上言： 洪武末，定《大明律》，后又申明《大诰》，有罪减等，累朝遵用。
现代文：到十三年，刑官又进言： 送武末年，制定《大明律》，后来又倡明《大诰》有罪者碱等，历代奉行。
English: In the thirteenth year, the criminal magistrate made another suggestion: in the last year of the martial law, the "Great Law" was formulated, and later the "Great Law" of the guilty was promulgated, which has been followed by all generations.

古文：其法外遗奸，列圣因时推广之而有例，例以辅律，非以破律也。
现代文：对那些法网之外的犯罪行为，诸位圣皇随时推衍法律而有案例，这些案例是辅助法律的手段，而不是破坏法律。
English: For those criminal acts that are outside the legal network, the holy emperors always deduce the law and have cases. These cases are a means of assisting the law, not destroying the law.

古文：乃中外巧法吏或借便己私，律浸格不用。 
现代文：可是朝廷内外有的执法官吏投机取巧，藉之为私利服务，法律渐被搁置不用。 
English: However, some law enforcement officials inside and outside the imperial court took advantage of opportunism to serve their own interests, and the law was gradually shelved.

古文：于是下尚书白昂等会九卿议，增历年问刑条例经久可行者二百九十七条。
现代文：于是皇帝将奏章下达尚书白昂等，命令他们会同九卿拟议，增设历年办案条例中经久可行者二百九十七条。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued a memorandum to Shang Shuxu Baiang and others, ordering them to propose with the nine lords to add the 297th article of the case handling regulations over the years.

古文：帝摘其中六事，令再议以闻。
现代文：皇帝选出其中六个事例，叫再行商议上报。
English: The emperor selected six of these cases and called for further discussion and report.

古文：九卿执奏，乃不果改。
现代文：九卿坚持原议，最终没有改动。
English: The Nine Lords insisted on the original proposal, and ultimately there was no change.

古文：然自是以后，律例并行而网亦少密。
现代文：但自此以后，法律和条例一起通行，法网渐渐细密。
English: But since then, laws and regulations have been passed together, and the legal network has gradually become more detailed.

古文：王府禁例六条，诸王无故出城有罚，其法尤严。
现代文：王府禁例有六条，诸侯王无故出城要处罚，其法尤其森严。
English: There are six royal edicts prohibiting princes from leaving the city without reason, and they are particularly strict.

古文：嘉靖七年，保定巡抚王应鹏言： 正德间，新增问刑条例四十四款，深中情法，皆宜编入。 
现代文：嘉靖七年，保定巡抚王应鹏进言： 正德年间，新增审案条例四十四款，深深切中案情法规，都应该把它们编进刑律。 
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, Wang Yingpeng, the governor of Baoding, said: During the Zhengde era, the newly added forty-four paragraphs of the adjudication regulations were deeply relevant to the case laws and regulations, and they should all be compiled into the criminal law.

古文：不从。惟诏伪造印信及窃盗三犯者不得用可矜例。
现代文：皇帝不采纳他的意见，只下了一道诏令：伪造图章与偷窃打劫犯罪三次的，不得使用 可矜 之例。
English: The emperor did not accept his opinion and issued only one edict: If a person has committed the crimes of forging stamps, stealing and robbing three times, he is not allowed to use the "permissible" example.

古文：刑部尚书胡世宁又请编断狱新例，亦命止依律文及弘治十三年所钦定者。
现代文：刑部尚书胡世宁又请求编写断案新例，皇帝亦命令只依律文和弘治十三年钦定的条例行事。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Hu Shining, also requested the preparation of a new ruling, and the emperor also ordered to act only in accordance with the law and the regulations approved by the emperor in the 13th year of Hongzhi.

古文：至二十八年，刑部尚书喻茂坚言： 自弘治间定例，垂五十年。
现代文：到二十八年，刑部尚书喻茂坚说： 自从弘治年间制定律例，到现在已五十年。
English: By the 28th year, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuyu Maojian, said: "It has been 50 years since the enactment of the law during the Hongzhi era.

古文：乞敕臣等会同三法司，申明《问刑条例》及嘉靖元年后钦定事例，永为遵守。
现代文：请求诏令臣等会同三个法律部门，阐明《问刑条例》和嘉靖元年以来钦定的事例，让人们永远遵守。
English: He asked the minister and other officials to work with the three legal departments to clarify the "Interrogation Regulations" and the cases approved by Jiajing since the first year of the year, so that people can always abide by them.

古文：弘治十三年以后、嘉靖元年以前事例，虽奉诏革除，顾有因事条陈，拟议精当可采者，亦宜详检。
现代文：弘治十三年以后，到嘉靖元年以前的案例，虽然已经奉诏革除，但有的因事列条陈述，议定精当值得采纳的，亦应详加查核。
English: After the 13th year of the Hongzhi era and before the first year of the Jiajing era, although the cases have been removed by imperial edict, some of the statements of reasons, which are agreed to be worthy of adoption, should also be examined in detail.

古文：若官司妄引条例，故入人罪者，当议黜罚。 
现代文：如果主管官吏乱引条例，故意重判，应废黜处罚。 
English: If the competent official misquotes the regulations and intentionally imposes a heavy sentence, the punishment shall be revoked.

古文：会茂坚去官，诏尚书顾应祥等定议，增至二百四十九条。
现代文：遭遇喻茂坚离任，皇帝下诏尚书顾应祥等议定，增加到二百四十九条。
English: After Yu Shoujian left office, the emperor issued the edict Shang Shu Gu Ying Xiang, which increased the number of articles to 249.

古文：三十四年，又因尚书何鳌言，增入九事。
现代文：三十四年，又根据尚书何鳌之言，增补九个案例。
English: In 2004, nine more cases were added, according to the words of He Zang of Shangshu.

古文：万历时，给事中乌昇请续增条例。
现代文：万历时期，给事中壹昱请求续增条例。
English: In the long term, there will be an increase in the number of requests for renewal.

古文：至十三年，刑部尚书舒化等乃辑嘉靖三十四年以后诏令及宗藩军政条例、捕盗条格、漕运议单与刑名相关者，律为正文，例为附注，共三百八十二条，删世宗时苛令特多。
现代文：到十三年，刑部尚书舒化等人于是辑录嘉靖三十四年以后诏令以及宗藩军政条例、捕盗条规、漕粮运输议单中与刑名有关的内容，以律条为正文，案例为附注，共三百八十二条，删除了世宗时的苛令特别多。
English: By the thirteenth year, the criminal department's Shangshu Shuhua and others then compiled the content related to the name of the sentence in the imperial edict issued after the thirty-fourth year of Jiajing, as well as the military and political regulations of the Zong clan, the theft regulations, and the grain transportation proposal, with the legal regulations as the main text and the case as a footnote, a total of 382 articles, and the harsh orders of the Zong Dynasty were deleted.

古文：崇祯十四年，刑部尚书刘泽深复请议定《问刑条例》。
现代文：崇祯十四年，刑部尚书刘泽深又请求议定《问刑条例》。
English: In the 14th year of the Chongzhen era, Liu Zeshen, the head of the Criminal Law Department, also requested that the "Interrogation Regulations" be agreed upon.

古文：帝以律应恪遵，例有上下，事同而二三其例者，删定画一为是。
现代文：皇帝认为律条应该严格遵守，案例有增减，同一种情况而有两三个事例的，删定统一为好。
English: The emperor believed that the rules of the law should be strictly observed. There are cases of increase and decrease. If there are two or three cases of the same situation, it is better to delete and unify.

古文：然时方急法，百司救过不暇，议未及行。
现代文：然而当时法律正峻急，百官补过还来不及，议定没有来得及实行。
English: However, at that time, the law was urgent, and it was too late for hundreds of officials to amend it, and the agreement did not have time to be implemented.

古文：太祖之定律文也，历代相承，无敢轻改。
现代文：太祖制定法律，历代君主沿用，没有敢轻易改动的。
English: The great-grandfather established the law, which has been used by successive monarchs, and no one dared to change it easily.

古文：其一时变通，或由诏令，或发于廷臣奏议，有关治体，言获施行者，不可以无详也。
现代文：遇到一时需耍变通，则或者发诏令，或者起于朝臣的奏议。凡是有关治国大政的事，能够施行的，不可以不详细记载。
English: If there is a need to make changes at the last minute, then either an imperial edict is issued, or a request is made by a courtier. Anything that can be done concerning the governance of the country must be recorded in detail.

古文：洪武元年，谕省臣： 鞫狱当平恕，古者非大逆不道，罪止及身。
现代文：洪武元年，太祖训谕各部大臣： 审案应当公平宽容，古代用法，祇要不是大逆不道，处罚仅限于当事人。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the great ancestor instructed the ministers of various ministries: the trial should be fair and tolerant, the ancient usage, but if it is not treason, the punishment is limited to the parties.

古文：民有犯者，毋得连坐。 
现代文：小民犯法，不要连坐。 
English: Peasants breaking the law, don't sit together.

古文：尚书夏恕尝引汉法，请著律，反者夷三族。
现代文：尚书夏恕曾经援引汉法，请求把谋反者夷灭三族的文字写进明律。
English: Shangshu Xia Shou once invoked Han law to request that the words "rebels exterminate the three ethnic groups" be written into the legal code.

古文：太祖曰： 古者父子兄弟罪不相及，汉仍秦旧，法太重。 
现代文：太祖说： 古时候，父子兄弟有罪不相牵连，汉沿袭秦代旧法，太苛重。 
English: The great-grandfather said: In ancient times, the guilt of a father and son was not related to each other. The Han Dynasty followed the old law of the Qin Dynasty, which was too harsh.

古文：却其奏不行。
现代文：拒绝了夏恕的奏议。
English: rejected Xia Shou's appeal.

古文：民父以诬逮，其子诉于刑部，法司坐以越诉。
现代文：有一小民，其父因被诬陷入狱，做儿子的申诉到刑部，执法官判他越级诉罪。
English: There is a small minority of people whose father was falsely imprisoned, and as his son's complaint to the criminal justice department, the magistrate judge sentenced him to an infraction.

古文：太祖曰： 子诉父枉，出于至情，不可罪。 
现代文：太祖说： 儿子为父亲申诉冤情，是出于最真的感情，不能判他的罪。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "When a son complains about his father, it is out of the truest feelings, and he cannot be convicted of a crime.

古文：有子犯法，父贿求免者，御史欲并论父。
现代文：某人的儿子犯法，做父亲的行贿请求赦免，御史决定连父亲一起办罪。
English: When someone's son broke the law and asked his father for a pardon for paying a bribe, he decided to join his father in committing a crime.

古文：太祖曰： 子论死，父救之，情也，但论其子，赦其父。 
现代文：太祖说： 儿子判了死罪，父亲挽救他，人之常情。只处理那个儿子，赦免他的父亲。 
English: The great-grandfather said: The son was sentenced to death, the father saved him, it's human nature. Just deal with that son and pardon his father.

古文：十七年，左都御史詹徽奏民殴孕妇至死者，律当绞，其子乞代。
现代文：十七年，左都御史詹徽禀告：一人殴打孕妇致死，按法律判处绞刑，他的儿子请求代父而死。
English: In the seventeenth year, Zhanhui, the governor of the Left Capital, made an obituary: a man beat a pregnant woman to death and was sentenced to hanging according to the law. His son asked his father to die in his place.

古文：大理卿邹俊议曰： 子代父死，情可矜。
现代文：大理卿邹俊发言： 子代父死，其情可悯。
English: Dali Sir Gong Jun said: It is a pity that his son's father died.

古文：然死妇系二人之命，犯人当二死之条，与其存犯法之人，孰若全无辜之子。 
现代文：但是死去的孕妇是两条人命，犯人触犯了二死的律条，与其让罪犯活命，不如保全其无辜的儿子。 
English: But the dead pregnant woman is two lives, the prisoner violated the rule of two deaths, rather than let the criminal live, it is better to protect his innocent son.

古文：诏从后议。
现代文：太祖诏令按邹俊所说办理。
English: Emperor Taizu's edict was carried out in accordance with Shunjun's words.

古文：二十年，詹徽言： 军人有犯当杖，其人尝两得罪而免，宜并论前罪，诛之。 
现代文：二十年，詹徽提出： 有军人犯法，应当受杖刑，此人曾经两次犯罪而两次赦免，应一并论处前罪，判他死刑。 
English: Twenty years ago, Zhan Hui proposed: If a military man commits a crime, he should be punished with the cane. If this person has committed two crimes and has been pardoned twice, he should be punished for the previous crime and sentenced to death.

古文：太祖曰： 前罪既宥，复论之则不信矣。 
现代文：太祖说： 以前的罪行既然已经宽恕，又拿来审判就不孚信用了。 
English: The great-grandfather said: Since the previous crimes have been forgiven, it is no longer credible to bring them to trial.

古文：杖而遣之。
现代文：于是把那人杖打一顿遣发了他。
English: So he hit him with the board and let him go.

古文：二十四年，嘉兴通判庞安获鬻私盐者送京师，而以盐赏获者。
现代文：二十四年，嘉兴通判庞安抓获了贩卖私盐的人押送京城，而用这些盐奖赏抓获者。
English: Twenty-four years ago, Jiaxing Tong Pang'an was sentenced to escort the capital city for those caught selling illegal salt, and use these salts to reward those who were caught.

古文：户部以其违例，罚偿盐入官，且责取罪状。
现代文：户部官员因他违反条例规定，罚他赔偿盐交入官府，还责成他交待罪状。
English: Because he violated the provisions of the regulations, the officials of the Household Department punished him to pay compensation for salt and submit it to the government office, and also ordered him to report the crime.

古文：安言： 律者万世之常法，例者一时之旨意。
现代文：庞安说： 律文是万世不变之法，而条例是一时的旨意。
English: Pang'an said, "Laws are eternal and unchanging, while regulations are temporary."

古文：今欲依例而行，则于律内非应捕人给赏之言，自相违悖，失信于天下也。 
现代文：如果现在依案例行事，则与律内对不是正式供职逮捕罪犯的人给予奖赏的规定不合，自相矛盾，这会在天下人面前丧失信用。 
English: If we now act according to the case, it will be inconsistent and contradictory with the provisions of the law to reward those who are not officially on duty to arrest criminals, which will lose credibility in front of the world.

古文：太祖然其言，诏如律。
现代文：太祖认为他说得对，下诏按律文办理。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was right, and the following edict was carried out in accordance with the law.

古文：永乐二年，刑部言河间民讼其母，有司反拟母罪。
现代文：永乐二年，刑部说河间有一个小民控告自己的母亲，主事官反倒要判母亲的罪。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the Criminal Investigation Department said that there was a citizen in Hema who accused his mother, but the officer in charge wanted to convict his mother.

古文：诏执其子及有司罪之。
现代文：皇帝下诏逮捕那个儿子和主事官，判他们的刑。
English: The emperor issued a decree to arrest the son and the magistrate and sentence them to death.

古文：三年，定文职官及中外旗校军民人等，凡犯重条，依律科断，轻者免决，记罪。
现代文：三年，议定文职官与朝廷内外旗军校官军民人等凡是犯了重罪的，依法判罪，罪轻的免于判决，记下所犯的罪。
English: In the third year, it was agreed that the civil servants, flag officers, military school officials, soldiers and civilians inside and outside the imperial court who committed serious crimes would be sentenced according to law, and those with minor crimes would be exempted from judgment, and the crimes committed would be recorded.

古文：其有不应侵损于人等项及情犯重者，临时奏请。
现代文：有不应侵害他人等项以及罪行严重的，临时上奏请示。
English: If there are items such as not to infringe on others and the crime is serious, the request will be made temporarily.

古文：十六年，严犯赃官吏之禁。
现代文：十六年，严定官吏贪污受贿的禁令。
English: Sixteen years later, the ban on official corruption and bribery was strictly established.

古文：初，太祖重惩贪吏，诏犯赃者无贷。
现代文：开国时，太祖严惩贪官，下诏食污受贿者不可宽赦。
English: At the time of the founding of the country, Taizu severely punished corrupt officials, and issued the edict that those who accepted bribes should not be pardoned.

古文：复敕刑部： 官吏受赃者，并罪通贿之人，徙其家于边。
现代文：又命令刑部： 受贿的官吏与行贿的人一同判罪，将犯法者全家迁移到边疆。
English: He also ordered the Criminal Law Department to: convict the bribe-taking officials together with the bribe-givers, and relocate the offender's entire family to the frontier.

古文：著为令。 
现代文：把此条写入律令。 
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：日久法弛，故复申饬之。
现代文：时间长了执法懈弛，所以又重申命令。
English: Law enforcement has been lax for a long time, so the order was reiterated.

古文：二十九年，大理卿虞谦言： 诳骗之律，当杖而流，今枭首，非诏书意。 
现代文：二十九年，大理卿虞谦进言： 诳骗罪，律文规定应判杖刑而后流放，现在却砍下犯人脑袋挂在树上，不是诏书的旨意。 
English: In the 29th year, Dali Lord Yu Qian said: "For the crime of deception, the law stipulates that he should be sentenced to the cane and then exiled, but now it is not the will of the edict to cut off the prisoner's head and hang it on a tree.

古文：命如律拟断。
现代文：皇帝下令按律文判刑。
English: The emperor ordered the sentence to be carried out according to the law.

古文：宣德二年，江西按察使黄翰言： 民间无籍之徒，好兴词论，辄令老幼残疾男妇诬告平人，必更议涉虚加罚乃可。 
现代文：宣德二年，江西按察使黄翰说： 民间没有户籍的家伙，喜欢挑起诉讼，总让那些老幼残病的男女诬告平民，必得再议定有关虚言诬告的加罚的条例纔行。 
English: In the second year of Xuande, Huang Han, the inspector general of Jiangxi Province, said: "People who do not have a household registration, like to provoke lawsuits, and always let those men and women who are old, young and disabled falsely accuse civilians. It is necessary to re-negotiate the regulations on increasing the punishment for false accusations.

古文：遂定老幼残疾男妇诬告人罚钞赎罪例。
现代文：于是制定老幼残病男女诬告人，罚纳款赎罪的条例。
English: As a result, an ordinance was enacted to impose a fine to atone for the sin of falsely accusing men, women, and children with disabilities.

古文：其后孝宗时，南京有犯诬告十人以上，例发口外为民。
现代文：后来孝宗时，南京有十余人犯诬告罪，按例发配长城以北为民。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, there were more than ten people in Nanjing who committed the crime of false accusation, and they were all exiled north of the Great Wall.

古文：而年逾七十，律应收赎者，更著令，凡年七十以上、十五以下及废疾者，依律论断。
现代文：而年纪超过七十岁，按法律当交银子赎罪的，另外制定律令，凡是七十岁以上、十五岁以下和残疾人犯，依法判罪。
English: However, for those who are over seventy years old and are required by law to pay a fine to atone for their sins, a separate ordinance will be formulated, and all offenders over seventy years old, under fifteen years old, and those with disabilities will be convicted according to law.

古文：例应充军瞭哨、口外为民者，仍依律发遣。
现代文：按例应充军入哨卡、长城外为民的，仍旧依法遣送。
English: As usual, those who were drafted into the army and sent to guard posts, and those who were civilians outside the Great Wall, were still deported according to law.

古文：若年八十以上及笃疾有犯应永戍者，以子孙发遣，应充军以下者免之。
现代文：如果年纪八十岁以上或病重，又判处永远戍边的，则将其子孙发遣出去，罪不到充军起初制度规定。
English: If a person is over 80 years old or seriously ill, and is sentenced to be shackled forever, his or her children and grandchildren will be sent away, and the crime is not a military conscription as stipulated in the original system.

古文：初制，凡官吏人等犯枉法赃者，不分南北，俱发北方边卫充军。
现代文：凡是贪脏枉法的官吏，不分人在南方或北方，全部发配到北方边防卫所充军。
English: All corrupt and law-breaking officials, regardless of whether they are in the south or the north, will be sent to the northern border defense station to join the army.

古文：正统五年，行在三法司言： 洪武定律时，钞贵物贱，所以枉法赃至百二十贯者，免绞充军。
现代文：正统五年，行在所三法司共同上奏： 洪武年间制定法律时，钱贵物贱，所以枉法贪脏达到百二十贯的贪官污吏，免于绞刑而充军。
English: Five years after the establishment of the orthodoxy, the three legal departments of the institute jointly issued a report: When the law was enacted in the Hongwu era, money was precious and cheap, so corrupt officials who had reached one hundred and twenty times of corruption were exempted from hanging and sent to the army.

古文：今钞贱物贵，若以物估钞至百二十贯枉法赃俱发充军，轻重失伦矣。
现代文：现在钱贱物贵，假若以财物折算钱达到一百二十贯枉法贪脏，全部发配充军，轻重就失调了。
English: Nowadays, money is a cheap commodity. If the conversion of money into property reaches one hundred and twenty yuan, it will be a waste of time and money, and all the money will be allocated to the army, and the weight will be out of balance.

古文：今后文职官吏人等，受枉法赃比律该绞者，估钞八百贯之上，俱发北方边卫充军。
现代文：今后接受枉法贪脏按法律该处绞刑的文职官吏，折合脏钱在八百贯以上者，全部发配北方边防卫所充军。
English: In the future, all civil servants and officials who have been convicted of corruption and sentenced to death by hanging in accordance with the law, and whose dirty money is equivalent to more than 800 yuan, will be assigned to the Northern Border Defense Force.

古文：其受赃不及前数者，视见行例发落。 
现代文：受贿数量不及前者的，按现行律例发落。 
English: If the number of bribes received is less than the former, the case will be handled according to the current regulations.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了三法司的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八年，大理寺言： 律载窃盗初犯刺右臂，再犯刺左臂，三犯绞。
现代文：八年，大理寺奏： 法律规定盗窃抢劫者初犯在右臂上刺字，再犯在左臂上刺字，三犯处绞刑。
English: Eight years, Dali Temple: The law stipulates that the first-time offender of theft and robbery should be tattooed on the right arm, the second-time offender should be tattooed on the left arm, and the third-time offender should be hanged.

古文：今窃盗遇赦再犯者，咸坐以初犯，或仍刺右臂，或不刺。请定为例。 
现代文：现在盗窃抢劫犯遇赦后再次犯罪的，都以初犯判罪，有的仍在右臂上刺字，有的不刺，请求定一个常例。 
English: Currently, thieves and robbers who commit crimes again after being pardoned are all sentenced as first-time offenders. Some still have a tattoo on their right arm, while others do not. We request that this be made a regular practice.

古文：章下三法司议，刺右遇赦再犯者刺左，刺左遇赦又犯者不刺，立案。
现代文：奏章下达给刑部、都察院和大理寺三法司讨论，讨论结果：右臂刺字遇赦再犯者刺左臂，左臂刺字遇赦又犯者不再刺，立为罪案。
English: The report was sent to the Criminal Investigation Department, the Criminal Investigation Agency, and the three legal departments of Dali Temple for discussion. The result of the discussion: if a repeat offender is pardoned and has his right arm tattooed, he will have his left arm tattooed; if a repeat offender is pardoned and has his left arm tattooed, he will no longer have his arm tattooed, and the case will be classified as a crime.

古文：赦后三犯者绞。 
现代文：遇赦后第三次犯罪处绞刑。
English: After being pardoned, the third crime is punishable by hanging.

古文：帝曰： 窃盗已刺，遇赦再犯者依常例拟，不论赦，仍通具前后所犯以闻。 
现代文：皇帝说： 犯盗窃抢劫罪已经刺字，遇赦再犯者依常例定罪，不再考虑其曾遇赦，仍旧将前后所犯的罪行一一记录，察报给朕。 
English: The emperor said: The crime of theft and robbery has already been engraved, and those who have been pardoned and repeat offenders are convicted according to the usual practice. No longer considering that they have been pardoned, they will still record the crimes committed before and after, and report to me.

古文：后宪宗时，都御史李秉援旧例奏革。
现代文：后来意宗时，都御史李秉援引旧例奏请革除此条。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Yizong, the prefectural governor, Li Bing, invoked an old precedent to request the removal of this article.

古文：既而南京盗王阿童五犯皆遇赦免。
现代文：不久南京大盗王阿童五次犯罪均遇赦免。
English: Not long after, Nanjing thief Wang Adong was pardoned for all five of his crimes.

古文：帝闻之，诏仍以赦前后三犯为令。
现代文：皇帝听说后，下韶仍然以遇赦前后总共祇能犯三次为绦令。
English: After the emperor heard about this, he still decreed that a person could only be pardoned a total of three times.

古文：至神宗时，复议奏请改遣云。
现代文：到神宗时，又讨论奏议请求改遣的意见。
English: When they arrived at the Shinshu Sect, they also discussed the opinion of petitioning for transfer.

古文：十二年，以知县陈敏政言，民以后妻所携前夫之女为子妇，及以所携前夫之子为婿者，并依同父异母姊妹律，减等科断。
现代文：十二年，根据知县陈敏政的建议，民间有人把后妻带来的其前夫之女娶为儿媳妇，或者把抛带来的其前夫的儿子招为女婿，一律依照同父异母姊妹关系的律条，减等判决。
English: In 2012, according to the suggestion of Chen Minzheng, a well-known county official, some people married the daughter of their ex-husband brought by the second wife as a daughter-in-law, or brought the son of their ex-husband as a son-in-law, all in accordance with the rules of the relationship between half-sisters and half-sisters, and reduced the judgment.

古文：成化元年，辽东巡抚滕照言： 《大明律》乃一代定法，而决断武臣，独舍律用例，武臣益纵荡不检。
现代文：成化元年，辽东巡抚滕照说： 《大明律》乃是一代既定大法，而判决武臣独独舍去法律而用条例，武臣愈加放荡不检点。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Teng Zhao, the inspector general of Liaodong, said: "The Great Ming Law" is an established great law, and it was decided that the samurai only abandoned the law and used regulations, and the samurai became more and more dissolute and indiscreet.

古文：请一切用律。 
现代文：请求全都用律判案。 
English: All the petitions were decided by the court.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏采纳此说。
English: He complied.

古文：武臣被黜降者，腾口谤讪，有司畏事，复奏革其令。
现代文：被罢官降级的武臣，口吐恶言，诽谤讥刺。主管官吏胆小怕事，又上奏革除这条法令。
English: The vassal, who was demoted from his post, spouted vile words, slandered and ridiculed. The officials in charge were afraid to do anything, and sent a report to revoke this decree.

古文：十九年定，窃盗三犯罪例。
现代文：十九年，制定盗窃犯三次处绞刑的律例。
English: In 1919, a law was enacted to sentence a thief to death by hanging three times.

古文：法司以 南京有三犯窃盗，计赃满百贯者犯，当绞斩。
现代文：司法官以 南京有个人盗窃抢劫犯罪满三次，总计赃物达到一百贯钱，判死刑。
English: A judicial officer in Nanjing sentenced an individual to death for theft and robbery three times, with the total stolen goods amounting to 100 million yuan.

古文：罪虽杂犯，其情颇重。 
现代文：其罪行虽属杂犯，而情节严重。
English: Although his crime is a misdemeanour, the circumstances are serious.

古文：三犯前罪，即累恶不悛之人，难准常例。
现代文：三次同犯前一大罪，就是怙恶不悛之徒，难以用常例为标准处理。
English: It is difficult to use the general rule as the standard for dealing with a three-time accomplice to a previous major crime, that is, an evil-doer.

古文：其不满贯犯，徒流以下罪者，虽至三犯，原情实轻，宜特依常例治之。 
现代文：那些赃物不满贯，犯苦役和流放以下罪行的，即使犯了三次，察其情节实际较轻，宜特许依常例处理 。
English: Those who are dissatisfied with the stolen goods and commit the following crimes of forced labor and exile, even if they have committed three times, the circumstances are actually lighter and should be dealt with as usual.

古文：议上，报允。
现代文：奏议呈上，皇帝回复应允。
English: The Emperor replied in the affirmative.

古文：弘治六年，太常少卿李东阳言： 五刑最轻者笞杖，然杖有分寸，数有多寡。
现代文：弘治六年，太常少卿李束阳说： 五刑之中最轻的是笞刑和杖刑，而杖的粗细有分寸，数量有多少。
English: In the sixth year of Hongzhi, Li Sokyang, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, said: "Among the five punishments, the lightest are beating and caning, while the thickness of the cane is measured and the number is measured.

古文：今在外诸司，笞杖之罪往往致死。
现代文：现在外廷各衙门，施笞刑和杖刑往往打人致死。
English: Now that the Outer Court has passed judgment, flogging and caning are often used to beat people to death.

古文：纵令事觉，不过以因公还职。
现代文：纵然事情泄露，不过叫主事者因公犯罪担任原职。
English: Even if the matter is leaked, however, the person in charge will be ordered to return to his or her previous position for committing a public crime.

古文：以极轻之刑，置之不可复生之地，多者数十，甚者数百，积骸满狱，流血涂地，可为伤心。
现代文：用极轻的刑罚，把人置于不可复生的境地，死人多的时候数十甚至敷百个，监狱裹堆满尸体，流血涂地，令人伤心。
English: With extremely light sentences, people are put in a situation where they cannot be brought back to life. In many cases, there are dozens or even hundreds of dead people. Prisons are filled with corpses, and the bloodshed is heartbreaking.

古文：律故勘平人者抵命，刑具非法者除名，偶不出此，便谓之公。
现代文：根据法律，官吏故意审讯常人致死的抵命，使用非法刑具的除名。偶尔有不遵用造条的，就说是公事需要。
English: According to the law, officials who deliberately interrogate ordinary people to death will be sentenced to death, and those who use illegal torture instruments will be removed from the list. Occasionally, if they do not follow the rules, it is said to be for business needs.

古文：一以公名，虽多无害。
现代文：一旦冠以公家之名，再多也没关系。
English: Once you are a public figure, it doesn't matter how many titles you have.

古文：此则情重而律轻者，不可以不议也。
现代文：这是情节严重而法律轻微，不可以不商讨。
English: This is a serious situation and a minor law, and it must be discussed.

古文：请凡考讯轻罪即时致死，累二十或三十人以上，本律外，仍议行降调，或病死不实者，并治其医。 
现代文：陈请凡是审讯轻罪犯当场致死，累计达二十或三十人以上的，除按律条处理之外，仍考虑降职调用，有的谎称犯人病死，一并处治作伪证的医生。 
English: Chen requested that anyone who interrogated minor offenders to death on the spot, with a total of more than twenty or thirty people, in addition to handling according to the rules, still consider demotion and transfer. Some falsely claimed that the prisoner died of illness, and also punished the doctor who committed perjury.

古文：乃下所司议处。
现代文：皇帝把奏章下达给有关机构讨论处理。
English: The emperor sent the report to the relevant agencies for discussion and handling.

古文：嘉靖十五年，时有以手足殴人伤重，延至辜限外死者，部拟斗殴杀人论绞。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，有人徒手殴打他人致重伤，被害人拖延到辜限期以外死亡，刑部准备以斗殴杀人罪判处绞刑。
English: In the 15th year of Jiajing, someone beat another person with his bare hands, causing serious injury. The victim died after delaying beyond the time limit. The criminal department is preparing to sentence him to death by hanging for the crime of assault and homicide.

古文：大理寺执嘉靖四年例，谓当以殴伤论笞。
现代文：大理寺坚持按嘉靖四年的事例处理，说应以殴伤罪判笞刑。
English: Dali Temple insisted on handling the case according to the four years of Jiajing, saying that it should be sentenced to flogging for the crime of beating.

古文：部臣言： 律定辜限，而《问刑条例》又谓斗殴杀人、情实事实者，虽延至限外，仍拟死罪，奏请定夺。
现代文：刑部大臣说： 法律规定辜限期内受害人死亡算杀人，而《问刑条例》又说斗殴杀人事实确凿的，伤者即使延期到辜隈外死亡，仍按死罪办，特上奏请皇帝定夺。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Justice said: The law stipulates that the death of the victim within the time limit is considered homicide, and the "Regulations on Sentencing" also says that the facts of assault and homicide are conclusive. Even if the injured person dies outside the time limit, it will still be handled as a capital crime, and the Emperor will be asked to decide.

古文：臣部拟上，每奉宸断，多发充军，盖虽不执前科，亦仅末减之耳。
现代文：臣部拟定上报，每奉圣断，案犯多发配充军，料想虽然不执着于前科，也仅仅稍微从轻处理罢了。
English: The Ministry of Internal Affairs plans to submit a report, and each time the decision is made, the offender will be assigned to the army. It is expected that although he is not attached to the previous conviction, he will only be slightly treated lightly.

古文：殴伤情实至限外死，即以笞断，是乃侥幸凶人也。
现代文：殴伤他人事实确实在辜期限外死亡，便判其笞刑，这是让凶手获得侥幸。
English: If a person who beats and injures another person actually dies outside the time limit, he will be sentenced to whipping, which is to let the murderer get a lucky break.

古文：且如以凶器伤人，虽平复，例亦充军，岂有实殴人致死，偶死限外，遂不当一凶器伤人之罪乎？
现代文：再说用凶器伤人，即使伤者创口平复了，按例也是充军，哪有实际上伤人致死，偶然死于辜限期之外，还抵不上一个拿凶器伤人的罪呢？
English: Furthermore, wounding someone with a deadly weapon, even if the injured person's wound is healed, is, as usual, conscription. Is there any crime of wounding someone to death, accidentally dying outside the prescribed time limit, that is not equal to the crime of wounding someone with a deadly weapon?

古文：矧四年例已报罢，请谕中外仍如《条例》便。 
现代文：况且四年那个事例皇上已经批覆废除，请求告谕朝廷内外仍按《问刑条例》办好。 
English: What's more, four years after that case, the Emperor has officially overturned and abolished it, requesting that both inside and outside the Imperial Court still be handled in accordance with the "Interrogation Regulations."

古文：诏如部议。
现代文：皇帝下诏按刑部所奏执行。
English: The emperor decreed that the execution would be carried out according to the report of the criminal department.

古文：自后有犯辜限外人命者，俱遵律例议拟，奏请定夺。
现代文：自此以后，欠了辜限外人命的罪犯都根据律例拟定判决，上奏请示皇帝定夺。
English: From then on, criminals who were guilty of endangering the lives of others were sentenced according to the law, and the emperor was asked to decide.

古文：隆庆三年，大理少卿王诤言： 问刑官每违背律例，独任意见。
现代文：隆庆三年，大理少卿王诤说： 审讯官常常违背律例，独断专行。
English: In the third year of the Longqing era, Wang Qi, a Dalian minor lord, said: Inquisitors often violate laws and regulations and act arbitrarily.

古文：如律文所谓 凡奉制书，有所施行而违者杖一百 ，本指制诰而言。
现代文：如律文所说的 凡奉圣旨应做某事而违令者判杖刑一百 ，本来针对制诰而言。
English: As the sutra says, anyone who disobeys a sacred order to do something is sentenced to a hundred strokes of the cane, which was originally meant to be a punishment.

古文：今则操军违限，守备官军不入直，开场赌博，概用此例。
现代文：现在却连操练部队越出限制，守备军官没有入宫值班，开场赌博，都移用此例。
English: Now, however, even the drill troops exceed the limit, the guard officers do not enter the palace on duty, and the opening gamble are all transferred to this example.

古文：律文犯奸条下，所谓 买休卖休、和娶人妻者 ，本指用财买求其妻，又使之休卖其妻，而因以娶之者言也。故律应离异归宗，财礼入官。
现代文：律文犯奸条下所说的 买休、卖休、和娶人妻者 ，本指用财物买求别人的妻子，而使对方休掉并出卖自己的妻子，于是娶人之妻为说，所以应依法律离婚，妇女返归娘家宗族，财礼交给官府。
English: The "buying, selling, and marrying another man's wife" mentioned in the article of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China on the crime of treason refers to the use of wealth to buy and solicit another man's wife, so that the other party can divorce and sell his wife, and then marry another man's wife. Therefore, divorce should be carried out according to the law, the woman should return to her family, and the financial gift should be handed over to the government.

古文：至若夫妇不合者，律应离异；妇人犯奸者，律从嫁卖；则后夫凭媒用财娶以为妻者，原非奸情，律所不禁。
现代文：至于夫妇不和，按法律应离异；女方与人通奸，法律规定听任丈夫嫁掉她或卖掉她；而后夫凭媒人用钱财娶以为妻的，本不属奸情，法律不予禁止。
English: As for discord between husband and wife, according to the law, they should be divorced; if a woman commits adultery, the law stipulates that she should allow her husband to marry her or sell her; if the husband later marries a woman with the help of a matchmaker, it is not adultery and is not prohibited by the law.

古文：今则概引买休、卖休、和娶之律矣。
现代文：现在判案却一概使用买休、卖休、和娶的律条。
English: Now, however, all cases are decided according to the rules of buying, selling, and marrying.

古文：所谓 不应得为而为者，笞四十，重者杖八十 。盖谓律文该载不尽者，方用此律也。
现代文：所谓 干了不该干的事，处笞刑四十下，严重的八十下 ，应是律文记载不完的罪行，纔用此条。
English: The so-called "doing something you shouldn't do," punishable by 40 strokes of the cane, or 80 if it is serious, should be a crime that is not fully recorded in the law.

古文：若所犯明有正条，自当依本条科断。
现代文：假如所犯的罪明明适合于某正条，自当依该条判决。
English: If the crime committed is clearly suitable for a certain article, it should be judged according to that article.

古文：今所犯殴人成伤，罪宜笞，而议罪者则曰 除殴人成伤，律轻不坐外，合依不应得为而为之事理，重者律杖八十 。
现代文：现在犯打人致伤条，应处笞刑，而审案者却说 除打人致伤，法律从轻处理不判刑以外，应依不该干而干的事理，严重的处杖刑八十下 。
English: Now, if a person commits the crime of beating a person to cause injury, he should be punished with whipping, but the judge said that in addition to beating a person to cause injury, the law should not impose punishment lightly, but should impose a serious punishment of 80 strokes of the cane according to the reason why it should not be done.

古文：夫既除殴人轻罪不坐，则无罪可坐矣。
现代文：既然除去了打人致伤轻微不判刑，就无刑可判了。
English: Now that the minor non-sentence of beating a person to cause injury has been eliminated, there is no sentence to be sentenced.

古文：而又坐以 不应得为 ，臣诚不知其所谓。 
现代文：而又用 不该干而干 判刑。臣实在不明白这个意思。 
English: He also used "shouldn't have done it" as a sentence. I really don't understand this meaning.

古文：刑部尚书毛恺力争之，廷臣皆是诤议。
现代文：刑部尚书毛恺竭力为现今做法辩护，朝臣却都认为王诤说得对。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shu Mao Jun, tried his best to defend the current practice, but the courtiers all thought that Wang Jun was right.

古文：得旨： 买休、卖休，本属奸条，今后有犯，非系奸情者，不得引用。
现代文：他们得到圣旨是： 买休、卖休。本属于作奸之条，今后有犯此罪而不属奸情者，不得引用该条。
English: The edict they received was: buy a leave of absence, sell a leave of absence. This was an article of treason, and those who commit this crime in the future, but are not adulterers, may not invoke this article.

古文：他如故。 
现代文：其余的按旧有律。 
English: The rest will follow the old rules.

古文：万历中，左都御史吴时来申明律例六条：
现代文：万历年间，左都御史昊时来申明六条律例：
English: During the Wanli years, the Left Capital Emperor Shi Hao affirmed six laws:

古文：一、律称庶人之家不许存养奴婢。盖谓功臣家方给赏奴婢，庶民当自服勤劳，故不得存养。
现代文：一、法律说平民家庭不得蓄养奴婢，应是指功臣之家皇上纔赏赐奴婢，平民该当自己承担劳苦，所以不得蓄养奴婢。
English: First, the law says that civilian families are not allowed to keep slaves and maids. It should refer to the fact that the emperor rewards the homes of meritorious soldiers with slaves and maids. Civilians should bear the labor themselves, so they are not allowed to keep slaves and maids.

古文：有犯者皆称雇工人，初未言及缙绅之家也。
现代文：违犯此条的人都声称是雇工人而已，当初法律也没有言及士大夫之家可否蓄奴。
English: The violators of this article all claimed to be hired workers. At the beginning, the law did not mention whether the house of the shidafu could keep slaves.

古文：缙绅之家，存养奴婢，势所不免。
现代文：士大夫之家，蓄养奴婢，情势不可免去。
English: In the house of the scholar-officials, the situation is unavoidable.

古文：合令法司酌议，无论官民之家，立券用值、工作有年限者，以雇工人论；受值微少、工作计日月者，以凡人论。
现代文：当命令掌管司法刑狱的官署斟酌讨论，无论官民之家，祇要签有契约拿取报酬、工作有年限的，以雇佣工人论；报酬微少、计时计月工作的，以平民论。
English: When ordering the government office in charge of the judicial penal prison to deliberate and discuss, regardless of whether it is a public or private house, those who only need to sign a contract to receive remuneration and work for a certain number of years are considered to be hired workers; those who are paid little and work by the hour and month are considered to be civilians.

古文：若财买十五以下、恩养日久、十六以上、配有室家者，视同子孙论。
现代文：若拿钱财购买十五岁以下小孩，抚养时间已长，或十六岁以上少年，为其安排了配偶的，枧同其子孙论。
English: If money is used to purchase a child under the age of 15 and the child has been raised for a long time, or a teenager over the age of 16 and a spouse has been arranged for him or her, this will be discussed with his or her children and grandchildren.

古文：或恩养未久，不曾配合者，庶人之家，仍以雇工人论；缙绅之家，视奴婢律论。
现代文：抚养时间不长与不曾婚配的，在平民之家，仍以雇工人论；在士大夫之家，则视为蓄养奴婢之律论处。
English: In the homes of commoners, those who have not been married for a long time and those who have not been married are still considered to be employees; in the homes of officials, they are considered to be slaves.

古文：一、律称伪造诸衙门印信者斩。
现代文：二、法律说伪造各衙门公章者处斩。
English: Second, according to the law, those who forge the official seals of the imperial residences shall be beheaded.

古文：惟铜铁私铸者，故斩。
现代文：考虑到这是用铜铁私铸的，所以处斩。
English: Considering the fact that it was cast with copper and iron, the punishment was carried out.

古文：若篆文虽印，形质非印者，不可谓之伪造，故例又立描摸充军之条。
现代文：如果祇是印章篆文，形状质地不像公章，不能称为伪造，因此又设立描摹公章充军的条例。
English: If it is only a seal seal seal, the shape and texture is not like the official seal, it can not be called a forgery, so the regulation of the official seal seal seal is established.

古文：以后伪造印信人犯，如系木石泥蜡之类，止引描摸之例，若再犯拟斩。
现代文：以后对伪造公章的人犯，如其使用木石泥蜡之类材料，祇按描摹论处，若再次犯此罪，判拟处斩。
English: In the future, offenders who forge official seals, such as those who use materials such as masonry wax, will only be punished according to the description, and if they commit this crime again, they will be sentenced to be beheaded.

古文：伪造行使止一次、而赃不满徒者，亦准窃盗论。
现代文：伪造公章只用过一次，而赃款不及判苦役的，也按盗窃罪论处。
English: If the forged official seal has only been used once, and the stolen money is less than the sentence of hard labor, it will also be dealt with according to the crime of theft.

古文：如再犯引例，三犯引律。
现代文：如再次犯此罪，依条例处置。第三次犯此罪，依法律处置。
English: If they commit this crime again, they will be dealt with according to the regulations. If they commit this crime for the third time, they will be dealt with according to the law.

古文：一、律称窃盗三犯者绞，以曾经刺字为坐。
现代文：三、法律说三次犯偷窃抢劫之罪即处绞刑，因为前面已经判刑刺字了。
English: Thirdly, the law says that the crime of theft and robbery committed three times is punishable by hanging, because the previous sentence has been engraved.

古文：但赃有多寡，即拟有轻重。
现代文：但是赃物有多少之分，论罪也有轻重之别。
English: However, there is a difference in the severity of the crime depending on the amount of stolen goods.

古文：以后凡遇窃盗，三犯俱在赦前、俱在赦后者，依律论绞。
现代文：以后凡遇犯偷抢案的，三次犯罪都在赦免前或都在赦免后，依法律判处绞刑。
English: In the future, in cases of robbery, all three crimes will be sentenced to hanging according to the law, either before or after the pardon.

古文：或赦前后所犯并计三次者，皆得奏请定夺。
现代文：有的在赦免前后犯罪共三次，均须上奏皇帝请示定夺。
English: Some of them committed a total of three crimes before and after the amnesty, all of which must be reported to the emperor for approval.

古文：录官附入矜疑辨问疏内，并与改遣。
现代文：审录官员附入怜悯疑难辩问的奏疏内的，一并予以重新处置。
English: The interrogating officer shall attach it to the file of mercy, doubt and difficult debate, and re-dispose of it at the same time.

古文：一、强盗肆行劫杀，按赃拟辟，决不待时。
现代文：四、强盗肆意劫财害命，按赃物论斩，决不拖延。
English: 4. The robbers wantonly plundered money and killed people, according to the stolen goods theory, and will not delay.

古文：但其中岂无罗织雠扳，妄收抵罪者？
现代文：但其中岂无罗织罪行，诬陷仇人，乱捕人抵罪的官吏？
English: But are there not among them officials who fabricate crimes, frame their enemies, and arbitrarily arrest people to atone for their crimes?

古文：以后务加参详。
现代文：以后务必加以详细考察。
English: In the future, it must be examined in detail.

古文：或赃证未明，遽难悬断者，俱拟秋后斩。
现代文：那些脏物证据不确，难以一下子推断的，都拟定为秋后斩首。
English: Those whose dirty evidence is uncertain and difficult to deduce at once are all scheduled to be beheaded after the autumn.

古文：一、律称同谋共殴人，以致命伤重，下手者论绞，原谋余人各得其罪。
现代文：五、法律说同谋打人，以致被害人伤重死亡，出手打人的处绞刑，其它同谋人各有处罚。
English: 5. According to the law, an accomplice who beats a person so that the victim is seriously injured and dies shall be sentenced to death by hanging. Other accomplices shall be punished separately.

古文：其有两三人共殴一人，各成重伤，难定下手及系造谋主令之人，遇有在监禁毙者，即以论抵。
现代文：有时两三个人共同殴打一人，各人都重伤了受害者，出手的和主谋难以确定，遇到犯人在监狱里禁闭死亡，即以之抵罪。
English: Sometimes two or three people together beat up one person, each of them seriously injuring the victim. It is difficult to determine who fired the shot and who was the mastermind. If the offender dies in prison, this is used to cover up the crime.

古文：今恤刑官遇有在家病故，且在数年之后者，即将见监下手之人拟从矜宥。
现代文：现在恤刑官遇到人犯在家中死去，并且数午之后在家病死的，就将现押出手打人的人以怜悯宽宥处理。
English: Now, when the probation officer encounters a criminal who died at home, and died of illness at home a few afternoons later, he will treat the person who hit the person with mercy and forgiveness.

古文：是以病亡之躯，而抵殴死之命，殊属纵滥。
现代文：因此用病亡之躯来抵殴死之命，确实太放宽了。
English: Therefore, it is indeed too liberal to use the body of a sick person to resist the life of a dead person.

古文：以后毋得一概准抵。
现代文：以后不能一概准予抵命。
English: From now on, no one can be allowed to die.

古文：一、在京恶逆与强盗真犯，虽停刑之年，亦不时处决。
现代文：六、在京城的证据确凿的恶逆犯和强盗，即使在停刑之年也随时处决。
English: Sixth, in Beijing, evildoers and robbers with solid evidence will be executed at any time, even in the year of suspension of punishment.

古文：乃凶恶至于杀父，即时凌迟，犹有余憾。
现代文：凶恶竟至于杀父，立即凌迟处死，还嫌不解恨。
English: As for the murder of his father, he was immediately and belatedly put to death.

古文：而在外此类反得迁延岁月，以故事当类奏，无单奏例耳。
现代文：而在外地，此类罪案反而要迁延年月，因为事情要成批上奏，不单奏一件的条例。
English: On the other hand, in other regions, such crimes are delayed for years, because the cases have to be reported in batches, not according to the regulations of a single case.

古文：夫单奏，急词也；类奏，缓词也。
现代文：单奏，是火急的文书；批奏，是不急的文书。
English: The solo is an urgent instrument; the ensemble is an unhurried instrument.

古文：如此狱在外数年，使其瘐死，将何以快神人之愤哉！
现代文：如犯此罪的人在外地蹲监狱数年，死在监狱中，怎么能够抒解天人之愤呢！
English: If the person who committed this crime sits in prison for several years in a foreign country and dies in prison, how can the anger of heaven and man be explained?

古文：今后在外，凡有此者，御史单详到院，院寺单奏，决单一到，即时处决。
现代文：今后外地凡有这种罪犯，御史用单独文书报告到都察院，都察院和大理寺单奏皇上，判决书一到，立时处决。
English: In the future, if there are any such criminals in other places, the imperial historian will report to the Duka-in with a separate document, and the Duka-in and the Dali-ji Temple will report to the Emperor. As soon as the verdict arrives, they will be immediately executed.

古文：其死者下府州县戮其尸。
现代文：死者下送府州陈尸示众。
English: The bodies of the deceased were sent to Fuzhou for public display.

古文：庶典刑得正。
现代文：这样可望施刑得当。
English: In this way, it is hoped that the punishment will be properly administered.

古文：旨下部寺酌议，俱从之。
现代文：皇帝下旨刑部和大理寺斟酌讨论，二署都听从他的意见。
English: The Emperor ordered the Criminal Investigation Department and Dali Temple to deliberate and discuss, and both departments listened to his opinion.

古文：惟伪造印文者，不问何物成造，皆斩。
现代文：只是对伪造公章的，不问用什么材料制造，一律处斩。
English: However, those who forge official seals, no matter what material they are made of, will be punished.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝批覆照准。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：赎刑本《虞书》，《吕刑》有大辟之赎，后世皆重言之。
现代文：赎罪的刑律本自《虞书》，《吕刑》有死刑的赎罪法，后代都重申它。
English: The penal code of atonement is from the "Book of the State," and the "Law of Lv" has the atonement of the death penalty, and the descendants have reiterated it.

古文：至宋时，尤慎赎罪，非八议者不得与。
现代文：到宋朝时，特别慎重赎罪法的使用，不属于八议之罪不考虑。
English: By the time of the Song Dynasty, the use of the Atonement Law was particularly cautious, and the sins that did not belong to the Eight Precepts were not considered.

古文：明律颇严，凡朝廷有所矜恤、限于律而不得伸者，一寓之于赎例，所以济法之太重也。
现代文：明律相当严，凡是朝廷有怜恤之意而受法律限制不能宽舒的罪人，全都放在交纳钱财赎罪的案例中，这样来补救过重的法律。
English: The law was very strict. All the criminals who could not be pardoned by the court's mercy and could not be pardoned by the law were placed in the case of paying money and money to atone for their sins, so as to remedy the excessive law.

古文：又国家得时藉其入，以佐缓急。
现代文：同时国家也能随时藉这种收入来帮补急用。
English: At the same time, the state can always use this income to help with urgent needs.

古文：而实边、足储、振荒、宫府颁给诸大费，往往取给于赃赎二者。
现代文：而充实边卫、鲎富储备、赈济灾荒和宫府颁发供应各项大的开支，往往用罪人赃款和赎罪费来供应。
English: On the other hand, the border guards, the wealth reserve, the disaster relief, and the supply of the palace were often provided with the stolen money of the criminals and the expiation fee.

古文：故赎法比历代特详。
现代文：所以赎罪法和历代相比，特别详细。
English: Therefore, the Atonement Law is particularly detailed compared to previous generations.

古文：凡赎法有二，有律得收赎者，有例得纳赎者。
现代文：赎罪法有两种，一种是按法律可赎罪的，一种是按条例可赎罪的。
English: There are two types of atonement, one that can atone for sins according to the law, and one that can atone for sins according to regulations.

古文：律赎无敢损益，而纳赎之例则因时权宜，先后互异，其端实开于太祖云。
现代文：按法律赎罪主事官吏不敢增减数量，按条例赎罪则可以因时制宜，交款先后数量不同，这是太祖开的先例。
English: According to the law, officials in charge of atonement dare not increase or decrease the amount, but according to the regulations, atonement can be made according to the time and conditions, and the number of payments is different, which is a precedent set by Taizu.

古文：律凡文武官以公事犯笞罪者，官照等收赎钱，吏每季类决之，各还职役，不附过。
现代文：按照法律，在办理公事时犯笞罪的文武官员，官府按等级收取赎菲费，吏则每季度成批审决？次，然后各返还自己的原职，不附记过失。
English: According to the law, civil and military officials who commit the crime of embezzlement during the handling of public affairs, the government will collect the redemption fee according to the level, and the officials will be reviewed in batches every quarter, and then each will return to their original position, without adding negligence.

古文：杖以上记所犯罪名，每岁类送吏、兵二部，候九年满考，通记所犯次数黜陟之。
现代文：如果受了杖刑以上的处罚就记下所犯的罪名，每年分类按批送达吏部和兵部，等到满九年考核，合计记录所犯杖刑的次数，对之进行撤职或升迁。
English: If the punishment is more than caning, the offenses committed will be recorded and sent to the Ministry of Personnel and the Ministry of Military Affairs in batches every year, and the total number of caning will be recorded when the evaluation is completed in nine years, and the offender will be dismissed or promoted.

古文：吏典亦备铨选降叙。
现代文：府县吏役也以此作为铨选升降的依据。
English: Prefectural and county officials also use this as a basis for promotion and demotion.

古文：至于私罪，其文官及吏典犯笞四十以下者，附过还职而不赎，笞五十者调用。
现代文：至于私罪，犯笞刑四十以下的文官和吏役，带过返任原职而不赎罪，处笞刑五十的调离使用。
English: As for private crimes, civil servants and functionaries who have committed a crime punishable by imprisonment for not more than forty years shall be transferred from their posts without remission, and shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than fifty years.

古文：军官杖以上皆的决。
现代文：军官犯杖刑以上的罪一律如实施行。
English: An officer who commits a crime punishable by caning or more will be executed without exception.

古文：文官及吏杖罪，并罢职不叙，至严也。
现代文：文官和吏役处罚杖刑，均开除官职不用，法律极严。
English: Civil servants and officials are punished with the cane and are dismissed from their posts, and the law is very strict.

古文：然自洪武中年已三下令，准赎及杂犯死罪以下矣。
现代文：然而从洪武中期开始皇上已经三次下令，准许赎罪之法扩大到杂犯中死罪以下的人了。
English: However, since the middle of the Hongwu period, the emperor has ordered three times to allow the law of atonement to be extended to those who have committed less than capital crimes.

古文：三十年，命部院议定赎罪事例，凡内外官吏，犯笞杖者记过，徒流迁徙者俸赎之，三犯罪之如律。
现代文：三十年，皇帝命令刑部和都察院议定赎罪案例，凡是犯笞刑、杖刑的朝廷内外官吏，记过处理，犯苦役、流放、迁徙的用其薪金赎罪，犯罪三次的依法律判决。
English: For 30 years, the emperor ordered the Criminal Investigation Department and the Duka-in to agree on the cases of atonement. All officials inside and outside the imperial court who committed flogging and caning were recorded and dealt with, those who committed hard labor, exile, and migration used their salaries to atone for their sins, and those who committed three crimes were sentenced according to the law.

古文：自是律与例互有异同。
现代文：从此法律与条例互有异同。
English: Since then, the laws and regulations have been different from each other.

古文：及颁行《大明律》，御制序： 杂犯死罪、徒流、迁徙等刑，悉视今定赎罪条例科断。 
现代文：等到颁行《大明律》皇帝亲自作序： 杂犯死罪、苦役、流放、迁徙等刑，一律按现在制定的赎罪条例判决。 
English: Wait until the promulgation of the "Great Law," the emperor himself will make the preface: the death penalty, hard labor, exile, migration and other punishments for minor offenders will all be sentenced according to the current regulations on atonement.

古文：于是例遂辅律而行。
现代文：于是条例辅助法律而通行。
English: As a result, the ordinance was passed in addition to the law.

古文：仁宗初即位，谕都察院言： 输罚工作之令行，有财者悉幸免，宜一论如律。 
现代文：仁宗初即位，训谕都察院说： 交纳罚金赎罪的条令一施行，有财力的人都幸免于刑罪，应依照法律统一处理。 
English: At the time of Emperor Nenzong's accession to the throne, the precept of the Duka-in said: As soon as the regulation of paying a fine to atone for a crime is implemented, people with financial resources are exempt from criminal offenses and should be dealt with uniformly in accordance with the law.

古文：久之，其法复弛。
现代文：时间一长，此法又松弛下来。
English: After a long time, this method slackened again.

古文：正统间，侍讲刘球言： 输罪非古，自公罪许赎外，宜悉依律。 
现代文：正统年间，侍讲刘球进言： 交纳钱财赎罪不是古制，除公罪允许赎罪外，宜全部依法律判罪。 
English: During the years of orthodoxy, Liu Qiujin, a lecturer, said: Paying money and property to atone for sins is not an old system. Except for public crimes that allow atonement, all crimes should be judged according to the law.

古文：时不能从。
现代文：当时不能照此办理。
English: This was not possible at the time.

古文：其后循太祖之例，益推广之。
现代文：此后遵循太祖的先例，赎罪之法愈益推广。
English: Since then, following the example of the great-grandfather, the law of atonement has been increasingly popularized.

古文：凡官吏公私杂犯准徒以下，俱听运炭纳米等项赎罪。
现代文：所有官吏公私杂犯犯了相当于苦役以下的罪，全都任其运炭、交米等来赎罪。
English: All officials, public and private miscellaneous criminals have committed a crime equivalent to less than hard labor, and all of them are allowed to carry coal, pay rice, etc. to atone for their sins.

古文：其军官军人照例免徒流者，例赎亦如之矣。
现代文：军官军人按条例免除徒刑流刑的，亦如此例赎罪。
English: If officers and soldiers are exempted from imprisonment and exile according to the regulations, this is also an example of atonement.

古文：赎罪之法，明初尝纳铜，成化间尝纳马，后皆不行，不具载。
现代文：赎罪的办法，明初曾规定交纳铜，成化年间曾让交纳马，后来都不实行，具体办法不一一列举。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the method of atonement stipulated the payment of copper, and during the Chenghua Dynasty, the payment of horse was allowed, but later they were not implemented, and the specific methods were not enumerated.

古文：惟纳钞、纳钱、纳银常并行焉，而以初制纳钞为本。
现代文：只有交纳银钞、铜钱和银子常一并通行，而以当初规定的纳钞作为根本。
English: Only the payment of silver banknotes, copper money and silver often go together, and the payment of banknotes as originally stipulated is the basis.

古文：故律赎者曰收赎律钞，纳赎者曰赎罪例钞。
现代文：所以按法律纳赎罪称收赎律钞，按例交纳赎金称赎罪例钞。
English: Therefore, according to the law, the payment of atonement is called atonement bill, and the payment of ransom is called atonement bill.

古文：永乐十一年，令除公罪依例纪录收赎，及死罪情重者依律处治，其情轻者，斩罪八千贯，绞罪及榜例死罪六千贯，流徒杖笞纳钞有差。
现代文：永乐十一年有令，除公罪依条例收取赎金及情节严重的死罪依法处治以外，情节较轻者，斩罪交八千贯，绞罪以及榜例死罪交六千贯，流放、徒刑、杖刑和笞刑各按等级交纳银钞。
English: In the 11th year of Yongle, it was ordered that in addition to the public crime of accepting ransom in accordance with the regulations and the death penalty for serious crimes, if the circumstances are minor, the beheading crime should be paid 8,000 yuan, the hanging crime and the exemplary death penalty should be paid 6,000 yuan, and the banishment, imprisonment, caning and flogging should be paid according to the grade.

古文：无力者发天寿山种树。
现代文：无力交纳的发配天寿山种树。
English: Those who are unable to pay are assigned to plant trees in Tianshou Mountain.

古文：宣德二年定，笞杖罪囚，每十赎钞二十贯。
现代文：宣德二年规定，处笞刑杖刑的霏囚，每打十下交赎罪钞二十贯。
English: In the second year of Xuande, it was stipulated that prisoners sentenced to the cane should pay 20 yuan of atonement money for every dozen.

古文：徒流罪名，每徒一等折杖二十，三流并折杖百四十。
现代文：苦役流放的罪，苦役每一等折算二十杖，流放三等每等折算一百四十杖。
English: For the crime of banishment to hard labor, the penalty for each class of hard labor shall be twenty canes, and for banishment to the third class, the penalty shall be one hundred and forty canes.

古文：其所罚钞，悉如笞杖所定。
现代文：其所罚的宝钞均依笞刑杖刑的定额交纳。
English: The treasure banknotes he was fined were all paid according to the fixed amount of the cane punishment.

古文：无力者发天寿山种树；死罪终身；徒流各按年限；杖，五百株；笞，一百株。
现代文：无力交纳的发配天寿山种树：死罪种树终身；苦役流放各依其年限种树；杖刑，种树五百株；笞刑，种树一百株。
English: Those unable to pay were assigned to plant trees in Tianshou Mountain: the death penalty for planting trees for life; hard labor exile for planting trees according to their respective years; caning, planting five hundred trees; flogging, planting one hundred trees.

古文：景泰元年，令问拟笞杖罪囚，有力者纳钞。
现代文：景泰元年，下令要求判笞刑、杖刑的罪囚，有财力的交宝钞赎罪。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, he ordered that prisoners who had been sentenced to flogging or caning and had the financial means to do so should pay treasure money to atone for their sins.

古文：笞十，二百贯，每十以二百贯递加，至笞五十为千贯。
现代文：笞十下，交二百贯，每十下以二百贯递加，到笞打五十下交宝钞一千贯。
English: At the tenth stroke of the gong, 200 sen will be paid. At every tenth stroke, 200 sen will be added. At the fiftieth stroke of the gong, 1,000 sen will be paid.

古文：杖六十，千八百贯，每十以三百贯递加，至杖百为三千贯。
现代文：杖刑六十下交一千八百贯，以每十杖三百贯递加，到一百杖达三千贯。
English: For every 60 strokes of the cane, 1,800 kan are to be paid. For every 10 strokes, 300 kan are to be paid, and for every 100 strokes, 3,000 kan are to be paid.

古文：其官吏赃物，亦视今例折钞。
现代文：犯法官吏的赃物也按现例折合成银钞。
English: The stolen goods of criminal magistrates are also folded into silver banknotes according to the current example.

古文：天顺五年，令罪囚纳钞，每笞十，钞二百贯，余四笞，递加百五十贯；至杖六十，增为千四百五十贯，余杖各递加二百贯，成化二年，令妇人犯法赎罪。
现代文：天顺五年，命令罪囚交钞票：笞刑每十下交钞票二百贯，其余四等笞刑，均递加一百五十贯；到杖刑六十下，增加为一千四百五十贯，其余四等各递加二百贯。成化二年下令妇人犯法也交钱赎罪。
English: In the fifth year of Tenshun, the criminal prisoners were ordered to pay banknotes: for every ten strokes of the cane, they were ordered to pay 200 sen, and for the remaining four strokes of the cane, they were ordered to pay 150 sen; for every sixty strokes of the cane, they were ordered to pay 1,450 sen, and for the remaining four strokes, they were ordered to pay 200 sen. In the second year of Chenghua, the woman was ordered to pay money to atone for her crime.

古文：弘治十四年，定折收银钱之制。
现代文：弘治十四年制定折算收取银钱的法规。
English: In the 14th year of the Konji era, regulations were established for the conversion and collection of silver money.

古文：例难的决人犯，并妇人有力者，每杖百，应钞二千二百五十贯，折银一两；每十以二百贯递减，至杖六十为银六钱；笞五十，应减为钞八百贯，折银五钱，每十以百五十贯递减；至笞二十为银二钱；笞十应钞二百贯，折银一钱。
现代文：按条例难以如实执罚的人犯和有财力的女犯，每罪罚一百杖，合交银钞二千二百五十贯，折合银子一两；以每十杖二百贯递减，到六十杖为银子六钱；笞五十下，应减为银钞八百贯，折合银子五钱，以每十下一百五十贯递减，到笞打二十下为银子二钱；笞十下应交银钞二百贯，折合银子一钱。
English: According to the regulations, offenders who are difficult to enforce the punishment truthfully and female offenders who have financial resources, the maximum penalty for each crime is 100 canes, and the amount of 2,250 silver coins is equivalent to one or two silver coins; the amount of 200 canes is reduced by 10 canes, and the amount of 60 canes is equivalent to six silver coins; the amount of 50 canes is reduced by 800 silver coins, equivalent to five silver coins; the amount of 1,150 canes is reduced by 10 canes, and the amount of 20 canes is equivalent to two silver coins; the amount of 30 canes is reduced by 200 silver coins, equivalent to one silver coin.

古文：如收铜钱，每银一两折七百文。
现代文：假如收铜钱，每一两银子折合七百文。
English: If copper money is collected, every two pieces of silver is equivalent to seven hundred mon.

古文：其依律赎钞，除过失杀人外，亦视此数折收。
现代文：依法律交赎金的，除过失杀人罪以外，亦按此数折收。
English: If a ransom is paid in accordance with the law, it will be reduced by the same amount, except in the case of manslaughter.

古文：正德二年，定钱钞兼收之制。
现代文：正德二年，定下铜钱和银钞兼收的制度。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, a system of accepting both copper and silver banknotes was established.

古文：如杖一百，应钞二千二百五十贯者，收钞千一百二十五贯，钱三百五十文。
现代文：如处杖刑一百下，应交银钞二千二百五十贯的，收钞一千一百二十五贯，钱三百五十文。
English: If the punishment is one hundred strokes of the cane, the amount of 2,250 silver coins should be paid, and the amount of 1,125 silver coins should be collected, and the amount of money should be 350 mon.

古文：嘉靖七年，巡抚湖广都御史朱廷声言： 收赎与赎罪有异，在京与在外不同，钞贯止聚于都下，钱法不行于南方。
现代文：嘉靖七年，巡抚湖广都御史朱廷声进言： 按法律赎罪和按条例纳赎不同，在京城与在外地不同，钱钞只聚积在京城，折算钱钞的办法不在南方通行。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing era, the governor of the Hubei-Guangdong Metropolitan Government, Zhu Ting, made the following remarks: The atonement according to the law is different from the atonement according to the regulations, and it is different in the capital and in other places. Money and banknotes are only accumulated in the capital, and the method of converting money and banknotes is not common in the south.

古文：故事，审有力及命妇、军职正妻，及例难的决者，有赎罪例钞；老幼废疾及妇人余罪，有收赎律钞。
现代文：从前的做法是，确有财力的、命妇或军官正妻，按条例难如实行刑的囚犯，有赎罪例钞；老幼残病和女犯、犯流罪杖责一百后的余罪，有收赎律钞的规定。
English: In the past, the practice was that prisoners with real financial resources, such as the wife of an officer or the legal wife of an officer, and prisoners who were difficult to execute according to regulations, had redemption notes; the elderly, the disabled, and female prisoners, and the remaining crimes after 100 years of punishment for the crime of emigration, had provisions for collecting redemption notes.

古文：赎罪例钞，钱钞兼收，如笞一十，收钞百贯，收钱三十五文，其钞二百贯，折银一钱。
现代文：赎罪例钞，钢钱和银钞兼收，如应笞打十下，则收钞一百贯，收铜钱三十五文。其钞二百贯折合银了一钱。
English: In the case of atonement bills, both steel money and silver money are accepted. If it is necessary to beat ten times, then the bill is 100 sen and the copper money is 35 sen. The 200 sen bill is equivalent to one silver coin.

古文：杖一百，收钞千一百二十五贯，收钱三百五十文，其钞二千二百五十贯，折银一两。
现代文：杖刑一百下，收宝钞一千一百二十五贯，收铜钱三百五十文，其钞二千二百五十贯，折合银子一雨。
English: One hundred strokes of the cane, one thousand one hundred and twenty-five gold coins, three hundred and fifty copper coins, and two thousand two hundred and fifty silver coins.

古文：今收赎律钞，笞一十，止赎六百文，比例钞折银不及一厘；杖一百，赎钞六贯，折银不及一分，似为太轻。
现代文：现在的收赎律钞，笞打十下，赎金只有六百文，和例钞折合银子相比，不及一厘；杖打一百下，钞票赎金是六贯，和例钞折合银子相比，不及一分，似太轻了。
English: The current redemption of legal banknotes, beating ten times, the ransom is only six hundred coins, compared with the standard banknote equivalent to silver, less than one cent; 100 strokes of the cane, the banknote ransom is six yuan, compared with the standard banknote equivalent to silver, less than one point, it seems too light.

古文：盖律钞与例钞，贯既不同，则折银亦当有异。
现代文：律钞和例钞既然贯数不同，则折合银子也应当不同。
English: Since there is a difference in the sequence number between the legal banknote and the regular banknote, the conversion of silver should also be different.

古文：请更定为则，凡收赎者，每钞一贯，折银一分二厘五毫。
现代文：请允许改定出规则，凡属收赎的，每一贯宝钞折合一分二厘五毫银子。
English: Please allow us to amend the rules. For those that have been redeemed, each treasure banknote is equivalent to one and two-fifths of a milligram of silver.

古文：如笞一十，赎钞六百文，则折银七厘五毫，以罪重轻递加折收赎。 
现代文：如笞打十下，需赎金钞六百文，则折合银子七厘五毫，根据罪行的轻重递加计算赎罪金额。 
English: If ten beatings are required, a ransom note of six hundred mon is required, which is equivalent to seven-and-a-half percent of a silver coin, and the amount of atonement is calculated according to the severity of the crime.

古文：帝从其奏，令中外问刑诸司，皆以此例从事。
现代文：皇帝依从其奏，下令朝廷内外审案的各衙门，全部依此例办案。
English: The emperor followed his advice and ordered that all courts, both inside and outside the imperial court, should handle cases in accordance with this precedent.

古文：是时重修条例，奏定赎例。
现代文：这时又重修审案条例，上奏议定赎罪办法。
English: At this time, the trial regulations were revised again, and an atonement was agreed upon.

古文：在京则做工、运囚粮、运灰、运砖、运水和炭五等。
现代文：处罚中运灰最重，运炭最轻。京城以外的人犯则分有财力和稍有财力二等。
English: Among the punishments, transportation of ashes is the heaviest and transportation of coal is the lightest. Offenders outside the capital are divided into those with financial resources and those with slightly more financial resources.

古文：运灰最重，运炭最轻。
现代文：起初有颇有财力、次有财力等名称，因御史上奏而除去。
English: At first, there were names such as quite wealthy, and then wealthy, but they were removed due to historical reasons.

古文：在外则有力、稍有力二等。
现代文：其中有财力者，比照在京运囚粮处理。
English: Among them, those who have financial resources are treated according to the Beijing Transport Prisoners' Grain.

古文：其有力，视在京运囚粮，每米五斗，纳谷一石。
现代文：每逗五斗米，交纳一石谷。先折银子入库，后折谷子入仓。
English: For every five buckets of rice, one koku of grain was paid. First, the silver was stored, and then the grain was stored.

古文：稍有力，视在京做工年月为折赎。
现代文：稍有财力的人，比照在京做工，以年月折算赎金。
English: People with a little financial resources, for example, work in Beijing, and the ransom is calculated by the year.

古文：妇人审有力，与命妇、军职正妻，及例难的决之人，赎罪应钱钞兼收者，笞、杖每一十，折收银一钱。
现代文：确实有财力的女犯与命妇、军官正妻，及按条例难以如实行刑的人，赎罪应铜钱和宝钞兼收的，笞刑、杖刑每十下，折合收银子一钱。
English: For female prisoners with real financial resources, widows, lawful wives of military officers, and those whose punishment is difficult to carry out according to regulations, who should receive both copper money and treasure bills to atone for their sins, every ten strokes of the cane and caning are equivalent to one coin.

古文：其老幼废疾妇人及天文生余罪收赎者，每笞一十应钞六百文，折收银七厘五毫。
现代文：其中老幼残病、妇女及占星先生等余罪交罚金赎罪的，每笞十下合六百文钱，折合收银子七厘五毫。
English: Among them, the old, the young, the disabled, the women and the astrologers who paid a fine to atone for the remaining crimes were fined 600 yuan for every 10 yuan, equivalent to 7.5 percent of the cash register.

古文：于是轻重适均，天下便之。
现代文：于是纳赎金轻重均衡，天下都称适用。
English: As a result, the importance of accepting ransom is balanced, and the whole world is said to be applicable.

古文：至万历十三年，复申明焉，遂为定制。
现代文：到万历十三年，又加以重申，因而成为固定制度。
English: In the 13th year of Wanli, it was reaffirmed and thus became a fixed system.

古文：凡律赎，若天文生习业已成、能专其事、犯徒及流者，决杖一百，余罪收赎。
现代文：凡是按法律赎罪的，如已经学成能独立作的占星先生，犯苦役和流放罪的，执行杖刑一百，余下的惩罚交金赎罪。
English: Those who have atoned for their sins according to the law, such as those who have learned to become astrologers who can work independently, and those who have committed the crimes of hard labor and banishment, will be punished with a hundred strokes of the cane, and the rest of the punishment will be paid to atone for their sins.

古文：妇人犯徒流者，决杖一百，余罪收赎。
现代文：妇人犯苦役和流放罪，执行杖刑一百，余下的惩罚交金赎罪。
English: If a woman commits the crimes of forced labor and banishment, she shall be sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane, and the rest of the punishment shall be paid as atonement.

古文：如杖六十，徒一年，全赎钞应十二贯，除决杖准讫六贯，余钞六贯，折银七分五厘，馀仿此。
现代文：如判杖刑六十下，苦役一年，全部赎钞是十二贯，除执行杖刑抵偿掉六贯，剩下的六贯折合银子七分五厘。其余类推。
English: If a person is sentenced to 60 strokes of the cane and one year of hard labor, the total amount of money to be redeemed is 12 shillings. In addition to the execution of the cane punishment, 6 shillings will be reimbursed, and the remaining 6 shillings will be equivalent to 7.5 percent of silver. The rest will be the same.

古文：其决杖一百，审有力又纳例钞二千二百五十贯，应收钱三百五十文，钞一千一百二十五贯。
现代文：那些执行杖刑一百下的确有财力者又交例钞二千二百五十贯，合收铜钱三百五十文，钞一千一百二十五贯。
English: Those who actually had the financial resources to carry out the punishment of 100 strokes of the cane also paid 2,250 sen, a total of 350 coins and 1,125 sen.

古文：凡年七十以上十五以下及废疾犯流以下，收赎；八十以上十岁以下及笃疾、盗及伤人者，亦收赎。凡犯罪时未老疾，事发时老疾者，依老疾论，犯罪时幼小，事发时长大者，依幼小论，并得收赎。
现代文：凡是犯罪时役老没患病，事情败露时已老已患病的，依年老患病者论处；犯罪时幼小，事情败露时已长大的，依幼小者论处，均可纳金赎罪。如果六十九岁以前犯罪，七十岁时事情败露，或者设患病时犯罪，残疾患病后事泄，得以依老者病者条件交赎金。其它如七十九岁以下犯死罪，八十岁事泄，或者残疾患病时犯罪，病重时事泄，得以归入上奏请示类。八十九岁犯死罪，九十岁事泄，得以不追究刑事责任，不在纳金赎罪之例。
English: If the crime was committed before the age of sixty-nine, and the crime was discovered at the age of seventy, or if the crime was committed when the victim was ill, or if the victim was already ill when the crime was discovered, the punishment will be according to the age of the victim; if the crime was committed when the victim was young, and the victim was already grown up when the crime was discovered, the punishment will be according to the age of the victim. If the crime was committed before the age of sixty-nine, and the crime was discovered at the age of seventy, or if the crime was committed when the victim was ill, or if the crime was committed when the victim was disabled and the

古文：若在徒年限内老疾，亦如之。
现代文：如果在服苦役的年限内老或病，亦照此办理。
English: If they become old or ill during their term of hard labor, they will be dealt with in the same way.

古文：如犯杖六十，徒一年，一月之后老疾，合计全赎钞十二贯。
现代文：例如处杖刑六十下，苦役一年，一个月之后犯人年老或患病，全部赎钞合计十二贯。
English: For example, 60 strokes of the cane, one year of hard labor, one month after the prisoner is old or sick, and a total of 12 ransom notes.

古文：除已杖六十，准三贯六百文，剩徒一年，应八贯四百文计算。
现代文：除已受刑六十杖，抵销三贯六百文，剩下苦役一年，合八贯四百文。
English: In addition to the 60 strokes of the cane he had already received, he had to pay 600 mon to compensate for the three strokes, and the remaining one year of hard labor amounted to 400 mon for the eight strokes.

古文：每徒一月，赎钞七百文，已役一月，准赎七百文外，未赎十一月，应收赎七贯七百文。
现代文：苦役每月需赎钞七百文，既已服役一个月，抵销七百文，其余十一个月，应收赎金七贯七百文。
English: The monthly ransom for forced labor is seven hundred monies. After one month of service, the ransom is seven hundred monies. For the remaining eleven months, the ransom is seven hundred monies.

古文：余仿此。
现代文：其余类推。
English: The rest follows by analogy.

古文：老幼废疾收赎，惟杂犯五年仍科之。
现代文：老幼残病交金赎罪，惟有杂犯判五年的仍然判服刑。
English: The old, the young, the disabled and the sick paid money to atone for their sins, but only the minor offenders sentenced to five years were still sentenced to serve their sentences.

古文：盖在明初，即真犯死罪，不可以徒论也。
现代文：大抵在明初时，如果真犯了死罪，就不可以苦役论处。
English: Generally, at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, if you really committed a capital crime, you could not be sentenced to hard labor.

古文：其诬告例，告二事以上，轻实重虚，或告一事，诬轻为重者，已论决全抵剩罪，未论决笞杖收赎，徒流杖一百，馀罪亦听收赎。
现代文：诬告条例，假若告两事以上，所诬陷的轻罪是真的而重罪是假的，或者告一事，将轻罪诬说为重罪，已判决执行的要完全抵去剩罪，没有执行的若该受笞刑杖刑，可交赎金赎罪，判苦役流放先杖打一百下，其余的刑罚也允许交赎金赎罪。
English: According to the False Accusation Ordinance, if more than two cases are reported, and the misdemeanor falsely accused is true but the felony is false, or if a case is reported and the misdemeanor is falsely described as a felony, the remaining crime shall be paid in full if it has been sentenced to be executed, and if it has not been executed, it shall be subject to the punishment of whipping and caning, and a ransom may be paid to atone for the crime; if it is sentenced to hard labor and banishment, the first hundred strokes of the cane shall be given, and the rest of the punishment may also be paid to atone for the crime.

古文：如告人笞三十，内止一十实已决，全抵，剩二十之罪未决，收赎一贯二百文。
现代文：例如因诬告罪被笞三十下，其中十下已经执行，则抵去这部分赎金。剩下二十下汝了结，交纳一贯二百文赎金。
English: For example, if a person is arrested 30 times for the crime of false accusation, of which 10 times have already been executed, this part of the ransom will be paid. The remaining 20 times will be settled, and a ransom of 200 mon will be paid.

古文：如告人杖六十，内止二十实已决，全抵，剩四十之罪未决，收赎二贯四百文。
现代文：如因诬告罪判杖刑六十下，其中已经执行杖刑二十下，这部分赎金全部抵销，剩下四十杖汝了结，交纳二贯四百文赎金。
English: If the sentence for the crime of false accusation is sixty strokes of the cane, of which twenty strokes of the cane have already been executed, this part of the ransom will be fully offset, and the remaining forty strokes will be settled, and a ransom of two hundred and four hundred mon will be paid.

古文：如告人杖六十，徒一年，内止杖五十实已决，全抵，剩杖一十、徒一年之罪未决，徒一年，折杖六十，并杖共七十，收赎四贯二百文。
现代文：如因诬告罪判杖刑六十下，苦役一年，其中已执行杖刑五十下，这部分赎金全部抵销，剩杖刑十下、苦役一年的罪未处罚。苦役一年，折合穴十杖，总共七十杖，交纳赎金四贯二百文。
English: If a person is sentenced to 60 strokes of the cane and one year of hard labor for the crime of false accusation, of which 50 strokes of the cane have already been executed, this part of the ransom will be fully offset, and the remaining 10 strokes of the cane and one year of hard labor will not be punished. One year of hard labor is equivalent to 10 strokes of the cane, a total of 70 strokes, and a ransom of 200 yuan will be paid.

古文：如告人杖一百，流二千里，内止杖六十、徒一年实已决，以总徒四年论，全抵，剩杖四十、徒三年之罪未决，以连徒折杖流加一等论，共计杖二百二十，除告实杖六十、徒一年，折杖六十，剩杖一百，赎钞六贯。
现代文：如诬告者判杖刑一百下，流放二千里，其中只执行了六十杖和一年苦役，以总共服苦役四年论，逭部分赎金全部抵销，剩杖刑四十下、苦役三年的罪未处罚。根据连苦役折合杖敷流放加一等计算，共有杖刑二百二十下。除去实际已经执行六十杖和苦役一年折合六十杖，剩下一百杖，需赎钞六贯。
English: If a false accuser is sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane and banished 2,000 li, but only 60 strokes of the cane and one year of hard labor are carried out, the total of four years of hard labor is counted, and all the ransom money is offset. The remaining 40 strokes of the cane and three years of hard labor are not punished. According to the first-class calculation of consecutive hard labor and one year of hard labor, the total cane sentence is 220 strokes of the cane. Excluding the actual execution of 60 strokes of the cane and one year of hard labor, there are 60 strokes of the cane, and there are 100 strokes left, which need to be redeemed

古文：若计剩罪，过杖一百以上，须决杖一百讫，余罪方听收赎。
现代文：若要计算剩罪，其罪超过一百杖以上，必须执行一百杖，余下的方纔让其纳钱赎罪。
English: If you want to calculate the remaining crime, if the crime is more than one hundred strokes, you must perform one hundred strokes, and let the remaining parties pay money to atone for the crime.

古文：又过失伤人，淮斗殴伤人罪，依律收赎。
现代文：又过失伤人罪，比照斗殴伤人罪依法律纳钱赎罪。
English: In addition, the crime of negligently injuring someone, and the crime of beating and injuring someone according to the law, paid money to atone for the crime.

古文：已徒五年，再犯徒收赎。
现代文：然后根据苦役或流放的年限，按老幼赎罪的方法办。
English: Then, according to the number of years of hard labor or exile, according to the method of atonement for the old and the young.

古文：若犯徒流，存留养亲者，止杖一百，余罪收赎。
现代文：此法自英宗时下诏主管官吏开始施行，后来成焉制度。
English: This law was enforced by the officials in charge of imperial edicts at the time of Emperor Yingzong, and later became a system.

古文：天文生、妇女犯徒流，决杖一百，余罪收赎者，虽罪止杖六十，徒一年，亦决杖一百，律所谓应加杖者是也。
现代文：占星先生或妇女犯苦役与流放罪，执行杖刑一百下，其余的罪行纳金赎罪的，即使只判了杖刑六十下，苦役一年，也执行杖刑一百下，这是法律规定的应加杖。
English: If a fortune-teller or a woman commits the crimes of forced labor and banishment and is sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane, and the rest of the crimes are atoned for with money, even if he is only sentenced to sixty strokes of the cane and one year of forced labor, he will also be sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane, which is an additional cane according to the law.

古文：皆先依本律议，其所犯徒流之罪，以《诰》减之。
现代文：罪犯都先依所犯律条议罪，对其所犯的苦役、流放之罪，依《大诰》减等。
English: Criminals are first judged according to the crimes they have committed, and the crimes of hard labor and banishment they have committed are reduced according to the "Great Law."

古文：至临决时，某系天文生，某系妇人，依律决杖一百，余收赎。
现代文：临到执行时，如果某人是占星先生，某人是妇女，就按法律规定实施杖刑一百下，其余的纳金赎罪。
English: When it comes to execution, if someone is an astrologer and someone is a woman, they will be sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane according to the law, and the rest of the money will be paid to atone for the crime.

古文：所决之杖并须一百者，包五徒之数也。
现代文：一律要处杖刑一百，是因为包括了五等苦役的数目。
English: All of them were to be punished with a hundred strokes of the cane, because this included the number of five grades of hard labor.

古文：然与诬告收赎剩杖不同。盖收赎余徒者决杖，而赎徒收赎剩杖者，折流归徒，折徒归杖，而照数收赎之，其法各别也。
现代文：但是这与犯诬告罪赎罪剩杖不同，因纳金赎罪剩下的苦役者执行杖刑，而这些人纳金赎罪剩下的杖刑，则先要将流放折合成苦役，苦役折合成杖刑，然后照数纳赎金，其法各自不同。
English: However, this is different from the remaining cane for the crime of false accusation to atone for the crime. The laborers who have the money to atone for the crime carry out the cane punishment, and those who have the money to atone for the remaining cane punishment must first convert the banishment into hard labor, the hard labor into cane punishment, and then pay the ransom according to the number. The methods are different.

古文：其妇人犯徒流，成化八年定例，除奸盗不孝与乐妇外，若审有力并决杖，亦得以纳钞赎罪。
现代文：妇人犯苦役流放罪，成化八年定例，除通奸盗窃不孝和歌妓以外，若确有财力并已受杖刑，也可以交钱赎罪。
English: Women who commit the crime of hard labor and banishment will be sentenced to eight years. In addition to adultery, theft, filial piety and singing prostitutes, if they have real financial resources and have been punished with a cane, they can also pay money to atone for their sins.

古文：凡律所谓收赎者，赎余罪也。其例得赎罪者，赎决杖一百也。
现代文：条倒的标准是，每十杖折合银子一钱，到一百杖，折合银子一两为止。
English: The standard was that every ten rods were equivalent to one silver coin, up to a hundred rods, equivalent to one or two silver coins.

古文：徒、杖两项分科之，除妇人，余囚徒流皆杖决不赎。
现代文：凡是法律所说的收赎，都是赎执行后剩下的罪。按条例赎罪，是说的赎那一百杖处罚。苦役和杖刑两项分别了断，除了妇女，其余囚徒苦役流放都按实杖打，不能赎罪。
English: All the redemption mentioned in the law is the redemption of the remaining sin after execution. The redemption according to the regulations is the punishment of the hundred rods. The two punishments of hard labor and caning are separated, and except for women, the remaining prisoners of hard labor and exile are beaten with real canes, which cannot atone for sin.

古文：惟弘治十三年，许乐户徒杖笞罪，亦不的决，此律钞之大凡也。
现代文：只是在弘治十三年，准许乐户所犯的苦役、杖刑和笞刑，也不按实执行。这就是按律纳钞的概要。
English: However, in the 13th year of the Hongzhi era, it was permitted to use hard labor, caning and whipping for crimes committed by merrymakers, but they were not actually carried out. This is the outline of paying bills according to the law.

古文：例钞自嘉靖二十九年定例。
现代文：按条例纳钱赎罪于嘉靖二十九年制定条例。
English: According to the regulations, the payment of money to atone for sins was enacted in the 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：凡军民诸色人役及舍余审有力者，与文武官吏、监生、生员、冠带官、知印、承差、阴阳生、医生、老人、舍人，不分笞、杖、徒、流、杂犯死罪，俱令运灰、运炭、运砖、纳米、纳料等项赎罪。
现代文：凡是军民杂役各种人和家有足够余财的，文武官吏、监生、生员、冠带官、知印、承差、阴阳先生、医生、老人、舍人，不分笞刑、杖刑、苦役、流放与杂犯死罪，一律命令其运灰、运炭、运砖、交米、交食料等赎罪。
English: All people and families who have enough money to spare, including civil and military officials, probationers, birth attendants, crowned officials, scholars, messengers, teachers of yin and yang, doctors, the elderly, and lay people, regardless of flogging, caning, hard labor, exile, and death penalty for minor offenders, will be ordered to carry ashes, coal, bricks, rice, and food to atone for their sins.

古文：若官吏人等，例应革去职役，与军民人等审无力者，笞、杖罪的决，徒、流、杂犯死罪各做工、摆站、哨瞭、发充仪从，情重者煎盐炒铁。死罪五年，流罪四年，徒按年限。
现代文：以上属于行止不亏者。若官吏按例应革去职务差役，此属于行止有亏者。与军民中确实无力赎罪的，笞刑、杖刑按实执行，苦役、流放与杂犯死罪各令做工、充任驿卒、守望、调发充当仪卫侍从，情节严重的煎盐冶铁，死罪做五年，流放做四年，苦役按所判年限计。
English: If a government official should be dismissed from his post as a result of the above, he is a loser. As for soldiers and civilians who are truly unable to atone for their sins, flogging and caning will be carried out according to the facts, and hard labor, banishment and death penalty for minor offenders will be carried out according to the order of work, serving as a footman, guarding, and dispatching as an attendant of the ceremonial guards, and if the circumstances are serious, salting and smelting will be carried out, and the death penalty will be carried out for five years, banishment for four years, and hard labor according to the length of the sentence.

古文：其在京军丁人等，无差占者与例难的决之人，笞杖亦令做工。
现代文：在京城的士卒中，无差使的和按条例难以如实行刑的人，犯了笞杖之罪也命其做工。
English: Among the officers and men in Beijing, those who did not make a mistake and those who were difficult to execute according to the regulations were also ordered to work if they committed the crime of walking with a cane.

古文：时新例，犯奸盗受赃，为行止有亏之人，概不许赎罪。
现代文：当时的新例，犯通奸、抢劫与受赂，为行为有亏损的人，一概不许赎罪。
English: The new cases at that time were adultery, robbery and bribery, and no one was allowed to atone for actions that resulted in a loss.

古文：唯军官革职者，俱运炭纳米等项发落，不用五刑条例的决实配之文，所以宽武夫，重责文吏也。
现代文：只有革职的军官，一律按运炭纳米之类发落，不按五刑条例实际受罚、实际刺配之文执行，这是为了体现武夫从宽，文吏从严。
English: Only officers who have been dismissed from their posts will be uniformly released according to the transportation of carbon nanotubes and the like, and will not be subject to actual punishment and actual punishment according to the Five Criminal Regulations. This is to reflect the fact that military personnel are more lenient and civil servants are stricter.

古文：祖制每钞一文，当银一厘，所谓笞一十折钞六百文定银七厘五毫者，即当时之银六钱也。
现代文：因而在京城内祇实行做工、运囚粮等五项，在外地只实行有财力、稍有财力二项。法律愈加简略了。总而言之，按法律纳钞赎罪轻，按条例纳钞赎罪重。然而律钞本来并不轻，祖宗的制度，每钞一文，等于一厘银子。所谓笞十下折合六百文钞、规定七厘五毫赎银，即当时的六钱银子。
English: Therefore, only five items, such as work and transportation of grain for prisoners, were implemented in the capital, and only two items, having financial resources and having little financial resources, were implemented outside the capital. The laws became more and more simplified. In short, according to the law, paying money to atone for a crime was light, and according to the regulations, paying money to atone for a crime was heavy. However, the regulation money was not light at all, and the ancestral system, each banknote, was equal to one silver cent. The so-called thirty-fold six-hundred-cent banknote and the prescribed seven-and-a-half-percent redemption silver, that is,

古文：所谓杖一百折钞六贯银七分五厘者，即当时之银六两也。
现代文：所谓杖刑一百折合六贯钞，七分五厘银子，即当时的六两银子。
English: The so-called cane penalty was equal to one hundred folds of a six-sentence banknote, seven-point-five silver coins, that is, six-two silver coins at that time.

古文：以银六钱，比例钞折银不及一厘，以银一两，比例钞折银不及一分，而欲以此惩犯罪者之心，宜其势有所不行矣。
现代文：以六钱银子，同例钞折银相比，不到一厘，以一两银子，同例钞折银相比，不到一分。而要以此警戒犯罪者的心，当然其情势不可能。
English: Compared to six coins, less than one cent, and compared to one or two coins, less than one cent, it is impossible to warn the criminal's heart.

古文：特以祖宗律文不可改也，于是不得已定为七厘五毫、七分五厘之制。
现代文：只是因为祖宗的律文不可更改，于是不得已定出折七厘五毫、七分五厘的制度。
English: However, since the ancestral texts cannot be changed, it was necessary to establish a system of seven-point-five percent and seven-point-five percent.

古文：而其实所定之数，犹不足以当所赎者之罪，然后例之变通生焉。
现代文：其实这样定下来的数目，还是不足以抵当所赎之罪，后来条例的变通办法就产生了。
English: In fact, the number determined in this way was still not enough to pay for the sin atoned for, and later a workaround of the regulation came into being.

古文：考洪武朝，官吏军民犯罪听赎者，大抵罚役之令居多，如发凤阳屯种、滁州种苜蓿、代农民力役、运米输边赎罪之类，俱不用钞纳也。
现代文：考洪武年间，对犯罪可赎的官吏军民。大抵下令罚劳役占多数，如发配到凤阳屯田、滁州种苜蓿、代农民服力役和运米到边疆赎罪之类，都不用钞为赎金。
English: During the Hongwu era, among the officials, soldiers and civilians who committed crimes that could be redeemed, most of them were ordered to be punished with forced labor. For example, those who were sent to Fengyang Tunden, Zhangzhou to grow rice, those who served as forced laborers on behalf of farmers, and those who transported rice to the frontier to atone for their sins, did not use banknotes as ransom.

古文：律之所载，笞若干，钞若干文，杖若干，钞若干贯者，垂一代之法也。
现代文：法律所载，笞刑若干下，用若干文钞抵罪；杖刑若干下，用若干贯钞抵罪，这是垂范后世的法规。
English: According to the law, the punishment of several strokes of the cane and a certain amount of money can be used to atone for the crime; the punishment of several strokes of the cane and a certain amount of money can be used to atone for the crime. This is a law to set an example for future generations.

古文：然按三十年诏令，罪囚运米赎罪，死罪百石，徒流递减，其力不及者，死罪自备米三十石，徒流十五石，俱运纳甘州、威虏，就彼充军。
现代文：但是按照三十年的诏令，罪囚运米赎罪，死罪运一百石，苦役和流放递减。体力不足的，死囚犯自备三十石米，苦役、流放犯各备十五石，一律运到甘州、威虏，到那里交米充军。
English: However, according to the thirty-year-old imperial edict, convicts were to be transported with rice to atone for their sins, criminals sentenced to death were to be transported with one hundred koku, and forced labor and exile were to be reduced. Those who were physically weak were to prepare thirty koku of rice for themselves, while forced laborers and exiles were to prepare fifteen koku each, and all of them were to be transported to Ganzhou and Wairu, where they were to hand over the rice to the army.

古文：计其米价、脚价之费，与钞数差不相远，其定为赎钞之等第，固不轻于后来之例矣。
现代文：计算其米价、脚力运输的费用，与应交赎金的数目差不多，这样确定赎金的等级，本不轻于后来的条例。
English: The cost of calculating the price of rice and the cost of transporting it by foot is almost the same as the amount of ransom to be paid, so determining the level of ransom is no less important than the later regulations.

古文：然罪无一定，而钞法之久，日变日轻，此定律时所不及料也。
现代文：可是罪行形形色色，而纳钞之法时日已久，越变越轻，这是制定法律时没有考虑到的。
English: But crimes come in all shapes and forms, and the law on banknotes has been in force for a long time and is becoming lighter and lighter. This was not taken into account when the law was drawn up.

古文：即以永乐十一年令 斩罪情轻者，赎钞八千贯，绞及榜例死罪六千贯 之诏言之，八千贯者，律之八千两也；六千贯者，律之六千两也；下至杖罪千贯，笞罪五百贯，亦一千两、五百两也。
现代文：举一例说，永乐十一年皇帝下诏： 犯斩罪情节较轻的，交赎钞八千贯，绞刑与作为榜例的死罪交六千贯。 八千贯，就是法律上的八千两；六千贯就是法律上的六千两；往下至杖刑交一千贯，笞刑交五百贯，即一千两、五百两。
English: To give an example, Emperor Yongle XI issued an edict that: for the lesser crime of beheading, the redemption money shall be 8,000 gon; for hanging and exemplary death penalty, the redemption money shall be 6,000 gon; for 8,000 gon, the redemption money shall be legally 8,000 gon; for 6,000 gon, the redemption money shall be legally 6,000 gon; for caning, the redemption money shall be 1,000 gon; and for flogging, the redemption money shall be 500 gon, that is, the redemption money shall be 1,000 gon and 500 gon, that is, the redemption money shall be 1,000 gon and 500 gon.

古文：虽革除之际，用法特苛，岂有死罪纳至八千两，笞杖罪纳至一千两、五百两而尚可行者？
现代文：虽然在革除时期，使用法律特别苛酷，哪有死罪纳赎金达到八千两，笞、杖之罪纳金达到一千雨、五百雨还可施行的办法？
English: Although the application of the law is particularly harsh during the period of expulsion, is there any way to enforce the death penalty with a ransom of 8,000 taels, or the death penalty with a ransom of 1,000 or 500 taels for the crime of beating and caning?

古文：则知钞法之弊，在永乐初年，已不啻轻十倍于洪武时矣。
现代文：可知纳钞法的弊病，在永乐初年，比洪武时期已不止减轻十倍了。
English: However, in the first year of Yongle, the drawbacks of accepting banknotes have been reduced more than ten times compared to the Hongwu period.

古文：宣德时，申交易用银之禁，冀通钞法。
现代文：童德时期，申明交易用银的禁令，希望让钞法通行。
English: During his childhood, he affirmed the ban on the use of silver in transactions and hoped that the banknote law would be allowed to pass.

古文：至弘治而钞竟不可用，遂开准钞折银之例。
现代文：到弘治时终于不可用钞法了，于是开用宝钞折合银子的先例。
English: By the time of Hongzhi, it was finally impossible to use the banknote method, so the precedent of using treasure banknotes to convert silver was set.

古文：及嘉靖新定条例，俱以有力、稍有力二科赎罪：有力米五斗，准律之纳钞六百文也；稍有力工价三钱，准律之做工一月也。
现代文：到嘉靖时期新定条例，全部以有财力，稍有财力两类赎罪：有财力者五斗米抵法律上的纳钞六百文；稍有财力者出工价三钱，抵法律上的做工一月。
English: By the time of the Jiajing period, the newly established regulations were all based on two types of atonement: those with financial resources and those with little financial resources: those with financial resources had to pay five dowels of rice to get the legal amount of 600 yuan; those with little financial resources had to pay 3 yuan for the labor price to get the legal amount of one month of work.

古文：是则后之例钞，才足比于初之律钞耳。
现代文：这样，后来的例钞，刚足以同开初的律钞相当而已。
English: In this way, the later examples of banknotes are just enough to be comparable with the early ritsuryo banknotes.

古文：而况老幼废疾，诸在律赎者之银七厘五毫，准钞六百文，银七分五厘，准钞六贯。
现代文：何况老幼残病，各类按法律赎罪之银七厘五毫，当钞六百文，银七分五厘，当钞六贯。
English: Not to mention the old and the disabled, all kinds of legal atonement of the law of the silver seven-point-five-point-five, when the bill is six hundred, silver seven-point-five, when the bill is six.

古文：凡所谓律赎者，以比于初之律钞，其轻重相去尤甚悬绝乎？
现代文：凡属所谓按法律交赎金的，同当初的律钞比，其轻重相差太悬殊了吧？
English: All of the so-called ransoms paid according to the law are so vastly different from the original ransom notes, aren't they?

古文：唯运炭、运石诸罪例稍重，盖此诸罪，初皆令亲自赴役，事完宁家，原无纳赎之例。
现代文：只有运炭、运石诸处罚稍重，因为这些罪，起初一律是亲身奔赴指定地服劳役，服完劳役释放回家，没有纳金赎罪之例。
English: Only the transportation of coal and the transportation of stones were punished more severely, because these crimes, at first, were all cases of personally going to the designated place to perform labor service, and then being released to go home after completing the labor service. There was no case of paying money to atone for sins.

古文：其后法令益宽，听其折纳，而估算事力，亦略相当，实不为病也。
现代文：后来法令越来越宽松，让罪犯纳金折罪，而估算其做事出力的代价，也大体相当，的确不是坏事。
English: Later, the laws became more and more lenient, allowing criminals to pay a fine, and estimating the cost of their work output, is also roughly equivalent, really not a bad thing.

古文：大抵赎例有二：一罚役，一纳钞，而例复三变。
现代文：大抵赎罪昀条例有二类：一是罚服劳役，一是交纳宝钞。而这种办法又变了三次。
English: Ordinarily, there are two types of atonement regulations: one is to be punished with labor service, and the other is to pay treasure money. And this method has changed three times.

古文：罚役者，后多折工值纳钞，钞法既坏，变为纳银、纳米。
现代文：罚劳役的，后来多折合工值纳钞，钞的折算法破坏以后，又变为交纳银、交纳米。
English: Penal labor, and later the multi-folding of the value of the work to pay the bill, after the destruction of the bill folding algorithm, it became to pay the silver, pay the nano.

古文：然运灰、运炭、运石、运砖、运碎砖之名尚存也。
现代文：而运灰、运炭、运石、运砖、运碎砖的名目还在。
English: But the names of transporting ash, transporting coal, transporting stone, transporting bricks, transporting broken bricks are still there.

古文：至万历中年，中外通行有力、稍有力二科，在京诸例，并不见施行，而法益归一矣。
现代文：到万历中期，朝廷内外通行有财力、稍有财力两等级。在京城的案例，一并不见施行，而法律越来越归于一致。
English: By the middle of the Wanli era, there were two levels of people in and out of the imperial court, those with financial resources and those with little financial resources. In the case of the capital, there was no enforcement at all, and the laws were becoming more and more consistent.

古文：所谓通变而无失于古之意者此也。
现代文：所谓灵活变化而不失古人用意，就是这样。
English: The so-called flexible change without losing the ancient people's intention, that's it.

古文：初，令罪人得以力役赎罪：死罪拘役终身，徒流按年限，笞杖计日月。
现代文：起初，让罪人得以下力服役赎罪：死罪拘禁服役终身，苦役流放各按年限计，笞刑杖刑按日月计。
English: At the beginning, the guilty were forced to serve the following terms to atone for their crimes: death penalty, imprisonment for life, exile with hard labor for a certain number of years, and whipping with a cane for a certain number of days.

古文：或修造，或屯种，或煎盐炒铁，满日疏放。
现代文：劳役或从事修造，或屯田，或煮盐，或冶铁，日期做满就释放。
English: labor service or engage in construction, or farmland, or boil salt, or smelt iron, release on completion of the date.

古文：疏放者，引赴御桥，叩头毕，送应天府，给引宁家。
现代文：所谓疏放，就是引犯人来到宫外御桥上，叩头完毕，送到应天府，发放通行证，释放回家团聚。
English: The so-called release is to lead the prisoners to the bridge outside the palace, complete the prostration, send them to Yingtianfu, issue a pass, and release them to go home for reunion.

古文：合充军者，发付陕西司，按籍编发。
现代文：应当充军的，送交陕西司，按籍贯编组发配。
English: Those who should be conscripted into the army should be sent to the Shaanxi Division, and distributed according to their place of birth.

古文：后皆折纳工价，惟赴桥如旧。
现代文：后来都折合工钱纳金赎罪，惟有仍旧赴御桥叩头。
English: Later, they all paid money to atone for their sins, except for those who still went to Mihashi to prostrate themselves.

古文：宣德二年，御史郑道宁言： 纳米赎罪，朝廷宽典，乃军储仓拘系罪囚，无米输纳，自去年二月至今，死者九十六人。 
现代文：宣德二年，御史郑道宁说： 罪人交纳米赎罪，是朝廷宽大的法典，而军储仓拘押的罪囚，无米交纳上来，从去年二月到现在，死者已达九十六人。 
English: Two years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, historian Zheng Daoning said: "Sinners paying nano-coins to atone for their sins is a lenient code of the imperial court, while prisoners detained in military warehouses have not paid any rice. From February of last year to the present, there have been 96 deaths.

古文：刑部郎俞士吉尝奏： 囚无米者，请追纳于原籍，匠仍输作，军仍备操，若非军匠，则遣还所隶州县追之。 
现代文：刑部郎俞士吉曾奏道： 囚犯没有米吃，请允许到原籍去催交。是工匠的仍留在军中服劳役，是军人的仍旧操练，如果不是工匠兵卒的遣还所属州县催米。 
English: "If the prisoners have no rice to eat, please allow them to go to their hometowns to collect it. If they are craftsmen, they can still serve in the army, if they are soldiers, they can still train, and if they are not craftsmen, they can be sent back to their home prefectures to collect rice.

古文：诏从其奏。
现代文：皇帝同意他的奏议。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：初制流罪三等，视地远近，边卫充军有定所。
现代文：明初的制度，流放罪有三等，根据地方的远近而定，到边防卫所充军有固定的地方。
English: In the system at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the crime of banishment had three levels, depending on the proximity of the place, and there was a fixed place for the troops to be sent to the border defense station.

古文：盖降死一等，唯流与充军为重。
现代文：低于死罪一等的处罚，就是流放与充军最重。
English: If the punishment is less than the death penalty, the most severe punishment is banishment and conscription.

古文：然《名例律》称二死三流各同为一减。
现代文：但是《名例律》称两种死罪三等流放都有罪碱一等的办法。
English: However, the "Law of Notable Cases" says that there is a first-class method for both capital crimes and third-class banishment.

古文：如二死遇恩赦减一等，即流三千里，流三等以《大诰》减一等，皆徒五年。
现代文：如两种死罪遇皇恩大赦碱一等，就是流放三千里；流放的三等依据《大诰》碱一等，都成了苦役五年。
English: If two capital offenses are given first-class amnesty by the emperor, they will be exiled three thousand li; if they are given first-class amnesty by the emperor, they will be exiled three thousand li; if they are given third-class amnesty by the emperor, they will be exiled three thousand li; if they are given first-class amnesty by the emperor, they will be exiled three thousand li; if they are given first-class amnesty by the emperor, they will be exiled three thousand li.

古文：犯流罪者，无不减至徒罪矣。故三流常设而不用。
现代文：犯流放罪的，无不减刑到苦役，所以三等流放罪常设而不用。
English: For those who commit the crime of banishment, the sentence will be reduced to hard labor, so the third-class banishment crime will be permanent and unnecessary.

古文：而充军之例为独重。
现代文：而惟独充军的条例很重。
English: However, the regulations for enlisting in the army are very strict.

古文：律充军凡四十六条，《诸司职掌》内二十二条，则洪武间例，皆律所不载者。
现代文：法律上充军的条文有四十六条，《诸司职掌》内有二十二条，则洪武年间的条例都是法律不载的。
English: There are 46 articles on military conscription in the law, and 22 articles in "All Departments and Offices," but the regulations during the Hongwu era are not contained in the law.

古文：其嘉靖二十九年条例，充军凡二百十三条，与万历十三年所定大略相同。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年的条例，充军的共二百一十三条，与万历十三年所制定的大致相同。
English: The regulations of the 29th year of Jiajing, with a total of two hundred and thirteen articles on military conscription, are roughly the same as those established in the 13th year of Wanli.

古文：洪武二十六年定，应充军者，大理寺审讫，开付陕西司，本部置立文簿，注姓名、年籍、乡贯，依南北籍编排甲为二册，一进内府，一付该管百户，领去充军。
现代文：洪武二十六年规定，应当充军的犯人，大理寺审核以后，发送陕西司，总部设立犯人的档案，写明姓名、年龄、籍贯、乡里，依南北籍编排单位，写为二册，一册进呈内府，一册交付主管的百户官，让百户领去充军。
English: According to the provisions of the 26th year of Hongwu, after the examination and approval of Dali Temple, the files of the prisoners who should be conscripted shall be sent to the Shaanxi Division, the headquarters shall set up the files of the prisoners, indicating the name, age, hometown, and township, arranged according to the north and south nationality, written in two volumes, one volume shall be submitted to the inner government, and one volume shall be delivered to the head of the hundred households, and let the hundred households lead the conscripts.

古文：如浙江，河南，山东，陕西，山西，北平，福建，直隶应天、庐州、凤阳、淮安、扬州、苏州、松江、常州、和州、滁州、徐州人，发云南、四川属卫；江西、湖广，四川，广东，广西，直隶太平、宁国、池州、徽州、广德、安庆人，发北平、大宁、辽东属卫。
现代文：如浙江，迥直，山豆，陕西，山西，北平，福建，直隶虑天、庐州、凤阳、淮安、扬州、苏州、松江、常州、和州、滁州、徐州人，发配到云南、四川的属卫；江西，塑廑，四川，广东，广西，直隶太平、宁国、池州、徽州、广德、安庆人，发配到北平、左窒、辽东的属卫。
English: For example, people from Zhejiang, Zhouzhuang, Shanzhuang, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Beiping, Fujian, Zhouzhuang, Ganzhou, Fengyang, Huai'an, Yangzhou, Suzhou, Songjiang, Changzhou, Hezhou, Ganzhou and Xuzhou were sent to Yunnan and Sichuan; people from Jiangxi, Shuxiu, Sichuan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Zhouzhuang, Taiping, Ningguo, Chizhou, Huizhou, Guangde and Anqing were sent to Beiping, Zuoyu and Liaodong.

古文：有逃故，按籍勾补。
现代文：有逃跑的或死亡的，按籍贯勾取补充人员。
English: If there are escapees or deaths, additional personnel will be recruited according to their origin.

古文：其后条例有发烟瘴地面、极边沿海诸处者，例各不同。
现代文：后来的条例有发配西南边远的湿热毒气之地、极边远处和沿海诸处等，办法各有不同。
English: Later regulations included the distribution of hot and humid poison gas to the far southwestern regions, the far western regions, and various coastal areas, with different methods.

古文：而军有终身，有永远。
现代文：而充军有终结于自身和永远之分。
English: But military service has an end in itself and forever.

古文：永远者，罚及子孙，皆以实犯死罪减等者充之。
现代文：永远充军的，罚及子孙，这种人犯是实犯死罪而减等的充任。
English: Those who serve in the army forever will be punished and their children and grandchildren will be punished. This kind of criminal is actually guilty of the crime of capital punishment and will be reduced to a lower rank.

古文：明初法严，县以千数，数传之后，以万计矣。
现代文：有的人家弄得丁男全无，户口勾销，只留下一点充军者的产业。
English: Some families have lost all their male children, their household registration has been cancelled, leaving only a little of the captives' property.

古文：有丁尽户绝，止存军产者，或并无军产，户名未除者，朝廷岁遣御史清军，有缺必补。
现代文：有的连充军的产业也没有，只是户名未除去。朝廷每年派御史清点充军人数，有缺员必定补上。
English: Some companies did not have any property, but the names of the households were not removed. The Imperial Court sent out an annual census to count the number of conscripts, and if there was a shortfall, it would be made up.

古文：每当勾丁，逮捕族属、里长，延及他甲，鸡犬为之不宁。
现代文：每当抓丁补员时，官吏逮捕犯人的亲族、里长，祸事延及别的保甲，为此闱得鸡犬不宁。
English: Every time when catching Ding patching, officials arrest the prisoner's relatives, village chiefs, and the evil extends to other guards, which makes the chickens and dogs restless.

古文：论者谓既减死罪一等，而法反加于刀锯之上，如革除所遣谪，至国亡，戍籍犹有存者，刑莫惨于此矣。
现代文：有人议论：既然减死罪从轻一等处理，而法律的严酷反而在死刑之上。如革除发配贬谪的犯人，直到国家灭亡，发配充军的户籍还有存在的。刑罚没有比这更惨烈的了。
English: Some people argue that since the crime of commutation of death is treated as a minor one, and the severity of the law is on top of the death penalty. For example, the removal of prisoners who have been sentenced to death, until the country is destroyed, the household registration of those who have been sentenced to death will still exist. There is no more cruel punishment than this.

古文：嘉靖间，有请开赎军例者。
现代文：嘉靖时期，有人请求开赎充军罪之例。
English: During the Jiajing period, there was a request for an example of expiation for military crimes.

古文：世宗曰： 律听赎者，徒杖以下小罪耳。
现代文：世宗说： 法律允许赎的罪，不过苦役、杖刑以下的小罪而已。
English: Sejong said: The law allows expiation of sins, but only minor sins such as hard labor and caning.

古文：死罪矜疑，乃减从谪发，不可赎。 
现代文：死罪中属于值得怜悯可疑的案例，纔碱等归于贬谪发配充军，不可赎罪。 
English: Among the capital crimes, those that are worthy of pity and doubtful cases, such as cadmium and alkali, are attributed to the army, and cannot be atoned for.

古文：御史周时亮复请广赎例。
现代文：后御史周时亮又请求扩大赎罪范围。
English: Later, Imperial Historian Zhou Shiliang also requested to expand the scope of atonement.

古文：部议审有力者银十两，得赎三年以上徒一年，稍有力者半之。
现代文：刑部决议为：确有财力者交纳十两银子，可以赎免三年以上的苦役一年，稍有财力者出半价赎半年。
English: The decision of the Criminal Investigation Department is as follows: Those who have sufficient financial resources can pay ten taels of silver to redeem one year of hard labor of more than three years, and those who have little financial resources can pay half price to redeem half a year.

古文：而赎军之议卒罢。
现代文：赎免充军之罪的提议就搁置一边了。
English: The proposal to atone for the crime of serving in the army has been put aside.

古文：御史胡宗宪言： 南方之人不任兵革，其发充边军者，宜令纳银自赎。 
现代文：御史胡宗宪进言： 南方人不能胜任兵革之事，那些发配边疆充军的，应该允许叫他们交纳银赎罪。 
English: The imperial historian Hu Zongxian said, "Southerners are not competent to lead the war, and those who dispatched troops to the frontier should be allowed to ask them to pay silver to atone for their sins."

古文：部议以为然，因拟纳例以上。
现代文：刑部讨论同意，于是拟定纳银条例上奏。
English: The Penal Affairs Department agreed to the discussion, and the proposed regulations on the confiscation of banknotes and coins were submitted for approval.

古文：帝曰： 岂可设此例以待犯罪之人？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 哪能预先设此条例，来等待犯罪之人。 
English: The emperor said, "How can this regulation be made in advance to wait for a criminal?

古文：复不允。
现代文：再次不允许。
English: Again, not allowed.

古文：万历二年，罢岁遣清军御史，并于巡按，民获稍安。
现代文：万历二年，废止每年派遣清军御史的制度，将清理充军人员的任务交给巡按掌管，百姓得以稍为安定。
English: In the 2nd year of Wanli, the system of dispatching the Qing army to the capital every year was abolished, and the task of cleaning up the military personnel was handed over to the inspection and control, and the people were able to be somewhat stable.

古文：给事中徐桓言： 死罪杂犯准徒充军者，当如其例。 
现代文：给事中徐桓说： 死罪杂犯比照苦役和充军处理的，应按条例办。 
English: During the presentation, Xu Huan said: The death penalty miscellaneous criminals should be dealt with in accordance with the regulations according to the comparison of hard labor and military conscription.

古文：给事中严用和请以大审可矜人犯，免其永戍。
现代文：给事中严用和请求对可怜悯人犯进行大审查时，免除其子孙后代的永远戍边。
English: When a major review is carried out on the use of severity and request for mercy in criminal cases, the future generations will be exempted from the eternal limelight.

古文：皆不许。
现代文：皇帝都不允许。
English: The emperor did not agree.

古文：而命法司定例： 奉特旨处发叛逆家属子孙，止于本犯亲枝内勾补，尽绝即与开豁。
现代文：而下令司法机关定出条例： 奉皇上特旨判罪发配的叛逆者家属子孙，只在本犯亲族支系中勾取替补，支系男性尽绝即予豁免。
English: He ordered the judicial organs to set forth regulations: the family members and descendants of the traitors who were sentenced and dispatched by the emperor's special order would only be substituted from the offender's family branch, and the male branch would be exempted as much as possible.

古文：若未经发遣而病故，免其勾补。
现代文：若犯人还没有发配出去就病死。免除子孙的替补。
English: If a prisoner dies of illness before he is sent out, he is exempt from replacement by his descendants.

古文：其实犯死罪免死充军者，以著伍后所生子孙替役，不许勾原籍子孙。
现代文：实犯死罪而免死充军的，以编伍后所生子孙替补服役，不许勾取原籍子孙。
English: For those who have actually committed capital crimes and have been exempted from death by military service, their children and grandchildren born after enlistment shall serve as substitutes, and they are not allowed to recruit their children and grandchildren of their original nationality.

古文：其他充军及发口外者，俱止终身。 
现代文：其它充军和发配长城以北者，一律只罚及终身。 
English: All other military conscripts and dispatched soldiers north of the Great Wall will only be punished with life imprisonment.

古文：崇祯十一年，谕兵部： 编遣事宜，以千里为附近，二千五百里为边卫，三千里外为边远，其极边烟瘴以四千里外为率。
现代文：岂祯十一年，皇帝训谕兵部： 编伍遣发之事，离乡一千里左右焉附近，两千五百里左右为边卫，三千里外为边远，那些极边和湿热烟瘴地区以四千里外为标准。
English: In the eleventh year of the Heian period, the emperor issued an edict to the military department: In the matter of dispatching troops, they should be sent about 1,000 miles away from their hometowns, 2,500 miles away for frontier guards, 3,000 miles away for outlying areas, and 4,000 miles away for those extreme and humid and hot regions.

古文：止拘本妻，无妻则已，不许擅勾亲邻。
现代文：连同犯人拘役的只限于其妻，没有妻子则罢，不许擅自抓补亲戚邻居。
English: In addition to the prisoner, only his wife is subject to criminal detention. If he does not have a wife, he is not allowed to arbitrarily arrest relatives and neighbors.

古文：如衰痼老疾，准发口外为民。 
现代文：若犯人衰老或有痼疾，准许发配长城外为民。 
English: If the prisoner is old or has malaria, he is allowed to be released outside the Great Wall.

古文：十五年，又谕： 欲令引例充军者，准其赎罪。 
现代文：十五年又训谕： 将按例判处充军的，准许纳钱赎罪。 
English: In the fifteenth year, there was another edict: Those who were sentenced to be conscripted as usual were allowed to pay money to atone for their sins.

古文：时天下已乱，议卒不行。
现代文：当时天下已乱，此项命令最终没有实行。
English: At that time, the country was in chaos, and this order was ultimately not implemented.

古文：明制充军之律最严，犯者亦最苦。
现代文：明代制度，充军的法律最严，犯罪者也最苦。
English: In the Ming Dynasty system, the law of military conscription was the strictest, and the criminals suffered the most.

古文：亲族有科敛军装之费，里递有长途押解之扰。
现代文：一旦有人犯罪，亲族有摊派军需的开支，里驿有长途押解的困扰。
English: Once someone commits a crime, relatives have to share the expenses of military supplies, and there is the problem of long-distance escort.

古文：至所充之卫，卫官必索常例。
现代文：到了充军的卫所，卫官必定索取常例钱。
English: When they arrived at the guards' station, the guards must have asked for the usual money.

古文：然利其逃走，可干没口粮，每私纵之。
现代文：然而卫官认为其逃跑对自己有利，可以贪污犯人的口粮，常常私下任其逃走。
English: However, the guards thought that his escape would be to their advantage, that they could embezzle the prisoners' rations, and often secretly let him escape.

古文：其后律渐弛，发解者不能十一。
现代文：后来执法渐渐弛懈，押解发配的人犯不到十分之一。
English: Later, the enforcement of the law gradually slackened, and less than one-tenth of the people who were sent out by the police were arrested.

古文：其发极边者，长解辄贿兵部，持勘合至卫，虚出收管，而军犯顾在家偃息云。
现代文：那些发配极边的，长解吏人常常贿赂兵部，拿着符契到达卫所，卫官凭空开出收管犯人的契据，而充军犯还在家里安居着。
English: Those with the most lenient sentences often bribe the military authorities and arrive at the garrison with a deed of enlistment. The guards draw up a deed of enlistment out of thin air, while the prisoner-of-war is still living at home.

