古文：十有三年春，狄侵卫。
现代文：十三年春季，狄人入侵卫国。
English: In the spring of the 13th year, the Di people invaded the motherland.

古文：夏四月，葬陈宣公。
现代文：夏季四月，安葬陈宣公。
English: In the summer of April, Chen Xuan Gong was buried.

古文：公会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯于鹹。
现代文：僖公与齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯在鹹地会见。
English: Zhai Gong met with Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man and Cao Bo in Handan.

古文：秋九月，大雩。
现代文：秋季九月，有大的祭祀。
English: In autumn and September, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：冬，公子友如齐。
现代文：冬季，公子友去齐国。
English: In winter, Gongziyu went to Qi Province.

古文：十三年春，齐侯使仲孙湫聘于周，且言王子带。
现代文：十三年春季，齐桓公派遣仲孙湫到成周聘问，同时要他说起王子带的事情。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, King Qiguan sent Zhong Sun Rong to Cheng Zhou for questioning, and asked him to talk about the matter of the prince's belt.

古文：事毕，不与王言。
现代文：聘问完了，仲孙湫不和周襄王谈起王子带。
English: After the interview was over, Zhong Sun and Zhou Xiang Wang talked about the prince's belt.

古文：归复命曰： 未可，王怒未怠，其十年乎。
现代文：回国，向齐桓公汇报说： 还不行。周襄王的怒气没有消除，恐怕要等十年了。
English: After returning to China, he reported to King Qi Huan: "Not yet. King Zhou Xiang's anger has not been eliminated. I'm afraid we'll have to wait ten years."

古文：不十年，王弗召也。 
现代文：不到十年周王是不会召他回去的。 
English: In less than ten years, King Zhou will not call him back.

古文：夏，会于鹹，淮夷病杞故，且谋王室也。秋，为戎难故，诸侯戍周，齐仲孙湫致之。
现代文：夏季，鲁僖公和齐桓公、宋襄公、陈穆公、卫文公、郑文公、许僖公、曹共公在咸地会见，一则由于淮夷让杞国感到担心，同时也由于商量使周王朝安定。秋季，为了戎人造成的祸难，诸侯派兵防守成周。齐国的仲孙湫也带领军队前去。
English: In the summer, Lu Yong and Qi Huan, Song Xiang, Chen Mu, Wei Wen, Zheng Wen, Xu Yong and Cao Gong met in the Aral Sea. On the one hand, because of Huaiyi, the state of Qi was worried, and at the same time, due to the discussion, the Zhou Dynasty was stabilized. In the autumn, because of the disaster caused by the Yong people, the princes sent troops to defend the Zhou. Zhong Sun Rong of Qi also led the army.

古文：冬，晋荐饑，使乞籴于秦。
现代文：冬季，晋国再次发生饥荒，派人到秦国请求购买粮食。
English: In winter, famine occurred again in Jin, and people were sent to Qin to request the purchase of grain.

古文：秦伯谓子桑： 与诸乎？ 
现代文：秦穆公对子桑说： 给他们吗？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said to Zi Sang, "Shall I give them a crane?"

古文：对曰： 重施而报，君将何求。
现代文：子桑回答说： 再一次给他们恩惠而报答我们，君王还要求什么？
English: Zizang replied, "What more does the king want than to repay us by granting them another favor?"

古文：重施而不报，其民必携，携而讨焉，无众必败。 
现代文：再一次给他们恩惠而不报答我们，他们的老百姓必然离心；离心以后再去讨伐，他没有群众就必然失败。 
English: If they once again give them favors without repaying us, their people will inevitably lose heart; if they go to war again after losing heart, they will inevitably fail without the masses.

古文：谓百里： 与诸乎？ 
现代文：秦穆公对百里说： 给他们吗？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said to Bai Li, "Shall I give it to them?

古文：对曰： 天灾流行，国家代有。
现代文：百里回答说： 天灾流行，总会在各国交替发生的。
English: Baili replied, "Natural disasters and epidemics always occur alternately in different countries.

古文：救灾恤邻，道也。
现代文：救援灾荒，周济邻国，这是正道。
English: It is the right path to provide disaster relief and assistance to neighboring countries.

古文：行道有福。 
现代文：按正道办事会有福禄。 
English: It's a blessing to run an office in the right way.

古文：丕郑之子豹在秦，请伐晋。
现代文：邳郑的儿子豹在秦国，请求进攻晋国。
English: Pan, the son of Yao Zheng, was in Qin and asked for permission to attack Jin.

古文：秦伯曰： 其君是恶，其民何罪？ 
现代文：秦穆公说： 厌恶他们的国君，百姓有什么罪？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said: What is the people's sin in detesting their sovereign?

古文：秦于是乎输粟于晋，自雍及绛，相继。命之曰 汎舟之役 。
现代文：秦国就这样把粟米运送到晋国，船队从雍城到绛城接连不断，人们把这次运粮称为 泛舟之役 。
English: In this way, the Qin State transported the corn to Jin Province, and the fleet from Yongcheng to Lucheng in succession. People called this grain transportation "the rafting campaign."

