古文：王安石罢相，吕惠卿参知政事。
现代文：原文王安石被免去宰相之职，由吕惠卿继任。
English: Original Wang Anshi was removed from the post of prime minister and succeeded by Lü Huiqing.

古文：富郑公见康节，有忧色。
现代文：富弼见到邵康节，神色十分忧虑。
English: Seeing the Shao Kang Festival, Fusheng looked very worried.

古文：康节曰： 岂以惠卿凶暴过安石耶？ 
现代文：邵康节问： 难道因为惠卿比安石还要凶暴吗？ 富弼说： 是的。 
English: Shao Kangjie asked: Is it because Huiqing is more ferocious than Anshi? Fuxi said: Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 康节曰： 勿忧。安石、惠卿本以势利相合，今势利相敌，将自为仇矣，不暇害他人也。 
现代文：邵康节说： 不必忧虑，王安石与吕惠卿本来是因权势名利相结合，如今权势名利起了冲突，彼此间互相仇恨都来不及了，哪有时间害别人？ 
English: Shao Kangjie said: Don't worry. Wang Anshi and Lü Huiqing were originally a combination of power, fame and wealth. Now, power, fame and wealth have come into conflict. It's too late to hate each other. Who has time to harm others?

古文：未几，惠卿果叛安石。
现代文：不久，吕惠卿果然反叛王安石。
English: Soon after, Lü Huiqing indeed rebelled against Wang Anshi.

古文：熙宁初，王宣徽之子名正甫，字茂直，监西京粮料院。
现代文：宋神宗熙宁初年，王宣徽的儿子名正甫，字茂直，负责监督西京的粮科院。
English: In the first year of Song Shenzong Xining, Wang Xuanhui's son, named Zhengfu and surnamed Maozhi, was responsible for supervising the Academy of Grain Science in West Beijing.

古文：一日约邵康节同吴处厚、王平甫食饭，康节辞以疾。
现代文：有一天，王正甫约邵康节和吴处厚、王平甫一同吃饭，邵康节借口病推辞掉。
English: One day, Wang Zhengfu had dinner with Wu Shuanhou and Wang Pingfu on Shao Kang Day. On Shao Kang Day, Wang Zhengfu resigned on the pretext of illness.

古文：明日，茂直来问康节辞会之故，康节曰： 处厚好议论，每讥刺执政新法；平甫者，介甫之弟，虽不甚主其兄，若人面骂之，则亦不堪矣。
现代文：第二天，王正甫来问邵康节为什么推辞。邵康节说： 吴处厚喜爱议论，往往会讥讽执政的新法；平甫是介甫的弟弟，虽然不太赞同哥哥的主张，如果别人当面骂自己的哥哥，毕竟也会觉得不好受。
English: The next day, Wang Zhengfu came to ask Shao Kangjie why he refused. Shao Kangjie said: Wu Duanhou likes to talk, and often mocks the ruling new law; Pingfu is the younger brother of Jiefu, although he does not agree with his brother's ideas, if others scold his brother in person, after all, he will also feel uncomfortable.

古文：此某所以辞也。 
现代文：所以我推辞不去。 
English: So I declined to go.

古文：茂直叹曰： 先生料事之审如此。
现代文：王正甫叹道： 先生真是事如神。
English: Wang Zhengfu sighed and said, "Teacher is really a god.

古文：昨处厚席间毁介甫，平甫作色，欲列其事于府。
现代文：昨天处厚在酒席间诋毁介甫，平甫很生气，想把这些话一条一条记下来送到相府，我在中间调解得好辛苦。 
English: Yesterday, Dechuko slandered Keifu during the banquet. Pingfu was very angry and wanted to write down these words one by one and send them to the Imperial Palace. I had a hard time mediating between them.

古文：某解之甚苦，乃已。 呜呼，康节以道德尊一代，平居出处，一饭食之间，其慎如此。
现代文：唉，康节先生因道德高尚受到当代尊崇，平日家居或外出，一饭一食之间，也这么谨慎。
English: Alas, Mr. Kang Jie has been revered by the contemporary world for his high moral standards. He is just as cautious when he is at home or out, and between meals.

古文：按荆公行新法，任用新进。
现代文：王荆公实行新法，任用很多新人。
English: Wang Jinggong implemented the new law and appointed many new people.

古文：温公贻以书曰： 忠信之士，于公当路时虽龃龉可憎，后必得其力；谄谀之人，于今诚有顺适之快，一旦失势，必有卖公以自售者。 
现代文：司马温公写信给他说： 忠信的人，在您当权时，虽然往往和您意见有所不合，觉得很可恨，以后您一定会得到他们的帮助；谄媚的人，在当前虽然顺从您，让您觉得很愉快，一旦您失去权势，一定会为了一己私利出卖您。 
English: Sima Wengong wrote to him: "Loyal people, when you are in power, although they often disagree with you and feel very hateful, you will certainly get their help in the future; Flattering people, although they obey you at the moment and make you feel very happy, once you lose power, they will surely betray you for their own benefit.

古文：盖指吕惠卿也。
现代文：这段话大概是指吕惠卿的。
English: This passage probably refers to Lü Huiqing.

