古文：厥阴之为病，消渴，气上撞心，心中疼热，饥而不欲食，食则吐蛔，下之利不止。
现代文：厥阴上热下寒证的主要症候特征，是口渴能饮水，气逆上冲心胸，胃脘部灼热疼痛，虽然腹中饥饿，但又不想吃东西，倘若进食就会出现呕吐或吐出蛔虫。如果误用攻下，就会导致腹泻不止。
English: The main symptoms of cold symptoms are thirst to drink water, gas inversely to the heart, burning pain in the stomach and jaw, although the stomach is hungry, but do not want to eat, if you eat, you will vomit or spit out maggots. If misused, it will lead to diarrhea.

古文：厥阴中风，脉微浮，为欲愈；不浮，为未愈。
现代文：厥阴感受风邪，如果脉象微微见浮的，是病邪从阴出阳，其病将要痊愈，如果脉象不浮的，是邪仍在里，疾病尚未好转。
English: If the pulse is weak, it means that the disease is from the yin to the yang, and the disease will be cured. If the pulse is weak, it means that the disease is still in the body, and the disease has not yet improved.

古文：厥阴病，欲解时，从丑至卯上。
现代文：厥阴病将要解除的时间，一般在时至时之间。
English: The time when the retrograde motion sickness will be relieved is generally between now and then.

古文：厥阴病，渴欲饮水者，少少与之，愈。
现代文：厥阴虚寒证，出现口渴想要喝水时，是阴寒邪去、阳气回复之象，可以给病人喝少量汤水，就可痊愈。
English: Jue Yin Deficiency Cold Symptoms, when there is thirst and want to drink water, it is the image of the cold going away and the yang returning, you can give the patient a small amount of soup, and they can recover.

古文：诸四逆厥者，不可下之，虚家亦然。
现代文：凡属虚寒厥逆证，不能用攻下药治疗，凡是身体虚弱的，也不能用攻下药治疗。
English: If you are suffering from hypothermia, you cannot be treated with cold medicine. If you are weak, you cannot be treated with cold medicine.

古文：伤寒先厥，后发热而利者，必自止。
现代文：伤寒病，先出现四肢厥冷，以后转为发热的，为阴去阳复之象，此时，虽有腹泻，一定会自行停止。
English: In typhoid fever, the extremities are cold at first, and then turn into fever, which is a symptom of yin and yang. At this time, although there is diarrhea, it will definitely stop on its own.

古文：见厥复利。伤寒始发热，六日，厥反九日而利。
现代文：如果再转为四肢厥冷的，为阴进阳退，就会再出现腹泻。伤寒病，开始发热六天，四肢厥冷及腹泻反有九天。
English: If it turns into cold limbs again, because of yin and yang, diarrhea will occur again. For typhoid fever, the onset of fever is six days, while cold limbs and diarrhea are nine days.

古文：凡厥利者，当不能食，今反能食者，恐为除中，食以索饼，不发热者，知胃气尚在，必愈，恐暴热来出而复去也。
现代文：凡是四肢厥冷而腹泻的，一般为阳衰阴盛，应当不能饮食，现在反而能够饮食，恐怕是中气败绝的除中证。此时，可给病人吃一些面条之类的食物以作试探。
English: Anyone with cold extremities and diarrhea usually has a yang decline and a yin rise. They should not be able to eat, but now they can eat. I'm afraid it's a sign of losing their temper. At this time, you can give the patient some food such as noodles as a test.

古文：后三日脉之，其热续在者，期之旦日夜半愈。
现代文：如果吃后突然发热而又猝然退去的，是除中证；如果吃后不出现这种发热的，可以断定胃气仍然存在，其能食是阳复的表现，就一定会痊愈。
English: If there is a sudden fever after eating and it suddenly subsides, it is an exception; if there is no such fever after eating, it can be concluded that gastric gas still exists, and its energy is a manifestation of impotence, and it will definitely be cured.

古文：所以然者，本发热六日，厥反九日，复发热三日，并前六日，亦为九日，与厥相应，故期之旦日夜半愈。
现代文：第二天进行诊察，病人发热继续存在，可以推测第二天半夜痊愈。之所以这样，是因为原先发热六天，其后四肢厥冷九天，再发热三天，与原先发热的六天相加，也是九天，与四肢厥冷的日期相等，所以预测第二天半夜痊愈。
English: The next day, the patient is examined, and the fever continues to exist, and it can be predicted that the patient will recover by midnight the next day. The reason for this is that the original fever lasts for six days, then the limbs are cold for nine days, and then the fever lasts for three days, and the six days of the original fever are added together, which is also nine days, which is equal to the date of the limbs becoming cold, so it is predicted that the patient will recover by midnight the next day.

古文：后三日脉之而脉数，其热不罢者，此为热气有余，必发痈脓也。
现代文：三天后再进行诊查，如果出现脉数不除、发热不退的，这是阳复太过，阳热有余，一造会产生疮痈脓疡的变证。
English: Three days later, the examination will be carried out. If the number of pulses is not removed and the fever does not recede, this is a variation of too much yang rejuvenation and too much yang fever, which will produce sores and abscesses.

古文：伤寒脉迟，六七日，而反与黄芩汤彻其热。
现代文：外感病，脉迟已经六七天了，却反而用黄芩汤清除其热。
English: Exogenous disease, the pulse has been delayed for six or seven days, but on the contrary, remove its heat with astragalus soup.

古文：脉迟为寒，今与黄芩汤，复除其热，腹中应冷，当不能食；今反能食，此名除中，必死。
现代文：脉迟主寒，其证属虚寒，现在却反而用黄芩汤清热，必使阴寒更甚，腹中应该更加寒冷，照理应当不能饮食，现在却反而食欲亢盛能够进食，这就是除中，预后不良。
English: The main symptom of a cold is a weak pulse, but now, on the contrary, people use astragalus soup to clear the heat, which will make the cold worse. The abdomen should be colder, and it should not be able to eat, but now, on the contrary, the appetite is strong and you can eat. This is a case of elimination, and the prognosis is poor.

古文：伤寒先厥后发热，下利必自止，而反汗出，咽中痛者，其喉为痹。
现代文：外感病，先见四肢厥冷而又腹泻，以后转为发热的，是阳复阴退，其腹泻一定会自然停止。如果发热反见汗出、咽喉红肿疼痛的，是阳复太过、邪热上迫，就会产生喉痹的变证。
English: Exogenous disease, foresaw that the extremities are cold and diarrhea, and later turned into fever, is yang-fixed-yin retreat, and its diarrhea will naturally stop. If the fever, on the other hand, sweats, and the throat is red and painful, if the yang-fixed is too much, and the evil fever is pressing, it will produce a laryngeal variance.

古文：发热无汗而利必自止，若不止，必便脓血。
现代文：如果发热无汗、腹泻不止的，是阳复太过、邪热下迫，就会出现下利脓血的变证。
English: If the fever is not accompanied by sweating or diarrhea, or if the yang-fu is too strong and the evil heat is pressing down, then there will be evidence of bleeding.

古文：便脓血者，其喉不痹。
现代文：如果发生下利脓血，就不会发生喉痹。
English: If there is a blood clot, there will be no sore throat.

古文：伤寒一二日，至四五日而厥者，必发热，前热者，后必厥，厥深者，热亦深，厥微者，热亦微，厥应下之，而反发汗者，必口伤烂赤。
现代文：外感病，起病一二日到四五日，如果四肢厥冷伴发热，并且发热在先、四肢厥冷在后的，是属于热厥。其四肢厥冷的程度越严重，则郁闭的邪热就越深重；四肢厥冷的程度轻微，则邪热郁闭也就轻微。热厥应当用清下法治疗，如果反用发汗法治疗，就会使邪热更炽，发生口舌生疮、红肿糜烂的变证。
English: Exogenous diseases, with an onset of 12 to 45 days, if the limbs are cold with fever, and the fever comes first, and the limbs are cold after that, it belongs to fever. The more severe the degree of cold in the limbs, the more severe the malignant fever; the less severe the degree of cold in the limbs, the less severe the malignant fever. Fever should be treated with a cleansing method, and if it is treated with a sweating method, it will make the malignant fever hotter, and cause lesions of the oral tongue and redness.

古文：伤寒病，厥五日，热亦五日，设六日当复厥，不厥者，自愈。
现代文：伤寒病，四肢厥冷五天，发热也是五天，假如到了第六天，应当再出现四肢厥冷，如果不出现四肢厥冷的，就会自行痊愈。
English: In typhoid fever, the extremities are cold for five days, and the fever is also five days. If it is the sixth day, the extremities should be cold again. If the extremities are not cold, it will heal by itself.

古文：厥终不过五日，以热五日，故知自愈。
现代文：这是因为四肢厥冷总共只有五天，而发热也是五天，四肢厥冷与发热时间相等，阴阳趋于平衡，所以知道会自行痊愈。
English: This is because the coldness of the limbs is only five days in total, and the fever is also five days. The coldness of the limbs is equal to the fever time, and the yin and yang tend to be balanced, so it is known that it will heal by itself.

古文：凡厥者，阴阳气不相顺接，便为厥。
现代文：所谓 厥 ，是指四肢冷而言。凡属厥证，都是阴气和阳气不能互相顺接所致。
English: The so-called jue refers to cold extremities. All jue symptoms are caused by the inability of yin and yang to adhere to each other.

古文：厥者，手足逆冷是也。伤寒，脉微而厥，至七八日，肤冷，其人躁，无暂安时者，此为藏厥，非为蛔厥也。
现代文：外感病，脉象微而四肢厥冷，到了七八天，出现周身肌肤都冰冷，病人躁扰不安，没有片刻安静，这是内脏阳气极虚所致的脏厥证，不是蛔厥证。
English: Exogenous disease, the pulse is weak and the limbs are cold, to seven or eight days, the skin around the body is cold, the patient is restless, not quiet for a moment, this is the visceral yang deficiency caused by the visceral yang deficiency, not the visceral yang deficiency.

古文：蛔厥者其人当吐蛔。令病者静，而复时烦，此为藏寒。
现代文：蛔厥证的症候，是病人有发作性的心烦腹痛，让病人安静却又时而发作心烦腹痛，这是肠中有寒，蛔虫不安其位向上钻入膈内所致，过一会儿烦痛就会缓解。
English: The symptoms of the convulsive syndrome are that the patient has episodic upset stomach pain. Let the patient be quiet, but sometimes the upset stomach pain occurs. This is caused by the cold in the intestine, the tapeworm is uneasy about its position and drills upward into the intestine. After a while, the pain will ease.

古文：蛔上入膈，故烦，须臾复止，得食而呕，又烦者，蛔闻食臭出，其人当自吐蛔。
现代文：进食后，又出现呕吐、腹痛而烦的，是因为蛔虫闻到食物气味上扰所致。此外，病人常有呕吐蛔虫的表现。
English: After eating, vomiting and abdominal pain occur again, which is caused by the maggots being disturbed by the smell of food. In addition, patients often vomit maggots.

古文：蛔厥者，乌梅丸主之。又主久利方。
现代文：蛔厥证用乌梅丸主治，此方又主治久泻。
English: 厥证用乌梅丸主治,此方又主治久泻.

古文：乌梅丸方
现代文：乌梅丸方
English: Umemaru Square

古文：乌梅三百个细辛六两干姜十两黄连一斤当归四两附子六两蜀椒四两桂枝六两人参六两黄蘖六两右十味，异捣筛，合治之，以苦酒渍乌梅一宿，去核，蒸之五升米下，饭熟，捣成泥，和药令相得，内臼中，与蜜，杵二千下，丸如梧桐子大，先食饮，服十丸，日三服，稍加至二十丸。禁生冷、滑物、臭食等。
现代文：另把乌梅放入米醋中浸泡一晚上，去掉内核。再将乌梅放在蒸具内，上面复盖五斗米共蒸，待米蒸熟后捣成泥状，与上药末混合均匀，放入药臼中，加入蜂蜜，用棒槌捣二千下，作丸如梧桐子大，每次饭前吞服十粒丸药，一日服三次。此后，再慢慢加量到每次服二十粒药丸。服药期间，禁食生冷、粘滑、有浓烈气味的食品。
English: In addition, the ume is soaked in rice vinegar for one night, removing the inner core. Then the ume is placed in a steamer, covered with five buckets of rice and steamed. After the rice is steamed, it is pounded into a puree, mixed evenly with the last of the medicine, placed in a mortar, honey is added, and pounded with a mallet for two thousand times to make a pill as big as a sycamore. Swallow ten pills before each meal, take three times a day. After that, slowly increase the dosage to twenty pills per serving. During the medication, fast from cold, slippery, and strong-smelling foods.

古文：伤寒，热少厥微，指头寒，默默不欲食，烦躁数日，小便利，色白者，此热除也，欲得食，其病为愈。
现代文：外感病、邪热郁遏较轻，四肢厥冷轻微，患者仅指头发凉，神情沉默，不想进食，烦躁不安。经过几天，出现小便通畅、颜色清亮的，这是里热已经解除的征象，此时，病人如想进食，示胃气已和，其病将要痊愈。
English: Exogenous disease, heat-induced depression is relatively mild, extremities are slightly cold, the patient only points to cool hair, silent look, does not want to eat, irritable and restless. After a few days, the urine appears smooth and clear in color, which is a sign that the fever has been relieved. At this time, if the patient wants to eat, the stomach gas has been reconciled, and the disease will be cured.

古文：若厥而呕，胸胁烦满者，其后必便血。
现代文：如果热邪加重出现四肢厥冷并见呕吐、胸胁满闷而烦躁的，此后就会发生便血的变证。
English: If the fever is aggravated, the extremities are cold and vomit is seen, the chest is full and irritable, and then there will be a change in blood in the stool.

古文：病者手足厥冷，言我不结胸，小腹满，按之痛者，此冷结在膀胱关元也。
现代文：病人手足厥冷，自诉无胸胁心下疼痛，而觉小腹胀满，触按疼痛的，这是寒邪凝结在下焦膀胱关元部位的缘故。
English: The patient's hands and feet were very cold, and he complained of pain under the heart without chest pain, but he felt his abdomen was swollen and painful to touch. This was due to the cold condensation in the lower part of the bladder.

古文：伤寒发热四日，厥反三日，复热四日，厥少热多，其病当愈。
现代文：外感病，发热四天，四肢厥冷仅只三天，又发热四天，四肢厥冷的时间少而发热的时间多，疾病应当痊愈。
English: Exogenous disease, fever for four days, extremities cold for only three days, fever for another four days, extremities cold for less time and fever for more time, the disease should be cured.

古文：四日至七日，热不除者，其后必便脓血。
现代文：如果到了第四天至第七天，发热仍不退的，是阳复太过，热伤血络，必致下利脓血。
English: If, on the fourth to seventh day, the fever still does not subside, it is because the yang has returned too much, and the heat has injured the blood circulation, which will result in bleeding.

古文：伤寒厥四日，热反三日，复厥五日，其病为进，寒多热少，阳气退，故为进也。
现代文：外感病，四肢厥冷四天，发热却只有三天，又见四肢厥冷五天，这是疾病在进展。因为四肢厥冷的时间多而发热的时间少，为阳气退阴寒邪气进，所以是病情进展。
English: Exogenous disease, the limbs are cold for four days, but the fever is only three days, and the limbs are cold for five days, which is the progression of the disease. Because the limbs are cold for more time and the fever is less, the yang qi fades and the cold evil qi enters, so the disease is progressing.

古文：伤寒六七日，脉微，手足厥冷，烦躁，灸厥阴，厥不还者，死。
现代文：外感病六七天，脉微，手足厥冷，烦躁不安，应当急灸厥阴的经穴。
English: Exogenous disease for six or seven days, weak pulse, cold hands and feet, restless, should be moxibustion jueyin's acupuncture points.

古文：伤寒发热，下利，厥逆，躁不得卧者，死。
现代文：如果灸后四肢厥冷仍不转温的，属于死证。
English: If the cold limbs do not warm up after moxibustion, it is a death certificate.

古文：伤寒发热，下利至甚，厥不止者，死。伤寒六七日，不利，便发热而利，其人汗出不止者，死。
现代文：外感病五六天，没有结胸证的表现，腹部柔软，脉象虚软而又四肢厥冷的，这是血虚所致。
English: Exogenous disease for five or six days, no signs of chest congestion, soft abdomen, weak pulse and cold extremities, this is caused by blood deficiency.

古文：有阴无阳故也。伤寒五六日，不结胸，腹濡，脉虚，复厥者，不可下，此为亡血，下之死。发热而厥，七日，下利者，为难治。
现代文：不能用攻下法治疗，如果误用攻下，就会更伤其血，可导致死亡。发热而又四肢厥冷，为阴盛阳亡之象，到了第七天，又发生腹泻的，是难治之候。
English: It can't be treated with the capture method. If the capture method is misused, it will cause more damage to the blood and can lead to death. Fever and cold extremities are signs of yin and yang. If diarrhea occurs again on the seventh day, it is difficult to cure.

古文：伤寒脉促，手足厥逆者，可灸之。
现代文：外感病，脉象促而四肢厥冷，可用温灸法治疗。
English: Exogenous diseases, where the pulse is rapid and the extremities are cold, can be treated using the thermo-moxibustion method.

古文：伤寒脉滑而厥者，里有热也，白虎汤主之。
现代文：外感病，脉象滑而手足厥冷的，是里有邪热所致，用白虎汤主治。
English: Exogenous diseases, where the pulse is slippery and the hands and feet are cold, are caused by fever, and are mainly treated with white tiger soup.

古文：手足厥寒，脉细欲绝者，当归四逆汤主之。
现代文：手足厥冷，脉象很细，好象要断绝一样的，用当归四逆汤主治。
English: My hands and feet are very cold, and my pulse is very thin, as if I want to break it, so I use Angelica root soup.

古文：当归四逆汤方
现代文：当归四逆汤方
English: Danggui four reverse soup side

古文：当归三两桂枝三两芍药三两细辛三两大枣二十五个通草二两甘草二两有七味，以水八升，煮取三升，去滓，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：当归三两桂枝三两，去皮芍药三两细辛三两甘草二两，炙通草二两大枣二十五枚，剖开，另一法用十二枚以上七味药，用水八升，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，一日服三次。
English: Danggui three two cinnamon sticks three two, peeled ginger medicine three two spicy three two licorice two two, roasted herbs two two jujube twenty-five, cut open, another method uses more than twelve seven-flavor medicine, eight liters of water, boiled into three liters, remove the dregs, warm one liter each time, three times a day.

古文：若其人内有久寒者，宜当归四逆加吴茱萸生姜汤主之。
现代文：如果病人素有寒饮停滞体内，而又见上证的，可用当归四逆加吴茱萸生姜汤治疗。
English: If the patient is known to have cold drink stagnation in the body, and it is certified, it can be treated with Angelica root and ginger decoction.

古文：大汗出，热不去，内拘急，四肢疼，又下利，厥逆而恶寒者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：大汗淋漓，而发热仍不退，腹中拘急，四肢疼痛，又见腹泻、四肢厥冷而怕冷的，是阴盛阳亡的表现，用四逆汤主治。
English: Sweating profusely, while the fever still does not recede, abdominal urgency, pain in the limbs, diarrhea, cold limbs and fear of cold, is a manifestation of yin and yang, and is mainly treated with four reverse soup.

古文：大汗，若大下利而厥冷者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：大汗淋漓，如果腹泻很厉害，而又四肢厥冷的，用四逆汤主治。
English: If you are drenched in sweat, have severe diarrhea, and your extremities are very cold, use the Four Reverse Soup.

古文：病人手足厥冷，脉乍紧者，邪结在胸中。心中满而烦，饥不能食者，病在胸中，当须吐之，宜瓜蒂散。
现代文：病人手足厥冷，脉忽然现紧象的，这是实邪结在胸中所致，应有胸脘部胀满不适，虽然饥饿却不能吃东西等症状，当用涌吐法治疗，可用瓜蒂散。
English: The patient's hands and feet are very cold, and the pulse suddenly appears to be tight. This is caused by a malignant knot in the chest. The chest and groin should be swollen and uncomfortable, and although it is hungry, it cannot eat, and other symptoms. It should be treated with the method of emesis and can be treated with Guadixan.

古文：伤寒厥而心下悸者，宜先治水，当服茯苓甘草汤，却治其厥；不尔，水渍入胃，必作利也。
现代文：外感病，四肢厥冷，心胸部悸动不宁，这是水饮内停所致，必须先治水饮，当用茯苓甘草汤，然后再治四肢厥冷。不然的话，水饮浸渍入肠，势必引起腹泻。
English: Exogenous disease, extremities cold, heart and chest throbbing restless, this is caused by water drinking stop, must first treat water drinking, should use ginger licorice soup, and then treat extremities cold. Otherwise, water drinking impregnated into the intestine, is bound to cause diarrhea.

古文：伤寒六七日，大下后，寸脉沉而迟，手足厥逆，下部脉不至，咽喉不利，唾脓血，泄利不止者，为难治。麻黄升麻汤主之。
现代文：外感病六七天，峻下以后，出现寸部脉沉而迟，尺部脉不现，手足厥冷，咽喉疼痛，吞咽困难，唾吐脓血，腹泻不停的，是难治之证，用麻黄升麻汤主治。
English: Six or seven days of extrinsic disease, after the fall, the inch part of the pulse is slow to appear, the inch part of the pulse does not appear, the hands and feet are cold, the throat is painful, swallowing is difficult, spitting and spitting blood, diarrhea is incessant, is a sign of intractability, and is mainly treated with ephedra.

古文：麻黄升麻汤方
现代文：麻黄升麻汤方
English: Ma Huang Sheng Ma Tang Fang

古文：麻黄二两半升麻一两一分当归一两一分知母黄芩萎蕤各十八铢石膏白术干姜芍药天门冬桂枝茯苓甘草各六铢右十四味，以水一斗，先煮麻黄一两沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取三升，去滓，分温三服，相去如炊三斗米顷，令尽汗出，愈。
现代文：麻黄二两半，去节升麻一两一分当归一两一分知母十八铢黄芩十八铢萎蕤十八铢，一方用菖蒲芍药六铢天门冬六铢，去心桂枝六铢，去皮茯苓六铢甘草六铢，炙石膏六铢，打碎，布包白术六铢干姜六铢以上十四味药，用水一斗，先加入麻黄煮一、二开，除去上面的白沫，再加入其他药物，共煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，分三次温服。在大约相距做熟一顿饭的时间内把药服完，药后汗出就会痊愈。
English: Two halves of ephedra, one-two-one-point of ascending ephedra, one-two-one-point of returning ephedra, one-two-one-point of knowing mother, eighteen-point of ephedra, eighteen-point of withering ephedra, eighteen-point of amethyst, six-point of celandine, six-point of cinnamon, six-point of licorice, six-point of roasted gypsum, six-point of dried ginger, six-point of more than fourteen-flavor medicine, one bucket of water, first add ephedra, boil

古文：伤寒四五日，腹中痛，若转气下趣少腹者，此欲自利也。
现代文：外感病四五天，腹中疼痛，如果腹内有气转动下行趋向小腹的，这是将要腹泻的先兆。
English: Exogenous illness for four or five days, pain in the abdomen. If there is gas in the abdomen turning downward and tending to the lower abdomen, this is a precursor to diarrhea.

古文：伤寒本自寒下，医复吐下之，寒格，更逆吐下；若食入口即吐，干姜黄连黄芩人参汤主之。
现代文：外感病，本属虚寒腹泻，医生却用涌吐、泻下法治疗，致使上热与下寒相格拒，如果再次误用吐下，出现饮食进口就吐的，用干姜黄芩黄连人参汤主治。
English: Exogenous diseases, originally hypothermia and diarrhea, but the doctor used the method of effusion and laxation to treat, causing the upper heat and the lower cold to be incompatible. If you misuse the exhalation again, if you vomit after eating, use the dried turmeric and ginseng soup to treat.

古文：干姜黄连黄芩人参汤方
现代文：干姜黄芩黄连人参汤方
English: Dried turmeric and ginseng soup

古文：干姜黄连黄芩人参各三两右四味，以水六升，煮取二升，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：干姜黄芩黄连人参各三两以上四味药，用水六升，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，分二次温服。
English: Dried turmeric and ginseng each contain three or more four-ingredient medicines, six liters of water, decocted into two liters, remove the drug residue, and divided into two warm treatments.

古文：下利，有微热而渴，脉弱者，今自愈。
现代文：虚寒腹泻，出现轻微发热，口渴，脉象弱的，是邪气已衰，阳气来复，疾病即将痊愈。
English: Hypothermia and diarrhea, slight fever, thirst, and weak pulse are signs that the evil spirit has declined, the yang spirit has returned, and the disease is about to be cured.

古文：下利，脉数，有微热汗出，今自愈。
现代文：虚寒腹泻，如果脉象由紧转数，微微发热汗出的，是阴去阳复，其病即将痊愈。
English: In hypothermia and diarrhea, if the pulse is from the number of tight turns, slightly hot sweat, it is yin to yang, and the disease is about to be cured.

古文：设复紧，为未解。
现代文：如果脉又现紧象的，为阴寒邪盛，其病没有缓解。
English: If the pulse is tight again, it is a cold and evil, and the disease has not eased.

古文：下利，手足厥冷无脉者，灸之不温，若脉不还，反微喘者，死。
现代文：腹泻，手足厥冷，无脉搏跳动的，急用灸法以回阳复脉。如果灸后手足仍不转温，脉搏跳动仍不恢复，反而微微喘息的，属于死候。
English: Diarrhea, cold hands and feet, no pulse, urgent use of moxibustion to restore the solar plexus. If the hands and feet still do not warm up after moxibustion, the pulse still does not recover, but slightly wheezing, it is death.

古文：少阴负趺阳者，为顺也。
现代文：如果足部的太溪脉和趺阳脉仍有搏动，而趺阳脉大于太溪脉的，为胃气尚旺，属可治的顺证。
English: If the Taixi vein and the Poyang vein of the foot are still pulsating, and the Poyang vein is larger than the Taixi vein, the stomach gas is still strong, which is a treatable symptom.

古文：下利，寸脉反浮数，尺中自涩者，必清脓血。
现代文：腹泻，寸部脉反见浮数，尺部脉现涩的，是阳热盛而阴血亏，热伤阴络，可能会产生大便泻下脓血的症候。
English: Diarrhea, ulnar vein contrary to the floating number, ulnar vein is now astringent, is yang feverish and yin blood loss, hot injury yin network, may produce stool laxity and bleeding symptoms.

古文：下利清谷，不可攻表，汗出，必胀满。
现代文：腹泻完谷不化，多属阴盛阳衰，此时，即使兼有表证，也不能发汗解表，如果误发其汗，就会引起腹部胀满的变证。
English: Diarrhea does not go away, it is mostly yin and yang. At this time, even if you have a symptom, you cannot sweat to solve the symptom. If you mistakenly sweat, it will cause a bloated abdomen.

古文：下利，脉沉弦者，下重也；脉大者，为未止；脉微弱数者，为欲自止，虽发热不死。
现代文：腹泻或下痢，如果脉沉弦的，是肝经湿热壅滞，多会出现里急后重；脉大的，为病势进展，腹泻不会停止；脉微弱数的，是邪退正复，腹泻将要停止，此时，虽有发热，也没有危险。
English: Diarrhea or diarrhea, if the pulse is low, it is the liver that is sluggish due to heat and humidity, and there will be a sudden weight gain; if the pulse is large, it is the progression of the disease, and the diarrhea will not stop; if the pulse is weak, it is retrograde, and the diarrhea will stop. At this time, although there is fever, there is no danger.

古文：下利，脉沉而迟，其人面少赤，身有微热，下利清谷者，必郁冒，汗出而解，病人必微厥。
现代文：腹泻不消化食物，脉象沉而迟，病人面部微发潮红，体表轻度发热，这是下焦阳虚阴盛，虚阳上浮。
English: Diarrhea does not digest food, the pulse is slow and sluggish, the patient's face is slightly flushed, and the body surface is mildly feverish. This is the lower jiaoyang virtual yin and yang, and the virtual yang and yang.

古文：所以然者，其面戴阳，下虚故也。
现代文：如果病人四肢厥冷轻的，则阳虽虚而不甚，阳与阴争，就一定会出现眩晕昏冒、随之汗出而病解的现象。
English: If the patient's limbs are cold and light, the yang will be weak, but the yang and yin will fight, and dizziness and fainting will definitely occur, followed by sweating and disease resolution.

古文：下利，脉数而渴者，今自愈；设不差，必清脓血，以有热故也。
现代文：虚寒腹泻，出现脉数而口渴的，是阳气回复，其病将要痊愈。假如不痊愈，则是阳热有余，势必引起大便下脓血。
English: Hypothermia and diarrhea, the appearance of pulse number and thirst, is the yang qi recovery, the disease will be cured. If not cured, it is the excess of yang fever, is bound to cause blood in the stool.

古文：下利后脉绝，手足厥冷，日卒时脉还，手足温者生，脉不还者死。
现代文：腹泻频剧，脉搏一时摸不能，手足厥冷，经过一昼夜，脉搏恢复，手足转温的，是阳气恢复，尚存生机；如果一昼夜脉搏仍不恢复的，则无生还之望。
English: Frequent diarrhea, the pulse can not be felt for a while, the hands and feet are cold, after a day and night, the pulse is restored, the hands and feet are warmed, the yang is restored, and there is still vitality; if the pulse is still not restored for a day and night, there is no hope of survival.

古文：伤寒下利，日十余行，脉反实者死。
现代文：外感病，患虚寒腹泻，一天十余次，脉象本当微弱沉迟，却反而出现弹指有力的实脉的，为真脏脉见之象，属于死候。
English: Exogenous disease, suffering from hypothermia and diarrhea, more than ten times a day, the pulse is weak and slow, but on the contrary, there is a strong real pulse, which is a symptom of the real pulse, and belongs to death.

古文：下利清谷，里寒外热，汗出而厥者，通脉四逆汤主之。
现代文：腹泻完谷不化，发热、汗出而四肢厥冷，证属里真寒、外假热，用通脉四逆汤主治。
English: Diarrhea does not go away, fever, sweating and cold extremities, cold in the body and fever outside, mainly treated with Tongmai Sihuang Tang.

古文：热利下重者，白头翁汤主之。
现代文：热性下痢，里急后重的，用白头翁汤主治。
English: Feverish diarrhea, acute and severe, should be treated with Baotou Weng Tang.

古文：白头翁汤方
现代文：白头翁汤方
English: Baotou Weng Tang Fang

古文：白头翁二两黄连黄柏秦皮各三两右四味，以水七升，煮取二升，去滓，温服一升；不愈，更服一升。
现代文：白头翁二两黄柏三两黄连三两秦皮三两以上四味药，用水七升，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，每次温服一升，服药后病仍不好的，再服一升。
English: Bai Tou Weng two two Huang Pei three two Huang Lian three two Qin Pei three two or more four-flavor medicine, use seven liters of water, boil it into two liters, remove the drug residue, take one liter each time, if the disease is still not good after taking the medicine, take another liter.

古文：下利，腹胀满，身体疼痛者，先温其里，乃攻其表。
现代文：虚寒腹泻，腹部胀满，身体疼痛的，是表里同病，应当先温里寒，然后再解表邪。
English: The symptoms of hypothermia and diarrhea, bloated abdomen, and body pain are the same as those on the outside. It is necessary to treat the cold on the inside first, and then treat the symptoms on the outside.

古文：温里四逆汤，攻表桂枝汤。
现代文：温里宜用四逆汤，解表宜用桂枝汤。
English: In terms of temperature, it is advisable to use Sichuan broth, and in terms of solving the table, it is advisable to use Guizhi broth.

古文：下利，欲饮水者，以有热故也，白头翁汤主之。
现代文：下痢，口渴想喝水的，是里有热的缘故，用白头翁汤主治。
English: Diarrhea, thirst to drink water, is due to the heat, with Paektu Weng soup.

古文：下利，谵语者，有燥屎也，宜小承气汤。
现代文：腹泻并见谵语、腹部硬痛的，是肠中有燥屎阻结，可用小承气汤治疗。
English: Diarrhea and see slang, abdominal pain, is a blockage of dry feces in the intestine, can be treated with Xiao Chengqi soup.

古文：下利后更烦，按之心下濡者，为虚烦也，宜栀子豉汤。
现代文：腹泻后心烦更甚，触按胃脘部柔软，这是无形邪热内扰胸膈所致，宜用栀子豉汤治疗。
English: After diarrhea, the upset is even worse, and the touch of the stomach and hips is soft. This is caused by the invisible evil fever disturbing the chest and should be treated with hazelnut soup.

古文：呕家有痈脓者，不可治，呕脓尽自愈。
现代文：宿有呕吐的病人，如果是内有痈脓而引起的，不能见呕而止呕，应解毒排脓，脓尽则呕吐自然痊愈。
English: Patients with persistent vomiting, if it is caused by internal maggots, cannot see vomit and stop vomiting, should detoxify and expel maggots, and if the maggots are eliminated, the vomiting will be cured naturally.

古文：呕而脉弱，小便复利，身有微热见厥者难治。四逆汤主之。
现代文：呕吐而见脉弱，小便通畅，体表有轻度发热，如果见到四肢厥冷的，是阴盛虚阳外越之候，治疗较为困难，可用四逆汤主治。
English: When vomiting, the pulse is weak, the urination is smooth, and the body surface has mild fever. If the limbs are very cold, it is a case of yin and yang, and the treatment is more difficult. It can be treated with four reverse soup.

古文：干呕，吐涎沫，头痛者，吴茱萸汤主之。
现代文：干呕，吐涎沫，头痛的，是肝寒犯胃、浊阴上逆所致，用吴茱萸汤主治。
English: Dry vomiting, foaming at the mouth, and headaches are caused by the cold of the liver, stomach, and upper and lower yin, and are mainly treated with wu jujube soup.

古文：呕而发热者，小柴胡汤主之。
现代文：呕吐而见发热的，可用小柴胡汤主治。
English: If you vomit and feel feverish, you can use the Xiaochaihu soup.

古文：伤寒大吐大下之，极虚，复极汗出者，以其人外气怫郁，复与之水，以发其汗，因得哕。所以然者，胃中寒冷故也。
现代文：伤寒病，用峻吐峻下法治疗，导致胃气极度虚弱，而又表气郁滞不畅，医生再与饮水以发汗，使汗出很多，胃气重虚，胃中寒冷，气机上逆，因而发生呃逆。
English: Typhoid fever, treated with the steep spit-down method, leads to extreme weakness of gastric qi, but the expression of qi is sluggish, the doctor then sweats with drinking water, causing a lot of sweat, the stomach qi is heavy, the stomach is cold, the gas machine is upside down, and thus the hiccup occurs.

古文：伤寒，哕而腹满，视其前后，知何部不利，利之则愈。
现代文：外感病，呃逆而腹部胀满，这是实邪内阻所致。应询问病人大小便是否通畅，以便采取不同的治疗措施。
English: Exogenous disease, ugh, on the contrary, the abdomen is swollen, this is caused by real internal obstruction. The patient should be asked whether the urine and feces are smooth, so that different treatment measures can be taken.

