古文：康默记，本名照。
现代文：康默记，原名照。
English: "Comme chez nous," goes the original name.

古文：少为蓟州衙校，太祖侵蓟州得之，爱其材，隶麾下。
现代文：年轻时任蓟州衙校，太祖进攻蓟州时获得他，爱其才，隶属于麾下。
English: When he was young, he was in charge of Bozhou Yingxue School. When his great-grandfather attacked Bozhou, he won him over. He loved him and was subordinate to him.

古文：一切番、汉相涉事，属默记折衷之，悉合上意。
现代文：所有与蕃、汉相关之事，都委托康默记折衷处理，他办事都很合乎皇上意旨。
English: All matters related to the Yi and Han dynasties were entrusted to Kang Mo Kee to handle in a compromise manner, and his work was very much in line with the emperor's will.

古文：时诸部新附，文法未备，默记推析律意，论决重轻，不差毫厘。
现代文：当时诸部新近归附不久，康默记推断剖析律令的意义，论断判决定刑的轻重，不曾有丝毫的差错。
English: At that time, various departments had just been newly annexed, and there was not the slightest error in the deduction and analysis of the significance of the ritsuryo and the judgment of the severity of the sentence.

古文：罹禁网者，人人自以为不冤。
现代文：触犯法网的人，人人都自认为没什么冤枉。
English: People who break the law all think they have done nothing wrong.

古文：顷之，拜左尚书。
现代文：不久，拜为左尚书。
English: Soon after, Bai became a disciple of Zuo Shang.

古文：神册三年，始建都，默记董役，人咸劝趋，百日而讫事。
现代文：神册三年，开始建造京城，康默记监督劳作，人人都互相劝勉赶去赴役，一百天就将事情办完了。
English: According to the Book of God, in the third year, the construction of the capital city began, Kang Miao supervised the work, everyone urged each other to rush to the service, and the work was completed in one hundred days.

古文：五年，为皇都夷离毕。
现代文：五年，任为皇都夷离毕。
English: Five years later, he left the imperial capital.

古文：会太祖出师居庸关，命默记将汉军进逼长芦水寨，俘馘甚众。
现代文：适逢太祖出兵居庸关，命令康默记率领汉军进逼长芦水寨，俘虏甚众。
English: At the right time, Emperor Taizu dispatched troops to Juyongguan and ordered Kang Mochi to lead the Chinese army to enter and force the Changlu Water Village, taking many prisoners.

古文：天赞四年，亲征渤海，默记与韩知古从。
现代文：天赞四年，皇上亲自征讨渤海，康默记与韩知古随从。
English: In the auspicious fourth year of the reign of the emperor, the emperor personally solicited the Bohai Sea, accompanied by Kang Mo Kee and Han Zhigu.

古文：后大諲歙叛，命诸将攻之。
现代文：后来大反叛，皇上令诸将进攻。
English: Later, there was a great rebellion, and the Emperor ordered his generals to attack.

古文：默记分薄东门，率骁勇先登。
现代文：康默记分兵进逼东门，率领勇士率先登城。
English: Commercy led a detachment of soldiers into the East Gate and led the warriors to the city.

古文：既拔，与韩延徽下长岭府。
现代文：攻下渤海城之后，与韩延徽又攻下长岭府。
English: After capturing Bohai City, he and Han Yanhui also captured Changling Prefecture.

古文：军还，已下城邑多叛，默记与阿古只平之。
现代文：大军撤回时，已攻下的城池大多反叛，康默记与阿古只平定之。
English: When the large army retreated, most of the captured cities rebelled, and only Kangmo and Ago were able to subdue them.

古文：既破回跋城，归营太祖山陵毕，卒。
现代文：攻破回跋城之后，回京营造太祖陵墓完工，便去世了。
English: After breaking through the city wall and returning to Beijing to complete the construction of the tomb of the great ancestor, he died.

古文：佐命功臣其一也。
现代文：为佐命功臣之一。
English: He is one of Satome's meritorious vassals.

古文：孙延寿，字胤昌，少倜傥，谓其所亲： 大丈夫为将，当效节边垂，马革裹尸。 
现代文：其嫡孙康延寿，字胤昌，少时卓异超凡，对亲近朋友说： 大丈夫为将，应该尽忠于边疆，以马革裹尸而还。 
English: His great-great-grandson, Kang Yan Shou, nicknamed Yan Chang, was extraordinary when he was young. He said to his close friends: "In order to be a good husband, you should be loyal to the frontier and return with your body wrapped in horse leather."

古文：景宗特授千牛卫大将军。
现代文：景宗特授之千牛卫大将军。
English: General Sen Niu Wei, specially conferred by King Gyeongjong.

古文：宋人攻南京，诸将既成列，延寿独奋击阵前，敌遂大溃。
现代文：宋人攻南京，诸将排成阵列之后，延寿独自出阵前奋勇进击，敌人于是大溃。
English: The Song people attacked Nanjing, and after the generals were lined up in an array, Yan Shou went out on his own and made a valiant attack, and the enemy was routed.

古文：以功遥授保大军节度使。
现代文：因功遥授为保大军节度使。
English: He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his contribution to the Great Patriotic War.

古文：乾亨三年卒。
现代文：乾亨三年去世。
English: Qianheng died three years later.

古文：韩延徽，字藏明，幽州安次人。
现代文：韩延徽，字藏明，幽州安次人。
English: Han Yanhui, Zizangming, Yuzhou Andijian.

古文：父梦殷，累官蓟、儒、顺三州刺史。
现代文：父韩梦殷，历任蓟、儒、顺三州刺史。
English: His father, Han Mengyin, was a historian of the three states of Zhai, Confucius and Shun.

古文：延徽少英，燕帅刘仁恭奇之，召为幽都府文学、平州录事参军，同冯道祗候院，授幽州观察度支使。
现代文：延徽在少时便才德出众，燕帅刘仁恭觉得他奇异不凡，征召为幽都府文学、平州录事参军，与冯道同掌祗候院，又授幽州观察度支使。
English: At a young age, Yanhui was outstanding in talent and virtue. Yan Shuai Liu Rengong thought he was extraordinary and extraordinary. He was conscripted to join the army for Yudu Prefecture Literature and Pingzhou Records, and he and Feng Dao were sent to the hospital together, and he was also awarded the Yuzhou Observation Support Envoy.

古文：后守光为帅，延徽来聘，太祖怒其不屈，留之。述律后谏曰： 彼秉节弗挠，贤者也，奈何困辱之？ 
现代文：后刘守光为军帅时，延徽被派来我国访问，太祖因他不肯屈服而恼怒，扣下了他，述律后劝谏说： 此人自持操守，不屈不挠，是个贤士，为什么要让他受窘迫和侮辱呢？ 
English: Later, when Liu Shouguang was the commander of the army, he was sent to Yanhui to visit our country. The great-grandfather was angry because he refused to give in, detained him, told him the rules and then persuaded him to say: This person is self-disciplined, unyielding, and a sage, why should he be embarrassed and insulted?

古文：太祖召与语，合上意，立命参军事。
现代文：太祖召延徽并跟他交谈，深合太祖之意，当下命他参与军事。
English: The great-grandfather summoned Yan Hui and talked with him. He deeply agreed with the great-grandfather's intention and immediately ordered him to participate in the military.

古文：攻党项、室韦，服诸部落，延徽之筹居多。
现代文：进攻党项、室韦，制服各部落，延徽之筹划居多。
English: Most of the plans were to attack the Party, the Muroto, to subdue the tribes, and to attack Yanhui.

古文：乃请树城郭，分市里，以居汉人之降者。
现代文：于是请太祖建立城郭，对城乡加以分割，让汉人之降服者居住下来。
English: Therefore, he asked the great-grandfather to build a castle and divide the city and countryside, so that the Han people who surrendered could live there.

古文：又为定配偶，教垦艺，以生养之。
现代文：又为之择定配偶，教他们垦田种庄稼，养活自己。
English: He also selected wives for them and taught them to plow fields and grow crops to feed themselves.

古文：以故逃亡者少。
现代文：所以逃亡之人很少。
English: That's why there are so few escapees.

古文：居久之，慨然怀其乡里，赋诗见意，遂亡归唐。已而与他将王缄有隙，惧及难，乃省亲幽州，匿故人王德明舍。
现代文：过了很久，思乡之心十分急切，做诗以寄托心意，于是逃回到唐，不久与另外一位将领王缄有了磨擦，害怕惹出祸事，便到幽州探望父母，躲在旧交王德明家中。
English: After a long time, his homesickness was very eager, he wrote poems to keep his heart, so he fled back to Tang. Soon, he had friction with another general Wang Yao. Afraid of causing trouble, he went to Yuzhou to visit his parents and hid in the home of his old friend Wang Deming.

古文：德明问所适，延徽曰： 吾将复走契丹。 
现代文：德明问他准备到哪儿去。延徽说： 我想再跑到契丹去。 
English: Deming asked him where he was going. Yanhui said, "I want to go to Qidan again."

古文：德明不以为然。
现代文：德明认为不妥。
English: Deming thinks this is wrong.

古文：延徽笑曰： 彼失我如失左右手，其见我必喜。 
现代文：延徽笑着说： 他们失去了我，好比失去了左右手一般，见到我一定很高兴。 
English: Yanhui said with a smile, "They lost me, just like they lost their right and left hands. They must be very happy to see me."

古文：既至，太祖问故。
现代文：到了以后，太祖问他去而复来的缘故。
English: When he arrived, the great-grandfather asked him why he had come back.

古文：延徽曰： 忘亲非孝，弃君非忠。臣虽挺身逃，臣心在陛下。
现代文：延徽说 ：忘弃父母称为不孝，背弃君王乃是不忠，臣尽管斗胆逃走，臣的心却是在陛下这里。
English: Yanhui said, "Forgetting one's parents is called being unfilial, turning one's back on the king is being disloyal. Although a vassal dares to run away, the vassal's heart is with His Majesty."

古文：臣是以复来。 
现代文：所以臣又回来了。 
English: That's why I came back.

古文：上大悦，赐名曰匣列。 匣列 ，辽言复来也。
现代文：皇上大喜，赐名为匣列。 匣列 ，辽语复来之意。
English: The emperor was so pleased that it was given the name of Zagirei. Zagirei, meaning "return" in the Liao language.

古文：即命为守政事令、崇文馆大学士，中外事悉令参决。
现代文：当下命为守政事令、崇文馆大学士，内外大事均让他参与决断。
English: His current orders are to protect the government and to be a scholar of the Chongwen Academy. He is allowed to participate in the decision-making of both domestic and foreign affairs.

古文：天赞四年，从征渤海，大諲歙乞降。
现代文：天赞四年，随太祖征讨渤海，大请降。
English: In the fourth year of the auspicious year, I went with my great-grandfather to conquer the Bohai Sea, and I was greatly honored.

古文：既而复叛，与诸将破其城，以功拜左仆射。
现代文：不久又反叛，延徽同众将一起破其城，因功拜为左仆射。
English: Soon they will rebel again, and together with the people of Yanhui, they will destroy their city. Because of their service, they will be left-handed shooters.

古文：又与康默记攻长岭府，拔之。
现代文：又与康默记一道攻长岭府，攻下之。
English: He also went to attack Choshenling Prefecture together with Kang Mo Kee and captured it.

古文：师还，太祖崩，哀动左右。
现代文：回师，太祖崩，延徽悲哀之情感动了左右众人。
English: The return of the teacher, the death of the great ancestor, and the sad feelings of Yanhui have moved many people.

古文：太宗朝，封鲁国公，仍为政事令。
现代文：太宗朝，封为鲁国公，仍为政事令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, the title of Prince of Lu was still used as a government order.

古文：使晋还，改南京三司使。
现代文：出使晋回来，改为南京三司使。
English: When Jin returned from his mission, it was changed to the Nanjing Third Divisional Envoy.

古文：世宗朝，迁南府宰相，建政事省，设张理具，称尽力吏。
现代文：世宗朝，迁南府宰相，建立政事省，对于机构设置颇具才识，荐举了一批能竭尽材力的官吏。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he moved the prime minister to the southern prefecture and established the Ministry of Political Affairs. He was quite knowledgeable about the establishment of institutions and recommended a group of officials who could do their best.

古文：天禄五年六月，河东使请行册礼，帝诏延徽定其制，延徽奏一遵太宗册晋帝礼，从之。
现代文：天禄五年六月，河东遣使请求行册礼，皇上诏令延徽确定其礼制，延徽奏请一概遵照太宗册封晋帝之礼，从之。
English: In June of the 5th year of the Tenroku era, the envoy from Hedong requested the performance of the Book of Rites, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to Yanhui to determine its system of rites, and requested that the performance of the Book of Rites in Yanhui follow the Book of Rites of Emperor Taizong and Emperor Jin.

古文：应历中，致仕。
现代文：应历年间，辞官归居。
English: Over the past few years, the retired officials have returned to their residences.

古文：子德枢镇东平，诏许每岁东归省。九年卒，年七十八。
现代文：九年卒，年七十八岁。
English: Nine years old, seventy-eight years old.

古文：上闻震悼，赠尚书令，葬幽州之鲁郭，世为崇文令公。
现代文：皇上知道后震惊悲痛，赠为尚书令，葬于幽州之鲁郭，世代为崇文令公。
English: The emperor was shocked and saddened when he found out. He gave the book to Shang Shuling, who was buried in Lukou, Yuzhou, and was succeeded by Chong Wenling.

古文：孙资让，寿隆初拜中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：当初，延徽南奔，太祖梦见白鹤从帐中飞出；快回来时，又梦见白鹤飞入帐中。次晨，对侍臣说： 延徽来了。 
English: At first, when Yanhui was heading south, the great-grandfather dreamed of a white crane flying out of his tent; when he was about to return, he also dreamed of a white crane flying into his tent. The next morning, he said to his attendant: Yanhui is coming.

古文：会宋徽宗嗣位，遣使来报，有司按籍，有 登宝位 文，坐是出为崇义军节度使。
现代文：不久果真如此。太祖建国之初，诸事均属草创，所有营造城邑，建筑宫殿，正君臣之位，定名分之别，法度井然，都是延徽之力。为佐命功臣之一。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, all things were grassroots, and all the construction of cities, the construction of palaces, the position of officials, the appointment of points, and the law were all the power of Yanhui. He was one of the heroes of the war.

古文：改镇辽兴，卒。韩知古，蓟州玉田人，善谋有识量。
现代文：韩知古，蓟州玉田人。善于谋划，富有见识和度量。
English: Han Zhigu, a resident of Yutian, Zhangzhou. Good at planning, insightful and meticulous.

古文：太祖平蓟时，知古六岁，为淳钦皇后兄欲稳所得。
现代文：太祖平定蓟州时，知古六岁，为淳钦皇后兄长欲稳所得。
English: When the great-grandfather conquered Zhangzhou, Zhi Gu was six years old. He was the eldest brother of Empress Junqin.

古文：后来嫔，知古从焉，未得省见。
现代文：后淳钦皇后出嫁，知古为随从，没有得到太祖接见和慰问。
English: After Empress Junchun married, Chiko was an attendant and did not receive an audience and condolences from her great-grandfather.

古文：久之，负其有，怏怏不得志，挺身逃庸保，以供资用。
现代文：过了很久，自恃胸中所学，怏怏不乐，觉得很不得志，便只身出逃，为人做雇工，以保证自己的钱财用度。
English: After a long time, he felt very discouraged because he was not happy with what he had learned in middle school, so he ran away to work as a hired laborer to ensure his financial well-being.

古文：其子匡嗣得亲近太祖，因间言。
现代文：其子韩匡嗣得以亲近太祖，于是找个机会说起他。
English: His son, Han Kuang-tsik, was able to get close to his grandfather, so he took the opportunity to talk about him.

古文：太祖召见与语，贤之，命参谋议。
现代文：太祖召见，跟他交谈，觉得他是贤才，让他参与谋划大事。
English: The great-grandfather summoned him, talked to him, thought he was a genius, and asked him to participate in the planning of major events.

古文：神册初，遥授彰武军节度使。
现代文：神册初年，遥授彰武军节度使。
English: In the first year of the Divine Records, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order of the Armed Forces.

古文：久之，信任益笃，总知汉儿司事，兼主诸国礼仪。
现代文：久而久之，得到更深信任，总管汉儿司事，同时主管各国礼仪。
English: Over time, he gained deeper trust and became the chief steward of the Chinese children's department, and also in charge of the etiquette of various countries.

古文：时仪法疏阔，知古援据故典，参酌国俗，与汉仪杂就之，使国人易知而行。
现代文：当时礼仪制度粗略，韩知古援引旧典，参酌国俗，与汉礼仪杂糅混用之，使得国人易于了解和采行。
English: At that time, the etiquette system was rough. Han Zhi Gu quoted ancient texts, took into account national customs, and mixed it with a mixture of Han etiquette, making it easy for Chinese people to understand and adopt.

古文：顷之，拜左仆射，与康默记将汉军征渤海有功，迁中书令。
现代文：不久，拜为左仆射，与康默记统率汉军征讨渤海有功，迁为中书令。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Zhongshirong (中書令) as the left-hand man of Baizhe, and was credited with leading the Han army under the command of Kangmo Ji to conquer the Bohai Sea.

古文：天显中卒，为佐命功臣之一。
现代文：天显年间去世，为佐命功臣之一。
English: He died during the Tengen era, and was one of the Satsumei meritorious vassals.

古文：子匡嗣。
现代文：子韩匡嗣。
English: He is the son of Han Kuang-tsu.

古文：匡嗣以善医，直长乐宫，皇后视之犹子。
现代文：韩匡嗣因为擅长医术，在长乐宫当值，皇后把他当亲生子看待。
English: Because Han Kuang-tsu was good at medicine, he was on duty at the Changle Palace, and the empress regarded him as her own son.

古文：应历十年，为太祖庙详稳。
现代文：应历十年，为太祖庙详稳。
English: It has been ten years since the founding of Taizu Temple.

古文：后宋王喜隐谋叛，辞引匡嗣，上置不问。
现代文：后来宋王喜隐阴谋反叛，供辞牵涉匡嗣，皇上置之不问。
English: Later, Song King Xiyin conspired to rebel, and his confession involved Kuanzhi, but the emperor did not question it.

古文：初，景宗在藩邸，善匡嗣。
现代文：当初，景宗在藩国时，与匡嗣交好。
English: At first, when he was in the domain, Kagemune befriended Yasutsugu.

古文：即位，拜上京留守。
现代文：即位后，拜为上京留守。
English: After the enthronement, Bae stayed in Tokyo.

古文：顷之，王燕，改南京留守。
现代文：不久，为燕王，改为南京留守。
English: Soon after, he changed his name to Yan Wang and stayed in Nanjing.

古文：保宁末，以留守摄枢密使。
现代文：保宁末年，以留守兼摄枢密使。
English: In the last years of the Boryeong era, he served as an envoy to the Imperial Court.

古文：时耶律虎古使宋还，言宋人必取河东，合先事以为备。
现代文：时逢耶律虎古出使宋国，声称宋人必定会出兵取河东，应当先行做好防备。
English: When the Yelu Tigers sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty, they claimed that the Song people would certainly send troops to take Hedong, and that they should first prepare for it.

古文：匡嗣诋之曰： 宁有是！ 
现代文：韩匡嗣驳斥他说 ：哪有这回事？ 
English: Han Kuang-hsi refuted him, saying: "How can this be?

古文：已而宋人果取太原，乘胜逼燕。
现代文：不久宋人果然攻取太原，乘胜进逼燕京。
English: Soon after, the Song Dynasty conquered Taiyuan and forced Yanjing.

古文：匡嗣与南府宰相沙、惕隐休哥侵宋，军于满城。方阵，宋人请降。
现代文：匡嗣与南府宰相耶律沙、惕隐耶律休哥进犯宋土，驻军于满城，刚刚布阵，宋人请求投降。
English: Kuanzhi, together with the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusha, and Titiyin Yerushuo, invaded the Song territory, stationed troops in Mancheng, and had just set up a battle line, when the Song people asked for surrender.

古文：匡嗣欲纳之，休哥曰： 彼军气甚锐，疑诱我也。
现代文：匡嗣想要纳降，休哥说： 敌军兵气十分精锐，我怀疑投降是引诱我们的。
English: Kuanzhi wanted to accept the surrender, but Xiu Ge said, "The enemy's army is very elite. I suspect the surrender is to lure us."

古文：可整顿士卒以御。 
现代文：应当整顿士兵加以防御。 
English: The soldiers should be reorganized to defend themselves.

古文：匡嗣不听。
现代文：匡嗣不听。
English: Kuanzhe didn't listen.

古文：俄而宋军鼓噪薄我，众蹙践，尘起涨天。
现代文：不久宋军鼓噪着进逼我军，大军猝然间冲了过来，扬尘迷漫了天空。
English: Soon after, the Song army entered our army with a drum noise, the army suddenly rushed over, and the sky was filled with dust.

古文：匡嗣仓卒谕诸将，无当其锋。
现代文：匡嗣仓猝之间晓谕诸将，无人能挡住宋军兵锋。
English: Kuang Zhicang suddenly told the generals that no one could stop the Song army.

古文：众既奔，遇伏兵扼要路，匡嗣弃旗鼓遁，其众走易州山，独休哥收所弃兵械，全军还。
现代文：众人既已奔逃，又遇到宋伏兵在要道扼守，匡嗣丢弃了旗鼓逃走，辽军奔逃到易州山，只有休哥收拣了辽军所丢弃的兵甲器械，全军而还。
English: Although everyone had already fled, they encountered Song ambush soldiers guarding the main road, Kuanzhe abandoned the banner and drum and fled, the Liao army fled to Yizhou Mountain, only Xiu Ge collected the armor equipment discarded by the Liao army, and the whole army was saved.

古文：帝怒匡嗣，数之曰： 尔违众谋，深入敌境，尔罪一也；号令不肃，行伍不整，尔罪二也；弃我师旅，挺身鼠窜，尔罪三也；侦候失机，守御弗备，尔罪四也；捐弃旗鼓，损威辱国，尔罪五也。 
现代文：皇上恼怒匡嗣，数落他说： 你不听众人的谋划，深入敌人境内，这是你的第一条罪；军令不严肃，队伍不整齐，这是你的第二条罪；抛弃我国的军队，独自一人逃窜，这是你的第三条罪；侦察敌情贻误军机，守卫防御不完备，这是你的第四条罪；遗弃军用旗鼓，损害军威，辱没国格，这是你的第五条罪。 
English: The emperor was angry with Kuanzhi and said to him, "Your first crime is that you did not listen to everyone's plan and penetrated deep into the enemy's territory; your second crime is that your military orders are not serious and your troops are not in order; your third crime is that you abandoned our country's army and fled alone; your fourth crime is that your reconnaissance of the enemy's situation was delayed by military aircraft and your defense was not complete; your fifth crime is that you abandoned the military banner and drum, damaged the military's prestige, and disgraced the national character.

古文：促令诛之。
现代文：下令将他立即斩首。
English: He was ordered to be beheaded immediately.

古文：皇后引诸内戚徐为开解，上重违其请。
现代文：皇后领着各位内亲慢慢地为他开脱释罪，皇上一再不听他们的求情。
English: The empress led his relatives in slowly exonerating him, and the emperor repeatedly refused to listen to their pleas.

古文：良久，威稍霁，乃杖而免之。
现代文：很久以后，震怒渐渐平息，于是杖击韩匡嗣然后释免了他。
English: After a long time, his anger gradually subsided, so he caned Han Kuang Ci and released him.

古文：既而遥授晋昌军节度使。
现代文：不久遥授晋昌军节度使。
English: He was soon given the title of the Jinchang Army's festival envoy.

古文：乾亨三年，改西南面招讨使，卒。
现代文：乾亨三年，改为西南面招讨使，去世。
English: In the third year of Qianheng, he was changed to the southwestern recruiting envoy, and died.

古文：睿智皇后闻之，遣使临吊，赙赠甚厚，后追赠尚书令。
现代文：睿智皇后闻讯，派使者前往吊唁，赠予助丧的钱物十分丰厚，后来追赠他为尚书令。
English: Upon hearing the news, Empress Rui Zhi sent an envoy to offer condolences. The amount of money given to help with the funeral was very rich, and he was later posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shuling.

古文：五子：德源，德让，后赐名隆运，德威，德崇，德凝。
现代文：有五子：德源、德让一一一后赐名隆运、德威、德崇、德凝。
English: He had five sons: De Yuan, De Zhan, De Long, De Wei, De Chong, and De Rong.

