古文：庄宗神闵敬皇后刘氏，魏州成安人也。
现代文：庄宗神闵敬皇后刘氏，魏州成安人。
English: Zhuangzong Shenshu respected Empress Liu, a native of Cheng'an, Wei Province.

古文：庄宗正室曰卫国夫人韩氏，其次燕国夫人伊氏，其次后也，初封魏国夫人。
现代文：庄宗正室曰卫国夫人韩氏，其次燕国夫人伊氏，再其次是后，初封魏国夫人。
English: Zhuangzong's lawful wife was said to be Han, the wife of Emperor Wei, followed by Yi, the wife of Emperor Yan, and finally, Hou, the first wife of Emperor Wei.

古文：后父刘叟，黄须，善医卜，自号刘山人。
现代文：后父刘叟，黄须，善医卜，自号刘山人。
English: His late father, Liu Xuan, was a yellow beard, a good healer, and called himself Liu Shanren.

古文：后生五六岁，晋王攻魏，掠成安，裨将袁建丰得后，纳之晋宫，贞简太后教以吹笙歌舞。
现代文：后五六岁时，晋王攻魏，掠成安，裨将袁建丰得后，送到晋宫里，贞简太后教她吹笙歌舞。
English: When the latter was five or six years old, the Jin king attacked Wei, captured Cheng'an, and sent Yuan Jianfeng to the Jin palace. Empress Dowager Zhengjian taught her to play music and dance.

古文：既笄，甚有色，庄宗见而悦之。
现代文：长大后非常美丽，庄宗很喜欢她。
English: She grew up to be very beautiful, and Zhuangzong liked her very much.

古文：庄宗已为晋王，太后幸其宫，置酒为寿，自起歌舞，太后欢甚，命刘氏吹笙佐酒，酒罢去，留刘氏以赐庄宗。
现代文：庄宗继晋王位，太后到他宫里，置酒为寿，自己歌舞，太后很欢喜，叫刘氏吹笙助酒，宴罢，把刘氏赐给庄宗。
English: Zhuangzong succeeded to the throne of Jin. The empress dowager came to his palace, celebrated his birthday with wine, sang and danced herself. The empress dowager was very happy, asked Liu to serve the wine, held a banquet, and gave Liu to Zhuangzong.

古文：先时，庄宗攻梁军于夹城，得符道昭妻侯氏，宠专诸宫，宫中谓之 夹寨夫人 。
现代文：以前，庄宗在夹城攻梁军，得符道昭妻子侯氏，宠专后宫，宫中称她 夹寨夫人 。
English: In the past, when Zhuangzong attacked Liang's army in Zhangcheng, he won the favor of Tao Zhao's wife Hou, who was the favorite of the imperial court. The court called her "Zhangzhai Madam."

古文：庄宗出兵四方，常以侯氏从军。
现代文：庄宗出兵四方，常叫侯氏相随。
English: Zhuangzong sent troops to four directions, often calling the Hou clan to follow.

古文：其后，刘氏生子继岌，庄宗以为类己，爱之，由是刘氏宠益专，自下魏博、战河上十余年，独以刘氏从。
现代文：后来，刘氏生子继岌，庄宗以为像自己，很爱他，从此刘氏专宠，自从攻下魏博，河上交战十多年，只叫刘氏随军。
English: Later, Liu's son succeeded him, Zhuang Zong thought that he was like himself and loved him very much. Since then, Liu's favorite, since the capture of Weibo, has been fighting on the river for more than ten years, only Liu is called to follow the army.

古文：刘氏多智，善迎意承旨，其他嫔御莫得进见。
现代文：刘氏多智谋，善迎意承旨，其他嫔妃得不到机会进见。
English: Ms. Liu is more resourceful and good at carrying out the will, while other concubines do not have the opportunity to advance.

古文：其父闻刘氏已贵，诣魏宫上谒。
现代文：后父听说刘氏已贵，到魏宫求见。
English: When his father-in-law heard that Mr. Liu had become rich, he went to the Wei Palace to see him.

古文：庄宗召袁建丰问之，建丰曰： 臣始得刘氏于成安北坞，时有黄须丈人护之。 
现代文：庄宗召袁建丰来问，建丰说： 臣起初得刘氏是在成安北坞，那时有个黄须老人保护她。 
English: Zhuang Zong called Yuan Jianfeng to inquire. Jianfeng said: At first, the minister learned that Ms. Liu was in Cheng'an North Dock. At that time, there was a yellow-bearded old man to protect her.

古文：乃出刘叟示建丰，建丰曰： 是也。 
现代文：庄宗叫刘叟与建丰见面，建丰说 ：是他。 
English: Zhuang Zong asked Liu Wei to meet with Jianfeng, and Jianfeng said, "It's him."

古文：然刘氏方与诸夫人争宠，以门望相高，因大怒曰： 妾去乡时，略可记忆，妾父不幸死于乱兵，妾时环尸恸哭而去。
现代文：然而刘氏正在和各位夫人争宠，以门第比高低，因此大怒说 ：我离开家乡时，略有记忆，我父亲不幸死于乱军之中，我当时环绕尸首痛哭而去。
English: However, Mr. Liu is competing with the ladies for their favor, competing with each other, so he said angrily: When I left my hometown, I have a slight memory, my father unfortunately died in the rebel army, I was crying around the corpse and left.

古文：此田舍翁安得至此！ 
现代文：这个田舍翁怎么到这里来！ 
English: How did this farmer get here?

古文：因命笞刘叟于宫门。
现代文：下令在宫门鞭打刘叟。
English: Liu Yao was ordered to be whipped at the palace gate.

古文：庄宗已即皇帝位，欲立刘氏为皇后，而韩夫人正室也，伊夫人位次在刘氏上，以故难其事而未发。
现代文：庄宗即位，想立刘氏为皇后，然而韩夫人是正室，伊夫人位次在刘氏之上，所以觉得很难办。
English: Zhuangzong ascended to the throne and wanted to make Liu the empress. However, Mrs. Han was the legal wife, and Mrs. Yi was ranked higher than Liu, so he found it difficult to do.

古文：宰相豆卢革、枢密使郭崇韬希旨，上章言刘氏当立，庄宗大悦。
现代文：宰相豆卢革、枢密使郭崇韬知道庄宗的心意，上奏章说刘氏当立，庄宗大喜。
English: Zhu Ruge, the prime minister, and Guo Chongya, the confidential envoy, knew Zhuangzong's intention. The inscribed chapter said that the Liu clan should stand up, and Zhuangzong was overjoyed.

古文：同光二年四月已卯，皇帝御文明殿，遣使册刘氏为皇后。
现代文：同光二年四月，皇帝在文明殿遣使册封刘氏为皇后。
English: In April of the same year, the emperor sent an envoy to the Hall of Civilization to crown Liu as empress.

古文：皇后受册，乘重翟车，卤簿、鼓吹，见于太庙。
现代文：皇后受册封，乘雉羽装饰的彩车，卤簿、鼓吹，祭告太庙。
English: The empress was canonized, and she was heralded to the Imperial Temple on a floats decorated with egrets' feathers, a halo book, and trumpets.

古文：韩夫人等皆不平之，乃封韩氏为淑妃，伊氏为德妃。
现代文：韩夫人等都愤愤不平，才封韩氏为淑妃，伊氏为德妃。
English: Mrs. Han and others were indignant, and it was only then that Mr. Han was given the title of concubine, and Ms. Yi was given the title of consort.

古文：庄宗自灭梁，志意骄怠，宦官、伶人乱政，后特用事于中。
现代文：庄宗自从灭梁以后，日益骄傲怠惰，宦官、艺人乱政，刘后特别专权于内。
English: After Zhuangzong killed Liang, he became more and more proud and lazy. Eunuchs and entertainers disrupted the government, and Empress Liu was given special powers.

古文：自以出于贱微，逾次得立，以为佛力。
现代文：自以为出身贫贱，起次而立，认为是佛的力量。
English: He believed that he was born poor and rose from humble beginnings, believing that he had the power of a Buddha.

古文：又好聚敛，分遣人为商贾，至于市肆之间，薪刍果茹，皆称中宫所卖。
现代文：喜欢聚敛，分派人当商贾，在街市叫卖，柴草果品，都说是中宫卖的。
English: They like to gather, assign people to be merchants, sell at the street market, and sell firewood and fruits, all of which are said to be sold by the Middle Palace.

古文：四方贡献，必分为二，一以上天子，一以入中宫，宫中货贿山积。
现代文：四方贡献，必须分为两份，一上天子，一入中宫，宫中贿赂的货物堆积如山。
English: The contribution of the four parties must be divided into two parts, one for the emperor and one for the imperial court. The bribe goods piled up like a mountain in the imperial court.

古文：惟写佛书，馈赂僧尼，而庄宗由此亦佞佛。
现代文：只写佛书和赏赐贿赂僧尼，而庄宗也因此盲目地提倡佛教。
English: He only wrote Buddhist books and rewarded and bribed monks and nuns, and so Zhuangzong blindly advocated Buddhism.

古文：有胡僧自于阗来，庄宗率皇后及诸子迎拜之。
现代文：有个胡僧从于田来，庄宗率皇后及诸子迎拜。
English: A male monk came from Yu Tian, and Zhuang Zong led the empress and her sons to pay homage.

古文：僧游五台山，遣中使供顿，所至倾动城邑。
现代文：僧游五台山，派使者沿路供应，所到之处轰动城镇。
English: The monk toured Mount Wutai, sent emissaries along the way to provide supplies, and made a splash in the town wherever he went.

古文：又有僧诚惠，自言能降龙。
现代文：有个和尚叫诚惠，自称能降龙。
English: There is a monk named Cheng Hui, who claims to be able to bring down dragons.

古文：尝过镇州，王镕不为之礼，诚惠怒曰： 吾有毒龙五百，当遣一龙揭片石，常山之人，皆鱼鳖也。 
现代文：经过镇州，王钅容不肯以礼迎送，诚惠大怒说： 我有毒龙五百，当派一龙揭片石，常山的人都成鱼鳖了。 
English: After passing through Zhenzhou, Wang Qirong refused to greet him with courtesy, and Cheng Hui said angrily: I have poisoned five hundred dragons, when I send one dragon to uncover the stone, the people of Changshan have become fish bait.

古文：会明年滹沱河大水，坏镇州关城，人皆以为神。
现代文：次年滹沱河长大水，冲坏镇州城，人们都认为他是神。
English: The following year, when the water in the Minhe River rose to the level of the sea, people thought that he was a god.

古文：庄宗及后率诸子、诸妃拜之，诚惠端坐不起，由是士无贵贱皆拜之，独郭崇韬不拜也。
现代文：庄宗及后率诸子、诸妃都拜迎，诚惠端坐不起，从此士无贵贱都拜他，只有郭崇韬不拜。
English: Zhuangzong and his descendants, sons and concubines, all bowed down to him. Zhengyu could not sit down. From then on, nobles and commoners alike bowed down to him. Only Guo Chongzhen did not bow down.

古文：是时，皇太后及皇后交通籓镇，太后称 诰令 ，皇后称 教命 ，两宫使者旁午于道。
现代文：那时，皇太后及皇后交通藩镇，太后称 诰令 ，皇后称 教命 ，两宫使者来往于道。
English: At that time, the empress dowager and the empress Kotsu Domain Town, the empress dowager called the imperial edict, the empress called the imperial edict, and the emissaries of the two palaces came and went in the road.

古文：许州节度使温韬以后佞佛，因请以私第为佛寺，为后荐福。
现代文：许州节度使温韬因为后信佛，就请求用自己的私第当佛寺，为皇后祝福。
English: At the festival in Huzhou, because she had come to believe in Buddhism, she asked to use her private quarters as a Buddhist temple to bless the empress.

古文：庄宗数幸郭崇韬、元行钦等私第，常与后俱。其後幸张全义第，酒酣，命后拜全义为养父。
现代文：庄宗常常和皇后一起到郭崇韬、元行钦家里，后来到张全义家里，酒喝得正高兴时，叫皇后拜全义为养父。
English: Zhuangzong often went with the empress to the homes of Guo Chongtao and Yuan Xingqin, and later to the home of Zhang Quanyi. When he was happy drinking wine, he asked the empress to adopt Bai Quanyi as his foster father.

古文：全义日遣姬妾出入中宫，问遗不绝。庄宗有爱姬，甚有色而生子，后心患之。
现代文：全义派姬妾入宫不断进奉物品。庄宗有个爱姬，长得很美而且生了个儿子，皇后很忧虑。
English: Zeng Yi sent his concubine, Ai Ji, to the palace and constantly gave her gifts. Zhuang Zong had an Ai Ji, who was very beautiful and gave birth to a son. The queen was very worried.

古文：庄宗燕居宫中，元行钦侍侧，庄宗问曰： 尔新丧妇，其复娶乎？
现代文：庄宗在宫中休息，元行钦在旁侍奉，庄宗说： 你才死了妻子，还想不想再娶？
English: Zhuangzong was resting in the palace, Yuan Xingqin was serving at his side. Zhuangzong said: You just lost your wife, do you still want to remarry?

古文：吾助尔聘。 
现代文：我帮你找一个。 
English: Let me help you find one.

古文：后指爱姬请曰： 帝怜行钦，何不赐之？ 
现代文：皇后指着爱姬请求说： 皇帝怜惜元钦，为啥不把姬赐给他？ 
English: Pointing to Aiki, the empress pleaded, "The emperor pities Yuan Qin, so why not give Aiki to him?

古文：庄宗不得已，阳诺之。
现代文：庄宗不得已，假装同意。
English: As a last resort, Zhuo Zong pretended to agree.

古文：后趣行钦拜谢，行钦再拜，起顾爱姬，肩舆已出宫矣。
现代文：皇后催行钦拜谢，行钦再拜，起来看见爱姬已坐轿出宫了。
English: The queen urged her to bow, bow, bow again, and got up to see that Aiki had left the palace in a carriage.

古文：庄宗不乐，称疾不食者累日。
现代文：庄宗不高兴，好几天称病不吃饭。
English: Zhuangzong was not happy, claiming to be ill and not eating for several days.

古文：同光三年秋大水，两河之民，流徙道路，京师赋调不充，六军之士，往往殍踣，乃预借明年夏、秋租税，百姓愁苦，号泣于路，庄宗方与后荒于畋游。
现代文：同光三年秋，涨大水，两河民众到处流亡，京城赋税收不起来，六军将士往往饿得昏倒死亡，就向百姓借征明年夏秋租税，百姓号哭于路，庄宗和皇后却每天打猎巡游。
English: At the same time, in the autumn of the third year, the floodwaters rose, the people of the two rivers fled everywhere, the tax revenue of the capital could not rise, the soldiers of the Six Armies often fainted and died of hunger, so they borrowed the next summer and autumn tax from the people, the people cried on the road, but Zhuangzong and the queen went hunting every day.

古文：十二月己卯腊，畋于白沙，后率皇子、后宫毕从，历伊阙，宿龛涧，癸未乃还。
现代文：十二月六日，到白沙打猎，后率皇子、后宫跟随，经过伊阙，宿于龛涧，二十四日才回京。
English: On December 6, he went hunting in Baisha, followed by the prince and his harem. He passed through Ili and stayed in Yunnan before returning to Beijing on the 24th.

古文：是时大雪，军士寒冻，金枪卫兵万骑，所至责民供给，坏什器，彻庐舍而焚之，县吏畏惧，亡窜山谷。
现代文：当时天下大雪，将士寒冷，金枪卫万骑，每到一处要发供给，毁器具，拆房烧屋，县吏害怕逃到山里。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, the soldiers were cold, and the soldiers had to go everywhere to distribute supplies, destroy equipment, demolish houses, and burn houses. The county officials were afraid to flee to the mountains.

古文：明年三月，客星犯天库，有星流于天棓。
现代文：次年三月，客星犯天库，有星流于天蒬。
English: In March of the following year, a guest star trespassed into the vault of heaven, and there was a stream of stars in the heavens.

古文：占星者言： 御前当有急兵，宜散积聚以禳之。 
现代文：占星者说： 御前有乱兵，应该散仓库钱财来消灾。 
English: The astrologer said, "There is a riot in front of the emperor. He should scatter money and wealth to eliminate the disaster."

古文：宰相请出库物以给军，庄宗许之，后不肯，曰： 吾夫妇得天下，虽因武功，盖亦有天命。
现代文：宰相要求拿出库房财物供应军队，庄宗同意，皇后不肯，说： 我夫妻得天下，虽然因为武功，也是由于天命。
English: Zhuangzong agreed, but the empress refused, saying: My husband and I won the world, although it was because of martial arts, it was also due to fate.

古文：命既在天，人如我何！ 
现代文：命既然在天，别人又能对我们怎样？ 
English: Since our life is in heaven, what can others do to us?

古文：宰相论于延英，后于屏间耳属之，因取妆奁及皇幼子满喜置帝前曰： 诸侯所贡，给赐已尽，宫中所有惟此耳，请鬻以给军！ 
现代文：宰相在延英殿讨论，皇后在屏风后听见了，就取出妆奁和幼子满喜放在皇帝面前说： 诸侯进贡的东西，已经赏赐光了，宫中只有这些了，请拿去供应军需！ 
English: The prime minister discussed the matter in Yan Ying's palace. The empress heard about it from behind the screen, and she took out her makeup case and her young son, Manki, and placed them in front of the emperor, saying, "The things that the lords brought as tribute have already been given away. This is all that is left in the palace. Please take them to supply the army!

古文：宰相惶恐而退。
现代文：宰相吓得走了。
English: The chancellor ran away in fright.

古文：及赵在礼作乱，出兵讨魏，始出物以赍军，军士负而诟曰： 吾妻子已饥死，得此何为！ 
现代文：到赵在礼作乱出兵讨伐时，才拿出财物赏军，军士边拿边骂说 ：我妻子已经饿死，拿这些有什么用呢？ 
English: It wasn't until Zhao sent troops to fight in the Reishu Disturbance that he took out his belongings to reward the troops. The sergeant scolded him as he took them, saying, "My wife has already starved to death, what's the use of taking these?"

古文：庄宗东幸汴州，从驾兵二万五千，及至万胜，不得进而还，军士离散，所亡太半。
现代文：庄宗往汴州，从驾兵二万五千，到万胜镇，不得进而退回，军士逃散了一大半。
English: Zhuang Zong went to Zhangzhou, from driving twenty-five thousand soldiers to Wansheng Town, and was not allowed to return, and most of the sergeants fled.

古文：至罂子谷，道路隘狭，庄宗见从官执兵仗者，皆以好言劳之曰： 适报魏王平蜀，得蜀金银五十万，当悉给尔等。 
现代文：至罂子谷，道路狭窄，庄宗见到从官拿着武器的，都用好话慰劳，说 ：刚才接战报说魏王已平蜀，得蜀金银五十万，准备完全赏给你们。 
English: When they arrived at Lazy Valley, the road was narrow. When Zhuangzong saw the officers with their weapons, they all consoled him with kind words, saying, "Just now, we received a battle report saying that the Wei King has conquered Shu, and he has gained 500 thousand Shu in gold and silver, and he is ready to reward you completely."

古文：对曰： 陛下与之太晚，得者亦不感恩。 
现代文：士兵回答说 ：陛下赏赐太晚，得者也不感恩。 
English: The soldier replied: Your Majesty's reward is too late, and the recipient is not grateful.

古文：庄宗泣下，因顾内库使张容哥索袍带以赐之，容哥对曰： 尽矣。 
现代文：庄宗流泪，就向内库使张容哥要袍带来赏赐，容哥回答说 ：已没有了。 
English: Zhuang Zong shed tears and asked Zhang Rongge to bring the robe to the inner treasury as a reward. Zhang Rongge replied, "It's gone."

古文：军士叱容哥曰： 致吾君至此，皆由尔辈！ 
现代文：军士斥骂容哥说 ：害得皇帝到这个地步，都是你们造成的！ 
English: The sergeant scolded him, saying, "You are the ones who have brought the emperor to this point!

古文：因抽刀逐之，左右救之而免。
现代文：说着抽出刀来驱赶他，左右救护得免。
English: He said he drew his knife to drive him away and had to be rescued.

古文：容哥曰： 皇后惜物，不以给军，而归罪于我。
现代文：容哥说 ：皇后惜物，不肯赏赐士兵，却归罪于我。
English: Yongge said, "The queen was stingy and refused to reward the soldiers, but she blamed me.

古文：事若不测，吾身万段矣！ 
现代文：若有不测之事，我身首万段啊！ 
English: If something unexpected happens, my head will explode!

古文：乃投水而死。
现代文：就投水而死。
English: He died from the water.

古文：郭从谦反，庄宗中流矢，伤甚，卧绛霄殿廓下，渴欲得饮，后令宦官进飧酪，不自省视。
现代文：郭从谦反叛，庄宗中流箭，伤重卧在绛霄殿廊下，渴得想喝水，后叫宦官送奶酪，不亲自看望。
English: Guo Zongqian rebelled, Zhuangzong middle stream arrow, lying heavily injured in the hallway of the palace, thirsty for water, and then asked the eunuch to send cheese, not to visit in person.

古文：庄宗崩，后与李存渥等焚嘉庆殿，拥百骑出师子门。
现代文：庄宗死，皇后与李存渥等人焚嘉陵殿，率百骑从师子门出逃。
English: After the death of Zhuangzong, the empress and Li Cunwu and others burned the Jia Ling Hall and led the hundred horsemen to flee from the Shizi Gate.

古文：后于马上以囊盛金器宝带，欲于太原造寺为尼。
现代文：后在马上用皮袋装金器宝带，想在太原建寺当尼姑。
English: After that, she immediately used a leather bag to make a gold treasure belt and wanted to build a temple in Taiyuan to become a nun.

古文：在道与存渥奸，及至太原，乃削发为尼。
现代文：在路上与存渥通奸，到太原就削发为尼姑。
English: She committed adultery with Cunwo on the way and became a nun in Taiyuan.

古文：明宗入立，遣人赐后死。
现代文：明宗即帝位，派人赐皇后死。
English: Emperor Mingzong sent someone to have the empress put to death.

古文：晋天福五年，追谥曰神闵敬皇后。
现代文：晋天福五年，追谥曰神闵敬皇后。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, it was said that the Emperor Jintian paid tribute to the Empress.

古文：明宗立，悉放庄宗时宫人还其家，独夏氏无所归，乃以河阳节度使夏鲁奇同姓也，因以归之，后嫁契丹突欲李赞华。
现代文：自从唐末天下大乱，后妃之制也乱，到庄宗时，后宫之数特别多，有昭容、昭仪、昭媛、出使、御正、侍真、懿才、咸一、瑶芳、懿德、宣一等，其余名号，不可胜记。庄宗遇弑，后宫走散，朱守殷不敢留。明宗即帝位，把庄宗时的宫女全部放回家，只有夏氏无处去，因与河阳节度使夏鲁奇同姓而送归，后嫁契丹突欲李赞华。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, and the system of empresses was also in disarray. When Zhuangzong came to power, there were a particularly large number of harems, including Zhaorong, Zhaoyi, Zhaoyuan, Envoy, Grand Empress, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Ham I, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager,

古文：赞华性酷毒，喜杀人，婢妾微过，常加刲灼。
现代文：赞华性格残酷狠毒，喜欢杀人，婢妾有小过失，常加割、烧之刑。
English: Zhanhua's character was cruel and vengeful, he liked to kill people, his concubines committed minor offenses, and he often punished them with flogging and burning.

古文：夏氏惧，求离婚，及削发为尼以卒。
现代文：夏氏害怕，要求离婚，削发当尼姑而死。
English: Mr. Xia was afraid, asked for a divorce, lost his hair and died as a nun.

古文：而韩淑妃、伊德妃皆居太原，晋高祖反时，为契丹所虏。
现代文：韩淑妃、伊德妃都住在太原，晋高祖反时，被契丹虏去。
English: Both Han Suk Hee and Ite Hee lived in Taiyuan, and were taken captive by Khitan when they went against the Emperor's wishes.

古文：○太祖四弟唐自硃邪得姓而为李氏，得国而为晋，得天下而为唐。
现代文：后唐自从朱邪得姓李，得国为晋，得天下为唐。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, since Zhu Xi was given the surname Li, the country became Jin, and the world became Tang.

古文：其始出于夷狄，而终以乱亡，故其世次不可详见。
现代文：开始出于少数民族，终于乱亡，所以世系不可能详知。
English: They started out as an ethnic minority and eventually died out, so it is impossible to know their lineage in detail.

古文：其可见者，曰太祖四弟、八子、五孙，三世而绝。
现代文：可知的是：太祖四弟、八子、五孙，三世而绝。
English: What can be known is that the great-grandfather had four brothers, eight sons and five grandchildren, and died in the third generation.

古文：克宁，为人仁孝，居诸兄弟中最贤，事太祖小心不懈。
现代文：太祖四弟曰：克让、克、克恭、克宁，都不知他们父母的名号。克宁，为人仁孝，是各兄弟中最贤良的，侍奉太祖小心谨慎从不懈怠。
English: The fourth brother of the great-grandfather said, "Kejang, K, Kgyong, and Kening, do not know the names of their parents. Kening, who is kind and filial, is the most virtuous of all the brothers. He serves his great-grandfather carefully and never slacks.

古文：太祖与赫连鐸、李可举战云、蔚间，后奔达靼，入破黄巢，克宁未尝不从行。
现代文：太祖与赫连铎、李可举在云、蔚间交战，后来逃到鞑靼，帮助唐击破黄巢军，克宁都随行。
English: The great-grandfather fought with Hereng Yao and Li Keqiu in Yun and Wei, and later fled to Tartary to help Tang defeat the Yellow Nest Army, accompanied by Kening.

古文：太祖镇太原，以为内外制置蕃汉都知兵马使，检校太保、振武军节度使，军中之事，无大小皆决克宁。
现代文：太祖镇守太原，用他当内外制置蕃汉都知兵马使、检校太保、振武军节度使，军中的事，不论大小都由克宁决定。
English: Taizu was the commander of Taiyuan, and he used it to set up the Han-Duch Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the Inspection of Schools, and the Zhenwu Army Festival, and the military affairs, no matter how big or small, were decided by Kening.

古文：太祖病，召庄宗侍侧，属张承业与克宁曰： 以亚子属公等。 
现代文：太祖病危，召庄宗侍侧，对张承业和克宁说 ：把亚子交给你们了。 
English: The great-grandfather was critically ill, summoned Zhuang Zong's attendants, and said to Zhang Chengye and Kening: I have handed over Yazi to you.

古文：太祖崩，庄宗告于克宁曰： 兒年孤稚，未通庶政，虽有先王之命，恐不足以当大事。
现代文：太祖死，庄宗告诉克宁说： 儿年幼孤独，不懂国政，虽然有先王的命令，恐怕担当不了大任。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Zhuangzong told Kening: My son is young and lonely, and does not understand state affairs. Although there is an order from the former king, I'm afraid I can't take on a big job.

古文：叔父勋德俱高，先王尝任以政矣，敢以军府烦季父，以待兒之有立。 
现代文：叔父勋德都高，先王曾经把大政交给你管，我想军府麻烦叔父管，等儿年长再说。 
English: My uncle's virtues are high. The former king once entrusted the great political power to you. I think the military government will trouble my uncle. Let's wait until I'm older.

古文：克宁曰： 吾兄之命，以兒属我，谁敢易之！ 
现代文：克宁说： 我兄长的命令，把儿托付我，谁敢换人？ 
English: Knin said: On my brother's orders, entrust my son to me. Who would dare to replace him?

古文：因下而北面再拜称贺，庄宗乃即晋王位。
现代文：马上走下去北面再拜称贺，庄宗才即晋王位。
English: Zhuang Zongcai ascended to the throne after he immediately went to the north to offer his congratulations.

古文：初，太祖起于云、朔之间，所得骁勇之士，多养以为子，而与英豪战争，卒就霸业，诸养子之功为多，故尤宠爱之，衣服礼秩如嫡。
现代文：以前，太祖在云、朔起兵，所得骁勇之士，多收为养子，在与天下英雄豪杰争战中逐渐成就霸业，养子立功最多，所以尤其宠爱，衣服礼秩和嫡子没什么区别。
English: In the past, the great-great-grandfather raised an army in the Yun and Shuo dynasties, and received many brave men. He adopted more sons, and gradually achieved dominance in the battle with the world's heroes. The adopted son made the most contributions, so he was especially loved. There is no difference between the clothes and the heir.

古文：诸养子麾下皆有精兵，恃功自恣，自先王时常见优假。
现代文：各位养子手下都有精兵，恃功骄傲，自从先王时常常受优待。
English: All of you adopted sons have excellent soldiers under your command, are proud of their achievements, and have often received preferential treatment since the time of the former king.

古文：及新王立，年少，或托疾不朝，或见而不拜。
现代文：到新王即位，年少，有的托病不朝，有的见而不拜。
English: When the new king came to the throne, he was young, and some did not pray for illness, and some did not worship.

古文：养子存颢、存实告克宁曰： 兄亡弟及，古之道也。
现代文：养子存景页、存实告诉克宁说 ：兄终弟及，古之常理。
English: Adopted son Cun Jie told Kuning: "Brother will always be brother, it's an old adage.

古文：以叔拜侄，理岂安乎？
现代文：以叔拜侄，以理能安心吗？
English: Can you feel at ease when you bow to your uncle or nephew?

古文：人生富贵，当自取之。 
现代文：人生富贵，应当自己争取。 
English: Life is precious, you should strive for it yourself.

古文：克宁曰： 吾家三世，父慈子孝，先王土宇，苟有所归，吾复何求也！ 
现代文：克宁说： 我家三代，父慈子孝，先王社稷只要能安排好，我还有什么要求呢？ 
English: Kening said, "In my family, there are three generations, father, son, and son-in-law. As long as I can arrange it well, what else can I ask for?"

古文：克宁妻孟氏素刚悍，存颢等各遣其妻入说孟氏，孟氏数以迫克宁。
现代文：克宁妻孟氏平常刚强骄悍，存颢等人各派妻子去说服孟氏，孟氏多次逼迫克宁。
English: Kening's wife, Meng, was usually strong and proud, and Cunxu and others sent their wives to persuade Meng. Meng repeatedly persecuted Kening.

古文：克宁仁而无断，惑于群言，遂至于祸。
现代文：克宁仁慈缺乏决断，惑于众言，终于受祸。
English: Kindness and gentleness lack resolution, are bewildered by all the talk, and finally suffer misfortune.

古文：都虞候李存质得罪于克宁，克宁杀之，而与张承业，李存璋有隙，又求兼领大同军节度使。
现代文：都虞候李存质得罪克宁被杀，而与张承业、李存璋有矛盾，又要求兼领大同军节度使。
English: Li Cunxu, the mayor of the capital, was killed for offending Kening, and he had a conflict with Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu, and also demanded that he should also lead the Datong Army.

古文：于是幸臣史敬熔见太后，告克宁与存颢谋执王及太后以降梁。
现代文：于是幸臣史敬钅容见太后，告克宁与存颢阴谋执王及太后降梁。
English: As a result, Prince Yukihito met the empress dowager, denounced Kening's conspiracy with Cunxu to become king and the empress dowager to abdicate.

古文：庄宗召承业、存璋告之曰： 季父所为如此，奈何？
现代文：庄宗召承业、存璋告诉他们说： 叔父这样做，怎么办？
English: Zhuangzong summoned Zongye and Cunxu and told them: "Uncle, what should we do?

古文：○庄宗五子庄宗五子、长曰继岌，其次继潼、继嵩、继蟾、继峣。
现代文：于是伏兵于府里，大设宴会，克宁到，被捉住杀掉了。唐庄宗有五子：长曰继岌，其次继潼、继嵩、继蟾、继山尧。
English: As a result, the ambushed soldiers held a grand banquet in the palace, and when Knin arrived, he was caught and killed. Tangzhuang Zong had five sons: the eldest was Jie Du, followed by Jie Xuan, Jie Song, Jie Xuan, and Jie Shan Du.

古文：继岌母曰刘皇后，其四皆不著其母名号。
现代文：继岌母亲是刘皇后，其余都未说明他们母亲的名号。
English: Queen Liu was the next mother, and the rest did not state their mother's name.

古文：庄宗即位，继岌为北都留守，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：庄宗即帝位，继岌当北都留守，判六军诸卫事。
English: Zhuangzong was enthroned as emperor, but he stayed behind in the northern capital and ordered the six armies to guard the capital.

古文：迁检校太尉、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：升检校太尉、同中书门下平章事。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain of the inspection school, and received a letter of commendation from the same school.

古文：豆卢革为相，建言：唐故事，皇子皆为宫使。
现代文：豆卢革当宰相，建议按唐朝惯例，皇子都当宫使。
English: According to the practice of the Tang Dynasty, it is recommended that the prince should be the palace envoy.

古文：因以鄴宫为兴圣宫，以继岌为使。
现代文：就以邺宫为兴圣宫，用继岌为使。
English: He used the Palace of the Grand Dukes as the holy palace, and the use of succession as the means.

古文：同光三年，封魏王。
现代文：同光三年，封魏王。
English: In the same light for three years, he was crowned the king of Wei.

古文：是岁伐蜀，以继岌为西南面行营都统，郭崇韬为都招讨使，工部尚书任圜、翰林学士李愚皆参军事。
现代文：当年伐蜀，用继岌为西南行营都统，郭崇韬为都招讨使，工部尚书任圜、翰林学士李愚都参予军事。
English: In the year of felling Shu, Guo Chongyi was the leader of the southwestern campaign, Guo Chongyi recruited envoys for the capital, and Shang Shushun Renjun of the Ministry of Industry and Li Yu, a scholar of Hanlin, both participated in the military.

古文：九月戊申，将兵六万自凤翔入大散关，军无十日之粮，而所至州镇皆迎降，遂食其粟。
现代文：九月十八日，率兵六万从凤翔入大散关，军无十日之粮，但所到州镇都归降，就地取粮。
English: On September 18th, he led 60,000 soldiers from Fengxiang into the Great Sankuan Pass. The army had no grain for ten days, but all the towns surrendered and took grain on the spot.

古文：至兴州，蜀将程奉琏以五百骑降，因以其兵修阁道，以过唐军。
现代文：到兴州，蜀将程奉琏率五百骑投降，就用他的兵修阁道，让唐军通过。
English: When he arrived in Xingzhou, Shu surrendered to the five hundred horsemen led by Cheng Fengyu, and used his soldiers to repair the pavilion road, allowing the Tang army to pass.

古文：王衍将兵万人屯利州，分其半逆战于三泉，为先锋康延孝所败，衍惧，断吉柏江浮桥，奔归成都。
现代文：王衍率兵万人屯利州，分兵一半在三泉进行抵抗，被先锋康延孝打败，衍害怕了，斩断吉柏江浮桥，逃回成都。
English: Wang Yan led ten thousand soldiers to Tunlizhou, and half of the soldiers resisted in Sanquan. They were defeated by the pioneer Kang Yanxiao. Yan was afraid, cut off the floating bridge of the Jibai River, and fled back to Chengdu.

古文：唐军自文州间道以入。
现代文：唐军从文州小道入川。
English: The Tang army entered the river from the Wenzhou Trail.

古文：十月己酉，继岌至绵州，衍上笺请降。
现代文：十一月二十日，继岌到绵州，衍上表请求投降。
English: On November 20th, after arriving in Mianzhou, Yan sent a request for surrender.

古文：丙辰，入成都。
现代文：十一月二十七日，入成都。
English: On November 27, it entered Chengdu.

古文：王衍乘竹舆至升仙桥，素衣、牵羊，草索系首，肉袒、衔璧、舆榇，群臣衰绖，徒跣以降。
现代文：王衍乘竹轿到升仙桥，穿白衣，牵羊，草绳系在脖子上，一只胳臂露在外面，用嘴含着玉璧，用车载着棺材，群臣穿孝服，光着脚来投降。
English: Wang Yan took a bamboo sedan to Shenxian Bridge, wearing a white coat, leading a sheep, a grass rope tied around his neck, one arm exposed, holding a jade bracelet in his mouth, carrying a coffin with a car, the courtiers wore filial piety, barefoot to surrender.

古文：继岌下而取璧，崇韬解缚，焚榇。
现代文：继岌下来取璧，崇韬解开绳子，烧掉棺材。
English: After taking the bricks from the coffin, he untied the rope and burned the coffin.

古文：自出师至降衍，凡七十五日，兵不血刃，自古用兵之易，未有如此。
现代文：从出师到王衍投降，共七十五天，没有打仗，自古以来打仗没有这样容易。
English: From the time the division was dispatched to the time Wang Yan surrendered, there were a total of seventy-five days without war. Since ancient times, war has never been so easy.

古文：然继岌虽为都统，而军政号令一出崇韬。
现代文：然则继岌虽然是都统，但是军政号令都出自崇韬。
English: However, even though it was Tongtong, the military and political orders all came from Chongzhen.

古文：初，庄宗遣宦者供奉官李从袭监中军，高品李廷安、吕知柔为典谒。
现代文：起初，庄宗派宦官供奉官李从袭监中军，高品李廷安、吕知柔为典谒。
English: At first, Zhuangzong sent eunuchs to offer the eunuch Li Conghuan to the Chinese army, and the high-ranking eunuchs Li Ting'an and Lv Zhirou became the eunuchs.

古文：从袭等素恶崇韬，又见崇韬专任军事，益不平之。
现代文：从袭等人平时讨厌郭崇韬，又见郭崇韬专任军事，更加不满。
English: Guo Chongyao is usually disliked by his subordinates, but seeing Guo Chongyao work full-time in the military has made him even more dissatisfied.

古文：及破蜀，蜀之贵臣大将，自王宗弼已下，皆争以蜀宝货，妓乐奉崇韬父子，而魏王所得，匹马、束帛、唾壶、麈柄而已；崇韬日决军事，将吏宾客趋走盈庭，而都统府惟大将晨谒，牙门阗然。
现代文：到破蜀以后，蜀的贵臣大将，从王宗弼以下，都争着用蜀宝货、妓乐奉献给崇韬父子，魏王所得匹马、束帛、唾壶、麈柄而已；崇韬每日决策军事，将吏宾客坐满客庭，然而都统府只有大将早晨去拜见，门庭寂静无人。
English: After the fall of Shu, the great dignitaries of Shu, from Wang Zongya on down, vied with each other to use Shu treasures and prostitutes to offer sacrifices to Chongya and his son. The Wei king received only a horse, a bundle of straw, a spittoon, and a pickaxe handle. Chongya made military decisions every day, and his courtyard was full of dignitaries and guests. However, only the general of the General Headquarters went to pay homage in the morning, and the courtyard was silent.

古文：由是从袭等不胜其愤。
现代文：因此从袭等人非常愤恨。
English: Therefore, the followers were very angry.

古文：已而宗弼率蜀人见继岌，请留崇韬镇蜀，从袭等因言崇韬有异志，劝继岌为备。
现代文：不久宗弼率蜀文武大臣拜见继岌，请求留下郭崇韬镇守蜀，从袭等人因此说郭崇韬有异志，劝继岌做好准备。
English: Soon after, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the State of Shu, led by Zonglu, visited Jide and asked him to leave Guo Chongyi in charge of the town of Shu. As a result, the followers said that Guo Chongyi had different ideas and advised Jide to be prepared.

古文：继岌谓崇韬曰： 陛下倚侍中如衡、华，尊之庙堂之上，期以一天下而制四夷，必不弃元老于蛮夷之地。
现代文：继岌对崇韬说 ：陛下依赖你如同衡山、华山，尊你在庙堂之上，希望一统天下治理四方，必定不会把你放在这偏远蛮夷之地。
English: He said to him, "Your majesty relies on you like Hengshan and Huashan. He respects you above the temple and hopes to rule the world and govern the four directions. He will certainly not put you in this remote and barbaric land."

古文：此事非予敢知也。 
现代文：这件事不是我能决定的。 
English: It's not for me to decide.

古文：庄宗闻崇韬欲留蜀，亦不悦，遣宦者向延嗣趣继岌班师。
现代文：庄宗听说崇韬想留在蜀，也不高兴，派宦官向延嗣催促继岌班师。
English: When Zhuangzong heard that Chongzhen wanted to stay in Shu, he was not happy, and sent an eunuch to urge Yanxi to succeed him.

古文：延嗣至成都，崇韬不出迎，及见，礼益慢，延嗣怒，从袭等因告延嗣崇韬有异志，恐危魏王。
现代文：延嗣到成都，崇韬不出来迎接，见面时礼节非常怠慢，延嗣愤怒，从袭告诉延嗣说崇韬有异志，怕危及魏王。
English: When Yan Zi arrived in Chengdu, Chong Yao could not come out to meet him. When they met, the etiquette was very negligent. Yan Zi was angry and told Yan Zi that Chong Yao had a different ideology, for fear of endangering the Wei King.

古文：延嗣还，具言之。
现代文：延嗣回朝，都告诉了皇帝。
English: When Yan Zi returned to China, he told the emperor everything.

古文：刘皇后涕泣请保全继岌，庄宗遣宦官马彦珪往视崇韬去就。
现代文：刘皇后哭着要求保全继岌，庄宗派宦官马彦皀去看崇韬的打算。
English: Empress Liu cried and asked for the preservation of the succession, and Zhuangzong sent eunuch Ma Yanjun to see the intention of Chongzhen.

古文：是时，两川新定，孟知祥未至，所在盗贼聚山林，崇韬方遣任圜等分出招集，恐后生变，故师未即还。
现代文：那时两川初定，孟知祥还没到任，各处盗贼聚集山林，崇韬正派遣任圜等人分别出去招安，怕以后发生变故，所以大军没有立即回师。
English: At that time, the two rivers had not yet been settled, Meng Zhixiang had not yet arrived at his post, thieves were gathering in the mountains and forests everywhere, and Chongzhen was sending Ren Qi and others to go out separately to seek peace, fearing that there would be a change in the future, so the army did not immediately return to the division.

古文：而彦珪将行，见刘皇后曰： 臣见延嗣言蜀中事势已不可，祸机之作，间不容发，安能三千里往复廪命乎！ 刘皇后以彦珪语告庄宗，庄宗曰： 传言未审，岂可便令果决？ 
现代文：临行时去见刘皇后说 ：臣听延嗣说蜀形势严重，祸乱一触即发，怎能三千里往来报告呢？ 刘皇后把彦皀的话告诉庄宗，庄宗说： 传说的话没有证实，哪能随便做出决断？ 
English: When he was about to leave, he went to see Empress Liu and said, "My vassal heard Enshi say that the situation in Shu was serious and that the calamity was about to break out, so how could he travel 3,000 miles to report it?" Empress Liu told Emperor Zhuangzong about the words of Emperor Yancheng, and Emperor Zhuangzong said, "The words of the legend have not been confirmed, so how can I arbitrarily make a decision?"

古文：皇后不得请，因自为教与继岌，使杀崇韬。
现代文：皇后因为得不到庄宗允许，就自己下令给继岌杀崇韬。
English: Because the empress could not get permission from Zhuangzong, she herself ordered to kill Chongzhen.

古文：明年正月，崇韬留任圜守蜀，以待知祥之至，崇韬期班师有日。
现代文：次年正月，崇韬留任圜守蜀，等待知祥到任，并确定了班师的日期。
English: In the first month of the following year, Chong Qi remained in charge of Shoushu, waiting for Zhi Xiang to take office, and determined the date of the class teacher.

古文：彦珪至蜀，出皇后教示继岌，继岌曰： 今大军将发，未有衅端，岂可作此负心事！ 
现代文：彦皀到蜀，拿出皇后教令给继岌，继岌说： 现在大军将要出发，没有发生事端，怎能做这种没良心的事？ 
English: When Yan Xuan arrived in Shu, he took out the Queen's edict and gave it to Zhuge Liang, who said: "Now the great army is about to set out. If there is no accident, how can you do such an unconscionable thing?"

古文：从袭等泣曰： 今有密敕，王苟不行，使崇韬知之，则吾属无类矣！ 
现代文：从袭等哭着说： 现在有密敕，王不执行，假若崇韬知道了，我们都无法活了！ 
English: From the attack, they cried and said: Now there is a secret plan, the king does not carry it out, if the king knew, we would not be able to live!

古文：继岌曰： 上无诏书，徒以皇后手教，安能杀招讨使？ 
现代文：继岌说： 皇上无诏书，只有皇后手谕，怎么能够杀招讨使？ 
English: He went on to say, "Since the emperor has no imperial edict, but only the queen's handwritten edict, how can he kill the envoy?

古文：从袭等力争，继岌不得已而从之。
现代文：从袭等力争，继岌不得已只得同意了。
English: After struggling with the attack, we had no choice but to agree.

古文：诘旦，从袭以都统命召崇韬，继岌登楼以避之。崇韬入，升阶，继岌从者李环挝碎其首。
现代文：第二天早晨，从袭以都统的命令召崇韬去，继岌到楼上回避，崇韬到府，刚上台阶，继岌的侍从李环用铁木过打碎了崇韬的头。
English: In the morning of the next day, he was summoned to the palace by the order of Emperor Taizu. He went upstairs to avoid the attack. When he arrived at the palace, he just went up the steps. Li Huan, his attendant, smashed his head with an iron bar.

古文：继岌遂班师。
现代文：继岌班师。
English: Following in his father's footsteps.

古文：二月，军至泥溪，先锋康延孝叛，据汉州，继岌遣任圜讨平之。
现代文：二月，大军到泥溪，先锋康延孝叛变，占据汉州，继岌派任圜去讨平。
English: In February, the army arrived at Mud Creek. The vanguard, Kang Yanxiao, mutinied, occupied Hanzhou, and successively sent Ren Yu to settle the score.

古文：四月辛卯，至兴平，闻明宗反，兵入京师，继岌欲退保凤翔。
现代文：四月五日，至兴平，听到明宗造反，大军已到京城的消息，继岌想退守凤翔。
English: On April 5, when Xingping heard the news that Mingzong had rebelled and that a large army had arrived in the capital, he desperately wanted to retreat to Fengxiang.

古文：至武功，李从袭劝继岌驰趋京师，以救内难。
现代文：到武功，李从袭劝继岌驰赴京师以救国难。
English: When it came to martial arts, Li Zongqi advised him to go to Beijing to save the country.

古文：行至渭河，西都留守张抃断浮桥，继岌不得度，乃循河而东，至渭南，左右皆溃。
现代文：走到渭河，西都留守张隔断浮桥，继岌无法渡河，只得沿河东进，到渭南，士兵溃散。
English: When they got to the Min River, the soldiers had to stay in the west to guard the floating bridge that was cut off by Zhang Jie, and then they couldn't cross the river, so they had to go east along the river to the south of Min. The soldiers dispersed.

古文：从袭谓继岌曰： 大事已去，福不可再，王宜自图。 
现代文：从袭对继岌说： 大事已去，好机会不再有，王应该自己想办法。 
English: From one to the next, they said: The important thing is gone, there is no longer a good opportunity, and the king should find his own way.

古文：继岌徘徊泣下，谓李环曰： 吾道尽途穷，子当杀我。 
现代文：继岌徘徊痛哭，对李环说： 我已穷途末路，你应当杀我。 
English: After weeping bitterly, he said to Li Huan: I have come to the end of the road, you should kill me.

古文：环迟疑久之，谓继岌乳母曰： 吾不忍见王，王若无路求生，当踣面以俟。 
现代文：环迟疑了很久，对继岌乳母说 ：我不忍看着王死，王若无路求生，应当面对着地下等着。 
English: Huan hesitated for a long time and said to the nurse: "I can't bear to watch Wang die. If Wang has no way to survive, he should wait facing the ground."

古文：继岌面榻而卧，环缢杀之。
现代文：继岌面榻而卧，环用绳子绞死他。
English: After lying face down, the ring strangled him with a rope.

古文：任圜从后至，葬继岌华州之西南。
现代文：任圜到后，把继岌安葬在华州的西南。
English: After Ren's arrival, he was buried in southwest Washington.

古文：继岌少病阉，无子。
现代文：继岌年少因病而阉，无子。
English: After being crippled by illness at a young age, he had no children.

古文：明宗已即位，圜率征蜀之师二万至京师，明宗抚慰久之，问圜继岌何在，圜具言继岌死状。
现代文：明宗即帝位，任圜率征蜀大军二万人回到京城，明宗再三抚慰他，问继岌在哪里？任圜报告了继岌自杀的详情。
English: Mingzong was the emperor, Ren Hui led the 20,000-strong Shu army back to the capital, Mingzong repeatedly comforted him, and asked, "Where is Ji Ji?" Ren Hui reported the details of Ji Ji's suicide.

古文：同光三年，诏以皇子继嵩、继潼、继蟾、继峣皆为光禄大夫，检校司徒。
现代文：同光三年，诏以皇子继嵩、继潼、继蟾、继山尧都当光禄大夫、检校司徒。
English: In the same year of Guang Guang's reign, Zhao Yi's sons Jishong, Jisheng, Jisheng, and Jisheng were appointed as Guang Lu's doctor and school inspector.

古文：盖其皆幼，故不封。
现代文：因为年龄都小，所以没封。
English: Because of their young age, they have not been sealed.

古文：当庄宗遇弑时，太祖子孙在者十有一人，明宗入立，其四人见杀，其余皆不知所终，太祖之后遂绝。
现代文：当庄宗遇弑时，太祖子孙有十一人，明宗入京时，有四人被杀，其余不知逃到哪里去了，太祖终于绝后。
English: When Zhuangzong was killed, there were eleven of his descendants. When Mingzong entered Beijing, four people were killed. The rest did not know where to go, and the great-grandfather finally died.

