古文：魏尚书郎杨伟表曰： 臣览载籍，断考历数，时以纪农，月以纪事，其所由来，遐而尚矣。
现代文：魏尚书郎杨伟上表说： 我阅览古籍，考察决断历数的作用，季节用来综理农事，月份用来综理人事，它们的由来已久了。
English: Wei Shang Shulang Yang Wei said on the table: I read ancient books, examined the role of determining the calendar, used the season to review agricultural affairs, and used the month to review personnel affairs. They have a long history.

古文：乃自少昊，则玄鸟司分，颛顼、帝喾，则重黎司天；唐帝、虞舜，则羲和掌日，三代因之，则世有日官。
现代文：少昊时，依据燕子归来之类的物候判断分至；颛顼、帝学时，重黎掌管天；唐帝、虞舜时，羲和掌管日，三代时沿袭了这种传统，每个朝代都有日官。
English: In the time of Xiao Hao, it was determined according to phenological judgments such as the return of swallows; in the time of Yao and Tei Xue, Chong Li was in charge of heaven; in the time of Tang Emperor, Yue Xue, Yao and in charge of the day, this tradition was followed in the three generations, and each dynasty had a day official.

古文：日官司历，则颁之诸侯，诸侯受之，则颁于境内。
现代文：曰官掌管历法，把它颁布给诸侯，诸侯得到以后，再在境内颁布。
English: It is said that the officials controlled the calendar, promulgated it to the lords, and after the lords obtained it, they promulgated it within the territory.

古文：夏后之世，羲和湎淫，废时乱日，则《书》载《胤徵》。
现代文：夏后时，羲和沉迷于酒中，使得历法紊乱，《书》把这件事写在《胤征》裹面。
English: After the summer, Zouhe indulged in wine, causing the calendar to be disordered, and "Book" wrote about this in "Seeking Seeds."

古文：由此观之，审农时而重人事，历代然之也。
现代文：由此看来，明悉农时，重视人事，历代都是这样。
English: From this point of view, it is clear that the agricultural age and the emphasis on personnel are the same throughout the ages.

古文：逮至周室既衰，战国横鹜，告朔之羊，废而不绍，登台之礼，灭而不遵，闰分乖次而不识，孟陬失纪而莫悟，大火犹西流，而怪蛰虫之不藏也。
现代文：一直到周室衰落，战国纷起，告朔用的羊，废弃而不继承，登台祭祀天地的礼仪，灭绝而不遵守，闰月设置乖错而不知道，正月安排与时令不符而不悟，大火星犹在西，却以蛰虫不隐藏为怪。
English: All the way up to the decline of the Zhou dynasty, the rise of the Warring States, the sheep for the new year, the abandonment without inheritance, the etiquette of sacrificing heaven and earth on stage, the extinction without observance, the setting of the leap month is wrong and does not know, the arrangement of the first month does not match the season and does not understand, the great Mars is still in the west, but it is strange that the aphids are not hidden.

古文：是时也，天子不协时，司历不书日。诸侯不受职，日御不分朔，人事不恤，废弃农时。
现代文：当时，天子不协调时令，掌管历法的官员不写明日辰的吉凶禁忌，诸侯不尽职，日官连朔日也不推算，人事不恤，废弃农时。
English: At that time, the heavenly sons did not coordinate the seasons, the officials in charge of the calendar did not write the auspicious and taboo of tomorrow's hour, the princes did not perform their duties, the Japanese officials did not calculate even the new year's day, the people were not tolerant, and the agricultural time was abandoned.

古文：仲尼之拨乱于《春秋》，托褒贬纠正，司历失闰，则讥而书之，登台颁朔，则谓之有礼。
现代文：仲尼在《春秋》这部书裹进行拨乱反正，依托褒贬来纠正错误，掌管历法的官员设置闰月不当，则在书中记录以讥讽之，登台颁布朔，则说他有礼。
English: In the book "Spring and Autumn," Zhongni carried out the "dispersion and rectification," relying on praise and criticism to correct mistakes, the official in charge of the calendar set the leap month improperly, then recorded it in the book with ridicule, and when he took the stage to announce the new moon, he said that he was polite.

古文：自此以降，暨于秦汉，乃复以孟冬为岁首，闰为后九月，中节乖错，时月纰缪。加时后天，蚀不在朔，累载相袭，久而不革也。
现代文：从此以后，一直到秦、汉，仍然以孟冬作为一年的开始，闰月为后九月，中气节气错乱，季节、月份错误，修正值落后于实际天象，日食不在朔时发生，多年沿袭，很久都没有改变。
English: From then on, all the way to the Qin and Han dynasties, Mengdong was still used as the beginning of the year, the leap month was the last September, the mid-air solar terms were confused, the seasons and months were wrong, the corrected values lagged behind the actual celestial phenomena, the solar eclipse did not occur at the new moon, and it has been followed for many years and has not changed for a long time.

古文：至武帝元封七年，始乃悟其缪焉，于是改正朔，更历数，使大才通人，更造《太初历》，校中朔所差，以正闰分，课中星得度，以考疏密，以建寅之月为正朔，以黄钟之月为历初。
现代文：到武帝元封七年，才意识到上述错误，于是更改正月所在，改变历法的基本数据，命令有大才的博学之人，造《太初历》，考校中气、朔时的误差，以改正闰分；观测中星得到相应的度数，以考察历法的疏密。以建寅之月作为正月，以黄钟之月作为历法的开始。
English: It was not until the seventh year of Emperor Wu's reign that he realized the above-mentioned error, so he changed the location of the first month, changed the basic data of the calendar, and ordered a talented and knowledgeable person to create the "Taishu Calendar" to correct the errors of the middle and new moon to correct the intercalary points; the corresponding degrees were obtained from the observation of the stars to examine the narrowness of the calendar. The month of Jianyin was used as the first month, and the month of the yellow clock as the beginning of the calendar.

古文：其历斗分太多，后遂疏阔。
现代文：这部历法的斗分太大，后来误差逐渐增大。
English: The scale of this calendar was too large, and later the error gradually increased.

古文：至元和二年，复用《四分历》，施而行之，至于今日，考察日蚀，率常在晦，是则斗分太多，故先密后疏而不可用也。
现代文：到丞和二年，再次行用《四分历》，一直使用到现在，考察日食，经常发生在晦日，这是斗分太多的缘故，所以先精密后来粗疏，现在已不可用。
English: In 1902, the "Quarterly Calendar" was used again, and has been used until now to study solar eclipses, which often occur on the eve of the New Year. This is due to too many points, so first it was precise, then it was rough, and now it is no longer usable.

古文：是以臣前以制典余日，推考天路，稽之前典，验之以蚀朔，详而精之，更建密历，则不先不后，古今中天。
现代文：我先前利用制典的空余时间，推算考察天体的运行，考核以前的典籍，以日食和朔验证，详细精密，建立了更为精密的历法，推算不先不后，与古今天象相符。
English: I had previously used the spare time of the codex, calculated and examined the movement of celestial bodies, assessed the previous classics, verified with eclipses and new moons, detailed and precise, and established a more precise calendar. The calculation is consistent with the ancient and modern times.

古文：以昔在唐帝，协日正时，允厘百工，咸熙庶绩也。
现代文：以前在唐帝时，协调时日，诚信地治理百姓，各种事业都很兴旺。
English: In the past, under the Tang Dynasty, all kinds of undertakings flourished as the emperor coordinated the times and governed the people in good faith.

古文：欲使当今国之典礼，凡百制度，皆韬合往古，郁然备足，乃改正朔，更历数，以大吕之月为岁首，以建子之月为历初。
现代文：想要使当今国家的典礼和各种制度都符合往古，非常完备充足，于是更改正月所在，改变历法的基本数据，以大吕之月作为一年的开始，以建子之月作为历法初始月。
English: In order to make the ceremonies and various systems of today's country consistent with the past and very complete and sufficient, the location of the first month was changed and the basic data of the calendar was changed, with the month of Lu as the beginning of the year and the month of Jianzi as the initial month of the calendar.

古文：臣以为昔在帝代，则法曰《颛顼》，曩自轩辕，则历曰《黄帝》，暨至汉之孝武，革正朔，更历数，改元曰太初，因名《太初历》。
现代文：我认为在颛顼时代，历法称为《颛顼》，在轩辕时代，历法称为《黄帝》，到汉孝远帝改革正朔，变更历法，改元叫作太初，因而其历法命名为《太初历》。
English: I think that in the Qianlong era, the calendar was called "Qianlong," in the Xuanlong era, the calendar was called "Yellow Emperor," and in the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xiaoyuan reformed Zhengshuo, changed the calendar, and changed the yuan to be called Taichung, so his calendar was named "Taichung Calendar."

古文：今改元为景初，宜曰《景初历》。
现代文：现在改元为景初，应该把历法叫作《景初历》。
English: Now that the era has been changed to the beginning of the scene, the calendar should be called the "beginning of the scene calendar."

古文：臣之所建《景初历》，法数则约要，施用则近密，治之则省功，学之则易知。
现代文：我所制定的《景初历》，方法数据简明扼要，施用则接近精密，研究它则节省功效，学习它则容易明白。
English: The method and data of the "New Year's Calendar" I developed are concise and concise, the application is close to precision, the research is efficient, and the learning is easy to understand.

古文：虽复使研桑心算，隶首运筹，重黎司晷，羲和察景，以考天路，步验日月，究极精微，尽术数之极者，皆未能并臣如此之妙也。
现代文：即使再让堑垂心算，蓥直运筹，重墼掌管日晷，盏勉考察日影、天象，推算验证日月的运行，穷究其精妙幽微之处，达到术敷的极限，也不可能像我的历法一样精妙。
English: Even if one were to let the pendulum of the heart calculate, the pendulum of the mind plan, the pendulum of the mind control the sundial, the pendulum of the mind study the sun shadow, the celestial body, the pendulum of the mind verify the movement of the sun and the moon, and the pendulum of the mind study the subtle subtleties of the sun and the moon, and the pendulum of the mind control the movement of the sun and the moon, and the pendulum of the mind control the movement of the mind control the movement of the sun and the moon, and the pendulum of the mind control the movement of the mind control the movement of the mind control the movement of

古文：是以累代历数，皆疏而不密，自黄帝以来，常改革不已。 
现代文：所以历代的历法都粗疏而不精密，自黄帝以来，不停地改变。 
English: Therefore, the calendars of all ages have been crude and imprecise, and have been constantly changing since the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：壬辰以来，至景初元年丁已岁，积四千四十六，算上。
现代文：壬辰元以来，至景初元年丁巳，积四千零四十六年，算上。
English: Since the beginning of the Imjin era, to the beginning of the first year of the Jing era, it has been 4,046 years, and counting.

古文：此元以天正建子黄钟之月为历初，元首之岁，夜半甲子朔旦冬至。
现代文：这个历元以天正建子黄钟之月为历法的初始，每元的第一年，甲子朔日半夜零点冬至。
English: This era is based on the beginning of the calendar, the first year of each era, and the winter solstice at midnight of the first day of the second month.

古文：元法，万一千五十八。
现代文：元法：一万一千零五十八。
English: Actual: 11,058.

古文：纪法，千八百四十三。
现代文：纪法：一千八百四十三。
English: Discipline: One thousand eight hundred and forty-three.

古文：纪月，二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：纪月：二万二千七百九十五。
English: Ji Yue: Twenty-two thousand seven hundred ninety-five.

古文：章岁。十九。
现代文：章岁：十九。
English: Chapter years: nineteen.

古文：章月，二百三十五。
现代文：章月：二百三十五。
English: Chapter Month: Two hundred thirty-five.

古文：章闰，七。
现代文：章闰：七。
English: Chapter: Seven.

古文：通数，十三万四千六百三十。
现代文：通数：十三万四千六百三十。
English: Total: one hundred thirty-four thousand six hundred thirty.

古文：日法，四千五百五十九。
现代文：日法：四千五百五十九。
English: Japan and France: 4559.

古文：余数，九千六百七十。
现代文：余数：九千六百七十。
English: Remaining: 9,670.

古文：周天，六十七万三千一百五十。
现代文：周天：六十七万三千一百五十。
English: Zhou Tian: 673,150.

古文：纪岁中，十二。
现代文：纪岁中：十二。
English: Junior high school: twelve.

古文：气法，十二。
现代文：气法：十二。
English: Gas method: twelve.

古文：没分，六万七千三百一十五。
现代文：没分：六万七千三百一十五。
English: No score: 67,315.

古文：没法，九百六十七。
现代文：没法：九百六十七。
English: No way: nine hundred and sixty-seven.

古文：月周，二万四千六百三十八。
现代文：月周：二万四千六百三十八。
English: Weeks of the month: 24,638.

古文：通法，四十七。
现代文：通法：四十七。
English: Passing: forty-seven.

古文：会通，七十九万百一十。
现代文：会通：七十九万零一百一十。
English: Membership: 7,901,110.

古文：朔望合数，六万七千三百一十五。
现代文：朔望合数：六万七千三百一十五。
English: The total number of confirmed cases now stands at 67,315.

古文：入交限数，七十二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：入交限数：七十二万二千七百九十五。
English: Entry limit: up to 7,222,795.

古文：通周，十二万五千六百二十一。
现代文：通周：十二万五千六百二十一。
English: Weekly: 125,621.

古文：周日日余，二千五百二十八。
现代文：周日日余：二千五百二十八。
English: Sunday and the rest of the day: 2528.

古文：周虚，二千三十一。
现代文：周虚：二千零三十一。
English: Zhou Xiao: The year is 2031.

古文：斗分，四百五十五。
现代文：斗分：四百五十五。
English: Score: four hundred and fifty-five.

古文：甲子纪第一
现代文：甲子纪第一
English: The first in the Koshiki period

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率四十一万二千九百一十九。
现代文：交会差率，四十一万二千九百一十九。
English: The difference at the trade fair was 4,112,919.

古文：迟疾差率，十万三千九百四十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，十万三千九百四十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 103,947.

古文：甲戌纪第二
现代文：甲戌纪第二
English: Ordovician II

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，五十一万六千五百二十九。
现代文：交会差率，五十一万六干五百二十九。
English: The difference in the number of visitors was 5.16 million to 5.29.

古文：迟疾差率，七万三千七百六十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，七万三千七百六十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 73,767.

古文：甲申纪第三
现代文：甲申纪第三
English: Koshinji 3rd

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，六十二万一百三十九。
现代文：交会差率，六十二万零一百三十九。
English: The difference at the trade fair was 6,201,139.

古文：迟疾差率，四万三千五百八十七。
现代文：迟疾差率，四万三千五百八十七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 43,587.

古文：甲午纪第四
现代文：甲午纪第四
English: 4th century BC

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，七十二万三千七百四十九。
现代文：交会差率，七十二万三千七百四十九。
English: The difference in the number of visitors was 7,223,749.

古文：迟疾差率，一万三千四百七。
现代文：迟疾差率，一万三千四百零七。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 13,407.

古文：甲辰纪第五
现代文：甲辰纪第五
English: 5th century of the Jocheng period

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，三万七千二百四十九。
现代文：交会差率，三万七千二百四十九。
English: The total number of visitors to the fair was 37,249.

古文：迟疾差率，十万八千八百四十八。
现代文：迟疾差率，十万八千八百四十八。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 108,848.

古文：甲寅纪第六
现代文：甲寅纪第六
English: 6th century of the Kamakura period

古文：纪首合朔，月在日道里。
现代文：纪的开始合朔，月亮在黄道南。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the moon is at the south of the zodiac.

古文：交会差率，十四万八百五十九。
现代文：交会差率，十四万零八百五十九。
English: The difference at the fair was 140,859.

古文：迟疾差率，七万八千六百六十八。
现代文：迟疾差率，七万八千六百六十八。
English: The delayed diagnosis rate rose to 78,668.

古文：交会纪差十万三千六百一十。
现代文：交会纪差为十万三千六百一十。
English: The discrepancy at the fair was 103,610.

古文：求其数之所生者，置一纪积月，以通数乘之，会通去之，所去之余，纪差之数也。
现代文：这个数据的计算方法是，用一纪的积月二万二千七百九十五，乘以通数十三万四千六百三十，连续减去会通七十九万零一百一十，所得小于会通之数即为交会纪差。
English: The calculation method of this data is to use the accumulation month of a discipline as 22,795, multiply by the number of disciplines as 10,34,630, and continuously subtract the number of disciplines as 7,901,110. If the income is less than the number of disciplines, it is the discipline difference of the fair.

古文：以之转加前纪，则得后纪。
现代文：以交会纪差加上前纪的交会差率，所得为后纪的交会差率。
English: The result of the trade fair difference plus the trade fair difference rate of the previous trade fair is the trade fair difference rate of the next trade fair.

古文：加之未满会通者，则纪首之岁天正合朔月在日道里；满去之，则月在日道表。
现代文：加上交会纪差后所得交会差率如果仍小于会通，则纪首这一年天正合朔时月亮在黄道南；如果大于会通，减之，月亮在黄道北。
English: In addition, if the ratio of the meeting difference to the meeting difference is still less than the meeting difference, the moon will be in the south of the zodiac at the first day of the year; if it is greater than the meeting difference, the moon will be in the north of the zodiac.

古文：加表，满在里；加里，满在表。
现代文：一直累加至大于等于会通，则月亮在黄道南；再一直累加至大于等于会通，则月亮在黄道北。
English: The moon is south of the ecliptic if the sum is greater than or equal to the conjunction; the moon is north of the ecliptic if the sum is greater than or equal to the conjunction.

古文：迟疾纪差三万一百八十。
现代文：迟疾纪差三莴零一百八十。
English: The number of cases of delayed diagnosis and discipline is 3,080.

古文：求其数之所生者，置一纪积月，以通数乘之，通周去之，余以减通周，所减之余，纪差之数也。
现代文：逭个数据的计算方法是，用一纪的积月二万二千七百九十五，乘以通数十三万四千六百三十，连续减去通周十二万五千六百二十一，余下小于通周部分九万五千四百四十一，用通周减之，所得为迟疾纪差。
English: The calculation method of the three data is to use the accrued month of a period to get 22,795, multiply by the common period to get 103,4630, continuously subtract the common period to get 125,621, and the remaining part is less than the common period to get 95,441, and subtract the common period to get the difference of the delayed period.

古文：以之转减前纪，则得后纪。
现代文：以上一纪的迟疾差率减去迟疾纪差，得到后一纪的迟疾差率。
English: By subtracting the delayed diagnosis rate from the delayed diagnosis rate of the previous period, the delayed diagnosis rate of the next period is obtained.

古文：不足减者，加通周。
现代文：如果不足减，则加上通周后再减之。
English: If there is a shortfall, it will be added to the weekly total and then reduced.

古文：求次元纪差率，转减前元甲寅纪差率，余则次元甲子纪差率也。
现代文：求次元的纪差率：用前元甲寅纪的差率减去纪差，所得为次元甲子纪差率。
English: To find the dimensional error rate: subtract the error rate from the pre-element error rate, and the result is the dimensional error rate.

古文：求次纪，如上法也。
现代文：求次纪差率，与前面的方法一样。
English: Find the difference between the second and third terms, the same as the previous method.

古文：推朔积月术曰：置壬辰元以来，尽所求年，外所求，以纪法除之，所得算外，所入纪第也，余则入纪年数也。
现代文：推朔积月方法：以上元壬辰至所求年的积年，减去一，除以纪法一千八百四十三，所得商数算外，得到入纪敷，余数为入纪年数。
English: The method of deducing the accrued months: subtract one from the accrued years from the above-mentioned date to the year sought, divide by one thousand eight hundred and forty-three, the income quotient, and get the accrued years, and the remaining number is the accrued years.

古文：以章月乘之，如章岁而一，为积月，不尽为闰余。
现代文：以章月二百三十五乘以入纪年数，再除以章岁十九，所得商敷为积月，余数为闰余。
English: Take the 235th day of the month of the lunar calendar, multiply it by the number of years of the lunar calendar, and then divide it by the 19th day of the year of the lunar calendar. The result is the number of months of the lunar calendar, and the remaining number is the remainder.

古文：闰余十二以上，其年有闰。
现代文：闰余在十二以上，当年有闰月。
English: There were more than twelve leap days, and there was a leap month that year.

古文：闰月以无中气为正。
现代文：闰月的确定以无中气之月为准。
English: The intercalary month shall be determined based on the moon without a meridian.

古文：推朔术曰：以通数乘积月，为朔积分。
现代文：推朔的方法：以通敷十三万四千六百三十乘以积月，为朔积分。
English: Method of deduction: Take the total sum of 134,630 and multiply it by the number of months to get the new moon integral.

古文：如日法而一，为积日，不尽为小余。
现代文：除以日法四千五百五十九，所得商敷为积曰，余数为小余。
English: Divided by 4,559 yen, the income of the store is the product of the day, and the remaining number is a small surplus.

古文：以六十去积日，余为大余。
现代文：积日连续减去六十，余下不满六十的部分为大余。
English: The accumulated number of days is continuously reduced by sixty, and the remaining part that is less than sixty is a large surplus.

古文：大余命以纪，算外，所求年天正十一月朔日也。
现代文：大余以所在纪干支起算，算外，为所求年天正十一月朔日。
English: Most of them are calculated from the beginning of the year in which they were made, but some are not. The required year is equal to the first day of November.

古文：求次月，加大余二十九，小余二千四百一十九，小余满日法从大余，命如前，次月朔日也。
现代文：求次月朔日：在上月基础上加大余二十九，小余二千四百一十九，如果加后小余满日法四千五百五十九，则化入大余，起算命名的方法舆前面一样，所得为次月朔日。
English: Ask for the new moon day of the next month: on the basis of the previous month, increase the remainder by 29, and the small remainder by 2,419. If the small surplus is added after the full day method of 4,559, it will be converted into a large surplus. The method of starting and naming is the same as before, and the result is the new moon day of the next month.

古文：小余二千一百四十以上，其月大也。
现代文：小余在二千一百四十以上，则当月大。
English: If the monthly surplus is more than 2,140 yuan, it will be the largest in the month.

古文：推弦望，加朔大余七，小余千七百四十四，小分一，小分满二从小余，小余满日法从大余，大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，上弦日也。
现代文：推弦望日：在朔日基础上加大余七，小余一千七百四十四，小分一，小分满二则化入小余，小余满日法四千五百五十九则化入大余，大余满六十则减之，余下不满六十的部分从所在纪干支起算，算外，即上弦日。
English: On the basis of the New Year's Day, increase the remainder by seven, the small remainder by 1,744, the small remainder by one, the small remainder by two becomes the small remainder, the small remainder by the full day method by 4,559 becomes the large remainder, the large remainder by 60 is reduced, and the remaining part that is less than 60 is calculated from the beginning of the current year and excluded, that is, the first day of the month.

古文：又加，得望、下弦、后月朔。
现代文：用同样的方法连加，依次可得望、下弦、后月朔日。
English: Use the same method to add together, and you can get the beginning, the end, and the day after the new moon.

古文：其月蚀望者，定小余如在中节者定小余如所近中节间限数、限数以下者，算上为日。
现代文：如果望时有月食，且定小余在中节者则舆之最近的中气或节气的间限、限数以下，则算上以确定其所在日。
English: If there is a lunar eclipse at the time of observation, and if the fixed small remainder is in the middle of the season, it is below the limit or limit of the nearest mid-air or solar terms, then it is calculated to determine its day.

古文：望在中节前后各四日以还者，视限数；望在中节前后各五日以上者，视间限。
现代文：望在中气或节气前后四天以内，看限数而定，望在中气或节气前后五天以上，看间限而定。
English: Within four days before and after the mid-air or solar terms, depending on the limit, and more than five days before and after the mid-air or solar terms, depending on the limit.

古文：推二十四气术曰：置所入纪年，外所求，以余数乘之，满纪法为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：推二十四中气、节气的方法：以入纪年减去一，乘以余数九千六百七十，除以纪法一千八百四十三，所得商数为大余，余数为小余。
English: To calculate the 24 meridians and solar terms, subtract 1 from the year of the zodiac, multiply the remainder by 9,670 and divide by 1,843. The resulting quotient is a large remainder and the remainder is a small remainder.

古文：大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，天正十一月冬至日也。
现代文：大余满六十则减之，余下不满六十部分从所在纪干支起算，算外，即得天正十一月冬至日。
English: If more than sixty, the remainder is subtracted, and the remaining less than sixty parts are counted from the beginning of the current year, and are not counted, that is, it is the winter solstice day in November.

古文：求次气，加大余十五，小余四百二，小分十一，小分满气法从小余，小余满纪法从大余，命如前，次气日也。
现代文：求次气：在上一气的基础上加大余十五，小余四百零二，小分十一，如果小分满气法十二则化入小余，小余满纪法则化入大余，起算命名的方法与前面一样，所得为次气日。
English: Asking for the next qi: on the basis of the previous qi, increase the remainder by fifteen, the small remainder by four hundred and two, the small fraction by eleven, if the small fraction is full of gas, the twelve will turn into a small remainder, the small remainder by the Manchu law will turn into a large remainder, the method of starting calculation and naming is the same as before, and the result is the next qi day.

古文：推闰月术曰：以闰余减章岁，余以岁中乘之，满章闰得一月，余满半法以上，亦得一月。
现代文：推闰月的方法：以章岁十九减去闰余，乘以岁中十二，乘积满章闰七得一月；剩下不满章闰部分如果在三点五以上，也得一月。
English: The method for calculating the leap month is as follows: subtract the remainder of the leap month from the age of nineteen, multiply by the age of twelve, and multiply by the number of completed leap months to get one month; if the remaining unsatisfied leap month part is more than three and a half, it will also be one month.

古文：数从天正十一月起，算外，闰月也。
现代文：这样所得的月敷从天正十一月起算，算外，得到闰月。
English: The monthly allowance obtained in this way is counted from Tensho November onwards, and is not counted, resulting in a leap month.

古文：闰有进退，以无中气御之。
现代文：如果闰月设置有出入，以有无中气作为判据。
English: If there is a discrepancy in the setting of the leap month, use the presence or absence of the mid-air as a criterion.

古文：大雪十一月节限数千二百四十二间限千二百四十八
现代文：大雪十一月节限数千二百四十二间限千二百四十八
English: November snowfall: 2,242 snowfall days, up 1,248

古文：冬至十一月中限数千二百五十四间限千二百四十五
现代文：冬至十一月中限数千二百五十四间限千二百四十五
English: Mid-winter to mid-November: From mid-winter to mid-November: From mid-winter to mid-November:

古文：小寒十二月节限数千二百三十五间限千二百二十四
现代文：小寒十二月节限数千二百三十五间限千二百二十四
English: Small cold December Festival limit thousand two hundred and thirty-five limit thousand two hundred and twenty-four

古文：大寒十二月中限数千二百一十三间限千一百九十二
现代文：大寒十二月中限数千二百一十三间限千一百九十二
English: The number of deaths in the coldest month of December has risen from 1,213 to 1,192.

古文：立春正月节限数千一百七十二间限千一百四十七
现代文：立春正月节限数千一百七十二间限千一百四十七
English: The Spring Festival of the first month of the year has a limit of one thousand one hundred seventy-two and a limit of one thousand one hundred forty-seven.

古文：雨水正月中限数千一百二十二间限千九十三
现代文：雨水正月中限数千一百二十二间限千九十三
English: Rainfall in the first half of the month is limited to one thousand one hundred and twenty-two thousand ninety-three

古文：惊蛰二月节限数千六十五间限千三十六
现代文：惊蛰二月节限数千六十五间限千三十六
English: February Festival: 65,000 tickets sold, up from 136,000

古文：春分二月中限数千八间限九百七十九
现代文：春分二月中限数千八间限九百七十九
English: Spring equinox February mid-limit thousands eight interval limit nine hundred seventy-nine

古文：清明三月节限数九百五十一间限九百二十五
现代文：清明三月节限数九百五十一间限九百二十五
English: The number of the Qingming March Festival is limited to nine hundred and fifty-one, and the interval is limited to nine hundred and twenty-five.

古文：谷雨三月中限数九百间限八百七十九
现代文：谷雨三月中限数九百间限八百七十九
English: Torrential rain in mid-March: 900 cases, 879 deaths

古文：立夏四月节限数八百五十七间限八百四十
现代文：立夏四月节限数八百五十七间限八百四十
English: For the first day of summer and the first day of the fourth month, the limit is eight hundred and fifty-seven and the interval is eight hundred and forty.

古文：小满四月中限数八百二十三间限八百一十二
现代文：小满四月中限数八百二十三间限八百一十二
English: The number of cases rose to 812 from 823 in mid-April.

古文：芒种五月节限数八百间限七百九十九
现代文：芒种五月节限数八百间限七百九十九
English: Mangseed May Festival limit of 800 up to limit of 799

古文：夏至五月中限数七百九十八间限八百一
现代文：夏至五月中限数七百九十八间限八百一
English: Summer solstice mid-May midpoint rises to 798 from 801

古文：小暑六月节限数八百五间限八百一十五
现代文：小暑六月节限数八百五间限八百一十五
English: June Festival limited to 815 rooms, up from 855

古文：大暑六月中限数八百二十五间限八百四十二
现代文：大暑六月中限数八百二十五间限八百四十二
English: The number of hot days in June reaches 825 and the number of cold days reaches 842

古文：立秋七月节限数八百五十九间限八百八十三
现代文：立秋七月节限数八百五十九间限八百八十三
English: For the Mid-Autumn Festival and the Mid-July Festival, the number of visitors is limited to 859 and the number of booths is limited to 883.

古文：处暑七月中限数九百七间限九百三十五
现代文：处暑七月中限数九百七间限九百三十五
English: July heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave heatwave

古文：白露八月节限数九百六十二间限九百九十二
现代文：白露八月节限数九百六十二间限九百九十二
English: White dew August festival limit nine hundred and sixty-two limit nine hundred and ninety-two

古文：秋分八月中限数千二十一间限千五十一
现代文：秋分八月中限数千二十一间限千五十一
English: Mid-autumn equinox to mid-August, thousand and twenty-one rooms to thousand and fifty-one

古文：寒露九月节限数千八十间即千一百七
现代文：寒露九月节限数千八十间即千一百七
English: The cold dew September festival is limited to a thousand and eighty, or a thousand and one hundred and seven.

古文：霜降九月中限数千一百三十三间限千一百五十七
现代文：霜降九月中限数千一百三十三间限千一百五十七
English: Mid-September frosts to fall from 1,133 to 1,157

古文：立冬十月节限数千一百八十一间限千一百九十八
现代文：立冬十月节限数千一百八十一间限千一百九十八
English: Beginning of Winter, October Festival, thousand one hundred and eighty-one, thousand one hundred and ninety-eight

古文：小雪十月中限数千二百一十五间限千二百二十九
现代文：小雪十月中限数千二百一十五间限千二百二十九
English: Light snowfall in October: 1,215,000 to 1,229,000

古文：推没灭术曰：因冬至积日有小余者，加积一，以没分乘之，以没法除之，所得为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：推没、减的方法：沿用冬至积日，如果有小余，再加一，乘以没分六万七千三百一十五，除以没法九百六十七，所得商敷为大余，余数为小余。
English: The method of deducting and subtracting: the winter solstice accumulation date is used. If there is a small surplus, add one more, multiply by zero point sixty-seven thousand three hundred and fifteen, divide by zero point nine hundred and sixty-seven, the income of the merchant is a large surplus, and the remaining number is a small surplus.

古文：大余满六十去之，余命以纪，算外，即去年冬至后日也。
现代文：大余满六十则减之，余下不满六十部分从所在纪干支起算，算外，即得去年冬至后没日。
English: If the number of days is more than sixty, it is subtracted. If the number of days is less than sixty, it is counted from the beginning of the current year. If it is not counted, it means that there was no day after the winter solstice last year.

古文：求次没，加大余六十九，小余五百九十二，小余满没法得一，从大余，命如前。
现代文：求次没：加大余六十九，小余五百九十二，小余满没法九百六十七得一，加入大余，起算命名的方法如前。
English: Subsequent requests: increase the remainder by 69, the small remainder by 592, the small surplus by 967 and add the large surplus. The method of starting and naming is as before.

古文：小余尽，为灭也。
现代文：小余尽，为灭。
English: A little more and it's gone.

古文：推五行用事日：立春、立夏、立秋、立冬者，即木、火、金、水始用事日也。
现代文：推五行用事日：立春、立夏、立秋、立冬曰，即木、火、金、水开始用事日。
English: Pushing the five-day event: the beginning of spring, the beginning of summer, the beginning of autumn, the beginning of winter, that is, the beginning of the event day of wood, fire, gold and water.

古文：各减其大余十八，小余四百八十三，小分六，余命以纪，算外，各四立之前，土用事日也。
现代文：在上述四个节气的基础上各减去大余十八，小余四百八十三，小分六，余下的从所在纪干支起算，算外，即得土用事日。
English: On the basis of the above-mentioned four solar terms, subtract the remainder of eighteen, the remainder of four hundred and eighty-three, and the remainder of six. The remainder is calculated from the location of the zodiac, and is not calculated, that is, it is the day of the earth.

古文：大余不足减者，加六十；小余不足者，减大余一，加纪法；小分不足减者，减小余一，加气法。
现代文：大余不足减，加六十；小余不足减，大余减一，加纪法一千八百四十三；小分不足减，小余减一，加气法十二。
English: For large surplus and deficit, add sixty; for small surplus and deficit, subtract one, for large surplus and deficit, add one thousand eight hundred and forty-three; for small deficit and deficit, subtract one, for small surplus and deficit, add twelve.

古文：推卦用事日：因冬至大余，六其小余，即《坎卦》用事日也。
现代文：推卦用事日：沿用冬至大余，小余乘以六，以之确定的时间即《坎卦》用事日。
English: Push Gua's event day: The winter solstice has been used as the big surplus, the small surplus multiplied by six, and the time determined by it is the "Kanggua" event day.

古文：加小余万九十一，满元法从大余，即《中孚》用事日也。
现代文：加小余一万零九十一，满元法一千一百五十八化入大余，即得《中孚》用事日。
English: Adding the smaller surplus of 10.91 million, the full yuan method of 11.58 million is converted into a large surplus, that is, the "Zhongfu" business day is obtained.

古文：求次卦，各加大余六，小余九百六十七。
现代文：求次卦：各加大余六，小余九百六十七。
English: Query: Each big number has a remainder of six, and each small number has a remainder of nine hundred sixty-seven.

古文：其四正各因其中日，六其小余。
现代文：四正的确定沿用中日大余，小余乘以六。
English: Four positive determinations continue to be used in China and Japan, with a large remainder and a small remainder multiplied by six.

古文：推日度术曰：以纪法朔积日，满周天去之，余以纪法除之，所得为度，不尽为分。
现代文：推太阳所在宿度的方法：以纪法一千八百四十三乘以朔积日，满周天六十七万三千一百五十则除去，余下不满周天部分除以纪法一千八百四十三，所得商敷为度，余数为分。
English: The method of deducing the degree to which the sun is located: multiply the new moon by the number of days in the solar year, and subtract the number of days in the solar year from the number of days in the solar year, and divide the number of days in the solar year by the number of days in the solar year, and divide the number of days in the solar year by the number of days in the solar year.

古文：命度从牛前五起，宿次除之，不满宿，则天正十一月朔夜半日所在度及分也。
现代文：度分从牛宿前五度起算，满一宿则除去，到剩下度分不满所在宿大小时，则此即为天正十一月朔夜半太阳所在宿度及分。
English: The degree points are counted from the fifth degree before the cattle lodge, and the full one is removed, and the remaining degree points are not satisfied with the hour of the lodge, then this is the degree and minute where the sun is at midnight on the first day of November.

古文：求次日，日加一度，分不加，经斗除斗分，分少，退一度。
现代文：求次日：每天加一度，分不加，经过斗宿时除去斗宿分，如果分少不足减，度数减一化为分，再减之。
English: The next day: add one degree every day, do not add a point, remove a point when passing through the dojo, if the point is less than or equal to, reduce the degree to a point, and then reduce it.

古文：推月度术曰：以月周乘朔积日，满周天去之，余以纪法除之，所得为度，不尽为分，命如上法，则天正十一月朔夜半月所在度及分也。
现代文：推月亮所在宿度的方法：以月周二万四千六百三十八乘以朔积日，满周天六十七万三千一百五十除去，余下不满周天部分除以纪法一千八百四十三，所得商数为度，余数为分，起算命名方法与求太阳所在宿度时一样，可得天正十一月朔夜半月亮所在宿度及分。
English: The method of deducing the degree of the moon's location: multiply the Tuesday of the month by 14,638 by the new moon day, remove the full moon day by 673,150, and divide the remaining unsatisfactory part of the day by the calendar by 1,843. The quotient is the degree, and the remainder is the minute. The starting naming method is the same as that of the sun's location. You can get the degree and minute of the moon's location at midnight on the first day of November.

古文：求次月，小月加度二十二，分八百六，大月又加一日，度十三，分六百七十九；分满纪法得一度，则并月朔夜半月所在度分及也。
现代文：求次月：小月加度二十二，分八百零六；大月再加一天，度加十三，分六百七十九；分满纪法一千八百四十三化入度，最后所得为次月朔夜半月亮所在宿度及分。
English: Ask for the next month: the small moon adds 22 degrees, divided by 806; the big moon adds another day, adds 13 degrees, divided by 679; the full moon adds 1843 degrees, and the final result is the next month's new moon night half moon.

古文：其冬下旬，月在张、心署之。
现代文：其冬下旬，月在张宿、心宿之日作出标记。
English: In late winter, the moon is marked at the Zhangjuku and Xinjuku.

古文：推合朔度术曰：以章岁乘朔小余，满通法为大分，不尽为小分。
现代文：推合朔所在宿度的方法：以章岁十九乘以朔小余，所得满通法四十七化为大分，余下不足通法部分为小分。
English: The method of deducing the place where Shuo is located: multiply Shuo's small remainder by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder multiplied by Shuo's small remainder

古文：以大分从朔夜半日度分，分满纪法从度，命如前，则天正十一月合朔日月所共合度也。
现代文：以大分加朔夜半太阳度分，分满纪法一千八百四十三化入度，起算命名方法如前，可得天正十一月合朔太阳、月亮共合时的宿度分。
English: Adding the midnight sun degree from Oita to the full moon degree from the Gregorian calendar results in one thousand eight hundred and forty-three degrees. The starting naming method is the same as before, and the predestined degree can be obtained when the sun and the moon are in conjunction on the first day of November.

古文：求次月，加度二十九，大分九百七十七，小分四十二，小分满通法从大分，大分满纪法从度，经斗除其分，则次月合朔日月所共合度也。
现代文：求次月；在上月基础上加度二十九，大分九百七十七，小分四十二，小分满通法四十七化入大分，大分满纪法一千八百四十三化入度，经过斗宿时除去斗宿分，所得为次月合朔太阳、月亮共合时的宿度分。
English: Ask for the next month; on the basis of the previous month, add 29 points, 977 points, 42 points, 47 points of the full moon method into Oita, 1843 points of the full moon method into Oita, and remove the points of the full moon method when passing through Douju, and the result is the points of the full moon method when the sun and the moon are in the same place.

古文：推弦望日所在度：加合朔度七，大分七百五，小分十，微分一，微分满二从小分，小分满通法从大分，大分满纪法从度，命如前，则上弦日所在度也。
现代文：推弦、望时太阳所在宿度分：在合朔时太阳度分的基础上加度七，大分七百零五，小分十，微分一，微分满二化入小分，小分满通法四十七化入大分，大分满纪法一千八百四十三化入度，起算命名方法舆前面一样，则可得上弦时太阳所在宿度分。
English: The degree of the sun's position at the time of deduction and observation: based on the degree of the sun's position at the time of conclusion, the degree of the sun's position at the time of addition is seven, the greatest is seven hundred and five, the smallest is ten, the differential is one, the differential is a perfect two into a small fraction, the small fraction is a perfect two into a large fraction, the small fraction is a perfect two into a large fraction, the small fraction is a perfect seven into a large fraction, the large fraction is a perfect seven into a small fraction, the perfect fraction is a perfect seven into a small fraction, the perfect fraction is a perfect seven into a small

古文：又加，得望，下弦、后月合也。
现代文：用同样的办法连续加，可依次得望、下弦、后月朔太阳所在宿度分。
English: Using the same method to continuously add, you can successively get the expected, the next chord, and the next moon where the moon is located.

古文：推弦望月所在度：加合朔度九十八，大分千二百七十九，小分三十四，数满命如前，即上弦月所在度也。
现代文：推弦、望时月亮所在宿度分：在合朔时月亮度分的基础上加度九十八，大分一千二百七十九，小分三十四，小分至大分，大分至度的转化及宿度分的推算与前面一样，可得上弦时月亮所在宿度分。
English: Pushing the chord and calculating the degree of the moon's position at the time of observation: on the basis of the degree of the moon at the time of conclusion, add ninety-eight degrees, one thousand two hundred and seventy-nine minutes, thirty-four fractions, fractions to large fractions, large fractions to large fractions, and the conversion and calculation of the degree of the moon's position at the time of the last chord can be obtained as before.

古文：又加，得望，下弦、后月合也。
现代文：用同样的办法连续加，可依次得望、下弦、后月朔月亮所在宿度分。
English: Using the same method to continuously add, you can successively get the expected, the next chord, and the next moon where the moon is located.

古文：推日月昏明度术曰：日以纪法，月以月周，乘所近节气夜漏，二百而一，为明分。
现代文：推太阳和月亮昏、明度分的方法：推算太阳以纪法一千八百四十三，月亮以月周二万四千六百三十八，乘以舆所求日最靠近的节气的夜漏，除以二百，所得分别为太阳和月亮的明分。
English: The method of calculating the difference between the brightness and dimness of the sun and the moon: the sun is calculated to be 1843 by the calendar, and the moon is calculated to be 146338 by the lunar calendar, multiplied by the nocturnal eclipse of the solar terms closest to the sun, divided by 200, and the result is the difference between the brightness of the sun and the moon.

古文：日以减纪法，月以减月周，余为昏分。
现代文：推算太阳以纪法，月亮以月周分别减去各自的明分，所得为各自的昏分。
English: According to the discipline method, subtract the day's bright points to get the dim points, and subtract the moon's bright points from the lunar week to get the moon's dim points.

古文：各以分加夜半，如法为度。
现代文：以各自明分、昏分加各自夜半度分，分满纪法化入度，可得太阳和月亮昏、明时所在宿度分。
English: According to their respective bright and dim points and their respective midnight points, the sun and the moon can be found in the dim and bright time.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪下交会差率之数加之，以会通去之，余则所求年天正十一月合朔去交度分也。
现代文：推合朔交会月食的方法：以所入纪的朔积分，加所在纪下交会差率，除去会通七十九万零一百一十，余下的即为所求年天正十一月合朔时的去交度分。
English: The method of deducing the lunar eclipse at the new moon conjunction: take the new moon integral at the beginning of the era, add the difference of the new moon conjunction at the end of the era, remove the new moon conjunction of 790,110, and the remaining is the degree of the new moon at the new moon conjunction in November of the year in question.

古文：以通数加之，满会通去之，余则次月合朔去交度分也。
现代文：加上通数十三万四千六百三十，满会通则除去，余下的即为次月合朔时的去交度分。
English: In addition, a total of several hundred and thirty-four thousand six hundred and thirty was added, and the total number of full meetings was removed. The remaining amount was the percentage of turnover at the end of the next month.

古文：以朔望合数各加其月合朔去交度分，满会通去之，余则各其月望去交度分也。
现代文：以朔望合敷六万七千三百一十五各加当月合朔时的去交度分，满会通则除去，余下的为当月望时的去交度分。
English: According to the calculation, the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month is 67,315. The total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month is subtracted from the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month, and the remaining shares are the total number of shares outstanding at the end of the month.

古文：朔望去交分，如朔望合数以下，入交限数以上者，朔则交会，望则月蚀。
现代文：朔和望时的去交度分，如果在朔望合数六万七千三百一十五以下，或入交限数七十二莴二千七百九十五以上，朔贝交会，望则月食。
English: According to the degree of declination between the New Moon and the sighting, if the number of New Moon sightings is less than 67,315 or the number of incoming sightings is more than 72,295, the New Moon will be a lunar eclipse.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀月在日道表里术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪下交会差率之数加之，倍会通去之，余不满会通者，纪首表，天正合朔月在表；纪首里，天正合朔月在里。
现代文：推合朔交会月食时月亮在黄道南北的方法：以所入纪的朔积分，加所在纪的交会差率，除去会通的两倍，余下的如果不满会通，则纪首时月亮在黄道北，天正合朔时月亮也在日道表；纪首时月亮在黄道南，天正合朔时月亮也在黄道南。
English: The method of deducing the north and south of the zodiac at the time of the lunar eclipse at the conjunction of the new moon and the lunar eclipse: take the new moon integral of the entering period, add the conjunction difference of the entering period, remove the double of the conjunction, and if the remaining ones are not satisfied with the conjunction, the moon will be in the north of the zodiac at the beginning of the period, and the moon will also be in the sundial at the time of the celestial conjunction; the moon will be in the south of the zodiac at the beginning of the period, and the moon will also be in the south of the zodiac at the time of the celestial conjunction

古文：满会通去之，表满在里，里满在表。求次月，以通数加之，满会通去之，加里满在表，加表满在里。
现代文：余下的如果满会通则除去，纪首时月亮在黄道北，则天正合朔时月亮在黄道南；纪首时月亮在黄道南，则天正合朔时月亮在黄道北。
English: If the remaining ones are removed, the moon is in the north of the zodiac at the beginning of the year, then the moon is in the south of the zodiac at the new moon; the moon is in the south of the zodiac at the beginning of the year, then the moon is in the north of the zodiac at the new moon.

古文：先交会后月蚀者，朔在表则望在表，朔在裹则望在里。先月蚀后交会者，看蚀月朔在里则望在表，朔在表则望在里。
现代文：求次月：以通敷十三万四千六百三十加上月合朔去交度分，满会通则除去，如果上月合朔月亮在黄道南，加通敷后满会通，则月亮变为在黄道北，不满会通，则仍在黄道南；如果上月合朔月亮在黄道北，加通数后满会通，则月亮变为在黄道南，不满会通，则仍在黄道北。如果先交会后月食，合朔时月亮在黄道北则望时月亮也在黄道北，合朔时月亮在黄道南则望时月亮也在黄道南。
English: For the next month: with a total of 134,630 and the new moon's declination, the full moon is removed. If the previous month's new moon is in the south of the zodiac, after adding the full moon, the moon will become in the north of the zodiac, and if the moon is dissatisfied, it will still be in the south of the zodiac. If the previous month's new moon is in the north of the zodiac, after adding the full moon, the moon will become in the south of the zodiac, and if the moon is dissatisfied, it will still be in the north of the zodiac. If the moon is eclipsed after the

古文：交会月蚀如朔望合数以下，则前交后会；如入交限数以上，则前会后交。
现代文：先月食后交会，看见月食之月合朔时月亮在黄道南则望时月亮在黄道北，合朔时月亮在黄道北则望时月亮在黄道南。交会月食如果在朔望合数六万七千三百一十五以下，则交在前，会在后；如果在入交限敷七十二万二千七百九十五以上，则会在前，交在后。
English: After the lunar eclipse last month, when the lunar eclipse is seen, the moon is in the south of the zodiac when the moon is in the north of the zodiac, and the moon is in the south of the zodiac when the moon is in the north of the zodiac when the moon is in the south of the zodiac. If the lunar eclipse at the meeting is below the number of sixty-seven thousand three hundred and fifteen, it will be placed in front and behind; if it is above the entry limit of seven hundred and twenty-two thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, it will be in front and behind.

古文：其前交后会近于限数者，则豫伺之；前会后交近于限数者，则后伺之。
现代文：前交后会情形下，接近限数时应在前月预候；前会后交情形下，接近限数时应在后月候之。
English: In the case of pre-meeting and post-meeting, when the limit is close, it should be anticipated in the previous month; in the case of pre-meeting and post-meeting, when the limit is close, it should be anticipated in the following month.

古文：求去交度术曰：其前交后会者，今去交度分如日法而一，所得则却交度分也。
现代文：求去交度的方法：交在前会在后的，以去交度分除以日法四千五百五十九，所得为交点后去交度。
English: The method of finding the degree of alternation: the former will be placed in the latter, and the degree of alternation will be divided by 4559, and the result will be the degree of alternation after the intersection.

古文：其前会后交者，以去交度分减会通，余如日法而一，所得则前去交度也。
现代文：会在前交在后的，以会通七十九万零一百一十减去去交度分，余下的除以日法四千五百五十九，所得为交点前去交度。
English: In the case of the former and the latter, the intersection of the former and the latter shall be calculated by subtracting the intersection of the former and the latter from the intersection of the former and the latter, and dividing the remainder by 4559, the intersection of the former and the latter.

古文：余皆度分也。
现代文：余数均为度分。
English: The remaining numbers are in degrees.

古文：去交度十五以上，虽交不蚀也，十以下是蚀，十以上，亏蚀微少，光晷相及而已。
现代文：去交度在十五以上，虽然交但不发生食，在十以下，必然发生食，在十以上，食亏很少，祇是光影相及而已。
English: If the degree of cross-fertilization is more than fifteen, although cross-fertilization does not occur, cross-fertilization will inevitably occur if it is less than ten, and if it is more than ten, cross-fertilization loss is very small, only light and shadow are similar.

古文：亏之多少，以十五为法。
现代文：食亏具体多少，以十五作为分母来表达。
English: The specific amount of food loss is expressed by using fifteen as the denominator.

古文：求日蚀亏起角术曰：其月在外道，先交后会者，亏蚀西南角起；先会后交者，亏蚀东南角起。
现代文：求日食亏起方位角的方法：如果月亮在外道，交在先会在后，日食从西南角起亏；会在先交在后，日食从东南角起亏。
English: The way to find the azimuth angle of the eclipse: if the moon is in the outer path, the eclipse will start from the southwest corner when the moon is in the first place, and the eclipse will start from the southeast corner when the moon is in the second place.

古文：其月在内道，先交后会者，亏蚀西北角起；先会后交者，亏蚀东北角起。
现代文：如果月亮在内道，交在先会在后，日食从西北角起亏；会在先交在后，日食从东北角起亏。
English: If the moon is in the inner path, the first to cross will be at the back, and the eclipse will start from the northwest corner; the first to cross will be at the back, and the eclipse will start from the northeast corner.

古文：亏蚀分多少，如上以十五为法。
现代文：日食亏分的多少，与月食一样，以十五为分母来表达。
English: As with lunar eclipses, the number of points lost by a solar eclipse is expressed by taking fifteen as the denominator.

古文：会交中者，蚀尽。
现代文：日月相会于交中则食尽。
English: When the sun and the moon meet at the intersection, they are completely consumed.

古文：月蚀在日之冲，亏角与上反也。
现代文：月食时月亮在舆太阳相对的位置，起亏的方位角与上面相反。
English: During a lunar eclipse, the moon is in the opposite position to the sun, and its azimuth is opposite to the above.

古文：月行迟疾度损益率盈缩积分月行分
现代文：月行迟疾度损益率盈缩积分月行分
English: Monthly Lagging Ratio Profit and Loss Ratio Profit and Loss Ratio Monthly Lagging Ratio

古文：一日十四度十四分益二十六盈初二百八十
现代文：一日十四度十四分益二十六盈初二百八十
English: 14 degrees 14 minutes a day, gain 26 points, rise 280 points in the first half of the year

古文：二日十四度十一分益二十三盈积分二百七十七
现代文：二日十四度十一分益二十三盈积分二百七十七
English: Two days fourteen degrees eleven points gain twenty-three points gain two hundred and seventy-seven points

古文：三日十四度八分益二十盈积分二百七十四
现代文：三日十四度八分益二十盈积分二百七十四
English: Three days fourteen degrees eight points gain twenty points up two hundred and seventy-four

古文：四日十四度五分益十七盈积分二百七十一
现代文：四日十四度五分益十七盈积分二百七十一
English: Four days, fourteen degrees, five points, seventeen points, 271 points

古文：五日十四度一分益十三盈积分二百六十七
现代文：五日十四度一分益十三盈积分二百六十七
English: Five days fourteen degrees one point gain thirteen points up two hundred and sixty-seven

古文：六日十三度十四分益七盈积分二百六十一
现代文：六日十三度十四分益七盈积分二百六十一
English: Six days, thirteen degrees, fourteen points, seven points, two hundred and sixty-one points

古文：七日十三度七分损盈积分二百五十四
现代文：七日十三度七分损盈积分二百五十四
English: Seven-day, thirteen-day, seven-point loss-gain-gain-gain-gain-gain-gain-gain up 254 points

古文：八日十三度一分损六盈积分二百四十八
现代文：八日十三度一分损六盈积分二百四十八
English: 8th, 13th, 1 point loss, 6 points gain, 248 points up

古文：九日十二度十六分损十盈积分二百四十四
现代文：九日十二度十六分损十盈积分二百四十四
English: Nine days twelve degrees sixteen points lost ten points up two hundred and forty-four

古文：十日十二度十三分损十三盈积分二百四十一
现代文：十日十二度十三分损十三盈积分二百四十一
English: Ten days twelve degrees thirteen points loss thirteen points gain two hundred forty-one

古文：十一日十二度十一分损十五盈积分二百三十九
现代文：十一日十二度十一分损十五盈积分二百三十九
English: 11th, 12th, 11th, 11th, 15th, 239th

古文：十二日十二度八分损十八盈积分二百三十六
现代文：十二日十二度八分损十八盈积分二百三十六
English: On the 12th, 12 degrees, 8 minutes loss, 18 points gain, 236 points increase

古文：十三日十二度五分损二十一盈积分二百三十三
现代文：十三日十二度五分损二十一盈积分二百三十三
English: On the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the loss was five-and-twenty, the gain twenty-one, and the gain two hundred and thirty-three.

古文：十四日十二度三分损二十三盈积分二百三十一
现代文：十四日十二度三分损二十三盈积分二百三十一
English: On the 14th, 12 three-point losses, 23 gains, and 231 points

古文：十五日十二度五分益二十一缩初二百三十三
现代文：十五日十二度五分益二十一缩初二百三十三
English: On the 15th, 12 degrees and 5 minutes gain, 21 contractions, 233 points up.

古文：十六日十二度七分益十九缩积分二百三十五
现代文：十六日十二度七分益十九缩积分二百三十五
English: Sixteen days twelve degrees seven minutes gain nineteen minutes of contraction two hundred and thirty-five

古文：十七日十二度九分益十七缩积分二百三十七
现代文：十七日十二度九分益十七缩积分二百三十七
English: On the seventeenth day of the twelfth month, nine parts increase, seventeen parts decrease, two hundred and thirty-seven parts increase.

古文：十八日十二度十二分益十四缩积分二百四十
现代文：十八日十二度十二分益十四缩积分二百四十
English: On the eighteenth day twelve degrees, twelve minutes, fourteen minutes of arc, two hundred and forty minutes of arc

古文：十九日十二度十五分益十一缩积分二百四十三
现代文：十九日十二度十五分益十一缩积分二百四十三
English: On the 19th, 12 degrees and 15 minutes gain, 11 points decrease, 243 points increase.

古文：二十日十二度十八分益八缩积分二百四十六
现代文：二十日十二度十八分益八缩积分二百四十六
English: On the 20th, 12 degrees, 18 minutes gain, 8 minutes contraction, 246 points increase.

古文：二十一日十三度三分益四缩积分二百五十
现代文：二十一日十三度三分益四缩积分二百五十
English: On the twenty-first day of the thirteenth month, the three-point gain, the four-point contraction, and the two-hundred-and-fiftieth integral

古文：二十二日十三度七分损缩积分二百五十四
现代文：二十二日十三度七分损缩积分二百五十四
English: On the 22nd, 13 degrees, 7 minutes of contraction, 254 points.

古文：二十三日十三度十二分损五缩积分二百五十九
现代文：二十三日十三度十二分损五缩积分二百五十九
English: On the 23rd, 13 degrees, 12 minutes, 5 minutes of contraction, and 259 minutes of integration

古文：二十四日十三度十八分损十一缩积分二百六十五
现代文：二十四日十三度十八分损十一缩积分二百六十五
English: On the 24th, 13 degrees, 18 minutes lost, 11 minutes decreased, and 265 minutes increased.

古文：二十五日十四度五分损十七缩积分二百七十一
现代文：二十五日十四度五分损十七缩积分二百七十一
English: On the 25th, 14 degrees and 5 minutes lost, 17 degrees and 5 minutes gained, 271 degrees and 5 minutes lost.

古文：二十六日十四度十一分损二十三缩积分二百七十七
现代文：二十六日十四度十一分损二十三缩积分二百七十七
English: On the 26th, 14 degrees, 11 minutes, 23 minutes of contraction, 277 minutes.

古文：二十七日十四度十二分损二十四缩积分二百七十八
现代文：二十七日十四度十二分损二十四缩积分二百七十八
English: 27th day, 14 degrees, 12 minutes lost, 24 minutes decreased, 278 minutes gained

古文：周日十四度十三分有小分六百二十六分损二十五有小分六百二十六
现代文：周日十四度十三分有小分六百二十六分损二十五有小分六百二十六
English: Sunday: 14 degrees, 13 minutes, minus 626 minutes, minus 25 degrees, plus 626 minutes

古文：缩积分二百七十九
现代文：缩积分二百七十九
English: Two hundred and seventy-nine

古文：有小分六百二十六
现代文：有小分六百二十六
English: There are six hundred and twenty-six fractions

古文：推合朔交会月蚀入迟疾历术曰：置所入纪朔积分，以所入纪下迟疾差率数加之，以通周去之，余满日法得一日，不尽为日余，命日算外，则所求年天正十一月合朔入历日也。
现代文：推合朔交会月食入迟疾历的方法：以所求年入纪朔积分，加所在纪迟疾差率，除去通周十二万五千六百二十一，余下不满通周部分除以日法四千五百五十九得入历天数，余数为日余，天数从所在纪干支起算，算外，可得所求年天正十一月合朔入历。
English: The method of deducing the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar eclipse of the lunar e

古文：求次月，加一日，日余四千四百五十。
现代文：求次月：加一天，余四千四百五十。
English: And the second month he shall add one day to it, and the number of the months shall be four thousand four hundred and fifty.

古文：求望，加十四日，日余三千四百八十九。
现代文：求望，加十四天，余三干四百八十九。
English: Seeking, add fourteen days, and the remaining three are four hundred and eighty-nine.

古文：日余满日法成日，日满二十七去之。
现代文：日余满曰法四千五百五十九化入天，天数满二十七减去。
English: At the end of the day, four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine days are added to the number of days, and at the end of twenty-seven days, the number is subtracted.

古文：又除余如周日余，日余不足除者，减一日，加周虚。
现代文：再以日余减去周日日余二千五百二十八，曰余不足减，天数减去一，加固虚二千零三十一。
English: Then subtract Sunday from the remaining days to arrive at the remaining 2,528 days, subtract the remaining days from the remaining days, subtract one from the number of days, and consolidate to arrive at the virtual 2,031.

古文：推合朔交会月蚀定大小余：以入历日余乘所入历损益率，以损益盈缩积分，为定积分。
现代文：推合朔交会月食定大小余：以入历余乘以所入历的对应损益率，以增减盈缩积分，所得为定积分。
English: Calculate the fixed size surplus of the lunar eclipse at the New Year's Eve Fair: multiply the corresponding profit and loss ratio of the incoming calendar by the incoming calendar surplus, add and subtract the profit and loss points, and the result is a fixed point.

古文：以章岁减所入历月行分，余以除之，所得以盈减缩加本小余。
现代文：以所入历日对应的月行分减去章岁十九，以定积分除以其差，所得如果是盈积分则以平朔小余减之，如果是缩积分则以平朔小余加之，可得为定小余。
English: Subtract the 19th day of the month corresponding to the calendar day entered, and divide the difference by the fixed integral. If the result is a positive integral, it will be reduced by a small surplus, and if it is a reduced integral, it will be added by a small surplus, and it can be obtained as a small surplus.

古文：加之满日法者，交会加时在后日；减之不足者，交会加时在前日。
现代文：缩加以后，小余满日法四千五百五十九，则交会加时在后一天；平朔小余不足减盈积分，则交会加时在前一天。
English: After the increase, if the small surplus exceeds the full-day method of four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine, the trading session will be extended on the following day; if the small surplus is less than the full-day method of four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine, the trading session will be extended on the previous day.

古文：月蚀者，随定大小余为日加时。
现代文：月食，同样由定大余小余以确定加时。
English: For lunar eclipses, it is also necessary to determine the extra time by setting a large remainder and a small remainder.

古文：入历在周日者，以周日日余乘缩积分，为定积分。
现代文：如果入历日在周曰，以周日日余二千五百二十八乘以缩积分，所得为定积分。
English: If the calendar date falls on a Sunday, the remainder of the day on Sunday is 2,528 multiplied by the contraction point, and the result is a fixed point.

古文：以损率乘入历日余，又以周日日余乘之，以周日日度小分并之，以损定积分，余为后定积分。
现代文：以损益率乘以入历日余，再乘以周日日余二千五百二十八，加周日度小分六百二十六，用定积分减之，余下的为后定积分。
English: Multiply the profit and loss ratio by the number of days remaining in the calendar, then multiply by the number of days remaining on Sunday, which is two thousand five hundred and twenty-eight, plus the number of days remaining on Sunday, which is six hundred and twenty-six. Subtract this by the fixed points, and the remainder is the final fixed points.

古文：以章岁减周日月行分，余以周日日余乘之，以周日度小分并之，以除后定积分，所得以加本小余，如上法。
现代文：以周月行分减章岁十九，乘以周曰日余，加周度小分，用后定积分除以它，所得加本小余，可得定小余。
English: Subtract nineteen years from the week and month, multiply by the day of the week and the day of the week, add the weekly fraction, and then divide by the fixed integral. The result of adding this small surplus can be the fixed small surplus.

古文：推加时：以十二乘定小余，满日法得一辰，数从子起，算外，则朔望加时所在辰也。
现代文：剩下的方法与上面一样。推加时：以十二乘以定小余，满曰法四千五百五十九得一辰，所得辰数从子时起算，算外，即为朔望加时所在之辰。
English: The rest of the method is the same as above. Pushing the extra time: multiply twelve by the fixed small surplus, and the full day method is four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine to obtain one hour. The number of hours obtained is calculated from the hour of the son, and is outside the calculation, that is, the hour where the extra time is expected.

古文：有余不尽者四之，如日法而一为少，二为半，三为太。
现代文：有余数，乘以四，再除以曰法四千五百五十九，如果得一，则为少，如果得二，则为半，如果得三，则为太。
English: If there is a remainder, multiply by four and then divide by five to get four thousand five hundred and fifty-nine. If you get one, it is less, if you get two, it is half, if you get three, it is too much.

古文：又有余者三之，如日法而一为强，半法以上排成之，不满半法废弃之。
现代文：再有余数，乘以三，除以日法四千五百五十九，如果得一，则为强，如果在四千五百五十九的一半以上，入为一，得强，在四千五百五十九的一半以下则舍去。
English: If there is a remainder, multiply by three and divide by four to get 4559. If you get one, you are strong. If you get more than half of 4559, you are strong. If you get less than half of 4559, you are weak.

古文：以强并少为少强，并半为半强，并太为太强。
现代文：以强与少合并为少强，以强与半合并为半强，以强与太合并为太强。
English: The combination of strong and less is less strong, the combination of strong and half is half strong, and the combination of strong and too strong is too strong.

古文：得二强者为少弱，以之并少为半弱，以之并半为太弱，以之并太为一辰弱。
现代文：如果得二强则为少弱，以少弱舆少合并为半弱，以少弱与半合并为太弱，以少弱与太合并为一辰弱。
English: If you get two strong, it will be a little weak, with a little weak and a little weak, it will be a half-weak, with a little weak and a half, it will be too weak, with a little weak and too weak, it will be a one-hour weak.

古文：以所在辰命之，则各得其少、太、半及强，弱也。
现代文：以其所在辰命名，各自得该辰少、太、半及其强、弱。
English: They are named after the hour in which they are located, with the hour being less than, greater than, less than half, strong, and weak.

古文：其月蚀望在中节前后四日以还者，视限数；在中节前后五日以上者，视间限。
现代文：如果月食在中气或节气前后四天以内，看限数；在中气或节气前后五天以上，看问限。
English: If the lunar eclipse is less than four days before or after the solar eclipse, see the limit; if it is more than five days before or after the solar eclipse, see the limit.

古文：定小余如间限、限数以下者，以算上为日。
现代文：定小余在间限、限数以下，以算上为月食所在日。
English: If the fixed small remainder is below the interval limit and the limit number, it is counted as the day of the lunar eclipse.

古文：斗二十六分四百五十五牛八女十二虚十危十七室十六壁九
现代文：斗二十六分四百五十五牛八女十二虚十危十七室十六壁九
English: Fighting twenty-six minutes, four hundred and fifty-five cows, eight women, twelve shadows, ten perils, seventeen rooms, sixteen walls, nine

古文：北方九十八度分四百五十五
现代文：北方九十八度分四百五十五
English: Ninety-eight degrees north, four hundred and fifty-five minutes

古文：奎十六娄十二胃十四昴十一毕十六觜二参九
现代文：奎十六娄十二胃十四昴十一毕十六觜二参九
English: Kui sixteen  twelve stomach fourteen  eleven Bi sixteen  two San nine

古文：西方八十度
现代文：西方八十度
English: Eighty degrees west

古文：井三十三鬼四柳十五星七张十八翼十八轸十七
现代文：井三十三鬼四柳十五星七张十八翼十八轸十七
English: Well, thirty-three ghosts, four willows, fifteen stars, seven sheets, eighteen wings, eighteen fins, seventeen

古文：南方百十二度
现代文：南方百十二度
English: 112 Degrees South

古文：角十二亢九氐十五房五心五尾十八箕十一
现代文：角十二亢九氐十五房五心五尾十八箕十一
English: Angle of the 12th, 9th, 15th, 5th, 5th, 18th, 11th

古文：东方七十五度
现代文：东方七十五度
English: Seventy-five degrees east

古文：表略
现代文：表略
English: Abbreviations

古文：右中节二十四气，如术求之，得冬至十一月中也。
现代文：以上中气、节气共二十四气，按历数推求，可得每年冬至十一月中气时有关的数据。
English: There are a total of twenty-four meridians and solar terms mentioned above. By extrapolating the calendar, data related to the time of the winter solstice in November can be obtained.

古文：加之得次月节，加节得其月中。
现代文：在此基础上加得次月节气数据，节气加得其月中气。
English: On this basis, the solar terms of the following month are added, and the solar terms of the following month are added.

古文：中星以日所在为正，置所求年二十四气小余，四之，如法得一为少；不尽少，三之，如法为强；所得以减其节气昏明中星各定。
现代文：中星的确定以太阳所在作为判据，以所求年二十四节气小余乘以四，除以法四千五百五十九，如果得一，为少；如果达不到少，乘以三，除以法为强；以所得减其节气，则昏明中星各个都能确定。
English: The determination of the middle star is based on the location of the sun, with the required year of 24 solar terms multiplied by four and divided by 4559. If the result is one, it is less; if it is not less, it is multiplied by three and divided by the method is strong; if the result is reduced by its solar term, then each dim star can be determined.

古文：推五星术
现代文：推五星术：
English: Pushing the five-star:

古文：五星者，木曰岁星，火曰荧惑星，土曰填星，金曰太白星，水曰辰星。
现代文：五大行星，木星又名岁星，火星又名荧惑星，土星又名镇星，金星又名太白星，水星又名辰星。
English: The five major planets, Jupiter, also known as the year star, Mars, also known as the fluorescent planet, Saturn, also known as the town star, Venus, also known as the white star, Mercury, also known as the star.

古文：凡五星之行，有迟有疾，有留有逆。
现代文：五大行星的运行，有快有慢，有留有逆。
English: The movement of the five major planets has a fast and a slow movement, and there is a stay and a reverse movement.

古文：曩自开辟，清浊始分，则日月五星聚于星纪。
现代文：白天地开辟，清浊刚分开时，太阳、月亮、五大行星相聚于星纪。
English: When the heavens and the earth opened during the day and the celestial bodies were just separated, the sun, the moon, and the five major planets gathered in the sidereal period.

古文：发自星纪，并而行天，迟疾留逆，互相逮及。
现代文：从星纪出发，在天上运行，有快有慢，有留有逆，相互赶上。
English: Starting from the ecliptic, it runs in the sky, with fast and slow, with stay and reverse, catching up with each other.

古文：星与日会，同宿共度，则谓之合。
现代文：行星与太阳相会，处在同一宿同一度，叫做合。
English: When a planet and the sun meet and are in the same place at the same time, it is called a conjunction.

古文：从合至合之日，则谓之终。
现代文：从合到下一次合，叫做终。
English: From one round to the next, it's called the end.

古文：各一以终之日与一岁之日通分相约，终而率之，岁数岁则谓之合终岁数，岁终则谓之合终合数。
现代文：各以一终的时间与一年的时间通分相约，分子为合终岁数，分母为合终合数。遗两个数确定后，则其他的基本数据也有了。
English: The numerator is the number of completed years, and the denominator is the number of completed years. After the last two numbers are determined, other basic data are also available.

古文：二率既定，则法数生焉。
现代文：以章岁十九乘以合数，所得为合月法。
English: Multiply the number of months by the number of years, and the result is the number of months.

古文：以章岁乘合数，为合月法。
现代文：以纪法一千八百四十三乘以合数，所得为度法。
English: By multiplying the combined number of disciplines by one thousand eight hundred and forty-three, the result is the degree method.

古文：以纪法乘合数，为日度法。以章月乘岁数，为合月分；如合月法为合月数，合月之余为月余。
现代文：以章月二百三十五乘以岁数所得为合月分；除以合月法所得商数为合月数，余数为月余。
English: The result obtained by multiplying the number of years by the number 235 of the previous month is the number of the current month; the result obtained by dividing the quotient obtained by the method of the previous month is the number of the current month, and the remaining number is the remainder of the month.

古文：以通数乘合月数，如日法而一，为大余。
现代文：以通数十三万四千六百三十乘以合月数，除以日法四千五百五十九，所得商数为大余。
English: Multiply the number of months by the number of days by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of days by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of months by the number of days by the number of months by the number of months by the number of days by the number of months by the number of months by the number of days by the number of months by the

古文：以六十去大余，余为星合朔大余。
现代文：以大余连续除去六十，余下不满六十的部分为行星合朔大余。
English: The remaining part that is less than 60 is the total number of planets.

古文：大余之余为朔小余。
现代文：大余之外的余数为朔小余。
English: The remainder beyond the large remainder is the small remainder.

古文：以通数乘月余，以合月法乘朔小余，并之，以日法乘合月法除之，所得星合入月日数也。
现代文：以通数乘以月余，以合月法乘以朔小余，二者相加，除以日法四千五百五十九与合月法之积，所得商数为行星合入月数。
English: Multiply the common divisor by the remainder of the month, and the common divisor by the small remainder of the new moon. Add the two together, and divide by the product of the Japanese divisor 4559 and the lunar divisor. The resulting quotient is the number of months into which the planets are added.

古文：余以通法约之，为入月日余。
现代文：余数除以通法四十七，所得为入月日余。
English: The remaining number is divided by forty-seven according to the law, and the income is the remaining day of the month.

古文：以朔小余减日法，余为朔虚分。
现代文：以朔小余减去日法，所得为朔虚分。
English: Subtract the Japanese law from the small surplus, and the result is the imaginary fraction.

古文：以历斗分乘合数，为星度斗分。
现代文：以历斗分四百五十五乘以合数，所得为星度斗分。
English: Four hundred and fifty-five points multiplied by a composite number gives a star rating.

古文：木、火、土各以合数减岁数，余以周天乘之，如日度法而一，所得则行星度数也，余则度余。
现代文：木星、火星、土星以各自的岁数减去合数，余下的乘以周天六十七万三千一百五十，除以日度法，所得商数为行星度数，余数为度余。
English: Jupiter, Mars and Saturn are calculated by subtracting the sum of their respective ages and multiplying the remainder by the number of days in a year, 673,150, and dividing by the solar day. The resulting quotient is the planetary degree, and the remainder is the degree-plus.

古文：金、水以周天乘岁数，如日度法而一，所得则行星度数也，余则度余也。
现代文：金星、水星以周天乘以各自岁数，除以日度法，所得商敷为行星度数，余数为度余。木星：
English: For Venus and Mercury, multiply their respective ages by the number of days in a month and divide by the number of days in a year. The product is the planetary degree and the remainder is the remainder. Jupiter:

古文：木：合终岁数，一千二百五十五。
现代文：合终岁数：一千二百五十五。
English: Total number of years of age: up to one thousand two hundred and fifty-five.

古文：合终合数，一千一百四十九。
现代文：合终合数：一千一百四十九。
English: The final total: eleven hundred and forty-nine.

古文：合月法，二万一千八百三十一。
现代文：合月法：二万一千八百三十一。
English: Harvest Moon: 21,831.

古文：日度法，二百一十一万七千六百七。
现代文：日度法：二百一十一万七千六百零七。
English: Daily cases: 2,117,607.

古文：合月数。
现代文：合月数：十三。
English: Total number of months: thirteen.

古文：月余，一万一千一百二十二。
现代文：月余：一万一千一百二十二。
English: Monthly balance: 11,122.

古文：朔大余，二十三。
现代文：朔大余：二十三。
English: New Year's Eve: the 23rd.

古文：朔小余，四千九十三。
现代文：朔小余：四千零九十三。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Four thousand and ninety-three.

古文：入月日，一十五。
现代文：入月日：十五。
English: Moonrise: The fifteenth.

古文：日余，一百九十九万五千六百六十四。
现代文：月余：一百九十九万五千六百六十四。
English: Remaining months: up 1,995,664.

古文：朔虚分，四百六十六。
现代文：朔虚分：四百六十六。
English: Shuo imaginary part: four hundred and sixty-six.

古文：斗分，五十二万二千七百九十五。
现代文：斗分：五十二万二千七百九十五。
English: Points: 5,222,795.

古文：行星度，三十三。
现代文：行星度：三十三。
English: Planet degree: thirty-three.

古文：度余，一百四十七万二千八百六十九。
现代文：度余：一百四十七万二千八百六十九。
English: Excess deaths: 1,472,869.

古文：火：合终岁数，五千一百五。
现代文：火星：合终岁数：五千一百零五。
English: Mars: Completion age: five thousand one hundred and five.

古文：合终合数，二千三百八十八。
现代文：合终合数：二千三百八十八。
English: The final count: two thousand three hundred eighty-eight.

古文：合月法，四万五千三百七十二。
现代文：合月法：四万五千三百七十二。
English: The number of the months of the year: 45,372.

古文：日度法，四百四十万一千八十四。
现代文：日度法：四百四十万一千零八十四。
English: Daily cases: 4,411,084.

古文：合月数，二十六。
现代文：合月敷：二十六。
English: Number of months: twenty-six.

古文：月余，二万三。
现代文：月余：二万零三。
English: Remaining months: 20,003.

古文：朔大余，四十七。
现代文：朔大余：四十七。
English: New Year's Eve: 47.

古文：朔小余，三千六百二十七。
现代文：朔小余：三千六百二十七。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Three thousand six hundred and twenty-seven.

古文：入月日，一十三。
现代文：入月日：十三。
English: Moonrise: The thirteenth.

古文：日余，三百五十八万五千二百三十。
现代文：日余：三百五十八万五千二百三十。
English: Remaining days: 3,585,230.

古文：朔虚分，九百三十二。
现代文：朔虚分：九百三十二。
English: The new moon: nine hundred and thirty-two.

古文：斗分，一百八万六千五百四十。
现代文：斗分：一百零八万六千五百四十。
English: Divisions: 1,086,540.

古文：行星度，五十。
现代文：行星度：五十。
English: Planetary degree: fifty.

古文：度余，一百四十一万二千一百五十。
现代文：度余：一百四十一万二千一百五十。
English: Surplus: 1,412,150.

古文：土：合终岁数，三千九百四十三。
现代文：土星：合终岁数：三千九百四十三。
English: Saturn: Conjunct the final years: three thousand nine hundred and forty-three.

古文：合终合数，三千八百九。
现代文：合终合敷：三千八百零九。
English: Total number of beds: 3,809.

古文：合月法，七万二千三百七十一。
现代文：合月法：七万二千三百七十一。
English: The number of the months of the year is 72,371.

古文：日度法，七百一万九千九百八十七。
现代文：日度法：七百零一万九千九百八十七。
English: Daily cases: 7,019,987.

古文：合月数，一十二。
现代文：合月数：十二。
English: Total number of months: twelve.

古文：月余，五万八千一百五十三。
现代文：月余：五万八千一百五十三。
English: Remaining months: 58,153.

古文：朔大余，五十四。
现代文：朔大余：五十四。
English: New Year's Eve: Fifty-four.

古文：朔小余，一千六百七十四。
现代文：朔小余：一千六百七十四。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: One thousand six hundred and seventy-four.

古文：入月日，二十四。
现代文：入月日：二十四。
English: On the first day of the month: It is the 24th.

古文：日余，六十七万五千三百六十四。
现代文：日余：六十七万五千三百六十四。
English: Remaining days: 675 364.

古文：朔虚分，二千八百八十五。
现代文：朔虚分：二千八百八十五。
English: Shuo imaginary part: two thousand eight hundred and eighty-five.

古文：斗分，一百七十三万三千九十五。
现代文：斗分：一百七十三万三千零九十五。
English: Dou score: up to one million seven hundred thirty three thousand and ninety five.

古文：行星度，一十二。
现代文：行星度：十二。
English: Planetary degrees: twelve.

古文：度余，五百九十六万二千二百五十六。
现代文：度余：五百九十六万二千二百五十六。
English: Excess deaths: 5,962,256.

古文：金：合终岁数，一千九百七。
现代文：金星：合终岁数：一千九百零七。
English: Venus: Completion age: nineteen hundred and seven.

古文：合终合数，二千三百八十五。
现代文：合终合敷：二千三百八十五。
English: Total number of beds: 2,385.

古文：合月法，四万五千三百一十五。
现代文：合月法：四万五千三百一十五。
English: The number of the first month of the year: 45,315.

古文：日度法，四百三十九万五千五百五十五。
现代文：日度法：四百三十九万五千五百五十五。
English: Daily: 4,395,555.

古文：合月数，九。
现代文：合月敷：九。
English: Total number of months: nine.

古文：月余，四万三百一十。
现代文：月余：四万零三百一十。
English: Remaining months: 40,310.

古文：朔大余，二十五。
现代文：朔大余：二十五。
English: New Year's Eve: Twenty-five.

古文：朔小余，三千五百三十五。
现代文：朔小余：三千五百三十五。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Three thousand five hundred and thirty-five.

古文：入月日，二十七。
现代文：入月日：二十七。
English: Moonrise: the 27th.

古文：日余，十九万四千九百九十。
现代文：日余：十九万四千九百九十。
English: Remaining days: 194,990.

古文：朔虚分，一千二十四。
现代文：朔虚分：一千零二十四。
English: Shuo imaginary score: one thousand and twenty-four.

古文：斗分，一百八万五千一百七十五。
现代文：斗分：一百零八万五千一百七十五。
English: Dou score: One hundred eighty-five thousand one hundred seventy-five.

古文：行星度，二百九十二。
现代文：行星度：二百九十二。
English: Planetary degrees: two hundred ninety-two.

古文：度余，十九万四千九百九十。
现代文：度余：十九万四千九百九十。
English: Excess deaths: 194,990.

古文：水：合终岁数，一千八百七十。
现代文：水星：合终岁数：一千八百七十。
English: Mercury: Completion age: One thousand eight hundred and seventy.

古文：合终合数，一万一千七百八十九。
现代文：合终合数：一万一千七百八十九。
English: Grand total: 11,789.

古文：合月法，二十二万三千九百九十一。
现代文：合月法：二十二万三千九百九十一。
English: The number of the full moon: 2,239,911.

古文：日度法，二千一百七十二万七千一百二十七。
现代文：日度法：二千一百七十二万七千一百二十合月数：一。
English: The number of days is 21,722,712 and the number of months is one.

古文：合月数，一。月余，二十一万五千四百五十九。朔大余，二十九。
现代文：月余：二十一万五千四百五十九。朔大余：二十九。
English: Monthly surplus: up to 215,459. Monthly surplus: 29.

古文：朔小余，二千四百一十九。
现代文：朔小余：二干四百一十九。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Two stem four hundred and nineteen.

古文：入月日，二十八。
现代文：入月日：二十八。
English: Moonrise: the 28th.

古文：日余，二千三十四万四千二百六十一。
现代文：日余：二千零三十四万四千二百六十一。
English: Remaining days: 2,034,461.

古文：朔虚分，二千一百四十。
现代文：朔虚分：二千一百四十。
English: Shuo imaginary part: two thousand one hundred and forty.

古文：斗分，五百三十六万三千九百九十五。
现代文：斗分：五百三十六万三千九百九十五。
English: Points: 5,363,995.

古文：行星度，五十七。
现代文：行星度：五十七。
English: Planetary degrees: fifty-seven.

古文：度余，二千三十四万千三百六十一。
现代文：度余：二千零三十四万四千三百六十一。
English: Excess deaths: 2,034,361.

古文：推五星术曰：置壬辰元以来尽所求年，以合终合数乘之，满合终岁数得一，名积合，不尽名为合余。
现代文：推五星的方法：以壬辰元至所求年的年数，乘以合终合数，除以合终岁数，所得商数命名为积合，余数命名为合余。
English: Five-star method: take the number of years from the year of the dog to the year of the dog, multiply by the number of years from the year of the dog to the year of the dog, and divide by the number of years from the year of the dog to the year of the dog. The resulting quotient is called the product, and the remainder is called the remainder.

古文：以合终合数减合余，得一者星合往年，得二者合前往年，无所得，合其年。
现代文：以合余除以合终合敷，如果商敷得一，则行星去年舆太阳合，如果商敷得二，则行星前年与太阳合，如果商数无所得，则行星在所求年与太阳合。
English: Divide the quotient by the remainder and add the result. If the quotient is one, the planet was conjunct the sun last year. If the quotient is two, the planet was conjunct the sun the year before. If the quotient is zero, the planet was conjunct the sun the year before.

古文：余以减合终合数，为度分。
现代文：合终合敷减去余数，为度分。
English: The grade is calculated by subtracting the remaining number from the final grade.

古文：金、水积合，偶为晨，奇为夕。
现代文：金星、水星的积合为偶数时，早晨舆太阳合，积合为奇数，晚上与太阳合。
English: When the sum of Venus and Mercury is an even number, the sun is conjunct in the morning, when the sum is an odd number, the sun is conjunct in the evening.

古文：推五星合月：以月数、月余各乘积合，余满合月法从月，为积月，不尽为月余。
现代文：推五星合时所在月：以月数、月余各乘以积合，月余满合月法化入月，最后所得为积月，不满合月法部分为月余。
English: The month at the time of the five-star conjunction: multiply the number of months by the number of months and the remaining months by the number of months. The remaining full months are converted into months according to the method of the full moon, and the final result is the accumulated month. The dissatisfied part of the method of the full moon is the remaining months.

古文：以纪月除积月，所得算外，所入纪也，余为入纪月。
现代文：以积月除以纪月二万二千七百九十五，所得商数算外，为所入纪，余数为入纪月。
English: The accrual month divided by the record month is 22,795, and the remainder is the record month, except for the income quotient.

古文：副以章闰乘之，满章月得一为闰，以减入纪月，余以岁中去之，余为入岁月，命以天正起，算外，星合月也。
现代文：以章闰乘以入纪月，除以章月二百三十五，所得为闰月数，以入纪月减之，差数大于岁中十一一除去，余下不满十二部分为入岁月，从天正十一月起算，算外，为行星会合时所在月份。
English: Multiply the intercalary month by the intercalary month, divide by the intercalary month and get 235. The result is the number of intercalary months. Subtract the intercalary month from the intercalary month. If the difference is greater than the middle of the year, subtract 11. The remaining part less than 12 is the intercalary year. Counting from November, the month in which the planets are in conjunction.

古文：其在闰交际，以朔御之。
现代文：如果正好在闰月，则按照朔日确定。
English: In the case of a leap month, the new moon day is determined.

古文：推合月朔：以通数乘入纪月，满日法得一，为积日，不尽为小余。
现代文：推会合所在月朔：以通数乘以十三万四千六百三十乘以入纪月，除以日法，所得商数为积日，余数为小余。
English: At the beginning of the month in which the meeting is held: Multiply the total number by 134,630 by the month of entry into the record, divide by the day method, and the resulting quotient is the day of accumulation, and the remainder is the small surplus.

古文：以六十去积日，余为大余，命以所入纪，算外，星合朔日也。
现代文：以积日连续减去六十，余下不满六十部分为大余，以所入纪干支起算，算外，为行星会合时所在月朔日。
English: Counting the number of days in a row and subtracting sixty, the remaining less than sixty parts are considered to be a large surplus. Counting from the first day of the previous year and excluding it, it is the first day of the month when the planets meet.

古文：推入月日：以通数乘月余，合月法乘朔小余，并之，通法约之，所得满日度法得一，则星合入月日也，不满日余。
现代文：推行星会合时入月日：以通数十三万四千六百三十乘以月余，合月法乘以朔小余，二者相加，除以日度法，所得商数为行星会合时入月数，余数为日余。
English: To calculate the date of the moon landing at the time of the planetary conjunction: Multiply the remainder of the month by the total of several hundred and thirty-four thousand six hundred and thirty, and multiply the remainder of the month by the method of the lunar month, add the two, and divide by the daily method. The resulting quotient is the number of the moon landing at the time of the planetary conjunction, and the remainder is the remainder of the day.

古文：命日以朔，算外，入月日也。
现代文：日敷从朔日起算，算外，为行星会合时入月日。
English: The solstice is counted from the day after tomorrow, and is the day of the new moon when the planets are in conjunction.

古文：推星合度：以周天乘度分，满日度法得一为度，不尽为余。
现代文：推行星会合时所在宿度：以周天六十七万三千一百五十乘以度分，除以日度法，所得余数为行星会合时度数，余数为度余。
English: The degree of the planet's position at the time of the conjunction is calculated by multiplying the number of degrees by the number of days of the week plus 673 150 and dividing by the number of days. The remaining number is the degree at the time of the conjunction, and the remaining number is the remainder.

古文：命以牛前五度起，算外，星所合度也。
现代文：度数从牛宿前五度起算，算外，为行星会合时所在宿度。
English: The number of degrees is counted from five degrees before the cow's lodging, and is the degree of lodging at the time of the meeting of the planets.

古文：求后全月：以月数加入岁月，以余加月余，余满合月法得一月。
现代文：求下次会合时所在月份：以月数加上次会合时入岁月，月余加上次会合时月余，所得月余在合月法以上，则化入月数。
English: Find the month in which the next meeting will be held: add the number of months to the number of years at the time of the next meeting, add the remaining month to the remaining month at the time of the next meeting, and if the remaining month is more than the number of months, it will be converted into months.

古文：月不满岁中，即在其年；满去之，有闰计焉，余为后年；再满，在后二年。
现代文：如果月数小于岁中十二，则行星在本年会合；如果月数大于等于岁中，减之，有闰月亦减之，余下小于岁中，则会合在上次会合的后一年；如果余下的仍大于等于十二，则会合在上次会合的后二年。
English: If the number of months is less than twelve, then the planets will meet in the current year; if the number of months is greater than or equal to the middle of the year, then less, if there is a leap month, then less than the middle of the year, then the meeting will be held one year after the last meeting; if the remaining is still greater than or equal to twelve, then the meeting will be held two years after the last meeting.

古文：金、水加晨得夕，加夕得晨也。
现代文：金星、水星加一次会合后由早晨会合变为晚上会合，晚上会合变为早上会合。
English: After Venus, Mercury and another meeting, the morning meeting changes to an evening meeting, and the evening meeting changes to a morning meeting.

古文：求后合朔：以朔大、小余数加合朔月大、小余，其月余上成月者，又加大余二十九，小余二千四百一十九，小余满日法从大余，命如前法。
现代文：求下次会合时所在月朔日：以朔大余、朔小余，加上次合月大余、小余，加后满一月，再加大余二十九，小余二千四百一十九，小余满日法四千五百五十九部分，化为大余，起算命名的方法如前。
English: It is requested that the new moon day of the month at the time of the next meeting: take the new moon day and the new moon day, add the new moon day and the new moon day, add the full moon day, and then increase the remaining 29, the remaining 2,419, and the remaining 4,559 parts of the full moon day method to become the remaining, and the starting naming method is as before.

古文：求后入月日：以入月日、日余加入月日及余，余满日度法得一。
现代文：求下次会合时的入月日：以入月日、日余，加上次会合时入月日、日余，日余满日度法部分，化为日。
English: Enter the month of the next meeting: add the day of the month, the day remaining, and the day of the month, the day remaining, and the day remaining at the next meeting, and convert it to a day.

古文：其前合朔小余满其虚分者，去一日；后小余满二千四百一十九以上，去二十九日；不满，去三十日，其余则后合入月日，命以朔。
现代文：如果上次会合朔小余大于等于对应虚分，则减一日；如果本次会合小余大于等于二千四百一十九，减去二十九日；小于二千四百一十九，减去三十曰，余下的为本次会合时入月曰，以朔日起算。
English: If the surplus at the last meeting is greater than or equal to the corresponding fractional part, then one day shall be subtracted; if the surplus at this meeting is greater than or equal to 2,419, then 29 days shall be subtracted; if it is less than 2,419, then 30 days shall be subtracted, and the remainder shall be the day of the new moon at the time of this meeting, calculated from the new moon.

古文：求后合度，以度数及分，如前合宿次命之。
现代文：求下次会合时所在宿度，以度数及分加上次会合时度数及分，从上次会合时所在宿度起算，所得即为本次会合时所在宿度。
English: Find the seat occupied at the time of the next meeting, add the number of degrees and minutes to the number of degrees and minutes at the time of the next meeting, and calculate from the seat occupied at the time of the last meeting. The result is the seat occupied at the time of this meeting.

古文：木：晨与日合，伏，顺，十六日九十九万七千八百三十二分行星二度百七十九万五千二百三十八分，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：木星：早晨舆太阳会合，伏，顺行，十六天九十九万七千八百三十二分，共运行二度一百七十九万五千二百三十八分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Jupiter: In the morning, the two suns meet, the sun rises and sets, 16 days, 997 832 minutes, a total of 2 orbits of 1795 238 minutes, and then appears in the morning in the east, after the sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行五十七分之十一，五十七日行十一度。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行五十七分之十一度，五十七天共运行十一度。
English: Forward, fast, run every day for 11/57, and run for a total of 11 times in 57 days.

古文：顺，迟，日行九分，五十七日行九度而留。
现代文：再顺行，慢，每天运行九分，五十七天共运行九度，留。
English: After that, it will run in a clockwise and anti-clockwise direction for nine minutes every day, and for a total of 57 days, it will run in a clockwise and anti-clockwise direction.

古文：不行二十七日而旋。
现代文：二十七天不动而转向。
English: Twenty-seven days without moving and turning around.

古文：逆，日行七分之一，八十四日退十二度而复留。
现代文：逆行，每天运行七分之一度，八十四天共退行十二度，再留。
English: retrograde, running one-seventh of a degree every day, retrograde a total of twelve degrees in eighty-four days, and then remain.

古文：二十七日复迟，日行九分，五十七日行九度而复顺。
现代文：二十七天停止不动，再慢行，每天运行九分，五十七天共运行九度而顺行。
English: Twenty-seven days to stop moving, and then slow, running nine minutes a day, fifty-seven days to run nine degrees and go along.

古文：疾，日行十一分，五十七日行十一度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：快，每天运行十一分，五十七天共运行十一度，在太阳之前，晚上隐伏于西方。
English: Fast, running eleven minutes a day, running a total of eleven times in fifty-seven days, before the sun, lurking in the west at night.

古文：顺，十六日九十九万七千八百三十二分行星二度百七十九万五千二百三十八分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，十六天九十九万七千八百三十二分，共运行二度一百七十九万五千二百三十八分，与太阳会合。
English: It moved clockwise for 16 days and 997 832 minutes, and moved twice for a total of 1795 238 minutes, when it met the sun.

古文：凡一终，三百九十八日百九十九万五千六百六十四分，行星三十三度百四十七万二千八百六十九分。
现代文：总计一终，三百九十八天一百九十九万五千六百六十四分，运行三十三度一百四十七万二千八百六十九分。
English: In total, it took 398 days, 19,995,664 minutes and 33 hours, 1,472,869 minutes to complete.

古文：火：晨与日合，伏，七十二日百七十九万二千六百一十五分行星五十六度百二十四万九千三百四十五分，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：火星：早晨与太阳会合，隐伏不见，七十二天一百七十九万二千六百一十五分，运行五十六度一百二十四万九千三百四十五分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Mars: Merged with the sun in the morning, disappeared, 72 days 1,792,615 minutes, moved 56 degrees 1,249,345 minutes, and appeared in the morning in the east, behind the sun.

古文：顺，日行二十三分之十四，百八十四日行百一十二度。
现代文：顺行，每天运行二十三分之十四度，一百八十四天运行一百一十二度。
English: Running in a clockwise direction, it runs at twenty-three-four degrees every day, and at one hundred and twelve degrees for one hundred and eighty-four days.

古文：更顺，迟，日行十二分，九十二日行四十八度而留。
现代文：再顺行，慢，每天运行十二分，九十二天运行四十八度而留。
English: Then go forward, slowly, run twelve minutes a day, run forty-eight degrees for ninety-two days, and stay up.

古文：不行十一日而旋。
现代文：十一天不动，转向。
English: Eleven days without moving, turning around.

古文：逆，日行六十二分之十七，六十二日退十七度而复留。
现代文：逆行，每天运行六十二分之十七度，六十二天退行十七度，再留。
English: Retrograde, every day run seventeen degrees of sixty-two, sixty-two days retrograde seventeen degrees, and then stay.

古文：十一日复顺，迟，日行十二分，九十二日行四十八度而复疾。
现代文：十一天后转为顺行，慢，每天运行十二分，九十二天运行四十八度，速度变快。
English: After the 11th day, it was changed to go forward, slow, run 12 minutes a day, run 48 degrees for 92 days, and the speed became faster.

古文：日行十四分，百八十四日行百一十二度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：每天运行十四分，一百八十四天运行一百一十二度，在太阳之前，晚上隐伏于西方。
English: Running fourteen minutes a day, a hundred and eighty-four days running a hundred and twelve degrees, before the sun, at night lurking in the west.

古文：顺，七十二日百七十九万二千六百一十五分行星五十六度百二十四万九千三百四十五分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，七十二天一百七十九万二千六百一十五分，运行五十六度一百二十四万九千三百四十五分，与太阳会合。
English: Along the line, seventy-two days one million seven hundred ninety-two thousand six hundred and fifteen minutes, running fifty-six degrees one million two hundred forty-nine thousand three hundred and forty-five minutes, meeting with the sun.

古文：凡一终，七百八十日三百五十八万五千二百三十分，行星四百一十五度二百四十九万八千六百九十分。
现代文：总计一终，七百八十天三百五十八万五千二百三十分，运行四百一十五度二百四十九万八千六百九十分。
English: In total, seven hundred and eighty days to three million five hundred and eighty thousand five thousand two hundred and thirty minutes, running four hundred and fifteen degrees two million four hundred and ninety nine thousand eight thousand six hundred and ninety minutes.

古文：土：晨与日合，伏，十九日三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半行星二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一分半，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：土星：早晨与太阳会合，隐伏不见，十九天三百八十四万七千六百七十五点五分，运行二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一点五分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Saturn: It meets the sun in the morning, hides, and disappears for nineteen days and three hundred and eighty-four thousand seven hundred and six hundred and seventy-five minutes. It orbits the sun twice for six hundred and forty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty-five minutes, and then appears in the morning in the east, behind the sun.

古文：顺，行百七十二分之十三，八十六日行六度半而留。
现代文：顺行，每天运行一百七十二分之十三度，八十六天运行六点五度而留。
English: It runs every day at 13 minutes past one hundred and seventy-two, and every eighty-six days at six minutes past five.

古文：不行三十二日半而旋。
现代文：三十二点五天不动，转向。
English: Don't move for thirty-two-five days, turn around.

古文：逆，日行十七分之一，百二日退六度而复留。
现代文：逆行，每天运行十七分之一度，一百零二天退行六度，再留。
English: Retrograde, every day run one seventeenth of a degree, one hundred and two days retrograde six degrees, and then stay.

古文：不行三十二日半复顺，日行十三分，八十六日行六度半，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：三十二点五天不动，转而顺行，每天运行十三分，八十六天运行六点五度，在太阳前面，晚上隐伏于西方。
English: For thirty-two and a half days, it does not move, but moves along, running thirteen minutes a day, for eighty-six days, it runs six and a half degrees, in front of the sun, and at night it hides in the west.

古文：顺，十九日三百八十四万七千六百七十五分半行星二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一分半，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，十九天三百八十四万七千六百七十五点五分，运行二度六百四十九万一千一百二十一点五分，与太阳会合。
English: It will travel along the ecliptic for nineteen days and reach the sun at 3,840,76,75.5 minutes, and travel around the sun twice for 6,491,121.5 minutes.

古文：凡一终，三百七十八日六十七万五千三百六十四分，行星十二度五百九十六万二千二百五十六分。
现代文：总计一终，共三百七十八天六十七万五千三百六十四分，运行十二度五百九十六万二千二百五十六分。
English: In total, there were 378 days, 675,364 minutes, and 5,962,256 minutes of operation.

古文：金：晨与日合，伏，六日退四度，而晨见东方，在日后而逆。
现代文：金星：早晨与太阳会合，伏，逆行，六天退行四度，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后，逆行。
English: Venus: morning conjunction with the sun, waxing, retrograde, six days retrograde four degrees, then morning appearance in the east, after the sun, retrograde.

古文：迟，日行五分之三，十日退六度。
现代文：慢，每天运行五分之三度，十天退行六度。
English: slowly, running three-fifths of a degree every day, and retreating six degrees in ten days.

古文：留，不行七日而旋。
现代文：留，七天不动，转向。
English: Stay, don't move for seven days, turn around.

古文：顺，迟，日行四十五分之三十三，四十五日行三十三度而顺。
现代文：顺行，慢，每天运行四十五分之三十三度，四十五天运行三十三度，顺行。
English: Forward, slow, every day run thirty-three degrees forty-five, forty-five days run thirty-three degrees, forward.

古文：疾，日行一度九十一分之十四，九十一日行百五度而顺。
现代文：快，每天运行一又九十一分之十四度，九十一天运行一百零五度而顺行。
English: Fast, running every day one and a quarter ninety-one degrees, running one hundred and five degrees for ninety-one days, and running smoothly.

古文：益疾，日行一度九十一分之二十一，九十一日行百一十二度，在日后，而晨伏东方。
现代文：更快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十一度，九十一天运行一百一十二度，在太阳之后，早晨隐伏于东方。
English: Faster, running once every day and twenty-one ninety-oneths, ninety-one days running one hundred and twelve degrees, behind the sun, morning lurks in the east.

古文：顺，四十二日十九万四千九百九十分行星五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，四十二天十九万四千九百九十分运行五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，与太阳会合。
English: Along the line, forty-two days nineteen hundred and forty-nine hundred and ninety, running fifty-two degrees nineteen hundred and forty-nine hundred and ninety, meeting with the sun.

古文：一合，二百九十二日十九万四千九百九十分，行星如之。
现代文：一合，总计二百九十二天十九万四千九百九十分，运行二百九十二度十九万四千九百九十分。
English: In total, 292 days, 194,9990 minutes, and 292 degrees, 194,9990 minutes of operation.

古文：金：夕与日合，伏，顺，四十二日十九万四千九百九十分行星五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：金星：晚上与太阳会合，隐伏不见，顺行，四十二天十九万四千九百九十分运行五十二度十九万四千九百九十分，转而晚上在西方出现，在太阳之前。
English: Venus: Meets the sun in the evening, hides, goes along, 42 days 194,990 minutes, 52 degrees 194,990 minutes, and then appears in the evening in the west, before the sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度九十一分之二十一，九十一日行百一十二度而更顺。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十一度，九十一天运行一百一十二度，再顺行。
English: Go forward, fast, run once every day and once every twenty-one ninety-one days, run one hundred and twelve degrees for ninety-one days, then go forward.

古文：迟，日行一度十四分，九十一日行百五度而顺。
现代文：慢，每天运行一度十四分，九十一天运行一百零五度，再顺行。
English: Slow, run once a day for fourteen minutes, run one hundred and five degrees for ninety-one days, and then run.

古文：益迟，日行四十五分之三十三，四十五日行三十三度而留。
现代文：更慢，每天运行四十五分之三十三度，四十五天运行三十三度而留。
English: More slowly, every day run thirty-three degrees forty-five, forty-five days run thirty-three degrees and stay.

古文：不行七日而旋。
现代文：七天不动，转向。
English: Don't move for seven days, turn around.

古文：逆，日行五分之三，十日退六度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：逆行，每天运行五分之三度，十天退行六度，在太阳之前，晚上隐伏于西方。
English: Retrograding, it moves three-fifths of a degree every day, and six degrees backwards in ten days. It precedes the sun and lurks in the west at night.

古文：逆，六日退四度，而与日合。
现代文：逆行，六天退行四度，舆太阳会合。
English: Retrograde, six days retrograde four degrees, Sun and Moon meet.

古文：凡再合一终，五百八十四日三十八万九千九百八十分，行星如之。
现代文：总计二次会合，一终，五百八十四天三十八万九千九百八十分，运行五百八十四度三十八万九千九百八十分。
English: The total of the second meeting was 584 days, 389,980 minutes, and the operation was 584 degrees, 389,980 minutes.

古文：水：晨与日合，伏，十一日退七度，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：水星：早晨与太阳会合，隐伏不见，十一天退行七度，早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Mercury: Merged with the sun in the morning, disappeared, retreated seven degrees in eleven days, appeared in the east in the morning, after the sun.

古文：逆，疾，一日退一度而留。
现代文：逆行，快，一天退行一度而留。
English: Retrograde, fast, retrograde once a day and stay.

古文：不行一日而旋。
现代文：一天不动，转向。
English: Don't move for a day, turn around.

古文：顺，迟，日行八分之七，八日行七度而顺。
现代文：顺行，慢，每天运行八分之七度，八天运行七度，顺行。
English: Go forward, slowly, run seven-eighths of a degree every day, run seven degrees for eight days, go forward.

古文：疾，日行一度十八分之四，十八日行二十二度，在日后，晨伏东方。
现代文：快，每天运行一又十八分之四度，十八天运行二十二度，在太阳之后，早晨隐伏于东方。
English: Fast, running every day one and four eighteenths of a degree, eighteen days running twenty-two degrees, after the sun, morning lurks in the east.

古文：顺，十八日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分行星三十六度二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，十八天二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分运行三十六度二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分，舆太阳会合。
English: Running in a straight line, 18 days, 2,034,462,061 minutes, running 36 degrees, 2,034,462,061 minutes, the Sun and the Moon meet.

古文：凡一合，五十七日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，行星如之。
现代文：一合，共五十七天二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分，运行五十七度二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分。
English: A total of 57 days, 2,03,440,261 minutes, and 57 degrees, 2,03,440,261 minutes of operation.

古文：水：夕与日合，伏，十八日二千三十四万四千二百六十一分行星三十六度二千三十四万四千二百六十一分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：水星：晚上与太阳会合，隐伏不见，十八天二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分运行三十六度二千零三十四万四千二百六十一分，晚上在西方出现，在太阳之前。
English: Mercury: Conjunction with the Sun in the evening, disappears, 18 days 203,444,261 minutes, 36 degrees 203,444,261 minutes, appears in the west in the evening, before the Sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度十八分之四，十八日行二十二度而更顺。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行一又十八分之四度，十八天运行二十二度，顺行。
English: Forward, fast, run every day one and four eighteenths of a degree, eighteen days run twenty-two degrees, forward.

古文：迟，日行八分之七，八日行七度而留。
现代文：慢，每天运行八分之七度，八天运行七度而留。
English: slowly, running seven-eighths of a degree a day, running seven degrees a day for eight days and staying there.

古文：不行一日而旋。
现代文：一天不动，转向。
English: Don't move for a day, turn around.

古文：逆，一日退一度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：逆行，一天退行一度，在太阳之前，晚上隐伏于西方。
English: Retrograde, retrograde once a day, before the sun, lurking in the west at night.

古文：逆，十一日退七度，而与日合。
现代文：逆行，十一天退行七度，与太阳会合。
English: retrograde, 11 days retrograde seven degrees, meeting with the sun.

古文：凡再合一终，百一十五日千八百九十六万一千三百九十五分，行星如之。五星历步术
现代文：总计二次会合，一终，一百一十五天一千八百九十六万一千三百九十五分，运行一百一十五度一千八百九十六万一千三百九十五分。五星历步术：
English: The total of the second meeting, in the end, one hundred and fifteen days to one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six thousand one hundred and three hundred and ninety-five minutes, running one hundred and fifteen degrees to one thousand eight hundred and ninety-six thousand one hundred and three hundred and ninety-five minutes.

古文：以法伏日度余加星合日度余，余满日度法得一从全，命之如前，得星见日及度余也。
现代文：把给定行星隐伏时的天数、度数及其余数，加入到此行星会合时的时间、所在宿度及其余数，余数大于日度法则化为天数、度数加之，命名的方法舆前面一样，即可得到此行星出现的时间和所在宿度。
English: Add the number of days, the number of degrees and the remaining number when the given planet is occulted, the time, the degree of occultation and the remaining number when the planet is joined, and the remaining number is converted into the number of days and the number of degrees. The naming method is the same as before, and the time and degree of occultation of this planet can be obtained.

古文：以星行分母乘见度分，如日度法得一，分不尽，半法以上亦得一，而日加所行分，分满其母得一度。
现代文：以行星每天运行分数的分母乘以该星首次出现时的度数，度余除以日度法得一，如果度余达到日度法的一半以上也得一，每天加上所运行的分数，分数大于等于其对应之分母得一度。
English: The denominator of the fraction of the planet's daily motion is multiplied by the number of degrees at the time of the star's first appearance. The remainder of the degree divided by the daily method is one, and if the remainder reaches more than half of the daily method, it is also one. If the fraction of the planet's daily motion is added to the daily, the fraction greater than or equal to the corresponding denominator is one.

古文：逆顺母不同，以当行之母乘故分，如故母而一，当行分也。
现代文：逆行和顺行时所用分母不同，以现行的对应分母乘以前面的运行分，除以前面运行分对应的分母，所得为对应于现行分母的运行分。
English: The denominator used for reverse and forward crosstalk is different. The current corresponding denominator is multiplied by the previous running point, and the denominator corresponding to the previous running point is subtracted. The result is the running point corresponding to the current denominator.

古文：留者承前，逆则减之，伏不尽度，除斗分，以行母为率。
现代文：当行星留时，宿度沿用前面的不变，逆行则减之，伏时不写出每天运行的度数，经过斗宿时除去斗分，以现行分母作为比率。
English: When the planet stays, the precession follows the previous constant, retrograde is reduced, volt does not write the degree of daily operation, when passing through the precession, remove the bucket point, and use the current denominator as the ratio.

古文：分有损益，前后相御。
现代文：运行分有增有减，前后相互照应。
English: There is an increase and decrease in the running score, and they correspond to each other.

古文：武帝侍中平原刘智，以斗历改宪，推《四分法》，三百年而减一日，以百五十为度法，三十七为斗分。
现代文：武帝时的侍中平原人刘智，以斗历修改历法，推崇《四分法》，三百年减一天，以一百五十为度法，三十七为斗分。
English: Liu Zhi, a man from the plains who was an aide-de-camp to Emperor Wu, modified the calendar using the Dou calendar and promoted the "four-point method," with three hundred years minus one day, one hundred and fifty as the degree method, and thirty-seven as the Dou points.

古文：推甲子为上元，至泰始十年，岁在甲午，九万七千四百一十一岁，上元天正甲子朔夜半冬至，日月五星始于星纪，得元首之端。
现代文：推算甲子作为上元，到泰始十年，即甲午年，共九万七千四百一十一年，上元天正甲子朔夜半冬至，太阳、月亮、五大行星从星纪开始，得到上元之首的开端。
English: The calculation of the year of the rooster as the Shangyuan, to the first ten years of the Tai, that is, the year of the rooster, a total of ninety-seven thousand four hundred and eleven years. In the Shangyuan, the day of the rooster was the midwinter solstice, and the sun, the moon, and the five planets began from the astrology to get the beginning of the head of the Shangyuan.

古文：饰以浮说，名为《正历》。
现代文：以虚浮之说作为饰辞，名为《正历》。
English: It is called "Geng Lian" with the phrase "false and fanciful" as an epithet.

古文：当阳侯杜预著《春秋长历》，说云：
现代文：当阳侯杜预著《春秋长历》，说：
English: Dangyang Houdu, author of "Spring and Autumn Long Calendar," said:

古文：日行一度，月行十三度十九分之七有奇，日官当会集此之迟疾，以考成晦朔，以设闰月。
现代文：太阳运行一度，月亮运行十三又十九分之七度多，掌管历法的官员根据太阳、月亮运动的快慢，以考察晦、朔，设置闰月。
English: The sun orbits the earth once, and the moon orbits the earth more than seven-nineteen-hundredths of a second. The officials in charge of the calendar set the leap month according to the speed of movement of the sun and the moon, by examining the waxing and waning of the moon.

古文：闰月无中气，而北斗邪指两辰之间，所以异于他月。
现代文：闰月没有中气，北斗斜指于两辰之间，因此与其他十二个月不一样。
English: The intercalary month does not have a midpoint, and the Big Dipper points diagonally between the two hours, so it is different from the other twelve months.

古文：积此以相通，四时八节无违，乃得成岁，其微密至矣。
现代文：以此连续推算，则四时八节没有乖错，这才能够成岁，其间达到极为精微细密的境界。
English: With this continuous calculation, there is nothing wrong with the four o'clock and eight o'clock, which is able to grow old, during which it reaches an extremely fine and delicate state.

古文：得其精微，以合天道，则事叙而不愆。
现代文：得其精微，以合天道，则事情有序而不错乱。
English: If it is refined and follows the heavenly way, then things will be orderly and not chaotic.

古文：故《传》曰： 闰以正时，时以作事。 
现代文：所以《传》说： 闰月用来校正纪时，纪时用来指导人事。 
English: Therefore, "Biography" said: The leap month is used to correct the chronology, and the chronology is used to guide personnel.

古文：然阴阳之运，随动而差，差而不已，遂与历错。
现代文：但是阴阳的运转，随着本身的移动而产生误差，误差不断积累，于是舆历法乖错。
English: However, the operation of yin and yang, along with its own movement, produces errors, and the errors continue to accumulate, so the public calendar method is incorrect.

古文：故仲尼、丘明每于朔闰发文，盖矫正得失，因以宣明历数也。
现代文：所以仲尼、丘明每次在朔和闰月时作记录，是为了矫正历法的得失，以此阐明历数。
English: Therefore, Zhongni and Quming made records every time at the new moon and the leap month, in order to correct the gains and losses of the calendar, and to clarify the calendar.

古文：刘子骏造《三正历》以修《春秋》，日蚀有甲乙者三十四，而《三正历》惟得一蚀，比诸家既最疏。
现代文：刘子骏造《三正历》，以之研习《春秋》，《春秋》所载日食，带日干支的有三十四次，而按《三正历》推算衹得一次，与其他历法相比，最为粗疏。
English: Liu Zi made the "Three Gregorian Calendars" to study the "Spring and Autumn." The solar eclipses contained in the "Spring and Autumn" have thirty-four solar terms, and according to the calculation of the "Three Gregorian Calendars," there is only one. Compared with other calendars, it is the most coarse.

古文：又六千余岁辄益一日，凡岁当累日为次，而故益之，此不可行之甚者。
现代文：并且六千多年一天，凡是年应该由每天累积而成，而故意增加，其不可行达到了极点。
English: And after more than six thousand years, the idea that a year should be made up of every day added together, and deliberately increased, has reached the extreme of impossibility.

古文：自古已来，诸论《春秋》者多违谬，或造家术，或用黄帝已来诸历，以推经传朔日，皆不谐合。
现代文：自古以来，那些讨论《春秋》的历家多有荒谬，或者用自己造的历法，或者用黄帝以来各家历法，推算经传中的朔，都与经传不合。
English: Since ancient times, those historians who discuss the "Spring and Autumn" are mostly absurd, or use their own calendar, or use the calendars of various families since the Yellow Emperor, to calculate the new moon in the legend, all of which are inconsistent with the legend.

古文：日蚀于朔，此乃天验，《经传》又书其朔蚀，可谓得天，而刘贾诸儒说，皆以为月二日或三日，公违圣人明文，其弊在于守一元，不与天消息也。
现代文：日食发生在朔日，这是符合自然的规律，《经》、《传》上又写着，朔日食，可以称为得天，而刘、买等各人的学说，都认为日食可在月初二或初三发生，公然违背圣人的明文，他们的弊端在于，衹认定一个上元，而不根据实际天象进行改正。
English: The eclipse of the sun occurred on the new moon, which is in line with the laws of nature. It is also written in the "Ching" and "Zhuan" that the new moon eclipse can be called gaining heaven, while the teachings of Liu, Buy and others all believe that the eclipse can occur on the second or third day of the first month of the month, blatantly violating the saint's clear text. Their drawback is that they identify a Shangyuan, but do not correct it according to the actual celestial phenomenon.

古文：余感《春秋》之事，尝著《历论》，极言历之通理。
现代文：我感慨于上述有关《春秋》历法之事，曾经着《历论》，极言历法的通理。
English: I am deeply moved by the above-mentioned things about the "Spring and Autumn" calendar, and I once wrote "History," a maxim about the logic of the calendar.

古文：其大指曰： 天行不息，日月星辰各运其舍，皆动物也。
现代文：大体的意思是：天运行不息，太阳、月亮和行星各自在天上运行，都是运动的天体。
English: The general meaning is: the sky is in constant motion, the sun, moon and planets are each moving in the sky, they are all moving celestial bodies.

古文：物动则不一，虽行度有大量可得而限，累日为月，累月为岁，以新故相涉，不得不有毫末之差，此自然之理也。
现代文：天体运动则不可能总保持一致，纵然它们的行度大量可得并且限定在一定的范围之内，日积累而成为月，月积累而成为年，新的和旧的相互关联，不可能没有微小的误差，这是很自然的道理。
English: The movements of the heavenly bodies, on the other hand, cannot always be uniform, even though their movements are abundant and limited to a certain range. It is only natural that the accumulation of days into months, and of months into years, and the interrelationship of the new and the old, cannot be without small errors.

古文：故春秋日有频月而蚀者，有旷年不蚀者，理不得一，而算守恆数，故历无不有先后也。
现代文：所以春秋时有的连续两个月都有日食，有的多年都没有日食，按理不可能统一，而历法推算所用的基本数据保持不变，所以按历法推算的结果都与实际天象有先有后。
English: Therefore, in spring and autumn, some have eclipses for two consecutive months, and some have no eclipses for many years. It is theoretically impossible to unify, and the basic data used for calendar calculation remain unchanged. Therefore, the results of calendar calculation are different from the actual celestial phenomena.

古文：始失于毫毛，而尚未可觉，积而成多，以失弦望晦朔，则不得不改宪以从之。
现代文：开始的误差很小，因此觉察不到，误差积累而变大，以至于推算所得弦、望、晦、朔与实际不符，则不得不修改历法，使之与实际天象相符。
English: The error at the beginning is very small, so it cannot be detected, and the error accumulates and becomes large, so that the calculated chord, hope, twilight, and new moon do not match the actual, so it is necessary to modify the calendar to match the actual celestial phenomenon.

古文：《书》所谓 钦若昊天，历象日月星辰 ，《易》所谓 治历明时 ，言当顺天以求合，非为合以验天者也。
现代文：这就是《书》所说的 钦若昊天，历象日月星辰 ，《易》所说的 治历明时 ，认为历法的制定应该顺应实际天象以求得二者的符合，而不是先制定历法，然后验证实际天象是否与之相符。
English: This is what the "Book" said, "Qin Ruo Hao Tian," the calendar is like the sun, the moon and the stars, and the "Yi" said, "Ji Li Ming Ti," that the formulation of the calendar should conform to the actual celestial objects in order to obtain the conformity of the two, rather than first formulating the calendar, and then verifying whether the actual celestial objects are consistent with it.

古文：推此论之，春秋二百余年，其治历变通多矣。
现代文：推而论之，春秋二百多年间，肯定有多次修改历法以顺应天象。
English: In other words, there must have been multiple revisions of the calendar over the course of more than two hundred years to accommodate the celestial phenomena.

古文：虽数术绝灭，远寻《经传》微旨，大量可知，时之违谬，则《经传》有验。
现代文：虽然春秋时的历法已经堙减不传，追寻《经》和《传》中隐含的旨意，从大量事实可以得知，时令的违谬，《经》和《传》上均有凭据。
English: Although the spring and autumn calendars have been reduced, the pursuit of the intentions implied in the "Ching" and "Zhuan" can be learned from a large number of facts that the seasonal fallacy, "Ching" and "Zhuan" have evidence.

古文：学者固当曲循《经传》月日、日蚀，以考晦朔，以推时验；而皆不然，各据其学，以推春秋，此无异于度己之迹，而欲削他人之足也。
现代文：学者们本应当探寻《经》和《传》中记载的月、日和日食，以考察晦、朔，推演它们是否与实际时间一致；但他们却不这样做，各自根据自己的历法，推算春秋月、日和日食，这样做无异于以自己的脚印为标准，去削他人之足。
English: Scholars should have explored the moon, sun and eclipse of the sun recorded in the "Ching" and "Zhuan" to investigate whether they are consistent with the actual time; but they did not do so, each according to their own calendar, calculating the spring and autumn months, the sun and the eclipse. Doing so is tantamount to using one's own footprints as a standard to cut the feet of others.

古文：余为《历论》之后，至咸宁中，善算者李修、卜显，依论体为术，名《乾度历》，表上朝廷。
现代文：我着《历论》之后，至咸宁年问，有善于计算的奎壁、上题两人，依据我的论述制造了名为《干度历》的历法，上于朝廷。
English: After I wrote the "Historical Theory," when Xianning asked for the year, Kuibai, who was good at calculation, and the above two people, based on my discussion, created a calendar called the "Dry Calendar," which was presented to the imperial court.

古文：其术合日行四分数而微增月行，用三百岁改宪之意，二元相推，七十余岁，承以强弱，强弱之差盖少，而适足以远通盈缩。
现代文：他们的历法，太阳运动用《四分历》的基本数据，仅仅增加了月亮运行的速率，用三百年修改历法的说法，用二元推算七十余年的天象，误差甚小，对天体运行的描述可以推演到遥远的年代。
English: Their calendar, the movement of the sun using the basic data of the "Quarterly Calendar," only increased the speed of the moon's movement, using the argument of three hundred years to modify the calendar, using binary to calculate more than seventy years of celestial phenomena, the error is very small, and the description of the movement of celestial bodies can be deduced to a distant age.

古文：时尚书及史官，以《乾度》与《泰始历》参校古今记注，《乾度历》殊胜《泰始历》，上胜官历四十五事。
现代文：当时的尚书和史官用《干度历》和《泰始历》参校古今记注，发现《干度历》大大胜过《泰始历》，于是上奏它胜过官历的具体的四十五个事例。
English: Shangshu and historians at that time used the "Gandu Calendar" and the "Thai New Year's Calendar" to record the past and present, and found that the "Gandu Calendar" was much better than the "Thai New Year's Calendar," so they played 45 specific cases where it was better than the official calendar.

古文：今其术具存。
现代文：现在他们的历法都还保存着。
English: Their calendars are still preserved.

古文：又并考古今十历以验《春秋》，知《三统》之最疏也。
现代文：又同时用古今十部历法推算检验《春秋》，从中可知，《三统历》最为粗疏。
English: At the same time, "Spring and Autumn" was tested with the calculation of ten calendars from ancient times to the present, from which it can be seen that "Three Calendars" is the most crude.

古文：《春秋》大凡七百七十九日，三百九十三《经》，三百八十六《传》。
现代文：《春秋》上总共记载了七百七十九个干支日，三百九十三日在《经》上，三百八十六日在传》上。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded a total of seven hundred and seventy-nine zodiac days, three hundred and ninety-three days in "Ching" and three hundred eighty-six days in "Zhuan."

古文：其三十七日食。
现代文：三十七次日食。
English: Thirty-seventh solar eclipse.

古文：三无甲乙。
现代文：三次没有日干支。
English: Three times there was no daily expenditure.

古文：《黄帝》历得四百六十六日，一蚀。
现代文：《黄帝历》推算四百六十六日和一次日食符合。
English: The calculation of 466 days in the "Yellow Emperor Calendar" is consistent with a solar eclipse.

古文：《颛顼历》得五百九日，八蚀。
现代文：《颛项历》推算五百零九日和八次日食符合。
English: According to the calculations of the Gregorian calendar, it coincides with the 509th day and the 8th solar eclipse.

古文：《夏历》得五百三十六日，十四蚀。
现代文：《夏历》推算五百三十六日和十四次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Summer Calendar" is consistent with the 536th day and the 14th solar eclipse.

古文：《真夏历》得四百六十六日，一蚀。
现代文：《真夏历》推算四百六十六日和一次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Midsummer Calendar" is consistent with 466 days and one solar eclipse.

古文：《殷历》得五百三日，十三蚀。
现代文：《殷历》推算五百零三日和十三次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Yin Calendar" is consistent with the 5003rd and 13th solar eclipses.

古文：《周历》得五百六日，十三蚀。
现代文：《周历》推算五百零六日和十三次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Weekly Calendar" is consistent with the 506th day and the 13th solar eclipse.

古文：《真周历》得四百八十五日，一蚀。
现代文：《真周历》推算四百八十五日和一次日食符合。
English: The calculation of 485 days and one solar eclipse is consistent with the "True Weekly Calendar."

古文：《鲁历》得五百二十九日，十三蚀。
现代文：《鲁历》推算五百二十九日和十三次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Lu Calendar" is consistent with the 529th day and the 13th solar eclipse.

古文：《三统历》得四百八十四日，一蚀。
现代文：《三统历》推算四百八十四日和一次日食符合。
English: The calculation of 484 days and one solar eclipse is consistent with the calculation of the "Three Chinese Calendars."

古文：《乾象历》得四百九十五日，七蚀。
现代文：《干象历》推算四百九十五日和七次日食符合。
English: The calculation of 495 days and seven solar eclipses in the "Dry Elephant Calendar" is consistent.

古文：《泰始历》得五百一十日，十九蚀。
现代文：《泰始历》推算五百一十日和十九次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "Thai New Year Calendar" is consistent with the 510th day and the 19th solar eclipse.

古文：《乾度历》得五百三十八日，十九蚀。
现代文：《干度历》推算五百三十八日和十九次日食符合。
English: The calculation of the "dry calendar" is consistent with the 538th day and the 19th solar eclipse.

古文：今《长历》得七百四十六日，三十三蚀。
现代文：现在的《长历》推算七百四十六和三十三次日食符合。
English: The current "Long Count" calculation of 746 corresponds to the 33rd solar eclipse.

古文：失三十三日，《经传》误；四日蚀，三无甲乙。
现代文：三十三不符，经》、《传》有误；四次日食不符，其中三次无干支。
English: Thirty-three do not match, and there is a mistake in the sutra and "Zhuan"; four solar eclipses do not match, of which three are unrelated.

古文：汉末，宋仲子集七历以考《春秋》，案其夏、周二历术数，皆与《艺文志》所记不同，故更名为《真夏》、《真周历》也。
现代文：汉末，宋仲子搜集七种历法考证《春秋》，经研究，其中夏、周二历都与《艺文志》所记载的不同，所以更名为《真夏历》、《真周历》。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Song Zhongzi collected seven kinds of calendars for the study of "Spring and Autumn." After research, the summer and Tuesday calendars were different from those recorded in "Art History," so they were renamed "Midsummer Calendar" and "True Weekly Calendar."

古文：穆帝永和八年，著作郎琅邪王朔之造《通历》，以甲子为上元，积九万七千年，四千八百八十三为纪法，千二百五为斗分，因其上元为开辟之始。
现代文：穆帝永和八年，著作郎琅邪人王朔之造《通历》，以甲子为上元，积九万七千年，四千八百八十三为纪法，一千二百零五为斗分，沿用其上元作为开辟之始。
English: In the 8th year of Mu Di Yonghe, he wrote the "Circular Calendar" made by Wang Shuo, the evil man of Langyi, and used the Jiaozi as the Shangyuan, with 97,000 years of accumulation, 4,883 as the Ji Fa, and 1,205 as the Dou, and continued to use the Shangyuan as the beginning of opening up.

古文：后秦姚兴时，当孝武太元九年，岁在甲申，天水姜岌造《三纪甲子元历》，其略曰： 治历之道，必审日月之行，然后可以上考天时，下察地化。
现代文：后秦姚兴时，孝武太元九年，即甲申年，天水人姜岌造《三纪甲子元历》，大略说： 研治历法的方法，先必须捆究、月的运行，然后才可以上考天时，下察地化。
English: After Qin Yao Xing, Xiaowu Taiyuan in the ninth year of the first millennium, that is, the year of Jia Sheng, Tianshui Ren Jiang made the "Three Dynasties Jia Zi Yuan Calendar," roughly saying: The method of studying the calendar must first study the movement of the moon, and then it can be tested in the examination of heaven and earth.

古文：一失其本，则四时变移。
现代文：一旦失去了这个根本，则四时季节的安排就会杂乱无序。
English: Once this foundation is lost, the arrangement of the four seasons will be chaotic and disorderly.

古文：故仲尼之作《春秋》，日以继月，月以继时，时以继年，年以首事，明天时者人事之本，是以王者重之。
现代文：所以仲尼创作《春秋》，以继月，月以继时，时以继年，年以首事，明悉天时是人事的根本，所以历代帝王都很重视历法。
English: That is why, in creating "Spring and Autumn," Zhong Ni followed the month, the month followed the hour, the hour followed the year, and the year followed the first day. He knew that the time of day was fundamental to human affairs, and that is why emperors throughout the ages attached great importance to the calendar.

古文：自皇羲以降，暨于汉魏，各自制历，以求厥中。
现代文：自皇羲以来，直到汉、魏，各朝都制定了自己的历法，以求与天象相符。
English: From the time of the imperial edict until the Han and Wei dynasties, each dynasty established its own calendar in order to match the celestial phenomenon.

古文：考其疏密，惟交会薄蚀可以验之。
现代文：考察历法是粗疏还是精密，衹能用交食作为判据。
English: Whether the examination calendar is coarse or precise, you can use the food exchange as a criterion.

古文：然书契所记，惟《春秋》著日蚀之变，自隐公讫于哀公，凡二百四十二年之间，日蚀三十有六，考其晦朔，不知用何历也。
现代文：然而书中所记，衹有《春秋》上载有日食，从隐公到哀公，总计二百四十二年间，人日食三十六次，考察其晦、朔，不知道用的是什么历法。
English: However, it is recorded in the book that "Spring and Autumn" contains eclipses of the sun, from the Hidden Emperor to the Sorrowful Emperor, a total of two hundred and forty-two years, people eclipse the sun thirty-six times, examining its decline and rise, I do not know what calendar is used.

古文：班固以为《春秋》因《鲁历》，《鲁历》不正，故置闰失其序。
现代文：班固认为《春秋》沿用《鲁历》，《鲁历》不正，所以闰月设置不当。
English: Bangu believes that "Spring and Autumn" follows the "Lu calendar" and that the "Lu calendar" is unfair, so the leap month is set improperly.

古文：鲁以闰余一之岁为蔀首，检《春秋》置闰不与此蔀相符也。
现代文：鲁以闰余为一的这年作为部首，考查《春秋》中设置闰月的方法，与此首不符。
English: Lu used the leap year as the head of the year, and the examination of the method of setting the leap month in "Spring and Autumn" did not match this dagger.

古文：《命历序》曰：孔子为治《春秋》之故，退修殷之故历，使其数可传于后。
现代文：《命历序》上说：孔子为了研究《春秋》，曾专门研治殷朝的历法，使之可以传于后世。
English: "Biography" said: Confucius, in order to study "Spring and Autumn," had specially studied the calendar of the Yin Dynasty, so that it could be passed on to future generations.

古文：如是，《春秋》宜用《殷历》正之。
现代文：如果真是这样的话，《春秋》月、和交食的校正应该用《殷历》。
English: If this is really the case, the "Spring and Autumn" month, and the correction of the meal should use the "Yin Calendar."

古文：今考其交会，不与《殷历》相应，以《殷历》考《春秋》，月朔多不及其日，又以检《经》，率多一日，《传》率少一日。
现代文：现考查《春秋》上的交食，与《殷历》不符，用《殷历》考查《春秋》，月朔日多数与《春秋》不一样，再以之对比《经》，都多一，《传》则少一日。
English: Now, the examination of the food exchange on the "Spring and Autumn" does not match the "Yin Calendar," and the examination of the "Spring and Autumn" with the "Yin Calendar" is different from the "Spring and Autumn," and the new moon day is mostly different from the "Spring and Autumn." In contrast, the "Ching" is one more, and the "Zhuan" is one less.

古文：但《公羊》、《经》、《传》异朔，于理可从，而《经》有蚀朔之验，《传》为失之也。
现代文：但《公羊》、《经》与《传》上朔日不一样，从道理上也说得过去，然而《经》上有日食于朔日的证据，《传》却认为失朔。
English: However, "Kangyang" and "Zhong" are not the same as "Zhuan" in terms of the date of the new year, and it can be said that it is reasonable. However, "Zhong" has evidence of a solar eclipse on the new year's day, but "Zhong" believes that it is out of date.

古文：服虔解《传》用太极上元，太极上元乃《三统历》刘歆所造元也，何缘施于《春秋》？
现代文：服虔用太极上元注解《传》，太极上元乃是刘歆《三统历》所制造的历元，哪裹能施用于《春秋》呢?
English: Zhu Qian used Taiji Shangyuan to annotate "Biography." Taiji Shangyuan is the calendar created by Liu Bei's "Three Dynasties Calendar." How can it be applied to "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：于《春秋》而用《汉历》，于义无乃远乎？
现代文：研究《春秋》而用《汉历》，从义理上来说不是差得太远了吗?
English: Studying "Spring and Autumn" and using "Chinese Calendar," is it not too far from the principle?

古文：《传》之违失多矣，不惟斯事而已。
现代文：《传》中不对的地方很多，不祇是这件事而已。
English: There are a lot of things wrong with "Biography," and it's not just this.

古文：襄公二十七年冬十有一月乙亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：襄公二十七年冬十一月乙亥朔日食。
English: In the winter of November of the 27th year of the Xianggong Dynasty, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：《传》曰： 辰在申，司历过，再失闰也。 
现代文：《传》上说： 日月相会在申，掌管历法官员出错，两次失闰。 
English: "Legend" said: The sun and moon will meet at the end of the month, and the official in charge of the calendar will make a mistake and miss the leap twice.

古文：考其去交分，交会应在此月，而不为再失闰也。
现代文：考察朔太阳月亮的去交分，交食应该在此月，而不是两次失闰。
English: Examining the sun-moon disjunction, the conjunction should be in this month, not twice.

古文：案歆历于《春秋》日蚀一朔，其余多在二日。因附《五行传》，著朓与侧匿之说云：春秋时诸侯多失其政，故月行恆迟。
现代文：用刘歆的历法考查《春秋》日食，衹有一次在朔，其余的多发生在月初二，因此刘歆在其历法后面附《五行传》，著述牵强附会之说：春秋时诸侯多不施行德政，所以月亮运行经常缓慢。
English: The eclipses in "Spring and Autumn" were examined using Liu Bei's calendar. The first eclipse occurred at the new moon, and most of the rest occurred on the second day of the first month. Therefore, Liu Bei appended "The Legend of the Five Elements" to his calendar. The author's statement is far-fetched: In the spring and autumn, many lords did not carry out their duties, so the moon often moved slowly.

古文：歆不以历失天，而为之差说。
现代文：刘歆不但不认为日食不发生在朔是历法推算的失误，反而为之作错误的辩解。
English: Liu Wei not only did not think that the solar eclipse did not occur on New Year's Eve was a mistake in calendar calculation, but instead made a wrong excuse for it.

古文：日之食朔，此乃天验也，而歆反以历非此，冤天而负时历也。
现代文：日食发生在朔，乃是天经地义之事，而刘歆反而据自己的历法非议实际天象，这是倚恃历法而冤屈天。
English: The fact that the solar eclipse occurred at the new moon is a matter of natural justice, but Liu Ye, on the contrary, criticized the actual celestial phenomenon according to his own calendar. This is relying on the old calendar and complaining to the heavens.

古文：杜预又以为周衰世乱，学者莫得其真，今之所传七历，皆未必是时王之术也。
现代文：杜预又认为周曲衰落，国家动荡不安，学者们没有得到当时真正施用的历法，现在传世的七种历法，都未必是各个王朝实际行用的历法。
English: Du Yuanyuan also believed that the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, the country was in turmoil, scholars did not have a calendar that was truly applied at that time, and the seven calendars now handed down to the world were not necessarily the calendars actually used by each dynasty.

古文：今诚以七家之历，以考古今交会，信无其验也，皆由斗分疏之所致也。
现代文：现今如果以遣七家历法考察古今交食，确信不可能得到验证，这都是由于斗分粗疏所致。
English: Nowadays, if the ancient and modern cross-fertilization is examined using the seven calendars of the Yuan Dynasty, it is believed that it is impossible to be verified. This is all due to the rough division of points.

古文：《殷历》以四分一为斗分，《三统》以一千五百三十九分之三百八十五为斗分，《乾象》以五百八十九分之一百四十五为斗分，今《景初》以一千八百四十三分之四百五十五为斗分，疏密不同，法数各异。
现代文：《殷历》以四分之一为斗分，《三统历》以一千五百三十九分之三百八十五为斗分，《干象历》以五百八十九分之一百四十五为斗分，现在的《景初历》以一千八百四十三分之四百五十五为斗分，疏密不同，方法和基本数据也不一样。
English: "Yin calendar" is a quarter, "San Zong calendar" is 385/1539, "Gan Xiang calendar" is 1545/589, and the current "Jingchuan calendar" is 455/1843. The density is different, and the methods and basic data are different.

古文：《殷历》斗分粗，故不施于今。
现代文：《殷历》斗分太大，所以不能施用于现在。
English: "The Yin Calendar" is too large, so it cannot be applied to the present.

古文：《乾象》斗分细，故不得通于古。
现代文：《干象历》斗分太小，所以不能用于古代。
English: The "dry elephant calendar" was too small, so it could not be used in ancient times.

古文：《景初》斗分虽在粗细之中，而日之所在乃差四度，日月亏已，皆不及其次，假使日在东井而蚀，以月验之，乃在参六度，差违乃尔，安可以考天时人事乎？
现代文：《景初历》斗分虽然在二者之间，但日所在宿度仍与实际相差四度，日月亏损，都不在对应的位置，假使在东井宿食，以月验算，却在参宿六度，相差这么大，怎么可以用来考察天时人事呢?
English: Although the "Lunar New Year Calendar" is divided between the two, the position of the sun is still four degrees different from the actual position. The loss of the sun and the moon is not in the corresponding position. If you stay in Dongjing and check the month, it will be six degrees different from the reference. How can it be used to investigate the time of the day?

古文：今治新历，以二千四百五十一分之六百五为斗分，日在斗十七度，天正之首，上可以考合于《春秋》，下可以取验于今世。
现代文：现在研治的新历，以二千四百五十一分之六百零五为斗分，日在斗宿十七度，天正之首，往上推考可以以《春秋》作为判据，往下可以看它是否舆现在的实际天象符合。
English: The new calendar currently being studied is based on the 6.05/2451 doubling of the solar year, with the 17th day of the month of dou, which is the first day of the week. If you look at it from above, you can use "Spring and Autumn" as a criterion, and if you look at it from below, you can see if it is consistent with the current actual celestial phenomenon.

古文：以今新施于春秋之世，日蚀多在朔，春秋之世，下至于今，凡一千余岁，交会弦望故进退于三蚀之间，此法乃可永载用之，岂三百岁斗历改宪者乎？
现代文：用它来考察《春秋》三十六次日食，正好在朔日的有二十五次。日食二的有二次，在晦日的有二次，有误的五次，总计三十三次，其余日食经中没有标明干支，没办法用来考证其得失。圆纬上都说 三百年修改历法，以上述新历施用于春秋时代，日食多在朔日。从春秋到现在，共一千多年，交会弦望，衹不过三次交食算对，新历可以永远施用，哪裹需要三百年修改一次呢? 
English: It was used to examine the thirty-six solar eclipses in "Spring and Autumn," of which twenty-five occurred on New Year's Day. There were two solar eclipses on the second day, two on the last day of the year, and five erroneous eclipses, for a total of thirty-three. The remaining solar eclipses were not marked with the zodiac signs, and there was no way to verify their gains and losses. It is said in circles that the calendar was revised three hundred years ago. The above-mentioned new calendar was applied in the Spring and Autumn period, and the solar eclipse occurred mostly on New Year's Day. From Spring and

古文：甲子上元以来，至鲁隐公元年已未岁，凡八万二千七百三十六，至晋孝武太元九年甲申岁，凡八万三千八百四十一，算上。
现代文：甲子上元以来，至鲁隐公元年己未，总共八万二千七百三十六年，至晋孝武太元九年甲申，总共八万三千八百四十一年，算上。
English: Since Jia Shangyuan, up to the year of Luyin, a total of 82,736 years have passed, and up to the year of Jian Xiaowu, a total of 83,841 years have passed.

古文：元法，七千三百五十三。
现代文：元法，七千三百五十三。
English: Yuan Fa, seven thousand three hundred and fifty-three.

古文：纪法，二千四百五十一。
现代文：纪法，二千四百五十一。
English: Discipline and Punish, 2451.

古文：通数，十七万九千四十四。
现代文：通数，十七万九千四十四。
English: The total number is 179,444.

古文：日法，六千六十二。
现代文：日法，六千六十二。
English: Japan and France, 662.

古文：月周，三万二千七百六十六。
现代文：月周，三万二千七百六十六。
English: The monthly average is 32,766.

古文：气分，万二千八百六十。
现代文：气分，万二千八百六十。
English: Qi, 12,860.

古文：元月，九万九百四十五。
现代文：元月，九万九百四十五。
English: January, ninety-nine thousand and forty-five.

古文：纪月，三万三百一十五。
现代文：纪月，三万三百一十五。
English: Ji Yue, thirty-three hundred and fifteen.

古文：没分，四万四千七百六十一。
现代文：没分，四万四千七百六十一。
English: No points, 44,761.

古文：没法，六百四十三。
现代文：没法，六百四十三。
English: No way, six forty-three.

古文：斗分，六百五。
现代文：斗分，六百五。
English: The score is six hundred and five.

古文：周天，八十九万五千二百二十。
现代文：周天，八十九万五千二百二十。
English: Sunday, 8,995,220.

古文：一名纪日。
现代文：一名纪日。
English: One of them is Ji Nichi.

古文：章月，二百三十五。
现代文：章月，二百三十五。
English: Chapter Month: Two hundred thirty-five.

古文：章岁，十九。
现代文：章岁，十九。
English: Chapter years: nineteen.

古文：章闰，七。
现代文：章闰，七。
English: Chapter: Seven.

古文：岁中，十二。
现代文：岁中，十二。
English: Middle years: twelfth.

古文：会数，四十七。
现代文：会数，四十七。
English: Number of meetings: forty-seven.

古文：日月八百九十三岁，凡四十七会，分尽。
现代文：日月八百九十三岁，凡四十七会，分尽。
English: Eight hundred and ninety-three years old, every forty-seventh meeting, complete.

古文：气中，十二。
现代文：气中，十二。
English: In the middle of the breath, twelve.

古文：甲子纪交差，九千一百五十七。
现代文：甲子纪交差，九千一百五十七。
English: Koshiki crossing, nine thousand one hundred and fifty-seven.

古文：甲申纪交差，六千三百三十七。
现代文：甲申纪交差，六千三百三十七。
English: Koshinji intersection, 6337.

古文：甲辰纪交差，三千五百一十七。
现代文：甲辰纪交差，三千五百一十七。
English: Jiucheng intersection, three thousand five hundred and seventeen.

古文：周半，一百二十七。
现代文：周半，一百二十七。
English: Midweek: One hundred and twenty-seven.

古文：朔望合数，九百四十一。
现代文：朔望合数，九百四十一。
English: The total number of confirmed cases now stands at 941.

古文：会岁，八百九十三。
现代文：会岁，八百九十三。
English: Age of the congregation: eight hundred and ninety-three.

古文：会月，万一千四十五。
现代文：会月，万一千四十五。
English: Monthly attendance: 11,045.

古文：小分，二千一百九十六。
现代文：小分，二千一百九十六。
English: Oita, two thousand one hundred ninety six.

古文：章数，一百二十九。
现代文：章数：一百二十九。
English: Number of chapters: one hundred and twenty-nine.

古文：小分，二千一百八十三。
现代文：小分：二千一百八十三。
English: Two thousand one hundred and eighty-three.

古文：周闰大分，七万六千二百六十九。
现代文：周闰大分：七万六千二百六十九。
English: Zhou Yue Oita: 76,269.

古文：历周，四十四万七千六百一十。
现代文：历周：四十四万七千六百一十。
English: The number of the weeks of the year was four hundred forty-seven thousand six hundred and ten.

古文：半周天
现代文：半周天。
English: Half the sky is dark.

古文：会分，三万八千一百三十四。
现代文：会分：三万八千一百三十四。
English: Membership: 38,134.

古文：差分，一万一千九百八十六。
现代文：差分：一万一千九百八十六。
English: Difference: 11,986.

古文：会率，一千八百八十二。
现代文：会率：一千八百八十二。
English: Membership: 1,882.

古文：小分法，二千二百九。
现代文：小分法：二千二百零九。
English: Subdivision: two thousand two hundred and nine.

古文：入交限，一万一百四。
现代文：入交限：一万零一百零四。
English: Entry limit: ten thousand one hundred and four.

古文：小周，二百五十四。
现代文：小周：二百五十四。
English: Xiao Zhou: Two hundred and fifty-four.

古文：甲子纪差率，四万九千一百七十八。
现代文：甲子纪差率，四万九千一百七十八。
English: The difference rate of Koshiki was 49,178.

古文：甲申纪差率，五万八千二百三十一。
现代文：甲申纪差率，五万八千二百三十一。
English: The number of A-level students who failed to reach the required standard rose to 58,231.

古文：甲辰纪差率，六万七千二百八十四。
现代文：甲辰纪差率，六万七千二百八十四。
English: The rate of difference in the Cretaceous period is 67,284.

古文：通周，十六万七千六十三。
现代文：通周：十六万七千零六十三。
English: Weekly: 167,063.

古文：周日日余，三千三百六十二。
现代文：周日日余：三千三百六十二。
English: Sunday and the day after: 3,362.

古文：周虚，二千七百一。
现代文：周虚：二千七百零一。
English: Zhou Xiao: Two thousand seven hundred and one.

古文：五星约法，据出见以为正，不系于元本。
现代文：五星约法，根据行星的出现作为推算的基点，不系于上元。
English: The five-star approximation, based on the appearance of the planet as the basis for the calculation, is not related to the above.

古文：然则算步究于元初，约法施于今用，曲求其趣，则各有宜，故作者两设其法也。
现代文：然而推步总要追寻到元初，约法可在现在施用，探求其中的旨趣，则各有其优越之处，所以作者把两种方法并列。
English: However, it is always necessary to trace the steps back to the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty. The approximation method can be applied now, and each method has its own advantages in exploring the purport, so the author puts the two methods side by side.

古文：岌以月食检日宿度所在，为历术者宗焉。
现代文：姜岌利用月食测量日所在宿度，为研治历法的人所宗仰。
English: Jiang Du used the lunar eclipse to measure the position of the sun, which is admired by those who study the calendar.

古文：又著《浑天论》，以步日于黄道，驳前儒之失，并得其中矣。
现代文：又着《浑天论》，于黄道推算太阳的运行，驳斥前儒的错误，所论都很合适。
English: He also wrote "The Theory of the Muddy Sky," in which he calculated the movement of the sun on the ecliptic and refuted the errors of the former Confucianism. All of his works are very appropriate.

