古文：昏礼者，将合二姓之好，上以事宗庙，而下以继后世也。故君子重之。
现代文：婚礼的意义在于要结成两性之好，对上以事宗庙，对下以继承后世，所以君子很重视它。
English: The significance of a wedding lies in the fact that it is meant to unite the good of both sexes, with the family temple at the top and the succession of future generations at the bottom, so the gentleman attaches great importance to it.

古文：是以昏礼纳采、问名、纳吉、纳征、请期，皆主人筵几于庙，而拜迎于门外，入，揖让而升，听命于庙，所以敬慎重正昏礼也。
现代文：因此在婚礼的纳采、问名、纳吉、纳征、请期这五个步骤中，每逢男方的使者到来时，女方家长都是在庙里铺设筵几，然后拜迎使者于门外。
English: Therefore, in the five steps of the wedding ceremony, namely, receiving, name-calling, nagging, receiving, and asking for a date, whenever the man's messenger arrives, the woman's parents will lay a rickshaw in the temple and then greet the messenger outside the door.

古文：父亲醮子，而命之迎，男先于女也。
现代文：进入庙门，宾主揖让升阶登堂，在庙堂上听使者传达男方家长的意见，这一切都是为了使婚礼庄敬隆重。
English: Entering the gate of the temple, the guest's hostess let him ascend to the temple, and listened to the messenger convey the opinions of the man's parents in the temple. All of this was done to make the wedding ceremony solemn and grand.

古文：子承命以迎，主人筵几于庙，而拜迎于门外。
现代文：父亲亲自给儿子行醮礼，吩咐他迎娶新妇，这表示男的要先去迎娶，然后女的才跟随男的而来。
English: The father himself performed the rite of passage for his son and ordered him to marry the bride, which meant that the man had to get married first, and then the woman had to follow the man.

古文：婿执雁入，揖让升堂，再拜奠雁，盖亲受之于父母也。
现代文：儿子奉命前去迎娶，女方的父母在庙里铺筵设几，然后在门外拜迎女婿。女婿捧着大雁进去，宾主揖让升阶登堂，婿行再拜稽首之礼，把大雁放在地上，这表示是从新妇父母手里领回了新妇。
English: The son was ordered to go ahead and get married, the woman's parents laid a few mats in the temple, and then greeted the son-in-law outside the door. The son-in-law went in holding the goose, the guest was allowed to ascend to the hall, and the son-in-law performed the bowing ceremony and placed the goose on the ground, which meant that the bride was returned from the hands of the bride's parents.

古文：降，出御妇车，而婿授绥，御轮三周。
现代文：然后妇随婿下堂出门。婿亲自驾驶妇所乘坐之车，又将挽以登车的这都是有意表示亲爱的举动。
English: Then the wife goes out of the house with her husband-in-law. The husband-in-law himself drives the car used by the women's shelter, and will also board the car in the other direction. These are all intentional gestures of love.

古文：先俟于门外，妇至，婿揖妇以入，共牢而食，合卺而酳，所以合体同尊卑以亲之也。
现代文：婿为妇驾车，当车轮转了三圈时，就交给御者驾驶。婿乘坐的车先到家门外等着，新妇到了，婿向妇作揖，请她一同进门。进入婿之寝室，婿与妇共食同一姐中的牲肉，合饮一樽酒，这样做是为了表示夫妇二人一体，不分尊卑，彼此相亲相爱。
English: The son-in-law drives the car for the woman, and when the wheel has turned three times, it is handed over to the driver to drive. The car in which the son-in-law is riding first waits outside the house, the bride arrives, the son-in-law greets the woman and invites her to enter the door together. Entering the son-in-law's bedroom, the son-in-law and his wife eat meat from the same sister and drink a barrel of wine together. This is done to show that the couple are one, regardless of superiority or inferiority, and love each other dearly.

古文：敬慎重正而后亲之，礼之大体，而所以成男女之别，而立夫妇之义也。
现代文：通过敬慎郑重其事的婚礼而后夫妇相亲，这是婚礼的基本原则，也从而确定了男女之别。建立起夫倡妇随的夫妇关系。
English: It is the basic principle of the wedding ceremony that the husband and wife should be carefully and solemnly married and then go on a blind date, thus establishing the difference between men and women and establishing a husband-wife relationship.

古文：男女有别，而后夫妇有义；夫妇有义，而后父子有亲；父子有亲，而后君臣有正。
现代文：有了男女之间的界限，才会有夫妇之间正常的关系；有了夫妇之间正常的关系，才会有父子相亲；有父子相亲，君臣才能各安其位。
English: Only when there is a boundary between men and women can there be a normal relationship between husband and wife; only when there is a normal relationship between husband and wife can there be a father-son relationship; only when there is a father-son relationship can the ruler and the ruled be at peace with each other.

古文：故曰：昏礼者，礼之本也。
现代文：所以说：婚礼是礼的根本。
English: That's why they say: the wedding is the foundation of the ceremony.

古文：夫礼始于冠，本于昏，重于丧祭，尊于朝聘，和于射乡此礼之大体也。
现代文：在众礼当中，冠礼是礼的开始，婚礼是礼的根本，丧礼、祭礼最为隆重，朝觐、聘问最尊敬，射礼、乡饮酒礼最能体现和睦，这就是礼的大原则。
English: Among all the ceremonies, the coronation ceremony is the beginning of the ceremony, the wedding ceremony is the foundation of the ceremony, the funeral ceremony and the festival are the most solemn, the pilgrimage and the invitation are the most respected, and the shooting ceremony and the township drinking ceremony can best reflect harmony. This is the great principle of the ceremony.

古文：夙兴，妇沐浴以俟见；质明，赞见妇于舅姑，执笲、枣、栗、段修以见，赞醴妇，妇祭脯醢，祭醴，成妇礼也。
现代文：新妇清早起床，梳洗打扮好，等待进见公婆。到天亮的时候，赞礼的妇人领着新妇去见公婆，新妇手捧容器，内盛枣子、栗子和肉干，以此作为进见之礼。赞礼的人代公婆酌甜酒赐新妇。妇先以脯酿祭先人，又以甜酒祭先人。
English: The bride gets up early in the morning, washes and dresses well, and waits to see her parents-in-law. At dawn, the woman of praise leads the bride to see her parents-in-law. The bride holds a container with dates, chestnuts and dried meat as a gift for the bridegroom. The people of praise give the bride sweet wine on behalf of her parents-in-law. The woman first sacrifices the ancestors with ginger beer, and then with sweet wine.

古文：舅姑入室，妇以特豚馈，明妇顺也。厥明，舅姑共飨妇以一献之礼，奠酬。舅姑先降自西阶，妇降自阼阶，以着代也。
现代文：行过以上的礼节，就表示作媳妇的礼完成了。舅姑进入室内，妇以一只煮熟的小猪向舅姑进食，这是表示新妇开始履行孝养的职责。
English: After performing the above etiquette, it means that the ceremony of becoming a daughter-in-law is complete. The aunt enters the room, and the woman feeds the aunt with a boiled piglet, which means that the bride begins to fulfill the duties of filial piety.

古文：成妇礼，明妇顺，又申之以着代，所以重责妇顺焉也。
现代文：第二天，舅姑共同用一献之礼慰劳妇，而妇应把姑酬己之酒放下不再饮。舅姑先从西阶卞堂，然后妇从东阶下堂，这表示新妇已有资格代姑主持家中内务了。
English: On the second day, the aunts jointly offered a gift to comfort the working woman, and the woman should put down her own wine and stop drinking. The aunts first went down from the west staircase, and then the woman went down from the east staircase, which meant that the bride was already qualified to preside over the housework of the aunt.

古文：妇顺者，顺于舅姑，和于室人；而后当于夫，以成丝麻布帛之事，以审守委积盖藏。
现代文：成就了妇礼，表明了妇顺，又进一步表明了妇有代姑主持家务的资格，所有这些，就是为了强调对妇在顺从上的要求。所谓妇的顺从，首先是要顺从舅姑，其次是要和家中其他女性和睦相处，然后才是让丈夫诚信满意，从而完成妇女应做的女工，谨慎地守护柴米油盐等物的储藏。
English: The accomplishment of the woman's rite, the demonstration of the woman's obedience, and the further demonstration of the qualification of the woman to have a substitute sister-in-law to preside over the housework, all of these are to emphasize the requirements for the woman's obedience. The so-called woman's obedience, first of all, is to obey the aunt, secondly, is to live in harmony with other women in the family, and then is to satisfy the husband's integrity, so as to complete the women's work that women should do, and carefully guard the storage of firewood, rice, oil and salt.

古文：是故妇顺备而后内和理；内和理而后家可长久也；故圣王重之。
现代文：所以，上述对妇顺的要求都做到了，家庭内部才能和谐安定；内部和谐安定了，然后家才会长久，所以圣王很重视妇顺。
English: Therefore, the above-mentioned requirements for women's obedience have been achieved, and harmony and stability can only be achieved within the family; if harmony and stability are achieved within the family, then the family will last for a long time. Therefore, the holy king attaches great importance to women's obedience.

古文：是以古者妇人先嫁三月，祖祢未毁，教于公宫，祖祢既毁，教于宗室，教以妇德、妇言、妇容、妇功。
现代文：因终古时候妇女在出嫁前的三个月，如果该妇女与国君还是五服以内的亲属，就在国君的祖庙里接受婚前教育；如果已经出了五服，就在大宗子的家里接受这种教育。由女师教以妇德、妇言、妇容、妇功。
English: In ancient times, three months before a woman was to be married off, if she was a relative of the sovereign or within five years of marriage, she would receive pre-marriage education in the ancestral temple of the sovereign; if she was already five years old, she would receive this education in the family of the great patriarch. She would be taught by a female teacher about women's morality, women's language, women's appearance, and women's virtue.

古文：教成祭之，牲用鱼，芼之以苹藻，所以成妇顺也。
现代文：教成以后，要举行教成之祭，这是向祖先察告，婚前教育已经完成。祭时用鱼作姐实，用薪、藻这两种水草作羹菜，这些祭品都属于阴性一类，所以用来造成妇人的顺从飞。
English: At the time of the festival, fish is used to make sisal, and the two kinds of aquatic plants, firewood and algae, are used to make soup. These offerings all belong to the category of the female sex, so they are used to make women obedient.

古文：古者天子后立六宫、三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，以听天下之内治，以明章妇顺；故天下内和而家理。
现代文：古代王后设立六宫，妇官有三夫人、十尸御妻，以管理普夭之下对妇女的教育九缤、二十七世妇、八，以显扬妇女应有的顺从，所以天下家庭和睦安定。
English: The ancient queens set up six palaces, and the women's officers had three wives and ten concubines to manage the education of women in general, nine concubines, twenty-seven concubines, and eight concubines to show the obedience that women should have, so the world's families are harmonious and stable.

古文：天子立六官、三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一元士，以听天下之外治，以明章天下之男教；故外和而国治。
现代文：天子设立六官，男官有三公、九卿、二十七大夫、八十一女御，以管理天下的政事，以显扬男子应有的教化，所以政事和谐，国家安定。
English: The Son of Heaven set up six officials, the male officials being three princes, nine nobles, twenty-seven magistrates, and eighty-one empresses, to manage the political affairs of the world and to show the enlightenment that men should have. Therefore, the political affairs are harmonious and the country is stable.

古文：故曰：天子听男教，后听女顺；天子理阳道，后治阴德；天子听外治，后听内职。
现代文：所以说： 天子管理对男子的教化，王后管理对妇女顺从的教育；天子治理政务，王后治理妇女事务；天子审察三公等官是否尽职，王后审察三夫人等官是否尽职。
English: Therefore, it is said that: the heavenly son administers the enlightenment of men, and the queen administers the education of women's obedience; the heavenly son administers government affairs, and the queen administers women's affairs; the heavenly son examines whether the three public officials are conscientious, and the queen examines whether the three wives and other officials are conscientious.

古文：教顺成俗，外内和顺，国家理治，此之谓盛德。
现代文：男教与妇顺形成风俗，内外协调一致，国与家都安定有序，做到了这一步，就叫作盛德。
English: Men's education and women's obedience have formed a custom, coordinated internally and externally, and the country and the family are stable and orderly. If this step is achieved, it is called Shengde.

古文：是故男教不修，阳事不得，适见于天，日为之食；妇顺不修，阴事不得，适见于天，月为之食。
现代文：所以，如果男子的教化没有搞好，政事失当，上天就会表示谴责，发生曰蚀；如果妇人的顺从没有搞好，妇人的事务处理失当，上天就会表示谴责，发生月蚀。
English: Therefore, if the enlightenment of men is not done well and the political affairs are improper, heaven will express its condemnation and a lunar eclipse will occur; if the obedience of women is not done well and the affairs of women are improperly handled, heaven will express its condemnation and a lunar eclipse will occur.

古文：是故日食则天子素服而修六官之职，荡天下之阳事；月食则后素服而修六宫之职，荡天下之阴事。故天子与后，犹日之与月、阴之与阳，相须而后成者也。
现代文：所以，发生曰蚀的时候，天子就身穿白色衣服，表示自我反省，还要督促六官改进工作，彻底除掉政事中的错误；发生月食的时候，王后就身穿白色衣服，表示自我反省，还要督促六宫改进工作，彻底除掉在妇女问题上发生的错误。所以，天子和王后，就好比曰之与月，阴之与阳，是相辅而后相成的关系。
English: Therefore, when there is a solar eclipse, the emperor wears white clothes to express his self-reflection and urge the six departments to improve their work and completely eliminate the mistakes in government affairs; when there is a lunar eclipse, the queen wears white clothes to express her self-reflection and urge the six palaces to improve their work and completely eliminate the mistakes in women's issues. Therefore, the emperor and the queen are like the sun and the moon, and the yin and the yang, which are complementary and complement each other.

古文：天子修男教，父道也；后修女顺，母道也。
现代文：因为天子掌管男教，所以属于父辈；因为王后掌管女顺，所以属于母辈。
English: Because the heavenly son is in charge of male education, it belongs to the father generation; because the queen is in charge of female education, it belongs to the mother generation.

古文：故曰：天子之与后，犹父之与母也。
现代文：所以说，天子和王后，就好比父亲和母亲。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven and the Queen of Heaven are like father and mother.

古文：故为天王服斩衰，服父之义也；为后服资衰，服母之义也。
现代文：因此，天子死了，诸侯和大臣就要为他服斩衰，这和为父亲服斩衰是同样道理；王后死了，就要为她服齐衰，这和为母亲服齐衰是同样道理。
English: Therefore, when the son of heaven dies, princes and ministers must obey him, which is the same as obeying the father; when the queen dies, they must obey her, which is the same as obeying the mother.

