古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：周痹之在身也，上下移徒随脉，其上下左右相应，间不容空，愿闻此痛，在血脉之中邪？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：周痹这个病，病邪在人的身体中随着血脉上下移动，疼痛的部位左右对称，随时在转移，又连续不断，我想知道这种疼痛是发生在血脉之中呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qi Bo: "What is the origin of this disease? The disease moves up and down in the human body along with the blood vessels. The painful areas are symmetrical, constantly shifting and continuous. I want to know if this pain occurs in the blood vessels?"

古文：将在分肉之间乎？
现代文：还是在分肉之间呢？
English: Or between cuts of meat?

古文：何以致是？
现代文：又是怎样形成这种病痛的呢？
English: And how does this pain come about?

古文：其痛之移也，间不及下针，其慉痛之时，不及定治，而痛已止矣。
现代文：这种疼痛部位转移得如此之快，快到来不及在疼痛的部位下针，当某一个部位的蓄积的疼痛很明显的时候，还没有来得及决定怎样治疗，疼痛就已经停止了。
English: This kind of pain site transfer is so fast, almost too fast to get a needle in the painful area, when the accumulated pain in a certain area is obvious, before deciding how to treat, the pain has stopped.

古文：何道使然？
现代文：这是什么样的机制呢？
English: What kind of mechanism is this?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：请你告诉我其中的缘故。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯答曰：此众痹也，非周痹也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是众痹病，而不是周痹病。
English: Qi Bo replied, "This is a collective paralysis, not a peripheral paralysis.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻众痹。
现代文：黄帝说：我也很想听你说一说众痹这个病。
English: Huang Di said: I would also like to hear you talk about this disease.

古文：岐伯对曰：此各在其处，更发更止，更居更起，以右应左，以左应右，非能周也，更发更休也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：众痹的痛点分布在身体的各个部位，可以随时发作，随时停止，随时转移，随时兴起，左侧会影响到右侧，右侧会影响到左侧，往往是左右对称的，连续不断的，但不是周遍全身都疼痛，而是集中在身体的某个区域，有时发作有时休止。
English: Qi Bo replied: the pain points of polio are distributed in various parts of the body, can occur at any time, stop at any time, transfer at any time, arise at any time, the left side will affect the right side, the right side will affect the left side, often symmetrical, continuous, but not all over the body, but concentrated in a certain area of the body, sometimes the attack sometimes pauses.

古文：黄帝曰：善。刺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：针刺治疗用什么方法呢？
English: Huang Di said: What method should be used for acupuncture treatment?

古文：岐伯对曰：刺此者，痛虽已止，必刺其处，勿令复起。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯回答说：要针刺疼痛发作的那个部位，即使疼痛暂时停止了，也还要准确的针刺疼痛发作的那个部位，以防止邪气流窜使疼痛复发。黄帝说：好极了。
English: Qi Bo replied, "It is necessary to acupuncture the site of the pain attack, even if the pain has temporarily stopped, it is also necessary to accurately acupuncture the site of the pain attack to prevent the evil qi flow from causing the pain to recur." Huang Di said, "That's great."

古文：愿闻周痹何如？
现代文：我还希望您再讲一讲周痹这个病是怎样的呢？
English: I'd also like you to tell me a little bit more about what it's like to live with this disease.

古文：岐伯对曰：周痹者，在于血脉之中，随脉以上，随脉以下，不能左右，各当其所。
现代文：岐伯回答说：周痹的病邪存在于血脉之中，能随着血脉在身体中上下游移而遍及全身，但是，在发病的时候，不像众痹那样是左右对称的疼痛，而是随着血液的流动，停在什么地方就在什么地方发病。
English: Qi Bo replied: The disease of peripheral paralysis exists in the blood vessels and can spread throughout the whole body as the blood vessels travel up and down in the body. However, at the time of onset, it is not a symmetrical pain like other paralysis, but with the flow of blood, where it stops is where the disease occurs.

古文：黄帝曰：刺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：那么针刺治疗又如何呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How can acupuncture be used to treat aphasia?

古文：岐伯对曰：痛从上下者，先刺其下以过之，后刺其上以脱之。
现代文：岐伯回答说：疼痛是从上至下传递的，就先针刺疼痛部位之下的穴位，使邪气不再继续下传，再针刺其上部疼痛的部位，以祛除病邪本身。
English: Qibo replied, "Pain is transmitted from top to bottom. First, prick the acupoints under the painful area so that the evil spirit does not continue to be transmitted, and then prick the painful area on the upper part to eliminate the disease itself.

古文：痛从下上者，先刺其上以过之，后刺其下以脱之。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：如果疼痛是从下至上传递的，就先针刺疼痛部位之上的穴位，使邪气不再继续上行，再针其下部疼痛的部位，以祛除病邪本身。黄帝说：好的。
English: If the pain is transmitted from the bottom to the top, the first thing to do is to prick the acupoints above the painful area, so that the evil spirit does not continue to rise, and then prick the painful area at the bottom to remove the disease itself. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：此痛安生？
现代文：那么这种疼痛是怎样产生的呢？
English: So how does this pain come about?

古文：何因而有名？
现代文：又为什么将这种疼痛称作周痹呢？
English: And why is this pain called pericardial?

古文：岐伯对曰：风寒湿气，客于外分肉之间，迫切而为沫，沫得寒则聚，聚则排分肉而分裂也，分裂则痛，痛则神归之，神归之则热，热则痛解，痛解则厥，厥则他痹发，发则如是。
现代文：岐伯回答说：风寒湿的邪气，从外至内逐渐侵入人体的分肉之间，将肌肉之间的津液挤压为汁沫，汁沫因寒冷而凝聚，凝聚为有形之物后就更加排挤分肉而使之分裂，因此而生疼痛，疼痛发生之后，人的注意力就会集中在那个疼痛的部位上，心神集中在这个地方，就会使阳气聚敛，阳气聚而热生，热生就会散寒而缓解疼痛，疼痛缓解就会使厥气上逆，厥气上逆则导致其他痹痛发作，于是疼痛也就随之转移了，因此疼痛就会这样此起彼落。
English: Qi Bo replied: The evil wind of wind, cold and wet gradually invades the human body from the outside to the inside, squeezing the fluid between the muscles into juice foam. The juice foam condenses due to the cold. After condensing into a tangible object, it will further expel the meat and cause it to split, thus causing pain. After the pain occurs, the person's attention will be focused on the painful part. Concentrating the mind in this place will cause the yang to accumulate. The yang will accumulate and heat up. The heat will dissipate the cold and relieve the pain. Relieving the pain will reverse the yang, and the reverse of the yang will cause

古文：帝曰：善。余已得其意矣。
现代文：黄帝说：好的，我已经明白这其中的道理了。
English: Huang Di said, "Okay, I have understood the reason for this.

古文：此内不在臓，而外未发于皮，独居分肉之间，真气不能周，故名曰周痹。
现代文：这种病邪在内并没有深入脏腑之中，在外也没有通过皮表发散出来，而是独留于分肉之间，致使人身的真气不能流畅地在周身贯通，因此叫做周痹。
English: This kind of disease does not penetrate deep into the internal organs, nor does it spread outside through the skin surface, but is left alone between the internal organs, so that the true qi of the human body cannot flow smoothly throughout the body, so it is called peripheral paralysis.

古文：故刺痹者，必先切循其下之六经，视其虚实，及大络之血结而不通，及虚而脉陷空者而调之，熨而通之。
现代文：在针刺治疗时，首先要沿着发病的经络，用手指按切诊察，以判断其病是虚是实，以及大络的血脉是不是有瘀结不通，以及经脉中有没有下陷空虚的情况，根据证候进行调治，或用熨蒸的方法通其经络。
English: In acupuncture treatment, first of all, it is necessary to walk along the meridians of the onset of the disease, and use the fingers to press the incision to diagnose, to judge whether the disease is false or true, and whether the blood vessels of the large network are knotted or not, and whether there is a depression in the meridians, according to the symptoms to adjust the treatment, or use the method of ironing to pass through the meridians.

古文：其瘈坚，转引而行之。黄帝曰：善。
现代文：如果筋脉拘紧，就用按摩导引等方法行其气血。黄帝说：对。
English: If the sinews are tight, use massage guidance and other methods to exercise the qi and blood. Huang Di said: Yes.

古文：余已得其意矣，亦得其事也。
现代文：我明白这个病的机制了，也知道了治疗的方法。
English: I understand the mechanism of the disease, and I know how to treat it.

古文：九者，经巽之理，十二经脉阴阳之病也。
现代文：原来使用九针除了能使经气顺达流畅之外，还能治疗十二经脉阴阳不调的各种疾病。
English: Originally, the use of nine needles, in addition to being able to make the meridians smooth and smooth, can also treat various diseases of the twelve meridians of yin and yang.

