古文：礼下建元四年，高帝山陵，昭皇后应迁祔。
现代文：建元四年，高帝的陵墓，昭皇后应迁殡拊葬。
English: In the fourth year of Jianyuan, Emperor Gao's mausoleum, Empress Zhao should be moved and buried.

古文：祠部疑有祖祭及遣启诸奠九饭之仪不。
现代文：祠部疑问是否应举行祖奠、遣奠、启奠等祭奠以及九饭礼仪。
English: The ancestral hall department questioned whether it was appropriate to hold the ancestor's memorial service, memorial service, opening ceremony and other memorial services, as well as the nine meals ceremony.

古文：左仆射王俭议： 奠如大敛。
现代文：左仆射王俭建议： 像大殓一样祭奠。
English: Zuo minion Shaowang Jian suggested: Like the giant centipede, make a ritual offering.

古文：贺循云 从墓之墓皆设奠，如将葬庙朝之礼 。
现代文：贺循说 拊葬帝王陵墓的墓都举行祭奠，就像安葬前在庙朝举行的礼仪。 
English: He Xun said that all the tombs in the imperial mausoleum held memorial services, just like the rituals held in the temple before burial.

古文：范宁云 将窆而奠 。
现代文：范宁说 将要钻土下棺时举行祭奠。 
English: Fanning said a memorial service will be held when the casket is lowered into the ground.

古文：虽不称为祖，而不得无祭。 
现代文：虽然不称她为祖，但不能没有祭奠。 
English: Although they do not call her an ancestor, they cannot do without a memorial service.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：有司又奏： 昭皇后神主在庙，今迁祔葬，庙有虞以安神，神既已处庙，改葬出灵，岂应虞祭？郑注改葬云 从庙之庙，礼宜同从墓之墓 。事何容异！前代谓应无虞。 
现代文：主管官吏又上奏： 昭皇后的神位在宗庙，现在迁殡拊葬，在宗庙虞祭安慰神灵，神位既然已经安置在宗庙，改葬迁灵，岂能虞祭郑玄注释改葬说 从祀宗庙的庙，礼仪应该与拊葬陵墓的墓相同，事情怎能容许不同前代说应当没有虞祭。 
English: The officials in charge also played up: The divine throne of Empress Zhao is in the ancestral temple, now it is moved to the funeral and burial, in the ancestral temple, the Yu Festival comforts the gods, since the divine throne has been placed in the ancestral temple, can the Yu Festival be moved to the funeral and burial, Zheng Xuan commented that the Yu Festival should be changed from the temple that worships the ancestral temple, the etiquette should be the same as the tomb of the funeral mausoleum, how can things be allowed to be different from the previous generation saying that there should be no Yu Festival.

古文：左仆射王俭议： 范宁云 葬必有魂车 。若不为其归，神将安舍？
现代文：左仆射王俭建议： 范宁说 下葬一定要有魂车，如果不是为了回归，神灵将停驻何处?
English: Left-hand man Sha Wang Jian suggested: Fanning said that the funeral must have a soul car, if not to return, where will the gods be stationed?

古文：世中改葬，即墓所施灵设祭，何得不祭而毁耶？
现代文：世间改葬，都是就近墓地祭祀神灵，怎能不举行祭祀而毁弃呢?
English: In the world of reburial, it is customary to offer sacrifices to the gods in the vicinity of the cemetery. How can this be done without offering a sacrifice?

古文：贺循云 既窆，设奠于墓，以终其事 。
现代文：贺循说： 钻土下棺之后，在墓地祭奠，完成葬事 。
English: He Xun said: After drilling the coffin under the soil, pay tribute at the cemetery and complete the funeral.

古文：虽非正虞，亦粗相似。
现代文：虽不是正式虞祭，也要粗略相似。
English: Although it is not an official state festival, it should be roughly similar.

古文：晋氏修复五陵，宋朝敬后改葬，皆有虞。
现代文：晋代修复五陵，宋朝敬后改葬，都有虞祭。
English: Five mausoleums were restored during the Jin Dynasty, and were reburied after the Song Dynasty. Both had the Yu Festival.

古文：今设虞非疑。 
现代文：现在举行虞祭没有什么可疑虑的。 
English: There is nothing suspicious about holding the festival now.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：建元二年，皇太子妃薨，前宫臣疑所服。
现代文：纽二年，皇太子妃去世，前宫的官员对应服何种丧服有疑问。
English: When the Crown Princess passed away in 2010, officials at the former imperial palace had questions about what kind of mourning attire she should wear.

古文：左仆射王俭议： 《礼记·文王世子》 父在斯为子，君在斯为臣。 
现代文：左仆射王俭建议： 《礼记。文王世子》 父亲在此是儿子，国君在此就是臣下 。
English: His left-hand man, Shaowang Jian, suggested: "Li Ji. Wen Wang Shizi" In this case, the father is the son, and the sovereign is the vassal.

古文：且汉魏以来，宫僚充备，臣隶之节，具体在三。
现代文：而且汉魏以来，太子宫僚齐备，奴仆的礼节，具体讲是服三个月丧。
English: Moreover, since the Han and Wei dynasties, the prince's courtiers are well-prepared, and the etiquette of the servants, specifically, is to serve a three-month mourning.

古文：昔庾翼妻丧，王允、滕弘谓府吏宜有小君之服，况臣节之重邪？
现代文：从前庾翼妻子的丧事，王垒、坠丛说府中衙役应该服妻子去世的丧服，何况作为臣下礼节的重要呢?
English: In the past, the funeral of the wife of the king's wing, the king's bastion, and the fallen bushes said that the eunuch should wear the mourning clothes of his wife's death, not to mention the importance of etiquette as a vassal?

古文：宜依礼为旧君妻齐衰三月，居官之身，并合属假，朝晡临哭悉系东宫。
现代文：应该依照礼制为旧君的妻子服齐衰三个月，有官职在身的，都应当请假，早晚前往哭吊的事，都由束宫承担。
English: According to the etiquette, the wife of the old ruler should serve for three months, and those who have official duties should take a leave of absence. The affairs of going to the crying and hanging in the morning and evening are borne by the Sokgong.

古文：今臣之未从官在远者，于居官之所，属宁二日半，仍行丧成服，遣笺表，不得奔赴。 
现代文：现在远方没有任职朝廷的臣下，在任职的官署服丧两天半，仍旧穿丧服行丧，派人送上哀悼文书，但不能赶赴奔丧。 
English: Now far away, there are no vassals of the imperial court who are in office. They have been mourning for two and a half days at the government office where they are in office. They still wear mourning clothes and go to the funeral. They send someone to send a condolence document, but they can't rush to the funeral.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：太子妃斩草乘黄，议建铭旌。
现代文：太子妃享受的丧服是斩衰，使用乘黄，商量为她设立铭旌。
English: The funeral attire enjoyed by the crown princess is cut-and-dried, the use of yellow, and the establishment of a memorial plaque for her.

古文：仆射王俭议： 礼，既涂棺，祝取铭置于殡东，大敛毕，便应建于西阶之东。 
现代文：仆射王俭建议： 礼制，涂棺之后，祝把铭旌放在灵柩的束侧，大殓完毕，就应该立在西阶的束侧。 
English: After the coffin is painted, it is best to place the epitaph on the side of the casket. After the coffin is finished, it should be placed on the side of the casket on the west step.

古文：宋大明二年，太子妃毙，建九旒。
现代文：宋大明二年，太子妃去世，树立九旒的幡旗。
English: In the second year of Song Daming, after the death of the crown princess, the flag of nine stripes was raised.

古文：有司又议： 斩草日建旒与不？
现代文：主管官吏又请示： 举丧曰树幡旗不?
English: The officials in charge also asked: Is it appropriate to raise the tree banner flag?

古文：若建旒，应几旒？及画龙升降云何？又用几翣？
现代文：如果树幡旗，应该装饰几条旒以及上面怎样画龙的升降又用几种棺饰? 
English: If it is a tree banner, how many ribbons should be decorated, how should the dragon be raised and lowered, and how many coffin ornaments should be used?

古文：仆射王俭议： 旒本是命服，无关于凶事。今公卿以下，平存不能备礼，故在凶乃建耳。
现代文：仆射王俭建议： 旒本是显示等级的礼仪饰物，与丧事无关，如今公卿以下，平常没有机会显示礼仪等级，所以才在丧事中树装饰旒的幡旗。
English: Servant Wang Jian suggested: The flagpole is a ceremonial ornament that shows rank, and has nothing to do with the funeral. Nowadays, below the nobility, there is usually no opportunity to show the level of etiquette, so it is only in the funeral that the flagpole is decorated.

古文：东宫秩同上公九命之仪，妃与储君一体，义不容异，无缘未同常例，别立凶旒。
现代文：柬宫太子按品级享有与上公同等的礼仪，太子妃与太子一体，按道理礼仪不容有区别，没有缘故不与常规相同，另外树立丧事幡旗。
English: The prince of the Cambodian palace enjoys the same etiquette as his father-in-law according to the rank, and the princess and the prince are one. According to the principle, there is no difference in etiquette, and there is no reason not to be the same as the routine. In addition, a funeral banner is set up.

古文：大明旧事，是不经详议，率尔便行耳。
现代文：大明旧的事例，是不经过详细计议，就草率地实行。
English: Daming old cases are implemented hastily without detailed deliberation.

古文：今宜考以礼典，不得效尤从失。
现代文：现在应当考核礼典，不能再仿效沿续错误。
English: Now it is time to evaluate the ceremony, we can no longer imitate the mistakes along the way.

古文：吉部伍自有桁辂，凶部别有铭旌，若复立旒，复置何处？
现代文：吉礼的队列自有桁辖，凶礼另有幡旗，如再树立装饰旒的幡旗，放在什么地方?
English: The procession of auspiciousness has its own ranks and ranks, while the procession of inauspiciousness has its own flags. If you were to erect a flag with a decorative urn, where would you place it?

古文：翣自用八。 
现代文：棺饰自然用八种。 
English: There are eight types of coffin ornaments.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：有司奏： 大明故事，太子妃玄宫中有石志。
现代文：主管官吏上奏： 大明旧的事例，太子妃的宫中有石刻墓志。
English: The official in charge reported: There is a very old case, a stone-carved epitaph in the palace of a princess.

古文：参议墓铭不出礼典。
现代文：大家议论墓志铭不是出自礼典。
English: People argue that epitaphs do not come from a ceremony.

古文：近宋元嘉中，颜延作王球石志。
现代文：近代宋元嘉年间，颜延创作王球墓志。
English: During the Song and Yuan dynasties, Yan Yan created the Tomb of Wang Qiu.

古文：素族无碑策，故以纪德。
现代文：历代世族都没有碑文，所以用墓志纪念功德。
English: All the generations of the clan had no inscriptions, so they used epitaphs to commemorate their merits.

古文：自尔以来，王公以下，咸共遵用。
现代文：自此以后，王公以下，都遵照采用。
English: Since then, emperors and the like have followed suit.

古文：储妃之重，礼殊恒列，既有哀策，谓不须石志。 
现代文：太子妃身份重要，礼仪不同于一般人，既然有了哀策，我认为不需要墓志。 
English: The identity of the crown princess is important, the etiquette is different from that of ordinary people, and since there is a mourning strategy, I don't think there is a need for an epitaph.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：有司奏： 穆妃卒哭后，灵还在道，遇朔望，当须设祭不？ 
现代文：主管官吏上奏： 穆妃丧礼卒哭之后，神灵还在途中，遇到初一、十五，是否应当举行祭祀? 
English: The responsible official recited: After Mu Fei's funeral ceremony ended in tears, the gods were still on their way. If it was the first day of the first month or the fifteenth day of the first month, should a sacrifice be held?

古文：王俭议： 既虞卒哭，祭之于庙，本是祭序昭穆耳，未全同卒吉四时之祭也，所以有朔望殷事。
现代文：王俭建议： 既然已经举行虞祭卒哭，在宗庙祭祀，本来就是用祭祀排列昭穆，不全同于卒哭之后的常祭祀，所以有初一、十五的祭祀。
English: Wang Jian suggested: Since the mourning ceremony of the state festival has already been held, the sacrifices in the ancestral temple are originally arranged with sacrifices, which are not exactly the same as the regular sacrifices after the mourning, so there are sacrifices on the first day and the fifteenth day.

古文：蕃国不行权制，宋江夏王妃卒哭以后，朔望设祭。
现代文：藩属国不依照临时制度，宋江夏王妃的丧礼卒哭仪式之后，初一、十五举行祭祀。
English: In accordance with the provisional system, the tributary states of the domain did not hold a memorial service on the first day and the fifteenth day of the first month after the funeral ceremony of Princess Song Jiangxia.

古文：帝室既以卒哭除丧，无缘方有朔望之祭。
现代文：帝室既然通过卒哭仪式解除了丧事，没有理由还有初一、十五的祭祀。
English: Since the imperial family has lifted the mourning through the funeral ceremony, there is no reason to have the first-day and fifteenth-day sacrifices.

古文：灵筵虽未升庙堂，而舫中即成行庙，犹如桓玄及宋高祖长沙、临川二国，并有移庙之礼。
现代文：灵位虽然没有进入宗庙灵堂，然而船舫之中实际成了临时的宗庙，好比桓玄以及宋高祖时长沙、临川二国，都有迁移宗庙的礼仪。
English: Although the spiritual position did not enter the ancestral temple hall, it actually became a temporary ancestral temple in the middle of the boat anchor, just like Huan Xuan and Song Gao's ancestors in Changsha and Linchuan both had the etiquette of moving the ancestral temple.

古文：岂复谓灵筵在途，便设殷事耶？推此而言，朔望不复俟祭。
现代文：岂还能说灵位在途中，就举行殷祭由此而言，初一、十五不需要再举行祭祀。
English: Can it still be said that the spiritual position is in the middle, as far as the holding of Yin Festival is concerned, there is no need to hold sacrifices on the first day and the fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：宋懿后时旧事不及此，益可知时议。 
现代文：宋懿后当时的丧事没有提到这事，更可知道当时的意见。 
English: This matter was not mentioned in the funeral of Emperor Song of Han at that time, and the opinions at that time could be known.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：建元三年，有司奏： 皇太子穆妃以去年七月薨，其年闰九月。
现代文：建元三年，主管官吏上奏： 皇太子的穆妃在去年七月去世，当年闰九月。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the official in charge reported: The crown prince's wife Mu Fei passed away in July of last year, which was leap September.

古文：未审当月数闰？为应以闰附正月？
现代文：不知道应把闰月算为月数还是应把闰月附在正式的月份后?
English: Not sure if you should count leap months as months or if you should add the leap month to the official month?

古文：若用月数数闰者，南郡王兄弟便应以此四月晦小祥，至于祥月，不为有疑不？ 
现代文：如果在月数裹计算闰月，南郡王兄弟就应在这年四月的最后一天举行小祥礼，对于该月举行祥祭，是否有疑问? 
English: If the intercalary month is calculated from the number of months, the Minamigun Wang brothers should hold a small ceremony on the last day of April this year. Is there any doubt about holding the ceremony in this month?

古文：左仆射王俭议： 三百六旬，尚书明义，文公纳币，春秋致讥。
现代文：左仆射王俭建议：年三百六十天，《尚书》有明确的解释，文公纳聘礼娶亲，《春秋》加以嘲讽。
English: The left-hand servant, Sha Wang Jian, suggested: 360 days a year, "Shang Shu" has a clear explanation, "Wang Gong" accepts the bride price to marry, and "Spring and Autumn" ridicules it.

古文：《谷梁》云 积分而成月 。
现代文：《谷梁传》说 时分积累形成闰月 。
English: "Guliangzhuan" says that the accumulation of time and minutes forms a leap month.

古文：《公羊》云 天无是月 。
现代文：《公羊传》说 上天没有这个月 。
English: "The History of the Ram" says that this month does not exist.

古文：虽然，左氏谓告朔为得礼。
现代文：虽然如此，《左传》认为告朔是符合礼的。
English: Despite this, "Zo Zhuan" believes that the announcement is in line with etiquette.

古文：是故先儒咸谓三年期丧，岁数没闰，大功以下，月数数闰。
现代文：因此先儒都说三年服丧期，年数包含了闰月，服丧期在大功之下，闰月算为月数。
English: Therefore, the early Confucians said that the three-year mourning period was three years, the number of years included the leap months, the mourning period was under great merit, and the leap months were counted as months.

古文：夫闰者，盖是年之余日，而月之异朔，所以吴商云 含闰以正期，允协情理 。今杖期之丧，虽以十一月而小祥，至于祥缟，必须周岁。
现代文：闰月，是各年多余的日子积累而成，相当于不正常的月份，所以吴商说 把闰月包含在正常的一年之中，符合情理，如今服丧一年使用丧杖的丧礼，虽然在十一个月后举行小祥仪式，但是祥祭缟服，必须在一周年时服用。
English: The leap month is the accumulation of the extra days in each year, which is equivalent to an abnormal month. Therefore, Wu Shang said that it is reasonable to include the leap month in a normal year. Nowadays, the funeral of a year of mourning uses the funeral stick. Although the small Xiang ceremony is held eleven months later, the Xiang festival dress must be worn on the first anniversary.

古文：凡厌屈之礼，要取象正服。
现代文：凡是丧期削减一年的丧礼，要效法正规的丧服制度。
English: All funerals that shorten the mourning period by one year should follow the formal mourning dress system.

古文：祥缟相去二月，厌降小祥，亦以则之。
现代文：祥祭与缟服相距二月，丧期削减一年的小祥礼，也要按照此理。
English: In accordance with this principle, it is necessary to shorten the mourning period by one year and hold a small farewell ceremony.

古文：又且求之名义，则小祥本以年限，考于伦例，则相去必应二朔。
现代文：再者从名义的角度要求，小祥礼本来就以一年为限，据伦理事例考察，那么相距必须是两个月。
English: Furthermore, from the nominal point of view, the small Xiangli was originally limited to one year, according to the ethical example, then the distance must be two months.

古文：今以厌屈而先祥，不得谓此事之非期，事既同条，情无异贯，没闰之理，固在言先。
现代文：现在因为丧期削减一年而先举行祥祭，不能说这样祭不是在一周年，事情既然属于同一律条，情理上也就没有不统一的，年份包含闰月的道理，自然不言自明。
English: Now, because the mourning period has been shortened by one year, the Xiang Festival is held first. It cannot be said that such a festival is not on the first anniversary. Since the events belong to the same principle, there is no inconsistency in the circumstances. The fact that the year includes a leap month is self-evident.

古文：设令祥在此晦，则去缟三月，依附准例，益复为碍。
现代文：假使祥祭在这个晦日，那么距缟服礼三个月，依照正规事例，更是讲不通。
English: If the auspicious festival is on this last day of the year, then it is three months away from the formal dress ceremony, according to formal cases, it is even more incomprehensible.

古文：谓应须五月晦乃祥。此国之大典，宜共精详。
现代文：我认为应当等到五月的最后一天再举行祥祭这是国家重大的礼典，应该共同仔细商议。
English: I think we should wait until the last day of May to hold the New Year's Festival. This is a major national ceremony and should be carefully discussed together.

古文：并通关八座丞郎，研尽同异。 
现代文：与通关八座丞郎一起，研究异同。
English: Together with Hachizajero, he studies similarities and differences.

古文：尚书令褚渊难俭议曰： 厌屈之典，由所尊夺情，故祥缟备制，而年月不申。
现代文：尚书令褚渊反驳王俭说： 丧期削减一年的礼制是用健在的尊亲抑制对死者的感情，所以祥祭缟服礼制完备，可是不明确年月。
English: Wang Jian said, "The etiquette of shortening the mourning period by one year is to use living relatives to restrain the feelings of the deceased. Therefore, the Xiang Festival mourning dress etiquette is complete, but the year is not clear.

古文：今以十一月而祥，从期可知。
现代文：如今在十一个月后举行祥祭，可见是遵照期服丧制。
English: Now, the auspicious festival is held eleven months later, which can be seen as compliance with the period of mourning.

古文：既计以月数，则应数闰以成典。
现代文：既然用月数计算，就应当计算闰月而完成典礼。
English: Since it is calculated by the number of months, the leap month should be calculated to complete the ceremony.

古文：若犹含之，何以异于缟制？
现代文：如果仍把闰月包含在一年之中，那与丧服制度有什么不同。
English: If the leap month is still included in the year, how is that different from the mourning dress system?

古文：疑者正以祥之当闰，月数相县。
现代文：怀疑的人正是因为祥礼期限应当计算闰月，所以月数有差别。
English: Skeptics say the difference in the number of months is due to the fact that leap months should be included in the countdown.

古文：积分余闰，历象所弘。
现代文：积累剩余时分形成闰月，是历法天象所弘扬的。
English: The accumulation of the remaining time to form a leap month is promoted by the calendar astrologer.

古文：计月者数闰，故有余月，计年者苞含，故致盈积。
现代文：计算月数时把闰月计算在内，所以有剩余的月，计算一年包含闰月，所以导致堆积。
English: When calculating the number of months, the leap months are taken into account, so there are remaining months, and the leap months are included in the calculation of the year, which leads to accumulation.

古文：称理从制，有何不可？ 
现代文：符合情理顺从礼制，有什么不可以? 
English: Be reasonable and follow the rules of etiquette. What's not to like?

古文：俭又答渊难曰： 含闰之义，通儒所难。但祥本应期，屈而不遂。
现代文：王俭又回答褚渊的辩驳说：一年包含闰月的意思，是通达的儒者所难以接受的祥礼本来应在一周年举行，因丧期削减一年而未成。
English: Wang Jian also replied to Gongyuan's argument, saying, "The meaning of a year including a leap month is difficult for the enlightened Confucians to accept. The auspicious ceremony should have been held on the first anniversary, but it was not done because the mourning period was shortened by one year.

古文：语事则名体具存，论哀则情无以异。
现代文：就事而言名义及事情本身都得以保存，就哀悼而论情感没有什么差异。
English: As far as the matter is concerned, both the name and the matter itself are preserved, and as far as mourning is concerned, there is no difference in emotion.

古文：迹虽数月，义实计年，闰是年之归余，故宜总而苞之。
现代文：从迹象上虽然是计算月，可按道理实际是计算年，闰月是年份剩余时分的积累，所以应当包括在一年之中。
English: From the signs, although it is a calculation month, it can reasonably be a calculation year. The leap month is the accumulation of the remaining time of the year, so it should be included in the year.

古文：期而两祥，缘尊故屈，祥则没闰，象年所申，屈申兼著，二途具举。
现代文：一周年两次祥祭，由于活着的尊亲所以削减丧期，祥祭期限不计算闰月，就像计算年所表明的，缩减、延伸兼而着明，两种礼制都实行。
English: For the first anniversary and the two auspicious festivals, the period of mourning is shortened because of the living relatives. The period of the auspicious festival does not count the leap month, just as the calculation of the year shows that the reduction and extension are both obvious. Both kinds of ceremonial systems are implemented.

古文：经记之旨，其在兹乎？如使五月小祥，六月乃闰，则祥之去缟，事成二月，是为十一月以象前期，二朔以放后岁，名有区域，不得相参。
现代文：经书传记的本意，就在这点吧假使五月举行小祥礼，六月就闰月，那么祥祭距离缟服，事情分在两个月，造就是十一个月像一周年前，两个月放在一周年后，名称有自己的分区，不能混杂。
English: This is the original intention of the biography of the sutras. If a small auspicious ceremony is held in May, and the leap month is in June, then the auspicious festival is far away. The events are divided into two months. For example, the eleventh month is like the year before the first anniversary, and the two months are placed after the first anniversary. The names have their own division, and cannot be mixed.

古文：鲁襄二十八年 十二月乙未楚子卒 。
现代文：鲁襄公二十八年 十二月乙未，楚子卒 。
English: Lu Xianggong in December 28th, Chu Zi passed away.

古文：唯书上月，初不言闰，此又附上之明义也。
现代文：衹写前一个月，本不说闰月，这又符合上文的明确含义。
English: The month before the transcription is not a leap month, which is consistent with the clear meaning of the above.

古文：郑、射、王、贺唯云期则没闰，初不复区别杖期之中祥，将谓不俟言矣。
现代文：郑、射、王、贺衹是说一周年丧期包含闰月，本来不再区别杖期之内的祥祭，认为不需要再说。
English: Zheng, Ya, Wang and He are saying that the first anniversary mourning period includes the leap month, and there is no longer any difference between the auspicious festival within the wand period, and that there is no need to say more.

古文：成休甫云 大祥后禫，有闰别数之 ，明杖期之祥，不得方于浸缟之末。
现代文：成休甫说 大祥礼之后举行禅祭，有闰月另外计算 。表明杖期内的祥祭，不能与服丧后期相比。
English: Cheng Xiu Fu said that the Zen festival should be held after the great auspicious ceremony, and the leap month should be calculated separately, indicating that the auspicious festival during the wand period cannot be compared with the late mourning period.

古文：即恩如彼，就例如此。 
现代文：既然像那样施恩，照例就应如此。
English: Since you are so generous, you should continue to be so.

古文：渊又据旧义难俭十余问，俭随事解释。
现代文：褚渊又依据旧的礼义问难王俭十几次，王俭就事加以解释。
English: Gongyuan also asked Wang Jian a dozen times in accordance with the old etiquette, and Wang Jian explained the matter.

古文：祠部郎中王圭之议，谓 丧以闰施，功衰以下小祥值闰，则略而不言。
现代文：祠部郎中王珪之的意见，说： 丧礼碰到闰月的处理，服丧在功、衰以下，小祥礼赶上闰月，就略而不说。
English: According to the opinion of Wang Xuanwu, the steward of the ancestral hall, said: When the funeral ceremony encounters the leap month, the funeral service is below the level of merit and demerit, and when the small ceremony catches up with the leap month, it is omitted.

古文：今虽厌屈，祥名犹存，异于余服。
现代文：现在虽然减除一年丧期，祥祭的名义还存在，不同于其他的丧服等级。
English: Now, although the one-year mourning period has been reduced, the name of the Xiang Festival still exists, which is different from other mourning clothes.

古文：计月为数，屈追慕之心，以远为迩。
现代文：把闰月计算为月数，有辱追念敬慕先人的心，把远当作近。
English: Counting the intercalary month as the number of months is an insult to the memory and admiration of the ancestors, and regards far as near.

古文：日既余分，月非正朔，含而全制，于情唯允。
现代文：既然有剩余时分，闰月又不是正式的月份，包含在一年之中，健全礼制，在情理上是可以的。
English: Since there is time left, the leap month is not an official month, it is included in the year, and it is reasonable to have a sound etiquette.

古文：仆射俭议，理据详博，谨所附同。
现代文：仆射王俭的意见，论据详明广博，应敬加附和赞同。
English: The opinions of the servant Wang Jian, with detailed and extensive arguments, should be respectfully added and endorsed.

古文：今司徒渊始虽疑难，再经往反，未同俭议。
现代文：现在司徒褚渊开始虽然疑问辩难，又经过往返问辩，还未同意王俭的意见。
English: Now, although the questions and arguments are difficult, and after the back-and-forth debate, Szeto Qianyuan has not yet agreed with Wang Qian's opinion.

古文：依旧八座丞郎通共博议为允。
现代文：应依旧由八座丞郎共同集思广议为是。
English: It should still be the eight choirmasters who brainstorm together.

古文：以来五月晦小祥，其祥禫自依常限。
现代文：在来年五月最后一天举行小祥礼，祥祭、撵祭自然依照正常的期限。
English: A small auspicious ceremony will be held on the last day of May next year, and the auspicious and auspicious festivals will naturally follow the normal time limit.

古文：奏御，班下内外。 
现代文：上奏御览，颁布内外。 
English: Prelude review, promulgated inside and outside.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：下诏说： 可以。 
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：皇太子穆妃服，尚书左丞兼著作郎王逡问左仆射王俭： 中军南郡王小祥，应待闻喜不？
现代文：为皇太子穆妃服丧，尚书左丞兼著作郎王逡请教左仆射王俭：中军南郡王举行小祥礼，是否应该等闻喜公一起?
English: For the funeral of Crown Prince Mu Fei, Shangshu's left-hand man and author of the book, Wang Yao, asked his left-hand man, Sha Wang Jian, to hold a small farewell ceremony for the king of the southern county of the Chinese army. Should he wait for Wen Qigong?

古文：穆妃七月二十四日薨，闻喜公八月发哀，计十一月之限，应在六月。
现代文：穆妃七月二十四去世，闻喜公八月发丧，计算小祥礼十一个月的期限，应该在六月举行。
English: Mu Fei passed away on July 24th, Weng Xi Gong went into mourning in August, and the countdown to the eleven-month period for the small New Year's Eve ceremony should be held in June.

古文：南郡王为当同取六月，则大祥复申一月，应用八月，非复正月，在存亲之义，若各自为祥，庐垩相间，玄素杂糅，未审当有此疑不？ 
现代文：南郡王以为应当同在六月，那么大祥礼再推延一个月，应当在八月，不再是正规的月数，衹在于保存亲情之义，如果分别举行祥祭，倚庐、垩室相隔，黑白丧服混杂，不知是否当有这些疑虑?
English: Nan Guowang thought that it should be in June, so the grand farewell ceremony should be postponed for another month, it should be in August, it is no longer a regular number of months, the reason is to preserve the meaning of kinship. If the farewell ceremony is held separately, the coffin and burial chamber are separated, and the black and white funeral clothes are mixed, I don't know if there should be these doubts?

古文：俭曰： 送往有已，复生有节，罔极非服制所申，祥缟明示终之断。
现代文：王俭说：发送死者有终了，恢复正常生活有节度，遥遥无期不是丧服制度所申明的，祥祭缟服明确表示了丧事的终结。
English: Wang Jian said: Sending the deceased has an end, returning to normal life has moderation, and the far future is not affirmed by the mourning dress system. The Xiang Festival mourning dress clearly indicates the end of the funeral.

古文：相待之义，经记无闻。
现代文：相互等待的意思，经传中没有记载。
English: The meaning of waiting for each other is not recorded in the sutras.

古文：世人多以庐室衰麻，不宜有异，故相去一二月者，或申以俱除。
现代文：世人多以为倚庐垩室衰麻丧服，不应该有区别，所以相隔一二个月，有的就推延到一起举行。
English: Most people in the world think that there should be no difference between mourning and burial, so they are held one or two months apart, and some are postponed to be held together.

古文：此所谓任情径行，未达礼旨。
现代文：造就是所谓放任情感径直行事，没有通晓礼的本意。
English: Making up is the so-called indulgence of emotion to act directly, without the intention of knowing the rules.

古文：昔撰《丧记》，已尝言之。
现代文：从前撰写《丧记》，曾经阐述过这个意思。
English: In the past, when I wrote "Memoirs of a Funeral," I explained this meaning.

古文：远还之人，自有为而未祭，在家之子，立何辞以不变？
现代文：从远方归来奔丧的人，自然是有事耽搁而未能赶上祥祭，住在家中的儿子，有什么理由不更换丧服。
English: People who come from far away to mourn are naturally delayed and unable to catch up with the auspicious festival, and the son who lives at home has no reason not to change his mourning clothes.

古文：礼有除丧而归者，此则经记之遗文，不待之明据。
现代文：礼经中有除去丧服归来祭祀的，这是经传遣存的记载，是不必等到一起的明确证据。
English: In the sutra, there is a record of removing the mourning clothes and returning for the sacrifice. This is a clear evidence that it is not necessary to wait until the funeral.

古文：假使应待，则相去弥年，亦宜必待，乃为衰绖永服以穷生，吉蠲长绝于宗庙，斯不可矣。
现代文：假如应当等到一起祥祭，那么相隔经年，也必须要等到一起，就会终生披麻戴孝，宗庙长期得不到祭祀，遣是不可以的。
English: If it is necessary to wait until the auspicious festival, then it is necessary to wait until the time of the year, and it will be a lifetime of filial piety. If the ancestral temple does not get the sacrifice for a long time, it is not allowed to send it.

古文：苟曰非宜，则旬月之间，亦不容申。
现代文：假如说不应当等到一起，那么旬月的间隔，也不容许推延。
English: If it is said that we should not wait until we are together, then the interval between the equinoxes should not be allowed to be delayed.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：礼有伦序，义无徒设。
现代文：礼制区分伦次，礼义不是白设的。
English: The etiquette system differentiates between etiquette and etiquette, and etiquette and etiquette are not arbitrary.

古文：今远则不待，近必相须，礼例既乖，即心无取。
现代文：现在间隔长的不等到一起，间隔短的必须等到一起，既违背礼的规定，而且用心也一无足取。
English: Now, the long intervals do not wait for each other, and the short intervals must wait for each other, which is against the rules of etiquette, and it is not done with the best of intentions.

古文：若疑兄弟同居，吉凶舛杂，则古有异宫之义。
现代文：假如顾虑兄弟住在一起，吉礼凶礼混杂，那么古代有兄弟各有宫室的说法。
English: If the brothers live together and the auspicious and inauspicious are mixed, then in ancient times there was a saying that each brother had his own palace.

古文：设无异宫，则远还之子，自应开立别门，以终丧事。
现代文：如果没有不同的宫室，那么从远方归来的儿子，自然应当另外开一个门，履行完丧礼仪式。
English: If there is no different palace, then the son who returns from afar should naturally open another door and complete the funeral ceremony.

古文：灵筵祭奠，随在家之人，再期而毁。
现代文：祭奠灵位，是随住在家中的人，两周年之后停止。
English: Dedication of the shrine, which is carried out by those who live in the house, stops after the second anniversary.

古文：所以然者，《奔丧礼》云 为位不奠 ，郑玄云 以其精神不存乎此也 。
现代文：之所以如此，是因为《奔丧礼》说 在官位者不祭奠 ，郑玄说 因为死者的灵魂没有在这裹 。
English: The reason for this is that "The Funeral March" says that those in official positions do not pay tribute, Zheng Xuan said that because the soul of the deceased is not wrapped here.

古文：闻哀不时，实缘在远。
现代文：不能及时听说噩耗，确实因为身在远方。
English: Not being able to hear the bad news in time is indeed due to being far away.

古文：为位不奠，益有可安。
现代文：在官位不祭奠，更有可以心安的理由。
English: There are even more reasons for peace of mind when you don't have to pay homage to your official position.

古文：此自有为而然，不关嫡庶。
现代文：这些自然都各有缘由，与嫡子庶子无关。
English: These naturally have their own reasons, and have nothing to do with the legitimate child or the illegitimate child.

古文：庶子在家，亦不待嫡矣。
现代文：庶子在家裹，也不需等待嫡子。
English: You don't have to wait for your legitimate child to grow up when your illegitimate child is at home.

古文：而况储妃正体王室，中军长嫡之重，天朝又行权制，进退弥复非疑。
现代文：何况太子妃是王室嫡系，中军处于嫡长子重位，朝廷又施行从权的礼制，进退之礼就更没有什么可顾虑的。
English: What's more, the crown princess is the official embodiment of the royal family. The general of the Chinese army occupies an important position as the eldest son, and holds great power in the imperial court. There should be no more doubts about his handling.

古文：谓不应相待。
现代文：我认为不应当等到一起举行祥祭。
English: I don't think we should wait to hold the New Year's festival together.

古文：中军祥缟之日，闻喜致哀而已，不受吊慰。
现代文：中军举行祥祭缟服的那天，对闻喜公衹是表示哀悼而已，不接受吊唁。
English: On the day when the Chinese army held the Xiang Festival, they only expressed their condolences to Wen Xi Gong and did not accept condolences.

古文：及至忌辰变除，昆弟亦宜相就写情而不对客。
现代文：等到忌日换上丧服，兄弟也应当聚到一起表达追念之情，不接待客人。
English: Wait until the day of death to change into mourning clothes. Brothers should also gather together to express their feelings of remembrance and not receive guests.

古文：此国之大典，宜通关八座丞郎，共尽同异，然后奏御。 
现代文：这是国家的大典，应当由通关八座丞郎共同研究同异，然后上奏皇上。
English: This is a great national ceremony, and the eight priests should jointly study the similarities and differences, and then perform it for the emperor.

古文：司徒褚渊等二十人并同俭议为允，请以为永制。
现代文：司徒褚渊等二十人都同意王俭的意见，请求作为永久的制度。
English: Twenty people, including Szeto Shanyuan, agreed with Wang Jian's opinion and requested that it be made a permanent system.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：皇上下诏说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：建元三年，太子穆妃薨，南郡王闻喜公国臣疑制君母服。
现代文：建元三年，太子穆妃去世，南郡王闻喜公的臣属对为主上母亲服丧有疑问。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, Prince Mu Fei died, and the vassals of Wang Wenshi of Nan County had doubts about the mourning of his mother.

古文：俭又议： 《礼》 庶人为国君齐衰 。先儒云 庶人在官，若府史之属是也 。
现代文：王俭又建议： 《礼经》 庶人为国君服齐衰之丧，先儒说 庶人在官府就好比是府史之类人 。
English: Wang Jian also suggested: "The Book of Rites" states that a commoner is of equal importance to the emperor, and the early Confucianists said that a commoner in the government is like a person in the history of the government.

古文：又诸侯之大夫妻为大人服繐衰七月，以此轻微疏远，故不得尽礼。
现代文：另外诸侯属下大夫的妻子要为诸侯的夫人服七个月的总衰，此制轻微疏远，所以不能尽礼。
English: In addition, the wife of a doctor belonging to a vassal of a vassal had to serve the vassal's wife for a total of seven months. This system was slightly alienating, so it was not appropriate.

古文：今皇孙自是蕃国之王公，太子穆妃是天朝之嫡妇。
现代文：现在皇孙自然是藩属国的王公，太子穆妃是天朝的嫡子之妻。
English: Now the emperor's grandson is naturally the prince of the country belonging to the domain, and the prince Mu Fei is the wife of the legitimate son of the Heavenly Court.

古文：宫臣得申小君之礼，国官岂敢为夫人之敬？
现代文：宫中臣下都能够作为诸侯妻子尽礼，王国官员怎敢衹是表示对夫人的礼敬。
English: Subordinates in the court are able to perform courtesies as wives of princes, but how dare officials of the kingdom show courtesy to their wives.

古文：当单衣白帢素带哭于中门外，每临辄入，与宫官同。 
现代文：应当穿单衣、戴白便帽、扎素带，在中门外就哭，每次哭吊都要进去，与宫中官员相同。 
English: They should wear a singlet, a white cap, and a garter belt. If they cry outside the middle gate, they must go inside every time they cry, the same as palace officials.

古文：永明十一年，文惠太子薨，右仆射王晏等奏： 案《丧服经》 为君之父、长子，同齐衰期 。今至尊既不行三年之典，止服期制，群臣应降一等，便应大功。
现代文：丞塱十一年，文惠太子去世，右仆射王昙等人上奏： 据《丧服经》 为国君的父亲、长子服丧，都是服齐衰一年，现在既然天子不用服丧三年，衹服丧一年，群臣应该降一等，就应当服大功之丧。
English: In the eleventh year of the Joseon Dynasty, Prince Wen Hui passed away, and his right-hand man, Prince Shotoku, and others made a speech: According to "The Book of Mourning," the father and the eldest son of the sovereign should be mourned for one year. Now that the son of heaven does not have to be mourned for three years, and the son of heaven should be mourned for one year, the ministers should be downgraded one grade, and they should be mourned for their great achievements.

古文：九月功衰，是兄弟之服，不可以服尊。
现代文：九个月的功衰丧服，是为兄弟服丧，不能够服尊者之丧。
English: Nine months of mourning for a brother is not enough to mourn for a saint.

古文：臣等参议，谓宜重其衰裳。减其月数，同服齐衰三月。
现代文：我们共同商议，认为应当加重丧服等级，减少月数，都服三个月的齐衰。
English: We discussed it together and thought that the level of mourning clothes should be increased, the number of months should be reduced, and all three months should be served.

古文：至于太孙三年既申，南郡国臣，宜备齐衰期服。
现代文：至于太孙已经明确要服三年丧，南郡王的臣属，应当服一年齐衰之丧。
English: As for the great-grandson, it has been made clear that he will have to serve three years of mourning, and the vassals of the southern county king should serve one year of mourning.

古文：临汝、曲江既非正嫡，不得祢先储，二公国臣，并不得服。 
现代文：临汝公、曲江公既然不是嫡系，就不用在宗庙中立已故太子的神位，二公的臣属，都不用服丧。 
English: Since Lin Rukong and Qu Jiangong are not direct descendants, they do not have to hold the throne of the deceased prince in the ancestral temple, and the subjects of the two princes do not have to attend the funeral.

古文：诏依所议。
现代文：皇上诏令就依照所议定的。
English: The imperial edict was issued in accordance with what had been agreed.

古文：又奏： 案《丧服经》虽有 妾为君之长子从君而服 。二汉以来，此礼久废，请因循前准，不复追行。 
现代文：又上奏： 案查《丧服经》虽然有 国君的妾为国君的长子服丧依照国君行事 ，两汉以来，这一礼制长期废弃，请沿袭从前的做法，不再实行古制。 
English: It was also reported that, according to the investigation of "The Book of Funeral Rites," although there is a concubine of the sovereign to act as the eldest son of the sovereign, since the Han Dynasty, this etiquette has long been abandoned. Please follow the previous practice and no longer implement the old system.

古文：诏曰： 既久废，停便。 
现代文：皇上下诏说： 既然长期废弃，停用为便。 
English: The imperial edict said: Since it has been abandoned for a long time, it is convenient to stop using it.

古文：又奏： 伏寻御服文惠太子期内不奏乐，诸王虽本服期，而储皇正体宗庙，服者一同，释服，奏乐、姻娶，便应并通。
现代文：又上奏： 据在下查考，皇上在文惠太子一年的服丧期内不演奏音乐，虽然对诸王本来也是服一年丧，然而太子是宗庙正统，在丧服上应该相同，除掉丧服，可以奏乐嫁娶的时间，就应当一致。
English: And again: According to the investigation below, the emperor did not play music during the one-year mourning period of Prince Wenhui. Although the kings were originally mourned for one year, the prince is the orthodox of the family temple, and the mourning clothes should be the same. If the mourning clothes are removed, the time for playing music and marrying should be the same.

古文：窃谓二等诚俱是嘉礼，轻重有异：娶妇思嗣，事非全吉，三日不乐，礼有明文。
现代文：我们认为对太子、诸王诚然都是用的嘉礼，但轻重有所不同。娶妇盼子嗣，事情并非全都吉祥，三日不奏乐，礼中有明文记载。
English: We believe that the prince and the kings are indeed used for the ceremony, but the weight is different. Marry a woman and hope for children, things are not all auspicious, three days without playing music, clearly recorded in the ceremony.

古文：宋世期丧降在大功者，婚礼废乐，以申私戚，通以前典。 
现代文：宋代一年的丧期降为服大功，婚礼废除音乐，表明私情，与前代典制相通。 
English: In the Song Dynasty, the one-year mourning period was reduced to a great service, and the wedding ceremony abolished music, indicating personal feelings, which was similar to the previous ceremony system.

古文：诏 依议 。
现代文：皇上下诏说 依照你们的意见 。
English: The Emperor issued an edict saying, "According to your opinions, go ahead."

古文：又奏： 案礼，详除皆先于今夕易服，明旦乃设祭。
现代文：又上奏： 根据礼，祥祭除去丧服都在当天晚上换衣服，第二天早晨才举行祭祀。
English: And again: According to the ritual, after removing the mourning clothes from the auspicious festival, they all changed their clothes in the evening of the same day, and the ritual was held in the morning of the next day.

古文：寻比世服临然后改服，与礼为乖。
现代文：查考连续几代都是临举行仪式才更换衣服，与礼不相符。
English: According to the survey, successive generations have changed their clothes before the ceremony, which is not consistent with the etiquette.

古文：今东宫公除日，若依例，皇太孙服临方易服。
现代文：现在东宫因公除去丧服的日期，如果依照前例，皇太孙的丧服要在临举行典礼时改换。
English: Now that the East Palace has set the date for removing the mourning clothes for official reasons, if the precedent is followed, the great-grandson's mourning clothes will be changed on the eve of the ceremony.

古文：臣等参议，谓先哭临竟而后祭之。
现代文：我们共同商议，认为要先哭吊完毕，然后祭祀。
English: We discussed it together and decided that the crying and hanging should be done first, and then the sacrifice.

古文：应公除者，皆于府第变服，而后入临，行奉慰之礼。 
现代文：应当因公除去丧服的，都在自己府第改换衣服，然后进去哭吊，行奉祀抚慰之礼。 
English: Those who should take off their mourning clothes for official reasons should change their clothes in their own homes, and then go inside to mourn and offer prayers of consolation.

古文：诏 可 。
现代文：皇上下韶说 可以 。
English: The next edict said yes.

古文：建武二年，朝会，时世祖遏密未终，朝议疑作乐不。
现代文：建武二年，会见群臣，当时世祖的丧期没有完结，朝廷对是否奏乐议论不决。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he met with a group of ministers. At that time, the period of mourning for the founder of the dynasty had not ended, and the imperial court was undecided about whether to play music.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议： 昔舜受终文祖，义非胤尧，及放勋徂落，遏密三祀。
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议： 当年舜在尧的祖庙继承帝位，其意义不是作为尧的后嗣，等到放勋逝世，禁绝三祀。
English: The suggestion of the ancestral hall minister, He Xizhi: In those days, Xizhi inherited the imperial throne from Xizhi's ancestral temple, but his significance was not as Xizhi's heir. When Huan Xun passed away, he forbade the worship of the three gods.

古文：近代晋康帝继成帝，于时亦不作乐。
现代文：近代晋康帝继承成帝皇位，当时也不奏乐。
English: The modern-day Emperor Jinkang, who succeeded to the imperial throne, did not play music at that time.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年，惠帝丧制未终，于时江充议云，古帝王相承，虽世及有异，而轻重同礼。 
现代文：怀帝丞裹元年，塞童的服丧期未完，当时逗立建议说，古代帝王承续帝位，虽然有继承父位、兄位的不同，然而礼的轻重是相同的。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Huai's reign, before the period of mourning for Saido was over, Zhi Li suggested that the ancient emperors succeeded to the throne, although there was a difference in the succession of father and brother, but the importance of the ceremony was the same.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了造一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：建武二年正月，有司以世宗文皇帝今二年正月二十四日再忌日，二十九日大祥，三月二十九日祥禫，至尊及群臣泄哀之仪，应定准。
现代文：建武二年正月，主管官吏因为世宗文皇帝在今二年正月二十四日是第二个忌日，二十九日大祥礼，三月二十九日祥潭礼，天子以及群臣表露哀悼的礼仪，应该有一定的标准。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jianwu, the officials in charge, because Emperor Shizongwen died on the 24th day of the first month of this year, the second death day, the 29th day of the Great Xiangli, the 29th day of the Xiangtanli in March, and the etiquette of the emperor and the courtiers to express their condolences should have a certain standard.

古文：下二学八座丞郎，博士陶韶以为 名立义生，自古之制。
现代文：下达太学、国学及八座丞郎商议。博士陶韶认为： 名称确立意义就会产生，这是自古以来的制度。
English: The order was issued after deliberation among scholars of Chinese and Japanese studies, as well as eight eminent scholars.Dr. Tao Wei believes that: The meaning of the name will be established, which is a system that has been in place since ancient times.

古文：文帝正号祖宗，式序昭穆，祥忌禫日，皇帝宜服祭服，出太极泄哀。百僚亦祭服陪位 。
现代文：文帝为嫡系祖宗，排位昭穆，祥礼、忌日、樟礼当天，皇帝应穿祭服，出太极殿致哀，百官也穿祭服列位相陪。 
English: Emperor Wen is the direct ancestor of the lineage, ranking as an illustrious person. On the day of the auspicious ceremony, the day of death, and the funeral ceremony, the emperor should wear a ceremonial robe and go out of the Taiji Hall to pay his respects. Hundreds of officials also wear ceremonial robes to accompany him.

古文：太常丞李捴议曰： 寻尊号既追，重服宜正，但已从权制，故苴杖不说。
现代文：太常丞李揭建议说： 查考尊号既已追封，丧服就应依照正式规定，但是已经遵从临时制度，所以没有提到苴杖。
English: Li Jie, the chief secretary of the commission, suggested that since the name of the deceased had been sealed, the funeral clothes should be in accordance with the official regulations, but they had already complied with the temporary system, so there was no mention of the cane.

古文：至于钻燧既同，天地亦变，容得无感乎？
现代文：至于其功德既然可与钻木取火相比，天地也为之变化，怎能不受感动。
English: As for his merit, since it can be compared to drilling wood to make fire, and the world has changed because of it, how can you not be moved?

古文：且晋景献皇后崩，群臣备小君之服。
现代文：而且晋景献皇后去世，群臣用对诸侯妻子的礼仪服丧。
English: Moreover, when the queen of Jinjing died, the courtiers mourned with the etiquette of the wife of a vassal.

古文：追尊之后，无违后典，追尊之帝，固宜同帝礼矣。
现代文：追尊的皇后，都要享受皇后的礼仪，迫尊的皇帝，自然应当与皇帝享受同样的礼仪。
English: The empress who pursues respect should enjoy the etiquette of an empress, and the emperor who pursues respect should naturally enjoy the same etiquette as the emperor.

古文：虽臣子一例，而礼随时异。至尊龙飞中兴，事非嗣武，理无深衣之变。
现代文：虽然为臣为子服制相同，然而礼随着时代而变化，天子犹如飞龙中兴朝运，不是用武力成事，按道理没有必要改变常服饰。
English: Although the dress code is the same for both the emperor and the emperor's son, the etiquette changes with the times. The emperor is like a flying dragon to promote the movement of the North Korean people. It is not done by force, so there is no need to change the dress code.

古文：但王者体国，亦应吊服出正殿举哀，百寮致恸，一如常仪。 
现代文：衹是帝王为国家表率，也应当穿哀悼礼服出正殿表示悲痛，百官痛哭，一切依照常规礼仪。 
English: If the emperor is to set an example for the country, he should also wear mourning clothes to show his grief outside the main hall, and the officials should weep bitterly, all in accordance with the usual etiquette.

古文：给事中领国子助教谢昙济议： 夫丧礼一制，限节两分。
现代文：给事中领国子助教谢昙济建议： 丧礼制度，分为两个部分。
English: Assistant Professor Xie Rongji, the leader of Guozi, suggested: The funeral system is divided into two parts.

古文：虞祔追亡之情，小祥抑存之礼，斯尽至爱可申，极痛宜屈耳。
现代文：虞祭拊祭是表现追念亡者的感情，小祥是克制生者的礼仪，这大概就是至深的亲情可以表露，极度的痛哭也要抑制。
English: The Yu Festival is a ceremony to express the feelings of remembering the dead, and the Xiao Xiang is a ceremony to restrain the living. This is probably the deepest affection that can be expressed, and extreme crying should also be restrained.

古文：文皇帝虽君德早凝，民化未洽，追崇尊极，实缘于性。
现代文：文皇帝虽然没有作为国君施行德业，教化百姓，但追尊为至高无上的皇帝，确是缘于其天性。
English: Although Emperor Wen did not carry out virtuous deeds and enlighten the people as a sovereign, it is indeed due to his nature that he is revered as the supreme emperor.

古文：今言臣则无实，论己则事虚。
现代文：现在说到臣下应遵守的礼制没有实际内容，议论到自己事情也是虚的。
English: Now, when it comes to the etiquette that should be observed by subordinates, there is no actual content, and it is also false to talk about one's own affairs.

古文：圣上驭宇，更奉天眷，祗礼七庙，非从三后，周忌祥禫，无所依设。 
现代文：圣上驾御宇内，更承受上天眷爱，祠祀七代宗庙，不是依照夏商周三代，所以周年忌及祥祭、樟祭，没有先例仿照举行。 
English: In the heavenly kingdom, it is even more important to be loved by God. The ancestral shrines and temples of the seven generations are not based on the three generations of Xia Shang, so there is no precedent for the anniversary, auspicious festival, and hail festival.

古文：太学博士崔愝同陶韶议，太常沈倓同李捴议，国子博士刘警等同谢昙济议。
现代文：太学博士崔惬赞同陶韶的意见，太常沈侠赞同李揭的意见，国子博士刘警等人赞同谢昙济的意见。
English: Dr. Cui Jun, the dean of the school, agreed with Tao Jun's opinion, Dr. Shen Xia, the dean of the school, agreed with Li Jie's opinion, and Dr. Liu Guan, the dean of the school, agreed with Xie Rongji's opinion.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议曰： 《春秋》之旨，臣子继君亲，虽恩义有殊，而其礼则一，所以敦资敬之情，笃方丧之义。
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议说： 《春秋》的意义，臣子继续君主宗亲的事业，虽然恩义有别，但用的礼是一致的，都为的是敦厚孝敬的感情，加重有关丧服的礼义。
English: "The significance of "Spring and Autumn" is that the vassals continue the cause of the monarch's great-grandparents. Although the gratitude is different, the courtesy is consistent. It is all for the sake of strong feelings of filial piety, and to increase the courtesy of the funeral dress.

古文：主上虽仰嗣高皇，尝经北面，方今圣历御宇，垂训无穷，在三之恩，理不容替。
现代文：皇上虽然上继高皇帝，曾经北面为臣，但现在秉承天运统治天下，教化百姓，凡是父亲、老师、国君的恩情，照理不容更替。
English: Although the Emperor succeeded Emperor Gao and was once a subject of the North, he is now upholding the fate of heaven to rule the world and educate the people. The grace of a father, a teacher, and a sovereign cannot be replaced.

古文：窃谓世宗祥忌，至尊宜吊服升殿，群臣同致哀感，事毕，百官诣宣德宫拜表，仍致哀陵园，以弘追远之慕。 
现代文：我认为世宗的祥祭忌日，皇上应穿哀悼礼服登上殿堂，群臣共同致哀，事情完毕，百官到宣德宫祭拜上表，还要到陵园致哀，弘扬追念思慕之义。 
English: I think that on the anniversary of the death of King Sejong, the emperor should wear a mourning dress to ascend the hall of fame, and the courtiers should mourn together. After the event is over, the officials should go to the Xuande Palace to worship the table, and also go to the cemetery to mourn and promote the memory of the deceased.

古文：尚事令王晏等十九人同佟之议。
现代文：尚书令王呈等十九人赞同何驻的建议。
English: Nineteen people, including Wang Zhen, agreed with He Jian's suggestion.

古文：诏 可。 
现代文：皇上下诏说 可以 。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict saying that it was okay.

古文：海陵王薨，百官会哀。时纂严，朝议疑戎服临会。
现代文：海陵王去世，百官集会致哀，当时实行戒严，朝廷议论对穿军服赴会犹疑不决。
English: When King Hailing died, hundreds of officials gathered to pay their respects. At the time, martial law was in effect, and the Imperial Court was hesitant to wear military uniforms to the meeting.

古文：祠部郎何佟之议： 羔裘玄冠不以吊，理不容以兵服临丧。
现代文：祠部郎何佟之建议： 不能穿羊羔皮衣、黑色帽子吊唁。照理不允许穿军服参加丧礼。
English: The suggestion of the ancestral minister, He Xizhong: You can't wear a lambskin coat, a black hat, and a mourning cap. It is not allowed to wear a military uniform to attend the funeral.

古文：宋泰始二年，孝武大祥之日，于时百寮入临，皆于宫门变戎服，著衣夹，入临毕，出外，还袭戎衣。 
现代文：宋泰始二年，为孝武帝举行大祥礼那天，当时百官进宫哭吊，都在宫门换下军服，穿上便衣，哭吊完毕出来，仍旧穿上军服。 
English: In the second year of the Song Dynasty, on the day of the grand welcoming ceremony for Emperor Xiaowu, when hundreds of officials entered the palace weeping and wailing, they all changed out of their military uniforms at the palace gate, put on civilian clothes, and when they had finished weeping and wailing, they still put on their military uniforms.

古文：从之。
现代文：采纳了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：赞曰：姬制孔作，训范百王。
现代文：赞曰：周公、孔子制作礼仪，训示规范百王。
English: Praise: Zhou Gong and Confucius made etiquette, and the instruction standard is one of the best.

古文：三千有数，四维是张。
现代文：共有三千之数，礼、义、廉、耻得以伸张。
English: There were a total of three thousand of them, and they were able to show respect, righteousness, integrity, and shame.

古文：损益彝典，废举宪章。
现代文：增减法度，兴废宪章。
English: Addition and subtraction of laws, promotion and abolition of the Charter.

古文：戎祀军国，社庙郊庠。
现代文：军队典礼国家祭祀，社稷宗庙郊祭学校礼仪。
English: The military ceremony is a national ritual, and the school ceremony is a suburb festival of a religious temple.

古文：冠婚朝会，服纪凶丧。
现代文：冠礼婚礼朝会礼，丧服标志凶丧之礼。
English: The crowning ceremony is the wedding morning ceremony, and the funeral dress is the funeral ceremony.

古文：存为盛德，戒在先亡。
现代文：国家保存是因为有大德，从前的亡国要引以为戒。
English: The preservation of the country is due to great virtue, and the former defeated country should be cautioned.

