古文：二十三日晨起，渡大溪之北，复西向行，八里，将至贵溪城，忽见溪南一桥门架空，以为城门与卷梁皆无此高跨之理。
现代文：二十三日早晨起来，渡过大溪北面，又向西行。走八里、将到贵溪城时，忽然看见溪南面有个桥门凌空横架，我想城门和卷梁都没有如此这般高高横跨在两边的。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, I got up, crossed the north side of the Daxi River, and then headed west. After walking for eight miles, when I was about to reach Guixi City, I suddenly saw a bridge on the south side of the river. I don't think the city gate and the rolling beam are so high on both sides.

古文：执途人而问之，知为仙人桥，乃石架两山间，非砖砌所成也。
现代文：拉住路上的人询问，才知道是仙人桥，它是用石头架在两山间形成的，不是砖块砌成的。
English: When people on the road stopped to ask about it, they learned that it was a hermit bridge. It was made of stone between two mountains, not bricks.

古文：大异之，即欲渡，无梁。
现代文：我觉得大为奇异，便想渡过溪观览，但溪上没有桥梁。
English: I thought it was very strange and wanted to cross the stream to watch, but there was no bridge over the stream.

古文：亟趋二里，入贵溪东关，二里至玉井头，觅静闻于逆旅，犹未晨餐也。
现代文：赶紧疾走二里，进入贵溪东关，又走两里，到玉井头，在旅店中找到静闻，他还没有吃早餐。
English: He hurriedly walked two miles, entered Guixi Dongguan, walked another two miles, to the head of Tamai, and found Jingwen in the hotel. He had not had breakfast yet.

古文：亟索饭，同出西南门，渡溪而南即建昌道矣。
现代文：于是急忙找吃的，和静闻一道出了西南门，从西南门渡过溪往南去就是到建昌府的路了。
English: So they hurried to find food, and together with Jing Wen, they went out of the southwest gate. From the southwest gate, crossing the stream to the south is the road to Jianchangfu.

古文：为定车一辆，期明晨早发，即东向欲赴仙桥。
现代文：在西南门预订了一辆车，约定明天早晨出发，就往东走，想前往仙桥。
English: I booked a car at the southwest gate and agreed to leave tomorrow morning. I want to go east to Xianqiao.

古文：逆旅主人舒龙山曰： 此中南山之胜非一。
现代文：旅店主人舒龙山说： 这地方南面山中的胜景不只一处。
English: Shulongshan, the innkeeper, said: There is more than one scenic spot in the mountains to the south of this place.

古文：由正南门而过中坊渡一里，即为象山，又名挂榜山，乃陆象山宋代著名理学家之遗迹也，仰止亭在焉。
现代文：从正南门经过中坊渡走一里，就是象山，又叫挂榜山，陆象山的遗迹仰止亭就在山上。
English: A one-mile walk from Zhenanmen through Zhongfangdu is Xiangshan, also known as Hangbangshan. The ruins of Lu Xiangshan, the Yangji Pavilion, are on the mountain.

古文：其西南二里为五面峰，上有佛宇，峰下有一线天，亦此中之最胜也。
现代文：象山西南边两里为五面峰，峰上有佛教寺庙，峰下有一线天，也是这地方中风景最优美的处所之一。
English: Two miles southwest of Xiangshan Mountain is Wufeng Peak. There is a Buddhist temple on the peak and a skyline below the peak. It is also one of the most beautiful places in this place.

古文：其南一里为西华山，则环亘而上，俱仙庐之所托矣。
现代文：五面峰南面一里为西华山，此山自下盘旋而上，都是些道土的居室构筑在上面。
English: To the south of Wufeng Peak, one mile away, is Xihua Mountain. This mountain spirals up from the bottom, and houses are built on top of it.

古文：其北二里为小隐岩，即旧名打虎岩者也。
现代文：五面峰北面两里为小隐岩，它就是以前称为打虎岩的地方。
English: Two miles to the north of Wufeng Peak is Xiaoying Rock, which was formerly known as the Tiger Rock.

古文：出小隐二里为仙桥，乃悬空架壑而成者。
现代文：出了小隐岩走两里为仙桥，它是悬空架在深谷上而形成的。
English: From the small hidden rock, walk two miles to reach the Fairy Bridge, which is suspended over a deep valley.

古文：此溪南诸胜之概也。
现代文：这些是溪流南各处风景名胜地的大概情形。
English: These are the general conditions of scenic spots in various places south of the stream.

古文：然五面峰之西，即有溪自南而北入大溪，此中无渡舟，必仍北渡而再渡中坊。 
现代文：然而五面峰的西面，就有一条溪水自南向北汇入大溪，那里没有摆渡的船，必须仍然回到北边再次从中坊渡渡河。 
English: However, on the west side of Wufeng Peak, there is a stream that flows from south to north into the big stream. There is no ferry boat there, so you must still go back to the north and cross the river from Zhongfang again.

古文：予时已勃勃兴趣勃勃，兴不可转，遂令龙山归而问道于路隅。
现代文：这时我已经兴致勃发，不可逆转，便让舒龙山回去，而我到路边去打探道路。
English: At this point, my interest was already irrevocably aroused, so I let Shulong Mountain go back and I went to the roadside to explore the road.

古文：于是南经张真人墓。
现代文：随后向南经过张真人墓。
English: Then, head south past Zhang Zhenren's tomb.

古文：碑乃元时敕赵松雪撰而书者，刳山为壁，环碑于中。
现代文：墓碑是元朝时皇帝诏令赵松雪撰作并书写的，碑是挖开山石，凿成环形壁而凿成的。
English: The tombstone was composed and written by Zhao Songxue at the time of the emperor's edict in the Yuan Dynasty. The monument was hewn by digging out the rock and chiseling it into a ring-shaped wall.

古文：又一里，越一小桥，由旁岐东向溪，溪流直逼五面峰下。
现代文：又走一里，越过一座小桥，从桥头岔路往东向溪边走，那溪直逼五面峰下。
English: I walked another mile, crossed a small bridge, and walked eastward from the bridgehead to the creek. The creek ran straight under Wufengfeng.

古文：盖此溪发源于江湖山，自花桥而下即通舟楫船只，六十里，西北至罗塘，又二十里至此，人溪为通闽间道，其所北转皆纸炭之类也。
现代文：大概此溪发源于江湖山，从花桥以下就可航船，行六十里，往西北到罗塘，又二十里到此处，沿溪流航行，是通往福建的近路，沿溪往北转运的都是纸炭之类的物品。
English: Presumably, this stream originates from the mountains of Jianghu. From the bottom of Huaqiao, ships can sail sixty miles to the northwest to Luotang, and another twenty miles to here. Sailing along the stream is a shortcut to Fujian. Items such as paper and charcoal are transported along the stream to the north.

古文：适有两舟舣ǐ停靠溪畔，而无舟人；旋有一人至，呼之渡，辄为刺舟用力划船。
现代文：我们到溪边时刚好有两只船停在岸边，但没有船夫。随后有一人来到，叫他为我们摆渡，他立即把船划了过来。
English: When we got to the creek, there happened to be two boats standing on the bank, but there was no boatman. Then a man came and asked him to ferry us, and he immediately rowed the boat over.

古文：过溪而东一里，由峰西北入其隘中，始知其山皆石崖盘峙，中剖而开，并夹而起，远近不一，离立同形。
现代文：过了溪向东走一里，从五面峰西北面进入山隘中，这才知道此山尽是石崖盘结对峙，中间破裂开，并排耸立，间隔远近不一，但对立着的形态相同。
English: After walking one mile eastward across the stream, and entering the mountain pass from the northwest side of the five-faced peak, it was only then that I knew that this mountain was made up of a series of rock cliffs facing each other, split in the middle, and standing side by side. The distances were far and near different, but the opposing forms were the same.

古文：随路抵穹岩之下，拾级而上，得一台，缀两崖如掌。
现代文：顺着路抵达弯隆的岩石下面，拾级而上，见到个石台，石台上连缀着两块手掌似的石崖。
English: Along the way, you reach the bottom of a steep rock, climb up and see a stone platform, on which there are two stone cliffs that look like palms.

古文：其南下之级，直垂涧底；其西上之级，直绕山巅。
现代文：从石台向南下去的石阶，宣垂山沟底部；向西上去的石阶，直绕到山巅。
English: The stone steps descending from the stone platform to the south hang down to the bottom of the ravine; the stone steps ascending to the west go all the way around to the top of the mountain.

古文：余意南下者为一线天，西上者为五面峰也。
现代文：我心想，从南面下去就是一线天，从西面上去就是五面峰。
English: I thought to myself, from the south down there is a line of sky, and from the west up there is Wufeng Peak.

古文：先跻峰，攀磴里许而至绝顶，则南瞰西华，东瞰夹壁，西瞰南溪，北瞰城邑，皆在指顾。
现代文：我们先登五面峰，攀着石瞪往上爬一里左右就到了最高处，于是向南俯瞰西华山，向东俯瞰夹立的石壁，向西俯瞰南边的溪流，向北俯瞰贵溪城池，都在一指手、一回头间。
English: We first climbed the Wufeng Peak, and climbed up the rock face for a mile or so to reach the highest point, so we could overlook the Xihua Mountain to the south, the stone wall to the east, the stream to the south to the west, and the Guixi Castle Pool to the north, all at the same time.

古文：然山雨忽来，僧人留点，踉跄下山。
现代文：然而忽然下起了山雨，僧人留我们吃了点心，我们便跌跌撞撞地下了山。
English: However, it suddenly started to rain, so the monk left us to eat some snacks, and we stumbled down the mountain.

古文：复从前磴南下一线天，则两崖并夹而上，直南即从峰顶下剖者，是为直峡。
现代文：仍旧从前面走过的石瞪往南下到一线天，那里两边石崖并排夹峙，向上矗立，直通南边的山峡就是从峰顶往下裂开的那个，这是直峡。
English: Still, the stones that I had passed in front of me stared southward to the first line of the sky, where the stone cliffs on both sides stood side by side, rising up, and the canyon that led straight to the south was the one that split down from the peak, this was the straight canyon.

古文：路至夹中忽转而东，穿坠石之隙，复得横峡。
现代文：路到了夹壁中忽然折向东，穿过向下悬坠着的石头间的缝隙，又见到了横峡。
English: When the road reached the wall, it suddenly turned to the east, passed through the gap between the stones hanging down, and saw the cross gorge.

古文：俱上下壁立，曲直线分，抵东而复出一坞，若非复人世矣。
现代文：横峡上下都是直立的石壁，弯处直处两边都仅隔一线，抵达横峡东面尽头后又进入一个山坞，让人觉得仿佛不再是人世间了！
English: There are upright stone walls up and down the canyon, and only a line separates the two sides at the bends. After reaching the eastern end of the canyon, you enter a dock, making you feel as if you are no longer in the human world!

古文：由坞而南，望两崖穹岩盘窦，往往到处而是。
现代文：由山坞向南走，望见两边的山崖上，弯隆的岩石和曲折迂回的洞穴，到处都是。
English: Walking south from the dock, you can see the cliffs on both sides, the craggy rocks and winding caves are everywhere.

古文：最南抵西华，以已从五面峰瞰视，遂不复登。
现代文：山坞的最南端抵达西华山，因为已经从五面峰上俯瞰过它的景象，便不再登山。
English: The southernmost end of the mountain dock arrived at Xihua Mountain, because it had been overlooked from the Wufeng Peak, it would no longer be climbed.

古文：仍转出一线天，北逾一岭，二里，转而东，入小隐岩。
现代文：仍然往回走，出了一线天，向北翻越一座山岭，走两里，折向东，进入小隐岩。
English: Still walking back, I saw a streak of sky, climbed over a mountain range to the north, walked two miles, turned east, and entered a small hidden rock.

古文：岩亦一山东西环转，南连北豁，皆上穹下逊，裂成平窍，岩后有宋人洪驹父书云： 宣和某年由徐岩而上，二里，复得射虎岩。 
现代文：这岩也是整座山自东向西环转，南面相连而北面豁缺，岩石都是上面弯隆而下面内缩，裂分成平直的洞穴，可以在其中建房休息。岩后面有宋代人洪驹父书写的一段文字：  宣和某某年我由徐岩往上走，两里后，又到射虎岩。 
English: This rock is also the entire mountain from east to west, the south side is connected and the north side is missing, the rocks are curved above and shrunk below, split into flat caves, where you can build a house and rest. Behind the rock there is a piece of text written by Song Dynasty man Hong Xuan's father: In Xuanhe year, I went up from Xu Rock, and two miles later, I went to Shigu Rock.

古文：余忆徐岩之名，前由弋阳舟中已知其为余家物，而至此忽忘不及觉，壁间书若为提撕提醒者，亟出岩询之，无一能知其处。
现代文：回想徐岩这个名称，前些日子在驶往弋阳县的船上已经得知与我家有关，而到了这地方忽然忘记没能想起来，崖壁间的文字像是专门提醒我似的，子是赶忙出岩来询问，但没有一个人知道它在何处。
English: Recalling the name of Xuyan, a few days ago on the boat sailing to Poyang County, I learned that it was related to my family, but when I got to this place, I suddenly forgot and couldn't remember. The text between the cliffs seemed to remind me specifically. I hurried out of the rock to ask, but no one knew where it was.

古文：已而再闻有称峨嵋，在小隐东南三里者，余意其为徐岩之更名也，亟从之。
现代文：旋即又听说有座称、 为峨嵋岩的，在小隐岩东南面三里，我心中以为它是徐岩的另一个名，便急忙前往。
English: Suddenly, I heard that there was a place called Emei Rock, three miles southeast of Xiaoqing Rock. I thought it was another name for Xu Rock, so I hurried there.

古文：遂由罗塘之大道，过一岭，始北转入山，竹树深蒨，岩石高穹；但为释人佛教徒，僧尼架屋叠墙，无复本来面目，且知其非徐岩也。
现代文：于是从到罗塘去的大道上，翻过一座岭，这才往北转进山中，山上竹子树木高大茂盛，岩石高高隆起，但因佛家子弟在岩间架构房屋累砌墙壁，那岩已经不再是本来面目，而且我弄清了它不是徐岩。
English: So, on the road to Luotang, I crossed a ridge before turning north into the mountains. The bamboo trees on the mountain were tall and lush, and the rocks were high and uplifted. However, because the children of the Buddhists built houses and piled up walls between the rocks, the rock was no longer its original appearance, and I found out that it was not Xuyan.

古文：甫欲下，雨复大至，时已过午，遂饭岩中。
现代文：刚想下山，大雨又下起来，当时已过中午，于是在岩中吃饭。
English: Just as I wanted to go down the mountain, it started to rain heavily again. It was after noon, so I ate in the rocks.

古文：既饭，雨止。
现代文：吃完饭，雨停下来。
English: After the meal, the rain stopped.

古文：问仙桥之道，适有一知者曰： 此有间道。
现代文：询问到仙桥的路，正好有个知道的人告诉说： 从这里去有条小路。
English: When I inquired about the way to Xianqiao, a person who knew the way told me: There is a path from here.

古文：循山而东，穿坞北去，四里可至 。
现代文：顺山向东走，然后穿过山坞向北，四里就可到达。 
English: Go east along the mountain, and then go north through the docks. You can get there in four miles.

古文：从之。
现代文：我们按那人所说的而行。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：路甚荒僻，或隐或现，或岐而东西无定，几成迷津。
现代文：路非常荒僻，忽隐忽现，或者不时地岔向东西两边，几乎成了迷津。
English: The road is very desolate, appearing and disappearing, or darting to the east and west from time to time, almost becoming a maze.

古文：久之逾一山，忽见蛩通 拱 然高驾者，甚近也。
现代文：走了许久，越过一座山，忽然看见一座高高拱架的天然石桥，离得很近。
English: After walking for a long time and crossing a mountain, I suddenly saw a natural stone bridge with a high arch, very close.

古文：及下谷而趋，复茫不可得，盖望之虽近，而隔崖分坞，转盼易向，猝不易遇矣。
现代文：等下到山谷中前往时，又看不清它在哪里。这大概是因为望着虽然近，但中间隔着石崖、山坞，转眼间方向变换了，一下子不容易发现。
English: When I went down to the valley, I couldn't see where it was. This was probably because, although I was looking closely, there was a rock cliff and a dock in the middle, and the direction changed in the blink of an eye, making it difficult to find at once.

古文：既而直抵其下，盖一石高跨峰凹，上环如卷，中辟成门，两端石盘下柱，梁面平整如台，正如砌造而成。
现代文：不久，直抵达石桥下，一块大石头高高横跨在两边山峰低凹处，上部环拱，如同圆筒，中间辟成门洞，两端的石头盘曲而下形成桥柱，石桥顶部平整如台，正如人工累砌建造而成的。
English: Soon, straight to the bottom of the stone bridge, a large stone high and high across the peaks on both sides of the low concave, the upper ring arch, like a cylinder, in the middle of a door hole, the two ends of the stone curl down to form a bridge pillar, the top of the stone bridge is flat as a table, just as artificially built.

古文：梁之东，可循崖而登其上；梁之西，有一石相去三丈余，轰踞其旁，若人之坐守者然。
现代文：从石桥的东面，可以顺崖壁登到它的顶上；石桥西面，有一块石头相距三丈多，高高地盘踞在桥旁边，如同一个坐在那里守护石桥的人。
English: From the east side of the stone bridge, you can climb along the cliff wall to its top; on the west side of the stone bridge, there is a stone more than three feet away, perched high next to the bridge, like a person sitting there to guard the stone bridge.

古文：余先至桥下，仰视其顶，高穹圆整不啻数十丈；及登步其上，修广平直，驾虹役鹊之巧，恐不迨至此也。
现代文：我先到桥下，仰视桥顶高高隆起，圆而齐整，距地面不下几十丈；等登上桥漫步，就觉得桥修长宽广，平坦笔直，那横贯空中的长虹和织女在七夕驱使喜鹊搭起的仙桥，恐怕都比不上这座石桥。
English: I first went under the bridge, looking up at the high rise of the bridge top, round and neat, not less than dozens of feet from the ground; when I walked on the bridge, I felt that the bridge was long and wide, flat and straight, and that the Changhong and the Weaver Girl, who drove the magpies to build the Fairy Bridge on the 7th day of the 7th month, were probably not comparable to this stone bridge.

古文：从其西二里，将抵象山，问所云徐岩，终不可得。
现代文：向西走两里，快要到象山时，打听所说的徐岩，终究没有结果。
English: Walking two miles to the west, when I was about to reach Xiangshan, I inquired about the so-called Xuyan, but in the end there was no result.

古文：后遇一老翁曰： 余舍后南入即是。旧名徐岩，今为朝真宫，乃鬼谷即鬼谷子修道处，今荒没矣。
现代文：后遇到一个老翁，他告诉说： 从我住房后面往南进去就是；以前叫徐岩，如今是朝真宫，它是鬼谷子修道的地方，现在已经荒废湮没了。
English: Later, he met an old man, who told him: "Going south from the back of my house is; it used to be called Xuyan, now it is Chaozhen Palace, it is the place of devils, now it is deserted.

古文：非明晨不可觅，今已暮，姑过而问象山可也。 
现代文：不等到明天早晨找不到那里，今天已经天晚，姑且过去探问象山的一些情况还可以。 
English: I won't wait until tomorrow morning to find it, it's already late in the day, so it's okay to go and inquire about some of the conditions in Elephant Mountain.

古文：余以明晨将发，遂强静闻南望一山峡而入。
现代文：我因打算明天早晨要出发，便强迫静闻和我一道向南朝着一个山峡走进去。
English: Since I was planning to leave tomorrow morning, I forced Jing Huan to walk with me south towards a canyon.

古文：始犹有路，渐入渐灭，两崖甚深。
现代文：开始时还有路，逐渐进去路就逐渐消失，两边的山崖都很幽深。
English: At the beginning, there was a road, but as you go further in, the road gradually disappears, and the cliffs on both sides are very deep.

古文：不顾莽刺，直穷其底，则石夹尽处，隘不容足。
现代文：我们不顾丛草荆棘，直下到峡底，两边石崖相夹的尽头处，狭窄得立不下脚。
English: In spite of the thorn bushes, we went straight down to the bottom of the gorge. At the end of the cliff on both sides, it was too narrow to stand on.

古文：时渐昏黑，踯躅荆刺中，出谷已不辨路矣，盖此乃象山东之第三坞也。
现代文：当时天逐渐黑下来，我们步履艰难地从荆棘中往回走，走出山谷已经辩不清路了，大概这是象山东面的第三个山坞。
English: At that time, the sky gradually darkened, we walked back from the thorns with difficulty, and the way out of the valley was already indistinguishable. This is probably the third dock on the east side of Xiangshan.

古文：望其西又有一坞，入之不得路；时闻人声高呼，既久，知路在西，乃得入。
现代文：看到西面又有一个山坞，走过去却没有找到进去的路；这时听到有人高声呼喊，过了好久，才知道路在西面，于是得以进入山坞中。
English: Seeing another dock to the west, he walked over but could not find the way in; then he heard someone shouting loudly. It took him a long time to find the way to the west, so he was able to enter the dock.

古文：则谷左高崖盘亘，一入即有深岩，外垂飞瀑。
现代文：山谷的左边高高的山崖盘曲连绵，一进去就有一个幽深的岩洞，岩洞外面挂着飞瀑。
English: The high cliffs on the left side of the valley are contorted continuously. Once you enter, there is a deep cave, with a waterfall hanging outside the cave.

古文：二僧俱新至托宿，问之，亦不知其为徐岩与否，当即所称朝真宫矣。
现代文：岩洞中的两个僧人都是新到这里托宿的，向他们打听，他们也不知道这里是否是徐岩，我想应该就是所称的朝真宫了。
English: The two monks in the cave are new to this place, and when I asked them, they didn't know if this was Xuyan, but I thought it must be the so-called Morning Glory Palace.

古文：此乃象山东之第二层也。
现代文：这是象山东面的第二层。
English: This is the second floor of the tower on the east side of Xiangshan.

古文：从暗中出，复西而南寻象山，其地虽暗而路可循，两崖前突，中坞不深而峻，当其中有坊峙焉。
现代文：从黑暗走出山谷，又往西而后折向南探寻象山，那地方虽然墨暗中但有路可循，象山的两座石崖向前伸突出来，中、间的山坞不深但四周峻峭，山坞中间耸立着一个牌坊。
English: From the darkness, I walked out of the valley, turned west and then south to explore Elephant Mountain. Although the place was in the dark, there was a path to follow. The two stone cliffs of Elephant Mountain jutted forward. The docks in the middle and in the middle were not deep, but they were steep all around. A gate towered in the middle of the docks.

古文：其内有堂两重，祠位在前而室圮，后则未圮而中空。
现代文：牌坊以内有个分为前后两重的祠堂，祠位在前堂但房屋已坍塌，后堂未坍塌但里面是空的。
English: Inside the archway, there is an ancestral hall divided into front and back, the ancestral hall is in the front hall but the house has collapsed, the back hall has not collapsed but is empty inside.

古文：穿而入，闻崖间人语声，亟蹑级寻之，有户依岩窦间，一人持火出，乃守祠杨姓者，引余从崖右登仰止亭。
现代文：穿过祠堂往里走，听到崖壁间有人的讲话声，赶忙踏着石级找上去，原来有户人家住在岩洞中。有一人拿着火把走出来，他是守护祠堂的人，姓杨，他领我从崖壁右边登上仰止亭。
English: Walking through the ancestral hall, I heard someone talking between the cliff walls and hurried up the stone steps to find it. It turned out that there was a family living in a cave. One man came out with a torch. He was the guardian of the ancestral hall, surnamed Yang. He led me to the right side of the cliff wall to climb up to the pavilion.

古文：亭高悬崖际，嵌空环映，仰高峰而俯幽壑，令人徙倚留连忘返。
现代文：此亭高悬在崖壁边缘，四面空透，青山环映，在亭上仰头可以观览高峻的山峰，俯首可以窥视幽深的沟谷，令人流连忘返。
English: This pavilion hangs high on the edge of the cliff wall, with the sky on all sides and the green mountains all around. If you look up at the pavilion, you can see the lofty peaks, and if you look down, you can see the deep ravines. It's an unforgettable experience.

古文：杨姓者以昏黑既久，街鼓已动，恐舟渡无人，暗中扶即陪伴余二里，送至中坊渡头。
现代文：姓杨的因为天黑已久，街上的更鼓已经敲过，担心渡口无人摆渡，便搀扶着我在黑暗中走了两里，送我们到达中坊渡渡口边。
English: Because it had been dark for a long time and the street drums had already been beaten, Yang, fearing that there would be no one to ferry the ferry, helped me walk two miles in the dark to get us to the Zhongfang Ferry.

古文：为余言，其父年已八十有八，尚健啖吃而善饭，盖孝而有礼者云。
现代文：他告诉我，他父亲已经八十八岁，但饭量还很好。我想他大概是个孝顺而知礼的人。
English: He told me that his father is eighty-eight years old, but he still eats well. I think he is probably a dutiful and polite person.

古文：呼隔溪渡舟，渡入南关，里余，抵舒肆而宿。
现代文：我们喊了溪流对岸的船将我们摆渡到南关，又走一里多，抵达舒家旅店休息。
English: We called a boat on the opposite bank of the stream to ferry us to Nankuan, walked more than a mile, and arrived at Shujia Hotel to rest.

古文：是游也，从壁间而得徐岩之名，从昏黑而遍三谷之迹，溪南诸胜一览无余，而仙桥、一线二奇，又可以冠生平者，不独为此中之最也。
现代文：这此游览，从崖壁间发现了徐岩这个名称，在昏黑中足迹踏遍了草个峡谷，溪南面的各处胜景一览无余，而其中的仙桥：一线天两处奇观，又可以说是平生所游胜景中最绝妙的，不止是这地方的最佳风景名胜。
English: During this tour, the name of Xuyan was discovered from between the cliff walls. In the dim darkness, the crane's footprints traveled throughout the grassy canyon. There was an unobstructed view of all the sights on the south side of the creek. And one of them, Xianqiao: two wonders of the sky, can also be said to be the most wonderful of the sights visited in my lifetime. It is not only the best scenic spot in this place.

