古文：东方朔匡衡边文礼荀慈明曹植诸葛恪车浚诸葛靓蔡洪范百年张融庾杲之王俭周颙王融李膺商铿萧琛朱淹崔光陈元康李谐卢恺卢思道王元景
现代文：东方朔匡衡边文礼荀慈明曹植诸葛恪车浚诸葛靓蔡洪范百年张融庾杲之王俭周颙王融李膺商铿萧琛朱淹崔光陈元康李谐卢恺卢思道王元景
English: Dongfang Shuo Kuang, Heng Bian, Wen Li, Zi Ming Cao, Zhi Zhuge, Chu Chu, Chu Chu, Chu Chu, Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu, Chu Chu

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝见画伯夷、叔齐形象，问东方朔，是何人？朔曰：古之愚夫。
现代文：汉武帝观看伯夷阳和叔齐的画像，问东方朔画像上的两个人是谁，东方朔说：古代很愚蠢的人。
English: Emperor Hanwu looked at the pictures of Bo Yiyang and Uncle Qi, and asked Dongfang Shuo who the two people on the picture were. Dongfang Shuo said, "Ancient people are very stupid."

古文：帝曰：夫伯夷、叔齐，天下廉士，何谓愚邪？
现代文：武帝：伯夷和叔齐是天下有名的廉洁之人，怎么能说愚蠢呢？
English: Emperor Wu: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are the world's famous incorruptible people. How can you call them stupid?

古文：朔对曰：臣闻贤者居世，与之推移，不凝滞于物。
现代文：东方朔回答说：我听说，聪明的人活在世上，应该顺应时代发展，不阻碍潮流。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied: I heard that intelligent people live in the world, and should conform to the development of the times and not hinder the trend.

古文：彼何不升其堂、饮其浆，泛泛如水中之凫，与彼徂游。
现代文：他们为什么不坐到自己应该坐的位置上，畅快地喝酒，自由自在地就像在水中游泳的野鸭一样？
English: Why aren't they sitting where they should be, drinking freely, as free as wild ducks swimming in the water?

古文：天子毂下，可以隐居，何自苦于首阳？
现代文：如果他们不想当官，天子脚下，京城附近，哪里不可以隐居，为什么要跑到首阳山去饿死呢？
English: If they don't want to be officials, at the foot of heaven, near the capital, where they can't live in seclusion, why run to Shouyang Mountain to starve to death?

古文：上喟然而叹。
现代文：武帝不觉也为之长叹。
English: Emperor Wu also unconsciously sighed.

古文：又汉武游上林，见一好树，问东方朔，朔曰：名善哉。
现代文：还有一次，武帝去长林游玩，见到一棵长得十分茂盛的树，他问东方朔是什么树。东方朔说：名字叫善哉。
English: On another occasion, Emperor Wu went to the Changlin Forest to play and saw a tree that was growing very luxuriantly. He asked Dongfang Shuo what kind of tree it was. Dongfang Shuo said, "My name is Zenya."

古文：帝阴使人落其树。
现代文：武帝暗中叫人把这棵树砍下去一截。
English: Emperor Wu secretly ordered the tree to be chopped down.

古文：后数岁，复问朔，朔曰：名为瞿所。
现代文：过了几年，武帝又问东方朔。东方朔说：名字叫瞿所。
English: A few years later, Emperor Wu asked Dongfangshuo again. Dongfangshuo said, "My name is Yuanshuo.

古文：帝曰：朔欺久矣，名与前不同何也？
现代文：武帝说：你欺骗我很久了，名称为什么和以前不一样？
English: Emperor Wu said: You have been deceiving me for a long time. Why is the name different from before?

古文：朔曰：夫大为马，小为驹；长为鸡，小为雏；大为牛，小为犊；人生为儿，长为老；且昔为善或，今为瞿所；长少死生，万物败成，岂有定哉！
现代文：东方朔说：比如马，大的叫马，小的叫驹；长大叫鸡，小时叫雏；大的叫牛，小的叫犊；人生下来叫儿子，长大叫老子。所以这棵树当初叫善哉，如今叫瞿所。大小生死，万物变化，哪有固定的事情。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: For example, a horse is called a horse when it is big and a rooster when it is small; a chicken is called a chicken when it is young; a cow is called a cow when it is big and a rooster when it is small; a child is called a son when it is born and an old man is called an old man. Therefore, this tree was originally called Zhenyao, but now it is called Shujo.

古文：帝乃大笑。
现代文：武帝大笑起来。
English: Emperor Wu burst out laughing.

古文：匡衡
现代文：匡衡
English: Kuangheng

古文：匡衡字稚圭，勤学而无烛，邻人有烛而不与，衡乃穿壁引其光，以书映之而读之。
现代文：匡衡的字叫稚圭，他勤奋好学但没有蜡烛，邻居家有蜡烛但不借给他，他便将墙壁凿了一个小孔，把烛光引过来，拿着书对着烛光读书。
English: Kuangheng's Chinese character is called "Zhonggui." He is diligent and eager to learn, but he doesn't have a candle. His neighbor has a candle but won't lend it to him. So he chiseled a small hole in the wall to bring in the candlelight and read his book by candlelight.

古文：邑人大姓文不识，家富多书，衡乃为其佣作，而不求直。
现代文：同镇有一个人连自己的姓名也不认识，但家中有钱，收藏了很多书。匡衡为他干活，但不要工钱，他奇怪地问匡衡为什么。
English: In the same town, there was a man who didn't even know his own name, but his family was rich and had a large collection of books. Kuangheng worked for him, but he didn't want any wages. He asked Kuangheng why.

古文：主人怪而问之，衡曰：愿得主人书，遍读之。主人感叹，资给以书，遂成大学。
现代文：匡衡说：愿意借来你的书，全都读一遍。这个人非常感叹，便资助匡衡书读，使匡衡成为一个大学问家。
English: Kuangheng said, "I'd like to borrow your books and read them all." This person was so impressed that he funded Kuangheng's book reading, making Kuangheng a university friend.

古文：能说诗，时人为之语曰：无说诗，匡鼎来，匡说诗，解人颐。
现代文：匡衡能够讲解《诗经》，人们为他编写了一首歌谣说：没有人会讲解《诗经》，请匡鼎来。匡鼎来讲授《诗经》，能解除人们的疑问和忧愁。
English: Kuangheng could explain the Book of Songs, and people composed a folk song for him, saying: "No one can explain the Book of Songs, please Kuangding come. Kuangding teaches the Book of Songs, and can relieve people's doubts and sorrows."

古文：鼎，衡小名也，时人畏服之如此，闻之皆解颐欢笑。
现代文：鼎是匡衡的小名，人们竟是如此敬佩他，听他讲解诗经的人都开颜欢笑。
English: Ding is a nickname of Kuangheng, people actually admire him so much, everyone who listens to his explanation of the poem and sutra laughs.

古文：衡邑人有言诗者，衡从之，与语质疑，邑人挫服，倒屣而去，衡追之曰：先生留听，更理前论。
现代文：镇上有个人讲解《诗经》，匡衡前去听讲。同这个人讨论《诗经》的疑难问题，这个人辩论不过他，对他十分佩服，急忙羞愧地倒穿着鞋跑了。匡衡追上去说：先生请留步，听我和你讨论刚才的问题。
English: There was a person in the town who gave a lecture on "The Book of Songs," and Kuangheng went to listen. He discussed the difficult questions of "The Book of Songs" with this person. This person couldn't argue with him, he admired him very much, and hurriedly and shamefully ran away in his shoes. Kuangheng chased after him and said: Sir, please stay and listen to me discuss the problem with you.

古文：邑人曰：穷矣。
现代文：那个人说：我讲不出什么来了。
English: The man said: "I can't tell you what happened.

古文：遂去不顾。边文礼
现代文：不顾匡衡而去。边文礼
English: In spite of Kuangheng, he left.

古文：边文礼见袁奉高，失次序，奉高因嘲之曰：昔尧聘许由，面无怍色，先生何为颠倒衣裳？
现代文：边文礼拜见袁奉高，慌乱中搞错了礼节次序。袁奉高开玩笑说：昔日唐尧聘用许由，许由面无惭愧之色，先生为什么慌乱的反穿衣服？
English: Bianwen paid a courtesy call on Yuan Bonggao, who got the order of etiquette wrong in the confusion. Yuan Bonggao joked: In the past, Tang Jun employed Xu You, Xu You did not look ashamed, why did you panic and refuse to wear clothes?

古文：文礼答曰：明府初临，尧德未彰，是以贱民颠倒衣裳耳。
现代文：边文礼回答说：贤明的首长初次接见，您像尧舜一样的功德未来得及展现，所以贱民我颠倒了衣裳。
English: Bianwenli replied: "Wise leader, at the first interview, your virtue like a dragonfly will not have time to show, so I turned my clothes upside down.

古文：荀慈明
现代文：荀慈明
English: Zou Ciming

古文：荀慈明与汝南袁少朗相见，问颍川士，慈明先及诸兄。
现代文：荀慈明与汝南的袁少朗见面，袁少朗问颖川的名人，慈明先提到自己的弟兄。
English: Zhai Ciming met with Yuan Shao Lang of Yunnan. When Yuan Shao Lang asked about famous people in Yingchuan, Ciming mentioned his brother first.

古文：少朗叹之曰：但可私亲而已。
现代文：袁少朗感叹地说：你只会照顾自己的亲属而已。
English: Yuan Shao Lang sighed and said: You can only take care of your own relatives.

古文：慈明答曰：足下相难，依据何经？
现代文：荀慈明回答说：你非难我，根据什么经典理论？
English: Zou Ciming replied, "On what classic theory do you accuse me?

古文：少朗曰：方问国士，始及诸兄，是以尤之。
现代文：袁少朗说：正要问你谁是全国少有的人才，可你却先提到自己的弟兄，所以不满意你。
English: Yuan Shao Lang said, "I was about to ask you who is a rare talent in the whole country, but you mentioned your brother first, so I am not satisfied with you."

古文：慈明曰：昔祁奚内举不失其子，外举不失其仇，以为至公；公旦周文王之子，诗不论尧、舜之德，而颂文、武者何？
现代文：荀慈明说：昔日的祁奚，推荐继承自己职位的人，对内不回避自己的儿子，对外不漏掉自己的仇人，人们都认为他是一心为公。历史上周公姬旦还是周文王的儿子呢！诗歌不歌颂尧舜，反歌颂文王武王是为什么呢？
English: Zou Ciming said: "In the past, Zou, the person who recommended inheriting his position, did not shun his own son internally, and did not omit his enemies externally. People all thought that he was dedicated to the public good. Historically, Zhou Gong Hidan was the son of King Zhou Wen! Why do poems not sing the praises of Zou, but instead sing the praises of King Wenwu?

古文：先亲之义也。
现代文：先照顾推举自己的亲人，也是春秋以来提倡的道义。
English: Taking care of one's own relatives first is also a moral principle that has been advocated since spring and autumn.

古文：春秋之义，内中国而外诸夏，且不能爱其亲而爱他人者，不当以是勃德乎？
现代文：先统治平定天子脚下，才能去治理各个诸侯国。如果不能热爱自己的亲人，而只爱其他的人，不是也违背道德标准吗？
English: If you can't love your own relatives, but only love others, isn't that also a violation of moral standards?

古文：曹植
现代文：曹植
English: Cao Zhi

古文：魏文帝尝与陈思王植同辇出游，逢见两牛在墙间斗，一牛不如，坠井而死。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕曾经和弟弟陈思王曹植一同出去游玩，看见两头牛在墙里斗架。一头牛斗不过对方，掉到井里摔死了。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Wei once went out to play with his brother Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi, and saw two cows fighting in the wall. One cow couldn't fight the other and fell into the well and died.

古文：诏令赋死牛诗，不得道是牛，亦不得云是井，不得言其斗，不得言其死，走马百步，令成四十言，步尽不成，加斩刑。
现代文：曹丕命令曹植，以死牛为题材作一首诗。但不许说牛字，也不许说井字，不许说斗，也不许说死。马走一百步，必须作完一首四十个字的诗，如果一百步作不完，就杀头。
English: Cao Pi ordered Cao Zhi to compose a poem on the theme of a dead cow. However, he was not allowed to say the word "cow," nor the word "well," nor the word "fight," nor the word "death." If the horse walked a hundred paces, he had to compose a poem of forty characters. If he could not complete a hundred paces, he had to be beheaded.

古文：子建策马而驰，既揽笔赋曰：两肉齐道行，头上戴横骨。
现代文：曹植一边骑马往前跑，一边提笔写道：两肉齐道行，头上戴横骨。
English: Cao Zhi ran forward on horseback, holding a pen as he wrote: "Two fleshes walk side by side, wearing crossbones on their heads."

古文：行至凼士头，峍起相唐突。
现代文：行至凼土头。峍起相唐突。
English: Go to the top of the mound. The mound rises abruptly.

古文：二敌不俱刚，一肉卧土窟。
现代文：二敌不俱刚，一肉卧土窟。
English: The two enemies are inseparable, and they are both lying in the ground.

古文：非是力不如，盛意不得泄。
现代文：非是力不如。盛意不得泄。
English: We can't do it alone. We have to do it together.

古文：赋成，步犹未竟。
现代文：诗作完了，还不到一百步。
English: The poem is finished, less than a hundred paces to go.

古文：重作三十言自愍诗云：煮豆持作羹，漉豉取作汁。
现代文：于是他又作了一首自己怜悯自己的三十个字的诗：煮豆持作羹，漉豉取作汁。
English: So he composed a thirty-character poem in which he pitied himself: Boiling beans to make soup, making broth to make soup.

古文：萁在釜下然，豆向釜中泣。
现代文：萁在釜下然，豆向釜中泣。
English: The bean curdling in the kettle, the beans crying into the kettle.

古文：本自同根生，相煎何太急。
现代文：本是同根生，相煎何太急。
English: Originally, it was rooted in the same root, so why is it so urgent to reheat it?

古文：诸葛恪
现代文：诸葛恪
English: Zhuge Ke

古文：孙权暂巡狩武昌，语群臣曰：在后好共辅导太子，太子有益，诸群厚赏，如其无益，必有重责。
现代文：孙权临时巡视武昌，对众位大臣说：以后你们要共同好好辅导太子。太子有进步，大家都有重赏，如果没有进步，众位都要受到责备。
English: Sun Quan made a temporary inspection of Wuchang and said to the ministers: "In the future, you should work together to properly guide the prince. If the prince makes progress, everyone will be rewarded, and if there is no progress, everyone will be blamed."

古文：张昭、薛综，并未能对。
现代文：张昭和薛综对答不上。
English: Zhang Showa Xue couldn't answer all of them.

古文：诸葛恪曰：今太子精微特达，比青盖来旋，太子圣睿之姿，必闻一知十，岂为诸臣虚当受赏。
现代文：诸葛恪说：如今太子精明细心，出类拔萃。等到乘青篷车来到，太子聪明睿智，必然听到一就知道十，怎么能让大家无功受禄呢？
English: Zhuge Ke said: "Nowadays, the prince is shrewd and meticulous, outstanding. When he arrives by blue caravan, the prince is clever and wise, and he will know ten things as soon as he hears them. How can we let everyone take the credit?

古文：孙权尝问恪，君何如丞相？
现代文：孙权曾经问诸葛恪说：你能不能比得上丞相？
English: Sun Quan once asked Zhuge Ke: Can you match the prime minister?

古文：恪曰：臣胜之。
现代文：是问他能不能比得上诸葛亮。诸葛恪说：我胜过他。
English: He was asked whether he could match Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Ke said: I am better than him.

古文：权曰：丞相受遗辅政，国富刑清，虽伊尹格于皇天，周公光于四表，无以远过。且为君叔，何宜言胜之邪？
现代文：孙权说：丞相受命辅佐处理政务，国家富足，刑法严明，民众安定。虽然昔日的伊尹遵循皇天的意旨，周公影响到四方极远的地方，也没有超过丞相多少，况且又是你叔叔，怎么可以说胜过他呢？
English: Sun Quan said, "The prime minister has been appointed to assist in handling government affairs, the country is prosperous, the criminal law is strict, and the people are stable. Although the former Yi Yin followed the will of the emperor, Zhou Gong influenced places far and wide, not much more than the prime minister. Moreover, he is your uncle. How can you say that you are better than him?

古文：恪对曰：实如陛下明诏，但至于仕于污君，甘于伪主，暗于天命，则不如臣从容清泰之朝，赞扬天下之君也。
现代文：诸葛恪回答说：事实确实如陛下您说的一样，但是如果投靠昏庸的君主，甘心为非法的君主服务，违背天命，则不如我从容地效忠清明安泰的朝廷，为天下赞扬的君主效力。
English: Zhuge Ke replied: The facts are indeed as you said, Your Majesty, but if you rely on a mediocre monarch, are willing to serve an illegal monarch, and go against the destiny of heaven, then it is not as good as I am calmly loyal to the clear and safe imperial court, and serve the monarch praised by the world.

古文：权复问恪：君何如步骘？
现代文：孙权又为诸葛恪说：你能不能赶上步骘？
English: Sun Quan also said for Zhuge Ke: Can you catch up with the pace?

古文：恪答曰：臣不如之。
现代文：诸葛恪回答说：我不如他。
English: Zhuge Ke replied: I am not as good as him.

古文：又问何如朱然？亦曰：不如之。
现代文：又问能否比得上朱然，诸葛恪也说不如他。
English: He also asked whether he could be compared to Zhu Ran, and Zhuge Ke also said that he was not as good as him.

古文：又问何如陆逊？亦曰：不如之。
现代文：又问能否比得上陆逊，也回答不如他。
English: He was also asked whether he could match Lu Xun, to which he replied that he was not as good as him.

古文：权曰：君不如此三人，而言胜叔者何？
现代文：孙权说：你说不如这三个人，而说胜过你叔叔，这是为什么？
English: Sun Quan said, "You say you are not as good as these three people, but you say you are better than your uncle. Why is that?"

古文：恪曰：不敢欺陛下，小国之有君，不如诸夏之亡，是以胜也。
现代文：诸葛恪说：不敢欺骗陛下，小国虽然有君主，不如灭亡的诸侯国，所以说胜过他。
English: Zhuge Ke said: I dare not deceive Your Majesty. Although a small country has a monarch, it is not as good as a ruined vassal state. Therefore, I am better than him.

古文：车浚
现代文：车浚
English: Vehicle dredging

古文：陆逊闻车浚令名，请与相见。谓曰：早钦风彩，何乃龙蟠凤峙，不肯降顾邪？
现代文：陆逊听到车浚的美名，把车浚请来相见，他对车浚说：早就钦佩您的风采，为什么像龙一样盘曲而伏，像凤一样耸立不动，不肯归顺投降东吴呢？
English: Lu Xun heard of Chezhuang's fame and invited him to meet him. He said to Chezhuang, "I have long admired your style. Why do you lie like a dragon, stand like a phoenix, and refuse to surrender to Dongwu?"

古文：答曰：诚知公侯，敦公旦之博纳，同尼父之善诱。
现代文：车浚回答确实知道吴侯和将军像周公旦一样广招贤士，像孔夫子一样善于诱导。
English: Chezong replied that he indeed knew that Wu Hou and the general were as good at recruiting sages as Zhou Gongdan and as good at inducing them as Confucius.

古文：然蜥蜴不能假重云以升举，鷃雀不能从激风以飞扬，是以无因尔。
现代文：然而蜥蜴不能借助云彩而飞升，麻雀不能凭借激风而飞扬，所以没有投靠。
English: However, lizards cannot fly up with the help of clouds, and sparrows cannot fly with the help of strong winds, so they have no refuge.

古文：时坐上宾客，多是吴人，皆相顾谓曰：武陵蛮夷郡，乃有此奇人也。
现代文：当时在坐的客人，大都是吴国人，他们说：武陵郡少数民族地区，还有这样的出奇人才！
English: The guests seated at that time were mostly from Wu. They said, "In the ethnic minority areas of Wuling County, there are still such amazing talents!"

古文：浚曰：吴太伯端委之化，以改被发文身之俗。今乃上挺圣主，下生贤佐，亦何常之有？
现代文：车浚说：吴太伯善于教化，使东吴人改变了披发纹身的习俗，如今的吴侯孙权英明，下面出现贤士扶助，这个局面也不是容易得来的。
English: Chejun said: Wu Taibo was good at enlightening, so that the East Wu people changed the custom of wearing hair tattoos. Today's Wu Hou Sun Quan is wise, and there is a sage support below. This situation is not easy to obtain.

古文：逊叹曰：国其昌也，乃有斯人。诸葛靓
现代文：陆逊赞叹说：有了这个人，国家一定会昌盛。诸葛靓
English: Lu Xun said with admiration: "With this man, the country will surely prosper. Zhuge Liang is the best."

古文：诸葛靓在吴，于朝堂大会。
现代文：诸葛靓在东吴百官商量事情的会议上。
English: Zhuge Liang was at a meeting where hundreds of officials from Eastern Wu discussed the matter.

古文：孙皓问：卿字仲思，为何所思？
现代文：孙皓问他：你的字叫仲思，为什么事情而思？
English: Sun Yat-sen asked him, "Your Chinese character is Zhong Si, why do you think about things?

古文：对曰：在家思孝，事君思忠，朋友思信，如斯而已。
现代文：诸葛靓回答说：在家中思孝，为君主效力时思忠，接交朋友时思信义，如此而已。
English: Zhuge Liang replied, "To be filial at home, to be loyal when serving the monarch, to be loyal when making friends, and so on.

古文：蔡洪
现代文：蔡洪
English: Cai Hong

古文：晋蔡洪赴洛中，人问曰：幕府初开，群公辟命，求英奇于仄陋，拔贤俊于岩穴。
现代文：晋朝的蔡洪来到洛中，有人问他：官署衙门刚刚开始办公，有才能的人都在谋求官职等待任命。
English: Cai Hong of the Jin Dynasty came to Luozhong, and someone asked him: The government office has just begun to operate, and talented people are all looking for official positions and waiting to be appointed.

古文：君吴楚之人，亡国之余，有何异才，而应斯举？
现代文：正是从平民陋室中寻求英雄奇才，从山乡隐居之处选拔贤士俊杰的时候。你是吴楚亡国以后剩下来的人，有什么出奇的本领，而来投奔应聘？
English: It was a time when heroes and wizards were sought from the common people's hovels, and sages and wizards were selected from secluded places in the mountains. You are a person left behind after the fall of Wu Chu. Do you have any surprising skills, and did you rush to apply?

古文：答曰：夜光之珠，不必出于孟津之河；盈尺之璧，不必采于昆仑之山，大禹生于东夷，文王出于西羌，贤圣所出，何必常处？
现代文：严仲弼如同深远的沼泽里的天鹅，深谷中的白马。
English: Yan Zhongyao is like a swan in a deep swamp, a white horse in a deep valley.

古文：昔武王伐纣。迁顽民于洛邑，得无诸君是其苗裔乎？
现代文：顾彦先如同钟、罄、琴瑟八种乐器，又像五彩龙纹的礼服。
English: Gu Yanxian is like a bell, a flute, a lute, eight musical instruments, and a colorful dragon dress.

古文：又问洪，吴旧姓何如？答曰：吴府君圣朝之盛佐，明时之俊人，朱永长理物之宏德，清选之高望，严仲弼九皋之鸿鹄，空谷之白驹；顾彦先八音之琴瑟，五色之龙章，张威伯岁寒之茂松，幽夜之逸光；陆士龙鸿鹄之徘徊，悬鼓之待槌：凡此诸君，以洪笔为锄耒，以纸札为良田，以玄墨为稼穑，以义礼为丰年，以谈论为英华，以忠恕为珍宝，著文章为锦绣，蕴五经为缯帛，坐谦虚为席荐，张议意为帏幕，行仁义为室宇，循道德为墙宅者矣。
现代文：张伯威如同严冬的青松，黑夜的灯光，陆士龙就像飞舞徘徊的天鹅，如同悬挂的钟鼓，等待有人去敲响。以上这些人，以笔当锄，以纸张作田地，以墨当庄稼，以礼义当作丰收，以谈论为美好的名誉，以忠诚和宽恕作为珍宝，以撰写文章当作锦绣，以收藏经典著作当作布匹，以保持谦虚作为坐位，以建立理论作为帏幕，以提倡仁义作为房屋，以遵守道德作为墙壁。
English: Zhang Bowei is like a winter pine, a night light, Lu Shilong is like a swan flying and wandering, like a hanging bell and drum, waiting for someone to ring. These people use pen as a beak, paper as a field, ink as a crop, courtesy as a harvest, talk as a beautiful honor, loyalty and forgiveness as a treasure, writing articles as embroidery, collecting classics as cloth, maintaining modesty as a seat, establishing theory as a curtain, advocating benevolence as a house, and observing morality as a wall.

古文：范百年
现代文：范百年
English: Fan Centennial

古文：宋梁州范百年因事谒明帝。帝言次，及广州贪泉，因问之曰：卿州复有此水否？
现代文：南朝时候梁州的范百年有事去见明帝，明帝在谈话中涉及到广州的贪泉，因而问范百年：你们那里是否也有这种泉水？
English: During the Southern Dynasties, Fan Shibei from Liangzhou went to see Emperor Ming for some reason. During the conversation, Emperor Ming mentioned the Greedy Spring in Guangzhou, so he asked Fan Shibei, "Do you also have this kind of spring water?"

古文：百年答曰：梁州唯有文川武乡，廉泉让水。
现代文：范百年回答说：梁州只有倡文习武的乡镇和廉泉让水。
English: Fan Shixian replied: Liangzhou only has townships that promote literature and martial arts and have clean water.

古文：又问卿宅在何处？
现代文：明帝又问：你的住宅在什么地方？
English: Emperor Ming also asked: Where is your residence?

古文：曰：臣居廉让之间。
现代文：范百年回答说：我住在廉泉和让水之间。
English: Fan Shibei replied, "I live between Lianquan and Jiaozuo.

古文：上称善。后除梁州刺史。
现代文：明帝认为他回答得好，后来任命他为梁州刺史。
English: Emperor Ming thought that his answer was good, and later appointed him as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：张融
现代文：张融
English: Zhang Rong

古文：吴郡张融字思光，长史畅之子，郎中纬之孙。
现代文：吴郡的张融字叫思光，他是长史张畅的儿子，郎中张纬的孙子。
English: Zhang Rong of Wu County is called Siguang. He is the son of Changshi Zhang Chang and the grandson of Zhang Wei.

古文：融神明俊出，机辩如流，尝谒太祖于太极西堂。弥时之方登。
现代文：张融聪明英俊，人才出众，他反应机敏，对答如流。有一次他去太极西堂朝见太祖皇帝，晚些时才赶到。
English: Zhang Rong is smart, handsome, and talented. He is quick-witted and fluent in answering questions. Once he went to the West Hall of the Taiji Temple to see the Emperor Taizu in the morning, but arrived later.

古文：上笑曰：卿至何迟？
现代文：皇帝笑说问：你为什么才到？
English: The emperor smiled and asked, "Why have you just arrived?"

古文：答曰：自地升天，理不得速。
现代文：他回答说：我从地面升到了天上，按道理不应该太快。
English: He replied, "I ascended from the ground to the sky, so I shouldn't be too fast.

古文：融为中书郎，尝叹曰：不恨我不见古人，恨古人不见我。
现代文：张融是中书郎，他曾经感叹地说：不恨我没有生在古人的时代，恨古人没有生在我这个时代！
English: Zhang Rong is a middle school teacher. He once said with a sigh: "I don't hate that I wasn't born in the era of the ancients, I hate that the ancients weren't born in my era!"

古文：融善草隶，太祖尝语曰：卿书殊有骨力，但恨无二王法。
现代文：张融善于写草书、隶书、太祖皇帝对他说：你的字非常具有骨架和力度，可惜缺少王羲之和王献之父子的章法。
English: Zhang Rong was good at writing cursive and Chinese characters. The great-grandfather emperor said to him, "Your characters are very strong and powerful. Unfortunately, they lack the style of Wang Xizhi and Wang Xian's father and son."

古文：答曰：非恨臣无二王法，亦恨二王无臣法。
现代文：张融回答说：不恨我缺少二王的章法，只恨二王缺少我的章法。
English: Zhang Rong replied, "I don't hate that I lack the two kings' rules, I only hate that the two kings lack my rules."

古文：庾杲之
现代文：庾杲之
English: 之

古文：齐武帝尝谓群臣曰：我后当何谥？
现代文：齐武帝曾经对众位大臣说：我死以后，会给我追加个什么谥号？
English: Emperor Qiwu once said to his ministers, "After I die, what nickname will you give me?"

古文：莫有对者。
现代文：没有人能回答。
English: No one could answer.

古文：王俭因目庾杲之对。果之曰：陛下寿比南山，与日月齐明，千载之后，岂是臣子轻所度量。
现代文：王俭用目光示意庾杲之回答，庾杲之说：皇帝陛下寿比南山，像日月一样长久放射光辉，千年以后的事情，哪里是我们现在作臣子的所能猜测和确定的。
English: Wang Jian replied with his eyes pointing at Yu Zhi, Yu Zhi said: His Majesty the Emperor is older than Nanshan Mountain, radiating brilliance for a long time like the sun and the moon. A thousand years from now, what kind of things can we, as courtiers, guess and determine?

古文：时人称其辩答。
现代文：当时的人们都称赞他有辩解应答的才能。
English: People at the time praised him for his ability to reason.

古文：王俭
现代文：王俭
English: Wang Jian

古文：齐王俭字仲宝，金紫僧绰之子，侍中昙首之孙。
现代文：齐朝的王俭字叫仲宝，是二品大官王僧绰的儿子，侍中王昙首的孙子。
English: Wang Jianzi of the Qi Dynasty was called Zhong Bao. He was the son of the second-ranked official, Wang Soqiao, and the grandson of the middle-ranking official, Wang Xizhao.

古文：少孤，幼有珪璋器，四五岁，与凡童有异。
现代文：他从小丧父，年幼的时候就品行端正，四五岁的时候，就和一般的儿童不一样。
English: He lost his father when he was a child. When he was young, he behaved well. When he was four or five years old, he was different from ordinary children.

古文：常为五言诗曰：稷契匡虞夏，伊吕翼商周。
现代文：他曾经作了一首诗说：稷契匡虞夏，伊吕翼商周。
English: He once wrote a poem that said: "Shuqi Kuangyu Xia, Ilyu Wing Shang Zhou."

古文：抚己愧前哲，裣衽归山丘。
现代文：抚己愧前哲。裣衽归山丘。
English: Shame on you, former philosopher. Go back to the hills.

古文：故论者以宰相许之。
现代文：议论评价的人都说他能当上宰相。后来当上了吏部尚书。
English: People who discussed the evaluation said that he could become the prime minister. Later, he became the head of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：后为吏部尚书，有客姓谭诣俭求官。俭曰：齐桓灭谭，那得有汝。
现代文：有一个姓谭的人来找他谋求官职，他说：齐桓公消灭了谭国，怎么还会有你？
English: A man surnamed Tan came to him to seek a government post. He said, "Qi Huan eliminated Tan Province, so how can you still exist?"

古文：答曰：谭子奔莒，所以有仆。
现代文：那人回答说：谭国的子孙投奔了莒国，所以还会有我。
English: The man replied, "The descendants of Tan have fled to Shan, so I am still here."

古文：俭赏之。
现代文：王俭表示赞赏。
English: Wang Jian expressed his appreciation.

古文：帝常幸乐游宴，群臣奉乐。
现代文：皇帝经常游玩设宴，让大臣们奉献演奏乐曲助兴。
English: The emperor would often hold banquets and have his ministers play music for his enjoyment.

古文：帝曰：好音乐，孰与朕同？
现代文：有一次皇帝说：喜欢音乐，谁和我一样？
English: Once the emperor said: "Who likes music as much as I do?

古文：对曰：沐浴皇风，并沾比屋。
现代文：王俭回答：沐浴皇风，并沾比屋。
English: Wang Jian replied: to bathe in the imperial style, and to touch the imperial family.

古文：亦既在齐，不知肉味。
现代文：亦既在齐，不知肉味。
English: It's all the same, I don't know the taste of meat.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：皇帝认为回答的很好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：俭尝集才学之士，累物而丽之，谓之丽事，丽事自此始也。
现代文：王俭曾经召集有才学的人，指定事物，作诗赞美，叫作丽事，丽事就是从此开始的。
English: Wang Jian once gathered talented people, designated things, made poems to praise, called them beautiful things, and the beautiful things began from here.

古文：诸客皆穷，唯庐江何宪为胜，乃赏以五色花簟白团扇。
现代文：一次大家都没词了，只有庐江的何宪最后得胜。王俭便奖赏他一块五色的花席子和一把白团扇。
English: Once everyone was speechless, only He Xian of the Li River finally won. Wang Jian then rewarded him with a five-colored flower seat and a white fan.

古文：宪坐簟执扇，意气自得。
现代文：何宪坐在席子上，手里拿着扇子，十分得意。
English: He Xian sat on the mat, holding a fan in his hand, and was very proud.

古文：秣陵令王摛后至，操笔便成，事既焕美，词复华丽，摛乃命左右抽簟掣扇，登车而去。
现代文：这时秣陵县令王摛来晚了，他一到立刻抓起笔，一挥而就，描写的事物美好，词句也华丽。王摛命令左右随行的人员上前抽出花席，抢下扇子，上车而去。
English: At this time, Wang Yao, the governor of Fuling County, was late to arrive. As soon as he arrived, he immediately grabbed a pen and swiped it. The things he described were beautiful, and the words were also gorgeous. Wang Yao ordered the people accompanying him to go forward, pull out the flower seat, grab the fan, get on the bus and leave.

古文：俭笑曰：所谓大力负之而趋。
现代文：王俭笑着说：这真是力气大，拿了就走啊！
English: Wang Jian smiled and said, "This is really powerful. Take it and go!"

古文：周颙
现代文：周颙
English: Zhou Ying

古文：汝南周颙隐居钟山，长斋蔬食。
现代文：汝南的周颙隐居在钟山，长期只吃素食及蔬菜。
English: In the south of the country, Zhou Xuan lived in seclusion in Zhongshan, eating only vegetarian food and vegetables for a long time.

古文：王俭谓之曰：卿在山中，何所啗食？
现代文：王俭问他：你在山里，吃什么东西？
English: Wang Jian asked him: What do you eat when you are in the mountains?

古文：答曰：赤米白盐，绿葵紫蓼。
现代文：周颙回答说：红米白盐，绿葵紫蓼。
English: Zhou Wei replied: red rice, white salt, green sunflower, purple radish.

古文：又曰：菜何者最美？
现代文：王俭又问什么菜最好吃？
English: Wang Jian also asked what dish is the most delicious?

古文：颙曰：春初早韭，秋暮晚菘。
现代文：周颙回答：初春韭菜，晚秋白菜。
English: Zhou Wei answered: early spring amaranth, late autumn Chinese cabbage.

古文：颙历中书侍郎。
现代文：周颙曾经当过中书侍郎。
English: Zhou Qi once worked as a junior secretary.

古文：王融
现代文：王融
English: Wang Rong

古文：魏使宋弁至，敕王融兼主客郎中。
现代文：魏国的使臣宋弁来了，南齐王命令王融兼任主客郎中。
English: The Wei envoy Song Ben arrived, and the King of Nanqi ordered Wang Rong to be concurrently the chief guest.

古文：融问弁曰：秦西冀北，实多骏骥，而彼所献，乃驽骀之不若，求名检事，殊为未知。
现代文：王融问宋弁说：秦西冀北一带，有很多牧民，而你所进献的马匹，连劣马都不如。如果核查清楚，结果恐怕难以预料。
English: Wang Rong asked Song Ben: There are a lot of herdsmen in the northern area of Qin and Western Hebei, and the horses you donated are not even as good as inferior horses. If the verification is clear, the result may be unpredictable.

古文：且将信誓有时而爽，而駉駉牧马，或未能嗣。弁曰：不容虚为之名，当是不习水土。
现代文：况且你们早就立下了表示忠诚的誓言，为什么没有饲养和挑选肥壮的骏马呢？宋弁说：不要随便说不好，可能是因为水土不服。
English: Besides, you have already taken an oath to show your loyalty, so why haven't you raised and selected fat horses? Song Ben said: Don't say bad things casually, it may be because you are not satisfied with the soil and water.

古文：融曰：周穆马迹，遍周天下，若骐骥之性，因地而迁，则造父之策，有时而踬。
现代文：王融说：周穆王骑马巡游的踪迹遍布天下，如果好马的性格随着地点而改变，那么造父驯养马的技术也会失败。
English: Wang Rong said: The traces of Zhou Mu Wang's horse riding tour are all over the world. If the character of a good horse changes with the location, then the technology of domesticating horses will fail.

古文：弁曰：卿何勤勤于千里？
现代文：宋弁说：你为什么不断地讲述马的事情？
English: Song Ben said, "Why do you keep talking about horses?

古文：融曰：卿国既名其优劣，卿以相访，若于千里必至，圣主将驾之鼓车。
现代文：王融说：你们国家既然知道优劣，我简单地了解一下，如果真送来了千里马，我们南齐王将用来拉车。
English: Wang Rong said: Since your country knows the merits and demerits of the horse, let me briefly understand that if the horse is really sent, our Nanqi Wang will be used to pull the car.

古文：弁不能答。
现代文：宋弁无法回答。
English: Song Ben could not answer.

古文：李膺
现代文：李膺
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：梁李膺有才辩。武帝谓之曰：今之李膺，何如昔时李膺？
现代文：萧梁时代的李膺有才而且善辩，武帝对他说：当今的李膺，能否比得上昔日的李膺？
English: Xiao Liang's Li Lan was talented and eloquent. Emperor Wu said to him, "Can today's Li Lan compare to the Li Lan of the past?"

古文：答曰：臣以为胜。
现代文：李膺回答说：我自己认为胜过昔日的李膺。
English: Li Yao replied: I think I am better than the old Li Yao.

古文：昔时李膺，仕桓灵之朝；今之李膺，奉唐虞之主。众皆悦服。
现代文：东郡商铿给他的儿子取名叫外臣，外臣的意思是方外之臣，也就是隐居不当官的意思。
English: A merchant in Dong County named his son Gaizhen. Gaizhen means "foreign minister" or "non-official who lives in seclusion."

古文：商铿东郡商铿名子为外臣。
现代文：外臣被任命为廷尉评以后，商铿进去给武帝谢恩。
English: After the foreign minister was appointed as a courtier, the merchants went in to thank Emperor Wu.

古文：外臣仕为廷尉评，铿入谢恩。
现代文：武帝问他：给儿子取名字叫外臣，为什么还让他当官？
English: Emperor Wu asked him, "You named your son Gaotian, so why did you make him an official?"

古文：武帝问：卿名子外臣，何为令其入仕？
现代文：商铿回答说：外臣如果生活在衰败的朝代，必然会不求上进，隐居起来。
English: Shangtao replied: If a foreign minister lives in a decaying dynasty, he will inevitably not seek advancement and live in seclusion.

古文：铿答曰：外臣生于齐季，故人思匿迹，今幸遭圣代，草泽无复遗人。
现代文：如今有幸遇上了当代的太平盛世，山林荒野不会再有遣漏的人才隐士了。
English: Nowadays, we are fortunate to encounter the contemporary Taiping prosperity, and there will be no more talent hermits in the mountains and forests.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：武帝听了非常高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：萧琛
现代文：萧琛
English: Xiao Yao

古文：武帝尝以枣掷兰陵萧琛，琛仍取栗掷帝，正中面。曰：陛下投臣以赤心，臣敢战栗于陛下。
现代文：武帝曾经扔红枣打兰陵的萧琛，萧琛也用栗子回敬，结果正打在武帝的脸上，萧琛说：陛下投臣以赤心，臣敢战栗于陛下。
English: Emperor Wu once threw red jujube at Xiao Yao of Lanling, Xiao Yao also responded with chestnuts. As a result, it hit Emperor Wu in the face. Xiao Yao said, "Your Majesty's vassal has a pure heart, and your vassal dares to tremble before Your Majesty."

古文：琛尝于御座，饮酒于北使员外常侍李道固，不受，曰：公庭无私礼，不容受卿劝。
现代文：萧琛曾经在武帝的座位旁向北使员外常侍李道固敬酒，李道固不接受，并且说：宫廷议事的地方，不讲私下的礼节，我不接受你的劝酒。
English: Xiao Yao once served Li Daogu a toast next to Emperor Wu's seat. Li Daogu did not accept it and said, "In the place of court proceedings, there is no private etiquette. I do not accept your persuasion to drink."

古文：众皆失色，恐无以酬。
现代文：众位官员的脸上都变了颜色，以为萧琛无法下台。
English: The faces of many officials changed color, thinking that Xiao Wei could not step down.

古文：琛徐曰：诗所谓：雨我公田，遂及我私。
现代文：萧琛不慌不忙地说：诗经里面讲，即使是在井田的公田里下雨，也要和耕种另外八块私田的人家发生关系。
English: Xiao Yao said unhurriedly: According to the poem, even if it rains in the public field of the well, it must have a relationship with the people who cultivate the other eight private fields.

古文：道固乃屈状受酒。
现代文：李道固表示服气，接受了敬酒。
English: Li Daogu was convinced and accepted the toast.

古文：琛历尚书左丞。
现代文：萧琛曾经担任过尚书左丞。
English: Xiao Yao once served as Shangshu Zuo.

古文：朱淹
现代文：朱淹
English: Zhu Yan

古文：后魏太皇太后冯氏崩，齐使散骑常侍裴昭明来吊，欲以朝服行事。
现代文：北魏的太皇太后冯氏死了，南齐的使臣散骑常侍裴昭明前来吊唁。
English: Northern Wei's Grand Empress Dowager Feng died, and envoys from Nanzhi rode out to offer their condolences, led by her equerry Pei Zhaoming.

古文：主客问之。昭明曰：不听朝服行礼，义出何典？
现代文：他想要穿平日上朝的礼服参加吊唁活动，北魏的主客质问他，裴昭明说：不准穿朝服行礼，这个规矩出自什么典籍？
English: He wanted to wear the morning dress to participate in the condolence activities. The Northern Wei host and guest questioned him. Pei Zhaoming said: "You are not allowed to wear morning dress to make a salute. Where did this rule come from?

古文：著作佐郎朱淹接对，谓之曰：吉凶不同，礼有成数，玄冠不吊，童孺共知。昔季孙将行，请遭丧之礼，千载之后。
现代文：著作佐郎朱淹接过话茬说：吉事和凶事不同，在礼节上有不同的规矩，不能穿礼服戴礼帽参加丧事，这是连儿童都知道的事情，从前季孙将出门，请问遭遇丧事的礼节。千年以后，仍然受到人们的赞扬。
English: The author of the book, Saro Zhuyun, took over the conversation and said, "Good things and bad things are different, and there are different rules in etiquette. You can't wear a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat to attend a funeral. This is something that even children know. Since the last time the grandson will go out, please ask about the etiquette of the funeral. A thousand years later, it is still praised by people.

古文：犹共称之。卿远自江南奉慰，不能式遵成事，乃云义出何典，行人得失，何甚异哉？
现代文：你自江南奉命前来吊唁，不能按规矩把事情办好，反而问礼节出自什么典籍。你作为使臣，不明白什么是得失，多么让人奇怪啊！
English: You were ordered to come from the south of the Yangtze River to offer condolences, but you can't do things according to the rules, but instead ask what books the etiquette comes from. As an envoy, you don't understand what is gain and loss. How strange!

古文：昭明曰：齐帝昔崩，李彪通吊。
现代文：裴昭明说：当初齐朝皇帝驾崩，李彪去吊唁，当时并没有穿丧服。
English: Pei Zhaoming said: At the beginning, when Emperor Qi died and Li Biao went to offer condolences, he did not wear mourning clothes.

古文：于时初不素服，齐朝不以为报，那见苦得邀迫。
现代文：齐朝也没有怪罪他，哪像你们如此苦苦相逼。
English: Qi Dynasty did not blame him, which is like you so hard.

古文：淹曰：彼朝不遵高宗追远之慕，乃逾月即吉，李彪行吊之时，齐之君臣，皆以鸣玉盈廷，朱紫照日。
现代文：朱淹说：你们齐朝不怀念高宗皇帝，过了一个月就结束了居丧。李彪去吊唁的时候，齐朝的皇帝和大臣都已经穿起了腰间饰玉的礼服上朝议事了，太阳下尽是穿着鲜艳礼服的高级官员。
English: Zhu Ruan said: You Qi Dynasty did not miss the memory of Emperor Gaozong, and the funeral ended after a month. When Li Biao went to offer condolences, the emperor and ministers of the Qi Dynasty had already put on the dress of the waist adorned with jewels and had a meeting, and the sun was full of high-ranking officials wearing bright dresses.

古文：彪既不被主人之命，何容独以素服间厕衣冠之中哉？
现代文：李彪又没有接到主人的命令，怎么能独自穿上白色的丧服夹杂在穿礼服的人群之中呢？
English: Li Biao did not receive an order from his master, so how could he put on a white mourning dress alone and mingle with the crowd of people wearing ceremonial dress?

古文：来责虽高，未敢闻命。
现代文：去的责任虽然重大，但不能不听从主人的安排。
English: Although the responsibility to go is great, it is impossible not to follow the master's arrangements.

古文：我皇帝仁孝之性，侔于有虞，谅暗已来，百官听于冢宰，卿岂得以此方彼也？
现代文：我们皇帝既仁义又孝顺，自从举行葬礼拜祭以来，到开始居丧的时候，文武百官全都守候在墓地。
English: Our emperor was both benevolent and dutiful. From the time of the funeral rites to the time of the funeral, all the military and civilian officials waited at the cemetery.

古文：明乃摇手而言曰：三皇不同礼，亦知得失所归。
现代文：你怎么能把我们这里想像成你们那里呢！裴昭明摆着手说：三皇，没有相同的礼节，我已经知道了得失利害。
English: How can you imagine that we here are the same as you there! Pei Zhaoming stood up and said, "Third Emperor, we don't have the same etiquette. I already know what's at stake."

古文：淹曰：若如来谈，卿以虞舜高宗非邪？
现代文：朱淹说：若是如此，你说虞舜和高宗谁对？
English: Zhu Yu said: If so, who do you think is right, Yu Xi and Gao Zong?

古文：明对曰：非孝无亲，请裁吊服，今为魏朝所逼，必获罪于本邦。
现代文：裴昭明回答说：不孝不亲，请为我裁制丧服。今天被魏朝所逼迫，必然获罪于齐朝。
English: Pei Zhaoming replied: "If you are not a filial son or a close relative, please make funeral clothes for me. If you are persecuted by the Wei Dynasty today, you will certainly be punished by the Qi Dynasty."

古文：淹曰：彼有君子，卿将命抗中，应有高赏；若无君子，但令有光国之誉，虽复非理得罪，亦复何嫌，南史董狐自当直笔。
现代文：朱淹说：你们朝中如果有君子，你出色地完成使命，应该受到重赏，如果没有君子，只要是为国争了光，虽然不是无理而得罪了某些人，那又有什么关系。
English: Zhu Yan said, "If there is a gentleman in your court, and you have fulfilled your mission brilliantly, you should be highly rewarded. If there is no gentleman, as long as you have fought for the country and have offended some people, although not unreasonably, then what does it matter.

古文：高祖赏之，转著作郎。
现代文：正直的史官董孤定会如实地记录这段历史。
English: Honest historian Dong Kui Ding will record this period of history truthfully.

古文：齐又使员外郎何宪、主客邢宗庆来朝，遣淹接对。
现代文：他受到高祖皇帝的赏识，改任他为著作郎。齐朝又派员外郎何宪、主客邢宗庆来北魏，北魏命令朱淹接待。
English: He was appreciated by Emperor Gao Zu and was appointed as his literary agent. The Qi Dynasty also sent his foreign agent, He Xian, and his chief guest, Xizong Qing, to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Northern Wei Dynasty ordered Zhu Yan to receive them.

古文：宗庆谓淹曰：南北连和既久，而比弃信绝好，为利而动，岂是大国善邻之义？
现代文：邢宗庆对朱淹说：南齐北魏友好合作已经很久了，而你们抛弃信义，断绝友好，只顾自己的利益而采取行动，不是大国和邻居应该遵循的道义。
English: Zou Zongqing said to Zhu Yan: It has been a long time since the beginning of the friendship and cooperation between the Northern Qi and Northern Wei Dynasties, and your abandonment of loyalty, severance of friendship, and actions based only on your own interests are not the morals that a big country and a neighbor should follow.

古文：淹曰：夫为王者，不拘小节，中原有菽，工采者获多，岂得眷眷守尾生之信？
现代文：朱淹说：作为称王的人，不拘小节。中原有豆类作物，善于采摘者收获就多，岂能只是依恋想往而像尾生那样死板地遵守信义。
English: Zhu Ruan said: As a person who praises the king, no matter what. There are bean crops in the Central Plains, and those who are good at picking will have more harvest. Can't they just cling to the past and rigidly abide by the principles like the tail.

古文：且齐先王历事宋朝，荷恩积世，岂应便尔篡夺？
现代文：况且齐朝的先王在宋朝当官，受到宋朝的恩惠，怎么可以篡夺了宋朝的江山呢！
English: Moreover, the former king of the Qi Dynasty was an official in the Song Dynasty, and was favored by the Song Dynasty. How could he usurp the Song Dynasty?

古文：庆等相顾失色。
现代文：刑宗庆和何宪相顾失色。
English: Gyoseong Ching and He Xian lose respect for each other.

古文：何宪知淹昔从南入北，谓淹曰：卿何不作于禁而作鲁肃？
现代文：何宪知道朱淹当初是从南齐来到北魏的，便对朱淹说：你为什么不作于禁而作鲁肃？
English: He Xian knew that Zhu Ruan originally came to the Northern Wei Dynasty from the Southern Qi Dynasty, so he said to Zhu Ruan: "Why don't you do Zhu Ruan?

古文：淹曰：我舍危就顺，欲追踪陈韩，何于禁之有。
现代文：朱淹说：我舍弃危险而顺应形势，想要走韩信的道路，跟于禁有什么相干？
English: Zhu Yun said: I abandon the danger and conform to the situation, I want to follow the path of Han Xin, what does it have to do with the ban?

古文：宪不能答。
现代文：何宪不能回答。
English: He Xian could not answer.

古文：崔光
现代文：崔光
English: Cui Guang

古文：后魏高祖名子曰恂、愉、悦、怿。崔光名子励、勖、勉。
现代文：北魏高祖皇帝的儿子的名字分别叫恂、愉、悦、怿，崔光的儿子的名字分别叫励、勖、勉。
English: The names of the sons of Emperor Gaozu of the Northern Wei Dynasty are respectively called Yu, Yue, Yue and Yao, and the names of the sons of Cui Guang are respectively called Li, Yao and Tsuen.

古文：高祖谓光曰：我儿名傍皆有心。卿儿名傍皆有力。
现代文：高祖对崔光说：我儿子的名字旁边部有 心 ，你儿子的名字旁边都有 力 。
English: Gao Zu said to Cui Guang: My son's name has heart next to it, your son's name has power next to it.

古文：答曰：所谓君子劳心，小人劳力。
现代文：崔光回答说：所以说君子劳心，小人劳力了。
English: Cui Guang replied, "That's why it's said that a gentleman works hard, and a villain works hard.

古文：上大嗟悦。
现代文：高祖非常高兴和赞叹。
English: Gaozu was very pleased and impressed.

古文：陈元康
现代文：陈元康
English: Chen Yuankang

古文：北齐河阳陈元康，刀笔吏也，善暗书。
现代文：北齐河阳的陈元康是个办理文书的小官，他善于在黑暗中写字。
English: Chen Yuankang in Heyang, North Qi, is a clerk. He is good at writing in the dark.

古文：尝雪夜，太祖命作军书，顷尔数十纸，笔不暇冻。
现代文：有一个下雪天的夜晚，太祖皇帝命令他作军事文书。他顷刻之间就写了几十张纸，笔上的墨都来不及结冰。
English: One snowy night, the great-grandfather emperor ordered him to write military documents. He wrote dozens of pieces of paper in an instant, and the ink on the pen was too late to freeze.

古文：太祖喜曰：此人何如孔子？
现代文：太祖高兴地说：这个人多么像孔子。
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "How much this man resembles Confucius!"

古文：自此信任焉。故时人谓之语曰：三崔两张，不如一陈元康。
现代文：从此对他十分信任，因此当时的人们说：三崔两张，不如一个陈元康。
English: From then on, he was very trusted, so people at the time said: "Three Cui and two Zhangs are not as good as one Chen Yuankang."

古文：三崔：暹、季舒、昂也。两张：德微、纂也。
现代文：三崔是崔暹、崔季舒、崔昂，两张是张德微、张纂。
English: Three Cui are Cui Siam, Cui Jishu and Cui Ang, and two are Zhang Dewei and Zhang Zuo.

古文：李谐
现代文：李谐
English: Li Jing

古文：北齐顿丘李谐，彭城王嶷之孙，吏部尚书平之子。
现代文：北齐顿丘的李谐是彭城王李嶷的孙子，吏部尚书李平的儿子。
English: Li Jing of North Zhidong Hill is the grandson of Pengcheng King Li Xi, and the son of Li Ping, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：少俊爽，有才辩。
现代文：他从小就才华出众，性格豪爽，长大以后富有才能而且善辩。
English: From an early age, he was talented and had a great personality. When he grew up, he was talented and eloquent.

古文：为黄门侍郎，除名，作述身赋。
现代文：官职是黄门侍郎。他除去原有身份的时候。
English: His official position is Huangmen waiter. When he removes his original status.

古文：其略曰：独浩然而任己，同虚舟而不系。
现代文：作了一篇讲述自己身世和理想的文章，大概意思是：光明正大独来独往，像没有系上缆绳的小船一样自由飘荡。
English: I wrote an article about my life and ideals, which probably means: I'm an honest loner, drifting freely like a boat without a cable.

古文：既未识其所以来，岂知其所以逝。
现代文：既然是不知道为什么而来，怎么能知道要去哪里。
English: Since you don't know why you came, how can you know where to go?

古文：于是得丧同遣，忘怀自深。
现代文：于是得失都不计较，并且越来越不介意。
English: As a result, they don't care about the gains and losses, and they don't mind more and more.

古文：遇物栖息，触地山林。
现代文：随处栖息，不管是山林还是荒野。
English: They roost anywhere, whether it's a mountain forest or a wilderness.

古文：虽类西浮之迹，何异东都之心。
现代文：虽有西去的行为，但与去东都的心思也没分别。
English: Although there is the act of going west, there is no difference from the thought of going east.

古文：除散骑常侍，为聘梁使。
现代文：在这之后，他又被任命为散骑常侍，受命出使萧梁。
English: After this, he was appointed as a roving equerry and was ordered to dispatch Xiao Liang.

古文：至梁，遣主客范胥迎接。
现代文：萧梁派主客范胥迎接，范胥问他：今天比较暖和吧？
English: Xiao Liang sent his guest Fan Qi to greet him. Fan Qi asked him, "Is it warmer today?"

古文：胥问曰：今犹可暖，北间当少寒于此。谐答曰：地居阴阳之正，寒暑适时，不知多少。
现代文：北方应该比这里稍冷一点。李谐回答说：我们那里地处阴阳的中心，寒暑冷暖适时恰当，不知道有什么差别。
English: The north should be a little colder than here. Lihong replied, "We are in the center of yin and yang, cold and heat are appropriate at the right time, I don't know what the difference is.

古文：胥曰：所访邻下。岂是侧景之地。
现代文：范胥说：如果出访你们那里，有什么风景名胜？
English: Fan Wei said: If I visit your country, what are the scenic spots?

古文：谐曰：是皇居帝里，相去不远，可得统而言之？
现代文：李谐说：那里是皇帝居住的地方，君主出身的家乡，差别不大，可以作出不差的点评。
English: Lihong said: It is the place where the emperor lives, the hometown of the monarch, there is not much difference, you can make a good comment.

古文：胥曰：洛阳既称盛美，何事廷邺？
现代文：范胥说：既然洛阳美丽繁华，为什么还要将都城迁到邺城？
English: Fan Wei said: Since Luoyang is beautiful and prosperous, why should the capital be moved to Handan?

古文：谐曰：不常厥邑，于兹五迁。
现代文：李谐说：不常在一个地方建宅居住，于是多次搬迁，帝王也是如此。
English: Li Jin said: It is not common to build a house and live in one place, so they moved several times, and so did the emperor.

古文：王者无外，所在关河，复何怪。
现代文：只要还在国家的山河上，那又有什么可奇怪的。
English: As long as they are still on the country's mountains and rivers, there is nothing strange about it.

古文：胥曰：殷人毁厄，故迁相圯耿，贵朝何为而迁。
现代文：范胥说：殷朝人面临危难，所以迁都到圯耿。你们为什么迁移都城？
English: Fan Rong said, "The people of the Yin Dynasty were facing a crisis, so they moved the capital to Gonggen. Why did you move the capital?

古文：谐曰：圣人藏往知来，相时而动，何必候于隆替。
现代文：李谐说：圣人知道过去未来，按时机而行动，何必等待形势的变化？
English: Lihong said: The sage knows the past and the future, and acts according to the timing. Why wait for the situation to change?

古文：胥曰：金陵王气，肇于先代，黄旗紫盖，本出东南，君临万邦，故宜在此。
现代文：范胥说：金陵的帝王之气，开始于先代。帝王应运而生的气象，本来出自东南。所以君临天下万邦的皇帝和都城，应该在这里。
English: Fan Wei said: The imperial spirit of Jinling began in the previous generation. The weather that the emperor was born with originally came from the southeast. Therefore, the emperor and the capital city of the world should be here.

古文：谐曰：帝王符命，岂得与中国比隆。紫盖黄旗，终于入洛。
现代文：李谐说：受命于天的征兆气象，哪里能同我们中国相比，帝王应运而生的气象终究还是在洛阳。
English: Lihong said: the meteorological signs ordered by heaven, where can be compared with our China, the meteorological signs of the emperor are still in Luoyang.

古文：胥默而无答。
现代文：范胥沉默不语。
English: Fan Ye was silent.

古文：江南士子，莫不嗟尚。
现代文：江南的读书人，没有不佩服李谐的。
English: Readers in southern Jiangsu have nothing but admiration for Li Jing.

古文：事毕。江浦赋诗曰：帝献二仪合，黄华千里清。
现代文：事情完毕以后，李谐在江边作了一首诗说：帝献二仪合，黄华千里清。
English: After the event was over, Lihong wrote a poem by the river, saying: "The emperor dedicated two rites, and Huanghua cleared thousands of miles."

古文：边笳城上响，寒月浦中明。
现代文：边笳城上响，寒月浦中明。
English: The shouts from the city rang out, and the cold moon shone brightly in the city.

古文：卢恺
现代文：卢恺
English: Lu Wei

古文：礼部尚书范阳卢恺兼吏部选，达野客师为兰州总管，客师辞曰：客师何罪，遣与突厥隔墙？
现代文：礼部尚书范阳卢恺兼任吏部选，他推荐客师去当兰州总管。客师推辞说：容师有什么罪，被送到和游牧民族只隔一道墙的地方？
English: Fan Yang Lu, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, also served as the secretary of the selection committee. He recommended the guest teacher to be the head of Lanzhou. The guest teacher declined and said: What is the fault of the guest teacher, who was sent to a place only separated by a wall from the nomads?

古文：恺曰：突厥何处得有墙？
现代文：卢恺说：游牧民族的什么地方有墙？
English: Lu Wei said: Where do nomads have walls?

古文：客师曰：肉为酪，冰为浆，穹庐为帐毡为墙。
现代文：客师说：肉为酪、冰为浆，天作帐篷，毡子作墙。
English: The guest teacher said: The meat is the cheese, the ice is the slurry, the sky is the tent, and the rafters are the walls.

古文：恺，中书监子刚之子也。
现代文：卢恺是中书监卢子刚的儿子。
English: Lu Wei is the son of Lu Zigang, a Chinese librarian.

古文：卢思道
现代文：卢思道
English: Ruth Road

古文：凌晨嵬峨。思道曰：长安酒，二百价，不嵬峨，何嵬峨？
现代文：武阳太守卢思道一天早晨喝得大醉，来到官署门前，他的侄子卢贲见了问他：叔叔在什么地方喝过酒，凌晨这么高大？卢思道说：长安的酒，二百文的钱价，不高大，何物高大？
English: Lu Si Dao, the governor of Wuyang, got very drunk one morning and came to the front door of the government office. His nephew Lu Yao saw him and asked him: "Where did your uncle drink wine and become so tall in the morning?" Lu Si Dao said: "Chang'an's wine, priced at 200 yuan, is not tall, what is tall?

古文：贲，燕郡公景仁之子，中书侍郎景裕之犹子，位历太常卿。
现代文：卢贲是燕郡公卢景仁的儿子，中书侍郎卢景裕侄子，担任过太常卿。
English: Lu Wei was the son of Yan County Prince Lu Jingren, the nephew of Lu Jingyu, the chief secretary of the Central Committee, and served as the First Secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：王元景
现代文：王元景
English: Wang Yuanjing

古文：王元景尝大醉，杨遵彦谓之曰：何太低昂？
现代文：王元景喝得大醉，杨遵彦对他说：为什么又是昂头又是低头的？
English: Wang Yuanjing was very drunk. Yang Zunyan said to him, "Why is your head up and your head down?

古文：元景曰：黍熟头低，麦熟头昂，黍麦俱有，所以低昂矣。
现代文：王元景说：黍子成熟了把头低，麦子成熟了把头昂。黍麦都有，所以又低又昂。
English: Wang Yuanjing said: "When the hazelnut ripens, its head is low, and when the wheat ripens, its head is high. Buckwheat has both, so it is both low and high.

