古文：韩光祚宣州司户崔圆郑仁钧季广琛刘可大奴苍璧南缵王常
现代文：韩光祚宣州司户崔圆郑仁钧季广琛刘可大奴苍璧南缵王常
English: Han Guangyong, Xuan Zhou, Zhu Di, Cui Yuan, Zheng Ren, Ji Guangyong, Liu Ke, Danzhong, Cang Bi, Nanzhong, Wang Chang

古文：韩光祚
现代文：韩光祚
English: Han Kwang-soo sings

古文：桃林令韩光祚，携家之官，途经华山庙，下车谒之。
现代文：桃林县令韩光祚，带着家眷去上任。经过华山庙时，他的爱妾突然死去。
English: Han Guangyao, the magistrate of Taolin County, took his family to take office. While passing Huashan Temple, his beloved concubine suddenly died.

古文：入庙门，而爱妾暴死。
现代文：韩光祚找来巫师，让他去向华山神请求放爱妾还阳。
English: Han Guangyao found a sorcerer and asked him to go to Huashan God to ask for the release of his beloved concubine.

古文：令巫请之，巫言：三郎好汝妾，既请且免，至县当取。
现代文：巫师说：华山神三郎看上了你的爱妾，我已求告，但只能暂时免她死。等你一到县里，三郎就会来娶她。
English: The sorcerer said, "Hasan Shinsaburo has fallen in love with your beloved concubine, I have appealed, but I can only temporarily spare her from death. As soon as you arrive in the prefecture, Shinsaburo will come to marry her."

古文：光祚至县，乃召金工，为妾铸金为观世音菩萨像，然不之告。
现代文：光祚到了县里，背地里找金匠为妾铸了一尊观世音菩萨像，没有告诉爱妾。
English: When Guangyao arrived in the county, he went behind the scenes to find a goldsmith to cast a Guanyin Bodhisattva statue for his concubine, but he did not tell his beloved concubine.

古文：五日，妾暴卒，半日方活，云：适华山府君，备车骑见迎。出门，有一僧，金色，遮其前，车骑不敢过。
现代文：五天后，爱妾又突然死去。半日后又活过来，对他说：刚才三郎派车马来迎我，一出门就遇见一个金色的菩萨挡在路上，车马不敢过去。
English: Five days later, the concubine suddenly died again. After half a day, the horse came back to life and said to him, "Just now, Saburo sent a carriage and horses to meet me. As soon as I went out, I met a golden bodhisattva blocking the road. The carriage and horses did not dare to pass.

古文：神曰： 且留，更三日迎之。
现代文：三郎说，先放我回来，三天后再来接我去。
English: Saburo said, let me come back first, and pick me up three days later.

古文：光祚知其故，又以钱一千，图菩萨像。
现代文：光祚心里明白是那尊金菩萨起了作用，就又拿一千钱画一幅菩萨像。
English: Guangyao knew in his heart that the golden Buddha had played a role, so he took another thousand money to paint a Buddha image.

古文：如期又死，有顷乃苏曰：适又见迎，乃有二僧在，未及登车。
现代文：三天后，爱妾果然又死了。过了一回活过来说：刚才华山神又派人来接我，这次是两个菩萨挡在路上。
English: Three days later, Ai Concubine died again. After a while, she came back to life and said, "Just now, Huashan God sent someone to pick me up again. This time, two bodhisattvas are standing in the way."

古文：神曰： 未可取，更三日取之。
现代文：华山神说先放我回来，过三天还要接我。
English: Huashan God said to let me come back first, and pick me up three days later.

古文：光祚又以千钱召金工，令更造像。
现代文：光祚又给了金匠一千钱，叫他再做一尊像。
English: Guangyao gave the goldsmith another thousand yuan and told him to make another statue.

古文：工以钱出县，遇人执猪，将烹之。工愍焉，尽以其钱赎之，像未之造也。
现代文：金匠带着钱出了县府，遇见有人将要杀猪，金匠是个慈悲心肠的人，把造金像的钱赎买了那头猪放掉，金像就没造成。
English: The goldsmith went out of the prefectural government with the money, and met someone who was going to kill a pig. The goldsmith was a compassionate person, and he redeemed the money for the gold statue and released the pig. The gold statue was not created.

古文：而妾又死，俄既苏曰：已免矣。
现代文：三天后县令的妾又一次死而复活，对韩县令说：这回我才彻底免死了。
English: Three days later, the county magistrate's concubine died again and came back to life. She said to the county magistrate, "This time, I was completely spared from death."

古文：适又见迎，车骑转盛，二僧守其门，不得入。
现代文：刚才华山神又来接我，这次派的车马更多。但是两个金菩萨守着咱家门，他们进不来。
English: Just now, Huashan Sheng came to pick me up again, and this time he sent more horses and chariots. However, two golden bodhisattvas were guarding our door, and they couldn't get in.

古文：有豪猪大如马，冲其骑，所向颠仆，车骑却走。神传言曰： 更勿取之。
现代文：接着跑出来一个象马那么大的猪，扑向车马横冲直撞，人们四散而逃。
English: Then a pig the size of a horse ran out and charged at the car and horse, sending people scattering.

古文：于是散去。
现代文：华山神没有办法，只好放弃了娶我的打算。
English: Huashan Shen had no choice but to give up his plan to marry me.

古文：光祚怪何得有猪拒之，金工乃言其故。
现代文：韩光祚奇怪怎么会出现那个大猪，那位金匠向他说明了真相。
English: Han Guangyao wondered how the big pig could appear, and the goldsmith told him the truth.

古文：由是盖信内教。
现代文：打这以后，韩光祚更加相信佛教。
English: After this, Han Guangya believed in Buddhism even more.

古文：宣州司户
现代文：宣州司户
English: Sengoku Shido

古文：吴俗畏鬼，每州县必有城隍神。
现代文：吴地的人都怕鬼，所以每个州县都供奉城隍神。
English: People in Wudi are afraid of ghosts, so every prefecture worships the god of the city.

古文：开元末，宣州司户卒，引见城隍神。
现代文：开元末年，宣州司户死了，死后被城隍神召去。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, the governor of Xuanzhou died, and after his death, he was summoned by the god of the city.

古文：神所居重深，殿宇崇峻，侍卫甲杖严肃。
现代文：神住在一个很大的宫殿里，门外有很多侍卫，十分森严。
English: The god lives in a large palace, and there are many guards outside the gate, which is very strict.

古文：司户既入，府君问其生平行事，司户自陈无罪，枉见录。
现代文：城隍见到司户后，问他一生做了些什么，司户说自己没做什么坏事，不该死。
English: When Shirohata saw Sido, he asked him what he had done in his life. Sido said that he had not done anything bad and did not deserve to die.

古文：府君曰：然，当令君去。
现代文：神说：你说得对，那就放你回去吧。
English: God said: You are right, so let you go back.

古文：君颇相识否？
现代文：不过，你认识我吗？
English: But do you know me?

古文：司户曰：鄙人贱陋，实未识。
现代文：司户说：我是凡人，得怎能认识你呢。
English: And the steward said, Am I a man, that I should know thee?

古文：府君曰：吾即晋宣城内史桓彝也，为是神管郡耳。
现代文：神说：我叫桓彝，最近就要晋升为宣城内史，成为主管全郡的神了。
English: The deity said, "My name is Kanen, and I am about to be promoted to the position of Xuancheng Inner History and become the deity in charge of the whole county.

古文：司户既苏言之。
现代文：这些都是司户活过来以后说的。
English: All of this was said after the steward came back to life.

古文：崔圆
现代文：崔圆
English: Cui Yuan

古文：天宝末，崔圆在益州。暮春上已，与宾客将校数十百人，具舟楫游于江，都人纵观为堵。
现代文：唐天宝末年一个清明时节，益州官员崔圆带着宾客和属下近百人乘船游江，盛况引得江岸上很多人看热闹。
English: In a bright season at the end of Tang Tianbao's reign, Yizhou official Cui Yuan took guests and nearly a hundred of his subordinates on a river cruise. The event attracted a lot of people on the riverbank to watch the fun.

古文：是日，风色恬和，波流静谧，初宴作乐，宾从肃如。忽闻下流十数里，丝竹竞奏，笑语喧然，风水薄送，如咫尺。
现代文：这天风和日丽，江上波平浪静。奏开宴乐时，宾客和仆从很肃静，忽听得江下游十几里外传来音乐和人的欢笑声，水上风传象很近。
English: It was a beautiful day, and the waves on the river were calm. When the banquet music was played, the guests and servants were very quiet. Suddenly, they heard music and people's laughter from more than ten miles downstream of the river. The wind on the water was very close.

古文：须臾渐近，楼船百艘，塞江而至。
现代文：过了不久，一个庞大的船队过来了，百余艘高大的楼船几乎堵塞了江面。
English: Soon after, a huge fleet of ships arrived. More than a hundred tall ships almost blocked the river.

古文：皆以锦繍为帆，金玉饰舟，旌纛盖伞，旌旗戈戟，缤纷照耀。
现代文：船帆都是彩色绸缎做的，船体镶金嵌玉。船上排列着旌旗伞盖等仪仗，光彩耀眼。
English: The sails are all made of colored silk and satin, the hull is inlaid with gold and jade, and the ship is lined with flags, umbrellas, and other ceremonial objects, dazzling in their brilliance.

古文：中有朱紫数十人，绮罗妓女几百许，饮酒奏乐方酣。
现代文：居中的一条船上有几十个穿红、紫袍的人，还有近百的歌女舞伎。饮酒奏乐欢乐正浓。
English: In one of the boats, there are dozens of people wearing red and purple robes, as well as nearly a hundred showgirls. The joy of drinking and playing music is strong.

古文：他舟则列从官武士五六千人持兵戒严。泝沿中流。
现代文：其它的船上则是武士和仆从随扈五六千人。浩浩荡荡的船队沿江过了很久。
English: On the other boats, there were five or six thousand samurai and their retainers. The huge fleet sailed along the river for a long time.

古文：良久而过。圆即令访问，随行数里，近舟，舟中方言曰：天子将幸巴剑，蜀中诸望神祗，迁移避驾，幸无深怪。
现代文：崔圆派人跟着船队打听，走了几里地才靠近船队。其中一条船上的人对崔圆派来的人说：皇帝要巡幸四川剑阁，我们这些四川的各路小神小仙必须搬迁回避，你们别见怪。
English: One of the people on one of the boats said to the people sent by Cui Yuan: "The emperor wants to visit Sichuan Jiange, and we, the little gods and fairies of Sichuan, have to move and avoid him. Don't be surprised."

古文：圆骇愕，因罢会。
现代文：崔圆听说后大吃一惊，不再继续游江了。
English: After hearing this, Cui Yuan was taken aback and stopped swimming in the river.

古文：时朝廷无事，自此先为其备。
现代文：而此时朝廷平安无事。崔圆却团此而预先有所防备。
English: At this time, the imperial court was safe. However, Cui Yuan took precautions in advance.

古文：明岁南狩，圆应卒无阙矣。
现代文：第二年乱起，皇帝真的南行幸蜀，崔圆则武备接应无所欠缺。
English: In the second year of the turmoil, the emperor really went south to Shengshu, and Cui Yuan was fully prepared to respond.

古文：郑仁钧
现代文：郑仁钧
English: Zheng Renzhong

古文：郑仁钧，钦说之子也，博学多闻，有父风。
现代文：郑仁钧是郑钦说的儿子，象他父亲一样博学多才。
English: Zheng Renzhong is the son of Zheng Qin, and he is as knowledgeable and talented as his father.

古文：洛阳上东门外有别墅，与弟某及姑子表弟某同居。
现代文：他在洛阳上东门外有座别墅，和姑姑、弟弟和表弟住在一起。
English: He has a villa just outside Luoyang's Upper East Gate, where he lives with his aunt, brother and cousin.

古文：弟有妹，嫁杨国忠之子。
现代文：还有个表妹嫁给了杨国忠的儿子。
English: Another cousin married Yang Guozhong's son Wu.

古文：时表弟因时疾丧明，眉睫复自毵毵然。
现代文：表弟有一天得了病突然双目失明，接着两个眼睛的睫毛突然长得很长很密，盖住了双眼，并从额头一直顺着鼻梁长下来，一直长到下巴颏。
English: My cousin got sick one day and suddenly lost his sight in both eyes, and then the eyelashes in both eyes suddenly grew very long and thick, covering both eyes, and growing from his forehead all the way down the bridge of his nose, all the way to his chin.

古文：又自发际，当鼻准中分，至于颌下，其左冷如冰而色白，其右热如火而色赤。
现代文：他的左半面脸凉得象冰而惨白，右半面脸却象火样热，颜色通红。姑姑和弟弟不知他得的什么病，又同情着急。
English: The left side of his face was ice-cold and white, while the right side was red-hot and red. His aunt and brother didn't know what was wrong with him, but they felt sorry for him.

古文：姑与弟皆哀怜之，不知其何疾也。
现代文：当时洛中有个郑生，自称有预卜未来的法术。
English: At that time, there was a Zheng Sheng in Luo who claimed to have the ability to predict the future.

古文：时洛中有郑生者，号为卜祝之士。
现代文：御史大夫崔琳奉命到河朔出使，经过洛阳，知道郑仁钧的表弟得了怪病，就想带着会法术的郑生去给郑仁钧的表弟看病。
English: Guishi doctor Cui Lin was ordered to go to Hexuo on a mission, passing through Luoyang. Knowing that Zheng Rensheng's cousin had a strange disease, she wanted to take Zheng Sheng, who knew magic, to see Zheng Rensheng's cousin.

古文：先是御史大夫崔琳，奉使河朔，路径洛阳，知郑生有术，乃召与俱行。及使回，入洛阳。
现代文：于是崔琳出使河朔之后就带着郑生回到洛阳。
English: As a result, Cui Lin took Zheng Sheng back to Luoyang after he was sent to Hexuo.

古文：郑生在后，至上东门道，素知仁钧庄居在路旁，乃诣之。
现代文：郑生在他的后面，走上东门道，还没进郑仁钧的门，郑生就连说自己犯了死罪，今天非死不可。
English: Zheng Sheng walked behind him on Dongmen Road, and before he entered Zheng Rensheng's door, Zheng Sheng even said that he had committed a capital crime, and that he had to die today.

古文：未入里门，而郑生遽称死罪，或言合死，词色慑惧。
现代文：郑仁钧问他怎么了，郑生不说别的，只不断的说自己肯定死在今天了。
English: Zheng Renzhen asked him what was wrong. Zheng Sheng didn't say anything else, just kept saying that he must have died today.

古文：仁钧问之，郑生无他言，唯云合死。仁钧因诘之，郑生曰：某才过此，不幸饥渴，知吾宗在此，遽为不速之客。
现代文：仁钧非得让他说出原因，郑生才说：我是第一次到这里，由于又渴又饿，不过是想到这位同姓的家里吃点喝点什么。早知我来必死，是决不该来的。
English: Rinchen had to ask him to explain the reason, and Zheng Sheng finally said: I am here for the first time, because I am thirsty and hungry, but I just want to eat and drink something with this family of the same name. I knew I would die, I should never have come.

古文：仁钧曰：吾与姑及弟在，更无异人，何畏惮如此？
现代文：仁钧说：这里只有我的弟弟和姑姑，没有其他人，你怎么怕成这样？
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche said, "There is only my younger brother and my aunt here, there is no one else. How can you be afraid of this happening?

古文：郑生股慄愈惧。
现代文：郑生不说话，怕得两腿不住地抖。
English: Zheng Sheng did not speak, his legs trembling with fear.

古文：仁钧初以无目表弟，不之比数，忽念疾状冷热之异，安知郑生不属意于此乎？
现代文：起初仁钧没有告诉郑生家里还有个生了怪病的表弟，现在一想，表弟的怪病是不是已被郑生知道了呢？不如索性告诉他，看他有什么反应。
English: At first, Rinchen did not tell Zheng Seng that there was also a cousin in the family who had a strange disease. Now, think about it, did Zheng Seng already know about his cousin's strange disease? It would be better to tell him directly and see how he reacts.

古文：乃具语表弟之状。
现代文：于是仁钧就把表弟奇怪的症状告诉了郑生。
English: So Renya told Zheng Sheng about her cousin's strange symptoms.

古文：郑生曰：彼天曹判官，某冥中胥吏。
现代文：郑生听后说：你表弟是天上的判官，而我是阴曹地府的一名小吏。
English: After listening, Zheng Sheng said, "Your cousin is a judge in heaven, while I am a minor official in the underworld.

古文：今日偶至此，非固有所犯。然谒之亦死，不谒亦死，礼须谒也。
现代文：今天我是偶然来到这里，并不是我有意冒犯他，现在我见他不见他都是个死，按礼数我还是拜见他吧。
English: Today I came here by chance, it wasn't my intention to offend him, now I see him and don't see him, he's a dead man, according to etiquette, I'll still visit him.

古文：遂书刺曰：地府法曹吏郑某再拜谒。
现代文：说罢写了个求见的名帖，上面写的是地府法曹吏郑某再拜谒几个字。
English: Saying that, he wrote a famous post asking for a meeting, on which was written a few words from Zheng Mou, the magistrate of the prefectural government.

古文：时仁钧弟与表弟，堂上掷钱为戏。
现代文：当时仁钧的表弟正在屋里和他的弟弟玩扔钱的游戏。
English: At the time, Nian's cousin was playing a game of tossing money with his brother inside the house.

古文：仁钧即于门屏呼引郑生，读其刺通之。郑生趋入，再拜谢罪而出。
现代文：仁钧就领着郑生来到门边，念着郑生名帖上的话请求表弟接见郑生，表弟答应后，郑生就进屋了。
English: Rinchen led Zheng Sheng to the door, read the words on Zheng Sheng's name card and asked his cousin to receive Zheng Sheng. After his cousin agreed, Zheng Sheng entered the house.

古文：表弟再顾，长睫飒然，如有怒者。
现代文：仁钧在门外只听得郑生在屋里不断向表弟告罪请求宽恕。后来郑生就出来了。
English: Outside the door, Renya could only hear Zheng Sheng pleading with his cousin and begging for forgiveness. Later, Zheng Sheng came out.

古文：仁钧为谢曰：彼不知弟在此，故来。
现代文：只见表弟的长睫毛札撒着随风飘动，好象是很生气的样子。
English: I could only see my cousin's long eyelashes fluttering in the wind, as if he was very angry.

古文：愿贳其罪可乎？良久朗言曰：为兄恕之。
现代文：仁钧就赶快为郑生求情说：郑生不知道你在这里，不是故意来冒犯你，你就宽恕他吧。
English: Rinchen quickly interceded for Zheng Sheng and said: Zheng Sheng did not know you were here and did not mean to offend you. You should forgive him.

古文：复诘之再三，终不复言。
现代文：表弟停了半天才说看在表哥的面上，这次就原谅他了。再问别的，表弟就什么也不说了。
English: The cousin paused for half a day before saying that, for the sake of his cousin, he would forgive him this time. If asked anything else, the cousin would not say anything.

古文：姑闻之，召于屏内，诱之以母子之情，感激使言，终不肯述其由。
现代文：仁钧的姑姑听说了这事，就偷偷把表弟找到一边，以母子之情劝说感动他，希望他说出真情，然而表弟仍是不肯说明原因。
English: After hearing about this, Zhenya's aunt secretly took her cousin aside and tried to persuade him with motherly and sonly feelings, hoping that he would tell the truth. However, her cousin still refused to explain why.

古文：后数年，忽谓母曰：促理行装，此地当有兵至，两京皆乱离。
现代文：过了几年，表弟忽然对姑姑说：娘，赶快收拾行装，这里很快要打仗，两京也要大乱。
English: A few years later, my cousin suddenly said to my aunt: "Daughter, hurry up and pack your things, there will soon be a war here, and there will be chaos in the two capitals.

古文：且拿我入城，投杨氏姊，丐三二百千，旬日便谋东归江淮避乱也。
现代文：你带着我进城去投奔嫁给杨国忠儿子的姐姐，去后向她家要些钱，十天后咱们再到江南去避乱。
English: You took me to the city to rush to marry Yang Guozhong's son's elder sister, and then asked her family for some money. Ten days later, we went to the south of the Yangtze River to escape the turmoil.

古文：此时杨氏百口，皆当诛灭，唯姊与甥，可以免矣。母居常已异之，乃入京，馆于杨氏。
现代文：郑仁钧的姑姑知道表弟不同凡人，就听信了他的话，带他进了京，客居在杨国忠家。
English: Knowing that her cousin was different from ordinary people, Zheng Rinyan's aunt took him at his word and brought him to Beijing, where he lived as a guest at Yang Guozhong's home.

古文：其母具以表弟之言告于女。其姊素知弟有郑生之言，及见其状貌，益异之，密白其夫，以启其父。
现代文：姑姑把表弟的话告诉了女儿，女儿早就听说自己这位弟弟有预卜未来之术，等到看见弟弟，更加惊异，就偷偷地把弟弟说天下就要大乱的话告诉丈夫，让丈夫跟公公杨国忠说，并向他要些钱好到江南避乱。
English: The aunt told the words of her cousin to her daughter. The daughter had long heard that her brother had the ability to predict the future. When she saw her brother, she was even more surprised. She secretly told her husband what her brother had said about the world being on the brink of chaos. She asked her husband to tell Yang Guozhong, her father-in-law, and ask him for some money to escape the chaos to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：国忠怒曰：姻亲需钱，何不以直告，乃妖言相恐耶？
现代文：杨国忠一听大怒，对儿子说：你小男子要钱就直说，拿这些胡说八道能吓住我吗？
English: Upon hearing Yang Guozhong's rage, he said to his son: "You little man, if you want money, just say so. Can you scare me with all this nonsense?

古文：终无一钱与之。
现代文：结果一个钱也没给。
English: As a result, not a single penny was paid.

古文：其女告母曰：尽箱箧所有，庶可得办，何以强吾舅？
现代文：女儿对母亲说：不必强行向我公公要钱，我把自己的私房钱和贵重东西都给你们就行。
English: The daughter said to her mother: "You don't have to force money from my father-in-law, I'll just give you all my private money and valuables."

古文：时母子止杨氏，已四五日矣。表弟促之曰：无过旬日也。
现代文：姑姑和表弟都不要。这时他们已在杨家住了四五天，表弟催促道：你们在这里不能超过十天，快走吧！
English: Neither the aunt nor the cousin wanted to go. By this time, they had been living in Yang's house for four or five days. The cousin urged, "You can't stay here for more than ten days, let's go!"

古文：其女得二三十万，与母去。
现代文：于是姐姐带了二三十万钱和母亲离开了杨家。
English: As a result, the sister took two or three million yuan and left the Yang family with her mother.

古文：临别，表弟谓其姊曰：别与我一短褐之袍。
现代文：临行时，表弟对他姐姐说：给我做一件短袍子，我有用。
English: As he was about to leave, his cousin said to his sister, "Make me a short robe, it will be useful for me."

古文：其姊以紫绫加短絮为短褐，与之而别。
现代文：他姐姐就用紫缎做了件短袍留给了他。
English: So his sister made him a robe of blue and purple and gave it to him.

古文：明年，禄山叛。驾至马嵬，军士尽灭杨氏，无少长皆死。
现代文：果然后来安禄山反叛，圣驾行至马嵬坡，叛军杀了杨国忠全家，老的少的都不留。
English: If the rebels then came to Anlu Mountain and rebelled, and the saint traveled to Malangpo, the rebels killed Yang Guozhong's entire family, leaving no trace of the old man.

古文：其姊闻乱。窜于旅舍后，潜匿草中得脱。及兵去之后，出于路隅，见杨氏一家。
现代文：只有表弟的姐姐听见叛兵到来后跑了出来，藏在草丛中。叛军退走后，姐姐从草丛中出来，看到杨国忠一家尸横遍地。
English: Only the cousin's sister heard the arrival of the rebels and ran out to hide in the grass. After the rebels retreated, the sister came out of the grass and saw the corpses of Yang Guozhong and his family all over the ground.

古文：枕籍而死。于乱尸中，得乳儿青衣，已失一臂，犹能言。姊问：我儿在否？
现代文：她在乱尸里发现了杨家的一个使女，已被砍掉了一只胳膊，忙问：我的儿子还活着吗？
English: She found a maid of the Yang family in the jumble of corpses, who had been cut off an arm, and asked: Is my son still alive?

古文：曰：在主人榻上，先以比者紫褐复之。
现代文：那奶妈说：在主人屋里的床上，身上盖着一件紫缎短袍子。
English: The wet nurse said: On the bed in the master's house, covered with a short purple robe.

古文：其姊遽往视之，则其儿尚寐，于是乃抱之东走。
现代文：姐姐急忙跑去看，见自己儿子正盖着紫袍睡觉呢，忙抱起向东走。
English: The sister hurriedly ran to see, and when she saw that her son was sleeping with his purple robe on, she quickly picked him up and walked east.

古文：姊初走之次，忽顾见一老妪继踵而来，曰：杨新妇缓行，我欲汝偕隐。
现代文：刚走不远，忽然看见一位老太太跟着她走来，老太太喊道：杨夫人等等我，我想跟你一起逃难。
English: After walking a short distance, she suddenly saw an old lady following her. The old lady called out, "Mrs. Yang, wait for me, I want to escape with you."

古文：姊问为谁，曰：昔日门下卖履妪也。
现代文：姐姐问：你是谁？老太太说：我是过去在你家门前卖鞋子的。
English: Sister asked: Who are you? The old lady said: I used to sell shoes in front of your house.

古文：兵散后能出及得儿者，皆此老妪导引保护，全于草莽。是无目表弟，使杨保持也。不然者，何以灭族之家，独漏此二人哉。
现代文：原来这老太太是奉命保护她们母子的，奉的正是郑仁钧的表弟的命令，要不然，在兵变中杨国忠全家都被杀害，何以她们母子二人得以幸存呢？
English: It turned out that the old lady had been ordered to protect their mother and son. She was following the orders of Zheng Renzhong's cousin. Otherwise, Yang Guozhong's entire family would have been killed in the mutiny. How did their mother and son manage to survive?

古文：季广琛
现代文：季广琛
English: Ji Guangyao

古文：河西有女郎神。
现代文：季广琛年轻时曾到河西一带旅游。
English: When he was young, Ji Guangyao used to travel around Hexi.

古文：季广琛少时，曾游河西，憩于旅舍。昼寝，梦见云车，从者数十人，从空而下，称是女郎。姊妹二人来诣。
现代文：有一次，在旅店里睡午觉，梦见有云车从空中而下，还有几十个随从跟着，说是叫女郎有姊妹二人来看望。
English: Once, when I was taking a nap in a hotel, I dreamed of a chariot of clouds descending from the sky, followed by dozens of attendants, who said they were calling on a young woman and her two sisters to come and visit.

古文：广琛初甚忻悦，及觉开目，窃见仿佛犹在。琛疑是妖，于腰下取剑刃之。
现代文：广琛起初很高兴，醒后觉得那姊妹俩好象还在屋里，想了想，疑心是妖怪，就抽出宝剑想杀她们。
English: At first, Guangyao was very happy. When he woke up, he felt as if the two sisters were still in the room. After thinking about it, he thought that suspicion was a monster, and he drew his sword to kill them.

古文：神乃骂曰：久好相就，能忍恶心！
现代文：这时就听姊妹俩说：一直看你这人不错，想和你交个朋友，没想到你竟能起这样的坏心，真恶毒！
English: At this time, I heard the two sisters say: I always thought you were a good person and wanted to make friends with you, but I didn't expect you to have such a bad heart. How evil!

古文：遂去。广琛说向主人，主人曰：此是女郎神也。
现代文：广琛把这事告诉店主，店主说：咳呀，她俩就是女郎神啊！
English: Guangya told this to the shopkeeper, who said, "Oh, they're both goddesses!"

古文：琛乃自往市酒脯作祭，将谢前日之过，神终不悦也。
现代文：广琛赶快去买了酒和肉，摆上后望空祭祷，请求女郎神原谅自己前日的鲁莽。然而女郎神始终生气。
English: Guang Zheng hurriedly went to buy wine and meat, put on the hindsight empty prayer, and asked the maiden god to forgive his recklessness the day before. However, the maiden god was always angry.

古文：于是琛乃题诗于其壁上，墨不成字。
现代文：于是广琛想在墙上写首诗以表白心迹，可是笔硬是在墙上写不出字来。
English: So Guangyao wanted to write a poem on the wall to express his feelings, but the pen was too hard to write on the wall.

古文：后夕，又梦女郎神来，尤怒曰：终身遣君不得封邑也。
现代文：夜里，广琛梦见女郎神又来了。女郎神仍然气乎乎地说：我们将叫你这一辈子也当不上能得到封地的官！
English: In the night, Guangya dreamed that the maiden god had come again. The maiden god still said angrily, "We will never let you become an official who can obtain a fief in this lifetime!"

古文：刘可大
现代文：刘可大
English: Liu Keda

古文：刘可大，以天宝中举进士，入京。出东都，途遇少年，状如贵公子，服色华侈，持弹弓而行，宾从甚伟。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，有个叫刘可大的秀才进京考举人，途中遇见一个衣冠华丽的少年公子，手里拿着弹弓，后面有很多随从。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a talented person named Liu Keda who went to Beijing to take the examination. On the way, he met a well-dressed young man with a slingshot in his hand and many followers behind him.

古文：初与可大相狎，数日同行。
现代文：少年对刘可大很友好，在一起走了好几天。
English: The boy was very friendly to Liu Keda, and they walked together for several days.

古文：至华阴，云：有庄在县东。
现代文：到华阴县时，少年说自家的庄园在县城东面，约秀才去住两天，秀才就跟去了。
English: When he arrived in Huayin County, the boy said that his family's manor was in the east of the county seat. He asked Xiu Cai to stay for two days, and Xiu Cai agreed.

古文：相邀往，随至庄所。室宇宏壮，下客于厅。
现代文：一看庄园房舍非常宏伟，少年安排秀才在前厅室内歇息后就出去了。
English: At first glance, the manor house is very grand, and the boy arranges for the scholar to rest in the anteroom before going out.

古文：入室良久，可大窃于中门窥觑，见一贵人，在内厅理事。庭中囚徒甚众，多受拷掠，其声酸楚。
现代文：秀才从中门向后院大厅里偷偷一看，见一个大官模样的人正在厅里问案，后院有很多囚犯，很多犯人正在被拷打用刑，一片悲惨的哭叫声。
English: Xiu Cai sneaked a look from the middle gate into the backyard hall and saw a person who looked like a high-ranking official asking questions in the hall. There were many prisoners in the backyard, many prisoners were being tortured, and there was a lot of miserable crying.

古文：可大疑非人境，惶惧欲去。
现代文：秀才怀疑这里大概不是人间，心里恐惧，想赶快离去。
English: Shoucai suspected that this place was probably not a human world. He was afraid and wanted to leave quickly.

古文：初少年将入，谓可大慎无私视，恐有相累。
现代文：这时那少年回来了，发现秀才已偷看了后院的情景，质问道：刚才不是告诉你不许偷看，你怎么不听？牵累了你怎么办？
English: At this time, the boy came back and found that Xiu Cai had peeked into the scene in the backyard. He asked: "Didn't I just tell you not to peek? Why didn't you listen? What if I got you involved?"

古文：及出曰：适以咨白，何尔负约？
现代文：现在既然你已经看见，我也就不瞒你了。
English: Now that you have seen it, I will not hide it from you.

古文：然以此不能复讳，家君是华山神，相与故人，终令有益，可无惧也。
现代文：我父亲就是华山神。不过你我既然是朋友，我会使你得到好处的，你不必怕。
English: My father is the god Huashan. But since you and I are friends, I will do you good. You don't have to be afraid.

古文：须臾下食，顾从者，别取人间食与刘秀才。
现代文：不一会要开饭了，少年对左右说：去拿些人间的食物，给刘秀才吃。
English: Soon it was time for dinner, and the boy said to the others, "Go get some human food and give it to Liu Xiucai to eat."

古文：食至相对，各饱，兼致酒叙欢，无所不至。
现代文：于是拿来了酒饭，相对边饮酒边欢叙，招待得无微不至。
English: So they brought wine and rice, and while drinking and celebrating, they invited everyone.

古文：可大求检己簿，当何进达，今年身事复何如。
现代文：秀才请出少年查一查自己今生官运如何，今年能不能考中。
English: The talented young man asked the boy to find out whether he could pass the middle school entrance examination this year.

古文：回视黄衫吏为检。
现代文：少年就命一个穿黄衣的官去查。
English: The boy ordered a yellow-clad officer to investigate.

古文：有顷吏云：刘君明年当进士及第，历官七政。
现代文：黄衣官查后说：刘秀才明年可以考中进士，今生可以做七任官。
English: After the investigation, the yellow-vested official said: Liu Xiucai can take the junior high school entrance examination next year, and he can be a seven-term official in this life.

古文：可大苦求当年，吏云：当年只得一政县尉。
现代文：秀才心急，苦苦请求今年就考中作官。黄衣官说：如果今年考取，只能当一任县尉小官，请您珍惜自己的前程。
English: Xiu Cai was anxious and pleaded with great difficulty to pass the middle school examination this year. Huang Yi said: If you pass the examination this year, you can only be a county lieutenant. Please cherish your future.

古文：相为惜此，可大固求之，少年再为改。
现代文：刘可大仍然苦苦央求，少年只好为他把本子改了。
English: Liu Keda was still pleading with him, so the boy had to change the book for him.

古文：吏去，屡回央央，惜其减禄。
现代文：那黄衣官员边走边遗憾地说：这人真是，屡次央求，可惜要减自己的官路。
English: As he walked along, the yellow-clad official said regretfully: "This person really, repeatedly begged, but unfortunately had to reduce his official path.

古文：可大恐鬼神不信，因再求之，后竟以此失职。
现代文：刘可大怕鬼神说的话不一定准，固执地去求那少年，后来因为这样竟失去很多官职。
English: Liu Ke was very afraid that what ghosts and gods said might not be true, so he persistently asked the boy, and later lost many official positions because of this.

古文：明年辞去，至京及第，数年拜荥阳县尉而终。
现代文：明年可大辞别那少年，到京城赶考，结果是只当了个荥阳县的县尉，过不几年就死了。
English: Next year, he can say goodbye to the boy and go to Beijing to catch up with the exam. As a result, he only became a county lieutenant of Poyang County, and died a few years later.

古文：奴苍璧
现代文：奴苍璧
English: He's brilliant.

古文：相国李林甫家一奴，号苍璧，性敏慧，林甫怜之。
现代文：宰相李林甫家有个奴仆名叫苍璧，十分聪明能干，李林甫很喜欢他。
English: Prime Minister Li Linfu's family had a servant named Cang Bi, who was very clever and capable. Li Linfu liked him very much.

古文：忽一日暴死，经宿复苏。
现代文：苍璧有一天突然死去，过了一夜，又复活了。
English: One day, Cang Bi died suddenly. One night later, he came back to life.

古文：林甫问之，奴曰：死时因不觉其死，但忽于门前见仪仗。拥一贵人经过，有似君上。
现代文：李林甫问他，苍璧说：我并没有以为死了，只记得以前忽然来了一队仪仗，簇拥着一个像是天子的人过去了。
English: Li Linfu asked him, and Cang Bi said, "I didn't think I was dead, I just remembered that a ceremonial troop suddenly came and passed by, surrounded by a person who looked like the Son of Heaven.

古文：方潜窥之，遽有数人走来擒之。随去，至一峭拔奇秀之山，俄及大楼下。
现代文：我正藏在一旁偷看，突然被几个人抓走，来到一个挺拔险峻的山上的大楼前面。
English: I was hiding and peeking when I was suddenly grabbed by several people and brought to the front of a building on a steep hill.

古文：须臾，有三四人黄衣小儿至，急唤苍璧入。
现代文：过了片刻，有三四个穿黄衣的少年叫我快进楼里。
English: After a while, three or four boys in yellow coats told me to hurry into the building.

古文：经七重门宇，至一大殿下。
现代文：我经过七道门，来到一座殿下。
English: I passed through seven gates and came to a palace.

古文：黄衣小儿曰： 且立于此，候君命。
现代文：黄衣少年说： 先在这里站着，等君王的旨意。
English: The boy in yellow said, "First stand here and wait for the king's command."

古文：见殿上卷一珍珠帘，一贵人临阶坐。
现代文：只见殿上卷着珠帘，有一个大官坐在大殿上，象是个主管决断的人。
English: I could only see the beaded curtains rolled up in the main hall, and a high-ranking official sitting in the main hall, as if he were a person in charge of making decisions.

古文：似剸割事。殿前东西立仗侍卫，约千余人。
现代文：殿前东西立着一千多名卫士。
English: In front of the hall, more than a thousand guards stand to the east and west.

古文：有一朱衣人，携一文簿奏言： 是新奉命乱国革位者安禄山，及相次三朝乱主。兼同时悖乱贵人先定案。
现代文：这时有个穿红衣的人，正拿着个大本子奏报说： 现在我呈送的是安禄山谋反和其后三朝中那些治国无方和谋朝篡位的案子。
English: At this time, a man in a red coat was holding a large book to report, saying: Now I am presenting the case of Anlu Mountain's rebellion and the subsequent three dynasties that have no way to govern the country and conspire to usurp the throne.

古文：殿上人问朱衣曰： 大唐君隆基，君人之数，虽将足矣，寿命之数何如耶？ 
现代文：殿上的大官问： 大唐皇帝李隆基怎么样了？做为皇帝他的气数是尽了，做为人，他还有没有阳寿？ 
English: The dignitary in the hall asked: How is the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty, Li Longji? As an emperor, his energy is exhausted. As a human being, does he still have longevity?

古文：朱衣曰： 大唐之君，奢侈不节俭，本合折数。但缘不好杀，有仁心，固寿命之数在焉。
现代文：红衣人说： 大唐皇帝平时非常奢侈豪华不知节俭，为此本该扣除他的阳寿，但他心地慈善，不好杀生害命，所以还有阳寿。
English: The man in red said: Emperor Datang is usually very extravagant and luxurious and does not know how to be frugal. For this reason, his Yang Shou should have been deducted, but his heart is charitable, it is not good to kill and harm life, so there is also Yang Shou.

古文：又问曰： 安禄山之后，数人僭伪为主，杀害黎元。当须速止之，无令杀人过多，以伤上帝心，虑罪及我府。
现代文：又问： 安禄山反叛以后，有好几个自称为王的，他们杀了不少百姓，应该尽快制止他们，别让他们杀人太多，伤了天帝的心，连我们也会吃罪不起。
English: He also asked: After the rebellion of Anlu Mountain, there were several self-proclaimed kings. They killed a lot of people. They should be stopped as soon as possible. Don't let them kill too many people. They broke the Emperor's heart. Even we can't bear the guilt.

古文：事行之时，当速止之。
现代文：你只要发现他们要闹事，就马上制止。
English: If you see them starting a riot, stop it immediately.

古文：朱衣奏曰： 唐君绍位临御以来，天下之人，安堵乐业，亦已久矣。据期运推迁之数，天下之人，自合罹乱惶惶。至于广害黎元，必不至伤上帝心也。
现代文：红衣人回奏道， 唐朝皇帝即位以后，天下人安居乐业很长时间了，按照世事的运行规律，必然要乱上一段时间，一乱，必然要有些百姓遭劫甚至死亡，这是劫数难逃，天帝不会伤心怪罪的。
English: The man in red echoed, After the emperor of the Tang Dynasty ascended the throne, the people of the world have been living and working peacefully for a long time. According to the law of the running of world affairs, it is inevitable that there will be chaos for a period of time. If there is chaos, it is inevitable that some people will be robbed or even die. This is unavoidable, and the heavenly emperor will not be sad to blame.

古文：殿上人曰： 宜便先追取李林甫、杨国忠也。
现代文：殿上的大官说， 那就先把李林甫、杨国忠抓来吧。
English: The high-ranking official in the palace said, "Then let's arrest Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong first."

古文：朱衣受命而退。俄又有一朱衣，捧一文簿至。
现代文：这时又有一个红衣人捧着簿子来奏报关于唐朝第六个皇帝复位和朝中的文武大臣的情况。
English: At this time, there was another man in red holding a book to report on the situation of the sixth emperor of the Tang Dynasty and the Minister of Culture and Military Affairs.

古文：虽嗣主复位，乃至于末，终不治也。
现代文：殿上的大官说， 唐太宗李世民费了那么大的力气才得天下太平，如今天乱成这样，真可惜呀。
English: The dignitary in the hall said, Tang Taizong Li Shimin expended so much effort to obtain world peace, such as today's chaos, what a pity.

古文：谓朱衣曰： 但速行之。朱衣又退。
现代文：虽然第六位皇帝复了位，大乱还是没有平息，你快想法子处理一下吧。红衣人就退下去了。
English: Although the sixth emperor has been reinstated, the turmoil still hasn't subsided. You'd better come up with a plan to deal with it. The man in red will step down.

古文：及将日夕，有一小儿下，急唤苍璧令对见。
现代文：这时已经天色将晚，一个少年急忙叫我去殿上朝见。
English: By this time it was getting late, and a boy hurriedly called me to go to the palace to meet him in the morning.

古文：苍璧方子细，见殿上一人，坐碧玉床，衣道服，戴白玉冠，谓苍璧曰： 当却回，寄语林甫，速来我紫府，应知人间之苦。
现代文：只见殿上的碧玉床上坐着一个穿道服戴白玉冠的人，他对我说， 你回到人间，告诉李林甫，快到这儿来报到，人世就要再遭大乱之苦了。
English: On the jasper bed in the hall, I saw a man wearing a white jade crown sitting in a pinafore. He said to me, "When you return to the world, tell Li Linfu to come here and report to me. The world is about to suffer from another great turmoil."

古文：苍璧寻得放回。
现代文：这样，我才又回到人世。
English: That's how I came back to life.

古文：林甫知世不久将乱矣，遂潜恣酒色焉。
现代文：李林甫听苍璧这么一说，知道天下又要大乱，就不再问政事，日日沉浸在酒色中了。
English: When Li Linfu heard Cangbi say this, he knew that the world would be in chaos again, so he stopped asking about politics and immersed himself in drinking every day.

古文：南缵
现代文：南缵
English: Nanluo

古文：唐广汉守南缵，常为人言：至德中，有调选同州督邮者，姓崔，忘其名字。
现代文：唐代广汉的太守南缵常常向别人讲述这样一件事。他说，至德年间，有个姓崔的人被派到同州去当督邮。
English: Nan Xuan, the eunuch governor of Guanghan in the Tang Dynasty, often told others about such a thing. He said that during the Zhi De era, a man surnamed Cui was sent to Tongzhou to be the postmaster.

古文：轻骑赴任，出春明门，见一青袍人，乘马出，亦不知其姓字，因相揖偕行，徐问何官。青袍云：新受同州督邮。
现代文：崔某只身单骑上路，出了春明门，遇见一个穿青袍的人，二人相识后一起走。崔某问青袍人作什么官，青袍人说他刚刚被任命为同州督邮。
English: Cui rode alone on the road, went out of the Chunming Gate, met a man wearing a blue robe, and the two met and walked together. Cui asked the man in the blue robe what kind of official he was, and the man in the blue robe said that he had just been appointed as the postmaster of the same state.

古文：崔云：某新授此官，君且不误乎？
现代文：崔某说：我刚刚被任命为同州督邮，你不是搞错了吧？
English: Cui said, "I have just been appointed as the postal inspector of the same state. Aren't you mistaken?

古文：青袍笑而不答。
现代文：青袍人笑了笑不说什么。
English: The blue-robed man smiled and said nothing.

古文：又相与行，悉云赴任。去同州数十里，至斜路中，有官吏拜迎。
现代文：两人继续同行，到了离同州几十里的一个岔路口，见有一个小官员在路口迎接。
English: The two continued their journey until they reached a fork in the road, dozens of miles from Tongzhou, where they were greeted by a small official.

古文：青袍谓崔生曰：君为阳道录事，我为阴道录事。路从此别，岂不相送耶？
现代文：这时青袍人才对崔某说：你是阳间的官，我是阴间的官，从这里咱俩就分开了，你不送我一程吗？
English: At this time, the blue-robed person said to Cui Mou: You are the official of the sun, I am the official of the underworld, from here we are separated, won't you give me a ride?

古文：崔生异之，即与联辔入斜路。
现代文：崔某心里十分惊异，就和青袍人并马走上岔道的一条斜路。
English: Cui Mou was very surprised in his heart, so he and the blue-robed man walked up a slope of the footpath.

古文：遂至一城郭，街衢局署，亦甚壮丽。
现代文：他们来到一座城池，见街道布局倒很壮观。
English: They came to a castle with a spectacular street layout.

古文：青袍至厅，与崔生同坐。
现代文：青袍人领着崔某进了衙门的大堂，和崔某一同坐下。
English: The man in blue robes led Cui Mou into the lobby of the main gate and sat down with Cui Mou.

古文：伍伯通胥传僧道等讫，次通词讼狱囚，崔之妻与焉。
现代文：这时衙门里的下属们开始报告一些日常的公务处理，接着又报告司法刑狱方面的情况，并开始问案。
English: At this time, the subordinates in the court began to report some daily business, then reported the situation of the judicial prison, and began to ask questions.

古文：崔生大惊，谓青袍曰：不知吾妻何得至此？
现代文：在问案时，崔某意外地发现，囚犯中竟有自己的妻子，大吃一惊，就问青袍人：我妻怎么会到了这里？
English: During the interrogation, Cui Mou discovered by accident that his wife was actually among the prisoners. Shocked, he asked the man in blue: How did my wife end up here?

古文：青袍即避案后，令崔生自与妻言。
现代文：青袍人回避了一下，让崔某和他妻子直接谈。
English: The blue-robed man evaded for a moment, letting Cui and his wife talk directly.

古文：妻云：被追至此，已是数日，君宜哀请录事耳！
现代文：崔妻说：我已被抓来好几天了，你快去为我求求情吧。
English: Cui Zhan said: I have been arrested for several days, you should quickly go and plead for me.

古文：崔生即祈求青袍，青袍因令吏促放崔生妻回。
现代文：崔某向青袍人求情以后，妻子就被放回阳世了。
English: After Cui Mou pleaded with the young man, his wife was released back into the world.

古文：崔妻问犯何罪至此，青袍曰：案家同州，应同州亡人，皆在此厅勘过。
现代文：崔某问青袍人妻子犯了什么罪，青袍说：凡是同州死的人，都到这里过堂，过了堂才知道罪名。
English: When Cui asked the blue-robed man what crime his wife had committed, the blue-robed man said: "All the people who died in the same state came here to go through the court, and only after the court did they know the charges.

古文：盖君管阳道，某管阴道。
现代文：你管阳世我管阴间，现在你知道了吧。
English: You rule the sun and I rule the underworld. Now you know.

古文：崔生淹留半日，请回，青袍命胥吏拜送曰：虽阴阳有殊，然俱是同州也，可不拜送督邮哉？
现代文：崔某停留了半日要求回去。青袍人让手下人拜送崔某，并说：尽管我俩各管阴阳，但毕竟都是同州人，怎么能不送送你督邮大人呢？
English: Cui stayed for half a day and asked to go back. Qingbao asked his subordinates to escort Cui, and said: Although we are both in charge of yin and yang, but after all, we are all from the same state, how can we not send you the postmaster?

古文：青袍亦饯送，再三勤款挥袂，又令斜路口而去。
现代文：然后设酒送行，依依惜别，并让崔某仍以岔路上的斜道回家。
English: Then they had a drink to see them off, bid them farewell, and let Cui Mou take the sloping road to go home.

古文：崔生至同州，问妻，云病七八日，冥然无所知，神识生人才得一日，崔生计之，恰放回日也。
现代文：崔某到了同州后，妻子已经病了七八天了，一直不省人事。原来阳间的一天是阴间的七八天，崔某一算，妻子生病时，正好自己在阴间求情，才使她得以还阳。
English: After Cui arrived in Dongzhou, his wife had been ill for seven or eight days and had been unconscious. Originally, a day in the sun is seven or eight days in the underworld. According to Cui, when his wife was ill, he happened to intercede in the underworld so that she could return to the sun.

古文：妻都不记阴道，见崔生言之，妻始悟为梦，亦不审记忆也。王常
现代文：然而他把这些情形告诉妻子时，妻子仍然不懂，只是恍然如梦地想起一些，但连梦也记不清楚了。王常
English: However, when he told these circumstances to his wife, she still did not understand, but vaguely remembered some, but even the dream was not clear. Wang Chang

古文：王常者，洛阳人。
现代文：洛阳有个王常，为人急公好义。
English: There is a Wang Chang in Luoyang, who is quick to do justice.

古文：负气而义，见人不平，必手刃之；见人饥寒，至于解衣推食，略无难色。唐至德二年，常入终南山，遇风雨，宿于山中。
现代文：见人不平必拨刀相助，见人饥寒，就解衣送食，宁可自己挨饿受冻。唐至德二年，王常进终南山，遇见风雨，只好在山里过夜。
English: When he saw people suffering from hunger and cold, he would give them food and clothing, rather than starve and freeze himself. In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Changjin finally went to the Nanshan Mountains, encountered wind and rain, and had to spend the night in the mountains.

古文：夜将半，雨霁，月朗风恬，慨然四望而叹曰：我欲平天下祸乱，无一人之柄以佐我，无尺土之封以资我；我欲救天下饥寒，而衣食自亦不充。
现代文：半夜时雨停了，月白风清。王常望天感叹说：我想治国安邦，手里却没有丝毫权力，也没有任何资助。我想救天下饥寒的人，自己却缺衣少食。
English: In the middle of the night, the rain stopped and the moon was white and the wind was clear. Wang Changwang Tian sighed and said: I want to govern the country, but I do not have the slightest power in my hands, nor any funding. I want to save the hungry and cold people in the world, but I lack clothes and food.

古文：天地神祗福善，顾不足信。
现代文：看来说什么神灵佑护好心的人，纯属胡说啊！
English: It seems to be pure nonsense to say that gods bless and protect good-hearted people!

古文：言讫有神人自空中而下，谓常曰：尔何为此言？
现代文：刚刚说完，就有一位神人从天而降，问王常：你怎么能这样说？
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, a man of God descended from heaven and asked Wang Chang: "How can you say such a thing?"

古文：常按剑良久曰：我言者，平生志也。
现代文：王常手按着佩剑，半天才说：我是在感叹平生的志向不能实现。
English: Wang Changru pressed his sword with his hand and said half a day later: I am lamenting that my lifelong ambition cannot be realized.

古文：神人曰：我有术，黄金可成，水银可化，虽不足平祸乱，亦可济人之饥寒。
现代文：神说：我有法术，可以点石成金，也能化水为银。虽然不能平乱安邦，也能救人饥寒。
English: God said: I have magic, I can turn stone into gold, and I can turn water into silver. Although I cannot bring peace to the world, I can save people from hunger and cold.

古文：尔能授此术乎？
现代文：你愿意学这样法术吗？
English: Would you like to learn this spell?

古文：常曰：我闻此乃是神仙之术，空有名，未之睹也。
现代文：王常说：我倒是听说过这种法术，但没有见过。
English: Wang Chang said, "I have heard of this kind of magic, but I have never seen it."

古文：徒闻秦始、汉武好此道，而终无成，只为千载讥诮尔！
现代文：听说秦始皇汉武帝非常喜欢研究这种法术，但始终没有结果，反成为千百年的笑话。
English: It is said that Emperor Qin Shihuang and Emperor Han Wu liked to study this magic very much, but there was never any result, and it became a joke for thousands of years.

古文：神人曰：昔秦皇、汉武，帝王也。处救人之位，自有救人之术而不行，反求神仙之术，则非也。
现代文：神说：秦皇汉武是帝王，他们本身就处在救人的位子上，也有救人的办法，却不去救人，反尔求神仙法术，真是大错特错了。
English: God said: Emperor Qin and Emperor Han were emperors. They were in the position to save people, and they had the means to save people. However, they did not save people, but instead asked the gods for magic. This was a big mistake.

古文：尔无救人之位，而欲救天下之人，固可行此术。
现代文：而你没有能救人的权力地位，却有救天下人的志向，就可以学会和使用法术。
English: But if you don't have the power to save people, but have the ambition to save the world, you can learn and use magic.

古文：常曰：黄金成，水银化，真有之乎？
现代文：王常问：真有这种法术吗？神人说，当然有。黄金和水银，都是山石的精华。
English: Wang Chang asked, "Is there really such a magic trick?" The god said, "Of course there is. Gold and mercury are the quintessence of rocks and stones."

古文：但偶纯阳之气合，即化矣。
现代文：水银因为受阴气，才流荡不空，如果为纯阳之气交合，水银也立刻能变成黄金。
English: Because mercury is affected by the negative air, it is not empty, and if it is mixed with the pure air of the sun, mercury can immediately turn into gold.

古文：君当受勿疑。
现代文：这些你都不必怀疑，就接受我的传授吧。
English: You don't have to doubt any of this, just accept my teachings.

古文：常乃再拜。神人于袖中取一卷书，授常，常跪受之。
现代文：王常拜谢后，神从袖中拿出一卷书交给王常，王常跪下来接过书。
English: After Wang Chang gave thanks, the god took out a book from his sleeve and handed it to Wang Chang. Wang Chang knelt down to receive the book.

古文：神人戒曰：异日当却付一人。勿轻授，勿终秘，勿授之以贵人。
现代文：神告诫王常：这种法术绝不能再传给别人，也不要泄漏秘密，更不能教给达官贵人，他们自会有救人的办法。
English: God warned Wang Chang: This kind of magic must not be passed on to others, nor should the secret be divulged, nor should it be taught to high-ranking officials. They will have their own way to save people.

古文：彼自有救人之术，勿授之以不义；彼不以饥寒为念，济人之外，无奢逸。如不然，天夺尔算。
现代文：也不要把这种法术教给不仁不义的人，他们根本不关心他人的疾苦。你掌握了这套法术，除了济世救人之外，绝不可做奢侈富贵的本钱，否则，上天会使你的法术失灵。
English: And do not teach this spell to those who are unkind and unjust, who do not care about the suffering of others. Once you have mastered this set of spells, you must not be the source of luxury and wealth, except for saving the world. Otherwise, heaven will make your spell fail.

古文：常又再拜曰：愿知何神也。
现代文：王常再次跪拜，完全应诺下来，并问，我想知道您是位什么神仙呢？
English: Wang Chang knelt down again, fully agreed to come down, and asked, I want to know what kind of fairy godmother you are?

古文：神人曰：我山神也。
现代文：神说，我是山神。
English: And God said, I am the God of the mountain.

古文：昔有道人藏此书于我山，今遇尔义烈之人，是付尔。
现代文：从前有个道士把这卷书藏在我山里，现在我遇见了你这位刚烈侠义的人，所以才把书给你。
English: Once upon a time, a Taoist monk hid this book in my mountain, but now I have met you, a man of courage and chivalry, and that is why I am giving it to you.

古文：言讫而灭。
现代文：说罢山神就不见了。
English: After saying this, the godman disappeared.

古文：常得此书读之，成其术。
现代文：王常得到这卷书，读后学会了法术。
English: Wang Chang obtained this book and learned magic after reading it.

古文：尔后多游历天下，以黄金赈济乏绝。
现代文：后来他就到处漫游，用他点化的金子赈济那些饥寒穷困的人们。
English: Later, he roamed everywhere, using the gold he lit to feed those who were hungry and poor.

