古文：黄帝曰：卫气之留于腹中，搐积不行，菀蕴不得常所，使人支胁胃中满，喘呼逆息者，何以去之？
现代文：黄帝问道：卫气留滞在腹中，蓄积而运行失常，无法到达它素常周流循行之处，人常发生胁部和胃脘胀满、喘息气逆等病症，应如何治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Wei qi stays in the abdomen, accumulates and malfunctions, and cannot reach the place where it normally flows. People often have symptoms such as stress and stomach fullness, and reverse asthma. How should it be treated?

古文：伯高曰：其气积于胸中者，上取之；积于腹中者，下取之；上下皆满者，旁取之。
现代文：伯高回答说：卫气，如果积聚在胸中的，应当选用上部的腧穴治疗；如果积聚在腹中的，应当选用下部的腧穴治疗；如果积聚在胸部和腹部，应当选用上部、下部和胸腹附近的腧穴治疗。
English: He replied: "For qi, if it accumulates in the chest, it should be treated in the upper part of the anus; if it accumulates in the abdomen, it should be treated in the lower part of the anus; if it accumulates in the chest and abdomen, it should be treated in the upper part, lower part, and around the chest and abdomen.

古文：黄帝曰：取之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：如何进行治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to carry out the treatment?

古文：伯高对曰：积于上，泻人迎、天突、喉中；积于下者，泻三里与气街；上下皆满者，上下取之，与季胁之下一寸；重者，鸡足取之。
现代文：伯高回答说：卫气积聚在胸中，泻足阳明胃经的人迎穴、任脉的天突廉泉穴。卫气积聚在腹中，泻足阳明胃经的足三里穴和气冲穴。胸腹部都有卫气积聚，应选用上部、下部的腧穴和季胁下面一寸足厥阴肝经的章门穴。
English: He replied, "The qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest, and the qi accumulates in the chest."

古文：诊视其脉大而弦急，及绝不至者，及腹皮急甚者，不可刺也。
现代文：病情重的，则用鸡足形取穴法就前举上中下各穴刺治。切诊时，出现脉大而弦急，或脉搏动消失，以及腹部皮肤非常绷急的，都不宜针刺治疗。
English: If the disease is severe, the chicken foot-shaped puncture method is used to puncture the upper, middle and lower holes. When incising, if the pulse is large and rapid, or the pulse disappears, and the skin of the abdomen is very tight, it is not suitable for acupuncture treatment.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：何以知皮肉、气血、筋骨之病也？
现代文：黄帝问伯高道：如何能知道皮肉、气血、筋骨发生病变呢？
English: Huang Di asked Baogao Dao: How can I know if there is a lesion on the skin, blood, and bones?

古文：伯高曰：色起两眉薄泽者，病在皮。
现代文：伯高回答说：病色出现在两眉之间、光泽较少，是疾病发生在皮肤。
English: Burgau replied: "The discoloration appears between the eyebrows and is less shiny. The disease occurs on the skin.

古文：唇色青黄赤白黑者，病在肌肉。
现代文：口唇出现青、黄、赤、白和黑色等色泽变化，是疾病发生在肌肉。
English: The lips appear blue, yellow, red, white and black and other color changes, the disease occurs in the muscle.

古文：营气濡然者，病在血气。
现代文：营气外泄，皮肤汗多而湿润的，是气血发生病变。
English: If there is a leakage of qi and the skin is sweaty and moist, it is due to the occurrence of qi and blood.

古文：目色青黄赤白黑者，病在筋。
现代文：眼出现青、黄、赤、白和黑色等色泽变化的，是疾病发生在筋。
English: If the eyes appear blue, yellow, red, white and black, the disease occurs in the muscle.

古文：耳焦枯受尘垢，病在骨。
现代文：耳廓干枯而容易附着灰尘污垢的，疾病发生在骨。
English: If the auricle is dry and prone to dust and dirt, the disease occurs in the bone.

古文：黄帝曰：病形何如，取之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：疾病表现怎样，应如何治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How does the disease manifest itself, and how should it be treated?

古文：伯高曰：夫百病变化，不可胜数，然皮有部，肉有柱，血气有输，骨有属。
现代文：伯高答道：疾病的变化是多种多样，没有办法具体说明。但是，皮肤有所表现的部位，肌肉有隆起的部分，气血有输注之处，筋有连结的部位，骨有相互连属的地方，发病后相应部位分别出现不同的症候。
English: Borgo replied: The changes of the disease are diverse and cannot be specified. However, different symptoms appear in different parts of the skin, muscle bulges, qi and blood transfusions, muscle connections, bone connections, and corresponding parts after the onset of the disease.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻其故。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the reason.

古文：伯高曰：皮之部，输于四末。
现代文：伯高道：皮肤所表现的部位主要在四肢。
English: Bogotá: The areas of the skin that are affected are mainly in the limbs.

古文：肉之柱，有臂胫诸阳分肉之间，与足少阴分间。
现代文：肌肉的主干主要在上肢和下肢所有阳经经过的肌肉隆起处，以及足少阴肾经经过的肌肉隆起处。
English: The main stem of the muscle is mainly in the bulge of the muscle of the upper and lower limbs, and the bulge of the muscle of the foot and the kidney.

古文：血气之输，输于诸络，气血留居则盛而起。
现代文：气血输注之处，主要在体表的血络，若气血滞留其中，就会出现血络充盈胀起。
English: Where qi and blood are transfused, it is mainly in the bloodstream on the surface of the body. If qi and blood remain there, the bloodstream will become engorged and swell.

古文：筋部，无阴无阳，无左无右，候病所在。
现代文：筋所主的部位，没有阴、阳的区别，也没有左侧与右侧的不同，所有的地方都可以诊察筋的病变。
English: There is no difference between yin and yang, and there is no difference between the left side and the right side. Muscular lesions can be diagnosed in all places.

古文：骨之属者，骨空之所，以受益而益脑者也。
现代文：骨骼相联的地方，即关节的间隙，髓液给予关节以营养，还向上输注补益脑髓。
English: Where the bones are connected, i.e. the joint space, the myelin fluid nourishes the joint, and the supplemental brain marrow is also infused upwards.

古文：伯高曰：夫病变化，浮沉深浅，不可胜究，各在其处。
现代文：伯高回答说：疾病的变化，或浮或沉，或深或浅，不可穷尽，须分别情况作不同处理。
English: Borgo replied: "The changes of the disease, either floating or sinking, or deep or shallow, are inexhaustible, and must be handled differently depending on the situation.

古文：病间者浅之，甚者深之；间者小之，甚者众之。
现代文：病轻的浅刺，病重的深刺；病轻的少刺，病重的多刺。
English: Mildly ill with shallow spines, seriously ill with deep spines; mildly ill with few spines, seriously ill with many spines.

古文：随变而调气，故曰上工。
现代文：随着病情变化而进行调治，这才算得是高明的医工。
English: It is a skillful doctor who adjusts treatment according to changes in the patient's condition.

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：人之肥瘦、大小、温寒，有老壮少小，别之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问伯高道：人体型的肥瘦、大小，身体的寒温，年龄的老壮、少小，如何区别呢？
English: Huang Di asked Bo Gao Dao: What is the difference between human body shape, size, body temperature, age, small and large?

古文：伯高对曰：人年五十已上为老，二十已上为壮，十八已上为少，六岁已上为小。
现代文：伯高回答说：人的年龄，五十岁以上为老，三十岁以上为壮，十八岁以下为少，六岁以下为小。
English: He replied, "A person's age is old if he is over fifty, strong if he is over thirty, young if he is under eighteen, and small if he is under six.

古文：黄帝曰：何以度知其肥瘦？
现代文：黄帝问：用什么标准来衡量人的肥瘦呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What standard should be used to measure a person's weight?

古文：伯高曰：人有肥、有膏、有肉。
现代文：伯高答道：人有多脂、多膏、多肉的不同。
English: He replied, "People differ in having too much fat, too much cream and too much meat.

古文：黄帝曰：别此奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：这三种类型又如何区别呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the difference between these three types?

古文：伯高曰：腘肉坚，皮满者，肥。
现代文：伯高说：隆起的肌肉坚实、皮肤丰满润泽是多脂的人。
English: Burgau said: The bulging muscles are firm, the skin is plump and moist, and the person is greasy.

古文：腘肉不坚，皮缓者，膏。
现代文：隆起的肌肉不坚实，皮肤松弛是多膏的人。
English: The bulging muscles are not solid, and the loose skin is greasy.

古文：皮肉不相离者，肉。
现代文：皮与肉紧紧粘连在一起是多肉的人。
English: A fleshy person is one whose skin and flesh stick tightly together.

古文：黄帝曰：身之寒温何如？
现代文：黄帝问：人体的寒温怎样区别呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How does the cold temperature of the human body differ?

古文：伯高：膏者，其肉淖而粗理者，身寒；细理者，身热。
现代文：伯高答道：多膏的人，肌肉柔润、纹理粗疏的身寒；纹理致密的身热。
English: He replied, "People with oily skin, soft muscles, coarse texture of body cold; dense texture of body heat.

古文：脂者，其肉坚，细理者热；粗理者寒。
现代文：多脂的人，肌肉坚实、纹理致密的身热；纹理粗疏的身寒。
English: A person with a lot of fat has a solid muscle, dense texture and body heat; a coarse texture and body cold.

古文：黄帝曰：其肥瘦大小奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：如何区别人体的肥瘦、大小呢？
English: Huangdi asked: How can we distinguish between the body's fatness, thinness and size?

古文：伯高曰：膏者，多气而皮纵缓，故能纵腹垂腴。
现代文：伯高答道：多膏的人，阳气充盛，皮肤松弛，所以腹部肥大而下垂。
English: He replied, "People with a lot of ointment have a lot of yang and loose skin, so their abdomen is large and saggy.

古文：肉者，身体容大。
现代文：多肉的人，身形宽大。
English: A fleshy person with a large body.

古文：脂者，其身收小。
现代文：多脂的人，身形较小。
English: People with more body fat tend to be smaller.

古文：黄帝曰：三者之气血多少何如？
现代文：黄帝问：这三种人气血的情况如何呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the situation of these three people?

古文：伯高曰：膏者，多气，多气者热，热者耐寒。
现代文：伯高说：多膏的人多气，气多则阳气旺盛而耐寒。
English: Bo Gao said: People with a lot of ointment have a lot of qi, and those with a lot of qi have a strong yang and are cold-resistant.

古文：肉者，多血则充形，充形则平。
现代文：多肉的人多血，血液充养形体，不偏寒也不偏热。
English: A fleshy person has more blood, the blood nourishes the body, and is neither cold nor hot.

古文：脂者，其血清，气滑少，故不能大。
现代文：多脂的人，血液清稀、气少而流动滑利，所以身形不大。
English: People with a lot of fat have thin blood, little gas and smooth flow, so they are not very tall.

古文：此别于众人者也。
现代文：这些与一般常人是有区别的。
English: These are different from ordinary people.

古文：黄帝曰：众人奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：一般常人又是怎样的呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What about ordinary people?

古文：伯高曰：众人皮肉脂膏不能相加也，血与气不能相多，故其形不小不大，各自称其身，命曰众人。
现代文：伯高答道：一般常人的皮肉、脂膏，不能对身形有所偏加，血与气保持平衡，所以他们的形体不大不小，皮肉筋骨各称其身。这就是一般常人。
English: He replied, "The flesh and fat of an ordinary person cannot add to the shape of the body, and the blood and qi maintain a balance. Therefore, their body is neither big nor small, and the flesh, muscle, and bone are all called the body. This is an ordinary person."

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：治之奈何？
现代文：怎样对这三类人进行治疗呢？
English: How is it treated?

古文：伯高曰：必先别其三形，血之多少，气之清浊，而后调之，治无失常经。
现代文：伯高道：一定先要分清膏、肉、脂三种不同的类型，以及血的多少、气的清浊，然后加以调治，治疗时不得违背针刺的常理。
English: Baogao Road: You must first distinguish between the three different types of cream, meat and fat, as well as the amount of blood and the clarity of qi, and then adjust it. The treatment must not violate the common sense of acupuncture.

古文：是故，膏人纵腹垂腴；肉人者，上下容大；脂人者，虽脂不能大者。
现代文：所以说，膏型的人，腹肌松弛，肚囊下垂；肉型的人，身体上下粗大；脂型的人，虽然脂肪多而身形并不粗大。
English: Therefore, the pasty-shaped person has loose abdominal muscles and a sagging belly; the fleshy-shaped person has a large upper and lower body; the fat-shaped person, although fat, is not large.

