古文：诸马既得罪，窦氏益贵盛，皇后兄宪、弟笃喜交通宾客。
现代文：原文东汉章帝时，马太后的几个兄弟先被封为列侯，后以 奢侈逾僭，浊乱圣化 的罪名罢免。
English: When Emperor Zhang of the Eastern Han Dynasty, several brothers of Queen Matthew were first made vassals, and later dismissed on charges of "excessive luxury" and "disturbing sanctification."

古文：第五伦上疏曰： 宪椒房之亲，典司禁兵，出入省闼，骄佚所自生也。
现代文：之后，窦太后的家族充满朝廷，其权势贵盛一时。窦太后之兄窦宪、弟窦笃都喜欢交结宾客。司空第五伦对此上疏说： 窦宪是朝廷的外戚，又掌管朝廷的禁军，可以自由地出入各个官署街门，骄奢淫逸的恶习是相当容易产生的。
English: Later, Empress Dowager Dou's family filled the imperial court, and her power flourished for a while. Empress Dowager Dou's elder brother Dou Xian and younger brother Dou Du both liked to mingle with guests. On this, Siku Wulun said: Dou Xian was a relative of the imperial court, and he was in charge of the imperial court's forbidden army. He was free to enter and leave any government office, and it was quite easy for him to indulge in the vice of luxury.

古文：议者以贵戚废锢，当复以贵戚浣濯之，犹解酲当以酒也，愿陛下防其未萌，令宪永保福禄。 
现代文：外边的人都议论说，当年马氏贵戚是因奢侈逾僭而废锢的，现在也应当用窦氏贵戚的奢侈逾僭来洗涮以往，就像要解除醉酒清醒后那种不舒适的感觉还需再用些酒一样。愿陛下能够对他们还没有发展到严重程度时加以防范，使窦宪能够永葆福禄。 
English: People on the outside have been saying that Ma's relatives were dethroned because of their extravagant excesses in the past, and now the extravagant excesses of Dou's relatives should be used to wash away the past, just as it is necessary to use more alcohol to relieve the uncomfortable feeling after sobering up. May His Majesty be able to prevent them when they have not yet developed to a serious degree, so that Dou Xian can be blessed forever.

古文：宪果以骄纵败。魏相因平恩侯许伯奏封事，言： 《春秋》讥世卿，恶宋三世无大夫，及鲁季孙之专权，皆危乱国家。
现代文：为此，御史大夫魏相借平恩侯许伯之事，用皂囊封缄，向宣帝呈进了一封密信。信中说： 《春秋》这部书是指责一个家族世代承袭卿大夫这种非礼现象的，它讨厌宋国的襄公、成公、昭公三世都娶大夫之女，因礼不臣妻之父母，所以去掉了大夫之名，致使公族以弱，妃党益强。也厌恶鲁国季孙氏世专鲁政，认为这些都是危乱国家的。
English: For this reason, Grand Historian Wei Xiang borrowed the story of Ping En Hou Xu Bo, sealed it with a soap bag, and presented a secret letter to Emperor Xuan. The letter said: "Spring and Autumn" is a book that accuses a family generation of inheriting the rude phenomenon of the noble doctor. It hates the Song Dynasty's Xiang Gong, Cheng Gong, and Zhaogong III for marrying the doctor's daughter, and because of the disrespect of the wife's parents, they removed the doctor's name, resulting in the weakness of the public family and the strength of the imperial party. It also abhors the autocratic rule of the Qisun dynasty in Lu

古文：自后元以来，禄去王室，政由冢宰。
现代文：汉朝自后元以来，霍光执政，任命官员的权力开始从皇帝手中离开，一切国家大事均由这个执政的大将军决定。
English: In the Han Dynasty since the late Yuan Dynasty, when Huo Guang was in power, the power to appoint officials began to leave the hands of the emperor, and all national affairs were decided by the ruling general.

古文：今霍光死，子复为大将军，兄子秉枢机，昆弟、诸婿据权势、任兵官，光夫人显及诸女皆通籍长信宫，或夜诏门出入，骄奢放纵，恐浸不制，宜有以损夺其权，破散阴谋，固万世之基，全功臣之世。 
现代文：现在霍光虽死，可其子仍为大将军，其兄子掌握着尚书省这个朝廷行政的中枢，其昆弟、诸婿也都把据权势、握有兵权，霍光夫人显及几个女儿都可以恣意出入皇后所居的长信宫，有时候夜里还以朝廷诏令的名义为其开门出入。这样的骄奢放纵，恐怕就渐渐地难以控制了。应当使他们丧失一些权势，破散他们的阴谋，才是朝廷万世的基础，才能保全功臣爵禄的世代相袭。 
English: Now, although Huo Guang is dead, his son is still a general, his elder brother controls Shangshu Province, the center of the imperial administration, his younger brother and sons-in-law also hold power and military power, and Mrs. Huo Guang and several daughters can freely enter and leave the Changxin Palace where the empress lives, and sometimes open the door for them at night in the name of the imperial edict. Such arrogance and indulgence may gradually become difficult to control. They should lose some power, and their conspiracy should be broken up. This is the foundation of the imperial court for all time, in order to preserve the succession of generations of heroes.

古文：又故事，诸上书者皆为二封，署其一曰 副封 。领尚书者先发副封，所言不善，屏去不奏。
现代文：根据过去的做法，凡是进上密信的，都要写成二封，在其中一封上署明 副封 ，兼任上递书信的先发副封，如果所言不善，就屏去不给上奏。
English: According to the past practice, all confidential letters should be written in two letters, in one of which there should be a countersignature, and it should also be the first countersignature of the letter to be delivered. If the words are not good, they should not be played.

古文：魏相复因许伯白去副封，以防壅蔽。
现代文：魏相又因为许伯而专门告诉这些人要去掉副封，以防止密信被他们阻塞或隐藏。
English: Wei Xiang also specifically told these people to remove the secondary seal because of Xu Bo, in order to prevent secret letters from being blocked or hidden by them.

古文：宣帝善之，诏相给事中，皆从其议。
现代文：宣帝看过密信后十分称赞，分别下诏给能够参与内朝之议的大臣知道，一切都按照魏相所说的办理。
English: After reading the confidential letter, Emperor Xuan highly praised it, and separately issued an edict to the ministers who could participate in the discussion between the Inner Court and the Northern Court to let them know that everything would be handled in accordance with what Wei Xiang said.

古文：霍氏杀许后之谋始得上闻。
现代文：这样，霍氏让人毒杀许皇后这件事才被宣帝知道。
English: In this way, the fact that Huo had someone poison Empress Xu only became known to Emperor Xuan.

古文：乃罢其三侯，令就第，亲属皆出补吏。
现代文：于是，罢免了霍氏家族中霍光之子、霍光兄霍去病的两个孙子的侯爵爵位，令他们回家闲居，霍家别的亲属也都出朝廷到郡县去做官了。
English: As a result, the marquis title of the son of Huo Guang and the two grandsons of Huo Guang's brother Huo who was ill were removed from the Huo family, and they were sent home to idle. Other relatives of the Huo family also went to the county to work as officials.

古文：永元初，何敞上封事，亦言及此。
现代文：东汉和帝永元初年，何敞也给皇帝奏书，说到此事。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty and Emperor Yongyuan, He Zhan also wrote a letter to the emperor, mentioning this matter.

古文：但在夺沁水公主田园及杀都乡侯畅之后，跋扈已著，未若伦疏之先见也。
现代文：但这已是在窦宪抢夺沁水公主的田园并杀掉侯畅后，那时窦宪的飞扬跋扈已显示出来，所以说何敞不如第五伦更具先见之明。
English: However, it was after Dou Xian robbed the pastoral land of the Princess of Surabaya and killed Hou Chang that Dou Xian's brilliance was revealed, so it can be said that he was more prescient than the Fifth Ron.

古文：茂陵徐福 曲突徙薪 之谋，魏相已用之早矣。
现代文：茂陵人徐福预防灾祸、防患未然的谋略，魏相早已使用了。
English: Xufu, a resident of Maolin, had already used Wei's strategy to prevent disasters.

古文：《隽不疑传》云：大将军光欲以女妻之，不疑固辞，不肯当，久之病免。
现代文：《隽不疑传》说，大将军霍光欲把女儿嫁给他，隽不疑坚决推辞不肯接受，不久就因病免官了。
English: "Doubtless Biography" said that General Huo Guangming wanted to marry his daughter to him, but Doubtless resolutely refused to accept, and was soon dismissed due to illness.

古文：《刘德传》云：大将军欲以女妻之，德不敢取。
现代文：《刘德传》也说，大将军霍光想把女儿嫁给他，刘德不敢接受，怕过分显贵，后来免官，成为平民，住在乡间。
English: "Liu De's Biography" also said that General Huo Guanglu wanted to marry his daughter to him, but Liu De did not dare to accept, for fear of being too prominent. Later, he was dismissed from his post, became a commoner, and lived in the countryside.

古文：霍光皆欲以女归二公而二公不受，当炙手炎炎之际，乃能避远权势，甘心摈弃，非有高识，孰能及此？
现代文：霍光想把女儿嫁给这两人，他们都不接受。在对方地位显贵之时，还能避免接近权势，甘心放弃富贵荣华，不是有高远的见识，谁能做得到呢？
English: Huo Guang wanted to marry his daughter to these two people, but they did not accept. When the other party's status is prominent, they can avoid approaching power, and are willing to give up wealth and glory. If they do not have far-sightedness, who can do it?

