古文：○高宗八二十三年春正月癸卯，进韦渊太傅。
现代文：绍兴二十三年春正月十三日，韦渊升为太傅。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the 23rd year of Shaoxing, Wei Yuan was promoted to Taifu.

古文：己酉，复以李显忠为宁国军节度使。
现代文：十九日，又任命李显忠为宁国军节度使。
English: On the 19th, Li Hsien Chung was also appointed as the Ningguo Army's envoy to the Spring Festival.

古文：二月癸亥，幸玉津园，遂幸延祥观。
现代文：二月初四，到玉津园，于是到延样观。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, I went to Tamatsu-en Garden, and then to Enso-gan.

古文：庚午，脔虔州军贼黄明等八人于都市。
现代文：十一日，虔州军贼黄明等八人在都市被碎尸万段。
English: On the 11th day of the month, eight people, including the military bandit Huang Ming from Qianzhou, were hacked to death in the city.

古文：辛未，改虔州为赣州。
现代文：十二日，改虔州为赣州。
English: On the 12th, Qianqianzhou was changed to Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，申严冒贯请举法。
现代文：十三日，再次严禁冒贯请举的做法。
English: On the 13th, it was once again strictly forbidden to take the approach of calling for a general election.

古文：癸未，赏平赣盗功，以李耕为金州观察使，将士进秩、给赏有差。
现代文：二十四日，奖赏平定赣州盗贼功劳，任命李耕为金州观察使，将士得到不等的进升赏赐。
English: On the 24th, he rewarded the merits of suppressing the thieves in Bozhou, and appointed Li Gang as the observation envoy of Jinzhou. The soldiers received different promotion rewards.

古文：三月丙午，齐安郡王士亻褭薨于建州，追封循王。
现代文：三月十七日，齐安郡王赵士可在建州逝世，追封他为循王。
English: On March 17th, the king of Qian County, Zhao Shikai, died in Jianzhou, and he was posthumously named King Xu.

古文：诏凡民认复军庄营田者，偿开耕钱。
现代文：下诏凡是百姓愿意耕种军庄营田并纳税者，一律给开耕钱。
English: According to the following edict, if the people are willing to cultivate the farmland of the military camp and pay taxes, they will all be given money to start farming.

古文：丁未，禁州县都监、巡尉擅置刑狱。
现代文：十八日，禁止州县都监、巡尉擅自兴置刑狱。
English: On the 18th, the prefectural and county supervisors and lieutenants were prohibited from setting up prisons without authorization.

古文：戊申，以前太府丞范彦辉谤讪，除名、荆门军编管。
现代文：十九日，前太府承范彦辉因诽谤罪被除名，荆门军编管。
English: On the 19th, former Dafu successor Fan Yanhui was expelled for defamation, and the Jingmen Army was reorganized.

古文：是春，金主亮徙都燕京。
现代文：这年春季，金主完颜亮把都城迁到燕京。
English: In the spring of that year, the emperor moved the capital to Yanjing.

古文：夏四月辛巳，诏诸州编管、羁管人，遵旧法，长吏月一验视，不许囚禁。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，下诏各州编管、羁管人，遵照原来的规定，长官每月视察一次，不允许囚禁他们。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, it was decreed that, in accordance with the original regulations, the superintendent would inspect the persons in charge of custody and custody in each state once a month, and they would not be allowed to imprison them.

古文：乙酉，减利州岁铸钱为九万缗。
现代文：二十六日，利州路每年铸钱减少到九万络。
English: On the 26th, the annual coinage of Lizhou Road was reduced to 90,000 rupees.

古文：五月庚寅，禁州县以私意籍罪人赀产。
现代文：五月初二，严禁州县因个人意志籍没犯罪人的资产。
English: On the second day of May, it is strictly forbidden for prefectures and counties to confiscate the assets of criminals due to personal will.

古文：乙巳，复以萧振为四川制置使。
现代文：十七日，又任命萧振为四川制置使。
English: On the 17th, he also appointed Xiao Zhen as the Sichuan Provincial Commissioner.

古文：辛亥，金遣纥石烈大雅等来贺天申节。
现代文：二十三日，金国派给石烈大雅等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 23rd, Jin Guo sent Shi Lie, Daya and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：乙卯，立淮南诸州举人解额。
现代文：二十七日，确立淮南各州解送举人名额。
English: On the 27th, the quota of people to be deported from Huainan was established.

古文：六月乙卯，潼川大水。
现代文：六月二十一日，撞川发生大水。
English: On June 21st, there was a big flood in Kuching River.

古文：秋七月壬辰，宽理平江府、湖、秀二州被水民夏税。
现代文：秋七月初五，减轻平江府、湖秀二州遭水灾百姓的夏税。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month of autumn, the summer tax of the flood-affected people in Pingjiang Prefecture and Huxiu County will be reduced.

古文：戊戌，从秦桧所请，命台州取綦崇礼草桧罢相制所受墨敕。
现代文：十一日，采纳秦桧的请求，命令台州取回纂崇礼草拟秦桧罢相制书时收藏的高宗御笔。
English: On the 11th, he accepted the request of Qin Hui and ordered Taizhou to retrieve the collection of Gaozong's pens from the time of compiling the Qin Hui draft.

古文：庚戌，禁诸军濒太湖擅作坝田。
现代文：二十三日，严禁各军在太湖边擅自开垦坝田。
English: On the 23rd, it was strictly forbidden for any army to open dam fields on the edge of Taihu Lake without authorization.

古文：八月乙丑，士撙薨，追封韶王。
现代文：八月初八，赵士搏逝世，追封韶王。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Zhao Shibo passed away, and was succeeded by Shao Wang.

古文：丙寅，左宣教郎王孝廉谋据成都叛，事觉，伏诛。
现代文：初九，左宣教郎王孝廉阴谋占据成都叛乱，事情发觉后被处以死刑。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Xiaolian, a left-wing missionary, plotted to occupy Chengdu and rebelled. After the matter was discovered, he was sentenced to death.

古文：己卯，赐秦桧建康府永丰圩田。
现代文：二十二日，赐给秦桧建康府永丰好田。
English: On the 22nd, Yongfeng Goodfield in Jiankang Prefecture was given to Qin Hui.

古文：乙酉，命敕令所编辑中兴以后宽恤诏令。
现代文：二十八日，命令救令所编辑中兴以来宽恤诏令。
English: On the 28th, it ordered the Rescue and Relief Bureau to issue a pardon decree for ZTE.

古文：九月甲午，振潼川被水州县，仍蠲其赋。
现代文：九月初八，贩济撞川遭受水灾州县，并免除他们的赋税。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the lunar month, the Jianchuan River was flooded in Zhoushu County, and they were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：庚子，禁采鹿胎。
现代文：十四日，严禁采集鹿皮。
English: On the 14th, it is strictly forbidden to collect deer skins.

古文：冬十月丁巳，诏郡守年七十者听自陈，命主宫观。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏郡守到达七十岁的，允许自己陈述，命令他们主管宫观。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in winter, when the county magistrate reached the age of seventy, he allowed himself to make a statement and ordered them to supervise the palace inspection.

古文：戊午，遣吴使金贺正旦，施钜贺金主生辰。
现代文：初三，派遣吴镐出使金朝祝贺正旦，施矩祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the first month, Wu Xi sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan, and congratulated the birthday of the Kim ruler.

古文：戊辰，宋朴罢。
现代文：十三日，宋朴被罢。
English: On the 13th, Song Pak was ousted.

古文：壬申，以右谏议大夫史才签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十七日，任命右谏议大夫史才为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 17th, the Right Rev. Dr. Shicai was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：丁丑，遣户部郎官钟世明修筑宣州、太平州圩田。
现代文：二十二日，派户部郎官钟世明修筑宣州、太平州好田。
English: On the 22nd, he sent Zhong Shiming, the steward of the Household Department, to rebuild Chikuzen, Xuanzhou and Taiping, Yoda.

古文：是月，命大理鞫妖人孙士道狱。
现代文：这个月，命令大理寺审讯妖人孙士道案件。
English: This month, the Dali Temple was ordered to investigate the case of the sorcerer Sun Shidao.

古文：十一月壬寅，诏立张叔夜庙于信州。
现代文：十一月十七日，下诏在信州设立张叔夜庙。
English: On November 17th, the edict was issued to establish the Zhangshu Night Temple in Xinshou.

古文：甲辰，班《大宗正司条令》。
现代文：十九日，颁布大宗正司条令。
English: On the 19th, Taizong Zhengji's edict was issued.

古文：乙丑，以经筵终帙，赐宰执、讲读等官宴于秘书省，为故事。
现代文：二十日，经筵官为高宗讲解经史完毕，高宗在秘书省赐宴招待宰执、讲读等官，为固定的制度。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zong gave a lecture on the history of scripture to the eunuch Gao Zong. Gao Zong gave a banquet in the secretary's office to invite the officials in charge and lecture, which is a fixed system.

古文：十二月丁巳，诏州县税额少者，罢其监官。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏州县税额少者，废罢监官。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, if the tax amount in Zhaozhou County is small, the inspector will be abolished.

古文：癸亥，韦渊薨。
现代文：初九，韦渊逝世。
English: Wei Yuan died at the age of nine.

古文：癸未，禁民车服逾制。
现代文：二十九日，严禁百姓车服超过允许的范围。
English: On the 29th, it is strictly forbidden for people's clothing to exceed the permitted range.

古文：闰月丙申，命检正都司官详定郡守所上利病以闻。
现代文：闰十二月十二日，命令检正都司官详细审定郡守上书陈述的利害报告朝廷。
English: On the 12th day of the 12th month of the leap year, he ordered the procurator of the capital to verify in detail the interest report of the county's submission to the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，命诸军保任统制官在职十年无过者进秩。
现代文：十七日，下命各军保任统制官任职十年没有过失的，进升秩禄。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the commanding officers of each army who have served for ten years without fault will be promoted to the next rank.

古文：庚戌，金遣蔡松年等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣蔡松年等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim sent Cai Songnian and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，减池州青阳县田租万七千石。
现代文：这一年，减免池州青阳县田租一万七千石。
English: In this year, the reduction and exemption of field rent in Qingyang County, Chizhou reached 17,000 koku.

古文：二十四年春正月辛未，幸延祥观。
现代文：绍兴二十四年春正月十八日，到延样观。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the spring of the 24th year of Shaoxing, he went to Yanxiang.

古文：癸酉，初诏郡国同以八月十五日试举人。
现代文：二十日，初次诏令州郡同在八月十五日考试举人。
English: On the 20th, for the first time, the prefectural government ordered the county to hold an examination on August 15.

古文：丙子，封婉容刘氏为贵妃。
现代文：二十三日，封婉容刘氏为贵妃。
English: On the 23rd, Ms. Wanrong Liu was awarded the title of honorary consort.

古文：戊寅，地震。
现代文：二十五日，发生地震。
English: On the 25th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：二月丁亥，前左从政郎杨炬坐其弟炜尝上书诽谤，送邕州编管。
现代文：二月初四，前左从政郎杨炬因他的弟弟杨炜曾上书诽谤获罪，被送往琶州编管。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the former left-wing politician Yang Jiao was convicted of defaming his younger brother, Yang Hui, and was sent to Pazhou to serve his sentence.

古文：丙午，加吴益太尉。
现代文：二十八日，加给吴益太尉职衔。
English: On the 24th, Wu Gai was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三月壬申，杨再兴复寇边，前军统制李道讨平之，禽再兴及其子正修、正拱，槛送行在。
现代文：三月十九日，杨再兴又攻打边境，前军统制李道讨伐平定他，俘虏他及其儿子杨正修、杨正拱，押送行在。
English: On March 19th, Yang Zaixing attacked the border again. The former army under the command of Li Dao subdued him, captured him and his sons Yang Zhengxiu and Yang Zhengqong, and escorted them away.

古文：乙亥，赐礼部进士张孝祥以下三百五十六人及第、出身。
现代文：二十二日，赐给礼部进士张孝样以下三百五十六人及第、出身。
English: On the 22nd, it was given to 356 cadres and their ranks and origins, including Zhang Xiaosong, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：庚辰，秦桧以私憾捃摭知建康府王循友，诏大理鞫之。
现代文：二十七日，秦桧因私恨罗织建康知府王循友的罪状，下诏大理寺审讯他。
English: On the 27th, because of his personal hatred for Luo Weijian Kangcheng, the king of the Chifu Kingdom, Qin Shi, issued an edict to interrogate him at Dali Temple.

古文：是春，始榷夔州路茶。
现代文：这年春季，开始禁榷夔州路茶。
English: In the spring of this year, Bozhou Road tea began to be banned.

古文：夏四月丙戌，诏诸路招补三衙诸军，期三年课其殿最。
现代文：夏四月初四，下诏各路招补三衙各军，限期三年，考核好坏。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：辛丑，西南小张蕃贡方物。
现代文：十九日，西南小张蕃进贡本地特产。
English: On the 19th, Southwest Xiaozhangyuan paid tribute to local special products.

古文：己酉，罗殿国贡名马。
现代文：二十七日，罗殿国进贡名马。
English: On the 27th, a famous horse came from Rhoden.

古文：五月癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：衢州民俞八作乱，围州城，通判州事汪召锡拒却之，遂掠严州寿昌县，遣殿前司正将辛立讨平之。
现代文：瞥州民俞八叛乱，围攻州城，通判州事汪召锡打退围攻，于是攻掠严州寿昌县，派殿前司正将辛立讨伐平定他。
English: Glancing at the eight rebellions of the state people, besieging the state capital, and passing judgment on the state affairs, Wang Zhaoxi fought back the siege, and then attacked and plundered Yanzhou Shuchang County, and sent the former secretary of the palace to fight and pacify Xinli.

古文：辛未，金遣耶律安礼等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派耶律安礼等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Jin Guo sent Jeru Anli and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：六月癸巳，史才罢。
现代文：六月十一日，史才被罢。
English: It was only on June 11 that he was ousted.

古文：甲午，以御史中丞魏师逊签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十二日，任命御史中承魏师逊为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Zhi Zhong Cheng Wei Shisong as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：辛丑，王循友贷死、藤州安置。
现代文：十九日，王循友免死，藤州安置。
English: On the 19th, Wang Xunyou was spared from death and resettled in Fujian.

古文：癸卯，诏： 尝命四川州县减免财物，以宽民力，尚虑未周，令制置司、总领所同共措置，务在不妨军食，可以裕民。 
现代文：二十一日，下诏： 曾经下命四川州县减免财物，以宽民力，但考虑到实行中还有一些问题，命令制置司、总领所共同处理具体问题，务必既不妨碍军食，又可以使百姓得到好处。 
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued: An order had been issued to the prefectures and counties of Sichuan to reduce and exempt property in order to broaden the people's power, but considering that there are still some problems in the implementation, the order to set up the department and the General Consulate to jointly deal with specific issues must not interfere with military food, but can also benefit the people.

古文：寻遣钟世明如四川同议。
现代文：不久派钟世明到四少共同参与商议。
English: Soon, he sent Zhong Shiming to the Four Minorities to jointly participate in the discussion.

古文：以主管侍卫马军司成闵为庆远军节度使。
现代文：任命主管侍卫马军司成阂为庆远军节度使。
English: Appointed the head of the bodyguards, Ma Junji, as the Qingyuan Army's festival envoy.

古文：秋七月癸丑，张俊薨。
现代文：秋七月初二，张俊逝世。
English: On the second day of the seventh month of autumn, Zhang Jun passed away.

古文：勒停人王Ｚ坐交通李光，下大理狱。
现代文：被勒令停职的王因与李光交结，被下大理狱。
English: Wang, who was suspended from duty, was sent to Dali Prison for associating with Li Guang.

古文：乙卯，脔徭人杨正修、正拱于市。
现代文：初四，瑶人杨正修、杨正拱在闹市被碎尸万段。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, Yang Zhengxiu and Yang Zhengqong, both of them were crushed to death in the downtown area.

古文：乙未，复置邛、雅二州博易场三所。
现代文：初八，重新设立黎、雅二州博易场三处。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, three gambling venues in Lijiang and Yaxuang were re-established.

古文：壬戌，诏捐四川茶马司羡余钱给军费，以宽民力。
现代文：十一日，诏令四川茶马司捐献多收取的钱供给军费开支，以宽民力。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered the Sichuan Tea Horse Company to donate the money it had overcharged for military expenses to the people.

古文：甲子，复落萧振职、池州居住。
现代文：十三日，又贬降萧振，池州居住。
English: On the 13th, he again demoted Xiao Zhen and lived in Chizhou.

古文：乙丑，以总领财赋符行中为四川制置使。
现代文：十四日，任命总领财赋符行中为四川制置使。
English: On the 14th, he was appointed as the general leader of the Sichuan Province.

古文：乙亥，南丹州莫公晟及宜州界外诸蛮纳土内附。
现代文：二十四日，南丹州莫公晨和宜州界外各蛮纳土内附朝廷。
English: On the 24th, Mokongchen of Nantan Prefecture and each of the provinces outside Yizhou were annexed by the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，幸张俊第临奠。
现代文：二十七日，高宗到张俊家吊丧。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong went to Zhang Jun's house to mourn.

古文：八月壬辰，禁百官避免轮对。
现代文：八月十一日，严禁文武百官回避轮对。
English: On August 11th, it is strictly forbidden for civil and military officials to evade the rotation.

古文：甲午，罢温州市黄柑、福州贡荔枝。
现代文：十三日，废罢温州买黄柑和福州进贡荔枝。
English: On the 13th, Wenzhou's ban on the purchase of mandarin oranges and Fuzhou's ban on the purchase of litchi were lifted.

古文：丙午，追封张俊为循王。
现代文：二十五日，追封张俊为循王。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Jun was posthumously crowned the King of Xu.

古文：以湘潭县丞郑杞、主簿贾子展嘲毁朝政，除名，杞容州、子展德庆府编管。
现代文：湘潭县承郑祀、主簿贾子展因嘲毁朝政，被除名，郑祀容州编管，贾子展德庆府编管。
English: Xiangtan County's Cheng Zheng Rui and chief editor Jia Zizeng were expelled for mocking the imperial government. Zheng Rui was put in charge of editing Yongzhou, and Jia Zizeng was in charge of editing Deqing.

古文：九月辛亥朔，李道如衡州措置盗贼。
现代文：九月初一，李道到衡州处治盗贼。
English: On the first day of September, Li Dao went to Hengzhou to deal with thieves.

古文：丁巳，赏平衢贼功，升辛立领忠州团练使，将士迁职、给钱有差。
现代文：初七，奖赏平定瞥州盗贼有功人员，辛立升任忠州团练使，将士得到不等的迁升和钱。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, rewards were given to the meritorious personnel who had subdued the thieves in Sheshou County, and Xin Li was promoted to the post of Chungju regimental training envoy. The soldiers received unequal promotion and money.

古文：冬十月壬午，蠲旱伤州县租赋。
现代文：冬十月初三，免除早灾损失州县租赋。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, the state and county rents will be exempted from premature disaster losses.

古文：戊子，遣沈虚中使金贺正旦，张士襄贺金主生辰。
现代文：初九，派沈虚中出使金国祝贺正旦，张士襄祝贺金主生日。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Shen Huizhong sent an envoy to Jin Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Zhang Shixiang congratulated Jin Guo on his birthday.

古文：十一月乙丑，魏师逊罢。
现代文：十一月十六日，魏师逊被罢。
English: On November 16th, Wei Shisong was ousted.

古文：丁卯，以权吏部侍郎施钜参知政事，郑仲熊签书枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命代理吏部侍郎施矩为参知政事，郑仲熊为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, the acting secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Shi Neng, was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Zheng Zhong Xiong was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：戊辰，进秦熺少傅，封嘉国公。
现代文：十九日，秦嬉进为少傅职衔，封为嘉国公。
English: On the 19th, Qin Qixin was given the title of Shao Fu and the title of Jia Guogong.

古文：是月，以通判武冈军方畴通书胡铨及他罪，除名、永州编管。
现代文：这个月，通判武冈军方畴因致书胡锉及其他罪状，被除名，永州编管。
English: This month, it was announced that a military official from the city of Wukan was expelled from the military for writing lies and other crimes, and was placed under house arrest in the city of Yongzhou.

古文：十二月丙戌，以故龙图阁学士程瑀有《论语讲解》，秦桧疑其讥己，知饶州洪兴祖尝为序，京西转运副使魏安行镂版，至是命毁之。
现代文：十二月初八，已故龙图阁学士程禹著有论语讲解一书，秦桧怀疑其中有讥讽自己的地方，饶州知州洪兴祖曾经为书作序，京西转运副使魏安行刻版刊印，到这时命令毁掉它。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, the late Longtu Ge scholar Cheng Yu authored a book of polemic explanation, Qin Yu suspected that there was a place to ridicule himself. Raozhou Zhizhou Hong Xingzu once wrote a preface for the book, and Wei Anxing, the vice-minister of West Beijing Transportation, engraved and printed it. At this time, he ordered to destroy it.

古文：兴祖昭州、安行钦州编管，瑀子孙亦论罪。
现代文：洪兴祖昭州编管，魏安行钦州编管，韵事的子孙也被治罪。
English: Hong Xing, the founder of Zhaozhou, and Wei An Xing, the founder of Qinzhou, were also punished.

古文：丁亥，王Ｚ除名、辰州编管。
现代文：初九，王被除名，辰州编管。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Wang was removed from his post, and Chenzhou was placed in administration.

古文：丁酉，知鄞县程纬为其丞王肇所告，慢上无人臣礼，除名、贵州编管，籍其赀。
现代文：十九日，郸县知县程纬被县承王肇控告，说他怠慢皇上，没有人臣之礼，被除名，贵州编管，没收他的财产。
English: On the 19th, Cheng Wei of Zhixian County was accused by Cheng Wang Zhao of the county, saying that he neglected the emperor and did not have the courtesy of a subject. He was removed from the list, placed under the administration of Guizhou, and his property was confiscated.

古文：壬寅，刺诸路编管人充厢军。
现代文：二十四日，刺面各路编管人补充厢军。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, officials from each road in Sasame came to supplement the van army.

古文：乙巳，金遣白彦恭等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣白彦恭等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, China sent Bai Yanqiao and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十五年春正月辛未，赏讨杨再兴功，保宁军承宣使李道落阶官，加龙神卫四厢都指挥使，将士进官、赐钱有差。
现代文：绍兴二十五年春正月二十三日，奖赏讨平杨再兴有功人员，保宁军承宣使李道除去了没有职掌的阶官，升为龙神卫四厢都指挥使，将士升官、赐钱不等。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the 25th year of Shaoxing's Spring, rewards were given to meritorious personnel who fought for the re-establishment of peace and prosperity. Li Dao, commander of the Boryeong Army, removed the officials who had no official duties, and promoted them to commanding officers of the Four Quarters of Longshenwei, and promoted the officers and gave them money.

古文：二月乙酉，以镇江都统制刘宝为安庆军节度使，建康都统制王权为清远军节度使。
现代文：二月初八，任命镇江都统制刘宝为安庆军节度使，建康都统制王权为清远军节度使。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Liu Bao, the commander of the Zhenjiang Capital, was appointed as the envoy of the Anqing Army, and Wang Quan, the commander of the Jiankang Capital, was appointed as the envoy of the Qingyuan Army.

古文：壬寅，以通判常州沈长卿、仁和县尉芮烨作诗讥讪，除名，长卿化州、烨武冈军编管。
现代文：二十五日，常州通判沈长卿、仁和县尉丙烨因作诗诽谤，被除名，沈长卿化州编管，丙烨武冈军编管。
English: On the 25th, the Changzhou court sentenced Shen Changqing and Renhe County Lieutenant Bing Jun to be removed from the list for slandering poetry. Shen Changqing is the editor-in-chief of Huazhou and Bing Jun is the editor-in-chief of Wugang Army.

古文：三月己酉，右司郎中张士襄自金国使还，坐奉使不肃罢官。
现代文：三月初二，右司郎中张士襄出使金国回国，因奉命出使没有尽职被罢官。
English: On the second day of March, Zhang Shizhong, a member of the Right Division, was sent on an envoy to return to China. He was dismissed from his post for failing to perform his duties as ordered.

古文：壬申，地震。
现代文：二十五日，发生地震。
English: On the 25th, an earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月乙酉，施钜罢，以郑仲熊兼权参知政事。
现代文：四月初九，施矩被罢，任命郑仲熊兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the year, Shi Rong was ousted and Zheng Zhong Xiong, who was also the acting party secretary, was appointed.

古文：戊子，命四川制置司许就类省试院校试刑法。
现代文：十二日，命令四川制置司允许在类省试院考试刑法。
English: On the 12th, the Sichuan Construction Division was ordered to allow the criminal law to be used in the provincial exam.

古文：己亥，减广西路折米钱。
现代文：二十三日，减免广西路折米钱。
English: On the 23rd, the reduction and exemption of Guangxi Road rice money.

古文：五月丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：太庙仁宗室柱生芝九茎。
现代文：太庙仁宗室柱上生出九个茎的芝草。
English: Nine stalks of turf grass sprouted on the family pillar of the Imperial Family's ancestral residence.

古文：戊申，罢诸路免行钱岁百八万缗。
现代文：初二，罢除各路每年免行钱一百零八万络。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the cancellation of all roads will result in an annual free travel fee of 10.8 million rupees.

古文：癸丑，以前知泉州宗室令衿讥讪秦桧，遂坐交结罪人、汀州居住。
现代文：初七，前泉州知州宗室赵令铃因诽谤秦桧，于是获交结罪犯罪，汀州居住。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Zhao Lingling, the former Quanzhou-Chizhou family member, was convicted of slandering Qin Hui, and was sentenced to live in Dingzhou.

古文：乙丑，金遣李通等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派李通等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Li Tong and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：壬申，赐刘锜湖南田百顷。六月庚辰，郑仲熊罢。
现代文：六月初四，郑仲熊被罢。
English: On June 4, Zheng Zhongxiong was ousted.

古文：辛巳，以礼部侍郎汤思退签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：初五，任命礼部侍郎汤思退为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Tong Si Rong, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：癸卯，以言者追谮岳飞，改岳州为纯州，岳阳军为华容军。
现代文：二十七日，因有人追毁岳飞，改岳州为纯州，岳阳军为华容军。
English: On the 27th, because someone chased and destroyed Yuefei, Yuezhou was changed to Chunzhou, and the Yueyang Army became the Huarong Army.

古文：是月，安南入贡。
现代文：这个月，安南进贡。
English: This month, Annan paid tribute.

古文：秋七月丙辰，减四川绢估、税斛、盐酒等钱岁百六十余万缗，蠲州县积欠二百九十余万缗。
现代文：秋七月十一日，减免四川绢估、税解、盐酒等钱每年一百六十余万络，免除州县多年拖欠二百九十多万络。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, the deduction and exemption of Sichuan's assessment, tax settlement, salt wine and other money was more than 1.6 million rupees per year, and the state and county were exempted from years of arrears of more than 2.9 million rupees.

古文：诏四川营田有占民田者，常平司按验给还。
现代文：下诏四川营田有占民田的，常平司核实后还给百姓。
English: According to the following edict, if there are occupied private fields in Yingtian, Sichuan, they will be returned to the people after verification by Changping Division.

古文：甲戌，封李天祚为南平王。
现代文：二十九日，李天柞封为南平王。
English: On the 29th, Li Tianyao was enthroned as the King of Nanping.

古文：八月丁丑，申严诬告加等法。
现代文：八月初二，再次表明严格执行诬告加倍处罚的办法。
English: On the second day of August, the method of strictly enforcing the double punishment for false accusation was once again demonstrated.

古文：辛巳，命大理鞫赵汾及令衿交通狱。
现代文：初六，命令大理寺审讯赵汾和赵令补交结串通案。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Dali Temple to investigate the collusion between Zhao Yu and Zhao Ling.

古文：丙戌，以吏部侍郎董德元参知政事。
现代文：十一日，任命吏部侍郎董德元为参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Dong Deyuan, an attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：蠲诸路身丁、免丁钱一年。
现代文：免除各路一年身丁钱和免丁钱。
English: All roads will be exempt from tolls and tolls for one year.

古文：壬辰，建执政府。
现代文：十七日，修建执政府。
English: On the 17th, the executive government was established.

古文：九月丁巳，秦桧上《绍兴宽恤诏令》。
现代文：九月十三日，秦桧进呈绍兴宽恤诏令。
English: On September 13th, Qin Yujin issued a pardon for Shaoxing.

古文：冬十月庚辰，复置鸿胪寺。
现代文：冬十月初六，重新设置鸿肪寺。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Hongda Temple was re-established.

古文：壬午，遣王岷使金贺正旦，郑柟贺金主生辰。
现代文：初八，派遣王崛出使金国祝贺正旦，关冰手祝贺金主生日。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Joryu was sent to the Jin Kingdom to congratulate Zhengdan, and Guan Bingde congratulated Jin on his birthday.

古文：乙酉，命大理鞫张祁附丽胡寅狱。
现代文：十一日，命令大理寺审讯张祁依附胡寅案。
English: On the 11th, he ordered Dali Temple to investigate the case of Zhang Ye's attachment to Hu Yin.

古文：乙未，幸秦桧第问疾。
现代文：二十一日，到秦桧家里探视他的病情。
English: On the 21st, I went to Qin Yu's home to check on his condition.

古文：夜，桧讽右司员外郎林一飞、台谏徐嘉张扶等请拜熺为相。
现代文：夜晚，秦桧用委婉的话劝说右司员外郎林一飞、台谏官徐哲和张扶等，要他们一起请求任命秦嬉为宰相。
English: In the evening, Qin Hui used euphemistic words to persuade the right secretary, Wai Lang Lin Yifei, and the Taiwan magistrates, Xu Zhe and Zhang Fu, to jointly request the appointment of Qin Hui as prime minister.

古文：丙申，进封桧建康郡王，熺为少师，并致仕。
现代文：二十二日，进封秦桧为建康郡王，秦嬉为少师，都退休。
English: On the 22nd, Qin Yu, the king of Jiankang County, and Qin Qixi, a young teacher, both retired.

古文：命汤思退兼权参知政事。
现代文：命令汤思退兼代理参知政事。
English: He ordered Townsend to step down as acting governor.

古文：是夕，桧薨。
现代文：这天夜晚，秦桧逝世。
English: On this night, Qin Yu passed away.

古文：丁酉，桧姻党户部侍郎兼知临安府曹泳停官、新州安置。
现代文：二十三日，秦桧姻党户部侍郎兼临安知府曹泳被停官，新州安置。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Yong, a member of the household department of the Qin Hui Rui Party and the governor of Lin'an Prefecture, was suspended and relocated to Xinzhou.

古文：朱敦儒、薛仲邕、王彦傅、杜思旦皆罢。
现代文：朱敦儒、薛仲琶、王彦傅、杜思旦都被罢职。
English: Zhu Dunru, Xue Zhongba, Wang Yanfu and Du Sidan were all dismissed.

古文：命有司具上执政、侍从官居外任及主宫观与在谪籍者职位、姓名。
现代文：命令有关部门排列执政、侍从官在外任职或主管宫观以及被贬滴者的职位、姓名报告朝廷。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to report to the imperial court the positions and names of those who were demoted, as well as the lineup of those in power, those who served as attendants or were in charge of the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，徙殿中侍御史徐嚞、右正言张扶皆出为他官。
现代文：二十七日，殿中侍御史徐哲、右正言张扶都改任他职。
English: On the 27th, the palace attendant Shi Xu Zhe and the right-hand man Zhang Fu were both reassigned to other positions.

古文：十一月乙巳朔，追封桧申王，谥忠献，赐神道碑，额为 决策元功，精忠全德 。
现代文：十一月初一，追封秦桧为申王，溢号为忠献，赐给神道碑，碑额为 决策元功，精忠全德 。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Qin Hui was posthumously crowned as the King of Shen, and his posthumous name was given as the King of Loyalty. He was also given a Shinto monument, and the monument was inscribed with the words "Celebrating the merits of decision-making, and being loyal and virtuous."

古文：戊申，夺赵汾二官。
现代文：初四，削夺赵汾二官。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Zhao Yao lost two positions.

古文：壬子，以敷文阁直学士魏良臣参知政事。
现代文：初八，任命敷文阁直学士魏良臣为参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wei Liangchen, a graduate of Shibunkaku, was appointed as a political advisor.

古文：癸亥，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十九日，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦全国。
English: On the 19th, at the round mound festival, the whole country was amnestied.

古文：甲子，幸秦桧第临奠。
现代文：二十日，到秦桧家吊丧。
English: On the 20th, the funeral was held at Qin Yu's home.

古文：乙丑，复洪皓官，释张祁狱。
现代文：二十一日，队复洪皓官职，释放张祁，不追究。
English: On the twenty-first day, the team reinstated Hongyao as an official, released Zhang Ye, and did not investigate.

古文：丁卯，罢大理寺官旬白。
现代文：二十三日，罢除大理寺官十天一次的查讯汇报。
English: On the 23rd, the officials of Dali Temple were dismissed and a 10-day inspection report was issued.

古文：庚午，诏监司、郡守，事无巨细，皆须奏闻裁决，毋得止上尚书省。
现代文：二十六日，下诏： 监司、郡守，不管是大事还是小事，都必须上报皇上由皇上裁决，不得只报告给尚书省。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Supervisors and county governors, regardless of whether it is a big or small matter, must report to the emperor for ruling by the emperor, and must not only report to the Ministry of Education.

古文：臣僚荐举人才，必三人以上同荐。
现代文：臣僚推举人才必须有三人或三人以上同时荐举。 
English: There must be three or more people recommending a person for promotion at the same time.

古文：封叔和州防御使、右监门卫大将军士俴为崇庆军节度使、嗣濮王，福建路提刑令詪为利州观察使、安定郡王。
现代文：封叔和州防御使、右监门卫大将军赵士浅为崇庆军节度使、嗣攫王，福建路提刑赵令很为利州观察使、安定郡王。
English: Uncle Feng and the state defense envoy, the right supervisor of the gate guard general Zhao Shiyan are the festival envoys of the Chongqing Army and the king of the descendants, and the Fujian Road Enforcement Zhao Ling is the observation envoy of Lishu and the king of the stable county.

古文：辛未，知建康府王会及列郡守臣王晌、王铸、郑侨年、郑震、方滋俱以谄附贪冒罢。
现代文：二十七日，建康知府王会及其他郡的守臣王晌、王铸、郑侨年、郑震、方滋都因馅附贪冒罢官。
English: On the 27th, Jiankang Chifu Wanghui and other county retainers Wang Yao, Wang Ji, Zheng Qiannian, Zheng Zhen and Fang Zhi were all dismissed for corruption.

古文：真腊、罗斛国贡驯象。
现代文：真腊、罗解国进贡驯象。
English: Zhenla and Liaoning pay tribute to train elephants.

古文：十二月甲戌朔，诏曰： 台谏风宪之地，比用非其人，党于大臣，济其喜怒，殊非耳目之寄。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏说： 台谏是国家纲纪法制的监督部门，近来没有任用合适的人才，他们与大臣结为同党，帮助大臣实现自己的喜怒哀乐，尤其没有尽到自己监督舆论的职责。
English: On the first day of December, the following edict was issued: "Taiwan is the supervisory department of the national discipline and legal system. Recently, it has not appointed suitable talents. They have joined the same party as the minister to help the minister achieve their own emotions. In particular, they have not fulfilled their duties of supervising public opinion.

古文：朕今亲除公正之士，以革前弊。
现代文：肤今天亲自任用公正之士，以革除旧的弊端。
English: Today, I am personally appointing an impartial person to eliminate the old malpractices.

古文：继此者宜尽心乃职，毋合党缔交，败乱成法，当谨兹戒，毋自贻咎。 
现代文：继任台谏职务的官员们，要尽心尽职，不要结党营私，败坏已有的法律制度，应当谨慎，不要因私心导致过失。 
English: Officials who succeed to the post of the Taiwan Provincial Government should do their best to fulfill their duties, not to form parties and corrupt the existing legal system, and should be careful not to cause mistakes due to selfishness.

古文：诏张浚、折彦质、万俟禼、段拂听自便。
现代文：下诏张浚、折彦质、万侯、段拂允许他们改过自新。
English: The following edicts issued by Zhang Jun, Orihixing, Wan Hou and Duan Hu allowed them to reform.

古文：量移李光郴州安置。
现代文：李光移近郴州安置。
English: Li Guang was resettled near Zhangzhou.

古文：乙亥，复以禼为资政殿学士，提举万寿观兼侍读。
现代文：初二，重新任命万侯为资政殿学士，提举万寿观兼侍读。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Wan Hou was reappointed as a scholar of the House of Councillors, and the concept of longevity and attendance were promoted.

古文：戊寅，郑亿年责建武军节度副使、南安军安置。
现代文：初五，郑亿年被贬降为建武军节度副使，南安军安置。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zheng Erian was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Jianwu Army, and the Nan'an Army was resettled.

古文：壬午，诏监司、守臣禁羡余，罢权摄，戢苞苴，节宴饮。
现代文：初九，下诏监司、守臣，严禁多征收税赋，罢除权摄官职，禁止行贿受贿，节减宴饮。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the following decrees were issued to supervisors and retainers: it is strictly forbidden to collect more taxes, to remove the power of procurator, to prohibit bribery, and to reduce banquets and drinks.

古文：诏前后告讦者莫汲、汪召锡、陆升之等九人除名，广南诸州编管。
现代文：下诏前后揭人隐私的莫汲、汪召锡、陆升之等九人被除名，广南各州编管。
English: Nine people, including Moku, Wang Zhaoxi and Lu Sheng, who revealed people's privacy before and after the edict was issued, were removed from their posts, with the Guangnan prefectures taking the lead.

古文：甲申，召孟忠厚奉朝请。
现代文：十一日，召孟忠厚为奉朝请。
English: On the 11th day, Meng Zhonghou was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：命胡寅、张九成等二十八人并令自便，仍复其官。
现代文：命令胡寅、张九成等二十八人改过自新，仍然恢复他们的官职。
English: He ordered 28 people, including Hu Ying and Zhang Jucheng, to make amends and resume their posts.

古文：乙酉，董德元罢。
现代文：十二日，董德元罢职。
English: On the 12th, Dong Deyuan resigned.

古文：丙戌，以刘锜知潭州。
现代文：十三日，任命刘倚为知潭州。
English: On the 13th, Liu Jie was appointed as the new governor of Zhitan Prefecture.

古文：辛卯，命三省、六部条具续降敕旨来上，审详施行。
现代文：十八日，命令三省、六部排列陈述续降救旨上报，审核后施行。
English: On the 18th, the three provinces and six provinces were ordered to continue to report the reduction of relief, and it was implemented after review.

古文：甲午，以敷文阁待制沈该参知政事。
现代文：二十一日，任命敷文阁待制沈该为参知政事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shikibun Cabinet-in-waiting Shen Gao was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：乙未，以王会恃权贪横，停官、循州编管。
现代文：二十二日，王会因恃仗权势，贪冒横行，被停官，循州编管。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Hui was suspended for abuse of power, corruption and abuse of power, and was ordered to leave the province.

古文：丙申，复以萧振为四川制置使。
现代文：二十三日，重新任命萧振为四川制置使。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Zhen was reappointed as the Sichuan Provincial Commissioner.

古文：复张浚、折彦质、赵汾、叶三省、王Ｚ、刘岑官。
现代文：恢复张浚、折彦质、赵汾、叶三省、王、刘岑官职。
English: Restore Zhang Jun, Orihixia, Zhao Jun, Ye San, Wang and Liu Jun to their official positions.

古文：移胡铨衡州。
现代文：胡锉迁移到衡州。
English: Wusong migrated to Hengzhou.

古文：丁酉，禁闽、浙、川、广贡真珠、文犀。
现代文：二十四日，严禁闽、浙、川、广进贡真珠、文犀。
English: On the 24th, it was strictly forbidden to bring tribute pearls and rhinestones from Handan, Zhejiang, Sichuan and Guangxi.

古文：戒州县加收耗粮。
现代文：严禁州县加收耗粮。
English: It is strictly forbidden for prefectures and counties to increase grain consumption.

古文：己亥，金遣耶律归一等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣耶律归一等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, the People's Republic of China sent Ye Lu Gui I and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十六年春正月壬子，省诸州税场，以宽商贾。
现代文：绍兴二十六年春正月初十，减省各州税场，以宽商贾。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 26th year of Shaoxing's Spring, the provincial tax offices were reduced, and the business district was widened.

古文：甲子，追复赵鼎、孙近、郑刚中、汪藻旧职。
现代文：二十二日，追复赵鼎、孙近、郑刚中、汪藻原来的官职。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Ding, Sun Qian, Zheng Gangzhong and Wang Mo were restored to their original posts.

古文：乙丑，诏选择监司，须七品以上清望官，或经朝擢及治郡著绩者。
现代文：二十三日，下诏选择监司，必须是七品以上的清廉有声望的官员，或者是在朝廷任过相应职务及治郡取得显著政绩的。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict was issued to select supervisors, who must be above the rank of Shichihon, a clean and reputable official, or who have held corresponding positions in the imperial court and have made significant achievements in county governance.

古文：丙寅，曹泳吉阳军编管。
现代文：二十四日，曹泳贬滴，吉阳军编管。
English: On the 24th, Cao Yong was demoted, and the Jiyang Army was put in charge.

古文：封伯令衿明州观察使、安定郡王，以其从弟令詪让也。
现代文：封伯赵令补为明州观察使、安定郡王，因他的从弟赵令很谦让之故。
English: Zhao Lingshu, the prince of Hubei, was appointed as the observation envoy of Mingzhou and the king of Ding'an County, because his younger brother Zhao Lingshu was very humble.

古文：戊辰，除民事律。
现代文：二十六日，废除民事律。
English: On the 26th, the Civil Code was abolished.

古文：蠲诸路积负及黄河竹索钱。
现代文：免除各路拖欠的税赋及黄河竹索钱。
English: exempt all roads from tax arrears and the Yellow River Bamboo Fund.

古文：二月乙亥，命四川州县，凡预借民赋税分限理析。
现代文：二月初三，命令四川州县，凡是预借百姓赋税要分期分批处理退还。
English: On the third day of February, Sichuan Prefecture ordered that all pre-borrowed people's taxes should be refunded in installments.

古文：己卯，定诸州流寓士人解额。
现代文：初七，确定各州流寓士人举人解送额。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, determine the amount of people to be sent by each state.

古文：庚辰，罢进奏院定本朝报。
现代文：初八，罢除进奏院审定门下后省每天编纂的朝廷大事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Imperial Court's major events, which had been compiled daily by Hougang Province under the supervision of the Song Academy, were abolished.

古文：乙酉，进士林东追谄秦桧，上书狂妄，英州编管。
现代文：十三日，进士林东追馅秦桧，上书狂妄，英州编管。
English: On the 13th day of the month, Jin Shilin Dong chased after Qin Zhen, sent a letter to him, and Yingzhou made a pipe.

古文：右朝奉郎林一飞坐指使林东，责监高州盐税。
现代文：右朝奉郎林一飞因指使林东上书，贬降为监高州盐税。
English: Lin Yifei, a vassal of the Right Dynasty, was demoted to supervising the high state salt tax because he ordered Lin Dong to submit a report.

古文：庚寅，三佛齐国入贡。
现代文：十八日，三佛齐国来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the Three Buddhas of Qi Kingdom came to pay tribute.

古文：辛卯，魏良臣罢。
现代文：十九日，魏良臣被罢。
English: On the 19th, Wei Liangchen was ousted.

古文：庚子，以左朝散大夫王严为秦桧亲党，直徽猷阁吕愿中贪虐附桧，严建昌军居住，愿中责果州团练副使、封州安置。
现代文：二十八日，因左朝散大夫王严为秦桧亲党，直徽酞阁吕愿中贪虐依附秦桧，王严贬建昌军居住，吕愿中贬降为果州团练副使，封州安置。
English: On the 28th, due to the fact that Wang Yan, the doctor of the Left Imperial Court, was a member of the party of Qin Yu's relatives, and Zhihui Xiangge Lvangzhong was greedy and attached to Qin Yu, Wang Yan demoted Jianchang Army to live in Lvangzhong, and Lvangzhong was demoted to the deputy envoy of Gozhou Rehearsal, and resettled in Fuzhou.

古文：三月甲寅，以边事已定，罢宰相兼领枢密使。
现代文：三月十三日，因边事已经平息，罢除宰相兼任枢密使。
English: On March 13, as the border dispute had calmed down, the prime minister was removed from his post and made a privy councilor.

古文：丁巳，诏两淮边民未复业者，复其租十年。
现代文：十六日，下诏两淮边民没有恢复农业生产的，免除他们十年租税。
English: On the 16th, the next day, the two Huai'an people who did not resume agricultural production were exempted from ten years of tax.

古文：己未，以万俟禼参知政事。
现代文：十八日，任命万侯为参知政事。
English: On the 18th, he appointed Manhou to be a councillor.

古文：癸亥，加吴璘开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十二日，加给吴瞒开府仪同三司职衔。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Zhenkai was given the title of the Third Division of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：乙丑，以东平府进士梁勋伏阙上书言北事，送千里外州军编管。
现代文：二十四日，因东平府进士梁勋到朝廷上书议论与金国的关系，被送到千里以外的州军编管。
English: On the 24th, because Liang Xun, an enlisted soldier from Dongpingfu, wrote to the imperial court to discuss relations with China, he was sent thousands of miles away to the headquarters of the state army.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 讲和之策，断自朕志，秦桧但能赞朕而已，岂以其存亡而渝定议耶？
现代文：二十五日，下诏说： 讲和的决策，出自肤的心愿和志向，秦桧只能支持肤罢了，怎么能够因为他的存亡而背弃已经确定的盟约呢？
English: On the 25th, the next imperial edict said: The decision to declare peace comes from one's heart's desire and ambition. Qin Yu can only support one's heart. How can he betray the already established covenant because of his survival?

古文：近者无知之辈，鼓倡浮言，以惑众听，至有伪撰诏命，召用旧臣，抗章公车，妄议边事，朕甚骇之。
现代文：近来无知之辈，用虚浮的言论挑拨鼓动，来迷惑众人，甚至有的假托圣旨，召用旧臣，违抗政府的命令，狂妄议论有关和议的事情，肤感到很震恐。
English: Recently, ignorant people have been instigating and agitating the masses with empty talk to mislead the people. Some have even made use of the holy will, summoned former ministers, disobeyed the government's orders, and talked about the matter of peace talks in an arrogant manner. I feel very shocked.

古文：自今有此，当重置典宪。 
现代文：从今以后，再有这种事情发生，一定要按法律从重制裁。 
English: From now on, if this kind of thing happens again, we must impose heavier sanctions in accordance with the law.

古文：丁卯，蠲闽、浙诸州岁供军器所物料三之一，减诸州工匠千人。
现代文：二十六日，免除闽、浙各州每年上供军器所物料的三分之一，减去各州工匠一千人。
English: On the 26th, one-third of the materials supplied annually to the Ordnance Research Institute by the provinces of Handan and Zhejiang were exempted, and the number of craftsmen in each province was reduced by 1,000.

古文：己巳，募四川民佃淮南、京西闲田，并边复租税十年，次边五年。
现代文：二十八日，招募四川百姓佃耕淮南、京西荒闲田地，紧邻边界的免除租税十年，离边界远一些的地区免除租税五年。
English: On the 28th, the Sichuan people were recruited to plow the idle fields in Huainan and West Beijing. The areas immediately adjacent to the border were exempted from taxes for ten years, and the areas farther away from the border were exempted from taxes for five years.

古文：夏四月戊子，增温、台等十六州解额。
现代文：夏四月十七日，增加温、台等十六州举人解送名额。
English: In the summer, on April 17, the number of people to be deported from 16 states, including Wen and Taiwan, was increased.

古文：命湖北路以增户、垦田为守令殿最。
现代文：命令湖北路以增加户口、垦田数量作为考核守臣和县令的根据。
English: He ordered Hubei Province to increase the number of hukou and shantian as the basis for assessing the number of provincial governors and county magistrates.

古文：庚寅，遣陈诚之等贺金主尊号礼成。
现代文：十九日，派遣陈诚之等人祝贺金主尊号礼成功。
English: On the 19th, Chen Chengzhi and others were dispatched to congratulate Jin Shuzhong on the success of the ceremony.

古文：癸巳，置武学官及弟子员百人。
现代文：二十二日，设置武学官，确定弟子为一百名。
English: On the 22nd, a martial arts official was set up to determine the number of disciples to be 100.

古文：甲午，禁州郡进祥瑞。
现代文：二十三日，严禁州郡进献样瑞物品。
English: On the 23rd, it was strictly forbidden for prefectures and counties to import sampled Swiss goods.

古文：戊戌，立六科以举士。
现代文：二十七日，确定用六科举士。
English: On the 27th, it was decided to use six subjects to select candidates.

古文：加韦谦太尉。
现代文：加给韦谦太尉衔。
English: and promoted Wei Qian to the rank of captain.

古文：诏大辟情犯无可矜悯者，禁刑、寺妄引例奏裁贷减。
现代文：下诏死刑罪犯没有可同情的，禁止刑部、大理寺乱引条例上书要求减免罪刑。
English: Under the decree, if there is no sympathy for the death penalty criminals, the Criminal Law Department and Dali Temple are prohibited from quoting the regulations in writing to request the reduction and remission of criminal punishment.

古文：罢乡饮酒举士法。
现代文：罢废乡饮酒举士法。
English: Abolish the Township Alcoholic Beverage Tax.

古文：诏淮南、京西占射官田逾二年未尽垦者，募人更佃。
现代文：诏令淮南、京西，占射官田超过两年还没有完全开垦的，招募他人佃耕。
English: Huainan, West Beijing, and Zhansha official fields that have not been fully reclaimed for more than two years should be reclaimed by others.

古文：五月壬寅，以沈该为尚书左仆射，万俟禼为右仆射，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月初二，任命沈该为尚书左仆射，万侯为右仆射，都任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Shen Gui was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left footman and Wan Hou as his right footman, both of whom were appointed to be in the middle of the book.

古文：汤思退知枢密院事。
现代文：汤思退为知枢密院事。
English: Townsend retired to the Privy Council.

古文：丁未，诏州军教授毋兼他职。
现代文：初七，下诏州军教授不要兼任其他职务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, it was decreed that the professor of the State Army should not hold other positions.

古文：丙辰，蠲楚州、盱眙军民租十年。
现代文：十六日，免除楚州、盯胎军百姓租税十年。
English: On the 16th, the people of Chuzhou and the People's Liberation Army were exempted from paying taxes for ten years.

古文：己未，金遣敬嗣晖等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派遣敬嗣晖等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Jong Un sent Kim Jong Un, Kim Jong Un's son Kim Jong Un and others to congratulate the Tianshan Festival.

古文：六月辛未朔，罢诸路鬻户绝田。
现代文：六月初一，废罢各路警卖户绝田。
English: On the first day of June, the abolition of all road police sellers came to Uchida.

古文：丁丑，以端明殿学士程克俊参知政事。
现代文：初七，任命端明殿学士程克俊为参知政事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Duanming palace bachelor Cheng Kijun was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：戊寅，复权要亲族中第覆试法。
现代文：初八，恢复权要亲族中第复试法。
English: On the eighth day of the new year, the right of reinstatement shall be exercised by relatives.

古文：乙酉，诏取士毋拘程颐、王安石一家之说。
现代文：十五日，下诏取士不要拘泥于程颐、王安石一家之说。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: "Don't stick to the words of Cheng Yu and Wang Anshi's family."

古文：丁亥，流星昼陨。
现代文：十七日，流星白天陨落。
English: On the 17th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：辛卯，以秦桧既死，命史馆重修日历。
现代文：二十一日，因秦桧已死，命令使馆重修日历。
English: On the twenty-first day, because Qin Yu had died, he ordered the embassy to restore the calendar.

古文：秋七月辛丑，诏三衙主帅举武臣堪知州者。
现代文：秋七月初二，下诏三衙主帅推举可以担任知州的武臣。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the next Imperial edict decreed that the commander-in-chief could be appointed as a vassal of Chishu.

古文：壬寅，蠲诸路丁绢一年为二十四万匹。
现代文：初三，免除各路一年二十四万匹丁绢。
English: On the third day of the Chinese New Year, 240,000 pigs will be exempted from each road for one year.

古文：丙午，右奉议郎薛仲邕连州编管。
现代文：初七，右奉议郎薛仲琶连州编管。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, his right-hand advisor, Xue Zhongwa, became the orchestra's music director.

古文：丁未，彗出井，避殿减膳。
现代文：初八，彗星出现在井宿一带，高宗不上殿，减少饮食。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a comet appeared in the Ijuku area. Gao Zong did not go to the temple and reduced his diet.

古文：辛亥，诏诸州守贰考各县丁籍，依年格收除。民间市物，官户、势家与编氓均科。
现代文：十二日，下诏各州正副长官考核各县丁籍，依年限标准上升和除掉；民间和买物品，官户、势家与普通编民一样科配。
English: On the 12th day of the following month, the chiefs and vice-chiefs of all prefectures and counties were required to pass the examination for the registration of Ding, which was increased and eliminated according to the standard of seniority; people and goods were purchased, and officials and influential people were assigned to the same department as ordinary citizens.

古文：丙辰，彗灭。
现代文：十七日，彗星消失。
English: On the 17th, the comet disappeared.

古文：诏进士因事送诸州军听读，特放逐便，仍许取应。
现代文：下诏进士因事送往各州军听读，特地释放，允许改过自新，仍然允许他们参加科举考试。
English: Due to the incident, the following officers were sent to the various state armies to listen and read, and were specially released, allowed to reform, and still allowed to participate in the imperial examinations.

古文：辛酉，雨水银。
现代文：二十二日，天上降水银。
English: On the twenty-second day, the sky rained mercury and silver.

古文：八月戊寅，班元丰、崇宁学制于诸路。
现代文：八月初九，向各路颁布元丰、崇宁学制。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the Yuanfeng and Chongning education systems were promulgated to all schools.

古文：革正前举登第奏埙、曹冠等九人出身，以淮南提举常平朱冠卿言，秦桧挟私废法，埙等皆其子孙、亲戚、门下憸人，于是有官应试者，所授阶官易左为右，白身者驳放。
现代文：除去前举登第秦埙、曹冠等九人出身。淮南提举常平朱冠卿上书说，秦桧挟私废法，秦埙等都是他的子孙、亲戚、门下小人，于是考官在考试时，所授阶官往往易左为右，没有官职出身的人除放。
English: Huainan nominated Changping Zhu Guanqing and wrote to him, saying that Qin Yu was a thief and a scoundrel, and Qin Yu and the others were his descendants, relatives, and underlings. Therefore, when the examiner was conducting the examination, the officials who were awarded the ranks were often left and right, and those who were not from official positions were excluded.

古文：占用省额，复还后科。
现代文：占用名额，复还后科。
English: Occupy a seat, return it after the exam.

古文：庚辰，裁州县吏额。
现代文：十一日，裁减州县吏额。
English: On the 11th, the number of officials from prefectures and counties was reduced.

古文：己丑，蠲建康府积欠内帑钱帛。
现代文：二十日，免除建康府拖欠内库钱帛。
English: On the 20th, Jiankang Prefecture was exempted from the arrears of the internal treasury.

古文：庚寅，安南国遣使入贡。
现代文：二十一日，安南派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Annan sent envoys to collect the tribute.

古文：辛卯，程克俊罢。
现代文：二十二日，程克俊被罢。
English: On the 22nd, Cheng Kedong was dismissed.

古文：甲子，以吏部侍郎张纲参知政事。
现代文：甲子日，任命吏部侍郎张纲为参知政事。
English: On the first day of the year, Zhang Gang, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：九月乙巳，以翰林学士陈诚之同知枢密院事。
现代文：九月初六，任命翰林学士陈诚之为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Chen Chengxing, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：丙午，立互易荐举坐罪法。
现代文：初七，确立互易荐举坐罪法。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the law on the crime of mutual recommendation was established.

古文：壬子，诏成都、潼川两路漕臣同制置、总领、茶马司审度四川财赋利害，其实惠得以及民、调度可以经久者，条具以闻。
现代文：十三日，下诏成都府路、撞川路槽臣与制置司、总领所、茶马司官员一起审定四川财赋利害，其中实惠得以及民、调度可以经久的，向朝廷陈述。
English: On the 13th, officials from the Chengdu Prefecture Road and Qianchuan Road together with the Ministry of Construction, the General Consulate, and the Tea and Horse Department reviewed the interests of Sichuan's financial resources, including the benefits to the people and the long-term scheduling, and made a presentation to the imperial court.

古文：甲寅，以天圣、绍兴真决赃吏指挥班示诸路。
现代文：十五日，把天圣、绍兴正确的符合实际的处置赃吏的法令向各路颁发。
English: On the 15th, the decrees on the correct and practical disposition of cadres in Tiansheng and Shaoxing were issued to all roads.

古文：丙寅，增大理寺吏禄。
现代文：二十七日，增加大理寺吏禄。
English: On the 27th, the salary of officials of Dali Temple was increased.

古文：戊辰，命吏、刑二部修条例为成法。
现代文：二十九日，命令吏部、刑部修改条例，使它成为定法。
English: On the 29th, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Criminal Justice were ordered to amend the regulations to make it a statutory law.

古文：冬十月己巳朔，诏许秦桧在位之日，无辜被罪者自陈厘正。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏允许秦桧在位之日，无辜受罪的人自己陈述改正。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, the day when Qin Hui was allowed to reign according to the edict, those who were innocent of the crime made their own statement and corrected themselves.

古文：罢浙东常平司平准务。
现代文：废罢浙东常平司平准务。
English: Zhe Dong Changping Siping Standard Service was abolished.

古文：乙亥，诏四川监司、帅臣、制置、总领、茶马司，各举可守郡者。
现代文：初七，下诏四川监司、帅臣、制置、总领、茶马司官员，分别推举可以担任郡守人才。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, officials of the Sichuan Supervision Department, the Military Minister, the Construction Department, the General Manager, and the Horse Breeding Department were separately elected to serve as county guards.

古文：甲午，蠲郴、道、永三州、桂阳军民身丁米。
现代文：二十六日，免除郴、道、永三州和桂阳军百姓身丁米。
English: On the 26th, he exempted the common people of Min, Dao, Yongsan, and Guiyang from military service.

古文：乙未，王会移琼州编管。
现代文：二十七日，王会迁移到琼州编管。
English: On the 27th, the Wang Association moved to Qiongzhou.

古文：以宋贶党附秦桧，责梅州安置。
现代文：因宋贩党附秦桧，贬滴梅州安置。
English: Due to the Song merchant party's attachment to Qin Hui, he was expelled and resettled in Meizhou.

古文：丁酉，以张浚上书论用兵，依旧永州居住。
现代文：二十九日，因张浚上书议论用兵，依旧永州居住。
English: On the 29th, because Zhang Jun was drafted into the army, he still lived in Yongzhou.

古文：辛丑。遣李琳使金贺正旦，葛立方贺金主生辰。
现代文：三十日，派遣李琳出使金国祝贺正旦，葛立方祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 30th, Li Lin was dispatched to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Ge Cub congratulated Jin Lord on his birthday.

古文：闰月丙午，罢廉州贡珠，纵蛋丁自便。
现代文：闰十月初八，罢除廉州贡献海珠，免除对丁的奴役，让他们自由生活。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of the leap year, Lianzhou's contribution of sea pearls was abolished, the enslavement of Ding was exempted, and they were allowed to live freely.

古文：己酉，命离军人愿归农者，人给江、淮、湖、广荒田百亩，复其租税十年。
现代文：十一日，命令离开军队的士兵愿意回到农业生产上去的，每人供给江、淮、湖、广地区荒田一百亩，免除十年租税。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the soldiers who were ordered to leave the army and were willing to return to agricultural production were each provided with 100 mu of wasteland in Jiangsu, Huai, Hunan and other regions, and were exempted from ten years of tax.

古文：乙卯，初置临安府左、右厢官，分掌讼牒。
现代文：十七日，初次设置临安府左右厢官，分别掌管本地区的诉讼案件。
English: On the 17th, Lin'an prefectural left and right chambers were set up for the first time, respectively in charge of litigation cases in this region.

古文：十一月甲戌，命吏部侍郎陈康伯、户部侍郎王俣稽考国用岁中出纳之数。
现代文：十一月初六，命令吏部侍郎陈康伯、户部侍郎王误稽查考核每年国家财政收人和开支数目。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, he ordered Chen Kangbo, the secretary of the personnel department, and Wang, the secretary of the household department, to inspect and evaluate the number of annual state financial receipts and expenditures.

古文：丙戌，裁定六曹、寺监百司吏额。
现代文：十八日，裁定六曹、寺监百司吏额。
English: On the 18th, it was decided that there would be six sergeants and one hundred supervisors.

古文：十二月辛丑，命三省录台谏所言事报枢密院。
现代文：十二月初四，命令三省记录台谏陈述的事情，报给枢密院。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the three provinces were ordered to record Taiwan's report and report it to the Privy Council.

古文：癸丑，万俟禼上《重修贡举敕令格式》。甲寅，罢诸路铸钱司。
现代文：十六日，万侯呈上重修贡举救令格式。十七日，废罢各路铸钱司。
English: On the 16th, Manhou submitted a form for the renewal of the tribute and rescue order. On the 17th, the mint of each road was abolished.

古文：庚申，赏应诏论事切当者。
现代文：二十三日，奖赏应诏论事贴切恰当的人。
English: On the 23rd, a reward will be given to the person who makes the most pertinent and appropriate comment.

古文：壬戌，三佛齐国入贡。
现代文：二十五日，三佛齐国来进贡。
English: On the 25th, the Three Buddhas of Qi Kingdom came to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，金遣梁求等来加明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣梁球等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the People's Republic of China sent Liang Qiu and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十七年春正月乙酉，幸延祥观。
现代文：绍兴二十七年春正月十八日，高宗到样延观。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the year of the 27th year of Shaoxing, Gao Zong went to Yean Guan.

古文：戊子，命侍从各荐宗室京朝官才识、治行者二人。
现代文：二十一日，命令侍从官各自举荐二名宗室京朝官有才有识、治绩品行都优异的人才。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered the attendants to each recommend two members of the imperial family to the imperial court officials who had talent and excelled in their performance.

古文：二月丁酉朔，复兼习经义、诗赋法。
现代文：二月初一，恢复兼习经义、诗赋法。
English: On the first day of February, both the study of scripture and the study of poetry were resumed.

古文：庚子，杨政卒。
现代文：初四，杨政去世。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Yang Zheng passed away.

古文：壬寅，太庙仁宗、英宗两室柱芝草生。
现代文：初六，太庙仁宗、英宗两室柱上生出芝草。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, turf grass sprouted on the pillars of the two rooms of the Ninzong and the Yingzong of the Great Temple.

古文：戊午，以御史中丞汤鹏举参知政事。
现代文：二十二日，任命御史中承汤鹏举为参知政事。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Tang Peng, a member of the Council of Elders, to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：庚申，更定福建路盐法。
现代文：二十四日，改变福建路盐法。
English: On the 24th, the Fujian Road Salt Law was changed.

古文：癸亥，加刘锜太尉。
现代文：二十七日，加给刘倚太尉职衔。
English: On the 27th, Liu Jie was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：三月己巳，命京局改官人先除知县。
现代文：三月初四，命令京局改官人先授给知县。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, the Beijing Bureau was ordered to assign the new officials to Zhixian first.

古文：乙酉，赤气出紫微垣。
现代文：二十日，紫微垣出现红气。
English: On the 20th, red gas appeared in Zi Weigaki.

古文：丙戌，赐礼部进士王十朋以下四百二十六人及第、出身。
现代文：二十一日，赐给礼部进士王十朋以下四百二十六人及第、出身。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, four hundred and twenty-six people of various ranks and backgrounds were awarded the title of Priest of the Ministry of Rites.

古文：丁亥，诏焚交阯所贡翠羽于通衢，仍禁宫人服用销金翠羽。
现代文：二十二日，下诏在交通要道焚烧交趾进贡的翠羽，并且严禁宫人服饰用翠羽装饰。
English: On the 22nd, an edict was issued to burn tributes of cedar feathers on major roads, and it was strictly forbidden for courtiers to decorate their clothing with cedar feathers.

古文：己丑，减三川对籴米岁十六万九千石，夔路激赏绢五万匹，两川绢估钱二十八万缗及茶司引息虚额钱岁九十五万缗。
现代文：二十四日，减除三川一年的对来米十六万九千石，夔路激赏绢五万匹，两川绢估钱二十八万络及一年的茶司引息虚额钱九十五万络。
English: On the 24th, 169,000 koku of rice was deducted from Mikawa's rice, 50,000 koku from Kushiro's rice, 280,000 rupees from Ryokawa's rice, and 950,000 rupees from the tea master's interest for one year.

古文：辛卯，万俟禼卒。
现代文：二十六日，万侯去世。
English: On the 26th, Wan Hou passed away.

古文：壬辰，以符行中前在蜀恣横，南雄州安置。
现代文：二十七日，因符行中前在蜀悠肆专横，南雄州安置。
English: On the 27th, due to the fact that he was domineering in Shuyuzha before the middle of the trip, he was resettled in Nanxiongzhou.

古文：甲午，除耕牛税。
现代文：二十九日，废除耕牛税。
English: On the 29th, the farm cattle tax was abolished.

古文：五月癸未，金遣耶律守素等来贺天申节。
现代文：五月十九日，金国派遣耶律守素等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On May 19th, the State of Kim sent Ye Lu Shou Su and others to congratulate the Tianshin Festival.

古文：辛卯，复以五帝、神州地祇等十三祭为大祀。
现代文：二十七日，重新以五帝、神州地袄等十三祭为大祀。
English: On the 27th, thirteen festivals such as the Five Emperors' Festival and the Divine Land March were held again.

古文：六月甲辰，命臣僚转对，尽忠开陈，毋摭细微以应故事。
现代文：六月十一日，命令臣僚转对，以忠诚的态度指陈时政，不要用细微小事应付惯制。
English: On June 11, he ordered his ministers to turn the other way, to be loyal to Chen Shizheng, and not to use minor issues to deal with the old system.

古文：戊申，以汤思退为尚书右仆射、同中中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五日，任命汤思退为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Tang Sijie was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shuxiu and the left-hand man of Zhong Shuxiu.

古文：庚戌，复余深、黄潜善并观文殿大学士。
现代文：十七日，恢复余深、黄潜善为观文殿大学士。
English: On the 17th, Yu Sheng and Huang Xuanzen were reinstated as scholars of the University of Literature.

古文：乙卯，裁定离军将士诸州添差数。
现代文：二十二日，裁定离开军队将士各州添差数。
English: On the 22nd, it was decided to increase the number of soldiers leaving the army from each state.

古文：戊午，初命太庙冬飨祭功臣，腊飨祭七祀，祫飨兼之。
现代文：二十五日，初次命令冬至日祭祀功臣，腊日祭祀七祀，洽飨兼之。
English: On the 25th, the first order was given for the winter solstice festival to honor meritorious vassals, and for the winter solstice festival to honor seven vassals.

古文：己未，进钱忱少傅。
现代文：二十六日，升钱忱为少傅。
English: On the 26th, he was promoted to sous chef.

古文：增命官捕获私茶盐赏典。
现代文：增加命官捕获私茶盐赏典。
English: The reward for the officer who caught me stealing tea and salt will be increased.

古文：秋七月己巳，复饶、赣、韶三州铸钱监。
现代文：秋七月初六，恢复饶、赣、韶三州铸钱监。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the mint supervisors of Rao, Handan and Handan were reinstated.

古文：癸酉，戒监司、郡守举劾守令观望徇私。
现代文：初十，告诫监司、郡守弹勃守令观望询私。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, I was warned by the superintendent and the county governor to wait and inquire.

古文：乙亥，以龙图阁学士李文会为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：十二日，任命龙图阁学士李文会为四川安抚制置使。
English: On the 12th, the Longtu Pavilion Bachelor Li Wenhui was appointed as the Sichuan Pacification Envoy.

古文：丙子，诏凡出命，令先经两省书读，如旧制。
现代文：十三日，下诏凡是发布命令，先经两省书读，像旧制一样。
English: On the 13th day of the following month, all orders were issued and read by the two provinces first, just like the old system.

古文：八月乙未，以汤鹏举知枢密院事。
现代文：八月初二，任命汤鹏举为知枢密院事。
English: On the second day of August, Tang Penghu was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：庚申，复置提领诸路铸钱司于行在，以户部侍郎荣薿领之。
现代文：二十七日，在行在重新设置提领各路铸钱司，任命户部侍郎荣镬主管。
English: On the 27th, the Bank of China re-established the position of the chief money changer, and appointed the head of the Household Department as the head of the Honorable Office.

古文：九月癸酉，张纲罢。
现代文：九月十一日，张纲被罢。
English: On September 11, Zhang Gang was ousted.

古文：戊寅，以吏部尚书陈康伯参知政事。
现代文：十六日，任命吏部尚书陈康伯为参知政事。
English: On the 16th, Chen Kangbo, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：蠲淮南、京西、湖北积欠内藏钱帛。
现代文：免除淮南、京西、湖北积年拖欠内藏库钱帛。
English: Exempt Huainan, West Beijing, and Hubei from years of arrears in the storage of banknotes.

古文：丁亥，校书郎叶谦亨言： 祀典散逸，隆杀不当，名称或舛，请敕礼官、秘书酌景德故事，取祭祀之式，定为一书，名曰《绍兴正祠录》，以为恒制。 
现代文：二十五日，校书郎叶谦亨上书说： 祭祀典籍散亡遗失，增减不当，名称也有错讹，请求命令祀官、秘书官参酌景德典制，取祭祀之式，定为一书，名叫绍兴正祠命，作为固定的制度。 
English: On the 25th, the school secretary Ye Qianheng wrote: "The sacrificial books have been lost and scattered, the additions and subtractions are improper, and the names are also wrong," and requested that the sacrificial officials and secretaries be ordered to participate in the Jingde ceremony system, take the sacrificial ceremony, and set it as a book, named Shaoxing Zhengcun Shrine Life, as a fixed system.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏采纳这个请求。
English: He complied.

古文：冬十月壬寅，有赤气随日入。
现代文：冬十月初十，有红气随太阳降落。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of winter, a red wind descends with the sun.

古文：癸卯，筑通、泰、楚三州捍海堰。
现代文：十一日，修筑通、泰、楚三州捍海堰。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Tong, Tai and Chu Three Provinces Defense Weir was built.

古文：辛酉、诏四川诸司察旱伤州县，捐其税，振其饥民。
现代文：二十九日，下诏四川各部门察核早灾州县，免除这些地区的租税，贩济这些地区的灾民。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that all departments in Sichuan would inspect the pre-disaster counties, exempt these areas from taxes, and help the victims of the disaster in these areas.

古文：十一月癸亥朔，减福建盐钞钱岁八万缗。
现代文：十一月初一，减免福建一年盐钞钱八万络。
English: On the first day of November, the reduction and exemption of Fujian's annual salt bill was 80,000 yuan.

古文：乙丑，遣孙道夫使金贺正旦。
现代文：初三，派遣孙道夫出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: On the third day of the first month, Sun Daofu was dispatched to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：辛巳，遣刘章贺金主生辰，丁亥，汤鹏举罢。
现代文：十九日，派遣刘章祝贺金主生日。二十四日，汤鹏举被罢。
English: On the 19th, Liu Zhang was sent to congratulate Kim on his birthday. On the 24th, Tang Penghu was dismissed.

古文：戊子，蠲庐州二税及上供钱米一年。
现代文：二十五日，免除庐州一年的二税及上供钱米。
English: On the 25th, the second tax and the upper supply of rice were exempted from Bozhou for one year.

古文：十二月甲午，诏广南经略、市舶司察蕃商假托入贡。
现代文：十二月初二，下诏广南经略司、市舶司察看审核外国商人假托进贡。
English: At the beginning of December 2nd, the Guangnan Economic Strategy Department and the Municipal Shipping Department inspected and approved the foreign merchants to pay tribute.

古文：丙辰，初命州县置禁历。
现代文：二十四日，初次命令州县设置禁历。
English: On the 24th, the first order was issued to the prefectures and counties to set the prohibited calendar.

古文：戊午，金遣高思廉等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣高思廉等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, the DPRK dispatched Gao Siliang and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十八年春正月己巳，申禁三衙强刺平民为兵。
现代文：绍兴二十八年春正月初八，再次严禁三衙强迫刺配平民充当兵卒。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 28th year of Shaoxing's Spring, it was once again strictly forbidden for the Three Gorges Dam to force civilians to serve as soldiers.

古文：己卯，幸延祥观，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：十八日，高宗到延样观，又顺便到玉津园。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zong went to Yanxiangyuan, and also dropped in at the Yujin Garden.

古文：壬午，禁诸路二税折纳增价。
现代文：二十一日，严禁各路二税折纳增价。
English: On the twenty-first day, it is strictly forbidden to increase the price of each road.

古文：癸未，遣户部郎中莫濛等检视淮南、浙西、江东沙田芦场。
现代文：二十二日，派遣户部郎中莫豪等视察淮南、浙西、江东沙田芦场。
English: On the 22nd, Mogao, the head of the Household Division, and others were dispatched to inspect the reed mills in Shatian, Huainan, West Zhejiang, and East Jiangsu.

古文：甲申，命台谏、侍从三人以上公荐监司治状。
现代文：二十三日，下命台谏、侍从官三人以上公荐监司治绩的好坏。
English: On the 23rd, more than three officials of the Taiwu and the attendants were ordered to publicly recommend the performance of the supervisors.

古文：二月癸巳，命史馆重修徽宗大观以前实录。
现代文：二月初二，下令史馆重修徽宗大观以前实录。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he ordered the history museum to revise the previous record of Huizong Grand View.

古文：丙申，以陈诚之知枢密院。
现代文：初五，任命陈诚之为知枢密院。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chen Chengguo was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：戊戌，禁沿海州军博买。
现代文：初七，严禁沿海州军博买。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it is strictly forbidden for coastal state troops to gamble.

古文：乙巳，以工部侍郎王纶同知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命工部侍郎王纶为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Wang Xi, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：乙酉，命六曹长贰详定差役旧法。
现代文：十八日，命令六曹正副长官详细审定差役旧法。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the six Cao Zheng and vice-chiefs to examine the old law in detail.

古文：癸丑，加杨存中少师，谥张俊曰忠烈。
现代文：二十二日，加给杨存中少师职衔，赐给张俊溢号为忠烈。
English: On the 22nd, Yang Cun was given the title of junior high school teacher, and Zhang Jun was given the title of loyalist.

古文：三月辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。初六，降雪。
English: A solar eclipse occurs on the first day of spring in March.

古文：丙寅，雪。丁丑，加田师中开府仪同三司。
现代文：十七日，加给田师中开府仪同三司职衔。
English: On the 17th, he was given the title of Tian Shi Zhong Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：戊寅，诏： 自今用人，选帅臣、监司曾任郎官已上者为侍从，监司、郡守有政绩者为卿监、郎官，朝官二年乃迁，卿监、郎官未历监司者更迭补外。 
现代文：十八日，下诏： 从今以后任用人才，挑选帅臣、监司曾经担任郎官以上职务的委任为侍从官，监司、郡守有政绩的委任为卿监、郎官，朝官任期满二年可以迁升，卿监、郎官没有担任过监司职务的交替补外。 
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: From now on, the appointment of talents, the selection of soldiers, and the appointment of supervisors who have served as vassals or higher positions will be appointed as attendants, and the appointment of supervisors and county governors with political achievements will be appointed as lord supervisors and vassals, and the court officials can be promoted after two years, and the lord supervisors and vassals have not served as supervisors.

古文：戊子，责秦桧党宋朴徽州居住，沈虚中筠州居住。
现代文：二十八日，秦桧同党宋朴贬滴徽州居住，沈虚中贬滴箔州居住。
English: On the 28th, Qin Hui lived in Huizhou together with the Song and Pak Dynasties, and Shen Huizhong lived in Foizhou.

古文：夏四月丙申，复诏文武官非犯赃罪，并许以致仕恩任子。
现代文：夏四月初七，重新诏令文武官员没有犯贪赃罪的，都允许按退休时的恩惠授给儿子官职。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was re-issued that civil and military officials who did not commit the crime of corruption were allowed to grant their sons official positions according to the grace at the time of retirement.

古文：辛亥，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：严州遂安贼江大明寇衢州，官军捕斩之。
现代文：严州遂安贼江大明攻打瞥州，官军捕获后把他们斩了。
English: Yanzhou, Sui'an, Qiujiang, Daming attacked and defeated Biezhou, and the government army captured and beheaded them.

古文：五月，金遣萧恭等来贺天申节。
现代文：五月，金国派遣萧恭等人来祝贺天申节。
English: In May, China sent Xiao Qiong and others to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：六月壬辰，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸巳，流星昼陨。
现代文：初五，流星白天陨落。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：甲寅，增浙西、江东、淮东沙田芦场租课，置提领官田所掌之。
现代文：二十六日，增加浙西、江东、淮东沙田芦场租课，设立提领官田所掌管。
English: On the 26th, the rent of Shatian Luchang Farm in West Zhejiang, East Jiangsu and East Huaiyin was increased, and an official farm management office was established.

古文：秋七月庚申，立江西上供米纲赏格。
现代文：秋七月初三，确定江西上供米纲奖赏标准。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, the reward standard for Jiangxi rice was determined.

古文：戊辰，诏： 监司按发官吏，不得送置司州军推鞫。
现代文：十一日，下诏： 监司按察揭发官吏，不得送置司州军审讯。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: officials who have been investigated and denounced by the Supervision Department shall not be sent to the State Army for trial.

古文：所犯涉重，即以奏闻，命邻路监司选官就鞫。 
现代文：所犯罪行情节严重，就上报朝廷，命令邻路监司选派官员进行审理。 
English: The crime was so serious that it was reported to the Imperial Court, which ordered the Neighborhood Road Supervision Division to send an official to investigate.

古文：己卯，命取公私铜器悉付铸钱司，民间不输者罪之。
现代文：二十二日，命令收取公私铜器全部交给铸钱司，民间不输纳的人要受到处罚。
English: On the 22nd, an order was issued to collect all public and private bronzes and hand them over to the mint. Those who did not accept the bronzes would be punished.

古文：庚辰，亲制郊庙乐章。
现代文：二十三日，高宗亲自制作郊庙乐章。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozong personally produced the suburban temple music.

古文：乙酉，复鬻没官田。
现代文：二十八日，又开始警卖没官田。
English: On the 28th, the police started selling vacant government land again.

古文：八月戊子朔，置国史院，修神、哲、徽三朝正史。
现代文：八月初一，设立国史院，修撰神宗、哲宗、徽宗三朝正史。
English: On the first day of August, the National Academy of History was established to compile the official history of the three dynasties of the Shenzong, Zhezong and Huizong.

古文：己丑，检放风水灾伤州县苗税，仍振贷饥民。
现代文：初二，查看免除遭受风水灾害州县苗税，并且贩济饥民。
English: On the second day of junior high school, check out the exemptions from the state and county seedling tax for those who have suffered from feng shui disasters, and sell food to the hungry.

古文：乙未，增四川十七州举人解额。
现代文：初八，增加四川十七州举人解送名额。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the number of people to be deported from the seventeen states of Sichuan will be increased.

古文：戊戌，汤思退等上《徽宗实录》。
现代文：十一日，汤思退等进呈徽宗实录。
English: On the 11th day, Tang Sijie and others presented a live recording of Huizong.

古文：壬寅，命户部侍郎令詪提领诸路铸钱。
现代文：十五日，命令户部侍郎赵令很提领各路铸钱。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ordered Zhao Ling, the steward of the household department, to collect money from all directions.

古文：甲寅，地震。
现代文：二十七日，发生地震。
English: March 6th, earthquake.

古文：九月辛未，定铜钱出界罪赏。
现代文：九月十五日，规定铜钱出境，要以铜钱偿还。
English: On September 15th, it was stipulated that if copper money left the country, it should be repaid with copper money.

古文：甲戌，诏以吏部七司旧制与续降参订异同，立为定法。
现代文：十八日，下诏按吏部七司旧的典章制度以及陆续颁布的一些制度，参订异同，立为定法。
English: On the eighteenth day of the following month, according to the old award system of the seven departments of the cadre department and some systems promulgated successively, the differences and similarities were recorded and established as a fixed law.

古文：丁丑，置殿前司虎翼水军千人。
现代文：二十一日，设置殿前司虎翼水军一千人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the prefect of the palace, Tora Tsubasa, established a naval force of one thousand men.

古文：庚辰，以中书舍人王刚中为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：二十四日，任命中书舍人王刚中为四川安抚制置使。
English: On the 24th, Wang Gangzhong, a Chinese scholar, was appointed as an envoy of the Sichuan Pacification System.

古文：辛巳，封叔建州观察使士輵为昭化军节度使、嗣濮王。
现代文：二十五日，封叔建州观察使赵解渴为昭化军节度使、嗣攫王。
English: On the 25th, Fengshu Jianzhou observation made Zhao Qie thirsty for the Zhaohua army festival envoy, the heir to the king.

古文：癸未，蠲平江、绍兴、湖州被水民逋赋。
现代文：二十七日，免除平江、绍兴、湖州遭受水灾百姓拖欠官府的赋税。
English: On the 27th, the people who suffered from the floods in Pingjiang, Shaoxing and Huzhou were exempted from tax arrears to the government.

古文：冬十月丁亥朔，遣沈介使金贺正旦，黄中贺金主生辰。
现代文：冬十月初一，派遣沈介出使金国祝贺正旦，黄中祝贺金主生日。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Shen Jie sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Huang Zhong congratulated Kim Guo on his birthday.

古文：辛丑，禁监司、帅、守私役军匠。
现代文：十五日，严禁监司、帅、守官私役军匠。
English: On the 15th, it was strictly forbidden for supervisors, marshals, and guards to act as private military artisans.

古文：十一月己卯，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月二十三日，在圆丘合祭天地，举行大赦。
English: On November 23rd, an amnesty was held at the Round Mound of Heaven and Earth.

古文：壬午，复命检举诸人因赦移放者，告讦得罪者不预。
现代文：二十六日，重新命令检举揭发那些因赦免得到移近安置、居住、编管或免罪的人，告发别人隐私受到治罪的不在检举揭发之列。
English: On the 26th, the procuratorate was re-ordered to expose and expose those who had been pardoned, resettled, resided, managed or pardoned, and exposing the privacy of others was not included in the list of exposures.

古文：十二月庚寅，安定郡王令衿薨。
现代文：十二月初四，安定郡王赵令铃逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Zhao Lingling, the king of Anning County, passed away.

古文：辛丑，修睦亲宅，建宫学。
现代文：十五日，修筑睦亲宅，建立宫学。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, build a family home and establish a palace school.

古文：丁未，复李光官，放自便。
现代文：二十一日，恢复李光的官职，释放让他改过自新。
English: On the 21st, Li Guang was reinstated in his official position, and he was released to make amends.

古文：戊申，蠲楚州归附民赋役五年。
现代文：二十二日，免除楚州归附百姓赋役五年。
English: On the 22nd, the people who were annexed to Chuzhou were exempted from military service for five years.

古文：壬子，金遣苏保衡等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣苏保衡等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim sent Su Baoheng and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，兴元都统制姚仲复籍兴元府等五州义士，得二万余人。
现代文：这一年，兴元都统制姚仲重新登记兴元府等五州义士，得到二万多人。
English: In this year, Yao Zhong, the governor of Xingyuan, re-registered the five states including Xingyuan, and more than 20,000 people were registered.

古文：二十九年春正月丙辰朔，以皇太后年八十，诣慈宁殿行庆寿礼。
现代文：绍兴二十九年春正月初一，因皇太后八十岁，高宗到慈宁殿行庆寿礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 29th year of Shaoxing Spring, Gao Zong went to the Jining Palace to celebrate the birthday of the empress dowager, who was 80 years old.

古文：庚申，浚平江三十六浦以泄水。
现代文：初五，疏浚平江三十六处人海口，以利于水的排泄。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, 36 places in the mouth of the Binhai River were dredged to facilitate the discharge of water.

古文：庚午，振湖、秀诸州饥民。
现代文：十五日，贩济湖州、秀州饥民。
English: On the 15th, the vendors came to the aid of starving people in Huzhou and Xiuzhou.

古文：癸酉，幸延祥观，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：十八日，高宗到延样观，又顺便到玉津园。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zong went to Yanxiangyuan, and also dropped in at the Yujin Garden.

古文：庚辰，禁诸州科卖仓盐。
现代文：二十五日，禁止各州科卖仓盐。
English: On the 25th, the sale of salt from storehouses was banned in all prefectures.

古文：癸未，蠲沙田芦场为风水所侵者租之半。
现代文：二十八日，免除沙田芦场被风水侵害者租税的一半。
English: On the 28th, half of the tax paid by the Fengshui infringers was exempted from Shatian Lujang.

古文：是月，金国罢沿边榷场，惟泗州如旧。
现代文：这个月，金国废罢沿边榷场，只有泅州依旧。
English: This month, the People's Republic of China abolished the strike along the border, and only Zhangzhou remained.

古文：二月丙戌朔，亦罢沿边榷场，存其在盱眙者。
现代文：二月初一，朝廷废罢沿边榷场，只保留盯胎一处。
English: On the first day of February, the imperial court abolished the checkpoints along the edge of the battlefield, reserving only one checkpoint.

古文：加吴璘少保。
现代文：加给吴瞒少保职衔。
English: Wu Zecheng was also given the title of "Minor Protector."

古文：己丑，禁海商假托风潮私往北界。
现代文：初四，严禁海商假托风潮私自到金国境内。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, it is strictly forbidden to smuggle into the territory of the People's Republic of China.

古文：壬辰，除临安府岁供修内司钱三万六千缗。
现代文：初七，免除临安府每年上供修内司钱三万六千络。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Lin'an was exempted from the annual allowance of 36,000 rupees.

古文：丁酉，蠲四川折估籴本积欠钱三百四十万缗。
现代文：十二日，免除四川折估来本多年拖欠钱三百四十万络。
English: On the 12th, Sichuan was exempted from the estimate of 3.4 million yuan in arrears for many years.

古文：戊戌，大雪，雨雹。
现代文：十三日，下大雪和降冰雹。
English: On the 13th, there was heavy snow and hail.

古文：己亥，禁贸易广南羁縻州物货。
现代文：十四日，严禁贸易广南羁摩州货物。
English: On the 14th, it is strictly forbidden to trade goods from Guangnan, Guimozhou.

古文：命广西教阅峒丁。
现代文：命令广西教阅酮丁。
English: Ordered Guangxi to teach reading ketone dye.

古文：庚戌，罢诸路斥侯递卒。
现代文：二十五日，废罢各路哨所骚站运输货物的兵卒。
English: On the 25th, the soldiers who transported goods from Suo Station, a sentry post on each road, were abolished.

古文：甲寅，取具贬死臣僚姓名，议加恩典。
现代文：二十九日，征取排列贬死臣僚姓名，商议加给恩惠。
English: On the 29th, they collected the names of the dead ministers and discussed granting them favors.

古文：三月丙子，除州县积欠钱三百九十七万缗有奇，及中下户所欠入宫钱物。
现代文：三月二十一日，免除州县拖欠官府钱三百九十七万多络以及中下户拖欠的人官钱物。
English: On March 21, the state and county governments were exempted from more than 3.97 million yuan in arrears of government money, and the middle and lower households were exempted from arrears of personal and official money and goods.

古文：丁丑，诏侍从、台谏、帅臣、监司岁举可任将帅者二人。
现代文：二十二日，诏命侍从、台谏、帅臣、监司每年推举可以担任将帅的人才二名。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict ordered the attendants, commanders, marshals, and supervisors to annually select two talents who could serve as marshals.

古文：限命官子孙制田减父祖之半，并其诡名寄产者，格外田亩同编户科役。
现代文：限定命官子孙置田产减父祖的一半，若有诡名寄产的，多余的田亩同编户一样要按数量多少服役。
English: The descendants of the designated officials are limited to half of the production of their fathers and grandfathers. If there is a strange name of the host, the extra acres and acres must be served according to the number.

古文：己卯，除湖州、平江、绍兴流民公私逋负。
现代文：二十四日，免除湖州、平江、绍兴流民拖欠的官府和私人的税租。
English: On the 24th, the government and private tax arrears of the Huzhou, Pingjiang and Shaoxing refugees were exempted.

古文：夏四月壬辰，国子司业黄中自金国使还，言金人将徙居汴京以见逼，望早饬边备。
现代文：夏四月初八，国子司业黄中出使金国回国，报告说金国即将徙居汁京来威逼朝廷，希望朝廷早一点做好边防准备。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Huang Zhong, the Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, sent Jin Guo back to China. He reported that Jin Guo was about to move to Beijing to intimidate the imperial court. He hoped that the imperial court would make border defense preparations earlier.

古文：宰相怒，不听。
现代文：宰相发怒，不接受建议。
English: The Prime Minister was furious and refused to accept the advice.

古文：己亥，修三省法。
现代文：初九，修改三省法。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the three provincial laws were amended.

古文：庚子，增置带御器械四员。
现代文：十六日，增加设置四名带御器械官。
English: On the 16th, four additional officers with monitoring equipment were set up.

古文：丙午，禁内外将佐营造、回易，掊敛军士。
现代文：二十日，严禁朝廷内外将佐营造、回易，以及拮克聚敛军士。
English: On the 20th, it was strictly forbidden for generals inside and outside the imperial court to create, buy back, and gather soldiers.

古文：辛亥，命县令有政绩者诸司同荐，不次升擢，以风厉之。
现代文：二十一日，命令县令有政绩的，各部门共同推举，不按资历、年限进升提拔，用来激励进取的官风。
English: On the 21st, it was ordered that if a county magistrate has political achievements, all departments should jointly nominate him or her for promotion. Promotion is not based on seniority or length of service, and is used to encourage an enterprising official style.

古文：五月甲寅朔，罢鬻福建闪生沙田。
现代文：五月初一，废罢警卖福建有时出现有时又淹没的沙田。
English: On the first day of May, the abolition of the police strike and the sale of Fujian sometimes appeared and sometimes flooded Shatian.

古文：丁巳，诏殿前司选统制官部兵千人戍江州，弹压盗贼，每岁一易。
现代文：初四，下诏殿前司挑选统制官率兵一千人戍守江州，镇压盗贼，每年更换一次。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the former governor of the Lower Court of the Imperial Palace selects a commanding officer to lead a thousand soldiers to defend Jiangzhou and suppress thieves, and is replaced once a year.

古文：己未，桩顿江、浙四路折帛钱于三总领所及浙西提刑司，以备军用。
现代文：初六，把江、浙四路折帛钱储存在三总领所及浙西提刑司，以备军用。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he stored the money from the four provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang in the Third General Consulate and the Criminal Division of the Western Zhejiang Province to prepare for the military.

古文：辛酉，禁权要、豪民举钱军中取息。
现代文：初八，严禁权要、豪民借钱给军中从而取息。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was strictly forbidden for the powerful and the wealthy to borrow money from the military and take interest.

古文：丁卯，命印给三总领所见钱公据、关子，许商人入纳。
现代文：十四日，命令印给三总领所现钱公据、关子，允许商人交纳钱物。
English: On the 14th, an order was issued to the three General Consulates for cash receipts and customs clearance, allowing merchants to pay money and goods.

古文：己巳，立监司、守臣举劾八条。
现代文：十六日，制定监司、守臣列举罪过进行弹勃的八条标准。
English: On the 16th, eight standards were established for supervisors and supervisors to list offenses for firing.

古文：金遣王可道等来贺天申节。
现代文：金国派遣王可道等人来祝贺天申节。
English: The People's Republic of China sent Wang Kedao and others to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：六月甲辰朔，遣王纶等为金国奉表称谢使。
现代文：六月甲辰朔，派遣王纶担任金国奉表称谢使。
English: In June, Wang Qi was dispatched to serve as the ambassador of thanks to the Kim Guomindang.

古文：丁亥，禁江、淮私渡北人。
现代文：初四，严禁江、淮私自让北人渡河。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, it is strictly forbidden to cross the river.

古文：丙申，陈诚之罢。
现代文：十三日，陈诚之被罢。
English: On the 13th, Chen Cheng was dismissed.

古文：禁积钱民户过万缗，官户过二万缗，满二年不易他物者没入之。
现代文：严禁储存钱民户过万络，官户过二万络，满二年不贸易他物者没收归公。
English: It is strictly forbidden to store more than ten thousand yuan for private households and more than twenty thousand yuan for government households. Those who have not traded with others for two years will be confiscated and returned to the public.

古文：丁酉，申禁包苴请托。
现代文：十四日，再次严禁行贿受贿，请托说情。
English: On the 14th, it was once again strictly forbidden to offer bribes and accept bribes. Please intercede.

古文：己亥，以陈康伯兼权枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命陈康伯兼代理枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, Chen Kangbo was appointed acting Privy Councillor.

古文：辛丑，李光卒。
现代文：十八日，李光去世。
English: On the 18th, Li Guang passed away.

古文：壬寅，以主管步军司赵密为太尉。
现代文：十九日，任命主管步军司赵密为太尉。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Mi, the head of the Infantry Division, was appointed as a second lieutenant.

古文：己酉，沈该以贪冒罢。
现代文：二十六日，沈该因贪图财利被罢。
English: On the 26th, Shen was ousted for greed.

古文：闰月甲寅，益荆南戍卒千人，守臣刘锜亦募效用三千人。
现代文：闰六月初二，增加荆南守卫士兵一千人，守臣刘简也招募效用三千人。
English: On the second day of the second month of June, 1,000 soldiers were added to the Jingnan guard, and the guard Liu Jian also recruited 3,000 soldiers.

古文：丁巳，命江、湖、浙西五漕司增价籴米二百二十万石赴沿江十郡，自荆至常州，以备振贷。
现代文：初五，命令江、湖、浙西等五槽司增价收来二百二十万石米送往沿江十郡，自荆州到常州，用作救济。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he ordered the five tank departments of Jiangsu, Hubei and West Zhejiang to increase the price and send 2.2 million koku of rice to the ten counties along the river, from Jingzhou to Changzhou, for relief.

古文：戊午，罢成都府路隔槽酒务监官七十一员，令民承买。
现代文：初六，罢除成都府路七十一名隔槽酒务监官，命令百姓承买。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the 71st partition tank liquor inspector of Chengdu Prefecture Road was dismissed, and the people were ordered to undertake the purchase.

古文：己未，罢江、浙、淮东沙田芦场所增租课。
现代文：初七，罢除江、浙、淮东沙田芦场增收租课。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, the rent-increasing class of Shatian Lujang in Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Huadong was cancelled.

古文：甲子，落沈该观文殿大学士，致仕。
现代文：十二日，沈该降为观文殿大学士，退休。
English: On the 12th, Shen Jie was demoted to a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and retired.

古文：罢福建安抚司官卖盐。
现代文：罢除福建安抚司官卖盐。
English: Expel the Fujian pacifying magistrate from selling salt.

古文：戊辰，大省淮西冗官。
现代文：十六日，大规模减免淮西冗官。
English: On the 16th, large-scale reduction and exemption of redundant officials in Huaxi.

古文：辛未，复置江、淮、荆、浙、福建、广南路提点坑冶铸钱官。
现代文：十九日，重新设置江、淮、荆、浙、福建、广南路提点坑冶铸钱官。
English: On the 19th, Jiangsu, Huai, Jing, Zhejiang, Fujian, and Guangnan roads were re-established.

古文：秋七月丁亥，以权吏部尚书贺允中参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命代理吏部尚书贺允中为参知政事。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the acting head clerk, Shangshu He Yunzhong, was appointed to be a political advisor.

古文：癸巳，封权户部侍郎令詪为安定郡王。
现代文：十二日，封代理户部侍郎赵令很为安定郡王。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Ling, the deputy head of the household, was a very stable county king.

古文：戊戌，福州大水。
现代文：十七日，福州发大水。
English: On the 17th, Fuzhou was hit by heavy rain.

古文：己酉，禁诸路抑买官田。
现代文：二十八日，严禁各路抑配强买官田。
English: On the 28th, it is strictly forbidden for all parties to suppress the forced purchase of government land.

古文：庚戌，以四川经、总制及田晟钱粮钱共百三十四万缗充增招军校费。
现代文：二十九日，用四川经、总制及田晨钱粮钱共一百三十四万络充作增招军校费。
English: On the 29th, a total of 1.34 million rupees from Sichuan Province, the General System and Tiancheng money and grain money were used to fund the additional military school fees.

古文：八月甲子，募商人输米行在诸仓，愿以茶、盐、矾钞等偿直者听。
现代文：八月十三日，招募商人把米输纳行在各仓，愿意用茶、盐、钞引等偿还米的价值者听便。
English: On August 13th, merchants were recruited to collect the rice from each warehouse, and those who were willing to pay back the value of the rice with tea, salt, banknotes, etc. were at their disposal.

古文：丁卯，除南雄、英、连三州经界，复丁米旧额。
现代文：十六日，废除南雄、英、连三州经界，恢复丁米旧额。
English: On the 16th, the administrative boundaries of the three states of Nanxiong, Ying and Lian were abolished, and the old amount of dingmei was restored.

古文：甲戌，并史馆归秘书省，玉牒所归宗正寺。
现代文：二十三日，史馆归并到秘书省，玉碟所归并到宗正司。
English: On the 23rd, the History Museum was merged into the Ministry of Secretaries, and the Jade Plate Museum was merged into the Department of State Security.

古文：九月甲申，诏建炎以来使未还而后嗣无禄者，与一子官。
现代文：九月初四，下诏建炎以来出使金国没能回国而后代又没有棒禄的，委任一个儿子为官。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, the emperor Jianyan, who had not been able to return to the country and whose descendants did not have a great reward, appointed one of his sons as an official.

古文：乙酉，王纶使还入见，言金国和好无他。
现代文：初五，王纶出使金国回国朝见高宗，报告说金国仍然与朝廷和好，没有其他可疑情况。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Hui sent an envoy from the State of Jin back to the Imperial Court to meet with Gao Zong, reporting that the State of Jin was still at peace with the Imperial Court and that there were no other suspicious circumstances.

古文：丙戌，汤思退等称贺。
现代文：初六，汤思退等大臣称庆祝贺。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, ministers such as Tong Siti and others said congratulations.

古文：甲午，以汤思退为尚书左仆射，陈康伯为右仆射，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十四日，任命汤思退为尚书左仆射，陈康伯为右仆射，都为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 14th, Tang Sijie was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man and Chen Kangbo as his right-hand man, both of which were the most important things for the school.

古文：乙未，以皇太后不豫，大赦，不视朝。
现代文：十五日，因皇太后身体不舒适，举行大赦，不上朝处理政事。
English: On the 15th, due to the Empress Dowager being unwell, an amnesty was held and she did not go to the North to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙申，为太后祈福。
现代文：十六日，为太后祈祷求福。
English: On the 16th, they prayed for the empress dowager.

古文：蠲中下户所欠税赋及江、浙蝗潦州县租。
现代文：免除中下户所拖欠税赋及江、浙遭受蝗灾、涝灾州县租税。
English: Exempt middle and lower households from tax arrears and Jiangsu and Zhejiang suffered from locust plagues, and the tax of the affected counties.

古文：丁酉，减僧道免丁钱。
现代文：十七日，减免僧道免丁钱。
English: On the seventeenth day, the reduction and exemption of the monk road is exempted.

古文：己亥，蠲见监赃罚赏钱。
现代文：十九日，免除现监赃罚钱和赏钱。
English: On the 19th, the current prisoners were exempted from fines and rewards.

古文：庚子，皇太后韦氏崩。
现代文：二十日，皇太后韦氏逝世。
English: On the 20th, Empress Dowager Wu Wei passed away.

古文：癸卯，遣周麟之等为金国奉表哀谢使。
现代文：二十三日，派遣周麟之等为金国奉表哀谢使。
English: On the 23rd, Zhou Lin and others were dispatched to send a letter of condolence to Kim Guo.

古文：冬十月甲寅，以群臣五上表，始听政。
现代文：冬十月初四，因群臣五次上表，高宗才上殿处理政事。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, due to the five-time appearance of the ministers, Gao Zong went to the palace to deal with political affairs.

古文：命保康军节度使吴益为欑宫总护使。
现代文：命令保康军节度使吴益为殡宫总护使。
English: He ordered the security forces to make Wu Yi the chief bodyguard of the Funeral Palace.

古文：乙亥，立诸路和籴募民妄运米赏格。
现代文：二十五日，确立各路和来募民运米奖赏标准。
English: On the 25th, the award criteria for the rice for the people's movement were established.

古文：戊寅，册谥皇太后曰显仁。
现代文：二十八日，册封皇太后溢号为显仁。
English: On the 28th, she was crowned empress dowager with the posthumous name of Hsien-jen.

古文：十一月丁亥，遣贺允中等为金国遗留国信使。
现代文：十一月初七，派遣贺允中等为金国遗留国信使。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, He Yun and others were sent as messengers to the remaining countries of China.

古文：丙午，权欑显仁皇后于永祐陵。
现代文：二十六日，显仁皇后殡宫暂且放在永陵。
English: On the 26th, the Funeral Palace of Empress Hsien-jen was temporarily placed in Yongling.

古文：十二月甲寅，谍言北界禁民传起兵，帝谕大臣常自治，为安边息民之计。
现代文：十二月初四，有情报说金国严禁百姓妄传兴兵，高宗告谕大臣应当治理好国内事务，为安边息民多献计献策。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month of the year, there was information that the people of the country were strictly forbidden to spread rumours about the rise of the army. Gao Zong told the minister that he should manage domestic affairs well and offer more plans and suggestions for the peace and prosperity of the people.

古文：甲子，祔显仁皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：十四日，奉显仁皇后神主祭于太庙。
English: On the 14th, the main festival in honor of Empress Hsien-Ren was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛未，以王纶知枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，任命王纶为知枢密院事。
English: On the 21st, Wang Xi was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：壬申，减三省、枢密院激赏库及诸书局岁用钱二十万缗，鼎州程昌寓所增蔡州官兵衣粮钱四之一，西和州官卖盐直之半，蒋州上供经、总制司无额钱如之。
现代文：二十二日，裁减三省、枢密院激赏库及各书局每年经费二十万络，鼎州程昌增加的蔡州官兵衣粮钱四分之一，西和州官卖盐价格的一半，蒋州上供经、总制司无额钱同样减半。
English: On the 22nd, the annual funds of the three provinces, the Privy Council Reward Library and the bookstores were reduced by 200,000 rupees. The clothing and grain money of the officers and soldiers of Caizhou, which was increased by Dingzhou Chengchang, was reduced by a quarter, the price of salt sold by the officers and soldiers of Xizhou was reduced by half, and the unlimited amount of money for providing education and general education in Jiangzhou was also reduced by half.

古文：丙子，金遣施宜生等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣施宜生等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, China sent Shi Yi and other students to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：三十年春正月戊子，给刘锜军费钱六十万缗。
现代文：绍兴三十年春正月初九，拨给刘倚军经费六十万络。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 30th year of Shaoxing's Spring, 600,000 rupees of funds were allocated to Liu Yijun.

古文：丙申，以吏部侍郎叶义问同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命吏部侍郎叶义问为知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Ye Yiqian, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：废御书院。
现代文：废除御书院。
English: Goshoin was abolished.

古文：丁酉，罢钧容班乐工及甲库酒局。
现代文：十八日，废罢钧容班乐工和甲库酒局。
English: On the 18th, the Yongban Musicians and the Jiuquan Liquor Bureau were abolished.

古文：壬寅，募人垦淮南荒田。
现代文：二十三日，招募百姓开垦淮南荒田。
English: On the 23rd, the people were recruited to reclaim the wasteland in Huainan Province.

古文：甲辰，定御辇院三营兵额为九百人。
现代文：二十五日，确定御举院三营兵额为九百人。
English: On the 25th, the number of soldiers in the three battalions of the Imperial General Court was determined to be 900.

古文：二月甲寅，罢夔州路榷茶。
现代文：二月初五，罢除夔州路榷茶。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Luzhou Lu Yao Cha was abolished.

古文：乙卯，金遣大怀忠等来吊祭。
现代文：初六，金国派遣大怀忠等来吊丧。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Kim Guo dispatched Dahua Zhong and others to pay their respects.

古文：戊午，遣叶义问为金国报谢使。
现代文：初九，派叶义问为金国答谢使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent Ye Yiqian to be the ambassador of thanks to the state of Jin.

古文：癸酉，诏立普安郡王瑗为皇子，更名玮。
现代文：二十四日，下诏立普安郡王赵缓为皇子，改名为赵玮。
English: On the 24th, King Zhao Xuan of Pu'an County was enthroned as the prince, and his name was changed to Zhao Xuan.

古文：丙子，进封建王。
现代文：二十七日，进封为建王。
English: On the 27th, he was crowned as the founding king.

古文：三月辛巳，复馆职召试，然后除擢。
现代文：三月初二，恢复朝廷诏召应试馆职，然后授给该职。
English: On the second day of the third month, the imperial edict revived the post of exam hall, and then awarded the post.

古文：免湖北、京西宣抚司诸库未输钱八十九万缗。
现代文：免除湖北、京西宣抚司各库没有输纳上缴钱八十九万络。
English: The Hubei and West Beijing counties were exempted from paying 8.9 million rupees.

古文：癸未，以淮东茶盐司钱十万缗充募民垦田费。
现代文：初四，用淮东茶盐司十万络钱当作招募百姓开垦荒田的经费。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Huaidong Tea and Salt Department used 100,000 rupees as funds to recruit people to reclaim wasteland.

古文：乙酉，加吴益少保，赵密开府仪同三司，以赏欑宫之劳。
现代文：初六，加给吴益少保职衔，赵密开府仪同三司职衔，用来奖赏他们护理殡宫的功劳。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, Wu Yishao was awarded the title of guarantor, and Zhao Mi Kaifu Yi was awarded the title of secretary. This was used to reward their efforts in caring for the mortuary.

古文：丁酉，初置金州御前诸军都统制，以知金州王彦为之。
现代文：十八日，初次设置金州御前各军都统制，任命金州知州王彦担任。
English: On the 18th, for the first time, the military command system was set up in front of the Jinzhou imperial court, and Wang Yan of Jinzhou Chizhou was appointed as the commander.

古文：癸卯，赐礼部进士梁克家以下四百一十二人及第、出身。
现代文：二十四日，赐给礼部进士梁克家以下四百一十二人及第、出身。
English: On the 24th, it was given to the 412 members of the Liang Ke family and their families.

古文：甲辰，置牧马监于潮、惠二州。
现代文：二十五日，在潮、惠二州设置牧马监。
English: On the 25th, horse herding inspectors were set up in Chaozhou and Huizhou.

古文：丙午，加恩平郡王璩开府仪同三司、判大宗正事，始称皇侄。
现代文：二十六日，恩平郡王赵朦升为开府仪同三司、判大宗正事，开始称皇侄。
English: On the 26th, the king of Enping County, Zhao Mingsheng, was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and was awarded the title of Daizong Zhengji, and began to be called the emperor's nephew.

古文：夏四月己酉朔，以孙愭为蕲州防御使，恺贵州团练使，惇荣州刺史。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命孙赵 嗜为薪州防御使，赵恺为贵州团练使，赵为荣州刺史。
English: On the first day of April in summer, Sun Zhao Jian was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhouzhou, Zhao Jian as the Guizhou regimental training envoy, and Zhao Jian as the Yongzhou historical envoy.

古文：丙辰，以贺允中兼权同知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，任命贺允中兼代理同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, He Yunzhong, also acting as Tongzhi Privy Councillor, was appointed.

古文：五月辛巳，刺海贼罪不至死者为龙猛、龙骑军。
现代文：五月初四，海贼不够判处死罪的刺充龙猛军、龙骑军。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the pirates were not enough to be sentenced to death.

古文：初置荆南府御前诸军都统制，以刘锜兼领之。
现代文：初次设置荆南府御前各军都统制，任命刘倚兼任都统制。
English: For the first time, Jingnan prefecture was set up to control all the armies in front of the emperor, and Liu Jie was also appointed to control the capital.

古文：乙酉，初置江州御前诸军都统制，以步军司前军都统制戚方为之。
现代文：初八，初次设置江州御前各军都统制，任命步军司前军都统制戚方担任。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Jiangzhou Imperial General Headquarters was set up for the first time, and the commander of the General Headquarters of the Imperial General Headquarters was appointed.

古文：诏诸路刺强盗贷死少壮者为兵。
现代文：下诏各路强盗免死的年青力壮者刺充士兵。
English: The young and strong who escaped death at the hands of the bandits are now serving as soldiers.

古文：丙戌，定铸钱司岁铸五十万缗。
现代文：初九，规定铸钱司每年铸钱五十万络。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was stipulated that the mint would mint 500,000 rupees worth of coins every year.

古文：辛卯，临安、于潜、安吉三县大水。
现代文：十四日，临安、于潜、安吉三县发大水。
English: On the 14th, Lin'an, Yuqian, and Anji counties experienced serious flooding.

古文：海贼陈演添作乱，掠高、雷二州境上，南恩州民林观禽杀之，命观以官。
现代文：海贼陈演添叛乱，攻掠高、雷二州边境，南恩州百姓林观捉住后杀掉了海贼，朝廷授给林观官职。
English: The pirates Chen staged a rebellion, attacked and plundered the border of Gao and Lei two states, and the people of Nan'an state Lin Guan caught and killed the pirates, and the court awarded Lin Guan an official post.

古文：丙申，金遣萧荣等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派遣萧荣等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Xiao Rong and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：壬寅，落沈该致仕，复观文殿大学士、知明州。
现代文：二十日，沈该退休后重新启用，恢复为观文殿大学士，明州知州。
English: On the 20th, after Shen retired, it was reopened and resumed as a bachelor of the Guanwendeng University, Chizhou, Mingzhou.

古文：丙午，加吴益太尉。
现代文：二十四日，加给吴盖太尉职衔。
English: On the 24th, Wu Gai was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：六月庚戌，复出诸军见钱关子三百万缗，听商贾以钱银请买。
现代文：六月初三，又印出各军现钱交子三百万络，允许商贾用钱银购买。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, another 3 million rupees worth of each army's current money was printed, allowing merchants to buy more with money and silver.

古文：庚午，王伦罢。
现代文：二十三日，王纶被罢。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Yao was dismissed.

古文：辛未，以江西广东湖南折帛、经总制钱合六十万缗，江西米六万石充江州军费。
现代文：二十四日，用江西、广东、湖南折帛钱和经总制钱共六十万络，江西六万石米，充作江州军的经费。
English: On the 24th, a total of 600,000 ryo and 60,000 koku of rice from Jiangxi, Guangdong and Hunan were used to finance the Jiangsu Army.

古文：后益以四川利路经总制、江西茶引合二十万缗。
现代文：后来又增加四川利路经总制、江西茶引钱共二十万络。
English: Later, a total of 200,000 rupees was added to the Sichuan Li Lu Jing General System and the Jiangxi Tea Withdrawal System.

古文：秋七月戊寅，遣明州水军三百戍昆山黄鱼垛，巡捕槽船之为盗者。
现代文：秋七月初二，派明州水军三百人戍守昆山黄鱼垛，巡视察捕槽船中为盗者。
English: On the second day of the second month of the autumn, 300 people from the Mingzhou Marine Corps were sent to guard the Kunshan yellow whiting, inspecting the trawlers for thieves.

古文：甲申，诏诸路帅司，春秋教阅禁兵弓弩手。戊戌，以叶义问知枢密院，翰林学士周麟之同知院事，御史中丞朱倬参知政事。
现代文：初八，下诏各路帅司，春秋教阅禁兵弓弩手&;;二十二日，任命叶义问为知枢密院，翰林学士周麟之为同知枢密院事，御史中承朱悼为参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he issued an edict to all the generals and admirals, and on the 22nd day of the year, he appointed Ye Yiwu as a member of the Privy Council, Hanlin Scholar Zhou Lin as a member of the Privy Council, and Zhi Zhong Zheng Zhu Mui as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：八月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On August 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：壬子，贺允中使还，言金人必叛盟，宜为之备。
现代文：初七，贺允中出使金国回国，报告说金朝必定会背叛盟约，应该为此做好准备。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, He Yunzhong sent Kim Guo back to China, reporting that the Kim dynasty would certainly betray the treaty, and that preparations should be made for this.

古文：癸丑，允中致仕。
现代文：初八，贺允中退休。
English: He retired in his eighth year of junior high school.

古文：甲寅，复以四川经、总制钱五十万缗给总领所，增招兵士。
现代文：初九，又以四川经总制钱五十万络拨给总领所，增招士兵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Sichuan Provincial Government allocated 500,000 rupees to the General Consulate to recruit more soldiers.

古文：壬申，淮东总管许世安奏，金主亮至汴京，起重兵五十余万，屯宿、泗州，谋来攻。
现代文：二十七日，淮东总管许世安奏称，金主完颜亮到达汁京，发重兵五十多万，屯驻宿州、泅州策划进攻朝廷。
English: On the 27th, Xu Shian, the governor-general of Huadong Province, announced that the emperor had arrived in Beijing in full color, dispatched more than half a million soldiers, and stationed them in Suzhou and Zhangzhou to plan an attack on the imperial court.

古文：九月庚寅，以带御器械李宝为浙西副总管，提督海船，驻平江。
现代文：九月十五日，任命带御器械李宝为浙西副总管，提督海船，屯驻平江。
English: On September 15th, Li Bao was appointed as the vice-governor of West Zhejiang Province and the admiral of the naval ship, stationed in Pingjiang.

古文：丙申，命刘宝招制胜军千人。
现代文：二十一日，命令刘宝招募制胜军一千人。
English: On the 21st, Liu Bao was ordered to recruit 1,000 men for the victorious army.

古文：丁酉，罢内侍省。
现代文：二十二日，废罢内侍省。
English: On the 22nd, the Ministry of the Interior was abolished.

古文：冬十月丙午，罢内侍官承受诸军奏报文字。
现代文：冬十月初二，罢除内侍官承受各军奏报朝廷文字。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the dismissal of the inner chamberlains was received by each army and reported to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，遣虞允文使金贺正旦，徐度贺金主生辰。
现代文：初三，派遣虞允文出使金国祝贺正旦，徐度祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yu Yunwen sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zhengdan, and gradually congratulated Kim on his birthday.

古文：庚戌，雷。
现代文：初六，打雷。
English: Sixth period, thunder.

古文：辛酉，镇江都统制刘宝以专悍贪横罢。
现代文：十七日，镇江都统制刘宝因专横跋启、贪图财利被罢。
English: On the 17th, Liu Bao, the governor of Zhenjiang, was ousted for his domineering behavior and greed for money and profit.

古文：壬戌，以刘锜为镇江都统制，荆南右军统制李道为都统制。
现代文：十八日，任命刘倚为镇江都统制，荆南右军统制李道为都统制。
English: On the 18th, Liu Jian was appointed as the commander-in-chief of Zhenjiang, and Li Dao, the commander-in-chief of Jingnan Right Army, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the capital.

古文：癸亥，日中无云而雷。
现代文：十九日，中午没有云而打雷。
English: On the 19th, at noon, there was no cloud but thunder.

古文：癸酉，蠲舒、和、蕲、黄四州民附种田租。
现代文：二十九日，免除舒、和、薪、黄四州百姓被强迫耕种营田而认纳的租课。
English: On the 29th, the people of Shu, He, Qi, and Huang were exempted from the forced cultivation of camp fields.

古文：十一月庚辰，禁诸路折输职田钱。
现代文：十一月初六，严禁各路折输职田钱。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, it is strictly forbidden to transfer money from the fields to the workers.

古文：癸已夜，有白气出入危、昴间。
现代文：十九日夜，有白气出人危宿星、晶宿星之间。
English: On the night of the 19th, there was white gas between the dangerous and the crystal stars.

古文：十二月乙巳朔，汤思退罢。
现代文：十二月初一，汤思退被罢。
English: On the first day of December, Tang Si retired.

古文：初行会子于东南。戊申夜，白气亘天。
现代文：开始在东南地区通行会子。初四夜，白气布满天空。
English: It began to pass through the southeastern region. On the first four nights, white clouds filled the sky.

古文：海南黎贼王文满平。
现代文：海南黎贼王文满被平定。
English: The Hainan-Li Kleptocracy was finally defeated.

古文：己酉，罢招刺三衙及江上诸军。
现代文：初五，罢除招刺三衙及江上各军。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the troops of the 3rd Division and the troops on the river were dismissed.

古文：庚戌，禁掠卖生口入溪峒。
现代文：初六，严禁掠卖百姓到溪酮。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, it is strictly forbidden to plunder and sell the people to Xi Ketong.

古文：癸丑，命户部立经、总制钱十年中数为定额。
现代文：初九，命令户部取经、总制钱实行十年来的中等数量作为今后的定额。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, it ordered the Household Department to collect and implement the total amount of money in the past ten years as the future quota.

古文：丁卯，金遣仆散权等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十三日，金国派遣仆散权等来祝贺明年的春节。
English: On the 23rd, the DPRK dispatched officials to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

