古文：古今言地险者，以谓函秦宅关、河之胜，齐负海、岱、赵、魏据大河，晋表里河山，蜀有剑门、瞿唐之阻，楚国方城以为城、汉水以为池，吴长江万里，兼五湖之固，皆足以立国。
现代文：从古至今讨论地形险要的论述中，说的不外乎都是：秦地长安处在函谷关、黄河的地理优势之中；齐地背靠大海和泰山；赵地、魏地倚仗黄河的优势；晋地外有大河内有大山作为优势；蜀地有剑门山和瞿唐关作为屏障阻碍；楚国以方城山作为城墙，又以汉水作为护城河；吴地不仅有万里长江，又牢牢占据了太湖这个优势，都足够各地凭借地理优势建国立邦。
English: From ancient times to the present, in the discussion of topographical perils, what is said is nothing more than: Qin and Chang'an are located in the geographical advantages of Hanzhong Pass and the Yellow River; Qi backs the sea and Mount Tai; Zhao and Wei rely on the advantages of the Yellow River; outside Jin, there are big mountains in Hanoi as advantages; Shu has Jianmen Mountain and Shantang Pass as barriers; Chu has Fangcheng Mountain as a city wall and Han water as a moat; Wudi not only has thousands of miles of Yangtze River, but also firmly occupies the advantage of Taihu Lake, which is enough for all regions to build a national state

古文：唯宋、卫之郊，四通五达，无一险可恃。
现代文：唯有宋地、卫地的周围，四通五达，没有一处天险可以凭借根据。
English: Only around the Song Dynasty and the Meiji era, there are four roads and five bridges, and there is no natural hazard that can be based on.

古文：然东汉之末，袁绍跨有青、冀、幽、并四州，韩遂、马腾辈分据关中，刘璋擅蜀，刘表居荆州，吕布盗徐，袁术包南阳、寿春，孙策取江东，天下形胜尽矣。
现代文：然而东汉末年，袁绍跨越四地占有了青州、冀州、幽州、并州，韩遂、马腾之辈则分据关中各地，刘璋占据了蜀地，刘表据守荆州，吕布窃据徐州，袁术包揽了南阳、寿春两地，孙策取得了江东地区，天下有险可据的战略地区都被分刮殆尽了。
English: However, at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Yuan Shao occupied Qingzhou, Jizhou, Yuzhou and Bianzhou across four regions, Han Sui and Ma Teng occupied Guanzhong and other regions, Liu Bei occupied Shu, Liu Bei occupied Jingzhou, Lv Bu occupied Xuzhou, Yuan Zhi occupied Nanyang and Shuchun, and Sun Ce captured Jiangdong. The world's strategic regions with potential were completely wiped out.

古文：曹操晚得兖州，倔强其间，终之夷群雄，覆汉祚。
现代文：曹操后来才占得兖州，在上述群雄中崛起强盛，最后剿平群雄，颠覆汉室江山。
English: Cao Cao later occupied Zhangzhou, rose to power among the above-mentioned heroes, and finally leveled the heroes, subverting the Han Dynasty.

古文：议者尚以为操挟天子以自重，故能成功。
现代文：坊间议论的人认为是曹操挟持皇帝借此提高自己的地位，所以才能成就功名。
English: Some people think that Cao Cao took the emperor hostage in order to improve his own status, which is why he was able to achieve fame.

古文：而唐僖、昭之时，方镇擅地，王氏有赵百年，罗洪信在魏，刘仁恭在燕，李克用在河东，王重荣在蒲，朱宣、朱瑾在兖、郓，时溥在徐，王敬武在淄、青，杨行密在淮南，王建在蜀，天子都长安，凤翔、邠华三镇鼎立为梗，李茂贞、韩建皆尝劫迁乘舆。
现代文：但是唐僖宗、唐昭宗的时候，藩镇割据，王氏据有赵地百来年，罗红信霸占了魏地，刘仁恭割据燕地，李克用占领河东山西地区，王重荣在蒲州，朱宣在兖州、朱瑾在郓州，时溥在徐州，王敬武在淄州、青州，杨行密在淮南，王建在蜀地。皇帝建都长安城，凤翔、閤、华三镇鼎立而立，处处为抗，李茂贞、韩建都尝试过劫持皇帝。
English: However, during the Tang and Zhaozong Dynasties, the Han and Zhou Dynasties divided their territory, the Wang Dynasty divided the Zhao and Baiyun Dynasties, Luo Hongxin occupied Wei, Liu Renkong divided the Yan and Li Ke occupied the western part of Shansi in the east of the river, Wang Chong Rong was in Puzhou, Zhu Xuan was in Ganzhou, Zhu Xi was in Ganzhou, Shigong was in Xuzhou, Wang Jingwu was in Ganzhou and Qingzhou, Yang Xingmi was in Huainan, and Wang Jian was in Shudi. The emperor built the capital Chang'an City,

古文：而朱温区区以汴、宋、毫、颖嶻然中居，及其得志，乃与操等，以在德不在险为言，则操、温之德又可见矣。
现代文：然而只是凭借区区汴州、宋州、亳州、颍州高峻其中，等到最后他却和曹操一样扫平群雄志得意满。如果说兴国安邦是靠品德而不是靠地理环境的险要优势，那么曹操朱温的品德又可见一斑了。
English: However, it was only by virtue of the lofty status of Bozhou, Songzhou, Bozhou and Bozhou that he finally became as proud as Cao Cao. If it is said that the prosperity of a country depends on its moral character and not on the geographical environment, then Cao Cao's moral character is also evident.

