古文：坤至柔而动也刚，至静而德方，后得主而有常，含万物而化光。
现代文：《文言》说：地道极为柔顺但它的运动却是刚健的，它极为娴静但品德是方正的，地道后于天道而行动，但运动具有规律性。它包容万物，其生化作用是广大的。
English: "The Analects" says: the Tao is extremely supple, but its movement is vigorous; it is extremely tranquil, but its virtue is upright; the Tao acts according to Heaven, but its movement is regular; it embraces all things, and its biochemical action is extensive.

古文：坤道其顺乎，承天而时行。
现代文：地道多么柔顺呵！顺承天道而依准四时运行。
English: How smooth is the earth's path! Obeying the heavenly path and running according to the four o'clock.

古文：积善之家必有余庆，积不善之家必有余殃。
现代文：积累善行的人家，必有不尽的吉祥；积累恶行的人家，必有不尽的灾殃。
English: Those who accumulate good deeds will have inexhaustible blessings; those who accumulate evil deeds will have inexhaustible disasters.

古文：臣弑其君，子弑其父，非一朝一夕之故，其所由来者渐矣。
现代文：臣子弑杀他的国君，儿子弑杀他的父亲，并不是一朝一夕形成的，所以出现这种局面是逐步发展的结果。
English: A vassal killing his sovereign, a son killing his father, did not form overnight, so this situation is the result of gradual development.

古文：由辩之不早辩也。
现代文：这是由于君父不曾早日辨清真相才导致的。
English: This is due to the fact that your father did not discern the truth earlier.

古文：《易》曰： 履霜，坚冰至。 
现代文：《易经》说： 践踏着薄霜，坚厚的冰层快要冻结成了。 
English: "I Ching" said: "The thin frost is trampled on, and the thick ice is about to freeze.

古文：盖言顺也。 直 其正也， 方 其义也。
现代文：大概就是一种循序渐进的现象。直是存心的正直，方是行为的道义。
English: It's probably a gradual phenomenon. It's the honesty of the intention that matters, not the morality of the action.

古文：君子敬以直内，义以方外，敬义立而德不孤。 直方大，不习无不利。 
现代文：君子通过恭敬谨慎来矫正思想上的偏差，用道义的原则来规范行为上的悖乱。恭敬、道义的精神树立起来了，他的品德就会产生广泛的影响。君子 正直、方正、广博，这些品德不为人们所了解，也没有什么不利的。 
English: A gentleman corrects deviations in his thinking through respect and prudence, and uses moral principles to regulate behavior. When a respectful and moral spirit is established, his character will have a broad impact. A gentleman is honest, upright, and broad-minded. These qualities are not understood by people, and there is nothing unfavorable about them.

古文：则不疑其所行也。
现代文：因为人们不会怀疑他的行为。
English: Because people don't question his actions.

古文：阴虽有美， 含 之以从王事，弗敢成也。
现代文：阴比喻臣下，虽有美德，但宜深藏含隐，从而服务于君王，不敢自居有功。
English: Yin is a metaphor for vassals, although they have virtues, it is advisable to hide them deeply, so as to serve the king, and dare not take credit.

古文：地道也，妻道也，臣道也。
现代文：这是地道的原则，也是妻道的原则，同样是臣道的原则。
English: This is the principle of the authentic way, the principle of the wife way, and the principle of the subject way.

古文：地道 无成 而代 有终 也。
现代文：地道不能单独地完成生育万物的功业，但是在时序的交替中，它始终一贯地发挥作用。
English: The tunnel alone cannot complete the work of giving birth to all things, but it plays a consistent role in the alternation of time sequences.

古文：天地变化，草木蕃，天地闭，贤人隐。
现代文：天地交通变化，草木就茂盛，天地阻隔不通，贤人就隐退。
English: As the traffic between heaven and earth changes, plants and trees will flourish, the barrier between heaven and earth will not pass, and sages will retreat.

古文：《易》曰： 括囊，无咎无誉。 盖言谨也。
现代文：《易经》说： 扎紧了口袋，如缄口不言。
English: "I Ching" says: If you tighten your pockets, you will not speak.

古文：君子 黄 中通理，正位居体，美在其中，而畅于四支，发于事业，美之至也！
现代文：没有指责也没有赞誉。 
English: There is no blame and no praise.

古文：阴疑于阳必战，为其嫌于无阳也。
现代文：因为阴极盛而与阳均等，所以把阴阳一并称作龙。
English: Because the cathode is abundant and is equal to the yang, the yin and yang are called dragons.

古文：故称 龙 焉犹未离其类也，故称 血 焉。
现代文：其实阴并未脱离其属类，所以又称为血，血即阴类。
English: In fact, yin has not separated from its genus, so it is also called blood. Blood is yin.

古文：夫 玄黄 者，天地之杂也，天玄而地黄。
现代文：所谓玄黄一一天玄地黄一一是天地交相混合的色彩。
English: The so-called black-and-yellow-one-day-black-and-yellow-one-day is the color of the intermingling of heaven and earth.

