古文：张璁桂萼方献夫夏言
现代文：张璁，字秉用，永嘉人。
English: Zhang Ye, the character Bing Ye, is played by Yong Jia Ren.

古文：张璁，字秉用，永嘉人。举于乡，七试不第。
现代文：早年被乡里举送参加考试，七次都不得第。
English: In his early years, he was sent by the township to take the exam, and he failed seven times.

古文：将谒选，御史萧鸣凤善星术，语之曰： 从此三载成进士，又三载当骤贵。 
现代文：将到吏部去等候选派，御史萧鸣凤善于占星术，告诉他说 ：从此以后三年你就可以中进士，再有三年该会飞黄腾达的。 
English: When the candidate faction was about to go to the cadres' office to wait, the imperial secretary Xiao Mingfeng, who was good at astrology, told him: "From now on, you can be a junior high school graduate in three years, and in another three years you will be flying high."

古文：璁乃归。
现代文：张璁于是还乡。
English: Zhang Ye then returned to his hometown.

古文：正德十六年登第，年四十七矣。
现代文：正德十六年登黄榜，已经四十七岁了。
English: Zhengde has been on the yellow list for 16 years, and is already 47 years old.

古文：世宗初践阼，议追崇所生父兴献王。
现代文：世宗刚刚登基时，讨论追崇亲生父亲兴献王。
English: When King Sejong had just ascended to the throne, he discussed pursuing his biological father, King Heungseong.

古文：廷臣持之，议三上三却。
现代文：廷臣不同意，决议三次上报，三次被否决。
English: The courtier disagreed, and the resolution was reported three times and rejected three times.

古文：璁时在部观政，以是年七月朔上疏曰： 孝子之至，莫大乎尊亲。
现代文：张璁当时在礼部见习政事，于这年七月初一上书说： 孝子的极致，没有比尊崇双亲更重要的。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye was a trainee in the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and on the first day of July of that year, he wrote: The ultimate of filial piety, there is nothing more important than honoring both parents.

古文：尊亲之至，莫大乎以天下养。
现代文：尊崇双亲的极致，没有比用整个天下供奉更为上策的了。
English: There is no better way to honor one's parents than to use the whole world to do so.

古文：陛下嗣登大宝，即议追尊圣考以正其号，奉迎圣母以致其养，诚大孝也。
现代文：陛下继位做了皇帝，就商量着尊崇已故的生身父而且确立他的名号，迎接亲生母亲加以赡养，实在是很孝顺的。
English: When His Majesty succeeded to the throne and became emperor, he discussed honoring his deceased biological father and establishing his name, welcoming his biological mother and supporting her, which was very filial.

古文：廷议执汉定陶、宋濮王故事，谓为人后者为之子，不得顾私亲。
现代文：大臣的决议引用汉朝定陶王、宋朝濮王的故事，说在入继大统以后就是人家的儿子，不能够再顾及亲生父母。
English: The minister's resolution quoted the stories of King Ding Tao of the Han Dynasty and King Song of the Song Dynasty, saying that after succeeding to the throne, he was someone else's son and could no longer take care of his biological parents.

古文：夫天下岂有无父母之国哉？
现代文：难道天下有没有父母的皇帝？
English: Are there any parents of emperors in the world?

古文：《记》曰： 礼非天降，非地出，人情而已。 
现代文：《记》说： 礼不是天上掉下来的，也不是地下冒出来的，是根据人的真实感情制定的。 
English: "Record" said: "Rites did not fall from the sky, nor did they emerge from underground, but were formulated based on people's true feelings.

古文：汉哀帝、宋英宗固定陶、濮王子，然成帝、仁宗皆预立为嗣，养之宫中，其为人后之义甚明。故师丹、司马光之论行于彼一时则可。
现代文：汉哀帝、宋英宗原本是定陶王、濮王的儿子，然而汉成帝、宋仁宗都在生前领养他们做后裔，把他们养在皇宫中，他们作为别人家后裔的道理很明白，所以师丹、司马光的主张在他们的那个时代实行是可以的。
English: Emperor Han'ei and Emperor Song Yingzong were originally the sons of King Ding Tao and King Gong. However, Emperor Hancheng and Emperor Song Renzong adopted them as their descendants and raised them in the imperial palace. They understood very well that they were the descendants of someone else's family. Therefore, Shidan's and Sima Guang's ideas could be implemented in their time.

古文：今武宗无嗣，大臣遵祖训，以陛下伦序当立而迎立之。
现代文：现在我们武宗没有后代，大臣们按照祖宗的教导，在武宗身后，因为陛下的辈份和排行应当立为皇帝所以才做了皇帝。
English: Now we, the ministers, follow the teachings of our ancestors and stand behind Emperor Buzong, because His Majesty's lineage and rank should have made him emperor.

古文：遗诏直曰 兴献王长子 ，未尝著为人后之义。
现代文：武宗的遗诏直接讲 兴献王的大儿子 ，并没有表示让您过继的意思。
English: Emperor Wuzong's last will and testament spoke directly to King Heungseong's eldest son, and did not indicate that he wanted you to succeed him.

古文：则陛下之兴，实所以承祖宗之统，与预立为嗣养之宫中者较然不同。
现代文：那么陛下登基实际上是为了继承祖宗的王统，与被立为他人后裔养在深宫中的定陶王、濮王的儿子比较是很不一样的。
English: Then, His Majesty's ascension to the throne was actually for the purpose of inheriting the royal line of his ancestors, which is very different from the sons of King Ding Tao and King Zou, who were raised as the descendants of others in the depths of the palace.

古文：议者谓孝庙德泽在人，不可无后。
现代文：议论的大臣说孝庙的恩惠体现在人间，不可让他绝后。
English: The controversial minister said that the benevolence of the filial piety temple is reflected in the human world, and he should not be allowed to die.

古文：假令圣考尚存，嗣位今日，恐弟亦无后兄之义。
现代文：但是假使陛下亲生父还在世，现在继位做皇帝，恐怕没有弟弟变作哥哥的后裔的道理。
English: However, assuming that His Majesty's biological father is still alive and is now succeeding to the throne as emperor, I am afraid that there is no reason for a younger brother to become the descendant of an older brother.

古文：且迎养圣母，以母之亲也。称皇叔母，则当以君臣礼见，恐子无臣母之义。
现代文：况且迎接亲生母亲来赡养，正因为是亲生母亲，称为皇叔母，就应当按君臣的礼节见面，恐怕没有儿子让母亲称臣的道理吧。
English: Moreover, to meet the biological mother to support, just because it is the biological mother, called the imperial aunt, it should be met according to the etiquette of the monarch, I'm afraid there is no reason for the son to make his mother a minister.

古文：《礼》 长子不得为人后 ，圣考止生陛下一人，利天下而为人后，恐子无自绝其父母之义。
现代文：《礼》说 ：长子不能给别人做后裔。 兴献王只您这么一个儿子，为了有利于天下而做别人的后裔，恐怕您自己也不该自绝于父母吧。
English: "Li" said: "The eldest son cannot be a descendant to others. Xing Xianwang, you are only such a son, in order to benefit the world and be a descendant of others, I am afraid you should not cut yourself off from your parents.

古文：故在陛下谓入继祖后，而得不废其尊亲则可；谓为人后，以自绝其亲则不可。
现代文：所以对于陛下，说是继承祖宗的王业，因而也不能废弃尊崇亲生父母，这种提法是可以的；说是做了别人的后裔而且要和自己父母割断亲情，那是不行的。
English: Therefore, for His Majesty, it is possible to say that he is inheriting the royal heritage of his ancestors, and therefore he cannot abandon the respect for his own parents; it is not possible to say that he is a descendant of others and wants to sever the family ties with his parents.

古文：夫统与嗣不同，非必父死子立也。
现代文：王统与后裔不同，不一定非父死子立不可。
English: Unlike descendants, royal succession does not necessarily have to be established by the father or the son.

古文：汉文承惠帝后，则以弟继；宣帝承昭帝后，则以兄孙继。若必夺此父子之亲，建彼父子之号，然后谓之继统，则古有称高伯祖、皇伯考者，皆不得谓之统乎？
现代文：如果必须割断这边父子间的亲情，确立那边父子的名称，然后才说是继承王统，那么古代有过称先皇帝为高伯祖、皇伯考的皇帝，他们都不能称为正统吗？
English: If it is necessary to sever the kinship between the father and son on this side, establish the names of the father and son on the other side, and then say that they are inheriting the royal line, then in ancient times there were emperors who called the previous emperor Gao Bozu, Emperor Bercow, can they not be called orthodox?

古文：臣窃谓今日之礼，宜别立圣考庙于京师，使得隆尊亲之孝，且使母以子贵，尊与父同，则圣考不失其为父，圣母不失其为母矣。 
现代文：我认为今天的礼数，应该是在北京另立陛下生父的庙宇，使陛下能够光大尊崇双亲的孝道，并且使生母因为儿子显贵，尊号和生父一致，那么谢世的生父不失为父亲，生身母亲也还是陛下的母亲。 
English: I think that today's ceremony should be to build a separate temple for His Majesty's biological father in Beijing, so that His Majesty can glorify and respect the filial piety of his parents, and so that his biological mother, because of her son's eminence, can have the same honorific title as his biological father. Then Xie Si's biological father is still his father, and his biological mother is still his mother.

古文：帝方扼廷议，得璁疏大喜，曰： 此论出，吾父子获全矣。 
现代文：世宗正为大臣们的决议所阻挠，得到张璁的奏章大为高兴，说： 这种观点摆出来，我们父子之名可得以保全了。 
English: Sejong, who had been thwarted by the ministers' decision, was overjoyed to receive Zhang Ye's score, saying, "With this view, the name of our father and son can be preserved."

古文：亟下廷臣议。
现代文：立即下发给大臣们讨论。
English: It was immediately sent to the ministers for discussion.

古文：廷臣大怪骇，交起击之。礼官毛澄等执如初。
现代文：大臣们对此大为诧异，相互起来攻击他，礼官毛澄等仍坚持原来的意见。
English: The ministers were greatly surprised by this and attacked him one after another, but the etiquette officer, Mao Cheng, and others still adhered to their original opinion.

古文：会献王妃至通州，闻尊称礼未定，止不肯入。
现代文：恰好献王的妃子来到通州，听说献王的封号还没定下来，就止步不肯进京。
English: The concubine who happened to offer the king came to Tongzhou. When she heard that the seal number of the offering king had not yet been set, she refused to go to Beijing.

古文：帝闻而泣，欲避位归藩。
现代文：世宗听说，流下了眼泪，想退位回藩王府去。
English: According to Sejong, he shed tears and wanted to abdicate and return to the royal palace.

古文：璁乃著《大礼或问》上之，帝于是连驳礼官疏。
现代文：张璁于是写《大礼或问》进呈，世宗于是连续批驳礼官的上书。
English: Zhang Qian then wrote "a big gift or a question" and submitted it, and Shizong then continuously refuted the letter from the etiquette official.

古文：廷臣不得已，合议尊孝宗曰 皇考 ，兴献王曰 本生父兴献帝 ，璁亦除南京刑部主事以去，追崇议且寝。
现代文：大臣们迫不得已，共同决定尊称孝宗为皇考，兴献王为 本生父兴献帝 ，张璁也被任命为南京刑部主事，离开北京，追封兴献王的大争论暂且停顿了。
English: As a last resort, the ministers jointly decided to honorably call Xiaozong the imperial examination, and Xingxian Wang the natural father Xingxian Emperor. Zhang Ye was also appointed as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department. He left Beijing, and the great debate on the pursuit of Xingxian Wang was temporarily suspended.

古文：至嘉靖三年正月，帝得桂萼疏心动，复下廷议。
现代文：到嘉靖三年正月，世宗收到桂萼的上书又动了心，又把奏章下发给大臣讨论。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jiajing, Sejong was moved by the petition received from Gui Caly, and sent the music chapter to the minister for discussion.

古文：汪俊代毛澄为礼部，执如澄。璁乃复上疏曰： 陛下遵兄终弟及之训，伦序当立。礼官不思陛下实入继大统之君，而强比与为人后之例，绝献帝天性之恩，蔑武宗相传之统，致陛下父子、伯侄、兄弟名实俱紊。
现代文：王浚当时代毛澄做了礼部首长，坚持原来的决议，张璁于是又上书说 ：陛下遵照兄长去世弟弟即位的道理，按照辈份和排行该当上皇帝，礼官不思量陛下实为入继王统的皇帝，而强行视作给别人过继为后裔的例子，割断献帝生育陛下的大恩，错误理解武宗传下来的王统，使得陛下一家人父子、伯侄、兄弟之间名实都乱了套。
English: Wang Jun, who was the head of the ceremonial department at the time of Mao Cheng, insisted on the original resolution. Zhang Xi then wrote again, saying, "Your Majesty, according to the principle of the succession of the deceased younger brother, should be the emperor according to the generation and rank. The etiquette official did not consider that Your Majesty was actually the emperor who succeeded to the throne, but forcibly regarded it as an example of adoption as a descendant to others. Cutting off the great grace of giving birth to Your Majesty, and misunderstanding the royal lineage passed down by the Wuzong, caused the names and facts of Your Majesty's family to be confused between father and son, uncle

古文：宁负天子，不敢忤权臣，此何心也？
现代文：宁可对不住皇上，不敢违背权臣的意志，这安得哪门心思？
English: It is better not to offend the emperor than to violate the will of a powerful minister. What kind of peace of mind is that?

古文：伏睹圣谕云： 兴献王独生朕一人，既不得承绪，又不得徽称，罔极之恩何由得报？ 
现代文：我看到诏书里说 ：兴献王只生了我一个人，既不能生前即位做皇帝，身后又得不到皇帝的名号，我怎么报答父王对我无上的恩德呢？ 
English: I saw in the imperial edict that "King Heungchen only gave birth to me, and since I can neither ascend the throne as emperor during my lifetime nor receive the title of emperor after my death, how can I repay my father's supreme kindness to me?"

古文：执政窥测上心，有见于推尊之重，故今日争一帝字，明日争一皇字。而陛下之心，亦日以不帝不皇为歉。
现代文：执政大臣揣测陛下的心思，有见于追崇生父的重要性，所以今天争一个帝字，明天争一个皇字，而陛下的心也因为生父不得为帝不得为皇感到惭愧。
English: The ruling minister guessed His Majesty's thoughts, seeing the importance of honoring his biological father, so today he fought for a title of emperor, tomorrow for a title of emperor, and His Majesty's heart was also ashamed because his biological father could not be emperor.

古文：既而加称为帝，谓陛下心既慰矣，故留一皇字以觇陛下将来未尽之心，遂敢称孝宗为皇考，称兴献帝为本生父。
现代文：既而兴献王加封号为帝，礼官以为陛下的心已有所欣慰了，所以留下一个皇字以试探陛下将来还不满足的心愿，于是才敢称呼孝宗为皇考，称呼兴献帝为本生父。
English: As soon as Emperor Xingxian was crowned emperor, the etiquette official thought that his majesty's heart had been somewhat comforted, so he left an imperial character to test his majesty's unsatisfied wish in the future. Only then did he dare to call Emperor Xingxian his real father.

古文：父子之名既更，推崇之义安在？
现代文：父子的名称都给改了，尊崇兴献帝的道理体现在什么地方？
English: The names of both father and son have been changed. Where is the principle of reverence and devotion to the emperor reflected?

古文：乃遽诏告天下，乘陛下不觉，陷以不孝。《礼》曰： 君子不夺人之亲，亦不可夺亲也。 
现代文：当时礼官趁陛下还没觉察，马上就用诏书布告天下，陷陛下于不孝之中。《礼》说： 有德行的人不争夺别人的亲情，也不能被别人剥夺亲情。 
English: At that time, the etiquette officer took advantage of His Majesty's unawareness and immediately announced to the world with an edict, trapping His Majesty in his lack of filial piety. "Ri" said: A virtuous person does not compete for the affection of others, nor can he be deprived of affection by others.

古文：陛下尊为万乘，父子之亲，人可得而夺之，又可容人之夺之乎？
现代文：陛下尊贵地做了皇帝，父子之间的亲情却给人剥夺了，您难道能容忍别人夺走它吗？
English: Your Majesty has nobly become emperor, but the affection between father and son has been robbed. Can you tolerate others taking it away?

古文：故今日之礼不在皇与不皇，惟在考与不考。
现代文：所以现在要争的不是皇与不皇的问题，而只在于考与不考之间。
English: Therefore, what we need to fight about now is not the issue of emperor versus non-emperor, but only between examination and non-examination.

古文：若徒争一皇字，则执政必姑以是塞今日之议，陛下亦姑以是满今日之心，臣恐天下知礼者，必将非笑无已也。 
现代文：如果只争一个皇字，那么执政大臣肯定会同意，用以阻止现在的论争，陛下也会姑且满足一下眼前的愿望，但是我恐怕天下真正懂礼数的人，将因此非议、笑话个没完没了。 
English: If only one imperial character is contested, then the ruling minister will certainly agree to use it to stop the current debate, and His Majesty will also temporarily satisfy the immediate desire, but I am afraid that people who really understand the number of etiquette in the world will have endless criticism and jokes.

古文：与桂萼第二疏同上。帝益大喜，立召两人赴京。
现代文：这个奏章和桂萼的第二篇上书一起进呈，世宗大为高兴，立即召唤他们进京。
English: This piece of music was submitted together with the second petition of Katsura Calyx. Shizong was very pleased and immediately summoned them to Beijing.

古文：命未达，两人及黄宗明、黄绾复合疏力争。
现代文：命令还没传到，张璁、桂萼两人就又和黄宗明、黄绾一起又递上一篇奏章与礼官争论。
English: Before the order arrived, Zhang Jun and Gui Cale, together with Huang Zongming and Huang Qi, submitted another piece of music and argued with the etiquette officer.

古文：及献帝改称 本生皇考 ，阁臣以尊称既定，请停召命，帝不得已从之。
现代文：等献帝称号改为本生皇考，内阁大臣用称号已经议定的理由，请中止对他们的召见，世宗迫不得已，听从了。
English: For the reason that the title of emperor was changed to emperor-in-waiting, and the cabinet ministers used the title already agreed upon, please stop calling them. Sejong had no choice but to obey.

古文：二人已在道，复驰疏曰： 礼官惧臣等面质，故先为此术，求遂其私。
现代文：他们两个已经在路上了，接到停召的命令又派人骑马上书说： 礼官怕我们当面质问，所以先玩弄这种伎俩，用以得逞他们的心愿。
English: The two of them were already on their way, and when they received the order to suspend the call-up, they sent someone on horseback to write: "The etiquette officials are afraid of our face-to-face questioning, so they first play this trick to use it to fulfill their wishes.

古文：若不亟去本生之称，天下后世终以陛下为孝宗之子，堕礼官欺蔽中矣。 
现代文：如果不立即去掉本生的字样，天下人、后世人还是要把陛下看作孝宗的儿子，这样还是落在礼官的蒙骗中。 
English: If you do not immediately remove the words of the original birth, the people of the world and the world to come will still regard His Majesty as the son of a filial son, and thus still fall into the deception of the etiquette.

古文：帝益心动，趣召二人。
现代文：世宗越发动心，催他们进京。
English: Shizong became more and more motivated and urged them to go to Beijing.

古文：五月抵都，复条上七事。众汹汹，欲扑杀之。
现代文：五月，二人到北京，又上书列举七条意见，大臣们气愤至极，想把他们俩逮住杀了。
English: In May, the two of them went to Beijing and wrote another letter listing seven opinions. The ministers were so angry that they wanted to arrest and kill them.

古文：萼惧，不敢出。
现代文：桂萼害怕了，不敢出门。
English: Katsura was scared and didn't dare to go out.

古文：璁阅数日始朝。
现代文：张璁过了几天才上朝。
English: It took a few days for Zhang Ye to wake up.

古文：给事御史张翀、郑本公等连章力攻，帝益不悦，特授二人翰林学士。二人力辞，且请面折廷臣之非。
现代文：给事御史张罛、郑本公等接连上书猛烈抨击他们，世宗越发不高兴了，就特别任命他们两个为翰林学士，他们两个人竭力辞让，并且要求当面驳斥大臣们的错误。
English: The Shizong became more and more displeased, and specially appointed two of them as scholars of Hanlin. The two of them tried their best to make concessions, and demanded that the ministers' mistakes be refuted face to face.

古文：给事御史李学曾、吉棠等言： 璁、萼曲学阿世，圣世所必诛。
现代文：给事御史李学曾、吉棠等说： 张璁、桂萼歪曲儒学迎合世俗，圣王之世必杀他们无疑。
English: Li Xuezeng, Jitang, and others said: Zhang Ye and Gui Cai distorted Confucianism to cater to the world, and they will undoubtedly be killed in the era of the holy king.

古文：以传奉为学士，累圣德不少。 
现代文：倒因为以经传奉迎做了学士，真是害皇上德行不浅。 
English: On the other hand, because he graduated with a bachelor's degree based on the teachings of the sutras, it really harmed the emperor's virtue.

古文：御史段续、陈相又特疏论，并及席书。
现代文：御史段续、陈相又特地上书议论，并连及席书。
English: Following the historical section, Chen Xiang also made a special floor discussion on the book, together with the chair.

古文：帝责学曾等对状，下续、相诏狱。
现代文：世宗批评了学曾的书面汇报，把段续、陈相关进监狱。
English: Sejong criticized Xuezeng's written report and sent Duanzhong and Chen to prison.

古文：刑部尚书赵鉴亦请置璁、萼于理，语人曰： 得俞旨，便捶杀之。 
现代文：刑部尚书赵鉴，请把张璁、桂萼也交给大理寺，对别人说： 得到皇上诏书，就用棍子把他们打死。 
English: Shangshu Zhao Jian of the Criminal Investigation Department, please also hand over Zhang Ye and Gui Cale to Dali Temple, and say to others: If you get the Emperor's edict, beat them to death with a stick.

古文：帝责以朋奸，亦令对状。
现代文：世宗批评他勾结为奸，并要张璁、桂萼上书述说此事。
English: Shizong criticized his collusion as treachery and asked Zhang Ye and Gui Cai to write about the matter.

古文：璁、萼乃复列欺罔十三事，力折廷臣。
现代文：张璁、桂萼于是又上书列举别人十三条欺骗皇帝的罪证，竭力要压服大臣。
English: Zhang Ye and Gui Cale then wrote a letter enumerating thirteen incriminating evidence that others had deceived the emperor, in an effort to subdue the minister.

古文：及廷臣伏阙哭争，尽系诏狱予杖。死杖下者十余人，贬窜相继。由是璁等势大张。
现代文：等大臣们到宫门前号哭争辩时，世宗便把他们一齐关进监狱，打了一顿大棒，死于棒下的有十多人，贬官放逐的一个接一个，由此张璁等人的势力大为扩大。
English: When the ministers came to the front gate of the palace crying and arguing, Shizong put them all in prison, beat them with a big stick, more than ten people died under the stick, and the officials were exiled one by one. As a result, the power of Zhang Ye and others greatly expanded.

古文：其年九月卒用其议定尊称。
现代文：那年九月最终用他们的意见确定了献王的尊号。
English: In September of that year, their opinions were finally used to determine the honorary title of the king.

古文：帝益眷倚璁、萼，璁、萼益恃宠仇廷臣，举朝士大夫咸切齿此数人矣。
现代文：世宗越发宠信张璁、桂萼，他们也越发恃宠仇视朝廷里的大臣，朝廷里的士大夫们对他们几个人都切齿痛恨。
English: The more the Sejong favored Zhang Ye and Gui Cai, the more they also favored and hated the ministers in the imperial court. The officials in the imperial court hated several of them.

古文：四年冬，《大礼集议》成，进詹事兼翰林学士。
现代文：四年冬天，《大礼集议》成书，张璁升官詹事兼翰林学士。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, the book "Dali Collection" was published, and Zhang Xuan was promoted to the post of secretary and scholar.

古文：后议世庙神道、庙乐、武舞及太后谒庙，帝率倚璁言而决。
现代文：后来商议祖宗庙宇的神道碑、庙乐、武舞及太后到庙里祭奠等事，世宗大多根据张璁的话来做出裁决。
English: Later, they discussed the Shinto monument of the ancestral temple, temple music, martial dance and the empress dowager's visit to the temple, and most of the sects made a ruling based on Zhang Ye's words.

古文：璁缘饰经文，委曲当帝意，帝益器之。
现代文：张璁根据经文牵强附会，曲解文意迎合世宗，世宗更器重他了。
English: Zhang Ye made a far-fetched association according to the scripture, distorted the meaning of the text to meet the world, and the world paid more attention to him.

古文：璁急图柄用，为大学士费宏所抑，遂与萼连章攻宏。帝亦知其情，留宏不即放。
现代文：张璁迫不及待想掌权，被大学士费宏压制，于是和桂萼一次次上书攻击费宏，世宗也知道两人的用心，仍旧留用费宏，不马上放他出去。
English: Zhang Ye couldn't wait to take power and was suppressed by Fei Hong, a university professor, so he and Gui Cai repeatedly sent letters to attack Fei Hong. Shizong also knew the intentions of the two and still kept Fei Hong and did not immediately let him go.

古文：五年七月，璁以省墓请。
现代文：五年七月，张璁因回家扫墓请还乡。
English: In July of the fifth year, Zhang Xuan was asked to return to his hometown because he was going to sweep the graves.

古文：既辞朝，帝复用为兵部右侍郎，兼官如故。
现代文：已经离开朝廷，世宗又任命他为兵部右侍郎，仍兼旧职。
English: Having already left the imperial court, Sejong appointed him as the right hand man of the military department, which was still his old position.

古文：给事中杜桐、杨言、赵廷瑞交章力诋，并劾吏部尚书廖纪引用邪人。
现代文：给事中杜桐、杨言、赵廷瑞上书竭力诋毁他，并弹劾吏部尚书廖纪提拔坏人，世宗不高兴了，严厉批评了他们。
English: During the incident, Du Tong, Yang Yan, and Zhao Tingrui wrote a letter to denigrate him, and impeached the promotion of the villain, Shangshu Liao Ji of the Personnel Department. Shizong was displeased and severely criticized them.

古文：帝怒，切责之。两京给事御史解一贯、张录、方纪达、戴继先等复交章论不已，皆不听。
现代文：两京给事御史解一贯、张录、方纪达、戴纪先等又不断上书议论他，他们的意见都没被听取。
English: The two capitals have been consistent in their interpretation of history, and Zhang Lu, Fang Jida, Dai Jixian and others have constantly written about him, but their opinions have not been listened to.

古文：寻进璁左侍郎，复与萼攻费宏。
现代文：不久，升张璁为左侍郎。他又和桂萼一起攻击费宏。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xuan was promoted to the left-hand man, and he and Gui Cale attacked Feihong together.

古文：明年二月兴王邦奇狱，构陷杨廷和等，宏及石珤同日罢。
现代文：第二年二月，他们制造了王邦奇一案，陷害杨廷和等人，费宏和石王缶等一天内都被罢官。
English: In February of the following year, they fabricated the Wang Bangqi case, framed Yang Tinghe and others, and dismissed Fei Hong and Shi Wang Can within a day.

古文：吏部郎中彭泽以浮躁被斥，璁言： 昔议礼时，泽劝臣进《大礼或问》，致招众忌。
现代文：吏部郎中彭泽因浮躁被斥逐，张璁对世宗说 ：过去讨论 大礼 时，彭泽劝我进呈《大礼或问》，以至于招得众人的忌恨。
English: Peng Ze, a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was expelled for his impetuousness. Zhang Ye said to Shizong: In the past, when discussing the Great Rite, Peng Ze advised me to submit "Great Rite or Question," so that it attracted the hatred of many people.

古文：今诸臣去之，将以次去臣等。 
现代文：现在那帮大臣驱逐他，是为了渐次排挤我们。 
English: Now those ministers are ousting him in order to gradually push us out.

古文：泽乃得留。
现代文：彭泽于是得以留用。
English: As a result, Penza was able to keep his job.

古文：居三日，复言： 臣与举朝抗四五年，举朝攻臣至百十疏。
现代文：过了三天，又说： 我与满朝大臣对抗了四五年，他们攻击我的奏章有百十篇。
English: Three days later, he added: I have been fighting against the Manchu ministers for four or five years, and they have attacked me in a hundred and ten articles.

古文：今修《大礼全书》，元恶寒心，群奸侧目。
现代文：现在修撰《大礼全书》，那议礼的大坏蛋感到寒心，那帮奸人侧目畏惧。
English: Now I am working on "The Complete Book of Etiquette." The great villain of etiquette is chilled, and the gang of traitors are scared.

古文：故要略方进，谗谤繁兴。
现代文：所以书的大纲正将递呈，对我的谗言就大肆煽动。
English: That's why the outline of the book is about to be submitted, and the criticism of me has been incited.

古文：使《全书》告成，将诬陷益甚。 
现代文：假使《全书》宣告完成，恐怕会更加厉害地诬陷我呢。 
English: If the "Complete Book" is announced to be complete, I'm afraid it will frame me even more severely.

古文：因引疾求退以要帝，帝优诏慰留。
现代文：因此称病求退，用以向皇帝求取好处，世宗温和地颁布诏书挽留他。
English: Therefore, saying that he was ill and wanted to retire, he used it to seek benefits from the emperor, and Shizong gently issued an edict to retain him.

古文：吏部阙尚书，推前尚书乔宇、杨旦；礼部尚书亦缺，推侍郎刘龙、温仁和。
现代文：吏部缺尚书，大家推选前任尚书乔宇、杨旦；礼部尚书也缺空，大家推举侍郎刘龙、温仁和。
English: There is a lack of honorifics in the personnel department, and the predecessors of honorifics, Qiao Yu and Yang Dan, have been elected. There is also a lack of honorifics in the etiquette department, and the attendants, Liu Long and Wen Renhe, have been elected.

古文：仁和以俸深争。
现代文：仁和为了俸禄也积极争取。
English: For the sake of the salary, Jinwa also actively fought for it.

古文：璁言宇、旦乃杨廷和党，而仁和亦不宜自荐。
现代文：张璁说乔宇、杨旦是杨廷和的党羽，而且仁和也不应该自我推荐。
English: Zhang Jun said Qiao Yu and Yang Tan were Yang Tinghe's followers, and that Renhe should not recommend himself.

古文：帝命大臣休致者，非奉诏不得推举，宇等遂废。
现代文：世宗命令说 ：凡被罢官、退休的大臣，没有接到诏书，他人不得推举。 乔宇等就被废弃不用。
English: The Sejong order said, "If a minister who has been dismissed or retired does not receive an imperial edict, no one else may be elected, and the position will be abandoned."

古文：璁积怒廷臣，日谋报复。
现代文：张璁积怨于人，大臣们天天在策划报复他。
English: Zhang Xuan was holding a grudge, and the ministers were plotting to take revenge on him every day.

古文：会山西巡按马钅录治反贼李福达狱，词连武定侯郭勋，法司谳如钅录拟。
现代文：恰好山西巡抚按察使马禄办理造反的乱贼李福达一案，供词中牵连到武定侯郭勋，法司按马禄拟写的原样定了罪。
English: It just so happened that the Shanxi procuratorate ordered Maru to investigate the case of the rebel bandit Li Fuda. The confession implicated Wu Ding Hou Guo Xun, and the law department found him guilty as originally drafted by Maru.

古文：璁谗于帝，谓廷臣以议礼故陷勋。
现代文：张璁对世宗谄言说大臣们是因议定大礼一事所以陷害郭勋。
English: Zhang Ye told Shizong Qianyan that the ministers framed Guo Xun because they had agreed on a grand gift.

古文：帝果疑诸臣朋比，乃命璁署都察院，桂萼署刑部，方献夫署大理，覆谳，尽反其狱，倾诸异己者。
现代文：世宗果然怀疑大臣们拉帮结派，于是任命张璁署理都察院、桂萼署理刑部、方献夫署理大理寺，重新议罪，全部把案翻了过来，并倾轧那些异己分子。
English: Sejong really suspected that the ministers were pulling the strings, so he appointed Zhang Xuan as the acting head of the Duza Academy, Gui Cai as the acting head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Fang Xianfu as the acting head of the Dali Temple. He re-examined the crimes, reversed all the cases, and cracked down on those dissidents.

古文：大臣颜颐寿、聂贤以下咸被搒掠，钅录等坐罪远窜。
现代文：大臣颜颐寿、聂贤以下都被加以刑讯，马禄等因罪贬往边远地带。
English: The ministers Yan Xizhou and Yan Xian and their subordinates were all subjected to torture and interrogation, while Maru and others were banished to remote areas for their crimes.

古文：帝益以为能，奖劳之便殿，赉二品服，三代封诰。
现代文：世宗更认为他能干，在便殿奖励、慰劳他，赐他二品官服，祖宗三代都加封诰。
English: The Sejong even thought that he was capable, rewarded and comforted him in the toilet, gave him a second-class official uniform, and all three generations of his ancestors were given a seal.

古文：京察及言官互纠，已黜御史十三人，璁掌宪，复请考察斥十二人。
现代文：京城的按察使和谏官互相检举，已罢黜了十三个御史，张璁掌管纪纲，又请考察并罢斥了十二人。
English: Beijing's inspectors and eunuchs reported on each other. Thirteen imperial historians have been removed from their posts, Zhang Ye is in charge of discipline, and twelve people have been investigated and dismissed.

古文：又奏行宪纲七条，钳束巡按御史。
现代文：后来经奏准推行七条纪纲，管束巡按御史。
English: Later, the Seven-Article Discipline Guideline was approved and implemented, and the inspection and control system was established.

古文：其年冬，遂拜礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士入参机务，去释褐六年耳。
现代文：那年冬天，张璁便官拜礼部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，入内阁参赞机密大事。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhang Rongbin, a scholar of the Ministry of Worship and a scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion University, became a cabinet counselor of confidential events.

古文：杨一清为首辅，翟銮亦在阁，帝侍之不如璁。
现代文：这时他做官总共才六年。杨一清为首辅，翟銮也在内阁，世宗待他们不如张璁好。
English: At this time, he had only been an official for a total of six years. Yang Iqing was the first assistant, and Zou was also in the cabinet. The world did not treat them as well as Zhang Xuan.

古文：尝谕璁： 朕有密谕毋泄，朕与卿帖悉亲书。 
现代文：世宗曾经对张璁说 ：我有密令给你请不要泄漏，我给你的信帖都是亲自书写的。 
English: Shizong once said to Zhang Ye: "I have a secret order for you, please don't leak it. I wrote all my letters to you myself."

古文：璁因引仁宗赐杨士奇等银章事，帝赐璁二章，文曰 忠良贞一 ，曰 绳愆弼违 ，因并及一清等。
现代文：张璁借机说出仁宗曾赐予杨士奇等银章的事，世宗便赐予他两枚银章，一个上面刻着 忠良贞一 ，另一个是 绳愆弼违 四字，并因此连带一清等人，都赐以银章。
English: Zhang Ye took the opportunity to say that Rinzong had given Yang Shiqi and others silver medallions. Shizong then gave him two silver medallions, one engraved with "Chung Liang Zhen Yi" (忠良貞一) and the other with "绳违四字" (绳违四字). As a result, he and Iqing and others were all given silver medallions.

古文：璁初拜学士，诸翰林耻之，不与并列。璁深恨。
现代文：张璁最初拜为学士时，其他翰林把他看作耻辱，不肯和他并排，张璁深为恼恨。
English: When Zhang Lu was first awarded a bachelor's degree, other scholars regarded him as a disgrace and refused to stand side by side with him. Zhang Lu was deeply annoyed.

古文：及侍读汪佃讲《洪范》不称旨，帝令补外。璁乃请自讲读以下量才外补，改官及罢黜者二十二人，诸庶吉士皆除部属及知县，由是翰苑为空。
现代文：等到侍读汪佃讲解《洪范》不能使世宗满意，被外放补地方官缺时，张璁借机请求把侍讲、侍读以下的翰林分别量才录用，到地方上任职，总计被改任和罢官的共二十二人，庶吉士们都被任用为部属小官和知县，由此翰林院为之一空。
English: When Wang Hao, the attendant, could not satisfy Shizong with his explanation of "Hong Fan," and was sent abroad to fill the shortage of local officials, Zhang Hao took the opportunity to request that the amount of Hanlin below the assistant lecturer and the attendant should be hired separately, and serve at the local level. A total of twenty-two people were reassigned and dismissed, and all of them were appointed as subordinate minor officials and counties. As a result, Hanlin Academy was empty.

古文：七年正月，帝视朝，见璁、萼班兵部尚书李承勋下，意嗛之。
现代文：七年正月，世宗登堂视朝，看见张璁、桂萼班位在兵部尚书李承勋下边，对此感到不满意。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Shizong went to the hall to see the emperor, and saw Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai's class rank below Li Chengxun's in the military department. He was not satisfied with this.

古文：一清因请加散官，乃手敕加二人太子太保。
现代文：一清因此请给他们在本官以外另加官号，于是以手令加封张璁、桂萼为太子太保。
English: As a result, Ichikiyo asked them to add an official title in addition to their official title, so he signed an order to add the names of Zhang Ye and Gui Caly for the Prince's Protector.

古文：璁辞以未建青宫，官不当设，乃更加少保兼太子太保。
现代文：张璁推辞说太子宫殿没有建立，不应当设官，于是更加封为少保兼太子太保。
English: Zhang Xuan said that the prince's palace had not been built and that no official should be appointed, so he was appointed as a minor official and the prince's senior official.

古文：《明伦大典》成，复进少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士。
现代文：《明伦大典》撰就，又晋升为少傅兼太子太傅、吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士。
English: He wrote the "Ming Lun Grand Textbook" and was promoted to Shofu and Taifu of the Crown Prince, Shoshu of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Shomei of the Imperial Household.

古文：一清再相，颇由璁、萼力，倾心下二人。
现代文：一清再次入为首辅，很得力于张璁、桂萼的帮忙，所以对他们尽力谦让。
English: Once again, I Ching was promoted to the position of Shoufu, and he was able to rely on the help of Zhang Ye and Gui Caly, so he tried his best to make concessions to them.

古文：而璁终以压于一清，不获尽如意，遂相龃龉。
现代文：而张璁最终因为在一清位置之下，不能事事如意，因而两人渐渐不和。
English: In the end, however, because Zhang Ye was in a clear position, he could not get everything he wanted, and the two gradually fell out.

古文：指挥聂能迁劾璁，璁欲置之死。
现代文：指挥聂能迁弹劾张璁，张璁想置他于死地。
English: The commanding officer could not bring himself to impeach Zhang Xuan, and Zhang Xuan wanted to put him to death.

古文：一清拟旨稍轻，璁益恨，斥一清为奸人鄙夫。
现代文：一清拟定圣旨对聂能迁处理稍轻了点，张璁更恨了，斥责一清是奸人、鄙夫。
English: I Ching, who drafted the edict, was a little lenient in his treatment of Zou Nengqian, but Zhang Ye hated him even more. He scolded I Ching as a traitor and scoundrel.

古文：一清再疏引退，且刺璁隐情。
现代文：一清两次上书请求退位，并且直指张璁不可告人的心思。
English: Iqing twice petitioned to abdicate, and directly pointed to Zhang Ye's secret thoughts.

古文：帝手敕慰留，因极言璁自伐其能，恃宠不让，良可叹息。
现代文：世宗手写诏书安慰并挽留他，借此严肃地指出张璁自我夸大，恃宠不让，实在令人叹息。
English: The handwritten edict of King Sejong consoled and retained him, by which he seriously pointed out that Zhang Ye was self-aggrandizing and did not allow himself to be favored, which was really a sigh.

古文：璁见帝忽暴其短，颇愧沮。
现代文：张璁见皇上忽然公开指责他的短处，很是惭愧、沮丧。
English: Zhang Ye was ashamed and dismayed to see the emperor suddenly publicly accuse him of his shortcomings.

古文：八年秋，给事中孙应奎劾一清、萼并及璁，其同官王准复劾璁私参将陈璠，宜斥。
现代文：八年秋，给事中孙应奎弹劾一清、桂萼并连及张璁，他的同事王准又弹劾张璁偏私参将陈，应予撤职。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year, Sun Yingkui impeached Iqing, Gui Cai and Zhang Ye, and his colleague Wang Jun impeached Zhang Ye for favoring Chen, who should be dismissed.

古文：璁乞休者再，词多阴诋一清，帝乃褒谕璁。
现代文：张璁两次请准他退休，文辞之间多暗中诋毁一清，世宗竟然夸奖了他。
English: Zhang Ye twice asked permission for him to retire. In his words, he often slandered I Ching, but Shizong actually praised him.

古文：而给事中陆粲复劾其擅作威福，报复恩怨。
现代文：而给事中陆粲又弹劾张璁作威作福，打击报复。
English: However, in the middle of the matter, Lu Yao impeached Zhang Ye for arrogance and retaliation.

古文：帝大感悟，立罢璁。
现代文：世宗大为觉醒，立刻罢了张璁的官。
English: Shizong was greatly awakened, and immediately dismissed Zhang Ye from his post.

古文：顷之，其党霍韬力攻一清，微为璁白。
现代文：不久，张璁的党羽霍韬尽力攻击一清，不公开地为张璁辩护。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xuan's henchman, Huo Xuan, tried his best to attack Iqing and secretly defended Zhang Xuan.

古文：璁行抵天津，帝命行人赍手敕召还。
现代文：张璁返乡走到天津时，世宗派行人送手令召他回来。
English: When Zhang Xuan walked to Tianjin on his way home, the sectarian passers-by waved their hands to call him back.

古文：一清遂罢去，璁为首辅。
现代文：一清就此罢去，由张璁出任首辅。
English: As a result, Ip Ching resigned and was replaced by Zhang Ye as First Assistant.

古文：帝自排廷议定 大礼 ，遂以制作礼乐自任。
现代文：世宗自从力排众议敲定 大礼 以后，就以制礼作乐作为自己的责任。
English: Ever since the Sejong made a concerted effort to finalize the grand salute, it has been its responsibility to make music with the salute.

古文：而夏言始用事，乃议皇后亲蚕，议勾龙、弃配社稷，议分祭天地，议罢太宗配祀，议朝日、夕月别建东、西二郊，议祀高禖，议文庙设主更从祀诸儒，议祧德祖正太祖南向，议祈谷，议大禘，议帝社帝稷，奏必下璁议。
现代文：而夏言开始掌权就建议皇后应亲自养蚕，建议以勾龙、弃配社稷，建议分别祭祀天地，建议罢去太宗配祀，建议为朝日、夜月分建东、西二郊祭坛，建议祭祀媒神，建议文庙中设神主以外更从祀别的名儒，建议把德祖的神主迁入太祖庙，位于太祖的正南方，建议祈祷谷神，建议祭祖，建议帝社帝稷，等等，他的奏章都被发给张璁评议。
English: However, from the beginning of his reign, Xia Yan suggested that the empress should personally raise silkworms, suggested using hooked dragons, abandoning the matching shrine, suggested separately sacrificing heaven and earth, suggested removing the Taizong matching shrine, suggested building the East and West suburb altars for the morning sun and night moon, suggested sacrificing the matchmaker, suggested that the temple should not only have a god, but also worship other famous Confucians, suggested moving the god of the ancestors into the ancestral temple, located in the south of the ancestors, suggested praying to the valley god, suggested sacrificing ancestors, suggested the imperial shrine, and so on. His compositions were all sent to Zhang

古文：顾帝取独断，璁言亦不尽入。
现代文：不过世宗实行独裁，张璁的话也不能都被采纳。
English: However, Shizong exercised dictatorship, and not all of Zhang Ye's words could be accepted.

古文：其谏罢太宗配天，三四往复，卒弗能止也。
现代文：他谏阻罢太祖配天一事，往返三四回，最后还是不能加以制止。
English: He went back and forth three or four times trying to prevent the dethronement of Taizu as a matchmaker, but in the end he was unable to stop it.

古文：十年二月，璁以名嫌御讳请更。乃赐名孚敬，字茂恭，御书四大字赐焉。
现代文：十年二月，张璁因为名字犯世宗的名讳，请求改名，世宗就赐他名孚敬，字茂恭，御书四个大字给他。
English: In February of the 10th year, Zhang Ye requested to change his name because his name violated the name of the Sejong. The Sejong gave him the name Fu Kei, the Chinese character茂恭, and the four Chinese characters 御書.

古文：夏言恃帝眷，数以事讦孚敬。
现代文：夏言依仗着世宗的宠信，几次因事攻击孚敬。
English: Relying on Shizong's favor, Xia Yan attacked Fu Jing several times.

古文：孕敬衔之，未有以发。
现代文：孚敬怀恨在心，却没找到借口发泄怒气。
English: Fu Jing held a grudge, but couldn't find an excuse to vent his anger.

古文：纳彭泽言构陷行人司正薛侃，因侃以害言。
现代文：后来听从彭泽的话陷害行人司正薛侃，借着薛侃进而陷害夏言。
English: Later, he listened to Peng Ze's words and framed the traffic warden, Zheng Xue Kan, and then used Xue Kan to frame Xia Yan.

古文：廷鞫事露，旨斥其忮罔。
现代文：朝廷审问时事情败露，世宗下诏指责他嫉妒忠良、欺骗君王。
English: When he was interrogated by the imperial court, the matter came to light, and Emperor Sejong issued an edict accusing him of being jealous of Tadayoshi and deceiving the emperor.

古文：御史谭缵、端廷赦、唐愈贤交章劾之。帝谕法司令致仕，孚敬乃大惭去。
现代文：御史谭缵、端廷赦、唐愈贤递上奏章弹劾他，世宗告诉法司让他退休，孚敬于是特别惭愧地走开了。
English: Emperor Taizong, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi, Empress Dowager Cixi

古文：未几，遣行人赍敕召之。
现代文：没多久，世宗又派行人送手令去召他回朝。
English: Not long after, Sejong sent another passerby with a sign to summon him back to Japan.

古文：明年三月还朝，言已擢礼部尚书，益用事。
现代文：第二年三月回到朝廷时，夏言已升为礼部尚书，更有实权了。
English: When he returned to the Imperial Court in March of the following year, Natsugen had been promoted to Shosho of the Ministry of Ceremonies, which gave him more real power.

古文：李时、翟銮在阁，方献夫继入，孚敬亦不能专恣如曩时矣。
现代文：李时、翟銮在内阁中，方献夫后来也进了内阁，孚敬不能像过去那样独断专行了。
English: With Li Shih and Zou in the cabinet, and Fang Xianfu later joining the cabinet, Fu Jian could no longer act arbitrarily as in the past.

古文：八月，彗星见东井，帝心疑大臣擅政，孚敬因求罢。
现代文：八月，彗星出现在井宿，世宗心下怀疑大臣独断专行，孚敬因此请求罢官。
English: In August, a comet appeared in Ijuku, and Shizong suspected that the minister was acting on his own, so Fu Kei asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：都给事中魏良弼诋孚敬奸，孚敬言： 良弼以滥举京营官夺俸，由臣拟旨，挟私报复。 
现代文：都给事中魏良弼谤毁孚敬奸邪，孚敬说： 良弼因滥举京营官被罚俸，是我起草的诏书，他是挟私仇报复我。 
English: Wei Liangyao slandered Fuxi Jingjing in the matter. Fuxi Jingjing said: Liangyao was fined for abusing the Beijing camp officials. It was I who drafted the edict. He was taking revenge on me.

古文：给事中秦鳌劾孚敬强辨饰奸，言官论列辄文致其罪，拟旨不密，引以自归，明示中外，若天子权在其掌握。
现代文：给事中秦鳌弹劾他强行狡辩，文过饰非，谏官检举他，他就转弯抹角给人加罪，起草圣旨不秘密进行，以此炫耀，明示天下，好像天子的权力在他手中掌握一样。
English: In the matter, Qin Yu impeached him for forcible quibbling, writing and embellishing, and the eunuch accused him, and he turned the corner to add to people's guilt, drafting the Holy Will without secrecy, in order to show off and show the world, as if the power of the Son of Heaven was in his hands.

古文：帝是鳌言，令孚敬自陈状，许之致仕。
现代文：世宗肯定了秦鳌的意见，让孚敬自己陈述事实，同意他退休。
English: Sejong affirmed Qin Hui's opinion, let Fu Jing himself state the facts, and agreed to his retirement.

古文：李时请给廪隶、敕书，不许。
现代文：李时请颁发俸禄、仆役给他，世宗亲自批示说不行。
English: If it is Li Shiji, please give him a salary and a servant. It is not possible for Shizong to give orders personally.

古文：再请，乃得驰传归。
现代文：又请求，才允许他乘官方车马还乡。
English: He also requested that he be allowed to return to his hometown in an official vehicle.

古文：十二年正月，帝复思之，遣鸿胪赍敕召。
现代文：十二年正月，世宗又想起他来，派鸿胪寺官员送手令召他来。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, Shizong thought of him again and sent officials from Hongye Temple to summon him.

古文：四月还朝。
现代文：四月他回到朝廷。
English: He returned to court in April.

古文：六月，彗星复见毕昴间，乞避位，不许。
现代文：六月，彗星又出现在毕宿昴宿中间，他自请退休，这次世宗没批准。
English: In June, the comet appeared again in the middle of Bi-juku, and he asked to retire, but this time Sejong did not approve.

古文：明年进少师兼太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：第二年又提升他为少师兼太子太师、华盖殿大学士。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to Junior Teacher and Prince's Senior Teacher, and became a member of the faculty at Hwagaido University.

古文：初，潞州陈卿乱，孚敬主用兵，贼竟灭。
现代文：最初，潞州陈卿作乱，孚敬主张用兵弹压，反贼最后败灭。
English: At first, Zhangzhou Chenqing made a riot, Fu Jing advocated the use of soldiers to suppress, and the anti-thieves were finally defeated.

古文：大同再乱，亦主用兵，荐刘源清为总督，师久无功。
现代文：大同又发生暴乱，又主张弹压，推荐刘源清为总督，出兵很长时间没有效果。
English: There were riots in Datong again, and they also advocated the use of pressure, recommending Liu Yuanqing as the governor. The dispatch of troops did not have any effect for a long time.

古文：其后乱定，代王请大臣安辑。
现代文：以后，暴乱被平定，代王请大臣安抚。
English: Afterward, the riot was quelled, and the acting king asked the minister to pacify the situation.

古文：夏言遂力诋用兵之谬，请如王言，语多侵孚敬。
现代文：夏言于是极力诋毁用兵的错误，请按代王的意见办，话语中很把孚敬批评了一番。
English: Xia Yan then tried his best to discredit the mistake of using soldiers. Please follow the advice of the acting king. He criticized Fu Jing a lot in his speech.

古文：孚敬怒，持王疏不行。
现代文：孚敬恼了，扣下代王的奏章不往上送。
English: Fu Jing was annoyed, so he did not send the king's medal to the emperor.

古文：帝谕令与言交好，而遣黄绾之大同，相机行事。
现代文：世宗告诫他与夏言言归于好，而派黄绾到大同，见机行事。
English: Shizong admonished him to make peace with Xia Yan, and sent Huang Qi to Datong to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：孚敬以议不用，称疾乞休，疏三上。
现代文：孚敬因为自己的建议不被采用，自称身体有病请求退休，三次递申请。
English: Because his suggestion was not adopted, Fu Jing claimed to be physically ill and asked to retire. He submitted his application three times.

古文：已而子死，请益力。
现代文：不久儿子死了，更坚决请求。
English: Soon after, his son died, and he begged for more.

古文：帝报曰： 卿无疾，疑朕耳。 
现代文：世宗回答说： 爱卿并无疾病，想迷惑我罢了。 
English: Sejong replied, "Ai Kyong is not ill, he is just trying to trick me."

古文：孚敬复上奏，不引咎，且历诋同议礼之萼、献夫、韬、绾等。
现代文：孚敬又递上奏章，不认错不说，还一一诋毁过去共同议论 大礼 的桂萼、献夫、霍韬、黄绾等。
English: Fu Jing also submitted a report, without admitting any mistakes, and also slandered Gui Calyx, Xianfu, Huo Xuan, Huang Xuan, etc. who had discussed the grand ceremony in the past.

古文：帝诘责之，乃复起视事。
现代文：世宗把他严厉批评了一通，他才出来办事。
English: After Sejong severely criticized him, he came out to do business.

古文：帝于文华殿后建九五斋、恭默室为斋居所，命辅臣赋诗。
现代文：世宗在文华殿后面建造九五斋、恭默斋作为斋戒时的住所，命左右大臣赋诗。
English: Sejong built Jiuwujai and Gongmujai at the back of the Palace of Literature as a residence for fasting, and ordered ministers to compose poems.

古文：孚敬及时各为四首以上。
现代文：孚敬和李时各做了四首递上。
English: Fu Jing and Li Shi each performed four songs.

古文：已，数召见便殿，从容议政。
现代文：过后，他几次被召见于便殿，世宗从容地和他议论政事。
English: After that, he was summoned to the throne room several times, and Sejong calmly discussed political affairs with him.

古文：十四年春得疾，帝遣中官赐尊牢，而与时言，颇及其执拗，且不惜人才以丛怨状。
现代文：十四年春天他得了病，世宗派宦官赐他酒肉，可是跟李时谈话时，很说了他的执拗，而且不爱惜人才，积怨成山。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, he fell ill, and the eunuchs of the world sect gave him wine and meat. However, when talking with Li Si, he said that he was very obstinate, and did not care about talent, and accumulated a mountain of resentment.

古文：又遣中官赐药饵，手敕言： 古有剪须疗大臣疾者，朕今以己所服者赐卿。 
现代文：后来又派宦官送他药物，手写便条说 ：古时候有皇帝剪下胡须为大臣治疗疾病的，我现在则把我所吃的药送给你。 
English: Later, he sent a eunuch to give him medicine, with a handwritten note saying, "In ancient times, an emperor cut off his beard to cure a minister's illness. Now, I am sending you the medicine I ate."

古文：孚敬幸得温谕，遂屡疏乞骸骨。
现代文：孚敬幸好得到这温和的谕旨，就一次次上书请求退休。
English: Fortunately, Fu Jing received this gentle decree, and he repeatedly petitioned to retire.

古文：命行人御医护归，有司给廪隶如制。
现代文：世宗派行人、御医护送他还乡，官府按规定供给他俸禄、仆从。
English: He was escorted back to his hometown by laymen and doctors, and the government provided him with a salary and servants in accordance with regulations.

古文：明年五月，帝复遣锦衣官赍手敕视疾，趣其还。
现代文：第二年五月，世宗又派遣锦衣官送他手诏并问候疾病，催他还朝。
English: In May of the following year, Sejong also sent a brocade official to give him a handshake and greet him for his illness, urging him to return.

古文：行至金华，疾大作，乃归。
现代文：路上走到金华，病发作得厉害，于是又返回去了。
English: On the way to Jinhua, he fell seriously ill, so he went back.

古文：十八年二月卒。
现代文：十八年二月去世。
English: He passed away in February 2018.

古文：帝在承天，闻之伤悼不已。
现代文：世宗在承天，听说这个消息，伤心不已。
English: When Sejong heard the news, he was heartbroken.

古文：孚敬刚明果敢，不避嫌怨。
现代文：孚敬刚强、明智，为人果敢，不避嫌怨。
English: Fu Jing is strong, wise, courageous, and does not avoid grudges.

古文：既遇主，亦时进谠言。
现代文：得到世宗信任后，也时常能进直言。
English: After gaining the trust of Shizong, he is often able to speak frankly.

古文：帝欲坐张延龄反，族其家。
现代文：世宗曾想因为张延龄的造反之罪杀他全家。
English: Sejong had wanted to kill Zhang Yanling's entire family for the crime of rebellion.

古文：孚敬诤曰： 延龄，守财虏耳，何能反？ 
现代文：孚敬争辩说 ：延龄这个人是个守财奴，能反得起来吗？ 
English: Fu Jing argued: Yanling this person is a miser, can it be reversed?

古文：帝恚，责孚敬： 自古强臣令主非一，若今爱死囚令主矣。当悔不从廷和事敬皇帝耶？ 
现代文：世宗几次询问，他还是那样回答。等秋后该问斩时，孚敬上书说 ：昭圣皇太后年纪大了，突然听到延龄死的消息，万一不吃不喝，有个三长两短，怎么告慰敬皇帝的在天之灵呢？ 
English: When it was time to ask questions after the autumn, Fu Jian wrote: The Holy Empress Dowager Zhao was very old, and suddenly heard the news of her death at an advanced age. If you don't eat or drink, there are two problems, how can you comfort the Emperor's spirit in heaven?

古文：帝故为重语悽止孚敬，而孚敬意不已。
现代文：世宗有意用语气很重的话喝斥他，而孚敬的意见仍不停地提。
English: Sejong deliberately rebuked him in strong language, but Fu Kei's opinion was still constantly mentioned.

古文：以故终昭圣皇太后世，延龄得长系。
现代文：所以昭圣皇太后在世的时候，延龄得以长期关押而不死。
English: Therefore, when Empress Dowager Zhaosheng was alive, Yanling was able to detain her for a long time without dying.

古文：他若清勋戚庄田，罢天下镇守内臣，先后殆尽，皆其力也。
现代文：其他如清理功臣亲戚的庄田，前前后后罢免天下镇守军队的宦官，几乎无有剩余，这些都是他出的力。
English: Others, such as cleaning up the manor of relatives of heroes, and dismissing the eunuchs of the world's garrison army, have almost nothing left. These are all his strength.

古文：持身特廉，痛恶赃吏，一时苞苴路绝。
现代文：他做官自持特别廉洁，痛恨贪赃枉法的官吏，一时间以财物行贿的事没有了。
English: As an official, he held himself to be particularly incorruptible, detested corrupt officials, and for a while there were no more cases of bribery with property.

古文：而性狠愎，报复相寻，不护善类。
现代文：但他生性狠毒，刚愎自用，打击报复，不护善人。
English: However, he is vicious by nature, uses his arrogance for personal gain, retaliates, and does not protect good people.

古文：欲力破人臣私党，而己先为党魁。 大礼 大狱，丛诟没世。
现代文：本想用力消除大臣中的小帮派，而自己先做了小集团的首领。 大礼 的建议，大案的制造，直到他死后仍招众人的怨恨。
English: Originally, he wanted to eliminate the small gangs among the ministers by force, but he first made himself the leader of a small group. The suggestion of a big gift, the creation of a big case, until his death, still attracted the resentment of everyone.

古文：铎与王守仁同乡，不宗其学；与璁同以考献王为是，不与同进。
现代文：但是世宗始终宠用他，他受到的礼遇，朝廷大臣中最终无人可比，世宗常称他为少师罗山而不叫他的名字。
English: However, Sejong always favored him, and the courtesy he received was ultimately unrivaled among imperial ministers. Sejong often referred to him as his younger teacher, Luo Shan, without giving his name.

古文：然其辨继统，谓国统绝而立君寓立贤之意，盖大谬云。桂萼，字子实，安仁人。
现代文：他死后礼官请给他取谥号，世宗采用不顾危难、忘己事君的意思，特谥文忠，追赠他为太师。桂萼，字子实，江西安仁人。
English: After his death, the etiquette official asked him to choose a posthumous name. Shizong adopted the meaning of disregarding the peril and forgetting oneself, and gave him the posthumous name of Taishi. Kuei calyx, Zizi solid, Jiangxi An Renren.

古文：正德六年进士。
现代文：正德六年进士。
English: Zhengde has been an officer for six years.

古文：除丹徒知县。性刚使气，屡忤上官，调青田不赴。
现代文：初任丹徒知县，性格刚强，好耍脾气，屡次触犯上司。朝廷调他到青田去，他不去上任。
English: At the beginning of his tenure in Dantsuchi County, he had a strong personality, a playful temper, and repeatedly offended his superiors. The imperial court transferred him to Aota, but he did not take up his post.

古文：用荐起知武康，复忤上官下吏。
现代文：后来因为别人推荐出任武康知县，又触犯上司被逮入狱。
English: Later, because he was recommended by others to serve in Bukangchi County, he was arrested and jailed for violating his superiors.

古文：嘉靖初，由成安知县迁南京刑部主事。
现代文：嘉靖初年，他由成安知县升任南京刑部主事。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, he was promoted from Cheng'an County to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Department.

古文：按宋范纯仁告英宗曰 陛下昨受仁宗诏，亲许为之子，至于封爵，悉用皇子故事，与入继之主不同 ，则宋臣之论，亦自有别。
现代文：世宗想尊崇自己的亲生父母，朝中大臣强烈反对，已称兴献王为帝，妃为兴国太后，颁布诏书通告全国两年了，桂萼当时和张璁同事，就在二年十一月上书说 ：据考订宋朝范纯仁曾对英宗皇帝说 陛下过去接受仁宗皇帝的诏书，亲自承认过您是他的儿子，至于给您的封爵，用的也全是皇子的惯例，与从他途入继皇位的天子不一样 ，这样说来宋朝大臣当时的议论和今天的情形自然不同。
English: King Sejong wanted to honor his own biological parents. The ministers of the two dynasties strongly objected. They had already proclaimed King Heungjong to be the emperor and Queen Heungjong to be the empress dowager, and had issued a proclamation to the whole country for two years. At that time, Gui Cai and his colleague Zhang Ye wrote a letter in November of the second year, saying, "According to the examination of the Song Dynasty, Fan Chunren once said to Emperor Yeongjong, "Your Majesty accepted the proclamation of Emperor Heungjong in the past, and personally acknowledged that you are his son. As for your knighthood,

古文：今陛下奉祖训入继大统，未尝受孝宗诏为之子也，则陛下非为人后，而为入继之主也明甚。
现代文：现今陛下遵循祖宗的教导入继皇位，又不曾接受孝宗皇帝的诏书收您做儿子，这样说来陛下不是给人做后裔，而是入继皇位的天子，这是很明显的。
English: Now that Your Majesty has succeeded to the throne following the teachings of your ancestors, and did not accept Emperor Xiaozong's edict to adopt you as his son, it is clear that Your Majesty is not a descendant of man, but a son of God who has succeeded to the throne.

古文：考兴献帝，母兴国太后，又何疑？
现代文：以兴献帝为父考，以兴国太后为母亲，又有什么可迟疑的？
English: With Emperor Xingxian as the father and Empress Dowager Xing as the mother, what is there to hesitate about?

古文：臣闻非天子不议礼；天下有道，礼乐自天子出。
现代文：古人常说非天子不谈论礼制，天下有道，礼乐制度应由天子制定出来。
English: The ancients often said that no one should talk about etiquette except the Son of Heaven. The world has its own etiquette, and the etiquette system should be worked out by the Son of Heaven.

古文：臣久欲以请，乃者复得席书、方献夫二疏。
现代文：我很早就想这样奏请了，而今又看到席书、方献夫的两篇奏疏。
English: I've wanted to do this for a long time, and now I've seen Seishu and Fang Xianfu's two recitals.

古文：伏望奋然裁断，将臣与二臣疏并付礼官，令臣等面质。 
现代文：我恳请陛下果断地裁决，把我和他们俩的奏疏一起发给礼官，让我们当面和他争论看！ 
English: I beseech your majesty to judge decisively, and send me to the procurator, together with the report of both of them, and let us dispute with him face to face!

古文：帝大喜，明年正月手批议行。
现代文：世宗大为高兴，第二年正月就亲自批示予以讨论、实施。
English: Sejong was very pleased, and in the first month of the following year, he personally ordered that it be discussed and implemented.

古文：三月，萼复上疏曰： 自古帝王相传，统为重，嗣为轻。
现代文：三月，桂萼又上书说： 自古帝王相传承，王位为重，后裔为轻。
English: In March, Katsura Calyx wrote again, saying, "From ancient times, emperors have been passed down from generation to generation. The throne is important, but descendants are less important.

古文：故高皇帝法前王，著兄终弟及之训。
现代文：所以我们高皇帝取法前代圣王，制定了兄终弟及的规章。
English: Therefore, our Emperor Gao took the law of the previous holy king and formulated the rules of brotherhood.

古文：陛下承祖宗大统，正遵高皇帝制。
现代文：陛下继承祖宗传下的天子之位，正是遵循了高皇帝定下的规章。
English: His Majesty's succession to the position of the heavenly son passed down by his ancestors is in accordance with the regulations set down by Emperor Gao.

古文：执政乃无故任己私，背祖训，其为不道，尚可言哉。
现代文：执政大臣竟然毫无根据地固执己见，违背祖训，这样的大逆不道，还能怎么讲呢？
English: How can it be said that a ruling minister should be so groundlessly obstinate in his own opinion and go against the teachings of his ancestors, such an act of high treason?

古文：臣闻道路人言，执政窥伺陛下至情不已，则加一皇字而已。
现代文：我听到路上闲人们都在说，执政大臣是窥测到陛下对兴献王的极端孝心无法压制，才加了一个 皇 字在他身上。
English: I heard idle people on the road all saying that the ruling minister was able to see that His Majesty's extreme filial piety towards King Heungchen could not be suppressed, and that's why he added the word "Imperial" to his name.

古文：夫陛下之孝其亲，不在于皇不皇，惟在于考不考。
现代文：但是陛下孝敬自己的父亲，关键还不在于皇不皇，而只在于考不考。
English: However, the key to His Majesty's reverence for his father is not whether he is an emperor or not, but whether or not he is a good leader.

古文：使考献帝之心可夺，虽加千百字徽称，何益于孝？
现代文：假使以献帝作为父考的愿望可以放弃，那么即使加千百个字的徽号，对孝德又有什么帮助呢？
English: Assuming that the desire to offer the emperor as a father test can be abandoned, then even if a thousand-hundred-character badge is added, how will it help with filial piety?

古文：陛下遂终其身为无父人矣。
现代文：陛下也就只好终身做一个没有父亲的人了。
English: His Majesty had to remain a fatherless man for the rest of his life.

古文：逆伦悖义如此，犹可使与斯议哉！ 
现代文：那些人违背人伦、不懂道理到了这个程度，还可以让他们参加这场讨论吗？ 
English: Those people have violated human ethics and do not understand reason to such an extent, can they still be allowed to participate in this discussion?

古文：与璁疏并上。
现代文：他的奏疏和张璁的一起递交上去。
English: His score was submitted along with Zhang Ye's.

古文：帝益大喜，召赴京。
现代文：世宗更加高兴了，就征召他们到京城去。
English: Sejong was even more pleased and called them to go to the capital.

古文：初，议礼诸臣无力诋执政者，至萼遂斥为不道，且欲不使议。其言恣肆无忌，朝士尤疾之。
现代文：当初，讨论 大礼 的大臣们还没有极力攻击执政大臣的，到了桂萼这时就把他们指斥为大逆不道，并且想不让他们参加讨论，他的话讲得肆无忌惮，大臣们尤其痛恨他。
English: At first, the ministers who were discussing the grand gift had not yet attacked the ruling minister, but when they arrived at Gui Cai, he denounced them as traitors and did not want them to participate in the discussion. His words were unscrupulous, and the ministers especially hated him.

古文：召命下，众益骇愕，群起排击，帝不为动。
现代文：征召他们俩的命令传下来，大家大为吃惊，接着又群起排挤他们，世宗却不为此动摇。
English: The order to conscript the two came down, to everyone's surprise, and then the crowd pushed them out, but the Sejong did not waver.

古文：萼复偕璁论列不已，遂召为翰林学士，卒用其言。
现代文：桂萼又和张璁不停地上书陈述，于是都被召为翰林学士，最后采用了他们的意见。
English: Gui Caly and Zhang Xuan kept writing statements, so they were both called to be scholars of Hanlin, and finally adopted their opinions.

古文：萼自是受知特深。
现代文：桂萼从此便特别地受到世宗的信任。
English: Since then, Katsura Calyx has been particularly trusted by the Sejong.

古文：四年春，给事中柯维熊言： 陛下亲君子而君子不容，如林俊、孙交、彭泽之去是也。
现代文：四年春天，给事中柯维熊上书说： 陛下亲近君子，可是君子没能被容纳下来，如林俊、孙交、彭泽的离开就是例子。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Covey wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: Your Majesty is close to the gentleman, but the gentleman could not be accommodated, such as the departure of Lin Jun, Sun Jia and Peng Ze.

古文：远小人而小人尚在，如张璁、桂萼之用是也。
现代文：疏远小人可是小人还在朝廷里，如张璁、桂萼受到的任用就是例子。
English: Alienate villains, but villains are still in the imperial court, such as the appointment of Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale is an example.

古文：且今伏阙诸臣多死徙，而御史王懋、郭楠又谪谴，窃以为罚过重矣。 
现代文：现在到宫门前哭谏的大臣很多人或死或贬了，御史王懋、郭楠又被贬出去了，我个人认为对他们的惩罚太重了。 
English: Many of the ministers who are now crying in front of the palace gate have either died or been demoted, and Wang Xi and Guo Nan have been demoted again. I personally think that the punishment for them is too heavy.

古文：萼、璁遂求去，优诏慰留。
现代文：桂萼、张璁因此就请求离职，世宗客气地颁诏安慰、挽留他们。
English: Gui Calyp and Zhang Ye therefore requested to resign, and Shizong politely issued an edict to comfort and retain them.

古文：寻进詹事兼翰林学士。
现代文：不久桂萼被提升为詹事兼翰林学士。
English: Soon, Gui Caly was promoted to Zhanji and Hanlin bachelor.

古文：议世庙神道及太后谒庙礼，复排廷议，希合帝指。帝益以为贤，两人气益盛。
现代文：后来讨论世庙前墓道的修筑及太后拜访太庙的礼仪，他们又力排众议，迎合了世宗的心意，世宗更认为他们两个贤能，他们两人也更加盛气凌人。
English: Later, they discussed the construction of the cemetery road in front of the world temple and the etiquette of the empress dowager's visit to the world temple. They also tried to arrange the public discussion and catered to the mind of Shizong. Shizong thought that they were both virtuous, and they were both more arrogant.

古文：而阁臣抑之，不令与诸翰林等。
现代文：但是内阁大臣压抑他们，不让他俩和其他翰林平等共事。
English: But the cabinet minister stifled them, not allowing them to work on an equal footing with the rest of the team.

古文：两人乃连章攻费宏并石珤，齮之去。
现代文：他们两个于是接连上书攻击费宏和石王缶，把他们排挤出去了。
English: The two of them then successively attacked Fei Hong and Shi Wang Can with letters, and pushed them out.

古文：给事中陈洸犯重辟，萼与尚书赵鉴攘臂争，为南京给事中所劾，不问。
现代文：给事中陈被重刑处死，桂萼和尚书赵鉴捋起胳膊争执，被南京给事中弹劾，世宗也不加过问。
English: During the incident, Chen was sentenced to death, Gui Cai and Zhao Jian, a monk, got into an argument and were impeached by Nanjing, and Shizong did not ask any questions.

古文：尝陈时政，请预蠲六年田租，更登极初宿弊，宽登闻鼓禁约，复塞上开中制，惩奸徒阻绝养济院，听穷民耕城垣陾地，停外吏赴部考满，申圣敬，广圣孝，凡数事。多议行。
现代文：桂萼曾经上书评论时政，请求预先免除六年田租，改革登基初年还存在的旧的弊端，放宽登闻鼓禁约，恢复边塞上领取中盐的制度，惩办破坏养济院的歹徒，听任穷苦百姓耕种城墙跟前的闲地，停止地方官来吏部进行满任考评，增加皇帝应养成的尊敬，加强皇帝应具备的孝行，共几件事，大多经讨论得到实行。
English: Gui Cai once wrote a letter commenting on the current politics, requesting that the six-year field rent be exempted in advance, reforming the old drawbacks that still existed in the first year of enthronement, relaxing the ban on public speaking and drumming, restoring the system of receiving salt on the border, punishing the criminals who destroyed the nursing home, allowing the poor people to cultivate the idle land in front of the city wall, stopping local officials from coming to the cadre department for full-time evaluation, increasing the respect that the emperor should develop, and strengthening the filial piety that the emperor should have, a total of several things, most of which were implemented after discussion.

古文：六年三月，进礼部右侍郎，兼官如故。
现代文：六年三月桂萼升任礼部右侍郎，同时仍兼原任。
English: In March of the sixth year, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, while still holding his original position.

古文：时方京察，南京言官拾遗及萼。
现代文：当时正赶上京官考评，南京的言官纠察政事涉及到桂萼。
English: At that time, it was catching up with Beijing's official evaluation, and Nanjing's official picketing was involved in political affairs.

古文：萼上言： 故辅杨廷和广植私党，蔽圣聪者六年，今次第斥逐，然遗奸在言路。
现代文：桂萼就上书说 ：前任首辅杨廷和广植私党，把陛下蒙蔽了六年之久，现在虽然这些人逐渐被驱逐，还是有遗留下的死党在谏院里。
English: Gui Caly said in a letter: "Former chief aide Yang Ting and Guang Zhihuang deceived His Majesty for six years. Now, although these people have been gradually expelled, there are still remnants of the dead in the Summer Palace.

古文：昔宪宗初年，命科道拾遗后，互相纠劾，言路遂清，请举行如制。 
现代文：宪宗初年曾经命令科道官在考察政事过失后互相检举揭发，谏院里的奸人方被肃清。请按旧制举行！ 
English: In the first year of Kenzong, he ordered the Taoist scholars to investigate and expose each other's political misdeeds, and the traitors in the imperial court were purged. Please hold it according to the old system!

古文：章下吏部，侍郎孟春等言： 宪宗无此诏。
现代文：他的奏章下到吏部后，侍郎孟春等上书说： 宪宗没有这个诏书。
English: After his imperial rescript was sent to the cadre, his attendant, Meng Chun, and others sent a letter saying, "Kenzong does not have this imperial rescript.

古文：萼被论报复，无以厌众心。 
现代文：桂萼被人检举想进行报复，无法令人心服。 
English: Gui Calyx was accused of wanting to retaliate, which was not convincing.

古文：萼言： 诏出宪宗文集。
现代文：桂萼说： 诏书出自宪宗的文集。
English: Gui Caly said: The edict is from the anthology of the Constitutionalists.

古文：春欲媚言官，宜并按问。 
现代文：孟春想讨好言官，应该一起被问罪。 
English: Meng Chun wanted to curry favor with the spokesman, and should have been questioned together.

古文：章下部再议，春等言成化中科道有超擢巡抚不称者，宪宗命互劾，去者七人，非考察拾遗比。
现代文：奏章再下发吏部讨论后，孟春等人说成化年间科道官有破格升任巡抚而不称职的，宪宗让他们互相揭发，然后免除了七个人，这和常规的考察纠正过失不能相比。
English: After the discussion, Meng Chun and others said that during Chenghua's reign, there were some incompetent Taoist scholars and officials who were promoted to the post of procurator in an unprecedented manner. The guru had them expose each other, and then exempted seven people. This could not be compared with the regular inspection and correction of faults.

古文：帝终然萼言，趣令速举。给事御史争之，并夺俸。
现代文：世宗最后还是认为桂萼说得对，催促吏部迅速进行，给事中御史劝阻的都被罚了俸禄。
English: In the end, Shizong still thought that Gui Caly was right and urged the cadre department to proceed quickly. Those who tried to dissuade him were fined.

古文：春等乃以御史储良才等四人名上。帝独黜良才，而特旨斥给事中郑自璧、孟奇。
现代文：孟春等于是就把储良才等四个人报了上去，世宗只罢了良才的官，同时又特别颁发诏书免了给事中郑自壁、孟奇。
English: Meng Chun immediately reported the four people such as Kuo Liangcai, and Shizong only reported the officials of Liangcai. At the same time, he issued a special edict to exempt Zheng Zhibi and Mengqi from the incident.

古文：且令部院再核，复黜给事中余经等四人、南京给事中顾溱等数人，乃已。
现代文：并且传令吏部、按察院继续清查，又罢了给事中余经等四个人和南京给事中顾氵秦等几个人，这才算完。
English: Moreover, the courier ordered the cadre department and the inspection institute to continue the investigation, and it was only after four people, including Yu Jing, and several people, including Gu Yaoqin, were sent to Nanjing, that it was over.

古文：其年九月改吏部左侍郎。是月拜礼部尚书，兼翰林学士。
现代文：当年九月桂萼改任吏部左侍郎，同一个月里又做了礼部尚书兼翰林学士。
English: In September of that year, Katsura was reappointed as the left attendant of the cadre department, and in the same month he became a scholar of etiquette and a scholar of history.

古文：故事，尚书无兼学士者，自萼始。
现代文：按惯例，尚书没有兼翰林学士的，这还是从桂萼始开的头。
English: According to the usual practice, Shangshu does not have Hanlin Baccalaureate, which is still the beginning of the beginning.

古文：甫逾月，迁吏部尚书，赐银章二，曰 忠诚静慎 ，曰 绳愆匡违 ，令密封言事与辅臣埒。
现代文：刚过一个月，又升任吏部尚书。世宗赐给他两枚银章，上面分别刻了 忠诚静慎 、 绳愆匡违 四个字，让他和辅臣一样密封上书评论政事。
English: Just a month later, he was promoted to the position of Shoshu, an official. The Sejong gave him two silver seals with the words "loyalty and prudence" and "loyalty and transgression" respectively engraved on them, so that he could comment on political affairs in a sealed letter, just like the assistant ministers.

古文：七年正月，手敕加太子太保。
现代文：七年正月，世宗传下手令给桂萼加官为太子太保。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Shizong passed down an order to Gui Cai to be promoted to the post of crown prince.

古文：《明伦大典》成，加少保兼太子太傅。
现代文：《明伦大典》成书后，他又加官做了少傅兼太子太傅。
English: After "Ming Lun Da Dian" was published, he was promoted to Shao Fu and Taifu.

古文：萼既得志，日以报怨为事。
现代文：桂萼得志以后，一天到晚以报复怨家为事。
English: After Katsura's ambition was achieved, he devoted himself to avenging his family all day long.

古文：陈九畴、李福达、陈洸之狱，先后株连彭泽、马录、叶应骢等甚众，或被陷至谪戍。
现代文：陈九畴、李福达、陈三案，先后株连到彭泽、马录、叶应骢等很多人，有的直至被坑害到发配充军。
English: In the cases of Chen Jiuzhen, Li Fuda, and Chen San, many people were successively transferred to Penza, Maro, Ye Yingtao, and so on, and some were even pitted to be dispatched to the army.

古文：廷臣莫不畏其凶威。
现代文：朝廷中的大臣无不畏惧他的凶残毒辣。
English: The ministers in the court were afraid of his ferocity.

古文：独疏荐建言狱罪邓继曾、季本等，因事贬谪黄国用、刘秉鉴等，诸人得量移。世亦稍以此贤萼。
现代文：只是他也曾上书推荐过因论事被办罪的邓继曾、季本等人，还有因事被贬官的黄国用、刘秉鉴等，这些人都酌情得到就近安置，当时人们也因此稍稍认为他有点好处。
English: However, he had also written a letter recommending Deng Jizeng, Ji Ben and others who were prosecuted for the matter, as well as Huang Guoying, Liu Bingjian and others who were demoted for the matter. These people were placed nearby as appropriate, and at that time people thought he was a little good.

古文：然王守仁之起也，萼实荐之。已，衔其不附己，力齮龁。
现代文：但是王守仁得到起用，实际上是他推荐的，过后他恨守仁不依附自己，就极力排挤守仁。
English: However, Wang Shou-Ren was appointed to the post, which was actually recommended by him. Afterwards, he hated Shou-Ren for not being attached to him, and tried his best to push Shou-Ren out.

古文：及守仁卒，极言丑诋，夺其世封，诸恤典皆不予。
现代文：守仁死后，他极力加以丑化、诋毁，剥夺了守仁的世袭封爵，各种抚恤恩典都没有给。
English: After Shujin's death, he tried his best to defame and discredit him, deprived Shujin of his hereditary knighthood, and did not give him any kind of pension or grace.

古文：八年二月命以本官兼武英殿大学士入参机务。
现代文：八年二月世宗让桂萼以原职兼武英殿大学士入内阁参与机要事宜。
English: In February of the eighth year, Sejong allowed Katsura to enter the cabinet to participate in important matters.

古文：初，萼、璁赴召，廷臣欲仿先朝马顺故事，于左顺门捶杀之，走武定侯郭勋家以免。
现代文：当初，桂萼、张璁应召赴京，朝中大臣想仿效前朝马顺的故事在左顺门捶死他们，他们跑到武定侯郭勋家里才躲过来。
English: At first, Gui Calyx and Zhang Xuan were summoned to Beijing, and the Minister of the Middle Court wanted to imitate the story of the former Emperor Ma Shun and strangled them at the Zuo Shun Gate. They ran to the house of Wuding Hou Guoxun to hide.

古文：勋遂与深相结，亦蒙帝眷典禁兵。
现代文：郭勋于是和他们结交很深，也受到世宗喜欢，让他掌管禁军。
English: Guo Xun then became very close friends with them, and was also liked by Shizong, who put him in charge of the forbidden army.

古文：久之，勋奸状大露，璁、霍韬力庇勋。萼知帝已恶之，独疏其凶暴贪狡数事，勋遂获罪。
现代文：时间长了，郭勋干的坏事明显暴露出来，张璁、霍韬仍极力庇护郭勋，桂萼知道世宗已讨厌他了，就独自上书揭发他几件贪污、违法的事情，郭勋于是被办了罪。
English: As time went on, the bad things Guo Xun had done were clearly exposed. Zhang Ye and Huo Yao still tried their best to protect Guo Xun. Gui Cai knew that Shizong already hated him, so he independently submitted a letter to expose several of his corrupt and illegal things. Guo Xun was then charged with a crime.

古文：杨一清为首辅持重，萼、璁好纷更，且恶其压己，遂不相能。
现代文：杨一清作为首辅办事沉稳、慎重，桂萼、张璁喜欢改这改那，并且讨厌一清压抑自己，所以双方不能相容。
English: Yang Yixing, as the chief aide, is calm and prudent, Gui Calyp and Zhang Ye like to change this and that, and hate Yixing to suppress himself, so the two sides are incompatible.

古文：给事中孙应奎请鉴别三臣贤否，诋萼最力。
现代文：给事中孙应奎请世宗鉴别他们三个人谁贤谁不贤，对桂萼攻击得厉害。
English: In response, Sun Yingkui asked Shizong to identify who was wise and who was not wise among the three of them, and attacked Gui Caly.

古文：帝已疑萼，令涤宿愆，全君臣终始之义。
现代文：世宗本来就怀疑桂萼，这下就传令要他改正过去的错误，以成全君臣之间有始有终的道理。
English: Sejong had originally doubted Gui Calypte, but now he was ordered to correct his past mistakes in order to fulfill the principle that there is a beginning and an end between monarchs and ministers.

古文：萼乃大惧，疏辨，且称疾乞休。
现代文：桂萼这才大为害怕，赶忙上书辩解，并且称病求退。
English: Gui Caly was very afraid of this, and hurriedly wrote a letter to defend himself, and said that he was ill and wanted to withdraw.

古文：帝报曰： 卿行事须勉徇公议，庶不负前日忠。 
现代文：世宗回答说： 你办事一定要尽可能地听取公众的意见，以期不违背自己当初的忠心。 
English: Sejong replied, "You must listen to the opinions of the public as much as possible, so as not to violate your original loyalty.

古文：萼益惧。
现代文：桂萼更加惧怕了。
English: Gui Caly was even more afraid.

古文：给事中王准因劾萼举私人李梦鹤为御医。
现代文：给事中王准于是弹劾桂萼举荐自己的亲信李梦鹤当了御医。
English: In response, Wang Quanzhong impeached Gui Cai and recommended his close friend Li Menghe to be the royal physician.

古文：诏下吏部，言梦鹤由考选，无私。
现代文：世宗传令让吏部核实，吏部说梦鹤是经过考选的，没有舞弊营私。
English: Shizong sent a message to the personnel department for verification. The personnel department said that Menghe was selected through examination, and there was no fraud.

古文：帝终以为疑，命太医院更考。
现代文：世宗还是疑心，就让太医院再次对梦鹤进行考试。
English: Sejong was still suspicious, so he asked Tai Hospital to test Meng He again.

古文：言官知帝意已移，给事中陆粲极论其罪，并言梦鹤与萼家人吴从周、序班桂林居间行贿事。
现代文：言官知道世宗对桂萼已经改变看法，给事中陆粲就上书极力讲桂萼的罪证，并且讲到梦鹤与桂萼的家人吴从周、序班官桂林三个人从中行贿的事情。
English: The magistrate knew that Shizong had changed his opinion of Gui Calyx. In the middle of the case, Lu Yao wrote a letter to the magistrate, trying his best to prove Gui Calyx's guilt. He also talked about Meng He, Gui Calyx's family member Wu Cong Zhou, and three Guilin officials who were involved in bribery.

古文：奏入，帝大悟，立夺萼官，以尚书致仕。
现代文：奏章递上后，世宗一下子省悟过来，立即罢了桂萼的官，让他以尚书的名义退休。
English: After the report was submitted, Shizong suddenly came to his senses and immediately dismissed Gui Caly's official, allowing him to retire in the name of Shang Shu.

古文：璁亦罢政。
现代文：张璁也被免了职。
English: Zhang Ye was also dismissed from his post.

古文：帝复列二人罪状诏廷臣，略言： 其自用自恣，负君负国，所为事端昭然众见，而萼尤甚。
现代文：世宗又发布诏书向大臣们宣布了他们两人的罪行，大概是说： 他们自以为是，肆无忌惮，对不住君上也对不起国家。他们所制造的事端大家都明白看到了，桂萼尤其恶劣。
English: Sejong also issued an imperial edict to the ministers announcing the crimes of the two of them, probably saying: They are self-righteous, unscrupulous, can't forgive the prince and don't feel sorry for the country. The things they have done are clear for everyone to see, and Katsura is particularly bad.

古文：法当置刑典，特宽贷之。 
现代文：依法本当判处重刑，现在特别宽恕他们一回。 
English: According to the law, they should have been given a heavy sentence, but now they will be given a special pardon.

古文：遂下梦鹤等法司，皆首服。
现代文：然后把梦鹤等交给法司审讯，都一一认了罪。
English: Menghe and the others were then handed over to the legal department for interrogation, and all of them confessed to the crime.

古文：无何，霍韬两疏讼萼，言一清与法司构成萼赃罪。
现代文：没过多久，霍韬两次上书诉说桂萼受了冤屈，说是一清和法司勾结故意捏造了桂萼的赃罪。
English: Not long after, Huo Wei twice sent a letter complaining that Gui Caly was wronged, saying that it was a clear collusion with the law department that deliberately fabricated Gui Caly's crime.

古文：一清遂去位，刑部尚书周伦调南京，郎中、员外皆夺职，命法司会锦衣镇抚官再谳。
现代文：一清于是离任而去，刑部尚书周伦被调往南京，郎中、员外全被罢了官，然后世宗让法司会同锦衣、镇抚官再审理此案。
English: As a result, Iqing left his post, the head of the criminal investigation department, Shangshu Zhoulun, was transferred to Nanjing, and all of his subordinates and non-commissioned officers were dismissed from their posts. Then, Shizong asked the Legal Affairs Committee to re-examine the case together with Jin Yi and the town magistrate.

古文：乃言梦鹤等假托行私，与萼无与。
现代文：结论说是梦鹤等人假托桂萼的名义舞弊营私，事实上与桂萼没有牵扯。
English: The conclusion is that Menghe and others are frauds in the name of Gui Calyx, but in fact they have nothing to do with Gui Calyx.

古文：诏削梦鹤、林籍，从周论罪，萼复散官。
现代文：世宗传令削了梦鹤、桂林的官籍，重新判罪，桂萼恢复散官职。
English: Sejong ordered to cut off Menghe and Guilin's official registration, re-sentenced, and Gui caly resumed his official duties.

古文：是时璁已召还。史馆儒士蔡圻知帝必复萼，疏颂萼功，请召之。
现代文：当时张璁又被召回朝中，史馆一个儒生叫蔡圻的猜测世宗一定会让桂萼复职的，就上书称赞桂萼的功劳，请召他还朝。
English: At that time, Zhang Qian was recalled to the court. A Confucian scholar named Cai Qian from the History Museum guessed that Shizong would definitely reinstate Gui Qian, so he wrote a letter praising Gui Qian's merits and invited him to return to the court.

古文：帝乃赐敕，令抚按官趣上道。
现代文：世宗于是传令让桂萼家乡的抚按官催促桂萼上路回朝。
English: Sejong then sent a message to Gui Cai's hometown official to urge Gui Cai to return to the court.

古文：萼未至，国子生钱潮等复请趣萼。
现代文：桂萼人还没到，国子监的学生钱潮等人又上书请催促桂萼还朝。
English: Gui Calyx has not yet arrived, and the students of the National Children's Supervision Center, Qian Chao and others, have written to urge Gui Calyx to return in the morning.

古文：帝怒曰： 大臣进退，幺么敢与闻耶？ 
现代文：世宗恼怒地说： 大臣的任免，你们这些人也敢说话？ 
English: Sejong said angrily, "You people dare to talk about the appointment and dismissal of ministers?

古文：并圻下吏。
现代文：就把他们连同蔡圻一起打入监牢。
English: They were sent to prison together with Cai Qi.

古文：明年四月还朝，尽复所夺官，仍参机务。
现代文：第二年四月桂萼回到朝中，恢复了被免除的全部官职，仍旧参与机要事宜。
English: In April of the following year, Gui Cai returned to the court and resumed all the official duties he had been relieved of, and still participated in important matters.

古文：萼初锐意功名，勇任事，不恤物议，骤被摧抑，气为之慑，不敢复放恣。
现代文：桂萼当初锐意功名，敢于办事，不顾忌周围的舆论，现在突然间受到打击以后，胆量因此惊吓了，不敢再放肆了。
English: At first, Gui Caly was determined to succeed, dared to do things, and did not care about the surrounding public opinion. Now, after suddenly being hit, his courage was shocked, and he dared not be reckless.

古文：居位数月，屡引疾，帝辄优旨慰留。
现代文：在位仅仅几个月，就一再称病求退，世宗总是用和缓的口气表示慰问、挽留。
English: After only a few months on the throne, he repeatedly said that he was ill and wanted to retire, and Shizong always expressed his condolences and regrets in a gentle tone.

古文：十年正月得请归，卒于家。
现代文：十年正月，桂萼得到批准，告老还乡，然后死在家中了。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, Gui Calyx was approved, returned to his hometown, and then died at home.

古文：赠太傅，谥文襄。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太傅，谥文襄。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of grand tutor, 文襄.

古文：萼所论奏，《帝王心学论》、《皇极论》、《易·复卦》、《礼·月令》及进《禹贡图》、《舆地图说》，皆有裨君德时政。
现代文：桂萼所著并进呈的《帝王心学论》、《皇极论》、《易·复卦》、《礼·月令》及《禹贡图》、《奥地图说》，对君主的德行、当时的政治都有裨益。
English: The Emperor's Theory of the Heart, the Theory of the Imperial Pole, the Yi-Fu-Gou, the Li-Yue-Ling, the Yu-Gong-Tu, and the Au-Chart, all of which were written and presented by Gui Cai, were beneficial to the monarch's moral conduct and the politics of the time.

古文：性猜狠，好排异己，以故不为物论所容。
现代文：但他疑心重，又狠毒，喜欢排挤异己，所以当时不能被社会舆论所认同。
English: However, he was suspicious and spiteful, and liked to exclude dissenters, so he could not be recognized by public opinion at the time.

古文：始与璁相得欢甚，比同居政府，遂至相失。方献夫，字叔贤，南海人。
现代文：当初他和张璁在一起好得不得了，后来等两个人都进入内阁，就不那么和谐了。方献夫，字叔贤，广东南海人。
English: At first, he and Zhang Ye got along extremely well, but later, when both of them entered the cabinet, it was not so harmonious.

古文：生而孤。弱冠举弘治十八年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：他一生下就死了父亲，刚刚加冠成人就考中弘治十八年进士，改选为庶吉士。
English: His father died before he was born, and just after he was crowned as an adult, he entered the junior high school examination in 18 and was re-elected as a junior member.

古文：乞归养母，遂丁母忧。
现代文：他正要告假回家侍养母亲，母亲也过世了，他于是住家守丧。
English: He was about to go home on leave to take care of his mother, who had also passed away, so he stayed at home to mourn.

古文：正德中，授礼部主事，调吏部，进员外郎。
现代文：正德年间，出任礼部主事，后调到吏部，升为员外郎。
English: During the Zhengde era, he served as the head of the ceremonial department, and was later transferred to the administrative department and promoted to the position of foreign minister.

古文：与主事王守仁论学，悦之，遂请为弟子。
现代文：他同主事王守仁谈论学问，喜欢上了守仁的学术，就请求王守仁将自己收为学生。
English: He talked about learning with the principal Wang Shouren, liked Shouren's scholarship, and asked Wang Shouren to accept him as a student.

古文：寻谢病归，读书西樵山中者十年。
现代文：不久后告病回乡，在西樵山读了十年书。
English: Soon after, he returned to his hometown due to illness, and read books for ten years in Xishuoshan.

古文：嘉靖改元，夏还朝，道闻 大礼 议未定，草疏曰：
现代文：嘉靖改元的那个夏天他回朝去，路上得知 大礼 的讨论还没定案，他起草一篇奏疏说：
English: In the summer of the Jiajing Yuan reform, he went back to the North. On the way, he learned that the discussion of the grand gift had not yet been finalized. He drafted a report saying:

古文：先王制礼，本缘人情。
现代文： 前代的圣主制定礼制，本来是根据人情来的。
English: The previous generation of saints established the ritual system, which was originally based on human feelings.

古文：君子论事，当究名实。
现代文：君子论事，应当考虑名称和事实的一致性。
English: A gentleman should consider the consistency between the name and the fact.

古文：窃见近日礼官所议，有未合乎人情，未当乎名实者，一则守《礼经》之言，一则循宋儒之说也。
现代文：我看前些时候礼官所提出的主张，就有不合乎人情，名实不相符的地方，一方面死守《礼经》中的话，另一方面遵循宋儒的说教。
English: In my opinion, the idea put forward by the etiquette official some time ago is not in line with human feelings and does not correspond to reality. On the one hand, it adheres to the words in the "Etiquette," and on the other hand, it follows the preaching of Song Confucius.

古文：臣独以为不然。
现代文：我却认为那样不对。
English: I don't think so.

古文：按《礼经·丧服》传曰 何如而可以为人后？
现代文：按《礼经？丧服传》说： 什么样的人可以做别人的继承人呢？
English: According to "The Book of Rites and Funeral Rites": What kind of person can be someone else's heir?

古文：支子可也 。
现代文：是支派子孙也就可以了。 
English: If you are a descendant of a tribe, that's fine.

古文：又曰 为人后者孰后？
现代文：又说： 大宗，是指尊贵者的统绪。 
English: He also said, "A large number" refers to a group of honorable people.

古文：后大宗也 。 大宗者，尊之统也 。 不可以绝，故族人以支子后大宗也。適子不得后大宗 。
现代文： 尊贵者的统绪不能终断，所以族人就让支派的子孙继为大宗。但是过继的假子不能继为大宗。 
English: The line of nobles could not be broken, so the tribesmen let the descendants of the tribe succeed to the throne. However, the adopted son could not succeed to the throne.

古文：为是礼者，盖谓有支子而后可以为人后，未有绝人之后以为人后者也。
现代文：这样看来，制定礼制的人们是认为只要是支派的子孙就可以做继承人了，没有非绝了别人家的后裔给这边当继承人的道理。
English: From this perspective, the people who established the etiquette system believed that anyone who was a descendant of a tribe could be an heir, and there was no reason why the descendants of someone else's family should be the heirs.

古文：今兴献帝止生陛下一人，别无支庶，乃使绝其后而后孝宗，岂人情哉！
现代文：现在兴献帝只生陛下一个儿子，此外连个庶子也没有，却要让他绝后而让您做孝宗的儿子，这合乎人情吗？
English: Now Emperor Xingxian has only given birth to His Majesty's second son, and has not even had an illegitimate child, but you want him to die and let you be the son of a filial son. Is this in line with human feelings?

古文：且为人后者，父尝立之为子，子尝事之为父，故卒而服其服。
现代文：况且过继给别人做儿子，也该经过父亲同意收他为儿子，儿子曾经把父亲当父亲侍奉过，所以父亲死后儿子为他穿孝服。
English: Moreover, if someone is to be adopted as a son, it should be with the father's consent. The son once served his father as a father, so after his father's death, the son should wear filial piety for him.

古文：今孝宗尝有武宗矣，未尝以陛下为子。
现代文：现今孝宗曾经有武宗这个儿子，不曾收养陛下做自己的儿子。
English: Today, Takamune once had a son named Takemune, but he never adopted His Majesty as his own son.

古文：陛下于孝宗未尝服三年之服，是实未尝后孝宗也，而强称之为考，岂名实哉！
现代文：陛下对孝宗也不曾穿过三年的丧服，实际上也没有给他当过儿子，却有人要您强称孝宗为父亲，名实相一致没有？
English: Your Majesty did not wear three years of mourning clothes for Takamune, and in fact did not give him a son, but someone wants you to call Takamune your father. Is the name consistent with reality?

古文：为是议者，未见其合于《礼经》之言也。
现代文：提出这种意见来，看不出它和《礼经》中的话相符。
English: In putting forward this view, it is not clear that it is consistent with what is said in the Book of Rites.

古文：又按程颐《濮议》谓 英宗既以仁宗为父，不当以濮王为亲 。
现代文： 又按程颐《濮议》说 英宗既然拿仁宗做了父亲，就不该再称濮王做父亲 。
English: According to Cheng's "Discussion," Yingzong said that since he had fathered Narenzong, he should no longer call the king his father.

古文：此非宋儒之说不善，实今日之事不同。
现代文：这倒不是宋儒的说法不对，而是现在的事实不一样。
English: This is not to say that what Song Ju said is wrong, but that the facts are different now.

古文：盖仁宗尝育英宗于宫中，是实为父子。
现代文：仁宗曾经把英宗养在宫廷中，事实上成为父子。
English: Rinzong once raised Yingzong in the court, and in fact, they became father and son.

古文：孝宗未尝育陛下于宫中，其不同者一。孝宗有武宗为子矣，仁宗未尝有子也，其不同者二。濮王别有子可以不绝，兴献帝无别子也，其不同者三。
现代文：孝宗不曾把陛下收养在宫廷中，这是第一点不同；孝宗有过武宗这么个儿子，仁宗不曾有过儿子，这是第二点不同；濮王当年还有别的儿子不会绝后，我们兴献帝就没有别的儿子了，这是第三点不同。
English: The first difference is that Emperor Xiaozong never adopted His Majesty in the court; the second difference is that Emperor Xiaozong had a son like Emperor Wuzong, and Emperor Renzong never had a son; the third difference is that Emperor Zhao had other sons who did not die, and we have no other sons to offer to the emperor.

古文：今日之事，臣尝为之说曰：陛下之继二宗，当继统而不继嗣。
现代文：哪里能拿濮王的事和今天的事相比拟呢？提出这种意见来，看不出这些人会正确评述宋儒的学说。 今天这个事，我曾经做过这么一种理解：陛下继承孝宗、武宗，应该是继承皇位而不是过继做后裔。
English: Where can we draw a parallel between the events of King Gong and the events of today? By putting forward this kind of opinion, it is not clear that these people will correctly comment on the doctrine of Song and Confucius. Today, I once made this kind of understanding: Your Majesty's succession to the throne of Xiaozong and Wuzong should be succession to the throne rather than adoption as a descendant.

古文：兴献之异群庙，在称帝而不称宗。
现代文：兴献和宗庙中的父祖之间的不同，在于他可称为帝但不可以称为宗。
English: The difference between Xingxian and the patriarch in the ancestral temple is that he can be called the emperor but not the patriarch.

古文：夫帝王之体，与士庶不同。
现代文：帝王家的事情和士人、百姓家不一样。
English: Matters in the imperial family are different from those in the families of nobles and commoners.

古文：继统者，天下之公，三王之道也。继嗣者，一人之私，后世之事也。
现代文：继承帝位，是天下的公事，是三王制定的道理，过继给人做儿子，是个人的私事，是后代才有的事。
English: Succession to the imperial throne is a public affair of the world, a principle established by the three kings, while adoption as a son is a private affair of an individual, a matter for future generations.

古文：兴献之得称帝者，以陛下为天子也。不得称宗者，以实未尝在位也。
现代文：兴献可以称帝，因为陛下是天子；不能称为宗，是因为他事实上未曾坐过皇帝位。
English: Xingxian can be called emperor because his majesty is the son of heaven; he cannot be called Zong because he has never actually sat on the throne of the emperor.

古文：伏乞宣示朝臣，复称孝宗曰 皇伯 ，兴献帝曰 皇考 ，别立庙祀之。
现代文：我恳求陛下指示大臣，还是称孝宗为皇伯，兴献帝为皇考，在太庙之外另建一座庙祭祀他。
English: I implore Your Majesty to instruct the minister to still refer to Emperor Xiaozong as the imperial uncle and Emperor Xingxian as the imperial examiner, and to build a temple to worship him in addition to the Grand Temple.

古文：夫然后合于人情，当乎名实，非唯得先王制礼之意，抑亦遂陛下纯孝之心矣。
现代文：这样做了之后合乎人情，名实相符，不仅体现了前代圣王制定礼制的精神，而且也满足了陛下您纯真的孝心。 
English: After doing so, it is in line with human feelings, the name is consistent with reality, and not only reflects the spirit of the previous holy king's establishment of the ritual system, but also satisfies Your Majesty's pure filial piety.

古文：疏具，见廷臣方抵排异议，惧不敢上，为桂萼所见，与席书疏并表上之。
现代文：奏疏写成后，看到朝中大臣们在排斥不同意见，就不敢递交上去。后来被桂萼看到，他就写了一份报告连献夫、席书的奏疏一起呈交上去了。
English: After the report was written, seeing that the ministers of the DPRK and China were rejecting different opinions, he did not dare to submit it. Later, when he was seen by Gui Caly, he wrote a report and submitted it together with the report of the dedicator and the secretary.

古文：帝大喜，立下廷议。
现代文：世宗看后很高兴，立刻发给大臣们讨论。
English: Sejong was very happy after watching it and immediately sent it to the ministers for discussion.

古文：廷臣遂目献夫为奸邪，至不与往还。
现代文：这下大臣们就把献夫也看作奸邪，甚至不跟他往来了。
English: The ministers now regarded the sacrificial husband as a traitor and did not even associate with him.

古文：献夫乃杜门乞假，既不得请，则进《大礼》上下二论，其说益详。
现代文：献夫于是想请假呆在家里，未获批准，就递交《大礼》上下两篇论文，更详尽地讲了他的意见。
English: Therefore, Xianfu wanted to take a leave of absence to stay at home. Without approval, he submitted two papers to the "Great Gift" to explain his opinions in more detail.

古文：时已召张璁、桂萼于南京，至即用为翰林学士，而用献夫为侍讲学士。
现代文：当时世宗已经从南京召来张璁、桂萼，他们来后就被任命为翰林学士，献夫被任命为侍讲学士。
English: At that time, Shizong had already summoned Zhang Xuan and Gui Cai from Nanjing. After their arrival, they were appointed as Hanlin Bachelors, and Xianfu was appointed as an assistant lecturer.

古文：攻者四起，献夫亦力辞。帝卒用诸人议定 大礼 ，由是荷帝眷与璁、萼埒。
现代文：反对的人蜂拥而起，献夫自己也极力推辞，世宗最终用他们几个的意见确定了 大礼 ，献夫因此跟张璁、桂萼一样受到世宗的喜爱。
English: Opponents swarmed, and the officiant himself tried his best to refuse. Finally, Shizong used the opinions of several of them to determine the grand gift. As a result, the officiant was loved by Shizong as much as Zhang Ye and Gui Caly.

古文：四年冬进少詹事。
现代文：四年冬季升为少詹事。
English: In the winter of 2004, it was raised to Shozhanji.

古文：献夫终不自安，谢病归。
现代文：但献夫终究感到有所不安，后来还是请病假回家乡去了。
English: However, the devoted husband eventually felt uneasy, and later he went back to his hometown on sick leave.

古文：六年召修《明伦大典》。
现代文：嘉靖六年，献夫应召入朝编撰《明伦大典》。
English: In the sixth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Xianfu was summoned to the North to compile the "Minglun Grand Text."

古文：献夫与霍韬同里，以议礼相亲善，又同赴召，乃合疏言： 自古力主为后之议者，宋莫甚于司马光，汉莫甚于王莽。
现代文：他跟霍韬是同乡，因为讨论 大礼 而相互友好，又一起应召入朝，就联合上书说 ：自古以来极力主张入继王位者应过继给先帝当儿子的，宋朝没有比司马光还坚决的了，汉朝没有比王莽更坚决的了。
English: He was a fellow villager with Hou Yi, and they were friendly with each other because of the discussion of the Great Ceremony. They were also summoned to the imperial court together, and jointly wrote a letter saying: Since ancient times, they have strongly advocated that the successor to the throne should be the son of the former emperor. The Song Dynasty was no more resolute than Sima Guang, and the Han Dynasty was no more resolute than Wang Mang.

古文：主《濮议》者，光为首，吕诲、范纯仁、吕大防附之，而光之说惑人最甚。
现代文：主张《濮议》的人，以司马光为首，吕诲、范纯仁、吕大防附和他，而司马光的说法最能迷惑人。
English: The proponents of "Referendum" are led by Sima Guang, and include Lu Ji, Fan Chunren, Lv Dafo and him, and Sima Guang's argument is the most misleading.

古文：主哀帝议者，莽为首，师丹、甄邯、刘歆附之，而莽之说流毒最深。
现代文：主持哀帝时 大礼 讨论的人，以王莽为首，师丹、甄邯、刘歆附和他，而王莽的说法流毒最深。
English: The person who presided over the discussion of the grand ceremony at the time of mourning the emperor was led by Wang Mang, and Shi Dan, Zhen Qi, Liu Qi followed him, and Wang Mang's argument was the most poisonous.

古文：宋儒祖述王莽之说以惑万世，误后学。臣等谨按《汉书》、《魏志》、《宋史》，略采王莽、师丹、甄邯之奏，与其事始末，及魏明帝之诏，濮园之议，论正以附其后。
现代文：宋儒实际上是陈述了王莽的说法，迷惑后人，耽误后代的学者，我们认真查对《汉书》、《魏志》、《宋史》，粗略地收集了王莽、师丹、甄邯的奏议和当时事情的经过，以及魏明帝的诏书，关于濮园的议论文字，并把我们的论证附在后边。
English: Song Ru actually stated Wang Mang's view, confusing later generations and delaying future generations of scholars. We carefully checked the "Han Shu," "Wei Zhi" and "Song History," and roughly collected Wang Mang's, Shi Dan's and Zhen Yao's proclamations and the course of events at that time, as well as Wei Ming Di's imperial edict and proclamations about the Summer Palace, and attached our arguments to the back.

古文：乞付纂修官，参互考订，俾天下臣子知为后之议实起于莽，宋儒之论实出于莽，下洗群疑，上彰圣孝。 
现代文：请把这些交给纂修官，交相考订，使天下的大臣们、儿子们都知道皇帝过继给人做儿子的主张实际上是由王莽提出来的，这样做往下可以扫除下边群众的疑惑，往上可以显示陛下的孝心。 
English: Please hand these over to the deacon, and have them cross-examined by each other, so that the world's ministers and sons know that the idea of the emperor's adoption of sons was actually proposed by Wang Mang. Doing so can sweep away the doubts of the masses below, and can show His Majesty's filial piety above.

古文：诏语下其书于史馆。
现代文：世宗诏令把这本书交给了史馆。
English: King Sejong gave the book to the museum by imperial decree.

古文：还朝未几，命署大理寺事，与璁、萼覆谳李福达狱。
现代文：他们回朝不久，世宗就让他总领大理寺的事务，和张璁、桂萼一起复审李福达一案。
English: Soon after their return to China, King Sejong made him the head of the affairs of Dali Temple, and he reviewed the case of Li Fuda together with Zhang Ye and Gui Cale.

古文：萼等议马录重辟，献夫力争得减死。
现代文：桂萼等人主张判马录腰斩，献夫极力相争才使马录减免死刑。
English: Gui Caly and others advocated that Ma Luo should be sentenced to beheading, and it was only after a fierce struggle that Ma Luo was spared the death penalty.

古文：其年九月拜礼部右侍郎，仍兼学士，直经筵日讲。
现代文：当年九月，献夫担任了礼部右侍郎，仍兼学士，到经筵前担任日讲。
English: In September of that year, Ken took on the role of Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. He was still a bachelor at the time, but became a lecturer of Japanese before entering the priesthood.

古文：寻代萼为吏部左侍郎，复代为礼部尚书。
现代文：不久又接桂萼当了吏部左侍郎，后来又接他当了礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Left Attendant of the Personnel Department, and later he was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Etiquette.

古文：《明伦大典》成，加太子太保。献夫视璁、萼性宽平，遇事亦间有执持，不尽与附会。
现代文：献夫比张璁、桂萼为人要宽厚、平和一些，遇事有时也跟他们争论，坚持己见，不完全附和他们。
English: Xianfu is more lenient and peaceful than Zhang Ye and Gui Cale. In times of trouble, he sometimes argues with them, insists on his own opinion, and does not completely follow them.

古文：萼反陈洸狱，请尽逮问官叶应骢等，以献夫言多免逮。
现代文：桂萼为陈翻案，奏请把原来的问讯官叶应骢等全逮起来，因为献夫的话世宗才少逮了很多人。
English: Gui caly for Chen's overturning of the case, please arrest the original interrogating officer Ye Yingjun and all the others, because the words of the offender Sejong only caught a few people.

古文：思恩、田州比岁乱，献夫请专任王守仁，而罢镇守中官郑润、总兵官朱骐，帝乃召润、骐还。
现代文：思恩、田州连年叛乱，献夫奏请专责任用王守仁，罢免那里的镇守宦官郑润、总兵官朱骐，世宗就把郑润、朱骐召了回来。
English: Sion and Tianzhou rebelled for years in a row, and Wang Shouren was asked to take the special responsibility to remove the town guard eunuch Zheng Run and the general officer Zhu Xi from there, and Shizong called Zheng Run and Zhu Xi back.

古文：思、田既平，守仁议筑城建邑，萼痛诋之。
现代文：思恩、田州平定以后，守仁主张修建、设置新城镇，桂萼大肆攻击他。
English: After the pacification of Shun and Tianzhou, Shuren advocated the construction and establishment of new towns, and Gui Caly attacked him.

古文：献夫历陈其功状，筑城得毋止。
现代文：献夫一一列举守仁的功劳，修建新城镇的事才没有中止。
English: The construction of the new town has not been suspended.

古文：璁、萼与杨一清构，献夫因灾异进和衷之说，且请收召谪戍削籍余宽、马明衡辈，而倍取进士之数。
现代文：张璁、桂萼跟杨一清闹矛盾，献夫借发生灾异的机会上书主张大家应同心同德，并且请求把贬官削籍或充军的大臣余宽、马明衡等人召回，成倍录取进士。
English: Zhang Xuan, Gui Cale and Yang Yixing quarreled, and Xianfu took the opportunity of the calamity to write a letter advocating that everyone should be of the same mind and spirit, and requested that the ministers Yu Guang and Ma Mingheng, who had been demoted or conscripted, be recalled, and the number of new recruits doubled.

古文：帝优诏答之，宽等卒不用。
现代文：世宗颁诏称赞，但余宽等人最终还是未予任用。
English: Sejong issued an imperial edict praising him, but in the end, Yuhiro and others were not appointed.

古文：献夫以尼僧、道姑伤风化，请勒令改嫁，帝从之。
现代文：献夫认为尼姑、道姑的存在伤风害俗，请勒令她们还俗嫁人，世宗听从了他的建议。
English: The dowry-giver thought that the existence of nuns and Taoist nuns was harmful to customs, and requested that they be ordered to marry laymen. Shizong listened to his suggestion.

古文：又因霍韬言，尽汰僧道无牒、毁寺观私创者。
现代文：又根据霍韬的建议，把没有印牒的僧、道全部予以裁汰，拆毁私立的寺院和道观。
English: In addition, according to the suggestion of Huo Zang, all the monks and Taoists who did not have seal certificates were eliminated, and private temples and Taoism were demolished.

古文：帝欲杀陈后丧，献夫引礼固争。
现代文：世宗想减轻陈皇后的丧葬仪式，献夫据理力争。
English: King Sejong wanted to lighten the funeral ceremony for Empress Chen, and the devotees fought for it.

古文：寻复代萼为吏部尚书。
现代文：不久以后，他又接替桂萼担任吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he took over from Gui Cale as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：萼、璁罢政，诏吏部核两人私党。
现代文：桂萼、张璁被罢官后，世宗诏令吏部清查他们两个的党羽分子。
English: After Gui Calyp and Zhang Ye were dismissed from their posts, Shizong Zhao ordered the cadre department to investigate their two party members.

古文：献夫言： 陆粲等所劾百十人，诬者不少。
现代文：献夫上书说 ：陆粲等所弹劾的百十个人，弄错的不少。
English: The petition said: "Many of the hundred and ten people impeached by Lu Wei and others are mistaken.

古文：昔攻璁、萼者，以为党而去之。今附璁、萼者，又以为党而去之。缙绅之祸何时已。 
现代文：过去攻击张璁、桂萼的人被看作私党给拿掉了，现在追随张璁、桂萼的人再被看作私党给拿掉，那么朝廷中官员们的灾难什么时候才能算完呢？ 
English: In the past, those who attacked Zhang Ye and Gui Calyp were regarded as a private party to be removed, and now those who follow Zhang Ye and Gui Calyp are regarded as a private party to be removed, so when will the disaster of officials in the imperial court be over?

古文：乃奏留黄绾等二十三人，而黜储良才等十二人。
现代文：于是奏请留用黄绾等二十三个人，贬斥储良才等十二个人。
English: As a result, 23 people, including Huang Qi, were asked to stay, and 12 people, including Kuo Liangcai, were dismissed.

古文：良才者，初为御史，以考察黜。
现代文：良才这个人当初当过御史，在考察中被罢了官。
English: This man, Yoshitaka, was once an imperial historian, but he was dismissed during an inspection.

古文：上疏诋杨廷和，指吏部侍郎孟春等为奸党，萼因请复其职。
现代文：他就上书攻击杨廷和，指责吏部侍郎孟春等人是奸党，桂萼因此奏请恢复了他的官职。
English: He wrote a letter attacking Yang Tinghe and accusing Meng Chun, the secretary of the personnel department, and others of being traitors, and Gui Caly therefore requested the reinstatement of his official position.

古文：至是斥去，时论快之。
现代文：到这时又被清算出去，当时舆论对此引以为快。
English: By this time it had been liquidated again, and public opinion at the time was pleased about this.

古文：安昌伯钱维圻卒，庶兄维垣请嗣爵。
现代文：安昌伯钱维圻死后，他的庶系哥哥维垣请求继承他的爵位。
English: After the death of Anchang Bochen Wei, his brother-in-law, Vigaki, requested to inherit his title.

古文：献夫言外戚之封不当世及，历引汉、唐、宋事为证。
现代文：献夫上书讲外戚的封爵不应当世袭，又列举了汉、唐、宋朝的事例当作证据。
English: The dedication stated that the title of nobility should not be hereditary, and cited examples from the Han, Tang and Song dynasties as evidence.

古文：帝善其言，下廷议，外戚遂永绝世封。
现代文：世宗认为他说得对，把他的奏章交给大臣们讨论，从此外戚就永远断除了世袭的封爵。
English: The Sejong thought he was right, so he submitted his report to the ministers for discussion, and cut off the hereditary knighthood forever.

古文：璁、萼既召还，羽林指挥刘永昌劾都督桂勇，语侵萼及兵部尚书李承勋。
现代文：张璁、桂萼被召回后，羽林指挥刘永昌弹劾都督桂勇，言辞之间连及桂萼及兵部尚书李承勋。
English: After Zhang Xuan and Gui Calyx were recalled, Liu Yongchang, the commander of Yulin, impeached the governor Gui Yong. Gui Calyx and Li Chengxun, the secretary of the military department, were linked by words.

古文：又劾御史廖自显，自显坐逮。
现代文：又弹劾御史廖自显，使他因此被逮入狱。
English: He also exposed himself by impeaching Mishiro Ryo, for which he was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：已，又讦兵部郎中卢襄等。
现代文：过后，又上书攻击兵部郎中卢襄等。
English: Later, he also wrote a letter attacking Lu Xiang, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：献夫请按治永昌，毋令奸人以蜚语中善类。帝不从。献夫遂求退，帝亦不允。
现代文：献夫奏请把永昌治罪，不要让奸人根据流言蜚语来打击好人，世宗不听，献夫就自请离职，世宗也不答应。
English: Xianfu said, "Please punish Yongchang. Don't let the traitors use rumors and gossip to attack good people. If Shizong doesn't listen, Xianfu will resign voluntarily, and Shizong won't agree."

古文：给事中孙应奎劾献夫私其亲故大理少卿洗光、太常卿彭泽。帝不听。
现代文：给事中孙应奎弹劾献夫偏向自己的亲友大理少卿洗光、太常卿彭泽，世宗不听。
English: When the middle son, Ying Kuei, proposed impeachment to his relatives and friends, Dali Shaoqing Shiguang and Tai Changqing Pengze, Shizong did not listen.

古文：都给事中夏言亦劾献夫坏选法，徙张璁所恶浙江参政黄卿于陕西，而用璁所爱党以平代，邪回之彭泽逾等躐迁太常，及他所私昵，皆有迹，疑献夫交通贿赂。
现代文：都给事中夏言也弹劾献夫打破选用官员的常规，把张璁厌恶的浙江参政黄卿调到陕西去了，让张璁所喜欢的党以平取代了他的职务；邪恶的彭泽破例升任太常；还有其他得到提拔的亲信，都有迹可察；献夫涉嫌收受贿赂，交通关节。
English: In the middle of the matter, Xia Yan also impeached Xianfu for breaking the routine of selecting officials, transferred Zhejiang politician Huang Qing, who was detested by Zhang Ye, to Shaanxi, and let the party that Zhang Ye liked replace his position with Ping; the evil Peng Ze was promoted too often; there were other cronies who were promoted, all of which were traceable; Xianfu was suspected of accepting bribes, traffic joints.

古文：疏入，帝令卿等还故官。
现代文：这个奏疏递上去以后，世宗传令让黄卿等各回原任。
English: After the report was submitted, Shizong ordered Huang Ching to return to his original post.

古文：献夫及璁疏辨，因引退。
现代文：献夫和张璁都上书作了辩解，并且请求离职。
English: Both Xianfu and Zhang Jun wrote a letter to defend themselves, and requested to leave the company.

古文：帝重违二人意，复令卿等如前拟。
现代文：世宗偏不听从他俩的意见，再次传令让黄卿等按照原先的决定各回原任。
English: However, Shizong did not listen to the opinions of the two of them, and once again ordered Huang Qing and others to return to their original posts in accordance with the original decision.

古文：顷之，给事中薛甲言： 刘永昌以武夫劾冢宰，张澜以军余劾勋臣，下凌上替，不知所止，愿存廉远堂高之义，俾小人不得肆攻讦。 
现代文：不久，给事中薛甲上书说： 刘永昌以武夫的身份弹劾六部长官，张澜是军队中冗员也敢批评勋臣，这样以下犯上，谁知道发展下去会弄成什么样子？
English: Not long after, Xue Jia wrote a letter saying: "Liu Yongchang impeached six ministers in his capacity as a military commander, Zhang Lan is a redundant member of the military and dares to criticize a distinguished minister. If such a crime is committed, who knows what will happen in the future?

古文：章下吏部。
现代文：我希望陛下维护廉洁者不争，朝堂之臣不得随便批评的道理，使地位卑微的官吏不敢放肆地乱加攻击。 
English: I hope that His Majesty's principle of upholding the principle that those who are honest should not be disputed, and that the subjects of the Imperial Court should not be criticized at will, will make low-ranking officials dare not to attack indiscriminately.

古文：献夫等请从甲言，敕都察院严禁吏民，毋得讠寿张乱政，并饬两京给事御史及天下抚按官论事，先大体毋责小疵。
现代文：他的奏章下发吏部后，献夫奏请采纳他的建议，由世宗指示都察院禁止吏民百姓上书，不许他们虚诳放肆，危害朝政，并告诫两京给事御史及普天下抚按官员，凡上书论事，以大体为先，不要抓别人的小过失不放。
English: After his report was issued to the officials, the presenters of the report were asked to adopt his suggestion, and Shizong instructed the Duka-in to prohibit the officials and the people from writing letters, not allowing them to be deceptive and impudent, endangering the government of the dynasty, and warning the two capitals to give the history of the matter and the officials throughout the world. When writing about the matter, take the general first, do not catch the small faults of others.

古文：当是时，帝方欲广耳目，周知百僚情伪，得献夫议不怿，报罢。
现代文：当时，世宗正想扩大自己的耳目，全面掌握百官的情况，所以接到献夫的奏议很不高兴，宣布不加采纳。
English: At that time, Sejong was trying to expand his ears and eyes and fully grasp the situation of the hundred officials, so he was very unhappy to receive the petition and announced that he would not accept it.

古文：于是给事中饶秀劾甲阿附： 自刘永昌后，言官未闻议大臣，独夏言、孙应奎、赵汉议及璁、献夫耳。汉已蒙诘谴，言、应奎所奏皆用人行政之失，甲乃指为毛举细故，而颂大臣不已。
现代文：于是给事中饶秀弹劾薛甲阿谀奉承，说： 自刘永昌以后，言官没听说过评议大臣的，只有夏言、孙应奎、赵汉谈到过张璁、献夫两人，赵汉已被批评，夏言、应奎所奏上的都是用人、行政上的过失，薛甲却指责为抓住细枝末节不放，自己却在起劲歌颂某些大臣。
English: Therefore, Rao Xiu flattered Xue Jia's flattery during the impeachment, saying: Since Liu Yongchang, the speaker has not heard of the minister of evaluation, only Xia Yan, Sun Yingkui, and Zhao Han have talked about Zhang Ye and Xuanwu. Zhao Han has been criticized, and what Xia Yan and Yingkui have played on are employment and administrative mistakes. However, Xue Jia has been accused of grasping the minutiae, but he is singing the praises of certain ministers.

古文：贪纵如郭勋，亦不欲人言。必使大臣横行，群臣缄口。
现代文：贪婪、放肆到郭勋那样，也不想让人说，难道一定要让大臣横行霸道，让一般官吏闭上嘴巴才成？
English: As greedy and presumptuous as Guo Xun was, he did not want people to say, "Is it necessary to let the minister be domineering and let the general officials keep their mouths shut?"

古文：万一有逆人厕其间，奈何！ 
现代文：万一大臣中间藏了一个谋逆之人该怎么办？ 
English: What should be done in the unlikely event that a traitor is hiding among the ministers?

古文：奏入，帝心善其言。下吏部再议。
现代文：他的奏章递上后，世宗认为他说得好，就交给吏部再行讨论。
English: After his musical composition was submitted, Shizong thought that he spoke well, so he handed it over to the officials for further discussion.

古文：甲具疏自明，帝恶其不俟部奏，命削二官出之外。
现代文：薛甲这时上书作自我解释，世宗厌弃他不等吏部奏议就私自辩护，传令贬官两级，把他调出去了。
English: At this time, Xue Jia wrote a letter to explain himself. Shizong was disgusted that he did not wait for the cadre department to make a report and defended himself privately. He was demoted two levels and transferred out.

古文：部谓甲已处分，不复更议。
现代文：吏部认为薛甲已受了处分，就不再讨论他们的奏章了。
English: The officials thought that Xue Jia had been punished, so they no longer discussed their performance.

古文：帝责令置对，停献夫俸一月，郎官倍之。
现代文：世宗却责令要作出回答，并因此扣发献夫一个月的俸禄，吏部的郎官扣发两个月。
English: However, Sejong ordered him to give an answer, and as a result, deducted one month's salary from the officiant, and two months from the steward of the office.

古文：献夫不自得，两疏引疾。帝即报允，然犹虚位以俟。
现代文：献夫很不自在，两次上书称病求退，世宗表示同意后，仍然空着这个位置等他病好。
English: Dedication is very uncomfortable. He twice sent a letter saying that he was ill and wanted to resign. After Shizong agreed, he still kept this position vacant until he was well.

古文：十年秋有诏召还。
现代文：嘉靖十年秋天，朝廷传发诏书召他回朝。
English: In the autumn of the tenth year of Jiajing, the imperial court issued an edict calling him back to the imperial court.

古文：献夫疏辞，举梁材、汪鋐、王廷相自代。
现代文：献夫上书辞谢，举荐梁材、汪钅宏或王廷相代替自己。
English: He wrote a letter of thanks to his husband, recommending Liang Zai, Wang Binghong or Wang Tingxiang to replace him.

古文：帝手诏褒答，遣行人蔡叆趣之。
现代文：世宗亲自写诏书称赞他，并派遣行人蔡云爰前往催促他。
English: Sejong personally wrote an imperial edict praising him, and dispatched the pedestrian Cai Yunjun to urge him.

古文：叆及门，献夫潜入西樵，以疾辞。
现代文：蔡云爰到他家门口，献夫却偷偷跑进西樵山了，然后又称病辞谢。
English: Cai Yunyao arrived at his doorstep, but his devoted husband secretly ran into Xishuoshan, and then called in sick.

古文：既而使命再至，云将别用，乃就道。
现代文：不久使者又来了，并说要让献夫改任别的官，献夫方勉强上路。
English: Soon after, the envoy came again, and said that he wanted to have the offering man reassigned to another official, and the offering man reluctantly went on his way.

古文：明年五月至京，命以故官兼武英殿大学士入阁辅政。
现代文：第二年五月到达京城，世宗让他以原来吏部尚书的名义兼武英殿大学士入内阁辅佐朝政。
English: In May of the following year, when he arrived in Kyoto, Sejong asked him to join the cabinet as an aide to the Emperor under the name of Shosho, who had previously been in charge of the personnel department, and also as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：初，赐献夫银章曰 忠诚直谅 ，令有事密封奏闻。
现代文：当初，世宗就曾赐给献夫一枚银章，上刻 忠诚直谅 ，让他有事情时密封上奏。
English: At the very beginning, Shizong had given his devoted husband a silver medallion, inscribed with the words "loyal and forgiving," so that he could seal it when he had something to do.

古文：献夫归，上之朝，至是复赐如故。
现代文：献夫回乡时交还朝廷，到这时还像原来那样又赐给他了。
English: When the officiant returned to his hometown, it was returned to the imperial court, and at that time it was given to him again as it was before.

古文：吏部尚书王琼卒，命献夫掌之。
现代文：吏部尚书王琼死后，世宗就让献夫掌管吏部的事。
English: After the death of Wang Qiong, the secretary of the General Staff, King Sejong put him in charge of the General Staff.

古文：献夫家居，引体自尊，监司谒见，辄称疾不报。
现代文：献夫住在家里时，洁身自好，当地监司前往拜见，他总是称病谢绝。
English: When his devoted husband lived at home, he kept himself clean. When the local superintendent went to visit him, he always said that he was sick.

古文：家人姻党横于郡中，乡人屡讦告，佥事龚大稔听之。
现代文：他家的一个姻亲在郡中为非作歹，当地人屡次上诉，佥事龚大稔受理此案。
English: An in-law of his family committed a crime in the county, the local people repeatedly appealed, and the case was accepted by the Anecdotal Bureau.

古文：献夫还朝，嘱大稔。
现代文：献夫还朝后，私下里吩咐过大稔。
English: After the dedication ceremony, he secretly ordered a big feast.

古文：会大稔坐事落职，疑献夫为之，遂上疏列其不法数事，词连霍韬。
现代文：恰好这时大稔因故被罢官，他怀疑是献夫干的，就上书列举几件献夫干的违法的事，言辞之间又牵连霍韬。
English: It was just at this time that Daju was removed from office for some reason. He suspected that it was Xianfu who did it, so he wrote a letter listing several illegal things that Xianfu had done. Between the words, he also implicated Huo Rong.

古文：献夫疏辨，帝方眷献夫，大稔遂被逮削籍。
现代文：献夫上书为自己作辩解，世宗又正喜欢献夫，所以大稔就被逮捕，剥夺了官籍。
English: In order to defend himself, Shizong wrote a letter of dedication, and Shizong liked it, so Dazhao was arrested and stripped of his official registration.

古文：十月彗见东井。御史冯恩诋献夫凶奸肆巧辨，播弄威福，将不利于国家，故献夫掌吏部而彗见。
现代文：这年十月有彗星出现在东井座，御史冯恩上书攻击献夫阴险毒辣，巧辩饰奸，玩弄权术，将危害国家，所以他一掌管吏部就出现了彗星。
English: In October of that year, a comet appeared in the constellation of the East Well. Goshi Fong En wrote a letter attacking the sacrificial husband, insidious and poisonous, cleverly arguing and playing tricks, and playing power games, which would endanger the country. Therefore, a comet appeared as soon as he took charge of the personnel department.

古文：帝怒，下之狱。
现代文：世宗恼了，把冯恩打入监牢。
English: Sejong was annoyed and put Feng En in jail.

古文：献夫亦引疾乞休，优诏不允。
现代文：献夫也称病请求退休，世宗传诏以和缓的口气表示不允许。
English: Dedication also said that he was ill and asked to retire, and Shizong Chuan Zhao said in a gentle tone that it was not allowed.

古文：献夫饰恬退名，连被劾，中恧。
现代文：献夫为人恬静自守，不争名夺利，接连受人弹劾后，就有些惭愧、畏缩。
English: After being impeached one after another, he felt a little ashamed and cringed.

古文：虽执大政，气厌厌不振。
现代文：虽然掌握大权，还是气息奄奄，精神不振。
English: Although they hold great power, they are still apathetic and lack energy.

古文：独帝欲杀张延龄，常力争。
现代文：只有世宗想杀张延龄一事，他曾极力劝阻。
English: Only Sejong wanted to kill Zhang Yanling, which he tried his best to dissuade.

古文：而其时桂萼已前卒。张璁最宠，罢相者屡矣。
现代文：当时桂萼已经死了，张璁最受宠信，也几次被罢相了。
English: At that time, Gui Caly was already dead, Zhang Ye was the most favored, and he was ousted several times.

古文：霍韬、黄宗明言事一不当，辄下之吏。
现代文：霍韬、黄宗明议论政事只要不合世宗心意，世宗就把他们打入监狱。
English: Huo Xi and Huang Zong openly discussed politics, and as long as they did not conform to the will of the Sejong, the Sejong would put them in prison.

古文：献夫见帝恩威不测，居职二岁，三疏引疾。
现代文：献夫看到世宗恩威不测，在职两年，就三次上书称病告老。
English: When he saw that Shizong Enwei had died unexpectedly after two years in office, he wrote three times to say that he was too old to work.

古文：帝优诏许之，令乘传，予道里费。
现代文：世宗最后以奖赏的口吻颁发诏书同意他退休，让他乘坐官方车马回乡，并发给他路费。
English: In the end, Sejong rewarded him by issuing an imperial edict agreeing to his retirement, allowing him to return to his hometown in an official carriage and horse, and providing him with travel expenses.

古文：家居十年卒。
现代文：他回乡以后在家里住了十年才死去。
English: She died after living in the home for 10 years.

古文：先已加柱国、少保，乃赠太保，谥文襄。
现代文：生前他已被加封为柱国、少保，所以朝廷就在他死后追赠他为太保，谥文襄。
English: During his lifetime, he had been awarded the title of pillar state and minor protector, so after his death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of grand protector, 文襄.

古文：献夫缘议礼骤贵。
现代文：献夫是因为讨论 大礼 一下子显贵的。
English: Dedication is due to the discussion of large gifts and sudden rise to prominence.

古文：与璁、萼共事，持论颇平恕，故人不甚恶之。
现代文：他与张璁、桂萼多年共事，只是由于他对人对事看法比较平正、宽容，所以人们不怎么厌恶他。
English: He has worked with Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly for many years, but people do not dislike him much because his view of people is relatively fair and tolerant.

古文：夏言，字公谨，贵溪人。
现代文：夏言，字公谨，贵溪人。
English: Xia Yan, his name is Gong Gong, he is from Guixi.

古文：父鼎，临清知州。
现代文：他的父亲夏鼎，曾任临清知州。
English: His father, Xia Ding, once served as the governor of Linqing and Chizhou.

古文：言举正德十二年进士，授行人，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：夏言本人考取正德十二年进士，被任命为行人，继而升任兵科给事中。
English: Xia Yan himself took the Zhengde 12th year entrance examination, was appointed as a pedestrian, and then was promoted to the middle of the military department.

古文：性警敏，善属文。
现代文：他生性机警灵敏，善于写文章。
English: He is alert and sensitive by nature, and good at writing articles.

古文：及居言路，謇谔自负。
现代文：等他做到谏官，便以直言为己任。
English: When he becomes a eunuch, it will be his duty to speak out.

古文：世宗嗣位，疏言： 正德以来，壅蔽已极。
现代文：世宗继位后，他上书说： 正德以来，上下消息不通已达极点。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he wrote in a letter: "Since Jeongdeok, the lack of communication between the upper and lower levels has reached an extreme.

古文：今陛下维新庶政，请日视朝后，御文华殿阅章疏，召阁臣面决。或事关大利害，则下廷臣集议。
现代文：现在陛下刚开始办理各项政务，请于每日早朝以后，亲自到文华殿批阅奏章，召内阁大臣当面商量决定，如有关重大利害的事情，则下达给全体大臣集中商议。
English: Now that His Majesty has just begun to deal with various government affairs, please come to the Palace of Literature in person after the early morning every day to approve and read the report, and call the cabinet ministers to discuss and decide in person. If it is a matter of serious harm, it will be sent to all ministers for centralized discussion.

古文：不宜谋及亵近，径发中旨。
现代文：不应和身边猥亵的宦官商量后就直接从宫中发出圣旨。
English: One should not issue a decree directly from the palace after consulting with the lewd eunuchs around him.

古文：圣意所予夺，亦必下内阁议而后行，绝壅蔽矫诈之弊。 
现代文：即使陛下所做出的取舍，也一定要下到内阁，经讨论然后实施，以杜绝为人蒙骗或弄虚作假的弊病。 
English: Even if His Majesty makes a choice, it must go down to the cabinet, be discussed and then implemented, so as to eliminate the ills of deception or deception.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：世宗赞赏并采纳了这个意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：奉诏偕御史郑本公、主事汪文盛核亲军及京卫冗员，汰三千二百人，复条九事以上。
现代文：后来，他领命和御史郑本公、主事汪文盛一起考核皇上身边的侍卫及京城卫队的冗员，裁汰了三千二百人，又上书讲了九条意见。
English: Later, he was given the task of reviewing the excessive number of bodyguards around the emperor and the capital guard together with the imperial historian Zheng Bengong and the leading official Wang Wensheng. He dismissed 3,200 people and made nine comments in a letter.

古文：辇下为肃清。
现代文：这下，京城治安秩序稳定多了。
English: As a result, the security and order situation in Beijing has become much more stable.

古文：嘉靖初，偕御史樊继祖等出按庄田，悉夺还民产。
现代文：嘉靖初，他和御史樊继祖等外出清理庄田，把被侵吞的民产如数夺出来归还百姓。
English: At the beginning of the Jiajing era, he and his stepfather and stepfather-in-law went out to clean up the village farmland and return the stolen property to the people.

古文：劾中官赵霦、建昌侯张延龄，疏凡七上。
现代文：为弹劾宦官赵靈、建昌侯张延龄，他前后上书七次。
English: In order to impeach eunuchs Zhao Ling and Jianchang Hou Zhang Yanling, he submitted letters seven times.

古文：请改后宫负郭庄田为亲蚕厂、公桑园，一切禁戚里求请及河南、山东奸人献民田王府者。
现代文：又请把后宫负郭庄田改为亲蚕厂、公桑园，禁止一切亲戚、乡人的请托及河南、山东一些坏人把民田献给王府的行为。
English: In addition, please change the negative Guo Xiaotian of the harem into a pro-silkworm factory and a public mulberry garden, and prohibit all relatives and villagers from asking and some bad people in Henan and Shandong from donating people's fields to the royal palace.

古文：救被逮永平知府郭九皋。
现代文：他曾解救过被逮捕的永平知府郭九皋。
English: He once rescued Guo Jiuyong, the governor of Yongping Prefecture, who had been arrested.

古文：庄奉夫人弟邢福海、肃奉夫人弟顾福，传旨授锦衣世千户，言力争不可。
现代文：庄奉夫人的弟弟刑福海，肃奉夫人的弟弟顾福，皇帝发布命令授予世袭千户锦衣的封赏，夏言力争，以为不行。
English: Lady Zhuang Bong's brother Ching Fuhai, Lady Su Bong's brother Gu Fu, the emperor issued an order to award the hereditary thousand households brocade award, Xia Yan struggled and thought it was impossible.

古文：诸疏率谔谔，为人传诵。
现代文：这些奏章大多梗直，被世人传诵。
English: Most of these pieces are straightforward and are recited by the world.

古文：屡迁兵科都给事中。
现代文：经几次晋升，做了兵科都给事中。
English: He's reassigned the entire military science department.

古文：勘青羊山平贼功罪，论奉悉当。
现代文：评定青羊山镇压叛乱的功罪，他的议论和奏章都很恰当。
English: In assessing the merits and demerits of Qingyangshan's suppression of the rebellion, his speech and composition are very appropriate.

古文：副使牛鸾获贼中交通名籍，言请毁之以安众心。
现代文：副使牛鸾缴获了乱军中的通讯名单，为了安抚人心，夏言请求烧毁了它。
English: Vice-envoy Niu Yao seized the communication list of the rebel army, and in order to appease the people, Xia Yan requested to burn it.

古文：孝宗朝，令吏、兵二部每季具两京大臣及在外文武方面官履历进御，正德后渐废，以言请复之。
现代文：孝宗一朝曾经命令吏部和兵部每个季度把两京大臣及在外文武两方面官员的履历表造好进呈皇帝，正德以后渐渐不执行了，因为夏言的建议恢复了这一制度。
English: Emperor Taizong once ordered the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Military Affairs to prepare a curriculum vitae of the ministers of the two capitals and the officials in the military and civilian fields in foreign countries and submit it to the emperor every quarter. After Zhengde, this was gradually not implemented, because Xia Yan's suggestion restored this system.

古文：七年，调吏科。
现代文：嘉靖七年，调入吏科。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, he was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：当是时，帝锐意礼文事。以天地合祀非礼，欲分建二郊，并日月而四。
现代文：这个时候，世宗正锐意于修饰礼文的工作，以为天地合在一起祭祀不合礼制，想分别建立两个郊祀台，加上日月，共四个祭坛。
English: At this time, Sejong was intent on the work of embellishing the ritual texts. He thought that it was not proper to hold a religious service when heaven and earth were united, and he wanted to build two suburban shrines, plus the sun and moon, for a total of four altars.

古文：大学士张孚敬不敢决，帝卜之太祖亦不吉，议且寝。会言上疏请帝亲耕南郊，后亲蚕北郊，为天下倡。
现代文：大学士张孚敬不敢决定，世宗以占卜问于太祖也不吉利，议论正要作废，恰好夏言上书，请世宗亲耕于京城南郊，皇后亲蚕于京城北郊，为天下人示范。
English: Zhang Fujian, a university scholar, did not dare to make a decision. It was not auspicious for Shizong to ask the great-grandfather about divination. The discussion was about to be scrapped. Just as the summer speech was published, he asked Shizong to cultivate in the southern suburbs of Beijing, and the queen to cultivate in the northern suburbs of Beijing, as a demonstration for the people of the world.

古文：帝以南北郊之说，与分建二郊合，令孚敬谕旨，言乃请分祀天地。
现代文：世宗因为这南北郊的说法与分别建立两个郊祀台的说法一致，所以命令孚敬以诏书询问，夏言于是便请分别祭祀天和地。
English: Sejong, because the north and south suburbs were consistent with the idea of establishing two suburb shrines, ordered Fu Kei to inquire with an edict, and Xia Yan was then asked to separately sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：廷臣持不可，孚敬亦难之，詹事霍韬诋尤力。
现代文：朝廷里大臣认为不行，孚敬也责问他，詹事霍韬攻击得尤其厉害。
English: The minister of the imperial court thought it was not possible, and Fu Jian also reproached him. Zhan Zhizhi was particularly badly attacked.

古文：帝大怒，下韬狱。降玺书奖言，赐四品服俸，卒从其请。
现代文：世宗非常恼火，把霍韬下到监狱里，颁发加盖玉玺的诏书奖励夏言，赐给他四品官官服和俸禄，最后听从了他的意见。
English: Sejong was very angry. He sent Ho to prison, issued an edict stamped with an emerald to reward Xia Yan, and gave him four official uniforms and a salary. Finally, he listened to his opinion.

古文：又赞成二郊配飨议，语详《礼志》。
现代文：他赞成分两郊祭祀天地的议论，详见于《礼志》中话语。
English: He was in favour of the two-suburbs-worshipping-heaven-and-earth argument, which is detailed in the "Rishi" discourse.

古文：言自是大蒙帝眷。
现代文：夏言从此以后很受世宗的宠爱。
English: Since then, Natsugen has been a favorite of the Sejong.

古文：郊坛工兴，即命言监之。
现代文：开始修造京城祭祀的工程就让夏言负责监督。
English: Natsugen was put in charge of supervising the construction of the construction project for the capital city's sacrificial rites.

古文：延绥饥，言荐佥都御史李如圭为巡抚。
现代文：延绥发生饥荒，夏言推荐佥都御史李如圭做了巡抚。
English: When a famine occurred in Yancheng, Xia Yan recommended Li Rougui, the governor of Yancheng, to act as an inspector.

古文：吏部推代如圭者，帝不用，再推及言。
现代文：吏部推荐替代如圭的人，世宗不愿任用，再推荐，轮到了夏言。
English: The personnel department recommended someone to replace Rugei, but Sejong did not want to appoint him. After that, it was Natsugen's turn to be recommended.

古文：御史熊爵谓言出如圭为己地，至比之张纟采。
现代文：御史熊爵认为夏言推荐如圭就是为了让他给自己让出位置，直至把他比作张彩。
English: Oshi Kumajaku thought that Natsugen recommended Rukue just to make him give up his position, until he compared him to Zhang Cai.

古文：帝切责爵，令言毋辨。而言不平，讦爵且辞新命，帝乃止。
现代文：世宗严厉批评了熊爵，命令夏言不要辩解，可是夏言心中不平，攻击熊爵并且推辞这一任命，世宗就此罢休了。
English: Shizong severely criticized Xiong Jie and ordered Xia Yan not to defend him, but Xia Yan was not satisfied, attacked Xiong Jie and rejected the appointment, and Shizong gave up.

古文：孚敬颐指百僚，无敢与抗者。
现代文：孚敬傲慢地指挥臣僚，没人敢与他违抗。
English: Fu Jing arrogantly commanded his ministers, and no one dared to disobey him.

古文：言自以受帝知，独不为下。
现代文：夏言自以为皇上了解自己，所以独立一面不肯居其下风。
English: Natsugen thought that the Emperor understood him, so he did not want to be an underdog on the independent side.

古文：孚敬乃大害言宠，言亦怨孚敬骤用彭泽为太常卿不右己，两人遂有隙。
现代文：孚敬就从中破坏世宗对夏言的宠信，夏言也抱怨孚敬破例任用彭泽为太常卿而不抬举自己，两人就这样有了嫌隙。
English: As a result, Fu Jing undermined Shizong's trust in Nia Yan. Nia Yan also complained that Fu Jing had made an exception and appointed Peng Ze as Tai Changqing without praising himself. Thus, the two had a rift.

古文：言抗疏劾孚敬及吏部尚书方献夫。
现代文：夏言大胆地上书弹劾孚敬及吏部尚书方献夫。
English: Xia Yan boldly wrote a letter to impeach Fu Jing and the cadre department Shang Shufang.

古文：孚敬、献夫皆疏辨求去。
现代文：孚敬、献夫都上书辩说并自求解职。
English: Both Fu Jing and Xianfu wrote letters to argue and seek dismissal.

古文：帝顾诸人厚，为两解之。
现代文：世宗对他们几个都很看重，所以为他们两头解劝。
English: Sejong thought highly of several of them, so he tried to persuade them both.

古文：言既显，与孚敬、献夫、韬为难，益以强直厚自结。
现代文：夏言官位已很显贵，因与孚敬、献夫、霍韬相互敌对，所以更加要以强直的性格来自我保护。
English: Xia Yan's official position was already very distinguished, and because he was hostile to Fu Jing, Zhenfu, and Huo Yao, he had to protect himself with a strong and upright personality.

古文：帝欲辑郊礼为成书，擢言侍读学士，充纂修官，直经筵日讲，仍兼吏科都给事中。
现代文：世宗想把郊祭之礼编成一书，提拔夏言为侍读学士，担任纂修官，叫他每天到经筵前讲论，同时仍旧兼任吏科都给事中。
English: The Sejong wanted to compile the rites of the suburb festival into a book, and promoted Xia Yan to attendant bachelor, to serve as a compiler, and asked him to give a lecture every day before the eulogy, while still serving as a clerk.

古文：言又赞帝更定文庙祀典及大禘礼，帝益喜。
现代文：夏言又帮助世宗重新制定了文庙的祭祀典礼和祖先的祭祀礼制，世宗更加高兴了。
English: Natsugen also helped Sejong re-establish the ritual ceremony of the temple and the ritual system of the ancestors, and Sejong was even happier.

古文：十年三月遂擢少詹事，兼翰林学士，掌院事，直讲如故。
现代文：十年三月，他被提升为少詹事，兼翰林学士，掌管院事，并和以前一样任直讲。
English: In March of the tenth year, he was promoted to Shao Zhanji, concurrently Hanlin Baccalaureate, in charge of the affairs of the academy, and was allowed to speak as before.

古文：言眉目疏朗，美须髯，音吐弘畅，不操乡音。
现代文：夏言眉目清朗，胡须也长得好看，口齿宏亮，不说家乡话。
English: Xia Yan's eyes are clear, his beard is also good-looking, his mouth is big, and he doesn't speak the language of his hometown.

古文：每进讲，帝必目属，欲大用之。
现代文：每次到经筵讲论，世宗都盯住他瞧，心里想要重用他。
English: Every time he came to lecture on economics, Shizong stared at him, wanting to reuse him in his heart.

古文：孚敬忌弥甚，遂与彭泽构薛侃狱，下言法司。
现代文：孚敬忌恨得更加厉害，于是就和彭泽一起制造薛侃一案，把夏言交司法部门处理。
English: Fu Jingyi's hatred was even more intense, so he and Peng Ze worked together to fabricate the Xue Kan case and brought Xia Yan to the judicial department for handling.

古文：已，帝觉孚敬曲，乃罢孚敬而释言。
现代文：不久，世宗发觉是孚敬曲意害人，就罢免了孚敬的官，释放了夏言。
English: Soon, Shizong found out that Fu Jingzhu's intention was to harm people, so he dismissed Fu Jingzhu's officials and released Xia Yan.

古文：八月，四郊工成，进言礼部左侍郎，仍掌院事。
现代文：八月，四郊祭坛竣工，提升夏言为礼部左侍郎，仍旧掌管翰林院的事。
English: In August, the four suburbs altar was completed, and Natsugen was promoted to the left attendant of the ritual department, still in charge of the affairs of Kanrin-in.

古文：逾月，代李时为本部尚书。
现代文：过一个月，接替李时为礼部尚书。
English: A month later, when he replaced Li, he became the head of the etiquette department.

古文：去谏官未浃岁拜六卿，前此未有也。
现代文：从谏官下来不满一年做到六卿之一的尚书，这还是以前没有过的事呢。
English: From eunuch to one of the six nobles in less than a year, this is something that has never happened before.

古文：时士大夫犹恶孚敬，恃言抗之。
现代文：当时士大夫们还在恨孚敬，凭借夏言来与之抗衡。
English: At that time, the scholars and doctors were still hating Fu Jing, relying on Xia Yan to compete with it.

古文：言既以开敏结帝知，又折节下士。
现代文：夏言既因为聪明颖悟得到皇帝信任，又能降低身份，屈己下人。
English: Not only did Xia Yan gain the emperor's trust because of his cleverness and insight, but he was also able to lower his status and become a subordinate.

古文：御史喻希礼、石金请宥 大礼 大狱得罪诸臣。帝大怒，令言劾。
现代文：御史喻希礼、石金请宽解因 大礼 一事而定下的案犯，得罪了在位的大臣，世宗非常恼火，让夏言揭发他们的罪状。
English: Sejong was very angry, and asked Natsugen to expose their crimes. Sejong asked Natsugen to grant clemency to the perpetrators of the crime, who had offended the reigning minister.

古文：言谓希礼、金无他肠，请帝宽恕。
现代文：夏言说希礼、石金并无坏心思，请世宗饶了他们。
English: Natsugen said that Giri and Sekigane did not have bad intentions, and asked Sejong to forgive them.

古文：帝责言对状，逮二人诏狱，远窜之，言引罪乃已。
现代文：世宗责怪他所作的回答，把希礼、石金关进京城的监狱，然后把他们赶到边远的地方去了。夏言作了自我批评才算罢休。
English: Sejong reproached him for his answer and put Giri and Sekigane in a prison in the capital, and then drove them to a remote place. It was only after Natsugan made a self-criticism that he stopped.

古文：以是大得公卿间声。
现代文：因为这件事，夏言很得公卿们的赞誉。
English: Because of this, Natsugen was highly praised by the nobles.

古文：帝制作礼乐，多言为尚书时所议，阁臣李时、翟銮取充位。
现代文：世宗制作礼乐，大多是夏言做礼部尚书时议定的，内阁大臣李时、翟銮只是空占官位罢了。
English: Sejong's production of ceremonial music was mostly negotiated by Xia Yan when he was in charge of the ceremonial department, and the cabinet ministers Li Shih and Zou merely occupied their official positions.

古文：帝每作诗，辄赐言，悉酬和勒石以进，帝益喜。
现代文：世宗每每写了诗，就赐给夏言，夏言予以唱和，并刻石记录，然后进呈，世宗更加高兴了。
English: Every time Sejong wrote a poem, he gave it to Natsugen, and Natsugen sang it, and engraved a stone record, and then submitted it. Sejong was even happier.

古文：奏对应制，倚待立办。
现代文：夏言撰写奏章或是应诏写诗填词，只片刻就能完成。
English: It only takes a few moments for Xia Yan to write a musical composition or compose a poem in response to an imperial edict.

古文：数召见，谘政事，善窥帝旨，有所傅会。
现代文：几次得到召见，谈到政治事务，很会揣摩世宗的心意，不免有牵强附会的时候。
English: He has been summoned several times, and when it comes to political affairs, he is very good at guessing Shizong's intentions, and there will inevitably be times when he is far-fetched.

古文：赐银章一，俾密封言事，文曰 学博才优 。
现代文：世宗赐给他一枚银章，让他密封上书，评论政事，诏书说他 学问博大，才识优裕 。
English: King Sejong gave him a silver medal and asked him to seal a letter, commenting on political affairs. The imperial edict said that he was well-educated and talented.

古文：先后赐绣蟒飞鱼麒麟服、玉带、兼金、上尊、珍馔、时物无虚月。
现代文：又前前后后不隔月地赏赐他绣蟒飞鱼麒麟服、玉带、精金、贵重的酒杯、美味佳肴、流行物品等。
English: He also rewarded him with embroidered flying fish and unicorn clothes, jade belts, fine gold, precious wine glasses, delicious dishes, popular items, etc.

古文：孚敬、献夫复相继入辅。知帝眷言厚，亦不敢与较。
现代文：孚敬、献夫也曾相继入内阁为首辅大臣，知道世宗很宠爱夏言，也不敢和他对着来。
English: Fu Jing and Xianfu also successively entered the cabinet as first and second ministers. They knew that Shizong was very fond of Xia Yan and did not dare to oppose him.

古文：已而皆谢事。
现代文：不久他们都辞去官职。
English: They all resigned their posts shortly afterwards.

古文：议礼诸人独霍韬在，仇言不置。
现代文：过去议论礼制的人只有霍韬还在位，继续仇视夏言。
English: In the past, the only people who talked about the etiquette were still in power and continued to hate Xia Yan.

古文：十五年以顺天府尹刘淑相事，韬、言相攻讦。
现代文：嘉靖十五年因为应天府尹刘淑相的事，霍韬、夏言相互攻击。
English: In the 15th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, because of the matter of Yin Liu Shuxiang of the Heavenly Capital, Huo Xi and Xia Yan attacked each other.

古文：韬卒不胜，事详《韬传》中。
现代文：最后霍韬输了，这事详见《霍韬传》中。
English: In the end, Ho Chi Minh lost, as detailed in "The Biography of Ho Chi Minh."

古文：言由是气遂骄。
现代文：夏言由此气势更加傲慢。
English: As a result, Natsugen became even more arrogant.

古文：郎中张元孝、李遂与小忤，即奏谪之。
现代文：郎中张元孝、李遂稍稍违了他的心愿，他就奏请贬了他们的官。
English: His son-in-law, Zhang Yuanxiao, and Li Sui slightly defied his wishes, and he had them demoted.

古文：皇子生，帝赐言甚渥。
现代文：皇子出生时，世宗赏给夏言很多东西。
English: When the prince was born, Shizong gave Natsugen a lot of things.

古文：初加太子太保，进少傅兼太子太傅。闰十二月遂兼武英殿大学士入参机务。
现代文：先是晋升为太子太保，又提升为少傅兼太子太傅，闰十二月份就兼任武英殿大学士，入内阁参与机务。
English: First, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo, and then to Junior Vice-Minister and Crown Prince Taifu. In December, he also served as Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household and entered the cabinet to participate in cabinet affairs.

古文：扈跸谒陵，还至沙河，言庖中火，延郭勋、李时帐，帝付言疏六亦焚。
现代文：随世宗拜谒墓陵，归回途中至沙河，夏言的厨中起火，烧到了郭勋、李时的帐篷，世宗交给夏言的六篇奏章也给烧了。
English: On the way back to Shahe after visiting the Mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen, a fire broke out in Xia Yan's kitchen and burned Guo Xun and Li Shiji's tents. Six pieces of music that Sun Yat-sen had given to Xia Yan were also burned.

古文：言当独引罪，与勋等合谢，被谯责焉。
现代文：夏言本当一个人请罪，却与郭勋等共同赔罪，被世宗责怪了一番。
English: Natsugen was the only one to plead guilty, but he and Guo Xun and others made joint reparation. He was blamed by Shizong.

古文：时李时为首辅，政多自言出。
现代文：当时，李时为首辅大臣，政令却多出自夏言。
English: At that time, Li Shih was the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, but most of the government orders came from Xia Yan.

古文：顾鼎臣入，恃先达且年长，颇欲有所可否。
现代文：顾鼎臣入内阁后，仗着自己入官在前并且年龄较大，很想对政事表示些意见。
English: After Gu Dingchen entered the cabinet, he wanted to express some opinions on political affairs, taking advantage of the fact that he was the first to enter the cabinet and was older.

古文：言意不悦，鼎臣遂不敢与争。
现代文：夏言心中不愉快，鼎臣也就不敢跟他争论了。
English: Xia Yan was not happy in his heart, and the prime minister did not dare to argue with him.

古文：其冬，时卒，言为首辅。
现代文：那年冬天，李时死去，夏言当上了首辅大臣。
English: That winter, Li Shih died, and Xia Yan became the first vice-minister.

古文：十八年，以祗荐皇天上帝册表，加少师、特进光禄大夫、上柱国。
现代文：十八年，因敬献祭祀皇天上帝的诏书表，晋升品位为少师，特进光禄大夫、上柱国。
English: In the 18th year, he was promoted to the rank of Shoshi (junior teacher) for his respectful offering of the Imperial Rescript, which was dedicated to the Emperor Ten Boku. He was also specially promoted to the rank of Kōroku no daibu (Master of the Glorious Jewel) and Shoshu no kuni (Upper Pillar State).

古文：明世人臣无加上柱国者，言所自拟也。
现代文：明代大臣没有晋升上柱国的，这名号是夏言自己想出来的。
English: The Ming-era minister was not promoted to Shangzhuang, this name was thought up by Xia Yan himself.

古文：武定侯郭勋得幸，害言宠。
现代文：武定侯郭勋得到皇帝欢心，就破坏世宗对夏言的宠信。
English: When Wuding marquis Guo Xun won the emperor's favor, he undermined Shizong's trust in Xia Yan.

古文：而礼部尚书严嵩亦心妒言。
现代文：而礼部尚书严嵩心里也忌妒夏言。
English: However, in the heart of the strict and formal etiquette department, he is also jealous of Xia Yan.

古文：言与嵩扈跸承天，帝谒显陵毕，嵩再请表贺，言乞俟还京。
现代文：夏言与严嵩随从皇帝到承天，世宗拜访显陵以后，严嵩两次请准许大臣上表称贺，夏言请等到回京以后。
English: Natsugen and Yan Song followed the emperor to Chengdu, and after Shizong's visit to Xianling, Yan Song twice asked permission to congratulate the minister on the table, and Natsugen asked to wait until after returning to Beijing.

古文：帝报罢，意大不怿。
现代文：世宗批示作罢，但心里很不愉快。
English: Shizong ordered him to stop, but he was very unhappy.

古文：嵩知帝指，固以请，帝乃曰： 礼乐自天子出可也。 
现代文：严嵩探知世宗的心思，坚持请求，世宗就说道 ：礼乐之事，当然可以出自天子。 
English: Yan Song detected Shizong's thoughts and insisted on his request. Shizong said, "The matter of ritual music, of course, can come from the Son of Heaven."

古文：令表贺，帝自是不悦言。
现代文：因而命令大臣上表祝贺，从此世宗渐渐不喜欢夏言。
English: Therefore, he ordered the minister to congratulate the table, and from then on, Shizong gradually disliked Natsugen.

古文：帝幸大峪山，言进居守敕稍迟，帝责让。
现代文：世宗巡幸大峪山，夏言前往侍候来得稍迟一些。
English: Sejong went on a sightseeing tour of Mount Dafu, and Natsugen came to wait for him a little later.

古文：言惧请罪。
现代文：世宗批评了他，夏言害怕得赶紧认罪。
English: Sejong criticized him, and Natsugen was so scared that he quickly confessed.

古文：帝大怒曰： 言自卑官，因孚敬议郊礼进，乃怠慢不恭，进密疏不用赐章，其悉还累所降手敕。 
现代文：世宗大为恼火地说 ：夏言本是一个卑微的小官，因为孚敬倡议郊礼一事得到提升，竟敢怠慢无礼，上机密奏章不使用我赐给他的银章，现在命令他归还前前后后我发给他的亲笔敕令。 
English: Sejong was very annoyed and said, "Natsugen was originally a lowly minor official, but because the matter of Fu Kei's proposal for a suburb ceremony was promoted, he dared to be disrespectful and did not use the silver medallion I gave him on the confidential record, and now I am ordering him to return the written orders I gave him before and after."

古文：言益惧，疏谢。请免追银章、手敕，为子孙百世荣，词甚哀。
现代文：夏言这下更害怕了，上书认罪，请不要追索银章和亲笔敕令，让他作为子子孙孙百代光荣，话说得很令人伤心。
English: Xia Yan was even more afraid now. He wrote a letter to plead guilty. Please don't ask for the silver medal and the imperial edict written by himself. Let him be glorious for hundreds of generations as a descendant. The words were very sad.

古文：帝怒不解，疑言毁损，令礼部追取。削少师勋阶，以少保尚书大学士致仕。
现代文：世宗怒气未消，怀疑他把亲笔敕令毁坏了，命令礼部催讨，并剥夺他少师的勋位，让他以少保、尚书、大学士退休。
English: Sejong, still angry, suspected that he had destroyed his own imperial edict, ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to investigate, and stripped him of the rank of junior teacher, allowing him to retire as a junior guard, senior scholar, and university scholar.

古文：言乃以手敕四百余，并银章上之。
现代文：夏言于是把四百多幅亲笔敕令并银章一枚缴上。
English: Xia Yan then handed over more than four hundred personally written imperial decrees and a silver medal.

古文：居数日，怒解，命止行。
现代文：过了几天，世宗怒气消了，让人制止他还乡。
English: After a few days, Shizong's anger subsided, and he was stopped from returning to his hometown.

古文：复以少傅、太子太傅入直，言疏谢。帝悦，谕令励初忠，秉公持正，免众怨。
现代文：又以少傅、太子太傅入内阁值勤，夏言上书表示感谢，世宗高兴了，指示他砥砺初忠，秉公办事，正道做人，以消除众人的怨气。
English: He was also appointed as Junior Minister and Senior Minister of the Crown Prince to serve in the cabinet. Xia Yan sent a letter to express his gratitude. Shizong was pleased and instructed him to be loyal, to act fairly, and to be a righteous person in order to eliminate the resentment of the people.

古文：言心知所云众怨者，郭勋辈也，再疏谢。
现代文：夏言心里知道所谓众人的怨气，是指郭勋等人。
English: Xia Yan knew in her heart that the so-called grudge of the people referred to Guo Xun and others.

古文：谓自处不敢后他人，一志孤立，为众所忌。
现代文：再次上书道谢，说自己不敢自处于别人的后边，一心一意，孤立无援，所以被众人怨恨。
English: He wrote again to say thank you, saying that he did not dare to be behind others, single-minded, isolated and helpless, so he was resented by everyone.

古文：帝复不悦，诘责之。惶恐谢，乃已。
现代文：世宗又不高兴了，责问他，他惶恐认罪，才算罢休。
English: Sejong was not happy again, and scolded him. He was too scared to confess, so he quit.

古文：未几，雷震奉天殿。召言及鼎臣不时至。
现代文：没过多久，雷电震坏了奉天殿，世宗召见夏言及鼎臣，夏言没按时来到。
English: Not long after, the lightning and electric shock damaged the Feng Tian Dian, and Shizong summoned Xia Yan and the three ministers. Xia Yan did not come on time.

古文：帝复诘让，令礼部劾之。言等请罪，帝复让言傲慢，并责鼎臣。
现代文：世宗又一次训斥了他，并让礼部揭发他的罪状，夏言等主动认错，世宗又批评他傲慢，并批评了鼎臣。
English: Once again, Shizong reprimanded him, and asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to expose his guilt, and Xia Yan and others voluntarily admitted their mistakes. Shizong also criticized his arrogance and criticized the top minister.

古文：已，乃还所追银章、御书。
现代文：过后，才算归还了以前追讨出来的银章和墨宝。
English: Only after that were the previously recovered silver medals and ink treasures returned.

古文：陕西奏捷，复少师、太子太师，进吏部尚书，华盖殿。
现代文：陕西传来捷报，恢复了他少师、太子太师的勋位，升为吏部尚书，值勤于华盖殿。
English: News of his victory came from Shaanxi, and he was restored to the ranks of junior teacher and prince's apprentice, promoted to the position of secretary of the personnel department, and was on duty at the Huagai Palace.

古文：江淮贼平，玺书奖励，赐金币，兼支大学士俸。
现代文：江、淮一带叛乱得到平定后，皇上用盖了玉玺的诏书奖励他，赐他金币，让他兼领大学士俸禄。
English: After the rebellion in the Jiang and Huai regions was quelled, the emperor rewarded him with an imperial edict stamped with a jade seal, gave him gold coins, and allowed him to receive a stipend as well.

古文：鼎臣已殁，翟銮再入，恂恂若属吏然，不敢少龃龉。
现代文：鼎臣死后，翟銮又一次入内阁，对夏言慎重得像所属小吏一样，言语中不敢有一点矛盾。
English: After the death of Dingchen, Zou once again entered the cabinet, and he was as cautious about Xia Yan as the minor officials he belonged to. He did not dare to have a contradiction in his words.

古文：而霍韬入掌詹事府数修怨。
现代文：而霍韬任詹事府主管，几次制造矛盾。
English: However, when he was in charge of the Janzhi Prefecture, he created conflicts several times.

古文：以郭勋与言有隙，结令助己，三人日相构。
现代文：因为郭勋与夏言感情上有裂痕，就结交他，让他帮助自己，三个人开始不停地钩心斗角。
English: Because Guo Xun had a rift with Xia Yan, he befriended him and asked him to help him, and the three of them began to fight.

古文：既而韬死，言、勋交恶自若。
现代文：后来，霍韬死了，夏言、郭勋依然在相互争斗。
English: Later, when Huo Gan died, Xia Yan and Guo Xun were still fighting with each other.

古文：九庙灾，言方以疾在告，乞罢，不允。
现代文：皇帝祭祀祖宗的庙宇发生火灾，夏言当时因病在假，请求罢官，未得到批准。
English: A fire broke out in the temple where the emperor was worshipping his ancestors. At the time, Natsugen was on leave due to illness. He requested to be removed from his post, but this was not approved.

古文：昭圣太后崩，诏问太子服制，言报疏有讹字。
现代文：昭圣太后逝世，世宗用诏书询问太子丧服的礼数，夏言的书面回答有错别字。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Zhaosheng, Shizong used an imperial edict to inquire about the number of eulogies for the prince's funeral attire, but Xia Yan's written answer contained a typo.

古文：帝切责言，言谢罪且乞还家治疾。
现代文：世宗严厉批评了他，他在认错的同时又请求回家乡治病。
English: Sejong severely criticized him, and while he admitted his mistake, he asked to return to his hometown for treatment.

古文：帝益怒，令以少保、尚书、大学士致仕。
现代文：世宗更为恼火，就命令他以少保、尚书、大学士的待遇退休。
English: Sejong was even more annoyed, and ordered him to retire with the treatment of a junior high school student, a high school student, and a college student.

古文：言始闻帝怒己，上御边十四策，冀以解。
现代文：夏言听说皇上对自己恼火，就进呈了十四篇有关边境防御的策论，希望因此得到谅解。
English: When Xia Yan heard that the emperor was angry with him, he submitted fourteen policy papers on border defense, hoping to gain understanding.

古文：帝曰： 言既蕴忠谋，何坚自爱，负朕眷倚，姑不问。 
现代文：世宗说 ：夏言既然对国事有忠诚的谋划，为什么那样坚决地自我爱惜，辜负我对他的信赖呢？姑且不治他的罪吧。 
English: Sejong said: Since Natsugen has a loyal plan for national affairs, why is he so determined to be self-indulgent and betray my trust in him? Let's not punish him.

古文：初，言撰青词及他文，最当帝意。
现代文：当初，夏言撰写宫体诗词，最能满足世宗的心意。
English: At first, Natsugen wrote palace-style poetry, which best satisfied Sejong's heart.

古文：言罢，独翟銮在，非帝所急也。
现代文：夏言罢官后，只有翟銮在职，并不是世宗急着要用的人。
English: After the dismissal of Xia Yan, only Zou was on duty, and he was not someone that Shizong was in a hurry to use.

古文：及将出都，诣西苑斋宫叩首谢。帝闻而怜之，特赐酒馔，俾还私第治疾，俟后命。
现代文：夏言即将离开京城时前往西苑的斋宫磕头谢恩，世宗听说，很怜惜他，特地赐他酒食，让他回私人住宅治病，等待以后的任命。
English: When Natsugen was about to leave the capital, he went to Saigu Shantou in Seiyuan. Sejong heard that he was very grateful and felt sorry for him. He specially gave him food and drink, and let him go back to his private residence to treat his illness and wait for a future appointment.

古文：会郭勋以言官重劾，亦引疾在告。
现代文：恰好郭勋因为谏官很厉害地弹劾他，他也称病在假。
English: It just so happens that Guo Xun is on sick leave because the eunuch has severely impeached him.

古文：京山侯崔元新有宠，直内苑，忌勋。
现代文：京山侯崔元新近得到皇上宠信，在西苑值勤，他忌恨郭勋。
English: Cui Yuan, a courtier from Beijing, had recently received the Emperor's favoured letter and was on duty in the West Courtyard. He hated Guo Xun.

古文：帝从容问元： 言、勋皆朕股肱，相妒何也？ 
现代文：世宗闲谈中问崔元说 ：夏言、郭勋是我的左右臂，他们相互忌妒是什么原因？ 
English: Sejong asked Cui Yuan in their chit-chat: "Xia Yan and Guo Xun are my right and left arms. What is the reason for their mutual jealousy?"

古文：元不对。
现代文：崔元不说。
English: Cui Yuan did not say anything.

古文：帝问言归何时，曰： 俟圣诞后，始敢请。 
现代文：世宗问夏言什么时候回家乡去，崔元说： 等皇上生日过后他才敢请放行。 
English: When Sejong asked Xia Yan when he would go back to his hometown, Cui Yuan said, "He won't dare to ask for release until after the emperor's birthday."

古文：又问勋何疾，曰： 勋无疾，言归即出耳。 
现代文：又问郭勋得了什么病，崔元说： 郭勋本没病，夏言一回家他就会出来了。 
English: He also asked Guo Xun what illness he had, Cui Yuan said: Guo Xun is not ill, Xia Yan will come out as soon as he gets home.

古文：帝颔之。
现代文：世宗深深点了个头。
English: The emperor nodded yes.

古文：言官知帝眷言恶勋，因共劾勋。勋辨语悖谩，帝怒，削勋同事王廷相籍。
现代文：谏官知道世宗宠信夏言而厌恶郭勋，就一起揭发郭勋的罪证，郭勋的辩护词狂悖错乱，世宗发火了，剥夺了郭勋同事王廷相的官籍。
English: The eunuchs knew that Shizong favored Xia Yan and detested Guo Xun, and together they exposed Guo Xun's incriminating evidence. Guo Xun's defense was insane. Shizong became angry and deprived Guo Xun's colleague Wang Tingxiang of his official status.

古文：给事中高时者，言所厚也，尽发勋贪纵不法十数事。
现代文：给事中高时，是夏言深厚交结的知己，这时揭发了郭勋十几件贪污、放纵、不守法度的事情。
English: When he was in middle school and high school, he was a close confidant of Xia Yan. At that time, Guo Xun exposed more than a dozen cases of corruption, indulgence and non-compliance with the law.

古文：遂下勋狱，复言少傅、太子太师、礼部尚书、武英殿大学士，疾愈入直。
现代文：世宗因此把郭勋关进了监狱，恢复了夏言少傅、太子太师、礼部尚书、武英殿大学士的官职，等病好入内值勤。
English: For this reason, King Sejong put Guo Xun in prison, and restored the official posts of Xia Yan Shao Fu, Prince Daishi, Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：言虽在告，阁事多取裁。
现代文：夏言虽然在病假中，内阁的事务多由他裁定。
English: Although Natsugen is on sick leave, most of the cabinet affairs are decided by him.

古文：治勋狱，悉其指授。
现代文：办理郭勋的案件，都是按他的授意进行的。
English: The handling of Guo Xun's case was all carried out at his behest.

古文：二十一年春，一品九年满，遣中使赐银币、宝钞、羊酒、内馔。尽复其官阶，玺书奖美，赐宴礼部。尚书、侍郎、都御史陪侍。
现代文：二十一年春，他做一品官满了九年，世宗派宦官颁赐银币、宝钞、羊酒和宫廷食品，全部恢复了他的官级，用加盖玉玺的诏书奖励、赞美他，在礼部为他举办宴会，由尚书、侍郎、都御史作陪。
English: In the spring of the twenty-first year, after he had been a court official for nine years, the eunuchs of the world sect gave him silver coins, treasure banknotes, sheep wine and court food, all of which restored his official rank. They rewarded and praised him with an imperial edict stamped with a jade seal, and held a banquet for him in the ceremonial department, accompanied by Shangshu, a waiter, and the governor of the capital.

古文：当是时，帝虽优礼言，然恩眷不及初矣。
现代文：这个时候，世宗虽然优待、礼遇夏言，不过对他的宠信已不如当初了。
English: At this time, although Shizong gave preferential treatment and courtesy to Xia Yan, his favor was not as good as it was at the beginning.

古文：慈庆、慈宁两宫宴驾，勋尝请改其一居太子。
现代文：慈庆、慈宁两宫夫人去世后，郭勋曾经请把其中一个改由太子居住。
English: After the death of Lady Cixing and Lady Cining, Guo Xun once asked that one of them be given to the crown prince to live in.

古文：言不可，合帝意。
现代文：夏言以为不合适，符合了世宗的意思。
English: Natsugen thought it was inappropriate, which was in line with Shizong's meaning.

古文：至是帝猝问太子当何居，言忘前语，念兴作费烦，对如勋指。
现代文：到这个时候世宗突然又问起太子应当住哪里，夏言忘记了自己先前的话，因想到再造宫殿费事烦人，就做出了和郭勋一样意思的回答。
English: At this time, Shizong suddenly asked again where the prince should live. Xia Yan forgot what he had said earlier, thinking that rebuilding the palace would be troublesome, so he answered with the same meaning as Guo Xun.

古文：帝不悦。又疑言官劾勋出言意。
现代文：世宗心里不高兴，又怀疑谏官弹劾郭勋是出于夏言的指使。
English: Sejong was not happy and suspected that the eunuch's impeachment of Guo Xun was at the behest of Xia Yan.

古文：及建大享殿，命中官高忠监视，言不进敕稿。
现代文：等建造大享殿时，世宗命令宦官监视，夏言却不替皇上写敕令文稿进呈。
English: For example, when the Grand Palace was being built, Shizong ordered eunuchs to supervise, but Natsugen did not write the imperial edict for the emperor and submit it.

古文：入直西苑诸臣，帝皆令乘马，又赐香叶束发巾，用皮帛为履。
现代文：到西苑值勤的几个大臣，世宗都命令他们骑马，又赐给他们束发用的香叶巾，让他们用皮绵做鞋子。
English: Several ministers who were on duty in the West Courtyard were ordered by Shizong to ride horses, and were also given bunches of fragrant leaves to make shoes.

古文：言谓非人臣法服，不受，又独乘腰舆。
现代文：夏言以为这不是礼制规定的大臣服装，不肯接受，并且只有他乘坐手挽的齐腰小轿。
English: Natsugen thought that this was not the dress of a minister according to the etiquette and refused to accept it, and he was the only one to ride in a hand-drawn, waist-high sedan.

古文：帝积数憾欲去言，而严嵩因得间之。
现代文：世宗积累了这几桩不满，想要罢他的官，因而严嵩得到了排挤他的机会。
English: Sejong accumulated these several grievances and wanted to remove him from office, so Yan Song got the opportunity to oust him.

古文：嵩与言同乡，称先达，事言甚谨。
现代文：严嵩与夏言是同乡，称夏言为前辈，对夏言很谨慎。
English: Yan Song is a fellow villager of Xia Yan, and he calls Xia Yan his senior. He is very cautious about Xia Yan.

古文：言入阁援嵩自代，以门客畜之，嵩心恨甚。
现代文：夏言入内阁时推荐严嵩接替他原来的官职，把他当作门客收笼，严嵩心里很是恨他。
English: When Xia Yan entered the cabinet, he recommended Yan Song to take over his former official position, and took him in as a protégé. Yan Song really hated him.

古文：言既失帝意，嵩日以柔佞宠。言惧斥，呼嵩与谋。
现代文：夏言失去世宗信任后，严嵩因为善于谄言媚语，得到皇帝欢心。
English: After Xia Yan lost the confidence of the world, Yan Song won the emperor's favor because he was good at flattery.

古文：嵩则已潜造陶仲文第，谋齮言代其位。
现代文：夏言担心被罢官，唤严嵩过去商量，严嵩却已经偷偷到陶文忠家里计划怎么咬他坏话以便取而代之。
English: Xia Yan, fearing that he would be dismissed, summoned Yan Song to discuss the matter, but Yan Song had already sneaked into Tao Wenzhong's home to plan how to speak ill of him in order to replace him.

古文：言知甚愠，讽言官屡劾嵩。
现代文：夏言得知非常恼恨，便示意谏官一次次弹劾严嵩。
English: Upon learning that Natsugen was very angry, he motioned to the eunuch to impeach Yan Song again and again.

古文：帝方怜嵩不听也，两人遂大郄。
现代文：世宗正在宠爱着他，哪里肯听，而他们俩从此就大为不和了。
English: The Sejong was fondling him to his heart's content, and the two of them have been at odds ever since.

古文：六月，嵩燕见，顿首雨泣，诉言见凌状。
现代文：六月，严嵩得到宴请和召见时，磕头下跪，诉说夏言怎么欺辱他，泪如雨下。
English: In June, when Yan Song was invited to a banquet and summoned to a meeting, he knelt down and told Xia Yan how to bully him, and tears fell like rain.

古文：帝使悉陈言罪，嵩因振暴其短。
现代文：世宗让他把夏言的罪状全说出来，严嵩这下得以大揭其短。
English: Sejong asked him to reveal all of Natsugen's crimes, and Yan Song was able to reveal his shortcomings.

古文：帝大怒，手敕礼部，历数言罪，且曰： 郭勋已下狱，犹千罗百织。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，写诏书给礼部，一一数说夏言的罪过，并且说： 郭勋已关入监狱，他还千方百计罗织罪名。
English: Sejong was very angry and wrote an imperial edict to the Ministry of Ceremonies, enumerating the sins of Xia Yan, and saying: Guo Xun has been put in prison, and he has done everything possible to fabricate charges.

古文：言官为朝廷耳目，专听言主使。
现代文：谏官本是朝廷的耳目，却专听他夏言指使。
English: Eunuchs were originally the eyes and ears of the imperial court, but they listened to his dictates.

古文：朕不早朝，言亦不入阁。
现代文：我不早朝，他夏言就不入阁办事。
English: If I'm not there early in the morning, he says he won't do cabinet work.

古文：军国重事，取裁私家。王言要密，视等戏玩。
现代文：军国大事，能在他家里裁决；天子说的机密话，他也敢把做儿戏玩。
English: Military affairs can be adjudicated in his home, and he dares to play games with the confidential words of the Son of Heaven.

古文：言官不一言，徒欺谤君上，致神鬼怒，雨甚伤禾。 
现代文：谏官对此不发一言，就这样欺骗我皇帝老子，使得鬼神怨怒，下大雨伤害了庄稼。 
English: The eunuch did not say a word about this, thus deceiving my Emperor Lao Zi, making the ghosts and gods angry, and the heavy rain damaged the crops.

古文：言大惧，请罪。
现代文：夏言很害怕，赶紧上书认错。
English: Xia Yan was very scared, and hurriedly admitted his mistake in the letter.

古文：居十余日，献帝讳辰，犹召入拜，候直西苑。
现代文：过了十多天，献帝周年时，他还被召进去拜见，到西苑侍候皇帝。
English: More than ten days later, on the anniversary of the emperor's consecration, he was also called in to pay his respects and wait on the emperor in the West Courtyard.

古文：言因谢恩乞骸骨，语极哀。
现代文：夏言借机谢皇上恩典，并请求准他老病还乡，话说得很哀伤。
English: Xia Yan took the opportunity to thank the emperor for his grace, and asked for permission to return to his hometown due to his old illness. His words were very sad.

古文：疏留八日，会七月朔日食既，下手诏曰： 日食过分，正坐下慢上之咎，其落言职闲住。 
现代文：奏章在皇帝那里放了八天，正好七月初一日食，过后，世宗亲写诏令下来说 ：老天日食超过常分，正犯着下级欺慢上级的过错，现在我命令剥夺夏言的官职，让他回家闲住。 
English: The record was left with the emperor for eight days, just after the solar eclipse at the beginning of July, and after that, Shizong himself wrote a decree saying: "God's solar eclipse exceeded the normal quota, and I am committing the fault of the lower level to bully the higher level. Now I order to deprive Xia Yan of his official position and let him go home to stay idle."

古文：帝又自引三失，布告天下。
现代文：世宗又承认自己的三种过失，布告天下。
English: Sejong also admitted his three faults and announced it to the world.

古文：御史乔佑、给事中沈良才等皆具疏论言，且请罪。
现代文：御史乔佑、给事中沈良才等都上书评论夏言的事，并各自请问己罪。
English: Mi Shi Qiao You, and Shen Liangcai, both of whom were involved in the case, wrote to comment on Xia Yan's case, and each of them asked for forgiveness.

古文：帝大怒，贬黜十三人。高时以劾勋故，独谪远边。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，贬斥了十三个人，其中高时因曾弹劾郭勋，单单被重贬到遥远的边地。
English: Sejong was very angry and reprimanded thirteen people, among whom Gao Shih, who had impeached Guo Xun, was simply relegated to a distant outpost.

古文：于是严嵩遂代言入阁。
现代文：于是严嵩取代夏言步入内阁。
English: As a result, Yan Song replaced Xia Yan in the cabinet.

古文：言久贵用事，家富厚，服用豪侈，多通问遗。
现代文：夏言多年执政做官，家境殷富，服饰、日用豪华、奢侈，也常和别人通讯问好并馈赠钱物。
English: Xia Yan has been a ruling official for many years. He comes from a wealthy family, and his clothing and daily necessities are luxurious and extravagant. He also often sends greetings to others and gives gifts of money and goods.

古文：久之不召，监司府县吏亦稍慢易之，悒悒不乐。
现代文：罢官时间长了，不见召用，监司府县的官吏也稍稍待他冷淡了，夏言心里闷闷不乐。
English: It took a long time for him to be dismissed, he was not called up, and the officials of the prefectural supervisors were a little cold to him, and Natsugen was unhappy.

古文：遇元旦、圣寿必上表贺，称 草土臣 。
现代文：每遇元旦、皇帝生日他必定上表称贺，自称为 草土臣 。
English: Whenever it was New Year's Day or the emperor's birthday, he would certainly go up to the table to offer congratulations, calling himself a grassland vassal.

古文：帝亦渐怜之，复尚书、大学士。
现代文：世宗也渐渐怜悯他，就恢复了他尚书、大学士的官衔。
English: Sejong also gradually took pity on him and restored his official title of Shangshu or Daigaku Shishi.

古文：至二十四年，帝微觉嵩贪恣，复思言，遣官赍敕召还，尽复少师诸官阶，亦加嵩少师，若与言并者。
现代文：到二十四年，世宗微微觉察到严嵩的贪婪和放纵，又想到了夏言，派官员送亲笔诏书召他回朝，恢复了他的少师等全部官职，也加封严嵩为少师，像是与夏言并重的样子。
English: In the 24th year of his reign, Shizong gradually became aware of Yan Song's greed and indulgence, and thought of Xia Yan again. He sent an official to send him a handwritten edict to call him back to the imperial court, and restored all of his official positions, including that of junior teacher. He also made Yan Song a junior teacher, as if he was of equal importance to Xia Yan.

古文：言至，直陵嵩出其上。凡所批答，略不顾嵩，嵩噤不敢吐一语。
现代文：夏言来以后，一直气愤严嵩凌驾在自己头上，凡有所批示，概不征求严嵩的意见，严嵩闭上嘴巴不敢说一句话。
English: After Xia Yan came, Yan Song has been angry and overriding his own head. Whenever there is an order, Yan Song's opinion is not solicited. Yan Song shuts his mouth and does not dare to say a word.

古文：所引用私人，言斥逐之，亦不敢救，衔次骨。
现代文：严嵩私自所提拔使用的人，夏言大加罢斥、放逐，严嵩也不敢帮忙，但对他恨入骨髓。
English: Those who were promoted and used by Yan Song, Xia Yan severely reprimanded and banished. Yan Song did not dare to help, but he hated him to the core.

古文：海内士大夫方怨嵩贪忮，谓言能压嵩制其命，深以为快。
现代文：当时全国的士大夫正恨严嵩贪婪、嫉妒，认为夏言能压服严嵩，制其死命，莫不深感痛快。
English: At that time, scholars and magistrates across the country were hating Yansong's greed and jealousy, and thought that Xia Yan could defeat Yansong and control his death, which was deeply gratifying.

古文：而言以废弃久，务张权。
现代文：而夏言因为罢官时间长了，现在一心要扩大权势。
English: However, because of the long time since his dismissal, Natsugen is now bent on expanding his power.

古文：文选郎高简之戍，唐龙、许成名、崔桐、王用宾、黄佐之罢，王杲、王暐、孙继鲁之狱，皆言主之。
现代文：文选郎高简充军边远，唐龙、许成名、崔桐、王用宾、黄佐被罢官，王杲、王日韦、孙继鲁吃官司，都出于夏言的指使。
English: Wensheng's deputy Gao Jianchong was banished to a remote area, Tang Long, Xu Rongmei, Cui Tong, Wang Yibin, and Huang Sa were dismissed from their posts, and Wang Xi, Wang Rongwei, and Sun Jilu were sued, all of which were ordered by Xia Yan.

古文：贵州巡抚王学益、山东巡抚何鳌为言官论劾，辄拟旨逮讯。
现代文：贵州巡抚王学益、山东巡抚何鳌被谏官弹劾，夏言马上就草拟命令加以逮捕、审讯。
English: Guizhou's governor, Wang Xueyi, and Shandong's governor, He Xuan, were both impeached by eunuchs, and Xia Yan immediately drafted an order to arrest and interrogate them.

古文：龙故与嵩善，暐事牵世蕃，其他所谴逐不尽当，朝士仄目。
现代文：唐龙过去与严嵩相好，王日韦的事又牵连着世蕃，还有其他被他贬斥的也不全恰当，因而朝廷中士大夫对他开始畏惧了。
English: In the past, Tang Long was friendly with Yan Song, Wang Rongwei's affair also entangled the world's public opinion, and there were other things he disparaged that were not entirely appropriate, so the court sergeant began to be afraid of him.

古文：最后御史陈其学以盐法事劾崔元及锦衣都督陆炳，言拟旨令陈状，皆造言请死，炳长跪乃得解。
现代文：最后御史陈其学因盐法的事情弹劾崔元及锦衣都督陆炳，夏言草拟命令要他们自己写供词说明，两人都到夏言跟前认死罪，陆炳乃至跪下双膝请求才得到谅解。
English: In the end, the Minister of History Chen Qixue impeached Cui Yuan and the Governor of Jin Yi, Lu Wei, for the matter of the Salt Law. Xia Yan drafted an order for them to write their own confessions. Both of them came to Xia Yan and confessed to the crime of death. Lu Wei even knelt down and begged for forgiveness.

古文：二人与嵩比而构言，言未之悟也。
现代文：后来他俩与严嵩开始勾结准备陷害夏言，而夏言却没有发觉。
English: Later, they both began to collude with Yan Song to set up Xia Yan, but Xia Yan did not find out.

古文：帝数使小内竖诣言所，言负气岸，奴视之；嵩必延坐，亲纳金钱袖中。
现代文：世宗几次派遣小宦官到夏言的住处，夏言气势凌人，把他们看作奴才。严嵩则肯定请他们坐下，并亲自把些金钱塞进他们的袖管中。
English: Several times, the Sejong sent young eunuchs to Natsugen's residence. Natsugen was domineering and regarded them as slaves. Yan Tak certainly invited them to sit down and personally stuffed some money into their sleeves.

古文：以故日誉嵩而短言。
现代文：因此这些宦官天天说严嵩的好，卖夏言的赖。
English: Therefore, these eunuchs say every day that it is good to be austere, and they do not hesitate to say so.

古文：言进青词往往失帝旨，嵩闻益精治其事。
现代文：夏言所献上的宫体诗往往不合世宗的心意，严嵩得知了，越发认真地撰写进呈的宫体诗词。
English: The palace poems presented by Natsugen were often not in line with the spirit of the Sect. Yan Song learned this and became more and more conscientious about the palace poems he submitted.

古文：未几，河套议起。
现代文：不多久，收复河套的议论为人提起。
English: It didn't take long for people to start talking about restoring Hetao.

古文：言故慷慨以经济自许，思建立不世功。
现代文：夏言原本是慷慨其辞，自以为有经世济用的才能的，想建立百代功勋。
English: Originally, Xia Yan was generous with his words, thinking that he had the ability to help the world, and wanted to establish a hundred generations of merits.

古文：因陕西总督曾铣请复河套，赞决之。
现代文：因为陕西总督曾铣请收复河套，就赞成、决定了这事。
English: Because the Governor of Shaanxi Province had requested the restoration of Hetao, he approved and decided on this matter.

古文：嵩与元、炳媒孽其间，竟以此败。
现代文：严嵩与崔元、陆炳在中间捣鬼，最后夏言因此弄得身败名裂。
English: Yan Song played tricks with Cui Yuan and Lu Wei in the middle, and in the end Xia Yan lost his reputation as a result.

古文：江都人苏纲者，言继妻父也，雅与铣善。
现代文：原来江都人苏纲，是夏言后妻的父亲，与曾铣关系很好。
English: Originally, Jiangdu native Su Gang, the father of Xia Yan's second wife, had a good relationship with Zeng Yao.

古文：铣方请复河套，纲亟称于言。
现代文：曾铣请求收复河套时，苏纲极力对夏言称赞他。
English: When Zeng Yao requested the recovery of Hetao, Su Gang tried his best to praise Xia Yan.

古文：言倚铣可办，密疏荐之，谓群臣无如铣忠者。
现代文：夏言以为倚靠曾铣此事能成，就秘密上书推荐他，说大臣中间没有比曾铣更忠诚的了。
English: Xia Yan thought that relying on Zeng Yao could accomplish this, so he secretly wrote a letter to recommend him, saying that there was no more loyal minister than Zeng Yao.

古文：帝令言拟旨，优奖之者再。铣喜，益锐意出师。
现代文：世宗让夏言拟定旨意，再三夸奖曾铣，曾铣心里高兴，更加坚决地出兵作战。
English: Shizong asked Xia Yan to draw up a will and repeatedly praised Zeng Yao. Zeng Yao was pleased and more resolutely sent troops to fight.

古文：帝忽降旨诘责，语甚厉。
现代文：世宗忽然又下诏书责备，语气很严厉。
English: Sejong suddenly issued another imperial edict to reprimand him, and the tone was very harsh.

古文：嵩揣知帝意，遂力言河套不可复，语侵言。
现代文：严嵩揣测到世宗的真心，就尽力说河套不可能收复，言词中间连及夏言。
English: Yan Song guessed the sincerity of Shizong, and tried his best to say that it was impossible to recover Hetao. His words were interspersed with Xia Yan.

古文：言始大惧，谢罪，且言 嵩未尝异议，今乃尽诿于臣 。
现代文：夏言方才大惧而称罪认错，又说严嵩未曾有过不同意见，现在竟一切推在我身上。
English: Xia Yanfang was too afraid to plead guilty and admit his mistake. He also said that Yan Wei had never had a different opinion, but now he was blaming everything on me.

古文：帝责言 强君胁众 ，嵩复腾疏攻言，言亦力辨。
现代文：世宗批评他为难君上，威逼众人。严嵩又上书折腾，攻击他。夏言也极力辩解。
English: Sejong criticized him for being difficult and intimidating to everyone. Yan Song also attacked him in a letter. Xia Yan also defended him vigorously.

古文：而帝已入嵩谮，怒不可解。
现代文：然而世宗已被严嵩的诬告蒙住，怒气难能消除。
English: However, Shizong has been blindfolded by Yan Song's false accusation, and his anger is difficult to dispel.

古文：二十七年正月尽夺言官阶，以尚书致仕，犹无意杀之也。
现代文：二十七年正月剥夺了夏言的全部官衔，让他以尚书的名义退休，但仍没有杀害他的意思。
English: In the first month of the 27th year, he stripped Xia Yan of all his official titles and let him retire under the name of Shang Shu, but he still had no intention of killing him.

古文：会有蜚语闻禁中，谓言去时怨谤。
现代文：碰巧有流言蜚语传入宫中，说夏言临走时埋怨、诬蔑皇上。
English: By chance, a rumor spread to the imperial court that Natsugen had complained and slandered the emperor before his departure.

古文：嵩复代仇鸾草奏讦言纳铣金，交关为奸利，事连苏纲，遂下铣、纲诏狱。
现代文：严嵩又代仇鸾起草上书，攻击夏言收了曾铣的贿赂，插手关市，谋取暴利，事情牵连到苏纲，于是把曾铣、苏纲关进了京城的大牢里。
English: Yan Song also drafted a petition on behalf of his enemy Zeng Yao, attacking Xia Yan for accepting Zeng Yao's bribe, intervening in the market, and seeking excessive profits. The matter involved Su Gang, so Zeng Yao and Su Gang were locked up in a big jail in Beijing.

古文：嵩与元、炳谋，坐铣交结近侍律斩，纲戍边，遣官校逮言。
现代文：严嵩和崔元、陆炳暗里商量，就用勾结皇帝身边侍卫人员罪名将曾铣斩首，苏纲到边远地区充军，并派官兵逮捕夏言。
English: Yan Song secretly discussed with Cui Yuan and Lu Wei, and beheaded Zeng Wei on the charge of colluding with the Emperor's bodyguards, while Su Gang gathered troops in a remote area and sent officers and soldiers to arrest Xia Yan.

古文：言抵通州，闻铣所坐，大惊堕车曰： 噫！
现代文：夏言抵达通州，听说曾铣的罪名，大惊失色，歪倒在车中，说 ：唉！
English: When Xia Yan arrived in Tongzhou and heard about Zeng Yao's crime, he was shocked and lost his composure. He slumped over in the car and said, "Alas!

古文：吾死矣。 
现代文：我恐怕非死不可了。 
English: I'm afraid I have to die.

古文：再疏讼冤，言： 鸾方就逮，上降谕不两日，鸾何以知上语，又何知嵩疏而附丽若此？
现代文：又上书诉说自己的冤屈，说： 仇鸾正要被捕，皇上下的圣旨不到两天，他怎么知道皇上说的话，又怎么知道严嵩的奏章而且这样附会它？
English: He also wrote a letter to complain about his grievances, saying: "Xuan Zhuang is about to be arrested, the emperor's edict is less than two days away, how does he know what the emperor said, and how does he know Yan Song's music and attach it in this way?

古文：盖嵩与崔元辈诈为之以倾臣。
现代文：大概是严嵩与崔元等伪造罪证，想迫害我就是了。
English: It's probably Yan Song and Cui Yuan and others who have fabricated evidence and want to persecute me.

古文：嵩静言庸违似共工，谦恭下士似王莽，奸巧弄权、父子专政似司马懿。
现代文：严嵩这个人，言是行非，像共工；谦恭下人，像王莽；奸巧弄权父子专政，像司马懿。
English: This person, Yan Song, is like a co-worker in his words, deeds and misdeeds; a humble subordinate, like Wang Mang; and a father-son dictatorship, like Sima Ye.

古文：在内诸臣受其牢笼，知有嵩不知有陛下。在外诸臣受其箝制，亦知有嵩不知有陛下。
现代文：在京城的大臣受他的笼络，只知道有严嵩不知道有陛下；在地方上的大臣受他的钳制，也只知道有严嵩不知道有陛下。
English: The ministers in the capital were ensnared by him and only knew of Yan Song and not of His Majesty; the ministers in the provinces were enslaved by him and only knew of Yan Song and not of His Majesty.

古文：臣生死系嵩掌握，惟归命圣慈，曲赐保全。 
现代文：我的命操在严嵩手中，我只有把我的命交给皇上您，希望能设法加以保全！ 
English: My life is in Yan Song's hands. I have no choice but to entrust my life to you, the emperor, and hope that you will find a way to save it!

古文：帝不省。
现代文：世宗并不明白他的话。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：狱成，刑部尚书喻茂坚、左都御史屠侨等当言死，援议贵议能条以上。帝不从，切责茂坚等，夺其俸，犹及言前不戴香冠事。
现代文：案件已定，刑部尚书喻茂坚、左都御史屠侨等当他将被处死时，援引大臣、能吏量刑时可以减免的条款上书请予减免死刑，世宗不愿听，严厉批评了喻茂坚等人，扣发了他们的薪俸，并且又提到了夏言以前不戴香叶巾帽的事情。
English: The case had been decided. When he was about to be executed, the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuyu, Moji Jian, and the governor of Zuo Province, Zuo Shi Tuoqiao, invoked the clause that allows ministers and high-ranking officials to reduce or waive the death penalty when sentencing. Shizong did not want to listen, severely criticized Yu Moji Jian and others, withheld their salaries, and also mentioned the fact that Xia Yan did not wear a silk scarf before.

古文：其年十月竟弃言市。
现代文：那年十月终于将夏言斩首街头。
English: In October of that year, he finally beheaded Xia Yan in the street.

古文：妻苏流广西，从子主事克承、从孙尚宝丞朝庆，削籍为民。
现代文：他的妻子苏氏流放广西，侄儿夏克承主事，侄孙夏朝庆尚宝丞，都被削职为民。
English: His wife, Su, was exiled to Guangxi, his nephew, Xia Kecheng, was put in charge, and his nephew, Sun Xia Chaoying, was removed from his post.

古文：言死时年六十有七。
现代文：夏言死的时候是六十七岁。
English: Natsugen was sixty-seven years old when he died.

古文：言豪迈有俊才，纵横辨博，人莫能屈。
现代文：夏言为人豪迈，才能过人，纵横议论，没人可以屈服他。
English: Xia Yan is a proud man, he has superior talent, he is a straight talker, and no one can give in to him.

古文：既受特眷，揣帝意不欲臣下党比，遂日与诸议礼贵人抗。
现代文：受到皇帝宠信以后，他揣摸世宗的心思，不想让大臣拉帮结派，因而他长期与议定 大礼 的达官们意见不一。
English: After being favored by the emperor, he felt the thoughts of the world and did not want the minister to form a group, so he had long disagreements with the dignitaries who agreed on the gift.

古文：帝以为不党，遇益厚，然卒为严嵩所挤。
现代文：世宗以为他不搞小集团，对他更加厚待，然而最终还是被严嵩迫害至死了。
English: Shizong thought that he did not run a small group and treated him more generously, but in the end he was persecuted to death by Yanfeng.

古文：言死，嵩祸及天下，久乃多惜言者。
现代文：夏言死后，严嵩祸国殃民，时间长了，天下有很多人开始惋惜夏言之死。
English: After Xia Yan's death, Yan Wei caused great harm to the country and the people. It has been a long time, and many people around the world have begun to regret Xia Yan's death.

古文：而言所推毂徐阶，后卒能去嵩为名相。
现代文：而夏言曾经推荐、提携的徐阶，后来终究铲除严嵩，为一代名臣。
English: And Xia Yan once recommended and partnered with Xu Ji, and later finally eradicated Yan Song, becoming a generation of eminent ministers.

古文：隆庆初，其家上书白冤状，诏复其官，赐祭葬，谥文愍。
现代文：隆庆初，他的家人上书诉说他冤枉，穆宗下诏恢复了他的官号，诏令祭祀、安葬，谥文愍。
English: At the beginning of the Longqing era, his family members wrote to complain that he had wronged them, and Emperor Mu restored his official title and ordered that he be sacrificed, buried, and cremated.

古文：言始无子。妾有身，妻忌而嫁之，生一子。
现代文：夏言开始没儿子，姨太太怀了胎，他的妻子出于嫉妒把她嫁给别人去了，生了一个男孩。
English: In the beginning, Xia Yan did not have a son. His aunt became pregnant, and his wife, out of jealousy, married someone else and gave birth to a boy.

古文：言死，妻逆之归，貌甚类言。
现代文：夏言死后，他的妻子把男孩迎接回家，相貌很像夏言。
English: After Xia Yan's death, his wife welcomed the boy home. He looked very much like Xia Yan.

古文：且得官矣，忽病死。言竟无后。
现代文：到马上就能当官的时候他却忽然病死了，夏言终于还是没有后裔。
English: But when he was about to become an official, he suddenly fell ill and died. In the end, Natsugen had no descendants.

