古文：跋黑及同母弟二人，自幼时每争攘饮食，昭祖见而恶之，曰： 吾娶此妾而生子如此，后必为子孙之患。 
现代文：跋黑和他的同母兄弟两个人，在小时候常常争抢饮食，昭祖见了很嫌恶，说 ：我娶了这个妾生出这样的儿子，以后必定是子孙的祸患。 
English: When he was a child, he and his brother, both of the same mother, used to fight over food and drink. When Shōzu saw this, he was disgusted and said, "I married this concubine and gave birth to such a son. He will surely be the scourge of my descendants in the future."

古文：世祖初立，跋黑果有异志，诱桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕离间部属，使贰于世祖。
现代文：世祖刚刚即位，跋黑果然另有志向，他引诱桓赤皮、散达、乌春、窝谋罕离间部属，使他们对世祖怀有二心。
English: The ancestor had just ascended to the throne, but he had other ambitions. He seduced the subordinates of Huan Chakpi, Sanda, Wuchun, and Wo Moushan, so that they had second thoughts about the ancestor.

古文：世祖患之，乃加意事之，使为勃堇而不令典兵。
现代文：世祖很担忧，就更加小心对待他，让他做勃堇而不让他执掌兵权。
English: The patriarch was worried, so he treated him more carefully, letting him be a burgundy rather than letting him hold military power.

古文：跋黑既阴与桓赧、乌春谋计，国人皆知之，而童谣有 欲征则附于跋黑，欲死则附于劾里钵、颇刺淑 之语。
现代文：跋黑暗地里与桓赤皮、乌春阴谋策划，国人都知道，童谣里有 欲生则附于跋黑，欲死则附于劾里钵、颇剌淑 这样的句子。
English: He plotted with Kanekaki and Wuchun in the dark, and the Chinese people all know that there are sentences in the nursery rhyme, "If you want to live, attach yourself to Wuchun, if you want to die, attach yourself to Impeachment," and "If you want to die, attach yourself to Impeachment."

古文：世祖亦以策探得兄弟部人向背。
现代文：世祖也用计策探知兄弟二人部下的人心向背。
English: The ancestor also used a strategy to detect the brothers' two subordinates' human hearts.

古文：乌春、桓赧相次以兵来攻，世祖外御强兵，而内畏跋黑之变。
现代文：乌春、桓赤皮依次领兵来攻打，世祖对外抵御强兵，又对内害怕跋黑变乱。
English: Wu Chun and Kuan Chak Pi led the troops to attack one after another. The ancestor resisted the strong soldiers from the outside, but was afraid of chaos from the inside.

古文：将行，闻跋黑食于其爱妾之父家，肉张咽而死，且喜且悲，乃迎尸而哭之。
现代文：正要出发，听说跋黑在他爱妾的父亲家里吃饭时，吃肉涨破喉咙而死。世祖又喜又悲，接来尸首并且恸哭。
English: Just as they were about to set out, they heard that while eating at the home of his father, who loved his concubine, he died from a ruptured throat after eating meat. The patriarch was both happy and sad, receiving the corpse and weeping.

古文：崇成，本名仆灰，泰州司属司人，昭祖玄孙也。
现代文：崇成，原名仆灰，泰州司属司人，是昭祖的玄孙。
English: Chongcheng, whose original name was Zhuhai, a subordinate of Taizhou, was the great-great-grandson of Zhao Zu.

古文：大定十八年收充奉职，改东宫入殿小底，转护卫。
现代文：大定十八年，他被收纳充任职务，改做东宫进殿的差役，又转为护卫。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, he was admitted to his post, changed to a guard for entering the East Palace, and turned into an escort.

古文：二十五年，章宗为原王，充本府祗候郎君。
现代文：大定二十五年，章宗做了原王，崇成充任府中祗候郎君。
English: In the 25th year of Dading, Zhang Zong became the original king, and Su Chengzheng was appointed as the vice-emperor.

古文：明年，上为皇太孙，复为护卫。
现代文：第二年，当今皇上做了皇太孙，崇成重当护卫。
English: The following year, the current Emperor became the Emperor's great-great-grandson, and Takenobu became his bodyguard.

古文：次室温迪痕氏，名敌本，生虞国公麻颇、隋国公阿离合懑、郑国公谩都诃。
现代文：皇上即位，授予崇成河间府判官之职，他因父母去世而卸职。守丧期未满，他又出任宿直将军，步步提升至武卫军都指挥使。泰和三年，崇成逝世，皇上赐给丧葬财物。
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne, he appointed Chongcheng as the magistrate of Kawama Prefecture, but he resigned due to the death of his parents. Before the period of mourning was over, he was appointed as the general of Sukuzuna, and was gradually promoted to the commander of the Imperial Guards. In the third year of the Taihe era, when Chongcheng died, the emperor gave him funeral goods.

古文：劾者、阿离合懑别有传。劾孙。天会十四年大封宗室，劾孙追封王爵。正隆例降封郑国公。
现代文：崇成谨慎守职，在宫禁中值宿警卫二十多年，从没出过差错，所以有人说侍卫做久了与皇帝关系亲近。劾孙在天会十四年皇上广封亲眷宗室的时候，被追封为亲王爵位，到正隆年被按例降封为郑国公。
English: Chongcheng carefully performed his duties. He was a guard on duty for more than 20 years during the imperial ban, and never made a mistake. Therefore, some people said that the guards had a close relationship with the emperor for a long time. In the 14th year of the Heian period, when the emperor sent his relatives to the imperial court, he was posthumously awarded the title of prince, and in the first year of the year, he was downgraded to Zheng Guogong as usual.

古文：子蒲家奴又名昱，尝从太祖伐留可、坞塔。
现代文：劾孙的儿子蒲家奴，也叫昱，曾经跟随太祖征战留可、坞塔。
English: The impeached Sun's son, Pu Jianu, also known as Pu, once followed his great-great-grandfather to fight in the war and stayed in the dockyard.

古文：太祖使蒲家奴招诈都，诈都即降。
现代文：太祖派蒲安奴招降诈都，诈都也就投降了。
English: The great-grandfather sent Puannu to recruit and surrender the fraud capital, and the fraud capital also surrendered.

古文：康宗八年，系辽籍女直纥石烈部阿里保太弯阻兵，招纳亡命，边民多亡归之。
现代文：康宗八年，蒲家奴随同辽国女真纥石烈部的阿里保太弯狙击敌兵，收容逃亡的人，许多边境百姓逃来归附他们。
English: In the eighth year of Kangzong, Pu Jia Nuo, together with Ali Bao Taibeng of Liaoning Province, attacked the enemy soldiers, sheltered the fugitives, and many border people fled to join them.

古文：蒲家奴以偏师夜行书止，抵石勒水，袭击破之，尽俘其孥而还。
现代文：蒲家奴带一部分军队昼伏夜行，到达石勒水，突然袭击，大破敌军，全数俘获敌人家属，胜利返回。
English: Pu Jianu led a part of the army on a day and night march, reached Shileshui, made a surprise attack, defeated the enemy army, captured all the enemy's family members, and returned in victory.

古文：边氓自此无复亡者。
现代文：边境百姓从此再没有逃亡的了。
English: The border people never fled again.

古文：后与宗雄视泰州地土，太祖因徙万家屯田于其地。
现代文：后来，蒲家奴和宗雄巡视泰州土地，太祖随之迁去上万户人家到那里屯田。
English: Later, Pu Jia Nuo and Muneo inspected the land in Taizhou, and the great-grandfather moved tens of thousands of households there to build a farm.

古文：天辅五年，蒲家奴为吴勃极烈，遂为都统，使袭辽帝，而以雨潦不果行。
现代文：天辅五年，蒲家奴做了昊勃极烈，又任都统，被派遣袭击辽国皇帝，但因为发生雨涝而未去成。
English: In the 5th year of Tianyu, Pu Jianu was sent to attack the Emperor of Liao, but he failed to do so because of a rainstorm.

古文：既而，忽鲁勃极烈杲都统内外诸军以取中京，蒲家奴等皆为之副。
现代文：不久，忽鲁勃极烈杲统领内外各路军队攻打中京，蒲家奴等人做副将。
English: Not long after, Hulubei Qigong led all the armies at home and abroad to attack Beijing, with Pu Jianlu and others as vice generals.

古文：辽帝西走，都统杲使蒲家奴以兵一千助挞懒击辽都统马哥，与挞懒不相及，蒲家奴与赛里、斜野降其西北居延之众。
现代文：辽帝向西逃走，都统杲叫蒲家奴带一千兵士援助挞懒进击辽国都统马哥，他没有赶上挞懒，却协同赛里、斜野打败了西北方居延的军队。
English: The Liao Emperor fled to the west, and the Liao Emperor ordered Pu Jiannu to bring a thousand soldiers to help the Liao Emperor to attack the Liao Emperor. He did not catch up with the Liao Emperor, but in cooperation with Sai Li and Xian Ye, he defeated the Jian army in the northwest.

古文：而降民稍复逃散，毗室部亦叛，遂率兵袭之。
现代文：可是降伏的百姓很快又逃散，毗宝部也叛变，于是太祖率兵出战。
English: However, the people who surrendered soon fled, and the treasury also mutinied, so the great-grandfather led the troops into battle.

古文：至铁吕川，遇敌八千，遂力战，兵败。
现代文：到了铁吕川，遭遇敌军八千人，奋力搏击，最后战败。
English: Arriving at the Tielu River, he encountered an enemy force of eight thousand, fought hard, and was finally defeated.

古文：察刺以兵来会，追及敌兵于黄水，获畜产甚众。
现代文：察剌派兵前来会合，把敌兵追杀到黄水，抓获大批牲畜。
English: Zha Yu sent soldiers to meet, chased the enemy soldiers to Huangshui, and captured a large number of livestock.

古文：是役也，奥敦按打海被十一创，竟败敌兵而还。军于旺国崖西。
现代文：这次战役中，奥炖按打海受伤十一处，竟然打败敌兵而凯旋，驻扎在旺国崖的西面。
English: During this battle, Okuhaya was wounded eleven times in the sea, defeated the enemy soldiers and returned triumphantly, stationed on the west side of the Wanguo Cliff.

古文：赛里亦以兵会太祖，自草泺追辽帝，蒲家奴、宗望为前锋，戒之曰： 彼若深沟高垒，未可与战，即侦伺巡逻，勿令遁去，以俟大军。
现代文：赛里也出兵会合太祖，从草泺出发追赶辽帝，蒲家奴、宗望任前锋。赛里告诫他们说 ：如果对方深挖沟、高筑垒，不能与他们作战，就侦察巡逻，别让他逃跑，等待大军到达。
English: Sai Li also sent troops to join Taizu, and they set out from Kusanagi to chase after Liao Di, with Pu Jia Nu and Zong Wang as the vanguard. Sai Li warned them: If the other side digs a deep trench and builds a high barrier and cannot fight with them, they should patrol and do not let him escape, and wait for the large army to arrive.

古文：若其无备，便可击也。 
现代文：如果对方没做防备，就可以出击。 
English: If the other side is unprepared, they can attack.

古文：上次胡离畛川，吴十、马和尚至小鱼泺，夜潜入辽主营，执新罗奴以还，送知辽帝所在。
现代文：皇上在胡离畛川驻留，吴十、马和尚到小鱼泺，于夜间潜入辽军主营，把新罗奴抓回来，由此得知辽帝的所在之处。
English: The emperor stayed in Huiyi and Luochuan, while Wu Zhi, Ma and the monk went to Xiaoyu and sneaked into the main camp of the Liao army at night to capture Xinronu, and thus learned the location of the Liao Emperor.

古文：蒲家奴等昼夜兼行，追及于石辇铎。
现代文：蒲家奴等人昼夜兼行，追到石辇铎。
English: Pujano and the others rode day and night to catch up with Shizuku.

古文：我兵四千，至者才千人，辽兵围之。
现代文：我军四千人，到达的才千把人，被辽兵包围起来。
English: Our army of four thousand men, only a thousand arrived, was surrounded by Liao soldiers.

古文：余睹指辽帝麾盖，骑兵驰之，辽帝遁去，兵遂溃，所杀甚众。
现代文：余睹指示辽帝的旌旗华盖，骑兵驰马杀奔过去，辽帝逃跑，辽兵也溃败下去，被杀死的人数众多。
English: Hua Gai, the banner bearer of the Liao Emperor, was seen in the distance, the cavalry galloped past, the Liao Emperor fled, the Liao soldiers were routed, and a large number of people were killed.

古文：宗翰为西北西南两路都统，蒲家奴、斡鲁为之副。
现代文：宗翰就任西北、西南两路都统，蒲家奴、斡鲁任副都统。
English: Zonghan was appointed as the leader of the Northwest and Southwest Regions, while Pu Jia Nu and Yulong Lu were appointed as vice-leaders.

古文：乌虎部叛，蒲家奴讨平之。
现代文：乌虎部叛乱，蒲家奴出征讨伐，平息了叛乱。
English: Wuhu rebelled, and Pu Jia Nu went out to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：改同签大宗正事、震武军节度使，卒。
现代文：天会年间，他任职司空，被封给王位。天眷二年，宗磐等被杀，言语牵连到蒲家奴，皇上下诏剥夺了他的司空职位。当年，蒲家奴逝世。
English: During the time of the Heavenly Assembly, he served as Sikyong and was given the throne. Two years after the Heavenly Assembly, Soiwa and others were killed, and his words implicated Puchan, and the emperor deprived him of the position of Sikyong. That year, Puchan died.

古文：斡者，天会十五年大封宗室，追封鲁王，正隆例改封公。
现代文：天德初年，配享太祖庙廷。正隆二年，依照定例，蒲家奴被封为豫国公。斡者在天会十五年皇帝大封皇室宗亲的时候，被追封为鲁王，正隆时期按规定改封为公。
English: In the first year of Tiande, he was assigned to the ancestral temple court. In the second year of Zhenglong, in accordance with the regulations, Pu Jianu was appointed as the Prince of Yue. When the Emperor Dafeng, the imperial family's ancestor, was crowned in the 15th year of Tianhe, he was posthumously appointed as the King of Lu. During the Zhenglong period, he was appointed as the Prince according to the regulations.

古文：子神土懑，骠骑卫上将军。
现代文：他的儿子神土懑，是骠骑卫上将军。
English: His son, Shintoku, was a general in the Imperial Horse Guards.

古文：子璋本名胡麻愈，多勇略，通女直、契丹、汉字。
现代文：斡者的另一个儿子璋，原名胡麻愈，非常勇猛而且有谋略，通晓女真、契丹及汉族文字。
English: The mediator's other son, Hao, whose original name was Hu Ma Yu, was very brave and resourceful, and was familiar with the Jurchen, Khitan, and Han scripts.

古文：年十八，左副元帅撒离喝引在麾下。
现代文：璋十八岁时，左副元帅撒离喝把他招到部下。
English: At the age of eighteen, the left deputy marshal Sa Rong called him to his subordinates.

古文：以事如京师，见梁王宗弼与语，宗弼悦之。
现代文：他因为有事来到京师，进见梁王宗弼，说过话以后，宗弼非常喜欢他。
English: He came to Beijing Division because of something and met with Liang Wang Zongyao. After talking, Zongyao liked him very much.

古文：皇统六年，父神土懑卒，宗弼奏璋可袭谋克，诏从之。
现代文：皇统六年，璋的父亲去世，宗弼上奏说璋可以承袭谋克，皇上下诏应允。
English: In the sixth year of imperial rule, Zou's father passed away. Zou told Zou that Zou could succeed him, and the emperor agreed.

古文：天德三年，充牌印祗候，以罪免，夺其谋克，寓居中都。
现代文：天德三年，璋充任牌印祗候，因犯下罪责而被罢免，并被剥夺谋克的职位，在中都居住。
English: For three years, Tiande lived in Zhongdu, waiting to be appointed as a badge seal, and was dismissed for committing crimes, and was deprived of the position of a strategist.

古文：海陵伐宋，左卫将军蒲察沙离只同知中都留守，佩金牌掌留府事。
现代文：海陵王攻伐宋国，左卫将军蒲察沙离只担任同知中都留守，佩带金牌，掌管留守府中的事务。
English: When King Hailing invaded Song, the left guard general Putsasa only stayed behind as a comrade-in-arms, wearing a gold medal and in charge of the affairs of the left guard.

古文：世宗即位于辽阳，璋劝沙离只归世宗，沙离只不从。
现代文：世宗在辽阳即位，璋劝沙离只归顺世宗，沙离只不听从璋的劝告。
English: When Shizong ascended to the throne in Liaoyang, Yao advised Shaye to return to Shun Shizong, but Shaye did not listen to Yao's advice.

古文：璋与守城军官乌林荅石家奴、乌林荅愿、徒单三胜、蒲察蒲查等以兵晨入留守府，遂杀沙离只及判官漫捻撒离喝，推宗强子阿琐为留守，璋行同知留守事。
现代文：璋与守城军官乌林答石家奴、乌林答愿、徒单三胜、蒲察蒲查等人，在早晨带兵进入留守府，杀死沙离只和判官漫睰撒离喝，推举宗强的儿子阿琐当留守，璋兼代同知留守事。
English: In the morning, Zou and the officers who guarded the city, such as Wulin Taishi Jia Nong, Wulin Taowang, Tujan Sansheng, and Pucha Pucha, led the soldiers into the garrison, killed Sha Yidong and the judge Meng Yao, and promoted Zong Qiang's son Azo to guard the city, and Zou and his son Tong Ji to guard the city.

古文：遣石家奴佩沙离只金牌与愿、蒲查、中都转运使左渊子贻庆、大兴少尹李天吉子磐奉表如东京，贺即位。
现代文：璋派遣乌林答石家奴佩带沙离只的金牌，与乌林答愿、蒲察蒲查、中都转运使左渊的儿子贻庆、大兴少尹李天吉的儿子磐，捧奏表去东京恭贺世宗即位。
English: He sent Ulin Taishi Jianu to wear a gold medal with a sand wreath, and together with Ulin Taowang, Putcha Pucha, and Zhongdu Transshipment, he sent Zuoyuan's son Zou Qing and Daxing Shao Yin Li Tianji's son Ban to Tokyo to congratulate Sejong on his accession to the throne.

古文：世宗嘉之，以愿、蒲查为武义将军，充护卫。
现代文：世宗对此十分赞许，任乌林答愿、蒲察蒲查为武义将军，充当护卫。
English: Sejong highly approves of this, and Ren Wulin agrees, and Putsa Putsa becomes General Buyei and acts as an escort.

古文：贻庆赐及弟，授从仕郎。
现代文：恩赐贻庆及第，授职从仕郎。
English: He was bestowed the title of Zongqing and the first to be awarded the position of Zongshiro.

古文：磐充閤门祗候。
现代文：磐充任阁门祗候。
English: Iwamitsu is waiting at the gate.

古文：就以璋为同知中都事。
现代文：随即任命璋为同知中都事。
English: He was immediately appointed to the position of Tongzhi Zhongdu.

古文：璋以杀沙离只自摄同知留守，世宗因而授之，心常不自安，遂与兵部尚书可喜谋，因世宗谒山陵作乱。
现代文：璋杀了沙离只后自行兼职同知留守，世宗顺便地授给他这个官职，由此他自己心中常常不安，于是与兵部尚书可喜谋划，趁世宗祭拜皇陵的时候叛乱。
English: After he had killed Sa Li, he took it upon himself to stay behind with a part-time friend, and Shizong gave him this official post by the way. As a result, he was often uneasy in his heart, so he was happy to plot with the military department to take advantage of Shizong's worship of the imperial mausoleum to rebel.

古文：大定二年，上谒山陵，璋等九人会于可喜家，说万户高松，不从。
现代文：大定二年，皇上去祭拜皇陵，璋等九人在可喜家聚会，劝说万户高松和他们一起干，高松不服从。
English: In the 2nd year of Dading, the emperor went to worship the imperial mausoleum, and nine people, including Yu, gathered at Keki's house to persuade all households in Takamatsu to work with them. Takamatsu did not obey.

古文：璋知事不成，乃与可喜共执斡论诣有司陈，上诛可喜、李惟忠等，以璋为彰化军节度使。
现代文：璋知道事情做不成了，就和可喜一同带着斡论到有司坦白交代，皇上诛杀了可喜、李惟忠等人，让璋当了彰化军节度使。
English: Knowing that things couldn't be done, Zou and Koki discussed the matter with Yoshi until Yoshi confessed that the emperor had killed Koki, Li Weizhong, and others, and made Zou the Changhua army's envoy.

古文：宋将吴璘出散关，据宝鸡以西，诏璋赴元帅都监徒单合喜军前任使。
现代文：宋国将领吴瞞，兵出散关，据守宝鸡以西地方。皇上诏令璋赴元帅都监徒单合喜军前任使。
English: Song general Wu Shizhe sent his troops to Sankuan and garrisoned the area west of Baoji. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering him to go to the capital to supervise the former envoys of the Han Hexi Army.

古文：于是，宋人据原州，宁州刺史颜盏门都以兵四千攻之，不克。
现代文：这时，宋国人占据原州，宁州刺史颜盏门都，用四千兵去攻打，没有攻下。
English: At this time, the Song people occupied Wonju, the capital of Ningzhou, and attacked it with four thousand soldiers, but failed to capture it.

古文：宋将姚良辅以兵十万至原州，权副统完颜习尼列以千骑援门都兵，而姚良辅兵多，诸将皆不敢与战。
现代文：宋将姚良辅带十万军队来到原州，权副统完颜习尼列，带一千骑兵援助颜盏门都，但是姚良辅的兵多，各位将军都不敢迎战。
English: Song sent Yao Liangyu to Yuanzhou with a hundred thousand troops. The vice-governor Yan Xi Nirei came with a thousand cavalry to aid Yan Qianmen. However, Yao Liangyu had many soldiers, and the generals did not dare to fight.

古文：及璋至军，会平凉、泾州、潘原、长武等戍兵，合二万人。
现代文：等璋到了军中，会合平凉、泾州、潘原、长武等地的驻防军队，共计二万人。
English: After the cormorant arrived in the army, the garrison troops in Pingliang, Zhangzhou, Panyuan, Changwu and other places, a total of twenty thousand people, gathered.

古文：璋使押军猛安石抹许里阿补以兵二千军于城北，习尼列以兵三千军于城西北十里麦子原，皆据高阜为阵。
现代文：璋让押军猛安石抹许里阿补带二千军兵驻扎在城北，让完颜习尼列带三千军兵驻扎在城西北十里远的麦子原，都是占据高地布置阵势。
English: let the army of Meng'an Shi and Makhuriya with two thousand soldiers stationed in the north of the city, and let Yan Xi Nirei with three thousand soldiers stationed in the wheat field ten miles away from the northwest of the city, all occupying highland layout positions.

古文：璋以本部兵阵于城西。
现代文：璋带主力部队在城西列阵。
English: The main forces of the umbilical cord are lined up in the west of the city.

古文：姚良辅出自北岭，先遣万人攻许里阿补，自以军九万阵麦子原下，捍以剑盾、行马，外列骑士，步卒居其中，敢死士锁足行马间，持大刀为拒，分为八阵，而别以骑二千袭璋军。
现代文：姚良辅从北岭出兵，先派一万人进攻石抹许里阿补，自己带九万人在麦子原下扎下阵营，用刀剑、盾牌、行马护阵，外边排列骑兵，步兵站在中间，敢死士把脚锁在行马之间，手持大刀拒敌，分列为八阵，另外又派二千骑兵袭击璋的军队。
English: Yao Liang-fu dispatched troops from Beiling. He first sent ten thousand men to attack Shima Huliarai. He and his ninety thousand men camped at the foot of the wheat field. They used swords, shields, and horses to protect the troops. Cavalry lined up on the outside, infantry stood in the middle, and daredevils locked their feet between the horses and held swords in their hands to resist the enemy. They were divided into eight lines. In addition, he sent two thousand cavalry to attack Yao's army.

古文：璋方出迎战，习尼列来报曰： 宋之重兵皆在麦子原矣。 
现代文：璋刚刚出来迎战，完颜习尼列来报告说 ：宋国的重兵都在麦子原了。 
English: Yao had just come out to face the battle, when Yan Xi Ni Lieli came to report: Song's heavy troops were all in Maizihara.

古文：璋遣万户特里失乌也以押军猛安奚庆喜、照撒兵二千援许里阿补，遣撒屋出、崔尹以兵二千益习尼列。
现代文：璋派万户特里失乌也，率押军猛安奚庆喜、照撒的军队二千人支援石抹许里阿补，派撒屋出、崔尹带二千人援助完颜习尼列。
English: He dispatched Wanyu Tri to the lost city of Wuzhou, and led the army to the city of Meng'an and the city of Qingxi. He also dispatched the army of Zhosa with two thousand soldiers to support Shimao, and sent the army of Yaotie and Cui Yin with two thousand soldiers to support Yanxi and Nili.

古文：许里阿补与宋人接战，良久，败之。
现代文：石抹许里阿补和宋军交战，打了很长时间之后战败了宋军。
English: Shi Maku Xu Liaqi fought with the Song Army and defeated the Song Army after fighting for a long time.

古文：宋兵在麦子原者最坚，习尼列与移刺补、奥屯撒屋出、崔尹、仆根撒屈出以兵五千沿壕为状，余兵皆舍马步战，击其前行骑士，走之。
现代文：在麦子原的宋军是最坚固的，习尼列和移剌补、奥屯撒屋出、崔尹、仆根撒屈出等人，把五千兵士沿战壕埋伏下来，其余兵士都舍弃马匹，步行作战，打击宋军的前行骑士，使他们逃跑了。
English: The Song army in Maizihuang was the strongest. Xi Nirei, Yigong Tongyu, Otun Saya, Cui Yin, Hugen Saya and others ambushed five thousand soldiers along the trench. The rest of the soldiers abandoned their horses and fought on foot. They attacked the advancing knights of the Song army and made them flee.

古文：于是，行马以前冲以长枪，行马以后射以劲弓。
现代文：这时，用长枪冲击行马的前面，用强弓射击行马的后面。
English: At this time, with a long gun hit the front of the horse, with a strong bow shot behind the horse.

古文：良辅兵稍挫，习尼列乘胜麾兵，撤其行马，破其七阵。
现代文：姚良辅的军队稍受挫折，习尼列乘胜指挥军队撤掉敌方行马，攻破敌方七座阵营。
English: Yao Liangyu's army suffered a slight setback, Xi Nirei took advantage of the victory to command the army to remove the enemy's cavalry and break through the enemy's seven camps.

古文：良辅复整兵出，习尼列少却，而璋已破城下宋兵，与习尼列会。
现代文：姚良辅整兵再次出战，习尼列退却少许，而璋已经攻破城下的宋兵，与习尼列会合。
English: Yao Liangyu's whole army went out to fight again, Xi Nirei retreated a little, while Zou had already defeated the Song soldiers under the city and met with Xi Nirei.

古文：使仆根以伏兵击良辅。
现代文：璋让仆根撒屈带领伏兵攻击姚良辅。
English: He let his servant, Gen Sakyu, lead the ambush to attack Yao Liangyu.

古文：习尼列亦整兵与战，奋击之，大破良辅军，斩首万余级，坠壕死者不可胜数，锁足行马者尽殪之，获甲二万余，器仗称是。
现代文：习尼列也整兵交战，奋力拼杀，大破姚良辅的军队，斩下首级一万多颗，敌兵摔死在战壕里的数不胜数，锁足在行马间的士卒全都被杀死，缴获铠甲两万多副，所得武器数目也相仿。
English: Xi Nirei also engaged the whole army, fought hard, defeated the army of Yao Liangyu, cut off more than ten thousand heads, countless enemy soldiers fell to their deaths in the trenches, and all the soldiers who locked their feet in the corridors were killed. More than twenty thousand pairs of armor were captured, and the number of weapons obtained was also similar.

古文：良辅亦中两创脱去。
现代文：姚良辅受两处伤，逃脱而去。
English: Yao Liangyu suffered two injuries and escaped.

古文：遂围原州，穴其西城，城圮，宋人宵遁。
现代文：璋接着围攻原州，在西城挖掘洞穴，城墙坍塌，宋人夜间逃遁了。
English: He then besieged Wonju, dug a cave in the west city, the city wall collapsed, and the Song people fled at night.

古文：璋等入原州。
现代文：璋等人进入原州。
English: Yao and the others entered Wonju.

古文：宋戍军在宝鸡以西，闻之皆自散关遁去。
现代文：在宝鸡以西的宋国守军听到后，都从散关逃走。
English: When the Song defenders west of Baoji heard this, they all fled from Sankuan.

古文：京兆尹乌延蒲离黑、丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改已去德顺州，宋吴璘复据之，都监合喜以璋权都统，与习尼列将兵二万救德顺。
现代文：京光尹乌延蒲离黑、丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改，已经离开德顺州，宋国的吴瞞又占据此地，都监合喜派璋兼代都统之职，与习尼列领兵二万援救德顺。
English: Jing Guang, Yin, Wu Yanbu, Li He, Danzhou, Zhishi, Chakkan, Hu Shilou, have already left Deshun Prefecture. Wu Xie of the Song Dynasty also occupied this place. He was the overseer of the capital as well as the representative of Xi and Ni, and led 20,000 soldiers to rescue Deshun.

古文：璋率骑兵前行，与璘骑拴二万战于张义堡遂沙山下，败之，追北四十余里。
现代文：璋率领骑兵走在前面，和吴瞞的两万骑兵在张义堡的遂沙山下交战，打败了对方，并往北追了四十多里路。
English: Yao led the cavalry in the front, and fought with Wu Xie's twenty thousand cavalry under the Sui Sha Mountain of Zhangyi Fort, defeated the other side, and chased more than forty miles north.

古文：璘军遇隘不得前，斩首数十级。
现代文：吴瞞的军队遇到阻碍不能往前再走，被砍掉数十颗首级。
English: When Wu Zhe's army encountered obstacles, it could not go any further, and dozens of heads were cut off.

古文：璋至德顺，璘据城北险要为营，璋亦策营与璘相望，可三里许。
现代文：璋到达德顺，吴瞞在城北险要的地方据守营盘，璋也扎下营盘，并与吴瞞遥相对应，相距大约三里多。
English: After arriving in Deshun, Wu Xie set up a camp in the north of the city at a critical point. He also set up a camp and corresponded with Wu Xie Yao, about three miles away.

古文：两军遇于城东，凡五接战，璘军败走，璋追至城下。
现代文：两军在城东遭遇，共交战五次，吴瞞的军队败走，璋追到城下。
English: The two armies encountered each other in the east of the city, and fought five times in total. Wu Xie's army was defeated and chased to the outskirts of the city.

古文：璘军已据城北冈阜，与其城上兵相应，以弩夹射璋军。
现代文：吴瞞的部队已占领了城北的山冈，和城上士兵相呼应，用弓箭夹击璋的军队。
English: Wu Xie's troops had already occupied the hills north of the city, and echoed the soldiers on the city, using bows and arrows to hit the army.

古文：璋军阳却，城中出兵来追，璋反施与战，大败之。
现代文：璋军表面上退却，当城中出兵来追的时候，又反过来迎击，把宋兵杀得大败。
English: On the surface, the Shan army retreated, but when the city sent troops to chase them, they counterattacked and defeated the Song soldiers.

古文：合喜遣统军都监泥河以兵七千来会，与璘军复战，败之。
现代文：合喜派遣统军都监泥河带军队七千人来和璋会合，与吴瞞的军队再次交战，又打败了他们。
English: He Xi dispatched a unified army of seven thousand people from Duyun and the muddy river belt to meet with He Qi, and once again fought with Wu Xie's army and defeated them.

古文：璘遣兵据东山堡，欲树栅，璋与习尼列、泥河议曰： 敌若据东山堡，此城亦不可拔，宜急击之。 
现代文：吴瞞派兵据守东山堡，想要树起栅栏，璋与习尼列、泥河商议道 ：敌人如果据守东山堡，这座城也攻不下来了，应该快速攻打。 
English: Wu Shidi sent soldiers to defend Dongshan Fort, and wanted to erect a fence, and discussed with Xi Nirei and Dihe: If the enemy defends Dongshan Fort, the city will not be able to be attacked, and it should be attacked quickly.

古文：于是璋先据要地，习尼列以兵逼东山堡，璘兵恃濠相拒，短兵接，璘兵退走，习尼列追击之。
现代文：于是，璋首先占领要害地区，习尼列带兵进逼东山堡，吴瞞军队凭靠护城河与之对抗，兵卒们持刀相搏斗，吴瞞的军队撤退，习尼列追击。
English: As a result, Zhai occupied the key areas first, Xi Nili led the troops into the East Mountain Fort, Wu Zhe's army confronted it by relying on the moat, the soldiers fought each other with swords, Wu Zhe's army retreated, and Xi Nili pursued.

古文：璘城北营兵可六千人，登北冈来战，璋之汉军少却，伤者二百人。
现代文：吴瞞在城北营地里的军兵大约有六千人，登上北面山冈出战，璋部下汉族军队稍稍退却，有二百人受伤。
English: Wu Xie's army of about six thousand soldiers in the camp north of the city climbed the hill to the north to fight. The Han troops under his command retreated slightly, and two hundred people were injured.

古文：璘遂焚璋军攻城具，璋率移刺补猛安兵逾北冈击走之。
现代文：吴瞞便放火烧璋军攻城的器具，璋率领移剌补猛安的军队越过北冈把吴瞞击退。
English: Wu Shide then set fire to the equipment of the Liao army attacking the city, and the Liao led the army that moved and reinforced Mengyuan across the North Hill to repel Wu Shide.

古文：璘军隔小堑射璋军，移刺补少却，习尼列望见北原火发，乃止攻东山堡，亟与将士来赴，引善射者先登，率刘安汉军三百人击败之。
现代文：吴瞞的军士隔着小濠沟放箭射击璋军，移剌补退后一些，习尼列望见城北地面上起火，就停止攻打东山堡，急忙领将士赶来，让善于射箭的人先上，率刘安汉的军队三百人打败了敌兵。
English: Wu Xie's sergeant shot arrows at the enemy across the small ditch, and then retreated a little. Xi Ni saw a fire on the ground north of the city, stopped attacking Dongshan Fort, hurriedly led the generals to come, and let those who were good at archery go first. Liu Anhan's army of three hundred people defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：璘军皆走险，璘以军三万据险作三阵，皆环以剑盾、行马。
现代文：吴瞞的军队都走到险要之处，吴瞞用三万人在险地布下三座阵，都用刀剑盾牌、拦护木架环绕。
English: Wu Shizhen's army all went to the critical point, Wu Shizhen used thirty thousand people to dangerously lay out three lines, all surrounded by swords, shields, and guard racks.

古文：璋遣万户石抹迭勒由别路自后击之，特里失乌也、移刺补以二千人当其前，以强弓射之，璘兵大败，堕沟壑者甚众。
现代文：璋派万户石抹迭勒走另外一条路从后面出击，特里失乌也、移剌补带二千人从前面出击，又用强弓射击，吴瞞的军队大败，堕入沟壑的人非常多。
English: He sent Wanhu Shi Er Dile to take another route to attack from the rear, and Tri lost Wuzhou. He also moved and supplemented 2,000 people to attack from the front, and shot with a strong bow. Wu Xie's army was defeated, and a lot of people fell into the ravine.

古文：璋军度涧追之，斩数千级而还。
现代文：璋军渡过涧水追杀，杀死数千敌兵后回师。
English: The Shan army crossed the Surabaya and chased and killed thousands of enemy soldiers before returning to the division.

古文：璘军虽败，犹恃其众，都监合喜使武威军副总管夹古查刺来问策。
现代文：吴瞞的军队虽然战败，都仍然依仗人多势众，都监合喜让武威军副总管夹古查剌来军中询问对策。
English: Although the army of Wu Xie was defeated, it still relied on the support of many people. They all agreed to let the deputy head of the Wuwei Army, Qigou Zhaqi, come to the army to inquire about countermeasures.

古文：诸将皆曰： 吴璘恃险，不善野战，我退军平凉，彼必弃险就平地，然后可图也。 
现代文：诸将都说 ：吴瞞凭仗地形险要，而并不善于在野外作战，我军如果退到平凉，他必定舍弃险要之地而到平原来，这样就可以打败他了。 
English: The generals all said, "Wu Jie is not good at fighting in the field because he relies on the dangerous terrain. If our army retreats to the plain, he will surely abandon the dangerous terrain and go to the plain. This will defeat him."

古文：璋曰： 不然。
现代文：璋说 ：不是这样的。
English: Zou said, "That's not true."

古文：彼恃其众，非特恃险也。
现代文：他凭靠的是人多，而并不是单凭险要之地。
English: He relies on a large number of people, and not just on a dangerous place.

古文：昔人有言， 宁弃千军，不弃寸地 ，故退兵不如济师。
现代文：过去人说， 宁弃千军，不弃寸地 ，所以退兵不如援兵。
English: In the past, it was said that it is better to abandon a thousand troops than to abandon an inch of land, so it is better to withdraw troops than to reinforce them.

古文：我退军平凉，彼军深入吾地，固垒以拒我，则如之何。 
现代文：我军退到平凉，敌军就会深入我方地盘，固守保垒来抵御我军，那时能把他们怎么样呢？ 
English: If our army retreats to the plains, the enemy troops will penetrate deep into our territory and fortify strongholds to resist our army. What can we do with them then?

古文：查刺还报，合喜于是亲率四万人赴之。
现代文：夹古查剌回去报告，合喜于是就亲自率领四万人前去应战。
English: He went back to investigate and report, and was so pleased that he personally led forty thousand people to go and fight.

古文：吴璘诘旦乘阴雾晦冥分兵四道来袭，战于城东，离而复合者数四。汉军千户李展率麾下兵先登奋击之，璘军阵动。
现代文：吴瞞于次日早晨乘雾气阴暗不明的时候，分兵四路来袭击，在城东交战，分开又交接了四次，汉族军中千户李展带部下率先上前备战，吴瞞的军阵动摇了。
English: In the morning of the next day, when Wu Zhe took advantage of the fog and the darkness was unclear, the detachment of soldiers attacked in four directions, fought in the east of the city, separated and transferred four times. Li Zhan and his subordinates in the Han army took the lead in preparing for battle, and Wu Zhe's army was shaken.

古文：璋乘胜踵击，璘军复败，追至北冈，璘走险，璋急击之，杀略殆尽。
现代文：璋乘胜连击，吴瞞军屡次失败，追到城北山冈，吴瞞从险要之地跑走，璋急忙出击，把敌军几乎杀尽了。
English: Zhai made a series of successful attacks, while Wu Zhe's army repeatedly failed and was chased to the mountains and hills north of the city. Wu Zhe ran away from the critical place, Zhai hurriedly attacked and almost killed the enemy army.

古文：璘分半军守秦州，合喜驻军水洛城东，自六盘山至石山头分兵守之，断其饷道。
现代文：吴瞞分出一半军兵守卫秦州，合喜把军队驻扎在水洛城的东面，从六盘山到石山头分兵把守，截断吴瞞军的粮饷道路。
English: Wu Zhe separated out half of the soldiers to guard Qinzhou, and He Xi stationed the army in the east of Shuiluo City, from Liupanshan to Shishantou, and cut off the grain supply route of Wu Zhe's army.

古文：璘乃引归。
现代文：吴瞞只好把军队召回来。
English: Wu Xie had no choice but to call back the army.

古文：宋经略使荆皋以步骑三万自德顺西去，璋以兵八千、习尼列以兵五千追击之。
现代文：宋国经略使荆皋带三万骑兵从德顺向西行进，璋率军八千人、习尼列率军五千人前来追击。
English: Song Guojing slightly sent Jing Zhe to march westward from Deshun with thirty thousand cavalry, with Zhe leading an army of eight thousand and Xi Nili leading an army of five thousand to pursue.

古文：习尼列兵乃出其前，还自赤觜，遇其前锋，败之于高赤崖下。
现代文：习尼列的军队是从前面出兵，从赤觜往回走，遇上荆皋的先锋部队，在高赤崖下战败。
English: Xi Nili's army sent troops from the front, walked back from Chibi, met Jing Yi's vanguard troops, and was defeated at the foot of the high cliff.

古文：复与其中军战，自日昃至暮，乃罢。
现代文：又和中军作战，从太阳西斜直打到傍晚才停战。
English: They also fought against the Chinese army, and fought from sunset to dusk before ending the war.

古文：荆皋乘夜来袭营，为退军八十里。
现代文：荆皋趁黑夜偷袭习尼列的军营，从而得以把军队后退八十里。
English: Jing Ye took advantage of the darkness to raid the military camp in Xi'an and was able to drive the army back eighty miles.

古文：明日，习尼列追之。
现代文：第二天，习尼列前去追赶。
English: The next day, Xi Jinping went to catch up.

古文：璋兵至上八节，宋兵据险为阵，璋舍马步战，地险不得接，相拒至曙。
现代文：璋的军队到了上八节，宋兵在险要处据守阵地。璋舍弃战马徒步作战，而由于地形险要不能够接近，相持到天亮。
English: The Song soldiers held their positions at the critical point. They abandoned their horses and fought on foot, and because the terrain was too dangerous to approach, they held each other until dawn.

古文：宋兵劝，璋乘之，追至甘谷城，习尼列兵亦至，宋兵宵遁，璋遂班师。
现代文：宋兵出动，璋随后追赶，到了甘谷城，习尼列的军队也赶来了，宋兵在夜晚逃遁，璋便班师回朝。
English: The Song soldiers set out, and the Jurchens chased after them. When they arrived at Gan Gu City, Xi Nili's army also arrived. The Song soldiers fled in the night, and the Jurchens returned to the North.

古文：习尼列追至伏羌城，不及而还。
现代文：习尼列继续追赶到伏羌城，没追上，也回朝了。
English: Xi Nirei continued to catch up to Fuxi City, but did not catch up, and also returned to the imperial court.

古文：上使御史中丞达吉视诸军功状，达吉旧与璋有隙，故损其功。
现代文：皇上派御史中丞达吉视察各路军队立功的情况，达吉过去与璋有隔阂，因此少报了璋的功绩。
English: The emperor sent Daji, the imperial historian, to inspect the meritorious achievements of the various armies. Daji had been estranged from Zou in the past, so he underreported Zou's achievements.

古文：诏璋将士赏比诸军半之，璋兼陕西路都统，进官一阶。
现代文：皇上命令奖给璋的将士的封赏与各路军相比只有一半，璋兼任陕西路都统，加升一级官职。
English: Compared with the armies of various provinces, the reward of the soldiers who were awarded the Emperor's Order Award was only half of that of the soldiers who were awarded the Emperor's Order Award. He also served as the Shaanxi Provincial Commander and was promoted to the first-level official post.

古文：及元帅府上功，璋居多，诏达吉削官两阶，杖八十，解职。
现代文：等到元帅府向皇上报功，璋的功劳最多，皇上下诏削去达吉两级官阶，打八十杖，解除职务。
English: When the marshal's office reported the achievement to the emperor, the merit of Shun was the most, and the emperor cut two levels of official ranks to Dagi, gave him eighty canes and relieved him of his duties.

古文：上复赏璋及将士如诸军，以璋为西北路招讨使。召为元帅左都监，兼安化军节度使，赐以弓矢衣带佩刀。
现代文：皇上重新像对各军一样封赏璋和他的将士，任命璋为西北路招讨使，召做元帅左都监，兼安化军节度使，并赐给弓箭、衣带和佩刀。
English: The emperor once again rewarded Zou and his soldiers as he did for all the armies, appointed Zou as the envoy of the Northwest Road, called him to be the marshal of the Left Capital, and also the envoy of the Anhua Army, and gave him a bow and arrow, a belt and a sword.

古文：改益都尹，左都监如故。
现代文：后又改任益都尹，仍旧做左都监。
English: Later, he was reassigned to Yidu Yin, still serving as the Left Capital Supervisor.

古文：宋人弃海州遁去，焚官民庐舍且尽。
现代文：宋国人丢掉海州逃跑，把官家平民的屋舍几乎烧尽了。
English: The Song people abandoned Haizhou and fled, burning down almost all the houses of officials and commoners.

古文：璋至海州，得所弃粮三万六千余石，安集其人，复其屯戍。
现代文：璋来到海州，获得宋人所遗弃的粮食三万六千多石，安置百姓，重新恢复耕田和守卫。
English: He came to Haizhou, obtained more than 36,000 kilos of grain abandoned by the Song people, resettled the people, and restored cultivated fields and guards.

古文：五年，宋人约和，罢三路都统，复置陕西路统军司，璋为统军使。
现代文：大定五年，与宋人订下和约，皇上减掉三路都统，又设置陕西路统军司，璋出任统军使之职。
English: In the fifth year of Dading, a peace treaty was signed with the Song people, the emperor reduced the three-way unification, and also set up the Shaanxi Road Unification Military Department, which served as the unified army.

古文：上曰： 监军合喜年老，故授卿此职。
现代文：皇上说： 监军合喜年纪老了，所以把这个职位授给你。
English: The emperor said, "Hexi, the supervisor of the army, is getting old, so I have given you this position.

古文：边境无事，且召卿矣。 
现代文：现在边境没有事故，暂且召你回来。 
English: Now that there is no incident at the border, you are being called back for the time being.

古文：以本官兼京兆尹。
现代文：让他在做本官职之外兼任京兆尹。
English: Let him concurrently hold the post of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China in addition to his official duties.

古文：召为御史大夫。
现代文：皇上召用璋为御史大夫。
English: The Emperor called on Tsukuda to become the Imperial Historian.

古文：璋奏： 窃观文武百官有相为朋党者，今在台自臣外无女直人，乞不限资考，量材奏拟。 
现代文：璋启奏道 ：我暗中观察到文武百官中有相互结为朋党的。现在御史台中，除我以外没有一个女真人，请您不限制出身，依据才能取用。 
English: 启奏道: I have secretly observed that among the hundreds of civil and military officials, there are those who have allied themselves with each other. Now, in the history department, there is no one except me. Please do not limit the origin, the basis can only be used.

古文：上曰： 朋党为谁，即纠治之。
现代文：皇上说： 结朋党的人，要纠察整治。
English: The emperor said, "Those who have formed a fraternal party should picket and rectify.

古文：朕选女直人，未得其人，岂以资考为限，论其人材而已。 
现代文：朕选拔女真人，没选到，哪里是以出身为限制，还是论人的才能罢了。 
English: I chose a real woman, but I didn't choose, where is the restriction based on origin, or on human talent.

古文：顷之，璋奏曰： 太祖武元皇帝受天明命，太宗皇帝奄定宋土，自古帝王之兴，必称受命，当制 大金受命之宝 ，以明示万世。 
现代文：不久，璋上奏说： 太祖武元皇帝接受上天命令，太宗皇帝安定宋国，自古以来帝王起兵，必定声称奉受天命，应当制作 大金受命之宝 ，以便公开向万世昭示。 
English: Soon after, Zang Shangso said: Emperor Wuyuan, the great ancestor, accepted the heavenly order, Emperor Taizong stabilized the Song Dynasty, and emperors have raised armies since ancient times. He must have claimed to have received the mandate of heaven, and should have made the treasure of the great gold in order to publicly show it to the world.

古文：上曰： 卿言正合朕意。 
现代文：皇上说 ：你的话正合朕意。 
English: The emperor said, "Your words are just what I wanted."

古文：乃遣使夏国市玉，十八年，受命宝成，奏告天地宗庙社稷，上御正殿。
现代文：于是派人到夏国买玉，大定十八年，受命之宝制成，皇上奏告天地宗庙社稷，在正殿处理朝政。
English: Therefore, someone was sent to Xia to buy jade, and in the 18th year of Datin, the ordered treasure was made, and the emperor reported the imperial edict to the Heaven and Earth Sect Temple, and dealt with the imperial government in the main hall.

古文：十三年，改大兴尹，为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：大定十三年，璋改做大兴尹，出任向宋国庆贺元旦的使臣。
English: In the thirteenth year of Dading, he changed his name to Daxingyin and served as an envoy to Song to celebrate New Year's Day.

古文：璋受命使宋，即行，上遣人驰谕璋曰： 宋人若不遵旧礼，慎勿付书。
现代文：他奉命出使宋国，已经出发了，皇上派人骑马来告诉璋说： 宋人如果不遵守以前的礼法，就不要把信给他们。
English: He had been ordered to send an envoy to Song, and he had already set off. The emperor sent a man on horseback to tell Zou: If the Song people do not observe the previous etiquette, do not give them the letter.

古文：如不令卿等入见，即持书归。
现代文：如果不让你们入朝进见，就带信回来。
English: If they don't let you into the palace, come back with a letter.

古文：若迫而取之，亦勿赴宴，其回书及礼物一切勿受。 
现代文：如果他们强行索取，也不要去赴宴，他们的回信和回送的礼物一律不要接受。 
English: If they force you to take it, don't go to the banquet, and don't accept their letters or gifts.

古文：璋至临安，宋人请以太子接书，不从。
现代文：璋来到临安，宋人请求让太子接信，璋不同意。
English: When Yu came to Lin'an, the Song people requested that the prince receive the letter, but Yu did not agree.

古文：宋人就馆迫取书，璋与之，且赴宴，多受礼物。
现代文：宋人到驿馆里强行索要书信，璋就给了他们，而且还去赴宴，接受了很多礼物。
English: The Song people forcibly demanded letters from the Yu Hall, and the Yu gave them to them. They also went to the banquet and accepted many gifts.

古文：有司以闻，上怒，欲置之极刑。
现代文：有司报告给皇上，皇上发怒，要把璋处以极刑。
English: Yushi reported to the emperor, and the emperor was so angry that he was going to give him the death penalty.

古文：左丞相良弼奏曰： 璋为将，大破宋军，宋人仇之久矣。将因此陷之死地，未可知也。
现代文：左丞相良弼上奏道 ：璋作为将帅，大破宋军，宋人仇视他很久了，说不定要因此把他陷于死地。
English: Zuojo Minister Yoshitaka made a speech, saying, "As a general, Yoshitaka defeated the Song army. The Song people have hated him for a long time, and may want to put him to death because of this.

古文：今若杀璋，或者堕其计中耳。 
现代文：现在如果杀了璋，也许正落进他们的诡计中。 
English: Now, if you kill a baboon, you may be falling into their trap.

古文：上以为然，乃杖璋百五十，除名，副使客省使高翊杖百，没入其所受礼物。
现代文：皇上认为是这样，就打了璋一百五十杖，除去官名，把副使客省使高翊打了一百杖，没收他们所接收的礼物。
English: The emperor thought so, so he fined them one hundred and fifty canes, removed their official titles, fined the vice-ambassadors of guest provinces and high-ranking officials one hundred canes, and confiscated the gifts they had received.

古文：后岁余，上念璋有征伐功，起为景州刺史，迁武定军节度使，授山东西路蒲底山拏兀鲁河谋克，改临洮尹。
现代文：几年之后，皇上感念璋征战有功，起用他为景州刺史，又提升为武定军节度使，授予山东西路蒲底山籋兀鲁河谋克，又改任临洮尹。
English: A few years later, the emperor was so impressed with his achievements in the war of conquest that he appointed him as the chief historian of Jingzhou, promoted him to the military commander of the Wuding Army, awarded him the command of the east-west road of Mount Puti and the Shilu River, and changed his post to Linyi Yin.

古文：十九年，卒。
现代文：大定十九年，璋逝世。
English: He died in the 19th year of the Kenmu era.

