古文：八卦成列，像在其中矣；因而重之，爻在其中矣；刚柔相推，变在其中焉；系辞焉而命之，动在其中矣。
现代文：八卦之中，乾坤相对，震与巽相对，离与坎相对，兑与艮相对，八卦对待成列，举凡天地间两两相重，成为六位的卦，以应事实的需要，因而八八六十四卦、三百八十四爻，都在其中了。阴阳两爻，递相推移，宇宙间的千变万化，都在其中了。各卦各爻，圣人都系以文辞，分别指出吉凶的征兆，于是人间所有的动作营为，和趋吉避凶的道理，都在其中了。
English: In the Eight Trigrams, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and the small, the great and

古文：吉凶悔吝者，生乎动者也；刚柔者，立本者也；变通者，趋时者也。
现代文：人事之间，所以有吉凶悔吝的产生，是由于动作营为的结果。阴阳两爻，是设立卦象以推演宇宙间万事万物的根本。推移变通，正是所以趋向于真理或时机的变化的。
English: Therefore, the occurrence of good luck, bad luck and regret between personnel affairs is due to the result of actions. The yin and yang duality is the basis for setting up a gua image to deduce everything in the universe. The transition is flexible, which is why it tends to the truth or the change of timing.

古文：吉凶者，贞胜者也；天地之道，贞观者也；日月之道，贞明者也；天下之动，贞夫一者也。
现代文：时机虽有吉有凶，但我们处在吉利或凶险时，必须安常守正，才可稳操胜算，立于不败之地。人事如此，宇宙自然亦复如此，皆以 守正 为前题，所以天地的道理，以正而观照万物。日月的道理，以正而光明，普照万物，都公正无私，使万物各遂其生，各得其所。
English: Although there are auspicious and inauspicious times, when we are in auspicious or inauspicious times, we must always keep to the right, so that we can steadily win the game and stand in an invincible position. This is true for people and the universe, and it is also true for nature. They all take "keeping to the right" as the premise. Therefore, the principle of heaven and earth is to observe all things with uprightness. The principle of the sun and the moon is to shine with uprightness and light, and shine on all things. They are all fair and selfless, so that all things can live their own lives and have their own place.

古文：夫乾，确然示人易矣；夫坤，隤然示人简矣。
现代文：天下一切的动作营为，都是归于端正专一，精诚无欲，才能有成就。乾道造化自然，很刚健的昭示众人，是非常的平易而容易知道呀。
English: All movements and actions under the heavens are attributed to being upright and single-minded, sincere and desireless, in order to achieve success. The dry road creates nature, very robust and shows everyone, it is very easy and easy to know.

古文：爻也者，效此者也。
现代文：坤道是顺应乾道而开务成物，很柔顺地昭示众人的道理，是非常简易的呀。
English: The way of the guru is a product of following the dry path, and it is very easy to show people the truth.

古文：象也者，像此者也；爻象动乎内，吉凶见乎外，功业见乎变，圣人之情见乎辞。
现代文：圣人制作卦爻，便是效法乾坤简易的理则而作的。卦象的设立，亦是仿乾坤简易的形迹而设立的。卦爻卦象先有变化于内，遂依象释理，吉凶之真象就表现于外了。进而裁制机宜，导致功业的成就，就表现于聪智的变化。圣人崇德广业、仁民爱物的言行，在卦辞爻辞中记载得很清楚。
English: The establishment of the Gua Zi was also established by imitating the simple shape of the Gua Zi. The Gua Zi and Gua Zi were first changed internally, and then according to the interpretation of the image, the truth of good and evil was manifested externally. Then, the tailoring mechanism, which led to the achievement of the work, was manifested in the change of wisdom. The words and deeds of the sage advocating virtue and industry, and benevolence and love for the people, were clearly recorded in the Gua Zi.

古文：天地之大德曰生，圣人之大宝曰位。
现代文：天地之大德，在于使万物生生不息，圣人之大宝，在于有崇高地位。
English: The great virtue of heaven and earth is to make all things live forever, and the great treasure of a saint is to have a lofty position.

古文：何以守位？
现代文：如何守着职位呢？
English: How do you keep your job?

古文：曰仁。
现代文：那就要靠仁爱的道德了。
English: That depends on the morality of benevolence.

古文：何以聚人？
现代文：如何招致人群呢？
English: How do you draw a crowd?

古文：曰财。
现代文：那就要有财物。
English: Then you have to have assets.

古文：理财正辞、禁民为非曰义。
现代文：调理财务，端正言行，禁止老百姓为非作歹，就是道义所应做的。
English: Adjusting finances, being upright in word and deed, and forbidding the common people to do evil is what morality should do.

