古文：贞观元年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 自古帝王凡有兴造，必须贵顺物情。
现代文：贞观元年，太宗对侍臣说： 自古帝王凡是有兴土木的大事，必须以物资人力来衡量利弊。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: Since ancient times, whenever the emperor has a major civil engineering project, he must weigh the pros and cons in terms of materials and manpower.

古文：昔大禹凿九山，通九江，用人力极广，而无怨讟者，物情所欲，而众所共有故也。
现代文：当初大禹凿九山，通九江，用的人力极为多数，而没有抱怨的人，顺应了力量，众人能享受建设成果。
English: At the beginning, Dayu chiseled the nine mountains and passed through the nine rivers with an extremely large number of manpower, and those who did not complain complied with the power, and everyone could enjoy the construction results.

古文：秦始皇营建宫室，而人多谤议者，为徇其私欲，不与众共故也。
现代文：秦始皇营建宫室，但人民非常反对，因为是为了满足其私欲，不和人民一起享受。
English: Qin Shihuang built a palace, but the people were very opposed to it, because it was to satisfy their selfish desires and not to enjoy it with the people.

古文：朕今欲造一殿，材木已具，远想秦皇之事，遂不复作也。
现代文：朕现在想造一座宫殿，材木工具已经准备就绪，但想想秦始皇的事，所以打算放弃。
English: I want to build a palace now, the timber tools are ready, but think about Qin Shi Huang, so I'm going to give up.

古文：古人云： 不作无益害有益。 
现代文：古人曾说： 不做没有益处的事，只挑有益的做。 
English: The ancients once said: "Do not do things that are not beneficial, only choose to do things that are beneficial."

古文： 不见可欲，使民心不乱。 
现代文： 不显耀可以引起贪欲的财货，免得搞乱人民清净的心思 。
English: Do not show off wealth and goods that can arouse greed, so as not to disturb the pure minds of the people.

古文：固知见可欲，其心必乱矣。
现代文：所以可知显耀财货，他的心一定被污浊了。
English: So his heart must have been polluted by showing off his wealth.

古文：至如雕镂器物，珠玉服玩，若恣其骄奢，则危亡之期可立待也。
现代文：就像雕镂器物，珠玉服玩，如果只知道享受它们，那么灭亡的时候就能数着日子到来了。
English: If you only know how to enjoy them, then you will be able to count the days when you die.

古文：自王公以下，第宅、车服、婚嫁、丧葬，准品秩不合服用者，宜一切禁断。 
现代文：自王公及之下，第宅、车服、婚嫁、丧葬，若装饰过于豪华，便一切都停止供应并查处。 
English: From the king on down, the first house, the car, the wedding, the funeral, if the decoration is too luxurious, everything will be stopped and investigated.

古文：由是二十年间，风俗简朴，衣无锦绣，财帛富饶，无饥寒之弊。
现代文：所以二十年来，风俗简朴，衣服没有锦绣，财产富饶，没有饥饿的坏情况。
English: Therefore, for twenty years, the customs are simple, the clothes are not embroidered, the property is rich, and there is no bad situation of hunger.

古文：贞观二年，公卿奏曰： 依《礼》，季夏之月，可以居台榭。今夏暑未退，秋霖方始，宫中卑湿，请营一阁以居之。 
现代文：贞观二年，公卿上奏说： 依《礼》中所讲的，六月夏日，可以居住在凉台，但是现在夏天暑气没有退却，秋天凉气刚刚开始，皇宫中非常潮湿，所以请求修建一座暖阁让您居住。 
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, the nobles petitioned: "According to what is said in the "Rite," you can live in the summer terrace in June, but now the summer heat has not retreated, the autumn coolness has just begun, and the palace is very humid, so I request you to build a warm pavilion for you to live in.

古文：太宗曰： 朕有气疾，岂宜下湿？
现代文：太宗说： 朕有哮喘病，难道就不怕潮湿？
English: Taizong said, "I have asthma, so shouldn't I be afraid of dampness?

古文：若遂来请，糜费良多。
现代文：但如果修建的话，会浪费许多人力物力。
English: But if it is built, it will waste a lot of manpower and material resources.

古文：昔汉文将起露台，而惜十家之产，朕德不逮于汉帝，而所费过之，岂为人父母之道也？ 
现代文：以前汉文想修建露台，因为怜惜十户百姓家产，朕功德不及汉文帝，而比他还要奢侈浪费，难道是为人父母的道理吗？ 
English: In the past, Han Wen wanted to build a terrace, because he was sparing the livelihoods of ten households. I am not as good as Han Wen, but I am even more extravagant and wasteful than him. Is this a reason for being a parent?

古文：固请至于再三，竟不许。
现代文：所以再三上书，太宗就是不允许。
English: Therefore, it is not allowed to repeatedly submit the application.

古文：贞观四年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 崇饰宫宇，游赏池台，帝王之所欲，百姓之所不欲。
现代文：贞观四年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣说： 用华丽的装饰宫殿，游览、观赏池台，是帝王想做的事情，百姓不希望做的事情。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the minister of the attendant: Using gorgeous decoration of the palace, sightseeing, and viewing the pool, is what the emperor wants to do, and what the people do not want to do.

古文：帝王所欲者放逸，百姓所不欲者劳弊。
现代文：帝王想要做这些的原因是要享乐，百姓不希望的原因是劳弊。
English: The reason why the emperor wants to do these things is to have fun, and the reason why the people don't want to do them is because of work.

古文：孔子云： 有一言可以终身行之者，其恕乎！
现代文：孔子说： 有一句话，可以终身施行的话，那就是 恕 ！
English: Confucius said: There is one sentence that can be carried out for life, and that is to forgive!

古文：已所不欲，勿施于人。 
现代文：己所不欲，勿施于人。 
English: Do not do unto others as you would not have them do unto you.

古文：劳弊之事，诚不可施于百姓。
现代文：劳弊的事情，实在不可以强加在百姓身上。
English: The matter of malpractice cannot be imposed on the people.

古文：朕尊为帝王，富有四海，每事由己，诚能自节，若百姓不欲，必能顺其情也。 
现代文：我尊为帝王，富有四海，每件事都可以自己决定，如果能自我约束，如果百姓不想做，就能够顺应他们的情况。 
English: I respect as an emperor, rich in the four seas, everything can decide for themselves, if they can self-discipline, if the people do not want to do, they can conform to their situation.

古文：魏征曰： 陛下本怜百姓，每节己以顺人。
现代文：魏徵说： 陛下本来已经爱民，每每约束自己来顺应百姓。
English: Wei Zheng said: His Majesty has always loved the people and always restrained himself to comply with the people.

古文：臣闻 以欲从人者昌，以人乐己者亡。 
现代文：臣听说： 为别人着想的人能康健，以自私夺利为思想的人不能长存。 
English: The minister heard that: People who think about others can be healthy, and people who think about selfish gain cannot last long.

古文：隋炀帝志在无厌，惟好奢侈，所司每有供奉营造，小不称意，则有峻罚严刑。
现代文：隋炀帝思想贪得无厌，只喜欢奢侈，主管官员一旦有大工程，稍不如意，就以严刑待之。
English: The Sui and Qian emperors were insatiably greedy and only liked luxury. If the officials in charge of a major project were less than satisfactory, they were severely punished.

古文：上之所好，下必有甚，竞为无限，遂至灭亡。此非书籍所传，亦陛下目所亲见。
现代文：上级喜欢的，下级就千方百计奉承，长此恶性循环，直到灭亡的一天，不是书中记载，陛下也亲眼目睹过。
English: It is not written in books that those who are liked by superiors are flattered by their inferiors in every possible way, and this vicious cycle continues until the day of their demise. His Majesty also witnessed it.

古文：为其无道，故天命陛下代之。
现代文：因为他暴虐，所以顺应天命让陛下取代。
English: Because he was a tyrant, it was his destiny to be replaced by His Majesty.

古文：陛下若以为足，今日不啻足矣；若以为不足，更万倍过此，亦不足。 
现代文：陛下如果能吸取教训，现在就不仅仅是这样了。如果不知足，就比这还要严重得多。 
English: If His Majesty has learned his lesson, it is more than that now. If he is not satisfied, it is much more serious than that.

古文：太宗曰： 公所奏对甚善。
现代文：太宗说： 爱卿所说的很好！
English: Taizong said, "What Ai Qing said is very good!

古文：非公，朕安得闻此言？ 
现代文：不是你，朕怎么能听到这番忠言？ 
English: How could I have heard this advice but for you?

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕近读《刘聪传》，聪将为刘后起仪殿，廷尉陈元达切谏，聪大怒，命斩之。
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 我近来读《刘聪传》，书中说刘聪准备给他的刘皇后建造华丽的宫殿，廷尉陈元达对此痛切地陈词，竭力劝谏刘聪不要这样做，刘聪听后大怒，命令把陈元达斩首。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: I recently read "The Biography of Liu Cong." In the book, it is said that Liu Cong was preparing to build a magnificent palace for his Empress Liu. The courtier Chen Yuanda made a bitter speech about this and tried his best to dissuade Liu Cong from doing so. After hearing this, Liu Cong was furious and ordered Chen Yuanda to be beheaded.

古文：刘后手疏启请，辞情甚切，聪怒乃解，而甚愧之。
现代文：后来，刘皇后亲手写了奏疏替陈元达求情，在文辞和道理上都很恳切，刘聪的怒气这才平息下来，而且内心感到很惭愧。
English: Later, Empress Liu personally wrote a petition to intercede for Chen Yuanda, which was very sincere in terms of words and reason. It was only then that Liu Cong's anger subsided, and she felt very ashamed.

古文：人之读书，欲广闻见以自益耳，朕见此事，可以为深诫。
现代文：人们读书，都是要增长见识，使自己获得好处，我看这件事，可以作为借鉴。
English: People read books to increase their knowledge and benefit themselves. In my opinion, this can be used as a reference.

古文：比者欲造一殿，仍构重阁，今于蓝田采木，并已备具，远想聪事，斯作遂止。 
现代文：近来我想营建一座宫殿，并加造层楼，现在从蓝田采办的木料，都已齐备。但遥想起刘聪这件事，我就把这项营建工程停止了。 
English: Recently, I wanted to build a palace and add floors, and now the wood procured from Lantian is all ready. But when I thought about Liu Cong, I stopped the construction project.

古文：贞观十一年，诏曰： 朕闻死者终也，欲物之反真也；葬者藏也，欲令人之不得见也。
现代文：贞观十一年，唐太宗下令说： 我听说，死是人生的终结，它让人回归到自然，葬就是收藏，要让别人不能再看到自己。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong ordered: I have heard that death is the end of life, it makes people return to nature, and burial is a collection, so that others can no longer see themselves.

古文：上古垂风，未闻于封树；后世贻则，乃备于棺槨。
现代文：上古的风俗，并没有堆坟树碑。只是到了后世，才在葬礼仪式上下工夫。
English: In ancient times, there was no custom of piling up tombstones. It was only in later times that people began to put effort into funeral ceremonies.

古文：讥僭侈者，非爱其厚费；美俭薄者，实贵其无危。
现代文：有人讥刺葬礼奢侈，这并非是吝惜钱财，而是为了提倡节俭薄葬，避免贻害自己和子孙。
English: Some people ridicule the extravagance of funerals, which is not to be stingy with money, but to promote frugality and thin burial, to avoid harming themselves and their descendants.

古文：是以唐尧，圣帝也，谷林有通树之说；秦穆，明君也，橐泉无丘陇之处。
现代文：所以，唐尧很圣明，死后葬在谷林，仅在坟边栽上树木作为标记。秦穆公是明君，去世后葬在橐泉，并没修筑高大的陵墓。
English: Therefore, Tang Xuan was very holy, and after his death he was buried in the valley forest, and only trees were planted at the edge of the grave as a mark. Qin Mu Gong was Ming Jun, and he was buried in Luquan after his death, and he did not build a tall mausoleum.

古文：仲尼，孝子也，防墓不坟；延陵，慈父也，嬴、博可隐。
现代文：孔子是孝子，他把双亲合葬在防这个地方，只有墓穴而不堆坟。
English: Confucius was a filial son, he buried his parents together in this place, only a grave without a grave.

古文：斯皆怀无穷之虑，成独决之明，乃便体于九泉，非徇名于百代也。
现代文：延陵是慈父，他本可以在嬴、博两地之间埋葬他的儿子，但他没有这样做，因为他心里怀着长远的考虑，他要使儿子的尸体安然地埋于地下，而不是为了获得后世的赞美之辞。相反，吴王阖闾违背礼制，用珠玉做成野鸭大雁，作为陪葬。
English: Yanling was a kind father. He could have buried his son between the two places of Yan and Bo, but he did not do so, because he had a long-term consideration in his heart. He wanted to bury his son's body safely underground, not in order to obtain the praise of future generations. On the contrary, Wu Wangqi violated the etiquette and made wild ducks and geese with jewels as funeral accompaniment.

古文：洎乎阖闾违礼，珠玉为凫雁；始皇无度，水银为江海；季孙擅鲁，敛以玙璠；桓魋专宋，葬以石槨，莫不因多藏以速祸，由有利而招辱。
现代文：秦始皇荒淫无度，坟墓里有水银做的江河大海。季孙在鲁国擅政，他用玛瑙之类的美玉装殓尸体。桓魃在宋国专权，墓葬建造石椁。这些人都是因为在墓里埋藏了大量的财物而招致了灾祸，由于墓里有利可图而遭受折辱。
English: Qin Shihuang was wild and debauched, and his tomb contained rivers and seas made of mercury. Jisun ruled Lu and decorated his corpse with onyx and other precious stones. Huan Yu had absolute power in Song and built stone coffins for his tombs. All of these people incurred misfortune because they buried a large amount of wealth in their tombs, and suffered humiliation because their tombs were profitable.

古文：玄庐既发，致焚如于夜台；黄肠再开，同暴骸于中野。
现代文：有的坟墓在发掘之后，葬器都被焚烧在墓穴中，有的棺椁被打开，尸骸暴露在旷野。
English: After some graves were excavated, the funerary vessels were burned in the grave, and some coffins were opened, exposing the remains to the wilderness.

古文：详思曩事，岂不悲哉？
现代文：仔细思量往事，岂不让人悲哀。
English: If you think about the past, it's sad.

古文：由此观之，奢侈者可以为戒，节俭者可以为师矣。
现代文：由此看来，奢侈的人可以作为我们的鉴戒，节俭的人可以为人师。
English: From this point of view, extravagant people can serve as our warning, and frugal people can be our teachers.

古文：朕居四海之尊，承百王之弊，未明思化，中宵战惕。
现代文：我位居四海之尊，承接百王之弊，如果不明白如何教化百姓，睡到半夜都会为之恐惧忧虑。
English: I live in the honor of the four seas and inherit the evils of a hundred kings. If I don't know how to educate the people, I will be afraid and worried about it until midnight.

古文：虽送往之典详诸仪制，失礼之禁著在刑书，而勋戚之家多流遁于习俗，闾阎之内或侈靡而伤风，以厚葬为奉终，以高坟为行孝，遂使衣衾棺槨极雕刻之华，灵輀冥器穷金玉之饰。
现代文：虽然现在丧葬的法规，在仪制中已经有详细的记载，对违礼的处罚，也在刑书中写明了，但是皇亲贵族之中依然有很多人还在沿袭着陈旧的习俗，民间很多百姓也在葬礼时奢侈靡费，伤风败俗，用厚葬来供奉死者，用高坟来表示孝道，衣衾棺椁，力求雕刻华丽，灵车冥器，也尽用金玉装饰。
English: Although the regulations for funerals now have detailed records in the ceremonial system, and the penalties for violations are also written in the criminal code, there are still many people among the imperial relatives and aristocrats who still follow the old customs. Many people also spend extravagantly at funerals, breaking the customs, using thick graves to honor the dead, using high graves to show filial piety, coffin coffins, striving to carve gorgeous, hearse necropolis, and also using gold and jade decorations.

古文：富者越法度以相尚，贫者破资产而不逮，徒伤教义，无益泉壤，为害既深，宜为惩革。
现代文：富贵人家破坏法度，相互炫耀，贫穷之家倾家荡产，彼此攀比，这样做有伤风俗，无益教化，造成的危害已经很深了，现在，对此应予惩治革除。
English: The rich and noble are breaking the law and showing off to each other, and the poor are squandering their wealth and comparing themselves with each other, which is harmful to customs and useless for enlightenment. The harm caused has been very deep. Now, this should be punished and eliminated.

古文：其王公以下，爰及黎庶，自今以后，送葬之具有不依令式者，仰州府县官明加检察，随状科罪。
现代文：凡王公以下，直至百姓，从今以后，希望各州府的官员严格检查，葬礼如有不遵照律令格式的，根据情节定罪。
English: From now on, I hope that officials from all prefectures, from princes down to ordinary citizens, will strictly inspect funerals, and if any do not follow the format of the regulation, they will be convicted according to the circumstances.

古文：在京五品以上及勋戚家，仍录奏闻。 
现代文：京城里五品以上官员和皇亲贵族如有违反，要写下罪状上奏朝廷。 
English: If there is a violation, officials above the rank of the fifth grade in the capital and the imperial relatives and nobles should write down the charges and report them to the imperial court.

古文：岑文本为中书令，宅卑湿，无帷帐之饰。有劝其营产业者，文本叹曰： 吾本汉南一布衣耳，竟无汗马之劳，徒以文墨致位中书令，斯亦极矣。荷俸禄之重，为惧已多，更得言产业乎？ 
现代文：岑文本担任中书令要职，但他的房宅却低下潮湿，没有帷帐之类的装饰，有人劝他买房置地，文本叹息道： 我本来只是汉水南边的一个平民百姓，并没有什么汗马功劳，只是凭借一点文墨，就当上了中书令，我已经很满足了，现在我享受着这么高的俸禄，已经感到很惭愧了，还买房置地干什么呢？ 
English: "I used to be just a commoner on the south side of the Han River, and I didn't do anything to deserve it. It was just by virtue of a bit of writing and ink that I became a middle-ranking official. I was already very satisfied. Now that I enjoy such a high salary, I feel very ashamed. Why should I buy a house and land?" the text sighed.

古文：言者叹息而退。
现代文：听他这么说，劝他的人叹息着离开了。
English: Hearing him say this, his advisers left with a sigh.

古文：户部尚书戴胄卒，太宗以其居宅弊陋，祭享无所，令有司特为之造庙。
现代文：户部尚书戴胄去世后，唐太宗见他的居所很简陋，没有地方祭拜吊唁，于是下令有关部门专门为他营造祭拜之庙。
English: After the death of the head of the household, Shang Shudei, Emperor Taizong of Tang saw that his residence was very simple and that there was no place to offer condolences, so he ordered the relevant departments to build a temple of worship specifically for him.

古文：温彦博为尚书右仆射，家贫无正寝，及薨，殡于旁室。
现代文：温彦博官居尚书右仆射，但是家中贫困没有正室，他死后，只有在旁屋祭奠。
English: At the time of his death, only a side room was dedicated to him.

古文：太宗闻而嗟叹，遽命所司为造，当厚加赙赠。
现代文：唐太宗知道后叹息不已，下令为他营造祭庙，又馈赠给他的家人丰厚的物资。
English: When Emperor Taizong learned of this, he sighed deeply, ordered a temple to be built for him, and gave his family rich gifts.

古文：魏征宅内，先无正堂。
现代文：魏徵的住宅开始时没有正堂。
English: Wei Zheng's residence did not have a main hall at the beginning.

古文：及遇疾，太宗时欲造小殿，而辍其材为征营构，五日而就。遣中使素褥布被而赐之，以遂其所尚。
现代文：一次他生病，唐太宗当时正要营造小型的宫殿，于是停下工，用这些材料为魏徵营造正堂，五天就完工了，唐太宗还派使者赠送给魏徵喜欢的素布被褥，以成全他节俭的志向。
English: Once when he was ill, Emperor Taizong was about to build a small palace, so he stopped the work and used these materials to build the main hall for Wei Zheng. It was completed in five days. Emperor Taizong also sent an envoy to present Wei Zheng's favorite plain cloth bedding to fulfill his frugal ambition.

