古文：王琨，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王琨，琅笽临沂人。
English: Wang Xuan, the founder of the Song Dynasty.

古文：祖荟，晋卫将军。
现代文：祖父王荟，晋朝任卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Wang Yao, was appointed General of the Imperial Guards during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父怿，不慧，侍婢生琨，名为昆仑。
现代文：父亲王怿，不聪慧，与侍婢生王琨，名为昆仑。
English: The father, Wang Yao, is not smart, and his servant, Wang Yao, is named Kunlun.

古文：怿后娶南阳乐玄女，无子，改琨名，立以为嗣。
现代文：王怿后来娶南阳乐玄的女儿，无子，改王琨名字，立为子嗣。
English: Wang Yao later married Nanyang Le Xuan's daughter, who had no children, changed his name to Wang Yao, and became his heir.

古文：琨少谨笃，为从伯司徒谧所爱。
现代文：王琨少时拘谨笃重，为堂伯父司徒王谧所喜爱。
English: When Wang Yao was young, he was prudent and serious. He was loved by his cousin, Wang Yao.

古文：宋永初中，武帝以其娶桓脩女，除郎中，驸马都尉，奉朝请。
现代文：宋朝永初年间，武帝因其娶了桓修女儿，授他郎中、驸马都尉、奉朝请。
English: During the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu, because he married the daughter of Emperor Kan, gave him the titles of junior vassal, lieutenant of the imperial horse, and vassal of the imperial court.

古文：元嘉初，从兄侍中华有权宠，以门户衰弱，待琨如亲，数相称荐。
现代文：元嘉初年，堂兄侍中王华权重受宠，因门户衰弱，待王琨如亲兄弟，多次荐举他。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hua, the cousin of the chamberlain, was favored by the weight of the weight. Due to the weakness of the portal, he treated Wang Yao like a brother and recommended him many times.

古文：为尚书仪曹郎，州治中。
现代文：后任尚书仪曹郎，州治中。
English: His successor was Shang Shuxi Cao Lang, who was in the middle of governing the state.

古文：累至左军谘议，领录事，出为宣城太守，司徒从事中郎，义兴太守。
现代文：累官至左军谘议，领录事，出京任宣城太守，司徒从事中郎，义兴太守。
English: He was assigned to the Left Army for consultation and record-keeping, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xuancheng, while Sito served as the middle-ranking official and Yixing as the governor.

古文：历任皆廉约。
现代文：历任都很廉洁。
English: All of them have been incorruptible.

古文：还为北中郎长史，黄门郎，宁朔将军，东阳太守。
现代文：还都任北中郎长史，黄门郎，宁朔将军，东阳太守。
English: He also served as the Northern Middle Lord Changshi, Huangmen Lang, Ningshuo General, Dongyang Governor.

古文：孝建初，迁廷尉卿，竟陵王骠骑长史，加临淮太守，转吏部郎。
现代文：孝建初年，迁任廷尉卿，竟陵王骠骑长史，加授临淮太守，又转为吏部郎。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, he was transferred to the position of court lieutenant, and was given the additional title of Linhuai governor, and was also transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：吏曹选局，贵要多所属请，琨自公卿下至士大夫，例为用两门生。
现代文：吏部选官，朝中权贵往往要来开后门，王琨规定从公卿到士大夫，以例任用两门生。
English: In selecting officials for the Ministry of Civil Service, the powerful and noble in the dynasty often have to open the back door, and Wang Xi stipulated that two students should be appointed from the noble to the scholar.

古文：江夏王义恭尝属琨用二人，后复遣属琨，答不许。
现代文：江夏王刘义恭曾要王琨照顾两个人，后又派来给王琨做下属，王琨回答说不行。
English: Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, once asked Wang Xi to take care of two people, and later sent him to be Wang Xi's subordinate. Wang Xi replied that it was impossible.

古文：出为持节、都督广交二州军事、建威将军、平越将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：出都任持节、都督广、交二州军事、建威将军、平越将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: He held the title of Jisai, the governor of Guangzhou, the military commander of the two states, the general of Jianwei, the general of Ping Yue, the general of Ping Yue, and the history of Guangzhou.

古文：南土沃实，在任者常致巨富，世云 广州刺史但经城门一过，便得三千万 也。
现代文：南方富实肥沃，在任者往往能聚敛巨富，世人称 广州刺史但凡从城门一过，便可得三千万 。
English: The south is rich and fertile, and those in office are often able to amass huge fortunes. The world calls Guangzhou the city of history, but anyone who passes through the city gate can get thirty million.

古文：琨无所取纳，表献禄俸之半。
现代文：王琨不仅分文不取，还上表献上俸禄的一半。
English: Wang Yao not only did not take a penny, but also presented half of his salary.

古文：州镇旧有鼓吹，又启输还。
现代文：州镇原有鼓吹一部，他也上启送还朝廷。
English: He was also sent back to the imperial court.

古文：及罢任，孝武知其清，问还资多少？
现代文：及卸任，孝武帝知道他清廉，问他还有多少资？
English: When he retired, Emperor Xiaowu knew that he was incorruptible and asked him how much money he had left.

古文：琨曰： 臣买宅百三十万，余物称之。 
现代文：王琨说： 臣买房用了一百三十万，别的东西就是应得的了。 
English: Wang Yao said, "The minister spent one million three hundred thousand yuan to buy a house. Other things are deserved."

古文：帝悦其对。
现代文：皇帝很满意他的回答。
English: The emperor was pleased with his answer.

古文：为廷尉，加给事中，转宁朔将军长史、历阳内史。
现代文：后任廷尉，加任给事中，又转任宁朔将军长史、历阳内史。
English: He later served as a court lieutenant, was assigned to the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was transferred to the Ningshuo General Changshi and Liyang Inner History.

古文：上以琨忠实，徙为宠子新安王东中郎长史，加辅国将军，迁右卫将军，度支尚书。
现代文：皇上因王琨忠厚老实，调他任宠子新安王东中郎长史，加任辅国将军，调任右卫将军，度支尚书。
English: Due to Wang Yao's loyalty and honesty, the emperor transferred him to the position of his favorite son, Xin'an Wang Dongzhongro Changshi, appointed him to the position of Vice-Governor General, transferred him to the position of Right Guard General, and gave him a good pension.

古文：出为永嘉王左军、始安王征虏二府长史，加辅国将军、广陵太守，皆孝武诸子。
现代文：出任永嘉王左军、始安王征虏二府长史，加任辅国将军、广陵太守，都是孝武帝的几个儿子。
English: Yongjia Wang Zuojun, Shi'an Wang Zhaojun, two prefectural governors, the general of Fu Guo, and the governor of Guangling, were all sons of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：泰始元年，迁度支尚书，寻加光禄大夫。
现代文：泰始元年，迁任度支尚书，不久加光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Taiji era, he was transferred to the post of Doushi Shangshu, and soon became a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：初，从兄华孙长袭华爵为新建侯，嗜酒多愆失。
现代文：当初，堂兄王华的孙子王长承南齐书袭王华的爵位为新建侯，嗜酒过度多有失言。
English: At first, Wang Changsheng Nanqi, the grandson of Wang Hua's cousin, inherited Wang Hua's peerage as a newly created marquess. He was an excessive drinker and often made gaffes.

古文：琨上表曰： 臣门侄不休，从孙长是故左卫将军嗣息，少资常猥，犹冀晚进。
现代文：王琨上表说： 臣下的门侄作风不好，从孙王长是已故左卫将军的后裔，少时资质猥劣，指望长大有所长进。
English: Wang Xuan said on the table: The nephew of the subject has a bad style. Since Sun Wangchang was a descendant of the late General Zuo Wei, he had poor qualifications when he was young, and he hoped to grow up and make progress.

古文：顷更昏酣，业身无检。
现代文：现在更是昏酣，毫不检点。
English: Now they are even more reckless and indiscreet.

古文：故卫将军华忠肃奉国，善及世祀；而长负衅承对，将倾基绪。
现代文：故卫将军王华忠肃奉国，善行泽及后世；而王长承袭封爵，将败坏原来的基业。
English: The late Wei general Wang Huazhong served the country and did good deeds for posterity; and Wang Chang inherited the knighthood, which would ruin the original foundation.

古文：嗣小息佟闲立保退，不乖素风，如蒙拯立，则存亡荷荣，私禄更构。 
现代文：下面还有个小孙儿王佟品性端正谦退，很有祖风，如能被扶立为继嗣，则死者和生者都将感荷皇上给予的殊荣，并可保下私禄。 
English: Below, there is also a small grandchild, Wang Yao, who has a dignified and modest character, and is very ancestral. If he can be made an heir, then both the dead and the living will be impressed by the honor given by the emperor, and he can keep his private income.

古文：出为冠军将军、吴郡太守，迁中领军。
现代文：又出任冠军将军、吴郡太守，迁任中领军。
English: He also served as the champion general and the governor of Wu County, and was transferred to be the leader of the middle army.

古文：坐在郡用朝舍钱三十六万营饷二宫诸王及作绛袄奉献军用，左迁光禄大夫，寻加太常及金紫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：在郡任时因用朝舍钱三十六万供给二宫诸王及作绛袄奉献军用，被降职为光禄大夫，不久加太常及金紫，加散骑常侍。
English: When he was in the county post, he was demoted to the post of doctor of honor for using 360,000 rupees of imperial money to supply the kings of the second palace and to make offerings to the military. He was soon promoted to the post of grand secretary and the post of gold and purple, as well as the post of equerry.

古文：廷尉虞龢议社稷合为一神，琨案旧纠驳。
现代文：廷尉虞和认为社稷应合为一神，王琨据典辩驳。
English: The courtier Yuhe believed that the social gods should be combined into one god, which was refuted by Wang Xi.

古文：时龢深被亲宠，朝廷多琨强正。
现代文：当时虞和很得皇上亲宠，朝廷很多人钦佩王琨强正。
English: At that time, Yuhe was very popular with the emperor, and many people in the imperial court admired Wang Jun Qiangzheng.

古文：明帝临崩，出为督会稽东阳新安临海永嘉五郡军事、左军将军、会稽太守，常侍如故。
现代文：明帝临崩时，王琨出京任督会稽、东阳、新安、临海、永嘉五郡军事、左军将军、会稽太守，常侍如故。
English: When Emperor Ming was on his deathbed, Wang Xi went to Beijing to serve as the inspector general of five counties, Dongyang, Xin'an, Linhai and Yongjia, the general of the Left Army, the inspector general of the association, and the attendant as before.

古文：坐误竟囚，降号冠军。
现代文：因失误竟被关押起来，降号冠军。
English: As a result of the mistake, he was actually arrested and stripped of his title.

古文：元徽中，迁金紫光禄，弘训太仆，常侍如故。
现代文：元徽年间，迁任金紫光禄、弘训宫太仆，常侍如故。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the posts of Jin Zi Guanglu, Hongxun Palace's grand chamberlain, and was a regular attendant until his death.

古文：本州中正，加特进。
现代文：任本州中正，加特进。
English: He was appointed as the head of the Honshu Junior High School.

古文：顺帝即位，进右光禄大夫，常侍余如故。
现代文：顺帝即位，进号右光禄大夫，常侍等如故。
English: Emperor Shun ascended the throne, and the titles of Doctor of the Right Hand, and Master of the Horse remained the same.

古文：顺帝逊位，琨陪位及辞庙，皆流涕。
现代文：顺帝逊位时，王琨陪同他交还帝位并辞别祖庙，都痛哭流涕。
English: When Emperor Shun abdicated, Wang Xi accompanied him to hand back the imperial throne and bid farewell to the ancestral temple, weeping bitterly.

古文：太祖即位，领武陵王师，加侍中，给亲信二十人。
现代文：太祖即位，王琨领武陵王师，加侍中，配给亲从二十人。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, Wang Qian led Wuling Wang Shi, plus the attendants, and distributed twenty people from his family.

古文：时王俭为宰相，属琨用东海郡迎吏。琨谓信人曰： 语郎，三台五省，皆是郎用人；外方小郡，当乞寒贱，省官何容复夺之。 
现代文：其时王俭为宰相，示意王琨用东海郡安排部下，王琨对传话的人说： 告诉他，中央的三台五省，都是他定人用人；外方小郡，应当让给寒贱人士，省官还能再剥夺去吗！ 
English: At that time, Wang Jian was the prime minister and indicated to Wang Xi that he should use Donghai County to arrange his subordinates. Wang Xi said to the messenger: Tell him that the central three provinces and five provinces are all his designated employees; foreign small counties should be given to low-class people, can the provincial officials still deprive them?

古文：遂不过其事。
现代文：于是不答应这事。
English: So I didn't agree to it.

古文：琨性既古慎，而俭啬过甚，家人杂事，皆手自操执。
现代文：王琨性情古板谨慎，但过于俭啬，家人杂事，都要亲自操持。
English: Wang Yao's temperament is old-fashioned and cautious, but he is too frugal. He has to personally manage all the family's miscellaneous affairs.

古文：公事朝会，必夙夜早起，简阅衣裳，料数冠帻，如此数四，世以此笑之。
现代文：公事朝会，都是半夜就早早起来，检查衣裳，料理冠帻，如此再三再四，世人因此笑他。
English: The world laughs at him for getting up in the middle of the night for business meetings, checking his clothes, cooking, and so on and so forth.

古文：寻解王师。
现代文：不久解去王师之职。
English: Wang Shi was soon relieved of his duties.

古文：建元四年，太祖崩，琨闻国讳，牛不在宅，去台数里，遂步行入宫。
现代文：建元四年，太祖驾崩，王琨闻这个噩耗时，牛车不在家，离朝有几里地，就步行入宫了。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, after the death of his great-grandfather, when Wang Xuan heard of this bad news, the ox-drawn carriage was not at home, and he walked into the palace a few miles away from the morning.

古文：朝士皆谓琨曰： 故宜待车，有损国望。 
现代文：朝士都说王琨： 你实在应坐车，这样有损国家威严。 
English: The courtiers all said to Wang Yao: "You really should take the car, this is detrimental to the country's dignity."

古文：琨曰： 今日奔赴，皆应尔。 
现代文：王琨说： 今日奔赴国丧，都应如此才是。 
English: Wang Yao said, "This is how it should be when you rush to a national funeral today.

古文：遂得病，卒。赠左光禄大夫，余如故。
现代文：不久得病，亡故，追赠左光禄大夫，别的官爵名位如故。
English: Soon after, he fell ill and died. He was posthumously awarded the title of Dr. Sakoroku, and his other titles remained the same.

古文：年八十四。
现代文：时年八十四岁。
English: He was then eighty-four years old.

古文：张岱，字景山，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：张岱字景山，是吴郡吴县人。
English: Zhang Yao Zi Jingshan is a native of Wu County, Wuxi County.

古文：祖敞，晋度支尚书。父茂度，宋金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父张敞，晋时曾任度支尚书，父亲张茂度，宋朝时任金紫光禄大夫。
English: Zhang Zhang's grandfather, Jin, once held the title of Duozhi Shangshu, and his father, Zhang Maodu, held the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Dafu during the Song Dynasty.

古文：岱少与兄太子中舍人寅、新安太守镜、征北将军永、弟广州刺史辨俱知名，谓之张氏五龙。
现代文：张岱少时与其兄太子中舍人张寅、新安太守张镜、征北将军张永、其弟广州刺史张辨都很知名，号称 张氏五龙 。
English: When Zhang Ye was young, he and his brother Zhang Yin, the prince's middle son, Zhang Jing, the new Anta governor, Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, and his brother Zhang Ben, the governor of Guangzhou, were all famous. They were known as the Five Dragons of the Zhang Clan.

古文：镜少与光禄大夫颜延之邻居，颜谈议饮酒，喧呼不绝；而镜静翳无言声。
现代文：张镜少时与光禄大夫颜延之做邻居，颜延之高谈阔论痛饮美酒，喧呼不休；而张镜静静地不大声说话。
English: When Zhang Jing was young, he was a neighbor of Yan Yan, the doctor of Guanglu. Yan Yan talked a lot about drinking wine and was always shouting. Zhang Jing, on the other hand, spoke quietly and not loudly.

古文：后延之于篱边闻其与客语，取胡床坐听，辞义清玄，延之心服，谓宾客曰： 彼有人焉。 
现代文：后来颜延之在篱边听见他和客人说话，拿个胡床坐篱边静听，听他辞义清玄，颜延之心服，对宾客说： 那边有个人物啊。 
English: Later, Yan Yan heard him talking to a guest on the edge of the fence. She took a bearded bed and sat on the edge of the fence to listen. Hearing his words, Yan Yan was convinced and said to the guest, "There's a figure over there."

古文：由此不复酣叫。
现代文：从此不再痛饮大嚷。
English: No more drinking and shouting.

古文：寅、镜名最高，永、辨、岱不及也。
现代文：张寅、张镜名气最大，张永、张辨、张岱不及。
English: Zhang Yin and Zhang Jing are the most famous, while Zhang Yong, Zhang Ben and Zhang Xuan are less famous.

古文：郡举岱上计掾，不行，州辟从事。
现代文：郡里荐举张岱为上计掾，没成行，州里聘他为从事。
English: The county recommended that Zhang Yao be promoted to a higher position, but he did not succeed. The state hired him to do so.

古文：累迁南平王右军主簿，尚书水部郎。
现代文：后来迁任南平王右军主簿，尚书水部郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of the chief secretary of the right army of Nanping Wang, and became the secretary of the water department.

古文：出补东迁令。
现代文：出京补东迁县令。
English: The order to move out of Beijing to make up for the relocation of the county to the east was issued.

古文：时殷冲为吴兴，谓人曰： 张东迁亲贫须养，所以栖迟下邑。
现代文：当时殷冲为政吴兴，对人说： 张东迁家贫需奉养，因此暂时栖身小邑。
English: At that time, Yin Chong was the political Wu Xing, and told people: Zhang Dong moved to a poor family and needed to be supported, so he temporarily lived in a small town.

古文：然名器方显，终当大至。 
现代文：但是名声才能已经显露，终当大有前途。 
English: But he has shown flashes of talent and has a bright future.

古文：随王诞于会稽起义，以岱为建威将军，辅国长史，行县事。
现代文：随王刘诞在会稽起义，任用张岱为建威将军、辅国长史，行县事。
English: With Wang Liuxing's uprising at the meeting, Zhang Ye was appointed as General Jianwei and Assistant Governor of the State to conduct county affairs.

古文：事平，为司徒左西曹。
现代文：事平后，张岱任司徒左西曹。
English: After the matter was settled, Zhang Xuan was appointed as the left assistant of the magistrate.

古文：母年八十，籍注未满，岱便去官从实还养，有司以岱违制，将欲纠举。宋孝武曰： 观过可以知仁，不须案也。 
现代文：他母亲八十岁了，任职期未满，张岱便离职回去奉养，有司因张岱违反制度，想要惩罚他，宋孝武帝说： 看过失可知他的仁，不要追究了。 
English: His mother was eighty years old and her term of office had not yet expired, so Zhang Xuan left his post and went back to look after her. Some officials wanted to punish Zhang Xuan for violating the system. Emperor Song Xiaowu said, "You can know his benevolence by looking at his mistakes, so don't investigate him."

古文：累迁抚军谘议参军，领山阴令，职事闲理。
现代文：后来他先后迁任抚军谘议参军，领山阴令，他处理公事娴熟明白。
English: Later, he was successively transferred to advise the army, advise the army, and lead the army. He handled public affairs skillfully and clearly.

古文：巴陵王休若为北徐州，未亲政事，以岱为冠军谘议参军，领彭城太守，行府、州、国事。
现代文：巴陵王刘休若任北徐州刺史时，还没能亲理政事，任张岱为冠军谘议参军，领彭城太守，行府、州、国事。
English: If Liu Xiu, the king of Baling, had not been able to personally manage political affairs when he was appointed as the governor of North Xuzhou, he would have appointed Zhang Ye as the champion to consult and join the army, lead Pengcheng to be the governor, and manage the government, state, and national affairs.

古文：后临海王为征虏广州，豫章王为车骑扬州，晋安王为征虏南兖州，岱历为三府谘议、三王行事，与典签主帅共事，事举而情得。
现代文：后来临海王为征虏将军广州刺史，豫章王为车骑将军扬州刺史，晋安王为征虏将军南兖州刺史，张岱历任三府谘议、三王行事，和典签主帅共事，办事成功，关系融洽。
English: Later, Linhai Wang made history as the conscript general of Guangzhou, Yu Zhang Wang made history as the cavalry general of Yangzhou, Jinan Wang made history as the conscript general of Nanluozhou, Zhang Ye successively served as the three prefectures to consult and act as the three kings, and worked with the coach of Danzhong, and the work was successful and the relationship was harmonious.

古文：或谓岱曰： 主王既幼，执事多门，而每能缉和公私，云何致此？ 
现代文：有人对张岱说： 主王年幼，管事的又很多，而你总能调和公私关系，是怎样做到的？ 
English: Someone said to Zhang Xuan: The lord king is young, there are many departments that can be in charge, but you can always coordinate the public-private relationship well. Tell me, how did you do it?

古文：岱曰： 古人言一心可以事百君。
现代文：张岱说： 古人说一心可以事奉百君。
English: Zhang Ye said: The ancients said that one can serve a hundred princes with one's whole heart.

古文：我为政端平，待物以礼，悔吝之事，无由而及。
现代文：我为政端正公平，以礼待物，不好的事自然不会发生。
English: I am politically upright and fair, treat everyone with courtesy, and bad things will naturally not happen.

古文：明暗短长，更是才用之多少耳。 
现代文：政事的清明昏暗长长短短，更是才能大小的体现啊。 
English: The length and shortness of the clarity and obscurity of politics is a reflection of the size of talent.

古文：入为黄门郎，迁骠骑长史，领广陵太守。
现代文：还都任黄门郎，迁任骠骑长史，领广陵太守。
English: He was also appointed as Huangmen Lang, moved to the post of Shaoqi Changshi, and became the governor of Guangling.

古文：新安王子鸾以盛宠为南徐州，割吴郡属焉。
现代文：新安王刘子鸾非常受宠因而被任为南徐州刺史，又把吴郡划给南徐州。
English: Liu Ziqi, the king of Xin'an, was so favored that he was appointed the governor of South Xuzhou and assigned Wu County to South Xuzhou.

古文：高选佐史，孝武帝召岱谓之曰： 卿美效夙著，兼资宦已多。
现代文：帝严格挑选僚佐。孝武帝召见张岱对他说： 卿美誉一直很高，且资宦已经很多了。
English: Emperor Xiaowu summoned Zhang Xuan and said to him, "Your reputation has always been high, and you already have many talents.

古文：今欲用卿为子鸾别驾，总刺史之任，无谓小屈，终当大伸也。 
现代文：现在欲让卿作子鸾别驾，总管刺史之事，不要说屈才，最终会让你大展身手。 
English: Now he wants you to be his son-in-law, but don't worry, the head of the history department, not to mention his talent, will eventually let you show your skills.

古文：帝崩，累迁吏部郎。
现代文：孝武帝驾崩后，张岱迁任吏部郎。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Zhang Xuan was transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：明帝初，四方反，帝以岱堪干旧才，除使持节、督西豫州诸军事、辅国将军、西豫州刺史。
现代文：明帝执政初期，四方造反。明帝因张岱干练可靠，任他为持节、督西豫州诸军事、辅国将军，西豫州刺史。
English: In the early days of the Ming Dynasty, four sides rebelled. The Ming Dynasty, because of Zhang Ye's ability and reliability, appointed him as the military commander, the military governor of West Henan Province, the general of the auxiliary state, and the historian of West Henan Province.

古文：寻徙为冠军将军、北徐州刺史，都督北讨诸军事，并不之官。
现代文：不久移任冠军将军、北徐州刺史、都督北讨诸军事，都没去到官。
English: He was soon transferred to the Champion General, North Xuzhou Shishi, and the Governor of the North to the military, but he did not go to the office.

古文：泰始末，为吴兴太守。
现代文：泰始末年，任吴兴太守。
English: At the end of the Taishi era, Wu Xing was appointed as the de facto ruler.

古文：元徽中，迁使持节、督益宁二州军事、冠军将军、益州刺史。
现代文：元徽年间，迁任使持节、督益、宁二州军事、冠军将军、益州刺史。
English: During the Yuanhui era, the following officials were transferred: Jizhi Jie, Duqi, Ning Erzhou Military, Champion General, and Yizhou Shishi.

古文：数年，益土安其政。
现代文：数年间，益州被治理得社会安定。
English: For several years, Yizhou has been governed with social stability.

古文：征侍中，领长水校尉，度支尚书，领左军，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：又调任侍中，领长水校尉，度支尚书，领左军，升任吏部尚书。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, leader of the Chosui school captain, governor of Doushi Province, leader of the Left Army, and promoted to the position of leader of the Rikibu Province.

古文：王俭为吏部郎，时专断曹事，岱每相违执，及俭为宰相，以此颇不相善。
现代文：王俭当时任吏部郎，时时专断吏部的事，张岱每每和他意见不一致，后来王俭做了宰相，以此对岱颇不友好。
English: At that time, Wang Jian was the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and he always arbitrarily decided the affairs of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. Zhang Shiyi disagreed with him every time. Later, Wang Jian became the prime minister, which made him quite unfriendly to Zou.

古文：兄子瑰、弟恕诛吴郡太守刘遐，太祖欲以恕为晋陵郡，岱曰： 恕未闲从政，美锦不宜滥裁。 
现代文：其兄之子张环、弟张恕，诛杀吴郡太守刘遐。太祖欲使张恕为南齐书政晋陵郡，张岱说： 张恕不宜从政，美锦不宜滥裁。 
English: His elder brother's sons, Zhang Huan and Zhang Shou, fought and killed the governor of Wu County, Liu Shao. The great-grandfather wanted to make Zhang Shou the governor of Jinling County, Southern Qi Province. Zhang Shou said: Zhang Shou should not be in politics, and the brocade should not be cut indiscriminately.

古文：太祖曰： 恕为人，我所悉。
现代文：太祖说： 张恕的为人我很清楚。
English: The great-grandfather said, "I know very well what kind of person Zhang Zhen is.

古文：且又与瑰同勋，自应有赏。 
现代文：并且又和张环立了同样的大功，自当有赏。 
English: And he has made the same great contribution as Zhang Huan, so he should be rewarded.

古文：岱曰： 若以家贫赐禄，此所不论，语功推事，臣门之耻。 
现代文：张岱说： 如果因家贫赏赐俸禄，这另当别论；若说因功勋而获此任，这是臣家门之耻。 
English: Zhang Ye said: If a salary is awarded to a person because of his family's poverty, that is a different matter; if it is said that he was appointed because of his meritorious service, this is a disgrace to the vassal family.

古文：寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久张岱加任散骑常侍。
English: Not long after, Guo Jun was appointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：建元元年，出为左将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：建元元年，出京任左将军、吴郡太守。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, he went to Beijing to serve as the left general and the governor of Wu County.

古文：太祖知岱历任清直，至郡未几，手敕岱曰： 大邦任重，乃未欲回换，但总戎务殷，宜须望实，今用卿为护军。 
现代文：太祖知张岱历任官职都很清廉正直，到郡里不久，亲笔下敕给张岱说： 吴郡乃是大郡，责任重大，因此不想再换别人，但总管的军事政务很繁多，应当名符其实，现任命卿为护军。 
English: The great-great-grandfather knew that Zhang Ye's successive official positions were very clean and honest. Not long after arriving in the county, he personally wrote to Zhang Ye saying: Wu County is a large county with great responsibilities, so I don't want to change anyone else, but the military affairs of the general manager are very diverse and should be true to the name. He is now appointed as a guardian.

古文：加给事中。
现代文：加给事中。
English: The case is pending.

古文：岱拜竟，诏以家为府。
现代文：张岱拜官完毕，朝廷诏命他以家为府。
English: After Zhang Yibai finished his official duties, the imperial court ordered him to make his home the capital.

古文：陈疾，明年，迁金紫光禄大夫，领鄱阳王师。
现代文：张岱向朝廷报告自己的病情。第二年，迁任金紫光禄大夫，领鄱阳王师。
English: Zhang Xuan reported his illness to the imperial court. The following year, he was transferred to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, the leader of the Shanyang Wang Shi.

古文：世祖即位，复以岱为散骑常侍、吴兴太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：世祖即位，又任张岱为散骑常侍、吴兴太守，俸禄待遇级别为二千石。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, and Zhang Ye was appointed as a knight-errant, and Wu Xing as the governor-general, and his salary was raised to 2,000 koku.

古文：岱晚节在吴兴，更以宽恕著名。
现代文：张岱晚年在吴兴，更以宽厚仁恕著名。
English: In his later years in Wuxing, Zhang Ye was even more famous for his clemency.

古文：迁使持节、监南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、后将军、南兖州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：迁任使持节监南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、后将军、南兖州刺史，常侍如故。
English: He was transferred to be the military envoy of the military governor of the five states of Nanxun, Handan, Xu, Qing and Hebei, and later became a general and the governor of Nanxun. He still serves as a regular attendant.

古文：未拜，卒。
现代文：未拜官，亡故。
English: Taiming died in his first year in office at the age of fifty.

古文：年七十一。
现代文：其时七十一岁。
English: He was then seventy-one years old.

古文：岱初作遗命，分张家财，封置箱中，家业张减，随复改易，如此十数年。
现代文：张岱当初有遗命，将家财分封于箱子里，随家业的增减而有所改变，如此执行十几年。
English: He died while in office, and his posthumous name was Kyoji. His son was named Zhang Yuan, and he was the second in line to the throne. Zhang Yuan's four younger brothers were Zhang Jing, Zhang Yong, Zhang Dian, and Zhang Xuan, all of whom were very famous and were known as the Five Dragons of the Zhang Clan.

古文：赠本官，谥贞子。
现代文：追赠本官，谥号 贞子 。
English: He was posthumously given the posthumous name Sadako.

古文：褚炫，字彦绪，河南阳翟人也。
现代文：褚炫字彦绪，河南阳翟人。
English: 炫字彦绪, Henanyang人.

古文：祖秀之，宋太常。
现代文：祖父褚秀之，在宋朝任太常。
English: His grandfather's name was Gong Xiuzhi, and he served as an official of the imperial court during the era of Liu Song.

古文：父法显，鄱阳太守。
现代文：父亲褚法显，曾任鄱阳太守。
English: His father, Zou Faxian, was once the governor of Shenyang.

古文：兄炤，字彦宣，少秉高节，一目眇，官至国子博士，不拜。
现代文：其兄褚火召，字彦直，少有高风亮节，一只眼盲，官至国子博士，没拜受。
English: His elder brother, Yan Hui Zhao, was nicknamed Yan Zhi, had a rare high wind and bright eyes, was blind in one eye, and rose to the position of provincial doctor, but was not accepted.

古文：常非从兄渊身事二代，闻渊拜司徒，叹曰： 使渊作中书郎而死，不当是一名士邪？
现代文：常非议堂兄褚渊身事奉两朝君主，听说褚渊拜受司徒之职，叹息说： 如果褚渊在中书郎职位上死去，不就是名士了吗！
English: Tsunefuchi's cousin, Shanyuan, served the monarchs of two dynasties, and when he heard that Shanyuan had been given the post of scribe, he sighed and said, "If Shanyuan dies in the position of chushuro, wouldn't he be a famous person?"

古文：名德不昌，遂令有期颐之寿。 
现代文：如果不能光大名德，还不如图个高寿呢。 
English: If you can't be famous, it's better to live a long life.

古文：炫少清简，为从舅王景文所知。
现代文：褚炫少年时就很清简，被堂舅王景文所赏识。
English: He was very simple when he was a young boy, which was appreciated by his uncle Wang Jingwen.

古文：从兄渊谓人曰： 从弟廉胜独立，乃十倍于我也。 
现代文：堂兄褚渊对人说： 堂弟廉正独立，胜我十倍。 
English: Cousin Gongyuan said to people: Cousin integrity and independence are ten times better than me.

古文：宋义阳王昶为太常，板炫补五官，累迁太子舍人，抚军车骑记室，正员郎。
现代文：宋义阳王刘昶为太常，补褚炫五官之职，历任太子舍人，抚军车骑记室，正员郎。
English: Song Yiyang King Liu Zhen was the first emperor, he filled the posts of five officials, he was the son of successive emperors, he was in charge of the military chariot riding room, and he was the right-hand man.

古文：从宋明帝射雉，至日中，无所得。
现代文：他曾跟从宋明帝打野鸡，到中午也没有收获。
English: He once played pheasant with Song Mingdi, but had no harvest by noon.

古文：帝甚猜羞，召问侍臣曰： 吾旦来如皋，遂空行，可笑。 
现代文：明帝便猜疑羞愧，召问侍臣们说： 我一早就出来打猎，还是空跑一趟，让人见笑。 
English: Emperor Ming was suspicious and ashamed, and summoned his courtiers to say: "I came out to hunt early in the morning, but I still ran away empty-handed, which makes people laugh."

古文：座者莫答。
现代文：在座的没人能答。
English: No one here can answer that.

古文：炫独曰： 今节候虽适，而云雾尚凝，故斯翚之禽，骄心未警。
现代文：只有褚炫说： 现在季节虽然合适，但云露尚凝，因此雉鸡等飞禽，还很骄慢不驯。
English: Only Zou Xuan said: Although the season is right now, the dew is still condensed, so the pheasants and other birds are still very proud and unruly.

古文：但得神驾游豫，群情便为载欢。 
现代文：只要圣驾游玩得高兴，我们心里也就高兴了。 
English: As long as we are happy with the tour, we are happy in our hearts.

古文：帝意解，乃于雉场置酒。
现代文：明帝心情才好起来。于是在猎场摆酒设宴。
English: Emperor Ming's mood only got better. So they had a feast with wine at the hunting ground.

古文：迁中书侍郎，司徒右长史。
现代文：后来褚炫迁任中书侍郎、司徒右长史。
English: Later, 炫迁 was appointed as the junior secretary, 司徒右長史.

古文：升明初，炫以清尚，与刘俣、谢朏、江斅入殿侍文义，号为 四友 。
现代文：升明初年，褚炫因为人清高，和刘俣、谢月出、江学攴入殿为文学侍从，号为 四友 。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Zhaoxuan, because he was a high-ranking person, and Liu Mata, Xie Yuexing, and Jiang Xuexuan entered the palace as literary attendants, with the number of four friends.

古文：迁黄门郎，太祖骠骑长史，迁侍中，复为长史。
现代文：后迁任黄门郎，太祖骠骑长史，又调任侍中，复为长史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Huangmenro, the great-great-grandfather riding the horse of Changshi, and he was also transferred to the post of chamberlain, and then to the post of Changshi.

古文：齐台建，复为侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：齐王国设立建制时，又任他为侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: When the Kingdom of Qi established a military system, he was also appointed as an attendant, leading infantry captain.

古文：以家贫，建元初，出补东阳太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：因家贫，建元初年，出补东阳太守之职，加俸禄级别在二千石。
English: Due to his family's poverty, in the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, he stepped up to fill the position of Dongyang Daju, with a salary level of 2,000 koku.

古文：还，复为侍中，领步兵。
现代文：还京，复任侍中，领步兵。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was reinstated as a chamberlain, leading the infantry.

古文：凡三为侍中。
现代文：如此三次任侍中。
English: Thus, he was appointed as a chamberlain three times.

古文：出为竟陵王征北长史，加辅国将军，寻徙为冠军长史、江夏内史，将军如故。
现代文：出任竟陵王征北长史、加授辅国将军，不久调任冠军长史、江夏内史，将军如故。
English: He was appointed as the general of Jingling Wang Zhengbei Changshi and the general of Zhaoju Fu Guo, and was soon transferred to the champion of Changshi and the general of Jiangxia Neishi, and remained a general.

古文：永明元年，为吏部尚书。
现代文：永明元年，任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：炫居身清立，非吊问不杂交游，论者以为美。
现代文：褚炫为人清正，除非参加必须的吊死问疾，一般不和别人来往，当时以为美谈。
English: He was a clean and upright person, and generally did not socialize with others unless it was necessary to participate in the hanging ceremony. At the time, he thought it was a nice thing to do.

古文：及在选部，门庭萧索，宾客罕至。
现代文：后在选部任职，门庭萧索，宾客罕至。
English: After that, he worked in the selection department. The entrance was drab, and guests were rare.

古文：出行，左右捧黄纸帽箱，风吹纸剥殆尽。
现代文：出行时，左右侍从捧黄纸帽箱，风一吹纸几乎剥落殆尽。
English: When traveling, the attendants on both sides hold yellow paper hat boxes, and the paper is almost peeled off by the wind.

古文：罢江夏还，得钱十七万，于石头并分与亲族，病无以市药。
现代文：从江夏卸任回来，得钱十七万，在石头就全分给亲族，后来得病也没钱买药。
English: After stepping down from Jiangxia, he came back with 170,000 yuan, which he divided among his relatives. Later, when he fell ill, he had no money to buy medicine.

古文：表自陈解，改授散骑常侍，领安成王师。
现代文：他上表陈述病情请求解职，改任散骑常侍，领安成王师。
English: He submitted a report on his illness and requested to be relieved of his duties. He was reassigned to the position of strolling attendant, leading Ancheng Wang Shi.

古文：国学建，以本官领博士，未拜，卒，无以殡敛。
现代文：国子学初建时，褚炫以本官任博士，未拜受，便去世了，竟没钱殡葬殓埋。
English: At the time of the initial construction of Kuniko Gakuin, Zou Xian was appointed as a doctor by his superior officer. He died without receiving it, and there was no money to bury him.

古文：时年四十一。
现代文：其时四十一岁。
English: He was then forty-one years old.

古文：赠太常，谥曰贞子。
现代文：追赠太常，谥号 贞子 。
English: Her posthumous nickname was Sadako.

古文：何戢，字慧景，庐江灊人也。
现代文：何戢字慧景，庐江灊人人。
English: What is the meaning of the word "Wu Jing"? The Yangtze River is full of people.

古文：祖尚之，宋司空。
现代文：他祖父何尚之，是宋朝的司空。
English: His grandfather, He Shangzhi, was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：父偃，金紫光禄大夫，被遇于宋武。
现代文：他父亲何偃，是金紫光禄大夫，被宋武帝赏识。
English: His father, He Xuan, was a doctor of the Golden Purple Guanglu, who was highly appreciated by Emperor Songwu.

古文：选戢尚山阴公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：选包毯匹配山阴公主，官拜驸马都尉。
English: The choice of blanket matches the princess of the mountain, and the captain of the horse is the official.

古文：解褐秘书郎，太子中舍人，司徒主簿，新安王文学，秘书丞，中书郎。
现代文：脱去百姓穿的布衣为秘书郎，太子中舍人，司徒主簿，新室王文学，秘书丞，中书郎。
English: Stripped of the cloth worn by the common people, he is the secretary, the prince's middle son, the steward, the new king's literature, the secretary, and the middle school teacher.

古文：景和世，山阴主就帝求吏部郎褚渊入内侍己，渊见拘逼，终不肯从，与戢同居止月余日，由是特申情好。
现代文：景和时，山阴公主到皇帝那襄请求由吏部郎宫侍奉自己，褚渊被强留受逼迫，但始终不肯依从，同何戢共同生活一个多月由此产生了友情。
English: During the Warring States period, Princess San'in went to the emperor to request that she be served by the palace officials. Shanyuan was forced to stay and was persecuted, but she still refused to comply. She lived with He Yao for more than a month, which resulted in a friendship.

古文：明帝立，迁司徒从事中郎，从建安王休仁征赭圻，板转戢司马，除黄门郎，出为宣威将军、东阳太守，吏部郎。
现代文：明帝即皇帝位，何戢迁司徒从事中郎，跟随建安王体仁征伐赵组，书面转坦毯为司马，除黄门郎，外出为宣威将军、东阳太守，吏部郎。
English: Emperor Ming is the emperor, He Qianqian Szu is engaged in the middle, followed by Jian'an Wang Tianzhen conquest of Zhao group, written turned into a carpet for the Sima, except Huangmen Lang, out for the Xuanwei General, Dongyang Dazhong, Li Bu Lang.

古文：元徽初，褚渊参朝政，引戢为侍中，时年二十九。
现代文：元徽初年，褚渊参预朝政，引荐何戢为侍中，那时何戢二十九岁。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zou Yuan participated in the pre-imperial politics and recommended He Ying as a chamberlain. At that time, He Ying was 29 years old.

古文：戢以年未三十，苦辞内侍，表疏屡上，时议许之。
现代文：何戢因为自己年龄未到三十岁，苦辞内侍职，屡次上表疏向皇帝申请，当时商议答应了他。
English: Because he was under the age of thirty, He Ying resigned from his position as an attendant and repeatedly petitioned the emperor. At that time, the emperor agreed to discuss the matter.

古文：改授司徒左长史。
现代文：改授司徒左长史。
English: He was re-assigned to the position of Shituzo chōshi.

古文：太祖为领军，与戢来往，数置欢宴。
现代文：太祖为领军时，同何戢往来交游，多次一起饮宴。
English: When the great-grandfather was the leader of the army, he and He Ying traveled back and forth and had banquets together many times.

古文：上好水引饼，戢令妇女躬自执事以设上焉。
现代文：皇上喜好一种称作水饮饼的食物，何戢让妻子女儿亲自操作安排侍奉皇上。
English: The emperor likes a kind of food called water drinking cake. He asked his wife and daughter to personally operate and arrange to serve the emperor.

古文：久之，复为侍中，迁安成王车骑长史，加辅国将军、济阴太守，行府、州事。
现代文：时间长了，又让何戢为侍中，迁安成王车骑长史，加辅国将军、济阴太守，行府、州事。
English: After a long period of time, He Zhen was allowed to serve as an attendant, and he was transferred to Ancheng King's carriage and rode for a long time, became the general of Gafu Province, the governor of Jiyin Province, and was in charge of the government and state affairs.

古文：出为吴郡太守，以疾归。
现代文：外出为吴郡太守，因患病返回京城。
English: He went out as the governor of Wu County, but returned to Beijing due to illness.

古文：为侍中，秘书监，仍转中书令，太祖相国左长史。
现代文：为侍中，秘书监，仍然转中书令，太祖相国左长史。
English: He was an attendant, secretary supervisor, still transferred to the Shirei, and the great-grandfather left the country for the long history.

古文：建元元年，迁散骑常侍，太子詹事，寻改侍中，詹事如故。
现代文：建元元年，迁散骑常侍，太子詹事，不久改任侍中，詹事一职依前未变。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, the Prince's equestrian, Prince Zhan Zhi, was relocated and soon became a chamberlain, but Zhan Zhi's position remained unchanged.

古文：上欲转戢领选，问尚书令褚渊，以戢资重，欲加常侍。
现代文：皇上想转何戢领选局，询问尚书令褚渊，认为何戢资望大，想加何戢常侍。
English: The emperor wanted to change the leader of the selection committee to He Jian, and asked Shang Shuling Zou Yuan about it. He thought He Jian was highly regarded and wanted to add He Jian as a regular attendant.

古文：渊曰： 宋世王球从侍中中书令单作吏部尚书，资与戢相似，顷选职方昔小轻，不容顿加常侍。
现代文：褚渊说： 前宋王球从侍中中书令仅做吏部尚书，资望同何戢相似。眼下选职同那时相比稍轻微些，不容许这么快加常侍。
English: Zou Yuan said: Before the Song Dynasty, Wang Qiu was promoted from the middle-ranked attendant to the highest-ranked attendant only, and his reputation was similar to that of He Qian. At present, the selection of posts is slightly lighter than that time, and it is unacceptable to add a regular attendant so quickly.

古文：圣旨每以蝉冕不宜过多，臣与王俭既已左珥，若复加戢，则八座便有三貂。
现代文：圣旨每每认为戴着用貂尾纹做修饰的蝉冠的人不宜过多，我与王俭既然已戴左珥的蝉冠，若再加何戢，那么五曹尚书、二仆射和一令，所谓八座之中就有三个戴珥貂蝉冠的了。
English: Since Wang Jian and I have already worn the left-hand cicada, if we add a few more cicadas, then there will be three cicadas wearing the left-hand cicada among the five emperors, two emperors, and one emperor, so-called eight emperors.

古文：若帖以骁、游亦为不少。 
现代文：假如由他兼骁、游一类职街，也不算少。 
English: It would not be a small number of people if he were to take over and lead the company into a new career field.

古文：乃以戢为吏部尚书，加骁骑将军。
现代文：于是以何戢为吏部尚书，加封骁骑将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao appointed He Jian as the secretary of the cadre department and appointed him as the general of the cavalry.

古文：戢美容仪，动止与褚渊相慕，时人呼为 小褚公 。
现代文：何戢仪容漂亮，行为举动仰慕并仿效褚渊，当时人们称呼他为 小褚公 。
English: At that time, people called him Xiao Ying Gong (小公) because of his beautiful appearance and his admiration for and imitation of Gongyuan.

古文：家业富盛，性又华侈，衣被服饰，极为奢丽。
现代文：他家业富有，性爱奢华，衣服装饰极为华丽。
English: He came from a wealthy family, had a luxurious sex life, and his clothes were extremely ornate.

古文：三年，出为左将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：建元三年，出京任左将军、吴兴太守。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, he went to Beijing to serve as the left general and Wu Xing became the de facto governor.

古文：上颇好画扇，宋孝武赐戢蝉雀扇，善画者顾景秀所画。
现代文：皇上很喜好画扇，宋孝武帝曾赏赐何戢一把蝉雀扇，是擅长绘画的顾景秀画的。
English: The emperor was very fond of painting fans, and Emperor Song Xiaowu once gave He Xuan a cicada fan. Gu Jingxiu, who was good at painting, was the best at painting.

古文：时陆探微、顾彦先皆能画，叹其巧绝。
现代文：当时陆探遨、顾彦先都是绘画的能手，他们都感叹这把画扇的巧妙绝伦。
English: At that time, Lu Tan Rong and Gu Yan Xian were both good at painting, and they both lamented the ingeniousness of this painting fan.

古文：戢因王晏献之，上令晏厚酬其意。
现代文：何戢通过王晏把扇进献皇上，皇上让王晏从厚酬谢何戢献扇的心意。
English: Ho Ho presented the fan to the emperor through Wang Hui, and the emperor asked Wang Hui to thank Ho Ho for the generous gift of the fan.

古文：四年，卒。时年三十六。
现代文：四年，逝世，时年三十六岁。
English: He died four years later, at the age of 36.

古文：赠散骑常侍、抚军，太守如故。
现代文：追赠散骑常侍、抚军，太守依前不变。
English: Afterward, the Imperial Household Agency will give away the riding attendants and attendants, and the Taishu will remain unchanged.

古文：谥懿子。
现代文：谧号懿子。
English: The music begins.

古文：女为郁林王后，又赠侍中、光禄大夫。
现代文：后来他的女儿做郁林王后，又追赠侍中、光禄大夫。
English: Later, his daughter became the Queen of Yulin, and he also posthumously awarded her the title of chamberlain and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：王延之，字希季，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王延之字希季，是琅邪临沂县人。
English: Wang Yanzhi's character, Hiji, is from Linyi County.

古文：祖裕，宋左光禄仪同三司。
现代文：祖父王裕，在宋朝曾任左光禄仪同三司。
English: Grandfather Wang Yu, in the Song Dynasty, once served as the third secretary of the Left Guanglu Ceremony.

古文：父升之，都官尚书。
现代文：父亲王升之，官都官尚书。
English: His father, Wang Shengzhi, was a high-ranking official.

古文：延之出继伯父秀才粲之。
现代文：王延之早年就过继给伯父秀才王粲之。
English: In his early years, Wang Yanzhi was adopted by his uncle, the brilliant Wang Xizhi.

古文：延之少而静默，不交人事。
现代文：王延之少年时就沉静寡言，不太与人往来。
English: When Wang Yan was a boy, he was quiet and did not socialize much.

古文：州辟主簿，不就。
现代文：州里聘他做主簿，他不去。
English: The state requisitioned him as chief accountant, but he did not comply with the order.

古文：举秀才。
现代文：推举他当了秀才。
English: He was recommended as an outstanding talent.

古文：除北中郎法曹行参军。转署外兵尚书外兵部，司空主簿，并不就。
现代文：被授予北中郎法曹行参军，转署为北中郎将府外兵曹参军，司空主簿，他都没接受。
English: He did not accept being awarded the position of the Northern Middle-aged Legal Officer to join the army, being transferred to the position of the Northern Middle-aged Legal Officer to join the army outside the prefecture, or the position of the Master of the Privy Council.

古文：除中军建平王主簿、记室，仍度司空、北中郎二府，转秘书丞，西阳王抚军谘议，州别驾，寻阳王冠军、安陆王后军司马，加振武将军，出为安远护军，武陵内史，不拜。
现代文：后被授为中军建平王主簿、记室，调入司空、北中郎二府，转任秘书丞，西阳王抚军谘议，州别驾，寻阳王冠军、安陆王后军司马，加授武将军，出任安远护军，武陵内史，都没拜受。
English: Later, he was awarded as the Chinese army Jianping Wang's main book and record office, transferred to Jiankuo and Beizhonglang two prefectures, transferred to the secretary-general, Xiyang Wang Fuzhong consultation, state-specific driving, Huanyang Wang champion, Anlu Queen's army Sima, awarded to General Wu, served as Anyuan protection army, Wuling internal history, but did not receive any worship.

古文：宋明帝为卫军，延之转为长史，加宣威将军。
现代文：宋明帝为卫军时，延之调任长史，加宣威将军。
English: When Emperor Song Ming was in charge of the imperial guard, Yan Zhi was transferred to Long Shi, and Xuan Wei was promoted to general.

古文：司徒建安王休仁征赭圻，转延之为左长史，加宁朔将军。
现代文：司徒建安王刘休仁征讨赭圻，调延之为左长史，加授宁朔将军。
English: Liu Xujin, the king of the Jian'an Dynasty, was awarded the title of General of Ningshuo.

古文：延之清贫，居宇穿漏。褚渊往候之，见其如此，具启明帝，帝即敕材官为起三间斋屋。
现代文：延之清贫，房屋破漏，褚渊去看望他，见此情况，禀告明帝，明帝立即命材官为他建三间斋屋。
English: Yan Zhiqing was poor, the house was leaking, and Zou Yuan went to visit him. Seeing this, he reported to Emperor Ming. Emperor Ming immediately ordered the official to build three houses for him.

古文：迁侍中，领射声校尉，未拜，出为吴郡太守。
现代文：调他为侍中，兼射声校尉，未拜受，出任吴郡太守。
English: He was transferred to be a chamberlain, and also a captain of the firing squad, but he was not accepted and became the governor of Wu County.

古文：罢郡还，家产无所增益。
现代文：离任还京时，家产一点没有增加。
English: When he left office and returned to Beijing, his family's income did not increase at all.

古文：除吏部尚书，侍中，领右军，并不拜。
现代文：又被任命为吏部尚书，侍中，领右军，都不受。
English: He was also appointed as a member of the staff, a courtier, a chamberlain, and the leader of the right army, all of which were unacceptable.

古文：复为吏部尚书，领骁骑将军，出为后军将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：又任吏部尚书，领骁骑将军，出任后军将军、吴兴太守。
English: He also served as the secretary of the general staff, the leader of the cavalry, the general of the rear army, and the governor of Wu Xing.

古文：迁都督浙东五郡、会稽太守。
现代文：又调任都督浙东五郡、会稽太守。
English: He was also transferred to the post of the governor of the five counties in eastern Zhejiang and the auditor general.

古文：转侍中，秘书监，晋熙王师。
现代文：转任侍中，秘书监，晋熙王师。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, secretary supervisor, and Jin Xi Wang's teacher.

古文：迁中书令，师如故。
现代文：调为中书令，师如故。
English: It was changed to Zhongshirong, and the division remains the same.

古文：未拜，转右仆射。
现代文：未拜受。转任右仆射。
English: He was not accepted. He was transferred to the post of right-hand man.

古文：升明二年，转左仆射。
现代文：升明二年，转左仆射。
English: Two years after graduation, he switched to left-handed shooting.

古文：宋德既衰，太祖辅政，朝野之情，人怀彼此。
现代文：宋朝衰败，太祖辅政，朝野人心，所向不一。
English: The Song Dynasty's decline and fall, the Emperor's great-grandfather Fu Zheng, and the hearts of the people in the court and in the countryside are all moving in different directions.

古文：延之与尚书令王僧虔中立无所去就，时人为之语曰： 二王持平，不送不迎。 
现代文：王延之和尚书令王僧虔保持中立不趋附任何一方，时人因此说： 二王持平，不送不迎。 
English: Wang Yanzhi's monk's book ordered Wang Xiangqian to remain neutral and not to adhere to any side. Therefore, people at the time said: The two kings are equal, do not send or welcome.

古文：太祖以此善之。
现代文：太祖因此而喜欢他。
English: His grandfather liked him for it.

古文：三年，出为使持节、都督江州豫州之新蔡晋熙二郡诸军事、安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：升明三年，出任使持节、都督江州、豫州的新蔡、晋熙二郡诸军事、安南将军、江州刺史。
English: In the three years since his promotion, he has served as the envoy of the National Day, the governor of Jiangzhou and Yuzhou, Xin Cai, the military of the two counties of Jinxi, General Annan, and the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：建元二年，进号镇南将军。
现代文：建元二年，进号镇南将军。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he was promoted to Zhenan General.

古文：延之与金紫光禄大夫阮韬，俱宋领军刘湛外甥，并有早誉。
现代文：王延之和金紫光禄大夫阮韬，都是宋朝领军刘湛外甥，都是美誉早著。
English: Wang Yanzhi and Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor, Nguyn Th, were both nephews of Liu Zhan, the leader of the Song Dynasty, and both were famous early authors.

古文：湛甚爱之，曰： 韬后当为第一，延之为次也。 
现代文：刘湛很喜欢他们，说： 阮韬以后当为第一，延之次之。 
English: Liu Zhan liked them very much and said, "After Nguyen Xuan, you should be the first, and Yan the second."

古文：延之甚不平。
现代文：延之非常不服气。
English: Wang Yanzhi was very upset.

古文：每致饷下都，韬与朝士同例。
现代文：每次下面送饷来时，王延之都把阮韬和朝士一例对待。
English: Wang Yanzhi treated Ruan Yu and Asashi as an example every time they came to see him.

古文：太祖闻其如此，与延之书曰： 韬云卿未尝有别意，当缘刘家月旦故邪？ 
现代文：太祖听说他如此，写信给延之说： 阮韬说你没有格外看待他，应是因为刘家当初的评价吧！ 
English: When the great-grandfather heard that this was the case, he wrote to Yan Zhimou, saying: "When Nguyen Xuan said that you didn't think much of him, it must have been because of the initial evaluation by the Liu family!

古文：在州禄俸以外，一无所纳，独处斋内，吏民罕得见者。
现代文：在州俸禄以外，王延之一无所取，独处斋内，吏民很少见到他。
English: In addition to the state salary, Wang Yan did not receive anything, he was alone in the courtyard, and the officials and people rarely saw him.

古文：四年，迁中书令，右光禄大夫，本州大中正。
现代文：建元四年，王延之调为中书令，右光禄大夫，本州大中正。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wang Yanzhi was transferred to the position of the middle school secretary, the doctor of the right light, and the junior high school principal of Honshu University.

古文：转左仆射，光禄、中正如故。
现代文：又调任左仆射，光禄、中正如故。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of left-handed archer, light-handed, and middle-aged, just as before.

古文：寻领竟陵王师。
现代文：不久任竟陵王师。
English: He was soon appointed as the director of the Imperial Mausoleum.

古文：永明二年，陈疾解职，世祖许之。
现代文：永明二年，王延之因病请求解职，世祖答应了他。
English: In the second year of Yongming, Wang Yanzhi requested to be relieved of his duties due to illness, and the patriarch agreed.

古文：转特进，右光禄大夫，王师、中正如故。
现代文：又调为特进，右光禄大夫，王师、中正如故。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of special advancement, Ukokoroku doctor, Wang teacher, and junior high school just as before.

古文：其年卒，年六十四。
现代文：这年去世，时六十四岁。
English: He died that year, aged 64.

古文：追赠散骑常侍，右光禄大夫、特进如故。谥简子。
现代文：追赠他散骑常侍，右光禄大夫、特进如故，谥号 简子 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Sanzhi" (free-riding) "Zenshishi" (regular attendant), "Ukokoroku-dokufu" (Doctor of the Right Light), "Tekjin" (special envoy) and "Janzi" (nickname).

古文：延之家训方严，不妄见子弟，虽节岁问讯，皆先克日。
现代文：王延之治家严格，不轻易见子弟，即使年节问讯，都先定好日期。
English: Wang Yan's family is strict, and it is not easy to see his children. Even if they ask about the New Year, they have to set a date first.

古文：子伦之，见儿子亦然。
现代文：其子王伦之，见儿子也是这样。
English: His son, Wang Lenzhi, saw his son do the same.

古文：永明中，为侍中。
现代文：永明年间，任侍中。
English: He served as a chamberlain for the rest of his life.

古文：世祖幸琅邪城，伦之与光禄大夫全景文等二十一人坐不参承，为有司所奏。诏伦之亲为陪侍之职，而同外惰慢，免官，景文等赎论。
现代文：世祖到琅笽城，伦之和光禄大夫金景文等二十一人因没参承，被有司检举，皇上下诏以伦之身为陪侍之职，而和外官一样惰慢，被免官，景文等人检讨认错。
English: When the founder of the dynasty came to Shicheng, twenty-one people, including Lun Zhi and Guanglu doctor Jin Jingwen, were reported to the imperial court for not taking part. The emperor decreed that Lun Zhi's role was to accompany the emperor, but he was just as lazy as the foreign officials, and he was removed from his post. Jingwen and the others admitted their mistakes after a review.

古文：建武中，至侍中，领前军将军，都官尚书，领游击将军，卒。
现代文：建武年间，官至侍中，领前军将军，都官尚书，领游击将军，后去世。
English: During the Jianwu era, he rose from an official to a chamberlain, led the front-line army as a general, was a metropolitan official, and led the guerrillas as a general. He later died.

古文：阮韬，字长明，陈留人，晋金紫光禄大夫裕玄孙也。韬少历清官，为南兖州别驾，刺史江夏王刘义恭逆求资费钱，韬曰： 此朝廷物。 
现代文：阮韬字长明，陈留人，晋金紫光禄大夫堡巡的玄孙阮韬年轻时历任政事清简的官职，做亩查蛆别驾，刺史江夏王刘义恭反向他支取资费钱，瞄舀说： 这是朝廷的财物。 
English: Nguyn Th, the great-great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th, the great-grandson of Nguyn Th

古文：执不与。
现代文：坚决不给他。
English: Insist on not giving in.

古文：宋孝武选侍中四人，并以风貌。
现代文：宋孝武帝选授侍中四个人，全都容貌风采出众。
English: The four attendants selected by Emperor Song Xiaowu were all distinguished in appearance and style.

古文：王彧、谢庄为一双，韬与何偃为一双。
现代文：王或、谢庄为一双，阮韬与何偃为一双。
English: Wang Kai and Xie Zhuang are a pair, and Ruan Yu and Ho Yu are a pair.

古文：常充兼假。
现代文：常常充任兼假。
English: He often works part-time.

古文：泰始末，为征南江州长史。
现代文：泰始末年，为征南江州长史。
English: At the end of the Taizhi era, he became the governor of the Nanjiang Province.

古文：桂阳王休范在镇，数出行游，韬性方峙，未尝随从。
现代文：桂阳王休范在江州镇治，几次出外巡游，阮韬性格正直孤傲，不曾跟随他去巡游。
English: Guiyang's King Xuanfan led the parade in Jiangzhou, and went on several foreign tours. Nguyen Xuan's character was honest and lonely, and he did not follow him on the tour.

古文：至散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫，领始兴王师。
现代文：官做到散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫，领始兴王师。
English: The officials were the strolling attendants, Jin Zi Guanglu the doctor, and Shi Xing Wang Shi the leader.

古文：永明二年，卒。
现代文：永明二年逝世。
English: Yongming died two years later.

古文：史臣曰：内侍枢近，世为华选。金榼颎耀，朝之丽服，久忘儒艺，专授名家。
现代文：史臣曰：朝廷的中枢近臣，历来被视为美缺，穿金戴玉富贵荣华，长期以来这些职位的人选已不讲究儒术，只是看重门第。
English: Shichen said: The central vassals of the imperial court have always been regarded as the most beautiful, rich and glorious. For a long time, the candidates for these positions have not paid attention to Confucianism, but only to their lineage.

古文：加以简择少姿，簪貂冠冕，基荫所通，后才先貌，事同谒者，以形骸为官，斯违旧矣。
现代文：加之不精，有权有势的人，关系通天，于是选人时先看面貌后看才能，其情形有如接待员，这是以模样为官，和以往的准则相去太大了！
English: In addition, powerful and influential people are well-connected, so when selecting people, they first look at their appearance and then look at their talents. Their situation is like that of a receptionist, which is to use appearance as an official, which is too far from the previous standards!

古文：辟强之在汉朝，幼有妙察；仲宣之处魏国，见贬容陋。
现代文：辟强在汉朝时，从小就很会观察人才；仲宣在魏国，则见贬于容陋。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Bi Qiang was very good at observing talents from an early age; in Wei, Zhong Xuan was seen as a disgrace.

古文：何戢之让，虽未能深识前古之美，与夫尸官靦服者，何等级哉！
现代文：何戢的辞让，虽然不能和古人完全比美，但和那些尸官混职的相比，已是非常了不起的了！
English: What a concession, although it can not be compared with the ancients, but compared with those coroners, it is already very remarkable!

古文：赞曰：万石祗慎，琨既为伦。
现代文：赞曰：万石号称谨慎，王琨可与他比伦。
English: Zang said: Wanshi is known for his prudence, and Wang Yao can compete with him.

古文：五龙一氏，张亦继荀。
现代文：张氏一门五龙，张岱可以继荀。
English: The Zhang family has five dragons, and Zhang Yao can succeed Yao.

古文：炫清褚族，戢遗何姻。
现代文：褚炫在其家族中最是清正，何戢则和王室保持了婚姻。
English: Hao Xuan was the most upright member of his family, while He Yuxuan remained married to the royal family.

古文：延之居简，名峻王臣。
现代文：王延之居官简静，是有名的严官王臣。
English: Wang Yan's official residence is Jianzhong, and he is a famous strict official Wang Chen.

