古文：宣王既丧南国之师，乃料民于太原。
现代文：周宣王丧失了南方的军队后，就在太原查点百姓。
English: After King Zhou Xuan lost the army in the south, he surveyed the people in Taiyuan.

古文：仲山父谏曰： 民不可料也！
现代文：仲山父劝谏说： 百姓是不能查点的！
English: Zhongshan's father advised him, "The people can't check the points!

古文：夫古者不料民而知其少多，司民协孤终，司商协民姓，司徒协旅，司寇协奸，牧协职，工协革，场协入，廪协出，是则少多、死生、出入、往来者皆可知也。
现代文：古时候不查点就能知道百姓有多少，司民核计年老病死者，司商核计出生受姓者，司徒掌握能征调的兵员，司寇掌握受惩的罪犯，牧人管理从事畜牧的民数，百工之官管理从事手艺的人数，场人敛藏收获的谷物，廪人出纳需用的物资，因此百姓的多少、死生、出入、往来都可知道。
English: In ancient times, it was possible to know how many people there were without checking the points. The steward counted the old, sick and dead, the steward and merchants counted those who were born and received surnames, the steward controlled the soldiers who could be conscripted, the steward controlled the criminals who were punished, the shepherds managed the number of people engaged in animal husbandry, the officials of the hundred craftsmen managed the number of people engaged in handicrafts, the field men stored the harvested grain, and the shepherds collected the materials needed for cashiers. Therefore, the number, life and death, and the comings and goings of the people could be known.

古文：于是乎又审之以事，王治农于籍，蒐于农隙，狝于既烝，狩于毕时，耨获亦于籍，是皆习民数者也，又何料焉？
现代文：同时又在日常政务中审察，天子在藉田上督促农耕，春闲时田猎，锄草、收割时仍去藉田督促，秋收和冬季农事完毕后都要举行大规模的狩猎，这些都是在熟悉了解百姓数目，何必还要查点呢？
English: At the same time, in the daily government affairs, it was examined that the Son of Heaven urged farmers to farm on borrowed fields, hunted in the fields during the spring leisure time, urged farmers to go to borrowed fields during weeding and harvesting, and held large-scale hunting after the autumn harvest and winter farming. These are all familiar with and understand the number of people. Why do we need to check?

古文：不谓其少而大料之，是示少而恶事也。
现代文：不说百姓少，却去大事查点，正显示了百姓减少、政事败坏。
English: Not to say that there are fewer people, but to go to the major investigation points, just shows the decline of the people and the corruption of politics.

古文：临政示少，诸侯避之；治民恶事，无以赋令。
现代文：掌管国政而百姓减少，诸侯就会躲避疏远；治理民众而政事败坏，法令就无法推行。
English: If you are in charge of state affairs and the population decreases, the lords will avoid alienation; if you govern the people and the government is corrupt, the laws cannot be implemented.

古文：且无故而料民，天之所恶也，害于政而妨于后嗣。 
现代文：况且无故查点百姓，是上天所憎厌的，既危害政事又不利于子孙后代。 
English: Moreover, surveying the people without any reason is abhorrent to God. It is not only harmful to politics, but also detrimental to future generations.

古文：王卒料之，及幽王乃废灭。
现代文：宣王最终还是查点了百姓，到幽王时西周便灭亡了。
English: In the end, King Xuan still surveyed the people, and by the time he arrived at Youwang, West Zhou had perished.

