古文：上章阉茂，一年。
现代文：上章阉茂，一年。
English: Standing on the shores of Yongkang Beach in March, and doing his best to make things better, every year is full of surprises.

古文：高祖武皇帝十中大通二年
现代文：梁武帝中大通二年
English: Emperor Liangwu in his second year of junior high school

古文：春，正月，己丑，魏益州刺史长孙寿、梁州刺史元俊等遣将击严始欣，斩之，萧玩等亦败死，失亡万馀人。
现代文：春季，正月，己丑，北魏益州刺史长孙寿、梁州刺史元俊等派将领攻打严始欣，将其斩首，萧玩等也战败而死，逃失走散一万余人。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei faction led by the Northern Wei fa

古文：辛亥，魏东徐州城民吕文欣等杀刺史元大宾，据城反，魏遣都官尚书平城樊子鹄等讨之。
现代文：辛卯，北魏东徐州城百姓吕文欣等人杀死了刺史元大宾，占据东徐州城而反乱，北魏派遣都官尚书平城人樊子鹄讨伐吕文欣。
English: Xinwu, the people of East Xuzhou City in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Lu Wenshin and others killed the guest of honor, occupied East Xuzhou City and revolted, and the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the capital official Shang Shuhei and the people of the city to fight against Lu Wenshin.

古文：二月，甲寅，斩文欣。
现代文：二月，甲寅，斩杀了吕文欣。
English: In February, Jia Yin killed Lu Wenxin.

古文：万俟丑奴侵扰关中，魏尔硃荣遣武卫将军贺拔岳讨之。
现代文：万俟奴侵扰关中地区，北魏尔硃荣荣派武卫将军贺拔岳讨万俟奴。
English: The Manchukuo invaded the Guanzhong area, and Northern Wei'er sent Wuwei General He Baturu to fight the Manchukuo.

古文：岳私谓其兄胜曰： 丑奴，勍敌也。今攻之不胜，固有罪；胜之，谗嫉将生。 
现代文：贺拔岳私下里对他哥哥贺拔胜说： 万俟奴是一个强敌，现在攻讨他若不能取胜，固然有罪，但如果打败了他，谗佞嫉妒之言也会产生。 
English: Privately, He Bajue said to his brother He Baxing: Wan Xun is a strong enemy. If you attack him now and fail to win, you will certainly be guilty, but if you defeat him, you will also be jealous.

古文：胜曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：贺拔胜问道： 那么如何办呢？ 
English: He Basheng asked: So how to do it?

古文：岳曰： 愿得尔硃氏一人为帅而佐之。 
现代文：贺拔岳说： 希望让一位尔硃荣氏家族的人为统帅，我作助手辅佐他。 
English: He Batyue said: I hope to have a member of the Er Rong family as commander-in-chief, and I will assist him as an assistant.

古文：胜为之言于荣，荣悦，以尔硃天光为使持节、都督二雍、二岐诸军事、骠骑大将军、雍州刺史，以岳为左大都督，又以征西将军代郡侯莫陈悦为右大都督，并为天光之副以讨之。
现代文：于是贺拔胜向尔硃荣荣讲了贺拔岳的建议，尔硃荣荣听了很高兴，便任命尔硃荣天光为使持节、都督二雍二岐诸军事、骠骑大将军、雍州刺史，以贺拔岳为左大都督，又任命征西将军代郡人侯莫陈悦为右大都督，贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦二人均作为尔硃荣天光的副手以征讨万俟奴。
English: As a result, He Batsheng told Er Bong Rong Rong about He Batsheng's suggestion. Er Bong Rong Rong was very pleased to hear this and appointed Er Bong Rong Tianguang as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the two yong and two military provinces, the cavalry general, and the governor of Yongzhou, with He Batsheng as the left grand governor, and also appointed the general of the Western Expedition, Hou Mo Chen Rong as the right grand governor, and both He Batsheng and Hou Mo Chen Rong as the deputy of Er Bong Rong Tianguang to conquer Manchukuo.

古文：天光初行，唯配军士千人，发洛阳以西路次民马以给之。
现代文：尔硃荣天光开始出发时，只配备了一千名士兵，靠征发洛阳以西沿途百姓的马匹装备了这支部队。
English: When Er Rong Tianguang set out, it was only equipped with a thousand soldiers. The troops were equipped by requisitioning the horses of the people along the route west of Luoyang.

古文：时赤水蜀贼断路，诏侍中杨侃先行慰谕，并税其马，蜀持疑不下。
现代文：当时，赤水的蜀贼切断了道路，朝廷便诏令侍中杨侃先到叛贼处抚慰劝谕，并征集他们的马匹，叛贼将领犹疑不决。
English: At that time, the Shu bandits of Chishui cut off the road, and the imperial court ordered the chamberlain Yang Kan to first go to the traitors to comfort and advise them, and to collect their horses. The traitor generals hesitated.

古文：军至潼关，天光不敢进，岳曰： 蜀贼鼠窃，公尚迟疑，若遇大敌，将何以战！ 
现代文：北魏军队到潼关后，尔硃荣天光便不敢再前进了，贺拔岳对他说： 这些蜀贼都是些鸡鸣鼠窃之辈，您尚且如此迟疑不决，如果遇到大敌的话，又将如何应敌呢！ 
English: After the Northern Wei army arrived at Shaoguan, Er Rong Tian Guang did not dare to advance any further. He Batyue said to him: These Shu bandits are all petty thieves. You are still so hesitant. If you encounter a great enemy, how will you deal with the enemy?

古文：天光曰： 今日之事，一以相委。 
现代文：尔硃荣天光说道： 今天的事情，我就全部委托给你了。 
English: Er Rong Rong said: I have entrusted all of today's affairs to you.

古文：岳遂进击蜀于渭北，破之，获马二千匹。简其壮健以充军士，又税民马合万馀匹。
现代文：贺拔岳于是便向渭水北岸的蜀贼进击，大破贼军，缴获战马二千匹，挑选贼军中健壮的士卒以充实北魏军队，又征集百姓的马匹合计一万多匹。
English: He Batyue then attacked the Shu bandits on the north shore of Surabaya, smashed the bandit army, captured two thousand horses, selected robust soldiers from the bandits to enrich the Northern Wei army, and recruited a total of more than ten thousand horses from the people.

古文：以军士尚少，淹留未进。
现代文：由于兵力还比较少，因此部队停了下来没有继续前进。
English: Due to the relatively small number of troops, the troops stopped and did not continue to advance.

古文：荣怒，遣骑兵参军刘贵乘驿至军中责天光，杖之一百，以军士二千人益之。
现代文：尔硃荣荣大怒，派骑兵参军刘贵乘驿马赶至军中，责斥尔硃荣天光，将他打了一百杖，又增兵二千人。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong was furious and sent cavalry to join the army. Liu Gui rushed to the army on a steed and rebuked Er Qian Rong Tian Guang, beating him with a hundred canes and increasing the number of soldiers by two thousand.

古文：三月，丑奴自将其众围岐州，遣其大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟仵自武功南渡渭，攻围趣栅。
现代文：三月，万俟奴亲自率众包围了岐州，派遣其大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟仵从武功南渡渭水，围攻北魏军队的营盘。
English: In March, Wan Xunnu personally led the crowd to encircle Qizhou, and dispatched his grand captains Chi Bodhisattva and Du Sha Wan Xuan from Wugong South to Watarishui to besiege the camp of the Northern Wei army.

古文：天光使贺拔岳将千骑救之。菩萨等已拔栅而还，岳故杀掠其吏民以挑之，菩萨帅步骑二万至渭北。
现代文：尔硃荣天光先派贺拔岳率一千骑兵前往救援，尉迟菩萨等叛将已拔起营盘返回了，贺拔岳故意大肆杀害掠夺万俟奴的官吏百姓，以此来激怒敌人，但是尉迟菩萨已率二万步兵和骑兵回到了渭水北岸。
English: After the victory, Heaven's Light first sent He Bajiao and a thousand cavalrymen to the rescue, but the rebel generals such as Lixi Bodhisattva had already set up camp and returned. He Bajiao deliberately killed the officials and people who plundered Wanzhongnu to provoke the enemy, but Lixi Bodhisattva had led twenty thousand infantrymen and cavalrymen back to the north shore of Surabaya.

古文：岳以轻骑数十自渭南与菩萨隔水而语，称扬国威，菩萨令省事传语，岳怒曰： 我与菩萨语，卿何人也！ 
现代文：贺拔岳率数十轻骑在渭河南岸与北岸的尉迟菩萨隔河对话，特意称赞崐张扬北魏的国威。尉迟菩萨不亲自出面，只命令传话的使者向贺拔岳传话，贺拔岳大怒，说道： 我跟尉迟菩萨说话，你算什么人！ 
English: He Baturake led dozens of light horsemen on the south bank of the Wei River to engage in cross-river dialogue with the north bank's Fuchi Bodhisattva, specifically praising him for promoting the national prestige of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Fuchi Bodhisattva did not appear in person, but only ordered the messenger to send a message to He Baturake. He Baturake was furious and said: I am talking to Fuchi Bodhisattva, what kind of person are you!

古文：射杀之。
现代文：于是用箭射杀了他。
English: So he shot him with an arrow.

古文：明日，复引百馀骑隔水与贼语，稍引而东，至水浅可涉之处，岳即驰马东出。贼以为走，乃弃步兵，轻骑南渡渭追岳。岳依横冈设伏兵以待之，贼半渡冈东，岳还兵击之，贼败走。
现代文：第二天，贺拔岳又带了一百多名骑兵隔着渭水跟贼军说话，渐渐地将贼军引向了东边，到了一处可以涉水而过的浅水地带，贺拔岳立即驰马向东跑去，贼军以为贺拔岳要逃跑，便抛下步兵，轻骑南渡渭水追击贺拔岳的部队，贺拔岳已经在一条横向土冈背后设下伏兵等待贼军，等贼军一半人马刚渡过冈东，贺拔岳回兵反击，贼军败逃而去。
English: The next day, He Baturake took more than a hundred horsemen across the Surabaya water to talk to the bandits. He gradually led the bandits to the east, to a shallow water area where they could wade through. He Baturake immediately galloped to the east. The bandits thought that He Baturake wanted to escape, so they left the infantry and lightly rode south to Surabaya water to pursue He Baturake's troops. He Baturake had already set an ambush behind a horizontal earthen mound to wait for the bandits. When half of the bandits had just crossed the east ridge, He Baturake's soldiers counterattacked,

古文：岳下令，贼下马者勿杀；贼悉投马，俄获三千人，马亦无遗，遂擒菩萨。
现代文：贺拔岳下令，贼军凡下马者不杀，贼军于是纷纷下马，很快俘获三千人，马匹也没有丢掉，最后捉获了尉迟菩萨。
English: He Batyue ordered that the bandits would not kill anyone who dismounted, so the bandits dismounted one after another, quickly captured three thousand people, and did not lose their horses, and finally captured Fuchi Bodhisattva.

古文：仍渡渭北，降步卒万馀，并收其辎重。
现代文：北魏军队于是渡过渭水北岸，贼军万余步兵投降，连同其辎重都被缴获过来了。
English: The Northern Wei army then crossed the northern shore of Surabaya, and more than ten thousand foot soldiers of the robber army surrendered and were captured along with their baggage.

古文：丑奴闻之，弃岐州，北走安定，置栅于平亭。
现代文：万俟奴听说了之后，放弃了岐州，向北逃至安定，在平亭设置了营栅。
English: After hearing this, Wanzhong abandoned Qizhou, fled north to Pingdian, and set up a camp in Pingting.

古文：天光方自雍至岐，与岳合。
现代文：尔硃荣天光这才从雍州至岐州，跟贺拔岳会合。
English: It was only then that Er Er Rong Tian Guang traveled from Yongzhou to Qizhou and met with He Batur.

古文：夏，四月，天光至汧、渭之间，停军牧马，宣言： 天时将热，未可行师，俟秋凉更图进止。 
现代文：夏季，四月，尔硃荣天光的部队来到了水和渭水之间，部队停下来，放养战马，并声言： 天气就要变热了，不能行军作战，等到秋天凉爽了以后再考虑进军或退兵。 
English: In the summer, in April, the troops of Er Rong Rong came to the water between the water and the water, the troops stopped, stocked the horses, and said: The weather is about to get hot, you can't march and fight, wait until the autumn is cool before considering entering or leaving the army.

古文：获丑奴觇候者，纵遣之。
现代文：北魏军队抓获了万俟奴的侦察兵，又放回去。
English: The Northern Wei army captured Wan Xuan's scouts and sent them back.

古文：丑奴信之，散众耕于细川，使其太尉侯伏侯元进将兵五千，据险立栅，其馀千人已下为栅者甚众。
现代文：万俟奴相信了这些话，于是便解散部队，令部队在细川耕作，并派其太尉侯伏侯元进率五千士兵，凭据险要设立营栅，其余一千人以下便设立营栅的很多。
English: Wanzhong believed these words, so he disbanded the troops, ordered the troops to cultivate in Hosokawa, and sent his lieutenant Hou Fu Houyuan to advance five thousand soldiers, with the evidence of setting up camp gates, and the remaining one thousand or less set up a lot of camp gates.

古文：天光知其势分，晡时，密严诸军，相继俱发。黎明，围元进大栅，拔之。所得俘囚，一皆纵遣，诸栅闻之皆降。
现代文：尔硃荣天光了解到万俟奴的兵势已经分散，傍晚时分，暗中督责各个部队，前后相继出发，黎明时分，包围并攻取了侯伏侯元进的大寨，所俘获的俘虏，全部放了回去，其他各营栅的贼军听说了之后，都投降了北魏军队。
English: Er Rong Rong Tian Guang learned that Wan Xun's army had been dispersed. In the evening, he secretly supervised the various troops and set off one after another. At dawn, he surrounded and captured the Dazhai of Hou Fu, Hou Yuanjin, and all the captured prisoners were released. After hearing this, the other invaders in each battalion surrendered to the Northern Wei army.

古文：天光昼夜径进，抵安定城下，贼泾州刺史侯几长贵以城降。
现代文：尔硃荣天光昼夜前进，抵达安定城下，万俟奴的泾州刺史侯几长贵率城而降。
English: Er Rong Rong advanced day and night, and arrived at the foot of the stable city. Wan Xunnu's Banzhou Jishi Hou Ji Changgui led the city to descend.

古文：丑奴弃平亭走，欲趣高平，天光遣贺拔岳轻骑追之，丁卯，及于平凉。
现代文：万俟奴放弃平亭城出逃，想去高平城，尔硃荣天光派贺拔岳率轻骑追击万俟奴，丁卯，到了平凉追上了敌人。
English: Wan Rongnu abandoned Ping Ting City and fled, wanting to go to Gaoping City. Er Rong Rong sent He Batyue to chase Wan Rongnu on a light horse. Ding Wu caught up with the enemy in Ping Liang.

古文：贼未成列，直阁代郡侯莫陈崇单骑入贼中，于马上生擒丑奴，因大呼，众皆披靡，无敢当者，后骑益集，贼众崩溃，遂大破之。
现代文：贼军还未列成阵势，直阁、代郡人侯莫陈崇单骑闯入，从马上生擒了万俟奴，并趁势高呼，贼军都望风披靡，没有人敢阻挡侯莫陈崇，北魏的后续骑兵聚集得越来越多，贼军全线崩溃，于是大破贼军。
English: The bandit army had not yet formed a formation. Zhougu and the deputy of the county, Hou Mo Chen Chong, rode in single-handedly. They rode in on horseback and killed thousands of bandits, and took advantage of the situation to shout. The bandit army was invincible. No one dared to stop Hou Mo Chen Chong. The following cavalry of the Northern Wei gathered more and more. The bandit army collapsed across the board, and the bandit army was defeated.

古文：天光进逼高平，城中执送萧宝寅以降。
现代文：尔硃荣天光又进逼高平，城中人抓住萧宝寅将其送到北魏军中请降。
English: After Xiao Rong's victory, the skylight entered Gaoping again, and the people in the city caught Xiao Baoying and sent him to the Northern Wei Army to ask him to surrender.

古文：壬申，以吐谷浑王佛辅为西秦、河二州刺史。
现代文：壬申，梁朝任命吐谷浑王佛辅为西秦州、河州两州的刺史。
English: In Jinshin, the Liang Dynasty appointed Tu Gu Hun Wang Fu Fu as the chief priest of the two states of West Qin and Hezhou.

古文：甲戌，魏以关中平，大赦。
现代文：甲戌，北魏因关中已经平定，于是大赦天下。
English: Armor-piercing, the Northern Wei Dynasty has been pacified due to the middle of the pass, so the world is pardoned.

古文：万俟丑奴、萧宝寅至洛阳，置阊阖门外都街之中，士女聚观凡三日。
现代文：万俟奴、萧宝寅被押至洛阳，置于阊阖门外的大街之中，洛阳城中的男女老少聚集围观了三天。
English: Wan Xunnu and Xiao Baoying were taken to Luoyang and placed in the middle of the street outside the city gate. Men, women and children in Luoyang gathered for three days to watch.

古文：丹杨王萧赞表请宝寅之命，吏部尚书李神俊、黄门侍郎高道穆素与宝寅善，欲左右之，言于魏主曰： 宝寅叛逆，事在前朝。 
现代文：丹扬王萧赞上表请求孝庄帝饶萧宝寅一命，吏部尚书李神俊、黄门侍郎高道穆平素与萧宝寅关系密切，也想帮萧宝寅求情，于是便对孝庄帝说： 萧宝寅叛逆之事，发生在前朝。 
English: Danyang King Xiaozan requested Xiaozhuang Emperor to spare Xiao Baotian's life on the table. Li Shenjun, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, and Gao Dao Mupingsu, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, had a close relationship with Xiao Baotian and also wanted to help Xiao Baotian to intercede, so he said to Xiaozhuang Emperor: Xiao Baotian's rebellion happened in the previous dynasty.

古文：会应诏王道习自外至，帝问道习在外所闻，对曰： 唯闻李尚书、高黄门与萧宝寅周款，并居得言之地，必能全之。
现代文：这时正赶上应诏官王道习从外面进来，孝庄帝问王道习： 你在外面听到了什么？ 王道习回答说： 只听到有人说李尚书、高黄门跟萧宝寅关系亲密，这二人都处在便于向皇帝进言的官位上，一定能够保全萧宝寅。
English: At this time, Wang Daoxi, the vice-prefect of the imperial court, came in from outside just in time. Emperor Xiaozhuang asked Wang Daoxi, "What did you hear outside?" Wang Daoxi replied, "I only heard that Li Shangshu, Gao Huangmen and Xiao Baojin had a close relationship. Both of them were in positions that made it easy for them to speak to the emperor, and they would definitely be able to protect Xiao Baojin."

古文：且二人谓宝寅叛逆在前朝，宝寅为丑奴太傅，岂非陛下时邪？
现代文：而且这两个人说萧宝寅叛逆之事发生在前朝，萧宝寅为万俟奴的太傅，难道不是在陛下当政之时么？
English: Moreover, these two people said that Xiao Baoying's rebellion happened in the previous morning. Xiao Baoying was the great-grandfather of Wan Xunnu. Wasn't it when His Majesty was in power?

古文：贼臣不剪，法欲安施！ 
现代文：贼臣若不剪除掉，王法还能施加于谁呢！ 
English: If the vassals of thieves are not cut off, on whom can the king's law be imposed?

古文：帝乃赐宝寅死于驼牛署，斩丑奴于都市。
现代文：孝庄帝于是便赐萧宝寅死于驼牛署，将万俟奴于都市中斩首。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang then gave Xiao Baoying to die in the camel station and beheaded Wanzhong in the city.

古文：六月，丁巳，帝复以魏汝南王悦为魏王。
现代文：六月，丁巳，梁武帝又加封原北魏汝南王元悦为魏王。
English: In June, Emperor Liangwu also conferred the title of Wei King on Yuan Rong, the former Northern Wei Runan King.

古文：戊寅，魏诏胡氏亲属受爵于朝者皆黜为民。
现代文：戊寅，北魏孝庄帝下诏，凡胡氏家族的亲属在朝廷受过爵位的一律罢黜为平民。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhuang decreed that all relatives of the Van Hu family who had received a title of nobility in the imperial court would be dismissed as commoners.

古文：庚申，以魏降将范遵为安北将军、司州牧，从魏王悦北还。
现代文：庚申，梁朝任命北魏降将范遵为安北将军、司州牧，跟随魏王元悦北还。
English: Goshun, the Liang Dynasty appointed the Northern Wei general Fan Zun as the general of Anbei and the governor of Shizhou, followed by Wei Wang Yuan and Yue Bei.

古文：万俟丑奴既败，自泾、豳以西至灵州，贼党皆降于魏，唯所署行台万俟道洛帅众六千逃入山中，不降。
现代文：万俟奴兵败后，从泾州、幽州以西直到灵州，原来万俟奴的贼党都归降了北魏，只有万俟奴任命的行台万俟道洛率六千部众逃入深山之中，拒不投降。
English: After the defeat of Wan Xun's soldiers, from Zhangzhou and west of Yuzhou to Lingzhou, the original Wan Xun's bandits all surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Only Wan Xun's appointee, Gangtai Wan Xun Daoluo, led by six thousand people, fled into the mountains and refused to surrender.

古文：时高平大旱，尔硃天光以马乏草，退屯城东五十里，遣都督长孙邪利帅二百人行原州事以镇之。
现代文：当时高平一带大旱，尔硃荣天光由于马匹缺少水草，便退兵屯驻在高平城东五十里的地方，并派都督长孙邪利率领二百人管理原州的军政事务，镇守在高平城内。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the Gaoping area, and Er Rong Tianguang, due to the lack of horses and water plants, withdrew from the army and stationed in a place 50 miles east of Gaoping City. He also sent the governor, the eldest son, Yanzhong, to lead 200 people to manage the military and political affairs of the original state, and the town guard was in Gaoping City.

古文：道洛潜与城民通谋，掩袭邪利，并其所部皆杀之。
现代文：万俟道洛暗中跟高平城中百姓合谋，偷袭了长孙邪利，连同其部下都杀害了。
English: Wanxuan Road Luo secretly conspired with the people of Gaoping City to attack the eldest grandson, Xiali, and killed him and his subordinates.

古文：天光帅诸军赴之，道洛出战而败，帅其众西入牵屯山，据险自守。
现代文：尔硃荣天光率各路人马赶赴高平城救援，万俟道洛出城迎战，结果战败，率其部下向西逃进了牵屯山，据险自守。
English: Er Rong Rong led all the people to rush to Gaoping City for rescue. Wan Rong and Luo went out of the city to fight. As a result, they were defeated. He led his subordinates to escape to the west into Tutun Mountain, and they had to defend themselves.

古文：尔硃荣以天光失邪利，不获道洛，复遣使杖之一百。以诏书黜天光为抚军将军、雍州刺史，降爵为侯。
现代文：尔硃荣荣因尔硃荣天光损失了长孙邪利，没有抓获万俟道洛，便又派使者打了尔硃荣天光一百杖，以皇帝诏书的名义贬黜尔硃荣天光为抚军将军、雍州刺史，降爵位为侯。
English: Because Er Rong Rong and Er Rong Tianguang lost their eldest grandson, Zari, and did not capture Wan Rong Daoluo, they sent an envoy to beat Er Rong Rong Tianguang with a hundred sticks, and in the name of the emperor's edict, denigrated Er Rong Rong Tianguang as the general of the Fuzhou army, the history of Yongzhou, and the knighthood of the marquis.

古文：天光追击道洛于牵屯，道洛败走，入陇，归略阳贼帅王庆云。
现代文：尔硃荣天光率军至牵屯山追击万俟道洛，万俟道洛战败逃走，进入陇山，投奔了略阳的贼军首领王庆云。
English: Er Qiong Rong led the army to Tutun Mountain to pursue Wanlu Douluo, Wanlu Douluo was defeated and fled, entered Lushan, and defected to Wang Qingyun, the leader of Liaoyang's thief army.

古文：道洛骁果绝伦，庆云得之，甚喜，谓大事可济，遂称帝于水洛城，置百官，以道洛为大将军。
现代文：万俟道洛骁勇绝伦，王庆云得到他后，非常高兴，以为这样一来大事便能成功了，于是王庆云便在水洛城称帝，设置文武百官，任命万俟道洛为大将军。
English: Wang Qingyun was very happy after he got him, thinking that this would lead to great success. Therefore, Wang Qingyun proclaimed himself emperor in Shuiluo City, set up a hundred civil and military officials, and appointed Wang Qingyun as a general.

古文：秋，七月，天光帅诸军入陇，至水洛城，庆云、道洛出战，天光射道洛中臂，失弓还走，拔其东城。
现代文：秋季，七月，尔硃荣天光率诸军进入陇地，来到了水洛城。王庆云、万俟道洛出城迎战，尔硃荣天光用箭射中了万俟道洛的胳臂，万俟道洛丢下弓箭回马便走，尔硃荣天光趁势攻下了贼军的东城。
English: In the autumn, in July, Er Qiong Rong led the army into Handan and came to Shuiluo City. Wang Qingyun and Wan Rong Douluo went out of the city to fight, Er Qiong Rong shot Wan Rong Douluo's arm with an arrow, Wan Rong Douluo left his bow and arrow and went back to his horse, and Er Qiong Rong took advantage of the situation to capture the East City of the thief army.

古文：贼并兵趣西城，城中无水，众渴乏，有降者言庆云、道洛欲突走。
现代文：贼军聚集起兵力退至西城，城中无水，士兵们又渴又乏，有投降北魏的士兵告诉尔硃荣天光说王庆云、万俟道洛打算突围逃走。
English: The invaders gathered their forces and retreated to the West City. There was no water in the city, and the soldiers were thirsty and poor. Some soldiers who had surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty told Er Rong Tianguang that Wang Qingyun and Wan Xuan Douluo were planning to break through the siege and escape.

古文：天光恐失之，乃遣人招谕庆云使早降，曰： 若未能自决，当听诸人今夜共议，明晨早报。 
现代文：尔硃荣天光担心敌人逃掉，于是便派人招降王庆云，让他早日投降，对他说： 如果自己还不能决定的话，应该叫大家今夜共同商议一下，明天早晨回话。 
English: Er Rong Tianguang was worried that the enemy would escape, so he sent someone to invite Wang Qingyun to surrender, asking him to surrender as soon as possible, and said to him: If you still can't decide, you should ask everyone to discuss it together tonight, and reply in the morning.

古文：庆云等冀得少缓，因待夜突出，乃报曰： 请俟明日。 
现代文：王庆云等贼将希望能够稍微缓解一下，以便等待夜间突围出逃，于是便回报说： 请等到明天吧。 
English: Wang Qingyun and other thieves will hope to be able to relax a little so that they can wait for the night to break out and escape, so they will reply: Please wait until tomorrow.

古文：天光因使谓曰： 知须水，今相为小退，任取涧水饮之。 
现代文：尔硃荣天光通过使者告诉王庆云等贼将说： 我军知道你们想得到水，现在我军为此稍微后退一些，让你们任意取山涧水饮用。 
English: Er Rong Rong told Wang Qingyun and other thieves through an emissary: Our army knows that you want to get water, so now our army has retreated a little, allowing you to drink water from the mountains.

古文：贼众悦，无复走心。
现代文：贼兵大喜，便不再有逃走之意。
English: The thief-soldier was overjoyed and no longer had any intention of running away.

古文：天光密使军士多作木枪，各长七尺，昏后，绕城布列，要路加厚。又伏人枪中，备其冲突，兼令密缚长梯于城北。
现代文：尔硃荣天光暗中让士兵们多做拒马枪，各长七尺，天黑后，环绕城边布置好，险要路口布置得更多一些，同时又让士兵埋伏在枪丛中，以防备敌人冲锋突围，还让人暗中在城北捆扎长梯子以备攻城之用。
English: Er Rong secretly ordered the soldiers to make more horse-drawn guns, each seven feet long. After dark, they were arranged around the edge of the city, and more dangerous intersections were arranged. At the same time, the soldiers were ambushed in the guns to prevent the enemy from storming and breaking through, and people were secretly tied up with long ladders in the north of the city to prepare for the siege of the city.

古文：其夜，庆云、道洛果驰马突出，遇枪，马各伤倒，伏兵起，即时擒之。
现代文：这天夜里，王庆云、万俟道洛果然驰马突围出逃，遇上了北魏军队布置好的拒马枪，战马各自受伤倒下，北魏伏兵又起，当时便抓获了王庆云、万俟道洛二人。
English: On this night, Wang Qingyun and Wan Xuan Douluo successfully broke out of the encirclement and fled on horseback. They encountered the anti-horse gun arranged by the Northern Wei army. The horses were injured and fell, and the Northern Wei ambush began again. At that time, Wang Qingyun and Wan Xuan Douluo were captured.

古文：军士缘梯入城，馀众皆出城南，遇枪而止，穷窘乞降。
现代文：北魏士兵沿长梯登上城墙进入城内，其余贼兵都从城南突出，遇上拒马枪后也被阻止住了，贼兵走投无路只好请降。
English: The Northern Wei soldiers climbed the city wall along the long ladder and entered the city. The rest of the bandits were protruding from the south of the city. They were also stopped after encountering a horse-drawn gun. The bandits had no choice but to surrender.

古文：丙子，天光悉收其仗而坑之，死者万七千人，分其家口。
现代文：丙子，尔硃荣天光收缴崐了降兵的武器，将他们全部活埋了，死者达一万七千人，将他们的家属分赏将士。
English: The heavens, however, collected the weapons of the dead soldiers and buried them alive. The dead amounted to 17,000 people, and their families were divided among the soldiers.

古文：于是三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯州皆降。
现代文：这样一来，三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯等州也都投降了北魏。
English: As a result, Sanqin, He, Handan, Gua, Liang, Handan and other provinces also surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：天光顿军略阳。
现代文：尔硃荣天光驻军于略阳。
English: Er Rong Rong Tian Guang garrisoned in Liaoyang.

古文：诏复天光官爵，寻加侍中、仪同三司。
现代文：北魏朝廷下诏恢复了尔硃荣天光的官职、爵位，不久又加封他为侍中、仪同三司。
English: The Northern Wei court issued an edict to restore Er Rong Tianguang's official position and peerage, and he was soon appointed as an attendant and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：以贺拔岳为泾州刺史，侯莫陈悦为渭州刺史。
现代文：北魏朝廷还任命贺拔岳为泾州刺史，侯莫陈悦为渭州刺史。
English: The Northern Wei court also appointed He Batyue as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Hou Mo Chen Yue as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：秦州城民谋杀刺史骆超，南秦州城民谋杀刺史辛显，超、显皆觉之，走归天光，天光遣兵讨平之。
现代文：秦州城民图谋杀掉刺史骆超，南秦州城民图谋杀掉刺史辛显，骆超、辛显都发觉了这一图谋，便投奔了尔硃荣天光。
English: Qinzhou city residents plan to murder the assassin Shi Luo Chao, South Qinzhou city residents plan to murder the assassin Shi Xin Xian, Luo Chao and Xin Xian have discovered this plot, they rushed to Er Rong Tian Guang.

古文：步兵校尉宇文泰从贺拔岳入关，以功迁征西将军，行原州事。
现代文：尔硃荣天光派兵讨伐平定了秦州、南秦州的叛乱。步兵校尉宇文泰跟从贺拔岳进入关内，因功升迁至征西将军，管理原州事务。
English: Er Rong Rong sent troops to quell the rebellion in Qin State and South Qin State. Infantry Lieutenant Wu Wentai followed He Baturan into Guanai, and was promoted to General of the Western Expedition for his services, managing the affairs of the original state.

古文：时关、陇凋弊，泰抚以恩信，民皆感悦，曰： 早遇宇文使君，吾辈岂从乱乎！ 
现代文：当时关、陇地区经济凋弊，宇文泰以恩德信义抚慰百姓，当地百姓非常感激、喜悦，都说： 要是早点遇到宇文使君的话，我们怎会跟着参预叛乱呢！ 
English: At that time, the economy of Guan and Handan regions was in a bad state, and Yu Wentai comforted the people with benevolence, faith and righteousness. The local people were very grateful and happy, and they all said: If we had met Yu Wentai earlier, how could we have followed the pre-revolt?

古文：八月，庚戌，上饯魏王悦于德阳堂，遣兵送至境上。
现代文：八月，庚戌，梁武帝在德阳堂为魏王元悦饯行，派兵将元悦送到边境上。
English: In August of the Heian period, Emperor Liangwu sent troops to escort the Wei king, Yuan Yue, to the border.

古文：魏尔硃荣虽居外籓，遥制朝政，树置亲党，布列魏主左右，伺察动静，大小必知。
现代文：北魏尔硃荣虽居处京城之外的藩镇，却遥控朝政，广树党羽，布置于孝庄帝左右，以便窥伺观察朝中动静，因此朝中不管大事小事，他都知晓。
English: Although he lived in a town outside the capital, Northern Wei'er Huan Rong remotely controlled the imperial court and the political parties. He was placed on the right and left of Emperor Xiaozhuang in order to observe the movements of the imperial court. Therefore, he knew everything about the imperial court, no matter how big or small it was.

古文：魏主虽受制于荣，然性勤政事，朝夕不倦，数亲览辞讼，理冤狱。
现代文：孝庄帝虽然受到尔硃荣荣的控制，但生性勤于政事，从早到晚不疲倦，多次亲自察览诉状，审理冤案。
English: Although Emperor Xiaozhuang was under the control of Er Qian Rong Rong, he was naturally diligent in political affairs and never tired from morning to night. He personally inspected complaints and tried cases of injustice many times.

古文：荣闻之，不悦。
现代文：尔硃荣荣听说这些之后，很不高兴。
English: After hearing this, Er Qian Rong Rong was very unhappy.

古文：帝又与吏部尚书李神俊议清治选部，荣尝关补曲阳县令，神俊以阶悬，不奏，别更拟人。
现代文：孝庄帝又跟吏部尚书李神俊商议整顿官吏的选拔，尔硃荣荣过去曾补授过一位曲阳县令，但是报到吏部之后，李神俊以官阶相差太悬殊为由，没有批准，而另外又选了别人。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang also discussed the rectification of the selection of officials with Li Shenjun, the secretary of the officials department. Er Qian Rongrong had previously awarded a Quyang County order, but after reporting to the officials department, Li Shenjun did not approve it on the grounds that the difference in official ranks was too great, and chose someone else.

古文：荣大怒，即遣所补者往夺其任。
现代文：尔硃荣荣对此大为恼怒，于是便派他所补授的人前往曲阳县抢夺县令之职。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong was very angry about this, so he sent his supplementary people to Quyang County to snatch the post of county magistrate.

古文：神俊惧而辞位，荣使尚书左仆射尔硃世隆摄选。
现代文：李神俊很恐惧，便辞了官职，尔硃荣荣便让尚书左仆射尔硃荣世隆取代李神俊来主持吏部。
English: Li Shenjun was very afraid and resigned from his post. Er Qiong Rong Rong then asked Shang Shu's left-hand man, Sha Er Qiong Rong Shilong, to replace Li Shenjun to preside over the cadre department.

古文：荣启北人为河南诸州，帝未之许；太宰天穆入见面论，帝犹不许。
现代文：尔硃荣荣向孝庄帝启请北方人为河南各州的刺史，孝庄帝没有同意。太宰元天穆入见孝庄帝，当面请求批准，孝庄帝还是没有答应。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong asked Emperor Xiaozhuang to invite the northerners to write the history of the states of Henan, but Emperor Xiaozhuang did not agree. Dazai Yuan Tianmu met Emperor Xiaozhuang and asked for approval in person, but Emperor Xiaozhuang still did not agree.

古文：天穆曰： 天柱既有大功，为国宰相，若请普代天下官，恐陛下亦不得违之，如何启数人为州，遽不用也！ 
现代文：元天穆说道： 天柱将军尔硃荣荣既然对国家有大功，身为宰相，如果他要求调换全国的所有官员的话，恐怕陛下您也不能违背他的意旨，为什么他启奏几个人为河南诸州的刺史，您竟然不允许呢！ 
English: Yuan Tianmu said: Since General Tianzhu Er Qian Rong Rong has made great contributions to the country, as the prime minister, if he requests the replacement of all officials across the country, I'm afraid your majesty, you can't go against his wishes. Why did he play the role of several people for the history of the states of Henan? You wouldn't allow it!

古文：帝正色曰： 天柱若不为人臣，朕亦须代；如其犹存臣节，无代天下百官之理！ 
现代文：孝庄帝严肃地说道： 天柱将军如果不想做人臣的话，朕也可以被他取代；如果他还想保持臣节的话，绝无更换天下百官的道理。 
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor said seriously: If General Tianzhu does not want to be a vassal, I can also be replaced by him; if he still wants to remain a vassal, there is no reason to replace the world's hundred officials.

古文：荣闻之，大恚恨，曰： 天子由谁得立！今乃不用我语！ 
现代文：尔硃荣荣听说了后，非常恼怒怨恨，说道： 他的天子之位靠谁才得以坐上的，现在却竟然不采纳我的意见了！ 
English: When Er Qian Rong Rong heard about this, he was very angry and resentful, saying, "Who did he rely on to sit on the throne of his heavenly son, but now he doesn't accept my opinion!

古文：尔硃皇后性石忌，屡致忿恚。
现代文：尔硃皇后生性妒忌，多次向孝庄帝发泄怨恨不满之意。
English: The Empress Erqin became jealous and repeatedly vented her resentment and dissatisfaction on Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：帝遣尔硃世隆语以大理，后曰： 天子由我家置立，今便如此；我父本即自作，今亦复决。 
现代文：孝庄帝派尔硃荣世隆向她晓以大义，皇后却说： 天子是由我家设立的，现在竟然这样，我父亲当初如果自己作皇帝的话，现在什么事情也就决定了。 
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor Pail Rong Shilong told her that he knew the truth, but the empress said: Tianzi was set up by my family, and now it's like this. If my father had been emperor himself, everything would have been decided by now.

古文：世隆曰： 止自不为，若本自为之，臣今亦封王矣。 
现代文：尔硃荣世隆说道： 正是由于自己没有作皇帝，如果当初他自己作了皇帝，我现在也可封王了。 
English: Er Zhen Rong Shilong said, "It is precisely because I did not become emperor. If he had become emperor in the beginning, I could be crowned king now.

古文：帝既外逼于荣，内迫皇后，恒怏怏不以万乘为乐，唯幸寇盗未息，欲使与荣相持。
现代文：孝庄帝既然外受逼于尔硃荣，内又受逼于尔硃荣皇后，因此总是怏怏不乐，并不以自己是皇帝而感到快乐，唯可庆幸的是寇盗尚未平息，希望寇盗与尔硃荣荣相抗衡。
English: Since Emperor Xiaozhuang was externally forced by Er Qiong Rong and internally forced by the Empress of Er Qiong Rong, he was always unhappy and did not feel happy to be an emperor. However, fortunately, the banditry had not yet subsided, and he hoped that the banditry would compete with Er Qiong Rong.

古文：及关、陇既定，告捷之日，乃不甚喜，谓尚书令临淮王彧曰： 即今天下便是无贼。 
现代文：等到关、陇地区已经平定，捷报传到朝廷之时，魏主却并不感到十分高兴，只是对尚书令临淮王元说道： 从今以后天下便无贼寇了。 
English: By the time the Guan and Min regions had been pacified and the news had reached the imperial court, Lord Wei did not feel very happy, but said to Shang Shuling Lin Huai Wang Yuan: From now on, there will be no thieves and robbers in the world.

古文：彧见帝色不悦，曰： 臣恐贼平之后，方劳圣虑。 
现代文：元见孝庄帝脸色不悦，说道： 我担心贼寇平定以后，才真正会使圣上您多费思虑呢。 
English: Yuancheng Xiaozhuangdi looked displeased and said, "I'm afraid that only after the bandits are subdued will it really cause Your Holiness to think too much."

古文：帝畏馀人怪之，还以它语乱之曰： 然。抚宁荒馀，弥成不易。 
现代文：孝庄帝怕其他人感到奇怪，赶忙用别的话打乱他搪塞道： 是的，抚慰安定兵荒后残剩的百姓，也实在不容易。 
English: Xiaozhuangdi, afraid that others would be surprised, hurriedly interrupted them with other words, saying, "Yes, it's really not easy to comfort the remaining people after the war."

古文：荣见四方无事，奏称 参军许周劝臣取九锡，臣恶其言，已斥遣令去。 
现代文：尔硃荣荣见四方平定无事，便向孝庄帝上奏道： 参军许周劝我取得九锡的特殊荣宠，我很厌恶他的话，已经斥责了他一通，让他离开了。 
English: When Er Qian Rong Rong saw that there was nothing wrong with the four sides, he sent a report to Emperor Xiaozhuang: "Joining the army, Xu Zhou advised me to obtain the special honor of Jiuxi. I am disgusted with his words. I have reprimanded him and let him leave."

古文：荣时望得殊礼，故以意讽朝廷。帝实不欲与之，因称叹其忠。
现代文：尔硃荣荣当时希望能够得到孝庄帝特殊的礼遇，所以故意以此来委婉地向魏主暗示自己的愿望，孝庄帝实在不想给尔硃荣荣以特殊礼遇，因此只是大加称赞了一番尔硃荣荣的忠诚之心。
English: At that time, Er Qiong Rong Rong hoped to receive special courtesy from Emperor Xiaozhuang, so he deliberately used this to subtly suggest his wishes to the Wei Lord. Emperor Xiaozhuang really did not want to give Er Qiong Rong special courtesy, so he only praised Er Qiong Rong's loyalty.

古文：荣好猎，不舍寒暑，列围而进，令士卒必齐壹，虽遇险阻，不得违避，一鹿逸出，必数人坐死。
现代文：尔硃荣荣喜好打猎，不管寒暑，使军队列队四面围狩，令士卒一定要整齐划一，行动一致，即便遇到艰难险阻，也不得逃避。如果一只鹿逃出去，必定会有几个人因此而处死。
English: Er Rong Rong likes to hunt, regardless of the cold and hot weather, so that the army lined up to hunt on all sides, so that the soldiers must be neat and uniform, act in unison, even if they encounter difficulties and obstacles, they must not escape. If a deer escapes, there will certainly be several people killed.

古文：有一卒见虎而走，荣谓曰： 汝畏死邪！ 
现代文：有一士兵看到老虎后吓得逃开了，尔硃荣荣对他说道： 你怕死吗？ 
English: When a soldier saw the tiger and ran away in fright, Er Qirong said to him, "Are you afraid of death?

古文：即斩之。自是每猎，士卒如登战场。
现代文：当即便将那个士兵斩杀了，从此每次打猎，士卒们便如同上了战场一般。
English: When that soldier was killed, every time they went hunting after that, it was as if they were on the battlefield.

古文：尝见虎在穷谷中，荣令十馀人空手搏之，毋得损伤。
现代文：有一次在一条幽僻的山谷中发现了一只老虎，尔硃荣荣命十几个人空手与那只老虎搏斗，而且不能损伤老虎，死了好几个人，最后才擒获了老虎。
English: Once, a tiger was found in a secluded valley. Er Rong Rong ordered a dozen people to fight the tiger with their bare hands. They could not harm the tiger, and several people died before the tiger was finally captured.

古文：死者数人，卒擒得之，以此为乐，其下甚苦之。
现代文：尔硃荣荣以此为乐，他的部下却为此吃尽了苦头。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong enjoyed this, but his subordinates suffered a lot for it.

古文：太宰天穆从容谓荣曰： 大王勋业已盛，四方无事，唯宜修政养民，顺时搜狩，何必盛夏驰逐，感伤和气？ 
现代文：太宰元天穆曾很随意地对尔硃荣荣说： 大王已经建立了丰功伟业，现在四方安定无事，正应该兴修德政，休养生息，按着季节行围打猎，为什么一定要在盛夏时狩围打猎，伤害自然的和谐之气呢？ 
English: Dazai Yuan Tianmu once said to Er Qian Rong Rong very casually: The great king has established a great achievement, now the four directions are stable, it is time to build a virtuous government, rest and recuperate, and hunt according to the season. Why do you have to hunt in the middle of summer and harm the harmony of nature?

古文：荣攘袂曰： 灵后女主，不能自正，推奉天子，乃人臣常节。
现代文：尔硃荣荣挽起袖子说道： 胡灵太后，身为女主，行为不正，推奉天子，乃是做臣子的常节。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong rolled up his sleeves and said: Empress Dowager Huling, as a hostess, behaves improperly, and praises the Son of Heaven, which is a constant of being a courtier.

古文：葛荣之徒，本皆奴才，乘时作乱，譬如奴走，擒获即已。
现代文：葛荣之徒，本来都是些奴才之辈，乘时发动叛乱，好比是奴婢逃跑，擒获了就是了。
English: Ge Rong's followers were originally a generation of slaves who took advantage of the situation to launch a rebellion. It was like a slave escaping and being captured.

古文：顷来受国大恩，未能混壹海内，何得遽言勋业！
现代文：近来我等受国家大恩，却还未能统一海内，怎能说是已建立了功勋业绩！
English: Recently, we have received great grace from the state, but we have not yet been able to unify the country. How can we say that we have established meritorious performance?

古文：如闻朝士犹自宽纵，今秋欲与兄戒勒士马，校猎嵩高，令贪污朝贵，入围搏虎。
现代文：如果听到朝内官员还是松松垮垮，今年秋天想与你整顿兵马，到嵩山围猎，让那些贪官显贵到围子中与虎搏斗。
English: If you hear that the officials in the imperial court are still lax, I would like to rectify the soldiers and horses with you this autumn, go to Songshan to hunt, and let those corrupt officials fight the tiger in the ring.

古文：仍出鲁阳，历三荆，悉拥生蛮，北填六镇，回军之际，扫平汾胡。
现代文：然后再出兵鲁阳，扫平三荆之地，将南方蛮贼一并擒获，向北镇抚六镇之后，回军的时候，再铲除汾州界内的胡匪。
English: Then, he sent troops to Luyang to sweep the land of the Three Thorns, and captured the southern bandits together. After heading northward to six towns, when returning to the army, he eradicated the Hu bandits within the borders of Zhangzhou.

古文：明年，简练精骑，分出江、淮，萧衍若降，乞万户侯；如其不降，以数千骑径度缚取。
现代文：明年，挑选精锐骑兵，分道出兵长江、淮河，萧衍如果投降的话，给他一个万户侯；如果不投降，便率数千骑兵直渡江、淮，将其擒缚。
English: Next year, select the elite cavalry and send troops to the Yangtze River and Huaihe River. If Xiao Yan surrenders, give him a million households; if he does not surrender, he will lead thousands of cavalry straight across the Yangtze River and Huaihe River to tie him down.

古文：然后与兄奉天子，巡四方，乃可称勋耳。
现代文：然后我与你侍奉天子，巡视四方，这才可以称得上是建立了功勋啊。
English: Then I will serve the Son of Heaven with you and inspect the four directions, which can be said to have established merit.

古文：今不频猎，兵士懈怠，安可复用也！ 
现代文：现在如果不频频围猎的话，士兵们就会懈怠，怎么能够再用呢！ 
English: Now, if they don't hunt around frequently, the soldiers will slack off, how can they use it again!

古文：城阳王徽之妃，帝之舅女；侍中李彧，延寔之子，帝之姊婿也。
现代文：城阳王元徽的妃子，是孝庄帝舅舅的女儿；侍中李，是李延之子，也是孝庄帝的姐夫。
English: The concubine of King Yuanhui of Chengyang was the daughter of Emperor Xiaozhuang's uncle; Li Yan, the son of Li Yan, was also Emperor Xiaozhuang's brother-in-law.

古文：徽、彧欲得权宠，恶荣为己害，日毁荣于帝，劝帝除之。
现代文：元徽、李想得到权力，获得孝庄帝的恩宠，便忌恨尔硃荣荣，认为他是自己的障碍，于是终日在孝庄帝面前诋毁尔硃荣荣，劝孝庄帝除掉他。
English: Yuan Hui and Li wanted to gain power and obtain the favor of Emperor Xiaozhuang, so they hated Er Qian Rong Rong and thought that he was their own obstacle, so they slandered Er Qian Rong in front of Emperor Xiaozhuang all day long and advised Emperor Xiaozhuang to get rid of him.

古文：帝惩河阴之难，恐荣终难保，由是密有图荣之意。
现代文：孝庄帝从河阴之难中吸取教训，担心尔硃荣荣最终难以驾驶，从此便暗暗生发了图谋尔硃荣荣的想法。
English: Xiaozhuangdi learned a lesson from the difficulties of the river shadow, worried that it would eventually be difficult to drive, and from then on, the idea of trying to drive a car was born.

古文：侍中杨侃、尚书右仆射元罗亦预其谋。
现代文：侍中杨侃、尚书右仆射元罗也参与了这一计划。
English: Yang Kan, a chamberlain, and Shoshu's right-hand man, Shogenro, also took part in this plan.

古文：会荣请入朝，欲视皇后娩乳。徽等劝帝因其入，刺杀之。
现代文：正赶上尔硃荣荣请求入朝，想照看皇后分娩，元徽等人便劝孝庄帝趁尔硃荣荣入朝之际刺杀他。
English: Just in time for Er Rong Rong's request to enter the imperial court, wanting to watch the queen give birth, Yuan Hui and others advised Emperor Xiaozhuang to assassinate him on the occasion of Er Rong Rong's entry into the imperial court.

古文：唯胶东侯李侃晞、济阴王晖业言： 荣若来，必当有备，恐不可图。 
现代文：只有胶东侯李侃、济阴王元晖业说道： 尔硃荣荣如果来的话，一定会有所防备，恐怕不好对付。 
English: Only Jiaodong Hou Li Kan and Jiyin Wang Yuan Rongye said: If Er Qiong Rong Rong comes, he must be prepared, I'm afraid it's not easy to deal with.

古文：又欲杀其党与，发兵拒之。
现代文：元徽等人又想杀掉尔硃荣荣的党羽，派兵去对付尔硃荣荣。
English: They also feared that if they killed him, his followers would rise up against them.

古文：帝疑未定，而洛阳人怀忧惧，中书侍郎邢子才之徒巳避之东出。荣乃遍与朝士书，相任去留。
现代文：孝庄帝犹疑不定，洛阳城中官民忧虑害怕，中书侍郎邢子才之徒已经跑出洛阳城向东逃走了，尔硃荣荣于是给朝中每个大臣都写了一封信，表示各人可以随意去留。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang hesitated, the officials and people in Luoyang City were worried and afraid, and the courtiers and scholars had already run out of Luoyang City and fled to the east. Er Rong Rong then wrote a letter to every minister in the court and said that everyone could stay at will.

古文：中书舍人温子升以书呈帝，帝恒望其不来，及见书，以荣必来，色甚不悦。
现代文：中书舍人温子将信呈给了孝庄帝，孝庄帝总希望尔硃荣荣不来，等到看了信后，知道尔硃荣荣一定要来，脸色很不高兴。
English: The person who wrote the letter, Atsuko, presented the letter to Emperor Xiaozhuang. Emperor Xiaozhuang always hoped that Er Qian Rong Rong would not come. After reading the letter, he knew that Er Qian Rong Rong must come, and his face was very unhappy.

古文：子才名邵，以字行，峦之族弟也。
现代文：邢子才名叫邢劭，以其字相称，他是邢峦的族弟。
English: The son of a mule is called a mule. He is the younger brother of a mule.

古文：时人多以字行者，旧史皆因之。
现代文：当时有很多人都是以字相称，所以旧史书都因袭下来称其字。
English: At that time, many people were familiar with the word, so the old history books were all named after it.

古文：武卫将军奚毅，建义初往来通命，帝每期之甚重，然犹以荣所亲信，不敢与之言情。
现代文：武卫将军奚毅，建义初年以来往返传达使命，孝庄帝对他很看重，但又由于他是尔硃荣荣所亲信的人，因此不敢跟他说实情。
English: Since the first year of Jianyi, Wuwei General Zou Yi has been traveling back and forth to convey the mission. Emperor Xiaozhuang attaches great importance to him, but because he is a person trusted by Er Qian Rong Rong, he does not dare to tell him the truth.

古文：毅曰： 若必有变，臣宁死陛下，不能事契胡！ 
现代文：奚毅对孝庄帝说： 如果有什么变故的话，我宁肯为陛下而死，也不会去为尔硃荣荣这个契胡做事。 
English: Hao Yi said to Emperor Xiaozhuang: "If anything should happen, I would rather die for your majesty than work for this ruffian Er Qian Rong Rong."

古文：帝曰： 朕保天柱无异心，亦不忘卿忠款。 
现代文：孝庄帝说道： 朕保证天柱将军尔硃荣荣不会有什么异心，朕也不会忘记你对我的忠诚。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang said, "I only hope that General Tianzhu has no ill will toward me, and I do not expect you to be loyal to me."

古文：尔硃世隆疑帝欲为变，乃为匿名书自榜其门云： 天子与杨侃、高道穆等为计，欲杀天柱。 取以呈荣。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆怀疑孝庄帝欲有所企图，便写了封匿名信贴在了自己家门上，信上称： 天子与杨侃、高道穆等人策划，打算杀掉天柱将军尔硃荣荣。 
English: Er Qiong Rong Shilong suspected that Emperor Xiaozhuang was up to something, so he wrote an anonymous letter and posted it on the door of his house. The letter said: Tianzi and Yang Kan, Gao Daomu and others were plotting to kill Tianzhu General Er Qiong Rong.

古文：荣自恃其强，不以为意，手毁其书，唾地曰： 世隆无胆。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆又取下这封信呈送给了尔硃荣荣。尔硃荣荣自恃自己的力量强大，对此并不在意，亲手撕了这封信，朝地上唾了一口道： 尔硃荣世隆太没有胆量了。
English: Er Qiong Rong Shilong also took down the letter and presented it to Er Qiong Rong. Er Qiong Rong boasted that his strength was strong, but he didn't care. He tore the letter with his own hands and spat on the ground, saying, "Er Qiong Rong Shilong is too gutless."

古文：谁敢生心！ 
现代文：谁敢有这样的想法！ 
English: Who would dare to think like that!

古文：荣妻北乡长公主亦劝荣不行，荣不从。
现代文：尔硃荣荣的妻子北乡长公主也劝尔硃荣荣不要入朝，尔硃荣荣不听。
English: Er Qiong Rong Rong's wife, the eldest princess of Beixiang, also advised Er Qiong Rong Rong not to enter the imperial court, but Er Qiong Rong did not listen.

古文：是月，荣将四五千骑发并州，时人皆言荣反，又云 天子必当图荣 。
现代文：这一月，尔硃荣荣率四五千骑兵从并州出发，当时人们都说： 尔硃荣荣要反叛 ，又说： 天子肯定要图谋杀了尔硃荣荣。 
English: In this month, Er Qiong Rong Rong led four or five thousand cavalrymen to set out from Anhui Province. At that time, people said, "Er Qiong Rong Rong will rebel," and also said, "Heaven's Son will definitely try to murder Er Qiong Rong Rong."

古文：九月，荣至洛阳，帝即欲杀之，以太宰天穆在并州，恐为后患，故忍未发，并召天穆。
现代文：九月，尔硃荣荣到了洛阳，孝庄帝当时便想杀了他，由于太宰元天穆还在并州，担心成为后患，所以忍住未杀尔硃荣荣，同时召元天穆进京。
English: In September, Er Qiong Rong Rong arrived in Luoyang. At that time, Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to kill him. Since Dazai Yuan Tianmu was still in the annexed state, he was afraid of becoming a hindrance, so he refrained from killing Er Qiong Rong Rong and summoned Yuan Tianmu to Beijing.

古文：有人告荣云 帝欲图之。 
现代文：有人告诉尔硃荣荣说： 皇帝想图谋杀了您。 
English: Someone told Er Qian Rong Rong: "The emperor is trying to murder you."

古文：荣即具奏，帝曰： 外人亦言王欲害我，岂可信之！ 
现代文：尔硃荣荣便将这话上奏了孝庄帝，孝庄帝说道： 外边的人也传言说你想害了我，怎么可以相信这些话呢！ 
English: Er Qian Rong Rong then played these words for Emperor Xiaozhuang, and Emperor Xiaozhuang said: People outside are also rumored to say that you want to harm me, how can you believe these words!

古文：于是荣不自疑，每入谒帝，从人不过数十，又皆挺身不持兵仗。
现代文：于是尔硃荣荣便不再怀疑，每次入朝拜谒皇帝，随从之人也不过几十，并且都赤手不带兵器。
English: As a result, Er Rong Rong no longer doubted. Every time he entered the court to worship the emperor, there were only dozens of people following him, and they were all bare-handed without weapons.

古文：帝欲止，城阳王徽曰： 纵不反，亦何可耐！况不可保邪！ 
现代文：孝庄帝又打算放弃原来的想法，不再杀尔硃荣荣，城阳王元徽说道： 即使尔硃荣荣不反叛，又怎么能容忍他这样呢，何况又怎样保证他不反呢？ 
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor also planned to give up the original idea and no longer kill Er Qian Rong Rong. Chengyang Wang Yuanhui said: Even if Er Qian Rong Rong does not rebel, how can he be tolerated like this, and how can he ensure that he does not rebel?

古文：先是，长星出中台，扫大角；恒州人高荣祖颇知天文，荣问之，对曰： 除旧布新之象也。 
现代文：这之前，彗星出中台，扫过天王座。恒州人高荣祖对天文历象很通晓，尔硃荣荣便问他这一现象的吉凶，高荣祖回答说： 这是除旧布新的预兆。 
English: Before that, a comet swept across the celestial throne. Gao Rongzu, a native of Hengzhou, was well versed in the astronomical calendar. Er Qian Rongrong asked him about the auspiciousness of this phenomenon. Gao Rongzu replied, "This is an omen of removing old cloth and replacing it with a new one."

古文：荣甚悦。
现代文：尔硃荣荣听了非常高兴。
English: Er Rong Rong was very happy to hear this.

古文：荣至洛阳，行台郎中李显和曰： 天柱至，那无九锡，安须王自索也！亦是天子不见机。 
现代文：尔硃荣荣到了洛阳城后，行台郎中李显和说： 天柱将军来到京城，怎能不加九锡，何须大王亲自索要，当今天子太不懂事了。 
English: After Er Qiong Rong Rong arrived at Luoyang City, Li Xianhe, one of the merchants, said: When General Tianzhu came to the capital, how could he not add nine tin, and why did the great king himself ask for it? He was too stupid.

古文：都督郭罗刹曰： 今年真可作禅文，何但九锡！ 
现代文：都督郭罗察说： 今年定可以写作禅让的文章，何止加九锡呀！ 
English: Governor Guo Rocha said, "This year, I'm sure I can write a zen-like article. I'll do my best!"

古文：参军褚光曰： 人言并州城上有紫气，何虑天柱不应之！ 
现代文：参军褚光说： 人们都说并州城上空有紫气，不必担心天柱大将军不应此征兆！ 
English: Joining the army, Hao Guang said: People say that there is a purple atmosphere over the city of Ningzhou, don't worry, General Tianzhu should not take this as a sign!

古文：荣下人皆陵侮帝左右，无所忌惮，故其事皆上闻。
现代文：尔硃荣荣的部下对孝庄帝左右之人大加凌侮，无所顾忌，所以这些事都传到了孝庄帝那里。
English: Rong Rong's subordinates were mercilessly insulting the people around Emperor Xiaozhuang, so these things were passed on to Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：奚毅又见帝，求间，帝即下明光殿与语。
现代文：奚毅又入见孝庄帝，请求单独说话，孝庄帝便走下明光殿与他交谈，知道他非常忠诚。
English: Zhai Yi went to see Emperor Xiaozhuang again and asked to speak to him alone. Emperor Xiaozhuang then went down to the Mingguang Palace to talk to him, knowing that he was very loyal.

古文：知其至诚，乃召城阳王徽及杨侃、李彧，告以毅语。
现代文：于是便召见城阳王元徽及杨侃、李等人，将奚毅的话告诉了他们。
English: Therefore, he summoned Wang Yuanhui, Yang Kan, Li and others from Chengyang to tell them the words of Zhai Yi.

古文：荣小女适帝兄子陈留王宽，荣尝指之曰： 我终当得此婿力。 
现代文：尔硃荣荣的小女儿嫁给皇帝的侄子陈留王元宽，尔硃荣荣有一次指着元宽说： 我最终会得到这位女婿的帮助。 
English: Er Qian Rong Rong's youngest daughter married the emperor's nephew Chen Liu Wang Yuan Kuan. Er Qian Rong Rong once pointed to Yuan Kuan and said, "I will eventually get help from this son-in-law."

古文：徽以白帝，曰： 荣虑陛下终为己患，脱有东宫，必贪立孩幼，若皇后不生太子，则立陈留耳。 
现代文：元徽将这事告诉了孝庄帝，说道 尔硃荣荣顾虑到陛下最终会成为他的后患，如果一旦有了东宫太子，他必然会立幼子为帝，如果皇后生的不是男孩，就会立陈留王。 
English: Yuan Hui told Emperor Xiaozhuang about this, saying, "Er Rong Rong is concerned that His Majesty will eventually become his successor. If there is a crown prince of the Eastern Palace, he will surely make his child emperor. If the queen's child is not a boy, he will make Chen Rong king."

古文：帝梦手持刀自割落十指，恶之，告徽及杨侃。徽曰： 蝮蛇螫手，壮士解腕。割指亦是其类，乃吉祥也。 
现代文：孝庄帝做梦梦见自己持刀割掉了自己的十个手指，很讨厌这个梦，便告诉了元徽和杨侃，元徽说道： 蝮蛇螫了手，壮士便要砍掉手腕，割掉手指跟这同一道理，这是吉祥之兆啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang had a dream that he cut off his own ten fingers with a knife. He hated this dream, so he told Yuan Hui and Yang Kan. Yuan Hui said: "When a boa constrictor cuts off a hand, a strong man will cut off his wrist, and the same applies to cutting off fingers. This is an auspicious sign!"

古文：戊子，天穆至洛阳，帝出迎之。
现代文：戊子，元天穆到了洛阳，孝庄帝出宫迎接。
English: When Empress Wu Zi and Empress Yuan Tianmu arrived in Luoyang, Emperor Xiaozhuang came out to greet them.

古文：荣与天穆并从入西林园宴射，荣奏曰： 近来侍官皆不习武，陛下宜将五百骑出猎，因省辞讼。 
现代文：尔硃荣荣与元天穆一起随孝庄帝来到西林园宴饮猎射，尔硃荣荣奏请道： 近来侍卫之臣都不再习武，陛下应率五百骑兵到外面围猎，正好也可以解脱一下由于处理辞讼公务带来的劳苦。 
English: Er Qian Rong Rong and Yuan Tianmu together with Emperor Xiaozhuang came to the West Forest Garden for a banquet and hunting. Er Qian Rong Rong requested: Recently, the attendants and guards have stopped practicing martial arts. His Majesty should lead five hundred cavalry to hunt outside. It is just right to get rid of the labor caused by the handling of the resignation proceedings.

古文：先是，奚毅言荣欲因猎挟天子移都，由是帝益疑之。
现代文：在这之前，奚毅曾告诉孝庄帝说尔硃荣荣打算趁围猎之时挟迫天子迁都，因此孝庄帝更加怀疑尔硃荣荣了。
English: Prior to this, Zou Yi had told Emperor Xiaozhuang that Er Qian Rong Rong intended to take advantage of the siege to blackmail Tianzi into moving the capital, so Emperor Xiaozhuang was even more suspicious of Er Qian Rong Rong.

古文：辛卯，帝召中书舍人温子升，告以杀荣状，并问以杀董卓事，子升具通本末。
现代文：辛卯，孝庄帝召见中书舍人温子，告诉了他欲杀尔硃荣荣之事，并问他当年王允杀董卓的事，温子从头至尾详细地谈了那件事。
English: Xinwu, Emperor Xiaozhuang summoned Wen Zi, a scholar of the Middle Kingdom, and told him that he wanted to kill Er Zi Rong Rong, and asked him about Wang Yun's killing of Dong Zhuo that year. Wen Zi talked about it in detail from beginning to end.

古文：帝曰： 王允若即赦凉州人，必不应至此。 
现代文：孝庄帝说道： 王允当时若立即赦免凉州人的话，一定不会落到最后那种地步。 
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor said: If Wang Yun had immediately pardoned the people of Liangzhou at that time, he would not have fallen to the last step.

古文：良久，语子升曰： 朕之情理，卿所具知。
现代文：过了许久，孝庄帝又对温子说： 朕内心的真实情感和想法，你是都知道的。
English: After a long time, Xiao Zhuangdi said to Wen Zi: You all know the true feelings and thoughts in my heart.

古文：死犹须为，况不必死！吾宁为高贵乡公死，不为常道乡公生！ 
现代文：即使冒死也一定要做，何况还不一定死呢，我宁愿象高贵乡公那样死，也不愿象常道乡公那样活着！ 
English: Even if I risk death, I must do it. What's more, I don't have to die. I'd rather die like a noble villager than live like an ordinary villager!

古文：帝谓杀荣、天穆，即赦其党，皆应不动。
现代文：孝庄帝认为杀掉尔硃荣荣、元天穆，然后立即赦免其党羽，那些党羽便一定都不会反叛了。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang believed that if he killed Er Qian Rong Rong and Yuan Tian Mu, and then immediately pardoned their followers, those followers would definitely not rebel.

古文：应诏王道习曰： 尔硃世隆、司马子如、硃元龙特为荣所委任，具知天下虚实，谓不宜留。 
现代文：应诏官王道习说： 尔硃荣世隆、司马子如、朱元龙等人深受尔硃荣荣的信任，都很了解国家的虚实，我认为不应留着他们。 
English: Wang Daoxi, the vice-premier, said: "Er Rong Rong Shilong, Sima Ziru, Zhu Yuanlong and others are deeply trusted by Er Rong Rong, and are very familiar with the reality of the country. I think they should not be kept.

古文：徽及杨侃皆曰： 若世隆不全，仲远、天光岂有来理！ 
现代文：元徽和杨侃都说： 如果尔硃荣世隆被杀，那么尔硃荣仲远和尔硃荣天光怎么还会来呢！ 
English: Yuan Hui and Yang Kan both said: If Er Qiong Rong Shilong was killed, then how can Er Qiong Rong Zhongyuan and Er Qiong Rong Tianlu still come!

古文：帝亦以为然。徽曰： 荣腰间常有刀，或能狼戾伤人，临事愿陛下起避之。 
现代文：孝庄帝也认为他们二人说的对，元徽又说道： 尔硃荣荣腰间经常带着刀，也许逼急了会伤人的，事发的时候希望陛下起身躲避一下。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang also thought that the two of them were right. Yuan Hui also said, "Er Qian Rong Rong often carries a knife around his waist. If he is in a hurry, he may hurt someone. When something happens, I hope that His Majesty will get up and take cover.

古文：乃伏侃等十馀人于明光殿东。
现代文：于是杨侃等十余人便在明光殿东侧埋伏了下来。
English: As a result, more than ten people, including Yang Kan, lay in ambush on the east side of the Mingguang Palace.

古文：其日，荣与天穆并入，坐食未讫，起出，侃等从东阶上殿，见荣、天穆已至中庭，事不果。
现代文：这一天，尔硃荣荣与元天穆一同入朝，坐下来还没吃完饭，便起身出去了，杨侃等人从东边的台阶上殿时，看到尔硃荣荣、元天穆已经到了中庭，这一次没能成功。
English: On this day, Er Qian Rong Rong and Yuan Tianmu entered the imperial court together, sat down and did not finish eating, then got up and went out. When Yang Kan and others went up to the hall from the eastern steps, they saw Er Qian Rong Rong and Yuan Tianmu had already arrived at the atrium. This time they did not succeed.

古文：壬辰，帝忌曰；癸巳，荣忌日。
现代文：壬辰，这一天是皇帝的忌日，癸巳，这一天是尔硃荣荣的忌日。
English: Im Chen, this day is the day of the emperor's death, Jinsi, this day is the day of Er Rong Rong's death.

古文：甲午，荣暂入，即诣陈留王家饮洒，极醉，遂言病动，频日不入。
现代文：甲午，尔硃荣荣短暂上朝之后，便到陈留王家里饮酒去了，喝得大醉，于是便说生病了，连日没有上朝。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon, after Er Qian Rong Rong briefly ascended to the throne, he went to Chen Liu Wang's home to drink alcohol. He was very drunk, so he said that he was ill and did not ascend to the throne for several days.

古文：帝谋颇泄，世隆又以告荣，且劝其速发。荣轻帝，以为无能为，曰： 何匆匆！ 
现代文：孝庄帝的计划大多被泄漏出去了，尔硃荣世隆又将这些告诉了尔硃荣荣，并且劝他赶快启程逃走，尔硃荣荣对孝庄帝很轻视，认为他不能有所作为，说道： 何必这么着急呢！ 
English: Most of Xiaozhuangdi's plans were leaked out, and Er Qiong Rong Shilong told these to Er QiongRong, and advised him to quickly leave for escape. Er QiongRong despised Xiaozhuangdi very much, thinking that he could not make a difference, and said: Why do you have to be in such a hurry!

古文：预帝谋者皆惧，帝患之。
现代文：参预孝庄帝谋划的人都非常害怕，孝庄帝也很担心。
English: The people who took part in Xiaozhuangdi's plan were very scared, and Xiaozhuangdi was also very worried.

古文：城阳王徽曰： 以生太子为辞，荣必入朝，因此毙之。 
现代文：城阳王元徽说： 以皇后生太子为借口，尔硃荣荣肯定会入朝，趁机便可杀了他。 
English: King Yuanhui of Chengyang said, "Using the birth of the crown prince as an excuse, Er Qian Rong Rong will definitely enter the imperial court, and you can kill him when you have the chance."

古文：帝曰： 后怀孕始九月，可乎？ 
现代文：孝庄帝说： 皇后才怀孕九个月，这样说行吗？ 
English: Xiao Zhuangdi said, "The empress has only been pregnant for nine months, is it okay to say this?

古文：徽曰： 妇人不及期而产者多矣，彼必不疑。 
现代文：元徽说道： 妇人不到日期而产子的多了，尔硃荣荣肯定不会怀疑的。 
English: Yuan Hui said: If a woman has more children than the due date, Er Qian Rong Rong will certainly not doubt it.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：孝庄帝于是听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：戊戌，帝伏兵于明光殿东序，声言皇子生，遣徽驰骑至荣第告之。
现代文：戊戌，孝庄帝在明光殿东厢埋伏武士，对外声言说皇后生了皇太子，派元徽飞马赶至尔硃荣荣的府第告诉他这一消息。
English: In Wuyi, Emperor Xiaozhuang ambushed the samurai in the east wing of the Mingguang Palace. He announced to the outside world that the empress had given birth to the crown prince, and sent Yuanhui Pegasus to rush to Erqi Rong Rong's palace to tell him the news.

古文：荣方与上党王天穆博，徽脱荣帽，欢舞盘旋，兼殿内文武传声趣之，荣遂信之，与天穆俱入朝。
现代文：尔硃荣荣当时正跟上党王元天穆赌博，元徽摘下了尔硃荣荣的帽子，拿在手上欢舞盘旋，向他祝贺，再加上殿内文武信使也前来催促尔硃荣荣，于是尔硃荣荣便相信了这一消息，跟元天穆一起来到了朝廷。
English: At that time, Er Qian Rong Rong was keeping up with the gambling of the party king, Yuan Tianmu. Yuan Hui took off Er Qian Rong Rong's hat, held it in his hand, danced around and congratulated him. In addition, the courier also came to urge Er Qian Rong Rong. Therefore, Er Qian Rong Rong believed this news and came to the imperial court with Yuan Tianmu.

古文：帝闻荣来，不觉失色，中书舍人温子升曰： 陛下色变。 
现代文：孝庄帝听说尔硃荣荣来了，不禁惊慌失色，中书舍人温子说： 陛下脸色都变了。 
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang heard that Er Qian Rong Rong had arrived, he couldn't help but panic and lose his color. Wen Zi, a Chinese scholar, said, "His Majesty's face has changed.

古文：帝连索酒饮之。
现代文：孝庄帝赶忙连连要酒来喝。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang hurriedly ordered more and more wine.

古文：帝令子升作赦文，既成，执以出，遇荣自外入，问： 是何文书？ 
现代文：孝庄帝命温子起草赦文，写成之后，温子拿着走出了宫殿，这时正遇上尔硃荣荣从外面进来，尔硃荣荣问道： 这是什么文书？ 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ordered Wen Zi to draft a pardon. After it was written, Wen Zi took it and walked out of the palace. At that time, he met Er Qian Rong Rong coming in from outside. Er Qian Rong Rong asked: What is this document?

古文：子升颜色不变，曰： 敕。 
现代文：温子神色不变，答道： 这是圣旨。 
English: Wen Ziqi, his face unchanged, said: "This is an order.

古文：荣不取视而入。
现代文：尔硃荣荣没有拿过来看一看便走了进去。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong didn't take a look at it and went inside.

古文：帝在东序下西向坐，荣、天穆在御榻西北南向坐。
现代文：孝庄帝在东墙下西向坐，尔硃荣荣、元天穆在御榻西北面南向坐。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang sat to the west under the east wall, while Er Qian Rong Rong and Yuan Tianmu sat to the south in the northwest of Otate.

古文：徽入，始一拜，荣见光禄少卿鲁安、典御李侃晞等抽刀从东户入，即起趋御座。帝先横刀膝下，遂手刃之。
现代文：元徽进来后，刚拜了一拜，尔硃荣荣便看见光禄少卿鲁安、典御李侃等人持刀从东门闯了进来，尔硃荣荣赶快起身快步来到孝庄帝的座位旁，孝庄帝预先将刀横在了膝下，于是亲手杀了尔硃荣荣。
English: After Yuan Hui came in, he had just bowed for a while, when Er Qian Rong Rong saw Guanglu Shaoqing Lu'an, Emperor Li Kan and others break in from the east gate with a knife. Er Qian Rong Rong quickly got up and walked quickly to the seat of Xiaozhuangdi. Xiaozhuangdi put the knife under his knee in advance, so he killed Er Qian Rong Rong with his own hands.

古文：安等乱斫，荣与天穆同时俱死。
现代文：鲁安等奔上前去一阵乱砍，尔硃荣荣与元天穆一起被杀死。
English: Lu'an and others rushed forward to slash at random, and Er Qian Rong Rong was killed together with Yuan Tianmu.

古文：荣子菩提及车骑将军尔硃阳睹等三十人从荣入宫，亦为伏兵所杀。
现代文：尔硃荣荣的儿子尔硃荣菩堤及车骑将军尔硃荣阳睹等三十名随尔硃荣荣入宫的人，也都被伏兵所杀。
English: Thirty people who entered the palace with Er Er Rong Rong, including Er Er Rong's son Er Er Rong Bodhi and the cavalry general Er Er Rong Yang Gan, were also killed by the ambush.

古文：帝得荣手板，上有数牒启，皆左右去留人名，非其腹心者悉在出限。
现代文：孝庄帝得到了尔硃荣荣的手版，上面有几张启奏书，记的都是些皇帝左右要除掉或留下的人名，不是尔硃荣荣心腹的人均在赶出之列。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang obtained Er Qian Rong Rong's manuscript, on which there are several opening notes, all of which are the names of people who the emperor wants to remove or leave behind. People who are not Er Qian Rong Rong's henchmen are among those who are driven out.

古文：帝曰： 竖子若过今日，遂不可制。 
现代文：魏主说道： 这小子如果活过了今天，就难以制驭了。 
English: Wei Lord said: If this boy survives today, he will be difficult to control.

古文：于是内外喜噪，声满洛阳城，百僚入贺。
现代文：于是朝廷内外一片欢喜之声，高兴的声音布满洛阳城。文武百官纷纷入朝庆贺。
English: As a result, there was an outpouring of joy both inside and outside the imperial court, and the sounds of joy spread throughout Luoyang City. Hundreds of civil and military officials came in the morning to celebrate.

古文：帝登阊阖门，下诏大赦，遣武卫将军奚毅、前燕州刺史崔渊将兵镇北中。
现代文：孝庄帝登上阊阖门，下诏实行大赦，派武卫将军奚毅、前燕州刺史崔渊率兵镇守北中城。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, issued an edict to implement amnesty, and sent Wuwei General Zou Yi and former Yanzhou Governor Cui Yuan to guard the north of the city.

古文：是夜，尔硃世隆奉北乡长公主帅荣部曲，焚西阳门，出屯河阴。
现代文：当夜，北乡长公主率尔硃荣荣的部曲烧毁了西阳门，逃出洛阳城，屯驻于河阴。
English: On the same night, the eldest princess of Beixiang, led by Zhu Rongrong, burned down the Xiyang Gate, escaped from Luoyang City, and settled in Heyin.

古文：卫将军贺拔胜与荣党田怡等闻荣死。奔赴荣第。
现代文：卫将军贺拔胜与尔硃荣荣的亲信田怡等人听说尔硃荣荣已死，赶忙奔赴尔硃荣荣的府第。
English: When Wei general He Baxeng and Er Qian Rong Rong's close confidant Tian Yi heard that Er Qian Rong Rong was dead, they rushed to Er Qian Rong's residence.

古文：时宫殿门犹未加严防，怡等议即攻门，胜止之曰： 天子既行大事，必当有备，吾等众少，何可轻尔！但得出城，更为它计。 
现代文：当时宫殿大门还未来得及严加防卫，田怡等商议立即攻打皇宫，贺拔胜说： 天子既然做了如此重大之事，一定会早有防备，我等人马这么少，怎么能轻率从事，只能逃出洛阳城，再想别的办法吧。 
English: At that time, the gates of the palace had not yet had time to be rigorously defended. Tian Yi and others discussed attacking the palace immediately. He Ba Sheng said: Since the Son of Heaven has done such a great thing, he must have prepared early. We are so few, how can we rashly engage? We can only escape from Luoyang City. Let's think of another way.

古文：怡乃止。
现代文：田悦这才作罢。
English: Tian Yi and other talents stopped.

古文：及世隆走，胜遂不从，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：等到尔硃荣世隆逃走时，贺拔胜却没有跟从他一起出逃，孝庄帝对贺拔胜很嘉奖。
English: When Er Qiong Rong Shilong fled, He Baxing did not flee with him. Emperor Xiaozhuang was very appreciative of He Baxing.

古文：硃瑞虽为荣所委，而善处朝廷之间，帝亦善遇之，故瑞从世隆走而中道逃还。
现代文：朱瑞虽然被尔硃荣荣所信任，但在朝廷大臣中间关系处得很好，孝庄帝对他也很善待，所以朱瑞随尔硃荣世隆出逃后中途逃了回来。
English: Although Zhu Rui was trusted by Er Qian Rong Rong, the relationship between the ministers of the imperial court was very good, and Emperor Xiaozhuang was also kind to him, so Zhu Rui escaped halfway back after fleeing with Er Qian Rong Shilong.

古文：荣素厚金紫光禄大夫司马子如，荣死，子如自宫中突出，至荣第，弃家，随荣妻子走出城。
现代文：尔硃荣荣平素对金紫光禄大夫司马子如很器重，尔硃荣荣死后，司马子如从宫中逃了出来，来到了尔硃荣荣的府第，抛弃了家人，随尔硃荣荣的妻子和儿子逃出了洛阳城。
English: Er Qiong Rong Rong had always been very important to the golden purple doctor Sima Ziru. After Er Qiong Rong Rong's death, Sima Ziru escaped from the palace, came to Er Qiong Rong's capital, abandoned his family, and his wife and son fled Luoyang City.

古文：世隆即欲还北，子如曰： 兵不厌诈，今天下恟恟，唯强是视，当此之际，不可以弱示人。若亟北走，恐变生肘腋。不如分兵守河桥，还军向京师，出其不意，或可成功。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆想马上便回到北方，司马子如说道： 兵不厌诈，当今天下一片混乱，只有强者才能号令天下，当此之际，不能以弱者的姿态示之于人，如果我们急急忙忙北逃的话，恐怕内部就会发生不测，不如分兵据守河桥，崐回军京师，出其不意，或许可以成功。
English: Er Qian Rong Shilong wanted to return to the north immediately. Sima Zi said: "The soldiers are not tired of deception. Today is a chaos. Only the strong can command the world. At this time, we cannot show it to people as the weak. If we hastily flee to the north, I am afraid that something will happen inside. It is better to guard the river bridge and bring back the Beijing division. If we are surprised, we may succeed."

古文：假使不得所欲，亦足示有馀力，使天下畏我之强，不敢叛散。 
现代文：即使不能成功，也足以显示我们还有余力，使天下之人畏惧我们的强大，不敢叛离。 
English: Even if we do not succeed, it will be enough to show that we still have enough strength to make people around the world fear our strength and not dare to defect.

古文：世隆从之。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆听从了他的建议。
English: Er Rong Shilong followed his advice.

古文：己亥，攻河桥，擒奚毅等，杀之，据北中城。
现代文：己亥，尔硃荣世隆的部队攻占了河桥，擒获了奚毅等人，将他们杀掉，占据了北中城。
English: At the same time, Rong Shilong's troops captured Heqiao, captured Zou Yi and others, killed them, and occupied Beizhong City.

古文：魏朝大惧，遣前华阳太守段育慰谕之，世隆斩首以徇。
现代文：北魏朝廷大为惊恐，于是派遣前华阳太守段育前往慰问安抚，尔硃荣世隆将段育斩首示众。
English: The Northern Wei court was greatly alarmed, so it sent the former Huayang governor Duan Yu to offer condolences and appeasement. Erqi Rong Shilong publicly beheaded Duan Yu.

古文：魏以雍州刺史尔硃天光为侍中、仪同三司，以司空杨津为都督并、肆等九州诸军事、骠骑大将军、并州刺史，兼尚书令、北道大行台，经略河、汾。
现代文：北魏任命雍州刺史尔硃荣天光为侍中、仪同三司。任命司空杨津为都督并、肆等九州诸军事、骠骑大将军、并州刺史，兼尚书令、北道行台，负责统辖河、汾地区。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yong Zhou's aide-de-camp Shil Rong Rong Tianguang as an aide-de-camp and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and appointed the aide-de-camp Kuang Yangjin as the governor-general of the capital, the military commander-in-chief of Kyushu, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, the aide-de-camp to the governor-general, the aide-de-camp to the governor-general, the aide-de-camp to the governor-general, the aide-de-camp to the governor-general, the aide-

古文：荣之入洛也，以高敖曹自随，禁于驼牛署。
现代文：尔硃荣荣到洛阳的时候，将高敖曹带在身边，囚禁驼牛署中。
English: When Er Qian Rong Rong arrived in Luoyang, he took Gao Qian Cao with him and imprisoned him in the camel station.

古文：荣死，帝引见，劳勉之。
现代文：尔硃荣荣死后，孝庄帝召见高敖曹，慰问嘉勉了他。
English: After Er Qian Rong Rong's death, Emperor Xiaozhuang summoned Gao Qian Cao to offer condolences to him.

古文：兄乾自东冀州驰赴洛阳，帝以乾为河北大使，敖曹为直阁将军，使归，招集乡曲为表里形援。
现代文：高敖曹的哥哥高乾从东冀州赶到了洛阳城，孝庄帝任命高乾为河北大使，高敖曹为直将军，让他们回去，召集乡勇作为朝廷的外援。
English: Gao Gan Cao's brother Gao Gan arrived in Luoyang City from East Hebei Province. Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed Gao Gan as the ambassador of Hebei Province and Gao Gan Cao as the general of Zhizhong. He asked them to go back and called on the Xiangyong as the imperial court's foreign aid.

古文：帝亲送之于河桥，举酒指水曰： 卿兄弟冀部豪杰，能令士卒致死，京城倘有变，可为朕河上一扬尘。 
现代文：孝庄帝亲自送高氏兄弟至河桥，举起酒杯，指着黄河之水说： 你们兄弟二人是冀部豪杰，能使士卒为你们拼死效力，京城倘若有什么变故，你们可以为我在黄河上助一下声势。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang personally sent Gao's brothers to the river bridge, raised his glass, pointed to the water of the Yellow River and said: You two brothers are heroes of the Hebei Province, if you can make the soldiers work hard for you, if there is any change in Beijing, you can help me on the Yellow River.

古文：乾垂涕受诏，敖曹援剑起舞，誓以必死。
现代文：高乾流着眼泪接受了诏命，高敖曹拔剑起舞，发誓以死报效孝庄帝。
English: Gao Qian accepted the imperial order with tears streaming down his face. Gao Yao Cao drew his sword and danced, vowing to repay Emperor Xiaozhuang with his life.

古文：冬，十月，癸卯朔，世隆遣尔硃拂律归将胡骑一千，皆白服，来至郭下，索太原王尸。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸卯朔，尔硃荣世隆派尔硃荣拂律归率领胡骑一千名，都穿着白色孝服，来到洛阳城下，索要太原王尔硃荣荣的尸首。
English: In winter, in October, a thousand Hu horsemen, all dressed in white filial piety, came to the city of Luoyang to ask for the body of King Er Rong Rong of Taiyuan.

古文：帝升大夏门望之，遣主书牛法尚谓之曰： 太原王立功不终，阴图衅逆，王法无亲，已正刑书。
现代文：孝庄帝登上大夏门观望后，派主书牛法尚对尔硃荣拂律归说： 太原王尔硃荣荣为国立功没有能保住晚节，阴谋策划叛乱，国法不分亲疏，已经按照刑书处死。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhuang boarded the Great Summer Gate to watch, he sent the master calligrapher Fahu Shang to punish Er Qian Rong Rong and said: Taiyuan King Er Qian Rong Rong could not keep the evening festival for national merit, plotted a rebellion, and the national law did not distinguish between relatives and strangers, and has been executed according to the punishment book.

古文：罪止荣身，馀皆不问。
现代文：但是，罪行只限于尔硃荣荣一人，其余的人一概不予追究。
English: However, the crime is limited to Er Qian Rong Rong alone, and the rest of the people will not be prosecuted.

古文：卿等若降，官爵如故。 
现代文：你们如果投降的话，官职爵位一切照旧。 
English: If you surrender, your offices and titles will remain the same.

古文：拂律归曰： 臣等从太原王入朝，忽致冤酷，今不忍空归。
现代文：尔硃荣拂律归说道： 我等追随太原王入朝，太原王忽然蒙受如此奇冤，现在我们不忍心空手回去。
English: Er Rong Rong said, "We waited to follow King Taiyuan into the imperial court. King Taiyuan suddenly suffered such a strange misfortune. Now we can't bear to go back empty-handed."

古文：愿得太原王尸，生死无恨。 
现代文：希望得到太原王的尸首，也就死而无恨了。 
English: Hoping to obtain the corpse of King Taiyuan, he died without hatred.

古文：因涕泣，哀不自胜，群胡皆恸哭，声振城邑。
现代文：说着便流下了眼泪，不胜悲哀，胡兵们也都大声恸哭，哭声振动了洛阳城。
English: As he spoke, he shed tears, overwhelmed with sorrow. The Hu soldiers also wailed loudly, and their cries shook Luoyang City.

古文：帝亦为之怆然，遣侍中硃瑞赍铁券赐世隆。
现代文：孝庄帝也不禁为之怆然，于是派侍中朱瑞持铁券赐予尔硃荣世隆。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang couldn't help but be impressed, so he sent his attendant, Zhu Rui, to present Er Er Rong Shilong with an iron certificate.

古文：世隆谓瑞曰： 太原王功格天地，赤心奉国，长乐不顾信誓，枉加屠害，今日两行铁字，何足可信！
现代文：尔硃荣世隆对朱瑞说： 太原王功盖天地，忠心为国，长乐王尚且不顾信誓，对他加以残害，今天这两行铁字，又怎能让人相信！
English: Er Zhen Rong Shilong said to Zhu Rui: King Taiyuan made great achievements in building heaven and earth, and was loyal to the country. However, King Changle destroyed him in spite of his oath. How can these two lines of iron words be believed today?

古文：吾为太原王报仇，终无降理！ 
现代文：我一定要为太原王报仇，决无投降之理！ 
English: I must avenge King Taiyuan, there is no reason to surrender!

古文：瑞还，白帝，帝即出库物置城西门外，募敢死之士以讨世隆，一日即得万人，与拂律归等战于郭外。
现代文：朱瑞回来后，报告了孝庄帝。孝庄帝于是便取出府库中的财物放在洛阳城西门外，招募不怕死的壮士以讨伐尔硃荣世隆，一天便招募了一万人，与尔硃荣拂律归等在城外交战。
English: After Zhu Rui returned, he reported to Emperor Xiaozhuang. Emperor Xiaozhuang then took out the property from the government treasury and placed it outside the west gate of Luoyang City, recruited strong men who were not afraid of death to fight against Rong Shilong, and recruited 10,000 people in one day to fight against Rong Shilong.

古文：拂律归等生长戎旅，洛阳之人不习战斗，屡战不克。
现代文：尔硃荣拂律归等从小在军旅中长大，洛阳城内之人不熟悉作战，因此几次战斗都未能打败尔硃荣拂律归。
English: People in Luoyang city are not familiar with warfare, so they have not been able to defeat Er Qiong Ronghu Liguo in several battles.

古文：甲辰，以前车骑大将军李叔仁为大都督，帅众讨世隆。
现代文：甲辰，朝廷任命前车骑大将军李叔仁为大都督，率军讨伐尔硃荣世隆。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed the former cavalry general Li Shuren as the grand governor, leading the army to fight against Rong Shilong.

古文：戊申，皇子生，大赦。
现代文：戊申，皇子出生，北魏实行大赦。
English: Boushen, the prince was born, and the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：以中书令魏兰根兼尚书左仆射，为河北行台，定、相、殷三州皆禀兰根节度。
现代文：任命中书令魏兰根兼任尚书左仆射，为河北行台。定、相、殷三州都受魏兰根管辖。
English: Wei Langen, who was appointed as the second-in-command of calligraphy, also served as the second-in-command of calligraphy, and was in charge of Hebei Province. The three provinces of Ding, Sang and Yin were all under Wei Langen's jurisdiction.

古文：尔硃氏兵犹在城下，帝集群臣博议，皆恇惧，不知所出。
现代文：尔硃荣氏的军队仍在洛阳城下，孝庄帝召集朝廷大臣广泛商议计策，大臣们都吓得不知如何是好。
English: Er Biao Rong's army was still at the foot of Luoyang Castle. Emperor Xiaozhuang called together the ministers of the imperial court to widely discuss strategies. The ministers were so scared that they didn't know what to do.

古文：通直散骑常侍李苗奋衣起曰： 今小贼唐突如此，朝廷有不测之危，正是忠臣烈士效节之日。
现代文：通直散骑常侍李苗起身说道： 现在贼兵如此猖狂，朝廷面临不测之忧，这正是忠臣烈士报效尽忠之日。
English: The regular attendant Li Miao stood up and said: Now that the bandits are so rampant, the imperial court is facing unexpected worries. This is the day when the loyal subjects and martyrs report their loyalty.

古文：臣虽不武，请以一旅之众为陛下径断河桥。 
现代文：我虽然不是武将，请求率一支部队为陛下截断河桥。 
English: Although I am not a military commander, I request to lead an army to cut off the river bridge for His Majesty.

古文：城阳王徽、高道穆皆以为善，帝许之。
现代文：城阳王元徽、高道穆都认为李苗的建议很好，孝庄帝便答应了。
English: Chengyang Wang Yuanhui and Gao Daomu both thought that Li Miao's suggestion was very good, and Emperor Xiaozhuang agreed.

古文：乙卯，苗募人从马渚上流乘船夜下，去桥数里，纵火船焚河桥，倏忽而至。
现代文：乙卯，李苗募人从马渚的上游乘船在夜间顺流而下，离桥还有几里，便放出火船焚烧河桥，很快到了桥边。
English: Second, Li Miao recruited people to take a boat from the upstream of Mazhu to go down the river at night, still a few miles away from the bridge, and then released a fire boat to burn the river bridge, and soon reached the bridge.

古文：尔硃氏兵在南岸者，望之，争桥北度。俄而桥绝，溺死者甚众。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆的那些在南岸的士兵，看到这种情况后，争着涌上桥向北逃，不一会桥便烧断了，溺水而死的人很多。
English: Seeing this, the soldiers on the south bank of the Rong Shilong River rushed to the bridge to escape to the north. Soon the bridge was burned, and many people died of drowning.

古文：苗将百许人泊于小渚以待南援官军，不至。尔硃氏就击之，左右皆尽，苗赴水死。
现代文：李苗率一百左右人马停驻在水中小岛上等待南援之兵，但官军一直未到，尔硃荣氏的部队便向他们发动了攻击，李苗的部下全部战死，李苗自己也投水而死。
English: Li Miao led a hundred or so men and horses stationed on a small island in the water to wait for the soldiers from the south to arrive, but the official army did not arrive until the troops of Er Qirong launched an attack on them. All of Li Miao's subordinates died in the battle, and Li Miao himself also drowned.

古文：帝伤惜之，赠车骑大将军、仪同三司，封河阳侯，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：孝庄帝对李苗之死很是伤心痛惜，追赠他为车骑大将军、仪同三司，加封河阳侯，谥号为 忠烈 。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was very sad and regretted Li Miao's death. He posthumously awarded him the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments of the Inner Palace Guards, and Governor of Hebei Province. His nickname was "Faithful."

古文：世隆亦收兵北遁。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆也收兵北逃。
English: Rong Shilong also withdrew his troops and fled north.

古文：丙辰，诏行台源子恭将步骑一万出西道，杨昱将募士八千出东道以讨之。
现代文：丙辰，孝庄帝下诏命令行台源子恭率一万步兵和骑兵出西道，杨昱率召募来的八千士兵出东道以讨伐尔硃荣世隆。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang issued an imperial edict ordering Yuan Ziqong to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry out of the West Road, and Yang Pi to lead 8,000 soldiers out of the capital to fight against Rong Shilong.

古文：子恭仍镇太行丹谷，筑垒以防之。
现代文：源子恭仍然镇守太行关的丹谷，修筑堡垒以防备贼军。
English: Minamoto no Tsukasa was still guarding the valley of Taihang Pass, building a fortress to keep out the invaders.

古文：世隆至建州，刺史陆希质闭城拒守。世隆攻拔之，杀城中人无遗类，以肆其忿，唯希质走免。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆的部队来到建州，建州刺史陆希质紧闭城门坚守，尔硃荣世隆攻取建州城，屠杀了城中所有的人，以发泄忿恨，只有陆希质逃走，史于一死。
English: Erh Rong Shilong's troops came to Jianzhou, Jianzhou assassinated Lu Xiqui and kept the city gate closed. Erh Rong Shilong captured Jianzhou city and killed all the people in the city to vent his anger. Only Lu Xiqui escaped and Shi died.

古文：诏以前东荆州刺史元显恭为晋州刺史，兼尚书左仆射、西道行台。
现代文：孝明帝下诏任命前东荆州刺史元显恭为晋州刺史，兼尚书左仆射、西道行台。
English: Emperor Xiaoming issued an edict appointing the former East Jingzhou prefect, Yuan Xiangyong, as the prefect of Jinzhou, and he was also appointed as the left-hand shooters and the west-hand shooters.

古文：魏东徐州刺史广牧斛斯椿素依附尔硃荣，荣死，椿惧。闻汝南王悦在境上，乃帅部众弃州归悦。
现代文：北魏东徐州刺史广牧人斛斯椿一直依附于尔硃荣荣，尔硃荣荣死后，斛斯椿很恐惧，听说汝南王元悦在东徐州的边境上，于是便率领部众放弃了东徐州投奔了元悦。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Eastern Xuzhou Shishiguang herdsman Gong Shiqin always adhered to Er Qiong Rong Rong. After the death of Er Qiong Rong Rong, Gong Shiqin was very afraid when he heard that the Southern King Yuan Yue was on the border of Eastern Xuzhou, so he led his followers to abandon Eastern Xuzhou and join Yuan Yue.

古文：悦授椿侍中、大将军、司空，封灵丘郡公，又为大行台前驱都督。
现代文：元悦任命斛斯椿为侍中、大将军、司空，加封灵丘郡公，又任命他为大行台前驱都督。
English: Yuan Yue appointed Gong Shizhuan as a chamberlain, general, secretary, and governor of Lingqiu County, and also appointed him as the pre-exilic governor of Dagangdai.

古文：汾州刺史尔硃兆闻荣死，自汾州帅骑据晋阳；世隆至长子，兆来会之，壬申，共推太原太守、行并州事长广王晔即皇帝位，大赦，改元建明。
现代文：汾州刺史尔硃荣兆听到了尔硃荣荣已死的消息后，从汾州率骑兵占据了晋阳。
English: After hearing the news that Er Rong Rong had died, the cavalry from Zhangzhou led the cavalry to occupy Jinyang.

古文：晔，英之弟子也。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆到了长子，尔硃荣兆前来与他会合。
English: When Er Er Rong Rong's eldest son arrived, Er Er Rong Zhao came to meet him.

古文：以兆为大将军，进爵为王；世隆为尚书令，赐爵乐平王，加太傅、司州牧。
现代文：壬申，大家共同推举太原太守、行并州事长广王元晔即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为建明。
English: In Jinshin, everyone jointly elected Taiyuan Dazhong, and combined with the governor of the state, Guang Wangyuan, that is, the emperor, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Jianming.

古文：又以荣从弟度律为太尉，赐爵常山王；世隆兄天柱长史彦伯为侍中；徐州刺史仲远为车骑大将军，兼尚书左仆射、三徐州大行台。
现代文：元晔是元英的侄子。任命尔硃荣兆为大将军，进爵为王；任命尔硃荣世隆为尚书令，赐爵为乐平王，加封为太傅、司州牧；又任命尔硃荣荣的堂弟尔硃荣度律为太尉，赐爵为常山王；任命尔硃荣世隆的哥哥天柱长史尔硃荣彦伯为侍中；任命徐州刺史尔硃荣仲远为车骑大将军，兼尚书左仆射、三徐州大行台。
English: Yuan Xuan was the nephew of Yuan Ying. He appointed Er Xuan Rong Zhao as grand general and made him a knight; he appointed Er Xuan Rong Shilong as Shang Shuling, gave him a knighthood as King Leping, and made him a taifu and a provincial governor; he also appointed Er Xuan Rong's cousin Er Xuan Rong Du Li as taifu and gave him a knighthood as King of Changshan; he appointed Er Xuan Rong Shilong's brother Tianzhu Chang Srong Rongyan Bo as a chamberlain; he appointed Xuzhou Jian Srong Rong Zhongyuan as a

古文：仲远亦起兵向洛阳。
现代文：尔硃荣仲远这时也出兵指向洛阳。
English: At this time, Er Rong Zhongyuan also sent troops to Luoyang.

古文：尔硃天光之克平凉也，宿勤明达请降，既而复叛，北走。
现代文：尔硃荣天光当时攻克平凉的时候，宿勤明达请求投降，但不久又反叛了尔硃荣天光，向北逃走。
English: At that time, when Er Rong Tiangong conquered Pingliang, Suqin Mingda requested surrender, but soon rebelled against Er Rong Tiangong and fled north.

古文：天光遣贺拔岳讨之，明达奔东夏。
现代文：尔硃荣天光派贺拔岳率兵讨伐，宿勤明达逃奔东夏。
English: After the victory, Heaven's Light sent He Baturak to lead the army to fight, and Suqin Mengda fled to Dongxia.

古文：岳闻尔硃荣死，不复穷追，还泾州以待天光。
现代文：贺拔岳听说尔硃荣荣已死，便不再穷追宿勤明达，回兵泾州以等待尔硃荣天光。
English: Hearing that Er Qiong Rong Rong was dead, He Baduyue no longer diligently searched for a place to stay, but returned to Bozhou to wait for Er Qiong Rong's return.

古文：天光与侯莫陈悦亦下陇，与岳谋引兵向洛。
现代文：尔硃荣天光与侯莫陈悦也南下陇地，跟贺拔岳商议率兵到洛阳。
English: Er Qiong Rong Tianguang and Hou Mo Chen Yue also went to the south and negotiated with He Batyue to lead the troops to Luoyang.

古文：魏敬宗使硃瑞慰谕天光，天光与岳谋，欲令帝外奔而更立宗室，乃频启云： 臣实无异心，唯欲仰奉天颜，以申宗门之罪。 
现代文：孝庄帝派朱瑞前去慰问安抚尔硃荣天光，尔硃荣天光跟贺拔岳策划打算让孝庄帝外逃，然后再重新立一个皇族崐宗亲为皇帝。于是尔硃荣天光频频向孝庄帝上表称： 我确实没有异心，只是想见到皇上，当面向皇上申述我们尔硃荣氏的罪过。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang sent Zhu Rui to comfort and pacify Er Rong Rong. Er Rong Rong and He Batyue planned to let Emperor Xiaozhuang escape, and then re-establish an imperial family member as emperor. Therefore, Er Rong Rong frequently said to Emperor Xiaozhuang: I really have no other intention, but I just want to see the emperor and complain to the emperor about our Er Rong's sins.

古文：又使其下僚属启云： 天光密有异图，愿思胜算以防之。 
现代文：同时又让他的下属向孝庄帝上表说： 尔硃荣天光暗中早有异图，希望陛下想个好主意以防备尔硃荣天光。 
English: At the same time, he asked his subordinates to present a report to Emperor Xiaozhuang: There has long been a different plan in the dark, I hope Your Majesty will come up with a good idea to prevent it.

古文：范阳太守卢文伟诱平州刺史侯渊出猎，闭门拒之。
现代文：范阳太守卢文伟引诱平州刺史侯渊出城狩猎，乘机紧闭城门不许侯渊返回。
English: Lu Wenwei, the governor of Fanyang, lured Houyuan, the prince of Pingzhou, out of the city to hunt, and closed the city gate to prevent Houyuan from returning.

古文：渊屯于郡南，为荣举哀，勒兵南向，进至中山，行台仆射魏兰根邀击之，为渊所败。
现代文：侯渊率军驻扎在范阳郡的南面，为尔硃荣荣举哀悼念，之后侯渊又率军向南进发，来到了中山，行台仆射魏兰根中道拦击侯渊，结果被侯渊打败。
English: Houyuan led the army stationed in the south of Fanyang County, and held a memorial service for Er Rong Rong. After that, Houyuan led the army to the south, came to Zhongshan, and stopped Houyuan in the middle of Wei Langen Road, and was defeated by Houyuan.

古文：敬宗以城阳王徽兼大司马、录尚书事，总统内外。
现代文：孝庄帝任命城阳王元徽兼任大司马、录尚书事，负责朝廷内外的一切事务。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed Chengyang Wang Yuanhui as the grand steward and record keeper, responsible for all affairs inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：徽意谓荣既死，枝叶自应散落，及尔硃世隆等兵四起，党众日盛，徽忧怖，不知所出。
现代文：元徽心里认为尔硃荣荣既然已死，他的下属自然也会四下分散了，等到尔硃荣世隆等人率兵四起，声势一天天兴盛后，元徽心中非常忧虑、恐惧，不知该如何是好。
English: In his heart, Yuan Hui thought that since Er Qiong Rong Rong was dead, his subordinates would naturally be scattered everywhere. When Er Qiong Rong Shilong and others led the troops to rise up, and the situation became more prosperous day by day, Yuan Hui was very worried and fearful in his heart, and did not know what to do.

古文：性多忌嫉，不欲人居己前。每独与帝谋议，群臣有献策者，徽辄劝帝不纳，且曰： 小贼何虑不平！ 
现代文：元徽生性嫉妒，不愿别人超过自己，常常独自与孝庄帝谋划商议，群臣中如有向孝庄帝献计献策的，元徽总是劝孝庄帝不要采纳，并且说： 何必担心这些小贼寇不能平定！ 
English: Yuan Hui was jealous by nature and did not want others to surpass him. He often planned and discussed with Emperor Xiaozhuang alone. If any of the courtiers offered advice to Emperor Xiaozhuang, Yuan Hui always advised Emperor Xiaozhuang not to accept it, and said: Why worry if these petty thieves cannot be subdued!

古文：又靳惜财货，赏赐率皆薄少，或多而中减，或与而复追，故徒有糜费而恩不感物。
现代文：元徽又很吝惜财货，对官兵的赏赐都很微薄，有时本来赏赐较多，但他却又从中克扣减少，有时已经赏给了人家，却又追夺回来，所以徒费钱财但人们却感觉不到朝廷的恩泽。
English: Yuan Hui was very stingy with money and goods, and the rewards for officers and soldiers were very meager. Sometimes he would have given more rewards, but he reduced the deductions from the central budget. Sometimes he had already given rewards to others, but he recaptured them, so he wasted money and money, but people did not feel the grace of the imperial court.

古文：十一月，癸酉朔，敬宗以车骑将军郑先护为大都督，与行台杨昱共讨尔硃仲远。
现代文：十一月，癸酉朔，北魏孝庄帝任命车骑将军郑先护为大都督，与行台杨昱一起讨伐尔硃荣仲远。
English: In November, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the cavalry general Zheng Xianguo as the grand governor, and together with Yang Xuan of Xingtai, they fought for the victory.

古文：乙亥，以司徒长孙稚为太尉，临淮王彧为司徒。
现代文：乙亥，孝庄帝任命司徒长孙稚为太尉，任命临淮王元为司徒。
English: In Eihei, Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed the head of the Sifu, Sun Zhi, as the first lieutenant, and appointed Lin Huai Wang Yuan as the Sifu.

古文：丙子，进雍州刺史广宗公尔硃天光爵为王。
现代文：丙子，孝庄帝将雍州刺史广宗公尔硃荣天光进爵为王。
English: Bongzi, Emperor Xiaozhuang made Yangzhou the capital of the Kingdom of Heaven.

古文：长广王亦以天光为陇西王。
现代文：长广王元晔也任命尔硃荣天光为陇西王。
English: Changguang Wang Yuanjun also appointed Er Qiong Rong Tianguang as the king of Shaanxi.

古文：尔硃仲远攻西兗州，丁丑，拔之，擒刺史王衍。
现代文：尔硃荣仲远攻打西兖州，丁丑，攻下了西兖州，活捉了刺史王衍。
English: Er Rong Zhongyuan attacked Xishuanzhou, Ding Ug, captured Xishuanzhou, and captured Sisi Wangyan alive.

古文：衍，萧之兄子也。
现代文：王衍是王肃的侄子。
English: Wang Yan is Wang Su's nephew.

古文：癸未，敬宗以右卫将军贺拔胜为东征都督。壬辰，又以郑先护兼尚书左仆射为行台，与胜共讨仲远。
现代文：癸未，孝庄帝任命右卫将军贺拔胜为东征都督，壬辰，又任命郑先护兼尚书左仆射，为行台，与贺拔胜共同讨伐尔硃荣仲远。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed He Baxian, the right guard general, as the governor of the Eastern Expedition, and also appointed Zheng Xianguo and Shangshu Zuofei as the governor of the Eastern Expedition, and He Baxian and Zheng Xianguo and Shangshu Zuofei as the governor of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：戊戌，诏罢魏兰根行台，以定州刺史薛昙尚兼尚书，为北道行台。
现代文：戊戌，孝庄帝下诏罢免了魏兰根的行台，任命定州刺史薛昙尚兼尚书，为北道行台。
English: Emperor Wuzhong and Emperor Xiaozhuang decreed that Wei Langen's Gangdai should be removed, and appointed Dingzhou Jishi Xue Yong Shang and Shang Shu as the North Road Gangdai.

古文：郑先护疑贺拔胜，置之营外。
现代文：郑先护对贺拔胜有所怀疑，将其置于大营之外。
English: Zheng Xianguo had doubts about He Bi Sheng and placed him outside the camp.

古文：庚子，胜与仲远战于滑台东，兵败，降于仲远。
现代文：庚子，贺拔胜与尔硃荣仲远在滑台以东交战，贺拔胜战败，投降了尔硃荣仲远。
English: Geng Zi, He Bi Sheng and Er Pu Rong Zhong Yuan fought in the east of the slide, He Bi Sheng was defeated and surrendered to Er Pu Rong Zhong Yuan.

古文：初，尔硃荣尝从容问左右曰： 一日无我，谁可主军？ 
现代文：当初，尔硃荣荣曾随便地问左右道： 一旦我死了，谁可以统领军队？ 
English: At the beginning, Er Qian Rong Rong had casually asked: Once I die, who can command the army?

古文：皆称尔硃兆。
现代文：左右都说尔硃荣兆可以。
English: Both the left and the right say that it's okay to be a Rong Zhao.

古文：荣曰： 兆虽勇于战斗，然所将不过三千骑，多则乱矣。
现代文：尔硃荣荣却说： 尔硃荣兆虽然战斗勇猛，但他率领的部队至多不能超过三千骑，再多就会乱了。
English: Er Qian Rong Rong, however, said: Although Er Qian Rong Zhao fought bravely, the troops he led could not exceed three thousand horsemen at most. Any more would cause chaos.

古文：堪代我者，唯贺六浑耳。 
现代文：能够代替我的人，只有高欢啊。 
English: The only one who can replace me is Gao Huan.

古文：因戒兆曰： 尔非其匹，终当为其穿鼻。 
现代文：因此尔硃荣荣告诫尔硃荣兆说： 你不是高欢的对手，最终要受其所制的。 
English: Therefore, Er Qiong Rong Rong admonished Er Qiong Rong Zhao and said: You are not the opponent of Gao Huan, and you will eventually be controlled by him.

古文：乃以高欢为晋州刺史。
现代文：于是便任命高欢为晋州刺史。
English: As a result, Gao Huan was appointed as Jinzhou chief historian.

古文：及兆引兵向洛，遣使召欢，欢遣长史孙腾诣兆，辞以 山蜀未平，今方攻讨，不可委去，致有后忧。
现代文：等到尔硃荣兆率军至洛阳的时候，派人召请高欢，高欢派长史崐孙腾前去见尔硃荣兆，推辞说： 山蜀的叛乱还没有平息，现在正在讨伐，不能放弃，以免招致后患。
English: When Er Qiong Rong Zhao led his army to Luoyang, he sent someone to summon Gao Huan. Gao Huan sent the head of Shi Qian Son Teng to meet Er Qiong Rong Zhao, and said: The rebellion in Shanshu has not yet subsided, it is now being fought, and it cannot be given up, so as not to cause future troubles.

古文：定蜀之日，当隔河为犄角之势。 
现代文：等到平定山蜀叛乱后，当隔黄河与您构成犄角之势。 
English: Wait until after the suppression of the Shanshu Rebellion, when the Yellow River separates from you, the situation will be critical.

古文：兆不悦，曰： 还白高晋州，吾得吉梦，梦与吾先人登高丘，丘旁之地，耕之已熟，独馀马蔺，先人命吾拔之，随手而尽。
现代文：尔硃荣兆很不高兴，对孙腾说道： 你回去告诉高刺史，我做了一个好梦，梦见自己与我的先人登上高丘，高丘周围的土地，耕翻得已经很熟了，却只剩下了马蔺草，先人命我将马蔺草拔除掉，我随手便将草拔除干净了。
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao was very unhappy and said to Sun Teng, "You go back and tell Gao Zhanshi, I had a good dream. I dreamed that I and my ancestors climbed a high hill. The land around the high hill was already well cultivated, but there was only horsetail grass left. The ancestors ordered me to pull out the horsetail grass, and I pulled the grass out with my own hands.

古文：以此观之，往无不克。 
现代文：由此来看，我一定会无往而不克的。 
English: From this point of view, I will definitely not give up.

古文：腾还报，欢曰： 兆狂愚如是，而敢为悖逆，吾势不得久事尔硃矣。 
现代文：孙腾回去向高欢作了汇报，高欢说道： 尔硃荣兆如此猖狂愚蠢，竟敢做悖逆之事，看来我是不能长久事奉尔硃荣氏了。 
English: Sun Teng went back and reported to Gao Huan. Gao Huan said, "Er Rong Zhao is so reckless and stupid that he dares to do something rebellious. It seems that I can no longer serve Er Rong."

古文：十二月，壬寅朔，尔硃兆攻丹谷，都督崔伯凤战死，都督史仵龙开壁请降，源子恭退走。
现代文：十二月，壬寅朔，尔硃荣兆攻打丹谷，都督崔伯凤战死，都督史仵龙打开营门向尔硃荣兆请降，源子恭溃退逃走。
English: In December, Ren Yin Shuo, Er Qiong Rong Zhao attacked Danggu, the governor Cui Bo Feng died in the battle, the governor Shi Xilong opened the gate to Er Qiong Rong Zhao to ask him to surrender, and Yuan Zi retreated and fled.

古文：兆轻兵倍道兼行，从河桥西涉渡。
现代文：尔硃荣兆率轻装兵士倍道兼程，从河桥的西边渡过了黄河。
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao led the light-armed soldiers to cross the Yellow River from the west side of the river bridge.

古文：先是，敬宗以大河深广，谓兆未能猝济，是日，水不没马腹。
现代文：在这之前，孝庄帝以为黄河又深又宽，尔硃荣兆不可能很快渡过黄河，但是这一天，黄河水还没不过马腹。
English: Prior to this, Xiaozhuangdi thought that the Yellow River was deep and wide, and it was impossible for Erqin Rongzhao to cross the Yellow River quickly, but on this day, the Yellow River water was not more than a horse's belly.

古文：甲辰，暴风，黄尘涨天，兆骑叩宫门，宿卫乃觉，弯弓欲射，矢不得发，一时散走。
现代文：甲辰，狂风大作，黄尘漫天，直至尔硃荣兆的骑兵叩击皇宫的宫门，值宿的卫士才发觉，搭弓放箭，由于狂风，箭射不出去，便都四散奔逃。
English: Once upon a time, there was a fierce wind, and yellow dust filled the sky. It wasn't until the cavalrymen of Erqin Rongzhao knocked on the palace gate of the imperial palace that the guards on duty discovered that they had set up bows and arrows, but because of the fierce wind, the arrows couldn't go out, so they all scattered and fled.

古文：华山王鸷，斤之玄孙也，素附尔硃氏。
现代文：华山王元鸷，是元斤的玄孙，一直依附于尔硃荣氏。
English: Huashan Wang Yuan Rong, the great-great-grandson of Yuan Jin, has always been attached to the Er Rong Rong clan.

古文：帝始闻兆南下，欲自帅诸军讨之，鸷说帝曰： 黄河万仞，兆安得渡！ 
现代文：孝庄帝开始听说尔硃荣兆南下的时候，想亲自统领六军讨伐，元鸷却对孝庄帝说： 黄河水宽万仞，尔硃荣兆怎么会过得来呢！ 
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor began to hear that when Er Qiong Rong Zhao went south, he wanted to personally lead the Six Army Crusade, but Yuan Zang said to Xiaozhuang Emperor: The Yellow River is very wide, how could Er Qiong Rong Zhao get through it!

古文：帝遂自安。
现代文：孝庄帝于是自己也觉得很安全了。
English: As a result, Zhuang Di settled down.

古文：及兆入宫，鸷复约止卫兵不使斗。
现代文：等到尔硃荣兆的部队攻进了皇宫，元鸷又制止宫廷卫兵，不让他们与之交战。
English: When the troops of Er Zheng Rong Zhao invaded the imperial palace, Yuan Zheng stopped the palace guards and did not allow them to fight with them.

古文：帝步出云龙门外，遇城阳王徽乘马走，帝屡呼之，不顾而去。
现代文：孝庄帝走出云龙门外，遇到城阳王元徽正骑马而逃，孝庄帝连声呼叫元徽，元徽却不顾孝庄帝，径自逃去。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang walked out of the Cloud Dragon Gate and met the King of Chengyang, Yuan Hui, who was fleeing on horseback. Emperor Xiaozhuang called for Yuan Hui in unison, but Yuan Hui ignored Emperor Xiaozhuang and ran away.

古文：兆骑执帝，锁于永宁寺楼上。帝寒甚，就兆求头巾，不与。
现代文：尔硃荣兆的骑兵抓住了孝庄帝，将他锁在永宁寺的楼上，孝庄帝感到十分寒冷，向尔硃荣兆要头巾，尔硃荣兆没有给他。
English: The cavalrymen of Erqin Rongzhao caught Emperor Xiaozhuang and locked him in the upstairs of Yongning Temple. Emperor Xiaozhuang felt very cold and asked Erqin Rongzhao for a headscarf, but Erqin Rongzhao did not give it to him.

古文：兆营于尚书省，用天子金鼓，设刻漏于庭，扑杀皇子，污辱嫔御妃主，纵兵大掠，杀司空临淮王彧、尚书左仆射范阳王诲、青州刺史李延寔等。
现代文：尔硃荣兆扎营于尚书省，用天子才能使用的金鼓，在庭中设刻漏，杀害了皇子，对宫中的嫔御、妃子、公主大加污辱，纵兵大肆掠夺财物，杀了司空临淮王元、尚书左仆射范阳王元诲和青州刺史李延等。
English: Erqin Rongzhao encamped in Shangshu Province, used the golden drum that only the son of heaven could use, set up a leak in the court, killed the prince, greatly defiled the empress, concubines and princesses in the palace, and plundered the property of the soldiers, killed Sifu Lin Huai Wangyuan, Shangshu's left-hand man Sha Fanyang Wangyuan and Qingzhou embroiderer Li Yan.

古文：城阳王徽走至山南，抵前洛阳令寇祖仁家。
现代文：城阳王元徽逃至山南，来到了前洛阳令寇祖仁家。
English: King Yuanhui of Chengyang fled to Shannan and came to the former Luoyang ruler Kozu Ren's home.

古文：祖仁一门三刺史，皆徽所引拔，以有旧恩，故投之。
现代文：寇祖仁一家出了三位刺史，都是由元徽引荐提拔的，由于有此旧恩，所以元徽才前来投奔。
English: The Kozu-Ren family had three sons, all of whom were recommended and promoted by Yuan Hui. It was because of this old favor that Yuan Hui came to defect.

古文：徽赍金百斤，马五十匹，祖仁利其财，外虽容纳，而私谓子弟曰： 如闻尔硃兆购募城阳王，得之者封千户侯，今日富贵至矣！ 
现代文：元徽带有黄金百斤，马五十匹，寇祖仁贪图财物，表面上虽然留纳了元徽，但私下里却对家人说： 听说尔硃荣兆正在悬赏捉拿城阳王元徽，抓到他的人封千户侯，今天我们富贵的日子到了！ 
English: The original emblem had a hundred catties of gold, fifty horses, and Kozu-Ren was greedy for possessions. On the surface, although he retained the original emblem, he said to his family members in private: I heard that Er Qiong Rong Zhao was offering a reward for capturing the King of the City of the Sun, Yuan Hui, and that the person who caught him would be bound to a thousand households. Today, our rich days have arrived!

古文：乃怖徽云官捕将至，令其逃于它所，使人于路邀杀之，送首于兆；兆亦不加勋赏。
现代文：于是寇祖仁吓唬元徽，说官军抓捕他的人就要到了，让元徽赶快逃到别处去，寇祖仁便派人在半路上杀了元徽，将他的人头送到了尔硃荣兆处，但尔硃荣兆却并未对寇祖仁加以赏赐。
English: As a result, Kozu-Ren scared Yuan Hui, saying that the official army was about to arrive to arrest him, so that Yuan Hui could quickly escape to another place. Kozu-Ren then sent someone to kill Yuan Hui on the way and sent his head to Er Qian Rong Zhao, but Er Qian Rong Zhao did not reward Kozu-Ren.

古文：兆梦徽谓己曰： 我有金二百斤、马百匹在祖仁家，卿可取之。 
现代文：尔硃荣兆梦见元徽对自己说： 我有黄金二百斤、马一百匹在寇祖仁家中，你可以派人去取。 
English: Er Qiong Rong Zhao dreamed of Yuan Hui and said to himself: I have two hundred catties of gold and a hundred horses in Kuo Zu Ren's home, you can send someone to get them.

古文：兆既觉，意所梦为实，即掩捕祖仁，征其金、马。
现代文：尔硃荣兆梦中醒来后，认为自己刚才的梦是真的，于是便收捕了寇祖仁，向他索要黄金和马匹。
English: After waking up in a dream, Er Qiong Rong Zhao thought that the dream he had just had was real, so he arrested Kuo Zu Ren and asked him for gold and horses.

古文：祖仁谓人密告，望风款服，云 实得金百斤、马五十匹。 
现代文：寇祖仁以为别人已密告了尔硃荣兆，一审问便全都照实招认了，说： 确实得到了百斤黄金和五十匹马。 
English: Kozu-Ren thought that someone else had tipped off Er Qiong Rong Zhao. When they were interrogated, they all confessed truthfully, saying, "I did indeed get a hundred kilos of gold and fifty horses."

古文：兆疑其隐匿，依梦征之，祖仁家旧有金三十斤、马三十匹，尽以输兆，兆犹不信，发怒，执祖仁，悬首高树，大石坠足，捶之至死。
现代文：尔硃荣兆怀疑寇祖仁还有隐瞒，便按梦中所见所闻搜查寇祖仁家，寇祖仁家自己原有黄金三十斤、马五十匹，也全都送与了尔硃荣兆。尔硃荣兆仍不相信，一怒之下，拘捕了寇祖仁，把他脑袋悬挂树上，大石坠脚，鞭打至死。
English: Er Qiong Rong Zhao suspected that Kozu-Ren still had something to hide, so he searched Kozu-Ren's house according to what he had seen and heard in his dream. The Kozu-Ren family also gave Er Qiong Rong Zhao all of their original thirty catties of gold and fifty horses. Er Qiong Rong Zhao still didn't believe it, and in a fit of rage, he arrested Kozu-Ren, hung his head from a tree, dropped a boulder on his foot, and whipped him to death.

古文：尔硃世隆至洛阳，兆自以为己功，责世隆曰： 叔父在朝日久，耳目应广，如何令天柱受祸！ 
现代文：尔硃荣世隆来到洛阳，尔硃荣兆自认为一切都是自己的功劳，责怪尔硃荣世隆说： 叔父您身在朝廷这么长时间，耳闻目见应该很广，为什么竟让天柱将军遭此大祸！ 
English: Er Qiong Rong Shilong came to Luoyang. Er Qiong Rong Zhao thought that everything was his own merit. He blamed Er Qiong Rong Shilong and said: "Uncle, you have been in the imperial court for such a long time, your ears and eyes should be very wide, why did you let General Tianzhu suffer such a big disaster!

古文：按剑瞋目，声色甚厉。
现代文：尔硃荣兆说话时手按宝剑，怒目圆睁，声色俱厉。
English: When Erqin Rongzhao spoke, his hand pressed the sword, his eyes were angry and his voice was harsh.

古文：世隆逊辞拜谢，然后得已，由是深恨之。尔硃仲远亦自滑台至洛。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆只好说好话下拜谢罪，这才算完事，但从此尔硃荣世隆对尔硃荣兆深为怨恨。此时尔硃荣仲远也从滑台来到了洛阳。
English: Er Er Rong Shilong had no choice but to say a kind word and apologize, and that was the end of the matter, but from then on, Er Er Rong Shilong was deeply resentful of Er Er Er Rong Zhao. At this time, Er Er Rong Zhongyuan also came to Luoyang from the slide.

古文：戊申，魏长广王大赦。
现代文：戊申，北魏长广王元晔实行大赦。
English: Wushin, Northern Wei's Changguang Wangyuan carried out an amnesty.

古文：尔硃荣之死也，敬宗诏河西贼帅纥豆陵步蕃使袭秀容。
现代文：尔硃荣荣死的时候，北魏孝庄帝下诏命河西贼帅纥豆陵步蕃攻袭秀容郡。
English: When Er Qiong Rong Rong died, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang ordered the Hexi bandits to attack Xiurong County.

古文：及兆入洛，步蕃南下，兵势甚盛，故兆不暇久留，亟还晋阳以御之，使尔硃世隆、度律、彦伯等留镇洛阳。
现代文：等到尔硃荣兆进入洛阳后，纥豆陵步蕃便挥军南下，兵势十分强盛，所以尔硃荣兆不敢在洛阳久留，赶忙回师晋阳以防御纥豆陵步蕃。尔硃荣兆让尔硃荣世隆、尔硃荣度律、尔硃荣彦伯等人留守洛阳。
English: After Er Qiong Rong Zhao entered Luoyang, Peasling Bu Xun waved his army to the south, the army was very strong, so Er Qiong Rong Zhao did not dare to stay in Luoyang for a long time, and hurried back to Jinyang to defend Peasling Bu Xun. Er Qiong Zhao let Er Qiong Rong Shilong, Er Qiong Rong Dulu, Er Qiong Rong Yan Bo and others stay in Luoyang.

古文：甲寅，兆迁敬宗于晋阳，兆自于河梁监阅财资。高欢闻敬宗向晋阳，帅骑东巡，欲邀之，不及。
现代文：甲寅，尔硃荣兆将孝庄帝迁至晋阳。尔硃荣兆自己在河梁监督掠取财货，高欢听说孝庄帝要被押至晋阳，便率骑兵东巡，打算截住孝庄帝，但未能赶上。
English: Gao Huan heard that Emperor Xiaozhuang was going to be driven to Jinyang, so he led his cavalry eastward, intending to intercept Emperor Xiaozhuang, but failed to catch up.

古文：因与兆书，为陈祸福，不宜害天子，受恶名；兆怒，不纳。
现代文：于是便给尔硃荣兆写了一封信，向他陈述利害，劝他不要杀害天子，承受恶名声。尔硃荣兆大怒，没有采纳高欢的劝谏。
English: As a result, he wrote a letter to Er Qian Rong Zhao, stating his interests to him and advising him not to kill the heavenly son and bear a bad reputation. Er Qian Rong Zhao was furious and did not accept Gao Huan's advice.

古文：尔硃天光轻骑入洛，见世隆等，即还雍州。
现代文：尔硃荣天光率轻骑来到洛阳，会见了尔硃荣世隆等人，之后便回到了雍州。
English: Er Rong Rong lightly rode to Luoyang, met with Er Rong Shilong and others, and then returned to Yongzhou.

古文：初，敬宗恐北军不利，欲为南走之计，托云征蛮，以高道穆为南道大行台，未及发而兆入洛。
现代文：当初，孝庄帝担心源子恭的北军会失败，便想做南逃的打算，假托是征讨蛮贼，任命高道穆为南道大行台，但还未来得及出发，尔硃荣兆便攻入了洛阳城。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaozhuang was worried that Yuan Zikong's northern army would fail, so he planned to escape to the south, pretending to fight against barbarians and appointing Gao Daomu as the governor of the southern province. However, before he could leave, Er Qiong Rong Zhao invaded Luoyang City.

古文：道穆托疾去，世隆杀之。
现代文：高道穆假托有病想逃离洛阳，被尔硃荣世隆所杀。
English: Gao Dao Mu Xuito was ill and wanted to escape from Luoyang. He was killed by Erqi Rong Shilong.

古文：主者请追李苗封赠，世隆曰： 当时众议，更一二日即欲纵兵大掠，焚烧郭邑，赖苗之故，京师获全。天下之善一也，不宜复追。 
现代文：主事之人请求追回对李苗的封赐，尔硃荣世隆说道： 当时大家商议，再过一两天便要纵兵大肆掠抢，焚烧掉洛阳城，多亏了李苗，京城才得以保全，天下之善是一样的，不应再追回李苗的封赐。 
English: The person in charge asked for the return of Li Miao's title, Erqin Rong Shilong said: At that time, everyone discussed that in a day or two, they would have to plunder and burn Luoyang City. Thanks to Li Miao, Beijing was preserved. The good of the world is the same. Li Miao's title should not be recovered.

古文：尔硃荣之死也，世隆等征兵于大宁太守代人房谟。谟不应，前后斩其三使，遣弟毓诣洛阳。
现代文：尔硃荣荣死时，尔硃荣世隆等向泰宁太守代郡人房谟证调兵员，房谟没有答应，前后共斩杀了三位尔硃荣世隆派来的使者，同时派弟弟房毓前往洛阳。
English: At the time of Er Qiong Rong Rong's death, Er Qiong Rong Shilong and others sent troops to Taining's deputy county governor Fang Moo, who did not agree and killed three envoys sent by Er Qiong Rong Rong, and sent his brother Fang Qiong to Luoyang at the same time.

古文：及兆得志，其党建州刺史是兰安定执谟系州狱，郡中蜀人闻之，皆叛。
现代文：等到尔硃荣兆得志之后，尔硃荣兆的党羽建州刺史是兰安定将房谟抓住囚禁于建州狱中，泰宁郡的蜀人听说后，便反叛了。
English: After Er Qiong Rong Zhao became famous, the story of Er Qiong Rong Zhao's faction seizing Jianzhou is that Lan Yan grabbed and imprisoned Bao Moo in Jianzhou Prison. When the Shu people in Taining County heard about this, they rebelled.

古文：安定给谟弱马，令军前慰劳。诸贼见谟，莫不遥拜。
现代文：是兰安定给房谟一匹瘦弱的马，让他前往军前慰劳安抚，贼军们见到房谟后，都远远叩拜。
English: It was Ran Yan who gave Fang Mu a frail horse and let him go to the front to comfort and pacify. When the bandits saw Fang Mu, they all bowed down far away.

古文：谟先所乘马，安定别给将士。
现代文：房谟原先乘的那匹马，被是兰安定另外给了别的将士。
English: The horse originally ridden by Tommo was given to another soldier by Ranjan.

古文：战败，蜀人得之，谓谟遇害，莫不悲泣，善养其马，不听人乘之。儿童妇女竞投草粟，皆言此房公马也。
现代文：战败后，那匹马被蜀人得到，蜀人以为房谟遇害了，都悲哭不已，精心饲养这匹马，不允许别人乘坐，儿童、妇女们争相给这匹马喂草料，都说这是房公的马。
English: After the defeat, the horse was obtained by the Shu people. The Shu people thought that Fong Mo had been killed, and they were all in tears. The horse was carefully bred and no one else was allowed to ride it. Children and women scrambled to feed the horse with grass, saying that it was Fong Guo's horse.

古文：尔硃世隆闻之，舍其罪，以为其府长史。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆听说了之后，免掉了房谟的罪名，任命他为自己府中的长史。
English: After hearing about it, Er Zhen Rong Shilong absolved the crime of Miao Miao and appointed him as the chief historian of his government.

古文：北道大行台杨津，以众少，留鄴召募，欲自滏口入并州，会尔硃兆入洛，津乃散众，轻骑还朝。
现代文：北道大行台杨津，由于军队人数少，于是驻留在邺郡城召募新兵，打算从滏口进入并州，这时正赶上尔硃荣兆攻入洛阳，杨津便遣散了部队，只带了一些骑兵回到朝廷。
English: Due to the small number of troops, Yangjin, the governor of the Northern Highway, stayed in the city of Shishun to recruit new soldiers, intending to enter the annexation of the state from Hekou. At that time, it was just in time for Erqi Rongzhao to enter Luoyang. Yangjin dismissed the troops and returned to the imperial court with only a few cavalrymen.

古文：尔硃世隆与兄弟密谋，虑长广王母卫氏干预朝政，伺其出行，遣数十骑如劫盗者于京巷杀之，寻悬榜以千万钱募贼。
现代文：尔硃荣世隆跟他的几个兄弟密谋，担心长广王的母亲卫氏会干预朝政，于是在侦察到她出行在外的时候，便派了几十名骑兵装扮成强盗，在洛阳城一个小崐巷中杀了卫氏，很快又贴出告示悬赏千万钱捉拿凶手。
English: Er Zhen Rong Shilong conspired with several of his brothers, fearing that Changguang Wang's mother Wei Jizhe would interfere in court politics, so when he detected her traveling outside, he sent dozens of cavalry dressed as robbers to kill Wei Jizhe in a small alley in Luoyang City, and soon posted a notice offering a reward of tens of millions of money to catch the murderer.

古文：甲子，尔硃兆缢敬宗于晋阳三级佛寺，并杀陈留王宽。
现代文：甲子，尔硃荣兆将孝庄帝缢杀于晋阳的三级佛寺中，同时还杀害了陈留王元宽。
English: At the same time, he also killed Chen Liu Wang Yuan Kuan.

古文：是月，纥豆陵步蕃大破尔硃兆于秀容，南逼晋阳。
现代文：这一月，纥豆陵步蕃在秀容大破尔硃荣兆，接着向南逼近晋阳。
English: In the same month, Peasling advanced to Rongzhao in Xiurong County, and then approached Jinyang in the south.

古文：兆惧，使人召高欢并力。
现代文：尔硃荣兆很害怕，赶快派人召请高欢并力攻敌。
English: Erqin Rongzhao was very scared, and quickly sent someone to summon Gao Huan and attack the enemy.

古文：僚属皆劝欢勿应召，欢曰： 兆方急，保无它虑。 
现代文：高欢的僚属都劝高欢不要答应尔硃荣兆的召请，高欢说道： 目前尔硃荣兆正处于危急之中，我保证他不会有其他方面企图的。 
English: Gao Huan's colleagues and relatives all advised Gao Huan not to accept the call of Erqin Rongzhao, Gao Huan said: At present, Erqin Rongzhao is in a critical situation, I guarantee that he will not try other aspects.

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是便率军出发了。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：欢所亲贺拔焉过儿请缓行以弊之，欢往往逗留，辞以河无桥，不得渡。
现代文：高欢的亲信贺拔焉过儿请高欢缓慢行进，以使尔硃荣兆更加疲弊，于是高欢便时时逗留，以汾河上没有桥，无法过河为托辞。
English: Gao Huan's relatives asked Gao Huan to march slowly to make Erqin Rongzhao more tired, so Gao Huan would linger from time to time, using the excuse that there was no bridge on the Fen River and he could not cross the river.

古文：步蕃兵日盛，兆屡败，告急于欢，欢乃往从之。
现代文：纥豆陵步蕃的部队气势越来越盛，尔硃荣兆屡战屡败，向高欢告急，高欢这才前往增援。
English: Peasling's troops were becoming more and more powerful. Erqin Rongzhao was repeatedly defeated in battle, and he was in a hurry to Gao Huan. Gao Huan then went to reinforce him.

古文：兆时避步蕃南出，步蕃至平乐郡，欢与兆进兵合击，大破之，斩步蕃于石鼓山，其众退走。
现代文：尔硃荣兆当时为避开纥豆陵步蕃而往南撤，纥豆陵步蕃率军来到平乐郡，高欢与尔硃荣兆进军平乐，两下合击，大败纥豆陵步蕃军，在石鼓山斩杀了纥豆陵步蕃，纥豆陵步蕃的部众四散逃亡。
English: At that time, Erqin Rongzhao retreated to the south in order to avoid Peasling Buyeo. Peasling Buyeo led the army to Pingle County. Gao Huan and Erqin Rongzhao marched into Pingle. In a two-pronged attack, they defeated Peasling Buyeo's army and killed Peasling Buyeo in Shigu Mountain. Peasling Buyeo's followers scattered and fled.

古文：兆德欢，相与誓为兄弟，将数十骑诣欢，通夜宴饮。
现代文：尔硃荣兆很感激高欢，与高欢相互发誓结为兄弟，尔硃荣兆带数十名骑兵来到高欢住所，通宵饮酒宴乐。
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao was very grateful to Gao Huan, and swore to be brothers with Gao Huan. Er Qian Rong Zhao brought dozens of cavalrymen to Gao Huan's residence for all-night drinking and feasting.

古文：初，葛荣部众流入并、肆者二十馀万，为契胡陵暴，皆不聊生，大小二十六反，诛夷者半，犹谋乱不止。
现代文：当初，葛荣的部下被流放到并州、肆州的有二十多万人，这些人深受胡人的欺凌，都无以为生，前后大大小小又反叛了二十六次，被杀掉了一大半，但仍图谋叛乱不止。
English: At the beginning, there were more than 200,000 of Ge Rong's subordinates who were exiled to Bianzhou and Zhouzhou. These people were deeply bullied by the Hu people and had nothing to live for. They rebelled 26 times before and after, large and small, and were killed more than half of them, but they still continued to plot rebellion.

古文：兆患之，问计于欢，欢曰： 六镇反残，不可尽杀，宜选王腹心使统之，有犯者罪其帅，则所罪者寡矣。 
现代文：尔硃荣兆深以为患，于是便问计于高欢。高欢说道： 六镇之民反叛，不能全部杀掉，应该选一位您的心腹之人，让他统领六镇军民，如有反叛者，则惩处其首领，那样的话，受惩处的人就少了。 
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao was deeply troubled, so he asked Gao Huan about it. Gao Huan said: The people of the six towns rebelled, you can't kill them all, you should choose a person who is your confidant, let him command the soldiers and people of the six towns, if there are rebels, then punish their leaders, in that case, there will be fewer people to be punished.

古文：兆曰： 善！
现代文：尔硃荣兆说： 好主意！
English: Er Zhen Rong Zhao said: What a good idea!

古文：谁可使者？ 
现代文：但派谁去合适呢？ 
English: But who would be a good fit?

古文：贺拔允时在坐，请使欢领之。
现代文：贺拔允当时也在座，他建议让高欢统领六镇军民。
English: He Bajun was also present at the time, and he suggested that Gao Huan should lead the soldiers and civilians of the six towns.

古文：欢拳殴其口，折一齿，曰： 平生天柱时，奴辈伏处分如鹰犬。今日天下事取舍在王，而阿鞠泥敢僭易妄言，请杀之！ 
现代文：高欢扬拳便朝贺拔允的嘴打了过去，打掉了贺拔允的一颗牙齿，并斥责道： 天柱大将军在世的时候，我高欢受其调遣如鹰犬一般，今日天下之事取舍全在大王，你贺拔允怎敢僭越职权大胆妄言，请大王您杀了贺拔允！ 
English: Gao Huan Yang punched the mouth of He Bajun, knocked out one of He Bajun's teeth, and scolded: When General Tianzhu was alive, I Gao Huan was at his beck and call like a hawk. Today, He Bajun is the king of all things. How dare you, He Bajun, overstep your authority and speak so boldly? Please, king, kill He Bajun!

古文：兆以欢为诚，遂以其众委焉。
现代文：尔硃荣兆认为高欢对自己很忠诚，于是便将六镇军民交与高欢统领。
English: Erqin Rongzhao thought Gao Huan was very loyal to him, so he put the six-town army and people under Gao Huan's command.

古文：欢以兆醉，恐醒而悔之，遂出，宣言： 受委统州镇兵，可集汾东受号令。 
现代文：高欢以为尔硃荣兆醉了，担心他酒醒之后又反悔，便赶快走出营帐，对将士们宣布说： 我受大王委托统领州镇兵，你们可到汾河东岸集合，听我的号令。 
English: Gao Huan thought that Er Qiong Rong Zhao was drunk, and worried that he would repent after waking up, he quickly walked out of the camp and announced to the soldiers: I am commissioned by the great king to command the state town soldiers, you can gather on the east bank of the Wei River and listen to my orders.

古文：乃建牙阳曲川，陈部分。
现代文：于是在阳曲川建立了幕府，安置所部。
English: As a result, the shogunate established the resettlement department in Yangqu River.

古文：军士素恶兆而乐属欢，莫不皆至。
现代文：士兵们平素憎恨尔硃荣兆而乐意做高欢的部下，纷纷前来投奔高欢。
English: The soldiers, who had always hated Er Qian Rong Zhao and were happy to be Gao Huan's subordinates, came one after another to join Gao Huan.

古文：居无何，又使刘贵请兆，以 并、肆频岁霜旱，降户掘田鼠而食之，面无谷色，徒污人境内，请令就食山东，待温饱更受处分。 
现代文：没过多长时间，高欢又派刘贵向尔硃荣兆请示，因 并州、肆州连年霜旱，降户只好挖田鼠为食，面无人色，这样只能白白玷污您所管辖的地区，请下令让他们到太行山东面乞食，等到解决了温饱之后再做安排。 
English: Not long after, Gao Huan also sent Liu Gui to Erqin Rongzhao to request instructions. Due to the consecutive years of frost and drought in Hengzhou and Zhouzhou, the descendants had to dig up voles for food, and they were unimpressed. This can only tarnish the area under your jurisdiction in vain. Please order them to beg in the east of Taihang Mountain, and wait until they have settled their food and clothing before making arrangements.

古文：兆从其议。
现代文：尔硃荣兆批准了这一建议。
English: Erqin Rongzhao approved the proposal.

古文：长史慕容绍宗谏曰： 不可。
现代文：长史慕容绍宗劝谏道： 不能答应。
English: Changshi Murong Shaozong advised him: I can't agree.

古文：方今四方纷扰，人怀异望，高公雄才盖世，复使握大兵于外，譬如借蛟龙以云雨，将不可制矣。 
现代文：当今天下纷乱，人人各怀异想，高欢雄才盖世，如果再让他在外握有重军，这好比是借云雨给蛟龙啊，您将无法控制他了。 
English: When the world is in turmoil, everyone has their own whims, and high-spirited talents are on the rise, if you let him hold a heavy army outside, it's like borrowing clouds and rain to give a dragon, you won't be able to control him.

古文：兆曰： 有香火重誓，何虑邪！ 
现代文：尔硃荣兆说： 我与高欢有结拜重誓，何必过虑！ 
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao said: I have made a solemn oath with Gao Huan, why worry!

古文：绍宗曰： 亲兄弟尚不可信，何论香火！ 
现代文：慕容绍宗道： 亲兄弟尚且不能完全相信，何论结拜兄弟呢！ 
English: Murong Shao Zongdao: One cannot fully believe in one's own brother, let alone a brother-in-law!

古文：时兆左右已受欢金，因称绍宗与欢有旧隙。兆怒，囚绍宗，趣欢发。
现代文：当时尔硃荣兆的左右部下已经接受了高欢的重金，于是便趁机称慕容绍宗跟高欢有旧仇，尔硃荣兆大怒，囚禁了慕容绍宗，催促高欢尽早出发。
English: At that time, the left and right subordinates of Er Qiong Rong Zhao had already accepted Gao Huan's heavy money, so they took the opportunity to say that Murong Shaosong had an old feud with Gao Huan. Er Qiong Rong Zhao was furious, imprisoned Murong Shaosong, and urged Gao Huan to leave as soon as possible.

古文：欢自晋阳出滏口，道逢北乡长公主自洛阳来，有马三百匹，尽夺而易之。
现代文：高欢从晋阳出滏口，中途遇上了从洛阳来的北乡长公主，北乡长公主带有三百匹好马，高欢将这些好马全部截夺下来，另用羸马掉换了。
English: Gao Huan left Jinyang through the gate, and on the way he met the eldest princess of Beixiang who came from Luoyang. The eldest princess of Beixiang brought three hundred good horses with her. Gao Huan intercepted all these good horses and replaced them with horses.

古文：兆闻之，乃释绍宗而问之，绍宗曰： 此犹是掌握中物也。 
现代文：尔硃荣兆听说了这件事后，便放出慕容绍宗，与之商议。慕容绍宗说道： 高欢目前还未走远，仍是您的掌中之物呢。 
English: When Erqin Rongzhao heard about this, he released Murong Shaosong to discuss with him. Murong Shaosong said: Gaohuan has not gone far, it is still in your hands.

古文：兆乃自追欢，至襄垣，会漳水暴涨，桥坏，欢隔水拜曰： 所以借公主马，非有它故，备山东盗耳。
现代文：尔硃荣兆于是亲自追赶高欢，追至襄垣县，正值漳河暴涨，桥梁被冲坏了。高欢隔着漳河遥拜尔硃荣兆道： 我之所以借公主马匹，并非有别的目的，只是为了防备山东的盗贼罢了。
English: Er Qiong Rong Zhao then personally chased Gao Huan to Xiangyuan County, just as the Wei River was surging and bridges were washed away. Gao Huan was far away across the Wei River. Er Qiong Rong Zhao said: The reason why I borrowed the princess's horses was not for any other purpose, but just to guard against thieves in Shandong.

古文：王信公主之谗，自来赐追，今不辞渡水而死，恐此众便叛。 
现代文：大王您竟相信公主的谗言，亲自前来追赶，我不害怕渡过河来受死，但恐怕我的这些部下便要叛离了。 
English: I am not afraid to die crossing the river, but I am afraid that these men of mine will turn against me.

古文：兆自陈无此意，因轻马渡水，与欢坐幕下陈谢，授欢刀，引颈使欢斫之。
现代文：尔硃荣兆自己也说没有这个意思，于是轻马渡过漳河，与高欢并坐大帐前，将自己所佩之刀交给了高欢，引颈让高欢斩杀。
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao himself also said that he did not have this intention, so the light horse crossed the Fen River, and sat with Gao Huan in front of the big account, handed the sword he was wearing to Gao Huan, and let Gao Huan be killed by the neck.

古文：欢大哭曰： 自天柱之薨，贺六浑更何所仰！
现代文：高欢痛哭道： 自从天柱将军去世后，我高欢还有谁可以仰靠！
English: Gao Huan cried bitterly: Since the death of General Tianzhu, who else can I, Gao Huan, rely on!

古文：但愿大家千万岁，以申力用耳。
现代文：只希望您长命百岁，我为您效力罢了。
English: I just hope you live to be a hundred. I'm just doing my part.

古文：今为旁人所构间，大家何忍复出此言！ 
现代文：现在却被旁人挑拨离间，您怎忍心说出这种话呢！ 
English: How dare you say such a thing when you are being picked on by others!

古文：兆投刀于地，复斩白马，与欢为誓，因留宿夜饮。
现代文：尔硃荣兆将刀投于地上，又斩杀了白马，与高欢发誓，并且留住下来与高欢通宵宴饮。
English: Er Qian Rong Zhao threw his sword to the ground, killed the white horse, swore with Gao Huan, and stayed up all night feasting with Gao Huan.

古文：尉景伏壮士欲执兆，欢啮臂止之，曰： 今杀之，其党必奔归聚结；兵饥马瘦，不可与敌。若英雄乘之而起，则为害滋甚。
现代文：尉景埋伏下士兵想捉捕尔硃荣兆，高欢咬破自己的臂制止了他，并向他说： 现在如果杀了尔硃荣兆，他的党羽肯定会聚集起来并力来争，我们兵饥马瘦，不能与其相匹敌，如果这时候有英雄乘机而发难，那么祸害就更大了。
English: The soldiers under the ambush of Li Jing wanted to catch Er Qian Rong Zhao, Gao Huan bit his own arm to stop him, and said to him: Now if you kill Er Qian Rong Zhao, his party will certainly gather and fight hard. We soldiers are hungry and thin, and cannot compete with them. If at this time there is a hero who takes advantage of the opportunity to attack, then the disaster will be even greater.

古文：不如且置之，兆虽骁勇，凶悍无谋，不足图也。 
现代文：因此不如暂且放走他。尔硃荣兆虽然骁勇善战，但却凶悍无谋，不难对付。 
English: Therefore, it is better to let him go for the time being. Although Er Er Rong Zhao is brave and good at fighting, he is fierce and reckless and not difficult to deal with.

古文：旦日，兆归营，复召欢，欢将上马诣之，孙腾牵欢衣，欢乃止。
现代文：第二天，尔硃荣兆渡河回营，又召请高欢，高欢上马要前去会见尔硃荣兆，部下孙腾牵住高欢的衣服，高欢这才未去。
English: The next day, Er Qiong Rong Zhao crossed the river to return to the camp, and called Gao Huan again. Gao Huan got on a horse to go to meet Er Qiong Rong Zhao. Gao Huan's grandchildren held on to Gao Huan's clothes, but Gao Huan did not go.

古文：兆隔水肆骂，驰还晋阳。
现代文：尔硃荣兆隔河责骂高欢，之后驰还晋阳。
English: He scolded Gao Huan across the river, and then went back to Jinyang.

古文：兆腹心念贤领降户家属别为营，欢伪与之善，观其佩刀，因取杀之。
现代文：尔硃荣兆的心腹念贤率领降户家属另外安营，高欢假意与念贤友善，借口观赏念贤的佩刀，趁机杀了他。
English: Erqin Rongzhao's henchman, Nian Xian, led the families of the families to set up a separate camp, pretending to be friendly with Nian Xian, and taking the opportunity to kill him on the pretext of watching Nian Xian's sword.

古文：士众感悦，益愿附从。
现代文：士兵们欢欣鼓舞，更愿意归附依从高欢了。
English: The soldiers were jubilant and more willing to surrender.

古文：齐州城民赵洛周闻尔硃兆入洛，逐刺史丹杨王萧赞，以城归兆。
现代文：齐州城的百姓赵洛周听说尔硃荣兆攻入洛阳，便赶走了齐州刺史丹扬王萧赞，率城归附了尔硃荣兆。
English: When the people of Qizhou City, Zhao Luo Zhou, heard that Er Qiong Rong Zhao had entered Luoyang, they drove out the Qizhou assassin, Stendan Yang Wang Xiaozan, and led the city to attach Er Qiong Rong Zhao.

古文：赞变形为沙门，逃入长白山，流转，卒于阳平。
现代文：萧赞化装成和尚，逃进了长白山，流离辗转，最后死于阳平县。
English: Xiao Zan disguised himself as a monk, fled into the Changbai Mountains, wandered around, and finally died in Yangping County.

古文：梁人或盗其柩以归，上犹以子礼葬于陵次。
现代文：梁朝有人将萧赞的棺柩盗出，送回了梁朝，梁武帝仍按葬子之礼将萧赞葬在皇族的陵地。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, someone stole Xiao Zan's coffin lid and sent it back to the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Wu of Liang still buried Xiao Zan in the imperial mausoleum according to the custom of burying sons.

古文：魏荆州刺史李琰之，韶之族弟也。
现代文：北魏荆州刺史李琰之，是李韶的族弟。
English: Northern Wei Jingzhou stabbed Shi Li Yanzhi, who was Li Yanzhi's younger brother.

古文：南阳太守赵修延，以琰之敬宗外族，诬琰之欲奔梁，发兵袭州城，执琰之，自行州事。
现代文：南阳太守赵延，因李琰之是孝庄帝的外戚，于是便诬称李琰之想投奔梁朝，发兵袭击荆州，抓获了李琰之，赵延自己掌管州政事务。
English: Nanyang governor Zhao Yan, because Li Shizhi was a relative of Emperor Xiaozhuang, then falsely claimed that Li Shizhi wanted to join the Liang Dynasty, sent troops to attack Jingzhou, captured Li Shizhi, and Zhao Yan himself was in charge of state affairs.

古文：魏王悦改元更兴，闻尔硃兆已入洛，自知不及事，遂南还。
现代文：魏王元悦改年号为更兴，听说尔硃荣兆已经攻入了洛阳城，自知无济于事，于是南还梁朝。
English: The Wei king Yuan Yue changed his era name to the more prosperous one. He heard that Erqin Rong Zhao had invaded Luoyang City, but he knew it would not help, so he returned south to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：斛斯椿复弃悦奔魏。
现代文：斛斯椿又叛离元悦投奔了北魏。
English: Gao Shizhong also defected from Yuan Yue and joined the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：是岁，诏以陈庆之为都督南、北司等四州诸军事、南、北司二州刺史。
现代文：这一年，梁武帝下诏任命陈庆之为都督南、北司等四州诸军事和南、北司二州刺史。
English: In the same year, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict appointing Chen Qingshi as the military governor of the four states including the South and the North, and as the governor of the two states of the South and the North.

古文：庆之引兵围魏悬瓠，破魏颍州刺史娄起等于溱水，又破行台孙腾等于楚城。
现代文：陈庆之率兵包围了北魏的悬瓠，大破北魏颍州刺史娄起等于溱水，又于楚城大破北魏行台孙腾等。
English: Chen Qingzhi and his soldiers encircled the Northern Wei's Suspension Bridge, defeated the Northern Wei's Zhangzhou Zhishi, and defeated the Northern Wei's Xingtai Sunteng in Chucheng.

古文：罢义阳镇兵，停水陆漕运，江、湖诸州并得休息；开田六十顷，二年之后，仓廪充实。
现代文：遣返义阳镇兵，停止水陆漕运，长江、大崐湖沿岸各州都得以休养生息；开垦田地六千顷，二年之后，仓廪充实。
English: Yiyang town soldiers were repatriated, land and water transport was suspended, and all the states along the Yangtze River and Dalang Lake were able to rest and recuperate. Six thousand hectares of fields were reclaimed, and two years later, the granaries were enriched.

