古文：杨素守西京日，李靖以布衣献策。
现代文：原文隋朝的杨素镇守长安的时候，李靖以平民身份求见杨素，杨素坐在椅子上，态度傲慢地接见了李靖。
English: When Yang Su of the Sui Dynasty was guarding Chang'an, Li Jing asked to see Yang Su as a commoner. Yang Su sat on a chair and arrogantly received Li Jing.

古文：素踞床而见，靖长揖曰： 天下方乱，英雄竞起，公为重臣，须以收罗豪杰为心，不宜倨见宾客。 
现代文：李靖向杨素深深行礼之后，说： 天下将要大乱，英雄群起。杨公身为国家重臣，理应谦恭下士，网罗豪杰引为心腹，怎么能坐在椅子上接待客人呢？ 
English: After Li Jing bowed deeply to Yang Su, he said: The world is about to be in turmoil, heroes are gathering. Yang Gong, as the chief minister of the country, should be a humble and courteous corporal, with heroes and heroines as his confidants. How can he sit on a chair to receive guests?

古文：素敛容谢之。
现代文：杨素听完这番话后，就急忙改变了态度道歉。
English: After listening to these words, Yang Su quickly changed his attitude and apologized.

古文：时妓妾罗列，内有执红拂者，有殊色，独目靖。
现代文：当时杨素身边围绕着好几名侍妾，其中一位手拿红拂的侍妾长得最漂亮，她对李靖的言行特别注意。
English: At that time, Yang Su was surrounded by several concubines, one of whom, holding a red whisk, was the most beautiful. She paid special attention to Li Jing's words and deeds.

古文：靖既去，而执拂者临轩指吏曰： 问去者处士第几？
现代文：当李靖告辞离开之后，她特地跟随李靖出去，站在台阶上手指小吏说： 赶快去问问刚才离去的那位客人，他科举功名第几，现在家在哪里？ 
English: When Li Jing said goodbye and left, she specifically followed Li Jing to go out, stood on the steps and pointed at the clerk and said, "Quickly go and ask that guest who just left, what was his rank in the imperial examination, and where is his home now?

古文：住何处？ 靖具以对。妓诵而去。
现代文：李靖都详细回答了小吏，那侍妾在一旁听完之后，又默默复诵了一遍才进入屋子。
English: Li Jingdu answered the minor official in detail. After the concubine had finished listening, she recited it again in silence before entering the room.

古文：靖归逆旅，其夜五更初，忽闻叩门而声低者，靖启视，则紫衣红拂纱帽人，杖一囊，问之，曰： 杨家红拂妓也。 
现代文：李靖回到旅店后，睡到半夜五更天时，突然听到有人敲门，并且很小声地叫他的名字。他打开房门一看，看到一位身穿紫衣，头戴纱帽，拄杖拿一只口袋的人。李靖询问，回答说： 杨家拿红拂的侍妾。 
English: After Li Jing returned to the hotel, he slept until midnight, when he suddenly heard someone knocking on the door and calling his name in a low voice. He opened the door and saw a man wearing a purple robe, a cap, and a cane with a pocket. Li Jing asked and answered: The concubine of the Yang family with a red whisk.

古文：延入，脱衣去帽，遽向靖拜，靖惊答之，再叩来意，曰： 妾侍杨司空久，阅天下之人多矣，无如公者，故来相就耳。 
现代文：便请她进入屋中。侍女脱去外衣、纱帽，向李靖行礼，李靖惊慌答礼，并问明她的来意，她说： 我服侍杨司空已经有一段时间了，也看到过不少天下豪杰，可是从来没有一位可以和阁下相比，因此特别前来投靠。 
English: Then he invited her to enter the room. The maid took off her coat and cap, bowed to Li Jing, Li Jing gave a panicked reply, and asked her what she had come for, she said: I have been serving Yang Siku for some time, and I have seen many world heroes, but there has never been one that can be compared to you, so I came to ask for help.

古文：靖曰： 如司空何？ 曰： 彼尸居余气，不足畏也。
现代文：李靖听了这番话后，就问她杨素的为人，她回答说： 他不过是一具行尸走肉罢了，不值得去害怕。
English: After hearing this, Li Jing asked her what kind of person Yang Su was. She replied, "He's just a walking corpse, he's not worth being afraid of."

古文：诸妓知其无成，去者甚众矣，彼亦不甚逐也。
现代文：许多侍女眼看日后没有指望，都纷纷离开他，已经很多了。而杨公也不怎么追究她们的离去，我的计划很周密，阁下不必怀疑。 
English: Many maidservants see no hope in the future and have left him one after another, there are already many. And Yang Gong does not pursue their departure very much. My plan is very thorough, Your Excellency need not doubt it.

古文：计之详矣，幸无疑焉。 
现代文：李靖问她的姓名，她只回答说： 姓张。 
English: When Li Jing asked her name, she only replied, "My surname is Zhang."

古文：问其姓，曰： 张。 
现代文：再问她家中排行，她回答说： 排行老大。 
English: When asked about her family's ranking, she replied: "Top of the leaderboard."

古文：问其伯仲之次，曰： 最长。 
现代文：李靖看她的容貌举止，以及说话的语气，简直如天人一般。
English: Li Jing looked at her appearance, demeanor, and the tone of her speech, and she was just like a normal person.

古文：观其肌肤仪状、言辞气语，真天人也。靖不自意获之，愈喜愈惧，万虑不安，而窥户者无停履。
现代文：李靖意外得到红拂女，心中既高兴又害怕，然而下意识中又总感觉不妥，总感觉门外有偷听者的脚步声。
English: Li Jing accidentally got a red whip. In his heart, he was both happy and afraid, but subconsciously he always felt uncomfortable, he always felt that there were eavesdroppers' footsteps outside the door.

古文：数日，亦闻追讨之声，意亦非峻。
现代文：几天之后，传出追捕红拂女的消息，但是言辞还不是非常的严峻。
English: A few days later, the news of the hunt for the red-bearded woman came out, but the words were not very serious.

古文：乃雄服乘马，排闼⑤而去，将归太原。
现代文：李靖觉得事不宜迟，立即让红拂改扮成男装，骑马冲出大门，奔向太原。
English: Li Jing felt that it was time to do something, and immediately had Hongyu dress up in men's clothing, ride a horse, rush out of the gate, and run to Taiyuan.

古文：行次灵石旅舍，既设床，炉中烹肉且熟。张氏以发长委地，立梳床前；靖方刷马，忽有一客，中形，赤髯如虬，策蹇驴而来，投革囊于驴前，取枕欹卧，看张梳头。
现代文：两人途中经过灵石，投宿在客栈里。一天，厨房的炉火上正在炖着一锅肉，肉要熟了，红拂女披散着一头及地的长发，站在床前梳头，李靖在客栈外洗马，突然有一位客人来到客栈门口，他中等身材，蓄着满腮红胡子，骑着一匹跛腿驴，下了驴之后，把行囊丢在驴前，然后就进入客栈，取过一只枕头斜躺在床上，一双眼睛却一直盯着红拂女梳头。
English: One day, a pot of meat was simmering on the kitchen fire. The meat was about to be cooked. The red-bearded woman, with her long hair down to the ground, was standing in front of the bed combing her hair. Li Jing was washing her horse outside the inn. Suddenly, a guest came to the door of the inn. He was of medium height, had a full red beard, and rode a lame donkey. After getting off the donkey, he threw his bag in front of the donkey, and then entered the inn. He took a pillow and lay on the bed, but his eyes kept staring at the red-bearded woman combing her hair.

古文：靖怒甚，欲发，张熟视客，一手映身摇示靖，令勿怒。
现代文：李靖见到后非常生气，正想要发火，可红拂女在观察这位客人的举动之后，却用身体挡住那个人的视线，摇手制止了李靖，让他先不要发脾气。
English: After seeing this, Li Jing was very angry and was about to lose his temper. However, after observing the guest's behavior, the red-haired woman blocked the person's line of sight with her body and shook Li Jing's hand to stop him from losing his temper.

古文：急梳毕，敛衽前问其姓，客卧而答之，曰： 姓张。 
现代文：红拂女赶紧梳完头，整理好衣裳，然后上前行礼，问客人姓名，客人躺在床上回答说： 姓张。 
English: The red-haired woman quickly finished combing her hair, arranged her clothes, and then came forward to salute and ask the guest's name. The guest, lying on the bed, replied: "Last name Zhang."

古文：对曰： 妾亦姓张，合是妹。 
现代文：红拂女说： 我也姓张，算起来应是你的妹妹了。 
English: The red-haired woman said, "My last name is also Zhang, so I should be your sister."

古文：遽拜之。
现代文：急忙参拜。
English: They hurried to pay their respects.

古文：问其第几，曰： 行三。 
现代文：又问虬髯客在家中的排行，虬髯客答： 排行老三。 
English: He also asked the customer's ranking at home. The customer replied: "Third in the ranking."

古文：亦问妹第几，曰： 最长。 
现代文：又问红拂女的排行，红拂女说： 我排行老大。 
English: He also asked the Red Whistle Woman about her ranking. The Red Whistle Woman said: I'm number one.

古文：客喜曰： 今日幸逢一妹。 
现代文：虬髯客高兴地说： 今天有幸认了一个妹妹。 
English: The client said happily, "Today, I have the honor of recognizing a younger sister."

古文：张氏遥呼： 李郎，且来见三兄! 
现代文：红拂女招呼说： 李郎，来见三哥。 
English: The red-bearded woman called out, "Li Lang, come and meet the third brother."

古文：靖骤拜之，遂环坐，问煮何肉，曰： 羊肉，计已熟矣。 
现代文：李靖向他行礼致意，于是三个人围坐着闲谈，虬髯客问李靖炉上炖的是什么肉，李靖答： 是羊肉，好像快熟了。 
English: Li Jing saluted him, so the three of them sat around and chatted. The waitress asked Li Jing what kind of meat was simmering on the stove, Li Jing replied: It was mutton, it seemed to be getting ripe.

古文：客曰饥，靖出市胡饼。客抽腰间匕首，切肉共食，复索酒饮，于是开革囊，取下酒物，乃一人首并心肝，却头囊中，以匕首切心肝共食之，曰： 此人乃天下负心者，衔之十年，今始获之。 
现代文：虬髯客说肚子饿了，李靖出去买来胡饼，虬髯客从腰中抽出一把匕首切肉，三个人一面配着饼吃肉，又要酒来喝，虬髯客从皮囊中拿出下酒菜，原来是一颗人头和一副人的心肝，虬髯客把人头放回袋中，用匕首切开心肝，邀李靖一起吃，并且说： 这个人是天底下最忘恩负义的人，我花了十年的时间，才找到他并砍下了他的头。 
English: The customer said that he was hungry. Li Jing went out to buy some hu cakes. The customer pulled out a dagger from his waist to cut the meat. The three of them ate the meat with the cake and asked for wine to drink. The customer took out the wine and vegetables from the leather bag. It turned out to be a human head and a pair of human hearts. The customer put the human head back in the bag, cut the heart with a dagger, invited Li Jing to eat with him, and said: This man is the most ungrateful person under the sky. It took me ten years to find him and cut off his head.

古文：又曰： 观李郎贫士，何以得致异人？ 
现代文：接着又说： 我怎么看李郎你都只是一个穷书生的样子，你是怎么得到这位绝世美人的呢？ 
English: Then he said, "From my point of view, Li Lang, you are just a poor student. How did you get this world-class beauty?

古文：靖不敢隐，具言其由，曰： 然。
现代文：李靖不敢有所隐瞒，就将结识红拂女的经过说给了虬髯客听。
English: Li Jing didn't dare to hide anything, so he told the client the story of how he met the red-haired woman.

古文：故知非君所致也，今将何之？ 
现代文：虬髯客笑着说： 原来是这样啊，我想光凭你自己，无论如何也没有办法获得美人心，那么今后你有什么打算呢？ 
English: The client smiled and said, "That's the way it is. I think you can't win the hearts of beautiful women on your own, so what are your plans for the future?"

古文：曰： 将避地太原。 
现代文：李靖回答： 想暂时去太原避一阵子。 
English: Li Jing replied: I want to go to Taiyuan for a while.

古文：曰： 望气者言太原有奇气，吾将访之。 
现代文：虬髯客说： 据术士观察星象，说太原上空有股不寻常的云气，我也想要去太原看一看。 
English: The client said: According to the sorcerer observing the stars, there is an unusual cloud over Taiyuan. I also want to go to Taiyuan to have a look.

古文：靖因言州将子李世民，客与靖期会于汾阳桥，遂乘驴疾去。
现代文：于是李靖谈到自己将去拜访李世民，并和虬髯客约在太原汾阳桥碰面，说完虬髯客就骑上驴走了。
English: So Li Jing said that he would visit Li Shimin, and arranged to meet his client at the Taiyuan Liyang Bridge. After saying this, the client rode away on a donkey.

古文：及期候之，相见大喜，靖诈言客善相，因友人刘文靖得见。 世民真天子矣! 
现代文：到了两个人约定的日期，虬髯客和李靖都依约而来，两个人再度碰面都十分高兴，李靖假称虬髯客会看相，托友人刘文靖介绍去见李世民，两个人一见面， 李世民是个真命天子。 
English: On the date agreed upon by the two people, the client and Li Jing both came by appointment. Both of them were very happy to meet again. Li Jing pretended that the client would see each other, and asked his friend Liu Wenjing to introduce him to Li Shimin. As soon as the two people met, Li Shimin was a true match.

古文：废然而返，遂邀靖夫妇至家，令其妻出见，酒极奢，因倾家财付靖，文簿匙锁，共二十床，曰： 赠李郎佐真主立功业也。 
现代文：虬髯客说，就颓丧地回家。于是虬髯客邀请李靖夫妇来到自己家中，介绍妻子和他们认识，酒宴十分奢华，另外变卖了家中的财物，将变卖的钱财，装了满满二十床的东西，说： 赠给李郎辅佐真主建功立业。 
English: The client said that he went home depressed. So the client invited Li Jing and his wife to his home, introduced his wife to them and got to know them. The wine banquet was very luxurious. In addition, he sold the family's belongings, the money he was going to sell, and filled twenty beds with things, saying: Give Li Lang and his assistant to Allah to build a career.

古文：与其妻戎服跃马，一奴从之。数步遂不复见。
现代文：他自己却和妻子穿着军服跨上快马，带着一名奴仆飘然而去了，一眨眼便看不到踪影了。
English: But he and his wife, dressed in military uniforms, got on a fast horse, took a servant with them, and disappeared without a trace in the blink of an eye.

古文：靖竟佐命，封卫公。
现代文：后来李靖辅佐李世民统一了天下，被封为卫国公。
English: Later, Li Jing, assisted by Li Shimin, unified the country and was named the Prince of National Defense.

古文：吴长卿曰： 红拂见卫公，自以为不世之遇，视杨素蔑如矣；孰知又有一虬髯也，视李郎又蔑如矣。
现代文：吴长卿说： 红拂女见李靖，以为遇见当世奇才，把杨素看得一文不值；日后又碰上虬髯客，那气度又远胜李靖了。
English: Wu Changqing said: The red-haired woman saw Li Jing and thought she had met a modern-day genius, and regarded Yang Su as worthless. Later, she met a broker, and her demeanor was far superior to Li Jing.

古文：惜哉，不及见李公子也! 
现代文：可惜啊，当时红拂女未能遇见李世民。 
English: It's a pity, then, that the red-haired woman didn't get to meet Li Shimin.

