古文：初十日，早觅担夫，晨餐即行。
现代文：初十日清早找到挑夫，早餐后立即动身。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, I found a porter early in the morning and set off immediately after breakfast.

古文：出振武门，五里，西过茶庵，令顾仆同行李先趋苏桥，余拉静闻由茶庵南小径经演武场，西南二里，至琴潭岩。
现代文：出了振武门，走上去柳州的路。五里，往西经过茶庵，叫顾仆同行李先赶到苏桥，我拉着静闻由茶庵南边的小径途经演武场，向西南二里，来到琴潭岩。
English: I went out of the Zhenwu Gate and walked along the road to Liuzhou. Five miles to the west, past the tea house, I called my companion Li Rua to rush to Suqiao first. I pulled Jingwen from the path on the south side of the tea house, through the martial arts arena, two miles to the southwest, and came to the Qintan Rock.

古文：岩东有村，土人俱讹为陈抟。
现代文：岩洞东边有个村庄，当地人都错读为 陈传 。
English: There is a village on the east side of the cave, which the locals mispronounce as Chen Chuan.

古文：其西北大道，又有平塘街。
现代文：它西北面的大道，又有个平塘街。
English: On the northwest side of the avenue, there is also a Pingtang Street.

古文：余前游中隐山，即询而趋之，以晚不及，然第知为陈抟，不知即琴潭也。
现代文：我以前游中隐山时，就打听这个地方而后赶去那里，由于天晚来不及走到，然而只知道是陈传岩，不知道就是琴潭岩了。
English: When I used to swim in the Hidden Mountain, I inquired about this place and then rushed there, because it was too late to walk, but I only knew it was Chen Chuan Rock, and I didn't know it was Qintan Rock.

古文：后得《桂胜》，知方信孺孚若： 最后得清秀、玉乳、琴潭、荔枝四岩。 
现代文：后来得到了《桂胜》，知道方信孺孚若的题记说： 最后见到清秀、玉乳、琴潭、荔枝四岩。 
English: Later, I got hold of "Gui Sheng" and knew Fang Xin's epigraph: "At last, I saw Qingxiu, Yulong, Qintan and Lai Chi Si Yan."

古文：故初四西出，即首索清秀，几及而复失之。以下三洞，更无知者。
现代文：所以初四那天往西出游时，便首先寻找清秀岩，几乎走到却又错过了以下三个洞，更没有知道的人。
English: So when I went out west on the fourth day of the first semester, I first looked for Qingshuiyan. I almost walked there, but I missed the following three holes, and I didn't know anyone.

古文：然余已心疑陈抟之即琴潭，姑俟西行时并及之。
现代文：不过我已疑心陈拎岩就是琴潭岩，姑且等到西行时一并到那里。
English: However, I already suspected that Chenluangyan is Qintan Rock. Let's wait until we go west and go there together.

古文：及今抵其村，觅导者，皆以为水深不可入。
现代文：至今天来到这个村子时，寻找向导，都认为水深不能进去。
English: To this day, when people come to this village, looking for a guide, they think that the water is too deep to go in.

古文：已得一人，许余为导，而复欲入市，订余下午方得前驱。
现代文：随后找到一个人，答应为我作向导，可又打算进城去，与我约定下午才能领路。
English: Then I found a man who promised to be my guide, but he also planned to go into the city and agreed with me that he would only lead the way in the afternoon.

古文：余颔之，闻其东南又有七宝岩，姑先趋焉。
现代文：我点头同意了他，听说这里的东南方又有处七宝岩，姑且先赶去那里。
English: I nodded and agreed with him. I had heard that there was a place called Shippo Rock in the southeastern part of the island, so I decided to go there first.

古文：乃东南行，度一岭，共三里，又度一桥，桥下水自西而东。
现代文：于是向东南行，越过一座岭，共三里，又越过一座桥，桥下的水自西往东流。
English: So we drove southeast, over a ridge, a total of three miles, and over a bridge, under which water flowed from west to east.

古文：又南为李家村。
现代文：又往南是李家村。
English: Further south is the village of Lijia.

古文：村之南有石峰西向巉突，有庵三楹缀其下，前有轩，已圮，而中无居者。
现代文：村子的南边有座石峰，面向西方，高峻突兀，有三间寺庵点缀在峰下，前边有轩，已坍塌，而庵中无人居住。
English: On the south side of the village there is a stone peak, facing west, high and abrupt, with three temples and hermitages dotted under the peak. In front there is a collapsed pavilion, but no one lives in the hermitage.

古文：其岩不深而峭，其地盖在南溪山白龙洞之正西，即向游白龙洞时西望群山回曲处也。
现代文：这里的岩洞不深但很陡峭，此地大概在南溪山白龙洞的正西，就是从前游白龙洞时望见西面群山曲绕之处了。
English: The rock cave here is not deep but very steep. It is probably located directly west of the White Dragon Cave on Nanxi Mountain. This is the place where you can see the mountains twisting in the west as you swim past the White Dragon Cave.

古文：时静闻病甚，憩不能行，强之还陈抟村，一步一息，三里之程逾于数里。
现代文：此时静闻病得厉害，坐下歇息不能行走，强逼他返回陈传村，走一步歇一歇，三里的路程胜过走几里。
English: At this time, Jing Huan was very ill, he could not sit down to rest and could not walk. They forced him to return to Chen Chuan Village, walking one step at a time. A three-mile journey is better than walking a few miles.

古文：及抵村，其人已归，余强老妪煮茶啖饵为入岩计，而令静闻卧其家待之。
现代文：到村里时，那人已经回来，我强逼老妇人煮茶吃点心为进洞做准备，并叫静闻躺在她家等我。
English: When I got to the village, the man had already returned. I forced the old woman to make tea and eat snacks to prepare for entering the cave, and told Jing Wen to lie down at her house and wait for me.

古文：已而导者负松明并梯至，遂西趋小山之南，曰： 请先观一水洞，然不可入也。 
现代文：不久向导扛着松明与梯子到来，就向西赶到小山的南麓，向导说： 请先去观看一个水洞，但是不能进去。 
English: Soon the guide arrived, carrying torches and a ladder, and they drove west to the southern foot of the hill. The guide said, "Please go first to see a water cave, but you can't go in.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我听从他。
English: I listened to him.

古文：其门南向，水汇其内，上浸洞口，而下甚满黑，深洞中宽衍，四旁皆为水际。
现代文：水洞洞口向南，水积在洞内，上边浸到洞口，而下边十分溢满深黑，深洞之中宽敞低平，四旁都临水。
English: The mouth of the water cave is to the south, the water accumulates in the cave, the upper side is immersed to the mouth of the cave, while the lower side is very dark, the middle of the deep cave is spacious and low, and there is water on all sides.

古文：其左深入，嵌空崡岈，洞前左崖濒水之趾，有刻书焉，即方孚若笔也。
现代文：由洞左深入进去，嵌入空中十分深邃，洞前左侧濒水的石崖根部，有刻写的字，是方孚若的手笔。
English: From the left side of the cave, it is very deep, embedded in the air. At the base of the cliff on the left side of the front of the cave, near the water, there are inscribed words. It is Fang Furuya's handwriting.

古文：因出洞前遍征之，又得 琴潭 二大字，始信 陈抟 之果为音讹，而琴潭之终不以俗没矣。
现代文：于是出到洞前遍处察看，又找到 琴潭 两个大字，才相信了 陈传 果然是音读错所致，但琴潭到底没有因为世俗而湮没。
English: So he went out to the front of the cave, looked everywhere, and found the two large characters of Qintan. Only then did he believe Chen Chuan. It was indeed caused by a mispronunciation, but Qintan did not disappear because of the world.

古文：洞左复开一旁门，后与洞通，其不甚异。
现代文：洞左又开有一个旁洞口，后边与此洞相通，其中没什么特点。
English: On the left side of the hole, there is a side opening, which is connected to the hole on the back side. There is nothing special about it.

古文：余既得琴潭之征，意所谓荔枝者当不远。
现代文：我得到琴潭的证据后，料想所谓的荔枝岩的地方应当不远了。
English: After I got the evidence of Qintan, I thought that the place of the so-called Litchi Rock should not be far away.

古文：导者篝火执炬，请游幽洞。
现代文：向导点燃火执着火把，请求去游深洞。
English: The guide lights a fire, holds a torch, and asks them to swim into a deep cave.

古文：余征幽洞何名，则荔枝岩也。
现代文：我追间此深洞叫什么名字，就是荔枝岩了。
English: What's the name of this deep cave in the distance? It's Litchi Rock.

古文：问： 有水否？ 
现代文：间道： 有水没有？ 
English: Interviewer: Is there any water?

古文：则曰： 无之。 
现代文：却答道： 无水。 
English: But he answered, "There is no water."

古文：然后知土人以为水深不可入者，指琴潭言；导者以为梯楼可深入者，指荔枝言。
现代文：这样之后明白了当地人认为水深不能进去的洞，说的是琴潭岩；向导认为用楼梯可以深入的洞，说的是荔枝岩。
English: After this, I understood that the local people thought that the depth of the water could not enter the cave, saying that it was Qintan Rock; the guide thought that the stairs could be used to go deep into the cave, saying that it was Litchi Rock.

古文：此中岩洞繁多，随人意所指，迹其语似多矛盾，循其实各有条理也。
现代文：这一带的岩洞繁多，随人意所指，追究他们的话似乎矛盾很多，考察岩洞的实情却都各有千秋。
English: There are a lot of caves in this area, as many as people want to point out. There seem to be a lot of contradictions in what they say, but the truth of the cave is different.

古文：出琴潭岩，沿山左潴塘而行。
现代文：走出琴潭岩，沿着山左的积水塘走。
English: Go out of Qintan Rock and walk along the reservoir on the left side of the mountain.

古文：绕塘北转而西，洞门东向琴潭西麓者，荔枝岩也。
现代文：绕过水塘北边转向西，洞口向东朝着琴潭岩西麓的，是荔枝岩。
English: Bypassing the north side of the reservoir and turning to the west, the entrance of the cave faces east towards the western foot of the Qintan Rock, which is Litchi Rock.

古文：门不甚高，既入稍下，西向进数丈，循洞底右窍入其下穴。
现代文：洞口不十分高，进去后略略向下倾，向西前进数丈，沿洞底右侧的石窍进入它的下洞。
English: The mouth of the cave is not very high, after entering it, it leans slightly downwards, advances a few meters to the west, and enters its lower hole along the stone nook on the right side of the bottom of the cave.

古文：其内不高而宽平，有方池，长丈余，阔五、六尺，而深及丈，四旁甚峻，潴水甚冽。
现代文：那里面不高却宽阔平坦，有个方形水池，长一丈多，宽五六尺，而深处达一丈，四旁十分陡峻，积水非常凉。
English: Inside it was not high, but broad and flat, with a square pool at the top, more than a foot long, five or six feet wide, but a foot deep, very steep on all sides, and the water was very cold.

古文：再东南转，平入数十丈，两转度低隘，右崖之半有窍，阔二尺，高一尺，内有洞，上穹下平，潴水平窍。
现代文：再向东南转去，平缓地进去几十丈，两次转过低矮的隘口，右边崖壁的半中腰有个石窍，宽二尺，高一尺，里边有洞，上边隆起下面平坦，积水与石窍口平齐。
English: Then turn to the southeast, slowly climb a few tens of meters, and twice turn through a low pass. There is a rocky outcrop on the right side of the cliff, two feet wide and one foot high, with a hole in it. The uplift at the top is flat below, and the standing water is level with the mouth of the rock outcrop.

古文：以首入窍东望，其水广邃，中有石蜿蜒，若龙之浮游水中。
现代文：把头探入石窍中向东望，那积水广阔深远，当中有岩石蜿蜿蜒蜒，好似龙浮游在水中。
English: Put your head in the stone and look to the east. The water is vast and deep, and there are rocks meandering among them, like dragons floating in the water.

古文：穴内南崖，有石盆一方，长二尺，阔一尺，高六七寸，平度水面，若引绳度矩，而弗之爽者。
现代文：洞穴内南面的石崖，有一个方形石盆，长二尺，宽一尺，高六七寸，平地量一量水面，好像是用墨线直尺制成，毫厘不差。
English: The stone cliff on the south side of the cave has a square stone basin, two feet long, one foot wide, sixty-seven inches high, and a flat measure of water, as if made with a straight ruler, not a millimeter off.

古文：仍出至洞底，少西进，又循一右窍入其上峡。
现代文：身体不能进去。仍出到洞底，略往西进去，又沿着一个右侧的石窍进到它上面的峡谷。
English: I couldn't go in. I still went out to the bottom of the cave, went in a little to the west, and then followed a stone nook on the right side into the canyon above it.

古文：其内忽庋为两层：下穴如队，少西转，辄止；上穴如楼，以梯上跻，内复列柱分楞。
现代文：峡内忽然架成两层：下面的洞穴如队列，稍向西转，便到了头；上边的洞穴像楼阁，用梯子爬上去，里面又排列着石柱分成石窗。
English: The canyon suddenly became two-tiered: the caves below were like a queue, and if you turned slightly to the west, you would reach the head; the caves above were like castles, and you had to climb up with a ladder, and inside they were lined with stone columns that divided into stone windows.

古文：穿楞少西，遂下南峡中。
现代文：穿过石窗稍往西走，便下到南面的峡中。
English: Walk a little west through the stone window, then descend into the gorge to the south.

古文：平入数十丈，又南旋成龛，龛外洞顶有石痕二缕，分络夭矫，而交其端。
现代文：水平深入数十丈，又在南边旋成一个石盒，石完外的洞顶有两条石痕，分别缠绕屈伸，而它们的顶端交织在一起。
English: Several tens of meters deep horizontally, it twists into a stone box on the south side. At the top of the cave, beyond the end of the stone, there are two stone marks, twisted and stretched separately, and their tips are intertwined.

古文：仍出，度梯下至洞底，又循一左窍入其上峡，则层壁累垂。悬莲嵌柱，纷缀壁间，可披痕蹈瓣而登也。
现代文：仍旧出来，爬梯子下到洞底，又沿着一个左边的石窍进到它上面的峡谷，就见层层石壁叠累下垂，悬垂的莲花，嵌空的石柱，纷纷点缀在壁间，可以分开石痕踩着莲瓣上登。
English: He still came out, climbed down the ladder to the bottom of the cave, and then followed a stone nook on the left to enter the canyon above it. He saw layers of stone walls stacked and sagging, overhanging lotus flowers, hollowed-out stone pillars, dotted in succession between the walls, and stone marks that could be separated stepping on the lotus petals to climb up.

古文：大抵此洞以幽嫱见奇，而深入在右。水窍之侧，有小石块如弹丸，而痕多磊落，其色玄黄，形如荔枝，洞名以此，正似九疑之杨梅，不足异也。
现代文：大体上此洞以幽深隐秘见奇而且深邃，在右边贮水石窍的侧边，有些小石块如同弹丸，而且石痕众多杂沓，石色玄黄，形状如像荔枝，洞名是由此得来的，正好像九疑山的杨梅洞一样，不值得惊异。
English: On the whole, this cave is surprisingly deep and mysterious. On the right side of the water storage stone, there are some small stones like bullets, and there are many stone marks. The stone color is dark yellow, and the shape is like a lychee. The name of the cave is derived from this. Just like Yangmei Cave in Jiuqi Mountain, it is not surprising.

古文：出洞，由琴潭之北共一里，仍至其村，已下午矣。
现代文：出洞后，从琴潭岩的北边共走一里，仍来到那个村子，已是下午了。
English: After coming out of the cave, I walked a total of one mile from the north side of Qintan Rock to the village. It was already afternoon.

古文：携静闻西北山由间道共二里，抵平塘街。
现代文：带着静闻向西北由近道共行二里，来到平塘街。
English: With Jing Wen, they walked two miles northwest from the shortcut and came to Pingtang Street.

古文：其西石峰峭甚，夹立如门，南峰山顶忽有窍透腹，明若展镜。
现代文：此地西面石峰非常陡峭，夹立如门，南峰的山顶忽然有洞穴穿透山腹，明亮得好像平展的镜子。
English: Here, the western stone peak is very steep and stands like a door, and the peak of the southern peak suddenly has a cave penetrating the mountainside, bright like a flat mirror.

古文：余向从中隐寻铜钱岩不得，晚趋西门，曾过而神飞，兹再经其下，不胜跃跃。
现代文：我先前在中隐山找铜钱岩找不到，晚上赶去西门，曾经路过而神魂飞舞，此番再次经过它下边，禁不住跃跃欲试。
English: I couldn't find the Copper Coin Rock in the past when I was looking for it in the Hidden Mountain, so I hurried to the West Gate in the evening. I had passed by it once, and my spirit soared. This time, I passed under it again, and I couldn't help but be eager to try.

古文：问之，皆云无路可登。
现代文：向路人打听，都说无路可登。
English: If you ask passers-by, they all say that there is no way to climb up.

古文：会恰好静闻病不能前，有卖浆者在路旁，亦向从中隐来，曾与之询穿岩之胜者。
现代文：恰巧静闻病得不能前走，在路旁有个卖水的人，也是从前从中隐山来，曾向他打听过穿岩胜景的人。
English: It just so happened that Jing Huan was too sick to walk, and there was a man selling water by the roadside. He was also a man who had come from Zhongyin Mountain and had asked him about the scenic spots through the rock.

古文：其人曰： 有岐路在道旁打油坊后，可扪而入，东南转至一古庙，可登山而上也。 
现代文：那人说： 有岔路在大道旁打油坊的后面，可以摸着进去，往东南转到一座古庙，就可登山上去了。 
English: The man said: There is a fork in the road next to the main road, behind the oil factory, you can feel your way in, turn southeast to an ancient temple, and you can go up the mountain.

古文：余乃以行李挂其桁间，并令静闻卧茅下以待，曳杖遂行。
现代文：我于是把行李挂在擦子上，并叫静闻躺在茅屋下等着，我拄着手杖便走。
English: So I hung my luggage on the railing and told Jing Wen to lie down under the hut and wait for me. I walked away with my cane.

古文：过打油者家问之，则仍云岩无可登，其居旁亦无径可入。
现代文：路过打油人的家，向他打听，却仍是说岩洞无路可登，他的住处旁也无小径可以入山。
English: Passing by the oiler's house, I asked him about it, but he still said that there was no way to enter the cave, and there was no path to enter the mountain next to his residence.

古文：余回眺其后，有蛇道伏草间，遂披篱穿隙，随山麓东行。
现代文：我回头眺望屋后，有条蛇形小道伏在草丛间，就分开篱笆钻出篱笆缝，顺着山麓往东行。
English: When I looked back at the house, there was a serpentine path crouching in the grass. I cut through the fence, drilled through the gap, and followed the foot of the mountain to the east.

古文：转而南向，将抵古庙，见有路西上，遂从之。
现代文：转而向南走，将到古庙时，见有路向西上去，便沿着这条路走。
English: Turn to the south, and when you get to the ancient temple, you will see a road to the west, so follow this road.

古文：始扪级，既乃梯崖。
现代文：开始时摸着石阶爬，随后踏着石崖登。
English: At the beginning, I felt the stone steps to climb, and then stepped on the stone cliff to climb up.

古文：崖之削者，有石纹锋利，履足不脱，拈指不滑；崖之觉者，有枝虬倒垂，足可蹑藤，指可攀杪。
现代文：石崖陡峭之处，有锋利的石纹，脚踩上去不会脱，手抓住不会滑；石崖高大竖立之处，有枝条盘曲倒垂，脚可以踩着藤条，手可以攀住树梢。
English: Where the cliff is steep, there are sharp stone lines. If you step on it with your foot, it won't come off, and if you grasp it with your hand, it won't slip. Where the cliff is tall and upright, there are branches that are bent and hanging down. Your foot can step on the rattan, and your hand can climb the treetops.

古文：惟崖穷踄峡，棘蔓填拥，没顶牵足，钩距纷纷，如蹈弱水，如蹈重围，淬不能出。
现代文：唯有石崖走尽涉过峡谷，荆棘蔓草填塞抱成团，没过头顶扯住脚下，似钩子剑戟一样乱纷纷，如踩在弱水之上，像蹈进重围之中，始终不能出来。
English: Only the stone cliff waded through the canyon as much as possible, the thorny vine and grass filled and hugged into a group, pulled under the feet without going over the head, like a hook and a sword, like a mess, such as stepping on the weak water, like walking into a siege, and can not get out.

古文：乃置伞插杖于石穴，而纯用力于指足，久之，抵丛石崖下。
现代文：只得放下雨伞把手杖插在石穴中，而把全部力量用在手脚上，很长时间，抵达成丛的石崖下。
English: I had to put down my umbrella and stick my cane into the stone hole, and use all my strength on my hands and feet for a long time to reach the bottom of the cliff.

古文：其上回狮舞象，翥凤腾龙，分形萃怪，排列缤纷。
现代文：石崖上岩石如狮子回头，大象舞动，凤凰飞翔，神龙升腾，分为不同形态，荟萃着各种怪兽，缤纷排列。
English: The rocks on the cliff are like a lion looking back, an elephant dancing, a phoenix flying, and a divine dragon rising. They are divided into different forms, and various monsters are arrayed in a colorful array.

古文：计透明之穴已与比肩，乃横涉而北，逾转逾出峰头，俯瞰嵌崖削窟，反在其下，而下亦有高呼路误，指余下践之级者。
现代文：估计透亮的洞穴已与我并肩而立，便横向往北跋涉，转过去越到峰头，俯瞰深嵌的山崖和陡削的石窟，反而在脚下，而且下边也有人高呼路走错了，给我指点下山的台阶。
English: Figuring that the transparent cave was already standing side by side with me, I trekked horizontally to the north, turned around and climbed to the top of the peak, overlooking the deeply embedded cliffs and steeply cut grottoes, but at the foot, and there were also people shouting that they had taken the wrong path, pointing out the steps down the mountain.

古文：余感其意，随之下，竟不得所置伞杖处。
现代文：我感激他们的好意，顺着他们指点的路下来，竟然找不到放雨伞和手杖的地方。
English: I thanked them for their kindness and followed the path they had pointed out, but I couldn't find a place to put my umbrella and cane.

古文：呼者乃二牧翁，疑余不得下而怜之者，余下谢之。
现代文：呼叫的人是两位放牧的老翁，是怀疑我不能下山而同情我的人，我下来后谢过了他们。
English: The callers were two elderly shepherds, who suspected that I couldn't get down the mountain and took pity on me. I thanked them when I got down.

古文：其人指登崖之道尚在古庙南，盖其岩当从崖后转入，不能从崖东入也。
现代文：那两人指点说登上山崖的路还在古庙南边，原来那个岩洞应当从山崖后转进去，不能从山崖东面进去。
English: The two pointed out that the path to climb the cliff was still on the south side of the ancient temple. Originally, the cave should be entered from behind the cliff, not from the east side of the cliff.

古文：余言伞置崖间，复循上时道觅之。
现代文：我说伞放在石崖之间，又沿着上山时的路去找伞。
English: I said that I would put the umbrella between the cliffs, and then follow the path up the mountain to find the umbrella.

古文：未几，闻平塘街小儿呼噪声，已而有数十人呼山下者，声甚急，余初不知其为余，迨获伞下面后知之。
现代文：不多时，听见平塘街小孩的呼叫喧哗声，随即有数十人在山下呼叫，声音十分急切，我开始不知他们是为了我，及拿到伞下山之后才知道。
English: Not infrequently, I would hear the children of Pingtang Street call out loudly, and then dozens of people would call out at the bottom of the mountain, their voices very urgent. I began to wonder if they were calling for me, and only found out after I got my umbrella and went down the mountain.

古文：下至古庙侧，则其人俱执枪挟矢，疑余为伏莽潜匿的盗匪而询之者。
现代文：下到古庙侧边，就见那些人都握着刀枪带着弓箭，怀疑我是伏在草丛中的强盗而来讯间我。
English: When I went down to the side of the ancient temple, I saw those people holding knives and guns and carrying bows and arrows. They suspected that I was a robber lying in the grass and came to interrogate me.

古文：余告以游岩之故，皆不之信。
现代文：我把游岩洞的缘故相告，都不信我的话。
English: When I told them the reason for the cave, they didn't believe me.

古文：乃解衣示之，且曰： 余有囊寄路口卖浆者茅中，汝可往而简检查也。 
现代文：只好解开衣服给他们查看，并说： 我有行李寄放在路口卖水人的茅屋中，你们可前去检查一下。 
English: I had to undo my clothes to show them and said: I have my luggage in the hut of the water seller at the junction, you can go and check it out.

古文：众乃渐散。
现代文：众人这才渐渐散去。
English: Only then did the crowd gradually disperse.

古文：余仍从古庙南历磴披棘上。
现代文：我仍从古庙南经由石瞪分开荆棘上山。
English: I still go up the mountain from the south of the ancient temple through the thorns separated by the stone walls.

古文：遂西南转出山后坳间，眺其南，一峰枝起，顶竖一石，高数丈。
现代文：于是往西南转出到山后的山坳间，眺望它的南边，一座石峰岔出，顶上竖着一块岩石，高数丈。
English: So I turned to the southwest, to the mountains behind the mountain, and looked to the south of it. A stone peak jutted out, and on top of it stood a rock several stories high.

古文：度已出岩后，而遥瞻石壁之下，犹未见洞门。
现代文：我所见过的缀立的石峰，雁岩的翔莺峰，龟峰的灵芝峰，以及此地竹笋状并列开放的石峰，没有奇妙怪异如像这般的。
English: Of all the standing stone peaks I have seen, the soaring cranes of the wild goose rock, the lingzhi peak of the turtle peak, and the open stone peaks here in the shape of bamboo shoots, there is nothing as strange as this.

古文：忽下有童子，复高声呼误，言不及登者。
现代文：估计已到了岩洞后方，可遥望石壁之下，仍不见洞口。忽然山下有个儿童，又高声呼叫路错了，说来不及登上去了。
English: He estimated that he had reached the back of the cave, but he could look far below the stone wall and still could not see the cave entrance. Suddenly, a child appeared at the bottom of the mountain, shouting loudly that the path was wrong and that it was too late to go up.

古文：时日已坠西峰，而棘蔓当前，度不可及，且静闻在茅店，其主人将去，恐无投宿，乃亟随之下，则此童已飏而去，不知其为怜为疑，将何属者。
现代文：此时太阳已坠入西峰，而荆棘蔓草挡在前面，估计不能登到了，况且静闻在那茅草店铺中，店主人即将离开，恐怕无处投宿，只好听他的话连忙下山，却见这个儿童已扬长而去，不知他是同情还是怀疑，究竟属于何者？
English: At this time, the sun has fallen into the west peak, and the thorny vine grass is in front, it is estimated that it can not be climbed, moreover, it is quietly heard that in that thatched shop, the shopkeeper is about to leave, I am afraid there is nowhere to stay, I have to listen to his words and hurry down the mountain, but I see that this child has left, I don't know if he is sympathy or doubt, who does he belong to?

古文：乃仍转北麓，出打油坊后，则卖浆主人将负所铺张为返家计。
现代文：于是仍转到北麓，出到打油坊的后边，就见卖水的店主人正要背着他摆设的东西作回家的打算。
English: So he still went to the northern foot, went out to the back of the oil mill, and saw that the owner of the water shop was planning to go home with the things he had set up.

古文：余取桁间挂物，随其人东趋平塘街求托宿处。
现代文：我取了凛子上挂着的物品，跟随那人向东赶到平塘街寻找投宿之处。
English: I took the items hanging on Rin and followed the man to the east to Pingtang Street to find a place to stay.

古文：其人言： 家隘不能容。 
现代文：那人说： 家窄不能容纳。 
English: The man said, "My house is too small to accommodate you."

古文：为余转觅邻居以下榻，而躬为执爂，且觅其宗人，令明晨导游焉。
现代文：替我转寻邻居家住下，并亲自为我烧火做饭，而且找来他的族人，叫明早领我游览。
English: He found a neighbour's house for me to live in, and cooked for me on his own fire. He also found a member of his tribe to show me around in the morning.

古文：是暮，蕴闷热隆雷声出极，而静闻病甚，顾仆乍分，迨晚餐后，出坐当衢明月下，而清风徐来，洒然众峰间，听诸村妇蛮歌对歌谑浪开玩笑，亦是群玉峰头一异境也。
现代文：这天傍晚，闷热到极点，雷声隆隆，而静闻病得十分严重，顾仆突然分手。到晚餐后，出门坐在当街的明月之下，而清风徐徐吹来，潇潇洒洒身在群峰之间，听着众村姑唱山歌对开玩笑，也是在这群玉峰头的一个奇异境遇。
English: In the evening of that day, when the heat was at its peak, the thunder was booming, and Jing Huan was very seriously ill, Gu Min suddenly broke up. After dinner, he went out to sit under the bright moon in the street, while the clear wind was blowing, and he was dashing between the peaks, listening to the villagers singing folk songs and joking. It was also a strange situation at the top of this group of jade peaks.

古文：十一日，晨起，静闻犹卧，余令主宿者炊饭，即先过卖浆者家，同其宗人南抵古庙南登山。
现代文：十一日清晨起床，静闻还躺着，我叫寄宿的这家主人烧饭，马上先去拜访卖水人的家，同他的族人向南来到古庙南登山。
English: On the 11th day, I got up early in the morning, still lying in bed, and asked the host of the hostel to cook dinner. I immediately went to visit the water seller's house, and went south to the ancient temple to climb the mountain with his relatives.

古文：导者扬镳斩棘，共一里，抵山西南坳。
现代文：向导扬起飞镖斩断荆棘，共走一里，到达山西南的山坳。
English: Yang, the guide, took off with a dart to cut off the thorns and walked a total of one mile to reach the foothills in the southwest of the mountain.

古文：从石隙再登一二步，即望见洞门西南向。
现代文：从石缝中再登一两步，立即望见洞口朝向西南。
English: After climbing one or two steps from the stone gap, you can immediately see the mouth of the cave to the southwest.

古文：又攀石崖数十步，即入洞焉。
现代文：又攀着石崖走了几十步，马上进入了洞中。
English: He walked a few dozen steps up the cliff and immediately entered the cave.

古文：盖其门前向东北，后向西南，中则直透，无屈曲崚嶒之掩隔。
现代文：大体上前洞口朝向东北，后洞口朝向西南，中间则径直穿透，没有曲折突起之处的遮挡和阻隔。
English: In general, the upper front hole faces northeast, the back hole faces southwest, and the middle hole is straight through, with no obstruction or barrier in the tortuous protrusion.

古文：导者谓兹洞曰榜岩洞，兹山曰枫木山。
现代文：向导告诉说此洞叫榜岩洞，此山叫枫木山。
English: The guide told us that this cave is called Punggol Cave and this mountain is called Maple Mountain.

古文：下山，仍过古庙，遂南由田塍中渡西来小涧，共东南一里，入石岩洞。
现代文：下山，仍走过古庙，于是向南由田野中渡过西面流来的小涧，涧水自两路口西边的水塘透逃往东穿过山麓，就是南溪的源头了。共往东南行一里，进入石岩洞。
English: Going down the mountain, I still walked past the ancient temple, so I walked south from the middle of the field across the small stream flowing from the west, and the water from the pond at the west of the junction of the two roads flowed east through the foot of the mountain, which is the source of the South Stream. I went one mile southeast and entered the rock cave.

古文：其门西北向，后门东北向，其中幽朗曲折，后门右崖，有架虚之台，盘空之盖，皆窗楞旁透，可憩可读。
现代文：洞口向西北，后洞口向东北，洞中幽静明朗，曲曲折折，后洞口右边的山崖上，有架空的平台，盘旋在空中的顶盖，旁边都通有窗权，可以歇息可以读书。
English: The entrance of the cave faces northwest, the back entrance faces northeast. The cave is quiet and clear, with twists and turns. On the cliff on the right side of the back entrance, there is an overhead platform, a roof that hovers in the air, and there are windows right next to it. You can rest and read.

古文：由后洞出，北一里，仍抵平塘街。
现代文：由后洞出来，向北走一里，仍抵达平塘街。
English: Come out of the back hole, walk north for one mile, and still arrive at Pingtang Street.

古文：街北有石峰巑岏若屏，东隅有岩东向，是为社岩。
现代文：街北有座石峰突兀好像屏风，东隅有岩洞向东，这是社岩。
English: To the north of the town there is a rocky peak jutting out like a screen, and in the east corner there is a cave to the east, which is the shrine rock.

古文：外浅而不深，土人奉社神于中。
现代文：外边浅而不深，当地人在洞中供奉土地神。
English: Shallow on the outside, but not deep, the locals worship the earth god in the cave.

古文：导者又指其西北，有石峰中立，山下南北俱有汇塘，北塘之上，岩口高列，南塘之侧，穴门下伏其内洞腹潜通，水道中贯，是名架梯岩，又名石鼓洞，盖即予前觅铜钱岩不得而南入之者。
现代文：向导又指着它的西北方，有座石峰当中而立，山下南北都有积水塘，北边水塘的上方，岩洞口高列，南面水塘的侧边，洞穴口低伏，它们里面山洞暗中相通，水道从中流贯而过，这里名叫架梯岩，又叫石鼓洞，原来就是我前次寻找铜钱岩未找到却向南走进去的洞。
English: The guide also pointed to its northwest, there is a stone peak in the middle, there are stagnant ponds in the north and south of the mountain, above the northern pond, the cave mouth is high, the side of the southern pond, the cave mouth is low, the caves inside them are connected in the dark, and the waterway runs through the middle. This place is called the ladder rock, also called the stone drum cave. Originally, it was the cave where I went to the south without finding the copper money rock.

古文：导者言之，而不知余之已游；余昔游之，而不知洞之何名。
现代文：向导介绍着它，却不知我已游览过它；我从前游览它时，却不知洞叫什么名字。
English: The guide introduced it, not knowing that I had already visited it; when I visited it before, I did not know what the name of the cave was.

古文：今得闻所未闻，更胜见所未见矣。
现代文：今天得以闻所未闻，更胜于见所未见了。
English: Today, it is better to have never heard of it than to have never seen it.

古文：于是还饭于宿处，强静闻力疾行。
现代文：于是返回住宿处吃饭，静闻尽力带病上路。
English: So she went back to her accommodation to eat, and Jing Huan tried her best to take her illness with her on the road.

古文：西二里，经两山之峡。
现代文：向西二里，经过两座山之间的峡谷。
English: Two miles west, through a canyon between two mountains.

古文：峡北山则巍然负扆，下为广福王庙；峡南山则森然北拱，其东有岩焉。
现代文：峡谷北面的山巍然而立似屏风，下边是广福王庙；峡谷南面的山森然向北拱立，它东边有个岩洞。
English: The mountains on the north side of the canyon, however, stand like a screen, with the Guangfu King Temple below; the mountains on the south side of the canyon arch northward, and there is a cave on the east side.

古文：门东向，当门有石塔，甚整而虚其中，塔后不甚崇宏。
现代文：洞口向东，正当洞口有座石塔，十分整齐而塔中是空的，塔后面不怎么高大宏伟。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, and right at the mouth of the cave there is a stone tower. It is very neat, but the middle of the tower is empty, and the back of the tower is not very tall and grand.

古文：由其右穴入，渐入渐隘而黑，有狼兵数人调守于此，就岩爂寝焉。
现代文：由塔右的洞穴进去，逐渐进去慢慢变得又窄又黑，有几个土司兵调守在此地，就着岩洞在里边煮饭睡觉。
English: From the cave on the right of the tower, it gradually became narrow and dark. A few Tusi soldiers were stationed here, cooking and sleeping in the cave.

古文：岩门外，右有旧镌磨崖，泐不可读。
现代文：岩洞口之外，右边有旧时刻的摩崖，剥落不可读。
English: Beyond the mouth of the cave, on the right there is an old cliff, peeling and unreadable.

古文：乃下，西出峡门，是为两路口。
现代文：于是下去，向西走出峡口，这里是两路口。
English: So I went down and headed west out of the gorge. This is the junction of two roads.

古文：市肆夹路。
现代文：街市中店铺夹路。
English: Shops jostle for space in the street market.

古文：西北循山，为义宁道；西南循山，为永福道。
现代文：往西北沿着山走，是去义宁县的路；向西南顺着山走，是通永福县的路。
English: Walking northwest along the mountain is the road to Yining County; walking southwest along the mountain is the road to Tongyongfu County.

古文：余就西南行，不一里，静闻从而后，俟之不至。
现代文：我踏上往西南的路，不到一里，静闻在后面就跟不上了。
English: I set out on the road to the southwest, less than a mile, and Jinghan couldn't keep up.

古文：望路东有岩西向，拨棘探之，岩不深而门异。
现代文：望见路东有个岩洞向西，拨开荆棘去探洞，洞不深可洞口很奇特。
English: On the east side of the road, there is a cave to the west. I opened the thorns to explore the cave. The cave is not deep, but the entrance is very strange.

古文：下瞰静闻，犹然不见其过；欲返觅，又恐前行。
现代文：下瞰静闻，仍然不见他走过；想要返回去找，又担心他走到了前边。
English: Looking down, listening, and still not seeing him pass; wanting to go back to find him, and worrying that he's gone ahead.

古文：姑急追之，又迟待之，执前后至者询焉，俱茫然无指，实为欲前欲却。
现代文：姑且急忙去追赶他，又等了他很长时间，拉着前后来到的人打听，都茫然不知所指，实在是又想前进又想后退。
English: They hurried to catch up with him, and waited for him for a long time, pulling the people who came before and after to inquire, all of whom were at a loss as to what he was referring to. They really wanted to advance and retreat.

古文：久之，又西行四里，路右有小峰，如佛掌高擎，下合而上岐，下束而上展，于众峰中尤示灵怪。
现代文：许久，又往西行四里，路右边有座小峰，如佛掌高高举起，下部合拢而上面分岔，下面紧束而上边舒展，在群峰中尤其显得神奇怪异。
English: For a long time, and four miles to the west, there is a small peak on the right side of the road, like a Buddha's palm held high, the lower part is closed and the upper part is divided, the lower part is tightly bunched and the upper side is stretched, which is particularly strange in the group of peaks.

古文：其南又骈峙两山，束而成峡，路由其中。
现代文：它南边又并立着两座山，束拢来形成峡谷，路经由峡中。
English: On the south side of it, two mountains stand side by side, bunching together to form a canyon. The road passes through the canyon.

古文：峡南之峰，其东层裂两岩，转盼间，觉上岩透明。
现代文：峡南面的山峰，它的东边分层裂开两个岩洞，转眼间，觉得在上的洞透出亮光。
English: The mountain peak on the south side of the gorge, its east side split into two rock caves, and in a blink of an eye, I felt the light coming through the upper cave.

古文：亟南向趋之，只下岩可入，而上岩悬叠莫登，乃入下岩。
现代文：急忙向南赶到那里，只有下洞可以进去，而上洞层层叠叠悬在高处无法上登，只好进入下洞。
English: Rushing south to get there, only the lower hole can be entered, while the upper holes are stacked on top of each other and cannot be climbed, so you have to enter the lower hole.

古文：岩中列柱牵帷，界而为峡，剖而为窗，曲折明朗，转透其后，则亦横贯山腹者也。
现代文：洞中排着石柱挂着石筛慢，分隔为峡谷，剖成石窗，曲折明朗，钻进去转到洞的后边，却也是横贯山腹的洞。
English: In the cave, stone pillars are lined up and a stone sieve hangs slowly, separated by a canyon, cut into stone windows, twists and turns are clear, drill into the hole and turn to the back of the hole, but it is also a hole across the mountainside.

古文：以为由后窍西出，可反跻上岩透处，而后窍上下俱削，旁无可攀。
现代文：以为由后洞向西出去，可以返回来登到上洞穿通之处，可后洞上下都如刀削，旁边无处可攀。
English: He thought that if he went west from the back hole, he could climb back to the place where the upper hole was pierced. However, the back hole was like a knife, and there was nowhere to climb next to it.

古文：乃仍东出洞前，见东北隅石颇坎坷，姑攀隙而登，遂达上层。遥瞰近视，岩外之收揽既奇，岩内之绾结亦异，诚胜境也。
现代文：凭靠在后洞口石兔石窗间，远瞰近视，洞外收入眼底的景色既己奇异，洞内盘结着的钟乳石也很奇特，真正是胜境。
English: By leaning between the stone windows at the back of the cave, overlooking the nearsighted, the scenery outside the cave is strange, and the stalactites inside the cave are also very strange. It is truly a win-win situation.

古文：既而下山，不知静闻之或前或后，姑西向行。
现代文：我在粤中所见过的重楼胜境，这里算第一。不久下山，不知静闻是在前还是在后，姑且向西走。
English: This is the first place I have ever seen in Guangdong. Soon I will go down the mountain, and I don't know if I am ahead or behind, so I will go west.

古文：又见大路之左，复有岩北向，登之亦浅而不深，此亦峡南之山也。
现代文：又见大路在左边，又有岩洞朝向北方，登上洞也是浅而不深，这也是峡谷南面的山。
English: You can also see the main road on the left, as well as a cave to the north. The entrance to the cave is shallow but not deep. This is also a mountain to the south of the canyon.

古文：其在峡北者，西向亦有二洞层列，洞门上下，所悬亦无几，而俱石色赭黄，若独为之标异者。
现代文：那在峡谷北面的山，向西处也有两个洞分层排列，洞口一上一下，悬隔之处也不多远，但岩石的颜色全是褚黄色，好像单独为它们标新立异的模样。
English: On the mountain to the north of the canyon, there are also two holes arranged in layers to the west. The holes are one on top of the other, and the suspension is not far away, but the color of the rocks is all bright yellow, as if they were unique.

古文：一出峡门，则汇水直浸两峡之西，中叠石为堤，以亘水面，旁皆巨浸，无从渡水一登赭岩。
现代文：一走出峡口，就有积水直浸到两侧峡谷的西边，当中垒石筑成堤坝，以便横截水面，旁边都是巨大的水泽，无从渡水去登一次赫黄色的岩洞。
English: As soon as you go out of the gorge, there is stagnant water directly immersed into the west side of the canyon on both sides. In the middle, the foundation stone is built into a dike to cross the water, and there are huge marshes next to it. There is no way to cross the water to climb a yellow rock cave.

古文：遂由石道西向行汇水中。
现代文：随即又听说有个八字岩，也不能去到。于是经由石头路向西行走在积水中。
English: Then I heard that there was a rock called "Hachijiiwa" that I couldn't get to, so I walked west along the stone path to get out of the stagnant water.

古文：又望其西峰之东崖壁高亘，上悬三洞，相去各二十余丈，俱东向骈列，分南、北、中焉。
现代文：又望见水西山峰的东崖高高横亘着，壁上悬着三个洞，相距各有二十余丈，都向东并列，分为南、北、中。
English: You can also see the east cliff of the west-to-water peak stretching high and wide, with three holes hanging on the wall, each more than twenty feet apart, all parallel to the east, divided into south, north, and middle.

古文：遥睇崖端，俱有微痕，自南而北，可以上跻，惟北洞则崭然悬绝，若不可阶焉。
现代文：那座山在积水的西南，与东面山峡的南峰东西相夹形成积水塘。遥视崖顶，都有微小的石痕，自南往北，可以上登，唯有北洞却在特别高峻的悬崖绝壁上，似乎不能登上去。
English: That mountain is in the southwest of the stagnant water, and is sandwiched between the south peak of the eastern mountain gorge to form a stagnant pond. Remote viewing of the cliff top, there are tiny stone marks, from south to north, can be climbed, but only the North Cave is on a particularly steep cliff cliff, it seems that it cannot be climbed.

古文：途中行人见余趋岩，皆伫呼莫前，姑缓行堤间。
现代文：途中的行人见我向岩洞赶去，都站下高呼不要前去，暂且在堤上慢慢走。
English: Pedestrians on the way saw me rushing towards the cave, and they all stopped and shouted not to go, but to walk slowly on the embankment for the time being.

古文：俟前后行人少间，视堤西草径，循水遵南麓而行，虽静闻之前后，俱不暇计。
现代文：等到前后行人少些蝴旬隙，看着堤西边草丛中的小径，顺着水边沿南麓走，即使静闻是在前还是在后，全都无暇顾及。
English: Wait until there are fewer pedestrians in front and behind, watch the path in the bushes on the west side of the embankment, walk along the water's edge along the southern foot, even if you are listening quietly in front or behind, there is no time to take care of everything.

古文：已而抵南洞之下，仰睇无级。
现代文：不久抵达南洞之下，仰视没有台阶。
English: Soon we reached the bottom of the south cave, looking up without any steps.

古文：仍以攀崖梯隙之法，猿升猱跃而上，遂入南洞，则洞门甚崇，其内崆峒宏峻，规模迥异。
现代文：仍然用攀石崖踏裂隙的方法，似猿猴上登猴子跳跃一样往上爬，终于进入南洞。洞口十分高大，洞内空旷宏大十分险峻，规模迥然不同。
English: I still used the method of climbing the rock cliff and stepping on the crack, climbing up like a monkey jumping on a monkey, and finally entering the south cave. The cave entrance is very tall, and the cave is vast and very steep, and the scale is completely different.

古文：稍下，一岐由右入，转而西南，渐觉昏黑，莫究厥底；一岐由左入，不五丈，忽一门西透山后，返照炳焉；一门北通中洞，曲景穿焉。
现代文：稍稍下走，一个岔洞由右边进去，转向西南，渐渐觉得昏黑，无法穷究洞底；一个岔洞向左边进去，不足五丈，忽见一个洞口向西通到山后，光线反照进来，十分明亮；一个洞口往北通到中洞，曲射的光影穿透到那里。
English: A little further down, a wormhole entered from the right, turned to the southwest, and gradually felt dark, unable to fully explore the bottom of the hole; a wormhole entered to the left, less than five meters, and suddenly saw a hole to the west to the back of the mountain, the light reflected in, very bright; a hole to the north to the middle hole, the curved light and shadow penetrated there.

古文：于是先西向披后岩，上下俱悬崖陟绝，可瞰而不可下。
现代文：于是先向西钻入后洞，洞口高处与东洞相等，上下都是悬崖，上登的路断了，可以俯瞰却不能下去。
English: As a result, he first drilled into the west into the back hole. The height of the hole is equal to the east hole. The top and bottom are cliffs. The way up is broken. You can look down but you can't go down.

古文：遥望西南对山，有洞亦若覆梁，而门广中遂，东向暗黑而不知其涯。
现代文：遥望西南方对面的山，有个洞也像下覆的桥梁，而洞口宽阔洞中深邃，叫做牛洞，朝向东方，黑暗得不知洞底。
English: Looking far to the south-west across the mountain, there is a cave that also looks like a covered bridge, and the mouth of the wide cave is deep, called the cow cave, facing east, dark enough not to know the bottom of the cave.

古文：仍入内，旋北向上中洞，洞内北转而东透。
现代文：仍进到洞内，随即向北上到中洞，洞内往北转去穿透东面。
English: He still entered the cave, then went north to the middle cave, turned north inside the cave and penetrated the east side.

古文：先探其北，转至洞门，有石内庋，架为两层，上叠为阁，倒向洞内，下裂为门，直嵌壁间，盖即所望之北洞矣。
现代文：先探它的北面，转到洞口，有岩石在内架着，分成两层，上面叠架成楼阁，倒向洞内，下边裂成门洞，直直地镶嵌在崖壁上，原来就是望见的北洞了。
English: First explore its northern side, turn to the mouth of the cave, there are rocks inside, divided into two layers, the top is stacked into towers, upside down into the cave, the bottom is cracked into a doorway, straightly embedded in the cliff wall, the original is the visible north cave.

古文：至此则兹洞之旁通曲达，既极崇宏，复多曲折，既饶旷达，复备幽奇，余所观旁穿之胜，此为最矣。
现代文：到了这里就见到弯弯曲曲四通八达的旁洞，既极其高大，又多环绕曲折，既空旷豁达，又幽雅奇绝，我所观赏过的旁通的胜景，这里是最好的了。
English: When I got here, I saw the twists and turns of the side passage, which is extremely tall and has many twists and turns. It is both spacious and elegant. The view of the side passage is the best I have ever seen.

古文：仍入中洞之内，东临洞门，则其外路绝崖轰，遂仍返其中，循南洞而出焉。
现代文：仍进入中洞之内，东临洞口，洞口愈加高高隆起，下边洞外则是路断崖崩，只得仍返回洞中，沿着南洞出来。
English: I still entered the middle cave, the east was near the mouth of the cave, the mouth of the cave was getting higher and higher, and the road outside the lower cave was a cliff collapse. I still had to return to the cave and come out along the south cave.

古文：始知是三洞者，外则分门，内俱连窍，南洞其门户也，北洞其奥窟也，中洞则左右逢原，内外共贯，何岩洞之灵异，出人意表如此！
现代文：这才知道这三个洞，外面虽分几个洞口，里面的洞穴都连着，南洞是它的门户，北洞是它深处的洞窟，中洞则左右逢源，内外连贯在一起，为何岩洞的神奇怪异如此出乎人的意料之外！
English: This is how we know that these three caves, although they are divided into several openings on the outside, the caves inside are all connected, the south cave is its gateway, the north cave is its deep cave, the middle cave is to the left and right of the source, inside and outside are connected, why is the cave so strange and unexpected!

古文：于是仍由旧级下，共一里，北出大道，亟西行。
现代文：于是仍由来时的台阶下山，共走一里，向北出到大道上，急忙往西行。
English: So I walked down the mountain, taking the same steps as before, for a total of one mile, walked north to the main road, and hurried to the west.

古文：循南山北麓而西，三里，越一平坡，歧而南为通城墟。
现代文：沿南山的北麓往西走，三里，越过一个平坡，平坡南北两面的岩洞非常多，无暇四处走到。
English: Walking west along the northern foot of Nanshan for three miles, you will cross a flat slope. There are many caves on both the north and south sides of the flat slope, so there is no time to walk around.

古文：墟房累累，小若鸽户，列若蜂房，虚而无人，以俟趁墟者。
现代文：沿岔路往南走是通城墟。墟上房屋层层叠叠，小得像鸽笼，好似蜂房排列着，空而无人，以等待赶集的人。
English: Walking south along Kushiro Road is the Tongcheng Market. On the market, houses are stacked on top of each other, so small that they look like pigeon coops. They are lined up like beehives, empty and deserted, waiting for people to gather.

古文：从墟又南一里，是为上岩余循西路登岩，门北向，前临深塘。
现代文：从墟上又向南走一里，这是上岩后洞。我沿着西边的路登上岩洞，洞口向北，前临深塘。
English: From the market, I walked another mile to the south. This is Shangyanwa Hou-dong. I followed the road on the west side to reach the cave. The cave opens to the north, in front of Shentang.

古文：入其内，扩然崇宏，右峡下坠，已浚为渊，水潴其底，石壁东西夹之，峻不可下。
现代文：进入洞内，空旷高大，分为左右两个峡谷。右边的峡谷向下深坠，已经疏浚为深潭，水积在峡底，石壁在东西两面夹着它，高得无法下去。
English: Entering the cave, the emptiness is high, divided into two canyons on the left and right. The canyon on the right plunges down, has been dredged into a deep pool, the water accumulates at the bottom of the canyon, the stone wall sandwiches it on both sides of the east and west, too high to go down.

古文：左峡上入，蹲石当门，中耸为台，台上一顶柱直挂洞顶。
现代文：出了右峡，由左峡往上进去，洞口蹲着一块岩石挡住去路，中央耸成高台，高台上方一根顶柱垂直挂在洞顶。
English: Out of the right canyon, up the left canyon. At the mouth of the cave, there is a rock blocking the way. In the center, there is a high platform. Above the platform, a pillar hangs vertically at the top of the cave.

古文：路从两旁入，其西复有石崖，由洞北突而南，若塞门焉。与洞之南壁夹而成罅。
现代文：路从两旁进去，它西侧又有石崖，由洞北突向洞南，好像要堵住洞口一样，与洞的南壁夹成一条裂缝。
English: The road enters from both sides, and there is a rocky cliff on its west side, which protrudes from the north of the cave to the south of the cave, as if to block the mouth of the cave, sandwiched in a crack with the southern wall of the cave.

古文：路循崖西出，转绕崖后，踞门阈而坐，俯仰双绝。
现代文：洞口向东，高处与后洞平肩相等，深处和曲折之处赶不上。洞前有神庙，侧边有处台基。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, the height is equal to the back of the cave, and the depths and twists cannot keep up. There is a temple in front of the cave, and a pedestal on the side.

古文：出洞，循其东麓，复开一门，东向内洼，而下洞门之南，则村居萃焉。村后叠石开径，曲折而上，是为上岩。其门东向，前有神庐，侧有台址。有村学究聚群蒙于台上。
现代文：有个乡村的读书人聚了一群蒙童在台上。由高台一直上登到洞后，洞穴进裂成石完，下垂的岩石似鸡爪：有下垂到地下相离仅有一线的，有中央悬垂四旁忽然上卷的，有柱子状高大地立在洞中的，有爪子样下分出脚趾的。它东南方相对的山上有泉水，叫做龙泉。
English: There was a village reader who gathered a group of Mongolian children on the platform. From the high platform all the way up to the cave, the cave was cracked into stone, and the sagging rocks resembled chicken claws: some sagged to the ground with only a line separating them, some overhanged in the center and suddenly rolled up on all sides, some stood in the cave in a column-like height, and some had their toes sticking out from under the claws. On the mountain opposite it to the southeast was a spring, called Longquan.

古文：下台端，西北行一里，入东来大道。
现代文：下了高台的前端，仍然出到后洞水塘的北边，向西北行一里，走上东来的大道。
English: After descending the front end of the plateau, still go out to the north side of Houdong Reservoir, go northwest for one mile, and take the eastbound road.

古文：又二里，为高桥，石梁颇整。
现代文：又走二里，是高桥，石桥十分整齐。
English: After another two miles, there is a high bridge. The stone bridge is very neat.

古文：越桥西南，石山渐开，北眺遥山连接，自西而东，则古田、义宁西来老龙矣。
现代文：越过桥往西南行，石山渐渐退开，往北眺望，远山连接，自西往东延伸，就是古田所、义宁县往西来的主脉了。
English: Crossing the bridge to the southwest, the stone mountain gradually recedes, looking north, connecting the distant mountains, extending from west to east, is the main artery of Gutasho and Yining County to the west.

古文：又七里为山蚤铺，其四旁虽间出土阜，而石峰尤屼突焉。
现代文：又行七里是山蚤铺，它的四旁虽然间或出现土山，而石峰更加突兀了。
English: The next seven miles are a flea market. Although there are occasional mounds of earth around it, the stone peaks are more abrupt.

古文：又西南八里，为马岭墟。
现代文：又向西南走八里，是马岭墟。
English: Another eight miles to the southwest is Ma Ling Hui.

古文：其日当市，余至已下午，墟既散，而纷然俱就饮啜浆矣。
现代文：这天正当赶集，我到时已是下午，集市已经散了，而人们都纷纷就着店铺饮茶喝酒。
English: It was the day of the fair, and by the time I arrived it was already afternoon, the market had already dispersed, and people were all rushing to the shops to drink tea and wine.

古文：始于墟间及静闻，复与之饭。
现代文：这才在集市上赶上静闻，再与他吃了饭。
English: It was only then that he caught up with Jingwen at the bazaar and had dinner with him.

古文：又西南二里，至缭江桥，越桥为缭江铺，于是山俱连阜回冈，无复石峰峥峥矣。
现代文：又向西南行二里，来到缭江桥，过了桥是缭江铺，到了这里，山全是土山，山冈相连回绕，不再有峥嵘的石峰了。
English: I drove another two miles to the southwest and came to the bridge over the Yangtze River. After crossing the bridge, I came to the Yangtze River crossing point. When I got here, the mountains were all dirt hills, mountains and hills were connected and winding around each other, and there were no more rugged stone peaks.

古文：又南八里为焉石铺，乃西入山坞。
现代文：又向南八里是焉石铺，于是往西走入山坞。
English: Another eight miles to the south was a stone shop, so I walked west to the dock.

古文：二里转而西南，又十里为苏桥，桥西是为苏桥之堡，入东门，抵南门，时顾仆已先抵此一日，卧南门内逆旅中。是晚蕴隆之极，与二病人俱殊益闷闷。
现代文：桥西是苏桥的城堡。走入东门，来到南门，此时顾仆已先一天到达此地，躺在南门内的旅店中。这天晚上极其闷热，雷声隆隆，我与两个病人都觉得特别郁闷。
English: West of the bridge is the castle of Su Qiao. Entering the east gate, I came to the south gate, at this time, Gu Min had arrived here the day before, lying in the inn inside the south gate. It was extremely hot in the evening, the thunder was rumbling, and I and the two patients felt particularly depressed.

古文：幸已得舟，无妨明日行计也。
现代文：幸好已找到船，不妨碍明天动身的计划。
English: Fortunately, the boat has been found, which does not interfere with the plan to leave tomorrow.

