古文：简王八年，鲁成公来朝，使叔孙侨如先聘且告。
现代文：周简王八年，鲁成公将要来朝见周王，派叔孙宣子先去访问并向简王报告这个消息。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of King Zhou Jian, Prince Lu Chenggong was about to come to the imperial court to meet King Zhou. He sent his uncle and grandson, Prince Xuan Zi, to visit first and report the news to King Jian.

古文：见王孙说，与之语。
现代文：叔孙宣子会见了王孙说，和他进行了交谈。
English: Uncle Sun Xuan Zi met with Wang Sun and had a conversation with him.

古文：说言于王曰： 鲁叔孙之来也，必有异焉。
现代文：王孙说对简王说： 鲁国的叔孙宣子这次来，一定是另有企图。
English: Wang Sun said to Jian Wang: Lu's great-great-grandson Xuan Zi's coming here this time must be another scheme.

古文：其享觐之币薄而言谄，殆请之也；若请之，必欲赐也。
现代文：他进献的聘礼菲薄而言谈阿谀奉承，恐怕是他自己要求来的吧。
English: I'm afraid he asked for it himself, as his offer of a bribe is nothing short of flattery.

古文：鲁执政唯强，故不欢焉而后遣之；且其状方上而锐下，宜触冒人。
现代文：如果是他自己要求来，肯定是想得到赏赐。鲁国的当政者惟有他强横，所以尽管不乐意也只得派他前来，再说他的相貌上宽下尖，很容易触犯他人。
English: If he came of his own accord, he must have wanted to be rewarded. He is the only powerful politician in the country, so he had to be sent here, even if he did not like it. Moreover, his appearance is both broad and sharp, so it is easy to offend others.

古文：王其勿赐。
现代文：陛下不要赏赐他。
English: Your Majesty, don't reward him.

古文：若贪陵之人来而盈其愿，是不赏善也，且财不给。
现代文：如果贪婪强横的人来朝见却达到了他的愿望，这不是鼓励善行，而且财物也满足不了他的欲望。
English: If a greedy and violent man comes to the court and gets what he wants, it is not an encouragement to good deeds, and wealth cannot satisfy his desires.

古文：故圣人之施舍也议之，其喜怒取与亦议之。
现代文：所以圣人在是否给予的问题上是要考虑的，在喜怒取予上也是要考虑的。
English: Therefore, a sage should consider whether to give or not to give, as well as whether to give or not to give.

古文：是以不主宽惠，亦不主猛毅，主德义而已。 
现代文：因此不主张宽惠，也不主张苛严，只主张赏罚得当而已。 
English: Therefore, we do not advocate leniency, nor do we advocate harshness, we only advocate appropriate reward and punishment.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：简王说： 好吧！ 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：使私问诸鲁，请之也。
现代文：便派人私下向鲁国打听，果然是叔孙宣子自己要求来的。
English: He then sent someone to inquire in private about Lu, and it turned out that it was his uncle Sun Xuan Zi himself who had requested the visit.

古文：王遂不赐，礼如行人。
现代文：简王便不给他赏赐，如同一般使节那样接待了他。
English: King Jan then gave him no reward, but received him like an ordinary envoy.

古文：及鲁侯至，仲孙蔑为介，王孙说与之语，说让。
现代文：到了鲁成公来朝时，由季文子陪同，王孙说与他交谈，他很谦和。
English: When Lu Chenggong came to the DPRK, he was accompanied by Ji Wenzi. Wang Sun said that he talked with him, and he was very humble.

古文：说以语王，王厚贿之。
现代文：王孙说将此告诉简王，简王赐给了季文子厚礼。
English: Wang Sun said that he told this to King Jian, and King Jian gave Ji Wenzi a gift.

