古文：十一月初一日晨起，余先作书令顾仆往投阮玉湾，索其导游缅甸书，并谢向之酒盒。
现代文：十一月初一日早晨起来，我先写信让顾仆送去给阮玉湾，向他索要导游缅甸的信，并感谢他在前送来的酒盒。
English: On the morning of the first day of November, I first wrote a letter for my servant to send to Nguyen Ngoc Van, asking him for a letter from the tour guide in Myanmar and thanking him for the wine box he had sent ahead.

古文：余在寓作晋宁诸柬，须其反命，即令往南坝候渡。
现代文：我在寓所中写好送到晋宁州的各封信，等顾仆一返回，就叫他去南坝等候渡船。
English: I wrote all the letters to be sent to Jinning Prefecture in my apartment. As soon as Gu Min returned, I told him to go to Nanba to wait for the ferry.

古文：下午，顾仆去，余欲入城拜阮仁吾，令其促所定负担人，为西行计。
现代文：下午，顾仆离去弓我打算进城拜访阮仁吾，让他催促所约定的挑夫，为去滇西作准备。
English: In the afternoon, my servant left for the bow. I planned to go to the city to visit Nguyn Nhu and ask him to urge the designated driver to prepare for the trip to the west of Hà Ni.

古文：适阮穆声来顾，已而玉湾以书来，期约定明日晤其斋中，遂不及入城。
现代文：适逢阮穆声来拜访，不久阮玉湾送信来，约定明天在他家中聚会，于是来不及进城。
English: When Nguyn Mc Sn came to visit, Nguyn Ngc Văn soon sent a message to arrange a meeting at his home the next day, so it was too late to go to the city.

古文：初二日晨起，余欲自仁吾处，次第拜穆声，后至玉湾所，忽玉湾来邀甚急，余遂从其使先过玉湾。
现代文：初二日早晨起来，我打算先去阮仁吾那里，其次拜访阮穆声，最后再去阮玉湾家，忽然阮玉湾家来邀请得很急，我于是跟着前来的人先去拜访阮玉湾。
English: When I got up in the morning of the first two days, I planned to go to Nguyn Nng's house first, then visit Nguyn Mu Cn, and finally go to Nguyn Ngc's house. Suddenly, Nguyn Ngc's invitation was very urgent, so I followed the people who came to visit Nguyn Ngc.

古文：则穆声已先在座，延于内斋，款洽殊甚。
现代文：到他家时阮穆声已经先入座了，把我请进内室，非常真诚融洽。
English: When I arrived at his house, Nguyn Mc Son had already taken his seat. He invited me into the inner room and was very sincere and congenial.

古文：既午，曰： 今日总府宴抚按，当入内一看即出，故特延穆声奉陪。 并令二幼子出侍客饮。
现代文：到了中午，阮玉湾说： 今天总兵官府中宴请巡抚、巡按，我要到府内去看一看，立即回来，所以专门请阮穆声前来奉陪，并且叫两个小儿子出来陪同客人宴饮。
English: At noon, Nguyn Ngc Văn said, "Today, there is a banquet in the General Headquarters of the People's Liberation Army for the inspectors and inspectors-general. I want to go to the headquarters to have a look and come back immediately. Therefore, I specially invited Nguyn Mc Sn to accompany me, and asked his two young sons to accompany the guests to the banquet."

古文：果去而即返，洗盏更酌。
现代文：阮玉湾果真去了就立即返回，洗杯再饮。
English: When Nguyn Ngc Văn did go, he immediately returned and washed his glass before drinking.

古文：余不能待，薄暮，托穆声代别而返。
现代文：不一会有人报告巡抚、巡按已经来到，阮玉湾又去了，瞩托阮穆声一定款待我多饮酒，等他回来再走。
English: Not long after, someone reported that the governor and the inspector-general had arrived, and that Nguyn Ngc Văn had left again. Nguyn Mc Sn assured me that he would treat me to more alcohol and wait for him to return before leaving.

古文：初三日晨往阮仁吾处，令促负担人。
现代文：我不能等候，将近太阳落山时，托付阮穆声代我告别就返回了。初三日早晨去阮仁吾那里，让他催促挑夫。
English: I couldn't wait, and when the sun was about to set, I said goodbye to Nguyn Mng and went back. On the morning of the third day, I went to Nguyn Nng and asked him to hurry up and pick me up.

古文：即从其北宅拜穆声。
现代文：然后就从他家北宅去拜访阮穆声。
English: He then went to visit Nguyen Mu Son from his home in the north of the city.

古文：留晨餐，引入内亭，观所得奇石。
现代文：阮穆声留我吃早饭，带我进人内亭，观看他所寻到的奇石。
English: Nguyn Mu Cn invited me to stay for breakfast and took me inside the pavilion to see the strange stone he had found.

古文：其亭名竹在，余询其故，曰： 父没时，宅为他人所有，后复业，惟竹在耳。 
现代文：亭子取名竹在，我询问这样取名的原因，阮穆声说： 父亲去世时，房屋被其他人占有，后来产业又恢复了，只有竹子还在。 
English: When I asked why the pavilion was named after bamboo, Nguyen Mu Son said: When my father passed away, the house was occupied by other people. Later, the property was restored, and only the bamboo was left.

古文：亭前红梅盛开。
现代文：亭前红梅花盛开。
English: The red plum blossoms in front of the pavilion are in full bloom.

古文：此中梅俱叶而花，全非吾乡本色，惟一株傍亭檐，摘去其叶，始露面目，犹故人之免胄脱去外壳相见也。
现代文：这里的梅花都是长出叶子后才开花，完全不是我家乡梅花的本色，只有一株靠在亭檐旁边，摘掉叶子，才露出本来的面目，犹如老朋友脱掉头盔相见 样。
English: The plum blossoms here only bloom after the leaves have grown out, which is not at all the true nature of the plum blossoms in my hometown. Only one plant is leaning next to the pavilion, removing the leaves, only to reveal its true face, just like an old friend taking off his helmet to see each other.

古文：石在亭前池中，高八尺，阔半之即四尺，玲珑透漏，不瘦不肥，前后俱无斧凿痕，太湖之绝品也。
现代文：奇石在亭前的水池中，有八尺高，宽是高的一半，玲珑透漏，不瘦不肥，前后都没有故意造作的痕迹，是太湖石中独一无二的上品。
English: The strange stone in the pool in front of the pavilion is eight feet high, half as wide as it is high, exquisitely transparent, neither thin nor fat, and there are no traces of intentional creation before and after. It is a unique high-grade stone in Taihu Lake.

古文：云三年前从螺山绝顶觅得，以八十余人舁至。
现代文：说是三年前从螺山最高峰上找到，用了八十多人抬回来。
English: Said to have been found three years ago on the highest peak of Mount Rao, it took more than eighty people to carry it back.

古文：其石浮卧顶上，不经摧凿而下，真神物之有待者。
现代文：当时这奇石浮空卧在山顶，没有经过凿断就抬下来了，真是神物在等待来人。
English: At that time, this strange stone floated in the air and lay on the top of the mountain. It was lifted down without being chiseled. It was truly a god waiting for someone to come.

古文：余昔以避雨山顶，遍卧石隙，乌没有睹有此类哉！
现代文：我过去在山顶上躲雨，到处的石缝都蹲伏过，哪里见到过这样的奇石呢！
English: I used to hide from the rain on the top of the mountain, crouching in stone crevices everywhere, where have I seen such strange stones!

古文：下午，过周恭先，遇于南门内，正挽一友来顾。
现代文：下午，去拜访周恭先，在南门内相遇，周恭先正好挽着一位朋友来看望我。
English: In the afternoon, I went to visit Zhou Jiaxian and met him in the south gate. Zhou Jiaxian just happened to bring a friend to visit me.

古文：其家乃教门在某教派中，可能是回教，举家用牛，不用豕猪也。
现代文：知道金公趾为我写了《送静闻骨诗；他们来约我一起去叩拜金公趾，而金公趾在他的田庄里，没能与他相遇。他的朋友于是挽留我们在家，杀鸡做饭，烹煮了很多牛杂脯菜肴，十分精细、干净。
English: Knowing that Jin Gongzi had written "Send Jing to Hear Bone Poetry" for me, they invited me to go and worship Jin Gongzi, but Jin Gongzi couldn't meet him in his grange. His friend then kept us at home, killed chickens to cook, and cooked a lot of beef chowder dishes, very fine and clean.

古文：其友姓马，字云客，名上捷，号阆仙。
现代文：他家是回族，全家吃牛肉，不吃猪肉。这个朋友姓马，字云客，是寻甸府人。
English: His family is of the Hui ethnic group, and the whole family eats beef and does not eat pork. This friend's surname is Ma, his Chinese name is Yunke, and he is from Xiangdianfu.

古文：寻甸府人。父以乡科任沅州守，当安酋困黔省时，以转饷功擢常德太守，军兴旁午诸事纷繁，独运援黔之饷，久而无匮，以劳卒于任。
现代文：他父亲通过乡荐出任玩州州守，当土司安邦彦围困贵阳时，因为运送粮响有功被提拔为常德府知府，战事兴起、各种事务繁杂，他父亲独自负责运送支援贵州省的粮响，时间久而没有匾乏，因为劳累而死在任上。
English: His father was promoted to the governor of Changde Prefecture through the recommendation of his hometown. He was promoted to the governor of Changde Prefecture because of his contribution to the transportation of grain during the siege of Guiyang. The war broke out, and various affairs were complicated. His father was solely responsible for the transportation of grain to support Guizhou Province. There was no shortage for a long time, and he died in office due to fatigue.

古文：云客其长子也，文雅蕴藉，有幽人墨士之风。
现代文：马云客是长子，举止文雅、含蓄宽容，有文人隐士的风度。
English: Ma Yunke is the eldest son, his manners are elegant, implicitly tolerant, and he has the demeanor of a literary hermit.

古文：是晚篝灯论文，云客出所著《拾芥轩集》相订，遂把盏深夜。
现代文：这天晚上点灯谈论文章，马云客取出他所著的《拾芥轩集》来订正，于是举杯饮酒到深夜。
English: That evening, they lit a lamp and talked about the article. Ma Yunge took out his book "Gleanings" to revise it, so he raised his glass and drank until late at night.

古文：恭先别去，余遂留宿其斋中。窗外有红梅一株盛放，此间皆红梅，白者不植。中夜独起相对，恍似罗浮魂梦间，然叶满枝头，转觉翠羽太多多耳。
现代文：周恭先告别离去，我就留宿在书斋里 窗外有一株盛开的红梅，半夜起来独自和红梅相对，恍惚觉得梅花是在梦中，然而绿叶布满枝头，反而觉得树叶实在太多了。
English: I stayed in the study. There was a red plum tree in full bloom outside the window. When I got up in the middle of the night, I stood alone opposite the red plum tree. I vaguely felt that the plum blossom was in a dream, but the branches were covered with green leaves. Instead, I felt that there were too many leaves.

古文：初四日马君留晨餐。
现代文：初四日马云客君留我吃早饭。
English: On the fourth day of the first week, Ma Yunka left me to have breakfast.

古文：恭先复至，对弈两局。
现代文：周恭先又来到，下了两局棋。
English: Zhou Qiong came back first and played two games.

古文：以留饭。
现代文：又留下吃午饭。
English: And stayed for lunch.

古文：过午乃出城，以为顾仆将返也。
现代文：中午过后才出城，以为顾仆会回来了。
English: He did not leave the city until after noon, thinking that his servant would return.

古文：及抵寓，顾仆不见，而方生已俨然形容庄重而整肃在楼。
现代文：回到寓所时，没有见顾仆，而吴方生已经真在楼上了。我问道： 为什么回来了？ 
English: When I returned to the apartment, I did not see Gu Min, but Wu Fang Sheng was already upstairs. I asked: Why did you come back?

古文：问： 何以来？ 曰： 昨从晋宁得君书，即骑而来送君。
现代文：他说： 昨天在晋宁州收到您的信，就骑马回来为您送行。
English: He said, "I received your letter yesterday in Jinning, and I came back on horseback to see you off.

古文：骑尚在，当迟一日复往晋宁。 
现代文：马还在，准备推迟一天再去晋宁州。 
English: The horse is still there, ready to postpone a day before going to Jinningzhou.

古文：问： 昔何以往？ 
现代文：我间： 原先为什么事去普宁州？ 
English: Me: Why did you go to Puning State in the first place?

古文：曰： 往新兴，便道晋宁看君耳。 
现代文：他说： 去新兴州，顺路去晋宁州看望您啊。 
English: He said, "Go to Xinxingzhou, and drop by Jinningzhou to visit you."

古文：问： 顾仆何在？ 
现代文：我问： 顾仆在哪里？ 
English: I asked: Where is the attendant?

古文：书为盗失，并不知其家之所在，但忆昔年与其弟宜兴总练同会于又生坐。今不知其弟尚在宜兴否。
现代文：他说： 还留在晋宁州等候渡船。 才知道吴方生去新兴州，是因为许知府考核期满，请求雷太史为他在巡按面前活动。
English: He said: I still stayed in Jinning Prefecture to wait for the ferry. I only knew that Wu Fang Sheng went to Xinxing Prefecture because Xu Zhifu's assessment period had expired and asked Lei Taishi to act for him in front of the patrol.

古文：怜余无资，其展转为余谋，胜余自为谋也。
现代文：初五日吴方生为我写信给永昌府的潘氏父子、腾越州的潘秀才；又为我请求许知府写信转给永昌府李知府，又为我写信给范复苏让他转写信给宾川州杨知州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wu Fang Sheng wrote a letter for me to Mr. Pan and his son Mr. Pan Xiu Cai of Yongchang Prefecture and Mr. Pan Xiu Cai of Tengyue Prefecture; he also asked Governor Xu to write a letter for me to send to Governor Li of Yongchang Prefecture, and he also wrote a letter for me to Fan Shuxing asking him to send a letter to Yang Chizhou of Binchuan Province.

古文：下午，顾仆自晋宁返，并得唐大来与陶不退书。
现代文：吴方生同情我没有路费，他展转为我求援，胜过我自己去求援。下午，顾仆从晋宁州返回，并且带来唐大来写给陶不退的信。
English: Wu Fang Sheng felt sorry for me because I didn't have any travel expenses, and he was more eager to ask for my help than I was to ask for help myself. In the afternoon, Gu Min returned from Jining and brought a letter from Tang Da to write to Tao.

古文：阮仁吾所促负担人亦至。
现代文：阮仁吾催的挑夫也来了。
English: Nguyn Nng's pick-up man also came.

古文：初六日余晨造别阮玉湾、穆声，索其所作《送静闻骨诗》。
现代文：初六日我早晨去向阮玉湾、阮穆声告别，索要他们写的《送静闻骨诗》。
English: On the morning of the sixth day of the first lunar month, I went to bid farewell to Nguyn Ngc Văn and Nguyn Mc Sn, and asked them to write a poem for me.

古文：阮欲再留款，余以行李已出辞。
现代文：阮玉湾想再留下款待，我用行李已经挑走作为理由辞谢。
English: Nguyn Ngc Văn wanted to keep the hospitality, but I used the reason that my luggage had already been taken away as a reason to decline.

古文：乃出叩任君。
现代文：于是出门叩拜任君。
English: So I went out to pay homage to him.

古文：任君，大来妹婿。
现代文：任君是唐大来的妹婿。
English: Renjun is the brother-in-law of Tang Dalai.

古文：大来母夫人在其家，并往起居之。
现代文：大来的母亲在他家，我一并去问候安否。
English: Otsuki's mother was at his house, so I went with her to see if she was okay.

古文：任固留饭，余乃趋别马云客，不值，留诗而还。
现代文：任君坚决留我吃饭，我于是去和马云客告别，没有遇到，留下诗而往回走。
English: Renjun resolutely let me stay for dinner, so I went to say goodbye to Ma Yuncai. I didn't meet him, but left a poem and walked back.

古文：过土主庙，入其中观菩提树。
现代文：经过土主庙，进去观看菩提树。
English: After passing the local temple, go inside to see the Bodhi tree.

古文：树在正殿陛庭间甬道之西，其大四五抱，干上耸而枝盘覆，叶长二三寸，似枇杷而光。
现代文：菩提树在正殿台阶和庭院之间的甫道西边，有四五抱粗，树午往上耸而树枝盘绕覆盖下来，树叶有二兰寸长，和批把树叶相似而没有绒毛。
English: The linden tree on the west side of the main road between the steps of the main hall and the courtyard is four or five feet thick, the tree rises up at noon and the branches are coiled to cover it, the leaves are two inches long, similar to the leaves of the palm tree, but without fluff.

古文：土人言，其花亦白而带淡黄色，瓣如莲，长亦二三寸，每朵十二瓣，遇闰岁则添一瓣。
现代文：当地人说，菩提树的花也是白中带点淡黄色，花瓣形状像荷花一样，也有二三寸长，每朵有十二片花瓣，碰到闰年则增添一瓣。
English: Locals say that the flowers of the linden tree are also white with a hint of pale yellow, the petals are shaped like lotus flowers, and they are also two or three inches long. Each flower has twelve petals, and an extra petal is added in a leap year.

古文：以一花之微，而按天行之数，不但泉之能应刻，州勾漏泉，刻百沸。而物之能测象如此，亦奇矣。
现代文：以小小的一朵花而言，竟然能按照自然运行的规律长花瓣，不只是泉水能够和时刻相应和，而事物竟然能够如此准确地测出天象，也确实神奇啊。
English: In the case of a small flower, it is truly amazing that it can grow petals in accordance with the laws of natural operation. Not only can spring water correspond to the time, but things can measure the celestial bodies so accurately.

古文：土人每以社日祭神之日，群至树下，灼艾代灸，言灸树即同灸身，病应灸而解。
现代文：当地人每到祭祀土地神的日子，成群结队来到树下，点燃艾草熏烤树干来代替灸治身体，说熏烤树干就和灸治身体一样，病随着熏烤而解除。
English: Whenever the local people come to the day of worshiping the land god, they come to the tree in droves to light the wormwood-smoked trunk to replace the moxibustion and cure the body, saying that the smoked trunk is the same as the moxibustion and cure the body, and the disease is relieved with the smoking.

古文：此固诞妄，而树肤为之瘢靥即斑痕凹陷无余焉。
现代文：这本来荒唐不合情理，但树皮因此而遍布疤痕，无一处幸免。
English: It was a preposterous idea, but it left the tree's bark scarred everywhere.

古文：出庙，饭于任，返寓。
现代文：从土主庙出来，在任君家里吃过饭，返回寓所。
English: They came out of the local temple, had dinner at Renjun's house, and returned to the apartment.

古文：周恭先以金公趾所书诗并赆至，又以马云客诗扇至。
现代文：周赞产类笋擎臀了烈竖登望路费，以及马云客的诗扇。
English: Zhou Zanzan's products have been highly praised, as well as Ma Yunke's poetry fan.

古文：阮玉湾以诗册并赆至，其弟鏳亦使人馈赆焉。
现代文：阮玉湾送来诗册以及路费，他的弟弟阮憎也派人送来路费。
English: Nguyn Ngc Văn sent a book of poems and travel expenses, and his brother Nguyn Hi also sent travel expenses.

古文：迨暮，金公趾自庄还，来晤，知余欲从筇往，曰： 余辈明晨当以筇竹为柳亭。 
现代文：到傍晚时，金公趾从田庄上返回城，来和我见面，知道我要从妹竹寺那里走，就说：我们明天早晨要把妹竹寺作为柳亭。 
English: In the late afternoon, Jin Gongzi returned to the city from the grange and came to meet me. Knowing that I was going to leave from Myeongjuksa Temple, he said, "Tomorrow morning, we will use Myeongjuksa Temple as a willow pavilion."

古文：余谢之曰： 君万万毋作是念。
现代文：我辞谢他说： 您千万不要这样想。
English: I thanked him and said, "Don't ever think like that.

古文：明晨君在温柔梦寐中，余已飞屐峰头矣，不能待也。 
现代文：明天早晨您还在温柔的睡梦中，我早已快速越过峰顶了，不能等你们了。 
English: Tomorrow morning you will still be in a gentle sleep, I have already passed the peak quickly, I can't wait for you.

古文：是晚，许郡尊亦以李永昌书至，惟范复苏书未至也。
现代文：这天晚上，许知府也送来写给永昌府李知府的信，只有范复苏的信还没送来。
English: That evening, Xu Zhifu also sent a letter addressed to Li Zhifu of Yongchang Prefecture. Only Fan Shuxing's letter had not yet been sent.

古文：初七日余晨起索饭欲行，范君至，即为作杨宾川书。
现代文：初七日我早早起床催促开饭，准备出发，范复苏君来到，当即为我写了给宾川州杨知州的信。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, I got up early to hasten dinner and prepare to set off. When Fan Shuxing came, he immediately wrote a letter to Yang Chizhou, Binchuan.

古文：余遂与吴方生作别。
现代文：我于是和吴方生告别。
English: So I said goodbye to Wu Fang Sheng.

古文：循城南濠西行二里，过小西门。
现代文：顺着城南的护城河往西走二里，经过小西门。
English: Walk two miles west along the moat to the south of the city, passing the Small West Gate.

古文：又西北沿城行一里，转而半里，是为大西门，外有文昌宫桂香阁峙其右，颇壮。
现代文：又往西北沿着城墙走了一里，向北转走了半里，到大西门，门外有文昌宫、桂香阁对峙在右边，很壮观。
English: I walked northwest along the city wall for another mile, turned north for half a mile, and arrived at the Great West Gate. Outside the gate, there was Wenchang Palace and Gui Xiang Ge, facing each other on the right. It was spectacular.

古文：又西半里，出外隘门，有岐向西北者，为富民正道；向正西者，为筇竹寺道。
现代文：又往西走半里，走出外隘门，有条岔路通往西北方，这是去富民县的大路；真直朝西边的，是去笨竹寺的路。
English: Another half-mile to the west, out of the outer gate, there is a branch road leading to the northwest, which is the main road to Fumin County; straight to the west is the road to Kunzhu Temple.

古文：余乃从正西傍山坡南行，即前所行湖堤之北涯也。
现代文：我于是从正西方向沿着山坡南面走，就是前几天所走的湖堤北岸。
English: So I walked from due west along the south side of the hill, which is the northern shore of the lake that I walked the other day.

古文：五里，其坡西尽，村聚骈集，是为黄土坡；坡西则大坞自北而南，以达滇海者也。
现代文：五里，到山坡西端尽头处，村舍并列、聚集，这是黄土坡；坡西面是从北往南延伸的大坞，一直抵达滇池。
English: Five miles to the end of the western end of the hillside, the village houses are side by side and clustered together, this is the loess slope; the west side of the slope is a large dock extending from north to south, all the way to Dianchi.

古文：西行坞塍中二里；有溪自西北注而南，石梁横其上，是即海源寺侧穴涌而出之水，遂为省西之第一流云。
现代文：往西在坞中田埂上走了二里，有条溪水从西北往南流，石桥横跨在溪流上，这是海源寺旁洞中涌出来的水，于是成为从省城往西走遇到的第一条河流。 
English: I walked two miles to the west on the dock of Nakata pier. There was a stream flowing from the northwest to the south. A stone bridge spanned the stream. This was the water gushing out of the cave next to Haiyuan Temple, so it became the first river I encountered when walking west from the provincial capital.

古文：又西一里半，有小山自西山横突而出，反自南环北；路从其北嘴上一里半，西达山下。
现代文：又往西走一里半，有座小山从西山上横着耸立出来，反过来从南绕向北；道路顺着小山北嘴上一里半，往西到达山下。
English: Another mile and a half to the west, there is a hill rising horizontally from the west hill, in turn from the south around to the north; the road follows the hill north of the mouth for a mile and a half to the west to reach the bottom of the mountain.

古文：有峡东向，循之西上，是为筇竹；由峡内越涧西南上，是为圆照；由峡外循山嘴北行，是为海源。
现代文：有道峡谷向东延伸，顺着峡谷往西上，就是笨竹寺；从峡谷内越过沟徊往西南上，是圆照寺；从峡谷外顺着山嘴往北走，是海源寺。
English: There is a canyon extending to the east, and along the canyon to the west, there is a Stupid Bamboo Temple; from the canyon, crossing the ditch and wandering to the southwest, is the Enso Temple; from outside the canyon, along the mountain mouth to the north, is the Haiyuan Temple.

古文：先有一妇骑而前，一男子随而行者，云亦欲往筇竹。随之，误越涧南上圆照，至而后知其非筇竹也。
现代文：在先有一个妇女骑着马走在前，一个男子跟着马走，说也是去笨竹寺，我跟着他们，误从峡谷内越过沟涧往南上到圆照寺，到了才知道不是笨竹寺。
English: At first, there was a woman on horseback walking in front, a man following the horse, saying that he was also going to Kunchu-ji Temple. I followed them, mistakenly crossing the ravine from the canyon to the south to Ensho-ji Temple, and only then did I know that it was not Kunchu-ji Temple.

古文：圆照寺门东向，层台高敞，殿宇亦宏，而阒静无人。
现代文：圆照寺寺门朝东，层层平台又高又宽敞，殿宇也大，但寂静无人。
English: The temple gate of Enshoji Temple faces east, the platform is high and spacious, and the hall is large, but no one is there.

古文：还下峡，仍逾涧北，令行李往候于海源，余从峡内入。
现代文：返下峡谷，仍然越到沟涧北边，让把行李挑往海源寺等候，我顺着峡谷往里走。
English: Returning down the canyon, I still crossed to the north side of the ravine. I waited for the luggage to be picked up and taken to Haiyuan Temple, and then I walked along the canyon.

古文：一里半，涧分两道来，一自南峡，一自北峡，二流交会处，有坡中悬其西。
现代文：一里半，沟涧分成两道伸来，一道从南边的峡谷，一道从北边的峡谷，二道沟涧交流会合的地方，有座山坡正好位于西边。
English: For a mile and a half, the ravine splits in two, one from the canyon to the south, one from the canyon to the north, and where the two ravines meet, there is a hillside just to the west.

古文：于是渡南峡之涧，即蹑坡西北上，渐转而西，一里半，入筇竹寺。
现代文：从这里渡过南边峡谷伸来的沟涧，就爬坡往西北上，逐渐转向西，一里半，进入年竹寺。
English: From here, cross the ravine that juts out of the canyon on the south side, climb the slope to the northwest, gradually turn to the west, one and a half miles, and enter Nianzhu Temple.

古文：其寺高悬于玉案山之北陲边缘，寺门东向，斜倚所踞之坪，不甚端称，而群峰环拱，林壑潆沓，亦幽邃之境也。
现代文：筇竹寺高高坐落在玉案山的北面，寺门朝东，斜靠在所坐落的平地上，不十分端正、对称，然而四周群峰环绕、簇拥，林木众多、沟壑曲折，也是幽静、深邃的境地。
English: Fuchu-ji Temple sits high on the north face of Mt. Tamade, with the temple gate facing east. It leans against the flat land on which it is located. It is not quite straight and symmetrical, but it is surrounded and surrounded by peaks, numerous trees, and winding gullies. It is also a quiet and profound place.

古文：入寺，见殿左庖脍喧杂，腥膻交陈，前骑来妇亦在其间。
现代文：进入寺中，只见大殿左边厨房中切肉声喧闹杂乱，腥味、擅味交织在一起，先前骑马来的妇女也在那里。
English: Entering the temple, one can only see the noisy and chaotic sounds of butchering meat in the kitchen on the left of the main hall, where the smell and taste are intertwined. The woman who had previously come on horseback is also there.

古文：余即入其后，登藏经阁。
现代文：我立即进入后院，登上藏经阁。
English: I immediately went into the backyard and climbed onto the bookshelf.

古文：望阁后有静室三楹，颇幽洁，四面皆环墙回隔，不见所入门，因徘徊阁下。
现代文：一看藏经阁后面有三间清静的房屋，非常幽静、整洁，但四面都是围墙隔着，看不见进去的门，于是在藏经阁下徘徊。
English: At a glance, there are three quiet houses behind the Zangjing Pavilion. They are very quiet and tidy, but they are surrounded by walls on all sides, and you can't see the door to get in. So I wandered around the Zangjing Pavilion.

古文：忽一人迎而问曰： 先生岂霞客耶？ 
现代文：忽然有一个人迎上来向道： 先生不就是霞客吗？ 
English: Suddenly, a person came up to me and said, "Isn't the teacher Xia Jie?

古文：问何以知之？
现代文：我间他为什么会知道呢？
English: Why would he know?

古文：曰： 前从吴方生案征其所作诗，诗题中见之，知与丰标形象风采不异也。 
现代文：他说： 从前在吴方生书案上求观他所写的诗，在诗的标题中见到先生名字，和您的风采没有什么不同。 
English: He said, "I once read a poem written by Wu Fangsheng on a book proposal. I saw your name in the title of the poem. Your style is no different.

古文：问其为谁，则严姓，名似祖，号筑居，严冢宰清之孙也。
现代文：我问他是谁，他说姓严，名似祖，号筑居，是吏部尚书严清的孙子。
English: I asked him who he was, and he said that his surname was Yan, his name was similar to his ancestor's, and he lived in the same house. He was the grandson of the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Yanqing.

古文：为人沉毅有骨，澹泊明志，与其侄读书于此，所望墙围中静室，即其栖托之所。
现代文：严似祖为人沉静刚毅而有骨气，恬静寡欲，志向完美，和他的侄儿在这里读书，所看到的围墙里的清静房屋，就是他们居住的地方。
English: Just like his grandfather, he is a quiet, strong-willed man with a strong backbone, quiet and modest, striving for perfection. He and his nephew are studying here, and the quiet houses within the walls you see are where they live.

古文：因留余入其中，恳停一宿。
现代文：他于是挽留我进入房屋中，恳请我住一夜。
English: He then detained me in the house and begged me to stay the night.

古文：余感其意，命题仆往海源安置行李，余乃同严君入殿左方丈。
现代文：我被他的诚意所感动，让顾仆前往海源寺安置行李，我就和严君一道进入大殿左边方丈。
English: I was moved by his sincerity. I asked my attendant to go to Haiyuan Temple to place my luggage, and together with Yan Jun, I entered the main hall and walked up to the abbot on the left.

古文：问所谓禾木亭者，主僧不在，锁钥甚固。
现代文：询问被称为禾木亭的地方，主管的僧人不在，锁锁得很牢。
English: Asking for the place known as Herokutei, the monk in charge is not there, the lock is firmly locked.

古文：复遇一段君，亦识余，言在晋宁相会，亦忘其谁何矣。
现代文：又遇到一位段君，也认识我，说在晋宁州相会过，而我忘了他是谁。
English: I met another Duanjun, who also knew me, and said that we had met in Jinning Prefecture, but I forgot who he was.

古文：段言为金公趾期会于此，金当即至。
现代文：段君说金公趾约他来这里聚会，金公趾立刻就到。
English: Duan Jun said that Jin Gongzi invited him to come here for a gathering, and Jin Gongzi arrived immediately.

古文：三人因同步殿右。
现代文：于是三人一同在大殿右边漫步。
English: So the three of them strolled up to the right side of the main hall.

古文：循阶坡而西北，则寺后上崖，复有坪一方，其北崖环抱，与南环相称，此旧筇竹开山之址也，不知何时徙迁移而下。
现代文：顺着有台阶的坡往西北去，则寺背后的山崖上，又有方方一块平地，其北部山崖环抱，和南部环抱的山崖相对称，这是蛛竹寺创建时的旧址，不知道什么进候搬迁到下面。
English: Following the stepped slope to the northwest, there is a square piece of flat land on the cliff behind the temple. The northern cliff is surrounded by the southern cliff. This is the old site of the spider bamboo temple when it was founded. I don't know what's waiting to move to the bottom.

古文：其处后为僧茔墓，有三塔皆元时者，三塔各有碑，犹可读。
现代文：平地背后是僧人的墓地，其中有三座塔都是元朝的，三座塔都有碑文，还能读出。
English: Behind the plain is the monk's cemetery, of which three towers are from the Yuan Dynasty. All three towers have inscriptions that can be read.

古文：读罢还寺，公趾又与友两三辈至，相见甚欢。
现代文：读完碑文返回寺中，金公趾又和两三批朋友来到，互相见面，十分愉快。
English: After reading the inscription and returning to the temple, Jin Gongzi came again with two or three groups of friends to meet each other. It was very pleasant.

古文：窥其意，即前骑来妇备酒邀众客，以筇竹为金氏护施之所，公趾又以夙与余约，故期备于此，而实非公趾作主人也。时严君谓余，其侄作饭于内已熟，拉往餐之。
现代文：观察他们的意思，是先前骑马来的妇女准备了酒宴邀请众位客人，因为笨竹寺受金家的保护施舍，金公趾原来又和我约定会面送别，所以按期在这里准备，而其实不是金公趾作主人 这时严君对我说，他的侄儿在里面已经作好饭，拉我去用餐。
English: Observing their intention, it was the woman who had previously come on horseback who had prepared a wine banquet and invited numerous guests. Because Kunchu-ji Temple was under the protection and charity of the Jin family, Jin Gongzi had originally agreed to meet me again to send me off, so they prepared it here on schedule, but in fact it was not Jin Gongzi who was the host. At this time, Yan Jun told me that his nephew had already prepared dinner inside, and pulled me to eat.

古文：顷之，住持僧体空至。
现代文：不一会，住持僧人体空来到。
English: After a while, the abbot came out of his body.

古文：其僧敦厚笃挚，有道行者，为余言： 当事者委往东寺监工修造，久驻于彼，今适到山，闻有远客，亦一缘也。
现代文：体空敦厚真诚，有道行，他对我说： 当事人委派我去监工修造东寺，长期住在那边，今天适逢回到山里，就听到有远道而来的客人，也是一次缘分。
English: He said to me, "The parties appointed me to supervise the construction of the East Temple, and I have been living there for a long time. Today, when I returned to the mountains, I heard that there were guests coming from far away, which was also a coincidence.

古文：必多留寺中，毋即去。 
现代文：一定要多留在寺里住几天，不要立即就离去。 
English: Be sure to stay in the temple for a few more days, do not leave immediately.

古文：余辞以鸡山愿切： 此一宵为严君强留者，必不能再也。 
现代文：我用去鸡足山的愿望迫切为理由辞谢道： 在这住一夜是因为严君强留，一定不能留第二夜了。 
English: I used my desire to go to the Chicken Foot Mountain as an urgent reason to say thank you: I stayed here for one night because Yan Jun forced me to stay, I must not stay for a second night.

古文：体空谓： 今日诸酒肉汉混聒喧闹寺中。
现代文：体空说： 今天很多吃肉喝酒的人混杂在寺中。
English: Tenshiro said, "Today, many meat eaters and drinkers are mingling in the temple.

古文：明晨当斋洁以请。 
现代文：明天早晨要用洁净的斋饭来招待您。 
English: Tomorrow morning, I will treat you to a clean meal.

古文：遂出。
现代文：于是出去了。
English: So he went out.

古文：余欲往方丈答体空，严君以诸饮者在，退而不出。
现代文：我想去方丈答拜体空，严君以众位饮酒人在为由，离开就没有出来。
English: I wanted to go to the abbot to pay homage to the empty body, but Yan Jun did not leave, citing the large number of drinkers.

古文：余见公趾辈同前骑妇坐正殿东厢，始知其妇为伎歌伎而称觞者敬酒之人，相当于现今公关小姐。余乃迂从殿南二门侧，曲向方丈。
现代文：我看到金公趾他们同先前骑马来的妇女坐在正殿东边的厢房里，才知道此妇女是歌伎以及举杯敬酒之人。我于是绕着从殿南二门旁边走，转向方丈走去。
English: I saw that they were sitting in a wing of the main hall on the east side of the main hall with a woman who had previously come on horseback, and I knew that this woman was a Kabuki and a person who raised a toast. So I walked around the south two doors of the hall and turned to the abbot.

古文：体空方出迎，而公趾辈自上望见，趋而至曰： 薄醴已备，可不必参禅。 
现代文：体空正出来迎接，而金公趾他们已从上面看见，急忙赶来说： 不太丰盛的酒宴已经准备好了，可以不必参禅了。 
English: The sky was coming out to greet them, but they had already seen the golden toe from above and hurried to say: The less sumptuous banquet is ready, so you don't have to meditate.

古文：遂拉之去。
现代文：于是拉我离开方丈。
English: So he pulled me away from the abbot.

古文：抵殿东厢，则筑居亦为拉出矣。
现代文：来到正殿东边厢房，则筑居也被拉来了。
English: When they came to the wing on the east side of the main hall, they were also drawn to the residence.

古文：遂就燕饮。
现代文：于是就坐宴饮。
English: So they sat down to a banquet.

古文：其妇所备肴馔甚腆。
现代文：那个妇女准备的菜饭非常丰盛。
English: The meal prepared by the woman was very rich.

古文：公趾与诸坐客，各歌而称觞，然后此妇歌，歌不及公趾也。
现代文：金公趾与各位就坐的客人，各自唱歌并举杯饮酒，然后那个妇女唱歌，唱得不如金公趾。
English: Jin Gongtui and all the seated guests sing and raise a glass of wine, and then the woman sings, but not as well as Jin Gongtui.

古文：既而段君去，余与筑居亦别而入息阴轩。
现代文：不久段君离去，我和筑居也告别后进到息阴轩。
English: Not long after Duan Jun left, I and Tsukuru also said goodbye and went to Xiyin Xuan.

古文：迨暮，公趾与客复携酒盒就饮轩中，此妇亦至，复飞斝征歌，二鼓乃别去。
现代文：到了傍晚，金公趾和客人又带着酒盒来息阴轩中饮酒，那个妇人也来了，还是一杯杯地敬酒、招呼唱歌，二更时分才离去。
English: In the evening, Jin Gongzi and his guests came with wine boxes to drink in the house. The woman also came, still toasting with a glass of wine, greeting and singing, and only left after two more minutes.

古文：余就寝。
现代文：我去寝室休息。
English: I'm going to my bedroom to rest.

古文：寝以纸为帐，即严发君之榻也。另一榻亦纸帐，是其侄者，严君携被袱就焉。
现代文：床上的帐子是纸的，是严君的床，另一张床上也是纸帐子，是严君侄儿的床，严君带着被子、包袱在那里睡。
English: The curtain on the bed is made of paper, which is Yan Jun's bed, and the other bed is also made of paper, which is the bed of Yan Jun's nephew. Yan Jun sleeps there with a quilt and luggage.

古文：既寝，严君犹秉烛独坐，观余《石斋诗帖》，并诸公手书。
现代文：我睡了，严君还点着蜡烛独自坐着，观看我的《石斋诗帖》，以及各位朋友的亲笔书信。
English: I was asleep, and Yan Jun was still sitting alone with a candle lit, watching my "Ishisai Shichitei," as well as the handwritten letters from friends.

古文：余魂梦间，闻其哦即吟哦，轻声朗诵三诗赠余，余寝熟不能辨也。
现代文：我在睡梦中听到他吟诵了三首诗赠送我，我因为熟睡而不能听清。
English: In my sleep I heard him recite the three poems he had given me, I couldn't hear them clearly because I was fast asleep.

古文：初八日与严君同至方丈叩体空。
现代文：初八日和严君一同到方丈中叩拜体空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, they went to the abbot's junior high school together to worship the sky.

古文：由方丈南侧门入幽径，游禾木亭。
现代文：从方丈南边的侧门走上小路，去游览禾木亭。
English: From the side gate on the south side of the abbot, walk up the path to visit the Herb Pavilion.

古文：亭当坡间，林峦环映，东对峡隙，滇池一杯，浮白于前，境甚疏窅ｙｏ深远，有云林笔意，亭以茅覆，窗棂洁净。
现代文：禾木亭位于山坡上，林木映衬，山峦环绕，东面正对峡谷间隙，滇池像一杯在握，满满地盛在眼前，环境非常疏空、深远，有画家倪云林的笔法和意境。亭子是茅草盖成的，窗权洁净。
English: He Mu Pavilion is located on a hillside, with trees as a backdrop, surrounded by mountains, and facing the canyon gap to the east. The Dianchi Lake is like a cup in your hand, and you can see it all over the place. The environment is very spacious and far-reaching, with the brushwork and artistic conception of the painter Ni Yunlin. The pavilion is covered with thatch, and the windows are clean.

古文：中有兰二本二丛或二株，各大丛合抱，一为春兰，止透二挺；一为冬兰，花发十穗，穗长二尺，一穗二十余花。
现代文：亭中有两株兰花，每株都是一大丛合抱在一起，一株是春兰，只露出两穗花；一株是冬兰，发了十穗花，花穗有二尺长，每穗有立十余朵花。
English: There are two orchids in the pavilion, each of which is a large cluster held together. One is a spring orchid, showing only two spikes; one is a winter orchid, with ten spikes. The flower spikes are two feet long, and each spike has more than ten flowers.

古文：花大如萱，乃赭斑之色，而形则与兰无异。
现代文：花和金针花一样大，是有斑点的猪色，而形状和其它兰花没有区别。
English: The flowers are as large as those of the coneflower, pig-coloured with spots, and are indistinguishable in shape from those of other orchids.

古文：叶比建兰阔而柔，磅礴四垂。
现代文：叶子比建兰的宽而柔软，很有气势地四面垂下。
English: The leaves are wider and softer than those of Jianlan, and they droop down gracefully on all sides.

古文：穗长出叶上，而花大枝重，亦交垂于旁。
现代文：花穗比叶子长，而且花大枝重，也交错着垂在叶子旁边。
English: The flower spikes are longer than the leaves, and the large branches of the flower are heavy, and they also hang in a staggered manner next to the leaves.

古文：其香盈满亭中，开亭而入，如到众香国中也。
现代文：兰花香飘溢在整个亭中，打开亭子进去，如同进入百花飘香之境。
English: The fragrance of orchids wafts through the entire pavilion. Entering the pavilion is like entering the realm of the fragrance of a hundred flowers.

古文：三人者，各当窗一隙，踞窗槛坐。
现代文：我们三个人各面对一扇窗子，靠着窗格而坐。
English: The three of us sat facing a window, leaning against the panes.

古文：侍者进茶，乃太华之精者。
现代文：侍者送来茶水，是太华山上最好的茶。
English: The waiter brought tea, the best tea on Mount Taihua.

古文：茶冽而兰幽，一时清供，得未曾有。
现代文：茶水清绿，兰花幽香，同时享有这样高洁的供奉，是不曾有过的。
English: The tea water is clear and green, the orchids are fragrant, and at the same time they enjoy such a noble offering, which has never been done before.

古文：禾木者，山中特产之木，形不甚大，而独此山有之，故取以为名，相仍已久，而体空新整之，然目前亦未睹其木也。
现代文：禾木是山中特有的树木，树形不太大，但只有这座山才有，所以取禾木作为亭名，相传已经很久，体空重新修整过亭子。但现在看不到这种树木。
English: "Herb" is a unique tree in the mountains. The tree shape is not too large, but it is unique to this mountain, so it has been a long tradition to take "herb" as the pavilion name. The pavilion has been renovated. But now you can't see this kind of tree.

古文：体空恳留曰： 此亭幽旷，可供披览；侧有小轩，可以下榻；阁有藏经，可以简阅有选择地阅读。
现代文：体空恳切地挽留道： 这个亭子幽静空旷，可以观览；旁边有小楼。可以居住；阁楼中藏有佛经，可以检阅。
English: He paused and said earnestly, "This pavilion is quiet and spacious, and can be viewed; there is a small building next to it. It can be lived in; there are Buddhist scriptures in the attic, and they can be examined.

古文：君留此过岁，亦空山胜事。
现代文：您留在这里过年，也是这深山里的好事。
English: Your staying here for the New Year is also a good thing in this deep mountain.

古文：虽澹泊，知君不以膻，非羊肉味来，三人卒岁之供，贫僧犹不乏也。 余谢： 师意甚善。
现代文：日子虽然清淡，知道您不是为了吃好的才来，三个人过年的费用，我还不至于缺乏的。 我辞谢说： 法师的用意十分好。
English: Although it's a light day, I know that you didn't come here just to eat well, and I don't need to pay for three people's New Year's expenses.I thanked him and said, "Master's preparation is very good.

古文：但淹留一日。余心增歉一日。
现代文：只是在此停留一日，我心里歉意就增加一日。
English: Just by staying here for one day, my heartfelt apologies have increased by one day.

古文：此清净界反成罪戾ｌì罪过场矣。 坐久之，严君曰： 所炊当熟，乞还餐之。 出方丈，别体空，公趾辈复来，拉就殿东厢，共餐鼎肉汤面，复入息阴轩饭。
现代文：这样，清净的境界反而成了罪过的场地了。 坐了一阵，严君说： 所做的饭应当熟了，请回去吃饭。 从方丈出来，告别了体空，金公趾他们又前来，拉我到大殿东边厢房，一起吃锅中的肉汤面，然后我又去息阴轩吃饭。
English: After sitting for a while, Yan Jun said, "The meal you have prepared should be ready, please go back to eat." The abbot came out and bade farewell to the empty space, and they came again, pulling me to the east wing of the main hall to eat the broth noodles in the pot together, and then I went to Xiyin Xuan to eat.

古文：严君书所哦三诗赠余，余亦作一诗为别。
现代文：严君写了昨晚吟诵的三首诗送我，我也写了一首诗作为告别。
English: Yan Jun wrote three poems for me to recite last night, and I also wrote a poem as a farewell.

古文：出正殿，别公趾，则行李前去，为体空邀转不容行。
现代文：从正殿出来，与金公趾告别，而行李在前出发，已被体空邀请转回，不容离开。
English: They came out of the main hall to say goodbye to Jin Gongzi, but their luggage, which had left earlier, had already been invited back by the sky, and they were not allowed to leave.

古文：余往恳之，执袖不舍。
现代文：我去体空那里恳请让我走，他拉着我的袖子不放。
English: I went to the loo and begged him to let me go. He held on to my sleeve.

古文：公趾、筑居前为致辞曰： 唐晋宁日演剧集宾，欲留名贤，君不为止。
现代文：我说： 法师的心意既然这样，等我从鸡足山返回，一定来法师这里停留数天。 
English: I said, "Since this is the mage's intention, when I return from Chicken Foot Mountain, I will definitely come to stay with the mage for a few days."

古文：若可止，余辈亦先之矣。 师曰： 君宁澹不膻，不为晋宁留，此老僧所以敢留也。 余曰： 师意既如此，余当从鸡山回，为师停数日。 盖余初意欲从金沙江往雅州四川雅安，参峨眉。
现代文：因为当初我打算从金沙江前往雅州，参拜峨眉山。
English: Because I originally planned to travel from the Jinsha River to Yazhou to visit Mount Emei.

古文：滇中人皆谓此路久塞，不可行，必仍归省，假道于黔而出遵义，余不信。
现代文：云南省的朋友都说这条路长期不通，不能走，一定还得返回省会，借道贵州省，从遵义去，我不相信。
English: Friends in Yunnan Province all say that this road has been impassable for a long time and cannot be taken. They must return to the provincial capital, go through Guizhou Province, and go from Zunyi. I don't believe it.

古文：及濒行，与吴方生别，方生执裾衣前襟黯然曰： 君去矣，余归何日？后会何日？
现代文：到临出发时，与吴方生告别，吴方生拉着我的衣襟，神色暗淡地说： 您走了，我什么时后能回去！
English: When it was time to leave, I said goodbye to Wu Fangsheng. Wu Fangsheng tugged at my collar and said with a gloomy expression, "You've left, when can I go back!"

古文：何不由黔入蜀，再图一良晤？ 余口不答而心不能自已。
现代文：我们什么时候再相见？为什么不从贵州省进四川省，再有一次愉快的见面？  我嘴里没有回答而心中不能自已。
English: When will we meet again? Why don't we go from Guizhou Province to Sichuan Province and have another pleasant meeting? There was no answer in my mouth and I couldn't help myself.

古文：至是见体空诚切，遂翻然有不由金沙之意。
现代文：到此时看到体空情意真切，于是转过来有了不从金沙江走的想法。
English: At this time, I saw that the body was empty and the meaning was real, so I turned around and had the idea of not going from the Jinsha River.

古文：筑居、公趾辈交口曰： 善。 师乃听别。
现代文：筑居、公趾他们异口同声地说： 好。 法师才允许我告别出发。
English: They all said in unison, "Good." Only then did the master allow me to leave.

古文：出山门，师犹远送下坡，指对山小路曰： 逾此可入海源上洞，较山下行近。 
现代文：走出山门，法师还远送到下坡，指着对面山上的小路说： 从这条路过去可以到海源寺上洞，比从山下走近。 
English: Coming out of the mountain gate, the sorcerer still went far downhill, pointing to the path on the opposite mountain and saying: From this road, you can go to Haiyuan Temple Upper Cave, but from the bottom of the mountain you can get closer.

古文：既别，一里半，下至峡中。
现代文：和法师分手后，走了一里半，下到峡谷中。
English: After parting with the sorcerer, he walked a mile and a half down into the canyon.

古文：令肩行李者逾南涧，仍来路出峡，往海源寺；余同顾仆逾北涧，循涧北入，即由峡东向蹑岭。
现代文：让挑夫从南边的沟涧过去，仍然从来的路走出峡谷，去海源寺；我和顾仆一同从北边的沟涧过去，顺着沟涧往北进去，然后顺峡谷往东登镊山岭。
English: Let the porter pass through the gully on the south side and still go out of the canyon along the road to go to Haiyuan Temple; I and my servant passed through the gully on the north side, followed the gully to the north, and then ascended the mountains along the canyon to the east.

古文：一里，逾岭东。
现代文：一里，越到山岭东面。
English: One mile, over to the east of the mountains.

古文：稍东下，半里，折而北，又半里，已遥见上洞在北岭，与妙高相并，而路则践危石历巉磴而下。
现代文：逐渐往东下，半里，转向北，又半里，已经远远地看见上洞在北岭，和妙高寺相并列，而小路则沿着陡峭的石壁、险要的石阶往下。
English: Gradually going down to the east, half a mile, turning to the north, another half a mile, I have already seen Shangdong in Beiling in the distance, alongside Myoko Temple, and the path is along the steep stone wall, almost stone steps down.

古文：下险，即由山半转而北行。
现代文：下了这段险路，就从半山腰转向北走。
English: After this dangerous stretch of road, turn north from mid-mountain.

古文：半里，有大道东南自海源上坡，从之。
现代文：半里，有条大路从东南边伸向海源寺上坡，跟着走。
English: Half a mile away, there is a large road stretching uphill from the southeast to Haiyuan Temple. Follow it.

古文：西北上半里，岭上乱石森立，如云涌出。
现代文：往西北上半里，岭上乱石林立，像云彩涌出一样。
English: In the first half-mile to the northwest, the rocks on the ridge are scattered, like clouds pouring out.

古文：再北，遂得上洞。
现代文：再往北，于是找到上洞。
English: Further north, I found the upper cave.

古文：洞门东向，高穹轩迥，其内深六七丈，阔与高亦如之，顶穹成盖，底平如砥，四壁围转，无嵌空透漏之状；惟洞后有石中突，高丈余，有隙宛转。
现代文：其洞口朝东，高高的弯形很开阔，洞内有六七丈深，宽和高也是六七丈，弯形的洞顶覆盖在上面，洞底平坦得如同磨刀石，四壁圆圆地围着，没有嵌空透漏的形状；只有洞后部有块石头耸立在中间，一丈多高，有弯曲的间隙。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, and the high curved shape is very open. The depth of the cave is sixty-seven meters, and the width and height are also sixty-seven meters. The curved roof of the cave covers the top, and the bottom of the cave is flat like a grindstone. The four walls are roundly surrounded, and there is no hollowed-out shape. Only the back of the cave has a stone towering in the middle, as high as one meter, with a curved gap.

古文：逾之而入，洞壁亦嵌而下坠，深入各二丈余，底遂窅黑。
现代文：越过石头后往里走，洞壁也凹嵌进去，并往下坠，往里往下深入各有二丈多，底部则完全漆黑。
English: After passing over the stones and going inside, the cave wall is also inlaid and falls down. There are more than two levels deep inside, and the bottom is completely dark.

古文：坠隙而下，见有小水自后壁滴沥而下，至底而水不见。黑处亦渐明。有樵者见余入，驻外洞待之，候出乃去。
现代文：我顺间隙坠下，看到有小水从后壁上滴滴答答地淋下来，到底部而水不见了，黑暗的地方也逐渐明亮，有个砍柴人见我进洞，站在外洞等着，等我出洞后才离去。
English: I fell down the gap and saw small drops of water trickling down the back wall. The water disappeared at the bottom, and the dark place gradually brightened. A woodcutter saw me enter the cave, stood outside the cave and waited until I left the cave.

古文：洞中野鸽甚多，俱巢于洞顶，见人飞扰不定，而土人设机关以取之。
现代文：洞中有很多野鸽，都在洞顶筑巢，见人进洞不停地乱飞，而当地人在洞中设置机关捕捉野鸽。
English: There are many wild pigeons in the cave, all of which build nests at the top of the cave. People can be seen flying in and out of the cave, while the locals set up an apparatus in the cave to catch wild pigeons.

古文：又稍北，共半里而得中洞。
现代文：又逐渐往北走，一共半里就来到中洞。
English: I gradually walked north again, and after a total of half a mile, I came to the middle cave.

古文：洞门亦东向，深阔高俱不及上洞三之一，四壁亦围转无他岐，惟门左旁列一柱，又有二孔外透为异耳。
现代文：中洞洞口也是朝东，其深度、宽度和高度都不到上洞的三分之一，四周的洞壁也是圆圆地围着而没有其它岔洞，只有洞口左边耸列着一根石柱，石柱上还有二个小洞透到外面，让人感到与众不同。
English: The mouth of the middle cave is also east-facing. Its depth, width and height are less than a third of the upper cave. The cave walls around it are also rounded and there are no other caves. There is only a stone pillar on the left side of the entrance. There are two small holes on the stone pillar that can be seen from the outside, which makes people feel different.

古文：余从洞前望往妙高大路，自海源由山下村落，盘西山北嘴而西上；洞前有如线之路，从岭北逾坳而西，即从岭头行，可省陟降之烦。
现代文：我在洞前看到去妙高寺的大路，从海源寺顺着山下村落，绕着西山北嘴往西上；洞前有条如同线一样的小路，从岭北面穿过山坳往西，就在岭头上走，可以省去上上下下的烦劳。
English: In front of the cave, I saw the main road to Myoko-ji Temple. From Haiyuan-ji Temple, I walked along the village at the bottom of the mountain and around the north end of the west mountain to the west. In front of the cave, there was a path like a line, from the north side of the ridge, through the mountains to the west, and walked on the top of the ridge, which could save the trouble of going up and down.

古文：乃令顾仆下山招海源行李，余即从洞岭北行，期会于妙高。
现代文：于是让顾仆下山去海源寺招呼行李，我就从洞前岭上往北行，约定在妙高寺会合。
English: So I asked my assistant to go down the mountain to Haiyuan Temple to fetch my luggage, and I headed north from Doushanling and agreed to meet at Myoko Temple.

古文：洞北路若断若续，缘西山之半，其下皆村聚，倚山之麓，大路随之。
现代文：洞前往北的小路断断续续，沿着西山半山腰走，山下都是村落，傍靠在山麓边，大路顺着山麓走。
English: The path to the north of the cave is intermittent, along the mid-mountain of the West Mountain, the villages are all under the mountain, next to the foot of the mountain, and the main road follows the foot of the mountain.

古文：余行岭半一里，有路自下村直上，西北逾岭从之。
现代文：我沿山腰走了一里，有条路从下边的村子直直上来，往西北越过山岭。
English: I walked along the mountainside for a mile, and there was a road coming straight up from the village below, going northwest over the mountains.

古文：一里，逾岭西，峰头有水一塘在洼中。
现代文：一里，翻越到山岭西面，峰头上有一塘水在洼地中。
English: One mile, climb over to the western side of the mountain, there is a pond of water in the depression at the top of the peak.

古文：由塘北西下一里，山复环成高坞，自南向北；坞口石峰东峙，嶙峋飞舞，踞众壑之交。
现代文：从水塘北边往西下一里，山又环绕，形成高处的山坞，从南向北延伸；坞口石峰向东面耸立，层层叠叠、凌空飞舞，位于各沟壑的交会处。
English: From the north side of the reservoir to the west for a mile, the mountains surround it, forming a high dock, extending from south to north; dock mouth stone peaks rise to the east, layer upon layer, flying in the sky, located at the intersection of each gully.

古文：石峰北，又有坞自西而东，西坞重壑层叠，有大山临之，其下路交而成蹊焉。
现代文：石峰北面，又有山坞从西往东延伸，西边的山坞中沟壑重重层叠，有大山对着，山下道路交汇，而小路也在那里。
English: On the north side of the stone peak, there is also a dock extending from west to east. On the west side of the dock, the ravines are heavily layered, there are mountains opposite, the roads under the mountains intersect, and the paths are also there.

古文：余望之行，半里，北下至石山之西。又半里，西抵西坞之底。
现代文：我看着路走，半里，往北下到石峰的西边、又走半里，往西抵达西坞底。
English: I looked at the road and walked half a mile north to the west side of the stone peak, and then walked another half mile west to the bottom of the west dock.

古文：路当从西坞北崖缘峡而上，余误从西坞南崖蹑坡而登。
现代文：道路应当从西坞北面的山崖沿着峡谷往上走，我误从西坞南面的山崖往上攀登。
English: The road should go up along the canyon from the cliff to the north of the West Dock, but I mistakenly climbed up from the cliff to the south of the West Dock.

古文：一里，逾岭脊而西，即见西北层冈之上，有佛宇重峙，余知即为妙高，而下有深峡间隔，路反折而西南，已觉其误。
现代文：一里，翻过岭脊往西，就看见西北边层状的山冈上，有佛寺层层坐落，我知道那就是妙高寺，但下面有一道很深的峡谷阻隔，道路反而转向西南，我发觉走错了。
English: After one mile, after crossing the ridge to the west, I saw the layered hills on the northwest edge, with Buddhist temples located in layers. I knew that it was Myoko-ji Temple, but there was a deep canyon below. The road turned to the southwest, and I realized that I had made a mistake.

古文：循之行一里，以为当截峡北渡，便可折而入寺。
现代文：顺着路走一里，我认为应当穿过峡谷往北过去，就可以转进妙高寺。
English: After walking one mile along the road, I thought I should go through the canyon to the north, where I could turn into Myoko-ji Temple.

古文：乃坠峡西北下，半里涉底，复攀峡西北上，以为寺在冈脊矣，而何以无路？
现代文：子是往西北边坠下峡谷，半里穿过峡谷底，又攀登着峡谷往西北上，以为寺庙就在冈脊上了，但为什么没有路呢？
English: The child fell down the canyon to the northwest, walked half a mile through the bottom of the canyon, and climbed the canyon to the northwest, thinking that the temple was on the ridge, but why was there no road?

古文：又半里，及登脊，则犹然寺前环峡之冈，与寺尚隔一坑也。
现代文：又上半里，等到登上冈脊，则仍然在寺前绕着的峡谷之冈上、和寺还是隔着一个坑。
English: In the first half of the second mile, when I reached the ridge, I was still on the ridge of the canyon around the temple, and there was still a pit across from the temple.

古文：冈上有一塔，正与寺门对。
现代文：冈上有一座塔，正正地和寺门相对。
English: There is a tower on the hill, directly opposite the temple gate.

古文：复从其东北下坑，半里，由坑底再上北崖，则犹然前坞底缘峡处也。北上半里，冈头有茶庵当道，是为富民大路，庵侧有坊。
现代文：又从山冈东北面下坑，半里，从坑底再登上北面的山崖，则仍然是先前西坞底攀登峡谷的地方；往北上半里，冈头路边有间茶庵，这是去富民县的大路，茶庵旁边有门坊。
English: Half a mile from the northeast side of the mountain, the pit, and half a mile from the bottom of the pit to the north cliff, it is still the place where the West dock bottom climbs the canyon; half a mile northward, there is a tea house on the side of the road, this is the road to Fumin County, and there is a gate next to the tea house.

古文：沿峡端西循坡半人，半里，是为妙高寺。
现代文：沿着峡端西边从半山腰进去，半里，到妙高寺。
English: Along the western edge of the gorge from mid-mountain, half a mile, to Myoko-ji Temple.

古文：寺门东向，前临重峡，后倚三峰，所谓三华峰也，三尖高拥攒而成坞，寺当其中，高而不觉其亢，幽而不觉其阒，亦胜地也。
现代文：妙高寺寺门朝东，寺前面临双层峡谷，寺后背靠三座山峰，就是所说的三华峰，三座山峰高高地簇拥而形成山坞，妙高寺坐落在山坞中，高而不觉得孤立，静而不觉得空旷，也是一处名胜。
English: The gate of Myoko-ji Temple faces east, the front of the temple faces a double-layered canyon, the back of the temple is backed by three peaks, that is, the so-called Sanhua Peak. The three peaks are clustered high and form a dock. Myoko-ji Temple is located in the dock, high but not isolated, quiet but not empty, and is also a place of scenic beauty.

古文：正殿左右，俱有官舍，以当富民、武定之孔道故。
现代文：大殿左右两边，都有官府的房屋，这是因为位于到富民县和武定府要道的缘故。
English: On both sides of the main hall, there are government buildings, which is because it is located on the main road to Fumin County and Wuding Prefecture.

古文：寺中亦幽寂。
现代文：寺里也很幽静。
English: The temple is also very quiet.

古文：土人言，妙高正殿有辟尘木，故境不生尘，无从辨也。
现代文：当地人说，妙高寺正殿上有辟尘木，所以寺中没有尘土，无法考辨此话的真假。
English: Locals say that the main hall of Myoko-ji Temple is covered with ash trees, so there is no dust in the temple, and it is impossible to tell whether this is true or not.

古文：瞻眺久之，念行李当至，因出待于茶庵侧。
现代文：我在妙高寺眺望了一阵，想着行李应该到了，就走出寺去茶庵旁边等候。
English: I looked around Myoko-ji Temple for a while, thinking that my luggage should have arrived, so I went out of the temple to wait next to the tea house.

古文：久之，乃从坡下山。
现代文：过了很久，他们才从坡下上来。
English: It was a long time before they came up the slope.

古文：余因执途人询沙朗道，或云仍下坡，自普击大道而去，省中通行之路也，其路迂而易行；或云更上坡，自牛圈哨分岐而入，此间间捷径达之路也，其路近而难知。
现代文：我于是拉着过路人询问去沙朗的路，有的说仍旧下坡，顺着去普击的大路就到了，是省里通行的路，这条路绕但好走；有的说再上坡，从牛圈哨分出的岔路往里走，是这一带人所走的直达小路，这条路近但难问路。
English: I then pulled passers-by to ask about the way to Sarang. Some said that it was still downhill, and that they had arrived following the main road to Puchat, which is a road through the province. This road is round but easy to walk; some said that it was uphill again, and that the branch road from the cattle post was a direct path for people in this area. This road is close but difficult to ask.

古文：余曰： 既上，岂可复下？ 
现代文：我说： 既然上了坡，怎么能再下去呢？ 
English: I said: "Since we have reached the top of the slope, how can we go down again?"

古文：遂更上坡。
现代文：于是再上坡。
English: Then it was uphill again.

古文：三里，逶迤逾岭头，即循岭北西向盘崖行。
现代文：三里，曲曲折折地翻过岭头，就顺着岭北面往西绕着山崖走。
English: For three miles, I zigzagged across the ridge, then walked along the north face of the ridge westward around the cliff.

古文：又二里，有小石峰自岭北来，与南峰属，有数家当其间，是曰牛圈哨，东西之水，从此分矣。
现代文：又二里，有座小石峰从岭北边延伸过来，与南边的山峰相连，两峰之间有数家人居住，这是牛圈哨，东边、西边的河水，就从这里分流。
English: Another two miles away, there is a small stone peak extending from the northern edge of the ridge, connected to the southern peak. Several families live between the two peaks. This is a cattle roundabout, and the east and west river waters are diverted from here.

古文：从哨西直下，则大道之出永定桥者。
现代文：从牛圈哨西面直直下去，是到永定桥的大路。
English: Straight down from the west side of the cattle post is the main road to Yongding Bridge.

古文：余乃饭而从岭脊北向行，一里，稍下涉壑，即从壑北上坡。
现代文：我在半圈哨吃饭后就顺岭脊往北行，一里，逐渐下山过沟，然后从沟壑北边上坡。
English: After eating at the half-circle post, I walked north along the ridge for one mile, gradually descending the mountain through the gully, and then uphill from the north side of the gully.

古文：缘坡东北上，回望壑底，西坠成峡，北走甚深。
现代文：沿着坡往东北上，回头俯视沟壑底部，西边坠下去形成峡谷，北边延伸得很深。
English: Along the slope to the northeast, looking back down to the bottom of the ravine, the west side falls down to form a canyon, and the north side extends very deep.

古文：路东北逾坡，其东犹下滇池之峡也。
现代文：路往东北越过山坡，其东面仍然是通往滇池的峡谷。
English: The road to the northeast crosses the mountain slope, and its eastern side is still a canyon leading to the Dianchi Lake.

古文：又一里半，从岭头逾坳而北。
现代文：又走一里半，顺岭头越过山坳往北。
English: After another mile and a half, Shunlingtou crossed the mountains and headed north.

古文：北行一里，再逾一西突之坳，其北遂仍出西峡上，于是东沿山脊行。又北一里半，西瞰有村当峡底，是为陡坡。
现代文：往北走一里，再越过一道向西边突出的山坳，其北边仍然通出西峡谷边，从这里往东顺着山梁走又往北走一里半，往西俯视，有个村子位于峡谷底渭 是陡坡。
English: Walk north for a mile, then cross a ridge that juts out to the west, the north side of which still leads out of the west canyon, from here walk east along the ridge and walk north for another mile and a half, looking down to the west, there is a village at the bottom of the canyon and it is a steep slope.

古文：其峡逼仄而深陡，此村居之最险者。
现代文：峡谷很窄而且又深又陡，这是位置最险要的山村。
English: The canyon is very narrow and deep and steep. This is the most dangerous mountain village.

古文：从岭上随岭东转，半里，有路自东坳间透而直西，遂坠西峡下，此陡坡通省之道，乃遵之东上。
现代文：从岭上顺着山岭往东转，半里，有条路从东边山坳中穿过并直直往西，然后顺着西边的峡谷下去，这是陡坡通往省城的路，我就跟着这条路往东上。
English: From the ridge, follow the ridge to the east, half a mile, there is a road from the east through the mountains and straight to the west, and then down the canyon on the west, this is the steep road to the provincial capital, I followed this road to the east.

古文：半里，逾坳东，于是南沿山脊行。
现代文：半里，穿到山坳东面，从这里往南顺着山梁走。
English: Half a mile, go through to the eastern side of the ridge, and from here walk south along the ridge.

古文：又东半里，稍东北下峡中。
现代文：又往东走半里，逐渐从东北边下到峡谷中。
English: Another half-mile to the east, gradually descending from the northeast into the canyon.

古文：半里，有水一池潴路南，是为清水塘，在度脊之北。塘北遂下坠成坑，随之北下，一里过峡底，有东来大道度峡西北去，此即自省会走富民间道也。
现代文：半里，有一池水汇集在道路南边，这是清水塘，位于所翻过的山梁北瓦清水塘北面则下坠成坑，顺着坑往北下，一里穿过峡底，有条从东边伸过来的大路穿越峡谷往西北走，这就是从省会到富民县的小路。
English: Half a mile away, a pool of water gathered on the south side of the road, which is the Clear Water Reservoir. On the north side of the Clear Water Reservoir, which is located on the north side of the overturned mountain beam, it fell into a pit, followed the pit to the north, and passed through the bottom of the canyon for a mile. There is a road stretching from the east through the canyon to the northwest, which is the path from the provincial capital to Fumin County.

