古文：◎宣宗中兴定元年春正月己卯朔，宋遣使来贺。癸未，宋使朝辞。
现代文：兴定元年春正月初一，宋朝派使者来祝贺。初五，宋朝使者辞别。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Xingding, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate. On the fifth day of the first month, the Song Dynasty envoy resigned.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 闻息州南境有盗，此乃彼界饥民沿淮为乱耳。
现代文：皇帝宣宗对宰臣说 ：听说息州南境有盗贼，这是那里的饥民沿淮河作乱。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said to his vice-minister, "I heard that there are thieves on the southern border of Xizhou. This is because the starving people there are making trouble along the Huai River."

古文：宋人何故攻我。 
现代文：宋朝人为什么攻打我们？ 
English: Why did the Song Dynasty attack us?

古文：高琪请伐之，以广疆土。
现代文：高琪请求攻打宋朝，以扩大疆土。
English: Gao Qi requested to attack the Song Dynasty in order to expand the territory.

古文：上曰： 朕意不然，但能守祖宗所付足矣，安事外讨？ 
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 朕认为不好，只要能守住祖宗给我们的土地就足矣，何必向外掠夺。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "I don't think it's a good idea. As long as we can hold on to the land given to us by our ancestors, that's enough. Why should we go out and plunder it?

古文：乙未，诏中都、西京、北京等路策论进士及武举人权试于南京、东平、婆速、上京等四路。
现代文：十七日，诏令中都、西京、北京等路在南京、东平、婆速、上京等四路招考进士及武举人。
English: On the 17th, the Central Capital, West Beijing, and Beijing were ordered to recruit candidates for the examination and military training in four ways, including Nanjing, Dongping, Baha, and Shangjing.

古文：丙申，东平行省言： 调兵以来，吏卒因劳进爵多至五品，例获封赠，及民年七十并该覃恩。
现代文：十八日，东平行省说： 调兵以来，官吏士兵因功劳进官爵的多数到五品，按旧例应获得封赠，百姓七十岁的也该受恩。
English: On the 18th, the Eastern Parallel Province said: Since the transfer of troops, the majority of officials and soldiers who have been promoted to the peerage for meritorious service to five products, according to the old practice, should receive the award, and people who are 70 years old should also be grateful.

古文：若人往自陈，公私俱费。
现代文：此事如果人们自己来陈述，公私都浪费。
English: It would be a waste of public and private resources if people had to present the case themselves.

古文：请令本路为制诰敕，类赴朝廷，以求印署。
现代文：请求命令本路的制诰令按类送到朝廷，以求得印鉴。
English: Request the order to send the imperial decree of this road to the imperial court according to the category, in order to obtain the seal.

古文：使受命者量输诸物而给之。
现代文：使受命者量物而给。
English: Let him who is given measure after measure give.

古文：人力不劳，兵食少济。 
现代文：人力不烦劳，军粮少接济。 
English: Manpower is not tiring, military food supplies are scarce.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：皇子平章政事濮王守纯授世袭东平府路三屯猛安。
现代文：皇子平章政事濮王完颜守纯被授予世袭东平府路三屯猛安。
English: The prince Pingzhang Zhengjiu Wang Guan Yan Shou Chun was awarded the hereditary Dongpingfu Road San Tun Meng'an.

古文：尚书左丞胥鼎进平章政事，封莘国公。
现代文：尚书左丞胥鼎进升平章政事，封为莘国公。
English: Shangshu Zuozhong Zhaoding was promoted to the political position of Pingzhang, and was given the title of Duke of Zhaozhou.

古文：癸卯，议减庶官冗员。
现代文：二十六日，议论裁减冗员。
English: On the 26th, the discussion on redundancy reduction ended.

古文：乙巳，大元兵攻观州。
现代文：二十八日，元朝军队攻打观州。
English: On the 28th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Ganzhou.

古文：二月戊申朔，初用 贞祐通宝 ，凡一贯当 贞祐宝券 千贯。
现代文：二月初一，始用 贞通宝 货币，一贯值 贞宝券 一千贯。
English: On the first day of February, Zhengtongbao currency will be used for the first time, with a consistent value of Zhengtongbao tickets of 1,000 yuan.

古文：己酉，命枢密院汰罢软军士。
现代文：初二，命令枢密院减去老弱士兵。
English: On the second day of the new year, he ordered the Privy Council to reduce the number of old and weak soldiers.

古文：谕尚书者，用官马给驿传以纾民力。
现代文：告谕尚书省，用官马作为驿马传递消息以延缓民力。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to use the official horse as a pack horse to deliver messages to slow down the people's power.

古文：庚戌，皇后生辰，诏百官免贺，仍谕旨曰： 时方多难，将来长春节亦免贺礼。 
现代文：初三，皇后生辰，诏令百官免贺，并传旨说： 目前多难，将来的长春节也免去贺礼。 
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Empress's birthday, the Emperor issued a decree exempting all officials from congratulating her, and sent a message saying, "It is difficult at present, but in the future, the Spring Festival will also be exempt from congratulating.

古文：辛亥，以崇进、元帅右都监完颜赛不签枢密院事。
现代文：初四，任命崇进、元帅右都监完颜赛不为签枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the appointment of Marshal Su Jin and Marshal Yu Du as supervisors was not signed by the Privy Council.

古文：癸丑，罢招贤所。
现代文：初六，废除招贤所。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, the recruitment office was abolished.

古文：乙卯，皇孙生，宣徽请称贺，诏无用乐。
现代文：初八，皇孙出生，宣徽请求贺喜，诏令禁止用乐。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor's grandson was born. The imperial seal requested congratulations, and the imperial edict prohibited the use of music.

古文：己未，大元兵徇忻、代。
现代文：十二日，元朝军队占领忻、代两地。
English: On the twelfth day, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied the two places of Yan and Dai.

古文：诏定州、县官虽积阶至三品，坐乏军储者，听行部决遣。
现代文：诏书制定州、县官即使达到三品的，因为缺乏军事储备，要听行部调遣。
English: The edict stipulated that even if a prefectural or county official reached the rank of Sanpin, due to the lack of military reserves, he had to be dispatched by the line ministry.

古文：壬戌，尚书省以军储不继，请罢州府学生廪给。
现代文：十五日，尚书省因为军事储备没有供应上，请求罢除州府学生粮食供应。
English: On the 15th, Shangshu Province requested the cancellation of the grain supply for students in the state capital due to the lack of supply from the military reserve.

古文：上曰： 自古文武并用，向在中都，设学养士犹未尝发，况今日乎？
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 自古文武并用，先前在中都，设学养士尚且未曾废止，况今日乎？
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said: Since ancient times, martial arts and literature have been used together. Previously, in the central capital, the establishment of school nurses has not yet been abolished. How about today?

古文：其令仍旧给之。 
现代文：命令仍然供给。 
English: The order still stands.

古文：丙子，议置庄献太子庙。
现代文：二十九日，议论设置庄献太子庙。
English: On the 29th, the discussion on the establishment of the Zhuangxian Prince Temple began.

古文：三月戊寅，敕事关刑名，当面议之，勿听转奏。
现代文：三月初一，命令关于刑事案子，要当面议论，不要听转奏。
English: On the first day of March, it was ordered that criminal cases should be discussed face-to-face, without listening to transcripts.

古文：以绛阳军节度使李革知平阳府，兼河东南路兵都总管，权参知政事，行尚书省。
现代文：任绛阳军节度使李革为知平阳府，兼河东南路兵马都总管，暂代参知政事，行尚书省。
English: Appointed as the commander of the Shenyang Army during the Spring Festival, Li Ge became the governor of Pingyang Prefecture, as well as the general manager of the South Hedong Road Military and Equestrian Center, temporarily taking part in the administration of the governor and the government, and acting as the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：壬午，定民间收溃军亡马之法，及以马送官酬直之格。
现代文：初五，制定民间收留败军逃马的规定，及把马送给官府所得报酬的价格。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, stipulations were made for the private sector to take in the horses of the defeated troops, and the price of the reward for giving the horses to the government was raised.

古文：乙酉，上宫中见蝗，遣官分道督捕，仍戒其勿以苛暴扰民。
现代文：初八，皇宫中出现蝗虫，派官分道捕杀，并告诫官吏不要用苛政侵扰百姓。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, locusts appeared in the imperial palace. Officials were dispatched to hunt and kill them separately, and officials were warned not to harass the people with harsh policies.

古文：庚寅，长春节，宋遣使来贺。
现代文：十三日，长春节，宋朝派使者来祝贺。
English: On the 13th day of the Spring Festival, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to congratulate.

古文：辛卯，诏罢平阳、河中元帅。
现代文：十四日，诏令废除平阳、河中元帅。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor issued a decree abolishing the positions of the Marshal of the Heian and the Marshal of the Heian.

古文：乙未，先征山东兵接应苗道润共复中都，而石海据真定叛，虑为所梗，乃集粘割贞、郭文振、武仙所部精锐与东平军为掎角之势，图之。
现代文：十八日，先征山东兵接应苗道润共同收复中都，因为石海在真定叛乱，考虑道路阻塞，于是集中粘割贞、郭文振、武仙所部精锐与东平军为犄角之势，共同平定他。
English: On the 18th, the first Shandong soldiers were recruited in response to Miao Daorun to jointly recover the Central Capital. Because Shihai was in the rebellion of Zhending, considering the road obstruction, he concentrated on the situation of the conflict between Caozhen, Guo Wenzhen, the elite of Wuxian and the Dongping Army to jointly quell him.

古文：己亥，大元兵攻新城。
现代文：二十二日，元朝军队攻打新城。
English: On the 22nd, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Xincheng.

古文：庚子，攻霸州。
现代文：二十三日，元朝军队攻打霸州。
English: On the 23rd, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Bazhou.

古文：甲辰，威州刺史武仙率兵斩石海及其党二百余人，降葛仲、赵林、张立等军，尽获海僣拟之物。
现代文：二十七日，威州刺史武仙率兵杀了石海及其党羽二百多人，降服了葛仲、赵林、张立等军，全部俘获了石海的假称帝号的模拟物。
English: On the 27th, Wizhou assassin Wuxian led his troops to kill more than two hundred of Shihai and his followers, subdued Ge Zhong, Zhao Lin, Zhang Li and other troops, and captured all of Shihai's fake emperors.

古文：寻进仙权知真定府事。
现代文：不久进升武仙暂代知真定府事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Busen and temporarily assumed the post of Chizhending prefect.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，以宋岁币不至，命乌古论庆寿、完颜赛不等经略南边。
现代文：夏四月初一，因为宋朝进贡的钱币没到，命令乌古论庆寿、完颜赛不等巡视南疆。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, because the money for the Song Dynasty tribute had not arrived, he ordered Uguon to make a tour of southern Xinjiang to celebrate the New Year and hold a beauty contest.

古文：戊申，孟州经略司万户宋子玉率所部叛，斩关而出，经略使从坦等追败之。
现代文：初二，孟州经略司万户宋子玉率所部叛乱，斩守关士卒而去，经略使从坦等追击打败了他们。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Song Ziyu, the director of the Mengzhou Economic Strategy Division, led the rebellion of the headquarters, cut off the guards and left, and the pursuit of the economic strategy division from Tan defeated them.

古文：庚戌，花帽军作乱于滕州，诏山东行省讨之。
现代文：初四，花帽军在滕州作乱，诏令山东行省讨伐他们。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Flower Hat Army rioted in Tengzhou, and the emperor ordered Shandong Province to fight them.

古文：南阳五朵山盗发，众至千余人，节度副使移剌羊哥出讨，遇之方城，招之不从，乃进击之，杀其众殆尽。
现代文：南阳五朵山发生盗贼，人数达一千多人，节度副使移剌羊哥出兵讨伐，在方城遭遇，他们不服招安，于是进攻他们，把他们全部杀尽。
English: Thieves occurred in Nanyang Wuduoshan, numbering more than a thousand people. The vice-minister of the festival, Yixing Yangge, sent troops to fight them, and encountered them in Fangcheng. They did not accept the invitation, so they attacked them and killed them all.

古文：癸丑，以安化军节度使完颜宇权元帅左都监，行元帅府事，督经略使苗道润进复都城，且令和辑河间招抚使移剌铁哥等军。
现代文：初七，任命安化军节度使完颜礪暂代元帅左都监，行元帅府事，督促经略使苗道润进军收复都城，且令他安抚河间招抚使移剌铁哥等军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Anhua Army commander to make Yan Xuan the temporary marshal of the Left Capital Supervisor, to conduct the affairs of the marshal's office, to urge Miao Daorun to march into the capital to recover the capital, and to pacify him.

古文：铁哥与道润不协，互言共有异志，故命重臣临镇之。
现代文：移剌铁哥与苗道润不和，互说对方有异志，所以命令重臣亲临镇慑他们。
English: Yibin Tiege and Miao Daorun did not get along. They said that the other side had different ideas, so they ordered the chief minister to come and restrain them.

古文：戊午，单州雨雹伤稼，诏遣官劝谕农民改莳秋田，官给其种。
现代文：十二日，单州下冰雹危害庄稼，诏令派官劝谕农民改种秋庄稼，国家给种子。
English: On the 12th, when hailstorms in Shanzhou damaged crops, the imperial edict sent officials to advise farmers to replant autumn crops, and the state provided seeds.

古文：平定州贼阎德用之党阎显杀德用，以其众降。
现代文：平定州盗贼阎德用之党徒阎显杀死阎德用，率手下来降。
English: Yan Xian, the party member of Yan De, the thief of Pingding Prefecture, killed Yan De and led his men down.

古文：己未，以权参知政事辽东路行省完颜阿里不孙为参知政事，行尚书省、元帅府于婆速路。
现代文：十三日，任命暂代参知政事辽东路行省完颜阿里不孙为参知政事，在婆速路行尚书省、元帅府。
English: On the 13th, Yan Ali Fusun, who was appointed as the provisional political advisor to the governor of Liaodong Province, was appointed as the political advisor to the governor of Shangshu Province and the marshal's office in Baotou Province.

古文：以权辽东路宣抚使蒲察五斤权参知政事，行尚书省、元帅府于上京。
现代文：任命暂代辽东路宣抚使蒲察五斤暂代参知政事，在上京行尚书省、元帅府。
English: He appointed Pu Cha Wujin as the provisional vice-governor of Liaodong Road, and went to Shangshu and Marshal's Office in Beijing.

古文：庚申，李革请罢义军总领使副，以畀州县。
现代文：十四日，李革请求废除义军总领使，交州县管理。
English: On the 14th, Li Ge requested the abolition of the commander-in-chief of the rebel army and the administration of Jiaozhou County.

古文：尚书省以秋防在迩，改法非便，姑如旧制，州县各司察之。
现代文：尚书省因为秋防在即，不便改变法制，暂如旧制，州县各自掌握检查。
English: Shangshu Province, because the autumn prevention is imminent, it is inconvenient to change the legal system. For the time being, it is the same as the old system, and the states and counties have their own inspection.

古文：甲子，元帅守颜赛不破宋兵于信阳，使来奏捷。
现代文：十八日，元帅完颜赛不在信阳打败宋朝军，使者前来奏捷。
English: On the 18th, the marshal did not finish the beauty contest in Xinyang to defeat the Song Dynasty army, and the envoy came to celebrate the victory.

古文：乙丑，济南、泰安、滕、兖等州贼并起，侯挚遣棣州防御使完颜霆讨平之，降其壮士二万人、老幼五万人。
现代文：十九日，济南、泰安、滕、兖等州盗贼并起，侯挚派棣州防御使完颜霆讨伐平定他们，降服壮士二万人、老幼五万人。
English: On the 19th, the bandits of Jinan, Tai'an, Teng and Handan provinces simultaneously rose up, and Hou earnestly dispatched the defense of Handan province to complete the fierce battle and pacify them, and subjugated 20,000 strong men and 50,000 old and young men.

古文：完颜赛不复奏败宋军于陇山等处，俘馘甚众。
现代文：完颜赛不又奏，在陇山等处打败宋朝军，俘虏很多。
English: After the beauty contest, the Song Dynasty army was defeated in Shaoshan and other places, and many prisoners were taken.

古文：戊辰，太白昼见于井。
现代文：二十二日，太白星出现在井宿旁。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Xing appeared next to the well.

古文：辛未，权孟州经略使从坦追贼宋子玉至辉州境上，其党邢福杀子玉，以众来归。
现代文：二十五日，权孟州经略使从坦追击盗贼宋子玉至辉州境内，宋子玉的党徒邢福杀了他，率队来归降。
English: On the 25th, the Mengzhou Economic Delegate sent an envoy from Tang to pursue the thief Song Ziyu to the territory of Huizhou. Song Ziyu's henchman Yan Fu killed him and led the team to surrender.

古文：壬申，以万奴叛逆未殄，诏谕辽东诸将。
现代文：二十六日，因为万奴叛逆未消灭，诏谕辽东诸将。
English: On the 26th, because the Wanyu Rebellion had not been extinguished, he issued an edict to the generals of Liaodong.

古文：完颜赛不军渡淮，破光州两关，获军实分给将士。
现代文：完颜赛不军渡淮河大破光州两关，获得军粮分给将士。
English: After the beauty contest, the soldiers crossed the Huaihe River and broke through the two gates of Gwangju, and received military rations for the soldiers.

古文：五月戊寅，陕西行省破夏人于大北岔，是日捷至。
现代文：五月初二，陕西行省在大北岔打败西夏人，当日捷报到。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Shaanxi Province defeated Xixia Province in the Great Northern War, and the victory was reported on the same day.

古文：丁亥，民苑汝济上书陈利害，上以示宰臣曰： 卑贱小人，犹能尽言如此，有可采者即行之。 
现代文：十一日，百姓苑汝济上书陈言利害事，皇帝拿给宰臣看，并说 ：卑贱小人，犹能这样尽言，有可采纳的就执行。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yuan Ruzhi, a commoner, sent a letter to the emperor, in which he stated his interests. The emperor showed it to his vassal, and said, "You lowly little man, you can say as much as you like, and if there is anything that can be accepted, it will be carried out."

古文：己丑，贼宋子玉余党家属悉放归农。
现代文：十三日，盗贼宋子玉余党家属都放出归家务农。
English: On the 13th, the thief Song Ziyu and the rest of the party's family members were all released to return to housework and farming.

古文：尚书右丞蒲察移剌都弃官擅赴京师，降知河南府事，行枢密院兼行六部事。
现代文：尚书右丞蒲察移剌都弃官擅自赴京城，降为知河南府事，行枢密院兼行六部事。
English: Shangshu Rongcheng, Pucha Yibin, and others resigned from their posts and went to Beijing without permission. They were reduced to working for the Henan prefecture and the Privy Council, and they also worked for six ministries.

古文：壬辰，延州原武县雨雹伤稼，诏官贷民种改莳。
现代文：十六日，延州原武县下冰雹危害了庄稼，诏令国家贷给百姓种子改种。
English: On the 16th, hailstorms in Yanzhou's Huanwu County damaged crops, and the state was ordered to loan seeds to the people for replanting.

古文：癸巳，宋人攻颍州，焚掠而去。
现代文：十七日，宋朝人攻打颍州，放火掠夺而去。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Song Dynasty attacked Zhangzhou, set fire to it and plundered it.

古文：戊戌，行枢密院兵败宋人于泥河湾，又败之樊城县。
现代文：二十二日，行枢密院兵在泥河湾打败宋朝军，又在樊城县打败了他们。
English: On the 22nd, the soldiers of the Academy of the Privy Council defeated the Song Dynasty army in Mud River Bay and defeated them in Lucheng County.

古文：山东行元帅府事蒙古纲擅械转运使李秉钧，法当决，秉钧返詈纲，应论赎，诏两释之。
现代文：山东行元帅府事蒙古纲擅自用镣铐拘禁转运使李秉钧，按法律应当判决，而李秉钧反过来骂蒙古纲，应当赎罪，诏令释放了他俩。
English: According to the law, Li Bingya, the marshal of the Shandong Provincial Mongolian Affairs Office, should be sentenced for arbitrarily detaining and transferring Li Bingya, while Li Bingya, in turn, should atone for cursing the Mongolian Mongolian Affairs Office, and the imperial edict released them both.

古文：宋人取涟水县。
现代文：宋朝军攻下涟水县。
English: The Song Dynasty army captured Surabaya County.

古文：癸卯，兰州水军千户李平等苦提控蒲察燕京贪暴，杀之。
现代文：二十七日，兰州水军千户李平等被提控蒲察燕京贪暴所苦，杀了他。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Li Pingliang of the Thousand Households of the Lanzhou Navy was accused of suffering from the corruption of Pucha Yanjing, and killed him.

古文：构夏人以叛，胁其徒张扆俱行，扆以计尽获之。
现代文：西夏人因为反叛，胁其徒张同行，张用计全部俘虏了他们。
English: Because the Xixia people rebelled, they threatened Zhang's companions, and Zhang captured them all.

古文：陕西行省便宜迁扆官四阶，授同知兰州事，赏士卒有差，以其事上闻。
现代文：陕西行省灵活迁升张官四级，授同知兰州事，不同程度地奖赏士卒，把他们的事报告给皇帝。
English: Shaanxi Province flexibly promoted Zhang officials to the fourth level, awarded the same knowledge of Lanzhou affairs, rewarded the soldiers to varying degrees, and reported their affairs to the emperor.

古文：甲辰，大元兵下沔城县，军官任福死之。
现代文：二十八日，元朝军队攻下沔城县，军官任福死了。
English: On the 28th, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Lucheng County, and the officer Ren Fu died.

古文：丙午，定河北求仕官渡河之法，曾经总兵者白枢密院，余验据听渡。
现代文：三十日，制定河北求仕官渡黄河之规定，曾经为总兵的人告知枢密院，其余渡河听便。
English: On the 30th, the regulations for the crossing of the Yellow River by officials from Hebei Province were formulated. Those who had been soldiers were notified to the Privy Council, and the rest of the river crossing was convenient.

古文：行枢密院事乌古论庆寿南伐还，奏不以实，诏鞫之。
现代文：行枢密院事乌古论庆寿南伐还朝，因回报不实，诏令审讯他。
English: He was interrogated by imperial edict for making a false report about the Southern Expedition and returning to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：六月己酉，苗道润表归国人李琛复以众叛，琛亦表道润异谋，诏山东行省察之。
现代文：六月初三，苗道润上表说归国人李琛又率众人叛乱，李琛也上表说苗道润有异谋，诏令山东行省查明此事。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Miao Daorun made a public announcement that the returnee Li Lan led the people in a rebellion. Li Lan also made a public announcement that Miao Daorun had a conspiracy, and ordered Shandong Province to investigate the matter.

古文：修潼关，遣中使持诏及署药劳夫匠。
现代文：修建潼关，派中使持诏及暑药慰劳工匠。
English: He built Shaoguan and sent emissaries with imperial edicts and hot potions to comfort the laborers.

古文：权参知政事张行信进参知政事。
现代文：权参知政事张行信进升参知政事。
English: Zhang Xingxin promoted to the post of vice-governor.

古文：庚戌，诏捕治辽东受伪署官家属，得按察使高礼妻子，皆戮之。
现代文：初四，诏令逮捕在辽东接受伪官的家属，获得按察使高礼的妻和子，杀了他们。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the arrest of the family members of those who accepted the pseudo-official in Liaodong, and the wife and son of those who obtained the high rank of inspector, and they were killed.

古文：壬子，制鄜、坊、丹州四品以下州县官视环、庆例，以二十月终更。
现代文：初六，制定、坊、丹州四品以下的州县官按环、庆之惯例，二十月更换一次。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the state and county officials who have formulated, wang, and Danzhou four products or less according to the ring and celebration practices will be replaced once in the 20th month.

古文：甲寅，招抚使惟宏言彰德府守臣擅徙民山砦避兵，上曰： 难保之城，守之何益，徒伤吾民耳。
现代文：初八，招抚使惟宏报告彰德府守臣擅自迁移百姓到山砦中避兵乱，皇帝宣宗说： 难保之城，守它还有什么益处，只是白白地伤害百姓。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong said, "If a city is difficult to defend, what is the use of defending it? It will only harm the people in vain."

古文：勿治。 
现代文：不要管它。 
English: Leave it alone.

古文：乙卯，显宗忌日，谒奠于启庆宫。
现代文：初九，是显宗的忌日，到启庆宫祭奠。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th lunar month, the day of the death of Emperor Xuanzong, a memorial service was held at the Qiqing Palace.

古文：丙辰，诏枢密院遣经历官分谕行院，严兵利器以守冲要，仍禁饮宴，违以军律论。
现代文：初十，诏令枢密院派经历官分别晓谕行院，严格训练军队锋利武器用以防守要冲，仍然禁止饮宴，违者军法处治。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Privy Council sent experienced officials to instruct the government separately, strictly trained the army to use sharp weapons to defend the rush, still banned banquets, and punished those who violated the military law.

古文：宋人合土寇攻东海境。
现代文：宋朝军联合土寇攻打东海境。
English: The Song dynasty army and the Turkic invaders jointly attacked the East Sea.

古文：戊午，以宋遣兵数犯境，及岁币不至，诏谕沿边罪宋。
现代文：十二日，因宋朝多次派兵侵犯边境，及进贡的钱币不到，诏谕沿边治宋朝罪。
English: On the 12th, because the Song Dynasty repeatedly sent troops to violate the border, and the tribute money did not arrive, the edict was issued to punish the Song Dynasty along the border.

古文：己未，诏凡上书人其言已采用者，上其姓名。
现代文：十三日，诏令凡是上书的人其言论被采用的，报上姓名。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor ordered that the names of everyone whose speech was adopted should be reported.

古文：辛酉，以进士朱盖、草泽人李维岩论议可取，诏给八贯石俸。
现代文：十五日，因进士朱盖、草泽人李维岳的议论可以取用，诏令给八贯俸禄。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the argument that Zhu Gai, a member of Jin Shi, and Li Wei Yue, a member of Kusazawa, could be used, the imperial decree was issued to give Hachikan a stipend.

古文：乙丑，设潼关使、副，及三门、集津提举官。
现代文：十九日，设置潼关使、副使，及三门、集津提举官。
English: On the 19th, an envoy to Shimonoseki and vice-envoys to Shimonoseki and Jitsu were appointed.

古文：尚书左丞相兼都元帅仆散端薨，辍朝。
现代文：尚书左丞相兼都元帅仆散端死去，辍朝。
English: Shangshu Zuoxing, Minister of the Left and Marshal of the Capital, died and left the imperial court.

古文：置南京流泉务。
现代文：设置南京流泉务。
English: Nanjing-style hot spring facilities will be set up.

古文：辽东行省遣使来上正月中败契丹之捷。
现代文：辽东行省派使者来报知正月里打败契丹的捷报。
English: Liaodong Province sent an envoy to report the successful report of defeating Qidan in the first month of the year.

古文：秋七月丙子朔，日有食之。辛巳，宋人围泗州。
现代文：秋七月初一，有日蚀。初六，宋朝兵围攻泗州。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, there was a solar eclipse. On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty besieged Bozhou.

古文：壬午，围灵璧县。
现代文：初七，围攻灵璧县。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they besieged Lingbi County.

古文：癸未，庾州振威军万户马宽逐其刺史李策，据城叛。
现代文：初八，阝奥州振威军万户马宽驱逐刺史李策，占城而叛。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wanyu Maquan of the Zhenwei Army of Yaozhou ousted the assassin Li Ce, occupied the city and rebelled.

古文：遣使招之，乃降。
现代文：派使者招安，于是投降了。
English: He sent an envoy to ask for peace, and then surrendered.

古文：已而复谋变，州吏擒戮之，夷其族。
现代文：不久又图谋叛乱，州官擒获杀了他，灭了他的族人。
English: Not long after, he plotted a rebellion, and state officials caught and killed him, exterminating his people.

古文：甲申，诏谕辽东诸路。
现代文：初九，诏谕辽东诸路。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, he issued an edict that all roads in eastern Liaoning Province were closed.

古文：乙酉，宋人袭破东海县。
现代文：初十，宋朝军攻下东海县。
English: In the early 10th century, the Song Dynasty army conquered Donghai County.

古文：丙申，置提举仓场使、副。
现代文：二十一日，设置提举仓场使、副使。
English: On the twenty-first day, set up the warehouse field envoy and deputy envoy.

古文：癸卯，太社坛产嘉禾，一茎十有五穗。
现代文：二十八日，太社坛长出好禾苗，一茎长出十五穗。
English: On the 28th, Taishatan grew good seedlings, and one stem grew fifteen ears.

古文：甲辰，夏人犯黄鹤岔，官军败之。
现代文：二十九日，西夏军侵犯黄鹤岔，守军打败了他们。
English: On the 29th, the Xixia Army invaded Huanghe County, and the defenders defeated them.

古文：乙巳，初置集贤院知院事、同知院事等官。
现代文：三十日，始设集贤院知院事、同知院事等官。
English: On the 30th, officials such as Jixian Academy Chienji and Tongchen Academy Chienji were established.

古文：宋人及土寇攻海州，经略使击破其众。
现代文：宋朝兵及土寇攻打海州，经略使打败了他们。
English: The Song Dynasty soldiers and the Turkic invaders attacked Haeju and were defeated.

古文：夏人围羊狼寨，帅府发诸镇兵击走之。
现代文：夏朝兵围攻羊狼寨，帅府派诸镇军队打跑了他们。
English: In the summer, the imperial soldiers besieged the Sheep and Wolf Village, and the Shuai Prefecture sent troops to the towns to drive them away.

古文：八月戊申，陕西行省报木波贼犯洮州败绩，遁去。
现代文：八月初三，陕西行省报告木波贼寇侵犯洮州被打跑的战绩。
English: At the beginning of August 3rd, Shaanxi Province reported that the wooden wave of bandits invaded Zhangzhou and were beaten.

古文：木星昼见于昴，六十有七日乃伏。己酉，海州经略司表官军与宋人战石湫南，战涟水县，战中土桥，宋兵败绩。壬子，削御史大夫永锡官爵，有司论失律当斩，上以近族，特贳其死。
现代文：初四，海州经略司上报，军队与宋朝军战于石湫南、涟水县、中土桥，宋朝军被打败。初七，削去御史大夫完颜永锡的官爵，有司说触犯法律当斩，皇帝宣宗认为他是近族人，特赦免其死罪。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, the secretary of the Haizhou Bureau of Statistics reported that the army fought with the Song Dynasty army in the south of Shijiazhuang, Surabaya County, and Zhongduchiao, and the Song Dynasty army was defeated. On the 7th day of the 7th month, the official title of the Imperial Historian was removed, and the secretary said that he violated the law and should be beheaded. Emperor Xuanzong believed that he was a member of a close tribe and pardoned his death penalty.

古文：癸丑，宋人攻确山县，为官军所败，诏谕国内军士，使知宋人渝盟之故，仍命大臣议其事。
现代文：初八，宋朝军攻打确山县，被军队打败，诏谕国内军士，让他们知道宋朝人改变盟约的原因，且命大臣讨论这件事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty army attacked Jishan County, was defeated by the army, and ordered the domestic sergeants to let them know the reason why the Song Dynasty changed the covenant, and ordered the minister to discuss the matter.

古文：乙卯，集贤院谘议官朱盖上书陈御敌三策。
现代文：初十，集贤院咨议官朱盖上书言防御敌人的三种策略。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Gai, the councilor of Jixian Academy, wrote a book entitled "Three Strategies for Defending Against the Enemy."

古文：壬戌，海州经略使阿不罕奴失剌败宋人于其境。
现代文：十七日，海州经略使阿不罕奴失剌在境内打败宋朝军。
English: On the seventeenth day, Haizhou's strategists defeated the Song Dynasty's army in the territory.

古文：提控李元与宋人战，屡捷，多所俘获。
现代文：提控李元同宋朝军作战，多次获捷，俘获很多。
English: Li Yuan fought against the Song Dynasty army, won many victories and captured a lot.

古文：徙栏通渡经略司于黄陵岗。
现代文：把栏通渡经略司迁到黄陵聏。
English: Relocated the Column of Tongdu History and Geography to Huangling.

古文：乙丑，制增定擒捕逃军赏格及居停人罪。
现代文：二十日，制定擒捕惩罚逃兵的规定。
English: On the 20th, the regulations for the capture and punishment of deserters were formulated.

古文：丙寅，左司谏仆散毅夫乞更开封府号，赐美名，以尉氏县为刺郡，睢州为防御使，与郑、延二州左右前后辅京师。
现代文：二十一日，左司谏仆散毅夫请求更改开封府号，赐美名，以尉氏县为刺郡，睢州为防御使，与郑、延二州左右前后辅佐京城。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the left secretary's manservant, San Yifu, requested that the name of Kaifeng Prefecture be changed and given a beautiful name, with Jishi County as the stabbing county, Bozhou as the defensive envoy, and Zheng and Yan as the two states around and behind the capital city.

古文：上曰： 山陵在中都，朕岂乐久居此乎？ 
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 山陵在中都，朕难道长久在这居住吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "Mountains are the center of the country. Will I live here forever?

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是停止了此事。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：癸酉，太祖忌日，谒奠于启庆宫。
现代文：二十八日，是太祖忌日，在启庆宫祭奠。
English: On the 28th, the day of the great-grandfather's death, a memorial service was held at the Kaiqing Palace.

古文：甲戌，元帅左都监承裔遣其部将纳兰记僧等，合葩俄族都管尼旁古，以兵掩袭瓜黎余族诸蕃帐，屡破之，斩馘士卒，禽其首领，俘获人畜甚多，是日捷至。
现代文：二十九日，元帅左都监承裔派其部将纳兰记僧等，联合葩俄族都管尼庞古，带兵突然袭击瓜黎余族各个蕃帐，屡次打败他们，割下士兵的耳朵，擒其首领，俘获很多人畜，当日捷报就到。
English: On the 29th, Marshal Zuo Du's successor sent his subordinates, including Nalan Ji Sang, and together with the Guarani-Russian Du Guan Nipangu, led soldiers to suddenly attack the Guarani-Yu people's various encampments, repeatedly defeated them, cut off soldiers' ears, beat their leaders, and captured many animals. The day's report arrived.

古文：九月丁丑，更定监察御史失察法。
现代文：九月初三，更改监察御史失察法。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month of the year, the Supervision of Historical Misconduct Law was amended.

古文：以元帅左监军必兰阿鲁带权参知政事，行省于益都。
现代文：任命元帅左监军必兰阿鲁带权参知政事，在益都行省。
English: Marshal Biraan Aru, the Left Supervisor of the Army, was appointed to lead the political affairs of the prefectural governor and govern the province of Yiwu.

古文：戊寅，夏人犯绥德之克戎寨，都统罗世晖逆击，却之。
现代文：初四，西夏军侵犯绥德的克戎寨，都统罗世晖迎击，打退了他们。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Western Xia Army invaded the Ke Rong Zhai of Shunde, and the Du Tong Luo Shijie counterattacked and repulsed them.

古文：己卯，蔡州帅府侦宋人将窥息州，以轻兵诱其进，别以锐师邀击之，虏其将沈俊。
现代文：初五，蔡州帅府侦知宋朝军将窥视息州，用轻兵引诱他们进犯，另外用精锐部队狙击他们，俘虏了其大将沈俊。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Caizhou General Headquarters detected that the Song Dynasty army would peep into Sichuan, lured them to attack with light soldiers, and sniped them with elite troops, capturing their general Shen Jun.

古文：壬午，以改元兴定，赦国内。
现代文：初八，因为改元兴定，大赦国内。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, because of the reform of the Yuan Dynasty, there was an amnesty in the country.

古文：甲申，罢规运所，设行六部。
现代文：初十，废除规运所，设置行六部。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the regulation office was abolished, and six lines were set up.

古文：辛卯，大元兵徇隰州及汾西县，癸巳，攻沁州。
现代文：十七日，元朝军占领隰州及汾西县，十九日，攻打沁州。
English: On the 17th, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Bozhou and Shaanxi County, and on the 19th, they attacked Bozhou.

古文：辽东行省完颜阿里不孙为叛人伯德胡土所杀。
现代文：辽东行省完颜阿里不孙被叛人伯德胡土所杀。
English: In Liaodong Province, Yan Alifusun was killed by the traitor Baode Hutu.

古文：月犯东井西扇北第二星。乙未，大元兵攻太原簸箕掌寨。丁酉，薄太原城，攻交城、清源。
现代文：二十一日，元朝兵攻打太原和簸箕掌寨。二十三日，元兵迫近太原城，攻打交城、清源。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Yuan Dynasty soldiers attacked Taiyuan and Shifang Village. On the twenty-third day, the Yuan soldiers approached Taiyuan City and attacked Jiaocheng and Qingyuan.

古文：癸卯，立沿河冰墙鹿角。
现代文：二十九日，沿黄河建立冰墙鹿角。
English: On the 29th, an ice wall was built along the Yellow River.

古文：冬十月丁未，以霖雨，诏宽农民输税之限。
现代文：冬十月初三，因为阴雨连绵，诏令宽限农民交税之期。
English: On the third day of October in winter, because of the continuous rain, the government issued a grace period for farmers to pay taxes.

古文：庚戌，以将有事于宋，诏帅臣整厉师徒。
现代文：初六，因为将对宋朝有战事，诏令元帅大臣整顿军队。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because there would be a war against the Song Dynasty, the marshal ordered the minister to rectify the army.

古文：辛亥，遣官括市民马，红赏格以示劝。甲寅，命高汝砺、张行简同修《章宗实录》。
现代文：初七，派官员收买百姓的马匹。初十，命令高汝砺、张行简共同修撰《章宗实录》。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, officials were sent to buy the people's horses. On the tenth day of the first month, Gao Rucheng and Zhang Xingjian were ordered to jointly compile the "Zhangzong Shihro."

古文：息州帅府献破宋人于中渡之捷。
现代文：息州帅府进献在中渡打败宋朝军队的捷报。
English: The victorious report that the army of the Song Dynasty was defeated in Zhongdu was presented to the emperor by the governor of Sichuan Province.

古文：乙卯，大元兵徇中山府及新乐县。
现代文：十一日，元朝军占领中山府及新乐县。
English: On the 11th, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Zhongshan Prefecture and Xinle County.

古文：丙辰，丹州进嘉禾，异亩同颖。
现代文：十二日，丹州进献好禾苗，种在不同的田里同样结穗。
English: On the 12th, Danzhou donated good seedlings, and the seedlings planted in different fields also sprouted.

古文：辛酉，制定州府司县官失觉奸细罪。
现代文：十七日，制定州府司县官对奸细失去警惕的治罪法规。
English: On the 17th, the state prefectural governor and county officials formulated the criminal law for losing vigilance against spies.

古文：壬戌，右司谏兼侍御史许古上疏，请先遣使与宋议和。
现代文：十八日，右司谏兼侍御史许古上奏章，请求首先派使者与宋朝议和。
English: On the 18th, Xu Guzheng, the Right Secretary and Attendant of the Grand Historian, requested that an envoy be sent first to discuss peace with the Song Dynasty.

古文：乙丑，大元兵下磁州。
现代文：二十一日，元朝军队攻下磁州。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Yuan Dynasty army captured the magnetic state.

古文：丙寅，定职官不求仕及规避不赴任法。
现代文：二十二日，制定职官不求当官及按规定避开不赴任的处罚法规。
English: On the 22nd, the regulations on the punishment of officials who do not seek office and avoid not taking office in accordance with the regulations were formulated.

古文：高汝砺上疏言，和议先发于我，恐自示弱，非便。
现代文：高汝砺上奏说，和议如果我们先请求，恐怕是我们示弱，不好。
English: Gao Ruchen said at the beginning of the performance that if we ask for peace first, I am afraid that we are weak and not good.

古文：戊辰，上命许古草通宋议和牒，既进以示宰臣，宰臣以其言有祈哀之意，徒示微弱，无足取者，议遂寝。
现代文：二十四日，皇帝宣宗命令许古起草通告宋朝议和文书，完成后拿到朝中给宰臣看，宰臣认为其言有哀求之意，只是表示微弱，不足取，议和于是停止。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Emperor Xuanzong ordered Xu Gu to draft a notice of the Song Dynasty's discussion and document. After completion, he took it to the court to show it to the Vice-Minister. The Vice-Minister thought that his words had the meaning of pleading, but it was weak and insufficient, and the discussion and document were stopped.

古文：辛未，罢流泉务。
现代文：二十七日，废除流泉务。
English: On the 27th, Ryusen-mu was abolished.

古文：大元兵收邹平、长山及淄州。
现代文：元朝军队收取邹平、长山及淄州。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army took Buping, Changshan and Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，改郇国号为管，避上嫌名。
现代文：二十八日，改旬阝国号为管，避皇帝名。
English: On the 28th, the name of the country was changed to Shandong, avoiding the name of the emperor.

古文：高汝砺表致仕，不允。
现代文：高汝砺上表请求退休，没被批准。
English: Gao Ruchen's request to retire was not approved.

古文：十一月壬午，从宜移剌买奴言： 五朵山贼鱼张二等，若悉诛之，屡诏免罪，恐乖恩信。
现代文：十一月初八，从宜移剌买奴说： 五朵山贼寇鱼张二等如果都杀了，恐怕违背信用，因我们屡诏免罪。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the lunar month, he said: "If I kill the second-ranked Zhang Wudang, I'm afraid it would be a breach of trust, because we have repeatedly pardoned him.

古文：且其亲属沦落宋境，近在均州，或相构乱。
现代文：况且他们的亲属沦落到宋朝境地，近在均州，有人会乘机制造混乱。
English: Moreover, their relatives have fallen to the Song Dynasty, near Junzhou, and some people will take the opportunity to create confusion.

古文：乞贷其死，徙之归德、睢、陈、钧、许间为便。 
现代文：乞求宽恕他们的死罪，把他们迁到归德、睢、陈、钧、许等地之间。 
English: He begged for forgiveness for their mortal sin, and moved them to Kuide, Zou, Chen, Zou, Xu, and other places.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇帝下诏允许。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：癸未，月晕木、火二星，木在胃，火在昴。丙戌，太白昼见，遣翰林侍讲学士杨云翼鋋之。
现代文：初九，月亮晕及木星、火星。十二日，太白星白天出现，派翰林侍讲学士杨云翼重视这件事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the moon halo and Jupiter and Mars. On the 12th day, the white star appeared in the daytime, and Yang Yunyi, a lecturer at Hanlin, paid attention to this matter.

古文：丁酉，诏唐、邓、蔡州行元帅府举兵伐宋。戊戌，大元兵攻太原府。
现代文：元朝兵收取山东滨、棣、博三州。十五日，攻下淄州。十六日，元兵攻下沂州。
English: The former imperial soldiers took Shandong Bin, Handan and Bo. On the 15th, they conquered Handan. On the 16th, the former soldiers conquered Handan.

古文：庚子，上谓宰臣曰： 朕闻百姓流亡，逋赋皆配见户，人何以堪？
现代文：二十日，河西掬纳、纳等族一千多户来归顺。二十四日，元朝军攻打太原府。二十六日，皇帝宣宗对宰臣说： 朕听说百姓流亡，拖欠的赋税又分配到没走的人家，人们怎能承受？
English: On the 20th, more than a thousand households of the Hena, Na and other ethnic groups in Hexi surrendered. On the 24th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Taiyuan. On the 26th, Emperor Xuan Zong said to his vassal: I heard that the people were exiled, and the tax arrears were distributed to the families of those who did not leave. How can people bear it?

古文：又添征军须钱太多，亡者讵肯复业，其并让除之。 
现代文：加上征兵需很多钱，逃走的人难道肯复来。这要一并讨论废除它。 
English: In addition, conscription costs a lot of money, and those who run away are not likely to return. This should be discussed together with its abolition.

古文：宰臣请命行部官阅实蠲贷，已代纳者以恩例，或除他役，或减本户杂征四之一。
现代文：宰臣请求命令行部官检查实情免去借贷，已经交纳的给以恩惠，或者除去其他劳役，或者减去其他四分之一的杂征。
English: The vice-minister requested that the ministry officials be ordered to check the facts and exempt the loan, grant the favor already paid, or remove the other labor service, or subtract the other one-fourth of the miscellaneous levy.

古文：上曰： 朕于此事未尝去怀，其亟行之。 
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 朕经常考虑此事，要赶快执行。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "I have often considered this matter, and I must quickly implement it.

古文：十二月甲辰朔，大元兵攻潞州，都统马甫死之。
现代文：十二月初一，元朝军攻打潞州，都统马甫战死。
English: On the first day of December, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Zhangzhou, and Du Tong Ma Fu was killed in the battle.

古文：戊申，即墨移风砦于大舶中得日本国太宰府民七十二人，因籴遇风，飘至中国。
现代文：初五，即墨移风砦在大船中得到日本国太宰府七十二人，他们因为买粮食遇到大风，漂到中国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Ink and Wind Fort received 72 people from Dazaifu, Japan, in a large ship. They encountered strong winds while buying grain and drifted to China.

古文：有司覆验无他，诏给以粮，俾还本国。
现代文：有司反复检查没发现其他情况，命令给他们粮食，让他们回到日本。
English: After repeated inspections, no other cases were found. They were ordered to give them food and let them return to Japan.

古文：庚戌，元帅左监军蒲察五斤进右副元帅，权参知政事，充辽东行省。
现代文：初七，元帅左监军蒲察五斤进升为右副元帅，权参知政事，充辽东行省。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, the marshal of the Left Supervisor Army, Pu Zha Wujin, was promoted to the right deputy marshal, the right to participate in political affairs, and went to the eastern province of Zhuo Liao.

古文：是日，大元兵平益都府。
现代文：这天，元朝军平定了益都府。
English: On this day, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Yidu Prefecture.

古文：辛亥，陕西行省胥鼎谏伐宋，不报。
现代文：初八，陕西行省胥鼎劝谏攻打宋朝，没有批复。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the Shaanxi Provincial Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) issued an advisory to the Song Dynasty, but there was no reply.

古文：甲寅，海州经略使报提控韩璧败宋人于盐仓。
现代文：十一日，海州经略使报告提控韩璧在盐仓打败宋朝军队。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the governor of Haizhou issued a report that Han Bi had defeated the Song Dynasty army in Yancang.

古文：己未，大元兵复攻沂州，官民弃城遁。辛酉，下密州，节度使完颜宇死之。
现代文：十六日，元朝军又攻打沂州，官民弃城逃走，十八日，元朝军攻下密州，节度使完颜礪战死。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan Dynasty army attacked Bozhou again, and the officials and people abandoned the city and fled. On the 18th, the Yuan Dynasty army captured Mishu, and Jiedu was killed in the battle.

古文：壬戌，侯挚兼三司使。
现代文：十九日，侯挚兼任三司使。
English: On the 19th, Hou Zhengyi also served as the third envoy.

古文：庚午，免逃户复业者差赋。
现代文：二十七日，免去逃走人家复业的差赋。
English: On the 27th, he was exempted from the duty of returning to work.

古文：二年春正月乙亥，诏议赈恤。
现代文：兴定二年春正月初三，诏令议论救济抚恤。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of Xingding's Spring Festival, the decree on the discussion of relief pensions was issued.

古文：辛巳，敕南征将帅所至毋纵杀掠。
现代文：初九，命令南征将帅所至之处不要放纵杀掠。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he ordered the commander of the Southern Expedition not to indulge in killing and looting wherever he went.

古文：壬午，宋人攻淮北，唐州元帅府击败之，获统领李雄韬、陈皋以归。
现代文：初十，宋朝军攻打淮北，唐州元帅府打败了他们，俘虏了宋军统领李雄韬、陈皋归朝。
English: In the early 10th century, the Song Dynasty army attacked Huaibei, and the Tangzhou Marshal's Office defeated them and captured the Song Army commanders Li Xionglu and Chen Qi, who returned to the dynasty.

古文：癸未，近侍局副使讹可遣使报南师之捷。
现代文：十一日，近侍局副使讹可派使者报告南征军队的捷报。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the deputy envoy of the Imperial Household Agency sent an envoy to report the successful report of the Southern Expeditionary Army.

古文：乙酉，陕西行省获归国人，言大元兵围夏王城，李遵顼命其子居守而出走西凉。
现代文：十三日，陕西行省获得归国人，其人说元朝军队围攻夏王城，李遵顼命令他的儿子驻守而自己却跑到西凉。
English: On the 13th, the province of Shaanxi received a returnee, who said that the Yuan Dynasty army besieged Xia Wangcheng, Li Zunyi ordered his son to stay and he ran to Xiliang.

古文：诏谕诸帅府明斥候，严守备。
现代文：诏谕诸帅府严加守备。
English: The imperial edict ordered the military governors to be on high alert.

古文：戊子，唐、邓元帅完颜赛不报连破宋人之捷。
现代文：十六日，唐、邓元帅完颜赛不报告接连打败宋朝军之捷报。
English: On the 16th, Tang and Deng marshals won the victory of defeating the Song Dynasty army one after another.

古文：宋人攻泗州，又战却之。
现代文：宋朝军攻打泗州，又被打跑了。
English: The Song Dynasty army attacked Bozhou and was beaten back.

古文：二月癸卯，宋人侵青口，行枢密院遣兵败之。
现代文：二月初一，宋朝军队侵犯青口，行枢密院派兵打败了他们。
English: On the first day of February, the Song Dynasty army invaded Qingkou, and the Privy Council sent troops to defeat them.

古文：甲辰，免中京、嵩、汝等州逋租。
现代文：初二，免去中京、嵩、汝等州拖欠的租子。
English: On the second day of the new year, the arrears of tenants in Zhongjing, Song, Ye and other counties will be waived.

古文：谕胥鼎，克宋散关，可保则保，不可保则焚毁而还。
现代文：告谕胥鼎，攻克宋朝散关，能守卫它就守卫，不能保卫它就烧毁它回来。
English: Conquer Song Dynasty Sanguan, if you can guard it, guard it. If you can't defend it, burn it.

古文：定奴婢救主法。
现代文：制定奴婢救主人的法规。
English: Enact laws for slaves to save their masters.

古文：丙午，讹可败宋人于防山。
现代文：初四，讹可在防山打败了宋朝军队。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Gongke defeated the Song Dynasty army in the mountains.

古文：纥石烈桓端亦遣使来上光州、信阳之捷。
现代文：纥石烈桓端也派使者来报告光州、信阳之捷。
English: The leader of the Jinshi Rebellion also sent an envoy to report the success of Gwangju and Shinyang.

古文：庚戌，海州经略败宋兵于朐山，表请继其军储，督东平帅府发兵护送资粮以应之。
现代文：初八，海州经略在朐山打败宋朝军队，上表请求继续供应军事物质，督促东平帅府派兵护送军粮物资用以供应。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Haizhou Economic Strategy defeated the Song Dynasty army in Shaoshan. The above table requested the continued supply of military materials, and urged Dongping Shaofu to send troops to escort military grain materials to be used for supply.

古文：许州长社县何冕等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：许州长社县何冕等谋反被杀。
English: He Guanzhong and others in Zhoushe County who plotted to rebel were killed.

古文：辛亥，张行信出为彰化军节度使兼泾州管内观察使。
现代文：初九，张行信出朝任彰化军节度使兼泾州管内观察使。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Xingxin went to the Tang Dynasty to serve as the Changhua Army's military envoy and the observation envoy in Zhangzhou Province.

古文：壬子，御史以北兵退，请汰各处行枢密院、元帅府冗官。
现代文：初十，御史因为元朝军撤退，请求裁减各处行枢密院、元帅府冗官。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, because of the withdrawal of the Yuan Dynasty army, Mishi requested the reduction of redundant officials in the Privy Council and the Marshal's Office.

古文：尚书以为非便，上从尚书言，仍旧制。
现代文：尚书认为这样做没有利益，皇帝宣宗听从了尚书的话，仍用旧制。
English: Shangshu thought that there was no benefit in doing so. Emperor Xuanzong obeyed Shangshu's words and still used the old system.

古文：完颜赛不报枣阳之捷。
现代文：完颜赛不报告枣阳之捷。
English: The victory of Zaoyang is not reported after the completion of the beauty contest.

古文：癸丑，完颜阿邻报皂郊堡之捷。
现代文：十一日，完颜阿邻报告皂郊堡之捷。
English: On the 11th day, all the neighbors reported the success of the soap suburban castle.

古文：丁巳，寿州行枢密院破宋人高柳桥水砦，夷其砦而还。
现代文：十五日，寿州行枢密院攻破宋朝人高柳桥的水砦，把水砦夷为平地而还。
English: On the 15th, the Privy Council of the Shoushou line broke through the water fort of the Song Dynasty Gaoliu Bridge, razed the water fort to the ground and returned.

古文：壬戌，讹可遣兵拔宋栅棋盘岭，又破其众于裴家庄、寒山岭、龙门关等处，得粟二千余石。
现代文：二十日，讹可派兵攻下宋朝栅栏棋盘岭，又在裴家庄、寒山岭、龙门关等地打败宋军大部队，得到二千多石粮食。
English: On the 20th, Yan Ke sent troops to capture the Song Dynasty palisade of Qipanling, and defeated the Song Army's large forces in Peijiazhuang, Hanshanling, Longmenguan and other places, gaining more than two thousand stone grain.

古文：乙丑，谕枢密曰： 中京商、虢诸州军人愿耕屯田，比括地授之。
现代文：二十三日，宣宗皇帝告谕枢密说： 中京商、虢等州军人愿耕地的，按收集田地的比例给他们。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Xuanzong issued an imperial edict saying, "If the merchants of Beijing and the soldiers of the states such as the Kuomintang are willing to farm the land, they should be given the land according to the proportion of the fields collected.

古文：闻徐、宿军独不愿受，意谓予田必绝其廪给也。
现代文：听说徐、宿军不愿接受，意思是说给田地了一定会断绝粮食供给。
English: It is said that Xu and the garrison did not want to accept it, meaning that giving them fields would definitely cut off the grain supply.

古文：朕肯尔耶？
现代文：朕肯这样吗？
English: Am I willing to do that?

古文：其以朕意晓之。 
现代文：把朕的意思告诉他们。 
English: Tell them what I mean.

古文：丙寅，谕尚书省曰： 闻中都纳粟官多为吏部缴驳，殊不思方阙乏时，利害为如何。
现代文：二十四日，告谕尚书省说： 听说中都纳粟官多被吏部驳回，却不考虑目前正是困难时期，利害如何。
English: On the 24th, a notice from the Ministry of Education and Culture said, "It is said that most of the candidates for the post of Central Nago official were rejected by the Ministry of Personnel, but they did not consider that this is a difficult time and what is at stake.

古文：又立功战阵人，必责保官，若辈皆义军白丁，岂识职官，苟文牒可信，即当与之。
现代文：又听说立功的人，一定责令他做官，假若这些人都是义军一字不识，怎能做官？假如能识字，就给他们官职。
English: It was also heard that if a person performed meritorious deeds, he must be ordered to become an official. If all these people were rebels and didn't know a single word, how could they become officials? If they could read, they would be given an official position.

古文：至若在都时，规运薪炭入城者，朕尝植恩授以官。
现代文：以前在都城时，规定运薪炭进城的人，朕曾给他恩德授以官职。
English: In the past, when I was in the capital, I gave an official position to a person who was in charge of transporting firewood and charcoal into the city.

古文：此岂容伪，而间亦为所沮格。
现代文：这难道容假吗？而且间断也有辱规定。
English: Is that even allowed? And there are rules about interruptions.

古文：其悉谕之，勿复若是。 
现代文：把这些都告谕大家，不要再这样做。 
English: Tell everyone about it and don't do it again.

古文：纥石烈牙吾塔破宋人盱眙军，上俘获之数。
现代文：纥石烈牙吾塔率盱眙军打败宋朝军，报上俘虏人数。
English: Zhisheng Rongya Guota led the Han army to defeat the Song Dynasty army, and the number of captives was reported.

古文：己巳，以侯挚行省河北，兼行三司安抚司事。
现代文：二十七日，任侯挚行省河北，兼行三司安抚司事。
English: On the 27th, he traveled to Hebei Province, concurrently serving as the third pacification secretary.

古文：三月庚辰，尚书集文资官杂议进士之选，诏依泰和例行之。
现代文：三月初九，尚书召集文资官杂议进士之选，诏令依照泰和年间的惯例实行。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the year, Shangshu convened the civil servants to discuss the election of the new recruits, and the edict was implemented in accordance with the practice during the Taihe era.

古文：癸未，讹可败宋人于光化军。
现代文：十二日，讹可率光化军打败宋朝军。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Yan led the Guanghua Army to defeat the Song Dynasty Army.

古文：甲申，长春节。
现代文：十三日，是长春节。
English: On the 13th, it is the Spring Festival.

古文：戊子，谕宰臣曰： 旧制，廷试进士日晡后出宫。
现代文：十七日，告谕宰臣说： 旧制，进士廷试当日晡时后出宫。
English: On the seventeenth day, he told the vice-minister: "Under the old system, you will leave the palace after the curfew on the day of your entrance examination.

古文：近欲复旧，恐能文而思迟者，不得尽其才，其令日没乃出。 
现代文：近时想恢复旧制，恐怕能文但思维迟缓的人，不能尽其才，命令太阳落山后再出宫廷。 
English: I am afraid that those who are literate but slow-witted, and who recently want to restore the old system, will not be able to do their best and order the sun to set before leaving the palace.

古文：以御史中丞把胡鲁为参知政事。
现代文：任御史中丞把胡鲁为参知政事。
English: Appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History, he made Huru a member of the Council of State.

古文：陕西行六部尚书杨贞削五官，累杖一百七十，解职。
现代文：陕西行六部尚书杨贞削官五级，累计杖打一百七十，解除职务。
English: In Shaanxi Province, Yang Zhengyu of the 6th Shangshu was demoted to the 5th grade, with a total of 170 strokes of the cane, and relieved of his duties.

古文：讹可表言，官军自桐柏入宋境，所向多克捷。
现代文：讹可上表说，军队从桐柏进入宋朝境内，所向披靡。
English: It can be said on the table that the army entered the territory of the Song Dynasty from Tongbai, and it was invincible.

古文：癸巳，宋人争皂郊堡，击官军，军溃，主将完颜阿邻战没。
现代文：二十二日，宋朝军争夺皂郊堡，攻击金朝军，金军大败，主将完颜阿邻战死。
English: On the 22nd, the Song Dynasty army fought for the Soju Suburban Fortress and attacked the Kim Dynasty army. The Kim Dynasty army was defeated, and the commander-in-chief, Guan Yan'an, died in the battle.

古文：丙申，更定京城捕告强盗官赏制。
现代文：二十五日，更改京城捕获告发强盗的奖赏制度。
English: On the 25th, the reward system for catching and reporting robbers in Beijing was changed.

古文：辛丑，上京行省蒲察五斤表，左监军哥不霭诬坊州宣抚副使纥石烈按敦将叛而杀之。
现代文：三十日，上京行省蒲察五斤上表，左监军哥不霭诬告坊州宣抚副使纥石烈按敦将叛乱而杀了他。
English: On the 30th, when he went to Beijing to visit the provincial governor Putsa Wujin, the left supervisor of the army, Brother Nuxuan, falsely accused the provincial vice-prefect of the proclamation of the vice-prefect of the province, Zou Shi Rongdong, of rebelling and killed him.

古文：事下尚书省，宰臣以为按敦之死徐议恤典，哥不霭亦姑牢笼使之，上勉从其言。
现代文：事情下到尚书省，宰臣认为纥石烈按敦已死，慢慢议论抚恤之事，哥不霭也姑且关进牢中，宣宗勉强听从了他们的话。
English: When the matter came down to Shangshu Province, the vice-minister thought that Zou Shishi Liaotong was dead, and slowly discussed the matter of the pension. He also let his brother go to prison, and Xuan Zong reluctantly obeyed their words.

古文：夏四月壬寅朔，蒲察五斤表，辽东便宜阿里不孙贷粮高丽不应，辄以兵掠其境。
现代文：夏四月初一，蒲察五斤上表，辽东便宜阿里不孙向高丽借粮遭到拒绝，他就带兵掠夺高丽国境。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, when the price of five jin was on the table, Liaodong's cheap Ali Fusun was refused to borrow grain from Korea, and he took soldiers to plunder the Korean border.

古文：上命五斤遣人以诏往谕高丽，使知兴兵非上国意。
现代文：皇帝命令蒲察五斤派人带着诏书前往诏谕高丽，使高丽国知道兴兵并不是朝廷的意思。
English: The emperor ordered Pucha Wujin to send people with the edict to Goryeo, so that the Goryeo kingdom would know that raising an army was not the intention of the imperial court.

古文：乙巳，诏河南路行总管府节镇以上官，充宣差捕盗使，以防御刺史以上长贰官，及世袭猛安之才武者为之副，又命濮王府尉完颜毛良虎为宣差提控以巡督之。
现代文：初四，诏令河南路行总管府节镇以上的官，充任宣差捕盗使，用以防御刺史以上长贰官，又任命濮王府尉完颜毛良虎为宣差提控，以巡查监督。这天，大赦辽东等路。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the general manager of Henan Road, the official above the town of Fu Jie, was appointed as the envoy of the proclamation to catch thieves to defend the chief eunuchs above the history, and the lieutenant of the king's palace, Guan Yanmao Lianghu, was appointed as the emissary to control and supervise the inspection. On this day, Liaodong and other roads were amnestied.

古文：是日，曲赦辽东等路。以户部尚书夹谷必兰为翰林学士承旨，权参知政事，行省于辽东。
现代文：任命户部尚书夹谷必兰为翰林学士承旨，权参知政事，在辽东行省。初六，承裔在皂郊堡打败宋朝军队。
English: He appointed the head of the household, Shang Shujigatani, to be the successor of the Hanlin scholar, the right to participate in the political affairs, and went to Liaodong Province. On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the successor defeated the Song Dynasty army in Soju Suburban Fort.

古文：丁未，承裔败宋人于皂郊堡。庚戌，御史劾集贤院谘议官李维岩本中山府无极县进士赵孝选家奴，乞正其事。上曰： 国家用人，奚择贵贱？ 
现代文：初九，御史劾集贤院咨议官李维岳曾是中山府无极县进士赵孝选的家奴，乞求更正其事。皇帝宣宗说： 国家用人，难道还择其贵贱。 
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Weiyue, the councilor of the Institute of Historians and Historians, who was once a domestic slave of Zhao Xiaosheng, a conscript from Wuji County, Zhongshan Prefecture, begged for a correction. Emperor Xuanzong said: Does the state still choose its nobles and commoners?

古文：命以官银五十两赎放为良，任使仍旧。
现代文：命令用银五十两赎他为民，像过去一样任用。
English: And commanded to give him for the redemption of the people fifty and two pieces of silver, and to set him over them, as before.

古文：壬子，遣侍御史完颜素兰、近侍局副使讹可同赴辽东，察访叛贼万奴事体。
现代文：十一日，派侍御史完颜素兰、近侍局副使讹可同赴辽东，查访叛贼万奴之事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he sent his attendant, Guan Yan Suran, and the vice-envoy of the Board of Attendants, Gao Can, to Liaodong together to investigate the matter of the traitor Wanlu.

古文：行省侯挚督兵复密州。
现代文：行省侯挚监督军队收复密州。
English: The provincial governor earnestly supervised the army to recapture Mishu.

古文：提控朱琛复高密县。
现代文：提控朱琛收复高密县。
English: Prosecute Zhu Xi and recover Gaomi County.

古文：癸丑，完颜素兰请宣谕高丽复开互市，从之。
现代文：十二日，完颜素兰请求宣谕高丽互通贸易，被批准了。
English: On the 12th, Kangyan Sulan's request to issue an edict on inter-Korean trade was approved.

古文：乙卯，特赐武举温迪罕缴住以下一百四十人及第。
现代文：十四日，特赐武举温迪罕缴住以下一百四十人及第。
English: On the 14th, the following 140 men and women were captured by the special military force of Wendy Han.

古文：丁巳，陕西行省破宋鸡公山，取和州、成州，至河池县黑谷关，守者皆遁，前后获粮九万斛，钱数千万，军实不可胜计。
现代文：十六日，陕西行省兵攻破宋朝鸡公山，攻取和州、成州，到河池县黑谷关，守军皆逃，前后获粮九万斛，钱几千万，军事物资不可数计。
English: On the 16th, the soldiers from Shaanxi Province broke through the Song Dynasty Chicken Mountain, captured Hezhou and Chengzhou, and arrived at Hechi County's Hegu Pass. The defenders all fled, gaining 90,000 mu of grain, tens of millions of money, and countless military supplies.

古文：戊午，红袄贼犯徐、邳，行枢密院兵大破之。
现代文：十七日，红袄贼寇侵犯徐、邳两地，行枢密院兵打败了他们。
English: On the 17th, the Red Army bandits invaded the two places of Xu and Handan, and the Imperial Guards defeated them.

古文：己未，阿里不孙自潼关之败，失其所在，变姓名匿居柘城，为御史觉察，系其家属，将穷治之，乃遣子上书诣吏待罪。
现代文：十八日，阿里不孙自潼关败，失去所在地，改变姓名隐居柘城，被御史觉察，拘捕了他的家属，准备追究治理，于是他派儿子到官府认罪。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Ali Fusun was defeated in the self-exile, lost his location, changed his name and lived in seclusion in Lucheng. He was noticed by the imperial historian, arrested his family members and prepared to investigate the governance, so he sent his son to the government to confess.

古文：台臣力请诛之，以惩不忠。
现代文：台臣力请杀了他，以惩不忠。
English: The Taiwanese government ordered him to be killed as a punishment for his disloyalty.

古文：上卒赦其罪，谕以自效。
现代文：皇帝宣宗最后赦免了他的罪，晓谕他自责。
English: Emperor Xuanzong finally pardoned him and told him to repent.

古文：癸亥，遣重臣审理京师冤狱。
现代文：二十二日，派重臣审理京城冤案。
English: On the 22nd, he sent a senior minister to try the case of injustice in the capital.

古文：丁卯，河南诸郡蝗。
现代文：二十六日，河南各地蝗灾。
English: On the 26th, locust plagues swept across Henan.

古文：临洮路报败宋人之捷。
现代文：临洮路报告打败宋朝军之捷。
English: Linyi Road reported the victory of defeating the Song Dynasty army.

古文：东平行省败黑旗贼，拔胶西县，渠贼李全来援，并破之。
现代文：东平行省打败黑旗贼寇，攻下胶西县，贼寇头李全来支援，一并被打败。
English: The Eastern Parallel Province defeated the Black Flag Kleptocracy and captured Jiaoxi County. The head of the Kleptocracy, Li Quan, came to support and was defeated.

古文：戊辰，河北行省败红袄贼，进至密州，降伪将校数十人，士卒七百人，悉复其业。
现代文：二十七日，河北行省打败红袄贼寇，进到密州，收降伪将校几十人，士兵七百人，把他们编到金军中。
English: On the 27th, Hebei Xinggu defeated the Red Kite bandits and entered Mizhou, captured dozens of fake officers and 700 soldiers, and organized them into the Golden Army.

古文：五月辛未朔，凤翔元帅完颜闾山破宋人步落埚、香炉堡诸屯。
现代文：五月初一，凤翔元帅完颜闾山攻破宋朝的步落埚、香炉堡等屯。
English: On the first day of May, Marshal Feng Xiang completed the conquest of Yan Lushan, breaking the Song Dynasty's retreat, and went to Incense Burner Castle and other towns.

古文：甲戌，招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答袭破李全于莒州及日照县之南，三道击之，追奔四十里。
现代文：初四，招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答在莒州及日照县之南攻破了李全，三路追击达四十里。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Huangpu Aruta, the vice-envoy of the matchmaker, defeated Li Quan in Luzhou and the south of Rizhao County, and the three-way pursuit reached forty miles.

古文：丙子，夏人自葭州入鄜延，元帅承立遣兵败之马吉峰，是日捷至。
现代文：初六，夏朝军自葭州侵入延，元帅承立派兵打败马吉峰，当天捷报就报到朝廷。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the summer imperial army invaded Yan from Bozhou, and the marshal led the soldiers to defeat Ma Jifeng. The victory report was reported to the imperial court on the same day.

古文：诏遣官督捕河南诸路蝗。
现代文：诏令派官监督捕杀河南诸路的蝗虫。
English: The imperial edict sent officials to supervise the killing of locusts along various roads in Henan Province.

古文：辛巳，策论词赋经义进士及武举人入见，赐告命章服。莱州民曲贵杀节度经略使内族转奴，自称元帅，构宋人据城叛。
现代文：十一日，诏令进士及武举人入朝。莱州平民曲贵杀死节度经略使内族转奴，自称元帅，并引诱宋朝军入境作乱。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor issued an edict to send soldiers and warriors to the imperial court. Laizhou civilian Qu Gui killed Jie Duo Jingli, turned the local people into slaves, called himself a marshal, and lured the Song Dynasty army into the country to make trouble.

古文：山东招抚司遣提控王庭玉、招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答等讨平之，斩伪统制白珍及牙校数十人，生禽贵及伪节度使吕忠等十余人，诛之。
现代文：山东招抚司派提控王庭玉、招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答等讨伐平定了他，斩了伪统制白珍及牙校几十人，活捉曲贵及伪节度使吕忠等十几人，全杀了他们。
English: Wang Tingyu, the leader of the Shandong Procuratorate, and Huang Pu Aruta, the vice-commander of the Procuratorate, led a crusade to subdue him. They killed dozens of members of the pseudo-administrative system Bai Zhen and the dental school, and captured alive more than a dozen members of the pseudo-administrative system Qu Gui and the pseudo-administrative system Lu Zhong. All of them were killed.

古文：乃命庭玉保莱，朱琛保密，阿鲁答保宁海，以安辑其民。
现代文：于是命令王庭玉保护莱州，朱琛保护密州，阿鲁答保护宁海，以安定百姓。
English: Therefore, he ordered Wang Tingyu to protect Laizhou, Zhu Xi to protect Mizhou, and Aluta to protect Ninghai, in order to stabilize the people.

古文：丙戌，陕西行省言： 四月中，巩州行元帅承裔遣提控乌古论长寿、纳兰记僧分道伐宋。
现代文：十六日，陕西行省说： 四月中旬，巩州行元帅承裔派提控乌古论长寿、纳兰记僧分道伐宋朝。
English: On the 16th, the Shaanxi Provincial Government said: In mid-April, the Gongzhou-bound Marshal Cheng Rong sent a detachment of Wu Gu's longevity and Nalan Ji's monks to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：长寿出盐川镇，记僧出铁城堡，皆克捷而还。 
现代文：乌古论长寿出兵盐川镇，纳兰记僧出兵铁城堡，都大功告捷。 
English: Wu Gu on longevity dispatched soldiers to Yanchuan Town, and Nalan monks dispatched soldiers to Iron Castle, both of which achieved great success.

古文：辛卯，寿州行枢密院南城军攻辛城镇，一军趣史河，与宋人战，胜之。
现代文：二十一日，寿州行枢密院南城军攻打辛城镇，一军奔赴史河，与宋朝军战，打胜了。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Southern Capital Army of the Privy Council marched to Shuzhou to attack Xin Town. One army rushed to Shihe and fought with the Song Dynasty Army, and won.

古文：壬辰，河北行省复黄县。
现代文：二十二，河北行省收复黄县。
English: On the 22nd, Hebei Province recovered Huang County.

古文：乙未，第凤翔、秦、巩三道南征将士功，各迁其官。
现代文：二十五日，按照凤翔、秦、巩三路南征将士功劳，各升其官。
English: On the 25th, in accordance with the merits of Feng Xiang, Qin and Gong soldiers in the Third Route of the Southern Expedition, they were each promoted to their respective positions.

古文：丙申，增随朝官及诸承应俸。
现代文：二十六日，增加随朝官和各承应人的俸禄。
English: On the 26th, the salary of officials and their subordinates was increased.

古文：戊戌，陕西行省连报承裔等入宋境之捷。
现代文：二十八日，陕西行省连续报告承裔等进入宋朝境内的捷报。
English: On the 28th, Shaanxi Province successively reported that the successors entered the territory of the Song Dynasty.

古文：己亥，大元兵徇锦州，元帅仲亨死之。
现代文：二十九日，元朝军占领锦州，元帅刘仲亨战死。
English: On the 29th, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Jinzhou, and Marshal Liu Zhongheng died in battle.

古文：庚子，陕州群狼伤百余人，立赏募人捕杀。
现代文：三十日，陕西群狼伤了一百多人，悬赏招人捕杀狼群。
English: On the 30th, more than 100 people were injured by wolves in Shaanxi, and a reward was offered for the capture and killing of the wolves.

古文：六月甲辰，枢密院言： 诸道表称大元集兵应州、飞狐，将分道南下，观其意不在河北，而在陕西。
现代文：六月初四，枢密院说： 诸道上表称元朝在应州、飞狐集合军队，将分道南下，观察得知其意不在河北，而在陕西。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the Privy Council said: According to the above table, the Yuan Dynasty was in Yingzhou, and the flying fox gathered the army and would go south, and it was observed that his intention was not in Hebei, but in Shaanxi.

古文：河东各路义士、土兵、蕃汉弓箭手，宜于农隙教阅，以备缓急。
现代文：河东各路义士、土兵、各族弓箭手，应该在农闲时练兵，以防备紧急情况。
English: All patriots, local soldiers and archers of all ethnic groups in the eastern part of the river should practice during their leisure time in order to be prepared for emergencies.

古文：东平、单州冲重，豫徙其农民粮畜，置可守之城，修近城水砦，因以为固。
现代文：东平、单州要塞之地，要把农民的粮食牲畜转移到能守卫的城中，修建近城水砦，加强坚固。
English: In Dongping, the land of the single-state fortress, it is necessary to transfer the grain and livestock of farmers to the city that can be guarded, build a water fort near the city, and strengthen it.

古文：潼谷远连商、虢，宜令两帅府选官按视扼塞。 
现代文：潼关远连商、虢，应命令两地帅府选官巡视关塞。 
English: Since Guan Guan is far away from the merchants and farmers, it is necessary to order the election officials of the two provinces to inspect the Guan.

古文：又言： 贾瑀等刺杀苗道润，乞治瑀等专杀之罪，余州郡各以正职授头目，使分治一方。 
现代文：又说 ：贾蠫等人刺杀苗道润，请求治贾蠫等人的刺杀罪。其余的州郡把正职授给头目，使他们各治一方。 
English: He also said, "Jia Jun and others assassinated Miao Daorun, and requested that Jia Jun and others be tried for the crime of assassination. The remaining states and counties should assign the chief posts to the leaders, and let them each govern one side.

古文：上谕之曰： 道润之众亟收集之，瑀等是非未明，姑置勿问。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说 ：苗道润的部下要赶快集合，贾蠫等人是非没明，姑且放置不问。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said: Miao Daorun's subordinates should quickly assemble, Jia Wei and others are not clear, let it be.

古文：诸头目各制一方，利害至重，更审处之。 
现代文：诸头目各治一方，利害重要，更要慎重处理。 
English: The interests of the ringleaders are important, and they should be dealt with carefully.

古文：石州贼冯天羽众数千，据临泉县为乱。
现代文：石州贼寇冯天羽有几千人，在临泉县作乱。
English: There are several thousand of the thief Kofong Tianyu from Shizhou making trouble in Linqu County.

古文：帅府命将讨捕之，为贼所败，旁郡县将谋应之。
现代文：帅府命令手下将领讨伐拘捕贼寇，却被贼寇打败，附近郡县商议接应他们。
English: The commander-in-chief ordered his generals to fight and arrest the bandits, but they were defeated by the bandits, and the nearby counties negotiated to receive them.

古文：州刺史纥石烈公顺赴以兵，天羽等数十人迎降，公顺杀之。
现代文：州刺史纥石烈公顺率兵前往，冯天羽等几十人前来投降，纥石烈公顺杀了他。
English: Zou Shi Liegongshun, the provincial governor, led his soldiers to the scene. Feng Tianyu and dozens of others came to surrender, and Zou Shi Liegongshun killed him.

古文：余贼走保积翠山，遣将王九思攻之，不下。
现代文：其余的贼寇逃到积翠山，派大将王九思攻打不下。
English: The rest of the bandits fled to Jiecui Mountain, and sent the general Wang Jiusi to attack.

古文：诏国史院编修官马季良持告敕金币往招之。
现代文：诏令国史院编修官马季良持文告诏书金币前去招安他们。
English: He ordered the editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History, Ma Jiliang, to go to them with a proclamation and gold coins.

古文：比至，九思先破栅，杀贼二千人，余复走险。
现代文：等到了那里，王九思先攻破了栅栏，杀了二千多贼寇，其余的又都逃跑了。
English: When he got there, Wang Jiusi first broke through the fence, killed more than two thousand thieves and robbers, and the rest fled.

古文：已而其党安国用等诣季良降者五千余人，就署国用同知孟州防御使事，以次迁擢有差。
现代文：不久，贼寇党羽安国用等五千多人到马季良处投降，安国用被任命为同知孟州防御使事，其余的依次授职。
English: Soon, more than five thousand people, including the Kleptocrat Party's Yu An Guoying, surrendered to the Maguire Office. An Guoying was appointed as Tongzhi Mengzhou Defense Envoy, and the rest were appointed in turn.

古文：分其众于绛、霍间。丁未，以参知政事把胡鲁权左副元帅，与平章政事胥鼎协力防秋。
现代文：初九，任参知政事把胡鲁权左副元帅，与平章政事胥鼎协力防护秋收。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Hu Ruquan, was promoted to vice-marshal, and he and the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Ping Zhang, worked together to protect the autumn harvest.

古文：己酉，苗道润所部军请隶潞州元帅府，诏河北行省审处之。
现代文：十一日，苗道润所部军请求隶属潞州元帅府，诏令河北行省审查处理。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the troops of the Miao Road Reclamation Research Institute requested to be subordinated to the Zhangzhou Marshal's Office, and ordered Hebei Province to review and deal with the request.

古文：壬子，红袄贼犯沂州，官军败之，追至白里港，都提控齐信没于阵，诏有司议赠恤。
现代文：十四日，红袄贼寇侵犯沂州，军队打败了他们，追到白里港，都提控齐信阵亡，诏令有司议论馈赠抚恤。
English: On the 14th, the Red Kite invaders invaded Zhangzhou. The army defeated them and chased them to Baili Port. They all accused Qi Xin of being killed in action and ordered him to discuss the gift of a pension.

古文：壬戌，御史言户部员外郎臧伯升供亿息州，偶遇官军战胜，亦冒迁一官，乞论其罪。
现代文：十八日，派监察御使粘割梭失前往河中、绛、解等郡，同守土官商量保卫城池。十九日，皇帝宣宗认为久旱，告谕宰臣审理京城冤案。二十四日，御史说户部员外郎臧伯升供职息州时，偶遇军队打胜仗，也冒充升了一级官，请求治其罪。
English: On the 18th, inspectors were sent to the counties of Hechu, Handan and He to discuss the defense of the city with the local officials. On the 19th, Emperor Xuanzong thought that it had been a long drought and ordered the vice-minister to hear the case of injustice in Beijing. On the 24th, the historian said that when the member of the household department, Wai Lang Zibo, was promoted to serve in the state, he happened to meet the army in a victorious battle, and also pretended to be promoted to a first-level official, and requested that he be punished.

古文：上曰： 军前如此者，何止伯升，今遽见罪，余皆不安。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 军中像这样的人，何止臧伯升一人？今天要治他的罪，其余的都不安心。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said, "How many soldiers in the army are like this man? Today, we are going to punish his crime. The rest of them are worried."

古文：且诘所从来，势连及帅府。
现代文：况且追问缘由，势必牵动帅府。
English: Moreover, the pursuit of the cause is bound to involve the government.

古文：多故之秋，岂为一官，遂忘大计？但令厘正之。 
现代文：多事之秋，难道为一官而忘大计，只令他改正。 
English: In the autumn of many things, is it possible for an official to forget the grand plan, only to make him correct it.

古文：癸亥，遣高汝砺、徒单思忠祷雨。
现代文：二十五日，派高汝砺、徒单思忠祈雨。
English: On the 25th, he sent Gao Ruchen and Tousan Shizhong to pray for rain.

古文：秋七月庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：辛未，诏赏南伐将有士有差。
现代文：初二，诏令不同程度地奖赏南伐将士。
English: On the second day of the new year, the Emperor issued a decree to reward the soldiers of the Southern Expedition to varying degrees.

古文：庚寅，择明干官提控铨选无违失者与升擢，令译史不任事者，验已历俸月放满，别选能者。
现代文：西夏人侵犯龛谷，提控夹谷瑞及副提控赵防打跑了他们。初五，因为旱灾，诏告中外。初十，在东郊祭太社、太稷，祭九宫贵神，以祈雨。
English: The Western Xia people invaded Shibuya, and they were chased away by Shibuya Rui and Zhao Fang. In the fifth day of the first month, because of the drought, it was announced to the public. In the tenth day of the first month, in the eastern suburbs, the Taisha, Taiko, and the Nine Palace Gods were held to pray for rain.

古文：甲午，夏人复犯龛谷，夹谷瑞大破之。
现代文：派太子太保阿不罕德刚、礼部尚书杨云翼分道审理冤案。十四日，天下大雨。
English: On the 14th, it rained heavily all over the country. The crown prince sent the grand tutor, Abuhang Degang, and the minister of etiquette, Shangshu Yang Yunyi, to hear the case separately.

古文：用点检承玄言，遣官诣诸道选寄居守阙丁忧官及亲军入仕才堪总兵者，得一百六人，付枢密任使。
现代文：太子、亲王、百官上表请求在御正殿恢复常膳。二十五日，西夏军又侵犯龛谷，夹谷瑞大败了他们。采用点检承玄的建议，派官到各道去选拔领兵的人才，得到一百六十人，交给枢密任用。
English: On the 25th, the Western Xia army invaded Shibuya again, and Shibuya Rui defeated them. Using the suggestion of the point checker Shogen, he sent officers to each province to select the talent to lead the army, and got 160 people, who were handed over to the Privy Appointment.

古文：八月庚子朔，河北行省以苗道润军隶涿州刺史李瘸驴，副以张甫、张柔。
现代文：八月初一，河北行省因为苗道润军隶属涿州刺史李瘸驴，任命张甫、张柔为副职。
English: On the first day of August, Zhang Fu and Zhang Rong were appointed vice-governors of Hebei Province because Miao Daorun's army was subordinate to Zhang Shishi and Li Xuan of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊申，敕亲军百户以下授职待阙者给本俸，仍充役，俟当赴任遣之。
现代文：初九，命令亲军百户以下授职未到任的人给本俸，且充役，等赴任后再调遣。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he ordered that those who had not been assigned to their posts within 100 households of pro-army families should be paid their salaries and given full-time service, and that they should be transferred after being assigned to their posts.

古文：己酉，诏河北行省完颜霆进军援山东招抚使田琢，自今将士立功听琢先赏以闻。
现代文：初十，诏令河北行省完颜霆进军援助山东招抚使田琢，将士立功听任田琢奖赏后报知。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered Tian Tuo, the envoy of Hebei Province, to go to Shandong Province after the completion of Yan Ting's march to aid Shandong Province, and to report to Tian Tuo after he had been rewarded for his service.

古文：大元遣木华里等帅步骑数万自太和岭徇河东。
现代文：元朝派木华里等率几万步骑兵自太和岭占领河东。
English: The Yuan Dynasty sent tens of thousands of foot cavalrymen led by Mu Huali and others from Taihe Ling to occupy Hedong.

古文：乙卯，大元兵收代州。
现代文：十六日，元朝军收取代州。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan Dynasty's military revenue was collected in place of the state.

古文：辛酉，棣州提控纥石烈丑汉讨贼张聚，大破其众，复滨、棣二州。
现代文：二十二日，棣州提控纥石烈丑汉讨伐贼寇张聚，大败他们，收复滨、棣二州。
English: On the 22nd, Zhangzhou took control of Zhangjiakou and defeated the bandits, recapturing Bin and Zhangjiakou.

古文：奸人李宜伏诛。
现代文：奸人李宜被杀。
English: The traitor Li Yi was killed.

古文：九月乙亥，下太原府，元帅左监军兼知枢府事乌古论德升死之。丙戌，论皇太子曰： 军务之速，动关机会，悉从中覆，则或稽缓。
现代文：又禁止北面回来的人渡黄河。二十九日，元朝军收取隰州。九月初六，太原府被攻下，元帅左监军兼知枢府事乌古论德升战死。十七日，告谕皇太子说： 从今天起当务之急事，先斩后奏。 
English: People returning from the north were also prohibited from crossing the Yellow River. On the 29th, the Yuan Dynasty army took Bozhou. At the beginning of the 6th of September, Taiyuan was captured, and the marshal of the Left Supervisor Army and the governor of the central government died in battle. On the 17th, the crown prince was told: From today, the urgent matters should be dealt with first.

古文：自今有当亟行者，先行后闻。 以户部尚书纳合蒲剌都为元帅右监军，行元帅府事于潞州。
现代文：任命户部尚书纳合蒲剌都为元帅右监军，在潞州行元帅府事。
English: He appointed the head of the household, Shang Shuna, to be the marshal of the Right Supervision Army and the marshal of the marshal's office in Zhangzhou.

古文：戊子，置秦关等处九守御使，命完颜蒲察等分戍诸厄。
现代文：十九日，设置秦关等处九守御使，命完颜蒲察等人分别驻守要塞。
English: On the 19th, nine guards of Qin Guan and other places were set up, and Yan Pucha and others were stationed at the fortress.

古文：议迁海州，侯挚言不便，止。
现代文：议论迁到海州，侯挚说不方便，停了下来。
English: The discussion moved to Haizhou, but Hou said it was inconvenient and stopped.

古文：大元兵徇汾州，节度使兀颜讹出虎死之。
现代文：元朝军占领汾州，节度使兀颜讹出虎战死。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army occupied Zhangzhou, and the festival made Yan Yan the tiger die in battle.

古文：庚寅，李全破密州，执招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答、同知节度使夹谷寺家奴。
现代文：二十一日，李全攻下密州，拘捕招抚副使黄掴阿鲁答、同知节度使夹谷寺家奴。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Quan captured Mianzhou, and arrested Huang Pu Aru Da, the vice-envoy of the Chinese envoy, and Jiaotong Jiedu, the vassal of the Jiaotong Temple.

古文：辛卯，大元兵下孝义县。
现代文：二十二日，元朝军攻下孝义县。
English: On the 22nd, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Xiaoyi County.

古文：乙未，设随处行六部官，以京府节镇长官充尚书，次侍郎、郎中、员外郎；防刺长官侍郎，次郎中、员外郎、主事；勾当官听所属任使。
现代文：二十六日，设立随处行六部官，用京府节镇长官充任尚书、次侍郎、郎中、员外郎、防刺长官侍郎，次郎中、员外郎、主事、勾当官听任所属任用。
English: On the 26th, six departments were established, with the director of the Beijing Festival Town being appointed as the secretary, the second secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the assistant secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, and the secretary.

古文：州府官并充劝农事，防刺长官及京府节镇同知以下充副使。
现代文：州府官一并充当劝农事，防刺长官及京府节镇同知以下充任副使。
English: The prefectural officials also served as agricultural advisers, and the chief of the anti-stabbing office and the Beijing prefectural governor of the same name served as deputy envoys.

古文：丙申，李全破寿光县。
现代文：二十七日，李全攻破寿光县。
English: On the 27th, Li Quan invaded Shouguang County.

古文：冬十月甲辰，李全破邹平县，戊申，破临朐县。
现代文：冬十月初六，李全攻破邹平县，初十，攻破临朐县。
English: In winter, on the sixth day of the first month of October, Li Quan conquered Suiping County, and on the tenth day of the first month, he conquered Linfen County.

古文：己酉，大元兵徇绛、潞。
现代文：十一日，元朝军占领绛、潞。
English: On the 11th day, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied  and.

古文：壬子，攻平阳，提控郭用死之。
现代文：十四日，元军攻打平阳，提控郭用战死。
English: On the 14th, the Yuan army attacked Pingyang, and Zhuang Guo died in battle.

古文：癸丑，下平阳，知府事，权参知政事、行尚书省李革及从坦死之。
现代文：十五日，元军攻下平阳，知府事、权参知政事、行尚书省李革及从坦战死。
English: On the 15th, the Yuan army conquered Pingyang, the prefectural governorship, the power to advise the prefectural governorship, the political affairs, the Li Ge and the Cong Tan died in battle.

古文：甲寅，权平定州刺史范铎以弃城伏诛。
现代文：十六日，权平定州刺史范铎因为弃城被杀。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Quanping Dingzhou assassin Fan Xuan was killed for abandoning the city.

古文：诏诸郡录囚官，凡坐军期者皆奏谳。
现代文：诏令诸郡录囚官，凡是因为犯了军期罪的人都要上奏审判定罪。
English: The edict ordered all counties to record prisoners, and anyone who had committed a military crime was to be tried and convicted.

古文：山东路转运副使兼同知沂州防御使程戩及邳州副提控王汝霖等通宋人为变，伏诛。
现代文：山东路转运副使兼同知沂州防御使程戬及邳州副提控王汝霖等里通宋朝人叛变被杀。
English: The vice-envoy of Shandong Road Transportation and the defense envoy of Zhangzhou, Cheng Yao, and the vice-commander of Zhangzhou, Wang Rulin, were killed.

古文：戊午，尚书省言获奸细叛亡，率多僧道。
现代文：宋朝军攻打涟水县，提控刘瑛打败了他们。十九日，元朝军攻打泽州。二十日，尚书省说捕获的奸细叛逃。
English: The Song Dynasty attacked Lishui County, and Liu Ying defeated them. On the 19th, the Yuan Dynasty attacked Zezhou. On the 20th, Shangshu said that the captured spies had defected.

古文：诏沿边诸州，惟本处受度听依旧居止，来自河北、山东遣入内郡，讥其出入。
现代文：诏令沿边各州，来自河北、山东派入内郡的人都要检查出入。
English: According to the edict, people from Hebei and Shandong who are sent to the counties along the border should check in and out.

古文：己未，李全据安丘，提控王政屯昌乐俟王庭玉兵同进讨。
现代文：二十一日，李全占据安丘，提控王政驻扎昌乐等王庭玉的兵一同前去讨伐。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Quan occupied Anqiu, took control of Wang Zheng stationed in Changle, and Wang Tingyu's soldiers went forward to fight.

古文：宣差太府少监伯德玩擅率政兵攻全，为全所败，提控王显死焉。
现代文：宣差太府少监伯德玩擅自率领王政的军去攻打李全，被李全打败，提控王显战死。
English: Wang Zheng's army was sent by the emperor to attack Li Quan, but Li Quan defeated Wang Xian and he died in battle.

古文：田琢上言乞正玩罪。
现代文：田琢上书请求定伯德玩的罪。
English: Tian Taku wrote a letter requesting that Bird be found guilty of playing.

古文：癸亥，月犯轩辕左角之少民星。
现代文：二十五日，月亮侵犯轩辕左角的少民星。
English: On the 25th, the moon invaded Xiao Minxing in the left corner of Xuanwu.

古文：甲子，诏河东北路忻、代、宁化、东胜诸州并受岚州帅府节制。
现代文：二十六日，诏令河东北路忻、代、宁化、东胜等州都受岚州帅府节制。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that the provinces of Hedongbei Road, Dai, Ninghua and Dongsheng were all subject to the control of the Shuaifu of Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月庚午，大赦。
现代文：十一月初二，大赦天下。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the general amnesty began.

古文：庚辰，御登贤门召致政旧臣赐食，访以时政得失。
现代文：十二日，皇帝宣宗御驾登贤门召唤旧臣赐食，向他们询问当前政治的得失。
English: On the twelfth day, Emperor Xuanzong drove to the gate of the wise men to summon the old vassals to give food and ask them about the current political gains and losses.

古文：辛巳，以行元帅府纥石烈桓端权签枢密院事，行院于徐州，权右都监讹可行元帅府事于息州。
现代文：十三日，任命行元帅府纥石烈桓端权签枢密院事，在徐州行院，权右都监讹可在息州行元帅府事。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the appointment of the marshal's office of Zou Shi, Li Hantuan, and the power to sign the Privy Council, in the Xuzhou Administration, the power to the right can be exercised by the marshal's office in Xizhou.

古文：甲申，诏河东南路隰、吉等州听绛州元帅府节制。
现代文：十六日，诏令河东南路隰州、吉州等听从绛州元帅府指挥。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Bozhou and Jizhou in the south of Hedong Road to obey the command of the Bozhou Marshal's Office.

古文：大元兵收潞州，元帅右监军纳合蒲剌都、参议官修起居注王良臣死之。
现代文：元朝军收取潞州，元帅右监军纳合蒲剌都、参议官修起居注王良臣战死。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army took Bozhou, the Marshal of the Right Supervision Army Nahao Pampo Capital, and the Councillor Xiu Jiuzhu Wang Liangchen died in battle.

古文：戊子，龛谷提控夹谷瑞败夏人于质孤堡。
现代文：二十日，龛谷提控夹谷瑞在质孤堡打败西夏军。
English: On the 20th, Shibuya took control of Jinggu Rui and defeated the Western Xia army in a solitary castle.

古文：河北行省报海州之捷。
现代文：河北行省报告海州之捷。
English: Hebei Province reported the victory of Haizhou.

古文：壬辰，定经兵州县职官子孙非本贯理荫及过期不荫等格。
现代文：二十四日，制定经兵州县官的子孙非血亲及过期不荫恩等规定。
English: On the 24th, the regulations on the non-blood relatives of the children and grandchildren of the county officials of Jingzhou and the expiration of the grace period were formulated.

古文：丙申，大元兵下太原之韩村砦。
现代文：二十八日，元朝兵攻下太原的韩村砦。
English: On the 28th, Yuan Dynasty soldiers captured Han Village Fort in Taiyuan.

古文：定京师失火法。
现代文：制定京城失火的法令。
English: To formulate a decree on fire accidents in the capital city.

古文：十二月己亥朔，以御史中丞完颜伯嘉权参知政事、元帅左监军，行河中府尚书省元帅府，控制河东南、北路便宜从事。
现代文：十二月初一，任命御史中丞完颜伯嘉权参知政事、元帅右监军，行河中府尚书省元帅府，控制河东南、北路，灵活处理事情。
English: On the first day of December, he appointed Gu Shizhongzheng to complete Yan Bo Jia Quan as a political adviser and marshal of the Right Supervision Army, and went to the marshal's office of Shangshu Province in the central part of He Prefecture to control the south-east and north routes of He and to deal with matters flexibly.

古文：升绛州为晋安府，总管河东南路兵，降平阳为散府。
现代文：绛州升为晋安府，总管河东南路军队，平阳降为散府。
English: Bozhou was promoted to Jin'an Prefecture, in charge of the army in the south of Hedong Road, and Pingyang was downgraded to Sanfu.

古文：辛丑，签枢密院事蒲察移剌都伏诛。
现代文：初三，签枢密院事蒲察移剌都被判罪杀死。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the signatories of the Privy Council, Putsa and Ipyeong, were all sentenced to death.

古文：壬寅，前山东西路转运使致仕移剌福僧上章言时事。
现代文：初四，前山东西路转运使退休官员移剌福僧上书议论时事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the transportation of the Qianshan East-West Road caused the retired officials to move to Fengfu Monastery to discuss the current affairs.

古文：癸卯，诏大理卿温迪罕达权同签枢密院事，行院于许州。
现代文：初五，诏令大理卿温迪罕达权同签枢密院事，在许州行院。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued a decree to the Grand Duke of Dali, Wendy Handa, to co-sign the Privy Council, in the Xuzhou Executive Yuan.

古文：甲辰，以诛移剌都，诏中外。
现代文：初六，因为杀了蒲察移剌都诏告中外。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, because he killed Pucha Yibao, he was denounced both at home and abroad.

古文：乙巳，命徒单思忠祈雪，已而大雪。
现代文：初七，命令徒单思忠祈雪，不久，天下大雪。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the disciples to think of loyalty and pray for snow. Soon, there was heavy snowfall.

古文：甲寅，以开封府治中吕子羽等使宋讲和。
现代文：十六日，用开封府治中吕子羽等人出使宋朝讲和。
English: On the 16th, Lu Zi Yu and others sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty to talk about peace.

古文：红袄贼攻彭城之胡材寨，徐州兵讨败之。
现代文：红袄贼寇攻打彭城的胡材寨，徐州军队打败了他们。
English: The Red Skull bandits attacked Hu Zhaizhai in Pengcheng, and the Xuzhou army defeated them.

古文：乙卯，以礼部侍郎抹撚胡鲁剌为汾阳军节度使，权元帅右监军，与岚州元帅古里甲石伦完复河东。
现代文：十七日，任命礼部侍郎抹睰胡鲁剌为汾阳军节度使，权元帅右监军，与岚州元帅古里甲石伦收复河东。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Maggot Hulun, as the festival envoy of the Shenyang Army, Marshal Quan as the right supervisor of the army, and Marshal of Zhangzhou, Guli Jia Shilun, to recover Hedong.

古文：丁巳，籍濒河埽兵。
现代文：十九日，登记治理黄河的士兵。
English: On the 19th, the soldiers who administered the Yellow River were registered.

古文：癸亥，尚书省言： 枢密掌天下兵，皇太子抚军，而诸道又设行院。
现代文：二十五日，尚书省说： 枢密掌管天下军队，皇太子安抚军队，然而各路又设行院。
English: On the 25th, Shang Shuxuan said: The Privy Council controls the world's armies, the crown prince pacifies the army, but each road is also set up.

古文：其有功及失律者，须白院，启东宫，至于奏可，然后诛赏，有司但奉行而已。
现代文：其有功及违纪者，必须告知行院，上启东宫，奏章获得通过后，然而奖惩，有司只是执行而已。
English: Those who are meritorious and those who violate discipline must inform the Executive Yuan, Shangqi Donggong, after the report is approved, however, rewards and punishments are only implemented.

古文：自今军中号令关赏罚者，皆明注诏旨、教令，毋容军司售其奸欺。 
现代文：从现在起军中的号令赏罚，都要注明诏旨、教令，不能容忍军司搞奸欺行为。 
English: From now on, the orders of rewards and punishments in the army should be marked with the edict and edict, and the military department cannot tolerate the act of cheating.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝宣宗批准了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：以枢密副使驸马都尉仆散安贞为左副元帅，权参知政事，行尚书省元帅府事，伐宋。
现代文：任命枢密副使驸马都尉仆散安贞为左副元帅，权参知政事，行尚书省元帅府事，攻打宋朝。
English: Appointed the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, the deputy marshal of the left, the deputy marshal of the right, the marshal of the left, the marshal of the left, the marshal of the left, the marshal of the left, the marshal of the left, and the marshal of the left to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：甲子，上谕旨有司： 京师丐食死于祁寒，朕甚悯之。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝下旨有司： 京城乞丐死于寒冷，朕很怜悯。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the emperor issued an order to the magistrate: I feel very sorry for the beggar who died of cold in Beijing.

古文：给以后苑竹木，令居获燠所。 
现代文：把后苑的竹木给他们，让他们盖个温暖的窝。 
English: Give them the bamboo and wood from the backyard and let them build a warm nest.

古文：三年春正月庚千，吕子羽至淮，宋人不纳而还。
现代文：兴定三年正月初三，吕子羽到淮河，宋朝人不接纳他，他又回到朝中。
English: On the third day of the first month of the third year of Xingding, Lu Zi Yu went to the Huaihe River. The Song Dynasty people did not accept him, and he returned to the court.

古文：诏伐宋。
现代文：诏令攻打宋朝。
English: The imperial edict was issued to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：丙子，税民种地亩，议行均输。
现代文：初九，议论种田的人平均交税。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the average tax paid by those who farmed increased.

古文：戊寅，敕和市边城军需，无至配民。
现代文：十一日，命令给边疆买的军需物质，不要分给边民。
English: On the 11th, it was ordered that military supplies bought for the border should not be distributed to the border residents.

古文：定镇戍征行军官减资历月日格。壬午，大雪。上闻东掖有撤瓦声，问左右，知为丁夫葺器物库庑舍，上恻然，谕主者曰： 雪寒役人不休，可乎？
现代文：十五日，下大雪。皇帝听到东掖有撤瓦声，问左右，知道是工匠修缮仓库房舍，皇帝悲伤，告谕主管此事的人说： 风雪寒冷工匠不休息，可以吗？
English: On the fifteenth day, there was heavy snowfall. The emperor heard the sound of roof tiles being removed in Donglu and asked around, knowing that craftsmen were repairing the warehouse building. The emperor was sad and told the person in charge of the matter: "Is it okay for craftsmen to work in the snow and cold without taking a break?"

古文：姑止之。 
现代文：暂时停止。 
English: Temporarily suspended.

古文：丙戌，纥石烈牙吾塔上濠州香山村之捷。
现代文：十九日，纥石烈牙吾塔报告濠州香山村大捷。
English: On the 19th, Zhangshi Leya Wuta reported that Zhangzhou Xiangshan Village won a great victory.

古文：丁亥，谕宣徽，皇后生日免百官贺。
现代文：二十日，告谕宣徽，皇后生日免去百官贺寿。
English: On the 20th, the proclamation of the proclamation of the emblem, the birthday of the empress was exempted from the celebration of the hundred officials.

古文：壬辰，以大元兵已定太原，河北事势非复向日，集百官议备御长久之计。
现代文：二十五日，因为元朝军已平定太原，河北的形势已非以前，召集百官计议长久防御计划。
English: On the 25th, because the Yuan Dynasty army had already subdued Taiyuan, and the situation in Hebei was no longer the same as before, hundreds of officials were convened to discuss a long-term defense plan.

古文：伐宋捷至，上谓侍臣曰： 此事岂得已哉。近日遣使实欲讲和，彼既不从，安得不用兵也？ 
现代文：攻打宋朝捷报到，皇帝宣宗对侍臣说 ：近日派使者实想讲和，他们既然不答应，怎能不用兵？ 
English: When the attack on the Song Dynasty was reported, Emperor Xuanzong said to his courtiers, "Recently, I sent an envoy to make peace. Since they did not agree, how can I not use soldiers?"

古文：免单丁民户月输军需钱。
现代文：免去单人户每月交纳军需钱。
English: Single-person households will be exempted from the monthly payment of conscription money.

古文：甲午，有司请立价以买南征军士所获马，上恐失众心，因至败事，不听。
现代文：二十七日，有司请求立价以买南征军士俘获的马匹，皇帝宣宗恐怕失去军心，而导致事情败坏，没有听从。
English: On the 27th, there was a request to set a price to buy the horses captured by the soldiers of the Southern Expedition. Emperor Xuanzong was afraid that he would lose his military spirit, which would lead to the deterioration of the situation, and did not obey.

古文：乙未，敕尚书省，自今六部禀议常事，但可再送，不得趣召辨正。
现代文：二十八日，命令尚书省，从今六部禀告议论的常事，只可再送，不能奔赴辨正。
English: On the 28th, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology issued an order that from now on, the six obituaries can only be re-sent, but cannot be sent for verification.

古文：余应入法寺定断而再送，犹未当者具以闻，下吏治之。宰相执政以下皆不得召部寺官，部寺官亦不得诣省，犯者论违制。
现代文：宰相执政以下官不能召令部寺官，部寺官也不得到省中，违者按违纪处置。
English: An official under the Prime Minister cannot summon a temple official, nor can a temple official be sent to the provincial middle school. Violators will be dealt with according to disciplinary action.

古文：丁酉，邓州元帅府提控娄室有罪，减死削爵。
现代文：三十日，邓州元帅府提控娄室有罪，减去死罪削去官爵。
English: On the 30th, the Dengzhou Marshal's Office brought charges against the Imperial Household Agency and found it guilty. After the death penalty was commuted, the Emperor was stripped of his title.

古文：二月庚子，上与太子谋南征帅，不得其人，叹曰： 天下之广，缓急无可使者，朕安得不忧？ 
现代文：二月初三，皇帝宣宗同太子谋寻南征的统帅，没找到合适人选，叹说 ：天下之大，紧急之时没有可用之人，朕怎能不忧心？ 
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong and the Crown Prince were trying to find a commander for the Southern Expedition, but they couldn't find a suitable candidate. He lamented, "The world is so big, and there is no one available in an emergency. How can I not be worried?"

古文：纥石烈牙吾塔败宋人于滁。
现代文：纥石烈牙吾塔在滁地打败宋朝军。
English: My tower of flint and steel teeth defeated the Song Dynasty army in Handan.

古文：甲辰，胥鼎言： 军中诛赏，近制须闻朝廷。
现代文：初七，胥鼎说： 军队中的惩杀奖赏，近来规定一定要让朝廷知道。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Hao Ding said: Recently, it has been stipulated that the imperial court must be informed of the punishment and reward in the army.

古文：赏由中出，示恩有归，可。
现代文：奖赏可以由朝廷出，以示君恩，可以。
English: The reward can be given by the Imperial Court to show its gratitude, yes.

古文：部分失律，主将不得即治其罪，不可。 
现代文：部分违纪的，主将不能立刻治罪，这不可以。 
English: If there is a partial violation of discipline, the captain cannot immediately punish the offense. This is unacceptable.

古文：诏尚书枢密杂议。
现代文：诏令尚书枢密杂议此事。
English: The Emperor ordered the Privy Council to discuss the matter.

古文：宰臣请城野战将校有罪，从七品以下许便宜决罚，余悉奏裁。
现代文：宰臣请求守城野战将校有罪的，从七品以下的人允许灵活决断惩罚，其余的都上奏裁决。
English: The vice-minister requested that if the officers in charge of the defense of the city and field battle were guilty, the people below the seventh grade were allowed to flexibly decide the punishment, and the rest were submitted for adjudication.

古文：上曰： 七品以下财令治之，将权太轻，或至误事。
现代文：皇帝宣宗说 ：七品以下才能治罪，给的权力太轻，有可能误大事。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong said, "Only those below the seventh grade can punish crimes. The power given is too light, and it is possible to make a big mistake."

古文：自今四品以下听决。 
现代文：从今开始四品以下的可听任决断。 
English: From now on, orders of four items or less are subject to discretion.

古文：乙巳，攻宋光山县，俘其统制蔡从定等，光州以兵求援，复败之。
现代文：初八，攻打宋朝光山县，俘虏了他们的统制蔡从定等人，光州派兵来援助，又打败了他们。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Song Dynasty attacked Guangshan County and captured their leader Cai Congding and others. Gwangju sent troops to help and defeated them.

古文：丙午，上谓宰臣： 江淮之人，号称选忄耎，然官军攻蔓菁埚，其众困甚，胁之使降，无一肯从者。
现代文：初九，皇帝宣宗对宰臣说 ：江淮的人，很懦弱，然而军队攻打蔓菁山呙，他们被围困，胁迫他们投降，没有一个肯屈从的。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Emperor Xuanzong said to his vice-minister: "The people of Jianghuai are very weak, but the army attacked Cangjing Mountain, they were besieged, they were forced to surrender, and no one was willing to yield.

古文：我家河朔州郡，一遇北警，往往出降，此何理也？ 
现代文：我们的河朔州郡，一遇到北方警报，往往投降，这是何理？ 
English: What is the reason that our county, Hechuozhou County, often surrenders in the face of the North's warning?

古文：丁未，敕凡立功将居丧者特起复迁授。戊申，拔宋小江寨，杀其统制王大蓬。
现代文：初十，诏命凡立功将士都要升职。十一日，攻破宋朝小江寨，杀了他们的统制王大蓬。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor ordered that all meritorious generals should be promoted. On the eleventh day, Xiao Jiangzhai of the Song Dynasty was defeated and their ruler Wang Dapeng was killed.

古文：己酉，取宋武休关。
现代文：十二日，攻取宋朝武休关。
English: On the 12th, the Song Dynasty was conquered.

古文：庚戌，元帅左都监承立，以绥德、保安之境，各获夏人统军司文移来上，其辞虽涉不逊，而皆有保境息民之言，诏尚书省议之。
现代文：十三日，元帅左都监承立，在绥德、保安境内，各俘获了西夏统军司文书，其言辞虽不谦逊，而都有保卫国境安息百姓之言，诏令尚书省议论这件事。
English: On the 13th, the marshal Zuo Du supervised and set up, and in the territory of Shunde and Baoxing, they each captured the documents of the Western Xia United Military Department. Although their words were not humble, they all had the words of defending the border and resting the people, and ordered Shangshu Province to discuss the matter.

古文：宰臣言： 镇戎、灵平等镇近耗，夏人数犯疆埸。
现代文：宰臣说： 镇戎、灵平等镇近来被毁坏，西夏人多次侵犯我们边疆。
English: The vice-minister said, "Zhenrong and Lingping Towns have been destroyed recently, and the Xixia people have repeatedly invaded our borders.

古文：此文正缓我耳，宜严备御，以破奸计。 
现代文：此文书正好可让我们缓一缓，应该严加防御，以破奸计。 
English: This instrument just allows us to take a breather, and we should be on the defensive, with a view to cracking down on fraud.

古文：上然其言。
现代文：皇帝认为说的对。
English: Emperor Sui agreed with what he said.

古文：又曰： 顷近侍还自陕西，谓白撒已得凤州，如得武休关，将遂取蜀。
现代文：皇帝又说 ：近来近侍从陕西回来，说白撒已取得凤州，如果取得武休关，将赶快攻取蜀地。
English: The emperor also said, "Recently, a courtier came back from Shaanxi and said that Baisa has already captured Fengzhou, and if he gains Wuyuguan, he will quickly capture Shu.

古文：朕意殊不然，假令得之，亦何可守？
现代文：朕认为不能这样，如果得到了武休关，怎能守卫？
English: I don't think so. If they get martial law, how can they guard it?

古文：此举盖为宋人渝盟，初岂贪其土地耶？
现代文：此举大概能让宋改变盟约，朕难道只贪图其土地吗？
English: This move will probably allow Song to change the covenant. Am I just coveting his land?

古文：朕重惜生灵，惟和议早成为佳耳。 
现代文：朕爱惜生灵，只有早日促成议和为佳。 
English: I cherish the lives of the living, and it is best to bring about a negotiated settlement as soon as possible.

古文：高汝砺乞致事，优诏不允。
现代文：高汝砺请求退休，没被批准。
English: Gao Rucheng's request to retire was not approved.

古文：甲寅，诏陕西行省，从七品以下官许注拟，有罪许决罚，丁忧等阙随宜任使。
现代文：十七日，诏令陕西行省，从七品以下官有罪允许判决处罚，为父母守丧官员留下的空缺要随时任命。
English: On the 17th, Shaanxi Province issued a decree, allowing the guilty to be sentenced and punished from the seventh grade. The vacancy left by the parents' funeral officials should be appointed at any time.

古文：军官徒以上罪及军事怠慢者，巡按御史治之。
现代文：军官因上述罪及怠慢军事的人，巡按御史处治。
English: For the above-mentioned crimes and those who neglect the military, the officers will be punished according to the imperial edict.

古文：己未，行省安贞入宋境，破梁县等军，擒统制李申之。
现代文：二十二日，行省安贞进入宋朝境内，打败梁县等地军队，擒获统制李申之。
English: On the 22nd, Anzhen marched into the territory of the Song Dynasty, defeated the armies of Liang County and other places, and captured the commanding position of Lishen.

古文：右副元帅完颜赛不、左都监牙吾塔，白石关、平山砦之捷俱至。
现代文：右副元帅完颜赛不、左都监牙吾塔的白石关、平山砦之捷报奏到。
English: The right vice-marshal finished the beauty contest, and the left vice-marshal finished the victory report of Shiroishi Pass and Hirayama Fort.

古文：三月丁卯朔，陕西兵破宋虎头关，取兴元、洋州。
现代文：三月初一，陕西军队攻破宋朝虎头关，夺取兴元、洋州。
English: On the first day of March, the Shaanxi army broke through the Song Dynasty's Tiger's Head Pass and captured Xingyuan and Yangzhou.

古文：捷至，上大悦。
现代文：捷报到，宣宗皇帝很高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy to hear the news.

古文：庚午，破宋人于七口仓。
现代文：初四，在七口仓打败宋朝军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he defeated the Song Dynasty army in Qikoucang.

古文：甲戌，高丽先请朝贡，因遣使抚谕之，使还，表言道路不通，俟平定后议通款。
现代文：初八，高丽首先请求朝贡，因此派使者去抚慰告谕，使者返回来了，上表说道路不通，等平定后再通告文款。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Goryeo first asked for tribute, so it sent an envoy to appease the emperor. The envoy returned and said that the road was impassable. It would announce the payment after the war was over.

古文：命行省姑示羁縻，勿绝其好。
现代文：命令行省先向他们表示笼络，不要断绝友好。
English: Command the provinces to make overtures to them first, and not to break off the friendship.

古文：戊寅，蔡州行元帅府右都监完颜合达破宋人于梅林关，擒统制张时。
现代文：十二日，蔡州行元帅府右都监完颜合达在梅林关打败宋朝军，俘虏统制张时。
English: On the 12th, after the Caizhou Campaign, the marshal of the Right Capital, Yan He Da, defeated the Song Dynasty army in Meilin Pass, and the captives unified Zhangjiakou.

古文：己卯，长春节，免朝贺。
现代文：十三日，长春节，免去朝贺。
English: On the 13th, the Spring Festival, morning greetings will be waived.

古文：提控奥屯吾里不败宋人于上津县，军还至濠州，宋人来拒，牙吾塔击走之。
现代文：提控奥屯吾里不在上津县打败宋朝军，金军回到濠州，宋朝军来抵抗，牙吾塔打跑了他们。
English: Taking control of Otunguri in Shangjin County, he defeated the Song Dynasty army, the Jin Army returned to Bozhou, the Song Dynasty army resisted, and Yaguta beat them away.

古文：乙酉，河南路节镇以上立军器库，设使、副各一员，防刺郡设都监、同监各一员、完颜合达败宋人于马岭堡。
现代文：十九日，河南路节镇以上建立军械库，设使、副使各一名，防刺郡设都监、同监各一名。完颜合达在马岭堡打败宋朝军。
English: On the 19th, an armory was built above Jiezhen on Henan Road, with an envoy and a deputy envoy each, and a city supervisor and a supervisor each were set up in Bozhi County. Gan Gangda defeated the Song Dynasty army in Maring Fort.

古文：丙戌，行省安贞破宋人于石堌山。
现代文：二十日，行省安贞在石山打败宋朝军。
English: On the 20th, Governor Anzhen defeated the Song Dynasty army in Shishan.

古文：己丑，追赐皇后父太尉汴国公彦昌姓温敦。
现代文：二十三日，追赐皇后父亲太尉汴国公彦昌姓温敦。
English: On the 23rd, the father of the Empress was posthumously awarded the title of Second Lieutenant, Shinguko Kimihikamasa, whose family name was Winton.

古文：庚寅，攻宋麻城县，拔之，获其令张倜等。
现代文：二十四日，攻打宋朝麻城县，攻下了它，俘虏了县令张倜等人。
English: On the 24th, he attacked Song Dynasty Macheng County, captured it, and captured the county's governor Zhang Jun and others.

古文：辛卯，行省安贞破宋兵于涂山。
现代文：二十五日，行省安贞在涂山打败宋朝军。
English: On the 25th, the provincial Anzhen army defeated the Song Dynasty army in Tu Mountain.

古文：壬辰，赛不败宋兵于老口镇，又败宋人于石鹘崖。
现代文：二十六日，赛不在老口镇打败宋朝军，又在石鹘崖打败宋朝军。
English: On the 26th, Sai did not defeat the Song Dynasty army in Laokou Town, but defeated the Song Dynasty army in Shijiazhuang Cliff.

古文：甲午，录用罪废官副元帅蒲察阿里不孙、御史大夫永锡等七十人。
现代文：二十八日，录用有罪发配官副元帅蒲察阿里不孙、御史大夫永锡等七十人。
English: On the 28th, Vice-Marshal Pucha Ali Fusong, Vice-Doctor of History Yongxi, and 70 others were appointed as guilty dispatching officers.

古文：诏太原等路，州县阙正授官，令民推其所爱为长，从行省量与职任。
现代文：诏令太原等路，州县授官，让百姓推其拥戴者为长，行省量力任用。
English: The emperor ordered Taiyuan and other provinces, prefectures and counties to award officials, let the people push their supporters to be the leaders, and make appointments as much as possible.

古文：及运解盐人陕西，以济调度，命胥鼎兼领其事。
现代文：运盐到陕西，以救济调配，命胥鼎兼管此事。
English: Transporting salt to Shaanxi, dispatching it with relief, and taking charge of the matter.

古文：闰三月丙申朔，申明屠宰牛罪律。
现代文：闰三月初一。公布杀牛罪法律。
English: On the first day of leap March, the law on the crime of killing cattle was announced.

古文：以雄、霸以东付权中都经略李瘸驴，易州以西付权中都西路经略靖安民治之。
现代文：把雄、霸两地以东交付给权中都经略李瘸驴，易州以西交付给权中都西路经略靖安民治理。
English: The two places east of Xiong and Ba were handed over to the Central Government of the People's Republic of China, and the West of Yizhou was handed over to the Central Government of the People's Republic of China, and the West of Yizhou was handed over to the Central Government of the People's Republic of China, and the West of Yizhou was handed over to the Central Government of the People's Republic of China.

古文：遥授金安军节度使完颜和尚、故行军副提控夹古吾典皆除名。
现代文：遥授金安军节度使完颜和尚、故行军副提控夹古吾典都除名。
English: The remote teaching of the Jinan Army Festival caused the removal of the name of the monk, the late deputy commander of the march, and the ancient Wu Dynasty.

古文：庚子，皇子平章政事濮王守纯进封英王。
现代文：初五，皇子平章政事濮王守纯进封为英王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Prince Taira no Shosho (平章政事王守純) was enthroned as the king.

古文：壬寅，叛贼王公喜构宋人取沂州。
现代文：初七，叛贼王公喜勾结宋朝军攻取沂州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the traitor Wang Gongxi colluded with the Song Dynasty army to capture Ganzhou.

古文：甲辰，以沂国公主薨，辍朝。
现代文：初九，因为沂国公主死辍朝。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, because the princess of Shikoku died, she left the imperial court.

古文：丙午，给空名宣敕及金银符，付岚州帅古里甲石伦，许便宜迁注，以招胁从。
现代文：十一日，把空白皇令及金银符给岚州帅古里甲石伦，允许他灵活授官，以招安侍从。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he sent a blank imperial order and gold and silver coins to the governor of Zhangzhou, Gu Li Jia Shi Lun, and allowed him to flexibly assign officials to recruit attendants.

古文：丁未，谕枢密院议晋安、东平、河中诸郡备兵之策。
现代文：十二日，告谕枢密院议论晋安、东平、河中诸郡守备之策略。
English: On the 12th, he ordered the Privy Council to discuss the strategy for the defense of Jinan, Dongping, and Hechong counties.

古文：庚戌，行省左副元帅仆散安贞至自军前，入见于仁安殿。
现代文：十五日，行省左副元帅仆散安贞从前线来朝，在仁安殿被召见。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, San Anzhen, the left deputy marshal of the province, came to the DPRK from the front line and was summoned to the Jinan Palace.

古文：辛亥，少府少监粘割梭失言利害七事。
现代文：十六日，少府少监粘割梭失说七件事之利害。
English: On the 16th day, the minor prefect and the minor superintendent of the viscosity-cutting shuttle lost the interest of seven things.

古文：甲寅，以南伐师还，罢南边州郡籍民为兵者。
现代文：十九日，因为南伐的军队回国，解散了南部边疆州郡临时当兵的百姓。
English: On the 19th, because the army of the Southern Expedition returned to China, the people who temporarily served as soldiers in the Southern Frontier Prefecture were disbanded.

古文：戊午，夏人破葭州之通秦砦，刺史纥石烈王家奴战没。
现代文：二十三日，西夏军攻破葭州的通秦砦，刺史纥石烈王家奴战死。
English: On the 23rd, the Xixia Army broke through the Tongqin Fort in Zhangzhou, and Wang Jianu, the hero of Zhangshi, died in battle.

古文：壬戌，治书侍御史蒲鲁虎上书，请选太子师傅。
现代文：二十七日，治书侍御史蒲鲁虎上书，请求选取太子师傅。
English: On the 27th, the chief secretary, Shi Buluhu, sent a letter requesting the selection of the prince's teacher.

古文：甲子，胥鼎等各迁官，赏南伐之功。
现代文：二十九日，胥鼎等升官，以奖赏他们南伐的功劳。
English: On the 29th, Gong Ding and others were promoted to reward their services in the Southern Expedition.

古文：夏四月丙寅朔，裕、宿等州置元帅府，选陕西步骑精锐六千人实京兆。
现代文：夏四月初一，裕州、宿州等地设置元帅府，选取陕西精锐步骑兵六千人充实京兆地区。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the Marshal's Office was set up in Yuzhou, Suzhou and other places, and six thousand elite infantry cavalrymen from Shaanxi were selected to enrich the Beijing-Shanghai region.

古文：戊辰，选精锐六万分屯凉、泾、邠、乾、耀等州。
现代文：初三，选取六万精锐部队分别驻守平凉、泾？乾、耀等州。
English: On the third day of the new year, 60,000 elite troops were selected to be stationed in the provinces of Pingliang, Shandong, Jiangsu and Yao.

古文：庚午，以秦州主御使女奚烈古里间行元帅府于平凉。
现代文：初五，任命秦州防御使女奚烈古里间在平凉行元帅府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Qinzhou defense maidservant Yan Liguo to march to the marshal's office in Pingliang.

古文：罢募民运解盐。
现代文：废除招募百姓运盐。
English: Abolish the practice of recruiting people to transport salt.

古文：筑京师里城，命侯挚董役，高琪总监之。
现代文：建筑京城内城，命令侯挚管理工程，高琪总监。
English: Construction of the inner city of Beijing, ordered Hou Zhi to manage the project, Gao Qi director.

古文：甲戌，以知临洮府事石盏合喜为元帅左都监，行元帅府事于巩州。
现代文：初九，任命知临洮府事石盏合喜为元帅左都监，在巩州行元帅府事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Shi Zhengyi was appointed as the marshal of Zhili prefecture and the marshal of Gongzhou prefecture.

古文：壬午，遣近侍四人巡视筑城丁夫，时其饮食，听其更休，督吏惨酷，悉禁止之。
现代文：十七日，派近侍四人巡察建城的民工，当时民工正吃饭休息，督告官吏禁止残酷刑罚。
English: On the 17th, four close attendants were sent to inspect the migrant workers in Jiancheng. At that time, the migrant workers were having a meal and taking a break. They complained to the officials to prohibit cruel and unusual punishment.

古文：癸未，陕西黑风昼起，有声如雷，地大震。
现代文：十八日，陕西黑风聚起，声响如雷，地大动。
English: On the 18th, the black wind gathered in Shaanxi, the noise was thunderous, and the ground was shaking.

古文：甲申，诏河北州县官止令土著推其所爱者充，朝廷已授者别议任使。
现代文：十九日，诏令河北州县官只让当地居民推选的人充任，朝廷已授职的另外讨论任用。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that county officials in Hebei Province would only be appointed by people elected by local residents, and those who had been appointed by the imperial court would be appointed by discussion.

古文：乙酉，夏人据通秦寨，提控纳合买住击败之。
现代文：二十日，西夏军占据通秦寨，提控纳合买住打败了他们。
English: On the 20th, the Xixia Army occupied Tongqinzhai and defeated them.

古文：己丑，林州都统霍成以疑贰诬杀降人，论罪当死，元帅惟良不欲以杀敌人诛边将，请宽其罚，仍请立护送降民赏格，以杜后患。
现代文：二十四日，林州都统霍成因怀疑投降的人有贰心而杀了他，霍成按律当死，元帅惟良不想因为杀了敌人而再杀自己的边将，请求宽恕霍成的罪，并请求建立护送投降人的奖赏规定，以杜绝后患。
English: On the 24th, Linzhou Governor Huo Cheng killed him because he suspected that the person who surrendered had a bad heart. Huo Cheng should die according to the law. Marshal Wueliang did not want to kill his own border guard because he killed the enemy. He asked for forgiveness for Huo Cheng's crime, and requested the establishment of a reward regulation for escorting the person who surrendered, in order to prevent future problems.

古文：上为之赦成，而命有司班赏格焉：护送十人以至者迁一官，不及者每名赏钱二百缗，五十人以上两官，百人以上两官杂班任使。
现代文：皇帝因此赦免了霍成，并命有司颁布奖赏规定：护送十人以上到达的人升一级官，护送不到十人的每护送一名赏二百钱，护送五十人的升二级官，护送百人以上的两官兼任。
English: As a result, the emperor pardoned Hucheng, and ordered the division to promulgate the reward regulations: those who escorted more than ten people would be promoted to the first-level officials, those who escorted less than ten people would be rewarded with two hundred yuan for each escort, those who escorted fifty people would be promoted to the second-level officials, and those who escorted more than one hundred people would concurrently serve as two officials.

古文：庚寅，以时暑，诏朝臣四日一奏事。
现代文：二十五日，因为时值暑日，诏令朝臣四天一奏事。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, because it was a hot day, the emperor ordered the courtier to make a speech for four days.

古文：高汝砺请备防秋之粮，宜及年丰于河南州郡验直立式，募民入粟。
现代文：高汝砺请求准备秋天的粮食，应该到年成丰收时在河南州郡标价，招募百姓交粮。
English: Gao Rucheng requested to prepare grain for autumn, and by the time of the year-end harvest, the price should be marked in Henan County, and the people should be recruited to pay grain.

古文：上与议定其法而行之。
现代文：皇帝让按议定的法规行事。
English: Let the emperor act according to the agreed rules.

古文：同提举榷货司王三锡请榷油，岁可入银数万两，高琪主之，众以为不便，遂止。
现代文：同提举榷货司王三锡请求专营油，这样每年可收入几万两白银。高琪主持此事，大家认为不便，于是停止了此事。
English: At the same time, Wang Sansi, the secretary of the State Administration for Industry and Commerce, requested the oil monopoly, which could earn tens of thousands of silver every year. Gao Qi presided over the matter, and everyone thought it was inconvenient, so the matter was stopped.

古文：辛卯，夏人犯通秦砦，元帅完颜合达出兵安塞堡以捣其巢。
现代文：二十六日，西夏军侵犯通秦砦，元帅完颜合达出兵安塞堡以捣他们的老巢。
English: On the 26th, the Western Xia army invaded the Tongqin Fort, and the marshal finally sent troops to Ansai Fort to destroy their nest.

古文：至隆州，夏人逆战，官军击之，众溃，进薄城，俄陷其西南隅，会日暮，还。
现代文：到隆州，西夏军迎战，金军攻击他们，夏军溃败，金军迫近城堡，不久攻陷西南角，正好日落，金军撤回。
English: To Longzhou, the Western Xia Army met the battle, the Golden Army attacked them, the Xia Army was defeated, the Golden Army approached the castle, soon captured the southwest corner, just at sunset, the Golden Army withdrew.

古文：壬辰，以同知平阳府事胡天作充便宜招抚使。
现代文：二十七日，任命同知平阳府事胡天作充任便宜招抚使。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Hu Tianzuo, an acquaintance of him, as the liaison officer of Pingyang.

古文：五月乙未朔，凤翔元帅府遣兵败宋人于黄牛等堡。
现代文：五月初一，凤翔元帅府派兵在黄牛等堡打败宋朝军。
English: On the first day of May, the Fengxiang Marshal's Office sent troops to defeat the Song Dynasty army in Huangniu and other castles.

古文：壬子，太白昼见于参。
现代文：十八日，太白星出现在参宿星旁。
English: On the 18th, Taibai Star appeared next to Betelgeuse.

古文：六月甲子朔，时暑，给修城夫病者药饵。
现代文：六月初一，当时暑天，给修城的有病的人药和食物。
English: On the first day of June, when it was hot, medicine and food were given to the sick people who were rebuilding the city.

古文：遣谕元帅合达曰： 以卿干局，故有唐、邓之委。
现代文：派人告谕元帅合达说： 因为你的才干，所以把唐、邓两地委托给你。
English: He sent someone to tell Marshal Heda: "Because of your talent, I have entrusted the Tang and Deng regions to you.

古文：或有侵轶，战退不宜远追，第固吾圉。 
现代文：如果有侵袭，打退了敌人不宜远追，只是巩固我们的边防。 
English: If there is an invasion, it is not advisable to pursue the enemy far after defeating him, but to consolidate our border defense.

古文：以骠骑上将军河南路统军使石盏女鲁欢为元帅右都监，行平凉元帅府事。
现代文：任命骠骑上将军河南路统军使石盏女鲁欢为元帅右都监，行平凉元帅府事。
English: He appointed the general of Henan Road to lead the army to make the stone woman Lu Huan the marshal's right supervisor, and carried out the affairs of the marshal's office.

古文：诏付辽东等处行省金银符及空名宣敕，听便宜处置。
现代文：诏令给辽东等地行省金银符及空白诏令，听任灵活处置。
English: The imperial edict gave Liaodong and other places provincial gold and silver certificates and blank imperial edicts, allowing them to be dealt with flexibly.

古文：壬申，制沿河戍兵逃亡罪并同征行军人例。
现代文：初九，制定沿黄河守兵逃跑罪并征军的条例。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, regulations on the crime of escaping along the Yellow River and the conscription of soldiers were formulated.

古文：诏御史中丞完颜伯嘉行枢密院于许州。
现代文：诏令御史中丞完颜伯嘉在许州行枢密院。
English: Emperor Zhao decreed that Gu Shizhongzheng and Yan Bojia should be sent to the Privy Council in Xuzhou.

古文：甲戌，定防秋将校击球饮燕之罚。
现代文：十一日，制定防卫将校击球饮宴惩罚的规定。
English: On the 11th, the regulations for the punishment of the batting banquet of the defense officers were formulated.

古文：李全寇日照、博兴，纥石烈万奴败之；寇即墨，完颜僧寿又败之，复莱州。
现代文：李全入侵日照、博兴，纥石烈万奴打败了他；入侵即墨，完颜僧寿又打败了他，并收复了莱州。
English: Li Quan invaded Rizhao and Boxing, and was defeated by Shanshi Lvannu; invaded Jimo, and was defeated by Guanxiang Shou, and recovered Laizhou.

古文：戊寅，诏陕西签军如河南例，曲赦河东南、北路。
现代文：十五日，诏令陕西签军依河南旧例行事，大赦河东南、北路。
English: On the 15th, the Shaanxi Signing Army was ordered to act in accordance with the old practice in Henan, and amnesty the southeast and north of the river.

古文：丁亥，命防御使徒单福定等帅所部义军，与沂州民老幼尽徙于邳。
现代文：二十四日，命令防御使徒单福定等率所部义军，与沂州百姓都迁到邳地。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he ordered the rebels of the Department of Defense of the Apostles, including Fu Ding, and the people of Zhangzhou to move to Lijiang.

古文：戊子，辽州总领提控唐括狗儿帅师复太原府。
现代文：二十五日，辽州总领提控唐括狗儿率军队收复太原府。
English: On the 25th, Liaozhou's commander-in-chief sent troops to recapture Taiyuan.

古文：平凉等处地震，诏右司谏郭著抚谕其军民。
现代文：平凉等地发生地震，诏令右司谏郭著抚恤安慰当地军民。
English: An earthquake occurred in Pingliang and other places, and the Right Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Zou Guo, came to comfort the local soldiers and civilians.

古文：秋七月丁酉，籍邳、海等州义军及胁从归国而充军者，人给地三十亩，有力者五十亩，仍蠲差税，日支粮二升，号 决胜军 。
现代文：秋七月初四，登记邳州、海州等地义军及胁从回国而充军的人，每人给三十亩地，有力的给五十亩，并免去赋税，每天供给二升粮，号称 决胜军 。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the registered rebels from Bozhou, Haizhou and other places, as well as those who were forced to join the army after returning to China, were each given 30 mu of land, the strong ones were given 50 mu, and they were exempted from taxes and supplied with two liters of grain every day, known as the "decisive victory army."

古文：戊戌，上进枢密臣僚谕之曰： 里城久未毕功，尚书欲增调民，朕虑妨农。
现代文：初五，宣宗皇帝告谕枢密院臣僚说 ：内城久未完工，尚书想增调百姓，朕担忧妨碍农业。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Xuanzong announced to the ministers of the Privy Council: "The inner city has not been completed for a long time, Shangshu wants to increase the number of people, I am worried about hindering agriculture.

古文：况粮储不继，将若之何，盍改图之。 
现代文：况且粮食储备不继，将怎么办，何不改计划。 
English: Moreover, if grain reserves do not continue, what will be done, why not change the plan.

古文：枢臣言： 是役之兴，实为大计，今功已过半，偶值霖潦，成功差迟。
现代文：枢臣说 ：此役兴建，实为大计，现在工程已过半，偶遇大雨，离完成就更远了。
English: The Vice-Minister said: "The construction of this project is actually a big plan. Now the project is more than half over, and if there is heavy rain, it will be further away from completion.

古文：尚书议增丁夫，势必验口，不令妨业。比及防秋，当告成矣。 
现代文：尚书议论增加工匠，不会妨碍农业。等到秋收，工程已完成了。 
English: Shang Shu's discussion about increasing the number of craftsmen will not hinder agriculture. By the time of the autumn harvest, the project will have been completed.

古文：上曰： 卿等善为计画，无贻朕忧。 
现代文：皇帝宣宗说： 你们好好谋划，不要让我担忧。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "You should make a good plan, don't let me worry.

古文：庚子，以地震，曲赦陕西路。
现代文：初七，因为地震大赦陕西路。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Shaanxi Road was closed due to the earthquake.

古文：甲辰，置京东、西、南三路行三司。
现代文：十一日，设置京东、西、南三路行三司。
English: On the 11th, three divisions were set up for the three lines of Beijing East, West and South.

古文：乙卯，曲赦山东西路。
现代文：二十二日，大赦山东西路。
English: On the 22nd, the east-west road of Amity Mountain was built.

古文：丁巳，遣单思忠以地震祭地祇于上清宫。
现代文：二十四日，因为地震派徒单思忠在上清宫祭地。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, because of the earthquake, the disciples sent Shan Sizhong to the Upper Qing Palace.

古文：八月丙寅，补阙许古等削官解职。
现代文：八月初三，补阙许古等人被削官解职。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Fuxi Xu Gu and others were removed from their posts.

古文：丁卯，木星犯舆鬼东南星。戊辰，遣礼部尚书杨云翼祭社稷，翰林侍读学士赵秉文祭后土于河中府。京西行三司李复亨言汝、邓冶铁，河南、北食盐之利。木星昼见于柳，百有九日乃灭。
现代文：初五，派礼部尚书杨云翼祭社稷，翰林侍读学士赵秉文在河中府祭后土。京西行三司李复亨说在汝、邓炼铁，黄河南、北采食盐的利益。木星出现在柳宿星旁，一百零九天才灭。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the ceremonial department sent Shangshu Yang Yunyi to the festival, and Hanlin attended the bachelor Zhao Bingwen at the post-festival in Hezhongfu. The third secretary Li Fuheng, who traveled west to Beijing, said that it was in the interests of Ru and Deng to mine iron, and to mine salt in the south and north of the Yellow River. Jupiter appeared next to the Pleiades, and it took 109 days to die.

古文：壬申，上敕台臣： 朕处分尚书事，或至数日不奉行，及再问则巧饰次第以对。
现代文：初九，宣宗皇帝告谕台臣说： 朕分给尚书省的事，有的几天不办理，等再问则巧言掩饰。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Xuanzong told the Tai retainer, "In matters assigned to Shang Shuxuan, I sometimes don't handle them for a few days. If you ask me again, I'll use clever words to cover up.

古文：大臣容有遗忘，左右司玩弛，台臣当纠。
现代文：大臣容许有遗忘之事，左右司则懈怠，台臣应当纠正。
English: The minister tolerates forgetfulness, the left and right ministers are slack, and the ministers should correct it.

古文：今后复尔，并罪卿等。 
现代文：今后再发生类似情况，连你们一起问罪。 
English: If a similar situation happens in the future, you will all be held accountable.

古文：乃定御史上下半月勾检省中制敕文字。
现代文：于是规定御史上下半月要批阅完文件。
English: As a result, it was stipulated that the documents should be approved and read in the second half of the month.

古文：大元兵下武州，军事判官郭秀死之。
现代文：元朝军攻下武州，军事判官郭秀死去。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army conquered Wuzhou, and the military judge Guo Xiu died.

古文：丁丑，缓在京差徭。中山治中王善杀权知府事李仲等以叛。
现代文：中山治中王善杀死权知府事李仲等人后叛乱。
English: After Zhongshan Zhi Zhong Wang Zhen killed the prefectural governor Li Zhong and others, there was a rebellion.

古文：大元兵下合河县，县令乔天翼等死之。
现代文：元朝军队攻下合河县，县令乔天翼等人死去。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army conquered Hehe County, and the county magistrate Qiao Tianyi and others died.

古文：乙酉，命枢密遣官简岭外诸军之武健者，养之彰德、邢、洺、卫、浚、怀、孟等城，弱者罢遣，戊子，敕侯挚谕三司行部官劝民种麦，无种粒者贷之。
现代文：二十二日，命令枢密派官选取岭外各军中武健的人，养在彰德、邢？卫、浚、怀、孟等城中，病弱的人派走。二十五日，命令侯挚告谕三司行部官劝农民种麦，没种子的国家贷给。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the officials of the Privy Council to select able-bodied men from all the armies outside the Ling, and to send away the weak and sick from the cities of Zhangde, Zhangwei, Jian, Huai, and Meng. On the 25th, he ordered Hou to tell the officials of the three departments to persuade farmers to grow wheat and lend it to the country that had no seeds.

古文：九月甲午，诏单州经略使完颜仲元屯宿州，与右都监纥石烈德同行帅府事。
现代文：九月初二，诏令单州经略使完颜仲元驻守宿州，同右都监纥石烈德同行帅府事。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Yan Zhongyuan, who was stationed in Shuzhou, was ordered to oversee the affairs of the prefecture by the governor of Shanzhou.

古文：丙申，唐州从宜夹谷天成败宋人于桐柏。
现代文：初四，唐州从宜夹谷天成在桐柏打败宋朝军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Tangzhou defeated the Song Dynasty army from Yijia Valley Tiancheng in Tongbai.

古文：丁酉，尚书省请申命侯挚广营策积贮，上不许，曰： 征敛已多，今更规画，不过复取于民耳。
现代文：初五，尚书省请申命侯挚广营积贮，宣宗皇帝不许，说 ：征敛已经很多。今天更要重新规划，不过仍是从民间收取罢了。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture requested that Emperor Xuanzong issue an order to collect funds from all sources, but Emperor Xuanzong refused, saying, "There has already been a lot of collection. Today, we need to re-plan, but we still need to collect funds from the people."

古文：防秋稍缓，当量减戍兵，用度幸足，何至是耶。 
现代文：秋收稍缓，应当适量减少戍兵，这样费用就足够了。何至于此？ 
English: The autumn harvest is a little slow, the number of pickers should be reduced appropriately, so that the cost is sufficient. What about this?

古文：甲辰，大元兵徇东胜州，节度使伯德窳哥死之。
现代文：十二日，元朝军占领东胜州，节度使伯德纞哥死去。
English: On the twelfth day, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Dongshengzhou, and the festival caused the death of Baode's brother.

古文：庚戌，命行省胥鼎领兵赴河中。
现代文：十八日，命令行省胥鼎领兵奔赴河中。
English: On the 18th, the commanding officer of the province, Yu Ding, led the soldiers to rush to the middle of the river.

古文：壬子，真定招抚使武仙请给金银符赏有功，从之。
现代文：二十日，真定招抚使武仙要求金银符赏有功的人，被批准。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Zhending invited Wu Xian to request that gold and silver tokens be awarded to those who had meritorious deeds, which was approved.

古文：沿河造战舰，付行院帅府。
现代文：沿黄河造战舰，交给行院帅府。
English: Warships were built along the Yellow River and handed over to the Governor's Office.

古文：冬十月癸亥朔，定保举县令能否升黜举主制。
现代文：冬十月初一，制定保举县令能否升降的制度。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a system will be established to determine whether or not a county order can be raised or lowered.

古文：乙丑，用蒙古纲言，招集义军各置都统、副统等官，如贞祐三年制。
现代文：初三，采用蒙古纲的建议，招集的义军各设置都统、副都统等官，像贞三年的制度。
English: In the third year of the Junior High School, using the suggestion of the Mongolian Program, each of the rebel forces that were called up was set up with a governor, vice-governor and other officials, like a three-year system.

古文：平凉府先以地震被命醮祭，方行事，庆云见，以图来上。遣官覆验得实，是日，百官奉表称贺。丁卯，以完颜开权元帅左都监，郭文振权右都监，并行元帅府事，谋复太原。
现代文：初五，任命完颜开为权元帅左都监，郭文振为权右都监，一同行元帅府事，谋划收复太原。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, after the appointment of Yan Kai as the Marshal of the Right, Guo Wenzhen as the Marshal of the Left, and Guo Wenzhen as the Marshal of the Right, they went together to the Marshal's office to plan the recovery of Taiyuan.

古文：壬申，定赃吏计罪以银为则。
现代文：初十，制定赃官论罪用银为标准。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the eunuch's crime of using silver as a standard was established.

古文：癸酉，以庆云遣官告太庙。
现代文：十一日，因为庆云派官告太庙。
English: On the 11th day, because Qingyun sent an official to complain to the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲戌，以庆云诏国内。
现代文：十二日，因为庆云诏告国内。
English: On the 12th, because of the celebration, it was announced to the country.

古文：己卯，大元兵次单州境，诏诸路民应迁避兵而不欲者，亟遣人以利害晓之。
现代文：十七日，元朝军临时驻扎单州境内，诏令各路百姓应迁走避元兵而不想走的人，赶快派人晓以利害。
English: On the 17th, the Yuan Dynasty army was temporarily stationed in the territory of Shan State. The emperor ordered the people of all walks of life to move away to avoid the Yuan soldiers, and those who did not want to leave should quickly send someone to know their interests.

古文：癸未，里城毕工，百官称贺。
现代文：二十一日，内城完工，百官庆贺。
English: On the twenty-first day, the inner city was completed, and hundreds of officials celebrated.

古文：宴宰臣便殿。
现代文：在便殿宴饮宰臣。
English: The vice-minister is feasting and drinking in the toilet.

古文：迁右丞挚官一阶，赐右丞相琪、左丞汝砺、参知政事思忠金鼎各一，重币三。
现代文：升右丞侯挚一级官，赐右丞相高琪、左丞汝砺、参知政事思忠各一个金鼎、三重币。
English: He promoted to the first-class official, and gave the right-hand minister Gao Qi, the left-hand minister Ru Qi, and the party secretary Zhengji Shizhong a gold ring and a three-tiered coin.

古文：是役，上虑扰民，募人能致甓五十万者迁一官，百万仍升一等。
现代文：此次工程，宣宗皇帝考虑扰了百姓，招募送砖五十万的人升一官，百万再升一等。
English: For this project, Emperor Xuanzong considered disturbing the people, and recruited 500,000 people to send bricks to be promoted to the first rank, and another million to the second rank.

古文：平阳判官完颜阿剌、左厢讥察霍定和发宋蔡京故居，得二百万有奇，准格迁赏。
现代文：平阳判官完颜阿剌、左厢讥察霍定和掘挖宋朝蔡京的故居，得二百万砖，按规定升赏。
English: The judge of Pingyang, after inspecting Huoding and excavating the former residence of Caijing of the Song Dynasty, obtained two million bricks and increased the reward according to regulations.

古文：甲申，宰臣请以里城之功建碑会朝门，从之。
现代文：二十二日，宰臣请求按内城修建之功在会朝门建碑，皇帝同意了。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor agreed to Zaisen's request to erect a monument at the entrance to the Imperial Palace in recognition of his contribution to the construction of the inner city.

古文：丁亥，大元兵屯绵上。
现代文：二十五日，元朝军驻守绵上。
English: On the 25th, the Yuan Dynasty army stationed in Mianshang.

古文：壬辰，命有司葺闲舍，给薪米，以济贫民，期明年二月罢，俟时平则赡之以为常。
现代文：三十日，命令有司修缮闲房，给柴粮，以赈济贫民，到明年二月停止。十一月初一，前岚州仓使张佑从西夏来归。
English: On the 30th, a division was ordered to repair idle houses, give firewood and grain to the poor, and stop by February next year. On the first day of November, Zhang You, the former Zhangzhou warehouse envoy, returned from Western Xia.

古文：十一月癸巳朔，前岚州仓使张祐自夏国来归。以枢密副使仆散安贞、同签院事讹可行院事于河北。
现代文：用枢密副使仆散安贞、同签院事讹可在河北行院事。
English: With the use of the Privy Vice-Minister, San Anzhen, and the same signature of the Council of Ministers, the Council of Ministers can be carried out in Hebei.

古文：乙未，以官驴借朝士之无马者乘之，仍给刍豆。
现代文：初三，把公家的驴借给朝中没马的人乘骑，且给草料。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he lent a donkey to a man without a horse to ride, and gave him hay.

古文：己亥，大元兵徇彰德府。
现代文：初七，元朝军占领彰德府。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Yuan Dynasty army occupied Changdefu.

古文：辛丑，诏朝官七品、外路六品以上官，二岁举县令一人。
现代文：初九，诏令朝廷七品、外路六品以上的官，两年推荐县令一人。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that there would be seven officials of the imperial court and six or more officials of the outside world, and one county magistrate would be recommended in two years.

古文：户部令史苏唐催租封丘，期限迫促，民有生刈禾输租者。
现代文：户部令史苏唐到封丘催租，期限逼近，农民有割禾苗交租的。
English: The household department ordered Shisutang to go to Fengqiu to demand rent. The deadline was approaching, and farmers had to cut grass seedlings to pay rent.

古文：上闻之，遣吏按问，杖唐五十，县令高希隆减二等。
现代文：宣宗皇帝听说此事，派官查问，杖打苏唐五十下，县令高希隆降二级。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong heard about this, he sent an official to investigate, and the county magistrate Gao Xilong was demoted two levels.

古文：尚书以希隆罚轻，上曰： 使臣至外路，自非至刚者，孰能不从？
现代文：尚书认为高希隆罚的轻，宣宗皇帝说： 使臣到外路，自己不坚强谁能受得了。
English: Shang Shuxu thought that Gao Xilong's punishment was light, and Emperor Xuan Zong said: If an envoy goes abroad, who can bear it if he is not strong.

古文：其依前诏。 
现代文：仍按前诏处理。 
English: The matter is still being handled according to the previous edict.

古文：甲寅，徐州总领纳合六哥大破红袄贼于狄山。
现代文：二十二日，徐州总领纳合六哥在狄山大败红袄贼寇。
English: On the 22nd, the general leader of Xuzhou, Nahe Liugo, defeated the Red Army bandits in Dizan Mountain.

古文：礼部郎中抹撚鲁剌上疏言时事。
现代文：礼部郎中抹睰胡鲁剌上书说时事。
English: Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism, Hulú Quan, wrote a letter on current affairs.

古文：丁巳，右丞相高琪下狱。
现代文：二十五日，右丞相高琪坐牢。
English: On the 25th, the Minister of the Right, Gao Qi, went to prison.

古文：泰安军副使张天翼为贼张林所执以归宋，絷之楚州，至是逃归，授睢州刺史，超两官，进职一等。
现代文：泰安军副使张天翼被贼寇张林拘捕回到宋朝，押在楚州。至此逃回，授予睢州刺史，破格升两官，进职一等。
English: Zhang Tianyi, deputy envoy of the Tai'an Army, was arrested by the bandit Zhang Lin and returned to the Song Dynasty and detained in Chuzhou. At this time, he fled back and was awarded the title of Zhang of Chuzhou, and was promoted to two posts and promoted to the first grade.

古文：戊午，大元兵平晋安府，行元帅府事、工部尚书粘割贞死之。
现代文：二十六日，元朝军平定晋安府，行元帅府事、工部尚书粘割贞死去。
English: On the 26th, the Yuan Dynasty army conquered Jin'an, and Shang Shuxu of the Ministry of Works died.

古文：十二月，诛高琪。
现代文：十二月，杀高琪。
English: In December, Gao Qi was killed.

