古文：管辂淳于智柳林祖隗照郭璞蔡铁吴中察声者王子贞张璟藏凑州筮者蔡微远车三李老开元中二道士蒋直
现代文：管辂淳于智柳林祖隗照郭璞蔡铁吴中察声者王子贞张璟藏凑州筮者蔡微远车三李老开元中二道士蒋直
English: Guanqian, Chun, Zhi, Liu, Lin, Zu, Zhao, Guo, Guo, Cai, Tie, Wu, Zhong, Zhao, Zheng, Zheng, Zhang, Zang, Zang, Zhu, Cai, Wei, Yuan, Zhe, San, Li, Lao, Kai, Yuan, Zhong, Zhao, Guo, Guo, Cai, Tie, Wu, Zhong, Zhao, Zheng, Zheng, Zhang, Zang, Zang, Zang, Zang, Zhu, Cai, Wei, Yuan, Zheng, Zhu, Guo, Guo, Zhu, Guo, Guo, Cai,

古文：管辂
现代文：管辂
English: Duct tape

古文：管辂洞晓术数。
现代文：管辂通晓用卜卦观察自然现象来推测事物。
English: Guan Jun Tongxiao uses divination and observation of natural phenomena to speculate on things.

古文：初有妇人亡牛，从卜。
现代文：初时，有个妇女丢了一头牛，让管辂给卜算一下。
English: At the beginning, there was a woman who lost a cow and asked Guan Yu to calculate it for her.

古文：曰：可视东丘冢中，牛当悬向上。
现代文：管辂说：你到东边山丘的坟墓中去看看，你丢的那头牛就在那悬空躺着呢。
English: Guan Yu said, "Go to the grave on the eastern hill and look. The cow you lost is lying there suspended in the air."

古文：既而果得。妇人反疑辂，告官按验。
现代文：到那里一看，果然看到牛在坟坑内悬空躺着呢。这位丢牛的妇女反而对管辂起了疑心，报告了官府。
English: When she looked there, she saw the cow lying in the grave. The woman who had lost the cow, however, became suspicious of the authorities and reported the matter to the government.

古文：乃知是术数所推。
现代文：官府派人来察验，才知道他是用卜卦推算出来的。
English: The government sent someone to investigate, only to find out that he had used divination.

古文：又洛中一人失妻。
现代文：又有一次，洛中有一个人的妻子丢失了。
English: On another occasion, the wife of a man in the city was lost.

古文：辂令与担豕人斗于东阳门。豚逸入一舍，突坏其墙。其妇出焉。
现代文：管辂让他跟一个挑猪人在东阳门相打斗，猪从挑猪人的萝筐里跑出来，跑到一家院里，撞坏了院墙，从屋里走出来一个女人，正是问卜人的妻子。
English: Guan Yu let him fight with a pig-picker at Dongyang Gate. The pig ran out of the pig-picker's carrot basket, ran into a courtyard, knocked down the courtyard wall, and a woman came out of the house, the wife of the fortune-teller.

古文：辂乡里范玄龙苦频失火。
现代文：管辂住的乡里范玄龙家中接连不断地失火。
English: Fan Xuanlong's home in the township where he lives is constantly on fire.

古文：辂云：有角巾诸生驾黑牛，从东来，必留之宿。
现代文：找管辂卜算。管辂说：有一位戴着角巾的男人驾着黑牛从东边来，你一定留他住下。
English: Guan Yu said, "There is a man wearing a kerchief driving a black ox from the east. You must let him stay."

古文：后果有此生来，玄龙因留之。
现代文：后来，果然有这么一个男人来了。
English: Later, such a man did come.

古文：生急求去，不听，遂宿。
现代文：范玄龙留他在家中住下，这个男人急着赶路，范玄龙不放他走，只好住下了。
English: Fan Xuanlong let him stay at home. The man was in a hurry to catch his flight. Fan Xuanlong would not let him go, so he had to stay.

古文：主人罢入。
现代文：天黑后，范玄龙一家不进屋去睡。
English: After dark, Fan Xuanlong and his family went to bed without entering the house.

古文：生惧图己，乃持刀门外，倚薪假寐。
现代文：这位男人怕他们谋害他，就手中持刀在里屋门外，倚着柴堆打个盹。
English: Fearing they were plotting to kill him, the man fled outside the inner door, knife in hand, and lay down on a pile of firewood to take a nap.

古文：忽有一物，以口吹火。生惊斫之死。而视之则狐也。
现代文：忽然看见一个东西，用口往外喷火，这个男人惊恐急忙用刀将它砍死，上前去看，原来是只狐狸。
English: Suddenly he saw something, spitting fire out of its mouth. Terrified, the man quickly hacked it to death with a knife. He went to see what it was, and it turned out to be a fox.

古文：自是不复有灾。
现代文：从这以后，范玄龙家再也不闹火灾了。
English: Since then, Fan Xuanlong's family has never had a fire.

古文：又有人捕鹿，获之，为人所窃。
现代文：又有一个人捕获一头鹿，让人偷走了，到管辂这儿推算。
English: Another man caught a deer and had it stolen, according to the police.

古文：诣辂为卦云：东巷第三家，候无人时，发其屋头第七椽，以瓦著椽下。
现代文：管辂告诉他：东街第三家，等他们家里没人的时候，掘开他家屋上第七根椽子，将瓦放在椽子下面。
English: The supervisor told him: The third house on Dongjie Street, when there is no one in their house, dig out the seventh rafters on the roof of his house and put the tiles under the rafters.

古文：明日食时，自送还汝也。
现代文：到明天吃饭的时候，有人就会将鹿送给你的。
English: By lunchtime tomorrow, someone will have given you a deer.

古文：其夜盗者父患头痛，亦来自占。
现代文：这天夜里偷鹿的人的父亲头痛得厉害，也到管辂这来占卜。
English: That night, the father of the man who had stolen the deer had a severe headache, and he also came to Guanzhong for divination.

古文：辂令归之。病乃愈。
现代文：管辂让他将偷来的鹿还回去，于是他父亲的头立时不痛了。
English: The bailiff told him to return the stolen deer, and his father's head stopped hurting.

古文：又治内吏失物。
现代文：又有一次，官府内部丢失了物品。
English: On another occasion, items were lost from within government offices.

古文：辂使候人静，于寺门，令指天画地，举手四向。
现代文：管辂让他们在人静时在寺门旁指天画地，举着手向四方。
English: Guan Yu asked them to point to the sky next to the temple gate when it was quiet, and raise their hands in all directions.

古文：暮果获于故处。
现代文：到了傍晚，丢失的物品果然又回到原来的地方了。
English: By late afternoon, the lost items had indeed returned to their original location.

古文：又平原太守刘邠取山鸡毛置器中，使辂筮之。
现代文：又：平原太守刘邠拿一根野鸡毛放在一个容器里，让管辂卜算是什么东西。
English: Also: the governor of the plains, Liu Xuan, took a pheasant feather and put it in a container, so that it could be counted as something.

古文：辂曰：高岳岩岩，有鸟朱身。羽翼玄黄，鸣不失晨。
现代文：管辂卜算说：在高高的山上，有只鸟身子是朱红色的，羽翼是玄黄色的，每天早晨它都鸣叫。
English: Guan Mubai said: On a high mountain, there is a bird with a scarlet body and yellow wings. It chirps every morning.

古文：此山鸡毛也。淳于智
现代文：你容器里装着的是根山鸡毛。淳于智
English: What you have in your container is chicken feathers.

古文：鲍瑗家多丧及病，淳于智为筮之。卦成云：宜入市门数十步，有一人持荆马鞭，便就买取，悬东北桑树上，无病。
现代文：鲍瑗家里经常有人病了或死了，淳于智给他占一卜，卦象上说：你赶快到离市门几十步的地方，看见一个人拿着荆条马鞭，就将马鞭买下来。拿回家来，悬挂在东北面桑树上，就会免出疾病的。
English: Bao Tong's family often had someone who was ill or died, and Chun Yu Chi gave him a prediction. Gua Zang said, "If you hurry to a place a few dozen steps from the city gate and see a person holding a horsewhip, buy the horsewhip. Take it home and hang it on a mulberry tree in the northeast, you will be free from illness."

古文：三年当得财。
现代文：而且，三年之内还将得到一笔外财。
English: Moreover, it will also receive a sum of foreign money within three years.

古文：如其言。后穿井得钱，及铜器二十万。
现代文：鲍瑗按照淳于智的话去做了，果然像他说的那样没有再生病了。后来挖井又挖到铜钱及各种铜器二十枚。
English: Bao Tong did as Jun Yu Zhi said, and as he said, he did not get sick again. Later, he dug a well and found twenty copper coins and various copper utensils.

古文：柳林祖
现代文：柳林祖
English: Liu Linzu

古文：有日者柳林祖善卜筮。
现代文：有个以占卜为生的人叫柳林祖，非常精通占卜术。
English: There is a person who lives by divination called Liu Linzu, who is very proficient in divination.

古文：其妻曾病鼠瘘，积年不差。渐困垂命。
现代文：他的妻子曾经得过老鼠疮，好几年了也未见好，而且眼看病重到危及生命的地步了。
English: His wife, who had suffered from rat bites, had not been well for several years and had developed a life-threatening eye condition.

古文：林祖遂占之，得颐之复。
现代文：柳林祖于是占卜推算，得到颐和复两卦。
English: Liu Linzu then did divination and calculation, and obtained the two gossips of  and 复.

古文：按卦曰：应得姓石者治之，当获灸鼠而愈也。
现代文：按着卦象说：应该让一位姓石的人医治，而且在捉到灸鼠的时候就能痊愈。
English: According to the riddle, it is said that a person with the surname of Shi should be allowed to heal, and he will be able to recover when he catches the moxibustion rat.

古文：既而乡里有一贱家，果姓石。自言能除此病。
现代文：过了一段时间，乡里有一户贫贱的人家姓石，说能治这种鼠疮病。
English: After a period of time, there was a poor family in the countryside with the surname of Shi, who said that they could cure this rat-bite disease.

古文：遂灸病者头上三处。觉佳。
现代文：于是在患者头上灸了三处，果然感觉好多了。
English: So I moxibustioned three places on the patient's head, and sure enough, I felt much better.

古文：俄有一鼠，色黄秀，迳前。噞噞然伏而不动。
现代文：过了一会儿，有一只老鼠，亮黄色，径自走到跟前来，活脱脱地望着他们一动不动。
English: After a while, a mouse, bright yellow, walked up to them and stared at them, motionless.

古文：呼犬噬杀之。视鼠头上，有三灸处。
现代文：叫唤狗来将这只老鼠捕住，看见老鼠头上有三处被灸。
English: He called the dog to catch the mouse and saw that the mouse had three moxa on its head.

古文：病者自差。
现代文：从此，柳林祖妻子的鼠疮病彻底痊愈了。
English: Since then, Liu Linzu's wife has been completely cured of rat-bite disease.

古文：隗照
现代文：隗照
English: 照

古文：晋隗照善易。临终谓妻子曰：后虽大荒，勿卖宅。
现代文：晋朝人隗照擅长易经，临死时对妻子说：以后虽然遇到大荒年，但不要卖掉房屋。
English: Emperor Jin's son Zhao Zhao was good at I Ching, and on his deathbed, he said to his wife, "In the future, even if there is a severe famine, don't sell your house.

古文：后五年，诏使龚负吾金，以吾所书板告之。
现代文：再过五年，召见姓龚的家仆，让他偿还欠我的金子，将我写的这块书板给他看就可以了。
English: In another five years, I'll just have to call my servant, whose surname is Yu, and have him pay back the gold he owes me, and show him this tablet I wrote on.

古文：后如其言。妻赍板诣之。使者惘然，沈吟不语。
现代文：后来，隗照的妻子按着丈夫的遗嘱，将姓龚的家仆召到跟前，把丈夫留下的板书给这位仆人看。仆人看书板后不懂是什么意思，想了半天还是不明白。
English: Later, in accordance with her husband's will, Gong Zhao's wife summoned the servant surnamed Zou to her side and showed the servant the board book left by her husband. The servant did not understand what it meant after reading the board, and after thinking for half a day, he still did not understand.

古文：取蓍筮之。卦成曰：妙哉隗生，吾不负金。
现代文：最后取出蓍草占卜，占成一卦说：真妙啊隗炤。
English: Finally, he took out the reed divination, and said, "It's wonderful.

古文：贤夫自藏金，以待太平。
现代文：我不欠你的金子，是你这位善良的丈夫生前自己藏着金子，准备太平时用。
English: I don't owe you the gold. It was your good husband who hid the gold himself before he died, to be used in times of peace.

古文：知吾善易，书板寄意。
现代文：知道我擅长易经，将它书写在板上。
English: Knowing that I am good at I Ching, I wrote it down on the board.

古文：金有五百斤，盛以青瓷，埋在堂屋。去壁一丈，入地九尺。
现代文：有五百斤黄金，装在青瓷中，埋在堂屋里离墙一丈远的地方，深有九尺。
English: There are five hundred pounds of gold, mounted in celadon, buried in the hall far away from the wall, nine feet deep.

古文：妻掘之，果得金也。郭璞
现代文：隗炤的妻子按卦上告诉的位置挖地，果然得到了一瓮黄金。郭璞
English: Guo's wife dug into the ground according to the location told on the riddle, and got a pile of gold.

古文：杨州别驾顾球娣生十年便病，至年五十余。
现代文：杨州别驾顾球的弟媳生下来后十岁便有病，到五十多岁了还是病厌厌的。
English: The younger sister-in-law of Yangzhou Bie Gu Ball fell ill at the age of ten after she was born, and she was still sick and tired when she was over fifty.

古文：令郭璞筮之。
现代文：顾球让郭璞给卜算一卦。
English: Gu Zhou asked Guo Jun to give him a riddle.

古文：得大过之升。
现代文：卜得大过和升卦。
English: Bu De Da is better than Sheng Gua.

古文：其辞曰：大过卦者义不嘉，冢墓枯杨无英华。
现代文：卦上说的是：得大过卦的是在 义 上不好，他家坟地上的杨树枯死不长叶子。
English: What the riddle says is: it is not good for justice to have too much of a riddle. The poplar tree on his family's burial ground withers and does not grow leaves.

古文：振动游魂见龙车，身被重累婴天邪。
现代文：受振的游魂看见龙车，身患重病是遭受天邪。
English: A shaken wandering soul sees a dragon chariot, and if it is seriously ill, it is the result of a natural disaster.

古文：法由斩树杀灵蛇，非己之咎先入瑕。
现代文：受到这么重的惩罚是由砍树杀灵蛇缘起的，罪过不在患病的人而在她的先人。
English: It was not the sick woman's fault, but that of her ancestors, that she was punished so severely for cutting down a tree and killing a snake.

古文：案卦论之可奈何，球乃访迹其家事。先世曾伐大树，得大蛇杀之。女便病。
现代文：这个卦说的是什么呢？顾球去访察弟媳娘家的情况，得知她的先人曾确伐过大树，斩杀过大蛇。从这之后，他弟媳便患病在身了。
English: What does this story say? Gu Gu visited his sister-in-law's family and learned that her ancestors had indeed cut down trees and killed snakes. Since then, his sister-in-law has been ill.

古文：病后有群鸟数千回翔屋上，人皆怪之，不知何故。
现代文：患病后，有一群鸟约几千只绕屋飞来飞去。人们都感到奇怪，不知这是为什么。
English: After he fell ill, there was a flock of several thousand birds flying around the house, and people were puzzled as to why.

古文：有县农行过舍边，仰视，见龙牵车，五色晃烂。甚大非常。
现代文：有一位本地的农夫经过他弟媳家，抬头看见一条龙拉着车，五彩斑斓，金光耀眼，不是一般的大，过了一会儿就消失了。
English: A local farmer was passing by his sister-in-law's house when he looked up and saw a dragon pulling a cart. It was multicolored, glittering, and unusually large. After a while, it disappeared.

古文：蔡铁
现代文：蔡铁
English: Cai Tie

古文：宋南郡王义宣在镇，府史蔡铁者善卜。
现代文：南北朝时，南宋的王义宣镇守南郡期间，属下有个叫蔡铁的府史擅长占卜。
English: At the time of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, during the Southern Song Dynasty, when Wang Yixuan was in charge of the Southern County, one of his subordinates, a prefectural historian named Cai Tie, was good at divination.

古文：王尝在内斋见一白鼠缘屋梁上，命左右射得之。内函中，命铁卜函中何物。
现代文：一次，王义宣在书房里看见一只白鼠缘着屋梁向上爬，让左右的仆人将它射下来，装在一个匣子里，让蔡铁卜算匣子里装的是什么？
English: Once, Wang Yixuan saw a white rat climbing up the roof beam in his study. He asked his servants to shoot it down and put it in a box. He asked Cai Tiebu to count what was in the box.

古文：卦成笑曰：得之矣。
现代文：蔡当场卜算一卦笑着说：卜到了！
English: On the spot, Cai said with a smile, "It's done!

古文：王曰：状之。白色之鼠背明户，弯孤射之，绝其左股。
现代文：王义宣说：你说说这件东西的样子蔡铁说：是一只白鼠背对着明亮的窗户，弯弓射它，射断了它的左腿。
English: Wang Yixuan said, "Tell me what this thing looks like." Cai Tie said, "It's a white rat with its back to a bright window. I shot it with a bow and arrow and broke its left leg."

古文：鼠孕五子，三雄二雌。若不见信，剖腹而立知。
现代文：这只老鼠肚中怀着五只小鼠，三只雄鼠两只雌鼠，若不相信，将白鼠的肚子剖开立时就清楚了。
English: This mouse is pregnant with five mice, three male mice and two female mice. If you don't believe me, dissect the white mouse's stomach and you'll see.

古文：王便剖之。皆如铁言。
现代文：王义宣便让人将白鼠肚子剖开，果然向蔡铁说的那样。
English: Wang Yixuan then had someone cut open the white mouse's stomach, as he had told Cai Tie.

古文：赐万钱。
现代文：王义宣赏赐给蔡铁钱一万。
English: Wang Yi announced a reward of ten thousand yuan to Cai Tieqian.

古文：吴中察声者
现代文：吴中察声者
English: Wu Zhong, the observer

古文：后魏末，有吴士至北间。目盲而妙察声。
现代文：后魏末年，有个从江南吴地来的盲人，擅长听声音卜算人的吉凶祸福。
English: At the end of the post-Wei era, there was a blind man from Wudi in the south of the Yangtze River who was good at listening to voices and divining people's fortunes.

古文：丞相嗣渤海王澄使试之。
现代文：丞相高欢的世子渤海王高澄让他试听一下。
English: Bokkai King Takasumi, the son of Prime Minister Takahana, asked him to listen to it.

古文：闻刘桃枝之声曰：当代贵王侯将相死于其手。
现代文：他听了刘桃枝的声音后说：当代的贵人王侯将相都将死在这个人的手里。
English: After listening to Liu Taoji's voice, he said: The contemporary noblemen, princes and generals will all die in this man's hands.

古文：然譬如鹰犬，为人所使耳。
现代文：然而这个人就象鹰犬，是听别人的命令而干的。
English: But this man, like a hawk-dog, does what he is ordered to do.

古文：闻赵道德之声曰：亦贵人也。
现代文：听了赵道德的声音后说：这也是位贵人啊。
English: After listening to Zhao Daode's voice, he said, "This is also a noble person."

古文：闻太原公洋之声曰：当为人主。
现代文：听了太原公高洋的声音后说：你将来贵为人主能当君王。
English: After listening to the high-pitched voice of Taiyuan Gong, he said, "You will be able to be a king in the future.

古文：闻澄之声，不动。崔暹私掐之，乃缪言：亦国王也。
现代文：听了高澄的声音后不言语了，崔暹暗中掐了他一下，他才违心地说了假话：也是国王啊。
English: After listening to Gao Cheng's voice, he was speechless. Cui Siam secretly slapped him, and he said a lie against his will: "He is also the king."

古文：王曰：我家群奴，犹当极贵，况吾身手。
现代文：高澄听了说：我家里的仆人都极富贵，何况我本人呢！
English: Hearing this, Takasumi said, "All the servants in my family are extremely wealthy, not to mention myself!

古文：后齐诸王大臣赐死，多为桃枝之所拉杀焉。
现代文：后来，北齐的各个王、大臣被处死，多数都是由刘桃枝拉出去砍头的。
English: Later, all the kings and ministers of Northern Qi were executed, and most of them were beheaded by Liu Taoji.

古文：而澄竟有兰京之祸。洋受禅，是为文宣王。
现代文：高澄也遭遇上了兰京之祸，被家中一个作饭的仆夫兰京杀死，高洋取代后魏自封为文宣王，作了北齐的开国君王。
English: Gaocheng also encountered the scourge of Ranjing. He was killed by Ranjing, a domestic servant who was a cook, and Gaoyang replaced him as the self-appointed King of Wenxuan after Wei, and became the founding king of Northern Qi.

古文：王子贞
现代文：王子贞
English: Prince Zhen

古文：唐贞观中，定州鼓城县人魏全家富，母忽然失明。问卜者王子贞。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，定州鼓城县有个叫魏全的富户，他母亲忽然双眼失明，到占卜人王子贞那儿去问卜。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, there was a rich man named Wei Quan in Dingzhou Gucheng County. His mother suddenly lost her sight and went to the fortuneteller Prince Zhen for divination.

古文：子贞为卜之曰：明年有从东来青衣者，三月一日来疗，必愈。
现代文：于是邀请这个人到家里，用好酒好菜招待他，请他给母亲治眼疾。这个人说：我不懂得医道。
English: So he invited the man to his house, gave him food and drink, and asked him to cure his mother's eyesight.

古文：至时，候见一人着青紬襦，遂邀为重设饮食。其人曰：仆不解医，但解作犁耳，为主人作之。
现代文：我只会做犁啊。
English: All I can do is sing.

古文：其持斧绕舍求犁辕，见桑曲枝临井上，遂斫下。
现代文：我就为你做一张吧。说着，这个人手拿斧子绕着房舍周围找能够做犁辕的材料，看见一株弯曲的桑树枝干遮临井上，就将它砍下来。
English: I'll make one for you," said the man, who with axe in hand went around the house looking for materials to make a raft, and when he saw a bent mulberry tree branch overhanging the well, he cut it down.

古文：其母两眼焕然见物。
现代文：就在这时，魏全母亲的两眼突然重见光明。
English: Just then, Wei Quan's mother's eyes suddenly saw the light again.

古文：此曲枝叶盖井之所致也。
现代文：原来这是株弯曲的桑树枝干上的叶子将井盖住而导致了魏全母亲双眼失明。
English: Originally, it was the leaves on the trunk of the curved branches of the mulberry tree that covered the well and caused Wei Quan's mother to go blind.

古文：张璟藏
现代文：张璟藏
English: Zhang Yizang

古文：周郎中裴珪妾赵氏，有美色。曾就张璟藏卜年命。
现代文：周时郎中裴珪的姨太太赵氏，很有姿色，曾经向张璟藏占卜年寿和命运。
English: Zhao, the aunt of Zhou's second-in-command, Pei Yao, was very beautiful, and once divined the year of his birth and his fate from Zhang Yizang.

古文：藏曰：夫人目长而慢视。
现代文：张璟藏说；夫人你的眼睛细长而且妩媚看人。
English: Zhang Yuzang said, "Madam, your eyes are slender and lovely.

古文：准相书，猪视者淫。
现代文：根据相书上说的，用妩媚的目光看人的人，性情淫荡。
English: According to the dating book, people who look at others with a seductive gaze have a lascivious nature.

古文：妇人目有四白，五夫守宅。夫人终以奸废，宜慎之。
现代文：夫人你眼珠小四围露白，将有五个男人跟你有奸乱的关系。
English: Madam, your eyes are small and pale all around, and five men will have adulterous relations with you.

古文：赵笑而去。
现代文：你最终还是因为奸情而受到惩处，应慎重啊。
English: You will eventually be punished for adultery, so be careful.

古文：后果与人奸，没入掖庭。
现代文：赵氏姨太太听了后一笑而去。后来，这位姨太太果然因为犯了奸情，被裴珪处以秘刑。
English: After listening, Zhao's aunt laughed and left. Later, this aunt was indeed secretly punished by Pei Yu for committing adultery.

古文：凑州筮者
现代文：凑州筮者
English: The people of Pizhou

古文：杜景佺，信都人也，本名元方，垂拱中更为景佺。
现代文：杜景佺，信都人。他原来的名字叫元方，在未任官职前改名为杜景佺。
English: Du Jingyao, a native of Xindu. His original name was Yuanfang, but he changed it to Du Jingyao before taking office.

古文：刚直严正，进士擢第。后为鸾台侍郎平章事。
现代文：杜景佺为人刚直严正，进士出身，后来官任门下省侍郎行使宰相的权力。
English: Du Jingyao was an upright and upright man. He was born as a scholar, and later he was appointed as a provincial chamberlain to exercise the power of the prime minister.

古文：时内史李昭德以刚直下狱。
现代文：当时，内史李昭德因为性情刚直触怒了武则天而被打入牢狱。
English: At that time, Inner Historian Li Zhaode was sent to prison because his temper had directly angered Wu Zetian.

古文：景佺庭称其公清正直。则天怒，以为面欺。
现代文：杜景佺在大殿相见时，直接向武则天讲述李昭德的公正清廉，刚直不阿，武则天大怒。认为他当面欺君。
English: When Du Jingyao met Wu Zetian in the Great Hall, he told him directly about Li Zhaode's fairness and integrity. Wu Zetian was furious, believing that he had deceived him.

古文：左授凑州刺史。
现代文：将他贬配到凑州任刺史。
English: He was demoted to the status of a minor official in Pizhou.

古文：初任凑州，会善筮者于路，言其当重入相，得三品而不着紫袍。
现代文：杜景佺刚到凑州上任，在路上遇见一位会占卜的人，说他能重新任宰相，官为三品而不穿紫袍。
English: Du Jinglian had just taken office in Pizhou when he met a fortuneteller on the road, who said that he could be reappointed as prime minister, and that he would hold the rank of Sanbon and not wear the purple robe.

古文：至是夏终，服紫衫而终。
现代文：这年夏天结束时。杜景佺身穿紫色军校服死了。
English: At the end of that summer, Du Jingyao, dressed in a purple military school uniform, died.

古文：蔡微远
现代文：蔡微远
English: Cai Weiyuan

古文：瀛州人安县令张怀礼，沧州弓高令晋行忠，就蔡微远卜。
现代文：瀛州人安县县令张怀礼，沧州弓高县令晋行忠，到蔡微远那问卜。
English: Zhang Huaili, the county magistrate of Ren'an County in Zhangzhou, and Jin Xingzhong, the county magistrate of Yugang County in Cangzhou, went to Cai Wei Yuan to ask questions.

古文：转式讫，谓礼曰：公大亲近，位至方伯。
现代文：蔡微远占卜后对张怀礼说：你的父母离你很近，你可以官至一方的主事人。
English: Cai Weiyuan said to Zhang Huaili after divination: Your parents are very close to you, you can be the leader of one side.

古文：谓忠曰：公得京官，今年禄尽。宜致仕可也。
现代文：对晋行忠说：你能得到一个京官的位置，今年的俸禄将会完结，适宜辞去官职就可以了。
English: To Jin Xingzhong, he said: You can get a position as a Beijing official, this year's salary will be completed, and it is appropriate for you to resign from the official position.

古文：二人皆应举。
现代文：这年，二人同去应考。
English: This year, the two of them went to the entrance examination together.

古文：怀礼授左补缺，后至和复二州刺史。
现代文：张怀礼官授左补缺，后来官至和、夏二州刺史。
English: Zhang Huaili was appointed to fill the vacancy, and later he was promoted to the position of vice-governor and appointed to the position of governor of Xia Erzhou.

古文：行忠受城门郎，至秋而卒。
现代文：晋行忠官授京都城门郎。他没有辞去这个官职，结果，这年秋就死去了。
English: He did not resign from this post, and as a result, he died in the autumn of that year.

古文：车三
现代文：车三
English: Car three.

古文：车三者，华阴人，善卜相。
现代文：车三，华阴人，擅长占卜相面。
English: The third chariot, the Hua Yin, is good at divination.

古文：进士李蒙宏词及第，入京注官。
现代文：李蒙参加科举考试中宏词进士，进京去听候任命官职，到了华阴县。
English: Li Meng took part in the entrance examination of the imperial examination, went to Beijing to wait for the appointment of an official post, and arrived in Huayin County.

古文：至华阴，县官令车三见。诳云李益。
现代文：县令让车三给李蒙相一面，并且欺骗他说叫李益。
English: The county magistrate gave the third carriage to Li Mengxiang and deceived him into saying that his name was Li Yi.

古文：车云：初不见公食禄。
现代文：车三相完面，说：开始见不到你能享受到朝廷的俸禄。
English: After finishing the three phases of the car, he said: I can't see you enjoying the salary of the imperial court.

古文：诸公云：应缘不道实姓名，所以不中。
现代文：诸位官员们说：大概是没有说出真实姓名，所以没有相对。
English: Officials said they probably didn't give their real names, so there's no comparison.

古文：此是李蒙，宏词及第，欲注官去。
现代文：这位叫李蒙，是 宏词 进士，正要进京听候任命官职。
English: This man, Li Meng, was a member of the Hongzhi Jin Shi, and was about to go to Beijing to await his appointment to an official post.

古文：看得何官？
现代文：你看看他能被任命个什么官职？
English: Can you see what office he could be appointed to?

古文：车云：公意欲作何官？
现代文：车三问李蒙：你想担任什么官职？
English: The third car asked Li Meng: What official position do you want to hold?

古文：蒙云：爱华阴县。
现代文：李蒙说：我爱到华阴县来任职。
English: Li Meng said: I love coming to Huayin County to work.

古文：车云：得此官在，但见公无此禄。
现代文：只是，从你的面相上看，你没有在华阴作官的命，怎么办？
English: However, from the look on your face, you don't have the life of an official in China, so what should you do?

古文：奈何。众皆不信。
现代文：众人都不相信车三的话。
English: Many people don't believe what Che San said.

古文：及至京，果注华阴县尉授官。相贺于曲江舟上宴会。
现代文：待到李蒙到京后，果然授任华阴县尉，诸位同事在曲江船上设宴为他祝贺。
English: After Li Meng arrived in Beijing, he was indeed awarded the title of Huayin County Lieutenant. Colleagues held a banquet on the Qujiang boat to congratulate him.

古文：诸公令蒙作序，日晚序成，史翙先起，于蒙手取序看。
现代文：同事们让李蒙作序记载曲江游宴这件事。到傍晚了，序写出来了。史翙先起来，从李蒙手中拿过序来拜读。
English: Colleagues asked Li Meng to write a preface to record the Qujiang River Banquet. By the evening, the preface was written. Shi Yan got up first, took the preface from Li Meng and read it.

古文：裴士南等十余人，又争起看序。其船偏，遂覆没。
现代文：后来，裴士南等十多人争抢着看序，使船偏向一边，于是翻了船。
English: Later, more than a dozen people, including Baishenan, scrambled to see the sequence, causing the ship to tilt to one side, thus overturning the ship.

古文：李蒙、士南等，并被没溺而死。
现代文：李蒙、裴士南等落水淹死了。李老
English: Li Meng, Baishenan and others fell into the water and drowned.

古文：李老开元中，有一人姓刘不得名。假荫求官，数年未捷。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，有一个人姓刘，不知道他叫什么名字，凭借先人的荫庇求官作，一连几年没有成功。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Liu. I don't know his name. With the help of his ancestors, he applied for a government post, but he was unsuccessful for several years.

古文：忽一年铨试毕，闻西市有李老善卜，造而问之。
现代文：这一年选授官职的考核刚定，刘生听说西市有个李老汉擅长占卜，就前去造访问卜。
English: This year, the assessment of the elective official position was just decided. Liu Sheng heard that there was a Li Laohan in West City who was good at divination, so he went to make a visit to the divination.

古文：老曰：今年官未合成，生曰：有人窃报我，期以必成。
现代文：李老汉说：今年你是选授不上官职了。刘生问：有人私下告诉我，今年这期选授官职肯定有我。
English: Li Laohan said, "This year, you are not eligible for an official post." Liu Sheng asked, "Someone told me privately that I would definitely be eligible for an official post this year."

古文：何不然也？
现代文：你怎么说授不上呢？
English: How can you say it can't be done?

古文：老人曰：今年必不成，来岁不求自得矣。
现代文：李老汉说：今年肯定选授不上。来年你不去谋取自然就能得到官职。
English: Li Laohan said: "This year is definitely not a good year to be selected. Next year, if you don't go looking for it, you will naturally get an official post."

古文：生既不信。
现代文：刘生不信李老汉的卜算。
English: Liu Sheng did not believe Li Laohan's conjecture.

古文：果为保所累，被驳。生乃信老人之神也。
现代文：后来他受张举人的连累，将他从选的名单中除了名，这时他才相信李老汉是占卜的神手。
English: Later, he was harassed by Zhang Zhiguo, who removed his name from the list of candidates. Only then did he believe that Li Laohan was a diviner.

古文：至明年试毕，自度书判微劣，意其未遂。又问李老。
现代文：第二年考试完了，刘生自认为这次书法和文章都考的不好，心想一定考不上了，就又去问李老汉。
English: After the exam of the second year was over, Liu Sheng thought that both the calligraphy and the essay were not good, and thought that he would not be able to pass the exam, so he went to ask Li Laohan again.

古文：李老曰：勿忧也，君官必成，禄在大梁。
现代文：李老汉说：不用忧愁，你这次一定能作成官。而且，你将被选授在大梁任职。
English: Li Laohan said: "Don't worry, you will definitely be able to become an official this time. Moreover, you will be selected to serve in Daliang.

古文：得之，复来见我。
现代文：接到任命的通知后，再来见我。
English: Come and see me when you are notified of your appointment.

古文：果为开封县尉。
现代文：刘生果然被授任开封县尉。
English: Liu Sheng was indeed awarded the title of Kaifeng County Lieutenant.

古文：又重见老人。
现代文：接到任命后他又去见李老汉。
English: After receiving the appointment, he went to see Li Laohan.

古文：老人曰：君为官，不必清俭，恣意求取。临满，请为使入城。
现代文：李老汉说：你在任职期间不必清廉节俭，尽可以随意求取，快到任时，请求让上峰委派你为进京的使臣。
English: Li Laohan said: You don't have to be honest and frugal during your term of office, you can ask for anything you want. When you are about to take office, ask Shangfeng to appoint you as an envoy to Beijing.

古文：更为君推之。
现代文：这样，你的官职还可以再升一步。
English: That way, you can take your official position one step further.

古文：生至州，果为刺史委任。
现代文：刘生到州府报到后，果然被刺史所信任。
English: After Liu Sheng reported to the prefectural government, he was trusted by Zhang Shi.

古文：生思李老之言。大取财贿。及满，贮积千万。
现代文：他想到李老汉说的话，大肆索取贿赂，快到任期满时，已经聚了千万家财。
English: He thought of what Li Laohan had said and demanded bribes in a big way. By the end of his term of office, he had collected tens of millions of family wealth.

古文：遂谒州将，请充纲使。
现代文：于是，他前去拜见州将，请求担任往京都运送货物的纲使。
English: As a result, he went to see the shogun and asked to be the envoy to transport goods to Kyoto.

古文：州将遣部其州租税至京。
现代文：州将果然委派他押运本州的租税去京都。
English: The state would indeed assign him to escort the shipment of the state's taxes to Kyoto.

古文：又见李老。
现代文：刘生得到这一任命后，又去见李老汉。
English: After Liu Sheng received this appointment, he went to see Li Laohan again.

古文：李老曰：公即合迁官。
现代文：李老汉告诉他：你这次又该升官了。
English: Li Laohan told him: You should be promoted again this time.

古文：生曰。某今向秩满后选之，今是何时。
现代文：刘生说：依贯例任期满后才能升迁。我的任期现在还未满呢，怎么能够再升迁呢？
English: Liu Sheng said: According to the usual practice, you can only be promoted after your term of office has expired. My term of office has not yet expired, how can I be promoted again?

古文：岂得更有官也？
现代文：李老汉说：你在三日内一定能升官。
English: Li Laohan said: You will definitely be promoted within three days.

古文：老曰：但三日内得官，官亦合在彼郡得之，更相见也。
现代文：而且，这个官职就在你要去的京城里得到它。得到后，再来见我。
English: Moreover, this post is in the capital where you are going to get it. When you get it, come see me again.

古文：生疑之，遂去。
现代文：刘生疑疑惑惑地离开了李老汉。
English: Liu Sheng left Li Laohan puzzled.

古文：明日，纳州赋于左藏库，适有凤凰见其处。
现代文：第二天，将押运来的租税送往左库，正好遇上了凤凰在库房边显现。
English: The next day, the escorted tax was sent to the left warehouse, and the phoenix just happened to appear at the side of the warehouse.

古文：敕云：先见者与改官。
现代文：皇上发下告示说：最先见到凤凰的人，为他晋升官职。
English: The emperor issued a notice saying that the first person to see the phoenix would be promoted to a higher post.

古文：生即先见，遂迁授浚仪县丞。
现代文：刘生是最先看到凤凰显现的人，于是被晋升为浚仪县丞。
English: Liu Sheng was the first person to see the phoenix appear, so he was promoted to the county magistrate.

古文：生益见敬李老。又问为官之方。云：一如前政。
现代文：他越来越恭敬李老汉，又问李老汉这次做官的方法，李老汉说：和你前任时一样。
English: He respected Li Laohan more and more, and asked Li Laohan how to do the job this time. Li Laohan said: the same as your predecessor.

古文：生满岁，又获千万。还乡居数年，又调集，复诣李老。
现代文：刘生在浚仪任县丞仅一年，又搜刮聚敛钱千万，然后，告退还乡过了几年归隐生活。朝廷又调他出来做官，他又找到了李老汉讨教。
English: Liu Sheng served as a county magistrate in Jianyi for only one year. He also collected tens of millions of money, and then returned to his hometown after several years to live in seclusion. The court also transferred him to work as an official, and he also found Li Laohan to ask for advice.

古文：李老曰：今当得一邑，不可妄动也，固宜慎之。
现代文：李老汉说：这次到一个新的城市去作官，不能再贿聚钱财了，应当谨慎小心。
English: Li Laohan said, "This time, when you go to a new city to work as an official, you can no longer collect bribes. You should be cautious.

古文：生果授寿春宰。
现代文：刘生果然又被授予寿春县令。
English: Liu Sheng was indeed awarded the Shouchun County Order.

古文：至官未暮，坐贜免。
现代文：但是还没有到岁末，就因为他贪赃枉法而被就地免职。
English: But before the end of the year, he was dismissed on the spot for corruption.

古文：又来问李老。
现代文：刘生被罢官后又来找李老汉询问原因。
English: After Liu Sheng was dismissed, he came to Li Laohan to inquire about the reason.

古文：老曰：今当为君言之，不必惭讳。
现代文：李老汉说：现在我可以如实告诉你了，不必再隐瞒保秘了。
English: Li Laohan said, "Now I can tell you the truth. I don't have to hide my secret anymore."

古文：君先代曾为大商，有二千万资，卒于汴州。其财散在人处。
现代文：你的先人曾经是大商人，聚积了两千万的家资。他死在汴州，家产失散在当地。
English: Your ancestor used to be a big businessman and amassed a family fortune of 20 million. He died in Zhangzhou, and the family assets were scattered in the local area.

古文：故君于此复得之，不为妄取也。
现代文：因此，你在汴为官时贿聚的钱财是将你先人散失的家产重新收回来，不是不义之财。因此，不会给你带来祸患。
English: Therefore, the money and wealth that you collected through bribery when you became an official is to recover the lost family property of your ancestors, and is not ill-gotten wealth. Therefore, it will not bring you any harm.

古文：故得无尤。此邑之人，不负君财。岂可过求也？
现代文：但是寿春县的人，不欠你家的钱财，怎么可以过多的敛取呢？
English: But people in Shuchun County, if they don't owe money to your family, how can they take too much?

古文：生大伏焉。
现代文：刘生完全拜服这位李老汉啦。
English: Liu Sheng completely worships this Li Laohan.

古文：开元中二道士
现代文：开元中二道士
English: Two Daoists from Kaimoto Junior High School

古文：开元二年，梁州道士梁虚舟以九宫推算张鷟云：五鬼加年，天罡临命，一生之大厄。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二年，梁州道士梁虚舟用九宫之法为张鷟推算，说：五鬼侵凌，天罡临命，今年是你一生中的一个大灾年。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, the Liangzhou Taoist priest Liang Qizhou used the method of the nine palaces to calculate for Zhang Xuan, saying: "Five ghosts invade, God's wrath is imminent, this year is a disaster year in your life.

古文：以周易筮之。
现代文：用周易再为张鷟卜算，得卦为观与涣。
English: Zhou Yi is used to calculate Zhang Zibo, and Gua is used to calculate Guanxi.

古文：遇观之涣，主惊恐。后风行水上，事即散。
现代文：观主惊恐涣既散，后为风行水上，灾祸才消去。
English: After the panic of the spectators had dissipated, it became popular to walk on the water, and only then did the disaster disappear.

古文：又安国观道士李若虚不告姓名，暗使推之。
现代文：又让安国观李若虚再给张鷟推算一下，不告诉他姓名。推算之后。
English: He also asked Li Ruo-hu, the An Guo Guan and Li Ruo-hu, to give Zhang Ye the calculation again, without telling him his name. After the calculation.

古文：云：此人今年身在天牢，负大辟之罪，乃可以免。
现代文：李道士说：这个人今年关在天牢，身遭死罪，才可以免去他的大灾。
English: Li Daoshi said, "This man has been locked up in the Heavenly Prison this year, and it took the death penalty for him to be spared the disaster.

古文：不然，病当死，无有救法。
现代文：不然，就会有病死去，没有挽救的办法。
English: Otherwise, they will get sick and die, and there is no way to save them.

古文：果被御史李全交致其罪，敕令处死。
现代文：后来张鷟果然被御史李全交弹劾他有罪，皇上下令处死他。
English: Later, Zhang Ye was indeed impeached and convicted by the Grand Historian Li Quanzhong, and he was executed by order of the emperor.

古文：而刑部尚书李日知、左丞张庭珪、崔玄升、侍郎程行谋咸请之，乃免死。
现代文：而刑部尚书李日知、左丞相张庭珪、崔玄升、侍郎程行谋都为他求情。
English: However, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Li Ritchi, the Minister of the Left, Zhang Tingtao, Cui Xuan Sheng, and the chamberlain, Cheng Xingmo, all pleaded for him.

古文：配流岭南。
现代文：这才免去死罪，改为发配岭南。
English: It was only then that he was spared the death penalty and was instead sentenced to Lingnan Prison.

古文：二道士之言，信有征矣。蒋直
现代文：这两位道士的话，得到了验证，还是可以信的啊。蒋直
English: The words of these two Taoists have been verified and can still be trusted. Jiang Zhihu

古文：天宝十二载，永嘉人蒋直云：郡城内有白幕。太守李江忽丁忧。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十二年，永嘉人蒋直说：城内有孝幔，太守李江会突然遇到父母的丧事。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Jiang Zhi, a native of Yongjia, said: "There are filial piety in the city, and Emperor Li Jiang will suddenly encounter the funeral of his parents.

古文：李欲归江北。
现代文：太守李江听了后，想回江北到老家去看看。
English: After listening to the governor Li Jiang, he wanted to go back to the north of the river to see his hometown.

古文：蒋又云：公至缙云郡却回。
现代文：蒋直又说：你回江北途中到缙云郡时，一定要返回来。
English: Jiang Zhi also said, "When you are on your way back to the north of the Yangtze River and come to Suiyun County, be sure to come back.

古文：当有一绯一绿、一碧人来相推按，然终无事。
现代文：这时会有一红、一绿、一碧三个人来推究审问你。
English: At this time, there will be a red, a green, and a blue three people to investigate and interrogate you.

古文：后果采访使张愿着绯，大理司直杜乔着绿，判官张璘着碧，来推。
现代文：然而最后会逢凶化吉什么事情也没有。后来，果然是采访史张愿身着红色官服、大理寺司直杜乔着绿色官服、判官张璘着碧色官服，奉命来推审李江。
English: However, in the end, nothing happened. Later, the interviewer, Zhang Jian, dressed in a red official uniform, the head priest of Dali Temple, dressed in a green official uniform, and the judge, Zhang Xuan, dressed in a blue official uniform, were ordered to investigate Li Jiang.

古文：遇赦而止。
现代文：接着，又遇上皇上大赦才完事。
English: Then, it took another amnesty from the emperor to finish the job.

