古文：伊尹作《咸有一德》。
现代文：伊尹写下了《咸有一德》。
English: Yi Yin wrote "Haman Has a Virtue."

古文：伊尹既复政厥辟，将告归，乃陈戒于德。
现代文：伊尹已经把政权归还给太甲，将要告老回到他的私邑，于是陈述纯一之德，告戒太甲。伊尹说： 唉！
English: Yi Yin had returned the political power to Taiga and was about to return to his hometown, so he declared the virtue of chastity and admonished Taiga. Yi Yin said: Alas!

古文：曰： 呜呼！天难谌，命靡常。
现代文：上天难信，天命无常。
English: It's hard to believe in God, and fate is fickle.

古文：常厥德，保厥位。厥德匪常，九有以亡。
现代文：经常修德，可以保持君位；修德不能经常，九州因此就会失掉。
English: If you constantly cultivate virtue, you can maintain your dignity; if you don't cultivate virtue often, you will lose Kyushu.

古文：夏王弗克庸德，慢神虐民。
现代文：夏桀不能经常修德，怠慢神明，虐待人民。
English: Xia Yao can't always cultivate virtue, neglect the gods, and abuse the people.

古文：皇天弗保，监于万方，启迪有命，眷求一德，俾作神主。
现代文：皇天不安，观察万方，开导佑助天命的人，眷念寻求纯德的君，使他作为百神之主。
English: The emperor is uneasy, observes all directions, enlightens and helps those who help the fate of heaven, remembers the prince who seeks purity, and makes him the lord of a hundred gods.

古文：惟尹躬暨汤，咸有一德，克享天心，受天明命，以有九有之师，爰革夏正。
现代文：只有伊尹自身和成汤都有纯一之德，能合天心，接受上天的明教，因此拥有九州的民众，于是革除了夏王的虐政。
English: Only Yi Yin himself and Cheng Tang have the virtue of purity, can meet the heart of heaven, accept the teachings of heaven, and therefore have the people of Kyushu, thus eliminating the tyranny of Xia Wang.

古文：非天私我有商，惟天佑于一德；非商求于下民，惟民归于一德。
现代文：这不是上天偏爱我们商家，而是上天佑助纯德的人；不是商家求请于民，而是人民归向纯德的人。
English: It is not that Heaven favors our merchants, but that Heaven helps those who are pure; it is not that the merchants appeal to the people, but that the people turn to those who are pure.

古文：德惟一，动罔不吉；德二三，动罔不凶。
现代文：德纯一，行动起来无不吉利；德不纯一，行动起来无不凶险。
English: If one's virtue is pure, one's action will be auspicious; if one's virtue is impure, one's action will be dangerous.

古文：惟吉凶不僭在人，惟天降灾祥在德。
现代文：吉和凶不出差错，虽然在人；上天降灾降福，却在于德啊！
English: Fortune and misfortune do not err, though in man; Heaven's blessing and misfortune, however, lie in virtue!

古文：今嗣王新服厥命，惟新厥德。终始惟一，时乃日新。
现代文：现在嗣王新受天命，要更新自己的品德；始终如一而不间断，这样就能日日更新。
English: Now the new king has received a heavenly mandate to renew his moral character, and he can renew it day by day in a consistent and uninterrupted manner.

古文：任官惟贤材，左右惟其人。
现代文：任命官吏当用贤才，任用左右大臣当用忠良。
English: The appointment of government officials should be made by the wise, and the appointment of left and right ministers should be made by the faithful.

古文：臣为上为德，为下为民。其难其慎，惟和惟一。
现代文：大臣协助君上施行德政，协助下属治理人民；对他们要重视，要慎重，当和谐，当专一。
English: The minister should assist the monarch in implementing the moral government and the subordinates in governing the people; they should be valued, prudent, harmonious, and single-minded.

古文：德无常师，主善为师。善无常主，协于克一。
现代文：德没有不变的榜样，以善为准则就是榜样；善没有不变的准则，协合于能够纯一的人就是准则。
English: Virtue has no unchanging example, and taking goodness as the standard is the example; goodness has no unchanging standard, and cooperating with those who can be pure is the standard.

古文：俾万姓咸曰： 大哉王言。 
现代文：要使万姓都说：重要呀！君王的话。
English: To make all say, "Important! The word of a king."

古文：又曰： 一哉王心 。
现代文：又说：纯一呀！君王的心。
English: And he said, Let there be no strife, but let the heart of the king be perfect.

古文：克绥先王之禄，永厎烝民之生。
现代文：这样，就能安享先王的福禄，长久安定众民的生活。
English: In this way, we will be able to enjoy the blessings of the former king and ensure the long-term stability of the people's lives.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：啊呀！
English: Alas!

古文：七世之庙，可以观德。万夫之长，可以观政。
现代文：供奉七世祖先的宗庙，可以看到功德；万夫的首长，可以看到行政才能。
English: The merit can be seen in the ancestral temple dedicated to the seventh generation of ancestors; the administrative ability can be seen in the head of Wanfu.

古文：后非民罔使；民非后罔事。
现代文：君主没有人民就无人任用，人民没有君主就无处尽力。
English: Without the people, there would be no one to appoint the monarch, and without the monarch, the people would have nowhere to put their efforts.

古文：无自广以狭人，匹夫匹妇，不获自尽，民主罔与成厥功。 
现代文：不可自大而小视人，小视人就不能尽人的力量。平民百姓如果不得各尽其力，人君就没有人帮助建立功勋。 
English: Don't be arrogant and look down on others. If you look down on others, you won't be able to do your best. If ordinary people can't do their best, there will be no one to help people build their merits.

