古文：怨在不舍小过，患在不预定谋。福在积善，祸在积恶。
现代文：怨被人怨恨是因为不能原谅他人小的过失；承受灾祸是因为事前未作仔细的谋划；享受幸福在于积善累德；灾难在于多行不义。
English: Grudges are grudges because one cannot forgive the small faults of others; disasters are disasters because they are not carefully planned in advance; happiness lies in the accumulation of virtues; and disasters lie in the multiplication of injustices.

古文：饥在贱农，寒在堕织。
现代文：轻视农业，必然会让百姓挨饿；养蚕桑懒惰，必然会挨冷受冻。
English: If you despise agriculture, you will inevitably starve the people; if you are lazy in raising silkworms and mulberries, you will inevitably suffer from cold and frost.

古文：安在得人，危在失士。
现代文：得到人才国家就安定，失去人才国家就有危难。
English: A country that obtains talent is stable, while a country that loses talent is in danger.

古文：富在迎来，贫在弃时。
现代文：招来远客，国家就富裕，农田荒废农，国家就贫困。
English: If you attract tourists, the country will be rich, if you waste farmland, the country will be poor.

古文：上无常操，下多疑心。
现代文：处于上位的人，反覆无常，言行不一，下属就心存疑惑，以求自保。
English: People at the top are capricious, words and deeds are inconsistent, and subordinates are suspicious in order to protect themselves.

古文：轻上生罪，侮下无亲。
现代文：轻视上级必定获罪；侮辱下属必定失去亲信。
English: Scorn your superiors and you are sure to be punished; insult your subordinates and you are sure to lose your confidants.

古文：近臣不重，远臣轻之。
现代文：近幸左右之臣不受尊重，关系疏远之臣必不安其位。
English: Those who are close to the emperor are not respected, and those who are distant from the emperor are not respected.

古文：自疑不信人，自信不疑人。
现代文：自己怀疑自己，则不会信任别人；自己相信自己，则不会怀疑别人。
English: If you doubt yourself, you will not trust others; if you believe in yourself, you will not doubt others.

古文：枉士无正友，曲上无直下。
现代文：邪恶之士决无正直的朋友；邪僻的上司必没有公正刚直的部下。
English: A wicked man hath no faithful friend; a perverse ruler hath no just and upright servant.

古文：危国无贤人，乱政无善人。
现代文：行将灭亡的国家，决不会有贤人辅政；陷于混乱的政治，决不会有善人参与。
English: When a country is on the verge of ruin, there will never be a wise person to assist in politics; when politics is in chaos, there will never be a good person to participate.

古文：爱人深者求贤急，乐得贤者养人厚。
现代文：爱人深者，一定急于求贤才，乐得于贤才者，待人一定丰厚。
English: Those who love deeply must be eager to seek wisdom, and those who enjoy wisdom must treat others generously.

古文：国将霸者士皆归，邦将亡者贤先避。
现代文：国家即将称霸，人才都会聚集来归；邦国即将败亡，贤者先行隐避。
English: When a country is on the verge of hegemony, talented people will gather and return; when a country is on the verge of defeat, wise people will retreat first.

古文：地薄者大物不产，水浅者大鱼不游，树秃者大禽不栖，林疏者大兽不居。
现代文：土地贫瘠，大物不产；水浅之处，大鱼不游；秃树之上，大禽不栖；疏林之中，大兽不居。
English: The land is barren, big things do not produce; where the water is shallow, big fish do not swim; on bald trees, big birds do not live; in sparse forests, big beasts do not live.

古文：山峭者崩，泽满者溢。
现代文：山势过于陡峭，则容易崩塌；沼泽蓄水过满，则会漫溢出来。
English: If the mountain is too steep, it is easy to collapse; if the swamp water storage is too full, it will overflow.

古文：弃玉取石者盲，羊质虎皮者柔。
现代文：弃玉抱石者目光如盲，羊质虎皮者虚于矫饰。
English: The eyes of those who throw away jade and hold stones are blind, and those who wear sheepskin and tiger skin are nothing more than pretentious.

古文：衣不举领者倒，走不视地者颠。
现代文：拿衣服时不提领子，势必把衣服拿倒。走路不看地面的一定会跌倒。
English: If you pick up your clothes without lifting the collar, you're bound to drop them. If you walk without looking at the ground, you're bound to fall.

古文：柱弱者屋坏，辅弱者国倾。
现代文：房屋梁柱软弱，屋子会倒塌；才力不足的人掌政，国家会倾覆。
English: A house divided against itself cannot stand; a house divided against itself cannot stand; a house divided against itself cannot stand.

古文：足寒伤心，人怨伤国。
现代文：脚下受寒，心肺受损；人心怀恨，国家受伤。
English: Cold feet, damaged heart and lungs; hatred of the people, the country was injured.

古文：山将崩者下先隳，国将衰者人先弊。
现代文：大山将要崩塌，土质会先毁坏；国家将要衰亡，人民先受损害。
English: Mountains will collapse, soil will be destroyed first; countries will decline, and people will be harmed first.

古文：根枯枝朽，人困国残。
现代文：树根干枯，枝条就会腐朽；人民困窘，国家将受伤害。
English: If the roots of a tree are withered, the branches will rot; if the people are in distress, the country will suffer.

古文：与覆车同轨者倾，与亡国同事者灭。
现代文：与倾覆的车子走同一轨道的车，也会倾覆；与灭亡的国家做相同的事，也会灭亡。
English: A wagon on the same track as the overturned wagon will also overturn; if it does the same thing as the destroyed country, it will also be destroyed.

古文：见已生者慎将生，恶其迹者须避之。
现代文：见到已发生的事情，应警惕还将发生类似的事情；预见险恶的人事，应事先回避。
English: Seeing what has happened, we should be on guard against similar things happening again; foreseeing sinister personnel affairs, we should avoid them in advance.

古文：畏危者安，畏亡者存。
现代文：害怕危险，常能得安全；害怕灭亡，反而能生存。
English: To fear danger is often to be safe; to fear death is to live.

古文：夫人之所行，有道则吉，无道则凶。
现代文：人的所作所为，符合行事之道则吉，不符合行事之道则凶。
English: A person's conduct is auspicious if it conforms to the way of doing things, and evil if it does not.

古文：吉者，百福所归；凶者，百祸所攻。
现代文：吉祥的人，各种各样的好处都到他那里；不吉祥的人，各种各样的恶运灾祸都向他袭来。
English: For auspicious people, all kinds of benefits come to him; for unlucky people, all kinds of bad luck and disasters come to him.

古文：非其神圣，自然所钟。
现代文：这并不是什么奥妙的事，而是自然之理。
English: It's not a mystery, it's a fact of nature.

古文：务善策者无恶事，无远虑者有近忧。
现代文：专心致志于筹策谋划的人没有险恶的事情发生，没有长远谋虑的人必定有眼前的忧患出现。
English: People who are dedicated to planning and planning do not have sinister things happen. People who do not have long-term plans must have immediate worries.

古文：同志相得，同仁相忧，同恶相党，同爱相求，同美相妒，同智相谋，
现代文：志趣相投的人相得益彰，志趣相同而又共事的人有共同的忧虑。劣性相似的人会结成朋党，爱好相同的人会相互访求。同为美人会互相嫉妒，同样才智卓绝的人会相互图谋。
English: People with similar interests complement each other, people with the same interests and work together have common concerns. People with similar inferiority will form friendships, people with the same hobbies will visit each other. People with the same beauty will envy each other, and people with the same intelligence will plot against each other.

古文：同贵相害，同利相忌，同声相应，同气相感，同类相依，同义相亲，
现代文：同权势地位相当的人会互相残害，有相同利益的人会相互憎恨。有共同语言，沟通起来就容易多了，他们之间，总是比较容易互相感应。性格差不多的人会互相依存，思想相近的人会彼此亲近。
English: People with the same power status will destroy each other, people with the same interests will hate each other. With a common language, it is much easier to communicate, and it is always easier to feel each other between them. People with similar personalities will depend on each other, and people with similar ideas will be close to each other.

古文：同难相济，同道相成，同艺相规，同巧相胜：此乃数之所得，不可与理违。
现代文：都处在困难中的人会互相帮助，共渡难关。政治抱负相近的人，总是能够走到一起，互相扶助，共成大事。有相同技艺的人，就会相互比较；彼此都很精通的人，就会互争胜负。
English: People who are all in difficulties will help each other and overcome difficulties together. People with similar political aspirations can always come together, help each other and achieve great things together. People with the same skills will compare each other; people who are very proficient in each other will compete with each other.

古文：释己而教人者逆，正己而化人者顺。
现代文：以上这些都是自然而然的道理，凡人类有所举措，均应遵守这些规律，不可与理相抗。
English: All of the above is a self-evident truth. Whenever mankind takes any action, it should abide by these laws and not go against reason.

古文：逆者难从，顺者易行，难从则乱，易行则理。如此理身、理国、理家，可也！
现代文：放纵自己，单纯去教育别人，别人一定不会接受他的话；如果严格要求自己，进而去感化别人，别人就会信服说的话。违反常理，部属则难以顺从；合乎常理，做起事来就容易很多。部属难以顺从，则容易产生动乱；办事容易，则能得到畅通的治理。
English: Indulge yourself, simply to educate others, others will not accept his words; if you strictly require yourself, and then to influence others, others will be convinced of what you say. Against common sense, subordinates are difficult to obey; according to common sense, it is much easier to start things. If subordinates are difficult to obey, it is easy to create turmoil; if things are easy to do, you can get smooth governance.

