古文：草柰祗草三赖草席箕草护门草仙人绦合离草老鸦笊篱草鬼皂荚青草槐
现代文：草柰祗草三赖草席箕草护门草仙人绦合离草老鸦笊篱草鬼皂荚青草槐
English: grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass grass

古文：铜匙草水耐冬三白草无心草盆甑草女草媚草醉草舞草相思草
现代文：铜匙草水耐冬三白草无心草盆甑草女草媚草醉草舞草相思草
English: Copper Spoon Grass Water Winter Resistant Three White Grass Heartless Grass Basin Eucalyptus Grass Lady Grass Lovely Grass Drunken Grass Dancing Grass Acacia Grass

古文：无情草忘忧草睡草千步香草麝草治盅草蛇衔草鹿活草解毒草
现代文：无情草忘忧草睡草千步香草麝草治盅草蛇衔草鹿活草解毒草
English: merciless grass forget-me-not sleeping grass thousand steps vanilla reed grass cure reed grass snake grass deer live grass antidote poison grass

古文：毒草蕉毒草牧麻草龙刍红草宫人草焦茅销明草黄渠草闻遐草
现代文：毒草蕉毒草牧麻草龙刍红草宫人草焦茅销明草黄渠草闻遐草
English: poisonous grass, banana, poisonous grass, pasture, hemp grass, tarragon, red grass, palace, human grass, coke, thatch, bright grass, yellow canal, grass smell, rush grass

古文：始皇蒲梦草汉武牧马草水网藻地日草书带草金橙草望舒草神草
现代文：始皇蒲梦草汉武牧马草水网藻地日草书带草金橙草望舒草神草
English: Emperor's Dream Grass, Hanwu Pasture Horse Grass, Water Net Algae, Sun Grass, Paper Belt Grass, Gold Grass, Orange Grass, Wish Grass, Divine Grass

古文：柰祗草
现代文：柰祗草
English: Asparagus

古文：柰祗，出拂林国。
现代文：柰祗，出在拂林国。
English: , from the country of whitewashed forests.

古文：苗长三四尺。
现代文：苗高三四尺。
English: The seedlings are three to four feet tall.

古文：根大如鸭卵。
现代文：根挺大，形如鸭蛋。
English: The roots are large and shaped like duck eggs.

古文：叶似蒜，叶中心抽条甚长。
现代文：叶像蒜叶，叶中心抽出一根长长的条。
English: The leaves are like garlic leaves, with a long stalk extending from the center of the leaf.

古文：茎端有花六出，红白色，花心黄赤。
现代文：茎端开花，花六个瓣，红白色，花心是橙红色的。
English: The stem end blooms, the flower has six petals, red and white, and the center of the flower is orange-red.

古文：不结子。
现代文：只开花不结籽。
English: It only flowers but does not produce seeds.

古文：其草冬生夏死，与荠麦相类。
现代文：这种草冬天生长夏天枯萎，和荠麦类似。
English: This grass grows in winter and withers in summer, similar to buckwheat.

古文：取其花，压以为油，涂身，除风气。
现代文：把它的花压成油，用油涂身，可以驱除风寒湿气。
English: Its flowers are pressed into oil, and the oil is applied to the body to drive away cold and dampness.

古文：拂林国王及国内贵人用之。
现代文：拂林国王以及国中的贵族们用它。
English: The king of the forest and the nobles of the country use it.

古文：三赖草
现代文：三赖草
English: Sanlai grass

古文：曹州及扬州淮口，出夏梨三赖草。
现代文：曹州及扬州的淮口，出产一种植物叫 夏梨三赖草 。
English: Huaikou in Caozhou and Yangzhou produce a plant called Xia Li Sanlai Cao.

古文：如金色，出于高崖。
现代文：金黄色，生长在高山脚下。
English: Golden yellow, it grows at the foot of high mountains.

古文：魅药中最切用。
现代文：此草最适用于做魅药。
English: This herb is most suitable for use as a charm.

古文：席箕草
现代文：席箕草
English: Seeded rushes

古文：席箕一名塞芦，生北胡地。
现代文：席箕，还有一名 塞芦 ，生长在北方胡人境内。
English: There is also a salamander, which grows in the territory of the northern Hu people.

古文：古诗云： 千里席箕草。 
现代文：古诗云： 千里席箕草。 
English: Classical Poetry Cloud: A Thousand Miles and a Little Grass.

古文：护门草
现代文：护门草
English: Gate grass

古文：常山北有草，名护门。
现代文：常山北有一种草，名叫 护门草 。
English: In the north of Changshan Mountain, there is a kind of grass called the gatekeeper grass.

古文：置诸门上，夜有人过，辄叱之。
现代文：把它放到门上，夜间有人通过，它就发出呵斥声。
English: You put it on the door, and if someone comes in at night, it screams.

古文：仙人绦
现代文：仙人绦
English: The Fairy Godmother

古文：衡岳出仙人绦。无根，多生石上。状如带，三股，色绿。
现代文：衡山出一种叫 仙人绦 的植物，没有根，多半生长在石头上，形状像带子，共三股，绿颜色。
English: In Hengshan, there is a plant called the hermit cucumber. It has no roots and mostly grows on stones. It is shaped like a ribbon with three strands and is green in color.

古文：亦不常有。
现代文：不过并不常见。
English: However, it is not common.

古文：合离草
现代文：合离草
English: Amalgamated grasses

古文：合离，根如芋魁，有游子十二环之。
现代文：合离草，它的根像芋魁，有十二个 游子 环绕着。
English: Its roots are like taro leaves, and it is surrounded by twelve wanderers.

古文：相须而生。
现代文：这十二个 游子 由根须互相牵连着。
English: These twelve wanderers are connected to each other by the roots.

古文：而实不连，以气相属。
现代文：但实际上并不相连，以气势相连属罢了。
English: But in fact they are not connected, they are only connected by force.

古文：一名独摇，一名离母。
现代文：一名叫 独摇 ，还有一名叫 离母 。
English: One is called "Unshakable," and the other is called "Motherless."

古文：若土人所食者，呼为 赤箭 矣。
现代文：那些本地人吃的，就被叫做 赤箭 了。
English: When the locals eat it, they call it red arrow soup.

古文：老鸦笊篱草
现代文：老鸦笊篱草
English: Old crow nibbles hedgerow grass

古文：老鸦笊篱，叶如牛蒡而狭。
现代文：老鸦笊篱草，它的叶像牛蒡叶而比牛蒡叶窄。
English: Old crow hedgerow, its leaves like burdock leaves but narrower than burdock leaves.

古文：子熟时，色黑。
现代文：种子成熟时，颜色发黑。
English: When the seed matures, the color turns black.

古文：状如笊篱。
现代文：它的形状像笊篱。
English: It's shaped like a hedge.

古文：鬼皂荚
现代文：鬼皂荚
English: The ghost soap bubble

古文：鬼皂荚，生江南地泽，如皂荚，高一二尺。
现代文：鬼皂荚，生长在江南沼泽地中，样子很像皂荚，高一二尺左右。
English: The ghost soapwort, which grows in the marshes south of the Yangtze River, looks very much like a soapwort and is about one or two feet tall.

古文：沐之长发，叶亦去衣垢。
现代文：用鬼皂荚煮水洗头，有益于头发的生长。它的叶也有除去衣垢的功效。
English: Washing your hair with boiled water with ghost soap is beneficial to hair growth. Its leaves also have the effect of removing dirt.

古文：青草槐
现代文：青草槐
English: The grass is greener

古文：龙阳县裨牛山南，有青草槐。丛生，高尺余。花若金灯，仲夏发花。
现代文：龙阳县裨牛山南，有一种叫做 青草槐 的植物，丛生，高一尺多，花像金色小灯，五月开花。
English: In the southern part of Longyang County's Li Niu Mountain, there is a plant called the grass fern, clumped, more than a foot high, flowers like golden lanterns, blooming in May.

古文：铜匙草
现代文：铜匙草
English: Copperwort

古文：铜匙草，生水中，叶如剪刀。
现代文：铜匙草，生长在水中。叶子像剪刀。
English: Copper grass, grows in water. Leaves like scissors.

古文：水耐冬
现代文：水耐冬
English: Water resistant to winter

古文：水耐冬，此草终冬在水不死。
现代文：水耐冬，这种草整个冬天都泡在水里但是不死。
English: Water resistant to winter, this grass is soaked in water all winter but does not die.

古文：段成式城南别墅池中有之。
现代文：段成式城南的别墅池子里有这种草。
English: There is this grass in the pool of a villa in the southern part of the city.

古文：三白草
现代文：三白草
English: Three white grasses

古文：三白草，初生不白。
现代文：三白草，刚生长出时并不白。
English: The three white grasses are not white when they first grow.

古文：入夏，叶端方白。
现代文：进入夏季，叶尖儿上才开始发白。
English: In the summer, the tips of the leaves begin to turn white.

古文：农人候之莳田。
现代文：农人等到这个时候才把它移栽到田里莳弄。
English: Farmers wait until this time to transplant it into the fields.

古文：三叶白，草毕秀矣。
现代文：三个叶发白时，就全都抽穗开花了。
English: When the three leaves turn white, all the spikelets will bloom.

古文：其叶似署预。
现代文：它的叶子很像署预。
English: Its leaves are very similar to those of the camellia.

古文：无心草
现代文：无心草
English: The Heartless Grass

古文：蚍蜉酒草，一曰鼠耳，像形也。
现代文：蚍蜉酒草，一名叫 鼠耳 ，是因为像鼠耳之形。
English: The name mouse ear comes from the shape of the plant, which resembles a mouse's ear.

古文：亦曰无心草。
现代文：此草也叫 无心草 。
English: This grass is also called the heartless grass.

古文：盆甑草
现代文：盆甑草
English: Pot marigold

古文：盆甑草，即牵牛子也。
现代文：盆甑草，就是牵牛子。
English: Bonchakuso, that is, morning glory.

古文：秋节后断之，状如盆甑。
现代文：中秋节之后它就不再生长。
English: After the Mid-Autumn Festival, it will no longer grow.

古文：其中有子，似龟蔓署预。
现代文：形状像小盆，里边有籽。此草像龟蔓署预。
English: It is shaped like a small pot, with seeds inside. This grass looks like a cucumber.

古文：女草
现代文：女草
English: Grasshopper

古文：葳蕤草，一名丽草，亦呼为女草。
现代文：葳蕤草，一名叫做 丽草 ，也叫它 女草 。
English: Valerian, also known as Licorice, is also known as lady grass.

古文：江湖中呼为娃草。
现代文：江湖中人叫它 娃草 。
English: Jianghu people call it "baby grass."

古文：美女曰娃，故以为名。
现代文：娃就是美女，所以又用 娃草 来称呼。
English: A baby is a beautiful woman, so it is also called a baby grass.

古文：媚草
现代文：媚草
English: Charming Grass

古文：鹤子草，蔓生也。
现代文：鹤子草，是一种蔓生植物。
English: Cranesbill, is a creeping plant.

古文：其花曲尘色，浅紫蒂。叶如柳而短。
现代文：它的花呈曲尘色，蒂呈浅紫色，叶像柳叶而比柳叶短。
English: Its flowers are maroon, its stamens are light purple, and its leaves are like willow leaves but shorter.

古文：当夏开花，南人云是媚草。
现代文：正当夏天开花。南方人说它是 媚草 。
English: It's blooming right now in the summer, and people in the south say it's the camellia.

古文：采之曝干，以代面靥。
现代文：把它采回来晒干，可以做成女人面部的化妆品。
English: It can be harvested and dried to make cosmetics for women's faces.

古文：形如飞鹤，翅尾觜足，无所不具。
现代文：它的形状象飞鹤，翅、尾、嘴、脚，没有不具备的。
English: It is shaped like a flying crane, with wings, tail, beak, and feet.

古文：此草蔓至春生双虫，只食其叶。
现代文：这种草的蔓到了春天生双虫，只吃它的叶。
English: In the spring, the vines of this grass produce double worms, which only eat its leaves.

古文：越女收于妆奁中，养之如蚕。摘其草饲之。
现代文：越地女子把这虫捉回去放到妆奁中，像养蚕那样养着，摘媚草叶喂它。
English: The woman from Viet Nam caught the insect, put it back in her makeup case, raised it like a silkworm, and fed it by picking the leaves of the grass.

古文：虫老不食，而蜕为蝶，赤黄色。
现代文：虫老之后蜕化成蝴蝶，赤黄色。
English: After the worms grow old, they pupate into butterflies, which are reddish yellow.

古文：妇女收而带之，谓之媚蝶。
现代文：妇女把这蝶带在身上，叫它 媚蝶 。
English: Women wear this butterfly on their bodies and call it "mei mo" (媚蝶).

古文：醉草
现代文：醉草
English: Drunk

古文：《尸子》：赤县洲为昆仑之墟。
现代文：《尸子》里有这样的记述：赤县洲，是依傍于昆仑的大土丘。
English: In "The Corpse," there is this description: Akaganshu is a large mound next to Kunlun.

古文：其东则卤水岛。
现代文：它的东面就是卤水岛。
English: To the east of it is the island of Halosu.

古文：山左右，玉红之草生焉。
现代文：山左右，生长着玉红色的草。
English: Around the mountain, jade-red grass grows.

古文：食其一实，醉卧三百岁。
现代文：吃这种草的一粒果实，就会醉卧三百年。
English: If you eat one fruit of this grass, you will be drunk for three hundred years.

古文：舞草
现代文：舞草
English: Dance music

古文：舞草出雅州。
现代文：舞草出在雅州。
English: The dance originated in Yashu.

古文：独茎三叶。
现代文：它一根茎三片叶。
English: It has three leaves on one stem.

古文：叶如决明。
现代文：叶的形状像决明。
English: The leaves are shaped like cinnamon.

古文：一叶在茎端；两叶居茎半。
现代文：一片叶长在茎端，两片叶相对长在茎半腰。
English: One leaf grows at the stem end, two leaves are relatively long at the stem half-waist.

古文：相对。
现代文：人走近它它就倾斜。
English: It tilts when you get close to it.

古文：人或近之则欹；抵掌讴曲，则摇动如舞矣。
现代文：人如果在它跟前击掌唱曲儿，它就像跳舞那样摇动起来了。
English: If you clap your hands in front of it and sing a song, it shakes as if it were dancing.

古文：相思草
现代文：相思草
English: Camellia sinensis

古文：秦赵间有相思草。
现代文：秦地赵地一带有 相思草 。
English: The Qin Dynasty, the Zhao Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty all had the herb of miscanthus.

古文：状若石竹，而节节相续。
现代文：这种草样子像石竹，一节一节地连续而生。
English: This kind of grass looks like stone bamboo, and grows continuously one section at a time.

古文：一名断肠草，又名愁妇草，亦名孀草，又呼为寡妇莎。
现代文：一名叫 断肠草 ，又名叫 愁妇草 ，也叫 孀草 ，还有人叫它 寡妇莎 。
English: One is called "Broken Bowel Grass," also known as "Sorrowful Woman Grass," also known as "Weeping Grass," and others call it "Widow's Grass."

古文：盖相思之流也。
现代文：这类叫法都含有 相思 的意思。
English: This kind of name has the connotation of "fondness."

古文：无情草
现代文：无情草
English: The Heartless Grass

古文：左行草。使人无情。
现代文：左行草，能使人无情。
English: Left-handed grass, can make people ruthless.

古文：范阳长贡。
现代文：范阳经常进贡。
English: Fan Yang often pays tribute.

古文：忘忧草
现代文：忘忧草
English: The forget-me-not

古文：萱草一名紫萱，又名忘忧草。
现代文：萱草，一个名叫 紫萱 ，又一个名叫 忘忧草 。
English: one was called the purple fern, and the other the forget-me-not.

古文：吴中书生谓之疗愁。
现代文：吴地的书生们叫它 疗愁 。
English: The students in Wudi call it "Healing Sorrow."

古文：嵇康《养生论》云： 萱草忘忧 。
现代文：嵇康《养生论》说： 萱草忘忧 。
English: Jikang's "Healthy Living Theory" says: "Let's forget about worries.

古文：睡草
现代文：睡草
English: Sleeping grass

古文：桂林有睡草，见之则令人睡。
现代文：桂林有一种草叫 睡草 ，见了就让人睡觉。
English: In Guilin, there is a kind of grass called "sleeping grass," which makes people sleep when they see it.

古文：一名醉草，亦呼懒妇箴。
现代文：一名 醉草 ，也叫做 懒妇箴 。
English: A drunkard, also known as a lazy woman.

古文：出《南海地记》。
现代文：此说见于《南海地记》。
English: This was reported in "South Sea Chronicle."

古文：千步香草
现代文：千步香草
English: A thousand steps of vanilla

古文：南海出百步香，风闻于千步也。
现代文：南海出产百步香，百步之外可以嗅到它的香味。
English: Nanhai produces a hundred-step incense, and its fragrance can be smelled a hundred steps away.

古文：今海隅有千步香，是其种也。
现代文：现在海边有千步香，是南海百步香的种繁育的。
English: Now there are thousand-step incense on the seashore, which is the breeding species of the South Sea hundred-step incense.

古文：叶似杜若，而红碧间杂。
现代文：叶似杜若，红碧间杂。
English: The leaves look like azaleas, mixed with red and blue.

古文：《贡籍》云： 日南郡贡千步香。 
现代文：《贡籍》说： 日南郡进贡千步香。 
English: "Gongseki" said: Nichinan County's tribute is a thousand-step incense.

古文：麝草
现代文：麝草
English: Asparagus

古文：龟甲香即桂香。
现代文：龟甲香就是 桂香 。
English: Turtle shell incense is cinnamon incense.

古文：善者紫术香。
现代文：上品是紫术香。
English: The top grade is Zishu incense.

古文：一名金杜香，一名麝草香。
现代文：一名叫 金杜香 ，一名叫 麝草香 。
English: One is called Chrysanthemum, one is called Valerian.

古文：出苍梧桂林二郡界。
现代文：出自苍梧、桂林二郡地界。
English: Originally from Cangwu, Guilin two counties border.

古文：今吴中有麝草，似红而甚芳香。
现代文：现在吴地有一种草叫 麝草 ，颜色红而特别芳香。
English: At present, there is a kind of grass in Wuxi called "Climbing Grass," which is red in color and particularly fragrant.

古文：治盅草
现代文：治盅草
English: Water hyacinth

古文：新州郡境有药，土人呼为吉财。
现代文：新州郡境内有一种药，当地人叫它 吉财 。
English: There is a medicine in the territory of Xinzhou County, the locals call it Ji Cai.

古文：解诸毒及盅，神用无比。
现代文：这种药解各种毒和毒虫，神效无以伦比。
English: The efficacy of this medicine, which can dissolve all kinds of poisons and poisonous insects, is unparalleled.

古文：昔有人尝至雷州，途中遇毒，面貌颇异，自谓即毙。
现代文：过去曾经有一个人到雷州去，半路上中了毒，脸肿得变了模样，他自己说马上就要死了。
English: In the past, there was a man who went to Leizhou and got poisoned on the way. His face was swollen and his appearance changed. He said he was going to die soon.

古文：以吉财数寸饮之，一吐而愈。
现代文：但是只用几寸的吉财做药让他服下，他吐过一阵之后就痊愈了。
English: But he only used a few inches of yakitori to medicate him, and after he vomited for a while, he recovered.

古文：俗云，昔人有遇毒，其奴吉财得是药，因以奴名名之。
现代文：当地人说，过去有一个人中了毒，他的家奴弄到这种药，家奴名叫吉财，因此就用奴名做了药名。
English: Locals said that in the past, a person was poisoned, and his family slave got this medicine. The family slave's name was Yoshitaka, so he used his slave's name as the name of the medicine.

古文：实草根也，类芍药。
现代文：其实就是一种草根，类似芍药。
English: In fact, it is a kind of herbaceous plant, similar to camphor.

古文：遇毒者，夜中潜取二三寸，或剉或磨，少加甘草，诘旦煎饮之，得吐即愈。
现代文：中毒的人，夜里潜取吉财二三寸，搓磨弄碎，稍微加一些甘草在里面，次日早晨煎服，能吐就好。
English: People who are poisoned, sneak two or three inches of yakitori in the night, grind it into powder, add some licorice in it, and fry it the next morning. If you can vomit, that's fine.

古文：俗传将服是药，不欲显言，故云潜取。而不详其故。
现代文：一般人传说，要服这种药，不要公开说明，所以叫做 潜取 ，但是不知道是因为什么。
English: According to popular legend, it is necessary to take this medicine without any public explanation, so it is called "sneak taking," but it is not known why.

古文：或云，昔有里媪病盅，其子为小胥，邑宰命以吉财饮之，暮乃具药。
现代文：有人说，过去有一个乡间老太太患上了毒虫病，她的儿子是个小官。县令得知小官的母亲害的是毒虫病，就让他弄吉财为母亲治病。天黑才弄到药。
English: Some people said that in the past, there was an old lady in the countryside who suffered from toxoplasmosis, and her son was a minor official. When the county magistrate learned that the minor official's mother was suffering from toxoplasmosis, he asked him to make good money to treat his mother's illness. It took until dark to get the medicine.

古文：及旦，其母谓曰： 吾梦人告我，若饮是且死，亟去之。 
现代文：等到第二天早晨，小官的母亲说： 我梦见有人告诉我，要是吃这药就会死，赶快离开它！ 
English: The next morning, the official's mother said, "I had a dream that someone told me that if I took this medicine I would die, so get off it!"

古文：即仆于地。
现代文：说完她就倒在地上。
English: She fell to the floor.

古文：其子又告县尹，县尹固令饮之，果愈。
现代文：她儿子又去告诉了县令，县令坚决让他给母亲吃下。
English: Her son also went to tell the county magistrate, who firmly told him to feed the toad to his mother.

古文：岂中盅者亦有神，若二竖哉！
现代文：果然就好了。难道中盅毒者也有盅神，就像潜入 膏 、 肓 之间的 二竖 呢？
English: That's all right, then. Do the poisoners also have evil spirits, like two deities who sneak into the ointment, between the pus?

古文：蛇衔草
现代文：蛇衔草
English: Snaketail grass

古文：《异苑》云：昔有田父耕地，值见伤蛇在焉。
现代文：《异苑》说：过去有一位老农耕地，遇见一条受了伤的蛇躺在那里。
English: "Paradise Lost" says: In the past, there was an old farmer who came across an injured snake lying there.

古文：有一蛇，衔草著疮上。
现代文：另有一条蛇，衔来一棵草放在伤蛇的伤口上。
English: There was also a snake with a blade of grass placed over its wound.

古文：经日伤蛇走。
现代文：经过一天的时间，伤蛇跑了。
English: After a day, the injured snake ran away.

古文：田父取其草馀叶以治疮，皆验。
现代文：老农拾取那棵草其余的叶子给人治疮，全都灵验。
English: The old farmer picked up the remaining leaves of the grass to treat people's sores, all of which were effective.

古文：本不知草名，因以蛇衔为名。
现代文：本来不知道这种草的名字，就用 蛇衔草 当草名了。
English: Originally, I didn't know the name of this grass, so I used snake grass as the grass name.

古文：《抱朴子》云： 蛇衔能续已断之指如故。 
现代文：《抱朴子》说： 蛇衔能把已经断了的手指接起来，接得和原先一样。 
English: "Embrace Pak Tzu" said: "The snake can connect the fingers that have been broken, and the connection is the same as before.

古文：是也。
现代文：说的就是这回事。
English: That's what this is all about.

古文：鹿活草
现代文：鹿活草
English: Deer grass

古文：天名精，一曰鹿活草。
现代文：天名精，另一个叫法是 鹿活草 。
English: Another name for it is deer live grass.

古文：青州刘炳，宋元嘉中。射一鹿。
现代文：青州有个叫刘炳的人，宋元嘉年间，他射到一头鹿。
English: There was a man in Qingzhou named Liu Wei. During the Song and Yuan Dynasty, he shot a deer.

古文：剖五脏，以此草塞之，蹶然而起。
现代文：他剖去鹿的五脏，把鹿活草塞进去，那鹿就像跌倒了似的，又站起来了。
English: He cut out the deer's entrails and stuffed the deer with live grass. The deer stood up as if it had fallen down.

古文：炳密录此草种之，多愈伤折。
现代文：刘炳秘密地收取此草栽种它，治好很多断折之伤。
English: Liu Ye secretly received this herb and cultivated it, healing many fracture injuries.

古文：俗呼为刘炳草。
现代文：因而鹿活草俗称 刘炳草 。
English: Therefore, Deer Grass is commonly known as Deer Grass.

古文：解毒草
现代文：解毒草
English: Detoxifying herbs

古文：建宁郡乌句山南五百里，生牧靡草，可以解毒。
现代文：建宁郡乌句山南五百里，生长一种草叫做 牧靡草 。这种草可以解毒。
English: Five hundred miles south of Wugu Mountain, Jianning County, there grows a kind of grass called Meadow grass. This grass can detoxify cucumbers.

古文：百卉方盛，乌多误食乌啄。
现代文：百草正茂盛，许多鸟雀都可能误吃毒草而中毒。
English: The grass is in full bloom, and many birds and finches may be poisoned by eating poisonous grass by mistake.

古文：中毒，必急飞牧靡山，啄牧靡以解。
现代文：鸟雀一旦中了毒，就一定紧急飞到牧靡山，啄食牧靡草来解毒。
English: Once a bird finch is poisoned, it must urgently fly to Mount Muimai and eat grass to detoxify.

古文：毒草
现代文：毒草
English: Poisonous plants

古文：博落回有大毒，生江淮山谷中。
现代文：博落回毒性很大，生在江淮一带的山谷中，茎和叶很像麻。
English: Bo Luo Hui is very poisonous. It was born in the valley around the Jianghuai River, and its stem and leaves are very similar to hemp.

古文：茎叶如麻，茎中空，吹作声，如勃逻。
现代文：茎中间是空的，一吹能发出 勃逻 、 勃逻 的声音，所以叫它 博落回 。
English: The middle of the stem is empty, and a blow can make a popping, popping sound, so let it fall back.

古文：故名之。蕉毒草
现代文：蕉毒草
English: poison ivy

古文：蕉毒草如芋巨，状如雀头。
现代文：蕉毒草像芋巨，形状似麻雀的脑袋。
English: The poisonous plant looks like a giant potato and is shaped like a sparrow's head.

古文：置干地则润，置湿地则干。
现代文：把它放在干地儿上，地就湿润；把它放在湿地上，地就干爽。
English: Put it on dry ground and the ground is wet; put it on wet ground and the ground is dry.

古文：炊饭时种于灶上，比饭熟，即著花结子。
现代文：做饭的时候把它种到灶台上，等到饭熟时，它就开花结果。
English: When cooking, plant it on the stovetop, and when the meal is ready, it will bear fruit.

古文：人食之立死。
现代文：人吃了立刻就死。
English: If you eat it, you will die immediately.

古文：牧麻草
现代文：牧麻草
English: Forage Hemp

古文：有牧麻草，大毒。
现代文：有一种草叫 牧麻草 ，有巨毒。
English: There is a type of grass called meadow hemp grass, which is highly poisonous.

古文：有此草，值风吹其气所至，则数里内稻皆即死。
现代文：这种草，凡是风能把它的气味吹到的地方，那就几里之内的禾苗全都会立即死掉。
English: This grass, wherever the wind can blow its scent, all the seedlings within a few miles will die immediately.

古文：李淳风云： 其汁本清，得水则稠，见日则湿，入荫即干，在夏欲凉，在冬欲温。 
现代文：李淳风说： 这种草的浆汁本来是清的，见了水就变稠了，见了日光它就湿，入到荫处它就干，在夏天它喜凉，在冬天，它喜暖。 
English: Li Chunfeng said: The pulp of this grass is originally clear. When it sees water, it becomes thick. When it sees sunlight, it becomes wet. When it enters the shade, it dries. In summer, it is cool, and in winter, it is warm.

古文：龙刍
现代文：龙刍
English: Longjing

古文：东海岛龙驹川，穆天子养八骏处。
现代文：东海岛的龙驹川，是穆天子养八骏的地方。
English: The Longyu River on the East China Sea island is the place where Mu Tianzi raises octopus.

古文：岛中有草名龙刍。马食之，日行千里。
现代文：岛中有一种草名叫 龙刍 ，马吃了它，可以日行千里。
English: There is a kind of grass on the island called dragon's mane, and if a horse eats it, it can travel thousands of miles a day.

古文：古语： 一株龙刍，化为龙驹。 
现代文：古话说： 一棵龙刍，化成龙驹。 
English: An ancient saying goes: A dragonfly grows into a dragonfly.

古文：红草
现代文：红草
English: Red Grass

古文：山戎之北有草，茎长一丈，叶如车轮，色如朝霞。
现代文：山戎的北部有一种草，茎长一丈，叶如车轮，色似朝霞。
English: There is a kind of grass in the northern part of Mt. Raku. The stem is as tall as a tree, the leaves are like wheels, and the color is like the morning mist.

古文：齐桓时，山戎献其种，乃植于庭，以表霸者之瑞。
现代文：齐桓公的时候，山戎献来这种草的种子，于是就种在庭院里，作为成就霸业者吉瑞的标志。
English: During the reign of King Chihwan, Mount Rong donated the seeds of this grass, which were then planted in the courtyard as a symbol of the achievements of the overlord, King Jiri.

古文：宫人草
现代文：宫人草
English: Miyabito grass

古文：楚中往往有宫人草。
现代文：楚地处处有宫人草。
English: In Chu District, there are Miyajin grasses everywhere.

古文：状似金橙，而甚芬氲。
现代文：形状像金橙，特别芬芳氤氲。
English: Shaped like a golden orange, it has a particularly fragrant aroma.

古文：花似红翠。
现代文：花像红色小鸟。
English: The flowers look like little red birds.

古文：俗说： 楚灵王时，宫人数千，皆多怨旷。
现代文：楚灵王的时候，宫中美人数千，大都哀怨空虚孤独。
English: In the time of King Chuling, there were thousands of beauties in the palace, and most of them lamented their emptiness and loneliness.

古文：有因死于宫中者，葬之，墓上悉生此草。
现代文：有因此死于宫中的，埋葬后，坟墓上全长这种草。
English: Some people died in the palace because of this, and after they were buried, the grass grew all over their graves.

古文：焦茅
现代文：焦茅
English: Jiaomao

古文：焦茅，高五丈。
现代文：焦茅，高可达五丈。
English: Jiao Mao, up to five meters high.

古文：火燃之成灰，以水灌之，复成茅。
现代文：用火把它烧成灰，再用水浇灌，它就又长成茅。
English: Burn it to ashes with fire, then water it with water, and it will grow back into a thatch.

古文：是谓灵茅。
现代文：这种茅叫 灵茅 。
English: This kind of maypole is called Lingmao.

古文：销明草
现代文：销明草
English: Pin Ming Cao

古文：销明草，夜视如列星，昼则光自销灭也。
现代文：销明草，夜晚看它像群星，到了白天它的光便自行消灭。
English: Pinming grass, at night it looks like stars, in the daytime its light will self-extinguish.

古文：黄渠草
现代文：黄渠草
English: Yellow canal grass

古文：黄渠，照日如火。
现代文：黄渠，在阳光照耀下就像一片火。
English: The Yellow River looks like a blazing fire in the sunshine.

古文：实甚坚。
现代文：它的果实很坚硬。
English: Its fruit is very hard.

古文：内食者，焚身不热。
现代文：吃下这种果实的人，有火烧身也不觉得热。
English: People who eat this fruit do not feel hot even if they are burned.

古文：闻遐草
现代文：闻遐草
English: Smell the grass

古文：闻遐草，服者轻身。
现代文：闻遐草，服用它的人能使体重减轻。
English: Fenugreek, which can help people lose weight.

古文：叶如桂，茎如兰。
现代文：它的叶像桂树，茎像兰草。
English: Its leaves are like those of the cinnamon tree, and its stem is like that of the orchid.

古文：其国献根，植之多不生实，草叶多萎黄。
现代文：产闻遐草的国家将闻遐草根献来，种植以后大多数不结果实，大多数草叶枯萎发黄。
English: The countries that produce Fenugreek will donate the roots of Fenugreek. After planting, most of them will not bear fruit, and most of the grass leaves will wither and turn yellow.

古文：诏并除焉。
现代文：皇上下令把它们全拔掉了。
English: The Emperor's orders were to pull them all out.

古文：始皇蒲
现代文：始皇蒲
English: Shihwangpu River

古文：齐南城东有蒲台，秦始皇所顿处。
现代文：齐南城东有个地方叫蒲台，是秦始皇停留过的地方。
English: There is a place in the east of the city of Qinan called Pudai, where the first emperor of Qin stayed.

古文：时始皇在台下，萦蒲以系马。
现代文：当时秦始皇在台下，缠绕蒲草拴马。
English: At that time, Qin Shihuang was off-stage, twisting the rushes.

古文：至今蒲生犹荣，俗谓之秦始皇蒲。
现代文：至今蒲草生长得还很茂盛，一般都叫它秦始皇蒲。
English: So far, the plant is still growing very luxuriantly, and it is generally called Qin Shi Huang Pu.

古文：梦草
现代文：梦草
English: Dreamweeds

古文：汉武时，异国献梦草。
现代文：汉武帝的时候，外国献来一种草叫 梦草 。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, a kind of grass called "Mengcao" was introduced from abroad.

古文：似蒲。
现代文：这种草像蒲。
English: This grass looks like cattails.

古文：昼缩入地，夜若抽萌。
现代文：它白天缩进地里，夜晚才抽发出来。
English: It retracts into the ground during the day and emerges at night.

古文：怀其草，自知梦之善恶。
现代文：怀揣这种草睡觉，自己就能知道梦的好坏。
English: If you sleep with this grass, you will be able to know whether your dream is good or bad.

古文：帝思李夫人，怀之辄梦。
现代文：汉武帝思念李夫人，怀揣这草就总能梦到她。
English: Emperor Hanwu misses Lady Li and dreams of her all the time.

古文：汉武牧马草
现代文：汉武牧马草
English: Hanwu Pasture Horse Grass

古文：汉武于湖中牧马处，至今野草皆有嚼啮之状。
现代文：汉武帝在湖中牧马的地方，至今野草还有被马啃咬过的痕迹。
English: In the place where Emperor Hanwu used to herd horses in the lake, there are still traces of wild grass that have been bitten by horseflies.

古文：湖中呼为马泽。
现代文：湖中人称这地方叫 马泽 。
English: People in the lake call this place Maze.

古文：泽中有汉武弹棋方石，上有勒铭焉。
现代文：泽中有汉武帝下棋的方石，石上有铭刻。
English: In the lake, there is a square stone where Emperor Hanwu played chess. There is an inscription on the stone.

古文：水网藻
现代文：水网藻
English: Water web algae

古文：汉武昆灵池中，有水网藻。
现代文：汉武帝的昆灵池中，有一种草叫 水网藻 。
English: In Emperor Hanwu's Kunling Pond, there is a kind of grass called aquatic net algae.

古文：枝横倒水上，长八九尺，有似网目。
现代文：枝条横倒在水上，长八九尺。枝条纵横，好像网眼。
English: Its branches are 89 feet long and lie on top of the water, like a net.

古文：凫鸭入此草中，皆不得出。
现代文：野鸭进入紫草之中，宛如进入一张大网，全都不能逃出。
English: When the wild ducks enter the purple grass, it is as if they have entered a large net, and none of them can escape.

古文：因名之。
现代文：因此而得此名。
English: Hence the name.

古文：地日草南方有地日草。
现代文：地日草南方有地日草。
English: Ground heliotrope There is ground heliotrope in the south.

古文：三足乌欲下食此草，羲和之驭，以手掩乌目，食此则闷不复动。
现代文：三足乌欲下食此草，羲和之驭，以手掩乌目，食此则闷不复动。
English: The three-legged grasshopper eagerly eats the grass, and the two-legged grasshopper hides its eyes with its hands, but the three-legged grasshopper does not move.

古文：东方朔言，为小儿时，井陷，坠至地下，数十年无所寄托。
现代文：东方朔言，为小儿时，井陷，坠至地下，数十年无所寄托。
English: Dongfang Shuo said that when he was a child, he fell into a well, fell to the ground, and had nothing to rely on for decades.

古文：有人引之，令往此草。
现代文：有人引之，令往此草。
English: Someone mentioned it, so we're moving on.

古文：中隔红泉，不得渡。其人以一只履，因乘泛红泉，得草处，食之。
现代文：那人把一只鞋送给他当船用，于是他乘着这只 鞋船 泛于红泉，找到有地日草的地方，终于吃到它。
English: The man gave him a shoe to use as a boat, so he rode this shoe boat across the red spring, found a place with heliotrope, and finally ate it.

古文：书带草
现代文：书带草
English: Cymbidium

古文：郑司农，常居不其城南山中教授。黄巾乱，乃避。
现代文：郑司农一直居住在不其城南山中，向学生们传授道业，直到黄巾军作乱他才避开。
English: Zheng Sianong had been living in the mountains south of the city, teaching Taoism to students, until the Yellow Turban Army made a disturbance and he avoided it.

古文：遣生徒崔琰、王经诸贤于此，挥涕而散。
现代文：他和学生崔琰、王经等贤士们在这里分手。师生挥泪而别。
English: He broke up with his students Cui Wei, Wang Jing and other sages here. Teachers and students left in tears.

古文：所居山下草如薤，叶长尺余许，坚韧异常。时人名作康成书带。
现代文：他所居住的山下，草如薤，叶长一尺左右，非常坚韧，当时的人给它起名叫 康成书带 。
English: At the foot of the mountain where he lived, the grass was like reeds, the leaves were about a foot long, very tough, and people at the time called it the Kangcheng Book Belt.

古文：金橙草
现代文：金橙草
English: Golden orange grass

古文：晋武帝为抚军时，府内后堂砌下，忽生异草三株。
现代文：晋武帝做抚军的时候，府内后堂的墙下，忽然间长出三棵奇怪的草来。
English: When Emperor Jinmu was raising an army, three strange grasses suddenly sprouted under the wall of the back hall of the palace.

古文：茎黄叶绿，若惣金抽翠。
现代文：这草茎黄叶绿，宛若在整体的金块上抽出翠芽。
English: The stems of this grass are yellow and the leaves are green, as if they were sprouting green buds on an entire gold nugget.

古文：花蓧苒弱，状如金橙。
现代文：花的形状有如金橙。
English: The flower is shaped like a golden orange.

古文：时人未得知是何祥瑞也，故隐蔽，不听外人窥眎。
现代文：当时的人没有能够知道这是什么祥瑞之兆的，所以就把这三棵草隐蔽起来，不让外人看见。
English: At that time, people did not know what this auspicious sign was, so they hid the three grasses from outsiders.

古文：有羌人姓姚名馥，字世芬，充厩养马，妙解阴阳之术。
现代文：有一个羌人姓姚名馥，字世芬。他在马厩里养马，却懂得阴阳之术。
English: There was an eunuch surnamed Yao Mingyao, also known as Shifen. He kept horses in a stable, but he knew the art of yin and yang.

古文：云，此草以应金德之瑞。
现代文：他说，这三棵草是预示主人将有美德的。
English: He said that the three grasses were a sign that the owner would be virtuous.

古文：馥年九十岁，姚襄即其祖也。
现代文：姚馥年龄已经九十岁，姚襄就是他的祖父。
English: Yao Xiang is ninety years old. Yao Xiang is his grandfather.

古文：馥好读书，嗜酒，每醉历月不醒。
现代文：他喜欢读书，对酒有特殊的嗜好，往往一醉就是一个多月不醒。
English: He likes to read and has a special affinity for alcohol. He often blacks out for more than a month when he gets drunk.

古文：于醉时，好言王者兴亡之事。
现代文：在醉了的时候，他喜欢说些帝王的兴亡之事。
English: When he was drunk, he liked to talk about the rise and fall of emperors.

古文：善戏笑，滑稽无穷。
现代文：他爱开玩笑，幽默有趣，特别滑稽。
English: He's playful, humorous and very funny.

古文：常叹云： 九河之水，不足以为蒸薪；七泽麋鹿，不足以充庖俎。 
现代文：他常常叹息道： 九河里的水，不够用来蒸饭的；七泽里的鹿，不够用来做菜的。 
English: He often sighed: The water in the nine rivers is not enough to steam rice; the deer in the seven lakes are not enough to cook.

古文：每言凡人禀天地精灵，不知饮酒者，动肉含气耳，何必土木之偶而无心识乎？
现代文：他常常谈到所有人都是禀承天地的精灵的，不会喝酒的，只是有一口气的行尸走肉罢了，何必要做一个没有思想意识的木偶石像呢？
English: He often talked about how everyone is a spirit that inherits heaven and earth, can't drink, and is just a walking corpse with a breath, so why do you need to be a puppet stone statue that has no consciousness?

古文：好啜浊嚼糟，恒言渴于醇酒。
现代文：他喜欢喝浓浊的劣酒，嚼其沉淀渣滓，却总说渴于美酒。
English: He likes to drink strong bad wine, chew its sediment dregs, but always says he is thirsty for good wine.

古文：群辈常弄狎之，呼为渴羌。
现代文：同辈们经常捉弄他，呼他为 渴羌 。
English: His peers often tease him, calling him "thirsty grasshopper."

古文：及晋武践位，忽见馥立于阶下。
现代文：到了晋武帝登上尊位的时候，忽然有一天他看到姚馥站在阶下。
English: When Emperor Jinwu ascended to the throne, one day he suddenly saw Yao Jun standing at the foot of the steps.

古文：帝奇其倜傥，擢为朝歌邑宰。
现代文：他惊奇地发现姚馥也很倜傥，就要提拔姚馥做朝歌郡的郡守。
English: He was surprised to find that Yao Yao was also shy. He wanted to promote Yao Yao to the position of county governor of Asaga County.

古文：馥辞曰： 氐羌异域，远隔风化，得游中华，已为殊幸。
现代文：姚馥推辞说： 我生在氏羌异域，远离华夏文化，能到中原来客居，已经是格外的荣幸。
English: Yao Yao said: I was born in a foreign country, far away from the Chinese culture, and it has been an extraordinary honor to be able to live in Zhongyuan.

古文：请辞朝歌之县，长充马圉之役。时赐美酒，以乐余年。 
现代文：请别把我派到那里去。长期当一个喂马的，时常赐我一点好酒，让我好好打发晚年就行了！ 
English: Please don't send me there. As a horse-feeder for a long time, just give me a little good wine from time to time, and let me enjoy my old age!

古文：帝曰： 朝歌郡纣之故都，地有酒池，故使老羌不复呼渴。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 朝歌是商纣的故都，地上有酒池子，所以才让你去，你再也用不着喊渴了！ 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Chaoga is the ancient capital of merchants, and there is a pool of wine on the ground. That's why I let you go. You don't have to be thirsty anymore!"

古文：馥于阶下，高声而应曰： 马圉老羌，渐染皇教，溥天夷貊，皆为王臣。今者欢酒池之乐，受朝歌之地，更为殷纣之比乎？ 
现代文：姚馥在阶下高声答应说： 喂马的老羌，渐渐懂得皇家礼教，普天下的各族百姓，都是帝王的臣子，今天尽享酒池之乐，我就接受朝歌之地，可以与商纣王相提并论吗！ 
English: Yao Yao promised in a loud voice: "Old Yao, who feeds the horses, gradually understands the royal etiquette. The people of all ethnic groups around the world are the emperor's courtiers. Today, I will enjoy the pleasure of the wine pool. I will accept the morning song. Can I be compared to the king of merchants?

古文：帝抚玉几大悦，即迁为酒泉太守。
现代文：晋武帝抚按着玉几，很是高兴，立即改派姚馥为酒泉太守。
English: Emperor Jinwu, who was very pleased, immediately reassigned Yao Jun to be the governor of Jiuquan.

古文：其地有青泉，其味如酒。
现代文：酒泉这地方有一眼清泉，水的味道像酒。
English: Jiuquan This place has a clear spring, the water tastes like wine.

古文：馥乘酒而拜之。
现代文：姚馥乘着酒兴拜谢晋武帝。
English: Yao Zhen rides on the wine to pay homage to Emperor Xie Jinwu.

古文：遂为善政。民为立生祠。
现代文：于是姚馥成为一个实行善政的好官，老百姓为他立了 活人祠 。
English: As a result, Yao Wei became a good official who practiced good governance, and the people set up a "living person's shrine" for him.

古文：后以府地赐张华，犹有此草。
现代文：后来晋武帝把府地赐给张华的时候，那三棵草还在。
English: Later, when Emperor Jinwu gave the capital to Zhang Hua, the three grasses were still there.

古文：故茂先《金橙赋》云： 擢九茎于汉庭，美二株于兹馆。
现代文：所以茂先的《金橙赋》说： 擢九茎于汉庭，美二株于兹馆。
English: That's why Shigenobu's "The Golden Orange Fist" says, "Nine stems sprout in the Han court, and two in the Zi court."

古文：贵表祥乎金德，名比类而相乱。 
现代文：贵表祥乎金德，名比类而相乱。 
English: The precious watch is full of virtue, and the name comparison is confusing.

古文：至惠帝咸熙元年，三株草化为树，条叶似杨树，高五尺，以应三杨擅之事。
现代文：到了惠帝咸熙元年，三棵草变成树，枝条叶子全都像杨树，高五尺，以应 三杨 拥有大权。
English: In the first year of Hui Di's reign, the three grasses turned into trees, and their branches and leaves all looked like poplars, five feet high, indicating that the three poplars possessed great power.

古文：时有杨隽，弟瑶，弟济，号曰三杨。
现代文：当时有杨隽、杨瑶、杨济三兄弟，号为 三杨 。
English: At that time, there were three brothers, Yang Hui, Yang Hui, and Yang Zi, and they were called the Three Yang.

古文：醉羌之验也。
现代文：是姚馥的话应验了。
English: Yao Yao's words have come true.

古文：望舒草
现代文：望舒草
English: Hoping grass

古文：晋太始十年，立河桥之岁，有扶支国，献望舒草。
现代文：晋太始十年，也就是修建河桥的那年，有个扶支国献来了望舒草。
English: In the first ten years of the Jin Dynasty, that is, the year of the construction of the river bridge, a supporting country presented a peony.

古文：其色红，叶如荷。近望则如卷荷，远望则如舒荷，团团如盖。
现代文：那草是红色的，叶子像荷叶，近看就像卷荷，远望就像舒荷，圆圆的，就像车盖。
English: The grass is red, the leaves are like lotus leaves, close up it looks like a roll, far away it looks like a loofah, round, like a car cover.

古文：亦云，月出则叶舒，月没则叶卷。
现代文：也有人说，月出的时候叶子就舒展，月落时叶子就卷拢。
English: It is also said that when the moon rises, the leaves stretch out, and when the moon sets, the leaves curl up.

古文：植于宫内，穿池广百步，名曰 望舒池 。
现代文：这种草被种植在宫内，穿凿水池宽百步，叫做 望舒池 。
English: This kind of grass is planted in the palace, and it is drilled through a hundred-step-wide pool, called the Wangshu Pool.

古文：愍帝之末，胡人移其种于胡中。
现代文：愍帝末年，胡人把望舒草移植到胡地。
English: In the last years of Emperor Qian, the Hu people transplanted the peony to the Hudi.

古文：至今绝矣。
现代文：到如今望舒草已经绝种了。
English: To date, the peony has become extinct.

古文：其池寻亦平也。
现代文：那个望舒池不久也成为平地。
English: That pond soon became a plain.

古文：神草
现代文：神草
English: The Sacred Grass

古文：魏明时，苑中有合欢草。
现代文：魏明帝的时候，御花园里有一种草叫合欢草。
English: In the time of Emperor Wei Ming, there was a kind of grass in the imperial garden called horsetail grass.

古文：状如蓍，一株百茎。昼则众条扶疏，夜乃合作一茎。谓之神。
现代文：这种草样子像蓍草，一棵草有上百的茎，白天则百条纷纷垂挂疏密有致，到了晚上就百茎并为一茎，人人都说神。
English: This kind of grass looks like rushes. A blade of grass has hundreds of stalks. During the day, hundreds of stalks hang down in a dense tangle. In the evening, the hundreds of stalks become a single stalk, and everyone calls it a god.

