古文：起柔兆困敦，尽重光大荒落，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。魏高贵乡公甘露元年
English: a total of six years. In the first year of Wei Gao Gui Township, Gongganlu

古文：高贵乡公下甘露元年
现代文：春季，正月，蜀汉姜维升任为大将军。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Shu Han Jiang Wei was promoted to general.

古文：春，正月，汉姜维进位大将军。二月，丙辰，帝宴群臣于太极东堂，与诸儒论夏少康、汉高祖优劣，以少康为优。
现代文：二月，丙辰，魏帝在太极东堂宴请群臣，与各位儒生讨论夏少康和汉高祖的优劣，魏帝认为少康优于汉高祖。
English: In February, Emperor Xian of Wei held a banquet for his ministers in the East Hall of the Taiji Temple and discussed the merits and demerits of Xia Shao Kang and Han Gao Zu with the Confucian scholars. Emperor Wei believed that Shao Kang was better than Han Gao Zu.

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，赐大将军昭衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚戌，赐给大将军司马昭绣龙的礼服和冠冕，另加一双帝王穿用的赤色木底靴。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zi, gave the general Sima Zhao a dragon-embroidered gown and crown, plus a pair of red wooden shoes for the emperor to wear.

古文：丙辰，帝幸太学，与诸儒论《书》、《易》及《礼》，诸儒莫能及。
现代文：丙辰，魏帝到太学去，与各位儒生讨论《书》、《易》和《礼》，各位儒生都自愧不如。
English: Xi Jinping and Wei Di went to Taixue to discuss "Book," "Ease" and "Rite" with all the Confucian students. All the Confucian students felt ashamed of themselves.

古文：帝常与中护军司马望、侍中王沈、散骑常侍裴秀、黄门侍郎钟会等讲宴于东堂，并属文论，特加礼异，谓秀为儒林丈人，沈为文籍先生。
现代文：魏帝曾与中护军司马望、侍中王沈、散骑常侍裴秀、黄门侍郎钟会等人在东堂饮宴讲论学术，并作文论，对他们特别加以礼遇，并称裴秀是儒林丈人，王沈是文籍先生。
English: Emperor Wei once had a banquet in the East Hall with the middle-ranking military officer Ma Wang, the middle-ranking equerry Wang Shen, the horseback-riding equerry Pei Xiu, the Yellow Gate chamberlain Zhong Hui, and others, and lectured on scholarship and composition. He treated them with special courtesy, and said that Pei Xiu was a scholar of Confucianism, and Wang Shen was a scholar of literature.

古文：帝性急，请召欲速，以望职在外，特给追锋车、虎贲五人，每有集会，辄奔驰而至。
现代文：魏帝性急，请人前来就希望快点到达，因为司马望在宫外任职，就特地赐给他一辆追锋车和勇士五人，每当有集会，就奔驰而至。
English: Emperor Wei was impatient. He invited people to come and hoped that they would arrive quickly. Since Sima Wang worked outside the palace, he specially gave him a chase car and five warriors. Whenever there was a meeting, they would come running.

古文：秀，潜之子也。
现代文：裴秀是裴潜之子。
English: Pei Xiu is the son of Pei Xiu.

古文：六月，丙午，改元。
现代文：六月，丙午，改年号为甘露。
English: In June, on the afternoon of the third day of the third month, the new year's name was changed to Kanro.

古文：姜维在钟提，议者多以为维力已竭，未能更出。
现代文：姜维在钟提，人们议论多认为他兵力已经衰竭，不能再次出征。
English: Jiang Wei is in Zhongdi, and people mostly think that he has exhausted his forces and cannot go to war again.

古文：安西将军邓艾曰： 洮西之败，非小失也，士卒雕残，仓廪空虚，百姓流离。
现代文：但安西将军邓艾说： 我们在洮西的失败，并不是小的损失，士卒伤残严重，十分衰弱，粮食仓库也已经空虚，百姓们流离失所。
English: But Anxi General Deng Ai said: "Our defeat in Shaanxi is not a small loss. The soldiers are seriously injured and very weak, the grain warehouses are empty, and the people have been displaced.

古文：今以策言之，彼有乘胜之势，我有虚弱之实，一也。
现代文：如今从谋略方面说，他们有乘胜进军的实力，而我们的现状却虚弱不堪，这是一。
English: According to the current situation, on the one hand, the enemy has a situation of winning and pursuing, and on the other hand, we have a weak situation.

古文：彼上下相习，五兵犀利，我将易兵新，器仗未复，二也。
现代文：他们官兵上下相互熟习，兵器齐备而犀利，而我们更换了将领，更新了士兵，兵器也不完备，这是二。
English: Their officers and soldiers are familiar with each other, and their weapons are complete and sharp, while we have changed generals, updated soldiers, and our weapons are not complete, which is two.

古文：彼以船行，吾以陆军，劳逸不同，三也。
现代文：他们是坐船行进，而我们是陆地行军，劳逸不同，这是三。
English: They go by ship, we go by land, there's a difference between work and rest, and that's three.

古文：狄道、陇西、南安、祁山各当有守，彼专为一，我分为四，四也。
现代文：狄道、陇西、南安、祁山各地都应当有人守卫，他们是专门进攻一处，而我们却分守四方，这是四。
English: Didao, Shaanxi, Nan'an and Lushan should all be guarded. They are attacking one place, while we are guarding four areas. That is four.

古文：从南安、陇西因食羌谷，若趣祁山，熟麦千顷，为之外仓，五也。
现代文：他们从南安、陇西进军可以就地食用羌人的粮食，如果向祁山进军，那里成熟的麦子有千顷之多，足以成为他们的外部粮仓，这是五。
English: If they march to Lushan, there are as many as a thousand hectares of mature wheat there, which is enough to become their external granary.

古文：贼有黠计，其来必矣。 
现代文：敌人素来狡黠善于算计，他们来进攻是必然的。 
English: The enemy has always been cunning and calculating, and it was inevitable that they would attack.

古文：秋，七月，姜维复率众出祁山，闻邓艾已有备，乃回，从董亭趣南安；艾据武城山以拒之。
现代文：秋季，七月，姜维再次率兵出祁山，听说邓艾已有防备，就撤兵返回，从董亭奔向南安；邓艾据守武城山来抵抗姜维。
English: In the autumn, in July, Jiang Wei once again led his troops out of Lushan. Hearing that Deng Ai had made preparations, he withdrew his troops and returned, running from Dongting to Nan'an; Deng Ai defended Wucheng Mountain to resist Jiang Wei.

古文：维与艾争险不克，其夜，渡渭东行，缘山趣上邽。艾与战于段谷，大破之。
现代文：姜维与邓艾争夺险要之地未能成功，当天夜里，他渡过渭水向东而行，沿山奔向上，邓艾又与姜维在段谷交战，把姜维打得大败。
English: Jiang Wei and Deng Ai did not succeed in competing for the crucial place. That night, he crossed Surabaya to the east and ran up the mountain. Deng Ai also fought with Jiang Wei in Duan Valley and defeated Jiang Wei.

古文：以艾为镇西将军，都督陇右诸军事。
现代文：魏国任命邓艾为镇西将军，都督陇右诸军事。
English: The State of Wei appointed Deng Ai as the general of Zhenxi, and the military was led by the governor of the capital.

古文：维与其镇西大将军胡济期会上邽，济失期，不至，故败，士卒星散，死者甚众，蜀人由是怨维。
现代文：姜维与蜀汉的镇西大将军胡济约定在上会合，胡济误期未能到达，因此姜维失败了，士兵们四散奔逃，伤亡惨重，蜀人因此而埋怨姜维。
English: Jiang Wei and Shu Han's Zhenxi Major General Hu Zhi agreed to meet at the meeting. Hu Zi failed to arrive on time, so Jiang Wei failed. The soldiers scattered and fled, with heavy casualties. Shu people complained about Jiang Wei because of this.

古文：维上书谢，求自贬黜；乃以卫将军行大将军事。
现代文：姜维上书谢罪，自求贬职，蜀汉就让他改卫将军代行大将军的职权。
English: Jiang Wei wrote a letter of apology and asked to be demoted, and Shu Han let him be promoted to acting general.

古文：八月，庚午，诏司马昭加号大都督，奏事不名，假黄钺。
现代文：八月，庚午，诏令司马昭加大都督封号，奏事可以不称名，出师持黄钺。
English: In August, at noon, the emperor ordered Sima Zhao to increase the title of the governor-general. The matter could be reported anonymously, and Huang Qi was appointed.

古文：癸酉，以太尉司马孚为太傅。
现代文：癸酉，任命太尉司马孚为太傅。
English: On the 29th, Taifu Sima Fu was appointed Taifu.

古文：九月，以司徒高柔为太尉。
现代文：九月，任命司徒高柔为太尉。
English: In September, he appointed Sito Goju as a second lieutenant.

古文：文钦说吴人以伐魏之利，孙峻使钦与骠骑将军吕扰及车骑将军刘纂、镇南将军硃异、前将军唐咨自江都入淮、泗，以图青、徐。
现代文：文钦向吴人游说讨伐魏国之利，孙峻派文钦与骠骑将军吕据以及车骑将军刘纂、镇南将军朱异、前将军唐咨等人从江都进入淮水、泗水，以图攻取青州、徐州。
English: Wenqin lobbied the Wu people to fight for the interests of Wei, and Sun Jun sent Wenqin and the cavalry general Lv Zhen, as well as the cavalry general Liu Zuo, the Zhenan general Zhu Ying, the former general Tang Zhe and others from the Yangtze River to enter Huai Shui and Surabaya in order to capture Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：峻饯之于石头，遇暴疾，以后事付从父弟偏将军纟林。丁亥，峻卒。
现代文：孙峻在石头城为他们饯别，突然得了暴病，就把后事托付给叔父偏将军孙。丁亥，孙峻去世。
English: Sun Jun bade them farewell in Stone Town. When he suddenly fell violently ill, he entrusted the aftermath to his uncle, General Sun. Dinghai, Sun Jun passed away.

古文：吴人以綝为侍中、武卫将军、都督中外诸军事，召吕据等还。
现代文：吴人任命孙为侍中、武卫将军、都督中外诸军事，又召吕据等人返回。
English: The people of Wu appointed Sun as a chamberlain, general of the armed forces, and military governor of foreign countries, and called Liusheng and others to return.

古文：己丑，吴大司马吕岱卒，年九十六。
现代文：己丑，吴国大司马吕岱去世，终年九十六岁。
English: In a tragic turn of events, the Grand Secretary of the State of Wu, Ma Lucheng, passed away at the age of 96.

古文：始岱亲近吴郡徐原，慷慨有才志，岱知其可成，赐巾褠，与共言论，后遂荐拔，官至侍御史。
现代文：起初，吕岱亲近吴郡人徐原，徐原慷慨大方而有才志，吕岱知道他能够取得成就，就赐与他巾帻、单衣等庶人穿戴的礼服，并与他一起交谈，后来就推荐提拔他，官至侍御史。
English: At first, Lv Ying was close to Xu Yuan, a man from Wuxi County. Xu Yuan was generous and talented. Lv Ying knew that he could achieve success, so he gave him a ceremonial dress worn by commoners, such as a kerchief and a singlet, and talked with him. Later, he recommended that he be promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：原性忠壮，好直言。岱时有得失，原辄谏争，又公论之。人或以告岱，岱叹曰： 是我所以贵德渊者也！ 
现代文：徐原性情忠厚豪放，喜好直言，吕岱有时出现失误，徐原就直言进谏争辩，又公然在众人之中议论；有人告诉了吕岱，吕岱感叹地说： 这是我所以看重徐原的原因。 
English: Xu Yuan had a loyal and generous disposition, and liked to be outspoken. Lv Ying sometimes made mistakes. Xu Yuan would argue bluntly and openly among the crowd. When someone told Lv Ying, Lv Ying said with a sigh: "This is why I value Xu Yuan."

古文：及原死，岱哭之甚哀，曰： 徐德渊，吕岱之益友，今不幸，岱复于何闻过！ 
现代文：徐原死时，吕岱哭得十分哀痛，说： 徐原啊，我的好友，如今你不幸而去，我又从何处听人指出我的错误？ 
English: When Xu Yuan died, Lv Yao wept with great sorrow and said, "Xu Yuan, my good friend, now that you have unfortunately passed away, where did I hear people pointing out my mistakes?

古文：谈者美之。
现代文：谈论的人十分赞美这件事。
English: People have spoken of their friendship in glowing terms.

古文：吕据闻孙纟林代孙峻辅政，大怒，与诸督将连名共表荐滕胤为丞相；纟林更以胤为大司马，代吕岱驻武昌。
现代文：吕据听说孙代替孙峻辅佐朝政，勃然大怒，就与诸位都督、将领连名共同上表推荐滕胤为丞相；孙改任滕胤为大司马，代替吕岱驻守武昌。
English: Upon hearing that Sun had been replaced by Sun Shunfu, Lü flew into a rage and, together with all the governors and generals, presented a list of names to recommend Teng Tan as chancellor; Sun appointed Teng Tan as grand steward and stationed him in Wuchang in place of Lü Gan.

古文：据引兵还，使人报胤，欲共废纟林。
现代文：吕据领兵返回，使人报告滕胤，想共同废掉孙。
English: When Lü Zheng returned from leading the troops, he had people report to him that Teng Ying wanted to jointly abolish Sun Quan.

古文：冬，十月，丁未，纟林遣从兄宪将兵逆据于江都，使中使敕文钦、刘纂、唐咨等共击取据，又遣侍中左将军华融、中书丞丁晏告喻胤宜速去意。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁未，孙派遣堂兄孙宪率兵在江都迎住吕据，让中使下令文钦、刘纂、唐咨等人共同击杀吕据，又派遣侍中左将军华融、中书丞丁晏去告诉滕胤，让他迅速离开都城前往武昌。
English: In the winter, in October, Ding Wei, Sun sent his cousin Sun Xian and his soldiers to meet Lv Jian in Jiangdu, and asked the middle envoy to order Wen Qin, Liu Zuo, Tang Zhao and others to jointly kill Lv Jian. He also sent the attendants, the middle left general Hua Rong and the middle secretary Ding Yao, to tell Teng Yin to quickly leave the capital and go to Wuchang.

古文：胤自以祸及，因留融、晏、勒兵自卫，召典军杨崇、将军孙咨，告以纟林为乱，迫融等使作书难纟林。
现代文：滕胤自认为灾祸已经来临，就拘留了华融、丁晏整兵自卫，招来典军杨崇、将军孙咨，告诉他们孙要作乱，并迫使华融等人写书信责难孙。
English: Teng Yin thought that the calamity had already come, so he detained Hua Rong and Ding Rong, called in Yang Chong and General Sun Zi, told them that Sun was going to make a disturbance, and forced Hua Rong and others to write letters to blame Sun.

古文：纟林不听，表言胤反，许将军刘丞以封爵，使率兵骑攻围胤。
现代文：孙不听，上表说滕胤要造反，又许愿给将军刘丞封爵，让他率兵马去围攻滕胤。
English: Sun did not listen, the table above said that Teng Ying wanted to rebel, and he also made a wish to give the general Liu Zheng a knighthood and let him lead the soldiers and horses to besiege Teng Ying.

古文：胤又劫融等使诈为诏发兵，融等不从，皆杀之。
现代文：滕胤又劫持华融等人让他假作诏书发兵起事，华融等人不从，滕胤把他们都杀了。
English: Teng Tien also kidnapped Hua Rong and others and made him pretend to issue an edict to raise an army. Hua Rong and others did not obey, and Teng Tien killed them all.

古文：或劝胤引兵至苍龙门： 将士见公出，必委纟林就公。 
现代文：有人劝滕胤领兵到苍龙门，认为将士们见他出来，必定弃孙而跟从他。
English: Some people advised Teng Tan to lead the soldiers to Soryu Gate, thinking that if the generals saw him coming out, they would surely abandon their grandson and follow him.

古文：时夜已半，胤恃与据期，又难举兵向宫，乃约令部曲，说吕侯兵已在近道，故皆为胤尽死，无离散者。
现代文：当时已经过了半夜，滕胤仗着与吕据有约，又难以向宫中发兵，就勒令部曲不得散乱，并说吕据的军队已经在附近的路上，因此手下兵士都为滕胤尽死守护，没有一个离散的。
English: At that time, it was already past midnight, and Teng Tan had an appointment with Lv Zuo, and it was difficult to send troops to the palace, so he ordered the troops not to scatter, and said that Lv Zuo's army was already on the road nearby, so his soldiers were all guarding Teng Tan to the death, and none of them were separated.

古文：胤颜色不变，谈笑如常。
现代文：滕胤脸不变色，谈笑如常。
English: Teng Tan's face didn't change color, and he was chatting and laughing as usual.

古文：时大风，比晓，据不至，纟林兵大会，遂杀胤及将士数十人，夷胤三族。
现代文：当时刮起了大风，到了拂晓，吕据仍没到来，而孙的兵大举进攻，结果杀了滕胤及他手下将士数十人，并诛灭滕胤三族。
English: At that time, a strong wind blew. At dawn, Lucheng still had not arrived, and Sun's soldiers launched a large-scale attack. As a result, they killed Teng Ying and dozens of his subordinates, and exterminated Teng Ying's three tribes.

古文：己酉，大赦，改元太平。
现代文：己酉，实行大赦，改年号为太平。
English: He was pardoned, an amnesty was implemented, and his era name was changed to Taiping.

古文：或劝吕据奔魏者，据曰： 吾耻为叛臣。 
现代文：有人劝吕据投奔魏国，吕据说： 我耻为叛臣。 
English: Some people advised Lü Zhen to go to Wei. Lü Zhen said: I am ashamed to be a traitor.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀而死。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：以司空郑冲为司徒，左仆射卢毓为司空。
现代文：任命司空郑冲为司徒，左仆射卢毓为司空。
English: Zheng Chong, the second-in-command, was appointed as the second-in-command, and Lu Wei, the left-hand man, was appointed as the third-in-command.

古文：毓固让骠骑将军王昶、光禄大夫王观、司隶校尉琅邪王祥，诏不许。
现代文：卢毓坚决辞让并推荐骠骑将军王昶、光禄大夫王观、司隶校尉琅邪人王祥，但诏令不准。
English: Lu Wei resolutely gave in and recommended the cavalry general Wang Qi, the doctor Wang Guan, the lieutenant Wang Xiang, but the edict did not allow it.

古文：祥性至孝，继母硃氏遇之无道，祥愈恭谨。
现代文：王祥生性大孝，继母朱氏对他很不好，但王祥对她更加恭敬。
English: Wang Xiang was a very filial child. His stepmother, Ms. Zhu, treated him very badly, but Wang Xiang treated her with more respect.

古文：硃氏子览，年数岁，每见祥被楚挞，辄涕泣抱持母；母以非理使祥，览辄与祥俱往。
现代文：朱氏的亲儿子王览，那年才几岁，见到王祥被鞭打，就哭泣着抱住母亲让她不要打；母亲让王祥干力不能及的苦差事，王览就与王祥一同去。
English: Zhu's own son Wang Qian, who was only a few years old at the time, saw Wang Xiang being whipped and cried and hugged his mother to ask her not to beat him. His mother let Wang Xiang do the hard work that he could not do, and Wang Qian went with Wang Xiang.

古文：及长，娶妻，母虐使祥妻，览妻亦趋而共之。母患之，为之少止。
现代文：长大后，都娶了妻子，母亲又暴虐地役使王祥之妻，王览之妻也赶快跑去一起干，母亲心有顾忌，惩罚就少了一些。
English: After they grew up, they both married wives, and their mothers brutally forced Wang Xiang's wife and Wang Zhan's wife to work together. The mother had scruples, so the punishment was reduced.

古文：祥渐有时誉，母深疾之，密使鸩祥。
现代文：王祥逐渐有了一些声誉，母亲深深地忌恨他，就暗地里在酒里下毒想要毒死王祥。
English: Wang Xiang gradually gained some reputation. His mother deeply resented him and secretly poisoned his wine in an attempt to kill him.

古文：览知之，径起取酒，祥争而不与，母遽夺反之。
现代文：王览知道了此事，就跑过去抢酒，王祥争执着不给他，母亲却突然夺过去倒掉了。
English: When Wang Zhan found out about this, he ran over to grab the wine. Wang Xiang insisted on not giving it to him, but his mother suddenly grabbed it and fell down.

古文：自后，母赐祥馔，览辄先尝。母惧览致毙，遂止。
现代文：从此后，母亲每次给王祥什么吃的东西，王览总要先尝一尝，母亲害怕王览死掉，于是就不再下毒了。
English: From then on, every time his mother gave Wang Xiang something to eat, Wang Zhan always tasted it first. His mother was afraid that Wang Zhan would die, so she no longer poisoned him.

古文：汉末遭乱，祥隐居三十馀年，不应州郡之命，母终，毁瘁，杖而后起。
现代文：东汉末年天下大乱，王祥就隐居了三十多年，不应州郡的征召，母亲去世，他哀痛得身心交瘁，拄着拐杖才能站起来。
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the world was in turmoil. Wang Xiang lived in seclusion for more than 30 years, refusing to be conscripted by the state. When his mother died, he was overcome with grief and had to stand up on crutches.

古文：徐州刺史吕虔檄为别驾，委以州事，州界清静，政化大行。时人歌之曰： 海沂之康，实赖王祥；邦国不空，别驾之功！ 
现代文：徐州刺史吕虔写信来召他担任别驾，委任他管理州中事务，结果州界境内平静安定，政事教化顺利推行，当时的人歌唱道： 海沂之康，实赖王祥；邦国不空，别驾之功。 
English: Lv Qian, the governor of Xuzhou, wrote a letter to call him to serve as the second-in-command, and appointed him to manage the affairs of the state. As a result, the state border was calm and stable, and the political education was carried out smoothly. The people at that time sang: the sea is healthy, the king is loyal; the country is not empty, the second-in-command is meritorious.

古文：十一月，吴孙纟林迁大将军。
现代文：十一月，吴国孙升任大将军。
English: In November, Wu Guosun was promoted to general.

古文：纟林负贵倨傲，多行无礼。
现代文：孙自负高贵倨傲不群，干了很多无礼之事。
English: Sun was conceited and arrogant, and did a lot of disrespectful things.

古文：峻从弟宪尝与诛诸葛恪，峻厚遇之，官至右将军、无难督，平九官事。
现代文：孙峻的堂弟孙宪曾参与诛杀诸葛恪之事，所以孙峻给他非常厚重的待遇，官至右将军、无难督，平九官事。
English: Sun Jun's cousin, Sun Xian, had participated in the assassination of Zhuge Liang, so Sun Jun gave him very heavy treatment. He was promoted to the position of General of the Right, Governor of No Difficulty, and had nine official posts.

古文：纟林遇宪薄于峻时，宪怒，与将军王惇谋杀纟林。事泄，綝杀惇，宪服药死。
现代文：孙对待孙宪不如孙峻对他那么优厚，孙宪十分恼怒，就与将军王密谋杀掉孙，事情败露，孙杀掉王，孙宪则服毒自杀。
English: Sun's treatment of Sun Xian was not as generous as Sun Jun's. Sun Xian was so angry that he conspired with the general Wang to murder Sun. The affair was exposed. Sun killed Wang, while Sun Xian committed suicide by taking poison.

古文：高贵乡公下甘露二年
现代文：甘露二年
English: Two years of nectar

古文：春，三月，大梁成侯卢毓卒。
现代文：春季，三月，大梁成侯卢毓去世。
English: In the spring, in March, Liang Chenghou Lu Wei passed away.

古文：夏，四月，吴主临正殿，大赦，始亲政事。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴王亲临正殿，实行大赦，开始亲自执政。
English: In the summer, in April, King Wu himself came to the main hall, implemented an amnesty, and began to govern in person.

古文：孙纟林表奏，多见难问，又科兵子弟十八已下，十五以上三千馀人，选大将子弟年少有勇力者，使将之，日于苑中教习，曰： 吾立此军，欲与之俱长。 
现代文：孙的上表奏章，多次受到他的质问，又选兵士子弟十八岁以下、十五岁以上的三千多人，选大将子弟中勇武有力的，让他们领兵，每天都在苑囿中练兵习武，他说： 我建立这支军队，是想和他们一起成长。 
English: He repeatedly questioned Sun Yat-sen's record and selected more than 3,000 soldiers under the age of 18 and over the age of 15, and selected the brave and powerful among the generals' sons to lead the army. He said, "I built this army to grow up with them."

古文：又数出中书视大帝时旧事，问左右侍臣曰： 先帝数有特制，今大将军问事，但令我书可邪？ 
现代文：他还多次拿出府藏书册阅览先帝时的旧事，问左右侍臣说： 先帝常常亲自书写诏书，而如今大将军奏事，为什么只让我签字认可呢？ 
English: He also repeatedly took out a book from the government library to read about the old times of the former emperor, and asked the attendants around him: The former emperor often wrote the imperial edict himself, but now the general plays a role, why only let me sign it?

古文：尝食生梅，使黄门至中藏取蜜，蜜中有鼠矢；召问藏吏，藏吏叩头。
现代文：他要生吃酸梅，让黄门到库里去取蜂蜜，蜜中有鼠屎；就召来守库官询问，守库官叩头谢罪。
English: He wanted to eat sour plums raw, so he asked Huangmen to go to the storehouse to get honey, and there was rat droppings in the honey. He called the treasurer to inquire, and the treasurer bowed his head and apologized.

古文：吴主曰： 黄门从尔求蜜邪？ 
现代文：吴王说： 黄门从你那儿要过蜂蜜吗？ 
English: King Wu said, "Has Huangmen ever asked for honey from you?"

古文：吏曰： 向求，实不敢与。 
现代文：守库官说： 以前曾要过，我没敢给他。 
English: The treasurer said: I asked for it before, but I didn't dare give it to him.

古文：黄门不服。
现代文：黄门不服。
English: Huangmen is not satisfied.

古文：吴主令破鼠矢，矢中燥，因大笑，谓左右曰： 若矢先在蜜中，中外当俱湿；今外湿里燥，此必黄门所为也。 
现代文：吴王让人破开鼠屎，屎中是干燥的，于是他大笑着对左右说： 如果鼠屎事先就在蜜中，那么里外都应是湿的，现在外面湿而里面干燥，这必定是黄门放进去的。 
English: The king of Wu had the mouse droppings broken open. The droppings were dry, so he laughed loudly and said to both sides: If the mouse droppings were in the honey beforehand, then they should be wet inside and out. Now they are wet outside and dry inside. This must have been put in by Huangmen.

古文：诘之，果服，左右莫不惊悚。
现代文：诘问黄门，他果然服了罪。左右之人都很震惊恐惧。
English: After interrogating Huangmen, he did indeed confess to the crime. Everyone around him was shocked and afraid.

古文：征东大将军诸葛诞素与夏侯玄、邓飏等友善，玄等死，王凌、毌丘俭相继诛灭，诞内不自安，乃倾帑藏振施，曲赦有罪，以收众心，畜养扬州轻侠数千人以为死士。
现代文：征东大将军诸葛诞平时与夏侯玄、邓等人关系亲密，夏侯玄等人死了，王凌、丘俭等也相继被诛杀，诸葛诞内心很不安，于是就尽量拿出官府库中的财物广泛地赈济施舍，又屈法赦免那些有罪之人以收买众人之心，还蓄养了扬州的轻捷侠客数千人当做护卫自己的敢死队。
English: Zhu Gexing, the general of the Eastern Expedition, had a close relationship with Xia Houxuan and Deng in peacetime. Xia Houxuan and others died, and Wang Ling and Qiu Jian were also killed one after another. Zhu Gexing was very uneasy in his heart, so he tried his best to take out the property in the government treasury and give alms extensively. He also forgave those guilty people to buy the hearts of the people. He also kept thousands of Yangzhou's light-speed heroes as a death squad to protect himself.

古文：因吴人欲向徐堨，请十万众以守寿春，又求临淮筑城以备吴寇。
现代文：因为吴国人想要攻打徐，诸葛诞就请求率十万兵众去守卫寿春，又要求滨临淮水建筑一座城以防备吴人进犯。
English: Because the people of Wu wanted to attack Xu, Zhuge Zhao requested the rate of 100,000 soldiers to guard Shuchun, and also required the construction of a city near Huai Shui to prevent the Wu people from attacking.

古文：司马昭初秉政，长史贾充请遣参佐慰劳四征，且观其志。
现代文：司马昭刚刚执掌朝政，长史贾充建议派遣部下去慰劳征东、征南、征西、征北四将军，并观察他们的志趣、动向。
English: Sima Zhao had just taken charge of the imperial government, and the chief, Sima Jia Chong, suggested sending a delegation to comfort the four generals of the Eastern, Southern, Western and Northern Expedition, and observe their interests and movements.

古文：昭遣充至淮南，充见诞，论说时事，因曰： 洛中诸贤，皆愿禅代，君以为如何？ 
现代文：司马昭派贾充到了淮南，贾充见到诸葛诞，一起谈论时事，贾充说道： 洛中的诸位贤达之人，都希望实行禅让，您认为如何？ 
English: Sima Zhao sent Jia Chong to Huainan, Jia Chong saw Zhuge's birthday and talked about current affairs together, Jia Chong said: All the sages in Luochu hope to practice Zen Zhen, what do you think?

古文：诞厉声曰： 卿非贾豫州子乎？
现代文：诸葛诞严厉地说： 你不是贾豫州的儿子吗？
English: Zhuge said sternly, "Aren't you the son of Jia Yuzhou?"

古文：世受魏恩，岂可欲以社稷输人乎！
现代文：你家世代受到魏国的恩惠，怎能想把国家转送他人？
English: Your family has been blessed by the state of Wei for generations. How can you want to hand the country over to others?

古文：右洛中有难，吾当死之。 
现代文：如果洛中发生危难，我愿为国家而死。 
English: If there is a crisis in Laos, I am willing to die for my country.

古文：充默然。
现代文：贾充默然无语。
English: The grocer sings in silence.

古文：还，言于昭曰： 诸葛诞再在扬州，得士众心。
现代文：回来之后，贾充对司马昭说： 诸葛诞再次到扬州后，深得士众之心。
English: After returning, Jia Chong said to Sima Zhao: After Zhuge Xi once again came to Yangzhou, he won the hearts of the people.

古文：今召之，必不来，然反疾而祸小；不召，则反迟而祸大；不如召之。 
现代文：如今召他来，他必然不来，还会反叛，但早反叛祸害不大；如果不召他来，那么晚反叛祸害就大了，因此不如召他来。 
English: If he were to be summoned now, he would certainly not come and would still rebel, but the evil of rebelling early would not be great; if he were not summoned, then the evil of rebelling late would be great, so it would be better to summon him.

古文：昭从之。
现代文：司马昭采纳了这个意见。
English: Sima Zhao accepted this opinion.

古文：甲子，诏以诞为司空，召赴京师。
现代文：甲子，诏令任命诸葛诞为司空，并召他往赴京师。
English: At the same time, the imperial edict appointed Zhuge Zeng as the official of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Cixi, and summoned him to Beijing.

古文：诞得诏书，愈恐，疑扬州刺史乐纟林间己，遂杀纟林，敛淮南及淮北郡县屯田口十馀万官兵，扬州新附胜兵者四五万人，聚谷足一年食，为闭门自守之计。
现代文：诸葛诞得到诏书，更加恐惧，怀疑是扬州刺史乐离间自己，于是就杀掉乐，聚集了在淮南及淮北郡县屯田的十余万官兵和扬州地区新招募的身强力壮的兵士四五万人，又聚集了足够食用一年的粮食，作了闭门自守的长期准备。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Zhuge Zheng was even more afraid and suspected that Yangzhou was trying to separate him from Le, so he killed Le and gathered more than 100,000 officers and soldiers from Tonden in Huainan and Huaibei County, as well as 450,000 newly recruited able-bodied soldiers from Yangzhou. He also gathered enough food for one year and made long-term preparations for self-defense behind closed doors.

古文：遣长史吴纲将小子靓至吴，称臣请救，并请以牙门子弟为质。
现代文：又派遣长史吴纲带着他的小儿子诸葛靓到吴国，向吴王称臣请求救援，并请求再让部下将士的子弟当做人质。
English: He also sent his eldest son Wu Gang and his youngest son Zhuge Liang to the State of Wu to ask the King of Wu for help, and to request that the sons of his subordinates be used as hostages.

古文：吴滕胤、吕据之妻，皆夏口督孙壹之妹也。
现代文：吴国滕胤和吕据之妻，都是夏口督孙壹的妹妹。
English: Wu Guotengyin and Liushen's wife were both the younger sisters of the governor of Hakka, Sun Yi.

古文：六月，孙纟林使镇南将军硃异自虎林将兵袭壹。
现代文：六月，孙派镇南将军朱异从虎林领兵去袭击孙壹。
English: In June, Sun sent Zhenan General Zhu Yi from Hulin to lead the troops to attack Sun Yi.

古文：异至武昌，壹将部曲来奔。
现代文：朱异到武昌时，孙壹率领部曲前来投奔。
English: When Zhu Yi went to Wuchang, Sun Yi led the leading part of the troupe to come and join him.

古文：乙巳，诏拜壹车骑将军、交州牧，封吴侯，开府辟召，仪同三司，衮冕赤舄，事从丰厚。
现代文：乙巳，朝廷下诏任命孙壹为车骑将军、交州牧，封为吴侯，开建府署征召僚属，仪同三司，又赐给帝王服用的全套服饰，各种事情都给予丰厚待遇。
English: At this time, the imperial court issued an edict to appoint Sun Yi as the general of cavalry and cavalry, the provincial governor of Jiaozhou, and Wu Hou, and to start the construction of the prefectural government to recruit subordinates, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and to give the emperor a full set of clothing to wear. All kinds of things were given generous treatment.

古文：司马昭奉帝及太后讨诸葛诞。
现代文：司马昭侍奉魏帝和太后共同去讨伐诸葛诞。
English: Sima Zhao served Emperor Wei and Empress Dowager together to fight against Zhuge.

古文：吴纲至吴，吴人大喜，使将军全怿、全端、唐咨、王祚将三万众，与文钦同救诞；以诞为左都护、假节、大司徒、骠骑将军、青州牧，封寿春侯。
现代文：吴纲到了吴国，吴人大喜，派将军全怿、全端、唐咨、王祚等人领兵三万人，与文钦一起去救援诸葛诞；任命诸葛诞为左都护，持符节、大司徒、骠骑将军、青州牧，并封为寿春侯。
English: When Wu Gang arrived in Wuxu, the people of Wuxu were overjoyed. He sent generals Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Tangzhi, Wang Hui and others to lead 30,000 soldiers to go with Wenqin to rescue Zhuge Xing. He appointed Zhuge Xing as the left capital guard, the bearer of the festival, the grand marshal, the general of the cavalry, the governor of Qingzhou, and the prince of Shouchun.

古文：怿，琮之子；端，其从子也。
现代文：全怿是全琮之子，全端是全琮之侄。
English: Quanzhang is Quanzhang's son, Quanzhang is Quanzhang's nephew.

古文：六月，甲子，车驾次项，司马昭督诸军二十六万进屯丘头，以镇南将军王基行镇东将军、都督扬豫诸军事，与安东将军陈骞等围寿春。
现代文：六月，甲子，魏帝车驾到达项县，司马昭率诸军二十六万人进驻丘头。让镇南将军王基为行镇东将军，都督扬、豫诸军事，并与安东将军陈骞等人围攻寿春。
English: In June, Emperor Gao Zi and Emperor Wei drove to Xiang County, and Sima Zhao led 260,000 troops to the hilltop. Let the general of Zhenan, Wang Ji, be the general of Zhendong, and the military governors Yang and Yu Zhu, and besiege Shuchun with the general of Andong, Chen Yao and others.

古文：基始至，围城未合，文钦、全怿等从城东北因山乘险，得将其众突入城。
现代文：王基刚到寿春，包围圈还未形成时，文钦、全怿等人从城东北凭借险要的山势，才得以率领军队突入城中。
English: When Wang Ji had just arrived in Shuchun and the encirclement was not yet formed, Wenqin, Quanzhang and others were able to lead the army into the city from the northeast of the city by virtue of the dangerous mountain situation.

古文：昭敕基敛军坚壁。
现代文：司马昭命令王基聚拢军队坚守壁垒不与敌人交战。
English: Sima Zhao ordered Wang Ji to gather the army, hold the barrier and not fight with the enemy.

古文：基累求进讨，会吴硃异率三万人进屯安丰，为文钦外势，诏基引诸军转据北山。
现代文：王基屡次要求进攻，恰好吴国的朱异率领三万人进驻安丰，成为文钦的外部接应势力，诏令王基率领诸军转移占据北山。
English: Wang Ji repeatedly asked for an attack. It just so happened that Zhu Yi of Wuxi led 30,000 people to Anfeng, becoming Wen Qin's external response force. He ordered Wang Ji to lead the troops to move and occupy Beishan.

古文：基谓诸将曰： 今围垒转固，兵马向集，但当精修守备，以待越逸，而更移兵守险，使得放纵，虽有智者，不能善其后矣！ 
现代文：王基对诸将说： 如今包围的营垒已经坚固了，兵马也近于集中，此时只应精心整治守备力量以等待敌人突围逃跑，但是却命令我们转移兵力把守险要之地，使城内敌人得以放纵，如果这样做，即使有聪明之人，也不能很好地处理以后的战事！ 
English: Wang Qi said to the generals, "Nowadays, the encircled camp is already solid, and the soldiers and horses are also close to concentration. At this time, we should only carefully adjust the defense force to wait for the enemy to break out and escape. However, they ordered us to divert the troops to defend the important place, so that the enemy in the city could indulge. If this is done, even if there are clever people, they will not be able to handle the future war well!

古文：遂守便宜，上疏曰： 今与贼家对敌，当不动如山，若迁移依险，人心摇荡，于势大损。
现代文：于是就坚持有利的做法继续包围寿春，同时又上疏说： 如今与敌人对峙，我们就像山那样岿然不动，如果转移部队依据险要，人心就会动荡不安，对于形势有很大损害。
English: Therefore, he insisted on the favorable approach of continuing to encircle Shuchun, and at the same time, he said, "Nowadays, in the confrontation with the enemy, we are as immovable as a mountain. If the transfer of troops is based on the urgency, people's hearts will be restless, and it will be very harmful to the situation."

古文：诸军并据深沟高垒，众心皆定，不可倾动，此御兵之要也。 
现代文：各军都已据守深沟高垒的营盘，众心都已稳定，不可再加以动摇，这是治军的要领。 
English: All the armies together hold fast to the solid barrier, everyone's heart can be stable and cannot be shaken, this is the main point of the unified army.

古文：书奏，报听。
现代文：上奏章之后，回报说同意王基的意见。
English: After the publication of the book, the emperor gave his approval.

古文：于是基等四面合围，表里再重，堑垒甚峻。
现代文：于是王基等人四面合围，形成里外两层包围圈，深沟高垒的防御工事非常坚固。
English: As a result, Wang Ji and others were surrounded on all sides, forming a two-layered encirclement, and the fortifications of the deep ditch high barrier were very strong.

古文：文钦等数出犯围，逆击，走之。
现代文：文钦等人多次出城企图突破包围，都受到迎面还击而逃回。
English: Wenqin and others repeatedly went out of the city to try to break through the siege, but were met with counterattacks and fled back.

古文：司马昭又使奋武将军监青州诸军事石苞督兗州刺史州泰、徐州刺史胡质等简锐卒为游军，以备外寇。
现代文：司马昭又派奋武将军监青州诸军事石苞统领兖州刺史州泰、徐州刺史胡质的轻装精锐士卒作为游动军队，以防备外面的敌兵。
English: Sima Zhao also sent General Fenwu to supervise the military units of Qingzhou, and to lead the light-armed elite soldiers of Shishizhou Tai and Xuzhou Shishizhou Hu as a roving army to guard against the enemy soldiers outside.

古文：泰击破硃异于阳渊，异走，泰追之，杀伤二千人。
现代文：州泰在阳渊击败了朱异，朱异逃走，州泰在后面追赶，杀伤了敌兵二千人。
English: Zhou Tai defeated Zhu Yiyi in Yangyuan, Zhu Yiyi fled, and Zhou Tai chased after him, killing and wounding two thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：秋，七月，吴大将军纟林大发卒出屯镬里，复遣硃异帅将军丁奉、黎斐等五人前解寿春之围。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴国大将军孙出动众多兵力驻扎在镬里，又派朱异率将军丁奉、黎斐等五人前去解寿春之围。
English: In the autumn, in July, Sun Quanguo, the general of Wu Guotai, dispatched a large number of troops to be stationed in Baoli, and sent Zhu Yixing, the general Ding Feng, Li Fei and five others to break the siege of Shouchun.

古文：异留辎重于都陆，进屯黎浆，石苞、州泰又击破之。
现代文：朱异把辎重粮草留在都陆，进驻黎浆，石苞、州泰又击败了他。
English: Zhu Yixing left his heavy grain and grasses in Duluth and stationed them in Lipu, but Shijiazhuang and Zhutai defeated him.

古文：太山太守胡烈以奇兵五千袭都陆，尽焚异资粮，异将馀兵，食葛叶，走归孙纟林。纟林使异更死战，异以士卒乏食，不从纟林命。
现代文：太山太守胡烈率奇兵五千人偷袭了都陆，全部焚毁了朱异的物资粮草，朱异率领剩余兵力吃着葛叶，逃归孙处；孙让朱异再次拼死出战，朱异以士卒缺乏粮食为由，不服从孙的命令。
English: Taishan Taishu Hu Lie led five thousand soldiers to attack Zhu Rong, all of which burned Zhu Rong's supplies of grain and grass. Zhu Rong led the remaining troops to eat the kudzu leaves and fled to his grandson; Sun let Zhu Rong fight to the death again. Zhu Rong disobeyed Sun's order on the grounds that his soldiers lacked food.

古文：纟林怒，九月，己巳，纟林斩异于镬里。
现代文：孙大怒，九月，己巳，孙在镬里杀了朱异。
English: Enraged, Sun killed Zhu Rong in September.

古文：辛未，引兵还建业，纟林既不能拔出诸葛诞，而丧败士众，自戮名将，由是吴人莫不怨之。
现代文：辛未，领兵回到建业。孙既不能救出诸葛诞，而且又伤亡了大量士卒，还杀戮自己的名将，因此吴人没有不怨恨他的。
English: Xinwei led his soldiers back to Jianye. Sun could not save Zhugezi, but he also lost a large number of soldiers and killed his own famous generals, so the people of Wu did not resent him.

古文：司马昭曰： 异不得至寿春，非其罪也，而吴人杀之，欲以谢寿春而坚诞意，使其犹望救耳。
现代文：司马昭说： 朱异不能到达寿春，不是他的罪过，但吴人却杀了他，这是想以此来安抚寿春的将士而坚定诸葛诞守城的意志，让他仍然盼望着救兵。
English: Sima Zhao said: Zhu Ying could not reach Shouchun, it was not his fault, but the Wu people killed him. This was to appease Shouchun's soldiers and strengthen Zhuge's will to defend the city, so that he was still looking forward to the rescue.

古文：今当坚围，备其越逸，而多方以误之。 
现代文：如今应加强包围，防备他们突围逃跑，而且要想方设法使他们判断失误。 
English: Now it is necessary to strengthen the encirclement, prevent them from breaking out and escaping, and find ways to make them misjudge.

古文：乃纵反间，扬言 吴救方至，大军乏食，分遣羸疾就谷淮北，势不能久 。
现代文：于是到处放风行反间之计，扬言说： 吴国救兵就要到了，魏国的大军缺乏粮食，要分散派遣病弱的士卒到淮北去吃那里的粮食，看形势围攻不会太久了。 
English: As a result, he tried to sow discord everywhere, and threatened: Wu's relief army is about to arrive, Wei's large army is short of grain, and it is necessary to send sick and weak soldiers to Huaibei to eat the grain there. Judging from the situation, the siege will not last long.

古文：诞等益宽恣食，俄而城中乏粮，外救不至。
现代文：诸葛诞等人更加放宽心任意吃粮，没过多久城中粮食告乏，而外边的救兵仍然未到。
English: Zhuge Xizhi and others were more relaxed about eating grain at will, and it wasn't long before there was a shortage of grain in the city, while outside rescuers still hadn't arrived.

古文：将军蒋班、焦彝，皆诞腹心谋主也，言于诞曰： 硃异等以大众来而不能进，孙纟林杀异而归江东，外以发兵为名，内实坐须成败。
现代文：将军蒋班、焦彝，都是诸葛诞的心腹主谋之人，此时对诸葛诞说： 朱异等人率众多兵力前来而不能进城，孙杀掉朱异而回到江东，表面上是以发救兵为名，内里实际上是要坐等成败。
English: Generals Jiangban and Jiao Tong were the masterminds of Zhuge Zhao. At this time, they said to Zhuge Zhao: Zhu Yixing and others came with a large number of troops but could not enter the city. Sun killed Zhu Yixing and returned to the east of the Yangtze River. On the surface, it was in the name of sending rescuers, but inside it was actually to wait for success or failure.

古文：今宜及众心尚固，士卒思用，并力决死，攻其一面，虽不能尽克，犹有可全者；空坐守死，无为也。 
现代文：如今应趁众人之心还能稳定，士卒愿意效力，集中力量拼死命攻其一面，尽管不能获全胜，仍有可能保全部队实力，如果空坐这里死守，是没有出路的。 
English: Now, we should take advantage of the fact that the hearts of the people are still stable, the soldiers are willing to work, and concentrate our efforts to attack their side desperately. Although we can't win a complete victory, it is still possible to maintain the strength of the whole team. If we sit here empty-handed, there is no way out.

古文：文钦曰： 公今举十馀万之众归命于吴，而钦与全端等皆同居死地，父兄子弟尽在江表，就孙纟林不欲来，主上及其亲戚岂肯听乎！
现代文：文钦说： 您如今率领十余万士卒来归附于吴国，而我与全端等人都与您共同居于死地，我们的父兄子弟都在江南，即使孙不想来，而主上及其亲戚又怎么肯听他的呢？
English: Wen Qin said: You are now leading more than a hundred thousand soldiers to join the State of Wu, and I and all the others are living with you in death. Our fathers, brothers and children are all in the south of the Yangtze River. Even if Sun does not want to come, how will the Lord and his relatives listen to him?

古文：且中国无岁无事，军民并疲，今守我一年，内变将起，奈何舍此，欲乘危徼幸乎！ 
现代文：而且魏国没有一年是没事的，军民都很疲惫，如今他们围守我们一年，内变就将兴起，为什么我们要舍弃这里而想冒着危险侥幸一战呢？
English: Moreover, there has never been a year when the state of Wei was not in trouble, and the military and people were very tired. Now they have surrounded us for a year, and internal changes will arise. Why should we abandon this place and risk a war?

古文：班、彝固劝之，钦怒。
现代文：蒋班、焦彝仍坚持劝他，文钦十分恼怒。
English: Jiang Ban and Jiao Tong still persisted in persuading him, which made Wenqin very angry.

古文：诞欲杀班、彝，二人惧，十一月，弃诞逾城来降。
现代文：诸葛诞要杀掉蒋班、焦彝，二人非常害怕，十一月，他们背弃诸葛诞越过城墙来投降。
English: Zhuge Zetian wanted to kill Jiang Ban and Jiao Wei, and the two were very afraid. In November, they turned their backs on Zhuge Zetian and crossed the city wall to surrender.

古文：全怿兄子辉、仪在建业，与其家内争讼，携其母将部曲数十家来奔。
现代文：全怿哥哥的儿子全辉、全仪在建业，与家内之人发生争执，就带着母亲率领部曲数十家来投奔魏国。
English: The sons of Quanzhang's elder brother, Quanzhang Hui and Quanzhang Yi, were engaged in construction. When they had a dispute with someone in the family, they took their mother and led dozens of families to flee to Wei.

古文：于是怿与兄子靖及全端弟翩、缉皆将兵在寿春城中，司马昭用黄门侍郎钟会策，密为辉、仪作书，使辉、仪所亲信赍入城告怿等，说 吴中怒怿等不能拔寿春，欲尽诛诸将家，故逃来归命 。
现代文：此时全怿与其兄之子全靖以及全端之弟全翩、全缉都领兵在寿春城中，司马昭采用黄门侍郎钟会的计策，秘密地替全辉、全仪写了书信，并让全辉、全仪的亲信之人送入城中告诉全怿等人，说： 吴国朝廷恼怒全怿等人不能击败包围寿春的敌兵，而想要杀尽诸将的家属，因此跑出来归顺魏国。 
English: At this time, Quan Hui and his brother's son Quan Jing, as well as Quan Fang and Quan Fang's brother Quan Lan and Quan Zhi all led soldiers in Shuchun City. Sima Zhao secretly wrote letters for Quan Hui and Quan Li, using the strategy of the Yellow Gate Bell Attendants' Association, and had Quan Hui's and Quan Li's close confidants sent into the city to tell Quan Hui and others, saying: The Wu court was angry that Quan Fang and others could not defeat the enemy soldiers surrounding Shuchun, but wanted to kill the families of the generals, so they ran out

古文：十二月，怿等率其众数千人开门出降，城中震惧，不知所为。
现代文：十二月，全怿等人率领手下兵将数千人开城门出来投降，城中的人十分震恐，不知怎么办好。
English: In December, Quanzhang and others led thousands of soldiers to open the city gate and surrender. The people in the city were very frightened and did not know what to do.

古文：诏拜怿平东将军，封临湘侯；端等封拜各有差。
现代文：诏令任命全怿为平东将军，封临湘侯，全端等人的拜官封职各有差等。
English: The imperial edict appointed Quanzhang as the general of Pingdong, and appointed Lin as the governor of Hunan, Quanzhang and others to the posts of officials.

古文：汉姜维闻魏分关中兵以赴淮南，欲乘虚向秦川，率数万人出骆谷，至沈岭。
现代文：蜀汉的姜维听说魏国分出关中的兵力去支援淮南，想乘虚攻向秦川，于是就率领数万人出骆谷，到达沈岭。
English: Jiang Wei of Shu Han heard that Wei had sent troops to support Huainan and wanted to use the opportunity to attack Qinchuan, so he led tens of thousands of people out of Luogu and reached Shenling.

古文：时长城积谷甚多，而守兵少，征西将军都督雍、凉诸军事司马望及安西将军邓艾进兵据之，以拒维。
现代文：当时长城一带积存的粮食很多，而守兵很少，征西将军都督雍州、凉州诸军事司马望和安西将军邓艾就进兵占据了那里，以抵挡姜维。
English: At that time, there was a lot of grain stored along the Great Wall, but there were few guards. The general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Yongzhou and Liangzhou, the military Sima Wang and the general of Anxi, Deng Ai, marched in and occupied there to resist Jiang Wei.

古文：维壁于芒水，数挑战，望、艾不应。
现代文：姜维筑营垒于芒水一带，多次出来挑战，而司马望、邓艾不应战。
English: Jiang Wei built a camp in the area of Mengshui and challenged several times, while Sima Wang and Deng Ai should not fight.

古文：是时，维数出兵，蜀人愁苦。中散大夫谯周作《仇国论》以讽之曰： 或问往古能以弱胜强者，其术如何？
现代文：当时，姜维屡次出兵征战，蜀人愁苦不堪，中散大夫谯周作《仇国论》以讽谏说： 有人问古代能以弱胜强者，他们的方法如何？
English: At that time, Jiang Wei repeatedly sent troops to fight, and the people of Shu were distressed. Zhongshan doctor Zhou Zhou wrote "On the Enemy State" and said with irony: Some people asked if the weak could defeat the strong in ancient times, what was their method?

古文：曰：吾闻之，处大无患者常多慢，处小有忧者常思善；多慢则生乱，思善则生治，理之常也。
现代文：曰：我听说，处于大国地位而无祸患者常常多有轻慢，处于小国地位而有忧虑者常常想着向善；怠轻之事多就会出现内乱，想着向善就能使国家安定，这是普遍的道理。
English: He said: I have heard that those who are in the position of a big country but have no misfortune are often more careless, and those who are in the position of a small country but have worries often think about doing good; things that are careless will often lead to civil unrest, and thinking about doing good can make the country stable. This is a universal truth.

古文：故周文养民，以少取多，勾践恤众，以弱毙强，此其术也。
现代文：因此周文王善于养民，就能以少取多；句践能够抚恤众人，就能以弱胜强，这是他们的方法。
English: Therefore, Zhou Wenwang rested and recuperated, using less to win more, exceeding the king to practice compassion for the people, and using weakness to win strength. This is one of the methods.

古文：或曰：曩者，项强汉弱，相与战争，项羽与汉约分鸿沟，各归息民，张良以为民志既定，则难动也，率兵追羽，终毙项氏。
现代文：有人说：以前，项羽强而汉高祖弱，互相交战，后来项羽与汉高祖约定中分天下以鸿沟为界，各归本土生息养民，张良认为民心一旦安定，就难以再发动，于是率兵追击项羽，终于消灭了他。
English: Some people said: In the past, Xiang Yu was strong and Han Gao Zu was weak, and they fought against each other. Later, Xiang Yu and Han Gao Zu agreed to divide the world with a chasm as the boundary, each returning to the mainland to live and feed the people. Zhang Liang believed that once the people's hearts were stable, it would be difficult to start again, so he led the troops to chase Xiang Yu and finally eliminated him.

古文：岂必由文王之事乎？
现代文：难道一定要像文王那样行事吗？
English: Is it necessary to behave like King Wen?

古文：曰：当商、周之际，王侯世尊，君臣久固，民习所专；深根者难拔，据固者难迁。
现代文：回答说：在商、周之际，王侯世代尊贵，君臣之分久已稳固，人民已习惯于专心事其君上；深深扎根的东西难以拔除，依托稳固的东西难以迁移。
English: He replied: On the occasion of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, the princes and princes have been distinguished for generations, the distinction between the monarchs and the subjects has been stable for a long time, and the people have become accustomed to concentrating on their monarchs; things that are deeply rooted are difficult to uproot, and things that are firmly supported are difficult to move.

古文：当此之时，虽汉祖安能杖剑鞭马而取天下乎！
现代文：在那个时代，即使是汉高祖又怎能靠持剑策马而夺取天下呢？
English: In that era, how could even the founder of the Han Dynasty conquer the world by holding a sword and riding a horse?

古文：及秦罢侯置守之后，民疲秦役，天下土崩，或岁改主，或月易公，鸟惊兽骇，莫知所从，于是豪强并争，虎裂狼分，疾搏者获多，迟后者见吞。
现代文：到秦朝废弃分封侯国设置郡守之后，百姓被秦朝的苦役搞得疲惫不堪，天下已经土崩瓦解，或者每年换个君主，或者每月换个主公，如同鸟兽般惊恐不安，不知所从，于是豪强们并力争夺天下，如狼似虎地撕裂分割，迅速搏杀者所获就多，行动迟缓者就被吞并。
English: After the Qin Dynasty abolished the fiefdoms and set up county governors, the people were exhausted by the hard labor of the Qin Dynasty. The world had already collapsed. Either a monarch was replaced every year, or a lord was replaced every month. Like birds and beasts, they were frightened and anxious, and they did not know what to do. Therefore, the powerful also competed for the world, tearing and dividing like wolves. Those who fought and killed quickly gained more, and those who were slow to act were annexed.

古文：今我与彼皆传国易世矣，既非秦末鼎沸之时，实有六国并据之势，故可为文王，难为汉祖。
现代文：如今我们与古代都是经历改朝换代而流传的国家，既不是秦朝末年天下鼎沸纷争的时代，实际上却有六国并立称雄的形势，因此可以行文王之事，难以有汉高祖的作为。
English: Today, we and ancient times are both countries that have been passed down through the change of dynasty and generation. It is not the era of great strife at the end of the Qin Dynasty, but in fact there is a situation in which six countries stand side by side, so we can do the things of King Wen, but it is difficult to have the deeds of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夫民之疲劳，则骚扰之兆生，上慢下暴，则瓦解之形起。
现代文：百姓的疲劳就是产生骚动不安的前兆；在上位的骄慢而在下位残暴，就会出现土崩瓦解的形势。
English: The fatigue of the people is a precursor to unrest; arrogance at the top and brutality at the bottom will lead to a situation of collapse.

古文：谚曰： 射幸数跌，不如审发。 
现代文：谚语说： 射箭如果屡次不中，不如慎重瞄准之后再发射。 
English: A proverb says: It is better to aim and fire than to shoot an arrow several times and miss.

古文：是故智者不为小利移目，不为意似改步，时可而后动，数合而后举，故汤、武之师不再战而克，诚重民劳而度时审也。
现代文：因此有智谋的人不为蝇头小利而动心，不为似是而非的情况改变常态，时机成熟以后再行动，形势适宜以后再举兵，所以商汤、周武的军队不用再次战斗就能取胜，实在是因为重视人民的劳苦状况而能审时度势。
English: Therefore, intelligent people do not shift their goals because of small benefits, nor do they change their steps because of plausible things, and wait until the time is ripe to act, and only succeed when the time is right. Therefore, King Zhou Wu's army can be conquered without having to go to war again, it is really because of the importance of the people's labor and the time to judge the situation.

古文：如遂极武黩征，土崩势生，不幸遇难，虽有智者，将不能谋之矣。 
现代文：如果竟然竭尽武力滥用征伐，出现了土崩瓦解的形势，又不幸遭遇危难，那么即使有有智谋的人也将不会有挽回局势的谋略了。 
English: If all-out force is used to abuse the conquest, a situation of collapse occurs, and misfortune encounters danger, then even people with wisdom will not have a strategy to save the situation.

古文：高贵乡公下甘露三年
现代文：甘露三年
English: Three years of nectar

古文：春，正月，文钦谓诸葛诞曰： 蒋班、焦彝谓我不能出而走，全端、全怿又率众逆降，此敌无备之时也，可以战矣。 
现代文：春季，正月，文钦对诸葛诞说： 蒋班、焦彝认为我们不能出城而走，全端、全怿又已率众投降，这正是敌人没有防备的时机，可以出城一战了。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Wen Qin said to Zhuge Zheng: "Chiang Ban and Jiao Tong think that we can't leave the city, and Quanzhang and Quanzhang have led the people to surrender. This is exactly the time when the enemy is unprepared, and they can leave the city for a battle.

古文：诞及唐咨等皆以为然，遂大为攻具，昼夜五六日攻南围，欲决围而出。
现代文：诸葛诞和唐咨等人都认为很对，于是就大力准备进攻的器具，连续五六个昼夜进攻南面的包围，想要突破重围而出。
English: Zhuge Xing and Tang Zhe and others all thought it was right, so they vigorously prepared the offensive equipment, attacked the southern encirclement for five or six days and nights in a row, and wanted to break through the encirclement.

古文：围上诸军临高发石车火箭，逆烧破其攻具，矢石雨下，死伤蔽地，血流盈堑，复不城。
现代文：包围圈上的魏国诸军站在高处发射石车火箭，迎面烧破敌方的进攻器具，箭石像雨一样泻下，死伤者遍地，流血充满堑沟，诸葛诞等又被迫返回城中。
English: The Wei armies on the encirclement stood at a high place and fired stone rocket launchers, burning the enemy's offensive equipment face to face. The arrow stones fell like rain, the dead and wounded were everywhere, the bloodshed was full of furrows, and Zhuge was forced to return to the city.

古文：城内食转竭，出降者数万口。
现代文：城内的粮食越来越少，出城投降者有数万人之多。
English: There was less and less food in the city, and tens of thousands of people left the city to surrender.

古文：钦欲尽出北方人，省食，与吴人坚守，诞不听，由是争恨。
现代文：文钦想让北方人都出城投降以节省粮食，留下他与吴国人一起坚守，但诸葛诞不同意，从此两人之间互相怨恨。
English: Wenqin planned to drive the people in the north out of the city to save grain, and Dongwu held firm. Zhuge did not listen, and thus a rift arose.

古文：钦素与诞有隙，徒以计合，事急愈相疑。
现代文：文钦平时就与诸葛诞有矛盾，只是因为反对司马昭的想法相同而结合，事态紧急了就愈加互相猜疑。
English: Wenqin has always been at odds with Zhuge Zhou, but they conspire because of the plan, and they are more suspicious of each other when things are urgent.

古文：钦见诞计事，诞遂杀钦。
现代文：文钦进见诸葛诞商量事情，诸葛诞就杀掉了文钦。
English: Wenqin saw Zhuge Zi planning things, and Zhuge Zi killed Wenqin.

古文：钦子鸯、虎将兵在小城中，闻钦死，勒兵赴之；众不为用，遂单走逾城出，自归于司马昭。
现代文：文钦之子文鸯、文虎领兵在小城中，听到文钦的死讯，就想带兵去为父报仇，但众人不为他们效命，二人随即独自越过城墙逃出来，投降了司马昭。
English: Wenqin's son, Wen Rong, and his son, Wen Hu, who were leading the troops, heard of Wenqin's death in a small town and wanted to take soldiers to avenge their father. However, no one would serve them, so the two of them immediately escaped over the city wall on their own and surrendered to Sima Zhao.

古文：军吏请诛之，昭曰： 钦之罪不容诛，其子固应就戮；然鸯、虎以穷归命，且城未拔，杀之是坚其心也。 
现代文：军吏请求杀了他们，司马昭说： 文钦罪不容诛，他的儿子本来也应该杀掉；但文鸯、文虎因走投无路而归顺，而且城还没攻破，杀了他们就更坚定了城内敌兵的死守之心。 
English: The military officials asked to kill them, and Sima Zhao said, "Wen Qin's crime is intolerable, and his son should have been killed as well; however, because of being cornered, Wen Hu and Wen Hu surrendered, and since the city had not yet been breached, killing them made the enemy soldiers in the city even more determined to defend themselves."

古文：乃赦鸯、虎，使将数百骑巡城，呼曰： 文钦之子犹不见杀，其馀何惧！ 
现代文：于是赦免了文鸯、文虎，让他们率数百骑兵巡城高呼： 文钦之子尚且不被杀，其余之人有什么可害怕！ 
English: So he pardoned Wen Xuan and Wen Hu, and let them lead hundreds of cavalry to patrol the city, shouting: "Even if Wen Qin's son is not killed, the rest of the people have nothing to fear!"

古文：又表鸯、虎皆为将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：又让文鸯、文虎都担任将军，并赐爵关内侯。
English: He also made both Wenyi and Wenzhu generals and gave them the title of Kuanai Hou.

古文：城内皆喜，且日益饥困。
现代文：城内之人闻讯都很高兴，而且人们也日益饥饿困乏。
English: People in the city are happy to hear the news, and people are increasingly hungry and weary.

古文：司马昭身自临围，见城上持弓者不发，曰： 可攻矣！ 
现代文：司马昭亲自来到包围圈，见城上持弓者不发箭，就说： 可以进攻了。 
English: Sima Zhao himself came to the encirclement, and when he saw that the bowmen on the city were not firing arrows, he said, "We can attack."

古文：乃四面进军，同时鼓噪登城。二月，乙酉，克之。
现代文：于是下令四面进军，同时鼓噪呐喊登上城墙，二月，乙酉，攻克寿春城。
English: So he ordered the troops to march in all directions, and at the same time, they ascended the city wall to the sound of drums and shouts. In February, acetylene was used to conquer Shuchun City.

古文：诞窘急，单马将其麾下突小城欲出，司马胡奋部兵击斩之，夷其三族。
现代文：诸葛诞情急窘迫，单枪匹马率领麾下突击小城想要闯出城，司马胡奋手下的兵士把他杀死，又诛杀其三族。
English: Zhuge Xuan was in a desperate situation. He single-handedly led his troops to attack a small town and tried to break out of the city. The soldiers under the command of Sima Huqin killed him and his three clans.

古文：诞麾下数百人，皆拱手为列，不降，每斩一人，辄降之，卒不变，以至于尽。
现代文：诸葛诞麾下的数百人，都拱手排成队列，却不投降，每杀一人，就问其余的人降不降，而他们的态度终究不变，以至于最后全部杀尽。
English: Hundreds of people under the command of Zhuge Zi, all lined up in a queue, but did not surrender. For each person killed, they asked the rest of the people whether to surrender, but their attitude remained unchanged, so that they finally killed them all.

古文：吴将于诠曰： 大丈夫受命其主，以兵救人，既不能克，又束手于敌，吾弗取也。 
现代文：吴将于诠说： 大丈夫受命于君主，带兵来救人，既不能取胜，又要被敌人俘虏，我决不如此。 
English: Wu Xiu said, "It's alright for a man to be ordered by the monarch to lead soldiers to rescue people, but he can't win and will be captured by the enemy. I will never do that."

古文：乃免胄冒陈而死。
现代文：于是就脱掉盔甲突入敌人兵阵而战死。
English: So he took off his armor and charged into the enemy lines, where he was killed.

古文：唐咨、王祚等皆降。
现代文：唐咨、王祚等人都投降了。
English: Tang Zhe, Wang Zhe and others all surrendered.

古文：吴兵万众，器仗山积。
现代文：俘虏的吴国兵卒有一万多人，缴获的兵器堆得像山一样。
English: More than ten thousand soldiers of Wu were captured, and the captured weapons were piled up like a mountain.

古文：司马昭初围寿春，王基、石苞等皆欲急攻之，昭以为 寿春城固而众多，攻之必力屈；若有外寇，表里受敌，此危道也。
现代文：司马昭当初包围寿春之时，王基、石苞等人都想加紧攻城，司马昭认为： 寿春城墙坚固而兵力众多，攻城必然损失兵力，如果再有外部敌人来犯，就要表里受敌，这是危险的做法。
English: When Sima Zhao initially besieged Shouchun, Wang Ji, Shijun and others wanted to step up the siege of the city. Sima Zhao believed that: Shouchun's city walls are solid and there are many troops, and the siege of the city will inevitably lose troops. If there is another external enemy, it is necessary to face the enemy, which is a dangerous approach.

古文：今三叛相聚于孤城之中，天其或者使同就戮，吾当以全策縻之。
现代文：现在三个叛将相聚在孤城之中，天意或许会让他们同时被杀，我当以完备的计策把他们围困在城中。
English: Now that the three traitors are gathered in the middle of the lonely city, and it may be God's will that they all be killed at the same time, I should encircle them in the city with a complete strategy.

古文：但坚守三面，若吴贼陆道而来，军粮必少；吾以游兵轻骑绝其转输，可不战而破也。
现代文：我们只坚守三面，如果吴兵从陆地而来，军粮必少，我们就用游动的轻骑兵断绝他们的运粮道路，这样可以不战而打败敌人。
English: We only hold three sides, if the Wu soldiers come from the land, there will be less food, we will use the swimming light cavalry to cut off their grain transportation route, so we can defeat the enemy without fighting.

古文：吴贼破，钦等必成擒矣！ 
现代文：吴兵失败，文钦等人必成笼中之鸟了。 
English: If Wu Bing fails, Wen Qin and others will become caged birds.

古文：乃命诸军按甲以守之，卒不烦攻而破。
现代文：于是命令诸军停止进攻坚守不动，终于不用频频进攻而破城取胜。
English: So he ordered the troops to stop attacking, hold fast, and finally break through the city to win without frequent attacks.

古文：议者又以为 淮南仍为叛逆，吴兵室家在江南，不可纵，宜悉坑之。 
现代文：议论者又认为： 淮南地区仍为叛逆之徒所占据，这些吴兵的家室都在江南，不可放他们回去，应该把他们全活埋。 
English: The commentators also believed that: Huainan region is still occupied by the rebels, the families of these Wu soldiers are in the south of the Yangtze River, they should not be allowed to go back, they should be buried alive.

古文：昭曰： 古之用兵，全国为上，戮其元恶而已。
现代文：司马昭说： 古人用兵，以保全对方的国家为上策，只杀其首恶而已。
English: Sima Zhao said: The ancients used soldiers to preserve the other side's country as the best policy, and only killed the first evil.

古文：吴兵就得亡还，适可以示中国之大度耳。 
现代文：吴兵得以逃回去，正好可以显示我国的宽宏大度。 
English: The fact that Wu Bing was able to escape and return to China shows the magnanimity of our country.

古文：一无所杀，分布三河近郡以安处之。
现代文：结果一个不杀，把俘虏分布在三河地区接近京师的地方加以安置。
English: Therefore, the Wei army did not kill a single prisoner, and freed the counties near the Three Rivers to settle them.

古文：拜唐咨安远将军，其馀裨将，咸假位号，众皆悦服，其淮南将士吏民为诞所胁略者，皆赦之。
现代文：又授予唐咨安远将军之职，其余的副将，也都给了他们相应的地位和封号，众人都心悦诚服。那些淮南将士吏民被诸葛诞所胁迫掠虏而来的，也都赦免放回。
English: He also awarded Tang Zi Anyuan the post of general, and the other vice-generals also gave them the corresponding status and title, and everyone was sincerely satisfied. Those Huainan generals, officials and people who were coerced and plundered by Zhuge Guo were also pardoned and released.

古文：听文鸯兄弟收敛父丧。给其车牛，致葬旧墓。
现代文：听任文鸯兄弟收敛其父之尸，并给他们车与牛，拉到旧墓安葬。
English: He allowed the brothers to collect their father's body, and gave them a cart and a cow to take it to the old tomb for burial.

古文：昭遗王基书曰： 初议者云云，求移者甚众，时未临履，亦谓宜然。
现代文：司马昭给王基写信说： 当初议论众说纷纭，要求转移到北山的人很多，当时我没有亲临营垒实地勘察，也认为应该转移。
English: Sima Zhao wrote a letter to Wang Ji, saying: At the beginning of the discussion, there were many different opinions, and many people asked to be transferred to Beishan. At that time, I did not come to the camp to inspect it in person, and I also thought that it should be transferred.

古文：将军深算利害，独秉固志，上违诏命，下拒众议，终至制敌禽贼，虽古人所述，不是过也。 
现代文：将军深入地考虑利害得失，独自坚持固定的意志，上边违背朝廷诏命，下面拒绝众人之议，终于制服敌人擒获贼兵，即使是古人所说那些忠臣良将，也不能超过你。 
English: General, you have carefully considered the interests involved, you have upheld a firm idea, you have violated the edict on the one hand and resisted the opinions of many people on the other, and finally you have been able to defeat the enemy army, even if the war described by the ancients did not exceed this matter.

古文：昭欲遣诸军轻兵深入，招迎唐咨等子弟，因衅有灭吴之势。
现代文：司马昭想派遣诸军轻兵深入，招抚迎接唐咨等人的子弟，利用敌人的内部裂痕造成消灭吴国的形势。
English: Sima Zhao wanted to send the army's light soldiers deep into the country to meet the children of Tang Zhao and others, and take advantage of the enemy's internal cracks to cause the situation of the destruction of Wuxi.

古文：王基谏曰： 昔诸葛恪乘东关之胜，竭江表之兵以围新城，城既不拔，而众死者太半。
现代文：王基进谏说： 以前诸葛恪乘着东关获胜之机，竭尽江南的兵力以围攻新城，城既没有攻克，而兵士也死了大半。
English: Wang Jizhong said: In the past, Zhuge Ke took advantage of the opportunity to win in Dongguan, and exhausted the forces of the south of the Yangtze River to besiege the new city. The city was not conquered, and most of the soldiers died.

古文：姜维因洮西之利，轻兵深入，粮饷不继，军覆上邽。
现代文：姜维凭借洮西的便利条件，轻兵深入，结果粮饷不继，军队在上遭到覆没。
English: Jiang Wei took advantage of the convenient conditions in Shaanxi to send light troops deep into the region. As a result, food shortages continued and the army was overwhelmed in the upper regions.

古文：夫大捷之后，上下轻敌，轻敌则虑难不深。
现代文：在取得大胜之后，上下之人就会轻敌，轻敌则考虑困难的一面就不深。
English: After a great victory, all soldiers, high and low, despise the enemy army. If they despise the enemy army, the problem of thinking will not be deepened.

古文：今贼新败于外，又内患未弭，是其修备设虑之时也。
现代文：如今敌人在外部刚刚失败，内部忧患又没有弭合，这正是他们加紧防备设计御敌的时候。
English: Now that the enemy has just failed on the outside, and the internal troubles have not merged, this is exactly the time for them to step up their defense and design against the enemy.

古文：且兵出逾年，人有归志，今俘馘十万，罪人斯得，自历代征伐，未有全兵独克如今之盛者也。
现代文：而且我们的兵士外出已经一年多了，人人都有归家之心，如今我们歼灭敌兵十万，擒获罪人，自历代征伐以来，还没有既保全兵力又获得全面胜利的战役能象这次这样盛大的。
English: Moreover, it has been more than a year since the great army sent troops, and the soldiers all have the idea of returning home. Now they have captured a hundred thousand enemy troops, and the criminals have been sent out. Since the wars of all generations, there has never been such a situation of preserving the great army but being able to overcome the strength of the enemy.

古文：武皇帝克袁绍于官渡，自以所获已多，不复追奔，惧挫威也。 
现代文：武皇帝在官渡战胜袁绍，自认为所获已很多，就不再追杀，这是惧怕挫伤自己的威势。 
English: Emperor Wu defeated Yuan Shao at Guandu, and since he thought that he had gained a lot, he no longer chased and killed. This was because he was afraid of losing his power.

古文：昭乃止，以基为征东将军、都督扬州诸军事，进封东武侯。
现代文：于是司马昭就停止了这次行动。任命王基为征东将军，都督扬州诸军事，并晋封他为东武侯。
English: As a result, Sima Zhao stopped the operation. He appointed Wang Ji as the general to conquer the East, the military governor of Yangzhou, and promoted him to the position of Dongwu Marquis.

古文：习凿齿曰：君子谓司马大将军于是役也，可谓能以德攻矣。
现代文：习凿齿曰：君子认为，司马大将军在这次战役中，可说是能以仁德进攻了。
English: Xi Zhizhen said: The gentleman believes that General Sima can be said to have attacked with benevolence in this battle.

古文：夫建业者异道，各有所尚而不能兼并也。
现代文：建功立业者采用的方法不同，各有所崇尚却不能同时兼顾。
English: The methods used by those who have made achievements are different, and each has its own merits, but they cannot be taken into account at the same time.

古文：故穷武之雄，毙于不仁；存义之国，丧于懦退。
现代文：因此穷兵黩武的雄杰，就会死于不仁；心存礼义之国，就会丧于懦弱退让。
English: Therefore, a valiant warrior will die of indifference; a nation of courtesy will perish of cowardice.

古文：今一征而禽三叛，大虏吴众，席卷淮浦，俘馘十万，可谓壮矣。
现代文：如今一次征战而擒获三个叛逆，俘虏众多吴国兵士，全部占据了淮浦地区，歼敌十万，可以说是宏伟了。
English: Now, it has captured three rebels in a single campaign, captured many soldiers of the State of Wu, occupied the entire Huaipu region, and wiped out 100,000 of the enemy, which can be said to be magnificent.

古文：而未及安坐，赏王基之功；种惠吴人，结异类之情；宠鸯葬钦，忘畴昔之隙；不咎诞众，使扬土怀愧。
现代文：但还没等坐安稳，就奖赏王基的功劳；在吴人中播种恩惠，拢络异国之人的感情；恩宠文鸯，安葬文钦，不记往日的怨恨；不责怪诸葛诞手下的兵将，使扬州的人们心怀惭愧。
English: However, he did not wait for the situation to be stable before he rewarded Wang Ji's merits; he sowed favor among the Wu people and attracted the feelings of people from foreign countries; he favored Wen Xuan and buried Wen Qin without remembering the resentment of the past; he did not blame the soldiers under Zhuge Xue, which made the people of Yangzhou feel ashamed.

古文：功高而人乐其成，业广而敌怀其德。
现代文：功高盖世而人们乐于看到他的成功，业绩广大而敌人也怀念他的恩德。
English: His achievements are widespread and people are happy to see his success, his achievements are vast and his enemies also miss his kindness.

古文：武昭既敷，文算又洽，推此道也，天下其孰能当之哉！
现代文：武功的光芒既已流布天下，文德的计划又非常广博，把这种道义推而广之，天下还有谁能够抵挡呢？
English: The light of martial arts has already spread all over the world, and the plan of Wen De is very extensive. Who else in the world can resist this morality?

古文：司马昭之克寿春，钟会谋画居多；昭亲待日隆，委以腹心之任，时人比之子房。
现代文：司马昭攻克寿春，钟会出谋划策很多；因此，司马昭对他日益亲近重视，委任他办理机密要事，当时人把他比之为汉代的张良。
English: When Sima Zhao conquered Shouchun, Zhong Hui made a lot of plans and suggestions. Therefore, Sima Zhao paid more and more attention to him and appointed him to handle confidential and important matters. At that time, people compared him to Zhang Liang in the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉姜维闻诸葛诞死，退还成都，复拜大将军。
现代文：蜀汉的姜维听到诸葛诞已死，又返回成都，重新担任大将军之职。
English: When Jiang Wei of Shuhan heard that Zhuge Liang was dead, he returned to Chengdu and resumed his position as general.

古文：夏，五月，诏以司马昭为相国，封晋公，食邑八郡，加九锡；昭前后九让，乃止。
现代文：夏季，五月，诏令任命司马昭为相国，封为晋公，食邑八个郡，加赐九锡；司马昭先后推辞了九次，才收回成命。
English: In the summer, in May, the imperial edict appointed Sima Zhao as a peer of the state, with the title of Jin Gong, eight counties and nine counties; Sima Zhao declined the appointment nine times before accepting it.

古文：秋，七月，吴主封故齐王奋为章安侯。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴王封以前的齐王孙奋为章安侯。
English: In the autumn, in July, Qi Wang Sunfen, formerly Wu Wang Feng, became Zhang An Hou.

古文：八月，以骠骑将军王昶为司空。
现代文：八月，任命骠骑将军王昶为司空。
English: In August, he appointed the cavalry general Wang Qi as the deputy commander of the air force.

古文：诏以关内侯王祥为三老，郑小同为五更，帝率群臣幸太学，行养老乞言之礼。
现代文：诏令以关内侯王祥为三老，郑小同为五更，魏帝率领群臣到太学去，行养老乞求善言的礼仪。
English: According to the imperial edict, Guan Nei Lord Wang Xiang was the third elder, Zheng Xiaodong was the fifth elder, and Emperor Wei led his courtiers to Taishu to perform the etiquette of begging for good words.

古文：小同，玄之孙也。
现代文：郑小同是郑玄之孙。
English: Zheng Xiaodong is the grandson of Zheng Xuan.

古文：吴孙纟林以吴主亲览政事，多所难问，甚惧；返自镬里，遂称疾不朝，使弟威远将军据入仓龙门宿卫，武卫将军恩、偏将军干、长水校尉闿分屯诸营，欲以自固。
现代文：吴国孙因吴王亲自管理政事，对他又多次质问，就非常害怕；从镬里返回之后，就称病不上朝，又让他的弟弟威远将军孙据进入苍龙门担任宿卫，武卫将军孙恩、偏将军孙、长水校尉孙，分别驻守各军营，想用以自保。
English: Sun Quanguo of the State of Wu was very afraid because the king of Wu personally managed the affairs of state and questioned him many times. After returning from Xili, he said that he would not go to the imperial court due to illness. He also let his younger brother, General Wei Yuan Sun Quan, enter the Canglong Gate to serve as a night watchman. General Wuwei Sun En, General Chuan Sun, and Captain Changshui Sun were stationed separately in each military camp and wanted to use it for self-protection.

古文：吴主恶之，乃推硃公主死意，全公主惧曰： 我实不知，皆硃据二子熊、损所白。 
现代文：吴王非常厌恶他，于是就追问朱公主被杀的情况，全公主害怕地说： 我实在不知情，都是朱据的两个儿子朱熊、朱损所说的。 
English: The King of Wu was very disgusted with him, so he asked Princess Zhu about the circumstances of her murder. The princess said fearfully, "I really don't know. It was all said by Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai, Zhu Zu's two sons."

古文：是时熊为虎林督、损为外部督，吴主皆杀之。
现代文：当时朱熊担任虎林督，朱损担任外部督，吴王把他们都杀了。
English: At that time, Zhu Xiong served as the tiger forest governor, and Zhu Zai served as the external governor. King Wu killed them both.

古文：损妻，即孙峻妹也。
现代文：朱损之妻，就是孙峻的妹妹。
English: Zhouzai's wife is Sun Jun's sister.

古文：纟林谏，不从，由是益惧。
现代文：孙劝谏，吴王不从，从此孙更加恐惧。
English: Sun advised him, but Wu Wang did not agree, and Sun became even more afraid.

古文：吴主阴与全公主及将军刘丞谋诛纟林。
现代文：吴王暗地里与全公主和将军刘丞谋划杀掉孙。
English: King Wu secretly plotted with Princess Quan and General Liu Rong to kill Sun.

古文：全后父尚为太常、卫将军，吴主谓尚子黄门侍郎纪曰： 孙纟林专势，轻小于孤。
现代文：全后的父亲全尚任太常、卫将军，吴王对全尚之子黄门侍郎全纪说： 孙专擅权势，轻视小看我。
English: Sun Quan's father, King Wu, said to Sun Quan's son, Huangmen's attendant, Quan Ji: "Sun Quan wields power and disdains me.

古文：孤前敕之使速上岸，为唐咨等作援，而留湖中不上岸一步；又委罪于硃异，擅杀功臣，不先表闻；筑第桥南，不复朝见。
现代文：我以前命令他迅速上岸，为唐咨等人作后援，但他却留在湖中不上岸一步；他又把罪责推卸给朱异，擅自杀掉有功之臣，也不事先上表奏明；他还在朱雀桥南建筑府第，不再上朝进见。
English: I had previously ordered him to quickly go ashore to support Tang Zhao and others, but he stayed in the lake and did not step on the shore; he also shifted the blame to Zhu Ying, arbitrarily killed a meritorious minister, and did not report in advance; he was still at the construction site south of Suzaku Bridge, and no longer went to the court.

古文：此为自在，无复所畏，不可久忍，今规取之。
现代文：在家自由自在，无所忌惮，不知还有君上，这种情况不能长久忍耐，我如今要图谋取缔他。
English: At home, he is free and easy, unscrupulous, and I don't know if he still has a boss. This situation can't be tolerated for long. I'm going to try to ban him now.

古文：卿父作中军都督，使密严整士马，孤当自出临桥，率宿卫虎骑、左右无难一时围之，作版诏敕纟林所领皆解散，不得举手。
现代文：你的父亲担任中军都督，让他秘密地整顿兵马，我当亲自出宫登临桥上，率领宿卫虎骑、左右无难突然包围孙府第，再作版诏命令孙统领的兵士都解散，不得反抗。
English: Your father served as the Chinese military governor, let him secretly rectify the situation of the soldiers and horses, I should personally go out of the palace, climb the bridge, lead the innkeeper, ride the tiger, suddenly surround Sun's palace, and then make a edict to order Sun's soldiers to disband and not resist.

古文：正尔，自当得之；卿去，但当使密耳！
现代文：如果一切事情都按我所说的去做，必然能够成功；你出去，必须秘密行事！
English: If everything is done as I say, it will succeed; if you go out, you must do it secretly!

古文：卿宣诏卿父，勿令卿母知之；女人既不晓大事，且纟林同堂姊，邂逅漏泄，误孤非小也！ 
现代文：向你的父亲宣明诏令，千万不要让你母亲知道；女人既不明晓大事，而且她又是孙的姐姐，如果见到孙泄漏出去，就会误我大事！ 
English: Declare the edict to your father, but don't let your mother know; a woman doesn't know what's important, and she's Sun's sister, if she sees Sun leak out, she'll miss my big event!

古文：纪承诏以告尚。
现代文：全纪接受诏令告诉了全尚。
English: Quanzhang told Quanzhang that Quanzhang accepted the edict.

古文：尚无远虑，以语纪母，母使人密语纟林。
现代文：但全尚没有认真考虑，就把此事告诉了全纪的母亲，她又派人秘密地告诉了孙。
English: However, Quan Quan did not seriously consider it and told Quan Ji's mother about it. She also sent someone to secretly tell Sun Quan.

古文：九月，戊午，纟林夜以兵袭尚，执之，遣弟恩杀刘承于苍龙门外，比明，遂围宫。
现代文：九月，戊午，孙深夜派兵袭击全尚，把他扣押起来，又派其弟孙恩在苍龙门外杀掉刘承，等到天将明时，就包围了王宫。
English: In September, at noon, late at night, Sun sent soldiers to attack Quan Shang and detain him. He also sent his brother Sun En to kill Liu Cheng outside the Canglong Gate. By dawn, they had surrounded the royal palace.

古文：吴主大怒，上马带建执弓欲出，曰： 孤大皇帝適子，在位已五年，谁敢不从者！ 
现代文：吴王勃然大怒，骑上马带了弓箭就要出宫，说道： 我是大皇帝的嫡子，在位已经五年，谁敢不服从我！ 
English: King Wu flew into a rage, mounted his horse, took his bow and arrow and was about to leave the palace, saying: I am the legitimate son of the great emperor, I have been on the throne for five years, who would dare to disobey me!

古文：侍中近臣及乳母共牵攀止之，不得出，叹咤不食，骂全后曰： 尔父愦愦，败我大事！ 
现代文：侍中近臣以及乳母等人一起连牵带扯地制止他，未能出宫。吴王叹气发怒不吃饭，又大骂全后说： 你的父亲昏愦无能，坏了我的大事！ 
English: The attendants and courtiers, as well as the nurse, all tried to stop him from leaving the palace. King Wu sighed, became angry, refused to eat, and then cursed Quan Quan, saying, "Your father is stupid and incompetent, and he ruined my big event!"

古文：又遣呼纪，纪曰： 臣父奉诏不谨，负上，无面目复见。 
现代文：又派人去叫全纪，全纪说： 我父亲奉行诏命不谨慎，辜负了皇上，我没有脸面再见皇上了。 
English: He also sent someone to summon Quan Ji. Quan Ji said, "My father was not prudent in carrying out the imperial edict and failed the emperor. I have no face to see the emperor again."

古文：因自杀。
现代文：然后就自杀而死。
English: He then took his own life.

古文：纟林使光禄勋孟宗告太庙，废吴主为会稽王。
现代文：孙让光禄勋孟宗祭告太庙，把吴王废为会稽王。
English: Sun Jang Guanglu honored the Mengzong festival and told the imperial temple to abolish the king of Wu as the king of reviewers.

古文：召群臣议曰： 少帝荒病昏乱，不可以处大位，承宗庙，已告先帝废之。诸君若有不同者，下异议。 
现代文：又召来群臣议论说： 少帝耽于享乐多病昏乱，不可以处于天子之位，继承宗庙统绪，已经祭告先帝把他废了，诸君若有不同意者，请提出异议。 
English: He also summoned a group of courtiers to discuss the matter, saying, "The young emperor indulges in too much pleasure and is often ill and confused. He cannot be in the position of the son of heaven, inheriting the unification of the ancestral temples. He has already been told that the former emperor has abolished him. If any of you disagree, please raise an objection."

古文：皆震怖，曰： 唯将军令！ 
现代文：众人都很震惊恐怖，说道： 愿服从将军的命令！ 
English: Everyone was shocked and horrified, and said: "Be willing to obey the general's orders!"

古文：纟林遣中书郎李崇夺吴主玺绶，以吴主罪班告远近。
现代文：孙派中书郎李崇夺来吴王的玺绶，把吴王的罪状布告远近各地。
English: Sun sent Li Chong, a scholar, to seize Wu Wang's scepter and announce Wu Wang's indictment far and wide.

古文：尚书桓彝不肯署名，纟林怒，杀之。
现代文：尚书桓彝不肯签署名字，孙大怒，杀掉了他。
English: Shang Shuhuan did not want to sign his name, so Sun Da Rong got angry and killed him.

古文：典国施正劝纟林迎立琅邪王休，纟林从之。
现代文：典军施正劝孙把琅邪王孙休迎来立为天子，孙同意了。
English: Shi Zheng advised Sun to make Sun Xiu, the evil king, the son of Heaven, and Sun agreed.

古文：己未，纟林使宗正楷与中书郎董朝迎琅邪王于会稽。
现代文：己未，孙派宗正孙楷与中书郎董朝到会稽迎接琅邪王。
English: Before long, Sun Pai, Zong Zheng, Sun Kai, and Zhong Shuro, Dong Cha, arrived at the meeting hall to welcome the evil king.

古文：遣将军孙耽送会稽王亮之国，亮时年十六。
现代文：派遣将军孙耽送会稽王孙亮到他的封国，孙亮这年十六岁。
English: Sending the general Sun Tan to escort the king-in-waiting Sun Liang to his fief, Sun Liang was sixteen years old.

古文：徙全尚于零陵，寻追杀之，迁全公主于豫章。
现代文：把全尚迁徙到零陵，随即又去追杀了他，把全公主迁到豫章。
English: He moved Quanzhang to Luling, then chased and killed him, and moved Quanzhang to Yuanzhang.

古文：冬，十月，戊午，琅邪王行至曲阿，有老公遮王叩头曰： 事久变生，天下喁喁，愿陛下速行！ 
现代文：冬季，十月，戊午，琅邪王走到曲阿，有位老人拦住他叩头说： 事久生变，天下人都在仰望于陛下。 
English: In winter, in October, on the afternoon of the third day of the third month, when the evil king came to Qu'ao, an old man stopped him and bowed to him, saying, "Things have changed a long time ago. People all over the world are looking up to Your Majesty.

古文：王善之。是日，进及布塞亭。
现代文：这一天，行进到布塞亭。
English: On this day, march to Buseiting.

古文：孙纟林以琅邪王未至，欲入居富中，召百官会议，皆惶怖失色，徒唯唯而已。
现代文：孙因琅邪王没到，想要进入宫中居住，召集百官商议，众人都惊惶失色，只唯唯地应着而不置可否。
English: Because the evil king did not come, Sun Yat-sen wanted to live in the palace and summoned hundreds of officials to discuss the matter. Everyone was panicked and disgraced. They only wanted to comply but did not say whether they could or not.

古文：选曹郎虞汜曰： 明公为国伊、周，处将相之任，擅废立之威，将上安宗庙，下惠百姓，大小踊跃，自以伊、霍复见。
现代文：选曹郎虞汜说： 您是国家的伊尹、周公，担当将相的重任，执掌废立的大权，必将上安定宗庙社稷，下施恩惠于百姓，上下大小之人一片欢呼跳跃，认为您是伊尹、霍光再现于世。
English: Zeng Cao Lang Yu Yao said: You are the Yi Yin and Zhou Gong of the country. You are in charge of the important task of the generals, and hold the power to abolish the establishment. You will certainly go to the Stable Patriarchal Temple and Shrine, and give favors to the people. People of all sizes cheered and jumped, thinking that you are Yi Yin and Huo Guang reappearing in the world.

古文：今迎王未至而始入宫，如是，群下摇荡，众听疑惑，非所以永终忠孝，扬名后世也。 
现代文：现在琅邪王还未迎来而您却想入宫居住，如果这样，那么群臣百姓就会动荡不安，众人的心里就会产生疑惑，这不是永远发扬忠孝、扬名于后世的做法。 
English: If you want to live in the palace when the evil king has not yet been ushered in, then the people will be unsettled, and doubts will arise in the hearts of many people. This is not the way to promote loyalty and filial piety forever and make a name for yourself in future generations.

古文：纟林不怿而止。
现代文：孙很不高兴地放弃入宫居住的作法。
English: Sun was very unhappy to give up the practice of living in the palace.

古文：汜，翻之子也。
现代文：虞汜是虞翻之子。
English: Yuxuan is the son of Yufu.

古文：纟林命弟恩行丞相事，率百僚以乘舆法驾迎琅邪王于永昌亭。筑宫，以武帐为便殿，设御坐。
现代文：孙让其弟孙恩执行丞相的职事，率领百官用皇帝乘坐的车到永昌亭去迎接琅邪王，修筑行宫，用军队的帐篷临时搭起便殿，设置了御座。
English: Sun asked his brother Sun En to carry out the duties of the prime minister, and led hundreds of officials to use the emperor's car to go to Yongchang Pavilion to meet the evil king, build a palace, use the army's tent to temporarily set up a toilet, and set up a throne.

古文：己卯，王至便殿，止东厢。
现代文：己卯，琅邪王到达便殿，止于东厢。
English: When he arrived at the lavatory, he stopped in the east compartment.

古文：孙恩奉上玺符，王三让，乃受。
现代文：孙恩奉上御玺，琅邪王辞让三次才接受。
English: Sun En offered the imperial scepter, and only accepted it three times after receiving the evil king's resignation.

古文：群臣以次奉引，王就乘舆，百官陪位。
现代文：群臣按照次序在前导引车驾，琅邪王上了乘舆，百官在旁陪伴。
English: According to the order, the group of courtiers drove in front of the guide car, and the evil king rode on the horse, accompanied by hundreds of officials.

古文：纟林以兵千人迎于半野，拜于道侧；王下车答拜。
现代文：孙率兵千人到郊外迎接，拜于道旁；琅邪王下车答拜。
English: Sun led a thousand soldiers to the outskirts to meet and worship beside the road; the evil king got off the car and bowed.

古文：即日，御正殿，大赦，改元永安。
现代文：当天，驾临正殿，实行大赦，改年号为永安。
English: On the same day, he arrived at the main hall, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Yongan.

古文：孙纟林称 草莽臣 ，诣阙上书，上印绶、节钺，求避贤路。
现代文：孙自称 草莽臣 ，在殿前上书，交上印绶、节钺，请求避让进贤之路。
English: Sun claimed to be a grass-mad minister, wrote a letter in front of the hall, handed in the seal and seal, and requested to avoid the path to becoming a scholar.

古文：吴主引见慰谕，下诏以纟林为丞相、荆州牧，增邑五县；以恩为御史大夫、卫将军、中军督，封县侯。
现代文：吴王引见他并以好言慰解，又下诏任命孙为丞相、荆州牧，增加封邑五个县；任命孙恩为御史大夫、卫将军、中军督，封为县侯。
English: King Wu introduced him and consoled him with kind words. He also issued an imperial edict to appoint Sun as chancellor and governor of Jing Province, adding five counties to his fief. He also appointed Sun En as goshi taifu, Wei general, Chinese military governor, and county magistrate.

古文：孙据、干、闿皆拜将军，封侯。
现代文：孙据、孙、孙也都授予将军之职，进封侯爵。
English: Sun, Sun, and Sun were also awarded the post of general and made marquesses.

古文：又以长水校尉张布为辅义将军，封永康侯。
现代文：又任命长水校尉张布为辅义将军，封为永康侯。
English: He also appointed Changshui lieutenant Zhang Bu as the general of Fuyi and named him Yongkang.

古文：先是，丹杨太守李衡数以事侵琅邪王，其妻习氏谏之，衡不听。
现代文：早先，丹阳太守李衡多次因事侵扰琅邪王，他的妻子习氏劝止他，他也不听。
English: Earlier, Danyang governor Li Heng had repeatedly harassed the evil king, and his wife Xi had tried to dissuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：琅邪王上书乞徙他郡，诏徙会稽。
现代文：后来琅邪王上书请求迁居其他郡，诏命让他迁到会稽。
English: Later, King Gongye wrote a letter requesting to move to another county, and the emperor ordered him to move to Canggu.

古文：及琅邪王即位，李衡忧惧，谓妻曰： 不用卿言，以至于此。
现代文：等到琅邪王即位为天子，李衡十分恐惧，就对他妻子说： 没听你的话，结果弄到这个地步。
English: When the Evil King was enthroned as the Son of Heaven, Li Heng was very afraid and said to his wife, "I didn't listen to your words and ended up in this situation."

古文：吾欲奔魏，何如？ 
现代文：我想去投奔魏国，怎么样？ 
English: I want to go to Wei, how about it?

古文：妻曰： 不可。
现代文：其妻说： 不行。
English: His wife said: "No."

古文：君本庶民耳，先帝相拔过重，既数作无礼，而复逆自猜嫌，逃叛求活，以此北归，何面目见中国人乎！ 
现代文：你本是一个庶民百姓，先帝把你破格提拔，现在你既已多次对琅邪王无礼，而又在心里胡乱猜疑，还想逃亡背主乞求活命，以你这样的情况跑到北方，又有什么脸面去见中原之人呢？ 
English: Originally, you were a commoner, but the former emperor promoted you to an unprecedented level. Now that you have been rude to the evil king many times, and you have wild suspicions in your heart, you still want to flee and beg for your life. In such a situation, you ran to the north. What kind of face do you have to meet the people of the Central Plains?

古文：衡曰： 计何所出？ 
现代文：李衡说： 那我应该怎么办？ 
English: Li Heng said: Then what should I do?

古文：妻曰： 琅邪王素好善慕名，方欲自显于天下，终不以私嫌杀君明矣。
现代文：其妻说： 琅邪王平时就好善而追求声名，现在他正想使自己显扬于天下，终究不会因私人怨恨而杀你，这是很明白的。
English: His wife said, "It is clear that the Evil King, who is usually kind and seeks fame, will not kill you out of personal grudge now that he is trying to make a name for himself.

古文：可自囚诣狱，表列前失，显求受罪。
现代文：你可以到牢狱把自己囚禁起来，上表陈述以前的过失，公开地要求接受处罚。
English: You can go to the jail and lock yourself up, recount your previous misdeeds, and publicly ask to be punished.

古文：如此，乃当逆见优饶，非但直活而已。 
现代文：这样，就会反而受到更优厚的待遇，岂只是仅仅保住性命而已。 
English: In this way, they will be treated more favourably, if only to save their lives.

古文：衡从之。
现代文：李衡照她的话做了。
English: Li Heng did as she said.

古文：吴主诏曰： 丹杨太守李衡，以往事之嫌，自拘司败。
现代文：吴王下诏说： 丹阳太守李衡，因往事的一些嫌隙，自我拘禁到刑狱之中。
English: Wu Wang Xiaozhao said: Danyang Governor Li Heng, because of some shortcomings in the past, self-imprisonment to prison.

古文：夫射钩、斩祛，在君为君，其遣衡还郡，勿令自疑。 
现代文：春秋时管仲箭射齐桓公带钩，寺人披砍断晋文公的衣袖，但齐桓、晋文当了君主就行君主之事而不计前嫌，我也会如此。送李衡回郡，让他不要自我生疑。 
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, Guan Zhong shot arrows at Qi Huan with a hook, and the temple people cut off the sleeves of Jinwen. However, when Qi Huan and Jinwen became monarchs, they did the things of monarchs without hesitation, and I will do the same. Send Li Heng back to the county, so that he does not doubt himself.

古文：又如威远将军，授以棨戟。
现代文：同时授李衡威远将军之职，又赠以显示官阶品级的戟。
English: At the same time, Li Hengwei Yuan was awarded the post of general, and was also presented with a badge showing the official rank.

古文：己丑，吴主封故南阳王和子皓为乌程侯。
现代文：己丑，吴王封已故南阳王孙和之子孙为乌程侯。
English: Ugly as he was, the king of Wu appointed the late Nanyang king Sun He and his son Sun as the prince of Wucheng.

古文：群臣奏立皇后、太子，吴主曰： 朕以寡德，奉承洪业，莅事日浅，恩泽未敷，后妃之号，嗣子之位，非所急也。 
现代文：群臣奏请立皇太后、太子，吴王说： 我以微薄之德继承了祖宗的大业，即位时间很短，也没有广施恩泽，所以后妃名号、太子地位的确立，不是当务之急。 
English: After the group of courtiers requested the establishment of the empress dowager and the prince, King Wu said: I have inherited the great cause of my ancestors with a meager virtue. The time of enthronement is very short, and there is no widespread grace, so the establishment of the title of empress dowager and the status of prince is not urgent.

古文：有司固请，吴主不许。
现代文：有关部门仍坚持要求，但吴王不准。
English: The relevant departments still insist on the request, but Wu Wang is not allowed to go.

古文：孙纟林奉牛酒诣吴主，吴主不受，赍诣左将军张布。酒酣，出怨言曰： 初废少主时，多劝吾自为之者。吾以陛下贤明，故迎之。
现代文：孙带着牛和酒去拜见吴王，但吴王不收，只好送到左将军张布家里；酒意正浓的时候，孙口出怨言说： 当初废掉少主之时，很多人劝我自立为君；我认为陛下贤明，因此把他迎来。
English: Sun took the cow and wine to visit King Wu, but King Wu did not accept them, so he had to send them to General Zhang Bu's house. When the wine was strong, Sun Guo complained: At the time of abolishing the young master, many people advised me to become the sovereign. I think His Majesty is wise, so I welcomed him.

古文：帝非我不立，今上礼见拒，是与凡臣无异，当复改图耳。 
现代文：没有我他当不了皇帝，但我今天给他送礼却遭到拒绝，这是对我与一般大臣没有区别，我当再另立别人为君。 
English: I was not made emperor without my consent, and now that the offer of a gift has been rejected, I am being treated no differently from an ordinary minister, and I should change the arrangement.

古文：布以告吴主，吴主衔之，恐其有变，数加赏赐。
现代文：张布把这些话告诉了吴王，吴王怀恨在心，恐怕他发动变乱，所以多次加以赏赐。
English: Zhang Bu told these words to King Wu. King Wu held a grudge against Zhang Bu, fearing that Zhang Bu would start a riot, so he rewarded Zhang Bu many times.

古文：戊戌，吴主诏曰： 大将军掌中外诸军事，事统烦多，其加卫将军、御史大夫恩侍中，与大将军分省诸事。 
现代文：戊戌，吴王下诏说： 大将军掌管中外诸军事，事务繁多，今加卫将军、御史大夫孙恩侍中之职，与大将军一起分担各种事务。 
English: According to the edict issued by King Wu of the State of Wu, "The general is in charge of all military affairs at home and abroad, and has a wide range of affairs. Now, he is General Gawei, the secretary of Sun En, and shares all kinds of affairs with the general.

古文：或有告纟林怀怨悔上，欲图反者，吴主执以付纟林纟林杀之，由是益惧，因孟宗求出屯武昌；吴主许之。
现代文：有人报告孙心怀怨恨侮辱主上，想图谋造反，吴王就把那人抓起来交给孙，孙把那人杀了，但从此心里更加害怕，通过孟宗向吴王要求外出驻扎在武昌，吴王答应了。
English: Some people reported that Sun harbored resentment and insulted the Lord in his heart and wanted to plot a rebellion. King Wu arrested the man and handed him over to Sun. Sun killed the man, but from then on he was more afraid. Through Meng Zong, he asked King Wu to go and stay in Wuchang. King Wu agreed.

古文：纟林尽敕所督中营精兵万馀人，皆令装载，又取武库兵器，吴主咸令给与。
现代文：孙命令他所统领的中军精兵万余人，都让他们上船，又取走了武库中的兵器，吴王都下令给他。
English: Sun ordered the more than ten thousand elite soldiers of the Chinese army under his command, let them all board the ship, and took away the weapons in the arsenal. King Wu ordered him to give them all to him.

古文：纟林求中书两郎典知荆州诸军事，主者奏中书不应外出，吴主特听之。
现代文：孙又要求让中书两郎一同去管理荆州诸军事，主管者奏明中书不应外出，但吴王也特许孙带走中书。
English: Sun also requested that Sun and Zhongshu go together to manage the military in Jingzhou. The supervisor made it clear that Zhongshu should not go out, but King Wu also allowed Sun to take away Zhongshu.

古文：其所请求，一无违者。
现代文：孙所要求的事没有一件不同意的。
English: There was not a single thing that Sun asked for that I disagreed with.

古文：将军魏邈说吴主曰： 纟林居外，必有变。 
现代文：将军魏邈对吴王说： 孙居住在外，必然会有变乱。 
English: General Wei Wei said to King Wu: If Sun lives outside, there will inevitably be turmoil.

古文：武卫士施朔又告纟林谋反。
现代文：武卫士施朔也报告说孙要谋反。
English: Wu's bodyguard Shi Shuo also reported that Sun was plotting a rebellion.

古文：吴主将讨纟林，密问辅义将军张布，布曰： 左将军丁奉，虽不能吏书，而计略过人，能断大事。 
现代文：吴王将要讨伐孙，就秘密地向辅义将军张布询问计策，张布说： 左将军丁奉，虽不能撰写文书，但他计谋过人，能决断大事。 
English: When the king of Wu was about to attack Sun, he secretly asked Zhang Bu, the general of Fuyi, for advice. Zhang Bu said, "Although Ding Bong, the general of Zuo, cannot write a document, he is a good strategist and can decide important matters.

古文：吴主召奉告之，且问以计画。奉曰： 丞相兄弟支党甚盛，恐人心不同，不可卒制；可因腊会有陛兵以诛之。 
现代文：吴王召来了丁奉，讲了自己的想法，并向他询问计策，丁奉说： 丞相的兄弟党羽很多，恐怕人心不同，不能突然制服他，可以乘腊祭集会之机用宿卫之兵杀掉他。 
English: The king of Wu summoned Ding Bong, told him of his thoughts, and asked him about his strategy. Ding Bong said, "The prime minister's brother has many supporters. I'm afraid people's hearts are different. We can't suddenly subdue him. We can use the opportunity of the wax festival gathering to kill him with the guards."

古文：吴主从之。
现代文：吴王同意了。
English: King Wu followed his advice.

古文：十二月，丁卯，建业中谣言明会有变，纟林闻之，不悦。
现代文：十二月，丁卯，建业城中有谣言流传说明日腊祭要有事变，孙听到后，很不高兴。
English: In December, Dingwu, there was a rumor circulating in Jianye City that there would be an incident at the Japanese-Brazilian festival. After hearing this, Sun was very unhappy.

古文：夜，大风，发屋扬沙，纟林益惧。
现代文：夜里，刮起了大风，吹掀了屋顶扬起漫天风沙，孙更加害怕。
English: In the night, a strong wind blew, blowing up the roof and lifting the wind and sand all over the sky. Sun was even more afraid.

古文：戊辰，腊会，纟林称疾不至；吴主强起之，使者十馀辈，纟林不得已，将入，众止焉。
现代文：戊辰，腊祭集会，孙称疾不去；吴王强令他来，派使者催促十余次，孙不得已，将要入宫，众人劝他别去。
English: When the wax festival was held in Wuchen, Sun said that he was too ill to go. Wu Wangqiang ordered him to come and sent an envoy to urge him more than ten times. Sun had no choice but to enter the palace, and everyone advised him not to go.

古文：纟林曰： 国家屡有命，不可辞。
现代文：孙说： 国家多次下令，我不可推辞。
English: Sun said, "The state has ordered me to do so many times, and I cannot refuse.

古文：可豫整兵，令府内起火，因是可得速还。 
现代文：你们可以预先整顿好兵力，在府内放一把火，以这个为借口我可以很快回来。 
English: You can reorganize your forces in advance and set fire to the palace, and I can use this as an excuse to come back soon.

古文：遂入，寻而火起，纟林求出，吴主曰： 外兵自多，不足烦丞相也。 
现代文：随即入宫，不久府内起了火，孙要求出去看看，吴王说： 外面兵力自然很多，不用麻烦丞相亲自去。 
English: Then he entered the palace, and soon there was a fire in the palace. Sun asked to go out and take a look, and King Wu said, "Naturally, there are a lot of troops outside, so don't bother the prime minister to go in person."

古文：纟林起离席，奉、布目左右缚之。
现代文：孙起身离席，丁奉、张布目示左右之人把他绑起来。
English: Sun got up and left the table. Ding Bong and Zhang Bu showed him around and tied him up.

古文：纟林叩头曰： 愿徙交州。 
现代文：孙叩头说： 我愿意迁徙到交州。 
English: Sun Kudou said: I am willing to move to Jiaozhou.

古文：吴主曰： 卿何以不徙滕胤、吕据于交州乎！ 
现代文：吴王说： 你为什么不把滕胤、吕据迁到交州？ 
English: King Wu said, "Why don't you move Teng Ying and Lv Jian to Jiaozhou?"

古文：纟林复曰： 愿没为官奴。 
现代文：孙又说： 我愿当个官家奴隶。 
English: Sun also said, "I am willing to be a slave of the government."

古文：吴主曰： 卿何不以胤、据为奴乎！ 
现代文：吴王说： 你为什么不让滕胤、吕据为奴呢？ 
English: King Wu said, "Why don't you let Teng Ying and Lv Zheng become your slaves?"

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：随即就把他杀了。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：以纟林首令其众曰： 诸与纟林同谋者，皆赦之。 
现代文：又拿着孙的首级对他手下的兵将说： 凡与孙同谋的人，一律赦免。 
English: And he took hold of his son's head and said to the soldiers who were with him, "Let all who have taken part in the conspiracy be absolved.

古文：放仗者五千人。
现代文：放下兵器投降者有五千人。
English: Five thousand people laid down their weapons at that time.

古文：孙闿乘船欲降北，追杀之。
现代文：孙乘船逃走想要投降魏国，吴王派人追杀了他。
English: Sun fled by boat and tried to surrender to Wei, but the king of Wu sent men after him to kill him.

古文：夷纟林三族，发孙峻棺，取其印绶，斫其木而埋之。
现代文：诛杀了孙的三族，又掘开孙峻的坟墓，取出他的印绶，消薄了他的棺木然后再埋上。
English: He killed Sun's three clans, dug up Sun Jun's grave, took out his seal, thinned out his coffin and then reburied it.

古文：己巳，吴主以张布为中军督。
现代文：己巳，吴王任命张布为中军督。
English: At that time, King Wu appointed Zhang Bu as the Chinese military governor.

古文：改葬诸葛恪、滕胤、吕据等，其罹恪等事远徒者，一切召还。
现代文：又改葬了诸葛恪、滕胤、吕据等人，凡受诸葛恪等人之事连累而迁徙远方的人全部召回。
English: They also reburied Zhuge Ke, Teng Tan, Liusheng and others, and all those who were affected by Zhuge Ke and others and moved far away were recalled.

古文：朝臣有乞为诸葛恪立碑者，吴主诏曰： 盛夏出军，士卒伤损，无尺寸之功，不可谓能；受托孤之任，死于竖子之手，不可谓智。 
现代文：朝廷大臣中有人请求为诸葛恪立碑，吴王下诏说： 他盛夏出军，士卒损伤严重，又没有取得任何成功，不能说是有才能；他接受托孤的重任，却死在一个小子手里，不能说是有智。 
English: One of the ministers of the imperial court requested that a monument be erected for Zhuge Ke, and King Wu issued an edict saying: He went to the army in the height of summer, his soldiers were seriously injured, and he did not achieve any success, so he cannot be said to have talent; he accepted the heavy responsibility of supporting someone, but died at the hands of a child, so he cannot be said to have wisdom.

古文：遂寝。初，汉昭烈留魏延镇汉中，皆实兵诸围以御外敌，敌若来攻，使不得入。
现代文：于是为他立碑的建议就作罢了。当初，蜀汉昭烈帝刘备留魏延镇守汉中，他在各个外围城中布满兵力以抵御入侵之敌，敌人如果来进攻，不让他们攻入。
English: Therefore, the suggestion of erecting a monument for him was abandoned. At the beginning, Liu Bei, the Shuhan Emperor, stayed in Wei Yan Town to defend Han Zhong. He filled the outlying towns with troops to resist the invasion of the enemy. If the enemy came to attack, he would not let them enter.

古文：及兴势之役，王平捍拒曹爽，皆承此制。
现代文：在兴势的战役中，王平勇猛地抗拒曹爽，也都承用了这种用兵之法。
English: By the time of the Battle of Mount Xingye, when Wang Ping fought against Cao Shuang, this method was still in use.

古文：及姜维用事，建议以为 错守诸围，适可御敌，不获大利。
现代文：到姜维掌兵时，提出建议，认为 置兵驻守各个据点，只能抵御入侵之敌，不能获得大胜。
English: When Jiang Wei received the soldiers, he made a suggestion that the soldiers stationed at various strongholds could only resist the invading enemy and could not win a great victory.

古文：不若使闻敌至，诸围皆敛兵聚谷，退就汉、乐二城，听敌入平，重关头镇守以捍之，令游军旁出以伺其虚。
现代文：不如让敌兵进入，各据点都收敛兵力积聚粮食，退守汉、乐二城，任凭敌人进入平原之地，我们镇守重要的关口以抵御敌人，再派游动军队在附近埋伏以伺察敌人的虚弱之处加以攻击。
English: It would be better to let the enemy soldiers enter, gather troops from all the strongholds, accumulate grain, retreat to Han and Le two cities, let the enemy enter the plains, guard the important pass to resist the enemy, and then send roving troops to ambush nearby to observe the enemy's weak points and attack them.

古文：敌攻关不克，野无散谷，千里运粮，自然疲乏；引退之日，然后诸城并出，与游军并力搏之，此殄敌之术也。 
现代文：敌人攻关不能取胜，野外又没有分散的粮食，他们从千里之外运送粮食，自然会非常疲乏劳顿；乘敌人撤兵的时候，我们各城守军一起出击，与游动军队共同与敌人拼杀，这是消灭敌人的战术。 
English: The enemy can not win the key, and there is no scattered grain in the field. They transport grain from thousands of miles away, and they will naturally be very tired and exhausted. When the enemy withdraws, our city defenders attack together and fight the enemy together with the roving army. This is the tactic of eliminating the enemy.

古文：于是汉主令督汉中胡济却住汉寿，监军王含守乐城，护军蒋斌守汉城。
现代文：于是汉后主下令让督领汉中的胡济撤兵进驻汉寿，让监军王含镇守乐城，让护军蒋斌镇守汉城。
English: Therefore, the Han empress ordered the commander-in-chief Hanzhong Hu Ji to withdraw his troops to Han Shou, let the supervisor Wang Han Zhen guard the city of Le, and let the guard Jiang Bin guard the city of Seoul.

古文：高贵乡公下甘露四年
现代文：甘露四年
English: Four years of nectar

古文：春，正月，黄龙二见宁陵井中。
现代文：春季，正月，黄龙两次出现于宁陵的井中。
English: In the spring, the first month, Huanglong appeared twice in the well of Ningling.

古文：先是，顿丘、冠军、阳夏进中屡有龙见，群臣以为吉祥，帝曰： 龙者，君德也，上不在天，下不在田，而数屈于井，非嘉兆也。 
现代文：在此之前，顿丘、冠军、阳夏地方的井中多次有龙出现，群臣认为这是吉祥的象征，魏帝说： 龙代表了君主之德。它上不在天，下不在田，而多次屈居圩井中，这不是好的兆头。 
English: Prior to this, many dragons had appeared in the wells of Dongqiu, Champion, and Yangxia. The courtiers considered this to be an auspicious symbol. Emperor Wei said: The dragon represents the monarch's virtue. It is not in the sky above, nor in the fields below, but many times in the wells. This is not a good sign.

古文：作《潜龙诗》以自讽，司马昭见而恶之。
现代文：于是作《潜龙诗》以自我讽喻，司马昭看后十分不满。
English: As a result, he wrote "Submerged Dragon Poem" as a self-parody, and Sima Zhao was very dissatisfied after reading it.

古文：夏，六月，京陵穆侯王昶卒。
现代文：夏季，六月，京陵穆侯王昶去世。
English: In the summer, in June, the Keiling Mu Hou Wang Yao passed away.

古文：汉主封其子谌为北地王，恂为新兴王，虔为上党王。
现代文：汉后主封其子刘谌为北地王，刘询为新兴王，刘虔为上党王。
English: The empress dowager of the Han Dynasty made her son Liu Xuan the King of the North, Liu Xun the Emerging King, and Liu Qian the Upper Party King.

古文：尚书令陈祗以巧佞有宠于汉主，姜维虽位在祗上，而多率众在外，希亲朝政，权任不及祗。
现代文：尚书令陈祗因善于花言巧语逢迎讨好，深得汉王宠幸，姜维的地位虽在孙祗之上，但大部分时间率兵在外，很少参与朝政，所以权力不如陈祗大。
English: Shang Shuling made Chen Qi the favorite of the Han king because he was good at flattery. Although Jiang Wei's status was higher than Sun Qi, he led soldiers outside most of the time and rarely participated in court politics, so his power was not as great as Chen Qi's.

古文：秋，八月，丙子，祗卒；汉主以仆射义阳董厥为尚书令，尚书诸葛瞻为仆射。
现代文：秋季，八月，丙子，陈祗去世；汉后主任命仆射、义阳人董厥为尚书令，尚书诸葛瞻为仆射。
English: In the autumn, in August, Cun Zi, Chen Yao passed away; the Han empress appointed Pusha, Yiyang person Dong Jue as Shang Shuling, and Shang Shuling Zhuge Zhan as Pusha.

古文：冬，十一月，车骑将军孙壹为婢所杀。
现代文：冬季，十一月，车骑将军孙壹被奴婢所杀。
English: In winter, in November, the chariot and cavalry general Sun Yi was killed by slaves.

古文：是岁，以王基为征南将军，都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：这一年，任命王基为征南将军，都督荆州诸军事。
English: In the same year, Wang Ji was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition and the military commander of Jingzhou.

古文：元皇帝上
现代文：元皇帝上
English: Former Emperor Wu

古文：高贵乡公下景元元年
现代文：魏元帝景元元年春季，正月朔，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred in the spring of the first month of the first year of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties.

古文：春，正月，朔，日有食之。夏，四月，诏有司率遵前命，复进大将军昭位相国，封晋公，加九锡。
现代文：夏季，四月，诏令有关官员一切遵照以前的命令，再次晋升大将军司马昭为相国，封为晋公，加赐九锡。
English: In the summer, in April, the emperor ordered the relevant officials to comply with all previous orders, and once again promoted General Sima Zhao to the position of consort of the emperor, made him the crown prince, and gave him Jiuxi.

古文：帝见威权日去，不胜其忿。
现代文：魏帝见自己的权力威势日渐削弱，感到不胜忿恨。
English: When Emperor Wei saw that his power was weakening day by day, he was furious.

古文：五月，己丑，召侍中王沈、尚书王经、散骑常侍王业，谓曰： 司马昭之心，路人所知也。
现代文：五月，己丑，召见侍中王沈、尚书王经、散骑常侍王业，对他们说： 司马昭的野心，连路上的行人都知道。
English: In May, Ji Jiu summoned the attendants Wang Shen, Shang Shu Wang Jing, and Sanzhi, who always served Wang Ye, and said to them: Sima Zhao's ambition, even pedestrians on the road know.

古文：吾不能坐受废辱，今日当与卿自出讨之。 
现代文：我不能坐等被废黜的耻辱，今日我将亲自与你们一起出去讨伐他。 
English: I can't wait for the ignominy of being deposed, and today I will personally go out with you to fight him.

古文：王经曰： 昔鲁昭公不忍季氏，败走失国，为天下笑。
现代文：王经说： 古时鲁昭公因不能忍受季氏的专权，讨伐失败而出走，丢掉了国家，被天下人所耻笑。
English: Wang Jing said: In ancient times, Lu Zhaogong couldn't stand the autocratic power of the Ji clan, so he went out in a failed crusade, lost his country, and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：今权在其门，为日久矣。朝廷四方皆为之致死，不顾逆顺之理，非一日也。
现代文：如今权柄掌握在司马昭之手已经很久了，朝廷内以及四方之臣都为他效命而不顾逆顺之理，也不是一天了。
English: Now, power has been in Sima Zhao's hands for a long time, and it has not been a day since the imperial court and the courtiers of the four quarters have been serving him regardless of the contrary.

古文：且宿卫空阙，兵甲寡弱，陛下何所资用；而一旦如此，无乃欲除疾而更深之邪！
现代文：而且宫中宿卫空缺，兵力十分弱小，陛下凭借什么？而您一旦这样做，不是想要除去疾病却反而使病更厉害了吗？
English: Moreover, there is a vacancy in the palace guards, and the army is very weak. What can His Majesty rely on? And once you do this, instead of trying to get rid of the disease, have you made it worse?

古文：祸殆不测，宜见重详。 
现代文：祸患恐怕难以预测，应该重新加以详细研究。 
English: The scourge may be difficult to predict and should be studied in detail again.

古文：帝乃出怀中黄素诏投地曰： 行之决矣！
现代文：魏帝这时就从怀中拿出黄绢绍书扔在地上说： 这样做已经决定了！
English: At this time, Emperor Wei took the Huang Qi Shao book out of his arms and threw it on the ground, saying, "It has been decided to do this!"

古文：正使死何惧，况不必死邪！ 
现代文：纵使死了又有什么可怕的，何况不一定会死呢！ 
English: What's so terrible about dying, especially if you don't have to die?

古文：于是入白太后。
现代文：说完就进内宫禀告太后。
English: After saying this, he went into the Inner Court to deliver an obituary to the Empress Dowager.

古文：沈、业奔走告昭，呼经欲与俱，经不从。
现代文：王沈、王业跑出去告诉司马昭，想叫王经与他们一起去，但王经不去。
English: Wang Shen and Wang Ye ran out to tell Sima Zhao that they wanted Wang Jing to go with them, but Wang Jing would not go.

古文：帝遂拔剑升辇，率殿中宿卫苍头官僮鼓噪而出。
现代文：魏帝随即拔出剑登辇，率领殿中宿卫和奴仆们呼喊着出了宫。
English: Emperor Wei then pulled out his sword and led the palace guards and servants out of the palace.

古文：昭弟屯骑校尉伷遇帝于东止车门，左右呵之，伷众奔走。
现代文：司马昭的弟弟屯骑校尉司马在东止车门遇到魏帝，魏帝左右之人怒声呵斥他们，司马的兵士被吓得逃走了。
English: Sima Zhao's younger brother, the cavalry captain Sima, met Wei Di at the east gate of the train. People around Wei Di shouted at them angrily. Sima's soldiers were scared and fled.

古文：中护军贾充自外入，逆与帝战于南阙下，帝自用剑。
现代文：中护军贾充从外而入，迎面与魏帝战于南面宫阙之下，魏帝亲自用剑拼杀。
English: Jia Chong, the middle guard, entered from the outside and fought against the Wei Emperor face-to-face under the southern palanquin. The Wei Emperor himself fought with a sword.

古文：众欲退，骑督成倅弟太子舍人济问充曰： 事急矣，当云何？ 
现代文：众人想要退却，骑督成之弟太子舍人成济问贾充说： 事情紧急了，你说怎么办？ 
English: The crowd wanted to retreat, but the prince asked Jia Chong: "The situation is urgent, what do you say?"

古文：充曰； 司马公畜养汝等，正为今日。
现代文：贾充说： 司马公养你们这些人，正是为了今日。
English: Jia Chong said: Sima Gong raised you people, just for today.

古文：今日之事，无所问也！ 
现代文：今日之事，没什么可问的！ 
English: There's nothing to ask about today!

古文：济即抽戈前刺帝，殒于车下。
现代文：于是成济立即抽出长戈上前刺杀魏帝，把他杀死于车下。
English: As a result, Cheng Jie immediately pulled out Chang Ge to go ahead and assassinate Wei Di, killing him under the car.

古文：昭闻之，大惊，自投于地。
现代文：司马昭闻讯大惊，自己跪倒在地上。
English: Sima Zhao was so shocked by the news that he fell to his knees.

古文：太傅孚奔往，枕帝股而哭，甚哀，曰； 杀陛下者，臣之罪也！ 
现代文：太傅司马孚奔跑过去，把魏帝的头枕在自己的腿上哭得十分悲哀，哭喊着说： 陛下被杀，是我的罪过啊！ 
English: Grand Master Sima Fu ran over, put Emperor Wei's head on his lap and wept very sadly, crying out, "It was my fault that Your Majesty was killed!

古文：昭入殿中，召群臣会议。
现代文：司马昭进入殿中，召集群臣议论。
English: Sima Zhao entered the hall and called the courtiers together for discussion.

古文：尚书左仆射陈泰不至，昭使其舅尚书荀顗召之，泰曰： 世之论者以泰方于舅，今舅不如泰也。 
现代文：尚书左仆射陈泰不来，司马昭让陈泰之舅尚书荀去叫他，陈泰说： 人们议论说我陈泰可以和您相比，今天看来您不如我陈泰。 
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Sho Chen Tai did not come, Sima Zhao asked Chen Tai's uncle Shang Shuxuan to call him, Chen Tai said: People say that I Chen Tai can be compared with you, today it seems that you are not as good as me Chen Tai.

古文：子弟内外咸共逼之，乃入，见昭，悲恸。昭亦对之泣曰： 玄伯，卿何以处我？ 
现代文：但子弟们里里外外都逼着陈泰去，这才不得已而入宫，见到司马昭，悲恸欲绝，司马昭也对着他流泪，说： 玄伯，你将怎样对待我呢？ 
English: But his sons were pushing Chen Tai to go everywhere, so he had no choice but to enter the palace. He saw Sima Zhao, who was heartbroken. Sima Zhao also shed tears for him and said, "Xuan Bo, how will you treat me?

古文：泰曰： 独有斩贾充，少可以谢天下耳。 
现代文：陈泰说： 只有杀掉贾充，才能稍稍谢罪于天下。 
English: Chen Tai said, "Only by killing Jia Chong can we slightly atone to the world."

古文：昭久之曰： 卿更思其次。 
现代文：司马昭考虑了很久才说： 你再想想其他办法。 
English: Sima Zhao thought about it for a long time before saying: You should think of other ways.

古文：泰曰： 泰言惟有进于此，不知其次。 
现代文：陈泰说： 我说的只能是这些，不知其他。 
English: Chen Tai said: I can only say this, I don't know anything else.

古文：昭乃不复更言。
现代文：司马昭就不再说话了。
English: Sima Zhao stopped talking.

古文：顗，彧之子也。
现代文：荀是荀之子。
English: Toad is the son of Toad.

古文：太后下令，罪状高贵乡公，废为庶人，葬以民礼。
现代文：太后下令，列举高贵乡公的罪状，把他废为庶人，以百姓的丧礼安葬。
English: The empress dowager gave orders to enumerate the crimes of the noble lord of the village, to depose him as a commoner, and to bury him with a commoner's funeral.

古文：收王经及其家属付廷尉。
现代文：拘捕了王经及其家属交付廷尉处置。
English: Wang Jing and his family were arrested and handed over to court officers.

古文：经谢其母，母颜色不变，笑而应曰： 人谁不死，正恐不得其所 以此并命，何恨之有！ 
现代文：王经向他母亲谢罪，他母亲脸色不变，笑着回答说： 人谁能不死，只恐怕死的不得其所。为此事大家同死，还有什么遗恨！ 
English: Wang Jing thanked his mother for her forgiveness. His mother's face did not change, and she replied with a smile: "Anyone who can not die, is just afraid that they will not be able to die. For this reason, we all died together, what is there left to hate!

古文：及就诛，故吏向雄哭，哀动一市。
现代文：到被诛杀的那天，故吏向雄为之痛哭，悲哀之情感动了整个街市之人。
English: On the day he was beaten to death, the former official cried bitterly for Xiang Xiong, and the emotion of grief moved the entire people in the market.

古文：王沈以功封安平侯。
现代文：王沈因有功被封为安平侯。
English: Wang Shen was awarded the title of Anping Marquis for his meritorious service.

古文：庚寅，太傅孚等上言，请以王礼葬高贵乡公，太后许之。
现代文：庚寅，太傅司马孚等人向朝廷进言，请求以藩王的丧礼安葬高贵乡公，太后同意了。
English: Gyeong-in, Taifu Sima Fu and others proposed to the imperial court to request that the noble townsman be buried with the funeral of the king of the clan, and the empress dowager agreed.

古文：使中护军司马炎迎燕王宇之子常道乡公璜于鄴，以为明帝嗣。
现代文：派中护军司马炎到邺城去迎接燕王曹宇之子常道乡公曹璜，作为魏明帝的继承人。
English: Sima Yan, a member of the Central Guard, was sent to Lushan to meet Cao Yu, the son of Yan King Cao Yu, and the heir of Wei Ming Emperor.

古文：炎，昭之子也。
现代文：司马炎是司马昭之子。
English: Sima Yan is the son of Sima Zhao.

古文：辛卯，群公奏太后自今令书皆称诏制。
现代文：辛卯，各位公侯向太后奏明，从今日起太后下达的命令文书都称为诏。
English: Xinwu, you princes should inform the empress dowager that from now on, all orders issued by the empress dowager will be referred to as the imperial edict.

古文：癸卯，司马昭固让相国、晋公、九锡之命，太后诏许之。
现代文：癸卯，司马昭坚决推辞封锡相国、晋公、九锡的命令，太后下诏同意。
English: However, Sima Zhao resolutely refused the order to seal Xixianguo, Jin Gong and Jiuxi, and the empress dowager agreed.

古文：戊申，昭上言： 成济兄弟大逆不道。 夷其族。
现代文：戊申，司马昭进言说： 成济兄弟大逆不道，要诛灭其族。 
English: According to Wushin, Sima Zhao said: "The Chengji brothers are traitors and want to exterminate their own people.

古文：六月，癸丑，太后诏常道乡公更名奂。
现代文：六月，癸丑，太后下诏让常道乡公改名为奂。
English: In June, the Empress Dowager issued an imperial edict to change the name of Jondo Township to Jang.

古文：甲寅，常道乡公入洛阳，是日，即皇帝位，年十五，大赦，改元。
现代文：甲寅，常道乡公进入洛阳，当天，即皇帝位，时年十五岁。实行大赦，改年号为景元。
English: Jia Yin, the prince of the township of Changdao, entered Luoyang at the age of fifteen on the same day that he became emperor. An amnesty was implemented, and his era name was changed to Jingyuan.

古文：丙辰，诏进司马昭爵位九锡如前，昭固让，乃止。
现代文：丙辰，诏令晋升司马昭的爵位、九锡如前所命，司马昭坚决推辞，于是作罢。
English: At that time, the imperial edict promoted Sima Zhao to the peerage, Jiuxi, as previously ordered, Sima Zhao resolutely refused, so he quit.

古文：癸亥，以尚书左仆射王观为司空。
现代文：癸亥，任命尚书右仆射王观为司空。
English: Zou Hai appointed Shang Shu's right-hand man, Sha Wangguan, as his subordinate.

古文：吴都尉严密建议作浦里塘，群臣皆以为难；唯卫将军陈留濮阳兴以为可成，遂会诸军民就作，功费不可胜数，士卒多死亡，民大愁怨。
现代文：吴国都尉严密建议建造浦里塘，群臣都认为很困难，只有卫将军、陈留人濮阳兴认为可以建成，于是集中各地军民去建造，工程耗资巨大，士卒也有很多人死亡，百姓十分愁苦怨恨。
English: Captain Wu Guo made a strict proposal to build the Urlitang, and the ministers all thought it was very difficult. Only General Wei and Chen Lvun believed that it could be built, so they concentrated soldiers and civilians from all over the country to build it. The project was very expensive, many soldiers also died, and the people were very sad and resentful.

古文：会稽郡谣言王亮当还为天子，而亮宫人告亮使巫祷祠，有恶言，有司以闻。
现代文：会稽郡有谣言说会稽王孙亮会重返天子之位，而孙亮的宫人告发说孙亮让巫者祈祷，说了些不好的话，有关官吏把这些情况奏告朝廷。
English: There was a rumor in the county of Hefei that the king of Hefei, Sun Liang, would return to the position of the Son of Heaven, and Sun Liang's courtiers reported that Sun Liang asked the sorcerer to pray and said some bad words. The relevant officials reported these circumstances to the imperial court.

古文：吴主黜亮为候官侯，遣之国；亮自杀，卫送者皆伏罪。
现代文：吴王贬孙亮为侯官侯，并遣送他去封国；孙亮自杀，护送之人也都被治罪。
English: The King of Wu demoted Sun Liang to the status of a vassal and sent him to a vassal state; Sun Liang committed suicide, and those who escorted him were also punished.

古文：冬，十月，阳乡肃侯王观卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，阳乡肃侯王观去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Gu, the mayor of Yangxiang, died.

古文：十一月，诏尊燕王，待以殊礼。
现代文：十一月，诏令尊崇燕王曹宇，并待以特殊的礼遇。
English: In November, the imperial edict honored Yan Wang Cao Yu and treated him with special courtesy.

古文：十二月，甲午，以司隶校尉王祥为司空。
现代文：十二月，甲午，任命司隶校尉王祥为司空。
English: In December, the afternoon of the first day of the month, Wang Xiang, a sergeant-major, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：尚书王沈为豫州刺史。
现代文：尚书王沈担任豫州刺史。
English: Shangshu Wang Shen served as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：初到，下教敕属城及士民曰： 若有能陈长吏可否，说百姓所患者，给谷五百斛。
现代文：上任之初，下命令给所辖各城邑及士民百姓说： 如有能陈述官吏的好坏，诉说百姓忧虑的人，赐给粮食五百斛。
English: At the beginning of his term of office, he issued an order to the people of the towns and villages under his jurisdiction, saying: If there is anyone who can tell the good and bad of officials and tell the people's worries, give him five hundred baht of grain.

古文：若说刺史得失、朝政宽猛者，给谷千斛。 
现代文：如有能说出刺史得失，朝政宽严的人，赐给粮食一千斛。 
English: If there is anyone who can tell us the gains and losses of the history of biting and the leniency and severity of the imperial government, give him a thousand baht of grain.

古文：主簿陈廞、褚䂮入白曰： 教旨思闻苦言，示以劝赏。
现代文：主簿陈、褚入府禀告说： 教令的宗旨是想听一听百姓的苦衷之言，加以劝勉和赏赐。
English: Chen, the chief bookkeeper, said in the notice: The purpose of the edict is to listen to the people's heartfelt words, and to encourage and reward them.

古文：窃恐拘介之士或惮赏而不言，贪昧之人将慕利而妄举。
现代文：我们恐怕那些清正廉洁之士害怕受赏而不说，而那些贪婪昏昧之人将要求利而胡言乱语。
English: We are afraid that those who are honest and upright will not speak out for fear of being rewarded, while those who are greedy and ignorant will demand profits and talk nonsense.

古文：苛不合宜，赏不虚行，则远听者未知当否之所在，徒见言之不用，谓设而不行。
现代文：如果说得不合适，赏赐不会白白地给他，但那些不了解内情的人不知正确错误之所在，只看到说的话不被采用，于是认为您设置赏格而不真正实行。
English: If it is not appropriate, the reward will not be given to him in vain, but those who do not know the inside story do not know the right and wrong, only see that the words are not adopted, so they think that you set a reward and do not really implement it.

古文：愚以告下之事可小须后。 
现代文：我们认为告示百姓之事，可以稍等一等再说。 
English: We think that the announcement of the people can wait a little longer.

古文：沈又教曰： 夫兴益于上，受分于下，斯乃君子之操，何不言之有！ 
现代文：王沈又下令说： 进言有益于上，赏赐给予百姓，这是君子的德操，有什么理由不说？ 
English: Wang Shen also ordered, "It is beneficial to the upper echelons to make suggestions, and to reward the people. This is the moral conduct of a gentleman. What is the reason for not saying it?

古文：褚䂮复白曰： 尧、舜、周公所以能致忠谏者，以其款诚之心著也。
现代文：褚又禀告说： 尧、舜、周公之所以能使人忠心进谏，是因为他们诚恳真挚的心十分显著。
English: The obituary also said: "The reason why Zou, Zou and Zhou Gong were able to inspire loyalty was because their sincere and sincere hearts were very obvious.

古文：冰炭不言而冷热之质自明者，以其有实也。
现代文：冰炭不会说话而其冷热的本质自然很明确，这是因为它们是真实的。
English: Because they are real, ice and coal do not speak and their hot and cold nature is naturally clear.

古文：若好忠直，如冰炭之自然，则谔谔之言将不求而自至。
现代文：如果喜好忠直之言，能象冰炭那样自然，那么忠直之言将不用求就会自然而至。
English: If a liking for honest speech could be as natural as charcoal, then honest speech would come naturally without having to be asked.

古文：若德不足以配唐、虞，明不足以并周公，实不可以同冰炭，是悬重赏，忠谏之言未可致也。 
现代文：如果德操不足以同唐尧、虞舜相配，贤明不足以同周公相比，真实不能象冰炭一样，那么尽管出具重赏，忠心直谏之言也不会听到。 
English: If morality is not enough to match with Tang Jun and Yu Jun, if wisdom is not enough to compare with Zhou Gong, and if truth cannot be like ice and coal, then despite the heavy reward, the words of loyalty will not be heard.

古文：沈乃止。
现代文：于是王沈就停止了赏赐进言的作法。
English: As a result, Wang Shen stopped the practice of rewarding suggestions.

古文：高贵乡公下景元二年
现代文：景元二年
English: In the second year of King Gyeongwon

古文：春，三月，襄阳太守胡烈表言： 吴将邓由、李光等十八屯同谋归化，遣使送质任，欲令郡兵临江迎拔。 
现代文：春季，三月，襄阳太守胡烈上表说： 吴国将领邓由、李光等十八个营垒共同商定归顺我国，并派遣使者送来人质，想让我们的军队开到长江边去迎取。 
English: In the spring, in March, Hu Lie, Yangyang's governor-general, issued a proclamation: "Wu's generals, Deng Yu, Li Guang, and eighteen other battalions have jointly agreed to surrender to our country, and have sent an envoy to bring the hostages and want our army to drive to the Yangtze River to meet them.

古文：诏王基部分诸军径造沮水以迎之。 若由等如期到者，便当因此震荡江表。 
现代文：诏令让王基布置军队直接到沮水去迎接。诏书说： 如果邓由等人能如期到达，就会因此而震荡江表。 
English: The imperial edict ordered Wang Ji to dispatch troops directly to Deshimizu to meet. The imperial edict said: If Deng Yu and others can arrive as scheduled, it will shake the river table.

古文：基驰驿遗司马昭书，说由等可疑之状， 且当清澄，未宜便举重兵深入应之。 
现代文：王基派驿使快速送信给司马昭，陈述邓由等人的可疑情况，说： 此事还应当进一步澄清查证，不应立即发重兵深入敌境去接应。 
English: Wang Ji dispatched an envoy to quickly send a message to Sima Zhao, stating the suspicious situation of Deng Yu and others, saying: This matter should also be further clarified and verified, and heavy troops should not be immediately sent deep into the enemy territory to respond.

古文：又曰： 夷陵东西道皆险狭，竹木丛蔚，卒有要害，弩马不陈。
现代文：又说： 夷陵东西两边都是险要狭隘之地，竹木丛密茂盛，如果敌人突然在要害之地出击，那么我们的兵马就不能施展力量。
English: He also said: Both the east and west sides of Yiling are narrow and narrow, and the bamboo thickets are dense and luxuriant. If the enemy suddenly attacks at the critical point, then our soldiers and horses cannot exert their strength.

古文：今者筋角濡弱，水潦方降，废盛农之务，徼难必之利，此事之危者也。
现代文：如今正值春夏之交，弓弩受潮而柔软无力，而且正当降雨之后，此时废弃繁忙的农事，邀取难以必得的利益，这是危险的事情。
English: Now is the turn of spring and summer, the bow and arrow are damp and weak, and after the proper rainfall, it is dangerous to abandon the busy farming at this time and invite hard-won benefits.

古文：姜维之趣上圭阝，文钦之据寿春，皆深入求利，以取覆没，此近事之鉴戒也。
现代文：姜维趋进上，文钦占据寿春，都是因深入敌境求取利益而遭到全军覆没的结局，这是近来之事的戒鉴。
English: Jiang Wei's tendency to advance and Wen Qin's occupation of Shouchun were both the result of the whole army being overwhelmed because of the pursuit of interests deep into the enemy territory. This is a cautionary tale of recent events.

古文：嘉平已来，累有内难，当今之宜，当务镇安社稷，抚宁上下，力农务本，怀柔百姓，未宜动众以求外利也。 
现代文：嘉平年间以来，多次发生内部危难，当今我们应做的事宜，最重要的是力求安定国家社稷，抚慰上下臣民，努力从事农业生产。安抚百姓，不应兴师动众以求外部利益。 
English: Since the Jiaping era, there have been many internal crises. The most important thing we should do today is to strive to stabilize the national society, comfort the people at all levels, and strive to engage in agricultural production. To appease the people, we should not stir up the masses to seek external benefits.

古文：昭累得基书，意狐疑，敕诸军已上道者，且权停住所在，须候节度。
现代文：司马昭多次得到王基书信，犹豫不定，命令已经上路的诸军暂时停止前进就地驻扎，等候新的部署。
English: Sima Zhao received Wang Ji's letters many times, hesitated, and ordered the troops that had already set out to temporarily stop advancing and stay in place, waiting for a new deployment.

古文：基复遗昭书曰： 昔汉祖纳郦生之说，欲封六国，寤张良之谋而趣销印。
现代文：王基又给司马昭写信说： 以前汉高祖采纳郦食其的意见，想要分封六国，明白张良的谋略后就迅速追回销毁了已刻之印。
English: Wang Ji also wrote a letter to Sima Zhao, saying: In the past, Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty adopted his opinion and wanted to subdivide the six countries. After he understood Zhang Liang's strategy, he quickly recovered and destroyed the engraved seal.

古文：基谋虑浅短，诚不及留侯，亦惧襄阳有食其之谬。 
现代文：我的谋虑短浅实在不如留侯张良，但也害怕襄阳之事会出现听信郦食其之言的错误。 
English: My short-sightedness is really not as good as Zhang Liang's, but I am also afraid that there will be a mistake of listening to and eating his words in the matter of Xiangyang.

古文：昭于是罢兵，报基书曰： 凡处事者多曲相从顺，鲜能确然共尽理实，诚感忠爱，每见规示，辄依来旨，已罢军严。 
现代文：于是司马昭停止进兵，又给王基写回信说： 一般人处事大多曲己而顺从，很少能明确而详尽地向我陈述实在的道理。真诚地感谢你的忠爱，多次得到你的规劝晓喻。现在就依照你来信的意思，已经停止了发兵。 
English: As a result, Sima Zhao stopped sending troops, and wrote a letter back to Wang Qi, saying, "Ordinary people are mostly devious and obedient in their dealings, and rarely can they clearly and thoroughly explain the real reason to me. I sincerely thank you for your loyalty, and have received your advice and explanation many times. Now, in accordance with the intention of your letter, I have stopped sending troops.

古文：既而由等果不降。
现代文：到了约定日期，邓由等人果然不来投降。
English: On the agreed date, Deng Yu and others did not surrender.

古文：烈，奋之弟也。
现代文：胡烈是胡奋之弟。
English: Hu Lie is the younger brother of Hu Fen.

古文：秋，八月，甲寅，复命司马昭进爵位如前，不受。
现代文：秋季，八月，甲寅，再次命令司马昭晋升爵位像以前那样，他仍然不接受。
English: In the autumn, in August, Gao Yin once again ordered Sima Zhao to promote him to a knighthood, but as before, he still did not accept.

古文：冬，十月，汉主以董厥为辅国大将军，诸葛瞻为都护、卫将军，共平尚书事，以侍中樊建为尚书令。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉后主任命董厥为辅国大将军，诸葛瞻为都护、卫将军，共同管理尚书事，又任命侍中樊建为尚书令。
English: In the winter, in October, the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty appointed Dong Jue as the assistant general of the country, Zhuge Zhan as the general of the capital guard and the guards, and jointly managed the official correspondence, and also appointed the chamberlain Yu Jian as the official correspondence.

古文：时中常侍黄皓用事，厥、瞻皆不能矫正，士大夫多附之，唯建不与皓往来。
现代文：当时宦官中常侍黄皓当政，董厥、诸葛瞻都不能纠正他的错误行事，士大夫们也都依附于他，只有樊建不与黄皓往来。
English: At that time, among the eunuchs, Huang Qi was often in power, and neither Dong Jue nor Zhuge Zhan could correct his wrong actions. The scholars and magistrates also clung to him. Only Yu Jian did not associate with Huang Qi.

古文：秘书令郤正久在内职，与皓比屋，周旋三十馀年，澹然自守，以书自娱，既不为皓所爱，亦不为皓所憎，故官不过六百石，而亦不罹其祸。
现代文：秘书令正多年在宫内任职，与黄皓的房屋相邻，周旋共处三十余年，淡然自守，每日以读书为乐，既不被黄皓所喜爱，也不被黄皓所憎恶，因此官职不过六百石，但也没遭受祸患。
English: For many years, the secretary, Ling Zheng, worked in the palace. He lived next to Huang Qi's house for more than 30 years. He kept to himself and enjoyed reading every day. He was neither loved nor hated by Huang Qi. As a result, his official position was only 600 koku, but he did not suffer any misfortune.

古文：汉主弟甘陵王永憎皓，皓谮之，使十年不得朝见。
现代文：汉后主的弟弟甘陵王刘永憎恶黄皓，黄皓就在汉后主面前诋毁他，使他十年都不得朝见。
English: Liu Yong, the brother of the Han Empress Dowager, hated Huang Qi. Huang Qi slandered him in front of the Han Empress Dowager, so that he was not allowed to see the emperor for ten years.

古文：吴主使五官中郎将薛珝聘于汉，及还，吴主问汉政得失，对曰： 主暗而不知其过，臣下容身以求免罪，入其朝不闻直言，经其野民皆菜色。
现代文：吴王派五官中朗将薛到蜀汉去访问，回来后，吴王向他询问蜀汉朝政的得失，他回答说： 主上昏乱暗弱而不知自己的错误，臣下安身其间只求免罪不思进取，进入其朝廷听不到忠直之言，途经其田野看到百姓们都面有饥色。
English: The king of Wu sent five officials to visit Xue in Shuhan. After his return, the king of Wu asked him about the gains and losses of the Shuhan dynasty. He replied: "The Lord is confused and weak and does not know his own mistakes. His subjects only ask for forgiveness and do not think about advancement. When they enter his court, they cannot hear the words of loyalty and honesty. When they pass through his fields, they see that the people are hungry.

古文：臣闻燕雀处堂，子母相乐，自以为至安也，突决栋焚，而燕雀怡然不知祸之将及，其是之谓乎！ 
现代文：我听说燕雀处于堂屋之上，子母之间相互嘻乐，认为这是最安定的地方，烟囱破裂屋栋被焚，而燕雀仍怡然自得而不知祸之将至，这指的就是蜀汉目前的状况。 
English: I heard that the chaffinch is on top of the hall, and the mother and child are laughing with each other, thinking that this is the most stable place. The chimney is broken and the house is burned, but the chaffinch is still happy and does not know what is going to happen. This refers to the current situation in Shuhan.

古文：珝，综之子也。是岁，鲜卑索头部大人拓跋力微，始遣其子沙漠汗入贡，因留为质。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑族索头部大人拓跋力微第一次派他的儿子沙漠汗入朝进贡，于是就留下他为人质。
English: This year, the adult Tuoba, the head of the Xianbei people, sent his son to the desert for the first time to pay tribute, and then left him as a hostage.

古文：力微之先世居北荒，不交南夏。
现代文：拓跋力微的祖先，世代居住在北部荒远之地，不与南方的华夏交往。
English: The ancestors of those who did not have the ability to travel far and wide lived in the desolate northern lands for generations and did not interact with the southern Chinese.

古文：至可汗毛，始强大，统国三十六，大姓九十九。后五世至可汗推寅，南迁大泽。又七世至可汗邻，使其兄弟七人及族人乙旃氏、车惃氏分统部众为十族。邻老，以位授其子诘汾，使南迁，遂居匈奴故地。
现代文：到可汗拓跋毛时，开始强大起来，统治的小国有三十六个，大姓之族九十九个；经历五代到可汗拓跋推寅，向南迁至大泽；又经历了七世至可汗拓跋邻，让他的兄弟七人以及同族人乙旃氏、车氏，分开统领部族百姓成为十个部族，拓跋邻老了之后，传位给他的儿子拓跋诘汾，让他再往南迁，就定居在匈奴人的故地。
English: By the time of Khan Tuoba Mao, he began to become powerful, ruling over thirty-six small countries and ninety-nine large families; after five generations to Khan Tuoba Tuyin, he moved south to Osawa; he also experienced the seventh generation to Khan Tuoba Neighbors, letting his seven brothers and fellow tribesmen, the Aizu clan and the Che clan, separate and rule the tribal people to become ten tribes. After Tuoba Neighbors grew old, he passed the throne to his son Tuoba Yan, let him move further south, and settled in the ancestral land of the Xiongnu people.

古文：诘汾卒，力微立，复徙居定襄之盛乐，部众浸盛，诸部皆畏服之。
现代文：拓跋诘汾死后，拓跋力微即位，又迁居到定襄郡的盛乐县，部族的兵民日益强盛，其他各部族都畏惧服从他。
English: After the death of Tuobao, Tuobao ascended the throne with feeble strength, and moved to Shengle County in Dingxiang County. The tribe's soldiers and people became increasingly powerful, and other tribes were afraid to obey him.

